Catalog link: https://jainqq.org/explore/034147/1

Page #1 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
॥ Shri Sudharmaswami ne Namah ॥ Aho! Shrut - Swadhyay Sangrah [ 6 ] Adhyatma
Saar [ Gatha and Arth ] -: Karta : Mahopadhyay Shri Yashovijayji Maharaj -:
Anuvadkarta : Pu. Padmavijayji M.Sa. -: Sankalan : Shrutopasak -: Prakashk :
Shri Ashapuran Parshvanath Jain Gyanbhandar Sha. Vimlabhen Saremal Javerchandji
Bedawala Bhavan Hirajain Society, Sabarmati, Ahmedabad-380005 Phone : 22132543,
9426585904 E-mail : ahoshrut.bs@gmail.com

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
  //  zrI sudharmAsvAmIne namaH  //  aho ! zrutam - svAdhyAya saMgraha [ 6 ]
adhyAtmasAra [ gAthA aura artha ] -: kartA :mahopAdhyAya zrI yazovijayajI
mahArAjA -: anuvAdakartA :pU. padamavijayajI ma.sA. -: saMkalana :zrutopAsaka -:
prakAzaka : zrI AzApUraNa pArzvanAtha jaina jJAnabhaMDAra zA. vImaLAbena
saremala javeracaMdajI beDAvALA bhavana hIrAjaina sosAyaTI, sAbaramatI,
ahamadAbAda-380005 phona : 22132543, 9426585904 E-mail : ahoshrut.bs@gmail.com

Page #2 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Publisher: Shri Ashapuran Parshvanath Jain Gyanbhandar Prakashan: Samvat 2074, -
- - - Know. Edition: First Gift from the Gyanidhi to the Pujya Sanayami
Bhagwantos and Gyanbhandar... _ Householders can own any association's knowledge
account by donating Rs. 20.  Receipt Locations: (1) Saremal Javerchand Kainefeb
(Pvt.) Ltd. 672/11, Bombay Market, Railwaypura, Ahmedabad-380002 Phone: 22132543
(Mob.) 9426585904 (2) Kulina K. Shah Adinath Medicine, Tu-02, Shankeshwar
Complex, Kailashnagar, Surat (Mob.) 9574696000 (3) Sha. Ramesh Kumar H. Jain
A-901, Gundeecha Garden, Lalbag, Mumbai-12. (Mob.) 9820016941 (4) Shri Vineet
Jain Jagadguru Heersuriswarji Jain Gyanbhandar, Chandanbala Bhavan, 129,
Shahukar Peth Pase, Mint Street, Chennai-1. (Mob.) 9381096009, 044-23463107 (5)
Sha. Hasmukh Lal Shanti Lal Rathod 7/8, Veer Bharat Society, Timber Market,
Bhavanipeth, Pune. (Mob.) 9422315985 Printer: Kirti Graphics, Ahmedabad (Mob.)
9898490091

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prakAzaka : zrI AzApUraNa pArzvanAtha jaina jJAnabhaMDAra prakAzana : saMvata
2074, - - - - jAna . AvRtti : prathama jJAnanidhi meM se pU. saMyamI bhagavaMto
aura jJAnabhaMDAra ko bheTa... _ gRhastha kisI bhI saMgha ke jJAna khAte meM 20
rupaye arpaNa karake mAlikI kara sakate haiN| prAptisthAna : (1) saremala
javeracaMda kAInapheba (prA.) lI. 672/11, bombe mArkeTa, relavepurA,
ahamadAbAda-380002 phona : 22132543 (mo.) 9426585904 (2) kulIna ke. zAha
AdinAtha meDIsIna, Tu-02, zaMkhezvara kompalekSa, kailAzanagara, surata (mo.)
9574696000 (3) zA. ramezakumAra eca. jaina A-901, guMdecA gArDana, lAlabAga,
muMbaI-12. (mo.) 9820016941 (4) zrI vinIta jaina jagadguru hIrasUrIzvarajI jaina
jJAnabhaMDAra, caMdanabAlA bhavana, 129, zAhukara peTha pAse, mInTa sTrITa,
cennAI-1. (mo.) 9381096009, 044-23463107 (5) zA. hasamukhalAla zAntIlAla rAThoDa
7/8, vIrabhArata sosAyaTI, TImbara mArkeTa, bhavAnIpeTha, pUnA. (mo.) 9422315985
mudraka : kirITa grAphiksa, ahamadAbAda (mo.) 9898490091

Page #3 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
●Adhyatma Sara First Chapter -: The Greatness of Adhyatma :- Aindra shreninataha
shrimannandatannabhinandanah. Uddghara yugadou yo jagadanjnapankaatah. ||1||
Meaning: May Shri Nabhinandan Rishabhdev Bhagwan, who has rescued the world from
the mud of ignorance at the beginning of the age, i.e., who has dispelled the
darkness of ignorance of the world with the light of his knowledge like the sun,
be pleased (with me). ||1|| Shri Shantistaantibhid bhuyaad bhavinam
mrigalanchanah. Gavaha kuvalayollaasam kurvate yasya nirmalaah. ||2|| Meaning:
May Shri Shantinath Bhagwan, whose pure voice, like the rays of the sun, makes
the lotus of the glorious beings bloom, end the suffering of the glorious
beings. ||2|| First Chapter 3

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 *adhyAtmasAra adhikAra pahalA -: adhyAtma kA mAhAtmya : aindra zreNinataH
zrImAnnandatAnnAbhinandanaH  /  uddaghAra yugAdau yo jagadajJAnapaGkataH  // 1
//  bhAvArtha : jinhoMne yuga ke prArambha meM ajJAnarUpa kIcar3a se jagat ko
ubArA hai; arthAt sUrya ke samAna jinhoMne apane jJAna ke prakAza se jagat ke
ajJAnAndhakAra ko miTAyA hai; ve indrasamUha dvArA namaskRta zrInAbhinandana
RSabhadeva bhagavAn (mujha para) Anandita (prasanna ) hoM  // 1 //  zrI
zAntistAntibhid bhUyAd bhavinAM mRgalAMchanaH  /  gAvaH kuvalayollAsaM kurvate
yasya nirmalAH  //  2  //  bhAvArtha : jinakI nirmalavANI sUryakiraNoM kI taraha
bhavyajIvarUpI kamaloM ko praphullita karatI hai, ve mRgalAMchana zrIzAntinAtha
bhagavAn bhavyajIvoM ke duHkhoM kA anta kareM  // 2 //  adhikAra pahalA 3

Page #4 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
I praise the glorious Śrī Śaiva, the Jina, who filled the three worlds with his
fame, as if by the wind emanating from his mouth, he blew the Pañcajanya conch.
||3||  Meaning: I praise Śrī Nemināth Bhagavān, the son of Śiva and Devī, who,
with the wind emanating from his mouth, blew the Pañcajanya conch, as if filling
the three worlds with his brilliant fame. ||3||  May he who, at one time, had
his reflection cast on the tip of a serpent's hood, as if assuming many forms to
liberate the three worlds, be victorious! He is Śrī Pārśvanāth Prabhu. ||4||
Meaning: May he who, at one time, had his reflection cast on the tip of a
serpent's hood, as if assuming many forms to liberate the three worlds, be
victorious! He is Śrī Pārśvanāth Prabhu. ||4||  The Lord, the joy of the world,
the son of Jñāta, is victorious! Even today, the wise ones live by his words,
which are like nectar. ||5||  Meaning: Victory to Śrī Vardhamāna Svāmī, the son
of Jñāta, who brings joy to the world! Even today, the wise ones live by his
words, which are like nectar. ||5||  Having bowed to these and other Jinas, and
also to the Guru, I now dare to reveal the essence of spirituality. ||6||  The
Essence of Spirituality

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI zaiveyaM jinaM staumi bhuvanaM yazaseva yaH  /  mArutena mukhotthena
pAMcajanyamapUpurat  // 3 //  bhAvArtha : jinhoMne apane mukha se niHsRta vAyu
se pAMcajanya nAmaka zaMkha ko isa prakAra phUMkA, mAno apane ujjvala yaza se
tInoM loka paripUrNa kara diye hoM; una zivAdevI ke nandana zrIneminAtha
bhagavAn kI maiM stuti karatA hU~ ||3|| jIyAt phaNiphaNaprAMta-
saMkrAtatanurekadA  /  uddhartumiva vizvAni zrIpArzvo bahurUpabhAk  // 4 //
bhAvArtha : kisI samaya sarpa ke phana ke sire para jinake zarIra kA par3A huA
pratibimba aisA laga rahA thA, mAno tInoM jagat kA uddhAra karane ke lie
anekarUpa dhAraNa kiye hoM; una pArzvanAtha prabhu kI jaya ho ||4||
jagadAnandanaH svAmI jayati jJAtanandanaH  /  upajIvanti yadvAcamadyApi vibudhAH
sudhAm  // 5 //  bhAvArtha : jinake vacanAmRta kA AsvAdana karake paNDitajana
Aja bhI apanA jIvana saphala banA rahe haiM; una jagat ko Ananda dene vAle
jJAtaputra zrI vardhamAnasvAmI kI vijaya ho  // 5 //  etAnanyAnapi
jinAnnamaskRtya gurunapi  /  adhyAtmasAramadhunA prakaTIkartumutsahe  //  6  //
4 adhyAtmasAra

Page #5 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Meaning:** I am enthusiastically embarking on the revelation of the essence of
spirituality, after paying homage to these five Tirthankaras, as well as the
other 22 Tirthankara Bhagavants like Ajitanatha, and the Gurudevs. || 6 ||
**Meaning:** I will expound upon a certain indescribable process related to
spirituality, being well-versed in this subject through scriptures, the true
tradition of wise men, and the experience of my own self. || 7 ||  **Meaning:**
Just as musical songs sung by beautiful women are pleasing to those who indulge
in worldly pleasures, similarly, beautiful verses filled with the essence of
spirituality are pleasing to yogis. || 8 ||  **Meaning:** The pleasure that
young men experience from tasting the nectar of a beloved's lips is like a mere
drop compared to the ocean of bliss derived from savoring the essence of
spiritual scriptures. || 9 ||  **Chapter One**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 bhAvArtha : ina pA~ca tIrthaMkaroM tathA anya ajitanAtha Adi 22 tIrthaMkara
bhagavantoM evaM gurudevoM ko namaskAra karake adhyAtmasAra arthAt adhyAtma kA
nicor3a prakaTa karane ke lie utsAhapUrvaka pravRtta ho rahA hU~  //  6  //
zAstrAt paricitAM samyak saMpradAyAcca dhImatAM  /  ihAnubhavayogAcca prakriyAM
kAmapi bruve  // 7 //  bhAvArtha : isa viSaya meM zAstroM se, tatvajJAnI
mahApuruSoM kI satya paramparA se tathA svAnubhava ke yoga se bhalIbhAMti
paricita (adhyAtmasambandhI) kisI anivarcanIya prakriyA kA nirupaNa karu~gA
||7|| yoginAM prItaye padyamadhyAtmarasapezalaM  /  bhoginAM bhAminIgItaM
saMgItakamayaM yathA  // 8  //  bhAvArtha : jaise bhogIjanoM ko lalanAoM ke
saMgItamaya gAyana prItikara hote haiM, vaise hI yogIjanoM ko adhyAtmarasa ke
manohara padya prItikAraka hote haiM  // 8 //  kAntAdharasudhAsvAdAd yUnAM
yajjAyate sukham  /  binduH pArzve tadadhyAtmazAstrasvAdasukhodadheH  // 9 //
bhAvArtha : striyoM ke adharAmRta ke AsvAdana se yuvakoM ko jo sukhada saMvedana
hotA hai, vaha adhyAtma - zAstra ke AsvAdanajanita sukhasindhu ke sAmane eka
bindu ke samAna hai  // 9 //  adhikAra pahalA

Page #6 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Those who are blessed with the happiness of contentment born from the study of
spiritual scriptures, do not consider the happiness of kings, Kubera, or Indra
as anything. ||10||  **Meaning:** Yogis adorned with the happiness of
contentment arising from the enjoyment of spiritual scriptures, do not consider
the happiness of kings, Kubera, Indra, etc. as anything in comparison to their
own happiness. ||10||  He who desires scholarship without studying spiritual
scriptures is like a cripple who raises his finger to obtain the fruit of the
Kalpavriksha. ||11||  **Meaning:** A person who desires scholarship and
erudition without studying spiritual scriptures is like a cripple who raises his
finger to obtain the fruit of the Kalpavriksha. ||11||  The spiritual scriptures
are like a thunderbolt that shatters the mountain of pride, like the moon that
increases the waves of the ocean of friendliness towards all beings, and like a
wildfire that burns down the dense forest of delusion. ||12||  **Meaning:**
Spiritual scriptures are like a thunderbolt that shatters the mountain of pride
(hypocrisy), like the moon that increases the waves of the ocean of friendliness
towards all beings, and like a wildfire that burns down the dense forest of
delusion. ||12||  The path of Dharma is well-established, the thief of sin
flees, and there is no rebellion in the kingdom of spiritual scriptures. ||13||
**Meaning:** The path of Dharma is well-established, the thief of sin flees, and
there is no rebellion in the kingdom of spiritual scriptures. ||13||  **Essence
of Spirituality**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 adhyAtma-zAstrasambhUta-saMtoSa-sukhazAlinaH  /  gaNayanti na rAjAnaM na zrIdaM
nApi vAsavam  // 10 //  bhAvArtha : adhyAtmazAstra ke AsvAdana se utpanna
santoSasukha se suzobhita yogIjana apane sukha ke sAmane rAjA, kubera, indra Adi
ke sukhoM ko kucha bhI nahIM ginate  // 10 //  yaH kilAzikSitAdhyAtmazAstraH
pANDityamicchati  /  utkSipatyaMgulI paMguH sa svardraphalalipsayA  // 11 //
bhAvArtha : jo manuSya adhyAtmazAstra kA adhyayana kiye binA hI vidvattA-
pANDitya cAhatA hai, vaha usa paMgu ke samAna hai, jo kalpavRkSa ke phala lene
kI icchA se uMgalI U~cI karatA hai  // 11 //  daMbhaparvatadaMbholiH
sauhArdAmbudhicandramAH  /  adhyAtmazAstramuttAla-mohajAlavanAnalaH  // 12 //
bhAvArtha : adhyAtmazAstra daMbha (kapaTa) rUpI parvata ko cakanAcUra karane meM
vajra ke samAna hai, samasta jIvoM ke prati maitrIbhAvarUpI samudra kI taraMgoM
ko bar3hAne meM candramA ke samAna hai aura vikaTa mahAmohajAlarUpI vana ko
jalAne meM dAvAnala ke samAna hai  // 12 //  adhvA dharmasya susthaH
syAtpApacauraH palAyate  /  adhyAtmazAstra-saurAjye na syAtkazcidupaplavaH  //
13 //  adhyAtmasAra

Page #7 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Meaning:** When the kingdom of spirituality is attained, the path of religion
becomes easy, the thief of sin flees, and there is no disturbance of any kind.
|| 13 ||  **Meaning:** Those whose hearts have digested the essence of the
meaning of spiritual scriptures, never experience the torment of passions like
anger, etc. Because they keep their mind and senses under their control. || 14
||  **Meaning:** If there is no compassion (grace) of the warrior of the
understanding of the meaning of spiritual scriptures, then the merciless,
lustful, and wicked torment even the learned. That is, even the scholars of law,
grammar, etc., are seen to engage in lustful activities like children, then what
to speak of ordinary people? || 15 ||  **Meaning:** The supreme sages cut off
the growing thirst, like a poisonous creeper, in the forest of the mind, with
the sword of spiritual scriptures. || 16 ||  **Chapter One** **7**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 bhAvArtha : adhyAtmazAstrarUpI surAjya prApta hone para dharma kA mArga sarala
ho jAtA hai, pAparUpI cora bhAga jAtA hai tathA kisI prakAra kA upadrava nahIM
hotA hai  //  13 //  yeSAmadhyAtmazAstrArthatattvaM pariNataM hRdi  /  kaSAya-
viSayAveza-klezasteSAM na karhicit  // 14 //  bhAvArtha : jinake hRdaya meM
AdhyAtmazAstra ke bhAvArtha kA tatva (rahasya) paca (pariNata ho) gayA hai,
unheM kabhI krodhAdi kaSAyoM kA kleza (paritApa) nahIM hotA  /  kyoMki ve apane
mana aura indriyoM ko apane kAbU meM rakhate haiM ||14|| nirdayaH kAmacANDAlaH
paNDitAnapi pIDayet  /  yadi nAdhyAtmazAstrArthabodha - yodhakRpA bhavet  // 15
//  T bhAvArtha : yadi adhyAtmazAstra ke arthabodha - rUpI yoddhA kI sahAnubhUti
(kRpA) na ho to nirdaya kAma - cAMDAla paMDitajanoM ko bhI pIr3ita kara detA hai
| arthAt nyAya-vyAkaraNa Adi zAstroM ke paNDita bhI bAlaceSTA ke samAna
kAmakrIr3A karate dekhe jAte haiM, to phira mAmUlI AdamiyoM kI to bAta hI kyA ?
// 15 //  viSavallisamAM tRSNAM vardhamAnAM manovane  /  adhyAtmazAstradAtreNa
chindanti paramarSayaH  //  16  //  bhAvArtha : paramaRSirAja adhyAtmazAstrarUpI
haMsiye se manarUpI vana meM viSalatA ke samAna bar3hatI huI tRSNA kA chedana
kara dete haiM  // 16 //  adhikAra pahalA 7

Page #8 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
In the forest, a dwelling; wealth in poverty; a lamp in darkness; water in the
desert - these are all extremely difficult to obtain. Similarly, in this Kali
Yuga, the attainment of Adhyatma Shastra is rare, it is found only by a
fortunate few. ||17||  One who knows the Vedas and other scriptures experiences
only distress, while one who knows Adhyatma Shastra enjoys the nectar of
experience. Just as a donkey carries only the burden of sandalwood, a fortunate
man uses it. ||18||  Those who know other scriptures, when they give lectures,
gesticulate wildly with their arms and contort their faces in acting. But those
who know Adhyatma Shastra, far from distorting their limbs, speak naturally
without even blinking their eyes. ||19||  Adhyatma Sara

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 vane vezma dhanaM dausthye tejo dhvAnte jalaM marau  /  durApamApyate dhanyaiH
kalAvadhyAtmavAGmayam  // 17 //  bhAvArtha : jaise vana meM ghara, nirdhanatA
meM dhana, andhakAra meM dIpaka aura marubhUmi meM jala kI prApti atidurlabha
hai, vaise hI isa kaliyuga meM adhyAtmazAstra kI prApti durlabha hai, vaha kisI
virale hI bhAgyazAlI ko milatA hai  // 17 //  vedA'nyazAstravit klezaM
rasamadhyAtmazAstravit  /  bhAgyabhRd bhogamApnoti vahate caMdanaM kharaH  // 18
//  bhAvArtha : veda Adi anya zAstroM kA jJAtA kleza kA hI anubhava karatA hai,
jabaki adhyAtmazAstra kA jJAtA anubhavarasAmRta kA AsvAdana karatA hai| jaise
gadhA to kevala candana ke bhAra ko hI DhotA rahatA hai, bhAgyazAlI puruSa hI
usa candana kA upayoga karatA hai  // 18 //  bhujAsphAlana-hastAsya-
vikArAbhinayAH pare  /  adhyAtmazAstravijJAstu vadantyavikRtekSaNAH  // 19 //
bhAvArtha : anya zAstroM ke jJAtA jaba upadeza=bhASaNa dete haiM, taba bhujAe~
jora se phaTakArate haiM tathA muMha Adi kI vikRta ceSTAoM dvArA abhinaya karate
haiM, parantu adhyAtmazAstra ke jJAtA anya aMgoM ko vikRta karanA to dUra rahA,
A~khoM ko bhI maTakAe binA svAbhAvika rUpa se bolate haiM  // 19 //
adhyAtmasAra

Page #9 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
From the ocean of Agamas churned by the Mount Meru of spiritual scriptures, do
the wise not obtain many jewels of virtues? Certainly they do. ||20||  The taste
of sensual pleasure lasts only till the enjoyment, the taste of delicious food
lasts only till the meal, but the taste obtained by serving spiritual scriptures
is limitless. ||21||  Books of fallacious arguments are like a fever of pride
that infects the whole being. The vision becomes pure by the medicine of
spiritual scriptures. ||22||  First Chapter 9

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 adhyAtmazAstrahemAdri-mathitAdAgamodadheH  /  bhUyAMsi guNaratnAni prApyate
vibudhairna kim ?  // 20 //  bhAvArtha : kyA adhyAtma - zAstrarUpI meruparvata
se Agama-samudra kA maMthana karake vidvAn aneka guNarUpI ratnoM ko nahIM pAte
haiM? avazya pAte haiM ||20|| raso bhogAvadhiH kAme sadbhakSye bhojanAvadhiH  /
adhyAtmazAstra - sevAyAmasau niravadhiH punaH  // 21 //  bhAvArtha :
kAmaviSayaka rasa sambhoga ke samaya taka rahatA hai, svAdiSTa AhAra kA svAda
bhojana karate samaya hI rahatA hai, kintu adhyAtmazAstra kA sevana karane para
jo rasa milatA hai, usake sthAyitva kI to sImA hI nahIM hai  // 21 //
kutarkagrantha sarvasva - garvajvaravikAriNI  /  eti dRg
nirmalIbhAvamadhyAtmagranthabheSajAt  // 22 //  -- bhAvArtha : kutarka-granthoM
ke adhikArapUrvaka jJAna se to prAyaH ahaMkArarUpI jvara se dRSTi vikArI ho jAtI
hai, jabaki adhyAtma-grantharUpI auSadha se dRSTi nirmala hotI hai  /
adhyAtmazAstra se dRSTi meM zodhakatva guNa pragaTa hotA hai, isake abhyAsa se
nirvikAratva prApta hotA hai, jisase abhimAnarUpI jvara zAnta ho jAtA hai  /
isalie yaha adhyAtmazAstra auSadharUpa hai  // 22 //  adhikAra pahalA 9

Page #10 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Dhaninampुtradarādi yathā saṁsāravṛddhyai | tathā pāṇḍityadṛptānāṁ śāstram
adhyātmavarjitam ||23|| Bhāvartha: Just as for the wealthy, wife, children, and
family, etc., are for the increase of worldly life, in the same way, for those
who are proud of their scholarship, other scriptures devoid of spirituality are
also the cause of worldly increase. ||23|| Adhyetavyam tadadhyātmaśāstram
bhāvyam punaḥ punaḥ | anusṭheyastadarthaśca deyo yogyasya kasyacit ||24||
Bhāvartha: Therefore, the liberated soul should study the scriptures of
spirituality, contemplate and meditate on them again and again, understand their
ultimate meaning, practice the conduct described in them, and if any worthy
seeker is found, explain the ultimate meaning to him. ||24|| || Ityadhyātmasāra-
māhātmyādhikāraḥ 1 || Adhyātmasāra

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dhaninAMputradArAdi yathA saMsAravRddhaye  /  tathA pANDityadRptAnAM
zAstramadhyAtmavarjitam  // 23 //  bhAvArtha : jaise dhanikoM ke lie strI-putra-
parivAra Adi saMsAravRddhi ke lie hote haiM, usI prakAra vidvattA ke abhimAnI
logoM ke lie adhyAtmazUnya anya zAstra bhI saMsAravRddhi ke kAraNa hote haiM  //
23 //  adhyetavyaM tadadhyAtmazAstraM bhAvyaM punaH punaH  /
anuSTheyastadarthazca deyo yogyasya kasyacit  // 24 //  bhAvArtha : isalie
mumukSu AtmA ko adhyAtma-zAstra kA adhyayana karanA cAhie, bAra-bAra usakA
cintana-manana karanA cAhie, usake paramArtha ko hRdayaMgama karanA cAhie,
usameM batAe hue vyavahAroM kA AcaraNa karanA cAhie, aura koI yogya jijJAsu
vyakti mila jAe to use paramArtha samajhAnA cAhie  // 24 //   //
ityadhyAtmasAra-mAhAtmyAdhikAraH 1 //  adhyAtmasAra

Page #11 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter Two ## The Nature of Adhyatma  **O Lord! What is this Adhyatma, which
you have described in such a way? Listen, dear one! As per the scriptures, I
describe it before you.** ||1||  **Meaning:** When the disciple asks, "O Lord!
What is this Adhyatma, whose greatness you have described?", the Guru replies,
"Dear one! As per the scriptures, I describe Adhyatma before you, listen
carefully." ||1||  **The pure action, which is performed by those whose power of
delusion has been destroyed, taking the soul as the object, is called Adhyatma
by the Jinas.** ||2||  **Meaning:** The Jinas have called the pure (blameless)
action, which is performed by those whose power of delusion has been destroyed,
taking the soul as the object, as Adhyatma. ||2||  **Just as Samayika is a
companion in all types of conduct, similarly, Adhyatma is desired to be a
companion in all Yogas.** ||3||  **Meaning:** Just as Samayika is a companion in
all types of conduct, similarly, Adhyatma is desired to be a companion in all
Yogas. ||3||  ## Chapter Two ## 11

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 adhikAra dUsarA adhyAtmakA svarUpa bhagavan ! kiM tadadhyAtmaM
yaditthamupavarNyate  /  zrRNu, vatsa ! yathAzAstra varNayAmi purastava  // 1 //
bhAvArtha : 'bhagavan ! jisake mAhAtmya kA Apane varNana kiyA hai, vaha adhyAtma
kyA hai ?" isa prakAra ziSya ke prazna karane para gurudeva usakA uttara dete
haiM - 'vatsa ! zAstra meM kahe anusAra maiM tumhAre sAmane adhyAtma kA varNana
karatA hU~, use dhyAnapUrvaka suno'  // 1 //  gatamohAdhikArANAmAtmAnamadhikRtya
yA  /  pravartate kriyA zuddhA tadadhyAtmaM jagurjinAH  // 2 //  bhAvArtha :
jinake moha kA sAmarthya naSTa ho gayA hai, unake dvArA AtmA ko lakSya karake jo
zuddha (nirdoSa) kriyA kI jAtI hai, jinezvaroM ne use hI adhyAtma kahA hai  // 2
//  sAmAyikaM yathA sarvacAritreSvanuvRttimat  /  adhyAtmaM sarvayogeSu
tathAnugatamiSyate  // 3 //  bhAvArtha : jaise sabhI prakAra ke cAritroM meM
sAmAyika sahacArI hai, vaise hI samasta yogoM meM adhyAtma kA sahagAmI honA
abhIpsita hai  // 3 //  adhikAra dUsarA 11

Page #12 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The fourteenth *gunasthan*, starting from *apunarbhandhaka*, is considered to be
*kriyadhyatmamayi* (spiritual in action), with progressively purer actions.
||4||  Actions performed by a *bhavaabhinandi* (one who desires worldly
existence) due to attachment to food, *upadhi* (external possessions), worship,
*ridhi* (wealth), and *gaurav* (prestige) are considered enemies of the spirit.
||5||  A being who is petty, greedy, humble, envious, fearful, deceitful,
ignorant, and engages in pointless sinful actions is a *bhavaabhinandi*. ||6||
A being who is peaceful, self-controlled, always discreet, seeking liberation,
benevolent to all, and performs actions without pride for the growth of
spiritual qualities is considered to be *sadhyatma* (spiritually inclined).
||7||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 apunarbandhakAdyAvad guNasthAnaM caturdazam  /  kramazuddhimatI tAvat
kriyAdhyAtmamayI matA  // 4 //  bhAvArtha : apunarbandhaka nAmaka cauthe
guNasthAnaka se lekara caudahaveM guNasthAnaka taka kramazaH jo uttarottara
adhikAdhika vizuddha kriyA hotI hai, vaha saba kriyA adhyAtmamayI hI mAnI jAtI
hai  // 4 //  AhAropadhipUjarddhi-gauravapratibandhataH  /  bhavAbhinaMdI yAM
kuryAt kriyAM sAdhyAtmavairiNI  //  5 //  bhAvArtha : AhAra, upadhi, pUjA, Rddhi
evaM gaurava (prasiddhi Adi) ke pratibandha se (prApti kI icchA ko lekara )
bhavAbhinaMdI jo kriyAe~ karatA hai, ve sArI kriyAe~ adhyAtma kI vairiNI
kahalAtI haiM  // 5 //  kSudrolobharatirdIno matsarI bhayavAn zaThaH  /  ajJo
bhavAbhinaMdI syAt niSphalArambhasaMgataH  //  6  //  bhAvArtha : kSudra, lobhI,
dIna, IrSyAlu, bhayabhIta, zaTha, ajJAnI aura akAraNa pApArambha karane vAlA
jIva bhavAbhinandI hotA hai  // 6 //  zAnto dAntaH sadA gupto mokSArtho
vizvavatsalaH  /  nirdambhAM yAM kriyAM kuryAt sAdhyAtmaguNavRddhaye  // 7 //
12 adhyAtmasAra

Page #13 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Meaning:** Peaceful, subdued, always with controlled senses, compassionate
towards the world, seeking liberation, the seeker who performs all actions
without ego, they are for the growth of spiritual qualities. ||7|| Therefore,
the being with the intellect to ask questions, desirous of asking, eager to go
to the holy ones, seeking Dharma, desiring to attain Dharma, the creator of the
previously attained vision (the first category of qualities called Samyaktva),
the devoted Shravaka (the second category of qualities), the Sadhu (the third
category of qualities), and the three types of Anantaanshakshapka (the fourth
category of qualities), the destroyer of the obscurations of vision (the fifth
category of qualities), the pacifier of delusion (the sixth category of
qualities), the peaceful delusion (the seventh category of qualities), the
destroyer (the eighth category of qualities), the diminished delusion (the ninth
category of qualities), the Jina (the tenth category of qualities), and the
Ayogi Kevali (the eleventh category of qualities), thus, there is a gradual
increase in spiritual qualities up to eleven categories of qualities. ||8-9-10||
**Chapter Two**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 bhAvArtha : zAnta, dAnta, sadA guptendriya, vizva ke prati vatsala, mokSArthI,
sAdhaka jo bhI dambharahita kriyAe~ karatA hai, ve AdhyAtmika guNoM kI vRddhi ke
lie hotI haiM  // 7 //  ataeva janaH pRcchotpannasaMjJaH pipRcchiSuH  /
sAdhupAi~ jigamiSurdharmaM pRcchan kriyAsthitaH  // 8 //  pratipitsuH sRjan
pUrvaM pratipannazca darzanaM  /  zrAddho yatizca trividho'nantAMzakSapakastathA
// 9 //  dRgmohakSapako mohazamakaH zAntamohakaH  /  kSapakaH kSINamohazca
jino'yogI ca kevalI  // 10 //  bhAvArtha : isI kAraNa prazna pUchane kI
buddhivAlA bhavyaprANI, prazna pUchane kA icchuka, sAdhusantoM ke pAsa jAne kA
icchuka, dharmajijJAsu, dharmaprApti kA abhilASI, pUrvaprAptadarzana kA sRjana-
sampAdanakartA (samyaktva nAmaka prathama guNazreNI), zrAddha zrAvaka (dvitIya
guNazreNI), sAdhu (tIsarI guNazreNI), tathA tIna prakAra kA anantAMzakSapaka,
(cauthI guNazreNI), darzanamohanIya kA kSapaka (paMcaguNazreNI), mohazamaka
(chaThI zreNI) zAntamoha (sAtavIM zreNI), kSapaka (8vIM zreNI), kSINamoha (9vIM
zreNI), jina (10vIM zreNI) aura ayogIkevalI (11vIM zreNI), isa prakAra kramazaH
11 guNazreNiyoM taka uttarottara adhyAtmaguNavRddhi hotI hai  // 8-9-10 //
adhikAra dUsarA

Page #14 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
As stated in order, these are the countless streams of virtues. Therefore, one
should strive to cultivate them for the growth of spirituality, even with
diligence. || 11 ||  **Meaning:** In this way, these 11 categories of virtues
have been described, each with countless streams of virtues. Therefore, one
should strive to practice them diligently for the growth of spirituality. || 11
||  Pure knowledge and pure action, these two parts are intertwined in
spirituality, like the two wheels of a great chariot or the two wings of a bird.
|| 12 ||  **Meaning:** Like the two wheels of a great chariot and the two wings
of a bird, pure knowledge and pure action, these two parts are intertwined and
connected in spirituality. || 12 ||  From the fifth stage of virtues onwards,
this is considered to be the definitive view. However, from the perspective of
practical application, it is also considered to be spirituality in the earlier
stages. || 13 ||  **Meaning:** From the perspective of definitive knowledge,
spirituality is considered to begin from the fifth stage of virtues. However,
from the perspective of practical application, it is also considered to be
spirituality in the earlier stages. || 13 ||  Even in the fourth stage of
virtues, actions like service are appropriate. Just as silver ornaments are
considered ornaments for those who do not have gold ornaments. || 14 ||
**Meaning:** Just as silver ornaments are considered ornaments for those who do
not have gold ornaments, in the fourth stage of virtues, actions like service
are considered appropriate. || 14 ||  **Essence of Spirituality**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 yathAkramamamI proktA, asaMkhyaguNanirjarAH  /  yatitavyamato'dhyAtma -
vRddhaye kalayApi hi  //  11  //  bhAvArtha : isa prakAra ye kramazaH 11
guNazreNiyA~ uttarottara asaMkhyaguNa nirjarA vAlI kahI gaI haiM  /  ataH
adhyAtmavRddhi ke lie inakA abhyAsapUrvaka prayatna karanA cAhie  // 11 //
jJAnaM zuddhaM kriyA zuddhetyaMzau dvAviha saMgatau  /  cakre mahArathasyeva,
pakSAviva patatriNaH  //  12 //  bhAvArtha : mahAratha ke donoM cakroM (pahiyoM)
kI taraha tathA pakSI kI donoM paMkhoM kI taraha zuddha jJAna aura zuddha kriyA,
ye donoM aMza adhyAtma meM eka dUsare ke sAtha ghule-mile haiMparaspara saMlagna
haiM  // 12 //  tatpaMcamaguNasthAnAdArabhyaivetadicchati  /  nizcayo
vyavahArastu pUrvamapyupacArataH  // 13 //  bhAvArtha : nizcayanaya kI dRSTi se
adhyAtma paMcamaguNasthAna se lekara hI mAnA jAtA hai, kintu vyavahAranaya kI
dRSTi se to isase pUrva (guNasthAna) meM bhI upacAra se adhyAtma mAnA jAtA hai
// 13 //  caturthe'pi guNasthAne, zuzrUSAdyA kriyocitA  /
aprAptasvarNabhUSANAM, rajatAbhUSaNaM yathA  // 14 //  bhAvArtha : jise sone ke
AbhUSaNa nahIM milate, usake lie jisa prakAra cA~dI ke AbhUSaNa bhI AbhUSaNa hI
kahalAte 14 adhyAtmasAra

Page #15 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Just as in the fourth stage of spiritual progress, even if the highest actions
are not present, there are still appropriate actions like serving the divine
teacher, the desire to listen to Dharma, humility, detachment, and charity,
which are characteristic of the fourth stage, called "Avirati-Samyagdristi."
Therefore, even in the fourth stage, it is not objectionable to consider it as
spiritual. Just as someone who does not have gold ornaments may still have
silver ornaments, which are also considered ornaments, similarly, someone who
has not attained the great renunciation may still have attained appropriate
actions like service, which are also considered spiritual. ||14||  Even for
those who have attained the state of "Apunarbhandhaka," the actions that are
accompanied by calmness, though they may appear different due to different
perspectives, are all for the destruction of obstacles to Dharma. ||15||
Meaning: According to various philosophies (or religious paths), the actions
performed by those who have attained the state of "Apunarbhandhaka," which are
accompanied by calmness and are diverse (varied), are all for the purpose of
eliminating obstacles to the attainment of Dharma. ||15||  Even impure actions,
if performed with good intentions (results), become the cause of pure actions.
Just as copper, when melted and infused with the essence of mercury, etc.,
acquires the quality of gold (becomes gold). ||16||  Meaning: Even impure
actions, if performed with good intentions (results), become the cause of pure
actions. Just as copper, when melted and infused with the essence of mercury,
etc., acquires the quality of gold (becomes gold). ||16||  Another Authority 15

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 haiM, usI prakAra cauthe guNasthAna meM bhI vaisI ucca kriyA na ho to bhI usa
guNasthAnaka ke yogya avirati-samyagdRSTi nAmaka cauthe guNasthAna meM bhI deva-
guru kI sevA, dharmazravaNa kI icchA, vinaya, vaiyAvRtya, dAna ityAdi ucita
kriyAe~ hotI haiM  /  isalie cauthe guNasthAna meM bhI adhyAtma mAneM to koI
Apatti nhiiN| jisake pAsa sone ke gahane na hoM, usake cA~dI ke gahane bhI
gahane hI kahalAte haiM, vaise hI jise bar3e pratyAkhyAna kI kriyA prApta na huI
ho, use prApta zuzrUSA Adi ucita kriyA bhI adhyAtma hI kahalAegI  // 14 //
apunarbandhakasyApi yA kriyA zamasaMyutA  /  citrA darzanabhedena dharma-
vighnakSayAya sA  // 15 //  bhAvArtha : vividha darzanoM (yA dharmapanthoM) ke
anusAra apunarbandhaka meM bhI jo zamayukta anekavidha (vicitra) kriyAe~ dikhAI
detI haiM, ve bhI dharmaprApti meM hone vAle vighna ko naSTa karane ke lie hotI
haiM  // 15 //  azuddhA'pi hi zuddhAyAH kriyAhetuH sadAzayAt  /  tAnaM
rasAnuvedhena svarNatvamadhigacchati  // 16 //  bhAvArtha : azuddha kriyA bhI
acche Azaya (pariNAma) se kI jAya to vaha zuddhakriyA kA kAraNa bana jAtI hai|
jaise tAMbe ko galAkara usameM pAre Adi ke rasa kA anuvedha karane se vaha
svarNatva (sone ke rUpa) ko prApta ho jAtA hai  // 16 //  adhikAra dUsarA 15

Page #16 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Therefore, for the entry into the path, even for those with false views, the
wise, endowed with patience, give the vows (conduct) by imputing the rightness
of substance. ||17||  Meaning: For this reason, in order to initiate them into
the path of Dharma, the wise, endowed with patience, give vows (conduct) even to
those with false views by imputing the rightness of substance. ||17||  He who,
understanding the non-virtuous nature of the world, is patient in observing the
vows, is to be considered worthy. The distinction of inner feelings is difficult
to perceive, therefore it should not be used here. ||18||  Meaning: He who,
understanding the non-virtuous nature of the world, is patient in observing the
vows, is to be considered worthy. The distinction of inner feelings is difficult
to perceive, therefore it should not be used here. ||18||  If, due to not
knowing the inner feelings, there is a destruction of both attainment and non-
attainment, then by giving initiation, the path of the worthy ones will be cut
off. ||19||  Meaning: If, due to not knowing the inner feelings, there is a
destruction of both attainment and non-attainment, then by giving initiation,
the path of the worthy ones will be cut off. ||19||  Even though one may have
attained the right view, due to lack of respect for the impure, and due to lack
of practice, one may not attain liberation. Because even that which is natural,
becomes attainable only through practice. ||20||  16 Adhyatma Sara

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 ato mArgapravezAya, vrataM mithyAdRzAmapi  /  dravyasamyaktvamAropya dadate
dhIrabuddhayaH  // 17 //  bhAvArtha : isa kAraNa se dharmamArga meM praveza
karAne ke lie, dravya-samyaktva kA AropaNa karake dhairyasampanna buddhivAle
mahAtmA mithyAdRSTiyoM ko bhI vrata (cAritra) dete haiM  // 17 //  yo buddhvA
bhavanairguNyaM, dhIraH syAd vratapAlane  /  sa yogyo bhAvabhedastu durlakSyo
nopayujyate  // 18 //  bhAvArtha : jo jIva saMsAra kI nirguNAtmaka niHsAratA
samajhakara vratapAlana karane meM dhIra hotA hai, use hI yogya jAnanA  /
Antarika bhAvoM kA rahasya jAnanA duSkara hai, isalie yahA~ usakA upayoga nahIM
karanA cAhie  // 18 //  no ced bhAvAparijJAnAt siddhayasiddhiparAhateH  /
dIkSA'dAnena, bhavyAnAM mArgocchedaH prasajyate  // 19 //  bhAvArtha : yadi
parvokta rUpa se yogyatA kA svIkAra nahIM kiyA jAya to kisI ke Antarika bhAvoM
ko nahIM jAnane ke kAraNa siddhi aura asiddhi donoM kA nAza ho jAyagA aura isase
bhavyajIvoM ko (pahacAna na hone ke kAraNa) dIkSA nahIM dI jA skegii| isa
prakAra mArga kA uccheda-lopa ho jAyagA  // 19 //  azuddhA'nAdare'bhyAsAyogAno
darzanAdyapi  /  siddhayennisargajaM muktvA tadapyAbhyAsikaM yataH  // 20 //  16
adhyAtmasAra

Page #17 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Translation:  **Verse 20:**  **Meaning:** Without disregarding the impure
(false vision) and without attaining the practice of pure yoga, only natural
rightness will be realized, other visions etc. will not be realized. Because
these visions etc. are also achieved through practice. ||20||  **Verse 21:**
**Meaning:** Due to the love for the pure path of liberation as spoken by the
omniscient, the pureness that exists in the virtuous, obedient to the wise,
learned, and authoritative guru, who are free from deceit, hypocrisy, etc., and
who follow the path of righteousness, does not get destroyed in any vision
(philosophy). Then what to say about the purity of the righteous people who are
inclined towards the Jain philosophy? ||21||  **Verse 22:**  **Meaning:** The
karma (action) is of three types, based on the object, the self, and the
attachment, and they are pure in ascending order. The first of these three is
called object-karma - falling from a mountain etc. for liberation. ||22||
**Chapter 2: Second Authority**  **17**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 bhAvArtha : azuddha (mithyAdRSTi) kA anAdara karane para aura zuddha yoga kA
abhyAsa prApta na hone se sirpha eka nisargaja (svAbhAvika) samyaktva ko
chor3akara dUsare darzana Adi bhI siddha nahIM hoNge| kyoMki ve darzana Adi bhI
abhyAsa se hI sAdhya (prApta) hote haiM  // 20 //  zuddhamArgAnurAgeNAzaThAnAM
yA tu zuddhatA  /  guNavatparataMtrANAM sA na kvApi vihanyate  // 21 //
bhAvArtha : sarvajJakathita zuddha muktimArga ke prati anurAga ke kAraNa kapaTa-
dambhAdi-rahita tathA jJAnI guNavAna vahazruta guru ke adhIna hokara jo
dharmapriya mArgAnusArI puruSa pravRtti karate haiM, usa samaya unameM mithyAtva
kaSAyAdi ko manda karane ke rUpa meM jo zuddhatA (nirmalatA) hai, vaha to kisI
bhI darzana (matapaMtha) meM naSTa nahIM hotI  /  taba phira jinamata meM
pravRtta dharmapriya janoM kI zuddhatA naSTa na ho, isameM to kahanA hI kyA ?
// 21 //  viSayAtmAnubandhairhi tridhA zuddhaM yathottaram  /  bruvate karma
tatrAdyaM muktyarthaM patanAdyapi  // 22 //  bhAvArtha : viSaya AtmA aura
anubandha, ina tInoM ko lekara karma (kriyA) tIna prakAra ke haiM aura ve
uttarottara zuddha haiM  /  ina tInoM meM prathama viSaya - karma kahA gayA hai
- mukti ke lie parvatAdi se giranA  // 22 //  adhikAra dUsarA 17

Page #18 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Ignorant people's second karma is Yama, Niyama, etc., from the worldly
perspective. The third karma is the one that follows the knowledge of the
respective principles with a peaceful mind. That is, the anubandha karma is only
for the knowers. ||23||  The first karma, due to the abundance of ignorance, is
not capable of stopping the obstacles to liberation, such as attachment, etc.
And many Acharyas have said that even a slight amount of dispassion, etc., with
a good intention, leads to a birth that is in accordance with that result.
||24||  The second karma leads to the destruction of some defects, like the
powder of a frog. The third karma, however, leads to the complete destruction of
defects, by considering the heavy and light. ||25||  Action is inherently pure,
therefore it is a purifier. With the conduct of the Muni-Indra, the seed of the
path is firmly established with reverence. ||26||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 ajJAninAM dvitIyaM tu lokadRSTyA yamAdikam  /  tRtIyaM zAntavRttyA
tattattvasaMvedanAnugas  // 23 //  bhAvArtha : dUsarA karma hai- lokadRSTi se
yama, niyama Adi  /  vaha ajJAniyoM kA hotA hai  /  aura tIsarA karma zAntavRtti
se una-una tattvoM ke jJAna kA anusaraNa karane vAlA hotA hai  /  arthAt vaha
anubandhakarma jJAniyoM kA hI hotA hai  // 23 //
AdyAnnAjJAnabAhulyAnmokSabAdhaka - bAdhanam  /  sadbhAvAzayalezenocitaM janma
pare jaguH  // 24 //  bhAvArtha : ajJAna kI adhikatA ke kAraNa prathama karma
mokSa meM bAdhaka rAgAdi ko rokane meM samartha nahIM hotA  /  aura kitane hI
AcAryoM kA kathana hai ki vairAgyAdi sadbhAva vAlA pariNAma lezamAtra hone se
vaha usa pariNAma ke anurUpa (yogya) janma prApta karatA hai  // 24 //  dvitIyAd
doSahAniH syAt kAcinmaNDUkacUrNavat  /  AtyantikI tRtIyA tu gurulAghavacintayA
// 25 //  bhAvArtha : dUsare karma se meMDhaka ke cUrNa ke samAna kucha doSoM kI
hAni ( nAza) hotI hai  /  aura tIsare karma se to gurulAghava para vicAra karane
se doSoM kA Atyantika (sarvathA) nAza (hAni) ho jAtA hai  // 25 //  api
svarUpataH zuddhA kriyA tasmAd vizuddhikRt  /  maunIndravyavahAreNa mArgabIjaM
dRDhAdarAt  // 26 //  18 adhyAtmasAra

Page #19 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Meaning:** The pure action of the living being, which arises from the conduct
of the Jinesvara, is purifying. Therefore, by showing utmost respect to action,
the living being attains the path-seed (samyaktva). ||26||  **Meaning:** By
remaining under the command of the Guru, even after receiving the Dravya Diksha,
many noble living beings have attained the supreme (moksha) position through the
process of Viryollaas (increase in power). ||27||  **Meaning:** Even during the
time of attaining spirituality, there are some actions and some knowledge that
follows the good crowd (general) cognition. ||28||  **Meaning:** Therefore,
spirituality exists in both the forms of knowledge and action. That spirituality
increases in those seekers who are adorned with unpretentious conduct. O
disciple! The spirituality you inquired about earlier, that spirituality is
different...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 bhAvArtha : jinezvaradeva ke vyavahAra se jIva kI jo svarUpa se zuddha kriyA
hotI hai, vaha vizuddhi karane vAlI hotI hai, isalie kriyA ke prati atyAdara
karane se jIva ko mArgabIja (samyaktva) kI prApti hotI hai  // 26 //
gurvAjJApAratantryeNa dravyadIkSAgrahAdapi  /  vIryollAsakramAtprAptA bahavaH
paramaM padam  // 27 //  bhAvArtha : guru kI AjJA ke adhIna rahane se
dravyadIkSA grahaNa karane para bhI bahuta se bhavya jIvoM ne vIryollAsa
(zaktivRddhi) ke krama se parama (mokSa) pada prApta kiyA hai  // 27 //
adhyAtmAbhyAsakAle'pi kriyA kApyevamasti hi  /  zubhaughasaMjJAnugataM
jJAnamapyasti kiJcana  // 28 //  bhAvArtha : adhyAtmaprApti ke nikaTakAla meM
bhI kucha kriyAe~ rahatI haiM aura zubha augha (sAmAnya) saMjJA ke anukaraNa
karane vAlA kucha jJAna bhI rahatA hai  // 28 //  ato jJAnakriyArUpamadhyAtmaM
vyavatiSThate  /  etatpravardhamAnaM syAnnirdambhAcArazAlinAm  // 29 //
bhAvArtha : isalie adhyAtma jJAna aura kriyA donoM rUpoM meM rahatA hai  /  vaha
adhyAtma niSkapaTa AcAra se suzobhita sAdhakoM meM vRddhigata hotA jAtA hai  /
he ziSya ! pahale tumane jisa adhyAtma ke viSaya meM pUchA thA, vaha adhyAtma
anya adhikAra dUsarA 19

Page #20 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Knowledge and action are both pervasive, except for the objects. And it
increases progressively in the life of great souls who are endowed with
spiritual nature, that is, sincere conduct = religious behavior. ||29|| || Thus
ends the chapter on the nature of the soul ||2|| Adhyatma Sara

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 viSayoM ko chor3akara jJAna aura kriyA ina donoM meM hI vyApta rahatA hai  /
tathA vaha adhyAtmabhAva yAnI niSkapaTa AcAra = dharmavyavahAra se sampanna
mahAtmAoM ke jIvana meM utarottara bar3hatA jAtA hai  // 29 //   //
ityadhyAtmasvarUpAdhikAraH  // 2 //  adhyAtmasAra

Page #21 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
... Right number three. [Pride-Renunciation] Pride is like fire to burn the vine
of liberation, pride is Rahu to the moon of action, pride is the cause of
misfortune, pride is like an obstacle to the attainment of spiritual happiness.
||1|| Meaning: Pride is like fire to burn the vine of liberation, pride is Rahu
to the moon of action, pride is the cause of misfortune, pride is like an
obstacle to the attainment of spiritual happiness. ||1|| Pride is like a
thunderbolt to break the mountain of knowledge, pride is like ghee to fuel the
fire of desire, pride is a friend to vices, pride is a thief who steals the
wealth of vows. ||2|| Meaning: Pride is like a thunderbolt to break the mountain
of knowledge, pride is like ghee to fuel the fire of desire, pride is a friend
to vices, pride is a thief who steals the wealth of vows. ||2|| One who takes
vows with pride and desires the highest state, is like one who boards a ship of
iron and desires to cross the ocean. ||3|| Meaning: One who takes vows with
pride and desires the highest state, is like one who boards a ship of iron and
desires to cross the ocean. ||3|| Right number three

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 ... adhikAra tIsarA . [ dambha-tyAga] daMbho muktilatAvahnirdambho rAhuH
kriyAvidhau  /  daurbhAgyakAraNaM daMbho, daMbho'dhyAtmasukhArgalA  // 1 //
bhAvArtha : dambha muktirUpI latA ko jalAne ke lie agni ke samAna hai, dambha
kriyArUpI candramA kA rAhu hai, dambha durbhAgya kA kAraNa hai aura dambha
adhyAtmasukha kI prApti meM argalA ke samAna hai  // 1 //
dambhojJAnAdridambholidambhaH kAmAnale haviH  /  vyasanAnAM suhRddambho,
daMbhazcauro vratazriyaH  // 2 //  bhAvArtha : dambha jJAnarUpI parvata ko
bhedana karane ke lie vajra ke samAna hai, dambha kAmAgni ko uttejita karane meM
havi= ghI ke samAna hai, dambha vyasanoM (burAIyoM) kA mitra hai, dambha
vratarUpI lakSmI (zobhA) ko haraNa karane vAlA cora hai  // 2 //
dambhenavratamAsthAya yo vAJchati paraM padam  /  lohanAvaM samAruhya so'bdheH
pAraM yiyAsati  // 3 //  bhAvArtha : jo manuSya dambhapUrvaka mahAvrata
(munidIkSA) yA aNuvrata grahaNa karake paramapada mokSa cAhatA hai, vaha aisA hI
hai adhikAra tIsarA

Page #22 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Just as one who tries to cross the ocean in an iron boat, the person who boards
the iron boat sinks in the ocean, similarly the arrogant one sinks in the ocean
of the world. ||3|| What is the use of vows or austerities if arrogance is not
eradicated? What is the use of a mirror or a lamp for a blind person? Just as
these two are useless for the blind, so are vows, austerities, etc., useless for
the arrogant, they are meaningless. ||4|| The practice of keeping hair and eyes
closed, sleeping on the ground, begging for alms, observing the vow of celibacy,
etc., are all tainted by arrogance, just as a precious gem is tainted by a small
blemish. ||5||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 jaise ki koI lohe kI nAva meM baiThakara samudra pAra karanA cAhe  /  lohe kI
naukA para car3hA huA vyakti samudra meM DUba jAtA hai, vaise hI dambhI saMsAra-
samudra meM DUba jAtA hai  // 3 //  kiM vratena tapobhirvA, dambhazcenna
nirAkRtaH  /  kimAdarzana kiM dIpairyadyAndhyaM na dRzorgatam  // 4 //
bhAvArtha : jisane dambha kA tyAga nahIM kiyA, use vrata grahaNa karane yA
vividha tapa karane se kyA lAbha hai? kucha bhI to nahIM  /  andhe AdamI ke liye
darpaNa aura dIpaka kisa kAma ke? jisa prakAra andhe ke liye ye donoM nirUpayogI
haiM, usI prakAra dambhI ke liye vrata, tapa Adi kisI kAma ke nahIM haiM,
nirarthaka haiM  // 4 //  kezaloca-dharAzayyA - bhikSA-brahmavratAdikam  /
dambhena dUSyate sarvaM trAseneva mahAmaNiH  // 5 //  bhAvArtha : jisa prakAra
bahumUlya maNi meM jarA-sA dAga (trAsa) laga jAya to vaha bilkula nikammA ho
jAtA hai, vaha atyanta dUSita ho jAtA hai; isI prakAra sAdhuveSa dhAraNa karake
koI vyakti kezaloca karatA ho, bhUmi para zayana karatA ho, doSarahita bhikSA
grahaNa karatA ho, brahmacarya Adi mahAvratoM kA pAlana karatA ho, vividha
pariSaha-upasarga Adi sahana karatA ho, lekina usake jIvana meM dambharUpI dAga
ho to mokSa 22 adhyAtmasAra

Page #23 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
I All the aforementioned religions, which are means, become contaminated. All
his aforementioned actions become useless and fruitless. ||5|| It is easy to
give up the craving for delicious food, it is also easy to give up the adornment
of the body. It is also easy to give up sensual pleasures; but it is very
difficult to give up pride. ||6|| Meaning: People who hide their faults think
that by doing so, they will be worshipped and respected by people, their glory
will increase, but in reality, these fools get ridicule (shame) only from pride.
||7|| Just as the character of a prostitute is for the increase of immorality,
so also the observance of vows (initiation) by those who wear the garb of a
saint is for the increase of non-observance (sin) due to pride. ||8|| Chapter
Three 23

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 I sAdhanarUpI ukta sabhI dharma dUSita ho jAte haiM  /  usakI ukta sabhI
kriyAe~ nikammI aura niSphala ho jAtI haiM  // 5 //  sutyajaM rasalAmpaTyaM
sutyajaM dehabhUSaNam  /  sutyajAH kAmabhogAzca dustyajaM dambhasevanam  // 6 //
bhAvArtha : susvAdu AhAra kI rasa- lolupatA chor3anA AsAna hai, zarIra kA
zRMgAra bhI chor3anA sarala hai  /  kAma-bhogoM ko bhI AsAnI se chor3A jA sakatA
hai; lekina dambha kA tyAga karanA atyanta kaThina hai ||6|| svadoSa-nihnavo
lokaH pUjA syAd gauravaMtathA  /  iyataiva kadarthyante, dambhena bata bAlizAH
// 7 //  bhAvArtha : apane doSoM ko chipAne vAle loga yoM socate ki aisA karane
se logoM meM hamArI pUjA - pratiSThA hogI, hamArA gaurava bar3hegA, lekina
sacamuca ve mUrkha itane se dambha se hI viDambanA (phajIhata) pAte haiM ||7||
11911 asatInAM yathA zIlamazIlasyaiva vRddhaye  /  dambhenAvratavRddhayarthaM
vrataM veSabhRtAM tathA  // 8 //  bhAvArtha : jaise kulaTA striyoM kA zIla
durAcAra kI hI vRddhi ke lie hotA hai, vaise hI kore vezadhArI sAdhuoM ke
vratagrahaNa (dIkSA) bhI dambha ke kAraNa avrata (pApa) kI vRddhi ke hetu hote
haiM  // 8 //  adhikAra tIsarA 23

Page #24 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The knowledgeable people also perceive the manifestation of hypocrisy. There,
the ones with steadfast faith stumble at every step.  Alas, the greatness of
delusion that they defile the Diksha Bhagavati even with deceit, like blackening
the face with collyrium.  Just as frost on the lotus, disease in the body, fire
in the forest, night in the day, foolishness in the scriptures, and affliction
in happiness, similarly, hypocrisy is a disturbance in the observance of Dharma.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 jAnAnA api dambhasya sphuritaM bAlizA janA:  /  tatraiva dhRtavizvAsAH
praskhanti pade pade  //  9  //  - bhAvArtha : dambha ( gUr3ha kapaTa) ke
pariNAma ko spaSTa jAnate hue bhI mUr3hajana usI dambha meM vizvAsa rakhakara
kadamakadama para skhalita hote (cUkate) haiM, athavA jagaha-jagaha tiraskRta-
apamAnita hote haiM  // 9 //  aho mohasya mAhAtmyaM dIkSAM bhAgavatImapi  /
dambhena yadvilumpanti kajjaleneva rUpakam  // 10 //  bhAvArtha : aho! mohanIya
karma kA adbhuta prabhAva ki jisa prakAra kAjala potakara koI apane asalI cehare
ko kAlA-zyAha kara letA hai, usI prakAra mUrkha manuSya bhI bhAgavatI dIkSA
svIkArakara mAyA ( kapaTa) se use dUSita kara detA hai  // 10 //  abje himaM
tanau rogo, vane vahnirdine nizA  /  granthe mauryyaM kali saukhye dharme dambha
upaplavAH  // 11 //  bhAvArtha : jaise kamala para himapAta ( pAlA par3anA),
zarIra meM roga, vana meM Aga, dina meM rAta (aMdherA), grantha ke sambandha meM
mUrkhatA aura sukha ke prasaMga meM kleza upadravarUpa haiM, usI prakAra dharma
kI ArAdhanA meM dambha upadravakAraka hai  /  isase dharma kI vizuddhatA naSTa
ho jAtI hai  // 11 //  24 adhyAtmasAra

Page #25 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Therefore, one who is unable to bear the fire of the root-virtues, it is proper
for him to accept the Shravaka-vratas, but it is not proper to live with pride.
||12|| Meaning: Therefore, one who is unable to bear the fire of the root-
virtues, it is proper for him to accept the Shravaka-vratas, but it is not
proper to live with pride. ||12|| One who is unable to renounce even the Linga
due to strong attachment, should become a Sanvijna-pakshiya, a humble servant of
the virtuous. ||13|| Meaning: One who is unable to renounce even the Linga due
to strong attachment, should become a Sanvijna-pakshiya, a humble servant of the
virtuous. ||13|| Even a humble and dejected one, who speaks the pure meaning,
his slight effort, given to a virtuous one, is like a drop of water in a desert.
||14|| Meaning: Even a humble and dejected one, who speaks the pure meaning, his
slight effort, given to a virtuous one, is like a drop of water in a desert.
||14|| Those who clearly know their own inability to bear the burden of the
Mahavratas, and yet pretend to be superior, their name is also a sin. ||15||
Meaning: Those who clearly know their own inability to bear the burden of the
Mahavratas, and yet pretend to be superior, their name is also a sin. ||15||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 ataeva na yo dhartuM mUlottaraguNAnalam  /  yuktA suzrAddhatA tasya, na tu
dambhena jIvanam  // 12 //  bhAvArtha : isalie jo sAdhu mUlaguNoM ko dhAraNa
karane meM asamartha hai, use zrAvakavrata grahaNa kara lenA ucita hai, lekina
dambha se jInA ucita nahIM  // 12 //  parihartuM na yo liGgamapyalaM
dRDharAgavAn  /  saMvijJapAkSikaH sa syAnnirdambhaH sAdhu-sevakaH  // 13 //
bhAvArtha : agara koI gAr3ha rAga-(moha) vaza muniveza kA tyAga na kara sake to
use cAhie ki dambharahita susAdhu kA sevaka hokara saMvijJa-pakSIya bana jAya
// 13 //  nirdambhasyAvasannasyApyasya zuddhArthabhASiNaH  /  nirjarAM yatanA
datte svalpApi guNarAgiNaH  // 14 //  bhAvArtha : koI sAdhu cAritra meM zithila
(mandakriyAvAn) ho, kintu dambharahita hokara zuddha artha kA nirUpaNa karatA
ho, to usa guNAnurAgI muni kI thor3I-sI yatanA bhI nirjarA kA kAma karatI hai
// 14 //  vratabhArAsahatvaM ye vidanto'tyAtmanaH sphuTam  /
dambhAdyatitvamAkhyAnti teSAM nAmApi pApmane  // 15 //  bhAvArtha : mahAvratoM
ke bhAra ko uThAne meM sApha taura se apanI asamarthatA jAnate hue bhI jo
kapaTapUrvaka apane meM adhikAra tIsarA 25

Page #26 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The existence of Munihood (monkhood) is revealed, even the mere mention of its
name incurs sin. ||15|| They do not make the proper effort appropriate to the
time. Alas, the world is deceived by these hypocritical ascetics in the name of
Yatinām (ascetic). ||16||  Those ascetics who do not perform the appropriate and
proper spiritual practices (such as vows, restraint, etc.) befitting their
stage, they merely create a facade and deceive the world under the guise of
being ascetics. ||16||  One who has concealed their own faults under the desire
for a reputation of being religious, even though they are deficient in
character, they consider the world as trivial like a blade of grass. Alas, what
a deception these deceitful people display! ||17||  Then, that hypocrite, out of
arrogance about themselves and defamation of others, binds themselves to a harsh
karma that is an obstacle to their spiritual progress. ||18||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 munitva kA astitva batalAtA hai, usakA nAma lene se bhI pApa lagatA hai  // 15
//  kurvate ye na yatanAM samyakkAlocitAmapi  /  tairaho yatinAmnaiva
dAmbhikairvaJcyate jagat  // 16 //  bhAvArtha : jo sAdhu paMcamakAla athavA
apanI avasthA ke yogya ucita yatanA (saMyamakriyA, vratarakSA Adi) bhI nahIM
karate, ve kapaTI (dAmbhika) kevala DhoMga racakara sAdhu ke nAma se jagat ko
Thagate haiM  // 16 //  dharmIti khyAtilobhena pracchAdita-nijAzravaH  /  tRNAya
manyate vizvaM hIno'pi dhRtakaitavaH  // 17 //  _ bhAvArtha : jisane dhArmika ke
rUpa meM apanI prasiddhi kI mahattvAkAMkSA se apane pApoM ko DhaMka diyA hai,
vaha DhoMgI sAdhu kapaTa racakara apane ApameM cAritrahIna hone para bhI jagat
ko tRNavat tuccha samajhatA hai  /  aho ! makkAra logoM kI kaisI viDambanA hai !
// 17 //  AtmotkarSAttato dambhI pareSAM cApavAdataH  /  badhnAti kaThinaM karma
bAdhakaM yogajanmanaH  // 18 //  bhAvArtha : phira vaha dambhI apanI bar3AI aura
dUsaroM kI nindA karake yogotpatti meM bAdhaka kaThora karmo kA bandhana kara
letA hai, jisase vaha narakAdi durgati meM jAtA hai  // 18 //  26 adhyAtmasAra

Page #27 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Therefore, the seeker of self-realization should abandon pride, which is the
cause of misery, because the Agamas state that "simplicity leads to the
purification of the soul."  Simplicity is the foundation of Dharma and the path
to liberation. ||19||  The Jinas have not prescribed any absolute rules or
prohibitions for any action. Their command is: "Whatever action you perform, do
it with simplicity and without pride." Therefore, the first and foremost duty is
to abandon pride. ||20||  For those whose minds are devoted to spirituality,
even a little pride is not appropriate, because even a small hole in a ship can
cause it to sink in the ocean. ||21||  Chapter Three 27

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 AtmArthinA tatastyAjyo dambho'narthanibandhanam  /  zuddhiH
syAdRjubhUtasyetyAgame pratipAditam  // 19 //  bhAvArtha : ataH dambha ko
anartha kA kAraNa jAnakara AtmArthI sAdhaka ko usakA tyAga karanA cAhie; kyoMki
Agama meM batAyA gayA hai ki 'saralatA se hI AtmA kI zuddhi hotI hai| saralAtmA
meM hI dharma TikatA hai aura vahI kalyANa kA mArga hai  // 19 //
jinairnAnumataM kiJciniSiddhaM vA na sarvathA  /  kArye
bhAvyamadambhenetyeSA''jJA pAramezvarI  // 20 //  bhAvArtha : zrItIrthaMkara
paramAtmA ne kisI bhI kArya ke viSaya meM ekAnta vidhAna yA niSedha nahIM kiyA
hai, kintu jinezvaroM kI aisI AjJA hai ki 'koI bhI kArya ho, use dambharahita
hokara saralatApUrvaka karo  / ' isalie sarvaprathama dambhatyAga karanA
anivArya hai  // 20 //  adhyAtmaratacittAnAM dambhaH svalpo'pi nocitaH  /
chidralezo'pi potasya sindhuM laMghayatAmiva  // 21 //  bhAvArtha : jinakA citta
adhyAtmabhAva meM rata hai, unake lie jarA-sA dambha karanA ucita nahIM hai,
kyoMki samudra pAra karane vAloM ke lie naukA meM jarA-sA bhI cheda anarthakArI
hotA hai  // 21 //  adhikAra tIsarA 27

Page #28 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Even the pride of Malli Nath, etc., is the cause of the evil of the female
scriptures. Therefore, the great soul should strive to avoid it. ||22||
Meaning: Just as old age, pride also became the cause of the evil of the female
scriptures for Malli Nath, etc. Therefore, the great soul should strive to
abandon it. ||22||  || Thus ends the chapter on the abandonment of pride. ||3||
28 Adhyatma Sara

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dambhalezA'pi malyAdeH strItvAnarthanibandhanam  /  atastatparihArAya
yatitavyaM mahAtmanA  // 22 //  bhAvArtha : jarA-sA dambha bhI mallinAtha Adi ke
lie strIvedarUpI anartha kA kAraNa banA, isalie mahAtmA puruSa ko usakA tyAga
karane ke lie prayatnazIla honA cAhie  // 22 //   //  iti dambha-tyAgAdhikAraH
// 3 //  28 adhyAtmasAra

Page #29 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter Four [Contemplation of the Nature of Existence]  Therefore, a wise
man, skilled in the practice of non-hypocrisy, should contemplate the nature of
existence, fixing his mind for even a moment. This contemplation is like the
waves of a vast spiritual lake, nourished by the pleasant wind of the foundation
of detachment, and brings happiness to the virtuous. ||1||  **Meaning:**
Therefore, a man skilled in the practice of non-hypocrisy and wise, should
contemplate the nature of existence, fixing his mind for even a moment. This
contemplation of the nature of existence is like the waves of a vast spiritual
lake, nourished by the pleasant wind of the foundation of detachment, and brings
happiness to the virtuous. ||1||  On one side, the unbearable fire of desire
burns fiercely, while on the other, the mountains of objects crumble, falling
from their peaks. On one side, the whirlpool of anger, created by the confluence
of the currents of delusion, churns. In this ocean of existence, who can be
fearless? ||2||  **Meaning:** On one side, the unbearable fire of desire burns
fiercely, while on the other, the mountains of objects crumble, falling from
their peaks. On one side, the whirlpool of anger, created by the confluence of
the currents of delusion, churns. In this ocean of existence, who can be
fearless? ||2||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 adhikAra cauthA [ bhavasvarUpacintA ] tadevaM nirdambhAcaraNapaTunA cetasi
bhavasvarUpaM saMcintyaM kSaNamapi samAdhAya sudhiyA  /  iyaM
cintA'dhyAtmaprasarasarasInIralaharI, satAM vairAgyAsthApriyapavanapInA
sukhakRte  // 1 //  bhAvArtha : isalie dambharahita AcaraNa karane meM nipuNa
aura buddhimAna puruSa kSaNabhara ke lie mana ko sthira kara saMsAra ke svarUpa
kA cintana kare  /  saMsArasvarUpa kA cintana adhyAtma ke vizAla sarovara kI
jala- taraGga ke samAna hai, vaha vairAgya kI AsthArUpI manoharavAyu se
paripuSTa hokara satpuruSoM ke lie sukhadAyI hotA hai  // 1 //  itaH
kAmaurvAgnirjvalati parito duHsaha itaH  /  patanti grAvANo
viSayagirikUTAdvighaTitAH  //  itaH krodhAvarto vikRtitaTinI - saMgamakRtaH  /
samudre saMsAre tadiha na bhayaM kasya bhavati ?  // 2 //  bhAvArtha : eka ora
duHsaha kAmarUpI var3avAnala cAroM tarapha se jala rahA hai, dUsarI ora
viSayarUpI parvata - zikhara se adhikAra cauthA 29

Page #30 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
A rain of broken stones is falling, on one side a wrathful vortex (whirlpool) is
seen arising from the confluence of deformed rivers; in such a world-ocean, who
does not experience fear? Fear is seen everywhere. ||2|| Where the beloved flame
flares up with the burning heat of desire. Her glances are like smoke-clouds,
dark as the petals of the blue lotus. And her limbs are like boundless coals,
transformed by many desires. In this fire of existence, where is peace to be
found? ||3|| Meaning: In this fire of the world, the beloved flame, made
restless by the burning heat of desire (lust). She throws out smoke-clouds, dark
as the petals of the lotus, in the form of her glances. Her limbs are like
coals, from which flames of worldly desires arise. In such a blazing fire of the
world, where is happiness to be found? ||3|| Having given the noose of affection
for son and wife, where the weak creatures of nature are oppressed.  Completely
sorrowful, with the cruel warriors of diverse desires, existence is a desolate
place, oh, how terrifying it is! ||4|| Meaning: Alas! This world is a terrifying
slaughterhouse, where the cruel warriors of diverse desires (lust) oppress the
weak creatures of nature. Completely sorrowful, with the cruel warriors of
diverse desires, existence is a desolate place, oh, how terrifying it is! ||4||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 TUTe hue pattharoM kI varSA ho rahI hai, eka tarapha vikRtirUpI nadiyoM ke
saMgama se utpanna krodharUpI Avartta (bha~varajAla) dikhatA hai; to aise
saMsAra - samudra meM kise bhaya utpanna nahIM hotA hai? sarvatra bhaya hI
dikhatA hai  // 2 //  priyA jvAlA yatrodvamati ratisaMtApataralA  /  kaTAkSAn
dhUmaughAn kuvalayadalazyAmalarUcIn  //  athAMgAnyaMgArAH kRtabahuvikArAzca
viSayA  /  dahantyasmin vahnau bhavavapuSi zarma kva sulabham  // 3 //
bhAvArtha : isa saMsArarUpI agni meM rati (kAma) rUpI saMtApa se caMcala banI
huI priyA rUpI jvAlA hai  /  jo kamala ke patra-sI zyAmakAnti vAle strI -
kaTAkSarUpI dhUmrasamUha ko bAhara pheMka rahI hai| strI ke aMga aMgAre haiM,
jinase viSaya-vikArarUpI lapaTeM nikalatI haiM  /  aisI dhadhakatI huI
saMsArarUpI agni meM sukha kahA~ se sulabha ho ? || 3 || gale dattvA pAzaM
tanayavanitAsnehaghaTitaM  /  nipIDyate yatra prakRtikRpaNAH prANipazavaH  //
nitAntaM duHkhArttA viSamaviSayairghAtakabhaTai -  /  rbhavaH sUnAsthAnaM
tadahaha mahAsAdhvasakaram  // 4 //  bhAvArtha : aho ! yaha saMsAra eka
mahAbhayAnaka kasAIkhAnA hai, jahA~ viSamaviSayarUpI ghAtaka zUra (kasAI)
prakRti se tuccha 30 adhyAtmasAra

Page #31 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
They are constantly tormenting the animal-like beings by putting a snare of
affection for their children, wives, etc., around their necks. And because of
this, the animal-like beings, who are suffering from extreme pain, are
screaming. ||4||  In the night of ignorance, he wanders, carrying a heavy load
of passions on his head. He throws the bones of objects around his neck. He
shows his teeth of great vices, with a crooked, deceitful face. This one is not
trustworthy, for he is a night-walker. ||5||  Meaning: This world is like a
demon, who walks in the night of ignorance, carries a heavy load of passions on
his head, has a pile of bones of objects hanging around his neck, and then, with
a crooked, deceitful face, shows his teeth of great vices. Therefore, one should
not trust such a demon-like world. ||5||  Having obtained a small alms of the
wealth of Dharma, the noble beings who wander in the forest of existence, are
robbed by the strong arrows of flowers in the difficult fortresses of the
breasts of women. In the forest of existence, it is not appropriate for the
helpless to go there. ||6||  Meaning: Having obtained a small alms of the wealth
of Dharma with great difficulty, the noble beings who wander in the forest of
existence, are robbed by the strong arrows of flowers in the difficult
fortresses of the breasts of women. In the forest of existence, it is not
appropriate for the helpless to go there. ||6||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 jIvarUpI pazuoM ke gale meM putra-strI Adi kA sneharUpI pAza (phaMdA) DAlakara
unheM satat pIr3ita kara rahe haiN| aura isa kAraNa atyanta duHkha se pIr3ita
jIva-rUpI pazu cillA rahe haiM  // 4 //  avidyAyAM rAtrau carati vahate mUrdhni
viSamaM  /  kaSAyavyAlaughaM kSipati viSayAsthIni ca gale  //  mahAdoSAna
dantAna prakaTayati vkrsmrmkho| na vizvAsArho'yaM bhavati bhavanaktaMcara iti
// 5 //  bhAvArtha : yaha saMsAra rAkSasarUpa hai, jo avidyArUpI rAtri meM
calatA hai, mastaka para bhayaMkara kaSAyarUpI so ko dhAraNa karatA hai, usake
gale meM viSayarUpI haDDiyoM kA Dhera laTaka rahA hai aura phira vaha
saMsArarUpI rAkSasa kAmarUpI kuTila mukha vAlA hokara apane mahAdoSarUpI dA~ta
dikhAtA hai  /  ataH aise saMsArarUpI rAkSasa para vizvAsa nahIM karanA cAhie
// 5 //  janA labdhvA dharmadraviNalavabhikSAM kathamapi  /  prayAnto
vAmAkSIstanaviSamadurgasthitikRtA  //  viluTyante yasyAM kusumazarabhillena
balinA  /  bhavATavyAM nAsyAmucitamasahAyasya gamanam  // 6 //  bhAvArtha :
bar3I muzkila se upArjita dharmarUpI dhana kI jarA-sI bhikSA prApta karake
saMsArarUpI aTavI meM vicaraNa karane vAle bhavyajIvoM ko striyoM ke stanarUpI
viSamadurga meM sthita adhikAra cauthA 31

Page #32 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Kamadeva, the formidable robber, plunders. Therefore, it is not at all proper to
enter this terrifying forest of the world without a guide. || 6 ||  "This wealth
is mine, that house is mine, these wife, children, etc., are mine"; thus, due to
the perverse understanding of "mineness", even after repeatedly experiencing
immense suffering, people in the world are filled with pride in false happiness.
Therefore, this world is made of falsehood. A wise person does not become
attached to this deceitful world. || 7 ||  Affection for a beloved is like a
shackle, the family, like a guard, wealth, like a new bond. This world, a
prison, is filled with the impure substance of pride, and is fraught with the
contact of vices like pits (burrows). Wise people have no desire for this. || 8
||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 kAmadevarUpI jabardasta luTerA lUTa letA hai  /  isalie aisI bhayaMkara saMsAra
- aTavI meM sahAyaka ke binA praveza karanA bilakula ucita nahIM hai  //  6  //
dhanaM me gehaM mama sukalatrAdikamato, viparyAsAdAsAditavitataduHkhA api muhuH
//  janA yasmin mithyAsukhamadabhRtaH kUTaghaTanAmayo'yaM saMsArastadiha na
vivekI prasajati  // 7 //  bhAvArtha : yaha dhana merA hai, vaha ghara merA hai,
ye strI-putra Adi mere haiM; isa prakAra merepana kI viparItabuddhi se bAra-bAra
atyanta duHkha pAne para bhI jagat meM jhUThe sukha kA ghamaMDa karane vAle loga
baiThe haiM  /  ata: yaha saMsAra asat - racanAmaya hai  /  isa kUTa -
kapaTamaya saMsAra meM vivekI puruSa Asakta nahIM hote  // 7 //  priyAsneho
yasminnigaDasadRzo yAmikabhaTo pamaH svIyo vargo dhanamabhinavaM baMdhanamiva
//  madAmedhyApUrNaM vyasanabilasaMsargaviSamaM  /  bhavaH kArAgehaMtadiha na
ratiH kvApi viduSAM  // 8  //  bhAvArtha : isa saMsAra meM priyA kA sneha ber3I
ke samAna hai, putra - strI Adi parijanavarga bahAdura paharedAra ke samAna hai,
dhana nayA bandhana hai tathA yaha saMsAra - kArAgAra madarUpI apavitra
padArthoM se bharA huA hai, vyasanarUpI gaDDhoM (biloM) ke saMsarga ke 32
adhyAtmasAra

Page #33 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The reason is terrible. In truth, this world is a prison. Therefore, wise men
never have attachment (āsakti) to it. ||8||  Great anger is like a terrible
vulture, the restless jackal is like avarice, and the owl, like Cupid, wanders
freely, making a harsh sound. ||9||  The fire of sorrow burns there, and the
heap of ashes of disgrace is spread all around. Therefore, where is the beauty
in this world, which is like a cremation ground? Nowhere at all. ||9||  The
shadow of wealth is like the shadow of a poisonous tree, which increases the
intoxication of the senses. The lust of women is like the pollen of that
poisonous tree, which causes great harm. ||10||  The taste of the fruits of this
world is like the poison of hell, which causes a multitude of diseases.
Therefore, the wise should not be attached to this world, which is full of
poison. ||10||  Chapter Four 33

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 kAraNa bhayaMkara hai  /  vastuta: yaha saMsAra kArAgRha hai  /  isalie isa
para vidvAn puruSa kadApi prIti (Asakti) nahIM karate  // 8 //  mahAkrodho
gRdhro'nuparati-zRgAlI ca capalA  /  smarolUko yatra prakaTakaTuzabdaH pracarati
//  pradIptaH zokAgnistatamapayazo bhasma paritaH  /  smazAnaM
saMsArastadabhiramaNIyatvamiha kim  // 9 //  bhAvArtha : yaha saMsAra eka
smazAna hai, jahA~ vikaTa krodharUpI bhayAnaka giddha (pakSI) rahate haiM,
aviratirUpa caMcala siyAranI rahatI hai, kAmadevarUpI ullU spaSTarUpa se
bhayaMkara AvAja karatA huA svacchanda ghUma rahA hai  /  vahA~ zokarUpI agni
jala rahI hai, cAroM ora vistRta apayazarUpI rAkha ke Dhera par3e haiM  /  ataH
aise saMsArarUpI maraghaTa meM ramaNIyatA kahA~ hai ? kahIM para bhI to nahIM
// 9 //  dhanAzA yacchAyApyativiSayamUrchA - praNayinI  /  vilAso nArINAM
guruvikRtaye yatsumarasaH  //  phalAsvAdA yasya
prasaranarakavyAdhinivahastadAsthA no yuktA bhavaviSatarAvatra sudhiyAm  // 10
//  bhAvArtha : yaha saMsAra viSavRkSa ke samAna hai; jisakI dhanAzArUpI chAyA
atyanta viSayamUrchA bar3hAne vAlI hai; usa viSavRkSa kA mahAvikAraka
puSpaparAga hai, - nAriyoM kA vilAsa  /  adhikAra cauthA 33

Page #34 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The taste of its fruits is like the vast group of diseases and suffering of
hell! It is not right for wise men to have faith in such a world-poisoning tree.
||10||  Sometimes a kingdom, sometimes even a little wealth is difficult to
obtain. Sometimes high caste, sometimes low birth and bad reputation. Sometimes
beauty and excessive splendor, sometimes not even the form of the body. This
disparity is pleasing to whom? To no one. ||11||  This desire, which digs a
path, is a weariness for the great ones, a quarrel with the side effects. Like
the snakes that crawl in their holes, the ignorant think this world is a place
of happiness. What do we say? How can there be happiness in this world of
constant change? ||12||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 usake phaloM kA svAda naraka ke vistIrNa vyAdhisamUhaduHkhasamUha ke samAna hai
! buddhimAna puruSoM ko aise saMsAraviSavRkSa para AsthA rakhanA ThIka nahIM  //
10 //  kvacitprAjyaM rAjyaM kvacana dhanalezo'pyasulabhaH  /  kvacijjAti -
sphAtiH kvacidapi ca nIcatva - kuyazaH  //  kvacillAvaNya zrIratizayavatI kvApi
na vapuHsvarUpaM vaiSamyaM ratikaramidaM kasya nu bhave  // 11 //  bhAvArtha :
isa saMsAra meM kisI janma meM vizAla rAjya mila jAtA hai to kisI janma meM
jarA-sA dhana bhI milanA durlabha ho jAtA hai  /  kisI janma meM uccajAti prApta
hotI hai to kisI janma meM nIcakula kA apayaza milatA hai  /  tathA kisI janma
meM deha kI atizaya sundaratArUpI zrI prApta hotI hai to kisI janma meM zarIra
kA rUpa bhI nahIM miltaa| isa prakAra isa saMsAra kI viSamatA (vicitratA) bhalA
kise prItikAraka ho sakatI hai? kise bhI nahIM  //  11  //  ihoddAmaH kAmaH
khanati paripaMthI guNamahImavizrAmaH pArzvasthitakupariNAmasya kalahaH  //
bilAnyantaH krAmanmada-phaNabhRtAM pAmaramataM  /  vadAmaH kiM nAma
prakaTabhavadhAmasthitisukham  // 12 //  bhAvArtha : pAmaraprANI jisa
saMsArarUpI ghara meM nivAsa ko atyanta sukhakara mAna baiThe haiM, usa sukha kA
hama kisa mu~ha se 34 adhyAtmasAra

Page #35 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Tell me, for in this house of the world, the lustful enemy, Kamadeva, has
entered like a thief, digging up the earth of virtue (Triratna), constantly
quarreling with the neighboring bad consequences, and within (the mind) are the
burrows of the mobile snake, adorned with eight fangs (Ashtamada). How can there
be happiness in such a house of the world? ||12||  The thirsty beings, enslaved
by the objects of sense, are distressed in this summer of the world. The lake of
virtue has dried up due to the fierce sun of wrath. Remember how the fat of
virtue melts daily due to the sweat of lust. In this terrible summer of
existence, what refuge is there to alleviate the heat? ||13||  Meaning: In this
summer of the world, where the fierce sun of intense anger has dried up the lake
of virtue, the thirsty beings, enslaved by the objects of sense, are distressed
by thirst. In this summer of the world, where the fat of virtue melts daily due
to the sweat of lust, what refuge is there to alleviate the heat? ||13||
Father, mother, brother, even those who are desired and approved, are not the
givers of wealth, nor are they knowledgeable about the village of virtue. People
are self-interested, deceitful, and harboring evil intentions. Who is the
connoisseur of the taste of happiness in this existence? ||14||  Chapter Four

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 bakhAna kareM? kyoMki isa saMsArarUpI ghara meM kAmadevarUpI ucchRkhala zatru
yA cora ghusA huA hai, jo (triratnamaya) guNarUpI pRthvI ko khodatA hai, par3osa
meM rahe hue kupariNAma ke sAtha nirantara jhagar3A calatA rahatA hai aura
andara (mana meM) aSTamadarUpI phaNoM ko dhAraNa karane vAle saMcaraNazIla so ke
bila bhI haiN| bhalA aise saMsArarUpI ghara meM sukha kahA~ se ho ?  // 12 //
tRSArtAH khidyante viSayavivazA yatra bhavinaH  /  karAlakrodhArkAcchamasarasi
zASaM gatavati  //  smarasvedakledaglapitaguNamedasyanudinam  /  bhavagrISme
bhISme kimiha zaraNaM tApaharaNam  // 13 //  bhAvArtha : jisa saMsArarUpI
grISmakAla meM atyanta ugrakrodharUpI pracaNDa sUrya ke kAraNa samatArUpI
sarovara ke sUkha jAne se viSayoM ke vazIbhUta hue pyAse bhavyaprANI pyAsa se
pIr3ita hokara khinna ho jAte haiM  /  jahA~ saMsArarUpI grISmakAla meM
pratidina kAmarUpI pasIne se tarabatara hone se guNarUpI carbI gala rahI hai|
aise saMsArarUpI bhayaMkara grISmakAla meM tApahArI kauna sI zaraNa hai ?  // 13
//  pitA mAtA bhrAtA'pyabhilaSitasiddhAvabhimato  /  guNagrAmajJAtA na khalu
dhanadAtA ca dhanavAn  //  janAH svArthasphAtAvanizamavadAtAzayabhRtaH  /
pramAtA kaH khyAtAviha bhavasukhasyAstu rasikaH ?  // 14 //  adhikAra cauthA

Page #36 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**भावार्थ:** In this world, mother, father, brother, etc., are favorable and
agreeable only when their desired object is obtained. Even a wealthy person,
knowing their good qualities and deeds, does not give wealth. Because in this
world, everyone is constantly engrossed in the growth of their own self-
interest. Therefore, who among the connoisseurs of worldly happiness
(**pramata**) is interested in calling this happiness? ||14||  **भावार्थ:**
Alas! When their great self-interest is fulfilled, people embrace those
(**nirdhan** or lowly or relatives) individuals with praise, prestige, or
wealth, giving their lives for them. When self-interest is not fulfilled, they
ruthlessly abandon them like straw. Thus, worldly people harbor poison in their
hearts and nectar in their mouths, betraying trust. If you are not distressed
(**vairagya**) by such a world, then what is the benefit of saying more? Nothing
at all. ||15||  **भावार्थ:** With beautiful appearances, they create joy, but
when these appearances are marred, even the wealthy and virtuous become
distressed. ||36||  **Adhyatma Sara**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 bhAvArtha : isa saMsAra meM mAtA, pitA, bhAI Adi apanI abhISTa vastu prApta
hone para hI anukUla va sahamata hote haiM  /  dhanika usake upakAra Adi guNoM
ko jAnatA huA bhI dhana nahIM detA  /  kyoMki isa jagat meM sabhI loga apane-
apane svArtha kI vRddhi meM hI nirantara race-pace (gADha pariNAmI) rahate haiM
/  isalie saMsAra ke sukha kI nApa-jokha karane vAle (pramAtA) kisa rasika ko
isameM sukha kahane meM dilacaspI hai ?  // 14 //  paNaiH prANairgRhnAtyahaha
mahati svArtha iha yAn  /  tyjtyuccailokstRnnvdghRnnstaanprthaa  //  viSaM
svAnte vaktre'mRtamiti ca vizvAsahatikRd  /  bhavAdityudvego yadi na gaditaiH
kiM tadadhikaiH  // 15 //  bhAvArtha : aho ! apanA bar3A svArtha siddha hotA hai
to loga jina (nirdhana yAnI nIca athavA svajana) vyaktiyoM ko prazaMsA,
pratiSThA yA dhana pradAna karake prANapaNa se apanAte haiM, svArtha siddha na
hone para unhIM ko nirdayatApUrvaka tinake kI taraha chor3a dete haiN| isa
prakAra sAMsArika jana hRdaya meM viSa aura mukha meM amRta rakhakara
vizvAsaghAta karate haiN| agara aise saMsAra se tumheM udvega (vairAgya) nahIM
hotA to phira adhika kahane se kyA lAbha hai? kucha bhI nahIM  // 15 //  dRzAM
prAntaiH kAntaiH kalayati mudaM kopakalitairamIbhiH khinnaH syAd
dhanadhananidhInAmapi guNI  //  36 adhyAtmasAra

Page #37 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
By means of praise and other upaya, how can one even slightly remove the
delusion? Alas, such is the uneven creation of the karma of delusion in the
house of existence. ||16||  **Meaning:** Even a virtuous man is delighted to see
the beautiful corners of the eyes of the wealthy who possess abundant wealth,
and he is saddened to see their angry gaze. Then, with great difficulty, he
pacifies them with praise and other upaya, and removes their anger. Alas! Such
is the uneven creation of the karma of delusion in the house of existence.
||16||  **Priya Preksha is the beloved, Vinaya is the son, Gunarati is the
daughter, Viveka is the father, and the pure and spotless Parinati is the
mother.** This is the clear and distinct family of the pure soul. The being has
not seen this family while wandering in the endless cycle of existence; yet, he
has the desire for the happiness of association in the external family of wife
and children. This is indeed a wonder. ||17||  **Chapter Four** **37**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 upAyaiH stutyAdyairapanayati SaM kathamapItyaho mohasyaivaM
bhavabhavanavaiSamyaghaTanA  // 16 //  bhAvArtha : svayaM guNI puruSa bhI
pracuradhananidhi vAle dhanADhyoM ke netroM ke manohara koNa dekhakara harSita
ho jAte haiM, aura unhIM kI roSayukta dRSTi dekhakara khinna ho jAte haiM  /
taba unakI stati (prazaMsA) Adi upAyoM se baDI mazkila se unheM manAkara unakA
roSa dUra karate haiM  /  aho ! saMsArarUpI bhavana meM mohanIyakarma kI aisI hI
viSama racanA hai  // 16 /  /  priyA prekSA putro vinaya, iha putrI
guNaratirvivekAkhyastAtaH pariNatiraniMdyA ca jananI  //  vizuddhasya svasya
sphurati hi kuTumba sphuTamidaM  /  bhave tanno dRSTaM tadapi bata
saMyogasukhadhIH  // 17 //  bhAvArtha : isa antaraMga kuTumba meM prekSA
(tattvacintA) nAma kI priyA hai, vinaya nAmaka putra hai, guNarati nAma kI putrI
hai, viveka nAma kA pitA aura zuddha nirmala pariNati mAtA hai| isa prakAra
vizuddha AtmA kA kuTumba sphaTika ke samAna spaSTataH pratibhAsita hotA hai  /
isa kuTumba ko anAdi-saMsAra meM paribhramaNa karate hue prANI ne dekhA hI
nahIM; phira bhI use strIputrAdi bAhyakuTumba meM saMyogasukha kI buddhi (icchA)
maujUda hai, yahI Azcarya hai  // 17 //  adhikAra cauthA 37

Page #38 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
In this world, there is no happiness anywhere. In this world, even the beginning
of love is painful, then maintaining that love unbroken is difficult; and when
love (the beloved) is lost (separation), there are many sorrows. These are
endured by the hard-hearted person like a pot placed in a potter's kiln, heated
on all sides, and finally, due to the consequences of evil deeds, he suffers the
pain of hell and other miseries in future lives. Therefore, there is no
happiness whatsoever in this world, which is like a kiln.  This battlefield of
existence, the army of Dharma has been destroyed by the arrows of the glances of
beautiful women. Here, the hearts of hundreds of righteous warriors are stained
with the thick blood of attachment. Hundreds of vices, like vultures, are
circling above, and this is indeed the land of great delusion, the battlefield
of love.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 purA premAraMbhe tadanu tadavicchedaghaTane  /  taducchede duHkhAnyatha
kaThinacetA viSahate  //  vipAkAdApAkAhitakalazavattApabahulAt  /  jano
yasminnasmin kvacidapi sukhaM hanta na bhave  //  18  //  bhAvArtha : isa
saMsAra meM kahIM bhI sukha nahIM hai  /  isa saMsAra meM pahale prema kA
prArambha karane meM hI duHkha hai, usake bAda usa prema ko akhaNDa rUpa se
TikAne meM kaSTa hai; aura prema (premapAtra) ke naSTa (viyoga ) ho jAne para
aneka duHkha hote haiM  /  jinheM kaThorahRdaya vyakti kumhAra ke Ave meM DAle
hue ghar3e ke samAna cAroM ora se tapta hokara sahana karatA hai aura anta meM,
vaha duSkarma ke vipAka ke kAraNa, janmAntara meM bhI narakAdi durgatiyoM ke
duHkha pAtA hai  /  ata: saMsArarUpI A~ve meM jarA bhI sukha nahIM hai  // 18 //
mRgAkSodRgbANairiha hi nihataM dharmakaTakam  /  viliptA hRddezA iha ca bahulai
rAgarudhiraiH  //  bhramantyUrdhvaM krUrA vyasanazatagRdhrAzca tadiyam  /
mahAmoha-kSoNIramaNaraNabhUmiH khalu bhavaH  // 19 //  bhAvArtha : saMsArarUpI
raNabhUmi meM mRnagayanA lalanAoM ke kaTAkSa bANoM se dharmarAjA kI senA naSTa
ho gaI hai, isase isa raNabhUmi meM atyanta gAr3ha rAgarUpI rakta se saikar3oM
dharmasubhaToM ke hRdayarUpI pradeza lathapatha ho gae haiM  /  jahA~ saiMkar3oM
vyasanoMrUpI 38 adhyAtmasAra

Page #39 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Cruel vultures are circling above (on the head or in the sky). For this reason,
truly this world is the battlefield of the great king. ||19|| They laugh, they
play, and then they become sad in many ways, they cry, they scream, and for a
moment they engage in disputes. ||20|| They flee, they rejoice, they dance
helplessly, they are possessed by the madness of delusion. ||20||  Meaning: In
this world, beings who are mad with the unprecedented madness of delusion,
helplessly laugh one moment, start playing another moment, become sad another
moment, start crying another moment, shout loudly another moment, lament, then
start arguing the next moment, start running around in a moment, dance with joy
another moment; in the world, all these wonderful actions are performed by
beings who are mad with delusion. ||20|| Incomplete knowledge is like a false
friendship, a deceitful system of conduct, or the youth of a widowed woman.
||21|| Like a deer's gaze on a husband who is not worthy, the wave of affection.
||21|| The play of existence burns the hearts of those who see the truth. ||21||
_ Meaning: The games related to the world burn the hearts of the true-seeing men
in the same way as incomplete knowledge burns the hearts of those who are not
worthy. ||21||  Fourth Authority

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 krUra giddha Upara (mastaka para yA AkAza meM) ghUma rahe haiN| isa kAraNa
sacamuca yaha saMsAra mahAmoharAjA kI raNabhUmi hI hai  // 19 //  hasanti
krIDanti kSaNamatha ca khidyanti bahudhA, rudanti krandanti kSaNamapi vivAdaM
vidadhate  //  palAyante modaM dadhati parinRtyanti vivazA, bhave mohonmAdaM
kamapi tanubhAjaH parigatAH  // 20 //  bhAvArtha : isa saMsAra meM moha ke
apUrva unmAda se unmatta bane hue prANI paravaza hokara kSaNa meM ha~sate haiM,
kisI kSaNa khelane laga jAte haiM, kisI kSaNa khinna ho uThate haiM, kisI samaya
rone lagate haiM, kisI kSaNa jora se cillAte haiM, vilApa karate haiM, phira
dUsare hI kSaNa vivAda karane lagate haiM, kSaNabhara meM phira bhAgadaur3a
karane lagate haiM, kisI kSaNa harSita hokara nAcane lagate haiM; saMsAra meM ye
saba adbhuta ceSTAe~ moha meM unmatta hokara prANI karate haiM  // 20 //  apUrNA
vidyeva prakaTakhalamaitrIva kunayapraNAlIvAsthAne vidhavavanitAyauvanamiva  /
aniSNAte patyau mRgadRza iva snehalaharI  /  bhavakrIDA vrIDA dahati hRdayaM
tAttvikadRzAm  // 21 //  _ bhAvArtha : saMsAra se sambandhita krIDAe~
tattvadarzI puruSoM ke hRdaya ko usI prakAra jalAtI haiM, jaise apUrNa vidyA
usake adhikAra cauthA

Page #40 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
To the reader, direct known friendship with the wicked, the tradition of
injustice in the assembly, the youth of a widowed woman, the wave of affection
of a doe-eyed woman towards an unskilled husband, all these go to the heart of
that person. ||21|| When dawn breaks, the dream-like creation becomes false, or
in the absence of darkness, the clear-sighted being sees two moons, a delusion.
Similarly, for the virtuous, with their unwavering, calm, and steady minds, who
have attained knowledge of the truth, this world appears as an illusion. ||22||
Meaning: Just as the creation seen in a dream becomes futile when dawn breaks,
or a clear-sighted being with the disease of night blindness (timir) gone sees
two moons, a delusion, similarly, for the virtuous, with their unwavering, calm,
and steady minds, who have attained knowledge of the truth, this world appears
as an illusion. ||22|| Previously, our mind (belief) was that this world was
made of nectar, with the beloved's sweet words, the sound of the veena, the
comfort of sleep and the body. Now, having contemplated the truth of the
Upanishads, our interest lies in this world, but also in our own Self. ||23||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 par3hane vAle ko, duSTa ke sAtha pratyakSa jJAta maitrI, sabhA meM anyAya-
paramparA, vidhavA strI kA yauvana, akuzala pati ke prati mRganayanI kI
snehalaharI usa-usa vyakti ke hRdaya ko jAtI hai  // 21 //  prabhAte saMjAte
bhavati vitathA svApakalanA, dvicandrajJAnaM vA timiravirahe nirmaladRzAm  //
tathA mithyArUpaH sphurati vidite tattvaviSaye, bhavo'yaM sAdhUnAmuparata -
vikalpasthiradhiyAm  // 22 //  bhAvArtha : jaise prabhAtakAla hone para svapna
meM dekhI huI racanA niSphala ho jAtI hai, athavA ratauMdhI (timira roga) naSTa
hone para nirmala dRSTi vAle jIva ko do candramA dekhane kI bhrAMnti mithyA
pratIta hotI hai, isI prakAra vikalpa - rahita, zAnta aura sthira buddhi vAle
sAdhuoM ko tattvajJAna hone para yaha saMsAra mithyArUpa lagatA hai  // 22 //
priyAvANIvINA - zayana-tanu- saMbAdhana-sukhai - bhavo'yaM pIyUSairghaTita iti
pUrvaM matirabhUt  //  akasmAdasmAkaM parikalitatattvopaniSadAmidAnImetasminna
ratirapi tu svAtmani ratiH  // 23 //  bhAvArtha : pahale hamArI buddhi (mAnyatA)
isa prakAra thI ki yaha saMsAra priyA aura usakI madhura vANI, vINAnAda, zayana
40 adhyAtmasAra

Page #41 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
And it is made of all kinds of nectar-like pleasures, such as body-massage
(pressing), etc., but now, due to the sudden attainment of the Upanishad
(secret) of the soul-principle, we do not feel any attachment to this world at
all, only interest in the soul-principle. ||23|| Those who hold the extreme
hardness of the world's illusory fabric, born of ignorance, like a doll made of
wood or stone, are extremely delighted like a pot of milk in the form of
breasts. ||24|| **Meaning:** Now, the illusory fabric of this world, born of
ignorance, does not seem very pleasurable or attractive, like a doll made of
wood or stone, or like a pot of milk in the form of breasts, because the
ignorance-cloud has dissipated, and the moon of self-knowledge has risen,
resulting in the natural attainment of the nectar of bliss. Therefore, it is
good to completely renounce the world's illusions. ||24|| Whether it is worldly
possessions or royal glory, or the collection of elephants, horses, and cows, it
is not born of knowledge, meditation, and peace. What is it to your mind? ||25||
External pleasures, what are they to your mind? They are not the pleasures of
the soul. Therefore, who would abandon the happiness that is within their
control and desire external happiness? ||25|| ||24|| Chapter Four 41

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 aura zarIra-saMvAhana (dabAnA) Adi sava prakAra ke sukharUpI amRta se banA huA
hai, lekina aba hameM acAnaka hI Atmatattva kA upaniSad (rahasya) prApta hone ke
kAraNa isa saMsAra meM jarA bhI prIti utpanna nahIM hotI, kevala Atmatattva meM
hI ruci hotI hai  // 23 //  dadhAnAH kAThinyaM
niravadhikamAvidyakabhavaprapaJcA: pAJcAlIkuca - kalazavannAtiratidAH  //
galatyajJAnAbhre prasRmararucAvAtmani vidhau  /  cidAnandasyandaH sahaja iti
tebhyo'stu viratiH  // 24 //  bhAvArtha : aba ajJAna se utpanna isa saMsAra ke
prapaMca kASTha yA pASANa Adi se nirmita putalI ke samAna behada kaThoratA ko
dhAraNa karane vAle stanarUpI kalaza kI taraha atyanta prItidAyaka va rucikara
nahIM lagate  /  kyoMki ajJAnarUpI bAdala ke bikharane para AtmajJAnarUpI
candrodaya ho jAne se svAbhAvikarUpa se cidAnandarasa prApta ho cukA hai  /
ata: aba saMsAra ke prapaMcoM se sarvathA virati ho, yahI acchA hai ||24|| bhave
yA rAjyazrIrgajaturagago-saMgrahakRtA  /  na sA jJAnadhyAnaprazamajanitA kiM
svamanasi  //  bahiryA: preyasyaH kimu manasi tA nAtmaratayaH  /  tataH
svAdhInaM kastyajati sukhamicchatyatha param  // 25 //   // 24 //  adhikAra
cauthA 41

Page #42 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**भावarth:** In the world, there is external wealth (Rajalakshmi) accumulated
from elephants, horses, cows, bulls, etc. So, is there not an internal wealth
(Antarang Lakshmi) arising from knowledge, meditation, and tranquility in the
minds of yogis? Certainly, there is. And just as there are external women in
this world, similarly, is there not a feminine form of Atmarati (love for the
soul) residing in the minds of yogis? It is indeed there. Therefore, which wise
person would abandon this independent happiness and desire dependent happiness?
||25||  **भावarth:** All the happiness in the world is dependent, perishable,
momentary, tainted by desires, and fearful. Yet, a person with a foolish mind
finds joy in it. But the wise, on the other hand, are immersed in independent,
imperishable, free from the desire of senses, and fearless spiritual happiness.
||26||  **Tadetad bhaṣante jagadabhayadanam khalu bhavasvarupanudhyanam
samasukhnidānam kṛtadhiyaḥ:** This is what the wise say: contemplation of the
true nature of existence is the source of fearlessness in the world, and the
foundation of peace and happiness. ||42||  **Adhyatmasara**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 bhAvArtha : saMsAra meM hAthI, ghor3A, gAya, baila Adi ke saMgraha se banI huI
rAjyalakSmI hotI hai, to kyA yogijanoM ke mana meM jJAna, dhyAna aura prazama se
utpanna antaraMga lakSmI nahIM hotI? avazya hotI hai  /  tathA jaise isa saMsAra
meM bAhya striyA~ haiM, isI prakAra yogiyoM ke mAnasa meM sthita Atmarati (AtmA
ke prati prIti) kyA strIrUpa meM nahIM rahatI? hai hI  /  ataH kauna vidvAn isa
svAdhIna sukha ko chor3akara parAdhIna sukha kI vAMchA karegA?  // 25 //
parAdhInaM zarma kSayi viSayakAMkSaughamalinaM, bhave bhItisthAnaM tadapi
kumatistatra ramate  //  budhAstu svAdhIne'kSayiNi karaNautsukyarahite  /
nilInAstiSThanti pragalitabhayAdhyAtmikasukhe  // 26 //  T bhAvArtha : saMsAra
meM jitane bhI sukha haiM, ve sabhI parAdhIna, vinAzI, kSaNika evaM
viSayAkAMkSAoM se malina aura bhayadAyaka haiM, phira bhI kubuddhi vyakti usameM
Ananda mAnatA hai parantu vidvAn, to svAdhIna, akSaya, indriyoM kI apekSA yA
utsukatA se rahita evaM bhayavihIna adhyAtmasukha meM magna rahate haiM  //  26
//  tadetad bhASaMte jagadabhayadAnaM khalu bhavasvarUpAnudhyAnaM
zamasukhanidAnaM kRtadhiyaH  //  42 adhyAtmasAra

Page #43 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
In whom the rays of knowledge are steady like camphor, there the glory and
prosperity of those who know the truth of the Jina's teachings will be great.
||27||  Meaning: Therefore, wise people say that contemplation (meditation) on
the nature of the world (shyama) is the cause of equanimity and happiness, and
it gives fearlessness to the world; and by becoming steady in that meditation,
the glory and prosperity of those who know the Jina's teachings will shine
brightly in the world like the rays of the moon and camphor. ||27||  || Thus
ends the first chapter of the Adhyatma-Sara-Prakarana, composed by Shri
Yashovijaya, the disciple of Shri Nayavijaya-Gani. ||4||  Chapter Four 43

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 sthirIbhUte yasminvidhukiraNakarpUravimalA  /  yazaHzrIH prauDhA
syAjjinasamayatattvasthitividAm  // 27 //  bhAvArtha : ataH buddhimAna loga
kahate haiM ki isa prakAra saMsAra ke svarUpa kA cintana (dhyAna) karanA (zama)
samatAsukha kA kAraNa hai, aura yaha jagat ko abhayadAna detA hai; tathA usa
dhyAna meM sthira ho jAne se jinAgamatattvajJAtA puruSoM kI jagat meM
candrakiraNa aura kapUra ke samAna ujjvala yazolakSmI bar3hatI hai  // 27 //
//  iti zrInaya-vijaya-gaNi-ziSya-zrIyazovijayena viracite adhyAtma-
sAraprakaraNa prathamaH prabandhaH  // 4 //  adhikAra cauthA 43

Page #44 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Right Number Five [Vairagya-Sam-bhav] From the knowledge of the true nature
of existence, and from the vision of non-quality (nirguna), arises aversion.
From this aversion, the cutting off of desire, which is the form of dispassion,
arises. ||1||  **Meaning:** From the special knowledge of the nature of the
world, and from seeing it with the vision of non-quality (emptiness), aversion
arises. This aversion, in the form of the cutting off of desire for that world
(in the form of birth and death), produces dispassion in the soul. When one has
special knowledge of the nature of the world, and sees no quality (essence) in
worldly beings, even in the slightest, then dispassion arises quickly. Just as a
body that is swollen appears full (nourished), but is actually hollow, so too
the world is full of empty pomp, it is devoid of essence, full of suffering, and
terrifying. Thus, from aversion to the world, dispassion, in the form of
renunciation (cutting off from the world), arises quickly. ||1||  Those who
describe dispassion as arising from the attainment of worldly happiness, their
opinion is not valid, as long as the true nature of things is not known. ||2||
**Meaning:** Those who describe dispassion as arising from the attainment of
worldly happiness, their opinion is not valid, as long as the true nature of
things is not known. ||2||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 adhikAra pA~cavAM [vairAgya-saMbhava] bhavasvarUpavijJAnAd
dveSAnnairguNyadRSTijAt  /  tadicchocchedarUpaM drAg vairAgyamupajAyate  // 1 //
bhAvArtha : saMsAra ke svarUpa kA vizeSa jJAna hone se, nairguNya (niHsAra)
dRSTi se dekhane se utpanna dveSa (aruci) se AtmA meM tatkAla usa saMsAra
(janmamaraNarUpa) kI icchA kA ucchedarUpa vairAgya paidA ho jAtA hai  /  saMsAra
ke svarUpa kA vizeSa bodha ho jAne se tathA saMsArI jIvoM ko apane AtmapakSa meM
lezamAtra bhI guNa (sAra) saMsAra meM nahIM dikhAI detA; jaise zarIra meM sUjana
hone se vaha phUlA huA (puSTa) dikhatA hai, kintu hotA hai khokhalA hI; vaise hI
saMsAra thothe ADambaroM se bharA hai, niHsAra hai, duHkhamaya evaM bhayAnaka
hai, isa prakAra saMsAra ke prati aruci (dveSa) hone se, saMsArasukha kI
abhilASA se nivRttirUpa (saMsAra-vicchedanarUpa) vairAgya zIghra hI paidA ho
jAtA hai  // 1 //  siddhyA viSayasaukhyasya vairAgyaM varNayanti ye  /  mataM na
yujyate teSAM yAvadAprasiddhitaH  // 2 //  bhAvArtha : jo viSayasukha kI siddhi
ko lekara vairAgya prApta hone kA nirUpaNa karate haiM, 'jaba taka padArtha hai,
taba taka 44 adhyAtmasAra

Page #45 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The statement that "worldly pleasures are happiness" is not proven, therefore it
is not appropriate. ||2|| Due to the delusion of non-attainment, even after
attaining infinite worldly pleasures, the desire of the deluded beings does not
subside. ||3|| Meaning: Even after attaining infinite worldly pleasures, the
deluded beings do not feel satisfied due to the delusion of non-attainment.
||3|| Just as fire does not subside with fuel, but rather burns more intensely,
similarly, the desire for worldly pleasures does not subside with their
consumption, but rather increases with the increase in power. ||4|| Meaning:
Just as fire does not subside with fuel, but rather burns more intensely,
similarly, the desire for worldly pleasures does not subside with their
consumption, but rather increases with the increase in power. ||4|| Just as
lions cannot be gentle and snakes cannot be forgiving, because their nature is
cruel, similarly, it is extremely difficult for beings who are attached to
worldly pleasures to attain detachment. ||5|| Meaning: Just as lions cannot be
gentle and snakes cannot be forgiving, because their nature is cruel, similarly,
it is extremely difficult for beings who are attached to worldly pleasures to
attain detachment. ||5|| One who desires detachment without renouncing worldly
pleasures is like one who desires to cure a disease without abandoning the
harmful food. ||6|| Chapter Five 45

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 viSayasukha hai, isa prakAra kA unakA mata aprasiddha (siddha nahIM ) hai,
isalie ucita nahIM hai ||2|| aprAptatvabhramAduccairavApteSvapyanantazaH  /
kAmabhogeSu mUDhAnAM samIhA nopazAmyati  // 3 //  bhAvArtha : kAmabhoga anaMta
bAra prApta hue haiM, phira bhI kabhI prApta nahIM, hue, isa bhrama se mUDha
jIvoM kI icchA zAnta nahIM hotI  // 3 //  viSayaiH kSIyate kAmo nendhanairiva
pAvakaH  /  pratyuta prollasacchaktirbhUya evopavarddhate  // 4 //  bhAvArtha :
jaise indhana se agni zAnta nahIM hotI, apitu adhikAdhika bhar3akatI hai, vaise
hI viSayoM ke sevana karane se kAmavAsanA zAnta nahIM hotI, parantu zakti bar3ha
jAne se kAmavAsanA bArabAra adhikAdhika bar3hatI jAtI hai  // 4 //
saumyatvamiva siMhAnAM pannagAnAmiva kSamA  /  viSayeSu pravRttAnAM vairAgyaM
khalu durlabham  // 5 //  bhAvArtha : siMhoM meM kabhI saumyatA nahIM A sakatI
tathA sarpoM meM kabhI kSamA nahIM A sakatI, kyoMki unakA svabhAva hI krUra hai,
isI prakAra viSayoM meM pravRtta hone vAle jIvoM ko vairAgya honA atidurlabha
hai  // 5 //  akRtvA viSayatyAgaM yo vairAgyaM didhIrSati  /
apathyamaparityajya sa rogocchedamicchati  // 6 //  adhikAra pA~cavAM 45

Page #46 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Meaning:** Even if a sick person takes the best medicine, but continues to
consume unhealthy food, the medicine will not be beneficial. Similarly, if a
being performs austerities, chanting, etc., but does not renounce worldly
desires, they will not benefit from these actions. They cannot be liberated from
the cycle of birth and death through such actions. ||6||  **Meaning:** Just as a
drop of water cannot stay on a heated iron mass, similarly, detachment cannot
stay in the mind of a being attached to worldly desires. ||7||  **Meaning:** If
the moon were to rise on the night of the new moon, or if a barren tree were to
bear fruit, then detachment could enter the heart of a being attached to worldly
desires. Just as these two things are impossible in all three periods of time,
similarly, detachment is never possible in a mind attached to worldly desires.
||8||  **Meaning:** Detachment arises without any hindrance from the sight of
the virtues of the Self, when there is aversion to the causes of existence and
non-involvement in worldly objects. ||9||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 bhAvArtha : rogI manuSya kitanI bhI acchI auSadha letA ho, parantu kupathya kA
sevana karatA ho to use auSadha lAbhadAyaka nahIM hotA; isI prakAra jo jIva
tapa, japa, Adi kriyA zuddha karatA ho, parantu viSaya-vAsanA kA tyAga nahIM
karatA; use kriyAdi se koI lAbha nahIM hotA  /  vaha una kriyAoM se saMsAra se
mukta nahIM ho sakatA  // 6 //  na citte viSayAsakte vairAgyaM sthAtumapyalam  /
ayoghana ivottapte nipatan bindurambhasaH  // 7 //  bhAvArtha : jaise tape hue
lohe ke ghana para jalabindu nahIM Tika sakate, vaise hI viSayAsakta jIva ke
mana meM vairAgya nahIM Tika sakatA  // 74/4/ yadInduH syAt kuhurAtrau phalaM
yadyavakezini  /  tadA viSayasaMsargicitte vairAgyasaMkramaH  // 8  //
bhAvArtha : yadi amAvasyA kI rAta ko candramA kA udaya ho jAe, yadi bAMjha vRkSa
phala de de to viSayIjIva ke hRdaya meM vairAgya kA saMkramaNa ho; arthAt ye
donoM bAteM jaise trikAla meM bhI sambhava nahIM haiM; vaise hI viSayAsakta
citta meM bhI vairAgya kadApi saMbhava nahIM  // 8 //  bhavahetuSu
tadveSAdviSayeSvapravRttitaH  /  vairAgyaM syAnnirAbAdhaM bhavanairguNyadarzanAt
// 9 //  46 adhyAtmasAra

Page #47 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Verse 9**  **Meaning:** Therefore, aversion (disgust) towards the causes of
worldly increase leads to non-attachment to objects; and only when objects are
seen as devoid of qualities (meaningless) does dispassion become unobstructed.
**Verse 10**  **Meaning:** Here, the disciple raises a doubt: Even in the fourth
stage of spiritual progress (Avirati Samyagdristi), where individuals are
attached to worldly pleasures, those who know the truth, through evidence and
certainty, understand the world's lack of qualities and its meaninglessness. Can
they experience dispassion? And is that dispassion justified?  **Verse 11**
**Meaning:** The above statement is true, but the power of the karma that
obscures right conduct (Charitramohaniya karma) is such that even in the fourth
stage of spiritual progress, when other factors are present, the desired result
is not achieved; the absence of the result is evident.  **Verse 12**
**Meaning:** It is not that in the fourth stage of spiritual progress, in the
state of right conduct (Samyaktva), dispassion is completely absent. However,
there is no attachment to one's own actions, and this is also stated in the
scriptures.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 bhAvArtha : isalie saMsAravRddhi ke kAraNoM para dveSa ( aruci) ho, tabhI
viSayoM meM apravRtti hotI hai; aura viSayoM meM apravRtti hone se saMsAra ko
nirguNa (niHsAra) rUpa meM dekhane para hI vairAgya nirAbAdha - nirvighna hotA
hai  //  9  //  caturthe'pi guNasthAne nanvevaM tat prasajyate  /  yuktaM khalu
pramAtRNAM bhavanairguNyadarzanam  // 10 //  bhAvArtha : yahA~ ziSya zaMkA
prastuta karatA hai ki yoM to avirati samyagdRSTi (bhogoM meM pravRtta) cauthe
guNasthAnaka meM bhI vastu ko yathArtharUpa se, pramANa se, nizcayarUpa se
jJAtApuruSa saMsAra kI nirguNatA asAratA jAnate haiM, kyA unheM vairAgya ho
sakatA hai? aura vaha vairAgya yukta hai ? ||10||  // 10 //  satyaM
cAritramohasya mahimA ko'pyayaM khalu  /  yadanyahetuyoge'pi phalAyogo'tra
dRzyate  //  11  //  bhAvArtha : uparyukta kathana satya hai, parantu
cAritramohanIyakarma kI kucha aisI mahimA hai ki cauthe guNasthAnaka meM anya
hetuoM kA yoga hone para bhI phala kA yoga nahIM hai; phala kA abhAva dikhAI
detA hai  //  11  //  dazAvizeSe tatrApi na cedaM nAsti sarvathA  /
svavyApArahRtAsaMgaM tathA ca stavabhASitam  // 12 //  bhAvArtha : cauthe
guNasthAna meM samyaktvadazA meM sarvathA vairAgya nahIM hotA, aisI bAta nahIM
hai, parantu vahA~ apane adhikAra pA~cavAM 47

Page #48 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Due to the activity of immersion in the spiritual nature, even though there is a
tendency towards objects, attachment diminishes. In the Shri Vitrag-Stotra,
Kalikāl Sarvajña Shri Hemchandrasuriśvaraji Maharaj has said the same. We quote
that verse here:  ||12||  Yada marunnaraindrashrīstvaaya naathopabhujyate |
Yatra tatra ratirnaama viraktatvam tadapi te ||13|| Meaning: O Lord, the Supreme
God! When you enjoy the wealth of Indra or a king, even then your delight is
seen everywhere, but in reality, you were in a state of detachment. ||13||
Bhavesha yasya vichchhinna pravrittih karmabhaavajaa |
Ratistasyaviraktasyasarvatra shubhavedyatah ||14|| Meaning: The one whose desire
for existence (birth and death) has been destroyed, whose activity in the
enjoyment of objects etc. arises from the emergence of exhausted karma, the
delight (rati) that is seen in that detached one, also arises from the emergence
of auspicious karma everywhere. This does not destroy their feeling of
detachment. ||14||  Atachchaakshepakjnaanaat kantaayaam bhogsannidhau | Na
shuddhi-prakshayoyasmadharibhadraamidam vachah ||15|| 48 Adhyatmasar

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Atmika svabhAva meM ramaNatArUpa vyApAra ke kAraNa viSayapravRtti hone para bhI
Asakti kA hrAsa hotA hai| zrI vItarAga-stotra meM kalikAla sarvajJa
zrIhemacandrasUrIzvarajI mahArAja ne isI prakAra kahA hai  /  vahI zloka yahA~
uddhRta karate haiM-  // 12 //  yadA marunnarendrazrIstvayA nAthopabhujyate  /
yatra tatra ratirnAma viraktatvaM tadApi te  // 13 //  bhAvArtha : he
devAdhideva nAtha ! jaba Apa devendra athavA narendra ke aizvarya kA upabhoga
karate haiM, usa samaya jahA~ tahA~ bhI ApakI prIti dikhatI hai, usameM vastutaH
ApakI virakta dazA hI thI  // 13 //  bhavecchA yasya vicchinnA pravRttiH
karmabhAvajA  /  ratistasya viraktasya sarvatra zubhavedyataH  // 14 //
bhAvArtha : jisakI bhava (janmamaraNa) kI icchA naSTa ho gaI hai, usakI
viSayopabhoga Adi meM jo pravRtti hotI hai, vaha nikAcita karma ke udaya se hotI
hai, usameM usa virakta kI jo prIti (rati) dikhAI detI hai, vaha bhI sarvatra
sAtAvedanIyakarma ke udaya se hotI hai  /  isase unakA vairAgya bhAva naSTa
nahIM hotA  // 14 //  atazcAkSepakajJAnAt kAntAyAM bhogasannidhau  /  na zuddhi-
prakSayo yasmAddhAribhadramidaM vacaH  // 15 //  48 adhyAtmasAra

Page #49 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Verse 15:**  **Meaning:** Therefore, even though a woman and the material
objects of enjoyment are near, their purity does not diminish due to the
knowledge of the **Akshapak** (non-virtuous). This is the statement of Shri
Haribhadrasuri.  **Verse 16:**  **Meaning:** He sees the entire world as a
mirage, with a **Tattvik** (true) vision. Therefore, he is not troubled by
sensual pleasures, nor is he consumed by passion. He does not become absorbed in
them. Such a great soul attains liberation without any obstacles.  **Verse 17:**
**Meaning:** Knowing the nature of sensual pleasures as an illusion, even while
enjoying them, one who is not attached to them attains the supreme state of
liberation.  **Verse 18:**  **Meaning:** However, the soul who identifies with
the world and its pleasures cannot cross the ocean of existence. This is truly a
mirage. Just like a mirage...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 bhAvArtha : isalie AkSepaka jJAna ke kAraNa strI tathA viSayabhoga kI sAmagrI
pAsa meM hote hue bhI unakI zuddhi kA kSaya nahIM hotA, aisA zrIharibhadrasUri
kA kathana hai  // 15 //  mAyAmbhastattvataH pazyannanudvignastato drutam  /
tanmadhye na prayAtyeva yathA vyAghAtavarjitaH  // 16 //  bhAvArtha : sAre
saMsAra ko vaha tAttvika dRSTi se mRgamarIcikA ke samAna dekhatA hai; isalie
kAmabhoga meM udvigna nahIM hotA tathA rAgAviSTa bhI nahIM hotA hai, usameM
tanmaya bhI nahIM hotA hai, aisI mahAn AtmA nirvighnatA se mokSa meM jAtI hai
// 16 //  bhogAn svarUpataH pazyaMstathA mAyodakopamAn  /  bhuJjAno'pi hyasaMgaH
san prayAtyeva paraM padam  // 17 //  bhAvArtha : viSayabhogoM ko svarUpataH
indrajAla ke samAna jAnakara viSayAdi kA upabhoga karate hue bhI jo usameM
Asakta nahIM hotA vaha paramapada mokSa ko prApta karate haiM  // 17 //
bhogatattvasya tu punarna bhavodadhilaMghanam  /  mAyodakadRDhAvezAttena yAtIha
kaH pathA?  // 18 //  bhAvArtha : aura jo bhavAbhinaMdI jIva saMsAra ke bhoga ko
tattvarUpa mAnatA hai, vaha AtmA saMsAra-samudra kA ullaMghana nahIM kara sakatI
/  yaha vAstava meM mAyAjala hai| jaise mRga-marIcikA adhikAra pA~cavAM 49

Page #50 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
He goes to take the water, seeing the reflection of water; but his hand finds
nothing, just like the objects of enjoyment. Understanding this, who in this
human world can reach the desired place from this vile path? ||18|| He remains
there, undoubtedly, full of worldly anxieties. Even on the path of liberation,
he is deluded by the entanglement of enjoyment. ||19|| Meaning: A soul with the
vision of the ultimate truth remains anxious about the world even while being a
householder; while the enjoyer remains entangled in the algae (moss) of
enjoyment even on the path of liberation. ||19|| The power of enjoyment does not
destroy the power of Dharma, which is stronger. Just as the wind that
extinguishes a lamp cannot extinguish a blazing fire, so too the power of
enjoyment cannot destroy the very strong power of Dharma. ||20|| Meaning: Just
as the wind that extinguishes a lamp cannot extinguish a blazing fire, so too
the power of enjoyment cannot destroy the very strong power of Dharma. ||20||
Just as a fly gets stuck in phlegm (mucus), so too a soul gets stuck in the
thick attachment to objects; but just as a fly does not get stuck in a dry clay
ball, so too a detached soul, free from attachment, does not get stuck in
objects. ||21|| Meaning: Just as a fly gets stuck in phlegm (mucus), so too a
soul gets stuck in the thick attachment to objects; but just as a fly does not
get stuck in a dry clay ball, so too a detached soul, free from attachment, does
not get stuck in objects. ||21|| 50 Essence of Spirituality

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 meM jala kI pratIti dekhakara usa jala ko lene jAtA hai; parantu hAtha kucha
nahIM AtA, vaise hI viSaya - bhoga hai  /  aisA samajhakara isa manuSyaloka meM
kauna isa kutsitamArga se abhISTa sthala para pahu~ca sakatA hai?  // 18 //  sa
tatraiva bhavodvigno yathA tiSThatyasaMzayaM  /  mokSamArge'pi hi tathA
bhogajaMbAla mohitaH  //  19  //  bhAvArtha : paramArthadRSTiyukta jIva gRhastha
meM bhI saMsAra se udvigna rahatA hai; jabaki bhogI mokSamArga meM bhI bhogarUpI
zaivAla (kAI) se lipaTA rahatA hai  //  19  //  dharmazaktiM na hantyatra
bhogayogo balIyasIm  /  hanti dIpApaho vAyurjvalanaM na davAnalam  // 20 //
bhAvArtha : dIpaka ko bujhAne vAlA vAyu jaise jAjvalyamAna dAvAnala ko nahIM
bujhA sakatA, vaise hI bhoga kA yoga atibalavatI dharmazakti kA nAza nahIM kara
sakatA ||20| badhyate bADhamAsaktau yathA zleSmaNi makSikA  /
zuSkagolavadazliSTo viSayebhyo na badhyate  // 21 //  bhAvArtha : jaise zleSma
(kapha) meM makkhI phaMsa jAtI hai, vaise hI viSaya kI gAr3ha Asakti meM jIva
phaMsa jAtA hai; kintu jaise sUkhI miTTI ke gole meM makkhI nahIM phaMsatI hai,
vaise hI Asakti se rahita udAsIna jIva viSaya meM nahIM phaMsatA hai  // 21 //
50 adhyAtmasAra

Page #51 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## English Translation:  **Verse 22:**  * **Text:**  *bahudoṣanirōdhārtham
anivṛttirapī kvacit | nivṛttiriv no duṣṭā yogānuabhavasālinām ||22||* *
**Meaning:** For those who are experienced in Yoga, even non-renunciation, at
times, is not a fault, as it can help to eliminate many faults.  **Verse 23:**
* **Text:** *yasminniṣevyamāṇe'pi yasyāśuddhiḥ kadācan | tenaiva tasya śuddhiḥ
syāt kadāciditi hi śrutiḥ || 23 ||* * **Meaning:** The scriptures say that the
very objects which cause impurity at times, can also lead to purification.
**Verse 24:**  * **Text:** *viṣayāṇām tato bandhajanane niyamo'sti na |
ajñānīnām tato bandho jñānīnām tu na karhicit || 24 ||* * **Meaning:** There is
no absolute rule that objects always bind. While the ignorant are bound by them,
the wise are never bound.  **Verse 25:**  * **Text:** *sevatae'sevamanō'pi
sevamanō na sevatae | kō'pi pārajanō na syācchrayan parajanānāpi || 25 ||* *
**Meaning:** The ignorant, even when not engaging in sense-objects, are still
bound by them. The wise, even when engaging in sense-objects, are not bound. No
one can be truly free while relying on others.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 bahudoSanirodhArthamanivRttirapi kvacit  /  nivRttiriva no duSTA
yogAnubhavazAlinAm  // 22 //  bhAvArtha : yoga ke anubhavoM se sampanna puruSoM
ke lie nivRtti kI taraha kisI-kisI prANI ke bahuta-se doSoM kA nirodha karane ke
lie kisI samaya anivRtti bhI doSarUpa nahIM hotI  // 22 //  yasminniSevyamANe'pi
yasyAzuddhiH kadAcana  /  tenaiva tasya zuddhiH syAtkadAciditi hi zrutiH  //  23
//  bhAvArtha : zruti meM kahA hai - jina bhogoM kA sevana karane se kisI samaya
jisakI azuddhi hotI hai, unhIM bhogoM kA sevana karane se usa manuSya kI kadAcit
zuddhi bhI hotI hai ||23|| viSayANAM tato bandhajanane niyamo'sti na  /
ajJAninAM tato bandho jJAninAM tu na karhicit  // 24 //  bhAvArtha : isalie
viSaya karma kA bandhana karate hI haiM, aisA ekAnta niyama nahIM hai  /  ajJAnI
kA jinase bandhana hotA hai jJAnI kA unase kabhI bandhana nahIM bhI hotA ||24||
sevate'sevamAno'pi sevamAno na sevate  /  ko'pi pArajano na syAcchrayan
parajanAnapi  //  25  //  hue bhAvArtha : ajJAnI jIva viSaya kA sevana na karate
bhI sevana karatA hai, aura jJAnI viSayasevana karate hue bhI sevana adhikAra
pA~cavAM 51

Page #52 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
He does not do it. Just as a being does not become a parjan even when taking
shelter of a parjan, he is called a swajan, in the same way, a jnani is not
karmamay. ||25|| Therefore, due to the merit of great punya-vipak, the moksha-
lakshmi has come close to them. The vairagya of those excellent men is not
destroyed from the womb. ||26|| For those who are calm towards objects, and
whose senses are constantly turned away from objects, this beautiful vairagya is
the royal path. ||27|| For those who are self-restrained, without any
stimulation and control, and whose senses are satisfied, the vairagya that they
have is considered to be a single path. ||28|| The senses, being driven by
force, become like a forest. They never come under control, but rather increase
in their purpose. ||29||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 nahIM karatA  /  jaise koI jIva parajana kA Azraya lene para bhI parajana nahIM
hotA, vaha svajana kahalAtA hai, vaise hI jJAnI karmamaya nahIM hotA  // 25 //
ataeva mahApuNyavipAkopahitazriyAm  /  garbhAdArabhya vairAgyaM nottamAnAM
vihanyate  // 26 //  bhAvArtha : isalie mahAn puNya-vipAka ke yoga se mokSa-
lakSmI jinake nikaTa ho gaI hai| una uttama puruSoM kA vairAgya garbha se lekara
naSTa nahIM hotA hai  // 26 /  /  viSayebhyaH prazAntAnAmazrAntaM vimukhIkRtaiH
/  karaNaizcArUvairAgyameSa rAjapathaH kila  // 27 //  bhAvArtha : jisakA mana
viSayoM se uparata hone se prazAnta ho gayA hai aura indriyoM ko viSayoM se
nirantara (avizrAnta) parAGmukha karane ke kAraNa satat manohara vairAgya
utpanna hotA hai; yahI vairAgya kA rAjamArga hai  // 27 //  svayaM
nivartamAnaistairanudIrNairayantritaiH  /  tRptairjJAnavatAM tatsyAdasAvekapadI
matA  // 28 //  bhAvArtha : apane Apa nivRtti hone se udIraNA sahita aura
niyaMtraNa ke binA tRpta huI indriyoM se jJAniyoM ko jo vairAgya hotA hai, vaha
vairAgya eka pagaDaMDI mAnI gaI hai  // 28 //  balena preryamANAni karaNAni
vanebhavat  /  na jAtu vazatAM yAnti pratyutAnarthavRddhaye  // 29 //  52
adhyAtmasAra

Page #53 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Verse 29:**  **Meaning:**  Forcing the senses (suppressing them) does not
bring them under control, like a wild elephant, but instead makes them prone to
causing harm.  **Verse 30:**  **Meaning:** Those who appear to be righteous but
look down upon others with shame, while harboring evil thoughts in their minds,
are deceitful and cast their souls into the pit of hell.  **Verse 31:**
**Meaning:** A man who is detached from the objects of the senses, by dedicating
his soul to pure devotion and constantly recognizing the distinction between
self and others, can successfully prevent his senses from being captivated by
those objects.  **Verse 32:**  **Meaning:** The extraordinary detachment is one
where there is no intention or effort, whether in attachment or detachment, and
the sensory afflictions gradually diminish.  **Verse 33:**  **Meaning:** The
activities of yogis, like the dance of a puppet controlled by strings, do not
cause any harm. Knowledgeable people who live in the world are like this.
**Chapter 5**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 bhAvArtha : indriyoM ko balapUrvaka prerita karane (dabAne) se ve jaMgalI hAthI
ke samAna kabhI kAbU (vaza) meM nahIM AtIM, balki anartha ko baDhAne vAlI bana
jAtI haiM  // 29 //  pazyanti lajjayA nIcairdurdhyAnaM ca prayuJjate  /  AtmAnaM
dhArmikAbhAsAH kSipanti narakAvaTe  // 30 //  bhAvArtha : jo dhArmikAbhAsa
dharmadhvajI lajjA se nIce dekhate haiM, parantu mana meM durdhyAna (burA
cintana) karate haiM, ve dhUrta apanI AtmA ko naraka ke kUpa meM DAlate haiM  //
30 //  vaJcanaM karaNAnAM tadviraktaH kartumaharti  /  sadbhAvaviniyogena sadA
svAnyavibhAgavit  // 31 //  bhAvArtha : AtmA ko zuddhabhAva meM arpaNa karake
nirantara sva aura para ke vibhAga ko jAnane vAlA una-una viSayoM se virakta
puruSa indriyoM ko viSayoM se vaMcita (dUra) karane meM samartha ho sakatA hai
// 31 //  pravRttervA nivRttervA na saMkalpo na ca zramaH  /  vikAro
hIyate'kSANAmiti vairAgyamadbhutam  // 32 //  bhAvArtha : jisa vairAgya meM
pravRtti ho cAhe nivRtti, kisI kA saMkalpa nahIM hai aura zrama bhI nahIM hai
tathA indriya-vikAra kSINa hotA jAtA hai, vaha adbhuta vairAgya kahalAtA hai  //
32 //  dArUyaMtrasthapAMcAlInRtyatulyAH pravRttayaH  /  yoginAM naiva bAdhAyai,
jJAnino lokavartinaH  // 33 //  adhikAra pA~cavAM

Page #54 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Meaning:** In worldly conduct, the tendencies of the wise are like the dance
of a puppet in a wooden instrument. Yet, for that yogi, worldly tendencies are
not painful. ||33|| This is called "Yoga Maya" by other philosophers. It is not
a fault because it is the cause of benefit to the world. ||34|| It is also heard
in the scriptures that even in the path of exception, it is consistent with the
result of the destruction of the assembly of ignorant men like deer. ||35|| When
knowledge matures, its fruit is indifference. At that time, even in the fourth
stage of the qualities, detachment remains. ||36|| || Thus ends the chapter on
the origin of detachment. || 54 Adhyatma Sara

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 bhAvArtha : laukika vyavahAra meM jJAnI kI pravRttiyA~ kASThayantra meM putalI
ke nRtya ke samAna hotI haiN| phira bhI usa yogI ke lie saMsArapravRtti
pIDAkAraka nahIM hotI hai  // 33 //  iyaM ca yogamAyeti prakaTa gIyate paraiH  /
lokAnugrahahetutvAnnAsyAmapi ca duSaNam  // 34 //  bhAvArtha : anya darzanakAroM
ne pUrvokta bhoga-pravRtti meM vairAgyadazA ko spaSTarUpa se 'yogamAyA' kahA
hai| vaha yogamAyA lokAnugraha kA kAraNa hone se doSarUpa nahIM hotI  // 34 //
siddhAnte zrUyate ceyamapavAdapadeSvapi  /  mRgaparSatparitrAsa-
nirAsaphalasaMgatA  // 35 //  bhAvArtha : siddhAnta meM bhI sunA jAtA hai ki
apavAdamArga meM bhI mRga ke samAna ajJa puruSoM kI parSadA (sabhA) ke khaNDana
(bhaMga) rUpa phala ke sAtha saMgata hai  // 35 //  audAsInyaphale jJAne
paripAkamupeyuSi  /  caturthe'pi guNasthAne tadvairAgyaM vyavasthitam  // 36 //
bhAvArtha : jaba jJAna paripakva hotA hai, taba usakA phala udAsInatA hotI hai|
usa samaya cauthe guNasthAnaka meM bhI vairAgya rahatA hai  // 36 //   //  iti
vairAgya-sambhavAdhikAraH  //  54 adhyAtmasAra

Page #55 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter Six [ **Vairagya-Bhed** ] That **Vairagya** is remembered as
threefold, due to its connection with **Dukha**, **Moha**, and **Jnana**. The
first, **Dukha-garbha** **Vairagya**, is characterized by anxiety (aversion)
towards the world, arising from the non-attainment of desired objects. || 1 ||
**Meaning:** That **Vairagya** is of three types: (1) **Dukha-garbha** (2)
**Moha-garbha** and (3) **Jnana-garbha**. Of these, the first, **Dukha-garbha**
**Vairagya**, is that which arises from anxiety (aversion) towards the world,
due to the non-attainment of desired objects. || 1 ||  Here, the sorrow of the
body and mind is not conducive to **Jnana**. Even if one attains their desired
object, their **Vairagya** is destroyed. || 2 ||  Those who are averse to
**Dukha**, desire the path of return (to the householder life) beforehand. Like
the impatient in battle, they enter the forest, etc. || 3 ||  **Meaning:** Those
who, due to fear of **Dukha**, adopt the life of a renunciant, desire to return
to the householder life beforehand. Like the impatient in battle, they enter the
forest, etc. || 3 ||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 adhikAra chaThA [ vairAgya-bheda ] tadvairAgyaM smRtaM duHkha - moha -
jJAnAnvayAt tridhA  /  tatrAdyaM viSayAprApteH saMsArodvegalakSaNam  // 1 //
bhAvArtha : vaha vairAgya tIna prakAra kA hotA hai - (1) duHkhagarbhita (2)
mohagarbhita aura (3) jJAnagarbhita  /  inameM se prathama duHkhagarbhita
vairAgya vaha hai, jo manovAMchita viSayoM kI prApti na hone se saMsAra ke prati
udvignatA (virakti) se hotA hai  //  1  //  atrAGgamanasoH khedo jJAnamApyAyakaM
na yat  /  nijAbhIpsitalAbhe ca vinipAto'pi jAyate  // 2 //  bhAvArtha : isa
duHkhagarbhita vairAgya meM kAraNa hai - zarIra aura mana kA kheda  /  isameM
tRpti karane vAlA jJAna hotA hI nahIM hai| yadi use iSTa vastu mila jAe to usakA
vairAgya naSTa bhI ho jAtA hai  // 2 //  duHkhAdviraktAH prAgevecchanti
pratyAgateH padaM  /  adhIrA iva saMgrAme pravizanto vanAdikam  // 3 //
bhAvArtha : duHkha se ghabar3A kara sAdhuveza dhAraNa karane vAle sAdhaka pahale
se hI vApasa gRhasthAzrama meM Ane kI icchA kara adhikAra chaThA 55

Page #56 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
He takes, just as an impatient coward desires (intends) to enter (hide) in the
forest, etc., before going to war. ||3|| Dry logic, etc., and some medicine,
etc., indeed. They read these, but not the principle-method. ||4|| Meaning: Oh!
Thus, a man endowed with dispassion studies the scriptures of dry logic and
medicine, etc., but does not read the principle-method, which is like the river
of calmness (equality). ||4|| By understanding the leaves of the scriptures,
they carry the heat of pride. They do not reach the end of truth, the nectar-
like stream of calmness. ||5|| Meaning: The seeker, detached from suffering,
gains superficial understanding from the scriptures, and increases the heat of
pride, but does not know or cannot attain the truth (spiritual secret), which is
like the nectar-like stream of peace. ||5|| These, who merely wear the garb, are
not superior to householders. For they are neither early risers nor late
sleepers. ||6|| Meaning: Those who are merely clothed in the garb of a sage are
not superior to householders. For they are neither early risers nor late
sleepers. ||6|| 56 Essence of Spirituality

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 letA hai, jaise adhIra kAyara puruSa yuddha meM jAne se pahale hI vanAdi meM
ghusa jAne (chipa jAne) kI icchA (irAdA) kara letA hai  // 3 //  zuSkatarkAdikaM
kinycidvaidykaadikmpyho| paThanti te zamanadIM na tu siddhAnta-paddhatim  // 4
//  bhAvArtha : aho ! isa prakAra vairAgya se sampanna puruSa zuSka tarkazAstra
tathA vaidyaka Adi ke granthoM kA adhyayana karate haiM parantu zamatA (samatA)
rUpI nadI ke samAna siddhAnta-paddhati ko nahIM par3hate  // 4 //
granthapallavabodhena, garvoSmANaM ca bibhrati  /  tatvAntaM naiva gacchanti
prazamAmRtanirjharam  // 5 //  bhAvArtha : duHkhavirakta sAdhaka granthoM kA
pallavagrAhI (Upara-Upara se) bodha prApta karake garva kI garmI bar3hA lete
haiM, kintu prazamAmRta (zAnti ke amRtamaya) jharane ke samAna tattva (adhyAtma-
rahasya) ko nahIM jAnate yA tattvajJAna hAsila nahIM kara pAte  // 5 //
veSamAtrabhRto'pyete, gRhasthAnnAtizerate  /  na pUrvotthAyino yasmAnApi
pazcAnipAtinaH  // 6 //  bhAvArtha : ye sirpha sAdhuveSadhArI haiM, aise vyakti
gRhasthoM se adhika (bar3hakara) nahIM haiN| kyoMki na to ve pUrvotthAyI haiM,
aura na ve pazcAtnipAtI haiM  // 6 /  /  56 adhyAtmasAra

Page #57 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
At home, there is barely enough food, but after taking *diksha*, one gets
*moudakas* (sweet balls) to eat every day. Then what is the suffering in
*diksha*? This kind of *vairagya* (renunciation) is a sign of *duhkha-garbha*
(suffering-filled) *vairagya*. ||7||  **Meaning:** The one who takes *diksha*
with such *vairagya* (renunciation) is a sign of *duhkha-garbha* (suffering-
filled) *vairagya*. ||7||  *Vairagya* (renunciation) born from the study of
*kushastra* (scripture) and seeing the *nirguna* (non-attribute) nature of the
world is *moha-garbha* (delusion-filled) *vairagya*. This kind of *vairagya* is
found in *balatapasvi* (young ascetics). ||8||  **Meaning:** *Vairagya*
(renunciation) born from the study of *kushastra* (scripture) and seeing the
*nirguna* (non-attribute) nature of the world is *moha-garbha* (delusion-filled)
*vairagya*. This kind of *vairagya* is found in *balatapasvi* (young ascetics).
||8||  Even those who take refuge in the principles of the *Jineshwara* (Jain
Tirthankara) and speak against the principles with their intellectual
imagination, even if they perform very difficult austerities or harsh actions,
their *vairagya* (renunciation) is still *moha-garbha* (delusion-filled). ||9||
**Meaning:** Even those who take refuge in the principles of the *Jineshwara*
(Jain Tirthankara) and speak against the principles with their intellectual
imagination, even if they perform very difficult austerities or harsh actions,
their *vairagya* (renunciation) is still *moha-garbha* (delusion-filled). ||9||
These are not truly liberating from the world, even if their outcome is good,
because they are not born from true knowledge and a state of disinterest. ||10||
**Meaning:** These are not truly liberating from the world, even if their
outcome is good, because they are not born from true knowledge and a state of
disinterest. ||10||  Chapter Six 57

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 gRhe'nnamAtradaurlabhyaM, labhyante maudakA vrate  /  vairAgyasyAyamartho hi
duHkhagarbhasya lakSaNam  // 7 //  bhAvArtha : ghara meM khAne ko paryApta anna
bhI nahIM milatA hai aura dIkSA lene ke bAda khAne ko roja laDDU milate haiM, to
phira dIkSA meM duHkha hI kyA hai ? isa prakAra ke vairAgyabhAsa bhAvoM se jo
dIkSA letA hai, vaha duHkha - garbhita vairAgya kA lakSaNa hai  // 7 //
kuzAstrAbhyAsasambhUtaM bhavanairguNyadarzanAt  /  mohagarbhaM tu vairAgyaM
mataM bAlatapasvinAm  // 8  //  bhAvArtha : kuzAstroM ke adhyayana se saMsAra kI
niHsAratA=nirguNatA jAnane (dekhane) se jo vairAgya hotA hai, vaha mohagarbhita
vairAgya hotA hai  /  aisA vairAgya bAlatapasviyoM ko hotA hai  // 8 //
siddhAntamupajIvyApi ye viruddhArthabhASiNaH  /  teSAmapyetadeveSTaM,
kurvatAmapi duSkaram  // 9 //  bhAvArtha : jo jinezvara ke siddhAnta kA Azraya
lekara bhI apanI bauddhika kalpanA se siddhAnta-viruddha prarUpaNa ( utsUtra
bhASaNa ) karate haiM; aise sAdhaka bhale hI atiduSkara tapa Adi yA kaThora
kriyAe~ karate hoM, unakA vaha vairAgya mohagarbhita hI kahalAtA hai ||9||
saMsAramocakAdInAmivaiteSAM na tAttvikaH  /  zubho'pi pariNAmo, yajjAtA
nAjJArucisthitiH  // 10 //  adhikAra chaThA 57

Page #58 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Bhavarth:** Because their auspicious outcome is not truly liberating like that
of those who hold the view of liberation from the cycle of birth and death; nor
is their interest in the commands of the liberated ones stable. ||10||
**Bhavarth:** The one who has moha-filled vairagya experiences a state of
calmness, but it is only for the nourishment of their faults, because their
inner being is filled with falsehood. Just as a hidden fever consumes the body's
elements, so too does the calmness of a sadhaka whose inner being is filled with
falsehood nourish their faults. ||11||  **Bhavarth:** Skill in worldly matters,
but confusion in spiritual matters; self-indulgence, faulty reasoning, and
praising the unworthy; self-exaltation, harming others, quarrelsomeness, and
living a life of pride; covering up one's attachments, acting without restraint,
and being indifferent to actions; attachment to qualities, forgetting kindness,
lack of concern for the consequences, and forgetting one's dedication; faith,
softness, arrogance, impatience, and lack of discernment. This is the list of
characteristics of the second type of vairagya. ||12-15||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 bhAvArtha : kyoMki unakA zubha pariNAma bhI saMsAra-mocakAdi mata vAloM ke
pariNAma kI taraha tAttvika nahIM hotA; aura na hI unakI vItarAga kI AjJA meM
ruci sthira huI hotI hai  // 10 //  amISAM prazamo'pyuccairdoSapoSAya kevalam  /
antarnilInaviSamajvarAnudbhavasannibhaH  // 11 //  bhAvArtha : mohagarbhita
vairAgya vAle meM prazamabhAva hotA hai, lekina vaha hotA hai, doSoM ke poSaNa
ke lie hI, kyoMki usake antaraMga meM to mithyAtva hotA hai| jaise antaraMga meM
dabA huA viSamajvara ho to vaha zarIra ke dhAtuoM kA zoSaNa karatA rahatA hai|
usake dvArA auSadhisevana bhI doSoM ke poSaNa ke lie hotA hai; vaise hI
antaraMga (aprakaTa) mithyAtva se yukta sAdhaka ke prazama (kaSAyopazAnti) kA
guNa bhI doSapoSaka hotA hai  // 11 //  kuzAstrArtheSu dakSatvaM zAstrArtheSu
viparyayaH  /  svacchandatA kutarkazca guNavatsaMstavojjhanam  // 12 //
AtmotkarSaH paradrohaH kalaho dambhajIvanam  /  AzravAcchAdanaM
zaktyullaGghanena kriyAdaraH  // 13 //  guNAnurAgavaidhuryamupakArasya vismRtiH
/  anubandhAdyacintA ca praNidhAnasya vismRtiH  // 14 //  zraddhA
mRdutvamauddhatyamadhairyamavivekitA  /  vairAgyasya dvitIyasya smRteyaM
lakSaNAvalI  // 15 //  58 adhyAtmasAra

Page #59 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Meaning:  **Verse 12:** Skill in interpreting scriptures, contradicting the
meaning of scriptures, acting on whims, fondness for fallacious arguments, and
abandoning the company of virtuous people.  **Verse 13:** Boasting about one's
own excellence, harboring treachery towards others, engaging in quarrels, living
a life of pride, concealing sins, and respecting actions that exceed one's
capacity.  **Verse 14:** Lack of attachment to virtues, forgetting about helping
others, not considering the karmic consequences of actions (whether they lead to
merit or demerit), and not focusing the mind (pranidhana) on religious practices
like detachment (vairagya).  **Verse 15:** This is the list of characteristics
of the second type of detachment, which is rooted in delusion: laxity in faith,
arrogance, impatience, and lack of wisdom.  **Verse 16:** Detachment for a soul
who is knowledgeable about the principles of right conduct (samyak-tattva), who
determines the truth through the doctrine of Syadvada (Anekantavada), who
touches upon the means of liberation (moksha), and who has a vision of the
truth, is imbued with knowledge.  **Verse 17:** The detachment of a seeker whose
contemplation (mimamsa) is vast, whose intellect is beyond the reach of self-
interest, is imbued with knowledge.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 bhAvArtha : kuzAstroM ke artha karane meM kuzalatA, zAstroM ke artha karane meM
viparItatA, svacchandatA, kutarkapriyatA, guNIjanoM ke satsaMga kA tyAga,  // 12
//  apane utkarSa (bar3appana) kI DIMga hAMkanA, dUsaroM se droha rakhanA,
jhagar3A karanA, dambhayukta jIvana, pApoM ko DhaMkanA, zakti se adhika kriyA kA
Adara karanA  // 13 //  guNAnurAga se rahita, paropakAra ko bhUla jAnA,
puNyAnubandhaka yA pApAnubandhaka karma kA vicAra na karanA, vairAgyAdi
dharmakAryoM meM upayogapUrvaka citta kI ekAgratA (praNidhAna) na rakhanA ||14||
zraddhA ke viSaya meM zithilatA, uddhattatA, adhIratA aura aviveka, yaha
mohagarbhita dvitIya vairAgya kI lakSaNAvalI (lakSaNoM kI sUcI ) batAI gaI hai
// 15 //  jJAnagarbha tu vairAgyaM samayaktattvaparicchidaH  /  syAdvAdinaH
zivopAyasparzinastattvadarzanaH  // 16 //  bhAvArtha : samyaktva tattvoM ke
jAnakAra, syAdvAda ( anekAntavAda) se vastutattva kA nirNaya karane vAle, mokSa
ke upAyoM kA sparza karane ( AcaraNa meM lAne ) vAle evaM tattvadarzI AtmA kA
vairAgya jJAnagarbhita hotA hai  //  16  //  mImAMsA mAMsalA yasya
svaparAgamagocarA  /  buddhiH syAttasya vairAgyaM, jJAnagarbhamudaJcati  // 17
//  bhAvArtha : jisa sAdhaka kI mImAMsA (tattva - vicAraNA) vizAla ho, jisakI
buddhi svapara (jainasiddhAntoM aura adhikAra chaThA 59

Page #60 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The soul, by acquiring knowledge of the scriptures like the Kapiladi Shastras
and Agamas, recognizes the path of purity. In it, knowledge-infused detachment
manifests. ||17||  One whose actions are not primarily focused on the practice
of self and other scriptures, does not attain the essence of pure karma from the
perspective of certainty. ||18||  **Meaning:** The ascetic soul whose actions
are not primarily focused on the practice of self and other scriptures
(according to their teachings), does not attain the essential fruit of pure
karma from the perspective of certainty. ||18||  The scripture states that
Samyaktvam (right faith) is Maun (silence/munitvam) and Maun is Samyaktvam,
indicating their interdependence. Therefore, Samyaktvam is the essence. ||19||
**Meaning:** Because the scripture states that Samyaktvam is Maun
(silence/munitvam) and Maun is Samyaktvam, indicating their interdependence.
Therefore, Samyaktvam is the essence. ||19||  Knowledge is the fruit of being
free from Asrava (influx of karma), and the fruit of being free from Asrava is
non-attachment to objects. The manifestation of both is Samyaktvam. Thus, there
is certainty of their oneness. ||20||  **Meaning:** Knowledge is the fruit of
being free from Asrava (influx of karma), and the fruit of being free from
Asrava is non-attachment to objects. The manifestation of both is Samyaktvam.
Thus, there is certainty of their oneness. ||20||  60 Adhyatma Sara

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 kapilAdi zAstroM) AgamoM kA jJAnasampAdana karake zuddhamArga ko pahacAna letI
hai| usameM jJAnagarbhita vairAgya pragaTa hotA hai  // 17 //  na
svAnyazAstravyApAre prAdhAnyaM yasya karmaNi  /  nA'sau nizcayasaMzuddhaM sAraM
prApnoti karmaNaH  // 18 //  _ bhAvArtha : jisa saMyamI AtmA ke kArya meM sva-
parazAstra ke (anusAra) vyApAra (pravRtti anuSThAna) kI pradhAnatA (mukhyatA)
nahIM hai, vaha nizcayadRSTi se paramArthazuddha karma (kriyA) kA sArabhUta
phala nahIM pAtA  // 18 //  samyaktvamaunayoH sUtre gata-pratyAgate yataH  /
niyamo darzitastasmAt sAraM samyaktvameva hi  // 19 //  bhAvArtha : kyoMki
zAstra meM yaha niyama batAyA hai ki jo samyaktva hai, vahI mauna (munitva) hai,
aura jo mauna hai, vahI samyaktva hai, ina donoM kA anyonyAzraya (gata-
pratyAgata) sambandha hai| isa kAraNa samyaktva hI sArabhUta hai  // 19 //
anAzravaphalaM jJAnamavyutthAnamanAzravaH  /  samyaktvaM
tadabhivyaktirityekatvavinizcayaH  // 20 //  bhAvArtha : jJAna kA phala
Azravarahita honA hai, aura anAzrava (AzravatyAga) kA phala hai-viSayoM ke prati
anaaskti| ina donoM kI abhivyakti (prakaTa honA) hI samyaktva hai| isa prakAra
ina donoM kI abhinnatA (ekatva) kA nizcaya hai  // 20 //  60 adhyAtmasAra

Page #61 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Verse 21:**  * **Translation:** Abstinence alone is the essence of conduct in
the practical sense. But in terms of the inward inclination, the essence is true
knowledge.  **Verse 22:**  * **Translation:** Mere faith in the six categories
of living beings does not lead to purity. Without the attainment of all the
categories, there is no certainty of the true nature.  **Verse 23:**  *
**Translation:** All the verbal categories, past, present, and future, and all
the categories of meaning, together constitute one single substance.  **Verse
24:**  * **Translation:** Thus, it is appropriate to understand that the same
substance, being united with its own and other categories, becomes the essence
of all things. Its own nature is due to its inherent qualities, and its other
nature is due to its distinct characteristics.  **Chapter 6:**  *
**Translation:** Chapter Six

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 bahirnivRttimAtraM syAccAritrAd vyAvahArikAt  /  antaHpravRttisAraM tu
samyakprajJAnameva hi  //  21  //  bhAvArtha : vyAvahArika cAritra se kevala
bAhyapadArthoM se nivRtti hotA hai  /  parantu anta:karaNa kI pravRtti kI dRSTi
se zreSThaphaladAyaka sArarUpa to samyaktvasahita jJAna hai  // 21 //  ekAntena
hi SaTkAyazraddhAne'pi na zuddhatA  /  sampUrNaparyayAlAbhAd yanna
yAthAtmyanizcayaH  // 22 //  bhAvArtha : ekAntarUpa se SaDjIvanikAya para
zraddhA rakhane se zuddhatA nahIM hotI; kyoMki sampUrNa paryAyoM ke lAbha ke
binA yathArthasvarUpa kA nizcaya nahIM hotA  //  22  //  yAvantaH paryayA vAcAM
yAvantazcArthaparyayAH  /  sAmpratA'nAgatAtItAstAvad dravyaM kilaikakam  // 23
//  bhAvArtha : jagat meM vartamAna, bhUta aura bhaviSya ke jitane vacana-
paryAya haiM, aura jitane arthaparyAya haiM, ve saba milakara (samasta
paryAyasahita ) eka hI dravya hai ||23|| syAtsarvamayamityevaM yuktaM
svaparaparyayaiH  /  anuvRttikRtaM svatvaM paratvaM vyatirekajam  // 24 //
bhAvArtha : isI prakAra sva-para- paryAyoM se yukta eka hI dravya
sarvapadArthamaya ho jAtA hai aura usameM anuvRtti - sahacArI guNa se svattva
aura vyatireka se utpanna paratva samajhanA cAhie ||24|| adhikAra chaThA 61

Page #62 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
These synonyms are considered to be unconnected with their own existence. They
are also called their own synonyms due to the special characteristic of the
synonym of renunciation. ||25||  Meaning: Those who are synonyms are considered
to be unconnected with their own existence. They are also called their own
synonyms due to the special characteristic of the synonym of renunciation.
||25||  Even though there is no connection in the soul, due to the use of the
relationship, their ownership is subtly revealed, like wealth. ||26||  Meaning:
Even though there is no connection in the soul, due to the use of the
relationship, their ownership is subtly revealed, like wealth. ||26||  The
synonyms of the sage are knowledge, vision, and character. Just as they are
different, so are they, due to their use, the synonyms of the object. ||27||
Meaning: Just as the synonyms of the sage's knowledge, vision, and character are
different, yet remain together, so are these synonyms of the object, due to
their use, from the point of view of determination. From the point of view of
practice, there is only one soul. ||27||  If there is no search for the
relationship of the soul, what will be the path? In the duality of the basis and
the competitor, there is no separation of the two. ||28||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 ye nAma paraparyAyA: svAstitvAyogato matAH  /  svakIyA apyamI tyAgasvaparyAya-
vizeSaNAt  // 25 //  bhAvArtha : jo paraparyAya haiM, ve saba apane astitva ke
ayoga (asambandha) se mAne gae haiN| ve paraparyAya bhI tyAgarUpa svaparyAya ke
vizeSaNa se svakIya (svaparyAyI) kahalAte haiM  // 25 //  atAdAmye'pi sambandha-
vyavahAropayogataH  /  teSAM svatvaM dhanasyeva vyajyate sUkSmayA dhiyA  //  26
//  bhAvArtha : AtmA meM una paraparyAyoM kI tadrUpatA nahIM hai, phira bhI
sambandharUpa vyavahAra ke kAraNa vaisA prayoga hotA hai  /  jaise dhana dhanika
ke vyavahAra se alaga nahIM dikhatA, vaise hI sUkSmabuddhi se AtmA meM
paraparyAyoM kA svaparyAyatva mAlUma hotA hai  // 26 //  paryAyAH
syurmunerjJAnadRSTicAritragocarAH  /  yathA bhinnA api tathopayogAd vastuno
hyamI  // 27 //  bhAvArtha : jaise muni ke jJAna, darzana aura cAritra ke
paryAya bhinna hote hue bhI sAtha hI rahate haiM, vaise hI upayoga kI dRSTi se
nizcayanaya se vastu ke ye apane-apane paryAya hote haiM, vyavahAranaya se to
eka AtmA hI hotI hai  // 27 //  no cedabhAvasambandhAnveSaNe kA gatirbhavet ?
AdhArapratiyogitve dviSThe na hi pRthak dvayoH  // 28 //  62 adhyAtmasAra

Page #63 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Meaning:** If this is not the case, then what will be the movement in the
investigation of the absence? Therefore, the relationship between the base and
the competitor exists in both of them, but it does not exist separately in both
of them. ||28||  **Meaning:** In the sutra, it is said that everything is one
due to the synthesis (relationship) of self-synonyms and other synonyms. That
is, one who knows one substance knows all substances, and one who knows all
substances knows one substance completely. ||29||  **Meaning:** By taking refuge
in attachment, skill, practice, and self-work, etc., a wise man knows all
substances from the essence, even by taking refuge in one synonym. ||30||
**Meaning:** Although there is no manifestation of each substance without
perfect knowledge, and in some cases, the authority of one part is excessive.
||31||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 bhAvArtha : agara aisA na ho to abhAva ke sambandha meM anveSaNa karane meM kyA
gati hogI? isalie AdhAra aura pratiyogI ina donoM ke viSaya meM vaha sambandha
rahatA hai, parantu una donoM meM pRthak-pRthak nahIM rahatA  // 28 //
svAnyaparyAyasaMzleSAt sUtre'pyevaM nidarzitam  /  sarvamekaM vidanveda sarvaM
jAhnastathaikakam  // 29 //  bhAvArtha : svaparyAya aura paraparyAya ke
saMzleSaNa (sambandha) se sUtra meM sarva eka hI hai, aisA kahA gayA hai  /
yAnI eka dravya ko jAnane vAlA sarvadravya ko jAnatA hai, aura sarvadravya ko
jAnane vAlA eka dravya ko sampUrNa jAnatA hai  // 29 //  AsattipATavAbhyAsa-
svakAryAdibhirAzrayan  /  paryAyamekamapyarthaM vetti bhAvAd budho'khilam  // 30
//  bhAvArtha : Asatti, paTutA, abhyAsa, aura svakArya Adi ko lekara eka paryAya
kA bhI Azraya lene vAlA paNDitapuruSa bhAva se samagra padArthoM ko jAnatA hai
// 30 //  antarA kevalajJAnaM prativyaktirna yadyapi  /  kvApi
grahaNamekAMzadvAraM cAtiprasaktimat  // 31 //  bhAvArtha : yadyapi kevalajJAna
ke binA pratyeka padArtha kI abhivyakti nahIM hotI, aura kisI-kisI viSaya meM
ekAMzadvAra adhikAra chaThA 63

Page #64 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The (knowledge) of the Grahaṇa takes place, however, the pseudo-knowers obtain
knowledge with many synonyms. ||31|| Faith in the Anekānta-āgama and also
unwavering always. Only the Samyak-drishți would have the complete meaning -
deliberation. ||32|| Meaning: Even so, the Samyak-drishți man has continuous
unwavering faith in the Āgamas inspired by Anekānta, and it is through that
faith that the complete meaning can be deliberated. ||32|| From the exposition
of the meaning of the Āgama, the knowledge of the wise is all-pervasive. The
conduct of actions, etc., is like the crest of his definite statement. ||33||
Meaning: By taking recourse to the exposition - meaning-creation - of the
meanings of the Āgama, the wise man obtains all-pervasive knowledge, and his
conduct of actions, etc., is like the crest of his definite statement. ||33||
Whoever, even though a detached seeker, holds on to one side only in an
exclusive manner, is a wrong-grasping person; because such a wrong-grasping
person, being an obstacle to the meaning of the scriptures, is a pseudo-Jain and
a sinner. ||34|| Meaning: Therefore, whoever, even though a detached seeker,
holds on to one side only in an exclusive manner, is a wrong-grasping person;
because such a wrong-grasping person, being an obstacle to the meaning of the
scriptures, is a pseudo-Jain and a sinner. ||34|| ||34|| In renunciation or in
criticism, in conduct or in determination, In knowledge or in action, if this is
not there, then there is no knowledge-essence. ||35|| 64 Adhyātma-sāra

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 kA grahaNa (jJAna) hotA hai, tathApi chadmasthoM ko aneka paryAyoM kI prApti
vAlA jJAna ho jAtA hai ||31|| anekAntAgamazraddhA tathA'pyaskhalitA sadA  /
samyagdRzastayaiva syAt sampUrNArtha - vivecanam  // 32 //  bhAvArtha : phira
bhI samyagdRSTi puruSa ko anekAnta se anuprANita AgamoM ke prati satat askhalita
zraddhA hotI hai, aura usI zraddhA se sampUrNa artha kA vivecana ho sakatA hai
||32|| AgamArthopanayanAjjJAnaM prAjJasya sarvagam  /  kAryAdervyavahArastu
niyatollekhazekharaH  // 33 //  bhAvArtha : Agama ke arthoM kA upanaya-
arthaghaTana kA Azraya lene se buddhimAna puruSa ko sarvagAmI jJAna ho jAtA hai
aura kArya Adi kA vyavahAra to usake nizcaya kiye hue ullekha ke zekhara ke
samAna hotA hai ||33|| tadekAntena yaH kazcid viraktasyA'pi kugrahaH  /
zAstrArthabAdhanAt so'yaM jainAbhAsasya pApakRt  // 34 //  bhAvArtha : isalie jo
koI virakta sAdhaka hokara bhI ekAntarUpa se eka hI pakSa kA kadAgraha rakhatA
hai, vaha kugrahI hai; kyoMki aisA kugrahI zAstra ke artha kA bAdhaka hone se
jainAbhAsa aura pApakArI hotA hai ||34||  // 34 //  utsarge vA'pavAde vA
vyavahAre'tha nizcaye  /  jJAne karmaNi vA'yaM cenna tadA jJAnagarbhatA  //  35
//  64 adhyAtmasAra

Page #65 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Translation:  **Verse 35:**  **Meaning:** If this renunciation of attachment
is about the subject of renunciation, about exceptions, about conduct or
determination, or about knowledge or action, then it is not called knowledge-
infused detachment.  **Verse 36:**  **Meaning:** All Nayas are true in their own
context, and meaningless (false) in considering another's perspective. Thus,
until there is a middle ground in all Nayas, it should be understood that there
is no knowledge-infused detachment.  **Verse 37:**  **Meaning:** Just as the
number one hundred is included in the number of the other half, similarly, if
there is no skill in including (reducing) the subjects of other darshanas in the
Swagam (Jain Agamas), then it should be considered that there is no knowledge-
infused detachment in that practitioner.  **Verse 38:**  **Meaning:** If there
is no skill in applying the meanings of the Agamas and the logical ones in their
respective places, then there is no knowledge-infused detachment.  **Chapter
Six**  **65**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 bhAvArtha : yadi yaha kadAgraha utsarga ke viSaya meM, apavAda ke viSaya meM,
vyavahAra yA nizcaya ke sambandha meM ho, athavA jJAna ke viSaya meM yA kriyA ke
viSaya meM ho, to vaha jJAnagarbhita vairAgya kahalAtA hI nahIM hai  // 35 //
nayeSu svArthasatyeSu mogheSu paracAlane  /  mAdhyasthyaM yadi nAyAtaM, na tadA
jJAnagarbhatA  // 36 //  bhAvArtha : apane-apane artha ke viSaya meM sabhI naya
satya haiM, tathA para kA vicAra karane meM anarthaka (asatya) haiM; isa prakAra
sabhI nayoM ke viSaya meM jaba taka madhyasthatA nahIM AI, taba taka samajhanA
cAhie ki jJAnagarbhita vairAgya nahIM hai  // 36 //  svAgame'nyAgamArthAnAM
zatasyeva parArdhake  /  nAvatArabudhatvaM cenna tadA jJAnagarbhatA  // 37 //
bhAvArtha : jaise parArdha kI saMkhyA meM sau kI saMkhyA kA samAveza ho jAtA
hai, vaise hI svAgamoM (jainAgamoM) meM anyadarzanIya AgamoM ke viSayoM kA
samAveza karane (ghaTAne) kA buddhikauzala na ho to usa sAdhaka meM
jJAnagarbhita vairAgya nahIM hai, aisA mAnanA cAhie  // 37 //
AjJayAgamikArthAnAM yauktikAnAM ca yuktitaH  /  na sthAne yojakatvaM cenna tadA
jJAnagarbhatA  // 38 //  adhikAra chaThA 65

Page #66 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Meaning:** If a seeker does not have the ability to combine the meanings
(words) that are acceptable by command, as "command-acceptable," and the
meanings (things) that are acceptable by logic, as "logic-acceptable," in their
proper place, then their dispassion is not knowledge-filled. ||38||
**Meaning:** Therefore, it is proven that knowledge-filled dispassion can only
be for the meaning of the scriptures; formally, the meaning of the non-
scriptures is also considered knowledge-filled dispassion in the reliance of the
meaning of the scriptures. ||39||  **Meaning:** Subtle vision, a sense of
mediation, thinking of the benefit of all, utmost respect for action, engaging
people in Dharma, being like a mute, blind, and deaf person in the affairs of
others, enthusiasm in practicing one's own virtues, like a poor person earning
wealth, suppressing the intoxication of pride, crushing pride, severing the
thread of envy, immersing oneself in the nectar of equality. ||40-42||
**Meaning:** Never wavering from one's nature, always being filled with
knowledge-bliss, this is the series of characteristics of the third type of
dispassion. ||43||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 bhAvArtha : Agamokta jo artha (vacana) AjJA se grAhya haiM, unheM AjJAgrAhya ke
rUpa meM, tathA jo artha (bAteM) yuktigrAhya haiM, unheM yukti se grahaNa karane
ke rUpa meM yathAsthAna saMyojana karane kI yogyatA yadi sAdhaka meM nahIM hai,
to usakA vairAgya jJAnagarbhita nahIM hai  // 38 //  gItArthasyaiva vairAgyaM
jJAnagarbhaM tataH sthitam  /  upacArAdagItasyApyabhISTaM tasya nizrayA  // 39
//  bhAvArtha : isalie yaha siddha huA ki jJAnagarbhita vairAgya gItArtha ko hI
ho sakatA hai; aupacArikarUpa meM gItArtha ke nizrAya meM agItArtha ko bhI
jJAnagarbhita vairAgya mAnA gayA hai  // 39 //  sUkSmekSikA ca mAdhyasthyaM
sarvatra hitacintanam  /  kriyAyAmAdaro bhUyAn dharme lokasya yojanam  // 40 //
ceSTA parasya vRttAnte mUkAndhabadhiropamA  /  utsAhaH svaguNAbhyAse
duHsthasyeva dhanArjane  // 41 //  madanonmAdavamanaM mada-sammardamardanam  /
asUyAtantuvicchedaH samatAmRtamajjanam  // 42 //  svabhAvAnnaiva calanaM
cidAnandamayAt sadA  /  vairAgyasya tRtIyasya smRteyaM lakSaNAvalI  // 43 //
bhAvArtha : sUkSmadRSTi, mAdhyasthyabhAva, hitacintana, kriyA ke prati atyanta
Adara, janatA ko dharma meM lagAnA, dUsaroM kI adhyAtmasAra

Page #67 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Effort like that of the mute, blind, and deaf in regard to words, the same and
such enthusiasm for the practice of increasing the qualities of oneself or the
soul, as much and as much enthusiasm as a poor man has for earning wealth; and
the vomiting (abandonment) of the madness (sexual arousal) of Kamadeva, the
killing (destruction) of the eight groups of pride like caste, family, etc., the
eradication of even a thread (particle) of envy (fault-finding and jealousy),
diving into the nectar of equality, always remaining unshakable (firm) in one's
own nature of knowledge and bliss, this is considered the characteristic of the
third detachment (knowledge-filled detachment). ||40-41-42-43|| Knowledge-filled
is given here, from the two, their own suppression. Use may sometimes be from
the grace of one's own spirituality. ||44|| Meaning: Of the three types of
detachment mentioned above, knowledge-filled detachment is the one to be adopted
here; the other two types of detachment may be of use, perhaps, from the grace
of one's own spirituality, in relation to their own destruction (annihilation).
|| Thus ends the chapter on the types of detachment || Chapter Six 67

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 bAtoM ke sambandha meM mUka, aMdhe aura bahare ke samAna ceSTA, apane meM yA
AtmA ke guNoM ko bar3hAne ke abhyAsa ke lie utanA aura vaisA hI utsAha, jitanA
aura jaisA utsAha nirdhana ko dhana kamAne ke lie hotA hai; tathA kAmadeva ke
unmAda (kAmottejanA) kA vamana (tyAga), jAtikulAdi aSTa madasamUha kA mardana
(mAra denA), asUyA (doSadRSTi tathA DAha) ke aMzamAtra (tantu) kA bhI uccheda,
samatArUpI sudhA meM DubakI lagAnA, sadaiva apane cidAnandamaya svabhAva meM
avicala (aTala) rahanA, yaha lakSaNAvalI tRtIya vairAgya (jJAnagarbhita
vairAgya) kI mAnI gaI hai  // 40-41-42-43 //  jJAnagarbhamihAdeyaM dvayostu
svopamardataH  /  upayogaH kadAcit syAnijAdhyAtmaprasAdataH  // 44 //  bhAvArtha
: pUrvokta tInoM prakAra ke vairAgyoM meM se jJAnagarbhita vairAgya hI yahA~
upAdeya (grahaNa karane yogya) hai; bAkI ke donoM prakAra ke vairAgyoM kA apane-
apane apamardana (nAza) ko lekara apane adhyAtma ke prasAda kRpA se kadAcit
upayoga ho sakatA hai|  //  itivairaagybhedaadhikaarH|| adhikAra chaThA 67

Page #68 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter Seven [On Dispassion]  Dispassion in this world arises in two ways:
in relation to objects and in relation to qualities. The first is called
"secondary" and the second "primary" by the wise in the spiritual realm. ||1||
**Meaning:** On this earth, two types of dispassion prevail - one in relation to
objects and the other in relation to qualities. The wise in spirituality have
called the first dispassion "secondary" and the second "primary". ||1||  Even
when objects are experienced or heard about through tradition, they do not
create any disturbance for the dispassionate seeker, just as a person immersed
in nectar does not experience poison. ||2||  **Meaning:** Even when objects are
experienced or heard about through scriptures or from experienced individuals,
they do not create any disturbance for the dispassionate seeker, just as a
person immersed in nectar does not experience poison. ||2||  The mind of the
yogi, absorbed in the tranquil and unstruck sound of Om, is not intoxicated by
the sweet fragrance of a vast mango tree filled with blooming flowers and the
chirping of cuckoos and crows. ||3||  **Meaning:** The mind of the yogi,
absorbed in the tranquil and unstruck sound of Om, is not intoxicated by the
sweet fragrance of a vast mango tree filled with blooming flowers and the
chirping of cuckoos and crows. ||3||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 adhikAra sAtavA~ [ vairAgya-viSaya ] viSayeSu guNeSu ca dvidhA, bhuvi
vairAgyamidaM pravartate  /  aparaM prathamaM prakIrtitaM
paramadhyAtmabudhairdvitIyakam  // 1 //  bhAvArtha : isa pRthvI para do prakAra
ke vairAgya pracalita haiM--eka to viSayoM ke sambandha meM aura dUsarA guNoM ke
sambandha meM | adhyAtma ke vidvAnoM ne ina donoM meM se prathama vairAgya ko
apara aura dUsare ko para (pradhAna) kahA hai  // 1 //  viSayA upalambhagocarA
api cAnuzravikA vikAriNaH  /  na bhavanti viraktacetasAM viSadhAreva sudhAsu
majjatAm  // 2 //  bhAvArtha : zAstroM Adi se yA anubhavI puruSoM se
karNaparamparA se sune hue viSaya ke upalabdha ( prApta) hone para bhI
viraktacitta sAdhakoM ke lie usI taraha vikAra paidA karane vAle nahIM hote,
jisa taraha amRta meM nimagna puruSa ko viSadhArA nahIM hotI  // 2 //
suvizAlarasAlamaMjarI - vicaratkokilakAkalIbharaiH  /  kimu mAdyati yoginAM mano
nibhRtAnAhatanAdasAdaram  // 3 //  bhAvArtha : zAnta aura anAhata OM kAra Adi
dhvani meM masta (Adara vAle) yogiyoM kA mana vizAla AmravRkSa kI 68
adhyAtmasAra

Page #69 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The sweet sounds of the cuckoo bird wandering on the mango blossoms can never
captivate (the Jain ascetic). ॥ 3 ॥  The melodious sounds of the bracelets on
the delicate hands of the women do not distract the Yogis who are immersed in
the beloved (spiritual) music revealed by the dancer of spiritual experience. ॥
4 ॥  The sweet melody of the women's panchama (fifth note) cannot disturb the
pure-hearted sadhaks, for the Sadhaks who are absorbed in the gentle and sweet
utterances of equanimity are not pleased by this panchama sound of the women. ॥
5 ॥  The ever-waning form born of semen and blood is not dear to the Yogis who
are the seers of their own imperishable, naturally pure, and primordial self-
form. ॥ 6 ॥  The object of senses, which is full of misery, is not pleasing to
the vision like the experience of the imperishable. ॥ 7 ॥  Adhikara Seven 69

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 maMjarI para vicaraNa karane vAlI koyala ke madhurazabda sunakara matta
(mohita) ho sakatA hai? kabhI nahIM  //  3  //  ramaNI-mRdupANi-kaMkaNa-
kvaNanAkarNanapUrNaghUrNanA:  /  anubhUtinaTI-sphuTIkRtapriyasaMgItaratA na
yoginaH  // 4 //  bhAvArtha : anubhUtirUpI naTI se prakaTa hone vAle priya
(AdhyAtma) saMgIta meM magna yogI ramaNiyoM ke komala kaNoM ke kaMkaNoM kI
dhvani sunakara kabhI Asakta nahIM hote  // 4 //  skhalanAya na zuddhacetasA
lalanApaMcamacArugholanA  /  yadiyaM samatApadAvalI - madhurAlAparaterna rocate
// 5 //  bhAvArtha : zuddhacitta vAle sAdhakoM ko ramaNiyoM ke paMcamasvara kI
yaha madhuradhvani skhalita nahIM kara sakatI, kyoMki samatA kI
komalakAntapadAvalI ke madhura AlApa meM rata sAdhakoM ko lalanAoM kA yaha
paMcamanAda rucikara nahIM hotA  // 5 //  satataM kSayi zukrazoNitaprabhavaM
rUpamapi priyaM na hi  /  avinAzi - nisarganirmalaprathamAnasvakarUpadarzinaH
// 6 //  bhAvArtha : avinAzI, svabhAva se nirmala aura virAT Atma-svarUpa
dekhane vAle yogijanoM ko satat kSINa hone vAlA, vIrya aura raja se utpanna
yuvatI - rUpa kadApi priya nahIM lagatA  // 6 //  paradRzyamapAyasaMkulaM viSayo
yatkhalu carmacakSuSaH  /  na hi rUpamidaM mude yathA nirapAyAnubhavaikagocaram
// 7 //  adhikAra sAtavA~ 69

Page #70 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Meaning:** Just as the soul, devoid of afflictions and perceived only through
experience, is delightful to yogis, so this physical form (beauty), filled with
afflictions (perishable) and the object of the physical eye, is not pleasing to
others. ||7||  **Meaning:** A foolish man finds joy in this (object of the eye)
by seeing the movements (gait), grace, laughter, and gestures of women, but the
eyes of the detached do not even glance at these women, who are like vajras
(thunderbolts) in their ability to pierce the mountain of good deeds. ||8||
**Meaning:** The fragrance of musk, jasmine, clove, sandalwood, and camphor does
not bring joy to the wise, whose bodies are fragrant with the virtue of a love
that is free from attachment and that is a barrier to Cupid. ||9||  **Meaning:**
That which is used for a long time and which the wind takes away, does not
deserve love here, for the fragrance of virtue is superior to it. ||10||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 bhAvArtha : jisa prakAra apAyoM se rahita tathA anubhavamAtragocara AtmasvarUpa
yogiyoM ko modakAraka hotA hai, usa prakAra anyajanoM dvArA dekhane yogya apAyoM
se vyApta (nAzavAna) evaM carmacakSa kA viSaya yaha zArIrika rUpa (saundarya)
prItikAraka nahIM hotA  // 7 //  gati-vibhrama-hAsya-ceSTitairlalanAnAmiha
modate'budhaH  /  sukRtAdripaviSvamISu no viratAnAM prasaranti dRSTayaH  // 8 //
bhAvArtha : mUrkha AdamI isa (cakSu ke) viSaya meM striyoM kI gati (cAlaDhAla),
vilAsa, hAsya aura ceSTAoM ko dekhakara Ananda pAte haiM, lekina sukRtarUpI
parvata kA bhedana karane meM vajra ke samAna ina striyoM ke viSaya meM
viraktajanoM kI dRSTiyA~ jarA bhI nahIM daur3atIM  // 8 //  na mude mRganAbhi-
mallikA-lavalI-candanacandrasaurabham  /  viduSAM nirupAdhibAdhitasmarazIlena
sugandhivarmaNAm  // 9 //  bhAvArtha : upAdhirahita rUpa meM kAmadeva ke bAdhaka
zIla se jinake zarIra sugandhita haiM, una vidvAnoM ko kastUrI, mAlatIpuSpa,
lavaMgalatA, candana aura kapUra kI saurabha AnandadAyaka nahIM hotI  // 9 //
upayogamupaiti yacciraM, harate yanna vibhAvamArutaH  /  na tataH khalu
zIlasaurabhAdaparasminniha yujyate ratiH  // 10 //  70 adhyAtmasAra

Page #71 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Verse 10**  Meaning: In this world, it is not appropriate to be attached to
anything other than the fragrance of good conduct, which is used for a long time
and cannot be taken away by the wind of worldly desires.  **Verse 11**  Meaning:
Just as bees, delighted by the pollen of blooming lotuses, do not have any
eagerness for tasteless flowers, similarly, virtuous people who relish the
nectar of spirituality do not have any eagerness for worldly pleasures.  **Verse
12**  Meaning: If the mind is immersed in the ninth, peaceful rasa, which is
pure and free from constant change, then what benefit is there from other rasas
that are full of terrible (unfavorable) consequences, superficially pleasurable
(only during the time of enjoyment), and full of change? Nothing at all.
**Verse 13**  Meaning: When they taste sweet rasa, the tongues of those who are
greedy for taste start to water. But for those who are detached, their eyes
water after they have experienced the true nature of the fruit of their actions.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 bhAvArtha : jo cirakAla taka upayoga meM AtA hai, tathA vibhAvarUpI vAyu jisakA
haraNa nahIM kara sakatI, usa zIla ke saurabha ke sivAya jagat meM anya kisIse
bhI prIti karanA ucita nahIM hai  // 10 //  madhurairna rasairadhIratA
kvacanA'dhyAtmasudhAlihAM satAm  /  arasaiH kusumairivAlinAM
prasaratpadmaparAgamodinAm  // 11 //  bhAvArtha : vikasita kamaloM ke parAga meM
mudita hone vAle bhauMroM ko jaise nIrasa puSpoM meM koI AturatA nahIM hotI,
vaise hI adhyAtmarUpI amRta kA AsvAdana karane vAle satpuruSoM ko paudgalika
madhura rasoM meM kahIM bhI adhIratA nahIM hotI  //  11  //  viSayamAyatibhirnu
kiM rasaiH sphuTamApAtasukhairvikAribhiH  /  navame'navame rase mano yadi magnaM
satatAvikAriNi  // 12 //  bhAvArtha : nirdoSa aura satat vikArarahita nauveM
zAntarasa meM yadi mana magna ho gayA ho to use bhayaMkara (viSama) pariNAma
vAle, Upara Upara se ( bhogakAla meM hI ) sukhakAraka evaM vikArayukta anya
rasoM se kyA lAbha hai? kucha bhI nahIM  // 12 //  madhuraM rasamApya niSpated
rasanAto rasalobhinAM jalam  /  paribhAvya vipAkasAdhvasaM, viratAnAM tu tato
dRzorjalam  // 13 //  bhAvArtha : madhura rasa ko pAkara svAdalolupa logoM kI
jIbha se pAnI Tapakane lagatA hai, lekina virakta jIvoM ko usake adhikAra
sAtavA~ 71

Page #72 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Fearsome consequences - the thought of them brings tears to the eyes. ||13||
These ascetics, embracing the chaste wife of fortitude, lie on the spotless,
well-arranged bed. Where will their attachment to external touch be? ||14||
Those who bear absolute bliss in their heart, the anointing of sandalwood does
not delight them. For those who have attained purity, even the skill of bathing
in water is futile. ||15||  Sensual people count their birth successful by the
joy of sexual pleasure, but for the Yogis, that very [pleasure] is like the
severe delirium of the venom of the serpent of passion. ||16||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 bhayaMkara pariNAmoM kA vicAra karane se A~khoM meM A~sU A jAte haiM  // 13 //
iha ye guNapuSpapUrite dhRtipatnImupaguhya zerate  /  vimale suvikalpatalpake
kva bahiHsparzaratA bhavantu te ?  // 14 //  bhAvArtha : jo sAdhaka isa jagat
meM guNarUpI puSpoM se paripUrNa nirmala zubha vikalparUpI palaMga para
dhRtirUpI patnI kA AliMgana karake sote haiM, ve strI Adi ke bAhya sparza meM
Asakta kyoM hoMge?  // 14 //  hRdi nirvRtimeva bibhratAM na made
candanalepanAvidhiH  /  vimalatvamupeyuSAM sadA salilasnAnakalA'pi niSphalA  //
15 //  bhAvArtha : hRdaya meM jo paramazAnti dhAraNa kiye hue haiM, unheM zarIra
para candana ke lepa karane se koI prasannatA nahIM hotii| sadA nirmala
AtmabhAvoM ko prApta karane vAloM ke lie jala se snAna karane kI kalA bhI
niSphala hai  // 15 //  gaNayanti januH svamarthavatsuratollAsasukhena bhoginaH
/  madanAhiviSogramUrcchanAmayatulyaM nu tadeva yoginaH  // 16 //  bhAvArtha :
bhogIjana maithuna ke vilAsarUpa sukha se apanA janma saphala mAnate haiM,
lekina yogIjana usI sukha ko kAmarUpI sarpa ke viSa kI ugramUrcchanArUpI vyAdhi
ke sadRza mAnate haiM  // 16 //  72 adhyAtmasAra

Page #73 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Therefore, for the detached-minded ascetics, no worldly subject is pleasurable,
and being immersed in the supreme bliss, they are indifferent to other
pleasures, and are not desirous of heavenly happiness. ||17||  Deities are also
afflicted by the fever of pride, delusion, sorrow, and envy. Therefore, their
happiness, like milk mixed with poison, does not reach the level of
pleasantness. ||18||  When the deities in heaven suffer from the fire of
separation from their celestial consorts, fanned by the wind of many eyes, how
can there be a state of happiness there? ||19||  Even when contemplating the
fall from the heavenly realm, the heart of the deities possessing great
celestial mansions does not break, as it is made of the thunderbolt of the Ghusa
clan. ||20||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 tadime viSayAH kilaihikA na mude ke'pi virakta cetasAm  /  paralokasukhe'pi
niHspRhA paramAnandarasAlasA amI  // 17 //  bhAvArtha : isalie viraktacetA
muniyoM ke ihalokasambandhI koI bhI viSaya AnandadAyaka nahIM hotA tathA parama
Anandarasa meM magna hokara anya rasoM se bhI udAsIna ye munivara paralokasukha
ke bAre meM ni:spRha hote haiM ||17|| madamohaviSAdamatsarajvarabAdhAvidhurAH
surA api  /  viSamizritapAyasAnnavat sukhameteSvapi naiti ramyatAm  // 18 //
bhAvArtha : devatA bhI mada, moha, viSAda evaM matsararUpa jvaroM se pIr3ita
hote haiM  /  isalie viSamizrita khIra ke samAna devoM kA sukha bhI ramaNIyakoTi
meM nahIM AtA ||18|| ramaNIviraheNa vahninA bahuvASpAniladIpitena yat  /
tridazairdivi duHkhamApyate, ghaTate tatra kathaM sukhasthiti: ?  // 19 //
bhAvArtha : svarga meM devatA devAMganA ke viraharUpI agni ko aneka cakSurUpI
vAyu se bhar3akA - bhar3akA kara duHkha pAte haiM, ata: svarga meM sukha kI
sthiti kaise ghaTita ho sakatI hai ?  // 19 //  prathamAnavimAnasampadAM
cyavanasyApi divo vicintanAt  /  hRdayaM na hi yad vidIryate ghusadAM
tatkulizANunirmitam  // 20 //  bhAvArtha : devaloka meM se cyavana hone vAlA
hai, yoM vicAra karake bar3e vimAnoM kI sampadA vAle devoM kA hRdaya adhikAra
sAtavA~ 73

Page #74 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
It does not break, because their heart is made of the atoms of vajra. ||20||
Desire for objects is not for those who seek liberation, not even in all the
four paths. Just as one who desires sandalwood trees in a dense forest of
sandalwood trees does not have any affection for other trees growing on
mountainous land, similarly, yogis who seek liberation do not have any affection
for the objects of the four paths. ||21||  Meaning: Thus, for the yogi who has
established the essence of detachment in his pure intellect, detachment from his
own qualities also arises. ||22||  Meaning: The gains obtained through
association, such as vast knowledge, gooseflesh, wandering, and strong poison,
are like straw to a detached mind; they cannot produce pride in him. ||23||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 phaTatA nahIM, kyoMki unakA hRdaya vajra ke paramANuoM se banA huA hai  // 20
//  viSayeSu ratiH zivArthino na gatiSvasti kilAkhilAsvapi  /
ghananandanacandanArthino giribhUmisvaparadrumeSviva  // 21 //  bhAvArtha :
jaise saghana nandanavana ke candanavRkSoM ke abhilASI ko parvatIya bhUmi para
uge hue anya vRkSoM para prIti nahIM hotI, vaise hI mokSArthI yogIjana ko
samasta (cAroM) gatiyoM ke viSayoM para prIti nahIM hotI  // 21 //  iti
zuddhamatisthirIkRtA'paravairAgyarasasya yoginaH  /  svaguNeSu vitRSNatAvahaM
paravairAgyamapi pravartate  // 22 //  bhAvArtha : isa prakAra jisane apanI
zuddha buddhi meM aparavairAgyarasa ko sthira kara (jamA) liyA hai, aise yogiyoM
ko AtmaguNoM ke prati niHspRhatA dhAraNa karane vAlA para vairAgya bhI utpanna
ho jAtA hai  // 22 //  vipuladdhi-pulAkacAraNaprabalAzIviSamukhyalabdhayaH  /
na madAya viraktacetasAmanuSaMgopanatAH palAlavat  // 23 //  bhAvArtha :
AnuSaMgika prApta huI, vipuladdhi, pulAka, cAraNa aura prabala AzIviSa Adi
labdhiyA viraktacitta puruSa ke lie anAja ke bhUse kI taraha hotI hai, ve usameM
mada nahIM paidA kara sakatIM  // 23 //  74 adhyAtmasAra

Page #75 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Even an excess of virtues, which is a source of pride for the wise, does not
make them feel superior. For they are naturally joyful in their pure self-nature
and do not consider anyone superior to themselves. ||24||  **Meaning:** Even an
excess of virtues, which is a source of pride for the wise, does not make them
feel superior. For they are naturally joyful in their pure self-nature and do
not consider anyone superior to themselves. ||24||  When a yogi's practice
becomes detached, even their heart does not have any desire for liberation. This
state, where one is united with the waves of innate bliss, is desirable for the
seeker. ||25||  **Meaning:** When a yogi's practice becomes detached, even their
heart does not have any desire for liberation. This state, where one is united
with the waves of innate bliss, is desirable for the seeker. ||25||  Thus, the
mind of a great sage, filled with the delight of detachment, is approached by
the glories of liberation, eager to bestow their blessings upon him, who is of
noble nature. ||26||  **Meaning:** Thus, the mind of a great sage, filled with
the delight of detachment, is approached by the glories of liberation, eager to
bestow their blessings upon him, who is of noble nature. ||26||  || Thus ends
the second chapter of the Adhyatma Sara, composed by Shri Mahapadhyaya Shri
Yashovijaya Gani. ||  **Chapter Seven** **75**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 kalitA'tizayo'pi vibudhAnAM madakRdguNavrajaH  /  adhikaM na vidantyamI yato
nijabhAve samudaJcati svataH  // 24 //  bhAvArtha : atizaya ko prApta koI bhI
mahAn guNasamUha vidvajjanoM meM abhimAna paidA karane vAlA nahIM hotA  /
kyoMki unheM apane zuddha Atma svabhAva meM ullAsa (niratizaya Ananda) hone se
usase bar3hakara adhika (atizaya) kisI ko bhI nahIM mAnate  // 24 //  hRdaye na
zive'pi lubdhatA sadanuSThAnamasaMgamaMgati  /  puruSasya dazeyamiSyate
sahajAnandataraMgasaMgatA  // 25 //  bhAvArtha : jaba yogI kA sadanuSThAna
niHsaMgatA ko prApta ho jAtA hai, taba unake hRdaya meM mokSa ke prati bhI
lubdhatA (Asakti) nahIM hotI  /  sahajAnanda kI taMraga kA saMga prApta hone
para sAdhaka ke lie yahI dazA iSTa hai  // 25 //  iti yasya mahAmaterbhavediha
vairAgyavilAsabhRnmanaH  /  upayanti varItumuccakaistamudAraprakRtiM yazaHzriyaH
// 26 //  bhAvArtha : isa taraha isa loka meM jisa mahAbuddhizAlI yogI kA
vairAgya-vilAsa se pUrNa mana hotA hai, usa udAraprakRtivAle ke nikaTa
mokSalakSmI varaNa karane ke lie utkaNThApUrvaka sAmane AtI hai  // 26 //   //
iti zrImahopAdhyAya-zrIyazovijayagaNiviracite adhyAtmasAra-prakaraNe dvitIyaH
prabandhaH  //  adhikAra sAtavA~ 75

Page #76 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter Eight [Mamtav-Tyag] Only the dispassionate one attains stability.
Therefore, the wise seeker should abandon mamta, which is the cause of great
misery. ||1||  **Meaning:** The dispassionate man's detachment alone achieves
stability; therefore, the wise seeker should abandon mamta, which is the cause
of great misery. ||1||  What is the benefit of abandoning objects if mamta
remains awake? Just as a snake does not become non-poisonous by abandoning its
skin, so too, mamta does not disappear by abandoning objects. ||2||
**Meaning:** What is the benefit of abandoning objects if mamta remains awake?
Just as a snake does not become non-poisonous by abandoning its skin, so too,
mamta does not disappear by abandoning objects. ||2||  The sage, with great
effort, cultivates a collection of virtues. But mamta, like a demon, devours all
those virtues in one gulp. ||3||  **Meaning:** The sage, with great effort,
cultivates a collection of virtues. But mamta, like a demon, devours all those
virtues in one gulp. ||3||  For a long time, the restrained sage, through
penance, vows, self-control, rules, and control of the senses, with great
effort, acquires virtues...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 adhikAra AThavAM [mamatva-tyAga] nirmamasyaiva vairAgyaM sthiratvamavagAhate  /
parityajyettataH prAjJo mamatAmatyanarthadAm  // 1 //  bhAvArtha : mamatArahita
puruSa kA vairAgya hI sthiratA prApta karatA hai; isalie buddhizAlI sAdhaka ko
atyanta anarthakAriNI mamatA kA tyAga karanA cAhie  // 1 //  viSayaiH kiM
parityaktairjAgarti mamatA yadi  /  tyAgAt kaJcakamAtrasya bhujago na hi
nirviSaH  // 2 //  _ bhAvArtha : jisake hRdaya meM mamatA jAgRta hai, usake
dvArA viSayoM kA tyAga kara dene mAtra se kyA lAbha? kaMcukI kA tyAga kara dene
se hI sApa nirviSa nahIM bana jAtA  // 2 //  kaSTena hi guNagrAmaM praguNIkurute
muniH  /  mamatArAkSasI sarvaM bhakSayatyekahelayA  // 3 //  bhAvArtha : guNoM
ke jisa puMja ko muni bar3e kaSTa se upArjana karatA hai, una saba guNoM ko
mamatArAkSasI eka hI kaura meM caTa kara jAtI hai| cirakAla taka tapa, vrata,
saMyama, niyama, indriyadamana Adi karake bar3e parizrama se jina guNoM se
saMyamI muni apanI 76 _ adhyAtmasAra

Page #77 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The soul is equipped, all those eternal qualities are devoured in one gulp by
the demonic attachment (kama-rupa) ॥3॥ By the power of ignorance-like medicine,
the wife, attachment, plays with the husband, who is like an animal, by many
means ॥4॥ Meaning: Oh! The wife, attachment, by the power of ignorance-like
medicine, quickly makes the husband, who is like an animal, play and dance by
many means ॥4॥ One goes to the next life alone, and is born alone, then by
excessive attachment, he creates all relationships in his mind ॥5॥ Meaning: The
soul goes to the next life alone and is born alone, then by excessive
attachment, he creates all relationships in his mind ॥5॥ Just as a banyan tree,
born from one seed, covers a vast land, so too, from the seed of attachment, the
vast universe is imagined ॥6॥ Meaning: Just as a banyan tree, born from one
seed, covers a vast land, so too, from the seed of attachment, the vast universe
is imagined ॥6॥ My mother, my father, my brother, my sister, my beloved, my
sons, my daughters, my friends, my relatives, my praised ones ॥7॥ Chapter Eight
77

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 AtmA ko susajjita karatA hai, una sabhI cirasaMcita guNoM ko mamatArUpI
(kAmanArUpI) rAkSasI eka hI grAsa meM khA jAtI hai  // 3 //  jantukAntaM
pazUkRtya drAgavidyauSadhibalAt  /  upAyairbahubhiH patnI mamatA krIDayatyaho
// 4 //  bhAvArtha : aho ! mamatArUpI patnI avidyArUpI auSadhi ke bala para
jIvarUpI pati ko jhaTapaTa pazu-sA banAkara aneka upAyoM se krIr3A karAtI hai,
nacAtI hai  // 4 //  ekaH parabhave yAti, jAyate caika eva hi  /  mamatodrekataH
sarvaM sambandhaM kalayatyatha  // 5 //  bhAvArtha : jIva parabhava meM akelA hI
jAtA hai aura akelA hI paidA hotA hai, phira mamatA bar3hAkara usake kAraNa
sabhI sambandhoM ko dimAga meM jamA letA hai  // 5 //  vyApnoti mahatI bhUmiM
vaTabIjAd yathA vttH| tathaikamamatAbIjAd prapaJcasyApi kalpanA  // 6 //
bhAvArtha : jaise vaTavRkSa ke eka bIja se paidA huA vaTavRkSa bahuta-sI bhUmi
ko ghera letA hai, vaise hI mamatArUpI bIja se saMsAra ke vizAla prapaJca kI
kalpanA hotI hai  // 6 //  mAtA pitA me bhrAtA me, bhaginI vallabhA ca me  /
putrAH sutA me mitrANi jJAtayaH saMstutAzca me  // 7 //  adhikAra AThavAM 77

Page #78 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Meaning: This is my mother, this is my brother, this is my sister, this is my
beloved, these are my sons and daughters, these are my friends; these are my
relatives, these are my acquaintances. In this way, as a person grows older in
the world, his attachment grows further and further. ||7||  Meaning: Thus, the
disease of attachment keeps increasing every moment. Without the great medicine
of knowledge, a person cannot eradicate this disease of attachment. ||8||
Meaning: Due to attachment, a being starts with no hesitation in undertaking
various activities. Driven by the greed of wealth, he runs around all the time,
regardless of whether it is appropriate or not. ||9||  Meaning: Those for whose
sustenance a person is distressed due to attachment; they are not a refuge or a
shelter for him in this world or the next. ||10||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 bhAvArtha : yaha merI mAM hai, yaha merA bhAI hai, yaha merI bahana hai, yaha
merI priyA hai, ye mere putra-putriyA~ haiM, ye mere mitra haiM; ye jAtibandhu
haiM, ye mere pUrvaparicita haiM  /  isa prakAra saMsAra meM jyoM-jyoM manuSya
bar3A hotA jAtA hai, tyoM-tyoM mamatA Age se Age bar3hatI jAtI hai  // 7 //
ityevaM mamatAvyAdhiM vardhamAnaM pratikSaNam  /  janaH zaknoti nocchettuM vinA
jJAnamahauSadham  // 8 //  bhAvArtha : isa prakAra mamatArUpI vyAdhi pratikSaNa
bar3hatI hI jAtI hai| jJAnarUpI mahauSadha ke binA manuSya isa mamatA kI bImArI
ko nahIM miTA sakatA  // 8 //  mamatvenaiva niHzaMkamArambhAdau pravartate  /
kAlAkAlasamutthAyI dhanalobhena dhAvati  // 9 //  bhAvArtha : prANI isa mamatA
ke kAraNa hI niHzaMka hokara Arambha-samArambha Adi meM par3atA hai| dhana ke
mamattvarUpa lobha ke kAraNa vyakti yogya-ayogya sabhI samaya uThakara
daur3adhUpa karatA rahatA hai  // 9 //  svayaM yeSAM ca poSAya khidyate
mamatAvazaH  /  ihAmutra ca te na syustrANAya zaraNAya vA  // 10 //  bhAvArtha :
svayaM mamatA ke vaza hokara jinake bharaNapoSaNa ke lie manuSya rAta-dina
khinna rahatA hai; ve isa loka 78 adhyAtmasAra

Page #79 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
And they are not ready to protect or give refuge in the afterlife.  Beings,
under the influence of attachment, nurture their relatives, children, etc., and
suffer in many ways for them, but when any calamity or distress befalls them, or
they are caught in some trouble, or mental anguish arises due to divine destiny,
then those children and relatives turn their eyes away; they turn their faces
away, they do not come to protect them, nor do they give them shelter. When they
cannot give protection and shelter in this world, being their own, then how can
they be protectors and refuge-givers in the afterlife (heaven, etc.)? Everyone
is engrossed in their own self-interest, knowing all this, yet the ignorant,
under the influence of egotism, continues to nurture them, doing nothing for
himself. ||10||  By attachment, one nourishes many worlds with his own earnings;
but he alone endures the intense sufferings of hell. ||11||  Meaning: Due to
attachment, a man alone earns wealth and nourishes many people with it, but as a
result, he alone suffers the intense pains of hell. Thinking, "This son, family,
etc., are mine, they should not suffer even a little," he alone earns wealth and
nourishes many people without seeking anyone's help.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 aura paraloka meM rakSA ke lie yA zaraNa dene ke lie taiyAra nahIM hote  /
prANI mamatA ke vazIbhUta hokara svajana - putra Adi kA pAlana-poSaNa karatA
hai, unake lie aneka prakAra se kaSTa bhI pAtA hai, kintu usa para jaba koI
Aphata yA saMkaTa A par3e yA kisI musIbata meM pha~sa jAya yA devayoga se koI
mAnasika saMtApa A par3e, taba ve putrAdi svajana A~kheM phera lete haiM; mu~ha
mor3a lete haiM, na ve rakSA ke lie Ate haiM, na usako Azraya hI dete haiM  /
jaba ve isa loka meM apane banakara rakSA aura Azraya nahIM de sakate; taba
paraloka (svargAdi) meM to ve rakSaka evaM zaraNadAtA ho hI kaise sakate haiM?
saba apanI-apanI svArthasiddhi meM tanmaya haiM, yaha saba jAnate hue bhI
svattva mohavaza ajJAnI banakara unhIM kA poSaNa karatA rahatA hai, apanA kucha
bhI nahIM karatA  // 10 //  mamattvena bahUn lokAn puSNAtyeko'rjitairdhanaiH  /
soDhA narakaduHkhAnAM tIvrANAmeka eva tu  // 11 //  bhAvArtha : mamattvavaza
manuSya svayaM akelA hI dhana kamAkara usase aneka logoM kA pAlana-poSaNa karatA
hai, kintu, usake pariNAmasvarUpa naraka ke tIvra duHkhoM ko bhogatA hai vaha
akelA hI  /  yaha putra, parivAra Adi merA hai, inako jarA bhI takalIpha na ho,
aisA socakara kisI kI sahAyatA liye binA akelA hI dhana kamA - kamA kara usase
aneka logoM kA poSaNa adhikAra AThavAM 79

Page #80 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
He does so. He happily brings whatever they ask for; as a result of that sinful
act, he alone suffers terrible torments in hell. When he endures those terrible
torments, no one, including his son, comes to his aid. On the contrary, his son
and others, having received the wealth left behind by the deluded person, enjoy
themselves, while he, poor fellow, alone suffers torment in hell. Therefore, one
should renounce attachment, the root of all suffering. ||11||  The one blinded
by attachment does not see what exists, but the one blinded by attachment sees
what does not exist as existing. This is the great difference between the two.
||12||  **Meaning:** A person born blind does not see what exists, but a person
blinded by attachment sees what does not exist as existing. This is the great
difference between the two. ||12||  By contemplating the impermanence of life,
one develops love for the beloved even more. Considering the beloved as one's
own life, one rejoices due to attachment. ||13||  **Meaning:** Under the sway of
attachment, a being considers his beloved, who destroys his life, as inseparable
or impermanent, and therefore, due to excessive love, considers her more
precious than life itself and rejoices. ||13||  1. In some places, the reading
is "inseparability" instead of "impermanence." 80 Adhyatma Sara

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 I karatA hai  /  ve jo bhI cIja mA~gate haiM, unheM khuzI-khuzI lAkara detA
hai; usa pApakarma ke phalasvarUpa svayaM akelA hI naraka meM dAruNa duHkhoM ko
bhogatA hai  /  una bhayaMkara duHkhoM ko sahate samaya usakI sahAyatA ke lie
putrAdi koI bhI nahIM AtA, ulTe, putrAdi to ukta mohita vyakti dvArA chor3akara
gae hue dhanamAla ko pAkara gulacharre ur3Ate haiM, khUba mauja lUTate haiM,
udhara vaha becArA akelA naraka meM saMtApa bhogatA hai  /  isalie saba duHkhoM
ke mUla - mamattva kA tyAga karanA cAhie  // 11 //  mamatAndho hi yannAsti,
tatpazyati, na pazyati  /  jAtyandhastu yadastyetadbheda ityanayormahAn  // 12
//  bhAvArtha : janmAndha vyakti to jo vastu vidyamAna hai, use nahIM dekhatA,
magara mamatAndha vyakti, jo vastu avidyamAna hai, usI ko astitvarUpa meM
dekhatA hai  /  yahI bar3A bhArI antara ina donoM meM hai  // 12 //
prANAnanityatAdhyAnAt premabhUmnA tato'dhikam  /  prANApahAM priyAM mattvA
modate mamatAvazaH  // 13 //  bhAvArtha : mamatA ke vaza hokara prANI prANoM kA
nAza karane vAlI apanI priyatamA ko abhinna yA anitya mAnatA hai, isalie
premAtizaya ke kAraNa prANoM se bhI adhika mAnakara Ananda mAnatA hai  // 13 //
1. ' anityatA' ke badale kahIM-kahIM 'abhinnatA' bhI pATha hai  /  80
adhyAtmasAra

Page #81 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The translation preserving the Jain terms is as follows:  The person attached to
possessiveness considers the bones of women as Kundanyas (buds of Kunda
flowers), the mouth as the abode of Shleshma (mucus), the moon. The masses of
flesh as the breasts, the golden vessels (14).  The person attached to
possessiveness, even if the Sadhvi (virtuous woman) has a different mind,
different speech, and different actions, considers her as charming with restless
eyes (15).  The ill-conducted woman engages in improper activities even at the
risk of the life of the attached person, yet the person attached to
possessiveness considers her as an innocent (16).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 kundAnyasthIni dazanAn mukhaM zleSmagRhaM vidhum  /  mAMsagranthI kucau kumbhau
hemno vetti mamattvavAn  // 14 //  bhAvArtha : mamatAvAna puruSa striyoM ke
haDDiyoM ke dA~toM ko kundapuSpa kI kaliyA~ samajhatA hai  /  zleSma ke ghara
mukha ko pUrNa candramA mAnatA hai, mA~sa kI gA~Tha ke samAna stanoM ko sone ke
kalaza samajhatA hai  /  yaha saba mamatA kI viDambanA hai  // 14 //
manasyanyad vacasyanyat kriyAyAmanyadeva ca  /  yasyAstAmapi lolAkSIM sAdhvIM
vetti mamattvavAn  // 15 //  bhAvArtha : jisa strI ke mana meM kucha aura hai,
athavA mana meM kisI dUsare (yAra) ke prati prIti hai, vacana meM premavacana se
viruddha kucha aura hotA hai, athavA vacana se anya puruSa ke prati prema batAtI
hai aura kAryarUpa meM kucha aura hI hotA hai, yAnI pati Adi kA aniSTa karatI
hai, athavA zarIra se ramaNAdi kriyA kisI aura ke sAtha karatI hai| aisI caMcala
netra vAlI duSTA strI ko mamattvavAn puruSa paramasatI mAnatA hai  // 15 //  yA
ropayatyakArye'pi rAgiNaM prANasaMzaye  /  durvRttA strI mamattvAndhastAM
mugdhAmeva manyate  // 16 //  bhAvArtha : durAcAriNI strI apane premI pati ke
prANoM ko saMkaTa meM DAlane vAle corI Adi akArya meM pravRtta kara detI hai,
athavA prANoM kA khatarA paidA ho jAya, aise duSkara kArya meM adhikAra AThavAM

Page #82 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
16. Even though the beloved one is discarded, the person devoid of
discrimination, blinded by attachment (moha) to her, foolishly considers her as
'this is my beloved'.  17. The body of a woman is covered with skin, and is a
repository of flesh, bones, excreta and urine. Yet, the affection towards such
repulsive women is merely a manifestation of attachment (mamata).  18. The
person attached to possessiveness (mamatavan) calls his child 'my dear' while
fondling him. And he considers the finger, smeared with his own saliva, as
nectar-like and pleasurable, due to his attachment.  19. The infatuated mother
does not leave her child even if he is covered in mud or excreta. She considers
him pure due to her attachment (mamattva).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 apane priyatama ko DAla detI hai, phira bhI usake moha (mamattva) meM aMdhA
vivekacakSurahita puruSa use 'yaha merI priyA hai', aisA mAnakara bholI hI
samajhatA hai  // 16 //  carmAcchAditamAMsAsthiviNmUtrapiTharISvapi  /  vanitAsu
priyatvaM yattanmamatvavijRmbhitam  // 17 //  bhAvArtha : striyoM kI deha Upara
se camar3e se mar3hI huI hai, tathA mAsa, haDDiyoM, viSThA aura mUtra kI piTArI
hai, phira bhI aisI ghinaunI striyoM ke prati jo prIti hai, vaha kevala mamatA
kA hI vilAsa hai  // 17 //  lAlayan bAlakaM tAtetyevaM brUte mamatvavAn  /
vetti ca zleSmaNA pUrNAmaMgulImamRtAJcitAm  // 18 //  bhAvArtha : mamatAvAn
puruSa apane putra ko lAr3a-pyAra karatA huA, tAta (bApU) kahakara bulAtA hai;
yAnI svayaM usakA putra bana jAtA hai| aura zleSma (lITa) se bharI huI apane
mu~ha meM DAlI huI U~galI ko mamatA ke kAraNa ghRNA kiye binA amRta se sanI huI
sukhadAyinI mAnatA hai  // 18 //  paMkAI mapi niHzaMkA sutamaMkAnna muJcati  /
tadamedhye'pi medhyatvaM jAnAtyambA mamattvataH  // 19 //  bhAvArtha : mohita
mAtA apane putra ko kIcar3a yA viSThA se bhare hue jAnakara bhI niHzaka hokara
apanI goda se nIce nahIM 82 adhyAtmasAra

Page #83 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
She considers it pure even when it becomes impure (dirty) or even when its
excrement (dung) etc. are impure. ||19|| Even though the relationship with
parents etc. is uncertain, it appears certain due to attachment. ||20|| Meaning:
For those whose hearts are filled with strong delusion, even the uncertain
relationship with parents, etc., appears certain due to attachment. ||20|| Each
soul is different, each pudgala is also different. There is no connection,
whoever sees this, sees. ||21|| Meaning: Each soul is different, each pudgala is
different from the soul, and there is no connection between them, whoever sees
this, sees (the seer). ||21|| Due to the delusion of ownership and selfhood,
which is the cause of ego and attachment, they flee from the knowledge of
difference, like snakes from the knowledge of a rope. ||22|| Meaning: Just as
the delusion of a snake is destroyed by the knowledge of a rope, so too the
delusion of ownership and selfhood, which is the cause of ego and attachment, is
destroyed by the knowledge of difference. ||22|| The question "What is this?"
arises in the face of the knowledge of the truth. Where can attachment stand
when there is no connection? ||23|| Chapter Eight 83

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 chor3atI  /  mamattvavaza vaha usake apavitra (gaMde) ho jAne para bhI athavA
usakI viSThA (TaTTI) Adi azuci ko bhI pavitratA se yukta samajhatI hai  // 19 //
mAtApitrAdi sambandho'niyato'pi mamattvataH  /  dRr3ha bhUmibhramavatAM
naiyatyenAvabhAsate  // 20 //  bhAvArtha : jisake hRdaya meM bhrama majabUta
sthAna jamAe hue hai, unheM mAtA, pitA, Adi kA anizcita - sambandha bhI
mamattvavaza nizcita pratIta hotA hai ||20|| bhinnAH pratyekamAtmAno, vibhinnAH
pudgalA api  /  zUnyaH saMsarga ityevaM yaH pazyati sa pazyati  //  21 //
bhAvArtha : pratyeka AtmA bhinna-bhinna hai, pudgala bhI AtmA se bhinna hai,
aura unakA kisI prakAra kA sambandha nahIM hai, isa prakAra jo dekhatA hai, vahI
dekhatA (draSTA ) hai  // 21 //  ahaMtAmamate svatva-svIyatva - bhramahetuke  /
bhedajJAnAt palAyete rajjujJAnAdivAhibhiH  //  22  //  bhAvArtha : jaise rassI
ke jJAna se sarpa kA bhrama naSTa ho jAtA hai, vaise hI bhedajJAna se svattva
aura svakIyatvarUpa bhrama ke hetu ahaMtva aura mamatva naSTa ho jAte haiM  //
22  //  kimetaditi jijJAsA tattvAntarjJAnasammukhI  /  vyAsaMgameva notthAtuM
datte kva mamatAsthitiH  // 23 //  adhikAra AThavAM 83

Page #84 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Meaning:** 'What is this?' The curiosity that arises in the face of knowledge
of Tattvantika (Jain philosophy) does not allow delusion to arise, then how will
it allow attachment to remain stable? ||23||  **Meaning:** Just as a lover
desiring a beloved does not find pleasure anywhere without the beloved,
similarly, a seeker of truth does not find peace anywhere without attaining the
knowledge of truth (Paramarthajnan). His interest is not in any object other
than the knowledge of truth. ||24||  **Meaning:** Therefore, the egoistic mind
hinders curiosity. And then that man, overwhelmed by various kinds of acting,
appears confused (bewildered). ||25||  **Meaning:** The one who has adopted yoga
(munijeevan), but his attachment has not died, and he has not attained equality,
and the truth has not been inquired into, then his birth has been wasted. ||26||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 bhAvArtha : 'yaha kyA hai?' isa prakAra kI jo tattvAnta ke jJAna ke sammukha
hone kI jijJAsu huI, vahI vyAmoha ko utpanna nahIM hone detI, taba phira mamatA
ko sthira kaise rahane degI?  // 23 //  priyArthinaH priyAprAptiM vinA kvA'pi
yathA ratiH  /  na tathA tattvajijJAsostattvaprAptiM vinA kvacit  // 24 //
bhAvArtha : jaise premikA ke abhilASI kAmuka ko premikA ke mile binA aura kahIM
bhI prIti nahIM hotI, vaise hI tattvajijJAsu sAdhaka ko tattvajJAna
(paramArthajJAna) kI prApti ke binA kahIM bhI caina nahIM par3atA  /  usakI ruci
tattvajJAna ke atirikta kisI bhI padArtha meM nahIM hotI  //  24  //  ata eva hi
jijJAsAM viSkambhati mamattvadhIH  /  vicitrAbhinayAkrAntaH sambhrAnta iva
lakSyate  //  25  //  bhAvArtha : isI kAraNa mamattvabuddhi jijJAsA ko roka detI
hai  /  aura taba vaha vicitra prakAra ke abhinayoM se vyApta manuSya sambhrAnta
- sA ( hakkA-bakkA - sA ) dikhAI detA hai ||25|| dhRto yogo, na mamatA hatA, na
samatA'dRtA  /  na ca jijJAsitaM tattvaM, gataM janma nirarthakam  // 26 //
bhAvArtha : jisane yoga (munijIvana ) dhAraNa kiyA, kintu usakI mamatA marI
nahIM, aura na usane samatA ko 84 adhyAtmasAra

Page #85 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
॥26॥ If one has adopted [the teachings] with faith, but has not inquired into
the Truth, then know that his human birth has gone in vain. ||26|| Inquiry and
discrimination are the two destroyers of attachment. Therefore, one should
subdue attachment, the enemy of spirituality, by these two. ||27|| Meaning:
Inquiry and discrimination are the two destroyers of attachment. Therefore, one
should subdue attachment, the enemy of spirituality, by these two. Attachment is
the enemy of spirituality, wherever it enters, it destroys the culmination of
spirituality. Therefore, to restrain this (attachment), one should adopt the
inquiry into the Truth and the discrimination between the body and the soul, or
the self and the other. By these two, one should expel the enemy of attachment
from the house of the heart; or one should subdue it well and become absorbed in
spirituality. ||27|| ॥ Thus ends the chapter on the renunciation of attachment.
|| Chapter Eight 85

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
  // 26 //  zraddhApUrvaka apanAyA, na hI tattva kI jijJAsA kI, usakA
manuSyajanma nirarthaka gayA, samajho ||26|| jijJAsA ca vivekazca
mamatAnAzakAvubhau  /  atastAbhyAM nigRhNIyAdenAmadhyAtmavairiNIm  // 27 //
bhAvArtha : jijJAsA aura viveka ye donoM mamatA ko naSTa karane vAle haiN|
isalie ina donoM se adhyAtmavairaNI mamatA kA nigraha karanA cAhie  /  adhyAtma
kI vairiNI mamatA hai, yaha jahA~ bhI ghusa jAtI hai, adhyAtma pariNati kA
saphAyA kara DAlatI hai  /  ata: isa (mamatA) kA nirodha karane ke lie
tattvajijJAsA tathA zarIra aura AtmA athavA svaparapadArtha kA bhedavijJAna
(viveka) ina donoM ko apanAe  /  ina donoM ke dvArA mamatArUpI duzmana ko
hRdayarUpI ghara se nikAla denA cAhie; yA usakA bhalIbhAMti nigraha kara denA
cAhie aura adhyAtma meM tanmaya bana jAnA cAhie  //  27 //   //  iti mamatA -
tyAgAdhikAraH  //  adhikAra AThavAM 85

Page #86 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Ninth Right: Equality  [Equality] When attachment is abandoned, equality
arises naturally. Just as the quality of clarity manifests in a crystal free
from impurities, so too does equality manifest when attachment is abandoned.
||1||  **Meaning:** Just as the quality of clarity manifests naturally in a
crystal free from impurities, so too does equality manifest naturally when
attachment is abandoned. ||1||  The idea of preference or aversion towards
objects arises from our perception. True equality is achieved by abandoning this
perception and becoming steady and unwavering. ||2||  **Meaning:** The idea of
preference or aversion towards objects arises from our perception. True equality
is achieved by abandoning this perception and becoming steady and unwavering.
||2||  A person who hates these very objects, and who is attached to them, does
not truly understand that from the perspective of true knowledge, nothing is
desirable or undesirable. It is only through perception that we create these
ideas. ||3||  **Meaning:** A person who hates these very objects, and who is
attached to them, does not truly understand that from the perspective of true
knowledge, nothing is desirable or undesirable. It is only through perception
that we create these ideas. ||3||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 adhikAra nauvA~ [samatA] tyaktAyAM mamatAyAM ca samatA prathate svataH  /
sphaTike galitopAdhau yathA nirmalatAguNaH  // 1 //  bhAvArtha : jaise
upAdhirahita hue sphaTika (billaurI kA~ca) meM nirmalatA ke guNa svataH pragaTa
ho jAte haiM, vaise hI mamatA kA tyAga hone para samatA svataH pragaTa hotI hai
// 1 //  priyApriyatvayoryArthairvyavahArasya kalpanA  /  nizcayAttadvyudAsena
stamityaM samatocyate  // 2 //  bhAvArtha : padArtho ko lekara unameM jo
priyatva yA apriyatva ke vyavahAra kI kalpanA hai, usakA nizcaya (paramArtha) se
nAza karake nizcala=sthira ho jAnA hI samatA kahalAtI hai  // 2 //  teSveva
dviSataH puMsasteSvevArtheSu rajyataH  /  nizcayAt kiJcidiSTaM vAniSTaM vA naiva
vidyate  // 3 //  bhAvArtha : puruSa unhIM padArthoM para dveSa karatA hai unhIM
ke prati rAga (moha) karane lagatA hai  /  nizcayadRSTi se to koI bhI padArtha
na to iSTa hai, na aniSTa  /  vyavahAra se kalpanA karane vAle 86 adhyAtmasAra

Page #87 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
A human being finds that objects like clothes, ornaments, women, food, etc.,
which are helpful for their primary purpose, become obstacles and undesirable
when they become useless. The object that was previously disliked becomes
desirable when it is needed. Therefore, the concept of liking and disliking
depends on the purpose and its absence. In reality, no object is truly desirable
or undesirable. It is only through the imagination of the mind that a human
being considers an object desirable or undesirable. A wise seeker should abandon
this imagination and accept equality. ||3||  What is a subject for one person,
due to their own opinion, is considered nourishing (pleasing), the same subject
becomes hateful (unpleasant) for another person due to their different opinion.
||4||  Therefore, these two, desirable and undesirable, are both imagined by the
mind, they are not true in reality. Just like duality, this duality is also a
product of imagination. ||5||  _ Meaning: Therefore, desirable and undesirable,
both are imagined by the mind, they are not true in reality. _  Chapter Ninth

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 manuSya ko vastra, AbhUSaNa, strI, AhAra Adi jo padArtha pahale prayojana kA
sAdhaka hotA hai, vahI padArtha niSprayojana ho jAne para bAdhaka bana jAtA hai,
aniSTa lagane lagatA hai| jisa padArtha ke prati dveSa paidA hotA thA, usI
padArtha kI AvazyakatA hone para prasannatA hotI hai| isalie priyatva-apriyatva
kI kalpanA prayojana-aprayojana para nirbhara karatI hai| vAstava meM nizcaya se
to koI bhI vastu na to iSTa (priya) hai, aura na aniSTa hI  /  apane mana kI
kalpanA se hI manuSya vastu ko iSTa yA aniSTa mAna letA hai  /  vivekI sAdhaka
ko isa kalpanA ko chor3akara samatA kA svIkAra karanA cAhie  // 3 //  ekasya
viSayo yaH syAt svAbhiprAyeNa puSTikRt  /  anyasya dveSyatAmeti sa eva
matibhedataH  // 4 //  bhAvArtha : jo viSaya eka vyakti ko apane anukUla
abhiprAya ke kAraNa puSTikAraka (rucikAraka) lagatA hai, vahI viSaya dUsare
manuSya ke apane abhiprAya se bhinna hone ke kAraNa dveSarUpa (apriya) ho jAtA
hai  // 4 //  vikalpakalpitaM tasmAd dvayametanna tAtvikam  /  vikalporame tasya
dvitvAdivadupakSayaH  // 5 //  _ bhAvArtha : isalie iSTa aura aniSTa ye donoM
vikalpa manaHkalpita vikalpa hai, paramArtha se (vastutaH) ye satya nahIM hai|
adhikAra nauvA~

Page #88 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
By transcending alternatives (nivrutti), duality and the like, including the
desirable and undesirable, are destroyed; then the quality of equanimity
manifests. ||5||  When one's own purpose is fulfilled, one's own autonomy shines
forth. When this happens, the arising of thoughts about external objects is
destroyed. ||6||  Meaning: When the seeker begins to perceive that the
fulfillment of their purpose is in their own hands, then the arising of thoughts
about external objects is destroyed. ||6||  When delusion is destroyed, the true
nature of the self is realized, like a necklace of gold worn around the neck.
This leads to the non-arising of attachment and aversion, resulting in
unhindered equanimity. ||7||  Meaning: When delusion is destroyed, the true
nature of the self is realized, like a necklace of gold worn around the neck.
This leads to the non-arising of attachment and aversion, resulting in
unhindered equanimity. ||7||  When the karmically created duality (dualism) in
the beings of the world is not perceived due to the limit of pure knowledge,
then unhindered equanimity is attained. ||8||  Meaning: When the karmically
created duality (dualism) in the beings of the world is not perceived due to the
limit of pure knowledge, then unhindered equanimity is attained. ||8||  When
one's mind is content in the self, due to the steadfastness in one's own
qualities and the conviction of oneness, then one's equanimity is unsurpassed.
||9||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 vikalpa se uparata (nivRtta) hone se dvitva Adi kI taraha usa iSTAniSTa kA
kSaya hotA hai; taba samatvaguNa pragaTa hotA hai  // 5 //
svaprayojanasaMsiddhiH svAyattA bhAsate yadA  /  bahirartheSu
saMkalpasamutthAnaM tadA hatam  // 6 //  bhAvArtha : jaba sAdhaka ko aisA
pratibhAsita hone lagatA hai ki apane prayojana kI siddhi apane hAtha meM hai,
taba bAhyapadArthoM ke sambandha meM saMkalpa kI utpatti naSTa ho jAtI hai  // 6
//  labdhe svabhAve kaNThasthasvarNanyAyAd bhramakSaye  /  rAgadveSAnupasthAnAt
samatA syAdanAhatA  // 7 //  sone bhAvArtha : bhrAnti kA kSaya hone para gale
meM par3e hue ke AbhUSaNa kI taraha AtmasvabhAva (svarUpa) kI sAkSAt prApti ho
jAtI hai aura usase rAgadveSa kI anutpatti hone se berokaToka samatA prApta hotI
hai  // 7 //  jagajjIveSu no bhAti dvaividhyaM karmanirmitam  /  yadA
zuddhanayasthityA tadA sAmyamanAhatam  // 8 //  bhAvArtha : jaba zuddhanaya kI
maryAdA se jagat ke jIvoM meM karmakRta dvaita (dvividhatA) pratibhAsita nahIM
hotA; tabhI anivArya apratibaddha samatA prApta hotI hai  // 8 //
svaguNebhyo'pi kauTasthyAdekatvAdhyavasAyataH  /  AtmArAmaM mano yasya tasya
sAmyamanuttaram  // 9 //  88 adhyAtmasAra

Page #89 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Meaning:** Consider the equality of that person whose mind dwells only in the
soul, due to the firm conviction of oneness, the qualities of the soul, and the
state of being one with the sole soul. Consider the equality of that seeker to
be the most excellent, whose mind becomes absorbed in the soul, due to the
understanding of oneness in all souls (from the perspective of the non-dualistic
viewpoint), the abandonment of the perception of duality in the qualities of the
soul like knowledge, etc., and the continuous, unwavering, single, result-soul
nature, like a lump of iron, without any expectation of production, destruction,
etc. ||9||  **Meaning:** With the maturity of equality, the attachment to
objects ceases, and in that state, the pure yogis become equal in both the
states of being chopped by an axe and being worshipped with sandalwood. ||10||
**Meaning:** O virtuous one! How much praise can we offer your equality, which,
due to the purpose of the soul, destroys the enmity of even those who are
eternally enemies, even when they are present. ||11||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 bhAvArtha : ekatva ke adhyavasAya (nizcaya) se, AtmA ke guNoM se aura
kUTastharUpa se ekamAtra AtmA meM hI sthita rahane se jisakA mana AtmA meM hI
ramaNa karatA hai, usI kI samatA ko anuttara (sarvotkRSTa) samajho  /
abhedarUpa se samasta AtmAoM meM (abhedagrAhI naya kI dRSTi se) ekatvabuddhi A
jAne se, AtmA ke jJAnAdi guNoM meM bhI bhedadRSTi kA tyAga karane se tathA
utpAda-vyaya Adi kI apekSArahita, lohe ke ghana kI taraha nirantara nizcala eka
pariNAma-AtmasvarUpa pariNAmarahane se jisakA mana AtmArAmI bana jAtA hai, usI
sAdhaka kI samatA ko sarvotkRSTa samajho  // 9 //  samatAparipAke syAd
viSayagrahazUnyatA  /  yayA vizadayogAnAM vAsIcandanatulyatA  // 10 //
bhAvArtha : samatA kI paripakvatA ho jAne se viSayoM kA Agraha samApta ho jAtA
hai, aura usase nirmala yoga vAle muniyoM meM kulhAr3I se chedana aura candana
se pUjana donoM avasthAoM meM samatA A jAtI hai  // 10 //  kiM stumaH samatAM
sAdho ryA svArthapraguNIkRtA  /  vairANi nityavairANAmapi hantyupatasthuSAm  //
11 //  bhAvArtha : he sAdhu ! hama ApakI samatA kI kitanI stuti (prazaMsA) kareM
?, jisa samatA ko AtmA ke proyajana se adhikAra nauvA~

Page #90 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Equipped with many virtues, they pacify the animosity of those beings who are
constantly opposed to each other, even if they are close by. ||11||  What is the
benefit of giving or doing penance? Or what is the benefit of following the
yamas and niyamas? Only equality should be worshipped, which is like a boat in
the ocean of the world. ||12||  Meaning: What is the benefit of giving or doing
penance? Or what is the benefit of following the yamas and niyamas? Only
equality should be worshipped, which is like a boat in the ocean of the world.
||12||  The happiness of heaven is far away, and the path of liberation is even
farther away. But the happiness of equality, which is close to one's mind, is
clear and evident. ||13||  Meaning: The happiness of heaven is far away, and the
path of liberation is even farther away. But the happiness of equality, which is
close to one's mind, is clear and evident. The happiness of the gods who live in
the heavenly realm, which arises from the five senses and their objects, is far
away and beyond the reach of the senses, such as the eyes. Therefore, it is far
away. And the place of liberation, which is full of infinite happiness, is even
farther away. These two are not clearly visible. But the natural, independent,
and close-to-the-mind happiness of equality, which arises from the cessation of
attachment and aversion, is directly experienced and is in one's heart.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 aneka guNoM se susajjita karane se jina jIvoM kA paraspara nitya virodha hai,
ve pAsa meM hoM to unake vairabhAva ko bhI zAnta kara detI hai  // 11 //  kiM
dAnena tapobhirvA yamaizca niyamaizca kim ? ekaiva samatA sevyA tariH
saMsAravAridhau  // 12 //  bhAvArtha : dAna karane yA tapa karane se kyA lAbha?
athavA yamoM aura niyamoM ke pAlana se bhI kyA phAyadA? ekamAtra samatA kI hI
ArAdhanA karanI cAhie, jo saMsArarUpI samudra meM naukA ke samAna hai  // 12 //
dUre svargasukhaM muktipadavI yA davIyasI  /  manaH sannihitaM dRSTaM spaSTaM tu
samatAsukham  // 13 //  I bhAvArtha : svarga kA sukha to dUra hai aura mukti kI
padavI aura bhI jyAdA dUra hai, parantu apane mana ke samIpa rahA huA samatA kA
sukha to pratyakSa aura spaSTa hai  /  devaloka meM rahane vAle devoM kA
paMcendriya - viSayoM se utpanna sukha to cakSu Adi indriyoM se agrAhya dUrastha
- pradeza meM hai, isalie dUra hai, aura anantasukhamaya mokSasthAna to aura bhI
atyanta dUra pradeza meM hai, ye donoM spaSTa dikhAI nahIM dete; parantu
rAgadveSAdirahita mana kI pariNati se utpanna svAbhAvika, svAdhIna evaM mana ke
nikaTa sthita samatAsukha to pratyakSa anubhUta hai, aura apane hRdaya meM 90
adhyAtmasAra

Page #91 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
It has been seen, therefore it is clearly near and experienced, while the
happiness of heaven etc. or of liberation is indirect, therefore it is not
experienced. ||13|| The poison of lust in the eyes dries up, the heat of anger
is destroyed, the dirt of arrogance is destroyed by bathing in the pool of
nectar of equality. ||14|| Meaning: By bathing in the pool of nectar of
equality, the poison of lust in the eyes dries up, the heat of anger is
destroyed, the dirt of arrogance is destroyed. In this forest of the world,
burning with the fire of old age and death, equality alone is like a rain of
nectar for happiness and peace. ||15|| Meaning: In this forest of the world,
burning with the fire of old age and death, equality alone is like a rain of
nectar for happiness and peace. ||15|| By relying on equality alone, Bharata
Chakravarti etc. have attained liberation, they did not do anything painful.
||16|| Meaning: By relying on equality alone, Bharata Chakravarti etc. have
attained liberation, they did not do anything painful. ||16|| The gate of hell
is a barrier, the lamp of the path to liberation. Equality is the earth of
ascent in the collection of virtues. ||17|| Authority Ninth 91

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dekhA huA hai, isalie vaha to spaSTa nikaTa aura anubhavasiddha hai, jabaki
svargAdi kA yA mokSa kA sukha to parokSa hai, ataH usakA anubhava hI nahIM hotA
// 13 //  dRzoH smaraviSaM zuSyet krodhatApaH kSayaM vrajet  /
auddhatyamalanAzaH syAt samatAmRtamajjanAt  // 14 //  bhAvArtha : samatArUpI
amRta ke kuMDa meM snAna karane se A~khoM se kAmaviSa sUkha jAtA hai, krodha kA
tApa kSINa ho jAtA hai, uddhatatA (uddaNDatA)-rUpI mala naSTa ho jAtA hai|
jarAmaraNadAvAgnijvalite bhavakAnane  /  sukhAya samataikaiva
pIyUSaghanavRSTivat  // 15 //  bhAvArtha : jarA aura mRtyurUpI dAvAgni se jalate
hue isa saMsArarUpI vana ke lie, sukha-zAnti ke lie amRtamaya meghavRSTi ke
samAna eka samatA hI hai  // 15 //  Azritya samatAmekAM nirvRtA bharatAdayaH  /
nahi kaSTamanuSThAnamabhUtteSAM tu kiJcana  // 16 //  bhAvArtha : kevala samatA
kA hI Azraya lekara bharata cakravartI Adi ne mokSa prApta kiyA hai, unhoMne
kucha bhI kaSTakArI (kriyA) nahIM kI thI  // 16 //  argalA narakadvAre,
mokSamArgasya dIpikA  /  samatA guNaratnAnAM saMgrahe rohaNAvaniH  // 17 //
adhikAra nauvA~ 91

Page #92 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Meaning:** Equality is like the threshold of a door that prevents a being from
entering hell, it is like a lamp that illuminates the path to liberation, it is
like Mount Meru that gathers the jewels of virtues. Therefore, equality is a
destroyer of evil and a promoter of good for the seeker. ||17||  **Meaning:**
For those whose eyes are covered with delusion, and who cannot see the nature of
the soul, equality is like a divine collyrium stick (ointment), which destroys
ignorance and other defects like an eye disease. When the diseases of the divine
eye (ignorance, etc.) are destroyed, the nature of the soul can be clearly
known. ||18||  **Meaning:** If a being, even for a moment, draws its mind away
from all objects and practices equality, the happiness it experiences cannot be
described to others. That is, it is an unparalleled joy that is indescribable.
Only one who has attained equality can experience the joy of equality. ||19||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 bhAvArtha : samatA naraka meM praveza karate hue jIva ko rokane daravAje kI
argalA ke samAna hai, vaha mokSamArga meM prakAza karane vAlI dIpikA hai,
guNaratnoM kA saMgraha karane meM rohaNAcala parvata ke samAna hai  /  ataH
samatA sAdhaka ke lie aniSTanirodhaka evaM iSTa-sampAdaka hai  // 17 //
mohAcchAditanetrANAmAtmarUpamapazyatAm  /  divyAJcanazalAkeva samatA doSanAzakRt
// 18 //  bhAvArtha : jinakI A~kheM moha se AcchAdita haiM, ataeva jo AtmA ke
svarUpa ko dekha nahIM sakate, unake lie samatA divya aMjanazalAkA (salAI) kI
taraha hai, jo netraroganAzaka kI taraha ajJAnAdi doSoM kA nAza karane vAlI hai|
divyacakSu ke rogoM (ajJAnAdi) kA nAza hone para AtmasvarUpa spaSTa jAnA jA
sakatA hai  // 18 //  kSaNaM cetaH samAkRSya samatA yadi sevyate  /  syAttadA
sukhamanyasya yadvaktuM naiva pAryate  // 19 //  bhAvArtha : jIva eka kSaNa ke
lie bhI samasta viSayoM se citta ko khIMcakara (sameTakara) yadi samatA kA
sevana kare to use jo sukha mile, usakA dUsaroM ke sAmane varNana karanA bhI
sambhava nahIM hai| yAnI vaha apUrva Ananda anirvacanIya hotA hai| samatA ke
Ananda kA anubhava samatAvAn hI kara sakatA hai  // 19 //  92 adhyAtmasAra

Page #93 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Kumari na yatha vetti sukham dayitbhogjam | Na janati tatha loko yoginam
samatasukham ||20|| **Meaning:** Just as a virgin girl does not know the
pleasure of conjugal bliss, so too worldly people do not know the equanimity-
bliss attained by yogis. ||20||  Nati-stutyadhika-samsasha-sarastivraḥ
svamarmabhit | Samata-varmaguptānām nārtikṛtso'pi jāyate ||21|| **Meaning:** The
desire for bowing, praise, appreciation, fame, etc., are sharp arrows that
pierce the very core of the seeker's soul; but for those who have already
protected their soul by wearing the armor of equanimity, these are not painful.
||21||  Prachitānyapi karmāni janmanām koṭikoṭibhiḥ | Tamāṁsi-va prabhā bhānoḥ
kṣiṇoti samatā kṣaṇāt ||22|| **Meaning:** Just as the light of the sun destroys
even the densest darkness in an instant, so too equanimity destroys the
accumulated karma of countless births in an instant. ||22||  Anyalingādisiddānām
ādhāraḥ samataiva hi | Ratnatrayaphalaprapteḥ yayā syād bhāvajainatā ||23||
**Meaning:** Equanimity is the foundation for the attainment of the Siddhas, who
are free from all limitations. It is through equanimity that one attains the
three jewels and becomes a true Jain in spirit. ||23||  **Chapter Nine** 93

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 kumArI na yathA vetti sukhaM dayitabhogajam  /  na jAnAti tathA loko yoginAM
samatAsukham  // 20 //  bhAvArtha : jaise kuMArI kanyA pati-sahavAsa ke sukha ko
nahIM jAnatI, vaise hI sAMsArika loga yogijanoM ko prApta hone vAle samatAsukha
ko nahIM jAnate  // 20 //  nati-stutyAdikAzaMsAzarastIvraH svamarmabhit  /
samatAvarmaguptAnAM nArtikRtso'pi jAyate  // 21 //  bhAvArtha : namaskAra,
stuti, prazaMsA, yaza Adi kI lipsA ve tIkhe bANa haiM, jo sAdhaka kI AtmA ke
marmasthAna kA bhedana kara dete haiM; parantu samatArUpI kavaca (bakhtara)
pahanakara jinhoMne pahale se hI apanI AtmA kI surakSA kara lI hai, unheM ye
saba pIr3AkArI nahIM hote  // 21 //  pracitAnyapi karmANi janmanAM koTikoTibhiH
/  tamAMsIva prabhA bhAnoH kSiNoti samatA kSaNAt  // 22 //  bhAvArtha : jaise
sUrya kI prabhA ghane se ghane andhakArasamUha ko kSaNabhara meM naSTa kara detI
hai, vaise hI koTi-koTi janmoM ke saMcita karmoM ko samatA ekakSaNa meM naSTa
kara detI hai  // 22 //  anyaliMgAdisiddhAnAmAdhAraH samataiva hi|
ratnatrayaphalaprApteryayA syAd bhAvajainatA  // 23 //  adhikAra nauvA~ 93

Page #94 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Meaning:** Those who have attained liberation (siddha) through means like
other-gender (different attire from Jain practitioners) etc., have achieved this
liberation through the foundation of equality. This equality leads to the
attainment of the three jewels - right faith, right knowledge, and right conduct
- resulting in the attainment of Jainhood. ||23|| This equality is also the
fruit of knowledge that establishes all the principles in their respective
places. Otherwise, that knowledge becomes ashes due to wrong attachment
(kadagrah) just like sandalwood becomes ashes in fire. ||24|| If the life force
of the person embodied in conduct departs due to the absence of equality, then
the enthusiasm of people rushing to pay their respects to him is like a
celebration of his death. ||25|| Any action that is performed by abandoning the
principle of equality is like a seed sown in barren land, which does not yield
the desired fruit. ||26||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 bhAvArtha : anyaliMga (jainasAdhakoM se bhinna veSa ) Adi se jo siddha (mukta)
hue haiM, unakI sAdhanA kA AdhAra samatA hI rahI hai, jisa samatA se
samyagdarzana - jJAna - cAritra - rUpa ratnatraya ke phala kI prApti hone se
bhAvajainattva prApta hotA hai ||23|| jJAnasya phalameSaiva nayasthAnAvatAriNaH
/  candanaM vahnineva syAt kugraheNa tu bhasma tat  // 24 //  bhAvArtha :
samasta nayoM ke apane-apane sthAna meM sthApita karane vAle jJAna kA phala bhI
yaha samatA hI hai; anyathA vaha jJAna kugraha ( kadAgraha) se usI prakAra
bhasma ho jAtA hai, jaise Aga se candana bhasma ho jAtA hai ||24||
cAritrapuruSaprANAH samatAkhyA gatA yadi  /  janAnudhAvanAvezastadA
tanmaraNotsavaH  //  25  //   // 24 //  bhAvArtha : cAritrarUpI puruSa ke
samatArUpI prANa yadi cale jAya~ to manuSyoM kA use vaMdanA karane ke lie
daur3akara pahuMcane kA Aveza hI mAno usakI mRtyu ke mahotsava sA ho rahA hai
// 25 //  saMtyajya samatAmekAM syAdyatkaSTamanuSThitam  /  tadIpsitakaraM naiva
bIjamuptamivore  //  26  //  bhAvArtha : eka samatA ko chor3akara jo bhI
kaSTakArI kriyA kI jAtI hai, vaha Usara bhUmi meM boye hue bIja ke samAna
abhISTa phala dene vAlI nahIM hotI  // 26 //  94 adhyAtmasAra

Page #95 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Upayaḥ samataiveka mukteranyaḥ kriyābharaḥ | Tattatpuruṣabhedena tasyā eva
prasiddhaye ||27|| Bhāvartha: Mukti kā ekamātra upaya samatā hai, iske binā anya
sabhī kriyā-kalāpa us us puruṣa (pātra) ke bhed ko lekar us samatā kī siddhi ke
liye hī hain ||27|| Diṅmātradarśane śāstravyāpāraḥ syānna dūragaḥ | Asyāḥ
svānuhavaḥ pāraṁ sāmarthyākhyo'vagāhate ||28|| Bhāvartha: Śāstra kā vyāpāra
(pravṛtti) kevala diśādarśana ke bāre hī hotā hai, vah dūr tak sāth nahīṁ ā
sakta | Isalie samatā kā sāmarthya nāmak ātmanubhava hī is samatā ke tīr tak
pahunchātā hai ||28|| Parasmāṭparameṣā yan nigūḍhaṁ tattvamātmanaḥ |
Tadadhyātmaprasādena kāryo'syāmeva nirbharaḥ ||29|| Bhāvartha: Is kārana yah
samatā hī ātma kā para se bhī para (sarvotkṛṣṭa) atigūḍha tattva hai | Atah
samatā ke viṣay meṁ adhyātma ke prasāda (pratāpa) se samatā par hī nirbhara
hokar udyam karnā cāhie ||29|| || Iti samatādhikāraḥ || Adhikāra nauvān

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 upAyaH samataivekA mukteranyaH kriyAbharaH  /  tattatpuruSabhedena tasyA eva
prasiddhaye  // 27 //  bhAvArtha : mukti kA ekamAtra upAya samatA hai, isake
binA anya sabhI kriyA-kalApa usa usa puruSa (pAtra) ke bheda ko lekara usa
samatA kI siddhi ke lie hI haiM  // 27 //  diGmAtradarzane zAstravyApAraH syAnna
dUragaH  /  asyAH svAnubhavaH pAraM sAmarthyAkhyo'vagAhate  // 28 //  bhAvArtha
: zAstra kA vyApAra (pravRtti) kevala dizAdarzana ke bAre meM hI hotA hai, vaha
dUra taka sAtha nahIM A sakatA  /  isalie samatA kA sAmarthya nAmaka AtmAnubhava
hI isa samatA ke tIra taka pahuMcAtA hai  // 28 //  parasmAtparameSA yannigUDhaM
tattvamAtmanaH  /  tadadhyAtmaprasAdena kAryo'syAmeva nirbharaH  // 29 //
bhAvArtha : isa kAraNa yaha samatA hI AtmA kA para se bhI para (sarvotkRSTa)
atigUDha tatva hai  /  ataH samatA ke viSaya meM adhyAtma ke prasAda (pratApa)
se samatA para hI nirbhara hokara udyama karanA cAhie  // 29 //   //  iti
samatAdhikAraH  //  adhikAra nauvA~

Page #96 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter Ten  **[Sadanushtan]** Anushtan becomes pure due to samata
(equality). Just as the powder of katak (purifier) purifies impure water, so too
does anushtan become pure through the yoga of samata. ||1||  **Meaning:** Just
as the powder of katak (purifier) purifies impure water, so too does anushtan
become pure through the yoga of samata. ||1||  Poison, gar (heat), non-anushtan,
its cause, and the supreme nectar are the five types of anushtan. ||2||
**Meaning:** Guru seva (service to the guru) and other anushtans are said to be
of five types: poison, gar (heat), non-anushtan, its cause, and the supreme
nectar. ||2||  Anushtan done with the desire for food, wealth, worship, or
prosperity is called visha-anushtan because it quickly destroys the pure mind.
||3||  **Meaning:** Anushtan done with the desire for food, wealth, worship, or
prosperity is called visha-anushtan because it quickly destroys the pure mind.
||3||  Both stationary and mobile beings, when consumed at that moment, are
poison. Just as they kill, so too does this destroy the pure mind from worldly
enjoyment. ||4||  **Adhyatma Sara**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 adhikAra dasavA~ [ sadanuSThAna] parizuddhamanuSThAnaM jAyate samatAnvayAt  /
katakakSodasaMkrAnteH kaluSaM salilaM yathA  // 1 //  bhAvArtha : jaise kataka
(nirmalI) kA cUrNa maile pAnI meM DAlane se vaha nirmala ho jAtA hai, vaise hI
samatA ke yoga se anuSThAna bhI parizuddha ho jAtA hai  // 1 //  viSa-
garo'nanuSThAnaM taddheturamRtaM param  /  gurusevAdyanuSThAnamiti paMcavidhaM
jaguH  // 2 //  bhAvArtha : gurusevA Adi anuSThAna viSa, gara, ananuSThAna
taddhetu aura utkRSTa amRta ke rUpa meM pA~ca prakAra kA kahA gayA hai  // 2 //
AhAropadhipUjaddhi-prabhRtyAzaMsayA kRtam  /  zIghraM
saccittahantRtvAdviSAnuSThAnamucyate  // 3 //  bhAvArtha : AhAra, upadhi, pUjA,
Rddhi Adi kI icchA se jo anuSThAna (kriyA) kiyA jAtA hai, vaha tatkAla zubha
citta ko haraNa karane vAlA hone se viSAnuSThAna kahalAtA hai  // 3 //
sthAvaraM jaMgamaM cA'pi tatkSaNaM bhakSitaM viSam  /  yathA hanti tathedaM
saccittamaihikabhogataH  // 4 //  adhyAtmasAra

Page #97 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Meaning:** Just as a stationary or mobile poison kills the one who eats it
immediately, so too does this poisonous ritual, when performed with the desire
for worldly pleasures - the desire for favorable food, etc. in this life -
destroy the auspicious mind. ||4||  **Meaning:** Due to the desire for divine
pleasures, the performance of the ritual leads to the destruction of the fruits
of one's virtuous actions in the future. Therefore, such a ritual performed with
such a desire is called a "gara-anusthana". ||5||  **Meaning:** Just as the
poison called "gara", which arises from the combination of impure substances,
kills in the future, so too does this "gara-anusthana" truly kill the soul in
the future (in the next life, etc.). ||6||  **Meaning:** To prohibit these two
types of rituals, which cause various kinds of harm, the Tirthankaras have
declared them to be the cause of all suffering. ||7||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 bhAvArtha : jaise sthAvara yA jaMgama viSa to khAne para use khAne vAle ko
tatkAla mAra DAlatA hai, vaise hI yaha viSAnuSThAna bhI aihika bhoga-isa janma
meM prApta hone vAle anukUla khAnapAna Adi kI AkAMkSA se karane para zubhacitta
ko khatma kara detA hai  // 4 //  divyabhogAbhilASeNa kAlAntara-parikSayAt  /
svAdRSTaphalasampUrtergarA'nuSThAnamucyate  // 5 //  bhAvArtha : divya bhogoM kI
lAlasA se sadanuSThAna karane para vaha apane puNyakarma ke phala kI pUrNatA ko
kAlAntara meM kSaya kara detA hai| isalie isa prakAra kI AkAMkSA se kiyA huA
anuSThAna garAnuSThAna kahalAtA hai  // 5 //  yathA kudravyasaMyogajanitaM
garasaMjJitam  /  viSaM kAlAntare hanti tathedamapi tattvataH  // 6 //
bhAvArtha : jaise ku dravyoM ke saMyoga se utpanna gara nAmaka viSa kAlAntara
meM mAratA hai, isI prakAra yaha garAnuSThAna bhI vastutaH kAlAntara (dUsare Adi
janma) meM AtmA kA hanana kara detA hai  // 6 //  niSedhAyAnayoreva
vicitrAnarthadAyinoH  /  sarvatraivAnidAnatvaM jinendraiH pratipAditam  // 7 //
bhAvArtha : vicitra prakAra ke anartha karane vAle ina do prakAra ke anuSThAnoM
ke niSedha karane ke lie hI tIrthaMkara adhikAra dasavA~ 97

Page #98 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Bhagavants have prohibited all (actions with) causation. ||7|| Due to the
absence of pranidhana (concentration of mind) etc., the action of a man without
adhyavasaya (firm resolve) is called ananushthana, like the activity of a mind
devoid of sammoochhim (awareness) or an action done in imitation. ||8|| The term
"oghasanjna" here refers to the general knowledge that is the binding factor,
and "lokasanjña" refers to the path of the faultless sutras, which is
independent of the path of the faultless sutras. ||9|| The one who acts due to
oghasanjna does not depend on the world, the sutras, or the guru's words; he
does something or the other without the firm resolve of his soul. ||10|| Those
who argue that the destruction of tirthas (sacred places) would occur in the
search for the pure, call the respect and faith in the customs of the world as
lokasanjña. ||11|| 98 Adhyatma Sara

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 bhagavantoM ne sarvatra (kriyAoM ke sAtha) nidAna kA niSedha kiyA hai  // 7 //
praNidhAnAdyabhAvena karmAnadhyavasAyinaH  /  saMmUcchima-
pravRttAbhamananuSThAnamucyate  // 8 //  bhAvArtha : praNidhAna (mana kI
ekAgratA) Adi ke abhAva se, adhyavasAyarahita puruSa kA saMmUcchima kI pravRtti
ke samAna sUne mana se athavA dekhAdekhI jo kriyA hotI hai, use ananuSThAna
kahate haiM  // 8 //  oghasaMjJA'tra sAmAnyajJAnarUpA nibandhanam  /  lokasaMjJA
ca nirdoSasUtramArgAnapekSiNI  // 9 //  bhAvArtha : isa ananuSThAnarUpa
anuSThAna (kriyA) meM pravRtti kA kAraNa sAmAnya jJAnarUpa oghasaMjJA tathA
nirdoSa sUtramArga kI apekSArahita loka saMjJA haiM  // 9 //  na lokaM nA'pi
sUtraM, no guruvAcamapekSate  /  anadhyavasitaM kiJcit kurute caughasaMjJayA  //
10 //  bhAvArtha : oghasaMjJA se pravRtti karane vAlA vyakti loka kI, sUtra kI
yA guruvacana kI apekSA nahIM rakhatA; vaha apanI AtmA ke adhyavasAya se rahita
kucha na kucha kriyAdi karatA rahatA hai  // 10 //  zuddhasyAnveSaNe
tIrthocchedaH syAditi vAdinAm  /  lokAcArAdarazraddhA lokasaMjJeti gIyate  // 11
//  98 adhyAtmasAra

Page #99 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Meaning:** Those who say that the destruction of the Tirtha (sacred place)
occurs only by seeking the pure path, are called Lokasankhya (people who follow
the popular opinion) because they respect and revere the popular trend and act
accordingly. ||11||  **Meaning:** Even the necessary things, which are adorned
with the words like "educated" etc., are called necessary in terms of substance.
Then what to say about the impure necessary, which is devoid of essence? It
cannot even be called a necessary substance. ||12||  **Meaning:** Alas! By
embracing the impure out of fear of the destruction of the Tirtha, the
scriptural practices are lost due to the tendency to follow the past. How can
the Tirtha be protected then? ||13||  **Meaning:** If many people have done a
certain task, then the righteous person should also do it. If this is said, then
the Dharma (righteousness) of the misguided should never be abandoned. ||14||
**Chapter 10** **99**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 bhAvArtha : 'zuddhamArga kA hI anveSaNa karane se tIrtha kA uccheda hotA hai;
aisA kahane vAloM kA lokapravRtti ke prati Adara aura zraddhA rakhakara
tadanusAra calanA lokasaMjJA kahalAtI hai  // 11 //
zikSitAdipadopetamapyAvazyakamucyate  /  dravyato bhAvanirmuktamazuddhasya tu kA
kathA ?  // 12 //  bhAvArtha : zikSita Adi padoM se yukta Avazyaka bhI dravya se
Avazyaka kahalAtA hai, taba phira bhAvarahita azuddha Avazyaka kI bAta hI kyA kI
jAya ? use to dravyAvazyaka bhI nahIM kahA jA sakatA  // 12 //
tIrthecchedabhiyA hantAvizuddhasyeva cAdare  /  sUtrakriyAvilopaH syAd
gatAnugatikattvataH  // 13 //  bhAvArtha : aphasosa hai ! tIrtha kA uccheda ho
jAyagA, isa bhaya se azuddha ko hI apanAne se to gatAnugatikatA ke kAraNa
zAstrokta kriyA kA hI lopa ho jAtA hai usase phira tIrtharakSA kaise hogI?  //
13  //  dharmodyotena kartavyaM kRtaM bahubhireva cet  /  tadA mithyAdRzAM
dharmo na tyAjyaH syAtkadAcana  // 14 //  bhAvArtha : jisa kArya ko aneka logoM
ne kiyA, use hI dharma meM puruSArthI ko karanA cAhie; agara aisI bAta kahate
haiM, adhikAra dasavA~ 99

Page #100 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Therefore, the religion performed by the Mithyadrishtis will never be abandoned,
it will remain eternal. ||14|| Therefore, whatever is done by Gatyanugatya, that
is, without the Sutras, without the rules of conduct, from the Oghaloka, from
the world, that is, from imitation, is considered to be non-performance. ||15||
Meaning: Therefore, the performance done by Gatyanugatya, that is, without the
Sutras, without the rules of conduct, from the Oghaloka, from the world, that
is, from imitation, is considered to be non-performance. Therefore, it should be
abandoned because it is not conducive to liberation. ||15|| Akama Nirjara is
caused by bodily exertion, such as getting up, sitting down, and vigorous
movement. Saka Nirjara, on the other hand, is caused by a purposeful and pure
use of the body. ||16|| Meaning: This performance, due to the bodily exertion
involved in getting up, sitting down, and vigorous movement, leads to excessive
physical labor, which in turn leads to Akama Nirjara. That is, because it is not
born out of the desire for liberation, this performance does not lead to
liberation. Therefore, this performance (non-performance) leads to worldly
happiness, as it causes some to attain the human realm, some to attain the
Vyantara realm, and so on, due to the merit it generates. This is what the Aptas
have said in the Agamas. However, Saka Nirjara, that is, the purposeful and pure
use of the body with the goal of liberation, is the only way to achieve
liberation. Therefore, the performance that is non-performance  100 Adhyatma
Sara

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 to phira mithyAdRSTiyoM dvArA kiyA huA dharma kadApi tyAjya nahIM hogA, vaha
zAzvata rahegA  // 14 //  tasmAd gatyAnugatyA yat kriyate sUtravarjitam  /
oghato lokato vA tadananuSThAnamevahi  // 15 //  bhAvArtha : isalie
gatAnugatikatA se yAnI sUtrokta, AcArarahita oghalokasaMjJA se-dekhAdekhI se jo
anuSThAna kiyA jAtA hai, vaha ananuSThAna hI kahalAtA hai  /  ataH mokSasAdhaka
na hone se usakA tyAga karanA cAhie  // 15 //  akAmanirjarAMgatvaM
kAyaklezAdihoditam  /  sakAmanirjarA tu syAt sopayogapravRttitaH  // 16 //
bhAvArtha : isa anuSThAna meM uThanA-baiThanA, ugravihAra Adi kA kAyakleza hone
se atyadhika zarIrazrama hone ke kAraNa vaha akAmanirjarA kA nimitta hotI hai|
arthAt mokSa ke uddezya se utpanna na hone ke kAraNa vaha anuSThAna mokSa kA
kAraNa nahIM banatA, isalie vaha anuSThAna (ananuSThAna) kucha ko manuSyagati,
kucha ko vyantara Adi gati prApta karAne vAle puNya kA kAraNa hone se sAMsArika
sukha kA nimitta ho jAtA hai, aisA Apta puruSoM ne AgamoM meM kahA hai| kintu
sakAmanirjarA yAnI mokSa ke uddezyapUrvaka zuddha upayogasahita sAdhya kI dRSTi
se pravRtti karane para hI hotI hai| isalie ananuSThAnarUpa anuSThAna 100
adhyAtmasAra

Page #101 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Only a rare man who is a **Sakaamani** (one who has attained liberation) can
achieve **Nirjara** (destruction of karma), not many others. Therefore, it is to
be abandoned. ||16||  **Sadanushthana** (right conduct) is the path for those
who are **Taddhetu** (motivated by the right cause). This is also achieved by
those who are **Charmaavarti** (in the final stage of existence) without
**Anabhoga** (enjoyment of the fruits of karma). ||17||  **Bhavartha:** Men who
follow the path are motivated by their love for **Sadanushthana** (right
conduct) and perform **Taddhetu** (right conduct). This conduct is achieved by
those who are **Charmaavarti** (in the final stage of existence) without
**Anabhoga** (enjoyment of the fruits of karma). ||17||  This **Charma
Pudgalparavartakal** (final stage of existence) is the youth of **Dharma**
(religion), while the rest of the time is the childhood of **Bhava**
(existence). In this **Charma Pudgalparavartakal**, there is a love for
**Satkriya** (righteous actions), while in the earlier stages, there is respect
for **Asatkriya** (unrighteous actions). ||18||  **Bhavartha:** This **Charma
Pudgalparavartakal** (final stage of existence) is the youth of **Dharma**
(religion), while the rest of the time is the childhood of **Bhava**
(existence). In this **Charma Pudgalparavartakal**, there is a love for
**Satkriya** (righteous actions), while in the earlier stages, there is respect
for **Asatkriya** (unrighteous actions). ||18||  Just as a young man finds
childish play embarrassing due to his attachment to **Bhoga** (enjoyment),
similarly, a **Dharma** (religious) person finds **Asatkriya** (unrighteous
actions) embarrassing due to his love for **Dharma** (religion). ||19||
**Bhavartha:** Just as a young man finds childish play embarrassing due to his
attachment to **Bhoga** (enjoyment), similarly, a **Dharma** (religious) person
finds **Asatkriya** (unrighteous actions) embarrassing due to his love for
**Dharma** (religion). ||19||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karane vAle kisI virale puruSa kI hI sakAmanirjarA hotI hai, anya bahuta-se
puruSoM kI nahIM hotI  /  isalie yaha tyAjya hai  // 16 //  sadanuSThAnarAgeNa
taddheturmArgagAminAm  /  etacca caramAvarte'nAbhogAdevinA bhavet  // 17 //
bhAvArtha : mArgAnusArI puruSoM ko sadanuSThAna ke prati anurAga se taddhetu-
anuSThAna hotA hai| yaha anuSThAna anAbhogAdi ke binA caramAvarta ke dhanI
(jisake eka-pudgala-parAvarta saMsAra bAkI rahatA hai, usa jIva) ko prApta hotA
hai  // 17 //  dharmayauvanakAlo'yaM bhavabAladazA'parA  /  atra syAt
satkriyArAgo'nyatra cAsatkriyAdaraH  // 18 //  bhAvArtha : yaha carama
pudgalaparAvartakAla dharma kI javAnI kA samaya hai, isake atirikta samaya
saMsAra kI bAlyAvasthA hai| isa carama-pudgalaparAvartakAla meM satkriyA
(dharmakriyA) ke prati anurAga hotA hai, jabaki usase pahale ke kAla meM
asatkriyA ke prati Adara hotA hai  // 18 //  bhogarAgAdyathA yUno
bAlakrIr3AkhilA hiye  /  dharme yUnastathA dharmarAgeNAsatkriyA hiye  // 19 //
bhAvArtha : jaise yuvaka ko bhoga ke rAga (Asakti) ke kAraNa bAlyakrIr3A
lajjAkAraka lagatI hai, vaise hI dharma ke adhikAra dasavA~ 101

Page #102 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
In this context, a man who has attained puberty finds immoral actions shameful
due to his devotion to Dharma. ||19||  The fourth (Taddhetu) practice is
prescribed in the final stage of life, because of devotion to Dharma, and it is
in accordance with the order of seed, etc. ||20|| Meaning: Therefore, in the
final stage of life, due to devotion to Dharma, the fourth (Taddhetu) practice
is described, which is in accordance with the order of seed, etc. ||20||  The
seed here is the desire to perform actions with pure objects, seeing people who
perform pure practices in the Jain religion, and being honored and praised by
them. ||21|| Meaning: In the context of the Jain religion, seeing people who
perform pure practices, the desire to perform actions with pure objects, through
their honor, praise, and respect, is the seed here. ||21||  The unblemished
consequence of that desire is called the sprout. The diverse investigation of
its cause is described as the trunk. ||22|| Meaning: The unblemished consequence
of that desire to perform pure practices is called the sprout. And the diverse
investigation of its cause is described as the trunk. ||22||  The diverse
activities in these are considered similar to leaves, etc. The flower is the
characteristic of the attainment of the cause, such as the Guru's guidance.
||23|| 102 Adhyatma Sara

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 sambandha meM yauvanaprApta puruSa ko dharma ke prati anurAga ke kAraNa
asatkriyA lajjAjanaka lagatI hai  // 19 //  caturthaM caramAvarte tasmAd
dharmAnurAgataH  /  anuSThAnaM vinirdiSTaM bIjAdikramasaMgatam  // 20 //
bhAvArtha : isalie caramAvartakAla meM dharma ke prati anurAga ke kAraNa bIja
Adi ke krama se yukta cauthA (taddhetu) anuSThAna batAyA hai  // 20 //  bIjaM
ceha janAn dRSTavA zuddhanuSThAnakAriNaH  /  bahumAna-prazaMsAbhyAM cikIrSA
zuddhagocarA  // 21 //  bhAvArtha : jinazAsana ke sandarbha meM zuddha
anuSThAnakartA manuSyoM ko dekhakara unake bahumAna, prazaMsA evaM satkAra dvArA
zuddha viSaya vAlI kriyA karane kI icchA hI yahA~ bIja hai  // 21 //  tasyA
evAnubandhazcAkalaMkaH kIrtyate'GkuraH  /  taddhatvanveSaNA citrA skandhakalpA
ca varNitA  // 22 //  bhAvArtha : usa zuddha anuSThAna ko karane kI icchA ke
niSkalaMka anubandha ko hI aMkura kahate haiM  /  aura usake hetu kI vividha
prakAra kI gaveSaNA ko skandharUpa batAyA hai  // 22 //  pravRttisteSu citrA ca
patrAdisadRzI mtaa| puSpaM ca guruyogAdihetusampattilakSaNam  // 23 //  102
adhyAtmasAra

Page #103 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Meaning:** In those rituals, the peculiar type of tendency is considered to be
like a letter, and the attainment of prosperity due to reasons like Guru
Samagam, etc., is called the form of a flower. ||23||  **Meaning:** Thus, the
attainment of Bhavadharma in the form of Sad-deshana, etc., should be understood
here as the fruit that is definitely conducive to liberation. ||24||
**Meaning:** The innate and pure Bhavadharma, like the fragrance of sandalwood,
is called Amrita Anusthana, when mixed with (tadgarbhit) Anusthana. ||25||
**Meaning:** The wise men (Tirthankaras, etc.) call it Amrita Anusthana, which
is performed with great fervor, with a pure mind, keeping the command of the
Jineswar in front. ||26||  **Meaning:** The proper contemplation of the
scriptures, the proper dedication to the work, and the reversal of the time,
etc., are the characteristics of Amrita Anusthana. ||27||  **Chapter Ten**
**103**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 bhAvArtha : una anuSThAnoM meM vicitra prakAra kI pravRtti ko hI patrAdisadRzI
mAnI gaI hai tathA gurusamAgama Adi kAraNoM se samRddhi prApta karane ko
puSparUpa kahA hai  // 23 //  bhAvadharmasya sampattiryA saddezanAdinA  /
phalaM tadatra vijJeyaM niyamAnmokSasAdhakam  // 24 //  bhAvArtha : tathA
saddezanA Adi ke rUpa meM jo bhAvadharma kI prApti hotI hai, usI ko yahA~
nizcaya se mokSasAdhaka phala samajhanA cAhie  //  24 //  sahajo bhAvadharmo hi
sugandhazcandanagandhavat  /  etadgarbhamanuSThAnamamRtaM sampracakSate  //  25
//  bhAvArtha : candana kI sugandha kI taraha jo sahaja aura zuddha bhAvadharma
hai, usa bhAva dharma se mizrita (tadgarbhita) anuSThAna hI amRtAnuSThAna
kahalAtA hai ||25||  // 25 //  jainImAjJAM puraskRtya pravRttaM cittazuddhitaH
/  saMvegagarbhamatyantamamRtaM tadvido viduH  //  26  //  bhAvArtha : jinezvara
kI AjJA ko samakSa rakhakara cittazuddhipUrvaka jo kArya atyanta saMvega ke
sAtha pravRtta hotA ho, use jJAnI puruSa (tIrthaMkara Adi) amRtAnuSThAna kahate
haiM  //  26  //  zAstrArthAlocanaM samyak praNidhAnaM ca karmaNi  /
kAlAdyaMgAviparyAso'mRtAnuSThAnalakSaNam  // 27 //  adhikAra dasavA~ 103

Page #104 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
_ **Meaning:** Contemplation of the meaning of the scriptures, concentration of
the mind on the subject of action, and the absence of error in the limbs such as
time, etc., are the characteristics of Amrita Anushthan. ||27||  Two of these
five types of Anushthan are Sat (true) and the first three are Asat (false).
Among those last two Anushthan, the last one is the best because it destroys the
poison of delusion. ||28||  Respect, delight in performing the action, absence
of obstacles, attainment of wealth such as knowledge, inquisitiveness, and
service to the knowledgeable, these are the characteristics of Sad Anushthan.
||29||  This fourfold Yoga, known as Anushthan, is differentiated by desire,
action, stability, and attainment, and it connects the soul with liberation.
||30|| 104 Adhyatma Saar

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 _ bhAvArtha : bhalIbhAMti zAstroM ke artha kA cintana, kriyA ke viSaya meM mana
kI ekAgratA tathA kAlAdi aMgoM kA aviparyAsa, ye amRtAnuSThAna ke lakSaNa haiM
// 27 //  dvayaM hi sadanuSThAnaM trayamatrAsadeva ca  /  tatrApi caramaM
zreSThaM mohogaviSanAzanAt  // 28 //  bhAvArtha : ina pA~ca prakAra ke
anuSThAnoM meM antima do anuSThAna sat haiM aura pahale ke tIna asat haiM  /
una antima do anuSThAnoM meM bhI antima anuSThAna moharUpI ugra viSa kA nAzaka
hone se zreSTha hai  // 28 //  AdaraH karaNe prItiravighnaH sampadAgamaH  /
jijJAsA tajjJasevA ca sadanuSThAnalakSaNam  // 29 //  bhAvArtha : Adara, kriyA
karane meM prIti, avighna, jJAnAdi sampatti kI prApti, jijJAsA aura usake vijJoM
kI sevA, ye sadnuSThAna ke lakSaNa haiM  // 29 //  bhedaibhinnaM bhavedicchA-
pravRttisthirasiddhibhiH  /  caturvidhamidaM mokSayojanAd yogasaMjJitam  // 30
//  bhAvArtha : icchA, pravRtti, sthiratA aura siddhi isa prakAra cAra bhedoM se
yukta tathA jIva ko mokSa ke sAtha yojana karanejor3ane vAlA hone se yaha
caturvidha yogasaMjJaka anuSThAna hai  // 30 //  104 adhyAtmasAra

Page #105 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Verse 31:**  * **Iccha Tadvātkatha Prītiyukta'viparināminī. Pravṛttiḥ Pālanam
Samyak Sarvatropaśamānvitam.**  **Meaning:** A story that reveals the nature of
yoga, free from transformation and filled with joy, is called *Iccha Yoga*.  And
the proper observance of vows, etc., accompanied by *upaśama* everywhere, is
called *Pravṛtti Yoga*.  **Verse 32:**  *
**Satkṣayopaśamotkarṣādatičarādicintayā. Rahitam Tu Sthiraṁ Siddhiḥ
Pareṣāmārthasaadhakam.**  **Meaning:** Yoga that is free from thoughts of
excess, etc., due to the excellence of *satkṣaya* and *upaśama*, is called
*Sthira Yoga*. And *Siddhi Yoga* is the means of achieving the goals of others.
**Verse 33:**  * **Bhedā Ime Vicitrāḥ Syuḥ Kṣayopaśamabhedatah.
Śraddhāprītyādiyogena Bhavyānām Mārgagāminām.**  **Meaning:** These distinctions
are diverse due to the differences in *kṣaya* and *upaśama* for the *bhavyas*
who are on the path, through the yoga of faith, joy, etc.  **Verse 34:**  *
**Anukampā Ca Nirvedaḥ Samvegaḥ Praśamastathā. Eteṣām Anubhāvāḥ Syuricchadīnām
Yathākramam.**  **Meaning:** These *Iccha* yogas have four effects in order:
*Anukampā* (compassion), *Nirveda* (dispassion), *Samvega* (arousal), and
*Praśama* (tranquility).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 icchA tadvAtkathA prItiyuktA'vipariNAminI  /  pravRttiH pAlanaM samyak
sarvatropazamAnvitam  // 31 //  bhAvArtha : yogasvarUpa ke darzana vAlI kathA,
vipariNAmarahita aura prItiyukta ho, vaha icchAyoga kahalAtA hai, tathA sarvatra
upazama ke yukta, vratAdi kA samyak pAlana karanA, pravRttiyoga kahalAtA hai  //
31 //  satkSayopazamotkarSAdaticArAdicintayA  /  rahitaM tu sthiraM siddhiH
pareSAmarthasAdhakam  // 32 //  bhAvArtha : satkSayopazama ke utkarSa se
aticArAdi kI cintArahita yoga sthirayoga kahalAtA hai aura dUsaroM ke artha kA
sAdhaka siddhayoga kahalAtA hai  // 32 //   /  bhedA ime vicitrAH syuH
kSayopazamabhedataH  /  zraddhAprItyAdiyogena bhavyAnAM mArgagAminAm  // 33 //
bhAvArtha : ye bheda zraddhA, prIti vagairaha ke yoga se mArgAnusArI bhavyajIvoM
ke kSayopazama ke bheda se vibhinna prakAra ke hote haiM  // 33 //  anukampA ca
nirvedaH saMvegaH prazamastathA  /  eteSAmanubhAvAH syuricchAdInAM yathAkramam
// 34 //  bhAvArtha : ina icchAdi yogoM ke kramazaH anukampA, nirveda, saMvega
aura prazama ye cAra-cAra prabhAva hote haiM  // 34 //  adhikAra dasavA~ 105

Page #106 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Verse 35:**  **Translation:**  Through faith, intelligence, and other such
sentiments towards the *Kayotsarga* and other *sutras*, those who have renounced
the world and have taken the vow of universal renunciation achieve success in
the *iccha* (desire) and other *yogas*.  **Verse 36:**  **Translation:** Just as
there are different types of sweetness in jaggery, sugar, etc., so too in this
*yoga*, there are differences in the *iccha* and other sentiments among
different individuals. However, these differences do not constitute a fault, as
the *iccha* and other objects are still connected (in their essence).  **Verse
37:**  **Translation:** The *acharyas* (teachers) say that it is a blatant
falsehood to teach this *shastra* to someone who does not even have a trace of
*iccha* and other *yogas*.  **Verse 38:**  **Translation:** This principle
should be understood by those who know the *Yoga-Vimsatika*: when one consumes
an inappropriate or unsuitable cause, it is like raising up a wrong path.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 kAyotsargAdisUtrANAM zraddhAmedhAdibhAvataH  /  icchAdiyoge sAphalyaM
dezasarvavrataspRzAm  // 35 //  bhAvArtha : kAyotsargAdi sUtroM ke prati
zraddhA, medhA Adi bhAvanAoM se dezavirati aura sarvavirati vAloM kA icchAdi
yoga meM saphalatA milatI hai  // 35 //  guDakhaNDAdimAdhuryabhedavat
puruSAntare  /  bhede'pIcchAdibhAvAnAM doSo nArthAnvayAdiha  // 36 //  bhAvArtha
: gur3a, khAMDa (zakkara) Adi kI madhuratA ke bheda ke samAna isa yoga meM bhI
icchAdi bhAvoM ko lekara alaga-alaga puruSoM meM bheda hone para bhI una icchAdi
padArthoM ke anvaya (sambandha) rUpa hone se unameM koI doSa nahIM  // 36 //
yeSAM necchAdilezo'pi teSAM tvetatsamarpaNe  /  sphuTo mahAmRSAvAda ityAcAryAH
pracakSate  // 37 //  bhAvArtha : jisameM lezamAtra bhI icchAdi yoga na ho, use
isa zAstra ko sikhAne se spaSTataH mahAmRSAvAda (bar3A jhUTha) lagatA hai, aisA
pUrvAcArya kahate haiM  // 37 //  unmArgotthApanaM bAr3hamasamaMjasakAraNe  /
bhAvanIyamidaM tattvaM, jAnAnairyogaviMzikAm  // 38 //  bhAvArtha : asamaMjasa
(ayogya yA asaMgata) kAraNa kA sevana karane para yaha samajhanA cAhie ki
unmArga kA utthApana 106 adhyAtmasAra

Page #107 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
It has been done, or awakened. This principle is worth considering for the
knowers of Yoga Vimstika. || 38 || The practice of Sadanuṣṭhāna should be
performed in three ways with a pure mind, knowing the harmony of time and
abandoning the worldly consciousness. || 39 || Meaning: Therefore, the
practitioner with a pure mind, knowing the ultimate meaning of the scriptures,
should abandon worldly consciousness and perform pure actions with mind, speech,
and body. || 39 || || Thus ends the chapter on Sadanuṣṭhāna. || Chapter Ten 107

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 kara diyA hai, yA jagAyA gayA hai  /  yaha tattva yogaviMzikA ke jJAtAoM ke lie
vicAraNIya hai  //  38  //  tridhA tatsadanuSThAnamAdeyaM zuddhacetasA  /
jJAtvA samayasadbhAvaM lokasaMjJAM vihAya ca  // 39 //  bhAvArtha : ata:
zuddhacitta vAle sAdhaka ko zAstra ke paramArtha ko jAnakara lokasaMjJA ko
chor3akara zuddha citta se manavacana kAyA se zuddha kriyA karanI cAhie  //  39
//   //  iti sadanuSThAnAdhikAraH  //  adhikAra dasavA~ 107

Page #108 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter Eleven: Purity of Mind  **[Mind Purity]** For those who desire good
conduct, the purification of the mind is the first step. What chemical can be
useful for cleansing the excrement of the sick without first purifying it? ||1||
**Meaning:** For those who desire good conduct, the purification of the mind is
the first step. For what use is a chemical for cleansing the excrement of the
sick without first purifying it?  If your mind is pure, what harm can come to
you if others love or hate you? Just as the moon's rays bring joy to the world
and sorrow to the separated, so too, what harm can come to the pure moon? ||2||
**Meaning:** If your mind is pure, what harm can come to you if others love or
hate you? Just as the moon's rays bring joy to the world and sorrow to the
separated, so too, what harm can come to the pure moon?  A person grieves in his
own mind when he does not perceive his desired object as present. But when he
receives it, he becomes happy. What can be said about the other? ||3||
**Meaning:** A person grieves in his own mind when he does not perceive his
desired object as present. But when he receives it, he becomes happy. What can
be said about the other?

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 . adhikAra gyArahavAM .. [ manaHzuddhi] ucitamAcaraNaM zubhamicchatAM
prathamato manasaH khalu zodhanam  /  gadavatAmakRte malazodhane
kamupayogamupaitu rasAyanam  // 1 //  bhAvArtha : apanA zubha AcaraNa cAhane
vAle puruSoM ke lie sarvaprathama mana kI zuddhi karanI ucita hai| kyoMki
rogiyoM ke mala kI zuddhi ke binA kauna-sA rasAyana lAbhadAyaka ho sakatA hai?
parajane prasabhaM kimu rajyati, dviSati vA svamano yadi nirmalam  /
virahiNAmaraterjagato raterapi ca kA vikRtivimale vidhau  // 2 //  bhAvArtha :
agara tumhArA mana nirmala ho to dUsare loga tuma para rAga kareM yA dveSa
kareM, usase tumhArI kyA hAni hai ? candramA kI kiraNoM ko dekhane se virahI
janoM ko aprIti hotI hai aura jagat ke anya jIvoM ko prIti hotI hai, isase
nirmala candra meM kyA vikRti ho sakatI hai? rucitamAkalayannupasthitaM
svamanasaiva hi zocati mAnavaH  /  upanate smayamAnasukhaH punarbhavati tatra
parasya kimucyatAm ? // 3 //  bhAvArtha : manuSya apanI-apanI abhISTa vastu ko
prApta huI na jAnakara apane mana meM zoka (cintA) karatA hai, aura usa 108
adhyAtmasAra

Page #109 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
If one becomes happy again as soon as they receive an object, how can another be
called the cause?  **Verse 4:**  This extremely fickle mind, like a monkey,
overturns the pots of virtue and spills all the nectar of tranquility. What can
the sage, the merchant of nectar, do in such a situation?  **Meaning:** This
extremely fickle mind, like a monkey, overturns the pots of virtue and spills
all the nectar of tranquility. What can the sage, the merchant of nectar, do in
such a situation?  **Verse 5:**  The mind, like a horse, constantly stirs up
darkness with the dust raised from the ground of time, which it has dug up with
its own feet. Even when bound with very strong ropes, it does not remain still.
**Meaning:** The mind, like a horse, constantly stirs up darkness with the dust
raised from the ground of time, which it has dug up with its own feet. Even when
bound with very strong ropes, it does not remain still.  **Verse 6:**  Alas!
This mind, like the wind, is very powerful, for it blows away the camphor of the
words of the Jinas, ignites the fire of desire, and destroys the forest of good
thoughts.  **Meaning:** Alas! This mind, like the wind, is very powerful, for it
blows away the camphor of the words of the Jinas, ignites the fire of desire,
and destroys the forest of good thoughts.  **Chapter Eleven**  **109**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 vastu ke prApta hote hI punaH prasannamukha ho jAtA hai, to usameM dUsare ko
kAraNa kaise kahA jA sakatA hai? caraNayogaghaTAn praviloThayan zamarasaM
sakalaM vikiratyadhaH  /  capala eSa manaH kapiruccakaiH rasavaNigvidadhAtu
munistu kim ? |4| bhAvArtha : yaha atyanta capala mana - rUpI baMdara cAritra ke
yogarUpI ghar3oM ko ulaTAkara sArA kA sArA zamatvarasa nIce girA detA hai, aisI
dazA meM munirUpI rasa - vyApArI kyA kare ?  // 4 //  satata
kuTTitasaMyamabhUtalotthitarajonikaraiH prathayaMstamaH  /  atidRDhaizca
manasturago guNairapi niyaMtrita eSa na tiSThati  // 5 //  bhAvArtha : nirantara
apane pairoM se khude hue samayarUpI bhUtala ko ukhAr3ane se ur3I huI dhUli ke
puMja se andherA - sA phailAtA huA manarUpI ghor3A atyanta majabUta rassoM se
jakar3ane para bhI sthira nahIM rahatA  // 5 //  jinavacoghanasAramalimlucaH
kusumasAyaka- pAvakadIpakaH  /  ahaha ko'pi manaHpavano balI
zubhamatidrumasaMtatibhaMgakRt  // 6 //  bhAvArtha : ahA ! yaha manarUpI pavana
atyanta balavAna hai, kyoMki vaha jinavacanarUpI kapUra ko ur3A le jAtA hai,
kAmarUpI agni ko prajvalita kara detA hai, zubhamatirUpI vRkSAvalI ko naSTa-
bhraSTa kara DAlatA hai || 6 ||  // 6 //  adhikAra gyArahavAM 109

Page #110 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Charanagopura-bhangaparaḥ sphurat-samayabodhatarūnapi pātayan. Bhramatī
yadyatimattamanogajaḥ kva kuśalaṁ śivarājapathe tadā ||7|| **Meaning:** When the
elephant of the intoxicated mind, intent on breaking the gate of the city of
character (the main gate) and uprooting the trees of the knowledge of principles
that are springing up, wanders, where can there be skill on the path of
liberation? It can never be. ||7|| Vratatarūn praguṇīkuru te jano, dahati
duṣṭamanodahanaḥ punaḥ. Nanu pariśrama eṣa viśeṣavān kva bhavitā suguno pavano-
daye ||8|| **Meaning:** Here, the yogis nurture the trees of vows, while the
fire of the evil mind burns them down. Then, when will this special effort made
for the garden of good qualities bear fruit? ||8|| Anigṛhītam anā vidadhatparām
na vapuṣā vacaśā ca śubhatriyām. Guṇamupaiti virādhanayā'nayā bata duranta
bhavabhramam añcati ||9|| **Meaning:** One who has not controlled the mind, even
if he performs as many auspicious actions as he can with his body and speech,
does not attain any virtue due to this opposition of the mind, but only attains
the endless cycle of worldly existence. ||9|| 110 Adhyātmasāra

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 caraNagopurabhaMgaparaH sphuratsamayabodhatarUnapi pAtayan  /  bhramati
yadyatimattamanogajaH kva kuzalaM zivarAjapathe tadA  // 7 //  bhAvArtha :
cAritrarUpI nagaradvAra (sadara daravAje) ko tor3ane meM tatpara aura sphuraNA
hote hue siddhAnta ke bodharUpI vRkSoM ko ukhAr3atA huA madonmatta manarUpI
hAthI jahA~ bhramaNa karatA ho, vahA~ mokSarUpI rAjamArga meM kuzalatA kahA~ se
ho? kadApi nahIM ho sakatI  // 7 //  vratatarUn praguNIkurute jano, dahati
duSTamanodahanaH punaH  /  nanu parizrama eSa vizeSavAn kva bhavitA suguNo
pavanodaye  // 8 //  bhAvArtha : yogijana idhara vratarUpI vRkSoM ko siMcana
karake taiyAra karatA hai, udhara duSTamanarUpI Aga unheM jalA DAlatI hai, taba
sadguNarUpI udyAna ke lie kiyA gayA yaha parizrama kaba vizeSa phaladAyaka ho
sakatA hai?  // 8 //  anigRhItamanA vidadhatparAM na vapuSA vacasA ca
zubhatriyAm  /  guNamupaiti virAdhanayA'nayA bata duranta bhavabhramamaJcati  //
9 //  bhAvArtha : jisane mana kA nigraha nahIM kiyA, aisA sAdhaka isa zarIra
aura vacana se cAhe jitanI zubha kriyA kara le, yaha mana kI isa virAdhanA ke
kAraNa kucha bhI guNavattA ko prApta nahIM karatA, balki duranta saMsAra-
paribhramaNa ko hI prApta karatA hai  // 9 //  110 adhyAtmasAra

Page #111 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Verse 10:**  *A man with an uncontrolled mind, due to poor choices, falls into
hell like a fish in rice.* This irony of going to hell is caused by choices made
for unattainable things, which are like indigestion arising without eating.
**Verse 11:**  *When the mind is restless, the concealment of speech, eyes,
hands, and bodily gestures leads to hypocrisy.*  The whole world has been
deceived by cunning men with deep hypocrisy.  **Verse 12:**  *Therefore, a wise
man should purify his mind according to the rules.* This purification of the
mind is like a drugless spell to subdue the goddess of liberation for a muni who
is devoted to the ultimate goal (moksha).  **Chapter 11**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 anigRhItamanA kuvikalpato narakamRcchati tandulamatsyavat  /  iyamabhakSaNajA
tadajIrNatAnupanatArthavikalpakadarthanA  // 10 //  bhAvArtha : mana kA nigraha
na karane vAlA manuSya kharAba vikalpoM ke kAraNa tandulamatsya kI taraha naraka
meM jAtA hai| vaha narakagamanarUpI viDambanA aprApta padArtho ke vikalpoM ke
dvArA dI gaI hai, jo bhojana kiye binA hI utpanna hue ajIrNa (apaca) kI taraha
hai  // 10 //  manasi lolatare viparItatAM, vacananetrakareGgitagopanA  /
vrajati dhUrtatayA hyanayA'khilaM nibir3adambhaparairmuSitaM jagat  // 11 //
bhAvArtha : yadi mana atyanta caMcala hotA hai, to vacana, netra, hAtha aura
zarIra kI ceSTAoM kA jo gopana (chipAva) karanA par3atA hai, vaha gupti
viparItatA ko hI lAtI hai| atyanta gUDha dAmbhika puruSoM ne isI prakAra kI
dhUrtatA karake sAre jagat ko ThagA hai  // 11 //  manasa eva tataH parizodhanaM
niyamato vidadhIta mahAmatiH  /  idamabheSajasaMvananaM muneH
parapumartharatasya zivazriyaH  // 12 //  bhAvArtha : isalie buddhimAna puruSa
ko avazyameva mana kI parizuddhi karanI cAhie, kyoMki mana kI zuddhi
paramapuruSArtha (mokSa) meM rata muni ke lie muktilakSmI ko vaza meM karane ke
hetu auSadharahita vazIkaraNa hai  // 12 //  adhikAra gyArahavAM 111

Page #112 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Pravachanaabja-vilas - Ravi-prabha prashamani-rataranga-tarangini | Hridaya-
shuddhi-rudhirna-mad-jvara - prasaranaasha-vidhau paramaushdham ||13||
**Meaning:** The purity of the heart is like the brilliance of the sun in the
development of the lotus of discourse. It is like a river with waves of calming
water and a great medicine for eliminating the spread of the eight types of
intoxication-like fever that arise. ||13||  Anubhavaamrita-kundamanuttaravrata -
maralavilas-payojini | Sakalakarma-kalankavinaashini, manasa eva hi shuddhi-
rudahrita || 14 ||  **Meaning:** Like a pool of nectar of experience, like a
lotus where the great swan of vows plays, and the destroyer of all karmic
stains, the purity of the mind alone is said to be the ultimate. ||14||
Prathamato vyavahara-nay-sthito'shubha-vikalpa-nivritti-paro bhavet | Shubha-
vikalpa-maya-vrata-sevaya harati kantaka eva hi kantakam ||15||  **Meaning:** To
purify the mind, one should first reside in the path of conduct and be dedicated
to the elimination of evil thoughts. By serving the great vows that are full of
good thoughts, one removes thorns with thorns. ||15||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pravacanAbjavilAsa - raviprabhA prazamanIrataraMgataraMgiNI |
hRdayazuddhirUdIrNamadajvara - prasaranAzavidhau paramauSadham  // 13 //
bhAvArtha : hRdaya kI zuddhi pravacanarUpI kamala kA vikAsa karane meM sUrya kI
prabhA ke samAna hai  /  prazamajala ke taraMgoM vAlI saritA hai aura
udayaprApta ATha prakAra ke madarUpI jvara ke prasAra (phailAva ) ko miTAne ke
lie mahAn rasAyaNa (auSadha) ke samAna hai  // 13 //
anubhavAmRtakuNDamanuttaravrata- marAlavilAsapayojinI  /
sakalakarmakalaMkavinAzinI, manasa eva hi zuddhirudAhRtA  //  14  //  bhAvArtha
: anubhavarUpI amRta ke kuNDa ke samAna mahAvratarUpI rAjahaMsa ke krIr3A karane
kI kamalinI ke samAna tathA samasta karma-kalaMka kA nAza karane vAlI ekamAtra
mana kI zuddhi hI kahI gaI hai  // 14 //  prathamato
vyavahAranayasthito'zubhavikalpanivRttiparo bhavet  /
zubhavikalpamayavratasevayA harati kaNTaka eva hi kaNTakam  // 15 //  bhAvArtha
: manaH zuddhi karane ke lie sarvaprathama vyavahAranaya meM rahakara azubha
vikalpoM se nivRtti ke lie zubha vikalpamaya mahAvratoM ke pAlana- ArAdhana
(arthAt jIvarakSA, tapa, japa, mahAvratapAlana, anuSThAna Adi) meM tatpara ho
jAnA cAhie  /  jaise kAMTA kA~Te se nikalatA hai, vaise azubha 112 adhyAtmasAra

Page #113 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
There is no fault in removing the thorns of vikalpa (wrong perception) with the
excellent thorns of shubhavikalpa (right perception). || 15 || The mantrika
gradually removes the poison by reciting the mantras until the end of the mantra
words. Similarly, the withdrawal of the mind from the country (part) is also
clearly beneficial. || 16 || Meaning: Just as a mantrika removes poison by
reciting mantra words until the end of the mantra words, similarly, the
withdrawal of the mind from the country (part) is also clearly beneficial. || 16
|| The mind, freed from the business of evil (asad) subjects, becomes attached
to a substance due to its great beauty. That substance is considered to be a
good support in this purification of the mind, either like the soul or like the
reflection of the Supreme Soul. || 17 || Meaning: The mind, freed from the
business of evil (asad) subjects, becomes attached to a substance due to its
great beauty. That substance is considered to be a good support in this
purification of the mind, either like the soul or like the reflection of the
Supreme Soul. || 17 || Then, the thought of certainty, like a mirror, arises,
reaching the end of the stages of conduct. It becomes face-to-face with the
contemplation of "nothing is mine" and leads to the complete cessation of all
activities. || 18 || Meaning: Then, the thought of certainty, like a mirror,
arises, reaching the end of the stages of conduct. It becomes face-to-face with
the contemplation of "nothing is mine" and leads to the complete cessation of
all activities. || 18 ||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 vikalparUpI kA~Te ko zubhavikalpapravRttirUpI bar3hiyA kA~Te se nikAlane meM
koI doSa nahIM hai  //  15  //  viSamadhItya padAni zanaiH zanairharati
maMtrapadAvadhi mAMtrikaH  /  bhavati dezanivRttirapi sphuTA guNakarI prathamaM
manasastathA  //  16  //  bhAvArtha : jaise mAMtrika maMtra ke padoM kI samApti
taka dhIre-dhIre maMtrapadoM ko bolakara viSaharaNa kara detA hai, jahara utAra
detA hai; vaise hI mana kI deza (aMza) se nivRtti bhI spaSTarUpa se guNakArI
hotI hai  //  16  //  cyutamasadviSayavyavasAyato lagati yatra
mano'dhikasauSThavAt  /  pratikRtiH padamAtmavadeva vA tadavalaMbanamatra zubhaM
matam  // 17 //  bhAvArtha : azubha (asad) viSayoM ke vyApAra se nivRtta mana
atiprasannatA ke kAraNa jisa padArtha meM laga jAtA hai yAnI tanmaya ho jAtA
hai, vaha padArtha bhI AtmA kI taraha athavA paramAtmA kI pratikRti kI taraha
isa mana:zuddhi meM zubha avalambanarUpa mAnA gayA hai  //  17  //  tadanu
kAcana nizcayakalpanA vigalitavyavahArapadAvadhiH  /  na kimapIti
vivecanasammukhI bhavati sarvanivRttisamAdhaye  // 18 //  bhAvArtha : usake bAda
'mere lie vyavahAra kisI kAma kA nahIM hai', isa prakAra kA vivecana karane meM
sammukha tathA jisameM vyavahAra ke padoM (sthAnoM) kA antima sirA bhI samApta
adhikAra gyArahavAM 113

Page #114 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
It has happened, such an extraordinary (wonderful) determination is conceived
for the complete cessation of samadhi. || 18 || Here, the heart, completely
detached from all external objects, is only absorbed in the Self. It spreads
without any alternatives, being familiar with the tradition of knowledge,
vision, and conduct. || 19 || Meaning: In this state of non-duality, the mind is
devoid of all external objects, absorbed only in the Self, accustomed to the
tradition of knowledge, vision, and conduct, and devoid of the spread of
alternatives. || 19 || This does not come to it again now, even though it is a
lover of the constant object (consciousness), due to its nature of certainty.
For a moment, the external knowledge, which is destroyed by the non-attachment
and the arising nature of the intellect, is not mentioned. || 20 || Meaning: In
this way, even though the yogi's mind is still a lover of the constant object
(consciousness), due to its nature of certainty, it does not accept anything
else. Because in such a state of determination, non-attachment and the arising
nature of the intellect destroy external knowledge in the mind for a moment. ||
20 || The conqueror of the passions, deep, naturally calm, noble and generous in
mind. By making his mind favorable, he experiences the supreme greatness, the
complete destruction of the darkness of delusion. || 21 || Meaning: The noble-
minded seeker, who has conquered the passions like anger, etc., makes his mind
favorable, becoming deep, naturally calm, noble, and destroys the darkness of
delusion, experiencing the supreme greatness. || 21 ||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 ho gayA hai, isa prakAra kI koI apUrva (adbhuta) nizcayanaya kI kalpanA
saMpUrNarUpa se nivRtti kI samAdhi ke lie hotI hai  //  18  //  iha hi
sarvabahirviSayacyutaM hRdayamAtmani kevalamAgatam  /  caraNadarzanabodha -
paramparAparicitaM prasaratyavikalpakam  // 19 //  bhAvArtha : isa nirvikalpaka
dazA meM mana samasta bAhyaviSayoM se rahita, kevala AtmA ke viSaya meM hI lIna,
jJAna - darzana - cAritra kI paramparA se abhyasta tathA vikalpoM ke prasAra se
rahita ho jAtA hai  //  19  //  tadidamanyadupaityadhunA'pi no,
niyatavastuvilAsyapi nishcyaat|
kSaNamasaMgamudItanisargadhIhatabahirgrahamantarudAhRtam  // 20 //  bhAvArtha :
isa prakAra aba bhI yogI kA mana niyatavastu (caitanya) ke viSaya meM vilAsI
hone para bhI nizcayasvabhAva ke kAraNa anya kucha bhI grahaNa nahIM karatA,
kyoMki aisI nizcayanaya kI avasthA meM citta meM kSaNabhara bhI asaMga tathA
uditanisargabuddhi dvArA bahirmukhI jJAna naSTa ho jAtA hai  // 20 //
kRtakaSAyajaya: gabhIrima prakRtizAntamudAtta udAradhIH  /  svamanugRhya
mano'nubhavatyaho galitamohatamaH paramaM mahaH  //  21  //  bhAvArtha :
krodhAdi kaSAyoM para vijaya pAne vAlA udArabuddhi sAdhaka apane citta ko
anukUla banAkara gaMbhIratAyukta, prakati se zAnta, udAtta, mohAndhakAra ke nAza
se 114 adhyAtmasAra

Page #115 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
He experiences the **Param Jyotirmaya**, the true nature of the Self. ||21||
When the mind has attained purity, the chain of evil thoughts is broken. Then,
the great sage, having attained **dhriti** (steadfastness), attains the glorious
**yasha-shri** (the glory of liberation). ||22||  **Meaning:** When the mind has
attained purity, the chain of evil thoughts is broken. Then, the great sage,
having attained **dhriti** (steadfastness), attains the glorious **yasha-shri**
(the glory of liberation). ||22||  This is from the **Adhyatma Sara** by
**Mahopaadhyaya Yashovijaya Gani**. Chapter 3, Section 11. Authority 115.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 yukta parama jyotirmaya jo AtmasvarUpa hai, usakA anubhava karatA hai  // 21 //
galitaduSTavikalpaparamparaM dhRtavizuddhimano bhavatIdRzam  /  dhRtimupetya
tatazca mahAmatiH samadhigacchati zubhrayazaHzriyam  // 22 //  bhAvArtha :
jisake mana ne vizuddhi dhAraNa kara lI hai, usake mana meM duSTa vikalpoM kI
paramparA samApta ho jAtI hai, usake bAda vaha mahAbuddhimAna yogI dhairya
dhAraNa karake ujjvala yazolakSmI (mokSalakSmI) prApta kara letA hai  // 22 //
iti zrImahopAdhyAya-yazovijayagaNi-viracite  /  adhyAtmasAra-prakaraNe tRtIyaH
prabandhaH  // 3 //  adhikAra gyArahavAM 115

Page #116 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Chapter Twelfth** [**Samyaktvam**]  The purity of the mind is truly
(**paramarthatah**) only with **Samyaktvam**. Without it, the purity of the mind
is filled with delusion and connected to **pratyapāya**. || 1 ||  **Meaning:**
Only when **Samyaktvam** is present, does the mind become truly pure. Purity of
the mind without **Samyaktvam** is filled with delusion and connected to
**pratyapāya**. || 1 ||  Actions like giving (**dāna**) etc. are pure only when
accompanied by **Samyaktvam**. These actions are said to be instrumental in
achieving the fruit of liberation (**mokṣa**), because **Samyaktvam** is a co-
worker in them. || 2 ||  **Meaning:** All actions, like giving, etc., can only
be pure when accompanied by **Samyaktvam**. These actions are said to be
instrumental in achieving the fruit of liberation, because **Samyaktvam** is a
co-worker in them. || 2 ||  Even if one performs actions, renounces caste,
wealth, and enjoyments, and even endures suffering, a blind person cannot
conquer his enemy. || 3 ||  **Meaning:** Even if a blind person performs many
actions, renounces his caste, wealth, and enjoyments, and even endures
suffering, he cannot conquer his enemy. || 3 ||  **Adhyatma Sara** 116

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 adhikAra bArahavA~ [ samyaktva ] manaH zuddhizca samyaktve satyeva
paramArthataH  /  tadvinA mohagarbhA sA pratyapAyAnubandhinI  //  1  //
bhAvArtha : samyaktva ke hone para hI paramArthata: (vastuta: ) mana kI zuddhi
hotI hai  /  samyaktva ke binA huI mana:zuddhi mohagarbhita tathA pratyapAya se
sambandhita hotI hai  // 1 //  samyaktvasahitA eva zuddhA dAnAdikAH kriyAH  /
tAsAM mokSaphale proktA yadasya sahakAritA  // 2 //  bhAvArtha : dAna Adi
samasta kriyAe~ samyaktvasahita hoM, tabhI ve zuddha ho sakatI haiM, kyoMki una
kriyAoM ke mokSarUpI phala meM yaha samyaktva sahayogI - sahakArI haiM  // 2 //
kurvANo'pi kriyAM jJAti-dhana- bhogAMstyajannapi  /  duHkhasyoro dadAno'pi
nAndho jayati vairiNaH  // 3 //  bhAvArtha : anghA manuSya cAhe jitanI kriyAe~
(zArIrika ceSTAe~) kara le, vaha apanI jAti, dhana aura bhogoM kA bhI tyAga kara
de, tathA kaSToM ko apane hRdaya meM sthAna de de (yAnI kitane hI duHkha saha le
) to bhI vaha zatru ko jIta nahIM sakatA  // 3 //  116 adhyAtmasAra

Page #117 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Even while practicing non-attachment (nivrutti), renouncing sensual pleasures
(kamabhoga), and even while enduring suffering, one with a false view
(mithyadristi) does not attain liberation (siddhi). ||4||  Just as the pupil is
the essence of the eye and fragrance is the essence of a flower, so too,
Samyaktvam is the essence of all religious practices (dharma karma). ||5||  This
Samyaktvam is described as Tattvasraddhan in the teachings of the Jinas
(Jinasasana), and the principle "All beings should not be killed" is declared as
the essence (tattva) in the scriptures. ||6||  This (ahimsa) is pure dharma
(shuddha dharma), and this (shraddhan) is the characteristic of the pure taste
(ruchira) of dharma. ||7||  Chapter Twelve 117

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 kurvannivRttimapyevaM kAmabhogAstyajannapi  /  duHkhasyoro dadAno'pi
mithyAdRSTirna sidhyati  // 4 //  bhAvArtha : isI prakAra nivRtti (saMtoSa)
karatA huA, kAmabhogoM kA tyAga karatA huA aura duHkha meM bhI hRdaya sthAna
detA huA, mithyAdRSTi siddha (mukta) nahIM hotA ||4|| kanInikeva netrasya
kusumasyeva saurabham  /  samyaktvamucyate sAraM sarveSAM dharmakarmaNAm  // 5
//  bhAvArtha : A~khoM meM putalI kI taraha evaM puSpa meM sugandha kI taraha
sabhI dharmakAryoM kA sAra samyaktva hai  // 5 //  tattvazraddhAnametacca
gaditaM jinazAsane  /  sarve jIvA na hantavyAH, sUtre tattvamItiSyate  // 6 //
bhAvArtha : jinazAsana meM isa samyaktva ko tattvazraddhAnarUpa kahA hai aura
'samasta jIvoM ko nahIM mAranA cAhie' ise tattva ke rUpa meM zAstra meM
pratipAdita kiyA hai  // 6 //  zuddha dharmo'yamityetadadharma rucyAtmakaM
sthitam  /  zuddhAnAmidamanyAsAM rucInAmupalakSaNam  // 7 //  bhAvArtha : yaha
(ahiMsArUpa) dharma zuddha ( nirdoSa) hai aura yahI ( zraddhAna) dharmarucirUpa
zraddhAna anya zuddha ruciyoM kA upalakSaNa hai ||7|| 11911 adhikAra bArahavA~
117

Page #118 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Or, as this principle of non-violence is said to be based on knowledge, so too
are all nine principles, as is understood by faith. ||8||  **Meaning:** Or, just
as this principle of non-violence is said to be based on knowledge, so too is
the knowledge of the nine principles, including the soul, based on faith,
knowledge, and other interests. ||8||  It is here stated that pure non-violence
is the principle, therefore, the acceptance of the authority of the sutras is
also right-conduct. ||9||  **Meaning:** Pure non-violence, or the pure
principle, is stated only in the scriptures revealed by the Jinas. Thus, the
acceptance of the authority of the sutras is also right-conduct. ||9||  The
statement of pure non-violence in the sutras establishes the authority of the
sutras, and from that, the being becomes pure in understanding non-violence;
thus, there is no danger of mutual dependence. ||10||  **Meaning:** The
statement of pure non-violence in the sutras establishes the authority of the
sutras, and from that, the being becomes pure in understanding non-violence;
thus, there is no danger of mutual dependence. ||10||  Since there is unanimity
among all regarding non-violence, and because of the consideration of
possibility (the origin of violence, the violent, the one to be violated), etc.,
the understanding of its purity is possible. ||11||  **Meaning:** Since there is
unanimity among all regarding non-violence, and because of the consideration of
possibility (the origin of violence, the violent, the one to be violated), etc.,
the understanding of its purity is possible. ||11||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 athavedaM yathAtattvamAjJayaiva tathA'khilam  /  navAnAmapi tattvAnAmiti
zraddhoditArthataH  // 8 //  bhAvArtha : athavA jaise yaha ahiMsArUpa tattva
AjJArUpa kahA hai, isI prakAra jIvAdi nau tattvoM para bhI zraddhA karane, AjJA
Adi ruciyoM dvArA jAnane ko bhI samyaktva kahA hai  // 8 //  ihaiva procyate
zuddhA'hiMsA vA tattvamityataH  /  samyaktvaM darzitaM sUtraprAmANyopagamAtmakam
// 9 //  bhAvArtha : zuddha ahiMsA athavA zuddhatattva jinapraNIta AgamoM meM hI
kahA gayA hai, isa prakAra sUtra ke pramANatva ke svIkAra karane ko bhI
samyaktva kahA hai  // 9 //  zuddhAhiMsoktitaH sUtraprAmANyaM tata eva ca  /
ahiMsAzuddhadhIrevamanyonyAzrayabhIrnanu  // 10 //  bhAvArtha : (sUtra meM)
zuddha ahiMsA kI ukti hone se sUtra kI pramANatA siddha hotI hai, aura usI ko
lekara prANI ahiMsA ke prati zuddha buddhi vAlA hotA hai; isa prakAra
anyonyAzrayadoSa kA khatarA nahIM rahatA  // 10 //  naivaM yasmAdahiMsAyAM
sarveSAmekavAkyatA  /  tatchuddhatAvabodhazca saMbhavAdivicAraNAt  // 11 //
bhAvArtha : cUki saMbhava (hiMsA kI utpatti, hiMsaka, hiMsya) Adi kA vicAra
karane para ahiMsA ke sambandha meM sabhI 118 adhyAtmasAra

Page #119 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Purity There is no unanimity of opinions. And the means and knowledge of non-
violence (avoidance of opposition) also do not come from those (other)
scriptures. || 11 || As non-violence, etc., are spoken of by the five vows,
dharma, yama, etc., words, and by the words of skillful dharma, etc., in their
respective visions. || 12 || Meaning: In their respective visions, those who
hold other views call the five, non-violence, etc., by the words vow, dharma,
yama, etc., and by the words skillful dharma, etc., as they are described. || 12
|| The Bhagavatas say there are five vows and five observances, thus ten. And
the Pashupatas say there are five yamas and five niyamas, thus ten dharmas. ||
13 || Meaning: In all these visions, those who follow the Bhagavata view
consider five vows and five observances, thus ten, and those who follow the
Pashupata view consider five yamas and five niyamas, thus ten dharmas. || 13 ||
Non-violence, truthfulness, non-stealing, non-attachment, and celibacy, and non-
anger, honesty, purity, and non-possession are the twelve. These are called
yamas by the Sankhyas, following Vyasa. || 15 || Meaning: Non-violence,
truthfulness, non-stealing, non-attachment (non-possession), and celibacy, and
non-anger, honesty, purity, and non-possession are the twelve. These are called
yamas by the Sankhyas, following Vyasa. || 15 ||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zuddhatA matoM kI ekavAkyatA nahIM hotI  /  tathA ahiMsA kI (virAdhanA ke
parihAra) kA upAya aura jJAna bhI una-una (anya) zAstroM se nahIM hotA  //  11
//  yathA'hiMsAdayaH paJca vratadharmayamAdibhiH  /  padaiH kuzaladharmAdyaiH
kathyante sva - svadarzane  //  12  //  bhAvArtha : anyadarzana vAle apane -
apane darzana meM ahiMsAdi pA~coM ko vrata, dharma, yama Adi zabdoM se tathA
kuzaladharma Adi zabdoM se jisa-jisa rUpa meM pukArate haiM, use Age batAte haiM
// 12 //  prAhurbhAgavatAstatra vratopavratapaJcakam  /  yamAMzca niyamAn
pAzupatA dharmAn dazA'bhyadhuH  //  13  //  bhAvArtha : ina sabhI darzanoM meM
bhAgavatamata vAle pA~ca vrata aura pA~ca upavrata, yoM dasa mAnate haiM, tathA
pAzupatamata vAle pA~ca yama aura pA~ca niyama, isa prakAra dasa dharma ko
mAnate haiM  // 13 //  ahiMsA satyavacanamastainyaM cApyakalpanA  /
brahmacaryaM tathA'krodho hyArjavaM zaucameva ca  // 14 //  saMtoSa guruzuzrUSA
ityete daza kIrtitAH  /  nigadyante yamAH sAMkhyairapi vyAsAnusAribhiH  // 15 //
bhAvArtha : AhiMsA, satyavacana, acaurya, akalpanA (niSparigraha) aura
brahmacarya tathA akrodha, Arjava, zauca, adhikAra bArahavA~ 119

Page #120 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Translation:  **।**  **14-15**   Santosha (contentment) and Guru Shushrusha
(service to the Guru) are the ten that have been mentioned. The first five of
these are considered as Yama (restraint) by those who follow the Vyasa path and
the Sankhya philosophy.  **16** Ahimsa (non-violence), Satya (truthfulness),
Asteya (non-stealing), Brahmacharya (celibacy) as the fourth, and Vyavahara
(renunciation of possessions) as the fifth, these five are known as Yama.
**Meaning:** Ahimsa, Satya, Asteya, Brahmacharya, and Vyavahara (renunciation of
possessions) are the five Yamas.  **17** Akrodha (forgiveness), Guru Shushrusha,
Shaucha (purity of body and mind), Ahar Laghva (light diet), and Apramada
(absence of negligence) are the five Niyamas (observances) that have been
described.  **Meaning:** Akrodha (forgiveness), Guru Shushrusha, Shaucha (purity
of body and mind), Ahar Laghva (light diet), and Apramada (absence of
negligence) are the five Niyamas.  **18-19** The Buddhists consider ten Kusala
Dharmas (virtuous actions). As they say: Himsa (violence), Asteya (stealing),
Anyatha Kama (sexual misconduct), Paishunya (gossip), Parush Anrita (harsh and
untrue speech), Sambhinna Alap (divisive speech), Vyapaada (anger), Abhidhya
(greed), Drg Viparyaya (wrong perception), and Papa Karma (evil deeds) - these
ten should be abandoned by body, speech, and mind.  **Meaning:** The Buddhists
consider ten Kusala Dharmas (virtuous actions). As they say: Himsa (violence),
Asteya (stealing), Anyatha Kama (sexual misconduct), Paishunya (gossip), Parush
Anrita (harsh and untrue speech), Sambhinna Alap (divisive speech), Vyapaada
(anger), Abhidhya (greed), Drg Viparyaya (wrong perception), and Papa Karma
(evil deeds) - these ten should be abandoned by body, speech, and mind.  **120**
Adhyatma Sara

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
  /  santoSa evaM guruzuzrUSA, ye dasa kahe gae haiM  /  inameM se pahale ke
pA~coM ko vyAsamArgAnugAmI va sAMkhyamata vAle yama ke rUpa meM mAnate haiM  //
14- 15 //  ahiMsAsatyamastainyaM brahmacaryaM turIyakam  /  paMcamo
vyavahArazcetyete paMca yamAH smRtAH  // 16 //  bhAvArtha : ahiMsA, satya,
asteya, cauthA brahmacarya aura pA~cavA~ vyavahAra (parigrahatyAga), ye pA~ca
yama kahe gae haiM ||16|| akrodho guruzuzrUSA zaucamAhAralAghavam  /
apramAdazca paJcaite niyamAH parikIrtitAH  // 17 //   /  bhAvArtha : akrodha
(kSamA), guruzuzruSA, zauca, (zarIrAdi kI pavitratA) AhAra kI laghutA (alpAhAra)
tathA apramAda (akArya meM pravRtti, kArya se nivRttirUpa pramAda athavA
asAvadhAnIrUpa pramAda kA tyAga) ye pA~coM niyama kahalAte haiM  // 17 //
bauddhaiH kuzaladharmAzca dazeSyante yaducyate  /  hiMsA'steyA'nyathAkAmaM
paizunyaM paruSAnRtam  // 18 //  saMbhinnAlApavyApAdamabhidhyA - dRgviparyayam
/  pApakarmeti dazadhA kAyavAG-mAnasaistyajet  // 19 //  bhAvArtha : bauddha
daza kuzaladharmoM ko mAnate haiM  /  jaisA ki ve kahate haiM - hiMsA, asteya,
anyathA kAma (duSTa pariNAma se parastrI ke sAtha maithuna - sevana karanA)
paizunya ( cugalI), paruSAnRta (mana-vacana dvArA kaThora aura asatya bolanA ),
120 adhyAtmasAra

Page #121 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Samhinnālap (paramarmabhedī asambaddha pralāpa), vyāpāda (droha kā cintana),
abhidhyā (paradhana harana karane kī iccha), and dṛgviparāya (kuśaladharma se
vipṛtidrṣṭi); this way, one should abandon the ten types of pāpakarma
(pāpabandhakartā karmas) from mind, speech, and body. ||18-19||
Brahmādipādavācyānī tānyāhurvaidikādayah. Ataḥ sarvaikavākyatvāddharmasāstram
ado'rthakam. ||20|| Bhāvartha: Vaidik ādi mata vāle ahiṃsā ādi ko brahma ādi
pada se vācya karte hain (pukārte hain), un sab kā ek hī vācyārtha hone se yah
dharmasāstra sāthak hai. ||20|| Kva caitat sambhavo yukta iti cintyam mahātmānā.
Śāstram parīkṣamāṇenāvyakulenāntarātmanā. ||21|| Bhāvartha: Yah ahiṃsādi dharma
kā sambhava (utpatti) kis śāstra meṃ kahā huā yukta (ucit) hai? Iske liye
parīkṣā karane vāle mahātmā ko avyagracitt se śāstra par cintana (vicāra) karana
cāhie. ||21|| Pramāṇalakṣaṇādestu nopayo'g'o'tra kaścana.
Tanniścaye'navasthanādan'yathārthasthite'ryatah. ||22|| Bhāvartha: Is prakar kī
śāstraparīkṣā meṃ pramāṇa evaṃ lakṣaṇa ādi koī bhī upayoga nahīṃ hotā; because
jīvādi  Adhikāra Bārahvāṃ 121

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 saMbhinnAlApa (paramarmabhedI asambaddha pralApa ), vyApAda (droha kA cintana),
abhidhyA (paradhana haraNa karane kI icchA), aura dRgviparyaya (kuzaladharma se
viparItadRSTi); isa prakAra daza prakAra ke pApakarmoM (pApabandhakartA karmoM)
kA mana, vacana aura kAyA se tyAga karanA cAhie  // 18-19 //
brahmAdipadavAcyAni tAnyAhurvaidikAdayaH  /  ataH
sarvaikavAkyatvAddharmazAstramado'rthakam  // 20 //  bhAvArtha : vaidika Adi
mata vAle ahiMsA Adi ko brahma Adi pada se vAcya karate haiM (pukArate haiM),
una sabakA eka hI vAcyArtha hone se yaha dharmazAstra sArthaka hai  // 20 //
kva caitatsambhavo yukta iti cintyaM mahAtmanA  /  zAstraM
parIkSamANenAvyAkulenA'ntarAtmanA  //  21 //  bhAvArtha : yaha ahiMsAdi dharma
kA saMbhava (utpatti) kisa zAstra meM kahA huA yukta (ucita) hai? isake lie
parIkSA karane vAle mahAtmA ko avyagracitta se zAstra para cintana (vicAra)
karanA cAhie  //  21  //  pramANalakSaNAdestu nopayogo'tra kazcana  /
tannizcaye'navasthAnAdanyathArthasthiteryataH  // 22 //  bhAvArtha : isa prakAra
kI zAstraparIkSA meM pramANa evaM lakSaNa Adi koI bhI upayoga nahIM hotA; kyoMki
jIvAdi adhikAra bArahavA~ 121

Page #122 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The possibility of the fault of non-definitive knowledge arises due to the
different states of substances. ||22|| The well-known proofs and the conduct
based on them are also well-known. There is no purpose in explaining the
characteristics of proof here. ||23|| Meaning: All proofs are well-known. The
conduct done by them is also well-known. Therefore, it is pointless to explain
the characteristics of proof here. ||23|| Those who have the one-sided view that
the soul is eternal, how can violence etc. happen to them, since the soul is
imperishable? ||24|| Meaning: From the perspective of those who have the one-
sided view that 'the soul is eternal', how can violence etc. happen to them,
since the soul is never destroyed (killed)? It cannot happen! ||24|| The
destruction of the mind and its activities is the death of the soul. Therefore,
that is violence. But in response to this, the principle-based (Jain) say that
if this is called violence, then this statement is also untrue, not proven, even
from your statement. Because in this way, the truth of the non-violent nature of
the artha (the true ultimate reality) is established. The violent and 122
Adhyatma Sara

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 padArthoM kI usase anyathA sthiti hone ke kAraNa usakA nizcaya karane meM
anavasthAdoSa utpanna hone kI sambhAvanA hai  // 22 //  prasiddhAni pramANAni,
vyavahArazca ttkRtH| pramANalakSaNasyoktau jJAyate na prayojanam  // 23 //
bhAvArtha : samasta pramANa prasiddha haiN| unake dvArA kiyA jAne vAlA vyavahAra
bhI prasiddha hai| isalie pramANa ko lakSaNa batAnA yahA~ niSprayojana hai  //
23 //  tatrA'tmA nitya eveti yeSAmekAntadarzanam  /  hiMsAdayaH kathaM teSAM
kathamapyAtmano'vyayAt  // 24 //  bhAvArtha : 'AtmA nitya hI hai' aisA jinakA
ekAnta mata hai, unakI dRSTi se AtmA kA kabhI nAza (ghAta) na hone ke kAraNa
hiMsAdi kisa prakAra ghaTita ho sakate haiM ? nahIM ho sakate !  // 24 //
manoyogavizeSasya dhvaMso maraNamAtmanaH  /  hiMsA tacchenna tattvasya
siddherArthasamAjataH  // 25 //  bhAvArtha : mana tathA usake vyApAra kA vinAza
hI AtmA kI mRtyu hai  /  isalie vahI hiMsA hai  /  parantu isake uttara meM
siddhAntavAdI (jaina) kahate haiM, yadi ise hI hiMsA kahI jAe to yaha kathana
bhI ayathArtha hai, siddha nahIM hotA, Apake kathana se bhI  /  kyoMki isa
prakAra to Artha (sadbhUta paramArtha) ke hiMsAbhAvasvarUpa tattva kI siddhi
hotI hai  /  hiMsaka aura 122 adhyAtmasAra

Page #123 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
I Violence arises from the conjunction of the violent, and from its arising, its
accomplishment occurs. And from its accomplishment, the violence of the good
being is accomplished, but the violence of the ultimate reality is not
accomplished by the destruction of mental activity, because the mind is inert,
and it is also different from the soul. Therefore, what is destroyed in the soul
by the destruction of the mind? Nothing. There is no violence of the inert, and
no violence of the inert is called violence. Because it is not affected by the
strike of weapons, etc. And how can mental activity be violent and the object of
violence? It cannot be said that it causes the mind to be bound by sinful
actions, because the mind is inert. If even the inert were to be called violent
and the object of violence, then no one would be able to attain liberation. Just
as the destruction of the mind would not lead to liberation from the inert
substances like food, clothing, etc., so too, the attainment of violence from
the inert substances would not lead to liberation. And those one-sensed beings
who are without mind, will not die, because there is no absence of the
destruction of mental activity. If the mind is called violent, then it will be
difficult for the whole world to live; because everyone's mind is inert. ||25||
||25|| This violence, which is in the form of the production of suffering, is
not appropriate in the intellect, because the intellect is not established in
the ultimate reality due to its separation from the man (soul). ||26|| Meaning:
This violence, which is in the form of the production of suffering, is not
appropriate in the intellect, because the intellect is not established in the
ultimate reality due to its separation from the man (soul). ||26|| Chapter
Twelve 123

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 I hiMsanIya kA saMyoga hone se huI hiMsA kI utpatti se usakI siddhi hotI hai  /
aura usakI siddhi hone se sadbhUta hiMsA siddha hotI hai, paramArthahiMsA
manoyoga kA nAza hone se siddha nahIM hotI, kyoMki mana jar3a hai, vaha AtmA se
bhinna bhI hai  /  ata: mana kA nAza hone se AtmA kA kyA bigar3atA hai? kucha
bhI nahIM  /  jar3avastu kI hiMsA hotI hI nahIM aura jar3avastu kI koI hiMsA
kahalAtI nahIM  /  kyoMki use zastrAdi ke prahAra se kucha bhI nahIM hotA  /
tathA manoyoga hiMsya aura hiMsaka kaise ho sakatA hai? usake nimitta se mana ko
pApakarmoM kA bandha, hotA hai, aisA kahA nahIM jA sakatA, kyoMki mana jar3a hai
/  yadi jar3a vastu ko bhI hiMsya - hiMsaka kahA jAya to phira kisI ko bhI mokSa
nahIM ho sakegA  /  acitta anna-vastrAdi jar3a padArthoM se bhI mana ke nAza kI
taraha hiMsAkArittva prApta hone se mokSa hogA hI nahIM  /  tathA manarahita jo
ekendriya jIva haiM, unakA maraNa hI nahIM hogA, kyoMki manoyoga ke nAza kA
abhAva hai  /  yadi mana ko hiMsaka kaheMge to sAre jagat kA jInA hI kaThina ho
jAegA; kyoMki sabakA mana jar3a hai ||25||  // 25 //  naiti buddhigatAH
duHkhotpAdarUpeyamaucitIm  /  puMsi bhedAgrahAttasyAH paramArthAvyavasthiteH  //
26  //  bhAvArtha : duHkha ko utpanna karane vAlI buddhi meM sthita yaha hiMsA
bhI ucita nahIM, kyoMki buddhi ko puruSa (AtmA) se adhikAra bArahavA~ 123

Page #124 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
It is considered extremely different. Therefore, in reality, there cannot be any
arrangement of violence here. ||26|| And how can the word "violence" be
synonymous with destruction? In the absolute eternity of the soul, it would be
an obstacle to experience. ||27|| Meaning: Oh! If the soul is considered
eternally existent, then the word "violence", which is synonymous with
destruction, will in no way be an obstacle to experience. It means that it will
be an obstacle to experience. ||27|| Even with the body, its connection is not
possible in its eternity. And in its omnipresence, this world will undoubtedly
not be imagined. ||28|| Meaning: If the soul is considered eternal, then its
connection with the body etc. is not possible. If it is considered omnipresent,
then undoubtedly this world will not be imagined. ||28|| The connection of the
body from unseen karma would be due to other karma. Thus, if you want to
establish the connection of birth, then it is not possible due to the lack of
understanding of that connection. ||29|| Meaning: The connection of the body
from unseen karma could be due to other karma, (therefore there is no
expectation of soul action). To this, Jain theorists reply that if you want to
establish the connection of birth in this way, then it is not possible  124
Adhyatma Sara

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 atyanta bhinna mAnA hai| isalie paramArthataH (vastutaH) yahA~ bhI hiMsA kI
vyavasthA nahIM ho sakatI  // 26 //  na ca hiMsApadaM nAzaparyAyaM kathamapyaho
! jIvasyaikAntanityatve'nubhavAbAdhakaM bhavet  // 27 //  bhAvArtha : aho ! jIva
ko ekAnta nitya mAnane se nAza kA paryAyarUpa hiMsA zabda kisI prakAra se bhI
anubhava kA abAdhaka nahIM hogA  /  matalaba yaha hai ki vaha anubhava kA
bAdhaka hI hogA  // 27 //  zarIreNA'pi sambandho nityatve'sya na saMbhavI  /
vibhutve na ca saMsAraH kalpitaH syAdasaMzayam  // 28 //  bhAvArtha : jIvAtmA ko
yadi nitya mAneM to usakA zarIrAdi ke sAtha sambandha saMbhava nahIM hai  /  ise
vibhusarvavyApaka mAneM to niHsaMdeha yaha saMsAra kalpita nahIM ho sakegA  //
28 //  adRSTAddehasaMyogaH syaadnytrkrmjH| itthaM janmopapattizcenna
tadyogAvivecanAt  // 29 //  bhAvArtha : adRSTa se kisI bhI karma se utpanna deha
kA saMyoga ho sakatA hai, (isalie AtmakriyA kI koI apekSA nahIM rahatI) isa para
jaina siddhAntI uttara dete haiM ki yadi isa prakAra janma kI saMgati biThAnA
cAhoge to vaha saMbhava nahIM ho 124 adhyAtmasAra

Page #125 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
It will not be possible, because there is no knowledge of the yoga of that body
(of those karmas). Therefore, without Atmakriya, the union of the body cannot
happen. ||29|| How can the acceptance of the subtle atoms happen without
Atmakriya? How can the conception of the difference of saṃyoga etc. also be
justified? ||30|| Meaning: If there is no action in the soul, how will the
acceptance of the subtle atoms known to that soul happen? It will not be
possible. And how will the conception of saṃyoga and bheda etc. be justified in
it? It will not be. ||30|| How can the soul attain any form without the body?
This is what the opponent has said, but it is not true, because there is no yoga
of the action of that soul. ||31|| Meaning: Since the soul is inactive, it never
kills anyone and is never killed by anyone. Therefore, this (eternal) soul does
not experience violence. ||32|| Authority Twelfth 125

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 sakegI, kyoMki usa zarIra ke yoga kA jJAna (una karmoM ko) nahIM hai| ataH
AtmakriyA ke binA deha kA saMyoga ho hI nahIM sakatA  // 29 //  AtmakriyAM vinA
ca syAnmitANugrahaNaM katham ? kathaM saMyogabhedAdikalpanA cApi yujyate  // 30
//  bhAvArtha : AtmA meM kriyA na ho to usa AtmA se paricita paramANuoM kA
grahaNa kaisa hogA ? nahIM ho sakegA  /  tathA saMyoga aura bheda vagairaha kI
kalpanA bhI usameM kaise yuktiyukta hogI? nahIM hogI  // 30 //
kathaMcinmUrtatApattivinA vapurasaMkramAt  /  vyApArAyogatazcaiva
yatkiJcittadidaM jaguH  // 31 //  bhAvArtha : zarIra ke binA bhI usameM saMkrama
na hone se AtmA ko kisI bhI prakAra se mUrttatA kI prApti ho jAegI  /  yaha jo
prativAdI ne bAta kahI hai, vaha tathyahIna hai, kyoMki usa AtmA ke vyApAra kA
hI ayoga hai  // 31 //  niSkriyo'sau tato hanti hanyate vA na jAtucit  /
kiJcitkenacidityeva na hiMsA'syopapadyate  // 32 //  bhAvArtha : isa prakAra
AtmA niSkriya hone se yaha kadApi kisI ko mAratA nahIM aura na kisI ke dvArA
mArA jAtA hai| isalie isa (nitya) AtmA ko hiMsA prApta nahIM hotI  // 32 /  /
adhikAra bArahavA~ 125

Page #126 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Even in the **Anitya-ekanta** view, violence etc. are not possible. Because by
establishing **kṣaṇikatva** (momentariness), the cause of destruction is absent,
i.e., there is no cause for destruction. ||33||  **Bhāvartha:** Even in the
**Anitya-ekanta** view, violence etc. are not possible. Because by establishing
**kṣaṇikatva** (momentariness), the cause of destruction is absent, i.e., there
is no cause for destruction. ||33||  Nor can the one who breaks the lineage be
considered violent. Because he is only present, not the creator of the lineage,
and the lineage is only certain in its origin. Therefore, calling it violence is
meaningless, it is not violence. ||34||  **Bhāvartha:** Nor can the one who
breaks the lineage be considered violent. Because he is only present, not the
creator of the lineage, and the lineage is only certain in its origin.
Therefore, calling it violence is meaningless, it is not violence. ||34||  The
human being etc. (the violent one) is only the cause for a moment, not the
violent one for the pig etc. (the victim). Because the human being does not
exist until the last moment of the pig. Therefore, who is the one who kills the
pig? If you say it is the human being, then there is a contradiction with the
last moment of the pig. ||35||  **Bhāvartha:** The human being etc. (the violent
one) is only the cause for a moment, not the violent one for the pig etc. (the
victim). Because the human being does not exist until the last moment of the
pig. Therefore, who is the one who kills the pig? If you say it is the human
being, then there is a contradiction with the last moment of the pig. ||35||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 anityaikAntapakSe'pi hiMsAdInAmasambhavaH  /  nAzahetorayogena kSaNikatvasya
sAdhanAt  // 33 //  bhAvArtha : ekAnta anityapakSa meM bhI hiMsA Adi kI
sambhAvanA nahIM hai| kyoMki kSaNikatA ko siddha karane se nAza ke kAraNa kA
ayoga hai, arthAt nAza kA kAraNa nahIM rahatA  // 33 //  na ca santAnabhedasya
janako hiMsako bhavet  /  sAMvRtatvAdajanyatvAd bhAvatvaniyataM hi yat  // 34 //
bhAvArtha : santAnaparamparA kA bheda (nAza) karane vAlA hiMsaka hogA, yaha
kahanA bhI yathArtha nahIM hai, kyoMki vaha hiMsaka to sirpha vidyamAnatA meM hI
rahatA hai, tathA ajanya yAnI santAna kA janaka-utpAdaka nahIM hai tathA vaha
santAna sirpha utpatti meM hI nizcita hai  /  isalie use hiMsA kahanA ayayArtha
hai, vaha hiMsA hI nahIM hai  // 34 //  narAdikSaNahetuzca zUkarAderna hiMsakaH
/  zUkarAntyakSaNenaiva vyabhicAraprasaMgataH  // 35 //  bhAvArtha : manuSya Adi
(hiMsaka) to eka kSaNamAtra kA hetu hai, sUara Adi (hiMsya) kA hiMsaka vaha
rahatA nahIM hai  /  kyoMki sUara ke antima kSaNa taka vaha manuSya rahatA hI
nahIM hai| isalie sUara mArane vAlA kauna hai? yadi kaho ki manuSya hai to sUara
se antima kSaNa ke sAtha vyabhicAradoSa kA prasaMga AtA hai  // 35 //  126
adhyAtmasAra

Page #127 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Translation:  **Verse 36:**  If we consider the origin of life in the next
moment, then the Buddha and the hunter will be equal. And if this is the case,
then there will be no renunciation anywhere, and the scriptures will also be
inconsistent.  **Verse 37:**  Truth, etc., do not occur in reality without non-
violence; because truth, etc., are like fences for the protection of non-
violence. Thus, the Lord Jinendra has said.  **Verse 38:**  In the teachings of
the Lord Mahavira, everything is appropriate. The soul is eternal and non-
eternal, it is both different from and non-different from the body, and it is
the same in itself.  **Verse 39:**  The soul is eternal from the perspective of
its substance, and perishable (non-eternal) from the perspective of its
modifications. Therefore, it harms, is harmed, and also receives the fruits of
its actions.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 anantarakSaNotpAde buddhalubdhakayostulA  /  naivaM tadviratiH kvApi tataH
zAstrAdyasaMgatiH  // 36 //  bhAvArtha : anantara kSaNa meM utpatti mAnane para
buddha aura zikArI donoM kI samAnatA dikhAI degI  /  aura aisA hone se kahIM bhI
virati nahIM hogI aura isase zAstrAdi bhI asaMgata hoMge ||36|| I ghaTante na
vinA'hiMsA, satyAdInyapi tattvataH  /  etasyA vRttibhUtAni tAni yadbhagavAn
jagau  // 37 //  bhAvArtha : ahiMsA ke binA satya Adi bhI tattvataH ghaTita
nahIM hote; kyoMki satya Adi to ahiMsA kI rakSA ke lie bAr3arUpa haiM, isa
prakAra jinezvara bhagavAn ne kahA hai ||37|| maunIndre ca pravacane yujyate
sarvameva hi  /  nityAnitye sphuTaM dehAd bhinnAbhinne tathAtmani  //  38  //
bhAvArtha : jinendra bhagavAn ke pravacana meM AtmA nitya tathA anitya hai, deha
se bhinna bhI hai, abhinna bhI hai, isalie isameM ahiMsA Adi saba spaSTarUpa se
ghaTita ho jAte haiM ||38||  // 38 //  AtmA dravyArthato nityaH
paryAyArthAdvinazvaraH  /  hinasti, hiMsyate tattatphalAnyapyadhigacchati  // 39
//  bhAvArtha : AtmA dravyArthadRSTi se nitya hai aura paryAyArthadRSTi se
vinazvara (anitya ) hai  /  isa kAraNa vaha dUsaroM adhikAra bArahavA~ 127

Page #128 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
He who violates and is himself violated by others, and also receives (enjoys)
that-that fruit. ||39|| This experience is the witness, the subject of the
relation of vyavritti and anvay. The arguments of the one-sided partisans are
mutually destroyed. ||40|| Meaning: In this matter, experience concerning anvay
and vyatireka is the witness, and the one-sided arguments are mutually
contradictory. ||40|| From the act of inflicting pain, from the destruction of
one's own body, and from evil consequences; thus, three types of violence are
mentioned in the Jinaagama. By believing in this way, that violence is not
without cause or merely imaginary, but is caused. ||41|| Meaning: From
inflicting pain on others, from destroying one's own body, and from evil
consequences; thus, three types of violence are mentioned in the Jinaagama. By
believing in this way, that violence is not without cause or merely imaginary,
but is caused. ||41|| The fault lies with the awakening of the karma of the
being to be killed, not with the killer. And in the absence of that killer, one
would have to kill another killer anyway, so if anyone says this, it is useless
talk. ||42|| Meaning: The fault lies with the awakening of the karma of the
being to be killed, not with the killer. And in the absence of that killer, one
would have to kill another killer anyway, so if anyone says this, it is useless
talk. ||42|| 128 Adhyatma Sara

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 kA hanana karatA hai aura svayaM dUsaroM se hanana bhI kiyA jAtA hai aura usa-
usa phala ko bhI prApta karatA (bhogatA) hai  // 39 //  iha cAnubhavaH sAkSI
vyaavRttynvygocrH| ekAntapakSapAtinyo yuktayastu mitho hatAH  // 40 //
bhAvArtha : isa viSaya meM anvaya aura vyatireka ke viSayavAlA anubhava hI sAkSI
hai aura ekAntavAda kI pakSapAtinI yuktiyA~ to paraspara kaTa jAtI haiM  // 40
//  pIr3AkartRttvato dehavyApattyA duSTabhAvataH  /  trighA hiMsAgame proktA
nahIthamapahetukA  // 41 //  bhAvArtha : dUsaroM ko pIr3A dene se, svayaM deha
ko naSTa karane se aura duSTa pariNAma se; yoM tIna prakAra kI hiMsA jinAgama
meM kahI gaI hai  /  isa prakAra mAnane se vaha hiMsA ahetuka yA korI kAlpanika
nahIM hai, apitu sahetuka hai  // 41 //  hanturjAgrati ko doSo hiMsanIyasya
karmaNi  /  prasaktistadabhAve cAnyatrApi mudhA vacaH  // 42 //  bhAvArtha :
hiMsya jIva kA karma udaya meM Ane se usakA vadha hotA hai, usameM hiMsaka kA
kyA doSa ? aura usa hiMsaka ke abhAva meM dUsare kisI hiMsaka kI hiMsA karanI hI
par3atI, isa prakAra yadi koI kahatA hai to vyartha kA bakavAsa hai  // 42 //
128 adhyAtmasAra

Page #129 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The consequence of the act of violence is due to evil intention. This violence
does not become the nature of the physician, like that of an enemy. ||43||
Meaning: This violence, which is caused by an evil resolve, is the karmic
consequence of the victim. Therefore, the physician does not acquire this
violence like an enemy. ||43||  Thus, by good advice, etc., the cessation of
this violence is also clear. This is because of the destruction of the sinful
act with its beginning and the increase of one's own good resolve. ||44||
Meaning: In this way, by good advice, etc., the destruction of the sinful act
with its beginning and the increase of one's own good resolve, the cessation of
this violence is also clear. ||44||  The seed of liberation is said to be the
primary non-violence. Truth, etc., the vows, are born as new shoots from this
tree of non-violence. ||45||  Meaning: Non-violence is the seed of the tree of
liberation, therefore it is called the primary (religion). And truth, etc., the
vows, are born as new shoots from this tree of non-violence. ||45||  The
possibility of non-violence is seen here in this Jain religion. The purification
of attachments, etc., is also real in this Jain religion. ||46||  Meaning: The
possibility of non-violence is seen here in this Jain religion. And the
purification of attachments, etc., is also real in this Jain religion. ||46||
Chapter Twelve 129

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 hiMsyakarmavipAkeyaM duSTAzayanimittatA  /  hiMsakatvaM na tenedaM vaidyasya
syAdriporiva  // 43 //  bhAvArtha : duSTa adhyavasAya ke nimitta se hone vAlI
yaha hiMsA hiMsya jIva ke karmavipAkarUpa hai, isa kAraNa zatru kI taraha vaidya
ko yaha hiMsakapana prApta nahIM hotA  //  43  //  itthaM
sadupadezAdestannivRttirapi sphuTA  /  sopakramasya pApasya nAzAt
svAzayavRddhitaH  // 44 //  bhAvArtha : isa prakAra sadupadeza Adi se, sopakramI
pApa ke naSTa hone se aura usase apane zubha adhyavasAya kI vRddhi hone se usa
hiMsA se nivRtti bhI sApha taura se ho jAtI hai  //  44  //  apavargatarorbIjaM
mukhyA'hiMseyamucyate  /   /  satyAdIni vratAnyatra jAyante pallavA navAH  // 45
//  bhAvArtha : ahiMsA mokSarUpI vRkSa kA bIja hai, isalie ise mukhya (dharma)
kahA gayA hai  /  tathA satya Adi vrata isI ahiMsAvRkSa ke naye-naye aMkurarUpa
meM utpanna hote haiM  //  45  //  ahiMsA sambhavazcetthaM dRzyate'traiva zAsane
/  anubandhAdisaMzuddhirapyatraivAsti vAstava  //  46  //  bhAvArtha : isa
prakAra ahiMsA kA saMbhava isa jinazAsana meM hI dikhAI detA hai tathA anubandha
vagairaha kI zuddhi bhI vAstavika rUpa se jinazAsana meM hI hai  // 46 //
adhikAra bArahavA~ 129

Page #130 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The great soul, endowed with right faith, does not have any attachment to
violence, which is like placing one's foot on hot iron, due to the yoga of
knowledge. ||47||  The attachment of the virtuous, who are devoted to effort and
devotion, to actions like worship of the Jinas, etc., is that of non-violence.
||48||  Violence arising from the actions of a wrong-faith person with a wicked
mind is attached to violence, and even their non-violence is similar due to the
connection with the power of ignorance. ||49||  This is the reason why the
killer of living beings gradually suffers a fall from heaven. Their violence is
great, leading to rebirth in the animal realm, hell, etc. ||50||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 hiMsAyA jJAnayogena samyagdRSTermahAtmanaH  /  taptalohapadanyAsatulyAyA
nAnubandhanam  // 47 //  bhAvArtha : samyagdRSTisampanna mahAtmA ko jJAna kA
yoga hone se tape hue lohe para paira rakhane jaisI hiMsA kA anubandha
(sambandha) nahIM lagatA  // 47 //  satAmasyAzca kasyAzcid yatanAbhaktizAlinAm
/  anubandho hyahiMsAyA jinapUjAdikarmaNi  //  48  //  bhAvArtha : yatanA aura
bhakti se suzobhita satpuruSoM (samyagdRSTi mAnavoM) ko jinapUjAdi kriyAoM meM
kabhI kucha hiMsA hotI bhI hai, to bhI use anubandha ahiMsA kA hI hotA hai  //
48 //  hiMsAnubandhinI hiMsA mithyAdRSTestu durmateH  /  ajJAnazaktiyogena
tasyAhiMsA'pi tAdRzI  //  49  //  bhAvArtha : duSTabuddhi vAle mithyAdRSTi kI
gRhArambhAdijanita hiMsA hiMsAnubandhI hotI hai, tathA usakI ahiMsA bhI
ajJAnazakti ke sambandha ke kAraNa hiMsA jaisI hI hotI hai  // 49 //  yena
syAnnihnavAdInAM diviSadurgatiH kramAt  /  hiMsaiva mahatI
tiryagnarakAdibhavAntare  // 50 //  bhAvArtha : yahI kAraNa hai ki nihnavAdi kI
devaloka meM bhI durgati hotI hai  /  usake bAda bhavAntara meM tiryaMca, naraka
130 adhyAtmasAra

Page #131 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Here is the English translation, preserving the Jain terms:  In other existences
(bhava), great violence (hiṃsā) is obtained, that is, they become those who
commit violence against living beings (jīvahinṃsā) ॥50॥  The violence (hiṃsā) of
the vigilant (apramatta) ascetics (sādhus) is also connected to non-violence
(ahiṃsānubandhinī). Because, with the severance of the connection (anubandha) of
violence, the enhancement of their qualities occurs from all sides ॥51॥  The
violence (hiṃsā) of the infatuated (mugdha) is never connected to non-violence
(anubandha), because the connection (anubandha) of this (non-violence) occurs
mainly through knowledge (jñāna) and vigilance (apramāda) ॥52॥  It has been said
that there is a very great difference even in a single type of violence (hiṃsā).
Similarly, there should be an understanding of the difference in non-violence
(ahiṃsā) as well, due to the diversity of mental state (bhāva) and energy
(vīrya) ॥53॥  This (difference) is also due to the difference in the fruition
(vipāka) over time, as well as the intervention of opposing factors
(pratipakṣāntarāla) and the application of power (śaktiniyoga) ॥54॥  Chapter
Twelve 131

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 vagairaha bhavoM meM bar3I hiMsA prApta hotI hai, arthAt ve jIvahiMsA karane
vAle banate haiM  // 50 //  sAdhUnAmapramattAnAM sA cAhi~sAnubandhinI  /
hiMsAnubandhavicchedAd guNotkarSo yatastataH  // 51 //  I bhAvArtha : apramatta
sAdhuoM se hone vAlI hiMsA bhI ahiMsAnubandhI hotI hai  /  kyoMki hiMsA ke
anubandha kA viccheda hone se isake viparIta jahA~-tahA~ se usake guNoM kI
vRddhi hotI jAtI hai  // 51 //  mugdhAnAmiyamajJAnAt sAnubandhA na karhicit  /
jJAnodrekApramAdAbhyAmasyA yadanubandhanam  // 52 //  bhAvArtha : ajJAnatA ke
kAraNa bhole-bhAle mUr3ha logoM ke lie vaha ahiMsA anubandha vAlI nahIM hotI  /
kyoMki ahiMsA kA anubandha prAyaH jJAna aura apramAda se hI hotA hai  // 52 //
ekasyAmapi hiMsAyAmuktaM sumahadantaram  /  bhAvavIryAdi-vaicitryAdahiMsAyAM ca
tattathA  //  53  //  bhAvArtha : eka hI prakAra kI hiMsA meM bhI bhAva aura
vIrya kI vicitratA ke kAraNa bahuta bar3A antara batAyA hai, isI prakAra ahiMsA
meM bhI antara samajhanA cAhie  // 53 //  sadyaH kAlAntare caitadvipAkenApi
bhinnatA  /  pratipakSAntarAlena tathA zaktiniyogataH  // 54 //  adhikAra
bArahavA~ 131

Page #132 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Meaning:** This is the distinction from the perspective of the consequences of
violence and non-violence. Due to the application of the power of cause, type,
and strength, it arises immediately or later, taking into account the interval
of the opposing party. ||54||  **Meaning:** Due to the attainment of specific
qualities in religious work and the abandonment of the attachment to non-
righteousness due to extreme devotion, only non-violence is called non-violence.
||55||  **Meaning:** The doctrine in which non-violence with hundreds of such
breaks (alternatives) is described, that is the most pure Jain doctrine
(Jainism) which is the proof. ||56||  **Meaning:** The Jinas have said that to
determine in the heart that all the above meanings of non-violence are good
things, and all the rest are bad things, is the excellent sign of faith in right
belief. ||57||  132 Adhyatma Sara

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 bhAvArtha : hiMsA aura ahiMsA ke vipAka kI dRSTi se yaha bheda hai, kAraNa,
tathA prakAra kI zakti ke niyoga se pratipakSa ke antarAla ko lekara tatkAla yA
kAlAntara meM usakA udaya hotA hai  // 54 //  hiMsA'pyuttarakAlIna -
viziSTaguNasaMkramAt  /  vyaktAvidhyanubandhatvAdahiMsaivAtibhaktitaH  // 55 //
bhAvArtha : dharmakArya meM viziSTa guNoM kI prApti hone se tathA atibhakti se
avidhi ke anubandha kA tyAga karane se ahiMsA hI kahalAtI hai  // 55  //
IdRgbhaMgazatopetA'hiMsA yatropavarNyate  /  sarvAMzaparizuddhaM tat pramANaM
jinazAsanam  // 56 //  bhAvArtha : jisa zAsana meM isa prakAra ke saikar3oM
bhaMga (vikalpa) - sahita ahiMsA kA varNana kiyA gayA hai, vaha sarvAMza
atizuddha jinazAsana (jinamata) hI pramANabhUta hai  // 56 //
artho'yamaparo'nartha iti nirdhAraNaM hRdi  /  AstikyaM paramaM cihnaM
samyaktvasya jagurjinAH  // 57 //  bhAvArtha : ahiMsA kA uparyukta sAre artha -
sadvastu haiM, isake atirikta sAre anartha - asadrUpa haiM, isa prakAra hRdaya
meM nizcaya karanA samyaktva kA AstikyarUpa utkRSTa cihna hai, aisA jinezvaroM
ne kahA hai  // 57 //  132 adhyAtmasAra

Page #133 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Refined by tranquility (shama), enthusiasm (sanvega), dispassion (nirveda), and
compassion (anukampa), this faith (astikya) should be constantly held. Those who
do so, their right faith (samyaktvam) attains stability and becomes unwavering.
||58||  Meaning: Those noble souls who are adorned with tranquility, enthusiasm,
dispassion, and compassion, and who constantly hold this faith, their right
faith becomes stable and unwavering. ||58||  || Thus ends the chapter on Right
Faith || Chapter Twelve

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zama-saMvega-nirvedAnukampAbhiH pariSkRtam  /  dadhatAmetadacchinnaM,
samyaktvaM sthiratAM vrajet  // 58 //  bhAvArtha : zama, saMvega, nirveda aura
anukampA se suzobhita isa Astikya ko satat dhAraNa karane vAle bhavyajIvoM kA
samyaktva sthiratA ko prApta hotA hai, avicala ho jAtA hai  // 58 //   //  iti
samyaktvAdhikAraH  //  adhikAra bArahavA~

Page #134 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter Thirteen [**Mithyatva-Tyaga**] By abandoning Mithyatva, pure
Samyaktvam arises for the Anginas. Therefore, the Mahatmas should strive to
eliminate it. ||1||  **Meaning:** By abandoning Mithyatva, beings attain pure
Samyaktvam. Therefore, the Mahatmas should strive to eliminate Mithyatva. ||1||
There is no Atma, no eternal Atma, no doer, no enjoyer, no liberated one, and no
means of liberation. These are the six aspects of Mithyatva. ||2||  **Meaning:**
There is no Atma, no eternal Atma, no doer, no enjoyer, no liberated one, and no
means of liberation. These are the six aspects of Mithyatva. ||2||  Because
these six aspects lead to the violation of pure conduct, they are the destroyers
of Mithyatva through the right teachings. ||3||  **Meaning:** Because these six
aspects lead to the violation of pure conduct, they are the destroyers of
Mithyatva through the right teachings. ||3||  **Adhyatma Sara**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 adhikAra terahavAM [mithyAtva-tyAga] mithyAtvatyAgataH zuddhaM samyaktvaM
jAyate'GginAm  /  atastatparihArAya yatitavyaM mahAtmanA  // 1 //  bhAvArtha :
mithyAtva kA tyAga karane se prANiyoM ko zuddha samyaktva prApta hotA hai,
isalie usa mithyAtva ke tyAga ke lie mahAtmA ko prayatna karanA cAhie  // 1 //
nAsti nityo, na kartA ca, na bhoktAtmA, na nivRtaH  /  tadupAyazca
netyAhurmithyAtvasya padAni SaT  // 2 //  bhAvArtha : AtmA nahIM hai, AtmA
ekAnta nitya hai, AtmA kartA nahIM hai, bhoktA nahIM hai, mukta nahIM hai, mukti
kA upAya koI bhI nahIM hai, isa prakAra mithyAtva ke 6 padasthAnaka kahe gae
haiM  // 2 //  etairyasmAd bhavecchuddha-vyavahAravilaMghanam  /  ayameva ca
mithyAtva-dhvaMsI sadupadezataH  // 3 //  bhAvArtha : jina pUrvokta 6 sthAnakoM
se zuddha vyavahAra kA ullaMghana hotA hai, vahI vyavahAra zuddha upadeza ke
kAraNa mithyAtva ko naSTa karane vAlA hotA hai  // 3 //  134 adhyAtmasAra

Page #135 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
There is no instruction or instructor when there is an attachment to non-
existence. Therefore, how can there be any benefit from removing doubt, etc.?
|| 4 ||  **Meaning:** When there is an attachment to non-existence, etc., there
is no instruction or instructor. How can there be any benefit from removing
doubt, etc., from the instruction of non-existence, etc.? Because according to
the doctrine of non-existence, when there are no listeners, etc., how can the
speaker benefit anyone? || 4 ||  Those who desire only certainty, their conduct
is inappropriate. Just as the language of the Mlecchas is not fit for the
Brahmanas, but they use it only for their own purposes, so also the instruction
of conduct is inappropriate for those who desire only certainty. || 5 ||
**Meaning:** Just as the language of the Mlecchas is not fit for the Brahmanas,
but they use it only for their own purposes, so also the instruction of conduct
is inappropriate for those who desire only certainty. || 5 ||  Just as a Shruta-
kevali knows only the self through the Shruta (scripture), so also he knows
everything through the Shruta (scripture) and through conduct. || 6 ||
**Meaning:** Just as a Shruta-kevali knows only the self through the Shruta
(scripture), so also he knows everything through the Shruta (scripture) and
through conduct. || 6 ||  The purpose of certainty cannot be directly spoken of
by anyone. Conduct, through its qualities, is incapable of understanding its
meaning. || 7 ||  **Chapter Thirteen** **135**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 nAstitvAdigrahe naivopadezo nopadezakaH  /  tataH kasyopakAraH syAt
saMdehAdivyudAsataH  //  4  //  bhAvArtha : nAstitva Adi kA Agraha rahate hue
upadeza aura upadezaka ghaTita ( ucita) nahIM hote  /  nAstitvAdi ke upadeza se
saMdeha Adi kA nirAkaraNa hone para kisakA upakAra hogA ? kyoMki nAstitvavAda ke
anusAra jaba zrotA Adi hI nahIM haiM, to vaktA kisakA upakAra karegA ?  // 4 //
yeSAM nizcaya eveSTo vyavahArastu saMgataH  /  viprANAM mlecchabhASeva
svArthamAtropadezanAt  // 5 //  bhAvArtha : jaise brAhmaNoM ke lie mlecchabhASA
bolane lAyaka nahIM hai, kintu apane svArtha- prayojanamAtra ke jitanA hI ve
usakA prayoga karate haiM, vaise hI jinheM nizcayanaya hI iSTa hai, unake lie
vyavahAranaya kA upadeza saMgata (anAdara karane yogya) hai  // 5 //  yathA
kevalamAtmAnaM jAnAnaH zrutakevalI  /  zrutena nizcayAtsarvaM zrutaM ca
vyavahArataH  // 6 //  bhAvArtha : jaise zrutakevalI zruta (zAstra) dvArA
nizcaya se kevala AtmA ko jAnatA hai  /  vaise hI vyavahAra se vaha sarvazruta (
AgamAdi) ko jAnatA hai || 6 ||  // 6 //  nizcayArtho'tra no sAkSAd vaktuM
kenA'pi pAryate  /  vyavahAro guNadvArA tadarthAvagamakSamaH  // 7 //  adhikAra
terahavAM 135

Page #136 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Meaning:** No one in this world is capable of directly stating the meaning of
**nirnaya** (absolute truth). However, **vyavahar nay** (practical logic) is
capable of conveying the meaning of **nirnaya** through its qualities. ||7||
**Meaning:** If someone claims the supremacy of **vyavahar**, how can they claim
supremacy in **nirnaya**? Because both **shabdatmika** (verbal) and
**jnanatmika** (knowledge-based) have equal **pararth** (other-oriented) and
**swarth** (self-oriented) aspects. ||8||  **Meaning:** Therefore, due to the
supremacy of **vyavahar**, the six aforementioned **padas** (categories) that
negate **vyavahar** are declared as **mithyatva** (false). ||9||  **Meaning:**
"There is no self because it is not perceived directly," and the declaration of
**ahamta** (ego) can be attributed to the body, thus says the **Charvaka**.
||10||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 bhAvArtha : isa jagat meM nizcayArtha ko koI bhI sAkSAt kahane meM samartha
nahIM hai  /  parantu vyavahAranaya usa nizcaya ke guNa dvArA usa (nizcaya) ke
artha kA bodha karAne meM samartha hai  // 7 //  prAdhAnyaM vyavahAre
cettatteSAM nizcaye katham ? parArthasvArthate tulye zabdajJAnAtmanordvayoH  //
8  //  bhAvArtha : yadi koI vyavahAra kI pradhAnatA batalAte haiM, to unheM
nizcayanaya meM pradhAnatA kaise hogI? kyoMki zabdAtmaka aura jJAnAtmaka ina
donoM kA parArthatva aura svArthatva tulya hai  // 8 //  prAdhAnyAd vyavahArasya
tattacchedakAriNAm  /  mithyAtvarUpataiteSAM padAnAM parikIrtitA  // 9 //
bhAvArtha : isalie vyavahAra kI pradhAnatA ke kAraNa vyavahAra kA hI uccheda
karane vAle una pUrvokta 6 padoM kI mithyAtvarUpatA kahI hai  // 9 //
nAstyAtmeti cArvAkaH pratyakSAnupalambhataH  /  ahaMtAvyapadezasya
zarIreNopapattitaH  // 10 //  bhAvArtha : 'pratyakSa upalabdha nahIM hotA (
dikhAI nahIM detA), isalie AtmA hai hI nahIM  / ' aura ahaMtA ('maiM hU~' isa
prakAra ke ahaMtva) kA vyapadeza (kathana) to zarIra se ho sakatA hai, isa
prakAra cArvAka kahatA hai 112011 136 adhyAtmasAra

Page #137 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Just as the intoxication does not manifest in each individual part of the liquor
(but only when all the parts are combined), similarly, the manifestation of
knowledge is considered to be present only when the five great elements are
combined. ||11||  The diversity of kings, paupers, etc., is also not due to the
power of the soul; because such natural diversity is also seen in stones, etc.
||12||  The soul cannot be understood through scriptures, because they are
contradictory to each other, and no one has ever seen the soul, so how can their
words be considered as evidence? ||13||  The deceiver, by speaking of the soul,
the other world, and various actions, elevates the minds of the people by
misleading them from their enjoyment. ||14||  Chapter Thirteen 137

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 madyAMgebhyo madavyakti: pratyekamasatI yathA  /  militebhyo hi bhUtebhyo
jJAnavyaktistathA matA  // 11 //  bhAvArtha : jaise madya ke aMgoM meM se
pratyeka aMga meM mada kI abhivyakti nahIM hotI, (sabhI aMga milane para hI
spaSTa abhivyakti hotI hai), vaise hI paMcamahAbhUta ekatra milane para jJAna kI
spaSTa abhivyakti hotI mAnI gaI hai  //  11  //  rAjaraMkAdivaicitryamapi
nAtmabalAhitam  /  svAbhAvikasya bhedasya grAvAdiSvapi darzanAt  // 12 //
bhAvArtha : rAjA, raMka Adi vibhinnatA bhI AtmA ke bala para utpanna huI nahIM
hai; kyoMki aisA svAbhAvika bheda to pASANa Adi meM bhI dikhAI detA hai  //  12
//  vAkyairna gamyate cAtmA parasparavirodhibhiH  /  dRSTavAnna ca ko'pyetaM,
pramANaM yadvaco bhavet  // 13 //  bhAvArtha : AgamavAkyoM se bhI AtmA nahIM
mAnI jA sakatI, kyoMki ve paraspara virodhI haiM tathA kisI ne AtmA ko pratyakSa
dekhA bhI nahIM ki usakA vacana pramANabhUta mAnA jAya?  // 13 //  AtmAnaM
paralokaM ca kriyAM ca vividhAM vadan  /  bhogebhyo bhraMzayatyuccairlokacittaM
pratArakaH  // 14 //  adhikAra terahavAM 137

Page #138 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Meaning:** Cunning men corrupt the minds of people by loudly describing the
soul, the afterlife, and various types of actions, causing them to be obsessed
with worldly pleasures. ||14||  **Meaning:** Therefore, it is not appropriate to
abandon the pleasures of this world and desire the pleasures of the future
(afterlife); because after the five elements have burned to ashes, the desire to
be reborn - to return to life again - is futile. ||15||  **Meaning:** For these
reasons, this (Charvaka's) philosophy is false; because the soul (Atman) is
directly perceived due to the non-difference of the qualities of perception,
doubt, etc. ||16||  **Meaning:** The perception of ego, etc., is not the nature
of the body. Because if it were, then there would necessarily be a problem with
the perception of the senses like eyes, etc., just like with gravity, etc.
||17||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 bhAvArtha : dhUrta AdamI AtmA, paraloka aura vividha prakAra kI kriyAe~ batA
(kaha) kara logoM ke citta ko bhogAdi se jorazora se bhraSTa karate haiM  // 14
//  tyAjyAstannaihikAH kAmAH kAryA nAnAgataspRhAH  /  bhasmIbhUteSu bhUteSu
vRthA pratyAgatispRhA  // 15 //  bhAvArtha : isalie isa loka ke kAmabhogoM ke
sukhoM ko chor3akara bhaviSya (paraloka) ke sukhoM kI icchA (spRhA) karanA ucita
nahIM hai; kyoMki paMcamahAbhUtoM ke jalakara rAkha ho jAne para punarjanma-
phira se lauTakara janma lene kI icchA vyartha hai  // 15 //  tadetaddarzana
mithyA, jIvaH pratyakSa eva yat  /  guNAnAM saMzayAdInAM pratyakSANAmabhedataH
// 16 //  bhAvArtha : ina-ina kAraNoM se yaha (cArvAka kA) darzana mithyA hai;
kyoMki pratyakSa saMzayAdi guNoM ke abheda ke kAraNa jIva (AtmA) pratyakSa hI
hai  // 16 //  na cAhaM pratyayAdInAM zarIrasyaiva dharmatA  /
netrAdigrAhyatApatterniyataM gauravAdivat  // 17 //  bhAvArtha : ahaMkAra Adi kI
pratIti to zarIra kA dharma nahIM hai| kyoMki aisA ho, taba to gurutva Adi kI
taraha netrAdi indriyoM kI grAhyatA kI Apatti avazya honI cAhie  // 17 /  /  138
adhyAtmasAra

Page #139 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
If the body itself were the soul, there would be no memory of past experiences.
This is because the body is constantly changing, from childhood to old age, and
so it cannot be the same entity. ||18||  **Meaning:** If the body were the soul,
there would be no memory of past experiences, because the body is constantly
changing, from childhood to old age, and so it cannot be the same entity. ||18||
The body cannot be the soul because even when a part of the body is lost, there
is no memory of what was experienced through that part. This is like a person
who has lost a window in their house still remembering what they saw through
that window. ||19||  **Meaning:** The body cannot be the soul because even when
a part of the body is lost, there is no memory of what was experienced through
that part. This is like a person who has lost a window in their house still
remembering what they saw through that window. ||19||  There is no fault in the
memory being transferred from cause to effect, or from one vasana to another.
This is because the fetus does not remember anything from its time in the womb,
even though it has experienced the water there. ||20||  **Meaning:** There is no
fault in the memory being transferred from cause to effect, or from one vasana
to another. This is because the fetus does not remember anything from its time
in the womb, even though it has experienced the water there. ||20||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zarIrasyaiva cAtmatve nAnubhUtasmRtirbhavet  /  bAlatvAdidazAbhedAt
tasyaikasyAnavasthiteH  //  18 //  bhAvArtha : zarIra ko hI AtmA mAnane para
pUrva anubhUta kI smRti nahIM hogI, kyoMki bAlya Adi avasthAoM ke bheda ke
kAraNa vaha akele zarIra kI anavasthiti=asthiratA hai  // 18 //  nAtmAGgaM
vigame'pyasya tallabdhAnusmRtiryataH  /  vyaye gRhagavAkSasya
tallabdhArthAdhigantRvat  // 19 //  bhAvArtha : tathA zarIra ko AtmA nahIM kahA
jA sakatA, kyoMki jisa aMga kA nAza ho jAtA hai, usake bAda usa aMga se pahale
jo kucha upalabdha (jAnA) huA thA, usa padArtha kA smaraNa ho sakatA hai| jaise
ghara kA jharokhA gira jAne para usa gavAkSa (jharokhe) se prApta huI cIjoM ko
jAnane vAle manuSya ko unakI smRti hotI hai, vaise hI usa aMga se pahale jo
kucha jAnA - sunA thA, usakI smRti zarIra ko honI cAhie; para hotI nahIM hai  //
19 //  na doSaH kAraNatkArye vAsanAsaMkramAcca na  /  bhrUNasya
smaraNApatterambAnubhavasaMkramAt  // 20 //  bhAvArtha : kAraNa se aura kArya
meM vAsanA ke saMkramaNa hone se smRti hone meM koI doSa nahI hai  /  kyoMki
mAtA ke T adhikAra terahavAM 139

Page #140 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The fetus in the womb of experience will also have its memory due to the
transmission of experience. ||20||  **Commentary:** The perception of the
stability of the vasana (tendency) of the object arising from the cause is not
seen due to the unsuitability of the atom's state, as the hand, etc., are not
the real cause (i.e., not the upadana-karana). ||21||  **Commentary:** Just as
the power of intoxication arises from the ingredients of alcohol, but not
without their mixture or the mixer, so also the manifestation of knowledge
should be understood, otherwise it would always be present. ||22||
**Commentary:** The diversity of kings, beggars, etc., is also due to the karma
performed by the soul, otherwise there would be no specific knowledge of
happiness, sorrow, etc. ||23||  **Commentary:** The soul is known from the
scriptures, which are non-contradictory to the perceived objects. The speaker of
these scriptures, being free from impurities, has seen the soul. ||24||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 anubhava kA garbhastha bAlaka meM saMkramaNa hone se usa bAlaka ko bhI usakI
smaraNApatti hogI  // 20 //  nopAdAnAdupAdeyavAsanA-sthairyadarzane  /
karAderatathAtvenAyogyatvApteraNusthitau  // 21 //  bhAvArtha : hAtha Adi
atathArUpa (yAnI upAdAnakAraNa nahIM) hone se paramANu kI sthiti meM ayogyatA kI
prApti hone se upAdAnakAraNa se upAdeya vAsanA aura sthiratA kA darzana nahIM
hotA  /  / 21 //  madyAMgebhyo madavyaktirapi no melakaM vinA  /
jJAnavyaktistathA bhAvyA'nyathA sA sarvadA bhavet  // 22 //  bhAvArtha : madya
ke aMgoM se madazakti paidA hotI hai, parantu inakA mizraNa yA mizraNakartA ke
binA nahIM ho sakatI, vaise hI jJAna kI abhivyakti meM bhI jAna lenA cAhie,
anyathA vaha jJAna sadA hI hotA rahanA cAhie  // 22 //
rAjaraMkAdivaicitryamapyAtmakRtakarmajam  /  sukhaduHkhAdi-saMvittivizeSo
nAnyathA bhavet  // 23 //  bhAvArtha : rAjA, raMka Adi kI vibhinnatA bhI AtmA ke
dvArA kRta karmajanita hai, nahIM to sukhaduHkhAdi kA viziSTa jJAna nahIM ho
sakatA  // 23 //  AgamAd gamyate cAtmA dRSTeSTA'rthA'virodhinaH  /  tadvaktA
sarvaviccainaM dRSTavAn vItakazmalaH  // 24 //  140 adhyAtmasAra

Page #141 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Meaning:** The soul is known through the non-contradictory Agamas (scriptural
evidence) of both the seen (direct) and the desired meaning. The speaker of that
Agama, the omniscient Lord, free from all faults, has seen that soul. ||24||
**Meaning:** The activities of the non-deluded men related to the next world do
not go in vain. Who is that man who will put his soul in sorrow for the sake of
another's bondage? None. ||25||  **Meaning:** The attainment of the soul is
clearly manifested from doubt, just like a lump of earth, etc. Because doubt is
also the subject of different meanings in a donkey and a horn, etc. ||26||
**Meaning:** The word 'Ajiva' also reveals the law of the existence of the soul.
Because there is negation of the combination, etc., of the existing substance;
there is no negation of the non-existent substances. ||27||  **Chapter 13**
**141**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 bhAvArtha : dRSTa (pratyakSa) aura iSTa artha ke virodharahita Agama (zAbda
pramANa) se AtmA jAnA jAtA hai  /  usa Agama ke vaktA samasta doSarahita
sarvajJa bhagavAn ne usa AtmA ko dekhA hai  // 24 //  abhrAntAnAM ca viphalA
nAmuSmikyaH pravRttayaH  /  parabandhanahetoH kaH svAtmAnamavasAdayet  // 25 //
bhAvArtha : bhrAntirahita puruSoM kI paraloka-sambandhI pravRttiyA~ niSphala
nahIM jAtIM  /  kauna aisA puruSa hai, jo para ke bandhana hetu apanI AtmA ko
viSAda meM DAlegA ? koI bhI nahIM  // 25 //  siddhiH sthANvAdivad vyaktA
saMzayAdeva cAtmanaH  /  asau kharaviSANAdau vyastArthaviSayaH punaH  // 26 //
bhAvArtha : lUMTha Adi ke samAna saMzaya se hI AtmA kI siddhi spaSTarUpa se hotI
hai  /  kyoMki saMzaya bhI to khara aura sIMga Adi meM bhinna-bhinna artha kA
viSaya hotA hai  // 26 /  /  ajIva iti zabdazca, jIvasattAniyaMtritaH  /  asato
na niSedho, yatsaMyogAdiniSedhanAt  // 27 //  bhAvArtha : 'ajIva' zabda bhI jIva
ke astitva kA niyama pragaTa karatA hai  /  kyoMki vidyamAna padArtha ke
saMyogAdi kA niSedha hotA hai; avidyamAna padArthoM kA niSedha nahIM hotA  // 27
//  adhikAra terahavAM 141

Page #142 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Combination, inherence, and generality, and specificity are negated for objects,
but not entirely. ||28|| Meaning: The negation of objects is only in terms of
combination, inherence, and generality and specificity; but the objects are not
negated entirely. ||28|| The word 'Jiva' is pure and derived, like the word
'pot', and therefore meaningful. Its meaning is not the body, because the
synonyms of the word 'Jiva' do not have the meaning of the body. ||29|| Meaning:
Like the word 'pot', the word 'Jiva' is pure and derived, and therefore
meaningful. The meaning of the word 'Jiva' cannot be the body, because the
synonyms of the word 'Jiva' do not have the meaning of the body. ||29|| The
Charvaka philosophy is to be rejected because of the established existence of
the soul. Their pronouncements are sinful and opposed to virtuous conduct.
||30|| Meaning: Thus, the existence of the soul is established, therefore the
Charvaka philosophy is to be rejected; because their pronouncements are sinful
and opposed to virtuous conduct. ||30|| The Buddhists say that the soul is not
eternal, but a series of moments of consciousness. This is not acceptable
because the eternal nature of the soul is established by its actions. ||31||
Meaning: The Buddhists say that the soul is not eternal, but a series of moments
of consciousness. This is not acceptable because the eternal nature of the soul
is established by its actions. ||31||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 saMyogaH samavAyazca sAmAnyaM ca viziSTatA  /  niSidhyate padArthAnAM ta eva na
tu sarvathA  // 28 //  bhAvArtha : padArtho ke saMyoga, samavAya aura
sAmAnyavizeSa kA hI niSedha kiyA jAtA hai; parantu una padArthoM kA sarvathA
niSedha nahIM kiyA jAtA  // 28 //  zuddhaM vyutpattimajjIvapadaM sArthaM
ghaTAdivat  /  tadarthazca zarIraM no paryAyapadabhedataH  // 29 //  bhAvArtha :
ghaTa Adi zabdoM kI taraha jIvazabda zuddha hai aura vyutpattiyukta hai, aura
isa kAraNa vaha samartha hai  /  jIva zabda kA vyutpattilabhya artha zarIra
nahIM ho sakatA, kyoMki jIva zabda ke paryAyavAcI zabdoM meM zarIrarUpa artha
nahIM hai  // 29 //  AtmA vyavasthitestyAjyaM tatazcArvAkadarzanam  /  pApAH
kilaitadAlApAH sadvyApAravirodhinaH  // 30 //  bhAvArtha : isa prakAra AtmA kI
vyavasthA (siddhi) ho jAtI hai, isalie cArvAkadarzana (mata) tyAjya hai; kyoMki
usake AlApa (bhASaNa) pApamaya haiM aura zubha vyApAra (pravRtti) ke virodhI hai
// 30 //  jJAnakSaNAvalIrUpo nityo nAtmeti saugatAH  /  kramAkramAbhyAM nityatve
yujyate'rthakriyA na hi  // 31 //  142 adhyAtmasAra

Page #143 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Meaning:** Buddhists say that the soul is a series of moments of knowledge, it
is not eternal. If the soul is considered eternal, then neither sequential nor
non-sequential actions can occur. ||31||  **Meaning:** If the soul is the cause
of actions sequentially, then its eternal nature will be lost, and thus the soul
will become impermanent. And if it is said that the soul acts non-sequentially,
then all actions should happen simultaneously; but they do not. ||32||
**Meaning:** There is no fault in considering the soul to be momentary. It takes
on new forms. The form that exists in the present moment, while performing its
act of creation, is not flawed by momentariness due to the characteristic of
being "doing" - a special characteristic. Rather, it is a great virtue that
eliminates the craving that arises from seeing the soul as eternal. ||33||
**Meaning:** This view, which considers the soul to be momentary, is certainly
not conducive to the growth of falsehood. It is because the soul, being
momentary, does not suffer any loss, nor does it gain anything. ||34||
**Chapter Thirteen** **143**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 bhAvArtha : bauddha kahate haiM ki AtmA jJAna ke kSaNoM kI paramparArUpa hai,
vaha nitya nahIM hai  /  AtmA ko nitya mAnane para krama se yA akrama se bhI
arthakriyA ghaTita nahIM hotI  // 31 //  svabhAvahAnito'dhrauvyaM
krameNA'rthakriyAkRtau  /  akrameNa ca tadbhAve yugapatsarvasambhavaH  // 32 //
bhAvArtha : yadi AtmA krama se arthakriyAkArI ho to usake nityatva-svabhAva kI
hAni hogI, aura isa prakAra AtmA meM anityatA A jAegI  /  aura yadi aisA kaheM
ki AtmA akrama se arthakriyA karatI hai, to ekasAtha sabhI kriyAe~ honI cAhie;
para hotI nahIM ||32|| kSaNike tu na doSo'smin kurvadrUpavizeSite  /
dhruvekSaNotthatRSNAyA nivRttezca guNo mahAn  // 33 //  bhAvArtha : AtmA ko
kSaNika mAnane meM koI doSa nahIM hai  /  vaha naye-naye rUpa karatA hai  /
vartamAnakSaNa meM apanI utpattikriyA karate-karate jo rUpa vidyamAna ho, use
kurvadrUpa - vizeSaNa yukta lakSaNa se kSaNikatva meM doSa nahIM AtA  /  balki
nityatvapakSa ko dekhane se utpanna huI tRSNA kI nivRttirUpI mahAguNa hI hotA
hai ||33|| mithyAtvavRddhikRnnUnaM tadetadapi darzanam  /  kSaNike
kRtahAniryattathAtmanyakRtAgamaH  // 34 //  adhikAra terahavAM 143

Page #144 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
_ **Meaning:** Certainly, this Buddhist philosophy is conducive to falsehood
(mithyatva) because considering the soul as momentary leads to the destruction
of actions performed and the fault of acquiring actions not performed. ||34||
**Meaning:** Due to the absence of the unity of one soul-substance, there will
be no transmission of vasana (latent tendencies). Because the sequence of
objects is always and everywhere highly relevant. ||35||  **Meaning:** By
assuming a soul with specific characteristics of action, there will be no
auspicious or inauspicious activity, no inference, and due to uncertainty, there
will be no direct evidence. In this regard, the theorist, motivating the
momentaryist, has said as follows: ||36||  **Meaning:** Without the specific
qualifier of "vijatya" (heterogeneous) in that soul with specific
characteristics of action, there will be no recollection of past experiences.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 _ bhAvArtha : nizcaya hI yaha bauddhadarzana mithyAtva (asatya) kI vRddhi
karane vAlA hai kyoMki AtmA ko kSaNika mAnane para kiye hue karmoM kA nAza aura
nahIM kiye hue karmoM kI prAptirUpa doSa Ate haiM  // 34 //
ekadravyAnvayAbhAvAd vAsanA-saMkramazca na  /  paurvAparyaM hiM bhAvAnAM
sarvatrAtiprasaktimat  // 35 //  bhAvArtha : eka Atmadravya kA anvaya na hone se
vAsanA kA saMkrama nahIM hogaa| kyoMki padArthoM kA paurvAparya sadA sarvatra
atiprasakti vAlA hai  // 35 //  kurvadrUpavizeSe ca na pravRttirna vA'numA  /
anizcayAnna vA'dhyakSaM tathA codayato jagau  // 36 //  bhAvArtha : kurvadrUpa
vizeSa vAlI AtmA mAnane se zubhAzubha pravRtti nahIM hogI, anumAna nahIM hogA
aura nizcaya na hone se pratyakSapramANa bhI nahIM rahegA  /  isa sambandha meM
kSaNikavAdI ko prerita karate hue siddhAntI ne nIce likhe anusAra kahA hai  //
36 //  na vaijAtyaM vinA tatsyAnna tasminnanumA bhavet  /  vinA tena na
tatsiddhirnAdhyakSa nizcayaM vinA  // 37 //  bhAvArtha : usa kurvadra pavizeSa-
yukta jIva meM vaijAtya (vijAtirUpa) vizeSaNa ke binA use pUrvAnubhUta kA
smaraNa nahIM 144 adhyAtmasAra

Page #145 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
It will not be possible without that remembrance. And without that remembrance,
the realization of the Kurvadrupa, i.e., certainty, will not be possible, and
without certainty, there will be no direct evidence. ||37|| The recognition of
unity contradicts momentariness. Because in recognition, there is a certainty
that 'I remember what I experienced before'. ||38|| There is no obstacle to the
object in the eternal (permanent) one soul. Because, just as in Buddhism, there
is no defect of unity in relating various types of knowledge to the momentary
soul, similarly, there is no defect in relating various types of many moments to
the stable soul. ||39|| It contradicts the nature of doing various actions
together. And by establishing the Svadvada, there is no contradiction in the
action of the eternal soul. ||40|| Adhikar Thirteenth 145

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 hogA aura usa smaraNa ke binA anumAna nahIM hogA  /  aura usa anumAna ke binA
kurvadrUpa kI siddhi arthAt nizcaya hogA nahIM, tathA nizcaya ke binA
pratyakSapramANa bhI nahIM hogA ||37|| ekatApratyabhijJAnaM kSaNikatvaM ca
bAdhate  /  yo'hamanvabhavaM so'haM smarAmItyavadhAraNAt  // 38 //   /
bhAvArtha : ekatva kA pratyabhijJAna kSaNikatva kA bAdhaka hai  /  kyoMki
pratyabhijJAna meM 'jo maiMne pahale anubhava kiyA thA, use maiM smaraNa karatA
hU~' aisA nizcaya hotA hai  // 38 //  nAsmin viSayabAdho yatkSaNike'pi
yathaikatA  /  nAnAjJAnAnvaye tadvat sthire nAnAkSaNAnvaye  // 39 //  bhAvArtha
: nitya (cirakAlasthAyI) eka AtmA meM isa viSaya kI bAdhA nahIM AtI  /  kAraNa,
jaise bauddhamata meM kSaNika AtmA meM bhI nAnA prakAra ke jJAna kA sambandha
karane meM ekatArUpa doSa nahIM AtA, vaise hI sthira AtmA meM bhI nAnA prakAra
ke aneka kSaNoM ke sAtha sambandha karane meM koI doSa nahIM AtA  //  39  //
nAnAkAryekyakaraNasvAbhAvye ca virudhyate  /  syAdvAdasaMnivezena
nityatve'rthakriyA na hi  // 40 //  bhAvArtha : nAnA prakAra ke kAryoM kI ekatA
karane ke svabhAva meM virodha AtA hai  /  aura svAvAda kI sthApanA karane se
nitya AtmA meM arthakriyA meM virodha nahIM AtA  //  40 //  adhikAra terahavAM
145

Page #146 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
How can the Buddhists speak of the powers of non-differentiation (atabheda) in
blue, black, etc., without accepting the existence of multiple natures
(anekasvabhava)? ||41||  **Meaning:** Without accepting the existence of
multiple natures, how can the Buddhists speak of the powers of non-
differentiation in blue, black, etc.? ||41||  Even in the constant perception
(dhruvekshana), love is not rejected due to the absence of disturbance
(anupaplava). Like the perceived form (grahyakar), there is no quality in his
knowledge in this Buddhist view. ||42||  **Meaning:** Even in the constant
perception of the soul, the omniscient one did not reject love due to the
absence of disturbance. Therefore, in this Buddhist view, there is no quality in
his knowledge, like the perceived form. ||42||  On the contrary, if one accepts
the impermanent nature (anityabhava), then the intellect of momentary birth
(kshanajanurdhiya) will arise spontaneously. Due to disregard for the cause
(hetu), all actions will become futile. ||43||  **Meaning:** On the contrary, if
one accepts the impermanent nature, then the intellect of momentary birth will
arise spontaneously. Due to disregard for the cause, all actions will become
futile. ||43||  Therefore, this impermanent (kshanikavadi) view should be
abandoned by those who desire the association of the eternal, true, conscious,
and blissful state (nityasatyachidanandapad). ||44||  **Meaning:** Therefore,
those who desire the association of the eternal, true, conscious, and blissful
state should abandon this impermanent view. ||44||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 nIlAdAvapyatadbhedazaktayaH suvacAH katham ? pareNA'pi hi
nAnaikasvabhAvopagamaM vinA  // 41 //  bhAvArtha : aneka svabhAva kA svIkAra
kiye binA nIlA, kAlA Adi varNoM meM bauddha bhI atabheda kI zaktiyoM kA kathana
kisa prakAra kara sakate haiM?  // 41 //  dhruvekSaNe'pi na prema
nivRttamanupaplavAt  /  grAhyAkAra iva jJAne guNastannAtra darzane  // 42 //
bhAvArtha : AtmA kA nitya ikSaNa karane se bhI anupadrava ke kAraNa sarvajJa ne
prema kA niSedha nahIM kiyA  /  isa kAraNa isa bauddhadarzana meM grAhya AkAra
kI taraha usake jJAna meM koI bhI guNa nahIM hai  // 42 //  pratyutAnityabhAve
hi svataH kSaNajanurdhiyA  /  hetvanAdarataH sarvakriyAviphalatA bhavet  // 43
//  bhAvArtha : isake viparIta anityabhAva mAnane se svataH hI kSaNika janma kI
buddhi se hetu - kriyAphala ke prati anAdara hogA aura usase samasta kriyAe~
niSphala ho jAe~gI  // 43 //  tasmAdidamapi tyAjyamanityatvasya darzanam  /
nityasatyacidAnandapadasaMsargamicchatA  // 44 //  bhAvArtha : isalie nitya -
sat-cit-Ananda-svarUpa muktipada kA saMsarga cAhane vAle ko anitya ( kSaNikavAdI
) darzana chor3a denA cAhie  // 44 //  146 adhyAtmasAra

Page #147 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Neither the doer, nor the enjoyer, is the soul, as the Kapilas declare. This is
not the refuge of the dharma of the generated (maya), but the nature that is the
result. ||45||  **Meaning:** In the Sankhya philosophy, the soul is neither the
doer nor the enjoyer, and the soul is not the refuge of the dharma of the
generated (maya), but the refuge is the nature that is the result (maya). ||45||
The first result of this is the intellect, endowed with the eight qualities.
From that, in succession, arise ego, the five subtle elements, the five senses,
and the five gross elements. ||46||  **Meaning:** The intellect, endowed with
the eight qualities, is the first result of this nature. And from that
intellect, in succession, arise ego, the five subtle elements, the five senses,
and the five gross elements. ||46||  The conscious being, in the form of
consciousness, is the proof for the perfection of the intellect, and the
conscious being, in the form of consciousness, is endowed with the rule of
limitation. Otherwise, its perfection is not the object. ||47||  **Meaning:**
The conscious being, in the form of consciousness, is the proof for the
perfection of the intellect, and the conscious being, in the form of
consciousness, is endowed with the rule of limitation. Otherwise, its perfection
is not the object. ||47||  Because of the nature of the male, the nature, the
object, and the senses, there is complete liberation. The division of the seen
and the unseen, and the separation, are not appropriate. ||48||  **Meaning:**
Because of the nature of the male, the nature, the object, and the senses, there
is complete liberation. The division of the seen and the unseen, and the
separation, are not appropriate. ||48||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 na kartA, nApi bhoktAtmA kApilAnAM tu darzane  /  janyadharmAzrayo nA'yaM,
prakRtiH pariNAminI  // 45 //  bhAvArtha : sAMkhyadarzana meM AtmA kartA aura
bhoktA nahIM hai, aura AtmA janya (mAyA) ke dharma kA Azraya bhI nahIM hai,
parantu jo usakA Azraya hai, vaha to pariNAma vAlI prakRti (mAyA) hai  // 45 //
prathamaH pariNAmo'syA buddhirdharmASTakAnvitA  /
tato'haMkAratanmAtrendriyabhUtodayaH kramAt  // 46 //  bhAvArtha : dharmAdi ATha
se yukta buddhi hI isa prakRti kA prathama pariNAma hai  /  aura usa buddhi se
kramazaH ahaMkAra, 5 tanmAtrA, 5 indriyoM aura 5 mahAbhUtoM kI utpatti hotI hai
// 46 /  /  cidrUpaH puruSo buddheH siddhayai caitanyamAnataH  /  siddhistasyA
aviSayA'vacchedaniyamAnvitaH  // 47 //  bhAvArtha : usa buddhi kI siddhi ke lie
caitanyarUpa pramANa hai aura avaccheda ke niyaya se yukta caitanyarUpa puruSa
hai, anyathA usakI siddhi aviSayA hai  // 47 //  hetuttve
puMsprakRtyarthendriyANAmati nirvRtiH  /  dRSTAdRSTavibhAgazca vyAsaMgazca na
yujyate  // 48 //  bhAvArtha : puruSa ko heturUpa meM aMgIkAra karane se puruSa,
prakRti, viSaya aura indriya kI atyanta nirvRti, dRSTa, aura adhikAra terahavAM
147

Page #148 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The division of Adrishta, and Vyāsanga, will not be rational (occurred) in any
way. ||48||  In a dream, due to the conception of a tiger etc., and the lack of
pride in being a human, Ahamkara is conceived as having a definite function.
||49|| Meaning: In a dream, like the conception of a tiger etc., due to the lack
of pride (ignorance) in being a human, Ahamkara is conceived as having a
definite function. ||49|| From that Ahamkara, the sequence of Tanmātra etc. is
for the origin of the universe. Thus, the intellect is the cause of the
universe, but the Purusha (soul) is not subject to modifications. ||50||
Meaning: From that Ahamkara, the sequence of Tanmātra etc. is for the origin of
the universe. Thus, the intellect is the cause of the universe, but the Purusha
(soul) is not subject to modifications. ||50||  Purushārtha and Upārāga are the
two agents in initiating all these activities (tendencies), and the involvement.
Therefore, the Jīvātmā has the intellect that says, "I know the object,
therefore I do it." Thus, the soul is the doer due to two types of indecision in
the intellect. But this is not true. ||51|| Meaning: Purushārtha and Upārāga are
the two agents in initiating all these activities (tendencies), and the
involvement. Therefore, the Jīvātmā has the intellect that says, "I know the
object, therefore I do it." Thus, the soul is the doer due to two types of
indecision in the intellect. But this is not true. ||51|| 148 Adhyātmasāra

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 adRSTa kA vibhAga, tathA vyAsaMga, koI bhI yuktisaMgata (ghaTita) nahIM hogA
// 48 //  svapne vyAghrAdisaMkalpatvAnnarattvAnabhimAnataH  /  ahaMkArazca
niyatavyApAraH parikalpate  // 49 //  bhAvArtha : svapna meM bAgha Adi saMkalpa
kI taraha puruSatva ke anabhimAna (ajJAna) se nizcita vyApAra vAle ahaMkAra kI
kalpanA kI jAtI hai  // 49 //  tanmAtrAdikramastasmAtprapaJcotpattihetave  /
itthaM buddhirjagatkI puruSo na vikArabhAk  // 50 //  bhAvArtha : usa ahaMkAra
se tanmAdi kA krama jagat kI utpatti ke lie hai  /  isa prakAra buddhi jagat kI
kI hai, parantu puruSa (AtmA) vikAra vAlA nahIM hai  // 50 //  puruSArthoparAgau
dvau vyApArAveza eva ca  /  atrAMzo vemyahaM vastu karomIti ca dhIstataH  // 51
//  bhAvArtha : ina sabhI vyApAroM (pravRttiyoM) ke Arambha (Aveza) karane meM
puruSArtha aura uparAga ye do kartA haiM  /  isa kAraNa aMza=jIvAtmA ko maiM
padArtha ko jAnatA hU~, ataH use karatA hU~, aisI buddhi hotI hai| isa taraha
buddhi meM do prakAra ke avyavasAya se AtmA kartA hai| parantu yaha bAta
atAttvika hai  // 51 //  148 adhyAtmasAra

Page #149 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Chetanāham karomi iti buddher bhedāgrahāt smayah | Etan nāśe'navacchinnam
chaitanyaṁ mokṣa iṣyate || 52 ||  **Meaning:** Laughter arises from the
intellect's misconception of oneness with the soul, thinking, "I am conscious, I
am the soul, I do all this." When this ego is destroyed, the uninterrupted
consciousness remains, and that is called liberation. || 52 ||  Kartṛbuddhigate
duḥkha sukhe puṁsy upacāratah | Narānāthe yathābhṛtyagatau jayaparājayaū || 53
||  **Meaning:** Just as the king experiences the victory and defeat of his
servant, similarly, the soul (puruṣa) experiences the happiness and sorrow of
the intellect, which is the doer. || 53 ||  Kartā bhoktā ca no tasmād ātmā nityo
niranjanah | Adhyātasādanyathābuddhis tathācoktan mahātmanā || 54 ||
**Meaning:** Therefore, the soul is neither the doer nor the enjoyer, and it is
eternal and pure. But due to adhyāsa (superimposition), the individual
experiences false knowledge about the soul. Thus, the great sage Kapila has
said. || 54 ||  Prakṛteḥ kriyamānāni guṇaiḥ karmāṇi sarvathā | Ahamkāra
vimūḍhātma karttā'ham iti manyate || 55 ||  **Meaning:** All actions are
performed by the qualities of nature. The soul, deluded by ego, thinks, "I am
the doer." || 55 ||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 cetanA'haM karomIti buddherbhedAgrahAt smayaH  /  etannAze'navacchinnaM
caitanyaM mokSa iSyate  //  52  //  11 bhAvArtha : "maiM cetana hU~. maiM AtmA
yaha saba karatA hU~,' isa prakAra buddhi kA (AtmA ke sAtha) abheda mAnane se
ahaMkAra hotA hai  /  isa ahaMkAra kA nAza hone para avicchinna caitanya rahatA
hai, vahI mokSa kahalAtA hai  // 52 //  kartRbuddhigate duHkhasukhe
puMsyupacArata:  /  naranAthe yathAbhRtyagatau jayaparAjayau  //  53  //
bhAvArtha : jaise sevaka kI jaya-parAjaya kA rAjA meM upacAra hotA hai; vaise hI
karttArUpa buddhi ke sukhaduHkha kA AtmA (puruSa) meM upacAra kiyA jAtA hai  //
53 //  karttA bhoktA ca no tasmAdAtmA nityo niraMjana:  /
adhyAtasAdanyathAbuddhistathAcoktaM mahAtmanA  // 54 //  bhAvArtha : isa kAraNa
AtmA kartA aura bhoktA nahIM hai tathA vaha nitya aura niraMjana hai  /  parantu
adhyAsa ke kAraNa usa para anyathAbuddhi yAnI atathya (asatya) jJAna puruSa ko
hotA hai  /  isa prakAra mahAtmA kapila ne kahA hai  // 54 //  prakRteH
kriyamANAni guNaiH karmANi sarvathA  /  ahaMkAravimUDhAtmA karttA'hamiti manyate
//  55  //  adhikAra terahavAM 149

Page #150 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Meaning:  **55.**  In reality, the qualities of nature perform actions; yet,
the deluded soul, blinded by ego, believes, "I am the doer."  **56.**  Upon
reflection, this view is not beautiful either.  For, the intellect and
consciousness (purusha) share the same substratum, making its ugliness evident.
**57.**  You have declared the intellect to be the doer and the enjoyer.  If
that intellect is eternal, there will be no liberation; and if it is non-
eternal, there will be no samsara, because before the intellect's origin, there
is no connection with dharma, etc.  **58.**  If we accept dharma, etc., as
belonging to nature, then what will we call the intellect?  And then, the
statement of the connection of such dharma, etc., will also naturally apply to
pots, etc.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 bhAvArtha : vAstava meM prakRti ke guNa hI karmoM ko karate haiM; phira bhI
ahaMkAra se mohita (mUr3ha) AtmA (puruSa) 'maiM kartA hU~' aisA mAnatA hai  //
55 //  vicAryamANaM no cAru tadetadapi darzanam  /  kRticaitanyayorvyaktaM
sAmAnadhikaraNyataH  // 56 //  bhAvArtha : vicAra karane para yaha darzana bhI
sundara nahIM hai  /  kyoMki buddhi aura caitanya (puruSa) kA adhikaraNa samAna
hone se usakI asundaratA spaSTa hai  // 56 //  buddhiH kartrI ca bhoktrI ca
nityA cennAsti nirvRtiH  /  anityA cenna saMsAraH prAgdharmAderayogataH  // 57
//  bhAvArtha : Apane buddhi ko kartrI aura bhoktrI batAI; agara vaha buddhi
nitya ho to mokSa nahIM hogA aura yadi vaha anitya ho to saMsAra nahIM hogA,
kyoMki buddhi kI utpatti se pahale dharmAdi kA yoga nahIM hotA  // 57 //
prakRtAveva dharmAdi-svIkAre buddhireva kA ? suvacazca ghaTAdau
syAdIgdharmAnvayastathA  //  58  //  bhAvArtha : yadi prakRti meM hI dharmAdi kA
svIkAra kareMge to phira buddhi kise kaheMge? aura phira isa prakAra ke dharmAdi
ke sambandha kA kathana ghaTAdi meM bhI anAyAsa hI ho jAegA  // 58 //  150
adhyAtmasAra

Page #151 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
If **karma** and **bhoga** are only of the **buddhi**, then **bandha** and
**moksha** do not occur in the **atman**. And if that is the case, then
everything that Kapila and others have said about the **atman** is in vain.
||59||  **Bhavartha:** If **karma** and **bhoga** are only of the **buddhi**,
then **bandha** and **moksha** do not occur in the **atman**. And if that is the
case, then everything that Kapila and others have said about the **atman** is in
vain. ||59||  The knower of the twenty-five **tattvas**, whether he is a
**jati**, a **mundi**, or a **shikhi**, is liberated from the bonds of
**samsara**, regardless of the **ashrama** he is in. ||60||  **Bhavartha:** The
knower of the twenty-five **tattvas**, whether he is a **jati**, a **mundi**, or
a **shikhi**, is liberated from the bonds of **samsara**, regardless of the
**ashrama** he is in. ||60||  If **bandha** and **moksha** are only **upacara**
in the **atman**, then the entire **moksha**-proclaiming scripture is in vain.
For who would act for the liberation of another? ||61||  **Bhavartha:** If
**bandha** and **moksha** are only **upacara** in the **atman**, then the entire
**moksha**-proclaiming scripture is in vain. For who would act for the
liberation of another? ||61||  Therefore, it is not appropriate to have faith in
the **Samkhya** doctrine of Kapila and others, because in that doctrine, the
experienced **karta** and **bhokta** are eliminated. ||62||  **Bhavartha:**
Therefore, it is not appropriate to have faith in the **Samkhya** doctrine of
Kapila and others, because in that doctrine, the experienced **karta** and
**bhokta** are eliminated. ||62||  Chapter Thirteen 151

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 kRtibhogau ca buddhazced bandho mokSazca nAtmanaH  /  tatazcAtmAnamuddizya
kUTametadyaducyate  // 59 //  bhAvArtha : yadi kartRtva aura bhoktRtva buddhi kA
hI ho to bandha aura mokSa AtmA meM ghaTita nahIM hoMge  /  aura agara vaisA
hogA, taba to AtmA ko lekara jo kucha bhI kapilAdi ne kahA hai, vaha saba
vyartha ho jAegA  // 59 //  paMcaviMzatitattvajJo yatra tatrAzrame rtH| jaTI
muMDI zikhI vA'pi mucyate bhavabandhanAt  // 60 //  bhAvArtha : paccIsa tattvoM
kA jJAtA jaTAdhArI, muMDita, coTI-dhArI athavA anya kisI veSa kA dhAraka, jisa
kisI bhI Azrama meM rata ho, saMsAra ke bandhana se mukta ho jAtA hai  // 60 //
etasya copacArattve mokSazAstra vRthAkhilam  /  anyasya hi vimokSArthaM na
ko'pyanyaH pravartate  // 61 //  bhAvArtha : yadi usa bandha aura mokSa kA AtmA
meM upacAra kareMge to samagra mokSapratipAdaka zAstra vyartha ho jaaegaa|
kyoMki dUsare kI mukti ke lie dUsarA kauna pravRtti karegA?  // 61 //  kapilAnAM
mate tasmAdAsminnavocitA rtiH| yatrAnubhavasaMsiddhaH kartA bhoktA ca lupyate
// 62 //  bhAvArtha : isa kAraNa kapilAdi ke isa sAMkhyamata meM prIti karanA
ucita nahIM hai, kyoMki ukta mata meM anubhavasiddha kartA aura bhoktA kA lopa
kiyA jAtA hai  // 62 //  adhikAra terahavAM 151

Page #152 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
"There is no liberation," some liberationists say, "because the soul is not
bound." This is because the soul is bound by karma, either before, after, or
simultaneously. (63)  **Meaning:** Some liberationists argue that liberation is
impossible because the soul is not bound. However, this is incorrect because the
soul is bound by karma, which can occur before, after, or simultaneously with
the soul's existence.  If the relationship between the soul and karma is
considered eternal, then the soul and karma would be eternally bound, just like
the relationship between the soul and space. This would make liberation
impossible. (64)  **Meaning:** If the relationship between the soul and karma is
considered eternal, then the soul and karma would be eternally bound, just like
the relationship between the soul and space. This would make liberation
impossible.  This view (of the liberationists) is completely illogical because
the relationship between the body and karma is like the relationship between a
seed and a sprout. They are both part of a continuous chain of cause and effect,
and their relationship is not eternal. (65)  **Meaning:** The view of the
liberationists is illogical because the relationship between the body and karma
is not eternal. It is like the relationship between a seed and a sprout, where
one is the cause and the other is the effect. They are both part of a continuous
chain of cause and effect.  The soul is the doer, the body is the instrument,
and karma is the action. The soul experiences the fruits of its actions, just
like a pot with a handle experiences the weight of the handle. (66)
**Meaning:** The soul is the doer, the body is the instrument, and karma is the
action. The soul experiences the fruits of its actions, just like a pot with a
handle experiences the weight of the handle.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 nAsti nirvANamityAhurAtmanaH ke'pyabandhataH  /  prAk pazcAd yugapadvApi
karmabandhAvyavasthiteH  // 63 //  bhAvArtha : kaI nirmokSavAdI kahate
haiM-'nirvANa hai hI nahIM', kyoMki AtmA ke bandha nahIM hone se mokSa bhI nahIM
hotA  /  kAraNa ki pahale, pIche, athavA sAtha-sAtha AtmA ke karmabandhana kI
avyavasthA hai  // 63 /  /  anAdiryadi sambandha iSyate jIvakarmaNoH  /
tadAnantyAnna mokSaH syAttadAtmAkAzayogavat  // 64 //  bhAvArtha : yadi Apa jIva
aura karma kA sambandha anAdi kaheMge to AtmA aura AkAza ke sambandha kI taraha
jIva aura karma kA sambandha bhI ananta ho jAegA aura usase mokSa siddha nahIM
hogA  // 64 //  tadetadatyasambaddhaM yanmitho hetukAryayoH  /  santAnAnAditA
bIjAMkuravad dehakarmaNoH  // 65 //  bhAvArtha : kintu yaha (amokSavAdiyoM kA)
mata atyanta asaMgata hai| kyoMki paraspara kAraNa aura kAryarUpa deha aura
karma kA bIja aura aMkura kI taraha paraspara pravAharUpa (paramparA) se
paraspara anAditva hai  // 65 //  kartA karmAnvito dehe jIvaH karmaNi dehayuk  /
kriyAphalopabhuk kumbhe daNDAnvitakulAlavat  // 66 //  152 adhyAtmasAra

Page #153 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Meaning:** The doer, the soul, is the doer only when it is associated with
karma and resides in the body. And it is the doer of karma only when it is
associated with the body. Just as a potter, associated with a stick, is the
maker of a pot, similarly, the soul, associated with the body and karma, is the
enjoyer of the fruits of its actions. ||66||  **Meaning:** Just like the seed
and sprout, the hen and the egg, and gold and its impurities, the endless
lineage (traditional relationship) of the soul and karma is destroyed. ||67||
**Meaning:** This arrangement should be known in relation to the liberated
souls. For the unliberated souls, the relationship between the soul and karma is
endless and without beginning, like the union of the soul and space. ||68||
**Meaning:** Just as the nature of substance is the same in all substances, yet
there is a difference between the living and the non-living, similarly, although
the nature of the soul is the same, there is a difference between the liberated
and the unliberated. ||69||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 bhAvArtha : kartA jIva karma se yukta hokara hI zarIra meM sthira hokara kartA
hotA hai, aura deha se yukta hokara hI vaha karma kA kartA hai| jaise DaMDe se
yukta kubhAra ghaTa kA karttA hotA hai vaise hI deha aura karma se yukta jIva
kriyA ke phala kA bhoktA hotA hai  // 66 //  anAdisantaternAzaH syAd
bIjAMkurayoriva  /  kukkuTyaMDakayoH svarNamalayoriva vAnayoH  // 67 //
bhAvArtha : bIja aura aMkura kI taraha, murgI aura aMDe kI taraha tathA sone
aura usake maila kI taraha jIva aura karma kI isa anAdi santati (paramparAgata
sambandha) kA nAza ho jAtA hai  // 67 //  bhavyeSu ca vyavastheyaM sambandho
jIvakarmaNoH  /  anAdyananto'bhavyAnAM syAdAtmAkAzayogavat  // 68 //  bhAvArtha
: yaha vyavasthA bhavyajIvoM ke sambandha meM jAnanI cAhie  /  abhavyajIvoM ke
Azrita to jIva aura karma kA sambandha AtmA aura AkAza ke saMyoga kI taraha
anAdiananta hai  // 68 //  dravyabhAve samAne'pi jIvAjIvatvabhedavat  /
jIvabhAve samAne'pi bhavyAbhavyatvayobhidA  // 69 //  bhAvArtha : jaise
dravyatva saba dravyoM meM eka samAna hai, phira bhI unameM jIvatva aura ajItva
kA bheda hai, vaise hI adhikAra terahavAM 153

Page #154 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Chapter 154, Adhyatma Sara  **69.**   Even though **Jivattva** (life
principle) is the same in all beings, whether **Bhavyas** (liberated souls) or
**Abhavyas** (non-liberated souls), there is a distinction between **Bhavyatva**
(liberation) and **Abhavyatva** (non-liberation).  **70.**  **Bhavyatva** is
natural, like the absence of a pot. There is no contradiction in its destruction
due to the presence of causes of destruction.  **70. Meaning:** Just as the
absence of a pot is natural, the destruction of **Bhavyatva** is also natural
due to the presence of causes of destruction.  **71.**  The destruction of
**Bhavyas** is not like the destruction of the regions of space, because they
are infinitely large. Just as a piece of stone is capable of becoming a statue,
even in the absence of the desired result, **Bhavyas** are always capable of
attaining liberation.  **71. Meaning:**  Just as the regions of space are
infinitely large and cannot be destroyed, **Bhavyas** are also infinitely large
and cannot be destroyed. Even if liberation is not achieved, **Bhavyas** are
always capable of attaining it, just as a piece of stone is always capable of
becoming a statue.  **72.**  We do not say that all **Bhavyas** attain
liberation. But we do say that those who attain liberation are definitely
**Bhavyas**.  **72. Meaning:** We do not claim that all **Bhavyas** attain
liberation. However, we do assert that those who attain liberation are
definitely **Bhavyas**.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 bhI jIvatva bhavya aura abhavya saba jIvoM meM samAna hote hue bhavyatva aura
abhavyatva kA bheda hotA hai  // 69 //  svAbhAvikaM ca bhavyatvaM
kalazaprAgabhAvavat  /  nAzakAraNasAmrAjyAd vinazyanna virudhyate  // 70 //
bhAvArtha : ghaTa ke prAgabhAva kI taraha svAbhAvika bhavyatva ke nAza kI
kAraNasAmagrI ko lekara nAza hone se bhI koI virodha nahIM AtA  // 70 //
bhavyocchedo na caivaM syAd gurvAnantyAnnabhoMzavat  /  pratimAdalavat kvApi
phalAbhAve'pi yogyatA  // 71 //  bhAvArtha : AkAza ke pradezoM kI taraha
bhavyajIva mahAananta hone se una bhavyoM kA sarvathA nAza nahIM hogA  /  anya
kisI viSaya meM kadAcit phala kA abhAva ho, lekina pratimA (banane yogya pASANa)
dala kI taraha bhavya meM mokSa kI yogyatA to hotI hI hai  // 71 //  naitad
vayaM vadAmo yad bhavyaH sarvo'pi sidhyati  /  yastu sidhyati so'vazyaM bhavya
eveti no matam  // 72 //  bhAvArtha : hama yaha nahIM kahate ki jitane bhI
bhavyajIva haiM, ve saba ke saba mokSa meM (siddha ho) jAte haiM, parantu itanA
hama dAve ke sAtha kaha sakate haiM ki jo mokSa meM gae haiM, ve sabhI avazya hI
mokSa kI yogyatA vAle bhavya jIva hI the ||72 || 154 adhyAtmasAra

Page #155 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
"Is it not the case that even in liberation, the state of existence is
perishable, since it is born?  No, for liberation is not like destruction, it is
imperishable." (73)  "Just as the sky does not increase when a pot is broken by
a hammer, so too the soul does not increase when karma is destroyed by
knowledge." (74)  "It is not proper to doubt that a liberated soul, even though
it is connected with karma-particles, is not liberated, because the yogas, which
are the causes of bondage, cannot be reborn." (75)  "Liberation is achieved
without fear, because it is the infinite knowledge of bliss, even though there
may be a difference in the intensity of bliss." (76)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 nanu mokSe'pi janyatvAd vinAzinI bhavasthitiH  /  naivaM
pradhvaMsavattasyAnidhanattvavyavasthiteH  // 73 //  bhAvArtha : prazna hotA
hai-vinAzasvabhAva vAlI AtmA mokSa meM janma letI hai, utpanna hotI hai, isalie
mokSa se phira bhava (saMsAra) meM sthiti (utpatti) honI cAhie ! isa para
siddhAntI uttara dete haiM, aisA nahIM hotA  /  pradhvaMsa kI taraha mokSa kI
vyavasthA avinAzinI hai, usakA nAza nahIM hotA  // 73 /  /  AkAzasyeva vaiviktyA
mudgraaderghttkssye| jJAnAdeH karmaNo nAze nAtmano jAyate'dhikam  // 74 //
bhAvArtha : mudgara Adi se ghar3e ke phUTa jAne para pRthaktA ho jAne se jaise
AkAza bar3hatA nahIM hai, vaise hI jJAnAdi dvArA karma kA nAza hone se bhI AtmA
kI vRddhi nahIM hotI  // 74 //  na ca karmANusambandhAnmuktasyApi na muktatA  /
yogAnAM bandhahetUnAmapunarbhavasambhavAt  // 75 //  bhAvArtha : karma-
paramANuoM ke sAtha sambandha hone se siddhi prApta huI muktAtmA ko bhI mukti
nahIM milatI, aisI zaMkA karanA ucita nahIM, kyoMki bandha ke heturUpa yogoM kI
punaH utpatti asaMbhava hai  // 5 //  sukhasya tAratamyena prakarSasyA'pi
sambhavAt  /  anantasukhasaMvittirmokSaH sidhyati nirbhayaH  // 76 //  adhikAra
terahavAM 155

Page #156 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Meaning:** Due to the gradation (difference in degree) of happiness, there is
also the possibility of supreme happiness. Therefore, it is proven that the one
who has the knowledge of infinite happiness is fearless liberation. ||76||
**Meaning:** Therefore, the words of those who deny the existence of liberation,
who are deluded and like atheists, should not be respected at all by the seeker
of truth. ||77||  **Meaning:** Some others, similar to atheists, say that "there
is no way to liberation." They accept the effect but not the cause; this is
their great irony. ||78||  **Meaning:** Liberation is obtained suddenly because
the period of liberation is fixed. This statement of theirs is also false.
Because the fixed nature of the period is rarely seen. Even the logician says
this in the following way. ||79||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 bhAvArtha : sukha kI taratamatA (nyUnAdhikatA) hone se utkRSTa sukha kI bhI
sambhAvanA hai| isalie jisameM anantasukha kA jJAna hotA hai, vahI nirbhaya
mokSa hai, aisA siddha hotA hai  // 76 /  /  vacanaM nAstikAbhAnAM
mokSasattAniSedhakam  /  bhrAntAnAM tena nAdeyaM paramArthagaveSiNA  // 77 //
bhAvArtha : isalie mokSa ke astitva kA niSedha karane vAle, bhrAnta evaM
nAstikoM ke tulya logoM ke vacana kA paramArthAnveSaka puruSa ko jarA bhI Adara
nahIM karanA cAhie  // 77 //  na mokSopAya ityAhurapare nAstikopamAH  /
kAryamasti na hetuzcetyeSA teSAM kadarthanA  // 7 //  bhAvArtha : nAstikasadRza
dUsare kitane hI loga kahate haiM ki 'mokSa kA upAya hai hI nahIM' ve kArya ko
mAnate haiM, lekina kAraNa ko nahIM mAnate; yahI unakI bar3I viDambanA hai  //
78 /  /  akasmAdeva bhavatItyalokaM niyatAvadheH  /  kadAcitkasya dRSTatvAd
babhASe tArkiko'pyadaH  // 79 //  bhAvArtha : mokSaprApti kI avadhi niyata hone
se akasmAt hI mokSa mila jAtA hai| unakA yaha kathana bhI mithyA hai| kyoMki
avadhi kI niyatatA kadAcit (zAyada hI kabhI) dikhAI detI hai  /  isa bAta ko
naiyAyika bhI nimnokta rUpa se kahate haiM  // 79 //  156 adhyAtmasAra

Page #157 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Hetubhutanishedho na svanupakyavidhi na cha. Svabhavarnanana naivam
avadherniyatatvatah ||80|| **Meaning:** Mokshavadhi is definite, therefore there
is no prohibition of material that is the cause, nor is there a rule for the
prohibition of the soul. Because of this, the description of the nature does not
arise. ||80|| Na cha sarvatriko moksha sansarasyaapi darshanat. Na chanidam na
tadvyakti vyanjako hetureva yat ||81|| **Meaning:** Samsara is visible,
therefore moksha is not universal, and it should not be said that there is no
clarity (expression) of that moksha at present. Because the cause = means that
reveals moksha is there. ||81|| Mokshopayo'stu kintvasya nischayo neti
chenmatam. Tan na ratnatrayasyaiva tathabhavavinischayata ||82|| **Meaning:**
Even if there is a means to moksha, but there is no definite (specific)
certainty of the means, if this is your opinion, then it is not true; because
the Ratnatraya are definitely the means to moksha. ||82|| Bhavakaranaragadi
pratipakshamadah khalu. Tadvipakshasya mokshasya karanam ghatate taram ||83||
**Meaning:** Attachment, etc., which are the causes of existence, are indeed the
opposite. The opposite of that, moksha, becomes the cause. ||83|| Adhikar
Terahvaan 157

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 hetubhUtaniSedho na svAnupAkhyAvidhirna ca  /  svabhAvavarNanA
naivamavadherniyatatvataH  // 80 //  bhAvArtha : mokSAvadhi niyata hai, isa
kAraNa heturUpa sAmagrI kA niSedha nahIM hai tathA AtmA ke niSedha kA vidhAna
nahIM hai  /  aisA hone se svabhAva kI varNanA utpanna nahIM hotI  // 80 //  na
ca sArvatriko mokSaH saMsArasyApi darzanAt  /  na cedAnIM na tadvyaktirvyaJjako
hetureva yat  // 81 //  bhAvArtha : saMsAra dRSTigocara hotA hai, isalie
sarvatra mokSa nahIM hotA tathA varttamAna meM usa mokSa kI spaSTatA
(abhivyakti) nahIM hotI, aisA bhI nahIM kahanA cAhie  /  kyoMki mokSa ko prakaTa
karane vAlA hetu = sAdhana to hai hI  //  81  //  mokSopAyo'stu kintvasya
nizcayo neti cenmatam  /  tanna ratnatrayasyaiva tathAbhAvavinizcayAt  // 82 //
bhAvArtha : mokSa kA upAya bhale hI ho, kintu upAya kA spaSTarUpa se (amuka)
nizcaya nahIM hai, yadi ApakA aisA mata hai to vaha yathArtha nahIM hai; kyoMki
ratnatraya hI mokSopAya ke rUpa meM nizcita haiM  // 82 //  bhavakAraNarAgAdi
pratipakSamadaH khalu  /  tadvipakSasya mokSasya kAraNaM ghaTatetarAm  // 83 //
adhikAra terahavAM 157

Page #158 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Meaning:** These three jewels (the means to liberation) are the enemies of the
causes of the world (like attachment, aversion, etc.). Therefore, these three
jewels are the causes of liberation, which is the enemy of the world. This seems
to be the logical conclusion. ||83||  **Meaning:** Just as the lightness of
karma can be achieved through other means before attaining the three jewels,
similarly, liberation can also be achieved through other means. So why should we
rely only on the three jewels? ||84||  **Meaning:** Previous service (etc.)
cannot be the means to liberation because it is weak. Therefore, it cannot be
the action of liberation. For liberation, the strong action of right faith,
right knowledge, and right conduct is the only suitable and capable means.
||85||  **Meaning:** Due to the potential for liberation or the lightness of
karma, the qualities manifest very intensely. So why do you reject the
expectation of them? ||86||  **Adhyatma Sara**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 bhAvArtha : yaha ratnatraya (mokSopAyabhUta) hI saMsAra ke kAraNa (hetu) rUpa
rAgadveSAdi ke pratipakSI zatrurUpa haiM  /  ataH ve triratna usa saMsArarUpa
kArya ke vipakSI-zatrurUpa mokSa ke kAraNa haiM, ghUma-phirakara yahI bAta
yuktisaMgata lagatI hai  // 83 /  /  atha ratnatrayaprApteH prAkarmalaghutA
yathA  /  parato'pi tathaiva syAditi kiM tadapekSayA  // 84 //  bhAvArtha :
jaise ratnatraya kI prApti se pahale bhI karmoM kA lAghava (halkApana) kisI bhI
anya sAdhana se ho jAtA hai, isake anusAra mokSa kA bhI anya koI sAdhana (upAya)
ho sakatA hai| ataH ratnatraya kI hI apekSA isake lie kyoM rakhI jAya?  // 84 //
naivaM pUrvasevaiva mRdvI no saadhnkriyaa| samyaktvAdikriyA tasmAd dRdvaiva
zivasAdhane  // 85 //  bhAvArtha : pUrvasevA (Adi) hI mokSa kA sAdhana nahIM ho
sakatI hai, kyoMki vaha komala hai| isalie vaha mokSasAdhana kI kriyA nahIM ho
sakatI  /  mokSasAdhana ke lie to sudRr3ha samyaktvAdi kriyA hI samartha va
ucita hai  // 85 /  /  guNAH prAdurbhavantyuccairathavA karmalAghavAt  /
tathAbhavyatayA teSAM kuto'pekSAnivAraNam  // 86 //  bhAvArtha : tathAbhavyatva
se athavA karmoM ke lAghava (alpatA) se atyanta tIvratA se guNa pragaTa hote
haiM, ataH usakI apekSA ko kyoM ThukarAte ho?  // 86 /  /  158 adhyAtmasAra

Page #159 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
And from the objection of the **Tathavyas**, the qualities like **virya**,
**utsaha**, etc., are not the causes of liberation. This is not our opinion. But
just as the stick, wheel, string, and rotation are mutually cooperative causes
in the making of a pot, similarly, **Tathavyatva**, etc., are mutually
cooperative causes in the attainment of liberation. ||87||  The means for the
destruction of the world are **jnana**, **darshan**, and **charitra**.
Therefore, the statement that negates this is to be rejected, as it increases
**mithyatva**. ||88||  Therefore, a person with excellent intellect should
abandon these places of **mithyatva** and contemplate the six places of
**samyaktva** in the opposite way. He should imbue himself with these **bhavy**
feelings. ||89||  || Thus ends the chapter on the abandonment of **mithyatva**.
||  Chapter Thirteen 159

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 tathAbhavyatayAkSepAd guNA na ca na hetavaH  /  anyo'nyasahakAritvAd
daNDacakrabhramAdivat  // 87 //  bhAvArtha : siddhAntiyoM dvArA samAdhAna-
tathAbhavyatA ke AkSepa se vIryotsAhAdi guNa mokSa ke hetu nahIM haiM, aisA
hamArA vicAra (mata) nahIM hai  /  parantu ghaTa ke banane meM DaMDA, cAka, DorI
aura bhramaNa vagairaha jaise anyonya sahakArI kAraNa haiM, vaise hI
mokSasAdhanA meM tathAbhavyatva Adi eka dUsare ke sahakArI kAraNa haiM  // 87 //
jJAnadarzanacAritrANyupAyAstadbhavakSaye  /  etanniSedhakaM vAkyaM tyAjyaM
mithyAtvavRddhikRt  // 88 //  _bhAvArtha : isalie saMsAra kA nAza karane ke lie
jJAna, darzana aura cAritra upAya haiM  /  ataH isakA niSedha karane vAlA vAkya
mithyAtvavarddhaka hone se tyAjya hai  // 88 /  /  mithyAtvasya
padAnyetAnyutsRjyottamadhIdhanaH  /  bhAvayet prAtilomyena samyaktvasya padAni
SaT  // 89 //  bhAvArtha : ataH uttama buddhi kA dhanI puruSa mithyAtva ke ina
sthAnoM ko chor3akara unake viparIta samyaktva ke 6 padoM (sthAnoM) para vicAra
kare  /  ina bhavya bhAvanAoM se apane ko otaprota kareM  // 89 //   //  iti
mithyAtvatyAgAdhikAraH  //  adhikAra terahavAM 159

Page #160 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter Fourteen  **[Renunciation of Attachment]**  They describe the
renunciation of false attachment as the renunciation of false grasping, which is
like a cloud for the fire of falsehood. Therefore, wise people with pure
intentions and who understand the essence of the scriptures should be interested
in this renunciation of attachment. ||1||  **Meaning:** False grasping (false
attachment) is said to be like a cloud for the fire of falsehood. Therefore,
wise people with pure intentions and who understand the essence of the
scriptures should be interested in this renunciation of attachment. ||1||  The
fire of false grasping burns within. Where can the vine of true knowledge grow
there? Seek the flowers of peace and the fruits of good advice elsewhere. ||2||
**Meaning:** The fire of false grasping burns within. Where can the vine of true
knowledge grow there? Seek the flowers of peace and the fruits of good advice
elsewhere. ||2||  Those who consider themselves wise after reading a little and
hearing a little from the scriptures, due to their attachment, may have their
mouths kissed by pleasant words, but they have not understood the secret of the
scriptures. ||3||  **Meaning:** Those who consider themselves wise after reading
a little and hearing a little from the scriptures, due to their attachment, may
have their mouths kissed by pleasant words, but they have not understood the
secret of the scriptures. ||3||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 adhikAra caudahavAM  /  [ kadAgrahatyAga: ]
mithyAtvadAvAnalanIravAhamasadgrahatyAgamudAharanti ato ratistatra
budhairvidheyA vizuddhabhAvaiH zrutasAravadbhiH  //  1  //  bhAvArtha :
asadgraha ( mithyA Agraha ) ko mithyAttvarUpI dAvAgni ke lie megha ke samAna
kahA hai, isalie zuddhAzayavAle zAstra ke sArajJa paNDitoM ko isa kadAgrahatyAga
karane meM ruci rakhanI cAhie ||1|| asadgrahAgnijvalitaM yadantaH kva tatra
tattvavyavasAyavallI  /  prazAntapuSpANi hitopadeza - phalAni cAnyatra
gaveSayantu  // 2 //  bhAvArtha : jinakA cita asadgraharUpI Aga se jalA huA hai,
vahA~ tattvanizcayarUpI bela kahA~ Thahara sakatI hai? ataH zAntirUpI phUloM
evaM hitopadezarUpI phaloM kI talAza kahIM aura jagaha jAkara kIjie  // 2 //
adhItya kiJcicca nizamya kiJcidasadgrahAd paNDitamAnino ye  /  mukhaM sukhaM
cumbitamastu vAco, lIlArahasyaM tu na tairjagAhe  //  3  //  bhAvArtha : kucha
par3hakara, kucha zAstrAdi sunakara jo kadAgrahavaza apane ko paNDita mAnate
hoM, unhoMne cAhe sukhapUrvaka 160 adhyAtmasAra

Page #161 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
They have kissed the mouth of speech, but they have not understood the secret of
the play of speech; this should be understood. || 3 ||  Those who are blinded by
a fragment of knowledge, whose ego is inflated due to their attachment to non-
truth, and who have deluded the simple-minded, alas, these dull-witted people
have ridiculed the beings of the three worlds with their itching for pedantic
quibbling. || 4 ||  Where the moon of discrimination is not seen, where the sun
of true knowledge is set, where the heart is shrouded in deep darkness, there is
only the play of the new moon, the non-truth, which is like the dark fortnight.
|| 5 ||  A man whose mind is covered by non-truth, cuts the vine of truth with
the sickle of false reasoning, waters the tree of faults with the sap of
attachment, and throws down the sweet fruit of knowledge. || 6 ||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 vANI ke mukha kA cumbana kara liyA ho, parantu unhoMne vANI ke lIlArahasya kA
avagAhana nahIM kiyA; yahI samajhanA cAhie  //  3  //   /
asadgrahotsaryadatucchadaryairbodhAMzatAndhokRtamugdhalokaiH viDambitA hanta
jar3airvitaNDApANDityakaNDUlatayA trilokI  // 4 //  bhAvArtha : kadAgraha ke
kAraNa jinakA ahaMkAra atyanta uchala rahA hai tathA jinhoMne bodha (jJAna) ke
eka aMza (leza) se mugdha (bhole) logoM ko aMdhA banA diyA hai, aphasosa hai,
aise jar3apuruSoM ne vitaNDAvAda karane meM pANDitya kI khujalI se tInoM jagat
ke jIvoM ko viDambita ( tiraskRta) kara rakhA hai ||4|| vidhorvivekasya na yatra
dRSTistamoghanaM tatvaravirvilInaH  /  azuklapakSasthitireSa nUnamasadgrahaH
ko'pi kuhUvilAsaH  // 5 //  bhAvArtha : jisase vivekarUpI candramA ke darzana
nahIM hue, hRdaya meM gAr3ha aMdhakAra chAyA huA hai, jisake mastika meM
tattvajJAnarUpI sUrya asta ho gayA hai, vahA~ kRSNapakSa kI sthiti vAlI
asadgraharUpI kisI (alaukika ) amAvasyA kA hI vilAsa hai  // 5 //
kutarkadAtreNa lunAti tattvavallIM rasAt siJcati doSavRkSam  /  kSipatyadhaH
svAduphalaM samAkhyamasadgrahacchannamatirmanuSyaH  // 6 //  bhAvArtha :
asadgraha se jisakI buddhi AcchAdita ho gaI hai, aisA manuSya kutarkarUpI
haMsiye se tattvarUpI bela ko kATa adhikAra caudahavAM 161

Page #162 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
It nourishes the tree of vices with its juice, and throws down sweet and
delicious fruits called equality. ||6|| In a mind filled with the poison of non-
acceptance, the juice of good conduct can never enter. How can the seed of pure
knowledge sprout in such a hardened mind? What is the fault of the teachings of
the principles? ||7|| The vows are worn out, the austerities are performed, and
the purity of the body is achieved with effort. But the fruits are not obtained
by the non-acceptors; indeed, their stubbornness is the fault. ||8|| The plate
is one's own intellect, and it is filled with an extraordinary amount of sweets
from the giver, the good teacher. But a wicked non-acceptor grabs it by the
throat and does not allow it to be enjoyed. ||9|| 162 Adhyatma Sara

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 detA hai, doSarUpI vRkSa ko rasa se sIMcatA hai, aura samatva nAma ke mIThe
svAdiSTa phaloM ko nIce pheMka detA hai  // 6 //  asadgrahagrAvamaye hi citte na
kvApi sadbhAvarasapravezaH  /  ihAMkurazcittavizuddhabodhaH siddhAntavAcAM bata
ko'parAdhaH  // 7 //  bhAvArtha : kadAgraharUpI pASANamaya citta meM kabhI
sadbhAvarUpI rasa kA praveza nahIM ho pAtA  /  aise kaThora citta para
manovizuddhiyukta bodharUpI aMkura kadApi paidA nahIM hotA, isameM siddhAnta-
vANI kA kyA doSa hai?  // 7 //  vratAni cIrNAni tapo'pi taptaM, kRtA prayatnena
ca piNDazuddhi  /  abhUtphalaM yattu na nihavAnAmasadgrahasyaiva hi so'parAdhaH
// 8 //  bhAvArtha : vratoM kA pAlana kiyA, tapazcaryA bhI kI, prayatnapUrvaka
piNDavizuddhi (AhArazuddhi) bhI rakhI, kintu nihnavoM ko unakA phala nahIM milA;
vAstava meM isameM unake haThAgraha kA hI aparAdha hai !  // 8 //  sthAlaM
svabuddhiH sugurozca dAturUpasthitA kAcana modakAlI  /  asadgRhaH ko'pi gale
gRhItA, tathApi bhoktuMna dadAti duSTaH  // 9 //  bhAvArtha : apanI buddhirUpI
thAlI hai, aura usameM sugururUpI dAtA se koI apUrva modakarAzi bhI prApta huI
hai, tathApi koI duSTa kadAgraha isa prakAra galA pakar3a letA hai ki unheM
khone nahIM detA  // 9 //  162 adhyAtmasAra

Page #163 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Verse 10:**  The one who is not receptive to the meaning given by the Guru as
a blessing, what is the fault of the Guru?  Just as a camel, who eats thorns,
will not eat grapes even when they are placed before him, so too, the fault lies
not with the Guru.  **Verse 11:**  Those who, due to their lack of receptivity,
associate with the common people, do not have any affection for the wise. Just
as crows, who are nourished by eating excrement, will not be interested in
eating sweet food, no matter how much they are forced.  **Verse 12:**  The
person who, due to his lack of receptivity, does not apply his intellect to the
right (scriptural) reasoning, but instead forces reasoning into his own
preconceived notions, is like someone who places a pot to collect water from a
mirage. He becomes the object of ridicule for everyone.  **Chapter Fourteen**
**Page 163**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 guruprasAdIkriyamANamarthaM gRhNAti nAsadgrahavAMstataH kim ? drAkSA hi
sAkSAdupanIyamAnAH kramelakaH kaMTakabhuGna bhuMkte  // 10 //  bhAvArtha : guru
: guru ke dvArA prasAdarUpa meM diye hue artha ko durAgrahI manuSya grahaNa
nahIM karatA, isameM (guru kA ) kyA doSa? kA~Te cabA jAne vAle U~Ta ke sAmane
aMgUroM kA Dhera lAkara rakha diyA jAya, phira bhI vaha nahIM khAtA to isameM
doSa kisakA hai ?  // 10 //  asadgrahAtpAmarasaMgatiM ye kurvanti teSAM na
ratirbudheSu  /  viSTAsu puSTA kila vAyasA no miSTAnnaniSThAM prasabhaM bhavanti
//  11  //  bhAvArtha : jo kadAgraha ke kAraNa pAmara janoM kI saMgati karate
haiM, unakI paNDitajanoM ke prati prIti nahIM hotI  /  kyoMki viSTA khAkara
puSTa bane hue kaue kitanI hI jabardastI kI jAya, miSTAnna khAne meM ruci nahIM
rakhate  // 11 //  , niyojayatyeva matiM na yuktau yuktiM matau yaH prasabhaM
niyukte  /  asadgrahAdeva na kasya hAsyo'jale ghaTAropamamAdadhAnaH  //  12  //
bhAvArtha : jo puruSa kadAgraha ke kAraNa zuddha (zAstrIya) yukti meM apanI
buddhi nahIM jor3atA, apitu apanI buddhi meM (jo bAta pakar3I huI hai, usameM)
jabarana yukti ko le jAtA hai, vaha manuSya mRga marIcikA meM se jala bharane ke
lie ghar3A rakhatA huA kisake upahAsa kA nizAnA nahIM banatA? sabake majAka kA
pAtra banatA hai  // 12 //  adhikAra caudahavAM 163

Page #164 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Verse 13:**  *Asadgraha* (non-acceptance of truth) is not destroyed in one who
has it, nor is the knowledge given to him considered fruitful. The royal fortune
of the wise does not bestow itself upon one who is stained with the blemish of
*vaikalya* (mental disturbance).  **Verse 14:**  Just as water kept in an
earthen pot, due to its inherent weakness, destroys both itself and the pot
immediately, similarly, giving knowledge to one whose mind is afflicted with
*asadgraha* (non-acceptance of truth) leads to the destruction of both the
knowledge and the person holding the *asadgraha*.  **Verse 15:**  The foolish
person who gives good advice to one whose mind is afflicted with *asadgraha*
(non-acceptance of truth) is like someone who applies musk to a dog's body,
thinking they are doing a great favor.  **Verse 16:**  One who gives the
profound meaning of the scriptures to someone who is tainted by *asadgraha*
(non-acceptance of truth), obtained with great effort, is like someone who sows
seeds in barren land, knowing that their efforts will be in vain.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 asadgraho yasya gato na nAzaM, na dIyamAnaM zrutamasya zasyam  /  na nAma
vaikalyakalaMkitasya praur3hA pradAtuM ghaTate nRpazrIH  // 13 //  bhAvArtha :
jisa prakAra aMgoM ke vikalatArUpI doSa se dUSita (apAhija), athavA mana kI
vyAkulatA se dUSita vyakti ko praur3ha rAjalakSmI nahIM dI (sauMpI) jAtI; usI
prakAra jisakA kadAgraha naSTa nahIM huA hai, use bhI zAstrajJAna denA ucita
nahIM hai  // 13 //  Ame ghaTe vAri yathA dhRtaM saddhinAzayet svaM ca ghaTaM ca
sadyaH  /  asadgrahagrastamatestathaiva zrutAtpradattAdubhayorvinAzaH  // 14 //
I bhAvArtha : kacce ghar3e meM pAnI rakhate hI jaise apanA (pAnI kA) aura ghar3e
kA tatkAla nAza ho jAtA hai  /  vaise hI jisakI buddhi kadAgraha se grasta ho,
use zAstrajJAna dene se zAstra aura kadAgrahI donoM kA vinAza ho jAtA hai  // 14
//  asadgrahagrastamateH pradatte hitopadezaM khalu yo vimUDhaH  /  zunIzarIre
sa mahopakArI kastUrikAlepanamAdadhAti  //  15  //  bhAvArtha : jisakI buddhi
durAgraha se pIr3ita hai, use jo bholA banakara hitopadeza de detA hai,
samajhanA cAhie vaha mUr3hapuruSa mahAn upakArI banakara kuttI ke zarIra para
mAno kastUrI kA lepa karatA hai  // 15 //  kaSTena labdhaM vizadAgamArthaM
dadAti yo'sadgrahadUSitAya  /  sa khidyate yatnazatopanItaM bIjaM
vapannUSarabhUmideze  //  16  //  164 adhyAtmasAra

Page #165 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Meaning:** The seeker who gives the meaning of the pure (clear or detailed)
Agamas, obtained with great difficulty, to a person contaminated by prejudice,
later feels regret in the same way as one who sows seeds obtained after hundreds
of efforts in a barren field. ||16||  **Meaning:** A person with prejudice never
listens to the scriptures from the Guru, nor does he ever follow their commands.
He, like a sieve, only accepts the worthless (useless chaff to be thrown away)
and considers himself a scholar (interpreter) on this earth. ||17||
**Meaning:** It is amazing how the qualities of a person with prejudice are
created in reverse! His cleverness is for arrogance, his study of scriptures is
for sin, his brilliance is for deceiving others, and his patience is for pride.
||18||  **Meaning:** A person with prejudice, surrounded by those who are
friendly and compassionate, suffers the same way as a banana tree, which is full
of thorns and sharp prickles. ||19||  **Chapter Fourteen** **165**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 bhAvArtha : jo sAdhaka bar3I muzkila se prApta nirmala (spaSTa yA vistRta)
Agama ke artha ko kisI durAgraha se dUSita vyakti ko de detA hai, vaha bAda meM
usI taraha kheda pAtA hai, jaise saiMkar3oM prayatnoM se prApta bIja ko Usara
bhUmi vAle kheta meM bone vAlA pAtA hai  // 16 //  zRNoti zAstrANi gurostadAjJAM
karoti nAsadgrahavAn kadAcit  /  vivecakatvaM manute tvasAragrAhI bhuvi svasya
ca cAlanIvat  // 17 //  bhAvArtha : kadAgrahI puruSa kabhI guru se zAstra -
zravaNa nahIM karatA, na kabhI unakI AjJA kA pAlana karatA hai  /  vaha to
cAlanI kI taraha asAra ( pheMkane lAyaka tuccha bhUse) ko hI grahaNa karatA huA
isa bhUmaNDala para apane ko vivecaka ( vyAkhyAtA) mAnatA hai ||17|| dambhAya
cAturyamaghAya zAstraM pratAraNAya pratibhApaTutvam garvAya dhIratvamaho
guNAnAmasadgrahasthe viparItasRSTiH  // 18 //  bhAvArtha : Azcarya hai,
kadAgrahI puruSa ke guNoM kI kaisI viparIta sRSTi hotI hai ! usakI caturAI
dambha ke lie hotI hai, usakA zAstrAdhyayana bhI pApa ke lie, usakI
pratibhApaTutA dUsaroM ko Thagane ke lie aura usakI dhIratA garva karane ke lie
hotI hai  // 18 //  asadgrahasthena samaM samantAt sauhArdabhRd duHkhamavaiti
tAdRk  /  upaiti yAdRk kadalI kuvRkSa - sphuTatnuTatkaNTakakoTikIrNA  // 19 //
adhikAra caudahavAM 165

Page #166 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Verse 19:**  **Meaning:** One who befriends a man in the state of *kadagrah*
(attachment) suffers all around, just as a banana tree (kadali-vriksha) suffers
from millions of thorns when bad trees grow and break near it.  **Verse 20:**
**Meaning:** Due to *asadgraha* (attachment), qualities like knowledge (vidya),
discernment (viveka), purity (vishuddhi), love for principles (siddhant-
vallabhya), and generosity (udaratā) are destroyed just as grass is destroyed by
a spark from a fire. Just as a pile of grass is completely burnt by a single
spark from a fire, similarly, *kadagrah* destroys all the beneficial qualities
like the study of scriptures (vidya), reflection on right and wrong actions
(viveka), humility (vinaya), purity of food and other things (vishuddhi), love
for scriptures and principles, and generosity. Therefore, one should stay away
from *kadagrah* or those who are attached.  **Verse 21:**  **Meaning:** A person
in *kadagrah* finds his own self-interest (swartha) dear, not virtuous
qualities. His friendship is with fools, not with wise men. This is the state of
those who are exhausted by the suffering caused by *asadgraha*, who are careless
and of the lowest kind.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 bhAvArtha : kadAgraha meM sthita puruSa ke sAtha maitrI karane vAlA cAroM ora
se usI taraha duHkha pAtA hai, jisa taraha pAsa meM kuvRkSoM ke phUTane aura
TUTane se karor3oM kAMToM se vyApta kadalIvRkSa (kele kA per3a) kaSTa uThAtA hai
// 19 //  vidyA viveko vinayo vizuddhiH siddhAntavAllabhyamudAratA ca  /
asadgrahAdyAnti vinAzamete, guNAstRNAnIva kaNAddavAgneH  // 20 //  bhAvArtha :
asadgraha se vidyA, viveka, vizuddhi, siddhAnta ke prati prIti aura udAratA Adi
ye guNa usI taraha naSTa ho jAte haiM, jisa taraha davAgni ke kaNa se tRNa
jalakara naSTa ho jAte haiN| jaise davAgni kI eka cinagArI se ghAsa kA Dhera
jalakara sApha ho jAtA hai, vaise hI kadAgraha se AgamAdi kA adhyayana (vidyA),
kRtyAkRtyavicAra (viveka), namratA (vinaya), AhArAdi kI zuddhi (vizuddhi),
AgamAdi siddhAnta ke prati prIti, udAratA, ye saba AtmahitakArI guNa samUla
naSTa ho jAte haiM  /  ataH kadAgraha yA kadAgrahI ke samparka se dUra hI rahanA
cAhie  // 20 //  svArthaH priyo no guNavAMstu kazcinmUDheSu maitrI na tu
tatvavitsu  /  asadgrahApAditavizramANAM sthitiH kilAsAvadhamAdhamAnAm  // 21 //
bhAvArtha : kadAgrahI ko apanA svArtha (khudagarjI) priya lagatA hai, guNavAn
priya nahIM lagatA  /  usakI dostI mUl ke 166 adhyAtmasAra

Page #167 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Moreover, it is not the same with those who know the truth. Those who have given
rest to their minds in attachment, or attachment has taken rest in them, or who
have become exhausted or disturbed due to attachment, the state of such low-
minded men is like this. ||21||  Knowing this truth, the noble-minded man who
abandons false attachment like a straw, he is not abandoned by fame and fortune,
who are attached to his qualities, just as a virtuous woman, attached to her
husband's qualities, does not abandon him. The word 'Yasha' in the verse
indicates the author's name 'Yashavijaya'. ||22||  || Thus ends the chapter on
the abandonment of false attachment. ||  Chapter Fourteen 167

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 sAtha hI hotI hai, tattvavettAoM ke sAtha nahIM  /  jinhoMne apane citta meM
kadAgraha ko vizrAma de rakhA hai, athavA kadAgraha ne jinake yahA~ vizrAma le
rakhA hai athavA kadAgraha ke kAraNa jo vizrAnta ho (thaka) gaye haiM yA vyAkula
ho rahe haiM, una adhamAdhama puruSoM kI sthiti aisI hI hotI hai  // 21 //  idaM
vidaMstatvamudArabuddhirasadgrahaM yastRNavajjahAti  /  jahAti nainaM kulajeva
yoSid guNAnuraktA dayitaM yazaH zrIH  // 22 //  bhAvArtha : isa prakAra jo
udArabuddhi kadAgraha ke tattva ko jAnakara isa mithyAgraha ko tinake kI taraha
chor3a detA hai, usa lokavallabha puruSa ko usake guNoM meM anurakta yazolakSmI
usI prakAra nahIM chor3atI, jaise kulavatI guNAnurakta strI apane pati ko nahIM
chor3atI  /  zlokagata 'yazaH' zabda granthakAra ke 'yazovijaya' nAma ko sUcita
karatA hai ||22||  //  iti asadgrahatyAgAdhikAraH  //  adhikAra caudahavAM 167

Page #168 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter Fifteen [Nature of Yoga]  **1.** The yoga of the **Samyaktvashali**,
the purifier of the **adhyatma**, becomes manifest when the **asadgraha** is
eradicated, and he has vomited out the **mithyatva-visha-bindu**.  **Meaning:**
When the **duraggraha** is destroyed, and the **mithyatva-visha-bindu**
(poisonous drops of false belief) are vomited out, the yoga of the
**Samyaktvashali**, the purifier of the **adhyatma**, becomes established.
**2.** This yoga is of two kinds, based on the difference between **karma** and
**jnana**. The first, **karma-yoga**, is described as the form of action
prescribed by the **avashyaka** and other **vidhi-vidhana**.  **Meaning:** This
yoga is of two types, based on the difference between **karma** and **jnana**.
The first, **karma-yoga**, is described as the form of action prescribed by the
**avashyaka** and other **vidhi-vidhana**.  **3.** This **karma-yoga**, which is
the very essence of the body's movements, performs actions that are auspicious
in nature, with love and affection born from **sadraga**. Therefore, it is
called **karma-yoga**.  **Meaning:** Since this **karma-yoga**, which is the
very essence of the body's movements, performs actions that are auspicious in
nature, with love and affection born from **sadraga**, therefore, it is called
**karma-yoga**.  **168** **Adhyatma-Sara**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 adhikAra pandrahavA~ [ yoga-svarUpa ] asadgrahavyayAd
vAntamithyAtvaviSavipruSaH  /  samyaktvazAlino'dhyAtmazuddheryogaH prasiddhyati
//  1  //  bhAvArtha : durAgraha ke miTa jAne para jisane mithyAtvaviSa-binduoM
kA vamana kara diyA hai, usa adhyAtma ke zuddhikarttA, samyaktvazAlI kA yoga
siddha hotA hai  //  1  //  karmajJAnavibhedena sa dvighA tatra cA''dimaH  /
AvazyakAdivihitakriyArUpaH prakIrtitaH  // 2 //  bhAvArtha : vaha yoga karma
aura jJAna ke bheda se do prakAra kA hai  /  usameM se prathama karmayoga ko
AvazyakAdi vidhividhAnarUpa kriyArUpa batAyA hai  // 2 //  zArIraspandakarmAtmA,
yadayaM puNyalakSaNam  /  karmo'tanoti sadrAgAt karmayogastataH smRtaH  // 3 //
bhAvArtha : cUMki zarIra ke spandana ( halacala ) rUpI karmasvarUpa yaha
karmayoga zubha ruci aura sadbhAva se premapUrvaka puNyalakSaNa vAlI kriyA
karatA hai, isalie ise karmayoga kahA gayA hai ||3|| 168 adhyAtmasAra

Page #169 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Due to attachment to necessities and affection for the Bhagavat's words (through
Karmayoga), the seeker attains the pleasures of heaven, but does not reach the
ultimate state (Moksha). ||4||  **Meaning:**  A seeker who is attached to
necessities and has affection for the Bhagavat's words (through Karmayoga)
attains the pleasures of heaven, but does not reach the ultimate state (Moksha).
||4||  Knowledge Yoga is characterized by pure austerity and single-minded
devotion to the Self. It is the means to attain the bliss of liberation, arising
from the detachment from the objects of the senses. ||5||  **Meaning:** When
there is only love (interest or faith) in the Self, and detachment from the
objects of the senses arises, then there is pure austerity, and that is
Knowledge Yoga, which is the means to attain the bliss of liberation. ||5||  In
this Knowledge Yoga, there is only knowledge (awareness) of the Self, therefore
there is no restriction from others (par), because even good karma (action) does
not cause distraction (disturbance of self-meditation) in Knowledge Yoga. ||6||
**Meaning:** In this Knowledge Yoga, there is only knowledge (awareness) of the
Self, therefore there is no restriction from others (par), because even good
karma (action) does not cause distraction (disturbance of self-meditation) in
Knowledge Yoga. ||6||  For the unmindful, even actions related to necessities
are not considered as distractions, because their mind is always focused on the
Self, as stated by others. ||7||  **Meaning:** For the unmindful, even actions
related to necessities are not considered as distractions, because their mind is
always focused on the Self, as stated by others. ||7||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 AvazyakAdirAgeNa vAtsalyAd bhagavagirAm  /  prApnoti svargasaukhyAni na yAti
paramaM padam  // 4 //  bhAvArtha : AvazyakAdi kriyA ke prati (zubha) rAga evaM
bhagavadvANI ke prati vAtsalya hone se (karmayoga se) sAdhaka devaloka ke sukha
pAtA hai, lekina aisA sAdhaka mokSapada nahIM prApta karatA  // 4 //
jJAnayogastapaHzuddhamAtmaratyekalakSaNam  /  indriyArthonmanIbhAvAt sa
mokSasukhasAdhakaH  // 5 //  bhAvArtha : jaba ekamAtra AtmA meM hI prIti (ruci
yA zraddhA) ho, tathA indriyoM ke viSayoM se unmanIbhAva utpanna hotA hai, taba
zuddhatapa hotA hai, aura vahI jJAnayoga hai, jo mokSasukha kA sAdhaka hai  // 5
//  na parapratibandho'sminnalpo'pyekAtmavedanAt  /  zubhaM karmA'pi naivA'tra
vyAkSepAyopajAyate  // 6 //  bhAvArtha : isa jJAnayoga meM sirpha AtmA kA hI
jJAna (vedana) hotA hai, isalie dUsare (para) kA pratibandha jarA bhI nahIM
hotA; kyoMki jJAnayoga meM zubhakarma (kriyA) bhI vyAkSepa (AtmadhyAnabhaMga) ke
lie nahIM hotA  // 6 //  na hyapramattasAdhUnAM kriyA'pyAzyakAdikA  /  niyatA
dhyAnazuddhatvAd yadanyairapyadaH smRtam  // 7 //  adhikAra pandrahavA~ 169

Page #170 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Meaning:** For the vigilant Sadhus, even the essential actions are not to be
performed regularly (they are not bound by them); because they are pure by
virtue of their mindfulness. This has also been said by others in the following
way: ||7||  **Meaning:** The person who finds joy in the Self, who is satisfied
in the Self, and who is content in the Self, has no duty to perform. ||8||
**Meaning:** Because in this world, there is no purpose in that man's doing or
not doing anything. He has no attachment to any self-interest towards all
beings. ||9||  **Meaning:** In this Jnana Yoga, even disinterest and joy are
forbidden. Because of the stability of the mind in meditation, how can there be
any choice (imagination) of actions? ||10||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 bhAvArtha : apramatta sAdhuoM ke lie Avazyaka Adi kriyAe~ bhI niyamitarUpa se
karanI nahIM hotI (unake lie pratibandha nahIM); kyoMki ve dhyAna se hI zuddha
hote haiM  /  yaha bAta anyadarzanI logoM ne bhI nimnokta prakAra se kahI hai
// 7 //  yastvAtmaratireva syAdAtmatRptazca mAnavaH  /  Atmanyeva ca
santuSTastasya kAryaM na vidyate  // 8 //  bhAvArtha : jisa vyakti kI AtmA meM
hI prIti hai, jo AtmA meM hI tRpta hai aura AtmA meM hI santuSTa hai, usake lie
kucha bhI karttavya nahIM hotA  // 8 //  naivaM tasya kRtenA'rtho nAkRteneha
kazcana  /  na cAsya sarvabhUteSu kazcidarthavyapAzrayaH  // 9 //  bhAvArtha :
kyoMki isa saMsAra meM usa puruSa ke karane se yA na karane se koI prayojana
nahIM hai  /  use sarvabhUtoM ke prati usake kucha bhI svArtha kA Alambana (
sambandha ) nahIM hai  //  9  //  avakAzo niSiddho'sminnaratyAnandayorapi  /
dhyAnAvaSTabhbhataH kvA'stu tatkriyANAM vikalpanam  // 10 //  bhAvArtha : isa
jJAnayoga meM arati aura Ananda avakAza bhI niSiddha hai  /  kyoMki dhyAna ke
Azraya (sthiratA) ke kAraNa use kriyA karane kA vikalpa (kalpanA) hI kahA~ se ho
sakatA hai ? ||10|| 170 adhyAtmasAra

Page #171 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Dehanirvahamaatraartha yaapi bhikṣāṭanādhika | Kriyā sā jñānino'sangaannaiva
dhyānavighatini || 11 || **Meaning:** Even though a Jñani engages in activities
like begging for sustenance, these actions do not disrupt his meditation due to
his non-attachment (asanga). || 11 ||  Ratnaśikṣā haganyā hi tanniyojanadṛgyathā
| Phalabhedātta thācāriyakriyā'pyasya vibhiddyate || 12 || **Meaning:** Just as
the vision of a person learning to examine gems is different from the vision of
a person examining gems, the actions of a Jñani are also different due to the
difference in their fruits. || 12 ||  Dhyānārthā hi kriyā seyaṁ pratyāhritya
nijam manaḥ | Prārabdhajanmasankalpādātmajñānāya kalpate || 13 || **Meaning:**
Therefore, this action, performed for the sake of meditation, is capable of
leading to self-knowledge when the mind is withdrawn from the karmic impulses of
the present life. || 13 ||  Sthīribhūtamapi svāntaṁ rajasā calatāṁ vrajet |
Pratyāhritya nigṛhyati jñānī yadi damuchyate || 14 || **Meaning:** Even though
the mind is settled, it can be agitated by the impurities (rajas). The Jñani
withdraws and controls it, as it is said. || 14 ||  **Adhikāra 15th** **171**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dehanirvAhamAtrArthA yA'pi bhikSATanAdikA  /  kriyA sA jJAnino'saMgAnnaiva
dhyAnavighAtinI  //  11  //  bhAvArtha : vaha kevala zarIranirvAha ke lie jo
bhikSAcarI Adi kriyAe~ karatA hai, ve bhI jJAnI kI asaMgatA (anAsakti) ke kAraNa
usake dhyAna kA vighAta (bhaMga) karane vAlI nahIM hotIM  // 11 //  ratnazikSA
haganyA hi tanniyojanadRgyathA  /  phalabhedAttathAcArakriyA'pyasya vibhidyate
// 12 //  bhAvArtha : jaise ratnaparIkSA kA prazikSaNa lete samaya kI dRSTi
alaga hotI hai aura ratnaparIkSA karate samaya kI dRSTi bhI phala ke antara ke
kAraNa alaga hotI hai, vaise hI jJAnI kI AcArakriyA meM bhI bheda hotA hai  //
12  //  dhyAnArthA hi kriyA seyaM pratyAhRtya nijaM manaH  /
prArabdhajanmasaMkalpAdAtmajJAnAya kalpate  // 13 //  bhAvArtha : ata:
dhyAnArtha kI huI yaha kriyA prArabdhajanma ke saMkalpa se apane mana ko vApasa
lauTAne para AtmajJAna ke lie samartha ho jAtI hai  //  13  //  sthirIbhUtamapi
svAntaM rajasA calatAM vrajet  /  pratyAhRtya nigRhyati jJAnI yadidamucyate  //
14  //  adhikAra pandrahavA~ 171

Page #172 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Meaning:** Even if the mind is still, it becomes restless due to Rajoguna
(attachment). Therefore, the wise person pulls it back and controls it, which is
further explained in the following verse. ||14||  **Meaning:** Gradually attain
calmness (peace) with the help of a mind controlled by fortitude (steadiness or
contentment). Then, by placing the mind in the Self, there is no need to think
about anything else. ||15||  **Meaning:** Wherever the restless and unstable
mind wanders, restrain it from there and bring it under the control of the Self.
These two verses from the Gita explain the methods of concentrating the mind. In
this way, the yogi, while moving from one subject to another, gradually controls
the fickle mind (which has the nature of grasping other subjects) by restraining
it from the distractions (thoughts) that arise and by binding it with the rope
of knowledge.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 bhAvArtha : mana sthira ho gayA ho to bhI rajoguNa (rAga) se caMcala ho jAtA
hai  /  isalie jJAnI use punaH khIMcakara usakA nigraha kara letA hai, jisake
sambandha meM Age kahA gayA hai  // 14 //  zanaiH zanairUparamed buddhyA
dhRtigRhItayA  /  AtmasaMsthaM manaH kRtvA na kiJcidapi cintayet  // 15 //  _
bhAvArtha : dhRti (sthiratA yA saMtoSa) se gRhIta (vasIkRta) buddhi se dhIre-
dhIre upazama pAtA (zAnta hotA) jAya  /  phira mana ko AtmA meM sthita karake
anya kucha bhI cintana karane kI AvazyakatA nahIM hai  // 15 //  yato yato
niHsarati manazcaJcalamasthiram  /  tatastato niyamyaitadAtmanyeva vazaM nayet
// 16 //  bhAvArtha : caMcala aura asthira mana jisa-jisa saMkalpAdi se bAhara
nikalatA hai, vahA~ se rokakara use AtmA ke hI adhIna (vaza meM) kare  /  gItA
ke ina do zlokoM meM mana ko ekAgra karane ke upAya batAe gae haiM  /  isa
prakAra yogI eka viSaya se dUsare viSaya meM jAte hue capala (anyAnyaviSayoM ko
grahaNa karane ke svabhAva vAle) mana ko vaha jisa-jisa saMkalpa vyAkSepa se
bAhara nikalatA hai, usa samaya vyAkSepa se rokakara (jJAnarUpI DorI se
bA~dhakara) dhIre-dhIre dhIratAyukta buddhi se 172 adhyAtmasAra

Page #173 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
He makes it steady and makes it subject to the soul (immersed in it) ||16||
Therefore, the great-minded one should perform the actions prescribed by the
scriptures with a firm mind. For the complete withdrawal of the senses ||17||
Meaning: Therefore, the great-minded man whose mind is not firm, should perform
all the actions prescribed by the scriptures to withdraw the mind from the
objects ||17|| Having heard the story of the Pisacha (ghost) and the protection
of the family bride, the ascetic should always be immersed in the practices of
restraint ||18|| Meaning: Having heard the story of the Pisacha (ghost) and the
protection of the family bride, the ascetic should always be immersed in the
practices of restraint. The said two stories are as follows - ||18|| Or, the
actions of those who are only in determination are not very useful. Those same
actions are very beneficial for those who are in the state of practice ||19||
Meaning: The actions that are not very useful for the ascetics who are only
immersed in determination, are the very actions that are very beneficial for the
practitioners who are in the state of practice ||19|| Even for pure karma, due
to the practice of faith, meditation, etc. The imperishable nature of liberation
is due to the knowledge yoga, not exceeding it ||20|| Chapter Fifteen 173

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 sthira karatA hai, tathA use AtmA ke adhIna (usameM tallIna) kara detA hai
||16|| ataevAdRDhasvAntaH kuryAcchAstroditAM kriyAm  /  sakalAM
viSayapratyAharaNAya mahAmatiH  //  17 //  bhAvArtha : isalie jisakA mana dRr3ha
nahIM hai, usa mahAmati puruSa ko mana ko viSayoM se vApasa khIMcane ke liye
zAstrokta samasta kriyAe~ karanI cAhie ||17| zrutvA paizAcikIM vArtAM
kulavadhvAzca rakSaNam  /  nityaM saMyamayogeSu vyApRtAtmA bhavedyatiH  //  18
//  bhAvArtha : pizAca (bhUta) kI aura kulavadhU kI rakSA kI kathA sunakara muni
ko sadA cAritra ke AcaraNa meM otaprota ho jAnA cAhie  /  ukta donoM kathAe~
kramazaH isa prakAra haiM -  // 18 //  yA nizcayaikalInAnAM kriyA nAtiprayojanAH
/  vyavahAradazAsthAnAM tA evAtiguNAvahAH  //  19  //  bhAvArtha : jo kriyAe~
kevala nizcaya meM hI lIna hue muniyoM ke lie atiprayojana vAlI nahIM hai, ve hI
kriyAe~ vyavahAradazA meM rahe hue sAdhakoM ke lie atyanta guNakAraka haiM  //
19 //  karmaNo'pi hi zuddhasya zraddhAmedhAdiyogataH  /  akSataM muktihetutvaM
jJAnayogAnatikramAt  // 20 //  adhikAra pandrahavA~ 173

Page #174 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Meaning: For one who performs pure actions through the combination of faith,
clear intellect (nirmalbuddhi), etc., they become the cause of unblemished
liberation, as they do not transgress the path of knowledge. Actions performed
with complete knowledge and in accordance with the scriptures, combined with
intense faith in the words of the Jinas, a mind capable of grasping subtle
meanings, and the virtues of patience, concentration, and contemplation, etc.,
all contribute to the attainment of unblemished liberation. This is because
these actions, such as kayotsarga, do not violate the path of knowledge, but
rather become a part of it. They lead to the cessation of mental activity and
the destruction of karma. ||20||  Meaning: During the practice of yoga, yogis
require pure actions for purification of the mind. However, upon the maturity of
knowledge, only tranquility (sama) is required, as stated by other schools of
thought. ||21||  Meaning: For a muni who desires to ascend the path of yoga,
actions are considered the cause. However, once the muni has attained yoga,
tranquility becomes the cause. ||22||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 bhAvArtha : zraddhA, meghA (nirmalabuddhi) Adi ke yoga se zuddhakriyA karane
vAle ke lie ve bhI jJAnayoga ke atikramarUpa na hone se akSata mukti kI kAraNa
hotI haiM  /  sarvajJokta evaM vidhipUrvaka kI huI kriyA bhI jinavacana ke prati
utkaTa zraddhA, aura sUkSma arthagrahaNa-samartha granthajJAna vAlI buddhi, Adi
zabda se dhRti, dhAraNA, anuprekSA vagairaha ke yoga se arthAt kAyotsargAdi
kriyAoM meM upayoga se uparyukta jJAnayoga kA ullaMghana na hone se (arthAt isa
tarIke ke karmayoga bhI jJAnayogatva ko prApta hone se) akSata paripUrNa mokSa
kI kAraNabhUta bana jAtI haiM, kyoMki usase mana kA nirodha hotA hai, karma kI
nirjarA bhI hotI hai  // 20 //  abhyAse satkriyApekSA yoginAM cittazuddhaye  /
jJAnapAke zamasyaiva yatparairapyadaH smRtam  // 21 //  bhAvArtha :
yogAbhyAsakAla meM yogiyoM ko cittazuddhi ke lie satkriyA kI apekSA hotI hai
aura jJAna kI paripakvatA meM kevala zama kI hI apekSA hotI hai, jise
anyadarzaniyoM ne bhI batAyA hai  // 21 //  ArurukSormuneryogaM karma
kAraNamucyate  /  yogArUDhasya tasyaiva zamaH kAraNamucyate  // 22 //  bhAvArtha
: yogArohaNa karanA cAhane vAle muni ke yoga kA kAraNa karma kahalAtA hai, aura
yogArUr3ha hone ke bAda usI 174 adhyAtmasAra

Page #175 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
For a Muni, **Sham** (equality) is called the cause. Yogis have said that for a
Muni to be established in meditation and other yogas, and for the purification
of the mind, the cause in the form of **Satkriya-karma** is necessary. But when
the same seeker becomes established in yoga (attains meditation and other
yogas), then he only needs **Sham**. Because only in the state of **Sham** does
the state of being established in yoga remain stable. ||22||  When one is not
attached to the objects of the senses and actions, then he is called a
**Yogarudha** who has renounced all desires. ||23||  Knowledge without action is
not knowledge, and action without knowledge is not action. But there is a
difference in their state (condition) due to the predominance of one over the
other. ||24||  Therefore, for those who are knowledgeable, have pure minds
through **Karma Yoga**, and have impeccable conduct, **Jnana Yoga** is
appropriate. ||25||  Chapter Fifteen 175

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 muni ke lie zama (samatva ) kAraNa kahalAtA hai  /  dhyAnAdi yoga meM tathA
mana kI zuddhi meM ArUr3ha hone ke lie muni ko satkriyA-karmarUpI kAraNa jarUrI
hai, aisA yogIzvaroM ne kahA hai, parantu vahI sAdhaka jaba yogArUr3ha ho jAtA
hai (dhyAnAdiyoga ko prApta ho jAtA hai) taba use zama kI hI apekSA rahatI hai
/  kyoMki zamabhAva meM hI yogArUr3ha dazA sthira rahatI hai  // 22 //  yadA hi
nendriyArtheSu na karmasvanuSajyate  /  sarvasaMkalpasaMnyAsI
yogArUDhastadocyate  //  23  //  bhAvArtha : jaba sAdhaka indriyoM ke viSayoM
meM tathA karmoM meM Asakta nahIM hotA, taba vaha sarvasaMkalpatyAgI yogI
yogArUr3ha kahalAtA hai  // 23 //  jJAnaM kriyAdihInaM, na kriyA vA jJAnavarjitA
/  guNapradhAnabhAvena dazAbhedaH kilaitayoH  // 24 //  bhAvArtha : kriyA se
rahita jJAna jJAna nahIM hai, aura jJAna se varjita kriyA bhI kriyA nahIM hai  /
parantu ina donoM meM gauNatA aura mukhyatA ko lekara avasthA (dazA) kA bheda
hai ||24|| jJAninAM karmayogena cittazuddhimupeyuSAm  /  niravadyapravRttInAM
jJAnayogaucitI tataH  //  25  //  bhAvArtha : isalie niravadya pravRtti vAle
tathA karmayoga se citta kI zuddhi ko prApta karane vAle jJAniyoM ke lie
jJAnayoga kA aucitya hai  // 25 //  adhikAra pandrahavA~ 175

Page #176 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Therefore, after touching the feet of the Shravaka, the Jinas have ordained the
acceptance of the difficult Shramanachara for the sake of nurturing. ||26||
Meaning: For this reason, after touching the feet of the Shravaka, the Jinas
have ordained the acceptance of the difficult Shramanachara for the sake of
nurturing. ||26|| The karma that is performed with a single purpose, as a
previous foundation, is that which destroys faults and leads to the growth of
Jnana Yoga. ||27|| Meaning: The karma that is performed with a single purpose,
as a previous foundation, is that which destroys faults and leads to the growth
of Jnana Yoga. ||27|| The karma of the ignorant does not purify the mind,
because it does not produce the same kind of feeling as the karma performed by
the Mlechchhas, etc., like sacrifices, etc. ||28|| Meaning: The karma of the
ignorant does not purify the mind, because it does not produce the same kind of
feeling as the karma performed by the Mlechchhas, etc., like sacrifices, etc.
||28|| Nor is that karma, even in Yoga, free from the desire for fruit, or from
the renunciation of Brahman knowledge, because it is inherently flawed. ||29||
Meaning: Nor is that karma, even in Yoga, free from the desire for fruit, or
from the renunciation of Brahman knowledge, because it is inherently flawed.
||29||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 ataeva hi suzrAddhacaraNasparzanottaram  /  duSpAlazramaNAcAragrahaNa vihita
taM jinaiH  // 26 //  bhAvArtha : isI kAraNa pahale suzrAvaka ke cAritra
(AcaraNa) kA sparza karane ke bAda pAlane meM duSkara zramaNAcAra grahaNa karane
kA vidhAna jinezvaroM ne kiyA hai  // 26 //  ekoddezena saMvRttaM karma yat
paurvabhUmikam  /  doSocchedakaraM tatsyAjjJAnayogapravRddhaye  // 27 //
bhAvArtha : pUrvabhUmikA ke rUpa meM jo karma eka ke uddeza se kiyA ho, vaha
karma doSoM ko naSTa karake jJAnayoga kI vRddhi ke lie hotA hai  // 27 //
ajJAninAM tu yatkarma na tatazcittazodhanam  /
yAgAderatathAbhAvAnmlecchAdikRtakarmavat  // 28 //  bhAvArtha : ajJAnIjanoM kA
jo karma (kriyA) hai, usase cittazuddhi nahIM hotI, kyoMki mleccha vagairaha
tamoguNI logoM dvArA kie hue karma kI taraha yajJAdi (sthUla) kriyAe~ karane se
unameM tathA prakAra kA bhAva paidA nahIM hotA  // 28 //  na ca tatkarmayoge'pi
phalasaMkalpavarjanAt  /  saMnyAso brahmabodhAdvA sAvadyatvAt svarUpataH  // 29
//  bhAvArtha : ve yajJayAgAdi karmayoga hote hue bhI unameM phala ke saMkalpa
ke tyAga se athavA brahma ke bodha se sanyAsa 176 adhyAtmasAra

Page #177 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
It cannot be, because (both Yaga or Brahmabodha) are inherently *savady* -
sinful. ||29|| Nor would there be clear purification from *gohinsa* etc. if this
were so. Or from the *syenayaga* prescribed by the Vedas, because there is no
difference between them. ||30|| Meaning: If this were not the case, then there
would be clear purification of the mind from *gohinsa* etc., or from the
*syenayaga* prescribed by the Vedas; because there is no difference
(distinction) between them. ||30|| Therefore, *savadyakarma* should not be
accepted, because it leads to a distortion of the intellect. If, by chance, such
*savadyakarma* is obtained due to the rise of karma, then it does not bind to
sinful karma because there is no intention involved. ||31|| Meaning: This leads
to a distortion of the intellect, therefore *savadyakarma* is not worthy of
acceptance. If, by chance, such *savadyakarma* is obtained due to the rise of
karma, then it does not bind to sinful karma because there is no intention
involved. ||31|| Even if a knower performs karma, his liberation does not
diminish; because bondage arises only from intention, as other philosophers have
also said. ||32|| Meaning: Even if a knower performs karma, his liberation does
not diminish; because bondage arises only from intention, as other philosophers
have also said. ||32|| Chapter Fifteen 177

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 ho nahIM sakatA, kyoMki ( yAga yA brahmabodha donoM) svarUpa se hI sAvadya -
pApayukta haiM  // 29 //  no ceditthaM bhavecchuddhirgorhisAderapi sphuTA  /
zyenAdvA vedavihitAd vizeSAnupalakSaNAt  // 30 //  bhAvArtha : agara aisA na ho
to phira gohiMsA Adi se spaSTarUpa se manaH zuddhi hone lagegI, athavA
vedavihita zyenayAga se manaH zuddhi ho jAyegI; kyoMki una donoM meM koI
vizeSatA (antara) nahIM dikhatI  // 30 //  sAvadyaM karma no tasmAdAdeyaM
buddhiviplavAt  /  karmodayAgate tvasminna saMkalpAdabandhanam  // 31 //
bhAvArtha : isase buddhi kA viparyAsa hotA hai, isIlie sAvadyakarma grahaNa
karane yogya nahIM hai  /  kadAcit karma ke udaya se aisA sAvadyakarma prApta ho
gayA ho to usameM saMkalpa na hone ke kAraNa vaha pApakarmabandhaka nahIM hotA
// 31 //  karmA'pyAcarato jJAturmuktibhAvo na hIyate  /  tatra saMkalpajo bandho
gIyate yatparairapi  // 32 //  bhAvArtha : jJAnI puruSa ke dvArA karma kA
AcaraNa hone para bhI usake muktibhAva kA hrAsa nahIM hotA; kyoMki usameM
saMkalpa se hI bandha utpanna hotA hai, isa viSaya meM anya darzanakAroM ne bhI
kahA hai ||32|| adhikAra pandrahavA~ 177

Page #178 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
He who sees inaction in action and action in inaction, he is wise among men, he
is the doer of all actions, and he is united (a Karma Yogi). ||33||
**Meaning:** The person who sees inaction in action and action in inaction, he
is the wise one among humans, he is the doer of all actions, and he is united (a
Karma Yogi). ||33||  Whether action is considered inaction, or inaction is
considered action, and both are considered in this Karma Yoga, or both are not
considered in this Karma Yoga, because there is a variety of interpretations
(alternatives)! Therefore, even in inaction, they are not considered. ||34||
**Meaning:** Whether action is considered inaction, or inaction is considered
action, and both are considered in this Karma Yoga, or both are not considered
in this Karma Yoga, because there is a variety of interpretations
(alternatives)! Therefore, even in inaction, they are not considered. ||34||
The wise one, remaining indifferent, contemplates the disparity (dissimilarity)
between Karma Yoga and Nishkarma (knowledge) Yoga, and does not get attached to
enjoyments, like a lotus leaf to water. ||35||  **Meaning:** The wise one,
remaining indifferent, contemplates the disparity (dissimilarity) between Karma
Yoga and Nishkarma (knowledge) Yoga, and does not get attached to enjoyments,
like a lotus leaf to water. ||35||  Munihood is not attained merely by
abstaining from sinful actions, due to doubt, but by the knowledge yogi, through
perfect equality, with no other aim than the Supreme. ||36||  **Meaning:**
Munihood is not attained merely by abstaining from sinful actions, due to doubt,
but by the knowledge yogi, through perfect equality, with no other aim than the
Supreme. ||36||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmaNyakarma yaH pazyedakarmaNi ca karma yaH  /  sa buddhimAn manuSyeSu sa
yuktaH kRtsnakarmakRt  // 33 //  bhAvArtha : jo manuSya karma meM akarma dekhatA
hai aura akarma meM karma dekhatA hai, vahI manuSyoM meM buddhimAna hai aura
vahI samasta karma karane vAlA, evaM yukta (karmayogI) hai  // 33 //
karmaNyakarma vAkarma karmaNyasminnubhe api  /  nobhe vA
bhaMgavaicitryAdakarmaNyapi no mate  // 34 //  bhAvArtha : karma meM akarma mAnA
hai, athavA akarma meM karma mAnA hai aura ye donoM isa karmayoga meM mAne haiM,
athavA ye donoM isa karmayoga meM nahIM mAne haiM, kyoMki bhaMgoM (vikalpoM) kI
vicitratA hai ! isa kAraNa akarma meM bhI ye nahIM mAne gaye haiM  // 34 //
karmanaiSkarmyavaiSamyamudAsIno vibhAvayan  /  jJAnI na lipyate bhogaiH
padmapatramivAmbhasA  // 35 //  bhAvArtha : udAsIna jJAnI karmayoga aura
niSkarma (jJAna) yoga kI viSamatA (asadRzatA) para vicAra karate hue jala se
kamala ke patte kI taraha bhogoM meM lipta nahIM hotA  // 35 //
pApAkaraNamAtrAddhi, na maunaM vicikitsayA  /  ananyaparamAt sAmyAjjJAnayogI
bhavenmuniH  // 36 //  bhAvArtha : kevala pApakarma na karane se hI vicikitsA ke
kAraNa munitva nahIM kahalAtA, apitu parama utkRSTa samatA se jJAnayogI muni
kahalAtA hai  // 36 //  178 adhyAtmasAra

Page #179 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
In matters, neither attached nor averse, he attains silence. Knowing them as
equal, the Jnana Yogi does not get attached. ||37||  Meaning: The Jnana Yogi is
neither attached nor averse to objects, hence he attains the state of a Muni.
Knowing the objects as equal, the Jnana Yogi does not get attached to them.
||37||  These objects, like words, etc., are fully absorbed in the contemplation
of their true nature in the seeker. He is the Atman, the Knower, the Veda-maya,
the Dharma-maya, and the Brahma-maya. ||38||  Meaning: The seeker in whom these
objects, like words, etc., are fully absorbed in the contemplation of their true
nature, is the Atman, the Knower, the Veda-maya, the Dharma-maya, and the
Brahma-maya. ||38||  The Jnana Yogis destroy ignorance, the seed of inequality.
Knowing the objects completely, they know the world truly. ||39||  Meaning: The
Jnana Yogis destroy ignorance, the seed of inequality. Knowing the objects
completely, they know the world truly. ||39||  From this and from the previous
knowledge, they become the enjoyers of Chit-Ananda, luminous, their sins
destroyed by knowledge. ||40||  Meaning: From this and from the previous
knowledge, they become the enjoyers of Chit-Ananda, luminous, their sins
destroyed by knowledge. ||40||  Chapter Fifteen 179

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 viSayeSu na rAgI vA, dveSI vA maunamaznute  /  samaM rUpaM vidaMsteSu na
jJAnayogI na lipyate  //  37 //  bhAvArtha : jJAnayogI viSayoM meM rAgI yA dveSI
nahIM hotA, isI kAraNa vaha munitva arjita kara letA hai  /  viSayoM meM
samAnarUpa jAnakara jJAnayogI unameM lipta (Asakta) nahIM hotA ||37||
sattatvacintayA yasyAbhisamanvAgatA ime  /  AtmavAn jJAnavAn
vedadharmabrahmamayo hi saH  // 38 //  bhAvArtha : ye zabdAdi viSaya
yathArthasvarUpa ke cintanarUpa meM jisa sAdhaka ke apane upabhoga meM
bhalIbhAMti A gae haiM, vahI AtmavAn hai, jJAnavAn hai, vedamaya hai, dharmamaya
hai aura brahmamaya hai ||38||  // 38 //  vaiSamyabIjamajJAnaM nighnanti
jJAnayoginaH  /  viSayAMste parijJAya lokaM jAnanti tatvataH  // 39 //
bhAvArtha : jJAnayogI viSamatA ke bIjarUpa ajJAna ko hI khatma kara dete haiM  /
ve viSayoM ko samagrarUpa se jAnakara loka ko tattvataH jAnate haiM  // 39 //
itazcApUrvavijJAnAccidAnandavinodinaH  /  jyotiSmanto bhavantyete
jJAnanirdhUtakalmaSAH  // 40 //  bhAvArtha : isake bAda ve jJAnayogI
apUrvavijJAna se cidAnanda ke vinodI banakara jJAna se pApoM kA nAza karake
jJAna - jyotirmaya bana jAtA hai  // 40 //  adhikAra pandrahavA~ 179

Page #180 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The increase in Tejo-leshya, as mentioned in the scriptures like Bhagavati, due
to the increase in the stages of Diksha-paryaya, is appropriate for such a yogi.
||41||  **Meaning:** The increase in Tejo-leshya, as mentioned in the scriptures
like Bhagavati, due to the increase in the stages of Diksha-paryaya, is
appropriate for such a yogi. ||41||  One who sees equality even in the unequal,
is the knower, the wise, the liberated while living, the stable, and the
Brahman. This has also been said by others. ||42||  **Meaning:** One who sees
equality even in the unequal, is the knower, the wise, the liberated while
living, the stable, and the Brahman. This has also been said by others. ||42||
Those who are endowed with knowledge and humility, whether they are Brahmanas,
cows, elephants, dogs, or scavengers, are wise and see equality. ||43||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 tejolezyAvivRddhiryA paryAyakramavRddhitaH  /  bhASitA bhagavatyAdau
setthaMbhUtasya yujyate  // 41 //  bhAvArtha : dIkSAparyAya ke krama kI vRddhi
ke sAtha jo tejolezyA kI vRddhi bhagavatI Adi sUtroM meM kahI gaI hai, vaha isa
prakAra ke yogI ke lie ucita hai, yogya hai  // 41 //  viSame'pi samekSI yaH sa
jJAnI sa ca paNDitaH  /  jIvanmuktaH sthiraM brahma tathA coktaM parairapi  //
42 //  bhAvArtha : jo viSa meM bhI samadRSTi rakhatA hai, vahI jJAnI hai,
paNDita hai, jIvanmukta hai aura sthira tathA brahma bhI vahI hai| anya
darzanakAroM ne bhI yahI kahA hai| jAti, kula, rUpa, vinaya, vidyA, aizvarya,
buddhi Adi se hIna yA adhika (viSama) jIvoM ko dekhakara jisa AtmA meM samadRSTi
hai, arthAt jo samabhAva se dekhatA hai, vahI puruSa sarva jJeyavastu kA jJAtA
hai, vahI paNDita (vidvatA ke phalasvarUpa kriyA meM dakSa) hai, vaha saMsAra
meM rahate hue bhI jIvanmukta isa janma meM karmabandharahita hai  /  aura vahI
sthira (nizcala) paramAtmasvarUpa brahma ko prApta karatA hai  /  yahI bAta
bhagavadgItA a.5 zloka 18 meM kahI gaI hai--  // 42 //  vidyA-vinayasampanne
brAhmaNe gavi hastini  /  zuni caiva zvapAke ca paNDitAH samadarzinaH  // 43 //
180 adhyAtmasAra

Page #181 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Meaning:** A learned person, endowed with knowledge and humility, sees
equality in all beings, be it a Brahmin, a cow, an elephant, a dog, or a
Chandala. ||43|| Those whose minds are established in equality have conquered
the world in this very life, because Brahman is faultless and equal. Therefore,
they are established in Brahman, one should understand. ||44|| The knower of
Brahman, established in Brahman, with a steady mind and free from delusion, does
not rejoice upon obtaining something pleasant, nor does he become distressed
upon obtaining something unpleasant. ||45|| In the earlier stages, seeing
equality (samyadarśana) in inequality is a fault, whereas for the detached
sages, the same samyadarśana is for the destruction of attachment and aversion.
||46|| Chapter Fifteen  181

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 bhAvArtha : vidyA aura vinaya se yukta brAhmaNa, gAya, hAthI, kuttA aura
cANDAla Adi para paNDita sarvatra samadarzI hote haiM  // 43 //  ihaiva
tairjitaH sargo yaSAM sAmye sthitaM manaH  /  nirdoSaM hi samaM brahma, tasmAd
brahmaNi te sthitAH  // 44 //  bhAvArtha : jinakA mana samatA meM sthita ho gayA
hai, unhoMne isI janma meM saMsAra ko jIta liyA hai, kyoMki brahma nirdoSa aura
samarUpa hai| isa kAraNa ve isa brahma meM hI sthita haiM, yaha samajhanA cAhie
// 44 //  na prahRSyet priyaM prApya, nodvijet prApya cApriyam  /
sthirabuddhirasammUDho, brahmavid brahmaNi sthitaH  // 45 //  bhAvArtha : brahma
meM sthita, sthitaprajJa (sthirabuddhi vAlA) evaM asammUr3ha (sammoharahita)
brahmavettA (brahmajJAnI) priya vastu ko pAkara harSita nahIM hotA tathA apriya
pAkara udvigna nahIM hotA  // 45 //  arvAgdazAyAM doSAya vaiSamye sAmyadarzanam
/  nirapekSamunInAM tu rAga-dveSakSayAya tat  // 46 //  bhAvArtha : arvAgdazA kI
viSamatA meM samadRSTi (sAmyadarzana) doSa ke lie hotI hai, jabaki nirapekSamuni
kI vahI samadRSTi rAgadveSa ke kSaya karane ke lie hotI hai  // 46 /  /
adhikAra pandrahavA~ 181

Page #182 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
From the destruction of attachment and aversion, the knower attains the
emptiness of objects. This one is never pierced, broken, or destroyed. ||47||
**Meaning:** The knower, by destroying attachment and aversion, attains the
emptiness of objects. He can never be pierced, broken, or destroyed by anyone.
||47||  He does not remember the past, nor does he desire the future. He is
equal in cold and heat, pleasure and pain, honor and dishonor. ||48||
**Meaning:** The wise man does not remember the past (things of the past), nor
does he desire the future, and he remains equal in all situations of cold and
heat, pleasure and pain, honor and dishonor. Now, the nature of the knower is
described in eight verses - ||48||  He who has conquered the senses, conquered
anger, is free from the disturbance of ego and illusion, is free from the touch
of greed, and is free from the pain caused by the desire for the Vedas. ||49||
**Meaning:** They (the knowers) are masters of their senses, conquerors of
anger, free from the disturbance of ego and illusion, free from the touch of
greed, and free from the pain caused by the desire for the Vedas. ||49||  He,
with his mind controlled, stands firm in the actions he has done. He is devoted
to the effort of self-control, through the practice of natural conduct. ||50||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 rAgadveSakSayAdeti jJAnI viSayazUnyatAm  /  chidyate bhidyate cA'yaM, hanyate
vA na jAtucit  // 47 //  bhAvArtha : jJAnI rAga-dveSa ke kSaya hone se viSayoM
kI zUnyatA ko prApta kara letA hai  /  usakA kadApi kisI ke dvArA chedana,
bhedana yA vinAza nahIM ho sakatA  // 47 //  anusmarati nAtItaM, naiva
kAMkSatyanAgatam  /  zItoSNasukhaduHkheSu samo mAnApamAnayoH  // 48 //
bhAvArtha : jJAnI puruSa bIte hue samaya (atIta kI bAtoM kA) smaraNa nahIM
karate, tathA anAgata kI icchA nahIM karate evaM zIta-uSNa, sukha-duHkha, mAna-
apamAna ina sabhI sthitiyoM meM sama rahate haiN| aba ATha zlokoM dvArA
jJAnayogI kA svarUpa batAte haiM-  // 48 //  jitendriyo jitakrodho
mAnamAyAnupadrutaH  /  lobhasaMsparzarahito, vedakhedavivarjitaH  // 49 //
bhAvArtha : ve (jJAnayogI) jitendriya, krodhavijayI, mAna aura mAyA ke upadrava
se rahita, lobha ke sparza se rahita, evaM vedodayajanita kAma kI pIr3A se mukta
hote haiM  // 49 //  sannirudhyAtmanA'tmAnaM sthitaH svakRtakarmabhit  /
haThaprayatnoparataH sahajAcArasevanAt  // 50 //  182 adhyAtmasAra

Page #183 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Verse 50:**  **Meaning:** He (the knower of the Self) remains established by
restraining the mind (or nature) from the Self, and he pierces through the
karmas created by himself. Due to following natural conduct, he is free from
forceful practices.  **Verse 51:**  **Meaning:** He is free from the concept of
the world, destroys the illusion of false conduct, is joyful in the state of the
Kanda, and is dependent on the Supreme Self with a noble attitude.  **Verse
52:**  **Meaning:** He is full of faith, united with the Jina's command,
surpasses even weapons (free from the weapon of evil intentions), yet devoid of
external weapons, has attained detachment from material objects, and does not
hide his inner strength (spiritual power).  **Verse 53:**  **Meaning:** He is
free from punishment, burns the fuel of sin with the fire of meditation, and
possesses a character that transcends the world by following the path against
the current.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 bhAvArtha : vaha (jJAnayogI) AtmA se AtmA (mana yA svabhAva) ko rokakara sthita
rahatA hai, svakRta karmoM kA bhedana karatA hai| sahaja AcAra kA pAlana karane
ke kAraNa vaha haTha (balAt) prayogoM se nivRtta (uparata) rahatA hai  // 50 //
lokasaMjJAvinirmukto mithyAcAraprapaJcahRt  /  ullasatkaNDakasthAnaH pareNa
paramAzritaH  // 51 //  bhAvArtha : tathA lokasaMjJA se mukta mithyA-AcAra ke
prapaJca kA nAzaka, kaNDakasthAna meM ullAsa rakhane vAlA tathA utkRSTa bhAva se
AtmA kA Azrita hotA hai  // 51 //  zraddhAvAnAjJayA yuktaH zastrAtIto
yazastravAn  /  gato dRSTeSu nirvedamanihRtaparAkramaH  // 52 //  bhAvArtha :
tathA zraddhAvAn, jinAjJA se yukta, zastroM ko bhI mAta karane vAlA (azubha
adhyavasAyazastramukta), tathApi bAhyazastroM se rahita, paudgalika padArthoM ke
prati nirveda (vairAgya) ko prApta aura apanI Atmazakti (AtmavIrya) ko nahIM
chipAne vAlA  // 52 //  nikSiptadaNDo dhyAnAgnirdagdhapApendhanavrajaH  /
pratisroto'nugatatvena lokottaracaritrabhRt  // 53 //  bhAvArtha : vaha daNDa se
dUra, dhyAnarUpI agni se pAparUpI kASThasamUha kA jalAne vAlA evaM lokapravAha
se adhikAra pandrahavA~ 183

Page #184 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
By practicing **pratistroto'nugami** (going against the current), one becomes a
holder of **lokoत्तरचरित्र** (transcendental character). ||53||  He rejects the
desires he has obtained, does not adopt **bahurupata** (multiformity), opens the
eye of knowledge and closes the eye of ignorance. ||54||  **Meaning:** The
**jnana yogi** (knowledge yogi) throws out the desired objects (enjoyments) that
he can obtain from his mind-house, he rejects them. He does not become attached
one moment and detached the next, angry one moment and pleased the next; he
never adopts such **bahurupata** (multiformity). Due to his purity, he opens the
excellent (knowledge-like) eyes and closes the other physical eyes (eyes of
ignorance). That is, he becomes so absorbed in meditation on the Self that his
eyes of ignorance automatically close completely, ignorance itself flees. ||54||
He observes the inner feelings, attains **पूर्णभाव** (perfection), enjoys the
kingdom of the Self, and does not see anything else remaining. ||55||
**Meaning:** And then he observes the objects that remain in his soul, attains
**पूर्णभाव** (perfection), enjoys the kingdom of the Self, and does not see
anything else remaining. ||55||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 viparIta anugamana karane (pratistroto'nugAmI hone) se lokottaracaritra kA
dhAraka hotA hai  // 53 //  labdhAn kAmAn bahiHkurvannakurvan bahurUpatAm  /
sphArIkurvan paraM cakSu raparaM ca nimIlayan  // 54 //  bhAvArtha : prApta hue
kAma-bhogoM ko dUra ThelatA huA, tathA bahurUpiyApana nahIM dhAraNa karane vAlA,
vaha jJAnayogI jJAnacakSu ko vikasita karatA (kholatA) hai aura ajJAnacakSu ko
banda karatA hai| jJAnayogI prApta ho sakane vAle iSTa kAmoM (bhogoM) ko mana
rUpI ghara se bAhara pheMka detA hai, unakA bahiSkAra kara detA hai, vaha
kSaNabhara meM rAgI, kSaNa meM virAgI, eka kSaNa meM ruSTa aura dUsare hI kSaNa
tuSTa; isa prakAra kA bahurUpiyApana kadApi nahIM apanAtA  /  vaha usa samaya
nirmalatA ke kAraNa utkRSTa (jJAnarUpI) netroM ko ughAr3a detA hai aura dUsare
carmanetroMajJAnanetroM ko banda kara detA hai| arthAt vaha AtmadhyAna meM itanA
tallIna ho jAtA hai ki usake ajJAnanetra svataH sarvathA banda ho jAte haiM,
ajJAna svayameva bhAga jAtA hai  // 54 //  pazyannantargatAn bhAvAn
purNabhAvamupAgataH  /  bhuJjAno'dhyAtmasAmrAjyamavaziSTaM na pazyati  // 55 //
bhAvArtha : aura phira vaha apanI AtmA meM rahe hue padArthoM kA nirIkSaNa
karatA huA pUrNatA (pUrNabhAva) ko prApta 184 adhyAtmasAra

Page #185 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
He does it and, consuming the unblemished enjoyment of the spiritual kingdom,
does not see anything else (anyone). ||55|| This knowledge-yoga is indeed the
best in the spiritual realm, for the Lord has declared in the essence of the
world, the definite liberation from bondage. ||56||  **Meaning:** This
knowledge-yoga is the best in the spiritual path; because the Lord has declared
in the essence of the world that there is a very definite liberation from
bondage. ||56||  Because its essence is in its use, it leads to immediate,
delusion-free knowledge. Therefore, it is appropriate for attaining liberation,
and this has also been said by others. ||57||  **Meaning:** Because its essence
is in its use, it leads to immediate, delusion-free knowledge. Therefore, it is
appropriate for attaining liberation, and this has also been said by others.
||57||  A yogi is superior to ascetics, he is considered superior even to the
learned. A yogi is superior to those who perform actions (karma), therefore, O
Arjuna! become a yogi. ||58||  **Meaning:** A yogi is superior to ascetics, he
is considered superior even to the learned. A yogi is superior to those who
perform actions (karma), therefore, O Arjuna! become a yogi. ||58||  Chapter
Fifteen 185

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 kara letA hai aura adhyAtmarAjya kA niSkaMTaka upabhoga karatA huA anya kucha
(kisI ko) bhI nahIM dekhatA  // 55 //  zreSTha hi jJAnayogo'yamadhyAtmanyeva
yajjagau  /  bandhapramokSaM bhagavAn lokasAre sunizcitam  // 56 //  bhAvArtha :
adhyAtmamArga meM yaha jJAnayoga sabase zreSTha hai; kyoMki bhagavAn ne lokasAra
meM atyanta nizcita bandha kA mokSa hai batAyA  // 56 //
upayogaikasAratvAdAzvasaMmohabodhataH  /  mokSApteryujyate caitattathA coktaM
parairapi  // 57 //  bhAvArtha : upayoga hI ekamAtra sAra hone se isIse zIghra
sammoharahita bodha hotA hai  /  isalie mokSa kI prApti meM yahI ( jJAnayoga hI)
yuktiyukta hai, anya darzanakAroM ne bhI yahI kahA hai  // 57 //
tapasvibhyo'dhiko yogI, jJAnibhyo'pyadhiko mataH  /  karmibhyazcAdhiko yogI,
tasmAdyogI bhavArjuna  // 58 //  bhAvArtha : yogI tapasviyoM se adhika hotA hai,
(yogI) paNDitoM se bhI adhika mAnA gayA hai  /  karma (kriyA) kANDa karane vAloM
se bhI yogI adhika hotA hai, isalie he arjuna ! tU yogI bana  // 58 //  adhikAra
pandrahavA~ 185

Page #186 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Samapattir iha vyaktamaatmanah paramaatmani. Abhedopasanaaroopas tatah
shreshthataro hyayam. ||59|| Bhavarth: In this Jnana Yoga, the present Atma
attains oneness with the Paramatma. Therefore, this Jnana Yoga, which is in the
form of Abhedopasana, is the best. ||59|| Upasana Bhagavati sarvebhyo'pi
gariyasi. Mahapaapakshayankari tatha choktam parairapi. ||60|| Bhavarth: The
worship of Bhagavan is the greatest, and it destroys great sins. Other
philosophers have also said this in this regard. ||60|| Yoginamapi sarvesham
madgatena'ntaanmana. Shraddhaavan bhajate yo mam sa me yuktatamo matah. ||61||
Bhavarth: Among all yogis, the yogi who is full of faith and always worships me
in the form of the inner self residing within him, I consider him to be the most
worthy. The secret meaning of this verse is that all yoga is fruitless without
devotion. Devotion encompasses all yoga. Among all yogis, the devotees of the
means of Parabrahama, who are full of faith (Mumukshu) and worship me in the
form of the inner self (Atmaroop) residing within me, I consider him to be the
best of all yogis. ||61|| 186 Adhyatma Saar

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 samApattiriha vyaktamAtmanaH paramAtmani  /  abhedopAsanArUpastataH
zreSThatarohyayam  // 59 //  bhAvArtha : isa jJAnayoga meM pravartamAna AtmA ko
paramAtmA ke sAtha ekatva kI prApti hotI hai| isa kAraNa yaha abhedopAsanArUpa
jJAnayoga hI sabase zreSTha hai  // 59 //  upAsanA bhAgavatI sarvebhyo'pi
garIyasI  /  mahApApakSayaMkarI tathA coktaM parairapi  // 60 //  bhAvArtha :
bhagavAna kI upAsanA sabase bar3I hai, tathA vaha mahApApa kA kSaya karane vAlI
hai  /  isa sambandha meM anya dArzanikoM ne bhI kahA hai  // 60 //  yoginAmapi
sarveSAM madgatenA'ntAnmanA  /  zraddhAvAn bhajate yo mAM sa me yuktatamo mataH
// 61 //  bhAvArtha : sabhI yogiyoM meM jo zraddhAvAn yogI mere andara sthita
antarAtmA ke rUpa meM sadA mujhe bhajatA hai, use hI maine atyanta yogya mAnA
hai| isa zloka kA rahasyArtha yaha hai ki bhakti ke binA samasta yoga niSphala
haiN| bhakti meM hI sabhI yogoM kA samAveza ho jAtA hai  /  parabrahma ke upAya
ke upAsakoM samasta yogiyo meM jo zraddhAvAn (mumukSu) mere andara sthita
antarAtmA ke rUpa meM (AtmarUpa meM) merI upAsanA karatA bhakti karatA hai; use
maine sabhI yogiyoM meM zreSTha mAnA hai  // 61 //  186 adhyAtmasAra

Page #187 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
He who worships the **Niranjan** and imperishable **Dev** (Paramatma) with
knowledge, he attains **Tanmayata** - the state of being one with the **Dev**,
by destroying his sins through meditation. || 62 ||  **Bhavartha:** The wise man
who worships the **Niranjan** and imperishable **Dev** (Paramatma) with
knowledge, he attains **Tanmayata** - the state of being one with the **Dev**,
by destroying his sins through meditation. || 62 ||  Even one who does not know
the specifics, but is free from **Kudragraha**, and serves the **Sarvagna**, he
too is established in **Samanyayoga**. || 63 ||  **Bhavartha:** Even one who
does not know the specifics, but is free from **Kudragraha**, and serves the
**Sarvagna**, he too is established in **Samanyayoga**. || 63 ||  The
**Sarvagna** is the main one, he is the only one, and the devotion towards him
is the same for all. All the wise ones are, in general, mainly attained to that
**Sarvagna**. || 64 ||  **Bhavartha:** The **Sarvagna** is the main one, he is
the only one, and the devotion towards him is the same for all. All the wise
ones are, in general, mainly attained to that **Sarvagna**. || 64 ||  The
specifics are not known at all by the **Asarvagna**. Therefore, they (Acharyas)
do not attain the real **Sarvagna** on earth, although they consider some
**Dev** as **Sarvagna** in a special way. || 65 ||  **Bhavartha:** The specifics
are not known at all by the **Asarvagna**. Therefore, they (Acharyas) do not
attain the real **Sarvagna** on earth, although they consider some **Dev** as
**Sarvagna** in a special way. || 65 ||  Chapter Fifteen 187

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 upAste jJAnavAn devaM yo niraJjanamavyayam  /  sa tu tanmayatAM yAti
dhyAnanirdhUtakalmaSaH  //  62  //  bhAvArtha : jo jJAnI puruSa niraJjana aura
avinAzI deva (paramAtmA) kI upAsanA karatA hai, vaha dhyAna ke dvArA pApoM kA
nAza karake tanmayatA - devarUpatA ko prApta kara letA hai  // 62 //
vizeSamapyajAnAno yaH kugrahavivarjitaH  /  sarvajJaM sevate so'pi
sAmAnyayogamAsthitaH  //  63  //  bhAvArtha : jo mumukSu vizeSa ko nahIM jAnatA
huA bhI kadAgraha se rahita hai, tathA jo sarvajJa kI sevA karatA hai, vaha bhI
sAmAnyayoga kA Azraya lekara TikA huA hai  // 63 //  sarvajJo mukhya
ekastatpratipattizca yAvatAm  /  sarve'pi te tamApannA mukhyaM sAmAnyato budhAH
// 64 //  bhAvArtha : sarvajJa mukhya hai, vaha eka hI hai, usapara aisI
pratipatti (bhaktibhAvanA) jitane bhavyoM ko hai, ve saba paNDita sAmAnyatayA
mukhyarUpa se usI sarvajJa ko prApta haiM  // 64 //  na jJAyate vizeSastu
sarvathA'sarvadarzibhiH  /  ato na te tamApannA viziSya bhuvi kecana  // 65 //
bhAvArtha : asarvajJa sarvathA vizeSa ko nahIM jAnate; isalie ve (AcArya) pRthvI
para kisI deva ko vizeSata: sarvajJarUpa meM mAnate haiM, parantu ve vAstavika
sarvajJa ko prApta nahIM karate  // 65 //  adhikAra pandrahavA~ 187

Page #188 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
From the aspect of omniscience, all yogis are equal. The difference of distance,
proximity, etc., does not destroy their servitude.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 sarvajJapratipattyaMzAt tulyatA sarvayoginAm  /  dUrAsannAdibhedastu
tadbhUtyatvaM nihanti n||66|| bhAvArtha : sarvajJa kI upAsanArUpa aMza se
samasta yogiyoM kI samAnatA hai| isalie dUra yA samIpa ityAdi bheda unake
sevakatva ko naSTa nahIM karatA  /  sarva yAnI jadhanya, madhyama aura utkRSTa
bheda vAle yogiyoM (parabrahma ke upAya ke ArAdhakoM) kI sarvajJa sevA ke aMza
se (paripUrNa brahmarUpa kevalI kI bhakti ArAdhanArUpa aMza se), arthAt mokSa kI
ArAdhanA ke prakAra se tulyatA (samAnatA) hai  /  parantu dUra
(pudgalaparAvartta Adi cirakAla ke bAda mahAkaSTa se prApta karane) tathA Asanna
yAnI alpakAla meM hI siddhi prApta karane ke bAda tathA Adi zabda se samyaktva-
prApti, mArgAnusArIpada-prApti vagairaha jo bheda haiM. yAnI mokSa ke sAdhanoM
kI bhinnatA hai, vaha unake sarvajJa-sevakatva kA nAza nahIM kara sakatI  /
jaise pradhAna Adi rAjA ke nikaTavartI sevaka hote haiM aura koI dvArapAla Adi
dUra ke sevaka hote haiM, para ve sabhI sevaka kahalAte haiM, sabhI rAjA ke
Azrita hote haiM, isI prakAra sarvajJa ke sevaka, cAhe ve nikaTastha hoM, yA
dUrastha, sabhI sevaka kahalAte haiM  /  bhale hI koI unameM Asannasiddhika hoM,
koI dUrasiddhika; haiM ve sarvajJa ke upAsaka hI  /  athavA dUra aura Asanna
zabda ke ye artha bhI ho sakate haiM-jinasambandhI dhyAna aura kriyAdi ke 188
adhyAtmasAra

Page #189 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
A **Sarvज्ञsevaka** who is diligent in effort and has a strong interest in
**Moksha** can attain **Moksha** quickly. However, a **Sarvज्ञsevaka** who is
diligent in effort but has a weak interest in **Moksha** due to other views, and
who practices **Vritti** control, **Indriyay** control, **Ashtaangayog**, etc.,
can attain **Moksha** only after a long time. This difference does not negate
their devotion to the **Sarvज्ञ**, nor does it deny them the status of being a
**Sarvज्ञ**'s servant. ||66||  It is through the reliance on **Maadhyasthya**
that the service of the **Devata**'s greatness is desired by all wise people.
Even the **Aachaarya** named **Kalaatiit** has said this. ||67||  The path of
others, including **Muktavaadi**, **Avidyaavaadi**, etc., is also established by
the same **Tattvaniiti**, only with a difference in name. ||68||  A **Mukta**,
**Buddha**, or **Arhan**, whoever is endowed with **Aishwarya**, is called
**Ishvara**. There is only a difference in name. ||69||  **Adhikaar** 15th 189

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prayatna meM pravartamAna aura saMkSiptaruci vAle sarvajJasevaka ko mokSaprApti
zIghra (samIpa) hI saMbhava hotI hai, aura vRtti ke nirodha kA kleza,
indriyajaya, aSTAMgayoga ityAdi anuSThAna ke prayatna meM pravarttamAna,
anyadarzanagata saMkSiptaruci vAle sarvajJasevaka ko cirakAla ke pazcAt
mokSaprApti saMbhava hotI hai; isa prakAra kA jo antara hai, vaha bhI sarvajJa
ke upAsakatva ko naSTa nahIM karatA, unheM sarvajJa kA sevaka mAnane se inkAra
nahIM karatA  // 66 //  mAdhyasthyamavalambyaiva devatAtizayasya hi  /  sevA
sarvairbudhairiSTA kAlAtIto'pi yajjagau  // 67 //  bhAvArtha : mAdhyastha kA
Azraya lekara hI deva ke atizaya kI sevA samasta vidvAnoM ko iSTa hai  /  isa
viSaya meM kAlAtIta nAma ke AcArya ne bhI kahA hai  // 67 //  anyeSAmapyayaM
mArgo muktAvidyAdivAdinAm  /  abhidhAnAdibhedena tattvanItyA vyavasthitaH  // 68
//  bhAvArtha : dUsare muktivAdI, avidyAvAdI vagairaha kA mArga bhI mAtra nAma
ke antara se isI tattvanIti se vyavasthita hai  // 68 //  mukto buddho'rhan
vA'pi yadaizvaryeNa smnvitH| tadIzvaraH sa eva syAt, saMjJAbhedo'tra kevalam  //
69 //  bhAvArtha : mukta, buddha yA arhan, jo koI bhI aizvarya se yukta ho, vahI
Izvara kahalAtA hai| isameM kevala saMjJA (nAma) kA hI bheda hai  // 69 //
adhikAra pandrahavA~ 189

Page #190 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The distinction of Anadi-Shuddha, etc., which is conceived, is considered by me
to be meaningless according to the respective scriptures. ||7|| **Meaning:** The
distinction of God, which is conceived by different philosophers using terms
like Anadi-Shuddha, etc., is considered by me to be meaningless. ||70|| Due to
the lack of knowledge of the specific form, the arguments of the caste-based
philosophers are often contradictory, and due to the non-differentiation of the
fruit in essence, there is a difference in the philosophies. ||71|| **Meaning:**
Due to the lack of knowledge of the specific form of the arguments of the caste-
based philosophers, there is often contradiction, and due to the non-
differentiation of the fruit in essence, there is a difference in the
philosophies. ||71|| Since ignorance, affliction, karma, etc., are the causes of
existence (samsara), there is a difference in the designation of these causes.
Therefore, the omniscient is also described in different philosophies due to the
difference in designation. Therefore, the essence of devotion to the omniscient
is (by abandoning the difference) the only principal and supreme. ||72||
**Meaning:** Since ignorance, affliction, karma, etc., are the causes of
existence (samsara), there is a difference in the designation of these causes.
Therefore, the omniscient is also described in different philosophies due to the
difference in designation. Therefore, the essence of devotion to the omniscient
is (by abandoning the difference) the only principal and supreme. ||72|| The
other distinction of this, which is also a pictorial attribute, is sung by the
wise as being due to past causes, but it is also meaningless. ||73||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 anAdizuddha ityAdiryo bhedo yasya kalpyate  /  tattattaMtrAnusAreNa manye so'pi
nirarthakaH  // 7 //  bhAvArtha : anAdi-zuddha ityAdi zabdoM se Izvara kA jo
bheda vibhinna darzanakAroM dvArA kalpita hai, maiM mAnatA hU~, vaha bhI
nirarthaka hai  // 70 //  vizeSasyAparijJAnAdyuktInAM jAtivAdinaH  /  prAyo
virodhatazcaiva phalAbhedAcca bhAvataH  // 71 //  bhAvArtha : jAtivAdI kI
yuktiyoM kA vizeSa rUpa na jAnane ke kAraNa prAyaH virodha Ane ke kAraNa tathA
bhAva se phala kI abhinnatA hone ke kAraNa darzanoM kA bheda hotA hai  // 71 //
avidyAklezakarmAdi yatazca bhavakAraNam  /  tataH pradhAnamevaitat
saMjJAbhedamupAgatam  // 72 //  bhAvArtha : jisa kAraNa avidyA, kleza, karma,
Adi bhava (saMsAra) ke kAraNa haiM, unameM saMjJA ko lekara bheda hai, usI
kAraNa sarvajJa bhI saMjJA ke bheda ke kAraNa apane-apane darzanoM meM batAyA
gayA hai  /  isalie sarvajJa kI bhakti kA tattva hI (bheda kA tyAga karake)
ekamAtra pradhAna zreSTha hai  // 72 //  asyA'pi yo'paro bhedazcitropAdhistathA
tathA  /  gIyate'tItahetubhyo dhImatAM so'pyapArthakaH  // 73 //  190
adhyAtmasAra

Page #191 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Meaning:** This karma, which is also called by various names like Avidya,
etc., is also useless for wise men. ||73|| Therefore, the attempt to describe
its distinctions is inappropriate. Because the subject of inference is
considered to be general. ||74||  **Meaning:** It is appropriate for a seeker
with a concise interest to not rely on specifics, just as the knowledge of the
grazing of the Chari Sanjeevani was appropriate in a general way. ||75||
**Meaning:** The inquiry of the righteous is also justified, because other (like
Gita, etc.) philosophers also say the same thing, that the seeker of Yoga also
transcends the word-Brahman. ||76||  **Chapter Fifteen** **191**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 bhAvArtha : isa karma kA bhI jo dUsare (avidyA Adi) vicitra upAdhi vAle bheda
pUrvokta kAraNoM se usa-usa prakAra se kahe jAte haiM, ve bhI buddhimAna puruSoM
ke lie vyartha haiM  // 73 //  tato'sthAnaprayAso'yaM yattadbhedanirUpaNam  /
sAmAnyamanumAnasya yatazca viSayo mataH  // 74 //  bhAvArtha : isa kAraNa usake
bheda kA nirUpaNa karanA anucita prayAsa hai  /  kyoMki anumAna kA viSaya
sAmAnya mAnA gayA hai;  // 74 //  saMkSiptarucijijJAsorvizeSAnavalambanam  /
cArisaMjIvanIcArajJAtAdatropayujyate  // 75 //  bhAvArtha : saMkSeparuci vAle
jijJAsu ko vizeSa kA avalambana na lenA hI yahA~ usI taraha upayukta hai, jisa
taraha cArI saMjIvanI ke carane kA jJAna sAmAnyarUpa se hI upayukta huA thA  //
75 //  jijJAsApi satAM nyAyyA, yatpare'pi vadantyadaH  /  jijJAsurapi yogasya
zabda brahmAtivartate  //  76  //  bhAvArtha : satpuruSoM kI jijJAsA bhI
nyAyocita hai, kyoMki dUsare (gItA Adi ) darzanakAra bhI yahI bAta kahate haiM
ki yoga kA jijJAsu bhI zabdabrahma kA atikramaNa kara jAtA hai  // 76 //
adhikAra pandrahavA~ 191

Page #192 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
There are four types of devotees: the distressed, the inquisitive, the seeker of
worldly benefits, and the wise. Among these, three are blessed due to their
specific nature. (This is mentioned in Bhagavad Gita, Chapter 7, Verse 16). The
wise, however, is distinguished by his peaceful disposition, unwavering
devotion, and constant inner connection with the Lord, being ever-loving. He,
being the inner self, is very close to the Lord. The one purified by the path of
action should engage his mind in the path of knowledge. But the ignorant, the
faithless, and the doubtful perish. The fearless, steadfast, with unwavering
gaze, seated comfortably, with a serene face, and not looking around, is the one
who is truly devoted.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Arto jijJAsurarthArthI jJAnI ceti caturvidhAH  /  upAsakAstrayastatra dhanyA
vastuvizeSataH  // 77 //  bhAvArtha : Artta, jijJAsu, arthArthI aura jJAnI ye
cAra prakAra ke upAsaka haiM  /  vastuvizeSa ke kAraNa inameM se tIna upAsaka
dhanya haiN| (bhagavadgItA a. 7 zlo. 16 meM inhIM nAmoM se cAra prakAra ke
bhaktoM kA ullekha kiyA gayA hai  // 77 //  jJAnI tu zAntavikSepo
nityabhaktirviziSyate  /  atyAsanno hyasau bharturantarAtmA sadAzayaH  // 78 //
bhAvArtha : jJAnI to 'zAntivikSepa' aura 'nityabhaktimAna' vizeSaNoM se yukta
hotA hai; kyoMki antarAtmA - rUpa vaha sadAzayI (sadbhAvanA- zIla) hone se
brahma (svAmI) ke atyanta nikaTa hotA hai  // 78 //  karmayogavizuddhastajjJAne
yuJjIta mAnasam  /  ajJazcAzraddadhAnazca saMzayAtmA vinazyati  // 79 //
bhAvArtha : karmayoga se vizuddha huA yogI jJAnayoga meM apane citta (mana) ko
jor3atA (laya karatA) hai  /  parantu ajJAnI azraddhAvAna aura saMdehazIla hotA
hai, ataH vaha naSTa (yogabhraSTa ) ho jAtA hai  // 79 //  nirbhayaH
sthiranAsAgradattadRSTivratasthitaH  /  sukhAsanaH prasannAsyo
dizazcAnavalokayan  // 80 //  192 adhyAtmasAra

Page #193 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Holding the middle of the body, head and neck straight, the wise one, not
touching teeth with teeth, with lips firmly closed, abandoning Ārta and Raudra
dhyāna, fixing the mind on Dharma and Śukla dhyāna, without negligence, devoted
to meditation, becomes a Muni, a knower of knowledge.   **Meaning:** Fearless,
steady, with gaze fixed on the tip of the nose, established in vows, seated in a
comfortable posture, with a cheerful face, not looking in any direction, the
wise one, holding the middle of the body, head and neck straight, not touching
teeth with teeth, with lips firmly closed, abandoning Ārta and Raudra dhyāna,
fixing the mind on Dharma and Śukla dhyāna, without negligence, devoted to
meditation, becomes a Muni, a knower of knowledge.   Having practiced Karma Yoga
and become absorbed in Jnana Yoga, the yogi then ascends to Dhyana Yoga and
attains Mukti Yoga.  **Meaning:** Having practiced Karma Yoga and become
absorbed in Jnana Yoga, the yogi then ascends to Dhyana Yoga and attains Mukti
Yoga.   **Thus ends the chapter on the nature of Yoga.**  **Chapter Fifteen**
**193**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dehamadhyazirogrIvamavakraM dhArayan budhaH  /  dantairasaMspRzan dantAn
suzliSTAdharapallavaH  // 81 //  Arttaraudre parityajya dharme zukle ca
dattadhIH  /  apramatto rato dhyAne jJAnayogI bhavenmuniH  // 82 //  bhAvArtha :
bhayarahita, sthira, nAka ke agrabhAga para dRSTi jamAyA huA, vrata meM sthita,
sukhakAraka Asana se upaviSTa, prasannamukha, dizAoM kI ora na dekhane vAlA,
deha ke madhyabhAga, mastaka aura gardana ko sIdhI rakhane vAlA jJAnI, dA~toM se
dA~toM ko na chUtA huA, donoM oSThapallavoM ko bhalIbhAMti milAe hue, Arta evaM
raudra dhyAna ko chor3akara dharma aura zukladhyAna meM buddhi ko gar3Ae hue, jo
apramatta aura dhyAna meM rata hai, vaha muni jJAnayogI hotA hai  /  / 80-81-82
//  karmayogaM samabhyasya jJAnayogasamAhitaH  /  dhyAnayogaM samArUhya
muktiyogaM prapadyate  // 83 //  bhAvArtha : karmayoga kA abhyAsa karake
jJAnayoga meM samAhita huA yogI phira dhyAnayoga para ArUr3ha hokara muktiyoga
ko prApta kara letA hai  // 83 //   //  iti yogasvarUpAdhikAraH  //  adhikAra
pandrahavA~ 193

Page #194 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter Sixteen  **[Nature of Meditation]** That which is steady is
meditation, and that which is unsteady is mind.  Meditation, contemplation, and
thought are considered to be its three forms. ||1||  **Meaning:**  One should
understand that a steady mind is meditation, and an unsteady mind is
contemplation, contemplation, or thought. Thus, an unsteady mind is considered
to be of three types. ||1||  Meditation is the state of the mind focused on a
single object for a moment.  A long and unbroken sequence of states, even if it
involves multiple objects, is called a meditation series (Dhyana-santati). ||2||
**Meaning:**  The state of the mind remaining focused on a single object
(alambana) for a moment is called meditation.  The long and unbroken state that
occurs during the transition between multiple objects (alambanas) is called a
meditation series (Dhyana-santati). ||2||  There are four types of meditation:
Arta, Raudra, Dharmya, and Shukla.  Two of these types are the causes of worldly
existence and liberation respectively. ||3||  **Meaning:**  Arta, Raudra,
Dharmya, and Shukla are the four types of meditation.  Two of these types
(meditation) are the causes of worldly existence and liberation respectively.
||3||  **Adhyatma-Sara**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 adhikAra solahavA~ [dhyAna-svarUpa] sthiramadhyavasAnaM yattaddhyAnaM
cittamasthiram  /  bhAvanA cA'pyanuprekSA cintA vA tat tridhA matam  // 1 //
bhAvArtha : jo citta sthira hai, use hI dhyAna samajhanA cAhie, aura jo citta
asthira hai, use bhAvanA, anuprekSA yA cintA samajhanA caahie| isa prakAra
asthira citta tIna prakAra kA mAnA gayA hai||1|| muhUrtAntarbhaved
dhyAnamekArthe manasaH sthitiH  /  bahvarthasaMkrame dIrghA'pyacchinnA
dhyAnasaMtatiH  // 2 //  bhAvArtha : eka Alambana (padArtha) meM antarmuhUrta
taka mana kI sthiti kA rahanA dhyAna kahalAtA hai  /  aneka padArthoM
(AlambanoM) ke saMkramaNa meM laMbI aura avichinna jo sthiti hotI hai, use
dhyAnazreNI (dhyAnasaMtati) kahate haiM  // 2 //  Arta raudraM ca dharmyaM ca
zuklaM ceti caturvidham  /  tatsyAd bhedAviha dvau dvau kAraNaM bhavamokSayoH
// 3 //  bhAvArtha : Arta, raudra, dharmya aura zukla yoM cAra prakAra kA dhyAna
kahalAtA hai  /  inameM do-do bheda (dhyAna) kramazaH saMsAra aura mokSa ke
kAraNarUpa haiM  // 3 //  194 adhyAtmasAra

Page #195 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Verse 4:**  The mental anguish arising from the separation and association
with undesirable objects like words, etc., and the mental anguish arising from
pain and restlessness.  **Verse 5:**  The mental anguish arising from the
association and separation with desirable objects, and the mental anguish
arising from contemplating the cause (of suffering). Thus, there are four types
of evil (sinful) mental anguish.  **Verse 6:**  In these four types of mental
anguish, there is a possibility of the three Leshyas - Kapota, Neel, and Krishna
- due to the results of karma that is not very intense.  **Verse 7:**  Wise ones
have said that the signs of one who is in mental anguish are: crying, weeping,
wailing loudly, lamenting, sobbing, beating (one's chest or head), and tearing
(one's clothes).  **Chapter 16**  **Page 195**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zabdAdInAmaniSTAnAM viyogAsamprayogayoH  /  cintanaM vedanAyAzca
vyAkulatvamupeyuSaH  // 4 //  iSTAnAM praNidhAnaM ca samprayogAviyogayoH  /
nidAnacintanaM pApamArttamitthaM caturvidham  // 5 //  _ bhAvArtha : (1) aniSTa
zabdAdi viSayoM ke viyoga kI cintA, (2) vedanA se vyAkula hone kI cintA (3)
iSTapadArtha ke saMyoga-viyoga hone kI cintA aura (4) nidAna kA cintana; isa
prakAra duSTa (pApajanaka) ArttadhyAna cAra prakAra kA hotA hai  // 4-5 //
kApotanIlakRSNAnAM lezyAnAmatra sambhavaH  /  anatikliSTabhAvAnAM karmaNAM
pariNAmataH  // 6 //  bhAvArtha : ina cAra prakAra ke ArttadhyAniyoM meM, jisakA
bhAva atikliSTa nahIM hai, aise karma ke pariNAma ke kAraNa kApota, nIla aura
kRSNa ina tIna lezyAoM kI sambhAvanA hai  // 6 //  kandanaM rudanaM proccaiH
zocanaM paridevanam  /  tADanaM luJcanaM ceti liMgAnyasya vidurbudhAH  // 7 //
bhAvArtha : krandana, rudana, (jora-jora se cillAnA), atyanta zoka (vilApa)
karanA, paridevana (jhUranA), pITanA (chAtI kUTanA, sira pITanA, tADana karanA)
aura luMcana (ukhAr3anA yA kapar3e Adi phAr3anA), ye saba ArttadhyAnI ke cihna
vidvAnoM ne batAe haiM  // 7 //  adhikAra solahavA~ 195

Page #196 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Verse 8:**  * **Moghāṁ nindannījaṁ kṛtyaṁ, praśaṁsan para-sampadaḥ |** *
**Vismitaḥ prārthayannētāḥ prasaktaścaitad-arjane ||8||**  **Meaning:** One who
condemns their own fruitless actions, praises the worldly wealth of others, is
amazed and begs for those possessions, and becomes attached to acquiring them.
Such a person, even after putting forth their best efforts in their craft,
trade, or other endeavors, finds themselves unsuccessful. They then criticize
their own fruitless work, praise the wealth of others, and, filled with wonder,
desire those possessions. They become intensely eager to obtain them by any
means. Such a person should be considered an *ārtta-dhyānī*.  **Verse 9:**  *
**Pramattaścendriyārtheṣu gṛddhaḥ dharmaparāṅmukaḥ |** * **Jino-ktam-
puraskurvan-nārtta-dhyāne pravarttate ||9||**  **Meaning:** A person who is
heedless, greedy for sense objects, averse to Dharma, and does not accept the
teachings of the Jinas, is prone to *ārtta-dhyāna*.  **Verse 10:**  *
**Pramattānta-guṇa-sthānānugametan-mahātmanā |** * **Sarva-pramāda-mūlatvāt-
tyājyaṁ tiryag-gati-pradam ||10||**  **Meaning:** Great souls should avoid
following the path of the heedless, as it is the root of all heedlessness and
leads to the path of the animals.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 moghaM nindannijaM kRtyaM, prazaMsan parasampadaH  /  vismitaH prArthayannetAH
prasaktazcaitadarjane  // 8 //  bhAvArtha : apane niSphala hue kRtya kI jo nindA
karatA hai, dUsaroM kI sAMsArika sampatti kI prazaMsA karatA hai, vismita hokara
una sampattiyoM ke lie prArthanA ( yAcanA yA abhilASA) karatA hai, tathA unheM
prApta karane ke lie Asakta ho jAtA hai  /  apane zilpa, vANijya Adi kAryoM
(vyavasAyoM) meM bharasaka prayatna karane para bhI niSphala ho jAne para ukta
niSphala hue nija kArya kI nindA karatA hai, dUsare kI sampattiyoM = sAMsArika
dhana Adi kA bakhAna karatA hai, tathA una sampattiyoM ke bAre meM camatkAra se
vismiya hokara unakI prArthanA ( unako pAne kI abhilASA) karatA hai tathA una
sampattiyoM ko yena-kenaprakAreNa pAne ko atyanta lAlAyita (Asakta) rahatA hai
/  aise lakSaNoM vAle vyakti ko ArttadhyAnI samajhanA cAhie  //  8  //
pramattazcendriyArtheSu gRddho dharmaparAGmukhaH  /
jinoktamapuraskurvannArttadhyAne pravarttate  //  9  //  bhAvArtha : pramatta,
indriyoM ke viSayoM meM gRddha (lolupa), dharma se vimukha, tathA jinavacanoM ko
aMgIkAra na karanevAlA vyakti ArttadhyAna meM pravRtta hotA hai  // 9 //
pramattAntaguNasthAnAnugametanmahAtmanA  /  sarvapramAdamUlatvAttyAjyaM
tiryaggatipradam  // 10 //  196 adhyAtmasAra

Page #197 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Meaning:** This **Ārttadhyāna** (meditation of distress), which is the root
cause of all **pramada** (negligence) that leads to **tiryañc-gati** (animal
rebirth) and persists until the **Pramattagunasthan** (stage of negligence),
should be abandoned by the great souls. ||10||  **Meaning:** Thinking about
killing, binding, etc., with extreme anger is called the first **Roudradhyāna**
(meditation of anger).  And, to be deceitful, gossipy, rude, and to have a
disposition to speak falsely is called the second **Roudradhyāna**.  The mind of
a person who is devoid of expectations and is overwhelmed with intense anger,
which leads to stealing, is called the third **Roudradhyāna**.  To have a mind
polluted with suspicion towards everyone in relation to protecting wealth is
called the fourth **Roudradhyāna**. ||11-12||  **Meaning:** This four-fold
**Roudradhyāna** exists in beings up to the **Deśaviratigunasthan** (stage of
detachment from the world), in the form of doing, causing to do, and approving
of these actions that are full of faults. ||13||  **Authority:** Sixteenth  197

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 bhAvArtha : pramattaguNasthAna ke anta taka rahane vAle evaM tiryaJcagati dene
vAle samasta pramAda kA mUla kAraNa yaha ArttadhyAna mahAtmA dvArA tyAjya hai
// 10 //  nirdayaM vadhabandhAdicintanaM nividd'aadhaa| pizunAsabhyamithyAvAk
praNidhAnaM ca mAyayA  // 11 //  cauryadhInirapekSasya tIvrakrodhAkulasya ca  /
sarvAbhizaMkAkaluSaM cittaM ca dhanarakSaNe  // 12 //  bhAvArtha : atyanta
krodha karake nirdayatApUrvaka vadha, bandhana vagairaha kA cintana karanA
prathama raudradhyAna kahalAtA hai tathA mAyA karake pizuna (cugalI), asabhya
evaM asatya bolane kA praNidhAna dUsarA raudradhyAna kahalAtA hai  /
apekSArahita aura tIvra krodha se Akula-vyAkula puruSa dvArA corI karane kI
buddhi tIsarA raudradhyAna kahalAtA hai, dhana kI rakSA ke sambandha meM sabhI
para zaMkA (zaka) karake mana malina karanA cauthA raudradhyAna kahalAtA hai  //
11-12 //  etatsadoSakaraNa-kAraNAnumatisthiti  /  dezaviratiparyantaM
raudradhyAnaM caturvidham  // 13 //  bhAvArtha : ina doSoM vAle kAryoM ko
karane, karAne aura anumodana karane ke rUpa meM jisakI sthiti hai, aisA cAra
prakAra kA raudradhyAna dezaviratiguNasthAna taka ke jIvoM ko hotA hai  // 13 //
adhikAra solahavA~ 197

Page #198 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
It is possible for the three *leshyas* of *kapota*, *nila*, and *krishna* to
occur in this (fierce meditation) due to the results of very complex karmas.
||14||  **Meaning:** Due to the results of very complex karmas in this (fierce
meditation), it is possible for the three *leshyas* of *kapota*, *nila*, and
*krishna* to occur. ||14||  Having many faults, having many kinds of faults,
having the fault of killing, being inclined towards violence, etc., being happy
after doing evil, being merciless, lack of remorse, and feeling pride when
others are in trouble; these are the signs of fierce meditation. Therefore, wise
men should abandon this fierce meditation, which gives rise to the suffering of
hell. ||15-16||  **Meaning:** Having many faults, having many kinds of faults,
having the fault of killing, being inclined towards violence, etc., being happy
after doing evil, being merciless, lack of remorse, and feeling pride when
others are in trouble; these are the signs of fierce meditation. Therefore, wise
men should abandon this fierce meditation, which gives rise to the suffering of
hell. ||15-16||  These two types of meditation are not auspicious, they are
difficult to overcome and are well-known. Therefore, it is appropriate to
practice and ascend to the auspicious meditation. ||17||  **Meaning:** These two
types of meditation are not auspicious, they are difficult to overcome and are
well-known. Therefore, it is appropriate to practice and ascend to the
auspicious meditation. ||17||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 kApotanIlakRSNAnAM lezyAnAmatra sambhavaH  /  atisaMkliSTarUpANAM karmaNAM
pariNAmataH  // 14 //  bhAvArtha : isa ( raudradhyAna meM atisaMkliSTa rUpa
karmoM ke pariNAma ke kAraNa kApota, nIla aura kaSNa ina tIna lezyAoM kA honA
sambhava hai ||14|| utsannabahudoSatvaM nAnAmAraNadoSatA  /  hiMsAdiSu
pravRttizca kRtvA'ghaM smayamAnatA  //  15 //  nirdayatvAnanuzayau, bahumAnaH
parApadi  /  liMgAnyatretyado dhIraistyAjyaM narakaduHkhadam  // 16 //
bhAvArtha : utsannadoSatva, bahudoSatva, nAnAprakAradoSatva, mAraNadoSatva,
hiMsA Adi meM pravRtti tathA pApa karake khuza honA, nirdayatA, pazcAttApa kA
abhAva, aura dUsaroM ko Apatti meM dekha kara, bahumAna (harSa) honA; ye
raudradhyAna ke cihna haiM  /  ataH dhIra puruSoM ko naraka ke duHkha dene vAle
isa raudradhyAna kA tyAga karanA cAhie || 15-16  //  aprazaste ime dhyAne,
durante cirasaMstute  /  prazastaM tu kRtAbhyAso, dhyAnamAroDhumarhati  // 17 //
bhAvArtha : ye donoM aprazasta dhyAna duranta aura ciraparicita haiM  /  isalie
abhyAsa karake prazasta dhyAna para ArUr3ha honA ucita hai  // 17 //  198
adhyAtmasAra

Page #199 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Translation:  **18. ** One should contemplate on the following: *bhavana*
(meditation), *desa* (place), *kala* (time), *shubhasana* (auspicious posture),
*alambana* (object of meditation), *anukrama* (sequence), *dhyatavya* (object to
be meditated upon), *dhyata* (meditator), *anupreksha* (reflection), *leshya*
(subtle body), *linga* (sign), and *phala* (fruit).  **19. ** Knowing these, one
should engage in *dharma-dhyana* (meditation on Dharma). There are four
*bhavanas* (meditations) in this context: *jnana* (knowledge), *darshan*
(vision), *charitra* (conduct), and *vairagya* (dispassion).  **20. ** The
fruits of these four *bhavanas* are: 1. *Nischalatva* (steadiness), 2.
*Asammoha* (non-delusion), 3. *Purvakarma* (past karma) *nirjara* (exhaustion),
4. *Sanga* (attachment) *ashansa* (hope) and *bhaya* (fear) *uccheda*
(destruction).  **21. ** One with a steady mind, through these *bhavanas*,
attains the qualification for meditation. This qualification is not attainable
by others. This has also been stated by other philosophers.  **22. ** O Krishna!
The mind is fickle, restless, and strong. I consider its control as difficult as
controlling the wind.  **Chapter 16** **199**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 bhAvanA dezakAlau ca svAsanAlambanakramAn  /
dhyAtavyadhyAtranuprekSAlezyAliMgaphalAni ca  // 18 //  jJAtvA dharmyaM tato
dhyAyeccatastrastatra bhAvanAH  /  jJAna-darzana-cAritra-vairAgyAkhyAH
prkiirtitaaH||19|| bhAvArtha : bhAvanA, deza, kAla, zubhAsana, Alambana,
anukrama, dhyAtavya, dhyAtA, anuprekSa, lezyA, liMga aura phala, ina sabako
jAnane-samajhane ke pazcAt dharmadhyAna meM pravRtti honA caahie| isake viSaya
meM jJAna, darzana, cAritra aura vairAgya nAma kI cAra bhAvanAeM batAI gaI haiM
// 18-19 //  nizcalatvamasammoho nirjarA pUrvakarmaNAm  /
saMgAzaMsAbhayocchedaH phalAnyAsAM yathAkramam  // 20 //  bhAvArtha : 1.
nizcalatA, 2. asammoha, 3. pUrvakarmoM kI nirjarA, 4. saMga kI AzaMsA aura bhaya
kA nAza, parvokta cAroM bhAvanAoM ke kramazaH ye cAroM phala jAnane cAhie  // 20
//  sthiracittaH kilaitAbhiryAti dhyAnasya yogyatAm  /  yogyataiva hi nAnyasya
tathA coktaM parairapi  // 21 //  bhAvArtha : ina bhAvanAoM se sthiracitta vAlA
puruSa hI dhyAna kI yogyatA prApta karatA hai| dUsare kI yogyatA hI nahIM hotI
/  isa viSaya meM anya darzanakAroM ne bhI kahA hai  // 21 //  caMcalaM hi manaH
kRSNa ! pramAthi balavad dRr3ham  /  tasyA'haM nigrahaM manye, vAyoriva
suduSkaram  // 22 //  adhikAra solahavA~ 199

Page #200 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
O mighty-armed one! The mind is indeed very difficult to control, like a strong
army of enemies. But, O son of Kunti, it can be controlled by practice and
detachment.    It is my opinion that yoga is difficult to attain for one whose
mind is not controlled. But, O Arjuna, for one whose mind is controlled, it can
be attained by means of effort.  All this is appropriate for one whose mind is
filled with contemplation, when, through repeated experiences of similar
objects, one becomes free from desire for external objects.  A place free from
women, animals, thieves, and wicked people should be sought out for meditation,
especially during the time of meditation. This is always prescribed for the
ascetics.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 asaMzayaM mahAbAho !, mano durnigrahaM calam  /  abhyAsena tu kaunteya !
vairAgyeNa ca gRhyate  // 23 //  asaMyatAtmano yogo duSprApa iti me matiH  /
vazyAtmanA tu yatatA, zakyo'vAptumupAyataH  // 24 //  bhAvArtha : he kRSNa !
mana to aticaMcala hai, prabala zatru kI senA ke samAna dRr3ha hai  /  maiM
mAnatA hU~, usakA nigraha karanA havA ke nigraha ke samAna atiduSkara hai  /  he
mahAbAho, arjuna ! niHsandeha mana caMcala hai aura bar3I kaThinatA se usakA
nigraha ho sakatA hai, parantu he kuntIputra ! abhyAsa aura vairAgya se usakA
nigraha ho sakatA hai| he arjuna ! jisakA mana vaza meM nahIM huA, usake liye
yoga duSprApya hai, aisI merI mAnyatA hai| jisakA mana vaza meM hai, vaha puruSa
prayatnapUrvaka upAe karane se yoga ko prApta kara sakatA hai  // 22-23-24 //
sadRzapratyAvRtyA vaitRSNyAd bahirarthataH  /  etacca yujyate sarvaM
bhAvanAbhAvitAtmani  // 25 //  bhAvArtha : bAhya artha se samAna bodha kI AvRtti
dvArA tRSNArahita ho jAne para uparyukta sabhI bAteM bhAvanAoM se bhAvita AtmA
meM ghaTita ho sakatI haiM, upayukta ho sakatI haiM  // 25 //  strI-pazu-klIba-
duHzIlavarjitaM sthAnamAgame  /  sadA yatInAmAjJaptaM dhyAnakAle vizeSataH  //
26 //  200 adhyAtmasAra

Page #201 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Meaning:  **Verse 26:** The _Agamas_ (Jain scriptures) command the _yatis_
(ascetics) to constantly reside in a place devoid of women, men, eunuchs, and
_kushila_ (immoral, adulterous) individuals. This is especially emphasized
during meditation.  **Verse 27:** For a _sthira-yogi_ (one who practices
_sthira-yoga_), there is no distinction between a village, forest, or grove. The
place where one's mind finds peace and is absorbed in meditation is considered
suitable for the meditator.  **Verse 28:** The time when one achieves _yoga-
samadhi_ (absorption in yoga) is the most auspicious time for meditation. For
the meditator, there is no rule regarding day, night, moments, or hours.
**Verse 29:** The meditator should practice meditation in a posture that has
been mastered and does not hinder meditation. They can meditate while sitting,
standing, or lying down.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 _ bhAvArtha : sadA strI, puruSa, napuMsaka aura kuzIla (durAcArI, parastrIgAmI)
se rahita sthAna meM nirantara rahane kI yatiyoM (muniyoM) ke lie Agama meM AjJA
dI hai| aura dhyAnakAla meM to vizeSarUpa se vaisA sthAna batAyA hai  // 26 //
sthirayogasya tu grAme'vizeSaH kAnane vane  /  tena yatra samAdhAnaM sa dezo
dhyAyato mataH  // 27 //  bhAvArtha : sthirayoga vAle yogI ke lie gA~va,
jaMgala, yA upavana meM (nivAsa kI) koI vizeSatA nahIM hai| isa dRSTi se jahA~
jisake mana kA samAdhAna rahe (mana samAdhi meM lage) vahI pradeza usa dhyAnI ke
lie yogya mAnA gayA hai  // 27 //  yatra yogasamAdhAnaM kAlo'pISTaH sa eva hi|
dina-rAtri-kSaNAdInAM dhyAnino niyamastu na  // 28 //  bhAvArtha : jisa samaya
yoga kI samAdhi hotI hai, vahI kAla dhyAna ke lie iSTa hai| dhyAnI ke lie dina,
rAta, kSaNa, ghar3I Adi kA koI niyama nahIM hai  // 28 //  yaivAvasthA jitA jAtu
na syAd dhyAnopaghAtinI  /  tathA dhyAyenniSaNNo vA sthito vA zayito'thavA  //
29 //  bhAvArtha : jo jItI (abhyasta kI) huI avasthA (Asana) dhyAna kA upaghAta
karane vAlI na ho, usI avasthA meM baiThe, khar3e yA sote hue yogI ko dhyAna
karanA cAhie  /  jo adhikAra solahavA~ 201

Page #202 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The state (stability of the body's elements) should be won (experienced with
regard to the suitability of meditation familiarized by much practice), and
should never destroy the commenced meditation, in that very state, the yogi
should meditate - become absorbed in meditation - while sitting in Padmasana
etc., standing in Kayotsarga etc., or sleeping on a bed of Darbha etc. ||29||
In all countries, times, and states, the Munis have attained Kevalgyan.
Therefore, there is no rule for them regarding country, time, etc. There is a
rule for the stability of yoga. ||30||  Reading, questioning, repetition,
contemplation, action, right dharma, and essentials are the supports for this
meditation. ||31||  One ascends to a difficult step with the support of a strong
object. Similarly, one ascends to true meditation with the support of sutras
etc. ||32||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 avasthA (zarIra ke avayavoM kI sthiratA) jItI huI (bahuta adhika abhyAsa se
paricita dhyAna kI anukUlatA ko lekara anubhUta) ho, tathA prArambha kiye hue
dharmadhyAna kA vinAza karane vAlI kadApi na ho, usI avasthA meM padmAsanAdi meM
baiThe hue, kAyotsargAdi meM khar3e hue athavA darbhAdika kI zayyA para soye hue
yogI ko dhyAna karanA cAhie-dhyAna meM tallIna ho jAnA cAhie  // 29 //  sarvAsu
munayo dezakAlAvasthAsu kevalam  /  prAptAstanniyamo nA''sAM niyatA yogasusthatA
// 30 //  bhAvArtha : samasta deza, kAla aura avasthAoM meM muniyoM ne
kevalajJAna prApta kiyA hai| isalie inameM dezakAlAdi kA koI niyama nahIM hai|
yoga kI sthiratA kA to niyama hai hI  // 30 //  vAcanA caiva pRcchA ca
parAvRtyanucintane  /  kriyA cAlambanAnIha saddharmAvazyakAni ca  // 31 //
bhAvArtha : isa dhyAna meM ArUr3ha hone ke lie vAcanA, pRcchA, AvRtti,
anucintana, kriyA, saddharma aura Avazyaka ye AlambanarUpa haiM  // 31 //
Arohati dRr3hadravyAlambano viSamaM padam  /  tathA rohati saddhyAnaM
sUtrAdyAlambanAzritaH  // 32 //  202 adhyAtmasAra

Page #203 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Meaning:** Just as a man with a firm substance (matter) as his support ascends
to a difficult place, so too does a yogi, taking refuge in the support of the
sutras, etc., ascend to the peak of true meditation. ||32||  **Meaning:** Due to
the destruction of obstacles arising from the respect for the support, yogis do
not fall while ascending the mountain of meditation. ||33||  **Meaning:** The
sequence of attaining meditation, starting from the restraint of the mind, etc.,
has been described for the Kevala Jnani. For others, the appropriate solution
(samadhi of mental concentration, etc.) has been described. ||34||  **Meaning:**
By contemplating the four aspects of command, hell, retribution, and
establishment, there are four types of meditation that are suitable for yogis
who are equipped with Dharma meditation. ||35||  **Authority: Sixteenth**
**203**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 bhAvArtha : jaise dRr3ha dravya (padArtha) ke Alambana vAlA puruSa viSamasthAna
para ArohaNa kara letA hai, vaise hI sUtrAdi AlambanoM kA Azraya liyA huA yogI
saddhyAna para ArUr3ha ho jAtA hai  // 32 //  AlambanAdarodbhUta-
pratyUhakSayayogataH  /  dhyAnAdhArohaNabhraMzo yoginAM nopajAyate  // 33 //
bhAvArtha : Alambana kA Adara karane se samutpanna vighnoM ke nAza ho jAne ke
kAraNa yogiyoM kA dhyAnarUpI parvata para ArohaNa karate hue bhraMza (pAta)
nahIM hotA  // 33 //  manonirodhAdiko dhyAnapratipattikramo jine  /  zeSeSu tu
yathAyogaM samAdhAnaM prakIrtitam  // 34 //  bhAvArtha : kevalajJAnI meM mana ke
nirodha Adi se lekara dhyAna kI pratipatti (prApti) kA krama batAyA hai  /
dUsaroM ke sambandha meM yathAyogya samAdhAna (manoyoga Adi kI samAdhi) batAyA
hai  // 34 //  AjJApAyavipAkAnAM saMsthAnasya ca cintanAt  /
dharmadhyAnopayuktAnAM dhyAtavyaM syAccaturvidham  // 35 //  _ bhAvArtha : AjJA,
apAya, vipAka aura saMsthAna kA cintana karane se dharmadhyAna ke lie upayukta
(samartha) hue yogiyoM ke cAra prakAra dhyAtavya hote haiM  // 35 //  adhikAra
solahavA~ 203

Page #204 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Naya-bhang-pramana-adhya-an hetu-udaharana-anvitam. Agyam dhyaye-j-jinen-dra-
anam apramanyakalan-kitaam ||36|| **Meaning:** One should contemplate the
commands of the Jinas, which are rich in Naya, Bhang, and Pramana, adorned with
reasons and examples, and free from the stain of non-authenticity. ||36|| Raga-
dvesha-kashayadi-pidita-anam janushmatam. Aihika-amushmika-ansta-ansta-an naana-
apaya-an vichintayet ||37|| **Meaning:** The second type of Dharma-dhyana is
called Apaya-vichaya, which involves contemplating the various sufferings
(apaya) related to this world and the next world, experienced by beings
afflicted by raga, dvesha, kashaya, etc. ||37|| Dhyayet karma-vipaka-an cha ta-
an ta-an yoga-anubhava-jam. Prakruti-adi-cha-tur-bheda-an shubha-ashubha-
vibhaga-tah || 38 || **Meaning:** The third type of Dharma-dhyana is called
Vipaka-vichaya, which involves contemplating the results (vipaka) of karma,
which are produced by the influence of different yogas, and are classified into
four types: Prakruti-bandha, etc., based on their auspicious and inauspicious
nature. ||38|| Utpad-sthi-ti-bhang-adi-parya-ayair-lakshanai-h prithak. Bhedair-
nama-adi-bhir-loka-samsthana-an chintayed bhritam ||39|| **Meaning:** One should
contemplate the world-structure, which is characterized by different names,
etc., and is distinguished by various features like birth, existence, and
destruction. ||39||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 nayabhaMgapramANADhyAM hetUdAharaNAnvitAm  /  AjJAM
dhyAyejjinendrANAmaprAmANyAkalaMkitAm  // 36 //  bhAvArtha : nayoM, bhaMgoM aura
pramANoM se samRddha ( vyApta); hetuoM aura udAharaNoM se yukta aura apramANa ke
kalaMka se rahita jinendroM kI AjJA kA dhyAna karanA cAhie ||36|| rAga-dveSa-
kaSAyAdi - pIr3itAnAM januSmatAm  /  aihikAmuSmikAMstAMstAnnAnA''pAyAn
vicintayet  // 37 //  bheda bhAvArtha : rAga, dveSa, kaSAya Adi se pIr3ita
prANiyoM ke ihaloka-paraloka-sambandhI una-una prakAra ke vividha kaSToM
(apAyoM) kA cintana karanA apAyavicaya nAmaka dUsarA hai ||37|| dhyAyet
karmavipAkaM ca taM taM yogAnubhAvajam  /  prakRtyAdi - caturbhedaM
zubhAzubhavibhAgataH  //  38  //  bhAvArtha : usa-usa yoga ke prabhAva se
utpanna hue aura prakRtibandha Adi cAra prakAra ke bandha vAle karmoM ke vipAka
kA zubha aura azubha ke vibhAgapUrvaka dhyAna (cintana) karanA vipAkavicaya
nAmaka tIsarA dharmadhyAna hai ||38|| utpAda-sthitibhaMgAdiparyAyairlakSaNaiH
pRthak  /  bhedairnAmAdibhirlokasaMsthAnaM cintayed bhRtam  // 39 //  204
adhyAtmasAra

Page #205 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Meaning:** Contemplating the Lokasthana (world structure) filled with diverse
entities, differentiated by characteristics like production, expenditure, and
Dhruva, and filled with names and distinctions, is the fourth Lokasthana-vijaya.
|| 39 ||  **Meaning:** In that Lokasthana, the soul itself is the doer, the
enjoyer, formless, imperishable, and characterized by utility, such
contemplation is also included in the Dharma-dhyana called Santhana-vichya. ||
40 ||  Birth, old age, and death, caused by karma, are like a great whirlpool of
delusion, fueled by the fire of desire, || 41 ||  Filled with the great fire of
hope, overflowing with the pot of Kshaya, and agitated by the waves of false
perceptions, || 42 ||  With a stream of desires flowing in the heart, a series
of evils, a vine of prayers, and a stomach that is difficult to satisfy, || 43
||  The darkness of ignorance, the fear arising from the lightning of
calamities, and the shaking of the heart caused by the wind of greed, || 44 ||
The ocean of existence, filled with various diseases, fish, and turtles, and
difficult to cross due to the moving mountains of faults, should be
contemplated. || 45 ||  **Chapter Sixteen** **205**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 bhAvArtha : utpAda, vyaya aura dhruva Adi payAryoM se paripUrNa (bhare hue)
lakSaNoM se bhinna-bhinna sattA vAle bheda aura nAma Adi se (bhare hue)
lokasaMsthAna (lokAkRti) kA cintana karanA, cauthA lokasaMsthAnaviya hai  //  39
//  cintayettatra kartAraM bhoktAraM nijakarmaNAm  /  arUpamavyayaM
jIvamupayogasvalakSaNam  // 40 //  bhAvArtha : usa lokasaMsthAna meM svayaM AtmA
apane karmoM kA karttA hai, bhoktA hai, arUpI hai, avinAzI hai, tathA
upayogalakSaNa se yukta hai, aisA cintana karanA bhI saMsthAnavicaya nAmaka
dharmadhyAna ke antargata hai  // 40 //  tatkarmajanitaM janma- jarA -
maraNavAriNA  /  pUrNa - mohamahAvartaM kAmaurvAnalabhISaNam  // 41 //
AzAmahAnilApUrNakaSAyakalazocchalat  /  asadvikalpakallolacakraM
dadhatamuddhatam  // 42 //  hRdi strotasikAvelAsampAtaduritakramam  /
prArthanAvallisantAnaM duSpUraviSayodaram  // 43 //  ajJAnadurdinaM
vyApadvidyutpAtodbhavadbhayam  /  kadAgrahakuvAtena hRdayotkampakAriNam  // 44
//  vividhavyAdhi-saMbaMdhamatsya - kacchapasaMkulam  /  cintayecca
bhavAmbhodhiM caladdoSAdridurgamam  // 45 //  adhikAra solahavA~ 205

Page #206 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Meaning:** The belly (middle part) of this ocean of worldly pleasures is
filled with the water of birth, old age, and death, which arises from the karmas
of each and every being. It is adorned with the great whirlpool of attachment,
terrifying like the fire of lust, filled with the great wind of desires
(aspirations), and tossed about by the pitchers of passions. It bears the
violent wave cycle of wrong views, and is insurmountable due to the increase of
the stream of sensory desires (strong tides of desires for objects of senses
like sound, etc.) in the heart. It has a lineage (offspring) of vines in the
form of prayers, and is filled with sorrow.   Where there is the dark day of
ignorance, frightening due to the falling of lightning in the form of
calamities, shaking the heart with the storm of the well-like wind, filled with
various fish, turtles, etc. in the form of diseases, and is inaccessible due to
the moving mountains of fickleness, emptiness, and pride, one should contemplate
this ocean of the world. || 41-42-43-44-45 ||  The means of crossing it is the
firm bond of right faith, adorned with many virtues and accompanied by the
knowledge of liberation. || 46 ||  The leak of the inflow of karma is stopped by
the practice of restraint, which is secret and guarded on all sides. The two
shores of this ocean are the platform of conduct, illuminated by the lamp of
right conduct, and the renunciation of blame. || 47 ||  This ocean is difficult
to cross, with countless, insurmountable, and difficult-to-bear waves of
desires. It is supported by the well of right effort, and its peak is adorned
with the white cloth of the soul. || 48 ||  206 Essence of the Soul

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 bhAvArtha : usa-usa jIva ke karmoM se utpanna, janma, jarA, mRtyurUpa jala se
paripUrNa, moharUpI mahAvarta vAlI, kAmarUpI vaDavAnala se bhayaMkara, AzAoM
(icchAoM) rUpI mahAvAta se pUrNa, kaSAyarUpI kalazoM se uchalate hue,
asadvikalpoM rUpI uddhata (pracaNDa) taraMgacakra ko dhAraNa karatA huA, hRdaya
meM strotasikArUpI velA kI vRddhi (mana meM zrotrAdi viSaya-vAsanA ke kaThora
jvAra) ke kAraNa durlaMghya, prArthanArUpI latAoM kI paramparA (santAna) vAlI,
duHkha se pUrNa ho sake, aise viSayasukharUpI samudra kA udara (madhyabhAga) hai
/  jahA~ ajJAnarUpI durdina (meghoM se Dha~kA huA) hai, Apatti rUpI bijaliyoM ke
girane se bhayotpAdaka hai, kadAgraharUpI kuvAta (AMdhI) se hRdaya ko kaMpAne
vAlA hai, vividha vyAdhirUpI machaliyA~, kachue Adi se vyApta hai, tathA
caMcalatA, zUnyatA aura garvadoSa rUpI calAyamAna parvatoM se vaha durgama hai,
aise saMsArarUpI samudra kA cintana karanA cAhie  //  41-42-43-44-45 //  tasya
santaraNopAyaM samyaktvadRDhabaMdhanam  /  bahuzIlAMgaphalakaM
jJAnaniryAmikAnvitam  // 46 //  saMvarAstAzravAcchidraM guptiguptaM samantataH
/  AcAramaNDapoddIptA'pavAdotsargabhUdvayam  // 47 //
asaMkhyairdurdharairyovairduSpradhRSyaM sadAzayaiH  /
sadyogakUpastambhAgranyastAdhyAtmasitAMzukam  // 48 //  206 adhyAtmasAra

Page #207 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Driven by the momentum of fervor, born from the favorable wind of austerity,
they embark on the path of detachment, relying on the vessel of conduct. || 49
||  With the jewel of pure consciousness placed in the casket of goodwill, the
wise traverse unimpeded to the city of liberation. || 50 ||  **Meaning:** In
crossing the ocean of existence, the means (instrument) is the firm bond of
right faith, the vessel is conduct with its eighteen thousand planks
(principles), the rudder is knowledge, the holes are sealed by restraint, the
guards are the secrets, the pavilion is conduct, the two stages are exception
and renunciation, the invincible warriors are the countless virtues, the pillar
of the well is the right conduct, the white flag is the spiritual cloth, and the
momentum is the fervor born from the favorable wind of austerity. This vessel of
conduct sails on the path of detachment. Boarding this vessel of conduct, the
wise, with the jewel of pure consciousness placed in the casket of goodwill,
reach the city of liberation unimpeded. Thus, contemplate with single-pointed
focus. || 46-47-48-49-50 ||  Just as in a play, when the curtain falls, there is
a fear of the play ending, so too, in the play of existence, there is a fear of
the end of the play. || 51 ||  Chapter Sixteen 207

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 tapo'nukUlapavanodbhUtasaMvegavegataH  /  vairAgyamArgapatitaM cAritravahanaM
zritAH  //  49 //  sadbhAvanAkhyamaMjUSAnyastasaccittaratnataH  /
yathA'vighnena gacchanti nirvANanagaraM budhAH  // 50 //  bhAvArtha : usa
saMsArasAgara ko pAra karane meM upAya (sAdhana)rUpa, samyaktvarUpI
dRDhabandhana vAlA, bahuta se (18 hajAra) zIlAMgarUpI phalaka (takhte) vAlA,
jJAnarUpI niryAmaka se yukta, saMvara se AzravarUpI chidroM ko banda karane
vAlA, cAroM ora guptiyoM se rakSita, AcArarUpI maMDapa se suzobhita, apavAda
aura utsarga nAmaka do bhUmikAoM vAlA, asaMkhya ajeya sadAzayarUpI yoddhAoM ke
kAraNa parAjita karane meM asamartha sadyogarUpI kUpastambha ke agrabhAga meM
adhyAtmarUpI zvetavastra kA mastUla car3hAyA huA, taparUpI anukUla vAyu se
utpanna hue saMvegarUpI vega se vairAgyarUpI patha para cAritrarUpI jalayAna
calatA hai  /  usa cAritrarUpI jalayAna meM baiThakara paNDitajana sadbhAvanA
nAma kI peTI meM subhacittarUpI ratna ko rakhakara nirvighnatA se mokSanagara
pahu~ca jAte haiM  /  isa prakAra ekAgracitta se cintana (dhyAna) karanA  //
46-47-48-49-50 //  yathA ca mohapallIze labdhavyatikare tathA  /
saMsAranATakocchedAzaMkApaMkAvile muhuH  // 51 //  adhikAra solahavA~ 207

Page #208 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The commander of the army, adorned with the insignia of his office, took refuge
in a boat named "Durbuddhi" (evil intellect), while the rest of the warriors
boarded the boat named "Durniti" (evil policy). ||52||  **Meaning:** As soon as
the commander of the army of delusion heard that he was repeatedly being stained
by the mud of fear, which is the end of the play of the world, he took refuge in
a boat named "Durbuddhi" (evil intellect), while the rest of the warriors
boarded the boat named "Durniti" (evil policy). ||51-52||  Then, the army of the
Dharma Raja, equipped with weapons like "Tattva-chinta" (reflection on truth)
and others, arrived at the battlefield, taking refuge in him. ||53||
**Meaning:** Then, the army of the Dharma Raja, equipped with weapons like
"Tattva-chinta" (reflection on truth) and others, arrived at the battlefield,
taking refuge in him. ||53||  When the battle began, the minister of Right View
(Samyag Darshan) brought the minister of Wrong View (Mithyatva Darshan) to a
very difficult and final state. ||54||  **Meaning:** When the battle began, the
minister of Right View (Samyag Darshan) brought the minister of Wrong View
(Mithyatva Darshan) to a very difficult and final state. ||54||  The passions
(Kashaya) are easily subdued by the great army of calmness (Prashma) and others,
and the thief of memory (Smara-Tskara) is subdued by virtue (Sheela). ||55||
**Meaning:** The passions (Kashaya) are easily subdued by the great army of
calmness (Prashma) and others, and the thief of memory (Smara-Tskara) is subdued
by virtue (Sheela). ||55||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 sajjIkRtasvIyabhaTe nAvaM durbuddhinAmikAm  /  zrite
durnItinauvRndArUr3hazeSabhaTAnvite  // 52 //  bhAvArtha : jaise hI moharUpI
pallIpati ne yaha vRttAnta sunA ki bAra-bAra vaha saMsArarUpI nATaka ke uccheda
kI zaMkArUpI paMka se malina huA, tabhI usane (moharAjA ne) apane subhaToM ko
susajjita karake durbuddhi nAma kI naukA kA Azraya liyA, aura bAkI ke yoddhA
durnIti nAma kI naukA meM Arur3ha hue  // 51-52 //  Agacchatyatra
dharmezabhaTaudhe raNamaNDapam  /  tattvacintAdinArAcasajjIbhUte samAzrite  //
53 //  bhAvArtha : usake bAda tattvacintA Adi bANoM se susajja hokara dharmarAjA
kA Azraya lekara unake subhaToM kA dala samarAMgaNamaNDapa meM A gayA  // 53 //
mitho lagne raNAveze smygdrshnmNtrinnaa| mithyAtvamaMtrI viSamAM prApyate
caramAM dazAm  // 54 //  bhAvArtha : usake bAda paraspara yuddha hone lagA,
usameM samyagdarzanarUpI mantrI ne mithyAdarzanarUpI mantrI ko atyanta viSama
antima avasthA meM pahuMcA diyA  // 54 //  lIlayaiva nirudhyante kaSAyacaraTA
api  /  prazamAdi-mahAyaudhaiH zIlena smarataskaraH  // 55 //  208 adhyAtmasAra

Page #209 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Verse 55:**  **Meaning:** The great warriors like *Prashma* and others
effortlessly captured the robbers in the form of *kashāyas*. And the great
warrior in the form of *sheela* arrested the thief in the form of *kāma*.
**Verse 56:**  **Meaning:** The army of *vairagya* defeated the group of six
robbers like *hāsya* and others. And the warriors like *nidrā* and others were
severely beaten by the valiant soldiers like *shrutodyoga* and others.  **Verse
57:**  **Meaning:** The two valiant soldiers, *Dharma* and *Shukla*, subdued the
two warriors named *Ārta* and *Roudra*. And the warrior in the form of
*indriyanigraha* conquered the immediate *asanyama*.  **Verse 58:**
**Meaning:** The warriors like *Kshaya* and *Upashama* frightened away the
*chakshudarshanaavaraṇiya* and others. And the valiant soldier named *Puṇyodaya*
routed the army of *asāta* with his prowess.  **Verse 59:**  **Meaning:** Along
with the elephant king *Dvesha* and the lion *Raga*, even the king of *moha* is
killed by the king of *dharma*, his son.  **Chapter 16**  **Page 209**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 bhAvArtha : prazamAdi mahAyoddhAoM ne kaSAyarUpI luTeroM ko bhI anAyAsa hI
pakar3a liyA aura zIlarUpI mahAyoddhA ne kAmarUpI cora ko giraphtAra kara liyA
// 55 //  hAsyAdiSaTluNTAkavRndaM vairAgyasenayA  /  nidrAdayazca tADyaMte
zrutodyogAdibhirbhaTaiH  // 56 //  bhAvArtha : vairAgyarUpI senA ne hAsyAdi chaH
luTeroM ke dala ko mAra bhagAyA aura nidrAdirUpI yoddhAoM ko zrutodyogAdi
subhaToM ne bahuta jora se pITA  // 56 //  bhaTAbhyAM
dharmazuklAbhyAmArttaraudrAbhidhau bhaTau  /  nigraheNendriyANAM ca jIyate
drAgasaMyamaH  // 57 //  bhAvArtha : dharma aura zukla ina do subhaToM ne Arta
aura raudra nAma ke do bhaToM ko vaza meM kara liyA aura indriyanigraharUpa
yoddhA ne tatkAla asaMyama ko jIta liyA  // 57||
kSayopazamatazcakSurdarzanAvaraNAdayaH  /  nazyatyasAtasainyaM ca
puNyodayaparAkramAt  // 58 //  bhAvArtha : kSayopazama nAmaka yoddhA ke bhaya se
cakSudarzanAvaraNIya Adi bhAga gae aura puNyodaya nAmaka subhaTa ke parAkrama se
asAtArUpI senA bhAga khar3I ho gaI  // 58 //  saha dveSagajendreNa rAgakesariNA
tathA  /  sutena mohabhUpo'pi dharmabhUpena hanyate  // 59 //  adhikAra
solahavA~ 209

Page #210 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**भावार्थ:** In the end, Dharma Raja killed Moharaja along with his two sons,
Dvesha Gajendra and Raga Kesari. ||59||  **भावार्थ:** After that, the virtuous
and practical people, being blessed by Dharma Raja, became extremely happy and
started behaving like practical people, having fulfilled their purpose. ||60||
**भावार्थ:** The Muni, whose mind is absorbed in Dharma Dhyana, should
contemplate in the aforementioned manner and also contemplate on other similar
groups of objects, which are described in the Agamas. ||61||  **भावार्थ:** The
Yogi, who has conquered his mind and senses and has become a mind free from
modifications, is called the meditator of Dharma Dhyana, the peaceful and
subdued Muni. ||62||  **भावार्थ:** If the characteristics of a steady-minded
person are desired by others, then all of that is fulfilled here, if it is
established in this way. ||63|| 210 Adhyatma Sara

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 bhAvArtha : anta meM moharAjA ko unake donoM putroMdveSagajendra evaM
rAgakesarI sahita dharmarAjA ne mAra DAlA  // 59 //  tataH prAptamahAnandA
dharmabhUpaprasAdataH  /  yathA kRtArthA jAyante sAdhavo vyavahAriNaH  // 60 //
bhAvArtha : usake bAda dharmarAjA kI kRpA se sAdhurUpa vyavahArI atyanta
Anandita hue aura vyavahAriyoM kI taraha kRtArtha hokara apanA vyavahAra karane
lage  // 60 //  vicintayettathA sarvaM dharmadhyAnaniviSTadhIH  /  IdRganyadapi
nyastamarthajAtaM yadAgame  // 61 //  bhAvArtha : dharmadhyAna meM jisakI buddhi
tallIna hai, usa muni ko pUrvokta prakAra se samasta cintana (dhyAna) karanA
cAhie aura isI taraha ke aura bhI padArthasamUha para, jisakA Agama meM varNana
ho, usakA bhI dhyAna karanA cAhie  // 61 //  manasazcendriyANAM ca jayAdyo
nirvikAradhIH  /  /  dharmadhyAnasya sa dhyAtA, zAnto dAntaH prakIrtitaH  // 62
//  bhAvArtha : jo yogI mana aura indriyoM para vijaya prApta karane se
nirvikAra buddhivAlA ho gayA ho, usI zAnta aura dAnta muni ko dharmadhyAna kA
dhyAtA kahA gayA hai  // 62 //  parairapi yadiSTaM ca sthitaprajJasya lakSaNam
/  ghaTate hyatra tatsarvaM, tathA cedaM vyavasthitam  // 63 //  210
adhyAtmasAra

Page #211 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Meaning:** All the characteristics of a **sthitaprajna** that other
philosophers desire are present here, and it is also arranged in the same way.
||63|| **Meaning:** O Arjuna! When the seeker abandons all desires (aspirations)
that reside in the mind and becomes content with the Self in the Self, then he
is called a **sthitaprajna**. ||64|| **Meaning:** One whose mind is not
disturbed by sorrows and who is devoid of desire in the face of happiness, and
whose attachment, fear, and anger have been destroyed, is called a
**sthitaprajna** sage. ||65|| **Meaning:** One who is devoid of attachment
everywhere and who, upon obtaining that particular good or bad thing or
situation, neither rejoices nor hates, his wisdom is established. ||66||
**Chapter Sixteen** **211**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 bhAvArtha : dUsare dArzanikoM ko sthitaprajJa kA jo lakSaNa abhISTa hai, vaha
saba yahA~ ghaTita hotA hai, usI prakAra isakI bhI vyavasthA hai  // 63 //
prajahAti yadA kAmAn sarvAn pArtha ! manogatAn  /  AtmanyevAtmanA tuSTaH
sthitaprajJastadocyate  //  64 //  bhAvArtha : he arjuna ! jaba mana meM rahe
hue sabhI kAmoM (manorathoM) ko sAdhaka chor3a detA hai aura AtmA se AtmA meM
santuSTa ho jAtA hai, taba vaha sthitaprajJa kahalAtA hai  // 64 //
duHkheSvanudvignamanAH sukheSu vigataspRhaH  /  vItarAgabhayakrodhaH
sthitadhIrmuniruccate  //  65 //  bhAvArtha : jisakA mana duHkhoM ke prasaMgoM
meM udvigna nahIM hotA aura jo sukha ke avasaroM para spRhA se rahita hai tathA
jisake rAga, bhaya aura krodha naSTa ho gae haiM, vaha muni sthitaprajJa
kahalAtA hai  //  65  //   // 65 //  yaH sarvatrAnabhisnehastattatprApya
zubhAzubham  /  nAbhinandati na dveSTi, tasya prajJA pratiSThitA  // 66 //
bhAvArtha : jo sarvatra Asakti se rahita hai tathA usa-usa zubha yA azubha vastu
yA sthiti prApta hone para na to Anandita hotA hai aura na hI dveSa (ghRNA)
karatA hai, usakI prajJA sthira hai  // 66 //  adhikAra solahavA~ 211

Page #212 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
When this one, like a tortoise, completely retracts all his limbs, his wisdom is
established when he withdraws the senses from sense objects. ||67|| **Meaning:**
Just as a tortoise retracts all its limbs, so too, when a yogi withdraws his
senses from sense objects, his wisdom is steady. Understand this. ||67|| He
becomes peaceful and subdued, dwelling in self-absorption, for the nature of a
Siddha is the same as the qualification of a seeker. ||68|| **Meaning:** Thus,
the yogi, dwelling in self-absorption, becomes peaceful and subdued, for the
nature of a Siddha is the same as the qualification of a seeker. ||68|| This
same, non-negligent seeker is the meditator of the two feet of the white
meditation, provided he is a former holder, and the meditator of the other two
feet are respectively the Sa-yogi Kevali and the A-yogi Kevali. ||69||
**Meaning:** This same non-negligent seeker is the meditator of the two feet of
the white meditation, provided he is a former holder, and the meditator of the
other two feet are respectively the Sa-yogi Kevali and the A-yogi Kevali. ||69||
Because of the impermanence, etc., even in the cessation of meditation, he
should constantly contemplate the impermanence, etc., without delusion. These
are the breaths of meditation. ||70|| **Meaning:** Because of the impermanence,
etc., even in the cessation of meditation, the non-deluded muni should
constantly contemplate the impermanence, etc. These are the breaths of
meditation. ||70||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 yadA saMharate cA'yaM kUrmo'GganIva srvshH| indriyANIndriyArthebhyastasya
prajJA pratiSThitA  // 67 //  bhAvArtha : jaise kachuA apane sabhI aMgoM ko
sarvathA sikor3a letA hai, vaise hI yogI jaba indriyoM ke viSayoM se indriyoM ko
sameTa letA hai, vApasa khIMca letA hai, taba usa muni kI buddhi sthira hai,
yaha samajha lo  // 67 //  zAnto dAnto bhavedIdRgAtmArAmatayA sthitaH  /
siddhasya hi svabhAvo yaH saiva sAdhakayogyatA  // 68 //  bhAvArtha : isa
prakAra AtmA meM ramaNatApUrvaka sthita yogI zAnta aura dAnta ho jAtA hai,
kyoMki siddha yogI kA jo svabhAva hai, vahI sAdhaka kI yogyatA hai  // 68 //
dhyAtA'yameva zuklasyA'pramattaH pAdayoH dvayoH  /  pUrvavid yogyayogI ca kevalI
parayostayoH  // 69 //  bhAvArtha : yahI apramatta sAdhaka zukladhyAna ke donoM
pAdoM kA dhyAtA hotA hai, bazarte ki vaha pUrvadhArI ho, tathA dUsare do pAda ke
dhyAtA kramazaH sayogI kevalI aura ayogI kevalI hai  // 69 //
anityatvAdyanuprekSA dhyAnasyoparame'pi hi| bhAvayennityamabhrAntaH prANA
dhyAnasya tAH khalu  // 70 //  bhAvArtha : bhrAntirahita muni ko dhyAna ke
uparama (virAmakAla) meM sadA anityatva Adi anuprekSA (bhAvanA) kA 212
adhyAtmasAra

Page #213 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
One should meditate, because these reflections are indeed the lifeblood of
meditation. || 70 ||  There are three final leshyas, characterized by intensity
and other distinctions. Their signs are: faith in the Agamas, humility, and
praise of the virtuous. || 71 ||  Meaning: For the yogi who practices the
highest form of Dharma meditation, with virtue and restraint, the fruit is said
to be the attainment of heaven, connected to mature merit. || 72 ||  One should
meditate on the white (Shukla) with forgiveness, gentleness,
straightforwardness, and liberation (non-attachment). The Muni, residing in the
subtle body, should focus the mind on the atom. But the Kevali, free from
attachment, should meditate on the white by restraining the mind. || 73 ||  With
thought, with deliberation, with separateness, that is the beginning. There, the
thought is the forerunner, relying on various things. || 74 ||  Chapter Sixteen
213

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dhyAna karanA cAhie | kyoMki ye anuprekSAe~ hI vAstava meM dhyAna kI prANarUpa
hai  //  70  //  tIvrAdibhedabhAjaH syurlezyAstitisraH ihottarAH  /
liMgAnyatrAgamazraddhA vinayaH sadguNastutiH  // 71 //  bhAvArtha : yahA~ tIvra
Adi bheda vAlI antima tIna lezyAe~ hotI haiM, unake cihna haiM- AgamoM ke prati
zraddhA, vinaya aura saguNastuti  //  71  //  zIlasaMyamayuktasya dhyAyato
dharmyamuttamam  /  svargaprAptiM phalaM prAhuH praur3hapuNyAnubandhinIm  // 72
//  bhAvArtha : zIla aura saMyama se yukta uttama dharmadhyAna kA AcaraNa karane
vAle yogI ke lie praur3ha puNya ke anubandha vAle svarga kI prAptirUpa phala
kahA gayA hai  // 72 //  dhyAyecchuklamatha kSAntimRdutvArjavamuktibhiH  /
chadmastho'Nau mano dhRtvA vyapanIya mano jinaH  // 73 //  bhAvArtha : usake
pazcAt kSamA, mArdava, Arjava aura mukti ( ni:spRhatA) se yukta chadmasthamuni
ko paramANu meM mana ko lagAkara zukladhyAna karanA cAhie, kintu vItarAga kevalI
ko mana kA nirodha karake zukladhyAna karanA cAhie ||73 || savitarkaM savicAraM
sapRthaktvaM tadAdimam  /  nAnAnayAzritaM tatra vitarkaH pUrvagaM zrutam  // 74
//  adhikAra solahavA~ 213

Page #214 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Meaning:** The first stage of white meditation, with vitarka, vicara, and
prithaktva, is composed of three types. Of these three, vitarka is that which
relies on various nayas and has knowledge of the past (past-heard). ||74||
**Meaning:** The mutual transition of artha, vyanjana, and yogas is called
vicara. The mutual movement (transition) of dravya, paryaya, and guna is called
prithaktva. ||75||  **Meaning:** For the sadhu yogi, this first white
meditation, endowed with vitarka, etc., is like the calm state of a sea with
slightly rippling waves. ||76||  **Meaning:** The second white meditation, with
one paryaya, united with unity, vitarka, and vicara, is steady like a lamp
placed in a windless space. ||77||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 bhAvArtha : vitarkasahita, vicArasahita, pRthaktvasahita, yoM zukladhyAna kA
prathama pAda tIna prakAra se yukta hotA hai| ina tInoM meM se vitarka vaha hai,
jo vividha nayoM kA Azraya lekara rahA ho, tathA jisameM pUrvagatazruta
(pUrvazruta kA bodha) hai  // 74 //  artha-vyaJjana-yogAnAM
vicAro'nyo'nyasaMkramaH  /  pRthaktvaM dravya-paryAya-guNAntaragatiH punaH  //
75 //  bhAvArtha : artha, vyaJjana aura yogoM kA paraspara eka dUsare meM
saMkramaNa vicAra kahalAtA hai| dravya, paryAya aura guNa kA eka dUsare meM
gamana (saMkramaNa) pRthaktva kahalAtA hai  // 75 /  /  triyogayoginaH
sAdhovitarkAdyanvitaM hyadaH  /  ISaccalataraMgAbdheH kSobhAbhAvadazAnibham  //
76 //  bhAvArtha : tInoM yogoM se yogI sAdhu ke lie vitarkAdi se yukta yaha
prathama zukladhyAna kucha capala taraMgoM vAle samudra kI kSobharahita dazA ke
samAna hotA hai  // 76 /  /  ekatvena vitarkeNa vicAreNa ca saMyutam  /
nirvAtasthapradIpAbhaM dvitIyaM tvekaparyayam  // 77 //  bhAvArtha : ekatva se,
vitarka se aura vicAra se yukta eka paryAya vAlA dUsarA zukladhyAna vAyurahita
sthAna meM rakhe hue dIpaka ke samAna nizcala hotA hai  // 77 //  214
adhyAtmasAra

Page #215 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The third, called *Sūkṣmakriyānivṛtti*, is the *Jina*'s (Kevalajnāni's)
*Śukladhyāna*, in which two *yogas* are completely stopped and one *yoga* is
partially stopped. ||78||  The fourth, called *Samuccinnākriyāpratipāti*, is the
*Śukladhyāna* of the *Śaileśī* state, which is born of the *Śailava* (mountain-
like) *niṣpakampa* (unshakeable) *Viśvavedin* (omniscient). ||79||  These four
types of *Śukladhyāna* have two fruits. The first two *Śukladhyānas* result in
attaining the *Suraloka* (heavenly realm), and the last two *Śukladhyānas*
result in *Mahōdaya* (liberation). ||80||  In the *Śuklavisrama* (state of white
meditation), one should not see the *āśravāpāya* (influx and efflux), the
*saṃsāra* (cycle of birth and death), the *anu-bhāva* (subtle impressions), the
*bhavasantati* (succession of existences), or the change in meaning. ||81||
Authority: Sixteenth. 215

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 sUkSmakriyAnivRtyAkhyaM tRtIyaM tu jinasya tat  /  ardharuddhAMgayogasya
ruddhayogadvayasya ca  // 78 //  bhAvArtha : sUkSmakriyAnivRtti nAmaka tIsarA
zukladhyAna jina (kevalajJAnI) ko hotA hai, isameM do yogoM kA nirodha ho jAtA
hai aura eka yoga kA arddhanirodha hotA hai  // 78 //  turIyaM tu
samucchinnakriyamapratipAti tat  /  /  zailavanniSpakampasya zailezyAM
vizvavedinaH  // 79 //  bhAvArtha : sarvathA ucchinna vyApAra vAlA; phira kabhI
gire nahIM, isa prakAra kA (apratipAtI) aura zailezI avasthA meM utpanna hone
vAlA cauthA zukladhyAna samucchinnakriyApratipAti nAma kA hai| yaha dhyAna
parvata kI taraha acala, niSkampa sarvajJa ko hotA hai  // 79 //
etaccaturvidhaM zukladhyAnamatra dvayoH phalam  /  AdyayoH
suralokAptirantyayostu mahodayaH  // 80 //  bhAvArtha : upara kahe anusAra
zukladhyAna cAra prakAra kA hai  /  unameM se prathama ke do zukladhyAnoM kA
phala svarga (devaloka) kI prApti hai tathA antima do zukladhyAnoM kA phala
mahodaya=mokSa hai  // 80 //  AzravApAyasaMsArAnubhAvabhavasantatIH  /  arthe
vipariNAmaM vA'nupazyecchuklavizrame  // 81 //  adhikAra solahavA~ 215

Page #216 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Meaning:** In the cessation of white meditation, he should continue to observe
the suffering obtained from inflow, the nature of the world, the tradition of
birth and death, and the result that occurs in matter, that is, he should
continue to meditate on the same. ||81|| In the first two meditations, there is
white leshya, in the third meditation called subtle action cessation, the
supreme (bright) white leshya is considered; and the fourth aspect of white
meditation has been declared by the Jinesvara Bhagavants as devoid of leshya.
||82|| The four signs of the white meditator who has pure yoga are said to be:
avadha, asammoha, viveka, and vyutsarga. ||83|| Due to avadha, he does not
tremble or fear from upsargas, due to asammoha, he does not get confused even in
subtle matters and illusions. ||84|| Due to viveka, he sees himself as different
from all connections, due to vyutsarga, the muni is born. ||85||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 bhAvArtha : zukladhyAna ke virAma meM Azrava se prApta hone vAle duHkha ko,
saMsAra ke svabhAva ko, janma-maraNa kI paramparA ko tathA padArtha meM hone
vAle pariNAma ko bAda meM dekhatA rahe, yAnI usI kA anudhyAna karatA rahe  // 81
//  dvayoH zuklA tRtIye ca lezyA sA paramA mtaa| caturthazuklabhedastu
lezyAtItaH prakIrtitaH  // 82 //  bhAvArtha : prathama do dhyAnoM meM zuklalezyA
hotI hai, tIsare sUkSmakriyAnivRtti nAmaka dhyAna meM parama (ujjvala)
zuklalezyA mAnI gaI hai; aura zukladhyAna ke cauthe bheda ko jinezvara
bhagavantoM ne lezyArahita kahA hai  // 82 //  liMgaM nirmalayogasya
zukladhyAnavato'vadhaH  /  asammoho vivekazca vyutsargazcAbhidhIyate  // 83 //
bhAvArtha : nirmala yoga vAle zukladhyAnI ke cAra liMga kahe haiM-avadha,
asammoha, viveka aura vyutsarga  // 83 /  /  avadhAdupasargebhyaH kampate, na
bibheti ca  /  asammohAnna sUkSmArthe mAyAsvapi ca muhyati  // 84 //
vivekAtsarvasaMyogAd bhinnamAtmAnamIkSate  /  dehopakaraNAsaMgo vyutsargAjjAyate
muniH  // 85 //  bhAvArtha : muni avadha hone se upasargoM se kampita nahIM hotA
aura na DaratA hai, asammoha hone se sukSma artha meM tathA 216 adhyAtmasAra

Page #217 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
He is not deluded by Devmaya etc. Due to the third limb of Vivek, the Shukla-
dhyani Muni sees his soul separate from all connections. And due to the
Vyutsarga-rupa limb, he is detached (anasakt = nishpriha) from the body and
equipment (materials). ||84-85|| And knowing the pure sequence of meditation, by
the command of the Bhagavan, whoever practices this, becomes a knower of the
complete spiritual knowledge. ||86|| Meaning: Thus, whoever practices this
meditation, knowing the pure sequence of meditation according to the command of
the Bhagavan, becomes a knower of the complete spiritual knowledge. ||86|| ||
Thus ends the chapter on meditation || Chapter Sixteen 217

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 devamAyA vagairaha meM mohamUDha nahIM hotA  /  zukladhyAnI muni kA tRtIya
liMga viveka hone se vaha apanI AtmA ko sarvasaMyogoM se pRthak dekhatA hai  /
tathA vyutsargarUpa liMga hone se vaha zarIra aura upakaraNa (sAmagrI) ke prati
niHsaMga (anAsakta=niHspRha) hote haiM  // 84-85 //  evaM dhyAnakramaM zuddhaM
matvA bhagavadAjJayA  /  yaH kuryAdetadabhyAsaM sampUrNAdhyAtmavid bhavet  // 86
//  bhAvArtha : isa prakAra jo bhagavAn kI AjJA ke anusAra zuddha dhyAna ke
krama ko jAnakara usa dhyAna kA abhyAsa karatA hai, vaha sampUrNa adhyAtma kA
jAnakAra ho jAtA hai  // 86 /  /   //  iti dhyaanaadhikaarH|| adhikAra solahavA~
217

Page #218 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Adhikar Seventeenth [Dhyana-Stuti] Yatra gachchati param paripākam,
pākaśāsanapadam tṛṇakalpam | Svaprakāśasukhabodhamayaṁ tat, dhyānameva bhavanāśi
bhajadhvam ||1|| Meaning: When the seeker attains the highest state of maturity
in dhyāna yoga, then the position of Indra also seems like a straw to him.
Therefore, partake in that dhyāna which is self-illuminating, blissful, and
destroyer of worldly illusions. ||1|| Āturairapi jaḍairapi sākṣāt sutyajā hi
viṣayā na tu rāgaḥ | Dhyānavāṁstu paramadyutidarśī tṛptiṁ āpya na tamaṛcchati
bhūyaḥ ||2|| Meaning: Even the impatient and dull-witted can easily abandon
objects directly, but not the attachment (rasa) to those objects. But the dhyāna
yogi, after seeing the light of the Supreme Self, becomes satisfied and does not
accept that attachment again. ||2|| Yā niśā sakalabhūtagṇānāṁ dhyānino
dinamahautsava eṣaḥ | Yatra jāgrati ca te'bhinivistā dhyānino bhavatī tatra
suṣuptiḥ ||3|| 218 Adhyātmasāra

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 adhikAra satarahavA~ [dhyAna-stuti] yatra gacchati paraM paripAkaM,
pAkazAsanapadaM tRNakalpam  /  svaprakAzasukhabodhamayaM tat, dhyAnameva
bhavanAzi bhajadhvam  // 1 //  bhAvArtha : jaba sAdhaka dhyAnayoga meM utkRSTa
paripakvadazA prApta karatA hai taba indra kA pada bhI use tinake ke samAna
lagatA hai  /  ataH AtmaprakAzakArI, sukhabodhamaya evaM
bhavabhramaNavinAzakartA usa dhyAna kA sevana karo  // 1 //  Aturairapi
jaDairapi sAkSAt sutyajA hi viSayA na tu rAgaH  /  dhyAnavAMstu paramadyutidarzI
tRptimApya na tamRcchati bhUyaH  // 2 //  bhAvArtha : Atura tathA jar3apuruSoM
ke dvArA viSaya to pratyakSarUpa meM AsAnI se tyAge jA sakate haiM, kintu una
viSayoM kA rAga (rasa) tyAgA nahIM jA sakatA  /  lekina dhyAnayogI to paramAtmA
ke prakAza kA darzana karane ke bAda tRpta ho jAte haiM, phira ve usa rAga kA
svIkAra hI nahIM karate  // 2 //  yA nizA sakalabhUtagaNAnAM dhyAnino
dinamahotsava eSaH  /  yatra jAgrati ca te'bhiniviSTA dhyAnino bhavati tatra
suSuptiH  // 3 //  218 adhyAtmasAra

Page #219 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Meaning:** For all beings, night is a festival related to the day for the
meditator. And in which they (beings) remain awake with attachment (insistence),
in that the meditating man sleeps. ||3||  **Meaning:** Just as the perfection
(attainment) of the water in the well is from the source of water (spring), so
the perfection of the fruits of all actions is from the flow of meditation (high
and continuous meditation). Therefore, meditation is the root cause of the
ultimate goal. ||4||  **Meaning:** The meditator, deeply absorbed in the soul,
is not bound (constrained) by the mental afflictions arising from passions, by
the mental afflictions arising from the salutations of kings, Indra, etc., by
the most undesirable objects, and by sorrows. ||5||  **Meaning:** May
meditation, which is filled with clearly seen happiness and is superior to the
happiness of liberation, be my favorite. If this is not the case, then the
atheist is killed by the punishment of the divine word. ||6||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 bhAvArtha : samasta prANigaNa ke lie jo rAtri hai, vaha dhyAnI ke lie divasa -
sambandhI mahotsava hotA hai  /  aura jisameM ve (prANigaNa) abhiniveza ( Agraha
) pUrvaka jAgRta rahate haiM, usameM dhyAnI puruSa soye rahate haiM ||3||
saMplutodaka ivAndhujalAnAM sarvaH sakalakarmaphalAnAm  /  siddhirasti khalu
yatra taduccaiH dhyAnameva paramArthanidAnam  // 4 //  bhAvArtha : jaise kue~ ke
jala kI siddhi (prApti) jala ke srota (jharane) se hotI hai, vaise hI samasta
kriyAoM ke phala kI siddhi dhyAna-pravAha (ucca va satat dhyAna) se hotI hai  /
isalie dhyAna hI paramArtha kA (nidAna) mUla kAraNa hai ||4|| bAdhyate nahi
kaSAyasamutthaiH mAnasairna tatabhUpanamadbhiH  /  atyaniSTaviSayairapi
duHkhairdhyAnavAnnibhRtamAtmani lInaH  // 5 //  bhAvArtha : AtmA meM atyanta
lIna (magna) dhyAnI kaSAyajanita mAnasika vikAroM se, namana karate hue rAjA,
indra Adi ke namaskAra se samutpanna mana ke vikAroM se evaM atyanta aniSTa
viSayoM se tathA duHkhoM se bAdhya (vivaza) nahIM hotA  //  5  //
spaSTadRSTasukhasaMbhRtamiSTaM dhyAnamastu zivazarmagariSTham  /  nAstikastu
nihato yadi na syAdevamAdinayavADmayadaNDAt  // 6 //  bhAvArtha : spaSTa rUpa se
dekhe hue sukha se paripUrNa, evaM mokSasukha se gariSTha dhyAna hI mere lie
iSTa ho  /  yadi isa prakAra adhikAra satarahavA~ 219

Page #220 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
If the non-believer is not destroyed by the blow of the weapon of Nay's
literature (scripture), then what happened to him? ||6|| Where there is no space
for the light of the sun, moon, stars, and lamps to spread, even that secret is
revealed to the sages who have attained the light of the soul by meditation,
which has dispelled the darkness of ignorance. ||7|| This meditation is our
friend, which quickly unites the beloved Shamrati, who has been separated for a
long time. So what do we care about artificial friends in the world? ||8|| The
soul finds happiness in the fire of meditation, which is seated on the bed of
peace in the high palace, where the heat of the sun of lust is stopped, and
where the cool fragrance of virtue is spreading. ||9||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 se naya ke vAGmaya (zAstra) rUpI daNDa ke prahAra se nAstika kA vighAta nahIM
huA to usase kyA huA ? ||6|| yatra nArkavidhutArakadIpajyotiSAM
prasaratAmavakAzaH  /  dhyAna-bhinnatamasAmuditAtmajyotiSAM tadapi bhAti
rahasyam  // 7 //  bhAvArtha : jahA~ (jisa rahasya ko pragaTa karane ke lie)
prakAza phailAte hue sUrya, candramA, tAre aura dIpakoM kI jyotiyoM ko bilkula
avakAza nahIM hai, yaha gUr3ha rahasya bhI dhyAna se ajJAnAndhakAra kA bhedana
karake Atmajyoti pAe hue muniyoM ko pratIta ho jAtA hai ||7||
yojayatyamitakAlaviyuktAM preyasIM zamaratiM tvaritaM yat  /
dhyAnamitramidameva mataM naH, kiM parairjagati kRtrimamitraiH  // 8  //   // 7
//  bhAvArtha : jo mitra cirakAla se viyoga pAI huI zamarati nAma kI priyA ko
tatkAla milA detA hai, usa dhyAnarUpI mitra ko hI hamane mitra mAnA hai  /  ataH
aba hameM jagat meM nakalI mitroM se kyA matalaba hai?  // 8 //
vAritasmarabalAtapacAre zIlazItalasugandhiniveze  /  ucchrite
prazamatalpaniviSTo dhyAnadhAgni labhate sukhamAtmA  //  9  //  bhAvArtha :
atyanta U~ce dhyAnarUpI raMgamahala meM prazamarUpI palaMga para baiThA huA
mahAtmA sukha pAtA hai  /  jisa prAsAda meM kAmadeva ke balarUpI dhUpa kA
saMcAra roka diyA gayA hai, aura jahA~ zIlarUpI zItala sugandha phaila rahI hai
//  9  //  220 adhyAtmasAra

Page #221 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Verse 10:**  In the palace of meditation, the self, the pure and supreme
guest, is honored with a seat of virtue, a foot-washing water of self-control,
an offering of knowledge, and a sweet drink of equanimity.  **Meaning:** In the
state of meditation, the self, which is inherently pure and the ultimate guest,
is worshipped with virtue as the seat, self-control as the foot-washing water,
knowledge as the offering, and equanimity as the sweet drink.  **Verse 11:**
The dispute arising from the perception of difference between the self and the
Supreme Self is instantly eradicated by the mediator of meditation, spreading
the oneness of both.  **Meaning:** The conflict caused by the belief in a
separation between the self and the Supreme Self is swiftly eliminated by the
unifying power of meditation, revealing the inherent unity of both.  **Verse
12:**  Where is nectar in the serpent realm filled with poison? Where is it in
the waning moon, or even in heaven? Where is it among the gods who are
infatuated with celestial nymphs? This nectar, fit for the wise, is found only
in meditation.  **Meaning:** Where can nectar be found in the serpent realm
filled with poison? Where is it in the waning moon, or even in heaven? Where is
it among the gods who are infatuated with celestial nymphs? This nectar, fit for
the wise, is found only in meditation.  **Verse 13:**  Neither in the flesh of
animals, nor in sugar, nor in the moon, nor in the face of a woman, does one
find that taste. Only the wise, who are established in the state of meditation,
know that taste.  **Meaning:** The true taste is not found in the flesh of
animals, nor in sugar, nor in the moon, nor in the face of a woman. Only the
wise, who are established in the state of meditation, know that taste.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zIlaviSTaradamodakapAdyaprAtibhArdhyasamatA-madhuparkeH  /  dhyAnadhAmni
bhavati sphuTamAtmAhUtapUtaparamAtithipUjA  // 10 //  bhAvArtha : yahA~
dhyAnarUpI prAsAda meM prakaTarUpa meM svataH bulAe hue pavitra aura uttama
atithirUpa AtmA kI pUjA zIlarUpI Asana se, damarUpI pAdodaka (paira dhone ke
jala) se, prAtibharUpI ardhya se aura samatArUpI madhuparka se hotI hai  // 10
//  Atmano hi paramAtmani yo'bhUd bhedabuddhikRta eva vivAdaH  /
dhyAnasandhikRdamuM vyapanIya drAgabhedamanayorvitanoti  //  11  //  bhAvArtha :
AtmA aura paramAtmA meM jo bhedabuddhi kA vivAda thA use dhyAnarUpI sandhikartA
ne jhaTapaTa miTAkara donoM meM abhedabhAva (ekatva) phailA diyA  // 11 //
kvA'mRtaM viSabhRte phaNiloke kva kSayiNyapi vidhau tridive vA  /
kvApsaroratimatAM tridazAnAM dhyAna eva tadidaM budhapeyam  // 12 //  bhAvArtha
: viSa se bhare hue nAgaloka meM amRta kahA~ se ho? pratidina kSINa hone vAle
candramA meM bhI amRta kahA~ hai aura (nAzavAna) svarga meM bhI apsarAoM ke
sAtha prema meM DUbe hue devoM ke pAsa bhI amRta kahA~ sambhava hai? parantu
paNDitajanoM dvArA pIne yogya vaha amRta to dhyAna (dhyAna yoga) meM hI hai  //
12 //  gostanISu na sitASu sudhAyAM nA'pi, nA'pi vanitAdharabimbe  /  taM rasaM
kamapi vetti manasvI, dhyAnasambhavadhRtau prathate yaH  //  13  //  adhikAra
satarahavA~ 221

Page #222 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Meaning:** Neither in grapes, nor in sugar, nor in nectar, nor in the lips of
a beautiful woman, is that divine taste found. Only a wise man knows that taste,
for it is manifest in the patience (contentment) born of meditation. ||13||
**Meaning:** Knowing with the mind the greatness of the fruit born of mature
meditation, he who delights in it, that sage, full of mature brilliance, quickly
attains fame and fortune. ||14||  **Thus ends the chapter on the praise of
meditation.**  **Chapter 222**  **Essence of Spirituality**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 bhAvArtha : na drAkSA meM vaha rasa hai, na zakkara meM hai, na amRta meM hai
athavA na kAminI ke adharabimba meM vaha rasa hai, jisa alaukika rasa ko koI
manasvI puruSa hI jAnatA hai, kyoMki vaha rasa dhyAna se utpanna hue dhairya
(saMtoSa) meM prasiddha hai athavA pragaTa hotA hai  // 13 //  ityavetya manasA
paripakvadhyAnasambhavaphale garimANam  /  tatra yasya ratirenamupaiti
praur3hadhAmabhRtamAzu yazaHzrIH  // 14 //  bhAvArtha : isa prakAra
paripakvadhyAna se utpanna phala kI garimA (mahattA) ko mana se jAnakara jo
isameM prIti karatA hai, usa praur3ha teja se paripUrNa muni ko zIghra hI
yazolakSmI prApta hotI hai  // 14 //   //  iti dhyAnastuti-adhikAraH  //  222
adhyAtmasAra

Page #223 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Adhikar Atharahava [Atmavinischay] Dhyana mahatmagyanam cha muktidam.
Atmagyanaya tannityam yatnah karyo mahatmana. ||1|| Bhavarth: Dhyana ka phal
atmagyan hai aur vah atmagyan mukti ka data hai. Isliye mahan atma ko sada
atmagyan mein purusharth karna chahiye. ||1|| Gnate hyatmani no bhuyo jnatavyam
avashishyate. Agnate punaretasmin gyanam anyannirarthakam. ||2|| Bhavarth: Jisne
atma ko jan liya, use aur kuchh jaanne ko avashisht nahin rahta. Aur yadi atma
ko nahin jana to sab gyan (jana hua) nirarthak hai. ||2|| Navanam api tattvanam
gyanam atma prasiddhaye. Yenajivadayo bhavah svabhed pratyoginah. ||3||
Bhavarth: Nau tattvon ka gyan bhi atma ki siddhi ke liye hi hai, kyonki ajiv adi
padarth atmabhed ke pratyogin hain. ||3|| Shruto hyatma parabhedo anubhuto
sanstuto api va. Nisargad upadeshad va vetti bhedam tu kachan. ||4|| Adhikar
Atharahava 223

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 adhikAra aThArahavAM [Atmavinizcaya] AtmajJAnaphalaM dhyAnamAtmajJAnaM ca
muktidam  /  AtmajJAnAya tannityaM yatnaH kAryo mahAtmanA  // 1 //  bhAvArtha :
dhyAna kA phala AtmajJAna hai aura vaha AtmajJAna mukti kA dAtA hai| isalie
mahAn AtmA ko sadA AtmajJAna meM puruSArtha karanA cAhie  // 1 //  jJAte
hyAtmani no bhUyo jJAtavyamavaziSyate  /  ajJAte punaretasmin
jJAnamanyannirarthakam  // 2 //  bhAvArtha : jisane AtmA ko jAna liyA, use aura
kucha jAnane ko avaziSTa nahIM rahatA  /  aura yadi AtmA ko nahIM jAnA to saba
jJAna (jAnA huA) nirarthaka hai  // 2 //  navAnAmapi tattvAnAM
jJAnamAtmaprasiddhaye  /  yenA'jIvAdayo bhAvAH svabhedapratiyoginaH  // 3 //
bhAvArtha : nau tattvoM kA jJAna bhI AtmA kI siddhi ke lie hI hai, kyoMki ajIva
Adi padArtha Atmabheda ke pratiyogI haiM  // 3 //  zruto
hyAtmaparAbhedo'nubhUtaH saMstuto'pi vaa| nisargAdupadezAd vA vetti bhedaM tu
kazcana  // 4 //  adhikAra aThArahavA~ 223

Page #224 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Meaning:** The non-duality of the soul (Atma) and non-soul (Anatma) has been
heard, experienced, and introduced, but only a rare individual knows its
distinction through nature or instruction. ||4||  **Meaning:** Therefore, self-
knowledge (Atma-jnana) is beneficial by considering oneness (Ekattva) and
separateness (Prithaktva). But the contrary intellect of those who are attached
to the external is false, futile, and hypocritical. ||5||  **Meaning:** There is
only one soul (Atma) which resides in its own nature, and it is described as
having the characteristics of knowledge (Jnana), vision (Darshan), and conduct
(Charitra). ||6||  **Meaning:** Just as the brilliance, purity, and power of a
gem are not separate from the gem, so too are the characteristics of knowledge,
vision, and conduct not separate from the soul. ||7||  **Meaning:** The
difference in the characteristics of the soul is due to convention (Vyavahar),
which is perceived through the use of words like "six" (Shastyaadi), but not
through certainty (Nischya). ||8||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 bhAvArtha : AtmA evaM anAtmA kA abheda sunA hai, anubhava kiyA hai aura
paricaya meM bhI AyA hai, parantu koI viralA vyakti hI isake bheda ko nisarga se
athavA upadeza se jAnatA hai ||4|| 11811 tadekatva-pRthaktvAbhyAmAtmajJAnaM
hitAvaham  /  vRthaivAbhiniviSTAnAmanyathA dhIbiDambanA  // 5 //  bhAvArtha :
isa kAraNa ekatva aura pRthakatva ko lekara AtmajJAna hitakAraka hotA hai  /
kintu kadAgrahIpuruSoM kI ulTI buddhi mithyA, vRthA aura viDambanArUpa hai  //
5  //   // 5 //  eka eva hi tatrAtmA svabhAve samavasthitaH  /  jJAna- darzana -
cAritralakSaNa: pratipAditaH  // 6 //  bhAvArtha : AtmA eka hI hai, vaha
svabhAva meM hI sthira rahatA hai, aura use jJAna - darzana - cAritra - lakSaNa
vAlA kahA hai  // 6 //  prabhAnairmalyazaktInAM yathAratnAnna bhinnatA  /
jJAnadarzanacAritralakSaNAnAM tathAtmanaH  // 7 //  bhAvArtha : jaise ratna kI
kAnti, nirmalatA aura zakti ratna se alaga nahIM haiM. vaise hI jJAna, darzana
aura cAritrarUpa lakSaNa AtmA se bhinna nahIM hai ||7|| Atmano lakSaNAnAM ca
vyavahAro hi bhinnatA  /  SaSTyAdivyapadezena manyate, na tu nizcayaH  //  8  //
224 adhyAtmasAra

Page #225 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Translation:  **Verse 8:**  **Meaning:** The **vyavaharanaya** (practical
standpoint) considers the soul to be different from its previously mentioned
characteristics due to the use of the sixth case ending (**ṣaṣṭhī**) and other
case endings. However, the **niścayanaya** (absolute standpoint) does not
consider it to be different in this way.  **Verse 9:**  **Meaning:** Just as the
difference between a pot and its form is merely a product of **vikalpa**
(conceptualization), so too is the difference between the soul and its qualities
a product of **vikalpa**, not **tāttvika** (essential).  **Verse 10:**
**Meaning:** The **niścayanaya** experiences the pure form of the soul, while
the **vyavaharanaya** experiences the difference in that excellent form.
**Verse 11:**  **Meaning:** In reality, the form of the qualities is not
separate from the soul. Otherwise, the soul would become **anātma** (non-soul),
and even knowledge and other things would become inert.  **Verse 12:**
**Meaning:** Due to the commonality of **chaitanya** (consciousness), all beings
are one in essence. The **niścayanaya** recognizes that the difference created
by **karma** (actions) is merely a temporary fluctuation.  **Chapter 18**
**Page 225**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 bhAvArtha : vyavahAranaya SaSThI Adi vibhakti se vyapadeza se AtmA ko usake
purvokta lakSaNoM se bhinna mAnatA hai, parantu nizcayanaya isa taraha bhinna
nahIM mAnatA  // 8 //  ghaTasya rUpamityatra yathA bhedo vikalpajaH  /
Atmanazca guNAnAM ca tathA bhedo na tAttvikaH  // 9 //  bhAvArtha : jaise ghaTa
aura ghaTa ke rUpa kA bheda kevala vikalpa se utpanna hotA hai; vaise hI AtmA
aura usake guNa kA bheda bhI vikalpaja hai, tAttvika nahIM hai  // 9 //  zuddhaM
yadAtmano rUpaM nizcayenA'nubhUyate  /  vyavahAro bhidA dvArA'nubhAvayati
tatparam  // 10 //  bhAvArtha : AtmA ke jisa zuddha svarUpa kA nizcayanaya dvArA
anubhava kiyA jAtA hai; vyavahAranaya usa utkRSTa svarUpa ke bheda kA anubhava
karAtA hai  // 10 //  vastutastu guNAnAM tadrUpaM na svAtmanaH pRthak  /  AtmA
syAdanyathA'nAtmA jJAnAdyapi jaDaM bhavet  // 11 //  bhAvArtha : vAstava meM
guNoM kA vaha svarUpa AtmA se bhinna nahIM hai, anyathA AtmA anAtmArUpa ho jAegI
aura jJAna Adi bhI jar3a ho jAeMge  // 11 //  caitanyaparasAmAnyAt
sarveSAmekatAtmanAm  /  nizcitA karmajanito bhedaH punarUpaplavaH  // 12 //
adhikAra aThArahavA~ 225

Page #226 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Meaning:** Due to the universal sameness of all souls in their nature of
consciousness, there is unity in the **Nischya Nay**. However, the difference
arising from karma is illusory. ||12||  **Meaning:** The **Vyavahar Nay**
considers the diversity of souls due to the difference in the group of beings
and the order of birth, etc. ||13||  **Meaning:** This diversity of beings is
not logical from the perspective of the **Nischya Nay**, because the entire
group of beings is born from the different karmic natures of the 14 types of
beings. This is not the nature of the soul. ||14||  **Meaning:** Birth, etc.,
are indeed the results of karma. And this karmic difference is not related to
the unchanging soul. ||15||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 bhAvArtha : nizcayanaya se samasta AtmAoM kI caitanyarUpa mahAsAmanyatva ke
kAraNa ekatA hai, parantu karmoM ko lekara utpanna huA bheda upaplavarUpa hai
// 12 //  manyate vyavahArastu bhUtagrAmAdibhedataH  /  janmAdezca vyavasthAto,
mitho nAnAtvamAtmanAm  // 13 //  bhAvArtha : vyavahAranaya prANisamUha ke bheda
ke kAraNa tathA janmAdi kI vyavasthA ke kAraNa AtmAoM kI paraspara vividhatA
mAnatA hai  // 13 //  na caitannizcaye yuktaM bhUtagrAmo yato'khilaH  /
nAnAkarmaprakRtijaH svabhAvo nAtmanaH punaH  // 14 //  bhAvArtha : nizcayanaya
kI dRSTi meM jIvoM kI yaha vividhatA yuktiyukta nahIM hai; kyoMki sAre hI
prANisamUha 14 prakAra ke jIvasamUha kI bhinnatA nAmakarma kI prakRtiyoM se
janita hai| vaha AtmA kA svabhAva nahIM hai  // 14 //  janmAdi ko'pi niyataH
pariNAmo hi karmaNAm  /  na ca karmakRto bhedaH syAdAtmanyavikAriNi  // 15 //
bhAvArtha : janma Adi bheda nizcaya hI karmoM ke pariNAma (phala) svarUpa haiM
/  aura vaha karmakRta bheda avikArI AtmA se sambandhita nahIM hotA  // 15 //
226 adhyAtmasAra

Page #227 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**16.** Attributing only the karmic defilements to the self, those with
corrupted knowledge wander in the ocean of samsara.  **17.** Just as a foolish
person perceives the difference arising from the difference in the object as a
difference in the crystal, so too does he perceive the karmic difference as
being in the self.  **18.** There is no behavior arising from karmic objects for
a being without karma (the self). Therefore, those who speak contrary to the
self have omitted the words of the scriptures.  **19.** Just like the Dharma-
stikaya, the self, though residing in one field, does not become associated with
karmic qualities, because of its inherent nature of being non-material.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Aropya kevalaM karmakRtAM vikRtimAtmani  /  bhramanti bhraSTavijJAnA bhIme
saMsArasAgare  // 16 //  bhAvArtha : kevala karmajanita vikAra kA AtmA meM
AropaNa karane se jJAnabhraSTa hue jIva saMsArasAgara meM paribhramaNa karate
haiM  // 16 //  upAdhibhedajaM bhedaM vettyajJaH sphaTike yathA  /  tathA
karmakRtaM bhedamAtmanyevAbhimanyate  // 17 //  bhAvArtha : jaise mUrkha manuSya
upAdhi ke bheda se utpanna hue bheda ko sphaTika meM bhedarUpa jAnatA hai, vaise
hI karmakRta bheda ko vaha AtmA ke viSaya meM mAnatA hai  // 17 //
upAdhikarmajo nAsti vyvhaarstvkrmH| ityAgamavaco luptamAtmavairUpyavAdinA  // 18
//  bhAvArtha : karmarahita jIva (AtmA) ke lie upAdhirUpakarma se utpanna huA
vyavahAra nahIM hotA  /  isalie AtmA ke viSaya meM viparIta kathana karane vAloM
ne Agamavacana kA lopa kiyA hai  // 18 //  ekakSetrasthito'pyeti nA''tmA
karmaguNAnvayam  /  tathA'bhavyasvabhAvatvAcchuddho dharmAstikAyavat  // 19 //
bhAvArtha : dharmAstikAya ke samAna AtmA eka kSetra meM rahate hue bhI vaha
(zuddha AtmA) karmaguNoM se saMyukta nahIM hotI, adhikAra aThArahavA~ 227

Page #228 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Because the pure soul does not have the nature of being like a Dharma-astika.
||19|| Just as a person with night blindness (taimirika) considers one moon to
be two, so too does a deluded person, due to uncertainty, consider the soul to
be many. ||20|| Meaning: Just as a person with night blindness (taimirika) sees
one moon as two, so too does a deluded person, due to uncertainty, consider one
soul to be many. ||20|| Just as the existence of the soul's nature is
experienced as one through inference, so too is the existence of the soul's
similarity one, without any contradiction. ||21|| Meaning: Just as the existence
of the soul's nature is experienced as one through inference, so too is the
existence of the soul's similarity one, without any contradiction. ||21|| The
friend, the pure path, protects the wise from the poison of the dualistic view
(sadasadvad) and shows them the one jewel through practice. ||22|| Meaning: The
friend, the pure path, protects the wise from the poison of the dualistic view
(sadasadvad) and shows them the one jewel through practice. ||22|| 228 Adhyatma-
sara

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 kyoMki zuddha AtmA kA dharmAstikAya kI taraha hone kA svabhAva hai hI nahIM  //
19 //  yathA taimirikazcandramapyekaM manyate dvidhA  /
anizcayakRtonmAdastathA''tmAnamanekadhA  // 20 //  bhAvArtha : jaise ratauMdhI
(netraroga) vAlA vyakti eka candramA ko bhI do rUpa meM jAnatA-dekhatA hai,
vaise hI nizcaya ke ajJAna ke kAraNa unmatta puruSa eka AtmA ke aneka prakAra
mAnatA hai  // 20 //  yathA'nubhUyate hyekaM svarUpAstitvamanvayAt  /
sAdRzyAstitvamapyekamaviruddhaM tathA''tmanaH  // 21 //  bhAvArtha : jaise
anvaya se AtmA ke svarUpa kA astitva eka hI anubhUta (mahasUsa) hotA hai, vaise
hI AtmA ke sAdRzya kA astitva bhI eka hI hai, isameM kisI prakAra kA virodha
nahIM hai  // 21 //  sadasadvAdapizunAt saMgopya vyavahArataH  /
darzayatyekatAratnaM satAM zuddhanayaH suhRt  // 22 //  bhAvArtha :
zuddhanayarUpI mitra syAdvAda ko batAne vAle vyavahAra meM rakSA karake sajjanoM
ko ekatArUpI ratna dikhAtAbatAtA hai  // 22 //  228 adhyAtmasAra

Page #229 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Even though the soul is born and destroyed in different states like human, hell,
etc., it does not abandon its oneness, its inherent nature, which is always
present. ||23||  Just as one gold exists in a bracelet, earrings, etc., so too,
one pure soul exists in human, hell, etc. states. ||24||  These states of human,
hell, etc. are due to karma, not the pure witness soul. Because karma is active
in nature, and the soul is unborn in nature. ||25||  This creation of the world
is not due to the nature of karma particles alone, nor is there another reality
existing in the absence of each one. ||26||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 nRnArakAdiparyAyairapyutpannavinazvaraiH  /  bhinnairjahAti
naikatvamAtmadravyaM sadAnvayi  // 23 //  bhAvArtha : AtmA kA manuSya, nAraka
Adi bhinna-bhinna paryAyoM meM utpanna aura vinAza hone para bhI nirantara
anvayavAlA Atmadravya ekatva ko nahIM chor3atA ||23|| yathaikaM
hemakeyUrakuNDalAdiSu vartate  /  nRnArakAdibhAveSu tathA''tmaiko niraMjanaH  //
24 //  bhAvArtha : jaise eka hI sonA keyUra ( bAjUbanda) aura kuNDala vagairaha
meM maujUda hai; vaise eka hI niraMjana AtmA manuSya, nAraka Adi bhAvoM
(padArthoM) meM vidyamAna rahatA hai ||24|| karmaNaste hi paryAyA nAtmanaH
zuddhasAkSiNaH  /  karmakriyAsvabhAvaM yadAtmamA tvajasvabhAvavAn  // 25 //   //
24 //  bhAvArtha : ve nara-nArakAdi paryAya karma ke ( karmajanita) hI haiM,
zuddha sAkSIrUpa AtmA ke nahIM haiM  /  kyoMki karma kriyAsvabhAva vAle haiM
aura AtmA to aja (janma na lene vAle) svabhAva vAlA hai  //  25  //  nANUnAM
karmaNo vA'sau bhavasargaH svabhAvajaH  /  ekaikavirahe'bhAvAnna ca tattvAntaraM
sthitam  // 26 //  bhAvArtha : isa saMsAra kI racanA (utpatti - sarjana) kevala
karmaparamANuoM ke svabhAva se nahIM hotI, aura na hI akele adhikAra aThArahavA~
229

Page #230 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
It is by the nature of the *jiva* itself, but it is born from the nature of
both, it exists; because if one of the two is absent (lacking), then there is no
*samsara* itself. The state of *samsara* does not arise from any other element.
||26||  Just as whiteness is produced on a wall by white substance, and is
beautiful without being inherent in both, so should the *prapancha* (the expanse
of *samsara*) be understood. ||27||  Just as an object seen in a dream is not
seen after waking up, so also the *sarga* (the world) perceived through
*vyavahara* (conventional reality) is not seen by the *jnani* (the wise one).
||28||  Just as a stream of water appears to flow in a mirage at midday, so also
the *sarga* born from *samyoga* (combination) appears due to the veil of
*viveka-akhyati-viplava* (the reversal of the perception of discrimination).
||29||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 jIva ke svabhAva se hI hotI hai, kintu donoM ke svabhAva se hI utpanna huI hai,
hotI hai; kyoMki donoM meM se eka kA viyoga (abhAva) ho to saMsAra kA hI abhAva
ho jAtA hai  /  anya kisI bhI tattva se saMsAra kI sthiti nahIM hotI  // 26 //
zvetadravyakRtaM zvaityaM bhittibhAge yathA dvayoH  /  bhAtyanantarbhavacchUnyaM
prapaJco'pi tathekSyatAm  // 27 //  bhAvArtha : jaise dIvAra para sapheda dravya
se kI huI saphedI (ujjvalatA) una donoM meM antarbhUta hue binA suzobhita hotI
hai, vaise ho prapaMca (saMsAra ke vistAra) ko samajhanA cAhie  // 27 //  yathA
svapnAvabuddho'rtho vibuddhena na dRzyate  /  vyavahAramataH sargo jJAninA na
tathekSyate  // 28 //  bhAvArtha : jaise svapna meM dekhA huA padArtha jAgane ke
bAda nahIM dikhatA, vaise hI vyavahAra se mAnA huA sarga (saMsAra) jJAnI ko
nahIM dikhatA  // 28 //  madhyAhne mRgatRSNAyAM payaHpUro yathekSyate  /  tathA
saMyogajaH sargo vivekAkhyAti-viplave  // 29 //  bhAvArtha : jaise madhyAhna
samaya meM mRgamarIcikA meM jala kA pravAha umar3atA dikhAI detA hai, vaise hI
viveka kI yathArthajJAna vAlI prApti ke AvaraNa ke kAraNa saMyoga se utpanna huA
saMsAra dikhAI detA hai  // 29 //  230 adhyAtmasAra

Page #231 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Just as the Gandharvanagara and other cities appear in the sky are illusory, so
too is the creation arising from conjunction, a mere play of appearances. (30)
**Meaning:** Just as the Gandharvanagara and other cities appear in the sky are
illusory, so too is the creation arising from conjunction, a mere play of
appearances. This is because the creation is not real, but is merely a product
of the conjunction of the soul and karma. (30)  Thus, in the soul, oneness is
attained through the pure nay, because the perfect-doctrine proponents do not
desire the conception of parts, etc., in the pure substance-based nay. (31)
**Meaning:** Thus, in the soul, oneness is attained through the pure nay,
because the perfect-doctrine proponents do not desire the conception of parts,
etc., in the pure substance-based nay. (31)  This is also the meaning of the
sutra, "The soul is one." The pure nayists do not consider the soul to be the
light of consciousness. (32)  **Meaning:** This is also the meaning of the
sutra, "The soul is one." The pure nayists do not consider the soul to be the
light of consciousness. (32)  The meaning of the sutra, "The soul is one," is
also understood in the same way. The pure nayists have said that the soul is
pure light. The meaning of the sutra, "The soul is one," is also understood in
the same way. The meaning of the sutra, "The soul is one," is also understood in
the same way. The meaning of the sutra, "The soul is one," is also understood in
the same way. The meaning of the sutra, "The soul is one," is also understood in
the same way. The meaning of the sutra, "The soul is one," is also understood in
the same way. The meaning of the sutra, "The soul is one," is also understood in
the same way. The meaning of the sutra, "The soul is one," is also understood in
the same way. The meaning of the sutra, "The soul is one," is also understood in
the same way. The meaning of the sutra, "The soul is one," is also understood in
the same way. The meaning of the sutra, "The soul is one," is also understood in
the same way. The meaning of the sutra, "The soul is one," is also understood in
the same way. The meaning of the sutra, "The soul is one," is also understood in
the same way. The meaning of the sutra, "The soul is one," is also understood in
the same way. The meaning of the sutra, "The soul is one," is also understood in
the same way. The meaning of the sutra, "The soul is one," is also understood in
the same way. The meaning of the sutra, "The soul is one," is also understood in
the same way. The meaning of the sutra, "The soul is one," is also understood in
the same way. The meaning of the sutra, "The soul is one," is also understood in
the same way. The meaning of the sutra, "The soul is one," is also understood in
the same way. The meaning of the sutra, "The soul is one," is also understood in
the same way. The meaning of the sutra, "The soul is one," is also understood in
the same way. The meaning of the sutra, "The soul is one," is also understood in
the same way. The meaning of the sutra, "The soul is one," is also understood in
the same way. The meaning of the sutra, "The soul is one," is also understood in
the same way. The meaning of the sutra, "The soul is one," is also understood in
the same way. The meaning of the sutra, "The soul is one," is also understood in
the same way. The meaning of the sutra, "The soul is one," is also understood in
the same way. The meaning of the sutra, "The soul is one," is also understood in
the same way. The meaning of the sutra, "The soul is one," is also understood in
the same way. The meaning of the sutra, "The soul is one," is also understood in
the same way. The meaning of the sutra, "The soul is one," is also understood in
the same way. The meaning of the sutra, "The soul is one," is also understood in
the same way. The meaning of the sutra, "The soul is one," is also understood in
the same way. The meaning of the sutra, "The soul is one," is also understood in
the same way. The meaning of the sutra, "The soul is one," is also understood in
the same way. The meaning of the sutra, "The soul is one," is also understood in
the same way. The meaning of the sutra, "The soul is one," is also understood in
the same way. The meaning of the sutra, "The soul is one," is also understood in
the same way. The meaning of the sutra, "The soul is one," is also understood in
the same way. The meaning of the sutra, "The soul is one," is also understood in
the same way. The meaning of the sutra, "The soul is one," is also understood in
the same way. The meaning of the sutra, "The soul is one," is also understood in
the same way. The meaning of the sutra, "The soul is one," is also understood in
the same way. The meaning of the sutra, "The soul is one," is also understood in
the same way. The meaning of the sutra, "The soul is one," is also understood in
the same way. The meaning of the sutra, "The soul is one," is also understood in
the same way. The meaning of the sutra, "The soul is one," is also understood in
the same way. The meaning of the sutra, "The soul is one," is also understood in
the same way. The meaning of the sutra, "The soul is one," is also understood in
the same way. The meaning of the sutra, "The soul is one," is also understood in
the same way. The meaning of the sutra, "The soul is one," is also understood in
the same way. The meaning of the sutra, "The soul is one," is also understood in
the same way. The meaning of the sutra, "The soul is one," is also understood in
the same way. The meaning of the sutra, "The soul is one," is also understood in
the same way. The meaning of the sutra, "The soul is one," is also understood in
the same way. The meaning of the sutra, "The soul is one," is also understood in
the same way. The meaning of the sutra, "The soul is one," is also understood in
the same way. The meaning of

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 gandharvanagarAdInAmambare Dambaro yathA  /  tathA saMyogajaH sargo vilAso
vitathAkRtiH  // 30 //  bhAvArtha : jaise AkAza meM gandharvanagara Adi kA
ADambara dikhAI detA hai, vaha mithyA hai, vaise hI saMyoga se hotA hai, para
vaha satya nahIM hai, isI prakAra jIva aura karma ke saMyoga se utpanna
sarvavilAsa vyartha hai, mithyA hai  // 30 //  iti zuddhanayAttamekatvaM
prAptamAtmani  /  aMsAdikalpanA'pyasya neSTA yatpUrNavAdinaH  // 31 //
bhAvArtha : isa taraha AtmA meM zuddhanaya ke adhIna aisA ekatva prApta huA hai,
kyoMki pUrNavAdI zuddha dravyArthika naya meM aMzAdi kI kalpanA karanA jarA bhI
abhISTa nahIM hai  // 31 //  eka Atmeti sUtrasyA'pyayamevAzayo mtH|
pratyagjyotiSamAtmAnamA nahuH zuddhanayAH khalu  // 32 //  bhAvArtha : 'AtmA eka
hI hai,' isa sUtra kA Azaya bhI Upara kahe anusAra hI mAnA gayA hai, kyoMki
zuddhanayoM ne AtmA ko zuddhajyoti vAlA kahA hai| samagra asaMkhya pradezoM ko
lekara tathA jJAnAdi ko lekara 'AtmA eka hI', hai, 'ege AyA' isa satra para bhI
isase parva kahA haA abhiprAya mAnA hai| yAnI pUrvAcAryoM ne isI abhiprAya ko
pramANita kiyA hai| kAraNa yaha hai ki zuddha naya (arthAt utpAda aura vyaya kA
tyAga karake adhikAra aThArahavA~ 231

Page #232 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Verse 32**  **Translation:** The statement (vada) of the collection
(sangrahanaya) that grasps the absolute (dhruva vastu) states that the soul
(atma) is pure light (jyotiswaroop) - free from bondage (bandha) and liberation
(moksha) - pure light (jyotirman). ||32||  **Verse 33**  **Translation:** O
Lord, the Soul (Atman)! I am afraid of your illusory form (mayamay roop) which
is full of worldly attachments (prapancha), accumulations (sanchay), and
afflictions (klishta). Therefore, be pleased with me and reveal your pure form
(shuddh roop). ||33||  **Verse 34**  **Translation:** The one who knows the
world (vyavaharavit) believes that the soul (atma) is one with the body (deha),
because the soul (atma) experiences pain (vedana) etc. due to the attainment of
some form (moortata). The one who knows the world (vyavaharavit) - that is, the
one who follows the practical path (vyavaharanayavadi) - says, "The soul is
inseparable from the body." However, the one who follows the path of certainty
(nishchayanayavadi) refutes this statement, saying, "The soul is different from
the body." But before this statement, the one who follows the practical path
(vyavaharanay) supports his statement by arguing, "The soul is (in some way)
inseparable from the body, because when someone strikes the body with a stick,
etc., the pain (duhkha) is experienced by the soul."

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pUrNa = dhruva vastu ko grahaNa karane vAle saMgrahanaya) kA vAda= kathana AtmA
ko pratyakSa = zuddha jyotisvarUpa - bandha - mokSa kI apekSArahita zuddha
jyotirmAna batAtA hai ||32|| prapaJca- saMcaya - kliSTAnmAyArUpAd bibhemi te  /
prasIda bhagavannAtman ! zuddharUpaM prakAzaya  // 33 //   // 32 //  bhAvArtha :
he bhagavan Atman ! prapaJcoM ke dala se kliSTa tere mAyAmaya rUpa se maiM
DaratA hU~  /  ata: tU mujha para prasanna ho aura zuddha rUpa ko prakAzita kara
// 33 //  dehena samamekatvaM manyate vyavahAravit  /
kathaJcinmUrtatApapattervedanAdisamudbhavAt  // 34 //  , -- bhAvArtha :
vyavahAravettA manuSya deha ke sAtha AtmA kA ekatva mAnatA hai, kyoMki AtmA ko
kathaMcit mUrtimattA (rUpitva) kI prApti hone se vedanA Adi kI utpatti hotI hai
/  vyavahAravettA arthAt vizeSa ko grahaNa karane vAlA vyavahAranayavAdI kahatA
hai ' AtmA zarIra se abhinna hai, jabaki nizcayanayavAdI isa bAta kA khaNDana
karate hue kahatA hai - " AtmA zarIra se bhinna hai"; parantu isa kathana se
pUrva vyavahAranaya apanI ukta bAta kA samarthana karate hue yukti pratipAdana
karatA hai--'AtmA zarIra se ( kathaMcit ) abhinna hai, kyoMki jaba zarIra para
koI DaMDe Adi se prahAra karatA hai, taba usakI vedanA (duHkha kI anubhUti) AtmA
meM paidA hotI hai, 232 adhyAtmasAra

Page #233 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
This proves the definite corporeality (form) of the soul. Therefore, due to
corporeality, the soul is considered inseparable from the body." ||34|| That
conviction does not tolerate that the formless is not formless. Even a part of
fire cannot comprehend coldness. ||35|| Meaning: This conviction does not
tolerate that, just as fire cannot be cold, similarly, the formless soul cannot
be corporeal even in the slightest. ||35|| Just as due to the association with
hot fire, there is an illusion that ghee is hot, similarly, due to the
association (relationship) with the corporeal body, there is an illusion that
'the soul is corporeal'. ||36|| Meaning: Just as due to the association with hot
fire, there is an illusion that ghee is hot, similarly, due to the association
(relationship) with the corporeal body, there is an illusion that 'the soul is
corporeal'. ||36|| It has no form, no taste, no smell, no touch, no shape, and
no sound. How can there be corporeality (form) of such a soul? ||37|| Meaning:
It has no form, no taste, no smell, no touch, no shape, and no sound. How can
there be corporeality (form) of such a soul? ||37|| It is invisible to the eyes,
incomprehensible to the heart, and not even within the reach of words. What is
self-luminous, its form, how can there be corporeality of that? ||38||
Authority: Eighteenth.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 isase AtmA kI kathaJcit mUrtimattA (rUpitva) siddha hotI hai| ataH mUrtimattA
ke kAraNa AtmA ko deha ke sAtha abhinna mAnA jAtA hai|"  // 34 //  tannizcayo na
sahate yadamUrto na mUrtatAm  /  aMzenA'pyavagAheta pAvakaH zItatAmiva  // 35 //
bhAvArtha : isa bAta ko nizcayanaya sahana nahIM karatA, vaha kahatA hai-jaise
agni ThaMDI nahIM hotI, vaise hI amUrta AtmA lezamAtra bhI mUrtimAna nahIM hotA
// 35 //  uSNasyAgneryathA yogAd ghRtamuSNAmiti bhramaH  /  tathA
mUrtIgasambandhAdAtmA mUrta iti bhramaH  // 36 //  bhAvArtha : jaise garma agni
ke saMyoga se ghI garma hai, aisI bhrAnti hotI hai, vaise hI mUrtimAn aMga ke
saMyoga (sambandha) se 'AtmA mUrtimAna hai  / ' aisI bhrAnti hotI hai  // 36 //
na rUpaM. na raso gandho. na ca sparzo na cAkatiH  /  yasya dharmo na zabdo vA
tasya kA nAma mUrttatA  // 37 //  bhAvArtha : jisa AtmA kA dharma-rUpa nahIM,
rasa nahIM, gandha nahIM, sparza nahIM, AkRti nahIM, tathA zabda bhI nahIM, usa
AtmA kI mUrttatA (rUpIpana) kaise siddha ho sakatI hai?  // 37 //  dRzA'dRzyaM
hRdA'grAhyaM vAcAmapi na gocrH| svaprakAzaM hi yadrUpaM, tasya kA nAma mUrtatA ?
// 38 //  adhikAra aThArahavA~

Page #234 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Meaning:** How can the soul, which is invisible to the eyes, imperceptible to
the heart (mind), and inexpressible by words, but is itself luminous, be in the
form of a body? Never! ||38||  **Meaning:** The soul is the essence of truth,
consciousness, and bliss. It is subtle, beyond the subtle, and such a soul does
not even touch the slightest bit of materiality. This is also what other
philosophers have said. ||39||  **Meaning:** The senses are said to be superior
(to the body), the mind is said to be superior to the senses, the intellect is
superior to the mind, and the soul is superior to the intellect. ||40||
**Meaning:** Alas! In this world, due to the delusion of materiality regarding
the immaterial, the wise man, bewildered by his intellect, sees with wonder and
speaks words of wonder. ||41||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 bhAvArtha : jisakA rUpa dRSTi se agrAhya ( dikhAI dene lAyaka nahIM) hai,
hRdaya (mana) se bhI agocara hai, vANI se bhI agocara hai, parantu jo svayaM
prakAzarUpa hai, vaha AtmA mUrtarUpa kaise ho sakatA hai? kadApi nahIM ||38||
AtmA satyacidAnandaH sUkSmAtsUkSmaH parAtparaH  /  spRzatyapi na mUrttattvaM
tathA coktaM parairapi  //  39  //  bhAvArtha : AtmA sat, cit aura AnandasvarUpa
hai, vaha sUkSma hai, para se bhI para hai, aisI AtmA mUrttattva kA lezamAtra
bhI sparza nahIM karatA hai, isI prakAra kI bAta anya dArzanikoM ne bhI kahI hai
// 39 //  indriyANi parANyAhurindriyebhyaH paraM manaH  /  manaso'pi parA
buddhiryo buddheH paratastu saH  // 40 //  bhAvArtha : zarIra meM indriyoM ko
para (zreSTha) kahA gayA hai, indriyoM se para mana ko batAyA gayA hai, mana se
bhI para (zreSTha) buddhi hai aura jo buddhi se bhI para hai, vaha AtmA hai  //
40 //  vikale hanta ! loke'sminnamUrtte mUrttatAbhramAt  /
pazyatyAzcaryavajjJAnI vadatyAzcaryavad vacaH  // 41 //  bhAvArtha : aphasosa
hai ki amUrta ke viSaya meM mUrttatA ke bhrama ke kAraNa vivekavikala isa loka
meM jJAnI puruSa Azcaryacakita sA dekhatA hai aura Azcaryavat vacana bolatA hai
//  41  //  234 adhyAtmasAra

Page #235 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Pain is not the cause of the manifestation of the soul, for if it were, then the
pudgalas would also experience pain. In reality, it arises from the impure
inherent power of the soul itself. ||42||  Just as the soul itself transforms
into knowledge through the senses, so too does it transform into pain through
the contact of desirable and undesirable objects. ||43||  Having attained the
time of fruition, the soul becomes a participant in the result of pain.
Therefore, manifestation is not its cause. However, it is an attendant, like a
stick to a pot. ||44||  Knowledge, consciousness, and awareness are called
karma, while hatred and attachment are called karma. The fruit of karma is
called the soul, and pain is described as its consequence. ||45||  Chapter
Eighteen 235

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 vedanA'pi na mUrtatvanimittA sphuTamAtmanaH  /  pudgalAnAM tadApatteH
kintvazuddhasvazaktijA  // 42 //  bhAvArtha : vedanA bhI AtmA ke mUrttatva (ko
pragaTa karane) meM spaSTataH nimitta kAraNa nahIM hai, kyoMki agara aisA mAnA
jAegA to pudgaloM ko bhI vedanA kI prApti hone lgegii| vastutaH vaha vedanA to
apanI (jIva kI) azuddha svazakti se hI utpanna huI hai  // 42 //  akSadvArA
yathA jJAnaM svayaM pariNamatyayam  /  tatheSTAniSTaviSayasparzadvAreNa vedanAm
// 43 //  bhAvArtha : jaise yaha AtmA indriyoM dvArA svayaM hI jJAnarUpa meM
pariNamana karatI hai, (pariNata hotI hai), vaise hI iSTa aura aniSTa viSaya ke
sparza dvArA vedanArUpa meM pariNata hotI hai, vedanA kA anubhava vedana karatI
hai  // 43 //  vipAkakAlaM prApyA'sau vedanApariNAmabhAk  /  mUrta nimittamAtraM
no ghaTe daNDavadanvayi  // 44 //  bhAvArtha : yaha AtmA vipAkakAla ko pAkara
vedanA ke pariNAma kA bhAgI hotA hai| isalie mUrttatva (sAkAratA) hI usakA koI
kAraNa nahIM hai| parantu vaha ghar3e ke lie DaMDe kI taraha sahacArI anvayI hai
// 44 //  jJAnAkhyA cetanA bodhaH karmAkhyA dvissttrkttaa| jantoH karmaphalAkhyA
sA, vedanA vyapadizyate  // 45 //  adhikAra aThArahavA~ 235

Page #236 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Meaning:** The knowledge of the soul is called the consciousness of knowledge,
and its hatred and attachment are called the consciousness of karma, and the
fruit of that karma is called the consciousness of karma-phala, which is also
called pain. ||45|| Therefore, the soul does not violate its formlessness and
consciousness. This is why the soul is never one with the material body. ||46||
**Meaning:** In this way, the soul should be understood as distinct from the
nearby pudgalas like mind, speech, and karma, and also from the distant pudgalas
like wealth. ||47||  **Meaning:** The quality of pudgalas is materiality, and
the quality of the soul is knowledge; therefore, the Jinas have said that the
soul-substance is different from the pudgalas. ||48||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 bhAvArtha : AtmA kA bodha jJAna nAma kI cetanA kahalAtI hai, aura usakA
dveSatva aura rAgitva karma nAma kI cetanA kahalAtI hai aura usI ke karmaphala
ko karmaphala nAma kI cetanA kahate haiM, vahI vedanA ke nAma se pukArI jAtI hai
// 45 //  nAtmA tasmAdamUrttatvaM caitanyaM nAtivartate  /  ato dehena naikatvaM
tasya mUrttena karhicit  // 46 //  bhAvArtha : isa kAraNa AtmA amUrttatva aura
cetanattva kA ullaMghana nahIM karatA  /  yahI kAraNa hai ki mUrtta zarIra ke
sAtha AtmA kA ekatva kabhI nahIM hotA  //  46 //  sannikRSTAnmano - vANI -
karmAderapi pudgalAt  /  viprakRSTAddhanAdezca bhAvyaivaM bhinnatA''tmanaH  //
47 //  bhAvArtha : isa prakAra mana, vANI, karma Adi samIpavartI pudgaloM se
tathA dhana Adi dUravartI pudgaloM se bhI AtmA kI bhinnatA samajhanI cAhie  //
47 //  pudgalAnAM guNo mUrtirAtmA jJAnaguNaH punaH  /  pudgalebhyastato
bhinnamAtmadravyaM jagurjinAH  // 48 //  bhAvArtha : pudgaloM kA guNa
murtimattva hai, aura AtmA kA guNa jJAna hai; isalie jinendroM ne Atmadravya ko
pudgaloM se bhinna kahA hai  // 48 //  236 adhyAtmasAra

Page #237 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Dharmastikaya's quality is to be the cause of motion (hetu-tva), and the quality
of the soul is knowledge. For this reason, the Jinas have said that jiva-dravya
is different from Dharmastikaya. ||49||  The quality of Adharmastikaya is to be
the cause of stability (sthiti-hetu-tva), while the quality of jiva-dravya is
knowledge. Therefore, the Tirthankaras have said that jiva-dravya is different
from Adharmastikaya. ||50||  The quality of space (vyom) is to provide space
(avagaha), while the quality of the soul is knowledge. Therefore, the
Tirthankaras have said that atma-dravya is different from vyom-astikaya. ||51||
The soul is endowed with the quality of knowledge, this is undeniably proven,
while time (samaya) is endowed with the quality of change (vartana-guna).
Therefore, the omniscient ones have said that atma-dravya is different from
kala-dravya. ||52||  Chapter Eighteen 237

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dharmasya gatihetutvaM guNo jJAnaM tathA''tmanaH  /
dharmAstikAyatadbhinnamAtmadravyaM jagurjinAH  // 49 //  bhAvArtha :
dharmAstikAya kA guNa gati meM kAraNa (hetutva) banatA hai aura AtmA kA guNa
jJAna hai| isI kAraNa jinezvaroM ne jIvadravya ko dharmAstikAya se bhinna kahA
hai  // 49 //  adharme sthitihetutvaM guNo jJAnaguNo'sumAn  /
tato'dharmAstikAyAnyamAtmadravyaM jagurjinAH  // 50 //  bhAvArtha :
adharmAstikAya kA guNa sthiti meM kAraNarUpa hai; jabaki jIvadravya kA guNa
jJAna hai  /  isalie tIrthaMkaroM ne jIvadravya ko adharmAstikAya se bhinna kahA
hai  // 50 //  avagAho guNo vyomno, jJAnaM khalvAtmano guNaH  /
vyomAstikAyAttadbhinnamAtmadravyaM jagurjinAH  // 51 //  bhAvArtha : AkAza kA
guNa avakAza denA hai; jabaki AtmA kA guNa jJAna hai  /  isalie tIrthaMkaroM ne
Atmadravya ko AkAzAstikAya se bhinna kahA hai  // 51 //  AtmA jJAnaguNaH
siddhaH, samayo vartanAguNaH  /  tadbhinnaM samayadravyAdAtmadravyaM jagurjinAH
// 52 //  bhAvArtha : AtmA jJAnarUpa guNavAlA hai, yaha nirvivAda siddha hai,
jaba ki samaya (kAla) varttanAguNa vAlA hai| isalie sarvajJoM ne Atmadravya ko
kAladravya se bhinna kahA hai  // 52 //  adhikAra aThArahavA~ 237

Page #238 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The difference between the soul and non-soul substances is established. Due to
the order of the Nay of individual difference, the non-soul nature of the soul
is also desired. ||53||  **Meaning:** For this reason, the difference between
the soul substance and non-soul substances is established, and due to the order
of the Nay of individual difference, the non-soul nature of the soul is also
desired. ||53||  The worldly soul is non-soul in relation to pure feeling-life,
and the pure-knowing liberated soul is non-soul in relation to substance-life.
||54||  **Meaning:** In relation to pure feeling-life, the worldly soul is non-
soul, and in relation to substance-life, the pure-knowing liberated soul is non-
soul. ||54||  The senses, strength, breathing, and lifespan are the four types
of substance-life, whose modifications are based on the pudgala. ||55||
**Meaning:** The senses, strength, breathing, and lifespan are the four types of
substance-life, whose modifications are based on the pudgala. ||55||  These are
completely different from the soul; therefore, there is no life for the soul in
those substance-lives which are modified by knowledge, energy, constant
breathing, and eternal existence. ||56||  **Meaning:** These substance-lives are
completely different from the soul; therefore, there is no life for the soul in
those substance-lives which are modified by knowledge, energy, constant
breathing, and eternal existence. ||56||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 AtmanastadajIvebhyo vibhinnattvaM vyavasthitam  /
vyaktibhedanayAdezAdajIvattvamapISyate  // 53 //  bhAvArtha : isa kAraNa
Atmadravya kI ajIvadravyoM se bhinnatA siddha ho jAtI hai tathA vyaktibheda
karane vAle naya ke Adeza se AtmA kA ajIvattva bhI iSTa ho, aisA hI cAhate haiM
// 53 //  ajIvA janminaH zuddhabhAvaprANavyapekSayA  /  siddhAzca nirmalajJAnA
dravyaprANavyapekSayA  // 54 //  bhAvArtha : zuddha bhAvaprANa kI apekSA se
saMsArI jIva ajIva haiM aura nirmala jJAnavAn siddhajIva dravyaprANa kI apekSA
se ajIvarUpa haiM  // 54 //  indriyANi balaM zvAsocchvAso hyAyustathA'param  /
dravyaprANAzcaturbhedAH paryAyAH pudgalAzritAH  // 55 //  bhAvArtha : indriyA~,
bala, zvAsocchvAsa tathA AyuSya ye cAra prakAra ke dravyaprANa haiM, jinake
paryAya pudgalAzrita haiM  // 55 /  /  bhinnAste dyAtmano'tyantaM tadetairnAsti
jIvanam  /  jJAna-vIrya-sadAzvAsa-nityasthitivikAribhiH  // 56 //  bhAvArtha :
AtmA se ye dravyaprANa sarvathA bhinna haiM  /  isa kAraNa jJAna, vIrya, sadA
zvAsa aura nitya sthiti se vikRta rUpa vAle una dravyaprANoM (ke AdhAra) se AtmA
kA jIvana (jInA) nahIM hotA  // 56 //  238 adhyAtmasAra

Page #239 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
By these eternal powers, which are the nature of the soul, the soul lives
eternally, this is the state (arrangement) of the pure substance (dravyaarthic)
nay. ||57||  Meaning: By the power of these aforementioned eternal powers, such
as knowledge, energy, etc., which are the nature of the soul, the soul lives
eternally, this is the state (arrangement) of the pure substance (dravyaarthic)
nay. ||57||  The soul lives without the breaths, and the soul lives only by
those breaths. Who can understand this wonderful character? ||58||  Meaning: The
soul lives without the breaths, and the soul lives only by those breaths. Who
can understand this wonderful character? ||58||  The soul is neither virtuous
nor sinful, because (these) virtues and sins are pudgalatmak - they are in the
form of pudgalas and are conceived as the material cause of the first childhood
body. ||59||  Meaning: The soul is neither virtuous nor sinful, because (these)
virtues and sins are pudgalatmak - they are in the form of pudgalas and are
conceived as the material cause of the first childhood body. ||59||  Virtuous
karma is called punya and non-virtuous karma is called papa. Why is punya called
virtuous, because it throws beings into the pit of birth, causing them to take
many births. ||60||  Meaning: Virtuous karma is called punya and non-virtuous
karma is called papa. Why is punya called virtuous, because it throws beings
into the pit of birth, causing them to take many births. ||60||  Chapter
Eighteen 239

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 etatprakRtibhUtAbhiH zAzvatIbhistu zaktibhiH  /  jIvatyAtmA sadetyeSA
zuddhadravyanayasthitiH  // 57 //  bhAvArtha : ina pUrvokta jJAna-vIrya Adi
prakRtirUpa zAzvat zaktiyoM ke bala para AtmA nirantara jItA hai, yaha zuddha
dravya (dravyArthika) naya kI sthiti (vyavasthA) hai  // 57 //  jIvo jIvati na
prANairvinA taireva jIvati  /  idaM citraM caritraM ke hanta paryanuyuJjatAm  //
58  //  bhAvArtha : jina prANoM ke binA jIva jItA nahIM hai, unhIM prANoM ke
binA jIva jItA hai, isa Azcaryajanaka caritra ko kauna jAna sakate haiM?  // 58
//  nA''tmA puNyaM, na vA pApamete yatpudgalAtmake  /
AdyabAlazarIrasyopAdAnattvena kalpite  // 59 //  bhAvArtha : AtmA puNya nahIM
hai yA pApa bhI nahIM hai, kyoMki (ye) pApa-puNya pudgalAtmaka haiM- pudgalarUpa
haiM aura prathama bAlazarIra ke upAdAnakAraNa ke rUpa meM kalpita haiM  // 59
//  puNyaM karma zubhaM proktamazubhaM pApamucyate  /  tatkathaM tu zubhaM
jantUn yatpAtayati janmani ?  // 60 //  bhAvArtha : zubhakarma ko puNya kahA
jAtA hai aura azubhakarma ko pApa kahA jAtA hai  /  ina donoM meM puNya ko zubha
kyoM kahA jAtA hai ?, kyoMki vaha to prANiyoM ko janma ke gartta meM DAlatA hai,
aneka janma karAtA hai  // 60 //  adhikAra aThArahavA~ 239

Page #240 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Neither in the bondage of iron nor in that of gold, which is covered with gold,
is there any difference in dependence; therefore, there is no difference in the
fruits. ||61||  **Meaning:** Whether the fetters are made of iron or gold, the
dependence is the same in both; therefore, there is no difference in their
fruits. ||61||  There is no difference between merit and demerit in terms of the
fruits of happiness and suffering, because the fruit of merit, which is
happiness, is not essentially different from suffering. ||62||  **Meaning:**
There is no difference between merit and demerit in terms of the fruits of
happiness and suffering, because the fruit of merit, which is happiness, is not
essentially different from suffering. ||62||  The fruit of all merit is
suffering, because it arises from karma. The foolish think that suffering is
happiness because it is a compensation for suffering. ||63||  **Meaning:** The
fruit of all merit is suffering, because it arises from karma. The foolish think
that suffering is happiness because it is a compensation for suffering. ||63||
The wise consider the happiness arising from merit to be suffering because of
its consequences, its pain, its karmic imprint, and its opposition to the nature
of the soul. ||64||  **Meaning:** The wise consider the happiness arising from
merit to be suffering because of its consequences, its pain, its karmic imprint,
and its opposition to the nature of the soul. ||64||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 na hyAsayasya bandhasya tapanIyamayasya ca  /  pAratantryAvizeSeNa
phalabhedo'sti kazcana  // 61 //  bhAvArtha : ber3I lohe kI ho yA sone kI
paratantratA donoM meM eka sarIkhI hotI hai; isa kAraNa unameM kisI prakAra kA
phalabheda nahIM hotA  // 61 //  phalAbhyAM sukhaduHkhAbhyAM na bhedaH
punnypaapyoH| duHkhAna bhidyate hanta ! yataH puNyaphalaM sukham  // 62 //
bhAvArtha : sukha aura duHkharUpa phala ko lekara puNya aura pApa meM koI bheda
nahIM hai, kyoMki puNya kA phala, jo sukha hai, vaha duHkha se khAsa bhinna
nahIM hai  // 62 //  sarvapuNyaphalaM duHkhaM karmodayakRtatvataH  /  tatra
duHkhapratIkAre vimUDhAnAM sukhatvadhIH  // 63 //  bhAvArtha : samasta puNyoM kA
phala duHkharUpa hai, kyoMki yaha saba karmo ke udaya se hotA hai  /  mUr3ha
logoM ko duHkha ke pratIkAra meM sukha hone kI buddhi hotI hai  // 63 /  /
pariNAmAcca tApAcca saMskArAcca budhairmatam  /  guNavRttivirodhAcca duHkhaM
puNyabhavaM sukham  // 64 //  bhAvArtha : puNya se utpanna hue sukha ko paNDitoM
pariNAma kI dRSTi se, tApa kI dRSTi se, saMskAra kI dRSTi se tathA guNavRtti kA
virodha hone ke kAraNa duHkharUpa mAnA hai  // 64 //  240 adhyAtmasAra

Page #241 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Dehaputti of humans, devas, and leaders is clearly a terrible consequence, like
fattening a large goat by nourishing it.   Leeches enjoy sucking blood, and
those who indulge in sense pleasures also consider them pleasurable, but both
ultimately reach a terrifying state.  Just as iron heated by intense fire dries
up, when the senses are always eager for sense objects, there is only torment,
not happiness.  Before and after the touch of aversion, in the group of senses
that have undergone cooking, there is only anguish, not contentment.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dehapuSTenarAmartyanAyakAnAmapi sphuTam  /  mahAjapoSaNasyeva
pariNAmo'tidAruNaH  // 65 //  bhAvArtha : manuSyoM aura devoM ke tathA netAoM ke
bhI zarIra ke puSTa (haTTekaTTe) hone kA pariNAma bhI bar3e bakare ko poSaNa
karake moTA tAjA banAne ke samAna atyanta bhayaMkara AtA hai  // 65 //  jalUkAH
sukhamAninyaH pibantyo rudhiraM ythaa| bhuJjAnA viSayacAn yAnti
dazAmante'tidAruNAm  // 66 //  bhAvArtha : jaise joMka khUna cUsa kara atyanta
sukha mAnatA hai, vaise ho viSayabhogoM ko bhogane vAle unameM sukha mAnate
haiM, lekina donoM aMta meM atyanta bhayaMkara dazA ko prApta karate haiM  // 66
//  tIvrAgnisaMgasaMzuSyat payasAmayasAmiva  /  yatrautsukyAt sadAkSANAM taptatA
tatra kiM sukham ?  // 67 //  bhAvArtha : tIvra agni ke saMga se lohe kA pAnI
sUkha jAtA hai, aura vaha saMtapta ho jAtA hai, vaise hI viSayasukhoM meM sadA
utsuka hone ke kAraNa indriyA~ bhI saMtapta rahatI haiM  /  jahA~ tApa hai,
vahA~ sukha kahA~ se ho sakatA hai? prAkpazcAccAratisparzAt puTapAkamupeyuSi  /
indriyANAM gaNe tApavyApa eva na nirvRtiH  // 68 //  bhAvArtha : pahale aura
bAda meM bhI saMtApa (arati) ke sparza hone se puTa-pAka ko prApta indriyoM ke
gaNa meM saMtApa hI phailatA hai, sukha nahIM hotA  // 68 //  adhikAra
aThArahavA~ 241

Page #242 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Where there is constant mention of hatred towards one's opponents, even during
the experience of happiness, there the mind is afflicted with sorrow, even when
sitting peacefully at home. ||69||  Just as the burden does not actually
decrease by transferring it from one shoulder to another, so too, the karmic
impressions of sorrow are not truly eradicated by the enjoyment of the senses.
||70||  Happiness, sorrow, and delusion, these three are the activities of the
Gunas. Although they are opposed to each other, they do not transcend the nature
of sorrow, and therefore are sorrow-like. ||71||  All enjoyment arising from the
senses is like the spread of a cobra's hood in anger. Even pleasurable
enjoyment, like a beautiful painting, is a cause of fear for the discerning.
||72||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 sadA yatra sthito dveSollekhaH svapratipanthiSu  /  sukhAnubhavakAle'pi tatra
tApahataM manaH  // 69 //  bhAvArtha : jahA~ sukha kA anubhava karane ke samaya
bhI nirantara apane zatruoM ke prati dveSa kA cintana (ullekha) rahatA hai,
vahA~ usakA mana ghara meM zAnta baiThA rahane para bhI tApa se Ahata (vyathita)
rahatA hai  // 69 //  skandhAtskandhAntarArope bhArasyeva na tattvataH  /
akSAhlAde'pi duHkhasya saMskAro vinitartate  // 70 //  bhAvArtha : eka skandha
se dUsare skandha para bhAra rakha dene se jaise bhAra kama nahIM hotA, vaise hI
indriyoM ke Ananda se bhI vastutaH duHkha ke saMskAra naSTa (nivRtta) nahIM hote
// 70 //  sukhaM duHkhaM ca mohazca tistro'pi guNavRttayaH  /  viruddhA api
vartante duHkhajAtyanatikramAt  // 71 //  bhAvArtha : sukha, duHkha aura moha
ina tInoM guNoM kI vRttiyA~ viruddha haiM, to bhI ye tInoM duHkha kI jAti kA
atikramaNa (ullaMghana) nahIM karatIM, isalie duHkharUpa hI haiM  // 71 //
kruddhanAgaphaNAbhogopamo bhogodbhavo'khilaH  /  vilAsazcitrarUpo'pi
bhayaheturvivekinAm  // 72 //  bhAvArtha : sAre bhogoM se utpanna huA sukha kA
anubhava krodha meM uphanate hue sarpa ke phana ke phailAva sarIkhA hai aisA 242
adhyAtmasAra

Page #243 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The diverse kinds of luxury are also a cause of fear for the wise. ||72|| Having
attained oneness (siddh) in this way, as a result of merit and demerit. He who
does not believe this, the foolish soul, has no end to his ocean of existence.
||73|| Due to these aforementioned reasons, the soul is distinct from both merit
and demerit, which are both of the same nature as suffering. Because, from the
perspective of pure conviction, the soul is always sat-chit-ananda-maya. ||74||
Just as the form of the sun, which is of the nature of heat and light, becomes
visible when the clouds disappear, so too does the form of the soul, which is
capable of being known in the fourth state, become visible when the coverings
are destroyed. ||75|| Diverse thoughts and experiences of happiness arise from
the eyes of the waking state. But the common nature is that of chit-ananda,
which pervades all states. ||76||  Chapter Eighteen 243

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 vicitra prakAra kA vilAsa bhI vivekIjanoM ke lie bhaya kA kAraNa hai  // 72 //
itthamekatvAmApannaM phalataH puNyapApayoH  /  manyate yo na mUr3hAtmA
nAntastasya bhavodadheH  // 73 //  bhAvArtha : isa prakAra puNya-pApa ke phala
kI dRSTi se ekatva prApta (siddha) huaa| magara jo mUr3hAtmA isa bAta ko nahIM
mAnatA, usake bhavasAgara kA anta nahIM AtA  // 73 //
duHkhaikarUpayobhinnastenAtmA puNyapApayoH  /  zuddhanizcayataH
satyacidAnandamayaH sadA  // 74 //  bhAvArtha : isa pUrvokta kAraNoM se duHkha
ke hI eka svarUpa vAle puNya aura pApa donoM se AtmA pRthak hai  /  kyoMki
zuddha nizcayanaya kI dRSTi se AtmA sadA sat-cit-Anandamaya hai  // 4 //
tatturIyadazAvyaMgyarUpamAvaraNakSayAt  /  bhAtyuSNodyotazIlasya ghananAzAd
raveriva  // 5 //  bhAvArtha : jaise bAdaloM ke miTa (phaTa) jAne se uSNaprakAza
ke svabhAvavAle sUrya kA rUpa dikhAI dene lagatA hai; vaise hI AvaraNa kA kSaya
hone se taryadazA meM jAnA jA sake aisA AtmA kA rUpa dikhAI detA hai  // 75 //
jAyante jAgrato'kSebhyazcitrA dhiisukhvRttyH| sAmAnyaM tu cidAnandarUpaM
sarvadazAnvayi  // 76 //  adhikAra aThArahavA~ 243

Page #244 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Meaning:** The awakened soul experiences various types of mental afflictions
(ādhi) arising from the senses, while in general, the radiant, blissful, and
ever-connected nature of the soul is manifested. ||76||  **Meaning:** Just as
fire does not burn from a spark, nor does it generate heat in that state,
similarly, the soul is not affected by these pleasurable experiences, nor is it
overcome by them. ||77||  **Meaning:** Just as the sun shines in the state of
deep sleep, without any sense of self, so too, in pure discernment, the blissful
and witnessing nature of the soul is manifested with utmost clarity. ||78||
**Meaning:** Therefore, according to the perspective of pure discernment, the
soul is the experiencer of pure bliss (cidānanda), while according to the
perspective of impure discernment, it is the experiencer of pleasure and pain
caused by karma. ||79||  244 Adhyatma Sara

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 bhAvArtha : jAgRta AtmA ko indriyoM se aneka prakAra kI Adhi (mAnasika vyathA)
vAlI sukha kI vRttiyA~ utpanna hotI haiM, jabaki sAmAnyatayA to sarvadazA meM
sambandha vAlA cidAnandarUpa pratibhAsita hotA hai  // 76 //  sphuliMgairna
yathA vahnirdIpyate tApyate'thavA  /  nAnubhUtiparAbhUtI, tathaitAbhiH
kilAtmanaH  // 77 //  bhAvArtha : jaise agni tinake se nahIM jalatI, athavA usa
hAlata meM vaha garmI bhI nahIM detI, vaise hI ina sukha kI vRttiyoM se AtmA kA
anubhava athavA parAbhava nahIM hotA  // 77 //  sAkSiNaH sukharUpasya suSuptau
nirahaMkRtam  /  yathA bhAnaM tathA zuddhaviveke tadatisphuTam  // 78 //
bhAvArtha : suSupti-avasthA meM sukharUpa, aura sAkSIbhUta AtmA kA jaise
ahaMkAra rahita bhAna hotA hai, vaise hI zuddha viveka meM vaha bhAna atyanta
spaSTa hotA hai  //  78  //  taccidAnandabhAvasya bhoktAtmA zuddhanizcayAt  /
azuddhanizcayAtkarmakRtayoH sukhaduHkhayoH  // 79 //  bhAvArtha : isa kAraNa
zuddha nizcayanaya ke mata se AtmA cidAnanda svabhAva kA bhoktA hai, aura
azuddha nizcayanaya ke mata se karma ke dvArA kiye hue sukha - duHkha kA bhoktA
hai  // 79 //  244 adhyAtmasAra

Page #245 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Even in the case of karma, enjoyment, and objects of enjoyment, the practitioner
should understand the system of the *naigama* and other *nayas* from this
perspective. ||80||  **Meaning:** The soul experiences both *saataavedaniya* and
*asaataavedaniya* karma, and due to the acceptance of the *vyavahara*
perspective, it also experiences enjoyment of objects like garlands, clothes,
ornaments, women, etc. The *naigama* (a *naya* that considers multiple
possibilities) and other *nayas* like *sangraha* and *vyavahara* should also be
understood from this perspective, i.e., through the framework of the
*visheshgrahi* *naya*. In other words, scholars should carefully plan and
understand these *nayas*. ||80||  The soul, being the *vibhu* (pervasive) due to
the *shuddha* *naya*, is also the doer of pure actions, because this *shuddha*
*naya* considers the soul as the doer based on the activity of pure moments.
||81||  **Meaning:** The soul, being pervasive due to the *shuddha* *naya*, is
also the doer of pure actions, because this *shuddha* *naya* considers the soul
as the doer based on the activity of pure moments. ||81||  When the kingdom of
non-disturbance prevails and the state of *vishabhaga* is destroyed, the soul
engages in the creation of pure nature. ||82||  **Meaning:** When the kingdom of
non-disturbance prevails and the state of *vishabhaga* is destroyed, the soul
engages in the creation of pure nature. ||82||  Chapter Eighteen _245_

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmaNo'pi ca bhogasya stragAdervyavahArataH  /  naigamAdivyavasthA'pi
bhAvanIyA'nayA dizA  // 80 //  bhAvArtha : jIva sAtAvedanIya, asAtAvedanIya Adi
karma kA bhI azuddha nizcayanaya se bhoktA hai tathA vyavahAranaya ke mata kA
abalambana lene se puSpamAlA, vastra, AbhUSaNa, strI vagairaha bhogoM kA bhI
bhoktA hai| naigama yAnI aneka-vikalpAvalambI naya tathA Adi zabda se saMgraha,
vyavahAra vagairaha nayoM kI vyavasthA-maryAdA bhI isI dizA se hI-arthAt
vizeSagrAhInaya ke matAdi kI ranacA ke dvArA jAna lenA  /  yAnI paNDitoM ko
vicAraparvaka usakI yojanA kara lenI cAhie  // 80 /  /  kartA'pi
zuddhabhAvAnAmAtmA zuddhanayAdvibhuH  /  pratItya vRttiM yacchuddhakSaNAnAmeSa
manyate  // 81 //  bhAvArtha : zuddha naya se vibhu (vyApaka) AtmA zuddha bhAvoM
kA kartA bhI hotA kyoMki yaha zuddha naya zuddha kSaNoM kI vRtti kI apekSA se
(Azraya lekara) jIva ko karttA ke rUpa meM mAnatA hai  // 81 //
anupaplavAsAmrAjye visabhAgaparikSaye  /  AtmA zuddhasvabhAvAnAM jananAya
pravartate  // 82 //  _ bhAvArtha : anupadrava kA sAmrAjya hone para aura
visabhAga dazA kA nAza hone para bhI AtmA zuddha svabhAva ko utpanna karane kI
pravRtti karatA hai  // 82 //  adhikAra aThArahavA~ _245

Page #246 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The mind itself is the world, filled with passions and afflictions. It is said
that when it is freed from these passions and afflictions, it becomes the
**bhavant**. ||83||  **Meaning:** The mind, filled with passions and afflictions
like anger, is the world, and the mind freed from these passions and afflictions
is called the **bhavant**. ||83||  The moment of the mind that is afflicted is
not the Self, because of the contradiction. The word **ananvavikrit**
(unchanging) is appropriate for the form of the Self. ||84||  **Meaning:** The
moment of the mind that is afflicted is not the Self, because of the
contradiction, because the form of the Self is unchanging. Therefore, this word
is meaningful. ||84||  Just as the statement "Only what is useful is heard" is
false, so too is the statement "The Self is pure in form." This is what the
**shabdanyaya** says. ||85||  **Meaning:** Just as the statement "Only what is
useful is heard" is false, so too is the statement "The Self is pure in form."
This is what the **shabdanyaya** says. ||85||  When the Self is pure and
manifests its own nature, then it is pure. In this way, the distinctions of
primary and secondary, etc., are also real. ||86||  **Meaning:** When the Self
is pure and manifests its own nature, then it is pure. In this way, the
distinctions of primary and secondary, etc., are also real. ||86||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 cittameva hi saMsAro rAgaklezAdivAsitam  /  tadeva tairvinirmuktaM bhavAnta iti
kathyate  // 83 //  bhAvArtha : rAgAdi klezoM se vAsita citta hI saMsAra hai
aura una rAgAdi klezoM se mukta huA citta hI bhavAnta kahalAtA hai  // 83 //
yazca cittakSaNaH kliSTo nAsAvAtmA virodhataH  /  ananyavikRtaM
rUpamityanvarthaM hyadaH padam  // 84 //  bhAvArtha : jo citta kA kSaNa (samaya)
kliSTa hai, vaha virodha ke kAraNa AtmA nahIM hai, kyoMki usa AtmA kA rUpa
nirvikAra hai, isalie yaha pada sArthaka hai  // 84 //
zrutavAnupayogazcetyetanmithyA yathA vacaH  /  tathA''tmA zuddharUpazcetyevaM
zabdanayA jaguH  // 85 //  bhAvArtha : jaise "upayoga zrutavAn hI hotA hai" yaha
vacana mithyA hai, vaise hI 'AtmA zuddharUpa hI hotI hai', yaha vacana bhI
mithyA hai, yoM zabdanaya kahate haiM  // 85 /  /  zuddhaparyAyarUpastadAtmA
zuddhaH svabhAvakRt  /  prathamAprathamatvAdibhedo'pyevaM hi tAttvikaH  // 86 //
bhAvArtha : jaba AtmA zuddha paryAyarUpa hokara apane (AtmA ke) svabhAva ko
pragaTa karane vAlA hotA hai, tabhI AtmA zuddha hai| isa prakAra pradhAnatA aura
apradhAnatA Adi bheda bhI pAramArthika (vAstavika) hote haiM  // 86 //  246
adhyAtmasAra

Page #247 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
These Digambara, who consider the self as pure substance, declare it to be the
doer of pure nature. They are to be understood as having extraordinary
intellect. ||87||  Meaning: Those who consider the self as pure substance, like
the Digambara, and declare it to be the doer of pure nature, should be
understood as having extraordinary intellect. ||87||  The nature of the
substance is pure, as stated by the venerable Siddhasena Divakara in the
Sammatitarka, and is within the scope of the collection principle. ||48||
Meaning: This is the reason why the venerable Siddhasena Divakara, in the
Sammatitarka, has stated that the pure nature of the substance is within the
scope of the collection principle. ||48||  According to this principle, the self
is not the doer of actions, because there is always a connection (relationship)
between the self and actions. The self is merely a witness, remaining steadfast.
||89||  Meaning: According to the stated principle, the self is not the doer of
actions, because there is always a connection (relationship) between the self
and actions. Instead, the self is merely a witness, remaining steadfast. ||89||
This self, situated like an indifferent one, does not engage in any action. Just
as the sky is not stained by mud, so too the self is not stained by karma.
||90||  Meaning: This self, situated like an indifferent one, does not engage in
any action. Just as the sky is not stained by mud, so too the self is not
stained by karma. ||90||  Chapter Eighteen 247

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 ye tu digpaTadezIyAH zuddhadravyatayA''tmanaH  /  zuddhasvabhAvakartRtvaM
jaguste'pUrvabuddhayaH  // 87 //  bhAvArtha : jo digambarakalpa zuddhadravyatva
ko lekara AtmA ko zuddha svabhAva kA kartA kahate haiM, unheM apUrvabuddhi vAle
samajhane cAhie  // 87 //  dravyAstikasya prakRtiH zuddhA saMgrahagocarA  /
yenauktA sammatau zrImatsiddhasena-divAkaraiH  // 48 //  bhAvArtha : yahI kAraNa
hai ki zrImAn siddhasena divAkara ne sanmatitarka meM dravyAstika kI zuddha
prakRti saMgraha naya ke viSaya vAlI kahI hai  // 8 //  tanmate ca na kartRtvaM
bhAvAnAM sarvadA'nvayAt  /  kUTasthaH kevalaM tiSThatyAtmA sAkSitvamAzritaH  //
89 //  bhAvArtha : ukta naya ke mata se padArthoM kA sadA anvaya (sambandha)
hone se AtmA kA kartRtva nahIM hai, apitu sAkSitva kA Azraya karane vAlI kevala
kUTastha AtmA sthita hai  // 89 //  kartuM vyApriyate nAyamudAsIna iva sthitH|
AkAzamiva paMkena lipyate, na ca karmaNA  // 10 //  bhAvArtha : udAsIna kI
taraha sthita yaha AtmA kucha bhI karane ke lie vyApAra (pravRtti) nahIM karatI
/  jaise kIcar3a se AkAza lipta nahIM hotA, vaise hI AtmA karma se lipta nahIM
hotI  // 90 //  adhikAra aThArahavA~ 247

Page #248 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The true nature of the self (ātman) is not to be made (kर्तव्य), but only to be
known (ज्ञातव्य) by itself. Just as a lamp illuminates light, but does not
create new light, so too the self does not create its own nature.   Otherwise,
if the self were to be created, it would be devoid of its own nature (स्वरूप)
and become non-self (अनात्मा). And even with thousands of reasons, the non-self
cannot become the self.  Therefore, according to this principle (नय), the self
is not the doer (कर्त्ता), but the holder of pure consciousness (शुद्ध भाव).
However, for the sake of convention (लोकोपचार), the self may be considered the
doer, but there is no harm in that.  Those who believe in the creation of the
qualities of the self (आत्मधर्माणां) are mistaken. They believe that these
qualities are distinct and can be grasped. But since they are unmanifest
(अव्यक्ति) and covered (आवृतेस्तेषां), how can they have any reality (नाभावादिति
का प्रभा)?

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 svarUpaM tu kartavyaM, jJAtavyaM kevalaM svtH| dIpena dIpyate jyotirna
tvapUrvaM vidhIyate  // 11 //  bhAvArtha : AtmA ko apanA svarUpa karanA
(kartavya) nahIM hotA, kevala svataH jAnanA (jJAtavya) hotA hai  /  dIpaka se
jyoti (prakAza) pradIpta hotI hai, parantu usase koI apUrva jyoti pragaTa nahIM
kI jA sakatI  // 91 //  anyathA prAganAtmA syAt svarUpAnanuvRttitaH  /  na ca
hetusahastreNA'pyAtmA syAdanAtmanaH  // 12 //  bhAvArtha : anyathA (pUrvokta
mata ko na mAnane para) AtmA apane rUpa kI utpatti se pahale svarUpa ke
asambandha ke kAraNa anAtmA (jar3a) ho jaaygii| aura usa anAtmA kA Atmatva
hajAroM hetuoM se bhI siddha (prApta) nahIM hogA  // 92 /  naye teneha no karttA
kintvAtmA zuddhabhAvakRt  /  upacArAttu lokeSu tatkartRtvamapISyatAm  // 13 //
bhAvArtha : isalie isa naya se AtmA kartA nahIM hai, parantu zuddha bhAva kA
dhAraNa karane vAlA hai aura lokopacAra se usakA (AtmA kA) kartRtva bhI bhale hI
mAneM, koI harja nahIM  // 13 //  utpattimAtmadharmANAM vizeSagrAhiNo jaguH  /
avyaktirAvRtesteSAM nAbhAvAditi kA prabhA ?  // 14 //  248 adhyAtmasAra

Page #249 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Meaning:** This verse states the origin of the religions of the soul, which is
the special recipient of the Nay. They are not without manifestation (non-
manifestation) due to the covering, nor are they without manifestation due to
the absence of the soul's dharma. What is the proof of this? ||14||
**Meaning:**  Sattva (substance) is not suitable in any way for the parasantaana
(lineage of others), and since the santani (descendants) are impermanent, the
santana (lineage) is also not dhruva (permanent). Just as in the birth of a son
from a father, the cause of the father in the past leads to the effect of the
son in the future, there is an absence of fatherhood and sonship before this. In
this way, as fatherhood is destroyed through tradition, so too is sonship
destroyed. Similarly, the tradition of the birth and destruction of the soul
from parasantaana, that is, from the non-self (inert pudgala) other than itself,
continues in various times. That is, from the flow of birth, there is an absence
(destruction) of the past and the birth (existence) of the future. According to
this, the destruction of the past and then the future will be proven, and the
soul will become impermanent and perishable. However, the cause of sattva
(substance) in the form of parasantaana is not justified in any way. Just as in
the tradition of the thread, the right of the earth-like substance is the
eighteenth...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 bhAvArtha : vizeSagrAhI naya AtmA ke dharmoM kI utpatti kA kathana karate haiM
/  unheM AvaraNa ke kAraNa avyakti (anabhivyakti) nahIM hai, Atmadharma ke
abhAva se avyakti nahIM hai, isameM kyA pramANa hai?  // 14 //  satvaM ca
parasantAne nopayuktaM kathaccana  /  santAninAmanityatvAt santAno'pi ca na
dhruvaH  // 15 //  bhAvArtha : parasantAna meM satva kisI bhI taraha upayukta
nahIM hote aura santAnI kI anityatA hone se santAna bhI dhruva (nitya) nahIM
hote  /  jaisa pitA se putrarUpa santAna kI utpatti meM pUrva-pUrva pitArUpa
kAraNa se uttarottara putrarUpa kArya kI utpatti hotI hai, isase pahale pitRtva
kA abhAva aura putratva kA abhAva hotA jAtA hai| isa prakAra paramparA se
calate-calate jaise pitRtva kA nAza hotA hai, vaise putratva kA bhI nAza hotA
jAtA hai| isI taraha parasantAna se yAnI apane se atirikta anAtmA (jar3a
pudgala) se vividhakAla meM AtmA kI utpatti aura vinAza kI paramparA calatI hai
/  arthAta utpattirUpa pravAha se parva kA abhAva (vinAza) aura uttara kI
utpatti (bhAva) hotI hai  /  isake anusAra pahale pUrva kA, phira uttara kA nAza
siddha hogA aura AtmA azAzvata evaM nAzavAna ho jAegA parantu sattva (dravya) kA
parasantAnarUpa kAraNa kisI bhI prakAra yukti-yukta nahIM hotA  /  jaise tantu
kI paramparA meM miTTIrUpa dravya kA adhikAra aThArahavA~ 249

Page #250 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
There is no connection, in the same way, the offspring, that is, the
impermanence of the Jivadi dravya (due to the non-permanence of the continuous
oneness), the offspring (the dharma present in the action) is also not dhruva
(eternal). From this, it is proved that the birth that occurred in the Deva,
Manushya, Tiryanch and Naraka states, means that the soul was born; because
there is an inseparable connection between dharma and dharmi. From this
perspective, due to the impermanence of the offspring, the offspring is also
proved to be impermanent. ||95|| Even the sky is born from the nature of its
penetration into that-that substance, therefore, from the strength of this
example, the eternality of Atmadharmas is not there. ||96|| ||96|| Meaning: For
this reason, even the sky is born from the nature of its penetration into that-
that substance, from the strength of this example, the eternality of Atmadharmas
is not there. ||96|| The Riju Sutra Nay there considers it to be the doer. The
soul itself transforms into whatever state, whenever. ||97|| Meaning: The soul
itself, whenever, that is, in whatever state it transforms, the Riju Sutra Nay
considers the soul to be the doer of that-that state. ||97|| I The Jains do not
accept the doership of other states. For the Jains, two actions are not
considered to be of one dravya. ||98|| 250 Adhyatma Saar

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 sambandha nahIM hai, usI taraha santAnI kA yAnI jIvAdi dravya kI anityatA hone
se ( nirantara ekAkAratA na rahane se saMtAna bhI (kArya meM pravartamAna dharma
bhI ) dhruva (nitya) nahIM hai  /  isase yaha siddha huA ki deva, manuSya
tiryaMca aura nAraka - avasthA meM jo utpatti huI, usakA matalaba huA - AtmA
utpanna huI; kyoMki dharma aura dharmI kA abheda sambandha hai  /  isa dRSTi se
santAna kI anityatA ke kAraNa santAnI bhI anitya siddha huA  // 95 //
vyomA'pyutpattimattattadavagAhanAtmanA tataH  /  nityatA nAtmadhamINAM
taddRSTAntabalAdapi  //  96  //   // 96 //  bhAvArtha : isa kAraNa AkAza bhI
usa-usa padArtha kI avagAhanA ke svarUpa se utpattimAna hai, isa dRSTAnta ke
sAmarthya se bhI AtmadharmoM kI nityatA nahIM hai  // 96 //  RjusUtranayastatra
karttRtAM tasya manyate  /  svayaM pariNAmatyAtmA yaM yaM bhAvaM yadA yadA  //
97 //  bhAvArtha : AtmA svayaM jaba-jaba yAnI jisa-jisa bhAva meM pariNata hotI
hai | vahA~-vahA~ RjusUtranaya AtmA ko usausa bhAva kA karttA mAnatA hai  // 97
//  I karttRtvaM parabhAvAnAmasau nAbhyupagacchati  /  kriyAdvayaM hi naikasya
dravyasyAbhimataM jinaiH  // 98  //  250 adhyAtmasAra

Page #251 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Meaning:** This does not accept the agency of Nayaprabhavas, because two
actions in one dravya are not accepted by the Jineswaras. ||98||  **Meaning:**
The action that is to be in the lineage of one dravya is the same action, that
action does not occur without samana jatiya in the qualities of the paradravya.
||99||  **Meaning:** If there is no other person (soul) who is the doer of other
bhavas, then there will be no order of violence, compassion, charity, and
stealing, etc. ||100||  **Meaning:** "My dear! Your statement is true that there
is no dependent fruit for anyone; however, the karma that is present in oneself
does not violate its own fruit. ||101||  **Meaning:** It does not harm anyone
else, and certainly does not protect. Its lifespan is the destruction of karma,
death is otherwise life. ||102||  **Chapter Eighteen** **251**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 bhAvArtha : yaha naya parabhAvoM ke kartRtva kA svIkAra nahIM karatA, kyoMki
eka dravya meM do kriyAe~ jinezvaroM dvArA abhimata nahIM hai  // 98 //
bhUtiryA hi kriyA saiva syAdekadravyasantatau  /  na sAjAtyaM vinA ca syAt
paradravyaguNeSu sA  // 19 //  bhAvArtha : eka dravya kI santati meM jo kriyA
honI hotI hai, vahI kriyA hotI hai, vaha kriyA paradravya ke guNoM meM
samAnajAtIyatA ke binA nahIM hotI  // 99 //  nanvevamanyabhAvAnAM na cet
kartA'paro janaH  /  tadA hiMsAdayAdAnaharaNAdyavyavasthitiH  // 100 //
bhAvArtha : yadi dUsarA koI (AtmA) vyakti anya bhAvoM kA kartA nahIM hotA hai,
to phira hiMsA, dayA, dAna, aura haraNa Adi kI vyavasthA nahIM hogI  // 100 //
satyaM parAzrayaM na syAt phalaM kasyApi padyapi  /  tathApi svagataM karma
svaphalaM nAtivartate  // 101 //  bhAvArtha : "vatsa ! tumhArA kahanA satya hai
ki parAzrita phala yadyapi kisI ko bhI nahIM hotA; tathApi svayaM meM sthita
karma apane phala kA ullaMghana nahIM karatA  // 101 /  hinasti na para ko'pi,
nizcayAnna ca rakSati  /  tadAyuH karmaNo nAze, mRtirjIvanamanyathA  // 102 //
adhikAra aThArahavA~ 251

Page #252 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Meaning:** From the perspective of **nirnaya-drishti** (certain vision), no
one kills another, nor does anyone protect them. But when their **ayushya-
karma** (life-span karma) is destroyed, death occurs. Otherwise, they remain
alive. ||102||  **Meaning:** Only through the **svagata** (inherent) **himsa**
(violence) and **daya** (compassion) within oneself, a person (**purusha**)
attains diverse fruits without depending on others. ||103||  **Meaning:**
Whether the body dies or not, **himsa** (violence) is certainly incurred by the
**pramadi** (careless) being. But for one who strives with effort, even when
killing beings, it is **daya** (compassion). ||104||  **Meaning:** It is not
appropriate for anyone to give or take anything from another, because such
giving or taking is not for **dharma** (righteousness) and **sukha** (happiness)
due to the faults of **kritanasha** (destruction of merit) etc. ||105||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 bhAvArtha : nizcayadRSTi se to koI kisI dUsare ko nahIM mAratA, aura na rakSA
hI karatA hai, parantu usake AyuSyakarma kA nAza hone para mRtyu hotI hai,
anyathA vaha jIvita rahatA hai  // 102 //  hiMsAdayAvikalpAbhyAM svagatAbhyAM tu
kevalam  /  phalaM vicitramApnoti parApekSAM vinA pumAn  // 103 //  bhAvArtha :
kevala apane meM sthita hiMsA aura dayA ke pariNAma se puruSa (vyakti) anya kI
apekSA ke binA hI vicitra phala prApta kara letA hai  // 10 //  zarIrI mriyatAM
mA vA dhruvaM hiMsA pramAdinaH  /  dayaiva yatamAnasya vadhe'pi prANinAM kvacit
// 104 //  bhAvArtha : jIva mare yA na mare, phira bhI pramAdI jIva ko hiMsA
avazya lagatI hai  /  kintu yatanApUrvaka pravRtti karane vAle ko kadAcit
prANiyoM kA vadha hone para bhI vaha dayA hI hotI hai  // 104 //  parasya
yujyate dAnaM haraNaM vA na kasyacit  /  na dharmasukhayoryatte
kRtanAzAdidoSataH  // 105 //  bhAvArtha : kisI ko kisI dUsare kA dAna athavA
haraNa (grahaNa) karanA upayukta nahIM hai, kyoMki vaha dAna yA haraNa (AdAna)
kRtanAza vagairaha doSa ke kAraNa dharma aura sukha ke lie nahIM hotA  // 105 //
252 adhyAtmasAra

Page #253 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
From two different things, like food and wealth, etc., how can there be giving
and taking? Because giving is the acquisition of ownership, and taking is the
destruction of ownership. ||106||  **Meaning:**  The soul is distinct from food,
wealth, and other pudgalas. How can there be giving and taking of these things?
Giving is the acquisition of ownership, and taking is the destruction of
ownership. ||106||  And then, both giving and taking are due to the karmic
fruition of the beings. They happen automatically (arise), what effort do the
souls (purushas) have to make in this? ||107||  **Meaning:** Both giving and
taking are the result of karmic fruition in beings. They happen automatically,
without any effort from the souls. ||107||  Only from the feelings (parinaama
vikalpa) of giving and stealing that are present in the soul, there is benefit
and harm. There is no dependence on others for others. ||108||  **Meaning:**
The feelings of giving and stealing are inherent in the soul. They result in
benefit and harm, respectively. There is no need for dependence on others.
||108||  Because of the pride in agency and other feelings that are dependent on
others, the ignorant person is bound by karma. The wise person is not stained.
||109||  **Meaning:**  The ignorant person, due to pride in agency and other
feelings that are dependent on others, is bound by karma. The wise person, on
the other hand, is not stained by karma. ||109||  Chapter Eighteen 253

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 bhinnAbhyAM bhaktavittAdipudgalAbhyAM ca te kutH| svatvApattiryato dAnaM
haraNaM svatvanAzanam  // 106 //  bhAvArtha : AtmA se bhinna bhakta (bhojana)
aura dhana Adi pudgaloM se dAna aura haraNa kaise ho sakatA hai? kyoMki dAna
svakIyatva kI prAptirUpa hai aura haraNa svakIyatva kA nAzarUpa hai  // 106 //
karmodayAcca taddAnaM haraNaM vA zarIriNAm  /  puruSANAM prayAsaH
kastatropanamati svataH  // 107 //  bhAvArtha : aura phira dAna aura haraNa
donoM prANiyoM ke karmodaya se hote haiM, ve apane Apa hI pariNata hote (udaya
meM Ate) haiM, isameM puruSoM (AtmAoM) ko kauna-sA prayAsa karanA hotA hai?  //
107 //  svagatAbhyAM tu bhAvAbhyAM kevalaM dAnacauryayoH  /  anugrahopaghAtau
staH parApekSA parasya na  // 108 //  bhAvArtha : kevala AtmA meM sthita dAna
aura corI ke bhAva (pariNAma vikalpa) se anugraha aura upaghAta hotA hai, isameM
anya ko anya kI apekSA nahIM hotI  // 108 //  parAzritAnAM bhAvAnAM
kartRtvAdyabhimAnataH  /  karmaNA badhyate'jJAnI, jJAnavAMstu na lipyate  // 109
//  adhikAra aThArahavA~ 253

Page #254 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Meaning:** Due to the pride of being the doer of actions arising from
dependent states, the ignorant being is bound by karma, but the wise man is not
attached to it. Now it is certain that the soul is not the doer of dependent
states (states that depend on external factors like pudgala, etc.) or the
actions arising from them. However, due to delusion, the ignorant being, who is
devoid of true knowledge, becomes bound by karma due to the pride of being the
doer and enjoyer of actions arising from dependent states (states that depend on
external factors like pudgala, etc.). But, on the contrary, the wise man does
not fall into this delusion and considers the soul to be the doer only of its
own nature. He does not consider himself to be the doer or enjoyer of actions
arising from dependent states (states that depend on external factors like
pudgala, etc.). Therefore, he (the wise man) is not attached (bound) to that
karmic bondage. || 109 ||  **Meaning:** In this way, the soul is not the doer of
even the karma of the form of merit and demerit, but it is the doer of the
consequences of attachment and aversion in relation to desirable and undesirable
objects. || 110 ||  **Meaning:** When the soul desires or hates objects, it is
due to the different possibilities of actions arising from them. When the soul
is like this, then karma is attributed to it due to delusion. || 111 ||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 bhAvArtha : para ke Azrita bhAvoM ke kartRtva Adi ke abhimAna se ajJAnI prANI
karma se baddha hotA hai, parantu jJAnI puruSa usase lipta nahIM hotA  /  aba
yaha nizcaya ho gayA ki AtmA parAzrita (apane se atirikta pudgalAdi ke Azrita
rahe hue) bhAvoM=paryAyoM kA = pudgalaparyAyajanita kAryoM kA, karttA nahIM hai
/  tathApi bhramaNavaza apane se atirikta pudgalAdi Azrita paryAyoM kA yAnI
unase utpanna hue kAryoM ke kartRtva, bhoktatva Adi ke abhimAnavaza 'maiM karatA
hU~,' 'maiM bhogatA hU~' isa prakAra kI buddhi se tattvabodha rahita ajJAnI jIva
karmoM se baMdha jAtA hai; kintu isake viparIta jJAnI puruSa isa bhrama meM
nahIM Akara AtmA ko kevala svabhAva kA karttA mAnatA hai, pudgalAdi
paryAyajanita kAryoM kA apane ko kartA-bhoktA nahIM mAnatA, isalie vaha
(tattvajJa) usa karmabandhana se lipta (baddha) nahIM hotA  //  109  //
kartevamAtmA no puNyapApayorapi karmaNoH  /  rAgadveSAzayAnAM tu
karteSTAniSTavastuSu  // 110 //  bhAvArtha : isa prakAra AtmA puNya aura
pAparUpa karma kA bhI karttA nahIM hai, parantu iSTa aura aniSTa vastu ke viSaya
meM rAga aura dveSa ke pariNAmoM kA karttA hai  //  110 //  rajyate dveSTi
vArtheSu tattatkAryavikalpataH  /  AtmA yadA - tadA karma bhramAdAtmani yujyate
//  111  //  254 adhyAtmasAra

Page #255 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Translation:  **Verse 111:**  **Meaning:** When the soul, due to delusion,
develops attachment (raga) or aversion (dvesha) towards objects through various
actions, it gets bound by karma.  **Verse 112:**  **Meaning:** Just as dust
sticks to the body of a person who has applied oil or similar substances,
similarly, karma is considered to be bound to the soul that is filled with
attachment and aversion.  **Verse 113:**  **Meaning:** Just as iron, due to its
nature, gets attracted to a lodestone (magnet), similarly, various types of
karma get attracted to a soul filled with attachment and aversion.  **Verse
114:**  **Meaning:** The soul does not engage in the act of accepting those
karmas, but it creates the consequence of attachment and aversion, and through
that, it becomes responsible for the eighteen types of karma.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 bhAvArtha : jaba AtmA usa-usa kArya ke vikalpa se padArthoM para rAga karatA
hai yA dveSa karatA hai, taba bhrama se AtmA karma se baMdhatI hai-jur3a jAtA
hai  // 111 //  snehAbhyaktanoraMga reNunAzliSyate yathA  /
rAgadveSAnuviddhasya karmabandhastathA mataH  // 112 //  bhAvArtha : jaise kisI
ne zarIra para tela vagairaha kA mardana (mAliza) kiyA ho, usa puruSa ke aMga
para dhUla (raja) cipaka jAtI hai, vaise hI rAga-dveSa-yukta AtmA meM karma kA
bandha mAnA gayA hai  // 112 //  lohaM svakriyayA'bhyeti bhrAmakopalasannidhau
/  yathAkarma tathA citraM raktadviSTAtmasannidhau  // 113 //  bhAvArtha : jaise
lohA apanI kriyA se bhrAmaka pASANa (cumbaka) ke pAsa khiMcA huA calA jAtA hai,
vaise hI rAgI aura dveSI AtmA ke pAsa vicitra prakAra ke karma khice hue cale
Ate haiM  // 113 //  AtmA na vyApRtastatra rAgadveSAzayaM sRjan  /
tannimittopananeSu karmopAdAnakarmasu  // 114 //  bhAvArtha : una karmoM ko
grahaNa karane meM AtmA (akelA) vyApAra nahIM karatA-pravRtta nahIM hotA, kintu
rAga aura dveSa ke pariNAma ko utpanna karatA huA usake nimitta se adhikAra
aThArahavA~ 255

Page #256 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The one who is inclined to perform actions of attachment, etc., accepts the
karma that is being transformed. ||114|| Just as a cloud that rains water is
said to rain grain (food), so too the soul, which produces emotions, is also
called the doer of pudgala karma. ||115|| The Naya of logic and the Naya of
convention both say that the soul is the doer of karma, etc., because the soul's
activity (inclination) is seen to extend to the fruit. ||116|| Where is the
difference between these two Nayas that follow each other, like milk and water,
until the ultimate end? There is no difference at all! ||117||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pariNata hote hue karma ko grahaNa karane vAle rAgAdi karane meM pravRtta hotA
hai  // 114 //  vAri varSan yathAmbhodo dhAnyavarSI nigadyate  /  bhAvakarma
sRjannAtmA tathA pudgalakarmakRt  // 115 //  bhAvArtha : jaise pAnI barasAtA huA
bAdala lokavyavahAra meM dhAnya (anAja) barasAtA hai, aisA kahA jAtA hai, isI
prakAra bhAvakoM ko utpanna karatI huI AtmA pudgalakarmoM kA kartA bhI kahalAtI
hai  // 115 //  naigama-vyavahArau tu brUtaH karmAdikartRtAm  /  vyApAraH
phalaparyantaH paridRSTo yadAtmanaH  // 116 //  bhAvArtha : naigamanaya aura
vyavahAranaya AtmA ko karmAdi kA kartA kahate haiM, kyoMki AtmA kA vyApAra
(pravRtti) phalaparyanta dekhA gayA hai  // 116 //  anyo'nyAnugatAnAM kA
tadetaditi vA bhidA  /  yAvaccaramaparyAyaM yathA pAnIyadugdhayoH  // 117 //
bhAvArtha : athavA eka dUsare meM paraspara mile hue nayoM meM 'vaha yaha hai',
isa prakAra kA dUdha aura pAnI ke samAna antima paryAya taka bheda kahA~ se ho
sakatA hai? hargija nahIM ho sakatA !  // 117 //  256 adhyAtmasAra

Page #257 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Translation:  **Verse 118:**  *Nātmāno vikṛtiṁ datte, tadēṣā nayakalpana.
Śuddhasya rajatasyēva śukti- dharma - prakalpana.*  **Meaning:** Just as the
concept of the oyster's dharma is not attributed to the impurity of pure silver,
so too, this nayakalpana (theory of relativity) is not attributed to the
impurity of the soul.  **Verse 119:**  *Muṣitatvam yathā pānthagatam
pathyupacaryatē. Tathā pudgalakarmastḥā vikriyā'ātmāni bāliśaiḥ.*  **Meaning:**
Just as a traveler is robbed by a thief, and the remedy is said to be "he was
robbed on the path," similarly, foolish people attribute the actions of karma
(pudgalakarma) to the soul.  **Verse 120:**  *Kṛṣṇaḥ śoṇo'pi copādher nāśuddhaḥ
sphaṭiko yathā. Raktō dviṣṭastathaivātmā samsargāt puṇyapāpayoḥ.*  **Meaning:**
Just as a pure crystal appears black or red due to its adhyasa
(superimposition), but is not actually impure, similarly, the soul, though not
impure, appears to be attached and averse due to its association with merit and
demerit (puṇya-pāpa).  **Verse 121:**  *Sēyaṁ natakalā tāvad yāvad
vividhakalpana. Yad rūpaṁ kalpanātītaṁ tattu paśyatyakalpakaḥ.*  **Meaning:**
This is the art of drama (natakalā) as long as there are various imaginations
(vividhakalpana). The one who is free from imagination (akalpaka) sees the true
form that is beyond imagination.  **Chapter Eighteen**  **Page 257**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 nAtmano vikRtiM datte, tadeSA nayakalpanA  /  zuddhasya rajatasyeva zukti-
dharma - prakalpanA  // 118 //  bhAvArtha : isalie jaise sIpa ke dharma kI
kalpanA zuddha cA~dI ke vikAra ko nahIM dI jAtI, vaise hI isa naya kI kalpanA
AtmA ke vikAra ko nahIM dI jAtI  // 118 //  muSitatvaM yathA pAnthagataM
pathyupacaryate  /  tathA pudgalakarmasthA vikriyA''tmani bAlizaiH  // 119 //
bhAvArtha : jaise kisI pathika ko cora lUTa letA hai, taba upacAra se kahA jAtA
hai - " mArga meM luTa gayA hai"  /  isI prakAra mUrkha loga pudgalakarma meM
hone vAlI kriyA kA AtmA meM upacAra karate haiM  // 119 //  kRSNaH zoNo'pi
copAdhernAzuddhaH sphaTiko yathA  /  rakto dviSTastathaivAtmA saMsargAt
puNyapApayoH  // 120 //  bhAvArtha : jaise zuddha sphaTikamaNi upAdhi ke kAraNa
kAlA yA lAla dikhatA hai, kintu vAstava meM vaha azuddha nahIM hai  /  vaise hI
AtmA azuddha na hote hue bhI puNya-pApa ke saMyoga se rAgI-dveSI dikhatI hai  //
120 //  seyaM naTakalA tAvad yAvad vividhakalpanA  /  yadrUpaM kalpanAtItaM
tattu pazyatyakalpakaH  // 121 //  adhikAra aThArahavA~ 257

Page #258 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Meaning:** As long as there are various kinds of imaginations, it is the art
of the actors. But the form that is beyond imagination (transcendental), is seen
only by the imagination-less (akalpika) soul. ||121||  **Meaning:** A being
deluded by imagination sees white and black. But when that imagination is
dissolved, he does not see white or black. ||122||  **Meaning:** Therefore,
contemplation of the self-nature, devoid of merit and demerit, is the meditation
of the Supreme Self, it is its praise, and it is said to be devotion. ||123||
**Meaning:** Describing the body, form, beauty, hair, umbrella, flag, etc. of
the Vitaraga does not constitute real praise. ||124||  **Meaning:** This is the
praise of the worldly, for those who are Vitaraga. The description of knowledge,
etc., qualities, is the praise of certainty. ||125|| 258 Adhyatma Sara

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 bhAvArtha : jaba taka vividha prakAra kI kalpanA hai, taba taka yaha naToM kI
kalA hai  /  parantu jo rUpa kalpanAtIta (kalpanA se pare) hai, use to
kalpanArahita (akalpaka) AtmA hI dekhatI hai  // 121 //  kalpanAmohito jantuH
zuklaM kRSNaM ca pazyati  /  tasyAM punarvilInAyAmazuklAkRSNamIkSate  // 122 //
bhAvArtha : kalpanA se mohita prANI zukla (sapheda) aura kRSNa (kAle) ko dekhatA
hai  /  parantu usa kalpanA ke laya (nAza) hote hI zukla yA kRSNa ko nahIM
dekhatA  // 122 //  taddhyAnaM sA stutirbhaktiH saivoktA paramAtmanaH  /
puNyapApavihInasya yadpasyAnucintanam  // 123 //  bhAvArtha : isalie puNya-pApa
se rahita AtmasvarUpa kA cintana karanA hI paramAtmA kA dhyAna hai, vahI usakI
stuti hai, aura vahI bhakti batAI gaI hai  // 123 //
zarIrarUpalAvaNyavapracchatradhvajAdibhiH  /  varNitairvItarAgasya vAstavI
nopavarNanA  // 124 //  bhAvArtha : vItarAga ke zarIra, rUpa, lAvaNya, vapra,
chatra aura dhvaja Adi kA varNana karane se vAstavika prazaMsA nahIM hotI  //
124 //  vyavahArastutiH seyaM vItarAgAtmavartinAm  /  jJAnAdInAM guNAnAM tu
varNanA nizcayastutiH  // 125 //  258 adhyAtmasAra

Page #259 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Meaning:** This is all praise from a behavioral perspective.  To praise the
knowledge and other qualities residing in the *vitrag* soul should be understood
as true praise. || 125 ||  **Meaning:** Praise of a king through the description
of his city, etc., is called praise by way of courtesy. But praise of his valor,
gravity, patience, and other qualities is called true praise. || 126 ||
**Meaning:** Praise that is done without distinguishing between the main and
subsidiary virtues is like the poetry of a bad poet, not pleasing to the mind.
|| 127 ||  **Meaning:** Otherwise, praise done with attachment is harmful, just
like the edge of a sharp sword held carelessly in the hand. || 128 ||  **Chapter
Eighteen** 259

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 bhAvArtha : yaha saba vyavahAradRSTi se stuti (prazaMsA) hai, vItarAga AtmA meM
avasthita jJAnAdi guNoM kI prazaMsA karanA hI nizcaya stuti samajhanI cAhie  //
125  //  purAdivarNanAd rAjA stutaH syAdupacArata:  /  tattvataH zaurya-
gAmbhIrya - dhairyAdi-guNavarNanAt  // 126 //  bhAvArtha : nagara Adi ke varNana
se rAjA kI stuti = prazaMsA upacAra se kahalAtI hai, kintu usake zaurya,
gAmbhIrya aura dhairya Adi guNoM ke varNana karane se hI tattvataH ( vAstavika )
stuti kahalAtI hai  //  126 //  mukhyopacAradharmANAmavibhAgena yA stutiH  /  na
sA cittaprasAdAya kavitvaM kukaveriva  //  127 //  bhAvArtha : mukhyadharma aura
upacAradharma kA vibhAga kiye binA jo stuti kI jAtI hai, vaha kukavi kI kavitA
ke samAna citta ko prasanna karane vAlI nahIM hotI  // 127 //
anyathA'bhinivezena pratyutA'narthakAriNI  /  sutIkSNakhaGgadhAreva pramAdena
kare dhRtA  //  128  //  bhAvArtha : anyathA haThapUrvaka kI gaI stuti vaisI hI
anarthakAriNI hai, jaisI anarthakAriNI asAvadhAnI se hAtha meM pakar3I huI painI
talavAra kI dhAra hotI hai  //  128 //  adhikAra aThArahavA~ 259

Page #260 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
By the principle of *Mani Prabha-Mani Jnana*, the knowledge of an object is
obtained by touching it. This principle is applicable as long as the
*Ananjanapratha* is not present. (129)  **Meaning:** The principle of *Mani
Prabha-Mani Jnana* states that the brilliance of a gem reveals its true nature.
Similarly, touching an object is a valid way to understand it. However, this
principle is only applicable until the *Ananjanapratha* (a state of delusion or
ignorance) is overcome.  **Explanation:** The *Ananjanapratha* is a state of
mind where one is blinded by ignorance and cannot perceive reality clearly. In
such a state, even touching an object may not lead to true knowledge.  **Verse
130:**  Being completely free from merit and demerit, being free from duality in
the truth, and constantly meditating on the eternal Brahman - this is the state
of pure *naya*. (130)  **Meaning:** The state of pure *naya* is characterized by
complete liberation from the cycle of karma, which is manifested as merit and
demerit. It is also characterized by the realization of the ultimate truth,
which is beyond duality. This realization is achieved through constant
meditation on the eternal Brahman.  **Verse 131:**  *Ashrava* and *Samvara* are
not the characteristics of the soul, they are the characteristics of knowledge.
*Ashrava* and *Samvara* are the acceptance and cessation of *karma pudgalas*,
respectively. (131)  **Meaning:** *Ashrava* and *Samvara* are not the attributes
of the soul itself. They are rather the characteristics of knowledge. *Ashrava*
refers to the inflow of *karma pudgalas* (particles of karma) into the soul,
while *Samvara* refers to the cessation of this inflow.  **Verse 132:**  The
soul, through its own independent actions, accepts *karma pudgalas* due to the
influences of *mithyatva*, *avirati*, and *kṣayās*. These are the internal
*ashravas*. (132)  **Meaning:** The soul, through its own independent actions,
accepts *karma pudgalas* due to the influences of *mithyatva* (false belief),
*avirati* (lack of restraint), and *kṣayās* (passions). These are the internal
*ashravas* that contribute to the inflow of karma.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 maNiprabhA-maNijJAna-nyAyena zubhakalpanA  /  vastusparzitayA nyAyyA
yAvannA'naJjanaprathA  // 129 //  bhAvArtha : 'maNi kI kAnti se maNi kA jJAna
hotA hai', isa nyAya se vastu kA sparza karanA vastujJAna ke lie upayukta hai;
kintu jabataka anaJjanaprathA na ho, taba taka hI zubhakalpanA nyAyayukta hai
// 129 //  puNya-pApavinirmuktaM tattvatastvavikalpakam  /  nityaM brahma sadA
dhyeyameSA zuddhanayasthitiH  // 130 //  bhAvArtha : puNya aura pApa se sarvathA
mukta, tattva se nirvikalpa, tathA nitya brahma kA sadA dhyAna karanA hI zuddha
naya kI sthiti hai  // 130 //  AzravaH saMvarazcA'pi nAtmA vijJAnalakSaNaH  /
yatkarmapudgalAdAnarodhAvAzrava-saMvarau  // 131 //  bhAvArtha : AtmA-
saMvararUpa bhI nahIM hai, vaha to vijJAnalakSaNa vAlI hai; jaba ki Azrava aura
saMvara donoM karmapudgaloM ke kramazaH grahaNanirodharUpa haiM  // 131 //
AtmA''dattetu yairbhAvaiH svatantraH karmapudgalAt  /  mithyAtvA'viratI
yogAHkaSAyAste'ntarAzravAH  // 132 //  bhAvArtha : AtmA jina pariNAmoM (bhAvoM)
se svatantra rUpa se karmapudgaloM ko grahaNa karatA hai, una mithyAtva,
avirati, 260 adhyAtmasAra

Page #261 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Yoga and the results of *kṣaya* should be understood as internal *āśrava*.
||132|| *Bhāvanā*, *dharma*, *cāritra*, *pariṣaha-jaya* etc., which are the
destroyers of *āśrava*, are the *dharma* of the soul, they are called
*bhāvasamvara*. ||133||   **Meaning:** *Bhāvanā*, the ten types of excellent
*dharma*, *cāritra*, and *pariṣaha-jaya* etc., which are the destroyers of
*āśrava*, are the *dharma* of the soul, they are called *bhāvasamvara*. ||133||
*Āśrava* cannot be *samvara*, and *samvara* cannot be *āśrava* at any time.
Otherwise (if we do not accept this), due to the fault of *hetu* being mixed
(one with the other), the fruits of *bhava* and *mokṣa* will become inseparable.
||134||  **Meaning:** *Āśrava* cannot be *samvara*, and *samvara* cannot be
*āśrava* at any time. Otherwise (if we do not accept this), due to the fault of
*hetu* being mixed (one with the other), the fruits of *bhava* and *mokṣa* will
become inseparable. ||134||  The soul, with its different *pariṇāma*, accepts
*karma* *āśrava* (reception) and also performs *samvara* (restraint), but it
does not depend on others, because the soul is always self-sufficient. ||135||
**Meaning:** The soul, with its different *pariṇāma*, accepts *karma* *āśrava*
(reception) and also performs *samvara* (restraint), but it does not depend on
others, because the soul is always self-sufficient. ||135||  Chapter Eighteen
261

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 yoga aura kaSAyarUpa pariNAmoM ko Abhyantara Azrava samajhanA cAhie  // 132 //
bhAvanA-dharma-cAritra-parISahajayAdayaH  /  Azravocchedino dharmA Atmano
bhAvasaMvarAH  // 133 //  bhAvArtha : bhAvanA dazavidha uttama dharma, cAritra
aura parISaha-jaya Adi AzravoM ke vinAzaka jo AtmA ke dharma haiM, ve
bhAvasaMvara kahalAte haiM  // 133 //  AzravaH saMvaro na syAt saMvarazcAzravaH
kvacit  /  bhavamokSaphalAbhedo'nyathA syAddhetusaMkarAt  // 134 //  bhAvArtha :
Azrava saMvara nahIM ho sakate aura na kabhI saMvara hI Azrava ho sakate haiM  /
anyathA (agara aisA na mAneM to) hetu ke sAMkaryadoSa (eka dUsare meM mizrita
doSa) hone se saMsAra aura mokSa ke phala kI abhinnatA ho jAegI  // 134 //
karmAzravAMzca saMvRNAnnAtmA bhinnairnijAzayaiH  /  karoti na
parApekSAmalaMbhUSNuM svataH sadA  // 135 //  bhAvArtha : AtmA apane bhinna-
bhinna pariNAmoM se karmoM kA Azrava (grahaNa) karatA huA aura saMvara (nirodha)
karatA huA bhI para kI apekSA nahIM rakhatA, kyoMki AtmA sadA apane Apa meM
svataH samartha hai  // 135 //  adhikAra aThArahavA~ 261

Page #262 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
All actions, such as violence and non-violence, are merely **nimitta**
(conditions), because they are merely **parapraani paryaaya** (transformations
of other beings) and not the cause of their own fruits. (136)  However, those
who are deluded by worldly affairs consider these actions to be the cause.
Because their minds are engrossed in external activities, they do not see the
deeper truth. (137)  These actions do not touch the **niyama** (laws) and
therefore do not attain **hetu** (causality). As many **aashrava** (influx) are
mentioned, so many **parishrava** (efflux) are also mentioned. (138)  Therefore,
there is complete irregularity (uncertainty) in external causes. Due to the
diversity of emotions, the **aatma** (soul) itself is the **aashrava** and
**sanvara** (influx and efflux). (139)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 nimittamAtrabhUtAstu hiMsA'hiMsAdayo'khilAH  /  ye paraprANiparyAyA na te
svaphalahetavaH  //  136 //  bhAvArtha : hiMsA, ahiMsA Adi saba kevala
nimittabhUta hI haiM, kyoMki jo paraprANI ke paryAya hai, ve apane phala ke
heturUpa nahIM haiM  //  136  //  vyavahAravimUDhastu hetUMstAneva manyate  /
bAhyakriyAratasvAntastattvaM gUDhaM na pazyati  // 137 //  bhAvArtha : kintu
vyavahAra meM mUDhAtmA una hiMsAdi ko hI heturUpa mAnatA hai, kyoMki jisakA
anta:karaNa bAhya kriyAoM meM racA-pacA hai, vaha gahana tattva ko nahIM dekhatA
- samajhatA  // 137 //  hetutvaM pratipadyante navaite niyamAspRzaH  /  yAvantaH
AzravAH proktAstAvanto hi parizravAH  // 138 //  bhAvArtha : cUMki ye niyama kA
sparza nahIM karate, isa kAraNa se ( hiMsAdi) hetutva ko prApta nahIM karate,
kyoMki jitane Azrava kahe gae haiM, utane hI saMvara kahe gae haiM  // 138 //
tasmAdaniyataM rUpaM bAhyahetuSu sarvathA  /  niyatau
bhAvavaicitryAdAtmaivAzrava - saMvarau  // 139 //  bhAvArtha : isa kAraNa bAhya
hetuoM meM sarvathA aniyamitatA (anizcitatA) hai, ata: bhAvoM kI vicitratA ke
kAraNa AtmA adhyAtmasAra 262

Page #263 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
This **āśrava** and **samvara** are fixed (certain). ||139|| Due to ignorance,
the soul becomes attached to objects and is bound by them, not by the objects
themselves. Through knowledge, the soul is liberated, not by scriptures or other
**pudgalas**. ||140|| **Meaning:** The soul becomes attached to objects due to
ignorance and is bound by **karma**, but not by the objects themselves.
Similarly, the soul is liberated by knowledge, not by scriptures or other
**pudgalas**. ||140|| Scriptures, respect for the guru, actions, and
necessities, all these are said to be parts of **samvara** by those who are
proficient in the world. ||141|| **Meaning:** Scriptures, respect for the guru,
actions, and necessities, all these are said to be parts of **samvara** by those
who are proficient in the world. ||141|| Specific **pudgalas** of speech, body,
and mind are not fruitful, but the **bhāvas** of knowledge, etc., of the soul
attain the form of **samvara**. ||142|| **Meaning:** Specific **pudgalas** of
speech, body, and mind are not fruitful, but the **bhāvas** of knowledge, etc.,
of the soul attain the form of **samvara**. ||142|| Those who know the world
attribute **samvara** to the auspicious **yogas** that are filled with the
**bhāvas** of knowledge, etc., that are present in them. ||143|| **Meaning:**
Those who know the world attribute **samvara** to the auspicious **yogas** that
are filled with the **bhāvas** of knowledge, etc., that are present in them.
||143||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 hI Azrava aura saMvararUpa niyata (nizcita) hai  // 139 //  ajJAnAdviSayAsakto
badhyate viSayaistu na  /  jJAnAdvimucyate cAtmA, na tu zAstrAdipudgalAt  // 140
//  bhAvArtha : AtmA ajJAna se viSayAsakta hokara karmoM se baMdhatI hai,
parantu viSayoM se nahIM; tathaiva AtmA jJAna se mukta hotI hai, zAstrAdi
pudgala se mukta nahIM hotI  // 140 //  zAstraM gurozca vinayaM kriyAmAvazyakAni
ca  /  saMvarAMgatayA prAhurvyavahAravizAradAH  // 141 //  bhAvArtha : zAstra,
guruvinaya, kriyA aura Avazyaka ina sabakA vyavahAra meM pAraMgata puruSoM ne
saMvara ke aMgarUpa meM kahA gayA hai  // 141 //  viziSTA
vAktanusvAntapudgalAste palAvahAH  /  ye tu jJAnAdayo bhAvAH saMvaratvaM
prayAnti te  // 142 //  bhAvArtha : vANI, zarIra aura mana ke jo viziSTa pudgala
haiM, ve phaladAyaka nahIM haiM, parantu AtmA ke jo jJAnAdibhAva haiM, ve hI
saMvararUpa ko prApta karate haiM  // 142 //  jJAnAdibhAvayukteSu zubhayogeSu
tadgatam  /  saMvaratvaM samAropya smayante vyavahAriNaH  // 143 //  _ bhAvArtha
: vyavahAra ko jAnane vAle vyakti jJAnAdi pariNAmoM se yukta zubha yogoM meM
unameM nihita saMvaratva kA adhikAra aThArahavA~ 263

Page #264 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
They take pride in attributing (**āropaṇa**) to themselves.  The virtuous man,
situated in those good **yogas** filled with the results of the soul, such as
knowledge, tranquility, and compassion, i.e., in the activities of mind, speech,
and body motivated by **dharma**, attributes (**sankalpa**) to himself the
nature of **samvarta** - the cessation of karma.  He proudly says, "We are
righteous."  In reality, pride arises in one who does not know the truth.  The
one who knows the truth does not have pride. ||143||  They also speak of the
difference in results by attributing **āśrava** to the virtues like good
conduct, which are associated with **praśastra-rāga**. ||144||  **Meaning:**
They speak of the difference in results by attributing **āśrava** to the virtues
like good conduct, which are associated with **praśastra-rāga**. ||144||  There
is actually no contradiction in the causes of worldly existence and liberation.
It is only due to ignorance that this perception arises.  The wise one is not
deluded by it. ||145||  **Meaning:** There is actually no contradiction in the
causes of worldly existence and liberation.  It is only due to ignorance that
this perception arises.  The wise one is not deluded by it. ||145||  The fact
that the **tīrthankara** is said to be the cause of **samayakta** and that
**āhāraka** is said to be the cause of extreme **samyama**, ||146|| and that
**tapas** and **samyama** are said to be the cause of heaven in the previous
two,

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 AropaNa karake mana meM garvita hote haiM  /  jJAna, prazama aura kAruNya Adi
AtmA ke pariNAmoM se yukta zubha yogoM meM yAnI dharma ke nimitta se pravRtta
mana-vacana-kAyA ke vyApAroM meM una bhAvoM meM sthita saMvaratva -
karmanirodharUpa svabhAva kA AropaNa (saMkalpa) karake vyavahArajJa puruSa
abhimAnapUrvaka kahate haiM ki 'hama dharmAtmA haiM  / ' vAstava meM abhimAna
usI meM jAgRta hotA hai, jo vastutatva ko na jAnatA ho, vastutatvajJa ko
abhimAna nahIM hotA  // 143 //  prazastarAgayukteSu cAritrAdiguNeSvapi  /
zubhAzravatvamAropya phalabhedaM vadanti te  // 144 //  bhAvArtha : prazastarAga
se yukta cAritrAdi guNoM ke viSaya meM bhI Azravatva kA Aropa karake ve
phalabheda batAte haiM  //  144  //  bhavanirvANahetUnAM vastuto na viparyayaH
/  ajJAnAdeva tadbhAnaM jJAnI tatra na muhyati  //  145 //  bhAvArtha : vAstava
meM saMsAra aura mokSa ke hetuoM meM viparyAsa nahIM hotA, phira bhI usakA bhAna
ajJAna se hotA hai  /  usameM jJAnI mohita nahIM hotA  //  145  //
tIrthakRnnAmahetutvaM yatsamayaktvasya varNyate  /  yaccAhArakahetutvaM
saMyamasyAtizAyinaH  //  146  //  tapaHsaMyamayoH svargahetutvaM yacca pUrvayoH
/  264 adhyAtmasAra

Page #265 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The statement that **Samyaktvam** is the cause of **Tirthankara-nama** and that
**utkrista-samyama** is the cause of the **aaharaka-sharira** is like saying
"ghee burns". This is because the **aaharaka-sharira** is only attained by a
**muni** who is **utkrista** (exceedingly) **labdhivan** (possessing knowledge
and insight) and **samyami** (practicing self-restraint). The previous **tapa**
(austerity) and **samyama** were said to be the cause of **swarg** (heaven),
which is a statement that is appropriate in terms of **upacara** (figurative
language). || 146-147 ||  The **atma** (soul) has **ashrava** (influx of karma)
in the same proportion as it has **yoga** (union with the divine), and it has
**sanvara** (stopping of influx) in the same proportion as it has **upayoga**
(use) of **jnana** (knowledge) etc. || 148 ||  Therefore, the **atma**, resting
in its **ansha** (parts), bears **ashrava** and **sanvara**, always shining like
a mirror with two parts, one **swachchha** (pure) and the other **aswachchha**
(impure). || 149 ||  The **jnana-dhara** (stream of knowledge) becomes
**shuddha** (pure) after attaining **samyaktvam**.  **Adhikara** (Chapter) 18th
265

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 upacAraNe tadyuktaM syAd ghRtaM dahatItivat  // 147 //  bhAvArtha : samyaktva
ko jo tIrthaMkaranAma kA hetu (kAraNa) batAyA jAtA hai, aura utkRSTa saMyama ko
AhAraka zarIra kA hetu kahA jAtA hai, kyoMki AhAraka zarIra utkRSTa ( atizaya )
labdhivAn saMyamI muni ko hI hotA hai  /  pahale ke tapa aura saMyama ko svarga
kA hetu kahA gayA hai, vaha 'ghI jalatA hai' aisA kahane kI taraha upacAra se
upayukta kathana hai || 146-147 //  yenAMzenAtmano yogastenAMzenAzravo mataH  /
yenAMzenopayogastu tenAMzenAsya saMvaraH  //  148  //  bhAvArtha : jitane aMzoM
meM AtmA kA yoga ho, utane aMzoM meM use Azrava mAnA gayA hai, aura jitane aMza
meM jJAnAdi kA upayoga hai, utane aMza meM usakA saMvara hai  //  148  //
yenAsAvaMzavizrAntau bibhradAzravasaMvarau  /  bhAtyAdarza iva
svacchAsvacchabhAgadvayaH sadA  //  149  //  bhAvArtha : isa kAraNa yaha AtmA
aMza kI vizrAnti meM Azrava aura saMvara ko dhAraNa karatI huI svaccha (
nirmala) aura asvaccha (malina) isa taraha do bhAgoM ko dhAraNa karane vAle
darpaNa kI taraha sadA suzobhita hotI hai  //  149  //  zuddhaiva jJAnadhArA
syAt samyaktva prAptyanantaram  /  adhikAra aThArahavA~ 265

Page #266 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Due to the difference in the cause, the stream of yoga flows in a variety of
ways. ||150|| Meaning: After attaining Samyaktva, the stream of knowledge is
pure, and due to the difference in the cause, the stream of yoga flows in a
variety of ways. ||150|| The Samyagdrsti is pure in all ten states. The subtle,
medium, and excellent states are due to the variety of actions. ||151|| Meaning:
After that, the Samyagdrsti becomes pure in all ten states. The subtle, medium,
and excellent states are due to the variety of actions. ||151|| When both
streams become pure in all ways, then there is Sarvansavara due to the stability
called Shaileshi. ||152|| Meaning: And when both streams become pure in all
ways, then there is Sarvansavara due to the stability called Shaileshi. ||152||
Before that, whatever and however much stability there is in the soul, that much
is the soul's Samvara, and whatever and however much fickleness there is in the
yogas, that much is the Ashrava. ||153|| Meaning: Before that, whatever and
however much stability there is in the soul, that much is the soul's Samvara,
and whatever and however much fickleness there is in the yogas, that much is the
Ashrava. ||153|| Thus, the story of Samvara, Ashrava, and impurity. ||266||
Adhyatma Sara

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 hetubhedAd vicitrA tu yogadhArA pravartate  // 150 //  bhAvArtha : samyaktva kI
prApti ke bAda jJAnadhArA zuddha hI hotI hai aura hetu ke bheda ke kAraNa
vicitra yogadhArA pravRtta hotI hai  // 150 //  samyagdRzo vizuddhatvaM
sarvAsvapi dazAsvataH  /  mRdumadhyAdhibhAvastu kriyAvaicitryato bhavet  // 151
//  bhAvArtha : usake bAda samyagdRSTi kI samasta dazAoM meM vizuddhatA ho jAtI
hai  /  jadhanya, madhyama aura utkRSTa bhAva to kriyA kI vicitratA ke kAraNa
hotA hai  // 151 //  yadA tu sarvataH zuddhirjAyate dhArayordvayoH  /
zailezIsaMjJitaH sthairyAt tadA syAt sarvasaMvaraH  // 152 //  bhAvArtha : aura
jaba saba prakAra se donoM dhArAoM kI zuddhi hotI hai, taba zailezI nAmaka
sthairya se sarvasaMvara hotA hai  // 152 //  tato'rvAg yacca yAvacca sthiratvaM
tAvadAtmanaH  /  saMvaro yogacAJcalyaM yAvat tAvat kilAzravaH  // 153 //
bhAvArtha : usase pahale jaisI aura jitanI AtmA kI sthiratA ho, utanA hI AtmA kA
saMvara jAnanA aura jitanI aura jaisI yogoM kI capalatA ho, utanA hI Azrava
samajhanA  // 153 /  /  azuddhanayatazcaivaM saMvarAzravasaMkathA  /  266
adhyAtmasAra

Page #267 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
There is no difference between the worldly beings and the Siddhas in terms of
pure Nayas. ||154||  **Meaning:** Thus, the concept of restraint and inflow for
worldly beings is based on impure Nayas, but there is no difference for Siddhas
even in pure Nayas. As stated earlier, the acceptance of impure Naigamadi
Dravyarthic Nayas, which involves the purification of general and specific
aspects and the acceptance of the nature of things, leads to the concept
(consideration) of restraint and inflow for worldly beings. However, for
liberated beings, there is no difference because they rely on pure Nayas, which
are all-inclusive and synonymous. Therefore, there is no consideration of inflow
and restraint there. In reality, impure Nayas consider the soul to be in the
form of inflow, restraint, and synonyms. Pure Nayas consider the soul to be only
in the form of knowledge, etc. According to them, there are no two distinctions
of the soul, worldly and Siddha. They consider the soul to be different from
inflow and restraint. ||154||  The destruction of karmas is called Nirjara.
Nirjara is a synonym for karma and is not the soul, but the state by which
Nirjara of karma occurs is the characteristic of the soul. ||155||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 saMsAriNAM ca siddhAnAM na zuddhanayato bhidA  // 154 //  bhAvArtha : isa
prakAra azuddha naya se hI saMsArI jIvoM kA saMvara aura Azrava kA kathana hai,
parantu siddhajIvoM kA bhI zuddha naya se koI bheda nahIM hotA  /  pahale kahe
anusAra azuddha naya se yAnI sAmAnya aura vizeSa aMza kI zuddhi vagairaha
vastudharma ke grahaNa karane ko lekara azuddha naigamAdi dravyArthikanaya kA
svIkAra karane se saMsArI jIvoM ke lie saMvara aura Azrava kA kathana (vicAra)
pravRtta hotA hai; jaba ki muktajIvoM ke lie to zuddha naya se yAnI
sarvAMzazuddha paryAyArthikanaya kA Azraya lene se bheda hai hI nhiiN| ataH
vahA~ Azrava aura saMvara kA vicAra hai hI nahIM  /  vAstava meM azuddhanaya hI
AtmA ko Azrava-saMvara-paryAyarUpa mAnatA hai  /  zuddha naya to AtmA ko kevala
jJAnAdisvarUpa mAnatA hai  /  usake matAnusAra jIva ke saMsArI aura siddha do
bheda nahIM hote, AtmA ko vaha (naya) Azrava-saMvara se bhinna mAnatA hai  //
154 //  nirjarA karmaNAM zATo, nAtmA'sau karmaparyayaH  /  yena nirjIryate karma
sa bhAvastvAtmalakSaNam  // 155 //  bhAvArtha : karmoM kA parizATana kSaya
nirjarA kahalAtA hai| nirjarA karma kA paryAya hone se AtmArUpa nahIM hai,
parantu jisa bhAva se karmanirjarA hotI hai, usa bhAva ko AtmA kA lakSaNa
adhikAra aThArahavA~ 267

Page #268 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Knowing ||155|| Sattapa is twelvefold, endowed with pure knowledge. It is born
of the power of the soul, and is the suppressor of mental activities. ||156||
Meaning: Sattapa, which is born of the power of the soul, is the suppressor of
mental activities and is endowed with pure knowledge, is of twelve types.
||156|| Where there is suppression of passions, meditation on Brahman and the
Jina, that should be understood as pure tapa, the rest is merely transgression.
||157|| Meaning: That tapa in which there is suppression of passions, meditation
on Brahman and non-attachment, should be understood as pure tapa, the rest
should be understood as transgression. ||157|| Hunger or bodily emaciation is
not a characteristic of tapa. The knowledge that is the place of forbearance,
celibacy, etc., is the body of that tapa. ||158|| Meaning: Hunger and bodily
emaciation are not characteristics of tapa, but the knowledge that is the place
of forbearance, celibacy, etc., is the body of that tapa. ||158|| With skillful
knowledge, unity is attained, like the fragrance of sandalwood. When given to
the self, it is a tapa unlike any other. ||159|| Meaning: Tapa, united with
skillful knowledge, like sandalwood and its fragrance, purifies the soul.  268
Adhyatma Sara

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 jAnanA  // 155 //  sattapo dvAdazavidhaM zuddhajJAnasamanvitam  /  Atmazakti-
samutthAnaM cittavRttinirodhakRt  // 156 //  bhAvArtha : Atmazakti se utpanna,
cittavRtti kA nirodhakartA aura zuddhajJAna se yukta sattapa hotA hai, jo 12
prakAra kA hai  // 156 //  yatra rodhaH kaSAyANAM, brahma dhyAnaM jinasya ca  /
jJAtavyaM tattapaH zuddhamavaziSTaM tu laMghanam  // 157 //  bhAvArtha : jisa
tapa meM kaSAyoM kA nirodha, brahmacarya aura vItarAga kA dhyAna hotA ho, use hI
zuddha tapa samajhanA cAhie, zeSa sabako laMghana hI samajhanA  // 157 //
bubhukSA dehakAryaM vA tapaso nAsti lakSaNam  /  titikSA-brahmaguptyAdisthAnaM
jJAnaM tu tadvapuH  // 158 //  bhAvArtha : kSudhA aura deha kI kRzatA koI tapa
kA lakSaNa nahIM hai, parantu titikSA aura brahmacaryapAlana Adi ke sthAnarUpa
jo jJAna hai, vahI usa tapa kA zarIra hai  // 158 /  /  jJAnena nipuNenaikyaM
prAptaM candanagandhavat  /   /  nirjarAmAtmano datte, tapo nAnyAdRzaM kvacit
// 159 //  bhAvArtha : candana aura usakI sugandha ke samAna nipuNa jJAna ke
sAtha ekameka huI tapasyA AtmA kI nirjarA karatI hai| 268 adhyAtmasAra

Page #269 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
No other kind of austerity can ever bring about liberation. ||159|| The ascetic,
through devotion to the Jinas and the desire to uplift the Dharma, accumulates
great merit and, being free from all desires, attains liberation. ||160|| The
ascetic who does not know that knowledge which burns away karma is the true
austerity, how can such a deluded soul attain great liberation? ||161|| The
ignorant person destroys karma through austerity over countless lifetimes, while
the ascetic endowed with knowledge and austerity destroys it in an instant.
||162||  1. In some versions, the word 'शासनोद्भासनेच्छया' is used instead of
'शासनोद्भासनोत्थया'. Authority: Eighteenth Chapter. 269

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 usase bhinna prakAra kI tapasyA kadApi nirjarA nahIM dilAtI hai  // 159 //
tapasvI jinabhaktyA ca shaasnodbhaasnotthyaa| puNyaM badhnAti bahulaM mucyate tu
gataspRhaH  // 160 //  bhAvArtha : tapasvI (muni) zAsana (saMgha) kI unnati
jina-bhakti se atyadhika puNya bAMdhatA hai aura saba prakAra kI spRhA se rahita
tapasvI mukta ho jAtA hai  // 160 //  karmatApakaraM jJAnaM tapastannaiva vetti
yaH  /  prApnoti sa hatasvAnto vipulAM nirjarAM katham  // 161 //  bhAvArtha :
jo tapasvI yaha nahIM jAnatA hai ki karma ko tapAne vAlA jJAna hI tapa hai; vaha
naSTacitta vAlA muni mahAn nirjarA kaise kara sakatA hai ?  // 161 //  ajJAnI
tapasA janmakoTibhiH karma yannayet  /  antaM jJAnatapoyuktastatkSaNenaiva
saMharet  // 162 //  bhAvArtha : ajJAnI manuSya jisa karma kA tapasyA se
karor3oM janmoM meM naSTa karatA hai, usI karma ko jJAna aura tapa se yukta muni
kSaNa bhara meM hI naSTa kara DAlatA hai  // 162 //  1. kisI-kisI prati meM
'zAsanodbhAsanotthayA' ke badale 'zAsanodbhAsanecchayA' zabda hai| adhikAra
aThArahavA~ 269

Page #270 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## English Translation:  **Verse 163:**  **Text:** *Jnanayogatapah
shuddhamityahurmuni pungavaha | Tasmann nikachitasyaapi karmanoyujyate kshayah
||163||*  **Meaning:** The wise sages declare that *jnanayoga* (the path of
knowledge) is the purest form of austerity, for it leads to the destruction of
even *nikachita* karma (karma that has been accumulated over many lifetimes).
**Verse 164:**  **Text:** *Yadiha'apurvakaranam shreni, shuddha cha jayate |
Dhruvah sthitikshayastatra sthitanam prachyakarmnam ||164||*  **Meaning:**
Because this *jnanayoga* austerity produces *apurvakaranam* (a new beginning)
and a pure *shreni* (series of actions), it inevitably destroys the state of
*prachyakarma* (past karma) for those who practice it.  **Verse 165:**
**Text:** *Tasmaj jnanmaya shuddha tapasvi bhavanirjara | Shuddhanischayatastu
esha sada shuddhasyakapi || 165||*  **Meaning:** Therefore, the *jnanmaya*
(knowledge-filled) and pure *tapasvi* (austerity practitioner) is like a
*bhavanirjara* (a stream that flows without obstruction), and due to their pure
conviction, they are always free from any *nirjara* (obstruction) like the pure
soul (the *siddha*).  **Verse 166:**  **Text:** *Bandhah karmaatmasamslesho
dravyatah sa chaturvidhah | Taddhethvadhyavasaayatma bhavatastu prakirtitah ||
166||*  **Meaning:** The union of the soul with karma is called *bandha*
(bondage). It is of four types in terms of its material aspect, and it is
described as *taddhethvadhyavasaayatma* (the soul's identification with its
actions) in terms of its mental aspect.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 jJAnayogatapaH zuddhamityAhurmunipuMgavAH  /  tasmAnnikAcitasyApi karmaNo
yujyate kSayaH  // 163 //  bhAvArtha : jJAnayogarUpa tapa ko hI zreSTha muniyoM
ne zuddha tapa kahA hai, kyoMki usase nikAcita karma kA bhI zraya ho jAtA hai
// 163 //   /  yadihA'pUrvakaraNaM zreNi, zuddhA ca jAyate  /  dhruvaH
sthitikSayastatra sthitAnAM prAcyakarmaNAm  // 164 //  bhAvArtha : kyoMki usa
jJAnayogarUpa tapa meM apUrvakaraNa aura zuddha zreNI utpanna hotI hai  /  isase
pUrvakarmoM kI sthiti avazya hI naSTa ho jAtI hai  // 164 //  tasmAjjJAnamayaH
zuddhastapasvI bhAvanirjarA  /  zuddhanizcayatastveSA sadA zuddhasya kApi  //
165 //  bhAvArtha : isa kAraNa jJAnamaya zuddha tapasvIbhAva nirjarArUpa hai
aura zuddha-nizcayanaya se sadA zuddha AtmA (siddha) ke bilkula nirjarA nahIM
hotI  // 165 //  bandhaH karmAtmasaMzleSo dravyataH sa caturvidhaH  /
taddhetvadhyavasAyAtmA bhAvatastu prakIrtitaH  //  166 //  bhAvArtha : karma ke
sAtha AtmA kA jo saMzleSa hotA hai, vaha baMdha kahalAtA hai  /  vaha dravya se
cAra prakAra kA hai; aura 270 adhyAtmasAra

Page #271 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
From the standpoint of *bhaava*, it is called *adhyavasaya* which is the cause
of *bandha*. ||166|| Just as a serpent encircles itself with its own body, so
too does a being, transformed by its *bhaava*, bind itself with its own self.
||167|| **Meaning:** Just as a snake wraps its body with its own body,
similarly, a being, transformed by its *bhaava*, binds its soul (its
*parinaama*) with its own soul. ||167|| It binds itself, just as a silkworm
binds itself with its own threads. This simile has been given by the wise.
||168|| **Meaning:** Just as a silkworm binds its body with its own threads,
similarly, the soul binds itself with its own *bhaava*s, this simile has been
given by the wise. ||168|| It is not God who binds the sinful beings; because
the binder is non-existent and there is no activity for the unbound. ||169||
**Meaning:** It is not God who binds the sinful beings; because the binder is
non-existent and there is no activity for the unbound. ||169|| Nor is there a
constant instigator, like a wise person, to cause activity in ignorance. This is
not seen in actions done without understanding, like in dreams, etc. ||170||
**Meaning:** There is no constant instigator, like a wise person, to cause
activity in ignorance. This is not seen in actions done without understanding,
like in dreams, etc. ||170||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 bhAva se vaha bandha ke heturUpa adhyavasAya ke svarUpa vAlA kahalAtA hai  //
166 //  veSTayatyAtmanA''tmAnaM yathA sarpastathA'sumAn  /  tattadbhAvaiH
pariNato badhnAtyAtmAnamAtmanA  // 167 //  bhAvArtha : jaise sA~pa apane zarIra
se apane zarIra ko lapeTa letA hai, vaise prANI bhI usa usa bhAva se pariNamana
pAkara apanI AtmA (apane pariNAma) se apanI AtmA ko bAMdha letA hai||167||
badhnAti svaM-yathA kozakArakITaH svatantubhiH  /  AtmanaH svagatai vaibandhane
sopamA smRtA  // 168 //  bhAvArtha : jaise rezama kA kIr3A apane tantuo (rezoM
se) apane zarIra ko bAMdhatA hai, vaise hI AtmA bhI apane andara sthita bhAvoM
se bandhatA hai, yaha upamA jJAniyoM ne dI hai  // 168 //  jantUnAM sAparAdhAnAM
bandhakArI na hiishvrH| tadvandhakAnavasthAnAdabandhasyApravRttitaH  // 169 //
bhAvArtha : aparAdhI prANiyoM ko bandhana meM DAlane vAlA Izvara nahIM hai;
kyoMki usake bandha karane vAle kA anavasthAna hai aura bandharahita ko pravRtti
kA abhAva hai  // 169 //  na cAjJAnapravRttyarthe jJAnavannodanA dhruvA  /
abuddhipUrvakAryeSu svapnAdau tadadarzanAt  // 170 //  bhAvArtha : ajJAna meM
pravRtta karane ke lie jJAnavAna kI adhikAra aThArahavA~ 271

Page #272 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
There is no motivation. Because in actions done unknowingly in dreams etc., that
motivation is not seen. || 170 || Thus, the being, by its own nature, is
motivated. Binding both merit and demerit, according to the consequences. || 171
|| Meaning: According to the consequences, the being, motivated by its own
nature, binds merit and demerit. || 171 || From pure conviction, the soul is not
bound, it is unbound; but due to the fear of bondage, it experiences fear,
trembling, etc., like the illusion of a snake in a rope. || 172 || Meaning: From
pure conviction, the soul is not bound, it is unbound; but due to the fear of
bondage, it experiences fear, trembling, etc., like the illusion of a snake in a
rope. || 172 || Just as the behavior of a sick person is according to the state
of the disease, so also the bondage is described in relation to the state of
existence. || 173 || Meaning: Just as the behavior of a sick person is according
to the state of the disease, so also the bondage is described in relation to the
state of existence. || 173 || According to the being's bondage Those who desire
to remove this firm ignorance-filled doubt, Desire to hear the spiritual
scriptures, seeking dispassion. || 974 || Meaning: Those who desire to remove
this firm ignorance-filled doubt, Essence of Spirituality 272

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 preraNA hotI hI nahIM  /  kyoMki svapnAdi meM ajJAnapUrvaka kiye jAne vAle
kAryoM meM vaha preraNA dikhatI nahIM  //  170  //  tathAbhavyatayA
janturnoditazca pravarttate  /  badhnan puNyaM ca pApaM ca pariNAmAnusArataH  //
171  //  bhAvArtha : pariNAma ke anusAra puNya aura pApakarma kA bandha karatA
huA jIva apanI tathAprakAra kI bhavyatA se prerita hotA hai  // 171 //
zuddhanizcayatastvAtmA na baddho bandhazaMkayA  /  bhayakampAdikaM kintu
rajjAvahimateriva  //  172 //  bhAvArtha : zuddha nizcayanaya se to AtmA
ba~dhatI hI nahIM, abandhaka hai; parantu bandha kI zaMkA se rassI meM sA~pa kI
bhrAMti kI taraha bhaya, kaMpa Adi ko prApta karatA hai  //  172  //
rogasthityanusAreNa pravRttI rogimo yathA  /  bhavasthityanusAreNa tathA
bandhe'pi varNyate  //  173 //  bhAvArtha : jaise roga kI sthiti ke anusAra rogI
kI pravRtti hotI hai, vaise hI bhavasthiti ke ke viSaya meM bhI pravRtti kahI
hai  // 173 //  anusAra jIva kI bandha dRr3hAjJAnamayIM zaMkAmenAmapaninISavaH
/  adhyAtmazAstramicchanti zrotuM vairAgyakAMkSiNaH  //  974  //  bhAvArtha :
isa dRr3ha ajJAnamayI zaMkA ko dUra karane ke adhyAtmasAra 272

Page #273 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The desirous and the aspirant for renunciation want to hear this spiritual
science. ||174|| This science, by the analogy of the branch and the moon, only
shows the direction, but indirect knowledge does not remove doubts about direct
objects. ||175|| Meaning: This science, by the analogy of the branch and the
moon, only shows the direction, but indirect knowledge does not remove doubts
about direct objects. ||175|| Just as, even though there is knowledge of
whiteness in the conch shell, due to a defect, there is the perception of
yellowness, similarly, even though there is knowledge of the scriptures, due to
the influence of false perception, there is the perception of bondage in the
soul. ||176|| Meaning: Just as, even though there is knowledge of whiteness in
the conch shell, due to a defect, there is the perception of yellowness,
similarly, even though there is knowledge of the scriptures, due to the
influence of false perception, there is the perception of bondage in the soul.
||176|| Those who, having heard, contemplated, and remembered, experience it
directly, do not have the perception of bondage, their soul, free from bondage,
shines. ||177|| Meaning: Those who, having heard, contemplated, and remembered,
experience it directly, do not have the perception of bondage, their soul, free
from bondage, shines. ||177|| Liberation of substance is the destruction of
karmic substances, not the characteristic of the soul. Liberation of essence is
its cause, the soul is endowed with the three jewels. ||178|| Chapter Eighteen
273

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 icchuka eva vairAgyAkAMkSI puruSa hI adhyAtmazAstra ko sunanA cAhatA hai  //
174 //  dizaH pradarzakaM zAkhAcandranyAyena tatpunaH  /  pratyakSaviSayAM
zaMkAM nahi hanti parokSadhI:  //  175 //  bhAvArtha : yaha zAstra
zAkhAcandranyAya se kevala dizA dikhA detA hai, parantu parokSajJAna
pratyakSaviSayaka zaMkA kA nivAraNa nahIM karatA  // 175 //  zaMkhe
zvetyAnumAne'pi doSAtpItatvadhIryathA  /  zAstrajJAne'pi mithyAdhIsaMskArAd
bandhadhIstathA  //  176  //  bhAvArtha : jaise zaMkha meM zvetatva
(saphedapana) kA jJAna hote hue bhI doSa ke kAraNa usameM pItatva (pIlepana) kI
buddhi hotI hai, vaise hI zAstra kA jJAna hote hue bhI mithyAbuddhi ke saMskAra
se AtmA meM baMdha kI buddhi hotI hai  //  176  //  zrutvA matvA muhuH smRtvA
sAkSAdanubhavanti ye  /  tattvaM na bandhadhIsteSAmAtmA'bandhaH prakAzate  //
177 //  bhAvArtha : jo bAra - bAra tattva sunakara usa para manana karake, tathA
usakA smaraNa karake sAkSAt anubhava karate haiM, unheM bandha kI buddhi nahIM
hotI, unheM AtmA abandha (bandharahita ) prakAzita hotI hai  //  177 //
dravyamokSaH kSayaH karmadravyANAM nAtmalakSaNam  /  bhAvamokSastu taddheturAtmA
ratnatrayAnvayI  // 178 //  adhikAra aThArahavA~ 273

Page #274 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Bhavārtha: The destruction of karmic substances is called dravyamokṣa, but it is
not the characteristic of the soul. However, the soul endowed with the triad of
ratnatraya (right faith, right knowledge, and right conduct) is the cause of
that dravyamokṣa, and it is called bhāvamokṣa.  When the soul attains oneness
(ekya) with knowledge, perception, and conduct, the karmas become, as it were,
displeased and quickly separate.  Therefore, ratnatraya is the mokṣa
(liberation), and in its absence, there is no accomplishment in the guises of
the heretical sects or the householder's garb.  Those who are engrossed in the
guises of the heretical sects or the householder's garb are childish intellects
and are not the knowers of the essence of the doctrine (samayasāra).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 bhAvArtha : karmadravyoM kA jo kSaya, vaha dravyamokSa kahalAtA hai, para vaha
AtmA kA lakSaNa nahIM hai  /  parantu usa dravyamokSa kA heturUpa ratnatrayI se
yukta jo AtmA hai, vaha bhAvamokSa kahalAtI hai  // 178 //
jJAnadarzanacAritrairAtmaikyaM labhate yadA  /  karmANi kupitAnIva bhavantyAzu
tadA pRthak  // 179 //  bhAvArtha : jaba AtmA jJAna, darzana aura cAritra ke
sAtha ekya (tAdAmya) prApta kara letA hai, taba karma mAno kupita ho kara zIghra
hI pRthak ho jAte haiM  // 179 //  ato ratnatrayaM mokSastadabhAve kRtArthatA  /
pAkhaMDigaNaliMgaizca gRhiliMgaizca kA'pi na  // 180 //  bhAvArtha : isa kAraNa
ratnatrayarUpa mokSa hai| usa ratnatraya ke abhAva meM pAkhaMDI gaNa ke veSoM
meM yA gRhasthaveSoM meM koI kRtArthatA nahIM hai  // 180 //
pAkhaMDigaNaliMgeSu gRhIliMgeSu ye ratAH  /  na te samayasArasya jJAtAro
bAlabuddhayaH  // 181 //  bhAvArtha : jo pAkhaMDiyoM ke nAnA veSoM meM yA
gRhasthaveSoM meM Asakta haiM, ve bAlabuddhi haiM, samayasAra (siddhAnta ke
tattva) ke jAnakAra nahIM haiM  // 181 //  274 adhyAtmasAra

Page #275 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Translation:  **Verse 182:**  Those who dwell in the **Bhavalinga** are
knowers of the essence of all things. Therefore, whether they are in the garb of
a **Sadhu** or a householder, they attain the state of **Siddhi** by destroying
their karmas.  **Meaning:** Those who are in the **Bhavalinga** are enlightened
and understand the true nature of reality. Their state of being, whether they
are renunciates or householders, is a means to attain liberation.  **Verse
183:**  The **Bhavalinga** is the means to liberation, while the **Dravyalinga**
is not. This is because the **Dravyalinga** is not the ultimate goal, nor is it
the only means to liberation.  **Meaning:** The **Bhavalinga**, which is the
state of being free from attachment and identification with the body, is the
path to liberation. The **Dravyalinga**, which is the physical body, is not the
cause of liberation.  **Verse 184:**  If one claims that the ten types of
garments worn at birth are inseparable from the goal of liberation, then what is
the proof for this claim? In the absence of any opposing evidence, even animals
like deer, who are born naked, would also attain liberation. If the nakedness of
all beings is not desirable for liberation, then what is the evidence for
claiming that nakedness is the cause of liberation?  **Meaning:** The argument
that the ten types of garments worn at birth are essential for liberation is
flawed. If this were true, then animals who are born naked would also attain
liberation. This is absurd, as nakedness is not a requirement for liberation.
**Verse 185:**  If one claims that wearing clothes is an obstacle to liberation,
then what is the purpose of wearing clothes? Just as the hand is an obstacle to
the act of eating, so too is clothing an obstacle to liberation.  **Meaning:**
The argument that wearing clothes is an obstacle to liberation is illogical. If
this were true, then there would be no reason to wear clothes at all.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 bhAvaliMgaratA ye syuH sarvasAravido hi te  /  liMgasthA vA gRhasthA vA
sidhyanti dhUtakalmaSAH  // 182 //  bhAvArtha : jo bhAvaliMga meM rahate haiM,
ve sarvasAra ke jJAtA haiM, isalie ve sAdhuveSa meM hoM, yA gRhastha-veSa meM
hoM, phira bhI ve pApa kA kSaya karake siddhipada prApta karate haiM  // 182 //
bhAvaliMgaM hi mokSAMgaM dravyaliMgamakAraNam  /  dravyaM nAtyantikaM
yasmAnnApyekAntikamiSyate  // 183 //  bhAvArtha : bhAvaliMga hI mokSa kA aMga
(kAraNa) hai, dravyaliMga mokSa kA kAraNa nahIM hai; kyoMki dravya Atyantika
abhISTa nahIM hai, aura na hI aikAntika abhISTa hai  // 183 //
yathAjAtadazAliMgamarthAdavyabhicAri cet  /  vipakSabAdhakAbhAvAttadhetutve tu
kA pramA ?  // 184 //  bhAvArtha : jisa prakAra se janma huA, vaisI dazArUpa
veSa mokSarUpI artha se avyabhicArI hai, yadi aisA kahate hoM to vipakSabAdhaka
kA abhAva hone se mRga Adi bhI yathAjAta (nagna) dazA meM rahate haiM, unakA bhI
mokSa hone lagegA aura sabhI nagnoM kA yadi mokSa iSTa nahIM hai, to usa
nagnatva ko mokSa kA kAraNa kahane meM kyA pramANa hai?  // 184 //
vastrAdidhAreNacchA ced bAdhikA tasya tAM vinA  /  dhRtasya kimavasthAne
karAderiva bAdhakam  // 185 //  adhikAra aThArahavA~ 275

Page #276 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Meaning:** If the desire to wear clothes is an obstacle to liberation, then
what is the obstacle to having clothes worn like hands, etc., without the desire
for them? || 185 || If clothes are an obstacle to omniscience by their very
nature, then according to the Digambara view, they should be like the
omniscience-obscuring (kevalgyanavaran) || 186 || In this way, if someone throws
clothes on the head of a Kevali, then their omniscience should be lost (run
away), what a nonsensical (unsuitable, absurd) statement is this? || 187 ||
Therefore, liberation is certain even for those with different lingas (bodies)
from the bhavalinga (original body). Therefore, a wise man should consider this,
giving up attachment to the body. || 188 || The soul is bound and liberated
according to the impure path. It is not bound or liberated according to the pure
path. || 189 ||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 bhAvArtha : yadi vastrAdi dhAraNa karane kI icchA mokSa meM bAdhaka hai, to
usakI (vastra kI) icchA ke binA hI hAtha ityAdi kI taraha dhAraNa kie hue
vastrAdi ke hone meM kyA bAdhA hai ?  //  185  //  svarUpeNa ca vastraM
cetkevalajJAnabAdhakam  /  tadA dikpaTanItyaiva tattadAvaraNaM bhavet  // 186 //
bhAvArtha : yadi vastra svarUpa se hI kevalajJAna meM bAdhaka haiM to digambara
mata ke anusAra kevalajJAnAvaraNIya ke samAna vastrAvaraNa bhI honA cAhie || 186
| itthaM kevalinastena mUrdhni kSiptena kenacit  /  kevalitvaM palAyetetyaho
kimasamaJjasam  // 187 //  bhAvArtha : aisA hone para to kevalI ke mastaka para
koI vyakti vastra DAla de to unakA kevalajJAna naSTa ho (bhAga) jAnA cAhie, yaha
kaisA asamaMjasapUrNa (ayogya, aTapaTA) kathana hai?  // 187 //  bhAvaliMgAt
tato mokSo, bhinnaliMgeSvapi dhruvaH  /  kadA grahaM vimucyaitad bhAvanIyaM
manasvinA  // 188 //  bhAvArtha : isalie bhinnaliMga vAle hone para bhI
bhAvaliMga se avazya mokSa hai  /  ataH kadAgraha chor3akara manasvI puruSa ko
isa para bhalIbhA~ti vicAra karanA cAhie  // 188 //  azuddhanayato hyAtmA baddho
mukta iti sthiti:  /  na zuddhanayatastveSa baddhyate nA'pi mucyate  //  189 //
276 adhyAtmasAra

Page #277 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Verse 189:**  **Meaning:** From the perspective of the impure Nay, the soul is
bound and liberated. However, from the perspective of the pure Nay, there is
neither bondage nor liberation of the soul.  **Verse 190:**  **Meaning:** A wise
person should determine the nature of the soul through the principles of Anvaya
(inclusion) and Vyatireka (exclusion) from the nine Tattvas.  **Verse 191:**
**Meaning:** This is the highest Adhyatma, this is the nectar, this is the
highest knowledge, and this is called the supreme Yoga.  **Verse 192:**
**Meaning:** This is a more secret (guhya) than secret (guhyatar) truth,
dependent on the subtle Nay. Therefore, it is not suitable to give this truth to
those with limited understanding. For they often mock it.  **Verse 193:**
**Meaning:** This truth is not beneficial for people with limited understanding.
It is like food for the weak and hungry, just as it is for a wheel.  **Chapter
18**  **Page 277**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 bhAvArtha : azuddha naya kI dRSTi se AtmA baddha aura mukta hotI hai, parantu
zuddha naya se to AtmA kA bandha aura mokSa bhI nahIM hotA  // 189 //
anvayavyatirekAbhyAmAtmatatvavinizcayam  /  navebhyo'pi hi tattvebhyaH
kuryAdevaM vicakSaNaH  //  190  //  bhAvArtha : isa prakAra vicakSaNa puruSa ko
nau tatvoM se anvaya aura vyatireka dvArA Atmatatva kA nizcaya karanA cAhie  //
190 //  idaM hi paramAdhyAtmamamRtaM hyada eva ca  /  idaM hi paramaM jJAnaM
yogo'yaM paramaH smRtaH  // 191 //  bhAvArtha : yahI utkRSTa adhyAtma hai, yahI
amRta hai, yahI utkRSTa jJAna hai aura yahI parama yoga kahalAtA hai  // 191 //
guhyAt guhyataram tattvametatsUkSmanayAzritam  /  na deyaM svalpabuddhInAM te
hyetasya viDambakAH  // 192 //  bhAvArtha : yaha guhya (rahasyamaya ) se
guhyatara (adhika rahasyamaya) tatva sUkSmanaya ke Azrita hai  /  isalie
alpabuddhi vAloM ko yaha tattva dene yogya nahIM hai  /  kyoMki ve (prAyaH)
isakI viDambanA karane vAle hote haiM  //  192 //  janAnAmalpabuddhInAM
naitattatvaM hitAvaham  /  nirbalAnAM kSudhAttInAM bhojanaM cakriNo yathA  //
193 //  adhikAra aThArahavA~ 277

Page #278 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
_ **Meaning:** Just as heavy food is not beneficial for weak and hungry
individuals, similarly, this knowledge of the Self is not beneficial for those
with limited intellect. ||193||  **Meaning:** Just as it is harmful for one who
recites impure mantras to obtain the gem of the serpent king, similarly, this
knowledge is harmful for those who consider themselves great scholars after
acquiring a mere fragment of knowledge. ||194||  **Meaning:** One who is not
skilled in the conduct of worldly affairs, if he desires to know the knowledge
of certainty, is like someone who is unable to cross a small pond but desires to
cross the ocean. ||195||  **Meaning:** Therefore, one who takes refuge in the
pure path should first determine the conduct of worldly affairs and then, being
devoted to the knowledge of the Self, attain the highest equality. ||196||
**278** || Thus ends the chapter on the Determination of the Self. ||  **Essence
of Spirituality**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 _ bhAvArtha : jaise durbala kSudhAtura vyaktiyoM ke lie cakravartI kA gariSTha
bhojana hitakara nahIM hotA, vaise hI alpabuddhi vAle manuSyoM ko yaha
Atmatattva hitakArI nahIM hotA  // 193 //  jJAnAMzadurvidagdhasya
tattvametadanarthakRt  /  azuddhamaMtrapAThasya phaNiratnagraho yathA  // 194 //
bhAvArtha : jaise azuddhamaMtrapATha karane vAle ko zeSanAga kA ratna grahaNa
karanA anarthakArI hotA hai, vaise hI jJAna kA aMza pAkara apane ko mahAvidvAn
mAnane vAloM ke lie yaha tattva anarthakArI hotA hai  // 194 //
vyavahArAviniSNAto yo jJIpsati vinizcayam  /  kAsArataraNAzaktaH sa titIrSati
saagrm||195|| bhAvArtha : jo puruSa vyavahAra naya meM kuzala nahIM hai, vaha
agara nizcaya naya ko jAnanA cAhatA hai to vaha usI taraha hai, jisa taraha
choTe se tAlAba ko pAra karane meM asamartha koI vyakti samudra pAra karanA
cAhatA ho  // 195 /  /  vyavahAraM vinizcitya tataH zuddhanayAzritaH  /
AtmajJAnarato bhUtvA paramaM sAmyamAzrayet  // 196 //  bhAvArtha : isalie
zuddhanaya kA Azraya lene vAle puruSa ko pahale vyavahAra kA nizcaya karake
tadanantara AtmajJAna meM rata hokara utkRSTa samatA ko prApta karanA cAhie  //
196 //  278 ||iti AtmavinizcayAdhikAraH  //  adhyAtmasAra

Page #279 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Chapter Nineteen** [Praise of Jainism] The tumultuous waves of conduct and
determination, the group of turtles of the path of isolation, the crumbling
mountains of wrong views, all are terrifying. The ocean of Jainism, adorned by
the entry of rivers of irrefutable arguments and bound by the limits of
Syadvada, is beautiful. I will not seek refuge in anything else. ||1||
**Meaning:** The group of turtles of the path of isolation is distressed by the
tumultuous waves of conduct and determination, with mountains of wrong views
crumbling. The ocean of Jainism, adorned by the entry of rivers of irrefutable
arguments and bound by the limits of Syadvada, is beautiful. I will not seek
refuge in anything else. ||1||  The tree of Syadvada, adorned with the flowers
of pure conduct and the construction of proofs, is always established and bears
the fruit of knowledge of reality. It always triumphs. From this tree, the
flowers of teachings have fallen, making the garden of six philosophies fragrant
again with the desired scents of spiritual discussions. ||2|| **Meaning:** The
tree of Syadvada, adorned with the flowers of pure conduct and the construction
of proofs, is always established and bears the fruit of knowledge of reality. It
always triumphs. From this tree, the flowers of teachings have fallen, making
the garden of six philosophies fragrant again with the desired scents of
spiritual discussions. ||2||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 adhikAra unnIsavA~ [jinamata-stuti] utsarpadvyavahAra-nizcayakathA-
kallolakolAhalatrasyadurnayavAdi-kacchapakula-bhrazyatkupakSAcalam  //
udyadhuktinadIpravezasubhagaM syaadvaadmryaadyaa| yuktaM zrIjinazAsanaM
jalanidhiM muktvA paraM nAzraye  // 1 //  bhAvArtha : vyavahAra aura
nizcayakathArUpI uchalatI huI taraMgoM ke kolAhala se duHkhI hote hue durnaya
(ekAnta) vAdIrUpI kachuoM kA jhuMDa hai| jisameM kupakSarUpI parvata gira rahe
haiM, aura akATya yuktiyoMrUpI nadiyoM ke praveza se manohara hai, tathA
syAdvAda kI maryAdA se yukta hai, aise jinazAsanarUpI mahAsamudra ko chor3akara
maiM dUsare kisI kA Azraya nahIM letA  // 1 //  pUrNaH
puNyanayapramANaracanApuSpaiH sadAsthArasaisaH  /  tattvajJAnaphalaH sadA
vijayate syAdvAdakalpadrumaH  //  etasmAtpatitaiH pravAdakusumaiH
SaDdarzanArAmabhUH bhUyaH saurabhamudvamatyabhimatairadhyAtmavArtAlavaiH  // 2
//  bhAvArtha : samyak AsthArUpI pavitra nayoM aura pramANoM kI racanArUpa
puSpoM se jo paripUrNa hai, jisake tattvajJAnarUpI adhikAra unnIsavA~ 279

Page #280 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The **syādvāda**-tree, a wish-fulfilling tree, is always victorious. Its
branches are adorned with **pravāda**-flowers, small and filled with the essence
of the desired and the spiritual, which spread a fragrant aroma over the land of
the **ṣaḍdarśana**-garden. ||2||  Adorned with the beauty of peaks formed by the
creation of **citrotsarga** and auspicious **apvāda** paths, it is fragrant with
the wisdom that shines like sandalwood trees in the **śraddhā**-forest.  Always
served by the **paradarśana**-planets that wander around it, and elevated by the
golden stones of **tarka**, the **Jaināgama**-mountain, like Mount Meru, is
victorious. ||3||  **Meaning:** The **Jaināgama** is adorned with the beauty of
various **citrotsarga** and auspicious **apvāda** paths. It is fragrant with the
wisdom that shines like sandalwood trees in the **śraddhā**-forest.  Always
served by the **paradarśana**-planets that wander around it, and elevated by the
golden stones of **tarka**, the **Jaināgama**-mountain, like Mount Meru, is
victorious. ||3||  The **syāddosa**-mist disappears from the world in an
instant, the paths become clear, the deep sleep of the eyes departs. When this
**Jaināgama** rises, like the sun at the beginning of a day, it brings
auspiciousness to the world. It gives strength to the **naya**-speech and brings
joy. ||4||  **Meaning:** When the **Jaināgama** rises, the night of **moha**
(delusion) disappears from the world, the darkness of ignorance disappears from
the earth, and the deep sleep of the eyes departs. It brings auspiciousness to
the world, gives strength to the **naya**-speech, and brings joy. ||4||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 phala haiM, aisA syAdvAdarUpI kalpavRkSa sadA vijayI hotA hai  /  usake Upara
se gire hue abhISTa aura adhyAtmarUpI choTI-choTI bAtoM vAle pravAdarUpI puSpoM
se SaDdarzanarUpI upavana kI bhUmi atyanta saurabha phailA rahI hai  // 2 //
citrotsargazubhApavAdaracanAsAnuzriyAlaMkRtaH  /
zraddhAnandanacandanadrumanibhaprajJollasatsaurabhaH  //  bhrAmyadbhiH
paradarzanagrahagaNairAsevyamAnaH sadA  /  tarkasvarNazilocchrito vijayate
jainAgamo mandaraH  // 3 //  I bhAvArtha : aneka prakAra ke utsarga aura zubha
apavAdamArga kI racanArUpI zikharoM kI zobhA se jo alaMkRta hai | zraddhArUpI
nandanavana ke candanataruoM ke sadRza buddhi se jisameM sugandha phaila rahI
hai  /  paribhramaNa karate hue paradarzanarUpI grahagaNoM ke dvArA jo nirantara
sevita hai aura tarkarUpI svarNazilAoM se jo ati unnata hai, aisA jinAmagarUpI
meruparvata vijayI ho  // 3 //  syAddoSApagamastamAMsi jagati kSIyanta eva
kSaNAdadhvAno vizadIbhavanti nibaDA nidrA dRzorgacchati  //  yasminnabhyudite
pramANa divasaprArambhakalyANinI  /  prauDhatvaM nayagIrdadhAti sa ravirjenAgamo
nandatAt  // 4 //  bhAvArtha : jisakA udaya hone se jagat meM moharUpI rAtri kA
nAza ho jAtA hai aura pRthvI para sarvatra ajJAnarUpI andhakAra 280 adhyAtmasAra

Page #281 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
In a moment, they are extinguished and the paths become pure (clean), the deep
sleep is removed from the eyes. At the beginning of the day, which is the proof,
the auspicious Nayavaani attains maturity. It is enriched by the Sun in the form
of Jain Agamas. ||4||  The one who always rises, showering the earth with the
nectar of spirituality, and makes the earth's sphere (lotus) flourish with the
playful beauty of speech that destroys the spread (transmission) of heat (sun).
The one who is situated on the head of the pillar of logic, surrounded by
brilliant stars in the form of Nayas. This moon in the form of the Jina Shastra,
who does not find it pleasing? ||5||  Meaning: The moon in the form of Jain
Agamas always rises, showering the earth with the nectar of spirituality, and
makes the earth's sphere (lotus) flourish with the playful beauty of speech that
destroys the spread (transmission) of heat (sun). The one who is situated on the
head of the pillar of logic, surrounded by brilliant stars in the form of Nayas.
This moon in the form of the Jina Shastra, who does not find it pleasing? ||5||
The Buddhist view arose from the Riju Sutra Nay, the Vedanta view arose from the
Sangraha Nay, the Sankhya view arose from the Nigamana Nay, and Yoga and
Vaisheshika arose from the same. Even the Shabda Brahmavids, who know the word,
are bound by all the Nayas. The Jain view is seen here as the most essential,
directly. ||6||  Meaning: The Buddhist view arose from the Riju Sutra Nay, the
Vedanta view arose from the Sangraha Nay, the Sankhya view arose from the
Nigamana Nay, and Yoga and Vaisheshika arose from the same. Even the Shabda
Brahmavids, who know the word, are bound by all the Nayas. The Jain view is seen
here as the most essential, directly. ||6||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 kSaNabhara meM kSINa ho jAtA hai tathA usase mArga nirmala (svaccha) ho jAte
haiM, netroM se gAr3ha nidrA dUra ho jAtI hai| pramANarUpI divasa ke prArambha
hone para kalyANakAriNI nayavANI praur3hatA dhAraNa karatI hai  /  vaha
jainAgamarUpI sUrya samRddha ho  // 4 //  adhyAtmAmRtavarSibhiH kuvalayollAsaM
vilAsairgavAM  /  tApavyApavinAzibhirvitanute labdhodayo yaH sadA  //
tarkasthANuziraH sthitaH parivRttaH sphArairnayaistArakaiH  /  so'yaM
zrIjinazAsanAmRtaruciH kasyati no rucyatAm  // 5 //  bhAvArtha : jainAgamarUpI
candramA sadA udaya hokara adhyAtmarUpI amRta kI varSA karatA hai tathA tApa
(dhUpa) ke prasAra (saMcAra) ko nAza karane vAle vANI ke vilAsa se pRthvI ke
maMDala (kamala) ko ullasita (vikasita) karatA hai  /  jo tarkarUpI zaMkara ke
mastaka para sthita hai| tathA jo dedIpyamAna nayarUpI tAroM se ghirA huA hai  /
aisA jinazAsanarUpI candramA kise rucikara nahIM hotA ?  // 5 //
bauddhAnAmRjusUtrato matamabhUd vedAntinAM saMgrahAt  /  sAMkhyAnAM tata eva
naigamanayAd yogazca vaizeSikaH  //  zabdabrahmavido'pi zabdanayataH
sarvairnayairgumphitA  /  jainI dRSTiritIha sArataratA pratyakSamuvIkSyate  // 6
//  bhAvArtha : bauddhadarzana RjusUtranaya se huA hai, vedAntiyoM kA darzana
saMgrahanaya ke Azrita huA hai, sAMkhyadarzana bhI adhikAra unnIsavA~ 281

Page #282 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
It has originated from **Sangrahanaya**. Yoga and Vaisheshika philosophies have
originated from **Naigamanya**. And the philosophy of the Mimamsakas, who
consider word as Brahman, has originated from **Shabdanya**. But Jain philosophy
is interwoven with all **Nayas**. Therefore, the superiority of Jain philosophy
is evident. ||6||  Just as the sun cannot remove the heat, sparks cannot remove
the fire, the flood of the river cannot remove the ocean, and the falling
boulder cannot shake Mount Meru, in the same way, the Jineendra Agama, which is
the supreme abode of the unique nature of all **Nayas**, cannot be defeated by
the partial creation-like statements of other philosophies. ||7||  It is
difficult for opponents to criticize other philosophies without their own, and
their criticism leads to the mind becoming polluted with the mud of **Kashaya**.
This is the beginning of the **Vetala** who is determined to take away what is
not his own. This is not the Jain philosophy, which is for the benefit of all
and for the understanding of the truth. ||8||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 saMgrahanaya se hI huA hai| yoga aura vaizeSika darzana naigamanaya se hue haiM
/  tathA zabda ko hI brahma mAnane vAle mImAMsakoM kA darzana zabdanaya se huA
hai| parantu jainadarzana to sabhI nayoM se gumphita hai| isa kAraNa
jainadarzana kI zreSThatA pratyakSa hI dikhAI detI hai  // 6 //  uSmA
nArkamapAkaroti dahanaM naiva sphuliMgAvalI  /  nAbdhi sindhujalaplavaH
suragiriM grAvA na cAbhyApatan  //  evaM sarvanayaikabhAvagarimasthAnaM
jinendrAgamam  /  tattaddarzana saMkathAMzaracanArUpA na hantuM kSamA  // 7 //
bhAvArtha : jisa prakAra ghAma sUrya ko dUra nahIM kara sakatA, Aga kI cingAriyA
agni ko haTA nahI sakatIM, nadI ke pAnI kI bAr3ha samudra ko dUra nahIM haTA
sakatI, sAmane giratA huA pASANakhaNDa meruparvata ko DigA nahIM sakatA, isI
prakAra samastanayoM ke advitIyabhAva ke mahAsthAnarUpa jinendrAgama ko usa-usa
darzana (paradarzana) kA AMzika racanArUpa kathana parAbhUta (parAjita) karane
meM samartha nahIM hai  // 7 //  duHsAdhyaM paravAdinAM paramatakSepaM vinA svaM
mataM, tatkSepe ca kaSAyapaMkakaluSaM cetaH samApadyate  //  so'yaM
niHsvanidhigrahavyavasito vetAlakopakramo, nA'yaM sarvahitAvahe jinamate
tattvaprasiddhyarthinAm  // 8 //  282 adhyAtmasAra

Page #283 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Meaning:** It is difficult for the Paravadiyas (those with other philosophies)
to prove their own views without criticizing the views of others (refutation,
contempt). And that contempt stains the mind with the mud of kṣaya (negative
emotions). Therefore, this business is like the anger of a Vetala (a malevolent
spirit) who is eager to take possession of a poor man's treasure. Such a step
(undertaking) is not in the best interests of those who are seeking the truth in
the Jain philosophy. ||8||  **Meaning:** There are thousands of arguments in
each philosophy, arranged in a sequence based on different aspects of knowledge.
Yet, our mind, deeply immersed in the Agamas of the Jinas, does not even go
towards those arguments. Do not many vines, adorned with flowers, appear in
every direction during the spring season? Many do, yet the cuckoo, attached to
the mango bud, does not find pleasure in those (other) vines. ||9||
**Meaning:** Whether it is words, thoughts, wealth, caste, action, or qualities,
the question of "what is the meaning of words?" remains a source of doubt,
suspicion, and distress for those with different views. ||9||  **Chapter
Nineteen** **283**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 bhAvArtha : paravAdiyoM (anyadarzaniyoM) ke lie dUsare ke mata para AkSepa
(khaNDana, tiraskAra) kiye binA apane mata ko siddha karanA duSkara hai| aura
usa tiraskAra se citta kaSAyarUpI kIcar3a se malina hotA hai| ataH yaha vyApAra
nirdhana ke khajAne ko grahaNa karane meM udyata vetAla ke krodha sA upakrama
hai| aisA kadama (upakrama) tattva ke jijJAsArthiyoM ke lie sarva-hitakArI
jainadarzana meM nahIM hai  // 8 //  vArtAH santi sahasrazaH pratimataM
jJAnAMzabaddhakramAz cetastAsu na naH prayAti nitarAM lInaM jinendrAgame  /
notsarpanti latAH kati pratidizaM puSpaiH pavitrA madhau, tAbhyo naiti ratiM
rasAlakalikAraktastu puMskokilaH  // 9 //  bhAvArtha : pratyeka darzana meM
jJAna ke alaga-alaga aMza se kramabaddha hajAroM bAteM haiM  /  phira bhI
jinezvara ke Agama meM atyanta lIna huA hamArA mana una bAtoM kI ora jAtA hI
nhiiN| kyA vasantaRtu meM pratyeka dizA meM phUloM se pavitra (suzobhita) kaI
latAeM nahIM dikhatI ? bahuta-sI dikhatI haiM, tathApi Ama kI maMjarI meM Asakta
banA huA narakoyala una (anya) latAoM para rati (prIti) nahIM karatA  // 9 //
zabdo vA matirartha eva vasu vA jAtiH kriyA vA guNaH  /  zabdArthaH kimiti
sthitA pratimata sandehazaMkuvyathA  //  adhikAra unnIsavA~ 283

Page #284 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Jainen̄dre tu mate na sa pratipad jātyantarāth sthiteḥ | Sāmānyaṁ ca viśeṣameva
ca yathā tātparyam anvicchati ||10|| Bhāvartha:  Is the soul a word? Is it
intellect? Or is it a caste, an action, or a quality? Is it the meaning of a
word? In this way, in every opinion (philosophy), there is the pain of a nail of
doubt. But in the Jainen̄dra opinion (philosophy), since every word has the
meaning of jātyantara, there is no such pain of doubt; because it clearly finds
the general and the particular according to the intention. ||10|| Yatrānarpitam
ādhadhāti guṇatāṁ mukhyaṁ ca vastvārpitam, tātparyānavalambanena tu bhaved
bodhaḥ sphuṭaṁ laukikaḥ || Saṁpūrṇaṁ tvavabhāsate kṛtadhiyām kṛtsnād
vivakṣākramāt | Tāṁ lokoत्तरbhanga paddhatim ayīṁ syādvāda mudrāṁ stumaḥ ||11||
Bhāvartha: Where the unpresented object acquires secondary importance and the
presented object acquires primary importance, and without relying on the
intention, worldly knowledge becomes clear. For skilled intelligent men, the
whole object is revealed by the order of the whole intention. We praise that
syādvāda mudrā, which is endowed with the method of transcendental breaking
(non-worldly alternative creation). ||11|| 284 Adhyātmasāra

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 jainendre tu mate na sA pratipada jAtyantarAthasthiteH  /  sAmAnyaM ca
vizeSameva ca yathA tAtparyamanvicchati  // 10 //  bhAvArtha : kyA AtmA
zabdarUpa hai? kyA vaha buddhirUpa hai? yA vaha jAtirUpa hai, kriyArUpa hai
athavA guNarUpa hai? kyA vaha zabdArtharUpa hai? isa prakAra pratyeka mata
(darzana) meM saMdeharUpI kIla kI pIr3A vidyamAna hai  /  kintu jainendramata
(darzana) meM to pratyeka pada meM jAtyantara kA artha hone se usa prakAra kI
saMdehavyathA hai hI nahIM; kyoMki vaha sAmAnya aura vizeSa ko tAtparya ke
anusAra spaSTarUpa se DhU~Dha letA hai  // 10 //  yatrAnarpitamAdadhAti guNatAM
mukhyaM ca vastvarpitaM, tAtparyAnavalambanena tu bhaved bodhaH sphuTaM laukikaH
//  saMpUrNaM tvavabhAsate kRtadhiyAM kRtsnAd vivakSAkramAt  /  tAM
lokottarabhaMgapaddhatimayIM syAdvAdamudrAM stumaH  // 11 //  bhAvArtha :
jisameM anarpita vastu gauNatva ko aura arpita vastu mukhyatva ko prApta karatI
hai tathA tAtparya kA avalambana liye binA hI (vastu kA) laukika jJAna spaSTa ho
jAtA hai  /  kuzala buddhimAna puruSoM ko samagra vivakSA (kahane kI icchA) ke
krama se sampUrNa vastu pratibhAsita ho jAtI hai| usa lokottara bhaMga (alaukika
vikalparacanA) kI paddhati se yukta syAdvAdamudrA kI hama stuti karate haiM  //
11 //  284 adhyAtmasAra

Page #285 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter Nineteen ### 285  **Verse 12:**  The **Jinaagama**, whose subject
matter is the experience of the soul, is of the highest order. It is like
Sanskrit to the **mleccha** (non-Aryan), causing wonder and delusion in the
minds of the simple. We, having thoroughly understood the **Jinaagama** with its
detailed explanations of origin, comprehension, and reasons, based on the
**syadvada** (doctrine of conditional affirmation), are never subject to
criticism.  **Verse 13:**  The **Jinaasana** (Jain doctrine) is the well-known
source of the meaning of all scriptures. To refute it with the doctrines of
**naya** (principles of logic) that are derived from it, is like a man cutting
off his own branch, a foolish act of the **tarkarthins** (those who seek to
argue) whose minds are covered with the dirt of sin. This is a cruel act that
will only bring them suffering.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 kramaH  /   /  AtmIyAnubhavAzrayArthaviSayo'pyuccairyadIyaH mlecchAnAmiva
saMskRtaM tanudhiyAmAzcaryamohAvahaH  //  vyutpatti-
pratipattihetuvitatasyAdvAdavAggumphitam taM jainAgamamAkalayya na vayaM
vyAkSepabhAjaH kvacit  // 12 //  bhAvArtha : apane anubhava kA Azraya hI jisake
artha kA viSaya hai, jo jinAgama kA uccakrama hai, vaha mlecchoM ke lie saMskRta
bhASA kI taraha alpabuddhi vAloM ke lie Azcarya tathA moha utpanna karane vAlA
hai  /  vyutpatti, pratipatti tathA hetuoM se vistRta syAdvAda kI vANI se racita
jinAgama ko bhalIbhAMti hRdayaMgama karake hama kahIM para bhI AkSepa ke bhAjana
(tiraskAra ke pAtra) nahIM hote  //  12  //  mUlaM sarvavacogatasya viditaM
jainezvaraM zAsanam  /  tasmAdeva samutthitairnayamataistasyaiva yatkhaNDanam
//  etat kiMcana kauzalaM kalimalacchannAtmanaH svAzritAM  /  zAkhAM
chettumivodyatasya kaTukodarkAya tarkArthinaH  // 13 //  bhAvArtha : samasta
vacanoM ke abhiprAya kA mUla yaha jinazAsana suvidita (suprasiddha ) hai  /  isa
jinazAsana se hI utpanna naya ke matoM se usI kA khaNDana karanA apanI hI
AdhArarUpa zAkhA ko kATane ko udyata hue manuSya kI taraha hai pApamala se
AcchAdita hue tarkArthiyoM kI tuccha kuzalatA unhIM ke lie kaTu pariNAma lAne
vAlI hai  // 13 //  I adhikAra unnIsavA~ 285

Page #286 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Having heard the nectar of the ear, the composition of the *anekanta* (non-
absolutist) doctrine, which is free from delusion and division, where can a
knower of the secrets of the true meaning of the principles find delight in any
other scripture? In which all *nayas* (perspectives) enter, but do not exist in
those scattered *nayas* themselves. Just as there are beads in a garland, but if
those beads are scattered and separate, there is no garland. ||14||
**Meaning:** Having abandoned delusion and composed a doctrine worthy of
division (anekanta), a knower of the secrets of the meaning of the principles,
having heard the nectar of the ear, where can he find delight in any other
scripture? In which all *nayas* enter, but do not exist in those scattered
*nayas* themselves. Just as there are beads in a garland, but if those beads are
scattered and separate, there is no garland. ||14||  The one who, by virtue of
his own truth, divides the *nayas* that are false due to their mutual
opposition, and their own meaning, without relying on biased views, and by
adhering to the middle path. He, placing the mind on the path of *syadvada*,
removes their delusion. The fame of the victor, like that of the jasmine and the
moon, increases. ||15||  **Meaning:** The one who, by virtue of his own truth,
divides the *nayas* that are false due to their mutual opposition, and their own
meaning, without relying on biased views, and by adhering to the middle path.
He, placing the mind on the path of *syadvada*, removes their delusion. The fame
of the victor, like that of the jasmine and the moon, increases. ||15||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 tyaktonmAda-vibhajyavAdaracanAmAkarNya karNAmRtam  /  siddhAMtArtharahasyavit
kva labhatAmanyatra zAstre ratim  //  yasyAM sarvanayA vizanti na punarvyasteSu
teSveva yA  /  mAlAyaM maNayo luThanti na punarvyasteSu mAlA'pi sA  // 14 //
bhAvArtha : unmAda kA tyAga karake vibhAga karane yogya (anekAnta) vAda kI
racanArUpa karNAmRta kA zravaNa karake siddhAnta-pratipAdita artha kA rahasyajJa
puruSa anya kisa zAstra meM prIti sampAdana kara sakatA hai? jisa racanA meM
sabhI naya kA praveza hai, kintu ve naya alaga-alaga hoM to una bikhare hue
nayoM meM vaha racanA nahIM hotI  /  jaise mAlA meM maNiyA~ hotI haiM, lekina ve
maNiyA~ bikharI huI alaga-alaga hoM to unameM mAlA nahIM hotI  // 14 //
anyo'nyapratipakSabhAvavitathAn svasvArthasatyAnnayAn  /  nApekSA
viSamAgrahaivibhajate mAdhyasthyamAsthAya yaH  //  syAdvAde supathe nivezya
harate teSAM nu diGmUDhatAm  /  kundendupratimaM yazo vijayinastasyaiva
saMvardhate  // 15 //  bhAvArtha : paraspara zatru (virodha) bhAva ke kAraNa
asatya aura apane-apane artha meM satya nayoM kA jo puruSa apekSAviSayaka Agraha
se mAdhyasthyabhAva kA Azraya lekara vibhAga kara (chA~Ta) letA hai, tathA jo
syAdvAdarUpI sumArga para citta ko 286 adhyAtmasAra

Page #287 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
He destroys the bewilderment of those who are new to the path, and the fame of
that victorious man increases like the kundapushpa flower and the moon. ||15||
|| Thus ends the chapter on the praise of the Jina. || Chapter Nineteen 287

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 jamAkara una nayoM kI diGmUDhatA ko naSTa kara detA hai, usI vijayI puruSa kA
kundapuSpa aura candramA ke samAna ujjvala yaza bar3hatA hai  // 15 //   //  iti
jinamata-stutyadhikAraH  //  adhikAra unnIsavA~ 287

Page #288 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter Twenty [Experience-Form]  The secret that reveals itself to those
whose wrong perceptions, passions, and defilements (attachment and aversion)
have been destroyed by the direction indicated in the scriptures, is known only
through experience. ||1||  **Meaning:** For those whose wrong perceptions,
passions, and defilements (attachment and aversion) have been destroyed by the
direction indicated in the scriptures, a certain desirable secret is revealed,
which can only be known through experience. ||1||  This secret, which appears
from the delight of the first practice, makes the mind, which is absorbed in it
for a moment, very eager, like the charming delight of a young woman. ||2||
**Meaning:** This secret, which appears from the delight of the first practice,
makes the mind, which is absorbed in it for a moment, very eager, like the
charming delight of a young woman. ||2||  The yogis, who have thoroughly
understood the nature of yoga, have described five types of mind: (1) Kshipta,
(2) Mūḍha, (3) Vikṣipta, (4) Ekāgra, and (5) Niruddha. ||3||  **Meaning:** The
yogis, who have thoroughly understood the nature of yoga, have described five
types of mind: (1) Kshipta, (2) Mūḍha, (3) Vikṣipta, (4) Ekāgra, and (5)
Niruddha. ||3||  288 Adhyatma Sara

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 adhikAra bIsavA~ [ anubhava-svarUpa ] zAstropadarzitadizA
galitAsadgrahakaSAyakaluSANAm  /  priyamanubhavaikavaidyaM rahasyamAvirbhavati
kimapi  // 1 //  bhAvArtha : zAstra meM batAI huI dizA se jinake asadgraha,
kaSAya aura kAluSya (rAgadveSa) naSTa ho gae haiM, una puruSoM ko anubhava se hI
jAnA jA sake, aisA kucha iSTa rahasya pragaTa ho jAtA hai  // 1 //
prathamAbhyAsavilAsAdAvirbhUyaiva yatkSaNAllInam  /
caMcattaruNIvibhramasamamuttaralaM manaH kurute  //  2  //  bhAvArtha : jo
rahasya prathama abhyAsa ke vilAsa se prakaTa hokara kSaNabhara meM tallIna hue
mana ko yuvatI strI ke manohara vilAsa ke samAna atyanta AturatA vAlA banA detA
hai  // 2 //  suviditayogairiSTa kSiptaM mUDhaM tathaiva vikSiptam  /  ekAgraM
ca niruddhaM cetaH paJcaprakAramiti  // 3 //  bhAvArtha : jinhoMne yoga ke
svarUpa ko acchI taraha jAna liyA hai, una yogiyoM ne 5 prakAra kA mana batAyA
hai- (1) kSipta, (2) mUr3ha, (3) vikSipta, (4) ekAgra aura (5) niruddha ||3||
288 adhyAtmasAra

Page #289 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
In the objects that are imagined and those that are present in front, the mind
is invested with attachment (rajas). It is declared to be outward-looking, bound
by pleasure and pain, and tossed about. ||4||  **Meaning:** The mind that is
attached to imagined and present objects, bound by pleasure and pain, and
outward-looking is called tossed about. ||4||  The mind that is controlled by
anger, etc., engaged in contrary actions, dominated by tamas, and devoid of the
distinction between right and wrong actions (viveka), is called deluded. ||5||
**Meaning:** The mind that is controlled by anger, etc., engaged in contrary
actions, dominated by tamas, and devoid of the distinction between right and
wrong actions (viveka), is called deluded. ||5||  The mind that is constantly
engaged in the causes of pleasure, such as sound, etc., due to the predominance
of sattva, and is devoid of the causes of pain, is called distracted. ||6||
**Meaning:** The mind that is constantly engaged in the causes of pleasure, such
as sound, etc., due to the predominance of sattva, and is devoid of the causes
of pain, is called distracted. ||6||  The mind that is endowed with qualities
like non-hatred, etc., constantly free from defects like sorrow, etc., and is
connected with similar impressions, is called one-pointed. ||7||  **Meaning:**
The mind that is endowed with qualities like non-hatred, etc., constantly free
from defects like sorrow, etc., and is connected with similar impressions, is
called one-pointed. ||7||  Authority: Twentieth || _ 289

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 viSayeSu kalpiteSu ca puraH sthiteSu ca nivezitaM rajasA  /  sukha-
duHkhayugbahirmukhamAmnAtaM kSiptamiha cittam  // 4 //  bhAvArtha : kalpita aura
sAmane vidyamAna viSayoM meM rAga ke sthApita hue, sukha aura duHkha se yukta
tathA adhyAtma se bahirmukha citta ko kSipta kahate haiM  // 4 //
krodhAdibhirniyamitaM viruddhakRtyeSu yattamobhUmnA  /
kRtyAkRtyavibhAgAsaMgatametanmano mUDham  // 5 //  bhAvArtha : jo mana tamoguNa
ke bAhulya se viruddha kAryoM meM krodhAdi se niyamita tathA kRtya-akRtya ke
vibhAga (viveka) se rahita hai, vaha mana mUDha kahalAtA hai  // 5 //
satvodrekAt parihRtaduHkhanidAneSu sukhanidAneSu  /  zabdAdiSu pravRttaM sadaiva
cittaM tu vikSiptam  // 6 //  bhAvArtha : satvaguNa kI adhikatA ke kAraNa dukha
ke mUla kAraNoM se rahita aura zabdAdi sukha ke mUla kAraNoM meM nirantara
pravRtta huA citta vikSipta kahalAtA hai  // 6 //  adveSAdiguNavatAM nitya
khedAdidoSa parihArAt  /  sadRzapratyayasaMgatamekAgraM cittamAmnAtam  // 7 //
bhAvArtha : adveSa Adi guNavAlA, nirantara kheda Adi doSoM ke tyAga se samAna
pariNAma ko prApta jo mana hai, use ekAgra kahA gayA hai  // 7 //  adhikAra
bIsavA~ _ 289

Page #290 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The mind of the Atmaram Munis, which is free from the cycle of Vikalpa Vrittis,
Avgraha, etc., is pure and always restrained. ||8||  Meaning: The mind of the
Atmaram Munis, which is free from the cycle of Vikalpa Vrittis, Avgraha, etc.,
is pure and always restrained. ||8||  The first three stages of the mind are not
used in this Samadhi, but the last two stages are used due to the excellence of
Sattva, stability, and excessive happiness. ||9||  Meaning: The first three
stages of the mind are not used in this Samadhi, but the last two stages are
used due to the excellence of Sattva, stability, and excessive happiness. ||9||
The beginning of Yoga can happen in a distracted mind, sometimes with joy. But
in a distracted and foolish mind, it is always a cause of awakening. ||10||
Meaning: The beginning of Yoga can happen in a distracted mind, sometimes with
joy. But in a distracted and foolish mind, it is always a cause of awakening.
||10||  A mind that is free from objects and Kshayas, that wanders in various
Yogas, and that is playful like a child in the courtyard of the house, is
desirable for practice. ||11||  Meaning: A mind that is free from objects and
Kshayas, that wanders in various Yogas, and that is playful like a child in the
courtyard of the house, is desirable for practice. ||11||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 uparatavikalpavRttikamavagrahAdikramacyutaM zuddham  /  AtmArAmamunInAM bhavati
niruddhaM sadA cetaH  // 8 //  bhAvArtha : jisa mana se vikalpa kI vRttiyA~
zAnta ho gaI haiM, jo avagrahAdi (pratibandha Adi) ke krama se pRthak hai, aisA
AtmArAma muniyoM kA sadA ujjvala citta niruddha kahalAtA hai  // 8 //  na
samAdhAvupayogaM tistrazcetodazA iha labhante  /  sattvotkarSAt sthairyAdubhe
samAdhisukhAtizayAt  // 9 //  bhAvArtha : isa samAdhi meM citta kI pahalI tIna
avasthAe~ upayoga meM nahIM AtIM, parantu satva ke utkarSa ke kAraNa, sthairya
ke kAraNa, tathA atizaya sukha ke kAraNa citta kI antima do avasthAe~ upayoga
meM AtI haiM  // 9 //  yogArambhamastu bhavedvikSipte manasi jAtu sAnande  /
kSipte mUDhe cAsmin vyutthAnaM bhavati niyamena  // 10 //  bhAvArtha : vikSipta
mana kadAcit Anandayukta hone se usameM yoga kA Arambha ho sakatA hai; parantu
kSipta aura mUDha mana to isameM avazya hI vyutthAnarUpa hote haiM  // 10 //
viSayakaSAyanivRttaM yogeSu ca saMcariSNuvividheSu  /  gRhakhelabAlopamapi
calamiSTaM mano'bhyAse  // 11 //  _ bhAvArtha : viSayoM aura kaSAyoM se nivRtta,
vividha prakAra ke yogoM meM gamana karane vAlA, aura ghara ke A~gana meM krIr3A
adhyAtmasAra 290

Page #291 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
If the mind is as fickle as a child while practicing, it is desirable. ||11||
Even though the mind engaged in the practice of vows is prone to transgression
while going and coming, it is not corrupted in the state of practice, according
to the analogy of the elephant goad. ||12||  Meaning: Even though the mind
engaged in the practice of vows is prone to transgression while going and
coming, it is not corrupted in the state of practice, according to the analogy
of the elephant goad. ||12||  As the mind becomes increasingly joyful and
focused on knowledge and contemplation, it should be controlled by enticing it
with external objects. ||13||  Meaning: As the mind becomes increasingly joyful
and focused on knowledge and contemplation, it should be controlled by enticing
it with external objects. ||13||  Beautiful images of the Jinas, distinctive
words, syllables, and sentence structures, as well as special types of men,
etc., are also said to be objects of support. ||14||  Meaning: Therefore,
beautiful images of the Jinas, distinctive words, syllables, and sentence
structures, as well as special types of men, etc., are also said to be objects
of support. ||14||  Since good objects of support generally lead to good
emotions, the mind engaged in supported yoga should hold onto good objects of
support. ||15||  Chapter Twenty 291

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karate hue bAlaka ke samAna capala mana ho to vaha abhyAsadazA meM iSTa hai  //
11 //  vacanAnuSThAnagataM yAtAyAtaM ca sAticAramapi  /  ceto'bhyAsadazAyAM
gajAMkuzanyAyato'duSTam  // 12 //  bhAvArtha : vacanAnuSThAna meM sthita mana
yadyapi gamanAgamana karate samaya aticAra-sahita hotA hai, phira bhI
abhyAsadazA meM gajAMkuzanyAya (dRSTAnta) ke anusAra adUSita hai  // 12 //
jJAnAvicArAbhimukhaM yathA yathA bhavati kimapi sAnandam  /  arthaiH pralobhya
bAbairanugRNhIyAttathA cetaH  // 13 //  bhAvArtha : jaise-jaise citta kucha
(dharmakArya meM) Anandayukta aura jJAna tathA vicAra ke sammukha hotA jAya,
vaise-vaise bAhya padArthoM se use pralobhana dekara vaza karanA cAhie  // 13 //
abhirUpajinapratimAM viziSTapadavarNavAkyaracanAM ca  /  puruSavizeSAdikamapyata
evA'lambanaM bruvate  // 14 //  bhAvArtha : isalie sundara jinapratimA, viziSTa
pada, varNa aura vAkyaracanA ko tathA viziSTa prakAra ke puruSAdi ko bhI
AlambanabhUta kahe gae haiM  // 14 //  AlambanaiH prazastaiH prAyo bhAvaH
prazasta eva yataH  /  iti sAlambanayogI manaH zubhAlambanaM dadhyAt  // 15 //
adhikAra bIsavA~ 291

Page #292 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Meaning:** Therefore, from good supports, there are usually good states of
mind. A yogi who desires this support should attach his mind to a good support.
||15||  **Meaning:** One should make the mind dependent (connected to a good
support) for a moment and independent (free from support) for a moment. By doing
so, when the experience ripens, the mind becomes independent (free from support)
for life. ||16||  **Meaning:** When the mind, taking hold of one object, does
not think of anything else, then it becomes calm like a fire that has no fuel.
||17||  **Meaning:** Sorrow, pride, lust, envy, strife, greed, dejection, and
hatred all diminish in those with peaceful hearts. Our experience is the witness
here. ||18||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 bhAvArtha : isalie prazasta AlambanoM se prAyaH prazastabhAva hI hote haiM  /
isa Alambana ke abhilASI yogI ko apanA mana zubha Alambana meM jor3anA cAhie  //
15 //  sAlambanaM kSaNamapi kSaNamapi kuryAnmano nirAlambam  /
ityanubhavaparipAkAdAkAlaM syAnnirAlambam  // 16 //  bhAvArtha : mana ko kSaNa
meM sAlambana (zubha Azraya se yukta) karanA aura kSaNa bhara meM Alambanarahita
karanA cAhie  /  yoM karate-karate anubhava kA paripAka ho jAne para AjIvana
(sadA ke lie) mana nirAlambana (Alambana-rahita) ho jAtA hai  // 16 //
AlambyaikapadArthaM yadA na kiMcid vicintayedanyat  /
anupanatendhanavanhivadupazAnta syAttadA cetaH  // 17 //  _bhAvArtha : jaba mana
eka padArtha kA Alambana lekara usake sivAya anya kucha bhI cintana na kare,
taba usa agni kI taraha zAnta ho jAtA hai, jise indhana nahIM milatA  // 17 //
zoka-mada-madana-matsara-kalaha-kadAgraha-viSAda-vairANi  /  kSIyante
zAntahRdAmanubhava evAtra sAkSI naH  // 18 //  bhAvArtha : zAnta hRdaya vAloM ke
zoka, mada, kAma, matsara, kalaha, kadAgraha, viSAda aura vaira ye saba kSINa ho
jAte haiM, zamayukta citta vAloM ke zoka (iSTaviyogAdi se utpanna citta kA
udvega athavA pazcAttApa) jAti Adi 8 prakAra ke mada, 292 adhyAtmasAra

Page #293 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Kamavikara, matsarya (dah, irsya, not tolerating the qualities of others), kalah
(vaguuddha, quarrel), kadagraha (mithya aagraha), vishad (inability to work) and
vair (opposition, hatred) all become diminished. The peace of mind of
individuals, the destruction of their sorrow, etc., is witnessed by our
experience, that is, our intellect, which sees the manifested qualities, is the
witness, that is, it sees it directly. ||18|| When the mind is peaceful, the
light of the soul shines, which is natural and peaceful. Avidya is reduced to
ashes and the darkness of delusion is completely destroyed. ||19||  Meaning:
When the mind becomes peaceful, the natural and peaceful light of the soul
shines, ignorance is reduced to ashes and the darkness of delusion is completely
destroyed. ||19|| The external soul has no authority over the peaceful hearts of
the inner souls. The Supreme Soul, which is to be meditated upon, becomes close
by through meditation. ||20|| Meaning: The peaceful hearts of the inner souls
have no authority over the external soul, and the Supreme Soul, which is to be
meditated upon, becomes close by through meditation. ||20|| The body, etc., is
the external soul, and the one who resides in it is the inner soul. The Supreme
Soul, whose limitations have been completely removed, is described by the
knowers. ||21|| Authority Twentieth 293

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 kAmavikAra, matsara (DAha, IrSyA dUsare ke guNoM ko na sahanA), kalaha
(vAgyuddha, jhagar3A), kadAgraha (mithyA Agraha) viSAda (kArya karane kI azakti)
aura vaira (virodha dveSa) ye saba kSINa ho jAte haiM  /  zAnticitta vyaktiyoM
ke zokAdi kA nAza hone meM hamArA anubhava hI, yAnI prakaTa huI guNasampatti kA
sAkSAt darzana karane vAlI hamArI buddhi hI sAkSIbhUta hai, arthAt use sAkSAt
dekhane vAlI hai  // 18 //  zAnte manasi jyotiH prakAzate, zAntamAtmanaH sahajam
/  bhasmIbhavatyavidyA mohadhvAnta vilayameti  // 19 //  bhAvArtha : mana zAnta
ho jAne para AtmA kI svAbhAvika aura zAnta jyoti prakAzita hotI hai, avidyA
bhasmIbhUta ho jAtI hai aura moharUpI andhakAra kA sarvathA vinAza ho jAtA hai
// 19 //  bAhyAtmano'dhikAraH zAntahRdAmantarAtmanAM na syAt  /
paramAtmA'nudhyeyaH sannihito dhyAnato bhavati  // 20 //  bhAvArtha : zAnta
hRdaya vAlI antarAtmAoM ke bAhya AtmA kA adhikAra nahIM hotA aura dhyAna karane
yogya paramAtmA dhyAna se usake samIpavartI ho jAtA hai  // 20 //
kAyAdirbahirAtmA tadadhiSThAtAntarAtmatAmeti  /  gataniHzeSopAdhiH paramAtmA
kIrttitastajjJaiH  // 21 //  adhikAra bIsavA~ 293

Page #294 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Meaning:** The body and other external things are the external soul, the inner
soul is the one who resides in them, and the soul that is free from all
attributes is called the Supreme Soul by the wise. ||21||  **Meaning:** When
there is an attachment to objects and passions, disbelief in the truth, hatred
for virtues, and ignorance about the soul, then it is clear that it is the
external soul. ||22||  **Meaning:** When there is faith in the truth, knowledge
of the soul, observance of the great vows, vigilance, and victory over delusion,
then it is clear that it is the inner soul. ||23||  **Meaning:** When there is
perfect knowledge, cessation of yoga, destruction of all karmas, and dwelling in
liberation, then it is clear that it is the Supreme Soul. ||24||  **Meaning:**
He who distinguishes the soul, mind, and qualities every moment, and who attains
the state of Brahmanhood with the help of virtuous actions, is the one who
knows. ||25|| 294 Adhyatma Sara

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 bhAvArtha : zarIrAdi bahirAtmA haiM, unakA adhiSThAtA antarAtmA ko prApta
karatA hai tathA samagra upAdhi se rahita jo AtmA hai, use hI jJAniyoM ne
paramAtmA kahA hai  // 21 //  viSayakaSAyAvezaH tattvA'zraddhA guNeSu ca dveSaH
/  AtmA'jJAnaM ca yadA, bAhyAtmA syAttadA vyaktaH  // 22 //  bhAvArtha : jaba
viSayoM aura kaSAyoM kA Aveza hotA ho, tattva ke prati azraddhA ho, guNoM ke
prati dveSa ho aura AtmA ke viSaya meM ajJAnatA ho taba spaSTataH samajhanA
cAhie ki vaha bahirAtmA hai  // 22 //  tatvazraddhAjJAnaM
mahAvratAnyapramAdaparatA ca  /  mohajayazca yadA syAttadAntarAtmA bhaved
vyaktaH  // 23 //  bhAvArtha : jaba tattva para zraddhA ho, AtmA kA jJAna ho,
mahAvrata hoM, apramAdaparatA ho tathA moha para vijaya ho jAya to spaSTa hai ki
vaha antarAtmA hai  // 23 //  jJAnaM kevalasaMjJaM yoganirodhaH
samagrakarmahatiH  /  siddhinivAsazca yadA paramAtmA syAttadA vyaktaH  // 24 //
bhAvArtha : jaba kevalajJAna, yoga kA nirodha, sampUrNa karmoM kA kSaya, siddhi-
mukti meM nivAsa ho jAya, taba spaSTataH vaha paramAtmA ho jAtA hai  // 24 //
AtmamanoguNavRttIvivicya yaH pratipadaM vijAnAti  /  kuzalAnubandhayukta
prApnoti brahmabhUyamasau  // 25 //  294 adhyAtmasAra

Page #295 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Verse 25:**  **Meaning:** The man who, by analyzing the tendencies of the
qualities of the soul and mind, knows well each of their positions (places) in a
special way, becomes endowed with skillful attachment and attains Brahmanhood.
**Verse 26:**  **Meaning:** The one who is established in Brahman, who knows
Brahman, attains Brahman. What is surprising in this? But we experience the
delight of Brahman even from the words of those who know Brahman. The one who is
established in pure knowledge and use in Brahman, that is, the Supreme Soul, and
who knows Brahman (unchangeable consciousness), attains Brahman (pure soul).
What is surprising in this? Nothing is surprising. Even from the words of the
knowers of Brahman (those who know Brahman), we experience the delight of
Brahman (the joy of pure consciousness) with our intellect, we can know it
directly.  **Verse 27:**  **Meaning:** In the study of Brahman, Brahman is
considered to have the essence of eighteen thousand positions. The yogi who has
attained it in its entirety is superior to Brahman.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 bhAvArtha : jo puruSa AtmA aura mana ke guNoM kI vRttiyoM kA vizleSaNa karake
unake pratyeka pada (sthAna) ko bhalIbhAMti vizeSa prakAra se jAna letA hai,
vaha kuzalAnubandha se yukta hokara brahmatva ko prApta kara letA hai || 25  //
brahmastho brahmajJo brahma prApnoti tatra kiM citram | brahmavidAM vacasA'pi
brahmavilAsananubhavAmaH  // 26 //  I bhAvArtha : brahma meM sthita brahmajJAnI
brahma ko prApta karatA hai, isameM kyA Azcarya hai ? kintu hameM to
brahmajJAniyoM ke vacana se bhI brahmavilAsa kA anubhava hotA hai  /  jo brahma
arthAt paramAtmA meM zuddha jJAnopayoga meM sthita ( otaprota ) rahatA hai,
tathA brahma (nirvikAra caitanya) ko jAnatA hai, vaha brahma ( zuddha AtmA) ko
prApta kare, isameM Azcarya hI kyA hai? kucha bhI Azcarya nahIM  /  brahma (
zuddha caitanya) ke jJAtA (brahmajJAniyoM) ke vacana se bhI brahma ke vilAsa
(cidAnanda ke ullAsa) ko hama apanI buddhi se sAkSAt anubhava karate haiM,
pratyakSa jAna sakate haiM  // 26 //  brahmAdhyayaneSu mataM
brahmASTadazasahastrapadabhAvaiH  /  yenA''ptaM tatpUrNaM yogI sa brahmaNaH
paramaH  // 27 //  bhAvArtha : brahma ke adhyayana meM 18 hajAra padoM ke bhAvoM
se yukta brahma mAnA gayA  /  jisa yogI ne use sampUrNa rUpa meM prApta kara
liyA hai, vaha yogI brahma se parama (zreSTha) hai ||27|| adhikAra bIsavA~ 295

Page #296 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
We, who are tolerant of perfect conduct, rely on the *Icchayoga* and follow the
path of the great *munis* with devotion. ||28||  **Meaning:** We, who are unable
to follow perfect conduct, rely on the *Icchayoga* and follow the path of the
great *munis* with devotion. ||28||  Even a little effort in this *Icchayoga*,
devoid of hypocrisy, is conducive to auspiciousness, and the contemplation of
the nature of the soul destroys the poison of ignorance. ||29||  **Meaning:**
Even a little effort in this *Icchayoga*, devoid of hypocrisy, is conducive to
auspiciousness, and the contemplation of the nature of the soul destroys the
poison of ignorance. ||29||  Our ultimate reliance is the philosophy that,
according to our capacity, we should have knowledge of the principles and their
subsidiary scriptures. ||30||  **Meaning:** Our ultimate reliance is the
philosophy that, according to our capacity, we should have knowledge of the
principles and their subsidiary scriptures. ||30||  Our well-known devotion to
the teachings is expressed through the declaration of the rules, attachment to
the rules, establishment of those who desire the rules in the path of the rules,
and prohibition of the non-rules. ||31||  **Meaning:** Our well-known devotion
to the teachings is expressed through the declaration of the rules, attachment
to the rules, establishment of those who desire the rules in the path of the
rules, and prohibition of the non-rules. ||31||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 avalambyecchAyogaM pUrNAcArAsahiSNavazca vayam  /  bhaktyA paramamunInAM
tadIyapadavImanusarAmaH  // 28 //  bhAvArtha : pUrNa AcAra kA pAlana karane meM
asamartha hama icchAyoga kA avalambana lekara zreSTha muniyoM kI bhakti se unake
mArga kA anusaraNa karate haiM  // 28 //  alpA'pi yA'tra yatanA nirdambhA sA
zubhAnubandhakarI  /  ajJAnaviSa-vyavakRd vivecanaM cAtmabhAvAnAm  // 29 //
bhAvArtha : isa icchAyoga meM jarA-sI bhI dambharahita jo yatanA hai vaha
zubhAnubandhakAriNI hai tathA AtmA ke pariNAma kA jo vivecana hai, vaha
ajJAnarUpI viSa kA nAza karane vAlA hai  // 29 //  siddhAntatadaMgAnAM
zAstrANAmastu paricayaH zaktyA  /  paramAlambanabhUto darzanapakSo'yamasmAkam
// 30 //  bhAvArtha : zakti ke anusAra siddhAMta aura unake aMga rUpa zAstroM kA
paricaya ho, yaha hamArA parama AlambanarUpa darzana kA pakSa hai  // 30 //
vidhikathanaM vidhirAgo vidhimArge sthApanaM vidhIcchUnAm  /  avidhiniSedhazceti
pravacanabhaktiH prasiddhA naH  // 31 //  bhAvArtha : vidhi kA kathana karanA,
vidhi ke prati prIti, vidhi ke abhilASiyoM ko vidhimArga meM pravRtta (sthApita)
296 adhyAtmasAra

Page #297 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
To perform, to refrain from the unrighteous, etc., our devotion to preaching is
well-known. ||31|| It is our duty to have a mind illuminated by the
contemplation of the Self, and our desire to perform perfect actions, these two
are purifying to the Self. ||32||  Meaning: Our duty is to have a mind
illuminated by the contemplation of the Self, and our desire to perform perfect
actions, these two are purifying to the Self. ||32||  Here, the commencement of
the action that can be performed and the pure side are both auspicious, and
anything else is harmful, this is the path known through experience. ||33||
Meaning: Here, the commencement of the action that can be performed and the pure
side are both auspicious, and anything else is harmful, this is the path known
through experience. ||33||  Those who have not determined the path through
experience, and are therefore corrupted by the results of their conduct, and are
immersed in pride in their conduct due to external actions alone, are not wise.
||34|| Meaning: Those who have not determined the path through experience, and
are therefore corrupted by the results of their conduct, and are immersed in
pride in their conduct due to external actions alone, are not wise. ||34||
Those who are outwardly-minded in the world, and are attached to external
actions, do not have faith, and therefore are not considered to be true, as it
has been said. ||35|| Authority: Twentieth. 297

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karanA, avidhi kA niSedha karanA, ityAdi prakAra se hamArI pravacanabhakti
prasiddha hai  // 31 //  adhyAtmabhAvanojjvalacetovRttocitaM hi naH kRtyam  /
pUrNakriyAbhilASazceti dvayamAtmazuddhikaram  // 32 //  bhAvArtha : adhyAtma kI
bhAvanA se ujjvala cittavRtti ke yogya hamArA karttavya hai tathA hamArI pUrNa
kriyA karane kI abhilASA hai, ye donoM bAteM Atmazuddhi karane vAlI haiM  // 32
//  dvayamiha zubhAnubandhaH zakyArambhazca zuddhapakSazca  /  ahito viparyayaH
punarityanubhavasaMgataH panthAH  // 33 //  bhAvArtha : zakya kriyA kA Arambha
aura zuddhapakSa ye donoM yahA~ zubhAnubandharUpa haiM aura isake atirikta aura
koI bhI ahitakAraka hai, isa prakAra hamArA anubhavasiddha mArga hai  // 33 //
ye tvanubhavAvinizcitamArgAzcAritrapariNatibhraSTAH  /  bAhyakriyayA
caraNAbhimAno jJAnino'pi na te  // 34 //  bhAvArtha : jinhoMne anubhava se mArga
kA nizcaya nahIM kiyA hai, ataeva cAritra ke pariNAma se bhraSTa hokara sirpha
bAhyakriyAoM se hI cAritra ke abhimAna meM DUbe hue haiM, ve jJAnI nahIM haiM
// 34 //  lokeSu bahirbuddhiSu vigopakAnAM bahiHkriyAsu ratiH  /  zraddhAM vinA
na caitAH satAM pramANaM yato'bhihitam  // 35 //  adhikAra bIsavA~ 297

Page #298 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Meaning:** People with external intellect have a fondness for the external
actions of fools (or hypocrites). These external actions are not proof for the
virtuous without faith, because the scriptures (and other texts) also say so.
||35||  **Meaning:** A child (ignorant person) sees the linga (garb), a person
of average intellect considers the conduct, but a wise man examines the truth of
the scriptures with all his effort. ||36||  **Meaning:** Having thus ascertained
the truth of the scriptures, the yogi should constantly strive for purity of
faith and discrimination, abandoning worldly opinions. ||37||  **Meaning:** No
one in the world should be condemned; even towards the most sinful, one should
consider their state of existence. The virtuous, who are full of merit, should
be honored, and attachment should be maintained even towards those who are
inferior in virtue. ||38||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 bhAvArtha : bAhyabuddhi vAle logoM meM vidUSakoM (athavA dAmbhikoM) kI bAhya
kriyAoM ke prati prIti hotI hai| ye bAhyakriyAe~ zraddhA ke binA satpuruSoM ke
lie pramANarUpa nahIM haiM, kyoMki unake viSaya meM zAstra (tathA anya granthoM)
meM bhI kahA hai  // 35 //  bAlaH pazyati liMgaM, madhyamabuddhirvicArayati
vRttam  /  AgamatattvaM tu budhaH parIkSyate sarvayatnena  // 36 //  bhAvArtha :
bAla (ajJAnIjana) liMga (veSa) ko dekhatA hai, madhyamabuddhi vAlA manuSya
AcaraNa para vicAra karatA hai, kintu paNDitapuruSa samasta prayatna se
Agamatatva kI hI parIkSA karatA hai  // 36 //  nizcityAgamatattvaM tasmAdutsRjya
lokasaMjJAM ca  /  zraddhAvivekasAraM yatitavyaM yoginAM nityam  // 37 //
bhAvArtha : isa prakAra Agamatatva kA nizcaya karake lokasaMjJA kA parityAga
kara yogI ko nirantara zraddhA aura viveka ke lie zuddhipUrvaka prayatna karanA
cAhie  // 37 //  nindyo na ko'pi loke, pApiSTheSvapi bhavasthitizcintyA  /
pUjyA guNagarimADhyA, dhAryo rAgo guNalave'pi  // 38 //  bhAvArtha : yogIjana ko
loka meM kisI kI bhI nindA nahIM karanI cAhie; pApiyoM ke prati bhI unakI
saMsArasthiti kA 298 adhyAtmasAra

Page #299 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
One should contemplate, worship (pay respect) to men full of virtues, and have
love for even those who have a little virtue. ||38|| Even beneficial advice from
a child should be accepted, one should not have hatred for the talk of a wicked
person. One should abandon other's hope and understand that association-union is
like a bond (paasha). ||39|| One should not be proud on hearing one's praise
(appreciation) by others, nor should one be angry on hearing their criticism.
One should serve the Dharmaacharya and have a desire to know the truth. ||40||
One should practice cleanliness, steadiness, humility, detachment, and self-
control. One should contemplate the defects of the world and think about the
ugliness and destruction of the body, etc. ||41||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 cintana karanA cAhie, guNoM kI garimA se pUrNa puruSoM kI pUjA (satkAra) karanI
cAhie, aura jisameM thor3A-sA bhI guNa ho, usake prati bhI premabhAva rakhanA
cAhie  // 38 //  grAhyaM hitamapi bAlAdAlApairdurjanasya na dveSyam  /
vyaktavyA ca parAzA pAzA iva saMgamA jJeyAH  // 39 //  bhAvArtha : bAlaka se bhI
hitakara bAta ko grahaNa karanA cAhie, durjana ke pralApoM para dveSabhAva nahIM
karanA cAhie, parAI AzA kA tyAga kara denA cAhie aura saMgama-saMyoga bandhana
(pAza) kI taraha samajhanA cAhie  // 39 //  stutyA smayo na kAryaH, kopo'pi ca
nindayA janaiH kRtayA  /  sevyA dharmAcAryAstattvaM jijJAsAnIyaM ca  // 40 //
bhAvArtha : dUsare logoM dvArA kI huI apanI stuti (prazaMsA) sunakara garva
nahIM karanA cAhie, unake dvArA kI gaI nindA suna kara krodha nahIM karanA cAhie
dharmAcArya kI sevA karanI cAhie aura tattva ko jAnane kI icchA rakhanI cAhie
// 40 //  zaucaM sthairyamadambho vairAgyaM cAtmanigrahaH kaaryH| dRzyA
bhavagatadoSAzcintyaM dehAdrivarupyam  // 41 //  bhAvArtha : zauca, sthiratA,
adambha, vairAgya, aura Atmanigraha karanA cAhie  /  saMsAragata doSoM para
cintana karanA cAhie aura zarIra Adi kI virUpatA-vinAzitA kA vicAra karanA cAhie
// 41 //  adhikAra bIsavA~ 299

Page #300 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Bhakti to Bhagavati should be held, a secluded place should be served always.
One should remain steadfast in Samyaktva, and not trust the enemy of
carelessness in the world. ||42||  Meaning: One should have devotion to Bhagavan
Jinendra, always serve a secluded place (location), remain firm in one's
Samyaktva, and not trust the enemy of carelessness in the world. ||42||  One
should contemplate on the steadfastness of self-knowledge, the Agamas should be
held in high regard everywhere. One should abandon wrong thoughts and remain by
following the elders. ||43||  Meaning: One should contemplate on the
steadfastness of self-knowledge, hold the Agamas in high regard everywhere,
abandon wrong thoughts, and remain by following the elders. ||43||  One should
realize the Truth, be filled with Chit-Ananda, and this is a beneficial way for
the knowledgeable to experience. ||44||  Meaning: One should realize the Truth.
One should be filled with Chit-Ananda, this is a beneficial way for the
knowledgeable to experience. ||44||  || This is the authority of the nature of
experience ||  300 Adhyatma Sara

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 bhaktirbhagavati dhAryA, sevyo dezaH sadA viviktazca  /  sthAtavyaM samyaktve,
vizvasyo na pramAdaripuH  // 42 //  bhAvArtha : bhagavAn jinezvara ke prati
bhakti rakhanA, sadA ekAntapradeza (sthAna) kA sevana karanA, apane samyaktva
para dRr3ha rahanA aura pramAdarUpI zatru kA vizvAsa na karanA cAhie  // 42 //
dhyeyA''tmabodhaniSThA, sarvatraivAgamaH puraskAryaH  /  tyaktavyAH kuvikalpAH
stheyaM vRddhAnuvRtyA ca  // 43 //  bhAvArtha : AtmajJAna kI niSThA kA dhyAna
karanA cAhie, sarvatra Agama ko Age rakhanA cAhie, kuvikalpoM kA tyAgakara denA
cAhie aura vRddhajanoM kI anuvRtti se rahanA cAhie  // 43 //  sAkSAtkAryaM
tattvaM cidrUpAnandamedurairbhAvyam  /  hitakArI jJAnavatAmanubhavavedyaH
prakAro'yam  // 44 //  bhAvArtha : tattva kA sAkSAtkAra karanA cAhie  /
cidAnanda se paripUrNa honA cAhie, yaha anubhava se jAnane yogya prakAra
jJAniyoM ke lie hitakArI hai  // 44 //   //  ityanubhavasvarUpAdhikAraH  //  300
adhyAtmasAra

Page #301 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter Twenty-One [Praise of the Noble]  Those whose virtues, like the white
lotus, the cluster of Kunda flowers, the moon, and camphor, cleanse the minds of
the seekers and spread purity, those who have made their own interests secondary
and the welfare of others primary, may such noble souls be pleased with me; what
do I care for the extremely wicked, who are completely unrestrained? ||1||
**Meaning:** Those whose radiant virtues, like the white lotus, the cluster of
Kunda flowers, the moon, and camphor, cleanse the minds of the seekers and
spread purity, those who have made their own interests secondary and the welfare
of others primary, may such noble souls be pleased with me; what do I care for
the extremely wicked, who are completely unrestrained? ||1||  The noble ones,
with their waves of grace and beauty, enhance the meaning of the scriptures and
spread the fame of the poet. Like the beautiful honey-sweet blossoms of the
Madhuka tree, they spread their fragrance. The male cuckoos, with their five
wondrous qualities, proclaim their good fortune. ||2||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 adhikAra ikkIsavA~ [ sajjana-stuti: ] yeSAM kairava-kundavRnda-
zazabhRtkarpUrazubhrA guNA, mAlinyaM vyapanIya cetasi nRNAM vaizadyamAtanvate  /
santaH santu mayi prasannamanasaste ke'pi gauNIkRtasvArthA
mukhyaparopakAravidhayo'tyucchRMkhalaiH kiM khalaiH  // 1 //  bhAvArtha : zveta
kamala, kundapuSpa - samUha, candramA aura kapUra ke samAna jinake ujjvala guNa
mumukSuoM ke citta kI malinatA ko dUrakara svacchatA phailAte haiM, jinhoMne
apane svArtha ko gauNa kara diyA hai aura paropakAra ke kAryoM (vidhAnoM) ko
mukhya kara diyA hai, aise kaI santapuruSa mujha para prasanna citta vAle hoM;
phira mujhe atyanta acchRMkhala durjanoM se kyA matalaba hai ? || 1 ||
granthArthAn praguNIkaroti sukaviM yatnena teSAM prathAmAtanvanti
kRpAkaTAkSalaharIlAvaNyataH sajjanAH  /  mAkandadrumamaMjarIM vitanune citrA
madhuzrIstataH  /  saubhAgyaM prathayanti paMcamacamatkAreNa puMskokilAH  // 2
//  bhAvArtha : sukavi praur3ha granthoM ke arthoM ko prayatnapUrvaka taiyAra
(sarala) karate haiM, parantu unakI prasiddhi to sajjana apane kRpAkaTAkSarUpI
laharoM se utpanna vAtsalyarUpI lAvaNya se adhikAra ikkIsavA~ 301

Page #302 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
They (spread) increase. Just as the beautiful, strange spring-time mango tree
spreads its blossoms, but its good fortune is made known everywhere by the
excellent cuckoos with the wonder of their five-note song. ||2|| The poison of
fault-mentioning, arising from the mouth-like burrow of a wicked man, burning
with anger, like a tongue-shaped serpent, does not destroy what growing quality
of the virtuous? It destroys all qualities. ||3|| Because of the natural
understanding of straightforward words, they considered them to be devoid of
essence. In support of profound meaning, indeed, wicked men gave the fault of
hardness. What is the name of that quality, what is a good poet, what is poetry,
etc. - these doubts are removed by the established order of the virtuous. ||4||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 bar3hAte haiM (phailAte haiN)| jaise manohara vicitra vasantazrI AmravRkSa kI
maMjarI ko phailAtI hai, kintu usake saubhAgya ko to zreSTha koyaleM apane
paMcamasvara ke camatkAra se sarvatra prasiddha karatI haiM  // 2 //
doSollekhaviSaH khalAnanabilAdutthAya kopAjjvalan, jihvAhirnanu kaM guNaM na
guNinAM bAlaM kSayaM prApayet  /  na syAccetprabalaprabhAvabhavanaM, divyauSadhI
sannidhau, zAstrArthopaniSadvidAM zubhahRdAM kAruNyapuNyaprathA  // 3 //
bhAvArtha : agara zAstra ke upaniSad (rahasya) ke jAnakAra aura zubha hRdaya
vAle puruSoM kI karuNA (kRpA) rUpI puNya kI prasiddhirUpa aura prabala prabhAva
ke sthAna vAlI divya auSadhi pAsa meM na ho to doSa ke ullekha (uccAraNa) rUpI
viSa vAlA aura kopa se jAjvalyamAna jihvArUpI sarpa durjana puruSa ke mukharUpI
bila se nikalakara guNIjanoM ke kisa bar3hate hue guNa kA kSaya (nAza) nahIM
kara detA? sabhI guNoM ko kSaya kara DAlatA  // 3 //  uttAnArthagirAM
svato'pyavagamAt niHsAratAM menire  /  gambhIrArthasamarthane bata khalAH
kAThinyadoSaM daduH  /  tatko nAma guNo'stu, kazca sukaviH kiM kAvyamityAdikAM
/  sthityucchedamatiM haranti niyatA dRSTA vyavasthAH satAm  // 4 //  bhAvArtha
: durjanapuruSa sugama artha vAlI vANI ko svataH samajha sakate haiN| lekina
phira bhI use niHsAra mAnate haiM aura 302 adhyAtmasAra

Page #303 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
They blame the difficulty (hardness) in conveying the profound meaning. What
kind of quality is this? What kind of poet is this? And what kind of poetry is
this? That the intellect, which is capable of destroying such a situation, is
taken away by the fixed arrangements seen by the virtuous. ||4||  Even though
they drink the nectar-like rain of spiritual knowledge, the virtuous find
happiness, while the wicked vomit poison. Where does this disparity come from?
Or is this not a matter of wonder; because the chakor birds are extremely happy
by drinking the rays of the moon, but is the young pair of chakravakas not
sorrowful at the rise of the same moon? They are. ||5||  Those who, seeing some
similarity, create a blue-like appearance in the glass, their subtle intellect
is not a source of delight for the profound poets. Those who know the
difference, even in the unevenness, line by line, they have great celebration
for the objects of the virtuous. ||6||  Chapter Twenty-First 303

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 gambhIra artha kahane meM kaThinatA (muzkila hone) kA doSa dete haiM  /  isa
kAraNa aisA kauna-sA guNa ho? kauna-sA kavi ho? aura kauna-sA kAvya ho? ki isa
prakAra kI sthiti kA uccheda karane vAlI buddhi kA haraNa satpuruSoM kI dekhI
huI niyata vyavasthAe~ kara letI haiM  // 4 //  adhyAtmAmRtavarSiNImapi
kathamApIya santaH sukhaM, gAhante viSamugiranti tu khalA vaiSamyametatkutaH  /
nedaM vAdbhutamindudIdhitipibaH prItAzcakorA bhRzaM kiM na syurbata
cakravAkataruNAstvatyantakhedAturAH  // 5 //  bhAvArtha : adhyAtmarUpI amRta kI
varSA karane vAlI kathA kA pAna karake satpuruSa sukha pAte haiM aura usI kathA
kA pAna karake durjana loga jahara ugalate haiM  /  isa prakAra kI viSamatA
kahA~ se AI? athavA yaha koI Azcarya kI bAta nahIM hai; kyoMki candramA kI
kiraNoM kA pAna karake cakora pakSI atyanta prasanna hote haiM, parantu usI
candra ke udaya se javAna cakravAka kA jor3A kyA khedAtura nahIM hotA? hotA hI
hai  // 5 //  kiJcitsAmyamavekSya ye vidadhate kAcendranIlAbhidAM, teSAM na
pramadAvahA tanudhiyA gUDhA kavInAM kRtiH  /  ye jAnanti vizeSamapyaviSame
rekhoparekhAMzato, vastunyastu satAmitaH kRtadhiyAM teSAM mahAnutsavaH  // 6 //
adhikAra ikkIsavA~ 303

Page #304 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Verse 6:**  **Meaning:** Those with limited intellect, who perceive no
difference between glass and sapphire due to their superficial resemblance, find
no joy in the profound creations of poets. But those with discerning minds, who
recognize even the subtlest distinctions in seemingly similar things, find such
creations a grand celebration.  **Verse 7:**  **Meaning:** For those whose
vision is clouded by delusion, the composition of the entire body of spiritual
knowledge does not evoke wonder, as it does for the learned. The clever speech
of a woman, filled with double entendres, fueled by the pride of desire, and
overflowing with eloquence, does not delight the common folk, as it does the
wise.  **Verse 8:**  **Meaning:** We bow to those noble souls who, having bathed
in the pool of principles, cleansed by the radiant waters of spiritual
knowledge, have shed the suffering of the world, the impurities of the Kali
Yuga, greed, and desire. They have emerged pure, adorned with the sandalwood of
tranquility, self-control, and purity. They are the essence of virtuous
adornment, the treasure house of all virtues.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 bhAvArtha : jo loga kucha sadRzatA dekhakara kAMca aura indranIlamaNi meM
abheda (abhinnatA) pragaTa karate haiM, una alpabuddhi vAloM ko kaviyoM kI gUDha
kRti harSa pradAna karane vAlI nahIM hotI  /  parantu jo viSamatArahita vastu
meM bhI rekhA aura uparekhA ke aMza se bhI vizeSarUpa se jAnate haiM; una
kuzalabuddhi vAle satpuruSoM ko yaha kRti mahAn utsavarUpa hai  // 6 //
pUrNAdhyAtmapadArthasArthaghaTanA cetazcamatkAriNI, mohAcchannadRzAM
bhavettanudhiyAM, no paMDitAnAmiva  /
kAkuvyAkulakAmagarvagahanaproddAmavAkcAturI  /  kAminyAH prasabhaM pramodayati
na grAmyAn vidagdhAniva  // 7 //  bhAvArtha : jinakI A~kheM moha se DhakI huI
haiM, una alpabuddhi vAloM ke citta ko sampUrNa adhyAtmapadArtha-samUha kI
racanA paNDitoM kI taraha camatkRta (cakAcauMdha) karane vAlI nahIM hotIM  /
kAminI kI kAkuukti (vakrokti) se vyAkula, kAma ke garva se gahana, aura
atiprabala vANI kI cAturI catura (vidvAna) puruSoM kI taraha grAmyajanoM ko
pramudita nahIM karatI  // 7 //  snAtvA siddhAntakuNDe
vidhukaravizadAdhyAtmapAnIyapUraiH, tApaM saMsAraduHkhaM kalikaluSamalaM
lobhatRSNAM ca hitvA  /  jAtA ye zuddharUpAH zamadamazucitAcandanAliptagAtrAH  /
zIlAlaMkArasArAH sakalaguNanidhIn sajjanAMstAnnamAmaH  // 8 //  304 adhyAtmasAra

Page #305 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Meaning:** We bow down to those noble souls who, like the moonbeams in a pool
of doctrine, have bathed in the pure waters of spirituality, shedding the
suffering of the world, the pain, the impurities of sin, and the thirst of
greed. They have adorned themselves with the sandalwood of calmness, restraint,
and purity, and have become the essence of virtue, adorned with the jewels of
good conduct. They are like a treasure trove of all virtues. ||8||  **Meaning:**
The author, like a raincloud of beautiful verses, showers down a vast collection
of emotions. This downpour of love flows rapidly into the hearts of the
virtuous, filling their lakes of good fortune. But the hearts of the wicked, who
are filled with hatred for virtue, are broken. It is a wonder that tears of love
flow from the eyes of the wise. ||9||  **Meaning:** The great poets, like
churning the ocean of milk with Mount Meru, churn out the essence of their great
works, which are filled with the glory of their noble thoughts. This is the
twenty-first chapter. ||9||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 bhAvArtha : siddhAntarUpI kuNDa meM candrakiraNoM kI taraha nirmala
adhyAtmajala ke pUra se snAna karake santApa kA, saMsAra ke duHkha kA, kleza
aura pApamala kA evaM lobharUpI tRSA kA tyAga karake jo zuddharUpa ho gae haiM,
zama, dama aura pavitratArUpI candana se jinhoMne apane zarIra para lepana kara
liyA hai tathA zIlarUpI AbhUSaNa se jo sArabhUta ho gae haiM, vaise samagra
guNoM kI nidhi ke samAna sajjanoM ko hama namaskAra karate haiM  // 8 //
pAthodaH padyabandhairvipularasabharaM varSati granthakarttA premNAM pUraistu
cetaHsara iha suhRdAM plAvyate vegavadbhiH  /  truTyanti svAntabandhAH
punarasamaguNadveSiNAM durjanAnAM, citraM bhAvajJanetrAt praNayarasavazAn
niHsaratyazrunIram  // 9 //  bhAvArtha : granthakarttArUpI medya padyabandhoM se
vipula rasasamUha ko barasAte haiM, aura satpariNati vAle hRdayasarovara ko isa
meghavRSTi dvArA atyanta tejI se bahate hue prema ke pravAhoM se bhara dete haiM
/  kintu guNoM ke prati atyanta dveSa rakhane vAle durjanoM ke hRdayabandha TUTa
jAte haiM aura tattvajJa ke netra se premarasa ke vaza azrujala nikalatA hai,
yahI Azcarya hai  // 9 //  uddAmagranthabhAvaprathanabhavayazaH saMcayaH
satkavInAM, kSIrAbdhirmathyate yaH suhRdayavibudhairmeruNA varNanena  /
adhikAra ikkIsavA~ 305

Page #306 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
This is the ocean of milk, the accumulation of fame born from the expansion of
the profound meaning of the great works of the virtuous poets. It is churned by
the wise, compassionate, learned, who are like gods, with the mountain Meru as
the churning rod. The foam that arises from this churning is like the orb of the
moon's radiance, and the extremely leaping drops of the sound of recitation
become stars. And Mount Kailasa and the like take on the form of the waves
rising in this ocean of milk. ||10||  Seeing the poetry of the poets, the
gentle-hearted gentleman, fearing that it has stolen the nectar of the gods,
shakes his head in regret, being apprehensive of drinking. Knowing that the
flood of fame is enjoyable and spreadable for all, he is always delighted with a
smile, knowing the impermanence of protection and covering. ||11||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 etaDiMDIrapiMDIbhavati vidhurucermaMDalaM vipruSastAs  /  tArAkelAsazailAdaya
iha dadhate vIcivikSobhalIlAM  // 10 //  bhAvArtha : satkaviyoM ke
praur3hagrantha ke bhAvoM ko vistRta karane se utpanna hue yaza ke saMcayarUpa
kSIrasAgara kA vivekI sahRdaya paNDitarUpI devoM dvArA varNanarUpa meru se
maMthana kiyA jAtA hai, taba usameM se paidA huA phena kA puMja candramA kI
kAnti ke maMDala ke samAna hai tathA atyanta uchalatI huI uccAraNadhvanirUpa
bU~deM tAre bana gae, aura kailAzaparvata Adi isa kSIrasAgara meM uThatI huI
taraMgoM kI lIlA ko dhAraNa karate haiM  // 10 //  kAvyaM dRSTavA kavInAM
hRtamamRtamiti svaHsadAM pAnazaMkI  /  khedaM dhatte tu mUrdhnA mRdutarahRdayaH
sajjano vyAdhutena  /  jJAtvA sarvApabhogyaM prasRmaramatha
tatkIrttipIyUSapUraM, nityaM rakSApidhAnAniyatamatitarAM modate ca smitena  //
11 //  bhAvArtha : atikomala hRdaya vAle sajjana puruSa kaviyoM ke kAvya
dekhakara 'isane devoM ke amRta kA haraNa kara liyA' yaha socakara pAna se
azaMkita hokara sira dhuna - dhunakara pachatAtA T hai  /  aura usa kAvya ke
yazarUpI amRta ke saMcaya ko sabake lie upabhogya tathA prasaraNazIla jAnakara
sadA rakSA aura AcchAdana kI aniyatatA jAnakara muskarAkara atyanta harSita hotA
hai  // 11 //  306 adhyAtmasAra

Page #307 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  English Translation:  **Verse 12:**  Skilled poets, like potters, mold
verses into a pot using the clay of skillful rhetoric. They then expose it to
the sun of true scrutiny, adding some strength.  With a mind that devours
virtues, they plunge the pot into the fiery flames of a tongue, a blazing
inferno of fault-finding, fueled by the words of wicked men. This process makes
the verses strong and enduring.  **Verse 13:**  The words of poets, like a blend
of sugarcane and grape juice, are poured into the fiery furnace of a wicked
man's mouth.  This mixture of various meanings, like different ingredients,
enhances the quality and quickly transforms into a potent drink.  Good men, upon
drinking this nectar, experience immense joy, their eyes sparkle with delight,
and they spontaneously break into dance and song, overwhelmed by their
happiness.  **Chapter 21**  **Page 307**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 niSpAdya zlokakumbhaM nipuNanayamRdA kumbhakArAH kavIndrAH, dADhyaM cAropya
tasmin kimapi paricayAt stpriikssaarkbhaasaam| pakvaM kurvanti bADhaM
guNaharaNamatiprajvaladdoSadRSTijvAlAmAlAkarAle khalajanavacanAjvAlAjihvA
nivezya  // 12 //  bhAvArtha : kumbhakArarUpI kavIndra nipuNanayarUpI miTTI se
zlokarUpI ghar3e banAkara use satparIkSaNarUpI sUryakiraNoM kA samparka karAkara
unameM kucha majabUtI lAkara guNoM ko haraNa karane vAlI buddhi se doSadRSTirUpI
jAjvalyamAna jvAlA kI mAlAoM se vikarAla durjanapuruSa kI jihvArUpI agni-jvAlA
meM DAlakara unheM pakke banAte haiM  // 12 //  ikSudrAkSArasaughaH
kavijanavacanaM durjanAsyAgniyaMtrAn  /  nAnArthadravyayogAt samupacitaguNe
madyatAM yAti sadyaH  /  santaH pItvA yaduccairdadhati hRdi mudaM
ghUrNayantyakSiyugmaM,  /  svairaM harSaprakarSAdapi ca vidadhate
nRtyagAnaprabandham  // 13 //  bhAvArtha : kavijanoM ke vacanarUpI IkSu aura
aMgUra ke rasa kA puMja durjana puruSa ke mukharUpI agniyaMtra se vividha
prakAra ke artharUpI dravyoM ke saMyoga se guNavRddhi pAkara tatkAla madyarUpa
bana jAtA hai| usa madya kA pAna karake satpuruSa hRdaya meM atyanta harSita
hote haiN| ve donoM A~khoM ko capalatApUrvaka ghumAte haiM, aura
svacchandatApUrvaka harSAveza meM Akara nRtya aura gIta kA prabandha bhI karate
haiM  // 13 //  adhikAra ikkIsavA~ 307

Page #308 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
This new composition of ours, due to the influence of virtuous people who
possess many good qualities, will become famous. Are these virtuous people not
worthy of our prayers in this method of doing good? Or, like the sun rays that
cause the lotus to bloom, are they themselves exceptional in causing the
blossoming of good qualities, for their nature never depends on the approval of
others?  ||14||  **Meaning:** This new composition of ours, due to the influence
of virtuous people who possess many good qualities, will become famous. Are
these virtuous people not worthy of our prayers in this method of doing good?
Or, like the sun rays that cause the lotus to bloom, are they themselves
exceptional in causing the blossoming of good qualities, for their nature never
depends on the approval of others?  ||14||  The Sumeru mountain, heated by the
rays of the tireless, wandering, beautiful constellations, is cooled by the
water flowing from the celestial Ganges, which is disturbed by the noise of the
groups of celestial nymphs singing in praise of the glory of those great
teachers. In this group of virtuous people, the wise Muni, Nayavijaya, is
prominent. ||15||  **Meaning:** The Sumeru mountain, heated by the rays of the
tireless, wandering, beautiful constellations, is cooled by the water flowing
from the celestial Ganges, which is disturbed by the noise of the groups of
celestial nymphs singing in praise of the glory of those great teachers. In this
group of virtuous people, the wise Muni, Nayavijaya, is prominent. ||15||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 navyo'smAkaM prabandho'SyanaNuguNabhRtAM sajjanAnAM prabhAvAt  /  vikhyAtaH
syAditIme hitakaraNAvidhau prArthanIyA na kiM naH  /  niSNAtA vA svataste
ravirUcaya ivAmbhoruhANaM guNAnAmullAse'pekSaNIyo na khalu pararuceH kvApi teSAM
svabhAvaH  // 14 //  bhAvArtha : 'hamArI yaha racanA naI hotI huI bhI
bar3e-bar3e guNadhArI sajjanoM ke prabhAva se prasiddha ho' kyA ve sajjana hita
karane kI vidhi meM hamAre dvArA prArthanIya nahIM haiM ? athavA kamaloM ko
vikasita karane meM sUryakiraNoM kI taraha guNoM kA ullAsa (vikAsa) karane meM
ve sajjana svayameva vilakSaNa haiM, kyoMki unakA svabhAva kadApi dUsare kI ruci
icchA kI apekSA nahIM rakhatA  // 14 //
yatkIrtisphUrtigAnAvahitasuravadhUvRndakolAhalena, prakSubdhasvargasindhoH
patitajalabharaiH kSAlitaH zaityameti  /
azrAntabhrAntakAntagrahagaNakiraNaustApavAn svarNazailo bhrAjante te munIndrA
nayavijayabudhAH sajjanavAta-dhuryAH  // 15 //  bhAvArtha : avizrAnta bhramaNa
karate hue manohara grahagaNoM kI kiraNoM se tapA huA sumeruparvata una gurudeva
kI kIrti kA sphUrtipUrvaka gAna karane meM dattacitta devAMganAoM ke jhuNDa ke
kolAhala se prakSubdha svagaMgA se girate hue jalapravAhoM se dhulakara zItalatA
ko prApta karatA hai, una sajjanoM ke samUha meM agragaNya nayavijaya nAmaka
paNDita munivarya virAjamAna haiM  // 15 //  308 adhyAtmasAra

Page #309 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
In this chapter on the chakras, Yashovijaya, devoted to the service of the feet
of his Guru, has composed this treatise (Adhyatma Sara). May this be a source of
joy for those who are interested in spirituality. || 16 ||  Meaning: Yashovijaya
(Upadhyaya), who is eager to serve the feet of his Guru, has composed this
chapter (Adhyatma Sara). May this chapter be a source of joy for those who are
interested in spirituality. || 16 ||  || Thus ends the praise of the virtuous,
thus ends the eulogy || This is the seventh chapter of the Adhyatma Sara
treatise composed by Pandit Shri Yashovijaya, the younger brother of Pandit Shri
Padmavijaya, who is devoted to the lotus feet of Pandit Shri Nayavijaya, the
chief Pandit of the Shri Jitavijaya Gani Tirtha, the chief Pandit of the Shri
Labhavijaya Gani, the chief disciple of the Shri Kalyanavijaya Gani, the great
Upadhyaya. ||  Chapter Twenty-First 309

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 cakre prakaraNametat tatpadasevAparo yazovijayaH  /
adhyAtmadhRtarucInAmidamAnandAvahaM bhavatu  //  16  //  bhAvArtha : una
gurudeva kI caraNasevA karane meM tatpara yazovijaya (upAdhyAya) ne yaha
prakaraNa (adhyAtmasAra) racA (banAyA) hai| yaha prakaraNa adhyAtma meM ruci
rakhane vAle puruSoM ke lie AnandadAyaka ho  // 16 //   //  iti sajjanastutiH,
iti prazastizca  //  itizrI mahopAdhyAya
zrIkalyaNavijayagaNiziSyamukhyapaNDitazrI lAbhavijayagaNiziSya
mukhyapaNDitazrIjItavijayagaNisatIrthya- mukhyapaNDita - zrInayavijayagaNi-
caraNakamalacaMcarIkeNa, paNDitazrIpadmavijayagaNi-sahodareNa paNDita
zrIyazovijayena viracite'dhyAtmasAraprakaraNe saptamaH prabaMdhaH  //  adhikAra
ikkIsavA~ 309

Page #310 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Aha! The details of the Hindi books to be published in the Shruta Swadhyay
Sangrah are: (1) Jeev Vichar - Navtatva (2) Dandak - Laghu Sangrahani (3)
Bhashyatrayam - Chaityavandan / Guruvandan / Pacchakhan Bhashya (4) Karmagranth
1-2-3 (5) Gyanasar (6) Upadeshamala (7) Adhyatmasar (8) Shantasudharas (9)
Prashamrati (10) Vairagyshatak - Indriya Parajay Shatak (11) Adhyatmakalpdrum
(12) Ashtak Prakaran (13) Tattvarth Sutra (14) Vitragastotra (15)
Brihasangrahani (16) Laghukshetrasamaas 310 Adhyatmasar

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 aho ! zrutam svAdhyAya saMgraha meM prakAzita honevAle hindI graMtho kA
vivaraNa (1) jIvavicAra - navatattva (2) daMDaka - laghu saMgrahaNI (3)
bhASyatrayam - caityavaMdana / guruvaMdana / paccakhANa bhASya (4) karmagraMtha
1-2-3 (5) jJAnasAra (6) upadezamAlA (7) adhyAtmasAra (8) zAMtasudhArasa (9)
prazamarati (10) vairAgyazataka - indriya parAjaya zataka (11)
adhyAtmakalpadruma (12) aSTaka prakaraNa (13) tattvArthasUtra (14)
vItarAgastotra (15) bRhasaMgrahaNI (16) laghukSetrasamAsa 310 adhyAtmasAra

Page #311 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Shri Ashapuran Parshvanath Jain Gyan Bhandar Introduction**  (1) Established
in Samvat 2063 by the family of Shri Saremal Javerchandji Bedawala with their
own funds... (2)  Over 33,000 books have been issued from a collection of 2,500
Pratyakar Granths and over 21,000 books for the study of Guru Bhagwantos... (3)
For the protection of Shruta, 45 manuscript repositories have been digitized and
over 1,800 manuscripts out of 80,000 manuscripts stored in them have been sent
to learned Guru Bhagwantos for revision and editing... (4) 222 printed books,
which were old and almost unavailable, have been digitized and their limited
copies have been republished, enriching the Gyan Bhandar... (5)  46 issues of
the quarterly journal "Aho! Shrutagyanam" have been published with own funds for
Shruta Bhakti... (6)  A digital collection of over 9,000 books in PDF format is
available under the e-library, from which printed copies are sent according to
the needs of Guru Bhagwantos... (7) Every year, an event is organized for Pujya
Sadhviji M.Sa. to learn ancient script (lipitantaran)... (8) An event is
organized to publish illustrated stories in English for children... (9)  Aho!
Shruta has published eight unpublished works through its circular... (10)
Special presentation and dissemination of Jain literature at the National Book
Fair... (11)  Dissemination of appropriate knowledge and organization of
practical measures for the wise observance of the Pancham Samiti... (12)
Publication of 60 books of Chaturvidh Sangh Upayogi Priyam through digital
printing.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI AzApUraNa pArzvanAtha jaina jJAnabhaMDAra paricaya (1) zA. saremala
javeracaMdajI beDAvAlA parivAra dvArA svadravya se saMvat 2063 meM nirmita...
(2) gurubhagavaMto ke abhyAsa ke liye 2500 pratAkAra graMtha va 21000 se jyAdA
pustako ke saMgraha me se 33000 se jyAdA pustake isyu kI hai... zrutarakSA ke
liye 45 hastaprata bhaMDAro ko DijiTAIjezana ke dvArA surakSita kiyA hai aura
usa meM saMgrahita 80000 hastaprato meM se 1800 se jyAdA hastaprato kI jherokSa
vidvAna gurubhagavaMto ko saMzodhana saMpAdana ke liye bhejI hai... (4) jIrNa
aura prAyaH aprApya 222 mudrita graMtho ko DijiTAIjezana karake maryAdita nakale
punaH prakAzita karake jJAnabhaMDAro ko samRddha banAyA hai... aho ! zrutajJAnam
cAturmAsika patrikA ke 46 aMka zrutabhakti ke liye svadravya se prakAzita kiye
hai... I-lAyabrerI ke aMtargata 9000 se jyAdA pustako kA DijiTala saMgraha PDF
upalabdha hai, jisa meM se gurubhagavaMto kI jaruriyAta ke mutAbika mudrita
prinTa nakala bhejate hai... (7) hara sAla pUjya sAdhvIjI ma.sA. ke liye prAcIna
lipi (lipyaMtaraNa) zIkhane kA Ayojana... (8) baccoM ke liye aMgrejI meM sacitra
kathAoM ko prakAzita karane kA Ayojana... (9) aho ! zrutam I paripatra ke dvArA
adyAvadhi aprakAzita ATha kRtioM ko prakAzita kI hai... (10) nezanala buka phera
meM jaina sAhitya kI viziSTa prastuti evaM prasAra  /  (11) paMcama samiti ke
vivekapUrNa pAlana ke liye ucita jJAna kA prasAra evaM prAyogika upAya kA
Ayojana  /  (12) caturvidha saMgha upayogI priyam ke 60 pustako kA DijiTala
prinTa dvArA prakAzana  /  311

Page #312 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
COOG BRRORLLLLLLLLLLLLLLECO M Shri Panch Maha Mangal Shruta Skandha Shri
Namaskar Maha Mantra (Atiprachin) 18GET 1651 18XINEI 18[G & SI 18J 0 1 854 I
Beid loft ISTOCELI rafidd8e 8.84744 CLOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOO OO

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
COOG BRRORLLLLLLLLLLLLLLECO M zrI paMca mahAmaMgala zrutaskandha zrI namaskAra
mahAmaMtra (atiprAcina) 18GET 1651 18XINEI 18[G & SI 18J 0 1 854 I Beid loft
ISTOCELI rafidd8e 8.84744 CLOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOO OO

