Catalog link: https://jainqq.org/explore/003448/1

Page #1 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
In memory of  Sw. Pujya Gurudev Shri Joravarmalji Maharaj -20 E BOcts 2-22125
Coordinator and Chief Editor NASI Yuchary Shri Madhukar Muni Annadasha
(Original-Translation-Discussion-Notes-Appendix-Included)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 ma A IYA sva. pUjya gurudeva zrI jorAvaramalajImahArAja kI smRti meM Ayojita
-20 E BOcts 2-22125 saMyojaka evaM pradhAna sampAdaka NASI yucAcArya zrI
madhukara muni annadazA (mUla-anuvAda-vivecana-TippaNa-pariziSTa-yukta )

Page #2 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
ॐ Aham Jinagam-Granthamala: Granthank [ In the auspicious memory of
Paramashraddeya Gurudev Pujya Shri Joravarmalji Maharaj ] Pancham Ganadhar
Bhagavatsudharma-Swami-Pranit Ashtam Ang | Antakrid Dasasutra [ Original Text,
Hindi Translation, Commentary, Appendix Included ] Sanidhi Upapravartak
Shasanasevi Swami Shri Brajlalji Maharaj Coordinator and Chief Editor Yuvacharya
Shri Mishrimalji Maharaj 'Madhukar' Translation-Commentary-Editing Ba. Br. Jain
Sadhvi Divyaprabha M.A., Ph.D. [ Disciple of Acharya Samrat Shri Anandrishiji M.
and Antavasi of Mahasati Shri Ujjvalkumariji ] Publisher Shri Agam Prakashan-
Samiti, Byawar (Rajasthan)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 OM aha~ jinAgama-granthamAlA : granthAGka [ paramazraddheya gurudeva pUjya zrI
jorAvaramalajI mahArAja kI puNyasmRti meM Ayojita ] paMcama gaNadhara
bhagavatsudharma-svAmi-praNIta aSTama aMga | antakRddazAsUtra [ mUla pATha,
hindI anuvAda, vivecana, pariziSTa yukta ] sannidhi upapravartaka zAsanasevI
svAmI zrI brajalAlajI mahArAja saMyojaka tathA pradhAna sampAdaka yuvAcArya zrI
mizrImalajI mahArAja 'madhukara' anuvAdana-vivecana-sampAdana bA. bra. jaina
sAdhvI divyaprabhA ema.e., pI-eca.DI. [AcAryasamrAT zrI AnandaRSijI ma. kI
suziSyA aura mahAsatI zrI ujjvalakumArIjI kI antevAsinI] prakAzaka zrI
AgamaprakAzana-samiti, byAvara (rAjasthAna)

Page #3 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Jinagam-Granthamala : Granthank-5 Nirdéshan Mahasati Sadhvi Shri Umravakumarji
M.Sa. 'Archana' Sampadak Mandal Anuyog Pravartak Muni Shri Kanhaiyalal 'Kamal'
Acharya Shri Devendramuni Shastri Shri Ratnamuni Samprerak Muni Shri Vinaykumar
'Bheem' Sanshodhan Dev Kumar Jain Tritiya Sanskaran : Veer Nirvan San. 2526, Vi.
San. 2056 January 2000 E. Prakashan Shri Agam Prakashan Samiti Braj-Madhukar
Smriti Bhavan Pipaliya Bazaar, Byawar (Rajasthan)- 305 901 Durabhash : 50087
Mudrak Shrimati Vimlesh Jain Ajantā Paper Converters Lakshmi Chowk, Ajmer-305
001 Computerized Type Setting Aarushi Marketing 5, S.S. Market, Kacheri Road,
Ajmer-305 001 Muly : 65) Rupees

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 jinAgama-granthamAlA : granthAGka-5 nirdezana mahAsatI sAdhvI zrI
umarAvakuMvara jI ma.sA. 'arcanA' sampAdaka maNDala anuyoga pravartaka muni zrI
kanhaiyAlAla 'kamala' AcArya zrI devendramuni zAstrI zrI ratanamuni sampreraka
muni zrI vinayakumAra 'bhIma' saMzodhana deva kumAra jaina tRtIya saMskaraNa :
vIra nirvANa saM. 2526, vi0 saM0 2056 janavarI 2000 I0 prakAzaka zrI
AgamaprakAzana samiti braja-madhukara smRti bhavana pIpaliyA bAjAra, byAvara
(rAjasthAna)- 305 901 dUrabhASa : 50087 mudraka zrImatI vimaleza jaina ajantA
pepara kanvarTarsa lakSmI cauka, ajamera-305 001 kampyUTarAijDa TAipa saiTiMga
AruSi mArkeTiMga 5, esa. esa. mArkeTa, kacaharI roDa, ajamera-305 001 mUlya :
65) rupaye

Page #4 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Yuvacharya Shri Madhukar Muni Ji Ma.Ma. 卐 Maha Mantra Namo Arihantaanam, Namo
Siddhanam, Namo Ayariyanam, Namo Uvvajhayanam, Namo Loesavva Sahoonanam, Eso
Panch Namo-kkaro' Savvapavapanasano || Mangalanam Cha Savvesim, Padham Havai
Mangalam ||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 yuvAcArya zrI madhukara munIjI mA.mA. Wan  mahAmaMtra Namo arihaMtANaM, Namo
sidhdANaM, Namo AyariyANaM, Namo uvajjhAyANaM, Namo loesavva sAhUNaM, eso paMca
NamokkAro' savvapAvapaNAsaNo  //  maMgalANaM ca savvesiM, paDhama havai maMgalaM
//

Page #5 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The five great vows (Mahavratas) are: 1. Ahimsa (non-violence) 2. Satya
(truthfulness) 3. Asteya (non-stealing) 4. Brahmacharya (continence) 5.
Aparigraha (non-attachment)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================


Page #6 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Published at the Holy Remembrance occasion of Rev. Guru Shri Joravarmalji
Maharaj Fifth Ganadhara Sudharma Swami Compiled Eighth Anga ANTAGADA-DASAO
[Original Text, Hindi Version, Notes Annotations and Appendices etc.) Proximity
Up-pravartaka Shasansevi Rev. Swami Shri Brijlalji Maharaj Convener & Chief
Editor Yuvacharya Shri Mishrimalji Maharaj 'Madhukar' Translator & Annotator
Sadhwi Divyaprabha M.A., Ph.D. Publishers Shri Agam Prakashan Samiti Beawar
(Raj.)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Published at the Holy Remembrance occasion of Rev. Guru Shri Joravarmalji
Maharaj Fifth Ganadhara Sudharma Swami Compiled Eighth Anga ANTAGADA-DASAO
[Original Text, Hindi Version, Notes Annotations and Appendices etc.) Proximity
Up-pravartaka Shasansevi Rev. Swami Shri Brijlalji Maharaj Convener & Chief
Editor Yuvacharya Shri Mishrimalji Maharaj 'Madhukar' Translator & Annotator
Sadhwi Divyaprabha M.A., Ph.D. Publishers Shri Agam Prakashan Samiti Beawar
(Raj.)

Page #7 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Jinagam Granthmala Publication No. 5 Direction Mahasati Sadhwi Shri Umrav
Kunwarji “Archana” Board of Editors Anuyoga-Pravartaka Muni Sri Kanhaiyalal
“Kamal” Acharya Shri Devendramuni Shastri Shri Ratan Muni Promotor Muni Shri
Vinayakumar “Bhima” Corrections and Supervision Dev Kumar Jain Third Edition
Vir-Nirvana Samvat 2526 Vikram Samvat 2056 January 2000 Publishers Shri Agam
Prakashan Samiti Brij-Madhukar Smriti-Bhawan, Pipaliya Bazar, Beawar (Raj.) -
305 901 Ph. : 50087 Printers Smt. Vimlesh Jain Ajanta Paper Converters Laxmi
Chowk, Ajmer - 305 001 Laser Type Setting by : Aarushi Marketing 5, S. S. Market
Kutchery Road, Ajmer - 305 001 Price: Rs. 65/

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Jinagam Granthmala Publication No. 5 Direction Mahasati Sadhwi Shri Umrav
Kunwarji "Archana" Board of Editors Anuyoga-Pravartaka Muni Sri Kanhaiyalal
"Kamal" Acharya Shri Devendramuni Shastri Shri Ratan Muni Promotor Muni Shri
Vinayakumar "Bhima" Corrections ans Supervision Dev Kumar Jain Third Edition
Vir-Nirvana Samvat 2526 Vikram Samvat 2056 January 2000 Publishers Shri Agam
Prakashan Samiti Brij-Madhukar Smriti-Bhawan, Pipaliya Bazar, Beawar (Raj.) -
305 901 Ph. : 50087 Printers Smt. Vimlesh Jain Ajanta Paper Converters Laxmi
Chowk, Ajmer - 305 001 Laser Type Setting by : Aarushi Marketing 5, S. S. Market
Kutchery Road, Ajmer - 305 001 Price: Rs. 65/

Page #8 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Dedication**  To the illustrious ones, adorned with exceptional brilliance,
whose self-control was their all, who infused vitality into established
traditions with their profound teachings, who revealed the vast nature of
Dharma, whose personality was unique, who were endowed with the eightfold wealth
of the Ganis, to those epoch-making luminaries,  **To the revered Acharya Shri
Jawaharlalji Maharaj, at the lotus feet of whose hands, with humble reverence, -
Madhukar Muni**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 samarpaNa jo prakRSTa pratibhA se vibhUSita the, saMyama jinakA sarvasva thA,
jinhoMne apanI AgamAnusyata dharmadezanA se rUr3ha paramparAoM meM caitanya kA
saMcAra kiyA, dharma ke virAT svarUpa kA 'bodha karAyA, jinakA vyaktitva anaThA
thA, jo aSTavidha gaNisampadA se sampanna the, una yugapravartaka jyotirdhara,
sva0 AcAryavarya zrIjavAharalAlajI mahArAja ke kara-kamaloM meM sAdara savinaya
-madhukara muni

Page #9 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The five great vows (Mahavratas) are: 1. Ahimsa (non-violence) 2. Satya
(truthfulness) 3. Asteya (non-stealing) 4. Brahmacharya (continence) 5.
Aparigraha (non-attachment)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================


Page #10 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
This third edition of the Antakrid Dasanga Sutra is being published by the
committee for the benefit of the readers who are practitioners of the
Bhagavadvani. The committee is proud to acknowledge the contribution of the late
revered Yuvacharya Shri Madhukaramuni Ji M.Sa., who was a member of the Shraman
Sangh. He inspired the publication of the Bhagavadvani in its original language,
Prakrit, along with its meaning, interpretation, discussion, and commentary in
the widely accepted vernacular language, Hindi. Although he is no longer with
us, his blessings and the outlined plan for publication continue to guide us. In
accordance with this, we are publishing the Agam literature as a token of our
gratitude and as a tribute to him. On this occasion, we are pleased to mention
that every member of the society has contributed to this endeavor, thereby
approving the propagation of the Jinvani and inspiring us to work. We express
our gratitude to the scholars whose support has enabled the committee to
successfully complete its task. The committee once again congratulates them. The
translation of the Antakrid Dasanga Sutra has been done by the learned Sadhvi
Shri Divyaprabhaji M., M.A., Ph.D., who is a disciple of the late revered Sadhvi
Ratna Shri Ujjvalkumariji M. and a follower of the late revered Acharya Samrat,
the National Saint, Shri Anandrishiji M.Sa. Although her mother tongue is
Gujarati, the impactful style in which she has presented the Hindi translation,
etc., is a testament to her scholarship and linguistic expertise. The committee
highly commends her and her efforts. We remember with reverence the late revered
Acharya Pravar Shri Devendramuni Ji M.Sa. Shastri, whose introduction to every
Agam text is a literary piece in itself. He not only reveals the essence of the
text but also presents many important references, which are useful and
significant for those who study comparative literature. Finally, the committee
requests all its readers and fellow students to note that the publication of the
third edition of the Agam texts is ongoing. We hope to make all the texts of the
Agam Battisi available to you soon. We hope that your support will continue to
inspire us. Sagarmal Baitala President Ratanchand Modi Working President G.
Sayramal Chordia General Secretary Gyanchand Vinaykia Secretary Shri Agam
Prakashan Samiti, Byawar (Rajasthan)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prakAzakIya bhagavadvANI ke abhyAsI pAThakoM ke liye antakRddazAMgasUtra kA
yaha tRtIya saMskaraNa prakAzita karake samiti gauravAnubhUti karatI hai| samiti
ko gauravAnubhUti karAne kA samasta zreya zramaNasaMgha ke sarvatobhadra
svargIya yuvAcArya zrI madhukaramunijI ma.sA. ko hai| ApazrI ne apane sudIrgha
cintana ke dvArA bhagavadvANI ko apanI mUlabhASA prAkRta ke sAtha-sAtha
sarvamAnya lokabhASA hindI meM artha, bhAvArtha, vivecana, TippaNI sahita
prakAzita karane kI preraNA dii| yadyapi ApazrI Aja hamAre bIca nahIM haiM,
kintu unake varada AzIrvAda evaM prakAzana kI nirdhArita rUparekhA hamArI
mArgadarzaka hai| tadnusAra Agama- sAhitya ko prakAzita kara apanI kRtajJatA
vyakta kara rahe haiM tathA zraddhAMjali arpita karate haiN| isI prasaMga meM
hameM yaha ullekha karate hue prasannatA ho rahI hai ki samAja ke pratyeka
baMdhu ne sahayoga dekara jinavANI ke isa pracAra-prasAra ke anuSThAna kA
anumodana kiyA hai evaM hameM kArya karane kI preraNA dii| vidvAnoM ke prati
hama apanA pramodabhAva prakaTa karate haiN| unake sahayoga se samiti apane
kArya ko sampanna karane meM saphala huI hai| samiti punaH punaH unakA
abhinaMdana karatI hai| antakRddazAMga-sUtra kA anuvAda suvikhyAta sAdhvIratna
svargIya zrI ujjvalakumArIjI ma. kI suziSyA evaM AcArya samrATa rASTrasaMta
zraddheya svargIya AnandaRSijI ma.sA. kI AjJAnuvartinI viduSI sAdhvIzrI
divyaprabhAjI. ma. ema.e., pIeca.DI. ne kiyA hai| sAdhvIzrI kI mAtRbhASA
gujarAtI hai, lekina jisa prabhAvaka zailI meM hindI anuvAda Adi prastuta kiyA
hai, vaha ApakI vidvattA evaM bhASAvijJatA kA paricAyaka hai| samiti ApakI va
Apake prayAsa kI bhUri-bhUri prazaMsA karatI hai| svargIya AcAryapravara zrI
devendramuni jI ma.sA. zAstrI kA hama puNyasmaraNa karate haiM ki Apa dvArA
likhita pratyeka Agama graMtha kI prastAvanA apane Apa meM eka graMthAMza haiN|
ve graMtha ke aMtaraMga ko udghATita karane ke sAthasAtha aneka mahattvapUrNa
ullekhoM ko prastuta karate haiN| jo sAhitya kA tulanAtmaka adhyayana karane
vAloM ke lie upayogI evaM mahattvapUrNa haiN| .. _ aMta meM samiti apane sabhI
pAThakoM aura svAdhyAyI baMdhuoM se yaha nivedana karatI hai ki Agama graMthoM
ke tRtIya saMskaraNa ke prakAzana kA kArya abAdhagati se cala rahA hai| AzA hai
ki yathAzIghra Agama battIsI ke sabhI graMtha Apako upalabdha karA deNge| ApakA
sahayoga hameM utsAhita karatA rahe yahI AkAMkSA hai| sAgaramala baitAlA
adhyakSa ratanacaMda modI kAryAdhyakSa jI. sAyaramala corar3iyA mahAmaMtrI
jJAnacaMda vinAyakiyA maMtrI . zrI AgamaprakAzana samiti, byAvara (rAjasthAna)

Page #11 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The five great vows (Mahavratas) are: 1. **Ahimsa** (non-violence) 2. **Satya**
(truthfulness) 3. **Asteya** (non-stealing) 4. **Brahmacharya** (continence) 5.
**Aparigraha** (non-attachment)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================


Page #12 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Introduction  The foundation of Jain religion, philosophy and culture is the
word of the omniscient. Omniscient means the one who sees the self. Only those
who see the self completely can see the entire universe. Those who know the
whole can truly describe the essence. They can truly preach the ultimate good
and liberation.  The knowledge of the essence, self-knowledge and the right
understanding of conduct and behavior as stated by the omniscient is known as
'Agam', scripture or sutra.  The words of the Tirthankaras are like a shower of
fragrant flowers. Great wise men, the Ganadharas, compile them in the form of
sutras and give them the form of organized 'Agam'.  What we call 'Agam' today
was called 'Ganipitaka' in ancient times. The 'Ganipitaka' includes the entire
twelve-fold scripture. Later, its parts, sub-parts, roots, etc. were divided
into many categories.  When there was no tradition of writing, the Agams were
preserved based on memory or through the Guru tradition. For almost a thousand
years after Lord Mahavira, the 'Agam' followed the tradition of memory. Due to
weakness of memory, the breaking of the Guru tradition and many other reasons,
the knowledge of the Agam gradually disappeared. The water of the great lake
dried up, leaving only the footprint of the cow. Then, Devardvigani Kshamasraman
called a meeting of the Shramans and made a historic attempt to preserve the
knowledge of the Agam, which was disappearing due to memory lapses, and to
preserve the words of the Jinas. He compiled the words of the Jinas into books
and did an indescribable favor to future generations. This was an amazing
undertaking to keep the stream of Jain religion, philosophy and culture flowing.
This first compilation of the Agams was completed 980 or 993 years after the
Nirvana of the hero.  After being compiled into books, the form of the Jain
Agams was preserved in its original form, but due to the passage of time,
external attacks, internal differences of opinion, conflict, weakness of memory
and negligence, the pure stream of Agam knowledge, the right understanding of
the Guru tradition, gradually weakened. Many important references, words and
hidden meanings of the Agams became fragmented. The Agams that were written were
not completely pure. There were very few who could give the right understanding
of their meaning. Due to many other reasons, the stream of Agam knowledge became
narrow.  In the sixteenth century Vikram, Lonkashah made a revolutionary effort.
A bold attempt to describe the pure and true meaning of the Agams was started
again. But after some time, obstacles arose again. Communal hatred, theoretical
conflict and the lack of knowledge of language among the scribes became a major
obstacle in the achievement of the Agams and their correct understanding.  In
the first phase of the nineteenth century, when the tradition of printing the
Agams began, readers got some convenience...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Amukha jaina dharma, darzana va saMskRti kA mUla AdhAra sarvajJa kI vANI hai|
sarvajJa arthAt AtmadraSTA  /  sampUrNa rUpa se Atmadarzana karane vAle hI vizva
kA samagra darzana kara sakate haiN| jo samagra ko jAnate haiM, ve hI tattva kA
yathArtha nirUpaNa kara sakate haiN| paramahitakara niHzreyasa kA yathArtha
upadeza kara sakate haiN| sarvajJoM dvArA kathita tattvajJAna, AtmajJAna tathA
AcAra-vyavahAra kA samyak paribodha 'Agama', zAstra yA sUtra ke nAma se
prasiddha hai| tIrthaMkaroM kI vANI mukta sumanoM kI vRSTi ke samAna hotI hai,
mahAn prajJAvAn gaNadhara use sUtra rUpa meM grathita karake vyavasthita 'Agama'
kA rUpa de dete haiN| Aja jise hama 'Agama' nAma se abhihita karate haiM,
prAcIna samaya meM ve 'gaNipiTaka' kahalAte the| | 'gaNipiTaka' meM samagra
dvAdazAMgI kA samAveza ho jAtA hai| pazcAdvartI kAla meM isake aMga, upAMga,
mUla Adi aneka bheda kiye gye| jaba likhane kI paramparA nahIM thI, taba AgamoM
ko smRti ke AdhAra para yA guruparamparA se surakSita rakhA jAtA thaa| bhagavAn
mahAvIra ke bAda lagabhaga eka hajAra varSa taka 'Agama' smRtiparamparA para hI
cale Aye the| smRtidurbalatA, guru-paramparA kA viccheda tathA anya aneka
kAraNoM se dhIre-dhIre Agama-jJAna lupta hotA gyaa| mahAsarovara | kA jala
sUkhatA-sUkhatA gospada mAtra hI raha gyaa| taba devardvigaNi kSamAzramaNa ne
zramaNoM kA sammelana bulAkara smRtidoSa se lupta hote AgamajJAna ko, jinavANI
ko surakSita rakhane ke pavitra uddezya se lipibaddha karane kA aitihAsika
prayAsa kiyA aura jinavANI ko pustakArUDha karake Ane vAlI pIDhI para avarNanIya
upakAra kiyaa| yaha jaina dharma, darzana evaM saMskRti kI dhArA ko pravahamAna
rakhane kA adbhuta upakrama thaa| AgamoM kA yaha prathama sampAdana vIra nirvANa
ke 980 yA 993 varSa pazcAt sampanna huaa| pustakArUDha hone ke bAda jaina AgamoM
kA svarUpa mUla rUpa meM to surakSita ho gayA, kintu kAladoSa, bAharI |
AkramaNa, Antarika matabheda, vigraha, smRti-durbalatA evaM pramAda Adi kAraNoM
se AgamajJAna kI zuddha dhArA, arthabodha kI samyak gurupamparA dhIre-dhIre
kSINa hone se nahIM rukii| AgamoM ke aneka mahattvapUrNa sandarbha, pada tathA
gUDha artha chinna-vicchinna hote cale ge| jo Agama likhe jAte the, ve bhI pUrNa
zuddha nahIM hote the| unakA samyak arthajJAna denevAle bhI virale hI rhe| anya
bhI aneka kAraNoM se AgamajJAna kI dhArA saMkucita hotI gyii| vikrama kI
solahavIM zatAbdI meM loMkAzAha ne eka krAMtikArI prayatna kiyaa| AgamoM ke
zuddha aura yathArtha artha-jJAna ko nirUpita karane kA eka sAhasika upakrama
punaH cAlU huaa| kintu kucha kAla bAda punaH usameM bhI vyavadhAna A ge|
sAmpradAyika dveSa, saiddhAntika vigraha tathA lipikAroM kI bhASAviSayaka
alpajJatA AgamoM kI upalabdhi tathA unake samyak arthabodha meM bahuta bar3A
vighna bana ge| unnIsavIM zatAbdI ke prathama caraNa meM jaba Agama mudraNa kI
paramparA calI to pAThakoM ko kucha suvidhA

Page #13 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The ancient commentaries of the Agamas, Churni and Niyukti, were published and
based on them, the simple and clear form of the Agamas was printed and made
available to the readers, so naturally the study of Agam knowledge increased,
hundreds of inquisitive people developed a tendency towards Agam self-study and
non-Jain scholars from India and abroad also started practicing the Agamas. It
is difficult to mention the names of all the scholars and wise monks who played
a historical role in the publication, editing and printing of the Agamas, due to
lack of sufficient material. Nevertheless, I will definitely mention the names
of some great monks of the Sthanakwasi tradition. Reverend Shri Amolkarishiji
Maharaj was a great courageous and determined monk of the Sthanakwasi tradition,
who translated all thirty-two Sutras into Hindi and made them accessible to the
common people, despite having limited resources. The editing and publication of
the entire thirty-two was a historical work, which benefited the entire
Sthanakwasi and Terapanthi society. A resolution of Gurudev Pujya Swami Shri
Joravarmalji Maharaj When I was studying the Agamas under the guidance of
Gurudev Late Swami Shri Joravarmalji Maharaj, some Agamas published by the
Agamoday Committee were available. Gurudev used to make me study based on them.
Seeing them, Gurudev felt that although these editions were very laborious and
quite pure among the editions available so far, yet many places were unclear.
There is also a difference somewhere in the original text and its commentary,
somewhere the commentary is very brief. Gurudev Swami Shri Joravarmalji Maharaj
himself was a great scholar of Jain Sutras. His intellect was very learned and
argumentative. Seeing this state of Agam literature, he was very pained and he
expressed many times that it would be a great blessing if the Agamas were
published in a pure, beautiful and universally useful way. Due to some
circumstances, his resolution remained limited to sentiment only. Meanwhile,
Acharya Shri Jawaharlalji Maharaj, Jain Dharma Divakar Acharya Shri Atmaramji
Maharaj, Pujya Shri Ghasilalji Maharaj, etc. learned monks have fulfilled this
deficiency by writing beautiful explanations and commentaries of the Agamas or
by getting them written under their guidance. Currently, Acharya Shri Tulsi of
the Terapanth sect has also started this Herculean effort and their Agam work is
going on at a good level. Muni Shri Kanhaiyalalji 'Kamal' is making a unique and
important effort to classify the statements of the Agamas into Anuyogas.
Scholarly monks of the Svetambar Murtipujak tradition, Late Muni Shri
Punyavijayji, had started a very systematic and excellent work in the direction
of Agam editing. After his demise, this beautiful effort is going on under the
guidance of Muni Shri Jambhuvijayji. [10]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 huii| AgamoM kI prAcIna TIkAe~, cUrNi va niyukti jaba prakAzita huIM tathA
unake AdhAra para AgamoM kA sarala va spaSTa svarUpa mudrita hokara pAThakoM ko
sulabha huA to AgamajJAna kA paThana-pAThana svabhAvataH bar3hA, saikar3oM
jijJAsuoM meM Agama svAdhyAya kI pravRtti jagI va jainetara dezI-videzI vidvAn
bhI AgamoM kA anuzIlana karane lge| AgamoM ke prakAzana sampAdana mudraNa ke
kArya meM jina vidvAnoM tathA manISI zramaNoM ne aitihAsika kArya kiyA, paryApta
sAmagrI ke abhAva meM Aja una sabakA nAmollekha kara pAnA kaThina hai| phira bhI
maiM sthAnakavAsI | paramparA ke kucha mahAn muniyoM kA nAma grahaNa avazya hI
kruuNgaa| pUjya zrI amolakaRSijI mahArAja sthAnakavAsI paramparA ke ve mahAn
sAhasI va dRr3hasaMkalpabalI muni the, jinhoMne alpa sAdhanoM ke bala para bhI
pUre battIsa sUtroM ko hindI meM anUdita karake jana-jana ko sulA banA diyaa|
pUrI battIsI kA sampAdana prakAzana eka aitihAsika kArya thA, jisase sampUrNa
sthAnakavAsI va terApaMthI samAja upakRta | huaa| gurudeva pUjya svAmI zrI
jorAvaramalajI mahArAja kA eka saMkalpa maiM jaba gurudeva sva. svAmI zrI
jorAvaramalajI mahArAja ke tattvAvadhAna meM AgamoM kA adhyayana kara rahA thA
taba Agamodaya samiti dvArA prakAzita kucha Agama upalabdha the| unhIM ke AdhAra
para gurudeva mujhe adhyayana karAte the| unako dekhakara gurudeva ko lagatA thA
ki yaha saMskaraNa yadyapi kAphI zramasAdhya haiM evaM aba taka upalabdha
saMskaraNoM meM kAphI zuddha bhI haiM, phira bhI aneka sthala aspaSTa haiN| mUla
pATha meM evaM usakI vRtti meM kahIM-kahIM antara bhI hai, kahIM vRtti bahuta
saMkSipta hai| gurudeva svAmI zrI jorAvaramala jI mahArAja svayaM jaina sUtroM
ke prakANDa paNDita the| unakI medhA bar3I vyutpanna va tarkaNA-pradhAna thii|
AgamasAhitya kI yaha sthiti dekhakara unheM bahuta pIr3A hotI aura kaI bAra
unhoMne vyakta bhI kiyA ki AgamoM kA zuddha, sundara va sarvopayogI prakAzana ho
to bahuta kalyANa hogaa| kucha paristhitiyoM ke kAraNa unakA saMkalpa mAtra
bhAvanA taka sImita rhaa| isI bIca AcArya zrI javAharalAlajI mahArAja,
jainadharma divAkara AcArya zrI AtmArAmajI mahArAja, pUjya zrI ghAsIlAlajI
mahArAja Adi vidvAn muniyoM ne AgamoM kI sundara vyAkhyAe~ va TIkAe~ likhakara
athavA apane tattvAvadhAna meM likhavAkara isa kamI ko pUrA kiyA hai| vartamAna
meM terApaMtha sampradAya ke AcArya zrI tulasI ne bhI yaha bhagIratha prayatna
prArabhbha kiyA hai aura acche stara se unakA AgamakArya cala rahA hai| muni zrI
kanhaiyAlAlajI 'kamala' AgamoM kI vaktavyatA ko anuyogoM meM vargIkRta karane kA
maulika evaM mahattvapUrNa prayAsa kara rahe haiN| zvetAmbara mUrtipUjaka
paramparA ke vidvAn zramaNa sva. muni zrI puNyavijaya jI ne AgamasampAdana kI
dizA meM bahuta hI vyavasthita va uttama koTi kA kArya prArambha kiyA thaa|
unake svargavAsa ke pazcAt muni zrI jambUvijaya jI ke tattvAvadhAna meM yaha
sandara prayatna cala rahA hai| [10]

Page #14 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
After a comprehensive overview of all the aforementioned works, a resolve arose
in my mind. Today, somewhere the essence of the Agamas is being merely
published, and somewhere extensive interpretations of the Agamas are being made.
One is incomprehensible to the reader, while the other is complex. There should
be an effort to unveil the essence of the Agamvaani by following the middle
path, which is both easy to understand, simple, concise, yet comprehensive.
Gurudev desired the same. Keeping that sentiment in mind, I began contemplating
this subject 4-5 years ago. After long contemplation, on the 10th day of the
bright fortnight of Vaishakh, Vikram Samvat 2036, the day of Mahavir's
liberation, I made a firm decision and began the work of editing and reviewing
the Agambattisi, and now I am extremely happy that the Agam texts are in the
hands of the readers. This historic work of Agam editing has been organized in
the auspicious memory of our revered Gurudev. Today, the remembrance of his
virtues is filling my heart with joy. At the same time, the inspirations of my
venerable Guru-brother, revered Swami Shri Hazarimallji Maharaj, his devotion to
the Agamas, and his profound knowledge of the Agamas, along with ancient
beliefs, have been my support. Therefore, I am overwhelmed with the auspicious
memory of both these celestial souls. The guidance of Shasansevi Swami Shri
Brajlallji Maharaj, the encouragement of his enthusiasm, the companionship and
strength of the service-oriented Shishyamuni Vinaykumar and Mahendra Muni, their
service and cooperation, and the humble inspirations of Mahasati Shri
Kanakunvarji, Mahasati Shri Jhankarkunvarji, and the highly learned Sadhvi Shri
Umravkunvarji 'Archana' have always been instrumental in keeping me motivated
and dedicated to my work. I have firm faith that I will continue to receive full
cooperation from all my collaborators, listeners, and scholars in completing
this long and arduous task of editing the Agamvaani, and I will remain dynamic
in achieving my goal. With this hope... - Muni Mishrimal 'Madhukar' (From the
first edition) [11]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 ukta sabhI kAryoM kA vihaMgama-avalokana karane ke bAda mere mana meM eka
saMkalpa utthaa| Aja kahIM to AgamoM kA mUla mAtra prakAzita ho rahA hai aura
kahIM AgamoM kI vizAla vyAkhyAe~ kI jA rahI haiN| eka, pAThaka ke lie durbodha
hai to dUsarI jttil| madhyama mArga kA anusaraNa kara AgamavANI kA bhAvodghATana
karane vAlA aisA prayatna honA cAhie jo subodha bhI ho, sarala bhI ho, saMkSipta
ho, para sArapUrNa ho| gurudeva aisA hI cAhate the| usI bhAvanA ko lakSya meM
rakhakara maiMne 4-5 varSa pUrva isa viSaya meM cintana prArambha kiyaa|
sudIrgha cintana ke pazcAt vi.saM. 2036 vaizAkha zukla 10 mahAvIra
kaivalyadivasa ko dRr3ha nirNaya karake AgamabattIsI kA sampAdana vivecana kArya
prArambha kara diyA aura aba pAThakoM ke hAthoM meM Agama grantha kramaza: haiM,
isakI mujhe atyanta prasannatA hai| Agama sampAdana kA yaha aitihAsika kArya
pUjya gurudeva kI puNya-smRti meM Ayojita kiyA gayA hai| Aja unakA puNyasmaraNa
mere mana ko ullasita kara rahA hai| sAtha hI mere vandanIya gurubhrAtA pUjya
svAmI zrI hajArImala jI mahArAja kI preraNAe~, unakI Agamabhakti tathA Agama
sambandhI talasparzI jJAna, prAcIna dhAraNAe~ merA sambala banI haiN| ataH maiM
una donoM svargIya AtmAoM kI puNyasmRti meM vibhora huuN| zAsanasevI svAmIjI zrI
brajalAlajI mahArAja kA mArgadarzana, utsAhasaMvarddhana, sevAbhAvI ziSyamuni
vinayakumAra va mahendra muni kA sAhacarya-bala, sevAsahayoga tathA mahAsatI zrI
kAnakuMvarajI, mahAsatI zrI jhaMkArakuMvarajI, paramaviduSI sAdhvI zrI
umarAvakuMvara jI 'arcanA' kI vinamra preraNAe~ mujhe sadA protsAhita tathA
kAryaniSTha banAye rakhane meM sahAyaka rahI haiN| mujhe dRr3ha vizvAsa hai ki
AgamavANI ke sampAdana kA yaha sudIrgha prayatnasAdhya kArya sampanna karane meM
mujhe sabhI sahayogiyoM, zrAvakoM va vidvAnoM kA pUrNa sahakAra milatA rahegA
aura maiM apane lakSya taka pahu~cane meM gatizIla banA rhuuNgaa| isI AzA ke
sAtha...... -muni mizrImala 'madhukara' (prathama saMskaraNa se) [11]

Page #15 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
President Vice President Secretary Treasurer Advisor Member Shri Agam Prakashan
Samiti, Baywar (Executive Committee) : : : : 00 : :: : Shri Sagarmalji Baitala
Shri Ratanchandji Modi Shri Dhanrajji Vinayakia Shri Bhanwarlalji Gothi Shri
Hukmichandji Parkh Shri Dulichandji Chordia Shri Jasrajji Parkh Shri G.
Sayermalji Chordia Shri Gyanchandji Vinayakia Shri Gyanrajji Mootha Shri
Prakashchandji Chopra Shri Janvarilalji Shishodia Shri R. Prasannachandji
Chordia Shri Manakchandji Sancheti Shri Tejarajji Bhandari Shri S. Sayermalji
Chordia Shri Mulchandji Surana Shri Motichandji Chordia Shri Amarchandji Modi
Shri Kishnalalji Baitala Shri Jatanrajji Mehta Shri Devrajji Chordia Shri
Gautamchandji Chordia Shri Sumermalji Medtiya Shri Asulalji Bohra Shri
Buddharajji Bafna Indore Baywar Baywar Madras Jodhpur Madras Durg Madras Baywar
Pali Baywar Baywar Madras Jodhpur Jodhpur Madras Nagaur Madras Baywar Madras
Medta City Madras Madras Jodhpur Jodhpur Baywar

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 adhyakSa kAryAdhyakSa upAdhyakSa mahAmantrI mantrI sahamantrI koSAdhyakSa
parAmarzadAtA sadasya zrI AgamaprakAzana samiti, byAvara (kAryakAriNI samiti : :
: : 00 : :: : zrI sAgaramalajI baitAlA zrI ratanacandajI modI zrI dhanarAjajI
vinAyakiyA zrI bhaMvaralAlajI goThI zrI hukmIcandajI pArakha zrI dulIcandajI
coraDiyA zrI jasarAjajI pArakha zrI jI. sAyaramalajI coraDiyA zrI jJAnacandajI
vinAyakiyA zrI jJAnarAjajI mUthA zrI prakAzacandajI caupar3A zrI jaMvarIlAlajI
zizodiyA zrI Ara. prasannacandajI coraDiyA zrI mANakacandajI saMcetI zrI
tejarAjajI bhaNDArI zrI esa. sAyaramalajI coraDiyA zrI mUlacandajI surANA zrI
motIcandajI coraDiyA zrI amaracandajI modI zrI kizanalAlajI baitAlA zrI
jatanarAjajI mehatA zrI devarAjajI coraDiyA zrI gautamacandajI coraDiyA zrI
sumeramalajI mer3atiyA zrI AsUlAlajI boharA zrI buddharAjajI bAphaNA indaura
byAvara byAvara madrAsa jodhapura madrAsa durga madrAsa byAvara pAlI byAvara
byAvara madrAsa jodhapura jodhapura madrAsa nAgaura madrAsa byAvara madrAsa
mer3atA siTI madrAsa madrAsa jodhapura jodhapura byAvara

Page #16 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Editorial (From the First Edition) Salutations unto the Supreme Benefactor, the
Supreme Soul, Mahavira, a hundred times over. By the mere remembrance of whom,
the bonds of countless births of the seeker soul are broken, who, by ending the
world of countless seeker souls, successfully made them luminous in the ultimate
light of infinite Siddhas, becoming the immortal boon of liberation, and at the
same time, for the sake of the Siddhi of other souls in the world, removed their
tangled sorrows, becoming the life-giving force of unparalleled glorious tales.
This Antagaddashaang Sutra, the eighth Anga Sutra in the Dvadashaangi, is the
one that makes this tradition-received boon palatable and pure.  **Naming**
**Antakrit** The name of this Anga is 'Antakrit + Dasha + Anga + Sutra', because
this text contains the life stories of those ninety great souls who, by means of
restraint-practice and austerity-practice, conquered the eight types of karmas
and attained liberation from transmigration through eighty-four lakh species of
beings, attaining the state of liberation in the final moments of their lives.
Thus, the first element of the name of this scripture is 'Antakrit', because it
gives prominence to the description of the life stories of those great souls who
ended the cycle of life and death.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 sampAdakIya (prathama saMskaraNa se) parama upakArI paramAtmA mahAvIra ko zata-
zata vndn| jinake pAvana smaraNamAtra se sAdhaka AtmA ke koTi koTi janma ke
bandhana TUTa gaye, jo anekoM sAdhaka AtmAoM ke saMsAra kA anta kara ananta
siddhAtmAoM kI paramArtha jyoti meM jyotirmaya banAne kA saphala prayAsa kara
mukti kA amara varadAna bana gaye aura sAtha hI saMsAra ke anya AtmAoM kI siddhi
hetu unakI ulajhana bharI vyathAoM ko dUra kara apUrva gaurava gAthAoM kA
prANadAna bana gye| paraMparA-prApta isa anudAna kA anupAna karavA ke pAvana
banAnevAlA yaha aMtagaDadazAMga sUtra dvAdazAMgI meM AThavAM aMga sUtra hai|
nAmakaraNa antakRt prastuta aMga kA nAma 'antakRt+dazA+aMga+sUtra hai, kyoMki
prastuta grantha meM una navvai mahApuruSoM kA jIvanavRtta saMgRhIta kiyA gayA
hai jinhoMne saMyama-sAdhanA evaM tapa-sAdhanA dvArA ATha prakAra ke karmoM para
vijaya prApta karake evaM caurAsI lAkha jIva-yoniyoM meM AvAgamana se mukti
pAkara jIvana ke antima kSaNoM meM mokSapada kI prApti kii| isa prakAra jIvana-
maraNa ke cakra kA anta kara dene vAle mahApuruSoM ke jIvanavRtta ke varNana ko
hI pradhAnatA dene ke kAraNa isa zAstra ke nAma kA prathama avayava 'antakRt'
hai|

Page #17 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Antakritdasangasutra: A Translation  **Dasha**  The second component of the
name, "Dasha," is a word with two established meanings in Jain culture:  (1)
"Dasha" refers to the journey from the state of worldly enjoyment (bhogavastha)
to the state of yoga (yogavastha), in other words, the continuous progress
towards purity.  In this sutra, every Antakrit sadhaka (practitioner)
continuously progresses towards purity. Therefore, this text primarily describes
the state of Antakrit sadhakas, hence the name "Antakrit Dasha."  (2) "Dasha"
also refers to an Agam (scripture) that contains ten studies (adhyayan). This
Agam has eight sections (varga). The first (adi), fourth, fifth (madhya), and
eighth sections (ant) each contain ten studies. Thus, due to the presence of ten
studies in the beginning, middle, and end, this Agam is also called "Antakrit
Dasha."  **Ang**  The teachings of the Tirthankaras (liberated souls) had two
aspects: word (shabda) and meaning (artha). The Tirthankaras' direct disciples
could only grasp the meaning aspect. Therefore, Agams are also called "Ang"
because they are the meaning aspect of the Tirthankaras' words. This text is
also the meaning aspect of Lord Mahavira's words, hence the third part of its
name is "Ang."  **Sutra**  All Jain Agams are considered "Sutra" because they
are concise in words but vast in meaning. Therefore, the fourth component of
this Agam's name is "Sutra."  Thus, the name "Antakritdasangasutra" is formed by
combining these four components.  The significance of its name becomes evident
through its study. While the glorious tales of those seeking liberation are
found in other scriptures, this scripture focuses solely on the lives of those
saints who ended the cycle of birth, aging, and death in this very life, or who
attained the state of Siddha, Buddha, and Mukta (liberated) by ending the eight
types of karma. This scripture describes the state of those who have ended the
cycle of worldly existence forever, hence the name "Antakrit-Dashao."  Reading,
reciting, and contemplating this scripture inspires every soul to strive for
liberation. Therefore, it is a scripture of ultimate welfare. The "Upasakadasha"
describes the ascetics who attain liberation after one lifetime, but this eighth
Ang, "Antakritdasha," describes the superior ascetics who attain liberation in
the same life. Therefore, it is a scripture of ultimate auspiciousness and holds
a significant place in the lives of people.  The "Antakritdasangasutra"
describes the state of those souls who attained liberation in their final breath
but could not demonstrate the objects they saw through their perfect knowledge
and perfect vision due to the remaining lifespan karma. Therefore, they are
called "Antakrit Kevali."

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dazA dazA nAmaka dUsarA avayava 'dazA' zabda hai| jaina saMskRti meM dazA zabda
ke do rUDha artha haiM (1) jIvana kI bhogAvasthA se yogAvasthA kI ora gamana
'dazA' kahalAtA hai, dUsare zabdoM meM zuddha avasthA kI ora nirantara pragati
hI 'dazA' hai| prastuta sUtra meM pratyeka antakRt sAdhaka nirantara
zuddhAvasthA kI ora gamana karatA hai, ata: isa grantha meM antakRt sAdhakoM kI
dazA ke varNana kI hI pradhAnatA hone se 'antakRt dazA' kahA gayA hai| (2) jisa
Agama meM daza adhyayana hoM usa Agama ko bhI 'dazA' kahA jAtA hai| prastuta
Agama meM ATha varga haiN| inameM se prathama (Adi), caturtha, paMcama (madhya)
aura AThaveM varga (anta) meM dasa-dasa adhyayana haiN| isa prakAra Adi, madhya
aura anta meM dasa-dasa adhyayana hone ke kAraNa bhI prastuta Agama ko 'antakRt
dazA' nAma diyA gayA hai| aMga tIrthaGkaroM ne jo upadeza die haiM unake do aMga
the-zabda aura arth| tIrthaMkaroM ke paTTaziSya una do aMgoM meM se eka aMga
artha ko hI grahaNa kara pAte haiM, ata: bhagavAn kI vANI kA aMga hone se AgamoM
ko aMga bhI kahA jAtA hai| prastuta grantha bhI bhagavAn mahAvIra kI vANI kA
arthataH aMga hai, ataH isake nAma kA tIsarA bhAga 'aMga' hai| sUtra kyoMki
samasta jainAgama zabda kI apekSA alpa aura artha kI apekSA vizAla haiM, ataH
samasta AgamoM ko sUtra kahA gayA hai| isIliye prastuta Agama ke nAmakaraNa kA
cauthA avayava 'sUtra' ke rUpa meM rakhA gayA hai| isa prakAra cAra avayavoM ko
milAkara prastuta zAstra kA nAmakaraNa 'antakRddazAMgasUtra' kiyA gayA hai|
isake nAma kI sArthakatA svayaM isake adhyayana se vidita ho jAtI hai| yadyapi
mokSagAmI puruSoM kI gaurava gAthA to anya zAstroM meM bhI prApta hotI hai, para
isa zAstra meM kevala unhIM saMta satiyoM ke jIvana-paricaya haiM jinhoMne isI
bhava se janma-jarA-maraNa rUpa bhavacakra kA aMta kara diyA athavA aSTa vidha
karmoM kA anta kara jo siddha-buddha-mukta ho ge| sadA ke lie saMsAralIlA kA
anta karane vAle 'aMtagaDa' jIvoM kI sAdhanA-dazA kA varNana karane se hI isakA
'aMtagaDa-dasAo' nAma rakkhA gayA hai| isake paThana, pAThana aura manana se
hara bhavya jIva ko antakriyA kI preraNA milatI hai, ataH yaha parama
kalyANakArI grantha hai| upAsakadazA meM eka bhava se mokSa jAne vAle
zramaNopAsakoM kA varNana hai, kintu isa AThaveM aMga 'antakRtdazA' meM usI
janma meM siddhagati prApta karane vAle uttama zramaNoM kA varNana hai| ataH
parama-maMgalamaya hai aura isIliye lokajIvana meM isakA mahattvapUrNa sthAna
hai| antakRddazAMgasUtra meM isa prakAra ke bhavya jIvoM kI dazA kA varNana kiyA
gayA hai jo antima zvAsocchvAsa meM nirvANa-pada prApta kara sake haiM, kintu
AyuSya-karma ke zeSa na hone se kevalajJAna aura kevala-darzana se dekhe hue
padArthoM ko pradarzita nahIM kara sake, isI kAraNa se unheM 'antakRt kevalI'
kahA gayA hai| [14]

Page #18 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Introduction  The *Samvayanga* mentions ten studies and seven sections in
this *agama*. The *Nandi Sutra* mentions eight sections but not ten studies.
Acharya Abhaydeva, in his commentary on the *Samvayanga*, attempts to reconcile
the statements of both *agamas* by writing that the first section contains ten
studies. From this perspective, the *Samvayanga Sutra* mentions ten studies and
seven sections from the perspective of other sections. The *Nandi Sutra* does
not mention studies, only eight sections. But how can this reconciliation be
maintained until the end? Because the *Samvayanga* mentions ten *Antakrid Dasha*
education periods (objective periods), while the *Nandi Sutra* mentions eight.
In the commentary on the *Samvayanga*, Acharya Abhaydeva writes that we do not
know the meaning of the difference in objective periods.  Acharya Jinasagar
Mahत्तर in the *Nandi Churni* and Acharya Haribhadra in the *Nandi Vritti* have
written that the name of this *agama* is *Antagaddasa* because the first section
has ten studies. In the *Churni*, *dasha* also means state. The *Samvayanga*
instructs ten studies but does not mention their names. For example, Nami,
Matanga, Somil, Ramgupta, Sudarshan, Jamali, Bhogali, Kinkash, Chilvak, and Fal
Anvadpatra.  In the *Tattvarth Sutra Rajavartika* and the *Angapannatti*, ten
names are found with some variations in the text. For example, Nami, Matanga,
Somil, Ramgupta, Sudarshan, Yamalok, Valik, Kambla, Pal, and Ambashthputra. It
is written that this *agama* describes the ten *Antakrid Kevalis* who occurred
during the time of each Tirthankara.  The *Jayadhwala* also supports this. The
*Nandi Sutra* does not mention ten studies nor their names. The names mentioned
in the *Samvayanga* and *Tattvarthavartika* are the current *Antakrid Dasha*.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paricaya samavAyAMga meM isa Agama ke dasa adhyayana aura sAta varga kahe haiN|
nandIsUtra meM ATha vargoM kA ullekha hai kintu daza adhyayanoM kA ullekha nahIM
hai| AcArya abhayadeva ne samavAyAMgavRtti meM donoM AgamoM ke kathana meM
sAmaMjasya biThAne kA prayAsa karate hue likhA hai ki prathama varga meM daza
adhyayana haiN| isa dRSTi se samavAyAMga sUtra meM daza adhyayana aura anya
vargoM kI dRSTi se sAta varga kahe haiN| nandIsUtra meM adhyayanoM kA ullekha
nahIM kiyA hai, kevala ATha varga batalAye haiN| parantu isa sAmaMjasya kA anta
taka nirvAha kisa prakAra ho sakatA hai? kyoMki samavAyAMga meM antakRddazA ke
zikSAkAla (uddezanakAla) daza kahe gaye haiM, jabaki nandIsUtra meM unakI
saMkhyA ATha batAI gaI hai| samavAyAMga kI vRtti meM AcArya abhayadeva ne likhA
hai ki uddezanakAloM ke antara kA abhiprAya hameM jJAta nahIM hai| AcArya
jinadAsagaNI mahattara ne naMdIcUrNi meM" aura AcArya haribhadra ne naMdivRtti
meM likhA hai ki prathama varga ke daza adhyayana hone se prastuta Agama kA nAma
aMtagaDadasAo hai| cUrNi meM dazA kA artha avasthA bhI kiyA hai| samavAyAMga meM
daza adhyayanoM kA nirdeza hai kintu unake nAma kA nirdeza nahIM hai| jaise
nami, mAtaMga, somila, rAmagupta, sudarzana, jamAli, bhagAlI, kiMkaSa, cilvakka
aura phAla aNvddptr| 8 tattvArthasatra ke rAjavArtika meM evaM aMgapaNNattI meM
kucha pAThabheda ke sAtha daza nAma prApta hote haiN| jaise nami, mAtaMga,
somila, rAmagapta, sudarzana, yamaloka, valIka, kaMbala, pAla aura aNbsstthputr|
usameM likhA hai ki prastuta Agama meM pratyeka tIrthaMkaroM ke samaya meM hone
vAle daza-daza antakRta kevaliyoM kA varNana hai|10 jayadhavalA meM bhI isa bAta
kA samarthana kiyA hai|11 naMdIsUtra meM na to daza adhyayanoM kA ullekha hai
aura na unake nAmoM kA hI nirdeza hai| samavAyAMga aura tattvArthavArtika meM
jina nAmoM kA nirdeza huA hai vaha vartamAna antakRddazAMga 1. dasa ajjhayaNA
satta vggaa|-smvaayaaNg prakIrNaka, samavAya sUtra 96. 2. aTTha vaggA-naMdIsUtra
88. dasa ajjhayaNa tti prathamavargApekSayaiva ghaTante, nandyAM tathaiva
vyAkhyAtatvAt yacceha paThyate 'satta vagga' tti tat
prathamavargAdanyavargApekSayA yato'pyaSTa vargAH, nandyAmapi tathA paThitatvAt
-samavAyAMgavRtti patra 112. 4. tatto bhaNitaM-aTTha uddesaNakAlA ityAdi, iha ca
daza uddezanakAlA adhIyante iti naasyaabhipraaymvgcchaamH| -samavAyAMgavRtti,
patra 112. paDhamavagge daza ajjhayaNa tti tassakkhato aMtagaDadasa tti-
naMdisUtra cUrNisahita pR. 68. prathamavarge dazAdhyayanAni iti tatsaMkhyayA
antakRddazA iti -naMdisatravRttisahita, pa. 83. dasatti-avasthA-naMdIsUtra,
cUrNisahita pR. 68. 8. ThANaM, 10/113 9. tattvArthavArtika 1/20, pR. 73 /  10.
(ka) ........ ityete daza vardhamAnatIrthakaratIrthe, evamRSabhAdInAM
trayoviMzatestIrtheSvanye'nye ca daza dazAnagArA daza daza
dAruNAnupasargAnnirjitya kRtsnakarmakSayAdantakRtaH daza asyAM varNyante iti
antkRddshaa| -tattvArthavArtika 1/20, pR. 73. (kha) aMgapaNNattI, 51. 11.
aMtayaDadasA NAma aMgaM cauvvihovasagge dAruNe sahiUNa pADiheraM lakSNa NivvANaM
gade sudaMsaNAdi dasa-dasa sAhU titthaM pddivnnnnedi| -kasAyapAhuDa, bhA. 1, pR.
130. [15]

Page #19 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
It is not there. The Nandi Sutra describes the form of the present available
Agama. At this time, there are eight sections in the Antakrid Dasanga and ten
studies in the first section. But their names are different from the Stananga,
Rajavarttika and Angapannatti. For example, Gautam, Samudra, Sagar, Gambhir,
Stimit, Achal, Kampilya, Akshobha, Prasenajit and Vishnu. Acharya Abhaydev has
written this as a variant reading in the Stanangavritti. This shows that it is
different from the reading mentioned in the Samavayanga. The present Agama has
one Shruta Skandha, eight sections, 90 studies, 8 Uddeshanakalas,
Samuddeshanakalas and finite readings. It contains Anuyogadwar, Vedha, Shlokas,
Niruktis, Sangrahanis and Prathipattis in number. It has been stated that there
are thousands of words and letters in it. The present Anga is 900 shlokas in
quantity. It has eight sections and one Shruta Skandha. Each section has
separate studies, such as - 1 The first and second sections have ten studies
each, the third section has thirteen studies, the fourth and fifth sections also
have ten studies each, the sixth section has sixteen studies, the seventh
section has thirteen studies and the eighth section has ten studies, but in the
introduction of each study, this subject is explained that 'the meaning of such
and such study has been described by Shri Shraman Bhagwan Mahavira Swami in this
way, then what is the meaning of this study?' In this way, in the solution of
this doubt, Shri Sudharmaswami starts describing the meaning of the present
study in relation to Shri Jambuswami, therefore, this scripture is completely
acceptable because it is written by the omniscient. Although the Antakrid
Dasanga Sutra gives a glimpse of the brief life stories of the beings who lived
in the time of Bhagwan Arishtanemi and Bhagwan Mahavira Swami, the life stories
of the Antakrit Kevalis who lived in the reign of other Tirthankaras should also
be known in the same way. Because the Dvadasangi Vani is Paurusheya in words and
Apaurusheya in meaning. This scripture is a guide to the path of liberation for
the noble beings, therefore, every study of it is worth pondering. Although due
to the defect of time, the present scripture has become slightly less in the
number of shlokas and the number of words, yet each word of it is indicative of
many meanings, this subject can only be understood through experience, its study
done according to the rules will definitely be a guide to the path of Nirvana. 6
This is the eighth Anga of the reading of Ganadhar Shri Sudharmaswami. A glimpse
of the brief life stories of some beings has been given in it for the
understanding of the noble beings. Language of the present Agama Magadhi was the
language of the Magadh country, to give it a literary form, some special words
and provincial dialects were also mixed in it, therefore, the Agama language
came to be called Ardhamagadi. The Agamakaras say that Ardhamagadi is the
beloved language of Tirthankaras, Ganadharas and Devas, why not? The popularity
of the vernacular language is universally accepted. The use of the vernacular
language is also essential for the welfare of the people. The language of the
present Agama is also Ardhamagadi. Style The present Agama has been composed in
a narrative style, this style is called 'Kathanyog' in ancient technical
terminology, in this style, the story is started with the terminology 'Tenam
Kalenam Tenam Samayenam' Therefore, we should consider it in relation to other
readings. Stanangavritti, letter 483. [ 16 ] 1. .

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 meM nahIM hai| naMdIsUtra meM vartamAna meM upalabdha prastuta Agama ke svarUpa
kA varNana hai| isa samaya antakRtaddazAMga meM ATha varga haiM aura prathama
varga ke daza adhyayana haiN| kintu inake nAma sthAnAMga, rAjavArttika va
aMgapaNNattI se pRthak haiN| haiN| jaisegautama, samudra, sAgara, gaMbhIra,
stimita, acala, kAMpilya, akSobha, prasenajita aura viSNu  /  sthAnAMgavRtti meM
AcArya abhayadeva ne ise vAcanAntara likhA hai| isase yaha jJAta hotA hai ki
vaha samavAyAMga meM varNita vAcanA se pRthak haiN| prastuta Agama meM eka
zrutaskandha, ATha varga, 90 adhyayana, 8 uddezanakAla, samuddezanakAla aura
parimita vAcanAe~ haiN| isameM anuyogadvAra, veDhA, zloka, niryuktiyA~,
saMgrahaNiyA~ evaM pratipattiyA~ saMkhyAta saMkhyAta haiN| isameM pada saMkhyAta
aura akSara saMkhyAta hajAra batAye gaye haiN| vartamAna meM prastuta aMga 900
zlokaparimANa hai| isake ATha varga haiM aura eka hI zrutaskandha hai| pratyeka
varga ke pRthak pRthaka adhyayana haiM jaise ki - 1 pahale aura dUsare varga meM
dasa-dasa adhyayana rakhe gae haiM, tRtIya varga ke teraha adhyayana haiM,
caturtha aura paMcama varga ke bhI dasa-dasa adhyayana haiM, chaThe varga ke
solaha adhyayana haiM, sAtaveM varga ke teraha adhyayana aura AThaveM varga ke
dasa adhyayana haiM, kintu pratyeka adhyayana ke upodghAta meM isa viSaya ko
spaSTa kiyA gayA hai ki 'amuka adhyayana kA to artha zrI zramaNa bhagavAn
mahAvIra svAmI ne isa prakAra se varNana kiyA hai, to isa adhyayana kA kyA artha
batAyA hai?' isa prakAra kI zaMkA ke samAdhAna meM zrI sudharmAsvAmI zrI
jambUsvAmI ke prati prastuta adhyayana kA artha varNana karane laga jAte haiM,
ataH yaha zAstra sarvajJa-praNIta hone se sarvathA mAnya haiN| yadyapi
antakRdazAMga sUtra meM bhagavAn ariSTanemi aura bhagavAn mahAvIra svAmI ke hI
samaya meM honevAle jIvoM kI saMkSipta jIvanacaryA kA digdarzana karAyA gayA
hai, tathApi anya tIrthaMkaroM ke zAsana meM hone vAle antakRt kevaliyoM kI bhI
jIvana-caryA isI prakAra jAna lenI caahie| kAraNa ki dvAdazAMgIvANI zabda se
pauruSeya hai aura artha se apauruSeya hai| yaha zAstra bhavya prANiyoM ke liye
mokSa-patha kA pradarzaka hai, ataH isakA pratyeka adhyayana manana karane yogya
hai| yadyapi kAla doSa se prastuta zAstra zloka saMkhyA meM tathA pada saMkhyA
meM alpa sA raha gayA hai, tathApi isakA pratyeka pada aneka arthoM kA
pradarzaka hai, yaha viSaya anubhava se hI gamya ho sakegA, vidhipUrvaka kiyA
huA isakA adhyayana nirvANa patha kA avazya pradarzaka hogaa| 6 gaNadhara zrI
sudharmAsvAmIjI kI vAcanA kA yaha AThavAM aMga hai| bhavya jIvoM ke bodha ke
liye hI isameM katipaya jIvoM kI saMkSipta jIvana-caryA kA digdarzana karAyA
gayA hai| prastuta Agama kI bhASA mAgadhI magadha deza kI bolI thI, use
sAhityika rUpa dene ke liye usameM kucha vizeSa zabdoM kA evaM prAntIya boliyoM
kA mizraNa bhI ho gayA, ataH Agama-bhASA ko ardhamAgadhI kahA jAne lgaa|
AgamakAra kahate haiM ki ardhamAgadhI tIrthaMkaroM, gaNadharoM aura devoM kI
priya bhASA hai, ho bhI kyoM na ? loka bhASA kI sarvapriyatA sarvamAnya hI to
hai  /  lokopakAra ke liye lokabhASA kA prayoga anivArya bhI to hai  /  prastuta
Agama kI bhASA bhI ardhamAgadhI hai| zailI prastuta Agama kI racanA kathAtmaka
zailI meM kI gaI hai, isa zailI ko prAcIna pAribhASika zabdAvalI meM
'kathAnuyoga' kahA jAtA hai isa zailI meM 'teNaM kAleNaM teNaM samaeNaM' isa
zabdAvalI se kathA kA Arambha kiyA jAtA tato vacanAntarApekSANImAnIti
sambhAvayAmaH sthAnAMgavRtti, patra 483. [ 16 ] 1.  /

Page #20 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
I The *Jñatadharmakathā*, *Upāsakadashāṅga*, *Anuttaraupapātika*, *Vipākasūtra*
and *Antakṛddashāṅga* sūtras have been constructed in this same style in the
Āgamas. There are two forms of words in the Ardhamagadhi language -
*parivasati*, *parivasar*, *rāyavaṇṇato*, *rāyavaṇṇao*, *egabīsāte* *egabīsāe*.
In this Āgama, the style of adopting the vowel-ending form is mostly used. In
the Āgamas, the ancient style of expressing the remaining text by means of a dot
or a number at the end of a word, while adopting the style of abbreviation, is
prevalent. This style was adopted in the *Antakṛddashāṅga Sūtra* published by
the Āgamoday Samiti, but the *Antakṛddashāṅga Sūtra* published by the Shri
Amolakṛṣi Ji Maharaj Smārak Granthamālā has adopted the style of giving the full
text. This style is very convenient to read. Keeping this convenience in mind,
we have also had to adopt the style of presenting the original text in full. In
this sūtra, descriptions of many austerities are found in their respective
places. In the eighth chapter, the nature and methods of austerities are
discussed in detail. Many types of establishment instruments for these
austerities are found. We have tried to make all these establishment instruments
attractive by giving them an artistic form. The style of description of the
present text is very systematic. It mentions the city, garden, *caitya*,
*vyantarāyatana*, king, parents, *dharmacārya*, *dharmakathā*, prosperity in
this world and the next, acceptance of gifts, giving of gifts, renunciation of
enjoyments, *pravrajyā*, initiation period, study of scriptures, practice of
austerities, *sanlekhanā* and *anta-kriyā* of each practitioner. From the
introduction of the practitioner characters described in the *Antagaddasa*, it
is evident that in the reign of Śramaṇa Bhagavān Mahāvīra, people of different
castes and classes had equal rights in the practice of austerities. On the one
hand, where dozens of princes, princesses and *gāthāpati* were walking side by
side on the path of practice, on the other hand, some neglected people of the
lower castes were also coming to this field of practice with respect and
advancing equally. Even those who were very young, like the *ati-mukta* child
muni, and those who were considered to be the darlings of the royal palace, like
*gaja-sukumāra*, also came to this field and attained liberation. 1 From the
contemplation of the *Antagaddasa Sūtra*, it is known that by practicing the
*guṇaratnasamvatsar* austerity, like the 18 munis like Gautama, and the *bhikṣu-
pratimā*, the practitioner destroys his karma and attains liberation. Munis like
*anīkasenādi* attained liberation by destroying their karma through the
austerity of *bele-bele* while dwelling in the knowledge of the fourteen
*pūrvas*. *Arjunamālī* attained liberation by practicing the austerity of *bele-
bele* for only six months, with the predominance of *upasambhāva* - forgiveness.
On the other hand, *ati-mukta* kumāra attained liberation through the practice
of the *guṇaratna* austerity with knowledge, and *gaja-sukumāla* attained
liberation only by the power of pure meditation, without studying the scriptures
and without practicing austerities for a long time. This shows that meditation
is also a great austerity. Queens like *kālī* etc. practiced austerities with
restraint and attained liberation after a long time. Thus, some attained
liberation through ordinary austerities, some through severe austerities, some
through the predominance of forgiveness, and some others by throwing their karma
into the fire of self-meditation. *Antakṛt Kevalī*: A Bird's Eye View Study
There are thirteen studies in the third chapter of this scripture. Except for
*gaja-sukumāla*, all the other twelve studies have characters who are all
knowers of the fourteen *pūrvas* and have attained liberation. All the
characters in the fourth chapter are *dvādaśāṅgī* [१७]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 I hai AgamoM meM jJAtAdharmakathA, upAsakadazAMga, anuttaraupapAtika,
vipAkasUtra aura antakRdazAMga sUtra kA isI zailI meM nirmANa kiyA gayA hai|
ardhamAgadhI bhASA meM zabdoM ke do rUpa upalabdha hote haiM- parivasati,
parivasara, rAyavaNNato, rAyavaNNao, egabIsAte egbiisaae| isa Agama meM prAya:
svarAntarUpa grahaNa karane kI zailI ko apanAyA gayA hai| AgamoM meM prAyaH
saMkSiptIkaraNa kI zailI ko apanAte hue zabdAnta meM binduyojanA dvArA athavA
aMkayojanA dvArA avaziSTa pATha ko vyakta karane kI prAcIna zailI pracalita hai
/  Agamodaya samiti dvArA prakAzita 'antakRddazAMga sUtra' meM isI zailI ko
apanAyA gayA thA, kintu zrI amolakaRSijI mahArAja smAraka granthamAlA dvArA
prakAzita 'antakRdazAMga sUtra' meM pUrNapATha dene kI zailI ko svIkAra kiyA
gayA hai| isa zailI kI vAcanA meM atyanta suvidhA rahatI hai| isI suvidhA ko
lakSya meM rakhate hue mUla pATha ko pUrNarUpeNa nyasta karane kI zailI hameM
bhI apanAnI par3I hai| isa sUtra meM yathAsthAna aneka tapoM kA varNana prApta
hotA hai, aSTama varga meM vizeSa rUpa se tapoM ke svarUpa evaM paddhatiyoM kA
vistRta vivecana kiyA gayA hai| ina tapoM ke anekavidha sthApanAyantra prApta
hote haiN| hamane una samasta sthApanAyantroM ko kalAtmaka rUpa dekara AkarSaka
banAne kA prayAsa kiyA hai| prastuta grantha kI varNanazailI atyaMta vyavasthita
hai| isameM pratyeka sAdhaka ke nagara, udyAna, caitya- vyaMtarAyatana, rAjA,
mAtA-pitA, dharmAcArya, dharmakathA, ihaloka evaM paraloka kI Rddhi, pANigrahaNa
aura prItidAna, bhogoM kA parityAga, pravrajyA, dIkSAkAla, zrutagrahaNa,
tapopadhAna, saMlekhanA aura antakriyA kA ullekha kiyA gayA hai| 'antagaDadasA'
meM varNita sAdhaka pAtroM ke paricaya se prakaTa hotA hai ki zramaNa bhagavAn
mahAvIra ke zAsana meM vibhinna jAti evaM zreNI ke vyaktiyoM ko sAdhanA meM
samAna adhikAra prApta thaa| eka ora jahA~ bIsiyoM rAjaputra, rAjarAnI aura
gAthApati sAdhanApatha meM caraNa se caraNa milA kara cala rahe the, dUsarI ora
vahIM katipaya upekSita vargavAle kSudra jAtIya bhI sasammAna isa sAdhanAkSetra
meM Akara samAna rUpa se Age bar3ha rahe the vaya kI dRSTi se atimukta jaise
bAla muni aura gajasukumAra jaise rAjaprAsAda ke dulAre gine jAne vAle bhI isa
kSetra meM uttara kara siddhi prApta kara gye| 1 antagaDadasA sUtra ke manana se
jJAta hotA hai ki gautama Adi 18 muniyoM ke samAna 12 bhikSupratimA evaM
guNaratnasaMvatsara tapa kI sAdhanA se bhI sAdhaka karma kSaya kara mukti prApta
kara letA hai| anIkasenAdi muni 14 pUrva ke jJAna meM ramaNa karate hue sAmAnya
bele bele kI tapasyA se karma kSaya kara mukti ke adhikArI bana ge| arjunamAlI
ne upazamabhAva - kSamA kI pradhAnatA se kevala chaha mAsa bele bele kI tapasyA
kara siddhi prApta kara lii| dUsarI ora atimukta kumAra ko jJAna pUrvaka guNa
ratna tapa kI sAdhanA se siddhi milI aura gajasukumAla ne binA zAstra par3he
aura lambe samaya taka sAdhanA evaM tapasyA kie binA hI kevala eka zuddha dhyAna
ke bala se hI siddhi prApta kara lii| isase prakaTa hotA hai ki dhyAna bhI eka
bar3A tapa hai| kAlI Adi rAniyoM ne saMyama lekara kaThora sAdhanA kI aura lambe
samaya se siddhi milAI  /  isa prakAra koI sAmAnya tapa se, koI kaThora tapa se,
koI kSamA kI pradhAnatA se to koI anya kevala AtmadhyAna kI agni meM karmoM ko
jhoMka kara siddhi ke adhikArI bana gae  /  antakRt kevalI : eka vihaMgama dRSTi
adhyayana isa zAstra ke tIsare varga meM teraha adhyayana haiN| gajasukumAla ke
atirikta zeSa bAraha adhyayanoM meM jitane caritranAyaka haiM, ve saba caudaha
pUrvoM ke jJAnI hokara kaivalya ko pAnevAle hue haiN| cauthe varga ke sabhI
caritranAyaka dvAdazAMgI [17]

Page #21 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
They have become **Antakrit** after studying **Vani**. **Gajsukumal Anugar**
became **Antakrit** without studying any scripture. All the other eleven
**Angas** were studied by the rest. **Diksha** There was an **Atimukt Kumar**
with a long-term **Diksha** equivalent, who became **Antakrit** after observing
**Samyam** for a longer period than other characters. **Atimukt Kumar** is a
character who took **Pravrajya** before puberty. **Gajsukumal** is a character
who became **Antakrit** after **Karma-Kshaya** within hours of taking
**Pravrajya**. No other seeker has become **Antakrit** at such a young age.
**Arjun Anugar** received a six-month **Diksha** equivalent and a fifteen-day
**Santhara**. All other characters have a year-long **Diksha** equivalent and a
monthly **Santhara**. **Life** — Two characters were **Abal Brahmachari**, while
all other characters became **Antakrit** after renouncing worldly pleasures and
taking up **Yoga**. **Place** - Two kings became **Antakrit**, while all other
princes, crown princes, and queens became **Antakrit**. **Gajsukumal** and
**Arjun Anugar** had to endure **Parishha**, while other **Anugars** did not.
Except for **Arjun Anugar**, all other characters were born in royal families
and wealthy families and became **Antakrit**. One **Gajsukumal** attained
**Nirvana** in the cremation ground, while all other **Anugars** attained
**Nirvana** with **Santhara** on **Shatrunjaya** and **Vipulgiri**. 1 All
**Sadhviyas** became **Antakrit** in the **Upashraya**. **Male-Female** - The
fifth, seventh, and eighth studies contain the life stories of thirty-three
queens who became **Antakrit**. **Rule** — **Arishta Nemiji** Thirty-three
**Anugars** became **Antakrit Kevali** during the rule of **Arishta Nemiji**,
and sixteen **Anugars** became **Antakrit Kevali** during the rule of
**Mahavira**. Ten queens became **Antakrit** after taking **Diksha** during the
rule of **Arishta Nemiji**, and thirty-three queens became **Antakrit** after
taking **Diksha** during the rule of **Mahavira**. During the rule of **Arishta
Nemiji**, there was a **Sadhvi** named **Yakshini** who was a **Pravartini**,
and during the rule of **Mahavira**, **Arya Chandanbala** was a **Pravartini
Sadhvi**. [१८]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 vANI kA adhyayana karake antakRt hue haiN| gajasukumAla anagAra kisI bhI zAstra
kA adhyayana kie binA hI aMtakRt hue haiN| zeSa sabhI gyAraha aMgoM kA adhyayana
karake aMtakRt hue| dIkSA dIrghakAlika dIkSA paryAyavAle eka atimukta kumAra hue
haiM, jo ki anya caritranAyakoM kI apekSA adhika kAla taka saMyama pAla kara
aMtakRt hue haiN| atimukta kumAra eka aise caritranAyaka hue haiM, jinhoMne
yauvanakAla se pUrva hI pravrajyA grahaNa kara lii| gajasukumAla eka aise
caritranAyaka haiM jo pravrajyA - grahaNa ke anantara kucha ghaMToM meM hI
karma-kSaya kara aMtakRt hue haiN| anya koI bhI sAdhaka itanI svalpAyu meM
aMtakRt nahIM ho paayaa| chaha mAsa kI dIkSA paryAya aura paMdraha dinoM kA
saMthArA arjuna anagAra ko prApta huA, zeSa sabhI caritranAyaka varSoM kI dIkSA
paryAya aura mAsika saMdhArA vAle hue haiN| jIvana -- do caritranAyaka AbAla
brahmacArI hue haiM, zeSa sabhI caritranAyaka bhoga se nivRtti pAkara yogavRtti
grahaNa karake aMtakRt hue haiN| haiN| sthAna - do nareza antakRta hue haiM,
zeSa sabhI rAjakumAra yuvarAja tathA mahArAniyA~ antakRt hue haiN| gajasukumAla
aura arjuna anagAra ko parISaha sahane kA kAma par3A, anya anagAroM ko nhiiN|
eka arjuna anagAra ke atirikta zeSa sabhI caritra nAyaka rAjakula aura zreSThI
kula meM utpanna antakRt hue anagAroM meM eka gajasukumAla kA nirvANa zmazAna
bhUmi meM huA hai, zeSa sabhI anagAra zatruMjaya aura vipulagiri para saMthAre
ke sAtha nirvANa prApta karate haiN| 1 sabhI sAdhviyAM upAzraya meM hI antakRt
huiiN| nara-nArI - pAMcaveM, sAtaveM aura AThaveM adhyayana meM tetIsa
rAjarAniyoM ke jIvana caritra haiM, jo ki aMtakRt huI haiN| zAsana -- ariSTanemi
bhagavAn bhagavAn ke zAsana meM tetIsa anagAra antakRt kevalI hue aura mahAvIra
bhagavAn ke zAsana meM solaha anagAra antakRt kevalI hue| bhagavAn ariSTanemi ke
zAsana meM dasa mahArAniyA~ dIkSita hokara aMtakRt huI aura bhagavAn mahAvIra ke
zAsana meM tetIsa mahArAniyA~ dIkSita hokara aMtakRt huiiN| bhagavAn ariSTanemi
ke zAsana meM yakSiNI nAma kI sAdhvI pravartinI huIM aura bhagavAn mahAvIra ke
zAsana meM AryA candanabAlA pravartinI sAdhvI thiiN| [18]

Page #22 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Teachings  The study of this sutra can benefit seekers with many invaluable
teachings, which can make their lives ideal. For example:  1. Patience and firm
faith should be like that of Gaja Sukumala. Endurance should be like that of
Arjuna Mali. Lay people should emulate Sudarshan Shramanopasaka, whose spiritual
radiance even the gods could not bear. Faith in Dharma should be like that of
Krishna Vasudeva. The style of question and answer should be like that of Ati
Mukta Kumar. The spirit of renunciation should be like that of Krishna
Vasudeva's eight chief queens. Austerities should be like that of Maharaja
Shrenik's ten queens, which are described in detail in the eighth chapter.
Thus, this scripture is adorned with many teachings. The noble being who
embraces these teachings will have a meaningful human life and become an ideal
figure in society.  ## Acknowledgement  Although I was unable to fully edit this
scripture, I was able to contribute a little to this sacred ritual organized by
the young Acharya, Vidvadratna Muni Shri Madhukarji M.Sa. of the Shraman Sangh,
with the grace of the revered Gurudev Anuyogapravartka Shri Kanhaiyalalji
(Kamalamuniji) M.Sa., the blessings of the learned Manekkunvarji M.Sa., the
insistent inspiration of Pandit Shobhachandji Bharill, the scriptural assistance
of the supremely revered Agam Prabhakar Atmaramji M.Sa., and the complete
cooperation of Sadhvi Ba. Br. Mukti Prabhaji M.Sa., Ba. Br. Darshan Prabhaji
M.Sa., and Ba. Br. Anupamaji.  Therefore, I, who have become holy through the
great grace, feeling, and inspiration of all these great beings and noble souls,
take leave with the request for the purifying state that will end the world for
me and my dear readers, and I seek forgiveness from the Shruta Devatas and all
Shruta Dharas for any errors made due to carelessness, intellectual deficiency,
or ignorance.  Arhadvatsala Sadhvi Divyaprabha 1980 Jain Upashraya Jamnadas
Mehta Marg, Tinbatti Walkeshwar-6

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zikSAe~ isa sUtra ke adhyayana se mumukSujanoM ko aisI aneka amUlya zikSAoM kA
lAbha ho sakatA hai, jinake dvArA unakA jIvana Adarza rUpa ho jAtA hai| jaise1.
dhairya aura dRr3ha vizvAsa gajasukumAla kI taraha honA caahie| sahanazakti
arjunamAlI ke samAna honI caahie| zrAvaka logoM ko sudarzana zramaNopAsaka kA
anukaraNa karanA cAhie, jisakA Atmateja deva bhI sahana nahIM kara skaa|
dharmavizvAsa kRSNa vAsudeva kI bhAMti honA caahie| praznottara kI zailI
atimukta kumAra ke samAna honI caahie| tyAgavRtti kRSNa vAsudeva kI ATha
agramahiSiyoM kI bhAMti honI caahie| tapazcaryA mahArAjA zreNika kI dasa deviyoM
kI bhAMti honI cAhie, jo AThaveM varga meM savistAra varNita hai| isa prakAra
yaha zAstra aneka zikSAoM se alaMkRta ho rahA hai| jo bhavya prANI ukta zikSAoM
ko dhAraNa kara letA hai usakA manuSya-jIvana sArthaka aura janatA meM Adarza
rUpa bana jAtA hai| upakAra _ yadyapi isa zAstra ke samucita sampAdana meM maiM
asamartha thI tathApi pUjya gurudeva anuyogapravartaka zrI kanhaiyAlAlajI
(kamalamunijI) ma.sA. kI pAvana kRpA se, zAstravizArada mANekakuMvarajI ma.sA.
ke zubhAzISa se, paM. zobhAcandrajI bhArilla kI AgrahapUrita preraNA se, parama
pUjya Agama-prabhAkara AtmArAmajI ma.sA. kI zrutasahAyatA aura bhaginI sAdhvI
bA. bra. muktiprabhAjI ma.sA., bA.bra. darzanaprabhAjI ma.sA. aura bA.bra.
anupamAjI ke parama sahayoga se zramaNasaMgha ke yuvAcArya vidvadratna muni zrI
madhukarajI ma.sA. dvArA Ayojita isa pavitra anuSThAna meM kiMcit yogadAna
karane meM samartha ho gii| ataH ina sarva mahAvibhUtiyoM aura mahAnubhAvoM kI
mahatI kRpA, bhAvanA, preraNA se pAvana banI huI maiM mere aura priya pAThakoM
ke saMsAra kA aMta karanevAlI pAvanI dazA kI abhyarthanA ke sAtha virAma letI
hU~ aura pramAdavaza buddhidoSa yA ajJAnavaza huI truTiyoM hetu zrutadevatAoM kI
aura sarvazrutadharoM kI kSamA cAhatI huuN| arhadvatsalA sAdhvI divyaprabhA 1980
jaina upAzraya jamanAdAsa mehatA mArga, tInabattI vAlakezvara-6

Page #23 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The five great vows (Mahavratas) are: 1. **Ahimsa** (non-violence) 2. **Satya**
(truthfulness) 3. **Asteya** (non-stealing) 4. **Brahmacharya** (continence) 5.
**Aparigraha** (non-attachment)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================


Page #24 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Introduction (From the First Edition): Antakrid Dasha: A Study  When we delve
deep into the golden pages of history, it becomes clear that Indian philosophy
has flowed in two streams since prehistoric times, which we know as Brahman
culture and Shraman culture. Both these cultures originated in India. On this
sacred land, both cultures flourished. Both cultures co-existed, so it is
natural and spontaneous for the ideology of one culture to influence the other.
While there are many similarities in the fundamental ideologies of both
cultures, there are also differences. The source of the fundamental thinking of
Brahman culture is the 'Vedas'. The primary source of Jain tradition's thinking
is the 'Agam'. The Vedas are known as 'Shruti', while the Agam is known as
"Shruta"! The words Shruti and Shruta are very similar in meaning. Both are
related to "Shravan" (hearing). What is heard is Shruta. And the same noun form
of Shravan is Shruti. Simply hearing the word is not the desired meaning of
Shruti and Shruta. Its implied meaning is - what is real, what is evidence-
based, what carries the noble ideology of the well-being of all people, what is
spoken by the wise men, the omniscient, all-seeing, dispassionate great men,
that is Agam, Shruta, Shruti. The words of an ordinary person who is afflicted
by attachment and aversion do not fall into the category of Shruta and Shruti.
Acharya Vadideva, while defining Agam, wrote - "The meaning-perception that
arises from the words of the wise is Agam." a. Shruyate smeti Shrutam. b.
Shruyate atmana taditi Shrutam shabdah.
Aptvachanadaavibhrutamarthasanvedanamaagam. - Tattvarthrajavartika. -
Visheshaavashakabhaashya Maladhariyaavritti. - Pramananayatattvalok 4.1-2. 2.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prastAvanA (prathama saMskaraNa se) antakRddazA : eka adhyayana atIta ke
sunahare itihAsa ke pRSThoM kA jaba hama gaharAI se anuzIlana-parizIlana karate
haiM to yaha spaSTa parijJAta hotA hai ki prAgaitihAsika-kAla se hI bhAratIya
tattvacintana do dhArAoM meM pravAhita hai, jise hama brAhmaNasaMskRti aura
zramaNasaMskRti ke nAma se jAnate-pahacAnate haiN| donoM hI saMskRtiyoM kA
udgamasthala bhArata hI rahA hai| yahAM kI pAvanapuNya dharA para donoM hI
saMskRtiyAM phalatI aura phUlatI rahI haiN| donoM hI saMskRtiyAM sAtha meM rahIM
isaliye eka saMskRti kI vicAradhArA kA dUsarI saMskRti para prabhAva par3anA
svAbhAvika hai, sahaja hai| donoM hI saMskRtiyoM kI maulika vicAradhArAoM meM
aneka samAnatAeM hone para bhI donoM meM bhinnatAeM bhI haiN| brAhmaNasaMskRti
ke mUlabhUta cintana kA srota 'veda' hai| jaina paramparA ke cintana kA Adya
srota 'Agama' hai| veda 'zruti' ke nAma se vizruta hai to Agama "zruta" ke nAma
se! zruti aura zruta zabda meM artha kI dRSTi se atyadhika sAmya hai| donoM kA
sambandha "zravaNa" se hai| jo sunane meM AyA vaha zruta hai| aura vahI
bhAvavAcaka zravaNa zruti hai| kevala zabda zravaNa karanA hI zruti aura zruta
kA abhISTa artha nahIM hai| usakA tAtparyArtha hai-jo vAstavika ho, pramANabhUta
ho, jana-jana ke maMgala kI udAtta vicAradhArA ko liye hue ho, jo Apta puruSoM
va sarvajJa-sarvadarzI vItarAga mahApuruSoM ke dvArA kathita ho vaha Agama hai,
zruta hai, zruti hai| sAdhAraNa-vyakti jo rAga-dveSa se saMtrasta hai, usake
vacana zruta aura zruti kI koTi meM nahIM Ate haiN| AcArya vAdideva ne Agama kI
paribhASA karate hue likhA hai-Apta vacanoM se AvirbhUta hone vAlA artha-
saMvedana hI "Agama" ka. zrUyate smeti shrutm| kha. zrUyate AtmanA taditi zrutaM
shbdH| aaptvcnaadaavirbhuutmrthsNvednmaagmH| - tttvaarthraajvaartik|
-vizeSAvazyakabhASya mldhaariiyaavRtti| -pramANanayatattvAloka 4 / 1-2 /  2.

Page #25 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
In the Jain tradition, the scriptures spoken by the Arhats, composed by the
Ganadharas, Pratyekabuddhas, or Sthaviras are considered authoritative.
Therefore, the credit for the authorship of the Agam scriptures belongs to the
great sages. The Anga literature was initiated by the Tirthankaras themselves,
and the Ganadharas were the wise men who compiled the sutras. The basis for the
composition of the Anga-bahir literature are the Tirthankaras, and the compilers
are the Chaturdashapurvi, Dashapurvi, and Pratyekabuddha Acharyas. Acharya
Vattekar considered the sutras spoken by the Ganadharas, Pratyekabuddhas, and
Abhinna Dashapurvis as authoritative in the Mulachar.  From this perspective, we
arrive at the truth that the present available Anga-pravist literature was
initiated by Tirthankara Bhagwan Mahavira himself, and the author is his
disciple Ganadhara Sudharma. In the Anga-bahir literature, from the perspective
of authorship, many Agams were composed by Sthaviras, and many were derived or
quoted from the Dvadashaangas.  The Anga literature currently available is the
composition of Ganadhara Sudharma, who was a contemporary of Bhagwan Mahavira.
Therefore, the time of composition of the present Anga literature is confirmed
to be the 6th century BCE. The Anga-bahir literature is not the work of a single
person, therefore, they cannot have a single time period. Acharya Shayambhav
composed the Dashavaikalika Sutra, while the author of the Prajnapanasutra is
Shyamacharya. The author of the Cheda Sutras is Chaturdashapurvi Bhadrabahu,
while the author of the Nandi Sutra is Devavachaka. Some modern Western thinkers
consider the time of composition of the Jain Agams to be the time of
Devarddhigani Kshamasraman, who lived 980 or 993 years after Mahavira's Nirvana.
But this belief of theirs is not correct. Devarddhigani compiled the Agams, but
the Agams are ancient. Many knowledgeable scholars mix the time of writing with
the time of composition, and consider the time of writing of the Agams as the
time of composition of the Agams.  Earlier, the Shruta literature was not
written. Due to the prohibition of writing, it was being passed down orally. It
remained memorized for a long time, which naturally led to changes in the Shruta
verses. Devarddhigani Kshamasraman stopped the Shruta stream, which was flowing
rapidly towards decline, by putting it into writing. After that, with some
exceptions,

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 jaina paramparA meM arhat ke dvArA kathita, gaNadhara, pratyekabuddha yA
sthavira dvArA grathita vAGmaya ko pramANabhUta mAnA * hai| isalie Agama vAGmaya
ke kartRtva kA zreya mahanIya maharSiyoM ko hai  /  aGga sAhitya ke udgAtA
svayaM tIrthaMkara haiM aura sUtrabaddha racanA karane vAle prajJApuruSa
gaNadhara haiN| aMgabAhya sAhitya kI racanA ke mUla AdhAra tIrthaMkara haiM aura
sUtrita karane vAle haiM caturdazapUrvI, dazapUrvI aura pratyekabuddha AcArya  /
AcArya vaTTekara ne mUlAcAra meM gaNadharakathita, pratyekabuddhakathita aura
abhinnadazapUrvIkathita sUtroM ko pramANabhUta mAnA hai| isa dRSTi se hama isa
satya taka pahuMcate haiM ki vartamAna upalabdha aMgapraviSTa sAhitya ke udgAtA
svayaM tIrthaMkara bhagavAn mahAvIra haiM aura racayitA haiM unake anantara
ziSya gaNadhara sudharmA  /  aMgabAhya sAhitya meM kartRtva kI dRSTi se kitane
hI Agama sthaviroM ke dvArA racita haiM aura kitane hI Agama dvAdazAMgoM se
niryUr3ha yAnI uddhRta haiN| vartamAna meM jo aMgasAhitya upalabdha hai vaha
gaNadhara sudharmA kI racanA hai, jo bhagavAn mahAvIra ke samakAlIna haiN|
isaliye vartamAna aMga- sAhitya kA racanAkAla I. pU. chaTThI zatAbdI siddha hotA
hai  /  aMgabAhya sAhitya kI racanA eka vyakti kI nahIM hai, ataH una sabhI kA
eka kAla nahIM ho sktaa| dazavaikAlikasUtra kI racanA AcArya zayyaMbhava ne kI
hai to prajJApanAsUtra ke racayitA zyAmAcArya haiN| chedasUtroM ke racayitA
caturdazapUrvI bhadrabAhu haiM to nandIsUtra ke racayitA devavAcaka haiN|
Adhunika kucha pAzcAtya cintaka jaina AgamoM kA racanAkAla devarddhigaNi
kSamAzramaNa kA kAla mAnate haiM, jinakA samaya mahAvIra nirvANa ke pazcAt 980
athavA 993vA~ varSa hai| para unakA yaha mAnanA ucita nahIM hai| devarddhi gaNi
ne AgamoM ko lipibaddha kiyA thA, kintu Agama to prAcIna hI haiN| kitane hI
vijJagaNa lekhana - kAla ko aura racanA - kAla ko eka dUsare meM milA dete haiM
aura AgamoM ke lekhana kAla ko AgamoM kA racanA-kAla mAna baiThate haiN| pahale
zruta sAhitya likhA nahIM jAtA thaa| likhane kA niSedha hone se vaha kaNThastha
rUpa meM hI cala rahA thaa| cirakAla taka vaha kaNThastha rahA jisase
zrutavacanoM meM parivartana honA svAbhAvika thA  /  devarddhigaNi kSamAzramaNa
ne tIvra gati se hrAsa kI ora bahatI huyI zruta srotasvinI ko pustakArUr3ha kara
roka diyaa| usa ke pazcAt kucha apavAdoM 3. arhatproktaM gaNadharadRbdhaM
pratyekabuddhadRbdhaM ca  /  sthaviragrathitaM ca tathA pramANabhUtaM
tridhAsUtram  /  4. 5. 6. 7. droNasUri, oghaniryu. pR. 3. suttaM
gaNadharakathidaM, taheva patteyabuddhakathidaM ca  /  sudakevaliNA kathidaM
abhiNNadazapuvvikathidaM ca  //  mUlAcAra 5, 80. ka. dazavaikAlikasUtracUrNi -
pRSTha - 21. de kha. nizIthabhASya- 4004 ga. sUtrakRtAMga - zIlAMkAcArya vRtti
patra 336. dha. sthAnAMga, sabhayadeva vRtti prArambha  /  ka. valahipurammi
nayare, devadiDapamuheNa samaNasaMgheNa  /  putthai Agamu lihio navasaya asIAo
vIrAo  //  kha arthAt IsvI 453 matAntara se I. 466, eka prAcIna gAthA  /
kalpasUtra - devendra muni zAstrI, mahAvIra adhikAra  /  [22]

Page #26 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Except for the Shruta literature, there has been no change. The credit for the
preservation of the Agam literature currently available goes to Devarddhigani
Kshamasraman. It can be said with authority that the originality of the Agam
literature currently available is unquestionable. Although the text may have
been interpolated and changed in some places, it does not make any difference to
the authenticity of the Agams. Antakrddasha is the eighth Ang Sutra. This Ang
describes the specific holy-souled beings who end the cycle of birth and death,
and because it has ten studies, it is called Antakrddasha. The Samavayang Sutra
mentions the ten studies and seven categories of this Agam. Acharya Devavachka
has mentioned eight categories in the Nandi Sutra, but not ten studies. Acharya
Abhaydeva, in the Samavayang Vritti, has tried to reconcile the statements of
both the above Agams, writing that there are ten studies in the first category,
from this point of view, the Samavayang Sutra has mentioned ten studies and
seven categories in comparison to other categories. The Nandi Sutrakar has not
mentioned any studies, only eight categories. The question is, how can this
reconciliation be maintained until the end? Because the Samavayang itself
mentions ten education periods (Uddeśanakaal) for Antakrddasha, while the Nandi
Sutra mentions their number as eight. Acharya Abhaydeva himself has admitted
that we do not know the meaning of the difference in Uddeśanakaal. Acharya
Jindasgani Mahttar has written in the Nandi Churni and Acharya Haribhadra has
written in the Nandi Vritti that the name of this Agam is 'Antagadadsaao'
because it has ten studies in the first category. The Churnikar has interpreted
Dasha as Avस्था (state). It should be remembered that the Samavayang does
mention ten studies, but it does not indicate the names of those studies. The
Stanang mentions the names of the ten studies as follows: Nami, Matang, Somil,
Ramgupta, Sudarshan, Jamali, Bhogali, Kinksha, Chilvack, and Phal Ambadputra.
Acharya Akalank has given ten names in the Rajavartika and Acharya Shubhachandra
has given ten names in the Angpannatti with some variations in the text. They
are as follows: Nami, Matang, Somil, Ramgupta, Sudarshan, Yamalok, Valik,
Kambla, Pal, and Ambashtputra! It is also written in this that this Agam
describes the ten Antakrit Kevalis who occur in the time of each Tirthankara.
This statement has also been supported by Jayadhavalakar Virsen and Jayasen. In
the Nandi Sutra, 8. Samavayang Prakirnak Samavay 96. 9. Nandi Sutra 88. 10.
Samavayangvritti Patra 112. 11. Samavayangvritti Patra 112. 12. Nandi Sutra
Churnisahit Patra 68. 13. Nandi Sutra Vritti Sahit Patra 83. 14. Nandi Sutra
Churnisahit P. 68. 15. Stanang 10 | 113. 16. Tattvarthrajavartika 1 | 20 P. 73.
17. Angpannatti 51. 18. Kasayapahuḍ, Part 1, P. 130 [23]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 ko chor3akara zruta sAhitya meM parivartana nahIM huaa| vartamAna meM jo
AgamasAhitya upalabdha hai, usake saMrakSaNa kA zreya devarddhigaNi kSamAzramaNa
ko hai| yaha sAdhikAra kahA jA sakatA hai ki vartamAna meM upalabdha Agama-
sAhitya kI maulikatA asaMdigdha hai| kucha sthaloM para bhale hI pATha prakSipta
va parivartita hue hoM, kintu usase AgamoM kI prAmANikatA meM koI antara nahIM
AtA  /  antakRddazA yaha AThavAM aMga sUtra hai| prastuta aMga meM janma maraNa
kI paramparA kA anta karane vAle viziSTa pavitracaritrAtmAoM kA varNana hai aura
usake daza adhyayana hone se isakA nama antakRddazA hai| samavAyAMga sUtra meM
prastuta Agama ke daza adhyayana aura sAta varga batAye haiN|' AcArya devavAcaka
ne nandIsUtra meM ATha vargoM kA ullekha kiyA hai para daza adhyayanoM kA
nhiiN|" AcArya abhayadeva ne samavAyAMga vRtti meM donoM hI uparyukta AgamoM ke
kathana meM sAmaMjasya biThAne kA prayAsa karate hue likhA hai ki prathama varga
meM daza adhyayana haiM, isa dRSTi se samavAyAMga sUtra meM daza adhyayana aura
anya vargoM kI apekSA se sAta varga kahe haiM  /  nandIsUtrakAra ne adhyayanoM
kA koI ullekha na kara kevala ATha varga batAye haiM  /  10 para prazna yaha hai
ki prastuta sAmaMjasya kA nirvAha anta taka kisa prakAra ho sakatA hai? kyoMki
samavAyAMga meM hI antakRddazA ke zikSAkAla (uddezanakAla) daza kahe haiM jabaki
nandIsUtra meM unakI saMkhyA ATha batAI hai| AcArya abhayadeva ne svayaM yaha
svIkAra kiyA hai ki hameM uddezanakAloM ke antara kA abhiprAya jJAta nahIM hai
/  11 AcArya jinadAsagaNI mahattara ne nandIcUrNi meM 12 aura AcArya haribhadra
ne nandIvRtti 13 meM likhA hai ki prathama varga ke daza adhyayana hone se isa
Agama kA nAma 'antagaDadasAo' hai| cUrNikAra ne dazA kA artha avasthA kiyA hai|
14 yaha smaraNa rakhanA hogA ki samavAyAMga meM daza adhyayanoM kA nirdeza to
hai para una adhyayanoM ke nAmoM kA saMketa nahIM hai| sthAnAGga meM daza
adhyayanoM ke nAma isa prakAra batAye haiM-nami, mAtaMga, somila, rAmagupta,
sudarzana, jamAli, bhagAlI, kiMkaSa, cilvakka, aura phAla aMbaDaputra  /  15
AcArya akalaMka ne rAjavArtika 16 meM aura AcArya zubhacandra ne aMgapaNNatti 17
grantha meM kucha pAThabheda ke sAtha daza nAma diye haiN| ve isa prakAra haiM-
nami, mAtaMga, somila, rAmagupta, sudarzana, yamaloka, valIka, kaMbala, pAla
aura aMbaSTaputra ! isameM yaha bhI likhA hai ki prastuta Agama meM hara eka
tIrthaMkaroM ke samaya meM hone vAle daza-daza antakRt kevaliyoM kA varNana hai
/  isa kathana kA samarthana jayadhavalAkAra vIrasena aura jayasena ne bhI kiyA
hai  /  18 nandIsUtra meM 8. samavAyAMga prakIrNaka samavAya 96. 9. nandI sUtra
88. 10. samavAyAMgavRtti patra 112. 11. samavAyAMgavRtti patra 112. 12.
nandIsUtra cUrNisahita patra 68. 13. nandIsUtra vRtti sahita patra 83. 14.
nandIsUtra cUrNisahita pR. 68. 15. sthAnAGga 10  /  113. 16.
tattvArtharAjavArtika 1  /  20 pR. 73. 17. aMgapaNNattI 51. 18. kasAyapAhuDa,
bhAga 1, pR. 130 [23]

Page #27 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
There is no mention of the ten studies nor their names. The studies whose names
are mentioned in Samavayanga and Tattvarthrajavartika are not available in the
present Antakriddasha. The Nandisutr has the same description as is available in
the present Antakriddasha. This proves that the present form of Antakriddasha is
from before the time of Acharya Devavachka. There are eight sections in the
present Antakriddasha and the first section has ten studies, but their names are
different from those mentioned in the Stananga, Tattvarthrajavartika and
Angapannatti. For example, Gautam, Samudra, Sagar, Gambhir, Stimit, Achal,
Kampilya, Akshobha, Prasenajit and Vishnu. Acharya Abhaydev has called this a
variant reading in the Stananga Vritti. This clearly shows that the present
Antakriddasha is different from the reading mentioned in Samavayanga. Many
scholars have also speculated that earlier this Agam would have had ten studies
like Upasakadasha, just as Upasakadasha describes ten Shraman Upasakas,
similarly this Agam would have also included stories of ten Arhats.
Antakriddasha has one Shrutaskandha, eight sections, 90 studies, eight
Uddeshanakalas, eight Samuddeshanakalas and finite readings. It includes
Anuyogadwar, Vedha, Shloka, Niyuktis, Sangrahanis and Pratipattis, which are
counted. It has gone through the stages. The present Agam has 900 shlokas and
eight sections. They have ten, eight, thirteen, ten, ten, sixteen, thirteen and
ten studies respectively.  The first two sections describe the excellent tapasya
of eighteen princes of the Vrishnikul, including Gautam. The first ten princes
have a dikshaparaya of twelve years each, while the remaining eight princes have
a dikshaparaya of sixteen years each. All these princes embrace Shramandharma
and perform the intense tapasya of Gunaratnasamvatsar and attain liberation by
performing a one-month sanlekhana at the end of their lives.  From the first to
the fifth section, there is a description of Shri Krishna Vasudev. Shri Krishna
Vasudev is highly revered in all three traditions: Jain, Buddhist and Vedic. In
the Vedic tradition, Vasudev, Vishnu, Narayan, Govind, etc. are some of his
names. Shri Krishna was the son of Vasudev, hence he was called Vasudev. In the
Shantiparva of Mahabharata, Krishna is described as the form of Vishnu. In the
Gita, Shri Krishna is the complete avatar of Vishnu. The author of Mahabharata
has praised him by considering him Narayan. There, we see his divine and
magnificent human form. In Shatapatha Brahmana, his name Narayan is mentioned.
In Taittiriyaranyaka, he is called the possessor of all virtues. In the
Narayaniy Upadhyayana of Mahabharata, Narayan is given the form of the Supreme
Lord. Markandeya told Yudhisthira that Janardan himself is Narayan. In many
places in Mahabharata, there are references to his Narayan form.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 na to daza adhyayanoM kA ullekha hai aura na unake nAmoM kA hI nirdeza hai|
samavAyAMga aura tattvArtharAjavArtika meM jina adhyayanoM ke nAmoM kA nirdeza
hai ve adhyayana vartamAna meM upalabdha antakRddazAMga meM nahIM hai|
nandIsUtra meM vahI varNana hai jo vartamAna meM aMtakRddazA meM upalabdha hai|
isase yaha siddha hai ki vartamAna meM antakRddazA kA jo rUpa prApta hai vaha
AcArya devavAcaka ke samaya se pUrva kA hai| vartamAna meM antakRddazA meM ATha
varga haiM aura prathama varga ke daza adhyayana haiM kintu jo nAma sthAnAGga
tattvArtharAjavArtika va aMgapaNNatti meM Aye haiM unase pRthak haiN| jaise
gautama, samudra, sAgara, gaMbhIra, stimita, acala, kAMpilya, akSobha,
prasenajita aura viSNu  /  AcArya abhayadeva ne sthAnAGga vRtti meM ise
vAcanAntara kahA hai| isase yaha spaSTa parijJAta hotA hai ki vartamAna meM
upalabdha antakRddazA samavAyAMga meM varNita vAcanA se alaga hai| kitane hI
vijJoM ne yaha bhI kalpanA kI hai ki pahale isa Agama meM upAsakadazA kI taraha
daza hI adhyayana hoMge, jisa taraha upAsakadazA meM daza zramaNopAsakoM kA
varNana hai isI taraha prastuta Agama meM bhI daza arhatoM kI kathAeM AI hoNgii|
antakRddazA meM eka zrutaskandha, ATha varga, 90 adhyayana, ATha uddezanakAla,
ATha samuddezanakAla aura parimita vAcanAeM haiN| isameM anuyogadvAra, veDhA,
zloka, niyuktiyAM, saMgrahaNiyAM evaM pratipattiyAM saMkhyAta, saMkhyAta haiN|
isameM pada gaye haiN| vartamAna meM upalabdha prastuta Agama meM 900 zloka
haiM, ATha varga haiN| unameM kramazaH daza, ATha, teraha, daza, daza, solaha,
teraha aura daza adhyayana haiN| prathama do vargoM meM gautama Adi vRSNikula ke
aThAraha rAjakumAroM kI tapomaya sAdhanA kA utkRSTa varNana hai| unameM prathama
daza rAjakumAroM kI dIkSAparyAya bAraha-bAraha varSa kI hai, avazeSa ATha
rAjakumAroM kI dIkSAparyAya solahasolaha varSa pratipAdita kI gaI hai| ye sabhI
rAjakumAra zramaNadharma grahaNa kara guNaratnasaMvatsara jaise ugra tapa kI
ArAdhanA karate haiM aura jIvana kI sAdhyavelA meM eka mAsa kI saMlekhanA kara
mukti ko varaNa karate haiN| prathama varga se lekara pAMcaveM varga taka meM
zrIkRSNa vAsudeva kA varNana AyA hai| zrIkRSNa vAsudeva jaina, bauddha aura
vaidika tInoM hI paramparAoM meM atyadhika carcita rahe haiN| vaidika-paramparA
ke granthoM meM vAsudeva, viSNu, nArAyaNa, govinda prabhRti unake aneka nAma
pracalita haiN| zrIkRSNa vasudeva ke putra the| isaliye ve vAsudeva khlaaye|
mahAbhArata zAntiparva meM kRSNa ko viSNu kA rUpa batAyA hai,20 gItA meM
zrIkRSNa viSNu ke pUrNa avatAra haiN|21 mahAbhAratakAra ne unheM. nArAyaNa
mAnakara stuti kI hai| vahAM unake divya aura bhavya mAnavIya svarUpa ke darzana
hote haiN|22 zatapatha brAhmaNa meM unake nArAyaNa nAma kA ullekha huA hai  / 23
taittirIyAraNyaka meM unheM sarvaguNasampanna kahA hai|24 mahAbhArata ke
nArAyaNIya upAkhyAna meM nArAyaNa ko sarvezvara kA rUpa diyA hai| mArkaNDeya ne
yudhiSThira ko yaha batAyA hai ki jarnAdana hI svayaM nArAyaNa haiN| mahAbhArata
meM aneka sthaloM para unake nArAyaNa rUpa kA nirdeza haiN|25 padmapurANa,
vAyupurANa, vAmanapurANa, 19. tato vAcanAntarApekSANImAnIti smbhaavyaamH|
-sthAnAGgavRtti patra 486. 20. mahAbhArata-zAntiparva, a. 48. 21.
shriimdbhgvdgiitaa| 22. mahAbhArata-anuzAsana parva, 147/19-20 23.
zatapathabrAhmaNa, 13 /  3 /  4  /  /  24. taittirIyAraNyaka, 10 /  11 25.
mahAbhArata-vanaparva 16-47, udyoga parva 49 1. [24]

Page #28 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The character of Shri Krishna is described in detail in the Kurma Purana, Brahma
Vaivarta Purana, Harivamsa Purana and Shrimad Bhagavata. The Chandogya Upanishad
refers to Krishna as the son of Devaki. He studied near the great Angiras Rishi.
Shrimad Bhagavata describes Krishna as the Supreme Brahman. He is unique in six
qualities: knowledge, peace, strength, wealth, power and brilliance. His life in
various forms has been depicted in literature. The Acharyas of the Vedic
tradition have portrayed the character of Shri Krishna from their perspective.
Jayadeva, Vidyapati, etc., embraced the loving form of Krishna and gave rise to
Krishna Bhakti. Poets like Surdas and others of the Ashtachap group analyzed
Krishna's childhood and youth in detail. The deities of the Ritikal poets were
Shri Krishna, and they created a considerable amount of literature in the form
of songs and free verses. Even in the modern era, scholars of the Vedic
tradition have written many books like Priy-Pravas, Krishnavatar, etc. The
Ghatajataka in Buddhist literature describes the character of Shri Krishna.
Although there are significant differences in the sequence of events and names,
the essence of the Krishna story is similar. In the Jain tradition, Shri Krishna
is Vasudeva, a perfect being, noble, virtuous, extremely compassionate, loving
to the surrendered, bold, courageous, humble, devoted to his mother, a great
warrior, righteous, dutiful, intelligent, ethical and brilliant. The description
of his brilliant personality in the Samavayanga is amazing. He is the ruler of
the three worlds, the Ardhachakra. His body had one hundred and eight auspicious
marks. He was like a bull among men and like Indra, the king of the gods. He was
a great warrior. He fought three hundred and sixty battles in his life, but he
was never defeated. He had the strength of twenty lakh Ashtapadas. But he never
misused his power. Unlike the Vedic tradition, the Jain tradition does not
consider Vasudeva Shri Krishna to be a part of God or an avatar. He was the best
ruler. From a material perspective, he was the greatest ruler of that era. But
because he was Nidankrit, he could not progress beyond the fourth Gunasthan from
a spiritual perspective. He was a devout follower of the Tirthankara
Arishtanemi. Arishtanemi was older than Shri Krishna in terms of age, but older
than him in terms of spirituality. (One was a Dharmaveer, the other a Karmaveer,
one was inclined towards renunciation, the other towards action). Therefore,
whenever Arishtanemi visited Dwarka, Shri Krishna would go to worship him. His
glorious and brilliant form is revealed in the Agamas like Antakrid Dasha,
Samavayanga, Jnatadharmakatha, Stananga, Nirayavali, Prashnavyakaran,
Uttaradhyayana, etc. There are many incidents related to his life in the
commentary literature of the Agamas, in the Niyukti, Churni, Bhashya and Tika
texts. The leading thinkers of both the Shwetambar and Digambar traditions have
written more than a hundred books based on the incidents of Krishna's life. In
terms of language, these compositions are in Prakrit, Apabhramsha, Sanskrit, Old
Gujarati, Rajasthani and Hindi.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 kUrmapurANa, brahmavaivartapurANa, harivaMzapurANa aura zrImadbhAgavata meM
vistAra se zrIkRSNa kA caritra AyA hai| chAndogya upaniSad meM kRSNa ko devakI
kA putra kahA hai| ve ghora aGgirasa RSi26 ke nikaTa adhyayana karate haiN|
zrImadbhAgavata meM kRSNa ko paramabrahma batAyA hai|27 ve jJAna, zAnti, bala,
aizvarya, vIrya aura teja ina chaha guNoM meM viziSTa haiN| unake jIvana ke
vividha rUpoM kA citraNa sAhitya meM huA hai| vaidika paramparA ke AcAryoM ne
apanI dRSTi se zrI kRSNa ke caritra ko citrita kiyA hai| jayadeva vidyApati Adi
ne kRSNa ke premI rUpa ko grahaNa kara kRSNabhakti kA prAdurbhAva kiyaa|
sUradAsa Adi aSTachApa ke kaviyoM ne kRSNa kI bAla-lIlA aura yauvana-lIlA kA
vistAra se vizleSaNa kiyaa| rItikAla ke kaviyoM ke ArAdhya deva zrI kRSNa rahe
aura unhoMne gItikAeM va muktakoM ke rUpa meM paryApta sAhitya kA sRjana kiyaa|
Adhunika yuga meM bhI vaidika paramparA ke vijJoM ne priya-pravAsa, kRSNAvatAra
Adi aneka grantha likhe haiN|28 bauddha sAhitya ke ghaTajAtaka29 meM zrI kRSNa-
caritra kA varNana AyA hai| yadyapi ghaTanAkrama meM va nAmoM meM paryApta
antara hai, tathApi kRSNa-kathA kA hArda eka sadRza hai| jaina paramparA meM zrI
kRSNa sarvaguNasampanna, zreSTha, caritraniSTha, atyanta dayAlu,
zaraNAgatavatsala, pragalbha, dhIra, vinayI, mAtRbhakta, mahAn vIra, dharmAtmA,
kartavyaparAyaNa, buddhimAn, nItimAn aura tejasvI vyaktitva ke dhanI vAsudeva
haiN| samavAyAMga30 meM unake tejasvI vyaktitva kA jo citraNa hai, vaha adbhuta
hai, ve trikhaNDa ke adhipati ardhacakrI haiN| unake zarIra para eka sau ATha
prazasta cihna the| ve naravRSabha aura devarAja indra ke sadRza the, mahAn
yoddhA the| unhoMne apane jIvana meM tIna sau sATha yuddha kiye, para kisI bhI
yuddha meM ve parAjita nahIM huye| unameM bIsa lAkha aSTapadoM kI zakti thii|31
kintu unhoMne apanI zakti kA kabhI bhI durupayoga nahIM kiyaa| vaidika paramparA
kI bhAMti jaina paramparA ne vAsudeva zrI kRSNa ko Izvara kA aMza yA avatAra
nahIM mAnA hai| ve zreSThatama zAsaka the| bhautika dRSTi se ve usa yuga ke
sarvazreSTha adhinAyaka the| kintu nidAnakRta hone se ve AdhyAtmika dRSTi se
caturtha guNasthAna se Age vikAsa na kara ske| ve tIrthaMkara ariSTanemi ke
parama bhakta the| ariSTanemi se zrI kRSNa vaya kI dRSTi se jyeSTha the to
AdhyAtmika dRSTi se ariSTanemi jyeSTha the|32 (eka dharmavIra the to dUsare
karmavIra the, eka nivRttipradhAna the to dUsare pravRttipradhAna the) ataH jaba
bhI ariSTanemi dvArakA meM padhArate taba zrI kRSNa unakI upAsanA ke liye
pahu~cate the| antakRddazA, samavAyAGga, jJAtAdharmakathA, sthAnAGga,
nirayAvalikA, praznavyAkaraNa, uttarAdhyayana, prabhRti AgamoM meM unakA yazasvI
va tejasvI rUpa ujAgara huA hai| AgamoM ke vyAkhyA-sAhitya meM niyukti, cUrNi,
bhASya aura TIkA granthoM meM unake jIvana se sambandhita aneka ghaTanAeM haiN|
zvetAmbara aura digambara donoM hI paramparAoM ke mUrdhanya manISiyoM ne kRSNa
ke jIvana prasaGgoM ko lekara sau se bhI adhika granthoM kI racanAeM kI haiN|
bhASA kI dRSTi se ve racanAeM prAkRta, apabhraMza, saMskRta, purAnI gujarAtI,
rAjasthAnI va hindI meM hai| 26. chAndogyopaniSad a. 3, khaNDa 17, zloka 6,
gItApresa gorkhpur| 27. zrImadbhAgavata-dazama skandha, 8-45 3 /  13  /  24-25.
28. dekhiye-bhagavAn ariSTanemi aura karmayogI zrIkRSNa-eka anuzIlana pR. 176 se
186. jAtakakathAeM, caturtha khaNDa 454 meM ghaTajAtaka-bhadanta Ananda
kaushlyaayn| 30. samavAyAGga 158. 31. Avazyakaniyukti 415. 32. antakRddazA varga
1 se 3 tk| 0 0 [25]

Page #29 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
This Agam presents the multifaceted personality of Shri Krishna. Despite being
the ruler of three realms, he was a devoted son to his parents. To fulfill his
mother Devaki's desire, he worshipped the Hariṇai-gameṣī Dev. He had immense
affection for his brother and unwavering devotion to Lord Arishtanemi. While he
displayed extraordinary valor on the battlefield, crushing his enemies and
appearing as strong as a thunderbolt, his heart melted with compassion upon
seeing an elderly person, and he even lifted him up to help. Upon hearing of the
destruction of Dwarka, he inspired everyone to take Pravrajya (renunciation)
under Lord Arishtanemi, assuring them that he would take care of their families.
He readily granted permission to his own queens, sons, daughters, and grandsons
who wished to embrace Pravrajya. The Āvaśyaka-cūrṇi mentions that he was deeply
appreciative of virtues. He admired the shining teeth of a dog, even while it
was infested with insects, which is a clear indication of his appreciation for
virtues.  This Agam mentions the renunciants who took Pravrajya under Lord
Arishtanemi until the fifth chapter. Lord Arishtanemi is the twenty-second
Tirthankara. Although modern historians do not yet consider him a historical
figure, his historicity is undeniable. History is moving towards accepting this.
When Shri Krishna, who lived in the same era, is considered a historical figure,
there should be no hesitation in accepting him as well.  Not only in the Jain
tradition, but also in the Vedic tradition, Arishtanemi is mentioned in numerous
places. The word Arishtanemi appears four times in the Rig Veda. In the verse
"33. Swasti Nastārkshyo Arishtanemiḥ 34," the word Arishtanemi refers to Lord
Arishtanemi. Additionally, the Rig Veda 34 mentions "Tārkshya Arishtanemi" in
other verses. The Yajur Veda 25 and the Sama Veda 36 also refer to Lord
Arishtanemi as Tārkshya Arishtanemi. The word Tārkshya is used in the
Mahabharata 27, which should be another name for Lord Arishtanemi. The teachings
he gave to King Sagara about the path to liberation closely resemble the
teachings of Jainism on Moksha. 28 From a historical perspective, it is clear
that the Vedic people during Sagara's time did not believe in Moksha. Therefore,
these teachings must have originated from a sage belonging to a Shraman culture.
The Yajur Veda mentions Arishtanemi in one place as follows: "I offer an
oblation to the omniscient Neminath, who revealed the Adhyatma Yajna, who gave
true teachings to all the glorious beings in the world, and whose teachings
strengthened the souls of beings." 39  33. (a) Rig Veda 1.14.89.6. (c) Rig Veda
3.4.53.17. Rig Veda - 1.14.89.91.9.16.1.12.178 (b) Rig Veda 1.24.180.10. (d) Rig
Veda 10.12.17.8.1. .1. 34. 35. Yajur Veda 25.19. 36. Sama Veda 3.9. 37.
Mahabharata Shanti Parva - 288.4. 38. Mahabharata Shanti Parva - 288.5.6. 39.
Vajasaneyi Madhyandina Shukla Yajur Veda, Chapter 9 Mantra 25, Satavalekar
Edition (Vikram 1984). [26]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prastuta Agama meM zrIkRSNa kA indradhanuSI vyaktitva nihArA jA sakatA hai| ve
tIna khaNDa ke adhipati hone para bhI mAtA-pitA ke paramabhakta the| mAtA devakI
kI abhilASApUrti ke liye ve hariNaigameSI deva kI ArAdhanA karate haiM  /  bhAI
ke prati bhI unakA atyanta sneha hai| bhagavAn ariSTanemi ke prati bhI atyanta
niSThA hai| jahAM ve raNakSetra meM asAdhAraNavikrama kA paricaya dekara
ripumardana karate haiM, vajra se bhI kaThora pratIta hote haiM, vahAM eka
vRddha vyakti ko dekhakara unakA hRdaya anukampA se dravita ho jAtA hai aura
usake sahayoga ke liye svayaM bhI uThA lete haiN| dvArakA vinAza kI bAta
sunakara ve sabhI ko yaha preraNA pradAna karate haiM ki bhagavAn ariSTanemi ke
pAsa pravrajyA grahaNa karo  /  dIkSitoM ke parivAra ke pAlana-poSaNa Adi kI
vyavasthA maiM kruuNgaa| svayaM kI mahArAniyA~ putra-putriyA~ aura pautra jo bhI
pravrajyA ke liye taiyAra hote haiM, unheM ve saharSa anumati dete haiN|
AvazyakacUrNi meM varNana hai ki ve pUrNa rUpa se guNAnurAgI the| kutte ke
zarIra meM kulabulAte huye kIr3oM kI ora dRSTi na DAlakara usa ke camacamAte hue
dA~toM kI prazaMsA kI, jo unake guNAnurAga kA spaSTa pratIka hai| prastuta Agama
ke pA~ca varga taka bhagavAn ariSTanemi ke pAsa pravajita hone vAle sAdhakoM kA
ullekha hai| bhagavAn ariSTanemi bAIsaveM tIrthaMkara haiN| yadyapi Adhunika
itihAsakAra unheM nizcita taura para abhI taka aitihAsika puruSa nahIM mAnate
haiM, kintu unakI aitihAsikatA asaMdigdha hai  /  itihAsa isa svIkRti kI ora
bar3ha rahA hai| jaba unhIM ke yuga meM hone vAle zrI kRSNa ko aitihAsaka puruSa
mAnA jAtA hai to unheM bhI aitihAsaki puruSa mAnane meM saMkoca nahIM honA cAhie
/  jaina paramparA meM hI nahIM, vaidika paramparA meM bhI ariSTanemi kA ullekha
anekoM sthaloM para huA hai| Rgveda meM ariSTanemi zabda cAra bAra ayA hai| 33
'svasti nastArkSyo ariSTanemiH 34' yahAM para ariSTanemi zabda bhagavAn
ariSTanemi ke liye AyA hai  /  inake atirikta bhI Rgveda34, ke anya sthaloM para
'tArkSya ariSTanemi' kA varNana hai  /  yajurveda 25 aura sAmaveda36 meM bhI
bhagavAn ariSTanemi ko tArkSya ariSTanemi likhA hai| mahAbhArata meM27 bhI
tArkSya zabda kA prayoga huA hai| jo bhagavAn ariSTanemi kA hI apara nAma honA
caahiye| unhoMne rAjA sagara ko mokSa mArga kA jo upadeza diyAM thA, vaha
jainadharma ke mokSa-mantavyoM se atyadhika milatA-julatA hai| 28 aitihAsika
dRSTi se yaha spaSTa hai ki sagara ke samaya meM vaidika loga mokSa meM vizvAsa
nahIM karate the  /  ataH yaha upadeza kisI zramaNasaMskRti ke RSi kA hI honA
cAhiye  /  yajurveda meM eka sthAna para ariSTanemi kA varNana isa prakAra hai-
- adhyAtma yajJa ko prakaTa karane vAle, saMsAra sabhI bhavya jIvoM ko yathArtha
upadeza dene vAle, jinake upadeza se jIvoM kI AtmA balavAn hotI hai, una
sarvajJa neminAtha ke liye Ahuti samarpita karatA hUM  /  39 33. (ka) Rgveda 1
/  14  /  89  /  6  /  (ga) Rgveda 3  /  4  /  53  /  17  /  Rgveda - 1  /  14
/  89  / 9 1  /  9  /  16  /  1  /  12  /  178 (kha) Rgveda 1  /  24  /  180  /
10  /  (gha) Rgveda 10  /  12  /  17  /  8  /  1  /   /  1  /  34. 35. yajurveda
25  /  19  /  36. sAmaveda 3  /  9  //  37. mahAbhArata zAnti parva - 288  /  4
/  38. mahAbhArata zAnti parva - 288  /  5  /  6  /  39. vAjasaneyiH mAdhyaMdina
zuklayajurveda, adhyAya 9 maMtra 25, sAtavalekara saMskaraNa (vikrama 1984)  /
[26]

Page #30 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Dr. Radhakrishnan has clearly written that the Yajurveda mentions the three
Tirthankaras, Rishabhdev, Ajitnath and Arishtanemi.40 In the Prabhas Khand of
the Skanda Purana, there is a description - in his previous birth, Vamana did
penance. Due to the effect of that penance, Shiva gave Vamana darshan. He was
Shiva, Shyamvarn, Achel and seated in Padmasana. Vamana named him Neminath. This
Neminath is going to destroy all sins in this terrible Kaliyuga. By his darshan
and touch, the fruit of crores of yagnas is obtained. Arishtanemi is also
praised in the Prabhas Purana. In the Anushasan Parva of the Mahabharata3, the
word 'Shura Shourin Janeshwar' has come. The knowledgeable ones have interpreted
it as 'Shura Shourin Jineshwar', meaning Arishtanemi. In the third
transformation of the Lankavatara, a list of the names of Tathagata Buddha is
given. One name in it is 'Arishtanemi'.45 It is possible that Arishtanemi became
very popular due to the divine light of non-violence shining brightly, due to
which his name also came in the list of Buddha's names. Famous historian Dr. Ray
Chaudhary has written in his Ancient History of Vaishnava Tradition that Shri
Krishna was the cousin of Arishtanemi. Colonel Tod46 has written about
Arishtanemi that I know that in ancient times there were four wise Buddhas, one
of them was Adinath, the other was Neminath, Neminath was the first Odin of the
inhabitants of Scandinavia and the first "Fo" deity of the Chinese. Famous
lexicographer Dr. Nagenranath Basu, archaeologist Dr. Fahrer, Professor Barnett,
Mr. Karva, Dr. Haridatt, Dr. Prananath Vidyalankar, etc. many scholars have a
clear opinion that Lord Arishtanemi was an influential man. There is no obstacle
in considering him a historical man. In the Chandogya Upanishad, the name of
Lord Arishtanemi has come as "Ghor Angiras Rishi", who taught Shri Krishna the
knowledge of Atmayagna. Dharmanand Kausambi believes that Angiras was the name
of Lord Arishtanemi.47. Angiras Rishi said to Shri Krishna - Shri Krishna! When
the end time of a human being approaches, he should remember three things at
that time 1. Twam Akshatamasi - You are imperishable. 2. Twam Achyutamasi - You
are the one who dwells in one rasa. 3. Twam Pranasanshitimasi - You are the
giver of life to beings.48 40. Indian Philosophy, Vol. I. P. 287. 41. Skanda
Purana Prabhas Khand. 42. Prabhas Purana 49/50. 43. Mahabharata Anushasan Parva
A. 149, Shlo 50, 82 44. Mokshamarg Prakash, Pandit Todarmal. 45. Buddhist Dharma
Darshan, Acharya Narendradev, p. 162. 46. Annals of the Bhandarkar Research
Institute Journal, Vol. 23, p. 122. 47. Indian Culture and Non-violence-p. 57.
48. Tadhaitad Ghoram Angirasah, Krishnaya Devakiputrayaovatovavachapipasa eva sa
babhuva, so'anta velayametattryam
pratipadyetakshatamasyachyutamasipranasanshiti. - Chandogya Upanishad Pra. 3,
Khand 18. [27]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 DaoNkTara rAdhAkRSNan ne spaSTa zabdoM meM likhA hai ki yajurveda meM
RSabhadeva, ajitanAtha aura ariSTanemi, ina tIna tIrthaMkaroM kA ullekha pAyA
jAtA hai|40 skandapurANa ke prabhAsa khaNDa meM eka varNana hai-apane janma ke
pichale bhAga meM vAmana ne tapa kiyaa| usa tapa ke prabhAva se ziva ne vAmana
ko darzana diye| ve ziva, zyAmavarNa, acela tathA padmAsana se sthita the|
vAmana ne unakA nAma neminAtha rkhaa| yaha neminAtha isa ghora kalikAla meM saba
pApoM kA nAza karane vAle haiN| unake darzana aura sparza se karor3oM yajJoM kA
phala prApta hotA hai| prabhAsapurANa meM bhI ariSTanemi kI stuti kI gaI hai|
mahAbhArata3 ke anuzAsana parva meM 'zUraH zaurirjanezvara' pada AyA hai| vijJoM
ne 'zUraH zaurirjinezvaraH' mAnakara usakA artha ariSTanemi kiyA laMkAvatAra ke
tRtIya parivartana meM tathAgata buddha ke nAmoM kI sUcI dI gaI hai| unameM eka
nAma 'ariSTanemi' hai|45 sambhava hai ahiMsA ke divya Aloka ko jagamagAne ke
kAraNa ariSTanemi atyadhika lokapriya ho gaye the, jisake kAraNa unakA nAma
buddha kI nAma-sUcI meM bhI AyA hai| prasiddha itihAsakAra DaoN. rAya caudharI
ne apane vaiSNava paramparA ke prAcIna itihAsa meM zrI kRSNa ko ariSTanemi kA
cacerA bhAI likhA hai| karnala TaoNDa ne46 ariSTanemi ke sambandha meM likhA hai
ki mujhe aisA jJAta hotA hai ki prAcInakAla meM cAra buddha medhAvI mahApuruSa
hue haiM, unameM eka AdinAtha haiM, dUsare neminAtha haiM, neminAtha hI
skenDIneviyA nivAsiyoM ke prathama oDina tathA cIniyoM ke prathama "pho" devatA
the| prasiddha koSakAra DaoN. nagendranAtha vasu, purAtattvavettA DaoNkTara
phaharara, prophesara bAraneTa, misTara karavA, DaoNkTara haridatta, DaoNkTara
prANanAtha vidyAlaMkAra, prabhRti aneka-aneka vidvAnoM kA spaSTa mantavya hai ki
bhagavAn ariSTanemi eka prabhAvazAlI puruSa the| unheM aitihAsika puruSa mAnane
meM koI bAdhA nahIM hai| chAndogyopaniSad meM bhagavAn ariSTanemi kA nAma "ghora
AMgirasa RSi" AyA hai, jinhoMne zrI kRSNa ko AtmayajJa kI zikSA pradAna kI thii|
dharmAnanda kauzAmbI kA mAnanA hai ki AMgirasa bhagavAn ariSTanemi kA hI nAma
thaa|47 . AMgirasa RSi ne zrI kRSNa se kahA-zrI kRSNa! jaba mAnava kA anta
samaya sannikaTa Aye, usa samaya usako tIna bAtoM kA smaraNa karanA cAhiye 1.
tvaM akSatamasi-tU avinazvara hai| 2. tvaM acyutamasi-tU eka rasa meM rahane
vAlA hai| 3. tvaM prANasaMzitamasi-tU prANiyoM kA jIvanadAtA hai|48 40. Indian
Philosophy, Vol. I. P. 287. 41. skandapurANa prabhAsa khaNDa. 42. prabhAsa
purANa 49/50 /  43. mahAbhArata anuzAsana parva a. 149, zlo 50, 82 44.
mokSamArga prakAza, paNDita ttoddrml| 45. bauddha dharma darzana, AcArya
narendradeva, pR. 162. 46. annalsa oNpha dI bhaNDArakara risarca insTITyUTa
patrikA, jilda 23, pR. 122  /  47. bhAratIya saMskRti aura ahiMsA-pR. 57 /  48.
taddhaitad ghoraM AGgirasaH, kRSNAya devakIputrAyo vatvovAcA'pipAsA eva sa
babhUva, so'nta velAyAmetattrayaM pratipadyetAkSatamasyacyutamasi praannsNsiiti|
- chAndogyopaniSad pra. 3, khaNDa 18. [27]

Page #31 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
This sermon made Shri Krishna thirsty for knowledge. He felt blessed. This
statement can be compared to the statement of Lord Arishtanemi in Antakrid
Dasha, when Lord Krishna's face turns pale after hearing about the destruction
of Dwarka and his own death at the hands of Jaratkumar, the Lord says - Shri
Krishna! Don't worry. In the next birth, you will become a Tirthankara named
Amma.49 Hearing this, Shri Krishna became content and free from sorrow.  This
Agam contains a very interesting and inspiring story of Shri Krishna's younger
brother, Gajasukumar. He was so impressed by Lord Arishtanemi's first sermon
that he renounced everything and became a Shraman. He accepted the Bhikshu
Mahapratima in the Mahakal cremation ground and became absorbed in meditation.
Somil Brahman saw that his future son-in-law had become a monk. He had messed
with his daughter's life by not marrying her. The storm of anger extinguished
the lamp of his wisdom. He put a mound of earth on the Muni's head and placed
burning embers on it. The burning of the head, skin, marrow, and flesh caused
excruciating pain, yet he did not deviate from his meditation. There was not
even a hint of opposition or revenge in his mind. This was a glorious victory of
tolerance over anger. An immortal victory of humanity over demoniacal nature;
due to which he attained liberation by the four-fold virtues of a single day.
The 41 chapters of the four sections of the Antagad Sutra mention those princes
who renounced the vast wealth and comforts of Shri Krishna Vasudeva and
practiced intense austerities in the presence of Lord Arishtanemi, performed
various types of austerities, and finally attained liberation with the knowledge
of the Self.  The ten chapters of the fifth section describe the life of
renunciation of Vasudeva Shri Krishna's eight queens, Padmavati, Satyabhama,
Rukmini, Jambavati, etc., and two daughters-in-law. The royal queens who slept
on beds of flowers adopted the royal path of intense spiritual practice. How
different is the life of enjoyment of a queen from the austere life of spiritual
practice of Shramanas! The study of these chapters makes it clear that a woman
is as delicate as a flower, but she is also as tough as a lioness in spiritual
practice.  Thus, the 51 chapters of the five sections depict the life of
austerity of 51 great practitioners of Lord Neminath's era. The events of Dwarka
city and its destruction, and the story of Gajasukumal, have been the subject of
many independent poetic works by later writers. It contains living experiences
and inspirations that are still guiding us on the right path, even in the deep
darkness of fear, weakness, lust, and indulgence, it radiates the divine rays of
fearlessness, self-confidence, and detachment.  The sixth, seventh, and eighth
sections contain a vivid depiction of the heart-wrenching spiritual practices of
39 intense ascetics, embodiments of forgiveness, and simple souls during the
reign of Lord Mahavira. It describes the life of spiritual practice of Mankai
and Kinkam, who practiced the Gunaratnasamvatsar tapa for sixteen years and
attained liberation by Santhara on the Vipulgari mountain. The third chapter of
the sixth section describes Arjun Malakar of Rajgriha. Bandhumati was his wife.
49. Antakrid Dasha Sutra, Section 5, Chapter 1. [28]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prastuta upadeza ko zravaNa kara zrI kRSNa apipAsa ho gye| ve apane Apako
dhanya anubhava karane lge| prastuta kathana kI tulanA antakRddazA meM Aye hue
bhagavAn ariSTanemi ke isa kathana se kara sakate haiM ki jaba bhagavAn ke muMha
se dvArakA kA vinAza aura jaratkumAra ke hAtha se svayaM apanI mRtyu kI bAta
sunakara zrI kRSNa kA mukhakamala murzI jAtA hai, taba bhagavAn kahate haiM-zrI
kRSNa! tuma cintA na kro| AgAmI bhava meM tuma amama nAmaka tIrthaMkara bnoge|49
jise sunakara zrI kRSNa santuSTa evaM khedarahita ho gye| prastuta Agama meM zrI
kRSNa ke laghubhrAtA gajasukumAra kA kathA prasaMga atyanta rocaka va
preraNAdAyI hai| bhagavAn ariSTanemi ke prathama upadeza se hI ve itane adhika
prabhAvita huye ki saba kucha parityAga kara zramaNa bana jAte haiM aura
mahAkAla zmazAna meM bhikSu mahApratimA ko svIkAra kara dhyAnastha ho jAte haiN|
somila brAhmaNa ne dekhA ki merA jAmAtA hone vAlA muNDita ho gayA hai| isane
merI beTI ke jIvana ke sAtha vivAha na kara khilavAr3a kiyA hai| krodha kI AMdhI
se usakA viveka-dIpaka bujha jAtA hai| usane muni ke sira para miTTI kI pAla
bAMdhakara dhadhakate aMgAra rakha diye| mastaka, camar3I, majjA, mAMsa ke
jalane se mahAbhayaMkara vedanA ho rahI thI tathApi ve dhyAna se vicalita nahIM
hue| unake mana meM tanika bhI virodha yA pratizodha kI bhAvanA jAgrata nahIM
huii| yaha thI roSa para toSa kI zAnadAra vijaya  /  dAnavatA para mAnavatA kA
amara jayaghoSa; jisake kAraNa unhoMne eka hI dina kI cAritra-paryAya dvArA
mokSa prApta kara liyaa| antagaDasUtra ke cAra varga ke 41 adhyayanoM meM una
rAjakumAroM kA ullekha huA hai jinhoMne zrI kRSNa vAsudeva ke virATa-vaibhava
aura sukha-suvidhAoM se bharI huI jindagI ko tyAga kara bhagavAn, ariSTanemi ke
pAsa ugra tapa kI ArAdhanA kI, vividha prakAra ke tapoM kI ArAdhanA kI, aura
anta meM kevalajJAna ke sAtha mokSa prApta kiyaa| pA~caveM varga ke daza
adhyayanoM meM vAsudeva zrI kRSNa kI padmAvatI, satyabhAmA, rukmiNI, jAmavantI,
prabhRti ATha . rAniyoM tathA do putravadhuoM ke vairAgyamaya jIvana kA varNana
hai| phUloM kI zayyA para sone vAlI rAjarAniyoM ne ugra sAdhanA kA rAjamArga
apnaayaa| kahA~ rAjarAnI kA bhogamaya jIvana aura kahA~ zramaNiyoM kA kaThora
sAdhanAmaya jIvana! ina adhyayanoM ke adhyayana se yaha spaSTa hotA hai, nArI
jitanI phUla ke samAna sukumAra hai, utanI hI tapa:sAdhanA meM siMhanI kI bhA~ti
kaThora bhI hai| isa prakAra pA~ca varga ke 51 adhyayanoM meM bhagavAn neminAtha
ke yuga ke 51 mahAn sAdhakoM kA tapomaya jIvana udRGkita hai| dvArakA nagarI
aura usake vidhvaMsa kI ghaTanAeM tathA gajasukumAla kA AkhyAna aise rahe haiM,
jisa para paravartI sAhityakAroM ne svataMtra rUpa se aneka kAvyagrantha likhe
haiN| isameM anubhava aura preraNAoM ke jIte-jAgate prasaMga haiM jo Aja bhI
satpathapradarzaka haiM, bhaya-durbalatA, vAsanA-lAlasA aura bhogeSaNAA ke
gahana andhakAra meM bhI abhaya, AtmavizvAsa aura vItarAgatA kI divya kiraNeM
vikIrNa karate haiN| chaThe, sAtaveM aura AThaveM varga meM bhagavAn mahAvIra ke
zAsana-kAla ke 39 ugra tapasvI, kSamAmUrti aura saralAtmAoM kI hRdaya kaMpAne
vAlI sAdhanAoM kA sajIva citraNa hai| maMkAI, kiMkama ke sAdhanAmaya jIvana kA
varNana hai, jinhoMne solaha varSa taka guNaratnasaMvatsara tapa kI ArAdhanA kI
thI aura vipulagiri parvata para saMthArA karake mukta huye the| char3e varga ke
tRtIya adhyayana meM rAjagRha ke arjuna mAlAkAra kA varNana hai| bandhumatI
usakI patnI thii| 49. antakRddazA sUtra varga 5, adhyyn-1| [28]

Page #32 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
He worshipped the Mudgarapaani Yaksha. Arjun Mali was filled with extreme rage
when the six members of the Lalita Gosthi of Rajgriha city corrupted the
character of Bandhumati, and with the help of the Mudgarapaani Yaksha, he killed
them. He began to perform a naked dance of violence! He killed seven people
every day. Hearing of the arrival of Lord Mahavira, Sudarshan Shreshthi goes to
see him. He frees Arjun from the Yaksha-paash and brings him to the feet of the
Lord. Outside Rajgriha, there was terror because of the Yaksha-possessed Arjun
Mali. Who dared to venture out of the city! But when Lord Mahavira arrived,
Sudarshan did not stop even when his parents forbade him. He set out to see the
Lord. On the way, he encountered Arjun. The victory of non-violence over
violence. This narrative also states that there may be many named devotees, but
true devotees are very rare. When clouds gather in the sky and come in droves,
someone might tell a peacock, "Don't coo, don't make a sound!" The peacock will
say, "This is never possible." A true devotee, when the time comes, will even
stake his life, but will not back down. He knows that gold cannot be refined
without being bathed in fire. A diamond cannot shine without being polished!
Similarly, devotion cannot shine without suffering. Arjun Mali becomes a Shraman
and engages in intense penance. The one whose name once made even the bravest
tremble, whose heart beat with fear, who had killed 1141 humans in five months
and thirteen days, when he accepts the Nirgranth penance, his life is completely
transformed. People scorn him by speaking harshly to him. They torture him with
sticks, stones, bricks, and slaps, yet he does not feel anger! He thinks to
himself: — Kathai. Sanjaya 10 The Shraman is restrained and tamed, he suppresses
his senses. If someone beats and hits him, he still thinks that this soul will
never be destroyed, it is eternal, the body is fleeting. If it is destroyed,
what is there for me to lose! Thinking in this way with equanimity, he endures
even terrible calamities with calmness. Arjun attains liberation in just six
months through his forgiving and intense penance. Samana Sanjaya Danta Hanajj
Koi Natthi Jeevasa Namutti Evam Pehejj In the sixth chapter, there is also a
description of the young monk who took vows at the tender age of six. From a
historical perspective, he is the only monk who took vows at the youngest age
during Mahavira's reign. Any other young monk 50. Uttaradhyayanasutra 2.27 51.
'Kumarasamane' tti Shadvarshjatasy Tasy Pravrajitatvat, Aha Cha 'Chhavariso
Pavvaiyo Niggantham Hoiun Pavayanam' ti, Etadeva Cha Ascharyamiha Anyatha
Varshashtkadarann Pravrajya Syad iti. - Bhagavati Satikha Bha. 1. Sh. 5 U. 4,
Su. 188, Patra 219-2 [29]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 mudgarapANi yakSa kI vaha upAsanA karatA thaa| rAjagRha nagara kI lalitA goSThI
ke chaha sadasyoM ke dvArA bandhumatI ke caritra ko bhraSTa karane se arjuna
mAlI ke mana meM atyanta roSa paidA huA aura mudgarapANi yakSa ke sahayoga se
usane unakA vadha kara diyaa| vaha hiMsA kA nagna tANDava karane lagA !
pratidina sAta vyaktiyoM ko mAratA  /  bhagavAn mahAvIra ke Agamana ko zravaNa
kara sudarzana zreSThI darzanArtha jAtA hai| arjuna ko yakSa-pAza se mukta
karatA hai aura bhagavAn ke caraNoM meM pahu~cAta hai  /  rAjagRha ke bAhara
yakSAviSTa arjuna mAlI kA AtaMka thaa| kyA majAla ki koI nagara se bAhara
nikalane kI himmata kare ! magara bha. mahAvIra kA padArpaNa hone para
sudarzana, mAtA-pitA ke manA karane para bhI rukatA nhiiN| vaha bhagavAn ke
darzanArtha ravAnA hotA hai| mArga meM arjuna kA sAkSAtkAra hotA hai| hiMsA para
ahiMsA kI vijaya hotI hai| isa varNana meM yaha bhI pratipAdita kiyA hai ki
nAmadhArI aneka bhakta ho sakate haiM kintu sacce bhakta bahuta hI durlabha
haiN| jisa samaya AkAza meM umar3a-ghumar3a kara ghaTAyeM AyeM, una ghaTAoM ko
dekha kara koI mora se kahetU kuhUka mata, kekArava mata kara ! mora kahegA,
yaha kabhI saMbhava nahIM hai| jo saccA bhakta hai, vaha samaya Ane para prANoM
kI bAjI bhI lagA detA hai kintu pIche nahIM htttaa| vaha jAnatA hai, binA agni
snAna kiye suvarNa meM nikhAra nahIM aataa| binA ghise hIre meM camaka nahIM
AtI! vaise hI binA kaSTa pAye bhakti ke raMga meM bhI camaka-damaka nahIM aatii|
arjuna mAlI zramaNa banakara ugra sAdhanA karate haiN| jisa ke nAma se eka dina
bar3e-bar3e vIroM ke pAMva tha the, hRdaya dhar3akate the, jisane pAMca mAha
teraha dina meM 1141 mAnavoM kI hatyA kI thI, vahI vyakti jaba nirgrantha
sAdhanA ko svIkAra karatA hai, to usakA jIvana AmUla-cUla parivartita ho jAtA
hai| loga una zramaNa kA kaTuvacana kahakara tiraskAra karate haiN| lAThI,
patthara, IMTa aura thappar3oM se unheM pratAr3ita karate haiM tathApi una ke
mana meM Akroza paidA nahIM hotA! vaha yahI cintana karate haiM -- katthaI  /
saMjae 10 zramaNa saMyata aura dAnta hotA hai, vaha indriyoM kA damana karatA
hai| yadi koI use mAratA aura pITatA hai to bhI vaha cintana karatA hai ki yaha
AtmA kabhI bhI naSTa hone vAlA nahIM hai, yaha ajara amara hai, zarIra
kSaNabhaMgura hai| usakA nAza hotA hai, to usameM merA kyA jAtA hai! isa prakAra
samatvapUrvaka cintana karate hue ve bhayaMkara upasargoM ko bhI zAnta bhAva se
sahana karate haiN| arjuna apanI kSamAmayI ugra sAdhanA ke dvArA chaha mAha meM
hI mokSa prApta kara lete haiM  /  samaNaM saMjayaM daMtaM haNejja koi natthi
jIvassa nAmutti evaM pehejja chaThe varga meM usa bAlamuni kA bhI varNana hai
jisane chaha varSa kI laghuvaya meM pravrajyA grahaNa kI thI  /  51 aitihAsika
dRSTi se mahAvIra ke zAsana meM saba se laghuvaya meM pravrajyA grahaNa karane
vAlA vahI eka muni hai| anya jo bhI bAlamuni 50. uttarAdhyayana sUtra 2 / 27 51.
'kumArasamaNe' tti SaDvarSajAtasya tasya pravrajitatvAt, Aha ca 'chavvariso
pavvaio niggaMthaM hoiUNa pAvayaNaM' ti, etadeva cAzcaryamiha anyathA
varSASTakAdArAnna pravrajyA syAditi  /  -bhagavatI saTIka bhA. 1. za. 5 u. 4,
sU. 188, patra 219-2 [29]

Page #33 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
They were at least eight years old. Lord Mahavira did not give priority to age
from the perspective of spiritual practice. A seeker who is qualified, even if
he is young in terms of age, can become a monk. Lord Mahavira had initiated Ati
Muktak Kumar only after observing his inner qualifications. There have been
hundreds of such brilliant seekers in Jain history who, in their childhood, took
the initiation of Ahuti Diksha and made a vast impact on Jainism. The fourteen-
time-born Acharya Shayambhav initiated his son Manak52, and Arya Singhgiri
initiated Vajraswami in their childhood. Acharya Hemchandra Upadhyay
Yashovijayji etc. were also child initiates. Acharya Samrat Anand Rishiji M.,
Yuvacharya Shri Madhukar Muni Ji etc. also became monks at the tender age of
nine or ten. There is no prohibition of such initiation anywhere in the Agam
literature or subsequent literature. There is a prohibition of unqualified
initiation. Nishita Bhashya53 prohibits giving initiation to a child at a very
young age and the reasons given for it are more related to unqualified
initiation. There is a similar prohibition in the Buddhist text Mahavagga54.
Nishita Bhashya55 further allows initiation to a qualified child, even if he is
young, because children are not only foolish but also intelligent, they are also
endowed with strong talent, who have changed the pages of history. The story of
Ati Muktak Muni is a vivid example of this fact. Ati Muktak Kumar said to his
parents - "Respected ones! I know my immense power. I can walk smiling on embers
and I can also walk on spikes. I know that whoever is born will surely die, but
I do not know when and how I will die." In the face of his arguments, his
parents also became silent. _ Bhagavati56 Sutra contains an incident from Ati
Muktak Muni's monastic life - Ati Muktak Muni goes out with the elders for the
purpose of defecation. It had rained some time ago, so the water was flowing
fast. Seeing the flowing water, his childhood memories surfaced. He built a mud
dam to stop the flow of water. He left his vessel in it. He was overjoyed and
said - 'My boat is anchored, my boat is anchored'. The wind was blowing merrily.
Ati Muktak's boat was swaying. Nature was smiling. But how could the elders
tolerate this act contrary to the monastic code? The anger within was reflected
on their faces. Ati Muktak immediately recovered. He began to repent within
himself for his mistake. Repentance made him holy. The Lord said to the elders -
Ati Muktak Muni will be liberated in this very life. The Lord said in a very
sweet voice - Do not rebuke, criticize or condemn him. He is a pure soul. He is
young in age but his soul is higher than the Himalayas. In the seventh and
eighth chapters, there is a description of Emperor Shrenik's twenty queens,
Nanda, Nandavati, Nandottra, Nandshrenika etc., who, influenced by the holy
sermons of Lord Mahavira, accepted the monastic dharma, studied the eleven angas
and performed such excellent austerities that even reading them makes one's hair
stand on end. With comforts 52. Parishishta Parva-Sarg 5, Acharya Hemchandra 53.
Nishita Bhashya 11, -3531. 32 54. Mahavagga-1. 41-92, p. 80-81, compare. 55.
Nishita Bhashya 11-3537. 39 56. Bhagavati Shatak 5. Udd. 4 [30]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 hue haiM, ve kama se kama ATha varSa kI umra ke the| bhagavAn mahAvIra ne
sAdhanA kI dRSTi se vaya ko pradhAnatA nahIM dii| jisa sAdhaka meM yogyatA hai
vaha vaya kI dRSTi se bhale hI laghu ho, pravrajita ho sakatA hai| bhagavAn
mahAvIra ne atimuktaka kumAra kI Antarika yogyatA ko nihAra kara hI dIkSA
pradAna kI thii| jaina itihAsa meM aise saikaDoM tejasvI sAdhaka hue haiM
jinhoMne bAlyAvasthA meM AhatI dIkSA grahaNa kara jainadharma kI vipula
prabhAvanA kI thii| caturdazapUrvadhArI AcArya zayyaMbhava ne apane putra
maNaka52 ko, Arya siMhagiri ne vajrasvAmI ko bAlavaya meM dIkSA dI thii| AcArya
hemacandra upAdhyAya yazovijaya jI Adi bAladIkSita hI the| AcAryasamrAT
AnandaRSi jI ma., yuvAcArya zrI madhukara muni jI Adi bhI nau dasa varSa kI
nanhIM umra meM zramaNa bane haiN| Agama sAhitya aura paravartI sAhitya meM
kahIM bhI aisI dIkSA kA niSedha nahIM hai| ayogya dIkSA kA niSedha hai| nizItha
bhASya53 meM atyanta laghuvaya meM bAlaka ko dIkSA dene kA niSedha kiyA hai aura
usake lie jo kAraNa prastuta kiye haiM ve ayogya dIkSA se hI adhika sambandhita
haiN| mahAvagga54 bauddha grantha meM bhI isI prakAra niSedha hai| nizIthabhASya
55 meM Age calakara yogya bAlaka ko, jo laghuvaya kA bhI ho dIkSA dene kI
anumati dI hai, kyoMki bAlaka buddhU hI nahIM buddhimAn bhI hote haiM, prabala
pratibhA ke dhanI bhI hote haiM, jinhoMne itihAsa ke pRSThoM ko badala diyA hai|
atimuktaka muni kA kathAnaka isa tathya kA jvalaMta udAharaNa hai| atimuktaka
kumAra ne mAtA-pitA ko kahA-pUjyavara ! maiM apanI virAT zakti ko jAnatA huuN|
maiM aMgAroM para muskarAtA huA cala sakatA hUM aura zUloM para bhI bar3ha
sakatA huuN| maiM yaha jAnatA hUM ki jo janmA hai vaha avazya hI maregA para
kaba aura kisa prakAra maregA yaha mujhe parijJAta nahIM hai| unake tarkoM ke
sAmane mAtA-pitA bhI mauna ho gye| _ bhagavatI56 sUtra meM atimuktaka muni ke
zramaNajIvana kI eka ghaTanA AI hai-sthaviroM ke sAtha atimuktaka muni zaucArtha
bAhara jAte haiN| varSA kucha samaya pUrva hI huI thI, ataH pAnI tejI se baha
rahA thaa| bahatA pAnI dekhakara unake bAla-saMskAra ubhara aaye| miTTI kI pAla
bAMdhakara jala ke pravAha ko rokaa| apanA pAtra usameM chor3a diyaa|
Anandavibhora hokara vaha bola uThe-'tira merI naiyA tira' pavana Thumaka
Thumaka kara cala rahA thaa| atimuktataka kI naiyA thiraka rahI thii| prakRti
maskarA rahI thii| para sthaviroM ko zramaNamaryAdA ke viparIta yaha kArya kaise
sahana ho sakatA thA? antara kA roSa mukhakara jhalaka rahA thaa| atimuktaka
ekadama saMbhala gye| apanI bhUla para andara hI andara pazcAttApa karane lge|
pazcAttApa ne unako pAvana banA diyaa| sthaviroM se bhagavAn ne kahA-atimuktaka
muni isI bhava meM mukta hogaa| bhagavAn ne atyanta madhura svara meM kahA-isakI
hIlanA, nindanA aura garhaNA mata kro| yaha nirmala AtmA hai| yaha vaya se laghu
hai kintu isakA AtmA himagiri se bhI adhika unnata hai| sAtaveM aura AThaveM
varga meM samrAT zreNika kI nandA, nandavatI, nandottarA, nandazreNikA prabhRti
tebIsa mahArAniyoM kA varNana hai. jinhoMne bhagavAna mahAvIra ke pAvana-
pravacanoM se prabhAvita hokara zramaNadharma svIkAra kiyA, ekAdaza aMgoM kA
adhyayana kiyA aura itane utkRSTa tapa kI ArAdhanA kI jise par3hate-par3hate hI
roMgaTe khar3e ho jAte haiN| sukha suvidhAoM 52. pariziSTa parva-sarga 5, AcArya
hemacandra 53. nizItha bhASya 11, -3531  /  32 54. mhaavgg-1| 41-92, pR. 80-81,
tulanA kreN| 55. nizItha bhASya 11-3537 /  39 56. bhagavatI zataka 5 /  udde. 4
[30]

Page #34 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The fact that delicate princesses nurtured in palaces can achieve such intense
austerity and make their souls shine like pure gold is evident from the study of
these two sections. Scattered throughout the Agamas and their commentaries are
glimpses into the lives of these great queens. Due to the fear of excessive
length, we are not including all those instances here. These queens performed
various types of rigorous austerities, which are mentioned in these sections.
Finally, they all complete their lifespan, including Sanlekhana, and attain
Nirvana.  Thus, the Antakrid Dasang Sutra vividly describes the practices of
various types of sadhakas and sadhikas. On one hand, there are young ascetics
like Gaja Sukumar, while on the other hand, there are brilliant Shraman stars
like Ati Mukta Kumar at a young age. On the third hand, the life stories of the
queens of Vasudeva Shri Krishna and Emperor Shrenik are radiating bright rays of
austerity. This is why, during the holy and auspicious moments of Paryushana,
the speakers of the Sthanakwasi tradition recite this Agama. It is the eighth
Anga in the Angas, divided into eight sections, and there are eight days of the
Paryushana festival. It contains the sacred character of 90 sadhakas who
ultimately destroy the eight karmas. It is capable of bestowing the eight-fold
perfection.  It is unknown when the tradition of reciting this Agama during the
golden occasion of Paryushana began. It is possible that it started with Veer
Laungashah or after him! Whoever dared to start this tradition must have been a
very brilliant person!  Two commentaries on the Antakrid Dasang Sutra are
available in Sanskrit. One by Acharya Abhaydev and the other by Acharya
Ghasilalji Maharaj. Three or four Gujarati translations have been published, and
five Hindi translations have been released. In this way, twelve editions of this
Agama have come to light. 57 English translations have also been printed.  This
present edition has some distinct features compared to previous editions. It
contains the pure original text, meaning, and occasional discussions that
express the profound emotions found in the story. The appendix also includes
very useful material such as notes to reveal the secrets of the Agama.  The
credit for editing this Agama goes to Bahin Sadhvi Divyaprabhaji, who is a
disciple of the supremely learned Sadhvi Ratna Ujjvalkumariji. The learned
Mahasati Shri Ujjvalkumariji was a highly talented Sadhvi. The entire Jain
community is well acquainted with her name. The strong talent of Mahasatiji can
be easily seen in her disciples. The divine rays of Mahasati Shri
Divyaprabhaji's talent are scattered in this present Agama. Her effort is
commendable. Hopefully, she will continue to advance in the field of writing and
dedicate the best works to the treasury of Saraswati!  Jain Agamas are a
priceless treasure of Indian literature, upon which the grand palace of Jain
governance is based. Efforts have been made from various places regarding its
publication and editing. But there was a long-standing need for editions that
could clarify the core essence of the Agama. They should be able to unlock the
Guru Granth of the Agama in the light of the Agama's commentary literature. With
this vision, Shraman Sangh's young Acharya Shri Madhukar Muni Ji has
accomplished this great task. 57. See - Jain Agama Literature: Contemplation and
Interpretation - Le. Devendramuni p. 713 [31]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 meM palane vAlI sukumAra rAniyAM itanA ugra tapazcaraNa karake AtmA ko kundana
kI taraha camakA sakatI haiM, yaha ina do vargoM ke adhyayana se spaSTa hotA
hai| ina mahArAniyoM ke chuTa-puTa jIvana prasaMga AgamoM va AgamoM ke vyAkhyA-
sAhitya meM yatra-tatra bikhare par3e haiN| vistArabhaya se hama una sabhI
prasaMgoM ko yahAM nahIM de rahe haiN| ina mahArAniyoM ne vibhinna prakAra kI
kaThora tapazcaryA kI, jisakA ullekha ina vargoM meM kiyA gayA hai| anta meM
sabhI saMlekhanA-sahita Ayu pUrNa kara nirvANa ko prApta karatI haiN| isa
prakAra antakRddazAMga sUtra meM aneka prakAra ke sAdhakoM aura sAdhikAoM kI
sAdhanA kA sajIva varNana hai| eka ora gajasukumAra jaise taruNatapasvI haiM, to
dUsarI ora atimukta kumAra jaise alpavayaska tejasvI zramaNa nakSatra haiN|
tIsarI ora vAsudeva zrIkRSNa va samrAT zreNika kI mahArAniyoM kI jIvana-gAthAeM
tapa kI ujjvala kiraNeM vikIrNa kara rahI haiN| yahI kAraNa hai ki paryuSaNa ke
pAvana puNya paloM meM sthAnakavAsI paramparA ke vaktA isa Agama kA vAcana
karate haiN| aMgoM meM yaha AThavAM aMga hai, ATha vargoM meM vibhakta hai aura
paryuSaNa parva ke ATha dina hote haiN| AThakarmoM kA Atyantika rUpa se naSTa
karane vAle 90 sAdhakoM kA pavitra caritra hai| jo aSTaguNopeta siddhi ko
pradAna karane meM samartha hai| isa Agama ko paryuSaNa ke sunahare avasara para
kaba se vAMcane kI paramparA prArambha huI, yaha anveSaNIya hai| sambhava hai
vIra lauMkAzAha yA unake pazcAt prArambha huI ho! jisa kisI ne bhI yaha
paramparA prArambha karane kA sAhasa kiyA hogA, vaha bahuta hI tejasvI vyakti
rahA hogA! antakRddazA sUtra para saMskRta meM do vRttiyA~ prApta hotI haiN| eka
AcArya abhayadeva kI aura eka AcArya ghAsIlAlajI mahArAja kii| tIna-cAra
gujarAtI anuvAda prakAzita hue haiM aura pAMca hindI anuvAda prakaTa hue haiN|
isa taraha isa Agama ke bAraha saMskaraNa prakAza meM Aye haiN|57 aMgrejI
anuvAda bhI mudrita huA hai| prastuta saMskaraNa pUrva saMskaraNoM kI apekSA
apanI kucha alaga vizeSatAeM lie hue hai| zuddha mUla pATha hai, artha hai aura
yatra-tatra vivecana hai, jo kathA meM Aye hue gambhIra bhAvoM ko vyakta karatA
hai| pariziSTa meM Agama ke rahasya ko vyakta karane ke lie TippaNa Adi atyanta
upayogI sAmagrI bhI dI gaI hai| isa Agama ke sampAdana kA zreya hai bahina
sAdhvI divyaprabhAjI ko jo paramaviduSI sAdhvIratna ujjvalakumArIjI kI suziSyA
haiN| viduSI mahAsatI zrI ujjvalakumArI jI eka prakRSTapratibhAsampanna sAdhvI
thiiN| unake nAma se sampUrNa jaina samAja bhalI-bhA~ti paricita haiN| mahAsatI
jI kI prabala pratibhA ke saMdarzana unakI suziSyAoM meM sahaja rUpa se kiye jA
sakate hai| prastuta Agama meM mahAsatI zrI divyaprabhAjI kI pratibhA kI divya
kiraNeM vikIrNa huI haiN| unakA yaha prayAsa prazaMsanIya hai| AzA hai ve
lekhana ke kSetra meM Age bar3hakara sarasvatI ke bhaNDAra meM zreSThatama
kRtiyA~ samarpita kareMgI! _ jaina Agama bhAratIya sAhitya kI anamola sampadA
haiM, jisa para jaina zAsana kA bhavya prAsAda avalambita hai| usake prakAzana
sampAdana ke sambandha meM vibhinna sthAnoM se prayatna hue haiN| para aise
saMskaraNoM kI apekSA cirakAla se thI jo Agama ke mUla hArda ko spaSTa kara
skeN| Agama ke vyAkhyA-sAhitya ke Aloka meM Agama kI guru granthiyoM ko khola
skeN| isI dRSTi se zramaNasaMgha ke yuvAcArya zrI madhukara muni jI ne isa
mahAna kArya ko sampanna karane kA 57. dekhie-jaina Agama sAhitya : manana aura
mImAMsA-le. devendramuni pR. 713 [31]

Page #35 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
A firm resolve was made, which was praised by all with open hearts. My most
revered Sadguru, Upadhyay Shri Pushkarmuniji M., who was the closest friend and
classmate of Yuvacharyashri, also had the same auspicious thought that the work
of the Agamas is extremely necessary in today's age. By studying them, a person
can save himself from the dazzling glare of materialism. I am extremely
delighted that the work of editing and publishing the Agamas is progressing at a
very rapid pace. Under the guidance of Yuvacharyashri, the new editions of the
Agamas are reaching the hands of enlightened readers and they are being embraced
by the readers with great affection.  The hard work of the wise, expert in the
art of editing, Shri Shobhachandji Bharill, is also noteworthy in making this
edition the best. It is hoped that this edition will be very useful for Agama
practitioners, self-study lovers. May the fragrance of this fragrant flower
spread freely in all directions, this is my auspicious feeling.  Devendra Muni
Shastri Jain Sthanak Neemuch City (Madhya Pradesh) Date: 28 March 1981 [32]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 eka dRr3ha saMkalpa kiyA, jisakI sabhI ne muktakaNTha se prazaMsA kii| mere
parama zraddheya sadguruvarya upAdhyAya zrI puSkaramunijI ma. jo yuvAcAryazrI ke
nikaTatama snehI sahayogI va sahapAThI rahe haiM,unakI bhI yahI maMgala manISA
thI ki AgamoM kA kArya Aja ke yuga meM atyadhika Avazyaka hai| jisake adhyayana
se hI vyakti bhautikavAda kI cakAcauMdha se apane Apa ko bacA sakatA hai| mujhe
parama AhlAda hai ki Agama sampAdana aura prakAzana kA kArya atyanta drutagati
se cala rahA hai| yuvAcAryazrI ke pathapradarzana meM AgamoM ke abhinava
saMskaraNa prabuddha pAThakoM ke karakamaloM meM pahuMca rahe haiM aura unheM
atyanta sneha se pAThakagaNa apanA rahe haiN| prastuta saMskaraNa ko
sarvazreSTha banAne meM prajJAmUrti, sampAdanakalAmarmajJa zrI zobhAcandrajI
bhArilla kA atyadhika zrama bhI ullekhanIya hai| AzA hai yaha saMskaraNa Agama-
abhyAsI, svAdhyAya premI vyaktiyoM ke lie atyanta upayogI rhegaa| isa surabhita
sumana kI sugandha mukta rUpa se digdiganta meM phaile, yahI merI maMgala
bhAvanA hai| devendra muni zAstrI jaina sthAnaka nImaca siTI (madhyapradeza) di.
28 mArca 1981 [32]

Page #36 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Subject  **First Study: Utshepa** Sangrahni Gatha Gautama Bhikshu Pratimā
Gunaratnatap **Studies 2-10: Siddhi of Samudra and other Kumaras** Utshepa
Sangrahni Gatha: Description of Akshobha and others Utshepa Aṇiyasādi Pada:
Seventy-two Kalās Pritidan **Subject Index** **First Section** Studies 2-6
**Second Section** **Third Section** **Chaudahpurva** **Seventh Study: Sāran**
**Eighth Study: Gajasukumar** Utshepa **Six Anāgāras' Sankalpa** **Six Anāgāras'
Entry into Devaki's House** **Devaki's Doubt about their Return and its
Resolution** **Identification of the Sons** **Devaki's Desire for Sons**
**Krishna's Solution to her Worry** **Assurance to Devaki Devi** [33]  **Page
Number** 1 6 7 13 17 18 19 19 20 20 21 24 27 28 29 30 30 30 31 33 34 41 41 45

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 viSaya prathama adhyayana : utkSepa saMgrahaNI gAthA gautama bhikSupratimA
guNaratnatapa 2- 10 adhyayana : samudra Adi kumAroM kI siddhi utkSepa saMgrahaNI
gAthA akSobha Adi kA varNana utkSepa aNIyasAdi pada bahattara kalAe~ prItidAna
viSayAnukrama prathama varga 2-6 adhyayana dvitIya varga tRtIya varga
caudahapUrva saptama adhyayanaH sAraNa aSTama adhyayana : gajasukumAra utkSepa
chaha anagAroM kA saMkalpa chaha anagAroM kA devakI ke ghara praveza devakI ko
punaH Agamana kI zaMkA aura samAdhAna putroM kI pahacAna devakI kI putrAbhilASA
kRSNa dvArA cintAnivAraNa kA upAya devakI devI ko AzvAsana [ 33 ] pRSTha saMkhyA
1 6 7 13 17 18 on of ov 19 19 20 20 21 24 27 28 29 30 30 30 31 33 34 41 41 45

Page #37 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Gajsukumara's birth, Somila Brahmana's entry into Somilakanaya's inner palace.
Arishtanemi's worship, Dharmadeshana and detachment. Gajsukumala's initiation,
Gajmuni's Mahapratima-vahan, Somila's upsarga. Gajsukumala Muni's Siddhi,
Vasudeva Krishna's assistance to the elderly. Information about Gajsukumala's
Siddhi, Somila Brahmana's death, Somila-shava's misfortune, Nikshepa.  Navama
Adhyayana: Sumukh 10-13 Adhyayana: Durmukha etc. Chaturtha Varga 1-10 Adhyayana:
Utksepa Jali etc. Nikshepa Panchama Varga Prathama Adhyayana: Padmavati B.
Arishtanemi's appearance: Dharmadeshana, Dwarkavinasha's cause, Shrikrishna's
anxiety: its pacification, Shrikrishna's becoming a Tirthankara's prophecy,
Shrikrishna's Dharmaghoshana. Padmavati's initiation and Siddhi, 2-8 Adhyayana:
Gauri etc. 9-10 Adhyayana: Mulasri-Muladatta [34]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 gajasukumAra kA janma somila brAhmaNa somilakanyA kA antaHpura meM praveza bha.
ariSTanemi kI upAsanA dharmadezanA aura virakti gajasukumAla kI dIkSA gajamuni
kA mahApratimA-vahana somila dvArA upasarga gajasukumAla muni kI siddhi vAsudeva
kRSNa dvArA vRddha kI sahAyatA gajasukumAla kI siddhi kI sUcanA somila brAhmaNa
kA maraNa somila-zava kI durdazA nikSepa navama adhyayana : sumukha 10-13
adhyayana : durmukha Adi caturtha varga 1-10 adhyayana : utkSepa jAli prabhRti
nikSepa paJcama varga prathama adhyayana : padmAvatI bha. ariSTanemi kA
pardApaNa : dharmadezanA dvArakAvinAza kA kAraNa zrIkRSNa kA udvega : usakA
zamana zrIkRSNa ke tIrthaMkara hone kI bhaviSyavANI zrIkRSNa kI dharmaghoSaNA
padmAvatI kI dIkSA aura siddhi 2-8 adhyayana : gaurI Adi 9-10 adhyayana :
mUlazrI-mUladattA [34]

Page #38 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
105 107 108 110 WWW Sixth Section 1-2 Study: Makai and Kinkam Third Study:
Mudgarapani Arjun Malakar Gosthik men's misconduct Arjun's revenge Rajgriha
Nagar mein aatank Shravak Sudarshan Shreshthi B. Mahavira's arrival Sudarshan's
visit for veneration Arjun's upsarga to Sudarshan Upsarga removal Sudarshan and
Arjun's Bhagavatparyupasana Arjun's pravrajya. Parishha-sahana and Siddhi 4-14
Study: Kashyap etc. Gathapati 15 Study: Atimukta - Gautamswami's bhikchacharya
and Atimukta Gautam and Atimukta's meeting Atimukta's visit for veneration with
Gautam Atimukta's pravrajya: Siddhi 113 115 116 117 119 .120 125 127 129 130 131
16 Study: Alaksh Seventh Section 1-13 Study: Nanda etc. 137 Eighth Section First
Study: Kali 139 Utksep Kali Arya's Ratnavali tap Kali Arya's final sadhana-
siddhi 140 144 [35]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 105 107 108 110 WWW SaSTha varga 1-2 adhyayana : makAI aura kiMkama tRtIya
adhyayana : mudgarapANi arjuna mAlAkAra goSThika puruSoM kA anAcAra arjuna kA
pratizodha rAjagRha nagara meM AtaMka zrAvaka sudarzana zreSThI bha. mahAvIra kA
padArpaNa sudarzana kA vandanArtha gamana sudarzana ko arjuna dvArA upasarga
upasarga nivAraNa sudarzana aura arjuna kI bhagavatparyupAsanA arjuna kI
pravrajyA . parISaha-sahana aura siddhi 4-14 adhyayana : kAzyapa Adi gAthApati
15 adhyayana : atimukta - gautamasvAmI kI bhikSAcaryA aura atimukta gautama aura
atimukta kA samAgama atimukta kA gautama ke sAtha vandanArtha gamana atimukta kI
pravrajyA : siddhi 113 115 116 117 119 .120 125 127 129 130 131 16 adhyayana :
alakSa saptama varga 1-13 adhyayana : naMdA Adi 137 aSTama varga prathama
adhyayana : kAlI 139 utkSepa kAlI AryA kA ratnAvalI tapa kAlI AryA kI antima
sAdhanA-siddhi 140 144 [35]

Page #39 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Second Study: Sukali - Sukali's Kankaavali Tapa ## Third Study: Mahakali -
Mahakali's Laghusinghanishkridit Tapa ## Fourth Study: Krishna Krishna Devi's
Mahasinghanishkridit Tapa ## Fifth Study: Sukrishna Sukrishna's Bhikshu-Pratima-
Aradhana ## Sixth Study: Mahakrisha Mahakrisha's Laghusarvtobhdra Tapa ##
Seventh Study: Veerakrisha Veerakrisha's Mahatsarvtobhdra Tapa ## Eighth Study:
Ramakrisha Ramakrisha's Bhadrottarpratima Tapa ## Ninth Study: Pitrusenakrisha
Pitrusenakrisha's Muktaavali Tapa ## Tenth Study: Mahasenakrisha
Mahasenakrisha's Ayambil-Vardhaman Tapa  ## Conclusion ## Appendix-1: Special
Names Mentioned in the Agamas ## Appendix-2: Personalities ## Appendix-3:
Geographical Locations

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 ..... 152 88 dvitIya adhyayana : sukAlI _ sukAlI kA kanakAvalI tapa 147 tRtIya
adhyayana : mahAkAlI kA laghusiMhaniSkrIDita tapa......... 149 caturtha
adhyayana : kRSNA kRSNA devI kA mahAsiMhaniSkrIDita tapa paMcama adhyayana :
sukRSNA sukRSNA kA bhikSupratimA-ArAdhana 153 SaSTha adhyayana : mahAkRSNA
mahAkRSNA kA laghusarvatobhadra tapa saptama adhyayana : vIrakRSNA vIrakRSNA kA
mahatsarvatobhadra tapa - 160 aSTama adhyayana : rAmakRSNA rAmakRSNA kA
bhadrottarapratimA tapa navama adhyayana : pitRsenakRSNA pitRsenakRSNA kA
muktAvalI tapa dazama adhyayana : mahAsenakRSNA mahAsenakRSNA kA AyaMbila-
varddhamAna tapa 168 nikSepaH upasaMhAra pariziSTa-1 Agama meM varNita vizeSa
nAma 172-176 tIrthaMkara , 'jahA' zabda se gRhIta vyakti, Agama vizeSa, prayukta
vyakti vizeSa-muni Adi, deva vizeSa, kSatriyavarNa ke vyakti, vaizya-varNa ke
vyakti, brAhmaNa varNa ke vyakti, zUdravarNa ke vyakti, maMDalI, pazu, tapa,
svapna, nagarI, dvIpa, yakSAyatana, udyAna, parvata, vRkSa, puSpa-latAdi,
dhAtuvizeSa, bhavana vizeSa, bandhana, vastu, yAna, alaMkAra, pakvAnna, graha,
maNiratnAdi, kssetr| pariziSTa-2 vyakti paricaya 177-183 . indrabhUti gautama,
kRSNa, koNika, cellaNA, jambUsvAmI, jamAli, jitazatru, dhAriNI, mahAbalakumAra,
meghakumAra, skandakamuni, sudharmAsvAmI, zreNika raajaa| bhaugolika paricaya
183-196 kAkaMdI, guNazIla, campA, jambUdvIpa, dvArakA, dUtipalAza caitya,
pUrNabhadra caitya, bhaddilapura, bharatakSetra, rAjagRha, raivataka, vipulagiri
parvata, sahasrAmravana udyAna, sAketa, shraavstii| 170 [36]

Page #40 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Panchamagana-Srisuhummasamipaniyam Atthamam Angam Antagaddasaao
Panchamaganadhara-Srimatsudharmaswamipraneetam-Ashtamam Angam Antakriddasha

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paMcamagaNahara-sirisuhammasAmipaNIyaM aTThamaM aMgaM antagaDadasAo
paJcamagaNadhara-zrImatsudharmasvAmipraNItam-aSTamam aGgam antakRddazA

Page #41 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The five great vows (Mahavratas) are: 1. **Ahimsa** (non-violence) 2. **Satya**
(truthfulness) 3. **Asteya** (non-stealing) 4. **Brahmacharya** (continence) 5.
**Aparigraha** (non-attachment)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================


Page #42 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## First Class ## First Study ## Introduction ## 1 -  - In that time, in that
era, there was a city called Champa. Outside of it was a temple of the Yaksha,
Punnabhadda. In that time, in that era, Aryasudharmma Swami arrived in the city
of Champa. The people of the city [left the city to hear the Dharma discourse.
As long as Aryasudharmma Swami gave the Dharma discourse (the Dharma was
spoken). The people returned to the same direction] from which they had come. In
that time, in that era, Aryajambhu, the attendant of Aryasudharmma Swami [was an
Anugara (disciple). His gotra was Kashyap. His body was seven hands tall. His
form was samchatursra - samchauras. His strength was like a vajra - rishabha
naracha. He was golden in color, like a line of gold drawn on a touchstone and
like the saffron of a lotus. He was a fierce ascetic, a radiant ascetic, a
heated ascetic, a great ascetic, generous, terrible to the enemies of karma,
possessing terrible qualities, a terrible ascetic, a terrible practitioner of
brahmacharya, and therefore a renunciant of bodily modifications. He had
condensed within his body the vast radiance that extended far and wide. He -
Jambhu Swami, not too far and not too close to Aryasudharmma Swami, with his
knees raised and his head lowered, that is, with both knees raised and his head
bent downwards, entered the chamber of meditation, dwelling in restraint and
austerity, cultivating his soul. - Thus. Then, Aryajambhu, the Anugara, had
faith (curiosity) in the truth, doubt, curiosity, especially faith, especially
doubt, and especially curiosity. Faith

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prathama varga prathama adhyayana utkSepa 1 - - teNaM kAleNaM teNaM samaeNaM
caMpAnAmaM nayarI  /  puNNabhadde ceie, vaNNao  /  teNaM kAleNaM teNaM samaeNaM
ajjasuhamme samosarie  /  parisA niggayA jAva [ dhammo kahio  /  parisA jAmeva
disiM pAubbhUyA tAmeva disiM ] paDigayA  /  teNaM kAleNaM teNaM samaeNaM
ajjasuhammassa aMtevAsI ajjajaMbU jAva [ nAmaM aNagAre kAsavagotteNaM sattussehe
samacauraM sasaMThANasaMThie vajjarisahaNArAyasaMghayaNe
kaNayapulayanihasapamhagore uggatave dittatave tattatave mahAtave orAle ghore
ghoraguNe ghoratavassI ghorabaMbhaceravAsI ucchUDhasarIre
saMkhittaviulateyalesse ajjasuhammassa therassa adUrasAmaMte uDDhajANU ahosire
jhANakoTThovagae saMjameNaM tavasA appANaM bhAvemANe viharai  /  taNaM se
ajjajaMbU nAmaM aNagAre jAyasaDDhe jAyasaMsae jAyakouhalle, saMjAyasaDDhe
saMjAyasaMsae saMjAyakouhalle, uppannasaDDhe uppannasaMsae uppannakouhalle
samuppannasaDDhe samuppannasaMsae samuppannakouhalle uTThAe uttttheti| uTThAe
uTThittA jeNAmeva ajjasuhamme there teNAmeva uvaagcchti| uvAgacchittA
ajjasuhamme there tikkhuto AyAhiNapayAhiNaM karei  /  karettA vaMdati nama'sati,
vaMdittA namaMsittA ajjasuhammassa therassa NaccAsanne nAtidUre sussUsamANe
NamaMsamANe abhimuhaM paMjaliuDe viNaeNaM ] pajjuvAsamANe evaM vayAsI 1 usa kAla
aura usa samaya meM caMpA nAma kI nagarI thii| usake bAhara pUrNabhadra nAmaka
yakSa mandira thA  /  usa kAla aura usa samaya meM Arya sudharmA svAmI caMpA
nagarI meM pdhaare| nagara nivAsI jana [ dharma dezanA zravaNArtha nagara se
nikale  /  yAvat Arya sudharmA svAmI ne dharma dezanA dii| (dharma kathana
sunakara ) janatA jisa dizA se AI thI usa dizA meM] vApasa lauttii| usa kAla
aura usa samaya meM Arya sudharmA svAmI ke Arya jaMbU [nAma ke anagAra (ziSya)
the| unakA kAzyapa gotra thA  /  unakA zarIra sAta hAtha U~cA thA  /  unakA
saMsthAna samacaturasra - samacaurasa thaa| unakA saMhanana vajra - RSabha
nArAca thaa| kasauTI para khIMcI huI sone kI rekhA ke samAna tathA kamala kI
kesara ke samAna ve gauravarNa the| ve ugra tapasvI, dIpta tapasvI, tapta
tapasvI, mahAtapasvI, udAra, karmazatruoM ke lie ghora, ghora guNavAle, ghora
tapasvI, ghora brahmacarya kA pAlana karane vAle, ataeva zarIra- saMskAra ke
tyAgI the  /  dUra-dUra taka phailane vAlI vipula tejolezyA ko unhoMne apane
zarIra meM saMkSipta kara rakhI thii| ve - jambU svAmI, Arya sudharmA svAmI ke
na bahuta dUra aura na bahuta najadIka, UrdhvajAnu aura adhaH zira hokara arthAt
donoM ghuTanoM ko khar3e karake evaM zira ko nIce kI tarapha jhukA kara
dhyAnarUpI koSThaka meM praviSTa hokara saMyama aura tapa se apanI AtmA ko
bhAvita karate hue vicarate - the  /  tatpazcAt Arya jaMbU nAmaka anagAra ko
tattva ke viSaya meM zraddhA (jijJAsA) huI, saMzaya huA, kutUhala huA, vizeSa
rUpa se zraddhA huI, vizeSa rUpa se saMzaya huA aura vizeSa rUpa se kutUhala
huaa| zraddhA

Page #43 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  [2]  The Antakrddasha was born, doubt arose, curiosity arose, especially
faith, doubt, and curiosity arose. Then they rose and stood up and went to where
the venerable Aryasudharma was. Arriving there, they circumambulated the
venerable Aryasudharma three times, starting from the south. After
circumambulating, they praised him with words and bowed with their bodies. After
praising and bowing, they stood at a suitable place, neither too far nor too
close to the venerable Aryasudharma, with their hands joined in front of them,
humbly, and with a desire to listen, they spoke in this way:  **Discussion:**
In Jain literature, the Agamas hold a very important place, because the Agamas
are the teachings of the Tirthankaras. The glorious, omniscient, and all-seeing
Tirthankara Bhagwan establishes the path and preaches Dharma for the compassion
and protection of all beings. Therefore, it is said in the **Prashnavyakarana
Sutra**: "**Savva-jag-jiv-rakkhanadayatthayae Bhagavaya pavayanam sukahyam.**"
Their meaning-based sermons are compiled in the form of the **Ganadhara Sutra**,
which is divided into twelve parts, known as **Dwadashangi** in the Agamic
language.  Bhagwan's teachings are divided into four **Anuyogas**: (1)
**Dravyanuyoga**, (2) **Ganitanuyoga**, (3) **Charanakarananuyoga**, and (4)
**Dharmakathanuyoga**. The **Sthananga** and other Agamas are contained within
the **Dravyanuyoga**. The **Bhagavati Sutra** and other Agamas have more
**Ganitanuyoga**. The **Charanakarananuyoga**, i.e., the discussion of the
conduct and Dharma of the Sadhus and Shravakas, is found in the **Acharanga**
and other Sutras. The special form of **Dharmakatha** is found in the
**Jnatadharmakatha**, **Antakrddasha**, and other Agamas.  According to the Jain
Agamas, the **Dwadashangi** is taught by the Tirthankaras. These twelve parts
are: (1) **Acharanga**, (2) **Sutrakritanga**, (3) **Sthananga**, (4)
**Samavayanga**, (5) **Bhagavati Sutra**, (6) **Jnatadharmakatha**, (7)
**Upasakadashanga**, (8) **Antakrddasha**, (9) **Anuttaroppapatik**, (10)
**Prashnavyakarana**, (11) **Vipaksutra**, and (12) **Dristivad**. Of these
twelve parts, all except the twelfth, **Dristivad**, are available in the
present time, and the **Antakrddasha Sutra** is the eighth part.  The subject
matter of this Agama is presented in the form of a preface in the first Sutra,
which is revealed in the well-known conversational style of the Agamas. This is
also called **Upoddhat** or **Utksep**. This method of **Utksep** will continue
for about four Sutras, after which the statement of the subject matter will
begin.  In this first Sutra, the reader's attention is drawn to the time and
place of the creation of the Agama by the words "**Tenam kalena tenam samaena**"
etc. It mainly presents five topics: (1) **The field of description**, (2) **The
situation at that time**, (3) **The presenter of the Agama**, (4) **The
qualifications of the presenter**, and (5) **The questioner**.  In this Sutra,
the time of the first creation of the Agama is first indicated, and then the
place is indicated. It states that "in that time and at that time" there was a
city called **Champa**, and outside it was a **Chaitya** called **Purnbhadra**,
where the venerable Aryasudharma had taught this Agama to his beloved disciple,
the venerable Aryajambhu. Here, the question may arise: "Time and time" are both
indicative of the same meaning, then what is the intention of using two words?
Generally, time and time are synonymous. But in reality, if we look closely,
these two words have different meanings. The word **kal** refers to the
**Utsarpini** and **Avasarpini** forms...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 2] [antakRddazA utpanna huI, saMzaya utpanna huA, kautUhala utpanna huA, vizeSa
rUpa se zraddhA, saMzaya aura kautUhala utpanna huaa| taba ve utthAna kara uTha
khar3e hue aura uTha kara ke jahA~ Arya sudharmA sthavira the, vahIM aaye| Akara
Arya sudharmA sthavira kI tIna bAra dakSiNa dizA se Arambha karake pradakSiNA
kii| pradakSiNA karake vANI se stuti kI aura kAyA se namaskAra kiyaa| stuti aura
namaskAra karake Arya sudharmA sthavira se na bahuta dUra aura na bahuta samIpa
ucita sthAna para sthita hokara, sunane kI icchA karate hue, sanmukha donoM
hAtha jor3akara vinayapUrvaka] paryupAsanA karate hue isa prakAra bole vivecana-
jaina vAGmaya meM AgamoM kA bar3A mahattvapUrNa sthAna hai, kyoMki Agama,
tIrthaMkaropadiSTa haiN| mahAmahima, sarvajJa evaM sarvadarzI tIrthaMkara
bhagavAn tIrtha kI sthApanA karate haiM aura saba jIvoM kI dayA evaM rakSA ke
lie dharmopadeza karate haiM, isIliye praznavyAkaraNa sUtra meM kahA hai-"savva-
jaga-jIva-rakkhaNadayaTThayAe bhagavayA pAvayaNaM sukhiyN|" unake artharUpa
pravacana ko gaNadhara sUtra rUpa meM grathita karate haiM aura vaha bAraha
bhAgoM meM vibhakta hotA hai, jise Agamika bhASA meM dvAdazAMgI kahate haiN|
_bhagavAn kA upadeza cAra anuyogoM meM vibhakta kiyA gayA hai-(1) dravyAnuyoga,
(2) gaNitAnuyoga, (3) caraNakaraNAnuyoga aura (4) dhrmkthaanuyog| sthAnAMga Adi
Agama dravyAnuyoga meM garbhita hote haiN| bhagavatI sUtra Adi AgamoM meM
gaNitAnuyoga adhika hai| caraNakaraNAnuyoga arthAt sAdhu evaM zrAvakoM ke AcAra
dharma kA vivecana AcArAMgAdi sUtroM meM hai| dharmakathA kA vizeSa svarUpa
jJAtAdharmakathA, antagaDadazA Adi AgamoM meM hai| jainAgamoM ke anusAra
dvAdazAMgI kA upadeza tIrthaMkara karate haiM  /  ve bAraha aMga isa prakAra
haiM- (1) AcArAMga, (2) sUtrakRtAMga, (3) sthAnAMga, (4) samavAyAMga, (5)
bhagavatIsUtra, (6) jJAtAdharmakathA, (7) upAsakadazAMga, (8) antakRddazAMga,
(9) anuttaropapAtika, (10) praznavyAkaraNa, (11) vipAkasUtra aura (12)
dRssttivaad| ina bAraha aMgoM meM vartamAna kAla meM bArahaveM dRSTivAda ko
chor3akara anya sarva aMga upalabdha haiM aura unameM antakRddazAMga sUtra
AThavAM aMga sUtra hai| prastuta Agama meM pratipAdya viSaya kI pUrvabhUmikA
rUpa meM prathama sUtra hai, jo Agama-prasiddha saMvAdAtmaka zailI se prakaTa
hotA hai| ise upodghAta yA utkSepa bhI kahA jAtA hai| utkSepa kI yaha vidhi
karIba cAra sUtra taka rahegI, tadantara pratipAdya viSaya ke kathana kA
prArambha hogaa| isa prathama sUtra meM "teNaM kAleNaM teNaM samaeNaM" Adi
zabdoM dvArA AgamaracanA ke samaya aura sthAna kI ora pAThaka kA dhyAna
khIMcakara isameM mukhyataH pAMca viSayoM kA nirUpaNa prastuta kiyA gayA hai -
(1) varNanakSetra, (2) usa samaya kI paristhiti, (3) Agama ke pratipAdaka, (4)
pratipAdaka kI yogyatA aura (5) prshnkrtaa| prastuta sUtra meM prathama Agama-
racanA ke samaya kI ora aura bAda meM sthAna kI ora saMketa kiyA gayA hai|
isameM batAyA hai ki "usa kAla aura usa samaya" meM caMpA nAma kI eka nagarI thI
aura usake bAhara pUrNabhadra nAmaka caitya thaa| jahA~ para Arya sudharmA svAmI
ne apane priya ziSya Arya jaMbU ko prastuta Agama kA bodha karAyA thaa| yahA~
yaha prazna ho sakatA hai ki "kAla aura samaya" donoM eka hI artha ke dyotaka
haiM, phira do zabdoM kA prayoga karane kA kyA Azaya hai? sAdhAraNataH samaya
aura kAla paryAyavAcI haiN| parantu vAstava meM dekhA jAe to ye donoM zabda
bhinnArthaka haiN| kAla zabda utsarpiNI aura avasarpiNI rUpa

Page #44 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[First Section] is the indicator of the time cycle and the word "time" is the
indicator of the time of the person who happened in that time cycle. Here, the
meaning of that "time" is that this Agam was recited in the fourth Ara of this
Avasarpini. But it is not clear at what time it was recited in the fourth Ara?
Because the fourth Ara is 42 thousand years less than one Koti-Koti Sagaropama.
Therefore, this has been clarified by giving the words "Teṇam Samaeṇam". The
meaning of that time is that when Ary Sudharma Swami was wandering and arrived
in the city of Champa, at that time he recited the present Agam to Jambu Swami.
This implies that the present Agam was recited after the Nirvana of Bhagwan
Mahavira. In the Vritti, Abhaydevsuriji has interpreted "Kal" as the fourth
division of Avasarpini, i.e., the fourth Ara, and "Samaeṇam" as the specific
time.  After this, it has been told that at that time and at that time, Ary
Sudharma Swami arrived in the city of Champa and stayed in the Purnabhadra
Chaitya outside the city. His physical form, his lineage and his qualities have
not been described in the present Agam, because it has been described in detail
in the Nayadhammakhao. Therefore, only a hint has been given here. This makes it
clear that the proponent of the present Agam was Ary Sudharma Swami, the fifth
Ganadhar and the first Pattadhar of Bhagwan Mahavira, and his disciple Ary Jambu
Swami was the questioner.  The present description raises a question: who are
the creators of the Utshep-Upadhyay who present the wandering of Ary Sudharma
Swami? The solution to this is that just as Sudharma Swami has mentioned the
Ganadharas like Gautamadi, in the same way, the Acharyas like Prabhavadi who
came after Ary Jambu Swami have described Ary Sudharma Swami in this Utshep.
Therefore, it appears that the creators of this Upadhyay are Acharya Prabhavadi.
Thus, the Upalakshan-meaning of the word "Teṇam Samaeṇam" is that after the
fourth Ara, Ary Sudharma Swami arrived in the city of Champa and stayed in the
Chaitya named Purnabhadra outside the city of Champa. Hearing the auspicious
news of his arrival, the citizens came to see him and returned after listening
to the Dharma Upadesh. At that time, his disciple Ary Jambu Swami, with humility
and devotion, stood at his feet and spoke in humble words. What he said will be
told later.  In the present Sutra, the Sutrakar has only mentioned the name of
the field of description and the describer, etc. To know the complete form of
the place of description and the describer, a hint has been given to look at
other Agams. Therefore, the description of the city of Champa and the
Purnabhadra Chaitya located in it, and the description from the life history of
Ary Sudharma Swami who arrived there to the arrival of the Parishad, should be
known from the Aupapatik, etc. Agams. In it, the city of Champa and the
Purnabhadra Chaitya have been described in detail. In such places, the word
"Vaṇṇao" is the indicator of these described subjects.  "Vaṇṇao" is the
indicator of the describer. The section that describes is used with the word
"Vaṇṇak". Wherever the word "Vaṇṇak" is mentioned before any word, it will
indicate the text that describes the object indicated by that word.  Here, the
question may arise that even though the Ang Sutras have a prominent place in the
Agams, why are the readers made dependent on the Anga-Bahya Agams for the texts
described in the Ang Sutras? Agam

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prathama varga] kAlacakra kA bodhaka hai aura samaya zabda usa kAlacakra meM
hue vyakti ke samaya kA bodhaka hai| yahA~ para usa "kAla" kA yaha artha huA ki
isa avasarpiNI ke caturtha Are meM isa Agama kI vAcanA dI gaI thii| parantu
isase yaha spaSTa nahIM ki caturtha Are meM kisa samaya vAcanA dI gaI thI?
kyoMki caturtha ArA 42 hajAra varSa kama eka koTA-koTI sAgaropama kA hai| ataH
isa bAta ko "teNaM samaeNaM" ye pada dekara spaSTa kiyA hai| usa samaya kA yaha
artha hai ki jisa samaya Arya sudharmA svAmI vicaraNa karate hue caMpA nagarI
meM padhAre, usa samaya unhoMne jambU svAmI ko prastuta Agama kI vAcanA dii|
isase yaha dhvanita hotA hai ki prastuta Agama kI vAcanA bhagavAn mahAvIra ke
nirvANa ke bAda dI gaI thii| vRtti meM abhayadevasUrijI ne kAla se avasarpiNI kA
caturtha vibhAga arthAt cauthA ArA aura 'samaeNaM' kA vizeSa kAla artha kiyA
hai| isake pazcAt yaha batAyA gayA hai ki usa kAla aura usa samaya meM Arya
sudharmA svAmI caMpA nagarI meM padhAre aura nagarI ke bAhara pUrNabhadra caitya
meM tthhre| unakI zarIra-saMpadA, unake kula evaM unake guNoM kA varNana
prastuta Agama meM nahIM kiyA gayA hai, kyoMki nAyAdhammakahAo meM isakA vistAra
se varNana kiyA gayA hai| ataH yahA~ kevala saMketa kara diyA hai| isase yaha
spaSTa hotA hai ki prastuta Agama ke pratipAdaka bhagavAn mahAvIra ke paMcama
gaNadhara evaM prathama paTTadhara Arya sudharmA svAmI the aura unake ziSya Arya
jambU svAmI prazna-kartA the| prastuta vivaraNa se aisA prazna hotA hai ki Arya
sudharmA svAmI kA vicaraNa prastuta karane vAle utkSepa-upodghAta ke kartA kauna
haiM? isakA samAdhAna yaha hai ki jaise sudharmA svAmI ne gautamAdi gaNadharoM
kA ullekha kiyA hai, usI taraha Arya jaMbU svAmI ke bAda hone vAle prabhavAdi
AcAryoM ne isa utkSepa meM Arya sudharmA svAmI kA varNana kiyA hai| ataH aisA hI
parilakSita hotA hai ki isa upodghAta ke kartA AcArya prabhavAdi hI hoN| isa
prakAra 'teNaM samaeNaM' zabda kA upalakSaNa-artha yaha hotA hai ki-caturtha
Araka ke anantara Arya sudharmA svAmI caMpA nagarI meM padhAre aura caMpA nagarI
ke bAhara pUrNabhadra nAmaka caitya meM tthhre| unake Agamana kA zubha-saMdeza
sunakara nAgarika unake darzanArtha Ae aura dharmopadeza sunakara vApasa lauTa
gye| usa samaya unake ziSya Arya jaMbU svAmI vinaya-bhakti evaM zraddhApUrvaka
unake caraNoM meM upasthita hokara vinamra zabdoM meM bole| kyA bole, yaha Age
kahA jaaegaa| prastuta sUtra meM sUtrakartA ne varNana-kSetra evaM varNana-kartA
Adi ke nAma kA ullekha mAtra kiyA hai| varNana-sthAna evaM varNana-kartA ke
samparNa svarUpa ko jAnane ke liye anya AgamoM ko dekhane kA saMketa kara diyA
hai| ataH caMpA nagarI evaM usameM rahe hue pUrNabhadra caitya kA varNana evaM
usameM padhAre hue Arya sudharmA svAmI ke jIvana-paricaya se lekara pariSad ke
AvAgamana taka kA varNana aupapAtika Adi AgamoM se jAnanA caahie| usameM caMpA
nagarI evaM pUrNabhadra caitya kA vistAra se varNana kiyA gayA hai| aise sthAnoM
para ina varNita viSayoM kA saMsUcaka zabda hai-"vnnnno|" "vaNNao' yaha pada
varNaka kA bodhaka hai  /  varNana karane vAlA prakaraNa varNaka zabda se
vyavahRta kiyA jAtA hai| Age jahA~-jahA~ jisa pada ke Age varNaka pada kA
ullekha mile, vahA~-vahA~ para usa pada se saMsUcita padArtha kA varNana karane
vAle pATha kI ora saMketa rhegaa| yahA~ yaha prazna ho sakatA hai ki AgamoM meM
aMga sUtroM kA hI sthAna pramukha hone para bhI yahA~ aMga sUtroM meM varNita
pAThoM ke lie pAThakoM ko aMgabAhya AgamoM para kyoM avalaMbita kiyA jAtA hai?
Agama

Page #45 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
4] [ Antakrid Dasha According to the composition, the limbs were created first
and then the appendages. In such a situation, how can the 'Vannao' text be
appropriate in these Angasutras? Antakrid Dasha is an Angasutra and Aupapatik
Sutra is an Upanga, then how can the reference of Aupapatik Sutra be desired in
Antagad? The Angasutras have the highest place in the Agamas. It is an
undeniable truth that these Angasutras are also the basis for the composition of
the Upangas. Nevertheless, the main reason for the Angasutras to instruct the
Upangasutras is that this order was not taken care of while writing down the
Agamas. Four roots, four holes, Aupapatik Sutra, Acharang Sutra, Stanang Sutra,
no reference is given in any of these Sutras. It appears that these were written
down first. Subsequently, while writing down, it was not considered appropriate
to describe the subject in detail in one Sutra again and again. 2–““If, O
Venerable! by the Samana, the Aigarena, as far as [the Tithayarena, the Self-
Enlightened, the Best of Men, the Lion of Men, the Lotus of Men, the
Gandahastina of Men, the Best of the World, the Lord of the World, the
Benefactor of the World, the Lamp of the World, the Special Exertion of the
World, the Giver of Fearlessness, the Giver of Refuge, the Giver of Eyes of
Faith, the Giver of the Path of Dharma, the Giver of Enlightenment, the Giver of
Dharma, the Preacher of Dharma, the Leader of Dharma, the Charioteer of Dharma,
the Wheel-Turning King of Dharma, the Holder of Unhindered Perfect Knowledge and
Vision, the Destroyer of the Falsehood of Karmic Bonds, the Conqueror of
Passion, etc., and the Victor of Other Beings by Preaching, the One who has
Crossed the Ocean of Samsara Himself and the One who Saves Others, the One who
has Attained Enlightenment Himself and the One who Gives Enlightenment to
Others, the One who is Free from Karmic Bonds Himself and the One who Liberates
Others by Preaching, the Omniscient, the All-Seeing, the Shiva - Free from
Troubles, the Achalachalan - Free from Actions, etc., the Aruz - Free from
Physical and Mental Pain, the Infinite, the Imperishable, the Uninterrupted, and
the Non-Recurring - Free from Recurrence, the Eternal Place called Siddhigathi]
the Samana Bhagavan has attained, this is the meaning of the seventh Anga
Upasakadasang, which I have just heard from your lotus mouth. O Venerable! Now
please tell me what meaning the Samana Bhagavan Mahavira has given to the eighth
Anga Antakrid Dasang?" 1. Nayadhammakhao - - Shruta. 1, A. 1 - Page 5, the
original text is "Thanamuvagaean" instead of "Thanam Sampattenam".

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 4] [ antakRddazA racanA ke anusAra pahale aMgoM kI aura bAda meM upAMgoM kI
racanA huI hai| aisI sthiti meM ina aMgasUtroM meM 'vaNNao' pATha kaise ucita
baiTha sakate haiM? aMtakRddazAMga aMgasUtra hai aura aupapAtikasUtra upAMga
hai, to phira aMtagaDa meM aupapAtika sUtra kA sandarbha kaise abhISTa ho sakatA
hai? AgamoM meM aMgasUtroM kA sthAna sarvocca hai| upAMgoM kI racanA kA AdhAra
bhI ye aMgasUtra hI haiM, yaha nirvivAda satya hai| phira bhI aMgasUtroM meM
upAMgasUtroM kA nirdeza karane kA mukhya kAraNa AgamoM ko lipibaddha karate
samaya isa krama kA dhyAna nahIM rakhanA hai| cAra mUla, cAra cheda,
aupapAtikasUtra, AcArAMgasUtra, sthAnAMgasUtra, inameM kisI sUtra kA uddharaNa
nahIM diyaa| pratIta hotA hai ki ina ko lipibaddha prathama kara liyA gayA thaa|
tatpazcAt lipibaddha karate samaya jisa viSaya kA varNana vistArapUrvaka eka
sUtra meM kara diyA gayA, usa kA paunaH punyena varNana karanA ucita nahIM
samajhA gayA  /  2-'"jai NaM bhaMte! samaNeNaM AigareNaM, jAva [ titthayareNaM
sayaMsaMbuddheNaM, purisuttameNaM, purisasIheNaM, purisavarapuMDarIeNaM,
purisavaragaMdhahatthiNA, loguttameNaM, loganAheNaM, logahieNaM, logapaIveNaM,
logapajjoyagareNaM, abhayadaeNaM, saraNadaeNaM, cakkhudaeNaM, maggadaeNaM,
bohidaeNaM, dhammadaeNaM, dhammadesaNaM, dhammanAyageNaM, dhammasArahiNA,
dhammavaracAuraMtacakkavaTTiNA, appaDihayavaranANadaMsaNadhareNaM,
viyaTTachaumeNaM, jiNeNaM, jAvaeNaM, tinneNaM, tAraeNaM, buddheNaM, bohaeNaM,
mutteNaM, moageNaM, savvanneNaM, savvadarisaNeNaM
sivamayalamaruamaNaMtamakkhayamavvA bAhamapuNarAvattiaM sAsayaM ThANaM ]
saMpatteNaM, 1 sattamassa aMgassa uvAsagadasANaM ayamaTThe paNNatte, aTThamassa
NaM bhaMte! aMgassa aMtagaDadasANaM samaio ke aTTe paNNatte?" "evaM khalu jaMbU
! samaNeNaM jAva saMpatteNaM aTThamassa aMgassa aMtagaDadasANaM aTTha vaggA
pnnnnttaa|" "he bhagavan ! yadi zrutadharma kI Adi karane vAle tIrthaMkara,
[guru ke upadeza ke binA svayaM hI bodha ko prApta, puruSoM meM uttama, karma-
zatru kA vinAza karane meM parAkramI hone ke kAraNa puruSoM meM siMha ke samAna,
puruSoM meM zreSTha kamala ke samAna, puruSoM meM gaMdhahastI ke samAna, arthAt
jaise gaMdhahastI kI gaMdha se hI anya hastI bhAga jAte haiM, usI prakAra jinake
puNya prabhAva se hI Iti, bhIti Adi kA vinAza ho jAtA hai, loka meM uttama, loka
ke nAtha, . loka kA hita karane vAle, loka meM pradIpa ke samAna, loka meM
vizeSa udyota karane vAle, abhaya dene vAle, zaraNadAtA, zraddhA rUpa netra ke
dAtA, dharmamArga ke dAtA, bodhidAtA, dezavirati aura sarvaviratirUpa dharma ke
dAtA, dharma ke upadezaka, dharma ke nAyaka, dharma ke sArathi, cAroM gatiyoM kA
anta karane vAle dharma ke cakravartI, kahIM bhI pratihata na hone vAle
kevalajJAnadarzana ke dhAraka, ghAtikarma rUpa chadma ke nAzaka, rAgAdi ko
jItane vAle aura upadeza dvArA anya prANiyoM ko jitAne vAle aura saMsAra -
sAgara se svayaM tire hue aura dUsaroM ko tArane vAle, svayaM bodhaprApta aura
dUsaroM ko bodha dene vAle, svayaM karma-bandhanase mukta aura upadeza dvArA
dUsaroM ko mukta karanevAle, sarvajJa, sarvadarzI, ziva - upadrava rahita,
acalacalana Adi kriyA se rahita, aruja - zArIrika mAnasika vyAdhi kI vedanA se
rahita, ananta akSaya avyAbAdha aura apunarAvRtti - punarAgamana se rahita
siddhigati nAmaka zAzvata sthAna ko] prApta zramaNa bhagavAn ne saptama aMga
upAsakadazAGga kA yaha artha pratipAdana kiyA hai, jisa ko abhI maiMne Apake
mukhAraviMda se sunA hai| he bhagavan ! aba yaha batalAne kI kRpA kareM ki
zramaNa bhagavAn mahAvIra ne aSTama aMga antakRddazAGga kA kyA artha batAyA
hai?" 1. nAyAdhammakahAo - - zruta. 1, a. 1 - pR. 5 meM mUla pATha " ThANaM
saMpatteNaM" na hokara "ThANamuvagaeNaM" hai  /

Page #46 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[First Chapter] [5  Arya Sudharma Swami said - "Jambu! The Shraman Bhagwan has
expounded the eight sections of the Ashtama Antakrid Dashaang." Discussion - It
is clear from the observation of the Agam-Paripati that all the Agams are in the
form of questions and answers of Arya Jambu Swami and Arya Sudharma Swami. Arya
Jambu Swami asks questions and Arya Sudharma Swami answers them. These questions
and answers appear before us today in the form of Agams. This clarity is
reflected in the present Sutra. The Antakrid Dashaang Sutra begins with such
questions and answers. In this Sutra, Arya Jambu Swami has presented the
curiosity of hearing the Ashtama Antakrid Dashaang Agam through questions and
answers. Actually, there are three types of Agams - (1) Atmagam, (2) Anantaragam
and (3) Paramparagam: The knowledge of Agams without the teachings of the Gurus
is called Atmagam. For the Tirthankar Paramatma, Arthagam is Atmagam and for the
Ganadharas, Sutraagam is Atmagam. (The original Agam is called Sutraagam, the
Agam in the form of the meaning of the Sutra is called Arthagam and the Agam in
the form of both Sutra and meaning is called Tadubhayagam). The knowledge of
Agam obtained from a person who is himself an Atmagamdhari is called
Anantaragam. For Ganadhar Bhagwan, Arthagam is Anantaragam and for Jambu Swami
and other Ganadhar-Shishyas, Sutraagam is Anantaragam. The knowledge of Agam
which is not obtained from the Atmagamdhari Mahapurush but is obtained from the
tradition of his disciples, disciples etc., is called Paramparagam. For example,
Arthagam is Paramparagam for Jambu Swami and other Ganadhar Shishyas and both
Sutra and meaning of Agam are Paramparagam for all the Sadhakas after them.
Therefore, it is clear that the present Antakrid Dashaang Sutra is Atmagam for
the Tirthankar Paramatma, Anantaragam for the Ganadharas and Paramparagam for
the Ganadhar-Shishyas from the point of view of meaning. Similarly, this Agam is
Atmagam for the Ganadharas, Anantaragam for the Ganadhar-Shishyas and
Paramparagam for the Ganadhar-Prishishyas from the point of view of the Sutra.
The Tirthankar Paramatma expounds the Agams in the form of meaning, the
Ganadharas weave them into the form of Sutras. Actually, Ganadhar Bhagwan are
the preachers of the substance obtained from the Tirthankar Paramatma, they are
not the viewers or creators of it themselves. The present Sutra states that Arya
Sudharma said to Jambu Anugar - "O Jambu! Bhagwan Mahavira has expounded the
eight sections of the Antagad Sutra." The word "Vagga" used in this Sutra means
section. Section means a division of the scripture, a chapter or a group of
studies. The request presented by Arya Jambu Swami after knowing the present
views of Arya Sudharma Swami is now shown in the third Sutra. 1. Anuyogadwar
Praman Vishay-Sutra-147

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prathama varga] [5 Arya sudharmA svAmI bole-"jambU! zramaNa bhagavAn ne aSTama
antakRddazAMga ke ATha varga pratipAdana kie haiN|" vivecana-Agama-paripATI ke
paryavalokana se yaha spaSTa hotA hai ki sarva Agama Arya jaMbU svAmI aura Arya
sudharmA svAmI ke praznottara rUpa haiN| Arya jaMbU svAmI prazna karate haiM
aura Arya sudharmA svAmI usakA uttara dete haiN| yahI praznottara Aja hamAre
sAmane AgamoM ke rUpa meM dikhAI dete haiN| isakI spaSTatA prastuta sUtra meM
jhalakatI hai| antakRddazAMga sUtra kA zubhAraMbha isa prakAra ke praznottara se
hI hotA hai| isa sUtra meM praznottara dvArA Arya jaMbU svAmI ne aSTama
antakRddazAMga Agama ke zravaNavarNana kI jijJAsA prastuta kI hai| vastutaH
AgamoM ke tIna prakAra haiM - (1) AtmAgama, (2) anantarAgama aura (3)
paraMparAgamaH  /  gurujanoM ke upadeza binA svayameva AgamoM kA jJAna honA
AtmAgama kahalAtA hai| tIrthaMkara paramAtmA ke liye arthAgama AtmAgama rUpa
haiM aura gaNadharoM ke lie sUtrAgama AtmAgamarUpa haiM  /  (mUlarUpa Agama ko
sUtrAgama, sUtra ke artha rUpa Agama ko arthAgama aura sUtra aura artha
ubhayarUpa Agama ko tadubhayAgama kahate haiN)| svayaM AtmAgamadhArI puruSa se
prApta hone vAlA AgamajJAna anantarAgama kahA gayA hai| gaNadhara bhagavAn ke
liye arthAgama anantarAgama rUpa hai tathA jaMbU svAmI Adi gaNadhara-ziSyoM ke
liye sUtrAgama anantarAgamarUpa hai| AtmAgamadhArI mahApuruSa se prApta na
hokara jo Agama-jJAna unake ziSya-praziSya Adi kI paramparA se prApta hotA hai,
vaha paramparAgama kahA jAtA hai| jaise jaMbU svAmI Adi gaNadharaziSyoM ke liye
arthAgama paramparA rUpa hai tathA ina ke bAda ke sabhI sAdhakoM ke liye sUtra
evaM artha donoM prakAra ke Agama paramparAgama ata: yaha spaSTa hI hai ki
prastuta antakRddazAMgasUtra artha kI dRSTi se tIrthaMkara paramAtmA ke liye
AtmAgama hai, gaNadharoM ke liye anantarAgama hai aura gaNadhara-ziSyoM ke liye
paramparAgama hai| isI prakAra yaha Agama sUtra kI dRSTi se gaNadharoM ke liye
AtmAgama, gaNadhara-ziSyoM ke liye anantarAgama aura gaNadharapraziSyoM ke liye
paramparAgama hai| artharUpa se AgamoM kA pratipAdana tIrthaMkara paramAtmA
karate haiM, gaNadhara unheM sUtra rUpa meM gUMthate haiN| vastutaH gaNadhara
bhagavAn tIrthaMkara paramAtmA se prApta kie hue padArtha ke pracAraka haiM,
svayaM usake draSTA yA sraSTA nahIM haiN| prastuta sUtra meM batAyA gayA hai ki
Arya sudharmA ne jaMbU anagAra se kahA- he jaMbU! bhagavAn mahAvIra ne
antagaDasUtra ke ATha varga pratipAdana kiye haiN| isa sUtra meM prayukta
"vaggA" zabda varga kA bodhaka hai| varga kA artha hotA hai zAstra kA eka
vibhAga, prakaraNa yA adhyayanoM kA smuuh| Arya sudharmA svAmI ke prastuta
vicAroM ko jAnakara Arya jaMbU svAmI ne jo nivedana prastuta kiyA vaha aba
tRtIya sUtra meM darzAyA jAtA hai 1. anuyogadvAra pramANa viSaya-sUtra-147

Page #47 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
"Jaina, Venerable! The Samana, having attained liberation, has expounded eight
sections of the eighth Anga, Antakṛddasa. Venerable! How many studies has the
Samana, having attained liberation, expounded in the first section of the
Antakṛddasa?"  "Thus, Jambū! The Samana, having attained liberation, has
expounded ten studies in the first section of the eighth Anga, Antakṛddasa. They
are, as follows:  (1) Gautama, (2) Samudra, (3) Sāgara, (4) Gambhīra, (5)
Sthimita, (6) Acala, (7) Kampilya, (8) Akṣobha, (9) Prasenajit, and (10)
Viṣṇukumāra.  "Jaina, Venerable! The Samana, having attained liberation, has
expounded ten studies in the first section of the eighth Anga, Antakṛddasa.
Venerable! What is the meaning of the first study in the first section of the
Antakṛddasa, as expounded by the Samana, having attained liberation?"

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 [antakRddazA 3-"jaiNaM bhaMte! samaNeNaMjAva saMpatteNaM aTThamassa
aMgassaaMtagaDadasANaM aTTha vaggA paNNattA, paDhamassa NaM bhaMte! vaggassa
aMtagaDadasANaM samajeNaM jAva saMpatteNaM kai ajjhayaNA paNNattA?" evaM khalu
jaMbU! samaNeNaM jAva saMpatteNaM aTThamassa aMgasasa aMtagaDadasANaM paDhamassa
vaggassa dasa ajjhayaNA paNNattA, taM jahAsaMgahaNI-gAhA "goyama-samudda-sAgara-
gaMbhIre ceva hoi thimie y| ayale kaMpille khalu akkhobha-paseNai-viNhU"  //
(Arya jaMbU Arya sudharmA svAmI se nivedana karane lage)- "he bhagavan ! yadi
zramaNa yAvat mokSaprApta mahAvIra svAmI ne AThaveM aMga antakRddazA ke ATha
varga kathana kiye haiM, to bhagavan ! yAvat mokSa prApta mahAvIra svAmI ne
antaddakRzAMga sUtra ke prathama varga ke kitane adhyayana pratipAdana kiye
haiM?" (jaMbU svAmI ke isa prazna kA samAdhAna karate hue Arya sudharmA svAmI
bole)-"jaMbU! yAvat mokSaprApta mahAvIra svAmI ne AThaveM aMga antakRddazA ke
prathama varga ke daza adhyayana kahe haiM, jaise ki (1) gautama, (2) samudra,
(3) sAgara, (4) gaMbhIra, (5) stimita, (6) acala, (7) kAmpilya, (8) akSobha, (9)
prasenajit aura (10) vissnnukumaar| vivecana-sUtra ke avAntara vibhAga ko yA
grantha ke eka aMza ko adhyayana kahate haiN| adhyayana zabda kI vyAkhyA eka
zloka meM isa prakAra kI hai ajjhapparasANayaNaM kammANaM avacao uvciyaannN|
aNuvacao ca navANaM, tamhA ajjhynnmicchNti|| jisase adhyAtma- hRdaya ko zubha
dhyAna meM sthita kiyA jAtA hai, jisake dvArA pUrva saMcita karmoM kA nAza hotA
hai aura navIna karmoM kA bandhana rukatA hai, usakA nAma adhyayana hai|
4-"jaiNaM bhaMte! samaNeNaM jAvare saMpatteNaM aTThamassa aMgassa
aMtagaDadasANaM paDhamassa vaggassa dasa ajjhayaNA paNNattA paDhamassaNaM
bhaMte! ajjhayaNassa aMtagaDadasANaM samajeNaM jAva saMpatteNaM ke aTe
paNNatte?" Arya sudharmA svAmI se Arya jaMbU svAmI ne isa prakAra nivedana
kiyA-"bhagavan ! yadi zramaNa yAvat mokSaprApta mahAvIra ne AThaveM aMga
antagaDasUtra ke prathama varga ke daza adhyayana kathana kiye haiM to he
bhagavan ! zramaNa yAvat mokSaprApta mahAvIra svAmI ne antagaDasUtra ke prathama
varga ke prathama adhyayana kA kyA artha pratipAdana kiyA hai?" 1. prathama
varga, sUtra 2. 2. prathama varga, sUtra 2. 3. prathama varga, sUtra 2. 4.
prathama varga, sUtra 2.

Page #48 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[7 First Class] Gautama 5- "Thus, Jambū! At that time, at that time, there was a
city named Dwārakā. It was twelve yojanas long, nine yojanas wide, built by the
skill of the wealth-god Kubera, with golden ramparts (forts), adorned with
canopies studded with five-colored gems, resembling the city of Kubera,
Alkapuri, a place of joy and play, truly like the heavenly realm, worth seeing,
pleasing to the mind, beautiful, and exemplary. Outside that Dwārakā city, in
the northeast direction, there was a mountain named Revat. On that Revat
mountain, there was a garden named Nandana. The description of that garden
should be understood as similar to the description of the forest in the
Aupapātika Sutra. There was a temple of the Yaksha named Surapriya, it was very
ancient, and surrounded on all sides by a forest tract full of trees. In the
middle of that forest tract was a beautiful Ashoka tree." Discussion-"Dwārakā"–
The Sanskrit form of this word is Dwāravati. This is the name of the city of
Krishna Maharaj. In the Vedic tradition, this is called Dwārakā. Thus, both
Dwāravati and Dwārakā are words that refer to the same city. According to this
sutra, the city of Dwārakā was "Duwalasajoyanaayāma (Dwādashayोजनाayāma) i.e.
twelve yojanas long. In the present context, the measure of yojana is to be done
with "ātmāngula". In the time of the people who are there, their finger is
called ātmāngula. 96 angulas make one dhanuṣ, and two thousand dhanuṣ make one
kos, and four kos make one yojana. Thus, the length of the city of Dwārakā was
48 kos. The city of Dwārakā was built in a vast area of 48 kos. 'Dhanavai-mai-
nimmāyā' i.e. - the city whose construction was done by the intelligence of
Kubera, is called Dhanapatiमतिनिर्माता. The question arises, do any gods like
Kubera come to build cities in the mortal realm? The solution to this lies in a
mystery-"When the Yadavas were terrified by the terror of Jarasandha, the enemy
of Vasudeva, and left Shauryapur and reached Saurashtra near the sea, then
seeing a suitable and safe place for the city, Krishna Maharaj performed the
eighth penance there, worshiped the wealth-god Vaishramana. Pleased by the
worship, the god Vaishramana appeared. Then Krishna Maharaj requested him to
build a city. Thereafter, the wealth-god built a city there quickly according to
the divine plan of the divine beings. The gates of the city were very large,
hence it was named Dwāravati. Later, this Dwāravati came to be called Dwārakā.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 [7 prathama varga] gautama 5- "evaM khalu jaMbU! teNaM kAleNaM teNaM samaeNaM
bAravaI nAmaM nayarI hotthaa| duvAlasajoyaNAyAmA, nava-joyaNa-vitthiNNA,
dhaNavai-mai-nimmAyA, cAmIkara-pAgArA, nAnAmaNi-paMcavaNNa-kavisIsagamaMDiyA,
surammA, alakApurI-saMkAsA, pamudiya-pakkIliyA paccakkhaM devalogabhUyA pAsAdIyA
darisaNijjA abhirUvA pddiruuvaa| tIse NaM bAravaIe NayarIe bahiyA
uttarapurasthime disIbhAe ettha NaM revayae nAmaM pavvae hotthaa| tattha NaM
revayae pavvae naMdaNavaNe nAmaM ujjANe hotthaa| vnnnno| surappie nAmaM
jakkhAyataNe hotthA, porANe, se NaM egeNaM vaNasaMDeNaM savvao samaMtA
saMparikkhitte, asogvrpaayve|" (Arya sudharmA svAmI jaMbU anagAra ke prazna kA
uttara dete hue bole-) "jaMbU! usa kAla aura usa samaya meM dvArakA nAma kI eka
nagarI thii| vaha bAraha yojana lambI, nau yojana caur3I, vaizramaNa deva kubera
ke kauzala se nirmita, svarNa-prAkAroM (koToM) se yukta, paMcavarNa ke maNiyoM
se jaTita kaMgaroM se sazobhita thI aura kubera kI nagarI alakApurI sadRza
pratIta hotI thii| pramoda aura krIDA kA sthAna thI, sAkSAt devaloka ke samAna
dekhane yogya, citta ko prasanna karane vAlI, darzanIya thI, abhirUpa thI,
pratirUpa thii| usa dvArakA nagarI ke bAhara IzAna koNa meM raivataka nAma kA
parvata thaa| usa raivataka parvata para nandanavana nAma kA eka udyAna thaa|
usa udyAna kA varNana aupapAtikasUtra ke vana-varNana ke samAna jAna lenA
caahie| vahA~ surapriya nAmaka yakSa kA eka maMdira thA, vaha bahuta prAcIna thA
aura cAroM ora se ane vRkSasamudAya se yukta vanakhaMDa se ghirA huA thaa| usa
vanakhaMDa ke madhya meM eka sundara azoka vRkSa thaa|" vivecana-"bAravaI"- isa
pada kA saMskRtarUpa dvAravatI hotA hai| yaha kRSNa mahArAja kI nagarI kA nAma
hai  /  vaidika paraMparA meM isI ko dvArakA kahate haiM  /  isa prakAra
dvAravatI tathA dvArakA ye donoM zabda eka hI nagarI ke bodhaka haiN| isa sUtra
ke anusAra dvArakA nagarI "duvAlasajoyaNAyAmA (dvAdazayojanAyAmA) arthAt bAraha
yojana lambI thii| prastuta meM yojana kA mApa 'AtmAMgula' se karanA hai| jisa
kAla meM jo manuSya hote haiM apane agula ko AtmAMgula kahate haiN| 96 aMgula kA
eka dhanuSa hotA hai aura do hajAra dhanaSoM kA eka kosa, tathA cAra kosa kA eka
yojana hotA hai| isa taraha dvArakA nagarI kI lambAI 48 kosa kI thii| 48 kosa
jitane lambe vizAla kSetra meM dvArakA nagarI ko basAyA gayA thaa| 'dhaNavai-
mai-nimmAyA' arthAt-jisa nagarI kA nirmANa kubera kI buddhi dvArA huA, use
dhanapatimatinirmAtA kahate haiN| prazna hotA hai ki kyA martyaloka meM koI deva
kuberAdi nagarI kA nirmANa karane Ate haiM? isakA samAdhAna eka rahasya meM
hai-"jaba yAdava jarAsaMdha prativAsudeva ke AtaMka se AtaMkita ho gae aura
zauryapura ko chor3akara samudra ke samIpa saurASTra meM pahuMce, taba nagarI ke
yogya tathA surakSita sthAna dekhakara kRSNa mahArAja ne vahA~ aTThama tapa
kiyA, dhanapati vaizramaNa kA ArAdhana kiyaa| ArAdhanA se prasanna hue
vaizramaNa deva prakaTa ho ge| taba kRSNa mahArAja ne unako nagarI basAne ke lie
nivedana kiyaa| tadanantaraM dhanapati deva ne Abhiyogika devoM dvArA divya
yojanAnusAra zIghra hI vahA~ nagarI basA dii| nagarI ke dvAra bahuta bar3e-bar3e
the, isa kAraNa isakA nAma dvAravatI rakhA gyaa| Age calakara yahI dvAravatI
dvArakA kahalAne lgii|

Page #49 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
8] The Sutrakar has described this Dwarka city as "Alkapurisankasa", meaning
similar to Alkapuri. Alkapuri is the name of the city of Vaishramana Deva. This
Alkapuri is of unparalleled beauty. Dwarka city was built by Kubera himself. He
brought all the features of his city to Dwarka, he did not leave any deficiency
in it. Therefore, it is appropriate to compare Dwarka to Kubera's city or to say
that it is equal to Kubera's city. The meanings of the four words Pasadiya etc.
are as follows: The city that creates joy and happiness in the heart is
'Pasadiya'. The city which does not make the eyes feel tired or weary on seeing
it, but continues to have a desire to see it, is called 'Darsaniya'. The city
whose walls are adorned with beautiful paintings of swans, chakravakas, sarasas,
elephants, buffaloes, deer etc. and crocodiles etc. aquatic creatures (while
moving) in the water, or the city which, even after seeing it once, makes the
viewer want to see it again, is called 'Abhirupa'. The city which, whenever you
see it, shows something new to the viewer, is called 'Pratirupa'. 6-Tath na
baravaiye nayarie kanhe naam vasudeve raya parivasai. Mahayao rayavanno. Se na
tath samuddavijaypamokkhanam dasanham dasaranam baldevpamokkhanam panchanham
mahaviranam, panjunnapamokkhanam adhutthanam kumarakodiinam, sambpamokkhanam
satthie dudantasahassianam, mahasenapamokkhanam chappanaye balavaggasahasianam,
virasenapamokkhanam egavisae virasahasianam, uggasenapamokkhanam solasanham
rayasahassianam, ruppinipaamokkhanam solasanham devisahassianam
anangsenapamokkhanam aneganam ganiyasahasianam, anne sim cha bahunam, isar jav
[talavar-madambiy-kodumbiy-ibbh-setthi-senavai] satthavahaanam baravaiye nayarie
addhabarahass ya samathass ahevaccham jav [porevaccham bhattittan samittan
mahayartan anaaisarasenavanccham karemane palemane, mahayaa ahay-natta-giya-
vaiya-tanti-tal-tal-tudiya-ghan-muyanga-paduppavaiyaravena viulai bhogabhogaim
bhujmane] viharai. In that Dwarka city, King Vasudeva, named Krishna, ruled, he
was great. (His special description should be known from the Uvvai Sutra.) He
(Vasudeva Shri Krishna) was the head of the ten Dasha, ten Pujyajan, the five
Mahavirs headed by Baldev, the three and a half crore princes headed by
Pradyumna, the sixty thousand Durdant Kumaras headed by Shamb, the fifty-six
thousand brave soldiers headed by Mahasen, the twenty-one thousand brave
warriors headed by Virsen, the sixteen thousand kings headed by Ugrasen, the
sixteen thousand goddesses-queens headed by Rukmini, the thousands of courtesans
headed by Anangsen, and many other wealthy, as far as [sword, Madambik,
Kautumbik, Ibby, Shreshthi, Senapati], Sarthavaha - on all these and on Dwarka
and half of India, as far as [Purovartitvam (forwarding), Bhartritvam
(nourishment), Swamitvam, Mahattarattvam (greatness) and Agyakarak Senapatitvam
doing - protecting, the great sound arising from the playing of the story-dance,
song-drama, music, veena, kartal, tury, mridanga by skilled men, enjoying
abundant pleasures] wandered. 1. Pathantar-'Samantass'- Angasuttani-Bhag 3 p.
543. 'Sammatass'-Samyaggyan Pracharak Mandal-Jaipur edition p. 12

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 8] [antakRddazA isa dvArakA nagarI ko sUtrakAra ne "alakApurIsaMkAsA" arthAt
alakApurI sadRza kahA hai| vaizramaNadeva kI nagarI kA nAma alakApurI hai| yaha
alakApurI advitIya saundarya vAlI hai| dvArakA nagarI kA nirmANa svayaM kubera
ne kiyA hai| ve apanI nagarI kI sabhI vizeSatAoM ko dvArakA meM le Ae the,
usameM unhoMne koI nyUnatA nahIM rahane dI thii| ataH dvArakA ko kuberanagarI se
upamita karanA yA use kuberanagarI ke tulya batAnA ucita hI hai| pAsAdIyA Adi 4
zabdoM ke artha isa prakAra haiM- hRdaya meM pramoda-prasannatA paidA karane
vAlI nagarI 'pAsAdIyA' hai| jisa nagarI ko dekha-dekhakara AMkheM zrAnti-
thakAvaTa anubhava na kareM, nirantara dekhane kI hI unameM lAlasA banI rahe,
use 'darzanIyA' kahate haiN| jisa nagarI kI dIvAroM para rAjahaMsa, cakravAka
sArasa, hAthI, mahiSa, mRga Adi ke tathA jala meM sthita (vihAra karate hue)
magaramaccha Adi jalIya prANiyoM ke sundara citra bane hue hoM athavA jisa
nagarI ko eka bAra dekha lene para bhI, use punaH dekhane ke liye darzaka kI
icchA banI rahatI ho, usa nagarI ko 'abhirUpA' kahate haiN| jisa nagarI ko jaba
bhI dekho taba hI usa meM dekhane vAle ko kucha navInatA pratibhAsita ho, usa
nagarI ko 'pratirUpA' kahate haiN| 6-tattha NaM bAravaIe nayarIe kaNhe nAmaM
vAsudeve rAyA privsi| mahayA0 raayvnnnno| se NaM tattha samuddavijayapAmokkhANaM
dasaNhaM dasArANaM baladevapAmokkhANaM paMcaNhaM mahAvIrANaM,
panjuNNapAmokkhANaM adhuTThANaM kumArakoDINaM, saMbapAmokkhANaM saTThIe
dudaMtasAhassINaM, mahAseNapAmokkhANaM chappaNNAe balavaggasAhassINaM,
vIraseNapAmokkhANaM egavIsAe vIrasAhassINaM, uggaseNapAmokkhANaM solasaNhaM
rAyasAhassINaM, ruppiNIpAmokkhANaM solasaNhaM devisAhassINaM
aNaMgaseNApAmokkhANaM aNegANaM gaNiyAsAhassINaM, aNNesiM ca bahUNaM, Isara jAva
[talavara-mADaMbiya-koDuMbiya-ibbha-seTThi-seNAvai ] satthavAhANaM bAravaIe
nayarIe addhabharahassa ya samatthassa AhevaccaM jAva [porevaccaM bhaTTittaM
sAmittaM mahayarattaM ANAIsaraseNAvaMccaM kAremANe pAlemANe, mahayA''haya-NaTTa-
gIya-vAiya-taMtI-tala-tAla-tuDiya-ghaNa-muyaMgapaDuppavAiyaraveNaM viulAI
bhogabhogAiM bhuMjamANe] vihri|| usa dvArakA nagarI meM kRSNa nAma ke vAsudeva
rAjA rAjya karate the, ve mahAn the| (inakA vizeSa varNana uvavAI sUtra se jAna
lenA caahie|) ve (vAsudeva zrIkRSNa) samudravijaya kI pradhAnatA vAle daza
dazAha, daza pUjyajana, baladeva kI pradhAnatA vAle pA~ca mahAvIra, pradyumna kI
pradhAnatA vAle sAr3he tIna karor3a rAjakumAra, zAMba kI pradhAnatA vAle 60
hajAra durdAnta kumAra, mahAsena kI pradhAnatA vAle chappana hajAra zUravIra
sainika samUha, vIrasena kI pradhAnatAvAle ikkIsa hajAra vIra, ugrasena kI
pradhAnatA vAle 16 hajAra rAjA, rukmiNI kI pradhAnatA vAlI 16 hajAra deviyAM-
rAniyAM, anaMgasenA kI pradhAnatA vAlI hajAroM gaNikAeM, tathA aura bhI anekoM
aizvaryazAlI, yAvat [talavara, mADambika, kauTumbika, ibhya, zreSThI, senApati],
sArthavAha-ina saba para tathA dvArakA evaM Adhe bhAratavarSa para Adhipatya
yAvat [purovartitvaM (AgevAnI), bhartRttva (poSakatA), svAmitva, mahattaratva
(bar3appana) aura AjJAkAraka senApatittva karate hue-pAlana karate hue, kathA-
nRtya, gItinATya, vAdya, vINA, karatAla, tUrya, mRdaMga ko kuzala puruSoM ke
dvArA bajAye jAne se uThane vAlI mahAdhvani ke sAtha vipula bhogoM ko bhogate
hue] vicarate the| 1. pAThAntara-'samaMtassa'- aMgasuttANi-bhAga 3 pR. 543.
'sammattassa'-samyagjJAna pracAraka maMDala-jayapura saMskaraNa pR. 12

Page #50 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[9 First Chapter] This sutra describes the grandeur of the kingdom of
Dwarkadheesh Krishna Maharaj. This description makes it clear that all the
things necessary for a king were available in Maharaj Krishna's capital and his
kingdom was prosperous in all aspects - economic, social, and military. While
explaining the words 'Dasanham Dasaraanam', the commentator Abhaydevsuri says -
'Samudravijayokshobhyastimitah sagarastatha. Himavanchalaschchaiva, dharana
puranastatha ||1|| Abhichandrashcha navamo, vasudevascha veeryavan. Vasudevanuje
kanye, kunti madri cha vishrute ||2|| Dasha cha te'shchi -pujyaah iti
dasaarhaah.' Meaning - Krishna Maharaj's father Vasudev had ten brothers. (1)
Samudravijay, (2) Akshobhya, (3) Stimit, (4) Sagar, (5) Himavan, (6) Achal, (7)
Dharan, (8) Puran, (9) Abhichandra, (10) Vasudev. All ten were very strong.
Samudravijay was the eldest and Vasudev was the youngest. Kunti and Madri were
their two sisters. 'Pajunnapaamokkhanam adhutthanam kumarakodinam' - meaning
there were three and a half crore Kumaras and among them, Pradyumna was the
chief. Here a question may arise - were all these Kumaras present in Dwarka
city? Or were some princes in Dwarka and some outside Dwarka? The solution is
that the number of Kumaras mentioned by the sutrakar is not only of the princes
residing in Dwarka. Rather, it is of all the princes. They resided in the entire
kingdom of Maharaj Krishna. At that time, the kingdom of Krishna Maharaj
extended up to the Vaithadya mountain, hence the said number of Kumaras resided
in all three parts of Bharatavarsha. The sutrakar further gives the words
'Uggasenpaamokkhanam solasanham rayasahassiinam'. This means - there were
sixteen thousand kings, and Maharaj Ugrasen was their chief. Their kingdoms were
also in all three parts and they resided in all three parts. The sutrakar has
given the number of Kumaras, kings, and other people with the intention that all
these people lived in the kingdom of Krishna Maharaj and Krishna Maharaj ruled
over them. Just as nowadays the population is ascertained through census and
information about the caste, religion, and language of the residents of the
country is obtained, similarly, at that time, the sutrakar has clearly mentioned
how many Kumaras were there in the kingdom of Vasudev Krishna? How many kings
were there? How big was the army? How many queens were there? How many
courtesans were there? etc. This should not be understood to mean that all the
people introduced by the sutrakar lived in Dwarka. 'Duddantasahassiinam' -
meaning those who could not be subdued by enemies, who could not be defeated.
There were 60,000 such ferocious people in the kingdom of Maharaj Krishna.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 [9 prathama varga] vivecana-prastuta sUtra meM dvArakAdhIza kRSNa mahArAja ke
rAjya-vaibhava kA varNana kiyA gayA hai| isa varNana se spaSTa ho jAtA hai ki
mahArAja kRSNa kI rAjadhAnI meM rAjayogya sabhI vastueM upalabdha thIM aura
inakA rAjya Arthika, sAmAjika, sainika sabhI dRSTiyoM se sampanna thaa|
'dasaNhaM dasArANaM' ina padoM kI vyAkhyA karate hue vRttikAra abhayadevasUri
kahate haiM - 'samudravijayo'kSobhyastimitaH saagrstthaa| himavAnacalazcaiva,
dharaNaH pUraNastathA  // 1 //  abhicandrazca navamo, vasudevazca vIryavAn  /
vasudevAnuje kanye, kuntI madrI ca vizrute  //  2  //  daza ca te'zci -pUjyAH
iti dshaarhaaH|' arthAt - kRSNa mahArAja ke pitA vasudeva dasa bhAI the| (1)
samudravijaya, (2) akSobhya, (3) stimita, (4) sAgara, (5) himavAn, (6) acala,
(7) dharaNa, (8) pUraNa, (9) abhicandra, (10) vsudev| ye dasoM bar3e balI the|
samudravijaya inameM sabase bar3e the aura vasudeva sabase choTe  /  ina ke
kuntI aura mAdrI ye donoM bahineM thiiN| 'pajuNNapAmokkhANaM adhuTThANaM
kumArakoDINaM'- arthAt sADhe tIna karor3a kumAra the aura ina meM pradyumna
pramukha the| yahA~ eka prazna ho sakatA hai ki kumAroM kI itanI bar3I saMkhyA
kyA dvArakA nagarI meM hI vidyamAna thI? yA kucha rAjakumAra dvArakA meM aura
kucha dvArakA se bAhara rahate the? isakA samAdhAna yaha hai ki sUtrakAra ne
kamAroM kI jo saMkhyA batalAI hai, vaha kevala dvArakAnivAsI rAjakamAroM kI
nahIM. pratyata yaha sabhI rAjakumAroM kI hai| mahArAja kRSNa ke samasta rAjya
meM inakA nivAsa thaa| usa samaya kRSNa mahArAja kA rAjya vaitADhya parvata taka
phailA huA thA, ata: kumAroM kI ukta saMkhyA bhAratavarSa ke tInoM khaMDoM meM
nivAsa karatI thii| sUtrakAra ne Age calakara 'uggaseNapAmokkhANaM solasaNhaM
rAyasAhassINaM' ye pada diye haiN| inakA artha hai-solaha hajAra rAjA the, inake
pramukha mahArAja ugrasena the| inake rAjya bhI tInoM khaMDoM meM the aura tInoM
khaMDoM meM inakA nivAsa thaa| sUtrakAra ne kumAroM kI, rAjAoM kI tathA anya
logoM kI saMkhyA kA jo nirdeza kiyA hai isake pIche yahI bhAvanA hai ki kRSNa
mahArAja ke rAjya meM ye saba loga rahate the aura ina saba para kRSNa mahArAja
rAjya karate the| jisa prakAra Ajakala janagaNanA dvArA janatA kI saMkhyA kA
patA lagAyA jAtA hai aura deza ke nivAsiyoM kI jAti, dharma aura bhASA Adi kA
bodha prApta kiyA jAtA hai, ThIka isI prakAra usa samaya vAsudeva kRSNa ke rAjya
meM kitane kumAra the? kitane rAjA the? kitanA sainika dala thA? kitanI rAniyA~
thIM? kitanI gaNikAeM thIM? Adi sabhI bAtoM kA sUtrakAra ne spaSTa ullekha kiyA
hai| isakA yaha artha nahIM samajhanA cAhie ki sUtrakAra ne jina logoM kA
paricaya karAyA hai, ve saba dvArakA meM hI rahA karate the|
'duddantasAhassINaM'- arthAt zatruoM dvArA jinakA damana na kiyA jA sake, jinheM
parAjita na kiyA jA ske| mahArAja kRSNa ke rAjya meM aise 60 hajAra durdAnta
the|

Page #51 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[10] 'Balavaggasahaasini' - meaning 'strong army'. 'Bal' means army and 'vagg'
means group. Combining both, the meaning is 'army group'. The meaning is that
Vasudeva Krishna had 56,000 army groups. Mahaasen was the head of that army
group. Vasudeva Krishna's kingdom was divided into three parts. How can there be
only 56,000 soldiers in such a large territory? Millions of soldiers are needed
to protect all three parts. Then what is the reason for the sutrakar mentioning
56,000 soldiers? The solution to this question can be that the word 'Balavarg'
refers to an army group. An army group means a community of soldiers, so the
word 'Balavarg' given by the sutrakar is a symbol of military groups - military
units. Then, even if there are thousands of soldiers in one military group.
Therefore, the meaning here is that Krishna Maharaj had 56,000 military
communities. Iser (Ishwar) means Yuvaraj. Talwar - those who are favored by the
king or who have received a high seat (special rank) from the king, such
citizens are called Talwar. A region where there is no village within two
yojanas is called Madamb, and the ruler of Madamb is called Madambik. Kautumbik
- the owner of families is called Kautumbik and the leader of the group of
merchants and travelers is called Sarthavaha. 'Addhabharahass' - it has two
parts - one is Ardh and the other is Bharat. Ardh means half, Bharat means
Bharatavarsha. The shape of Bharat Kshetra is like a crescent moon. It is
bounded by the salt sea on three sides and the Challahimanvant mountain in the
north. That is, its boundary is bounded by the salt sea and the Challahimanvant
mountain. In the middle of India is the Vaithadya mountain. This divides Bharat
Kshetra into two parts. The southern part of Vaithadya is Dakshinardh Bharat and
the northern part is Uttarardh Bharat. The Ganga and Sindhu rivers, which flow
from above the Challahimanvant mountain, flow out of the caves of Vaithadya and
meet the salt sea. This creates six divisions of Bharat. These six divisions are
called six parts. The kingdom of the Chakravarti is in these six parts and that
of Vasudeva is in three parts, i.e., in Ardh Bharat. Maharaj Krishna was
Vasudeva, so he was ruling over Ardh Bharat. 7-Tathh Nam Baravaie Nayarie
Andhagavani Naam Raaya Parivasai. Mahaya Himavant01 Vannao. Tae Nam Sa Dharini
Devi Annaya Kayaai Tansi Tarisgansi Sayanijansi Evam Jaha Mahbabale
Suminadansan-Kahana, Jamm Balattan Kalam Yo. Jovvan-Paniggahan, Kanna Vasa Ya
Bhoga Ya ||2 Navaram Goyamore Aththanham Rayavarakannanam Egadivasena Panim
Genharveti, Aththatto Dao. In that Dwarka city, a king named Andhakavrishni
resided. He was great like the Himavan-Himalaya mountain. (His prosperity is
described in the Aupapatak Sutra.) Andhakavrishni Angasuttani-Bhag 3, p.543. In
this text, the text is as follows: Himavant-[Mahant-Malay-Mandar-Mahindasare]
Vannao. [ ] This much text is extra. This verse is not in Angasuttani. In
Antagad edited by M.C. Modi, the text is 'Goyamo Namenam'. 3.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 10] [antakRddazA _ 'balavaggasAhassINaM'-arthAt bala kA artha hai sainik|
samUha ko bhI bala kahate haiN| donoM ko milAkara artha hogA-sainikasamUha  /
bhAva yaha hai ki vAsudeva kRSNa ke pAsa 56 hajAra sainya-samUha thaa| mahAsena
usa sainya-samUha kA pramukha thaa| _ vAsudeva kRSNa kA rAjya tIna khaMDoM meM
thaa| itane bar3e pradeza meM 56 hajAra hI sainika kaise ho sakate haiM? tInoM
khaMDoM kI surakSArtha to karor3oM sainika apekSita haiN| phira sUtrakAra ne jo
56 hajAra sainika batAye isakA kyA kAraNa hai? isa prazna kA samAdhAna isa
prakAra ho sakatA hai ki 'balavagga' zabda sainyasamUha kA bodhaka hai|
sainyasamUha kA artha hai-sainikoM kA samudAya, ataH sUtrakAra ne jo balavarga
zabda diyA hai yaha sainika daloM-sainika Tukar3iyoM kA paricAyaka hai| phira
eka sainika dala meM bhale hI hajAroM sainikoM kI saMkhyA ho| ataH yahA~ yahI
bhAva niSpanna hotA hai ki kRSNa mahArAja ke pAsa 56 hajAra sainika-samudAya
the| Isara (Izvara) yAne yuvarAja  /  talavara- rAjA ke kRpApAtra ko athavA
jinhoMne rAjA kI ora se ucca Asana (padavI vizeSa) prApta kara liyA hai, aise
nAgarikoM ko talavara kahate haiN| jisake nikaTa dodo yojana taka koI grAma na
ho usa pradeza ko maDamba kahate haiM, maDamba ke adhinAyaka ko mADambika kahA
jAtA hai| kauTumbika-kuTumboM ke svAmI ko kauTumbika aura vyApArI pathikoM ke
samUha ke nAyaka ko sArthavAha kahate haiN| 'addhabharahassa'- isameM do pada
haiM -eka ardha aura dUsarA bhrt| arddha Adhe ko kahate haiM, bharata kA artha
hai bhAratavarSa  /  bharatakSetra kA arddha candra jaisA AkAra hai| tIna ora
lavaNasamudra aura uttara meM callahimavanta parvata hai| arthAt lavaNasamudra
aura cullahimavanta parvata se usakI sImA baMdhI huI hai| bhArata ke madhya meM
vaitADhya parvata hai| isa se bharatakSetra ke do bhAga ho jAte haiN| vaitADhya
kI dakSiNa ora kA dakSiNArdha bharata aura uttara kI ora kA uttarArdha bharata
hai| cullahimavanta parvata ke Upara se nikalane vAlI gaMgA aura sindhu nadiyA~
vaitADhya kI guphAoM se nikalakara lavaNasamudra meM milatI haiN| isase bharata
ke chaha vibhAga hote haiN| inhIM chaha vibhAgoM ko chaha khaMDa kahate haiN|
cakravartI kA rAjya ina chaha khaMDoM meM hotA hai aura vAsudeva kA tIna khaMDoM
meM arthAt arddha bharata meM hotA hai| mahArAja kRSNa vAsudeva the, ataH ve
arddha bharata para zAsana kara rahe the| 7-tattha NaM bAravaIe nayarIe
aMdhagavaNhI nAma rAyA privsi| mahayA himavaMta01 vnnnno| tae NaM sA dhAriNI
devI aNNayA kayAI taMsi tArisagaMsi sayaNijaMsi evaM jahA mahabbale
sumiNadaMsaNa-kahaNA, jammaM bAlattaNaM kalAo y| jovvaNa-pANiggahaNaM, kaNNA
vAsA ya bhogA y||2 navaraM goyamore aTThaNhaM rAyavarakaNNANaM egadivaseNaM
pANiM geNhArveti, aTThaTThao daao| usa dvArakA nagarI meM andhakavRSNi nAma kA
rAjA nivAsa karatA thaa| vaha himavAn-himAlaya parvata kI taraha mahAn thaa|
(usakI Rddhi-samRddhi kA varNana aupapAtika sUtra meM kiyA gayA hai|)
andhakavRSNi aMgasuttANi-bhAga 3, pR.543. meM yaha pATha isa prakAra
haihimavaMta-[mahaMta-malaya-maMdara-mahiMdasAre] vnnnno| [ ] itanA pATha adhika
hai| yaha gAthA aMgasuttANi meM nahIM hai| M.C. Modi dvArA sampAdita aMtagaDa
meM 'goyamo nAmeNaM' pATha hai| 3.

Page #52 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[First Varga] [The queen named Dharini was the wife of the 11th king. At some
time, the queen Dharini was resting on an excellent bed, which should be
understood as similar to the bed described in the Mahabal (chapter). Thereafter,
(the description of) the dream-vision, birth of a son, his childhood play,
knowledge of arts, youth, marriage, beautiful palace, and enjoyments etc. should
also be understood as similar to (the description in) Mahabal.  Specifically,
the name of that child was Gautama, he was made to perform the marriage ceremony
with eight excellent princesses on the same day, and eight types of dowry items
were given.  Elucidation - In the present sutra, the description from the entry
of Gautama Kumar in the womb up to the enjoyment of sensual pleasures and
marriage has been given. Now the sutra-maker, in the next sutra, describes the
initiation of Gautama Kumar into the refuge of the most worshipful Lord
Arishtanemi:  At that time and at that moment, the Arhat Arishtanemi, while
dwelling [engaged in cultivating the self with asceticism and austerity], the
four types of devas arrived. Kanha also came out. Hearing the Dharma, (he said)
"O divine ones! I shall take permission from my parents. O divine ones, [after
shaving my head and becoming a homeless ascetic, I shall renounce the household
life]" - just as Megh (did), so also Gautama himself takes the five-fold vow of
the world. Having done so, he approaches the ascetic Lord Arishtanemi.
Approaching the ascetic Lord Arishtanemi, he thrice requests for ordination.
Having done so, he pays obeisance, prostrates, and after paying obeisance and
prostrating, speaks thus:  "O Lord! I am attached to the world, O Lord! I am
stained by the world, O Lord! I am attached and stained by the world due to old
age and death. Just as a householder, while dwelling in a house, takes a light
burden, inexpensive and of little value, and goes to a secluded place, so also,
in my case, there is a certain light burden, dear, pleasant, and agreeable,
this, being my last, will be the helper, companion, and follower in the
destruction of the cycle of rebirth. Therefore, I wish to be initiated,
tonsured, trained, and instructed by the divine ones in the code of conduct,
alms-round, discipline, scriptures, practices, and the teaching of the Dharma."
Then the ascetic Lord Arishtanemi himself initiates him, himself tonsures him,
himself trains him, himself instructs him in the code of conduct, alms-round,
discipline, scriptures, practices, and the teaching of the Dharma, (saying) "O
divine ones! One should go, stand, sit, lie down, eat, speak, and rise up,
controlling oneself with restraint towards living beings. And there should be no
negligence."  Then, Gautama Kumar, having heard and understood this Dharmika
instruction from the ascetic Lord Arishtanemi, readily accepts it. He goes
accordingly, stands accordingly, sits accordingly, lies down accordingly, eats
accordingly, speaks accordingly, and rises up accordingly, controlling himself
with restraint towards living beings. Then, Gautama became a homeless ascetic
and dwells, practicing this very Nirgantha doctrine.]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prathama varga] [11 rAjA kI dhAriNI nAma kI rAnI thii| kabhI kisI samaya vaha
dhAriNI rAnI anyatra varNita (puNyavAn jana ke yogya) uttama zayyA para zayana
kara rahI thI, jisakA varNana mahAbala (ke prakaraNa meM varNita zayyA ke)
samAna samajha lenA caahie| tatpazcAt svapna-darzana, putrajanma, usakI bAla-
lIlA, kalAjJAna, yauvana, pANigrahaNa, ramya prAsAda evaM bhogAdi-(yaha saba
varNana bhI mahAbala jaisA hI smjhnaa)| vizeSa yaha ki usa bAlaka kA nAma
gautama rakhA gayA, usakA eka hI dina meM ATha zreSTha rAjakumAriyoM ke sAtha
pANigrahaNa karavAyA gayA tathA daheja meM ATha-ATha prakAra kI vastueM dI giiN|
vivecana-prastuta sUtra meM gautama kumAra ke garbha meM Ane se lekara vivAha
tathA viSayabhogoM ke upabhoga taka kA varNana kiyA gayA hai, aba sUtrakAra
agrima sUtra meM paramArAdhya bhagavAn ariSTanemi ke caraNoM meM pahu~ca kara
gautama kumAra ke dIkSita hone kA varNana karate haiM - 8-teNaM kAleNaM teNaM
samaeNaM arahA ariTThanemI Aigare jAva [saMjameNaM tavasA appANaM bhAvemANe ]
viharai, cauvvihA devA aagyaa| kaNhe vi nnigge| dhamma soccA 'jaM navaraM
devANuppiyA! ammApiyaro aapucchaami| devANuppiyANaM [ aMtie muMDe bhavittA
AgArAo aNagAriyaM pavvayAmi ] evaM jahA mehe jAva (tahA goyame vi)[sayameva
paMcamuTThiyaM loyaM krei| karittA jeNAmeva samaNe bhagavaM ariTThanemI teNAmeva
uvaagcchi| uvAgacchitA samaNaM bhagavaM ariTThanemiM tikkhutto AyAhiNaM
payAhiNaM krei| karittA vaMdai, namasai, vaMdittA namaMsittA evaM vayAsI Alitte
NaM bhaMte! loe, palitte NaM bhaMte! loe, Alittapalitte NaM bhaMte! loe jarAe
maraNeNa y| se jahA nAmae keI gAhAvaI AgAraMsi jhiyAyamANaMsi je tattha bhaMDe
bhavai appabhAre mollagurue taM gahAya AyAe egaMtaM avakkamaDa, esa me NitthArie
samANe pacchA parA hiyAe sahAe khamAe NissesAe ANugAmiyattAe bhvissi| evAmeva
mama vi ege AyA bhaMDe iTTe kaMte pie maNunne maNAme, esa me NitthArie samANe
saMsAravoccheyakare bhvissi|tN icchAmi NaM devANuppiyAhiM sayameva pavvAviyaM,
sayameva muMDAviyaM, sehAviyaM, sikkhAviyaM, sayameva AyAra-goyara-viNaya-
veNaiya-caraNa-karaNa-jAyAmAyAvattiyaM dhmmmaaikkhiyN| tae NaM samaNe bhagavaM
ariTThanemI sayameva pavvAvei, sayameva AyAra0 jAva dhammamAikkhai-evaM
devANuppiyA! gaMtavvaM ciTThiyavvaM NisIyavvaM tuyaTTiyavvaM bhuMjiyavvaM
bhAsiyavvaM, evaM uThAe uTThAya pANehiM bhUehiM jIvehiM sattehiM saMjameNaM
saMjamiyavvaM, assi ca NaM aTe No pmaaeyvvN| tae NaM se goyama kumAre samaNassa
bhagavao ariTThanemissa aMtie imaM eyArUvaM dhammiyaM uvaesaM soccA Nisamma
samma pddivjji| tamANAe taha gacchai, taha ciTThai, taha nisIyai, taha tuyaTTai,
taha bhuMjai, taha bhAsai, taha uTThAe uTThAya pANehiM bhUehiM jIvehiM sattehiM
saMjamai] tae NaM se goyame aNagAre jAe iNameva NiggathaM pAvayaNaM purao kAuM
vihri|| _ usa kAla tathA usa samaya zruta-dharma kA AraMbha karane vAle, dharma
ke pravartaka ariSTanemi bhagavAn yAvat [saMyama aura tapa se AtmA ko bhAvita
karate hue] vicaraNa kara rahe the| (jaba ve dvArakA nagarI ke 1. sUtra naM. 2
meM prastuta pATha pUrNa kiyA gayA hai| yahAM viharai hetu apUrNa pATha brAkeTa
meM pUrNa kiyA gayA hai|

Page #53 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[12] [ Antakrid Dasha When they were seated in the garden outside, four types of
gods were present in their assembly. Krishna Vasudeva also came there.
Thereafter, Gautam Kumar was also ready to see them. Just as Megha Kumar had
gone to the Shraman Bhagwan Mahavira Swami, so too Gautam Kumar went to the feet
of Bhagwan Arishtanemi and listened to the Dharma. Notably, he said to Bhagwan
Arishtanemi - Devanupriya! I will ask my parents and then take initiation from
you. Just as Megha Kumar was initiated by Shraman Bhagwan Mahavira Swami, so too
[Gautam Kumar himself] performed Panchmusthik Loch. After performing Loch, he
came to where Arishtanemi Bhagwan was. Arriving there, he circumambulated
Shraman Bhagwan Arishtanemi three times, starting from the right side. Then he
offered his obeisance - Namaskar and said Bhagwan! This world is ablaze,
illuminated by old age and death (by the fire of old age and death). Bhagwan,
this world is ablaze and illuminated. Just as a householder, when fire breaks
out in his house, takes the light and valuable things from that house and moves
himself to one side. He thinks, "This material saved from burning in the fire
will be for my benefit in the future, for my happiness, for my ability, for my
well-being, and for future use." Similarly, this soul-like vessel (object) of
mine is dear to me, beloved, pleasing, attractive, and extremely beautiful - I
will take out this soul - I will save it from being consumed by the fire of old
age and death, then this world - birth - death will be destroyed. Therefore, I
want Devanupriya! (you) to initiate me yourself - give me the robes of a monk,
shave my head yourself - perform my Loch, teach me writing and other things
yourself, teach me by providing sutras and their meanings yourself, teach me the
principles of Dharma like knowledge, conduct, discipline, the fruits of
discipline, Charanasattari, Karanasattari, the path of restraint, and the
quantity (of food) yourself. After that, Shraman Bhagwan Arishtanemi himself
initiated Gautam Kumar and taught him the Dharma, including conduct and other
principles, saying - Devanupriya! You should walk on the earth with only your
eyes, you should stand on the lifeless ground, you should sit after cleaning the
ground, you should sleep after reciting Samayik and cleaning your body, you
should eat food that is free from faults due to pain and other causes, you
should speak in a beneficial, moderate, and sweet manner. You should practice
restraint by protecting the life (of the disabled), the plants (vegetation), the
living beings (with five senses), and the beings (with one sense) with vigilance
and caution. You should not be negligent in this matter at all. After that,
Gautam Kumar Muni, having heard this Dharma-related instruction from Shraman
Bhagwan Arishtanemi and having held it in his heart, accepted it completely. He
walked according to the Bhagwan's instructions, stood in the same way, sat in
the same way, slept in the same way, ate in the same way, and spoke sweetly in
the same way, abandoning negligence and sleep, taking care of life, plants,
living beings, and beings, and practicing restraint. After becoming an Anagari,
Gautam, keeping the Nirgrantha in front of him, began to wander, following the
Bhagwan's instructions. Preach To 9 - Then, in that Gotama, another person, a
worthy one, was the last of the Theras who were preaching Arishtanemi.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 12] [ antakRddazA bAhara udyAna meM virAjamAna hue, taba inake samavasaraNa
meM) cAra prakAra ke deva upasthita hue| kRSNa vAsudeva bhI vahA~ aaye|
tadanantara unake darzana karane ko gautama kumAra bhI taiyAra hue| jaise megha
kumAra zramaNa bhagavAn mahAvIra svAmI ke pAsa gaye the vaise hI gautama kumAra
bhI bhagavAn ariSTanemi ke caraNoM meM gae aura dharma kA zravaNa kiyaa| vizeSa
yaha ki bhagavAn ariSTanemi se kahA- devAnupriya ! maiM apane mAtApitA se
pUchakara Apake pAsa dIkSA grahaNa karUMgA  /  jisa prakAra zramaNa bhagavAn
mahAvIra svAmI ke pAsa megha kumAra dIkSita hue the yAvat (ThIka usI prakAra
gautama kumAra ne bhI ) [ svayaM hI paMcamuSThika loca kiyA  /  loca karake
jahA~ ariSTanemi bhagavAn the vahA~ Aye  /  Akara zramaNa bhagavAn ariSTanemi ko
tIna bAra dAhinI ora se AraMbha karake pradakSiNA kii| phira vandanA - namaskAra
kiyA aura kahA bhagavan! yaha saMsAra jarA aura maraNa se ( jarA-maraNa rUpa
agni se) AdIpta hai, pradIpta hai  /  bhagavan, yaha saMsAra AdIpta aura
pradIpta hai| jaise koI gAthApati ghara meM Aga laga jAne para, usa ghara meM jo
alpa bhAra vAlI aura bahumUlya vastu hotI hai use, grahaNa karake svayaM eka ora
calA jAtA hai  /  vaha socatA hai " agni meM jalane se bacAyA huA yaha padArtha
mere lie Age-pIche hita ke lie, sukha ke lie, kSamA (samarthatA) ke lie, kalyANa
ke lie aura bhaviSya meM upayoga ke lie hogaa| isI prakAra merA bhI yaha eka
AtmA rUpI bhAMDa (vastu) hai, jo mujhe iSTa hai, kAnta hai, priya hai, manojJa
hai aura atizaya manohara hai - isa AtmA ko maiM nikAla lU~gA - jarA - maraNa kI
agni meM bhasma hone se bacA lU~gA, to yaha saMsAra - janma - maraNa kA uccheda
karane vAlA hogaa| ataeva maiM cAhatA hU~ ki devAnupriya ! (Apa) svayaM hI mujhe
pravrajita kareM - muniveSa pradAna kareM, svayaM hI mujhe muMDita kareM - -
merA loca kareM, svayaM hI pratilekhana Adi sikhAveM, svayaM hI sUtra aura artha
pradAna karake zikSA deM, svayaM hI jJAnAdika AcAra, gocarI, vinaya, vainayika
(vinaya kA phala), caraNasattarI, karaNasattarI, saMyamayAtrA aura mAtrA
(bhojana kA parimANa) Adi rUpa dharma kA prarUpaNa kreN| tatpazcAt zramaNa
bhagavAn ariSTanemi ne gautamakumAra ko svayaM pravrajyA pradAna kI aura svayaM
hI yAvat AcAragocara Adi dharma kI zikSA dI ki - he devAnupriya ! isa prakAra -
pRthvI para yuga mAtra dRSTi rakhakara calanA cAhie, isa prakAra - nirjIva bhUmi
para khar3A honA cAhie, isa prakAra - -bhUmi kA pramArjana karake baiThanA
cAhie, isa prakAra - sAmAyika kA uccAraNa karake, zarIra kI pramArjanA karake
zayana karanA cAhie, isa prakAra - vedanA Adi kAraNoM se nirdoSa AhAra karanA
cAhie, isa prakAra - hita mita aura madhura bhASaNa karanA cAhie  /  isa prakAra
- apramatta evaM sAvadhAna hokara prANa (vikalendriya), bhUta (vanaspatikAya)
jIva (paMcendriya) aura sattva ( zeSa ekendriya) kI rakSA karake saMyama kA
pAlana karanA caahie| isa viSaya meM tanika bhI pramAda nahIM karanA caahie|
tatpazcAt gautamakumAra muni ne zramaNa bhagavAn ariSTanemi ke nikaTa isa
prakAra kA yaha dharma sambandhI upadeza sunakara aura hRdaya meM dhAraNa karake
samyak prakAra se use aMgIkAra kiyaa| ve bhagavAn kI AjJA ke anusAra gamana
karate, usI prakAra khar3e rahate, usI prakAra baiThate, usI prakAra zayana
karate, usI prakAra AhAra karate aura usI prakAra madhura bhASaNa karate hue
pramAda aura nidrA kA tyAga karake prANoM, bhUtoM, jIvoM aura satvoM kI yatanA
karake saMyama kA ArAdhana karane lage ]  /  anagAra bana jAne para gautama
nirgranthasanmukha rakhakara bhagavAn kI AjJAoM kA pAlana karate hue vicarane
lage  /  pravacana ko 9 - tae NaM se goyame aNNayA kayAI arahao ariTThanemissa
tahArUvANaM therANaM aMtie

Page #54 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[First Section] [The ascetic, having attained the thirteen Samayika
(introspective meditation), the four Anagara (renunciation), the Ahiṃsā (non-
violence), the Ahiṃsita (non-injury), and practicing various types of
austerities like the fourth to the sixth, the tenth, and the twelfth
Masadharmana (monthly observances) and Masardharmana (fortnightly observances)],
dwells, contemplating on the self. Then the Arhat (enlightened being) Ariṣṭanemi
departs from the cities of Bāravati and the Nandana gardens, and resides in
other inhabited areas.  The Bhikṣu (ascetic) Gautama approaches where the Arhat
Ariṣṭanemi is, and after paying obeisance and reverence to him three times,
speaks thus:  "I wish, venerable sir, with your permission, to undertake the
Māsikī (monthly) Bhikṣu-pratimā (vow of asceticism) and dwell accordingly." As
Skandaka (an ascetic) did, so he too practices the twelve Bhikṣu-pratimās and
fully engages in the austerity called Guṇaratna (Gem of Virtues).   Just as
Skandaka contemplated, so does he; just as he inquired, so does he; just as he
ascended the steep path together with the Elders, so does he; [for twelve years
he practices the Māsikī Saṃlekhanā (gradual reduction of food intake), until he]
exhausts himself, breaks his fast, shaves his head, adopts nudity, brahmacarya
(celibacy), non-bathing, non-using of a seat, non-use of a vehicle, sleeping on
the ground, sleeping on a plank, non-entry into another's house, enduring praise
and blame, censure, ridicule, beating, reviling, the twenty-two Parisaha
(hardships) and Upaśarga (calamities) like thorns in the village - he
accomplishes them, [and attains] the state of the Siddha (perfected one), Buddha
(enlightened one), Mukta (liberated one), Parinirvāṇa (final liberation), and
the cessation of all suffering.  This, verily, O Jambū, is the exposition of the
first section of the first chapter of the first lecture of the eighth Aṃga
(canonical text), as taught by the ascetic who has attained perfection.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prathama varga] [13 sAmAiyamAiyAI ekkArasa aMgAi ahijjai ahijjittA bahUhiM
cauttha jAva[chaTThaTThama-dasama-duvAlasehiM mAsaddhamAsakhamaNehiM vivihehiM
tavokammehiM ] appANaM bhAvemANe vihri| tae NaM arahA ariTThanemI aNNayA kayAiM
bAravaIo nayarIo naMdaNavaNAo paDiNikkhamai, bahiyA jaNavayavihAraM vihri|
bhikSupratimA taeNaM se goyame aNagAre aNNayA kayAi jeNeva arahA ariTThanemI
teNeva uvAgacchai, uvAgacchittA arahaM ariTThanemiM tikkhutto AyAhiNaM payAhiNaM
karei, karettA vaMdai namasai, vaMdittA namaMsittA evaM vayAsI icchAmiNaM
bhaMte! tubbhehiM abbhaNuNNAesamANe mAsiyaM bhikkhapaDimaM uvasaMpajjittANaM
vihritte| evaM jahA khaMdao tahA bArasa bhikkhupaDimAo phaasei| guNarayaNaM pi
tavokammaM taheva phAsei nirvsesN| jahA khaMdao tahA ciMtei, tahA Apucchai, tahA
therehiM saddhiM settuMjaM durUhai, bArasa' varisAiM pariyAe mAsiyAe saMlehaNAe
jAva[appANaM jhosei, jhosittA saTuiM bhattAiM aNasaNAe chedei, chedittA
jassaTTAe kIrai naggabhAve muMDabhAve, kesaloe, baMbhaceravAse, aNhANagaM,
acchattayaM, aNuvAhaNayaM, bhUmisejjAo, phalagasejjAo, paragharappavese,
laddhAvaladdhAiM mANAvamANAiM, paresiMhIlaNAo, niMdaNAo, khiMsaNAo, tAlaNAo,
garahaNAo, uccAvayA virUvarUvA bAvIsaM parIsahovasaggA-gAmakaMTagA ahiyAsijjaMti
tama ArAhei, carimussAsehiM ] siddhe-buddhe-mutte-prinivvaae-svvdukkhphiinne|
nikSepa _ evaM khalu jaMbU! samaNeNaM jAva saMpatteNaM aTThamassa aMgassa
aMtagaDadasANaM paDhamassa vaggassa paDhamassa ajjhayaNassa ayamadve pnnnntte|
isake pazcAt gautama anagAra ne anyadA kisI samaya bhagavAn ariSTanemi ke
sAnnidhya meM rahane vAle AcAra, vicAra kI uccatA ko pUrNatayA prApta sthaviroM
ke pAsa sAmAyika se lekara AcArAMgAdi 11 aMgoM kA adhyayana kiyA yAvat
[adhyayana karake phira aneka upavAsa, belA, telA, caulA, pacaulA, mAsakhamaNa,
ardhamAsakhamaNa Adi vividha prakAra ke tapa se] AtmA ko bhAvita karate hue
vicarane lge| arihaMta bhagavAn ariSTanemi ne aba dvArakA nagarI ke nandanavana
se vihAra kara diyA aura ve anya janapadoM meM vicaraNa karane lge| tapasyA aura
zAstra-svAdhyAya meM tatpara anagAra gautama avasara pAkara bhagavAn ariSTanemi
kI sevA meM upasthita hue| vidhipUrvaka vaMdanA, namaskAra karane ke anantara
unhoMne bhagavAn se nivedana kiyA "bhagavan ! merI icchA hai.yadi Apa AjJA deM
to maiM mAsikI bhikSu-pratimA (pratijJA vizeSa) kI ArAdhanA kruuN|" bhagavAn se
AjJA pAkara ve sAdhanA meM lIna ho ge| jaise skandhaka muni ne sAdhanA kI vaise
hI muni gautamakumAra ne bhI bAraha bhikSupratimAoM kA ArAdhana karake guNaratna
nAmaka tapa kA bhI vaise 1. kahIM-kahIM 'mAsiyAe saMlehaNAe vArasa varisAiM
pAriyAe' aisA pATha hai parantu isameM jAva kI pUrti barAbara nahIM baiThatI
ataH ullikhita pATha hI samIcIna pratIta hotA hai| 2. varga 1, sUtra 2.

Page #55 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[14] He performed the Antakrid Dasha. He contemplated in the same way as the
Skandhaka, asked the Lord, and climbed Mount Shatrujaya with the elder monks. He
completed the 12-year initiation period and then, through a one-month
Sanlekhana, he worshipped the soul. He abandoned sixty meals through fasting,
and for the purpose of [worshipping the soul], he practiced nakedness, shaved
his head with a razor, renounced possessions in thought, plucked out his hair
with his hands (Kes Loch), practiced celibacy, did not bathe (Asnanak), did not
use an umbrella (Achhatrak), did not use shoes (Upanah), slept on the ground
(Bhumishayya), slept on a wooden plank (Phalakshayya), entered other people's
homes for alms (Parghar Pravesh), accepted and rejected things (Labhalab),
experienced honor and dishonor (Manapaman), endured insults, slander, and
humiliation (Heelna), revealed the secrets of people's caste, etc. in front of
others (Khinsna), endured beatings, dust, slander, and various kinds of
suffering from the 22 senses (Tadnamaarna, Gardaa, Ninda, Unch-Neech). He
endured all these 22 types of painful afflictions of the senses, and finally
achieved his goal. With his last breaths, he became a Siddha, a Buddha, a
liberated soul, free from all karmic afflictions and all kinds of suffering.
Sudharma Swami said to his disciple Jambu, "O Jambu! The liberated Lord Mahavira
has explained the meaning of the first study of the first section of the eighth
Antagad Sutra."  **Discussion:** This Sutra presents the story of Gautam
Anugar's studiousness, austerity, and righteous conduct from the time of his
initiation to the attainment of the Siddha state through the final rites.
"Taharuaan Theraan" means "such an elder." "Tatharoop" means one who follows the
conduct described in the scriptures, and "Sthavir" means an elder monk. The
Stananga Sutra describes three types of Sthavirs: (1) Vayah-Sthavir - one who is
60 years old, (2) Sutra-Sthavir - one who knows the Anga Sutras like Stananga,
Samavayanga, etc., and (3) Pravrajya-Sthavir - a monk who has completed 20 years
of initiation.  There are five well-known meanings of Samayik: (1) Samayik
Charitra - freedom from all sinful actions, (2) the ninth vow of a Shravak,
Samayik Charitra in the form of Deshaviriti, (3) Samayik Shruta - Acharaanga,
etc., (4) the first study of the Aavashyak Sutra, and (5) the result arising
from the essence of matter (Dravya Leshya) - determination (Adhyavasaya).  Of
these meanings, "the first study of the Aavashyak Sutra" is the most desirable.
Therefore, Muni Gautam studied the eleven Angas, starting with Samayik. Now the
question arises: the eleven Angas also mention the Antakrid Dasha Anga. The
first study of its first section presents the life of Shri Gautam Kumar. Was he
the same Gautam Kumar or someone else? If he was the same, how did he study the
Antakrid Dasha Anga, which was created later?  The solution to this is that the
Gautam Kumar described in the first study is the same as our Dwarkadheesh
Maharaj, the son of Andhakavrushti. Now, regarding the matter of reading, the
solution is that the Ganadhar of Lord Arishtanemi, Anupam, was a holder of
knowledge and other qualities. He had many recitations, which were known by the
same names as the aforementioned Angas and Upangas. Each one had a different
subject matter, and their order of study was also different. The recitation that
is available today is that of Shri Sudharma Swami, the revered disciple of Lord
Mahavira. The eleven Angas that Gautam Kumar studied were the eleven Angas of
some Ganadhar's recitation at that time. He did not study the Angasastra of the
recitation available today. This recitation did not exist at that time, so the
question of reading this recitation does not arise.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 14] [antakRddazA hI ArAdhana kiyaa| pUrNa rUpa se skandhaka kI taraha hI
ciMtana kiyA, bhagavAn se pUchA tathA sthavira muniyoM ke sAtha vaise hI
zatrujaya parvata para car3he  /  12 varSa kI dIkSA paryAya pUrNa kara eka mAsa
kI saMlekhanA dvArA yAvat [AtmA ko ArAdhita kiyaa| anazana dvArA sATha bhojanoM
kA parityAga kara, jisa artha-prayojana ke liye nagnabhAva-sAdhuvRtti,
muNDabhAva-dravya se sira ko muMDita karanA, bhAva se parigraha kA tyAga karanA,
keza loca arthAt bAloM ko hAthoM se ukhAr3anA, brahmacaryavAsa, asnAnaka-snAna
na karanA, achatraka-chatra kA prayoga na karanA, upAnaha-jUte kA upayoga na
karanA, bhUmizayyA-bhUmi para zayana karanA, phalakazayyAtakhta para zayana
karanA, paragharapraveza-dUsaroM ke gharoM meM bhikSArtha praveza karanA,
lAbhAlAbha-kisI samaya vastu kA prApta honA, kisI samaya na honA, mAnApamAna-
kahIM mAna kahIM apamAna honA, dUsaroM dvArA kI gaI hIlanA-avahelanA, niMdA,
khiMsanA-logoM ke sAmane jAti Adi kA gupta rahasya prakaTa karanA, tADanAmAranA,
gardA, niMdA, U~ca-nIca nAnA prakAra ke 22 parISaha indriyoM ke duHkhadAyaka
upasarga sahana karanA Adi kiyA jAtA hai, anta meM usa prayojana ko siddha kara
liyA aura antima zvAsoM dvArA] siddha, buddha, mukta, sakala karmajanya santApoM
se rahita evaM saba prakAra ke duHkhoM se vimukta ho ge| sudharmA svAmI ne apane
ziSya jaMbU se kahA- "he jaMbU! mokSa ko prApta bhagavAn mahAvIra ne AThaveM
aMtagaDasUtra ke prathama varga ke prathama adhyayana kA yaha artha kahA hai|
vivecana-prastuta sUtra meM dIkSA ke anantara gautama anagAra kI
adhyayanazIlatA, tapobhAvanA, aura samyak AcaraNa se lekara antimavidhi kara
siddha pada kI upalabdhi taka kA varNana prastuta kiyA gayA hai| 'tahArUvANaM
therANaM' arthAt tathArUpa sthavira  /  tathArUpa kA artha hai- zAstra meM
varNana kiye gaye AcAra kA pAlana karane vAle aura sthavira kA artha hai vRddha
sAdhu  /  sthAnAMga sUtra meM isake tIna bheda batAe haiM - (1) vayaH-sthavira-
sATha varSa kI Ayu vAle, (2) sUtra-sthavira - sthAnAMga-samavAyAMga Adi aMga
sUtroM ke jJAtA, (3) pravrajyA-sthavira - 20 varSa kI dIkSA-paryAya vAle sAdhu
/  . sAmAyika ke 5 artha prasiddha haiM - (1) sAmAyika cAritra-sarva sAvadya
yogoM se nivRtti, (2) zrAvaka kA navama vrata, dezavirati rUpa sAmAyika cAritra,
(3) sAmAyika zruta, AcArAMga Adi, (4) Avazyaka sUtra kA prathama adhyayana aura
(5) dravya lezyA se utpanna hone vAlA prinnaam-adhyvsaay| prastuta arthoM meM
"Avazyaka sUtra kA prathama adhyayana" yaha artha adhika abhISTa hai| ata: muni
gautama ne sAmAyika Adi se lekara 11 aMgoM kA adhyayana kiyaa| aba prazna hotA
hai ki-gyAraha aMgoM meM antakRddazAMga kA bhI nirdeza kiyA gayA hai| isake
prathama varga ke prathama adhyayana meM zrI gautamakumAra kA jIvana prastuta
huA hai| to kyA vaha gautama kumAra yahI thA yA anya? yadi yahI thA to usane
antakRddazAMga kA adhyayana kaise kiyA? jisakA nirmANa hI bAda meM huA hai? _
isakA samAdhAna isa prakAra ho sakatA hai ki prathama adhyayana meM jisa gautama
kumAra kA varNana kiyA gayA hai yahI hamAre dvArakAdhIza mahArAja andhakavRSTi
ke suputra haiM  /  aba rahI bAta paDhane kii| isakA samAdhAna yaha hai ki
bhagavAn ariSTanemi ke gaNadhara anupama jJAnAdi guNoM ke dhAraka the| unakI
anekoM vAcanAeM thIM, jo ki inhIM pUrvokta aMgoM evaM upAMgoM ke nAma se
prasiddha thiiN| pratyeka meM viSaya bhinna-bhinna hotA thA aura unakA
adhyayana-krama bhI vibhinna hI hotA thaa| vartamAna kAla meM jo vAcanA
upalabdha ho rahI hai, vaha bhagavAn mahAvIra ke paTTadhara zraddheya
zrIsudharmA svAmI kI hai| gautama kumAra ne jo ekAdaza aMga paDhe the ve
tatkAlIna kisI gaNadhara kI vAcanA ke 11 aMga the| vartamAna meM upalabdha
vAcanAvAle aMgazAstroM kA unhoMne adhyayana nahIM kiyaa| yaha vAcanA to usa
samaya meM thI hI nahIM, ata: isa vAcanA ke par3hane kA prazna

Page #56 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[First Class] [15 is not present. Acharya Abhaydeva Suri, in his commentary on
the Bhagavati Sutra, raised a similar doubt regarding the episode of Skandhak
Kumar and presented a solution, which is worth pondering and reading for
resolving the doubt arising in the present case. 'Ekkāras angāi ahijjai' - This
is a question - Does the eleventh anga exist before the Skandhak Charita, and
the Skandhak Charita is found within the fifth anga, how is there no
contradiction? It is said - Shri Mahavira Tirtha had nine recitations. In all
those recitations, the meanings that are called Skandhak Charita, which existed
before the Skandhak Charita, are known through other charitas. At the time of
the origin of the Skandhak Charita, Sudharmaswami, by accepting Jambū as his
disciple, authorized him to recite, and in this recitation, he relied on the
Skandhak Charita and presented its meaning, so there is no contradiction. Or,
due to their extraordinary nature, the Ganadharas have compiled the charitas of
the future, which are not faulty. The indication of the past is also not faulty
in relation to the future lineage. Meaning - This question arises that the 11
angas were already created before the Skandhak Charita. The Skandhak Charita is
available in the fifth anga (Bhagavati Sutra). Then what does it mean that
Skandhak read the 11 angas? Did he read his own life? The answer is as follows:
In the Tirthankara of Bhagwan Mahavira, there were nine recitations. In each
recitation, the meaning (educational purpose) of Skandhak's life was present in
the same form. The only difference was that all the companions of the
protagonist of life were different. The meaning is that the education that is
obtained from Skandhak's life is also found in the collection of other life-
charitas that give the same education in the contemporary recitations.
Sudharmaswami, aiming at his disciple Jambuswami, in his recitation, presented
the meaning from Skandhak's life-charita, which was implicit in other
recitations, therefore, it is clear that the angadi scriptures that Skandhak
read were not from Sudharmaswami's recitation. Secondly, it may also be that the
Ganadhar Maharaj are holders of extraordinary (special knowledge). Therefore,
they have also compiled the charitas of the future. In addition, the indication
of the past cannot be said to be faulty in relation to the future disciple
tradition. In 'Chautham jav bhavamāne', the word 'chautham' used is indicative
of the vow - one fast, and 'jav' means 'yāvat' and 'bhavamāne' means -
'bhavayann - vāsayann' - that is, using it in one's life. 'Māsiyam bhikkupadim'
means monthly bhikkhu pratima. The meaning of pratima is pledge. The pledge of a
bhikkhu is called bhikkhu-pratima. These pratima are twelve. Their detailed
discussion is done in the Dasha-shruta-skandha. The sadhu who holds this pratima
takes one grain and one water datti (the uninterrupted flow of grain and water
given by the donor is called datti). He takes food from where food is made for
one person, he does not take food made for a pregnant woman or a mother of a
small child. He does not take food from a woman who has weaned her child and
gives alms, and from a woman who is about to give birth and gets up from her
seat to give food. He does not take food from someone whose both feet are inside
or outside the threshold. He goes for alms in one part of the three parts of the
day, beginning, middle, and end. He stays for one night in a familiar place. 1.
Bhagavati Sutra-Shatak-2, Uddeshak-1, Sutra 93 ]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prathama varga] [15 hI upasthita nahIM hotaa| AcArya abhayadeva sUri ne
bhagavatI sUtra kI vyAkhyA meM skandhaka kumAra ke prasaMga ko lekara aisI hI
AzaMkA uThAkara usakA jo samAdhAna prastuta kiyA hai, vaha mananIya evaM
prastuta prakaraNa meM utpanna zaMkA ke samAdhAna ke liye paThanIya hai ekkArasa
aMgAI ahijjai'- iha kazcidAha-nanvanena skandhakacaritAt
prAgevaikAdazAMganiSpattiravasIyate, paMcamAMgAntarbhUtaM ca
skandhakacaritamupalabhyate, iti kathaM na virodhaH? ucyate-zrImanmahAvIra-
tIrtha kila nava vaacnaaH| tatra ca sarvavAcanAsu skandhaka-caritAt pUrvakAle ye
skandhakacaritAbhidheyA arthAste caritAntaradvAreNa prajJApyante,
skandhakacaritotpatau ca sudharmasvAminA jaMbUnAmAnaM
svaziSyamaMgIkRtyAdhikRtavAcanAyAmasyAM skandhakacaritamevAzritya
tadarthaprarUpaNA kRteti na virodhaH athavA sAtizayAditvAt
gnndhraannaamnaagtkaal-bhaavicrit-nibndhnmdussttmiti| bhAviziSya santAnApekSayA
atItakAlanirdezo'pyuduSTa iti| arthAt-yaha prazna upasthita hotA hai ki
skandhakacarita se pahale hI 11 aMgoM kA nirmANa ho cukA thaa| skandhakacarita
paMcama aMga (bhagavatI sUtra) meM upalabdha hotA hai| taba skandhaka ne 11 aMga
par3he, isakA kyA artha haA? kyA usane apanA hI jIvana paDhA? isakA uttara isa
prakAra hai bhagavAn mahAvIra ke tIrthazAsana meM nau vAcanAeM thii| pratyeka
vAcanA meM skandhaka ke jIvana kA artha (zikSArUpa prayojana) samAnarUpa se
avasthita rahatA thaa| antara kevala itanA hotA thA ki jIvana ke nAyaka ke sabhI
sAthI bhinna-bhinna hote the| bhAva yaha hai ki jo zikSA skandhaka ke jIvana se
milatI hai usI zikSA ko dene vAle anya jIvana-caritoM kA saMkalana tatkAlIna
vAcanAoM meM milatA thaa| sudharmAsvAmI ne apane ziSya jaMbUsvAmI ko lakSya
karake apanI isa vAcanA meM skandhaka ke jIvanacarita se hI usa artha kI
prarUpaNA kI hai, jo artha anya vAcanAoM meM garbhita thA, ata: yaha spaSTa hai
ki skandhaka ne jo aMgAdi zAstra par3he the, ve sudharmAsvAmI kI vAcanA ke nahIM
the| dasarI bAta yaha bhI ho sakatI hai ki gaNadhara mahArAja atizaya (jJAna
vizeSa) ke dhAraka hote haiM. isaliye unhoMne bhaviSya meM hone vAle caritoM kA
bhI saMkalana kara diyaa| isake atirikta bhAvI ziSya paramparA kI apekSA se
atIta kAla kA nirdeza bhI doSayukta nahIM kahA jA sktaa| 'cautthaM jAva
bhAvemANe' meM upayukta caturtha zabda vrata-eka upavAsa kA bodhaka hai, tathA
'jAva' arthAt yAvat aura bhAvemANe kA artha hai-bhAvayan-vAsayan-arthAt apane
jIvana meM usakA prayoga karatA huaa| 'mAsiyaM bhikkhupaDima' kA artha hai
mAsikI bhikssuprtimaa| pratimA kA artha hai prtijnyaa| bhikSu kI pratijJA ko
bhikSu-pratimA kahate haiN| ye pratimAeM bAraha hotI haiN| unakA vistRta
vivecana dazAzrutaskandha meM kiyA gayA hai| isa pratimA kA dhAraka sAdhu eka
anna kI aura eka pAnI kI datti (dAtA dvArA die jAne vAle anna aura pAnI kI
akhaNDadhArA datti kahalAtI hai| letA hai| jahAM eka vyakti ke liye bhojana banA
hai, vahAM se bhojana letA hai, garbhavatI yA choTe bacce kI mAM ke liye banAyA
gayA bhojana vaha nahIM letA hai| dugdhapAna chur3avAkara bhikSA dene vAlI strI
tathA apane Asana se uThakara bhojana dene vAlI AsannaprasavA strI se bhojana
nahIM letaa| jisake donoM paira dehalI ke bhItara hoM yA bAhara hoM usase AhAra
nahIM letaa| dina ke Adi, madhya aura carama ina tIna bhAgoM meM se eka bhAga
meM vaha bhikSA ko jAtA hai| paricita sthAna para vaha eka rAta rahatA 1.
bhagavatIsUtra-zataka-2, uddezaka-1, sUtra 93

Page #57 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter 16  **Antakrid Dasha:** A monk who stays in an unfamiliar place for
one or two nights, speaks four languages: (1) **Yachani** - begging for food,
(2) **Pricchni** - asking for directions, (3) **Anugyanapni** - seeking
permission for places, etc., (4) answering questions. He can stay in these
places with the permission of the owner: (1) **Adha Aaramgriha** - a place
surrounded by a garden, (2) **Adho Vikatgriha** - open on all sides, covered
from above, (3) **Adho Vriksh ka Mool ya Vahaan par bana Sthan** - the root of a
tree or a place built there. If someone sets fire to these places, the monk does
not leave the place himself for the safety of his life. If a thorn gets stuck in
his foot during Vihar, he does not remove it. If dust falls into his eyes, he
does not remove it either. He stays where the sun sets. He does not use water
except for bodily purification. If a violent creature comes in front of him
during Vihar, he does not retreat in fear. If a creature is afraid of him, he
moves aside. He does not use warm places, clothes, or similar things to avoid
cold. He does not go to a cold place to avoid heat. By this method, the
**Maasiki Pratima** is observed. Its duration is one month. This is how the
special **Abhigha** of a Sadhu is called **Bhikshu Pratima**. The first is
called **Maasiki**, the second **Dwaimasiki**, the third **Traimasiki**, the
fourth **Chaturmasiki**, the fifth **Panchamasiki**, the sixth **Shanmasiki**,
and the seventh **Saptamasiki**. In the first Pratima, one **Datti** of food and
water is taken, in the second two, in the third three, in the fourth four, in
the fifth five, in the sixth six, and in the seventh seven Dattis are taken. The
eighth Pratima lasts for seven days and nights. The ninth also lasts for seven
days and nights. In the eighth, **Chauihar** fasting is done. In the ninth,
**Chauihar Bele-Bele Parana** is done. The duration is seven days. The tenth
also lasts for seven days and nights. In this, **Chauihar Tele-Tele Parana** is
done. The eleventh Pratima lasts for one day and night. The twelfth Pratima is
only for one night. Its worship is done with **Chauihar Tele**. All these
Pratiamas were worshipped by **Shri Gautam Muni Ji**.  **'Gunrayanan
Pitavokamman'** means - **Gunratna Tapa Karma**. **Gunratna** is one type of
**Tapa** among the various types of **Tapa**. It is also called **"Gun-Ratna-
Samvatsar Tapa"**. This **Tapa** is completed in sixteen months. The **Tapa** in
which the whole year is spent with **Gun** like **Ratnas** is called **"Gun-
Ratna Samvatsar" Tapa**. This **Tapa** takes sixteen months. Out of which 407
days are for **Tapasya** and 73 days for **Parana**. As follows:  **Panneras Vīs
Chauvvīs Chev Chauvvīs Pannaviśā Ya. Chauvvīs Ekkavīsā, Chauvīs Sattavīsā Ya.
||1|| Tīsā Tetīsā Vi Ya Chauvvīs Chhavvīs Aṭṭhavīsā Ya. Tīs Vattīsā Viya
Sollasamāsesu Tavadīvasā. ||2|| Panneras Daṣṭṭha Chha Panch Chaur Panchasu Ya
Tiṇṇi Tiṇṇi Tti. Panchasu Do Do Ya Tahā Sollasamāsesu Pāraṇagā. ||3||**
Meaning: In the first month, fifteen, in the second month, twenty, in the third
month, twenty-four, in the fourth month, twenty-four, in the fifth month,
twenty-five, in the sixth month, twenty-four, in the seventh month, twenty-one,
in the eighth month, twenty-four, in the ninth month, twenty-seven, in the tenth
month, thirty, in the eleventh month, thirty-three, in the twelfth month,
twenty-four, in the thirteenth month, twenty-six, in the fourteenth month,
twenty-eight, in the fifteenth month, thirty, and in the sixteenth month,
thirty-two days are for **Tapasya**. All these add up to 407 days of
**Tapasya**. The days of **Parana** are as follows:  In the first month,
fifteen, in the second month, ten, in the third month, eight, in the fourth
month, six, in the fifth month, five, in the sixth month, four, in the seventh
month, three, in the eighth month, three, in the ninth month, three, in the
tenth month, three...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 16] [ antakRddazA hai, aparicita sthAna para eka yA do rAteM Thahara jAtA hai,
vaha (1) yAcanI - AhAra kI yAcanA karanA, (2) pRcchanI - mArga pUchanA, (3)
anujJApanI sthAna Adi ke liye AjJA lenA, (4) praznoM kA uttara denA, ye cAra
bhASAeM bolatA hai| vaha (1) adhaH ArAmagRha - - jisake cAroM ora bAga ho, (2)
adhovikaTagRhacAroM ora se khulA ho, Upara se DhakA ho (3) adho vRkSa kA mUla yA
vahA~ para banA sthAna, ina sthAnoM para svAmI kI AjJA lekara Thahara sakatA
hai| ina sthAnoM meM koI Aga lagA de to, yaha muni jIvana kI surakSA ke liye
svayaM sthAna se bAhara nahIM nikalatA  /  vihAra meM yadi pAMva meM kAMTA laga
jAe to use nahIM nikAlatA, AMkhoM meM dhUla par3a jAe to usako bhI dUra nahIM
karatA  /  jahA~ sUrya asta ho jAe vahIM Thahara jAtA hai | zarIrazuddhi ko
chor3akara jala kA prayoga nahIM karatA  /  vihAra ke samaya yadi sAmane koI
hiMsaka jIva Ae to Darakara pIche nahIM haTatA  /  yadi koI jIva use dekhakara
DaratA ho to vaha eka ora ho jAtA hai| zIta -nivAraNa ke liye garama sthAnoM yA
vastroM kiMvA tathArUpa vastuoM kA sevana nahIM karatA  /  garamI kA parihAra
karane ke liye zIta sthAna meM nahIM jaataa| isa vidhi se mAsikI pratimA kA
pAlana hotA hai| isakA samaya eka mAsa kA hai| isa prakAra sAdhu ke abhigraha
vizeSa kA nAma bhikSu pratimA hai  /  pahalI mAsikI, dUsarI dvaimAsikI, tIsarI
traimAsikI, cauthI cAturmAsikI, pAMcavIM pAJcamAsikI, chaThI SANmAsikI aura
sAtavIM sAptamAsikI kahalAtI haiN| pahalI pratimA meM anna-pAnI kI eka datti,
dUsarI meM do, tIsarI meM tIna, cauthI meM cAra, pAMcavIM meM pAMca, chaTThI meM
chaha, sAtavIM meM sAta dattiyAM lI jAtI haiN| AThavIM pratimA kA samaye sAta
dina-rAta hai| navamI kA samaya bhI sAta dina-rAta hai| AThavIM meM cauvihAra
upavAsa karanA hotA hai| navamI meM cauvihAra bele-bele pAraNA karanA hotA hai
/  samaya sAta divasa kA hai| dasavIM kA samaya bhI sAta dina-rAta kA hotA hai|
isameM cauvihAra tele-tele pAraNA karanA hotA hai| gyArahavIM pratimA kA samaya
eka ahorAtra hai  /  bArahavIM pratimA kevala eka rAtri kI hai| isakA ArAdhana
cauvihAra tele se hotA hai  /  ina sabhI pratimAoM kA ArAdhana zrI gautamamunijI
ne kiyA thA  /  - 'guNarayaNaM pitavokammaM' kA artha hai - guNaratna tapaH
karma  /  tapoM ke nAnA prakAroM meM guNaratna bhI eka prakAra kA tapa hai| ise
'guNa - ratna - saMvatsara tapa' bhI kahate haiN| yaha tapa solaha mahInoM meM
sampanna hotA hai| jisa tapa meM guNa rUpa ratnoM vAlA sampUrNa varSa bitAyA
jAye vaha tapa" guNa-ratna saMvatsara" tapa kahalAtA hai  /  isa tapa meM solaha
mAsa lagate haiM  /  jisameM se 407 dina tapasyA ke aura 73 dina pAraNA ke hote
haiM  /  yathA-- paNNarasa vIsa cauvvIsa ceva cauvvIsa paNNavIsA ya  /  cauvvIsa
ekkavIsA, cauvIsA sattavIsA ya  // 1  //  tIsA tetIsA vi ya cauvvIsa chavvIsa
aTThavIsA ya  /  tIsa vattIsA viya solasamAsesu tavadivasA  // 2 //  paNNarasa
dasaTTha cha paMca caura paMcasu ya tiNNi tiNNi tti  /  paMcasu do do ya tahA
solasamAsesu pAraNagA  // 3 //  arthAt - pahale mAsa meM pandraha, dUsare mAsa
meM bIsa, tIsare mAsa meM caubIsa, cauthe mAsa meM caubIsa, pAMcaveM mAsa meM
paccIsa, chaTThe mAsa meM caubIsa, sAtaveM mAsa meM ikkIsa, AThaveM mAsa meM
caubIsa, nauveM mAsa meM sattAIsa, dasaveM mAsa meM tIsa, gyArahaveM mAsa meM
tetIsa, bArahaveM mAsa meM caubIsa, terahaveM mAsa meM chabbIsa, caudahaveM mAsa
meM aTThAIsa, pandrahaveM mAsa meM tIsa aura solahaveM mAsa meM battIsa dina
tapasyA ke hote haiM  /  ye saba milAkara 407 dina tapasyA ke hote haiM  /
pAraNA ke dina isa prakAra haiM - pahale mAsa meM pandraha, dUsare mAsa meM
dasa, tIsare mAsa meM ATha, cauthe mAsa meM chaha, pAMcaveM mAsa meM pAMca,
chaTThe mAsa meM cAra, sAtaveM mAsa meM tIna, AThaveM mAsa meM tIna, nauveM mAsa
meM tIna, dasaveM mAsa meM tIna,

Page #58 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[First Class] [There are three paranas in the eleventh month, two in the twelfth
month, two in the thirteenth month, two in the fourteenth month, two in the
fifteenth month, and two in the sixteenth month. All these add up to 73 paranas.
There are 407 days of tapasya and 73 days of parana, which together make 480
days, meaning this tapasya is completed in sixteen months. In this tapasya, the
days of tapasya and parana combined in a month may exceed thirty, and in some
months may be less than thirty, but the excess and deficit compensate each
other, making a total of thirty. In this way, this tapasya is completed in
sixteen months. In short, in this tapasya, alternate fasting is done in the
first month, belebele parana is done in the second month, and tele-tele parana
is done in the third month. In this way, increasing the number of fasts, in the
sixteenth month, sixteen-sixteen fasts are done and parana is performed. In this
tapasya, during the day, one sits in the utkutuk asana and takes the sun's rays,
and at night, one sits in the virasana without clothes and meditates. The yantra
of the Gunaratnasamvatsara tapasya is also seen, which is as follows: Tapasya
days Parana days All days 32/16 | 16 30/15 | 15 | 24/12 |12 11/11 3010 | 10|10
27 9 | 9 | 9 248 8 8 217 | 77

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prathama varga] [17 gyArahaveM mAsa meM tIna, bArahaveM mAsa meM do, terahaveM
mAsa meM do, caudahaveM mAsa meM do, pandrahaveM mAsa meM do, solahaveM mAsa meM
do dina pAraNe ke hote haiN| ye saba milAkara 73 dina pAraNA ke hote haiN|
tapasyA ke 407 aura pAraNA ke 73 ye donoM milAkara 480 dina hote haiM arthAt
solaha mahInoM meM yaha tapa pUrNa hotA hai| isa tapa meM, kisI mahIne meM
tapasyA aura pAraNA ke dina milAkara tIsa se adhika ho jAte haiM aura kisI mAsa
meM tIsa se kama raha jAte haiM, kintu kama aura adhika kI eka dUsare meM pUrti
kara dene se tIsa kI pUrti ho jAtI hai, isa taraha se yaha tapa barAbara solaha
mAsa meM pUrNa ho jAtA hai| saMkSepa meM isa tapa ke antargata pahale mAsa meM
ekAntara upavAsa kiyA jAtA hai, dUsare mAsa meM belebele pAraNA karanA hotA hai,
tIsare mahIne meM tele-tele pAraNA karanA par3atA hai| isI prakAra bar3hAte hue
solahaveM mahIne meM solaha-solaha upavAsa karake pAraNA kiyA jAtA hai| isa tapa
meM dina ko utkuTuka Asana meM baiThakara sUrya kI AtApanA lI jAtI hai aura
rAtri ko vastrarahita vIrAsana meM baiThakara dhyAna lagAnA hotA hai|
guNaratnasaMvatsara tapa kA yantra bhI dekhane meM AtA hai, jo isa prakAra
haitapa dina pAraNA dina sarva dina 32/16 | 16 30/15 | 15 | 24/12 |12 11/11 3010
| 10|10 27 9 | 9 | 9 248 8 8 217 | 77

Page #59 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[18] The term "Antakṛddasha Sanlehanāe" means a special type of austerity
performed in the final moments of life, which aims to reduce the body and the
kṣayās (passions). 2-10 Ajjhayanāni 10- Just as Gautama is described, so too
should the remaining nine Ajjhayanāni be understood: Samudde, Sāgare, Gambhire,
Thimie, Ayale, Kampille, Akkhobe, Paseṇati, and Viṇhue. All of them had
Andhakavṛṣṇi as their father and Dhāriṇī as their mother. Their descriptions are
all similar. In this way, the first group, consisting of ten Ajjhayanāni, has
been described.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 18] [antakRddazA saMlehaNAe-zabda kA artha hotA hai-antima samaya meM kiyA jAne
vAlA zarIra aura kaSAya Adi ko kRza karane vAlA tapa-vizeSa  /  2-10 ajjhayaNANi
10-evaM jahA goyame tahA sesaa| vahI piyA, dhAriNI mAtA, samudde, sAgare,
gaMbhIre, thimie, ayale, kaMpille, akkhobhe, paseNati, viNhue, ee eggmaa|
paDhamo vaggo, dasa ajjhayaNA pnnnnttaa| 2-10 adhyayana mUlArtha-jisa prakAra
gautama kA varNana kiyA gayA hai, usI prakAra zeSa samudra, sAgara, gambhIra,
stimita, acala, kAMpilya, akSobha, prasenajita aura viSNu, ina nava adhyayanoM
kA artha bhI samajha lenA caahie| sabake pitA andhakavRSNi the| mAtA dhAriNI
thii| saba kA varNana eka jaisA hai| isa prakAra dasa adhyayanoM ke samudAya
rUpa prathama varga kA varNana kiyA gayA hai|"

Page #60 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Second Section of the Antagaddasha  "If, Venerable Sir, the Ascetic Bhagavan
Mahavira has expounded the meaning of the first section of the Antagaddasha, the
eighth Anga, then how many studies has the Ascetic Bhagavan Mahavira expounded
for the second section?"  "Thus, Jambū, the Ascetic Bhagavan Mahavira has
expounded eight studies for the second section of the Antagaddasha, the eighth
Anga. The Sangahani-Gatha:  Akshobha, Sagara, Samudra, Himavant, Acala, Dharana,
Purna, and Abhichanda, these eight are the names.  Just as the first section
describes Gautama Kumar, so too should one understand the description of these
eight studies. They also practiced the Gunaratna Tapa, observed restraint for
sixteen years, and finally attained Siddhipada through a one-month Sanlekhana on
Mount Shatrujaya.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dvitIya varga utkSepa 1-"jai NaM bhaMte! samaNeNaM bhagavayA mahAvIreNaM
aTThamassa aMgassa aMtagaDadasANaM paDhamassa vaggassa ayamaDhe paNNatte,
doccassa NaM bhaMte! vaggassa aMtagaDadasANaM samajeNaM bhagavayA mahAvIreNaM
kai ajjhayaNA paNNattA? evaM khalu jaMbU! samaNeNaM bhagavayA mahAvIreNaM
aTThamassa aMgassa aMtagaDadasANaM doccassa vaggassa aTTha ajjhayaNA pnnnnttaa|
saMgahaNI-gAhA akkhobha sAgara khalu samudda himavaMta acala nAme ya  /  dharaNe
ya pUraNe vi ya abhicaMde ceva aTThamae  //  akSobhAdi-pada jahA paDhamo vaggo
tahA savve aTTha ajjhayaNA gunnrynntvokmmN| solasavAsAI priaao| settuMje mAsiyAe
saMlehaNAe siddhii| Arya jaMbU ne Arya sudharmA svAmI se pUchA- he bhagavan !
zramaNa bhagavAn mahAvIra ne aMtagaDadazA ke prathama varga kA yaha artha
pratipAdana kiyA hai to dvitIya varga ke kitane adhyayana pharamAye haiM?
sudharmA svAmI isakA samAdhAna karate hue bole-he jaMbU! zramaNa bhagavAn
mahAvIra ne AThaveM aMga aMtagaDadazA ke dvitIya varga ke ATha adhyayana
pharamAye haiN| usa kAla aura usa samaya meM dvArakA nAma kI nagarI thii|
mahArAja vRSNi rAjya karate the| rAnI kA nAma dhAriNI thaa| unake ATha putra the
(1) akSobhakumAra, (2) sAgarakumAra, (3) samudrakumAra, (4) haimavantakumAra,
(5) acalakumAra, (6) dharaNakumAra, (7) pUrNakumAra, (8) abhicndrkumaar| jaise-
prathama varga meM gautamakumAra kA varNana kiyA gayA hai, usI prakAra inake
ATha adhyayanoM kA varNana bhI samajha lenA caahie| inhoMne bhI guNaratna tapa
kA ArAdhana kiyA aura 16 varSa kA saMyama pAlana karake anta meM zatrujaya
parvata para eka mAsa kI saMlekhanA dvArA siddhipada prApta kiyaa|

Page #61 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Third Class ## First Study: Aṇīyas Utkṣepa  **1.  **"If so, what is the
Utkṣepa of this?" "Indeed, Jambū! There are thirteen studies within the
Antagadaśā of this class, as follows: (1) Aṇīyas, (2) Anaṃtaseṇa, (3) Aṇihaya,
(4) Viū, (5) Devayaśa, (6) Sattuseṇa, (7) Sāraṇa, (8) Gāe, (9) Sumuhe, (10)
Dummuhe, (11) Kūvae, (12) Dārue, (13) Aṇāḍiṭṭhī.  "If so, Venerable Sir! There
are thirteen studies within the Antagadaśā of this class, as taught by the
Śramaṇa who has attained liberation. What is the meaning of the first study of
this class, Venerable Sir?"  **Indeed, Jambū!** At that time, in that era, there
was a city named Bhaddilpura. In the north-east direction of that Bhaddilpura,
there was a garden named Śrīvana. There, King Jitasatru ruled. In that city of
Bhaddilpura, there lived a merchant named Nāga. He was very wealthy, with many
wives, beautiful houses, comfortable beds, and luxurious chariots. He had many
servants, slaves, cows, buffaloes, and horses. He was very respected. His wife
was named Sulasa. She was beautiful, with perfect limbs, a charming face, and a
pleasant voice. She was a perfect woman.  **The liberated Śramaṇa Bhagavān
Mahāvīra Swami has taught thirteen studies in the third class of the Antagadaśā,
as follows:**  (1) Aṇīyasakumāra, (2) Anaṃtaseṇakumāra, (3) Aṇihatakumāra, (4)
Vidvatkumāra, (5) Devayaśakumāra, (6) Śatruseṇakumāra, (7) Sāraṇakumāra, (8)
Gajakumāra, (9) Sumukhakumāra, (10) Durmukhakumāra, (11) Kūpakakumāra, (12)
Dārukakumāra, (13) Anāḍṛṣṭikumāra.  **Venerable Sir!** If the Śramaṇa who has
attained liberation, Bhagavān Mahāvīra, has taught thirteen studies in the
Antagadaśā, then, Venerable Sir! What is the meaning of the first study of the
third class of the Antagadaśā, as taught by the Śramaṇa who has attained
liberation, Mahāvīra Swami?  **Aṇīyasādi-pada-Sudharmā Swami said:** "O Jambū!
**1.** Understand the Utkṣepa word as before.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 tRtIya varga prathama adhyayana : anIyasa utkSepa 1-jai NaM tccss| ukkhevo'|
evaM khalu jaMbU! taccassa vaggassa aMtagaDadasANaM terasa ajjhayaNA paNNattA,
taM jahA (1) aNIyase, (2) aNaMtaseNe,(3) aNihaya, (4)viU, (5) devajase,(6)
sattuseNe, (7) sAraNe,(8) gae, (9) sumuhe,(10) dummuhe,(11) kUvae, (12) dArue,
(13) annaaditttthii| "jaiNaM bhaMte! samaNeNaMjAva saMpatteNaMtaccassa vaggassa
aMtagaDadasANaM terasa ajjhayaNA paNNattA, taccassa NaM bhaMte! vaggassa
paDhama-ajjhayaNassa aMtagaDadasANaM ke aTe paNNatte?" aNIyasAdi pada evaM khalu
jaMbU! teNaM kAleNaM teNaM samaeNaM bhaddilapure NAmaM nayare hotthaa| vnnnno|
tassa NaM bhaddilapurassa uttarapuracchime disibhAe sirivaNe NAmaM ujjANe
hotthaa| vnnnno| jiyasattU raayaa| tattha NaM bhaddilapure Nayare nAge nAma
gAhAvaI hotthaa| aDDhe jAva [ ditte, vitthiNNa-viula-bhavaNasayaNAsaNa-jANa-
vAhaNAiNNe, bahudhana-bahujAyarUva-rayae, AogappaogasaMpautte vicchaDDiyaviula-
bhattapANe, bahudAsI-dAsa-go-mahisa-gavelagappabhUe bahujaNassa ] apribhuue|
tassa NaM nAgassa gAhAvaissa sulasA-nAmaM bhAriyA hotthaa| sUmAla-jAva [pANi-
pAyA ahINa-paDipuNNapaMciMdiya-sarIrA lakkhaNa-vaMjaNa guNovaveA mANummANa-
ppamANa-paDipuNNa-sujAya-savvaMgasuMdaraMgI sasi-somAkAra-kaMta-piyadaMsaNA]
suruuvaa| mokSaprApta zramaNa bhagavAn mahAvIra svAmI ne aMtagaDadazA ke tRtIya
varga ke 13 adhyayana pharamAye haiM -jaise ki (1) anIyasakumAra, (2)
anantasenakumAra, (3) anihatakumAra, (4) vidvatkumAra, (5) devayazakumAra, (6)
zatrusenakumAra, (7) sAraNakumAra, (8) gajakumAra, (9) sumukhakumAra, (10)
durmukhakumAra, (11) kUpakakumAra, (12) dArukakumAra, (13) anaadRssttikumaar|
bhagavan ! yadi zramaNa yAvat mokSaprApta bhagavAn mahAvIra ne antagaDadazA ke
13 adhyayana batAye haiM to bhagavan! zramaNa yAvat mokSaprApta mahAvIra svAmI
ne antagaDa sUtra ke tIsare varga ke prathama adhyayana kA kyA artha pratipAdana
kiyA hai? anIyasAdi-pada-sudharmA svAmI bole-he jaMbU! usa kAla aura usa samaya
meM bhaddilapura nAmaka nagara thaa| usake IzAnakoNa meM zrIvana nAmaka udyAna
thaa| vahA~ jitazatru rAjA rAjya karatA thaa| usa nagara ma 1. utkSepa pada
pUrvavat samajha lenaa|

Page #62 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Third Class] [There was a Gāthāpati named Nāga, who had twenty-one names. He
was extremely prosperous and wealthy, possessing extensive and spacious
buildings, beds, seats, vehicles, and conveyances, and was abundant in gold,
silver, and other wealth. He successfully utilized the means of acquiring
wealth. Even after eating, a large quantity of food remained in his house. He
had slaves, maids, cows, buffaloes, and goats, and he was not defeated by many.
The wife of that Nāga Gāthāpati was named Sulasā. She had extremely delicate
hands and feet. Her five senses and body were flawless and perfect. She was
endowed with auspicious marks, decorations, and qualities. Her body was complete
in measurement, weight, and size, and all her limbs were beautiful. Her form was
as gentle as the moon, and her appearance was charming and dear.  The present
sūtra describes the studies of this class, and the first study is the
description of the parents of Anīyasakumāra.  2. That Nāga Gāthāpati's wife
Sulasā had a son named Anīyasa. [He was delicate, flawless in his five senses
and body, endowed with auspicious marks, decorations, and qualities, complete in
measurement, weight, and size, with all his limbs beautiful, as gentle as the
moon, charming and dear in appearance, surrounded by five wet-nurses, firmly
established, nourished by the wet-nurses of milk, decoration, bathing,
embracing, and playing, surrounded by many hunchbacks, dwarfs, short people, fat
people, barbarians, dancers, courtesans, Damilīs, Siṃhalīs, Muruṇḍīs, Sabarīs,
Pārasīs, and people from various other regions and countries, skilled in
gestures, thoughts, desires, and knowledge, wearing various types of clothes and
ornaments, skilled and disciplined, surrounded by young women of the royal
court, honored and worshipped by the rain-bearing clouds, the great mountains,
and the Campaka trees.]  Then, the parents of Anīyasa entrusted him to the
teacher Kalāyariya, [and that Kalāyariya taught and trained Anīyasa in thirty-
two arts and sciences, such as writing, arithmetic, drawing, dancing, singing,
playing musical instruments, archery, swimming, keeping time, gambling, public
speaking, painting, astrology, poetry, Prākrit, Sanskrit, Māgadhī, verses,
songs, siloka, gold-craft, silver-craft, lime-craft, types of ornaments, the
rituals of young women, elephant-lore, human-lore, horse-lore, ox-lore, chicken-
lore, umbrella-lore, staff-lore, sword-lore, gem-lore, crow-lore, knowledge of
materials, measurement of shoulders, measurement of cities, military formations,
and so on.]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 tRtIya varga] [21 nAga nAma kA gAthApati rahatA thaa| vaha atyanta samRddhizAlI
yAvat dhanI tejasvI vistRta aura vipula bhavanoM, zayyAoM, AsanoM, yAnoM aura
vAhanoM vAlA thA tathA suvarNa rajata Adi dhana kI bahulatA se yukta thaa| vaha
arthalAbha ke upAyoM kA saphalatA se prayoga karatA thaa| bhojana karane ke
anantara bhI usake yahAM bahutasA anna bAkI baca jAtA thaa| usake ghara meM
dAsa-dAsI Adi aura gAya-bhaiMsa tathA bakarI Adi pazu the aura vaha bahutoM se
bhI parAbhava ko prApta nahIM hotA thaa| usa nAga gAthApati kI sulasA nAma kI
bhAryA thii| vaha atyanta sukomala hAtha-pairoM vAlI thii| usakI pAMcoM indriyA~
aura zarIra khAmiyoM se rahita aura paripUrNa thaa| vaha (svastika Adi) lakSaNa,
(tila maSAdi) vyaMjana aura guNoM se yukta thii| mApa, bhAra aura AkAra vistAra
se paripUrNa aura samasta sundara aMgoM vAlA usakA zarIra thaa| usakI AkRti
candra ke samAna saumya aura darzana kAnta aura priya thaa| isa prakAra usakA
rUpa bahuta sundara thaa| vivecana-prastuta sUtra meM isa varga ke adhyayanoM kA
aura prathama adhyayana meM pratipAdya anIyasakumAra ke mAtA-pitA kA varNana
hai| 2-tassa NaM nAgassa gAhAvaissa putte sulasAe bhAriyAe attae aNIyase nAma
kumAre hotthaa| sUmAle jAva [ ahINa-paDipuNNa-paMciMdiya-sarIre , lakkhaNa-
vaMjaNa-guNovavee mANummANappamANa-paDipuNNa-sujAyasavvaMgasuMdaraMge
sasisomAgAre kaMte piyadaMsaNe ] surUve paMcadhAiparikkhitte jahA daDhapaiNNe
jAva [ khIradhAIe maMDaNadhAIe majaNadhAIe aMkadhAIe kIlAvaNadhAIe, bahUhiM
khujjAhiM cilAiyAhiM vAmaNiyAhiM vaDabhiyAhiM babbarAhiM lAsiyAhiM lAusiyAhiM
dAmilIhiM siMhalIhiM muraMDIhiM sabarIhiM pArasIhiM NANAdesIvidesaparimaMDiyAhiM
iMgiyAciMtiyapatthiyaviyANiyAhiM sadesaNevatthagahiyavesAhiM niuNaku salAhiM
viNIyAhiM ceDiyAcakkavAlataruNivaMda pariyAla-parivuDe
varisadharakaMcuimahayara-vaMdaparikkhitte hatthAo hatthaM sAharijjamANe aMkAo
aMkaM paribhujjamANe, parigijjamANe, cAlijjamANe, uvalAlijjamANe, rammaMsi
maNikoTTimatalaMsi parimijjamANe parimijjamANe NivvAyaNivvAghAyaMsi]
girikaMdaramallINe va caMpagapAyave suhaMsuheNaM privddddhi| tae NaM taM
aNIyasaM kumAraM sAtiregaaTThavAsajAyaM ammApiyaro kalAyariyassa uvaNeti jAva
[tae NaM se kalAyarie aNIyasaM kumAraM lehAiyAo gaNitappahANAo
sauNirutapajjavasANAo bAvattariM kalAo suttao a atthao a karaNao ya sehAvei,
sikkhaavei| taM jahA-(1) lehaM (2) gaNiyaM (3) rUvaM (4) naTTe (5) gIyaM (6)
vAiyaM (7) saragayaM (8) pokkharagayaM (9) samatAlaM (10) jUyaM (11) jaNavAyaM
(12) pAsayaM (13) aTThAvayaM (14) porekaccaM (15) dagamaTTiyaM (16) annavihiM
(17) pANavihiM (18) vatthavihiM (19) vilevaNavihiM (20) sayaNavihiM (21) ajjaM
(22) paheliyaM (23) mAgahiyaM (24) gAhaM ( 25) gIiyaM (26) siloyaM (27)
hiraNajuttiM (28) suvaNNajuttiM (29) cunajuttiM (30) AbharaNavihiM (31)
taruNIpaDikammaM (32) hathilakkhaNaM (33) purisalakkhaNaM (34) hayalakkhaNaM
(35) gayalakkhaNaM (36) goNalakkhaNaM (37) kukkuDalakkhaNaM (38) chattalakkhaNaM
(39) daMDalakkhaNaM (40) asilakkhaNaM (41) maNilakkhaNaM (42) kAgaNilakkhaNaM
(43) vatthuvijaM (44) khaMdhAramANaM (45) nagaramANaM (46) vUhaM (47)

Page #63 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 22] [Antakṛddaśā Paḍivūhaṁ (48) Cāraṁ (49) Paḍicāraṁ (50) Cakkavūhaṁ (51)
Garulavūhaṁ (52) Sagadavūhaṁ (53) Juddhaṁ (54) Nijuddhaṁ (55) Juddhatijuddhaṁ
(56) Aṭṭhijuddhaṁ (57) Muṭṭhijuddhaṁ (58) Bāhujuddhaṁ (59) Layājuddhaṁ (60)
Īsatthaṁ (61) Chharuppavāyaṁ (62) Dhanuvveyaṁ (63) Hirannapāgaṁ (64)
Savannapāgaṁ (65) Sattakheḍaṁ (66) Vakheḍaṁ (67) Nāliyākhaḍaṁ (68) Patacchhejj
(69) Kaṭagacchhejj (70) Sajīvaṁ (71) Nijjīvaṁ (72) Sauṇiruamiti. Tae ṇaṁ se
kalāyariē aṇīyasaṁ kumāraṁ lehaīyāo gaṇiyapphaṇāo sauṇiruappajjavaśānāo
bāvattareṁ kalāo suttao ya atthao ya karaṇao ya sihāveī, sikkhāveī, sihāvettā
sikkhāvettā ammapīuṇaṁ uvaṇeī. Tae ṇaṁ aṇīyasa kumārassā ammāpiyaro taṁ
kalāyariyaṁ madhurehiṁ vayaṇehiṁ vipuleṇaṁ vatthagandha-mallālankāreṇaṁ
sakkārenti, sammāṇeiti, sakkāritta sammāṇitta vipulaṁ jīviyārihaṁ pīḍāṇaṁ
dalayanti. Dalaiṭṭā paḍivisajjenti. Tae ṇaṁ se aṇīyase kumāre
bāvattarekalāpaṇḍiē navaṅgasuttapaḍibōhiē aṭṭhārasavihīpphagāradeśībhasāvisārae
gīīraī gandhavvanatṭakusale hayajōhī gayajōhī rahajōhī bāhujōhī bāhuppamāddī]
alaṁ bhoga samatthe jāe yāvi hotthā. Usa nāga gāthāpati kā putra sulasā bhāryā
kā ātmāj aṇīyas nāmak kumāra thā. (Vah) sukōmal thā yāvat usakī pāñcoṁ indriyāṁ
pūrṇa evaṁ nirdoṣa thīṁ. Usakā śarīra vidyā, dhana aura prabhutva ādi ke sūcak
sāmudrik lakṣaṇoṁ, massā-tilādi vyajanoṁ aura vinaya, suśīlatā ādi guṇoṁ se yukt
thā. Māna, unmāna aura pramāṇa se paripūrṇa evaṁ angopāṅga-gat saundarya se
paripūrṇa thā. Candramā ke samāna saumya (śānta), kānta, manohar, priyadarśana
aura pāñc dhāyamātāoṁ se parirakṣit vah dṛḍhapratijña kumāra kī tarah yāvat 1
kṣīradhātrī- dūdh pilāne vāli dhāy 2-maṇḍanadhātrī-vastrabhūṣaṇa pahnāne vāli
dhāy, 3-majjandhātrī-snāna karāne vāli dhāy, 4-krīḍāpanadhātrī-khel khilāne vāli
dhāy aura 5 - aṅkadhātrī-god meṁ lene vāli dhāy; inake atirikta vah aṇīyas
kumāra anyānna kubjā (kubṛī), cilātika (cilātakiṛāt nāmak anārya deś meṁ
utpann), vāmana (baunī), vaḍabhī (baḍe pet vāli), barbarī (barbar deś meṁ
utpann), bakuś deś kī, yōnak deś kī, palhavik deś kī, Īsinik, dhaurukin, lhāsak
deś kī, lakuś deś kī, draviḍ deś kī, siṁhal deś kī, arab deś kī, pulind deś kī,
pakkaṇ deś kī, vahal deś kī, muruṇḍ deś kī, śabar deś kī, pāras deś kī, is
prakār nāna deśoṁ kī parades-apne deś se bhinn rājagṛha ko suśōbhit karne vāli,
iṅgit (mukhadī kī ceṣṭā), cintīt (mānasik vicār) aura prārthīt (abhilṣit) ko
jānne vāli, apne-apne deś ke veṣ ko dhāraṇa karne vāli, nipuṇoṁ meṁ bhī
atinipuṇa , vinayayukt dāsīoṁ ke dvārā tatha svadeśīya dāsīoṁ dvārā aura
varṣadharoṁ (prayōga dvārā napuṁsak banāye hue puruṣoṁ), kancukiyoṁ aura
mahattaroṁ (antaḥpura ke kārya kī cintā rakhne vāloṁ) ke samudāya se ghirā rahnē
lagā. Vah ek ke hāth se dūsre ke hāth meṁ jātā, ek kī god se dūsre kī god meṁ
jātā, gāgā kar bahalāyā jātā, uṅgalī pakṛṛ kar chalāyā jātā, krīḍā ādi se lālan-
pālan kiyā jātā evaṁ ramaṇīya maṇijatīt pharṣa par chalāyā huā vāyurahit aura
vyāghātarahīt) giriguphā meṁ sthit campak vṛkṣ ke samāna sukhapūrvaṁ baṛhnē
lagā. Tattpaścāt aṇīyas kumāra ko āṭh varṣa se kuchh adhik umra vāla huā jānakr
mātā-pitā ne

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 22] [antakRddazA paDivUhaM (48) cAraM (49) paDicAraM (50) cakkavUhaM (51)
garulavUhaM (52) sagaDavUhaM (53) juddhaM (54) nijuddhaM (55) juddhAtijuddhaM
(56) aTThijuddhaM (57) muTThijuddhaM (58) bAhujuddhaM (59) layAjuddhaM (60)
IsatthaM (61) charuppavAyaM (62) dhaNuvveyaM (63) hirannapAgaM (64) savannapAgaM
(65) sattakheDaM (66)vakheDaM (67) nAliyAkheDaM (68) patacchejja (69)
kaTagachejja (70) sajIvaM (71) nijjIvaM (72) sunniruamiti| tae NaM se kalAyarie
aNIyasaM kumAraM lehAiyAo gaNiyappahANAo sauNiruapajjavasANAo bAvattariM kalAo
suttao ya atthao ya karaNao ya sihAvei, sikkhAvei, sihAvettA sikkhAvettA
ammapiUNaM uvnnei| tae NaM aNIyasakumArassa ammApiyaro taM kalAyariyaM
madhurehiM vayaNehiM vipuleNaM vatthagaMdha-mallAlaMkAreNaM sakkAreMti,
sammANeti, sakkArittA sammANittA vipulaM jIviyArihaM pIidANaM dlyNti| dalaittA
pddivisjjeNti| tae NaM se aNIyase kumAre bAvattarikalApaMDie
NavaMgasuttapaDibohie aTThArasavihippagAradesIbhAsAvisArae gIiraI
gaMdhavvanaTTakusale hayajohI gayajohI rahajohI bAhujohI bAhuppamaddI] alaM
bhogasamatthe jAe yAvi hotthaa| usa nAga gAthApati kA putra sulasA bhAryA kA
Atmaja anIyasa nAmaka kumAra thaa| (vaha) sukomala thA yAvat usakI pA~coM
indriyA~ pUrNa evaM nirdoSa thiiN| usakA zarIra vidyA, dhana aura prabhutva Adi
ke sUcaka sAmudrika lakSaNoM, massA-tilAdi vyaMjanoM aura vinaya, suzIlatA Adi
guNoM se yukta thaa| mAna, unmAna aura pramANa se paripUrNa evaM aMgopAMga-gata
saundarya se paripUrNa thaa| candramA ke samAna saumya (zAnta), kAnta, manohara,
priyadarzana aura pA~ca dhAyamAtAoM se parirakSita vaha dRDhapratijJa kumAra kI
taraha yAvat 1kSIradhAtrI- dUdha pilAne vAlI dhAya 2-maMDanadhAtrI-vastrAbhUSaNa
pahanAne vAlI dhAya, 3-majjanadhAtrIsnAna karAne vAlI dhAya, 4-krIDApanadhAtrI-
khela khilAne vAlI dhAya aura 5 - aMkadhAtrI-goda meM lene vAlI dhAya; inake
atirikta vaha anIyasa kumAra anyAnya kubjA (kubar3I), cilAtikA (cilAtakirAta
nAmaka anArya deza meM utpanna), vAmana (baunI), vaDabhI (baDe peTa vAlI),
barbarI (barbara deza meM utpanna), bakuza deza kI, yonaka deza kI, palhavika
deza kI, Isinika, dhaurukina, lhAsaka deza kI, lakusa deza kI, draviDa deza kI,
siMhala deza kI, araba deza kI, puliMda deza kI, pakkaNa deza kI, vahala deza
kI, muruMDa deza kI, zabara deza kI, pArasa deza kI, isa prakAra nAnA dezoM kI
paradeza-apane deza se bhinna rAjagRha ko suzobhita karane vAlI, iMgita (mukhAdi
kI ceSTA), cintita (mAnasika vicAra) aura prArthita (abhilaSita) ko jAnane vAlI,
apane-apane deza ke veSa ko dhAraNa karane vAlI, nipUNoM meM bhI atinipuNa ,
vinayayukta dAsiyoM ke dvArA tathA svadezIya dAsiyoM dvArA aura varSadharoM
(prayoga dvArA napuMsaka banAye hue puruSoM), kaMcukiyoM aura mahattarakoM
(antaHpura ke kArya kI cintA rakhane vAloM) ke samudAya se ghirA rahane lgaa|
vaha eka ke hAtha se dUsare ke hAtha meM jAtA, eka kI goda se dUsare kI goda meM
jAtA, gAgA kara bahalAyA jAtA, uMgalI pakar3a kara calAyA jAtA, krIr3A Adi se
lAlana-pAlana kiyA jAtA evaM ramaNIya maNijaTita pharza para calAyA jAtA huA
vAyurahita aura vyAghAtarahita) giriguphA meM sthita campaka vRkSa ke samAna
sukhapUrvaka bar3hane lgaa| tatpazcAt anIyasa kumAra ko ATha varSa se kucha
adhika umra vAlA huA jAnakara mAtA-pitA ne

Page #64 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Third Chapter] [23] He was sent to the art teacher. Thereafter, the art teacher
taught and made Aneyaskumar proficient in seventy-two arts, starting from
writing, which is primarily mathematics, and ending with the interpretation of
bird calls (shakuniruta), through the sutras (original text), meaning, and
practice.  These arts are as follows: (1) Writing, (2) Mathematics, (3) Changing
form, (4) Drama, (5) Singing, (6) Playing musical instruments, (7) Knowing the
notes, (8) Tuning musical instruments, (9) Knowing the same rhythm, (10)
Gambling, (11) Debating with people, (12) Playing with dice, (13) Playing
chaupad, (14) Protecting the city, (15) Creating objects from the combination of
water and soil, (16) Harvesting grain, (17) Generating new water, purifying and
heating water, (18) Making new clothes, dyeing, sewing, and wearing them, (19)
Identifying, preparing, and applying ointments, (20) Making beds, knowing the
method of sleeping, etc., (21) Recognizing and creating Arya Chanda, (22)
Creating and solving riddles, (23) Creating stories, etc., in Magadhika, i.e.,
the language of the Magadh country, (24) Creating stories, etc., in the Prakrit
language, (25) Creating Geeti Chanda, (26) Creating Shloka (Anushtup Chanda),
(27) Making gold, making ornaments from it, wearing them, etc., (28) Making new
silver, making ornaments from it, wearing them, etc., (29) Making powders like
rose, abir, etc., and using them, (30) Making ornaments, wearing them, etc.,
(31) Serving a young woman, applying cosmetics, (32) Knowing the characteristics
of a woman, (33) Knowing the characteristics of a man, (34) Knowing the
characteristics of a horse, (35) Knowing the characteristics of an elephant,
(36) Knowing the characteristics of a cow and bull, (37) Knowing the
characteristics of a rooster, (38) Knowing the characteristics of an umbrella,
(39) Knowing the characteristics of a staff, (40) Knowing the characteristics of
a sword, (41) Knowing the characteristics of a gem, (42) Knowing the
characteristics of a Kakani gem, (43) Vastu Vidya - the science of buildings
like houses, shops, etc., (44) Knowing the evidence of the army's encampment,
etc., (45) The art of establishing a new city, etc., (46) Creating a formation,
a front line, (47) Creating a front line for one's army in front of the enemy's
formation, (48) Commanding the army, (49) Counterattack - moving one's army in
front of the enemy army, (50) Chakravyuha - creating a formation in the shape of
a wheel, (51) Creating a formation in the shape of a Garuda, (52) Creating a
Shakatavyuh, (53) Engaging in general warfare, (54) Engaging in special warfare,
(55) Engaging in highly special warfare, (56) Fighting with a stick (yashti or
asthi), (57) Fighting with fists, (58) Fighting with arms, (59) Fighting with
vines, (60) Making the small appear large and the large appear small, (61)
Making the hilt of a sword, etc., (62) Having skill in archery, (63) Making
silver paste, (64) Making gold paste, (65) Piercing a thread, (66) Plowing a
field, (67) Piercing the stalk of a lotus, (68) Piercing a leaf, (69) Piercing a
bangle, an earring, etc., (70) Reviving the dead (unconscious), (71) Making the
living dead (like dead), and (72) Recognizing the calls of birds like crows,
owls, etc.  Thereafter, the art teacher makes Aneyaskumar proficient in seventy-
two arts, starting from writing, which is primarily mathematics, and ending with
the interpretation of bird calls (shakuniruta), through the sutras (original
text), meaning, and practice. After making him proficient and teaching him, he
takes him to his parents.  Then, Aneyaskumar's parents honored the art teacher
with sweet words and abundant clothes, fragrances, garlands, and ornaments.
After honoring him, they gave him a generous gift of affection, which was
suitable for his livelihood. After giving him the gift of affection, they bid
him farewell.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 tRtIya varga] [23 use kalAcArya ke pAsa bhejaa| tatpazcAt kalAcArya ne
anIyasakumAra ko gaNita jinameM pradhAna hai aisI lekha Adi zakuniruta (pakSiyoM
ke zabda) taka kI bahattara kalAe~ sUtra se, artha se aura prayoga se siddha
karavAI tathA sikhlaaii| - ve kalAe~ isa prakAra haiM - (1) lekhana, (2) gaNita,
(3) rUpa badalanA, (4) nATaka, (5) gAyana, (6) vAdya bajAnA, (7) svara jAnanA,
(8) vAdya sudhAranA, (9) samAna tAla jAnanA (10) juA khelanA (11) logoM ke sAtha
vAdavivAda karanA (12) pAsoM se khelanA (13) caupar3a khelanA (14) nagara kI
rakSA karanA (15) jala aura miTTI ke saMyoga se vastu kA nirmANa karanA (16)
dhAnya nipajAnA (17) nayA pAnI utpanna karanA, pAnI ko saMskAra karake zuddha
karanA evaM uSNa karanA (18) navIna vastra banAnA, raMganA, sInA aura pahananA
(19) vilepana kI vastu ko pahacAnanA, taiyAra karanA, lepana karanA Adi (20)
zayyA banAnA, zayana karane kI vidhi jAnanA Adi (21) AryA chaMda ko pahacAnanA
aura banAnA (22) paheliyA~ banAnA aura bUjhanA (23) mAgadhikA arthAt magadha
deza kI bhASA meM gAthA Adi banAnA (24) prAkRta bhASA meM gAthA Adi banAnA (25)
gIti chaMda banAnA (26) zloka (anuSTupa chaMda) banAnA (27) suvarNa banAnA,
usake AbhUSaNa banAnA, pahananA Adi (28) naI cAMdI banAnA, usake AbhUSaNa
banAnA, pahananA Adi (29) cUrNa - gulAba abIra Adi banAnA aura usakA upayoga
karanA (30) gahane ghar3anA, pahananA Adi (31) taruNI kI sevA karanA -
prasAdhana karanA (32) strI ke lakSaNa jAnanA (33) puruSa ke lakSaNaM jAnanA
(34) azva ke lakSaNa jAnanA (35) hAthI ke lakSaNa jAnanA (36) gAya baila ke
lakSaNa jAnanA (37) murgA ke lakSaNa jAnanA (38) chatra - lakSaNa jAnanA (39)
daMDa lakSaNa jAnanA (40) khaDga-lakSaNa jAnanA (41) maNi ke lakSaNa jAnanA (42)
kAkaNI ratna ke lakSaNa jAnanA (43) vAstuvidyA - makAna dukAna Adi imAratoM kI
vidyA (44) senA ke par3Ava kA pramANa Adi jAnanA (45) nayA nagara basAne Adi kI
kalA (46) vyUha - morcA banAnA (47) virodhI ke vyUha ke sAmane apanI senA kA
morcA racanA (48) senA saMcAlana karanA (49) praticAra - zatrusenA ke samakSa
apanI senA ko calAnA (50) cakravyUha- - cAka ke AkAra meM morcA banAnA (51)
garur3a ke AkAra kA vyUha banAnA (52) zakaTavyUha racanA (53) sAmAnya yuddha
karanA (54) vizeSa yuddha karanA (55) atyanta vizeSa yuddha karanA (56) aTThi
(yaSTi yA asthi se ) yuddha karanA (57) muSTiyuddha karanA (58) bAhuyuddha
karanA (59) latAyuddha karanA (60) bahuta ko thor3A aura thor3e ko bahuta
dikhalAnA (61) khaDga kI mUTha Adi banAnA (62) dhanuSa-bANa saMbaMdhI kauzala
honA (63) cAMdI kA pAka banAnA (64) sone kA pAka banAnA (65) sUtra kA chedana
karanA (66) kheta jotanA (67) kamala ke nAla kA chedana karanA (68) patra-
chedana karanA (69) kar3A kuMDala Adi kA chedana karanA (70) mRta ( mUrcchita)
ko jIvita karanA (71) jIvita ko mRta (mRtatulya) karanA aura (72) kAka ghUka Adi
pakSiyoM kI bolI pahacAnanA  /  tatpazcAt vaha kalAcArya anIyasakumAra ko gaNita
pradhAna, lekhana se lekara zakuniruta paryanta bahattara kalAe~ sUtra (mUla
pATha) se, artha se aura prayoga se siddha karAtA hai tathA sikhalAtA hai  /
siddha karavA kara aura sikhalA kara mAtA-pitA ke pAsa le jAtA hai  /  taba
anIyasakumAra ke mAtA-pitA ne kalAcArya kA madhura vacanoM se tathA vipula
vastra, gaMdha, mAlA aura alaMkAroM se satkAra kiyA, sanmAna kiyA  /  satkAra-
sanmAna karake jIvikA ke yogya vipula prItidAna diyaa| prItidAna dekara use vidA
kiyaa|

Page #65 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Anantakrit Dasha] Then the young prince Aniyasaputra became proficient in
seventy-two arts. His nine organs - two ears, two eyes, two nostrils, tongue,
skin, and mind - which were dormant and had indistinct consciousness due to
childhood, became awakened. He became skilled in eighteen types of regional
languages. He developed a fondness for music, and became adept in singing and
dancing. He became capable of horse-riding, elephant-fighting, chariot-warfare,
and hand-to-hand combat. He gained the ability to overpower his opponents with
his own arms. He acquired the capacity to enjoy sensual pleasures.  The sutra-
author, after describing the childhood and educational life of Aniyasaputra, now
proceeds to narrate the further course of his life:  3. Then, recognizing that
Aniyasaputra had outgrown his childhood, his parents arranged for him to be
married to thirty-two celestial maidens of equal status, beauty, youth, and
virtues, who were brought from celestial abodes.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 24] [antakRddazA taba anIyasakumAra bahattara kalAoM meM paMDita ho gyaa| usake
nau aMga-do kAna, do netra, do nAsikA, jihvA, tvacA aura mana bAlyAvasthA ke
kAraNa jo soye-se the- avyakta cetanA vAle the, ve jAgRta se ho gye| vaha
aThAraha prakAra kI dezI bhASAoM meM kuzala ho gyaa| vaha gIti meM prIti vAlA,
gIta aura nRtya meM kuzala ho gyaa| vaha azvayuddha, gajayuddha, rathayuddha
aura bAhuyuddha karane vAlA bana gyaa| apanI bAhuoM se vipakSI kA mardana karane
meM samartha ho gyaa| bhoga bhogane kA sAmarthya usameM A gyaa| vivecana-
prastuta sUtra meM anIyasakumAra ke zaizava tathA zaikSaNika jIvana kA ullekha
karake aba sUtrakAra usake agrima jIvana kA varNana karate hue kahate haiM -
3-tae NaM taM aNIyasaM kumAraM ummukkabAlabhAvaM jANittA ammApiyaro sarisiyANaM
[sarivvayANaM sarittayANaM sarisalAvaNNa-rUva-jovvaNa-guNovaveyANaM sarisaehiMto
ibbhakulehito ANilliyANaM] battIsAe ibbhavarakaNNagANaM egadivaseNaM pANiM
gennhaaveNti| tae NaM se nAge gAhAvaI aNIyasassa kumArassa imaM eyArUvaM
pIidANaM dalayai, taM jahAbattIsaM hiraNakoDIo jahA mahAbalassa jAva [battIsaM
suvaNNakoDIo, mauDe maThaDappavare, battIsaM kuMDalajue kuMDalajuyappavare,
battIse hAre hArappavare, battIsaM addhahAre addhahArappavare, battIsaM egAvalIo
egAvalippavarAo, evaM muttAvalIo, evaM kaNagAvalIo, evaM rayaNAvalIo, battIsaM
kaDagajoe kaDagajoyappavare, evaM tuDiyajoe, battIsaM khomajuyalAI
khomajuyappavarAI, evaM vaDagajuyalAiM, evaM paTTajuyalAiM, evaM dugullajuyalAI
battIsaM sirIo, battIsaM hirIo, battIsaM dhiIo, kittIo, buddhIo, lacchIo,
battIsaM NaMdAiM, battIsaM bhaddAiM, battIsaM tale talappavare, savvarayaNAmae,
NiyagavarabhavaNake U battIsaM jhae jhayappavare, battIsaM vaye vayappavare,
dasagosAhassieNaM vaeNaM, battIsaM NADagAiM NADagappavarAI battIsabaddheNaM
NADaeNaM, battIsaM Ase Asappavare, savvarayaNAmae, sirigharapaDirUvae, battIsaM
hatthI hatthippavare savvarayaNAmae sirigharapaDirUvae battIsaM jANAiM
jANappavarAiM, battIsaM jugAiM jugappavarAI, evaM sibiyAo, evaM saMdamANIo, evaM
gillIo thillIo, battIsaM viyaDajANAI viyaDajANappavarAI, battIsaM rahe pArijANie
battIsaM rahe saMgAmie, battIsaM Ase Asappavare, battIsaM hatthI hatthIppavare,
battIsaM gAme gAmappavare dasakulasAhassieNaM gAmeNaM, battIsaM dAse
dAsappavare, evaM ceva dAsIo, evaM kiMkare, evaM kaMcuijje, evaM varisadhare,
evaM mahattarae, battIsaM sovaNNie, olaMbaNadIve, battIsaM rUppAmae
olaMbaNadIve, battIsaM suvaNNarUppAmae olaMbaNadIve, battIsaM sovaNNie
ukkaMcaNadIve, battIsaM paMjaradIve, evaM ceva tiNNi vi, battIsaM sovaNNie
thAle, battIsaM ruppamae thAle, battIsaM suvaNNarUppamae thAle, battIsaM
sovaNiyAo pattIo 3, battIsaM sovaNiyAiM thAsayAI 3, battIsaM sovaNiyAI mallagAI
3, battIsaM sovaNiyAo tAliyAo 3, battIsaM sovaNiyAo kAvaiAo, battIsaM sovaNNie
avaeDae 3, battIsaM sovaNiyAo avayakkAo 3, battIsa sovaNNie pAyapIDhae 3,
battIsaM sovANiyAo bhisiyAo 3, battIsaM sovaNiyAo karoDiyAo 3, battIsaM sovaNNie
pallaMke 3, battIsaM sovaNiyAo paDisejjAo 3, battIsaM haMsAsaNAI, battIsaM
koMcAsaNAI, evaM garulAsaNAI, uNNayAsaNAiM, paNayAsaNAiM, dIhAsaNAI, bhaddAsaNAI
pakkhAsaNAiM, magarAsaNAiM, battIsaM paumAsaNAI battIsaM disAsovatthiyAsaNAI
battIsaM tellasamugge, jahA rAyappaseNaijje, jAva battIsaM sarisavasamugge,
battIsaM khujAo, jahA

Page #66 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  The Third Class  [25 Uvvaiya, 32 Parisiya, 32 Chhatte, 32 Chhatdhariyo
Chediya, 32 Chamarao, 32 Chamaradhario Chediya, 32 Taliyantao, 32 Taliyantdhario
Chediya, 32 Karodiya, 32 Karodiadhario Chediya, 32 Khirudhaiyo, 32 Ankudhaiyo,
32 Angamaddiya, 32 Ummahiyao, 32 Pahaviya, 32 Pasahiya, 32 Vannagpesiya, 32
Chunnagpesiya, 32 Kottaagariya, 32 Davakariya, 32 Uvattaniya, 32 Nadaijja, 32
Kedumbini, 32 Mahanasini, 32 Bhandagarini, 32 Azzhadharini, 32 Pushpadharini, 32
Panidharini, 32 Balikari, 32 Sejjakari, 32 Abhin Padhihari, 32 Bahiriya
Padhihari, 32 Malakari, 32 Pesankari, and other things like silver, gold,
bronze, lead, and various kinds of precious stones, up to the essence of the
universe, and also the families of the most devoted, to be given, to be enjoyed,
to be used.]  Therefore, those young men, being brothers to each other, gave
each other a crore of silver, a crore of gold, a crown, a crown of jewels, and
so on, up to giving each other a gift of a Pesankari, and other things like
silver, up to being used. Then those young men, going to the top of the
mountain, enjoyed themselves, eating and drinking, and being happy.  At that
time, at that moment, the Arhat, Arhitthnemi, up to the Sami, Samosadhe,
Sirivane, Ujane, up to the Pariruva, was living in restraint, controlling his
senses, and being mindful of himself. The assembly departed.  Then, to that
young man, that great (with the sound of people and the sound of people talking,
and hearing and seeing, and thinking and desiring, and the mind arising in the
form of a thought), as in the case of a cow, he went to the forest, and was
ordained by the fourteen previous ones. He lived for twenty years as a Paria.
The rest is the same, up to the time of the seventh month, when he was perfected
in the assembly.  Thus, Jambū, this is the explanation of the eighth limb, the
inner part of the eight limbs, and the first part of that class.  2-6. The
explanations are as follows: The young men, and the rest, up to the seven
armies, have six explanations in common. There are thirty-two in total. They
live for twenty years as Pariya, and are ordained by the fourteen previous ones.
They are perfected in the seventh month.  Then, the parents, knowing that the
young man had passed through childhood, gave him a wife, (of equal age and
complexion, equal beauty, form, youth, and qualities, brought up in equal
families) thirty-two   1. In the texts published by Poo. Atmaramji M.Sa., M.C.
Modi, and Bhavnagar, the text is "Jha Jav Viharai". But "Aha" is more
appropriate than "Jha", so "Aha" is used here. 2-3. First Class Sutra 9. 4.
Third Class, Sutra 1.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 tariyAo tRtIya varga] [25 uvavAie, jAva battIsaM pArisIo, battIsaM chatte,
battIsaM chattadhArIo ceDIo, battIsaM cAmarAo, battIsaM cAmaradhArIo ceDIo,
battIsaM tAliyaMTAo battIsaM tAliyaMTadhArIo ceDIo, battIsaM karoDiyAo, battIsaM
karoDiyAdhArIo ceDIo, battIsaM khIradhAIo, jAva battIsaM aMkadhAIo battIsaM
aMgamaddiyA, battIsaM ummahiyAo, battIsaM pahAviyAo, battIsaM pasAhiyAo battIsaM
vaNNagapesIo, battIsaM cuNNagapesIo, battIsa koTThAgArIo, battIsaM davakArIo,
battIsaM uvatthANiyAo, battIsaM NADaijjAo, battIsaM keDuMbiNIo, battIsaM
mahANasiNIo, battIsaM bhaMDAgAriNIo, battIsaM ajjhAdhAriNIo, battIsaM
puSphadhAriNIo, battIsaM pANIdhAriNIo, battIsaM balikArIo, battIsaM sejjAkArIo,
battIsaM abhiM paDihArIo, battIsaM bAhiriyAo paDihArIo, battIsaM mAlAkArIo,
battIsaM pesaNakArIo, aNNaM vA subahuM hiraNNaM vA suvaNNaM vA kaMsaM vA dUsaM
vA viuladhaNa-kaNaga0 jAva saMtasArasAvaejaM, alAhi jAva AsattamAo kulavaMsAo
pakAmaM dAuM, pakAmaM bhottuM, pakAmaM pribhaaeuN| tae NaM se aNIyase kumAre
egamegAe bhanjAe egamegaM hiraNNakoDiM dalayai, egamegaM suvaNNakoDiM dalayai,
egamegaM mauDaM mauDappavaraM dalayai, evaM taM ceva savvaM jAva egamegaM
pesaNakIraM dalayai, aNNaM vA subahuM hiraNNaM vA jAva pribhaaeuN| tae NaM se
aNIyasakumAre uppiM pAsAyavaragae] phuTTamANehiM muiMgamasthaehiM bhogabhogAiM
bhuMjamANe vihri| teNaM kAleNaM teNaM samaeNaM arahA ariTThanemI, jAva [sAmI]
samosaDhe, sirivaNe ujaanne| ahA' jAva paDirUvaM uggahaM uggiNhittA saMjameNa
tavasA appANaM bhAvemANe vihri| parisA niggyaa| tae NaM tassa aNIyasassa taM
mahA0 (jaNasahaM ca jaNakalakalaM ca suNettA ya pAsettA ya imeyArUve ajjhathie
ciMtie patthie maNogae saMkappe samuppajitthA) jahA goyame tahA aNagAre jAe
navaraM sAmAiyamAiyAI cauddasa puvvAI ahijji| vIsaM vAsAiM paariyaao| sesaM
taheva jAva' settuMje pavvae mAsiyAe saMlehaNAe jAvare siddhe| evaM khalu jaMbU!
samaNeNaM aTThamassa aMgassa aMtagaDadasANaM taccassa vaggassa paDhamassa
ajjhayaNassa ayamaThe pnnnntte| 2-6 ajjhayaNANi evaM jahA aNIyase evaM sesA vi
aNaMtaseNo jAva sattuseNe cha ajjhayaNA ekkgmaa| battIsao daao| vIsaM vAsAiM
pAriyAo, cauddasa puvvAiM ahijji| settuMje siddhaa| taba mAtA-pitA ne
anIyasakumAra ko bAlyAvasthA se pAra huA jAnakara samAna, (samAna vaya evaM
samAna tvacA vAlI, samAna lAvaNya, rUpa, yauvana tathA guNoM vAlI, samAna
ibhyakuloM se lAI huI) battIsa 1. pU. AtmArAmajI ma.sA., ema.sI. modI tathA
bhAvanagara se prakAzita pAThoM meM "jahA jAva viharai" pATha hai| kintu "jahA"
kI apekSA "ahA" pATha adhika upayukta hone se yahA~"ahA" kA hI upayoga kiyA gayA
hai| 2-3. prathama varga sUtra 9 /  4. tRtIya varga, sUtra 1 /

Page #67 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Antakrddasa Uttama Ibhya-kanyas ka ek hi din panigrahan karava'ya. Vivah ke
anantara vaha naga gatha'pati Aniya'sa Kuma'ra ko pritida'na dete samaya battisa
karoda ca'ndi'ke sikke tatha' Maha'bala Kuma'ra ki' taraha aneka battisa prakara
ki' anekona vastuve'n ya'vat battisa koti sauvarnya, battisa srestha mukuta,
battisa srestha kundalayugala, battisa uttama ha'ra, battisa uttama arddhaha'ra,
battisa uttama ekasara' ha'ra, battisa muktavali' ha'ra, battisa kanakavalī
ha'ra, battisa ratna'vali' ha'ra, battisa uttama kadona ki' joda'i, battisa
uttama trutita (ba'jūbanda) ki' joda'i, battisa uttama reśami vastrayugala,
battisa pattayugala, battisa dukūlayugala, battisa śri', battisa hi', battisa
dhi', battisa kīrti, battisa buddhi aura battisa Laksmī devīyona ki' pratima',
battisa nanda, battisa bhadra, battisa tala-ta'davrksa diye. Ye saba ratnama'ya
ja'nane ca'hiye. Apane bhavana me'n ketu, battisa uttama dhvaja, dasa hajara
ga'yona ke eka vraja (gokula) ke hisa'ba se battisa uttama gokula, battisa
manusyana dvara' kiya' ja'na va'la' eka na'taka hota' hai-aise battisa uttama
na'taka, battisa uttama ghode (ye saba ratnama'ya ja'nane ca'hiye),
bha'nda'ga'ra sama'na battisa ratnama'ya uttamottama ha'thi', śrīghara
(bha'nda'ga'ra), sama'na sarva ratnama'ya battisa uttama ya'na, battisa uttama
yuga (eka prakara ka' va'hana) battisa śivika', battisa syandama'nika', battisa
gilli' (ha'thi' ki' ambada'i), battisa thilli' (ghode ka' pala'nakathi'),
battisa uttama vikada (khule hue) ya'na, battisa pa'riya'nika (kridā' karane ke)
ratha, battisa uttama aśva, battisa uttama ha'thi', dasa hajara kula-parivara
jisame'n rahate hona aise battisa ga'n, battisa uttama da'sa, battisa uttama
da'siya'n, battisa uttama kinkara, battisa kancuki' (dvararaksa'ka) battisa
varsadhara (antahpura ke raksaka khoja'), battisa mahattaraka (antahpura ke
ka'rya ka' vica'ra karane va'le) battisa sone ke, battisa ca'ndi' ke aura
battisa sona-ca'ndi' ke avalambana dipaka (latakane va'le dipaka-handiya'n),
battisa sone ke, battisa ca'ndi' ke, battisa sona-ca'ndi' ke utkancana
dipaka(dandayukta dipaka-maśa'la) isi' pra'ka'ra sona, ca'ndi' aura sona-
ca'ndi', ina tinona pra'ka'ra ke battisa panjara dipaka. Sona, ca'ndi' aura
sona-ca'ndi' ke battisa tha'la, battisa tha'liya'n, battisa mallaka (katore)
battisa ta'lika' (raka'biya'n) battisa kala'cika' (cammaca), battisa
ta'pika'-hastaka (sandāsiya'n) battisa tave, battisa pa'dapītha (pairarakhane ke
ba'joth) battisa bhisika' (a'sanaviśesa) battisa karoti'ka' (lota'), battisa
palanga, battisa pratiśayyā' (chote palanga), battisa hamsā'sana, battisa
kraunca'sana,battisa garudā'sana, battisa unnata'sana, battisa avanata'sana,
battisa dirgha'sana, battisa bhadra'sana, battisa paksa'sana, battisa.
makara'sana, battisa padma'sana, battisa diksvastika'sana, battisa tela ke dibbe
itya'di saba' ra'japrasni'ya sūtra ke anusa'ra ja'nana' ca'hiye ya'vat battisa
sarsa'pa ke dibbe, battisa kubja' da'siya'n itya'di saba' aupapa'tika sūtra ke
anusa'ra ja'nana' ca'hiye, ya'vat battisa pa'rasa deśa ki' da'siya'n, battisa
chatra, battisa chatradha'rini' da'siya'n, battisa ca'mara, battisa
ca'maradha'rini' da'siya'n, battisa pankhē, battisa pankhā'dha'rini' da'siya'n,
battisa karoti'ka' (ta'mbūla ke karandiye) battisa karoti'ka'dha'rini'
da'siya'n, battisa dha'triya'n (dūdha pila'ne va'li' dha'ya), ya'vat battisa
anka-dha'triya'n, battisa angamardika' (śarira ka' mardana karane va'li'
da'siya'n) battisa sna'na karane va'li' da'siya'n, battisa alankā'ra pahana'ne
va'li' da'siya'n, battisa candana ghisane va'li', battisa ta'mbūla-cūrna pīsane
va'li', battisa kostha'ga'ra ki' raksa' karane va'li', battisa parihā'sa karane
va'li', battisa sabhā' me'n pa'sa rahane va'li', battisa na'taka karane va'li',
battisa kautumbika (sa'tha rahane va'li'), battisa rasoi' banana' va'li',
battisa bhandā'ra ki' raksa' karane va'li', battisa taruniya'n, battisa puspa
dha'rana karane va'li', battisa balikarmma karane va'li', battisa śayyā'
bichā'ne va'li', battisa a'bhya'ntara aura battisa ba'hya pratihā'riya'n,
battisa ma'la' banana' va'li' aura battisa pesana karane va'li' da'siya'n din.]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 26] [antakRddazA uttama ibhya-kanyAoM kA eka hI dina pANigrahaNa kraayaa|
vivAha ke anantara vaha nAga gAthApati anIyasa kumAra ko prItidAna dete samaya
battIsa karor3a cAMdI ke sikke tathA mahAbala kumAra kI taraha anya battIsa
prakAra kI anekoM vastueM yAvat battIsa koTi sonaye, battIsa zreSTha mukuTa,
battIsa zreSTha kuMDalayugala, battIsa uttama hAra, battIsa uttama arddhahAra,
battIsa uttama ekasarA hAra, battIsa muktAvalI hAra, battIsa kanakAvalI hAra,
battIsa ratnAvalI hAra, battIsa uttama kar3oM kI jor3I, battIsa uttama truTita
(bAjUbanda) kI jor3I, battIsa uttama rezamI vastra yugala, battIsa paTTayugala,
battIsa dukUla yugala, battIsa zrI, battIsa hI, battIsa dhI, battIsa kIrti,
battIsa buddhi aura battIsa lakSmI deviyoM kI pratimA, battIsa nanda, battIsa
bhadra, battIsa tala-tAr3avRkSa diye| ye saba ratnamaya jAnane caahie| apane
bhavana meM ketu, battIsa uttama dhvaja, daza hajAra gAyoM ke eka vraja (gokula)
ke hisAba se battIsa uttama gokula, battIsa manuSyoM dvArA kiyA jAna vAlA eka
nATaka hotA hai-aise battIsa uttama nATaka, battIsa uttama ghor3e (ye saba
ratnamaya jAnane cAhie), bhANDAgAra samAna battIsa ratnamaya uttamottama hAthI,
zrIghara (bhANDAgAra), samAna sarva ratnamaya battIsa uttama yAna, battIsa
uttama yugya (eka prakAra kA vAhana) battIsa zivikA, battIsa syandamAnikA,
battIsa gillI (hAthI kI ambADI), battIsa thilli (ghor3e kA palANakAThI), battIsa
uttama vikaTa (khule hue) yAna, battIsa pAriyAnika (krIDA karane ke) ratha,
battIsa uttama azva, battIsa uttama hAthI, dasa hajAra kula-parivAra jisameM
rahate hoM aise battIsa gA~va, battIsa uttama dAsa, battIsa uttama dAsiyA~,
battIsa uttama kiMkara, battIsa kaMcukI (dvArarakSaka) battIsa varSadhara
(antaHpura ke rakSaka khojA), battIsa mahattaraka (antaHpura ke kArya kA vicAra
karane vAle) battIsa sone ke, battIsa cA~dI ke aura battIsa sone-cAMdI ke
avalambana dIpaka (laTakane vAle dIpaka-haNDiyA~), battIsa sone ke, battIsa
cA~dI ke, battIsa sonA-cAMdI ke utkaJcana dIpaka(daNDayukta dIpaka-mazAla) isI
prakAra sonA, cA~dI aura sonA-cA~dI, ina tInoM prakAra ke battIsa paJjara diipk|
sonA, cA~dI aura sonA-cA~dI ke battIsa thAla, battIsa thAliyA~, battIsa mallaka
(kaTore) battIsa tAlikA (rakAbiyA~) battIsa kalAcikA (cammaca), battIsa tApikA-
hastaka (saMDAsiyA~) battIsa tave, battIsa pAdapITha (paira rakhane ke bAjoTha)
battIsa bhiSikA (AsanavizeSa) battIsa karoTikA (loTA), battIsa palaMga, battIsa
pratizayyA (choTe palaMga), battIsa haMsAsana, battIsa krauMcAsana,battIsa
garuDAsana, battIsa unnatAsana, battIsa avanatAsana, battIsa dIrghAsana, battIsa
bhadrAsana, battIsa pakSAsana, battIsa. makarAsana, battIsa padmAsana, battIsa
diksvastikAsana, battIsa tela ke Dibbe ityAdi sabhI rAjapraznIya sUtra ke
anusAra jAnanA cAhie yAvat battIsa sarSapa ke Dibbe, battIsa kubjA dAsiyA~
ityAdi sabhI aupapAtika sUtra ke anusAra jAnanA cAhiye, yAvat battIsa pArasa
deza kI dAsiyA~, battIsa chatra, battIsa chatradhAriNI dAsiyA~, battIsa cAmara,
battIsa cAmaradhAriNI dAsiyA~, battIsa paMkhe, battIsa paMkhAdhAriNI dAsiyA~,
battIsa karoTikA (tAmbUla ke karaNDiye) battIsa karoTikAdhAriNI dAsiyA~, battIsa
dhAtriyA~ (dUdha pilAne vAlI dhAya), yAvat battIsa aMka-dhAtriyA~, battIsa
aMgamardikA (zarIra kA mardana karane vAlI dAsiyA~) battIsa snAna karAnevAlI
dAsiyA~, battIsa alaMkAra pahanAne vAlI dAsiyA~, battIsa candana ghisane vAlI
dAsiyA~, battIsa tAmbUla-cUrNa pIsane vAlI, battIsa koSThAgAra kI rakSA karane
vAlI, battIsa parihAsa karane vAlI, battIsa sabhA meM pAsa rahane vAlI, battIsa
nATaka karane vAlI, battIsa kauTuMbika (sAtha rahane vAlI), battIsa rasoI banAne
vAlI, battIsa bhaNDAra kI rakSA karane vAlI, battIsa taruNiyA~, battIsa puSpa
dhAraNa karane vAlI, battIsa balikarma karane vAlI, battIsa zayyA bichAne vAlI,
battIsa Abhyantara aura battIsa bAhya pratihAriyA~, battIsa mAlA banAne vAlI
aura battIsa peSaNa karane vAlI dAsiyA~ diiN| isake

Page #68 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Third Class] [27]  A great deal of gold, silver, bronze, cloth, and abundant
wealth, including gold, was given, which was sufficient for seven generations to
give and enjoy willingly. Similarly, Aniyaskumar also gave each woman one koti
of gold, one koti of silver, etc., all the aforementioned things, as well as one
grinding maid and a lot of gold, silver, etc., divided among them. Aniyaskumar
began to live in high palaces, enjoying abundant pleasures with the sound of
drums. At that time, Lord Arishtanemi Swami arrived in the garden called Srivan.
He requested the proper reception, and began to wander, inspiring his soul with
restraint and penance. The people reached the garden to hear his Dharmadesha,
and after hearing the Dharmadesha, they returned to their homes. Hearing the
noise of the crowd, Aniyaskumar also resolved to go near the Lord. He reached
the service of the Lord. He also heard the Lord's discourse. The effect of the
discourse produced detachment in his heart. Finally, like Gautamkumar, he was
initiated into the Lord's feet. After taking initiation, he studied the Samayik
to the fourteen Purvas. He followed the initiation for twenty years. At the end,
he performed a one-month Sanlekhana and attained Siddha-Gati on Shatrujaya
mountain. _ Sudharma Swami said, "O Jambu! In this way, Shraman Bhagwan Mahavira
Swami had explained the meaning of the first study of the third class of the
eighth anga Antagad." 2-6 One should also know the description of the studies
from Anantasen to Shatrusen. All of them were married to thirty-two excellent
daughters, and all of them were given thirty-two of the aforementioned things.
They followed restraint for twenty years and studied the fourteen Purvas.
Finally, they attained the five Siddha-Gatis on Shatrujaya mountain by
performing a one-month Sanlekhana. Discussion - This sutra describes the
remaining life of Aniyaskumar and the five Shreshthi-sons, Anantasen, etc.
'Peeidaan' means 'pritidan', which is given due to joy. Here, the meaning of
'dan' is 'paritoshik-premopahar'. Generally, 'pritidan' is especially famous in
the sense of dowry. Currently, the money and respect given by the girl's side to
the boy's side on the occasion of marriage is called dowry, but this sutra
reveals that this dowry was given by the father of the groom to the groom on the
occasion of marriage. Which was distributed by the groom among the married
girls. 'Navaram samaaiyamaaiyaaiin chaudas puvvaai' - The word 'Navaram' read in
this sentence is an indeclinable word that reveals the difference in the study
of Gautamkumar and Aniyaskumar. The meaning of the word 'Navaram' is "so special
or so different." The difference in the study of Aniyaskumar and Gautamkumar has
been expressed by the sutrakar through the words Samaaiya....... Puvvaai. The
meaning is that Gautamkumar had only studied eleven angas, but Aniyaskumar had
studied eleven angas as well as fourteen Purvas. 14 Purvas - When establishing
the Tirtha, the Tirthankara Bhagwan first explained the meaning to the
Ganadharas.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 tRtIya varga] [27 atirikta bahutasA hiraNya, suvarNa, kAMsya, vastra tathA
vipula dhana, kanaka yAvat sArabhUta dhana diyA, jo sAta pIr3hI taka
icchApUrvaka dene aura bhogane keliye paryApta thaa| isI prakAra anIyasakumAra
ne bhI pratyeka strI ko eka-eka hiraNya koTi, eka-eka svarNa koTi, ityAdi
pUrvokta sabhI vastue~ dIM, yAvat eka-eka peSaNakArI dAsI tathA bahuta-sA
hiraNya-suvarNa Adi vibhakta kara diyaa| U~ce prAsAdoM meM anIyasakumAra bajate
hue mRdaMgoM ke dvArA paryApta bhogoM kA upabhoga karatA huA rahane lgaa| usa
kAla tathA usa samaya zrIvana nAmaka udyAna meM bhagavAn ariSTanemi svAmI
padhAre  /  yathA-vidhi avagraha kI yAcanA karake saMyama evaM tapa se AtmA ko
bhAvita karate hue vicarane lge| janatA unakA dharmopadeza sunane ke liye udyAna
meM pahuMcI aura dharmopadeza suna kara apane-apane ghara vApasa calI gii|
janasamUha kA kolAhala sunakara anIyasakumAra ne bhI bhagavAn ke nikaTa jAne kA
saMkalpa kiyaa| ve bhagavAn kI sevA meM phuNce| unhoMne bhI bhagavAn kA
pravacana sunaa| pravacana ke prabhAva se unake hRdaya meM vairAgya utpanna ho
gyaa| anta meM gautamakumAra kI taraha ve bhagavAn ke caraNoM meM dIkSita ho
gye| dIkSA lene ke anantara unhoMne sAmAyika se lekara caudaha pUrvo kA
adhyayana kiyaa| bIsa varSa dIkSA kA pAlana kiyaa| anta samaya meM eka mAsa kI
saMlekhanA karake zatrujaya parvata para siddha gati ko prApta kiyaa| _ sudharmA
svAmI kahane lage-he jambU! isa prakAra zramaNa bhagavAn mahAvIra svAmI ne
aSTama aMga antagaDa ke tRtIya varga ke prathama adhyayana kA artha pratipAdana
kiyA thaa| 2-6 adhyayana isI prakAra anantasena se lekara zatrusena paryanta
adhyayanoM kA varNana bhI jAna lenA caahiye| saba kA battIsa-battIsa zreSTha
kanyAoM ke sAtha vivAha huA thA aura saba ko battIsa-battIsa pUrvokta vastueM dI
gii| bIsa varSa taka saMyama kA pAlana evaM 14 pUrvo kA adhyayana kiyaa| anta
meM eka mAsa kI saMlekhanA dvArA zatrujaya parvata para pA~coM hI siddhagati ko
prApta hue| vivecana-prastuta sUtra meM anIyasakumAra ke zeSa jIvana kA tathA
anantasena Adi pA~ca zreSThi-putroM kA varNana kiyA gayA hai| 'pIidANaM' kA
artha hai-prItidAna, jo harSa hone ke kAraNa diyA jAtA hai| yahA~ dAna kA artha
hai pAritoSika-premopahAra  /  vaise prItidAna kA prayoga daheja artha meM
vizeSa prasiddha hai| vartamAna meM vivAha ke avasara para kanyApakSa kI ora se
varapakSa ko diyA jAne vAlA dhana aura sammAna daheja kahA jAtA hai, kintu
prastuta satra se patA calatA hai yaha daheja vivAha ke avasara para vara ke
pitA kI ora se vara ko diyA jAtA thaa| jo vara dvArA vivAhita kanyAoM meM bAMTa
diyA jAtA thaa| 'navaraM sAmAiyamAiyAiM cauddasa puvvAI'-isa vAkya meM paThita
'navaraM' yaha avyaya pada gautamakumAra aura anIyasakumAra kI adhyayanagata
bhinnatA ko prakaTa kara rahA hai| 'navaraM' zabda kA artha hai "itanA vizeSa
hai yA itanA antara hai|" anIyasakumAra aura gautamakumAra ke adhyayana meM jo
antara hai use sUtrakAra ne sAmAiya....... puvvAiM ina padoM dvArA vyakta kara
diyA hai| bhAva yaha hai ki gautamakumAra ne to kevala gyAraha aMgoM kA
adhyayana kiyA thA paraMtu anIyasakumAra ne 11 aMga bhI par3he aura sAtha hI 14
pUrvo kA adhyayana bhI kiyaa| 14 pUrva-tIrtha kA pravartana karate samaya
tIrthaMkara bhagavAn jisa artha kA gaNadharoM ko pahale pahala

Page #69 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  [28]  The Antakṛddasa Upadesa or the Ganadhara Deva first weave the meaning
into a sutra form, which is called the Purva. These Purvas are 14 in number,
which are as follows:  1. **Utpāda Purva:** This Purva elaborates on the
production of all substances and all Paryayas. 2. **Agrayani Purva:** This
describes the magnitude of all substances, all Paryayas, and all living beings.
3. **Virya-Pravada Purva:** This describes the Virya (power) of beings with and
without karma, as well as non-living beings. 4. **Asti-Nasti-Pravada Purva:**
This Purva describes all things that exist in the world, such as Dharma-
Astikaya, and all things that do not exist, such as Akasha-Kusuma. 5. **Jnana-
Pravada Purva:** This elaborates on the five types of knowledge, including Mati-
Jnana. 6. **Satya-Pravada Purva:** This elaborates on the true form of restraint
or the true word. 7. **Atma-Pravada Purva:** This describes the soul from the
perspective of various Nayas and Matas. 8. **Karma-Pravada Purva:** This
elaborates on the eight karmas, their nature, state, division, and region. 9.
**Pratyakhyana-Pravada Purva:** This describes the various types of
Pratyakhyanas. 10. **Vidya-Anuvada Purva:** This describes various Vidya and
Mantras. 11. **Avandhya Purva:** This describes actions that bear good fruits,
such as knowledge, penance, and restraint, and actions that bear bad fruits,
such as negligence, which are not futile. 12. **Pranayuṣya-Pravada Purva:** This
elaborates on the ten Pranas and the various types of Aayu. 13. **Kriya-Vishala
Purva:** This describes bodily actions, actions related to the authority, and
actions that are beneficial in restraint. 14. **Loka-Bindusar-Purva:** This is
the most excellent point in the Shruta-Jnana, like a point in a scripture.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 28] [antakRddazA upadeza dete haiM yA gaNadhara deva pahale pahala artha ko
sUtra rUpa meM gUMthate haiM use pUrva kahate haiN| ye pUrva 14 haiM, jo isa
prakAra haiM 1. utpAda pUrva-isa pUrva meM sabhI dravyoM aura sabhI paryAyoM ke
utpAda ko lekara prarUpaNA kI gaI 2.agrAyaNI pUrva-isa meM sabhI dravyoM, sabhI
paryAyoM aura sabhI jIvoM ke parimANa kA varNana hai| 3. vIrya-pravAda pUrva-isa
meM karma-sahita aura karma-rahita jIvoM tathA ajIvoM ke vIrya (zakti ) kA
varNana hai| 4. asti-nAsti-pravAda pUrva-saMsAra meM dharmAstikAya Adi jo
vastue~ vidyamAna haiM tathA AkAza-kusuma Adi jo avidyamAna haiM, una saba kA
varNana isa pUrva meM hai| 5. jJAnapravAda pUrva-isa meM matijJAna Adi
paMcavidha jJAnoM kA vistRta varNana hai| 6. satyapravAda pUrva- isa meM
satyarUpa saMyama kA yA satya vacana kA vistRta vivecana kiyA gayA other 7.
AtmapravAda pUrva- isa meM aneka nayoM tathA matoM kI apekSA se AtmA kA varNana
hai| 8. karmapravAda pUrva-isameM ATha karmoM kA nirUpaNa prakRti, sthiti,
anubhAga aura pradeza Adi bhedoM dvArA vistRta rUpa meM kiyA gayA hai| 9.
pratyAkhyAnapravAda pUrva-isa meM pratyAkhyAnoM kA bheda-prabhedapUrvaka varNana
hai| 10. vidyAnuvAda pUrva- isa meM aneka vidyAoM evaM maMtroM kA varNana hai|
11. avandhya pUrva-isa meM jJAna, tapa, saMyama Adi zubha phala vAle tathA
pramAda Adi azubha phala vAle. niSphala na jAne vAle kAryoM kA varNana hai| 12.
prANAyuSyapravAda pUrva- isa meM dasa prANa aura Ayu Adi kA bheda-
prabhedapUrvaka vistRta varNana 13. kriyAvizAla pUrva-isameM kAyikI AdhikaraNikI
Adi tathA saMyama meM upakAraka kriyAoM kA varNana hai| 14. lokabindusAra-pUrva-
zrutajJAna meM jo zAstra bindu kI taraha sabase zreSTha hai, vaha lokabindusAra
hai|

Page #70 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Seventh Study Saran 4 - At that time, in that era, there was the city of
Dwaraka. As before, Vasudeva was the king. His queen was Dharini. She saw a lion
in a dream after conception. When the time came, she gave birth to a son and
named him Saran Kumar. He received a dowry of fifty-fifty items in his marriage.
Saran Kumar studied from Samayik to fourteen Purvas. He observed the twenty-year
Diksha Paryaya. The rest of the story is like that of Gautam. He attained Siddhi
after performing a one-month Sanlekhana on Shatrunjaya mountain. 1. The
supplementary text of the present Jāv is included in the 9th Sutra of the first
section.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 saptama adhyayana sAraNa 4 - teNaM kAleNaM teNaM samaeNaM bAravaIe nayarIe,
jahA paDhame, navaraM vasudeve rAyA  /  dhAriNI devI  /  sIho sumiNe | sAraNe
kumaare| paNNAsao dAo  /  cauddasa puvvA  /  vIsaM vAsA pariyAo  /  sesaM jahA
goyamassa jAva' settuMje siddhe  /  usa kAla tathA usa samaya meM dvArakA nagarI
thI  /  usameM vasudeva rAjA the| usakI rAnI dhAriNI thii| usane garbhAdhAna ke
pazcAt svapna meM siMha dekhA  /  samaya Ane para bAlaka ko janma diyA aura
usakA nAma sAraNakumAra rakhA gyaa| use vivAha meM pacAsa-pacAsa vastuoM kA
daheja milaa| sAraNakumAra ne sAmAyika se lekara 14 pUrvI kA adhyayana kiyaa|
bIsa varSa taka dIkSA paryAya kA pAlana kiyaa| zeSa saba vRttAnta gautama kI
taraha hai  /  zatruMjaya parvata para eka mAsa kI saMlekhanA karake yAvat
siddha hue  /  1. prastuta jAva kA pUraka pATha prathama varga ke 9 veM sUtra
meM A gayA hai|

Page #71 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The English translation preserving the Jain terms is as follows:  The Eighth
Adhyayana Gajasukumara Utkshepa 5- (Bhante! If the Samana Bhagavan Mahavira has
expounded the meaning of the seventh Adhyayana of the third Varga of the
Antargadadasa, then Bhante! what is the meaning expounded by the Samana Bhagavan
Mahavira for the eighth Adhyayana of the third Varga of the Antargadadasa?)
Thus, indeed, Jambusavami! At that time, in the city of Dvaraka, as described in
the first (Adhyayana), the Arihanta Aristanemi Bhagavan arrived.  The Resolve of
the Six Anointed Ones 6- At that time, the six Anagara (anointed ones), who were
the disciples of the Arihanta Aristanemi, were brothers. They were similar in
appearance, complexion, and condition. Their complexion was like the blue lotus,
the interior of the horn of a buffalo, the guliga (a type of flower), and the
blossoming of the alasi flower. They had the auspicious mark of Srivatsya and
their hair was soft and curly like the flower-garlands of Nalakubara. Then, on
the very day that these six Anagaras had renounced the household life and taken
up the life of an Anagara (anointed one), they venerated and paid obeisance to
the Arihanta Aristanemi. After venerating and paying obeisance, they said,
"Bhante! We wish, with your permission, to live, for the rest of our lives,
practicing the sixfold asceticism, the uninterrupted spiritual effort, and the
penance."  The Devanampriya (the Venerable One) said, "Do not create any
obstacle." Then, those six Anagaras, with the permission of the Arihanta
Aristanemi, lived, for the rest of their lives, practicing the sixfold
asceticism, the uninterrupted spiritual effort, and the penance.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 aSTama adhyayana gajasukumAra utkSepa 5- jai NaM ( bhaMte! samaNeNaM bhagavayA
mahAvIreNaM aTThamassa aMgassa taccassa vaggassa sattamassa ajjhayaNassa
ayamaTThe paNNatte, aTThamassa NaM bhaMte! ajjhayaNassa aMtagaDadasANaM ke aTThe
paNNatte ? ) evaM khalu jaMbU! teNaM kAleNaM teNaM samaeNaM bAravaIe nayarIe,
jahA paDhame jAva arahA ariTThanemI samosaDhe  /  jaMbU svAmI ne Arya sudharmA
svAmI se nivedana kiyA- bhagavan ! yadi zramaNa bhagavAn mahAvIra svAmI ne
antagaDadazA ke tRtIya varga ke saptama adhyayana kA yaha artha pratipAdana kiyA
hai, to bhagavan! zramaNa bhagavAn mahAvIra svAmI ne antagaDadazA ke tRtIya
varga ke AThaveM adhyayana kA kyA artha pratipAdana kiyA hai? sudharmA svAmI ne
kahA - he jaMbU ! usa kAla, usa samaya meM dvArakA nagarI meM prathama adhyayana
meM kiye gaye varNana ke anusAra yAvat arihaMta ariSTanemi bhagavAn pdhaare|
chaha anagAroM kA saMkalpa 6- teNaM kAleNaM teNaM samaeNaM arahao ariTThaNemissa
aMtevAsI cha aNagArA bhAyaro sahodarA hotthA  /  sarisayA sarittayA sarivvayA
nIluppala - gavala - guliya-ayasikusumappagAsA sirivacchaMkiyavacchA kusuma-
kuMDalabhaddalayA nalakubbarasamANA  /  taNaM te cha aNagArA jaM ceva divasaM
muMDA bhavittA agArAo aNagAriyaM pavvaiyA, taM ceva divasaM arahaM ariTThaNemiM
vaMdaMti NamaMsaMti, vaMdittA NamaMsittA evaM vayAsI "icchAmo NaM bhaMte!
tubbhehiM abbhaNuNNAyA samANA jAvajjIvAe chaTThachaTTheNaM aNikkhitteNaM
tavokammeNaM saMjameNaM tavasA appANaM bhAvemANA viharittae  /  " ahAsuhaM
devANuppiyA! mA paDibaMdhaM kareha  /  tae NaM te cha aNagArA arahayA
ariTThaNemiNA abbhaNuNNAyA samANA jAvajjIvAe chaTTha-chaTTheNaM jAva viharati  /
usa kAla, usa samaya bhagavAn ariSTa neminAtha ke aMtevAsI - ziSya chaha muni
sahodara bhAI the  /  ve samAna AkAra, tvacA aura samAna avasthA vAle pratIta
hote the  /  unakA varNa nIlakamala, mahiSa ke zrRMga ke antarvartI bhAga,
gulikA - raMga vizeSa aura alasI ke puSpa ke samAna thA  /  zrIvatsa se aMkita
vakSa vAle aura kusuma ke samAna komala aura kuMDala ke samAna ghuMgharAle bAloM
vAle ve sabhI muni nalakUbara (vaizramaNa-putra) ke samAna pratIta hote the  /
taba (dIkSita hone ke pazcAt ) ve chahoM muni jisa dina muMDita hokara AgAra se
anagAra dharma meM

Page #72 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Third Class] [31 Having become ascetics, on that very day, they bowed and paid
homage to the Arhat Arishtanemi and spoke thus: 'O Bhagavan! We desire that,
having received your command, we may wander continuously throughout our lives,
purifying our souls through the practice of the Bele-Bele tapas.' Arhat
Arishtanemi said: 'Devanupriyo! Do as you please, there should be no delay in
doing good deeds.' Then, upon the Bhagavan's saying this, those six monks,
having received the command of Bhagavan Arishtanemi, began to wander, practicing
the Bele-Bele tapas for the rest of their lives. The entry of the six ascetics
into the house of Devaki 7-Then those six ascetics, on another occasion, on the
day of the completion of the Bele-Bele tapas, in the first watch, performed
their study, and like Gautama Swami (in the second watch, they became absorbed
in meditation, in the third watch, they remained free from physical and mental
agitation, and they copied the mouth-cloth, the vessel, and the garments. After
that, they placed the vessels in their bags, and taking up their bags, they went
to the service of Bhagavan Arishtanemi Swami. They bowed and paid homage, and
then they made a request)-. 'O Bhagavan! We desire to wander for alms in the
city of Dwaraka, in three groups of two, with your permission, on the day of the
completion of the Bele-Bele tapas, throughout [according to the virtuous
conduct, in the houses of the rich and the poor, etc.].' Then those six
ascetics, having received the command of Arhat Arishtanemi, bowed and paid
homage to Arhat Arishtanemi. Having bowed and paid homage, they departed from
the presence of Arhat Arishtanemi, from the Sahasambavana garden. Then, in three
groups of two, they moved with ease, throughout [free from agitation and
confusion, seeing the ground for four hands' length, following the rules of
walking, they came to where the city of Dwaraka was. Arriving there, in the city
of Dwaraka,

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 tRtIya varga] [31 pravrajita hue, usI dina arihaMta ariSTanemi ko vaMdanA
namaskAra kara isa prakAra bole 'he bhagavan ! hama cAhate haiM ki ApakI AjJA
pAkara hama jIvana paryanta nirantara bele-bele tapa dvArA AtmA ko bhAvita
(zuddha) karate hue vicaraNa kreN|' arihaMta ariSTanemi ne kahA-devAnupriyo !
jaise tumheM sukha ho, vaisA karo, zubha karma karane meM vilamba nahIM karanA
caahie| taba bhagavAn ke aisA kahane para ve chahoM muni bhagavAn ariSTanemi kI
AjJA pAkara jIvana bhara ke liye bele-bele kI tapasyA karate hue yAvat vicaraNa
karane lge| chahoM anagAroM kA devakI ke ghara meM praveza 7-tae NaM te cha
aNagArA aNNayA kayAI chaTThakkhamaNapAraNayaMsi paDhamAe porisIe sajjhAyaM
kareMti, jahA goyamo jAva[bIyAe porisIe jhANaM jhiyAyaMti, taiyAe porisIe
aturiyamacavalamasaMbhaMtA muhapottiyaM paDilehaMti, paDilehittA bhAyaNa-vatthAI
paDilehaMti, paDilehittA bhAyaNAI pamanjaMti, pamajjittA bhAyaNAI uggAheti,
uggAhittA jeNeva arahA ariTThanemI teNeva uvAgacchaMti, uvAgacchittA arahaM
ariTThanemiM vaMdaMti namasaMti, vaMdittA namaMsittA evaM vayAsI-] . icchAmo NaM
bhaMte! chaTThakkhamaNassa pAraNae tubbhehiM abbhaNuNNAyA samANA tihiM
saMghADaehiM bAravaIe nayarIe jAva [ ucca-nIya-majjhimAiM kulAI gharasamudANassa
bhikkhAyariyAe] additte| tae NaM te cha aNagArA arahayA ariTuNemiNA abbhaNuNNAyA
samANA arahaM ariTThanemiM vaMdaMti namasaMti, vaMdittA namaMsittA arahao
ariTThanemissa aMtiyAo sahasaMbavaNAo paDinikkhamaMti, paDinikkhamittA tihiM
saMghADaehiM aturiyama jAva[cavalamasaMbhaMtA jugaMtarapaloyaNAe diTThIe
puraoriyaM sohemANA-sohemANA jeNeva bAravaI nayarI teNeva uvAgacchaMti,
uvAgacchittA bAravaIe nayarIe uccanIya-majjhimAiM kulAI gharasamudANassa
bhikkhAyariyaM] addNti| tadanantara una chahoM muniyoM ne anyadA kisI samaya,
bele kI tapasyA ke pAraNe ke dina prathama prahara meM svAdhyAya kiyA aura
gautama svAmI ke samAna (dUsare prahara meM dhyAnArUDha hue, tIsare pahara meM
kAyika aura mAnasika capalatA se rahita ho kara mukhavastrikA, bhAjana tathA
vastroM kI pratilekhanA kii| tatpazcAt ve pAtroM ko jholI meM rakhakara aura
jholI ko grahaNa kara bhagavAna ariSTanemi svAmI kI sevA meM upasthita hote
haiM. vandanA-namaskAra karate haiM, tadanantara nivedana karate haiM)-.
bhagavan ! hama bele kI tapasyA ke pAraNe meM ApakI AjJA lekara do-do ke tIna
saMghAr3oM se dvArakA nagarI meM yAvat [sAdhuvRtti ke anusAra dhanI-nirdhana Adi
sabhI gharoM meM] bhikSA hetu bhramaNa karanA cAhate haiN| taba una chahoM
muniyoM ne arihaMta ariSTanemi kI AjJA pAkara prabhu ko vaMdana namaskAra kiyaa|
vaMdana namaskAra kara ve bhagavAn ariSTanemi ke pAsa se sahasrAmravana udyAna
se prasthAna karate haiN| phira ve do do ke tIna saMghATakoM meM sahaja gati se
yAvat [capalatA tathA saMbhrAnti se rahita, cAra hAtha pramANa bhUmi ko dekhate
hue, IryAsamiti kA pAlana karate hue, jahA~ dvArakA nagarI thI, vahA~ Ate haiN|
vahA~ Akara dvArakA nagarI meM

Page #73 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[32] [Following the virtuous conduct of the Antakṛddasa, they began to wander
for alms in all houses, rich and poor.] Discussion: This sūtra states that the
six muni-bhagawan, having received permission from Bhagavan Ariṣṭanemi, divided
themselves into three groups and went to Dwarka city to partake of the bēla
parana. This sūtra explains when and how the sadhus go for alms. 8. There, one
of the groups, consisting of twelve, wandered through the city, from house to
house, in the high, low, and middle classes, seeking alms. They came to the
palace of King Vasudeva and his queen Devaki. _ At that time, the queen Devaki
saw the group of two munis coming towards her. Seeing them, she was delighted
and her heart was filled with joy. [Her mind was filled with supreme bliss, and
her heart blossomed like a lotus.] She rose from her seat and went seven or
eight steps towards the muni-yugal. Going forward, she circumambulated them
three times from the south. After circumambulating them, she bowed and
prostrated herself. After bowing and prostrating herself, she went to the food
hall. Entering the food hall, she filled a plate with lion-mane modakas and
offered it to the munis. She bowed and prostrated herself, and then dismissed
them. After that, the second group of twelve, consisting of two, wandered
through the city, from the high to the low classes. Of those three groups, one
group of twelve wandered through the city of Dwarka, from house to house, in the
high, low, and middle classes, seeking alms. They entered the palace of King
Vasudeva and his queen Devaki. At that time, Queen Devaki saw the group of two
munis coming towards her. Seeing them, she was delighted and her heart was
filled with joy. [Her mind was filled with supreme bliss, and her heart
blossomed like a lotus.] She rose from her seat and went seven or eight steps
towards the muni-yugal. Going forward, she circumambulated them three times from
the south. After circumambulating them, she bowed and prostrated herself. After
bowing and prostrating herself, she went to the food hall. Entering the food
hall, she filled a plate with lion-mane modakas and offered it to the munis. She
bowed and prostrated herself, and then dismissed them. After the first group
returned, the second group of twelve, consisting of two, also wandered through
the city of Dwarka, from house to house, in the high, low, and middle classes,
seeking alms. They entered the palace of Queen Devaki. Discussion: This sūtra
describes how the first and second groups of six sadhus of Bhagavan Ariṣṭanemi
were honored and respected by Queen Devaki, the wife of King Vasudeva, and how
they were given lion-mane modakas as alms according to the proper procedure. The
two groups of munis left Devaki's house after receiving food. The sūtrakar then
continues to speak about the third group: 1. This is included in the previous
paragraph.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 32] [antakRddazA sAdhuvRtti ke anusAra dhanI-nirdhana Adi sabhI gharoM meM
bhikSA ke liye] bhramaNa karane lge| vivecana-prastuta sUtra meM batAyA gayA hai
ki bhagavAn ariSTanemi ke chahoM muni bhagavAn se AjJA lekara tIna bhAgoM meM
vibhAjita hokara dvArakA nagarI meM bele ke pAraNe ke liye padhArate haiN|
sAdhuoM kA bhikSArtha gamana kaba aura kisa prakAra hotA hai, yaha isa sUtra meM
batAyA gayA hai| 8-tattha NaM ege saMghADae bAravaIe nayarIe ucca-nIya-
majjhimAiM kulAiM gharasamudANassa bhikkhAyariyAe aDamANe aDamANe vasudevassa
raNNo devaIe devIe gehe annuppvitu| _ tae NaM sA devaI devI te aNagAre ejjamANe
pAsai, pAsittA haTTha jAva [ tuTThacittamANaMdiyA pIimaNA paramasomaNassiyA
harisavasa-visappamANa ] hiyayA AsaNAo abbhuDhei, abbhuTTittA sattaTTha payAI
aNugacchai, tikkhutto AyAhiNaM payAhiNaM karei, karettA vaMdai namasai, vaMdittA
namaMsittA jeNeva bhattagharae teNeva uvAgayA sIhakesarANaM moyagANaM thAlaM
bharei, te aNagAre paDilAbhei, vaMdai namasai, vaMdittA namaMsittA pddivisjjei|
tayANaMtaraM docce saMghADae bAravaIe nayarIe ucca jAva' visjjei| una tIna
saMghATakoM (saMghAr3oM) meM se eka saMghAr3A dvArakA nagarI ke U~ca-nIca-
madhyama gharoM meM, eka ghara se, dUsare ghara, bhikSAcaryA ke hetu bhramaNa
karatA huA rAjA vasudeva kI mahArAnI devakI ke prAsAda meM praviSTa huaa| usa
samaya vaha devakI rAnI una do muniyoM ke eka saMghADe ko apane yahA~ AtA
dekhakara hRSTa-tuSTa [citta ke sAtha Anandita huii| prItivaza usakA mana
paramAhlAda ko prApta huA, harSAtireka se usakA hRdaya kamalavat praphullita ho
uThA] Asana se uThakara vaha sAta-ATha kadama muniyugala ke. sammukha gii|
sAmane jAkara usane tIna bAra dakSiNa kI ora se unakI pradakSiNA kii| pradakSiNA
kara unheM vandana-namaskAra kiyaa| vandana-namaskAra ke pazcAt jahA~
bhojanazAlA thI vahA~ aaii| bhojanazAlA meM Akara siMhakesara modakoM se eka
thAla bharA aura thAla bhara kara una muniyoM ko pratilAbha diyaa| punaH
vandana-namaskAra karake tatpazcAt devakI ne unheM prativisarjita kiyA arthAt
vidAI dii| prathama saMghATaka ke lauTa jAne ke pazcAt una chaha sahodara
sAdhuoM ke tIna saMghATakoM meM se dUsarA saMghATaka bhI dvArakA ke ucca-nIca-
madhyama kuloM meM bhikSArtha bhramaNa karatA huA mahArAnI devakI ke prAsAda meM
aayaa| vivecana-prastuta sUtra meM ariSTanemi bhagavAn ke chaha sAdhuoM meM se
pahalI aura dUsarI TolI ko mahArAja vasudeva kI mahArAnI devakI devI dvArA
satkRta aura sanmAnita karane ke anantara vidhipUrvaka dI jAne vAlI siMha-kezara
modakoM kI bhikSA kA varNana kiyA gayA hai| muniyoM kI do ToliyA~ devakI ke
ghara se AhAra lekara calI gaIM, isake pazcAt tIsarI TolI ke saMbaMdha meM
sUtrakAra Age kahate haiM - 1. Upara ke paire meM A gayA hai|

Page #74 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Third Varga] [33. Doubt about the return of Devaki and its resolution
Thereafter, the third sanghadya (group) of monks came to the city of Dvaraka and
begged for alms in the high, low and middle class families. After obtaining
alms, they spoke thus: "Devaanupiya! Is it true that in this city of Dvaraka,
which is nine yojanas long and nine yojanas wide, the Shramana Nirgranthas (Jain
monks) beg for alms in the high, low and middle class families of the
householders, but do not get food and drink? As a result, do they have to
revisit the same families again and again for food and drink? Then those monks
said to the Devī (Devaki): "Devaanupiya! It is not true that in this city of
Dvaraka, the Shramana Nirgranthas (Jain monks) beg for alms in the high, low and
middle class families, but do not get food and drink. Nor do they revisit the
same families a second or third time for food and drink." "Devaanupiya! We, the
sons of the householder Naga of the city of Bhaddilapura, along with our six
brothers born of the same mother Sulasā, having heard the Dharma from the
venerable Ariṣṭanemi, became terrified of the cycle of birth and death, fearful
of birth and death, shaved our heads, and became ascetics. From the very day we
took asceticism, we worship and pay obeisance to the venerable Ariṣṭanemi. We
have taken this kind of vow - we wish, O Lord! to be permitted by you to live
happily." Thereupon, we, having been permitted by the venerable Ariṣṭanemi, live
happily for the rest of our lives. Today, on the occasion of the sixth-monthly
fast-breaking ceremony, after studying in the first watch, practicing meditation
in the second watch, and being permitted by the venerable Ariṣṭanemi, we have
entered your house with the three sanghadyas (groups) of Dvaraka city, begging
for alms in the high, low and middle class families of the householders. It is
not we alone, Devaanupiya, but others too. The Devī (Devaki) said this and then
disappeared in the direction she had come from.]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 tRtIya varga] [33 devakI ko punaH Agamana kI zaMkA aura samAdhAna
9-tayANaMtaraM ca NaM tacce saMghADae bAravaIe nayarIe ucca-nIya jAva'
paDilAbhei, paDilAbhettA evaM vayAsI kiNNaM devANuppiyA! kaNhassa vAsudevassa
imIse bAravaIe nayarIe navajoyaNavitthiNNAe jAva paccakkhaM devalogabhUyAe
samaNA niggaMthA ucca-nIya jAva [majjhimAiM kulAiM gharasamudANassa
bhikkhAyariyAe] aDamANA bhattapANaM no labhaMti, jaNNaM tAI ceva kulAI
bhattapANAe bhujjobhujo aNuppavisaMti? tae NaM te aNagArA devaiM deviM evaM
vayAsI-no khalu devANuppie! kaNNahassa vAsudevassa imIse bAravaIe nayarIe jAva'
devalogabhUyAe samaNA niggaMthA ucca-nIya jAva aDamANA bhattapANaM No labhaMti,
No ceva NaM tAI tAI kulAI doccaM pi taccaM pi bhattapANAe annuppvisNti| _ evaM
khalu devANuppie! amhe bhaddilapure nayare nAgassa gAhAvaissa puttA sulasAe
bhAriyAe attayA cha bhAyaro sahodarA sarisayA jAva nala-kubbarasamANA arahao
ariTThanemissa aMtie dhamma soccA saMsArabhauvviggA bhIyA jammamaraNANaM muMDA
jAva pvviyaa| tae NaM amhe jaM ceva divasaM pavvaiA taM ceva divasaM arahaM
ariTThanemiM vaMdAmo namasAmo, imaM eyArUvaM abhiggahaM ogiNhAmo-icchAmo NaM
bhaMte! tubbhehiM abbhaNuNNAyA samANA jAva ahAsuhaM devaannuppiyaa| tae NaM amhe
arahayA ariTThaNemiNA abbhaNuNNAyA samANA jAvajjIvAe chaTheMchaTTeNaM jAva
vihraamo| taM amhe ajja chaTThakkhamaNapAraNayaMsi paDhamAe porisIe jAva
[sajjhAyaM karettA, bIyAe porisIe jhANaM jhiyAittA taiyAe porisIe arahayA
ariTThanemiNA abbhaNuNNAya samANA tihiM saMghADaehiM bAravaIe nayarIe
uccanIyamajjhimAiM kulAiM gharasamudANassa bhikhAyariyAe] aDamANA tava gehaM
annuppvitttthaa| taM No khalu devANuppie! te ceva NaM amhe, amhe NaM annnne|
devaI deviM evaM vadaMti, vadittA jAmeva disaM pAubbhUyA tAmeva disaM pddigyaa|
isake bAda muniyoM kA tIsarA saMghADA AyA yAvat use bhI devakI devI pratilAbha
detI hai| unako pratilAbha dekara vaha isa prakAra bolI-"devAnupriyo ! kyA kRSNa
vAsudeva kI isa bAraha yojana lambI, nava yojana caur3I pratyakSa svargapurI ke
samAna dvArakA nagarI meM zramaNa nigraMthoM ko ucca-nIca evaM madhyama kuloM ke
gRha-samudAyoM se, bhikSArtha bhramaNa karate hue AhAra-pAnI prApta nahIM hotA?
jisase unheM AhAra-pAnI ke liye jina kuloM meM pahale A cuke haiM, unhIM kuloM
meM punaH AnA par3atA hai?" devakI dvArA isa prakAra kahane para ve muni devakI
devI se isa prakAra bole- "devAnupriye ! aisI bAta to nahIM hai ki kRSNa
vAsudeva kI yAvat pratyakSa svarga ke samAna, isa dvArakA nagarI meM zramaNa-
nirgrantha ucca-nIca-madhyama kuloM meM yAvat bhramaNa karate hue AhAra-pAnI
prApta nahIM krte| aura munijana bhI jina gharoM se eka bAra AhAra le Ate haiM,
unhIM gharoM se dUsarI yA tIsarI bAra AhArArtha nahIM jAte haiN|" 1. 3. 5. 99
varga-3 kA sUtra -7 varga-3 kA sUtra-7 varga-3 kA sUtra-6 varga-3 kA 2. 4. 6.
varga-1 kA sUtra-6 varga-3 kA sUtra-6 varga-3 kA sUtra-6

Page #75 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Antakrddasa "Devanuppriye! The fact is that we are six brothers, the sons of
Naga Gathapati of the city of Bhaddilapura and his wife Sulasa. We are exactly
alike in appearance, just like the celestial being Nalakubara. After listening
to the religious teachings of the Arihanta Arishtanemi, we became distressed by
the fear of the worldly existence and terrified of birth and death, and we got
our heads shaved and took the vows of the Sramana Dharma. On the very day we
took the vows, we paid obeisance and reverence to the Arihanta Arishtanemi, and
while doing so, we requested his permission in this manner - "O Lord! With your
permission, we wish to wander, engaging our souls in the austerity of the vow of
Bele-Bele for the rest of our lives." The Lord said, "Devaanupriya! Do as you
find happiness, but do not be negligent."  After obtaining the permission of the
Arihanta Arishtanemi, we started wandering, constantly engaged in the austerity
of the Bele-Bele vow for the rest of our lives. And so, today, we six brothers
have come to your house after performing Svadhyaya in the first Prahara,
meditation in the second Prahara, and obtaining the command of the Arihanta
Arishtanemi in the third Prahara, and wandering for alms in the three
Sanghataka, both the high and low, and the middle classes. Devaanupriya! It is
not the case that the two monks who had come to your house earlier are the same
as us. We are different. Those monks told Devaki Devi this and then left in the
same direction from which they had come.  Vivechana - Due to the similarity in
appearance and form, Devaki was mistaken in thinking that the third group of
ascetic monks who came to her house for alms was the same as the earlier pair,
since the disciplined monks do not visit the house of a householder repeatedly
for a specific alms. In this sutra, the ascetic monks have clarified Devaki's
doubt.  The clarification by the ascetic monks has created a new turmoil in
Devaki's mind, which the author of the sutra describes further, narrating the
identification of the sons.  10- Then Devaki Devi had this thought arise in her
mind - "Indeed, I had eight sons born to me in Paurasapura, exactly alike, just
like Nalakubara. But no other mothers have given birth to such similar sons.
This is impossible. It is clearly visible that other mothers too have given
birth to sons exactly alike, just like the shining blue lotus, jasmine, and
golden flowers, with auspicious marks, adorned with flower garlands and
earrings, just like Nalakubara." Thinking thus, she went to pay obeisance and
reverence to the Arihanta Arishtanemi, and after doing so, she requested this
kind of statement - "With horns marked by auspicious signs, adorned with
garlands of Jambunada gold, wearing excellent celestial ornaments of bells and
ropes, surrounded by a network of various precious gem bells, accompanied by
excellent young cows, this excellent, well-crafted, praised, and skillfully made
twin pair of ropes..."

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 34] [antakRddazA "devAnupriye! vAstava meM bAta yaha hai ki hama bhaddilapura
nagarI ke nAga gAthApati ke putra aura unakI sulasA bhAryA ke Atmaja chaha
sahodara bhAI haiN| pUrNataH samAna AkRti vAle yAvat nalakUbara ke samAna hama
chahoM bhAiyoM ne arihaMta ariSTanemi ke pAsa dharma-upadeza sunakara saMsAra-
bhaya se udvigna evaM janma-maraNa se bhayabhIta ho muMDita hokara yAvat
zramaNadharma kI dIkSA grahaNa kii| tadanantara hamane jisa dina dIkSA grahaNa
kI usI dina arihaMta ariSTanemi ko vaMdana-namaskAra kiyA aura vandana namaskAra
kara isa prakAra kA yaha abhigraha karane kI AjJA cAhI-"he bhagavan! ApakI
anujJA pAkara hama jIvana paryanta bele-bele kI tapasyA se apanI AtmA ko bhAvita
karate hue vicaranA cAhate haiN|" yAvat prabhu ne kahA-"devAnupriyo ! jisase
tumheM sukha ho vaisA karo, pramAda na kro|" usake bAda arihaMta ariSTanemi kI
anujJA prApta hone para hama jIvana bhara ke liye niraMtara bele-bele kI tapasyA
karate hue vicaraNa karane lge| to isa prakAra Aja hama chahoM bhAI bele kI
tapasyA ke pAraNA ke dina prathama prahara meM svAdhyAya kara, dvitIya prahara
meM dhyAna kara, tRtIya prahara meM arihaMta ariSTanemi kI AjJA prApta kara,
tIna saMghATakoM meM ucca-nimna evaM madhyama kuloM meM bhikSArtha bhramaNa
karate hue tumhAre ghara A pahuMce haiN| to devAnupriye ! aisI bAta nahIM hai ki
pahale do saMghATakoM meM jo muni tumhAre yahA~ Aye the ve hama hI haiN|
vastutaH hama dUsare haiN| una muniyoM ne devakI devI ko isa prakAra kahA aura
yaha kahakara ve jisa dizA se Aye the usI dizA kI ora cale gye| vivecana- sAdhu-
yugala kI tIsarI TolI kA bhI devakI ke ghara meM bhikSArtha gamana ke samaya
AkRti aura rUpa ke sAmya ke kAraNa devakI ko muniyugala jo pahale Aye the kA
tIsarI vAra AnA samajha lene se zaMkA hotI haiM, kyoMki saMyamazIla muni viziSTa
bhikSA hetu kisI gRhastha ke ghara meM punaH punaH nahIM Ate haiN| prastuta
sUtra meM devakI ke mana meM uThI zaMkA kA muniyugala ne samAdhAna prastuta kiyA
hai| . prastuta samAdhAna ne devakI ke mana meM jo nayI uthala-puthala macAI,
isakA varNana karate hue sUtrakAra Age kahate haiMputroM kI pahacAna 10-tae NaM
tIse devaIe devIe ayameyArUve ajjhathie ciMtie patthie maNegae saMkappe
samuppaNNe-evaM khalu ahaM polAsapure nayare aimutteNaM kumArasamaNeNaM
bAlattaNe vAgariA-tumaNNaM devANuppie! aTTha putte payAissasi sarisae jAva
nalakubbarasamANe, no ceva NaM bharahe vAse aNNAo ammayAo tArisae putte
pyaaissNti| taM NaM micchaa| imaM NaM paccakkhameva dissai-bharahe vAse aNNAo vi
ammayAo khalu erisae jAva [ sarisae sarittae sarivvae nIluppala-gavalaguliya-
ayasikusumappagAse, sirivacchaMkiyavacche, kusuma-kuMDala-bhaddAlae
nalakubbarasamANe] putte pyaayaao| taM gacchAmi NaM arahaM ariTThaNemiM vaMdAmi
namasAmi, vaMdittA namaMsittA imaM ca NaM eyArUvaM vAgaraNaM pacchissAmitti
kaTaTa evaM saMpeheDa, saMpehettA koDaMbiyaparise sahAveDa saddAvittA evaM
vayAsI-lahu karaNappavaraM jAva [ jutta-joiya-sama-khura-
vAlihANasamAlihiyasiMgehiM, jaMbUNayA-mayakalAvajutta-parivisijhehiM,
rayayAmayaghaMTA-suttarajjuyapavarakaMcaNaNatthapaggahoggahiyaehiM,
NIluppalakayAmelaehiM, pavaragoNajuvANaehiM NANAmaNi-rayaNaghaMTiyAjAla-
parigayaM sujAyajuga-jottarajjuyajuga-pasatthasuviri- ciyaNimmiyaM,
pavaralakkhaNovaveyaM

Page #76 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Third Varga] [35 ...... Dhammiyam jāṇappavaram juttāmeva uvaṭṭhaveha,
uvaṭṭhavettā mama eyamāṇittayaṃ paccāppiṇaha. Tae ṇaṃ te koḍumbiya purisa evaṃ
vuttā samāṇā haṭṭha jāva hiyayā, karayal evaṃ tahattiyāṇāe viṇṇaṃ vacaṇaṃ jāva
paḍisuṇettā khippāmeva lahukkaraṇajutta jāva dhammiyaṃ jāṇappavaram juttāmeva ]
uvaṭṭhaventi. Jahā devānandā jāva [tae ṇaṃ sā devī devī anto anteuramsi ṇhāyā,
kayabalikaramā, kayakouya-maṃgalapāyacchittā, kiṃca varapāyapattaṇeur-maṇimehala
hāra - raciya uciyakaḍagakhuḍḍāgae-gāvalīkaṇṭhasutta- uratthagevevejja-
soṇisuttagaṇāmamani- rayana-bhūsaṇavirāiyaṃgī, cīṇaṃsuyavatthapavarparihiyā,
dugullasukumāluttarijjā, savvouya-surabhi-kusumavariyas-iriyā,
varacandaṇavandiyā, varābharaṇa-bhūsiyaṃgī, kālāgaru dhūvadhūviyā,
sirisamāṇavesā, jāva appamahagghābharaṇalaṃkiyasarīrā, bahūhi khujjāhi,
cilāiyāhi, ṇāṇādesa - videsamaṃḍiyāhi, sadesamevatthagarahiyavesāhi, iṃgiya-
cintiya-patthiya-viyāṇiyāhi, kusālāhi, vīṇīyāhi, ceḍiyācakka vālavariyadhara-
theraka ṃ cuijja- mahattaragavaṃdaparikkhittā anteurāo niggacchati, niggacchittā
jeṇaiva bāhiriyā uvaṭṭhāṇasālā, jeṇeva dhammie jāṇappavare teṇeva uvāgacchati,
uvāgacchittā jāva dhammiyaṃ jāṇappavaram durūḍhā. ...... Taṇaṃ sā devī devī
dhammiyāo jāṇapparāo paccoruhati, paccoruhittā bahūhi khujjāhi jāva
mahattaragavaṃdaparikkhittā bhagavaṃ ariṭṭhanemiṃ pañcavihena abhigameṇaṃ
abhigacchati, taṃ jahāsacittāṇaṃ dravvāṇaṃ viusaraṇayāe, acittāṇaṃ dravvāṇaṃ
avimocaṇayāe, viṇayoṇayāe gāyalāṭṭhīe, cakkhuphāse aṃjalipaggaheṇaṃ, maṇassa
egatībhāvakaraṇeṇaṃ; jeṇeva bhagavaṃ ariṭṭhanemi teṇeva uvāgacchati;
uvāgacchittā bhagavaṃ ariṭṭhanemiṃ tikkhutte āyāhiṇa-payāhiṇaṃ kareti, karitā
vandaṇaṃ namasati, vandittā namasittā sussūsamāṇī, namassamāṇī, abhimuhā
viṇaeṇaṃ paṃjaliuḍḍā jāva] pajjuvāsati. Taṇaṃ araha ariṭṭhanemi devīṃ devīṃ evaṃ
vayāsī -' se nūṇaṃ tava devī! hame chaṇṇaṃ aṇagāre pāsittā ayameyārūve ajjhattie
cintie patthie maṇogae saṃkappae samuppanṇe - evaṃ khalu ahaṃ polāsapure ṇagare
atimuttakumāreṇaṃ jāva' taṃ ṇiggacchasi, ṇiggacchittā jeṇeva mama antiyaṃ teṇeva
havvāmāgayā, se nūṇaṃ devī! aṭṭhe samaṭṭhe?' 'hāṃtā atthi.'  The Jain terms have
been preserved in the translation.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 tRtIya varga ] [ 35 ...... dhammiyaM jANappavaraM juttAmeva uvaTThaveha,
uvaTThavettA mama eyamANittayaM paccAppiNaha  /  tae NaM te koDuMbiya purasA
evaM vuttA samANA haTTha jAva hiyayA, karayala evaM tahattiANAe viNaNaM vayaNaM
jAva paDisuNettA khippAmeva lahukaraNajutta jAva dhammiyaM jANappavaraM
juttAmeva ] uvaTThaveMti  /  jahA devANaMdA jAva [ tae NaM sA devaI devI aMto
aMteuraMsi NhAyA, kayabalikammA, kayakouya-maMgalapAyacchittA, kiMca
varapAyapattaNeura- maNimehalA hAra - raciya uciyakaDagakhuD DAgae-
gAvalIkaMThasutta- uratthagevejja-soNisuttaga- NANAmaNi- rayaNa-
bhUsaNavirAiyaMgI, cINaMsuyavatthapavara-parihiyA, dugullasukumAlauttarijjA,
savvouyasurabhiku sumavariyasiriyA, varacaMdaNavaMdiyA, varAbharaNa-bhUsiyaMgI,
kAlAgaru dhUvadhUviyA, sirisamANavesA, jAva appamahagghAbharaNalaMkiyasarIrA,
bahUhiM khujjAhiM, cilAiyAhiM, NANAdesa - videsaparimaMDiyAhiM,
sadesaNevatthagahiyavesAhiM, iMgiya- ciMtiya-patthiyaviyANi - yAhiM, kusalAhiM,
viNIyAhiM, ceDiyAcakka vAlavarisadhara-therakaM cuijja-
mahattaragavaMdaparikkhittA aMteurAo Niggacchai, NiggacchittA jeNaiva bAhiriyA
uvaTThANasAlA, jeNeva dhammie jANappavare teNeva uvAgacchai, uvAgacchittA jAva
dhammiyaM jANappavaraM durUDhA  /  ...... taNaM sA devaI devI dhammiyAo
jANappavarAo paccoruhai, paccoruhittA bahUhiM khujjAhiM jAva
mahattaragavaMdaparikqhittA bhagavaM ariTThanemiM paMcavihe abhigameNaM
abhigacchai, taM jahAsacittANaM davvANaM viusaraNayAe, acittANaM davvANaM
avimoyaNayAe, viNayoNayAe gAyalaTThIe, cakkhupphAse aMjalipaggaheNaM, maNassa
egattIbhAvakaraNeNaM; jeNeva bhagavaM ariTThanemI teNeva uvAgacchai;
uvAgacchittA bhagavaM ariTThanemiM tikkhutto AyAhiNa -payAhiNaM karei, karitA
vaMdana NamaMsai, vaMdittA NamaMsittA sussUsamANI, NamaMsamANI, abhimuhA
viNaeNaM paMjaliuDA jAva] pajjuvAsai  /  taNaM arahA ariTThanemI devaI deviM
evaM vayAsI -' se nUNaM tava devaI ! hame cha aNagAre pAsittA aYameyArUve
ajjhatthie ciMtie patthie maNogae saMkappe samuppaNNe - evaM khalu ahaM
polAsapure nayare aimutteNaM jAva' taM Niggacchasi, NiggacchittA jeNeva mama
aMtiyaM teNeva havvamAgayA, se nUNaM devaI! aTThe samaTThe ?' 'haMtA atthi  / '
isa prakAra kI bAta kahakara una zramaNoM ke lauTa jAne ke pazcAt devakI devI ko
isa prakAra AdhyAtmika, cintita, prArthita, manogata aura saMkalpita vicAra
utpanna huA ki " polAsapura nagara meM atimuktakumAra nAmaka zramaNa ne mujhe
bacapana meM isa prakAra kahA thA - he devAnupriye devakI! tuma ATha putroM ko
janma dogI, jo paraspara eka dUsare se pUrNata: samAna [AkAra, tvacA aura
avasthA vAle, nIlakamala, mahiSa ke zRMga ke antarvartI bhAga, gulikA-raMga
vizeSa aura alasI ke puSpa samAna varNa vAle, zrIvatsa se aMkita vakSa vAle,
kusuma ke samAna komala aura kuMDala ke samAna ghuMgharAle bAloM vAle]
nalakUbara ke samAna pratIta hoNge| bharatakSetra meM dUsarI koI mAtA vaise
putroM ko janma nahIM degii| para vaha kathana mithyA nikalA, kyoMki pratyakSa
dRSTigocara ho rahA hai ki anya mAtAoM ne bhI aise yAvat putroM ko janma diyA
hai| ataH arihaMta ariSTanemi bhagavAn kI sevA meM jAUM, vaMdana-namaskAra karUM
aura vaMdana-namaskAra karake isa prakAra ke uktivaiparItya ke viSaya meM pUchUM
/  1. prastuta sUtra meM Upara dekhie  /

Page #77 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[36] Thinking thus, you called your family men and said to them, "Prepare a
chariot of the best quality, with two excellent young bulls, swift-moving,
having the same form, the same hooves and tails, the same horns, adorned with
golden neck ornaments, of excellent speed, with silver bells, tied with a golden
nose rope, with a blue lotus headrest, equipped with an excellent wooden yoke
adorned with a group of various kinds of gem-studded bells, and two excellent
ropes for yoking, and bring it here. And after completing the task, inform me."
Upon hearing this command from Devaki Devi, those servant men were delighted and
joyful, and placing their hands in a gesture of respect on their foreheads, they
said, "Your command is acceptable to us." Accepting the command with humility,
they quickly brought the chariot of the best quality, with two swift-moving
bulls.  Then, like the Brahmani Devananda, Devaki Devi also bathed in the inner
chambers, performed the Bali ritual, and applied the auspicious mark (mashi-
tilak). Then, adorning her body with beautiful anklets, a gem-studded girdle, a
necklace, excellent bangles, rings, a unique gem-studded necklace, a neck chain,
a long necklace worn on the chest, a waist chain, and ornaments of various gems
and jewels, she wore a fine silk garment over her body, adorned her hair with
fragrant flowers of all seasons, applied sandalwood to her forehead, adorned her
body with excellent ornaments, and was fragrant with the incense of the black
guru. She adorned her body with ornaments of little weight and great value, like
Lakshmi, and with a family of many hunchbacked maidservants, maidservants from
the Chilat country, and maidservants gathered from various countries, both
domestic and foreign, who wore the attire of their own country, were skilled in
understanding the meaning of gestures, and were humble and efficient, along with
the maidservants of her own country, the searchers, the old Kunchuki, and a
group of respected men, she left her inner chambers and came to the place where
the outer reception hall was and where the chariot of the best quality was
standing. She mounted the chariot of the best quality.  (She came to where
Arishta-nemi Bhagavan was, and seeing the extraordinary qualities of the
Tirthankara) she descended from the chariot of the best quality and, surrounded
by her maidservants and other family members, began to approach Bhagavan
Arishta-nemi with five types of approaches. These approaches are: (1) giving up
possessions with attachment, (2) not giving up possessions without attachment,
(3) bowing the body with humility, (4) joining both hands upon seeing Bhagavan,
and (5) focusing the mind. With these five approaches, Devaki Devi came to where
Arishta-nemi Bhagavan was and, circumambulating Bhagavan three times in the
clockwise direction, offered her respects and salutations. Offering her respects
and salutations, she began to worship with humility, joining her hands.  Then,
the Arhant Arishta-nemi addressed Devaki, saying, "O Devaki! Did you have this
kind of spiritual, thoughtful, prayerful, mental, and resolved thought arise in
your mind upon seeing these six non-householders: that in the city of Pola-
shapur, Ati-mukta-kumara gave birth to eight sons, all equal, like the Nala-
kubera, and that in the Bharat-kshetra, other mothers did not give birth to such
sons?"

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 36] [antakRddazA aisA socakara tumane kauTumbika puruSoM ko bulAyA aura
bulAkara kahA-"zIghragAmI yAnapravara-[samAna rUpa vAle, samAna khura aura
pUMcha vAle, samAna sIMga vAle, svarNa-nirmita kaNTha ke AbhUSaNoM se yukta,
uttama gati vAle, cA~dI kI ghaMTiyoM se yukta, svarNamaya nAsArajju se baMdhe
hue, nIla-kamala ke sirapeca vAle do uttama yuvA bailoM se yukta, aneka prakAra
kI maNimaya ghaNTiyoM ke samUha se vyApta uttama kASThamaya dhoMsarA (juA) aura
jota kI do uttama DoriyoM se yukta, pravara (zreSTha) lakSaNa yukta dhArmika
zreSTha yAna (ratha) taiyAra karake yahA~ upasthita karo aura AjJA kA pAlana
kara nivedana karo arthAt kArya sampUrNa ho jAne kI sUcanA do|" devakI devI kI
isa prakAra kI AjJA hone para ve sevaka puruSa prasanna yAvat Anandita hRdaya
vAle hue aura mastaka para aMjali karake isa prakAra bole - ApakI AjJA hameM
mAnya hai' aisA kahakara vinayapUrvaka AjJA ko svIkAra kiyA aura AjJAnusAra
zIghra calane vAle do bailoM se yukta yAvat dhArmika zreSTha ratha ko zIghra]
upasthita kiyaa| taba devAnandA brAhmaNI kI taraha devakI devI ne bhI [aMta:pura
meM snAna kiyA, balikarma kiyA, kautuka (maSi-tilaka) kiyaa| phira pairoM meM
pahanane ke suMdara nUpura, maNiyukta mekhalA (kandorA) hAra, uttama kaMkaNa,
aMgUThiyA~, vicitra maNimaya ekAvali (eka lar3A) hAra, kaNTha-sUtra, graiveyaka
(vakSasthala para rahA huA gale kA lambA hAra), kaTisUtra aura vicitra maNi
tathA ratnoM ke AbhUSaNa, ina saba se zarIra ko suzobhita karake, uttama
cInAMzuka (vastra) pahanakara zarIra para sukumAla rezamI vastra oDhakara, saba
RtuoM ke sugandhita phUloM se apane kezoM ko gUMthakara, kapAla para candana
lagA kara, uttama AbhUSaNoM se zarIra ko alaMkRta kara, kAlAguru ke dhUpa se
sugandhita hokara, lakSmI ke samAna veSa vAlI yAvat alpa bhAra aura bahumUlya
vAle AbharaNoM se zarIra ko alaMkRta karake, bahuta sI kubjA dAsiyoM, cilAta
deza kI dAsiyoM, yAvat aneka deza videzoM se Akara ekatrita huI dAsiyoM, apane
deza ke veSa dhAraNa karane vAlI, iMgitaAkRti dvArA cintita aura iSTa artha ko
jAnanevAlI kuzala aura vinayasampanna dAsiyoM ke parivAra saMhita tathA svadeza
kI dAsiyoM, khojA puruSa, vRddha kaMcukI aura mAnya puruSoM ke samUha ke sAtha
vaha devakI devI apane anta:pura se nikalI aura jahA~ bAhara kI upasthAnazAlA
thI aura jahA~ dhArmika zreSTha ratha khar3A thA vahA~ AI aura usa dhArmika
zreSTha ratha para cddhii| (jahA~ ariSTanemi bhagavAn the vahA~ AI, Akara,
tIrthaMkara ke atizayoM ko dekhakara) dhArmika ratha se nIce utarI aura apanI
dAsiyoM Adi parivAra se parivRtta hokara bhagavAn ariSTanemi ke pAsa pAMca
prakAra ke abhigamoM se yukta hokara jAne lgii| ve abhigama isa prakAra haiM
-(1) sacitta dravyoM kA tyAga karanA, (2) acitta dravyoM kA tyAga nahIM karanA,
(3) vinaya se zarIra ko avanata karanA (nIce kI ora jhukA denA), (4) bhagavAn ke
dRSTigocara hote hI donoM hAtha jor3anA aura (5) mana ko ekAgra krnaa| ina pA~ca
abhigamoM ke sAtha devakI devI jahA~ ariSTanemi bhagavAn the vahA~ AI aura
bhagavAn ko tIna bAra AdakSiNapradakSiNA karake vandana namaskAra kiyaa|
vandana-namaskAra karake zuzrUSA karatI huI, vinayapUrvaka hAtha jor3akara]
upAsanA karane lgii| tadanantara arihaMta ariSTanemi devakI ko sambodhita kara
isa prakAra bole - "he devakI! kyA ina chaha anagAroM ko dekhakara tumhAre mana
meM isa prakAra kA AdhyAtmika, cintita, prArthita , manogata aura saMkalpita
vicAra utpanna huA hai ki -polAsapura nagara meM atimuktakumAra ne tumheM eka
samAna, nalakUbaravat ATha putroM ko janma dene kA aura bharatakSetra meM anya
mAtAoM dvArA isa prakAra ke putroM ko janma nahIM dene kA

Page #78 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Third Chapter] [37] The prophecy was proven false, because other mothers in the
Bharat Kshetra have also given birth to such sons. Knowing this, you went out to
ask about this matter and came to me quickly. Devaki Devi! Is this true? Devaki
said - 'Yes Lord, it is true.' Discussion - When Devaki Devi saw the disciples
of Lord Arishtanemi coming to her house for the third time, a resolve arose in
her heart. To ascertain the subject of this resolve, she went to the feet of
Lord Arishtanemi. The Lord described her heart's resolve in clear words. All
these things have been shown in the present sutra. "Ajzhathie Samuppanne"
.......... means - Ajzhathie means spiritual - internal. Kappie - imagined,
meaning various kinds of imaginations arising in the heart. Chintiye -
contemplated, meaning thought repeatedly. Patthie - prayed, meaning "What is the
root cause of this situation?" This curiosity happening again and again. Manogae
- mental, meaning the thoughts that are in the mind are not yet revealed.
Sankalp - resolve, meaning general thought. - 'Aimumutteṇ Kumārasamaṇeṇam' means
- Ati Mukta named Kumar Shraman. Ati Mukta Kumar Shraman (Shraman with a
delicate body, or Shraman in the state of youth) was the younger brother of
Kansa. When Kansa's wife Jiwayasha was playing with Devaki, Ati Mukta Kumar went
to Jiwayasha's house for alms. Jiwayasha, engrossed in amusement and pleasure,
began to mock her brother-in-law, seeing him as a muni. She said, "Brother-in-
law! Come, you also play with me, participate in this amusement and pleasure."
On this, Muni Ati Mukta Kumar said to Jiwayasha - 'Jiwayashe! From the womb of
this Devaki, with whom you are playing at this time, eight sons will be born.
These sons will be so beautiful and virtuous that no other woman in Bharatvarsha
will have such sons. But the seventh son of this Devaki will kill your husband
and rule over half of Bharatvarsha.' Devaki Devi had heard this in her
childhood. Therefore, to resolve this, she decided to go to Lord Arishtanemi.
The necessary rules to be followed when going to the Arihant Paramatma or Sadhu-
Sadhvis are called 'Abhigam'. In the present sutra, the sutrakar has depicted
the heart's resolve and doubts of Devaki Devi. Devaki Devi went to the feet of
Arishtanemi Bhagwan to express her heart's feelings and was present there.
Thereafter, the sutrakar says, describing what Arishtanemi Bhagwan said to
pacify Devaki Devi's mind in the next sutra. 11-Evam Khalu Devaṇuppie! Teṇam
Kāleṇam Teṇam Samaeṇam Bhaddilpure Nayare Nāge Nāma Gāhāvai Parivasai Aḍḍe.
Tassa ṇam Nāgassa Gāhāvaissassa Sulasa Nāmam Bhāriyā Hotthā. Tae ṇam Sā Sulasa
Bālattane Ceva Hariṇegamesibhattayā Yāvi Hotthā. Nemittiyeṇ Vāgariyā-Es ṇam
Dāriyā Niṇḍū Bhavisai. Tae ṇam Sā Sulasa Bālapphabhiī Ceva Hariṇegamecissassa
Paḍiman Karei, Karettā Kallākalim

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 tRtIya varga] [37 bhaviSya-kathana kiyA thA, vaha mithyA siddha huA, kyoMki
bharatakSetra meM bhI anya mAtAoM ne aise yAvat putroM ko janma diyA hai| aisA
jAnakara isa viSaya meM pRcchA karane ke liye tuma yAvat vandana ko nikalIM aura
nikalakara zIghratA se mere pAsa calI AI ho| devakI devI! kyA yaha bAta satya
hai? devakI ne kahA -'hA~ prabhu, satya hai|' vivecana- bhagavAn ariSTanemi ke
ziSyoM ko tIsarI bAra apane ghara meM AyA dekhakara devakI devI ke hRdaya meM jo
saMkalpa utpanna huA, usake viSaya meM nizcaya karane ke liye vaha
bhagavAn.ariSTanemi ke caraNoM meM upasthita huii| bhagavAn ne usake hRdayagata
saMkalpa kA spaSTa zabdoM meM varNana kiyaa| ina saba bAtoM kA prastuta sUtra
meM digdarzana karAyA gayA hai| "ajjhathie samuppaNNe" .......... kA artha isa
prakAra hai -ajjhathie arthAt AdhyAtmika - Atmagata  /  kappie-kalpita arthAta
hRdaya meM uThane vAlI anekavidha klpnaaeN| cintie-cintita arthAt bAra-bAra kiyA
gayA vicAra  /  patthie-prArthita arthAt "isa dazA kA mUla kAraNa kyA hai?'' isa
jijJAsA kA punaH punaH honA  /  maNogae - manogata arthAt jo vicAra abhI mana
meM haiM prakaTa nahIM kiye gaye haiN| saMkappa - saMkalpa arthAt sAmAnya
vicaar| - 'aimutteNa kumArasamaNeNaM' kA artha hai -atimukta nAmaka kumAra
zramaNa  /  atimukta kumAra zramaNa (sukumAla zarIra vAle, yA kumArAvasthA vAle
zramaNa) kaMsa ke choTe bhAI the| jisa samaya kaMsa kI patnI jIvayazA devakI ke
sAtha krIDA kara rahI thI usa samaya atimukta kumAra jIvayazA ke ghara meM
bhikSA ke liye gaye the| Amoda-pramoda meM magna jIvayazA ne apane devara ko
muni ke rUpa meM dekhakara upahAsa karanA prAraMbha kiyaa| vaha bolI devara ! Ao
tuma bhI mere sAtha krIDA karo, isa Amoda-pramoda meM tuma bhI bhAga lo| isa
para muni atimukta kumAra jIvayazA se kahane lage - 'jIvayaze ! jisa devakI ke
sAtha tuma isa samaya krIDA kara rahI ho, isa devakI ke garbha se ATha putra
utpanna hoNge| ye putra itane sundara aura puNyAtmA hoMge ki bhAratavarSa meM
anya kisI strI ke aise putra nahIM hoNge| paraMtu isa devakI kA sAtavAM putra
tere pati ko mArakara Adhe bhAratavarSa para rAjya kregaa|' yaha bAta devakI
devI ne bacapana meM sunI thii| ataH isI ke samAdhAna hetu usane bhagavAn
ariSTanemi ke pAsa jAne kA nizcaya kiyaa| arihaMta paramAtmA yA sAdhu-sAdhviyoM
ke pAsa jAte samaya jo Avazyaka niyama apanAne hote haiM, unheM 'abhigama' kahA
jAtA hai| prastuta sUtra meM sUtrakAra ne devakI devI ke hRdayagata saMkalpa-
vikalpa kA citraNa kiyA hai| devakI devI apane hRdaya kI bAta ariSTanemi
bhagavAn ke caraNoM meM nivedana karane ke liye cala par3I aura vahAM upasthita
ho gii| tadanantara devakI devI ke mAnasa ko samAhita karane ke liye ariSTanemi
bhagavAn ne jo kucha kahA, agrima sUtra meM isakA varNana karate hue sUtrakAra
kahate haiM 11-evaM khalu devANuppie! teNaM kAleNaM teNaM samaeNaM bhaddilapure
nayare nAge nAma gAhAvaI parivasai adddde| tassa NaM nAgassa gAhAvaissa sulasA
nAmaM bhAriyA hotthaa| tae NaM sA sulasA bAlattaNe ceva hariNegamesIbhattayA
yAvi hotthaa| nemittieNa vAgariyA-esa NaM dAriyA NiMdU bhvissi| tae NaM sA
sulasA bAlappabhiI ceva hariNegamesissa paDimaM karei, karettA kallAkaliM

Page #79 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[38] [ Antakrid Dasha ] "Devanupriye! In those days, in the city of Bhaddilpur,
there lived a Gahapati named Nag. He was very wealthy and had a great reputation
among the citizens. Nag Gahapati had a wife named Sulasa. When Sulasa was a
child, a fortune teller had said, 'This girl will be a Nindu, meaning she will
give birth to dead children.' After that, Sulasa became a devotee of
Harinegamesi Dev from her childhood. She had a statue of Harinegamesi Dev made.
After making the statue, she would bathe every morning and perform atonement to
ward off bad dreams. She would wear a wet (goli) saree and worship the statue
with precious flowers. After worshipping with flowers, she would kneel down and
prostrate with all five limbs, then she would eat, look at the statue, and do
her other daily tasks.  Then, Harinegamesi Dev was pleased with Sulasa
Gahapati's devotion and respect. After being pleased, Harinegamesi Dev made
Sulasa Gahapati and you both reach the age of menstruation at the same time.
Then, you both conceived at the same time, carried the pregnancy at the same
time, and gave birth to children at the same time. During childbirth, Sulasa
Gahapati gave birth to a dead child. Then, Harinegamesi Dev, out of compassion
for Sulasa, took the dead child in his hands and brought it to you. At the same
time, you also gave birth to a healthy child after nine months. Devanupriye! The
children who were yours, Harinegamesi Dev took them from you with both his hands
and brought them to Sulasa Gahapati. Therefore, Devaki, these are actually your
children, not Sulasa Gahapati's children."  Discussion: Lord Arishtanemi, to
console Devaki Devi, explained that Sulasa, the wife of Nag, was a Nindu, her
devotion to Harinegamesi Dev, the Dev being pleased and sending Devaki Devi's
children to Sulasa, and Sulasa's dead children being sent to Devaki Devi. 1. See
the previous Sutra.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 38] [ antakRddazA hAyA jAva' pAyacchittA ullapaDasADayA maharihaM pupphaccaNaM
karer3a, karettA jaNNupAyapaDiyA paNAmaM karei, karettA tao pacchA AhArei vA
nIhArei vA varai vA  /  tae NaM tIse sulasAe gAhAvaiNIe bhattibahumANasussUyAe
hariNegamesI deve ArAhi yAvi hotthA  /  tae NaM se hariNegamesI deve sulasAe
gAhAvaiNIe aNukaMpaNaTTayAe sulasaM gAhAvaiNiM tumaM ca do vi samauuyAo karei  /
tae NaM tubbhe do vi samameva gabbhe giNhaha, samameva gabbhe parivahaha,
samameva dArae pyaayh| tae NaM sA sulasA gAhAvaiNI viNihAyamAvaNNe dArae payAya
/  tae NaM se hariNegamesI deve sulasAe aNukaMpaNaTTayAe viNihAyamAvaNNe dArae
karayalasaMpuDeNaM gehar3a, geNhittA tava aMtiyaM sAharai  /  taM samayaM ca NaM
tumaM pi navaNhaM mAsANaM sukumAladArae pasavasi  /  je vi ya NaM devANuppie!
tava puttA te vi ya tava aMtiAo karayala-saMpuDeNaM geNhai, geNhittA sulasAe
gAhAvaiNIe aMtie sAharai  /  taM tava ceva NaM devaI ! ee puttA  /  No sulasAe
gAhAvaiNIe  /  T arihaMta ariSTanemi ne kahA - 'devAnupriye ! usa kAla usa
samaya meM bhaddilapura nAmaka nagara meM nAga nAma kA gAthApati rahatA thA  /
vaha pUrNatayA sampanna thaa| nAgarikoM meM usakI bar3I pratiSThA thI  /  usa
nAga gAthApati kI sulasA nAma kI bhAryA thI  /  usa sulasA gAthApatnI ko
bAlyAvasthA meM hI kisI nimittajJa ne kahA thA - 'yaha bAlikA niMdU arthAt
mRtavatsA (mRta bAlakoM ko janma dene valI ) hogii| tatpazcAt vaha sulasA
bAlyakAla se hI hariNaigameSI deva kI bhakta bana gii| usane hariNaigameSI deva
kI pratimA bnvaaii| pratimA banavA kara pratidina prAta:kAla snAna karake yAvat
duHsvapna nivAraNArtha prAyazcitta kara Ardra (golI) sAr3I pahane hue usakI
bahumUlya puSpoM se arcanA karatI  /  puSpoM dvArA pUjA ke pazcAt ghuTane
Tekakara pAMcoM aMga namA kara praNAma karatI, tadanantara AhAra karatI, nihAra
karatI evaM apanI dainandinI ke anya kArya karatI  /  tatpazcAt usa sulasA
gAthApatnI kI usa bhakti- bahumAnapUrvaka kI gaI zuzrUSA se deva prasanna ho
gyaa| prasanna hone ke pazcAt hariNaigameSI deva sulasA gAthApatnI ko tathA
tumheM -donoM ko samakAla meM hI RtumatI (rajasvalA) karatA aura taba tuma donoM
samakAla meM hI garbha dhAraNa karatI, samakAla meM hI garbha kA vahana karatIM
aura samakAla hI bAlaka ko janma detIM  /  prasavakAla meM vaha sulasA
gAthApatnI mare hue bAlaka ko janma detI  /  taba vaha hariNaigameSI deva sulasA
para anukaMpA karane ke liye usake mRta bAlaka ko hAthoM meM letA aura lekara
tumhAre pAsa laataa| idhara usI samaya tuma bhI nava mAsa kA kAla pUrNa hone
para sukumAra bAlaka ko janma detiiN| he devAnupriye ! jo tumhAre putra hote
unako hariNaigameSI deva tumhAre pAsa se apane donoM hAthoM meM grahaNa karatA
aura unheM grahaNa kara sulasA gAthApatnI ke pAsa lAkara rakha detA (pahu~cA
detA)  /  ata: vAstava meM he devakI ! ye tumhAre hI putra haiM, sulasA
gAthApatnI ke putra nahIM haiN|' vivecana- bhagavAn ariSTanemi ne devakI devI ke
samAdhAna ke liye nAga kI dharmapatnI sulasA kA nindU honA, usakA hariNaigameSI
deva kI ArAdhanA karanA, deva kA prasanna hokara devakI devI ke putroM ko sulasA
ke pAsa pahuMcAnA tathA sulasA ke mRtaputroM ko devakI devI ke pAsa pahuMcAnA
Adi jo kathana kiyA 1. dekhie pichalA sUtra  /

Page #80 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Third Section] [39 This is described in the present sutra. The word
'Nemittiena' means Naimittika. An astrologer who predicts the future is called
Naimittika. The word 'Nindu' means dead-born. A woman whose children are born
dead is called Nindu. There are two types of dead children - one is born dead in
the womb, the other dies after birth. In the present case, the first meaning of
Nindu seems to be the desired one. In the Kalpasutra (in the section on the
change of womb in the Pradeepika commentary), the word Harinaigameshi is
explained as follows: 'Hareh Indrasya Naigamam Aadeshimchchatiti Harinaigameshi,
Kecit Hareh Indrasya Sambandhi Naigameshi, Nama Deva iti' - meaning that there
are two meanings of the word Harinaigameshi - 1. A god who desires the Naigama -
order of Hari-Indra and 2. A god who is related to Hari-Indra, i.e. Naigameshi.
Harinaigameshi is the commander-in-chief of the gods in the Saudharma heaven,
the king Maharaja Shakrendra. It was this god who changed the womb of Bhagwan
Mahavira on receiving the order of Indra. 'Ull-pad-sadaya' means - one who wears
a wet (soaked) pat and shatika. Pat is the name of a garment worn on the upper
body. The word shatika refers to a dhoti or saree worn on the lower body.
'Ahareiva, Nihareiva, Vareiva' means - she used to eat - she used to eat food.
Nihareiva means she was relieved from the activities of defecation etc. The word
Vareiva is derived from the root Vri, which means - to think, to choose, to get
engaged, to beg, to cover, to serve. In the present case, the root Vri seems to
be used in the sense of thinking. Then 'Vareiva' will mean she used to think,
she used to think about other matters. "Bhakti = Bahuman-Sususaae" means - by
devotion, respect and service. The word Bhakti is indicative of affection, the
word Bahuman is indicative of excessive respect and the word Sushrusha is
indicative of service. By these words, the sutrakar has indicated three means of
worshipping - proving or pleasing the Harinaigameshi god. These three things are
required to prove the god. First of all, the devotee should have affection for
the god in his heart, then there should be a feeling of excessive respect and
honour for the god in the devotee's heart. The third means of proving the god is
service to the god. Sulsana worshipped the Harinaigameshi god, worshipped him,
as a result she achieved her desired goal. This clearly proves that the worship
done towards the deity can be helpful in fulfilling the desires of the devotee.
The god is powerful to protect his devotee and to bestow grace upon him. People
worship gods to obtain sons etc. and due to the support of some past good deeds,
they obtain sons etc. and due to excessive devotion, they consider it to be
given by the god. They consider the god to be the main reason for obtaining sons
etc. They are wrong, because if the god can be the instrumental cause in
manifesting the fruits of past deeds, then on the contrary, if the past deeds
are not supportive...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 tRtIya varga] [39 usI kA prastuta sUtra meM varNana diyA gayA hai|
_'nemittieNaM' zabda kA artha hotA hai naimittik| bhaviSya kI bAta batAne vAle
jyotiSI ko naimittika kahA jAtA hai| "NiMdU' - zabda kA artha hai - mRt-
prsvinii| jisake bacce mRta paidA hoM, use nindU kahate haiM  /  mRta bAlaka do
taraha ke hote haiM - eka to garbha meM hI mare hue paidA hone vAle, dUsare
paidA hone ke bAda mara jAne vaale| prastuta prakaraNa meM nindU se prathama
artha kA grahaNa hI abhISTa pratIta hotA hai| hariNaigameSI - zabda kA artha
karate hue kalpasUtra (pradIpikA TIkA ke garbha parivartana-prakaraNa) meM likhA
hai -'hareH indrasya naigamam AdezamicchatIti harinaigameSI, kecit harerindrasya
saMbaMdhI naigameSI, nAma deva iti' - arthAt harinaigameSI zabda ke do artha
haiM - 1. hari-indra ke naigama - Adeza kI icchA karane vAlA deva tathA 2. hari-
indra kA naigameSI arthAt saMbaMdhI eka dev| harinaigameSI saudharma devaloka ke
svAmI mahArAjA zakrendra kA senApati deva hai| indra kI AjJA milane para
bhagavAn mahAvIra ke garbha kA parivartana isI deva ne kiyA thaa| 'ulla-paDa-
sADayA' kA artha hai - jisane Ardra (bhIgA huA) paTa aura zATikA dhAraNa kara
rakhI hai| paTa Upara oDhane ke vastra kA nAma hai  /  zATikA zabda se nIce
pahanane kI dhotI yA sAr3I kA bodha hotA 'AhArei vA, nIhArei vA, varai vA' kA
artha hai - AhAra karatI thI - bhojana khAtI thii| nihArei arthAt zaucAdi
kriyAoM se nivRtta hotI thii| varai-zabda vR dhAtu se banatA hai jisakA artha
hai - vicAra karanA, cunanA, sagAI karanA, yAcanA karanA, AcchAdana karanA, sevA
krnaa| prastuta meM vR dhAtu vicAra karane ke artha meM prayukta huI pratIta
hotI hai  /  taba 'varai' kA artha hogA vicAra karatI thI, anya kAryoM ke
sambandha meM cintana karatI thii| "bhatti= bahumANa-sussUsAe" kA artha hai -
bhakti-bahumAna tathA zuzrUSA ke dvaaraa| bhakti zabda anurAga, bahumAna zabda
atyadhika satkAra tathA zuzrUSA zabda sevA kA paricAyaka hai| ina padoM dvArA
sUtrakAra ne hariNaigameSI deva ko ArAdhita - siddha yA prasanna karane ke tIna
sAdhanoM kA nirdeza kiyA hai  /  deva ko siddha karane ke liye ukta tIna bAtoM
kI apekSA huA karatI hai| deva ko siddha karane ke liye sarvaprathama sAdhaka ke
hRdaya meM deva ke prati anurAga honA cAhie, tadanantara sAdhaka ke hRdaya meM
deva ke liye atyadhika satkArasammAna kI bhAvanA honI caahiye| deva ko siddha
karane ke liye tIsarA sAdhana deva kI sevA hai| sulasA ne hariNaigameSI deva kI
ArAdhanA kI, usakI pUjA kI, pariNAma svarUpa usane apanA abhISTa kArya siddha
kara liyaa| isase bhalIbhAMti siddha ho jAtA hai ki devatA ke prati kI jAne vAlI
ArAdhanA sAdhaka kI kAmanA pUrNa karane meM sahAyaka bana sakatI hai| deva apane
bhakta kI rakSA karane tathA usa para anugraha karane meM sazakta hotA hai| loga
putrAdi ko upalabdha karane ke liye deva-pUjana karate haiM aura pUrvopArjita
kisI puNya karma ke sahayogI hone ke kAraNa putrAdi kI prApti kara lene para
bhakti ke atireka se use deva-pradatta hI mAna lete haiN| putrAdi kI prApti meM
deva ko hI pradhAna kAraNa mAna lete haiM  /  ve bhUla karate haiM, kyoMki yadi
pUrvopArjita karma ke phala ko prakaTa karane meM deva nimitta kAraNa bana
sakatA hai to isake viparIta, yadi pUrva karma sahayogI nahIM

Page #81 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
40] [If it is the nature of the destroyer, then devotion to the devas is not
done once, but many times, or if many vows are made to the devas, even then the
devas cannot do anything. In fact, the devas can only be the instrumental cause
in the accomplishment of any work, not the material cause. After hearing the
account of the six munis from the auspicious mouth of Bhagavan Arishṭanemi, the
description of the state of Devaki Devi is being given in the following sutra.
12. - Then that Devaki Devi, having heard this from the Arihanta Arishṭanemi,
becomes delighted and joyful, and with a pleased heart, she venerates and pays
obeisance to the Arihanta Arishṭanemi. After venerating and paying obeisance,
she goes to where those six Anagāras (ascetics) are, and there she venerates and
pays obeisance to those six Anagāras. Seeing those six Anagāras, out of maternal
affection, her breasts start flowing with milk. Due to joy, her eyes become
radiant, the bonds of her bodice start loosening, the ornaments on her arms
become tight, her body hair stands on end like the flowers of the Kadamba tree
drenched in rain. Gazing at those six Anagāras with unblinking eyes, she keeps
observing them for a long time. After that, she venerates and pays obeisance to
those six Anagāras, and then goes to where the Arihanta Arishṭanemi is. Reaching
there, she circumambulates the Arihanta Arishṭanemi three times from the right
side, and then venerates and pays obeisance to him. After venerating and paying
obeisance, she mounts the same auspicious chariot. Mounted on the chariot, she
comes to the city of Dvārakā, enters the city of Dvārakā, and reaches the outer
audience hall of her own palace, descends from the auspicious chariot, and then
goes to her own residence, to her own bed, and sits down on it. Explanation -
After hearing the account of the six munis from Bhagavan Arishṭanemi, when the
idea arose in Devaki Devi that "these six are my own sons", she goes to see the
six munis and is delighted to see them repeatedly. In this state, her hidden
maternal affection is revealed, and it is manifested through the flow of milk
from her breasts. Thereafter, she becomes composed in her own state and returns
to her palace, and becomes absorbed in a particular line of thought. In the next
sutra, the author depicts her thought process and the flow of her mental states
- 1. See verse 3, sutra 7.]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 40] [antakRddazA hai to eka bAra nahIM, anekoM bAra devapUjA kI jAe yA deva kI
anekoM manautiyAM mAna lI jAyeM to bhI deva kucha nahIM kara skte| vastutaH kisI
bhI kArya kI siddhi meM deva kevala nimitta kAraNa bana sakatA hai, upAdAna
kAraNa nhiiN| bhagavAn ariSTanemi ke zrImukha se chahoM muniyoM ke itivRtta ko
sunakara devakI devI kI kyA dazA huI, isakA varNana agrima sUtra meM kiyA jA
rahA hai 12. - tae NaM sA devaI devI arahao ariTThaNemissa aMtie eyamaDhe soccA
nisamma haTTatuTTha jAva hiyayA arahaM ariTThanemiM vaMdai namasai, vaMdittA
namaMsittA jeNeva te cha aNagArA teNeva uvAgacchai, uvAgacchittA te chappi
aNagAre vaMdai namasai, vaMdittA namaMsittA AgayapaNhuyA, pappuyaloyaNA,
kaMcuyaparikkhittayA, dariyavalaya-bAhA, dhArAhaya-kalaMba-pupphagaM viva
samUsasiya-romakUvA te chappi aNagAre aNimisAe diTThIe pehamANI-pehamANI suciraM
nirikkhai, nirikkhittA vaMdai namasai, vaMdittA namaMsittA jeNeva arahA
ariTThaNemI teNeva uvAgacchai, uvAgacchittA arahaM ariTThaNemiM tikkhutto
AyAhiNaM payAhiNaM karei, karettA vaMdai namasai, vaMdittA namaMsittA tameva
dhammiyaM jANappavaraM duruhai duruhittA jeNeva bAravaI nayarI teNeva
uvAgacchai, uvAgacchittA bAravaI nayariM aNuppavisai, aNuppavisittA jeNeva sae
gihe jeNeva bAhiriyA uvaTThANasAlA teNeva uvAgayA, dhammiyAo jANappavarAo
paccoruhai, paccoruhittA jeNeva sae vAsaghare jeNeva sae sayaNijje teNeva
uvAgayA sayaMsi sayaNijaMsi nisiiyi| tadanantara usa devakI devI ne arihaMta
ariSTanemi bhagavAn ke pAsa se ukta vRttAnta ko sunakara aura usa para cintana
kara hRSTa-tuSTa yAvat praphullahRdayA hokara ariSTanemi bhagavAn ko vaMdana
namaskAra kiyaa| vaMdana namaskAra karake vaha chahoM muni jahA~ virAjamAna the
vahA~ aaii| Akara vaha una chahoM muniyoM ko baMdanA namaskAra karatI hai| una
anagAroM ko dekhakara putra-prema ke kAraNa use stanoM se dUdha jharane lgaa|
harSa ke kAraNa locana praphullita ho uThe, harSa ke mAre kaMcukI ke bandhana
TUTane lage, bhujAoM ke AbhUSaNa taMga ho gaye, usakI romAvalI, meghadhArA se
abhitADita hue kadamba puSpa kI bhA~ti khila utthii| vaha una chahoM muniyoM ko
nirnimeSa dRSTi se dekhatI huI cirakAla taka nirakhatI hI rhii| tatpazcAt una
chahoM muniyoM ko vandananamaskAra kiyA, vaMdana-namaskAra karake jahA~ bhagavAn
ariSTanemi virAjamAna the vahA~ AI, Akara arihanta ariSTanemi ko dakSiNa tarapha
se tIna bAra pradakSiNA karake vandana-namaskAra karatI hai  /  vandana-
namaskAra karake usI dhArmika zreSTha ratha para ArUDha hotI hai| rathArUDha ho
jahAM dvArakA nagarI thI, vahA~ AtI hai, Akara dvArakA nagarI meM praviSTa hotI
hai, praveza kara jahAM apane prAsAda ke bAhara kI upasthAnazAlA arthAt baiThaka
thI vahA~ AtI hai, Akara dhArmika ratha se nIce utaratI hai, nIce utara kara
jahAM apanA vAsagRha thA, jahAM apanI zayyA thI usa para baiTha jAtI hai|
vivecana - bhagavAn ariSTanemi se chahoM muniyoM kA vRttAnta sunane para "ye
chahoM mere hI putra haiM" isa prakAra kI pratIti ho jAne para vaha devakI devI
chahoM muniyoM ke darzana karatI hai aura punaH punaH unheM dekhakara harSita
hotI hai, aisI sthiti meM usakA chipA huA vAtsalya ujAgara huA, aura stanadugdha
dvArA prakaTa ho gyaa| tadanantara apanI sthiti meM samAhita vaha apane bhavana
meM vApasa lauTI aura vizeSa vicAradhArA meM DUba gii| agrima sUtra meM
sUtrakAra usakI vicAradhArA aura pariNAmadhArAoM kA digdarzana karAte haiM - 1.
dekhie varga 3, sUtra 7.

Page #82 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Third Chapter] [41 Devaki's Desire for a Son] . 13 - Then, in the heart of
Devaki Devi, this thought, contemplation, and desire-filled mental resolve arose
- "Alas! I have given birth to seven sons, all of them equal in form, like
Nalakubara, yet I have not experienced the joy of even one's childhood. Even
you, Krishna Vasudeva, come to me for obeisance after six months. Therefore, I
consider those mothers blessed, whose sons, born from their own wombs, are
greedy for breast milk, speak sweet words, babble with their lisping tongues,
and whose breasts are filled with the milk that flows to their chests, and who,
holding those charming children in their lotus-like, soft hands, place them in
their laps and speak to them again and again with sweet and gentle words. I am
surely unfortunate and devoid of merit, for I have not witnessed the childhood
of even one of my sons." Thus, Devaki, with a heavy heart, placed her face in
her palm (in a gesture of grief) and began to lament. Discussion - This sutra
presents a heart-wrenching depiction of the thoughts and feelings of Devaki
Devi, who, despite being the mother of seven sons, is filled with sorrow at
being deprived of their childhood joys. Krishna's Solution to Devaki's Sorrow 14
- At that time, Krishna Vasudeva, adorned with all ornaments, [like those used
in auspicious ceremonies, like the offering of oblations, and the auspicious
reception of guests], came to Devaki Devi for obeisance. Then, Krishna Vasudeva
saw Devaki Devi, and after seeing her, he took her feet in his hands. Having
done so, he spoke to Devaki Devi as follows: "Mother! You are filled with joy
and happiness, [your mind is filled with bliss, you are experiencing the supreme
joy, and your heart is overflowing with love for me], when you see me. Mother!
Why are you filled with such sorrowful thoughts, [and why are you lamenting,
with your face in your palm, and your mind filled with grief]? Then, Devaki Devi
spoke to Krishna Vasudeva as follows: "My son! I have given birth to seven sons,
all of them equal in form, like Nalakubara, yet I have not experienced the joy
of even one's childhood. Even you, my son, come to me for obeisance after six
months. Therefore, I consider those mothers blessed..."  1. Sutra-5 of Chapter
3. 2. Sutra-12 of Chapter 3.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 tRtIya varga] [41 devakI kI putrAbhilASA . 13 - tae NaM tIse devaIe devIe ayaM
ajjhathie ciMtie patthie maNogae saMkappe samuppaNNe-evaM khalu ahaM sarisae
jAva nalakubbara-samANe satta putte payAyA, no ceva NaM mae egassa vi bAlattaNae
smnnubbhuue| esa vi ya NaM kaNhe vAsudeve chaNhaM-chaNhaM mAsANaM mamaM aMtiyaM
pAyavaMdae hvvmaagcchdd| taM dhaNNAo NaM tAo ammayAo, paNNao NaM tAo ammayAo.
kayapuNNAo NaM tAo ammayAo, kayalakkhaNAo NaM tAo ammayAo, jAsiM maNNe
Niyagakucchi -saMbhUyAI thaNaduddha-luddhayAI mahu rasamullAvAyAI mammaNa-
pa~japiyAI thaNa-mUlA kakkhadesabhAgaM abhisaramANAI muddhayAiM puNo ya komala-
kamalovamehiM gihiUNa ucchaMge NivesiyAI deMti samullAvae sumahure puNo-puNo
mNjulppbhnnie| ahaM NaM adhaNNA apuNNA akayapuNNA akayalakkhaNA etto
ekkataramavi Na pattA, ohaya jAva [maNasaMkappA karayalapalhatthamuhI
aTTajjhANevagayA] jhiyaayi| usa samaya devakI devI ko isa prakAra kA vicAra,
cintana aura abhilASApUrNa mAnasika saMkalpa utpanna huA ki aho ! maiMne
pUrNataH samAna AkRti vAle yAvat nalakUbara ke samAna sAta putroM ko janma diyA
para maiMne eka kI bhI bAlyakrIDA kA AnandAnubhava nahIM kiyaa| yaha kRSNa
vAsudeva bhI chaha-chaha mAsa ke anantara caraNa-vandana ke liye mere pAsa AtA
hai, ataH maiM mAnatI hU~ ki ve mAtAeM dhanya haiM, jinakI apanI kukSi se
utpanna hue, stana-pAna ke lobhI bAlaka, madhura AlApa karate hue, tutalAtI bolI
se manmana bolate hue jinake stanamUla kakSa-bhAga meM abhisaraNa karate haiM,
evaM phira una mugdha bAlakoM ko jo mAtAeM kamala ke samAna apane komala hAthoM
dvArA pakar3a kara goda meM biThAtI haiM aura apane bAlakoM se madhura-maMjula
zabdoM meM bAra bAra bAteM karatI haiN| maiM nizcitarUpeNa adhanya aura
puNyahIna hU~ kyoMki maiMne inameM se eka putra kI bhI bAlakrIDA nahIM dekhii|
isa prakAra devakI khinna mana se hathelI para mukha rakhakara (zoka-mudrA meM)
ArtadhyAna karane lgii| vivecana - prastuta sUtra meM sAta-sAta putroM kI mAtA
banane para bhI unakI bAlyakrIDA Adi se vaMcita devakI devI kI khinna avasthA-
vizeSa se uThane vAle saMkalpa-vikalpoM kA hRdaya-drAvaka citraNa prastuta kiyA
gayA hai| kRSNa dvArA cintAnivAraNa kA upAya 14 - imaM ca NaM kaNhe vAsudeve
NhAe jAva [kayabalikamme kayakouya-maMgala-pAyacchitte savvAlaMkAra ] vibhUsie
devaIe devIe pAyavaMdae hvvmaagcchi| tae NaM se kaNhe vAsudeve devaI deviM
pAsai, pAsittA devaIe devIe pAyaggahaNaM karer3a, karittA devaI deviM evaM
vayAsI _aNNayA NaM ammo! tubbhe mamaM pAsittA haTTatuTThA jAva [cittamANaMdiyA
pIimaNA paramasomaNassiyA harisavasa-visappamANahiyayA] bhavaha, kiNNaM ammo!
ajja tubbhe ohayamaNasaMkappA jAva [karayalapalhatthamuhI aTTajjhANovagayA ]
jhiyAyaha? tae NaM sA devaI devI kaNhaM vAsudevaM evaM vayAsI - evaM khalu ahaM
puttA! sarisae jAva' nalakubbarasamANe satta putte payAyA, no ceva NaM mae
egassa vi bAlattaNe annubhuue| tumaM pi ya NaM puttA! chaNhaM-chaNhaM mAsANaM
mama aMtiya pAyadae hvvmaagcchsi| taM dhaNNAo NaM tAo ammayAo jAva jhiyaami| 1.
varga 3 kA sUtra-5. 2. varga 3 kA sUtra-12

Page #83 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
English translation with Jain terms preserved:  "O Vasudeva! I, the Hariṇegameṣī
deva, have come here. That which you, O Devaṇupiya!, are holding the
Aṣṭamabhakta (eighth meal) in the Poṣadhashālā and remembering me in your mind,
I have come here for that purpose.   The Hariṇegameṣī deva sees that the seat of
Kṛṣṇa Vasudeva is shaking as the Aṣṭamabhakta is being consumed. Seeing the
shaking seat of the Hariṇegameṣī deva, he becomes thoughtful. This thought
arises in the Hariṇegameṣī deva's mind - 'Indeed, in the Jambūdvīpa, in the
Bhārata region, in the city of Vārāṇasī, in the Poṣadhashālā, the one named
Kṛṣṇa Vasudeva is holding the Aṣṭamabhakta and remembering me in his mind. It
would be good if he were to manifest before me.'  Thinking thus, he steps
towards the northwest direction, covers a distance of countless yojanas, and
adorns himself with various precious gems such as ratnas, vaiḍūryas, lohitākṣas,
musāragalvas, haṃsagarbhas, pulakas, saugandhikas, jyotirrasas, aṃkas, añjanas,
ratnyas, jāyarūpas, añjanapulayas, phalihās, and riṣṭhās. Holding these
extremely subtle substances, and feeling compassion towards Kṛṣṇa, he then
manifests in a magnificent celestial vehicle, adorned with the most excellent
jewels, emitting the sound of the celestial musical instruments, with a radiant
and spotless golden complexion, possessing unparalleled virtues that delight the
mind, with a charming and graceful appearance, with a face that emanates a
moonlike beauty, and with eyes that are a source of joy, resembling the full
moon, and with a divine fragrance that is pleasing to all. He appears like the
magnificent Mount Meru, wearing diverse celestial attires, surpassing the
innumerable names of the islands and oceans, illuminating the world with his
pure radiance, and approaches Kṛṣṇa Vasudeva in Vārāṇasī.  Then, the deva,
adorned with the ten-colored celestial garments, comes near Kṛṣṇa Vasudeva and
says, 'O Devaṇupiya! I, the Hariṇegameṣī deva, have come here. That which you
are holding the Aṣṭamabhakta in the Poṣadhashālā and remembering me in your
mind, I have come here for that purpose.'"

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 [ antakRddazA taNaM se kahe vAsudeve devaI deviM evaM vayAsI mA NaM tubbhe ammo
! ohayamaNasaMkappA jAva' jhiyaayh| ahaNNaM tahA jatissAmi jahA NaM mamaM
sahodare kaNIyase bhAue bhavissati tti kaTTu deva deviM tAhiM iTThAhiM vaggUhiM
samAsAsei  /  tao paDiNikkhamai, paDiNikkhamittA jeNeva posahasAlA teNeva
uvAgacchai, uvAgacchittA jahA abhao  /  navaraM hariNegamesissa aTThamabhattaM
pageNhai jAva [ pageNhaittA posahasAlAe posahie baMbhayArissa
ummukkamaNisuvaNNassa vavagayamAlAvannagavilevaNassa nikkhittasatthamusalassa
egassa abIyassa dabbhasaMthArovagayassa aTTamabhattaM parigiNhittA hariNegamesiM
devaM maNasi karemANe karemANe ciTThA  /  42] tae NaM tassa kaNhassa vAsudevassa
aTThamabhatte pariNamamANe hariNegamesissa devassa AsaNaM calai  /  tae NaM
hariNegamesI deveM AsaNaM caliyaM pAsai, pAsittA, ohiM pauMjati  /  tae NaM
tassa hariNegamesissa devassa ayameyArUve ajjhatthie ciMtie patthie maNogae
saMkappe samuppajjitthA - evaM khalu jaMbuddIve dIve bhArahe vAse bAravaI
nayarIe posahasAlAe kaNhe nAmaM vAsudeve aTThamabhattaM parigiNhittA NaM mama
maNasi karemANe karemANe ciTThai  /  taM seyaM khalu mama kaNhassa vAsudevassa
aMtie pAubbhavittae  /  evaM saMpehei, saMpehittA uttarapuracchimaM disIbhAgaM
avakkamati, avakkamittA viuvviyasamugdhAeNaM samohaNati, samohaNittA saMkhejjAI
joyaNAI daMDaM nisira  /  taM jahA (1) rayaNANaM, (2) vairANaM, (3) veruliyANaM,
(4) lohiyakkhANaM, (5) masAragallANaM, ( 6 ) haMsagabbhANaM, (7) pulagANaM, (8)
sogaMdhiyANaM (9) joirasANaM, (10) aMkANaM, (11) aMjaNANaM, (12) rayayANaM, (13)
jAyarUvANaM, (14) aMjaNapulayANaM, ( 15 ) phalihANaM, (16) riTThANaM ahAbAyare
poggale parisADer3a, parisADittA ahAsuhume poggale parigiNhatti, parigiNhaittA
kaNhamaNukaMpamANe deve tao vimANavarapuNDariyAo rayaNuttamAo
dharaNiyalagamaNaturiya-saMjaNitagayaNapayAro vAghuNNtivimalakaNagapayaragavaDiM
sagamauDukkaDADovadaMsiNijjo, aNegamaNi - kaNaga-rayaNa-
pahakaraparimaMDitabhatticittaviNiuttamaguNajaNiyaharise,
peMkholamANavaralalitakuMDalujja liyavayaNaguNajanitasomarUve, udito viva
komudInisAe saNiccharaMgAraujjaliyamajjhabhAgatthe NayaNANaMdo, sarayacaMdo,
divvosahipajjalujjaliyadaMsaNAbhirAmo uulacchi samattajAyasohe
paiTThagaMdhuddhyAbhirAmo meruriva nagavaro, viguvviyavicittavese,
dIvasamuddANaM asaMkhaparimANanAmadhejjANaM majjhaMkAreNaM vIiyavamANo,
ujjoyaMto pabhAe vimalAe jIvalogaM bArAvaI puravaraM ca kaNhassa ya tassa pAsaM
uvayai divvarUvadhArI  /  tae NaM se deve aMtalikkhapaDivanne dasaddhavannAI
sakhiMkhiNiyAiM pavaravatthAI parihie( ekko tAva eso gamo aNNe vi gamo - ) tao
ukkiTThAe turiyAe cavalAe caMDAe sIhAe uddhuyAe jaiNAe cheyAe divvAe devagatIe
jeNAmeva bAravaIe nayare posahasAlAe kaNhe vAsudeve teNAmeva uvAgacchai,
uvAgacchittA aMtalikkhapaDivanne dasaddhavannAiM sakhiMkhiNiyAiM pavaravatthAI
parihie- kaNhaM vAsudevaM evaM vayAsI "ahaM NaM devANuppiyA! hariNegamesI deve
mahiDDie, jaM NaM tumaM posahasAlAe aTThamabhattaM pagirihattA NaM mamaM maNasi
karemANe ciTThasi taM esa NaM devANuppiyA! ahaM ihaM havvamAgae  /  3. isI sUtra
meM Upara A gayA hai|

Page #84 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Third Class] [43 Sandisahi, O Devānuppeyā! What shall I do? What shall I give?
What shall I offer? Or what is your heart's desire?" . Then, that Kanha Vasudeva
saw that Harinegamesi Dev, who was like an ant, was passing by. Having seen him,
he offered him a seat, and having offered him a seat, he received him with
folded hands and said thus: "I desire, O Devānuppeyā! a younger brother, a
beloved one, who is separated." At that time, Shri Krishna Vasudeva, having
bathed, performed the bali-karma, performed auspicious rituals and atonement,
and adorned himself with clothes and ornaments, came quickly to pay his respects
to Devaki Mata. He, Krishna Vasudeva, saw Devaki Mata, and having seen her, he
bowed at her feet. Having bowed at her feet, he asked Devaki Devi thus: "O
Mother! Previously, whenever I came to pay my respects to you, you would be
overjoyed and delighted upon seeing me. But Mother! Why do you appear sad,
worried, and lost in thought today?" Upon being asked this question by Krishna,
Devaki Devi said to Krishna Vasudeva thus: "O Son! The truth is that I have
given birth to seven sons who are of the same form and appearance. But I have
not enjoyed the pleasure of their childhood or their childish play. Son! You
also come to pay your respects to me at intervals of six months. Therefore, I am
thinking that those mothers are blessed and virtuous who breastfeed their
children, engage in sweet conversation with them, and experience the joy of
their childish play. I am unfortunate and without merit. Thinking all this, I am
sad and lost in thought." Hearing his mother's words, Shri Krishna Vasudeva said
to Devaki Maharani thus: "Mother! Do not be sad or worried and lost in thought.
I will make an effort so that a younger brother of mine will be born." Saying
this, Shri Krishna comforted and reassured his mother with kind, pleasant, and
pleasing words. Having reassured his mother, Shri Krishna left his mother's
palace and went to the place where the dispensary was. Having arrived there, he
performed the Ashtama-bhakta tapa (fasting) just as Abhayakumar had done to
worship his friend Dev. In particular, he worshipped Harinegamesi Dev. He
performed the Ashtama-bhakta tapa, and having performed it, he stayed in the
dispensary, taking medicine, observing celibacy, renouncing ornaments of gems
and gold, renouncing garlands, dyes, and ointments, renouncing weapons, maces,
etc., i.e., all beginnings and initiations, and becoming solitary, he sat on a
dais of sand and performed the tapa of fasting, constantly thinking of
Harinegamesi Dev in his mind. Then, as Krishna Vasudeva's Ashtama-bhakta tapa
was about to be completed, the seat of Harinegamesi Dev moved. Seeing his seat
moving, he used his knowledge of intuition. Then, Harinegamesi Dev had this
inner thought: "In the island called Jambudvipa, in Bharatavarsha, in the
southern part of Bharat, in the city of Dwaraka, in the dispensary, Krishna
Vasudeva is performing the Ashtama-bhakta tapa and constantly remembering me in
his mind. Therefore, it is appropriate for me to appear (go) near Krishna
Vasudeva." Thinking this, the Dev went in the northeast direction (Ishaan kona)
and performed the Vaikriya-samudghāt.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 tRtIya varga] [43 saMdisAhi NaM devANuppiyA! kiM karemi? kiM dalAmi? kiM
payacchAmi? kiM vA te hiy-icchitN|" . tae NaM se kaNhe vAsudeve taM
hariNegamesiM devaM aMtilikkhapaDivannaM pAsai, pAsittA haTThatuDhe posahaM
pArei, pArittA karayalapariggahiyaM] aMjaliM kaTTha evaM vayAsI icchAmi NaM
devANuppiyA! sahodaraM kaNIyasaM bhAuyaM vidinnnnN| usI samaya vahAM zrIkRSNa
vAsudeva snAna kara, balikarma kara, kautuka-maMgala aura prAyazcitta kara,
vastrAlaMkAroM se vibhUSita hokara devakI mAtA ke caraNa-vaMdana ke liye
zIghratApUrvaka aaye| ve kRSNa vAsudeva devakI mAtA ke darzana karate haiM,
darzana kara devakI ke caraNoM meM vaMdana karate haiN| caraNavandana kara
devakI devI se isa prakAra pUchane lage "he mAtA! pahale to maiM jaba-jaba Apake
caraNa-vandana ke liye AtA thA, taba-taba Apa mujhe dekhate hI hRSTa tuSTa yAvat
AnaMdita ho jAtI thIM, para mA~! Aja Apa udAsa, cintita yAvat ArtadhyAna meM
nimagna-sI kyoM dikha rahI ho?" kRSNa dvArA isa prakAra kA prazna kiye jAne para
devakI devI kRSNa vAsudeva se isa prakAra kahane lagI- he putra! vastutaH bAta
yaha hai ki maiMne samAna AkRti yAvat samAna rUpa vAle sAta putroM ko janma
diyaa| para maiMne unameM se kisI eka ke bhI bAlyakAla athavA bAla lIlA kA sukha
nahIM bhogaa| putra ! tuma bhI chaha chaha mahInoM ke antara se mere pAsa
caraNa-vaMdana ke liye Ate ho| ata: maiM aisA soca rahI hU~ ki ve mAtAeM dhanya
haiM, puNyazAlinI haiM jo apanI santAna ko stanapAna karAtI haiM, yAvat unake
sAtha madhura AlApa-saMlApa karatI haiM, aura unakI bAlakrIDA ke Ananda kA
anubhava karatI haiN| maiM adhanya hU~ akRtapuNya huuN| yahI saba socatI huI
maiM udAsIna hokara isa prakAra kA ArtadhyAna kara rahI huuN| mAtA kI yaha bAta
sunakara zrIkRSNa vAsudeva devakI mahArAnI se isa prakAra bole -"mAtAjI! Apa
udAsa athavA cintita hokara ArtadhyAna mata kro| maiM aisA prayatna karUMgA
jisase merA eka sahodara choTA bhAI utpanna ho|" isa prakAra kaha kara zrIkRSNa
ne devakI mAtA ko iSTa, kAnta, priya, manojJa vacanoM dvArA dhairya baMdhAyA,
Azvasta kiyaa| isa prakAra apanI mAtA ko Azvasta kara zrIkRSNa apanI mAtA ke
prAsAda se nikale, nikalakara jahAM pauSadhazAlA thI vahAM aaye| Akara jisa
prakAra abhayakumAra ne aSTamabhakta tapa (telA) svIkAra karake apane mitra deva
kI ArAdhAnA kI thI, usI prakAra zrIkRSNa vAsudeva ne bhI kii| vizeSatA yaha ki
inhoMne hariNaigameSI deva kI ArAdhanA kii| ArAdhanA meM aSTama bhakta tapa
grahaNa kiyA, grahaNa karake pauSadhazAlA meM pauSadhayukta hokara, brahmacarya
aMgIkAra karake, maNi-suvarNa Adi ke alaMkAroM kA tyAga karake, mAlA, varNaka
aura vilepana kA tyAga, karake, zastra-mUsala Adi arthAt samasta Arambha-
samArambha ko chor3akara ekAkI hokara, DAbha ke saMthAre para sthita hokara,
telA kI tapasyA grahaNa karake, hariNaigameSI deva kA mana meM punaH punaH
cintana karane lge| tatpazcAt kRSNa vAsudeva kA aSTama bhakta tapa prAyaH pUrNa
hone AyA, taba hariNaigameSI deva kA Asana calAyamAna huaa| apane Asana ko
calita huA dekhakara usane avadhijJAna kA upayoga lgaayaa| taba hariNaigameSI
deva ko isa prakAra kA yaha Antarika vicAra utpanna hotA hai - "jambUdvIpa
nAmaka dvIpa meM, bhAratavarSa meM dakSiNArdha bharata meM dvArakA nagarI meM,
pauSadhazAlA meM, kRSNa vAsudeva aSTamabhakta grahaNa karake mana meM punaH
punaH merA smaraNa kara rahA hai, ataeva mujhe kRSNa vAsudeva ke samIpa prakaTa
honA (jAnA) yogya hai|" deva isa prakAra vicAra karake uttarapUrva digbhAga
(IzAna koNa) meM jAtA hai aura vaikriyasamudghAta karatA hai

Page #85 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[44] Antakruddasha, meaning the one who creates the Uttar Vaikriya body,
extracts the Jiva-pradeshas to create a body of countless yojanas. He does so by
discarding the non-essential pudgalas of the following gems: (1) Karketaan
Ratna, (2) Vajra Ratna, (3) Vaidurya Ratna, (4) Lohitaksha Ratna, (5)
Masaragalla Ratna, (6) Hansagarbha Ratna, (7) Pulaka Ratna, (8) Saugandhika
Ratna, (9) Jyotir-asa Ratna, (10) Anka Ratna, (11) Anjana Ratna, (12) Rajata
Ratna, (13) Jatarupa Ratna, (14) Anjanapulaka Ratna, (15) Sphatika Ratna, (16)
Ristha Ratna, and then absorbing the essential pudgalas. After absorbing them,
he creates the Uttar Vaikriya body. Then, out of compassion for Krishna
Vasudeva, the deva, with his superior celestial vehicle made of gems, quickly
moved towards the earth. At that time, he appeared magnificent with his pure
gold-like ears, camphor, and a magnificent crown. He was adorned with a
beautiful belt made of various gems, gold, and jewels, which filled him with
joy. His bright face was illuminated by his beautiful, moving earrings, making
his appearance very gentle. He was like the full moon of the Kartik Purnima
night, situated between Shani and Mangal, giving joy to the eyes of the viewers.
In other words, his face, illuminated like the autumn moon, was situated between
his two shining earrings, which were like the planets Shani and Mangal. He was
radiant with the brilliance of his crown and other ornaments, like the light of
divine herbs. He was beautiful in form, adorned with the wealth of all seasons,
and fragrant like the Meru mountain, making him appear very charming. The deva
assumed this unique form. He traveled through countless islands and oceans,
illuminating the Jiva-loka and the city of Dwaraka with his pure radiance. The
deva, in his divine form, reached Krishna Vasudeva.  Then, the deva, wearing a
fine garment of five colors and bells, stood in the sky and spoke to Krishna
Vasudeva. [This is one version of the text. Another version is as follows:] The
deva, with his excellent speed, agility, and strength, victorious over his
enemies, skilled, and with divine speed, arrived at Jambudvipa, Bharatavarsha,
and the southern part of Bharat. He stood in the sky, wearing a fine garment of
five colors and bells, and spoke to Krishna Vasudeva. "O beloved of the devas! I
am the great, powerful Harinaigameshi deva. Because you, while in the
dispensary, took the eighth vow of devotion, keeping me in your mind, I have
come here quickly. O beloved of the devas! Tell me, what can I do for you? What
can I give you? What can I give to any of your relatives? What is your heart's
desire?" Then, Krishna Vasudeva saw the Harinaigameshi deva standing in the sky,
and seeing him, he was delighted. He completed the offering of the medicine,
then joined his hands above his head and said, "O beloved of the devas! My wish
is that my younger brother be born."

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 44] [antakRddazA arthAt uttara vaikriya zarIra banAne ke liye jIva-pradezoM ko
bAhara nikAlatA hai| jIva-pradezoM ko bAhara nikAlakara saMkhyAta yojana kA
daMDa banAtA hai| vaha isa prakAra -(1) karketana ratna, (2) vajra ratna, (3)
vaiDUrya ratna, (4) lohitAkSa ratna, (5) masAragalla ratna, (6) haMsagarbha
ratna, (7) pulaka ratna, (8) saugaMdhika ratna, (9) jyotirasa ratna, (10) aMka
ratna, (11) aMjana ratna, (12) rajata ratna, (13) jAtarUpa ratna, (14)
aMjanapulaka ratna, (15) sphaTika ratna, (16) riSTa ratna - ina ratnoM ke
yathAbAdara arthAt asAra pudgaloM kA tyAga karatA hai aura yathAsUkSma arthAt
sArabhUta pudgaloM ko grahaNa karatA hai| grahaNa karake (uttara vaikriya zarIra
banAtA hai) phira kRSNa vAsudeva para anukaMpA karate hue usa deva ne apane
ratnoM ke uttama vimAna se nikalakara pRthvItala para jAne ke liye zIghra hI
gati kA pracAra kiyA, arthAt vaha zIghratApUrvaka cala pdd'aa| usa samaya
calAyamAna hote hae nirmala svarNa ke pratara jaise karNapUra aura mukuTa ke
utkaTa ADambara se vaha darzanIya laga rahA thaa| aneka maNiyoM, suvarNa aura
ratnoM ke samUha se zobhita aura vicitra racanA vAle pahane hue kaTisUtra se use
harSa utpanna ho rahA thaa| hilate hue zreSTha aura manohara kuMDaloM se ujjvala
mukha kI dIpti se usakA rUpa bar3A hI saumya ho gyaa| kArtikI pUrNimA kI rAtri
meM, zani aura maMgala ke madhya meM sthita aura udayaprApta zArada-nizAkara ke
samAna vaha deva darzakoM ke nayanoM ko Ananda de rahA thaa| tAtparya yaha hai
ki zani aura maMgala graha ke samAna camakate hue donoM kuNDaloM ke bIca meM
usakA mukha zarada Rtu ke candramA ke samAna zobhAyamAna ho rahA thaa| divya
oSadhiyoM (jar3I-bUTiyoM) ke prakAza ke samAna mukuTa Adi ke teja se
dedIpyamAna, rUpa meM manohara, samasta RtuoM kI lakSmI se vRddhiMgata zobhAvAle
tathA prakRSTa gaMdha ke prasAra se manohara meru parvata ke samAna vaha deva
abhirAma pratIta hotA thaa| usa deva ne aise vicitra veSa kI vikriyA kii| vaha
asaMkhya-saMkhyaka aura asaMkhya nAmoM vAle dvIpoM aura samudroM ke madhya meM
hokara jAne lgaa| apanI vimala prabhA se jIvaloka ko tathA nagaravara dvArakA
nagarI ko prakAzita karatA huA divya rUpadhArI deva kRSNa vAsudeva ke pAsa A
phuNcaa| tatpazcAt daza ke Adhe arthAt pA~ca varNavAle tathA dhuMgharUvAle
uttama vastroM ko dhAraNa kiyA huA vaha deva AkAza meM sthita hokara [kRSNa
vAsudeva se isa prakAra bolA -(yaha eka prakAra kA gama (pATha) haiN| isake
sthAna para dUsarA bhI pATha hai jo isa prakAra hai -] vaha deva utkRSTa
tvarAvAlI, kAyika capalatA vAlI, ati utkarSa ke kAraNa uddhRta, zatru ko jItane
vAlI hone se jaya karane vAlI, nipuNatA vAlI aura divya devagati se jahA~
jaMbUdvIpa thA, jahA~ bhAratavarSa thA aura jahA~ dakSiNArdha bharata thA, vahIM
AtA hai, Akara ke AkAza meM sthita hokara pA~ca varNavAle evaM dhuMgharUvAle
uttama vastroM ko dhAraNa kiye hue vaha deva kRSNa vAsudeva se isa prakAra
kahane lagA - he devAnupriye ! maiM mahAn RddhidhAraka hariNaigameSI deva huuN|
kyoMki tuma pauSadhazAlA meM aSTama bhakta tapa grahaNa karake mujhe mana meM
rakhakara sthita ho, isa kAraNa he devAnupriya! maiM zIghra yahA~ AyA huuN| he
devAnupriya! batAo tumhArA kyA iSTa kArya karU~? tumheM kyA dU~? tumhAre kisI
sambandhI ko kyA dU~? tumhArA manovAMchita kyA hai? tatpazcAt kRSNa vAsudeva ne
AkAzasthita usa hariNaigameSI deva ko dekhA, aura dekhakara vaha hRSTa tuSTa
huaa| pauSadha ko pAlA-pUrNa kiyA, phira donoM hAtha mastaka para jor3akara isa
prakAra kahA he devAnupriya! mere eka sahodara laghubhrAtA kA janma ho, yaha
merI icchA hai|

Page #86 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
English Translation (preserving Jain terms):  [Third Canto] [45] Assurance to
Devaki Devi 15 - Then that Harinegamesi said to Kanha Vasudeva thus: "O
Devanappriya! Your younger brother will be born in the divine world. He, after
passing the childhood stage, will attain the age of youth, and then, having
become a monk, will renounce the household life and take up the ascetic life.
Tell Kanha Vasudeva this again and again, and after saying this, he went back in
the same direction from which he had appeared.  Then that Kanha Vasudeva
returned from the Posadha-sala, went to where Devaki Devi was, and after paying
obeisance to Devaki Devi, spoke thus: "O mother! My younger brother will be
born. Now do not worry. Your desire will be fulfilled." After saying this, he
assured Devaki Devi with sweet, desirable, beloved, and pleasant words, and then
went back in the same direction from which he had appeared.  Explanation - The
pleased Harinegamesi Deva gives the assurance to Shri Krishna of the birth of
his younger brother, but also informs him of the latter's renunciation. Shri
Krishna goes to Devaki Devi and conveys the news of the fulfillment of this
task. The present sutra mentions the assurance given by Krishna to Devaki Devi.
16 - Then that Devaki Devi, in that excellent, beautiful, and charming abode -
inside, engaged in meditational activities; outside, on the well-plastered and
decorated floor, on the variegated and splendid terrace, in the jewel-and-gem-
bedecked darkness, in the well-divided and spacious area, in the midst of the
fragrant and colorful flowers, in the pleasant fragrance of excellent aloe,
sandalwood, and camphor, in the delightful scent, in the fragrant atmosphere, on
the couch adorned with embracing, on both sides elevated, in the middle deep, on
the sand-covered bank of the Ganga, under the shade of the fine, soft, and
delicate cloth, on the excellent, comfortable bed, covered with red silk,
beautiful, with the touch of fresh butter, oil, and cotton - in that excellent,
fragrant abode...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 tRtIya varga] [45 devakI devI ko AzvAsana 15 - tae NaM se hariNegamesI kaNhaM
vAsudevaM evaM vayAsI - hohii NaM devANuppiyA! tava devaloyacue sahodare
kaNIyase bhaaue| se NaM ummukka jAva [bAlabhAve viNNaya-pariNayamette jovvaNaga]
maNupatte arahao ariTThaNemissa aMtiyaM muMDe jAva [ bhavittA AgArAo aNagAriyaM]
pvvissi| kaNhaM vAsudevaM doccaM pi taccaM pi evaM vadaha, vadittA jAmeva disaM
pAubbhUe tAmeva disaM pddige| tae NaM se kaNhe vAsudeve posahasAlAo
paDiNivattai, paDiNivattittA jeNeva devaI devI teNeva uvAgacchai, uvAgacchittA
devaIe devIe pAyaggahaNaM karei, karettA evaM vayAsI hohii NaM ammo! mama
sahodare kaNIyase bhAue tti kaTu devaiM deviM tAhiM iTThAhiM jAva [kaMtAhiM
piyAhiM maNNuNAhiM vaggUhiM ] AsAsei, AsAsittA jAmeva disaM pAunbhUe tAmeva
disaM pddige| taba hariNaigameSI deva zrIkRSNa vAsudeva se isa prakAra bolA -
"he devAnupriya! devaloka kA eka deva vahA~ kA AyuSya pUrNa hone para devaloka
se cyuta hokara Apake sahodara choTe bhAI ke rUpa meM janma legA aura isa taraha
ApakA manoratha avazya pUrNa hogA, para vaha bAlyakAla bItane para, vijJa aura
pariNata hokara yuvAvasthA prApta hone para bhagavAn zrI ariSTanemi ke pAsa
muNDita hokara zramaNadIkSA grahaNa kregaa|" zrIkRSNa vAsudeva ko usa deva ne
dUsarI bAra, tIsarI bAra bhI yahI kahA aura yaha kahane ke pazcAt jisa dizA se
AyA thA usI meM lauTa gyaa| isake pazcAt zrIkRSNa-vAsudeva pauSadhazAlA se
nikale , nikalakara devakI mAtA ke pAsa Aye, Akara devakI devI kA caraNa-vaMdana
kiyA, caraNa-vaMdana kara ve mAtA se isa prakAra bole he mAtA! merA eka sahodara
choTA bhAI hogaa| aba Apa ciMtA na kreN| ApakI icchA pUrNa hogii| aisA kaha
karake unhoMne devakI mAtA ko madhura evaM iSTa, kAMta, priya, manojJa vacanoM
dvArA Azvasta kiyaa| Azvasta karakeM jisa dizA meM prAdurbhUta - prakaTa hue the
usI dizA meM lauTa gye| vivecana - prasanna huA hariNaigameSI deva zrIkRSNa ko
unake sahodara bhAI hone kA AzvAsana detA hai paraMtu sAtha hI usake dIkSita ho
jAne kA sUcana bhI karatA hai| zrIkRSNa mAtA devakI ke pAsa jAkara isa kArya-
siddhi kI sUcanA dete haiN| prastuta sUtra meM kRSNa dvArA devakI devI ko
AzvAsana dene kA ullekha kiyA gayA hai| gajasukumAra kA janma 16 - tae NaM sA
devaI devI aNNayA kayAiM taMsi tArisagaMsi jAva [vAsagharaMsi abhitarao
saMcittakamme, bAhirao dUmiya-ghaTThamaDhe, vicittaulloya-cilliyatale, maNi-
rayaNapaNAsiyaMdhayAre, bahusama-suvibhattadesabhAe, paMcavaNNa-sarasa-
surabhimukka-pupphapuMjovayArakalie, kAlAgurupavara-kuMdurukkaturukka-
dhUvamaghamaghaMtagaMdhuddhayAbhirAme, sugaMdhivaragaMdhie, gaMdhavaTTibhUe,
taMsi tArisagaMsi sayaNijasi sAliMgaNavaTTie, ubhaovibboyaNe, duhao uNNae, majhe
Naya-gaMbhIre, gaMgA-puliNa-vAluya-uddAla-sAlisae, uvaciya-khomiya-dugullapaTTa
paDicchAyaNe, suviraiyarayattANe, rattaMsuya-saMvue, suramme, AiNaga-ruya-bUra-
NavaNIya-tUlaphAse, sugaMdha-varakusuma

Page #87 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Here is the English translation, preserving the Jain terms:  The Devī (celestial
queen) had a wonderful, auspicious, blessed, and magnificent dream. She saw in
the dream a lion-like figure with the following characteristics:  It had a face
that was charming, beautiful, and delightful, with a gentle, soft, and delicate
tongue like a lotus petal. Its eyes were wide, large, and pure like lightning.
It had a broad chest, well-developed shoulders, and a body with fine, delicate,
and praiseworthy features. Its hair was beautifully arranged, and its tail was
gracefully curved. It had a moon-like appearance, was playful and yawning, and
was reclining comfortably.  After seeing this magnificent dream, the Devī was
delighted and overjoyed. She carefully grasped the dream, recollected it, and
then approached King Vāsudeva with the dream, addressing him with sweet,
pleasant, and auspicious words.  The king, upon hearing the description of the
dream, was also delighted and overjoyed. He carefully grasped the meaning of the
dream through his own innate wisdom and understanding.  The king then told the
Devī that the dream was auspicious, indicating the birth of a child who would be
charming, beautiful, blessed, and a source of joy, prosperity, and well-being.
The child would be the pride, glory, and support of the family, and would bring
happiness and fame to the lineage.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 [antakRddazA cuNNa-sayaNovayArakalie, addharattakAlasamayaMsi sutta-jAgarA
ohIramANI ohIramANI ayameyArUvaM orAlaM, kallANaM, sivaM, dhaNNaM, maMgallaM
sassiriyaM mahAsuviNaM pAsittA NaM pddibuddhaa| hAra- rayaya-khIrasAgara-
sasaMkakiraNa-dagaraya-rayayamahasila-paMDurataroruramaNijjapecchaNijjaM,
thiralaTTha-pauTTha-vaTTa-pIvara-susiliTThavisiTTha-tikkhadADhAviDaMbiyamuhaM,
parikammiyajaccakamalakomala-mAiasobhaMtalaTThauTheM,
rattuppalapattamauasukumAlatAlujIhaM, mUsagayapavarakaNagatAviyaAvattAyaMta-va-
taDivimalasarisaNayaNaM, visAlapIvaroLaM, paDipuNNavipula-khaMdhaM,
miusivisayasuhuma-lakkhaNa-pasatthavicchiNNa-kesarasaDovasobhiyaM, Usiya-
suNimmiya-sujAyaapphoDiyalaMgUlaM, somaM, somAkAraM, lIlAyaMtaM, jaMbhAyaMtaM,
NahayalAo ovayamANaM NiyayavayaNamaDavayaMtaM], sIhaM saviNe pAsittA pddibddhaa|
jAva [tae NaM sA devaI devI ayameyArUvaM orAlaM jAva-sassiriyaM mahAsuviNaM
pAsittA NaM paDibaddhA samANI haTThataTTha jAva hiyayA dhArAhayakalaMbapuNphagaM
piva samUsiyaromakUvA taM suviNaM ogiNhai, ogiNhittA sayaNijjAo abbhuDhei,
abbhuTThittA aturiyamacavalamasaMbhatAe avilaMbiyAe rAyahaMsasarisIe gaIe jeNeva
vasudevassa raNNo sayaNijje teNeva uvAgacchai, uvAgacchittA vasudevarAyaM tAhiM,
iTThAhiM kaMtAhi, piyAhiM, maNuNNAhiM maNAmAhiM orAlAhiM kallANAhiM sivAhiM
dhaNNAhiM maMgallAhiM sassirIyAhiM miya-mahura-maMjulAhiM girAhiM saMlavamANI
saMlavamANI paDibohei, paDibohittA vasudeveNaM abbhaNuNNAyA samANI
NANAmaNirayaNabhatticittaMsi bhaddAsaNaMsi NisIyai NisIittA AsatthA vIsatthA
suhAsaNavaragayA vasudevaM rAyaM tAhiMiTThAhiM kaMtAhiM jAva-saMlavamANI
saMlavamANI evaM vayAsI evaM khalu ahaM devANuppiyA! ajja taMsi tArisagaMsi
sayaNijaMsi sAliMgaNa0 taM ceva jAva NiyagavayaNamaivayaMtaM sIhaM suviNe
pAsittA NaM paDibuddhA, taNNaM devANuppiyA! eyassa orAlassa jAva mahAsaviNassa
ke maNNe kallANe phalavittivisese bhavissaDa? tae NaM se vasudeve rAyA devaIe
devIe aMtiyaM eyamalaiM soccA Nisamma haTThatuTTha0 jAva hayahiyae
dhArAhayaNIvasurabhikusumacaMcumAlaiyataNuya-UsaviyaromakUve taM suviNaM
ogiNhai, ogiNhittA IhaM pavisai, IhaM pavisittA appaNo sAbhAvieNaM maipuvvaeNaM
buddhiviNNANeNaM tassa suviNassa atthoggahaNaM karei tassa0 devaiM deviM tAhiM
iTThAhiM kaMtAhiM jAva maMgallAhiM miya-mahura-sassiri0 saMlavamANe saMlavamANe
evaM vayAsI orAle NaM tume devI! suviNe diDhe, kallANe NaM tume jAva sassirIe
NaM tume devI! suviNe diDhe, Arogga-tuTThidIhAu-kallANa-maMgallakArae NaM tume
devI! suviNe diDhe, atthalAbho devANuppie! bhogalAbho devANuppie! puttalAbho
devANuppie! rajjalAbho devANuppie! evaM khalu tumaM devANuppie! NavaNhaM mAsANaM
bahupaDipuNNANaM addhaTThamANarAiMdiyANaM viikkaMtANaM amhaM kulakeuM,
kuladIvaM, kulapavvayaM, kulavaDeMsayaM, kulatilagaM kulakittikaraM,
kulaNaMdikaraM, kulajasakaraM, kulAdhAraM, kulApAyavaM, kulavivaddhaNakara,
sukumAlapANi-pAyaM, ahINapaDipuNNapaMciMdiyasarIraM, jAva sasisomAkAraM, kaMtaM,
piyadaMsaNaM, surUvaM, devakumArasamappabhaM dAragaM pyaahisi| se vi ya NaM
dArae ummukkabAlabhAve viNNAyapariNayamitte jovaNagamaNupatte sUre vIre vikkaMte
vitthiNNa-viula-bala-vAhaNe rajjavaI rAyA bhvissi| taM urAle NaM tume jAva
sumiNe

Page #88 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Third Class] [47] "O Devi! You have seen a good dream. Tell us about it in
detail." The Devi, the queen of Vasudeva, thought about it for a while and then
said, "This dream is auspicious! This dream is auspicious! This dream is very
auspicious! This dream is fulfilled! This dream is desired! This dream is
received! This dream is desired and received! This is what I saw in my dream."
She accepted the dream completely. After accepting it, she got up from her bed,
adorned with precious jewels and adorned with the best clothes, and went to the
place where Vasudeva, the king, was. After reaching there, she sat down on a
comfortable seat and said, "May this auspicious dream, which I saw on this
excellent bed, not be destroyed by other dreams." She stayed awake, remembering
the dream, and enjoyed the auspiciousness of the dream, along with the blessings
of the gods, the gurus, the good people, and the righteous. 1 King Vasudeva, at
the time of the afternoon, called the astrologer. After calling him, he said, "O
astrologer! Please interpret this dream, which is auspicious and full of good
omens, and which has many auspicious signs." The astrologer, after hearing this,
immediately left the king's palace and went to the place where the dream
interpreters lived. After reaching there, he quickly went to the dream
interpreters and told them about the dream. The dream interpreters, after
hearing the king's message, got up from their seats, happy and excited, and went
to their homes, adorned with auspicious signs of victory and success. After
reaching their homes, they went to the king's palace and praised Vasudeva with
victory and joy. The dream interpreters, after being praised and honored by the
king, sat down on comfortable seats in the front of the palace. The king then
placed the Devi in a comfortable place and, with flowers and fruits in his
hands, asked the dream interpreters, "O astrologer! What will be the result of
this dream, which the Devi saw in her dream last night in her palace?" The dream
interpreters, after thinking about it for a while, accepted the dream and went
to the place where the dream was interpreted. After reaching there, they
interpreted the meaning of the dream, discussed it with each other, and then,
after understanding the meaning of the dream, they told the king, "O king! We
have seen 82 dreams, 30 great dreams, and 22 all-encompassing dreams. Of these
30 great dreams, 14 dreams were seen by the Devi, who was pregnant with a son or
a daughter. These dreams are: - Going, riding, lion, coronation, garland, moon,
sun, fire, pot, lotus, ocean, flying chariot, palace, and a mountain of jewels.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 tRtIya varga ] [ 47 diTThe, AroggatuTThi, jAva maMgalakArae NaM tume devI!
suviNe diTThe tti kaTTu bhujjo bhujjo aNuvUhe  /  devaI devI vasudevassa raNNo
aMtiyaM eyamaTThe soccA Nisamma haTThatuTTha0 karayala0 jAva evaM vayAsI - "
evameyaM devANuppiyA ! tahameyaM devANuppiyA! avitahameyaM devANuppiyA !
asaMdiddhameyaM devANuppiyA ! icchiyameyaM devANuppiyA! paDicchimeyaM
devANuppiyA ! icchiyapaDicchiyameyaM devANuppiyA! sa jaheyaM tujjhe vayaha" tti
kaTTu taM suviNaM sammaM paDicchai, paDicchittA vasudeveNaM raNNA abbhaNuNNAyA
samANI NANAmaNi- rayaNabhatticittAo bhaddAsaNAo abbhuTTei, abbhuTThittA
aturiyamacavala jAva gaIe jeNeva sae sayaNijje teNeva uvAgacchai, teNeva
uvAgacchittA sayaNijjaMsi NisIyai, NisIittA evaM vayAsI - " mA me se uttame
pahANe maMgalle suviNe aNNehiM pAvasuviNehiM paDihammissai" tti kaTTu deva
gurujaNasaMbaddhAhiM pasatthAhiM maMgallAhiM dhammiyAhiM kahAhiM suviNajAgarayaM
paDijAgaramANI paDijAgaramANI viharai  /  1 taNaM vasudeve rAyA
paccUsakAlasamayaMsi koDuMbiyapurise saddAvei, saddAvettA evaM vayAsI"
khippAmeva bho devANuppiyA! aTThaM gamahANimitta-suttatthadhArae, vivihasatthaku
sale, suviNalakkhaNapAThae saddAveha  / " tae NaM te koDuMbiyapurisA jAva
paDisuNittA vasudevassa raNo aMtiyAo paDiNikkhamaMti paDiNikkhamittA sigghaM
turiyaM cavalaM caMDaM veiyaM jeNeva suviNalakkhaNapADhagANaM gihAI teNeva
uvAgacchaMti teNeva uvAgacchittA te suviNalakkhaNapADhae saddAveMti  /  tae NaM
te suviNalakkhaNapADhagA vasudevassa raNNo koDuMbiyapurisehiM saddAviyA samANA
haTThatuTTha0 NhAyA kaya0 jAva sarIrA siddhatthaga-hariyAliyakayamaMgalamuddhANA
saehiM saehiM gehehiMto NiggacchaMti, NiggacchittA jeNeva kaNhassa raNo
bhavaNavaravaDeMsae teNeva uvAgacchaMti, uvAgacchittA karayala vasudevaM jaeNaM
vijaeNaM vaddhAveMti  /  tae NaM te suviNalakkhaNapADhagA vasudeveNaM raNNA
vaMdiya-pUia - sakkAria - sammANiA samANA patteyaM patteyaM puvvaNNatthesu
bhaddAsaNesu NisIyaMti  /  tae NaM se vasudeve rAyA devanaM deviM
javaNiyaMtariyaM ThAvei, ThAvettA puppa - phala paDipuNNahatthe pareNaM viNaNaM
te suviNalakkhaNapAThae evaM vayAsI - " evaM khalu devANuppiyA! devaI devI ajja
taMsi tArisagaMsi vAsagharaMsi jAva sIhaM suviNe pAsittA NaM paDibuddhA, taNNaM
devANuppiyA ! eyassa orAlassa jAva ke maNNe kallANe phalavittivisese bhavissai ?
tae NaM suviNalakkhaNapADhagA vasudevassa raNNo aMtiyaM eyamaThThe soccA Nisamma
haTTatuTTa0 taM suviNaM ogiNhaMti, ogiNhittA IhaM aNuppavisaMti, aNuppavisittA
tassa suviNassa atthoggahaNaM kareMti, tassa0 aNNamaNNeNaM saddhiM saMcAleMti,
saMcAlittA tassa suviNassa laddhaTThA gahiyaTThA pucchiyaTThA viNicchiyaTThA
abhigayaTThA vasudevassa raNNo purao suviNasatthAiM uccAremANA uccAremANA evaM
vayAsi " evaM khalu devANuppiyA! amhaM suviNasatthaMsi bAyAlIsaM suviNA, tIsaM
mahAsuviNA, bAvantariM savvasuviNA ditttthaa| tattha NaM devANuppiyA !
titthayaramAyaro vA cakkavaTTimAyaro vA tithayaraMsi vA cakkavaTTiMsi vA gabbhaM
vakkamamANaMsi eesiM tIsAe mahAsuviNANaM ime coddasa mahAsuviNe pAsittA NaM
paDibujjhati  /  taM jahA gaya-vasaha-sIha-abhiseya-dAma-sasi-diNayaraM jhayaM
kuMbhaM  /  paumasara-sAgara-vimANa-bhavaNa- rayaNuccaya-sihiM ca  //

Page #89 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Antakrddasa Vasudeva-mayaro va Vasudeva-msi gabbham vakkamanamsi eesim
chouddasanham mahasu-vinananam annayare satta mahasu-vine pasittana padi-
buddhanti. Baladeva-mayaro va Baladeva-msi gabbham vakkamanamsi eesim
chouddasanham mahasu-vinananam annayare chattari mahasu-vine pasittana padi-
buddhanti. Mandaliya-mayaro va Mandaliya-msi gabbham vakkamanamsi eesim
chouddasanham mahasu-vinananam annayare egam mahasu-vinam pasittana padi-
buddhanti. Ime ya nam devanuppiya! Devadiya deviya ege mahasu-vine diddhe, javam
arogga-tutthi-javam mangallakare nam devanuppiya! Devadiya deviya su-vine
diddhe, attha-labho devanuppiya! Bhoga-labho devanuppiya! Putta-labho
devanuppiya! Rajja-labho devanuppiya! Evam khalu devanuppiya! Devadi devi
navannham masanam bahu-padi-punnananam javam vii-kkantanam tumham kula-keum
javam payahiti. Se vi ya nam darake ummukkabala-bhave javam rajja-vadi raja
bhavissadi, anagare va bhaviya-ppa. Tam orale nam devanuppiya! Devadiya deviya
su-vine diddhe, javam arogga-tutthi-diha-aua-kallana-javam diddhe.  Tae nam se
Vasudeva-raja su-vina-lakkhana-padhagana-antie eyam-attham soccna nisamma
hatthatuttho kariyala javam kattu te su-vina-lakkhana-padhage evam vayasi -
"Evam-eyanam devanuppiya! javam se jaheyam tumhe vayaha" ti kattu su-vinam samma
padi-cchadi, padi-cchittana su-vina-lakkhana-padhaya viulena asana-pana-khaina-
saima-puppha-vattha-gandha-mallalankarenam sakkaredi, sammandedi, sakkarittha,
sammandittana viulam jiviya-arihim pidi-danam dalayadi, dalayittana padi-
visajjedi. Hatthatuttiya tam gabbham suham suhenam parivahadi.  Tae nam sa
Devadi devi navannham masanam padi-punnananam jasamana-ratta-bandhujiva-
lakkhara-rasa-sarisa-parijataka-taruna-divayara-samappabham savva-nayanak-
kantam-sukumalam javam pani-payam ahina-padi-punna-pancindiya-sarirm lakkhana-
vanjan-gunuppaveam manumman-pamana-padi-punna-sujaya-savvanga-sundaram sasi-
soma-akaram-kanta-piya-damsanam suruvam gayatalusa-manam dariyam payaya. Jammam
jahha Mehakumara javam Tae nam tao angapadi-yario Devadim devim navannham
masanam javam dariyam payayam pasanti, pasittana siggham turiyam chavalam
veyiyam, jeneya Vasudeve raja teneya uvagacchanti, uvagacchittana Vasudevam
rajam jayena vijayena vaddhaventi. Vaddhavittana kariyala-parigga-hiyam
sirasavattam matthai-anjali kattu evam vayasi - "Evam khalu devanuppiya! Devadi
devi navannham masanam javam dariyam payaya. Tam nam amhe devanuppiyananam piyam
niveemo, piyam me bhavadu."  Tae nam se Vasudeve raja tasinam angapadi-yariyanam
antie eyam-attham soccna nisamma hatthatuttho tao angapadi-yariyo mahurehi
vayanehi vipulena ya puppha-gandha-mallalankarenam sakkaredi, sammandedi,
sakkarittha sammandittana matthayadhoyao karedi, puttanuputtiyam vittim kappedi,
kappittana padi-visajjedi.  Tae nam se Vasudeve raja kodumbiya-purise saddavedi,
sahavittana evam vayasi - "Khippameva bho devanuppiya! Baravadi nayarim asittam
javam parigiyam karaha, karittha charaga-parisohanam karaha, karittha manumman-
vaddhanam karaha, karittha eyam-anattiyam paccappinaha." Javam paccappinanti.
Tae nam se Vasudeve raja attharasa-seni-ppaseniyo saddavedi, saddavittana evam
vayasi - "Gacchaha nam tumhe devanuppiya! Baravadiya nayariya abhitara-bahiriye
ussukka-ukkaraabhada-ppavesam karaha, karittha tassa nayariya sarvva-parisohanam
karaha, karittha tassa nayariya sarva-mangallam karaha, karittha tassa nayariya
sarva-pujjam karaha, karittha tassa nayariya sarva-sammanam karaha, karittha
tassa nayariya sarva-pariggaham karaha, karittha tassa nayariya sarva-rakkhana-
samvibhagam karaha, karittha tassa nayariya sarva-pariggaha-samvibhagam karaha,
karittha tassa nayariya sarva-pariggaha-samvibhagam karaha, karittha tassa
nayariya sarva-pariggaha-samvibhagam karaha, karittha tassa nayariya sarva-
pariggaha-samvibhagam karaha, karittha tassa nayariya sarva-pariggaha-
samvibhagam karaha, karittha tassa nayariya sarva-pariggaha-samvibhagam karaha,
karittha tassa nayariya sarva-pariggaha-samvibhagam karaha, karittha tassa
nayariya sarva-pariggaha-samvibhagam karaha, karittha tassa nayariya sarva-
pariggaha-samvibhagam karaha, karittha tassa nayariya sarva-pariggaha-
samvibhagam karaha, karittha tassa nayariya sarva-pariggaha-samvibhagam karaha,
karittha tassa nayariya sarva-pariggaha-samvibhagam karaha, karittha tassa
nayariya sarva-pariggaha-samvibhagam karaha, karittha tassa nayariya sarva-
pariggaha-samvibhagam karaha, karittha tassa nayariya sarva-pariggaha-
samvibhagam karaha, karittha tassa nayariya sarva-pariggaha-samvibhagam karaha,
karittha tassa nayariya sarva-pariggaha-samvibhagam karaha, karittha tassa
nayariya sarva-pariggaha-samvibhagam karaha, karittha tassa nayariya sarva-
pariggaha-samvibhagam karaha, karittha tassa nayariya sarva-pariggaha-
samvibhagam karaha, karittha tassa nayariya sarva-pariggaha-samvibhagam karaha,
karittha tassa nayariya sar

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 48] [antakRddazA vAsudevamAyaro vA vAsudevaMsi gabbhaM vakkamamANaMsi eesiM
coddasaNhaM mahAsuviNANaM aNNayare satta mahAsuviNe pAsittA NaM pddibujjhNti|
baladevamAyaro vA baladevaMsi gabbhaM vakkamamANaMsi eesiM coddasaNhaM
mahAsuviNANaM aNNayare cattAri mahAsuviNe pAsittA NaM pddibujhNti|
maMDaliyamAyaro vA maMDaliyaMsi gabbhaM vakkamamANaMsi eesiM coddasaNhaM
mahAsuviNANaM aNNayare egaM mahAsuviNaM pAsittA NaM pddibujhNti| ime ya NaM
devANuppiyA! devaIe devIe ege mahAsuviNe diDe, jAva Arogga-tuTThi0 jAva
maMgallakArae NaM devANuppiyA! devaIe devIe suviNe didve, atthalAbho
devANuppiyA! bhogalAbho devANuppiyA! puttalAbho devANuppiyA! rajjalAbho
devANuppiyA! evaM khalu devANuppiyA! devaI devI NavaNhaM mAsANaM
bahupaDipuNNANaM jAva vIikkaMtANaM tumhaM kulakeuM jAva pyaahii| se vi ya NaM
dArae ummukkabAlabhAve jAva rajjavaI rAyA bhavissai, aNagAre vA bhaaviyppaa| taM
orAle NaM devANuppiyA! devaIe devIe suviNe diDhe, jAva AroggatuTThi-dIhAua-
kallANa0 jAva ditthe| tae NaM se vasudevarAyA suviNalakkhaNapADhagANaM aMtie
eyamaDhaM soccA Nisamma haTThatuTTha0 karayala jAva kaTu te
suviNalakkhaNapADhage evaM vayAsI - "evameyaM devANuppiyA! jAva se jaheyaM
tubbhe vayaha" ti kaTu suviNaM samma paDicchai, paDicchittA suviNalakkhaNa]
pADhayA [viuleNaM asaNa-pANa-khAima-sAima-puppha-vattha-gaMdha-mallAlaMkAreNaM
sakkArei, sammANei, sakkArittA, sammANittA viulaM jIviyArihaM pIidANaM dalayai,
dalayittA pddivisjjei|] haTThahiyayA taM gabbhaM suhaM suheNaM privhi| _tae NaM
sA devaI devI navaNhaM mAsANaM paDipuNNANaM jAsumaNa-
rattabaMdhujIvayalakkhArasasarasapArijAtaka-taruNadivAyara-samappabhaM
savvaNayaNakaMtaM-sukumAlaM jAva [ pANipAyaM ahINapaDipuNNa-paMciMdiya-sarIraM
lakkhaNa-vaMjaNa-guNovaveaM mANummANa-ppamANa-paDipuNNa-sujAyasavvaMga-
suMdaraMga sasisomAkAraM-kaMta-piya-daMsaNaM] surUvaM gayatAlusamANaM dArayaM
pyaayaa| jammaNaM jahA mehakumAre jAva [ tae NaM tAo aMgapaDiyArio devaiM deviM
navaNhaM mAsANaM jAva dArayaM payAyaM pAsaMti, pAsittA sigdhaM turiyaM cavalaM
veiyaM, jeNeva vasudeve rAyA teNeva uvAgacchaMti, uvAgacchittA vasudevaM rAyaM
jaeNaM vijaeNaM vddhaaveNti| vaddhAvittA karayalapariggahiyaM sirasAvattaM
matthae aMjaliM kaTu evaM vayAsI evaM khalu devANuppiyA! devaI devI navaNhaM
mAsANaM jAva dAragaM pyaayaa| taM NaM amhe devANuppiyANaM piyaM Niveemo, piyaM
me bhvu| tae NaM se vasudeve rAyA tAsiM aMgapaDiyAriyANaM aMtie eyamaDheM soccA
Nisamma haTThatuTTha0 tAo aMgapaDiyAriyAo mahurehiM vayaNehiM vipuleNa ya
puSphagaMdhamallAlaMkAreNaM sakkArei, sammANei, sakkArittA sammANittA
matthayadhoyAo karei, puttANuputtiyaM vittiM kappei, kappittA pddivisjjei| tae
NaM se vasudeve rAyA koDuMbiyapurise saddAvei, sahAvittA evaM vayAsI -
khippAmeva bho devANuppiyA! bAravaI nayariM Asitta jAva parigIyaM kareha,
karittA cAragaparisohaNaM kareha, karittA mANummANavaddhaNaM kareha, karittA
eyamANattiyaM pccppinnh| jAva pccppinnNti| _ tae NaM se vasudeve rAyA
aTThArasaseNIppaseNIo saddAvei, saddAvittA evaM vayAsI - "gacchaha NaM tubbhe
devANuppiyA! bAravaIe nayarIe abhitarabAhirie ussukkaM ukkaraM abhaDappavesaM

Page #90 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Third Class] [49 Adandimakudandimam adharim am adharanijjam anuddhayamuingam
amilaayamalladamam ganiyavaranadaijjakaliyam anegtala - yaranucharitam
pamujhyapakkiliyabhiram jahariham thiivadaiyam dasadivasaiyam kareh, karitta
eyamanattiyam paccappinah. Te vi karenti, karitta tahev paccappinanti. Tanam se
vasudeve raya bahiriaae uvattanasalaae sihasanavarage puratthabhimue sannisanne
saiehi ya sahassiehi ya sayasahassiehi ya jaehim daaehim bhogehi dalayamane
dalayamane padicchhemane padicchhemane evam ca nam viharai. Tanam tassa
ammapiero padhame divasae jatakammam karenti, karitta bitiyadivasae jagariyam
karenti, karitta tatiya divasae chandasuradansaniyam karent, karitta evamev
nivatte asuijatakammakaranae sampatte barasahadivase vipulam asanam panam khaim
sam saim uvakkhadaveti, uvakkhadavitta mittanaai - niyag-sayan- sambandhi-
parijanam balam ca bahave gananayag- dandanaayag jav ammante. Tao paccha pahaya
kaybalikamma kaykouy-mangal-payacchitta savvalankarabhibusiyaa mahimahalayansi
bhoyanamandavansi tam vipulam asanam panam khaim sam saim mittanaai... gananayag
jav sadhim asaemaana visaemana paribhaemaana paribhumjemana evam ca nam viharai.
Jimiyattuttaragaya vi ya nam samana ayanta chokkha paramasuibhuyaa tam mitt-
nainiyag-sayanasambandhiparijano... gananayag... vipulenam
pupphagandhamallalankaraenam sakkareti, sammanenti, sakkaritta sammanitta evam
vayaasi " jamha nam amham ime darage gayatalusamane tam hou" nam amh eyass
daragass namadhejjee gayasukumale 2. Tae nam tassa daragass ammapierae nam
kareti gayasukumaloti sesam jaha mehe jav' alam bhogsamatthe jae yaavi hottha. -
Thereafter, Devaki Devi was sleeping on her bed in her dwelling. That dwelling
(bedroom) [was painted from inside, white from outside and made smooth by
rubbing. Its upper part was adorned with various paintings and the lower part
was decorated. Its darkness was destroyed by the light of gems and jewels. It
was perfectly level, divided into sections, adorned with the treatment of five-
colored, sweet-smelling flower-bunches. It was fragrant all around with the
incense of excellent black aloeswood, kundaruk and turushk (rock-juice),
fragrant with fragrant substances and like a lump of fragrant substance. The bed
in it was with a pillow, with pillows on both sides of the head and the feet. It
was elevated on both sides and slightly bent in the middle. It was covered with
a soft, delicate, silky cotton sheet, like the sand on the bank of the vast
Ganga, covered with a dust-proof cloth, with a mosquito net, a beautiful skin (a
type of soft leather cloth), soft to the touch like cotton, wool, butter, arka-
toul (cotton of the plant), adorned with fragrant, excellent flowers, powder and
other bed-treatments. Devaki Devi, sleeping on such a bed, saw a generous,
auspicious, auspicious, blessed, auspicious and beautiful great dream in a semi-
conscious state in the middle of the night and woke up. 1 Necklaces of pearls,
silver, milk ocean, moonbeams, water drops and silver-great mountains (Vaidhy
mountain 1. class, 3 sutra 2.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 tRtIya varga] [ 49 adaMDimakuDaMDimaM adharimaM adhAraNijjaM aNuddhayamuiMgaM
amilAyamalladAmaM gaNiyAvaraNADaijjakaliyaM aNegatAlA - yarANucaritaM
pamujhyapakkIliyAbhirAmaM jahArihaM ThiivaDiyaM dasadivasiyaM kareha, karittA
eyamANattiyaM paccappiNaha  /  te vi karenti, karittA taheva paccappiNaMti  /
taNaM se vasudeve rAyA bAhiriyAe uvaTThANasAlAe sIhAsaNavaragae puratthAbhimuhe
sannisanne saiehi ya sAhassiehi ya sayasAhassiehi ya jAehiM dAehiM bhogehiM
dalayamANe dalayamANe paDicchemANe paDicchemANe evaM ca NaM viharai  /  taNaM
tassa ammApiyaro paDhame divase jAtakammaM karenti, karittA bitiyadivase
jAgariyaM karenti, karittA tatiya divase caMdasUradaMsaNIyaM kareMti, karittA
evAmeva nivvatte asUijAtakammakaraNe saMpatte bArasAhadivase vipulaM asaNaM
pANaM khAimaM sAimaM uvakkhaDAventi, uvakkhaDAvittA mittanAi - Niyaga-sayaNa-
saMbaMdhi-parijaNaM balaM ca bahave gaNaNAyaga- daMDanAyaga jAva AmaMtei  /  tao
pacchA pahAyA kayabalikammA kayakouya-maMgala-pAyacchittA savvAlaMkAravibhUsiyA
mahaimahAlayaMsi bhoyaNamaMDavaMsi taM vipulaM asaNaM pANaM khAimaM sAimaM
mittaNAi0 gaNaNAyaga jAva saddhiM AsAemANA visAemANA paribhAemANA paribhuMjemANA
evaM ca NaM viharai  /  jimiyattuttarAgayA vi ya NaM samANA AyaMtA cokkhA
paramasuibhUyA taM mitta-nAiniyaga-sayaNasaMbaMdhiparijaNa0 gaNaNAyaga0
vipuleNaM pupphagaMdhamallAlaMkAreNaM sakkAreMti, saMmANeMti, sakkArittA
sammANittA eMva vayAsI " jamhA NaM amhaM ime dArage gayatAlusamANe taM hou ] NaM
amha eyassa dAragassa nAmadhejje gayasukumAle 2  /  tae NaM tassa dAragassa
ammApiyare nAmaM kareMti gayasukumAlotti sesaM jahA mehe jAva' alaM
bhogasamatthe jAe yAvi hotthA  /  - tadanantara vaha devakI devI apane AvAsagRha
meM zayyA para soI huI thii| vaha vAsagRha ( zayanakakSa) [ bhItara se citrita
thA, bAhara se zveta aura ghisakara cikanA banAyA huA thA  /  usakA UparibhAga
vividha citroM se yukta thA aura nIce kA bhAga suzobhita thA  /  maNiyoM aura
ratnoM ke prakAza se usakA aMdhakAra naSTa ho gayA thaa| vaha ekadama samatala
suvibhakta bhAga vAlA, paMcavarNa ke sarasa aura suvAsita puSpa-puMjoM ke
upacAra se yukta thaa| uttama kAlAguru, kundaruka aura turuSka (zilArasa ) kI
dhUpa se cAroM ora sugandhita, sugandhI padArthoM se suvAsita evaM sugandhita
dravya kI guTikA ke samAna thA  /  usameM jo zayyA thI vaha takiyA sahita,
sirahAne aura pAyate donoM ora takiyAyukta thii| donoM ora se unnata aura madhya
meM kucha namI (jhukI huI thI  /  vizAla gaMgA ke kinAre kI retI ke avadAla
(paira rakhane se phisala jAne) ke samAna komala, kSomika - rezamI dukUlapaTa se
AcchAdita, rajastrANa (ur3atI huI dhUla ko rokane vAle vastra) se DhaMkI huI,
raktAMzuka (maccharadAnI) sahita, suramya Ajinaka (eka prakAra kA camar3e kA
komala vastra ) ruI, bUra, navanIta, arkatUla (Aka kI ruI) ke samAna komala
sparza vAlI, sugandhita uttama puSpa, cUrNa aura anya zayanopacAra se yukta thI
/  aisI zayyA para soI huI devakI devI ne arddhanidrita avasthA meM arddharAtri
ke samaya udAra, kalyANa, ziva, dhanya, maMgalakAraka aura zobhana mahAsvapna
dekhA aura jAgRta huI  /  1 motiyoM ke hAra, rajata, kSIrasamudra, candrakiraNa,
pAnI ke bindu aura rajata- mahAzaila (vaitADhya parvata 1. varga, 3 sUtra 2.

Page #91 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[50] She saw in her dream a lion, with a body like that of an Antakrid Dasha,
white in color, vast, beautiful and spectacular, with a stable and beautiful
chamber, round, plump, well-nourished, with distinct and sharp teeth, with its
mouth open, with soft, well-cultured, excellent lotus-like lips, with a very
soft tongue and palate like the leaf of a red lotus, with eyes like a round
lightning, with a color like the best gold that has been heated in fire and is
revolving in the furnace, with vast and strong thighs, with a complete and
abundant chest, with soft, broad, subtle and well-defined marks of saffron, with
its beautiful and raised tail hitting the earth, with a gentle form, playing and
yawning, entering its mouth. ] Devaki Devi, seeing such a generous and
magnificent dream, woke up. She was delighted, with a satisfied heart, thrilled
like the Kadamba flower blooming from the stream of clouds, remembering the
dream. Then she got up from her bed and walked with the best speed, like a royal
swan, without haste, agility, confusion or delay, to the bedroom of King
Vasudeva. Coming there, she started to wake up King Vasudeva with a sweet,
charming, beloved, pleasing, pleasant, generous, auspicious, auspicious,
blessed, auspicious, beautiful, moderate, sweet and soft voice. The king woke
up. On the king's command, the queen sat on a beautiful seat decorated with the
creation of various gems and jewels. After sitting on the comfortable seat,
Devaki Devi, healthy and calm, spoke in a sweet voice, "Devana Priya! Today,
while sleeping in such a comfortable bed, I saw a lion entering my mouth in my
dream. O Devana Priya! What will be the fruit of this generous great dream?"
Hearing this from Devaki Devi and holding it in her heart, the king became
delighted and with a satisfied heart. Thrilled like the fragrant flower of
Kadamba blooming from the stream of clouds, he started to consider the dream in
general and in particular. Doing so, he determined the fruit of that dream with
his natural intelligence and wisdom. Then the king, speaking in a sweet,
charming, auspicious, moderate, sweet voice, said, "O Devi! You have seen a
generous dream. O Devi! You have seen an auspicious dream. O Devi! You have seen
a beautiful dream. O Devi! You have seen a dream of health, satisfaction, long
life, auspiciousness and auspiciousness. O Devana Priya! You will have wealth,
enjoyment, son and kingdom. Devana Priya! After nine months and seven and a half
days, you will give birth to a son who will be like a flag, a lamp, a mountain,
a peak, a tilak, and a glory of your family, who will bring joy to your family,
who will increase the glory of your family, who will be the foundation for your
family, who will be like a tree in your family, who will increase your family,
who will have soft hands and feet, who will be free from inferiority, who will
have all five senses, who will have a complete body, who will have a gentle form
like the moon, who will be charming, beloved, beautiful and radiant like a
divine prince." That child, freed from childhood, becoming wise and mature,
attaining youth, will become a warrior, powerful, with vast and abundant
strength (army) and vehicles, and will be the master of the kingdom. O Devi! You
have seen a generous (main) dream. Thus, O Devi! You have seen a dream of
health, satisfaction, auspiciousness. Thus, King Vasudeva told Devaki Devi this
same thing two or three times with sweet words. Hearing and understanding the
aforementioned words of King Vasudeva, Devaki Devi became delighted and
satisfied and folded her hands and said, "O Devana Priya! What you have said is
true, true and without doubt. I wish and

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 50 ] [ antakRddazA ke samAna) zveta varNavAlA, vizAla, ramaNIya aura darzanIya
sthira aura sundara prakoSThavAlA, gola-puSTasuzlaSTa, viziSTa evaM tIkSNa
dADhAoM se yukta, mu~ha ko phAr3e hue, susaMskRta uttama kamala ke samAna
komala, pramANopeta, atyanta suzobhita oSThavAlA, raktakamala ke patra ke samAna
atyanta komala jIbha aura tAluvAlA, mUsa meM rahe hue agni se tapAye hue tathA
Avarta karate hue uttama svarNa ke samAna varNavAlI gola bijalI ke samAna A~khoM
vAlA, vizAla aura puSTa jaMghA vAlA, saMpUrNa aura vipula skandha vAlA, komala,
vizada - sUkSma evaM prazasta lakSaNavAlI kesara se yukta, apanI sundara tathA
unnata pU~cha ko pRthvI para phaTakAratA huA, saumya AkAra vAlA, lIlA karatA huA
evaM ubAsI letA huA siMha apane mu~ha meM praveza karatA svapna meM dekhA  / ]
vaha devakI devI isa prakAra ke udAra yAvat zobhAvAle mahAsvapna ko dekhakara
jAgRta huI  /  vaha harSita, saMtuSTahRdaya yAvat megha kI dhArA se vikasita
kadamba puSpa ke samAna romAMcita hotI huI svapna kA smaraNa karane lagI  /
phira apanI zayyA se uThI aura zIghratA, capalatA, saMbhrama evaM vilamba se
rahita rAjahaMsa ke samAna uttama gati se calakara vasudeva rAjA ke zayanagRha
meM AyI  /  Akara iSTa, kAnta, priya, manojJa, manAma, udAra, kalyANa, ziva,
dhanya, maMgala, sundara, mita, madhura aura maMjula (komala) vANI se bolatI huI
vasudeva rAjA ko jagAne lgii| rAjA jAgRta huaa| rAjA kI AjJA hone para, rAnI
vicitra maNi aura ratnoM kI racanA se citrita bhadrAsana para baitthii| sukhada
Asana para baiThane ke bAda svastha evaM zAMta banI huI devakI devI iSTa, priya
yAvat madhura vANI se isa prakAra bolI- devAnupriye ! Aja tathAprakAra kI
(uparyukta varNanavAlI) sukhazayyA meM sote hue maiMne apane mukha meM praveza
karate hue siMha ke svapna ko dekhA hai  /  he devAnupriya ! isa udAra
mahAsvapna kA kyA phala hogA? devakI devI kI yaha bAta sunakara aura hRdaya meM
dhAraNa karake rAjA harSita aura saMtuSTa hRdayavAlA huA  /  megha kI dhArA se
vikasita kadamba ke sugandhita puSpa ke samAna romAMcita banA huA vaha rAjA, usa
svapna kA avagrahaNa (sAmAnya vicAra) tathA IhA (vizeSa vicAra) karane lgaa|
aisA karake apane svAbhAvika buddhi-vijJAna se usa svapna ke phala kA nizcaya
kiyaa| tatpazcAt rAjA iSTa, kAnta, maMgala, mita, madhura vANI se bolatA huA isa
prakAra kahane lagA he devI! tumane udAra svapna dekhA hai| he devI! tumane
kalyANakAraka svapna dekhA hai yAvat he devI! tumane zobhAyukta svapna dekhA
hai| he devI! tumane Arogya, tuSTi, dIrghAyuSya, kalyANa aura maMgalakAraka
svapna dekhA hai| he devAnupriye ! tumheM arthalAbha, bhogalAbha, putralAbha
aura rAjyalAbha hogaa| devAnupiye ! nava mAsa aura sADhe sAta dina bItane ke
bAda tuma apane kula meM dhvajA samAna, dIpaka samAna, parvata samAna, zikhara
samAna, tilaka samAna aura kula kI kIrti karane vAle, kula ko Ananda dene vAle,
kula kA yaza bar3hAne vAle, kula ke liye AdhArabhUta, kula meM vRkSa samAna,
kula kI vRddhi karane vAle, sukumAla hAtha pAMva vAle hInatArahita paMcendriya
yukta saMpUrNa zarIra vAle yAvat candra ke samAna saumya AkRti vAle, kAnta,
priyadarzana, surUpa evaM devakumAra ke samAna kAnti-vAle putra ko tuma janma
dogI  /  vaha bAlaka bAla vaya se mukta hokara vijJa aura pariNata hokara,
yuvAvasthA ko prApta karake zUravIra, parAkramI, vistIrNa aura vipula bala
(senA) tathA vAhana vAlA, rAjya kA svAmI hogaa| he devI! tumane udAra (pradhAna)
svapna dekhA hai| isa prakAra he devI! tumane Arogya tuSTi yAvat maMgalakAraka
svapna dekhA hai| isa prakAra vasudeva rAjA ne iSTa yAvat madhura vacanoM se
devakI devI ko yahI bAta do tIna bAra khii| vasudeva rAjA kI pUrvokta bAta
sunakara aura avadhAraNa kara devakI devI harSita evaM saMtuSTa huI aura hAtha
jor3akara isa prakAra bolI - "he devAnupriya ! Apane jo kahA hai vaha yathArtha
hai, satya hai aura sandeha rahita hai| mujhe icchita aura

Page #92 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Third Chapter] [51 Accepted. Again and again desired and accepted. Thus
accepting the meaning of the dream, with the permission of King Vasudeva, she
rose from the Bhadraasana and came to her bedchamber with a swift and non-
hurried pace. The queen thought, 'May this auspicious, principal, and auspicious
dream of mine not be destroyed by other sinful dreams.' Therefore, she remained
seated, awakening from the dream with auspicious and auspicious religious
stories and discussions related to the Devaguru. When morning came, King
Vasudeva summoned the domestic servants and said to them, "Devanupriyo! Go
quickly and bring such dream interpreters - who are knowledgeable in the sutras
and meanings of the Ashtaanga Mahaanimitta and are knowledgeable in various
scriptures!" Accepting the royal command, the domestic servants went quickly,
with agility, speed, and swiftness through the city of Dwaraka to the homes of
the dream interpreters and conveyed the royal command to them. The dream
interpreters were pleased. They bathed and adorned their bodies. They made
auspicious marks on their foreheads with mustard seeds and green grass. They
left their homes and reached the gate of the royal palace. Then all the dream
interpreters gathered together and came to the outer waiting room. They joined
their hands and greeted King Vasudeva with the words "Jai-Vijay." Having been
saluted, worshipped, honored, and respected by King Vasudeva, the dream
interpreters sat on the Bhadraasanas that had been prepared beforehand. King
Vasudeva called Devaki Devi and seated her inside the curtain. Then, holding
flowers and fruits in his hands, the king said to the dream interpreters with
great humility, "Devanupriyo! Today, Devaki Devi, while sleeping in the dwelling
described earlier, saw a lion in her dream. O Devanupriyo! What will be the
fruit of such a dream?" Hearing King Vasudeva's question and understanding it,
the dream interpreters were pleased. They considered the dream in general,
considered it in particular, determined the meaning of the dream, discussed it
with each other, and knowing the meaning of the dream themselves, receiving it
from others, and resolving doubts, they finally determined the meaning and
addressed King Vasudeva, saying, "Devanupriyo! In the science of dreams, there
are forty-two types of general dreams and thirty Mahaasvapnas, thus a total of
seventy-two types of dreams are mentioned. Of these, the mothers of Tirthankaras
and Chakravartis, when a Tirthankara or Chakravarti is in the womb, see fourteen
Mahaasvapnas - (1) elephant, (2) bull, (3) lion, (4) Lakshmi who has been
anointed, (5) garland of flowers, (6) moon, (7) sun, (8) flag, (9) kumbha (pot),
(10) lotus pond, (11) ocean, (12) aircraft or building, (13) treasure of jewels,
and (14) smokeless fire. Of these fourteen Mahaasvapnas, the mother of Vasudeva,
when Vasudeva is in the womb, sees seven dreams. The mother of Baldeva, when
Baldeva is in the womb, sees four Mahaasvapnas out of these fourteen dreams. And
the mother of the Mandalik king sees one Mahaasvapna out of these fourteen
dreams. O Devanupriyo! Devaki Devi has seen one Mahaasvapna. This dream is
generous, auspicious, healthy, satisfying, and auspicious. It is indicative of
happiness and prosperity. It will bring you wealth, enjoyment, sons, and
kingdom. Nine months and seven and a half days will pass, and Devaki Devi will
give birth to a son like a flag in your lineage. This child, after passing
through childhood and becoming a young man, will be the king of the kingdom or
will be a future soul who will not marry. Therefore, O Devanupriyo! Devaki Devi
has seen this generous and auspicious dream. Hearing and understanding this
dream-fruit from the dream interpreters, King Vasudeva was delighted, satisfied

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 tRtIya varga] [51 svIkRta hai| punaH punaH icchita evaM svIkRta hai| isa
prakAra svapna ke artha ko svIkAra kara vasudeva rAjA kI anumati se bhadrAsana
se uThI aura zIghratA evaM capalatA rahita gati se apane zayanAgAra meM Akara
zayyA para baitthii| rAnI ne vicAra kiyA 'yaha merA uttama, pradhAna aura,
maMgalarUpa svapna dUsare pApa-svapnoM se vinaSTa na ho jAya' ataH vaha deva
guru sambandhI prazasta aura maMgalarUpa dhArmika kathAoM aura vicAraNAoM se
svapnajAgaraNa karatI huI baiThI rhii| prAtaH kAla hone para vasadeva rAjA ne
kauTambika (sevaka) paruSoM ko balAkara isa prakAra kahA"devAnupriyo! tuma
zIghra jAo aura aise svapnapAThakoM ko bulAo - jo aSTAMga mahAnimitta ke sUtra
evaM artha ke jJAtA hoM aura vividha zAstroM ke jJAtA hoM ! rAjAjJA ko svIkAra
kara kauTumbika puruSa zIghra, capalatAyukta, vegapUrvaka evaM tIvra gati se
dvArakA nagarI ke madhya hokara svapnapAThakoM ke ghara pahuMce aura unheM
rAjAjJA sunaayii| svapnapAThaka prasanna hue| unhoMne snAna karake zarIra ko
alaMkRta kiyaa| ve mastaka para sarSapa aura harI dUba se maMgala karake apane-
apane ghara se nikale aura rAjaprAsAda ke dvAra para phuNce| phira ve sabhI
svapnapAThaka ekatrita hokara bAhara kI upasthAnazAlA meM aaye| unhoMne hAtha
jor3akara jaya-vijaya zabdoM se vasudevarAjA ko bdhaayaa| vasudeva rAjA se
vandita, pUjita, satkRta aura sammAnita kiye hue ve. svapnapAThaka, pahale se
rakhe hue una bhadrAsanoM para baitthe| vasudevarAjA ne devakI devI ko bulAkara
yavanikA ke bhItara baitthaayaa| tatpazcAt hAthoM meM puSpa aura phala lekara
rAjA ne atizaya vinayapUrvaka una svapnapAThakoM se isa prakAra kahA -
"devAnupriyo! Aja devakI devI ne tathArUpa (pUrvavarNita) vAsagRha meM zayana
karate hue svapna meM siMha dekhaa| he devAnupriyo ! isa prakAra ke svapna kA
kyA phala hogA?" vasudeva rAjA kA prazna sunakara, usakA avadhAraNa karake
svapnapAThaka prasanna hue| unhoMne usa svapna ke viSaya meM sAmAnya vicAra
kiyA, vizeSa vicAra kiyA, svapna ke artha kA nizcaya kiyA, paraspara eka dUsare
ke sAtha vicAra-vimarza kiyA aura svapna kA artha svayaM jAnakara, dUsare se
grahaNa kara tathA zaMkAsamAdhAna karake artha kA antima nizcaya kiyA aura
vasudeva rAjA ko saMbodhita karate hue isa prakAra bole "devAnupriya!
svapnazAstra meM bayAlIsa prakAra ke sAmAnya svapna aura tIsa mahAsvapna isa
prakAra kula bahattara prakAra ke svapna kahe haiN| inameM se tIrthaMkara tathA
cakravartI kI mAtAeM, jaba tIrthaMkara yA cakravartI garbha meM Ate haiM,
caudaha mahAsvapna dekhatI haiM - (1) hAthI, (2) vRSabha, (3) siMha, (4)
abhiSeka kI huI lakSmI (5) puSpamAlA, (6) candra, (7) sUrya, (8) dhvajA, (9)
kumbha (kalaza), (10) padmasarovara, (11) samudra, (12) vimAna athavA bhavana
(13) ratna-rAzi aura (14) nirdhUma agni| ina caudaha mahAsvapnoM meM se vAsudeva
kI mAtA, jaba vAsudeva garbha meM Ate haiM taba, sAta svapna dekhatI hai|
baladeva kI mAtA, jaba baladeva garbha meM Ate haiM taba, ina caudaha svapnoM
meM se cAra mahAsvapna dekhatI hai aura mAMDalika rAjA kI mAtA, ina caudaha
mahAsvapnoM meM se koI eka mahAsvapna dekhatI hai| he devAnupriya! devakI devI
ne eka mahAsvapna dekhA hai| yaha svapna udAra, kalyANakArI, Arogya, tuSTi evaM
maMgalakArI hai| sukhasamRddhi kA sUcaka hai| isase Apako arthalAbha,
bhogalAbha, putralAbha aura rAjyalAbha hogaa| nava mAsa aura sADhe sAta dina
vyatIta hone para devakI devI Apake kula meM dhvaja samAna putra ko janma
deNgii| yaha bAlaka bAlyAvasthA pAra kara yuvaka hone para rAjya kA adhipati
rAjA hogA athavA bhAvitAtmA anagAra hogaa| ataH he devAnupriya! devakI devI ne
yaha udAra yAvat mahAkalyANakArI svapna dekhA hai| svapnapAThakoM se yaha
svapna-phala sunakara evaM avadhAraNa karake vasudeva rAjA harSita huA, santuSTa

Page #93 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[52] [Antakrid Dasha] Hwa and joined his hands and spoke to the dream
interpreters in this way - "Devanupriyo! As you have told the meaning of the
dream, it is exactly the same. Saying this, he accepted the meaning of the dream
well. Then he honored the dream interpreters with abundant food, drink,
servants, delicious food, flowers, clothes, fragrance, garlands and ornaments,
honored them and gave them a lot of pritidan worthy of livelihood and allowed
them to leave.] After that, being happy and with a joyful and satisfied heart,
Devaki Devi started to nurture her womb happily. After that, Devaki Devi
completed the nine-month gestation period and gave birth to a son who was like a
Japa-Kusuma, a red Bandhujeevak flower, like a Laksharas, a superior Parijat and
a morning sun, with a radiant glow, pleasing to the eyes of all, delicate [with
hands and feet, without any limblessness, with a complete body with all five
senses, (in terms of form) complete and pure (swastika etc.), signs (til mash
etc.) ingredients and qualities, complete in measure, weight and size - extent
and beautifully made with all limbs, with a gentle form like the moon, with a
radiant glow and a beautiful face like a beautiful elephant's palate. Understand
the description of the birth like that of Megha Kumar. It is like this - After
that, the maids see Devaki Devi giving birth to a son after nine months are
complete, seeing this, they are happy and quickly, with a mind full of haste,
with a nimble and fast body, those maids come to where Vasudeva Raja is. Coming
there, they congratulate Vasudeva Raja with the words "Jai-Vijay",
congratulating him, they join both their hands, circumambulate their heads,
offer anjali and say in this way, "O Devanupriyo! Devaki Devi has given birth to
a son after nine months are complete. We are informing Devanupriyo of this good
(news). May it be pleasing to you. After that, Vasudeva Raja, hearing this
meaning from those maids and holding it in his heart, became happy and
satisfied. He honored those maids with sweet words and with abundant flowers,
fragrant garlands and ornaments, and honored them by washing their heads, i.e.,
freeing them from servitude. He gave them such a livelihood that it would
continue for their sons, grandsons, etc. In this way, he gave them a lot of
wealth and sent them off. After that, Vasudeva Raja calls the family men, calls
them and gives this order - "O Devanupriyo! Quickly sprinkle fragrant water in
the city of Dwarka, and let there be (auspicious songs sung everywhere. Release
the prisoners from the prison. Do all this and return this order." The family
men, according to the king's order, do the work and return the order. After
that, Vasudeva Raja calls the potters and other castes, eighteen categories and
their sub-divisions, eighteen sub-categories, calls them and says in this way -
"Devanupriyo! You go and perform the ten-day sthitipathika (special ritual of
the son's birth celebration according to the family tradition) inside and
outside the city of Dwarka. It is like this - for ten days, the toll (tax)
should be stopped, the annual tax should be waived, the entry of royal officials
for taking forced labor in the houses of relatives, farmers, etc. should be
prohibited, punishment (money taken according to the crime) and kudand (small
punishment - a small amount of money taken even for a big crime) should not be
taken, no one should be left in debt, i.e., all debts should be paid by the
king. No debtor should be caught, make such an announcement. And play mridanga
and other instruments everywhere. Hang garlands of fresh flowers all around.
Have plays performed by actors, including the main ones, the courtesans. Have
plays performed by many spectators. Do it in such a way that people are happy
and play. In this way, perform the ten-day sthitipathika as appropriate, perform
it and return this order to me.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 52] [ antakRddazA huA aura hAtha jor3akara yAvat svapnapAThakoM se isa prakAra
bolA - "devAnupriyo ! jaisA Apane svapnaphala batAyA vaha usI prakAra hai  /
isa prakAra kahakara svapna kA artha bhalI-bhAMti svIkAra kiyaa| phira
svapnapAThakoM ko vipula azana, pAna, khAdima, svAdima, puSpa, vastra, gandha,
mAlA aura alaMkAroM se satkRta kiyA, sanmAnita kiyA aura jIvikA ke yogya bahuta
prItidAna diyA aura unheM jAne kI anumati dI  / ] tatpazcAt harSita evaM hRSTa-
tuSTa-hRdayA hotI huI vaha devakI devI sukhapUrvaka apane garbha kA pAlana-
poSaNa karane lgii| tatpazcAt usa devakI devI ne navamAsa kA garbha-kAla pUrNa
kara japA- kusuma, lAla bandhujIvakapuSpa ke samAna, lAkSArasa, zreSTha pArijAta
evaM prAtaH kAlIna sUrya ke samAna kAntivAle, sarvajana nayanAbhirAma sukumAla
[hAtha pAMva vAle, aMgahInatArahita, saMpUrNa paMcendriyoM se yukta zarIra vAle,
(svarUpa kI apekSA se) paripUrNa va pavitra ( svastika Adi), lakSaNa (tila maSa
Adi) vyaMjana aura guNoM se yukta, mApa, bhAra aura AkAra - vistAra se paripUrNa
aura sundara bane hue samasta aMgoM vAle, candra ke samAna saumya AkAra vAle,
kAnta aura priyadarzI sundara gaja-tAlu ke samAna rUpavAn putra ko janma diyaa|
janma kA varNana meghakumAra ke samAna smjheN| vaha isa prakAra hai - tatpazcAt
dAsiyA~ devakI devI ko nau mAsa pUrNa hone para putra utpanna huA dekhatI haiM,
dekhakara harSa ke kAraNa zIghra, mana meM tvarA vAlI kAya se capala evaM vega
vAlI ve dAsiyAM jahA~ vasudeva rAjA hai vahAM AtI haiN| Akara vasudeva rAjA ko
jaya-vijaya zabda kahakara badhAI detI haiM, badhAI dekara donoM hAtha jor3akara
mastaka para Avartana karake aMjali karake isa prakAra kahatI haiM"he
devAnupriye! devakI devI ne nau mAsa pUrNa hone para yAvat putra kA prasava kiyA
hai| hama devAnupriya ko yaha priya (samAcAra) nivedana karatI haiN| Apako priya
ho  /  tatpazcAt vasudeva rAjA una dAsiyoM se yaha artha sunakara aura hRdaya
meM dhAraNa karake hRSTa-tuSTa huaa| usane una dAsiyoM kA madhura vacanoM se
tathA vipula puSpoM, gaMdhamAlAoM aura AbhUSaNoM se satkAra aura sanmAna karake
unheM mastaka - dhauta kiyA arthAt dAsIpana se mukta kara diyaa| unheM aisI
AjIvikA kara dI ki unake putra-pautra Adi taka calatI rhe| isa prakAra vipula
dravya dekara unheM vidA kiyaa| tatpazcAt vasudeva rAjA kauTumbika puruSoM ko
bulAtA hai, bulAkara isa prakAra Adeza detA hai - he devAnupriyo ! zIghra hI
dvArakA nagarI meM sugandhita jala chir3ako, yAvat sarvatra (maMgala gAna kraao|
kArAgAra se kaidiyoM ko mukta kro| yaha saba karake yaha AjJA vApasa sauMpo
yAvat kauTumbika puruSa rAjAjJA ke anusAra kArya karake AjJA vApasa sauMpate
haiN| tatpazcAt vasudeva rAjA kuMbhakAra Adi jAti rUpa aThAraha zreNiyoM ko aura
unake upavibhAgarUpa aThAraha prazreNiyoM ko bulAte haiM, bulAkara isa prakAra
kahate haiM - devAnupriyo ! tuma jAo aura dvArakA nagarI ke bhItara aura bAhara
dasa dina kI sthitipatikA (kulamaryAdA ke anusAra hone vAlI putra - janmotsava
kI viziSTa rIti) kraao| vaha isa prakAra hai - dasa dinoM taka zulka (cuMgI)
banda kiyA jAya, prativarSa lagane vAlA kara mApha kiyA jAya, kuTumbiyoM aura
kisAnoM Adi ke ghara meM begAra lene Adi ke liye rAjapuruSoM kA praveza niSiddha
kiyA jAya, daMDa (aparAdha ke anusAra liyA jAne vAlA dravya) aura kudaMDa (alpa
daMDa - bar3A aparAdha karane para bhI liyA jAne vAlA thor3A dravya) na liyA
jAya, kisI ko RNI na rahane diyA jAya arthAt rAjA kI ora se saba kA RNa cukA
diyA jaay| kisI denadAra ko pakar3A na jAya, aisI ghoSaNA kara do  /  tathA
sarvatra mRdaMga Adi bAje bjvaao| cAroM ora vikasita tAjA phUloM kI mAlAe~
laTakAo  /  gaNikAe~ jinameM pradhAna haiM, aise pAtroM se nATaka krvaao| aneka
tAlAcAroM (prekSAkAriyoM) 'nATaka krvaao| aisA karo ki loga harSita hokara krIDA
kreN| isa prakAra yathAyogya dasa dina kI sthitipatikA karo, karAo aura merI
yaha AjJA mujhe vApisa sauMpo  /

Page #94 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Third Chapter]  Hearing this order of King Vasudeva, they do so and return the
royal order. Thereafter, King Vasudeva sat on the best throne in the outer
assembly hall, facing east, and gave offerings (worship) and charity with
hundreds, thousands, and lakhs of wealth. He gave a certain portion of his
income and wandered around accepting the wealth received. Thereafter, the
parents of that child performed the Jatakarma (cutting the umbilical cord, etc.)
on the first day. On the second day, they performed the Jagarika (night vigil).
On the third day, they showed him the moon and the sun. Thus, the ritual of the
impure Jatakarma was completed. Then the twelfth day arrived, so they prepared
abundant food, drinks, edibles, and delicious food. After preparing it, they
invited friends, relatives, kin, sons, etc., uncles, etc., relatives, fathers-
in-law, etc., related people, servants, etc., and many accountants, punishment
officers, etc. After that, he bathed, performed the Bali karma, performed the
auspicious rituals of applying tilak with musk, etc., performed auspicious
rituals, performed atonement, and adorned himself with all ornaments. Then, in a
very large dining hall, he enjoyed, tasted, shared, and consumed that food,
drinks, edibles, and delicious food with friends, relatives, etc., and
accountants, etc. . After eating this way, they all came to the place to sit.
They performed Achaman (rinsing the mouth) with pure water. They washed their
hands and faces, became clean, and their clothes became pure. Then they honored,
respected, and honored those friends, relatives, kin, relatives, related people,
servants, etc., and accountants, etc., with abundant clothes, fragrances,
garlands, and ornaments, and said this way] - "Because our child is as delicate
and beautiful as the palate of an elephant, therefore, the name of our child
will be Gajasukumal (Gaj-Sukumar)." Considering this, the parents of that child
named him "Gajsukumara." Understand the rest of the description to be like Megha
Kumar. Gradually, Gajsukumara became capable of enjoying pleasures. Discussion-
This sutra describes the mother Devaki seeing a lion in a dream, telling her
husband about her dream upon waking up, the husband calling the dream
interpreters, the dream interpreters presenting the description of the dreams
and telling the result of the dream, protecting the womb, the birth of a son as
red and delicate as the palate of an elephant at the appropriate time (after
nine months), and his naming ceremony as Gajsukumara, and finally, Gajsukumara's
transition from childhood to youth.    When a Tirthankara and a Chakravarti are
born, their mothers see fourteen great dreams. Among them, in the twelfth dream,
they see a flying machine or a building. The meaning of the alternative of a
flying machine or a building here is that the mother of a being who comes from
the Devlok and takes birth as a Tirthankara sees a flying machine in her dream,
and the mother of a being who comes from hell and takes birth as a Tirthankara
sees a building in her dream. Jassumana.................The explanation of the
word Sampapbham is as follows- Jassumana-Jayasuman-Jaya is the name of a
particular plant. It is also called Jassu or Adhul. The Sanskrit dictionary
called Sanskrit-Shabdarthakostubh states that the meaning of Jaya is "evergreen
rose flower or plant." The flowers of Jaya are called 'Jassumana', these flowers
are red in color.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 tRtIya varga] rAjA vasudeva kA yaha Adeza sunakara ve isI prakAra karate haiM
aura rAjAjJA vApisa karate haiN| tatpazcAt vasudeva rAjA bAhara kI upasthAnazAlA
(sabhA) meM, pUrva kI ora mukha karake, zreSTha siMhAsana para baiThA aura
saikar3oM, hajAroM aura lAkhoM ke dravya se yAga (pUjana) evaM dAna diyaa| Aya
meM se amuka bhAga diyA aura prApta hone vAle dravya ko grahaNa karatA huA
vicarane lgaa| tatpazcAt usa bAlaka ke mAtA-pitA ne pahale dina jAtakarma (nAla
kATanA Adi) kiyaa| dUsare dina jAgarikA (rAtri-jAgaraNa) kiyaa| tIsare dina
candra-sUrya kA darzana kraayaa| isa prakAra azuci jAtakarma kI kriyA sampanna
huii| phira bArahavA~ dina AyA to vipula azana, pAna, khAdima aura svAdima AhAra
taiyAra krvaayaa| taiyAra karavAkara mitroM, bandhu Adi jJAtijanoM, putra Adi
nijakoM, kAkA Adi svajanoM, zvasura Adi sambadhijanoM, dAsa Adi parijanoM tathA
senA- aura bahuta se gaNanAyaka, daMDanAyaka Adi ko AmaMtraNa diyaa| usake
pazcAt snAna kiyA, balikarma kiyA, maSi tilaka Adi kautuka kiyA, maMgala kiyA,
prAyazcitta kiyA aura sarva alaMkAroM se vibhUSita huaa| phira bahuta vizAla
bhojana-maMDapa meM, usa azana, pAna, khAdima aura svAdima bhojana kA mitra,
jJAti Adi tathA gaNanAyaka Adi ke sAtha AsvAdana, visvAdana, paraspara vibhAjana
aura paribhoga karatA huA vicarane lgaa| . isa prakAra bhojana karane ke pazcAt
ve saba baiThane ke sthAna para aaye| zuddha jala se Acamana (kullA) kiyaa|
hAtha-mu~ha dhokara svaccha hue, paraMsa zuci hue| phira una mitra, jJAti
nijaka, svajana, sambandhIjana, parijana Adi tathA gaNanAyaka Adi kA vipula
vastra, gaMdha, mAlA aura alaMkAra se satkAra kiyA, sammAna kiyA, satkAra-
sammAna karake isa prakAra kahA] - "kyoMki hamArA yaha bAlaka gaja ke tAlu ke
samAna sukomala evaM sundara hai, ataH hamAre isa bAlaka kA nAma gajasukumAla
(gaja-sukumAra) ho|" isa prakAra vicAra kara usa bAlaka ke mAtA-pitA ne usakA
"gajasukumAra" yaha nAma rkhaa| zeSa varNana meghakumAra ke samAna smjhnaa|
kramazaH gajasukumAra bhoga bhogane meM samartha ho gyaa| vivecana- isa sUtra
meM mAtA devakI kA svapna meM siMha dekhanA, jAgane para patideva ko apane
svapna kA hAla kahanA, patideva dvArA svapnapAThakoM ko bulavAnA, svapnapAThakoM
dvArA svapnoM kA vivaraNa prastuta karanA aura svapna kA phala batalAnA, garbha-
saMrakSaNa karanA, yathAsamaya (nau mAsa vyatIta hone para) hAthI ke tAlu ke
samAna rakta evaM komala putra kA janma honA, aura usakA gajasukumAra nAma-
saMskAra karanA, anta meM gajasukumAra kA bAlyAvasthA se yuvAvasthA meM
padArpaNa karanA, ina saba bAtoM kA varNana kiyA gayA hai| tIrthaMkara aura
cakravartI ke garbha meM Ane para unakI mAtAeM caudaha mahAsvapna dekhatI haiN|
unameM se bArahaveM svapna meM vimAna yA bhavana' dekhatI haiM  /  yahA~ vimAna
yA bhavana ke vikalpa kA Azaya yaha hai ki jo jIva devaloka se Akara tIrthaMkara
rUpa meM janma letA hai usakI mAtA svapna meM vimAna dekhatI hai aura jo jIva
naraka se Akara tIrthaMkara ke rUpa meM janma letA hai usakI mAtA svapna meM
bhavana dekhatI hai| jAsumaNA.................samappabhaM pada kI vyAkhyA isa
prakAra hai-jAsumaNA-jayasumana-jayA eka vanaspati vizeSa kA nAma hai| ise jAsu
yA aDahula bhI kahate haiN| saMskRta-zabdArthakaustubha nAmaka saMskRta koSa meM
jayA kA artha- sadAbahAra gulAba kA phUla yA paudhA" aisA likhA hai  /  jayA ke
phUloM ko 'jAsumana' kahA jAtA hai, ye puSpa raktavarNa ke hote haiN|

Page #95 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 54]  **Raktbandhujeevak** is a word composed of two terms: **Rakt** and
**Bandhujeevak**. **Rakt** refers to the red color. **Bandhujeevak** means a
specific type of plant, a kind of herb, that blooms in the rainy season and has
red flowers. The combined meaning is a specific herb called **Duphariya** with
red color.   According to Acharya Abhaydev Suri, **Bandhujeevak** refers to a
specific type of flower with five colors. In this context, the red color is
desired, hence the use of **Rakt** with **Bandhujeevak**.   The **Sachitra
Ardhamagadi Kosh** defines **Raktbandhujeevak** as a red-colored creature called
**Goglagay**, **Devgay**, or **Indragop** that is born in the rainy season. The
**Ardhamagadi Koshkar** describes **Raktbandhujeevak** as **Indragop** or **Veer
Bahuti** in common language. This creature is red in color and soft like velvet.
**Lakkharas** or **Laaksharasa** or **Mahavar** is the name of the color of lac.
It is red and used by women to adorn their feet.  **Saras** in **Saras
Parijatak** signifies **developed** or **bloomed**. **Parijatak** has multiple
meanings: 1) a specific type of flower, 2) the flower of **Farhad** which is red
and very beautiful, 3) a specific type of divine tree, 4) a specific type of
**Kalpataru** (wish-fulfilling tree). In this context, the meaning of
**Parijatak** as a red-colored flower seems most appropriate.  **Tarun
Divaakar** uses the word **Tarun** which signifies youth. The sun is considered
to reach its youth in the midday, hence the midday sun can be called **Tarun
Divaakar**. However, this meaning is not desired here. The prince
**Gajsukumara** has a red complexion, and there is no similarity between him and
the midday sun. This is why Acharya Abhaydev Suri has defined **Tarun Divaakar**
as the rising sun. This meaning is also appropriate because the rising sun is
red, and this aligns well with the red complexion of prince **Gajsukumara**.
Additionally, the word **Tarun** is also used in the sense of red. The 34th
chapter of **Uttaraadhyayanasutra** in the **Tejoleshya** section states:
"Hingul Dhaau Sankaasa, Tarunaicchasannibha. Suyatuandaphaiva nibha, Teulesa U
Vannao."  This means that the **Hingul** metal, the young sun, the beak of a
parrot, and the flame of a lamp have the same **Tejoleshya** (radiance). In this
sutra, the word **Tarun** is used in the sense of red, otherwise, the meaning
related to the color of **Tejoleshya** would not be consistent.  **Japasuman**,
**Raktbandhujeevak**, **Laaksharasa**, **Saras Parijatak**, and **Tarun
Divaakar** are all terms that describe something that has the same radiance,
brilliance, shine, or color.  **Gajtaluy** - **Gaj** means elephant. **Taluy**
means the hollow between the upper teeth and the palate. The palate of an
elephant is called **Gajtaluy**. Someone with a palate similar to that of an
elephant is called **Gajtaluy**.  1. **Vritti-patra-9**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 54] [antakRddazA rattabaMdhujIvaga-raktabaMdhujIvaka yaha zabda rakta aura
bandhujIvaka ina do padoM se banA hai| rakta lAla varNa ko kahate haiM,
baMdhujIvaka zabda kA artha hotA hai -gulma-vizeSa-dupahariyA kA paudhA, jisameM
lAla raMga ke phUla lagate haiM aura jo barasAta meM phUlatA hai| donoM kA
sammilita artha hai-lAla raMga kA dupahariyA nAmaka eka gulma vishess| AcArya
abhayadeva sUri ke anusAra bandhujIvaka pAMca varNavAle puSpa vizeSa hote haiN|
prastuta meM raktavarNa abhISTa hai, ataH sUtrakAra ne bandhujIvaka zabda ke
sAtha rakta zabda kA prayoga kiyA hai| sacitra ardhamAgadhI koSa meM rakta
baMdhujIvaka kA artha-varSA Rtu meM utpanna hone vAlA, gogalagAya, devagAya,
indragopa, nAmaka lAla raMga kA jiiv|ardhmaagdhii koSakAra ne raktabandhujIvaka
zabda kA jo artha likhA hai, use lokabhASA meM indragopa yA (vIra bahUTI) kahate
haiN| yaha jIva raktavarNa kA tathA makhamala jaisA narama hotA hai| lakkhArasa-
lAkSArasa-mahAvara, lAkha ke raMga kA nAma hai| yaha rakta hotA hai, ise striyAM
apane pAMvoM meM lagAtI haiN| sarasa-pArijAtaka-meM sarasa zabda vikasita-khilA
huA, isa artha kA bodhaka hai| pArijAtaka zabda ke anekoM artha upalabdha hote
haiM, 1-puSpa-vizeSa, 2-pharahada kA phUla jo rakta varNa kA aura atyanta
zobhAyamAna hotA hai, 3-devavRkSa-vizeSa, 4-klptru-vishess| prastuta meM
pArijAtaka kA artha raktavarNIya puSpa hI adhika upayukta pratIta hotA hai|
taruNa divAyara- isa pada meM prayukta 'taruNa' zabda yuvA artha kA bodhaka hai
aura madhyAhnakAla meM hI sUrya taruNa-yuvA avasthA ko prApta huA mAnA jAtA hai,
ataH madhyAhna ke sUrya ko hI 'taruNa divAkara' kaha sakate haiM, parantu
prastuta meM yaha artha iSTa nahIM hai| rAjakumAra gajasukumAra kA varNa rakta
hone se dopahara ke sUrya ke sAtha usakA sAdRzya nahIM ho sktaa| yahI kAraNa hai
ki AcArya abhayadeva sUri ne taruNadivAkara kA artha udIyamAna-udaya hotA huA
sUrya kiyA hai| yaha artha ucita bhI hai, kyoMki udIyamAna sUrya kA varNa lAla
hotA hai, ata: rAjakumAra gajasukumAra ke rakta varNa ke sAtha isakA sambandha
ThIka baiTha jAtA hai| isake atirikta taruNa zabda rakta artha meM bhI prayukta
hotA hai| uttarAdhyayana sUtra ke 34veM adhyayana ke tejolezyA-prakaraNa meM
likhA hai "hiMgula dhAu saMkAsA, trunnaaiccsNnibhaa| suyatuMDapaIvanibhA,
teulesA u vnnnno"|| arthAt hiMgula dhAtu, taruNa sUrya, tote kI coMca aura
dIpazikhA ke samAna tejolezyA kA varNa hotA hai| prastuta sUtra meM taruNa zabda
rakta artha meM prayukta huA hai, anyathA tejolezyA ke varNa sambandhI artha kI
saMgati nahIM ho sktii| japAsumana, raktabandhu-jIvaka, lAkSArasa, sarasa
parijAtaka aura taruNa divAkara samAna jisakI prabhA ho, kAnti ho, camaka ho,
varNa ho, usako 'japAsumana- raktabandhujIvaka-lAkSArasa-sarasa pArijAtakataruNa
divAkara-samaprabha' kahate haiN| _ gaya-tAluya-samANaM-arthAt-gaja hAthI ko
kahate haiN| tAlu arthAt Upara ke dAMtoM aura kauve ke bIca kA gaDDhA  /  gaja
ke tAlu ko gajatAlu kahate haiM  /  gaja ke tAlu ke samAna jisakA tAlu ho vaha
'gaja 1. vRtti-patra-9

Page #96 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Third Class] [55] It is called "talu-saman". The palate of all beings is
blood and soft, but the palate of the elephant is considered to be especially
blood and soft. What happened in relation to the marriage, etc., of the young
Gaja-sukumara? In relation to this curiosity, the Sutrakar says: [16] In that
city, there lived a Brahmin named Somila. He was well-versed in the Rig Veda,
[Yajur Veda, Sama Veda, Atharva Veda, the fifth, history, and the sixth,
Nigantu, along with all their limbs and parts, and the secrets of all these four
Vedas. He was the 'sarak' (memorial) of these, i.e., he taught them, therefore
he was their originator, or he reminded those who had forgotten the Vedas, etc.,
therefore he was the memorial. He was the 'warak', i.e., he stopped those who
pronounced the Vedas, etc., incorrectly, therefore he was the 'warak'. He was
the 'dharak', i.e., he did not forget the Vedas, etc., that he had learned, but
held them firmly, therefore he was the 'dharak'. He was the 'parak' - proficient
in the Vedas, etc. He knew the six limbs. He was a scholar (pandit) in the 6th
tantra (Kapiliya Shastra). He was very proficient in mathematics, education,
ethics, grammar, prosody, etymology, astrology, and many other] Brahmin and
Parivajak related scriptures. That Brahmin Somila had a Brahmin wife named
Somashri. Somashri was beautiful, graceful, and youthful. That Brahmin Somila's
daughter and Brahmin Somashri's daughter was named Soma, who was beautiful and
graceful. She was flawless in terms of her form, shape, and beauty, therefore
she was excellent and had an excellent body. That daughter Soma, on another day,
went out of her house after bathing and adorning herself with ornaments,
surrounded by many hunchbacks, etc., and greater ones. After going out of the
house, she came to the royal road and started playing with a golden ball on the
royal road. 2. See, the ninth sutra of the third class. 1. 3. See, the first
sutra of the third class. See, class 3, a. 1, sutra 2.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 tRtIya varga] [55 tAlu-samAna' kahalAtA hai| vaise sabhI prANiyoM kA tAlu rakta
aura komala hotA hai para hAthI kA tAlu vizeSa rUpa se rakta aura komala mAnA
gayA hai| gajasukumAra ke yuvaka ho jAne para usake vivAha Adi ke sambandha meM
kyA huA? isa jijJAsA ke sambandha meM sUtrakAra kahate haiMsomila brAhmaNa
16-tattha NaM bAravaIe nayarIe somile nAma mAhaNe privsi-addddhe| riuvveya jAva
[jajuvveda-sAmaveda-ahavvaNaveda-itihAsapaMcamANaM, nighaMTuchaTThANaM cauNhaM
vedANaM saMgovaMgANaMsarahassANaM sArae, vArae, dhArae, pArae, saDaMgavI,
saTThitaMtavisArae, saMkhANe, sikkhAkappe, vAgaraNe, chaMde, nirutte,
joisAmayaNe, annesu ya bahUsu bamhaNNaesu parivAyaesu nayesu] supariNiTThie yAvi
hotthaa| tassa somila-mAhaNassa somasirI nAmaM mAhaNI hotthaa| sukmaal| tassa
NaM somilassa dhUyA somasirIe mAhaNIe attayA somA nAma dAriyA hotthaa| somAlA
jAva' suruuvaa| rUveNa jAva (jovvaNeNaM) lAvaNNeNaM ukkiTThA ukkiTThasarIrA yAvi
hotthaa| tae NaM sA somA dAriyA aNNayA kayAi NhAyA jAvara vibhUsiyA, bahUhiM
khujjAhiM jAva3 parikkhittA sayAo gihAo paDiNikkhamaDa, paDiNikkhamittA jeNeva
rAyamagge teNeva uvAgacchaDa, uvAgacchittA rAyamaggaMsi kaNagatiMdUsaeNaM
kIlamANI citttthi| usa dvArakA nagarI meM somila nAmaka eka brAhmaNa rahatA thA,
jo samRddha aura Rgveda, [yajurveda, sAmaveda, atharvaveda ina cAroM vedoM,
pAMcaveM, itihAsa, tathA chaThe nighaNTu, ina sabake aMgopAMga sahita rahasya kA
jJAtA thaa| vaha inakA 'sAraka' (smAraka) arthAt inako par3hAne vAlA thA, ata:
inakA pravartaka thA athavA jo koI vedAdi ko bhUla jAtA thA usako punaH yAda
karAtA thA, ataH vaha smAraka thaa| vaha vAraka thA arthAt jo koI dUsare loga
vedAdi kA azuddha uccAraNa karate the, unako rokatA thA, isaliye vaha 'vAraka'
thaa| vaha 'dhAraka' thA arthAt par3he hue vedAdi ko nahIM bhUlane vAlA thA
apitu unako acchI taraha dhAraNa karanevAlA thaa| vaha vedAdi kA 'pAraka'-
pAraMgata thaa| chaha aMgoM kA jJAtA thaa| SaSThitantra (kApilIya zAstra) meM
vizArada (paMDita) thaa| vaha gaNitazAstra, zikSAzAstra, AcArazAstra,
vyAkaraNazAstra, chandazAstra, vyutpattizAstra, jyotiSazAstra, ina saba zAstroM
meM tathA dUsare bahuta se] brAhmaNa aura pArivrAjaka sambandhI zAstroM meM
bar3A nipuNa thaa| usa somila brAhmaNa ke somazrI nAma kI brAhmaNI (patnI) thii|
somazrI sukumAra evaM rUpalAvaNya aura yauvana se sampanna thii| usa somila
brAhmaNa kI putrI aura somazrI brAhmaNI kI AtmajA somA nAma kI kanyA thI, jo
sukomala yAvat bar3I rUpavatI thii| rUpa, AkRti tathA lAvaNya-saundarya kI dRSTi
se usameM koI doSa nahIM thA, ataeva vaha uttama tathA uttama zarIravAlI thii|
vaha somA kanyA anyadA kisI dina snAna kara yAvat vastrAlaMkAroM se vibhUSita
ho, bahuta sI kubjAoM, yAvat mahattarikAoM se ghirI huI apane ghara se bAhara
niklii| ghara se bAhara nikala kara jahAM rAjamArga thA, vahA~ AI aura rAjamArga
meM svarNa kI geMda se khela khelane lgii| 2. dekhie, tRtIya varga kA
navamasUtra 1. 3. dekhie, tRtIya varga kA prathamasUtra  /  dekhie, varga 3, a.
1, sUtra 2 /

Page #97 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[56] The Entry of Soma into the Inner Palace [Antakrddasha 18 - At that time, at
that moment, the Arhat Arishthanemi was in Dwaraka. The assembly had gone out.
At that time, Krishna Vasudeva, having heard the news of the Lord's auspicious
arrival, bathed, adorned himself with all kinds of ornaments, and mounted an
elephant with his younger brother, Gajasukumal, riding with him. He was adorned
with a garland of Korant flowers, a canopy held above him, and white, excellent
chamaras waving on both sides. He was going through the middle of Dwaraka city
to pay homage to the Arhat Arishthanemi. On the way, he saw Soma, a girl playing
on the royal road. Seeing Soma's beauty, youth, and radiance, Krishna Vasudeva
was astonished. Then he called his obedient men. Calling them, he said: - "O
Devānupriya! Go to the Soma-Brahmana and ask him for this Soma girl. Obtain her
and bring her to the inner palace of the girls. This Soma girl will be the wife
of my younger brother, Gajasukumal." Then the obedient men did just that.
Discussion - 'Kannaṃteuraṃsi' - This word contains two words: 'kanya' and
'antaḥpura'. 'Kanya' is the name of a girl, a young woman, or an unmarried girl.
'Antaḥpura' refers to the royal dwelling place of women. Combining both words,
the meaning is: the royal palace where unmarried girls reside. The use of the
word 'Kannaṃteuraṃsi' in this sutra suggests that at that time, many young women
were gathered for the marriage of Gajasukumal. Worship of the Lord Arishthanemi
19 - Then Krishna Vasudeva went through the middle of Dwaraka city. As he went,
he reached the garden where the Arhat Arishthanemi was. Reaching there, he saw
the Arhat Arishthanemi, surrounded by canopies and umbrellas, with the gods
praising him and offering him flowers. Seeing the Arhat Arishthanemi, he
approached him with five types of approaches: (1) by scattering wealth, (2) by
not scattering wealth, (3) by approaching with a single mind, (4) by offering
anjali with his eyes, and (5) by unifying his mind.  -

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 56] somilakanyA kA antaHpura meM praveza [ antakRddazA 18 - teNaM kAleNaM teNa
samaeNaM arahA ariTThanemI samosaDhe  /  parisA niggayA  /  taNaM se kahe
vAsudeve imIse kahAe laddhaTThe samANe NhAe jAva vibhUsie gayasukumAleNaM
kumAreNaM saddhiM hatthikhaMdhavaragae sakoraMTamalladAmeNaM chatteNaM
dharijjamANeNaM seyavaracAmarAhiM uddhuvvamANIhiM bAravaIe nayarIe
majjhaMmajjheNaM arahao ariTTaNemissa pAyavaMdae niggacchamANe somaM dAriyaM
pAsai, pAsittA somAe dAriyAe rUveNa ya jovvaNeNa ya lAvaNNeNa ya jAyavimhae
koDuMbiyapurise saddAvei, saddAvittA evaM vayAsI - " gacchaha NaM tubbhe
devANuppiyA! somilaM mAhaNaM jAyittA somaM dAriyaM geNhaha, geNhittA
kaNNaMteuraMsi pakkhivaha  /  tae NaM esA gayasukumAlassa kumArassa bhAriyA
bhavissai  /  tae NaM koDuMbiya jAva [ purisA somaM dAriyaM geNhittA
kaNNaMteuraMsi ] pakkhivaMti  /  usa kAla aura usa samaya meM arihaMta
ariSTanemi dvArakA nagarI meM pdhaare| pariSad dharma-kathA sunane ko AI  /  usa
samaya kRSNa vAsudeva bhI bhagavAn ke zubhAgamana ke samAcAra se avagata ho,
snAna kara, yAvat vastrAlaMkAroM se vibhUSita ho gajasukumAla kumAra ke sAtha
hAthI ke hode para ArUr3ha hokara koraMTa puSpoM kI mAlA sahita chatra dhAraNa
kiye hue, zveta evaM zreSTha cAmaroM se donoM ora se nirantara vIjyamAna hote
hue, dvArakA nagarI ke madhya bhAga se hokara arhat ariSTanemi ke caraNa-vandana
ke liye jAte hue, rAja-mArga meM khelatI huI usa somA kanyA ko dekhate haiN|
somA kanyA ke rUpa, lAvaNya aura kAnti-yukta yauvana ko dekhakara kRSNa vAsudeva
atyanta Azcarya cakita hue  /  taba vaha kRSNa vAsudeva AjJAkArI puruSoM ko
bulAte haiM  /  bulAkara isa prakAra kahate haiM - "he devAnupriyo ! tuma somila
brAhmaNa ke pAsa jAo aura usase isa somA kanyA kI yAcanA karo, use prApta karo
aura phira use lekara kanyAoM ke antaHpura meM pahu~cA do| yaha somA kanyA, mere
choTe bhAI gajasukumAla kI bhAryA hogii|" taba AjJAkArI puruSoM ne yAvat vaisA
hI kiyA  /  vivecana -'kaNNaMteuraMsi' - isa pada meM kanyA aura antaHpura ye do
zabda haiN| kanyA, kumAra yA avivAhitA lar3akI kA nAma hai  /  antaHpura -
striyoM ke rAjakIya AvAsa bhavana ko kahate haiN| donoM zabdoM ko milAne para
artha hotA hai - vaha rAjamahala jisameM avivAhita lar3akiyA~ rahatI haiN|
prastuta sUtra meM 'kaNNaMteuraMsi' zabda ke prayoga se yaha pratIta hotA hai ki
usa samaya gajasukumAla ke vivAhArtha aneka kumAriyAM ekatrita kI gaI thiiN|
bhagavAn ariSTanemi kI upAsanA 19 - tae NaM se kaNhe vAsudeve bAravaIe nayarIe
majjhaMmajjheNaM niggacchai, niggacchittA jeNeva sahasaMbavaNe ujjANe jAva [
jeNeva arahA ariTThanemI teNeva uvAgacchai, uvAgacchittA arahao ariTTaNemissa
chattAtichattaM paDAgAtipaDAgaM vijjAharacAraNe jaMbhae ya deve ovayamANe
uppayamANe pAsai, pAsittA arahaM ariTThanemiM paMcaviheNaM abhigameNaM
abhigacchai  /  taM jahA - (1) sacittANaM davvANaM viusaraNAyAe (2) acittANaM
davvANaM aviusaraNayAe (3) egasADiyaM uttarAsaMgakaraNeNaM (4) cakkhupphAse
aMjalipaggaheNaM (5) maNaso egattIkaraNeNaM  /  jeNAmeva  /  -

Page #98 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Third Chapter] [57 Arhat Arishthanemi, he came, having come, Arhat
Arishthanemi, with great respect, performed the act of coming and going, having
performed, he bowed, he prostrated, having bowed, having prostrated, Arhat
Arishthanemi, not very close, not very far, listening attentively, prostrating,
with folded hands, facing, with humility] he worshipped. After that, Krishna
Vasudeva, from the middle part of Dwaraka city, having come out, [having come
out, where the Mahratram forest garden was and where Bhagwan Arishthanemi was,
he came there. Having come, he saw the umbrella over the Arhat Arishthanemi
Swami, the flags over the flags, and other such extraordinary things, and he saw
the Vidyadharas, the Charanas, the Manis, and the Jambhaka Devas coming down and
going up. Seeing, he performed five types of approaches and went in front of
Arhat Arishthanemi Swami. These five approaches are as follows: (1) Giving up of
fragrant flowers, drinks, etc., which are objects of consciousness, (2) Giving
up of clothes, ornaments, etc., which are objects of non-consciousness, (3)
Wearing a single shawl (dupatta), (4) Joining both hands as soon as the eyes
fall on Bhagwan, and (5) Concentrating the mind. Having performed these
approaches, he came where Arhat Bhagwan Arishthanemi was. Having come, he
performed circumambulation (three times) starting from the south direction.
Having performed circumambulation, he performed a praise-like bow and
prostration to Bhagwan. Having bowed and prostrated, not very close to Bhagwan,
not very far either, sitting in a suitable place, desiring to listen to the
Dharma-deshana, prostrating, with folded hands, facing] he started worshipping.
Dharma-deshana and detachment 20-Then, Arhat Arishthanemi, to Krishna Vasudeva,
the son of Gaya-sukumala, spoke the Dharma, he listened. Then, that Gaya-
sukumala, to Arhat Arishthanemi, thought deeply about the Dharma, [that I will
ask my mother and father, just like a Meghkumar, just like a Mahaliya-vajja,
until I reach the Vaddhiya-kula] with great respect, he performed the act of
coming and going, having performed, he bowed, he prostrated, having bowed,
having prostrated, he said thus: "I have received, O Master! the Niggantha-
pavana, I have received, O Master! the Niggantha-pavana, I have received, O
Master! the Niggantha-pavana, I have received, O Master! the Niggantha-pavana, I
have received, O Master! the Niggantha-pavana. Thus, O Master! Thus, O Master!
Not otherwise, O Master! I desire, O Master! I accept, O Master! I desire and
accept, O Master! This is what I will say to you! O Deva-anuppiya! I will ask my
mother and father. Then, after getting my head shaved, I will leave the
household and become a homeless one. Alas, O Deva-anuppiya! Do not restrain me.
Then, that Gaya-sukumala, bowed and prostrated to Arhat Arishthanemi, having
bowed and prostrated, he came by the same path, having come, he went to the
elephant-stable, having gone, he went to the middle of the city, which was
adorned with great buildings, with a large number of chariots, and with a large
number of flags, by the same path, having come, he went to the elephant-stable,
having gone, he climbed up the elephant-stable, having climbed up, he went to
his mother and father by the same path, having come, he performed the act of
bowing at the feet of his mother and father, having performed, he said thus:
"Thus, O Mother and Father! I have taken refuge in the Dharma of Arhat
Arishthanemi, and I also desire and accept and am pleased with this Dharma.
Here, the Sutrakar has described the life of Gajasukumala as "just like a
Meghkumar", and then he has given the reading "Mahaliya-vajja", which means
without a wife or unmarried. In the Jnata, Meghkumar has been described as
married. Therefore, the word presented here shows the difference in the
situation of both. Here, to complete the reading "until", keeping this
difference in mind, the appropriate completing readings have been started from a
new paragraph.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 tRtIya varga] [57 arahA ariTThanemI teNAmeva uvAgacchai, uvAgacchittA arahaM
ariTThanemiM tikkhutto AyAhiNaM payAhiNaM karei, karittA vaMdai, NamaMsai,
vaMdittA NamaMsittA arahao ari?Nemissa NaccAsanne NAidUre sussUsamANe namasamANe
paMjaliuDe abhimuhe viNaeNaM] pjjuvaasi| tatpazcAt kRSNa vAsudeva dvArakA nagarI
ke madhya bhAga se hote hae nikale. [nikalakara jahAM mahatrAmavana udyAna thA
aura bhagavAna ariSTanemi the.vahA~ aaye|aakr arihaMta ariSTanemi svAmI ke
chatra para chatra aura patakAoM para patAkA Adi atizayoM ko dekhA tathA
vidyAdharoM cAraNa maniyoM aura jaMbhaka devoM ko nIce utarate hue evaM Upara
uThate hue dekhaa| dekhakara pAMca prakAra ke abhigama karake arihaMta
ariSTanemi svAmI ke sanmukha cle| ve pAMca abhigama isa prakAra haiM - (1.)
puSpa-pAna Adi sacitta dravyoM kA tyAga, (2) vastra-AbhUSaNa Adi acitta dravyoM
kA atyAga, (3) eka zATikA (dupaTTe) kA uttarAsaMga, (4) bhagavAn para dRSTi
par3ate hI donoM hAtha jor3anA aura (5) mana ko ekAgra krnaa| ye abhigraha
karake jahAM arhat bhagavAn ariSTanemi the vahAM aaye| Akara arihaMta ariSTanemi
ko dakSiNa dizA se Arambha karake (tIna bAra) pradakSiNA kii| pradakSiNA karake
bhagavAn ko stutirUpa vandana kiyA aura namaskAra kiyaa| vandananamaskAra karake
bhagavAn ke atyanta samIpa nahIM aura atyanta dUra bhI nahIM, aise samucita
sthAna para baiThakara, dharmopadeza sunane kI icchA karate hue, namaskAra
karate hue, donoM hAtha jor3e, sanmukha rahakara] upAsanA karane lge|
dharmadezanA aura virakti 20-tae NaM arahA ariTThaNemI kaNhassa vAsudevassa
gayasukumAlassa kumArassa tIse ya dhammaM kahei, kaNhe pddige| taeNaM se
gayasukumAle arahao ariTThanemissa aMtiyaM dhamma soccA, [jaM navaraM,
ammApiyaraM ApucchAmi jahA meho maheliyAvajjaM jAva vaDDiyakule] nisamma
haTThatuDhe arahaM ariTThanemiM tikkhutto AyAhiNaM payAhiNaM karei, karittA
vaMdai namasai, vaMdittA namaMsittA evaM vayAsIsaddahAmi NaM bhaMte! niggaMthaM
pAvayaNaM, pattiyAmi NaM bhaMte! niggaMthaM pAvayaNaM, roemi NaM bhaMte!
niggaMthaM pAvayaNaM, abbhuTTemiNaM bhaMte! niggaMthaM paavynnN| evameyaM
bhaMte! tahameyaM bhaMte! avitahameyaM bhaMte! icchiyameyaM bhaMte!
paDicchiyameyaM bhaMte! icchiya-paDicchiyameyaM bhaMte! se jaheyaM tubbhe
vayaha! navari devANuppiyA! ammApiyaro aapucchaami| tao pacchA muMDe bhavittA
NaM agArAo aNagAriyaM pvvissaami| ahAsuhaM devANuppiyA! mA paDibaMdhaM krehi|
tae NaM se gayasukumAle arahaM ariTunemiM vaMdai namasai, vaMdittA namaMsittA
jeNAmeva hatthirayaNe teNAmeva uvAgacchai, uvAgacchitA hatthikhaMdhavaragae
mahayAbhaDa-caDagara-pahakareNaM bAravaIe nayarIe majhamajheNaM jeNAmeva sae
bhavaNe teNAmeva uvAgacchai, uvAgacchittA hatthikhaMdhAo paccoruhai,
paccoruhittA jeNAmeva ammApiyaro teNAmeva uvAgacchai, uvAgacchittA ammApiUNaM
pAyavaMdaNaM karei, karittA evaM vayAsI-evaM khalu ammayAo! mae arahao
ariTThanemissa aMtie dhamme nisaMte, se vi ya me dhamme icchie paDicchie
abhiruie| yahAM sUtrakAra ne gajasukumAla ke jIvana ko"jahA meho"yaha kahakara
meghakumAra ke samAna batAkara Age 'maheliyAvajja' pATha diyA hai, jisakA artha
hotA hai mahilArahita yA avivAhita  /  jJAtA0 meM meghakumAra ko vivAhita vyakta
kiyA hai| ata: yahA~ prastuta zabda se donoM kI sthiti kI vibhinnatA darzAyI hai
/  yahA~ 'jAva' pATha kI pUrti hetu isa vibhinnatA ko dRSTi meM rakha kara
upayukta pUrti-pAThoM ko naye pairegrApha se zurU kiyA gayA hai|

Page #99 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[58] The mother and father of the noble youth, Gayasukumala, said to him, "You
are blessed, son! You are perfect, son! You are worthy, son! You are virtuous,
son! You have renounced the world for the sake of the Arhat, Arhat Ariṭṭhanemi,
and you have taken refuge in the Dharma. You have desired, received, and
embraced the Dharma."  The noble youth, Gayasukumala, replied to his mother and
father, "Indeed, mother and father! I have renounced the world for the sake of
the Arhat, Arhat Ariṭṭhanemi, and I have taken refuge in the Dharma. I have
desired, received, and embraced the Dharma. I wish, mother and father, to become
a monk for the sake of the Arhat, Arhat Ariṭṭhanemi, after being properly
instructed and ordained."  The goddess, his mother, was deeply saddened by this,
and she spoke in a voice choked with sorrow, her words filled with anguish,
grief, and jealousy. Overwhelmed by the pain of losing her son, she became like
a withered lotus, her body weak and pale, her hair disheveled, her ornaments
loosened, her clothes torn, her hands trembling, her eyes filled with tears, her
voice choked with sobs. She collapsed, her body heavy and lifeless.  The
goddess, his mother, overcome with grief, her face wet with tears, her voice
trembling, her body shaking, her eyes filled with sorrow, her heart heavy with
pain, spoke to her son, Gayasukumala, in a voice filled with anguish:  "My son!
You are our only child, our beloved son, our pride and joy, our hope and our
future. You are like a precious jewel, a rare gem, a breath of fresh air, a
source of joy and happiness. You are like a rare flower, a precious treasure.
Why would you leave us? We cannot bear to be separated from you, even for a
moment. Please stay with us, my son! Enjoy the pleasures of this world, the joys
of life, while we are still alive. After we are gone, you can then renounce the
world and become a monk for the sake of the Arhat, Arhat Ariṭṭhanemi, and
continue the lineage of our family."  The noble youth, Gayasukumala, hearing his
mother and father speak thus, replied, "Mother and father, I understand your
feelings. You have said, 'My son! You are our only child, our beloved son, our
pride and joy, our hope and our future. You are like a precious jewel, a rare
gem, a breath of fresh air, a source of joy and happiness. You are like a rare
flower, a precious treasure. Why would you leave us? We cannot bear to be
separated from you, even for a moment. Please stay with us, my son! Enjoy the
pleasures of this world, the joys of life, while we are still alive. After we
are gone, you can then renounce the world and become a monk for the sake of the
Arhat, Arhat Ariṭṭhanemi, and continue the lineage of our family.' But, mother
and father, I cannot stay in this world, which is full of suffering, pain, and
sorrow. I must renounce the world and become a monk for the sake of the Arhat,
Arhat Ariṭṭhanemi."

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 - 58] [antakRddazA tae NaM tassa gayasukumAlassa ammApiyaro evaM vayAsI-
dhannosi tumaM jAyA! saMpuNNosi tumaM jAyA! kayatthosi tumaM jAyA!
kayalakkhaNosi tumaM jAyA! jaNNaM tume arahao ariTThanemissa aMtie dhamme
nisaMte se vi ya te dhamme icchie paDicchie abhiruie| _ tae NaM se gayasukumAle
ammApiyaro doccaM pi taccaM pi evaM vayAsI-evaM khalu ammayAo! mae arahao
ariTThanemissa aMtie dhamme nisaMte, se vi ya me dhamme icchie paDicchie
abhiruie| taM icchAmi NaM ammayAo! tubbhehiM abbhaNuNNAe samANe arahao
ariTTanemissa aMtie muMDe bhavittA NaM agArAo aNagAriyaM pvvitte| tae NaM sA
devaI devI taM aNiTuM aMkaMtaM appiyaM amaNuNNaM amaNAmaM assuyapuvvaM pharusaM
giraM soccA nisamma imeNaM eyArUveNaM maNomANasieNaM mahayA puttadukkheNaM
abhibhUyA samANI seyAgaya-romakUvapagalaMta-ciliNagAyA soyabhara-paveviyaMgI
nitteyA dINa-vimaNa-vayaNA karayalamAliyavva kamalamAlA
takkhaNaoluggadubbalasarIra-lAvaNNasunna-nicchAya-gayasirIyA pasiDhilabhUsaNa-
paDaMtakhummiyasaMcuNNiyadhavalavalaya-pabbhaTTha-uttarijjA sUmAlavikiNNa-
kesahatthA mucchAvasanaTThaceya-garuI parasuniyattavva caMpagalayA
nivvattamahevva iMdalaTThI vimukkasaMdhi-baMdhaNA koTTimatalaMsi savvaMgehiM
dhasatti pddiyaa| tae NaM sA devaI devI sasaMbhamovattiyAe turiyaM
kaMcaNabhiMgAramuhaviNiggaya-sIyalajalavimala-dhArAe
parisiMcamANanivvAviyagAyalaTThI ukkhevaya-tAlaviMTa-vIyaNaga-jaNiyavAeNaM
saphusieNaM aMteuraparijaNeNaM AsAsiyA samANI muttAvali-sannigAsa-pavaDaMta-
aMsudhArAhiM siMcamANI paohare, kaluNa vimaNa-dINA royamANI kaMdamANI tippamANI
soyamANI vilavamANI gayasukumAlaM kumAraM evaM vayAsI "tumaM si NaM jAyA! amhaM
ege putte iTe kaMte pie maNuNNe maNAme thegje vesAsie sammae bahumae aNumae
bhaMDakaraMDagasamANe rayaNe rayaNabhUe jIviya-UsAsie hiyaya-NaMdi-jaNaNe
uMbarapuSpaM va dullahe savaNayAe, kimaMga puNa pAsaNayAe? no khalu jAyA! amhe
icchAmo khaNamavi vippaogaM shitte| taM bhuMjAhi tAva jAyA! vipule mANussae
kAmabhoge jAva tAva vayaM jIvAmo! tao pacchA amhehiM kAlagaehiM pariNayavae
vaDDhiya-kulavaMsataMtu-kajjammi nirAvayakkhe arahao ariTThanemissa aMtie muMDe
bhavittA agArAo aNagAriyaM pvvisssi|"  /  tae NaM se gayasukumAle ammApiUhiM
evaM vutte samANe ammApiyaro evaM vayAsI-taheva NaM taM ammo! jaheva NaM tubbhe
mamaM evaM vayaha-"tumaM si NaM jAyA! amhaM ege putte iTe kaMte pie maNuNNe
maNAme thejje vesAsie sammae bahumae aNumae bhaMDakaraMDagasamANe rayaNe
rayaNabhUe jIviya-ussAsie hiyaya-NaMdikare uMbarapappaM va dallahe savaNayAe.
kimaMga paNa pAsaNayAe? no khalu jAyA! amhe icchAmo khaNamavi vippaogaM shitte|
taM bhuMjAhi tAva jAyA! vipule mANussae kAmabhoge jAva tAva vayaM jiivaamo| tao
pacchA amhehiM kAlagaehiM pariNayavae vaDDhiya-kulavaMsataMtukajjammi
nirAvayakkhe arahao ariTThanemissa aMtie muMDe bhavittA agArAo aNagAriyaM
pvvisssi|" evaM khalu ammayAo! mANussae bhave adhuve aNitie asAsae 1.
pAThAntara-vilINagAyA

Page #100 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Third Chapter] [59]  When overcome by the delusion of the five senses, fickle,
uncertain, like water bubbles, like a drop of water on a lotus leaf, like a
swarm of bees attracted by the scent of flowers, like a dream, like a vision, in
the nature of destruction, decay, and annihilation, then indeed, one should
completely abandon the world. Who knows, mother, whether one will go to the next
life or not? I desire, mother, that you, having been well-instructed, should,
after the death of the Arhat, the great Arhat, the great Neminatha, become a
monk, having renounced the household life.  Therefore, mother and father, say to
this dear son, "My dear son, you have been born into a noble family, and you
have enjoyed many riches, gold, silver, bronze, copper, jewels, conch shells,
stones, corals, precious stones, and all kinds of wealth. You have enjoyed the
pleasures of the world, and you have been honored by the people. Now, my dear
son, enjoy the pleasures of the world, the great multitude of human beings, and
the respect they give. Then, after you have enjoyed these pleasures, you will
become a monk, after the death of the Arhat, the great Arhat, the great
Neminatha, having renounced the household life."  Then, this dear son said to
his mother and father, "Mother and father, as you have said to me, 'My dear son,
you have been born into a noble family, and you have enjoyed many riches, and
you will become a monk,' so, mother and father, I will enjoy gold, silver,
bronze, copper, jewels, conch shells, stones, corals, precious stones, and all
kinds of wealth, and I will enjoy the pleasures of the world, and I will be
honored by the people. But, mother and father, I will not enjoy the pleasures of
the world, the great multitude of human beings, and the respect they give. I
will not enjoy the pleasures of the world, the great multitude of human beings,
and the respect they give. I will not enjoy the pleasures of the world, the
great multitude of human beings, and the respect they give. I will not enjoy the
pleasures of the world, the great multitude of human beings, and the respect
they give. I will not enjoy the pleasures of the world, the great multitude of
human beings, and the respect they give. I will not enjoy the pleasures of the
world, the great multitude of human beings, and the respect they give. I will
not enjoy the pleasures of the world, the great multitude of human beings, and
the respect they give. I will not enjoy the pleasures of the world, the great
multitude of human beings, and the respect they give. I will not enjoy the
pleasures of the world, the great multitude of human beings, and the respect
they give. I will not enjoy the pleasures of the world, the great multitude of
human beings, and the respect they give. I will not enjoy the pleasures of the
world, the great multitude of human beings, and the respect they give. I will
not enjoy the pleasures of the world, the great multitude of human beings, and
the respect they give. I will not enjoy the pleasures of the world, the great
multitude of human beings, and the respect they give. I will not enjoy the
pleasures of the world, the great multitude of human beings, and the respect
they give. I will not enjoy the pleasures of the world, the great multitude of
human beings, and the respect they give. I will not enjoy the pleasures of the
world, the great multitude of human beings, and the respect they give. I will
not enjoy the pleasures of the world, the great multitude of human beings, and
the respect they give. I will not enjoy the pleasures of the world, the great
multitude of human beings, and the respect they give. I will not enjoy the
pleasures of the world, the great multitude of human beings, and the respect
they give. I will not enjoy the pleasures of the world, the great multitude of
human beings, and the respect they give. I will not enjoy the pleasures of the
world, the great multitude of human beings, and the respect they give. I will
not enjoy the pleasures of the world, the great multitude of human beings, and
the respect they give. I will not enjoy the pleasures of the world, the great
multitude of human beings, and the respect they give. I will not enjoy the
pleasures of the world, the great multitude of human beings, and the respect
they give. I will not enjoy the pleasures of the world, the great multitude of
human beings, and the respect they give. I will not enjoy the pleasures of the
world, the great multitude of human beings, and the respect they give. I will
not enjoy the pleasures of the world, the great multitude of human beings, and
the respect they give. I will not enjoy the pleasures of the world, the great
multitude of human beings, and the respect they give. I will not enjoy the
pleasures of the world, the great multitude of human beings, and the respect
they give. I will not enjoy the pleasures of the world, the great multitude of
human beings, and the respect they give. I will not enjoy the pleasures of the
world, the great multitude of human beings, and the respect they give. I will
not enjoy the pleasures of the world, the great multitude of human beings, and
the respect they give. I will not enjoy the pleasures of the world, the great
multitude of human beings, and the respect they give. I will not enjoy the
pleasures of the world, the great multitude of human beings, and the respect
they give. I will not enjoy the pleasures of the world, the great multitude of
human beings, and the respect they give. I will not enjoy the pleasures of the
world, the great multitude of human beings, and the respect they give. I will
not enjoy the pleasures of the world, the great multitude of human beings, and
the respect they give. I will not enjoy the pleasures of the world, the great
multitude of human beings, and the respect they give. I will not enjoy the
pleasures of the world, the great multitude of human beings, and the respect
they give. I will not enjoy the pleasures of the world, the great multitude of
human beings, and the respect they give. I will not enjoy the pleasures of the
world, the great multitude of human beings, and the respect they give. I will
not enjoy the pleasures of the world, the great multitude of human beings, and
the respect they give. I will not enjoy the pleasures of the world, the great
multitude of human beings, and the respect they give. I will not enjoy the
pleasures of the world, the great multitude of human beings, and the respect
they give. I will not enjoy the pleasures of the world, the great multitude of
human beings, and the respect they give. I will not enjoy the pleasures of the
world, the great multitude of human beings, and the respect they give. I will
not enjoy the pleasures of the world, the great multitude of human beings, and
the respect they give. I will not enjoy the pleasures of the world, the great
multitude of human beings, and the respect they

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 tRtIya varga] [59 vasaNasaovaddavAbhibhUte vinjulayAcaMcale aNicce
jalabubbuyasamANe kusaggajalabiMdusannibhe saMjhabbharAgasarise
suviNadaMsaNovame saDaNa-paDaNa-viddhaMsaNa-dhamme pacchA puraM ca NaM
avssvippjhnnije| se ke NaM jANai ammyaao| ke puvviM gamaNAe ke pacchA gamaNAe?
taM icchAmi NaM ammayAo! tubbhehiM abbhaNuNNAe samANe arahao ariTThanemissa
aMtie muMDe bhavittA NaM agArAo aNagAriyaM pvvitte| tae NaM taM gayasukumAlaM
kumAraM ammApiyaro evaM vayAsI-ime ya te jAyA! ajaya-pajjaya piupajjayAgae
subahuM hiraNe ya suvaNNe ya kaMse ya dUse ya maNimottiya-saMkha-sila-
ppavAlarattarayaNa-saMtasAra-sAvaejje ya alAhi jAva AsattamAo kulavaMsAo pagAmaM
dAuM pagAmaM bhottuM pagAmaM pribhaaeuN| taM aNuhohI tAva jAyA! vipulaM
mANussagaM iddddiskkaarsmudyN| tao pacchA aNubhUya kallANe arahao ariTThanemissa
aMtie muMDe bhavittA agArAo aNagAriyaM pvvisssi| tae NaM se gayasukumAle
ammApiyaraM evaM vayAsI-taheva NaM taM ammayAo! jaM NaM tubbhe mamaM evaM vayaha
-"ime te jAyA! ajjaga-pajjaga-piupajjayAgae jAva pvvisssi|"-evN khalu ammayAo!
hiraNe ya jAva sAvaejje ya aggisAhie corasAhie rAyasAhie dAiyasAhie maccusAhie,
aggisAmapaNe corasAmaNNe rAyasAmaNNe dAiyasAmaNNe maccusAmaNNe saDaNa-
paDaNaviddhaMsaNadhamme pacchA puraM ca NaM avassa vippjhnnijje| se ke NaM jANai
ammayAo! kiM puvviM gamaNAe? ke pacchA gamaNAe? taM icchAmi NaM ammayAo!
tubbhehiM abbhaNuNNAe samANe arahao ariTThanemissa aMtie muMDe bhavittA agArAo
aNagAriyaM pvvitte| tae NaM tassa gayasukumAlassa kumArassa ammApiyaro jAhe no
saMcAeMti gayasukumAlaM kumAraM bahUhiM visayANulomAhiM AghavaNAhi ya
paNNavaNAhi ya saNNavaNAhi ya viNNavaNAhi ya Aghavittae vA paNNavittae vA
saNNavittae vA viNNavittae vA tAhe visayapaDikUlAhiM saMjamabhayauvveyakAriyAhiM
paNNavaNAhiM paNNavemANA evaM vayAsI esaNaM jAyA! niggaMthe pAvayaNe sacce
aNuttare kevalie paDipuNNe neyAue saMsuddhe sallagattaNe siddhimagge muttimagge
nijANamagge nivvANamagge savvadukkhapahINamagge, ahIva egaMtadiTThIe, khuro iva
egaMtadhArAe, lohamayA iva javA cAveyavvA, vAluyAkavale iva nirassAe, gaMgA iva
mahAnaI paDisoyagamaNAe, mahAsamuddo iva bhuyAhiM duttare, tikkhaM kamiyavvaM,
garuaM laMbeyavvaM, asidhAravvayaM criyvvN| no khalu kappai jAyA! samaNANaM
niggaMthANaM AhAkammie vA uddesie vA kIyagaDe vA Thavie vA raie vA
dubbhikkhabhatte vA kaMtArabhatte vA baddaliyAbhatte vA gilANabhatte vA
mUlabhoyaNe vA kaMdabhoyaNe vA phalabhoyaNe vA bIyabhoyaNe vA hariyabhoyaNe vA
bhottae vA pAyae vaa| tumaM ca NaM jAyA! suhasamucie no ceva NaM duhasamucie,
nAlaM sIyaM nAlaM uNhaM nAlaM khuhaM nAlaM pivAsaM nAlaM vAiya-pittaya-siMbhiya-
sannivAie vivihe rogAyaMke, uccAvae gAmakaMTae, bAvIsaM parIsahovasagge udiNNe
sammaM ahiyaasitte| taM bhuMjAhi tAva jAyA! mANussae kaambhoge| tao pacchA
bhuttabhogI arahao ariTThanemissa aMtie muMDe bhavittA agArAo aNagAriyaM
pvvisssi|

Page #101 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Here is the English translation, preserving the Jain terms:  [Antakrddasa Tale
Then That Gajasukumala Kumara When Mother-Father Thus Spoken Being Mother-Father
Thus Spoke-"O Mother! What You Me Thus Speak-'This Now Jaina! Nirgranthas
Preaching True Unexcelled Again That Same Until Then After Bhuttabhogi Arihanta
Aristanemi's Near Shaved Becoming From Home Homelessness Shall Renounce.' Thus
Verily O Mother! Nirgranthas Preaching Of How Many Cowardly Pusillanimous Men
This-Worldly Attached Other-Worldly Dispassionate Difficult To Approach Wicked
People's, Not Verily Resolute. Determined Steadfast Here What Difficult To Do?
That I Wish O Mother! By You Permitted Being Arihanta Aristanemi's Near Shaved
Becoming From Home Homelessness To Renounce.]  Then That Krishna Vasudeva This
Story Heard Being Where Gajasukumala There Approaches, Approaching Gajasukumala
Embraces, Embracing Lap Places, Placing Thus Spoke-'You My Uterine Younger
Brother. That Do Not O Devanappriya! Now Arihanta Aristanemi's Near Shaved Until
[Becoming From Home Homelessness] Renounce. I You In Barhavati City Great-Great
Coronation Shall Consecrate.' Then That Gajasukumala By Krishna Vasudeva Thus
Spoken Being Silent Remains. Then That Gajasukumala Krishna Vasudeva And Mother-
Father Again And Again Thus Spoke-  'Thus Verily O Devanappriya! Human [Sensual
Pleasures Impure Vomited Bile-Influx Phlegm-Influx] Saliva-Influx Until [Semen-
Influx Blood-Influx Foul-Smelling Exhalations Foul-Smelling Urine-Feces
Abundantly Filled Excretion-Urination-Saliva-Snot-Vomit-Bile-Semen-Blood-Born
Impermanent Unstable Unreliable Destruction-Prone Afterwards Front And That
Verily] Abandoning Shall Become, That I Wish O Devanappriya! By You Permitted
Being Arihanta Aristanemi's Near [Shaved Becoming From Home Homelessness] To
Renounce.'  [Then That Gajasukumala (R) Kumara Arihanta Aristanemi Svami's From
Dharma-Hearing Having Done And It Heart-In Holding, Delighted-Satisfied Becoming
Arihanta Aristanemi Svami Three Times Rightward Circumambulation Did,
Circumambulation Having Done Veneration-Obeisance Made, Veneration-Obeisance
Having Made Thus Said-"Bhagavan! I Nirgranthas Preaching On Faith Hold, It
Highest Accept, I On It Belief Hold, Me Nirgranthas-Preaching Pleases, That Is
Jinasasana According To Conduct Desiring. Bhagavan! I Nirgranthas-Preaching To
Accept Wish. Bhagavan! This Such Only Is (As You Say), This That Type's Only Is,
That Is True. Bhagavan! I Its Desire Have Done, Again Again Desire Have Done,
Bhagavan! This Desired And Again Again Desired Is. This Such Only Is As You
Command. Special Matter This Is That, O Devanappriya! I My Mother-Father's Order
Take, Thereafter Shaved Becoming Diksha Shall Undertake."]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 60] [antakRddazA tae NaM se gayasukumAle kumAre ammApiuhiM evaM vutte samANe
ammApiyaraM evaM vayAsItaheva NaM taM ammayAo! jaM NaM tubbhe mamaM evaM
vayaha-"esa NaM jAyA! niggaMthe pAvayaNe sacce aNuttare puNaravi taM ceva jAva
tao pacchA bhuttabhogI arahao ariTThanemissa aMtie muMDe bhavittA agArAo
aNagAriyaM pvvisssi|" evaM khalu ammayAo! niggaMthe pAvayaNe kIvANaM kAyarANaM
kApurisANaM ihalogapaDibaddhANaM paraloganippivAsANaM duraNucare pAyayajaNassa,
no ceva NaM dhiirss| nicchiyavavasiyassa ettha kiM dukkaraM karaNayAe? taM
icchAmi NaM ammayAo! tubbhehiM abbhaNuNNAe samANe arahao ariTThanemissa aMtie
muMDe bhavittA agArAo aNagAriyaM pavvaittae] tae NaM se kaNhe vAsudeve imIse
kahAe laddhaDhe samANe jeNeva gayasukumAle teNeva uvAgacchai, uvAgacchittA
gayasukumAlaM AliMgai, AliMgittA ucchaMge nivesei, nivesettA evaM vayAsI-'tumaM
mamaM sahodare kaNIyase bhaayaa| taM mA NaM tumaM devANuppiyA! iyANiM arahao
ariTThanemissa aMtie muMDe jAva [bhavittA agArAo aNagAriyaM] pvvyaahi| ahaNNaM
tume bAravaIe nayarIe mahayA-mahayA rAyAbhiseeNaM abhisiNcissaami|' tae NaM se
gayasukumAle kaNheNaM vAsudeveNaM evaM vutte samANe tusiNIe sNcitttthi| tae NaM
se gayasukumAle kaNhaM vAsudevaM ammApiyaro ya doccaM pi taccaM pi evaM vayAsI
evaM khalu devANuppiyA! mANussayA kAma [ bhogA asuI vaMtAsavA pittAsavA]
khelAsavA jAva [sukkAsavA soNiyAsavA durUya-ussAsa nIsAsA durUya-mutta-purIsa-
pUya-bahupaDipuNNA uccAra-pAsavaNa-khela-siMghANaga-vaMta-pitta-sukka-
soNiyasaMbhavA adhuvA aNitiyA asAsayA saDaNa-paDaNa-viddhaMsaNadhammA pacchA
puraM ca NaM avassa] vippajahiyavvA bhavissaMti, taM icchAmi NaM devANuppiyA!
tubbhehiM abbhaNuNNAe samANe arahao ariTThanemissa aMtie jAva [ muMDe bhavittA
agArAo aNagAriyaM] pvvitte| _ usa samaya bhagavAn ariSTanemi ne kRSNa vAsudeva
aura gajasukumAla kumAra pramukha usa sabhA ko dharmopadeza diyaa| prabhu kI
amogha vANI sunane ke pazcAt kRSNa apane AvAsa ko lauTa gye| tadanantara
gajasukumAla kumAra bhagavAn zrI ariSTanemi ke pAsa dharmakathA sunakara virakta
hokara bole- bhagavan ! mAtA-pitA se pUchakara maiM Apake pAsa dIkSA grahaNa
kruuNgaa| megha kumAra kI taraha, vizeSa rUpa se mAtA-pitA ne unheM mahilAvarja
(avivAhita avasthA-arthAt vivAha aura) vaMzavRddhi hone ke bAda dIkSA grahaNa
karane ko khaa| [tatpazcAt gajasukumAla(ra) kumAra ne arihaMta ariSTanemi svAmI
ke pAsa se dharma-zravaNa karake aura use hRdaya meM dhAraNa karake, hRSTa-tuSTa
hokara arihaMta ariSTanemi svAmI ko tIna bAra dAhinI ora se Arambha karake
pradakSiNA kI, pradakSiNA karake vandana-namaskAra kiyA, vaMdana-namaskAra
karake isa prakAra kahA-"bhagavan! maiM nirgrantha pravacana para zraddhA karatA
hU~, use sarvottama svIkAra karatA huuN| maiM usa para pratIti karatA huuN|
mujhe nirgrantha-pravacana rucatA hai, arthAt jinazAsana ke anusAra AcaraNa
karane kI abhilASA karatA huuN| bhagavan ! maiM nirgranthapravacana ko aMgIkAra
karanA cAhatA huuN| bhagavan ! yaha aisA hI hai (jaisa Apa kahate haiM), yaha
usI prakAra kA hai, arthAt satya hai  /  bhagavan ! maiMne isakI icchA kI hai,
punaH punaH icchA kI hai, bhagavan ! yaha icchita aura punaH punaH icchita hai|
yaha vaisA hI hai jaisA Apa pharamAte haiM  /  vizeSa bAta yaha hai ki, he
devAnupriya ! maiM apane mAtA-pitA kI AjJA le lU~, tatpazcAt muNDita hokara
dIkSA grahaNa

Page #102 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[61 Third Class] I will do. "] The Lord said - Devānupriya! Do what gives you
happiness, but do not delay in it. Thereafter, Gajasukumāl (r) Kumār paid homage
to the Arhant Ariṣṭanemi, that is, he praised him, bowed to him, and after
paying homage and bowing, he went to where the Hastīratna was. Going there, he
sat on the elephant's shoulder and with the great warriors and the family with a
large group, he came through the middle of the city of Dwārkā to where his house
was. Coming there, he got down from the elephant's shoulder, bowed at the feet
of his parents and said thus - 'O Mother and Father! I have heard the Dharma
from the Lord Ariṣṭanemi and I have desired to attain it, I have desired it
again and again. It is pleasing to me.' Thereafter, Gajasukumāl's parents spoke
thus - 'Son! You are blessed, Son! You are virtuous, O Son! You are fulfilled,
that you have heard the Dharma from the Lord Ariṣṭanemi and that Dharma is also
pleasing to you, again and again pleasing and pleasing to you.' Thereafter,
Gajasukumāl said to his parents for the second time and the third time - 'Mother
and Father! I have heard the Dharma from the Arhant Lord Ariṣṭanemi. I have
desired that Dharma, I have desired it again and again, it has become pleasing
to me. Therefore, O Mother and Father! With your permission, I want to get my
head shaved near the Lord Ariṣṭanemi, renounce my household life and accept the
vow of Anāgārīta.' Thereafter, Devakī Devī, hearing that inauspicious
(unwanted), unpleasant, unpleasing and unmanageable (not pleasing to the mind),
never heard before, harsh speech and holding it in her heart, was afflicted with
the great grief of the loss of her son. Sweat came out of her pores, causing
sweat to flow from her limbs. Due to the excess of grief, her limbs began to
tremble. She became weak. She became humble and dejected. She became like a
lotus garland stained with palm. At the moment of hearing the words "I want to
accept the vow", she became sad and weak. She became devoid of beauty, devoid of
radiance, devoid of glory, her body became weak, her ornaments became very
loose, the excellent rings worn on her hands slipped to the ground and broke
into pieces. Her upper garment slipped. The delicate hair strands scattered. Due
to fainting, her mind was lost, her body became heavy. She appeared like a
champak tree cut by an axe and like an Indra flag (without glory) after the
festival was over. The joints of her body loosened. Thus, Devakī Devī fell to
the ground (floor) with a thud from all her limbs. _ Thereafter, Devakī Devī,
with confusion, quickly, was sprinkled with the pure stream of cold water that
came out of the mouth of the golden pot. Therefore, her body became cool. She
was reassured by the people of the inner apartments with the air produced by the
utkshepak (a type of bamboo fan), tālavṛnta (a fan made of palm leaves) and
vījanaka (a bamboo fan whose handle is held from inside) and containing water
droplets. Then Devakī Devī began to weep, watering and soaking her breasts with
a stream of tears like a string of pearls. She became pitiful, dejected and
humble. She wept, cried, dripped sweat and saliva, grieved in her heart and
lamented, saying to Gajasukumāl -

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 [61 tRtIya varga] kruuNgaa|"] bhagavAn ne kahA- devAnupriya! jisase tujhe sukha
upaje vaha karo, paraMtu usameM vilamba na krnaa| tatpazcAt gajasukumAla (ra)
kumAra ne arihaMta ariSTanemi ko vandana kiyA, arthAt unakI stuti kI, namaskAra
kiyA, stuti-namaskAra karake jahAM hastiratna thA, vahAM gye| jAkara hAthI ke
kandhe para baiThakara mahAn subhaToM aura vipula samUha vAle parivAra ke sAtha
dvArakA nagarI ke bIcoMbIca hokara jahAM apanA ghara thA, vahAM Aye, Akara
hasti-skandha se utarakara, mAtA-pitA ke pairoM meM praNAma karake isa prakAra
kahA-'he mAtA-pitA! maiMne bhagavAn ariSTanemi ke samIpa dharma zravaNa kiyA hai
aura maiMne usakI prApti kI icchA kI hai, bAra-bAra icchA kI hai| vaha mujhe
rucA hai|' tatpazcAt gajasukumAla ke mAtA-pitA isa prakAra bole 'putra ! tuma
dhanya ho, putra! tuma puNyavAn ho, he putra! tuma kRtArtha ho, ki tumane
bhagavAn ariSTanemi ke nikaTa dharma zravaNa kiyA hai aura vaha dharma bhI
tumheM iSTa, punaH punaH iSTa aura rucikara huA hai|' tatpazcAt gajasukumAla
mAtA-pitA ko dUsarI bAra aura tIsarI bAra isa prakAra kahane lagAmAtA-pitA !
maiMne arihaMta bhagavAn ariSTanemi ke pAsa dharma zravaNa kiyA hai| usa dharma
kI maiMne icchA kI hai, bAra-bAra icchA kI hai, vaha mujhe rucikara huA hai|
ataeva he mAtA-pitA! maiM ApakI anumati pAkara bhagavAn ariSTanemi ke samIpa
muNDita hokara, gRhavAsa tyAga kara anagAritA kI pravrajyA aMgIkAra karanA
cAhatA huuN| tatpazcAt devakI devI usa aniSTa (anicchita) apriya, amanojJa aura
amaNAma (mana ko na rucane vAlI) pahale kabhI na sunI huI, kaThora vANI ko
sunakara aura hRdaya meM dhAraNa karake manogata mahAn putra-viyoga ke duHkha se
pIr3ita huii| usake romakUpoM meM pasInA Ane se aMgoM se pasInA jharane lgaa|
zoka kI adhikatA se usake aMga kA~pane lge| vaha nisteja ho gii| dIna aura
vimanaska ho gii| hathelI se malI huI kamala kI mAlA ke samAna ho gii| "maiM
pravrajyA aMgIkAra karanA cAhatA hU~," yaha zabda sunane ke kSaNa meM hI vaha
dukhI aura durbala ho gii| vaha lAvaNyarahita ho gaI, kAntihIna ho gaI,
zrIvihIna ho gaI, zarIra durbala hone se usake pahane hue alaMkAra atyaMta DhIle
ho gaye, hAthoM meM pahane hue, uttama valaya khisaka kara bhUmi para jA par3e
aura cUra-cUra ho gye| usakA uttarIya vastra khisaka gyaa| sukumAra kezapAza
bikhara gyaa| mUrchA ke vaza hone se citta naSTa hone ke kAraNa zarIra bhArI ho
gyaa| parazu se kATI huI caMpakalatA ke samAna tathA mahotsava sampanna ho jAne
ke pazcAt indradhvaja ke samAna (zobhAhIna) pratIta hone lgii| usake zarIra ke
jor3a DhIle par3a gye| aisI vaha devakI devI sarva aMgoM se dhas-dhar3Ama se
pRthvItala (pharza) para gira pdd'ii| _ tatpazcAt vaha devakI devI, saMbhrama ke
sAtha zIghratA se, suvarNakalaza ke mukha se nikalI huI zItala jala kI nirmala
dhArA se siMcana kI gii| ataeva usakA zarIra zItala ho gyaa| utkSepaka (eka
prakAra ke bAMsa ke paMkhe) se, tAlavRnta (tAr3a ke patte ke paMkhe) se tathA
vIjanaka (jisakI DaMDI andara se pakar3I jAye, aise bAMsa ke paMkhe) se utpanna
hue tathA jalakaNoM se yukta vAyu se antaHpura ke parijanoM dvArA use AzvAsana
diyA gyaa| taba devakI devI motiyoM kI lar3I ke samAna azrudhArA se apane stanoM
ko sIMcanebhigone lagI-rudana karane lgii| vaha dayanIya, vimanaska aura dIna ho
gii| vaha rudana karatI huI, krandana karatI huI, pasInA evaM lAra TapakAtI huI
hRdaya meM zoka karatI huI aura vilApa karatI huI gajasukumAla se

Page #103 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[62] Antakridasha began to speak in this way: "O son! You are our only son. You
are our beloved, dear, cherished, handsome, gem, and the abode of patience and
faith. You are agreeable (accepted) in doing work, very much accepted in many
works, and also permitted after doing work. You are like a box of ornaments. You
are a gem because of being the best in the human race. You are the form of a
gem. You are like the breath of life. You are the one who generates joy in our
hearts. Even hearing your name is rare, like the flower of the banyan tree, so
what to say about seeing you? O son! We do not want to bear your separation even
for a moment. Therefore, O son! First, enjoy the abundant worldly pleasures as
long as we are alive. Then, when we are gone by time and you become of mature
age - your youth is complete, the work of the family lineage (son, grandson,
etc.) has grown, when there is no need for worldly work, at that time you should
get your head shaved and renounce household life and accept the vows of
renunciation near Lord Arishtanemi."  After the parents spoke in this way,
Gajasukumal said to his parents: "O mother and father! What you are saying to
me, that 'O son! You are our only son,' etc., all that should be said as before,
until you become free from worldly work and become a renunciant near Lord
Arishtanemi - that is fine. But, O mother and father! This human existence is
not permanent, that is, it is not something that is regularly obtained again and
again like sunrise, it is not fixed, that is, there are changes in this life, it
is impermanent, that is, it is perishable in a moment, it is filled with
hundreds of troubles and disturbances, it is fickle like the flash of lightning,
it is impermanent, it is like a bubble of water, it is like a drop of water
hanging on the tip of a blade of grass, it is like the clouds at dusk, it is
like a dream - it is there and it is not there, it is prone to decay from
leprosy, etc., to be cut by a sword, etc., and to become weak. And it is
definitely something that must be abandoned in the future or in the past. O
mother and father! Who knows who will go first (die) and who will go later?
Therefore, O mother and father! I want to accept the vows of renunciation near
Lord Arishtanemi, having received your permission."  Then the parents said to
Gajasukumal: "O son! This much gold, silver, bronze, fine cloth, gems, pearls,
conch shells, stone, coral, red ruby, etc., essential substances, have come down
from your grandfather, your father's grandfather, and your father's great-
grandfather. It is so much that it will not be exhausted even in seven
generations. You should give a lot of it in charity, enjoy it yourself, and
distribute it. O son! You should enjoy all the wealth and respect that is
available in the human world. After that, having experienced happiness, you
should accept initiation near Lord Arishtanemi."  Then Gajasukumal said to his
parents: "O mother and father! What you are saying is fine, that 'O son! This
much excellent substance has come down from your grandfather, your father's
grandfather, and your father's great-grandfather, you should enjoy it and then,
having experienced happiness, accept initiation.' But, O mother and father! This
gold, silver, etc., all worldly possessions are subject to fire - fire can burn
it, a thief can steal it, a king can confiscate it, heirs can divide it, and
when death comes, it does not remain ours. In the same way, this wealth is equal
to fire, that is, the wealth belongs to its owner, and in the same way, it also
belongs to fire, and in the same way...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 62] [antakRddazA isa prakAra kahane lagI "he putra! tU hamArA ikalautA beTA
hai| tU hameM iSTa hai, kAMta hai, priya hai, manojJa hai, maNAma hai tathA
dhairya aura vizvAsa kA sthAna hai| kArya karane meM sammata (mAnA huA) hai,
bahuta kAryoM meM bahuta mAnA huA hai aura kArya karane ke pazcAt bhI anumata
hai| AbhUSaNoM kI peTI ke samAna hai| manuSya jAti meM uttama hone ke kAraNa
ratna hai| ratna rUpa hai| jIvana ke ucchvAsa ke samAna hai| hamAre hRdaya meM
Ananda utpanna karane vAlA hai| gUlara ke phUla ke samAna terA nAma zravaNa
karanA bhI durlabha hai to phira darzana kI to bAta kyA hai? he putra! hama
kSaNa bhara ke lie bhI terA viyoga nahIM sahana karanA caahte| ataeva he putra!
prathama to jaba taka hama jIvita haiM, taba taka manuSya saMbaMdhI vipula kAma-
bhogoM ko bhog| phira jaba hama kAlagata ho jAe~ aura tU paripakva umra kA ho
jAye-terI yuvAvasthA pUrNa ho jAye, kula-vaMza (putra-pautra Adi) rUpa taMtu kA
kArya vRddhi ko prApta ho jAye, jaba sAMsArika kArya kI apekSA na rahe, usa
samaya tU bhagavAn ariSTanemi ke pAsa muNDita hokara gRhasthI kA tyAga karake
pravrajyA aMgIkAra kara lenaa|" tatpazcAt mAtA-pitA ke dvArA isa prakAra kahane
para gajasukumAla ne mAtA-pitA se isa prakAra kahA "he mAtA-pitA! Apa mujha se
yaha jo kahate haiM ki he putra! tuma hamAre ikalaute putra ho, ityAdi saba
pUrvavat kahanA cAhie, yAvat sAMsArika kArya se nirapekSa hokara bhagavAn
ariSTanemi ke samIpa pravrajita honA-so ThIka hai, parantu he mAtA-pitA! yaha
manuSya bhava dhruva nahIM hai, arthAt sUryodaya ke samAna niyamita samaya para
punaH punaH prApta hone vAlA nahIM hai, niyata nahIM hai arthAt isa jIvana meM
ulaTa-phera hote rahate haiM, azAzvata hai arthAt kSaNa vinazvara hai, saikar3oM
saMkaToM evaM upadravoM se vyApta hai, bijalI kI camaka ke samAna caMcala hai,
anitya hai, jala ke bulabule ke samAna hai, dUba kI noka para laTakane vAle
jalabindu ke samAna hai, sandhyAsamaya ke bAdaloM ke sadRza hai, svapna-darzana
ke samAna hai-abhI hai aura abhI nahIM hai, kuSTha Adi se sar3ane, talavAra Adi
se kaTane aura kSINa hone ke svabhAva vAlA hai| tathA Age yA pIche avazya hI
tyAga karane yogya hai| he mAtA-pitA! kauna jAnatA hai ki kauna pahale jAegA
(maregA) aura kauna pIche jAegA? ataeva he mAtA-pitA ! maiM ApakI AjJA prApta
karake bhagavAn ariSTanemi ke samIpa yAvat pravrajyA aMgIkAra karanA cAhatA
huuN|" tatpazcAt mAtA-pitA ne gajasukumAla se isa prakAra kahA-'he putra!
tumhAre pitAmaha, pitA ke pitAmaha aura pitA ke prapitAmaha se AyA huA yaha
bahuta-sA hiraNya, suvarNa, kAMsA, dUSya-vastra, maNi, motI, zaMkha, silA,
mUMgA, lAla ratna Adi sArabhUta dravya vidyamAna hai| yaha itanA hai ki sAta
pIr3hiyoM taka bhI samApta na ho  /  isakA tuma khUba dAna karo, svayaM bhoga
karo aura baMTavArA kro| he putra! yaha jitanA manuSya sambandhI Rddhi-satkAra
kA samudAya hai, utanA saba tuma bhogo| usake bAda anubhUta-kalyANa hokara tuma
bhagavAn ariSTanemi ke samIpa dIkSA grahaNa kara lenaa|' tatpazcAt gajasukumAla
ne mAtA-pitA se kahA-he mAtA-pitA! Apa jo kahate haiM so ThIka hai ki-he putra!
yaha dAdA, paDadAdA aura pitA ke paDadAdA se AyA huA yAvat uttama dravya hai,
ise bhogo aura phira anubhUta-kalyANa hokara dIkSA le lenaa| parantu he mAtA-
pitA! yaha hiraNya suvarNa yAvat svApateya (dravya) saba agnisAdhya hai-ise agni
bhasma kara sakatI hai, cora curA sakatA hai, rAjA apaharaNa kara sakatA hai,
hissedAra ba~TavArA karA sakate haiM aura mRtyu Ane para yaha apanA nahIM rahatA
hai| isI prakAra yaha dravya agni ke liye samAna hai, arthAt dravya usake svAmI
kA hai, usI prakAra agni kA bhI hai aura isI taraha

Page #104 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[63 Third Class] It is common for thieves, kings, partners and death. It is of
the nature of decay, falling and destruction. It is to be abandoned before or
after (death). O parents! Who knows who will go first and who will go last?
Therefore, I want to take initiation as long as I can. Thereafter, when the
parents of Gajasukumal were unable to convince, address and persuade him with
words that are conducive to the subjects, with knowledge, with instructions,
with announcements, then they spoke in this way with knowledge that is
unfavorable and generates fear and anxiety towards restraint. 'O son! This
Nirgranth discourse is true (beneficial for the virtuous), unsurpassed (the
best), unique, spoken by the omniscient, perfect, i.e., full of qualities that
lead to liberation, logical, i.e., just or leading to liberation, pure, i.e.,
completely flawless, surgical, i.e., destroying delusions and other afflictions,
the path to perfection, the path to liberation (the means to destroy sins), the
path to Nirvana (the realm of perfection), the path to Nirvana, and the path to
completely destroy all suffering. Just as a serpent keeps its gaze steady while
catching its prey, so too must one keep one's gaze steady in this discourse. It
is sharp like a knife, i.e., it lacks exceptions like a second edge. To follow
this discourse is like chewing iron barley. It is tasteless like a mouthful of
sand - devoid of worldly pleasures. To follow it is as difficult as crossing the
Ganges, a great river, in flood, crossing the ocean with one's arms, attacking a
sharp sword, tying heavy stones like a great rock around one's neck, walking on
the edge of a sword. O son! It is not proper for Nirgranth ascetics to consume
food that is half-cooked, intentionally bought, established (left for the
ascetic), prepared (powder of sweets, etc., prepared again for the ascetic),
famine-food (food made for the ascetic during a famine), forest-food (food made
in the forest for the ascetic), rainy-season food (food made in a shelter during
the rainy season), sick-food (food given by a sick householder hoping to be
cured), etc., contaminated food. Similarly, it is not proper to eat root food,
tuber food, fruit food, seed food or green food. Moreover, O son! You are fit to
enjoy pleasures, not to endure suffering. You are not able to endure cold, you
are not able to endure heat. You cannot bear hunger, you cannot bear thirst,
various diseases (like leprosy, etc.) caused by wind, bile, phlegm and fever,
attacks (sudden death-inducing pain, etc.), unfavorable words from high and low,
the twenty-two types of trials and tribulations that arise, properly. Therefore,
O dear one! Enjoy the pleasures of human relationships. Later, after having
enjoyed them, accept the vows in the presence of the Arhat Arishta-nemi.
Thereafter, when the parents said this, Gajasukumar said to his parents, "O
parents! What you are saying to me is right, that - 'O son! The Nirgranth
discourse is true,

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 [63 tRtIya varga] cora, rAjA, bhAgIdAra aura mRtyu ke liye bhI sAmAnya hai|
yaha sar3ane, par3ane aura vidhvasta hone ke svabhAva vAlA hai| (maraNa) ke
pazcAt yA pahale avazya tyAga karane yogya hai  /  he mAtA-pitA! kise jJAta hai
ki pahale kauna jAyegA aura pIche kauna jAyegA? ataeva maiM yAvat dIkSA grahaNa
karanA cAhatA huuN| tatpazcAt gajasukumAla ke mAtA-pitA jaba gajasukumAla ko
viSayoM ke anukUla AkhyApanA (sAmAnya rUpa se pratipAdana karane vAlI vANI) se,
prajJApanA (vizeSa rUpa se pratipAdana karane vAlI vANI) se, saMjJApanA
(saMbodhana karane vAlI vANI) se, vijJApanA (anunaya-vinaya karane vAlI vANI) se
samajhAne bujhAne, saMbodhana karane aura anunaya karane meM samartha na hue
taba pratikUla tathA saMyama ke prati bhaya aura udvega utpanna karane vAlI
prajJApanA se isa prakAra kahane lage 'he putra! yaha nirgrantha pravacana satya
(satpuruSoM ke liye hitakArI) hai, anuttara (sarvottama) hai, kaivalika-sarvajJa
kathita athavA advitIya hai, pratipUrNa arthAt mokSa prApta karAne vAle guNoM se
paripUrNa hai, naiyAyika arthAt nyAyayukta yA mokSa kI ora le jAne vAlA hai,
saMzuddha arthAt sarvathA nirdoSa hai, zalyakartana arthAt mAyA Adi zalyoM kA
nAza karane vAlA hai, siddhi kA mArga hai, mukti kA mArga (pApoM ke nAza kA
upAya) hai, niryANa kA (siddhi kSetra kA) mArga hai, nirvANa kA mArga hai aura
samasta duHkhoM ko pUrNarUpeNa naSTa karane kA mArga hai| jaise sarpa apane
bhakSya ko grahaNa karane meM nizcala dRSTi rakhatA hai, usI prakAra isa
pravacana meM dRSTi nizcala rakhanI par3atI hai| yaha chure ke samAna eka dhAra
vAlA hai, arthAt isa meM dUsarI dhAra ke samAna apavAda rUpa kriyAoM kA abhAva
hai| isa pravacana ke anusAra calanA lohe ke jau cabAnA hai| yaha reta ke kavala
ke samAna svAdahIna hai-viSayasukha se rahita hai| isakA pAlana karanA gaMgA
nAmaka mahAnadI ke pUra meM sAmane tirane ke samAna kaThina hai, bhujAoM se
mahAsamudra ko pAra karanA hai, tIkhI talavAra para AkramaNa karane ke samAna
hai| mahAzilA jaisI bhArI vastuoM ko gale meM bA~dhane ke samAna hai| talavAra
kI dhAra para calane ke samAna hai| he putra! nirgrantha zramaNoM ko AdhAkarmI,
auddezika krItakRta (kharIda kara banAyA huA), sthApita (sAdhu ke lie rakha
chor3A huA), racita (modaka Adi ke cUrNa ko punaH sAdhu ke lie modaka rUpa meM
taiyAra kiyA huA, durbhikSa bhakta (sAdhu ke liye durbhikSa ke samaya banAyA huA
bhojana) kAntAra bhakta (sAdhu ke nimitta araNya meM banAyA huA AhAra),
vardalikA bhakta (varSA ke samaya upAzraya meM Akara banAyA bhojana) glAnabhakta
(rugNa gRhastha nIroga hone kI kAmanA se de vaha bhojana), Adi dUSita AhAra
grahaNa karanA nahIM kalpatA hai| isI prakAra mUla kA bhojana, kaMda kA bhojana,
phala kA bhojana, bIjoM kA bhojana athavA harita kA bhojana karanA bhI nahIM
kalpatA hai| isake atirikta he putra! tU sukha bhogane yogya hai, duHkha sahane
yogya nahIM hai| tU zIta sahane meM samartha nahIM hai, uSNa sahane meM samartha
nahIM hai| bhUkha nahIM saha sakatA, pyAsa nahIM saha sakatA, vAta, pitta, kapha
aura sannipAta se hone vAle vividha rogoM (kor3ha Adi ko) tathA AtakoM (acAnaka
maraNa utpanna karane vAle zUla Adi) ko, U~ce-nIce indriya-pratikUla vacanoM ko,
utpanna hue bAIsa parISahoM aura upasargoM ko samyak prakAra sahana nahIM kara
sktaa| ataeva he lAla ! tU manuSya saMbaMdhI kAmabhogoM ko bhog| bAda meM
bhuktabhogI hokara arihaMta ariSTanemi ke samIpa pravrajyA aMgIkAra krnaa|
tatpazcAt mAtA-pitA ke isa prakAra kahane para gajasukumAra kumAra ne mAtA-pitA
se isa prakAra kahA-he mAtA-pitA ! Apa mujhe jo yaha kahate haiM so ThIka hai
ki- 'he putra ! nirgranthapravacana satya hai,

Page #105 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[64] The Antakrid Dasha is the best, the aforementioned statements should be
repeated here, until one accepts the vows of renunciation after becoming a
liberated soul. But O parents! This Nirgranth discourse is difficult for
ordinary people, who are devoid of cleavages, lack stability in their cowardly
minds, are detestable, desire worldly pleasures, and do not desire the happiness
of the afterlife. It is not difficult for a man of fortitude and firm resolve to
follow it. What is the difficulty in following it? Therefore, O parents! With
your permission, I wish to accept the vows of renunciation in the presence of
Arihant Arishtanemi.  Thereafter, Krishna Vasudeva came to Gajasukumar, having
heard of his dispassion, and embraced him, seated him on his lap, and spoke to
him in this way: "O Devānupriya! You are my younger brother, therefore I say
that do not accept the initiation of becoming a renunciate from the household at
this time in the presence of Lord Arishtanemi. I will anoint you with the royal
coronation in the city of Dwarka with great pomp and ceremony." Then Gajasukumar
remained silent when Krishna Vasudeva spoke to him in this way. After remaining
silent for some time, Gajasukumar spoke to his elder brother Krishna Vasudeva
and his parents a second and third time in this way: "O Devānupriya! In truth,
the enjoyments and the body of a human being [are impure, impermanent,
momentary, and repositories of excrement, urine, phlegm, vomit, bile, semen, and
blood. They are filled with foul breath, bad urine, excrement, and pus. They are
born from excrement, urine, phlegm, nasal mucus, vomit, bile, semen, and blood.
This human body and these enjoyments are unstable, impermanent, and subject to
decay, putrefaction, and destruction, and will inevitably be destroyed sooner or
later. Therefore, O Devānupriya! I wish to accept the vows of renunciation
(Shraman Diksha) in the presence of Arihant Arishtanemi, with your permission."
The Initiation of Gajasukumar 21-Then, Gajasukumar's parents, Krishna Vasudeva,
and others, who were not persuaded, continued to persuade him in many ways,
until he was convinced. Then, Gajasukumar, being dispassionate, spoke to them in
this way: "I wish to go to the king's palace tomorrow."  Then, Gajasukumar,
while being persuaded by Krishna Vasudeva and his parents, remained silent.
Until [then, Gajasukumar's father, the head of the family, spoke to him, and
having spoken, said: "Quickly, O Devānupriya! Let us arrange a great,
magnificent, and grand royal coronation for Gajasukumar." Then, the head of the
family continued to persuade him in this way. Then, Gajasukumar's parents seated
him on a throne facing the east, as is done for a king, until they anointed him
with the royal coronation with eight hundred golden pots filled with water, with
great sound and great pomp.  Having anointed him with the royal coronation, they
celebrated his victory with [1. This has already been mentioned in the previous
sutra.]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 64] [antakRddazA sarvottama hai, Adi pUrvokta kathana yahA~ doharA lenA cAhie,
yAvat bAda meM muktabhogI hokara pravrajyA aMgIkAra kara lenaa| parantu he mAtA-
pitA ! isa prakAra yaha nirgrantha pravacana klIva-hIna saMhanana vAle, kAyara-
citta kI sthiratA rahita, kutsita, isa loka saMbaMdhI viSaya sukha kI abhilASA
karane vAle, paraloka ke sukha kI icchA na karane vAle, sAmAnya jana ke liye hI
duSkara hai| dhIra evaM dRr3ha saMkalpa vAle puruSa ko isakA pAlana karanA
kaThina nahIM hai| isakA pAlana karane meM kaThinAI kyA hai? ataeva he mAtA-
pitA! ApakI anumati pAkara maiM arihaMta ariSTanemi ke samIpa pravrajyA grahaNa
karanA cAhatA hU~  /  tadanantara kRSNa vAsudeva gajasukumAra ke virakta hone kI
bAta sunakara gajasukumAra ke pAsa Aye aura Akara unhoMne gajasukumAra kumAra kA
AliMgana kiyA, AliMgana kara goda meM biThAyA, goda meM biThAkara isa prakAra
bole ' 'he devAnupriya! tuma mere sahodara choTe bhAI ho, isaliye merA kahanA
hai ki isa samaya bhagavAn ariSTanemi ke pAsa muMDita hokara agAra se anagAra
banane rUpa dIkSA grahaNa mata kro| maiM tumako dvArakA nagarI meM bahata baDe
samAroha ke sAtha rAjyAbhiSeka se abhiSikta kruuNgaa|' taba gajasakumAra kumAra
kRSNa vAsudeva dvArA aisA kahe jAne para mauna rahe  /  kucha samaya mauna
rahane ke bAda gajasukumAra apane bar3e bhAI kRSNa vAsudeva evaM mAtA-pitA ko
dUsarI bAra aura tIsarI bAra bhI isa prakAra bole 'he devAnupriyo ! vastutaH
manuSya ke kAmabhoga evaM deha [apavitra, azAzvata, kSaNavidhvaMsI aura mala-
mUtra-kapha-vamana-pitta-zukra evaM zoNita ke bhaMDAra haiM  /  gaMde ucchvAsa-
nizvAsa vAle haiM, kharAba mUtra, mala aura pIva se atyanta paripUrNa haiM,
mala, mUtra, kapha, nAsikAmala, vamana, pitta, zukra aura zoNita se utpanna hone
vAle haiN| yaha manuSya-zarIra aura ye kAmabhoga asthira haiM , anitya haiM evaM
sar3ana-galana evaM vidhvaMsI hone ke kAraNa Age pIche kabhI na kabhI avazya]
naSTa hone vAle haiN| isaliye he devAnupriyo ! maiM cAhatA hUM ki ApakI AjJA
milane para maiM arihaMta ariSTanemi ke pAsa pravrajyA (zramaNa dIkSA) grahaNa
kara luuN|' gajasukumAra kI dIkSA 21-tae NaM taM gayasukumAlaM kaNhe vAsudeve
ammApiyaro ya jAhe no saMcAenti bahuyAhiM aNulomAhiM jAva' Aghavittae tAhe
akAmAI ceva (gayasukumAlaM kumAraM) evaM vayAsI-taM icchAmo NaM te jAyA!
egadivasamavi rajjasiriM paasitte| _ tae. NaM gayasukumAle kumAre kaNhaM
vAsudevaM ammApiyaraM ca aNuvattamANe tusiNIe sNcitttthi| jAva-[tae NaM se
gayasukumAlassa piyA koDuMbiyapurise saddAvei, saddAvittA evaM vayAsI-khippAmeva
bho devANuppiyA! gayasukumAlassa kumArassa mahatthaM, mahagdhaM, maharihaM
vipulaM rAyAbhiseyaM uvtttthveh| tae NaM te koDuMbiyapurisA taheva jAva
pccppinnNti| tae NaM taM gayasukumAlaM kumAraM ammA-piyaro sIhAsaNavaraMsi
puratthAbhimuhaM NisIyAti jahA rAyappaseNaijjeM, jAva aTThasaeNaM sovaNiyANaM
kalasANaM savviDDIe jAva mahayA raveNaM mahayA mahayA rAyAbhiseeNaM abhisiNcNti|
mahayA mahayA rAyAbhiseeNaM abhisiMcittA karayala-jAva jaeNaM vijaeNaM
vaddhAveMti, 1. pUrva sUtra meM A gayA hai|

Page #106 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Third Class] [65. The Jain victor, having been adorned, spoke thus: "My dear,
what shall we give, what shall we offer, or what is your wish?" Then the son of
Gayasukumala, his mother and father, spoke thus: "I desire, my dear, a house, a
chariot, a horse, and a tortoise." The departure is like that of Mahabala. _
Then the mother and father of the son of Gayasukumala, in the presence of the
Koḍumbiya-purisa, spoke thus: "Quickly, O Devānupiya! Give three hundred
thousand gold coins for the house, two hundred thousand for the chariot and
horse, and one hundred thousand for the tortoise." Then those Koḍumbiya-purisa,
having spoken thus to the father of the son of Gayasukumala, were pleased and
agreed to give three hundred thousand gold coins, and so on, until they agreed
to give the tortoise. Then the tortoise, having been given to the father of the
son of Gayasukumala by the Koḍumbiya-purisa, was pleased and agreed to perform
the sacrificial act until he reached the place. Having reached the place, he
performed the act. The Jain victor, having adorned the son of Gayasukumala,
spoke thus: "My dear, what shall I do?" Then the father of Gayasukumala spoke
thus to the tortoise: "My dear Devānupiya! You shall cut the hair of the son of
Gayasukumala with a four-finger-long blade." Then the tortoise, having heard
this, was pleased and agreed, saying: "So be it! I will obey your command."
Having heard this, he washed his hands and feet with fragrant water, and having
washed them, he tied a clean cloth over his mouth. Having tied the cloth over
his mouth, he cut the hair of the son of Gayasukumala with a four-finger-long
blade. Then the mother of the son of Gayasukumala, the goddess Devī, received
the hair with a swan-like gesture. Having received the hair, she washed it with
fragrant water. Having washed it with fragrant water, she anointed it with
fragrant oils and perfumes. Having anointed it with fragrant oils and perfumes,
she tied it in a clean cloth. Having tied it in a clean cloth, she placed it in
a jewel casket. Having placed it in the jewel casket, she adorned herself with
necklaces, armlets, anklets, earrings, and garlands of flowers, and with tears
flowing from her eyes, she spoke thus: "This will be seen by our son
Gayasukumala on many occasions, on festivals, on journeys, and in the future."
Then she placed it in a strong, firm place. Then the mother and father of
Gayasukumala placed a double-backed, north-facing throne. Having placed the
double-backed, north-facing throne, they bathed the son of Gayasukumala with
fragrant water. Having bathed him with fragrant water, they anointed his body
with fragrant sandalwood paste. Having anointed his body with fragrant
sandalwood paste, they adorned him with a nose-ring, earrings, a necklace, a
garland of flowers, a white turban, a jeweled crown, a magnificent robe, and a
swan-like gesture. Having adorned him, they placed a necklace on him. Having
placed a necklace on him, they placed a half-necklace on him. Having placed a
half-necklace on him, they placed a crown on him, just as the sun is adorned
with its rays. In short, they adorned him with four kinds of perfumes, with a
garland of flowers, and with a jeweled crown. 2. In the description of Mahabala,
for this text, "What shall we offer, the rest is like that of Jamali, and so on,
until then" is given. Therefore, the supplementary text that follows is woven
together from the descriptions of Mahabala, Jamali, etc., as needed. ]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 tRtIya varga] [65 jaeNaM vijaeNaM vaddhAvittA evaM vayAsI-bhaNa jAyA! kiM demo,
kiM payacchAmo, kiNA vA te aTTho? tae NaM se gayasukumAle kumAre ammApiyaro evaM
vayAsI-icchAmi NaM ammayAo kuttiyAvaNAo rayaharaNaM ca paDiggahaM ca ANiuM
kAsavagaM ca sddaaviuN| NikkhamaNaM jahA mhbblss| _ tae NaM gayasukumAlassa
kumArassa ammApiyaro koDuMbiyapurise saddAveMti, saddAvittA evaM vayAsI-
khippAmeva bho devANuppiyA! sirigharAo tiNi sayasahassAiM gahAya dohiM
sayasahassehiM rayaharaNaM paDiggahaM ca uvaNeha, sayasahasseNa kAsavagaM
sddaaveh| tae NaM te koDuMbiyapurisA gayasukumAlassa kumArassa piuNA evaM vuttA
samANA haTThatuTTha karayala jAva paDisuNettA khippAmeva sirigharAo tiNNi
sayasahassAI, taheva jAva kAsavagaM sddaaveNti| tae NaM se kAsavae gayakumArassa
piuNA koDuMbiya purisehiM saddAvie samANe haTThatuDhe pahAe kayabalikamme jAva
uvAgacchai, uvAgacchittA karayala0 gayasukumAlassa kumArassa piyaraM jaeNaM
vijaeNaM vaddhAvei, vaddhAvittA evaM vayAsI-saMdisaMtu NaM devANuppiya! jaM mae
karaNijjaM? tae NaM se gayasukumAlassa piyA taM kAsavagaM evaM vayAsI-tumaM
devANuppiyA! gayasukumAlassa kumArassa pareNaM jatteNaM cauraMgulavajje
NikkhamaNapAogge aggakese kppehi| tae NaM se kAsave evaM vutte samANe
haTTatuTTha karayala jAva evaM sAmI! tahatti ANAe viNaeNaM vayaNaM paDisuNei,
paDisuNittA surabhiNA gaMdhodaeNaM hatthapAe pakkhAlei, pakkhAlittA suddhAe
aTTha paDalAe pottIe muhaM baMdhai, muhaM baMdhittA gayasukumAlassa kumArassa
pareNaM jatteNaM cauraMgulavajje NikkhamaNapAogge aggakese kppei| tae NaM sA
gayasukumAlassa kumArassa mAyA devaI devI haMsalakkhaNeNaM paDasADaeNaM aggakese
paDicchai, aggakese paDicchittA surabhiNA gaMdhodaeNaM pakkhAlei, surabhiNA
gaMdhodaeNaM pakkhAlittA aggehiM varehiM gaMdhehiM, mallehiM accei, aggehiM
varehiM gaMdhehiM, mallehiM accittA suddhe vatthe baMdhai, suddhe vatthe
baMdhittA rayaNakaraMDagaMsi pakkhivai, pakkhivittA hAra-vAridhArasiMduvAra-
chiNNamuttAvalippagAsAiM suyaviyoga-dUsahAI aMsUI viNimmuyamANI viNimmuyamANI
evaM vayAsI-esa NaM amhaM gayasukumAlassa kumArassa bahusu tihIsu ya pavvaNIsu
ya ussavesu ya jaNNesu ya chaNesu ya apacchime darisaNe bhavissai itti kaTTha
UsIsagamUle tthvei|] tae NaM tassa gayasukumAlassa ammApiyaro doccaM pi
uttarAvakkamaNaM sIhAsaNaM rayAti, doccaM pi uttarAvakkamaNaM sIhAsaNaM
rayAvittA gayasukumAlassa kumArassa seyApIyaehiM kalasehiM NhAveMti
seyA0NhAvittA pamhalasukumAlAe surabhIe gaMdhakAsAIe gAyAiM lUheMti, lUhittA
saraseNaM gosIsacaMdaNeNaM gAyAI aNuliMpaMti aNuliMpittA NAsANissAsavAyavojjhaM,
cakkhuharaM, vaNNapharisajuttaM, hayalAlApelavA'iregaM, dhavalaM,
kaNagakhacitaMtakammaM, maharihaM, haMsalakkhaNapaDasADagaM parihiMti, parihittA
hAraM piNaddhati, piNaddhittA addhahAraM piNaddhati, piNaddhittA evaM jahA
sUriyAbhassa alaMkAro taheva jAva cittaM rayaNasaMkadukkaDaM mauDaM piNiddhati;
kiM bahuNA? gaMthima-veDhimapUrima saMghAimeNaM cauvviheNaM malleNaM
kapparukkhagaM piva alaMkiya-vibhUsiyaM kreNti| 2. mahAbala ke varNana meM isa
pATha hetu-"kiM payacchAmo, sesaM jahA jamAlissa taheva jAva taeNaM"-diyA hai|
ataH prastuta jAva kA pUraka pATha mahAbala, jamAli Adi ke varNanoM ke AdhAra
para yathAvazyaka rUpa se guMphita kiyA hai|

Page #107 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[The Dasa of the Destroyer (Antakrddasa)]  Then the beloved kinsmen of the
prince Gaya summoned, and having assembled, spoke thus: "Quickly, O beloved of
the gods! Arrange for a thousand-pillared pavilion, adorned with graceful Sal
trees, like the palace of King Prasenajit, up to the one surrounded by a network
of gem-studded bells and a thousand-person procession. After arranging this,
present it to my majesty." Then the kinsmen accordingly presented it.  Then the
young prince Gaya, adorned with hair ornaments, garments, garlands, and jewelry,
the fourfold adornment, fully adorned, rises from the lion throne, rises from
the lion throne, and slowly ascends, and having ascended, sits on the excellent
lion throne, facing the east.  Then the mother of Gaya, having bathed and
performed the ritual, up to taking the swan-mark on the body, slowly ascends and
sits on the excellent seat on the right side of the young prince Gaya. Then the
maternal aunt of the young prince Gaya, having bathed and performed the ritual,
up to taking the jewel-necklace, slowly ascends and sits on the excellent seat
on the left side of the young prince Gaya. Then from behind the young prince
Gaya, a noble young woman of charming appearance, endowed with beauty, youth,
and grace, holding a white, fragrant, cool garland of Mallika flowers that
shines like the moon, moon, and snow, stands there, gracefully holding and
displaying it.  Then on both sides of the young prince Gaya, two noble young
women of charming appearance, endowed with beauty, youth, and grace, holding
white chauris made of various precious gems, jewels, and pure, excellent
materials, stand there, gracefully waving them.  Then on the north-eastern side
of the young prince Gaya, a noble young woman of charming appearance, endowed
with beauty, youth, and grace, stands holding a pure, spotless, golden bell-
shaped ornament filled with fragrant, cool liquid.  Then on the south-eastern
side of the young prince Gaya, a noble young woman of charming appearance,
endowed with beauty, youth, and grace, stands holding a golden staff with a
peacock design.  Then the beloved kinsmen of the prince Gaya summoned and,
having summoned, spoke thus: "Quickly, O beloved of the gods! Summon a thousand
noble kinswomen, equal, similar, and comparable in beauty, youth, and qualities,
adorned with a single ornament and garment." Then the kinsmen, having heard,
quickly summoned the thousand noble kinswomen, equal, similar, and comparable.
Then those kinsmen, joyful and delighted, bathed, performed the ritual, and
adorned with a single ornament and garment, approached the father of Gaya,
approached and, with joined palms, spoke thus: "May the beloved of the gods
instruct us what is to be done." Then the father of Gaya said to that thousand
noble kinswomen: "You, O beloved of the gods, having bathed and performed the
ritual, up to being adorned, should carry the palanquin of the young prince
Gaya." Then the kinsmen, having heard, bathed and, up to being adorned, carried
the thousand-person palanquin of the young prince Gaya.  Then, as the thousand-
person palanquin of the young prince Gaya was being ascended...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 66] [antakRddazA tae NaM tassa gayakumArassa piyA koDuMbiyapurise saddAvei,
sahAvittA evaM vayAsIkhippAmeva bho devANuppiyA! aNegakhaMbhasayasaNNiviTuM,
lIlaTThiyasAlabhaMjiyAgaM jahA rAyappaseNaijje vimANa-vaNNao, jAva
maNirayaNaghaMTiyAjAlaparikkhittaM purisasahassavAhiNiM sIyaM uvaTThaveha,
uvaTThavettA mama eyamANattiyaM pccppinnh| tae NaM te koDuMbiyapurisA jAva
pccppinnNti| tae NaM se gayasukumAle kumAre kesAlaMkAreNaM, vatthAlaMkAreNaM,
mallAlaMkAreNaM, AbharaNAlaMkAreNaM cauvviheNaM alaMkAreNaM alaMkArie samANe
paDipuNNAlaMkAre sIhAsaNAo abbhuTei sIhAsaNAo abbhuTThittA sIyaM aNuppadAhiNI
karemANe sIyaM durUhai, durUhittA sIhAsaNavaraMsi puratthA'bhimuhe snnnnisnnnne|
tae NaM tassa gayakumArassa mAyA NhAyA kayabalikammA jAva sarIrA haMsalakkhaNaM
paDasADagaM gahAya sIyaM aNuppadAhiNI karemANI sIyaM durUhai, durUhittA
gayasukumAlassa kumArassa dAhaNe pAse bhaddAsaNavaraMsi snnnnisnnnnaa| tae NaM
tassa gayasukumAlassa kumArassa ammadhAI NhAyA jAva sarIrA, rayaharaNaM
paDiggahaM ca gahAya sIhaM aNuppadAhiNI karemANI sIyaM durUhai, sIyaM durUhittA
gayasukumAlassa kumArassa vAme pAse bhaddAsaNavaraMsi snnnnisnnnnaa| tae NaM
tassa gayasuMkumAlassa piTThao egA varataruNI siMgArAgAracAruvesA saMgayagaya
jAva rUpa-jovvaNa-vilAsakaliyA suMdarathaNa0 hima-rayaya-kumuda-kuMdenduppagAsaM
sakoraMTamalladAmaM dhavalaM AyavattaM gahAya salIlaM uvari dhAremANI dhAremANI
citttthi| tae NaM tassa gayasukumAlassa ubhao pAsiM duve varataruNIo
siMgArAgAracAru jAva kaliyAo, NANAmaNi-kaNaga-rayaNa-vimala-
maharihatavaNijjujjalavicitta-daMDAo, cilliyAo, saMkhaMka-kundendu-dagaraya-
amayamahiyapheNapuMjasaNNikAsAo dhavalAo cAmarAo gahAya salIlaM vIyamANIo
vIyamANIo cittuNti| tae NaM tassa gayasukumAlassa uttarapurasthimeNaM egA
varataruNI siMgAragAra jAva kaliyA seya rayayAmayaM vimalasalilapuNNaM
mattagayamahAmuhAkiisamANaM bhiMgAraM gahAya citttthi| tae NaM tassa
gayasukumAlassa dAhiNapurasthimeNaM egA varataruNI siMgArAgAra jAva kaliyA
cittakaNagadaMDaM tAlaveMTa gahAya citttthi| tae NaM tassa gayasukumAla-
kumArassa piyA koDuMbiyapurise saddAvei, saddAvittA evaM vayAsI khippAmeva bho
devANuppiyA! sarisayaM, sarittayaM, sarivvayaM, sarisalAvaNNa-rUva-
jovvaNaguNovaveyaM, egAbharaNa-vasaNagahiyaNijjoyaM koDuMbiyavarataruNasahassaM
sddaaveh| tae NaM te koDuMbiyapurisA jAva paDisuNittA khippAmeva sarisayaM
sarittayaM jAva sddaaveNti| tae NaM te koDuMbiyapurisA haTThatuTTha NhAyA,
kayabalikammA, kayakouya-maMgala-pAyacchittA egAbharaNa-vasaNagahiya-NijjoyA
jeNeva gayakumArassa piyA teNeva uvAgacchaMti, uvAgacchittA karayala jAva
vaddhAvittA evaM vayAsI-saMdisaMtu NaM devANuppiyA! jaM amhehiM krnnijj| tae NaM
se gayakumArassa piyA taM koDuMbiyavarataruNa sahassaM pi evaM vayAsI-tubbhe NaM
devANuppiyA! bahAyA kayabalikammA jAva gahiyaNijjoA gayasukumAlassa kumArassa
sIyaM privheh| tae NaM te koDuMbiyapurisA gayasukumAlassa jAva paDisuNittA
bahAyA jAva gahiyaNijjoA gayasukumAlassa kumArassa purisasahassavAhiNiM sIyaM
privhNti| tae NaM gayasukumAlassa kumArassa purisasahassavAhiNiM sIyaM
durUDhassa samANassa tappaDhamayAe

Page #108 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Third Division] [67] These are the auspicious signs that appear in front of the
Anupurvi; that is - auspicious, auspicious marks, up to mirrors; and then the
decorated pot, as described, up to touching the sky with their hands, appear in
front of the Anupurvi; in the same way as described, it should be stated up to
performing the Alokana and uttering the sounds of victory.   Then, many
excellent enjoyments, as described, up to surrounded by the great men, the
preceptors, appear in front of the Anupurvi of the young prince Gaya-sukumala.
Then, the beloved father of the young prince Gaya-sukumala, having performed the
ritual of offering, up to being carried on the excellent royal umbrella,
surrounded by the fourfold army with horses, elephants, chariots, and infantry,
along with the great army of soldiers, follows behind the young prince Gaya-
sukumala.  Then, in front of the young prince Gaya-sukumala, there is a great
expectation, elephants on both sides, excellent elephants, chariots behind, and
chariot-riders. Then, the young prince Gaya-sukumala, with excellent
decorations, holding the royal parasol, with the excellent royal chowries
waving, with all the ornaments, up to the sounds of musical instruments, and
then many holders of sticks, spears, up to books, up to veenas; and then eight
hundred elephants, eight hundred horses, eight hundred chariots; and then many
foot soldiers with lances, swords, and spears in front; and then many royal
ministers, generals, up to caravan leaders in front, proceed towards the city of
Varavati in the middle.  As the young prince Gaya-sukumala is proceeding in the
middle of the city of Varavati, many well-wishers in the streets, crossroads, up
to markets, welcoming and praising, say, "Victory, victory, Nanda! By the
Dharma, victory, victory, Nanda! By the austerity, victory, victory, Nanda! May
the supreme knowledge, vision, and conduct be yours, may you conquer the senses,
may you establish the monastic Dharma; may you reside in the center of
perfection, destroy the stains of attachment and aversion, with austerity bind
the knot of wealth and poverty, and with the supreme, pure meditation, destroy
the eight karmic enemies, O wise one! Attain the path of worship in the center
of the three worlds, obtain the unsurpassed pure knowledge, and go to the
supreme state of liberation through the path shown by the Jina, having conquered
the army of adversities and the obstacles of the village, may the Dharma be
unobstructed for you." Thus, they welcome and praise him.  Then, the young
prince Gaya-sukumala proceeds in the middle of the city of Varavati, and
proceeds to the Sahasrambavana garden, and there he sees the Tirthankaras' seat,
places the royal parasol, and descends from the royal palanquin. Then, the
mother and father of Gaya-sukumala approach him where the Arhat Aristhanemi is,
prostrate three times, and say, "Indeed, O Lord! This Gaya-sukumala is our dear
and beloved son, what more to say? Just as the lotus, or the thousand-petaled
lotus, grows in the mud but is not stained by the mud, is not stained by the
water, in the same way, Gaya-sukumala, born of desires, grown in enjoyments, is
not stained by the stain of desires."

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 tRtIya varga ] [67 ime aTThaTThamaMgalagA purao ahANupuvvIe saMpaTTiyA; taM
jahA -sotthiya- sirivaccha jAva dappaNA; tayANaMtaraM ca NaM
puNNakalasabhiMgAraM jahA uvavAie, jAva gagaNatalamaNulihaMtI purao ahANupuvvIe
saMpaTTiyA; evaM jahA uvavAie taheva bhANiyavvaM jAva AloyaM ca karemANA
jayajayasaddaM ca pajamANA purao ahANupuvIe saMpaTTiyA  /  tayANaMtaraM ca NaM
bahave uggA bhogA jahA uvavAie jAva mahApurisavaggurA-parikkhittA,
gayasukumAlassa kumArassa purao ya maggao ya pAsao ya ahANupuvvIe saMpaTTiyA  /
taNaM se gayasukumAla - kumArassa piyA pahAe kayabalikamme jAva
hatthikhaMdhavaragae sakoraMTamalla- dAmeNaM chatteNaM dharijjamANeNaM
seyavaracAmarAhiM uddhavvamANIhiM haya-gaya-rahapavarajoha-kaliyAeM cAuraMgiNIe
seNAe saddhiM saMparivuDe, mahayAbhaDacaDagara jAva parikkhitte gayasukumAlassa
kumArassa piTTao aNugacchai  /  tae NaM tassa gayasukumAlassa kumArassa purao
mahaM AsA AsavarA, ubhao pAsiM NAgA, NAgavarA, piTTao rahA, rahasaMgellI  /  tae
NaM se gayasukumAla - kumAre abbhuggayabhiMgAre, parigahiyatAliyaMTe,
Usaviyaseyachatte, pavIiyaseyacAmarabAlavIyaNAe, savviDDIe jAva NAiyaraveNaM,
tayANaMtaraM ca bahave laTThiggAhA kuMtaggAhA jAva putthayaggAhA, jAva
vINaggAhA; tayANaMtaraM ca NaM aTThasayaM gayANaM, aTThasayaM turayANaM
aTThasayaM rahANaM; tayANaMtaraM ca NaM lauDa - asi - koMtahatthANaM bahUNaM
pAyattANINaM purao saMpaTTiyA tayANaMtaraM ca NaM bahave rAIsara - talavara jAva
satthavAhappabhiio purao saMpaTTiyA bAravaIe nayarIe majjhamajjheNaM jeNeva
arahao ariTThanemI teNeva pahArettha gamaNAe  /  taNaM tassa gayasukumAla -
kumArassa bAravaIe nayarIe majjhamajjheNaM NiggacchamANassa siMghADaga-tiya-
caukka jAva pahesu bahave atthatthiyA jahA uvavAie, jAva abhiNaMdaMtA ya abhittA
ya evaM vayAsI jaya jaya NaMdA! dhammeNaM, jaya jaya NaMdA! taveNaM, jaya jaya
NaMdA ! bhaddaM te abhaggehiM NANa- daMsaNa-carittamuttamehiM, ajiyAiM jiNAhi
iMdiyAI, jiyaM ca pAhi samaNadhammaM; jiyaviggho vi ya vasAhi taM deva!
siddhimajhe, NihaNAhi ya rAga-dosamalle, taveNaM dhiidhaNiyabaddhakacche,
maddAhi ya aTTha kammasattU jhANeNaM uttameNaM sukkeNaM, appamatto harAhi
ArAhaNapaDAgaM ca dhIra! telokkaraMgamajjhe, pAvaya vitimiramaNuttaraM kevalaM
ca NANaM, gaccha ya mokkhaM paraM padaM jiNavarovadidveNaM siddhimaggeNaM
akuDileNaM, haMtA parIsahacamuM, abhibhaviya gAmakaMTakovasaggANaM, dhamme te
avigghamatthu, tti kaTTu abhiNaMdaMti ya abhithuNaMti ya  /  tae NaM se
gayasukumAle kumAre bAravaIe nayarIe majjhaM-majjheNaM Niggacchai, NiggacchittA
jeNeva sahassaMbavaNe ujjANe teNeva uvAgacchai, uvAgacchittA chattAIe
titthagarAisee pAsai, pAsittA purisasahassavAhaNiM sIyaM Thavei,
purisasahassavAhiNIo sIyAo paccoruhai  /  tae NaM taM gayasukumAlaM kumAraM
ammApiyaro purao kAuM jeNeva arahA ariTThanemI teNeva uvAgacchanti, uvAgacchittA
arahaM ariTThanemiM tikkhutto jAva NamaMsittA evaM vayAsI evaM khalu bhaMte!
gayasukumAle kumAre amhaM ege putte iTThe kaMte jAva kimaMga! puNa pAsaNayAe, se
jahANAmae uppale i vA, paume i vA jAva sahassapatte i vA paMke jAe jale
saMvuDDhe Novalippar3a paMkaraeNaM, Novalippai jalaraeNaM, evAmeva gayasukumAle
kumAre kAmehiM jAe, bhogehiM saMvuDDhe Novalippar3a kAmaraeNaM

Page #109 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[68] [ Antakrid-dasha Valipp-ai bhogar-aenam no-valip-pad mitta-nai - niyag-
sayan- sambandhi-parijane-nam. Es nam dev-appiya! Sansar-bhay-uvvigge bhie
jamman-marane-nam; dev-anuppiya-nam antie mund-e bhavitta agara-o anagariyam
pavvate-i; tam eyam nam dev-anuppiya-nam amhe sis-bhikkham dal-yamo, padich-
chantu nam dev-anuppiya! Sis-bhikkham. Tae nam araha aritt-hanemi gay-sukumalam
kumaran evam vayasi - ahasuham dev-anuppiya! Ma padhi-bandham! Tae nam se gay-
sukumale kumarae arahaya aritt-hanemina evam vutte samane hatth-tutthe araham
arin-emi ttikkhutto jav namansitta uttar-puratthim disi-bhagam avakkam-ai,
avakkamitta sayamev abharan-malla-lankaran omu-yai. Tae nam sa gay-sukumal -
kumara-ssa maya hans-lakkhane-nam pad-saad-ae-nam abharan - malla-lankara
padich-chai, padich-chitta har - vari jav vinimmu-yaman-i vinimmu-yaman-i gay-
sukumalam kumaran evam vayasi- ghadi-yavvam jaya! Jay-yavvam jaya! Parikkam-
iyavvam jaya! Assim cha nam att-he, no pama-eyavvam ti katta gay-sukumala-ssa
kumara-ssa amma- piyaro aritt-hanemim vandanti namansanti, vanditta namansitta
jamev disim pau-bbhuya tamev disim padhi-gaya. Tanam se gas-sukumale kumarae
sayamev panch-mutthi-yam loyam kare-i, karitta jenev aritt-hanemi tenev uv-
agach-chai, uv-agach-chitta bhagavan aritt-hanemim ttikkhutto ayahi-napayahi-nam
kare-i, karitta jav namansitta evam vayasi A-litte nam bhan-te! Loe, palitte nam
bhan-te! Loe, a-litta palitte nam bhan-te! Loe jarae marane-nam ya. Se jaha-na-
mae kei gaha-v-ai agaransi jhi-yaman-si, je se tatth bhande bhavai app-bhare
molla-guru-e, tam gahay ayae egantam avakkam-ai es me nith-tharie samane pacch-a
pura ya hi-yae suhae khema-e nissey-sa-e a-nuga-miyatta-e bhavis-sai. Evamev
dev-anuppiya! Majjh vi ege aya bhande itthe kante pie manun-ne man-ame thejje
vess-asi-e sam-ae a-numae bahu-mae bhande-karand-ga-samane, ma nam siyam, ma nam
unham, ma nam khuha, ma nam pi-vasa, ma nam chora, ma nam bala, ma nam damsa, ma
nam masaga, ma nam vaiy-pitti-y- sembhi-y- sanni-vaiya viviha roga-yanka parisa-
ho-vas-ga phusantu ti katta es me nith-tharie samane par-loya-ssa hi-yae suhae
khema-e nise-sa-e a-nuga-miyatta-e bhavis-sai. Tam ich-chhami nam dev-anuppiya!
Sayamev pavva-viyam, sayamev mund-aviyam, sayamev seha-viyam, sayamev sikkha-
viyam, sayamev ayara-goyaram vinay-ven-ai-yacharan-karan-jaya - maya-vatti-yam
dhamma-maikkhi-yam. Tae nam aritt-hanemi araha gay-sukumalam kumaran sayamev
pavva-ve-i, jav dhamma-maikkhai - evam dev-appiya! Gantavvam, evam chitthi-
yavvam, evam nise-yavvam, evam tu-yatt-iyavvam, evam bhunji-yavvam, evam bhasi-
yavvam, evam uttha-e uttha-y pane-him bhu-e-him jive-him satte-him sanjame-nam
sanjam-iyavvam, assim cha nam att-he no kinchi pi pama-iyavvam. Tae nam se gay-
sukumale kumarae arahao aritt-hanemi-ssa imam ey-aruvam dhammi-yam uv-aesam
sammam sampad-ivvaj-jai ], tamana-ae taha jav [ gach-chai, tah chitth-ad, tah
nise-yai, tah tu-yatt-hai, tah bhun-jai, tah bhas-ai, tah uttha-e uttha-y pane-
him bhu-e-him jive-him satte-him sanjame-nam sanjam-e-i, ] se gay-sukumale
anagare iriya-samiv [ bhasa-samie esana-samie aya-na-bhande-mattanikkh-evan-a-
samie, uchar- pasavan - khel- jall-singha-na-paridva-vani-ya-samie man-samie
vay-samie kay-samie man-gutte vay-gutte kay-gutte guttin-die ] gutta-bhamb-
ayari, inamev nigantham pavayanam puro kaun vihar.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 68] [ antakRddazA valippai bhogaraeNaM Novalippar3a mitta-NAi - Niyaga-sayaNa-
saMbaMdhiparijaNeNaM  /  esa NaM devAppiyA! saMsArabhayuvvigge bhIe jammaNa-
maraNeNaM; devANuppiyANaM aMtie muMDe bhavittA agArAo aNagAriyaM pavvatei; taM
eyaM NaM devANuppiyANaM amhe sIsabhikkhaM dalayAmo, paDicchaMtu NaM devANuppiyA!
sIsabhikkhaM  /  tae NaM arahA ariTThanemI gayasukumAlaM kumAraM evaM vayAsI -
ahAsuhaM devANuppiyA! mA paDibaMdhaM ! tae NaM se gayasukumAle kumAre arahayA
ariTTaNemiNA evaM vutte samANe haTTha-tuTThe arahaM arinemiM tikkhutto jAva
NamaMsittA uttara-puratthimaM disibhAgaM avakkamai, avakkamittA sayameva
AbharaNa-mallA-laMkAraM omuyai  /  tae NaM sA gayasukumAla - kumArassa mAyA
haMsalakkhaNeNaM paDasADaeNaM AbharaNa - mallA-laMkAra paDicchai, paDicchittA
hAra - vAri jAva viNimmuyamANI viNimmuyamANI gayasukumAlaM kumAraM evaM vayAsI-
ghaDiyavvaM jAyA ! jaiyavvaM jAyA! parikkamiyavvaM jAyA! assiM ca NaM aTThe, No
pamAeyavvaM ti kaTTa gayasukumAlassa kumArassa ammA- piyaro ariTThaNemiM
vaMdaMti namaMsaMti, vaMdittA NamaMsittA jAmeva disiM pAubbhUyA tAmeva disiM
paDigayA  /  taNaM se gasukumAle kumAre sayameva paMcamuTThiyaM loyaM karei,
karittA jeNeva ariTThanemI teNeva uvAgacchai, uvAgacchittA bhagavaM ariTThanemiM
tikkhutto AyAhiNapayAhiNaM karei, karittA jAva namaMsittA evaM vayAsI Alitte NaM
bhaMte! loe, palitte NaM bhaMte! loe, Alitta palitte NaM bhaMte! loe jarAe
maraNeNa ya  /  se jahANAmae keI gAhAvaI agAraMsi jhiyAyamANaMsi, je se tattha
bhaMDe bhavai appabhAre mollagurue, taM gahAya AyAe egaMtaM avakkamai esa me
nitthArie samANe pacchA purA ya hiyAe suhAe khemAe nisseyasAe ANugAmiyattAe
bhavissai  /  evAmeva devANuppiyA! majjha vi ege AyA bhaMDe iTThe kaMte pie
maNuNNe maNAme thejje vessAsie saMmae aNumae bahumae bhaMDakaraMDagasamANe, mA
NaM sIyaM, mA NaM unhaM, mA NaM khuhA, mA NaM pivAsA, mA NaM corA, mA NaM bAlA,
mA NaM daMsA, mA NaM masagA, mA NaM vAiya-pittiya- seMbhiya- sannivAiyA vivihA
rogAyaMkA parIsahovasaggA phusaMtu tti kaTTu esa me nitthArie samANe paraloyassa
hiyAe suhAe khemAe nIsesAe ANugAmiyattAe bhavissai  /  taM icchAmi NaM
devANuppiyA ! sayameva pavvAviyaM, sayameva muMDAviyaM, sayameva sehAviyaM,
sayameva sikkhAviyaM, sayameva AyAra-goyaraM viNayaveNaiyacaraNa-karaNa-jAyA -
mAyAvattiyaM dhammamAikkhiyaM  /  tae NaM ariTThanemI arahA gayasukumAlaM
kumAraM sayameva pavvAvei, jAva dhammamAikkhai - evaM devAppiyA ! gaMtavvaM,
evaM ciTThiyavvaM, evaM nisIyavvaM, evaM tuyaTTiyavvaM, evaM bhuMjiyavvaM, evaM
bhAsiyavvaM, evaM uTThAe uTThAya pANehiM bhUehiM jIvehiM sattehiM saMjameNaM
saMjamiyavvaM, assiM ca NaM aTThe No kiMci pi pamAiyavvaM  /  tae NaM se
gayasukumAle kumAre arahao ariTThanemissa imaM eyArUvaM dhammiyaM uvaesaM sammaM
saMpaDivajjai ], tamANAe tahA jAva [ gacchai, taha ciTThar3a, taha nisIyai, taha
tuyaTThai, taha bhuMjai, taha bhAsai, taha uTThAe uTThAya pANehiM bhUehiM
jIvehiM sattehiM saMjameNaM saMjamei, ] se gayasukumAle aNagAre IriyAsamiva [
bhAsAsamie esaNAsamie AyANabhaMDamattanikkhevaNAsamie, uccAra- pAsavaNa - khela-
jalla-siMghANaparidvAvaNiyAsamie maNasamie vayasamie kAyasamie maNagutte
vayagutte kAyagutte guttiMdie ] guttabaMbhayArI, iNameva niggaMthaM pAvayaNaM
purao kAuM vihara  /

Page #110 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Third Chapter] After that, when Krishna-Vasudeva and the parents were unable to
convince Gaja-sukumala Kumar with many favorable and affectionate arguments,
they became disappointed and spoke to him in this way: "If this is the case,
then O son! We wish to see your royal glory (splendor of royal magnificence) for
just one day. Therefore, at least for one day, accept the royal fortune." Then
Gaja-sukumala Kumar remained silent, following the wishes of Vasudeva Krishna
and his parents.  After this, Gaja-sukumala's father called the family members
and said: [Devanupriyo! Quickly sprinkle water inside and outside this Dwarka
city. Clean the ground by sweeping and dusting, etc., as mentioned in the
relevant sutra, and carry out the work accordingly.] After that, he told the
servants: Devanupriyo! Quickly make preparations for Gaja-sukumala Kumar's
grand, valuable, worthy (worthy of great men) and abundant coronation. The
servants carried out the work as instructed and reported back. After this, Gaja-
sukumala's parents seated him on a fine throne facing east and performed his
coronation with one hundred and eight golden pots, according to the
Rajaprashniya sutra, and with one hundred and eight earthen pots, using the
words "Sarvariddhi" and "Yavat Mahashabda." After the coronation, they joined
their hands and praised him with the words "Yavat Jay-Vijay." After praising
him, they said: "O son! What shall we give you? What shall we do for you? What
is your desire?" Then Gaja-sukumala said: "O parents! I want to have the Rajo-
haran and the Patra brought from the Kutrikapan (Ku meaning earth, Trik meaning
three, Apan meaning shop. A divinely appointed place where things from the three
worlds of heaven, earth, and hell are found), and I want to call the barber."
Then Gaja-sukumala's father called the family members and said: "Devanupriyo!
Quickly bring out three lakh sonayas from the treasury. Give two lakh sonayas to
bring the Rajo-haran and the Patra from the Kutrikapan, and give one lakh
sonayas to call the barber." Hearing the above order, the servants, happy and
pleased, joined their hands, accepted their master's words, and brought out
three lakh gold coins from the treasury, brought the Rajo-haran and the Patra
from the Kutrikapan, and called the barber.  The barber was very happy when he
was called by Gaja-sukumala's father's servants. He bathed, adorned his body,
and then went to Gaja-sukumala's father, praised him with the words "Jay-Vijay,"
and said: "Devanupriya! Tell me what I can do for you." Gaja-sukumala's father
said to the barber: "Devanupriya! Cut Gaja-sukumala Kumar's forelock very
carefully, leaving four fingers long, so that it can be removed." Hearing the
order of Gaja-sukumala's father, the barber was very happy and joined his hands,
saying: "Swamin! As you command." Saying this, he humbly accepted his words.
Then he washed his hands and feet with fragrant water, tied his mouth with a
pure cloth of eight stripes, and then very carefully cut Gaja-sukumala Kumar's
hair, leaving four fingers of forelock for removal, and cut the rest of the
hair.  After that, Gaja-sukumala's mother took those forelocks in a white cloth
like a swan. She washed them with fragrant water, worshipped them with the best
and chief fragrances and garlands, tied them in a pure cloth, and placed them in
a jewel casket. After this, Gaja-sukumala Kumar's mother, weeping with grief
over the separation from her son, ...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 tRtIya varga] tadanantara gajasukumAla kumAra ko kRSNa-vAsudeva aura mAtA-pitA
jaba bahuta-sI anukUla aura sneha bharI yuktiyoM se bhI samajhAne meM samartha
nahIM hue taba nirAza hokara zrIkRSNa evaM mAtA-pitA isa prakAra bole "yadi aisA
hI hai to he putra! hama eka dina hI tumhArI rAjyazrI (rAjavaibhava kI zobhA)
dekhanA cAhate haiM  /  isaliye tuma kama se kama eka dina ke liye to rAjalakSmI
ko svIkAra kro|" taba gajasukumAla kumAra vAsudeva kRSNa aura mAtA-pitA kI icchA
kA anusaraNa karake cupa raha ge| isake bAda gajasukumAla ke pitA ne kauTumbika
puruSoM ko bulAyA aura isa prakAra kahA[devAnupriyo ! zIghra hI isa dvArakA
nagarI ke bAhara aura bhItara pAnI kA chiTakAva kro| jhAr3a-buhAra kara jamIna
ko sApha karo, ityAdi aupapAtika sUtra meM kahe anusAra kArya karake una puruSoM
ne AjJA vApasa sauNpii|] isake pazcAt usane sevaka puruSoM se isa prakAra kahA-
devAnupriyo ! zIghra gajasukumAla kumAra ke mahArtha, mahAmUlya, mahArha (mahAn
puruSoM ke yogya) aura vipula rAjyAbhiSeka kI taiyArI kro| sevaka puruSoM ne
AjJAnusAra kArya karake AjJA vApisa sauNpii| isake pazcAt gajasukumAla ke mAtA-
pitA ne unheM uttama siMhAsana para pUrva kI ora muMha karake baiThAyA aura eka
sau ATha suvarNa-kalazoM se rAjapraznIya sUtra ke vata eka sau ATha miTTI ke
kalazoM se sarvaRddhi dvArA yAvata mahAzabdoM dvArA rAjyAbhiSeka se abhiSikta
kiyaa| abhiSeka karake hAtha jor3akara yAvat jaya-vijaya zabdoM se bdhaayaa|
badhAkara ve isa prakAra bole- "he putra ! hama tujhe kyA deveM? tere liye kyA
kArya kareM? terA kyA prayojana hai?'' taba gajasukumAla ne isa prakAra kahA-"he
mAtA-pitA ! maiM kutrikApaNa (ku arthAt pRthvI, trika arthAt tIna, ApaNa arthAt
dUkAna  /  svarga, martya aura pAtAla rUpa tIna lokoM meM rahI huI vastue~
milane kA devAdhiSThita sthAna,) se rajoharaNa aura pAtra maMgavAnA tathA nApita
ko bulAnA cAhatA huuN| taba gajasukumAla ke pitA ne kauTumbika puruSoM ko bulAyA
aura kahA-he devAnupriyo! zIghra hI bhaMDAra meM se tIna lAkha sonaye nikaalo|
unameM se do lAkha sonaiyA dekara kutrikApaNa se rajoharaNa aura pAtra maMgAo
aura eka lAkha sonaiyA dekara nAI ko bulaao| uparyukta AjJA sunakara harSita
aura tuSTa hue sevakoM ne hAtha jor3akara svAmI ke vacanoM ko svIkAra kiyA aura
bhaMDAra meM se tIna lAkha suvarNa-mudrAeM nikAlakara kutrikApaNa se rajoharaNa
aura pAtra lAe tathA nAI ko bulaayaa| gajasukumAla ke pitA ke sevaka puruSoM
dvArA bulAye jAne para nAI bar3A prasanna huaa| usane snAnAdi kiyA aura apane
zarIra ko alaMkRta kiyaa| phira gajasukumAla ke pitA ke pAsa AyA, Akara unheM
jaya-vijaya zabdoM se badhAyA aura isa prakAra kahA-"devAnupriya! mere karane
yogya kArya khiye|" gajasukumAla ke pitA ne nApita se isa prakAra kahA-
"devAnupriya! gajasukumAla kumAra ke agrakeza atyanta yatnapUrvaka cAra aMgula
chor3akara niSkramaNa ke yogya kaatto|" taba gajasukumAla kumAra ke pitA kI AjJA
sunakara nApita atyaMta prasanna huA aura donoM hAtha jor3akara bolA-'svAmin!
jaisI ApakI AjJA' isa prakAra kahakara vinayapUrvaka unake vacanoM ko svIkAra
kiyaa| phira sugandhita gandhodaka se hAtha-paira dhoye aura zuddha ATha paTa
vAle vastra se mu~ha bA~dhA, phira atyanta yatnapUrvaka gajasukumAla kumAra ke,
niSkramaNa yogya cAra aMgula agrakeza chor3akara zeSa kezoM ko kaattaa| _
tadanantara gajasukumAla kI mAtA ne haMsa ke samAna zveta vastra meM una
agrakezoM ko grahaNa kiyaa| sugandhita gandhodaka se dhoyaa| uttama aura
pradhAna gandha tathA mAlA dvArA unakA arcana kiyA aura zuddha vastra meM
bA~dhakara unheM ratnakaraMDiye meM rkhaa| isake bAda gajasukumAla kumAra kI
mAtA, putra-viyoga se rotI huI

Page #111 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[70] [ Antakrid Dasha ] She, shedding tears like a garland of pearls, a stream
of water, a Sindhuvar tree's blossoms, and a broken garland of pearls, spoke
thus: "These hairs will be for us, like the final darshan, or repeated darshan,
of Gajasukumal Kumar, in many tithis, festivals, celebrations, and yajnas like
Nagpujada." Thinking thus, she placed them under her pillow.  After this,
Gajasukumal Kumar's parents had another throne placed in the north direction,
and had Gajasukumal Kumar bathed with golden and silver kalashas. Then, they
wiped his body with fragrant, gandhakaashyita (red, fragrant) cloth. They
anointed his body with Gosirsha Chandan. After that, they dressed him in a
patashaatak (silk cloth). He was so light that he could be blown away by the air
of his nose, pleasing to the eyes, beautiful in complexion, and soft to the
touch. The cloth was softer than the saliva of a horse, white, with gold threads
on its edges. It was very valuable and had the mark of a swan. Then, they
adorned him with a haar (eighteen-stringed) and an ardhahaar. What more can be
said, he was adorned and decorated like a Kalpa tree with granthim (knotted),
veshtit (woven), purim (filled), and sanghatim (interwoven) garlands.  After
this, his father called the family men and said, "O Devanupriyo! Please prepare
a shivika (palanquin) for me, like the vimanas described in the Rajprasniya
sutra, which are adorned with hundreds of pillars, playing puppets, and groups
of bells made of precious gems, and can be lifted by a thousand men." After
this, Gajasukumal Kumar, adorned and decorated with four types of ornaments:
keshalankar, vastralankar, malalankar, and abharanalanakar, rose from the
throne. He circumambulated and ascended the shivika, and sat on the best throne
facing east.  After that, Gajasukumal Kumar's mother, having bathed and adorned
her body, took a patashaatak with the mark of a swan, circumambulated, ascended
the shivika, and sat on the best bhadrasan to the right of Gajasukumal. Then,
Gajasukumal's foster mother, having bathed and adorned her body, took a
rajoharan and a vessel, circumambulated, ascended the shivika, and sat on the
best bhadrasan to the left of Gajasukumal. After this, behind Gajasukumal, stood
a young woman with a beautiful form and dress, beautiful gait, beautiful body,
and adorned with the beauty and charm of youth, holding a white korantak flower
garland, like snow, silver, kumud, mogra flowers, and the moon, and playfully
wearing it. Then, on the right and left of Gajasukumal, stood two beautiful
young women, like treasure houses of beauty, with beautiful dress, holding
chamaras on both sides. The chamaras were made of gems, gold, precious stones,
and pure, malleable (red gold), with intricate handles, and were white like
conch shells, ankaratna, mogra flowers, the moon, water drops, and the foam of
churned nectar. After this, Gajasukumal...  In the northeast direction (Ishaan
kona), stood a beautiful woman with beautiful dress and adornment, holding a
kalash filled with white, silver-colored, holy water, shaped like the mouth of a
mad elephant. In the southeast direction (Agneya kona), stood a beautiful woman
with beautiful dress, like a house of beauty, holding a fan with an intricate
golden handle.  Then, Gajasukumal's father called the family men and said, "O
Devanupriyo!

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 70] [ antakRddazA hAra, jala-dhArA, sinduvAra vRkSa ke puSpa aura TUTI huI
motiyoM kI mAlA ke samAna A~sU girAtI huI isa prakAra bolI - " ye keza hamAre
liye bahuta-sI tithiyoM, parvoM, utsavoM, nAgapUjAdi rUpa yajJoM aura mahotsavoM
meM gajasukumAla kumAra ke antima darzana - rUpa yA punaH punaH darzanarUpa
hoNge| aisA vicAra kara usane unheM apane takiye ke nIce rakha liyaa| isake bAda
gajasukumAla kumAra ke mAtA-pitA ne uttara dizA kI ora dUsarA siMhAsana
rakhavAyA aura gajasukumAla kumAra ko sone cA~dI ke kalazoM se snAna karavAyA  /
phira sugandhita gandhakASAyita (gandha-pradhAna lAla) vastra se usake aMga
poMche  /  gozIrSa candana se gAtroM kA vilepana kiyaa| tatpazcAt use paTazATaka
(rezamI vastra ) pahanAyA  /  vaha nAsikA ke nizvAsa kI vAyu se bhI ur3a jAya
aisA halkA thA, netroM ko acchA lagane vAlA, sundara varNa aura komala sparza se
yukta thaa| vaha vastra ghor3e ke mukha kI lAra se bhI adhika mulAyama thA,
zveta thA, usake kinAroM meM sone ke tAra the  /  mahAmUlyavAn aura haMsa ke
cihna se yukta thaa| phira hAra (aThAraha lar3I vAlA) aura arddhahAra phnaayaa|
adhika kyA kahA jAya, graMthima ( gU~thI huI) veSTita (vIMTI huI) pUrima (pUra
kara banAI huI) aura saMghAtima (paraspara saMghAta kI huI ) mAlAoM se kalpa
vRkSa ke samAna gajasukumAra ko alaMkRta evaM vibhUSita kiyA gyaa| isake bAda
usake pitA ne kauTumbika puruSoM ko bulAyA aura isa prakAra kahA - 'he
devAnupriyo ! saikar3oM stambhoM se yukta lIlA karatI putaliyoM se yukta ityAdi
rAjapraznIya sUtra meM varNita vimAna ke samAna yAvat maNiratnoM kI ghaNTikAoM
ke samUhoM se yukta, hajAra puruSoM dvArA uThAne yogya zivikA (pAlakI) taiyAra
karake mujhe nivedana kro|' isake bAda gajasukumAla kumAra kezAlaMkAra,
vastrAlaMkAra, mAlAlaMkAra aura AbharaNAlaMkAra, ina cAra prakAra ke alaMkAroM
se alaMkRta aura vibhUSita hokara siMhAsana se uThA  /  vaha pradakSiNA karake
zivikA para car3hA aura pUrva kI ora mu~ha karake zreSTha siMhAsana para baiThA
/  tatpazcAt gajasukumAla kumAra kI mAtA, snAnAdi karake yAvat zarIra ko
alaMkRta karake haMsa ke cihna kA paTazATaka lekara pradakSiNA karake zibikA
para car3hI aura gajasukumAla ke dAhinI ora uttama bhadrAsana para baiThI  /
phira gajasukumAla kI dhAyamAtA snAnAdi karake yAvat zarIra ko alaMkRta karake
rajoharaNa aura pAtra lekara pradakSiNA karake zivikA para car3hI aura
gajasukumAla ke bAMI ora uttama bhadrAsana para baitthii| isake bAda
gajasukumAla ke pIche manohara AkAra aura sundara veSa vAlI, sundara gativAlI,
sundara zarIravAlI yAvat rUpa aura yauvana ke vilAsa se yukta eka yuvatI hima,
rajata, kumuda, , mogare ke phUla aura candramA ke samAna zveta koraNTaka puSpa
kI mAlA se yukta chatra hAtha meM lekara, lIlApUrvaka dhAraNa karatI huI khar3I
huiiN| phira gajasukumAla ke dAhinI tathA bA~yI ora, zrRMgAra ke AgAra ke samAna
manohara AkAra vAlI aura sundara veSavAlI uttama do yuvatiyA~ donoM ora cAmara
DhulAtI huI khar3I huiiN| ve cAmara maNi, kanaka, ratna aura mahAmUlyavAn,
vimala tapanIya (rakta suvarNa) se bane hue, vicitra daNDa vAle the aura zaMkha,
aMkaratna, mogarA ke phUla, candra, jala-bindu aura mathe hue amRta ke phena ke
samAna zveta the| isake bAda gajasukumAla uttara-pUrva dizA (IzAna koNa) meM
zrRMgAra sahita uttama veSavAlI eka uttama strI zveta rajatamaya pavitra pAnI se
bharA huA, unmatta hAthI ke mukha ke AkAra vAlA kalaza lekara khar3I huI  /
gajasukumAla ke dakSiNa-pUrva (Agneya koNa) meM, zrRMgAra ke ghara ke samAna
uttama veSavAlI eka uttama strI vicitra sone ke daNDavAlA paMkhA lekara khar3I
huI  /  taba gajasukumAla ke pitA ne kauTumbika puruSoM ko bulAkara isa prakAra
kahA "he devAnupriyo !

Page #112 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Third Class] "Call one thousand excellent young men, all with the same skin
color, the same age, the same beauty and youthfulness, and adorned with the same
ornaments and clothes." The servants accepted their master's command and quickly
summoned a thousand men. Those thousand men were delighted and pleased. They
bathed, adorned themselves with the same ornaments and clothes, and came to the
father of Gajasukumal, joining their hands and bowing, saying, "O Devānupriya!
Tell us what task is worthy of us." Then the father of Gajasukumal said to them,
"Devānupriya! All of you carry the palanquin of Gajasukumal." They carried the
palanquin. When Gajasukumal mounted the palanquin, eight auspicious symbols led
the way: (1) Svastika, (2) Śrīvatsa, (3) Nandāvarta, (4) Vardhamānaka, (5)
Bhadrāsana, (6) Kalasa, (7) Matsya, and (8) Darpaṇa. Behind these eight
auspicious symbols, a full Kalasa followed, and so on, as stated in the
Aupapātika Sutra, until the Vijayanti (flag) touched the sky. People cheered and
followed in procession. After that, men born in the Ugrakula and Bhogakula, as
well as a multitude of men, followed Gajasukumal from behind, in front, and
around him. Gajasukumal's father, bathed and adorned, mounted the excellent
shoulder of an elephant. He wore a canopy adorned with a garland of Koṛanṭaka
flowers, was fanned by two white chamaras, and followed behind Gajasukumal with
a fourfold army of horses, elephants, chariots, and soldiers, surrounded by a
group of great soldiers. In front of Gajasukumal, great and excellent horses
ran, on both sides excellent elephants, and behind chariots and a group of
chariots. Thus, Gajasukumal proceeded, accompanied by prosperity and the sounds
of musical instruments. In front of him walked men carrying Kalasas and
Tālavṛnta. They wore white canopies on their heads. On both sides, white
chamaras and fans were being waved. Behind them walked many men carrying sticks,
spears, books, and even vīṇās. Behind them walked one hundred and eight
elephants, one hundred and eight horses, and one hundred and eight chariots.
After that, infantrymen carrying wood, swords, and spears walked. Behind them
walked many princes, wealthy men, swordsmen, and even merchants. Thus, passing
through the middle of Dwārakā city, they went towards the Sahasrāmrvana garden
outside the city, to the Arhant Ariṣṭanemi. As Gajasukumal Kumar passed through
the middle of Dwārakā city, many men seeking wealth, pleasure, and love, in the
Śṛṅgāṭaka, Trika, Caturṣka, and other royal roads, greeted him and praised him,
saying, "O Nanda (giver of joy)! May your good fortune (welfare) be. O Nanda!
Conquer your unconquered senses with perfect, excellent knowledge, vision, and
character, and follow the Śramaṇa Dharma. Strengthen the armor of patience and
conquer all obstacles. Conquer your senses and win over the army of patience.
Conquer the wrestlers of attachment and aversion through austerity, and crush
the eight enemies of karma with excellent white meditation. O brave one! In the
world-stage of the three realms, you should wander with the flag of worship,
attain pure, unblemished, unsurpassed, perfect knowledge, and through the simple
path of liberation taught by the Jinas, attain the supreme state of liberation.
May there be no obstacle in your path of Dharma." Thus, people greeted and
praised him. Then Gajasukumal Kumar, passing through the middle of Dwārakā city,
came to the Sahasrāmrvana garden outside the city, and seeing the canopy and
other extraordinary things of the Tirthankara Bhagavan, he descended from the
palanquin carrying a thousand men.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 tRtIya varga] [71 samAna tvacAvAle, samAna umravAle, samAna rUpa-lAvaNya aura
yauvana guNoM se yukta tathA eka samAna AbhUSaNa aura vastra pahane hue eka
hajAra uttama yuvaka puruSoM ko bulaao|" sevaka puruSoM ne svAmI ke vacana
svIkAra kara zIghra hI hajAra puruSoM ko bulaayaa| ve hajAra puruSa harSita aura
tuSTa hue| ve snAnAdi karake eka samAna AbhUSaNa aura vastra pahanakara
gajasukumAla ke pitA ke pAsa Aye aura hAtha jor3akara, badhAkara, isa prakAra
bole- "he devAnupriya! hamAre yogya jo kArya ho, vaha khiye|" taba gajasukumAla
ke pitA ne unase kahA- "devAnupriyo! tuma saba gajasukumAla kumAra kI zibikA ko
vahana kro| unhoMne zibikA vahana kii| jaba gajasukumAla zibikA para ArUDha ho
gae to sabase Age ATha maMgala anukrama se cle| yathA(1) svastika, (2) zrIvatsa,
(3) nandAvarta, (4) vardhamAnaka, (5) bhadrAsana, (6) kalaza, (7) matsya aura
(8) drpnn| ina ATha maMgaloM ke pIche pUrNa kalaza calA, ityAdi aupapAtika sUtra
meM kahe anusAra yAvat gaganatala ko sparza karatI huI vaijayantI (dhvajA) clii|
loga jaya-jayakAra karate hue anukrama se Age cle| isake bAda ugrakula,
bhogakula meM utpanna puruSa yAvat bahusaMkhyaka puruSoM ke samUha gajasukumAla
ke Age pIche aura AsapAsa calane lge| snAta evaM vibhUSita gajasukumAla ke pitA
hAthI ke uttama kaMdhe para cddh'e| koraNTaka puSpa kI mAlA se yukta chatra
dhAraNa kiye hue, do zveta cAmaroM se biMjAte hue, azva, hAthI, ratha aura
subhaToM se yukta, caturaMginI senA sahita aura mahAsubhaToM ke vRnda se
parivRta gajasukumAla ke pitA usake pIche calane lge| gajasukumAla ke Age mahAn
aura uttama ghor3e, donoM ora uttama hAthI, pIche ratha aura ratha kA samUha
claa| isa prakAra Rddhi sahita yAvat vAdyoM ke zabdoM se yukta gajasukumAla
calane lge| unake Age kalaza aura tAlavRnta liye hue puruSa cle| unake sira para
zveta chatra dhAraNa kiyA huA thaa| donoM ora zveta cAmara aura paMkhe biMjAye
jA rahe the| inake pIche bahuta-se lAThI vAle, bhAlA vAle, pustaka vAle yAvat
vINA vAle puruSa cle| unake pIche eka sau ATha hAthI, eka sau ATha ghor3e aura
eka sau ATha ratha cle| usake bAda lakar3I, talavAra, bhAlA liye hue padAti
puruSa cle| unake pIche bahuta-se yuvarAja, dhanika, talavara, yAvat sArthavAha
Adi cle| isa prakAra dvArakA nagarI ke bIca meM se calate hue nagara ke bAhara
sahasrAmravana udyAna meM arihaMta ariSTanemi ke pAsa jAne lge| dvArakA nagarI
ke bIca se nikalate hue gajasukumAla kumAra ko zrRMgATaka, trika, catuSka, yAvat
rAjamArgoM meM bahuta se dhanArthI, bhogArthI aura kAmArthI puruSa, abhinandana
karate hue evaM stuti karate hue isa prakAra kahane lage-'he nanda (Ananda
dAyaka)! tumhArA bhadra (kalyANa) ho| he nanda! akhaNDita uttama jJAna, darzana
aura cAritra dvArA avijita indriyoM ko jIto aura zramaNa dharma kA pAlana kro|
dhairya rUpI kaccha ko majabUta bA~dhakara sarva vighnoM ko jiito| indriyoM ko
vaza karake pariSaha rUpI senA para vijaya prApta kro| tapa dvArA rAgadveSa rUpI
malloM para vijaya prApta karo aura uttama zukla-dhyAna dvArA aSTa karma rUpI
zatruoM kA mardana kro| he dhIra! tIna loka rUpI vizva-maNDapa meM Apa ArAdhanA
rUpI patAkA lekara apra vicaraNa kareM aura nirmala, vizuddha, anuttara kevala-
jJAna prApta kareM tathA jinavaropadiSTa sarala siddhi-mArga dvArA parama pada
rUpa mokSa ko prApta kreN| Apake dharma-mArga meM kisI prakAra kA vighna nahIM
ho|' isa prakAra loga abhinandana aura stuti karane lge| taba ve gajasukumAla
kumAra dvArakA nagarI ke madhya se hote hue nagarI ke bAhara sahasrAmravana
udyAna meM Aye aura tIrthaMkara bhagavAn ke chatra Adi atizayoM ko dekhate hI
sahasrapuruSavAhinI zivikA se nIce

Page #113 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 72] [ Antakrid Dasha Utare. Then, bringing forward Gajasukumal, his parents
presented him to the Arihant Arishta-nemi Bhagwan, and after circumambulating
the Bhagwan thrice, they spoke as follows: "Bhagwan! This Gajasukumal Kumar is
our only beloved and cherished son. Even hearing his name is rare, so seeing him
is even rarer, what to say about his darshan? Just as a lotus, though born in
mud and raised in water, remains detached from water and mud, similarly,
Gajasukumal Kumar, though born from desire and raised by pleasures, is not
attached to desires and pleasures in the least. He is not attached to friends,
relatives, family, connections, and acquaintances. Bhagwan! This Gajasukumal is
distressed by the fear of the world, terrified by the fear of birth and death.
He wishes to accept the An-agar dharma by getting his head shaved in your
presence. Therefore, O Bhagwan! We offer you the alms of a disciple. Please
accept him."  After that, Bhagwan Arishta-nemi said to Gajasukumal Kumar: "O
Dev-anupriya! Do as you please, but do not delay." Upon hearing this from the
Bhagwan, Gajasukumal Kumar was delighted and pleased, and after circumambulating
the Bhagwan thrice and offering salutations, he went to the northeast (Ishaan-
kona). He himself removed his ornaments, garlands, and adornments. His mother
received them in a pat-shaatak (garment) marked with the sign of a swan. Then,
shedding tears like a string of pearls and a waterfall, she spoke to her son as
follows: "O son! Be diligent in restraint, be valiant in restraint. Do not be
negligent in restraint even for a moment." Saying this, Gajasukumal Kumar's
parents offered salutations to the Bhagwan and returned in the same direction
from which they had come.  After that, Gajasukumal Kumar himself performed the
Panch-musti Loch and after performing the Loch, he came to where Arihant
Arishta-nemi was. Upon arriving, he circumambulated Bhagwan Arishta-nemi thrice,
starting from the right side. Then, he offered salutations and said:  "Bhagwan!
This world is ablaze with the fire of old age and death. O Bhagwan! This world
is ablaze. Just as a householder, upon a fire breaking out in his house, takes
the least weighty and most valuable things from the house and goes into solitude
himself. He thinks: 'This thing, saved from burning in the fire, will be for my
benefit in the future, for my happiness, for my ability, for my well-being, and
for my future use.' Similarly, this soul of mine is a vessel (thing) that is
dear to me, beautiful, beloved, pleasing, and extremely charming. I will take
out this soul - I will save it from being consumed by the fire of old age and
death, then it will be the destroyer of this world. Therefore, I wish that Dev-
anupriya (you) yourself initiate me - grant me the robes of a monk, yourself
shave my head - perform my Loch, yourself teach me writing and other things,
yourself teach me the sutras and their meaning, yourself teach me the principles
of knowledge, conduct, conduct, humility, the fruits of humility, the seven
steps of the feet, the seven steps of the hands, the journey of restraint, and
the measure (quantity of food) etc., the form of dharma."  After that, Arihant
Arishta-nemi himself initiated Gajasukumal and himself taught him the principles
of dharma, conduct, etc.: "O Dev-anupriya! You should walk on the earth with
only a glance, you should stand on the lifeless ground in this way, you should
sleep after cleaning the ground in this way, you should take food free from the
causes of pain, etc., in this way -

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 72] [ antakRddazA utre| phira gajasukumAla ko Age karake unake mAtA-pitA,
arihaMta ariSTanemi bhagavAn kI sevA meM upasthita hue aura bhagavAn ko tIna
bAra pradakSiNA karake isa prakAra bole - " bhagavan ! yaha gajasukumAla kumAra
hamArA ikalautA priya aura iSTa putra hai| isakA nAma sunanA bhI durlabha hai,
to darzana durlabha ho isameM to kahanA hI kyA? jisa prakAra kIcar3a meM utpanna
aura pAnI meM bar3A hone para bhI kamala, pAnI aura kIcar3a se nirlipta rahatA
hai, isI prakAra gajasukumAla kumAra bhI kAma se utpanna huA aura bhogoM se
bar3A huA, parantu vaha kAma-bhogoM meM kiMcit bhI Asakta nahIM hai| mitra,
jJAti, svajana, sambandhI aura parijanoM meM lipta nahIM hai| bhagavan ! yaha
gajasukumAla saMsAra ke bhaya se udvigna huA hai, janma-maraNa ke bhaya se
bhayabhIta huA hai| yaha Apake pAsa muNDita hokara anagAradharma svIkAra karanA
cAhatA hai  /  ata: he bhagavan ! hama Apako ziSya rUpI bhikSA dete haiN| Apa
ise svIkAra kreN| " tatpazcAt bhagavAn ariSTanemi ne gajasukumAla kumAra se isa
prakAra kahA- -"he devAnupriya ! jisa prakAra tumheM sukha ho vaisA karo, kintu
vilamba mata kro|" bhagavAn ke aisA kahane para gajasukumAla kumAra harSita aura
tuSTa huA aura bhagavAn ko tIna bAra pradakSiNA kara yAvat vandanA namaskAra
kara, uttara pUrva (IzAnakoNa) meM gayA  /  usane svayameva AbharaNa mAlA aura
alaMkAra utaare| usakI mAtA ne unheM haMsa ke cihna vAle paTazATaka (vastra) meM
grahaNa kiyaa| phira hAra aura jaladhArA ke samAna AMsU girAtI huI, apane putra
se isa prakAra bolI - " he putra ! saMyama meM yatna karanA, saMyama meM
parAkrama karanA  /  saMyama meM kiciMtmAtra bhI pramAda mata karanA  / " isa
prakAra kahakara gajasukumAla kumAra ke mAtA-pitA bhagavAn ko vandanAnamaskAra
karake jisa dizA se Aye the, usI dizA meM vApasa lauTa gaye  /  ! tatpazcAt
gajasukumAla kumAra ne svayaM hI paMcamuSTi loca kiyA aura loca karake jahA~
arihaMta ariSTanemi the, vahA~ aaye| Akara bhagavAn ariSTanemi ko tIna bAra
dAhinI ora se AraMbha karake pradakSiNA kii| phira vandana - namaskAra kiyA aura
kahA "" 'bhagavan! yaha saMsAra jarA-maraNa rUpa agni se AdIpta hai, pradIpta
hai  /  he bhagavan ! yaha saMsAra AdIpta- pradIpta hai| jaise koI gAthApati
ghara meM Aga laga jAne para, usa ghara meM jo alpa bhAra vAlI aura bahumUlya
vastu hotI hai, use grahaNa karake svayaM ekAnta meM calA jAtA hai| vaha socatA
hai ki- 'agni meM jalane se bacAyA huA yaha padArtha mere liye Age-pIche hita ke
liye, sukha ke liye, kSamA (samarthatA) ke liye, kalyANa ke liye aura bhaviSya
meM upayoga ke liye hogaa| isI prakAra merA bhI yaha AtmA rUpI bhAMDa (vastu)
hai, jo mujhe iSTa hai, kAnta hai, priya hai, manojJa hai aura atizaya manohara
hai| isa AtmA ko maiM nikAla lU~gA - jarAM - maraNa kI agni meM bhasma hone se
bacA lU~gA, to yaha saMsAra kA uccheda karane vAlA hogaa| ataeva maiM cAhatA hU~
ki devAnupriya (Apa) svayaM hI mujhe pravrajita kareM- -muniveSa pradAna kareM,
svayaM hI mujhe muMDita kareM - merA loca kareM, svayaM hI pratilekhana Adi
sikhAe~, svayaM hI sUtra aura usakA artha pradAna karake zikSA deM, svayaM hI
jJAnAdika AcAra, gocarI, vinaya, vainayika (vinaya kA phala) caraNasattarI,
karaNasattarI, saMyamayAtrA aura mAtrA ( bhojana ke parimANa) Adi rUpa dharma kA
prarUpaNa kreN|" "" tatpazcAt arihaMta ariSTanemi ne gajasukumAla ko svayaM hI
pravrajyA pradAna kI aura svayaM hI yAvat AcAra gocara Adi dharma kI zikSA dI ki
- he devAnupriya ! isa prakAra - pRthvI para yuga mAtra dRSTi rakhakara calanA
cAhiye, isa prakAra - nirjIva bhUmi para khar3A honA cAhie, isa prakAra - 1 -
bhUmi kA pramArjana karake zayana karanA cAhie, isa prakAra - vedanA Adi ke
kAraNoM se nirdoSa AhAra karanA cAhie, isa prakAra -

Page #114 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Third Section] [73 One should speak in a way that is beneficial, moderate, and
pleasant. In this way, one should practice restraint by protecting the life
(vikaleendriya) of the bhutas (vanaspatikaaya), jivas (panchendriya), and
sattvas (shesh ekaindriya) with mindfulness and caution. One should not be
negligent in this matter even for a moment. After hearing this Dharma-related
instruction from the Arhat Arishthanemi, and holding it in his heart,
Gajasukumaal accepted it in the right way. He started to practice restraint by
diligently protecting the lives of the bhutas, jivas, and sattvas, following the
instructions of the Bhagwan, sitting in the same way, and remaining vigilant,
i.e., by abandoning negligence and sleep.] Becoming an Anagaar, the Muni
Gajasukumaal started to diligently follow the Iryasamiti, [Bhasasamiti,
Eshanasamiti, Aadaan-Bhaandamaatranikshepanasamiti, and Ucchaar-Prasravan-Khel-
Jall-Singhaan-Paristhapanikasamiti, and Manasamiti, Vachanasamiti, and
Kaayasamiti. He started to remain guarded in thought, speech, and action. He
became a Gupabrahmachaari, controlling his senses, and started to wander with
this Nirgranthpravachan in front of him. 'Discussion - The present two sutras
describe the arrival of Shri Krishna Maharaj and Prince Gajasukumaal at the feet
of Bhagwan Arishthanemi, the development of detachment in the heart of the
charmashareee Gajasukumaal after hearing the auspicious teachings of the
Bhagwan, then obtaining permission from his parents to be initiated, Krishna
Maharaj and his mother Devaki trying to convince him not to take initiation
(detailed conversation on this topic), Gajasukumaal being crowned king for a
day, the celebration of the Pravrajyaabhishek, and finally becoming an Anagaar
and wandering accordingly. Many topics are described in this. _ 'Maheliyavajan'
- This word has two meanings. It means without a woman and unmarried. One who is
not married is Maheliyavarj. The sutrakar has described the life of Gajasukumaal
as 'Jaha Meho', comparing him to Meghakumar. In the first study of the
'Jnataadharmakathaang Sutra', Meghakumar is described as married, and
Gajasukumaal was unmarried, therefore the sutrakar has indicated this difference
with the word 'Maheliyavajj'. Abhishek means - the act of sprinkling water on
the head with sacred water containing all herbs, with mantras, to bestow a title
- the act of crowning a king, the celebration of sitting on the throne, the
ascension of the king to the throne, the coronation. Gajamuni carrying the
Mahapratima 22 - Then, on the same day that Gajasukumaal was celebrating, in the
early morning hours of that day, Arhat Arishthanemi arrived. After arriving,
Arhat Arishthanemi performed the Tikkhutto Aayahiin-Payahiin, and after
performing it, he bowed and paid respects. After bowing and paying respects, he
said, 'I wish, Bhante! that you, who are worthy of being worshipped, would
wander in the Mahakaal, in the cremation ground, after being adorned with the
Mahapratima.' Ahasuhum Devaanuppiya! Do not bind yourself. 1. Variant reading -
Angasuttaani - "Pachvaavaranh0" 3/563.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 tRtIya varga] [73 hita, mita aura madhura bhASaNa karanA caahie| isa prakAra
apramatta evaM sAvadhAna hokara prANa (vikalendriya) bhUta (vanaspatikAya), jIva
(paMcendriyo) aura sattva (zeSa ekendriya) kI rakSA karake saMyama kA pAlana
karanA caahie| isa viSaya meM tanika bhI pramAda nahIM karanA caahie| tatpazcAt
gajasukumAla ne ariSTanemi arhat ke nikaTa isa prakAra kA dharma sambandhI yaha
upadeza sunakara aura hRdaya meM dhAraNa karake samyak prakAra se use aMgIkAra
kiyaa| vaha bhagavAn kI AjJA ke anusAra gamana karate, usI prakAra baiThate,
yAvat sAvadhAna rahakara arthAt pramAda aura nidrA kA tyAga karake prANoM,
bhUtoM, jIvoM aura satvoM kI yatanA karake saMyama kI ArAdhanA karane lage]
anagAra banakara ve gajasukumAla muni IryAsamiti, [bhASAsamiti, eSaNAsamiti,
AdAna-bhANDamAtranikSepaNasamiti aura uccAra-prasravaNa-khela-jalla-siMghANa-
paristhApanikAsamiti, evaM mana:samiti, vacanasamiti aura kAyasamiti kA
sAvadhAnIpUrvaka pAlana karane lge| manogupti, vacanagupti aura kAyagupti se
rahane lge| indriyoM ko vaza meM rakhane vAle] guptabrahmacArI bana kara evaM
isI nirgranthapravacana ko sanmukha rakha kara vicarane lge| 'vivecana-prastuta
do sUtroM meM zrIkRSNa mahArAja tathA rAjakumAra gajasukumAla kA bhagavAn
ariSTanemi ke caraNoM meM upasthita honA, bhagavAn kA maMgalamaya upadeza
sunakara caramazarIrI gajasukumAla ke hRdaya meM vairAgya utpanna honA, phira
dIkSita hone ke liye mAtA-pitA se AjJA prApta karanA, kRSNa mahArAja dvArA tathA
mAtA, devakI dvArA unheM dIkSA na lene ke lie samajhAnA (isa viSaya meM vistRta
saMvAda), gajasukumAla ko eka dina ke liye rAjyAbhiSikta karanA,
pravrajyAbhiSeka mahotsava aura anta meM anagAra banakara yathAvidhi vicaraNa
Adi aneka viSayoM kA varNana prastuta kiyA gayA hai| _ 'maheliyAvajaM'- isa pada
ke do artha kiye jAte haiN| mahilArahita aura avivaahit| jisa kA vivAha nahIM
huA vaha mahilAvarja hai| sUtrakAra ne gajasukumAla ke jIvana ko 'jahA meho'
yaha kaha kara meghakumAra ke samAna batAyA hai| jJAtAdharmakathAMga sUtra' ke
prathamAdhyayana meM meghakumAra ko vivAhita kahA hai aura gajasukumAla
avivAhita the, ata: sUtrakAra ne isa vibhinnatA ko 'maheliyAvajjaM' zabda se
sUcita kiyA hai| abhiSeka kA artha hai-sarva auSadhiyoM se yukta pavitra
jaladvArA mantropacArapUrvaka padavI kA AropaNa karane ke liye mastaka para jala
chir3akane kI kriyA-rAjyAbhiSekakriyA, rAjagaddI para baiThane kA mahotsava,
rAjA kA siMhAsanArohaNa, raajtilk| gajamuni kA mahApratimA-vahana 22-tae NaM se
gayasukumAle jaM ceva divasaM pavvaie tasseva divasassa
puvvAvaraNhakAlasamayaMsi' jeNeva arahA ariTThaNemI teNeva uvAgacchai,
uvAgacchittA arahaM ariTThaNemiM tikkhutto AyAhiNa-payAhiNaM karei, karettA
vaMdai, namasai, vaMdittA namaMsittA evaM vayAsI 'icchAmi NaM bhaMte! tubbhehiM
abbhaNuNNAe samANe mahAkAlaMsi susANaMsi egarAiyaM mahApaDimaM uvasaMpajjittANaM
vihritte|' ahAsuhaM devANuppiyA! mA paDibaMdhaM kreh| 1. pAThAntara-
aMgasuttANi-"pacvAvaraNha0" 3/563  /

Page #115 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[74] After being initiated into the Shraman Dharma, the monk Gajasukumal arrived
at the place where the Arhat Arishta-nemi was residing, on the very day of his
initiation, in the latter part of the day. Arriving there, he circumambulated
the Lord Neminath three times from the south. After circumambulating, he said,
"O Bhagavan! With your permission, I wish to perform a Mahapadima (great image)
for one night in the Mahakal cemetery." The Lord said, "O Dev-anupriya! Do
whatever brings you happiness." Then, after receiving the permission of the
Arhat Arishta-nemi, the monk Gajasukumal bowed and prostrated to the Lord
Neminath. After bowing and prostrating, he left the presence of the Arhat
Arishta-nemi and went out of the Sahasramravan garden. From there, he went to
the Mahakal cemetery. Arriving at the Mahakal cemetery, he made a record of the
Prasauk Sthandila land. After making the record, he made a record of the land
suitable for the discharge of excrement and urine. After making the record, he
stood at one place, slightly bending his body, [with his hands extended to his
knees, looking at the white pudgala, with unwavering eyes, keeping all his
senses under control] with both his feet together (at a distance of four
fingers), and performed a Mahapadima for one night, becoming absorbed in
meditation. Commentary: "Puvvavaranhakalasamayans-i" means the latter half of
the day, from noon to sunset, which is called Aparah. The third watch of the day
is called Parva-aparah. Time is general and moment is specific. In this chapter,
the Sutrakar wants to use the word "kal" for the third watch and the word
"samay" for the specific moment when this event occurred. The word "Thandill-am"
means Prasauk land, a place devoid of living beings, a place of seclusion, where
there is no obstacle of any kind. By Somila's prefix 22-Imam cha nam Somile
Mahane Samidheyass-a Atthaye Baravaiyo Nayariyo Bahiya Puvvaniggae. Samihao
Yadabbey Kuse ya Pattamodam ya Genhai, Genhitta Tao Padiniyattai, Padiniyattaita
Mahakalass-a Susanas-sa Adur-asamantenam Vee-ivayamane-Vee-ivayamane
Sanjhakalasamayans-i Paviralamanussans-i Gayasukumal-am Anagar-am Pasa-i,
Pasitta Tam Ver-am Sara-i, Saritta Asurutte Rutte Kuvie Chandikkae Misimisemane
Evam Vayasi "Es nam Bho! Se Gayasukumale Kumare Apathiya-jav [Patthie, Durant-
pant-lakkhane, Heen-punna-chauddasiye, Siri-hiri-dhi-kitti] Parivadjjie, Je nam
Mam Dhuyam Somasiriye 1. Pathantar-Kabhallenam.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 74] [antakRddazA tae NaM se gayasukumAle aNagAre arahayA ariTThaNemiNA
abbhaNuNNAe samANe arahaM ariTThaNemiM vaMdai namasai, vaMdittA namaMsittA
arahao ariTThaNemissa aMtie sahasaMbavaNAo ujjANAo paDiNikkhamai,
paDiNikkhamittA jeNeva mahAkAle susANe teNeva uvAgae, uvAgacchittA thaMDillaM
paDilehei, paDilehettA uccArapAsavaNabhUmi paDilehei, paDilehettA IsiM
pabbhAragaeNaM kAraNaM jAva [vagghAriyapANI aNimisanayaNe sukkapoggala-
niruddhadiTThI] dovi pAe sAha? egarAiM mahApaDimaM uvasaMpajjittA NaM vihri|
zramaNadharma meM dIkSita hone ke pazcAt gajasukumAla muni jisa dina dIkSita
hue, usI dina ke pichale bhAga meM jahA~ arihaMta ariSTanemi virAjamAna the,
vahA~ aaye| vahA~ Akara unhoMne bhagavAn neminAtha kI dakSiNa kI ora se tIna
bAra pradakSiNA kii| pradakSiNA karake ve isa prakAra bole-'bhagavan! ApakI
anujJA prApta hone para maiM mahAkAla zmazAna meM eka rAtri kI mahApaDimA
(mahApratimA) dhAraNa kara vicaranA cAhatA huuN|' prabhu ne kahA- 'he
devAnupriya! jisase tumheM sukha prApta ho vahI kro|' tadanantara vaha
gajasukumAla muni arihaMta ariSTanemi kI AjJA milane para, bhagavAn neminAtha ko
vaMdana namaskAra karate haiM  /  vaMdana-namaskAra kara, arhat ariSTanemi ke
sAnnidhya se calakara sahasrAmravana udyAna se nikle| vahA~ se nikalakara jahA~
mahAkAla zmazAna thA, vahA~ Ate haiN| mahAkAla zmazAna meM Akara prAsuka
sthaMDila bhUmi kA pratilekhana karate haiN| pratilekhana karane ke pazcAt
uccAra-prasravaNa (mala-mUtra) tyAga ke yogya bhUmi kA pratilekhana karate haiN|
pratilekhana karane ke pazcAt eka sthAna para khar3e ho apanI deha-yaSTi ko
kiMcit jhukAye hue, [hAthoM ko ghuTanoM taka laMbA karake, zukla pudgala para
dRSTi rakhate hue animeSa netroM se nizcalatApUrvaka saba indriyoM ko gopana
karake] donoM pairoM ko (cAra aMgula ke antara se) ekatra karake eka rAtri kI
mahApratimA aMgIkAra kara dhyAna meM magna ho jAte haiN|
vivecana-"puvvAvaraNhakAlasamayaMsi-" arthAt dina ke pichale Adhe bhAga-dopahara
se lekara saryAsta taka ke kAla ko aparAha kahate haiN| dina kA tIsarA prahara
parvAparAha kahA jAtA hai| kAla sAmAnya aura samaya viziSTa hotA hai| prastuta
satra meM kAla zabda se tRtIya prahara tathA samaya zabda se usa viziSTa kSaNa
kA grahaNa karanA sUtrakAra ko iSTa hai jisameM yaha ghaTanA ghaTita huI hai|
'thaMDillaM' zabda kA artha hai prAsuka bhUmi, jIva-jantu rahita pradeza,
nivRttimaya sthAna, jahA~ kisI prakAra kI koI bAdhA na ho| somila dvArA upasarga
22-imaM ca NaM somile mAhaNe sAmidheyassa aTThAe bAravaIo nayarIo bahiyA
puvvnnigge| samihAo yadabbheya kuse ya pattAmoDaM ya geNhai, geNhittA tao
paDiNiyattai, paDiNiyattitA mahAkAlassa susANassa adUrasAmaMteNaM vIIvayamANe-
vIIvayamANe saMjhAkAlasamayaMsi paviralamaNussaMsi gayasukumAlaM aNagAraM pAsai,
pAsittA taM veraM sarai, sarittA Asurutte ruTe kuvie caMDikkae misimisemANe evaM
vayAsI "esa NaM bho! se gayasukumAle kumAre apatthiya-jAva [patthie, duraMta-
paMta-lakkhaNe, hINa-puNNacAuddasie, siri-hiri-dhii-kitti] parivajjie, je NaM
mama dhUyaM somasirIe 1. paatthaantr-kbhllennN|

Page #116 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Third Class] [75 The ascetic Somila, having abandoned his wife and children,
became a monk. This was a source of great anger for Gayasukumala's son. He
thought to himself, "I must avenge this insult." He looked around to make sure
no one was watching, then went to a nearby pond and took some wet mud. He went
to Gayasukumala's hermitage and smeared the mud on his head. Then he took some
burning embers from a funeral pyre and placed them on Gayasukumala's head.
Fearing that he might be seen, he quickly fled back the way he had come.]
Meanwhile, Somila, a Brahmin, had gone out of the city of Dwaraka to gather
firewood for a sacrifice. He had already collected the firewood, darbha grass,
kusha grass, roots, and leaves. He was returning home when he saw Gayasukumala
meditating near the Mahakal cemetery.  Somila was filled with hatred at the
sight of him. He thought to himself, "This is the same Gayasukumala who
abandoned my daughter Soma, a beautiful and virtuous young woman, and became a
monk. I must take revenge on him." He looked around to make sure no one was
watching, then went to a nearby pond and took some wet mud. He went to
Gayasukumala's hermitage and smeared the mud on his head. Then he took some
burning embers from a funeral pyre and placed them on Gayasukumala's head.
Fearing that he might be seen, he quickly fled back the way he had come.
**Commentary:** Somila, blinded by anger and unaware of Gayasukumala's deep
devotion, acted with great cruelty towards the meditating monk. This passage
describes his demonic act in a heart-wrenching manner.  The commentator, Acharya
Abhaydeva Suri, explains the term "samidheyassa" as "samitsamuhassa," meaning a
collection of firewood. The words "dabbe, kuse, pattamodam" are explained as
follows: "samidhauutti" refers to firewood, "dabbeti" refers to darbha grass
with roots, "kuseti" refers to the tips of darbha grass, and "pattamodam" refers
to leaves that are folded from the branches of trees, used for worship.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 tRtIya varga] [75 bhAriyAe attayaM somaM dAriyaM adiTThadosapattiyaM
kAlavattiNiM vippajahittA muMDe jAva pvvie| taM seyaM khalu mama gayasukumAlassa
kumArassa veranijjAyaNaM karettae; evaM saMpehei, saMpehettA disApaDilehaNaM
karei, karettA sarasaM maTTiyaM geNhai, geNhittA jeNeva gayasukumAle aNagAre
teNeva uvAgacchai, uvAgacchittA gayasukumAlassa aNagArassa matthae maTTiyAe
pAliM baMdhai, baMdhittA jalaMtIo ciyayAo phulliyakiMsuyasamANe khariMgAle
kahalleNaM' geNhai, geNhittA gayasukumAlassa aNagArassa matthae pakkhivai,
pakkhivittA bhIe tatthe tasie uvvigge saMjAyabhae tao khippAmeva avakkamai,
avakkamittA jAmeva disaM pAubbhUe tAmeva disaM pddige|" idhara somila brAhmaNa
samidhA (yajJa kI lakar3I) lAne ke liye dvArakA nagarI ke bAhara gajasukumAla
anagAra ke zmazAnabhUmi meM jAne se pUrva hI nikalA thaa| vaha samidhA, darbha,
kuza, DAbha evaM patrAmoDoM ko letA hai| unheM lekara vahA~ se apane ghara kI
tarapha lauTatA hai| lauTate samaya mahAkAla zmazAna ke nikaTa (na ati dUra na
ati sannikaTa) se jAte hue saMdhyA kAla kI belA meM, jabaki manuSyoM kA
gamanAgamana nahIM ke samAna ho gayA thA, usane gajasukumAla muni ko vahA~
dhyAnastha khar3e dekhaa| unheM dekhate hI somila ke hRdaya meM vaira bhAva
jAgRta huaa| vaha krodha se tamatamA uThatA hai aura mana hI mana isa prakAra
bolatA hai are! yaha to vahI aprArthanIya kA prArthI (mRtyu kI icchA karane
vAlA), [duranta-prAnta-lakSaNa vAlA, puNyahIna caturdazI meM utpanna huA hrI
aura zrI (lajjA tathA lakSmI) se] parivarjita, gajasukumAla kumAra hai, jo merI
somazrI bhAryA kI kukSi se utpanna, yauvanAvasthA ko prApta nirdoSa putrI somA
kanyA ko akAraNa hI tyAga kara muMDita ho yAvat zramaNa bana gayA hai isaliye
mujhe nizcaya hI gajasukumAla se isa vaira kA badalA lenA caahiye| isa prakAra
vaha somila socatA hai aura socakara saba dizAoM kI ora dekhatA hai ki kahIM se
koI dekha to nahIM rahA hai| isa vicAra se cAroM ora dekhatA huA pAsa ke hI
tAlAba se vaha gIlI miTTI letA hai, lekara gajasukumAla muni ke mastaka para
pAla bA~dhatA hai| pAla bA~dhakara jalatI huI citA meM se phUle hue kiMzuka
(palAza) ke phUla ke samAna lAla-lAla khaira ke aMgAroM ko kisI khappara
(ThIkare) meM lekara una dahakate hue aMgAroM ko gajasukumAla muni ke sira para
rakha detA hai| rakhane ke bAda isa bhaya se ki kahIM use koI dekha na le,
bhayabhIta hokara ghabarA kara, trasta hokara evaM udvigna hokara vaha vahA~ se
zIghratApUrvaka pIche kI ora haTatA huA bhAgatA hai| vahA~ se bhAgatA huA vaha
somila jisa ora se AyA thA usI ora calA jAtA hai| vivecana-gajasukumAla ke ugra
vairAgya se anabhijJa hone se tathA apanI putrI ke sAtha vivAha nahIM karane ke
kAraNa krodha meM aMdhA ho kara somila, dhyAnastha gajasukumAla muni ke prati
atyanta krUra evaM nRzaMsa vyavahAra karatA hai| prastuta sUtra meM usake
paizAcika kRtya kA hRdayavidAraka varNana prastuta kiyA gayA hai| _
'sAmidheyassa' kI vyAkhyA karate hue TIkAkAra AcArya abhayadeva sUri kahate haiM
'saamidheysstti'smitsmuuhsy|' yahA~ samit kA artha hai havana meM jalAI jAne
vAlI lkdd'ii| Age 'dabbhe kuse pattAmoDaM' zabdoM kA prayoga huA hai, jinakA
TIkA meM isa prakAra artha kiyA hai 'samihAutti' indhanabhUtA kASThikAH,
'dabbhetti' samUlAn darbhAn, 'kusetti' darbhAgrANIti, pattAmoDayaM ti
zAkhizAkhA-zikhAmoTitapatrANi devatArcanArthAnItyarthaH- arthAt-samidhA
indhanabhUta lakar3I ko, mUlasahita DAbha-jar3oM vAlI ghAsa ko darbha, DAbha ke
agrabhAga ko kuza tathA devapUjana ke liye vRkSoM kI zAkhAoM ke agrabhAga se
mur3e hue pattoM ko patrAmoTita kahate haiN|

Page #117 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[76] **The Siddhi of Muni Gajasukumal**  23–Therefore, the naked ascetic
Gajasukumal experienced intense pain in his body, which was [exceedingly
painful, extremely terrible, fierce, intense, dreadful, and unbearable]. Even
then, the naked ascetic Gajasukumal did not harbor any animosity towards the
Brahmin Somila in his mind, and he endured that [heart-wrenching, terrible,
fierce, intense, dreadful, unbearable] pain with equanimity. At that time, while
enduring that [exceedingly painful, unbearable, scorching] pain with equanimity,
due to auspicious results and noble aspirations, the karmas that covered his
virtues were destroyed, and he became free from all karmic defilement, entering
the state of A-puvva-karana, which destroys karmas. The naked ascetic
Gajasukumal attained the infinite, unsurpassed [unobstructed, unhindered,
complete, and perfect] state of Kevala-jnana and Kevala-darsana. After that,
when his lifespan was complete, he became a Siddha, [a knower of all things,
free from all karmas], and free from all suffering.  At that time, the nearby
gods, knowing that the Muni Gajasukumal had performed the most excellent worship
of the Shraman dharma, showered him with divine fragrant water, five types of
divine flowers, and divine garments, using their divine powers. They also filled
the sky with the sound of divine sweet songs and Gandharva musical instruments.
**Commentary:**  The Muni Gajasukumal, who was completely absorbed in his own
self, in self-meditation, endured this extremely terrible, heart-wrenching,
intense pain inflicted by the Brahmin Somila with complete equanimity and
without any animosity. As a result, he attained Kevala-jnana and Kevala-darsana
and attained liberation.  The two factors that are most helpful in attaining
liberation, (1) auspicious results and (2) noble aspirations, are mentioned in
the sutra with the words "Subhena parinaamena, pasatthajjhavasaanena". The
difference in meaning between the two is as follows: 1. Generally, auspicious,
pure thoughts are called auspicious results. 2. The state of being absorbed in
self-meditation or engaged in deep self-reflection is called noble aspirations.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 76] [antakRddazA somila brAhmaNa dvArA kI jAne vAlI isa kalpanAtIta asahya
mahAvedanA ke bAda bhI muni gajasukumAla kI kyA sthiti rahI, isakA hRdaya-sparzI
varNana karate hue sUtrakAra kahate haiMgajasukumAla muni kI siddhi 23-tae NaM
tassa gayasukumAlassa aNagArassa sarIrayaMsi veyaNA pAubbhUyA-ujalA jAva [viulA
kakkhaDA pagADhA caMDA ruddA dukkhA] durhiyaasaa| tae NaM se gayasukumAle
aNagAre somilassa mAhaNassa maNasA vi appadussamANe taM ujjalaM jAva [viulaM
kakkhaDaM pagADhaM caMDaM rudaM dukkhaM durahiyAsaM veyaNaM] ahiyaasei| tae NaM
tassa gayasukumArassa aNagArassa taM ujjalaM jAva ahiyAsemANassa subheNaM
pariNAmeNaM, pasatthajjhavasANeNaM, tadAvaraNijjANaM kammANaM khaeNaM
kammarayavikiraNakaraM apuvvakaraNaM aNuppaviTThassa aNaMte aNuttare jAva
[nivvAghAe nirAvaraNe kasiNe paDipuNNe ] kevalavaraNANadaMsaNe smuppnnnne| tao
pacchA siddhe jAva [buddhe mutte aMtayaDe parinivvue savvadukkha] pphiinne||
tattha NaM ahAsaMnihiehiM devehiM sammaM ArAhie tti kaTu divve surabhigaMdhodrae
vuDhe; dasaddhavaNNe kusume nivADie; celukkheve kae; divve ya gIyagaMdhavvaNiNAe
kae yAvi hotthaa| sira para una jAjvalyamAna aMgAroM ke rakhe jAne se
gajasukumAla muni ke zarIra meM mahA bhayaMkara vedanA utpanna huI jo atyanta
dAhaka, duHkhapUrNa [atyadhika hRdayavidAraka, atyadhika bhayaMkara, ugra,
tIvra, bhISaNa aura dussaha] thii| itanA hone para bhI gajasukumAla muni somila
brAhmaNa para mana se bhI, leza mAtra bhI dveSa nahIM karate hue usa ekAnta
duHkharUpa [hRdaya-vidAraka, bhayaMkara, ugra, tIvra, bhISaNa, dussaha] vedanA
ko samabhAvapUrvaka sahana karane lge| usa samaya usa ekAnta duHkhapUrNa duHsaha
dAhaka vedanA ko samabhAva se sahana karate hue zubha pariNAmoM tathA prazasta
zubha adhyavasAyoM (bhAvanAoM) ke phalasvarUpa AtmaguNoM ko AcchAdita karane
vAle karmoM ke kSaya se samasta karma-raja ko jhAr3akara sApha kara dene vAle,
karma-vinAzaka apUrvakaraNa meM praviSTa hue| una gajasukumAla anagAra ko
anaMta-aMtarahita anuttara-sarvazreSTha [nirvyAghAta nirAvaraNa saMpUrNa evaM
paripUrNa] kevalajJAna evaM kevaladarzana kI upalabdhi huii| tatpazcAt AyuSya
pUrNa ho jAne para ve siddhakRtakRtya, [buddha-sakalapadArthoM ke jJAtA, mukta-
sakala karmoM] aura sarva prakAra ke duHkhoM se rahita ho gye| usa samaya vahA~
samIpavartI devoM ne "aho! ina gajasukumAla muni ne zramaNadharma kI atyanta
utkRSTa ArAdhanA kI hai" yaha jAna kara apanI vaikriya zakti ke dvArA divya
sugandhita acitta jala kI tatha pAMca vargoM ke divya acitta phUloM evaM vastroM
kI varSA kI aura divya madhura gItoM tathA gandharvavAdyayantroM kI dhvani se
AkAza ko guMjA diyaa| vivecana-parama Atmastha, Atma-samAdhi meM lIna muni
gajasukumAla ne somila-brAhmaNa dvArA kI gaI yaha bhISaNAtibhISaNa
hRdayavidAraka mahAvedanA pUrNa samabhAvapUrvaka nidveSa bhAva se sahana kii|
pariNAmataH kevalajJAna aura kevaladarzana ko prApta kara ve mokSa meM padhAra
gye| mokSa-prApti meM parama sahayogI rUpa (1) zubha pariNAma aura (2) prazasta
adhyavasAya ina do padoM kA "subheNa pariNAmeNaM pasatthajjhavasANeNaM" zabdoM
se sUtra meM ullekha kiyA hai| donoM kA artha-vibheda isa prakAra - 1. sAmAnya
rUpa se zubha niSpApa vicAroM ko zubha pariNAma kahate haiN| 2. vizeSa rUpa se
Atma-samAdhi meM laga jAne yA gaMbhIra Atmacintana meM saMlagna hone kI dazA ko
prazasta adhyavasAya kahA

Page #118 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Third Section] [77] "Tadavaranijjaṇam Kammaṇam"- In this phrase, 'karma' is the
object and 'tadavaranīya' is its adjective. The word 'karma' refers to the
karman particles obtained from the soul's regions, and the word 'tadavaranīya'
indicates the meaning of those that cover the soul's qualities like knowledge
and vision. "Kammarayavikiraṇakaram"- Kammarajovikiraṇakaram means one who
destroys the radiation of karma-rajo-mala, which is the karma-form of rajo-mala,
like jñāna-āvaraṇīya. "Apuvvakaraṇam-Apūrvakaraṇam, Ātmano'bhūtapūrvam
Shubhaparināmam"- The word 'apūrvakaraṇam' means that which has not been
obtained before. This is also considered to be the characteristic of the eighth
'nivṛttibādar guṇasthāna'. From this guṇasthāna, two categories begin - the
upasamaśreṇī and the kṣapakaśreṇī. The being of the upasamaśreṇī, while subduing
the natures of mohanīya karma, stops at the eleventh guṇasthāna and falls down.
The being of the kṣapakaśreṇī, from the tenth guṇasthāna, directly goes to the
twelfth guṇasthāna and becomes apratipātī. The being who has ascended to the
eighth guṇasthāna, increasing progressively from the kṣapakaśreṇī, when he
reaches the twelfth guṇasthāna, destroys all the destructive karmas and attains
kaivalya. Thereafter, he remains stable in the thirteenth guṇasthāna. Upon the
completion of his lifespan, he attains the fourteenth guṇasthāna and obtains the
supreme bliss, the state of mokṣa. In the present context, the sūtra-kāra, by
giving the phrase "apūvvakaraṇam", has indicated the connection of the
apūrvakaraṇam state with the gajasukumāla. The meaning is that the gajasukumāla
muni, having entered the eighth guṇasthāna, had adopted the kṣapakaśreṇī.
Anate......dansaṇe etc. phrases are explained as follows: 1. Ananta-endless,
that which never ends, that which remains forever. 2. Anuttara-pradhana-there is
no knowledge greater than this, the highest. 3. Nirvyāghāta-vyāghāta-free from
obstruction. 4. Nirāvaraṇa-that which has no covering-veil, showering knowledge-
light from all sides. 5. Krtsna-complete, that which is not incomplete. 6.
Pratipūrṇa-making all the knowable objects of the world its subject, from which
no object of the world is hidden. The meaning of the words Siddha-Buddha etc. is
as follows: 1. Siddha-those who have become accomplished, whose all actions have
become accomplished-complete. 2. Buddha-those who know all the objects of the
world and the non-world. 3. Mukta-those who have become free from all karmas. 4.
Parinirvāta-those who are peaceful due to the destruction of all karma-born
afflictions. 5. Sarvadukha-prahīṇa-those whose all physical and mental
sufferings have been destroyed. Vāsudeva Kṛṣṇa's help to the old man , 24-Taye
ṇam se kaṇhe vāsudeve kallāṁ pāuppabhāyāe raṇīye jāv [phulluppalaka-malako-malu-
mmiliyammi, ahapandure pabhāe, rattāsogap-agās-kinsu-y-suyamuha-guṇjad-dhārāga-
bandhu-jīvagap-ārāvay-calana-nayaṇa-parahu-yasuratta-loyaṇa-jāsumina-kusuma-
jaliyajalaṇa-tavaṇijjakalasahingul-ayana-ir-rūvāire gare hanta-sassirīe divāgare
ahakka-meṇa udiye, tassa diṇakara-parampārāvayār-pārāddhammi andhayāre,
bālātavakunkumenaṁ khaie vv jīvaloē, loyaṇavisa-āṇu-āsaviga-sant-avisad-
dansiyammi loē, kamalāgarasanda-bohae utthiyammi sūre sahasrassimmi diṇayare
teyasa jalante] bahāe jāv' vibhūsie hatthikhandhavaragae sakorenta malla dāmenaṁ
chhattenaṁ dharijja-māṇenaṁ 1. See-the thirteenth sūtra of the third section.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 tRtIya varga] [77 gayA hai| "tadAvaraNijjANaM kammANaM"- isa pada meM karma
vizeSya hai aura 'tadAvaraNIya' yaha usakA vizeSaNa hai| karma zabda
AtmapradezoM se mile karmANuoM kA bodhaka hai aura jJAna-darzana Adi Atmika
guNoM ko DhaMkanevAle, isa artha kA sUcaka tadAvaraNIya zabda hai|
"kammarayavikiraNakaraM"-karma-rajovikiraNa-karaM arthAt jJAnAvaraNIya Adi karma
rUpa rajamala kA vikiraNa-nAza karanevAle ko kamarrajovikiraNa-kara kahate haiN|
_'apuvvakaraNaM-apUrvakaraNam, Atmano'bhUtapUrvaM zubhapariNAmam-arthAt-
apUrvakaraNa zabda jisakI pahale prApti nahIM huI-isa artha kA bodhaka hai| yaha
AThaveM 'nivRttibAdara guNasthAna' kA bhI.paricAyaka mAnA gayA hai| isa
guNasthAna se do zreNiyAM AraMbha hotI haiM - upazamazreNI aura ksspkshrennii|
upazamazreNI vAlA jIva mohanIya karma kI prakRtiyoM kA upazama karatA huA
gyArahaveM guNasthAna taka jAkara ruka jAtA hai aura nIce gira jAtA hai|
kSapakazreNI vAlA jIva dazaveM guNasthAna se sIdhA bArahaveM guNasthAna para
jAkara apratipAtI ho jAtA hai| AThaveM guNasthAna meM ArUDha huA jIva
kSapakazreNI se uttarottara bar3hatA huA jaba bArahaveM guNasthAna meM pahuMca
jAtA hai taba samasta ghAtI karmoM kA kSaya karatA huA kaivalya prApta kara letA
hai| tatpazcAt terahaveM guNasthAna meM sthira hotA hai| Ayu pUrNa hone para
caudahavAM guNasthAna prApta karake parama kalyANa rUpa mokSapada ko prApta kara
letA hai| prastuta meM sUtrakAra ne "apuvvakaraNaM" pada dekara gajasukumAla ke
sAthaM apUrvakaraNa avasthA kA sambandha sUcita kiyA hai| bhAva yaha hai ki
gajasukumAla muni ne AThaveM guNasthAna meM praviSTa hokara kSapakazreNI ko
apanA liyA thaa| aNate......daMsaNe Adi padoM kI vyAkhyA isa prakAra hai-1.
anaMta-aMta rahita, jisakA kabhI anta na ho, jo sadA kAla banA rahe  /  2.
anuttara-pradhAna-jisase bar3hakara anya koI jJAna nahIM hai, sabase uuNcaa| 3.
nirvyAghAta-vyAghAta-rukAvaTa rhit| 4. nirAvaraNa- jisa para koI AvaraNa-pardA
nahIM hai, cAroM ora se jJAna-prakAza kI varSA karane vaalaa| 5. kRtsna-
saMpUrNa, jo apUrNa nahIM hai| 6. pratipUrNa-saMsAra ke saba jJeya padArthoM ko
apanA viSaya banAnevAlA, jisase saMsAra kA koI padArtha ojhala nahIM hai|
siddha-buddha Adi zabdoM kA artha isa prakAra hai-1. siddha-jo kRtakRtya ho gaye
haiM, jinake samasta kArya siddha-pUrNa ho cuke haiN| 2. buddha-jo loka aloka ke
sarva padArthoM ke jJAtA haiN| 3. mukta -jo samasta karmoM se rahita ho cuke
haiN| 4. parinirvAta-samasta karma-janita vikAroM ke naSTa ho jAne se jo zAnta
haiN| 5. sarvaduHkha-prahINa-jinake samasta zArIrika tathA mAnasika duHkha naSTa
ho cuke haiN| vAsudeva kRSNa dvArA vRddha kI sahAyatA , 24-tae NaM se kaNhe
vAsudeve kallaM pAuppabhAyAe rayaNIe jAva [ phulluppalakamalakomalummiliyaMmi,
ahapaMDure pabhAe, rattAsogapagAsa-kiMsuya-suyamuha-guMjaddharAga-
baMdhujIvagapArAvayacalaNa-nayaNa-parahuyasurattaloyaNa-jAsumiNakusuma-
jaliyajalaNa-tavaNijjakalasahiMgulayaniyara-rUvAire gare hanta-sassirIe divAgare
ahakkameNa udie, tassa diNakaraparaMparAvayArapAraddhammi aMdhayAre,
bAlAtavakuMkumeNaM khaie vva jIvaloe, loyaNavisaANuAsavigasaMtavisadadaMsiyammi
loe, kamalAgarasaMDabohae uTThiyammi sUre sahassarassimmi diNayare teyasA
jalaMte ] bahAe jAva' vibhUsie hatthikhaMdhavaragae sakoreMTa malla dAmeNaM
chatteNaM dharijjamANeNaM 1. dekhie-tRtIya varga kA terahavAM suutr|

Page #119 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Antakrid Dasha 78] While the white chamaras were being waved, Krishna Vasudeva,
surrounded by a large crowd of soldiers and guards, set out from the middle of
Dwaraka towards the place where the Arhat Arishthanemi was staying. As he was
leaving the middle of Dwaraka, Krishna Vasudeva saw a very old man, his body
weakened by age, [extremely tired, withered, and weak], struggling to carry
bricks from a large pile outside his house. Krishna Vasudeva, out of compassion
for the old man, picked up a brick from the pile while still seated on his
elephant and carried it inside the house. Seeing Krishna Vasudeva pick up a
brick, many hundreds of men in the crowd carried the entire pile of bricks from
the street into the house. After that, on the next day, at dawn, when the sun
rose [when the petals of the blooming lotuses opened, the eyes of the black
deer, deprived of sleep, became wide open. Then the morning became pale white.
The sun rose with a redness that surpassed the brilliance of the red Ashoka
tree, the Palasha flower, the parrot's beak, the half of the Chirmi flower, the
midday flower, the pigeon's feet and eyes, the Jasoda flower, the blazing fire,
the golden pot, and the group of Hingula. The rays of the sun descended and
began to destroy the darkness. The world seemed to be filled with saffron, like
the young sun. The world, which had been awakened by the sight of the sun,
became clearly visible. The sun, which caused the lotus forests in the lakes to
bloom, shone brightly with its thousand rays. When this happened], Krishna
Vasudeva, after bathing and adorning himself with clothes and ornaments, mounted
his elephant. He wore a crown adorned with Korant flowers. White and bright
chamaras were waved on his right and left. He set out for the place where the
Lord Arishthanemi was staying. Then, as Krishna Vasudeva was passing through the
middle of Dwaraka, he saw a man who was very old, his body weakened by age,
[extremely tired, withered, and weak], and exhausted. He was very sad. Outside
his house, on the road, there was a large pile of bricks that the old man was
carrying one by one into his house. Then Krishna Vasudeva, out of compassion for
the man, picked up a brick while still seated on his elephant and carried it
inside the house. Then, when Krishna Vasudeva picked up a brick, (his followers)
many hundreds of men carried the entire pile of bricks from the street into the
house. The Achievement of Gaja Sukumala 25 - Then Krishna Vasudeva left the
middle of Dwaraka and went to where the Arhat Arishthanemi was staying. When he
arrived, he [the Arhat Arishthanemi, with a joyful heart, welcomed him and]
bowed and prostrated himself. After bowing and prostrating himself, he said:
"Tell me, Lord! My younger brother, Gaja Sukumala, who is adorned with
ornaments, whom I bow to and prostrate myself to, what is his name?" -

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 [antakRddazA 78] seyavaracAmarAhiM uddhavvamANIhiM mahayAbhaDa-caDagara -
pahakaravaMda - parikkhitte bAravaI nayariM majjhamajjheNaM jeNeva arahA
ariTThanemI teNeva pahArettha gamaNAe  /  taNaM se kahe vAsudeve bAravaIe
nayarIe majjhaMmajjheNaM niggacchamANe ekkaM purisaM juNNaM jarA-jajjariya-dehaM
jAva [ AuraM jhUsiyaM pivAsiyaM dubbalaM ] kilaMtaM mahaimahAlayAo iTTagarAsIo
egamegaM iTTagaM gahAya bahiyA ratthApahAo aMtogihaM aNuppavisamANaM pAsa | tae
NaM se kahe vAsudeve tassa purisassa aNukaMpaNaTThAe hatthikhaMdhavaragae ceva
egaM iTTagaM geves, geNhittA bahiyA ratthApahAo aMtogharaMsi aNuppavesie  /
taNaM kaNheNaM vAsudeveNaM egAe iTTagAe gahiyAe samANIe aNegehiM purisehiM se
mahAlae iTTagassa rAsI bahiyA ratthApahAo aMtogharaMsi aNuppavesie  /
tadanantara kRSNa vAsudeva dUsare dina prAtaHkAla sUryodaya hone para [jaba
praphullita kamaloM ke patte vikasita hue, kAle mRga ke netra nidrArahita hone
se vikasvara hue| phira vaha prabhAta pANDura- zveta varNa vAlA huaa| lAla azoka
kI kAnti, palAza ke puSpa, tote kI coMca, ciramI ke arddhabhAga, dupaharI ke
puSpa, kabUtara ke paira aura netra, jAsoda ke phUla, jAjvalyamAna agni,
svarNakalaza tathA hiMgalU ke samUha kI lAlimA se bhI adhika lAlimA se jisakI
zrI suzobhita ho rahI hai, aisA sUrya kramazaH udita huaa| sUrya kI kiraNoM kA
samUha nIce utara kara aMdhakAra kA vinAza karane lagA  /  bAla-sUrya rUpI
kuMkuma se mAno jIvaloka vyApta ho gyaa| netroM ke viSaya kA pracAra hone se
vikasita hone vAlA loka spaSTa rUpa se dikhAI dene lgaa| sarovaroM meM sthita
kamaloM ke vana ko vikasita karane vAlA tathA sahasra kiraNoM vAlA divAkara teja
se jAjvalyamAna ho gyaa| aisA hone para ] kRSNa vAsudeva snAna kara
vastrAlaMkAroM se vibhUSita ho, hAthI para ArUDha hue| koraMTa puSpoM kI mAlA
vAlA chatra dhAraNa kiyA huA thA  /  zveta evaM ujjvala cAmara unake dAyeM-bAyeM
dulAye jA rahe the  /  ve jahA~ bhagavAn ariSTanemi virAjamAna the, vahA~ ke
liye ravAnA hue| taba kRSNa vAsudeva ne dvArakA nagarI ke madhya bhAga se jAte
samaya eka puruSa ko dekhA, jo ati vRddha, jarA se jarjarita [ ati klAnta,
kumhalAyA huA durbala] evaM thakA huA thA  /  vaha bahuta duHkhI thA  /  usake
ghara ke bAhara rAjamArga para IMToM kA eka vizAla Dhera par3A thA jise vaha
vRddha eka-eka IMTa karake apane ghara meM sthAnAntarita kara rahA thA  /  taba
una kRSNa vAsudeva ne usa puruSa kI anukaMpA ke liye hAthI para baiThe hue hI
eka IMTa uThAI, uThAkara bAhara rAste se ghara ke bhItara pahuMcA dii| taba
kRSNa vAsudeva ke dvArA eka IMTa uThAne para (unake anuyAyI) aneka saikar3oM
puruSoM dvArA vaha bahuta bar3A IMToM kA Dhera bAhara galI meM se ghara ke
bhItara pahuMcA diyA gyaa| gajasukumAla kI siddhi kI sUcanA 25 - tae NaM se
kaNhe vAsudeve bAravaIe nayarIe majjhamajjheNaM niggacchai, niggacchittA jeNeva
arahA ariTThanemI teNeva uvAgae, uvAgacchittA jAva [ arahaM ariTThanemiM
tikkhutto AyAhiNaM payAhiNaM karei, karettA ] vaMdai namasai, vaMdittA
namaMsittA evaM vayAsI "kahi NaM bhaMte! se mamaM sahodare kaNIyase bhAyA
gayasukumAle aNagAre jaM NaM ahaM vaMdAmi nama'sAmi?" -

Page #120 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Third Section] [79. Then Krishna Vasudeva said to the Arhat Arishta-nemi, "Sir,
where is my younger brother, the monk Gaja-sukumala?" Then the Arhat Arishta-
nemi said to Krishna Vasudeva, "Tell me, sir, where is your younger brother, the
monk Gaja-sukumala?" Then the Arhat Arishta-nemi said to Krishna Vasudeva,
"Indeed, Krishna, Gaja-sukumala, the monk, came to me in the early part of the
afternoon yesterday and bowed and prostrated himself. After bowing and
prostrating himself, he said, 'I wish to spend the night in the Maha-kala
cremation ground, if you permit.' Having received my permission, he went to the
Maha-kala cremation ground and stood there in meditation, assuming the form of a
mendicant." Then a man saw Gaja-sukumala, the monk, and became very angry. Thus,
Krishna, Gaja-sukumala, the monk, has achieved his purpose. 26. Then Krishna
Vasudeva said to the Arhat Arishta-nemi, "Sir, what kind of man was that, who,
being devoid of the marks of a good man, and being of low character, and being
devoid of shame, modesty, faith, and fame, tried to harm my younger brother, the
monk Gaja-sukumala, and to cause him to die prematurely?" 1. Section 3, Sutra
21. 2. See Sutra 22.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 tRtIya varga] [79 tae NaM arahA ariTunemI kaNhaM vAsudevaM evaM vayAsI "sAhie
NaM kaNhA! gayasukumAleNaM aNagAreNaM appaNo atte|" tae NaM se kaNhe vAsudeve
arahaM ariTThanemiM evaM vayAsI-"kahaNNaM bhaMte! gayasukumAleNaM aNagAreNaM
sAhie appaNo aDe?" tae NaM arahA ariTThanemI kaNhaM vAsudevaM evaM vayAsI-evaM
khalu kaNhA gayasukumAle NaM aNagAre mamaM kallaM puvvAvaraNahakAlasamayaMsi
vaMdai namasai, vaMdittA namaMsittA evaM vayAsI-'icchAmi NaM jAva'
uvasaMpajjittA NaM vihri'|" tae NaM taM gayasukumAlaM aNagAraM ege purise pAsai,
pAsittA Asurutte jAva siddhe| taM evaM khalu kaNhA! gayasukumAleNaM aNagAreNaM
sAhie appaNo addhe| vRddha puruSa kI sahAyatA karane ke anantara kRSNa vAsudeva
dvArakA nagarI ke madhya meM se hote hue jahA~ bhagavanta ariSTanemi virAjamAna
the vahAM A ge| kRSNa ne dAhinI ora se AraMbha karake tIna bAra bhagavAn kI
pradakSiNA-parikramA kI, vaMdana-namaskAra kiyaa| isake pazcAt gajasukumAla muni
ko vahA~ na dekhakara unhoMne arihaMta ariSTanemi se vaMdana-namaskAra karane ke
bAda pUchA-"bhagavan ! mere sahodara laghubhrAtA muni gajasukumAla kahAM haiM?
maiM unako vandanA-namaskAra karanA cAhatA huuN|" mahArAja kRSNa ke isa prazna
kA samAdhAna karate hue arihaMta ariSTanemi ne kahA-kRSNa! muni gajasukumAla ne
mokSa prApta karane kA apanA prayojana siddha kara liyA hai| ariSTanemi bhagavAn
se apane prazna kA uttara suna kara kRSNa vAsudeva ariSTanemi bhagavAn ke
caraNoM meM punaH nivedana karane lage bhagavan ! muni gajaMsukumAla ne apanA
prayojana kaise siddha kara liyA hai? mahArAja kRSNa ke isa prazna kA uttara
dete hue ariSTanemi bhagavAn kahane lage "he kRSNa! vastutaH kala dina ke
aparAhna kAla ke pUrva bhAga meM gajasukumAla muni ne mujhe vandananamaskAra
kiyaa| vandana-namaskAra karake isa prakAra nivedana kiyA-he prabho! ApakI AjJA
ho to maiM mahAkAla zmazAna meM eka rAtri kI mahAbhikSupratimA dhAraNa karake
vicaranA cAhatA huuN| yAvat merI anujJA prApta hone para vaha gajasukumAla muni
mahAkAla zmazAna meM jAkara bhikSu kI mahApratimA dhAraNa karake dhyAnastha
khar3e ho gye| isake bAda gajasukumAla muni ko eka puruSa ne dekhA aura
dekhakara vaha una para atyanta kruddha huaa| ityAdi samasta pUrvokta ghaTanA
sunAkara bhagavAn ne anta meM kahA- isa prakAra gajasukumAla muni ne apanA
prayojana siddha kara liyaa| 26-tae NaM se kaNhe vAsudeve arahaM ariTunemiM evaM
vayAsI se ke NaM bhaMte! se purise apatthiyapatthie jAva [ duraMta-paMta-
lakkhaNe, hINapuNNacAuddasie, siri-hiri-dhii-kitti] parivajie, jeNaM mamaM
sahodaraM kaNIyasaM bhAyaraM gajasukumAlaM aNagAraM akAle ceva jIviyAo vavarovei
(vavarovie)? 1. varga 3, sUtra 21. 2. dekhie-sUtra 22.

Page #121 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
80] Then the Arhat Arishthanemi said to Krishna Vasudeva, "O Krishna! Do not
harbor hatred towards that man. For that man has surely helped your younger
brother, the monk Gajasukumal, in fulfilling his own purpose." - [End of the
Chapter] Hearing this, Krishna Vasudeva, the Lord, asked Neminath, "Bhanta! Who
is that man who desires the unaskable, that is, who desires death, [who has the
characteristics of a distant shore, who was born on the inauspicious fourteenth
day, who is devoid of shame and wealth] who is shameless, and who has taken the
life of my younger brother, the monk Gajasukumal, before his time?" Then the
Arhat Arishthanemi said to Krishna Vasudeva, "O Krishna! Do not harbor hatred
towards that man. For that man has surely helped your younger brother, the monk
Gajasukumal, in fulfilling his own purpose." - Discussion - "Akale cheva jiviao
vavarovai" Here, the reading "vavarovai" seems more appropriate. However, the
meaning of these words is - "He was deprived of life before his time." The word
"akal mrityu" is used for untimely death. Death that occurs at the appropriate
time, in a practical sense, after completing one's time, is not called "akal
mrityu", it is "kal mrityu". In Jain scriptures, there are two types of lifespan
- one is "apavartaaniya" and the other is "anpavartaaniya". The lifespan that
can be quickly consumed before the completion of the bondage period due to the
cause of poison, weapons, etc., is "apavartaaniya" lifespan, and the lifespan
that cannot be consumed before the completion of the bondage period is
"anpavartaaniya" lifespan. This duality of lifespan is not natural, it is based
on the intensity of the consequences. When binding the lifespan, if the
consequences are slow, the binding of the lifespan will be loose, if the
consequences are intense, the binding will be intense. The lifespan with loose
binding decreases when the cause is found - it is consumed before the appointed
time, and the lifespan with intense binding (extracted) does not decrease even
when the cause is found. The "Sthananga Sutra" mentions seven causes of lifespan
difference, which are as follows: - 1. Ajzhavasan - Adhyavasana - When a strong
mental shock in the form of affection or fear occurs, the lifespan ends before
time. 2. Nimitta - When a cause like a weapon, stick, fire, etc., is found, the
lifespan ends quickly. - 3. Ahar - Eating too much food reduces lifespan. 4.
Vedana - When there is unbearable pain in any part of the body, the lifespan
arises before the appointed time and falls away from the soul. 5. Paraghāt -
When a person falls into a pit, a roof falls on him, or suffers an external
injury, the lifespan is stimulated. 6. Sparsha - When a person is bitten by a
poisonous creature like a snake, or when he touches an object that is poisonous,

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 80] tae NaM arahA ariTThanemI kaNhaM vAsudevaM evaM vayAsI " mA NaM kaNhA!
tumaM tassa purisassa padosamAvajjAhi  /  evaM khalu kaNhA! teNaM puriseNaM
gayasukumAlassa aNagArassa sAhijje diNNe  /  " - [ antakRddazA yaha sunakara
kRSNa vAsudeva bhagavAn neminAtha se isa prakAra pUchane lage "bhaMte! vaha
aprArthanIya kA prArthI arthAt mRtyu ko cAhanevAlA, [ duranta prAnta lakSaNa
vAlA, puNyahIna caturdazI ko utpanna, lajjA aura lakSmI se rahita] nirlajja
puruSa kauna hai jisane mere sahodara laghu bhrAtA gajasukumAla muni kA asamaya
meM hI prANa haraNa kara liyA?" taba arhat ariSTanemi kRSNa vAsudeva se isa
prakAra bole " he kRSNa ! tuma usa puruSa para dveSa- roSa mata karo, kyoMki usa
puruSa ne sunizcita rUpeNa gajasukumAla muni ko apanA Atma - kArya - - apanA
prayojana siddha karane meM sahAyatA pradAna kI hai|" - vivecana - " akAle ceva
jIviyAo vavarovei" yahAM 'vavarovie' pATha adhika upayukta pratIta hotA hai  /
astu, ina padoM kA artha hai- akAla meM hI jIvana se rahita kara diyaa| akAla
mRtyu zabda asamaya kI mRtyu ke liye prayukta hotA hai| jo mRtyu samaya para ho,
vyAvahArika dRSTi meM apanA samaya pUrNa kara lene para ho, use akAla mRtyu
nahIM kahate, vaha kAlamRtyu hai| jaina zAstroM meM Ayu ke do prakAra haiM - eka
apavartanIya aura dUsarI anpvrtniiy| jo Ayu bandhakAlIna sthiti ke pUrNa hone se
pahale hI viSa, zastra Adi kA nimitta milane para zIghra bhogI jA sake vaha
apavartanIya Ayu hai, aura jo bandhakAlIna sthiti ke pUrNa hone se pahale na
bhogI jA sake vaha anapavartanIya Ayu hai  /  isa Ayudvaya kA bandha svAbhAvika
nahIM hai, pariNAmoM ke tAratamya para AdhArita hai  /  Ayu bAMdhate samaya
agara pariNAma maMda ho to Ayu kA baMdha zithila par3egA, agara pariNAma tIvra
hoM to baMdha tIvra hogaa| zithila baMdhavAlI Ayu nimitta milane para ghaTa jAtI
hai - niyata kAla se pahale hI bhoga lI jAtI hai aura tIvra baMdhavAlI
(nikAcita) Ayu nimitta milane para bhI nahIM ghaTatI hai  /  sthAnAMgasUtra meM
Ayubheda ke sAta nimitta batAye haiM, jo isa prakAra haiM -- 1. ajjhavasANa -
adhyavasAna- -sneha yA bhaya rUpa prabala mAnasika AghAta hone para Ayu samaya
se pahale hI samApta hotI hai  /  2. nimitta - zastra, daNDa, agni Adi kA
nimitta pAkara Ayu zIghra samApta ho jAtI hai  /  - 3. AhAra - adhika bhojana
karane se Ayu ghaTa jAtI hai| 1 4. vedanA - kisI bhI aMga meM asahya vedanA hone
para Ayu ke dalika samaya se pUrva hI udaya meM Akara AtmA se jhar3a 1 5.
parAghAta - gaDDhe meM giranA, chata kA Upara gira jAnA Adi bAhya AghAta pAkara
Ayu kI udIraNA ho jAtI hai  /  6. sparza - sarpa Adi jaharIle jIvoM ke kATane
para athavA aisI vastu kA sparza hone para jisase

Page #122 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Third Class] [81 Poison spreads in the body. Income ends prematurely. 7. When
the movement of breath stops, there is a difference in lifespan. The lifespan
that is consumed in a short period of time before the fixed time due to the
attainment of causes is called irreversible lifespan. It is also called Sopakram
lifespan. That which is with the beginning is Sopakram. The attainment of causes
like sharp weapons, strong poison, intense fire, etc. is the beginning.
Irreversible lifespan is of both Sopakram and Nirupkram types. In other words,
this irreversible lifespan is the presence or absence of the aforementioned
causes like the end of life that brings untimely death. Even if the
aforementioned causes are present, the irreversible lifespan does not end before
the fixed time. It is important to note here that the जीव has to experience all
the Dalik that are bound in the Bandhakal, only that experience is called
untimely death in comparison to the Kalik situation when it happens in a short
period of time. 27- "Bante! Did that man help the ascetic Gajasukumal?"
"Krishna! You saw a man in Dwarka city while coming to pay your respects to me
[who was very old, decrepit from old age, very tired, withered, weak, and was
carrying a brick from the highway to his house. Seeing you place a brick, all
the men with you also picked up a brick and delivered it to the old man's house,
and that huge pile of bricks immediately moved from the highway to the old man's
house. In this way, your good deed relieved the old man's suffering.] Krishna!
Just as you helped that man by relieving his suffering, Krishna! That man also
helped the ascetic Gajasukumal, who was engaged in the eradication of a huge
amount of karma accumulated over millions of births, in the complete eradication
of those karmas." Hearing this, Krishna Vasudeva asked again, "O Venerable One!
How did that man help Gajasukumal Muni?" Arhat Arishtanemi replied to Krishna
Vasudeva in this way "Krishna! While coming to pay your respects to me, you saw
a man in Dwarka city [who was very old, decrepit from old age, very tired,
withered, weak, and was carrying a brick from the highway to his house. Seeing
you place a brick, all the men with you also picked up a brick and delivered it
to the old man's house, and that huge pile of bricks immediately moved from the
highway to the old man's house. In this way, your good deed relieved the old
man's suffering.] Krishna! Just as you helped that man by relieving his
suffering, Krishna! That man also helped Gajasukumal Muni, who was engaged in
the eradication of a huge amount of karma accumulated over millions of births,
in the complete eradication of those karmas." Discussion- In this sutra, Lord
Arishtanemi explained to Shri Krishna with an example from his own (Shri
Krishna's) life that he actually became a helpful participant in the karma-
destruction of Gajasukumal Muni. 1. See Sutra 24

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 tRtIya varga] [81 zarIra meM viSa phaila jAe. Aya asamaya meM hI samApta ho
jAtI hai| 7. ANa-pANa-zvAsa kI gati banda ho jAne para Ayu-bheda ho jAtA hai|
nimittoM ko pAkara jo Ayu niyata kAla samApta hone se pahale hI antarmuhUrta
mAtra meM bhoga lI jAtI hai, usa Ayu kA nAma apavartanIya Ayu hai| ise sopakrama
Ayu bhI kahate haiN| jo upakrama sahita ho vaha sopakrama hai| tIvra zastra,
tIvra viSa, tIvra agni Adi nimittoM kA prApta honA upakrama hai| anapavartanIya
Ayu sopakrama aura nirupakrama donoM prakAra kI hotI hai| dUsare zabdoM meM isa
anapavartanIya Ayu ko akAlamRtyu lAnevAle adhyavasAna Adi ukta nimittoM kA
saMnidhAna hotA bhI hai aura nahIM bhI hotA hai| ukta nimittoM kA saMnidhAna
hone para bhI anapavartanIya Ayu niyatakAla se pahale pUrNa nahIM hotii| yahA~
itanA dhyAna rakhanA Avazyaka hai ki bandhakAla meM Ayukarma ke jitane dalika
baMdhate haiM, una saba kA bhoga to jIva ko karanA hI par3atA hai, kevala vaha
bhoga jaba svalpa kAla meM ho jAtA hai taba vaha kAlika sthiti kI apekSA
akAlamaraNa kahA jAtA hai| 27-kahaNNaM bhaMte! teNaM puriseNaM gayasukumAlassa
aNagArassa sAhijje diNNe? tae NaM arahA ariTThanemI kaNhaM vAsudevaM evaM vayAsI
se nUNaM kaNhA! tumaM mamaM pAyavaMdae havvamAgacchamANe bAravaIe nayarIe egaM
purisaM-jAva' [juNNaM jarAjajariyadehaM AuraM jhUsiyaM pivAsiyaM dubbalaM
kilaMtaM mahaimahAlayAo iTTagarAsIo egamegaM iTTagaM gahAya bahiyA ratthApahAo
aMtogihaM annuppvessi| tae NaM tume egAe iTTagAe gahiyAe samANIe aNegehiM
parisasaehiM se mahAlae igassa rAsI bahiyA ratthApahAo aMtogharaMsi annupvesie|
jahA NaM kaNhA! tume tassa purisassa sAhijje diNNe, evAmeva kaNhA! teNaM
puriseNaM gayasukumAlassa aNagArassa aNegabhava-sayasahassa-saMciyaM kammaM
udIremANeNaM bahukammaNijjaratthaM sAhijje dinnnne| yaha sunakara kRSNa vAsudeva
ne punaH prazna kiyA- 'he pUjya ! usa puruSa ne gajasukumAla muni ko kisa
prakAra sahAyatA dI?' arhat ariSTanemi ne kRSNa vAsudeva ko isa prakAra uttara
diyA "kRSNa! mere caraNavaMdana ke hetu zIghratApUrvaka Ate samaya tumane
dvArakA nagarI meM eka vRddha puruSa ko dekhA [jo ati vRddha, jarA se jarjarita,
ati klAnta, kumhalAyA huA, durbala thA, usake ghara ke bAhara rAjamArga para
par3I huI eka IMTa usa vRddha ke ghara meM jAkara rakha dii| tumheM eka IMTa
rakhate dekhakara tumhAre sAtha ke saba puruSoM ne bhI eka-eka IMTa uThA kara
usa vRddha ke ghara meM pahu~cA dI aura IMToM kI vaha vizAla rAzi tatkAla
rAjamArga se uThakara usa vRddha ke ghara meM calI gii| isa taraha tumhAre isa
satkarma se vRddha puruSa kA kaSTa dUra ho gyaa|] he kRSNa! vastutaH jisa taraha
tumane usa puruSa kA duHkha dUra karane meM usakI sahAyatA kI, usI taraha he
kRSNa! usa puruSa ne bhI anekAneka lAkhoM bhavoM ke saMcita karmoM kI rAzi kI
udIraNA karane meM saMlagna gajasukumAla muni ko una karmoM kI saMpUrNa nirjarA
karane meM sahAyatA pradAna kI hai|" vivecana-prastuta sUtra meM bhagavAn
ariSTanemi ne zrIkRSNa ko unhIM ke (zrIkRSNa ke) jIvana meM ghaTita udAharaNa se
yaha samajhAyA ki vAstava meM gajasukumAla muni ke karmakSaya meM somila
sahAyaka bnaa| 1. dekhie sUtra 24

Page #123 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 82]  Acharya Shri Atmaramji Maharaj, in his commentary on the Antagad Sutra
(page 189), has narrated a traditional story about the karmic connection between
Somil Brahmana and Muni Gajasukumal in the past.  There were two wives of a man,
one had a child and the other did not. The childless woman tried many remedies
but did not conceive. Out of jealousy, she decided that if she ever got the
chance, she would kill her co-wife's child.  Unfortunately, the child developed
boils on his head, and despite many treatments, the pain did not subside. The
child's mother asked her co-wife for a remedy, and seizing the opportunity, she
cooked a hot 'pooda' (bread) and applied it to the child's head. As a result,
the child died. This made her very happy.  After traversing through thousands of
births and deaths, the same woman was born as Gajasukumal in the house of Mata
Devaki, and the child was born as Somil Brahmana in the city of Dwaraka.
According to the storyteller, ninety-nine lakh births ago, Gajasukumal's soul
had killed Somil Brahmana's soul by applying hot 'pooda' to his head. Therefore,
in this birth, Somil took revenge by placing a burning brazier on him.
'Anegbhav...kamma-arthat' - 'Anegbhav' means many births, 'kamma' means karma,
'shatasahasra' means lakhs, and 'sanchit' means accumulated. Karma is the name
of that material force which makes the soul wander in the forest of the world.
'Udiremane' - means to stir up. Jain scriptures describe four stages of karma:
Bandha, Uday, Udirana, and Satya. The merging of karma-pudgalas with the soul
like milk and water, due to Mithyatva, etc., in the form of Jnanavaraniya, etc.,
is called Bandha. When the period of Abadihakal ends and the time for Uday-kal-
phaladan arrives, the giving of auspicious and inauspicious fruits of karma is
called Uday. Even after the Abadihakal (the period during which the bound karma
does not yield its fruit to the soul) has passed, the karma-dalik that are to
arise later are pulled up by special effort and enjoyed along with the Uday-
prapta dalik, this is called Udirana. The bound karma remaining attached to the
soul without losing its form is called Satya. The difference between Uday and
Udirana is that in Uday, the fruits of karma are enjoyed naturally without any
effort, while in Udirana, the fruits of karma are enjoyed only through effort.
The karma-phal that Muni Gajasukumal has enjoyed in the present case has not
been enjoyed naturally, but has been made to be enjoyed by the special effort of
Somil Brahmana, therefore, the meaning of Udirana of karma is intended here.
The death of Somil Brahmana:  28 - Then, that Kanha Vasudeva asked the Arhat
Arithanemi, "How should I recognize that man?" Then, the Arhat Arithanemi told
Kanha Vasudeva, "Kanha! When you see a man entering the city of Dwaraka,
standing at the gate, and spending time there, then you should know that he is
that man." Then, Kanha Vasudeva bowed and prostrated before the Arhat
Arithanemi. After bowing and prostrating, he took the elephant chariot and went
to the city of Dwaraka. After reaching there, he mounted the elephant and went
to the gate of the city.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 82] [antakRddazA AcArya zrI AtmArAmajI mahArAja ne apane antagaDa sUtra kI
vRtti (pR. 189) meM somila brAhmaNa tathA muni gajasukumAla ke atIta kAlIna
karma-sambandha ko lekara paraMparAgata kathA dI hai eka puruSa kI do patniyA~
thIM, eka ko baccA thA, eka ko nahIM thaa| baccA-rahita strI ne bahutere upAya
kiye paraMtu use baccA nahIM huaa| IrSyAvaza usane nirNaya kiyA ki kabhI avasara
pAkara maiM sauta ke bacce ko mAra ddaaluuNgii| durbhAgya se bacce ke sira meM
phusiyA nikalIM, anekoM ilAja karane para bhI darda nahIM miTA taba bacce kI mA~
ne sauta se upAya pUchA aura avasara pAkara usane pUDA pakAyA aura garama-garama
pUDA bacce ke sira para bA~dha diyaa| pariNAmata: bacce kI mRtyu huii| isase
vaha atyanta prasanna huii| hajAroM janma-janmAMtara kI ghATiyA~ pAra karatI huI
vahI nArI eka dina mAtA devakI ke ghara gajasukumAla ke rUpa meM paidA huI aura
vaha baccA dvArakA nagarI meM somila brAhmaNa ke rUpa meM utpanna huaa|
kathAkAra ke anusAra ninyAnavai lAkha janma pahale gajasukumAla ke jIva ne kisI
samaya somila brAhmaNa ke jIva ke sira para garama-garama pUDA bA~dhakara use
mArA thaa| ataH isa janma meM somila.ne jalatI haI aMgIThI rakhakara badalA
liyaa| aNega bhava....kamma-arthAt aneka zabda eka se adhika artha kA, bhava
zabda janma kA, zatasahasra zabda lAkhoM aura saMcita zabda upArjita kie hue,
artha kA bodhaka hai| karma usa paudgalika zakti kA nAma hai jo AtmA ko saMsAra-
aTavI meM bhramaNa karAne vAlI hai| 'udIremANeNaM' arthAt udIraNA krke| jaina
zAstroM meM karma kI cAra avasthAe~ batAI gaI haiMbaMdha, udaya, udIraNA aura
sttaa| mithyAtvAdi ke nimitta se jJAnAvaraNIya Adi ke rUpa meM pariNata hokara
karma-pudgaloM kA AtmA ke sAtha dUdha-pAnI kI taraha mila jAnA baMdha hai|
abAdhAkAla samApta hone para aura udaya-kAla-phaladAna kA samaya Ane para karmoM
kA zubhAzubha phala denA udaya hai| abAdhAkAla (baMdhe hue karmoM kA jaba taka
AtmA ko phala nahIM milatA vaha kAla) vyatIta ho cukane para bhI jo karma-dalika
bAda meM udaya meM AnevAle haiM, unako prayatna-vizeSa se khIMca kara udaya-
prApta dalikoM ke sAtha bhoga lenA udIraNA hai| baMdhe hue karmoM kA apane
svarUpa ko na chor3a kara AtmA ke sAtha lage rahanA sattA hai| udaya aura
udIraNA meM yaha antara hai ki udaya meM kisI bhI prakAra ke prayatna ke binA
svAbhAvika krama se karmoM ke phala kA bhoga hotA hai aura udIraNA meM prayatna
karane para hI karmaphala kA bhoga hotA hai| prastuta meM muni gajasukumAla ne
jo karma-phala kA upabhoga kiyA hai, vaha svAbhAvika krama se nahIM kiyA, kintu
somila brAhmaNa ke prayatna vizeSa se karmoM kA upabhoga karAyA gayA hai, ataH
yahA~ karmoM kI udIraNA artha apekSita hai| somila brAhmaNa kA maraNa 28-tae NaM
se kaNhe vAsudeve arahaM ariTTanemiM evaM vayAsI-se NaM bhaMte! purise mae kahaM
jANiyavve? tae NaM arahA ariTThaNemI kaNhaM vAsudevaM evaM vayAsI-je NaM kaNhA!
tuma bAravaIe nayarIe aNuppavisamANaM pAsettA Thiyae ceva ThiibheeNaM kAlaM
karissai, taNNaM tuma jANijjAsi "esa NaM se purise|" tae NaM se kaNhe vAsudeve
arahaM ariTThanemiM vaMdai namasai, vaMdittA namaMsittA jeNeva AbhiseyaM
hatthirayaNaM teNeva uvAgacchai, uvAgacchittA hatthiM duruhai, duruhittA jeNeva
bAravaI nayarI jeNeva sae gihe teNeva pahArettha gmnnaae|

Page #124 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Third Chapter] [83] Then, that Somila Brahmin, while his mind was filled with
fear, thought, "I have committed a sin, I have committed a sin, I have committed
a sin, I have committed a sin."  Thus, Krishna Vasudeva, having received the
solution to his question from the Arhat Arishta-nemi, bowed at his feet and
departed.  "O Arhat, will this be known, will this be known, will this be known,
will this be known to Krishna Vasudeva?"  "Krishna Vasudeva will know it.  He
will not be pleased with me, he will kill me with some evil means," thought
Somila Brahmin, filled with fear.  He was overcome with fear and left his home.
Krishna Vasudeva, entering the city of Dwaraka, saw him. The Bhagavan Arishta-
nemi, having solved Krishna Vasudeva's question, said, "Krishna, when you return
and enter the city of Dwaraka, you will see a man who will be terrified at the
sight of you.  He will fall down right there.  He will die because his lifespan
has ended.  At that time, you will know that this is the man."  Having heard the
answer to his question from the Bhagavan Arishta-nemi, Krishna Vasudeva bowed to
him and departed.  He mounted his chief elephant and set out for home. On the
other hand, the Somila Brahmin, as soon as the sun rose the next day, thought,
"Krishna Vasudeva has surely gone to the feet of the Arhat Arishta-nemi.  The
Bhagavan is omniscient, nothing is hidden from him.  He must have known about my
evil deed regarding the death of Gaja-sukumala.  He must have known everything
from beginning to end.  He must have understood everything clearly from the
Arhat Arishta-nemi.  In that case, Krishna Vasudeva will be angry and kill me
with some evil means."  Frightened by this thought, he left his home and entered
the city of Dwaraka, where he came face to face with Krishna Vasudeva.
**Discussion:** This sutra explains that the Somila Brahmin was fleeing the city
of Dwaraka to save his life from Krishna, but suddenly Krishna also came out on
the same path, and they met unexpectedly. The word "thitibheena" used in this
sutra means "destruction of the state of lifespan." Just as sugar or candy
dissolves in water, losing its hardness, and just as ghee becomes thin when it
comes into contact with fire, so too does the lifespan, which is a gradual
process, become destroyed when it encounters specific causes like death.
Therefore, according to the practical point of view, the destruction of lifespan
for worldly beings is called untimely death. "Tan nayameyam arahaya...
sitthameyam arahaya" - This phrase contains four words: known, recognized,
heard, and refined.  To know in general that the Muni Gaja-sukumala has died is
to know.  To know specifically that the Somila Brahmin killed the Muni Gaja-
sukumala with fire for a certain purpose is to recognize.  The meaning is that
both the words "known" and "recognized" are indicators of general and specific
knowledge.  "Suyameyam" has two meanings: 1. "remembered this" and 2. "heard
this."  Acharya Abhaydeva Suri has accepted the first meaning...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 tRtIya varga] [83 tae NaM tassa somilamAhaNassa kallaM jAva' jalaMte
ayameyArUve ajjhathie ciMtie patthie maNogae saMkappe samuppaNNe-evaM khalu
kaNhe vAsudeve arahaM ariTThaNemiM pAyavaMdae nigge| taM nAyameyaM arahayA,
viNNAyameyaM arahayA, suyameyaM arahayA, siTThameyaM arahayA bhavissai kaNhassa
vaasudevss| taM na najjai NaM kaNhe vAsudeve mamaM keNai ku-mAreNaM mArissai tti
kaTu bhIe tatthe tasie uvvigge saMjAyabhae sayAo gihAo pddinnikkhmi| kaNhassa
vAsudevassa bAravaI nayari aNuppavisamANassa purao sapakkhi sapaDidisiM
hvvmaage| bhagavAn ariSTanemi dvArA apane prazna kA samAdhAna prApta karake
kRSNa vAsudeva phira bhagavAn ke caraNoM meM nivedana karane lage-"bhagavan !
maiM usa puruSa ko kisa taraha pahacAna sakatA hU~?" zrI kRSNa ke isa prazna kA
samAdhAna karate hue bhagavAn ariSTanemi kahane lage-'kRSNa ! yahA~ se lauTane
para jaba tuma dvArakA nagarI meM praveza karoge to usa samaya eka puruSa tumheM
dekhakara bhayabhIta hogA, vaha vahA~ para khar3A-khar3A hI gira jaayegaa| Ayu
kI samApti ho jAne se mRtyu ko prApta ho jaayegaa| usa samaya tuma samajha lenA
ki yaha vahI paruSa hai|' ariSTanemi bhagavAna dvArA apane prazna kA uttara
sunakara bhagavAn ariSTanemi ko vaMdana evaM namaskAra karake zrIkRSNa ne vahA~
se prasthAna kiyA aura apane pradhAna hastiratna para baiThakara apane ghara kI
ora ravAnA hue| . udhara usa somila brAhmaNa ke mana meM dUsare dina sUryodaya
hote hI isa prakAra vicAra utpanna huAnizcaya hI kRSNa vAsudeva arihaMta
ariSTanemi ke caraNoM meM vaMdana karane ke liye gaye haiN| bhagavAn to sarvajJa
haiM, unase koI bAta chipI nahIM hai| bhagavAn ne gajasukumAla kI mRtyu
sambandhI mere kukRtya ko jAna liyA hogA, (AdyopAnta) pUrNataH vidita kara liyA
hogaa| yaha saba bhagavAn se spaSTa samajha suna liyA hogaa| arihaMta ariSTanemi
ne avazyameva kRSNa vAsudeva ko yaha saba batA diyA hogaa| to aisI sthiti meM
kRSNa vAsudeva ruSTa hokara mujhe na mAlUma kisa prakAra kI kumauta se maareNge|
isa vicAra se DarA huA vaha apane ghara se nikalatA hai, nikalakara dvArakA
nagarI meM praveza karate hue kRSNa vAsudeva ke ekadama sAmane A par3atA hai|
vivecana-prastuta sUtra meM yaha batAyA gayA hai ki somila brAhmaNa zrIkRSNa se
apane jIvana ko surakSita rakhane ke vicAra se dvArakA nagarI se bAhara bhAgA jA
rahA thA, paraMtu acAnaka zrIkRSNa bhI usI mArga se nikale aura acAnaka donoM kA
sAmanA ho gyaa| isa sUtra meM prayukta 'ThitibheeNaM' kA artha hai-Ayu kI sthiti
kA naash| jisa prakAra jala ke saMyoga se mizrI yA batAzA apanI kaThinatA ko
chor3akara jala meM vilIna ho jAtA hai tathA jaise agni kA saMparka pAkara ghRta
patalA ho jAtA hai, usI prakAra sopakrama AyuSyakarma bhI adhyavasAna Adi
nimitta vizeSa ke milane para kSaya ko prApta ho jAtA hai| ataH vyavahAra-naya
ke anusAra saMsArI jIvoM ke Ayu-kSaya ko akAla mRtyu ke nAma se vyavahRta kiyA
jAtA hai| taM nAyameyaM arahayA.... siTThameyaM arahayA- isa pada meM jJAta,
vijJAta, zruta aura ziSTa ye cAra pada haiM  /  sAmAnya rUpa se yaha jAnanA ki
gajasukumAla muni kA prANAnta ho gayA hai, yaha jJAta honA hai| vizeSa rUpa se
jAnanA ki somila brAhmaNa ne amuka abhiprAya se gajasukumAla muni kA agni dvArA
ghAta kiyA hai, vijJAta honA hai| bhAva yaha hai ki sAmAnya bodha aura vizeSa
bodha ke saMsUcaka jJAta aura vijJAta ye donoM zabda haiN| suyameyaM-ke do artha
hote haiM- 1. smRtametat aura 2. zrutametat  /  AcArya abhayadevasUri ne
prathama artha grahaNa

Page #125 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[84] The explanation of the term "Antakrid Dasha" is as follows: "Smritam
purvakale jnatam sat kathavavasaare smritam bhavishyati". This explanation
implies that Somil Brahmana thought that Bhagavan Arishta Nemiji must have
witnessed the death of Gaja Sukumal with his own knowledge at the time of the
incident, and he must have remembered it upon the arrival of Shri Krishna.
Another interpretation, taking the meaning of "Shruta", would be: "Shrutam etad
arhata kasmadapi devaviseshadva bhagavata shrutam bhavishyati". This means that
Somil Brahmana thought that Shri Krishna Vasudeva must have heard the account of
the death of Muni Gaja Sukumal from Bhagavan or some special deity. The meaning
of the word "Shishta" is "said". This implies that Bhagavan Arishta Nemiji must
have told Vasudeva Krishna about the death of Gaja Sukumal. The plight of
Somil's corpse - 29-Therefore, when Somil Brahmana saw Krishna Vasudeva
suddenly, he was terrified and stood there petrified. While standing there, his
lifespan ended due to a change in his state, and he fell to the ground with his
body completely limp. At that time, Krishna Vasudeva saw Somil Brahmana falling
and said: "Oh Devanupriya! This is the same Somil Brahmana who desired death and
was devoid of shame and dignity, who made my younger brother Gaja Sukumal Muni a
victim of time prematurely." Saying this, Krishna Vasudeva had the corpse of
Somil Brahmana dragged away by the Chandals and thrown outside the city. He also
had the ground where the corpse had touched washed with water. After washing the
ground with water, Krishna Vasudeva went to his royal palace and entered his
chambers. Deposition 30-Thus, Jambhu! This is the meaning of the eighth study of
the third section of the Antakrid Dasha Anga Sutra, as expounded by the
liberated Shraman Bhagavan Mahavira. Shri Sudharma Swami addresses his disciple
Jambhu, saying: "Oh Jambhu! This is the meaning of the eighth study of the third
section of the Antakrid Dasha Anga Sutra, as expounded by the liberated Shraman
Bhagavan Mahavira." 1. See - Third section, Sutra 24. 2. See - First section,
Sutra 2.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 84] [antakRddazA kara isakI vyAkhyA isa prakAra kI hai--'smRtaM pUrvakAle
jJAtaM sat kathanAvasare smRtaM bhaviSyati'- isa vyAkhyA se bhAva yaha hogA ki
somila brAhmaNa ne vicAra kiyA ki bhagavAn ariSTanemi ne gajasukumAla kI mRtyu-
ghaTanA ko ghaTita hote samaya hI svayaM ke jJAna se dekha liyA hogA, aura
zrIkRSNa ke Agamana para unheM isakA smaraNa huA hI hogaa| dUsarA zruta artha
lene para isakI vyAkhyA hogI-"zrutametad arhatA kasmAdapi devavizeSAdvA
bhagavatA zrutaM bhaviSyati" arthAt somila brAhmaNa socatA hai- zrI kRSNa
vAsudeva ne muni gajasukumAla kA mRtyu-vRttAnta bhagavAn dvArA athavA kisI deva
vizeSa dvArA suna liyA hogaa| ziSTa zabda kA artha hotA hai - kaha diyaa| bhAva
yaha hai ki bhagavAn ariSTanemi ne vAsudeva kRSNa ko gajasukumAla kI mRtyu kA
vRttAnta kaha diyA hogaa| somila-zava kI durdazA - 29-tae NaM se somile mAhaNe
kaNhaM vAsudevaM sahasA pAsettA bhIe tatthe tasie uvvigge saMjAyabhae Thiyae
ceva ThiibheeNaM kAlaM karer3a, dharaNitalaMsi savvaMgehiM "dhasa" tti
snnnnivddie| tae NaM se kaNhe vAsudeve somilaM mAhaNaM pAsai, pAsittA evaM
vayAsI _"esa NaM bho! devANuppiyA! se somile mAhaNe apatthiya-patthie jAva'
parivajie, jeNaM mamaM sahoyare kaNIyase bhAyare gayasukumAle aNagAre akAle ceva
jIviyAo vavarovie tti kaTu" somilaM mAhaNaM pANehiM kaDDhAvei, kaDDAvettA taM
bhUmiM pANieNaM abbhokkhAvei, abbhokkhAvettA jeNeva sae gihe teNeva uvaage|
sayaM gihaM annuppvitu| usa samaya somila brAhmaNa kRSNa vAsudeva ko sahasA
sammukha dekha kara bhayabhIta huA aura jahA~ kA tahA~ stambhita khar3A raha
gyaa| vahIM khar3e-khar3e hI sthitibheda se apanA AyuSya pUrNa ho jAne se
sarvAMgazithila ho dhar3Ama se bhUmitala para gira pdd'aa| usa samaya kRSNa
vAsudeva somila brAhmaNa ko giratA huA dekhate haiM aura dekhakara isa prakAra
bolate haiM - "are devAnupriyo! yahI vaha mRtyu kI icchA karane vAlA tathA lajjA
evaM zobhA se rahita somila brAhmaNa hai, jisane mere sahodara choTe bhAI
gajasukumAla muni ko asamaya meM hI kAla kA grAsa banA ddaalaa|" aisA kahakara
kRSNa vAsudeva ne somila brAhmaNa ke usa zava ko cAMDAloM ke dvArA ghasITavA
kara nagara ke bAhara phiMkavA diyA aura usa zava ke sparza vAlI bhUmi ko pAnI
se dhulvaayaa| usa bhUmi ko pAnI se dhulavAkara kRSNa vAsudeva apane rAjaprAsAda
meM pahuMce aura apane AgAra meM praviSTa hue| nikSepa 30-evaM khalu jaMbU!
samaNeNaM bhagavayA mahAvIreNaM jAva saMpatteNaM aTThamassa aMgassa
aMtagaDadasANaM taccassa vaggassa aTThamajjhayaNassa ayamaDhe pnnnntte| zrI
sudharmA svAmI apane ziSya jaMbU ko sambodhita karate hue kahate haiM - he
jaMbU! yAvat mokSasamprApta zramaNa bhagavAn mahAvIra ne antakRddazAMga sUtra ke
tRtIya varga ke aSTama adhyayana kA yaha artha pratipAdita kiyA hai| 1. dekhie-
tRtIya varga, sUtra 24. 2. dekho prathama varga, sUtra 2.

Page #126 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Ninth Study ##  Su-mukha Inquiry and Solution ## 31 - Navamas Ukkhevo - [If,
O Venerable One! The eighth study of the eighth chapter of the eighth Anga,
which is the Antagad-dasa, has been explained, then, O Venerable One! What has
been explained in the ninth study?]  Thus, O Jambu! At that time, at that
moment, there was a city called Dwaraka, as described earlier. At that time,
there was a king named Baldeva in Dwaraka. Here, the description of the king
should be understood according to the Aupapatik Sutra. That Baldeva king had a
queen named Dharini. Her description should also be understood according to the
Aupapatik Sutra. That Dharini queen saw a lion in her dream, and the subsequent
birth of a son, etc., should be understood like the story of Gautam Kumar.
Notably, she was a twenty-year-old Diksha-paryaya. The rest is the same, until
she attained Siddhi on Mount Shatrunjaya.  Thus, O Jambu! This is the meaning of
the ninth study of the third chapter of the Antagad-dasa, as explained by the
Venerable One, Mahavira, until the attainment of liberation, so I say.  See -
Sutra 6 of the first chapter. See - Sutra 2 of the first chapter.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 navama adhyayana sumukha jijJAsA aura samAdhAna 31 - navamassa ukkhevao-[jai
NaM bhaMte! samaNeNaM bhagavayA mahAvIreNaM aTThamassa aMgassa taccassa vaggassa
aTThamassa ajjhayaNassa ayamaDhe paNNatte, navamassa NaM bhaMte! ajjhayaNassa
aMtagaDadasANaM ke aDhe paNNatte?] evaM khalu jaMbU! teNaM kAleNaM teNaM
samaeNaM bAravaIe nayarIe kaNhe nAmaM vAsudeve rAyA jahA paDhamae jAva' vihri|
tattha NaM bAravaIe baladeve nAmaM rAyA hotthaa-vnnnno| tassa NaM baladevassa
raNo dhAriNI nAmaM devI hotthaa| vnnnno| tae NaM sA dhAriNI devI sIhaM suviNe
jahA goyame, navaraM vIsaM vAsAiM priyaao| sesaM taM ceva settuMje siddhe| evaM
khalu jaMbU! samaNeNaM bhagavAyA mahAvIreNaM jAva' saMpatteNaM aTThamassa
aMgassa aMtagaDadasANaM taccassa vaggassa navamassa ajjhayaNassa ayamaDhe
paNNatte tti bemi| bhagavan ! zramaNa bhagavAn mahAvIra ne antagaDadazA sUtra ke
tIsare varga ke AThaveM adhyayana ke jo bhAva kahe ve maiMne Apase sune|
bhagavan ! navameM adhyayana ke bhagavAn ne kyA bhAva kahe haiM? yaha bhI mujhe
batAne kI kRpA kreN| zrI sudharmA svAmI ne kahA-he jaMba! usa kAla usa samaya
meM dvArakA nAmaka nagarI thI. jisakA varNana pUrva meM kiyA jA cukA hai| eka
dina bhagavAn ariSTanemi tIrthaMkara vicarate hue usa nagarI meM pdhaare| vahA~
dvArakA nagarI meM baladeva nAmaka rAjA thaa| yahA~ rAjA kA varNana aupapAtika
satra ke anasAra samajha lenA caahie| usa baladeva rAjA kI dhAriNI nAma kI rAnI
thii| usakA varNana bhI aupapAtika sUtra ke anusAra jaannaa| usa dhAriNI rAnI ne
siMha kA svapna dekhA, tadanantara putrajanma Adi kA varNana gautamakumAra kI
taraha jAna lenA caahie| vizeSatA yaha ki vaha bIsa varSa kI dIkSAparyAya vAlA
haa| zeSa usI prakAra yAvata zatrujaya parvata para siddhi prApta kii| - he
jaMbU! isa prakAra yAvat mokSa-prApta zramaNa bhagavAn mahAvIra ne antagaDasUtra
ke tRtIya varga ke navama adhyayana kA yaha artha pratipAdana kiyA hai, aisA
maiM kahatA huuN| dekhie-prathama varga kA sUtra 6. dekhie-prathama varga kA
sUtra 2. 2.

Page #127 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
10-13 Study The end of the third section, the end of the third section, 32- and
Durmukha. Kuparaka. Tinni. Baldeva-Dharini-Suya. Daruka. And also, Navaran-
Vasudeva-Dharini-Sue. And Anahitthi. Vasudeva-Dharini-Sue. And thus, Jambudvipa!
By the Samana, the Bhagavan Mahavira, with the complete knowledge, the eighth
Anga, Antagadadasana, the third section, the thirteenth study, this is the
explanation. In the same way, the description of Durmukha and Kuparaka Kumar
should be known. Both their fathers were Baldeva and their mothers were Dharini.
Daruka and Anadhristi are also the same. The special thing is that Vasudeva was
the father and Dharini was the mother. Shri Sudharma Swami said - O Jambudvipa!
The Shraman, the liberated Lord, has explained this meaning of the first to
thirteenth studies of the third section of the eighth Anga, Antagadadasasutra.
1. See - the second sutra of the first section.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 10-13 adhyayana tRtIya varga kI samApti tRtIya varga kI samApti 32- evaM
dummahe vi| kUvae vi| tiNNi vi bldev-dhaarinnii-suyaa| dArue vi evaM ceva, nvrN-
vsudev-dhaarinnii-sue| evaM aNAhiTThI vi vsudev-dhaarinnii-sue| evaM khalu
jaMbU! samaNeNaM bhagavayA mahAvIreNaM jAva' saMpatteNaM aTThamassa aMgassa
aMtagaDadasANaM taccassa vaggassa terasamassa ajjhayaNassa ayamaDhe pnnnntte|
isI prakAra durmukha aura kUpadAraka kumAra kA varNana jAnanA caahiye| donoM ke
pitA baladeva aura mAtA dhAriNI thii| dAruka aura anAdhRSTi bhI isI prakAra hai|
vizeSa yaha hai ki vasudeva pitA aura dhAriNI mAtA thii| zrI sudharmA svAmI ne
kahA- he jaMbU! zramaNa yAvat muktiprApta prabhu ne AThaveM aMga
aMtagaDadazAsUtra ke tIsare varga ke eka se lekara teraha adhyayanoM kA yaha
bhAva pharamAyA hai| 1. dekhiye-prathama varga kA dvitIya sUtra

Page #128 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Fourth Section  **1-10 Study of the Throw**  **1.**  "O Venerable! What were
the ten throws, within the fourth section, declared by the Bhagavan Mahavira,
with all the details?"  **Answer:** "O Jambū! The Bhagavan Mahavira, with all
the details, declared ten throws within the fourth section. They are as follows:
**(1)** Jāli, **(2)** Mayāli, **(3)** Uvayāli, **(4)** Purisaseṇe, **(5)**
Vāriseṇe, **(6)** Panjuṇṇa, **(7)** Sambha, **(8)** Aṇiruddha, **(9)**
Saccaṇemi, **(10)** Daḍhaṇemi. ||1||  **2.** "O Venerable! What were the details
of the first throw, declared by the Bhagavan Mahavira, with all the details?"
**Answer:** "O Jambū! At that time, in that era, there were twelve cities. In
the first of those twelve cities, as in the first, there was a king named
Vasudeva, who was a wanderer. In that city, Vasudeva was the king, Dhāriṇī was
the queen, the color was white, the name was Go-yamo, the throw was Jāli, the
number of dice was fifty, the throw was with the hand, the number of throws was
sixteen, and the rest was as in Go-yamo, up to the Siddha.  **3.** "Similarly,
in Mayāli, Uvayāli, Purisaseṇe, and Vāriseṇe, the throw was with the hand, the
name was Piya, and the color was Rūppiṇī.  **4.** "Similarly, in Sambha, the
throw was with the hand, the name was Jambavī, and the color was Māyā.  **5.**
"Similarly, in Aṇiruddha, the throw was with the hand, the name was Panjuṇṇa,
and the color was Vedabbhi.  **6.** "Similarly, in Saccaṇemi, the throw was with
the hand, the name was Samuddavijaya, and the color was Sivā.  **7.**
"Similarly, in Daḍhaṇemi, all were the same."  **1.2.3.4.** See - First Section,
Sutra 2.  **5.** See - First Section, Sutra 5.  **6.** See - First Section,
Sutra 6.  **7.** See - First Section, Sutra 7, 9.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 caturtha varga 1-10 adhyayana utkSepa 1-jai NaM bhaMte! samaNeNaM bhagavayA
mahAvIreNaM jAva' saMpatteNaM taccassa vaggassa ayamaDhe paNNatte, cautthassa
vaggassa aMtagaDadasANaM samaNeNaM bhagavayA mahAvIreNaM jAva saMpatteNaM ke aTe
paNNatte? evaM khalu jaMbU! samaNeNaM bhagavayA mahAvIreNaM jAvare saMpatteNaM
cautthassa vaggassa dasa ajjhayaNA paNNattA, taM jahAsaMgrahaNI-gAthA (1) jAli
(2) mayAli (3) uvayAlI (4) purisaseNe (5) vAriseNe y| (6) panjuNNa (7) saMba (8)
aNiruddha (9) saccaNemi ya (10) dddhnnemii||1|| - jai NaM bhaMte! samaNeNaM
bhagavayA mahAvIreNaM jAva saMpatteNaM cautthassa vaggassa dasa ajjhayaNA
paNNattA, paDhamassa NaM ajjhayaNassa ke aTe paNNatte? jAliprabhRti evaM khalu
jaMbU! teNaM kAleNaM teNaM samaeNaM bAravaI nyrii| tIse NaM bAravaIe nayarIe
jahA paDhame jAva' kaNhe vAsudeve AhevaccaM jA vihri| tattha NaM bAravaIe
nayarIe vasudeve raayaa| dhAriNI devI. vnnnno| jahA goyamo. navaraM jaalikmaare|
paNNAsao daao| vaarsNgii| solasavA priyaao| sesaM jahA goyamassa jAva settuMje
siddhe| evaM mayAlI uvayAlI purisaseNe ya vAriseNe y| evaM pajjuNNe vi, navaraM-
kaNhe piyA, ruppiNI maayaa| evaM saMbe vi, navaraM-jaMbavaI maayaa| evaM
aNiruddhe vi, navaraM-panjuNNe piyA, vedabbhI maayaa| evaM saccaNemI, navaraM-
samuddavijae piyA, sivA maayaa| evaM daDhaNemI vi savve eggmaa|| 1.2.3. 4.
dekhiye-prathama varga, sUtra 2. 5. dekhiye-prathama varga, sUtra 5, 6 6.
dekhiye-prathama varga, sUtra 6. 7. dekhiye-prathama varga, sUtra 7, 9

Page #129 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 88] [Antakṛddaśā Nikṣepa]  Thus, O Jambū! This is the explanation of the
fourth section of the eighth Anga, Antakṛddaśā, as explained by the Bhagavan
Mahāvīra.  Śrī Jambū Svāmī requested Sudharma Svāmī, "O Bhagavan! I have heard
the description of the third section of Antakṛddaśā as explained by the Śramaṇa,
the Lord who has attained liberation. O Venerable one, please tell me what the
Śramaṇa Bhagavan has explained about the fourth section of Antakṛddaśā."
Sudharma Svāmī replied to Jambū Svāmī, "O Jambū! The Śramaṇa, the Lord who has
attained liberation, has described ten studies in the fourth section of
Antakṛddaśā, which are as follows:  (1) Jālī Kumāra, (2) Mayālī Kumāra, (3)
Uvayālī Kumāra, (4) Puruṣaseṇa Kumāra, (5) Vāriṣeṇa Kumāra, (6) Pradyumna
Kumāra, (7) Śāmba Kumāra, (8) Aniruddha Kumāra, (9) Satyanema Kumāra, and (10)
Dṛḍhanema Kumāra.  Jambū Svāmī asked, "O Bhagavan! The Śramaṇa, the Lord who has
attained liberation, has described ten studies in the fourth section. What is
the meaning of the first study as explained by the Śramaṇa, the Lord who has
attained liberation? Jālī, etc."  Sudharma Svāmī replied, "O Jambū! In that time
and at that time, there was a city called Dvārakā, which has been described in
the first study of the first section. Śrī Kṛṣṇa Vāsudeva was ruling there. In
that city of Dvārakā, King 'Vāsudeva' and Queen 'Dhāriṇī' resided. The
description of the king and queen should be understood according to the
Aupapātika Sūtra. The description of Jālī Kumāra should be understood as similar
to that of Gautama Kumāra. The special point is that Jālī Kumāra, after
attaining youth, married fifty maidens and received fifty-fifty items as dowry.
After becoming a monk, Jālī Muni attained knowledge of the twelve Angas,
followed the sixteen-year period of initiation, and the rest of the description
is similar to that of Gautama Kumāra, until he attained liberation on Mount
Śatrujaya.  Similarly, the description of Mayālī Kumāra, Uvayālī Kumāra,
Puruṣaseṇa, and Vāriṣeṇa should be understood.  Similarly, the description of
Pradyumna Kumāra should also be understood. The special point is that Kṛṣṇa was
his father and Rukmiṇī Devī was his mother.  Similarly, Śāmba Kumāra also; the
special point is that his mother's name was Jāmbavatī. He was the son of Śrī
Kṛṣṇa.  Similarly, the description of Aniruddha Kumāra is also there. The
special point is that Pradyumna was his father and Vaidarbhi was his mother.
Similarly, the description of Satyanema Kumāra is there. The special point is
that Samudravijaya was his father and Śivā Devī was his mother. Similarly, the
description of Dṛḍhanema Kumāra should also be understood. All these studies are
similar.  Sudharma Svāmī said, "Thus, O Jambū! This is the meaning of the fourth
section with ten studies as explained by the Śramaṇa, the Lord who has attained
liberation.  Discussion: The fourth section describes ten great personalities,
Jālī, Mayālī, etc. Since their entire description is similar to that of Gautama
Kumāra, it is clarified by the phrase "Jaha Goyamo Navaram" and Savve Egggama,
meaning that the ten studies described in the fourth section, the texts
explaining the lives of the princes described in them are all the same. The
Sūtrakara has separately mentioned the differences in names, etc.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 88] [antakRddazA nikSepa evaM khalu jaMbU! samaNeNaM bhagavayA mahAvIreNaM
aTThamassa aMgassa aMtagaDadasANaM cautthassa vaggassa ayamaDhe pnnnntte| zrI
jaMbU svAmI ne sudharmA svAmI se nivedana kiyA- bhagavan ! zramaNa yAvat
muktiprApta prabhu ne ga aMtakRtdazA ke tIsare varga kA jo varNana kiyA vaha
sunaa| aMtagaDadazA ke cauthe varga ke he pUjya! zramaNa bhagavAn ne kyA bhAva
darzAye haiM, yaha bhI mujhe batAne kI kRpA kreN| sudharmA svAmI ne jaMbU svAmI
se kahA- he jaMbU! zramaNa yAvat muktiprApta prabhu ne aMtagaDadazA ke cauthe
varga meM daza adhyayana kahe haiM, jo isa prakAra haiM (1) jAli kumAra, (2)
mayAli kumAra, (3) uvayAli kumAra, (4) puruSasena kumAra (5) vAriSeNa kumAra,
(6) pradyumna kumAra, (7) zAmba kumAra (8) aniruddha kumAra, (9) satyanemi
kumAra aura (10) dRDhanemi kumaar| jaMbU svAmI ne kahA- bhagavan ! zramaNa yAvat
muktiprApta prabhu ne cauthe varga ke daza adhyayana kahe haiM, to prathama
adhyayana kA zramaNa yAvat muktiprApta prabhu ne kyA artha batAyA hai? jAli-
prabhRti sadharmA svAmI ne kahA- he jaMba! usa kAla aura usa samaya meM dvArakA
nAma kI nagarI thI, jisakA varNana prathama varga ke prathama adhyayana meM kiyA
jA cukA hai| zrIkRSNa vAsudeva vahA~ rAjya kara rahe the| usa dvArakA nagarI meM
mahArAja 'vasudeva' aura rAnI 'dhAriNI' nivAsa karate the| yahA~ rAjA aura rAnI
kA varNana aupapAtika sUtra ke anusAra jAna lenA caahie| jAli kumAra kA varNana
gautama kumAra ke samAna jaannaa| vizeSa yaha ki jAli kumAra ne yuvAvasthA
prApta kara pacAsa kanyAoM se vivAha kiyA tathA pacAsa-pacAsa vastuoM kA daheja
milaa| dIkSita hokara jAli muni ne bAraha aMgoM kA jJAna prApta kiyA, solaha
varSa dIkSAparyAya kA pAlana kiyA, zeSa saba varNana gautama kumAra kI taraha
yAvat zatrujaya parvata para jAkara siddha hue| isI prakAra mayAli kumAra,
uvayAli kumAra, puruSasena aura vAriSeNa kA varNana jAnanA caahie| isI prakAra
pradyumna kumAra kA varNana bhI jAnanA caahiye| vizeSa-kRSNa unake pitA aura
rukmiNI devI mAtA thii| isI prakAra sAmba kumAra bhI; vizeSa-unakI mAtA kA nAma
jAmbavatI thaa| ye zrIkRSNa ke putra the| isI prakAra aniruddha kumAra kA bhI
varNana hai| vizeSa yaha hai ki pradyumna pitA aura vaidarbhI usakI mAtA thii| .
isI prakAra satyanemi kumAra kA varNana hai| vizeSa, samudravijaya pitA aura
zivA devI mAtA thii| isI prakAra dRDhanemi kumAra kA bhI varNana smjhnaa| ye
sabhI adhyayana eka samAna haiN| sudharmA svAmI ne kahA- isa prakAra he jaMbU!
daza adhyayanoM vAle isa cauthe varga kA zramaNa yAvat mokSaprApta prabhu ne
yaha artha kahA hai| vivecana-caturtha varga meM jAli mayAli Adi daza
mahApuruSoM kA varNana hai| inakA sarva varNana gautama kumAra kI taraha hone se
"jahA goyamo navaraM"- zabda se ise spaSTa kiyA hai aura savve egagamA arthAt
caturtha varga ke jo daza adhyayana haiM, inameM varNita rAjakumAroM ke jIvana
kI vyAkhyA karanevAle pATha eka jaise hI haiN| nAma Adi kA jo antara thA, usakA
sUtrakAra ne alaga ullekha kara diyA hai|

Page #130 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Fifth Section  **First Study: The Appearance of Padmavati and the Dharma-
Deshana of Arishta-nemi**  1. "O Jambu! If the Blessed Lord Mahavira, the
Ascetic, has explained the meaning of the fourth section of the Antagad Sutra,
then what meaning has the Blessed Lord Mahavira, the Ascetic, explained for the
fifth section of the Antagad Sutra?"  "O Jambu! The Blessed Lord Mahavira, the
Ascetic, has explained ten studies for the fifth section of the Antagad Sutra.
They are:  (1) Padmavati (2) Gauri (3) Gandhari (4) Lakshmana (5) Susima (6)
Jambavati (7) Satyabhama (8) Rukmini (9) Mulasri (10) Muladatta."  "O Jambu! If
the Blessed Lord Mahavira, the Ascetic, has explained ten studies for the fifth
section of the Antagad Sutra, then what meaning has he explained for the first
study?"  "O Jambu! At that time, in that era, there was a city called Dwaraka.
As described in the first study, Vasudeva, the son of Kansa, was living there.
At that time, a goddess named Padmavati, beautiful in form, was born to Kansa,
Vasudeva.  At that time, in that era, the Arhat Arishta-nemi, the great ascetic,
was living in the forest, practicing self-control and austerity. He was living
in the forest, having left Kansa, Vasudeva. At that time, Padmavati, the
goddess, was living in the forest, having been abandoned by her parents. She was
living in the forest, like a goddess, beautiful and adorned.  At that time, the
Arhat Arishta-nemi, seeing Padmavati, the daughter of Kansa, Vasudeva, preached
the Dharma to her. She was pleased with his words."

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paMcama varga prathama adhyayana : padmAvatI bha. ariSTanemi kA padArpaNaH
dharmadezanA 1-jai NaM bhaMte! samaNeNaM bhagavayA mahAvIreNaM jAva' saMpatteNaM
cautthassa vaggassa ayamaDhe paNNatte, paMcamassa vaggassa aMtagaDadasANaM
samaNeNaM bhagavayA mahAvIreNaMjAva saMpatteNaM ke aTe paNNatte? evaM khalu
jaMbU! samaNeNaM bhagavayA mahAvIreNaM jAvare saMpatteNaM paMcamassa vaggassa
dasa ajjhayaNA paNNattA,taM jahA (1) paumAvaI ya (2) gorI (3) gaMdhArI (4)
lakkhaNA (5) susImA y| (6) jaMbavaI (7) saccabhAmA (8) ruppiNI (9) mUlasiri (10)
mUladattA vi  //  jai NaM bhaMte! samaNeNaM bhagavayA mahAvIreNaM jAva
saMpatteNaM paMcamassa vaggassa dasa ajjhayaNA paNNattA, paDhamassa NaM bhaMte!
ajjhayaNassa ke aTe paNNatte? evaM khalu jaMbU! teNaM kAleNaM teNaM samaeNaM
bAravaI nyrii| jahA paDhame jAva' kaNhe vAsudeve AhevaccaM jAva vihri| tassa NaM
kaNhassa vAsudevassa paumAvaI nAmaM devI hotthA, vnnnno| teNaM kAleNaM teNaM
samaeNaM arahA ariTunemI samosaDhe jAva [ahApaDirUvaM uggahaM ugiNhittA
saMjameNaM tavasA appANaM bhAvemANe] vihri| kaNhe vAsudeve niggae jAva
pjjuvaasi| tae NaM sA paumAvaI devI imIse kahAe laddhaTThA samANI haTThatuTThA
jahA devaI devI jAva pjjuvaasi| tae NaM arahA ariTThanemI kaNhassa vAsudevassa
paumAvaIe ya, jAva dhmmkhaa| parisA pddigyaa| Arya jaMbU svAmI ne Arya sudharmA
svAmI se nivedana kiyA- bhagavan! yAvat mokSaprApta zramaNa bhagavAn mahAvIra ne
yadi antagaDasUtra ke caturtha varga kA yaha artha varNana kiyA hai, to bhagavan
! yAvat mokSaprApta zramaNa bhagavAn mahAvIra ne antagaDasUtra ke paMcama varga
kA kyA artha pratipAdana kiyA hai? uttara meM Arya sudharmA svAmI bole-he jaMbU!
yAvat mokSa prApta zramaNa bhagavAn mahAvIra ne antagaDasUtra ke paMcama varga
ke dasa adhyayana batAe haiN| unake nAma isa prakAra haiM (1) padmAvatI devI (2)
gaurI devI (3) gAndhArI devI (4) lakSmaNA devI (5) susImA devI (6) jAmbavatI
devI (7) satyabhAmA devI (8) rukmiNI devI (9) mUlazrI devI aura (10) mUladattA
devii| jambU svAmI ne punaH pUchA- bhaMte ! zramaNa bhagavAn mahAvIra ne paMcama
varga ke dasa adhyayana kahe haiM to prathama adhyayana kA kyA artha kahA hai?
sudharmA svAmI ne kahA he jaMbU! usa kAla usa samaya meM dvArakA nAma kI eka
nagarI thI, jisakA varNana prathama adhyayana meM 1-4. prathama varga, sUtra 2.
7. tRtIya varga, sUtra 18 5. prathama varga sUtra 5, 6. 6. prathama varga, sUtra
6. 8. tRtIya varga, sUtra 9.

Page #131 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[90] The Antakrid Dasha has already passed. At that time, Shri Krishna Vasudeva
was ruling. Shri Krishna Vasudeva had a queen named Padmavati. Here, according
to the Aupapatik Sutra, one should know about the description of the king. At
that time, Arihant Arishtanemi Tirthankara, while wandering, filled his soul
with restraint and penance, arrived in Dwaraka city. Shri Krishna, to pay his
respects, left the royal palace and reached the Lord. He began to worship Lord
Arishtanemi. At that time, Padmavati Devi heard the news of the Lord's arrival,
and she was very happy. Like Devaki Maharani, she also mounted a religious
chariot and went to pay her respects to the Lord. She began to worship Neminath.
Arihant Arishtanemi told a Dharmakatha to Krishna Vasudeva, Padmavati Devi, and
the assembly of people. After listening to the Dharmakatha, the assembly of
people returned. The reason for the destruction of Dwaraka 2 - Tana said to
Vasudeva, "Arham Arittanemi, I bow to you, I salute you, having bowed and
saluted, I ask you this. O Master! What will be the reason for the destruction
of this Dwaraka city, which is twelve yojanas long and nine yojanas wide, and is
like the Devaloka?" "Kanha!" Ariha Arittanemi said to Kanha Vasudeva, "Thus, O
Kanha! This Dwaraka city, which is twelve yojanas long and nine yojanas wide,
and is like the Devaloka, will be destroyed due to the fire of the Suraggini
Diwayana." Then Krishna Vasudeva bowed and saluted Lord Neminath and asked him
this way, "O Bhagavan! What will be the reason for the destruction of this
Dwaraka city, which is twelve yojanas long and nine yojanas wide, and is like
the Devaloka?" 44 - - "O Krishna!" Arihant Arishtanemi replied, addressing him
thus, "O Krishna! Certainly, this Dwaraka city, which is twelve yojanas long and
nine yojanas wide, and is like the Devaloka, will be destroyed due to the anger
of the wine (Sura), fire, and Dvaipayana Rishi." Shri Krishna's anxiety: its
pacification 1. 2. See - Section 1, Sutra 5. 3 - Kanha Vasudeva, after hearing
this from Ariha Arittanemi, became very sad and thought about it. He thought
about it, searched for it, and a thought arose in his mind - "Blessed are those
princes - Aniruddha - Dadhanemi - Sachchanemi - Prabhayu - who have given away
wealth - gold, silver, and other wealth - horses, chariots, weapons, treasuries,
cities, and outer cities - and have given away a lot of wealth, gold, jewels,
gems, pearls, conch shells, stones, corals, and precious things - and have given
away a lot of wealth, gold, jewels, gems, pearls, conch shells, stones, corals,
and precious things - and have given away a lot of wealth, gold, jewels, gems,
pearls, conch shells, stones, corals, and precious things - and have given away
a lot of wealth, gold, jewels, gems, pearls, conch shells, stones, corals, and
precious things - and have given away a lot of wealth, gold, jewels, gems,
pearls, conch shells, stones, corals, and precious things - and have given away
a lot of wealth, gold, jewels, gems, pearls, conch shells, stones, corals, and
precious things - and have given away a lot of wealth, gold, jewels, gems,
pearls, conch shells, stones, corals, and precious things - and have given away
a lot of wealth, gold, jewels, gems, pearls, conch shells, stones, corals, and
precious things - and have given away a lot of wealth, gold, jewels, gems,
pearls, conch shells, stones, corals, and precious things - and have given away
a lot of wealth, gold, jewels, gems, pearls, conch shells, stones, corals, and
precious things - and have given away a lot of wealth, gold, jewels, gems,
pearls, conch shells, stones, corals, and precious things - and have given away
a lot of wealth, gold, jewels, gems, pearls, conch shells, stones, corals, and
precious things - and have given away a lot of wealth, gold, jewels, gems,
pearls, conch shells, stones, corals, and precious things - and have given away
a lot of wealth, gold, jewels, gems, pearls, conch shells, stones, corals, and
precious things - and have given away a lot of wealth, gold, jewels, gems,
pearls, conch shells, stones, corals, and precious things - and have given away
a lot of wealth, gold, jewels, gems, pearls, conch shells, stones, corals, and
precious things - and have given away a lot of wealth, gold, jewels, gems,
pearls, conch shells, stones, corals, and precious things - and have given away
a lot of wealth, gold, jewels, gems, pearls, conch shells, stones, corals, and
precious things - and have given away a lot of wealth, gold, jewels, gems,
pearls, conch shells, stones, corals, and precious things - and have given away
a lot of wealth, gold, jewels, gems, pearls, conch shells, stones, corals, and
precious things - and have given away a lot of wealth, gold, jewels, gems,
pearls, conch shells, stones, corals, and precious things - and have given away
a lot of wealth, gold, jewels, gems, pearls, conch shells, stones, corals, and
precious things - and have given away a lot of wealth, gold, jewels, gems,
pearls, conch shells, stones, corals, and precious things - and have given away
a lot of wealth, gold, jewels, gems, pearls, conch shells, stones, corals, and
precious things - and have given away a lot of wealth, gold, jewels, gems,
pearls, conch shells, stones, corals, and precious things - and have given away
a lot of wealth, gold, jewels, gems, pearls, conch shells, stones, corals, and
precious things - and have given away a lot of wealth, gold, jewels, gems,
pearls, conch shells, stones, corals, and precious things - and have given away
a lot of wealth, gold, jewels, gems, pearls, conch shells, stones, corals, and
precious things - and have given away a lot of wealth, gold, jewels, gems,
pearls, conch shells, stones, corals, and precious things - and have given away
a lot of wealth, gold, jewels, gems, pearls, conch shells, stones, corals, and
precious things - and have given away a lot of wealth, gold, jewels, gems,
pearls, conch shells, stones, corals, and precious things - and have given

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 90] [ antakRddazA kiyA jA cukA hai| yAvat zrIkRSNa vAsudeva vahA~ rAjya kara
rahe the  /  zrIkRSNa vAsudeva kI padmAvatI nAma kI mahArAnI thI  /  yahA~
aupapAtika sUtra ke anusAra rAjJIvarNana jAna lenA cAhie  /  usa kAla usa samaya
meM arihaMta ariSTanemi tIrthaMkara saMyama aura tapa se AtmA ko bhAvita kara
vicarate hue dvArakA nagarI meM pdhaare| zrIkRSNa vaMdana - namaskAra karane
hetu rAjaprAsAda se nikala kara prabhu ke pAsa pahu~ce yAvat prabhu ariSTanemi
kI paryupAsanA karane lge| usa samaya padmAvatI devI ne bhagavAn ke Ane kI
khabara sunI to vaha atyanta prasanna huI  /  vaha bhI devakI mahArAnI ke samAna
dhArmika ratha para ArUr3ha hokara bhagavAn ko vaMdana karane gaI  /  yAvat
neminAtha kI paryupAsanA karane lagI  /  arihaMta ariSTanemi ne kRSNa vAsudeva,
padmAvatI devI aura jana pariSadA ko dharmakathA kahI  /  dharmakathA sunakara
jana pariSadA vApisa lauTa gaI  /  dvArakAvinAza kA kAraNa 2 - taNaM se kahe
vAsudeve arahaM ariTThaNemiM vaMdai, namasai, vaMdittA namaMsittA evaM
vayAsI"imIse NaM bhaMte! bAravaIe nayarIe navajoyaNavitthinnAe jAva'
devalogabhUyAe kiMmUlAe viNAse bhavissai ? 'kaNhAi !' arahA ariTThaNemI kaNhaM
vAsudevaM evaM vayAsI 'evaM khalu kaNhA! imIse bAravaIe nayarIe
navajoyaNavitthinnAe jAva' devalogabhUyAe suraggidIvAyaNamUlAe viNAse bhavissai
/  ' taba kRSNa vAsudeva ne bhagavAn neminAtha ko vaMdana - namaskAra karake
unase isa prakAra pRcchA kI 'bhagavan ! bAraha yojana laMbI aura nava yojana
caur3I yAvat sAkSAt devaloka ke samAna isa dvArakA nagarI kA vinAza kisa kAraNa
se hogA ?" 44 - - 'he kRSNa !' isa prakAra saMbodhita karate hue arihaMta
ariSTanemi ne uttara diyA 'he kRSNa ! nizcaya hI bAraha yojana lambI aura nava
yojana caur3I yAvat pratyakSa svargapurI ke samAna isa dvArakA nagarI kA vinAza
madirA (surA), agni aura dvaipAyana RSi ke kopa ke kAraNa hogaa|' zrIkRSNa kA
udvega : usakA zamana 1. 2. dekhiye - varga 1, sUtra 5. 3 - kaNhassa vAsudevassa
arahao ariTThaNemissa aMtie eyaM soccA nisamma ayaM ajjhatthie ciMtie patthie
maNogae saMkappe samuppajjitthA - 'dhaNNA NaM te jAli - mayAli-uvayAli -
purisaseNavAriseNa-pajjuNNa-saMba- aNiruddha - daDhaNemi - saccaNemi-ppabhiyao
kumArA je NaM caittA hiraNNaM, jAva [ caittA suvaNNaM evaM dhaNNaM dhaNaM balaM
vAhaNaM kosaM koTThAgAraM puraM aMteuraM caittA viulaM dhaNakaNaga- rayaNa-maNi-
mottiya saMkha-sila-ppavAla - saMtasAra - sAvaejjaM vicchaDDaittA vigovaittA
dANaM dAiyANaM ]' paribhAittA, arahao ariTThaNemissa aMtiyaM muMDA jAva [
bhavittA agArAo aNagAriyaM ] pavvaiyA  /  ahaNaNaM adhaNNe akayapuNNe rajje ya
jAva [ raTThe ya kose ya koTThAgAre ya bale ya vAhaNe ya pure ya] aMteure ya
mANussaesu ya kAmabhogesu mucchie gaDhie giddhe ajjhovavaNNe no saMcAemi

Page #132 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[The Fifth Chapter] [91. The Arhat Aristanemi said: "Henceforth, having shaved
off the hair of my head, I shall renounce the household life and adopt the life
of a mendicant."] 'Kanha!' said the Arhat Aristanemi to Kanha Vasudeva,
"Surely, Kanha! This thought, contemplation, aspiration and resolve has arisen
in your mind that 'Blessed are those Kshatriya princes - Jali, Mayali, Uvayali,
Purisasena, Virasena, Pradyumna, Shambu, Aniruddha, Dridhanemi and Satyanemi -
who, having renounced wealth, army, vehicles, treasury, storehouse, city, harem
and other possessions, and a large quantity of gold, silver, copper, precious
clothes, gems, pearls, conches, stones, corals and other valuable substances,
have shaved off their hair, renounced the household life and adopted the life of
mendicants at the feet of Lord Neminatha.'"  "And I am unfortunate and devoid of
merit, being attached to the kingdom, treasury, storehouse, army, vehicles,
city, harem and human pleasures, and unable to shave off my hair, renounce the
household life and adopt the life of a mendicant at the feet of Lord Neminatha."
Knowing through his omniscience the thoughts that had arisen in the mind of
Kanha Vasudeva who was immersed in distress, the Arhat Aristanemi said to him:
"Surely, Kanha! It is true that those Kshatriya princes - Jali, Mayali and
others - have renounced wealth and family and adopted the life of mendicants,
and you are unfortunate and devoid of merit, being attached to the kingdom,
treasury and human pleasures, and unable to renounce the household life.  But,
Kanha! It has never happened, does not happen, and will never happen that the
Vasudeva renounces wealth, grain, gold and other possessions and adopts the life
of a mendicant. The Vasudeva does not initiate, has not initiated, and will
never initiate [the monastic life]."  Kanha asked, "Bhante! Why is it said that
it has never happened, does not happen, and will never happen [that the Vasudeva
adopts the life of a mendicant]? What is the reason for this?"

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paMcama varga] [91 arahao ariTThanemissa jAva [ aMtie muMDe bhavittA agArAo
aNagAriyaM] pvvitte|' 'kaNhAi!' arahA ariTThaNemI kaNhaM vAsudevaM evaM vayAsI
"se nUNaM kaNhA! tava ayaM ajjhathie ciMtie patthie maNogae saMkappe
samuppajitthAdhaNNA NaM te jAlippabhiikumArA jAva pvviyaa| se nUNaM kaNhA! atthe
samatthe? haMtA atthi| taM no khalu kaNhA! eyaM bhUyaM vA bhavvaM vA bhavissai
vA jaNNaM vAsudevA caittA hiraNNaM jAva pvvissNti| se keNaTeNaM bhaMte! evaM
vuccai 'na eyaM bhUyaM vA jAva pavvaissaMti?' 'kaNhAi!' arahA ariTThaNemI kaNhaM
vAsudevaM evaM vayAsI 'evaM khalu kaNhA! savve vi ya NaM vAsudevA puvvabhave
nidANakaDA se eteNadveNaM kaNhA! evaM vuccai na eyaM bhUyaM jA pvvissNti|
arihanta ariSTanemi se dvArakA nagarI ke vinAza kA kAraNa suna-samajhakara
zrIkRSNa vAsudeva ke mana meM aisA vicAra cintana, prArthita evaM manogata
saMkalpa utpanna huA ki-ve jAli, mayAli, uvayAli, purisasena, vIrasena,
pradyumna, zAmba, aniruddha, dRDhanemi aura satyanemi prabhRti kumAra dhanya
haiM jo hiraNyAdi [saMpadA aura dhana, sainya, vAhana, koSa, koSThAgAra, pura,
antaHpura Adi parijana chor3akara tathA bahuta-sA hiraNya, suvarNa, kAMsA,
dUSya-vastra, maNi, motI, saMkha, silA, mUMgA, lAlaratna Adi sArabhUta dravya
Adi] deyabhAga dekara, neminAtha prabhu ke pAsa muMDita hokara agAra ko
tyAgakara anagAra rUpa meM pravrajita ho gaye haiN| maiM adhanya hU~, akRta-
puNya hUM ki rAjya [koSa, koSThAgAra, sainya, vAhana, nagara] anta:pura aura
manuSya saMbaMdhI kAmabhogoM meM mUrcchita hU~, inheM tyAgakara bhagavAn
neminAtha ke pAsa muMDita hokara anagAra rUpa meM pravrajita hone meM asamartha
huuN| bhagavAn neminAtha prabhu ne apane jJAna-bala se kRSNa vAsudeva ke mana
meM Aye ina vicAroM ko jAnakara ArtadhyAna meM DUbe hue kRSNa vAsudeva se isa
prakAra kahA-"nizcaya hI he kRSNa! tumhAre mana meM aisA vicAra utpanna huA-ve
jAli, mayAli Adi kumAra dhanya haiM jinhoMne dhana vaibhava evaM svajanoM ko
tyAgakara munivrata grahaNa kiyA aura maiM adhanya hUM, akRtapuNya hUM jo rAjya
antaHpura aura manuSya saMbaMdhI kAma-bhogoM meM gRddha huuN| maiM prabhU ke
pAsa pravrajyA nahIM le sktaa| he kRSNa! kyA yaha bAta sahI hai?" zrIkRSNa ne
kahA- "hA~ bhagavan ! Apane jo kahA vaha sabhI yathArtha hai|" prabhu ne phira
kahA-"to he kRSNa! aisA kabhI huA nahIM, hotA nahIM aura hogA bhI nahIM ki
vAsudeva apane bhava meM dhana-dhAnya-svarNa Adi saMpatti chor3akara munivrata
le leN| vAsudeva dIkSA lete nahIM, lI nahIM evaM bhaviSya meM kabhI leMge bhI
nhiiN|" zrIkRSNa ne kahA- 'he bhagavan ! aisA kyoM kahA jAtA hai ki aisA kabhI
huA nahIM, hotA nahIM aura hogA bhI nhiiN| isakA kyA kAraNa hai?' 3.4.5.6.-isI
sUtra meM Upara pATha A cukA hai|

Page #133 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 92] [ Antakrid Dasha ]  Arihant Arishtanemi Bhagwan said, "O Krishna!
Certainly, all Vasudevas are Nidankrit (those who have made a Nidana) in their
previous births. Therefore, I say that it has never happened, does not happen,
and will never happen that a Vasudeva will ever accept Pravrajya
(renunciation)."  **Explanation:** This Sutra presents a description of some
questions asked to Arishtanemi Bhagwan. After hearing about the destruction of
Dwarka, Shri Krishna's affection for the ascetics increased, and at the same
time, he felt remorse that he himself could not take initiation! To resolve his
distress, Bhagwan said, "You are a Vasudeva, and no Vasudeva can ever take
initiation in the three times, because they have made a Nidana in the past."
'Nidana' is a technical term in the Jain tradition. When the desire for sensual
pleasures arises due to the rise of Mohaniya Karma, a Sadhu, Sadhvi, Shravak, or
Shravika resolves in their mind that they will achieve a certain result through
their penance. This is called Nidana. In common parlance, it is called Niyana.
Nidana is not conducive to welfare. A person who dies after making a Nidana
cannot attain Nirvana even after receiving its fruits. He wanders in the world
for a very long time. The tenth Dasha of Dasha-Shruta-Skandha mentions nine
causes of Nidana. They are as follows:  1. A man makes a Nidana after seeing a
prosperous person. 2. A woman makes a Nidana to obtain a good husband. 3. A man
makes a Nidana for a beautiful woman. 4. A woman makes a Nidana after seeing a
happy and beautiful woman. 5. A being born in the Deva-Gati (heavenly realm)
with a divine form makes a Nidana to enjoy himself and other goddesses through a
Vaikriya body. 6. A being in the Deva-Bhavana makes a Nidana to enjoy only his
own goddess. 7. A being makes a Nidana to become a Shravak in the next birth. 8.
A being in the Deva-Bhavana makes a Nidana to enjoy his goddess without
Vaikriya. 9. A being makes a Nidana to become a Sadhu in the next birth.  Of
these, a being who makes the first four types of Nidana cannot even hear the
Dharma preached by the Kevali Bhagwan. A being who makes the fifth Nidana can
hear the Dharma but is Durlabha-Bodhi (slow to understand) and wanders in the
world for a long time. A being who makes the sixth Nidana, even after hearing
and understanding the Jin-Dharma, is interested in other religions. A being who
makes the seventh Nidana can attain Samyaktva (right faith), can have faith in
Dharma, but cannot accept vows. A being who makes the eighth Nidana can take the
vows of a Shravak but cannot become a Sadhu. A being who makes the ninth Nidana
can become a Sadhu but cannot attain Moksha in the same birth.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 92] [ antakRddazA arihaMta ariSTanemi bhagavAn ne kahA- 'he kRSNa ! nizcaya hI
sabhI vAsudeva pUrva bhava meM nidAnakRta ( niyANA karane vAle) hote haiM,
isaliye maiM aisA kahatA hUM ki aisA kabhI huA nahIM, hotA nahIM aura hogA bhI
nahIM ki vAsudeva kabhI pravrajyA aMgIkAra kareM  / ' vivecana- prastuta sUtra
meM ariSTanemi bhagavAn se pUche gaye kucha praznoM kA vivaraNa prastuta kiyA
gayA hai  /  dvArakA ke vinAza kA kAraNa sunakara zrIkRSNa kA saMyamiyoM ke
prati anurAga bar3hA aura sAtha hI svayaM ke prati glAni huI ki ve svayaM dIkSA
nahIM le sakate haiM! unakI isa vyathA ke samAdhAna meM bhagavAn ne kahA - -tuma
vAsudeva ho aura tIna kAla meM kabhI koI vAsudeva dIkSA nahIM le sakatA, kyoMki
pUrva meM unhoMne nidAna kiyA hotA hai  /  'nidAna' jaina paramparA kA apanA eka
pAribhASika zabda hai  /  mohanIya karma ke udaya se kAmabhogoM kI icchA hone
para sAdhu, sAdhvI, zrAvaka aura zrAvikA kA apane citta meM saMkalpa kara lenA
ki merI tapasyA se mujhe amuka phala kI prApti ho, use nidAna kahate haiN| jana
sAdhAraNa meM ise niyANA kahA jAtA hai| nidAna kalyANa- sAdhaka nhiiN| jo vyakti
nidAna karake maratA hai, usakA phala prApta karane para bhI use nirvANa kI
prApti nahIM ho sktii| vaha bahuta kAla taka saMsAra meM bhaTakatA hai|
dazAzrutaskaMdha kI dazavIM dazA meM nidAna ke nava kAraNa batAye haiM  /  ve
isa prakAra haiM - 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. eka puruSa kisI samRddhizAlI ko dekhakara
nidAna karatA hai| strI acchA puruSa prApta karane ke liye nidAna karatI hai|
puruSa sundara strI ke lie nidAna karatA hai| strI kisI sukhI evaM sundara strI
ko dekhakara nidAna karatI hai  /  koI jIva devagati meM devarUpa se utpanna
hokara apanI tathA dUsarI deviyoM ko vaikriya zarIra dvArA bhogane kA nidAna
karatA hai| 6. koI jIva devabhava meM sirpha apanI devI ko bhogane kA nidAna
karatA hai| 7. koI jIva agale bhava meM zrAvaka banane kA nidAna karatA hai| 1
8. koI jIva devabhava meM apanI devI ko binA vaikriya ke bhogane kA nidAna
karatA hai  /  9. koI jIva agale bhava meM sAdhu banane kA nidAna karatA hai|
inameM se pahale cAra prakAra ke nidAna karanevAlA jIva kevalI bhagavAn dvArA
prarUpita dharma ko suna bhI nahIM sktaa| pAMcavAM nidAna karane vAlA jIva
dharma ko suna to sakatA hai, para durlabhabodhi hotA hai aura bahuta kAla taka
saMsAra meM paribhramaNa karatA hai| chaThe nidAnavAlA jIva jinadharma ko
sunakara aura samajhakara bhI dUsare dharma kI ora ruci rakhatA hai| sAtaveM
nidAna vAlA jIva samyaktva prApta kara sakatA hai, dharma para zraddhA kara
sakatA hai, kintu vrata aMgIkAra nahIM kara sakatA hai| AThaveM nidAna vAlA
zrAvaka kA vrata le sakatA hai, para sAdhu nahIM ho sktaa| nauveM nidAna vAlA
jIva sAdhu ho sakatA hai, para usI bhava meM mokSa prApta nahIM kara sakatA  /

Page #134 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Fifth Section] [93 Prophecy of Krishna becoming a Tirthankara] 4-Then Krishna
Vasudeva asked the Arhat Arishthanemi, "O Venerable One! Where will I go and
where will I be born at the time of my death?" Then the Arhat Arishthanemi said
to Krishna Vasudeva, "O Krishna! You will be destroyed by the wrath of the gods,
fire, and Dvaipayana. After the destruction of your city of Dwaraka, and the
separation from your parents and relatives, you will go with Rama and Balarama
towards the southern sea coast, near the five Pandavas, the sons of Panduraja,
towards Pandu Mathura. On the way, you will rest in the Kaushambavan garden,
under a very large banyan tree, on a stone slab, wearing a yellow robe. At that
time, a sharp arrow, shot by Jarakumar, mistaking you for a deer, will pierce
your left foot. Pierced by this sharp arrow, you will die at the time of your
death, and your body will be illuminated by the light of the sand. You will be
reborn in the human world, in the land of Valukaprabha. Then Krishna Vasudeva
thought about this and became very sad. Krishna! The Arhat Arishthanemi said to
Krishna Vasudeva, "O Devānuppaiya! Do not be sad. You will be reborn in the
human world, in the land of Valukaprabha, and after that, you will be born in
Jambudvipa, in the land of Bharata, in the city of Ayodhya, in the family of the
Pusundas, in the lineage of the Janavas, in the twelfth city, named Amme. There,
you will live for many years, and you will attain Kevalijñāna, and you will
become a Tirthankara. You will be liberated from all suffering. Then Krishna
Vasudeva thought about this and became very happy. He jumped up and down, and
then he broke a branch of a tree, and then he made a lion's roar, and then he
bowed down to the Arhat Arishthanemi, and then he was crowned by the Arhat
Arishthanemi. Then he went to the twelfth city, and then he went to the hundred
houses, and then he went to the hundred thrones. He sat on the throne, facing
east, and then he spoke to the people of the city. Then Krishna Vasudeva asked
the Arhat Arishthanemi, "O Venerable One! Where will I go and where will I be
born at the time of my death?" In response, the Arhat Arishthanemi said, "O
Krishna! You will be destroyed by the wrath of the gods, fire, and Dvaipayana.
After the destruction of your city of Dwaraka, and the separation from your
parents and relatives, you will go with Rama and Balarama towards the southern
sea coast, near the five Pandavas, the sons of Panduraja, towards Pandu Mathura.
On the way, you will rest in the Kaushambavan garden, under a very large banyan
tree, on a stone slab, wearing a yellow robe. At that time, a sharp arrow, shot
by Jarakumar, mistaking you for a deer, will pierce your left foot. Pierced by
this sharp arrow, you will die at the time of your death, and your body will be
illuminated by the light of the sand. You will be reborn in the human world, in
the land of Valukaprabha. 1.2. See Section 3, Sutra 12.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paMcama varga] [93 zrIkRSNa ke tIrthaMkara hone kI bhaviSyavANI 4-tae NaM se
kaNhe vAsudeve arahaM ariTThaNemiM evaM vayAsI"ahaM NaM bhaMte! io kAlamAse
kAlaM kiccA kahiM gamissAmi? kahiM uvavajjissAmi?" tae NaM arahA ariTThaNemI
kaNhaM vAsudevaM evaM vayAsI "evaM khalu kaNhA! tumaM bAravaIe nayarIe suraggi-
dIvAyaNa-kova-nidaDDhAe ammApiiniyaga-vippahUNe rAmeNa baladeveNa saddhiM
dAhiNaveyAliM abhimuhe juhiTThillapAmokkhANaM paMcaNhaM paMDavANaM paMDurAya
puttANaM pAsaM paMDumahuraM saMpatthie kosaMbavaNakANaNe naggohavarapAyavassa
ahe puDhavisilApaTTae pIyavattha pacchAiya-sarIre jarAkumAreNaM tikkheNaM
kodaMDa-vippamukkeNaM usuNA vAme pAde viddhe samANe kAlamAse kAlaM kiccA taccAe
vAluyappabhAe puDhavIe ujjalie narae neraiyattAe uvvnjihisi|" tae NaM se kaNhe
vAsudeve arahao ariTThaNemissa aMtie eyamaDhe soccA nisamma ohaya jAva' jhiyaai|
kaNhAi! arahA ariTThaNemI kaNhaM vAsudevaM evaM vayAsI-"mA NaM tumaM
devANuppiyA! ohayamaNasaMkappe jAva jhiyaah| evaM khalu tumaM devANuppiyA!
taccAo puDhavIo ujjaliyAo narayAo aNaMtaraM uvvaTTittA iheva jaMbuddIve dIve
bhArahe vAse AgamesAe ussappiNIe puMDesu jaNavaesu sayaduvAre nayare bArasame
amame nAmaM arahA bhvisssi| tattha tumaM bahUI vAsAiM kevalipariyAgaM pAuNettA
sijjhihisi bujjhihisi muccihisi parinivvAhisi savvadukkhANaM aMtaM kaahisi| _
tae NaM se kaNhe vAsudeve arahao ariTThaNemissa aMtie eyamaDhe soccA nisamma
haTThatuTTha0 apphoDei, apphoDettA vaggai, vaggittA tivaI chiMdai, chiMdittA
sIhaNAyaM karei, karettA arahaM ariTThaNemiM vaMdai namasai, vaMdittA namaMsittA
tameva AbhisekkaM hatthiM duruhai, duruhittA jeNeva bAravaI nayarI, jeNeva sae
gihe teNeva uvaage| AbhiseyahatthirayaNAo paccoruhai, paccoruhittA jeNeva
bAhiriyA uvaTThANasAlA jeNeva sae sIhAsaNe teNeva uvAgacchai, uvAgacchittA
sIhAsaNavaraMsi puratthAbhimuhe nisIyai, nisIittA koDuMbiyapurise saddAvei
sadAvittA evaM vayAsI taba kRSNa vAsudeva arihaMta ariSTanemi ko isa prakAra
bole"he bhagavan! yahA~ se kAla ke samaya kAla kara maiM kahA~ jAUMgA, kahAM
utpanna hoUMgA?" isake uttara meM ariSTanemi bhagavAn ne kahA he kRSNa ! tuma
surA, agni aura dvaipAyana ke kopa ke kAraNa isa dvArakA nagarI ke jala kara
naSTa ho jAne para aura apane mAtA-pitA evaM svajanoM kA viyoga ho jAne para
rAma baladeva ke sAtha dakSiNI samudra ke taTa kI ora pANDurAjA ke putra
yudhiSThira Adi pAcoM pAMDavoM ke samIpa pANDu mathurA kI ora jaaoge| rAste meM
vizrAma lene ke lie kauzAmbavana-udyAna meM atyanta vizAla eka vaTavRkSa ke
nIce, pRthvIzilApaTTa para pItAmbara or3hakara tuma so jaaoge| usa samaya mRga
ke bhrama meM jarAkumAra dvArA calAyA huA tIkSNa tIra tumhAre bAeM paira meM
lgegaa| isa tIkSNa tIra se biddha hokara tuma kAla ke samaya kAla karake
vAlukAprabhA 1.2. dekhiye varga 3, sUtra 12.

Page #135 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Antakrid Dasha 94]  He will be born in the third earth called "Antakrid Dasha".
Hearing this from the Lord's mouth, Krishna Vasudeva became sad and started
meditating. Then the Arihant Arishtanemi said again, "O Devānupriya! Do not be
sad and meditate in sorrow. Certainly, O Devānupriya! In due course of time, you
will leave the third earth and come to the Bharat Kshetra of this Jambudvipa in
the Utsarpini Kal. In the city of Shatdwar in the Pundr Janapada, you will
become the twelfth Tirthankara named "Amma". There, you will follow the Kevali
Paryaya for many years and become Siddha-Buddha-Mukta. Hearing this account of
his future from the mouth of the Arihant Prabhu, Krishna Vasudeva was very happy
and started tapping his arm. He shouted "Jay" and jumped three times on the
earth. He stepped back a little and roared like a lion. Then he bowed to Lord
Nemnath and mounted his royal elephant. He went through the middle of Dwarka
city and reached his royal palace. He got down from the elephant and went to the
place where the reception hall was outside and where his throne was. He sat on
the throne facing east. Then he called his obedient men and servants and said,
Shri Krishna's Proclamation 5 - "Go now, O Devānupriya! Go to the Shringaटक,
Trik, Chatushk, Chatvar, Chaturmuh Mahapath and paths of Dwarka city, and
proclaim loudly from the elephant's back, saying, 'O people of Dwarka! This
Dwarka city, which is as beautiful as a heavenly city, will be destroyed due to
the wrath of Sura, Agni, and Dvaipayan. Therefore, O Devānupriya! Whoever in
Dwarka city desires to be initiated, whether he be a king, a prince, a lord
(master or prince), a sword (king's favorite), a Maḍambik (lord of a small
village), a Kautumbik (lord of two or three families), an Ibh, a queen, a
prince, a princess, a queen, a princess, whoever among them desires to be
initiated by shaving his head near Lord Nemnath, Krishna Vasudeva gives him
permission to do so. Krishna will also make arrangements for all the family
members of the initiate and will celebrate his initiation ceremony with great
pomp and ceremony.' Proclaim this twice or thrice and then inform me." Hearing
this order of Krishna, those obedient royal men proclaimed it twice or thrice
and returned to inform Krishna. 1. Varga 1, Sutra - 5 2. Varga 5, Sutra - 2

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 [ antakRddazA 94] nAmaka tIsarI pRthvI meM janma loge| prabhu ke zrImukha se
apane AgAmI bhava kI yaha bAta sunakara kRSNa vAsudeva khinnamana hokara
ArttadhyAna karane lge| taba arihaMta ariSTanemi punaH isa prakAra bole "he
devAnupriya ! tuma khinnamana hokara ArttadhyAna mata kro| nizcaya se he
devAnupriya ! kAlAntara meM tuma tIsarI pRthvI se nikalakara isI jaMbUdvIpa ke
bharata kSetra meM Ane vAle utsarpiNI kAla meM puMDra janapada ke zatadvAra nAma
ke nagara meM " amama" nAma ke bArahaveM tIrthaMkara banoge  /  vahA~ bahuta
varSoM taka kevalI paryAya kA pAlana kara tuma siddha-buddha-mukta hovoge  /
arihaMta prabhu ke mukhAravinda se apane bhaviSya kA yaha vRttAnta sunakara
kRSNa vAsudeva bar3e prasanna hue aura apanI bhujA para tAla Thokane lge|
jayanAda karake tripadI - bhUmi meM tIna bAra pA~va kA nyAsa kiyaakuude| thor3A
pIche haTakara siMhanAda kiyA aura phira bhagavAn neminAtha ko vaMdana namaskAra
karake apane abhiSeka-yogya hastiratna para ArUDha hue aura dvArakA nagarI ke
madhya se hote hue apane rAjaprAsAda meM Aye  /  abhiSekayogya hAthI se nIce
utare aura phira jahA~ bAhara kI ora upasthAnazAlA thI aura jahAM apanA
siMhAsana thA vahAM Aye  /  ve siMhAsana para pUrvAbhimukha virAjamAna hue|
phira apane AjJAkArI puruSoMrAjasevakoM ko bulAkara isa prakAra bole zrIkRSNa kI
dharmaghoSaNA 5 - " gacchaha NaM tubbhe devANuppiyA ! bAravaIe nayarie
siMghADaga jAva [ tiga- caukkacaccara - caummuha - mahApahapahesu
hatthikhaMdhavaragayA mahayA - mahayA saddeNaM ] ugghosemANA - ugghosemANA evaM
vayaha - ' evaM khalu devANuppiyA! bAravaIe nayarIe navajoyaNa jAva'
devalogabhUyAe suraggidIvAyaNa - mUlAe viNAse bhavissai, taM jo NaM devANuppiyA!
icchai bAravaIe nayarIe rAyA vA juvarAyA vA Isare vA talavare vA mADaMbiya -
koDuMbiya - ibbha-seTThI vA devI vA kumAro vA kumArI vA arahao ariTTaNemissa
aMtie muMDe jAva' pavvaittae, taM NaM kaNhe vAsudeve visajjei  /  pacchAMturassa
vi ya se ahApavittaM vittiM aNujANai  /  mahayA iDDisakkArasamudaeNa ya se
nikkhamaNaM kare  /  doccaM pi taccaM pi ghosaNayaM ghoseha, ghosittA mamaM evaM
ANattiyaM paccappiNaha  / " tae NaM te koDuMbiyA jAva paccappiNaMti  /
devAnupriyo ! tuma dvArakA nagarI ke zrRMgATaka, trika, catuSka, catvara,
caturmukha mahApathoM evaM pathoM meM hastiskaMdha para se jora-jora se ghoSaNA
karate hue isa prakAra kaho ki - " he dvArakAvAsI nagarajano ! isa bAraha yojana
laMbI yAvat pratyakSa svargapurI ke samAna dvArakA nagarI kA surA, agni evaM
dvaipAyana ke kopa ke kAraNa nAza hogA, isaliye he devAnupriyo ! dvArakA nagarI
meM jisakI icchA ho, cAhe vaha rAjA ho, yuvarAja ho, Izvara (svAmI yA
rAjakumAra) ho, talavara (rAjA kA mAnya) ho, mADaMbika (choTe gAMva kA svAmI)
ho, kauTumbika (do tIna kuTuMboM kA svAmI) ho, ibhya ho, rAnI ho, kumAra ho,
kumArI ho, rAjarAnI ho, rAjaputrI ho, inameM se jo bhI prabhu neminAtha ke
nikaTa muNDita hokara yAvat dIkSA lenA cAhe, use kRSNa vAsudeva aisA karane kI
AjJA dete haiN| dIkSArthI ke pIche usake Azrita sabhI kuTuMbIjanoM kI bhI
zrIkRSNa yathAyogya vyavasthA kareMge aura bar3e Rddhi-satkAra ke sAtha usakA
dIkSA mahotsava sampanna kreNge|" isa prakAra dotIna bAra ghoSaNA ko doharA kara
punaH mujhe sUcita kro| " kRSNa kA yaha Adeza pAkara una AjJAkArI rAjapuruSoM ne
vaisI hI ghoSaNA do-tIna bAra karake lauTakara isakI sUcanA zrIkRSNa ko dii| 1.
varga 1, sUtra -5 2. varga 5, sUtra - 2

Page #136 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Fifth Chapter] [95 Discussion - In the previous sutras, Lord Krishna Vasudeva
asks Arishta-nemi about his death and where and in what situation he will be
reborn. He then makes a religious declaration. In response to his question, Lord
Arishta-nemi reveals that Krishna will be born on Earth for the third time and
will become the 12th Tirthankara named Amma in the future cycle of 24
Tirthankaras. Krishna is called Krishna Vasudeva. According to grammar, the word
Vasudeva means "Vasudevasya apatyam puman Vasudevah." The son of Vasudeva is
called Vasudeva. Krishna's father's name was Vasudeva, hence he is called
Vasudeva. The word Vasudeva is generally used to refer to Krishna - it is
another name for Krishna. However, even though the above meaning of Vasudeva is
accepted, this word has become a technical term in Jain philosophy. Therefore,
all Ardhachakravartis are called by the word Vasudeva. In Jain tradition, nine
Vasudevas are mentioned - 1. Tripṛṣṭha, 2. Dviprṣṭha, 3. Svayambhū, 4.
Puruṣottama, 5. Puruṣasiṃha, 6. Puruṣa-puṇḍarīka, 7. Datta, 8. Nārāyaṇa
(Lakṣmaṇa), 9. Kṛṣṇa. Krishna is the last in this list. The technical meaning of
Vasudeva is - one who is the lord of three of the six continents and seven
jewels, and who is endowed with many kinds of riches. From the Jain perspective,
Vasudevas conquer and kill their counter-parts (Prativa-Vasudeva) and rule over
three continents. In addition, Jain tradition considers Vasudeva to be one of
the 28 attainments. The one who is the master of three continents and seven
jewels is called Vasudeva, and attaining this position is the Vasudeva
attainment. Vasudevas have great strength. Describing this strength by way of
analogy, Jain Acharyas say - If a Vasudeva sitting on the edge of a well and
eating is bound with chains and sixteen thousand kings with their entire armies
try to pull him, they will not be able to pull him. But if the Vasudeva holds
the same chain in his left hand and pulls it towards himself, he can easily pull
them. The Krishna mentioned in the Jain Agamas is such a Vasudeva, endowed with
the Vasudeva attainment. The Antagad Sutra describes a Vasudeva Krishna. In the
literature of Sanatana Dharma, the Jain interpretation of the word Vasudeva is
not found. There is no mention in Vedic literature of Vasudeva being a specific
title or attainment. It is clear from the Antagad Sutra and other Agamas that
Vasudeva Krishna was a devoted follower and devotee of Lord Arishta-nemi. This
is why when the Lord arrived in Dwaraka, he was present in his service with
great pomp and ceremony, taking his family along, and listening to his sermons.
Hearing about the burning of Dwaraka from the Lord, he was distressed because he
could not be initiated by the Lord himself. He praises the princes like
Jalikumar, etc., for being initiated and becoming self-liberated. All these
things prove that Vasudeva Krishna was a follower of Lord Arishta-nemi. He
supported those who walked on his path, and even though he was not capable, he
desired to walk on that path himself. In short, Maharaja Krishna was a Jain. The
six sons of Seth Naga, a resident of Bhaddilpur, who were initiated at the feet
of Lord Arishta-nemi, were the maternal uncles of Vasudeva Krishna. Gajasukumar
was the younger brother of Vasudeva Krishna. Thus, these seven brothers of
Maharaja Krishna became Jain monks at the feet of Lord Arishta-nemi. Jalikumar,
Mayalikumar, Upayalikumar, Purusha-sena-kumar and Varisha-sena-kumar - these
five princes

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paMcama varga] [95 vivecana-pichale sUtroM meM zrIkRSNa vAsudeva bhagavAn
ariSTanemi se apane mRtyu-vRttAnta kI aura nUtana janma kahA~ kisa sthiti meM
hogA, isa sambandha kI jijJAsA kA samAdhAna prApta karate haiN| tatpazcAt
dhArmika ghoSaNA karavAte haiN| unakI jijJAsA ke samAdhAna meM bhagavAn
ariSTanemi ne unake tRtIya pRthvI meM utpanna hone aura phira bhAvI tIrthaMkara
caubIsI meM 12 veM amama nAma ke tIrthaMkara hone kA bhaviSya prakaTa kiyA hai|
kRSNa ko kRSNa vAsudeva kahA jAtA hai| vAsudeva zabda kA vyAkaraNa ke AdhAra
para artha hotA hai"vasudevasya apatyaM pumAn vaasudevH|" vasudeva ke putra ko
vAsudeva kahate haiN| kRSNa ke pitA kA nAma vasudeva thA, ata: inako vAsudeva
kahate haiM  /  vAsudeva zabda sAmAnya rUpa se kRSNa kA vAcaka hai-kRSNa kA
dUsarA nAma hai, parantu vAsudeva kA ukta artha mAnya hone para bhI yaha zabda
jainadarzana kA pAribhASika zabda bana gayA hai| ataeva sabhI ardhacakravatI
vAsudeva zabda se kahe jAte haiN| jaina-paramparA meM vAsudeva nau kahe gae haiM
- 1. tripRSTha, 2. dvipRSTha, 3. svayaMbhU, 4. puruSottama, 5. puruSasiMha, 6.
puruSa-puNDarIka, 7. datta, 8. nArAyaNa (lakSmaNa), 9. kRssnn| inameM kRSNa kA
aMtima sthAna hai| vAsudeva kA pAribhASika artha hai- jo sAta ratnoM, chaha
khaMDoM meM se tIna khaMDoM kA adhipati ho tathA jo anekavidha RddhiyoM se
sampanna ho| jainadRSTi se vAsudeva prativAsudeva ko jIta kara evaM mAra kara
tIna khaMDa para rAjya kiyA karate haiN| isake atirikta jaina paramparA ne 28
labdhiyoM meM se vAsudeva bhI eka labdhi mAnI hai| tIna khaMDa tathA sAta ratnoM
ke svAmI vAsudeva kahalAte haiM, isa pada kA prApta honA vAsudeva labdhi hai|
vAsudeva meM mahAn bala hotA hai| isa balaM kA upamA dvArA varNana karate hue
jainAcArya kahate haiM - kUpa ke kinAre baiThe hue aura bhojana karate hue
vAsudeva ko jaMjIroM se bAMdha kara yadi caturaMgiNI senA sahita solaha hajAra
rAjA milakara khIMcane lage to bhI ve unheM khIMca nahIM sakate, kintu usI
jaMjIra ko bAeM hAtha se pakar3a kara vAsudeva apanI ora khIMce to unheM AsAnI
se khIMca sakatA hai| jaina AgamoM meM jina kRSNa kA ullekha hai ve aise hI
vAsudeva haiM, vAsudeva-labdhi se sampanna haiN| antagaDasUtra meM eka vAsudeva
kRSNa kA varNana kiyA hai| sanAtana-dharmiyoM ke sAhitya meM vAsudeva zabda kI
jaina-zAstra sammata vyAkhyA dekhane meM nahIM aatii| vaidika sAhitya meM
vAsudeva padavizeSa yA labdhivizeSa hai" aisA koI ullekha nahIM miltaa|
antagaDasUtra tathA anya AgamoM se spaSTa pratIta hotA hai ki vAsudeva kRSNa
bhagavAn ariSTanemi ke ananya zraddhAlu bhakta the, upAsaka the| yahI kAraNa hai
ki bhagavAn ke dvArakA meM padhArane para ve bar3I sajadhaja ke sAtha
darzanArtha unakI sevA meM upasthita hote haiM, apane parivAra ko sAtha le jAte
haiM, unakI dharmadezanA sunate haiN| bhagavAn se dvArakAdAha kI bAta sunakara
svayaM bhagavAn ke caraNoM meM dIkSita na ho sakane ke kAraNa Akula hote haiN|
jAlikumAra Adi rAjakumAroM ke dIkSita hokara Atma-kalyANonmukha hone se unakI
prazaMsA karate haiN| ina saba bAtoM se pramANita hotA hai ki vAsudeva kRSNa
bhagavAn ariSTanemi ke anuyAyI the| unake mArga para calane vAloM ko sahayoga
dete the, kSamatA na hone para bhI usa para svayaM calane kI abhilASA rakhate
the| saMkSepa meM kahA jAye to kRSNa mahArAja jaina dharmAvalambI the|
bhaddilapura nivAsI seTha nAga ke chaha putra, jo bhagavAn ariSTanemi ke caraNoM
meM dIkSita hue the, vAsudeva kRSNa ke mamere bhAI the| gajasukumAra to vAsudeva
kRSNa ke anuja bhAI hI the| isa taraha mahArAja kRSNa ke ye sAta bhAI bhagavAn
ariSTanemi ke pAsa jaina sAdhu bane the| jAlikumAra, mayAlikumAra,
upayAlikumAra, puruSaSeNakumAra aura vAriSeNakumAra- ye pAMcoM mahArAja

Page #137 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[96] [Antakrid Dasha] Vasudeva was the son of Vasudeva, hence Vasudeva was the
brother of Krishna. His mother was Dharini. Prince Satyaneme and Dridhaneme,
both these princes were the sons of Vasudeva Krishna's uncle. Pradyumna Kumar
and Shambhu Kumar, both these were the sons of Vasudeva Krishna. Prince
Aniruddha was the grandson of Vasudeva Krishna. All the princes became sadhus at
the feet of Lord Arishtanemi. Queen Padmavati, Gauri, Gandhari, Lakshmana,
Susima, Jambavati, Satyabhama, Rukmini, these eight were the queens of Maharaja
Krishna. Mulasri and Muladatta, both these were the queens of Krishna Maharaja's
son Shambhu Kumar. All of them became Jain sadhvis after being initiated at the
feet of Lord Arishtanemi. 1 According to the present sutra, Vasudeva Krishna had
an announcement made by his servants in all the provinces of Dwarka city. The
announcement said that Dwarka city would be burnt down by the sage Dvaipayan one
day, therefore, whoever wants to do their welfare by being initiated at the feet
of Lord Arishtanemi, they have the permission of Maharaja Krishna. If anyone is
worried about those left behind, they should leave them behind, Maharaja Krishna
will take care of all the arrangements for those left behind himself. In
addition, the announcement also said that whoever wants to become a sadhu and do
their welfare, all the arrangements for their initiation ceremony will be made
by Maharaja Shri Krishna. This announcement was made not once, but three times.
From this discussion, it becomes clear that Krishna Vasudeva, who has been
described as going to hell, has also been given the highest respect by being
described as going to moksha after becoming a Tirthankara. Now Dvaipayan Rishi,
who was tormented by the intoxicated Yadava princes, had decided that if my
penance bears any fruit, I will burn Dwarka city to ashes. According to the
decision, Dvaipayan Rishi became the Agni Kumar jati deva. On the other hand, he
was remembering the old enmity and was looking for an opportunity to burn
Dwarka, but he had no control over the effect of the daily Ayambil penance. He
was unsuccessful in burning Dwarka city, but he did not give up his efforts, his
efforts continued for twelve years. After twelve years, some people of Dwarka
started thinking - years have passed while doing penance, what can Agni Kumar do
to us? In addition, some people were also thinking that all the people of Dwarka
are doing Ayambil, if we don't do it, what difference does it make? Understand
the matter of time, one day came in Dwarka when no one did penance. Due to
personal selfishness, everyone turned away from the crisis-removing Achamla
penance. What better opportunity could there be for Agni Kumar Dvaipayan Rishi.
He set fire to Dwarka. There were terrible sounds all around, a strong storm
started, houses collapsed due to the earthquake, fire engulfed all of Dwarka.
Vasudeva Krishna made many attempts to extinguish the fire, but the karma was so
intense that the water poured on the fire was acting like oil. Water
extinguishes fire, but as water was poured into it, the fire flared up even
more. The fierce flames of the fire seemed to be trying to burn even the sky.
Krishna Vasudeva, Balarama, all were disappointed, they watched Dwarka burn,
they could not save it. T After Dwarka was burnt down, Krishna Vasudeva and
Balarama started preparing to leave from there. The sutrakar has expressed this
point with the word "Suraggidivayanakovnidddhaae".

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 96] [ antakRddazA vasudeva ke putra the, ataH vAsudeva kRSNa ke bhAI the, inakI
mAtA dhAriNI thI, rAjakumAra satyanemi tathA dRr3hanemi ye donoM rAjakumAra
vAsudeva kRSNa ke tAU ke lar3ake the  /  pradyumnakumAra tathA zAmbakumAra ye
donoM vAsudeva kRSNa ke putra the  /  rAjakumAra aniruddha vAsudeva kRSNa kA
potA thaa| sabhI rAjakumAra bhagavAn ariSTanemi ke caraNoM meM sAdhu bane the  /
mahArAnI padmAvatI, gaurI, gAndhArI, lakSmaNA, susImA, jAMbavatI, satyabhAmA,
rukmiNI ye AThoM mahArAja kRSNa kI rAniyAM thiiN| mUlazrI tathA mUladattA ye
donoM kRSNa mahArAja ke putra zAmbakumAra kI rAniyA~ thiiN| ye saba bhagavAn
ariSTanemi ke caraNoM meM dIkSita hokara jaina sAdhviyA~ bana gaI thiiN| 1
prastuta sUtra ke anusAra vAsudeva kRSNa apane rAjasevakoM dvArA dvArakA nagarI
ke sabhI pradezoM meM eka udghoSaNA karAte haiM  /  ghoSaNA meM kahA jAtA hai ki
dvArakA nagarI eka dina dvaipAyana RSi dvArA jalA dI jAyegI, ataH jo bhI vyakti
bhagavAn ariSTanemi ke caraNoM meM dIkSita hokara apanA kalyANa karanA cAhe, use
mahArAja kRSNa kI AjJA hai  /  kisI ko pIche vAloM kI cintA ho to use vaha
chor3a denI cAhiye, pIche kI saba vyavasthA mahArAja kRSNa svayaM kreNge| isake
atirikta ghoSaNA meM yaha bhI kahA gayA thA ki jo bhI vyakti sAdhu bana kara
apanA kalyANa karanA cAhe, usake dIkSA samAroha kI saba vyavasthA mahArAja
zrIkRSNa kI ora se hogI  /  yaha ghoSaNA eka bAra nahIM, tIna-tIna bAra kI gaI
thii| isa vivecana se yaha spaSTa ho jAtA hai ki kRSNa vAsudeva ko jahAM
narakagAmI batalAyA gayA hai vahA~ unheM tIrthaMkara bana jAne ke anantara
mokSagAmI batalA kara parama sammAna bhI pradAna kiyA gayA hai| aba madonmatta
yAdavakumAroM se pratADita dvaipAyana RSi ne nidAna kara liyA thA ki yadi merI
tapasyA kA koI phala ho to maiM dvArakA nagarI ko jalA kara bhasma kara dUM  /
nidAnAnusAra dvaipAyana RSi agnikumAra jAti deva bne| idhara vaha pUrva vaira kA
smaraNa karake dvArakAdAha kA avasara dekha rahA thA, parantu pratidina kI
AyaMbila tapasyA ke prabhAva ke sAmane usakA koI vaza nahIM calatA thA  /  vaha
dvArakA nagarI ko jalAne meM asaphala rahA, tathApi usane prayatna nahIM chor3A,
lagAtAra bAraha varSoM taka usakA yaha prayatna calatA rahA  /  bAraha varSoM ke
bAda dvArakA ke kucha loga socane lage-tapasyA karate-karate varSoM vyatIta ho
gae haiM, agnikumAra hamArA kyA bigAr3a sakatA hai? isake atirikta kucha loga
yaha bhI soca rahe the ki dvArakA ke sabhI loga to AyaMbila kara hI rahe haiM,
yadi hama loga na bhI kareM to isase kyA antara par3atA hai ? samaya kI bAta
samajhie ki dvArakA meM eka dina aisA A gayA jaba kisI ne bhI tapa nahIM kiyA  /
vyaktigata svArtha ke kAraNa saMkaTa mocaka AcAmla tapa se sabhI vimukha ho ge|
agnikumAra dvaipAyana RSi ke liye isase bar3hakara aura kaunasA avasara ho
sakatA thA  /  usane dvArakA ko Aga lagA dii| cAroM ora bhayaMkara zabda hone
lage, jora kI AMdhI calane lagI, bhUcAla se makAna dharAzAyI hone lage, agni ne
sArI dvArakA ko apanI lapeTa meM le liyaa| vAsudeva kRSNa ne Aga zAnta karane ke
anekoM yatna kie, para karmoM kA aisA prakopa cala rahA thA ki Aga para DAlA
jAnevAlA pAnI tela kA kAma kara rahA thA  /  pAnI DAlane se Aga zAnta hotI hai,
para usameM jyoM-jyoM pAnI DAlA jAtA thA tyoM-tyoM agni aura adhika bhar3akatI
thI  /  agni kI bhISaNa jvAlAe~ mAno gagana ko bhI bhasma karane kA yatna kara
rahI thiiN| kRSNa vAsudeva, balarAma, saba nirAza the, inake dekhate dekhate
dvArakA jala gaI, ve use bacA nahIM sake  /  T dvArakA ke dagdha ho jAne para
kRSNa vAsudeva aura balarAma vahAM se jAne kI taiyArI karane lge| isI bAta ko
sUtrakAra ne "suraggidIvAyaNakovanidaDDhAe" isa pada se abhivyakta kiyA hai|

Page #138 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  [Fifth Category] [97] "Amma-pii-niyag-vippahuune" - Ambapitru -
nijakaviprheeṇaḥ - matṛpitṛbhyāṁ svajaneṣu ca vihīnaḥ - meaning, devoid of
mother, father and relatives. Storytellers say that when Dwarka was burning,
Krishna Vasudeva and his elder brother Balarama were both trying to extinguish
the fire, but when they were unsuccessful, they reached their palaces and tried
to save their parents. With great difficulty, they managed to get their parents
out of the palace. They thought that they should put their parents on a chariot
and take them to a safe place. To fulfill their intention, when Vasudeva Shri
Krishna reached the stable, he saw that the stable had been destroyed by fire.
He left from there and came to the chariot shed. The chariot shed was on fire,
but one chariot appeared safe to him. He immediately brought it out, put his
parents on it. Both brothers got on in place of the horses, but as soon as they
crossed the lion gate and the chariot's wheel and both brothers came out of the
gate, the upper part of the gate immediately broke and their parents were
crushed under it. They died. Vasudeva Krishna and Balarama could not bear to see
this poignant and terrible sight. They were impatient with the separation from
their parents. Somehow they controlled their minds, patiently endured the great
sorrow caused by the separation from their parents and other relatives. The
storyteller has indicated this lack of parents and other relatives with the word
"Ammapii - niyag-vippahuune". 44 44 1 "Rameṇa Baldeveṇa saddiṁ" - means - with
Rama Baldeva. King Vasudeva had a queen named Rohini. Rohini gave birth to a
virtuous and brilliant son. He was extremely beautiful and charming, so he was
named "Rama". Later, due to being extremely strong and powerful, the epithet
"Bala" was added to Rama and he became known by many names like Rama, Balarama,
Balabhadra, and Bala. According to Jain scriptures, Baldeva is also a specific
position. Every Vasudeva's elder brother is called Baldeva, they are destined
for heaven or liberation. Balarama was the ninth Baldeva. The love between
Baldeva and Vasudeva is unparalleled and unique. The storyteller has expressed
Baldeva Rama, the elder brother of King Krishna, with the words "Rameṇa
Baldeveṇa". "Dahiṇaveyāliṁ abhimukhe juhiṭṭhillpaamokkhāṇaṁ, pañcaṇhaṁ
paṇḍavāṇaṁ paṇḍurāyaputtāṇaṁ pāsaṁ paṇḍumahurāṁ sampatthie" means - towards the
shore of the southern sea, the five Pandavas, the sons of Panduraja, went
towards Pandu Mathura. 44 - After the city of Dwarka was burnt, Krishna was very
worried. He said to Balarama - Krishna, who gives shelter to others, where will
he go for shelter today? In response, Balarama said - You have always helped the
Pandavas, it is right to go to them. At that time, the Pandavas were living in
Pandu Mathura, having been exiled from Hastinapur. Their story of exile should
be known from the Gnatadharmakatha. Hearing Balarama's words, Krishna said - It
is shameful to seek shelter from those whom you have sheltered, moreover,
Subhadra (Arjuna's wife) is my sister. It is also not appropriate to stay at my
sister's house. Hearing Krishna's logical argument, Balarama said - Brother!
Kunti is your aunt, there is nothing disrespectful about going to your aunt's
house.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paMcama varga ] [97 'ammA- pii-niyaga-vippahUNe" - ambApitR - nijakaviprahINaH
- mAtRpitRbhyAM svajanebhyazca vihInaH - arthAt mAtA-pitA aura apane
sambandhiyoM se rahita  /  kathAkAroM kA kahanA hai ki jaba dvArakA jala rahI
thI taba kRSNa vAsudeva aura unake bar3e bhAI balarAma donoM Aga bujhAne kI
ceSTA kara rahe the, para jaba ye saphala nahIM hue taba apane mahaloM meM
pahuMce aura apane mAtA-pitA ko bacAne kA prayatna karane lge| bar3I kaThinAI se
mAtA-pitA ko mahala meM se nikAlane meM saphala hue| inakA vicAra thA ki
mAtApitA ko ratha para baiThAkara kisI surakSita jagaha para pahuMcA diyA jAye
/  apane vicAra kI pUrti ke liye vAsudeva zrIkRSNa jaba azvazAlA meM pahu~ce to
dekhate haiM, azvazAlA jalakara naSTa ho cukI hai  /  ve vahAM se cale,
rathazAlA meM Ae  /  rathazAlA ko Aga lagI huI thI, kintu eka ratha unheM
surakSita dikhAI diyaa| ve tatkAla usI ko bAhara le Aye, usa para mAtA-pitA ko
baitthaayaa| ghor3oM ke sthAna para donoM bhAI juta gae para jaise hI siMhadvAra
ko pAra karane lage aura ratha kA jUA aura donoM bhAI dvAra se bAhara nikale hI
the ki tatkAla dvAra kA UparI bhAga TUTa par3A aura mAtA-pitA usI ke nIce daba
ge| unakA dehAnta ho gayA  /  vAsudeva kRSNa tathA balarAma se yaha mArmika
bhayaMkara dRzya dekhA nahIM gyaa| ve mAtA-pitA ke viyoga se adhIra ho utthe|
jaise-taise unhoMne apane mana ko saMbhAlA, mAtA-pitA tathA anya sambandhiyoM ke
viyoga se utpanna mahAn saMtApa ko dhairyapUrvaka sahana kiyaa| mAtA-pitA tathA
anya sambandhiyoM kI isI vihInatA ko sUtrakAra ne " ammApii - niyaga-vippahUNe"
isa pada se saMsUcita kiyA hai| " 44 44 1 'rAmeNa baladeveNa saddhiM" - kA artha
hai- - rAma baladeva ke saath| mahArAja vasudeva kI eka rAnI kA nAma rohiNI thA
/  rohiNI ne eka puNyavAn tejasvI putra ko janma diyaa| vaha parama abhirAma
sundara thA, isalie usakA nAma "rAma" rakhA gyaa| Age calakara atyanta balavAn
aura parAkramI hone ke kAraNa rAma ke sAtha " bala" vizeSaNa aura jur3a gayA
aura ve rAma, balarAma, balabhadra aura bala Adi aneka nAmoM se prasiddha ho
gye| jainazAstroM ke anusAra baladeva eka pada vizeSa bhI hai  /  pratyeka
vAsudeva ke bar3e bhAI baladeva kahalAte haiM, ye svarga yA mokSagAmI hote haiM
/  balarAma nauveM baladeva the  /  baladeva aura vAsudeva kA prema anupama aura
advitIya hotA hai| mahArAja kRSNa ke bar3e bhAI baladeva rAma ko hI sUtrakAra ne
" rAmeNa baladeveNa " ina padoM se vyakta kiyA hai  /  'dAhiNaveyAliM abhimuhe
juhiTThillapAmokkhANaM, paMcaNhaM paMDavANaM paMDurAyaputtANaM pAsaM
paMDumahuraM saMpatthie" kA artha hai - dakSiNasamudra ke kinAre pAMDurAjA ke
putra yudhiSThira Adi pAMcoM pAMDavoM ke pAsa pANDu mathurA kI ora cala diye| 44
- dvArakA nagarI ke dagdha ho jAne para kRSNa bar3e cintita the  /  unhoMne
balarAma se kahA- - auroM ko zaraNa denevAlA kRSNa Aja kisa kI zaraNa meM jAye?
isake uttara meM balarAma kahane lage - pANDavoM kI Apane sadA sahAyatA kI hai,
unhIM ke pAsa calanA ThIka hai| usa samaya pANDava hastinApura se nirvAsita
hokara pANDumathurA meM raha rahe the  /  unake nirvAsana kI kathA
jJAtAdharmakathA se jAna lenI cAhie  /  balarAma kI bAta sunakara kRSNa bole-
jinako sahArA diyA ho, unase sahArA lenA lajjAspada hai, phira subhadrA (arjuna
kI patnI) apanI bahina hai  /  bahina ke ghara rahanA bhI zobhAspada nahIM hai
/  kRSNa kI tarka-saMgata bAta sunakara balarAma kahane lage - bhAI ! kuntI to
apanI bUA hai, bUA ke ghara jAne meM apamAnajanaka koI bAta nahIM  /

Page #139 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[98] At the end, even though Krishna was reluctant, Balarama took Krishna with
him and they set out towards Pandu Mathura, the Pandavas' capital, situated on
the coast of the southern sea. The sutrakar has given the words "Dahiṇabeḷāe
abhimūhe pāṇḍumahurṁ sampattiē" in the present sutra, which are pointing towards
the above mentioned story. "Jarākumāreṇṁ" means by Jarākumāra. Jarākumāra was a
prince of the Yadava dynasty, who was the brother of Maharaja Śrī Kṛṣṇa.
Bhagavan Ariṣṭanemi had prophesied that Vasudeva would die by the arrow of
Jarākumāra. Knowing this, Jarākumāra was very sad. He decided that he would
leave Dvārakā and go to Kośāṁśravan, where he would spend the rest of his life,
thus avoiding becoming the cause of Śrī Kṛṣṇa's death. According to his
decision, he started living in Kośāṁśravan. But who can escape destiny? When
Dvārakā was about to be submerged in water, Śrī Kṛṣṇa was going to Pāṇḍu Mathura
with his elder brother Balarama. On the way, they came to Kośāṁśravan. Maharaja
Śrī Kṛṣṇa felt thirsty, so Balarama went to fetch water. Behind him, Śrī Kṛṣṇa
was resting under a tree, wearing a yellow garment. He had placed one foot on
top of the other. Vasudeva had a lotus mark on his foot. Just as the eye of a
deer shines from a distance, in the same way, the lotus mark on Śrī Kṛṣṇa's foot
was shining. On the other side, Jarākumāra was wandering in the same forest. He
was looking for prey. When he came near the banyan tree, he saw from a distance
what looked like a deer sitting there. He immediately put an arrow on his bow
and released it. As soon as the arrow hit, Krishna writhed in pain. He thought,
"Could this arrow be from Jarākumāra?" Seeing Jarākumāra in front of him, his
thought was confirmed. When Jarākumāra apologized, he said, "Jarākumāra! What is
your fault in this? This was destiny. How could the prophecy of Bhagavan
Ariṣṭanemi be otherwise?" Seeing that it was almost time for Balarama to arrive,
Krishna said, "Jarākumāra! You run away from here, otherwise you will not be
able to escape from Balarama's hands." The very act that Jarākumāra wanted to
escape from, the sin from which he had left the city of Dvārakā and embraced the
abode of Kośāṁśravan, he saw that same sin happening by his own hands, and his
heart wept. But what could he do? Śrī Kṛṣṇa's pain intensified. At the same
time, his peace was disturbed. He started saying, "My killer has escaped from my
hands. I should have finished him off." Raudra dhyāna came to its youth, and in
that same Raudra dhyāna-filled state, Śrī Kṛṣṇa's death occurred. "Tacchāe
bāluyappabhāe puḍhavīe ujjaliē narē"-Tṛtīyasyaṁ bālukāprabhāyāṁ
pṛthivyāmujjvalitē narakē–meaning in the luminous hell of the third earth called
Bālukāprabhā. From the Jain perspective, this world is divided into three
realms: Ūrdhvaloka, Madhyaloka, and Adholoka. In Adholoka, there are seven
hells. The places in Adholoka where beings are born and experience the fruits of
their sins are called hells. These are divided into seven earths, whose names
are: Ghammā, Vaṁśā, Śailā, Anjanā, Riṭṭhā, Magha, and Māghavai. Their seven
gotras are: Ratnaprabhā, Śarkarāprabhā, Bālukāprabhā, Paṁkaprabhā, Dhūmaprabhā,
Tamaḥprabhā, and Mahātamaḥprabhā. A name that does not have a connection with
the meaning of the word is called a 'name', and the name given to an object
keeping the meaning of the word in mind is called a 'gotra'. Bālukāprabhā is the
third earth. There is a lot of sand,

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 98] [antakRddazA anta meM kRSNa kI anicchA hone para bhI balarAma kRSNa ko
sAtha lekara dakSiNa samudra ke taTa para basI pAMDavoM kI rAjadhAnI
pANDumathurA kI ora cala die| sUtrakAra ne prastuta sUtra meM jo "dAhiNabelAe
abhimuhe pAMDumahuraM saMpatthie" ye pada diye haiM ye ukta kathAnaka kI ora hI
saMketa kara rahe haiN| "jarAkumAreNaM" kA artha hai jarAkumAra ne| jarAkumAra
yAdavavaMzIya eka rAjakumAra thA, jo mahArAja zrIkaSNa kA bhAI thaa| bhagavAna
ariSTanemi ne bhaviSyavANI karate hae kahA thA ki jarAkamAra ke bANa se vAsudeva
kI mRtyu hogii| yaha jAnakAra jarAkumAra ko bar3A duHkha huaa| usane nizcaya
kiyA ki maiM dvArakA chor3akara kozAmravana meM calA jAtA hUM, vahIM jIvana ke
zeSa kSaNa vyatIta kara dUMgA, isase zrIkRSNa kI mRtyu kA kAraNa banane se baca
jaauuNgaa| apane nizcaya ke anusAra vaha kozAmravana meM rahane lagA thaa| para
bhavitavyatA kauna TAla sakatA thA? dvArakA ke jala jAne para zrIkRSNa apane
bar3e bhAI balarAma ke sAtha pANDumathurA jA rahe the| rAste meM kozAmravana
aayaa| mahArAja zrIkRSNa ko pyAsa lagI, balarAma pAnI lene cale gye| pIche
zrIkRSNa eka vRkSa ke nIce pIta vastra or3hakara vizrAma karane lge| unhoMne eka
pAMva para dUsarA pAMva rakhA huA thaa| vAsudeva ke pAMva meM padma kA cihna
hotA hai| dUra se jaise mRga kI A~kha camakatI hai ThIka usI prakAra zrIkRSNa ke
pAMva meM padma-cihna camaka rahA thaa| udhara jarAkumAra usI vana meM bhramaNa
kara rahA thaa| use kisI zikAra kI khoja thii| jaba vaha vaTavRkSa ke nikaTa AyA
to use dUra se aisA lagA jaise koI mRga baiThA hai| usane tatkAla dhanuSa para
bANa car3hAyA, aura chor3a diyaa| bANa lagate hI kRSNa chaTapaTA utthe| unheM
dhyAna AyA ki bANa kahIM jarAkumAra kA to nahIM? jarAkumAra ko sAmane dekhakara
unakA vicAra satya pramANita huaa| jarAkumAra ke kSamA mAMgane para ve bole
jarAkumAra! tumhArA isameM kyA doSa hai? bhavitavyatA hI aisI thii| bhagavAn
ariSTanemi kI bhaviSyavANI anyathA kaise ho sakatI thI? balarAma ke Ane kA
samaya nikaTa dekhakara kRSNa bole-jarAkumAra! tuma yahA~ se bhAga jAo, anyathA
balarAma ke hAthoM se tuma baca nahIM skoge| jisa adhama kArya se jarAkumAra
bacanA cAhatA thA, jisa pApa se bacane ke lie usane dvArakA nagarI ko chor3akara
kozAmravana kA vAsa aMgIkAra kiyA thA, usI pApa ko apane hAthoM se hote
dekhakara usakA hRdaya ro pdd'aa| para kyA kara sakatA thA? zrIkaSNa kI vedanA
ugra ho gaI.sAtha hI unakI zAnti bhaMga ho gii| kahane lage-merA ghAtaka mere
hAthoM se bacakara nikala gyaa| mujhe to use samApta kara hI denA cAhie thaa|
raudradhyAna apane yauvana para A gayA aura usI raudradhyAnapUrNa sthiti meM
zrIkRSNa kA dehAnta ho gyaa| "taccAe bAluyappabhAe puDhavIe ujjalie
narae"-tRtIyasyAM bAlukAprabhAyAM pRthivyAmujjvalite narake-arthAt bAlukAprabhA
nAmaka tIsarI pRthvI ke ujjvalita naraka meN| jaina-dRSTi se yaha jagat
Urdhvaloka, madhyaloka aura adholoka ina tIna lokoM meM vibhakta hai| adholoka
meM sAta naraka haiN| adholoka ke jina sthAnoM meM paidA hokara jIva apane pApoM
kA phala bhogate haiM, ve sthAna naraka kahalAte haiN| ye sAta pRthviyoM meM
vibhakta haiM, jinake nAma haiM-ghammA, vaMsA, zailA, aMjanA, riTThA, maghA
tathA maaghvii| inake-ratnaprabhA, zarkarAprabhA, bAlukAprabhA, paMkaprabhA,
dhUmaprabhA, tamaHprabhA aura mahAtama:prabhA ye sAta gotra haiN| zabdArtha se
sambandha na rakhane vAlI saMjJA ko 'nAma' kahate haiM aura zabdArtha kA dhyAna
rakha kara kisI vastu ko jo nAma diyA jAtA hai vaha 'gotra' kahalAtA hai  /
bAlukAprabhA tIsarI bhUmi hai  /  bAlU reta adhika hone

Page #140 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Fifth Class] [99. Its name is Balukaprabha. Due to its nature, it experiences
intense heat. The land here is hotter than burning coals. Krishna Vasudeva was
born in the third earth called Balukaprabha. The word "Ujjwalit" has two
meanings: first, the seventh Narakendraka-Narakasthan (a specific hell) of the
third earth, and second, fierce and terrifying. The word "Ujjwalit" is an
adjective for hell. "Ussappiniye" - Utsarpiniyam - meaning in the Utsarpini
period. Jain scholars have divided time into two parts, one called Avasarpini
and the other Utsarpini. The period in which the beings' Sanhanan (specific bone
structure), Sansthan (body structure), and other qualities gradually decline,
and their lifespan and Avagahana (spiritual progress) decrease, is called the
Avasarpini period. During this period, the color, smell, taste, and touch of
Pudgalas (matter particles) become less refined. Auspicious emotions decrease,
and inauspicious emotions increase. This period is equivalent to ten Koda-Kodi
Sagaropama (a vast period of time). Conversely, the period in which the beings'
Sanhanan, etc., gradually become more and more auspicious, and their lifespan
and Avagahana increase, is the Utsarpini period. The color, smell, taste, and
touch of Pudgalas also become more auspicious during this period. This period is
also equivalent to ten Koda-Kodi Sagaropama. . Lord Arishtanemi said to Krishna
Vasudeva, "O Krishna! In the coming Utsarpini period, you will be the twelfth
Tirthankara in the city of Shatdwar in the country of Pundra, named Amma." In
the first chapter of the Prajnapanasutra, 25 and a half countries in
Bharatavarsha are considered Aryas (noble). The birth of Arihants, Chakravartis,
Baldevs, and Vasudevas is said to occur only in Arya countries. Here, the
question arises: the names of the 25 and a half countries mentioned in the
scriptures do not include Pundra. How can it be considered an Arya country?
According to Lord Arishtanemi, Krishna Vasudeva will become the twelfth
Tirthankara there, so Pundra cannot be considered an Anarya (non-noble) country
either. If the birth of a Tirthankara makes a country Arya, then the count of 25
and a half becomes inconsistent. This contradiction requires reconciliation. The
answer is that the countries where Tirthankaras and other great souls are born
are Arya. This principle is logical and scriptural. Regarding the count of 25
and a half countries, it seems to have been made in relation to the time of Lord
Mahavira. Therefore, there is no contradiction in considering Pundra an Arya
country. The word "Arha" indicates omniscience in its general sense and
Tirthankaratva (the state of a Tirthankara) in its specific sense. "Rah" means
secret, hidden, etc. Those who are free from "Rah" are "Arha," meaning those who
are not hidden from any secret of the world are "Arha." Arha means worthy and
revered. They are also called Arihants because they have ended their Ghatikarma
(negative karmas). 'Apphodeï, Apphodeïtta Vaggäï, Vaggäïtta Tivaliṁ Chindaï,
Chinditta Sihanāyam Kareï' Through this verse, the Sutrakar (author of the
sutra) has conveyed four points. Maharaja Krishna, overjoyed at the auspicious
news of becoming the twelfth Tirthankara in the future, expresses his inner joy
through various actions. These actions are divided into four parts: (1)
Tirthankara in the future

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paMcama varga] [99 se isakA nAma bAlukAprabhA hai  /  kSetrasvabhAva se isameM
uSNa vedanA hotI hai| yahAM kI bhUmi jalate hue aMgAroM se adhika tapta hai|
kRSNa vAsudeva bAlukAprabhA nAmaka tIsarI pRthvI meM paidA hue| ujjvalita zabda
ke do artha hote haiMpahalA tIsarI bhUmi kA sAtavA~ narakendraka-narakasthAna
vizeSa aura dUsarA bhiissnn-bhyNkr| ujjvalita zabda naraka kA vizeSaNa hai|
"ussappiNIe"- utsarpiNyAm-arthAt utsarpiNIkAla meN| jaina zAstrakAroM ne kAla ko
do vibhAgoM meM vibhakta kiyA hai,eka kA nAma avasarpiNI aura dUsare kA
utsarpiNI hai| jisa kAla meM jIvoM ke saMhanana (asthiyoM kI racanAvizeSa),
saMsthAna, kramazaH hIna hote cale jAeM, Ayu aura avagAhanA ghaTatI calI jAye,
vaha kAla avasarpiNI kAla kahalAtA hai| isa kAla meM pudgaloM ke varNa, gaMdha,
rasa aura sparza hIna hote cale jAte haiN| zubha bhAva ghaTate haiM, azubha
bhAva bar3hate haiN| yaha kAla dasa kor3A-kor3I sAgaropama kA hai| isake
viparIta jisa kAla meM jIvoM ke saMhanana Adi kramaza: adhikAdhika zubha hote
cale jAte haiM, Ayu aura avagAhanA bar3hatI jAtI hai, vaha utsarpiNI kAla hai|
pudgaloM ke varNa, gaMdha, rasa aura sparza bhI isa kAla meM kramazaH zubha hote
jAte haiN| yaha kAla bhI dasa kor3A-kor3I sAgaropama kA hai| . bhagavAn
ariSTanemi ne kRSNa vAsudeva se kahA- he kRSNa ! tuma Ane vAle utsarpiNIkAla meM
puNDra deza ke zatadvAra nagara meM amama nAma ke bArahaveM tIrthaMkara hooge|
prajJApanAsUtra ke prathama pada meM bhAratavarSa meM sADhe 25 dezoM ko Arya
mAnA gayA hai| Arya deza meM hI arihanta, cakravartI, baladeva aura vAsudeva kI
utpatti batAI gaI hai| yahA~ prazna upasthita hotA hai ki jina sADhe 25 dezoM ke
nAma zAstroM meM batalAe gae haiM unameM puNDra deza kA nAma dekhane ko nahIM
milatA, aisI dazA meM usako Aryadeza kaise kaha sakate haiM? bhagavAn ariSTanemi
ke kathanAnusAra vahA~ kRSNa vAsudeva bArahaveM tIrthaMkara baneMge, to puNDra
deza ko anArya bhI nahIM kaha skte| yadi tIrthaMkara kI utpatti hone se use Arya
deza mAneM to phira sAr3he 25 kI gaNanA asaMgata ho jAtI hai| yaha pUrvApara kA
virodha saMgati cAhatA hai| uttara meM nivedana hai ki jahAM para tIrthaMkara
Adi mahApuruSoM kA janma hotA hai, ve deza Arya haiM, yaha siddhAnta yuktiyukta
aura zAstrasammata hai| rahI bAta sADhe 25 dezoM kI gaNanA kI, vaha bhagavAn
mahAvIra svAmI ke samaya kI apekSA se kI gaI pratIta hotI hai| ata: puNDra deza
ko Arya deza mAnane meM kisI prakAra kA virodha dikhAI nahIM detaa| "arahA"
zabda bhagavAn ariSTanemi kI sAmAnya artha se sarvajJatA kA sUcaka hai tathA
vizeSa artha se tIrthaMkaratva kA dyotaka hai| "raha" arthAt rahasya, guptatA
Adi raha jinameM nahIM haiM ve 'arahA' arthAt jagat kA koI bhI rahasya jinase
gupta nahIM hai ve 'arahA' haiN| arha kA artha hai-yogya honA aura pUjita honaa|
ghAtikarmoM kA anta karane se unheM arihanta bhI kahate haiN| 'apphoDei,
apphoDaittA vaggai, vaggaittA tivaliM chiMdai, chiMdittA sIhanAyaM karei' arthAt
isa pATha se sUtrakAra ne cAra bAteM dhvanita kI haiN| mahArAja kRSNa bhaviSya
meM bArahaveM tIrthaMkara banane kI zubha vArtA sunakara Anandavibhora ho uThate
haiN| apanI anekavidha ceSTAoM dvArA apane Antarika harpa ko abhivyakta karate
haiN| unakI ye ceSTAe~ cAra bhAgoM meM vibhAjita kI gaI haiM (1) bhaviSya meM
tIrthaMkara

Page #141 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[100] Hearing that he would attain the great spiritual state of Antakrid Dasha,
Shri Krishna was delighted and flapped his arms. A thrill began to run through
his limbs. (2) Shri Krishna uttered words expressing joy in a loud voice. (3) He
performed three turns on the ground like a wrestler, or jumped three times in
the Samavasaran of the Lord. (4) He roared like a lion.  6-Then that Padmavati
Devi, having heard the Dharma preached by the Arihant Arishthanemi, was filled
with joy and satisfaction, her heart was filled with joy, and she bowed and
prostrated to the Arihant Arishthanemi, and having bowed and prostrated, she
spoke thus: "I have faith, Bhante! in the Nirgrantha preaching, as you say, so
it is. O Navara-Devanupiya! I ask you, what did Kanha Vasudeva say? Then I,
Devanupiya, will go to the Arihant and get my head shaved and take the vows."
"As you please, Devanupiya! Do not delay." Then that Padmavati Devi, mounting a
chariot fit for a Dharma-knowing person, went to her palace in the city of
Dwaraka, and having arrived there, she descended from the chariot, and having
descended, she went to where Kanha Vasudeva was, and having arrived there, she
joined her hands, bowed her head, and with folded hands on her forehead, she
spoke thus to Kanha Vasudeva: "Devanupiya! If you permit, I wish to go to the
Arihant Arishthanemi and get my head shaved and take the vows." 1. Third Class,
Sutra 7. 2-3. Fifth Class, Sutra 2.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 100] [antakRddazA jaise mahAn AdhyAtmika pada ko prApta karUMgA, yaha sunakara
zrIkRSNa pramudita hokara apanI bhujAeM phar3akAte haiN| unake aMgoM meM
sphuraNA Arambha ho jAtI hai| (2) zrIkRSNa ucca svara se prasannatA prakaTa
karane vAle zabdoM kA uccAraNa karate haiM  /  (3) pahalavAnoM kI taraha bhUmi
para tIna bAra paiMtare badalate haiM yA bhagavAn ke samavasaraNa meM tIna bAra
uchalate haiN| (4) zera kI taraha garjanA karate haiN| 6-tae NaM sA paumAvaI
devI arahao ariTThanemissa aMtie dhamma soccA nisamma haTTatuTTha jAva' hiyayA
arahaM ariTThaNemiM vaMdai namasai, vaMdittA namaMsittA evaM vayAsI "saddahAmi
NaM bhaMte! niggaMthaM pAvayaNaM, se jaheyaM tubbhe vyh| jaM navaraM-
devANuppiyA! kaNhaM vAsudevaM aapucchaami| tae NaM ahaM devANuppiyANaM aMtie
muMDA jAva pvvyaami|" 'ahAsuhaM devANuppiyA! mA paDibaMdhaM krehi|' tae NaM sA
paumAvaI devI dhammiyaM jANappavaraM duruhai, duruhittA jeNeva bAravaI nayarI
jeNeva sae gihe teNeva uvAgacchai, uvAgacchittA dhammiyAo jANappavarAo
paccoruhai, paccoruhittA jeNeva kaNhe vAsudeve teNeva uvAgacchai, uvAgacchittA
karayala jAva[ pariggahiyaM dasaNahaM sirasAvattaM matthae-aMjaliM] kaTu kaNhaM
vAsudevaM evaM vayAsI icchAmi NaM devANuppiyA! tubbhehiM abbhaNuNNAyA samANA
arahao ariTThanemissa aMtie muMDA jAvare pvvitte| ahAsuhaM devANuppiyA! mA
paDibaMdhaM krehi| tae NaM se kaNhe vAsudeve koDuMbiyapurise saddAvei,
saddAvittA evaM vayAsI- khippAmeva bho devANuppiyA! paumAvaIe mahatthaM
nikkhamaNAbhiseyaM uvaTThaveha, uvaTThabittA eyamANattiyaM pccppinnh| tae NaM te
jAva pccppinnNti| isake bAda vaha padmAvatI mahArAnI bhagavAn ariSTanemi se
dharmopadeza sunakara evaM use hRdaya meM dhAraNa karake prasanna aura santuSTa
huI, usakA hRdaya praphullita ho uThA yAvat vaha arihaMta neminAtha ko
vaMdanAnamaskAra karake isa prakAra bolI _ bhaMte ! nirgranthapravacana para
maiM zraddhA karatI huuN| jaisA Apa kahate haiM vaha vaisA hI hai| ApakA
dharmopadeza yathArtha hai  /  he bhagavan ! maiM kRSNa vAsudeva kI AjJA lekara
phira devAnupriya ke pAsa muNDita hokara dIkSA grahaNa karanA cAhatI huuN|'
prabhu ne kahA-'jaise tumheM sukha ho vaisA kro| he devAnupriye! dharma-kArya
meM vilamba mata kro|' neminAtha prabhu ke aisA kahane ke bAda padmAvatI devI
dhArmika zreSTha ratha para ArUDha hokara dvArakA nagarI meM apane prAsAda meM
Akara dhArmika ratha se nIce utarI aura jahAM para kRSNa vAsudeva the vahAM
Akara apane donoM hAtha jor3akara sira jhukAkara, mastaka para aMjali para kRSNa
vAsudeva se isa prakAra bolI 'devAnupriya! ApakI AjJA ho to maiM arihaMta
neminAtha ke pAsa muNDita hokara dIkSA grahaNa karanA cAhatI huuN|' 1. tRtIya
varga, sUtra 7. 2-3. paMcama varga, sUtra 2.

Page #142 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Fifth Chapter] [101 Krishna said - 'Devanupriye! Do as you please.' Then
Krishna Vasudeva called his obedient men and ordered them thus - 'Devanupriye!
Soon make grand preparations for the initiation ceremony of Queen Padmavati and
inform me when the preparations are complete.' Then the obedient men did the
same and informed him of the completion of the preparations for the initiation
ceremony. 7 - Then Vasudeva said to Padmavati Devi, 'Let the palanquin be
brought.' Then he had her seated on the palanquin and had her sprinkled with
water from one hundred and eight golden kalasas, [one hundred and eight silver
kalasas, one hundred and eight golden and silver kalasas, one hundred and eight
gem-studded kalasas, one hundred and eight golden gem-studded kalasas, one
hundred and eight silver gem-studded kalasas, one hundred and eight golden and
silver gem-studded kalasas, and one hundred and eight earthen kalasas - thus,
from eight hundred and sixty-four kalasas filled with all kinds of water and
adorned with all kinds of earth, all kinds of flowers, all kinds of fragrances,
all kinds of garlands, all kinds of medicines, and mustard seeds, with all
prosperity, radiance, and all armies, with the sound of the resounding drums,
with the highest]  Nishkramanaabhisheka. After the abhisheka, he adorned her
with all kinds of ornaments and had her seated in a palanquin carried by a
thousand men. He then had her taken out through the middle of Dwaraka city and
towards the direction of the Raivatak mountain and the Sahasramravan garden.
Upon reaching there, Padmavati Devi descended from the palanquin. Then Krishna
Vasudeva went to where Arishta-nemi Bhagavan was, circumambulated him three
times from the right side, and offered him salutations and prostrations. After
offering salutations and prostrations, he spoke thus -  'O Bhagavan! My chief
queen, Padmavati Devi, is my beloved, dear, and charming one, [who is the life-
breath of my heart, the source of joy, and a rare flower like the Umber flower]
Why then, O Bhagavan, should she be subjected to the test of fire? Therefore, O
Devanupriye! I give her to you as a disciple. Please accept her as a disciple, O
Devanupriye!' 'O Devanupriye! Do not be concerned.'

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paMcama varga] [101 kRSNa ne kahA - 'devAnupriye ! jaise tumheM sukha ho vaisA
karo  /  ' taba kRSNa vAsudeva ne apane AjJAkArI puruSoM ko bulAkara isa prakAra
Adeza diyAdevAnupriyo ! zIghra hI mahArAnI padmAvatI ke dIkSA mahotsava kI
vizAla taiyArI karo aura taiyArI ho jAne kI mujhe sUcanA do| taba AjJAkArI
puruSoM ne vaisA hI kiyA aura dIkSA mahotsava kI taiyArI kI sUcanA dii| 7 - tae
NaM se kahe vAsudeve paumAvaI deviM paTTayaM duruhei, aTThasaeNaM
sovaNNakalasANaM jAva [ evaM ruppakalasANaM, suvaNNaruppakalasANaM,
maNikalasANaM, suvannamaNikalasANaM, ruppamaNikalasANaM,
suvannaruppamaNikalasANaM, bhomejjakalasANaM savvodaehiM savvamaTTiyAhiM
savvapupphehiM savvagaMdhehiM savvamallehiM savvosahihi ya, siddhatthaehi ya,
savviDDIe savvajuIe savvabaleNaM jAva [ savvasamudaeNaM savvAdareNaM
savvavibhUIe savvavibhUsAe savvasaMbhrameNaM savvapupphagaMdhamallAlaMkAreNaM
savvatuDiya-saha-saNNiNAeNaM mahayA iDDhIe mahayA juIe mahayA baleNaM mahayA
samudaNaM mahayA varatuDiya - jamagasamagappavAieNaM saMkha- paNava- paDaha -
bheri-jhallarikharamuhi- huDukka - muraya-muiMga-duMdubhighosaraveNaM mahayA
mahayA ] mahANikkhamaNAbhiseeNaM abhisiMcAi, abhisiMcittA savvAlaMkAravibhUsiyaM
karer3a, karettA purisasahassavAhiNiM siviyaM duruhAvei, duruhAvettA bAravaIe
nayarIe majjhamajjheNaM niggacchai, niggacchittA jeNeva revayae pavvae, jeNeva
sahasaMbavaNe ujjANe teNeva uvAgacchai, uvAgacchittA sIyaM Thavei "paumAvaI
deviM" sIyAo paccoruhai, paccoruhittA jeNeva arahA ariTThaNemI teNeva
uvAgacchai, uvAgacchittA arahaM ariTThaNemiM tikkhutto AyAhiNa -payAhiNaM karei,
karettA vaMdai namasai, vaMdittA namaMsittA evaM vayAsI - esa NaM bhaMte! mama
aggamahisI paumAvaI nAmaM devI iTThA kaMtA piyA maNuNNA maNAbhirAmA jAva
[jIviyaUsAsA hiyayANaMdajaNiyA, uMbarapuSpaM piva dullahA savaNayAe] kimaMga
puNa pAsaNayAe ? taNNaM ahaM devANuppiyA! sissiNibhikkhaM dalayAmi  /
paDicchaMtu NaM devANuppiyA! sissiNibhikkhaM  /  'ahAsuhaM devANuppiyA! mA
paDibaMdhaM kareha  / ' isake bAda kRSNa vAsudeva ne padmAvatI devI ko paTTa
para biThAyA aura eka sau ATha suvarNa kalazoM se, [ eka sau ATha rajata-kalazoM
se, eka sau ATha suvarNa rajatamaya kalazoM se, eka sau ATha maNimaya kalazoM,
eka sau ATha svarNa-maNi ke kalazoM, eka sau ATha rajata-maNi ke kalazoM, eka
sau ATha svarNarajata-maNi ke kalazoM aura eka sau ATha miTTI ke kalazoM se -
isa prakAra ATha sau causaTha kalazoM meM saba prakAra kA jala bhara kara tathA
saba prakAra kI mRttikA se, saba prakAra ke puSpoM se, saba prakAra ke gaMdhoM
se, saba prakAra kI mAlAoM se, saba prakAra kI auSadhiyoM se tathA sarasoM se
unheM paripUrNa karake, sarvasamRddhi, dyuti tathA sarva sainya ke sAtha,
duMdubhi ke nirghoSa kI pratidhvani ke zabdoM ke sAtha uccakoTi ke ]
niSkramaNAbhiSeka se abhiSikta kiyaa| abhiSeka karake phira sabhI prakAra ke
alaMkAroM se vibhUSita karake hajAra puruSoM dvArA uThAyI jAne vAlI zivikA (
pAlakhI) meM biThAkara dvArakA nagarI ke madhya se hote hue nikale aura jahAM
raivataka parvata aura sahasrAmravana udyAna thA usa ora cle| vahAM pahu~ca kara
padmAvatI devI zivikA se utrii| tadanantara kRSNa vAsudeva jahAM ariSTanemi
bhagavAn the vahAM Aye, Akara bhagavAn ko dakSiNa tarapha se tIna bAra
pradakSiNA karake vandanA - namaskAra kiyA, vandanA - namaskAra kara isa prakAra
bole

Page #143 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[102] "O Bhagavan! This Padmavati Devi is my queen. She is my beloved, my dear,
my favorite, my beautiful, and she follows my heart. O Bhagavan! She is like
breath in my life, she brings joy to my heart. Such a woman-jewel is rare even
to hear about, let alone see. O Devānupriya! I give you this beloved wife of
mine as a disciple. Please accept her."  Hearing Krishna Vasudeva's prayer, the
Lord said, "Devānupriya! Do as you please."  [8] Then Padmavati went to the
north-east corner, removed her ornaments and decorations, and tied her hair in a
five-knotted bun. Then she went to the Arhat Arihanemi, bowed and prostrated
herself, and said, "O Devānupriya! This world is burning in the fire of birth,
old age, death, and other sorrows. Please give me initiation."  Then the Arhat
Arihanemi himself initiated Padmavati Devi and gave her to the Yakshini Arya as
a disciple. Then the Yakshini Arya taught Padmavati Dharma, saying, "This is how
one should practice restraint." Then Padmavati became Arya's disciple. She
practiced [Iryāsamiti, [Bhāṣāsamiti, Eṣaṇāsamiti, Āyāṇabhaṇḍa-matta-
nikkhevaṇāsamiti, Uccāra-pāsavaṇa-khela-siṁghāṇa-jalla-pāriṭṭhāvaṇiya-samiti,
Maṇasamiti, Vaiṣamiti, Kāyasamiti, Maṇagutta Vaigutta Kāyagutta Gutta
Guttindiya] Gutta-bhambhāyarini.  Then Padmavati, the disciple of the Yakshini
Arya, practiced the eleven angas, and for many months, she practiced the fourth,
sixth, eighth, tenth, and twelfth vows, and she lived with a sense of self-
awareness.  Then Padmavati, the disciple, attained Samanna-pariyāga after twenty
years. After attaining it, she practiced the monthly fast, and after that, she
practiced the sixty-day fast. After that, she practiced the practice of
nakedness [mundabhava, kesaloa, bhambacheravase, aṇhāṇagaṁ, acchattayam,
aṇuvahaṇayam, bhūmisejjāo, phalagasejjāo, pargharapphavese, laddhavaladdhāiṁ,
māṇavāmāṇāiṁ, paresim hīlaṇāo, nindaṇāo, khiṁsaṇāo, tālaṇāo, garahaṇāo, uccavaya
virūvarūva bāvisam parisahovasaggā-gāmakantgā ahiyāsijjati tamaḍaṁ ārahei,
carimusāsāhiṁ siddha.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 102] [antakRddazA "bhagavan ! yaha padmAvatI devI merI paTarAnI hai| yaha mere
liye iSTa hai, kAnta hai, priya hai, manojJa hai aura mana ke anukUla calane
vAlI hai, abhirAma hai| bhagavan ! yaha mere jIvana meM zvAsocchvAsa ke samAna
hai, mere hRdaya ko Ananda dene vAlI hai| isa prakAra kA strI-ratna udumbara
(gUlara) ke puSpa ke samAna sunane ke liye bhI durlabha hai; taba dekhane kI to
bAta hI kyA hai? he devAnupriya! maiM aisI apanI priya patnI kI bhikSA ziSyA
rUpa meM Apako detA huuN| Apa use svIkAra kreN|" kRSNa vAsudeva kI prArthanA
sunakara prabhu bole-'devAnupriya! tumheM jisa prakAra sukha ho vaisA kro|'
8-tae NaM sA paumAvaI uttarapurasthimaM disIbhAgaM avakkamai, avakkamittA,
sayameva AbharaNAlaMkAraM omuyai, omuyittA sayameva paMcamuTThiyaM loyaM karei,
karettA jeNeva arahA ariTThaNemI teNeva uvAgacchai, uvAgacchittA arahaM
ari?NemiM vaMdai namasai, vaMdittA namaMsittA evaM vayAsI-Alitte jAva' taM
icchAmi NaM devANuppiehiM dhmmmaaikkhiyN| tae NaM arahA ariDaNemI paumAvaiM
deviM sayameva pavvAvei pavAvettA sayameva jakkhiNIe ajjAe sissiNittAe dlyi| tae
NaM sA jakkhaNI ajjA paumAvaI deviM sayameva jAva saMjamiyavvaM  /  tae NaM sA
paumAvaI ajjA jaayaa| iriyAsamiyA jAva [bhAsAsamiyA esaNAsamiyA AyANabhaMDa-
matta-NikkhevaNAsamiyA uccAra-pAsavaNa-khela-siMghANa-jalla-pAriTThAvaNiyA-
samiyA maNasamiyA vaisamiyA kAyasamiyA maNaguttA vaiguttA kAyaguttA guttA
guttiMdiyA ] guttbNbhyaarinnii| tae NaM sA paumAvaI ajjA jakkhiNIe ajAe aMtie
sAmAiyamAiyAiM ekArasa aMgAI ahijjai, bahUhiM cauttha-chaTThaTThama-dasama-
duvAlasehiM mAsaddhamAsakhamaNehiM vivihehiM tavokammehiM appANaM bhAvemANI
vihri| tae NaM sA paumAvaI ajjA bahupaDipuNNAI vIsaM vAsAiM sAmaNNapariyAgaM
pAuNai, pAuNittA mAsiyAe saMlehaNAe appANaM jhUsei, jhUsettA saTThi bhattAiM
aNasaNAe chedei, chedittA jassaTTAe kIrai naggabhAve jAva [ muMDabhAve, kesaloe,
baMbhaceravAse, aNhANagaM, acchattayaM aNuvAhaNayaM bhUmisejjAo, phalagasejjAo,
paragharappavese, laddhAvaladdhAiM, mANAvamANAiM, paresiM hIlaNAo, niMdaNAo,
khiMsaNAo, tAlaNAo, garahaNAo, uccAvayA virUvarUvA bAvIsaM parIsahovasaggA-
gAmakaMTagA ahiyAsijjati tamaDhaM ArAhei, carimussAsehiM siddhaa| _ taba usa
padmAvatI devI ne IzAna-koNa meM jAkara svayaM apane hAthoM se apane zarIra para
dhAraNa kie hue sabhI AbhUSaNa evaM alaMkAra utAre aura svayaM hI apane kezoM kA
paMcamuSTika loca kiyaa| phira bhagavAn neminAtha ke pAsa Akara vandanA kii|
vandana-namaskAra karake isa prakAra kahA-"bhagavan ! yaha saMsAra janma, jarA,
maraNa Adi duHkha rUpI Aga meM jala rahA hai, yAvat mujhe dIkSA deN|" isake bAda
bhagavAn neminAtha ne padmAvatI devI ko svayameva pravrajyA dI aura svayaM hI
yakSiNI AryA ko ziSyA ke rUpa meM pradAna kii| taba yakSiNI AryA ne padmAvatI ko
dharmazikSA dI, yAvat isa prakAra saMyamapUrvaka pravRtti karanI caahie| taba
vaha padmAvatI AryA IryAsamiti, [bhASAsamiti, eSaNAsamiti, 1-2. varga 5, sUtra
8.

Page #144 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Fifth Class] The Adan-Bhand-Matra-Nikshepana Committee, the Uccar-Prasravan-
Khel-Jall-Singhan-Paristhapanika Committee, the Man:Samiti, the VachanSamiti,
the KaySamiti, these eight committees and the Manogupti, VachanGupti and
KayGupti, the Gupteindriya, which keeps the senses hidden, like a tortoise,
which controls the senses, the Brahmachariņi Arya became. [103 Thereafter, that
Padmavati Arya studied from Samayik to the eleven Angas from the Yakshini Arya,
she began to wander, affecting the soul with many fasts - - Bele-Tele-Chole-
Pachole-Mas and Ardhamass - Khaman, etc., various austerities. In this way,
Padmavati Arya observed the Dharma of character for twenty years and finally,
affecting the soul with a month's Sanlekhana, completing sixty days of fasting,
the meaning - purpose for which nakedness, [Mundabhav, Keshaloch,
Brahmacharyavas, Asnanak, Achhatrak, Anupahanak, Bhumishayya, Falakshayya,
Parigruhpravesh, Labhalab, Manapaman, Hilna, Avahelana, Ninda, Khinsna, Tadana,
Garha, various types of high and low 22 Parishah and Upsarga are endured,
worshiping that meaning, she became Siddha-Buddha-Mukta with her last breath.
2-8 Study Gauri etc. 9 - Tenam Kalena Tenam Samayena Baravai Nayari. Revaye
Pavvae. Ujjane Nandana Vane. Tattha Nam Baravaiye Nayariye Kanhe Vasudeve. Tassa
Nam Kanhasse Vasudevasse Gori Devi, Vannao. Araha Samosadhe. Kanhe Niggae. Gori
Jaha Paumavai Taaha Niggayaa. Dhammakhaa. Parisaa Padigayaa. Kanhe Vi. Tae Nam
Saa Gori Jaha Paumavai Taaha Nikkhantaa Jaav' Siddhaa. Evam Gandhari, Lakkhana,
Susima, Jambavai, Sachchabhama, Ruppini, Atthavi Paumavaisarisaaao, Attha
Ajzhayanaa. In that time and at that time, there was the city of Dwaraka. Near
it was a mountain called Raivatak. On that mountain was a garden called Nandana
Van. In the city of Dwaraka, Shri Krishna Vasudeva ruled. Those Krishna Vasudeva
had a queen named Gauri, according to the Aupapatik Sutra, one should know the
description of the queen. One time, Lord Arishtanemi arrived in that Nandana Van
garden. Krishna Vasudeva went to see the Lord. The public also went. The public
returned. Krishna Vasudeva also returned to his royal palace. Thereafter, Gauri
Devi was initiated like Padmavati Rani, until she became Siddha. Similarly, (3)
Gandhari, (4) Lakshmana, (5) Susima, (6) Jambavati, (7) Satyabhama and (8)
Rukmini's six studies should also be understood as being the same as Padmavati.
1. Class 5, Sutra 5, 6.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paMcama varga ] AdAna- bhANDa - mAtra - nikSepaNA samiti, uccAra-prasravaNa -
khela - jalla-siMghANa-pariSThApanikAsamiti, mana:samiti, vacanasamiti,
kAyasamiti ina ATha samitiyoM aura manogupti, vacanagupti aura kAya gupti se
sampanna, indriyoM kA gopana karane vAlI guptendriyA - kachue kI bhAnti indriyoM
ko vaza meM karane vAlI ] brahmacAriNI AryA ho gii| [103 tadanantara usa
padmAvatI AryA ne yakSiNI AryA se sAmAyika se lekara gyAraha aMgoM kA adhyayana
kiyA, bahuta se upavAsa - - bele-tele-cole- pacole- mAsa aura ardhamAsa -
khamaNa Adi vividha tapasyA se AtmA ko bhAvita karatI huI vicarane lagI  /  isa
taraha padmAvatI AryA ne pUre bIsa varSa taka cAritradharma kA pAlana kiyA aura
anta meM eka mAsa kI saMlekhanA se AtmA ko bhAvita kara, sATha bhakta anazana
pUrNa kara, jisa artha - prayojana ke liye nagnabhAva, [muNDabhAva, kezaloca,
brahmacaryavAsa, asnAnaka, achatraka, anupAhanaka, bhUmizayyA, phalakazayyA,
paragRhapraveza, lAbhAlAbha, mAnApamAna, hIlanA, avahelanA, nindA, khiMsanA,
tAr3anA, garhA, vividha prakAra ke UMce-nIce 22 parISaha tathA upasarga sahana
kiye jAte haiM, usa artha kA ArAdhana kara antima zvAsa se siddha-buddha-mukta
ho gaI  /  2-8 adhyayana gaurI Adi 9 - teNaM kAleNaM teNaM samaeNaM bAravaI
nayarI  /  revayae pavvae  /  ujjANe naMdaNavaNe  /  tattha NaM bAravaIe nayarIe
kaNhe vAsudeve  /  tassa NaM kaNhassa vAsudevassa gorI devI, vnnnno| arahA
samosaDhe  /  kaNhe Niggae  /  gorI jahA paumAvaI tahA niggayA  /  dhmmkhaa|
parisA paDigayA  /  kaNhe vi  /  tae NaM sA gorI jahA paumAvaI tahA nikkhaMtA
jAva' siddhA  /  evaM gaMdhArI, lakkhaNA, susImA, jambavaI, saccabhAmA, ruppiNI,
aTThavi paumAvaIsarisayAo, aTTha ajjhayaNA  /  usa kAla aura usa samaya meM
dvArakA nagarI thii| usake samIpa raivataka nAma kA parvata thA  /  usa parvata
para nandanavana nAmaka udyAna thA  /  dvArakA nagarI meM zrIkRSNa vAsudeva
rAjya karate the  /  una kRSNa vAsudeva kI gaurI nAma kI mahArAnI thI,
aupapAtika sUtra ke anusAra rAnI kA varNana jAna lenA caahie| eka samaya usa
nandanavana udyAna meM bhagavAn ariSTanemi pdhaare| kRSNa vAsudevaM bhagavAn ke
darzana karane ke lie gye| janapariSad bhI gii| pariSad lauTa gii| kRSNa
vAsudeva bhI apane rAja-bhavana meM lauTa gaye  /  tatpazcAt gaurI devI
padmAvatI rAnI kI taraha dIkSita huI yAvat siddha ho gaI  /  isI taraha (3)
gAMdhArI, (4) lakSmaNA, (5) susImA, (6) jAmbavatI, (7) satyabhAmA aura (8)
rukmiNI ke bhI chaha adhyayana padmAvatI ke samAna hI samajhanA cAhie  /  1.
varga 5, sUtra 5, 6.

Page #145 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[104] [Antakrid Dasha 9-10 Study Mulasri-Muladatta 10-At that time, in that era,
in the city of Dwaraka, on the mountain called Raivatak, in the Nandana garden,
Krishna-Vasudeva ruled. There, in the city of Dwaraka, Krishna-Vasudeva's son,
born to Queen Jambavati Devi, was a prince named Shamb, who was perfect in all
his senses and had a beautiful body. Shamb Kumar had a wife named Mulasri, who
was very beautiful and delicate. One time, Arishtanemi arrived there. Krishna-
Vasudeva went to see him. Mulasri Devi also went to see the Lord, like
Padmavati. She spoke specifically, "O Devānupriya! I ask Krishna-Vasudeva (and
have been initiated by asking) until I have become perfected." Similarly, the
entire story of Muladatta should be known. (She was the second queen of Shamb
Kumar). 1. Class 5, Sutras 4-6

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 104] [antakRddazA 9-10 adhyayana mUlazrI-mUladattA 10-teNaM kAleNaM teNaM
samaeNaM bAravaIe nayarIe revayae pavvae, naMdaNavaNe ujjANe, kaNhe vaasudeve|
tattha NaM bAravaIe nayarIe kaNhassa vAsudevassa putte jaMbavaIe devIe attae
saMbe nAmaM kumAre hotthaa-ahiinnpddipunnnnpNciNdiysriire| tassa NaM saMbassa
kumArassa mUlasirI nAmaM bhajjA vi niggayA, jahA pumaavii| jaM navaraM-
devANuppiyA! kaNhaM vAsudevaM ApucchAmi jAva' siddhaa| evaM mUladattA vi| usa
kAla usa samaya meM dvArakA nagarI ke pAsa raivataka nAma kA parvata thA, vahAM
nandanavana udyAna thaa| vahAM kRSNa-vAsudeva rAjya karate the| kRSNa vAsudeva
ke putra aura rAnI jAmbavatI devI ke Atmaja zAmba nAma ke kumAra the, jo
sarvAMga sundara the| una zAmba kumAra kI mUlazrI nAma kI bhAryA thii| atyanta
sundara evaM komalAMgI thii| eka samaya ariSTanemi vahAM pdhaare| kRSNa vAsudeva
unake darzanArtha gye| mUlazrI devI bhI padmAvatI ke samAna prabhu ke
darzanArtha gii| vizeSa meM bolI- he devAnupriya! kRSNa vAsudeva se pUchatI hU~
(pUchakara dIkSita huI) yAvat siddha ho gii| mUlazrI ke samAna mUladattA kA bhI
sArA vRttAnta jAnanA caahiye| (yaha zAmba kumAra kI dUsarI rAnI thii)| 1. varga
5, sUtra 4-6

Page #146 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Sixth Section 1-2 Study Maokai and Kinkam 1- Jai, Bante! By the Ascetic, the
Blessed Lord Mahavira, the eighth Anga, Antagadadasana, the fifth section, this
has been explained. What, Bante!, has been explained in the sixth section? Thus,
Jambu! By the Ascetic, the Blessed Lord Mahavira, the eighth Anga,
Antagadadasana, the sixth section, sixteen Ajjhayana have been explained. That,
as the collection of verses, (1) Maokai (2) Kinkam also, (3) Moggarapani also
(4) Kasave. (5) Khemae (6) Dhiiharae, also (7) Kelase (8) Harichandane. ||1||
(9) Varatt (10) Sudansan (11) Punnabhadda also (12) Sumanabhadda (13) Supaite.
(14) Mehe (15) Aimutta (16) Alakke, Ajjhayana, sixteen in number. ||2|| If
sixteen Ajjhayana have been explained, what, Bante!, has been explained in the
first Ajjhayana, Antagadadasana? Thus, Jambu! At that time, at that moment, in
the city of Rayagih. In the Gunasilae Cheiyae. The king was there. There, the
Maokai named verse, dwelling, - from the beginning until the end, without being
despised. At that time, at that moment, the Ascetic, the Blessed Lord Mahavira,
in the Gunasilae, until [Cheiyae, without being despised, the highest, the
highest, having taken the highest, with restraint, with self-control, being
pleased with oneself] dwells. The assembly went out. Then, that Maokai verse, in
this story, having been obtained, as explained in the Panatti, in the
Gangadatta, in the same way, this, the son of Vijettha, in the family, having
placed, with a thousand men, with a chariot, went out, until, going to the
Anagarae, - from the beginning until the end, with the Gutabhambayari. Then,
that Maokai, in the Anagarae, to the Ascetic, the Blessed Lord Mahavira, to the
elders, in front of them, having come, eleven Anga, he touches. The rest, as in
the Khandaya, the Gunarayan, the Tavokamma, the sixteen Vasai, the Pariyao. In
the same way, in the Viule Siddhe. Kinkam also, in the same way, until, in the
Viule Siddhe. The noble Jambu Swami said to Sudharma Swami - Blessed Lord! The
Ascetic, the Blessed Lord Mahavira, explained the meaning of the fifth section
of the eighth Anga, Antagadadasana. Then, Lord! The Ascetic, the Blessed Lord
Mahavira, explained the sixth section 1. 2-3 Section 3, Sutra 1 Section 1, Sutra
18. 4. According to the above description of this Sutra.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 SaSTha varga 1-2 adhyayana makAI aura kiMkama 1-jai NaM bhaMte! samaNeNaM
bhagavayA mahAvIreNaM aTThamassa aMgassa aMtagaDadasANaM paMcamassa vaggassa
ayamaDhe paNNatte, chaTThassa NaM bhaMte! vaggassa ke aDhe paNNatte?  /  evaM
khalu jaMbU! samaNeNaM bhagavayA mahAvIreNaM aTThamassa aMgassa aMtagaDadasANaM
chaTThassa vaggassa solasa ajjhayaNA paNNattA, taM jahAsaMgahaNI gAhA (1) makAI
( 2 ) kiMkame ceva, (3) moggarapANI ya (4) kaasve| (5) khemae (6) dhiihare, ceva
(7) kelAse (8) hricNdnne||1|| (9) vAratta (10) sudaMsaNa (11) puNNabhadda taha
(12) sumaNabhadda (13) supitte| (14) mehe (15) aimutta (16) alakke, ajjhayaNANaM
tu solasayaM  //  2 //  jai solasa ajjhayaNA paNNattA, paDhamassa NaM bhaMte!
ajjhayaNassa aMtagaDadasANaM ke aTThe paNNa te? evaM khalu jaMbU! teNaM kAleNaM
teNaM samaeNaM rAyagihe nyre| guNasilae ceie| seNie raayaa| tattha NaM makAI
nAmaM gAhAvaI parivasai-aDDe jAva' apribhuue| teNaM kAleNaM teNaM samaeNaM
samaNe bhagavaM mahAvIre guNasilae jAva [ ceie ahApaDirUvaM uggahaM uggiNhai,
ahApaDirUvaM uggahaM uggiNhittA saMjameNaM tavasA appANaM bhAvemANe] vihri|
parisA niggyaa| tae NaM se makAI gAhAvaI imIse kahAe laddhaDhe jahA paNNattIe
gaMgadatte taheva imo vijeTThaputtaM kuDuMbe ThavettA purisasahassavAhiNIe sIyAe
nikkhaMte jAva' aNagAre jAe-iriyAsamie jAvare guttbNbhyaarii| tae NaM se makAI
aNagAre samaNassa bhagavao mahAvIrassa tahArUvANaM therANaM aMtie sAmAiyamAiyAiM
ekkArasa aMgAI ahijji| sesaM jahA khaMdayassa guNarayaNaM tavokammaM solasavAsAI
priyaao| taheva viule siddhe| kiMkame vi evaM ceva jAva' viule siddhe| Arya
jambUsvAmI ne sudharmAsvAmI se nivedana kiyA- bhagavan ! zramaNa bhagavAn
mahAvIra ne aSTama aMga aMtagaDadazA ke paMcama varga kA yaha artha pratipAdana
kiyA, to prabho! zramaNa bhagavAna mahAvIra ne chaThe varga 1. 2-3 varga 3,
sUtra 1 varga 1, sUtra 18. 4. isI sUtra ke uparokta varNanAnusAra  /

Page #147 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 106] [ Antakrid Dasha What are the Bhavas (feelings) said? In response,
Sudharma Swami said - "O Jambu! Shraman Bhagwan Mahavira has said sixteen
studies of the sixth category of the eighth Anga Antagaddasha, which are as
follows: Gatharth - (1) Makai, (2) Kinkam, (3) Mudgarpani, (4) Kashyap, (5)
Kshemak, (6) Dhriti Dhar, (7) Kailash (8) Harichandan, (9) Waratt, (10)
Sudarshan, (11) Punyabhadra, (12) Sumanbhadra, (13) Supratisthit, (14)
Meghkumar, (15) Atimuktakumar and (16) Alak (Alakshya) Kumar. Jambu Swami said
to Sudharma Swami - "Bhagwan! Shraman Bhagwan Mahavira has said sixteen studies
of the sixth category, then what is the meaning of the first study?" Sudharma
Swami replied - "O Jambu! In that time, there was a city called Rajgriha. There
was a Chaitya-Udyan named Gunashil. In that city, King Shrenik ruled. There
lived a Gathapati named Makai, who was very rich, even immeasurable. In that
time, Shraman Bhagwan Mahavira, the founder of Dharma, arrived in the Gunashil
Udyan [obtaining a suitable Avgraha for Sadhuvritti, inspiring the soul through
restraint and penance]. Hearing the arrival of Prabhu Mahavira, the council came
for darshan and to listen to Dharma Upadesh. Makai Gathapati also left his home,
as described in the Bhagavati Sutra for Gangadatta. Hearing the Dharma Upadesh,
he became detached. Coming home, he entrusted the burden of the house to his
eldest son and himself sat in a Shivika (palanquin) carried by a thousand men,
and came to the service of Bhagwan to accept Shraman Diksha, until he became an
Angar. He became a Brahmachari, equipped with Irya and other committees, and
hidden by secrets. After this, Makai Muni studied the eleven Angas, including
Samayik, from the virtuous and well-dressed Sthaviras of Shraman Bhagwan
Mahavira, and performed the penance of Gunaratnasamvatsar like Skandakji. He
remained in Dikshaparaya for sixteen years. Finally, he attained Siddhi on the
Vipulagiri mountain, performing Santhar and other things like Skandakji. Kinkam
also attained Siddhi Buddha Mukta on Vipulachal, taking Diksha like Makai. Sc

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 106] [ antakRddazA ke kyA bhAva kahe haiM? isake uttara meM sudharmAsvAmI bole
- 'he jambU ! zramaNa bhagavAn mahAvIra ne aSTama aMga aMtagaDadazA ke chaThe
varga ke solaha adhyayana kahe haiM, jo isa prakAra haiM gAthArtha - (1) makAI,
(2) kiMkama, (3) mudgarapANi, (4) kAzyapa, (5) kSemaka, (6) dhRtidhara, (7)
kailAza (8) haricandana, (9) vAratta, (10) sudarzana, (11) puNyabhadra, (12)
sumanabhadra, (13) supratiSThita, (14) meghakumAra, (15) atimuktakumAra aura
(16) alakka (alakSya) kumAra  /  jambUsvAmI ne sudharmAsvAmI se kahA - bhagavan
! zramaNa bhagavAn mahAvIra ne chaTThe varga ke 16 adhyayana kahe haiM to
prathama adhyayana kA kyA artha kahA hai? sudharmAsvAmI ne uttara diyA - he
jambU ! usa kAla usa samaya meM rAjagRha nAmaka nagara thaa| vahAM guNazIla
nAmaka caitya - udyAna thA  /  usa nagara meM zreNika rAjA rAjya karate the|
vahAM makAI nAmaka gAthApati rahatA thA, jo atyanta samRddha yAvat aparibhUta
thA  /  usa kAla usa samaya meM dharma kI Adi karane vAle zramaNa bhagavAn
mahAvIra guNazIla udyAna meM [sAdhuvRtti ke anukUla avagraha upalabdha kara,
saMyama aura tapa ke dvArA AtmA ko bhAvita karate hue ] pdhaare| prabhu mahAvIra
kA Agamana sunakara pariSad darzanArtha evaM dharmopadeza- zravaNArtha aaii|
makAI gAthApati bhI bhagavatIsUtra meM varNita gaMgadatta ke varNanAnusAra apane
ghara se nikalA  /  dharmopadeza sunakara vaha virakta ho gyaa| ghara Akara
jyeSTha putra ko ghara kA bhAra sauMpA aura svayaM hajAra puruSoM se uThAI jAne
vAlI zivikA (pAlakhI) meM baiThakara zramaNadIkSA aMgIkAra karane hetu bhagavAn
kI sevA meM AyA, yAvat vaha anagAra ho gyaa| IryA Adi samitiyoM se yukta evaM
guptiyoM se gupta brahmacArI bana gyaa| isake bAda makAI muni ne zramaNa
bhagavAn mahAvIra ke guNasaMpanna tathA veSasampanna sthaviroM ke pAsa sAmAyika
Adi gyAraha aMgoM kA adhyayana kiyA aura skaMdakajI ke samAna
guNaratnasaMvatsara tapaM kA ArAdhana kiyaa| solaha varSa taka dIkSAparyAya meM
rahe  /  anta meM vipulagiri parvata para skandakajI ke samAna hI saMthArAdi
karake siddha gye| kiMkama bhI makAI ke samAna hI dIkSA lekara vipulAcala para
siddha buddha mukta hue| Sc

Page #148 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Third Study Mudgarapani Arjun Malakar 2- In that time, in that era, in the
city of Rajagriha, there was a garden called Gunasila. King Srenic ruled there.
His queen was Chelna. In that city of Rajagriha, there lived a gardener named
Arjun, who was respected and honored. Arjun the gardener had a wife named
Bandhumati, who was very beautiful and delicate. Arjun the gardener had a large
flower garden outside the city of Rajagriha. This garden was [sometimes dark,
sometimes blue like the neck of a peacock, sometimes green, sometimes cool to
the touch, sometimes smooth, sometimes intensely shaded due to the abundance of
color and other qualities, sometimes deeply shaded due to the dense intertwining
of branches, beautiful and like] a gathering of great clouds. It was adorned
with flowers of all five categories. This garden was extremely beautiful,
pleasing and exhilarating to the heart. 1. Chapter 3, Sutra 1.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 tRtIya adhyayana mudgarapANi arjuna mAlAkAra 2-teNaM kAleNaM teNaM samaeNaM
rAyagihe nyre| guNasIlae ceie| seNie raayaa| celaNA devii| tattha NaM rAyagihe
nayare ajjuNae nAmaM mAlAgAre parivasai-aDDe jAva' apribhuue| tassa NaM
ajjuNayassa mAlAyArassa baMdhumaI nAmaM bhAriyA hotthaa-suumaalpaannipaayaa|
tassa NaM ajjuNayassa mAlAyArassa rAyagihassa nayarassa bahiyA, etthaM NaM mahaM
ege pupphArAme hotthA-kiNhe jAva [kiNhobhAse, nIle nIlobhAse, harie hariobhAse,
sIe sIobhAse, Niddhe NiddhobhAse, tivve tivvobhAse, kiNhe kiNhacchAe, nIle
nIlacchAe, harie hariyacchAe, sIe sIyacchAe, Niddhe NiddhacchAe, tivve
tivvacchAe, ghaNa-kaDiya-kaDicchAe ramme mahAmeha ] niuraMbabhUe
dasaddhavaNNakusumakusumie pAsAIe darisaNijje abhirUve pddiruuve| tassa NaM
puNphArAmassa adUrasAmaMte, ettha NaM ajjuNayassa mAlAyArassa ajjaya-
pajjayapiipajja-yAgae aNegakulapurisa-paraMparAgae moggarapANissa jakkhassa
jakkhAyayaNe hotthA-porANe divve sacce jahA punnnnbhdde| tattha NaM
moggarapANissa paDimA egaM mahaM palasahassaNipphaNNaM aomayaM moggaraM gahAya
citttthi| tae NaM se ajjuNae mAlAgAre bAlappabhiI ceva moggarapANi-jakkhabhatte
yAvi hotthaa| kallAkalliM pacchiyapiDagAiM geNhai, geNhittA rAyagihAo nayarAo
paDiNikkhamai, paDiNikkhamittA jeNeva pupphArAme teNeva uvAgacchai, uvAgacchittA
pupphuccayaM karei, karettA aggAiM varAiM pupphAiM gahAya, jeNeva moggarapANissa
jakkhassa jakkhAyayaNe teNeva uvAgacchai, uvAgacchittA moggarapANissa jakkhassa
maharihaM puSphaccaNaM karei, karettA jANupAyapaDie paNAmaM karei, tao pacchA
rAyamaggaMsi vittiM kappemANe vihri| usa kAla usa samaya meM rAjagRha nAma kA
nagara thaa| vahA~ guNazIlaka nAmaka udyAna thaa| usa nagara meM rAjA zreNika
rAjya karate the| unakI rAnI kA nAma celanA thaa| usa rAjagRha nagara meM
arjuna' nAma kA eka mAlI rahatA thaa| usakI patnI kA nAma 'bandhumatI' thA, jo
atyanta sundara evaM sukumAra thii| usa arjuna mAlI kA rAjagRha nagara ke bAhara
eka bar3A puSpArAma (phUloM kA bagIcA) thaa| vaha puSpodyAna kahIM kRSNa varNa
kA thA, [zyAma kAntivAlA thA, kahIM mora ke gale kI taraha nIla evaM nIla
kAntivAlA thA, kahIM harita evaM harita kAntivAlA thaa| sparza kI dRSTi se kahIM
zIta aura zIta kAntivAlA, kahIM snigdha evaM snigdha kAntivAlA, varNAdi guNoM kI
adhikatA ke kAraNa tIvra evaM tIvra chAyAvAlA, zAkhAoM ke Apasa meM saghana
milane se gaharI chAyAvAlA, ramya tathA mahAmeghoM ke] samudAya kI taraha
pratIta ho rahA thaa| usameM pAMcoM vargoM ke phUla khile hue the| vaha bagIcA
isa bhAMti hRdaya ko prasanna evaM praphullita karane vAlA atizaya darzanIya
thaa| 1. varga 3, sUtra 1.

Page #149 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  [108]  The Yaksha shrine of Mudgarpani was located near the Pushparama, a
flower garden, and was connected to the ancestral lineage of Arjun Mali, the
gardener. It was as old as the Purnabhadra Chaitya, divine and imbued with
truth. Inside the shrine was a statue of the Yaksha Mudgarpani, holding a mudgar
(a mace) made of iron, weighing a thousand palas (approximately 62 seers or 57
kilograms in modern weight).  Arjun Mali, from his childhood, was a devotee of
the Yaksha Mudgarpani. Every day, he would take a bamboo basket and go to his
flower garden outside the city of Rajgriha, collecting flowers. He would then
select the finest flowers and offer them to the Yaksha Mudgarpani. Thus, he
would worship the Yaksha with the best flowers, prostrating himself before the
deity. Afterward, he would sit in the market by the roadside and sell the
flowers, earning his livelihood.  **Discussion:** This sutra marks the beginning
of the third study of the sixth section. This study is called "Moggarapaani."
The protagonist of this study is Arjun Mali. Mudgarpani is a Yaksha who brings a
great storm into the life of his servant, Arjun Mali. However, the storm
subsides through the contact of a Shravak named Sudarshan, a resident of the
same city. The Yaksha mentioned in this chapter is named Mudgarpani because he
possessed a special weapon called Mudgar in his hand (pani). This is why he was
known by this name.  The sutrakar, describing Mudgarpani, says -
"Palasahassanipfannm" - meaning that it was made from a thousand palas. The word
"pala" means two karsha (one karsha is equal to 10 masha). "Kobhyam palam
proktam, karshah syaddashamashaka" (Shangaadhar Samhita). Thus, one pala is
equal to 20 masha. Other dictionaries state that "pala" is a very small weight,
equal to four tola (Prakatashabdamahaarnavapaiyasaddamahaannavoo). One tola (a
specific unit - Arddhamaagadhi Kosh) is equal to four tola. If one pala is
considered to be four tola, then the Yaksha held a huge mudgar weighing 1 mana
and 10 seers. Another interpretation is that one pala is equal to the weight of
five rupees today. One seer is equal to 16 palas. Thus, 1000 palas are equal to
62 and a half seers. This is called "Palasahasar-nispann."  The word
"Pachchipidagai" is composed of two words: "Pachchi" and "Pitak." "Pachchi" is a
word from the local language used for a small basket. The word "Pitak" also
signifies a box. The use of two synonymous words indicates various types of
boxes or baskets. The meaning is that Arjun Mali would go to the flower garden
with various types of baskets.  **The Immorality of the Gosthik Men**  3 -
"Taththa nam Raayagihe nayare Lallia naamm gotthi parivasai - adda jaav
aparibhuyaa jankayasukaya yaavi hottha."  "Tae nam Raayagihe nayare annayaya
kayaai pamode ghudhe yaavi hottha."  "Tae nam se ajjuane maalaagaare kallan
pabhuuyataraaehimm pupfhehimm kajjam iti katu pacchuusakaalasamayansi bandhumaee
bariaae..."

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 108] [antakRddazA usa puSpArAma arthAt phUlavADI ke samIpa hI mudgarapANi
nAmaka yakSa kA yakSAyatana thA, jo usa arjuna mAlI ke purakhAoM-bApa-dAdoM se
calI AI kulaparaMparA se sambandhita thaa| vaha pUrNabhadra' caitya ke samAna
purAnA, divya evaM satya prabhAva vAlA thaa| usameM 'mudgarapANi' nAmaka yakSa
kI eka pratimA thI, jisake hAtha meM eka hajAra pala-parimANa (vartamAna tola ke
anusAra lagabhaga 62  //  sera tadnusAra lagabhaga 57 kilo) bhAravAlA lohe kA
eka mudgara thaa| vaha arjuna mAlI bacapana se hI mudgarapANi yakSa kA upAsaka
thaa| pratidina bAMsa kI chabar3I lekara vaha rAjagRha nagara ke bAhara sthita
apanI usa phUlavADI meM jAtA thA aura phUloM ko cuna-cuna kara ekatrita karatA
thaa| phira una phUloM meM se uttama-uttama phUloM ko chAMTakara unheM usa
mudgarapANi yakSa ke samakSa car3hAtA thaa| isa prakAra vaha uttamottama phUloM
se usa yakSa kI pUjA-arcanA karatA aura bhUmi para donoM ghuTane Tekakara use
praNAma krtaa| isake bAda rAjamArga ke kinAre bAjAra meM baiThakara una phUloM
ko becakara apanI AjIvikA upArjana kiyA karatA thaa| vivecana- isa sUtra se
chaThe varga ke tRtIya adhyayana kA kathAnaka prAraMbha hotA hai| isa adhyayana
kA nAma hai "moggrpaannii|" vastutaH isa adhyayana kA pAtra hai arjuna maalii|
mudgarapANi eka yakSa hai jo apane sevaka arjuna mAlI ke jIvana meM eka bahuta
bar3A tUphAna lAtA hai  /  parantu usI nagara ke nivAsI sudarzana nAma ke eka
zrAvaka ke samparka meM tUphAna zAMta hotA hai| isa adhyAya meM varNita yakSa kA
nAma mudgarapANi isa kAraNa hai ki usake pANi arthAt hAtha meM mudgara nAma kA
eka astra vizeSa thaa| isI kAraNa vaha isa nAma se prasiddha thaa| _ mudgarapANi
kA varNana karate hue sUtrakAra kahate haiM - "palasahassaNipphaNNaM"- arthAt
jisakA nirmANa hajAra paloM se kiyA gayA hai| pala zabda kA artha isa prakAra
hai- do karSa pramANa (karSa 10. mAse kA hotA hai)| kobhyAM palaM proktaM,
karSaH syaaddshmaassk:| (zAGgadhara saMhitA)  /  isa prakAra 20 mAse kA eka pala
hotA hai| anya koSoM meM likhA hai-pala arthAta eka bahata choTI tola.cAra tolA
(praaktshbdmhaarnnvpaaiysddmhnnnnvo)| eka tola (mAna vizeSa-arddhamAgadhI koSa)
astu cAra tole kA yadi eka pala mAnA jAya to yakSa ke hAtha meM 1 mana 10 sera
kA vizAla mudgara thaa| anya prakAra se isakI vyAkhyA yoM haiAja kala ke pAMca
rupayoM ke bhAra barAbara eka pala hotA hai, 16 paloM kA eka sera hotA hai, isa
taraha 1000 pala ke sADhe bAsaTha (62 // ) sera hote haiN| ina se bane hue ko
'palasahasra-niSpanna' kahate haiN| _ 'pacchipiDagAI' isa pada meM pacchi' aura
'piTaka' ye do zabda haiM  /  pacchI dezIya bhASA kA zabda hai jo choTI TokarI
ke liye prayukta hotA hai| piTaka zabda bhI piTArI kA bodhaka hai| do
samAnArthaka padoM kA prayoga anekavidha piTAriyoM arthAt TokariyoM kA bodhaka
hai| bhAva yaha hai ki arjuna mAlI aneka prakAra kI TokariyA~ lekara puSpavATikA
meM jAyA karatA thaa| goSThika puruSoM kA anAcAra 3-tattha NaM rAyagihe nayare
laliyA nAmaM goTThI parivasai-aDDA jAva aparibhUyA jaMkayasukayA yAvi hotthaa|
tae NaM rAyagihe nayare aNNayA kayAi pamode ghuDhe yAvi hotthaa| tae NaM se
ajjuNae mAlAgAre kallaM pabhUyatarAehiM pupphehiM kajjaM iti kaTu
paccUsakAlasamayaMsi baMdhumaIe bhAriyAe

Page #150 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Sixth Chapter] [109] He (Arjunamali) takes his wife Bandhumati along with him,
and after taking her, he goes out of the city of Rajagriha through the middle
gate. After going out, he reaches the flower garden, and after reaching there,
he collects flowers with his wife Bandhumati. Then, six men of the Lalita group,
who are enjoying themselves in the temple of the Yaksha Mudgarapani, see him. In
the city of Rajagriha, there was a group (circle of friends) called 'Lalita'. It
(its members) was prosperous with wealth, wealth, etc., and it did not suffer
defeat from many. At one time, the king had given a grant of immunity to that
group of friends, being pleased with them for having accomplished some desired
work of the king, that it was free to do any work as it wished. It had full
protection from the state, due to which this group became very arrogant and
unrestrained. One day, an announcement was made to celebrate a festival in the
city of Rajagriha. On this, Arjunamali guessed that there would be a great
demand for flowers on the occasion of this festival tomorrow. Therefore, he got
up early that morning and, taking a bamboo basket, left home early with his wife
Bandhumati. After leaving, he went to his flower garden in the city and started
collecting flowers with his wife. At that time, the aforementioned six men of
the 'Lalita' group came to the temple of the Yaksha Mudgarapani and started
enjoying themselves. 4-Then, Arjunamali collects flowers with his wife
Bandhumati in the flower garden, (fills the basket), and after filling it, he
goes to the temple of the Yaksha Mudgarapani to offer flowers in the morning.
Then, those six men see Arjunamali going to the flower garden with his wife
Bandhumati, and after seeing him, they say to each other: "This is the beloved
of the gods! Arjunamali is coming here with his wife Bandhumati. So, this is the
beloved of the gods! We will bind Arjunamali with ropes and throw him aside, and
enjoy ourselves with his wife Bandhumati," they say harshly, and they hear each
other's words. After hearing, they hide behind the doors, and they stand still,
motionless, silent, and hidden. Then, Arjunamali reaches the temple of the
Yaksha Mudgarapani with his wife Bandhumati, and he bows down to the idol,
offers flowers, and bows down to the foot of the idol. Then, the six men come
out from behind the doors one by one, and after coming out, they seize
Arjunamali, and after seizing him, they bind him with ropes. They enjoy
themselves with Bandhumati, the wife of the flower-seller, and enjoy various
pleasures.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 SaSTha varga] [109 saddhiM pacchipiDayAiM geNhai, geNhittA sayAo gihAo
paDiNikkhamai, paDiNikkhamittA rAyagihaM nayaraM majjhamajheNaM niggacchai,
niggacchittA jeNeva pupphArAme teNeva uvAgacchai, uvAgacchittA baMdhumaIe
bhAriyAe saddhiM puNphaccayaM krei| tae NaM tIse laliyAe goTThIe cha goTThillA
purisA jeNeva moggarapANissa jakkhassa jakkhAyayaNe teNeva uvAgayA abhiramamANA
cittuNti| usa rAjagRha nagara meM 'lalitA' nAma kI eka goSThI (mitramaMDalI)
thii| vaha (usake sadasya) dhanadhAnyAdi se sampanna thI tathA vaha bahutoM se
bhI parAbhava ko prApta nahIM ho pAtI thii| kisI samaya rAjA kA koI abhISTa-
kArya saMpAdana karane ke kAraNa rAjA ne usa mitra-maMDalI para prasanna hokara
abhayadAna de diyA thA ki vaha apanI icchAnusAra koI bhI kArya karane meM
svataMtra hai| rAjya kI ora se use pUrA saMrakSaNa thA, isa kAraNa yaha goSThI
bahuta ucchRkhala aura svacchanda bana gii| eka dina rAjagRha nagara meM eka
utsava manAne kI ghoSaNA huii| isa para arjunamAlI ne anumAna kiyA ki kala isa
utsava ke avasara para bahuta adhika phUloM kI mAMga hogii| isaliye usa dina
vaha prAta:kAla jaldI hI uThA aura bAMsa kI chabar3I lekara apanI patnI
bandhumatI ke sAtha jaldI ghara se niklaa| nikalakara nagara meM hotA huA apanI
phulavAr3I meM pahuMcA aura apanI patnI ke sAtha phUloM ko cuna-cuna kara
ekatrita karane lgaa| usa samaya pUrvokta 'lalitA' goSThI ke chaha goSThika
puruSa mudgarapANi yakSa ke yakSAyatana meM Akara Amoda-pramoda karane lge|
4-tae NaM ajjuNae mAlAgAre baMdhumaIe bhAriyAe saddhiM pupphuccayaM karei,
(patthiyaM bharei), bharettA aggAiM varAiM pupphAiM gahAya jeNeva moggarapANissa
jakkhassa jakkhAyayaNe teNeva uvaagcchi| tae NaM te cha goTThillA purisA
ajjuNayaM mAlAgAraM baMdhumaIe bhAriyAe saddhiM ejjamANaM pAsaMti, pAsittA
aNNamaNNaM evaM vayAsI "esa NaM devANuppiyA! ajjuNae mAlAgAre baMdhumaIe
bhAriyAe saddhiM ihaM hvvmaagcchi| taM seyaM khalu devANuppiyA! amhaM ajjuNayaM
mAlAgAraM avaoDaya-baMdhaNayaM karettA baMdhumaIe bhAriyAe saddhiM viulAI
bhogabhogAiM bhuMjamANANaM viharittae,"tti kaTu, eyamajheM aNNamaNNassa
paDisuNeti, paDisuNettA kavADaMtaresu nilukkaMti, niccalA, niSphaMdA, tusiNIyA,
pacchaNNA cittuNti| tae NaM se ajjuNae mAlAgAre baMdhumaIe bhAriyAe saddhiM
jeNeva moggarapANissa jakkhassa jakkhAyayaNe teNeva uvAgacchai, Aloe paNAmaM
karei, maharihaM pupphaccaNaM karei, jaNNupAyapaDie paNAmaM krei| tae NaM cha
goDhillA purisA davadavassa kavADaMtarehiMto niggacchaMti niggacchittA ajjuNayaM
mAlAgAraM geNhaMti, geNhittA avaoDaya-baMdhaNaM kreNti| baMdhumaIe mAlAgArIe,
saddhiM viulAI bhogabhogAI bhuMjamANA vihrNti| udhara arjuna mAlI apanI patnI
bandhumatI ke sAtha phUla-saMgraha karake unameM se kucha uttama phala
chAMTakara unase nitya-niyama ke anusAra mudgarapANi yakSa kI pUjA karane ke
liye yakSAyatana kI ora claa| una chaha goSThika puruSoM ne arjunamAlI ko
bandhumatI bhAryA ke sAtha yakSAyatana kI ora Ate dekhaa| dekhakara paraspara
vicAra karake nizcaya kiyA-"arjuna mAlI apanI bandhumatI bhAryA ke sAtha idhara
hI A rahA hai| hama logoM ke liye yaha uttama avasara hai ki arjuna mAlI ko to
auMdhI muzkiyoM (donoM hAthoM ko pITha pIche) se balapUrvaka bAMdhakara eka ora
paTaka deM aura bandhumatI ke sAtha khUba kAma krIDA kreN|" yaha nizcaya karake
ve chahoM usa yakSAyatana ke kivAr3oM ke pIche chipa kara nizcala khar3e ho gaye
aura una donoM

Page #151 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
English translation preserving Jain terms:  [110] [The Destruction of Arjuna]
Entering the Yakshaayatana (abode of the Yaksha), they began to wait, holding
their breath. Meanwhile, Arjuna the garland-maker, along with his wife
Bandhuvati, entered the Yakshaayatana and paid obeisance to the Yaksha as soon
as he saw him. Then, after offering the choicest flowers, both of them knelt
down on the ground and paid their respects. At that very moment, those six
Goshthika men quickly came out from behind the doors and seized Arjuna the
garland-maker, bound his hands behind his back in Avakotaka bondage, and threw
him aside. Then, they began to engage in various amorous acts with Arjuna's wife
Bandhuvati the garland-maker.  Explanation - The text states that those
Goshthika men bound Arjuna in Avakotaka bondage, which means putting a rope
around his neck and taking his arms behind his back and binding them. In common
parlance, this is called 'binding his hands'.  Nichala... Pacchanna means -
Nichala: motionless, devoid of bodily activity; Nipphandha: devoid of trembling;
Tushiniya: silent; Pacchanna: concealed, hidden.  Arjuna's Revenge Then, this
thought arose in the mind of Arjuna the garland-maker: "Since my childhood, I
have been worshipping the Bhagavan Mudgara-paani (Mace-handed) as my chosen
deity, and after performing his worship, I have been sustaining my life by
selling these flowers. So if the Yaksha Mudgara-paani were truly present here,
would he not see me being subjected to such a calamity? Therefore, it is certain
that the Yaksha Mudgara-paani is not actually present here, but this is merely a
wooden idol."  Realizing Arjuna the garland-maker's such thoughts, the Yaksha
Mudgara-paani entered his body, broke his bonds one after the other, and then
took the iron mace in his hand. Possessed by the Yaksha Mudgara-paani, Arjuna
killed those six Goshthika men along with his wife Bandhuvati using the blows of
that mace.  Having thus killed those seven, the Arjuna the garland-maker,
possessed by the Yaksha Mudgara-paani, began to wander around the outskirts of
the city of Rajagriha, daily killing six men and one woman, a total of seven
human beings.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 110] [ antakRddazA ke yakSAyatana ke bhItara praviSTa hone kI zvAsa rokakara
pratIkSA karane lge| idhara arjuna mAlI apanI bandhumatI bhAryA ke sAtha
yakSAyatana meM praviSTa huA aura yakSa para dRSTi par3ate hI use praNAma kiyaa|
phira cune hue uttamottama phUla usa para car3hAkara donoM ghuTane bhUmi para
Tekakara praNAma kiyaa| usI samaya zIghratA se una chaha goSThika puruSoM ne
kivAr3oM ke pIche se nikala kara arjuna mAlI ko pakar3a liyA aura usakI auMdhI
muzkeM bAMdhakara use eka ora paTaka diyaa| phira usakI patnI bandhumatI mAlina
ke sAtha vividha prakAra se kAmakrIDA karane lage  /  vivecana - prastuta sUtra
meM batAyA hai ki una goSThika puruSoM ne arjuna mAlI ko avakoTaka bandhana
bAMdhA, jisakA artha hotA hai - gale meM rassI DAlakara use pIche mor3anA tathA
donoM bhujAoM ko pITha ke pIche le jAkara bA~dhanA  /  janasAdhAraNa kI bhASA
meM ise muzkeM bAMdhanA kahate haiM  /  niccalA..... pacchaNNA kA artha isa
prakAra hai -niccalA - nizcala - zarIra ke vyApAra se rahita  /  nipphaMdA-
niSpaMda-kampana se bhI rahita  /  tusiNIyA - tUSNIka - mauna  /  pacchaNNA-
pracchanna- chipe hue| arjuna kA pratizodha 5 - tae NaM tassa ajjuNayassa
mAlAgArassa ayamajjhatthie ciMtie patthie maNogae saMkappe samujjitthA evaM
khalu ahaM bAlappabhiI ceva moggarapANissa bhagavao kallAkalli jAva'
pupphaccaNaM karemi, jaNNupAyapaDie paNAmaM karemi tao pacchA rAyamaggaMsi
vittiM kappemANe viharAmi  /  taM jai moggarapANI jakkhe iha saNNihie hoMte, se
NaM kiM mama eyArUvaM AvaI pAvejjamANaM pAsaMte? taM natthi NaM moggarapANI
jakkhe iha saNNihie  /  suvvattaM NaM esa kaTThe  /  tae NaM se moggarapANI
jakkhe ajjuNayassa mAlAgArassa ayameyArUvaM ajjhatthiyaM jAva viyANettA
ajjuNayassa mAlAgArassa sarIrayaM aNuppavisai, aNuppavisittA taDataDassa baMdhAI
chiMdai, chiMdittA taM palasahassaNipphaNNaM aomayaM moggaraM geNhai, geNhittA
te itthisattame cha purise ghAei  /  tase ajjuNa mAlAgAre moggarapANiNA
jakkheNaM aNNAiTThe samANe rAyagihassa nayarassa pariperaMteNaM kallAkalli
itthisattame cha purise ghAemANe ghAemANe viharai  /  yaha dekhakara arjuna mAlI
ke mana meM yaha vicAra AyA- -maiM apane bacapana se hI bhagavAn mudgarapANa ko
apanA iSTadeva mAnakara isakI pratidina bhaktipUrvaka pUjA karatA A rahA huuN|
isakI pUjA karane ke bAda hI ina phUloM ko becakara apanA jIvana-nirvAha karatA
huuN| to yadi mudgarapANi yakSa deva yahAM vAstava meM hI hotA to kyA mujhe isa
prakAra vipatti meM par3A dekhatA rahatA ? ataH nizcaya hotA hai ki vAstava meM
yahA~ mudgarapANi yakSa nahIM hai  /  yaha to mAtra kASTha kA putalA hai| taba
mudgarapANi yakSa ne arjunamAlI ke isa prakAra ke manogata bhAvoM ko jAnakara
usake zarIra meM praveza kiyA aura usake bandhanoM ko tar3Atar3a tor3a DAlA  /
taba usa mudgarapANi yakSa se AviSTa arjuna mAlI ne lohamaya mudgara ko hAtha
meM lekara apanI bandhumatI bhAryA sahita una chahoM goSThika puruSoM ko usa
mudgara ke prahAra se mAra ddaalaa| isa prakAra ina sAtoM kA ghAta karake
mudgarapANi yakSa se AviSTa ( vazIbhUta) vaha arjuna mAlI rAjagRha nagara kI
bAharI sImA ke AsapAsa cAroM ora chaha puruSoM aura eka strI, isa prakAra sAta
manuSyoM kI pratidina hatyA karate hue ghUmane lagA  /  varga 6. sUtra 2. 1.

Page #152 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Sixth Chapter] [111 Terror in Rajagriha City] 6-Then in Rajagriha city, in the
[Tig-Chauk-Chaccar-Chaummuh] great squares, many people were looking at each
other, speaking to each other, discussing and arguing. "Oh, Devānupriyā! Today
in the Mālagāra, the Muggarapāṇi Yaksha, possessed by another, is roaming
outside Rajagriha city, killing a woman and six men, thus seven people." Then
the king, Śreṇika, hearing this, called his servants, the Koḍumbiyapurisas, and
said to them, "Oh, Devānupriyā! Today in the Mālagāra, the Muggarapāṇi Yaksha is
roaming outside Rajagriha city, killing a woman and six men, thus seven people.
Therefore, you all should not go out of the city for any reason, be it for wood,
grass, water, or fruits and flowers. Do not let their bodies be destroyed. Oh,
Devānupriyā! Announce this two or three times and inform me." Then those
Koḍumbiyapurisas went and announced the king's order throughout the city, and
after announcing it, they informed the king. The Śrāvaka, Sudarśana, the Śreṣṭhi
7-Then in Rajagriha city, there was a Śreṣṭhi named Sudarśana. Then that
Sudarśana, going to the Samana's residence, [Uvaladdhapuṇṇapāve, Āsava-Samvara-
Nijjara-Kiriyāhigarana-Bandha-Mokkhakusalē, Asahejjadēva-Sura-Nāga-Suvaṇṇa-
Jakkha-Rakkhasa-Kinnara-Kimpurisa-Garula-Gandhavva-Mahoragāiēhiṁ Dēvaganēhiṁ
Nigganthāo Pāvayanaō Anaikkamanijjē, Nigganthē Pāvayane Nissankie Nikkankhie
Nivvitigicchē, Laddhatē, Gahiyaddē, Pucchiyaddē, Ahigayaddē, Viṇicchiyaddē,
Aṭṭhimimjapēmāṇurāgarattē. Ayamauso! Nigganthē Pāvayane Aḍē, Ayan Paramaḍē, Sēsē
Aṇḍē, Usiyafalihe Avanguyaduvare, Chiyattanteurapargharadārappavēsē, Bahūhiṁ
Sīlavvay-Guṇa-Vēramanapacchakkhāṇa-Posahopavāsēhiṁ Chauddassatṭhamuddiṭṭha-
Puṇṇamāsinīsu Paḍipuṇṇam Posahṁ Sammṁ Aṇupālēmāṇē Samanē Nigganthē
Phāsuēsaṇijjēṇam Asana-Pāṇa-Khāim-Sāimēṇam Vaththa-Paḍiggaha-Kambala-
Pāyapuṁchhaṇēṇam Pīḍha-Phalaga-Sijjā-Santhārēṇam Osah-Bhēsajjēṇ Ya Paḍilābēmāṇē
Ahapariggahiēhiṁ Tavokammēhiṁ Appāṇam Bhāvēmāṇē] lived. 1-2. See the above
mentioned sūtra.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 SaSTha varga] [111 rAjagRha nagara meM AtaMka 6-tae NaM rAyagihe nayare
siMghADaga jAva [tiga-caukka-caccara-caummuha ] mahApahapahesu bahujaNo
aNNamaNNassa evamAikkhai evaM bhAsei evaM paNNavei evaM parUvei "evaM khalu
devANuppiyA! ajjuNae mAlAgAre moggarapANiNA aNNAiDhe samANe rAyagihe nayare
bahiyA itthisattameM cha purise ghAemANe-ghAemANe vihri|' tae NaM se seNie rAyA
imIse kahAe laddhaDhe samANe koDuMbiyapurise saddAvei, saddAvettA evaM vayAsI _
"evaM khalu devANuppiyA! ajjuNae mAlAgAre jAva' ghAemANe ghAemANe vihri| taM mA
NaM tubbhe kei kaTThassa vA taNassa vA pANiyassa vA puNphaphalANaM vA aTThAe
sairaM niggcchh| mA NaM tassa sarIrayassa vAvattI bhavissai tti kaTu doccaM pi
taccaM pi ghosaNayaM ghoseha, ghosettA khippAmeva mameyaM pccppinnh| tae NaM se
koDuMbiyapurisA jAva pccppinnNti|" usa samaya rAjagRha nagara ke zRMgATaka,
trika, catuSka, catvara, caturmukha, rAjamArga Adi sabhI sthAnoM meM bahuta se
loga paraspara isa prakAra bolane lage "devAnupriyo ! arjuna mAlI, mudgarapANi
yakSa ke vazIbhUta hokara rAjagRha nagara ke bAhara eka strI aura chaha puruSa,
isa prakAra sAta vyaktiyoM ko pratidina mAra rahA hai|" usa samaya jaba zreNika
rAjA ne yaha bAta sunI to unhoMne apane sevaka puruSoM ko bulAyA aura unako isa
prakAra kahA 'he devAnupriyo ! rAjagRha nagara ke bAhara arjuna mAlI yAvat chaha
puruSoM aura eka strI-isa prakAra sAta vyaktiyoM kA pratidina ghAta karatA huA
ghUma rahA hai| ataH tuma sAre nagara meM merI AjJA ko isa prakAra prasArita
karo ki koI bhI ghAsa ke liye, kASTha, pAnI athavA phala-phUla Adi ke liye
rAjagRha nagara ke bAhara na nikle| aisA na ho ki unake zarIra kA vinAza ho
jaay| he devAnupriyo! isa prakAra do tIna bAra ghoSaNA karake mujhe sUcita kro|'
yaha rAjAjJA pAkara rAjasevakoM ne rAjagRha nagara meM ghUma ghUma kara rAjAjJA
kI ghoSaNA kI aura ghoSaNA karake rAjA ko sUcita kara diyaa| zrAvaka sudarzana
zreSThI 7-tattha NaM rAyagihe nayare sudaMsaNe nAmaM seTThI parivai-aDDe0  /
tae NaM se sudaMsaNe samaNovAsae yAvi hotthA-abhigayajIvAjIve jAva
[uvaladdhapuNNapAve, Asava-saMvara-nijjara - kiriyAhigaraNabaMdha-mokkhakusale,
asahejjadevA-sura-nAga-suvaNNa-jakkha-rakkhasa-kinnarakiMpurisa-garula-
gaMdhavva-mahoragAiehiM devagaNehiM NiggaMthAo pAvayaNAo aNaikkamaNijje,
NiggaMthe pAvayaNe nissaMkie nikkaMkhie nivvitigicche, laddhaTe, gahiyaDhe,
pucchiyaDhe, ahigayaDhe, viNicchiyaDhe, atttthimiNjpemaannuraagrtte| ayamAuso!
niggaMthe pAvayaNe aDhe, ayaM paramaDhe, sese aNaDhe, usiyaphalihe
avaMguyaduvAre, ciyattaMteuraparagharadArappavese, bahUhiM sIlavvaya-guNa-
veramaNapaccakkhANa-posahopavAsehiM cAuddassaTThamuddiTTha-puNNamAsiNIsu
paDipuNNaM posahaM sammaM aNupAlemANe samaNe niggaMthe phAsuesaNijjeNaM asaNa-
pANa-khAima-sAimeNaM vattha-paDiggaha-kaMbala-pAyapuMchaNeNaM pIDha-phalaga-
sijjA-saMthAraeNaM osaha-bhesajjeNa ya paDilAbhemANe ahApariggahiehiM
tavokammehiM appANaM bhAvemANe ] vihri| 1-2. dekhie Upara prastuta sUtra  /

Page #153 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  [112] [ Antakrid Dasha In the city of Rajagriha, there lived a wealthy Seth
named Sudarshan. He was a Shramanopasak - Shravak and knew the nature of Jiva -
Ajiva [as well as the nature of punya and papa]. He was also knowledgeable about
Asrava, Samvara, Nirjara Kriya (the twenty-five types of actions that are the
cause of karma-bandha), Adhikarana (the means - weapons of karma-bandha), and
the nature of Bandha and Moksha. He did not rely on others for any task. He was
so steadfast in Nirgrantha-Pravachan that even Devas, Asuras, Suparnas, Yakshas,
Rakshasas, Kinnaras, Kimpurushas, Garudas, Gandharvas, Mahoragas, and other
Devatas could not distract him from Nirgrantha-Pravachan. He had no doubt,
desire, or uncertainty (doubt in the result) in Nirgrantha-Pravachan. He had
understood the ultimate meaning of the scriptures. He was firmly holding the
meaning - the secret of the scriptures. He had inquired about the doubtful
places in the scriptures, gained knowledge of them, and made a special decision
about them. His bones and marrow were attached to the love of the Sarvagya Deva.
He had an unwavering love for Nirgrantha-Pravachan. He had such faith that -
"Ayushman! This Nirgrantha-Pravachan is the truth, the ultimate truth, the
supreme truth, everything else is anarth (false form)." Due to his generosity,
the door of his house remained open, his door was open to everyone. He would
create joy in the house or the inner chambers of whoever he went to. He followed
Sheelavrat (five Anuvrats), Gunavrat, Viraman (restraint from raga, etc.),
Pratyakhyan, Poushadh, Upavas, etc., and observed a complete Poushadhavrat on
the fourteenth, eighth, new moon, and full moon days. He received great benefit
by donating blameless food, drink, Khadim and Swadim food, clothes, vessels,
blankets, Rajoharan, back, plank, bed, Sanstarak, medicine, and Bheshaj, etc.,
to Shramans - Nirgranthas, and by cultivating his soul through the accepted
tapas-karma] was wandering. The arrival of Bhagwan Mahavira 8 - At that time, at
that time, the Shraman Bhagwan Mahavira was staying in Samoshadh. Then in the
city of Rajagriha, in Shringatak, Rajmarg, etc., many people were talking to
each other in this way - [especially they started saying, they expressed the
same meaning in different words, they made reasoned statements with the
explanation of cause and effect - "O Devanupriya! The fact is that Shraman
Bhagwan Mahavira, who is self-enlightened, the founder of Dharma Tirtha and
Tirthankara, is the best of men.... who are inclined to attain the
Siddhigatirupa sthana, they are gradually wandering 1. Varga 5 Sutra 1 2. Varga
6. Sutra 6.  ]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 112] [ antakRddazA usa rAjagRha nagara meM sudarzana nAma ke eka dhanADhya
seTha rahate the  /  ve zramaNopAsaka - zrAvaka the aura jIva- ajIva ke atirikta
[ puNya aura pApa ke svarUpa ko bhI jAnate the  /  isI prakAra Asrava saMvara
nirjarA kriyA (karmabaMdha kI kAraNabhUta paccIsa prakAra kI kriyAoM) adhikaraNa
(karmabaMdha kA sAdhana - zastra) tathA bandha aura mokSa ke svarUpa ke jJAtA
the| kisI bhI kArya meM ve dUsaroM kI sahAyatA kI apekSA nahIM rakhate the  /
nirgrantha-pravacana meM itane dRr3ha the ki deva, asura, suparNa, yakSa,
rAkSasa, kinnara, kiMpuruSa, garuDa, gaMdharva, mahoragAdi devatA bhI unheM
nirgrantha-pravacana se vicalita nahIM kara sakate the  /  unheM
nirgranthapravacana meM zaMkA, kAMkSA aura vicikitsA (phala meM sandeha) nahIM
thI  /  unhoMne zAstra ke paramArtha ko samajha liyA thA  /  ve zAstra kA artha
- rahasya nizcita rUpa se dhAraNa kie hue the  /  unhoMne zAstra ke sandeha
janaka sthaloM ko pUcha liyA thA, unakA jJAna prApta kara liyA thA, unakA vizeSa
rUpa se nirNaya kara liyA thaa| unakI haDDiyA~ aura majjA sarvajJa deva ke
anurAga se anurakta ho rahI thiiN| nirgranthapravacana para unakA aTUTa prema
thaa| unakI aisI zraddhA thI ki - AyuSman ! yaha nirgranthapravacana hI satya
hai, paramArtha hai, parama satya hai, anya saba anartha (asatyarUpa) haiN|
unakI udAratA ke kAraNa unake bhavana ke daravAje kI argalA UMcI rahatI thI,
unakA dvAra sabake liye khulA rahatA thA  /  ve jisake ghara meM yA antaHpura
meM jAte usameM prIti utpanna kiyA karate the  /  ve zIlavrata (pAMcoM aNuvrata
), guNavrata, viramaNa ( rAgAdi se nivRtti) pratyAkhyAna, pauSadha, upavAsa Adi
kA pAlana karate tathA caturdazI, aSTamI, amAvasyA aura pUrNimA ke dina
paripUrNa pauSadhavrata kiyA karate the  /  zramaNoM-nirgranthoM ko nirdoSa
azana, pAna, khAdima aura svAdima AhAra, vastra, pAtra, kambala, rajoharaNa,
pITha, phalaka, zayyA, saMstAraka, auSadha aura bheSaja Adi kA dAna karate hue
mahAn lAbha prApta karate the, tathA svIkAra kiye tapa-karma ke dvArA apanI AtmA
ko bhAvita - vAsita karate hue ] viharaNa kara rahe the  /  bhagavAn mahAvIra kA
padArpaNa 8 - teNaM kAleNaM teNaM samaeNaM samaNe bhagavaM mahAvIre samosaDhe
jAva' viharai  /  tae NaM rAyagihe Nayare siMghADaga jAva' mahApahesu bahujaNo
aNNamaNNassa evamAikkhar3a jAva [ evaM bhAsai, evaM paNNavei, evaM parUvei - "
evaM khalu devANuppiyA! samaNe bhagavaM mahAvIre, Aigare titthayare
sayaMsaMbuddhe, purisuttame jAva saMpAviukAme, puvvANupuvviM caramANe,
gAmANugAmaM dUijmANe, ihamAgae, iha saMpatte, iha samosaDhe; iheva rAyagihe
Nayare bAhiM guNasilae ceie ahApaDirUvaM uggahaM uggahittA saMjameNaM tavasA
appANaM bhAvemANe viharai  / " taM mahamphalaM khalu bho devANuppiyA !
tahArUvANaM arahaMtANaM bhagavaMtANaM NAmagoyassa vi savaNayAe; kimaMga puNa
abhigamaNa-vaMdaNasaNa-paDipucchaNa-pajjuvAsaNayAe ? egassa vi Ayariyassa
dhammiyassa suvayaNassa savaNayAe; ] kimaMga puNa viulassa atthassa gahaNayAe ?
usa kAla aura usa samaya zramaNa bhagavAn mahAvIra rAjagRha padhAre aura bAhara
udyAna meM tthhre| unake padhArane ke samAcAra sunakara rAjagRha nagara ke
zrRMgATaka, rAjamArga Adi sthAnoM meM bahuta se nAgarika paraspara isa prakAra
vArtAlApa karane lage - [ vizeSa rUpa se kahane lage, prakaTa rUpa se eka hI
Azaya ko bhinna-bhinna zabdoM ke dvArA prakaTa karane lage, kArya-kAraNa kI
vyAkhyA sahita- tarka yukta kathana karane lage - " he devAnupriya ! bAta aisI
hai ki zramaNa bhagavAn mahAvIra jo svayaM saMbuddha, dharmatIrtha ke AdikartA
aura tIrthaMkara he, puruSottama haiM.... yAvat siddhigati rUpa sthAna kI prApti
ke lie pravRtti karane vAle haiM, ve kramazaH vicaraNa 1. varga 5 sUtra 1 2.
varga 6. sUtra 6.

Page #154 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Sixth Chapter] [113 They have arrived here, they have come here, they are
residing here. Outside this Rajagriha city, in the virtuous Chaitya, they are
taking the place suitable for the ascetics, and are affecting the soul with
austerity and penance. O Devanupriyo! By listening to the name (the name given
in the world for identification) and lineage (the name given according to the
qualities) of the Lord, who is endowed with the qualities of an Arihant, i.e.,
who is of the nature of bestowing the great fruit of Tatha-rupa, one attains
great fruit, then what to say of the fruit that is obtained by going near them,
praising them, bowing to them, inquiring about their ascetic journey, etc., and
worshipping them? That is, certainly, great fruit is obtained. By listening to
even one of their noble (bestowing the best qualities) and righteous excellent
words] and by grasping the vast meaning, what to say of the fruit that is
obtained? Sudarshan's departure to pay homage 9-Therefore, in the end, this
thought arose in the mind of Sudarshan, who was surrounded by many people, and
he thought, desired, and resolved in his mind - "Thus, indeed, the ascetic, the
Lord Mahavira, is dwelling. I will go to the ascetic, the Lord Mahavira, and pay
homage to him, bow to him; thus he thought, and whoever thought like this, he
also understood, and having understood, he took the vow of conduct, and so on. •
"Thus, indeed, O mother! The ascetic, the Lord Mahavira, is dwelling. I will go
to the ascetic, the Lord Mahavira, and pay homage to him, bow to him, and so on
[I will honour him, respect him, and wish him well]. I will stay with him."
Then, the Seth Sudarshan said to his mother - "Thus, indeed, son! Today, in the
garland market, and so on, he is dwelling, going from place to place. Son! Do
not go to the ascetic, the Lord Mahavira, to pay homage to him, lest there be
harm to your body. You should pay homage to the ascetic, the Lord Mahavira, here
itself." Then, the Seth Sudarshan said to his mother - "Mother! Shall I pay
homage to the ascetic, the Lord Mahavira, by coming here, by reaching here, by
staying here, by going here? I will go, mother! I will pay homage to the
ascetic, the Lord Mahavira, who is praised by you, and so on, I will stay with
him." Then, the Seth Sudarshan said to his mother - "Mother! I will not go, for
I am surrounded by many duties, and so on, I will go tomorrow." Then, the Seth
Sudarshan, praised by his mother, having taken a bath in pure water, and so on,
having adorned his body with auspicious clothes, and with expensive ornaments,
left his house, and having left, he went out of the city of Rajagriha through
the middle, and having gone out, he went towards the place where the chariot of
Moggarapani, the charioteer, was, not far from the place where the ascetic, the
Lord Mahavira, was dwelling, in order to go there. 1. In this Sutra 3. In this
Sutra 5. Chapter 3, Sutra 18. 2. Chapter 5. Sutra 4. 4. Chapter 6. Sutra 5.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 SaSTha varga] [113 karate hue yahA~ padhAre haiM, yahA~ A cuke haiM, yahA~
virAjamAna haiM  /  isI rAjagRha nagara ke bAhara, guNazIla caitya meM
saMyamiyoM ke yogya sthAna ko grahaNa karake saMyama aura tapa se AtmA ko
bhAvita kara rahe haiN| he devAnupriyo ! tathArUpa-mahAphala kI prApti karAne
rUpa svabhAva vAle arthAt arihaMta ke guNoM se yukta bhagavAn ke nAma (pahacAna
ke liye banI huI loka meM rUDha saMjJA) gotra (guNa ke anusAra diyA huA nAma) ko
bhI sunane se mahatphala kI prApti hotI hai, to phira unake nikaTa jAne, stuti
karane, namaskAra karane, saMyamayAtrAdi kI samAdhipRcchA karane aura unakI
upAsanA karane se hone vAle phala kI to bAta hI kyA? arthAt nizcaya hI
mahatphala kI prApti hotI hai| unake eka bhI Arya (zreSTha guNoM ko prApta
karAne vAle) aura dhArmika uttama vacana ko sunane se] aura vipula artha ko
grahaNa karane se hone vAle phala kI to bAta hI kyA hai?" sudarzana kA
vandanArtha gamana 9-tae NaM tassa sudaMsaNassa bahujaNassa aMtie eyaM aTuM
soccA nisamma ayaM ajjhathie ciMtie patthie maNogae saMkappe samuppajjitthA-evaM
khalu samaNe bhagavaM mahAvIre jAva' vihri| taM gacchAmi NaM samaNaM bhagavaM
mahAvIraM vaMdAmi NamaMsAmi; evaM saMpehei, saMpehettA jeNeva ammApiyaro teNeva
uvAgacchai, uvAgacchittA karayalapariggahiyaM jAva evaM vayAsI * "evaM khalu
ammayAo! samaNe bhagavaM mahAvIre jAva3 vihri| taM gacchAmi NaM samaNaM bhagavaM
mahAvIraM vaMdAmi namasAmi jAva [ sakkAremi sammANemi kallANaM maMgalaM devayaM
ceiyaM] pjjuvaasaami|" tae NaM sudaMsaNaM seTuiM ammApiyaro evaM vayAsI-evaM
khalu puttA! ajjuNae mAlAgAre jAva ghAemANe-ghAemANe vihri| taM mA NaM tumaM
puttA! samaNaM bhagavaM mahAvIraM vaMdae niggacchAhi, mA NaM tava sarIrayassa
vAvattI bhvissi| tumaNNaM ihagae ceva samaNaM bhagavaM mahAvIraM vNdaahi|" tae
NaM se sudaMsaNe seTThI ammApiyaraM evaM vayAsI-"kiNNaM ahaM ammAyAo! samaNaM
bhagavaM mahAvIraM ihamAgayaM iha pattaM iha samosaDhaM iha gae ceva vaMdissAmi
namaMsissAmi? taM gacchAmi NaM ahaM ammayAo! tubbhehiM abbhaNuNNAe samANe
samaNaM bhagavaM mahAvIraM vadAmi namasAmi jAva pjjuvaasaami|" tae NaM
sudaMsaNaM seTuiM ammApiyaro jAhe no saMcAeMti bahUhiM AghavaNAhiM jAva'
parUvettae tAhe evaM vayAsI-"ahAsuhaM devANuppiyA!" tae NaM se sudaMsaNe
ammApiIhiM abbhaNuNNAe samANe pahAe suddhappAvesAiM jAva maMgalAI vatthAI
pavaraparihie appamahagghAbharaNAlaMkiya] sarIre sayAo gihAo paDiNikkhamai,
paDiNikkhamittA pAyavihAracAreNaM rAyagihaM nayaraM majhamajheNaM niggacchai,
niggacchittA moggarapANissa jakkhassa jakkhAyayaNassa adUrasAmaMteNaM jeNeva
guNasilae ceie jeNeva samaNe bhagavaM mahAvIre teNeva pahArettha gmnnaae| 1. isI
sUtra meM 3. isI sUtra meM 5. varga 3, sUtra 18. 2. varga 5. sUtra 4. 4. varga
6. sUtra 5.

Page #155 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[114] Hearing the news of the Lord's arrival from the mouths of many citizens,
Sudarshan Seth's mind became filled with anxious thoughts, prayers, and
resolutions. "Surely the Shraman Bhagwan Mahavira has arrived in the city and is
residing in the Gunashilka garden outside. Therefore, I should go and pay my
respects to the Shraman Bhagwan." Thinking this, he went to his parents and,
with folded hands, said, "O Mother and Father! Shraman Bhagwan Mahavira Swami is
residing in the garden outside the city. Therefore, I wish to go and pay my
respects to him. I want to honor him, respect him, and humbly serve this
benevolent, sin-removing, divine, and knowledgeable Lord."  Hearing this, his
parents said to Sudarshan Seth, "O Son! Surely Arjun Malakar is roaming around
killing people. Therefore, O Son! Do not go outside the city to pay your
respects to Shraman Bhagwan Mahavira. Going outside the city may harm your body.
Therefore, it is best that you pay your respects to Shraman Bhagwan Mahavira
from here."  Then Sudarshan Seth said to his parents, "O Mother and Father! How
can I pay my respects to Shraman Bhagwan Mahavira from here when he has arrived
here, has held a Samvasaran, and is residing in the garden outside? Therefore, O
Mother and Father! Please grant me permission to go there and pay my respects to
Shraman Bhagwan Mahavira, to bow down to him, and to serve him."  When his
parents could not convince Sudarshan Seth with various arguments, they
reluctantly said, "O Son! Do as you please."  Thus, Sudarshan Seth, having
obtained permission from his parents, bathed and donned pure, auspicious
garments suitable for attending the Dharma Sabha. [He adorned his body with
light, precious ornaments.] Then he left his house and walked through the middle
of Rajagaha city, passing not too far or too close to the Yakshayatan of
Mudgarpani Yaksha, towards the Gunashilka garden where Shraman Bhagwan Mahavira
was.  **Discussion:** In this Sutra, the three terms "Ihamagayam, Iha Pattam,
Iha Samoshadham" appear to be synonymous, but the commentator has explained the
difference in meaning as follows:  "Ihamagayam, etc. - Even if someone has
arrived in this city, this term can be used when they are close by. Therefore,
it is said, 'Iha Sampraptam' - they have arrived. Even when they have arrived, a
special term is used, 'Iha Samvasritam' - they are settled here, engaged in the
explanation of Dharma. Or, 'Iha Nagare' - in this city, 'Iha Udyane' - in this
garden, 'Iha Sadhuchita Avagrahe' - in a place suitable for the Sadhus."  In
other words, "Ihamagayam" means - having arrived in this city. But this can also
be said when someone is near the city. Therefore, the Sutrakar has used 'Iha
Pattam'. This means - having arrived in this city. To make this point even
clearer, "Iha Samoshadhe" is written. This means - engaged in the explanation of
Dharma. Or, 'Ihamagayam' means - having arrived in this city, 'Iha Pattam' means
- having arrived in this garden, and 'Iha Samoshadham' means - having settled in
a place suitable for the Sadhus.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 114] [antakRddazA isa prakAra bahuta se nAgarikoM ke mukha se bhagavAn ke
padhArane ke samAcAra sunakara sudarzana seTha ke mana meM isa prakAra, ciMtita,
prArthita, manogata saMkalpa utpanna huA-"nizcaya hI zramaNa bhagavAn mahAvIra
nagara meM padhAre haiM aura bAhara gaNazIlaka udyAna meM virAjamAna haiM.
isaliye maiM jAUM aura zramaNa bhagavAna ko vaMdana-namaskAra kruuN|" aisA
socakara ve apane mAtA-pitA ke pAsa Aye aura hAtha jor3akara bole _he mAtA-pitA!
zramaNa bhagavAn mahAvIra svAmI nagara ke bAhara udyAna meM virAja rahe haiN|
ataH maiM cAhatA hU~ ki maiM jAUM aura unheM vaMdana-namaskara kruuN| unakA
satkAra karUM, sanmAna kruuN| una kalyANa ke heturUpa, duritazamana (pApanAza)
ke heturUpa, deva svarUpa aura jJAnasvarUpa bhagavAn kI vinayapUrvaka
paryupAsanA kruuN| yaha sunakara mAtA-pitA, sudarzana seTha se isa prakAra bole-
"he putra ! nizcaya hI arjuna mAlAkAra yAvat manuSyoM ko mAratA huA ghUma rahA
hai isaliye he putra! tuma zramaNa bhagavAn mahAvIra ko vaMdana karane ke liye
nagara ke bAhara mata niklo| nagara ke bAhara nikalane se sambhava hai tumhAre
zarIra ko hAni ho jaay| ata: yahI acchA hai ki tuma yahIM se zramaNa bhagavAn
mahAvIra ko vaMdana- namaskAra kara lo|" taba sudarzana seTha ne mAtA-pitA se
isa prakAra kahA- "he mAtA-pitA! jaba zramaNa bhagavAn mahAvIra yahAM padhAre
haiM, yahAM samavasRta hue haiM aura bAhara udyAna meM virAjamAna haiM to maiM
unako yahIM se vaMdanA- namaskAra karUM, yaha kaise ho sakatA hai? ataH he mAtA-
pitA! Apa mujhe AjJA dIjiye ki maiM vahIM jAkara zramaNa bhagavAn mahAvIra ko
vaMdana karUM, namaskAra karUM yAvat unakI paryupAsanA kruuN|" sudarzana seTha
ko mAtA-pitA jaba aneka prakAra kI yuktiyoM se nahIM samajhA sake, taba mAtA-
pitA ne anicchApUrvaka isa prakAra kahA-"he putra ! phira jisa prakAra tumheM
sukha upaje vaisA kro|" isa prakAra sudarzana seTha ne mAtA-pitA se AjJA prApta
karake snAna kiyA aura dharmasabhA meM jAne yogya zuddha mAMgalika vastra
dhAraNa kiye [thor3e bhAravAle, bahumUlya AbhUSaNoM se zarIra ko sajAyA] phira
apane ghara se nikalA aura paidala hI rAjagaha nagara ke madhya se calakara
mudgarapANi yakSa ke yakSAyatana ke na ati dUra aura na ati nikaTa se hote hue
jahA~ guNazIla nAmaka udyAna aura jahA~ zramaNa bhagavAn mahAvIra the usa ora
jAne lgaa| vivecana- isa sUtra meM "ihamAgayaM, iha pattaM, iha samosaDhaM-" ye
tInoM pada samAnArthaka pratIta hote haiM, para TIkAkAra ne isa sambandha meM jo
artha-bheda darzAyA hai vaha isa prakAra hai "ihamAgayamityAdi-iha nagare AgataM
pratyAsannatve'pyevaM vyapadezaH syAt, ataH ucyate- iha samprAptaM, prAptAvapi
vizeSAbhidhAnamucyate, iha samavasRtaM dharma-vyAkhyAnapravartanayA vyavasthitam
athavA iha nagare punarihodyAne punariha sAdhUcitAvagrahe iti|" arthAt
"ihamAgayaM" kA artha hai - isa nagara meM Ae hue| para yaha to nagara ke pAsa
pahuMcane para bhI kahA jA sakatA hai, ataH sUtrakAra ne 'ihapattaM' kahA hai|
isa kA artha hai isa nagara meM pahuMce hue| isI bAta ko adhika spaSTa karane ke
liye "iha samosar3he" yaha likhA hai| isakA bhAva hai-dharma-vyAkhyAna meM lage
hue| athavA 'ihamAgayaM' kA artha hai - isa nagara meM Ae hue, 'iha pattaM' kA
artha hai- isa udyAna meM Ae hue tathA iha samosaDhaM' kA artha hai - sAdhuoM ke
yogya sthAna para Thahare hue|

Page #156 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Sixth Chapter] [115 Sudarsana by Arjuna] 10- Then that Mudgarpani Yaksha saw
Sudarsana Shramanopasaka coming from a distance. Seeing him, he became angry,
enraged, furious, fierce with excessive anger, burning with the flames of anger,
grinding his teeth, he swung the iron mudgar weighing a thousand palas, and came
towards Sudarsana Shramanopasaka. At that time, seeing the angry Mudgarpani
Yaksha coming towards him, Sudarsana Shramanopasaka, knowing the possibility of
death, did not experience any fear, terror, anxiety or agitation. His heart did
not waver or become fearful. Fearlessly, he wiped the ground with the hem of his
garment. Then he sat down facing the east! Sitting down, he raised his left knee
and folded his hands, placing his palms on his forehead. Then he spoke as
follows: 'I bow to all the Arihant Bhagavants who have attained liberation in
the past and to the Tīrthankara Shraman Bhagavan Mahāvīra, the founder of
Dharma, who will attain liberation in the future. I have previously renounced
gross Prāṇātipāta, gross Mṛṣāvāda, gross Adattādāna, Swadārasantoṣa and
Ichchāparimāṇa vows for life. Now, in the presence of the same Bhagavan Mahāvīra
Swami, I renounce Prāṇātipāta, Mṛṣāvāda, Adattādāna, Mithuna and all-possession
for life. I renounce all anger [pride, illusion, greed, attachment, 1. Chapter
1. Sutra 2.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 SaSTha varga] [115 sudarzana ko arjuna dvArA upasarga 10-tae NaM se moggarapANI
jakkhe sudaMsaNaM samaNovAsayaM adUrasAmaMteNaM vIIvayamANaMvIIvayamANaM pAsai,
pAsittA Asurutte ruThe kuvie caMDikkie misimisemANe taM palasahassaNipphaNNaM
aomayaM moggaraM ullAlemANe-ullAlemANe jeNeva sudaMsaNe samaNovAsae teNeva
pahArettha gmnnaae| tae NaM se sudaMsaNe samaNovAsae moggarapANiM jakkhaM
ejjamANaM pAsai, pAsittA abhIe atatthe aNuvvigge akkhubhie acalie asaMbhaMte
vatthaMteNaM bhUmiM pamajjai, pamajjittA karayalapariggahiyaM dasaNahaM
sirasAvattaM matthae aMjaliM kaTu evaM vayAsI 'namotthu NaM arahaMtANaM jAva
sNpttaannN| namotthu NaM samaNassa bhagavao mahAvIrassa Aigarassa titthayarassa
jAva sNpaaviukaamss| puvviM pi NaM mae samaNassa bhagavao mahAvIrassa aMtie
thUlae pANAivAe paccakkhAe jAvajjIvAe, thUlAe musAvAe, thUlAe adiNNAdANe
sadArasaMtose kae jAvajjIvAe, icchAparimANe kae jaavjjiivaae| taM idANiM pi NaM
tasseva aMtiyaM savvaM pANAivAyaM paccakkhAmi jAvajjIvAe, musAvAyaM adattAdANaM
mehuNaM pariggahaM paccakkhAmi jAvajjIvAe, savvaM kohaM jAva [mANaM mAyaM lohaM
pejjaM dosaM kalahaM abbhakkhANaM pesuNNaM paraparivAyaM arairaI mAyAmosaM]
micchAdasaNasallaM paccakkhAmi jaavjjiivaae| jai NaM etto uvasaggAo muccissAmi
to me kappar3a paaritte| aha NaM etto uvasaggAo na muccissAmi 'to meM tahA'
paccakkhAe ceva' tti kaTu sAgAra paDimaM pddivjji| tae NaM se moggarapANI jakkhe
taM palasahassaNipphaNNaM aomayaM moggaraM ullAlemANeullAlemANe jeNeva sudaMsaNe
samaNovAsae teNeva uvaage| no ceva NaM saMcAei sudaMsaNaM samaNovAsayaM teyasA
smbhipdditte| 10- taba usa mudgarapANi yakSa ne sudarzana zramaNopAsaka ko
samIpa se hI jAte hue dekhaa| dekhakara vaha kruddha huA, ruSTa huA, kupita huA,
kopAtireka se bhISaNa banA huA, krodha kI jvAlA se jalatA huA, dAMta pIsatA huA
vaha hajAra pala bhAravAle lohe ke mudgara ko ghumAte-ghumAte jahA~ sudarzana
zramaNopAsaka thA, usa ora Ane lgaa| usa samaya kruddha mudgarapANi yakSa ko
apanI ora AtA dekhakara sudarzana zramaNopAsaka mRtyu kI saMbhAvanA ko jAnakara
bhI kiMcit bhI bhaya, trAsa, udvega athavA kSobha ko prApta nahIM huaa| usakA
hRdaya tanika bhI vicalita athavA bhayAkrAnta nahIM huaa| usane nirbhaya hokara
apane vastra ke aMcala se bhUmi kA pramArjana kiyaa| phira pUrva dizA kI ora
muMha karake baiTha gayA! baiThakara bAeM ghuTane ko UMcA kiyA aura donoM hAtha
jor3akara mastaka para aMjalipuTa rkhaa| isake bAda isa prakAra bolA 'maiM una
sabhI arihaMta bhagavaMtoM ko, jo atItakAla meM mokSa padhAra gaye haiM evaM
dharma ke AdikartA tIrthaMkara zramaNa bhagavAn mahAvIra ko jo bhaviSya meM
mokSa padhArane vAle haiM, namaskAra karatA huuN| maiMne pahale zramaNa bhagavAn
mahAvIra se sthUla prANAtipAta kA AjIvana tyAga (pratyAkhyAna) kiyA, sthUla,
mRSAvAda, sthUla adattAdAna kA tyAga kiyA, svadArasaMtoSa aura icchAparimANa
rUpa vrata jIvana bhara ke liye grahaNa kiyA hai| aba unhIM bhagavAn mahAvIra
svAmI kI sAkSI se prANAtipAta, mRSAvAda, adattAdAna, maithuna aura saMpUrNa-
parigraha kA sarvathA AjIvana tyAga karatA huuN| maiM sarvathA krodha [mAna,
mAyA, lobha, rAga, 1. varga 1. sUtra 2.

Page #157 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[116] I renounce forever all the eighteen sins, including the ten cardinal sins
[Antakruddash, Dvesha, Kalaha, Abhyakhyan, Paishunya, Paraparivad, Arati-rati,
Mayamrusa] and the sin of wrong belief [Mithyadarshan Shalya]. I also renounce
all four types of food: Asan, Pan, Khadim, and Swadim. If I survive this
impending death, I will break this vow and resume eating. If I do not survive
this affliction, then let this complete renunciation be for the rest of my life.
Having made this firm resolve, Sudarshan Seth took the Sagari Padima-Anashan
Vrat.  Meanwhile, the Mudgarpani Yaksha, wielding the thousand-pound iron mace,
arrived where Sudarshan the Shramanopasak was. However, he could not overpower
Sudarshan the Shramanopasak with his might, nor could he cause him any harm.  -
Commentary - Seeing Sudarshan the Shreshthi going towards the Gunashilka garden,
the Mudgarpani Yaksha, gnashing his teeth in anger, raises his mace to strike
him. But seeing the Yaksha, Sudarshan remains completely calm and fearless. He
takes the Sagari Santhara. In this, he completely renounces anger, pride, and
even the sin of wrong belief.  A question arises here: The twelve vows of the
Shramanopasak are taken only with right belief, and in that, wrong belief is
automatically renounced. Then how can the renunciation of wrong belief by
Sudarshan while taking the Sagari Pratima (Sagari Santhara) be explained? After
embracing the Shravak Dharma, there is no need to renounce wrong belief. In
response, it is said that although the first thing a vow-taking Shravak must do
is to renounce wrong belief, and it is only through the elimination of wrong
belief that right belief is attained, the renunciation of the Deshvirati Shravak
is partial, not complete. There are many sub-categories of wrong belief, such as
Deshshanka, Sarvashanka, etc. Renouncing all of them completely is the goal of
renouncing the sin of wrong belief here. The meaning is that even a slight doubt
or other defect remaining in the acceptance of the Deshvirati Dharma is
renounced in this vow.  "Sagaram Padimam Padivajjad" - The word "Sagaram" read
here means "with exceptions," "with limitations." Here, Pratima-Santhara is the
name of a fast unto death. The verb "Pratipadyate" is used in the sense of "to
accept." A vow taken with exceptions is called Sagari-Pratima. When a person
takes a vow, if they make an exception for a particular thing or time and say,
"If this work is done, then I will break my fast. If the work is not done, then
I will not break my fast, I will continue it," and if they take a rule with this
kind of resolve, then that rule is called Sagari-Pratima. Upsarga-Nivaran  11 -
Then, the Mudgarpani Yaksha, circling Sudarshan the Shramanopasak from all
sides, did not even touch Sudarshan the Shramanopasak. Seeing him thus,
Sudarshan the Shramanopasak stood before him, facing him directly, and looked at
him steadily for a long time. Having looked, he saw the body of the Yaksha's
mace-wielding form disappear. Having disappeared,

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 116] [antakRddazA dveSa, kalaha, abhyAkhyAna, paizunya, paraparivAda, arati-
rati, mAyAmRSA] aura mithyAdarzana zalya taka ke samasta (18) pApoM kA bhI
AjIvana tyAga karatA huuN| saba prakAra kA azana, pAna, khAdima aura svAdima ina
cAroM prakAra ke AhAra kA bhe tyAga karatA huuN| yadi maiM isa AsannamRtyu
upasarga se baca gayA to isa tyAga kA pAraNA karake AhArAdi grahaNa kruuNgaa|
yadi isa upasarga se mukta na hoUM to mujhe isa prakAra kA saMpUrNa tyAga
yAvajjIvana ho|' aisA nizcaya karake sudarzana seTha ne uparyukta prakAra se
sAgArI paDimA-anazana vrata dhAraNa kara liyaa| idhara vaha mudgarapANi yakSa
usa hajAra pala ke lohamaya mudgara ko ghumAtA huA jahA~ sudarzana zramaNopAsaka
thA vahA~ aayaa| parantu sudarzana zramaNopAsaka ko apane teja se abhibhUta
nahIM kara sakA arthAt use kisI prakAra se kaSTa nahIM pahuMcA skaa| - vivecana-
zreSThI sudarzana ko guNazIlaka udyAna kI ora jAte dekhakara mudgarapANi yakSa
krodha ke mAre dA~ta pIsate hue use mArane ke lie mudgara uchAlatA huA AtA hai,
para yakSa ko dekha sudarzana sarvathA zAnta aura nirbhaya rahate haiN| sAgArI
saMthArA grahaNa karate haiN| isa meM ve sarvathA krodha mAna yAvat
mithyAdarzana zalya kA tyAga karate haiN| yahA~ eka prazna upasthita hotA hai ki
zramaNopAsaka ke jo bAraha vrata haiM ve samyaktva pUrvaka hI grahaNa kiye jAte
haiM, usameM mithyAtva kA parityAga svataH hI ho jAtA hai| to phira sAgAra-
pratimA (sAgArI saMthArA) grahaNa karate samaya sudarzana ne mithyAtva kA jo
parityAga kiyA hai, isakI upapatti kaise hogI? zrAvaka-dharma ko dhAraNa kara
lene ke anantara mithyAtva ke parityAga karane kI AvazyakatA hI nahIM raha
jaatii| uttara meM nivedana hai ki yadyapi vratadhArI zrAvaka ke liye mithyAtva
kA parityAga sabase pahale karanA hotA hai aura mithyAtva ke parihAra para hI
samyaktva kI prApti hotI hai, tathApi dezavirati zrAvaka kA jo tyAga hai, vaha
AMzika hai, sarvataH nahIM hai| mithyAdarzana ke dezazaMkA, sarvazaMkA Adi
anekoM upabheda haiN| una sabakA sarvathA parityAga karanA hI yahA~ para
mithyAdarzana zalya ke tyAga kA lakSya hai| bhAva yaha hai ki dezavirati dharma
ke aMgIkAra meM leza mAtra rahe hue zaMkA Adi doSoM kA bhI ukta pratijJA meM
parityAga kara diyA gayA hai| "sAgAraM paDimaM paDivajjar3a"- yahA~ paThita
"sAgAra" zabda kA artha hai-apavAda yukta, chaTa shit| yahA~ pratimA-saMthArA
AmaraNa anazana kA nAma hai| 'pratipadyate' yaha kriyApada svIkAra karane ke
artha meM prayukta hai| chUTa rakha kara jo pratijJA kI jAtI hai use sAgAra-
pratimA kahate haiN| koI vyakti pratijJA karate samaya usameM jaba kisI vastu yA
samaya vizeSa kI chUTa rakha letA hai aura "yaha kAma ho gayA to maiM anazana
khola luuNgaa| yadi kAma na banA to maiM apanA anazana nahIM kholUMgA, use
lagAtAra calAUMgA" isa prakAra kA saMkalpa karake yadi koI niyama liyA jAtA hai
to usa niyama ko sAgAra-pratimA kahA jAtA hai| upasarga-nivAraNa 11-tae NaM se
moggarapANI jakkhe sudaMsaNaM samaNovAsayaM savvao samaMtA parigholemANe
parigholemANe jAhe no ceva NaM saMcAei sudaMsaNaM samaNovAsayaM teyasA
samabhipaDittae, tAhe sudaMsaNassa samaNovAsayassa purao sapakkhiM sapaDidisiM
ThiccA sudaMsaNaM samaNovAsayaM aNimisAe diTThIe suciraM nirikkhai, nirikkhittA
ajjuNayassa mAlAgArassa sarIraM vippajahai, vippajahittA

Page #158 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Sixth Chapter] [117 The iron mace weighing a thousand palas, held by the
Yaksha, circled around Sudarshan, but could not defeat him with its power. Then
the Yaksha stood before Sudarshan, the Shramanopasaka, and stared at him with
unwavering eyes. After that, the mace-wielding Yaksha abandoned the body of
Arjun, the garland-maker, and went in the same direction from which he had come.
As soon as Arjun, the garland-maker, was freed from the Yaksha, he fell to the
ground with a sound of 'Dhas'. Then Sudarshan, the Shramanopasaka, knowing that
he was free from the attack, broke his vow and opened his eyes. Discussion -
This sutra shows that when Arjun, the garland-maker, saw Seth Sudarshan, he
threw his mace, but it remained suspended in the air. Due to the brilliance of
Sudarshan's self-power, the mace could not strike him in any way. The sutra-
writer has used the phrase "Teysa Sambhipadittae" for this reason. The mace-
wielding Yaksha attacked Sudarshan, but due to his spiritual brilliance, he
could not inflict any harm. He himself became devoid of brilliance. Defeated by
the extraordinary brilliance of Sudarshan, the mace-wielding Yaksha fled from
the body of Arjun, the garland-maker, and Arjun fell to the ground. Then
Sudarshan, understanding that the danger was over, ended his vow. The devotion
of Sudarshan and Arjun to the Bhagavan 12 - Then Arjun, the garland-maker, got
up from his seat after a short while. Getting up, he addressed Sudarshan, the
Shramanopasaka, saying - "O Devānupiya! What do you desire?" Then Sudarshan, the
Shramanopasaka, addressed Arjun, the garland-maker, saying - "O Devānupiya! I am
Sudarshan, the Shramanopasaka - I desire to worship the Bhagavan Mahavira, the
great sage, with devotion, following the path of right conduct and right
livelihood, and with the qualities of a true disciple." Then Arjun, the garland-
maker, addressed Sudarshan, the Shramanopasaka, saying - "O Devānupiya! I also
wish to worship the Bhagavan Mahavira along with you, until [we have bowed down,
paid homage, honored, respected, wished well, and offered auspicious offerings
to the divine] we have completed our stay." "O Devānupiya! Do not be bound by
any restrictions." Then Sudarshan, the Shramanopasaka, along with Arjun, the
garland-maker, went to the place where the Bhagavan Mahavira was, following the
path of right conduct and right livelihood. Reaching there, Sudarshan, the
Shramanopasaka, along with Arjun, the garland-maker, bowed down to the Bhagavan
Mahavira with great devotion, [approaching, departing, bowing down, paying
homage, bowing down again, paying homage again,  -

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 SaSTha varga] [117 taM palasahassaNipphaNNaM aomayaM moggaraM gahAya jAmeva
disaM pAubbhUe tAmeva disaM paDigae  /  taNaM se ajjuNae mAlAgAre moggarapANiNA
jakkheNaM vippamukke samANe 'dhasa' tti dharaNiyalaMsi savvaMgehiM nivaDie  /
tae NaM se sudaMsaNe samaNovAsae 'niruvasagga' mitti kaTTu paDimaM pArei  /
mudgarapANi yakSa sudarzana zrAvaka ke cAroM ora ghUmatA rahA aura jaba usako
apane teja se parAjita nahIM kara sakA taba sudarzana zramaNopAsaka ke sAmane
Akara khar3A ho gayA aura animeSa dRSTi se bahuta dera taka use dekhatA rahA  /
isake bAda usa mudgarapANi yakSa ne arjuna mAlI ke zarIra ko tyAga diyA aura usa
usI dizA meM calA gyaa| hajAra pala bhAra vAle lohamaya mudgara ko lekara jisa
dizA se AyA thA, mudgarapANi yakSa se mukta hote hI arjuna mAlAkAra 'dhas' isa
prakAra ke zabda ke sAtha bhUmi para gira par3A  /  taba sudarzana zramaNopAsaka
ne apane ko upasarga rahita huA jAnakara apanI pratijJA kA pAraNa kiyA aura
apanA dhyAna kholaa| vivecana - prastuta sUtra meM yaha darzAyA gayA hai ki
seTha sudarzana ko dekhakara arjuna mAlI ne apanA mudgara uchAlA to sahI para
vaha AkAza meM adhara hI raha gyaa| sudarzana kI Atma-zakti kI tejasvitA ke
kAraNa vaha kisI bhI prakAra se pratyAghAta nahIM kara paayaa| sUtrakAra ne isa
hetu - "teyasA samabhipaDittae" pada kA prayoga kiyA hai| mudgarapANi yakSa ne
sudarzana para AkramaNa kiyA, paraMtu unakI AdhyAtmika tejasvitA ke kAraNa
AghAta nahIM kara paayaa| vaha svayaM tejovihIna ho gayA  /  sudarzana ke
asAdhAraNa teja se parAbhUta mudgarapANi yakSa arjuna mAlI ke zarIra meM se
bhAga gayA aura arjuna mAlI bhUmi para gira pdd'aa| taba sudarzana ne "saMkaTa
Tala gayA" yaha samajha kara apanA vrata samApta kara diyaa| sudarzana aura
arjuna kI bhagavatparyupAsanA 12 - tae NaM se ajjuNae mAlAgAre tatto
muhuttaMtareNaM Asatthe samANe uTThei, uTThettA sudaMsaNaM samaNovAsayaM evaM
vayAsI - "tubbhe NaM devANuppiyA ! ke kahiM vA saMpatthiyA?" taNaM se sudaMsaNe
samaNovAsae ajjuNayaM mAlAgAraM evaM vayAsI "evaM khalu devANuppiyA! ahaM
sudaMsaNe nAmaM samaNovAsae - abhigayajIvAjIve guNasilae ceie samaNaM bhagavaM
mahAvIraM vaMdae saMpatthie  /  " taNaM se ajju mAlAgAre sudaMsaNaM
samaNovAsayaM evaM vayAsI "taM icchAmi NaM devANuppiyA! ahamavi tumae saddhiM
samaNaM bhagavaM mahAvIraM vaMdittae jAva [namaMsittae sakkArittae sammANittae
kallANaM maMgalaM devayaM ceiyaM ] pajjuvAsittae  /  " ahAsuhaM devANuppiyA! mA
paDibaMdhaM karehi  /  taNaM sudaMsaNe samaNovAsae ajjuNaeNaM mAlAgAreNaM
saddhiM jeNeva guNasilae ceie, jeNeva samaNe bhagavaM mahAvIre teNeva
uvAgacchai, uvAgacchittA ajjuNaeNaM mAlAgAreNaM saddhiM samaNaM bhagavaM
mahAvIraM tikkhutto jAva [ AyAhiNaM payAhiNaM karettA vaMdai, namaMsai, vaMdittA
namaMsittA -

Page #159 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 118] [ Antakrid Dasha There are three types of Paryupasana (worship): Kayika
(physical), Vaachika (verbal), and Manasika (mental).   **Kayika:**  Involves
physically positioning oneself in a respectful manner, such as standing with
hands clasped in a respectful gesture, facing the object of worship, not too far
or too close, and listening attentively to the teachings.  **Vaachika:**
Involves verbally affirming the teachings of the object of worship, such as
saying "Evameyam Bhanta! Tahameyam Bhanta! Avitahmeyam Bhanta! Asandiddhameyam
Bhanta! Ichhiyameyam Bhanta! Padicchhiyameyam Bhanta! Ichhiy-Padicchhiyameyam
Bhanta! Se Jaheyam Tubbhe Vadah" (This is so, Bhanta! This is the truth, Bhanta!
This is the reality, Bhanta! This is undoubtedly so, Bhanta! This is desirable,
Bhanta! This is acceptable, Bhanta! This is desired and accepted, Bhanta! As you
are saying, so be it), without contradicting the teachings.  **Manasika:**
Involves mentally engaging with the teachings, such as experiencing deep emotion
(enthusiasm or a desire for liberation), and being intensely devoted to the
teachings. ]  —  At that time, the Shraman Bhagwan Mahavira, in the presence of
Sudarshan Shramanopasak, Arjun Mali, and the vast assembly, delivered a
Dharmakatha (religious discourse). Sudarshan, having listened to the
Dharmakatha, returned to his home.  **Discussion:** This Sutra describes how
Sudarshan, after the threat posed by Mudgarpani Yaksha was resolved, ended his
fast unto death. After ending his fast, Seth Sudarshan acted with great
seriousness and foresight. He was not afraid when he saw Arjun Mali in an
unconscious state, and he did not try to leave. Instead, he remained there
peacefully. The reason...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 118] [ antakRddazA tivihAe pajjuvAsaNAe pajjuvAsa  /  taM jahA - kAiyAe vAiyAe
mANasiyAe  /  kAiyAe tAva saMkuiyaggahatthapAe NaccAsaNNe nAidUre sussUsamANe
NamaMsamANe, abhimuhe viNaeNaM paMjaliuDe pajjuvAsai  /  vAiyAe - jaM jaM
bhagavaM vAgarei " evameyaM bhaMte! tahameyaM bhaMte! avitahameyaM bhaMte!
asaMdiddhameyaM bhaMte! icchiyameyaM bhaMte! paDicchiyameyaM bhaMte! icchiya-
paDicchiyameyaM bhaMte! se jaheyaM tubbhe vadaha " apaDikUlamANe pajjuvAsai |
mANasiyAe mahayA saMvegaM jaNaittA tivvadhammANurAgaratto ] pajjuvAsai  /  tae
NaM samaNe bhagavaM mahAvIre sudaMsaNassa samaNovAsagassa ajjuNayassa
mAlAgArassa tIse ya maha mahAliyA parisAe majjhagae vicittaM dhammamAikkhai  /
sudaMsaNe paDigae  /  idhara vaha arjuna mAlI muhUrta bhara (kucha samaya) ke
pazcAt Azvasta evaM svastha hokara uThA aura sudarzana zramaNopAsaka ko sAmane
dekhakara isa prakAra bolA "devAnupriya ! Apa kauna ho ? tathA kahA~ jA rahe
ho?" - yaha sunakara sudarzana zramaNopAsaka ne arjuna mAlI se isa taraha kahA -
'devAnupriya ! maiM jIvAdi nava tattvoM kA jJAtA sudarzana nAmaka zramaNopAsaka
hUM aura guNazIla udyAna meM zramaNa bhagavAn mahAvIra ko vaMdana - namaskAra
karane jA rahA huuN|' yaha sunakara arjuna mAlI sudarzana zramaNopAsaka se isa
prakAra bolA - 'he devAnupriya ! maiM bhI tumhAre sAtha zramaNa bhagavAn
mahAvIra ko vaMdanA - namaskAra karanA cAhatA hU~, unakA satkAra-sammAna karanA
cAhatA hU~, kalyANasvarUpa, maMgalasvarUpa, divyasvarUpa evaM jJAnasvarUpa
bhagavAn kI paryupAsanA karanA cAhatA hU~  / ' sudarzana ne arjuna mAlI se kahA
- 'devAnupriya ! jaise tumheM sukha ho vaisA kro|' isake bAda sudarzana
zramaNopAsaka arjuna mAlI ke sAtha jahA~ guNazIla udyAna meM zramaNa bhagavAn
mahAvIra virAjamAna the, vahA~ AyA aura arjuna mAlI ke sAtha zramaNa bhagavAn
mahAvIra ko tIna bAra [ AdakSiNa pradakSiNA kI, vandanA kI aura unheM namaskAra
kiyA  /  vandanA - namaskAra karake, tIna prakAra kI paryupAsanA karane lagA,
yathA - kAyikI vAcikI aura maansikii| hAtha-paira ko saMkucita karake, na adhika
dUra na adhika nikaTa aise sthAna para sthita hokara ( dharmopadeza) zravaNa
karate hue - namaskAra karate hue, bhagavAn kI ora muMha rakhakara vinayapUrvaka
hAtha jor3e hue paryupAsanA karanA kAyikI upAsanA hai  /  vAcikI upAsanA hai -
jo jo bhagavAn kahate, use 'yaha aisA hI hai, bhaMte! yahI tathya hai, bhaMte!
yahI satya hai, bhaMte! niHsaMdeha aisA hI hai, bhaMte! yahI iSTa hai, bhaMte!
yahI svIkRta hai, bhaMte! yahI vAMchita gRhIta hai, bhaMte! jaisA ki Apa yaha
kaha rahe haiMyoM apratikUla banakara paryupAsanA krnaa| mAnasikI upAsanA arthAt
- ati saMvega ( utsAha yA mumukSu bhAva) apane meM utpanna karake, dharma ke
anurAga meM tIvratA se anurakta honA  /  '] -- usa samaya zramaNa bhagavAn
mahAvIra ne sudarzana zramaNopAsaka, arjuna mAlI aura usa vizAla sabhA ke
sammukha dharmakathA kahI  /  sudarzana dharmakathA sunakara apane ghara lauTa
gyaa| vivecana - prastuta sUtra meM batAyA gayA hai mudgarapANi yakSa dvArA hone
vAle upadrava ke samApta hone para sudarzana ne apane AmaraNa anazana ko samApta
kara diyaa| anazana samApta karane ke anantara seTha sudarzana bar3I gaMbhIratA
evaM dUradarzitA se kAma liyA  /  ve arjuna mAlI ko mUcchita dazA meM dekhakara
bhayabhIta nahIM hue aura unhoMne vahAM se jAne kA bhI prayatna nahIM kiyA,
pratyuta ve vahA~ bar3I zAnti ke sAtha baiThe rahe  /  kAraNa

Page #160 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Sixth Chapter] [119] It is clear. His heart was compassionate, empathetic.
Arjun Mali did not want to leave him in an unconscious state. He thought that
Arjun Mali was now free from bondage, so it is my duty to take care of him and
guide him. It was with this sense of duty that he did not leave from there.
Arjun Mali remained unconscious for a while, "Muhurtantaranam-Muhurtantaran-
Stokakalen"-The word Muhurta means 48 minutes. Two ghadi are called muhurta and
the time less than two ghadi is called antarmuhurta. The sutrakara means that
when the yaksha left Arjun Mali's body, Arjun Mali fell to the ground with a
thud and remained unconscious for some time. After that he regained
consciousness. Upon regaining consciousness, Arjun Mali saw Sudarshan standing
in front of him, inquired about his identity, had some conversation with him,
and reached the feet of Lord Mahavira in the Gunashil Garden with Seth
Sudarshan. Arjun's Pravrajya 13-Then Arjun Mali, in the presence of the Shraman
Bhagwan Mahavira, listened to the Dharma Upadesh and accepted it, became
extremely happy and satisfied, and circumambulated the Lord Mahavira three
times, bowed and prostrated, and said thus: "Bhagavan! I have faith in the
Nirgranth Pravachan, I am interested in it, I want to take Pravrajya at your
feet." Bhagwan Mahavira said: "Devanupriya! Do as you please." Then Arjun Mali
went to the northeast corner and performed the Panchamoustik lunchan himself.
After performing the lunchan, he became an Anagari. He began to live by
cultivating his soul through restraint and austerity. 1.-2. Chapter 3, Sutra 18.
4. Chapter 3, Sutra 2. 3. Chapter 5, Sutra 2. 5. Chapter 3, Sutra 6.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 SaSTha varga] [119 spaSTa hai| unakA hRdaya dayAlu thA, sahAnubhUtipUrNa thaa|
arjuna mAlI ko aceta dazA meM chor3akara ve jAnA nahIM cAhate the| unakA vicAra
thA ki arjuna mAlI aba paravazatA se unmukta ho gayA hai, ataH isakI dekhabhAla
karanA tathA isakA mArgadarzana karanA merA karttavya hai| isI karttavyapAlana
kI buddhi se unhoMne vahAM se prasthAna nahIM kiyaa| arjuna mAlI antarmuhUrta
taka besudha par3A rahA, "muhuttaMtareNaM-muhUrtAntareNa-stokakAlena"-muhUrta
zabda kA artha hai-48 miniTa  /  do ghar3iyoM ko muhUrta kahate haiM aura do
ghar3I se nyUna kAla ko antarmuhUrta kahA jAtA hai| sUtrakAra ke kahane kA Azaya
yaha hai ki arjuna mAlI ke zarIra se jaba yakSa nikala kara calA gayA, usake
anantara arjuna mAlI dhar3Ama se bhUmitala para gira par3A aura kucha samaya
taka behoza par3A rhaa| usake anantara use hoza aayaa| saceta hone para arjuna
mAlI ne sAmane upasthita sudarzana ko dekha unakA paricaya jAnane ke sAtha kucha
saMvAda kiyA aura seTha sudarzana ke sAtha guNazIlaka udyAna meM bhagavAn
mahAvIra ke caraNoM meM pahu~ca gyaa| arjuna kI pravrajyA 13-tae NaM se ajjuNae
mAlAgAre samaNassa bhagavao mahAvIrassa aMtie dhamma soccA nisamma haTThatuDhe
samaNaM bhagavaM mahAvIraM tikkhutto AyAhiNa-payAhiNaM karei, karettA vaMdai
namasai, vaMdittA namaMsittA evaM vayAsI-"saddahAmiNaM bhaMte! niggaMthaM
pAvayaNaM jAva' abbhuDhemiNaM bhaMte! niggaMthaM paavynnN|' 'ahAsuhaM
devANuppiyA! mA paDibaMdhaM krehi|' tae NaM se anjuNae mAlAgAre
uttarapuratthimaM disIbhAgaM avakkamai, avakkamittA sayameva paMcamuTThiyaM
loyaM karei, karettA jAva vihri| tae NaM se anjuNae aNagAre jaM ceva divasaM
muMDe jAva pavvaie taM ceva divasaM samaNaM bhagavaM mahAvIraM vaMdai, namasai,
vaMdittA namaMsittA imaM eyArUvaM abhiggahaM ogeNhai-kappar3a me jAvajjIvAe
chaThaMchaTTeNaM aNikkhitteNaM tavokammeNaM appANaM bhAvamANassa viharittae tti
kaTu ayameyArUvaM abhiggahaM ogiNhai, ogiNhittA jAvajjIvAe jAva' vihri| tae NaM
se ajjuNae aNagAre chaTThakkhamaNapAraNayaMsi paDhamAe porisIe sajjhAyaM karei,
jAva addi| arjana mAlI zramaNa bhagavAna mahAvIra ke pAsa dharmopadeza sanakara
evaM dhAraNa kara atyanta prasanna evaM santuSTa huA aura prabhu mahAvIra ko
tIna bAra AdakSiNa pradakSiNA kara, vaMdana-namaskAra karake isa prakAra
bolA-'bhagavan ! maiM nirgranthapravacana para zraddhA karatA haM,ruci karatA
haM,yAvat Apake caraNoM meM pravrajyA lenA cAhatA huuN|' bhagavAn mahAvIra ne
kahA-'devAnupriya! jaise tumheM sukha upaje, vaisA kro|' taba arjuna mAlI ne
IzAnakoNa meM jAkara svayaM hI paMcamauSTika luMcana kiyA, luMcana karake ve
anagAra ho gye| saMyama va tapa se AtmA ko bhAvita karate hue vicarane lge|
1.-2. varga 3, sUtra 18. 4. varga 3, sUtra 2. 3. varga 5, sUtra 2. 5. varga 3,
sUtra 6.

Page #161 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[120] After this, on the day Arjun Muni took the vows of renunciation and became
a monk, he paid homage to the Lord Mahavira and made this vow: "From today, I
will constantly strive to purify my soul through the practice of austerities,
and I will live my life in this way." Accepting this vow for life, Arjun Muni
began to wander.  After this, on the day of the breaking of the fast of his
austerities, Arjun Muni would study the scriptures in the first watch of the
night and meditate in the second watch. Then, in the third watch, he would go
begging for food in the city of Rajgriha.   **Endurance and Attainment**  [14]
Then, in the city of Rajgriha, while Arjun Muni, the homeless one, was begging
for food in the houses of the high, middle, and low classes, many women, men,
children, and old people would say to him:  "This one killed my father. This one
killed my mother. This one killed my brothers, sisters, sons, daughters,
grandsons, and granddaughters. This one killed my other relatives." They would
be filled with hatred, they would insult him, they would slander him, they would
abuse him, they would despise him, and they would reject him.  Then, Arjun Muni,
the homeless one, would endure all this abuse from those many women, men,
children, and old people. He would bear it patiently, he would forgive them, he
would tolerate them, he would be kind to them. While enduring, forgiving,
tolerating, and being kind, he would beg for food in the city of Rajgriha, in
the houses of the high, middle, and low classes. If he got food, he would not
get a beating. If he got a beating, he would not get food.  Then, Arjun Muni,
the homeless one, would remain undeterred, unmoved, unstained, unattached,
unperturbed, and with his mind focused on his vows. He would leave the city of
Rajgriha, and as soon as he would reach a place with good qualities, he would go
to the Lord Mahavira. He would pay his respects to the Lord Mahavira, and he
would stay close to him, going back and forth. He would take care of his food
and drink, and he would serve the Lord Mahavira. The Lord Mahavira would accept
his service with a smile, without any greed, without any attachment, without any
pride, and without any desire for praise. He would eat his food like a bird,
without any fuss. Then, the Lord Mahavira would leave the city of Rajgriha, and
he would wander in the company of many people.  Then, Arjun Muni, the homeless
one, would attain the state of a monk after six months, due to his great effort,
his great determination, his great merit, and his great devotion. After
attaining this state, he would purify himself for half a month. After purifying
himself, he would fast for thirty days. After fasting, he would become a naked
ascetic, and he would attain liberation.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 120] [antakRddazA isake pazcAt arjuna muni ne jisa dina muMDita ho pravrajyA
grahaNa kI, usI dina zramaNa bhagavAn mahAvIra ko vaMdanA-namaskAra karake isa
prakAra kA abhigraha dhAraNa kiyA-'Aja se maiM nirantara bele-bele kI tapasyA se
AjIvana AtmA ko bhAvita karate hue vicruuNgaa|' aisA abhigraha jIvana bhara ke
lie svIkAra kara arjuna muni vicarane lge| isake pazcAta arjuna muni bele kI
tapasyA ke pAraNe ke dina prathama prahara meM svAdhyAya aura dUsare prahara meM
dhyAna karate  /  phira tIsare prahara meM rAjagRha nagara meM bhikSArtha
bhramaNa krte| parISaha-sahana aura siddhi 14-tae NaM taM ajjuNayaM aNagAraM
rAyagihe nayare ucca jAva (nIya-majjhimAiM kulAI gharasamudANassa
bhikkhAyariyAe) aDamANaM bahave itthIo ya purisA ya DaharA ya mahallA ya juvANA
ya evaM vayAsI _ 'imeNa me pitA maarie| imeNa me mAtA maariyaa| imeNa me bhAyA
bhagiNI bhajA putte dhUyA suNhA maariyaa| imeNa me aNNayare sayaNa-sambandhi-
pariyaNe mArie tti kaTu appegaiyA akkosaMti, appegaiyA hIlaMti niMdati khiMsaMti
garihaMti tajati taaleti|' taeNaM se ajjuNae aNagAre tehiM bahUhiM itthIhi ya
purisehi ya Daharehi ya mahallehi ya juvANaehi ya AosijamANe (AkojamANe)
jAva(hIlemANe, niMdemANe, khiMsemANe, garihemANe, tajjejamANe) tAlejamANe tesiM
maNasA vi appaussamANe sammaM sahai sammaM khamai sammaM titikkhai samma
ahiyAsei, samma sahamANe sammaM khamamANe samma titikkhamANe sammaM ahiyAsemANe
rAyagihe nayare ucca-NIya majjhima-kulAI aDamANe jai bhattaM labhai to pANaM na
labhai, aha pANaM labhai to bhattaM na lbhi| tae NaM se ajjuNae aNagAre adINe
avimaNe akaluse aNAile avisAdI aparitaMtajogI aDai, aDittA rAyagihAo nayarAo
paDiNikkhamai, paDiNikkhamittA jeNeva guNasilae ceie, jeNeva samaNe bhagavaM
mahAvIre jAva (teNeva uvAgacchai, uvAgacchittA samaNassa bhagavao mahAvIrassa
adUra-sAmaMte gamaNAgamaNAe paDikkamei, paDikkamettA esaNamaNesaNaM Aloei,
AloettA bhattapANaM) paDidaMsei, paDidaMsettA samaNeNaM bhagavayA mahAvIreNaM
abbhaNuNNAe samANe amucchie agiddhe agaDhie aNajjhovavaNNe bilamiva
paNNagabhUeNaM appANeNaM tamAhAraM aahaarei| tae NaM samaNe bhagavaM mahAvIre
aNNayA rAyagihAo paDiNikkhamai, paDiNikkhamittA bahiyA jaNavayavihAraM vihri|
tae NaM se ajuNae aNagAre teNaM orAleNa vipuleNaM payatteNaM paggahieNaM
mahANubhAgeNaM tavokammeNa appANaM bhAvemANe bahupaDipuNNe chammAse
sAmaNNapariyAgaM pAuNai, pAuNittA addhamAsiyAe saMlehaNAe appANaM jhUsei,
jhUsettA tIsaM bhattAI aNasaNAe chedei,chedettA jassaTTAe kIrai naggabhAve jAva'
siddhe| usa samaya arjuna muni ko rAjagRha nagara meM ucca-nIca madhyama kuloM
meM bhikSArtha ghUmate hue dekhakara nagara ke aneka nAgarika-strI, puruSa,
bAla, vRddha isa prakAra kahate 1. varga 5, sUtra 6.

Page #162 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Sixth Chapter] [121] "He killed my father. He killed my mother. He killed my
brother, sister, wife, son, daughter, daughter-in-law, and my other relatives."
Saying this, some would abuse, some would mock, some would disrespect, some
would slander, some would criticize by pointing out caste or other flaws, some
would threaten with fear, and some would beat with slaps, bricks, stones,
sticks, etc.  Despite enduring such anger, abuse, mockery, disrespect, slander,
and being beaten and threatened by many women, men, children, old people, and
young people, Arjun Muni did not harbor any hatred in his heart. He patiently
endured all the trials they put him through, accepting them with equanimity. He
considered these hardships as a means to liberation. With right knowledge, he
endured all these troubles, forgave, practiced forbearance, and considered these
hardships as a means to benefit. While wandering for alms in the small, large,
and middle-class families of Rajgriha city, Arjun Muni sometimes got food but
not water, and sometimes got water but not food.  In such a situation, whatever
little food was available, he accepted it with complete humility, without any
desire, without any impurity, without any stain, without any anxiety or
agitation, and without any resentment. He did not feel tired.  Thus, he wandered
for alms. After wandering, he left Rajgriha city and came to the virtuous garden
where the Lord Mahavira was residing. Upon arriving there, he performed the
Pratikramana (reflection on his actions) regarding his coming and going,
criticized the faults he had committed while begging, and then showed the food
and water he had received to Lord Mahavira. After showing it to him and
receiving his permission, he consumed it without fainting, without greed,
without attachment, and without any desire. Just as a snake enters its hole
straight, he consumed the food and water without any attachment or aversion.
Later, one day, the Lord Mahavira left that virtuous garden in Rajgriha city and
went to wander in other regions.  Arjun Muni, with that generous, noble, and
pure heart, having received the great benefit, and having inspired his soul with
abundant penance, followed the Shraman Dharma for six months. Then, he inspired
his soul with half a month of Sanlekhana (a fast leading to death) and completed
the thirty-day fast of a devotee. He fulfilled the purpose for which he had
taken the vow, and Arjun Muni became a Siddha, a Buddha, and a liberated soul.
**Discussion:** While wandering in Rajgriha city for alms, Arjun Muni suffered
hardships at the hands of the people there. Yet, he remained steadfast in his
virtuous conduct, did not harbor any hatred in his heart towards anyone, and
instead, with equanimity, patiently endured all the hardships he faced. This
equanimity resulted in his liberation from all karmic bonds and attainment of
his desired ultimate welfare, Nirvana.  The meaning of the verbs "akkosanti,
hilanti, nindanti, khinsanti, garihanti, tajjenti" is as follows: "akkosanti" -
they criticize with harsh words. Criticism means - curse, blame, scold, speak
ill of.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 SaSTha varga] [121 'isane mere pitA ko mArA hai| isane merI mAtA ko mArA hai|
bhAI ko mArA hai, bahana ko mArA hai, bhAryA mArA hai, putra ko mArA hai, kanyA
ko mArA hai, putravadhU ko mArA hai evaM isane mere amuka svajana sambandhI yA
parijana ko mArA hai| ' aisA kahakara koI gAlI detA, koI hIlanA karatA, anAdara
karatA, niMdA karatA, koI jAti Adi kA doSa batAkara garhA karatA, koI bhaya
batAkara tarjanA karatA aura koI thappar3a, IMTa, patthara, lAThI Adi se tAr3anA
karatA  /  isa prakAra una bahuta se strI-puruSa, bacce, bUr3he aura javAnoM ke
Akroza- gAlI, (hIlanA, anAdara, niMdA gardA sahate hue), tADita- tarjita hote
hue bhI ve arjuna muni una para mana se bhI dveSa nahIM karate hue unake dvArA
diye gae sabhI parISahoM ko samabhAvapUrvaka sahana karate hue una kaSToM ko
samabhAva se jhela lete evaM nirjarA kA lAbha samajhate  /  samyagjJAnapUrvaka
una sabhI saMkaToM ko sahana karate, kSamA karate, titikSA rakhate aura una
kaSToM ko bhI lAbha kA hetu mAnate hue rAjagRha nagara ke choTe-bar3e, evaM
madhyama kuloM meM bhikSA hetu bhramaNa karate hue arjuna muni ko kabhI bhojana
milatA to pAnI nahIM milatA aura pAnI milatA to bhojana nahIM miltaa| vaisI
sthiti meM jo bhI aura jaisA bhI alpa svalpa mAtrA meM prAsuka bhojana unheM
milatA use ve sarvathA adIna, avimana, akaluSa, amalina, Akula-vyAkulatA rahita
akheda-bhAva se grahaNa karate, thakAna anubhava nahIM karate  /  isa prakAra ve
bhikSArtha bhramaNa karate  /  bhramaNa karake ve rAjagRha nagara se nikalate
aura guNazIla udyAna meM, jahAM zramaNa bhagavAn mahAvIra virAjamAna the, vahAM
Ate aura vahAM Akara ( bhagavAn se na ati dUra na ati nikaTa se upasthita hokara
gamanAgamana sambandhI pratikramaNa karate, bhikSA meM lage hue doSoM kI AlocanA
karate) aura phira bhikSA meM mile hue AhAra -pAnI ko prabhu mahAvIra ko
dikhaate| dikhAkara unakI AjJA pAkara mUrcchA rahita, gRddhi rahita, rAga rahita
aura Asakti rahita; jisa prakAra bila meM sarpa sIdhA hI praveza karatA hai, usa
prakAra rAga-dveSa bhAva se rahita hokara usa AhAra- pAnI kA ve sevana karate  /
tatpazcAt kisI dina zramaNa bhagavAn mahAvIra rAjagRha nagara ke usa guNazIla
udyAna se nikalakara bAhara janapadoM meM vihAra karane lage  /  arjuna muni ne
usa udAra, zreSTha pavitra bhAva se grahaNa kiye gaye, mahAlAbhakArI, vipula
tapa se apanI AtmA ko bhAvita karate hue pUre chaha mAsa zramaNa dharma kA
pAlana kiyaa| isake bAda Adhe mAsa kI saMlekhanA se apanI AtmA ko bhAvita karake
tIsa bhakta ke anazana ko pUrNa kara jisa kArya ke liye vrata grahaNa kiyA thA
usako pUrNa kara ve arjuna muni yAvat siddha buddha aura mukta ho gye| vivecana
- rAjagRha nagara meM bhikSA ke nimitta ghUmate hue arjuna muni ko vahAM kI
janatA dvArA kaSTa prApta hue, phira bhI ve apanI sAdhujanocita vRtti meM sthira
rahe, mana se bhI kisI para dveSa nahIM kiyA, pratyuta jo kucha bhI kaSTa prApta
huA, usako samabhAva meM rahate hue bar3I zAnti aura dhairya se sahana kiyA  /
isI samabhAva kA yaha satpariNAma huA ki ve samasta karma-baMdhanoM kA viccheda
karake apane abhISTa parama kalyANasvarUpa nirvANa ko prApta hue  /  'akkosaMti,
hIlaMti, niMdaMti, khiMsaMti, garihaMti, tajjeMti'- ina kriyApadoM kA artha isa
prakAra hai-'akkosaMti'-kaTu vacanoM se bhartsanA karate haiM  /  bhartsanA kA
artha hai - lAnata, malAmata, phaTakAra, burA bhalA

Page #163 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 122]  **Describing the ten types of abuse:**  * **"Heelanti"** - They
disrespect and humiliate. * **"Nindanti"** - They slander. Slander means to
describe someone's faults. * **"Khinsanti"** - They get angry, irritated,
resentful, and try to provoke anger by using harsh words. * **"Garihanti"** -
They expose faults. * **"Tajjenti"** - They scold, reprimand, and try to
intimidate using fingers. * **"Talenti"** - They beat with sticks, stones, etc.
**Explaining the terms "Samm Samhati, Samm Khamathi, Titikkhai, Ahiyaaseti":**
The commentator Abhaydeva Suri writes:  * "Some Acharyas consider all four terms
'Sahati' etc. to have the same meaning. Others differentiate their meanings,
saying:     * **"Sahati"** - They endure hardship without fear.     *
**"Kshamate"** - They remain calm, free from anger.     * **"Titikkhate"** -
They endure hardships without showing any weakness.     * **"Adhisahati"** -
They endure a lot.  These verbs indicate that the tolerance of Arjun Muni was
appropriate and ideal. Tolerance born out of fear is not true tolerance.
Forgiveness that contains anger, where anger is hidden in the heart, cannot be
called forgiveness. And forbearance done out of weakness is not true
forbearance. If even a little bit of passion arises in the mind while enduring
insults, etc., then instead of progress, the soul will be driven towards
downfall.  **To emphasize this point, the sutra uses the words "Adine, Avimane,
Akluse, Anaile, Avisadi, Aparitantjogi".**  The commentator Abhaydeva Suri
explains:  * **"Adine"** - Not being humble due to the absence of sorrow. *
**"Avinmane"** - Not being empty-minded due to a focused mind. * **"Akluse"** -
Not being tainted due to the absence of hatred. * **"Anaile"** - Not being
agitated due to being free from disturbance. * **"Avisadi"** - Not being
depressed due to not having thoughts like "What is the use of my life?" *
**"Aparitantjogi"** - Therefore, he is a continuous yogi, one who is constantly
in samadhi.  This means that Arjun Muni was not humble due to the absence of
sorrow in his mind. He was not empty-minded because his mind was focused. He was
not tainted because there was no hatred in his mind. He was not agitated because
he was free from disturbance. He was not depressed because he did not have
thoughts like "What is the use of my life?" Therefore, he was constantly in
samadhi. He is called "Aparitantjogi" because he was constantly engaged in
samadhi. The word "Aparitantjogi" is formed by adding the suffix "in" to the
word "Aparitantyoga".  **"Bilimiva Pannagabhuena Appaanenam Tamaharam Ahare"** -
This means: Just as a snake enters a hole, so was the food consumed.  The
commentator explains:  * **"Bilimiva Pannagabhu tena Atmana Tamaharam
Aharayati"** - Just as a snake enters a hole without touching the sides, only
through the middle, similarly, the food was consumed without touching the sides
of the mouth, directly entering the throat.  This means that just as a snake
enters a hole without touching the sides, only through the middle, similarly,
Arjun Muni consumed food without touching the sides of his mouth, directly
entering the throat.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 122] [antakRddazA khnaa| 'hIlanti'-anAdara-apamAna karate haiN|
'nindanti'-niMdA karate haiM, nindA kA artha hai-kisI ke doSoM kA varNana krnaa|
'khiMsaMti'-khIjate haiM, jhuMjhalAte haiM, kur3hate haiM, durvacana kahakara
krodhAveza meM lAne kA prayatna karate haiM  /  'garihaMti'-doSoM ko prakaTa
karate haiN| tajjeMti'-tarjanA karate haiM, DAMTate haiM, DapaTate haiM, tarjanI
Adi aMguliyoM dvArA bhayotpanna karane kA prayatna karate haiN|
tAleMti'-lAThiyoM aura pattharoM Adi se mArate haiN| 'sammaM sahati, sammaM
khamati, titikkhai, ahiyAseti'-ina padoM kI vyAkhyA karate hue TIkAkAra
abhayadevasUri likhate haiM _ 'sahate ityAdIni ekArthAni padAnIti kecit  /  anye
tu sahate bhayAbhAvena, kSamate kopAbhAvena, titikSate dainyAbhAvena, adhisahate
Adhikyena sahate iti|' arthAt kucha AcArya sahate Adi cAroM padoM ko ekArthaka
mAnate haiM, kucha inakA arthabheda karate hue kahate haiM- sahate-binA kisI
bhaya se saMkaTa sahana karate haiM  /  kSamate-krodha se dUra rahakara zAnta
rahate haiN| titikSate-kisI prakAra kI dInatA dikhAye binA pariSahoM kA sahana
karate haiN| adhisahate-khUba sahana karate haiM  /  ina kriyApadoM se dhvanita
hotA hai ki arjuna muni kI sahanazIlatA samIcIna aura Adarza thI, jo
sahanazIlatA bhaya ke kAraNa hotI hai, vaha vAstavika sahanazIlatA nahIM hai|
jisa kSamA meM krodha kA aMza vidyamAna hai, hRdaya meM krodha chipA huA hai,
use kSamA nahIM kahA jA sakatA aura dInatApUrvaka kI gaI titikSA vAstavika
titikSA nahIM kahI jA sktii| Akroza Adi pariSahoM ke sahana karane meM yadi
anta-karaNa meM aMzatayA bhI kaSAyoM kA udaya ho jAtA hai to vikAsa ke badale
yaha AtmA patana kI ora pravRtta ho jAtA hai| isakI vizeSa pratIti hetu
sUtrakAra ne-'adINe, avimaNe akaluse, aNAile, avisAdI, aparitaMtajogI' zabdoM kA
prayoga kiyA hai| ina padoM kI vyAkhyA karate hue AcArya abhayadevasUri likhate
haiM-'adINe' tyAdi tatrAdInaH zokAbhAvAta avimanA na zUnyacittaH akaluSo
dveSavarjitatvAt anAvilaH janAkulo vA niHkSobhatvAt aviSAdI kiM me jIvitenetyAdi
cintArahita: ataevAparitAnta:-avizrAnto yogaH-samAdhiryasya saH tathA
svaarthikenntttvaaccaapritaantyogii| isakA artha isa prakAra hai mana meM kisI
prakAra kA zoka na hone se arjuna muni adIna-dInatA se rahita the, samAhita
citta hone se avimana the, dveSa rahita hone se mana meM kisI prakAra kI
kaluSatA-malinatA aura AkulatA nahIM thii| kSobhazUnya hone se mana meM kisI
prakAra kA viSAda-duHkha nahIM thaa| 'merA isa prakAra ke tiraskRta jIvana se
kyA prayojana hai,' aisI glAni unake mana meM nahIM thI, ataeva vaha nirantara
samAdhi meM lIna the| samAdhi meM satata lage rahane ke kAraNa hI arjuna muni ko
aparitAntayogI kahA gayA hai| aparitAntayoga zabda se svArtha meM 'ina' pratyaya
lagA kara aparitAntayogI zabda banatA hai| bilamiva paNNagabhUeNaM appANeNaM
tamAhAraM AhArei'- kA artha hai- jisa prakAra sAMpa bila meM praveza karatA hai,
usI prakAra AhAra ko grahaNa kiyA gyaa| ina padoM kA artha vRttikAra ke zabdoM
meM isa prakAra hai bilamiva pannagabhUtena AtmanA tamAhAramAhArayati-yathA
bhujaMgo bilasya pArzvabhAgadvayamasaMspRzan madhyamArgata evAtmAnaM bile
pravezayati tathA mukhasya pArzvadvayasparzarahitamAhAraM kaNThanAlAbhimukhaM
pravezayA'' hArayatIti bhaavH|' arthAt jaise sarpa bila ke donoM bhAgoM kA
sparza kie binA kevala bila ke madhyabhAga se hI bila

Page #164 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Sixth Chapter] [123 Just as food enters the mouth, in the same way, Arjun Muni,
without touching either side of the mouth, only keeping the mouth, swallows it
down the throat. The implication is that just as a snake does not touch its
limbs while entering a hole, it enters with great hesitation, in the same way,
Arjun Muni, without expecting any kind of taste, free from attachment and
aversion, as if it had not touched the mouth, in this way, only for the purpose
of satisfying hunger, Arjun Muni consumes food. This statement indicates the
complete absence of their sensory perception of taste. The supreme practice of a
restrained person is to conquer the sense of taste. Arjun Muni had understood
the secret of this practice well and had also implemented it in his life. 'Teṇam
Orāleṇam Viuleṇam Payatteṇam Paggahieṇam Mahāṇubhāgeṇam Tavokammeṇam' - Teṇam
Pūrvabhaṇiten Udareṇam-Pradhānena, Vipuleṇam - Viśālena, Bhagavatā Dattena,
Pragṛhītena, Utkṛṣṭabhāvataḥ Svīkṛtena, Mahāṇubhāgena Mahān Anuabhāgaḥ Prabhāvo
Yasya, Teṇam Tapaḥ Karmaṇā. Here, the importance of the penance that Arjun Muni
has performed is expressed. In the present text, Tapa Karma is the special and
Udara etc. are its adjectives. Their meaning is as follows. - Teṇam - This word
refers to the fully described penance. It was mentioned in the case of Arjun
Muni's practice that when Arjun Muni went to the city for alms, he was abused by
the people, he was insulted, he was beaten, yet he endured all these tortures
peacefully. In addition, if he got food, he did not get water, if he got water,
he did not get food. Even though all this happened, Arjun Muni never became
restless, even after fasting for two days, he never felt dejected without
getting satisfactory food. The sutrakara has indicated this type of penance with
the word 'Teṇam'. 'Udara' - The word means - Pradhan. Pradhan is said to be the
greatest. It is easy to stay hungry, control over the sense of taste can also be
done, it is also possible to make a living by begging, but it is not a child's
play to perform penance by being insulted by people and enduring beatings. This
is a very difficult task, a very rigorous practice, which is why the sutrakara
has called Arjun Muni's penance Udara, i.e. the greatest. 'Vipul' - It is said
to be vast. One can endure hardship once, one can face hardship two or three
times, but how difficult is it to live under the shadow of hardship for six
months continuously? It is not difficult to understand. Wherever you go, there
is insult, wherever you enter a house, there is a shower of disrespect, there is
no sign of respect anywhere. In such a situation, to keep the mind calm, to keep
anger away, is a great feat and a great penance, an unprecedented tolerance. It
is possible that this is why the sutrakara has called Arjun Muni's penance
practice Vipul - vast and great. 'Pradatt' - means - given. The penance that
Arjun Muni was performing, he did not start it on his own without asking anyone,
but he started it after receiving the command of Bhagwan Mahavira. Therefore,
the sutrakara has called this penance Pradatt.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 SaSTha varga] [123 meM AhAra meM praviSTa hotA hai, usI prakAra arjuna muni
mukha ke donoM bhAgoM kA sparza kie binA kevala mukha rakha kara gale ke nIce
utAra lete haiM  /  tAtparya yaha hai ki jisa prakAra bila meM praveza karate
samaya sarpa apane aMgoM kA usase sparza nahIM karatA, bar3e saMkoca se usameM
praveza karatA hai, usI prakAra kisI prakAra ke AsvAda kI apekSA na karate hue
rAgadveSa se rahita hokara mukha meM jaise sparza nahIM huA ho, isa prakAra se
kevala kSudhA kI nivRtti ke uddezya se arjuna muni AhAra sevana karate haiM  /
isa kathana se inakI rasaviSayaka mUrcchA ke Atyantika abhAva kA saMsUcana kiyA
gayA  /  saMyamI vyakti kI utkRSTa sAdhanA rasanendriya para vijaya prApta
karanA hai| arjuna muni ne isa sAdhanA ke rahasya ko bhalIbhAMti samajha liyA
thA aura use jIvana meM utAra bhI liyA thaa| 'teNaM orAleNaM viuleNaM payatteNaM
paggahieNaM mahANubhAgeNaM tavokammeNaM' - tena pUrvabhaNitena udAreNa-
pradhAnena, vipulena - vizAlena, bhagavatA dattena, pragRhItena, utkRSTabhAvataH
svIkRtena, mahAnubhAgenamahAn anubhAgaH prabhAvo yasya, tena tapaH karmaNA  /
yahA~ para arjuna muni ne jo tapa ArAdhana kiyA hai usa tapa kI mahattA ko
abhivyakta kiyA gayA hai| prastuta pATha meM tapa karma vizeSya hai aura udAra
Adi usake vizeSaNa haiN| inakI arthavicAraNA isa prakAra hai. - teNaM - yaha
zabda pUrNa pratipAdita tapa kI ora saMketa karatA hai| arjuna muni ke sAdhanA -
prakaraNa meM batAyA gayA ki arjuna muni jaba nagara meM bhikSArtha jAte the
taba unako logoM kI ora se bahuta burA bhalA kahA jAtA thA, unakA apamAna kiyA
jAtA thA, mAra-pITa kI jAtI thI, tathApi ye saba yAtanAeM zAMtipUrvaka sahana
karate the| isake atirikta unako anna mila jAtA to pAnI nahIM milatA thA, kahIM
pAnI mila gayA to anna nahIM milatA thaa| yaha saba kucha hone para bhI arjuna
muni kabhI azAnta nahIM hue, do dinoM ke upavAsa ke pAraNe meM bhI santoSajanaka
bhojana na pAkara unhoMne kabhI glAni anubhava nahIM kii| isa prakAra ke tapa ko
sUtrakAra ne 'teNaM' isa pada se dhvanita kiyA hai  /  'udAra' - zabda kA artha
hai - pradhAna  /  pradhAna saba se bar3e ko kahate haiN| bhUkhA rahanA AsAna
hai, rasanendriya para niyaMtraNa bhI kiyA jA sakatA hai, bhikSA dvArA jIvana kA
nirvAha karanA bhI saMbhava hai para logoM se apamAnita hokara tathA mAra-pITa
sahana kara tapasyA kI ArAdhanA karate cale jAnA baccoM kA khela nahI hai| yaha
bar3A kaThina kArya hai, bar3I kaThora sAdhanA hai, isI kAraNa sUtrakAra ne
arjunamuni ke tapa ko udAra arthAt saba se bar3A kahA hai| 'vipula' - vizAla ko
kahate haiN| eka bAra kaSTa sahana kiyA jA sakatA hai, do yA tIna bAra kaSTa kA
sAmanA kiyA jA sakatA hai, parantu lagAtAra chaha mahInoM taka kaSToM kI chAyA
tale rahanA kitanA kaThina kArya hai ? yaha samajhanA kaThina nahIM hai| jidhara
jAo udhara apamAna, jisa ghara meM praveza karo vahAM anAdara kI varSA, sammAna
kA kahIM cihna bhI nhiiN| aisI dazA meM mana ko zAnta rakhanA, , krodha ko
nikaTa na Ane denA, bar3A hI vilakSaNa sAhasa hai aura bar3I vikaTa tapasyA hai,
apUrva sahiSNutA hai  /  saMbhava hai isIliye sUtrakAra ne arjuna muni kI
tapa:sAdhanA ko vipula - vizAla bar3I kahA hai| 'pradatta'- kA artha hai-diyA
huA  /  arjuna muni jisa tapa kI sAdhanA kara rahe the, yaha tapa unhoMne binA
kisI se pUche apane Apa hI Arambha nahIM kiyA, pratyuta bhagavAn mahAvIra kI
AjJA prApta karake Arambha kiyA thaa| ataeva sUtrakAra ne isa tapa ko pradatta
kahA hai|

Page #165 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 124] **Antakrid Dasha**  'Pragrihit' means 'taken, accepted'. The mental
state of a person who undertakes a vow is not always the same. Sometimes there
is an abundance of faith, sometimes faith weakens, and sometimes a vow is
observed due to social pressure without any faith. Keeping all these things in
mind, the sutrakar has characterized the tapas performed by the muni with the
adjective 'pragrihit', which signifies 'taken with an excellent feeling'. Arjun
Muni's faith did not weaken during times of crisis; he came into the world of
sadhana as a strong sadhak and remained a strong sadhak till the end. He never
let his mind waver.  If the Sanskrit form of 'payattenam' is 'prayatnena', then
'udhar' and 'vipula' both become adjectives of 'prayatna', then the meaning of
these words would be 'taken with a great, vast effort'. Performing tapas is not
an ordinary thing; it requires great effort. This great effort is called
'praadhan vishal prayatna'.  The word 'mahanubhag' signifies a powerful meaning.
What doubt can there be about the impactful importance of the tapas by which
Arjun Muni destroyed the karmas of countless births and attained the ultimate
goal of nirvana?  To burn the karma-mal attached to the soul, the fire of tapas
is absolutely necessary. When the karma-mal is burnt to ashes by the fire of
tapas, the soul becomes pure and clear like a crystal. Therefore, after
accepting restraint, Arjun Muni ignited the fire of tapas to purify his karma-
mal-laden soul. As a result, after attaining kaivalya, he attained the state of
nirvana.  In the Shrenik Charitra, it is written that the Mudgarpani Yaksha
entered the body of Arjun Malakar for five months and thirteen days. During this
time, he killed 1141 people. Of these, 978 were men and 163 were women. This
clearly proves that he killed seven people every day. Here, there is a doubt
that how could a person who committed such a great animal-slaughter and caused a
great fall of the soul due to sinful karma attain liberation with only six
months of sadhana?  The answer is that tapas has an inconceivable, illogical,
and miraculous power. The Agam says, 'Bhavkodi sanchiyam kammam tavasa
nijjarrijjai'. That is, the karmas accumulated and bound over millions of births
can be destroyed by tapascharya. It is also said:  — Annanni jam kammam khavei
bhavasayasahasakodhihim. Tam naani tihim gutto, khavei usasamettenam. —
Pravachansar  That is, the ignorant soul consumes the karmas that it accumulates
over millions of births, while the wise soul, who keeps the mind, speech, and
body secret, destroys them in a moment as short as a breath. When the fire of
intense tapas is ignited, the groups of karmas are burnt to ashes like dry grass
and straw.  In addition to this, it can also be said in this context that the
killing done by Arjun Malakar was actually done by the Yaksha. Arjun was under
the control of the Yaksha at that time. He was acting like a machine. Therefore,
the intensity of the kashaya that makes killing humans appropriate was not
possible in him.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 124] [ antakRddazA 'pragRhIta' kA artha hai - grahaNa kiyA huA  /  kisI bhI
vrata grahaNa karane vAle vyakti kI mAnasika sthiti eka jaisI nahIM rhtii| kisI
samaya mana meM zraddhA kA atireka hotA hai aura kisI samaya zraddhA kamajora
par3a jAtI hai aura kisI samaya lokalajjA ke kAraNa binA zraddhA ke hI vrata kA
paripAlana kiyA jAtA hai  /  ina saba bAtoM ko dhyAna meM rakhakara sUtrakAra ne
muni dvArA kRta tapa ko pragRhIta vizeSaNa se vizeSita kiyA hai, jo utkRSTa
bhAvanA se grahaNa kiyA huA, isa artha kA bodhaka hai| arjuna muni kI AsthA
saMkaTa kAla meM zithila nahIM huI, ve sudRr3ha sAdhaka bana kara sAdhanA-jagat
meM Ae the aura anta taka sudRr3ha sAdhaka hI rhe| unhoMne apane mana ko kabhI
DAMvADola nahIM hone diyA  /  yadi payatteNaM kA saMskRta rUpa prayatnena kiyA
jAya to udAra aura vipula ye donoM prayatna ke vizeSaNa bana jAte haiM, taba ina
zabdoM kA artha hogA- pradhAna vizAla prayatna se grahaNa kiyA gyaa| tapa karanA
sAdhAraNa bAta nahIM hai, isake liye bar3e puruSArtha kI AvazyakatA hotI hai|
isI mahAn puruSArtha ko pradhAna vizAla prayatna kahA gayA hai 1 'mahAnubhAga'
zabda prabhAvazAlI artha kA bodhaka hai| jisa tapa ke pratApa se arjunamuni ne
janmajanmAntara ke karmoM ko naSTa kara diyA, parama sAdhya nirvANa prApta kara
liyA, usakI prabhAvagata mahattA meM kyA AzaMkA ho sakatI hai  /  AtmA ke sAtha
lage hue karma-mala ko jalAne ke liye tapa rUpa agni kI nitAnta AvazyakatA hotI
hai| tapa rUpa agni ke dvArA karma-mala ke bhasmasAt hone para AtmA zuddha
sphaTika kI bhAMti nirmala ho jAtI hai| isalie arjunamuni ne saMyama grahaNa
karane ke anantara apane karmamala yukta AtmA ko nirmala banAne ke lie taparUpa
agni ko prajvalita kiyA  /  pariNAma svarUpa ve kaivalya-prApti ke anantara
nirvANa-pada ko prApta hue  /  zreNikacaritra meM likhA hai ki arjunamAlI ke
zarIra meM mudgarapANi yakSa kA pAMca mAsa 13 dinoM taka praveza rhaa| usase
usane 1141 vyaktiyoM kA prANAnta kiyA  /  isameM 978 puruSa aura 163 striyAM
thIM  /  isase spaSTa pramANita hai ki vaha pratidina sAta vyaktiyoM kI hatyA
karatA rhaa| yahAM eka AzaMkA hotI hai ki jisa vyakti ne itanA bar3A prANi-vadha
kiyA aura pApa karma se AtmA kA mahAn patana kiyA, usa vyakti ko kevala chaha
mAsa kI sAdhanA se kaise mukti prApta ho gaI? uttara yaha ki tapa meM acintya,
atarkya evaM adbhuta zakti hai  /  Agama kahatA hai- 'bhavakoDisaMciyaM kammaM
tavasA nijjarijjai  /  ' arthAt karor3oM bhavoM meM saMcita kie bAMdhe karma bhI
tapazcaryA dvArA naSTa kie jA sakate haiN| yaha bhI kahA gayA hai -- aNNANI jaM
kammaM khavei bhavasayasahassakoDIhiM  /  taM nANI tihiM gutto, khavei
UsAsametteNaM  //  - pravacanasAra arthAt ajJAnI jIva jina karmoM ko lAkhoM-
karor3oM bhavoM meM khapA pAtA hai, unheM trigupta-mana-vacana, kAya kA gopana
karane vAlA jJAnI AtmA eka zvAsa jitane svalpa kAla meM kSaya kara DAlatA hai  /
jaba tIvratara tapa kI agni prajvalita hotI hai to karmoM ke dala ke dala sUkhe
ghAsa-phUsa kI taraha bhasmasAt ho jAte haiM  /  isake atirikta prastuta
prasaMga meM yaha bhI kahA jA sakatA hai ki arjuna mAlAkAra dvArA jo vadha kiyA
gayA, vaha vastutaH yakSa dvArA kiyA gayA vadha thaa| arjuna usa samaya
yakSAviSTa hone se parAdhIna thaa| vaha to yaMtra kI bhAMti pravRtti kara rahA
thaa| ataeva manuSyavadha yogya kaSAya kI tIvratA usameM saMbhava nahIM thI  /

Page #166 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Sixth Chapter] [125 4-14 Study of Kashyap and other Gahapati] 15-At that time,
in the city of Rajagriha, there was a garden called Gunasil. The king was named
Srenic. There lived a Gahapati named Kashyap. He followed the Dikshaparaya for
sixteen years, like Makai. He attained Siddhi on the Vipulagiri mountain.
Similarly, Kshemak Gahapati was also a resident of Kakandhi city. He followed
the Dikshaparaya for sixteen years and attained Siddhi on the Vipulagiri
mountain. Similarly, Dhritihar Gahapati was also a resident of Kakandhi city. He
followed the Muni-charitra for sixteen years and attained Siddhi on the
Vipulagiri mountain. Similarly, Kailash Gahapati was also a resident of Saketa
city. He followed the Dikshaparaya for twelve years and attained Siddhi on the
Vipulagiri mountain. Similarly, the eighth, Harichandan Gahapati was also a
resident of Saketa city. He followed the Shraman-charitra for twelve years and
attained Siddhi on the Vipulagiri mountain. Similarly, the ninth, Varatt
Gahapati was a resident of Rajagriha city. He followed the charitra for twelve
years and attained Siddhi on the Vipulagiri mountain. Similarly, Sudarshan
Gahapati was a resident of the city of Vanijagrama. He followed the Dikshaparaya
for five years and attained Siddhi on the Vipulagiri mountain. Similarly,
Punnabhadda Gahapati was a resident of the city of Vanijagrama. He followed the
Dikshaparaya for five years and attained Siddhi on the Vipulagiri mountain.
Similarly, Sumanbhadda Gahapati was a resident of the city of Savatthi. He
followed the Dikshaparaya for many years and attained Siddhi on the Vipulagiri
mountain. Similarly, Supaita Gahapati was a resident of the city of Savatthi. He
followed the Dikshaparaya for twenty-seven years and attained Siddhi on the
Vipulagiri mountain. Similarly, Meha Gahapati was a resident of the city of
Rajagriha. He followed the Dikshaparaya for many years and attained Siddhi on
the Vipulagiri mountain.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 SaSTha varga] [125 4-14 adhyayana kAzyapa Adi gAthApati 15-teNaM kAleNaM teNaM
samaeNaM rAyagihe nayare, guNasilae ceie| seNie rAyA, kAsave nAma gAhAvaI
privsi| jahA mkaaii| solasa vAsA priyaao| vipule siddhe| evaM-khemae vi gAhAvaI,
navaraM-kAyaMdI nyrii| solasa vAsA priyaao| vipule pavvae siddhe| evaM-dhiihare
vi gAhAvaI, kAyaMdIe nyriie| solasa vAsA priyaao| vipule siddhe| evaM-kelAse vi
gAhAvaI, navaraM-sAee ngre| bArasa vAsAiM priyaao| vipule siddhe| evaM-
haricaMdaNe vi gAhAvaI, sAee nayare- bArasa vAsA priyaao| vipule siddhe| evaM-
vArattae vi gAhAvaI, navaraM-rAyagihe nyre| bArasa vAsA priyaao| vipule siddhe|
evaM-sudaMsaNe vi gAhAvaI, navaraM-vANiyaggAme nyre| dUipalAsae ceie| paMca vAsA
priyaao| vipule siddhe| evaM-puNNabhadde vi gAhAvaI, vANiyaggAme nyre| paMca
vAsA priyaao| vipule siddhe| evaM-sumaNabhadde vi gAhAvaI, sAvatthIe nnyriie|
bahuvAsAiM priyaao| vipule siddhe| evaM-supaiTe vi gAhAvaI, sAvatthIe nnyriie|
sattavIsaM vAsA priyaao| vipule siddhe| evaM-mehe vi gAhAvaI, rAyagihe nyre|
bahUI vAsAiM priyaao| vipule siddhe| usa kAla usa samaya rAjagRha nagara meM
guNazIla nAmaka udyAna thaa| vahAM zreNika rAjA rAjya karatA thaa| vahAM kAzyapa
nAma kA eka gAthApati rahatA thaa| usane makAI kI taraha solaha varSa taka
dIkSAparyAya kA pAlana kiyA aura anta samaya meM vipulagiri parvata para jAkara
saMthArA Adi karake siddha buddha aura mukta ho gyaa| isI prakAra kSemaka
gAthApati kA varNana samajheM  /  vizeSa itanA hai ki kAkaMdI nagarI ke ve
nivAsI the aura solaha varSa kA unakA dIkSAkAla rahA, yAvat ve bhI vipulagira
para siddha hue| aise hI dhRtidhara gAthApati kA bhI varNana smjheN| ve kAkaMdI
ke nivAsI the| solaha varSa taka municAritra pAlakara ve bhI vipulagiri para
siddha hue| isI prakAra kailAza gAthApati bhI the| vizeSa yaha ki ye sAketa
nagara ke rahane vAle the, inhoMne bAraha varSa kI dIkSAparyAya pAlI aura
vipulagiri parvata para siddha hue| aise hI AThaveM haricandana gAthApati bhI
the| ve bhI sAketa nagara ke nivAsI the| unhoMne bhI bAraha varSa taka
zramaNacAritra kA pAlana kiyA aura anta meM vipulagiri para siddha hue| isI
taraha navameM vAratta gAthApati rAjagRha nagara ke rahane vAle the| bAraha
varSa kA cAritra pAlana kara ve vipulagiri para siddha hue|

Page #167 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  [126]  **Antakrid Dasha**  Understand the description of the tenth Sudarshan
Gaathapati in the same way. The special thing is that there was a garden called
Tiplaash outside the city of Vanijyagram. He was initiated there. After
observing the vows for five years, he attained Siddhi from Vipulagiri.  The
description of Purnabhadra Gaathapati is also similar. The special thing is that
he was a resident of the city of Vanijyagram. After observing the vows for five
years, he also attained Siddhi on Vipulachal mountain.  Sumanabhadra Gaathapati
was a resident of the city of Shravasti. He attained Siddhi on Vipulachal after
observing the vows for many years.  Suप्रतिष्ठित Gaathapati was from the city of
Shravasti and attained Siddhi on Vipulagiri after observing restraint for
twenty-seven years.  Understand the story of Megh Gaathapati in the same way.
Special - He was a resident of Rajgriha and attained Siddhi on Vipulagiri after
observing the vows for many years.  **Discussion**  This sutra mentions eleven
Shravakas. All of them, breaking the bonds of attachment and delusion, and
connecting with detachment, reached the feet of the auspicious Karunasagar
Bhagwan Mahavira and were initiated. The differences in their lives are given in
the following table:  **Name** | **City** | **Garden** | **Years of Vows** |
**Place of Initiation** | **Place of Nirvana** ------- | -------- | -------- |
-------- | -------- | -------- 1. Shri Kashyapji | Rajgriha | Gunashil | 16
years | Vipul Parv | Vipul Parvat 2. Shri Kshemakji | Kakand | Dyutipalaash | 16
years | Vipul Parvat | Vipul Parvat 3. Shri Dhriti Dharji | Kakand |  | 16 years
| Vipul Parvat | Vipul Parvat 4. Shri Kailashji | Saketa |  | 12 years | Vipul
Parvat | Vipul Parvat 5. Shri Harichandanji | Saketa |  | 12 years | Vipul
Parvat | Vipul Parvat 6. Shri Varattji | Rajgriha |  | 12 years | Vipul Parvat |
Vipul Parvat 7. Shri Sudarshanji | Vanijyagram |  | 5 years | Vipul Parvat |
Vipul Parvat 8. Shri Purnabhadraji | Vanijyagram |  | 5 years | Vipul Parvat |
Vipul Parvat 9. Shri Sumanabhadraji | Shravasti |  | Many years | Vipul Parvat |
Vipul Parvat 10. Shri Suप्रतिष्ठितji | Shravasti |  | 27 years | Vipul Parvat |
Vipul Parvat 11. Shri Meghkumarji | Rajgriha |  | Many years | Vipul Parvat |
Vipul Parvat

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 126] [ antakRddazA dazaveM sudarzana gAthApati kA varNana bhI isI prakAra
smjheN| vizeSa yaha ki vANijyagrAma nagara ke bAhara tipalAza nAma kA udyAna
thaa| vahAM dIkSita hue| pAMca varSa kA cAritra pAlakara vipulagiri se siddha
hue  /  pUrNabhadra gAthApati kA varNana bhI aisA hI hai| vizeSa yaha ki ve
vANijyagrAma nagara ke rahane vAle the  /  pAMca varSa kA cAritra pAlana kara
vaha bhI vipulAcala parvata para siddha hue  /  sumanabhadra gAthApati zrAvastI
nagarI ke vAsI the| bahuta varSoM taka cAritra pAlakara vipulAcala para siddha
hue  /  supratiSThita gAthApati zrAvastI nagarI ke the aura sattAIsa varSa
saMyama pAlakara vipulagiri para siddha hue  /  megha gAthApati kA vRttAnta bhI
aise hI samajheM  /  vizeSa- rAjagRha ke nivAsI the aura bahuta varSa taka
cAritra pAlakara vipulagiri para siddha hue  /  vivecana prastuta sUtra meM
gyAraha zrAvakoM kA ullekha kiyA gayA hai| ye saba moha-mamatva ke baMdhana
tor3akara tathA vairAgya se nAtA jor3akara maMgalamaya karuNAsAgara bhagavAn
mahAvIra ke caraNoM meM pahuMcakara dIkSita ho gye| inake jIvana meM jo-jo
aMtara hai va nimnokta tAlikA meM diyA jA rahA hai nAma 1. zrI kAzyapajI 2. zrI
kSemakajI 3. zrI dhRtidharajI 4. zrI kailAzajI 5. zrI haricandanajI 6. zrI
vArattajI 7. zrI sudarzanajI 8. zrI pUrNabhadrajI 9. zrI sumanabhadrajI 10. zrI
supratiSThitajI 11. zrI meghakumArajI nagara rAjagRha nagara kAkaMdI nagarI
kAkaMdI nagarI sAketa nagara sAketa nagara rAjagRha nagara vANijyagrAma nagara
vANijyagrAma nagara zrAvastI nagarI zrAvastI nagarI rAjagRha nagara udyAna
guNazIla dyutipalAza dIkSA - paryAya nirvANa sthAna 16 varSa vipula parva vipula
parvata vipula parvata vipula parvata 16 varSa 16 varSa 12 varSa 12 varSa 12
varSa 05 varSa 05 varSa aneka varSa 27 varSa aneka varSa vipula parvata vipula
parvata vipula parvata vipula parvata vipula parvata vipula parvata vipula
parvata

Page #168 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Fifteenth Study The begging of Ati Mukta Gautam Swami and Ati Mukta 16-At
that time, in that era, in the city of Polapur, in the garden of Srivan, there
was a king named Vijay. His queen was named Sri, here is a description of the
king and queen. 1. Section 3, Sutra 13

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pandrahavA~ adhyayana atimukta gautama svAmI kI bhikSAcaryA aura atimukta
16-teNaM kAleNaM teNaM samaeNaM polAsapure nyre| sirivaNe ujjaanne| tattha NaM
polAsapure nayare vijaya nAmaM rAyA hotthaa| tassa NaM vijayassa raNo sirI nAmaM
devI hotthA, vnnnno| tassa NaM vijayassa raNNo putte sirIe devIe attae aimutte
nAma kumAre hotthA, suumaalpaannipaae| teNaM kAleNaM teNaM samaeNaM samaNe
bhagavaM mahAvIre jAva (puvvANupuvviM caramANe gAmANugAma dUijjamANe
suhaMsuheNaM viharamANe jeNAmeva polAsapure nayare sirivaNe ujANe teNeva
uvAgacchai, uvAgacchittA ahApaDirUvaM oggahaM ogiNhittA saMjameNaM tavasA
appANaM bhAvemANe) vihri| teNaM kAleNaM teNaM samaeNaM samaNassa bhagavao
mahAvIrassa jeTe aMtevAsI iMdabhUI aNagAre jahA paNNattIe jAva bhagavaM goyame
chaTThakkhamaNapAraNayaMsi paDhamAe porisIe sajjhAyaM karei, bIyAe porisIe
jhANaM jhiyAyai, taiyAe porisIe aturiyamacavalamasaMbhante muhapottiyaM
paDilehei, paDilehittA bhAyaNAI vatthAI paDilehei, paDilehittA bhAyaNAI
pamajjai, pamajittA bhAyaNAI uggahei, uggahittA jeNeva samaNe bhagavaM mahAvIre
teNeva uvAgacchai, uvAgacchittA samaNaM bhagavaM mahAvIraM vaMdai namasai,
vaMdittA namaMsittA evaM vayAsI 'icchAmi NaM bhaMte! tubbhehiM abbhaNuNNAe
chaTThakkhamaNapAraNagaMsi polAsapure nayare ucca (nIya-majjhimAiM kulAI
gharasamudANassa bhikkhAyariyAe additte)| ahAsuhaM devANuppiyA! mA paDibaMdhaM
/  tae NaM bhagavaM goyame samaNeNaM bhagavayA mahAvIreNaM abbhaNuNNAe samANe
samaNassa bhagavao mahAvIrassa aMtiyAo sirivaNAo ujjANAo paDinikkhamai,
paDinikkhamittA aturiyamacavalamasaMbhaMte jugaMtarapaloyaNAe diTThIe puraoriyaM
sohemANe sohemANe jeNeva polAsapure nayare teNeva uvAgacchai, uvAgacchittA
polAsapure nayare ucca-nIya-majjhimAiM kulAI gharasamudANassa bhikkhAyariyaM)
addi| imaM ca NaM aimutte kumAre pahAe jAva' savvAlaMkAravibhUsie bahUhiM
dAragehi ya dAriyAhi ya DiMbhaehi ya DibhiyAhi ya kumAraehi ya kumAriyAhi ya
saddhiM saMparivuDe sAo gihAo paDiNikkhamai, paDiNikkhamittA jeNeva iMdaTThANe
teNeva uvAgae, tehiM bahUhiM dAraehi ya saMparivuDe abhiramANe-abhiramamANe
vihri| tae NaM bhagavaM goyame ucca jAvaM aDamANe iMdaTThANassa dUrasAmaMteNaM
viiiivyi| usa kAla aura usa samaya meM polAsapura nAmaka nagara thaa| vahAM
zrIvana nAmaka udyAna thaa| usa nagara meM vijaya nAmaka rAjA thaa| usa kI
zrIdevI nAma kI mahArAnI thI, yahAM rAjA aura rAnI kA varNana 1. varga 3, sUtra
13

Page #169 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[128] [ Antakrid Dasha ] This should be understood from the Auppapatika Sutra.
The son of Maharaja Vijay and the son of Shridevi was a Kumar named Ati Mukt who
was very delicate. At that time and at that time, Shraman Bhagwan Mahavira was
wandering, purifying one village after another, and staying free from physical
pain - the obstacle to restraint - pain, and staying in the Shrivan garden of
the city of Polaspur. At that time, at that time, Shraman Bhagwan Mahavira's
eldest disciple, Indrabhuti, was constantly performing tapasya according to the
Vyākhyāprajñapti, cultivating the soul with restraint and tapasya. On the day of
the par, in the first pauri, he performs swadhyay, in the second pauri, he
meditates, and in the third pauri, he writes the Mukhavastrika without physical
haste, mental fickleness, anxiety, and curiosity. Then he writes the vessels and
clothes. Then, after cleaning the vessels and taking the vessels, he came to
where Shraman Bhagwan Mahavira was seated, bowed to the Bhagwan, and said this:
'O Bhagwan! Today, on the day of the parana of the Shashthabhakta, I want to go
to the city of Polaspur to take alms according to the method of alms-giving in
the high, low, and middle castes, with your permission.' Shraman Bhagwan
Mahavira said - Devanupriya! Do as you please, do not delay. With the permission
of the Bhagwan, Gautam Swami left from the Bhagwan's side, from the Shrivan
garden. Leaving, he looked at the Yuga (Dhusra) proof land without physical
haste and mental fickleness, and without anxiety and curiosity, and came to the
city of Polaspur with Iryasamit. There, he began to wander in the high, low, and
middle castes according to the method of alms-giving. On the other hand, Ati
Mukt Kumar, after bathing and adorning his body, left his house with many boys
and girls, children, and young men and women, and came to the Indra-sthana, that
is, the playground. There, he began to play with those children. At that time,
Bhagwan Gautam was wandering in the city of Polaspur, in the rich, poor, and
middle castes, and was passing by that playground. Discussion - The present
Sutra presents the description of the sweet meeting or first meeting of Ati Mukt
Kumar, the prince of Polaspur, and Gautam, the first Ganadhar of Shraman Bhagwan
Mahavira. In this, the word 'Daraihi Ya, Dimbhahi Ya, Kumarahi Ya' is used for
those with whom Ati Mukt plays. The words Darak, Dimbhak, and Kumar all seem to
be synonymous, but the Vrittikar has explained their different meanings as
follows: Darak - ordinary child, good age, Dimbhak - young age, Kumar -
unmarried. The place of playing is called 'Indatthan'. It means a playground,
where a thick pillar called Indrastambha is planted and children play.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 128] [ antakRddazA aupapAtikasUtra se samajha lenA caahie| mahArAjA vijaya kA
putra aura zrIdevI kA Atmaja atimukta nAma kA kumAra thA jo atIva sukumAra thA
/  usa kAla aura usa samaya zramaNa bhagavAn mahAvIra kramazaH vicarate hue, eka
grAma se dUsare grAma ko pAvana karate hue aura zArIrika kheda se rahita -
saMyama meM Ane vAlI bAdhA - pIr3A se rahita vihAra karate hue polAsapura nagara
ke zrIvana udyAna meM pdhaare| usa kAla, usa samaya zramaNa bhagavAn mahAvIra ke
jyeSTha ziSya indrabhUti, vyAkhyAprajJapti meM kahe anusAra nirantara bele- bele
kA tapa karate hue saMyama aura tapa se AtmA ko bhAvita karate hue vicarate the
/  pAra ke dina pahalI paurisI meM svAdhyAya, dUsarI paurisI meM dhyAna aura
tIsarI paurisI meM zArIrika zIghratA se rahita, mAnasika capalatA rahita,
AkulatA aura utsukatA rahita hokara mukhavastrikA kI pratilekhanA karate haiM
aura phira pAtroM aura vastroM kI pratilekhanA karate haiN| phira pAtroM kI
pramArjanA karake aura pAtroM ko lekara jahAM zramaNa bhagavAn mahAvIra
virAjamAna the vahAM Ae, Akara bhagavAn ko vaMdanA - namaskAra kara isa prakAra
nivedana kiyA 'he bhagavan! Aja SaSThabhakta ke pAraNe ke dina ApakI AjJA hone
para polAsapura nagara meM UMca, nIca aura madhyama kuloM meM bhikSA kI vidhi ke
anusAra bhikSA lene ke liye jAnA cAhatA huuN|' zramaNa bhagavAn mahAvIra ne
kahA- devAnupriya ! jisa prakAra tumheM sukha ho, karo, usameM vilamba na karo
/  bhagavAn kI AjJA hone para gautamasvAmI bhagavAn ke pAsa se, zrIvana udyAna
se nikle| nikala kara zArIrika tvarA aura mAnasika capalatA se rahita evaM
AkulatA va utsukatA se rahita yuga ( dhUsarA ) pramANa bhUmi ko dekhate hue
IryAsamitipUrvaka polAsapura nagara meM aaye| vahAM UMca-nIca aura madhyama
kuloM meM bhikSA kI vidhi anusAra bhikSA hetu bhramaNa karane lage  /  idhara
atimukta kumAra snAna karake yAvat zarIra kI vibhUSA karake bahuta se lar3ake-
lar3akiyoM, bAlaka-bAlikAoM aura kumAra-kumAriyoM ke sAtha apane ghara se nikale
aura nikala kara jahAM indra- sthAna arthAt krIDAsthala thA vahAM aaye| vahAM
Akara una bAlaka-bAlikAoM ke sAtha khelane lage  /  usa samaya bhagavAn gautama
polAsapura nagara meM sampanna - asampanna tathA madhyama kuloM meM yAvat
bhramaNa karate hue usa krIr3Asthala ke pAsa se jA rahe the  /  vivecana -
prastuta sUtra polAsapura ke rAjakumAra atimukta kumAra tathA zramaNa bhagavAn
mahAvIra ke prathama gaNadhara gautama ke madhura milana yA prathama mulAkAta kA
varNana prastuta karatA 1 isameM atimukta jinake sAtha khelate haiM, unake liye
'dAraehi ya, DiMbhaehi ya, kumAraehi ya' zabda kA prayoga huA hai  /  dAraka,
DiMbhaka tathA kumAra ye tInoM zabda samAnArthI pratIta hote haiM parantu
vRttikAra ne inake vibhinna artha isa prakAra batAye haiM- dAraka - sAmAnya
bAlaka, acchI Ayu vAlA, DiMbhaka-choTI Ayu vAlA, kumAra - avivAhita  /  khelane
ke sthAna ko 'iMdaTThANe' kahA hai| jisakA artha hotA hai krIDAsthAna, jahAM
para indrastambhanAmaka eka moTA khambhA gAr3akara bAlaka aura bAlikAeM khelate
haiN|

Page #170 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Sixth Chapter] [129 The meeting of Gautama and Ati Mukta Kumar] 17. Then Ati
Mukta Kumar saw Bhagavan Gautama walking in the distance. Seeing him, he went to
where Bhagavan Gautama was and said to him, "Bhagavan Gautama, who are you? And
why are you wandering?" Then Bhagavan Gautama said to Ati Mukta Kumar, "We are
Devānupriyā, Śramaṇa Nirgrantha, living as Iryāsamiti, etc., up to Brahmachārī,
wandering for alms in small and large families." Then Ati Mukta Kumar said to
Bhagavan Gautama, "Bhagavan! Come, I will give you alms." Saying this, Ati Mukta
Kumar took Bhagavan Gautama's finger and brought him to his house. Seeing
Bhagavan Gautama coming, the queen Śrīdevī was very happy and got up from her
seat and came before Bhagavan Gautama. She circumambulated Bhagavan Gautama
three times from the right side, bowed to him, and offered him a plentiful
offering of food, drink, and delicacies, and then dismissed him according to the
proper procedure. Then Ati Mukta Kumar said to Bhagavan Gautama, "Bhagavan,
where do you live?" Then Bhagavan Gautama said to Ati Mukta Kumar, "Devānupriyā,
I live in the forest of Śrīvana, outside the city of Pōlāspur, in a secluded
place, in a cave, practicing restraint and self-control, and living in
accordance with the Dharma preached by the Śramaṇa Bhagavan Mahāvīra." 1.
Chapter 3, Sutra 18. 2. Chapter 1, A. 1, Sutra 2.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 SaSTha varga] [129 gautama aura atimukta kumAra kA samAgama 17-tae NaM se
aimutte kumAre bhagavaM goyamaM adUrasAmaMteNaM vIIvayamANaM pAsai, pAsittA
jeNeva bhagavaM goyame teNeva uvAgae, bhagavaM goyama evaM vayAsI 'ke NaM
bhaMte! tubbhe? kiM vA aDaha?' tae NaM bhaMte goyame aimuttaM kumAraM evaM
vayAsI-'amhe NaM devANuppiyA! samaNA niggaMthA iriyAsamiyA jAva' guttabaMbhayArI
ucca jAva(nIya-majjhimAI kulAiM gharasamudANassa bhikkhAyariyAe) addaamo|' tae
NaM aimutte kumAre bhagavaM goyama evaM vayAsI-eha NaM bhaMte! tubbhe jA NaM
ahaM tubbhaM bhikkhaM davAvemi tti kaTu bhagavaM goyamaM aMgulIe geNhai,
geNhittA jeNeva sae gihe teNeva uvaage| tae NaM sA siridevI bhagavaM goyamaM
ejamANaM pAsai, pAsittA haTThatuTThA AsaNAo abbhuDhei, abbhuDhettA jeNeva
bhagavaM goyame teNeva uvaagyaa| bhagavaM goyamaM tikkhutto AyAhiNaM-payAhiNaM
karei, karettA, vaMdai, namasai, vaMdittA namaMsittA viuleNaM asaNa-pANa-khAima-
sAimeNaM paDilAbhei, paDilAbhettA pddivisjei| tae NaM se aimutte kumAre bhagavaM
goyamaM evaM vayAsI'kahi NaM bhaMte! tubbhe parivasaha?' tae NaM se bhagavaM
goyame aimuttaM kumAraM evaM vayAsI 'evaM khalu devANuppiyA! mama dhammAyarie
dhammovadesae samaNe bhagavaM mahAvIre Aigare jAva' saMpAviukAme iheva
polAsapurassa nayarassa bahiyA sirivaNe ujANe ahApaDirUvaM oggahaM ogiNhittA
saMjameNaM tavasA appANaM bhAvemANe vihri| tattha NaM amhe privsaamo| usa samaya
atimukta kumAra ne bhagavAn gautama ko pAsa se jAte hue dekhA  /  dekhakara
jahAM bhagavAn gautama the vahAM Aye aura bhagavAn gautama se isa prakAra bole
'bhaMte ! Apa kauna haiM? aura kyoM ghUma rahe haiM?' taba bhagavAn gautama ne
atimukta kumAra ko isa prakAra kahA- 'he devAnupriya! hama zramaNa nirgrantha
haiM, IryAsamiti Adi sahita yAvat brahmacArI haiM, choTe-bar3e kuloM meM
bhikSArtha bhramaNa karate haiN|' _yaha sunakara atimukta kumAra bhagavAn
gautama se isa prakAra bole-'bhagavan! Apa Ao ! maiM Apako bhikSA dilAtA huuN|'
aisA kahakara atimukta kumAra ne bhagavAn gautama kI aMgulI pakar3I aura unako
apane ghara le aaye| zrIdevI mahArAnI bhagavAn gautama ko Ate dekha bahuta
prasanna huI yAvat Asana se uThakara bhagavAn gautama ke sammukha aaii| bhagavAn
gautama ko tIna bAra dakSiNa tarapha se pradakSiNA karake vaMdanA kI, namaskAra
kiyA phira vipula azana, pAna, khAdima aura svAdima se pratilAbha diyA yAvat
vidhipUrvaka visarjita kiyaa| isake bAda bhagavAn gautama se atimukta kumAra isa
prakAra bole 1. varga 3, sUtra 18. 2. varga 1, a. 1, sUtra 2.

Page #171 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Antakṛddaśā 'He devānupriya! Where do you reside?' Bhagavān Gautama replied to
Atimukta Kumāra  Devānupriya! My spiritual preceptors and Dharma teachers, the
Omniscient Lord Mahāvīra, the founder of the Dharma, aspiring for the eternal
abode of liberation (mokṣa), are residing in the Śrīvana garden outside this
Paurasapura city, observing restraint and austerities to purify their soul. We
reside there.'  Explanation - From the study of this sūtra, it is clear that the
young Atimukta Kumāra had asked Bhagavān Gautama three questions. The questions
were - Who are you? For what purpose are you wandering? Where do you reside? The
present sūtra also provides the answers to all three questions. While answering
the first question, Bhagavān Gautama introduced himself and also described the
code of conduct of a ascetic.  In the answer to the first question, Gautama
Svāmī said - 'We are Śramaṇas, free from possessions, observing the Īryāsamiti,
and celibate.' In fact, these four words are indicative of the code of conduct
of an ascetic. Their explanation is as follows - The great beings who have
equanimity towards all living beings are called Śramaṇas. Those who are devoid
of possessions or in whom there is no attachment-aversion are called Nirgrantha.
Īryāsamiti means carefulness and vigilance in walking. The practitioner who
observes the fourth great vow of celibacy is called a Brahmacārī.  While solving
the second question, Bhagavān Gautama told Atimukta Kumāra - 'Child! I am
wandering for the purpose of alms.'  In the answer to the third question, Svāmī
Gautama did not say that 'My residence is in the Śrīvana garden', but said that
'Our residence is in the Śrīvana garden near the Omniscient Lord Mahāvīra.' This
reflects his unparalleled reverence for the Guru.  Viulaṇaṃ..........sāimaṇaṃ -
In this phrase, the word 'vipula' has several meanings - abundant, profuse,
extensive, vast, excellent, best etc. In the present context, the meaning
'excellent' should be accepted. The journey of Atimukta to meet Gautama for
veneration  18-Then that Atimukta Kumāra said to Bhagavān Gautama, 'I shall,
sir, pay obeisance to the ascetic Bhagavān Mahāvīra along with you.' 'Be
pleased, devānupriya! Do not obstruct me.'  Then that Atimukta Kumāra approached
the ascetic Bhagavān Mahāvīra along with Bhagavān Gautama, and on approaching,
he thrice circumambulated the ascetic Bhagavān Mahāvīra, and after
circumambulating, he paid obeisance up to (the level of) worship.  Then Bhagavān
Gautama approached the ascetic Bhagavān Mahāvīra, and on approaching, (he walked
around the ascetic Bhagavān Mahāvīra at a short distance, and after walking
around), he contemplated on the quest and non-quest, contemplated, (and then
partook of) food and drink), practiced restraint and austerities, dwelling,
purifying his soul.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 130] [antakRddazA 'he devAnupriya! Apa kahAM rahate haiM?' bhagavAn gautama ne
atimukta kumAra ko uttara diyA devAnupriya! mere dharmAcArya aura dharmopadezaka
bhagavAn mahAvIra dharma kI Adi karane vAle, yAvat zAzvata sthAna-mokSa ke
abhilASI isI polAsapura nagara ke bAhara zrIvana udyAna meM maryAdAnusAra sthAna
grahaNa karake saMyama evaM tapa se AtmA ko bhAvita kara vicarate haiN| hama
vahIM rahate haiN|' vivecana-prastuta sUtra ke parizIlana se yaha spaSTa hai ki
bAlaka atimukta kumAra ne bhagavAn gautama se tIna prazna kie the| ve prazna
haiM - Apa kauna haiM? Apa kisa uddezya se bhramaNa kara rahe haiM? Apa kahAM
para rahate haiM? prastuta sUtra meM ina tInoM ke uttara bhI diye gaye haiN|
prathama prazna kA uttara dete hue bhagavAn gautama ne apanA paricaya dene ke
sAtha-sAtha sAdhu-jIvana kI maryAdA kA varNana bhI kara diyA hai| prathama
prazna ke uttara meM gautama svAmI ne kahA-'hama zramaNa haiM, nirgrantha
IryAsamita evaM brahmacArI haiN|' vastuta: ye cAroM zabda sAdhumaryAdA ke
paricAyaka haiN| unakI vyAkhyA isa prakAra hai- tapasvI athavA prANimAtra ke
sAtha samatAmaya samAna vyavahAra karane vAle mahApuruSa zramaNa kahalAte haiM
/  jo parigraha se rahita haiM athavA jinameM rAga-dveSa kI granthi na ho ve
nirgrantha haiN| IryA-gamana sambandhI samiti-viveka arthAt Age dekhakara tathA
sAvadhAnI se calanA IryAsamiti hai| caturtha mahAvrata brahmacarya ke paripAlaka
sAdhaka ko brahmacArI kahate haiN| dUsare prazna kA samAdhAna karate hue
bhagavAn gautama ne atimukta kumAra se kahA-'vatsa ! maiM bhikSArtha bhramaNa
kara rahA huuN|' tIsare prazna ke uttara meM gautama svAmI ne zrIvana udyAna meM
merA nivAsa hai, aisA na kahakara zrIvana udyAna meM paramAtmA mahAvIra ke pAsa
hamArA nivAsa hai, aisA btaayaa| isameM unakI apUrva gurubhakti jhalakatI hai|
viuleNaM..........sAimeNaM-isa pada meM vipula zabda ke kaI artha pAe jAte haiM-
prabhUta, pracura, vistIrNa, vizAla, uttama, zreSTha aadi| prastuta meM 'uttama'
artha grahaNa karanA caahie| atimukta kA gautama ke sAtha vandanArtha gamana
18-tae NaM se aimutte kumAre bhagavaM goyama evaM vayAsI'gacchAmi NaM bhaMte!
ahaM tubbhehiM saddhiM samaNaM bhagavaM mahAvIraM paayvNde|' 'ahAsuhaM
devANuppiyA! mA paDibaMdhaM krehi|' tae NaM se aimutte kumAre bhagavayA
goyameNaM saddhiM jeNeva samaNe bhagavaM mahAvIre teNeva uvAgacchai,
uvAgacchittA samaNaM bhagavaM mahAvIraM tikkhutto AyAhiNaM-payAhiNaM karei,
karettA vaMdai jAva' pjuvaasi| tae NaM bhagavaM goyame jeNeva samaNe bhagavaM
mahAvIre teNeva uvAgae, jAva (uvAgacchittA samaNassa bhagavao mahAvIrassa
adUrasAmaMte gamaNAgamaNAe paDikkamei, paDikkamettA esaNamaNesaNaM Aloei,
AloettA bhattapANaM) paDidaMsei, paDidaMsettA saMjameNaM tavasA appANaM
bhAvemANe vihri| 1 varga 6, sUtra 11

Page #172 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Sixth Chapter  Then, the Samana Bhagavan Mahavira told this Dharmakatha to
the Ati Mukta Kumar.  Then, the Ati Mukta Kumar spoke to Bhagavan Gautam in this
way - "O Venerable one! I too will go with you to pay homage to the Samana
Bhagavan Mahavira."  Sri Gautam said - "O Devānupriya! Do as you please!"  Then,
the Ati Mukta Kumar went with Gautam Swami to the Samana Bhagavan Mahavira Swami
and after arriving, he circumambulated the Samana Bhagavan Mahavira three times
from the right side. Then, he paid homage and started to perform Paryupasana.
[131]  Meanwhile, Gautam Swami was present in the service of Bhagavan Mahavira
and performed the Pratikramana related to going and coming, and criticized the
faults in taking alms. Then, he showed the brought food and water to Bhagavan
and after showing it, he started to wander, influencing his soul with restraint
and penance.  Then, the Samana Bhagavan Mahavira told the Dharmakatha to the Ati
Mukta Kumar and the great assembly.  **The Initiation of Ati Mukta**  19. Then,
the Ati Mukta Kumar, after listening to the Dharma of the Samana Bhagavan
Mahavira, became very happy and said - "O Devānupriya! I will go to my parents
and inform them."  "O Devānupriya! Do not be bound by them."  Then, the Ati
Mukta Kumar went to his parents and after arriving, he paid homage to his
parents and said - "O Mother and Father! I have listened to the Dharma of the
Samana Bhagavan Mahavira and I desire, accept, and am pleased with this Dharma."
Then, his parents said - "You are blessed! You are fulfilled! You are fortunate!
You have listened to the Dharma of the Samana Bhagavan Mahavira and you desire,
accept, and are pleased with this Dharma."  Then, the Ati Mukta Kumar said to
his parents - "O Mother and Father! I have listened to the Dharma of the Samana
Bhagavan Mahavira. I desire, accept, and am pleased with this Dharma. I wish, O
Mother and Father! to become a monk, having my head shaved, and leave the
household life for the homeless life, after being blessed by you."  Then, his
parents said to the Ati Mukta Kumar -  "You are still a child, my son! You are
not enlightened, my son! Do you understand the Dharma?"  Then, the Ati Mukta
Kumar said to his parents - "O Mother and Father! I know what I know and I don't
know what I don't know. I know what I don't know and I don't know what I know."
Then, his parents said to the Ati Mukta Kumar -  2. Chapter 5, Sutra 4. 1. 3.
Chapter 3, Sutra 18. Chapter 3, Sutra 18.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 SaSTha varga ] tae NaM samaNe bhagavaM mahAvIre aimuttassa kumArassa tIse ya
dhmmkhaa| taba atimukta kumAra bhagavAn gautama se isa prakAra bole - he pUjya !
maiM bhI Apake sAtha zramaNa bhagavAn mahAvIra ko vaMdana karane calatA hU~  /
zrI gautama ne kahA - 'devAnupriya ! jaise tumheM sukha ho vaisA karo !' taba
atimukta kumAra gautama svAmI ke sAtha zramaNa bhagavAn mahAvIra svAmI ke pAsa
Aye aura Akara zramaNa bhagavAn mahAvIra ko tIna bAra dakSiNa tarapha se
pradakSiNA kii| phira vaMdanA karake paryupAsanA karane lage  /  [131 idhara
gautama svAmI bhagavAn mahAvIra kI sevA meM upasthita hue aura gamanAgamana
sambandhI pratikramaNa kiyA tathA bhikSA lene meM lage hue doSoM kI AlocanA kI
/  phira lAyA huA AhAra- pAnI bhagavAn ko dikhAyA aura dikhAkara saMyama tathA
tapa se apanI AtmA ko bhAvita karate hue vicarane lage  /  taba zramaNa bhagavAn
mahAvIra ne atimukta kumAra ko tathA mahatI pariSad ko dharma-kathA kahI  /
atimukta kI pravrajyAH siddhi 19- taNaM se aimutte kumAre samaNassa bhagavao
mahAvIrassa aMtie dhammaM soccA nisamma haTThatuTThe jAva' jaM navaraM
devANuppiyA! ammApiyaro ApucchAmi tae NaM ahaM devANuppiyANaM aMtie jAvare
pavvayAmi  /  ahAsuhaM devANuppiyA! mA paDibaMdhaM karehi  /  tae NaM se aimutte
kumAre jeNeva ammApiyaro teNeva uvAgae jAvare [ uvAgacchittA ammApiUNaM
pAyavaMdaNaM karei, karettA evaM vayAsI - ' evaM khalu ammayAo! mae samaNassa
bhagavao mahAvIrassa aMtie - dhamme NisaMte, se vi ya me dhamme icchie paDicchie
abhiruie|' tae NaM tassa aimuttassa ammapiyaro evaM vayAsI - 'dhanno si tumaM
jAyA ! saMpunno si tumaM jAyA! kayattho si tumaM jAyA ! jaM NaM tume samaNassa
bhagavao mahAvIrassa aMtie dhamme NisaMte, se vi ya te dhamme icchie paDicchie
abhiruie  /  ' ] taNaM se aimutte kumAre ammApiyaro doccaM pi taccaM pi evaM
vayAsI - evaM khalu ammayAo! mae samaNassa bhagavao mahAvIrassa aMtie dhamme
nisNte| se vi ya NaM me dhamme icchie, paDicchie, abhiruie| taM icchAmi NaM
ammayAo ! tubbhehi abbhaNuNNae samANe samaNassa bhagavao mahAvIrassa aMtie muMDe
bhavittA NaM agArAo aNagAriyaM pavvaittae  /  ta NaM taM aimuttaM kumAraM
ammApiyaro evaM vayAsI 'bAle si tAva tumaM puttA! asaMbuddhe si tumaM puttA kiM
NaM tumaM jANasi dhammaM ? ' taNaM se aimutte kumAre ammApiyaro evaM vayAsI - '
evaM khalu ahaM ammayAo ! jaM ceva  /  jANAmi taM ceva na jANAmi, jaM ceva na
jANAmi taM ceva jANAmi  / ' tae NaM taM aimuttaM kumAraM ammApiyaro evaM vayAsI
2. varga 5, sUtra 4. 1. 3. varga 3, sUtra 18. varga 3, sUtra 18.

Page #173 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[132] [ Antakrid Dasha ] 'How do you know, son? What you know, you don't know?
What you don't know, you know?' The young prince said to his parents, 'I know,
mother and father! Just as I know that I will die, I don't know, mother and
father! - Why, what, how, or for how long? I don't know, mother and father! By
what karmas do beings transmigrate to hell, animal, human, and heavenly realms?
I know, mother and father! Just as I know that by certain karmas beings
transmigrate to hell, etc. Thus, mother and father! What I know, I don't know,
and what I don't know, I know. I desire, mother and father! To be ordained by
you.' Then the parents of the young prince, unable to dissuade him, despite many
attempts, finally agreed. One day, they took him to the king. The young prince,
with a mind filled with the teachings of the Tirthankara, remained silent. The
king, seeing his determination, performed the abhisheka ceremony. He left the
palace and, after many years, attained the Samaya-Maaya-Aaya-Ekadasa-Anga, and
achieved great perfection in the virtues, knowledge, and conduct. The young
prince, now a monk, was very happy and satisfied after listening to the
teachings of the Tirthankara Mahavira and embracing them. He said, 'Devanupriya!
I will ask my parents. Then I will take the vows from Devanupriya.' The
Tirthankara Mahavira said, 'O Devanupriya! Do as you please. But do not be
negligent in your religious duties.' Then the young prince went to his parents.
He bowed at their feet and said, 'Mother and father! I have listened to the
teachings of the Tirthankara Mahavira. I find them pleasing, very pleasing, and
very attractive.' The young prince's parents said, 'Son! You are blessed, son!
You are virtuous, son! You are fortunate to have listened to the teachings of
the Tirthankara Mahavira and found them pleasing, very pleasing, and
attractive.' Then the young prince said the same thing a second and third time,
'Mother and father! I have listened to the teachings of the Tirthankara Mahavira
and found them pleasing, very pleasing, and attractive. Therefore, mother and
father! With your permission, I wish to be ordained by the Tirthankara Mahavira,
renounce the world, and take the vows of a monk.' His parents said to him, 'Son!
You are still a child, immature. How can you understand the teachings?' Then the
young prince said to his parents, 'Mother and father! What I know, I don't know,
and what I don't know, I know.' 1. In this 3 - 4, Section 3, Sutra 18 2. Section
6, Sutra 18 5. Section 1, Sutra 9

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 132] [ antakRddazA 'kahaM NaM tumaM puttA! jaM ceva jANasi jAva (taM ceva na
jANasi? jaM ceva na jANasi ) taM ceva jANasi ? taNaM se aimutte kumAre
ammApiyaro evaM vayAsI 'jANAmi ahaM ammayAo! jahA jAeNaM avassa mariyavvaM, na
jANAmi ahaM ammayAo ! - kAhe vA kahiM vA kahaM vA kiyaccireNa vA? na jANAmi NaM
ammayAo! kehiM kammAyayaNehiM jIvA neraiya-tirikkhajoNiya - maNussa- devesu
uvavajjaMti, jANAmi NaM ammayAo jahA saehiM kammAyayaNehiM jIvA neraiya jAva
uvavajjaMti  /  evaM khalu ahaM ammayAo! jaM ceva jANAmi taM ceva na jANAmi, jaM
ceva na jANAmi taM ceva jANAmi  /  taM icchAmo NaM ammayAo! tubbhehiM
abbhaNuNNAe jAva' pvvitte|' tae NaM taM aimuttaM kumAraM ammapiyaro jAhe no
saMcAeMti bahUhiM AghavaNAhiM jAvare taM icchAmo te jAyA ! egadivasamavi
rAyasiriM pAsettae  /  tae NaM se aimutte ammapiuvayaNa maNuyattamANe tusiNIe
sNcitttthi| abhiseo jahAM mahAbalassa  /  nikkhamaNaM  /  jAva sAmAiyamAiyAI
ekkArasa aMgAI ajji  /  bahUhiM vAsAiM sAmaNNapariyAgaM pAuNai, guNarayaNaM
tavokammaM jAva' vipule siddhe  /  atimuktakumAra zramaNa bhagavAn mahAvIra ke
pAsa dharmakathA sunakara aura use dhAraNa kara bahuta prasanna aura saMtuSTa
huA  /  vizeSa yaha hai ki usane kahA - 'devAnupriya ! maiM mAtA-pitA se pUchatA
hUM  /  taba maiM devAnupriya ke pAsa yAvat dIkSA grahaNa kruuNgaa|' bhagavAn
mahAvIra bole- 'he devAnupriya ! jaise tumheM sukha ho vaisA kro| para dharma
kArya meM pramAda mata kro|' tatpazcAt atimukta kumAra apane mAtA-pitA ke pAsa
phuNce| unake caraNoM meM praNAma kiyA aura kahA - ' mAtA-pitA! maiMne zramaNa
bhagavAn mahAvIra ke nikaTa dharma zravaNa kiyA hai| vaha dharma mujhe iSTa lagA
hai, puna: puna: iSTa pratIta huA hai aura khUba rucA hai| ' atimuktakumAra ke
mAtA-pitA ne kahA - vatsa ! tuma dhanya ho, vatsa ! tuma puNyazAlI ho, vatsa !
tuma kRtArtha ho ki tumane zramaNa bhagavAn mahAvIra ke nikaTa dharma zravaNa
kiyA hai aura vaha dharma tumheM iSTa punaHpunaH iSTa aura rucikara huA I taba
atimukta kumAra ne dUsarI aura tIsarI bAra bhI yahI kahA - ' mAtA-pitA ! maiMne
zramaNa bhagavAn mahAvIra ke nikaTa dharma sunA hai aura vaha dharma mujhe iSTa,
pratISTa aura rucikara huA hai| ataeva maiM he mAtApitA! ApakI anumati prApta
kara zramaNa bhagavAn mahAvIra ke nikaTa muNDita hokara, gRhatyAga karake
anagAra-dIkSA grahaNa karanA cAhatA huuN|' isa para mAtA-pitA atimukta kumAra se
isa prakAra bole- 'he putra ! abhI tuma bAlaka ho, asaMbuddha ho| abhI tuma
dharma ko kyA jAno ?' taba atimukta kumAra ne mAtA-pitA se isa prakAra kahA -
'he mAtA - pitA ! maiM jise jAnatA hUM use nahIM jAnatA hUM aura jisako nahIM
jAnatA hUM usako jAnatA hUM  / ' 1. isI meM 3 - 4 varga 3, sUtra 18 2. varga 6,
sUtra 18 5. varga 1, sUtra 9

Page #174 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Sixth Chapter] [133] Then the parents spoke to the liberated prince in this
way: "Son! You do not know what you know, and you know what you do not know, how
is this?" Then the liberated prince said to his parents in this way: "Parents! I
know that whoever is born must die, but I do not know when, where, how, and
after how many days he will die? Then I also do not know why the soul is born in
hell, animal, human, and divine realms due to what karmas, but I know that the
soul is born in hell and up to the divine realms due to its own karmas. Thus,
certainly, O parents! I do not know what I know, and I know what I do not know.
Therefore, O parents! I wish to accept the renunciation with your permission."
When the parents of the liberated prince were unable to convince him with many
strategies and tactics, they said: "O son! We want to see the splendor of your
kingdom for one day." Then the liberated prince remained silent, following the
words of his parents. Then his coronation took place like that of Mahabal, and
then he received initiation from the Lord and studied the eleven angas from
Samayik. He followed the conduct of a Shraman for many years. He practiced the
austerities of Gunaratnasamvatsar. He attained Siddhi on the Vipulachal
mountain. **Discussion:** In the present sutra, a beautiful description of the
question and answer between Prince Atimukta Kumar and his parents is obtained.
When Atimukta Kumar told his parents that he knew and did not know the same
thing, his parents were surprised. For this reason, the parents asked their son
to explain it to them. Then he presented two points before his parents: 1. I do
not know what I know. 2. I know what I do not know. The parents were very
surprised to hear these words of Prince Atimukta. They started thinking: "What
is the meaning of not knowing what has been known? And what is the meaning of
knowing what has not been known? When knowledge is not called ignorance and
ignorance is not called knowledge, then what could be the purpose of Atimukta
Kumar saying this? Finally, they said to Atimukta Kumar: "Son! Clarify your
statement. We do not understand this riddle of yours." Clarifying his statement,
Atimukta Kumar said that it is not that I am completely ignorant about religion.
I do not know the complete definition of religion, but I do know something. Do
not consider me a small child and think that I am completely unfamiliar with the
principles of religion. I am aware that whoever is born will die one day, there
is an eternal relationship between birth and death. Whoever is born has to
become food for death one day. I know this, but I do not know when? Where and
how? After how much time will I have to endure the blow of death? I do not
understand why the soul is born in the four realms due to what karma-bonds, but
I do know that the soul is born in hell and other realms due to its own actions.
In the present story of Atimukta Kumar, the clear difference between limited
knowledge and omniscience is evident.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 SaSTha varga ] [133 taba atimukta kumAra se mAtA-pitA isa prakAra bole - 'putra
! tuma jisako jAnate ho usako nahIM jAnate aura jisako nahIM jAnate usako jAnate
ho, yaha kaise ?" taba atimukta kumAra ne mAtA-pitA se isa prakAra kahA- -'mAtA-
pitA ! maiM jAnatA hUM ki jo janmA hai usako avazya maranA hogA, para yaha nahIM
jAnatA ki kaba, kahAM, kisa prakAra aura kitane dina bAda maranA hogA? phira
maiM yaha bhI nahIM jAnatA ki jIva kina karmoM ke kAraNa naraka, tiryaca,
manuSya aura deva-yoni meM utpanna hote haiM, para itanA janatA hUM ki jIva
apane hI karmoM ke kAraNa naraka yAvat devayoni meM utpanna hote haiM  /  isa
prakAra nizcaya hI he mAtA-pitA ! maiM jisako jAnatA hUM usI ko nahIM jAnatA
aura jisako nahIM jAtA usI ko jAnatA hUM  /  ataH he mAtA-pitA ! maiM ApakI AjJA
pAkara yAvat pravrajyA aMgIkAra karanA cAhatA huuN|' atimukta kumAra ke mAtA-
pitA jaba bahuta-sI yukti-prayuktiyoM se samajhAne meM samartha nahIM hue to
bole- he putra ! hama eka dina ke lie tumhArI rAjyalakSmI kI zobhA dekhanA
cAhate haiM  /  taba atimukta kumAra mAtA-pitA ke vacana kA anuvartana karake
mauna rahe  /  taba mahAbala ke samAna unakA rAjyAbhiSeka huA phira bhagavAn ke
pAsa dIkSA lekara sAmAyika se lekara gyAraha aMgoM kA adhyayana kiyaa| bahuta
varSoM taka zramaNa cAritra kA pAlana kiyA  /  guNaratnasaMvatsara tapa kA
ArAdhana kiyA  /  yAvat vipulAcala parvata para siddha hue  /  vivecana-
prastuta sUtra meM rAjakumAra atimukta kumAra tathA unake mAtA-pitA ke madhya
meM hue praznottaroM kA suMdara vivaraNa prApta hotA hai| atimukta kumAra ne
jaba apane mAtA-pitA se eka hI viSaya ko jAnane aura na jAnane kI bAta kahI to
mAtA-pitA Azcaryacakita ho gye| isI kAraNa mAtA-pitA ne apane putra ko usakA
spaSTIkaraNa karane ko kahA  /  taba usane apane mAtA-pitA ke sammukha do bAte
rakhIM 1. maiM jise jAnatA hUM, use nahIM jAnatA hUM  /  2. jise nahIM jAnatA
hUM, use jAnatA hUM  /  rAjakumAra atimukta kI ye bAteM sunakara mAtA-pitA ko
bar3A Azcarya huaa| ve socane lage- 'jise jAna liyA gayA hai, use na jAnane kA
kyA matalaba? aura jise nahIM jAnA, use jAnane kA kyA artha ? jaba jJAna ajJAna
aura ajJAna jJAna nahIM kahalAtA to atimukta kumAra ke aisA kahane kA kyA
prayojana ho sakatA hai ? anta meM unhoMne atimukta kumAra se kahA - 'putra !
apane vaktavya ko kucha spaSTa kro| tumhArI yaha prahelikA hamArI samajha meM
nahIM AI  /  atimukta kumAra ne apanI bAta spaSTa karate huA kahA ki dharma ke
sambandha meM maiM sarvathA anabhijJa hUM, aisI bAta nahIM hai| dharma kI pUrNa
paribhASA maiM nahIM jAnatA tathApi kucha na kucha jAnatA avazya huuN| mujhe
nanhA bAlaka samajhakara aisA na mAna leM ki dharma tattva se maiM sarvathA
aparicita huuN| mujhe isa bAta kA bodha hai ki jo paidA huA hai, use eka dina
maranA hai, janma ke sAtha mRtyu kA anAdi kAlIna sambandha hai  /  janma lene
vAle ko eka dina mRtyu kA grAsa bananA hI par3atA hai| yaha maiM jAnatA hU~,
para mujhe yaha nahIM patA ki kaba ? kahA~ aura kaise? kitane samaya ke anantara
mRtyu kA prahAra sahana karanA par3egA? maiM yaha nahIM samajhatA ki jIva kina
karmabandha ke kAraNoM se cAroM gatiyoM meM janma lete haiM, parantu maiM yaha
avazya jAnatA hUM ki apane kie hue karmoM ke kAraNa hI jIva narakAdi gatiyoM meM
utpanna hote haiM  /  atimukta kumAra ke prastuta 'kathAnaka meM alpajJa aura
sarvajJa kA spaSTa antara parilakSita hotA hai  /

Page #175 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[134] In the present sutra, the word 'kammayayanehi' has been interpreted by the
commentator as follows: 'Kammayayanehi, karmaṇām jñānāvaraṇīyādināmāyatānāni
ādānanī bandhahetava ityārthaḥ. Pāṭhantarēṇa 'kammavayaṇehi' tatra karmāpatānāni
yaiḥ karmāpatati-ātmani sambhavati, tāni tatha'- meaning 'karma' refers to the
karmas like jñānāvaraṇīya, darśanāvaraṇīya etc. and 'āyatana' refers to the
causes of bondage. In some places, 'kammavayaṇehi' is found as a variant reading
in place of 'kammayayanehi'. The reasons due to which karmas fall into the lake
of the soul, are connected with the regions of the soul, are called karmāpatana.
Both have the same meaning. _ In addition to this description of the Antagad
Sutra regarding the life of Atimukta Kumar, a very beautiful discussion of an
incident in the life of Muni Atimukta is found in the fourth uddeśaka of the
Bhagavati Sutra. It is being mentioned here as it is necessary. . 'Teṇa kālenaṁ
tēṇaṁ samaēṇaṁ samaṇassa bhagavao mahāvīrassāṁtevāsī aimuttē nāmaṁ kumārasamaṇē
pagai bhaddae, jāva-viṇīē. Tae ṇṁ se aimuttē kumārasamaṇē aṇṇayā kayāī
mahāvutṭhikāyansi ṇivayamāṇansi kakkhapaḍiggaha-rayaharaṇamāyāē bahiya
sampatṭhiē vihārāē. Tae ṇṁ aimuttē kumārasamaṇē vāhayaṁ vahmāṇaṁ pāsai, pāsitttā
maṭṭiyāē pāliṁ bandhai, bandhittā 'ṇāviyā mē ṇāviyā mē' ṇāviō viv ṇāvamāyaṁ
paḍiggahaṁ udagaṁsi kaṭu pavvāhamāṇē pavvāhamāṇē abhiramaī, taṁ ca thērā
adakkhu, jēṇēv samaṇē bhagavaṁ mahāvīrē tēṇēv uvāgacchai, uvāgacchittā evaṁ
vayāsī Evaṁ khalu devāṇuppiyāṇāṁ āṁtevāsī aimuttē nāmaṁ kumārasamaṇē bhagavaṁ,
se ṇṁ bhanṭē! aimuttē kumārasamaṇē kaihiṁ bhavaggahaṇēhiṁ sijjhihii jāva antaṁ
karehii? Ajo! tti samaṇē bhagavaṁ mahāvīrē tē thērē evaṁ vayāsī– evaṁ khalu ajo!
mamaṁ āṁtevāsī aimuttē nāmaṁ kumārasamaṇē pagai bhaddae, jāva-viṇīē, se ṇṁ
aimuttē kumārasamaṇē imēṇa cēv bhavaggahaṇēṇaṁ sijjhihii jāva antaṁ karihii taṁ
mā ṇṁ ajo! tubbhē aimuttaṁ kumārasamaṇṁ hīlēh, nindah, khiṁsah, garahah,
avamanṇah, tubbhē ṇṁ devāṇuppiyā! aimuttaṁ kumārasamaṇṁ agilāē saṁgiṇhah, agilāē
uvagiṇhah, agilāē bhattēṇaṁ pāṇēṇaṁ viṇēṇaṁ vēyāvaḍiyaṁ kareh. Aimuttē ṇṁ
kumārasamaṇē antakarē cēv, antimasarīriē cēv; tae ṇṁ tē thērā bhagavanto
samaṇēṇaṁ bhagavayā mahāvīrēṇaṁ evaṁ vuttā samāṇā samaṇṁ bhagavaṁ mahāvīraṁ
vandai, namasai; aimuttaṁ kumārasamaṇṁ agilāē saṁgiṇhaṁti, jāva vēyāvaḍiyaṁ
karentī.' Meaning – At that time, at that time, there was a disciple of the
Shraman Bhagavan Mahavir Swami named Atimukta Kumar Shraman. They were naturally
blessed and virtuous. One day, when there was heavy rain, Atimukta Kumar Shraman
went out to the field for the purpose of collecting alms, carrying his alms bowl
under his arm and a vessel. While going, Atimukta Kumar Shraman saw a small
stream of flowing water on the way. Seeing it, they built a mud dam on that
stream. After that, just as a boatman releases his boat into the water, in the
same way, they also released their vessel into that water and said, 'This is my
boat, this is my boat' - saying so, they played by floating the vessel in the
water. Seeing Atimukta Kumar Shraman doing this, the elder monks came away
without saying anything and asked Shraman Bhagavan Mahavir Swami O Bhagavan! How
many births will your disciple Atimukta Kumar Shraman take before he becomes a
Siddha? Until when will he end all suffering?

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 134] [antakRddazA prastuta sUtra meM prayukta kammAyayaNehiM' zabda kA artha
vRttikAra ne isa prakAra kiyA hai- 'kammAyayaNehi tti, karmaNAM
jJAnAvaraNIyAdInAmAyatanAni AdAnAni baMdhahetava ityrthH| pAThAntareNa
'kammAvayaNehiM tti' tatra karmApatanAni yaiH karmApatati-Atmani saMbhavati,
tAni tathA'- arthAt 'karma' zabda jJAnAvaraNIya, darzanAvaraNIya Adi karmoM kA
saMsUcaka hai aura 'Ayatana' zabda baMdha ke kAraNoM kA paricAyaka hai| kahIM-
kahIM kammAyayaNehiM' ke sthAna para 'kammAvayaNehiM' aisA pAThAntara bhI
upalabdha hotA hai| jina kAraNoM se karma Atma-sarovara meM girate haiM, Atma-
pradezoM se sambandhita hote haiM, unheM karmApatana kahate haiN| donoM kA Azaya
eka hI hai| _ atimukta kumAra ke jIvana sambandhI aMtagaDasUtra ke isa varNana
ke atirikta bhagavatIsUtra ke caturtha uddezaka meM muni atimukta ke jIvana kI
eka ghaTanA kA bar3A suMdara vivecana milatA hai| yahAM Avazyaka hone se usakA
ullekha kiyA jA rahA hai . 'teNa kAleNaM teNaM samaeNaM samaNassa bhagavao
mahAvIrassa aMtevAsI aimutte NAmaM kumArasamaNe pagaibhaddae, jaav-vinniie| tae
NaM se aimutte kumArasamaNe aNNayA kayAI mahAvuTThikAyaMsi NivayamANaMsi
kakkhapaDiggaha-rayaharaNamAyAe bahiyA saMpaTThie vihaaraae| tae NaM aimutte
kumArasamaNe vAhayaM vahamANaM pAsai, pAsittA maTTiyAe pAliM baMdhaI, baMdhittA
'NAviyA me NAviyA me' NAvio viva NAvamayaM paDiggahaM udagaMsi kaTu pavvAhamANe
pavvAhamANe abhiramaI, taM ca therA adakkhu, jeNeva samaNe bhagavaM mahAvIre
teNeva uvAgacchai, uvAgacchittA evaM vayAsI evaM khalu devANuppiyANaM aMtevAsI
aimutte NAmaM kumArasamaNe bhagavaM, se NaM bhaMte! aimutte kumArasamaNe kaihiM
bhavaggahaNehiM sijjhihii jAva aMtaM karehii? ajo! tti samaNe bhagavaM mahAvIre
te there evaM vayAsI- evaM khalu ajo! mamaM aMtevAsI aimutte NAmaM kumArasamaNe
pagaibhaddae, jAva-viNIe, se NaM aimutte kumArasamaNe imeNa ceva bhavaggahaNeNaM
sijjhihii jAva aMtaM karihii taM mA NaM ajo! tubbhe aimuttaM kumArasamaNaM
hIleha, niMdaha, khiMsaha, garahaha, avamaNNaha, tubbhe NaM devANuppiyA!
aimuttaM kumArasamaNaM agilAe saMgiNhaha, agilAe uvagiNhaha, agilAe bhatteNaM
pANeNaM viNaeNaM veyAvaDiyaM kreh| aimutte NaM kumArasamaNe aMtakare ceva,
aMtimasarIrie ceva; tae NaM te therA bhagavaMto samaNeNaM bhagavayA mahAvIreNaM
evaM vuttA samANA samaNaM bhagavaM mahAvIraM vaMdai, namasai; aimuttaM
kumArasamaNaM agilAe saMgiNhaMti, jAva veyAvaDiyaM kreNti|' arthAt - usa kAla
usa samaya meM zramaNa bhagavAn mahAvIra svAmI ke ziSya atimukta nAma kumAra
zramaNa the| ve prakRti se bhadra yAvat vinIta the| ve atimukta kumAra zramaNa
kisI dina mahAvarSA barasane para apanA rajoharaNa kAMkha-bagala meM lekara
tathA pAtra lekara bAhara sthaMDila-hetu gye| jAte hue, atimukta kumAra zramaNa
ne mArga meM bahate hue pAnI ke eka choTe nAle ko dekhaa| use dekhakara unhoMne
usa nAle kI miTTI kI pAla baaNdhii| isake bAda jisa prakAra nAvika apanI nAva ko
pAnI meM chor3atA hai, usI taraha unhoMne bhI apane pAtra ko usa pAnI chor3A
aura 'yaha merI nAva hai, yaha merI nAva hai'-aisA kaha kara pAtra ko pAnI meM
tirAte hue krIr3A karane lge| atimukta kumAra zramaNa ko aisA karate hue
dekhakara sthavira muni unheM kucha kahe binA hI cale Ae aura zramaNa bhagavAn
mahAvIra svAmI se unhoMne pUchA he bhagavan ! ApakA ziSya atimukta kumAra
zramaNa kitane bhava karane ke bAda siddha hogA? yAvat saba dukhoM kA anta
karegA?

Page #176 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Sixth Section] [135] The Venerable Lord Mahavira addressed those senior monks,
saying, "O Aryas! From nature, the one who is virtuous, from nature, the one who
is humble, my Antyavasī, Atimukta Kumāra, will attain Siddhi in this very birth,
and will end all sorrows. Therefore, O Aryas! Do not mock, slander, harm,
criticize, or insult the Atimukta Kumāra Śramaṇa. But you should accept the
Atimukta Kumāra Śramaṇa with a cheerful mind. Help him and offer him food and
water with humility. The Atimukta Kumāra Śramaṇa is a Charmaśarīrī and will
destroy all karmas in this very birth." Hearing this account from the Venerable
Lord Mahavira, those senior monks paid homage and bowed to the Venerable Lord
Mahavira. Then, they accepted the Atimukta Kumāra Śramaṇa with a cheerful mind
and began to serve him.  Sixteenth Study: Alaka 20- At that time, in that era,
there was a garden called Kāmamāhvana in the city of Vārāṇasī. In that city of
Vārāṇasī, there was a king named Alaka.  At that time, in that era, the
Venerable Lord Mahavira was staying in the Kāmamāhvana garden. The assembly went
out. Hearing that the Venerable Lord Mahavira had arrived, King Alaka was
delighted and, like King Kuṇika, he began to worship the Lord. The Lord preached
the Dharma.  Then, King Alaka, like Udayana, took Śramaṇa-dīkṣā from the
Venerable Lord Mahavira. Notably, he placed his eldest son on the throne. He
studied the eleven Angas. He followed the Śramaṇa-charitra for many years, until
he attained Siddhi on the Vipulagiri mountain.  Thus, O Jambū! The Venerable
Lord Mahavira has explained this meaning of the sixth section of the eighth
Anga, Antagada-daśā.  Discussion: This sixteenth study mentions the life of King
Alaka of the city of Vārāṇasī. King Alaka was a devout devotee of the Venerable
Lord Mahavira. To illustrate his devotion and faith in the Lord, the Sūtra-kāra
has pointed to King Kuṇika of Champa, whose story is found in: 1. Section 6,
Sūtra 15, 2. Uvvaiya 3, Section 1, Sūtra 9.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 SaSTha varga] [135 zramaNa bhagavAn mahAvIra svAmI una sthavira muniyoM ko
sambodhita karake kahane lage-"he AryoM! prakRti se bhadra yAvat prakRti se
vinIta merA aMtevAsI atimukta kumAra, isI bhava me siddha hogA yAvat sabhI
duHkhoM kA anta kregaa| ataH he Aryo ! tuma atimukta kumAra zramaNa kI hIlanA,
niMdA, khiMsanA, garhA aura apamAna mata kro| kintu tuma aglAna bhAva se
atimukta kumAra zramaNa ko grahaNa kro| usakI sahAyatA karo aura AhAra pAnI ke
dvArA vinayapUrvaka vaiyAvRtya kro| atimukta kumAra zramaNa caramazarIrI hai
aura isI bhava meM saba karmoM kA kSaya karane vAlA hai| zramaNa bhagavAn
mahAvIra svAmI dvArA yaha vRttAnta sunakara una sthavira muniyoM ne zramaNa
bhagavAn mahAvIra svAmI ko vandanA-namaskAra kiyaa| phira ve sthavira muni
atimukta kumAra zramaNa ko aglAna bhAva se svIkAra kara yAvat unakI vaiyAvRtya
karane lge| solahavAM adhyayana alakSa 20-teNaM kAleNaM teNaM samaeNaM vANArasI
nayarI, kAmamahAvaNe ceie| tattha NaM vANArasIe alakke nAmaM rAyA hotthaa| teNaM
kAleNaM teNaM samaeNaM samaNe bhagavaM mahAvIre jAva' vihri| parisA niggyaa| tae
NaM alakke rAyA imIse kahAe laddhaDe haTThatuDhe jahA koNie jAva dhmmkhaa| tae
NaM se alakke rAyA samaNassa bhagavao mahAvIrassa aMtie jahA udAyaNe tahA
nikkhaMte, navaraM jeTTaputtaM raje abhisiNci| ekkArasa aNgaaii| bahU vAsA
pariyAo jAvare vipule siddhe| evaM khalu jaMbU! samaNeNaM bhagavayA mahAvIreNaM
aTThamassa aMgassa aMtagaDadasANaM chaTThassa vaggassa ayamaDhe pnnnntte| usa
kAla aura usa samaya vANArasI nagarI meM kAmamahAvana nAmaka udyAna thaa| usa
vANArasI nagarI meM alakSa nAmaka rAjA thaa| usa kAla aura usa samaya zramaNa
bhagavAn mahAvIra yAvat kAmamahAvana udyAna meM pdhaare| janapariSad prabhu
vaMdanA ko nikalI, rAjA alakSa bhI prabhu mahAvIra ke padhArane kI bAta sunakara
prasanna huA aura koNika rAjA ke samAna vaha bhI yAvat prabhu kI sevA meM
upAsanA karane lgaa| prabhu ne dharmakathA khii| taba alakSa rAjA ne zramaNa
bhagavAn mahAvIra ke pAsa udAyana kI taraha zramaNadIkSA grahaNa kii| vizeSatA
yaha ki unhoMne apane jyeSTha putra ko rAjya siMhAsana para bitthaayaa| gyAraha
aMgoM kA adhyayana kiyaa| bahuta varSoM taka zramaNacAritra kA pAlana kiyA yAvat
vipulagiri parvata para jAkara siddha hue| isa prakAra 'he jaMbU! zramaNa
bhagavAn mahAvIra ne aSTama aMga aMtagaDadazA ke chaThe varga kA yaha artha kahA
hai|' vivecana-prastuta solahaveM adhyayana meM vANArasI nagarI ke alakSa nareza
ke jIvana kA ullekha kiyA gayA hai| alakSa nareza bhagavAn mahAvIra ke caraNoM
ke parama zraddhAlu bhakta the| inakI prabhu caraNoM meM niSThA evaM AsthA kA
digdarzana karAne ke lie sUtrakAra ne caMpA-nareza kUNika kI ora saMketa kiyA
hai, jisakA 1. varga 6, sUtra 15 2. uvavAI 3. varga 1, sUtra 9

Page #177 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[136] The story of the ten stages of death is described in the *Aupapatik
Sutra*. The meaning of "Jaha Udayane taha Nikkhanta" is - Just as Maharaja
Udayan took initiation, so did the king of Alaksh. The description of King
Udayan is found in the *Bhagavati Sutra*, Shatak 13, U. 6. According to it,
Udayan was the lord of sixteen countries including Sindhu and Sauvira. One day
he was sitting in the dispensary, taking medicine. While reflecting on Dharma,
he remembered Lord Mahavira. He started thinking - that city, that forest is
blessed where the Lord resides. Those kings, etc. are blessed who listen to the
Lord's words, worship him, and give him pure food, clothes, vessels, etc. with
their own hands. Where is my such fortune? I don't even get the opportunity to
see those great lords. The stream of contemplation turned upwards. He thought -
if the Lord comes to my city, I will serve him and at the same time leave this
impermanent world and become initiated. At that time, the Lord was residing in
the Purnabhadra garden of Champa. There was a distance of seven hundred kos
between Vitabhayapur and Champa, but the compassionate, devotee-loving Lord
Mahavira, to fulfill the desire of his devotee, left Champa and slowly
traveling, he reached Udayan's city. On receiving the good news of the Lord's
arrival, Udayan was overjoyed. With great ceremony, the king, queen, and Kumar
all appeared at the Lord's feet. They listened to the Dharma-katha, and hearing
the Lord's auspicious words, Udayan became detached. To decide his successor, he
returned to the palace. He should have entrusted all the responsibilities of the
kingdom to Abhich Kumar, but Udayan thought - I am renouncing the kingdom
considering it a bondage, then why should I trap my son Abhich Kumar in this
bondage? To put my bondage on Kumar's neck would be an injustice to him.
Finally, the king announced throughout the kingdom - my successor is my nephew
Keshi Kumar, I will become initiated after his coronation. This announcement
caused great sorrow to the heir prince and he left his kingdom in anger. Here,
Udayan made his nephew king and became initiated. Once, Muni Udayan became ill.
While traveling, he came to his city Vitabhayapur, but Keshi Kumar had changed.
He was afraid that Udayan might want to take back the kingdom! Therefore, he
ordered everyone in the city - no one should give food to Udayan, nor should he
be allowed to rest. Anyone who disobeys this order will be put to death along
with his family. Out of fear of death, no citizen gave him shelter. Udayan
wandered all over the city, then a potter was moved with compassion. He gave him
shelter. On receiving this information from his spies, the king sent a physician
to kill Udayan. The physician gave Udayan poison in the guise of treatment.
There was immense pain in his body, but Muni Udayan endured the poison-pain
peacefully. Due to the unperturbed state of his mind, Muni Udayan attained
*avadhi jnana*. As soon as the light of knowledge shone, he understood the
situation, but he did not let his mind become disturbed. He crossed the steps of
*dharma dhyana* and *shukla dhyana* and finally attained *keval jnana* and
became liberated.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 136] [antakRddazA varNana aupapAtikasUtra meM hai| 'jahA udAyaNe tahA
nikkhaMte' kA artha hai-jisa prakAra mahArAjA udAyana ne dIkSA grahaNa kI thI,
usI prakAra alakSa nareza bhI dIkSita hue| udAyana rAjA kA varNana
bhagavatIsUtra ke zataka 13 u. 6 meM AyA hai| usake anusAra udAyana sindhu-
sauvIra Adi solaha dezoM kA svAmI thaa| eka dina vaha pauSadhazAlA meM pauSadha
karake baiThA huA thaa| dharma-jAgaraNa karate hue use bhagavAn mahAvIra kI
smRti A gii| vaha socane lagA- vaha nagara, kAnana dhanya haiM jahAM bhagavAn
vihAra karate haiN| ve rAjA Adi dhanya haiM jo bhagavAn kI vANI sunate haiM,
unakI upAsanA karate haiM, apane hAtha se unheM nirdoSa bhojana, vastra, pAtra
Adi dete haiN| merA aisA saubhAgya kahAM? mujhe to una mahAprabhu ke darzana
karane kA bhI avasara nahIM miltaa| cintana kI dhArA UrdhvamukhI hone lgii|
usane socA-yadi bhagavAn merI nagarI meM padhAra jAeM to maiM unakI sevA karUM
aura sAtha hI isa asAra saMsAra ko chor3akara dIkSita ho jaauuN| usa samaya
bhagavAn campA ke pUrNabhadra udyAna meM virAjamAna the| vItabhayapura aura
campA meM sAta sau kosa kA antara thA, para karuNAsAgara bhaktavatsala bhagavAn
mahAvIra ne apane bhakta kI kAmanA pUrNa karane ke lie campA se prasthAna kara
diyA aura dhIre-dhIre yAtrA karate hue ve udAyana kI nagarI meM padhAre gye|
bhagavAn ke padhArane ke zubha samAcAra pAkara udAyana AnaMda-vibhora ho utthe|
bar3e samAroha ke sAtha rAjA, rAnI aura kumAra saba bhagavAn ke caraNoM meM
upasthita hue| dharma-kathA sunI, bhagavAn kI kalyANa-kAriNI vANI sunakara
udAyana ko vairAgya ho gyaa| apanA uttarAdhikArI nizcita karane ke lie vaha
vApasa mahaloM meM aayaa| zAsana kA sArA dAyitva abhIca kumAra ko saMbhalA denA
cAhiye thA, para udAyana ne socA-rAjya ko baMdhana kA kAraNa samajhA kara maiM
tyAga rahA hUM, phira apane putra abhIca kumAra ko isa baMdhana meM kyoM
phaMsAUM apanA baMdhana kumAra ke gale meM DAlUM yaha to usake sAtha anyAya
hogaa| anta meM rAjA ne sAre rAjya meM gha kara dI ki-merA uttarAdhikArI merA
bhAgineya kezI kumAra hai, usakA rAjyAbhiSeka karake maiM dIkSita ho jaauuNgaa|
isa ghoSaNA se uttarAdhikArI rAjakumAra ko mahAn duHkha huA aura vaha ruSTa
hokara apane rAjya se bAhara calA gyaa| idhara, udAyana bhAnaje ko rAjA banAkara
dIkSita ho gye| eka bAra muni udAyana asvastha ho gye| ve bhramaNa karate hue
apanI nagarI vItabhayapura meM Ae para kezIkumAra badala cukA thaa| usako bhaya
ho gayA ki kahIM udAyana punaH rAjya na lenA cAhate hoM! ata: usane nagara meM
sabako Adeza de diyA ki - koI vyakti udAyana ko AhAra na de aura na vizrAma
karane kA  /  isa Adeza kI avahelanA karegA use rAjA parivAra sahita mauta ke
ghATa utAra degaa|' mRtyu ke bhaya se kisI bhI nAgarika ne unheM Azraya nahIM
diyaa| udAyana sAre nagara meM ghUme, taba kahIM eka kumhAra ko dayA A gii|
usane unheM sthAna diyaa| apane guptacaroM se yaha sUcanA pAkara rAjA ne udAyana
ko maravAne ke lie eka vaidya ko bhejaa| vaidya ne upacAra ke nimitta udAyana ko
viSa khilA diyaa| zarIra meM apAra vedanA huI para udAyana muni ne viSa-vedanA
ko zAMtipUrvaka sahana kiyaa| bhAvanA kI nirvikAratA se udAyana muni ko
avadhijJAna ho gyaa| jJAna-prakAza hote hI sthiti samajhane meM dera na lagI,
para unhoMne apane mana ko vikSubdha nahIM hone diyaa| dharmadhyAna aura
zukladhyAna kI sIr3hiyA pAra karake anta meM kevalajJAna prApta kiyA aura mukta
ho ge|

Page #178 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Seventh Varga 1-13 Studies Nanda etc.  1. Venerable sir! What is the meaning of
the Seventh Varga, as expounded by the Venerable Ascetic Mahavira in the
Antargadasas of the Eighth Anga?  Verily, O Jambū! The Venerable Ascetic
Mahavira has expounded thirteen studies in the Seventh Varga of the Antargadasas
of the Eighth Anga, namely: 1. Nandā, 2. Nandavatī, 3. Nanduttarā, 4.
Nandīśreṇikā, 5. Marutā, 6. Sumarutā, 7. Mahāmarutā, 8. Maruddevā, 9. Bhadrā,
10. Subhadrā, 11. Sujātā, 12. Sumanāyikā, and 13. Bhūtadattā. These are the
names of the queens of King Śreṇika.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 saptama varga 1-13 adhyayana naMdA Adi 1-jai NaM bhaMte! samaNeNaM bhagavayA
mahAvIreNaM aTThamassa aMgassa aMtagaDadasANaM chaThussa vaggassa ayamaDhe
paNNatte, sattamassa vaggassa ke aTe paNNatte? evaM khalu jaMbU ! samaNeNaM
bhagavayA mahAvIreNaM aTThamassa aMgassa aMtagaDadasANaM sattamassa vaggassa
teraha ajjhayaNA paNNattA, taM jahAsaMgahaNI-gAhA 1. naMdA taha 2. naMdavaI, 3.
naMduttara 4. naMdiseNiyA cev| 5. marutA 6. sumarutA 7. mahamarutA 8. marudevA
ya aTThamA  // 1 //  9. bhaddA ya .10. subhaddA ya, 11. sujAyA 12. sumnnaaiyaa|
13. bhUyadiNNA ya bodhavvA, seNiya bhajANa naamaaiN||2|| jai NaM bhatte!
samaNeNaM bhagavayA mahAvIreNaM aTThamassa aMgassa aMtagaDadasANaM sattamassa
vaggassa terasa ajjhayaNA paNNattA, paDhamassa NaM bhaMte! ajjhayaNassa
aMtagaDadasANaM ke aTe paNNatte? evaM khalu jaMbU! teNaM kAleNaM teNaM samaeNaM
rAyagihe nyre| guNasilae ceie| seNie rAyA, vnnnno| tassa NaM seNiyassa raNo
naMdA nAma devI hotthaa-vnnnno| sAmI samosaDhe, parisA niggyaa| tae NaM sA naMdA
devI imIse kahAe laddhaTThA haTTatuTThA koDuMbiyapurise saddAvei, saddAvettA
jANaM duruhi| jahA paumAvaI jAva' ekkArasa aMgAi ahijjittA vIsaM vAsAiM pariyAo
jAva siddhaa| evaM terasa vi devIo naMdA-gameNa neyvvaao| chaDe varga kA artha
sunane ke anantara Arya jaMbUsvAmI Arya sudharmAsvAmI se nivedana karane
lagebhagavan! yAvat mokSaprApta zramaNa bhagavAn mahAvIra ne aSTama aMga
aMtagaDadazA ke chaThe varga kA jo artha batAyA hai, usakA maiMne zravaNa kara
liyA hai, aba zramaNa yAvat mokSaprApta bhagavAn mahAvIra ne aSTama aMga
aMtagaDadazA ke sAtaveM varga kA jo artha kahA hai, use sunAne kI kRpA kreN|
usake uttara meM sudharmA svAmI ne kahA-sAtaveM vargake teraha adhyayana kahe
gaye haiM, jo isa prakAra hai gAthArtha-(1) nandA (2). nandavatI, (3).
nandottarA, (4). nandazreNikA, (5). marutA, (6). sumarutA, (7). mahAmarutA, (8).
maruddevA, (9). bhadrA (10). subhadrA, (11). sujAtA, (12). sumanAyikA,
(13).bhuutdttaa|ye saba zreNikarAjA kIrAniyAM thiiN|ye saba zreNikarAjA kI
patniyoM ke nAma haiN| 1. varga 5, sUtra 4.6 2. varga 5, sUtra 6

Page #179 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[138] [Antakṛddaśā _Ārya Jambū asked Sudharmāsvāmī - 'Bhagavan! The Lord has
spoken of thirteen studies in the seventh category, so what is the meaning of
the first study, O venerable one, that the Śramaṇa, the liberated Lord, has
spoken of?' - Ārya Sudharmāsvāmī said - 'O Jambū! In that time and at that time,
there was a city called Rājagṛha. Outside it was a garden called Guṇasīla,
outside it was a garden called Gaṇasīla. There, King Śreṇika ruled. Here, one
should know the description of the king. King Śreṇika had a queen named Nandā,
her description should also be understood as similar to the description of the
king in the Aupapātika Sūtra. The Lord Mahāvīra arrived in the garden of
Rājagṛha city. The assembly went out to pay homage. Nandā Devī, hearing the news
of the Lord's arrival, was very happy and called an obedient servant and ordered
him to bring a religious chariot. Like Padmāvatī, she also took initiation,
studied all eleven angas. She observed the conduct for twenty years, and finally
became a Siddha. ... Nandavatī and the remaining twelve studies are like Nandā.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 138] [antakRddazA _Arya jaMbU ne sudharmAsvAmI se pUchA-'bhagavan! prabhu ne
sAtaveM varga ke teraha adhyayana kahe haiM to prathama adhyayana kA he pUjya !
zramaNa yAvat muktiprApta prabhu ne kyA artha kahA hai?' . - Arya sudharmAsvAmI
ne kahA- 'he jaMbU ! usa kAla aura usa samaya meM rAjagRha nAma kA nagara thaa|
usake bAhara guNazIla nAmaka udyA usake bAhara gaNazIla nAmaka udyAna thaa|
vahAM zreNika rAjA rAjya karatA thaa| yahAM rAjavarNana jAna lenA caahie|
zreNika rAjA kI nandA nAma kI rAnI thI, usakA bhI varNana aupapAtikasUtra ke
rAjJIvarNana ke samAna samajha lenA caahie| prabhu mahAvIra rAjagRha nagara ke
udyAna meM padhAre  /  pariSad vandana karane ko niklii| nandA devI bhagavAn ke
Ane kA samAcAra sunakara bahuta prasanna huI aura AjJAkArI sevaka ko bulAkara
dhArmikaratha lAne kI AjJA dii| padmAvatI kI taraha isane bhI dIkSA lI yAvat
gyAraha aMgoM kA adhyayana kiyaa| bIsa varSa taka cAritra kA pAlana kiyA, aMta
meM siddha huii| ... nandavatI Adi zeSa bAraha adhyayana nandA ke samAna haiN|

Page #180 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Eighth Section, First Study: Kali  **Utkṣepa**  1. **Jada:** "O Venerable
One! What did the Great Hero, the Ascetic, the Liberated One, declare as the
meaning of the first study of the eighth section of the Antagaddadasa of the
eighth anga?"  **Evam Khalu Jambu:** "O Jambu! The Great Hero, the Ascetic, the
Liberated One, declared ten studies of the eighth section of the Antagaddadasa
of the eighth anga, which are as follows:  (1). Kali (2). Sukali (3). Mahakali
(4). Kanha (5). Sukanha (6). Mahakanha (7). Virakanha, who is also known as
Bodhavva (8). Ramakanha, likewise (9). Pitusenakanha, the ninth (10).
Mahasekanha, the tenth. ||1||  **Jada:** "O Venerable One! If the Great Hero,
the Ascetic, the Liberated One, declared ten studies of the eighth section of
the Antagaddadasa, then what did he declare as the meaning of the first study of
the Antagaddadasa?"  **Evam Khalu Jambu:** "O Jambu! In that time and at that
time, there was a city named Champa. There was a garden called Punnabhadde. In
that city of Champa, there was a king named Konika. In that city of Champa,
there was a queen named Kali, the daughter of the king Seniya, the younger
sister of Konika. Just as Nanda, up to the Samaiya, has eleven limbs, and dwells
in many forms, up to the fourth, being attached to her own form."  **Sri
Jambuswami** asked **Arya Sudharmaswami:** "O Venerable One! What did the
Ascetic, the Liberated One, the Great Hero, declare as the meaning of the eighth
section of the Antagaddadasa of the eighth anga?"  **Sri Sudharmaswami**
replied: "O Jambu! The Ascetic, the Liberated One, the Great Hero, declared ten
studies of the eighth section of the Antagaddadasa of the eighth anga, which are
as follows:  **Gatha-arth:** (1). Kali (2). Sukali (3). Mahakali (4). Krishna
(5). Sukrishna (6). Mahakrisha (7). Virakrishna (8). Ramakrishna (9).
Pitusenakrishna and (10). Mahasekanha.  **Sri Jambuswami** asked again: "O
Venerable One! If there are ten studies of the eighth section, then what did the
Ascetic, the Liberated One, the Great Hero, declare as the meaning of the first
study?"  **Arya Sudharmaswami** replied: "O Jambu! In that time and at that
time, there was a city named Champa. There was a garden called Punnabhadde. In
that city of Champa, there was a king named Konika. In that city of Champa,
there was a queen named Kali, the daughter of the king Seniya, the younger
sister of Konika. Just as Nanda, up to the Samaiya, has eleven limbs, and dwells
in many forms, up to the fourth, being attached to her own form."
**Footnotes:**  1.  **Varga 5, Sutra 4, 6** 2.  **Varga 1, Sutra 9**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 aSTama varga prathama adhyayana kAlI utkSepa 1-jar3a NaM bhaMte! samaNeNaM
bhagavayA mahAvIreNaM aTThamassa aMgassa aMtagaDadasANaM sattamassa vaggassa
ayamaTe paNNatte. adamassa vaggassa ke aTe paNNate? evaM khalu jaMbU! samaNeNaM
bhagavayA mahAvIreNaM aTThamassa aMgassa aMtagaDadasANaM aTThamassa vaggassa
dasa ajjhayaNA paNNattA, taM jahAsaMgahaNI gAhA (1). kAlI (2). sukAlI (3).
mahAkAlI,(4). kaNhA (5). sukaNhA (6). mhaaknnhaa| . (7). vIrakaNhA ya bodhavvA,
(8). rAmakaNhA taheva y| (9). piuseNakaNhA navamI, dasamI (10). mahAseNakaNhA ya
// 1 //  jai NaM bhaMte! samaNeNaM bhagavayA mahAvIreNaM aTThamassa aMgassa
aMtagaDadasANaM dasa ajjhayaNA paNNattA, paDhamassa NaM bhaMte ! ajjhayaNassa
aMtagaDadasANaM ke aTe paNNatte? _ evaM khalu jaMbU ! teNaM kAleNaM teNaM
samaeNaM caMpA nAmaM nayarI hotthaa| puNNabhadde ceie| tattha NaM caMpAe nayarIe
koNie rAyA, vnnnno| tattha NaM caMpAe nayarIe seNiyassa raNNo bhajjA, koNiyassa
raNNo cullakamAuyA, kAlI nAmaM devI hotthA, vnnnno| jahA naMdA jAva'
sAmAiyamAiyAI ekkArasa aMgAI ahiji| bahUhiM cauttha jAva appANaM bhAvemANe
vihri| zrI jaMbUsvAmI ne Arya sudharmAsvAmI se nivedana kiyA- "bhagavan! zramaNa
yAvat muktiprApta bhagavAn mahAvIra ne AThaveM aMga aMtagaDadazA ke AThaveM
varga kA kyA artha pratipAdana kiyA hai?" zrI sudharmAsvAmI ne kahA-"he jaMbU!
zramaNa yAvat muktiprApta prabhu mahAvIra ne AThaveM aMga aMtagaDadazA ke
AThaveM varga ke daza adhyayana kahe haiM, jo isa prakAra haiM gAthArtha- (1).
kAlI, (2). sukAlI (3). mahAkAlI, (4). kRSNA, (5). sukRSNA, (7). mahAkRSNA, (7).
vIrakRSNA (8). rAmakRSNA, (9). pitusenakRSNA aura (10). mhaasenkRssnnaa| zrI
jaMbUsvAmI ne punaH prazna kiyA-'bhagavan! yadi AThaveM varga ke daza adhyayana
kahe haiM to prathama adhyayana kA zramaNa yAvat muktiprApta mahAvIra ne kyA
artha kahA hai|' Arya sadharmAsvAmI ne kahA -'he jaMba! usa kAla aura usa samaya
campA nAma kI nagarI thii| vahA~ pUrNabhadra nAma kA udyAna thaa| vahAM koNika
rAjA rAjya karatA thaa| usa campAnagarI meM zreNika rAjA kI rAnI 1. varga 5,
sUtra 4, 6 2. varga 1, sUtra 9

Page #181 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[140] The younger mother of Antakrid Dasha and Maharaja Konik was a goddess
named Kali. According to the Aupapatik Sutra, her description should be told.
Like Nanda Devi, Queen Kali also took Shramanidiksha near Lord Mahavira and
studied the eleven Angas from Samayik to the end. She wandered, affecting her
soul with many fasts, Bales, Teles, etc. Kali Arya's Ratnavalli Tapa 2-Then she,
Kali, said to Ajachandana, "I wish, Ajachandana, that you would grant me the
Ratnavalli Samadhi, which is adorned with jewels, and I would wander." The
Devauppias said, "Do not be bound." Then Kali, Ajachandana, adorned with jewels,
received the Ratnavalli Samadhi and wandered. It is as follows: She performs the
fourth, and by performing it, she crosses all desires. She performs the sixth,
and by performing it, she crosses all desires. She performs the eighth, and by
performing it, she crosses all desires. She performs the eighth and sixth, and
by performing it, she crosses all desires. She performs the fourth, and by
performing it, she crosses all desires. She performs the sixth, and by
performing it, she crosses all desires. She performs the eighth, and by
performing it, she crosses all desires. She performs the tenth, and by
performing it, she crosses all desires. She performs the twelfth, and by
performing it, she crosses all desires. She performs the fourteenth, and by
performing it, she crosses all desires. She performs the sixteenth, and by
performing it, she crosses all desires. She performs the eighteenth, and by
performing it, she crosses all desires. She performs the twentieth, and by
performing it, she crosses all desires. She performs the twenty-second, and by
performing it, she crosses all desires. She performs the twenty-fourth, and by
performing it, she crosses all desires. She performs the twenty-sixth, and by
performing it, she crosses all desires. She performs the twenty-eighth, and by
performing it, she crosses all desires. She performs the thirtieth, and by
performing it, she crosses all desires. She performs the thirty-second, and by
performing it, she crosses all desires. She performs the thirty-fourth, and by
performing it, she crosses all desires. She performs the thirty-fourth and
sixth, and by performing it, she crosses all desires. She performs the thirty-
fourth, and by performing it, she crosses all desires. She performs the thirty-
second, and by performing it, she crosses all desires. She performs the
thirtieth, and by performing it, she crosses all desires. She performs the
twenty-eighth, and by performing it, she crosses all desires. She performs the
twenty-sixth, and by performing it, she crosses all desires. She performs the
twenty-fourth, and by performing it, she crosses all desires. She performs the
twenty-second, and by performing it, she crosses all desires. She performs the
twentieth, and by performing it, she crosses all desires. She performs the
eighteenth, and by performing it, she crosses all desires. She performs the
sixteenth, and by performing it, she crosses all desires. She performs the
fourteenth, and by performing it, she crosses all desires. She performs the
twelfth, and by performing it, she crosses all desires. She performs the tenth,
and by performing it, she crosses all desires. She performs the eighth, and by
performing it, she crosses all desires. She performs the sixth, and by
performing it, she crosses all desires. She performs the fourth, and by
performing it, she crosses all desires. She performs the eighth and sixth, and
by performing it, she crosses all desires. She performs the eighth, and by
performing it, she crosses all desires. She performs the sixth, and by
performing it, she crosses all desires. She performs the fourth, and by
performing it, she crosses all desires. Thus, this Ratnavalli, with its Tapa
Karma, is performed in one year, three months, and twenty-two days and nights.
It is performed with the body, speech, and mind, and it is performed with the
right faith, right knowledge, and right conduct. It is performed with the right
effort, right mindfulness, and right concentration. It is performed with the
right speech, right action, and right livelihood. It is performed with the right
effort, right mindfulness, and right concentration. It is performed with the
right speech, right action, and right livelihood. It is performed with the right
effort, right mindfulness, and right concentration. It is performed with the
right speech, right action, and right livelihood. It is performed with the right
effort, right mindfulness, and right concentration. It is performed with the
right speech, right action, and right livelihood. It is performed with the right
effort, right mindfulness, and right concentration. It is performed with the
right speech, right action, and right livelihood. It is performed with the right
effort, right mindfulness, and right concentration. It is performed with the
right speech, right action, and right livelihood. It is performed with the right
effort, right mindfulness, and right concentration. It is performed with the
right speech, right action, and right livelihood. It is performed with the right
effort, right mindfulness, and right concentration. It is performed with the
right speech, right action, and right livelihood. It is performed with the right
effort, right mindfulness, and right concentration. It is performed with the
right speech, right action, and right livelihood. It is performed with the right
effort, right mindfulness, and right concentration. It is performed with the
right speech, right action, and right livelihood. It is performed with the right
effort, right mindfulness, and right concentration. It is performed with the
right speech, right action, and right livelihood. It is performed with the right
effort, right mindfulness, and right concentration. It is performed with the
right speech, right action, and right livelihood. It is performed with the right
effort, right mindfulness, and right concentration. It is performed with the
right speech, right action, and right livelihood. It is performed with the right
effort, right mindfulness, and right concentration. It is performed with the
right speech, right action, and right livelihood. It is performed with the right
effort, right mindfulness, and right concentration. It is performed with the
right speech, right action, and right livelihood. It is performed with the right
effort, right mindfulness, and right concentration. It is performed with the
right speech, right action, and right livelihood. It is performed with the right
effort, right mindfulness, and right concentration. It is performed with the
right speech, right action, and right livelihood. It is performed with the right
effort, right mindfulness, and right concentration. It is performed with the
right speech, right action, and right livelihood. It is performed with the right
effort, right mindfulness, and right concentration. It is performed with the
right speech, right action, and right livelihood. It is performed with the right
effort, right mindfulness, and right concentration. It is performed with the
right speech, right action, and right livelihood. It is performed with the right
effort

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 140] [antakRddazA aura mahArAjA koNika kI choTI mAtA kAlI nAma kI devI thii|
aupapAtikasUtra ke anusAra usakA varNana kahanA caahie| nandA devI ke samAna
kAlI rAnI ne bhI prabhu mahAvIra ke samIpa zramaNIdIkSA grahaNa karake sAmAyika
se lekara gyAraha aMgoM kA adhyayana kiyA evaM bahuta se upavAsa, bele, tele Adi
tapasyA se apanI AtmA ko bhAvita karatI huI vicarane lgii| kAlI AryA kA
ratnAvalI tapa 2-tae NaM sA kAlI ajA aNNayA kayAi jeNeva ajacaMdaNA ajA teNeva
uvAgayA, uvAgacchittA evaM vayAsI _'icchAmi NaM ajAo! tubbhehiM abbhaNuNNAyA
samANI rayaNAvaliM tavaM upasaMpajittA NaM vihritte|' ahAsuhaM devANuppie! mA
paDibaMdhaM krehi| tae NaM sA kAlI ajA ajjacaMdaNAe abbhaNuNNAyA samANI
rayaNAvaliM tavaM uvasaMpajittA NaM viharai, taM jahA cautthaM karei, karettA
savvakAmaguNiyaM paarei| chaTuM karei, karettA savvakAmaguNiyaM paarei| aTThamaM
karei, karettA savvakAmaguNiyaM paarei| aTTha chaTThAI karei, karettA
savvakAmaguNiyaM paarei| cautthaM karei, karettA savvakAmaguNiyaM paarei|
chaTheM karei, karettA savvakAmaguNiyaM paarei| aTThamaM karei, karettA
savvakAmaguNiyaM paarei| dasamaM karei, karettA savvakAmaguNiyaM paarei|
duvAlasamaM karena, karettA savvakAmaguNiyaM paarei| coddasamaM karei, karettA,
savvakAmaguNiyaM paarei| solasamaM karei, karettA, savvakAmaguNiyaM paarei|
aTThArasamaM karei, karettA savvakAmaguNiyaM paarei| vIsaimaM karei, karettA,
savvakAmaguNiyaM paarei| bAvIsaimaM karei, karettA savvakAmaguNiyaM paare||
cauvIsaimaM karei, karettA, savvakAmaguNiyaM paarei| chavvIsaimaM karei, karettA
savvakAmaguNiyaM paare| aTThAvIsaimaM karei, karettA savvakAmaguNiyaM paarei|
tIsaimaM karei, karettA savvakAmaguNiyaM paarei| battIsaimaM karei, karettA
savvakAmaguNiyayaM paarei| cottIsaimaM karei karettA savvakAmaguNiyaM paarei|
cottIsaM chaTThAI karei, karettA savvakAmaguNiyaM paarei| cottIsaimaM karei,
karettA savvakAmaguNiyaM paarei| battIsaimaM karei, karettA savvakAmaguNiyaM
paarei| tIsaimaM karei, karettA savvakAmaguNiyaM paarei| aTThAvIsaimaM karei,
karettA savvakAmaguNiyaM paarei| chavvIsaimaM karei, karettA savvakAmaguNiyaM
pArei, cauvIsaimaM karei, karettA savvakAmaguNiyaM paarei| bAvIsaimaM karei
karettA savvakAmaguNiyaM paarei| vIsaimaM karei, karettA savvakAmaguNiyaM pArei,
aTThArasamaM karei, karettA savvakAmaguNiyaM paarei| solasamaM karei, karettA
savvakAmaguNiyaM paarei| coddasamaM karei, karettA savvakAmaguNiyaM paarei|
bArasamaM karei, karettA savvakAmaguNiyaM paarei| dasamaM karei, karettA
savvakAmaguNiyaM paare| aTThamaM karei, karettA savvakAmaguNiyaM paarei| chaTheM
karei, karettA savvakAmaguNiyaM paarei| cautthaM karei, karettA savvakAmaguNiyaM
paarei| aTTha chaTThAI karei, karettA, savvakAmaguNiyaM paarei| aTThamaM karei,
karettA savvakAmaguNiyaM paarei| chaTuM karei, karettA savvakAmaguNiyaM paarei|
cautthaM karei, karettA savvakAmaguNiyaM paare| evaM khalu esA rayaNAvalIe
tavokammassa paDhamA parivADI egeNaM saMvacchareNaM tihiM mAsehiM bAvIsAe ya
ahorattehiM ahAsuttaM jAva[ ahAatthaM ahAttaccaM ahAmaggaM ahAkappaM sammaM
kAeNaM phAsiyA pAliyA sohiyA tIriyA kiTTiyA ] ArAhiyA bhvi|

Page #182 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Eighth Chapter] [141] One day, Kali Arya approached Chandana Arya and, joining
her hands, spoke humbly, "O Arya! If I may have your permission, I wish to
practice the Ratnavati Tapa." Arya Chandana said, "Devanupriye! Do as you
please, do not be careless." Then Kali Arya, having received the permission of
Arya Chandana, began to practice the Ratnavati Tapa, which is as follows: She
performed a fast, followed by a Parana with all auspicious qualities. After the
Parana, she performed a Bela, followed by a Parana with all auspicious
qualities. After the Parana, she performed a Tela, followed by a Parana with all
auspicious qualities. After the Parana, she performed eight Belas, followed by a
Parana with all auspicious qualities. After the Parana, she performed a fast,
followed by a Parana with all auspicious qualities. After the Parana, she
performed a Bela, followed by a Parana with all auspicious qualities. After the
Parana, she performed a Tela, followed by a Parana with all auspicious
qualities. After the Parana, she performed a Dasham Chola, followed by a Parana
with all auspicious qualities. After the Parana, she performed a Dwadashma-
Panchola, followed by a Parana with all auspicious qualities. After the Parana,
she performed six fasts, followed by a Parana with all auspicious qualities.
After the Parana, she performed seven fasts, followed by a Parana with all
auspicious qualities. After the Parana, she performed eight fasts, followed by a
Parana with all auspicious qualities. After the Parana, she performed nine
fasts, followed by a Parana with all auspicious qualities. After the Parana, she
performed ten fasts, followed by a Parana with all auspicious qualities. After
the Parana, she performed eleven fasts, followed by a Parana with all auspicious
qualities. After the Parana, she performed twelve fasts, followed by a Parana
with all auspicious qualities. After the Parana, she performed thirteen fasts,
followed by a Parana with all auspicious qualities. After the Parana, she
performed fourteen fasts, followed by a Parana with all auspicious qualities.
After the Parana, she performed fifteen fasts, followed by a Parana with all
auspicious qualities. After the Parana, she performed sixteen fasts, followed by
a Parana with all auspicious qualities. After the Parana, she performed thirty-
four Belas, followed by a Parana with all auspicious qualities. After the
Parana, she performed sixteen fasts, followed by a Parana with all auspicious
qualities. After the Parana, she performed fifteen fasts, followed by a Parana
with all auspicious qualities. After the Parana, she performed fourteen fasts,
followed by a Parana with all auspicious qualities. After the Parana, she
performed thirteen fasts, followed by a Parana with all auspicious qualities.
After the Parana, she performed twelve fasts, followed by a Parana with all
auspicious qualities. After the Parana, she performed eleven fasts, followed by
a Parana with all auspicious qualities. After the Parana, she performed ten
fasts, followed by a Parana with all auspicious qualities. After the Parana, she
performed nine fasts, followed by a Parana with all auspicious qualities. After
the Parana, she performed eight fasts, followed by a Parana with all auspicious
qualities. After the Parana, she performed seven fasts, followed by a Parana
with all auspicious qualities. After the Parana, she performed six fasts,
followed by a Parana with all auspicious qualities. After the Parana, she
performed a Panchola, followed by a Parana with all auspicious qualities. After
the Parana, she performed a Chola, followed by a Parana with all auspicious
qualities. After the Parana, she performed a Tela, followed by a Parana with all
auspicious qualities. After the Parana, she performed a Bela, followed by a
Parana with all auspicious qualities. After the Parana, she performed a fast,
followed by a Parana with all auspicious qualities. After the Parana, she
performed eight Belas, followed by a Parana with all auspicious qualities. After
the Parana, she performed a Tela, followed by a Parana with all auspicious
qualities. After the Parana, she performed a Bela, followed by a Parana with all
auspicious qualities. After the Parana, she performed a fast, followed by a
Parana with all auspicious qualities. In this way, Kali Arya performed the first
cycle of the Ratnavati Tapa. According to the scriptures, this first cycle
(series) of the Ratnavati Tapa was completed in one year, three months, and
twenty-two days, (as per the scriptures, according to the meaning, according to
both, according to the path, according to the plan, in a perfectly correct
manner, by the body, touching, maintaining, purifying, crossing, commendable).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 aSTama varga] [141 eka dina vaha kAlI AryA candanA ke samIpa AyI aura Akara
hAtha jor3akara kara vinayapUrvaka isa prakAra bolI-'he Arye! ApakI AjJA prApta
ho to maiM ratnAvalI tapa ko aMgIkAra karake vicaranA cAhatI huuN|' AryA candanA
ne kahA-'devAnupriye ! jaise sukha ho vaisA karo, pramAda mata kro|' taba kAlI
AryA, AryA candanA kI AjJA pAkara ratnAvalI tapa ko aMgIkAra karake vicarane
lagI, jo isa prakAra hai upavAsa kiyA, karake sarvakAmaguNayukta pAraNA kiyA,
pAraNA karake belA kiyA, karake sarvakAmaguNayukta pAraNA kiyA, pAraNA karake
telA kiyA, karake sarvakAmaguNayukta pAraNA kiyA, pAraNA karake ATha bele kie,
karake sarvakAmaguNayukta pAraNA kiyA, pAraNA karake upavAsa kiyA, karake
kAmagaNayakta pAraNA kiyA. pAraNA karake belA kiyA, karake sarvakAmaguNayukta
pAraNA kiyA, pAraNA karake telA kiyA, karake sarvakAmaguNayukta pAraNA kiyA,
pAraNA karake dazama colA kiyA, karake sarvakAmaguNayukta pAraNA kiyA, pAraNA
karake, dvAdazama-paMcolA kiyA, karake sarvakAmaguNayukta pAraNA kiyA, pAraNA
karake, chaha upavAsa kiye, karake sarvakAmaguNayukta pAraNA kiyA, pAraNA
karake, sAta upavAsa kiye, karake sarvakAmaguNayukta pAraNA kiyA, pAraNA karake
ATha upavAsa kiye, karake sarvakAmaguNayukta pAraNA kiyA, pAraNA kara nava
upavAsa kiye, karake sarvakAmaguNayukta pAraNA kiyA, pAraNA karake daza upavAsa
kiye, karake sarvakAmaguNayukta pAraNA kiyA, pAraNA kara gyAraha upavAsa kiye,
karake sarvakAmaguNayukta pAraNA kiyA, pAraNA karake bAraha upavAsa kiye, karake
sarvakAmaguNayukta pAraNA kiyA, pAraNA karake teraha upavAsa kiye,karake
sarvakAguNayukta pAraNA kiyA, pAraNA karake caudaha upavAsa kiye, karake
sarvakAmaguNayukta pAraNA kiyA, pAraNA karake pandraha upavAsa kiye, karake
sarvakAmaguNayukta pAraNA kiyA, karake solaha upavAsa kiye, karake
sarvakAmaguNayukta pAraNA kiyA, pAraNA karake cautIsa bele kiye, karake
sarvakAmaguNayukta pAraNA kiyA, pAraNA karake solaha upavAsa kiye, karake
sarvakAmaguNayukta pAraNA kiyA, pAraNA karake pandraha upavAsa kiye, karake
sarvakAmaguNayukta pAraNA kiyA, karake caudaha upavAsa kiye, karake
sarvakAmaguNayukta pAraNA kiyA, karake teraha upavAsa kiye, karake
sarvakAmaguNayukta pAraNA kiyA, pAraNA karake bAraha. upavAsa kiye, karake
sarvakAmaguNayukta pAraNA kiyA, pAraNA karake gyAraha upavAsa kiye karake,
sarvakAmaguNayukta pAraNA kiyA, pAraNA karake, dasa upavAsa kiye, karake,
sarvakAmaguNayukta pAraNA kiyA, pAraNA karake, nava upavAsa kiye, karake,
sarvakAmaguNayukta pAraNA kiyA, pAraNA karake, ATha upavAsa kiye,karake
sarvakAmaguNayukta pAraNA kiyA,pAraNA karake,sAta upavAsa kiye,karake,
savekAmaguNayukta pAraNA kiyA. karake chaha upavAsa kiye. karake
sarvakAmagaNayukta pAraNA kiyA, karake paMcolA kiyA karake sarvakAmaguNayukta
pAraNA kiyA, karake colA kiyA, karake sarvakAmaguNayukta pAraNA kiyA, karake
telA kiyA, karake sarvakAmaguNayukta pAraNA kiyA, karake belA kiyA, karake,
sarvakAmaguNayukta pAraNA kiyA, pAraNA karake upavAsa kiyA, karake
sarvakAmaguNayukta pAraNA kiyA, karake ATha bele kie, karake, sarvakAmaguNayukta
pAraNA kiyA, karake telA kiyA, karake sarvakAmaguNayukta pAraNA kiyA, karake
belA kiyA, karake sarvakAmaguNayukta pAraNA kiyA, karake upavAsa kiyA, karake
sarvakAmaguNayukta pAraNA kiyaa| isa prakAra isa ratnAvalI tapazcaraNa kI
prathama paripATI kI kAlI AryA ne ArAdhanA kii| sUtrAnusAra ratnAvalI tapa kI
isa ArAdhanA kI prathama paripATI (lar3I) eka varSa tIna mAsa aura bAIsa
ahorAtra meM, (yathAsUtra, arthAnusAra, tadubhayAnusAra, mArgAnusAra,
kalpAnusAra samyakprakAra se kAyA dvArA sparza kara, pAla kara, zodhita kara,
pAra kara prazaMsanIya) ArAdhanA pUrNa kii|

Page #183 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[142] [Antakrid Dasha OTHA 000000000 Tapasya Kaal/Ek Paripati Ka Kaal 1 year, 3
months, 22 days 'Four Paripati Ka Kaal 5 years, 2 months, 28 days of Tapasya [.
One Paripati Ke Tapodin 1 year, - 24 days Four Paripati Ke Tapodin 4 years, 3
months, 6 days per one Paripati Ke Parane 88 Four Paripati Ke Parane 352 500000
Ratnavali Tapas Ka . Sthapana-Yantra 9000 (૨ ૨ ૨ ૨ ૨ ૨) Vivechan-Rayanavali Ka
Arth Vrittikar' Ke Shabdon Mein Is Prakar Hai-Rayanavali Tti, Ratnavali
Abharnavishish: Ratnavali Tapas Ratnavali. Yathahi Ratnavali Ubhayatah Aadau
Sukshma-Sthul-Sthulatar-Vibhagkahaalikakhya-Sauvarnavayavadvayyukta Bhavati,
Punarmध्यदेशे Sthulvishistamannyalankrita Cha Bhavati, Evam Yattapah
Pattadavupadaryamanamimamakaram Dharayati Tadratnavali Tyuchyate-Arthath
Ratnavali Ek Abhushan Vishishta Hota Hai. Uski Rachna Ke Saman Jis Tap Ka
Aradhan Kiya Jaye Usko Ratnavali Tapas Kahte Hain. Jaise Ratnavali Bhushan Dono
Or Se Aarambh Mein Sukshma Fir Sthul, Fir Us Se Adhik Sthul, Madhy Mein
Vishishta Sthul Maniyon Se Yukt Hota Hai, Vaise Hi Jo Tap Aarambh Mein Swalp Fir
Adhik, Fir Vishishta Adhik Hota Chala Jata Hai, 1. Antagad Sutra-Savritti-
Patra-25

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 142] [antakRddazA OTHA 000000000 tapasyAkAla/ekaparipATIkAkAla 1varSa,3 mAsa,22
dina 'cAra paripATI kA kAla 5varSa, 2 mAsa, 28 dina tapa ke dina [. eka paripATI
ke tapodina 1 varSa, - 24 dina cAra paripATI ke tapodina 4 varSa,3 mAsa,6 dina
para eka paripATI ke pAraNe 88 cAra paripATI ke pAraNe 352 500000 ratnAvalI tapa
kA . sthApanA-yantra 9000 (2 2 2 2 2 2) vivecana-rayaNAvalI kA artha vRttikAra'
ke zabdoM meM isa prakAra hai-rayaNAvali tti, ratnAvalI AbharaNavizeSaH,
ratnAvalItapaH rtnaavlii| yathAhi ratnAvalI ubhayataH Adau sUkSma-sthUla-
sthUlatara-vibhAgakAhalikAkhya-sauvarNAvayavadvayayuktA bhavati, punarmadhyadeze
sthUlaviziSTamaNyalaMkRtA ca bhavati, evaM yattapaH
paTTAdAvupadaryamAnamimamAkAraM dhArayati tadratnAvalItyucyate-arthAt ratnAvalI
eka AbhUSaNa vizeSa hotA hai| usakI racanA ke samAna jisa tapa kA ArAdhana kiyA
jAye usako ratnAvalI tapa kahate haiN| jaise ratnAvalI bhUSaNa donoM ora se
Arambha meM sUkSma phira sthUla, phira usa se adhika sthUla, madhya meM vizeSa
sthUla maNiyoM se yukta hotA hai, vaise hI jo tapa Arambha meM svalpa phira
adhika, phira vizeSa adhika hotA calA jAtA hai, 1. antagaDasUtra-savRtti-
patra-25

Page #184 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Eighth Section] [143] This is the Ratnavali. Just as ornaments enhance the
beauty of the body, the Ratnavali tapa adorns the soul with virtues. The
Ratnavali tapa lasts for five years, two months, and twenty-eight days. The
mechanism of this tapa is given on the previous page. 3. After that, on the
fourth day of the Parivadi, one should perform the Tapa, and after performing
it, one should perform the Vigayavajan Parana. On the sixth day, one should
perform the Tapa, and after performing it, one should perform the Vigayavajan
Parana. Similarly, as in the Parivadi, so also in the Biya, and in the Navaran-
Savvaparana, one should perform the Vigayavajan Parana. (Thus, in this
Ratnavali, the Biya Parivadi of the Tapa Karma lasts for one year, three months,
and twenty-two days, until it is completed.) After that, on the fourth day of
the Taccha Parivadi, one should perform the Tapa, and after performing it, one
should perform the Alevadi Parana. The rest is the same. One should perform the
Alevadi Parana for the Navaran. Thus, the fourth Parivadi. For the Navaran-
Savvaparana, one should perform the Ayambila Parana. The rest is the same.
**Gatha** _In the first, all virtues, in the second, Vigayavajan Parana. In the
third, Alevadi, and in the fourth, Ayambila Parana._ Therefore, that Kali Arya
performed the Ratnavali Tapa Karma for five years, two months, and twenty-eight
days, until the Ajachandana became Ajja. Having become Ajja, she worshipped and
bowed to the Ajachandana. After worshipping and bowing, she lived, considering
herself to be in many fourth, sixth, tenth, and twelfth Tapa Karmas. In this one
practice, there are three hundred and eighty-four days of Tapa and eighty-eight
days of Parana. Thus, there are a total of four hundred and seventy-two days.
After that, in the second practice, Kali Arya fasted and performed a Vigayavajan
Parana, performed the Bela, and performed a Vigayavajan Parana. Thus, this is
also the same as the first practice. The only difference is that the Parana is
Vigayavajan. Thus, according to the Sutra, this second practice is performed.
After that, in the third practice, that Kali Arya fasted and performed a
Leparajan Parana. The rest is the same as before. Similarly, Kali Arya performed
the fourth practice. The special feature of this is that all the Paranas are
performed with Ayambila. The rest is the same. **Gatha Meaning** _In the first
practice, all virtues, in the second, Vigayavajan Parana. In the third,
Leparajan, and in the fourth, Ayambila Parana._ In this way, Kali Arya performed
the Ratnavali Tapa for five years, two months, and twenty-eight days, according
to the Sutra. 2.-3. Section 8, Sutra 2.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 aSTama varga] [143 vaha ratnAvalI hai| jisa prakAra ratnAvalI se zarIra kI
zobhA bar3hatI hai usI prakAra ratnAvalI tapa AtmA ko sadguNoM se vibhUSita
karatA hai| ratnAvalI tapa meM pAMca varSa do mAsa aura aTThAIsa dina lagate
haiN| isa tapa kA yaMtra pUrva pRSTha para diyA gayA hai| 3-tayANaMtaraM ca NaM
doccAe parivADIe cautthaM karei, karettA vigaivajaM paarei| chaTuM karei,
karettA vigaivajaM paarei| evaM jahA paDhamAe parivADIe tahA bIyAe vi, navaraM-
savvapAraNae vigaivajaM pArei jAva (evaM khalu esA rayaNAvalIe tavokammassa
biiyA parivADI egeNaM saMvacchareNaM tihiM mAsehiM bAvIsAe ya ahorattehiM jAva
ArAhiyA bhvi|) tayANaMtaraM ca NaM taccAe parivADIe cautthaM karei, karettA
alevADaM paarei| sesaM thev| navaraM alevADaM paare| evaM cautthA privaaddii|
navaraM savvapAraNae AyaMbilaM paarei| sesaM taM cev| saMgahaNI gAhA paDhamaMmi
saLkAmaM, pAraNayaM biiyae vigivjN| taiyaMmi alevADaM, AyaMbilamo cautthammi  //
1 //  . tae NaM sA kAlI ajA rayaNAvalI tavokammaM paMcahiM saMvaccharehiM dohi
ya mAsehiM aTThavIsAe ya divasehiM ahAsuttaM jAva ArAhettA jeNeva ajacaMdaNA
ajjA teNeva uvAgacchai, uvAgacchittA ajjacaMdaNaM ajaM vaMdai namasai, vaMdittA,
namaMsittA bahUhiM cauttha-chaTTaTThama-dasama-duvAlasehiM tavokammehiM appANaM
bhAvemANI vihrh| isa eka paripATI meM tIna sau caurAsI dina tapasyA ke evaM
aThAsI dina pAraNA ke hote haiN| isa prakAra kula cAra sau bahattara dina hote
haiN| isake pazcAt dUsarI paripATI meM kAlI AryA ne upavAsa kiyA aura vikRti
(vigaya) rahita pAraNA kiyA, belA kiyA aura vigaya rahita pAraNA kiyaa| isa
prakAra yaha bhI pahalI paripATI ke samAna hai| isameM kevala yaha vizeSa
(antara) hai ki pAraNA vigayarahita hotA hai| isa prakAra sUtrAnusAra isa dUsarI
paripATI kA ArAdhana kiyA jAtA hai| isake pazcAt tIsarI paripATI meM vaha kAlI
AryA upavAsa karatI hai aura leparahita pAraNA karatI hai| zeSa pahale kI taraha
hai| aise hI kAlI AryA ne cauthI paripATI kI ArAdhanA kii| isameM vizeSatA yaha
hai ki saba pAraNe AyaMbila se karatI hai| zeSa usI prakAra hai| gAthArtha
_prathama paripATI meM sarvakAmaguNa, dUsarI meM vigayarahita pAraNA kiyaa|
tIsarI meM lepa rahita aura cauthI paripATI meM AyaMbila se pAraNA kiyaa| isa
bhAMti kAlI AryA ne ratnAvalI tapa kI pAMca varSa do mAsa aura aTThAIsa dinoM
meM sUtrAnusAra 2.-3. varga 8, sUtra 2.

Page #185 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[144] After completing the Antakrid Dasha period of worship, she went to where
Arya Chandana was and paid her respects. After that, she began to wander, her
soul moved by many fasts, belās, telās, chārs, pāñchs, and other types of
anashan tapas. **Explanation:** * **'Alevaḍam'** refers to food that is not
coated with any impurities, food that is not greasy with ghee, etc., and is
completely dry. * **'Āyambil'** is a Prakrit word. In Sanskrit, it has three
forms: Āchāml, Āchāmāml, and Āyāmāml. It involves eating a bland meal once,
devoid of ghee, milk, yogurt, oil, jaggery, sugar, etc. Examples include rice,
black gram, sattu, roasted chickpeas, etc. The Ratnavāli tapa takes five years,
two months, and 28 days to complete. Kali Ārya's final practice: Siddhi 4. So,
she, Kali, with that Urāl-principal, [vast, long-lasting, extensive, adorned
with splendor, given by a guru or achievable through effort, accepted with
honor, beneficial, health-giving, due to Shiva-mukti, blessed, auspicious,
destroyer of sin, intense, selfless, generous, excellent, free from ignorance
and darkness, and having a great impact, with a dry and bland body due to
tapasya, hungry, 1. Section 3. Sutra 22. 2. Already mentioned above. 3. Section
5. Sutra 6.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 144] [antakRddazA yAvat ArAdhanA pUrNa karake jahAM AryA candanA thIM, vahA~ AI
aura AryA caMdanA ko vaMdanA-namaskAra kiyA tadanantara bahuta se upavAsa, belA,
telA, cAra, pAMca Adi anazana tapa se apanI AtmA ko bhAvita karatI huI vicarane
lgii| vivecana-'alevADaM' arthAt jisa bhojana meM vikRti kA lepa bhI na ho, jo
bhojana ghRtAdi se cupar3A huA na ho, ekadama rUkhA ho, use alepakRta kahate
haiN| _ 'AyaMbila'-zabda prAkRtabhASA kA hai| saMskRta meM isake AcAmla,
AcAmAmla tathA AyAmAmla, ye tIna rUpa banate haiN| isameM eka hI bAra ghRta-
dUdha-dahI-tela-gur3a-zakkara Adi se rahita nIrasa bhojana karanA hotA hai|
yathA-cAvala, ur3ada, sattU, bhune hue cane aadi| ratnAvalI tapa kI cAroM
paripATiyoM meM pAMca varSa do mAsa aura 28 dina lagate haiN| kAlI AryA kI
antima sAdhanA : siddhi 4-tae NaM sA kAlI ajjA teNaM urAleNaM jAva[viuleNaM
payatteNaM paggahieNaM kallANeNaM siveNaM dhaNNeNaM maMgalleNaM sassirIeNaM
udaggeNaM udatteNaM uttameNaM udAreNaM mahANubhAgeNaM taMvokammeNaM sakkA lakkhA
nimmaMsA advicammAvaNaddhA kiDikiDiyAbhayA kisA] dhamaNisaMtayA jAyA yAvi
hotthaa| se jahA iMgAlasagaDI vA jAva [ uNhe diNNA sukkA samANI sasadaM gacchai,
sasadaM ciTThai, evAmeva kAlIe vi ajjA sasadaM gacchai, sasaI ciTThai, uvacie
taveNaM, avacie maMsa-soNieNaM] suhuyahuyAsaNe iva bhAsarAsipalicchaNNA taveNaM,
teeNaM, tavateyasirIe aIva-aIva uvasohemANI-uvasohemANI citttthi| tae NaM tIse
kAlIe anjAe aNNayA kayAi puvvarattAvarattakAle ayamajjhathie ciMtie patthie
maNogae saMkappe samuppajjitthA, jahA khaMdayassa ciMtA jAva asthi uTThANe kamme
bale vIrie purisakkAraparakkame tAvatA me seyaM kallaM jAva jalaMte ajjacaMdaNaM
ajaM ApucchittA ajjacaMdaNAe anjAe abbhaNuNNAyAe samANIe saMlehaNA-jhUsaNA-
jhUsiyAe bhattapANa-paDiyAikkhAe kAlaM aNavakaMkhamANIe viharittae tti kaTu evaM
saMpehei, saMpehettA kallaM jeNeva ajjacaMdaNA ajjA teNeva uvAgacchai,
uvAgacchittA ajjacaMdaNaM ajaM vaMdai namasai, vaMdittA namaMsittA evaM
vayAsI-'icchAmiNaM anjo! tubbhehiM abbhaNuNNAyA samANI saMlehaNA jAva' vihritte|
'ahaasuhN|' _tae NaM sA kAlI ajjA ajjacaMdaNAe abbhaNuNNAyA samANI saMlehaNA-
jhUsaNA-jhUsiyA jAvare vihri| tae NaM sA kAlI ajjA ajjacaMdaNAe aMtie
sAmAiyamAiyAI ekkArasa aMgAI ahijjittA bahupaDipuNNAiM aTTha saMvaccharAiM
sAmaNNapariyAgaM pAuNittA, mAsiyAe saMlehaNAe attANaM jhUsittA, sarTi bhattAiM
aNasaNAe chedittA, jassaTTAe kIrai naggabhAve jAva carimussAsehiM siddhaa|
nikkhevo| tatpazcAt kAlI AryA, usa urAla-pradhAna, [vipula, dIrghakAlIna,
vistIrNa, sazrIka-zobhAsampanna, guru dvArA pradatta athavA prayatnasAdhya,
bahumAnapUrvaka gRhIta, kalyANakArI, nIrogatA-janaka, zivamukti ke kAraNa,
dhanya, mAMgalya-pApavinAzaka, udagra-tIvra, udAra-niSkAma hone ke kAraNa
audArya vAle, uttama-ajJAna andhakAra se rahita aura mahAn prabhAvavAle,
tapaHkarma se zuSka-nIrasa zarIravAlI, bhUkhI, 1. varga 3. sUtra 22. 2. Upara A
cukA hai| 3. varga 5 sUtra 6

Page #186 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Eighth Chapter] [145 Rough, without flesh] and filled with veins. Just as a
cart filled with coals, a cart filled with dry wood, a cart filled with leaves,
dried in the sun, that is, coal, wood, leaves, etc. are thoroughly dried and
then loaded into the cart, then that cart moves with a rattling sound and stops,
in the same way the black Arya walked with the rattling of bones and stood with
the rattling. She had attained the increase of merit through austerity, but she
had attained the decrease of merit due to flesh and blood.] Like fire covered
with a group of ashes, she was shining brightly with the intensity of austerity,
and she was extremely radiant with the wealth of austerity. One day, in the last
watch of the night, a thought arose in the heart of the black Arya, like Skanda
Muni - "Due to this rigorous austerity, my body has become extremely emaciated.
However, as long as there is upliftment, karma, strength, vigor, and courage in
this body of mine, and faith, patience, and detachment in my mind, it is
appropriate for me to eat the Sanlekhanā Jhūshanā after sunrise tomorrow, after
asking Arya Chandanā and obtaining her permission, and to renounce food and
drink, becoming indifferent to death." Thinking this, she went to where Arya
Chandanā was as soon as the sun rose the next day, and after bowing and greeting
Arya Chandanā, she spoke as follows - "O Arya! If you permit, I wish to wander
while wearing the Sanlekhanā Jhūshanā." Arya Chandanā said - "O Devānupriyā! Do
as you please. Do not delay in doing good deeds." Then, having received the
permission of Arya Chandanā, the black Arya took the Sanlekhanā Jhūshanā and
began to wander. The black Arya studied the eleven Angas from Samayika to Arya
Chandanā Arya, and for eight years she followed the Dharma of conduct, and after
purifying her soul with a month-long Sanlekhanā, she completed the fast of sixty
meals, and fulfilled the purpose for which she had taken the vow, until her last
breath, and became a Siddha, a Buddha, and a liberated soul. Discussion - The
black Arya studied the eleven Anga scriptures from her teacher, this statement
clearly proves that just as a Sadhu has the right to study the Anga scriptures,
so does a Sadhvi. In addition, the biography of the black goddess also proves
that both Sadhus and Sadhvis have an equal right to attain the state of Nirvana,
which is the ultimate bliss. The tenth Uddesaka of the Vyavahāra Sutra describes
the curriculum of Sadhus and Sadhvis. It is written there that a Sadhu who has
been initiated at the age of ten can read the Vyākhyāprajñapti - (Bhagawti)
Sutra, but not before. But the black goddess was initiated at the age of eight,
and she read the eleven Angas. In such a situation, it is natural to ask why the
black goddess studied the Anga scriptures even though she was not entitled to do
so according to the Vyavahāra Sutra? In response, it is submitted that five
types of Vyavahāra are mentioned in the Sthānānga Bhagawti and other Sutras.
Vyavahāra refers to the specific knowledge that is the cause of the inclination
and disinclination of souls seeking liberation. The five Vyavahāras are as
follows: 1. Āgama Vyavahāra - The study of Kevalajñāna, Manahparyavajñāna,
Avadhijñāna, fourteen Pūrvas, ten Pūrvas, and nine Pūrvas is called Āgama. The
Vyavahāra that is the inclination and disinclination arising from Āgama is
called Āgama Vyavahāra.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 aSTama varga ] [145 rUkSa, mAMsarahita] aura nasoM se vyApta ho gayI thii|
jaise koI koyaloM se bharI gAr3I ho, sUkhI lakar3iyoM se bharI gAr3I ho, pattoM
se bharI gAr3I ho, dhUpa meM DAlakara sukhAI ho arthAt koyalA, lakar3I patte Adi
khUba sukhA liye gaye hoM aura phira gAr3I meM bhare gaye hoM, to vaha gAr3I
khar3akhar3a AvAja karatI huI calatI hai aura ThaharatI hai, usI prakAra kAlI
AryA hAr3oM kI khar3akhar3AhaTa ke sAtha calatI thI aura khar3akhar3AhaTa ke
sAtha khar3I rahatI thI  /  vaha tapasyA se to upacita- vRddhi ko prApta thI,
magara mAMsa aura rudhira se apacita - hrAsa ko prApta ho gaI thI  / ] bhasma ke
samUha se AcchAdita agni kI taraha tapasyA ke teja se dedIpyamAna vaha tapasteja
kI lakSmI se atIva zobhAyamAna ho rahI thI  /  eka dina rAtri ke pichale prahara
meM kAlI AryA ke hRdaya meM skandakamuni ke samAna vicAra utpanna huA - " isa
kaThora tapa sAdhanA ke kAraNa merA zarIra atyanta kRza ho gayA hai| tathApi
jaba taka mere isa zarIra meM utthAna, karma, bala, vIrya aura puruSakAra-
parAkrama hai, mana meM zraddhA, dhairya evaM vairAgya hai taba taka mere liye
ucita hai ki kala sUryodaya hone ke pazcAt AryA caMdanA se pUchakara unakI AjJA
prApta hone para, saMlekhanA jhUSaNA kA sevana karatI huI bhaktapAna kA tyAga
karake mRtyu ke prati niSkAma ho kara vicaraNa kruuN|" aisA socakara vaha agale
dina sUryodaya hote hI jahA~ AryA caMdanA thI vahA~ AI aura AryA candanA ko
vaMdanA - namaskAra kara isa prakAra bolI- " he Arye! ApakI AjJA ho to maiM
saMlekhanA jhUSaNA karatI huI vicaranA cAhatI hU~  / " AryA candanA ne kahA -
"he devAnupriye ! jaise tumheM sukha ho, vaisA karo  /  satkArya meM vilamba na
kro| " taba AryA candanA kI AjJA pAkara kAlI AryA saMlekhanA jhUSaNA grahaNa
karake yAvat vicarane lagI  /  kAlI AryA ne AryacandanA AryA ke pAsa sAmAyika se
lekara gyAraha aMgoM kA adhyayana kiyA aura pUre ATha varSa taka cAritradharma
kA pAlana karake eka mAsa kI saMlekhanA AtmA ko jhUSita kara sATha bhakta kA
anazana pUrNa kara, jisa hetu se saMyama grahaNa kiyA thA yAvat usako antima
zvAsocchvAsa taka pUrNa kiyA aura siddha, buddha aura mukta ho gii| vivecana -
AryA kAlI ne apanI guruNI se gyAraha aMgazAstroM kA adhyayana kiyA, isa kathana
se yaha bAta bhalI bhAMti pramANita ho jAtI hai ki jisa prakAra sAdhu ko
aMgazAstra par3hane kA adhikAra hai usI prakAra sAdhvI ko bhI hai| isake
atirikta kAlI devI kI jIvanI se yaha bhI siddha ho jAtA hai ki paramakalyANarUpa
nirvANapada kI prApti meM sAdhu aura sAdhvI donoM kA samAna adhikAra hai  /
vyavahArasUtra ke dasaveM uddezaka meM sAdhu-sAdhvI ke pAThya-krama kA varNana
kiyA gayA hai  /  vahA~ likhA hai ki dasa varSa kI dIkSAvAlA sAdhu
vyAkhyAprajJapti - (bhagavatI) sUtra par3ha sakatA hai, isase pahale nhiiN|
parantu kAlI devI kI dIkSA ATha varSa kI thI, usane gyAraha aMga pddh'e| aisI
dazA meM yaha prazna honA svAbhAvika hai ki vyavahArasUtrAnusAra kAlI devI ne
aMgazAstra par3hane kI adhikAriNI na hote hue bhI aMgazAstroM kA adhyayana kyoM
kiyA? uttara meM nivedana hai ki sthAnAMga bhagavatI Adi sUtroM meM pAMca
prakAra ke vyavahAra batalAe gaye haiM  /  mokSAbhilASI AtmAoM kI pravRtti aura
nivRtti evaM tatkAraNaka jJAna vizeSa ko vyavahAra kahate haiN| pAMca vyavahAra
isa prakAra haiM 1. AgamavyavahAra - kevalajJAna, manaH paryavajJAna,
avadhijJAna, caudaha pUrva, daza pUrva aura nava pUrva kA adhyayana Agama
kahalAtA hai| Agama se pravRtti evaM nivRttirUpa vyavahAra ko AgamavyavahAra
kahate haiM  /

Page #187 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Translation:  **146]**  **2.** The knowledge of *Shrutavyavahar*,
*Acharprakalpad*, etc. is *Shruta*. The conduct based on this knowledge is
*Shrutavyavahar*. The knowledge of the past nine, ten, and fourteen *Pūrvas* is
also *Shruta*, but it is considered *Aagama* because it is the cause of special
knowledge related to *Ateeindriya* objects.  **3.** *Aagnavyawahar* - If two
*Geetaarth* Sadhus reside in different regions and are unable to travel due to
their weakened bodies, and one of them needs to perform *Prayashchitta*, he
sends his disciples to the *Geetaarth* Muni in the absence of a qualified
disciple. The disciple then criticizes the *Geetaarth* Muni. Upon hearing the
criticism in a cryptic language, the *Geetaarth* Muni considers the *Dravya*,
*Kshetra*, *Kaal*, *Bhaav*, *Sanhanan*, *Dhairya*, and *Bala* and either comes
himself or sends a qualified disciple. If even such a disciple is not available,
the messenger delivers the message of criticism and performs the purification of
the transgression, i.e., *Prayashchitta*, in a cryptic manner. This is
*Aagnavyawahar*.  **4.** *Dharnavyawahar* - The practice of applying the same
*Prayashchitta* for the same offense based on the understanding of the *Dravya*,
*Kshetra*, *Kaal*, and *Bhaav* of the *Geetaarth* Muni who has committed the
offense is *Dharnavyawahar*.  **5.** *Jeetvyavahar* - The *Prayashchitta* given
considering the *Dravya*, *Kshetra*, *Kaal*, *Bhaav*, *Purush* service, and the
loss of *Sanhanan*, *Dhriti*, etc. is *Jeetvyavahar*.  - The provision in the
*Vyavahar Sutra* for teaching the *Bhagawti Sutra* to a *Deekshit* Muni after
ten years is written considering the *Prayashchitta Sutra Vyavahar*. This
provision does not apply to the *Mahapurushas* who follow *Aagama Vyavahar*.
What they say is considered appropriate. There is no room for impropriety in
their conduct.  - In relation to *Kali Devi*, the study of *Ang Shastra* is
mentioned in the eight-year *Deeksha Paryaya*, but in relation to *Dhannya
Anagaar*, it is written that he studied *Ang Shastra* in the nine-month *Deeksha
Paryaya*. This clearly shows that *Sutra Vyavahar* is insignificant in front of
*Aagama Vyavahar*. In the same vein, *Vyakhya Pragyapti*, *Sthananga Sutra*, and
*Vyavahar Sutra* state, "**Aagama Baliya Samana Niggantha**."  - This discussion
clarifies that according to the *Vyavahar Sutra*, *Ang* is taught to a
*Deekshit* Sadhu after ten years, but this provision does not apply to the Munis
who follow *Aagama Vyavahar*.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 146] [antakRddazA 2.zrutavyavahAra-AcAraprakalpAdi jJAna zruta hai, isase kiyA
jAnevAlA vyavahAra zrutavyavahAra hai| nava, daza aura caudaha pUrva kA jJAna
bhI zrutarUpa hai, parantu atIndriya arthaviSayaka viziSTa jJAna kA kAraNa hone
se ukta jJAna atizaya vAlA hai, ataH vaha Agama rUpa mAnA gayA hai| 3.
AjJAvyavahAra-do gItArtha sAdhu eka dUsare se alaga bhinna-bhinna pradezoM meM
rahe hoM aura zarIra kSINa ho jAne se ve vihAra meM asamartha hoN| unameM se
kisI eka ko prAyazcitta Ane para vaha muni yogya gItArtha ziSya ke abhAva meM
akuzala ziSyoM ko gItArtha muni ke pAsa bhejatA hai aura usake dvArA AlocanA
karatA hai| gUDha bhASA meM kahI huI AlocanA sunakara ve gItArtha dravya-kSetra-
kAla-bhAva, saMhanana, dhairya aura balAdi kA vicAra kara svayaM vahAM Ate haiM
athavA yogya gItArtha ziSya ko samajhAkara bhejate haiN| yadi vaise ziSya kA bhI
unake pAsa yoga na ho to AlocanA kA saMdeza lAnevAle ke dvArA hI gUDha artha meM
aticAra kI zuddhi arthAt prAyazcitta dete haiN| yaha AjJAvyavahAra hai| 4.
dhAraNAvyavahAra-kisI gItArtha saMvigna muni ke dravya-kSetra-kAla evaM bhAva kI
apekSA jisa aparAdha meM jo prAyazcitta diyA ho, usakI dhAraNA se vaise aparAdha
meM vaise hI prAyazcitta kA prayoga karanA dhAraNAvyavahAra hai| 5.
jItavyavahAra-dravya-kSetra-kAla-bhAva-puruSa pratisevanA kA aura saMhanana,
dhRti Adi kI hAni kA vicAra kara jo prAyazcitta diyA jAtA hai vaha jItavyavahAra
hai| - vyavahArasUtra meM dasa varSa ke dIkSita muni ko bhagavatIsUtra par3hAne
kA jo vidhAna kiyA gayA hai vaha prAyazcitta-sUtra-vyavahAra ko lekara likhA
gayA hai| AgamavyavahAra ko lekara calane vAle mahApuruSoM para yaha vidhAna
lAgU nahIM hotaa| Agama-vyavahArI jo kahate haiM use ucita hI mAnA jAtA hai|
unake kisI vyavahAra meM anaucitya ke liye koI sthAna nahIM hotaa| kAlI devI ke
saMbaMdha meM ATha varSoM kI dIkSA-paryAya meM aMga-zAstra par3hane kA ullekha
milatA hai, paraMtu dhanya anagAra ke saMbaMdha meM to likhA hai ki unhoMne nau
mAsa kI dIkSA-paryAya meM aMga-zAstra par3he  /  isase spaSTa hai ki
AgamavyavahAra ke sAmane sUtravyavahAra nagaNya hai| isI dRSTi se
vyAkhyAprajJapti, sthAnAMga sUtra aura vyavahAra sUtra meM likhA
hai-"AgamabaliyA samaNA niggNthaa|" isa vivecana se yaha spaSTa ho jAtA hai ki-
vyavahArasUtra ke anusAra "dazavarSIya" dIkSita sAdhu ko aMga par3hAe jAte haiM,
para yaha vidhAna AgamavyavahAra vAle muniyoM para lAgU nahIM hotaa|

Page #188 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Second Study ## Sukali's Kankaavali Tapa  In those days, in that time, there
was a city named Champa. There was the Punnabhadde garden and King Konika ruled
there. In that city, Queen Sukali, the wife of King Sreniya and the younger
mother of King Konika, was there. Like Kali, Sukali also renounced the world and
wandered, cultivating her soul through many fasts and other austerities.  Then,
one day, Sukali went to Arya Chandana and said, "Oh Arya! If you permit, I wish
to practice the Kankaavali Tapa." Having received Arya Chandana's permission,
Sukali, like Ratnavali, practiced the Kankaavali Tapa. The difference was that
she performed the Ashtama-tele in all three places, while Ratnavali performed
the Shashtha-bele.   One Paripaati takes one year, five months, and twelve days.
In this one Paripaati, there are 88 days of Parana and one year, two months, and
twelve days of Tapa. The duration of all four Paripaatis is five years, nine
months, and eighteen days. The rest is the same as for Kali Arya. She practiced
her vows for nine years until she became Siddha, Buddha, and liberated.  ##
Discussion  The only difference between the Kankaavali Tapa and the Ratnavali
Tapa is that the Ratnavali Tapa performs Ashtama-bele and Chaturth-bele, while
the Kankaavali Tapa performs Ashtama-tele and Chaturth-tele. The rest of the
days of Tapa are the same. The Parana is also the same. One Paripaati of the
Kankaavali Tapa takes one year, five months, and twelve days. Thus, all four
Paripaatis take five years, nine months, and eighteen days. The outline of the
first Paripaati of the Kankaavali Tapa is clearly shown by the instrument on the
next page.  1. Varga 5, Sutra 5-6 2. Varga 5, Sutra 6 3. Varga 8, Sutra 4 4.
Varga 5, Sutra 6

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dvitIya adhyayana sukAlI sukAlI kA kanakAvalI tapa 5-teNaM kAleNaM teNaM
samaeNaM caMpA nAmaM nyrii| puNNabhadde ceie| koNie raayaa| tattha NaM seNiyassa
raNNo bhajjA, koNiyassa raNNo cullamAuyA sukAlI nAmaM devI hotthaa| jaMhA kAlI
tahA sukAlI vi nikkhaMtA jAva' bahUhiM jAva tavokammehiM appANaM bhAvemANI
vihri| tae NaM sA sukAlI ajjA aNNayA kayAi jeNeva anjacaMdaNA ajA jAvare icchAmi
NaM ajjAo! tubbhehiM abbhaNuNNAyA samANI kaNagAvalI-tavokammaM uvasaMpajjittA
NaM vihritte| evaM jahA rayaNAvalI tahA kaNagAvalI vi, navaraM-tisu ThANesu
aTThamAI karei, jahiM rayaNAvalIe chtttthaaii| ekkAe parivADIe saMvaccharo,
paMca mAsA, bArasa ya ahorttaa| cauNhaM paMca varisA navamAsA aTThArasa divsaa|
sesaM thev| nava vAsA pariyAo jAva' siddhaa| - usa kAla aura usa samaya meM
caMpA nAma kI nagarI thii| vahA~ pUrNabhadra udyAna thA aura koNika rAjA vahAM
rAjya karatA thaa| usa nagarI meM zreNika rAjA kI rAnI aura koNika rAjA kI choTI
mAtA sukAlI nAma kI rAnI thii| kAlI kI taraha sukAlI bhI pravrajita huI aura
bahuta se upavAsa Adi tapoM se AtmA ko bhAvita karatI huI vicarane lgii| phira
vaha sukAlI AryA anyadA-kisI dina Arya candanA AryA ke pAsa Akara isa prakAra
bolI- "he Arye! ApakI AjJA ho to maiM kanakAvalI tapa aMgIkAra karake vicaranA
cAhatI huuN|" AryA candanA kI AjJA pAkara ratnAvalI ke samAna sukAlI ne
kanakAvalI tapa kA ArAdhana kiyaa| vizeSatA isameM yaha thI ki tInoM sthAnoM
para aSTama-tele kiye jaba ki ratnAvalI meM SaSTha-bele kiye jAte haiN| eka
paripaTI meM eka varSa, pA~ca mAsa aura bAraha ahorotriyAM lagatI haiN| isa eka
paripATI meM 88 dina kA pAraNA aura 1 varSa, 2 mAsa 12 dina kA tapa hotA hai|
cAroM paripATI kA kAla pAMca varSa, navamAsa aura aThAraha dina hotA hai| zeSa
varNana kAlI AryA ke samAna hai| nava varSa taka cAritra kA pAlana kara yAvat
siddha, buddha aura mukta ho gii| vivecana-kanakAvalI tapa aura ratnAvalI tapa
meM itanA hI bheda hai ki ratnAvalI meM jahA~ ATha bele tathA 34 bele kiye jAte
haiM, vahA~ kanakAvalI tapa meM ATha tele aura 34 tele kiye jAte haiN| zeSa tapa
ke dina barAbara haiN| pAraNe meM bhI samAnatA hai| kanakAvalI tapa kI eka
paripATI meM eka varSa pA~ca mAsa aura 12 dina lagate haiM  /  isa prakAra cAroM
paripATiyoM ke 5 varSa 9 mAsa aura 18 dina hote haiM  /  kanakAvalI kI prathama
paripATI kI rUparekhA agale pRSTha para pradarzita yaMtra dvArA spaSTa hotI hai|
1. varga 5, sUtra 5-6 2. varga 5, sUtra 6 3. varga 8, sUtra 4 4. varga 5, sUtra
6

Page #189 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[148] (10) (11) 12 (13) 3 Om (14) Tapasya Kala - One Paripati Kala - 1 year, 5
months, 12 days - Four Paripati Kala - 5 years, 9 months, 18 days Days of
Tapasya { One Paripati Tapasya Days - 1 year, 2 months, 14 days - Four Paripati
Tapasya Days - 4 years, 9 months, 26 days - One Paripati Parana - 88 - Four
Paripati Parana - 352 Parana 15 1 16 3 3 3 | 3 3 2 3 3 3 3 3 (33) 3 3 3 3 3 333
3 3 3 PE Coe ooooo Kankaavali Sthapana - Yantra (15) 3 14 13 3 4 (10 12 [
Antakrid Dasha

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 148] (10) (11) 12 (13) 3 OM (14) tapasyA kAla eka paripATI kA kAla 1 varSa, 5
mAsa, 12 dina cAra paripATI kA kAla 5varSa, 9 mAsa, 18 dina tapa ke dina { eka
paripATI ke tapodina 1 varSa, 2 mAsa, 14 dina - cAra paripATI ke tapodina 4
varSa, 9 mAsa, 26 dina eka paripATI ke pAraNe 88 -cAra paripATI ke pAraNe 352
pAraNe 15 1 16 3 3 3 | 3 3 2 3 3 3 3 3 (33) 3 3 3 3 3 333 3 3 3 PE Coe ooooo
kanakAvalI sthApanA - yantra (15) 3 14 13 3 4 (10 12 [ antakRddazA

Page #190 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Third Study ## Mahakali ## Mahakali's Laghusinghanishkridit Tapa  6 - Thus
Mahakali, having attained the auspiciousness of the Khuddagasīhanikkīliyā tapa,
did as follows:  She performed a **vihara**, followed by a **sarvakaamguṇiyā
pāraṇā**. She performed a **chautha**, followed by a **sarvakaamguṇiyā pāraṇā**.
She performed a **chhattha**, followed by a **sarvakaamguṇiyā pāraṇā**. She
performed an **aṭṭhama**, followed by a **sarvakaamguṇiyā pāraṇā**. She
performed a **chhattha**, followed by a **sarvakaamguṇiyā pāraṇā**. She
performed a **dasama**, followed by a **sarvakaamguṇiyā pāraṇā**. She performed
an **aṭṭhama**, followed by a **sarvakaamguṇiyā pāraṇā**. She performed a
**duvālasama**, followed by a **sarvakaamguṇiyā pāraṇā**. She performed a
**dasama**, followed by a **sarvakaamguṇiyā pāraṇā**. She performed a
**chaudasama**, followed by a **sarvakaamguṇiyā pāraṇā**. She performed a
**duvālasama**, followed by a **sarvakaamguṇiyā pāraṇā**. She performed a
**sollasama**, followed by a **sarvakaamguṇiyā pāraṇā**. She performed a
**chaudasama**, followed by a **sarvakaamguṇiyā pāraṇā**. She performed an
**aṭṭhārasama**, followed by a **sarvakaamguṇiyā pāraṇā**. She performed a
**sollasama**, followed by a **sarvakaamguṇiyā pāraṇā**. She performed a
**vīsaima**, followed by a **sarvakaamguṇiyā pāraṇā**. She performed an
**aṭṭhārasama**, followed by a **sarvakaamguṇiyā pāraṇā**. She performed a
**vīsaima**, followed by a **sarvakaamguṇiyā pāraṇā**. She performed a
**sollasama**, followed by a **sarvakaamguṇiyā pāraṇā**. She performed an
**aṭṭhārasama**, followed by a **sarvakaamguṇiyā pāraṇā**. She performed a
**chaudasama**, followed by a **sarvakaamguṇiyā pāraṇā**. She performed a
**sollasama**, followed by a **sarvakaamguṇiyā pāraṇā**. She performed a
**bārasama**, followed by a **sarvakaamguṇiyā pāraṇā**. She performed a
**chaudasama**, followed by a **sarvakaamguṇiyā pāraṇā**. She performed a
**dasama**, followed by a **sarvakaamguṇiyā pāraṇā**. She performed a
**bārasama**, followed by a **sarvakaamguṇiyā pāraṇā**. She performed an
**aṭṭhama**, followed by a **sarvakaamguṇiyā pāraṇā**. She performed a
**dasama**, followed by a **sarvakaamguṇiyā pāraṇā**. She performed a
**chhattha**, followed by a **sarvakaamguṇiyā pāraṇā**. She performed an
**aṭṭhama**, followed by a **sarvakaamguṇiyā pāraṇā**. She performed a
**chautha**, followed by a **sarvakaamguṇiyā pāraṇā**. She performed a
**chhattha**, followed by a **sarvakaamguṇiyā pāraṇā**. She performed a
**chautha**, followed by a **sarvakaamguṇiyā pāraṇā**.  Thus, there are four
**parivāḍī**s. In one **parivāḍī**, there are six months and seven days. In four
**parivāḍī**s, there are two years and twenty-eight days until **siddha**.  1.
Like Kali, Mahakali also accepted **dīkshā**. Notably, she performed the
**laghusinghanishkridit tapa**, which is as follows:  She performed a
**upavāsa**, followed by a **sarvakaamguṇiyā pāraṇā**. She performed a **bela**,
followed by a **sarvakaamguṇiyā pāraṇā**. She performed a **upavāsa**, followed
by a **sarvakaamguṇiyā pāraṇā**. She performed a **tela**, followed by a
**sarvakaamguṇiyā pāraṇā**. She performed a **bela**, followed by a
**sarvakaamguṇiyā pāraṇā**. She performed a **chaula**, followed by a
**sarvakaamguṇiyā pāraṇā**. She performed a **tela**, followed by a
**sarvakaamguṇiyā pāraṇā**. She performed a **pachौla**, followed by a
**sarvakaamguṇiyā pāraṇā**. She performed a **chaula**, followed by a
**sarvakaamguṇiyā pāraṇā**. She performed six **upavāsa**s, followed by a
**sarvakaamguṇiyā pāraṇā**. She performed seven **upavāsa**s,  **Varg 8, Sutra
2**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 tRtIya adhyayana mahAkAlI mahAkAlI kA kSullakasiMhaniSkrIDita tapa 6 - evaM
mahAkAlI vi  /  navaraM - khuDDAgasIhanikkIliyaM tavokammaM uvasaMpajjittA NaM
taM jahA - viharai, cautthaM karei, karettA savvakAmaguNiyaM pAre  /  chaTTaM
karei, karettA savvakAmaguNiyaM pAre  /  cautthaM karei, karettA
savvakAmaguNiyaM pAre  /  aTTamaM karer3a, karettA savvakAmaguNiyaM pAre  /
chaTTaM karei, karettA savvakAmaguNiyaM pAre  /  dasamaM karei, karettA
savvakAmaguNiyaM pAre  /  aTThamaM karei, karettA savvakAmaguNiyaM pAre  /
duvAlasamaM karei, karettA savvakAmaguNiyaM pAre  /  dasamaM karei, karettA
savvakAmaguNiyaM pAre  /  coddasamaM karei, karettA savvakAmaguNiyaM pAre  /
duvAlasamaM karer3a, karettA savvakAmaguNiyaM pArei  /  solasamaM karei, karettA
savvakAmaguNiyaM pAre  /  coddasamaM karei, karettA savvakAmaguNiyaM pArei  /
aTThArasamaM karer3a, karettA savvakAmaguNiyaM pAre  /  solasamaM karei, karettA
savvakAmaguNiyaM pAre  /  vIsaimaM karei, karettA savvakAmaguNiyaM pAre  /
aTThArasamaM karei, karettA savvakAmaguNiyaM pAre  /  vIsaimaM karei, karettA
savvakAmaguNiyaM pAre  /  solasamaM karei, karettA savvakAmaguNiyaM pAre  /
aTThArasamaM karei, karettA savvakAmaguNiyaM pAre  /  coddasamaM karei, karettA
savvakAmaguNiyaM pAre  /  solasamaM karei, karettA savvakAmaguNiyaM pAre  /
bArasamaM karei, karettA savvakAmaguNiyaM pAre  /  coddasamaM karei, karettA
savvakAmaguNiyaM pAre  /  dasamaM karer3a, karettA savvakAmaguNiyaM pAre  /
bArasamaM karei, karettA savvakAmaguNiyaM pAre  /  aTThamaM karei, karettA
savvakAmaguNiyaM pArei  /  dasamaM karer3a, karettA savvakAmaguNiyaM pAre  /
chaTTaM karei, karettA savvakAmaguNiyaM paarei| aTTamaM karei, karettA
savvakAmaguNiyaM pAre  /  cautthaM karei, karettA savvakAmaguNiyaM pAre  /
chaTTaM karei, karettA savvakAmaguIiyaM pAre  /  cautthaM karei, karettA
savvakAmaguNiyaM pAre  /  taheva cattAri privaaddiio| ekkAe parivADIe chammAsA
satta ya divasA  /  cauNhaM do varisA aTThAvIsA ya divasA jAva' siddhA  /  1.
kAlI kI taraha mahAkAlI ne bhI dIkSA aMgIkAra kI  /  vizeSa yaha ki usane
laghusiMhaniSkrIDita tapa kiyA, jo isa prakAra hai upavAsa kiyA, karake
sarvakAmaguNayukta pAraNA kiyA, karake belA kiyA, karake sarvakAmaguNayukta
pAraNA kiyA, karake upavAsa kiyA, karake sarvakAmaguNayukta pAraNA kiyA, karake
telA kiyA, karake sarvakAmaguNayukta pAraNA kiyA, karake belA kiyA, karake
sarvakAmaguNayukta pAraNA kiyA, karake caulA kiyA, karake sarvakAmaguNayukta
pAraNA kiyA, karake telA kiyA, karake sarvakAmaguNayukta pAraNA kiyA, karake
pacaulA kiyA, karake sarvakAmaguNayukta pAraNA kiyA, karake caulA kiyA, karake
sarvakAmaguNayukta pAraNA kiyA, karake chaH upavAsa kiye, karake
sarvakAmaguNayukta pAraNA kiyA, karake sAta upavAsa kiye, varga 8, sUtra 2.

Page #191 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[150] She performed the **Parana** with all auspicious qualities after
completing ten **Antakrid Dasha** (periods of ten days), then performed eight
**Upavasa** (fasts), then performed the **Parana** with all auspicious
qualities, then performed seven **Upavasa**, then performed the **Parana** with
all auspicious qualities, then performed nine **Upavasa**, then performed the
**Parana** with all auspicious qualities, then performed eight **Upavasa**, then
performed the **Parana** with all auspicious qualities, then performed nine
**Upavasa**, then performed the **Parana** with all auspicious qualities, then
performed seven **Upavasa**, then performed the **Parana** with all auspicious
qualities, then performed eight **Upavasa**, then performed the **Parana** with
all auspicious qualities, then performed six **Upavasa**, then performed the
**Parana** with all auspicious qualities, then performed seven **Upavasa**, then
performed the **Parana** with all auspicious qualities, then performed five
**Upavasa**, then performed the **Parana** with all auspicious qualities, then
performed six **Upavasa**, then performed the **Parana** with all auspicious
qualities, then performed **Chaula** (a type of fast), then performed the
**Parana** with all auspicious qualities, then performed **Pachoula** (a type of
fast), then performed the **Parana** with all auspicious qualities, then
performed **Tela** (a type of fast), then performed the **Parana** with all
auspicious qualities, then performed **Chaula**, then performed the **Parana**
with all auspicious qualities, then performed **Vela** (a type of fast), then
performed the **Parana** with all auspicious qualities, then performed **Tela**,
then performed the **Parana** with all auspicious qualities, then performed
**Upavasa**, then performed the **Parana** with all auspicious qualities, then
performed **Vela**, then performed the **Parana** with all auspicious qualities,
then performed **Upavasa**, then performed the **Parana** with all auspicious
qualities.  In this way, all four **Paripatis** (cycles) should be understood.
One **Paripati** takes six months and seven days. The duration of all four
**Paripatis** is two years and twenty-eight days, until the **Arya Mahakal**
attained **Siddhi** (liberation).  **Discussion:** **Arya Mahakal** performed
the **"Laghu Singh Nishkridit Tap"** (minor lion-like penance). In this sutra,
it is called **"Khuddaga Sihanikkiliyam"**, which means - just as a lion, while
walking, looks back at its traversed path, similarly, in this penance, the days
of **Upavasa** that were transgressed are consumed again and then one moves
forward.  **Singh Nishkridit Tap** is of two types, one **"Laghu Singh
Nishkridit"** and the other **"Maha Singh Nishkridit Tap"**. In the present
study, **Arya Mahakal** performed the **Laghu Singh Nishkridit Tap**. This
penance also has four **Paripatis**. One **Paripati** takes six months and seven
days. Thirty-three days are spent in **Parana**. In this way, the first
**Paripati** is completed in six months and seven days. All four **Paripatis**
take two years and twenty-eight days.  This is clearly evident from the
**establishment mechanism** shown on the next page.  Just as **Kali Devi**
consumed milk, ghee, and all other substances during the **Parana** of the first
**Paripati** of the **Ratnavali Tap**, she abandoned these juices during the
**Parana** of the second **Paripati**, she abandoned even the **lepamatra** (a
small amount) in the third **Paripati**, and she performed the **Parana** of the
**Upavasa** with **Ayambila** (a type of food) in the fourth **Paripati**,
similarly, **Mahakal Devi** consumed **Vigya** (a type of food) in the first
**Paripati** of the **Laghu Singh Nishkridit Tap**, she abandoned it in the
second, she abandoned even the **lepamatra** in the third, and she performed the
**Parana** of the **Upavasa** with **Ayambila Tap** in the fourth.  1.
**Antakrid Dasha Ang Sutra - Patra 28/1**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 150] [antakRddazA karake sarvakAmaguNayukta pAraNA kiyA, karake ATha upavAsa
kiye , karake sarvakAmaguNayukta pAraNA kiyA, karake sAta upavAsa kiye, karake
sarvakAmaguNayukta pAraNA kiyA, karake nava upavAsa kiye, karake
sarvakAmaguNayukta pAraNA kiyA, karake ATha upavAsa kiye, karake
sarvakAmaguNayukta pAraNA kiyA, karake nava upavAsa kiye, karake
sarvakAmaguNayukta pAraNA kiyA, karake sAta upavAsa kiye, karake
sarvakAmaguNayukta pAraNA kiyA, karake ATha upavAsa kiye, karake
sarvakAmaguNayukta pAraNA kiyA, karake chaha upavAsa kiye,karake
sarvakAmaguNayukta pAraNA kiyA, karake sAta upavAsa kiye, karake
sarvakAmaguNayukta pAraNA kiyA, karake pAMca upavAsa kiye, karake
sarvakAmaguNayukta pAraNA kiyA, karake chaha upavAsa kiye, karake
sarvakAmaguNayukta pAraNA kiyA, karake caulA kiyA, karake sarvakAmaguNayukta
pAraNA kiyA, karake pacaulA kiyA, karake sarvakAmaguNayukta pAraNA kiyA, karake
telA kiyA, karake sarvakAmaguNayukta pAraNA kiyA, karake caulA kiyA, karake
sarvakAmaguNayukta pAraNA kiyA, karake velA kiyA, karake sarvakAmaguNayukta
pAraNA kiyA, karake telA kiyA, karake sarvakAmaguNayukta pAraNA kiyA, karake
upavAsa kiyA, karake sarvakAmaguNayukta pAraNA kiyA, karake velA kiyA, karake
sarvakAmaguNayukta pAraNA kiyA, karake upavAsa kiyA, karake sarvakAmaguNayukta
pAraNA kiyaa| isI prakAra cAroM paripATiyA~ samajhanI caahie| eka paripATI meM
chaha mAsa aura sAta dina lge| cAroM paripATiyoM kA kAla do varSa aura aTThAIsa
dina hote haiM yAvat mahAkAlI AryA siddha huii| vivecana-AryA mahAkAlI ne
'laghusiMhaniSkrIDita tapa' kI ArAdhanA kI thii| prastuta sUtra meM ise
'khuDDAgasIhanikkIliyaM' kahA hai, jisakA artha hai- jisa prakAra gamana karatA
huA siMha apane atikrAnta mArga ko pIche lauTakara phira dekhatA hai, usI
prakAra jisa tapa meM atikramaNa kie hue upavAsa ke dinoM ko phira se sevana
karake Age bar3hA jaae| siMhaniSkrIDita tapa do prakAra kA hotA hai, eka
"laghusiMhaniSkrIDita aura dUsarA mahAsiMhaniSkrIDita tp"| prastuta adhyayana
meM varNita AryA mahAkAlI ne laghusiMhaniSkrIDita tapa kI ArAdhanA kii| isa tapa
kI bhI cAra paripATiyA~ hotI haiN| eka paripATI meM chaha mAsa aura sAta dina
lagate haiM  /  33 dina pAraNe meM jAte haiN| isa taraha prathama paripATI 6
mAsa 7 dina meM sampanna hotI hai| cAroM paripATiyoM meM do varSa aura aTThAIsa
dina hote haiN| agale pRSTha para pradarzita sthApanA yantra se yaha spaSTa
parilakSita hotA hai| jaise kAlIdevI ne ratnAvalI tapa kI prathama paripATI ke
pAraNe meM dUdha ghRtAdi sabhI padArthoM ko grahaNa kiyA, dUsarI paripATI ke
pAraNe meM ina rasoM ko chor3a diyA, tIsarI paripATI meM lepamAtra kA bhI tyAga
kara diyA tathA caturtha paripATI meM upavAsoM kA pAraNA AyaMbiloM se kiyA,
vaise hI mahAkAlI devI ne laghusiMhaniSkrIDita tapa kI prathama paripATI meM
vigayoM ko grahaNa kiyA, dUsarI meM tyAga kiyA, tIsarI meM lepamAtra kA bhI
tyAga kiyA, cauthI meM upavAsoM kA pAraNA AyaMbila tapa se kiyaa| 1.
antakRdazAMga sUtra-patra 28/1

Page #192 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[151 925308335915888058 0000000000000000 3 Tapasya Kaal Car Khuddaga-
Singhnikiliyam 599359933 Days of Tapasya [One Paripati Kaal 6 months, 7 days
Four Paripati Kaal 2 years, 28 days [One Paripati's Tapodin 5 months, 4 days
Four Paripati's Tapodin 1 year, 8 months, 16 days [One Paripati's Parane 33 Four
Paripati's Parane 132 Parane BASESABREE TERRRRRRREEEETEERIES 0000000000000000
Ashtam Varga]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 [151 925308335915888058 0000000000000000 3 tapasyA kAla kAra khuDDAga-
siMhanikIliyaM 599359933 tapa ke dina [eka paripATI kA kAla 6 mAsa, 7 dina cAra
paripATI kA kAla 2 varSa, 28 dina [eka paripATI ke tapodina 5 mAsa, 4 dina cAra
paripATI ke tapodina 1 varSa, 8 mAsa, 16 dina [eka paripATI ke pAraNe 33 cAra
paripATI ke pAraNe 132 pAraNe BASESABREE TERRRRRRREEEETEERIES 0000000000000000
aSTama varga]

Page #193 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Krishna Devi's Mahasinhnishkridit Tapa 7 - Thus, Kanha. Navaran - Mahalayam
Sihanikkiliyam Tavokamma, Jahev Khuddagam. Navaran Chottisaim Jam Navv. 'Tahev
Osareyavvam'. Ekkae Varisan Chhammasa Attarasa Ya Divasa. Chaunham Chavvarisa Do
Masa Barasa Ya Ahoratta. Sesam Jaha Kalie Jav' Siddha. Fourth Study Krishna is.
. Class-5, Sutra -6 - Similarly, understand about Krishna Rani. Especially,
Krishna did Mahasinhnishkridit Tapa. It is different from Laghusinhnishkridit
Tapa in that it involves fasting from one to sixteen days and then gradually
reducing the fast. In one cycle, it takes nine years, six months, and eighteen
days. In all four cycles, 10 1. 1 2 1 3 2 4 3 11 it takes six years, two months,
and twelve days. 10 12 Discussion - Special information presented by this device
is clear 11 13 12 14 13 15 14 16 4 6 5 7 6 8 7 9 8 Mahaliy Sihanikkiliyam Parane
Tapa ke Din Tapasya Kaal One cycle Four cycles' Parane 244 Ka Kaal One cycle's
Parane 61 Four cycles' Tapaodin 5 years, 6 One cycle's Tapaodin 1 year 4 months,
17 days Four cycles' Kaal 6 years, 2 months, 12 days 1 Masa, 8 Din Varsha, 6
Masa, 18 Din 15 1 2 1 3 2 4 3 5 4 6 5 7 6 8 7 9 8 10 9 11 10 12 11 13 12 14 13
15 14 1.6

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 kRSNA devI kA mahAsiMhaniSkrIDita tapa 7- evaM kaNhA vi  /  navaraM - mahAlayaM
sIhaNikkIliyaM tavokammaM, jaheva khuDDAgaM  /  navaraM cottIsaimaM jAva
neyavvaM  /  'taheva osaareyvvN'| ekkAe varisaM chammAsA aTThArasa ya divasA  /
cauNhaM chavvarisA do mAsA bArasa ya ahorttaa| sesaM jahA kAlIe jAva' siddhA  /
caturtha adhyayana kRSNA hotI hai. . varga-5, sUtra -6 - isI prakAra kRSNA rAnI
ke viSaya meM bhI samajhanA  /  vizeSa yaha ki kRSNA ne mahAsiMhaniSkrIDita tapa
kiyaa| laghusiMhaniSkrIDita tapa se isameM itanI vizeSatA hai ki isameM eka se
lekara 16 taka anazana tapa kiyA jAtA hai aura usI prakAra utArA jAtA hai| eka
paripATI meM eka 9 varSa, chaha mAsa aura aThAraha dina lagate haiN| cAroM
paripATiyoM 10 1. 1 2 1 3 2 4 3 11 meM chaha varSa, do mAsa aura bAraha ahorAtra
lagate haiM  /  10 12 vivecana - vizeSa jAnakArI prastuta yaMtra se spaSTa 11 13
12 14 13 15 14 16 4 6 5 7 6 8 7 9 8 mahAliya siMhanikkIliyaM pAraNe tapa ke dina
tapasyA kAla eka paripATI cAra paripATI ke pAraNe 244 kA kAla eka paripATI ke
pAraNe 61 cAra paripATI ke tapodina 5 varSa, 6 eka paripATI ke tapodina 1 varSa
4 mAsa, 17 dina cAra paripATI kA kAla 6 varSa, 2 mAsa, 12 dina 1 mAsa, 8 dina
varSa, 6 mAsa, 18 dina 15 1 2 1 3 2 4 3 5 4 6 5 7 6 8 7 9 8 10 9 11 10 12 11 13
12 14 13 15 14 1.6

Page #194 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Fifth Study ## Sukrushna ## Sukrushna's Worship of the Bhikshu Pratimā  8 -
Thus, Sukrushna, the noble one, practiced the Sapta Saptamika Bhikshu Pratimā.
In the first week, she received one datti of food and one datti of water. In the
second week, she received two dattis of food and two dattis of water. In the
third week, she received three dattis of food and three dattis of water. In the
fourth week, she received four dattis of food and four dattis of water. In the
fifth week, she received five dattis of food and five dattis of water. In the
sixth week, she received six dattis of food and six dattis of water. In the
seventh week, she received seven dattis of food and seven dattis of water.
Thus, in forty-nine nights and days, there are one hundred and ninety-six dattis
of alms. Arya Sukrushna, following the prescribed method, performed the perfect
worship of this 'Sapta Saptamika' Bhikshu Pratimā penance. In this, the total
food and water received in the first week was seven dattis, in the second week
fourteen, in the third week twenty-one, in the fourth week twenty-eight, in the
fifth week thirty-five, in the sixth week forty-two, and in the seventh week
forty-nine. 1. Chapter 8, Sutra 2  I wish, noble ones, that you, the enlightened
ones, may practice the Ashtamika Bhikshu Pratimā, having attained it.
Devānupiya, the divine one, do not be attached.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paJcama adhyayana sukRSNA sukRSNA kA bhikSupratimA ArAdhana 8 - evaM sukaNhA
vi, navaraM - sattasattamiyaM bhikkhupaDimaM uvasaMpajjittA NaM viharai  /
paDhame sattae ekkekkaM bhoyaNassa dattiM paDigAhei, ekkekkaM pANayassa  /
docce sattara do-do bhoyaNassa do-do pANayassa paDigAhe  /  tacce sattae tiNNi-
tiNNi dattIo bhoyaNassa, tiNNi-tiNNi dattIo pANayassa  /  cautthe sattae cattAri
- cattAri dattIo bhoyaNassa, cattAri cattAri dattIo pANayassa  /  paMcame sattae
paMca-paMca dattIo bhoyaNassa, paMca-paMca dattIo pANayassa  /  chaTThe sattae
cha-cha dattIo bhoyaNassa, cha-cha dattIo pANayassa  /  sattame sattae satta-
satta dattIo bhoyaNassa, satta satta dattIo pANayassa paDigAhei  /  evaM khalu
eyaM sattasattamiyaM bhikkhupaDimaM egUNapaNNAe rAtiMdiehiM egeNa ya chaNNaueNa
bhikkhAsaeNaM ahAsuttaM jAva' ArAhettA jeNeva ajjacaMdaNA ajjA teNeva uvAgayA,
uvAgacchittA ajjacaMdaNaM ajaM vaMdai namaMsai, vaMdittA namaMsittA evaM vayAsI
- icchAmi NaM ajjAo! tubbhehiM abbhaNuNNAyA samANI aTThamiyaM bhikkhupaDimaM
uvasaMpajjittANaM viharattae  /  ahAsuhaM devANuppie! mA paDibaMdhaM karehi  /
kAlI AryA kI taraha AryA sukRSNA ne bhI dIkSA grahaNa kii| vizeSa yaha ki vaha
sapta saptamikA bhikSupratimA grahaNa karake vicarane lagI, jo isa prakAra hai
prathama saptaka meM eka datti bhojana kI aura eka datti pAnI kI grahaNa kii|
dvitIya saptaka meM do datti bhojana kI aura do datti pAnI kI grahaNa kii|
tRtIya saptaka meM tIna datti bhojana kI aura tIna datti pAnI kI grahaNa kii|
caturtha saptaka meM cAra datti bhojana kI aura cAra datti pAnI kI grahaNa kii|
pAMcaveM saptaka meM pAMca datti bhojana kI aura pAMca datti pAnI kI grahaNa
kii| chaTThe saptaka meM chaha datti bhojana kI aura chaha datti pAnI kI grahaNa
kii| sAtaveM saptaka meM sAta datti bhojana kI aura sAta datti pAnI kI grahaNa
kii| isa prakAra unapacAsa (49) rAta-dina meM eka sau chiyAnave (196) bhikSA kI
dattiyAM hotI haiM  /  sukRSNA AryA ne sUtrokta vidhi ke anusAra isI 'sapta
saptamikA' bhikSupratimA tapa kI samyag ArAdhanA kii| isameM AhAra- pAnI kI
sammilita rUpa se prathama saptAha meM sAta dattiyA~ huIM, dUsare saptAha meM
caudaha, tIsare saptAha meM ikkIsa, cauthe meM aTThAIsa, pAMcaveM meM paiMtIsa,
chaTThe meM bayAlIsa aura sAtaveM saptAha meM unapacAsa 1. varga 8, sUtra 2

Page #195 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[154] [Antakrid Dasha] There are 196 Dattis in total. Thus, according to the
Sutra, Sukrushna Arya came to Arya Chandana Arya after worshipping this image
and, after bowing and saluting her, spoke as follows: "O Arya! If you permit, I
will accept the 'Ashta-Ashtamika' Bhikku-Pratima Tapa."  Arya Chandana said, "O
Devanupriya! Do as you please. Do not be negligent in your religious duties."
**Discussion:** This Sapta-Saptamika Bhikku-Pratima is different from the
Bhikku-Pratima mentioned in the 19th Sutra of the third category. It has no
connection with it. The duration of the seventh Bhikku-Pratima is one month, and
in it, seven Dattis of food and seven Dattis of water are taken. However, the
Sapta-Saptamika Bhikku-Pratima described in the present study has a duration of
49 days and nights. It is completed in seven weeks (7 x 7 = 49). In the first
week, one Datti of food and one Datti of water are taken, in the second, two
each, in the third, three each, and so on, increasing by one each in the fourth,
fifth, sixth, and seventh, until seven Dattis of food and water are taken in the
seventh. The total number of Dattis in this Sapta-Saptamika Bhikku-Pratima is
196. Therefore, this Bhikku-Pratima has no connection with the aforementioned
twelve Bhikku-Pratimas. Its establishment mechanism is as follows:  1 2 3 Satta-
Saptamika Bhikku Padima 1 1 1 2 3 1 2 1 49 Days 196 Dattis  9 - Then, Sukrushna
Arya, having accepted the Ashta-Ashtamika Bhikku-Pratima, dwells in the presence
of Arya Chandana Arya.  In the first Ashta, she takes one Datti of food and one
Datti of water, in the second, two each, and so on, until in the eighth Ashta,
she takes eight Dattis of food and eight Dattis of water.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 154] [ antakRddazA dattiyAM hotI haiN| isa prakAra sabhI milAkara kula eka sau
chiyAnave (196) dattiyAM huiiN| isa taraha sUtrAnusAra isa pratimA kA ArAdhana
karake sukRSNA AryA Arya candanA AryA ke pAsa AI aura unheM vaMdanA namaskAra
karake isa prakAra bolI- 'he Arye ! ApakI AjJA ho to maiM 'aSTa- aSTamikA'
bhikSupratimA tapa aMgIkAra karake virUM  / ' - AryA candanA ne kahA - he
devAnupriye ! jaise tumheM sukha ho vaisA kro| dharmakArya meM pramAda mata kro|
vivecana - tIsare varga ke 19 veM sUtra meM varNita bhikSupratimA se yaha sapta
saptamikA bhikSupratimA alaga hai| usase isakA koI saMbaMdha nahIM hai| sAtavIM
bhikSupratimA kA samaya eka mAsa hai aura usameM sAta dattiyA~ bhojana kI aura
sAta dattiyAM pAnI kI grahaNa kI jAtI haiM parantu prastuta adhyayana meM
varNita sapta saptamikA bhikSupratimA kA samaya 49 dina-rAtri kA hai| yaha sAta
saptAhoM meM pUrNa hotI hai (7 x 7 = 49)  /  prathama saptAha meM eka datti anna
kI aura eka datti pAnI kI grahaNa kI jAtI hai, dUsare meM do-do, tIsare meM
tInatIna, cauthe, pAMcaveM, chaTThe, sAtaveM meM eka-eka kI vRddhi kramaza:
karate hue sAtaveM taka sAta-sAta dattiyAM anna pAnI kI grahaNa kI jAtI haiN|
isa sapta saptamikA bhikSupratimA meM samasta dattiyoM kI saMkhyA 196 hotI  /
ataH isa bhikSupratimA kA ukta bAraha bhikSupratimAoM ke sAtha koI sambandha
nahIM hai  /  isakA sthApanAyaMtra isa prakAra hai. 1 2 3 sattasattamiyAbhikkhU
paDimA 1 1 1 2 3 1 2 1 49 divasa 196 dattiyAM 9 - tae NaM sA sukaNhA ajjA
ajjacaMdaNAe ajjAe abbhaNuNNAyA samANI aTThaTThamiyaM bhikkhupaDimaM
uvasaMpajjittA NaM viharai - paDhame aTTae ekkekkaM bhoyaNassa dattiM paDigAhei,
ekkekkaM pANayassa jAva [ dattiM paDigAher3a ], aTTame aTThae aTTha bhoyaNassa
paDigAhei, aTThaTTha pANayassa  /

Page #196 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Eighth Group ] [155 Thus, this eighth group of the Bhikkhu-pratima, with
sixty-four nights and two hundred and eighty-eight Bhikshas, is completed. After
completing this, the Bhikkhu-pratima enters the ninth group. - In the first
nine, one takes one Datti of food and one Datti of water. In the second nine,
two Dattis of food and two Dattis of water. In the ninth nine, nine Dattis of
food and nine Dattis of water. Thus, this ninth group of the Bhikkhu-pratima,
with eighty-one nights and four hundred and five Bhikshas, is completed. After
completing this, the Bhikkhu-pratima enters the tenth group. - In the first ten,
one takes one Datti of food and one Datti of water. In the second ten, two
Dattis of food and two Dattis of water. In the tenth ten, ten Dattis of food and
ten Dattis of water. Thus, this tenth group of the Bhikkhu-pratima, with one
hundred nights and one hundred and fifty-six Bhikshas, is completed. After
completing this, the Bhikkhu-pratima enters the stage of many months, where one
practices various types of Tapas, such as the fourth, sixth, eighth, tenth, and
twelfth months, and the half-month, with the intention of self-development.
Then, that virtuous one, through that Tapas, becomes perfected. End.
Aryachandana, having received the order, began to practice the Ashta-Ashtamika
Bhikkhu-pratima. The form of the Ashta-Ashtamika Bhikkhu-pratima is as follows:
For the first eight days, Arya Sukrushna took one Datti of food and one Datti of
water. In the second Ashtaka, she took two Dattis of food and two Dattis of
water. In this way, she continued to increase the number of Dattis, taking three
in the third, four in the fourth, five in the fifth, six in the sixth, seven in
the seventh, and eight in the eighth Ashtaka. This Ashta-Ashtamika Bhikkhu-
pratima took sixty-four days to complete and involved two hundred and eighty-
eight Bhikshas. After completing the Ashta-Ashtamika Bhikkhu-pratima according
to the Sutra, Arya Sukrushna began to practice the Nava-Navamika Bhikkhu-
pratima. While practicing the Nava-Navamika Bhikkhu-pratima, Arya Sukrushna took
one Datti of food and one Datti of water each day in the first Navaka. In this
way, she continued to increase the number of Dattis, taking nine Dattis of food
and nine Dattis of water in the ninth Navaka. This Nava-Navamika Bhikkhu-pratima
was completed in eighty-one days. It involved four hundred and five Bhikshas and
eighty-one days. After completing the Nava-Navamika Bhikkhu-pratima according to
the Sutra, Arya Sukrushna began to practice the Dasha-Dashamika Bhikkhu-pratima.
While practicing the Dasha-Dashamika Bhikkhu-pratima, Arya Sukrushna took one
Datti of food and one Datti of water each day in the first Dashaka. 1- 2 - 3
Groups 8, Sutra 2 Group 8, Sutra 4 4. "

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 aSTama varga ] [155 evaM khalu eyaM aTThaTThamiyaM bhikkhupaDimaM causaTThIe
rAtiMdiehiM dohi ya aTThAsIehiM bhikkhAsaehiM ahAsuttaM jAva' ArAhittA
navanavamiyaM bhikkhupaDimaM uvasaMpajjittA NaM viharai - paDhame navae ekkekkaM
bhoyaNassa dattiM paDigAhei, ekkekkaM pANayassa jAva [ dattiM paDigAhei ] navame
navae nava-nava dattIo bhoyaNassa paDigAhei, nava-nava pANayassa  /  evaM khalu
eyaM navanavamiyaM bhikkhupaDimaM ekkAsItie rAIdiehiM cauhi ya paMcuttarehiM
bhikkhAsaehiM ahAsuttaM jAva' ArAhettA dasadasamiyaM bhikkhupaDimaM
uvasaMpajjittA NaM viharai - paDhame dasae ekke kkaM bhoyaNassa dattiM
paDigAhei, ekkekkaM pANayassa jAva [dattiM paDigAhei ]  /  dasame dasae dasa-
dasa dattIo bhoyaNassa paDigAhei, dasa-dasa pANayassa  /  evaM khalu eyaM
dasadasamiyaM bhikkhupaDimaM ekkeNaM rAiMdiyasaeNaM addhachaTThehi ya
bhikkhAsaehiM ahAsuttaM jAvare ArAhei, ArAhettA bahUhiM cauttha-chaTThaTThama-
dasama - duvAlasehiM mAsaddhamAsakhamaNehiM vivihehiM tavokammehiM appANaM
bhAvemANI viharai  /  taNaM sA sukaNhA ajjA teNaM orAleNaM tavokammeNaM jAva
siddhA  /  nikkhevao  /  AryacandanA AryA se AjJA prApta hone para AryA sukRSNA
devI aSTa- aSTamikA nAmaka bhikSupratimA ko dhAraNa karake vicarane lgii| aSTa-
aSTamikA bhikSupratimA kA svarUpa isa prakAra hai pahale ATha dinoM meM AryA
sukRSNA ne eka datti bhojana kI aura eka datti pAnI kI grahaNa kii| dUsare
aSTaka meM anna-pAnI kI do-do dattiyAM liiN| isI prakAra krama se tIsare meM
tIna-tIna, cauthe meM cAracAra, pAMcaveM meM pAMca-pAMca, chaTThe meM chaha-
chaha, sAtaveM meM sAta-sAta aura AThaveM meM ATha-ATha anna-jala kI dattiyAM
grahaNa kIM 1 isa aSTa- aSTamikA bhikSupratimA kI ArAdhanA meM 64 dina lage aura
288 bhikSAeM grahaNa kI giiN| bhikSupratimA kI sUtrokta paddhati se ArAdhanA
karane ke anantara AryA sukRSNA ne nava-navamikA nAmaka bhikSupratimA kI
ArAdhanA Arambha kara dI  /  nava-navamikA bhikSupratimA kI ArAdhanA karate
samaya AryA sukRSNA ne prathama navaka meM pratidina eka-eka datti bhojana kI
aura eka-eka datti pAnI kI grahaNa kii| isI prakAra Age kramaza: eka-eka datti
bar3hAte hue nauveM navaka meM anna jala kI nau-nau dattiyAM grahaNa kIM  /  isa
prakAra yaha nava-navamikA bhikSupratimA ikyAsI (81) dinoM meM pUrNa huii|
isameM bhikSAoM kI saMkhyA 405 tathA dinoM kI saMkhyA 81 hotI hai| sUtrokta
vidhi ke anusAra nava-navamikA bhikSupratimA kI ArAdhanA karane ke anantara AryA
sukRSNA ne daza dazamikA nAmaka bhikSupratimA kI ArAdhanA AraMbha kii| daza-
dazamikA bhikSupratimA kI ArAdhanA karate samaya AryA sukRSNA prathama dazaka
meM eka-eka datti bhojana aura eka-eka datti pAnI kI grahaNa karatI hai  /  1- 2
- 3 varga 8, sUtra 2 varga 8, sUtra 4 4. "

Page #197 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[156] In the same way, increasing the number of *dattis* one by one, in the
tenth decade, she accepts ten *dattis* of food and ten of water. The *Dasha-
Dashamika Bhikhu-Pratima* takes one hundred nights and days. In this, five
hundred and fifty (550) *bhikshas* and eleven hundred *dattis* have to be taken.
According to the method described in the scriptures, after performing the
*Dasha-Dashamika Bhikhu-Pratima*, Arya Sukrushna, in addition to the austerities
of *upavas*, *bela*, *tela*, *choula*, *pachoula*, six, seven, eight, up to
fifteen, and *mashakhaman*, also performed many other types of austerities to
purify her soul. Due to this difficult austerity, Arya Sukrushna became
extremely weak, until she destroyed all her karmas and attained liberation. .
Discussion - Like the *Sapta-Saptamika Bhikhu-Pratima*, this sutra mentions the
*Ashta-Ashtamika*, *Nava-Navamika*, and *Dasha-Dashamika Bhikhu-Pratimas*. The
difference between the three is clear from the instruments. *Ashtamika Bhikhu-
Pratima* 22222222 16 33333333 24 32 64 days 288 *dattis*

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 156] [antakRddazA isI prakAra eka-eka datti bar3hAte hue dasaveM dazaka meM
dasa-dasa dattiyAM bhojana kI aura dasa pAnI kI svIkAra karatI hai| daza-
dazamikA bhikSupratimA meM eka sau rAtri-dina laga jAte haiN| isameM sAr3he
pAMca sau (550) bhikSAe~ aura 11 sau dattiyAM grahaNa karanI hotI haiN| sUtrokta
vidhi ke anusAra daza-dazamikA bhikSupratimA kI ArAdhanA karane ke anantara AryA
sukRSNA ne upavAsa, belA, telA, caulA, pacaulA, chaha, sAta, ATha, se lekara 15
tathA mAsakhamaNa taka kI tapasyA ke atirikta anya anekavidha tapoM se apanI
AtmA ko bhAvita kiyaa| isa kaThina tapa ke kAraNa AryA sukRSNA atyadhika durbala
ho gaI yAvat saMpUrNa karmoM kA kSaya karake mokSagati ho prApta huii| .
vivecana-sapta-saptamikA bhikSupratimA kI taraha isa sUtra meM kathita aSTa-
aSTamikA, nava-navamikA tathA daza-dazamikA bhikSupratimAe~ hotI haiN| tInoM kA
antara yaMtroM se spaSTa hotA hai| aTThamiyAbhikkhUpaDimA 22222222 16 33333333
24 32 64 divasa 288 dattiyAM

Page #198 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Eighth Section ] mr x 5 w 5 3 3 4 4 2 1 7 3 6 6 S 9 7 026 7 4 5 1 2 7 mr x s
w 9 v 6 8 8 8 4 5 3 Navamiyabhickhoopdima 1 2 2 2 3 4 4 6 7 9 9 8 4 5 1 2 3 6 1
1 1 5 ^ 6 m £ 6 ू 6 9 9 9 81 days 7 8 3 4 5 Ww 9 v 5 7 1 2 2 8 62 mr x 3 w 9 3 5
6 7 8 m x 5 9 r m x 5 7 9 4 4 5 1 6 8 2 3 3 3 9 9 4 5 8 7 | 7 | 7
Dasadasamiyabhickhoopdima 9 7 1 1 1 1 9 0^6 m sα 6 mr x 5 w 9 100 days 20 0 0 6
m s & w 5 2 3 4 8 8 6 5 1 1 1 1 1 1 10 '6 9 3 4 x 5 7 9 || 9 405 Dattiyas 9 8 r
m x 5 w 9 2 2 7 3 4 5 2 2 18 7 8 4 5 6 3 27 4 36 5 45 6 54 7 63 7 8 V mr x mr to
s m x 5 w 9 0 0 2 s w |9 |v | w 9 0 0 2 2 3 4 5 9 81 72 9 9 8 2 550 Dattiyas 3 4
7 7 5 6 8 9 20 0 0 6 0 6 0 0 0 9 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 100 30 40 50 60
70 80 90 [157

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 aSTama varga ] mr x 5 w 5 3 3 4 4 2 1 7 3 6 6 S 9 7 026 7 4 5 1 2 7 mr x s w 9
v 6 8 8 8 4 5 3 navamiyAbhikkhUpaDimA 1 2 2 2 3 4 4 6 7 9 9 8 4 5 1 2 3 6 1 1 1
5 ^ 6 m PS 6 uu 6 9 9 9 81 divasa 7 8 3 4 5 Ww 9 v 5 7 1 2 2 8 62 mr x 3 w 9 3 5
6 7 8 m x 5 9 r m x 5 7 9 4 4 5 1 6 8 2 3 3 3 9 9 4 5 8 7 | 7 | 7
dasadasamiyAbhikkhUpaDimA 9 7 1 1 1 1 9 0^6 m sa 6 mr x 5 w 9 100 divasa 20 0 0
6 m s & w 5 2 3 4 8 8 6 5 1 1 1 1 1 1 10 '6 9 3 4 x 5 7 9 || 9 405 dattiyAM 9 8
r m x 5 w 9 2 2 7 3 4 5 2 2 18 7 8 4 5 6 3 27 4 36 5 45 6 54 7 63 7 8 V mr x mr
to s m x 5 w 9 0 0 2 s w |9 |v | w 9 0 0 2 2 3 4 5 9 81 72 9 9 8 2 550 dattiyAM
3 4 7 7 5 6 8 9 20 0 0 6 0 6 0 0 0 9 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 100 30 40 50
60 70 80 90 [157

Page #199 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Sixth Study **The Short Sarvatobhadra Tapas of Mahakrisna**  10. Thus,
Mahakrisna, having received the Khuddaga Sarvatobhadra, lived as follows: She
performed the **Upavasa** (fast), and then performed the **Sarvakamagunya
Parana** (breaking of the fast with auspicious food). She performed the **Bela**
(a specific type of fast), and then performed the **Sarvakamagunya Parana**. She
performed the **Tela** (another type of fast), and then performed the
**Sarvakamagunya Parana**. She performed the **Chaula** (another type of fast),
and then performed the **Sarvakamagunya Parana**. She performed the **Pacaula**
(another type of fast), and then performed the **Sarvakamagunya Parana**. She
performed the **Tela**, and then performed the **Sarvakamagunya Parana**. She
performed the **Chaula**, and then performed the **Sarvakamagunya Parana**. She
performed the **Pacaula**, and then performed the **Sarvakamagunya Parana**. She
performed the **Upavasa**, and then performed the **Sarvakamagunya Parana**. She
performed the **Bela**, and then performed the **Sarvakamagunya Parana**. She
performed the **Pacaula**, and then performed the **Sarvakamagunya Parana**. She
performed the **Upavasa**, and then performed the **Sarvakamagunya Parana**. She
performed the **Bela**, and then performed the **Sarvakamagunya Parana**. She
performed the **Tela**, and then performed the **Sarvakamagunya Parana**. She
performed the **Chaula**, and then performed the **Sarvakamagunya Parana**. She
performed the **Bela**, and then performed the **Sarvakamagunya Parana**. She
performed the **Tela**, and then performed the **Sarvakamagunya Parana**. She
performed the **Chaula**, and then performed the **Sarvakamagunya Parana**. She
performed the **Pacaula**, and then performed the **Sarvakamagunya Parana**. She
performed the **Upavasa**, and then performed the **Sarvakamagunya Parana**. She
performed the **Bela**, and then performed the **Sarvakamagunya Parana**. She
performed the **Pacaula**, and then performed the **Sarvakamagunya Parana**. She
performed the **Upavasa**, and then performed the **Sarvakamagunya Parana**. She
performed the **Bela**, and then performed the **Sarvakamagunya Parana**. She
performed the **Tela**, and then performed the **Sarvakamagunya Parana**. She
performed the **Chaula**, and then performed the **Sarvakamagunya Parana**. She
performed the **Pacaula**, and then performed the **Sarvakamagunya Parana**.
Thus, this is the first **Parivadi** (cycle) of the **Khuddaga Sarvatobhadra
Tapas** (short Sarvatobhadra penance). It is performed for three months, ten
days each. The **Aharasutta** (food intake) is to be performed until the
**Arahett** (the time of the sun's setting). The **Dochcha** (a specific type of
food) is to be taken during the **Parivadi**. The fourth **Parivadi** is
performed, and then the **Vigaivajja** (a specific type of food) is taken. The
**Parana** (breaking of the fast) is to be performed as in the **Rayanavali** (a
specific type of food). Thus, there are four **Parivadi**s. The **Parana** is
the same. The time is four **Kalas** (a unit of time), one year, one month, and
ten days. The rest is the same as before. **Sidda** (perfected). **Nikkevo**
(conclusion).  In the same way, Mahakrisna also took **Diksha** (initiation),
specifically, she accepted the **Laghusarvatobhadra** (short Sarvatobhadra)
**Pratima** (image) and lived accordingly.   1. Chapter 8, Sutra 2. 2. Chapter
8, Sutra 3. 4.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 SaSTha adhyayana mahAkRSNA mahAkRSNA kA laghu sarvatobhadra tapa 10-evaM
mahAkaNhA vi, navaraM-khuDDAgaM savvaobhadaM paDimaM uvasaMpajjittA NaM viharai
cautthaM karei, karettA savvakAmaguNiyaM paarei| chaTheM karei, karettA
savvakAmaguNiyaM paarei| aTThamaM karei, karettA savvakAmaguNiyaM paarei|
dasamaM karei, karettA savvakAmaguNiyaM paarei| duvAlasamaM karei, karettA
savvakAmaguNiyaM paarei| aTThamaM karei, karettA savvakAmaguNiyaM paarei|
dasamaM karei, karettA savvakAmaguNiyaM paarei| duvAlasamaM karei, karettA
savvakAmaguNiyaM paarei| cautthaM karei, karettA savvakAmaguNiyaM paarei|
chaTheM karei, karettA savvakAmaguNiyaM paarei| duvAlasamaM karei, karettA
savvakAmaguNiyaM paarei| cautthaM karei, karettA savvakAmaguNiyaM paarei|chttheN
karei, karettA savvakAmaguNiyaM paarei|atttthmN karei karettA savvakAmaguNiyaM
paarei| dasamaM karei, karettA savvakAmaguNiyaM paarei| chaTheM karei, karettA
savvakAmaguNiyaM paarei| aTThamaM karei, karettA savvakAmaguNiyaM paarei|
dasamaM karei, karettA savvakAmaguNiyaM paarei| duvAlasamaM karei, karettA
savvakAmaguNiyaM paarei| cautthaM karei, karettA savvakAmaguNiyaM paarei|
dasamaM karei, karettA savvakAmaguNiyaM paarei| duvAlasamaM karei karettA
savvakAmaguNiyaM paarei| cautthaM karei, karettA savvakAmaguNiyaM paarei| chaTuM
karei, karettA savvakAmaguNiyaM paarei| aTThamaM karei, karettA savvakAmaguNiyaM
paarei| evaM khalu eyaM khuDDAgasavvaobhaddassa tavokammassa paDhamaM parivADiM
tihiM mAsehiM dasahi ya ahAsuttaM jAva' ArAhettA doccAe parivADIe cautthaM
karei, karettA vigaivajjaM pArei, pArettA jahA rayaNAvalIe tahA ettha vi cattAri
privaaddiio| pAraNA thev| cauNhaM kAlo saMvaccharo mAso dasa ya divsaa| sesaM
taheva jAve siddhaa| nikkhevo| isI prakAra mahAkRSNA ne bhI dIkSA grahaNa kI,
vizeSa-vaha laghusarvatobhadra pratimA aMgIkAra karake vicarane lagI, jo isa
prakAra hai upavAsa kiyA, karake sarvakAmaguNayukta pAraNA kiyA, karake belA
kiyA, karake sarvakAmaguNayukta pAraNA kiyA, karake telA kiyA, karake
sarvakAmaguNayukta pAraNA kiyA, karake caulA kiyA, karake sarvakAmaguNayukta
pAraNA kiyA, karake pacaulA kiyA, karake sarvakAmaguNayukta pAraNA kiyA, karake
telA kiyA, karake sarvakAmaguNayukta pAraNA kiyA, karake caulA kiyA, karake
sarvakAmaguNayukta pAraNA kiyA, karake pacaulA kiyA. karake sarvakAmaguNayukta
pAraNA kiyA, karake upavAsa kiyA, karake sarvakAmaguNayuda pAraNA kiyA, karake
belA kiyA, karake sarvakAmaguNayukta pAraNA kiyA, karake pacaulA kiyA, karake
sarvakAmaguNayukta pAraNA kiyA, karake upavAsa kiyA, karake sarvakAmaguNayukta
pAraNA kiyA, karake belA kiyA, karake sarvakAmaguNayukta pAraNA kiyA; karake
telA kiyA, karake sarvakAmaguNayukta pAraNA kiyA, karake caulA kiyA, karake
sarvakAmaguNayukta pAraNA kiyA, karake belA kiyA, karake sarvakAmaguNayukta
pAraNA kiyA, karake telA kiyA, karake sarvakAmaguNayukta pAraNA kiyA, karake
caulA kiyA, karake sarva 1. varga 8, sUtra 2. 2. varga 8, sUtra 3 4

Page #200 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Eighth Section] [159] Performing a *kamguna*-infused *parana*, followed by a
*pacaula*, then a *sarvakamguna*-infused *parana*, followed by a fast, then a
*sarvakamguna*-infused *parana*, followed by a *bela*, then a
*sarvakamguna*-infused *parana*, followed by a *tela*, then a
*sarvakamguna*-infused *parana*.  In this way, the first practice of this
*laghu* (small, insignificant) *sarvatobhadra* penance-action is completed in
three months and ten days. Following the *sutra*, with proper *samyagriti*
(method), Arya Mahakrishna performed a fast in the second practice and a
*vigaya*-free *parana*. Just as four practices are described in the *Ratnavali*
penance, so too are there four practices in this one. The *parana* should be
understood in the same way. The first practice takes a total of one hundred
days, with twenty-five days of *parana* and seventy-five days of fasting. The
combined duration of all four practices is one year, one month, and ten days.
**Discussion:** The word *khuddaga* in " *khuddaga* *savvaobhai* *padimam*"
refers to something small in comparison to something great. *Sarvatobhadra*
penance is of two types: one great and one small. This is the small one. The
word *khuddaga* is used to indicate this. When the numbers are even, not odd,
and the same from whichever direction they are counted, it is called
*sarvatobhadra*. In this, numbers from one to five are given, and no matter
which direction you count from, the total is always fifteen. Since the number is
the same when counting from one to five in all directions, it is called
*sarvatobhadra*. This is clear from the presented diagram.  *Khuddaga*
*savvatobhadd* *padimam* Penance days 75 *parana* 25.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 aSTama varga] [159 kAmaguNayukta pAraNA kiyA, karake pacaulA kiyA karake
sarvakAmaguNayukta pAraNA kiyA, karake upavAsa kiyA, karake sarvakAmaguNayukta
pAraNA kiyA, karake belA kiyA, karake sarvakAmaguNayukta pAraNA kiyA karake telA
kiyA, karake sarvakAmaguNayukta pAraNA kiyA isa prakAra yaha laghu (kSudra-
kSullaka) sarvatobhadra tapa-karma kI prathama paripATI tIna mAha aura dasa
dinoM meM pUrNa hotI hai| isakI sUtrAnusAra samyagrIti (vidhi) se ArAdhanA
karake AryA mahAkRSNA ne isakI dUsarI paripATI meM upavAsa kiyA aura vigaya
rahita pAraNA kiyaa| jaise ratnAvalI tapa meM cAra paripATiyAM batAI gaIM, vaise
hI isa meM bhI hotI haiN| pAraNA bhI usI prakAra samajhanA caahiye| isakI
prathama paripATI meM pUre sau dina lage, jisameM paccIsa dina pAraNA ke aura 75
dina upavAsa ke hote haiN| cAroM paripArTiyoM kA sammilita kAla eka varSa, eka
mAsa aura dasa dina huaa| vivecana-'khuDDAgaM savvaobhaI paDimaM' meM kSullaka
zabda mahad kI apekSA se hai| sarvatobhradra tapa do prakAra kA hai. eka mahada
'eka lgh| yaha lagha hai. isa bAta ko prakaTa karane ke liye kSallaka zabda kA
prayoga kiyA gayA hai| gaNanA karane para jisake aMka sama arthAt barAbara hoM,
viSama na hoM, jidhara se gaNanA kI jAe udhara se hI samAna hoM, use
sarvatobhadra kahate haiN| isameM eka se lekara pAMca aMka diye jAte haiM, cAroM
ora jidhara se cAheM gina leM, sabhI ora 15 hI saMkhyA hotI hai| eka se pAMca
taka sabhI ora se ginane para eka jaisI saMkhyA hone se ise sarvatobhadra kahA
jAtA hai| yaha prastuta yaMtra se spaSTa hotI hai| khuDDayA savvatobhadda-paDimA
tapadina 75 pAraNe 25  /

Page #201 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Seventh Study The Great Sarvatobhadra Tapas of Virakrishna 11-Thus-Virakanha,
having attained the Sarvatobhadra Tapa, dwells in the nine-fold Mahaalaya, as
follows. He performs the fourth, and by performing it, he transcends all
desires. He performs the sixth, and by performing it, he transcends all desires.
He performs the eighth, and by performing it, he transcends all desires. He
performs the tenth, and by performing it, he transcends all desires. He performs
the twelfth, and by performing it, he transcends all desires. He performs the
fourteenth, and by performing it, he transcends all desires. He performs the
sixteenth, and by performing it, he transcends all desires. He performs the
tenth, and by performing it, he transcends all desires. He performs the twelfth,
and by performing it, he transcends all desires. He performs the fourteenth, and
by performing it, he transcends all desires. He performs the sixteenth, and by
performing it, he transcends all desires. He performs the fourth, and by
performing it, he transcends all desires. He performs the sixth, and by
performing it, he transcends all desires. He performs the eighth, and by
performing it, he transcends all desires. He performs the sixteenth, and by
performing it, he transcends all desires. He performs the fourth, and by
performing it, he transcends all desires. He performs the sixth, and by
performing it, he transcends all desires. He performs the eighth, and by
performing it, he transcends all desires. He performs the tenth, and by
performing it, he transcends all desires. He performs the twelfth, and by
performing it, he transcends all desires. He performs the fourteenth, and by
performing it, he transcends all desires. He performs the eighth, and by
performing it, he transcends all desires. He performs the tenth, and by
performing it, he transcends all desires. He performs the twelfth, and by
performing it, he transcends all desires. He performs the fourteenth, and by
performing it, he transcends all desires. He performs the sixteenth, and by
performing it, he transcends all desires. He performs the fourth, and by
performing it, he transcends all desires. He performs the sixth, and by
performing it, he transcends all desires. He performs the fourteenth, and by
performing it, he transcends all desires. He performs the sixteenth, and by
performing it, he transcends all desires. He performs the fourth, and by
performing it, he transcends all desires. He performs the sixth, and by
performing it, he transcends all desires. He performs the eighth, and by
performing it, he transcends all desires. He performs the tenth, and by
performing it, he transcends all desires. He performs the twelfth, and by
performing it, he transcends all desires. He performs the sixth, and by
performing it, he transcends all desires. He performs the eighth, and by
performing it, he transcends all desires. He performs the tenth, and by
performing it, he transcends all desires. He performs the twelfth, and by
performing it, he transcends all desires. He performs the fourteenth, and by
performing it, he transcends all desires. He performs the sixteenth, and by
performing it, he transcends all desires. He performs the fourth, and by
performing it, he transcends all desires. He performs the twelfth, and by
performing it, he transcends all desires. He performs the fourteenth, and by
performing it, he transcends all desires. He performs the sixteenth, and by
performing it, he transcends all desires. He performs the fourth, and by
performing it, he transcends all desires. He performs the sixth, and by
performing it, he transcends all desires. He performs the eighth, and by
performing it, he transcends all desires. He performs the tenth, and by
performing it, he transcends all desires.  One time, eight months, five days.
Four times, two months, eight months, twenty days. The rest is the same, until
it is perfected. 1. Chapter 8, Sutra 34.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 saptama adhyayana vIrakRSNA vIrakRSNA kA mahatsarvatobhadra tapa 11-evaM-
vIrakaNhA vi, navaraM-mahAlayaM savvaobhadaM tavokammaM uvasaMpajjittA NaM
viharai, taM jahA. cautthaM karei, karettA savvakAmaguNiyaM paarei| chaTuM
karei, karettA savvakAmaguNiyaM paarei| aTThamaM karei, karettA savvakAmaguNiyaM
paarei| dasamaM karei, karettA savvakAmaguNiyaM paarei| duvAlasamaM karei,
karettA savvakAmaguNiyaM paarei| coddasamaM karei, karettA savvakAmaguNiyaM
paarei| solasamaM karei, karettA savvakAmaguNiyaM paarei| dasamaM karei, karettA
savvakAmaguNiyaM paarei| duvAlasamaM kareI karettA savvakAmaguNiyaM paarei|
coddasamaM karei, karettA savvakAmaguNiyaM paarei| solasamaM kareI, karettA
savvakAmaguNiyaM paarei| cautthaM karei, karettA savvakAmaguNiyaM paarei|
chaTheM kareI, karettA savvakAmaguNiyaM paarei| aTThamaM karei, karettA
savvakAmaguNiyaM paarei| solasamaM karei karettA savvakAmaguNiyaM paarei|
cautthaM karei, karettA savvakAmaguNiyaM paarei| chaTuM karei karettA
savvakAmaguNiyaM paarei| aTThamaM karei, karettA savvakAmagaNiyaM paaredd|
dasamaM kareDa, karettA savvakAmagaNiyaM paaredd| davAlasamaM kareDa, karettA
savvakAmaguNiyaM paarei| coddasamaM karei, karettA savvakAmaguNiya paarei|
aTThamaM karei, karettA savvakAmaguNiyaM paarei| dasamaM karei, karettA
savvakAma guNiyaM paarei| duvAlasamaM karei, karettA savvakAmaguNiyaM paarei|
coddasamaM karei, karettA savvakAmaguNiyaM paarei| solasamaM karei, karettA
savvakAmaguNiyaM paarei| cautthaM karei, karettA savvakAmaguNiyaM paarei| chaTuM
kareI, karettA savvakAmaguNiyaM paarei| coddasamaM karei karettA
savvakAmaguNiyaM paarei| solasamaM karei karettA savvakAmaguNiyaM paarei|
cautthaM karei, karettA savvakAmaguNiyaM pArei, chaTuM karei karettA,
savvakAmaguNiyaM paarei| aTThamaM karei, karettA savvakAmaguNiyaM paarei|
dasamaM karei, karettA savvakAmaguNiyaM paarei| duvAlasamaM karei, karettA
savvakAmaguNiyaM paarei|chttheN karei, karettA savvakAmaguNiyaM paarei|atttthmN
karei, karettA savvakAmaguNiyaM paarei| dasamaM karei, karettA savvakAmaguNiyaM
paarei| duvAlasamaM karei, karettA savvakAmaguNiyaM paare|| coddasamaM karei,
karettA savvakAmaguNiyaM paarei| solasamaM karei, karettA savvakAmaguNiyaM
paarei| cautthaM karei, karettA savvakAmaguNiyaM paarei| duvAlasamaM karei,
karettA savvakAmaguNiyaM paarei| coddasamaM karei, karettA, savvakAmaguNiyaM
paarei| solasamaM karei, karettA savvakAmaguNiyaM paarei| cautthaM karei,
karettA savvakAmaguNiyaM paarei|chttheN karei, karettA savvakAmaguNiyaM
paarei|atttthmN karei, karettA savvakAmaguNiyaM paare| dasamaM karei, karettA
savvakAmaguNiyaM paare|| ekkAe kAlo aTTha mAsA paMca ya divsaa| cauNhaM do vAsA
aTTha mAsA vIsa divsaa| sesaM taheva jAva' siddhaa| 1. varga 8, sUtra 3 4.

Page #202 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[161 Eighth Class] - Just as Arya Kali, Arya Veerakrishna also accepted diksha.
The notable thing is that she accepted the great Sarvatobhadra tapas karma,
which is as follows:  She observed upavasa, then performed sarvakamagunavat
parana, then observed bela, then performed sarvakamagunavat parana, then
observed tela, then performed sarvakamagunavat parana, then observed chola, then
performed sarvakamagunavat parana, then observed pachola, then performed
sarvakamagunavat parana, then observed six upavasa, then performed
sarvakamagunavat parana, then observed seven upavasa, then performed
sarvakamagunavat parana.  This was the first lata (cycle).  She observed chola,
then performed sarvakamagunavat parana, then observed pachola, then performed
sarvakamagunavat parana, then observed six upavasa, then performed
sarvakamagunavat parana, then observed seven upavasa, then performed
sarvakamagunavat parana, then observed upavasa, then performed sarvakamagunavat
parana, then observed bela, then performed sarvakamagunavat parana, then
observed tela, then performed sarvakamagunavat parana.  This was the second
lata.  She observed seven upavasa, then performed sarvakamagunavat parana, then
observed upavasa, then performed sarvakamagunavat parana, then observed bela,
then performed sarvakamagunavat parana, then observed tela, then performed
sarvakamagunavat parana, then observed chola, then performed sarvakamagunavat
parana, then observed pachola, then performed sarvakamagunavat parana, then
observed six upavasa, then performed sarvakamagunavat parana.  This was the
third lata.  She observed tela, then performed sarvakamagunavat parana, then
observed chola, then performed sarvakamagunavat parana, then observed pachola,
then performed sarvakamagunavat parana, then observed six upavasa, then
performed sarvakamagunavat parana, then observed seven upavasa, then performed
sarvakamagunavat parana, then observed upavasa, then performed sarvakamagunavat
parana, then observed bela, then performed sarvakamagunavat parana.  This was
the fourth lata.  She observed six upavasa, then performed sarvakamagunavat
parana, then observed seven upavasa, then performed sarvakamagunavat parana,
then observed upavasa, then performed sarvakamagunavat parana, then observed
bela, then performed sarvakamagunavat parana, then observed tela, then performed
sarvakamagunavat parana, then observed chola, then performed sarvakamagunavat
parana, then observed pachola, then performed sarvakamagunavat parana.  This was
the fifth lata.  She observed bela, then performed sarvakamagunavat parana, then
observed tela, then performed sarvakamagunavat parana, then observed chola, then
performed sarvakamagunavat parana, then observed pachola, then performed
sarvakamagunavat parana, then observed six upavasa, then performed
sarvakamagunavat parana, then observed

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 [161 aSTama varga] - AryA kAlI kI taraha AryA vIrakRSNA ne bhI dIkSA aMgIkAra
kii| vizeSa yaha ki usane mahatsarvatobhadra tapokarma aMgIkAra kiyA, jo isa
prakAra hai upavAsa kiyA, karake sarvakAmaguNayukta pAraNA kiyA, karake belA
kiyA, karake sarvakAmaguNayukta pAraNA kiyA, karake telA kiyA, karake
sarvakAmaguNayukta pAraNA kiyA, karake colA kiyA, karake sarvakAmaguNayukta
pAraNA kiyA, karake pacolA kiyA, karake sarvakAmaguNayukta pAraNA kiyA, karake
chaha kiye, karake sarvakAmaguNayukta pAraNA kiyA, karake sAta kiye, karake
sarvakAmaguNayukta pAraNA kiyaa| yaha prathama latA huii| colA kiyA, karake
sarvakAmaguNayukta pAraNA kiyA, karake pacaulA kiyA, karake sarvakAmaguNayukta
pAraNA kiyA, karake chaha upavAsa kiye, karake sarvakAmaguNayukta pAraNA kiyA,
karake sAta upavAsa kiye, karake sarvakAmaguNayukta pAraNA kiyA, karake upavAsa
kiyA karake sarvakAmaguNayukta pAraNA kiyA, karake belA kiyA, karake
sarvakAmaguNayukta pAraNA kiyA, karake telA kiyA, karake sarvakAmaguNayukta
pAraNA kiyaa| ye dUsarI latA huii| .. sAta upavAsa kiye, karake
sarvakAmaguNayukta pAraNA kiyA, karake upavAsa kiyA, karake sarvakAmaguNayukta
pAraNA kiyA, karake belA kiyA, karake sarvakAmaguNayukta pAraNA kiyA, karake
telA kiyA, karake sarvakAmaguNayukta pAraNA kiyA, karake colA kiyA, karake
sarvakAmaguNayukta pAraNA kiyA, karake pacolA kiyA, karake sarvakAmaguNayukta
pAraNA kiyA, karake chaha upavAsa kiye, karake sarvakAmaguNayukta pAraNA kiyaa|
yaha tIsarI latA huii| telA kiyA, karake sarvakAmaguNayukta pAraNA kiyA, karake
colA kiyA, karake sarvakAmaguNayukta pAraNA kiyA, karake pacolA kiyA, karake
sarvakAmaguNayukta pAraNA kiyA, karake chaha upavAsa kiye, karake
sarvakAmaguNayukta pAraNA kiyA, karake sAta upavAsa kiye, karake
sarvakAmaguNayukta pAraNA kiyA, karake upavAsa kiyA, karake sarvakAmaguNayukta
pAraNA kiyaa| belA kiyA, karake sarvakAmaguNayukta pAraNA kiyaa| yaha cauthI
latA huii| chaha upavAsa kiye, karake sarvakAmaguNayukta pAraNA kiyA, karake
sAta upavAsa kiye, karake sarvakAmaguNayukta pAraNA kiyA, karake upavAsa kiyA,
karake sarvakAmaguNayukta pAraNA kiyA, karake belA kiyA, karake
sarvakAmaguNayukta pAraNA kiyA, karake telA kiyA karake sarvakAmaguNayukta
pAraNA kiyA, karake colA kiyA, karake sarvakAmaguNayukta pAraNA kiyA, karake
pacolA kiyA, karake sarvakAmaguNayukta pAraNA kiyaa| yaha pAMcavIM latA huii|
belA kiyA, karake sarvakAmaguNayukta pAraNA kiyA, karake telA kiyA, karake
sarvakAmaguNayukta pAraNA kiyA, karake colA kiyA, karake sarvakAmaguNayukta
pAraNA kiyA, karake pacolA kiyA, karake sarvakAmaguNayukta pAraNA kiyA, karake
chaha upavAsa kiye, karake sarvakAmaguNayukta pAraNA kiyA, karake

Page #203 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[162] She performed seven Antakrid Dasha fasts, followed by a Parana with all
auspicious qualities, then another fast, followed by a Parana with all
auspicious qualities. In this way, the sixth Lata was completed.  She performed
a Pachola, followed by a Parana with all auspicious qualities, then six fasts,
followed by a Parana with all auspicious qualities, then seven fasts, followed
by a Parana with all auspicious qualities, then a fast, followed by a Parana
with all auspicious qualities, then a Bela, followed by a Parana with all
auspicious qualities, then a Tela, followed by a Parana with all auspicious
qualities, then a Chola, followed by a Parana with all auspicious qualities.
This completed the seventh Lata. Thus, the duration of the seven Latas, or the
Pariparti, was eight months and five days. The duration of all four Paripatis is
two years, eight months, and twenty days. The rest is as before. After
completing the full Aradhana, she finally attained liberation through Sanlekhana
and became a Siddha Buddha, Veerakrishna.  **Discussion:** In the first Paripati
of the Mahatsarvatobhadra Tapa, there are 196 days of Tapa and 49 days of
Parana. Thus, one Paripati has a total of 245 days. Multiplying this by four, we
get 980 days for all four Paripatis. In the present Yantra, the number 28
appears repeatedly. For clarity, see the Yantra.  Mahaliya Savvato Bhadd-Padima
0000000 000000 0000000 (3 4 5 6 7 1 (2) 00000000 IDRB0000 0000000 Tapa days 196
Parana 49

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 162] [antakRddazA sAta upavAsa kiye, karake sarvakAmaguNayukta pAraNA kiyA,
karake upavAsa kiyA, karake sarvakAmaguNayukta pAraNA kiyaa| isa taraha chaThI
latA pUrNa huii| pacolA kiyA, karake sarvakAmaguNayukta pAraNA kiyA, karake
chaha upavAsa kiye, karake sarvakAmaguNayukta pAraNA kiyA karake sAta upavAsa
kiye, karake sarvakAmaguNayukta pAraNA kiyA, karake upavAsa kiyA, karake
sarvakAmaguNayukta pAraNA kiyA, karake belA kiyA, karake sarvakAmaguNayukta
pAraNA kiyA, karake telA kiyA, karake sarvakAmaguNayukta pAraNA kiyA, karake
colA kiyA, karake sarvakAmaguNayukta pAraNA kiyaa| . yaha sAtavIM latA pUrNa
huii| isa prakAra sAta latAoM kI paripArTI kA kAla ATha mAsa aura pAMca dina
huaa| cAroM paripATiyoM kA kAla do varSa ATha mAsa aura bIsa dina hotA hai| zeSa
pUrvavat  /  pUrNa ArAdhanA karake anta meM saMlekhanA karake vIrakRSNA bhI
siddha buddha mukta ho gii| vivecana-mahatsarvatobhadra tapa kI prathama
paripATI meM tapa ke 196 hote haiM aura pAraNo ke dina 49  /  isa prakAra eka
paripATI kekula dina 245 hote haiN| inako cAra se guNA karane para cAro
paripATiyoM ke 980 dina hote haiN| prastuta yaMtra meM kahIM se bhI ginane para
saMkhyA 28 hotI hai| spaSTatA ke lie dekheM yNtr| mahAliyA savvatobhadda-paDimA
0000000 000000 0000000 ( 3 4 5 6 71 (2) 00000000 IDRB0000 0000000 tapadina 196
pAraNe 49

Page #204 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Eighth Study **Ramakrishna Ramakrishna's Bhadraottara Pratima Tapas**  12 -
And Ramakanha, having adopted the Bhadraottara Padimam, lives thus: She performs
twelve fasts, and performs the **Parana** with all auspicious qualities. She
performs fourteen fasts, and performs the **Parana** with all auspicious
qualities. She performs sixteen fasts, and performs the **Parana** with all
auspicious qualities. She performs eighteen fasts, and performs the **Parana**
with all auspicious qualities. She performs twenty fasts, and performs the
**Parana** with all auspicious qualities. She performs sixteen fasts, and
performs the **Parana** with all auspicious qualities. She performs eighteen
fasts, and performs the **Parana** with all auspicious qualities. She performs
twenty fasts, and performs the **Parana** with all auspicious qualities. She
performs twelve fasts, and performs the **Parana** with all auspicious
qualities. She performs fourteen fasts, and performs the **Parana** with all
auspicious qualities. She performs twenty fasts, and performs the **Parana**
with all auspicious qualities. She performs twelve fasts, and performs the
**Parana** with all auspicious qualities. She performs fourteen fasts, and
performs the **Parana** with all auspicious qualities. She performs sixteen
fasts, and performs the **Parana** with all auspicious qualities. She performs
eighteen fasts, and performs the **Parana** with all auspicious qualities. She
performs fourteen fasts, and performs the **Parana** with all auspicious
qualities. She performs sixteen fasts, and performs the **Parana** with all
auspicious qualities. She performs eighteen fasts, and performs the **Parana**
with all auspicious qualities. She performs twenty fasts, and performs the
**Parana** with all auspicious qualities. She performs twelve fasts, and
performs the **Parana** with all auspicious qualities. She performs eighteen
fasts, and performs the **Parana** with all auspicious qualities. She performs
twenty fasts, and performs the **Parana** with all auspicious qualities. She
performs twelve fasts, and performs the **Parana** with all auspicious
qualities. She performs fourteen fasts, and performs the **Parana** with all
auspicious qualities. She performs sixteen fasts, and performs the **Parana**
with all auspicious qualities.  _One period is six months and twenty days. Four
periods are two years, two months and twenty days. The rest is the same as the
**Kali** period._  One should understand the story of Ramakrishna in the same
way as the story of **Arya**. The special thing is that Ramakrishna adopted the
**Arya Bhadraottara Pratima** and started living like this:  She performed five
fasts, and performed the **Parana** with all auspicious qualities. She performed
six fasts, and performed the **Parana** with all auspicious qualities. She
performed seven fasts, and performed the **Parana** with all auspicious
qualities. She performed eight fasts, and performed the **Parana** with all
auspicious qualities. She performed nine fasts, and performed the **Parana**
with all auspicious qualities.  This was the first **Lata**.  She performed
seven fasts, and performed the **Parana** with all auspicious qualities. She
performed eight fasts, and performed the **Parana** with all auspicious
qualities. She performed nine fasts, and performed the **Parana** with all
auspicious qualities. She performed five fasts, and performed the **Parana**
with all auspicious qualities. She performed six fasts, and performed the
**Parana** with all auspicious qualities.  This was the second **Lata**. She
performed nine fasts, and performed the **Parana** with all auspicious
qualities. She performed five fasts, and performed the **Parana** with all
auspicious qualities.  1. Chapter 8, Sutras 3, 4.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 aSTama adhyayana rAmakRSNA rAmakRSNA kA bhadrottara pratimA tapa 12-evaM
rAmakaNhA vi, navaraM-bhaddottarapaDimaM uvasaMpajittA NaM viharai, taM jahA
duvAlasamaM karei, karettA savvakAmaguNiyaM paarei| coddasamaM karei, karettA
savvakAmaguNiyaM paarei| solasamaM karei, karettA savvakAmaguNiyaM paarei|
aTThArasamaM karei, karettA savvakAmaguNiyaM paarei| vIsaimaM karei, karettA
savvakAmaguNiyaM paarei| solasamaM karei, karettA savvakAmaguNiyaM paarei|
aTThArasamaM karei, karettA savvakAmaguNiyaM paarei| vIsaimaM karei karettA
savvakAmaguNiyaM paarei| duvAlasamaM karei, karettA savvakAmaguNiyaM paarei|
coddasamaM karei, karettA, savvakAmaguNiyaM paarei| vIsaimaM karei, karettA,
savvakAmaguNiyaM paarei| duvAlasamaM karei, karettA savvakAmaguNiyaM paarei|
coddasamaM karei, karettA savvakAmaguNiyaM paarei| solasamaM karei, karettA
savvakAmaguNiyaM paarei| aTThArasamaM karei, karettA savvakAmaguNiyaM paarei|
coddasamaM karei, karettA savvakAmaguNiyaM paarei| solasamaM karei, karettA
savvakAmaguNiyaM paarei,| aTThArasamaM karei, karettA savvakAmaguNiyaM paarei|
vIsaimaM karei, karettA savvakAmaguNiyaM paarei| duvAlasamaM karei, karettA
savvakAmaguNiyaM paarei| aTThArasamaM karei, karettA savvakAmaguNiyaM paarei|
vIsaimaM karei, karettA savvakAmaguNiyaM paarei| duvAlasamaM karei, karettA
savvakAmaguNiyaM paarei| coddasamaM karei, karettA savvakAmaguNiyaM pArei,
solasamaM karei, karettA savvakAmaguNiyaM paarei| _ ekAe kAlo chammAsA vIsa ya
divsaa| cauNhaM kAlo do varisA do mAsA vIsa ya divsaa| sesaM taheva jahA kAlI
jAva' siddhaa| AryA kAlI kI taraha AryA rAmakRSNA kA bhI vRttAnta samajhanA
caahie| vizeSa yaha ki rAmakRSNA AryA bhadrottarapratimA aMgIkAra karake
vicaraNa karane lagI, jo isa prakAra hai pAMca upavAsa kiye, karake
sarvakAmaguNayukta pAraNA kiyA, karake chaha upavAsa kiye, karake
sarvakAmaguNayukta pAraNA kiyA, karake sAta upavAsa kiye, karake
sarvakAmaguNayukta pAraNA kiyA, karake ATha upavAsa kiye, karake
sarvakAmaguNayukta pAraNA kiyA, karake nava upavAsa kiye, karake
sarvakAmaguNayukta pAraNA kiyaa| yaha prathama latA huii| sAta upavAsa kiye,
karake sarvakAmaguNayukta pAraNA kiyA, karake ATha upavAsa kiye, karake
sarvakAmaguNayukta pAraNA kiyA, karake nava upavAsa kiye, karake
sarvakAmaguNayukta pAraNA kiyA, karake pAMca upavAsa kiye, karake
sarvakAmaguNayukta pAraNA kiyA, karake chaha upavAsa kiye, karake
sarvakAmaguNayukta pAraNA kiyaa| yaha dUsarI latA huii| nava upavAsa kiye,
karake sarvakAmaguNayukta pAraNA kiyA, karake pAMca upavAsa kiye, karake 1.
varga 8, sUtra 3, 4.

Page #205 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[164] Antakrid Dasha with all auspicious qualities, Parana was done, six fasts
were done, Parana with all auspicious qualities was done, seven fasts were done,
Parana with all auspicious qualities was done, eight fasts were done, Parana
with all auspicious qualities was done. This is the third creeper completed. Six
fasts were done, Parana with all auspicious qualities was done, seven fasts were
done, Parana with all auspicious qualities was done, eight fasts were done,
Parana with all auspicious qualities was done, nine fasts were done, Parana with
all auspicious qualities was done, five fasts were done, Parana with all
auspicious qualities was done. This is the fourth creeper. Eight fasts were
done, Parana with all auspicious qualities was done, nine fasts were done,
Parana with all auspicious qualities was done, five fasts were done, Parana with
all auspicious qualities was done, six fasts were done, Parana with all
auspicious qualities was done, seven fasts were done, Parana with all auspicious
qualities was done. This is the fifth creeper completed. In this way, there is
one cycle of five creepers. There are four such cycles in this penance. The
duration of one cycle is six months and twenty days. The duration of all four
cycles is two years, two months and twenty days. The remaining description
should be understood according to the festival. Like Kali, Arya Ramkrishna also
attained liberation by Sanlekhana and became a Siddha-Buddha. Discussion- The
meaning of Bhaddottara Pratima is - Bhadra - giver of auspiciousness, Uttara -
principal. This statue is called Bhaddottara Pratima because it is the giver of
supreme auspiciousness. It starts with five fasts and goes up to nine fasts.
Bhadduttara-Padima Penance days 1757 Parana 25 All time 6 months 20 days

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 164] [antakRddazA sarvakAmaguNayukta pAraNA kiyA, karake chaha upavAsa kiye,
karake sarvakAmaguNayukta pAraNA kiyA, karake sAta upavAsa kiye, karake
sarvakAmaguNayukta pAraNA kiyA, karake ATha upavAsa kiye, karake
sarvakAmagaNayakta pAraNA kiyaa| yaha tIsarI latA pUrNa huii| chaha upavAsa
kiye, karake sarvakAmaguNayukta pAraNA kiyA, karake sAta upavAsa kiye, karake
sarvakAmaguNayukta pAraNA kiyA, karake ATha upavAsa kiye, karake
sarvakAmaguNayukta pAraNA kiyA, karake nava upavAsa kiye, karake
sarvakAmaguNayukta pAraNA kiyA, karake pAMca upavAsa kiye, karake
sarvakAmaguNayukta pAraNA kiyaa| yaha cauthI latA huii| ATha upavAsa kiye,
karake sarvakAmaguNayukta pAraNA kiyA, karake nava upavAsa kiye, karake
sarvakAmaguNayukta pAraNA kiyA, karake pAMca upavAsa kiye, karake
sarvakAmaguNayukta pAraNA kiyA, karake chaha upavAsa kiye, karake
sarvakAmaguNayukta pAraNA kiyA, karake sAta upavAsa kiye, karake
sarvakAmaguNayukta pAraNA kiyaa| yaha pAMcavIM latA pUrNa huii| isa taraha pAMca
latAoM kI eka paripATI huii| aisI cAra paripATiyAM isa tapa meM hotI haiN| eka
paripATI kA kAla chaha mAha aura bIsa dina hai| cAroM paripATiyoM kA kAla do
varSa, do mAha aura bIsa dina hotA hai| zeSa varNana parva ke anasAra samajhanA
caahiye| kAlI ke samAna AryA rAmakRSNA bhI saMlekhanA karake yAvat siddha-buddha
mukta ho gii| vivecana- bhadrottara pratimA kA artha hai-bhadrA-kalyANa kI
pradAtA, uttr-prdhaan| yaha pratimA parama kalyANaprada hone se
bhadrottarapratimA kahI jAtI hai| yaha pAMca upavAsa se prArambha hokara nau
upavAsa taka jAtI hai| bhadduttarA-paDimA tapadina 1757 pAraNe 25 sarvakAla 6
mAsa 20 dina

Page #206 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Ninth Study ## Pituśena-Kṛṣṇa's Muktāvalī Tapa  13. And Pituśena-Kṛṣṇa,
having performed the Muktāvalī Tapa, dwells in the world. This is how it is:  He
performs the fourth, and having performed it, he crosses over all the desires.
He performs the sixth, and having performed it, he crosses over all the desires.
He performs the fourth, and having performed it, he crosses over all the
desires. He performs the eighth, and having performed it, he crosses over all
the desires. He performs the fourth, and having performed it, he crosses over
all the desires. He performs the tenth, and having performed it, he crosses over
all the desires. He performs the fourth, and having performed it, he crosses
over all the desires. He performs the twelfth, and having performed it, he
crosses over all the desires. He performs the fourth, and having performed it,
he crosses over all the desires. He performs the fourteenth, and having
performed it, he crosses over all the desires. He performs the fourth, and
having performed it, he crosses over all the desires. He performs the sixteenth,
and having performed it, he crosses over all the desires. He performs the
fourth, and having performed it, he crosses over all the desires. He performs
the eighteenth, and having performed it, he crosses over all the desires. He
performs the fourth, and having performed it, he crosses over all the desires.
He performs the twentieth, and having performed it, he crosses over all the
desires. He performs the fourth, and having performed it, he crosses over all
the desires. He performs the twenty-second, and having performed it, he crosses
over all the desires. He performs the fourth, and having performed it, he
crosses over all the desires. He performs the twenty-fourth, and having
performed it, he crosses over all the desires. He performs the fourth, and
having performed it, he crosses over all the desires. He performs the twenty-
sixth, and having performed it, he crosses over all the desires. He performs the
fourth, and having performed it, he crosses over all the desires. He performs
the twenty-eighth, and having performed it, he crosses over all the desires. He
performs the fourth, and having performed it, he crosses over all the desires.
He performs the thirtieth, and having performed it, he crosses over all the
desires. He performs the fourth, and having performed it, he crosses over all
the desires. He performs the thirty-second, and having performed it, he crosses
over all the desires. He performs the fourth, and having performed it, he
crosses over all the desires. He performs the thirty-fourth, and having
performed it, he crosses over all the desires. He performs the fourth, and
having performed it, he crosses over all the desires. He performs the thirty-
sixth, and having performed it, he crosses over all the desires.  And so on, he
continues until he performs the fourth, and having performed it, he crosses over
all the desires.  The time is eleven months and fifteen days. The duration is
three years and ten months. The rest is until the attainment of liberation.  The
character of Pituśena-Kṛṣṇa should be understood like that of the Āryas. The
special thing is that Pituśena-Kṛṣṇa performed the Muktāvalī Tapa, which is as
follows:  He performed fasting, and having performed it, he performed the
*parṇā* with all the qualities of the desires. He performed *belā*, and having
performed it, he performed the *parṇā* with all the qualities of the desires. He
performed fasting, and having performed it, he performed the *parṇā* with all
the qualities of the desires. He performed *telā*, and having performed it, he
performed the *parṇā* with all the qualities of the desires. He performed
fasting, and having performed it, he performed the *parṇā* with all the
qualities of the desires. He performed *caulā*, and having performed it, he
performed the *parṇā* with all the qualities of the desires. He performed
fasting, and having performed it, he performed the *parṇā* with all the
qualities of the desires.  1. Chapter 8, Sutras 3-4

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 navama adhyayana pitRsenakRSNA pitRsenakRSNA kA muktAvalI tapa 13-evaM-
piuseNakaNhA vi, navaraM-muttAvaliM tavokammaM uvasaMpajittA NaM viharai, taM
jahA cautthaM karei, karettA savvakAmaguNiyaM paarei| chaTuM karei, karettA
savvakAmaguNiyaM paarei| cautthaM karei, karettA savvakAmaguNiyaM paarei|
aTThamaM karei, karettA savvakAmaguNiyaM paarei| cautthaM karei, karettA
savvakAmaguNiyaM paarei| dasamaM karei, karettA savvakAmaguNiyaM paarei|
cautthaM karei, karettA savvakAmaguNiyaM paarei| duvAlasamaM karei, karettA
savvakAmaguNiyaM paarei| cautthaM karei, karettA savvakAmaguNiyaM paarei|
coddasamaM karei, karettA savvakAmaguNiyaM paarei| cautthaM karei, karettA
savvakAmaguNiyaM paarei| solasamaM karei, karettA savvakAmaguNiyaM paarei|
cautthaM karei, karettA savvakAmaguNiyaM paarei| aTThArasamaM karei, karettA
savvakAmaguNiyaM paarei| cautthaM karei, karettA savvakAmaguNiyaM paarei|
vIsaimaM karei, karettA savvakAmaguNiyaM paarei| cautthaM karei, karettA
savvakAmaguNiyaM paarei| bAvIsaimaM karei, karettA savvakAmaguNiyaM paarei|
cautthaM karei, karettA savvakAmaguNiyaM paarei| cauvIsaimaM karei, karettA
savvakAmaguNiyaM paarei| cautthaM karei, karettA savvakAmaguNiyaM paarei|
chavvIsaimaM karei, karettA savvakAmaguNiyaM paarei| cautthaM karei, karettA
savvakAmaguNiyaM paarei| aTThAvIsaimaM karei, karettA savvakAmaguNiyaM paarei|
cautthaM karei, karettA savvakAmaguNiyaM paarei| tIsaimaM karei, karettA
savvakAmaguNiyaM paarei| cautthaM karei, karettA savvakAmaguNiyaM paarei|
battIsaimaM karei, karettA savvakAmaguNiyaM paarei| cautthaM karei, karettA
savvakAmaguNiyaM paarei| cauttIsaimaM karei, karettA savvakAmaguNiyaM paarei|
cautthaM karei, karettA savvakAmaguNiyaM paarei| battIsaimaM karei, karettA
savvakAmaguNiyaM paarei| evaM taheva osArei jAva cautthaM karei, karettA
savvakAmaguNiyaM paarei| ekkAe kAlo ekkArasa mAsA paNNarasa ya divsaa| cauNhaM
tiNNi varisA dasa ya maasaa| sesaM jAva siddhaa| pitRsenakRSNA kA caritra bhI
AryA kAlI kI taraha smjhnaa| vizeSa yaha ki pitRsenakRSNA ne muktAvalI tapa
aMgIkAra kiyA, jo isa prakAra hai upavAsa kiyA, karake sarvakAmaguNayukta pAraNA
kiyA, karake belA kiyA, karake sarvakAmaguNayukta pAraNA kiyA, karake upavAsa
kiyA, karake sarvakAmaguNayukta pAraNA kiyA, karake telA kiyA, karake
sarvakAmaguNayukta pAraNA kiyA, karake upavAsa kiyA, karake sarvakAmaguNayukta
pAraNA kiyA, karake caulA kiyA, karake sarvakAmaguNayukta pAraNA kiyA, karake
upavAsa kiyA, karake sarvakAmaguNayukta pAraNA kiyA, 1. varga 8, sUtra 3-4

Page #207 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Antakrddasa] He performed the Paucaula, then performed the
Sarvakamagunapraptiparnana, performed the Upavasa, then performed the
Sarvakamagunapraptiparnana, performed six Upavasa, then performed the
Sarvakamagunapraptiparnana, performed the Upavasa, then performed the
Sarvakamagunapraptiparnana, performed seven Upavasa, then performed the
Sarvakamagunapraptiparnana, performed the Upavasa, then performed the
Sarvakamagunapraptiparnana, performed eight Upavasa, then performed the
Sarvakamagunapraptiparnana, performed the Upavasa, then performed the
Sarvakamagunapraptiparnana, performed nine Upavasa, then performed the
Sarvakamagunapraptiparnana, performed the Upavasa, then performed the
Sarvakamagunapraptiparnana, performed ten Upavasa, then performed the
Sarvakamagunapraptiparnana, performed the Upavasa, then performed the
Sarvakamagunapraptiparnana, performed eleven Upavasa, then performed the
Sarvakamagunapraptiparnana, performed the Upavasa, then performed the
Sarvakamagunapraptiparnana, performed twelve Upavasa, then performed the
Sarvakamagunapraptiparnana, performed the Upavasa, then performed the
Sarvakamagunapraptiparnana, performed thirteen Upavasa, then performed the
Sarvakamagunapraptiparnana, performed the Upavasa, then performed the
Sarvakamagunapraptiparnana, performed fourteen Upavasa, then performed the
Sarvakamagunapraptiparnana, performed the Upavasa, then performed the
Sarvakamagunapraptiparnana, performed fifteen Upavasa, then performed the
Sarvakamagunapraptiparnana, performed the Upavasa, then performed the
Sarvakamagunapraptiparnana, performed sixteen Upavasa, then performed the
Sarvakamagunapraptiparnana, performed the Upavasa, then performed the
Sarvakamagunapraptiparnana, performed the Upavasa, then performed the
Sarvakamagunapraptiparnana, performed fifteen Upavasa, then performed the
Sarvakamagunapraptiparnana.  In the same order as the Upavasa were increased,
they are decreased, until finally the Upavasa is performed, and the
Sarvakamagunapraptiparnana is done.  This is a set pattern. One set pattern
lasts for eleven months and fifteen days. There are four such set patterns in
this Tapa. These four set patterns take three years and ten months. The rest
should be understood as before.  Vivecana - The word Muktavali means a garland
of pearls. Just as pearls are arranged in a garland, in the same way, the
arrangement of Upavasa in a Tapa is called Muktavali Tapa. For clarity, see the
diagram on the next page.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 166] [ antakRddazA karake pacaulA kiyA, karake sarvakAmaguNayukta pAraNA kiyA,
pAraNA karake upavAsa kiyA, karake sarvakAmaguNayukta pAraNA kiyA, karake chaha
upavAsa kiye, karake sarvakAmaguNayukta pAraNA kiyA, karake upavAsa kiyA, karake
sarvakAmaguNayukta pAraNA kiyA, karake sAta upavAsa kiye, karake
sarvakAmaguNayukta pAraNA kiyA, karake upavAsa kiyA, karake sarvakAmaguNayukta
pAraNA kiyA, karake ATha upavAsa kiye, karake sarvakAmaguNayukta pAraNa kiyA,
karake upavAsa kiyA, karake sarvakAmaguNayukta pAraNA kiyA, karake nava upavAsa
kiye, karake sarvakAmaguNayukta pAraNA kiyA, karake upavAsa kiyA karake
sarvakAmaguNayukta pAraNA kiyA karake dasa upavAsa kiye, karake
sarvakAmaguNayukta pAraNA kiyA, karake upavAsa kiyA, karake sarvakAmaguNayukta
pAraNA kiyA, karake gyAraha upavAsa kiye, karake sarvakAmaguNayukta pAraNA kiyA,
karake upavAsa kiyA karake sarvakAmaguNayukta pAraNA kiyA, karake bAraha upavAsa
kiye, karake sarvakAmaguNayukta pAraNA kiyA, karake upavAsa kiyA karake
sarvakAmaguNayukta pAraNA kiyA, karake teraha upavAsa kiye, karake
sarvakAmaguNayukta pAraNA kiyA, karake upavAsa kiyA karake sarvakAmaguNayukta
pAraNA kiyA, karake caudaha upavAsa kiye, karake sarvakAmaguNayukta pAraNA kiyA,
karake upavAsa kiyA, karake sarvakAmaguNayukta pAraNA kiyA, karake pandraha
upavAsa kiye, karake sarvakAmaguNayukta pAraNA kiyA, karake upavAsa kiyA, karake
sarvakAmaguNayukta pAraNA kiyA, karake solaha upavAsa kiye, karake
sarvakAmaguNayukta pAraNA kiyA, karake upavAsa kiyA, karake sarvakAmaguNayukta
pAraNA kiyA, karake upavAsa kiyA, karake sarvakAmaguNayukta pAraNA kiyA, karake
pandraha upavAsa kiye, karake sarvakAmaguNayukta pAraNA kiyaa| isa prakAra jisa
krama se upavAsa baDhAe jAte haiM usI krama se utAre jAte haiM yAvat anta meM
upavAsa karake sarvakAmaguNayukta pAraNA kiyA jAtA hai  /  isa taraha yaha eka
paripATI huii| eka paripATI kA kAla gyAraha mAha aura pandraha dina hote haiN|
aisI cAra paripATiyAM isa tapa meM hotI haiN| ina cAroM paripATiyoM meM tIna
varSa aura dasa mAsa kA samaya lagatA hai| zeSa varNana pUrva kI taraha
samajhanA caahie| vivecana - muktAvalI zabda kA artha hai - motiyoM kA haar|
jisa prakAra motiyoM kA hAra banAte samaya una motiyoM kI sthApanA kI jAtI hai,
usI prakAra jisa tapa meM upavAsoM kI sthApanA kI jAe, usa tapa ko muktAvalI
tapa kahate haiN| spaSTatA hetu (agale pRSTha para ) yaMtra dekhie  /

Page #208 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Eighth Chapter] [167 0000000©©©© The duration of one *tapasya* period is 11
months, 15 days 'The duration of four *tapasya* periods is 3 years, 10 months
The number of *tapo* days in one *tapasya* period is 285 days 'The number of
*tapo* days in four *tapasya* periods is 3 years, 2 months The number of
*parana* days in one *tapasya* period is 60 'The number of *parana* days in four
*tapasya* periods is 240 0000000000000 GOOGOOOS 00000000 *Muktavali* *tap* The
establishment-mechanism

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 aSTama varga] [167 0000000(c)(c)(c)(c) sa tapasyAkAla eka
paripATIkAkAla11mAsa,15 dina 'cAra paripATIkA kAla 3varSa,10 mAsa eka paripATI
ke tapodina 285 dina tapake dina  /  'cAra paripATI ke tapodina 3 varSa, 2 mAsa
eka paripATI ke pAraNe 60 'cAra paripATI ke pAraNe 240 0000000000000 GOOGOOOS
00000000 muktAvalI tapa kA sthApanA-yantra

Page #209 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Austere Penance of Mahaseanakrishna  **Chapter 14: The Increasing Penance
of Mahaseanakrishna**  Mahaseanakrishna, having attained the increasing penance
of Ayambila, lived as follows:  **Tenth Study**  Mahaseanakrishna performed one
Ayambila, then four. He performed two Ayambilas, then four. He performed three
Ayambilas, then four. He performed four Ayambilas, then four. He performed five
Ayambilas, then four. He performed six Ayambilas, then four.  When the Ayambila
increased by one, the fourth part of the Ayambila was performed, and then the
Ayambila was performed.  Thus, Mahaseanakrishna performed the increasing penance
of Ayambila for fourteen days, three months, and twenty nights. He would wake up
before sunrise, and after waking up, he would bow and pay homage. After bowing
and paying homage, he would live with many fourth parts of the Ayambila.  Thus,
Mahaseanakrishna would live with the Ayambila, and he would remain in the state
of contemplation.  Thus, Mahaseanakrishna would contemplate on the past,
present, and future, and he would ask himself about the time of the sunrise. He
would live in the state of contemplation until the time of the assembly.  Thus,
Mahaseanakrishna would assemble at the time of the sunrise, and he would perform
eleven angas. He would perform the seventeen vows, and he would observe the
assembly. He would purify himself, and he would eat only the prescribed food. He
would perform the austerities, and he would live in the state of nakedness. He
would perform the Ayambila, and he would attain liberation with his last breath.
**Summary**  **Verse 1:**  Eight days, one, then seventeen. This is the vow, the
vow of the Jain monks.  Thus, you should understand the story of
Mahaseanakrishna. He performed the increasing penance of Ayambila, which is as
follows:  **Verse 2:**  **Chapter 5, Verse 6**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 mahAsenakRSNA kA AyaMbila vardhamAna tapa 14- evaM mahAseNakaNhA vi, navaraM-
AyaMbilavaDDhamANaM tavokammaM uvasaMpajjittA NaM viharar3a, taM jahA - dazama
adhyayana mahAsenakRSNa AyaMbilaM karei, karettA cautthaM karei  /  be AyaMbilAI
karei, karettA cautthaM karei, tiNNi AyaMbilAI karei, karettA cautthaM karer3a
/  cattAri AyaMbilAI karer3a, karettA cautthaM karei  /  paMca AyaMbilAI karei,
karettA cautthaM karei  /  chaha AyaMbilAI karei, karettA cautthaM karei  /
ekkuttariyAe vaDDIe AyaMbilAI vaDRti cautthaMtariyAI jAva AyaMbilasayaM karei,
karettA utthaM kare  /  taNaM sA mahAseNakaNhA ajjA AyaMbilavaDDhamANaM
tavokammaM coddasahiM vAsehiM tihi ya mAsehiM vIsahi ya ahorattehiM ahAsuttaM
jAva' ArAhettA jeNeva ajjacaMdaNA ajjA teNeva uvAgayA, uvAgacchittA vaMdai
namasai, vaMdittA narmasittA bahUhiM cautthaM jAva bhAvemANI viharai  /  taNaM
sA mahAseNakaNhA ajjA teNaM orAleNaM jAva' taveNaM teeNaM tavateyasirIe aIva -
aIva uvasomANI ciTThai | taNaM tI mahAseNakaNhAe ajjAe aNNayA kayAi
puvvarattAvarattakAle ciMtA jahA khaMdayassare, jAva ajjacaMdaNaM ajjaM Apucchai
/  jAva' saMlehaNA kAlaM aNavakaMkhamANI viharai  /  taNaM sA mahAseNakaNhA ajjA
ajjacaMdaNAe ajjAe aMtie sAmAiyamAiyAI ekkArasa aMgAI ahijjittA, bahupaDipuNNAI
sattarasa vAsAiM pariyAyaM pAlaittA, mAsiyAe saMlehaNAe appANaM jhUsittA, sadvi
bhattAiM aNasaNAe chedittA jassaTThAe kIrai naggabhAve jAva' tama ArAhei,
ArAhittA carimaussAsa - nissAsehiM siddhA  /  saMgahaNI - gAhA 1. varga 8, sUtra
2 3-4-5, varga-8 sUtra 4 aTTha ya vAsA AI, ekkottariyAe jAva sattarasa  /  eso
khalu pariyAo, seNiyabhajjANa nAyavvo  //  1  //  isI prakAra mahAsenakRSNA kA
vRttAnta bhI samajhanA  /  vizeSa yaha ki inhoMne varddhamAna AyaMbila tapa
aMgIkAra kiyA, jo isa prakAra hai 2. varga 5 sUtra 6. 6. varga 5, sUtra 6

Page #210 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Eighth Section] [169 One Ayambil was performed, followed by a fast, then two
Ayambils were performed, followed by a fast, then three Ayambils were performed,
followed by a fast, then four Ayambils were performed, followed by a fast, then
five Ayambils were performed, followed by a fast, then six Ayambils were
performed, followed by a fast. In this way, the Ayambils were increased one by
one. Fasting was done in between, and in this way, fasting was done after
performing one hundred Ayambils. Thus, Arya Mahasenakrishna performed this
'Vardhaman-Ayambil' penance for fourteen years, three months and twenty days,
according to the scriptures and in accordance with the prescribed rituals. After
completing the penance, Arya Mahasenakrishna went to her Guru, Arya
Chandanabala, and after paying her respects and receiving her blessings, she
began to wander, her soul filled with the emotions of many fasts, etc. Due to
this great penance, Arya Mahasenakrishna, though physically weak, began to
appear extremely radiant. Once, Arya Mahasenakrishna had a thought about Dharma,
as vast as the sky. After asking Arya Chandana, she began to wander, free from
the desire for life and death, and ready for Sanlekhana. Arya Mahasenakrishna
studied the eleven Angas from Samayik with Arya Chandana, followed the path of
restraint for seventeen years, filled her soul with the emotions of a one-month
Sanlekhana, completed sixty days of fasting, and finally achieved the purpose
for which she had taken restraint. After completing the full penance, she
attained liberation as a Siddha Buddha with her last breath. Gatha-meaning: It
should be known that the initiation period of Kali Devi, the first among the
wives of King Shrenik, was eight years, and thereafter, it increased by one year
each time, so that the initiation period of the tenth, Mahasenakrishna, was
seventeen years. Discussion: 'Ayambil Vaddaman' - Ayambil-Vardhaman is a penance
in which the Ayambils are gradually increased. This penance takes fourteen
years, three months and twenty days to perform. Examining the previous penances,
it is clear that the author of the scriptures has included all the days,
including the days of penance and the days of breaking the fast, in the number
of days mentioned for the penances. If the same method is followed, how can the
duration be fourteen years, three months and twenty days? The solution is that
there is no day of breaking the fast in this case. There are two reasons for
this - firstly, the author of the scriptures has been instructing about breaking
the fast in the past, but here, the author has not given any instructions, and
secondly, if all the days of breaking the fast are also included, then the
number of days of this penance would not be fourteen years, three months and
twenty days, but fourteen years and ten days. Therefore, it is correct to
understand that Arya Mahasenakrishna performed penance for fourteen years, three
months and twenty days, without breaking the fast in between. The establishment
mechanism of Ayambil-Vardhaman penance is as follows:

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 aSTama varga] [169 eka AyaMbila kiyA, karake upavAsa kiyA, karake do AyaMbila
kiye, karake upavAsa kiyA, karake tIna AyaMbila kiye, karake upavAsa kiyA,
karake cAra AyaMbila kiye, karake upavAsa kiyA, karake pAMca AyaMbila kiye,
karake upavAsa kiyA, karake chaha AyaMbila kiye, karake upavAsa kiyaa| aise eka
eka kI vRddhi se AyaMbila bddh'aae| bIca-bIca meM upavAsa kiyA, isa prakAra sau
AyaMbila taka karake upavAsa kiyaa| isa prakAra mahAsenakRSNA AryA ne isa
varddhamAna-AyaMbila' tapa kI ArAdhanA caudaha varSa, tIna mAha aura bIsa
ahorAtra kI avadhi meM sUtrAnusAra vidhipUrvaka pUrNa kii| ArAdhanA pUrNa karake
AryA mahAsenakRSNA jahAM apanI guruNI AryA candanabAlA thIM, vahAM AI aura
caMdanabAlA ko vaMdanA-namaskAra karake, unakI AjJA prApta karake, bahuta se
upavAsa Adi se AtmA ko bhAvita karatI huI vicarane lgii| isa mahAna tapateja se
mahAsenakRSNA AryA zarIra se durbala ho jAne para bhI atyanta dedIpyamAna lagane
lgii| ekadA mahAsenakRSNA AryA ko skaMdaka ke samAna dharma-ciMtana utpanna
huaa| AryacaMdanA AryA se pUchakara yAvat saMlekhanA kI aura jIvana-maraNa kI
AkAMkSA se rahita hokara vicarane lgii| _ mahAsenakRSNA AryA ne AryacaMdanA AryA
ke pAsa sAmAyika se lekara gyAraha aMgoM kA adhyayana kiyA, pUre satraha varSa
taka saMyamadharma kA pAlana karake, eka mAsa kI saMlekhanA se AtmA ko bhAvita
karake sATha bhakta anazana ko pUrNakara yAvat jisa kArya ke liye saMyama liyA
thaa| usakI pUrNa ArAdhanA karake aMtima zvAsa-ucchvAsa se siddha buddha mukta
huii| gAthArtha-evaM zreNika rAjA kI bhAryAoM meM se pahalI kAlI devI kA
dIkSAkAla ATha varSa kA, tatpazcAt kramaza: eka-eka varSa kI vRddhi karate-
karate dasavIM mahAsenakRSNA kA dIkSAkAla sattaraha varSa kA jAnanA caahie|
vivecana-'AyaMbila vaDDamANa'-AyaMbila-varddhamAna-vaha tapa hai, jisameM
AyaMbila kramazaH bar3hAyA jAtA hai| isa tapa kI ArAdhanA meM 14 varSa 3 mAha
aura 20 dina lagate haiN| pichale tapoM kA parizIlana karane se patA calatA hai
ki sUtrakAra ne tapoM kI jo dina-saMkhyA likhI hai, usameM tapasyA ke dina aura
pAraNe ke dina, isa prakAra sabhI dina saMkalita kie jAte haiN| yadi usI
paddhati kA anusaraNa kiyA jAe to isakA kAla-mAna 14 varSa 3 mAha aura 20 dina
kaise ho satA hai? samAdhAna yahI hai ki isameM pAraNe kA koI dina nahIM aataa|
isake do kAraNa haiM-prathama to sUtrakAra jaise pIche pAraNe kA nirdeza karate
cale A rahe haiM, vaise yahAM para sUtrakAra ne nirdeza nahIM kiyA, dUsarA yadi
pAraNe ke saba dina bhI sAtha meM sammilita kara die jAeM to isa tapa kI dina
saMkhyA 14 varSa 3 mAsa 20 dina na rahakara 14 varSa 10 dina ho jAtI hai| ata:
yahI samajhanA ThIka hai ki AryA mahAsenakRSNA ne 14 varSa 3 mAsa aura 20 dina
taka tapa kiyA, bIca meM koI pAraNA nahIM kiyaa| AyaMbila-vardhamAna-tapa kA
sthApanA yaMtra isa prakAra hai

Page #211 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[170] 11 31 41 51 a 21 1 22 1 1 91 1 12 1 32 1 42 52 61 1 62 71 1 72 81 1 82 1
92 ov Ayambil-Vardhaman sthapana - yantra 3 1 13 1 23 1 1 43 1 1 24 1 1 33 1 34
1 1 53 1 1 63 1 1 83 4 1 73 1 14 2 2 2 54 64 1 74 1 84 1 1 93 1 94 44 1 45 1 1 5
1 15 1 25 1 55 on 35 1 1 85 65 1 75 1 1 3. 95 1 6 1 7 16 1 17 1 56 26 36 46 66
76 86 1 27 1 37 1 47 1 57 1 67 1 77 1 87 96 1 97 1 8 1 1 18 1 1 1 1 1 1 a 28 1
38 1 58 1 1 1 48 1 49 1 78 68 1 88 1 1 98 1 9 1 10 1 19 29 39 59 69 79 89 [
Antakriddasha 99 1 20 1 30 1 1 40 1 1 50 1 60 1 70 on 1 80 1 90 1 1 1 1 1 100 1
nikshepa : upasamhar 15 evam khalu jambu! samanenam bhagavayan mahaviran jav'
sampattenam atthamasas angass antagadadasanam ayamatthe panatte. Antagadadasanam
angass ego suyakhando. atth vagga. atthasu cheva divasesu uddissijjanti. tattha
padhama-biiyavagge das-das uddegasaga. taiyavagge teras uddegasaga. chauttha-
panchamavagge das-das uddegasaga. chatthavagge solas uddegasaga. sattamavagge
teras uddegasaga. atthamavagge das uddegasaga. sesam jaha nayadhammakahanam.
This way, O Jambu! I say that the liberated Shraman Bhagavan Mahavira has
explained the meaning of the eighth Anga, Antakriddasha, in this way. The
Antakriddasha Anga has one Shruta Skandha. There are eight sections. These are
read in eight days. In the first and second sections, there are ten uddegas
each. In the third section, there are thirteen uddegas. In the fourth and fifth
sections, there are ten uddegas each. In the sixth section, there are sixteen
uddegas. In the seventh section, there are thirteen uddegas. In the eighth
section, there are ten uddegas. The rest should be known according to the
Nayadhammakatha. 1. Section 1, Sutra 2.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 170] 11 31 41 51 a 21 1 22 1 1 91 1 12 1 32 1 42 52 61 1 62 71 1 72 81 1 82 1
92 ov Ayambila-vardhamAna sthApanA - yantra 3 1 13 1 23 1 1 43 1 1 24 1 1 33 1
34 1 1 53 1 1 63 1 1 83 4 1 73 1 14 2 2 2 54 64 1 74 1 84 1 1 93 1 94 44 1 45 1
1 5 1 15 1 25 1 55 on 35 1 1 85 65 1 75 1 1 3. 95 1 6 1 7 16 1 17 1 56 26 36 46
66 76 86 1 27 1 37 1 47 1 57 1 67 1 77 1 87 96 1 97 1 8 1 1 18 1 1 1 1 1 1 a 28
1 38 1 58 1 1 1 48 1 49 1 78 68 1 88 1 1 98 1 9 1 10 1 19 29 39 59 69 79 89 [
antakRddazA 99 1 20 1 30 1 1 40 1 1 50 1 60 1 70 on 1 80 1 90 1 1 1 1 1 100 1
nikSepa : upasaMhAra 15 evaM khalu jaMbU ! samaNeNaM bhagavayA mahAvIreNaM jAva'
saMpatteNaM aTThamassa aMgassa aMtagaDadasANaM ayamaTThe paNNatte  /
aMtagaDadasANaM aMgassa ego suykhNdho| aTTha vaggA  /  aTThasu ceva divasesu
uddissijjaMti  /  tattha paDhama-biiyavagge dasa-dasa uddesagA  /  taiyavagge
terasa uddesagA  /  cauttha-paMcamavagge dasa-dasa uddegaa| chaTThavagge solasa
uddesgaa| sattamavagge terasa uddesagA  /  aTThamavagge dasa uddesgaa| sesaM
jahA nAyAdhammakahANaM  /  isa prakAra he jaMbU ! yAvat muktiprApta zramaNa
bhagavAn mahAvIra ne AThaveM aMga antakRddazA kA yaha artha kahA hai, aisA maiM
kahatA hUM  /  aMtagaDadazA aMga meM eka zrutaskaMdha hai  /  ATha varga haiN|
ATha hI dinoM meM inakA vAMcana hotA hai| isameM prathama aura dvitIya varga meM
dasa-dasa uddezaka haiN| tIsare varga meM teraha uddezaka haiN| cauthe aura
pAMcaveM varga meM dasa-dasa uddezaka haiN| chaThe varga meM solaha uddezaka
haiN| sAtaveM varga meM teraha uddezaka haiM aura AThaveM varga meM dasa
uddezaka haiN| zeSa varNana jJAtAdharmakathA ke anusAra jAnanA caahie| 1. varga
1, sUtra 2.

Page #212 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Appendix - 1 Special Names Mentioned in the Agamas 1. 2. Tirthankara Specifics
Individuals Conceived from the Word 'Jaha' Mentioned in the Agamas Specifics 3.
Agama Specifics 4. Individual Specifics - Muni etc. 5. Deva Specifics 6.
Individuals of the Kshatriya Varna 7. Individuals of the Vaishya Varna -
Gathapati etc. 8. Individuals of the Brahmin Varna 9. Individuals of the Shudra
Varna - Mandala Specifics 10. 11. Animal Specifics 12. Tapas Specifics 13. Dream
Specifics 14. City Specifics 15. Island Specifics 16. Yakshayatan 17. Garden 18.
Mountain 19. Tree Specifics 20. Flower Vines etc. 21. Metal Specifics 22.
Building Specifics 23. Bondage Specifics 24. Object Specifics 25. Vehicle
Specifics 26. Ornament Specifics 27. Cooked Food Specifics Appendix 28. Planet
Specifics 29. Gemstones etc. 30. Region Specifics  Appendix - 2 Individual and
Geographical Introduction 1. Specific Individual Introduction Indrabhuti Gautam
Ganadhar 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. Krishna Konik Chellana Jambuswami Jamali
Jitashatru Raja Dharini Devi 8. 9. Mahabalkumar 10. Meghkumar 11. Skandkamuni
12. Sudharmaswami 13. Shrenik Raja 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. 10. 11. 12. 13. 14. 15. 2.
Geographical Introduction 1. Kakandhi 2. Gunashil 3. 4. Champa Jambudvipa Dwarka
(Dwaravati) Dutipalash Cha Purnabhadra Chaitya Bhaddilpur Bharat Kshetra
Rajgriha Raivatak Vipulghiri Parvat Sahasramravan Udyan Saketa Shravasti

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pariziSTa - 1 Agama meM varNita vizeSanAma 1. 2. tIrthaMkara vizeSa Agama meM
varNita 'jahA' zabda se gRhIta vyakti vizeSa 3. AgamavizeSa 4. vyaktivizeSa-muni
Adi 5. devavizeSa 6. kSatriyavarNa ke vyakti 7. vaizyavarNa ke vyakti-gAthApati
Adi 8. brAhmaNavarNa ke vyakti 9. zUdravarNa ke vyakti maMDalIvizeSa 10. 11.
pazuvizeSa 12. tapavizeSa 13. svapnavizeSa 14. nagarIvizeSa 15. dvIpavizeSa 16.
yakSAyatana 17. udyAna 18. parvata 19. vRkSavizeSa 20. puSpalatAdi 21.
dhAtuvizeSa 22. bhavanavizeSa 23. baMdhanavizeSa 24. vastuvizeSa 25. yAnavizeSa
26. alaMkAravizeSa 27. pakvAnnavizeSa pariziSTa 28. grahavizeSa 29. maNiratnAdi
30. kSetravizeSa pariziSTa - 2 vyakti aura bhaugolika paricaya 1. viziSTa vyakti
paricaya indrabhUti gautama gaNadhara 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. kRSNa koNika cellaNA
jambUsvAmI jamAli jitazatrurAjA dhAriNI devI 8. 9. mahAbalakumAra 10.
meghakumAra 11. skandakamuni 12. sudharmAsvAmI 13. zreNikarAjA 5. 6. 7. 8. 9.
10. 11. 12. 13. 14. 15. 2. bhaugolika paricaya 1. kAkandI 2. guNazIla 3. 4.
campA jambUdvIpa dvArakA (dvAravatI) dUtipalAza cai pUrNabhadra caitya
bhaddilapura bharata kSetra rAjagRha raivataka vipulagiri parvata sahasrAmravana
udyAna sAketa zrAvastI

Page #213 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Appendix-1 **Special Names Mentioned in the Agamas - Category/Sutra**  **6.
Kshatriya Varna Individuals**  **1. Tirthankara**  **Kings**  1. **Amam
Tirthankara** 2. **Arishta Nemibhawan** - Category 3 to 5 3. **Mahavira Swami**
- Category 3 to 8 4. **Konikraja** - Individual 5. **Jitashatru** 6.
**Pradyumna** 7. **Vijayraja** 8. **Vasudeva Raja** 9. **Baldev** 10.
**Samudravijay** 11. **Shrenikraja**  **Queens**  1. **Andhakavrushni Patni** 2.
**Kali** 3. **Krishna** 4. **Gandhari** 5. **Gauridevi** 6. **Chellana** 7.
**Jambavati** (who predicted the future of Devaki) 8. **Devaki** 9. **Dharini**
10. **Nandashenika** 11. **Nanda** 12. **Nandavati** 13. **Nandottara** 14.
**Padmavati** 15. **Pitrusen Krishna** 16. **Baldev Patni**  **1. Abhaykumar**
**2. Udayan** **3. Gangadatt** **4. Gautam Swami** **5. Devananda Brahmani**
**6. Mahabal Kumar** **7. Meghkumar** **8. Skandkamuni**  **3. Agamas**  **1.
Uvasagadasa (Upasakadasang)** **2. Pannatti (Pragyapti-Bhagavati Sutra)**
**Used Individuals - Muni etc.**  **1. Atimukta Kumar Shraman** **2. Gautam
Swami** **3. Chandana Sadhvi** **4. Yakshini Sadhvi** **5. Devavishesha** **1.
Mudgarpani Yaksha** **2. Vaishramana Kubera** **3. Harinaigameshi**  **• 1/7
8/1-4** **8/7 5/1 5/1** **7** **6/2 4/1** **17** **8/1** **7/1** **7/1** **7/1**
**8/13 3/28**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 1/7 6/19 8/1 4/1 6/15 6/1 3/28 4/1 6/1 pariziSTa-1 Agama meM varNita vizeSanAma
saMketa-varga/sUtra 6. kSatriyavarNa ke vyaktivizeSa1. tIrthaMkara vizeSa rAjA
1. amama tIrthaMkara 5/3 1. andhakavRSNi 2. ariSTanemi bhagavAn-varga 3 se varga
5 taka 2. alakSarAjA 3. mahAvIra svAmI-varga 3 se varga 8 taka 3. zrIkRSNa
vAsudeva 2. Agama meM varNita (jahA) zabda se gRhIta 4.koNikarAjA vyaktivizeSa
5. jitazatru 1. abhayakumAra 3/13 6. pradyumna 2. udAyana 6/19 7.vijayarAjA 3.
gaMgadatta 8. vasudevarAjA 4. gautamasvAmI 9. baladeva 3/6, 6/12 5. devAnandA
brAhmaNI 3/9 10. samudravijaya 11. zreNikarAjA 6. mahAbala kumAra 1/7, 3/18
rAniyAM7. meghakumAra 1/8, 3/18 1. andhakavRSNi-patnI 8. skandakamuni 1/9, 6/1,
8/14 2. kAlI 3. Agama vizeSa 3. kRSNa 1. uvAsagadasA (upAsakadazAMga) 1/2 4.
gAMdhArI 2. paNNatti (prajJapti-bhagavatIsUtra) 6/1,6/15 5. gaurIdevI prayukta
vyaktivizeSa-muni Adi  /  6.cellaNA 1. atimukta kumAra zramaNa 7. jAmbavatI
(jisane devakI ko bhaviSya kahA thA) 8. devakI 2. gautama svAmI 6/15 9. dhAriNI
3. candanA sAdhvI 10.nandazreNikA 4. yakSiNI sAdhvI 5/6 11. nandA 5. devavizeSa
12. nandAvatI 1. mudgarapANi yakSa 6/2 13. nandottarA 2. vaizramaNa kubera 14.
padmAvatI 3. hariNaigameSI 3/10 15. pitRsenakRSNA 16. baladevapatnI * 1/7 8/1-4
8/7 5/1 5/1 7 6/2 4/1 17 8/1 7/1 7/1 7/1 8/13 3/28

Page #214 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Appendix 1] 17. Bhadra 18. Marutadevi 19. Marutadevi 20. Mahakali 21.
Mahakrisna 22. Mahamaruta 23. Mahasenakrisna 24. Muladatta 25. Mulasri 26.
Ramakrisna 27. Rukmini 28. Lakshmana 29. Vasudeva-patni 30. Virakrisna 31.
Vaidarbi 32. Satyabhama 33. Sukalika 34. Sukrisna 35. Sujata 36. Subhadra 37.
Sumanatika 38. Sumaruta 39. Susima 40. Sridevi Prince 1. Achal Kumar 2. Atimukta
Kumar 3. Anantasen Kumar 4. Anadrusti Kumar 5. Aniyas Kumar 6. Aniruddha Kumar
7. Anihit Kumar 8. Abhichandra Kumar [173 7/1 9. Akshobha Kumar 1/10 10. Uvayali
Kumar 4/1 11. Kampilya Kumar 1/10 8/6 12. Kupaka Kumar 3/4 8/10 13. Gajasukumal
3/4 7/1 14. Gambhira Kumar 1/10 8/14 15. Gautama Kumar 1/7 16. Jali Kumar 4/1
5/1 17. Dridhanemi Kumar 8/12 18. Daruka Kumar 19. Durmukha Kumar 5/1 20.
Devayash Kumar 4/1 21. Dharana Kumar 8/11 22. Pradyumna Kumar 4/1 23. Prasenajit
1/10 24 Purushahena 8/5 25. Purna Kumar 8/9 26. Mayali Kumar 4/1 7/1 27.
Varishena Kumar 28. Vidu Kumar 3/1 7/1 29. Vishnu Kumar 1/10 7/1 30. Satyanemi
Kumar 4/1 5/1 31. Samudra Kumar 1/10 6/15 32. Sagar Kumar 33. Sarana Kumar 3/4
1/10 34. Stimit Kumar 1/10 6/15 35. Sumukha Kumar 3/1-5 36. Shatrusena Kumar 37.
Shamba Kumar 38. Haimavanta Kumar 1/10 4/1 7. Vaishya Varna ke Vyakti-Gathapati
adi 1. Kashyapa Gathapati 6/14 2/1 2. Kinkam Gathapati 2/1 4/1 7/1 3/4 3/1 4/1
3/1 3/1

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 7/1 7/1 5/1 4/1 4/1 2/1 4/1 5/1 4/1 pariziSTa 1] 17. bhadrA 18. marutadevI 19.
marutAdevI 20. mahAkAlI 21. mahAkRSNA 22. mahAmarutA 23. mahAsenakRSNA 24.
mUladattA 25. mUlazrI 26. rAmakRSNA 27. rukmiNI 28. lakSmaNA 29. vasudeva-patnI
.30. vIrakRSNA 31. vaidarbhI 32. satyabhAmA 33. sukAlikA 34. sukRSNA 35. sujAtA
36.subhadrA 37. sumanatikA 38. sumarutA 39. susImA 40. zrIdevI rAjakumAra 1.
acala kumAra 2. atimukta kumAra 3. anaMtasena kumAra 4. anAdRSTi kumAra 5.
aniyasa kumAra 6. aniruddha kumAra 7. anihata kumAra 8. abhicandra kumAra [173
7/1 9. akSobha kumAra 1/10 10. uvayAli kumAra 4/1 11. kAMpilya kumAra 1/10 8/6
12. kUpaka kumAra 3/4 8/10 13. gajasukumAla 3/4 7/1 14. gaMbhIra kumAra 1/10
8/14 15. gautama kumAra 1/7 16. jAli kumAra 4/1 5/1 17. dRDhanemi kumAra 8/12
18. dAruka kumAra 19. durmukha kumAra 5/1 20. devayaza kumAra 4/1 21. dharaNa
kumAra 8/11 22. pradyumna kumAra 4/1 23. prasenajita 1/10 24 puruSaSeNa 8/5 25.
pUrNa kumAra 8/9 26. mayAli kumAra 4/1 7/1 27. vAriSeNa kumAra 28. vidu kumAra
3/1 7/1 29. viSNu kumAra 1/10 7/1 30. satyanemi kumAra 4/1 5/1 31. samudra
kumAra 1/10 6/15 32. sAgara kumAra 33. sAraNa kumAra 3/4 1/10 34. stimita kumAra
1/10 6/15 35. sumukha kumAra 3/1-5 36. zatrusena kumAra 37. zAmba kumAra 38.
haimavanta kumAra 1/10 4/1 7. vaizyavarNa ke vyakti-gAthApati Adi1. kAzyapa
gAthApati 6/14 2/1 2. kiMkama gAthApati 2/1 4/1 7/1 3/4 3/1 4/1 3/1 3/1

Page #215 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
8/6 174] [Antakruddasha 3. Kailashji 6/14 7. Bhadrouttar Pratima 8/12 4.
Dvaipayana Rishi 5/2 8. Mahaservatobhadra 8/11 5. Dhriti Dharaji 6/14 9.
Muktavali 8/13 6. Nag Gathapati 10. Ratnavalli 8/13 7. Purnbhadraji 6/14 11.
Laghuservatobhadra 8/10 8. Mankaati Gathapati 12. Laghusinghniskridit 9.
Meghkumaraji 6/14 13. Saptasaptaamika Bhikshapratima 8/8 10. Varattakji 6/14 13.
Swapna-Vishesh 11. Sudarshan Sheth (Pratham) 1. Kumbha (Kalash) 3/15 12.
Sudarshan Sheth (Dvitiya) 6/14 2. Chandra 3/15 13. Supratisthitaji 6/14 3.
Dhvaja 3/15 14. Sumanbhadraji 6/14 4. Nidhum Agni 3/15 15. Sulasa (Nag Gathapati
ki Patni) 3/1 5. Padmasarovar 3/15 16. Harichandanji 6/14 6. Pushpamala 3/15 17.
Kshemak Gathapati 6/14 7. Bhavan 3/15 8. Brahmanavarna ke vyakti vishesh 8.
Ratnarashi 3/15 1. Somashri 3/16 9. Lakshmi 3/15 2. Soma 3/16 10. Vimaan 3/15 3.
Somil Brahman 3/16 11. Vrishabha 3/15 9. Shudravarna ke vyakti vishesh 12.
Samudra 3/15 1. Arjun Mali 6/2 13. Singh 3/15 2. Bandhumati (Uski Patni) 6/2 14.
Surya 3/15 10. Mandali Vishesh 15. Hasti 3/15 1. Lalita Mitramandali 6/1 14.
Nagari Vishesh 11. Pashu Vishesh 1. Alakapuri (Kubernagri) 1. Hastiratna 3/26 2.
Kakandhi Nagari 6/14 12. Tap Vishesh 3. Kamandhi Nagari 6/14 1. Ashtaashtamaika,
Navanavamiika 8/9 4. Champa Nagari 1/1, 8/1 2. Ayambilavardhamantap 8/14 5.
Dwaraka Nagari 3. Ekaratri ki Mahapratima 3/19 6. Pandu-Mathura (Pandavo ki
Rajdhani) 5/3 4. Kankaavali Tap 8/5 7. Polaspur 3/9, 6/15 5. Gunaratnatap 1/8,
2/1, 6/1, 6/18 8. Bhaddilpur 6. Barahmaasiki Bhikshupratima 1/9 9. Rajgriha
Nagari 6/1

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 8/6 174] [antakRddazA 3. kailAzajI 6/14 7. bhadrottara pratimA 8/12 4.
dvaipAyanaRSi 5/2 8. mahAsarvatobhadra 8/11 5. dhRtidharajI 6/14 9. muktAvali
8/13 6. nAga gAthApati 10. ratnAvali 8/13 7. pUrNabhadrajI 6/14 11.
laghusarvatobhadra 8/10 8. maMkAti gAthApati 12. laghusiMhaniSkrIr3ita 9.
meghakumArajI 6/14 13. saptasaptamikA bhikSapratimA 8/8 10. vArattakajI 6/14 13.
svapna-vizeSa11. sudarzanazeTha (prathama) 1. kumbha (kalaza) 3/15 12.
sudarzanazeTha (dvitIya) 6/14 2. candra 3/15 13. supratiSThitajI 6/14 3. dhvajA
3/15 14. sumanabhadrajI 6/14 4. nidhUma agni 3/15 15. sulasA (nAga gAthApati kI
patnI) 3/1 5. padmasarovara 3/15 16. haricandanajI 6/14 6. puSpamAlA 3/15 17.
kSemaka gAthApati 6/14 7. bhavana 3/15 8. brAhmaNavarNa ke vyakti vizeSa 8.
ratnarAzi 3/15 1. somazrI 3/16 9. lakSmI 3/15 2. somA 3/16 10. vimAna 3/15 3.
somila brAhmaNa 3/16 11. vRSabha 3/15 9. zUdravarNa ke vyakti vizeSa 12. samudra
3/15 1. arjuna mAlI 6/2 13. siMha 3/15 2. bandhumatI (usakI patnI ) 6/2 14.
sUrya 3/15 10. maMDalIvizeSa 15. hastI 3/15 1. lalitA mitramaMDalI 6/1 14.
nagarIvizeSa11. pazuvizeSa 1. alakApurI (kuberanagarI) 1. hastiratna 3/26 2.
kAkandI nagarI 6/14 12. tapavizeSa 3. kAmandI nagarI 6/14 1. aSTaaSTamikA,
navanavamikA 8/9 4. campA nagarI 1/1,8/1 2. AyaMbilavardhamAnatapa 8/14 5.
dvArakA nagarI 3. ekarAtri kI mahApratimA 3/19 6. pAMDu-mathurA (pAMDavoM kI
rAjadhAnI) 5/3 4. kanakAvalItapa . 8/5 7. polAsapura 3/9, 6/15 5. guNaratnatapa
1/8,2/1,6/1,6/18 8. bhaddilapura 6. bArahamAsikI bhikSupratimA 1/9 9. rAjagRha
nagarI 6/1

Page #216 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Appendix 1  **[175 10. Commercial Village 6/14 5. Jasmine Flowers** **3/15
11. Varanasi 6/19 6. Parijat** **3/15 12. Saketa (Ayodhya) 6/14 7.
Raktabandhujeevak Veer Bahuti 3/15 13. Shatadwar Nagari** **5/3 21. Special
Metal 14. Shravasti Nagari** **6/14 1. Gold 15. Special Island** **22. Special
Building 1. Jambudweep** **3/13, 5/3 1. Indrasthan (where children play) 6/15**
**2. Antahpur (Palace of Girls) 3/17 16. Yakshayatan** **3. Upasthanashala**
**3/11 1. Purnabhadra** **4. Paushdhashala** **3/13 2. Surapriya** **5.
Vasagruh** **3/11 17. Udyan** **23. Special Bond 1. Kamamahavan** **6/19 1.
Avkotak Bandhan '2. Gunshilka 6/2 .. 2. Kanchuk Bandhan** **3/11 3.
Dootipalash** **6/14 24. Special Item 4. Nandanvan Udyan** **1. Various types of
baskets** **6/2 5. Sahasramravan** **3/6 2. Umbrella of Korant tree flowers 3/17
6. Shrivan Udyan 3/1, 3/6, 6/15 3. Golden Ball** **3/16 18. Mountain 4. White
Chawar** **3/17 1. . Raivatak** **2. Vipulachal 6/1, 6/14, 6/18-19** **3.
Shatrujay 1/9, 2/1, 3/3-4, 3428 25. Special Vehicle 4. Himavan** **1/7 1.
Vrishabharath 19. Special Tree** **2. Hastiskanth 1. Ashoka Tree** **1/5 26.
Special Ornament 2. Korant Tree** **3/17 1. Valayabah (Hand Bracelets) 3/11 3.
Koshamra Tree** **5/3 27. Special Cooked Food 4. Nyagrodhavat Tree** **5/3 1.
Singhkeshar-Modak 20. Flower Vines etc.** **28. Special Greatness 1. Kadambak
Flower** **1. Chandra** **3/13 2. Kinshuk (Palash) Flowers 3/20 2. Mangal**
**3/13 3. Korant Flower 3/22 3. Shani** **3/13 4. Champaklata 3/2 4. Surya**
**3/26** **1/5** **3/11**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pariziSTa 1] [175 10. vANijyagrAma 6/14 5. jAsU ke phUla 3/15 11. vANArasI 6/19
6. pArijAta 3/15 12. sAketa (ayodhyA) 6/14 7. raktabaMdhujIvaka vIra bahUTI 3/15
13. zatadvAra nagarI 5/3 21. dhAtuvizeSa14. zrAvastI nagarI 6/14 1. suvarNa 15.
dvIpavizeSa 22. bhavanavizeSa1. jaMbUdvIpa 3/13,5/3 1. indrasthAna (jahAM bacce
khelate haiM) 6/15 2. antaHpura (kanyAoM kA mahala) 3/17 16. yakSAyatana 3.
upasthAnazAlA 3/11 1. pUrNabhadra 4. pauSadhazAlA 3/13 2. surapriya 5. vAsagRha
3/11 17. udyAna 23. baMdhanavizeSa1. kAmamahAvana 6/19 1. avakoTaka bandhana '2.
guNazIlaka 6/2 .. 2. kaMcuka baMdhana 3/11 3. dUtipalAza 6/14 24. vastuvizeSa4.
nandanavana udyAna 1. anekavidha TokariyAM 6/2 5. sahasrAmravana 3/6 2. koraMTa
vRkSa ke phUloM kA chatra 3/17 6. zrIvana udyAna 3/1, 3/6, 6/15 3. suvarNa
kanduka 3/16 18. parvata 4. zveta caMvara 3/17 1. . raivataka 5. loha mudgara 2.
vipulAcala 6/1, 6/14, 6/18-19 (hajAra pala bhAravAlA) 3. zatrujaya 1/9, 2/1,
3/3-4, 3428 25. yAnavizeSa4. himavAn 1/7 1. vRSabharatha 19. vRkSavizeSa 2.
hastiskaMdha 1. azokavRkSa 1/5 26. alaMkAravizeSa2. koraMTa vRkSa 3/17 1.
valayabAhU (hAtha ke kaMkaNa) 3/11 3. kozAmra vRkSa 5/3 27. pakvAnnavizeSa4.
nyagrodhavaTa vRkSa 5/3 1. siMhakezara-modaka 20. puSpalatAdi 28. mahavizeSa1.
kadaMbaka puSpa 1. candra 3/13 2. kiMzuka (palAza) ke phUla 3/20 2. maMgala 3/13
3. koraMTa puSpa 3/22 3. zani 3/13 4. caMpakalatA 3/2 4. sUrya 3/26 1/5 3/11

Page #217 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
3/13 3/13 3/13 3/13 176] Maniratnadi 1. Ankaratna 2. Anjanaratna 3. Anjanpulaka
Ratna 4. Indranila 5. Karketanaratna 6. Jataruparatna 7. Jyotisarasaratna 8.
Padmaraga 9. Pulakaratna 10. Mani [Antakriddasha 11. Masaragallararatna 12.
Rajataratna 3/13 13. Rishta Ratna 3/13 14. Lohitakshararatna 3/13 15. Vajraratna
3/13 16. Vaiduryaratna 1/5, 3/13 17. Sphatikaratna 3/13 18. Saugandhikaratna
3/13 19. Hansagarbharatna 3/13 30. Kshetravishesha 1. Bharatkshetra
(Bharatavarsha is said) 1/6 3/13 3/13 3/13 3/13 3/13 1/5

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 3/13 3/13 3/13 3/13 176] maNiratnAdi 1. aMkaratna 2. aMjanaratna 3.
aMjanapulaka ratna 4. indranIla 5. karketanaratna 6. jAtarUparatna 7.
jyotirasaratna 8. padmarAga 9. pulakaratna 10. maNi [antakRddazA 11.
masAragallaratna 12. rajataratna 3/13 13. riSTaratna 3/13 14. lohitAkSaratna
3/13 15. vajraratna 3/13 16. vaiDUryaratna 1/5,3/13 17. sphaTikaratna 3/13 18.
saugaMdhikaratna 3/13 19. haMsagarbharatna 3/13 30. kSetravizeSa 1.
bharatakSetra (bhAratavarSa kahA hai) 1/6 3/13 3/13 3/13 3/13 3/13 1/5

Page #218 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Appendix-2 Personal and Geographical Introduction Specific Personal Introduction
_ This book mentions many Tirthankaras, Ganadharas, Kings, Princes and Queens
etc. From the perspective of Agamas and history, many special introductions are
presented here. The introduction of Bhagwan Arishtanemi and Tirthankara
Mahavira, who are the life support of the Siddha souls, has not been given
because they are well-known. (1) Indrabhuti Gautam Ganadhar Indrabhuti Gautam
was the chief disciple of Bhagwan Mahavira. Gobar village near Rajgriha, the
capital of Magadh, was his birthplace', which is now considered a part of
Nalanda. His father's name was Vasubhuti and his mother's name was Prithvi. His
gotra was Gautam. - Jain Acharyas have written, explaining the etymological
meaning of Gautam - the one whose darkness is destroyed by wisdom, he is Gautam.
Thus, the word Gautam has been a symbol of clan and lineage. Seven types of
Gautam are mentioned in the Stananga - Gautam, Garg, Bharadwaj, Angiras,
Sharkarabha, Bhaskarabha, Udakatmabha. In Vedic literature, the name Gautam has
also been associated with the clan and also with the Rishis. Many hymns are
found in the Rigveda in the name of Gautam, which are related to Gautam Rahugana
Rishi. By the way, many Rishis, Dharmasutrakar, Naya Shastrakar,
Dharmashastrakar, etc. have been individuals by the name of Gautam. The paternal
name of Arunoudalaka, Aruni etc. Rishis was also Gautam. It is difficult to say
what was the gotra of Indrabhuti Gautam, from which Rishi's lineage was he
associated? But it is clear that his personality was as great and influential as
the great glory of the Gautam gotra. 1. Magha Gubbargame Jaya Tinnev
Goyamasugutta. Aavashyak Niyukti, Ga. 643 2. (a) Aavashyak Niyukti, Ga. 647-48
(b) Aadyanaam Trayanaam Ganabhutanam Pita Vasubhutih.  _Aadyanaam Trayanaam
Ganabhutanam Mata Prithvi. Aavashyak Malay. 338 Gobhistamo Dhvastaam Yasy -
Abhidhanarajendrakoosha Bha. 3 4. Je Goyama Te Satviha Pannaatta, Tam Jaha Te
Goyama, Te Gagga, Te Bharadda, Te Angirasa, Te Sakarabha, Te Udakattabha.
Stananga 7/551. Rigveda 1/62/13, Vedic Kosha, p. 134. 6. Bharatiya Prachin-
Charitra Kosha, p. 193-195

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pariziSTa-2 vyakti aura bhaugolika paricaya viziSTa vyakti paricaya _ prastuta
graMtha meM aneka tIrthaMkaroM, gaNadharoM, rAjAoM, rAjakumAroM evaM rAniyoM Adi
kA ullekha huA hai| Agama aura itihAsa kI dRSTi se aneka vizeSa paricaya ko
yahAM prastuta kiyA jAtA hai| bhagavAn ariSTanemi tathA tIrthaMkara mahAvIra, jo
siddhi prApta AtmAoM ke prANAdhAra haiM, ke prasiddha hone se unakA paricaya
nahIM diyA gayA hai| (1) indrabhUti gautama gaNadhara indrabhUti gautama
bhagavAn mahAvIra ke pradhAna ziSya the| magadha kI rAjadhAnI rAjagRha ke pAsa
gobara gAMva unakI janmabhUmi thI', jo Aja nAlandA kA hI eka vibhAga mAnA jAtA
hai| unake pitA kA nAma vasubhUti aura mAtA kA nAma pRthvI thaa| unakA gotra
gautama thaa| - gautama kA vyutpattijanya artha karate hue jainAcAryoM ne likhA
hai-buddhi ke dvArA jisakA aMdhakAra naSTa ho gayA hai, vaha gautm| yoM to
gautama zabda kula aura vaMza kA vAcaka rahA hai| sthAnAMga meM sAta prakAra ke
gautama batAe gaye haiM- gautama, gArgya, bhAradvAja, AMgirasa, zarkarAbha,
bhAskarAbha, udkaatmaabh| vaidika sAhitya meM gautama nAma kula se bhI sambaddha
rahA hai aura RSiyoM se bhii| Rgveda meM gautama ke nAma se aneka sUkta milate
haiM, jinakA gautama rAhUgaNa nAmaka RSi se sambandha hai| vaise gautama nAma se
aneka RSi, dharmasUtrakAra, nyAyazAstrakAra, dharmazAstrakAra, prabhRti vyakti
ho cuke haiN| aruNauddAlaka, AruNi Adi RSiyoM kA bhI paitRka nAma gautama thaa|
yaha kahanA kaThina hai ki indrabhUti gautama kA gotra kyA thA, ve kisa RSi ke
vaMza se sambaddha the? kintu itanA to spaSTa hai ki gautama gotra ke mahAn
gaurava ke anurUpa hI unakA vyaktitva virAT va prabhAvazAlI thaa| 1. magahA
gubbaragAme jAyA tinneva goymsguttaa| Avazyaka niyukti, gA. 643 2. (ka) Avazyaka
niyukti, gA.647-48 (kha) AdyAnAM trayANAM gaNabhUtAM pitA vsubhuutiH| _AdyAnAM
trayANAM gaNabhUtAM mAtA pRthivii| Avazyaka malaya.338 gobhistamo dhvastaM
yasya-abhidhAnarAjendrakoSa bhA. 3 4. je goyamA te sattavihA paNNattA, taM jahA
te goyamA, te gaggA, te bhAraddA, te aMgirasA, te sakarAbhA, te bhakkharAbhA, te
udgttaabhaa| sthAnAMga 7/551. Rgveda 1/62/13, vaidika koza, pR. 134. 6.
bhAratIya prAcIna-caritra koza, pR. 193-195

Page #219 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[178] Indrabhuti Somil Arya once went to the Yajna festival in Pawapuri at the
invitation of the king. At the same time, Bhagwan Mahavira was also present in
the Mahasen Garden outside Pawapuri. Seeing the glory of Bhagwan, Indrabhuti
came to Bhagwan's Samavasaran with the intention of defeating him, but he
himself was defeated. After his doubts were cleared, he became a disciple of
Bhagwan along with his five hundred disciples. Gautam became the first Ganadhar.
There is much written about Gautam's life in the Agamas and the Agameत्तर
literature. Indrabhumi Gautam was 50 years old at the time of his initiation. He
remained in the Sadhu-paryaya for 30 years and in the Kevali-paryaya for 12
years. At the time of his Nirvana, he handed over his Gan to Sudharma and
attained Nirvana at the age of 92 years, 12 years after Bhagwan's Nirvana, by
observing a monthly fast in the Gunashilak Chaitya. The scriptures describe
Ganadhar Gautam as follows: He was the eldest disciple of Bhagwan. He was seven
hands tall. His body was well-built and strong. He was fair like a golden line.
He was a fierce ascetic, a great ascetic, a severe ascetic, a severe celibate,
and possessed a vast and brilliant radiance. He was detached from his body. He
was a fourteen-time Purvadhar. He was the holder of four knowledges: Mati,
Shruta, Avadhi, and Manah-paryaya. He was Sarvaaksharasannipati. He sat near
Bhagwan Mahavira with his head bowed lower than the Ukkud Asana. He would walk
around, remaining steady in the meditation posture, influencing the soul with
restraint and penance. (2) Krishna Krishna Vasudeva. His mother's name was
Devaki, and his father's name was Vasudeva. Krishna was born in the prison of
his maternal uncle Kansa in Mathura. Due to the troubles of Jarasandha, Shri
Krishna left the land of Braj and went to the distant Saurashtra, where he built
Dwarka. Shri Krishna was a devout devotee of Neminath. In the future, he will be
the Tirthankara named Amma. In Jain literature, the life of Shri Krishna is
found in detail in both Sanskrit and Prakrit languages. After the destruction of
Dwarka, Shri Krishna died at the hands of Jarakumar. Shri Krishna's life was
great. (3) Konik The son of Queen Chellana, the wife of King Shrenik, the ruler
of Champanagari, the capital of Angadesh. A devout devotee of Bhagwan Mahavira.
Konik Raja is a famous king. He is described in many ways in the Jain Agamas.
There is a detailed description of Konik in Bhagavati, Aupapatik, and
Niryavalika. Due to his greed for the kingdom, he imprisoned his father Shrenik.
After Shrenik's death, Konik made Champanagari his capital in Angadesh.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 178] [antakRddazA eka bAra indrabhUti somila Arya ke nimaMtraNa para pAvApurI
meM hone vAle yajJotsava meM gae the| usI avasara para bhagavAn mahAvIra bhI
pAvApurI ke bAhara mahAsena udyAna meM padhAre hue the| bhagavAn kI mahimA ko
dekhakara indrabhUti unheM parAjita karane kI bhAvanA se bhagavAn ke
samavasaraNa meM Aye, kintu vaha svayaM hI parAjita ho gye| apane mana kA
saMzaya dUra ho jAne para vaha apane pAMca-sau ziSyoM sahita bhagavAn ke ziSya
ho gye| gautama prathama gaNadhara hue| AgamoM meM va Agamettara sAhitya meM
gautama ke jIvana ke sambandha meM bahuta kucha likhA milatA hai| indrabhUmi
gautama dIkSA ke samaya 50 varSa ke the| 30 varSa sAdhu-paryAya meM aura 12
varSa kevalIparyAya meM rhe| apane nirvANa ke samaya apanA gaNa sudharmA ko
sauMpakara guNazIlaka caitya meM mAsika anazana karake bhagavAn ke nirvANa se 12
varSa bAda 92 varSa kI avasthA meM nirvANa ko prApta hue| . zAstroM meM
gaNadhara gautama kA paricaya isa prakAra kA diyA gayA hai-ve bhagavAn ke
jyeSTha ziSya the| sAta hAtha UMce the| unake zarIra kA saMsthAna aura saMhanana
utkRSTa prakAra kA thaa| suvarNa rekhA ke samAna gaura the| ugra tapasvI, mahA
tapasvI, ghora tapasvI, ghora brahmacArI aura saMkSipta vipula-tejolezyA
sampanna the| zarIra meM anAsakta the| caudaha pUrvadhara the|mti, zruta, avadhi
aura manaH paryAya-cAra jJAna ke dhAraka the| sarvAkSarasannipAtI the, ve
bhagavAn mahAvIra ke samIpa meM ukkuDa Asana se nIcA sira kara ke baiThate the|
dhyAna-mudrA meM sthira rahate hue saMyama aura tapa se AtmA ko bhAvita karate
hue vicarate the| (2) kRSNa kRSNa vaasudev| mAtA kA nAma devakI, pitA kA nAma
vasudeva thaa| kRSNa kA janma apane mAmA kaMsa kI kArA meM mathurA meM huA thaa|
jarAsandha ke upadravoM ke kAraNa zrIkRSNa ne braja-bhUmi ko chor3akara sudUra
saurASTra meM jAkara dvArakA kI racanA kii| * zrIkRSNa bhagavAn neminAtha ke
parama bhakta the| bhaviSya meM vaha amama nAma ke tIrthaMkara hoNge| jaina
sAhitya meM, saMskRta aura prAkRta ubhaya bhASAoM meM zrIkRSNa kA jIvana vistRta
rUpa meM milatA hai| dvArakA kA vinAza ho jAne para zrIkRSNa kI mRtyu jarAkumAra
ke hAthoM se huii| zrIkRSNa kA jIvana mahAn thaa| (3) koNika rAjA zreNika kI
rAnI cellaNA kA putra, aMgadeza kI rAjadhAnI campAnagarI kA adhipati  /
bhagavAn mahAvIra kA parama bhkt| koNika rAjA eka prasiddha rAjA hai| jainAgamoM
meM aneka sthAnoM para usakA aneka prakAra se varNana AtA hai| bhagavatI,
aupapAtika aura nirayAvalikA meM koNika kA vistRta varNana hai| rAjya-lobha ke
kAraNa isane apane pitA zreNika ko kaida meM DAla diyA thaa| zreNika kI mRtyu ke
bAda koNika ne aMgadeza meM campAnagarI ko apanI rAjadhAnI banAyA thaa|

Page #220 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Appendix 2] [179 This also fought a fierce battle with Nana Chetak to seize
the elephant of Har and Sechanak from his own brothers Hall and Vihall. The
Konik-Chetak war is famous. (4) Chellana Queen of King Shrenik and daughter of
Chetak, the king of Vaishali. Chellana was a beautiful, virtuous, intelligent,
and religious woman. Chellana played a significant role in making King Shrenik
religious and devoted to Jainism. The 'Niryavalika' provides evidence of
Chellana's deep affection for King Shrenik. Konik, Hall, and Vihall were all
sons of Chellana. (5) Jambuswami Jambhu, a disciple of Arya Sudharma, appears
everywhere in the Agamas as a supreme seeker... Jambhu was the son of a wealthy
and prosperous Seth of Rajgriha city. His father's name was Rishabhdatta and his
mother's name was Dharini. Jambhu's mother saw a Jambhul tree in a dream before
his birth, hence the son was named Jambhukumar. ... Sudharma's words awakened
dispassion in Jambhukumar's mind. However, he agreed to marriage due to his
parents' insistence. Jambhukumar married the daughters of eight Sethas. While
Jambhukumar was enlightening his eight newlywed wives, a thief named Prabhav
came to steal. He was also enlightened after listening to Jambhukumar's
dispassionate words. 501 thieves, 8 wives, 16 parents of wives, his own parents,
and Jambhukumar himself, thus 528 took initiation together from Sudharma.
Jambhukumar lived as a householder for 16 years, as a recluse for 20 years, and
in the Kevali state for 44 years. After living for 80 years, Jambuswami became a
Siddha, Buddha, and liberated, leaving Prabhav on his seat. (6) Jamali He was a
prince of the Kshatriya Kund of Vaishali. Once, the Lord arrived in the village
of Kshatriya Kund, Jamali also came to listen to the sermon. Returning home,
Jamali asked his parents for permission to take initiation. His mother was
frightened and fainted. Jamali's parents could not dissuade him from his
resolve. He renounced his eight wives and took initiation from the Lord along
with five hundred Kshatriya Kumaras. Jamali had performed Prarupana against the
Lord's principles. (7) Jitashatruraja The one who conquers enemies. Just as the
name of King Brahmadatt often appears in Buddhist Jatakas, similarly...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pariziSTa 2] [179 apane sahodara bhAI halla aura vihalla se hAra aura secanaka
hAthI ko chInane ke lie isane nAnA ceTaka se bhayaMkara yuddha bhI kiyA thaa|
koNika-ceTaka yuddha prasiddha hai| (4) cellaNA rAjA zreNika kI rAnI aura
vaizAlI ke adhipati ceTaka rAjA kI putrii| cellaNA sundarI, guNavatI,
buddhimatI, dharma-prANA nArI thii| zreNika rAjA ko dhArmika banAne meM,
jainadharma ke prati anurakta karane meM cellaNA kA bahuta bar3A yoga thaa|
cellaNA kA rAjA zreNika ke prati kitanA pragAr3ha anurAga thA, isakA pramANa
'nirayAvalikA' meM milatA hai| koNika, halla aura vihalla ye tInoM cellaNA ke
putra the| (5) jambUsvAmI Arya sudharmA ke ziSya jambU eka parama jijJAsu ke
rUpa meM AgamoM meM sarvatra dIkha par3ate haiN|.. jambU rAjagRha nagara ke
samRddha, vaibhavazAlI-ibhya-seTha ke putra the| pitA kA nAma RSabhadatta aura
mAtA kA nAma dhAriNI thaa| jambUkumAra kI mAtA ne jambUkumAra ke janma se pUrva
svapna meM jambU vRkSa dekhA thA, isI kAraNa putra kA nAma jambUkumAra rkhaa| .
sudharmA kI vANI se jambUkumAra ke mana meM vairAgya jaagaa| parantu mAtA-pitA
ke atyanta Agraha se vivAha kI svIkRti dii| ATha ibhya-vara seThoM kI kanyAoM ke
sAtha jambUkumAra kA vivAha ho gyaa| jisa samaya jambUkumAra apanI ATha
navavivAhitA patniyoM ko pratibodha de rahe the, usa samaya eka cora corI karane
ko aayaa| usakA nAma prabhava thaa| jambUkumAra kI vairAgyapUrNa vANI sunakara
vaha bhI pratibuddha ho gyaa| 501 cora, 8 patniyAM, patniyoM ke 16 mAtA-pitA,
svayaM ke mAtA-pitA aura svayaM jambUkumAra isa prakAra 528 ne eka sAtha
sudharmA ke pAsa dIkSA grahaNa kii| jambUkumAra 16 varSa gRhastha meM rahe, 20
varSa chadmastha rahe, 44 varSa kevalI paryAya meM rhe| 80 varSa kI Ayu bhoga
kara jambUsvAmI apane pATa para prabhava ko chor3akara siddha, buddha aura mukta
hue| (6) jamAli vaizAlI ke kSatriyakuNDa kA eka rAjakumAra thaa| eka bAra
bhagavAn kSatriyakuNDa grAma meM padhAre, jamAli bhI upadeza sunane ko aayaa|
vApisa ghara lauTa kara jamAli ne apane mAtA-pitA se dIkSA kI anumati maaNgii|
mAtA ghabarA uThI, vaha mUchita ho gii| jamAli ke mAtA-pitA usako usake saMkalpa
se haTA nahIM ske| apanI ATha patniyoM kA tyAga karake usane pAMca sau kSatriya
kumAroM ke sAtha bhagavAn ke pAsa dIkSA lii| jamAli ne bhagavAn ke siddhAnta-
viruddha prarUpaNA kI thii| (7) jitazatrurAjA zatru ko jItane vaalaa| jisa
prakAra bauddha jAtakoM meM prAyaH brahmadatta rAjA kA nAma AtA hai, usI

Page #221 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 180] **Antakrid Dasha**  The name of King Jitashatru often appears in Jain
texts. The name Dharini is also often mentioned alongside Jitashatru. It has
been an ancient practice of storytellers to mention the name of a king at the
beginning of any story. Even if there is no such king, the storyteller uses this
name at the beginning of their story.   The name of King Jitashatru is mentioned
many times in the narrative texts of Jain literature. The following cities are
said to have been ruled by a king named Jitashatru:  **City** | **King** -------
| -------- 1. Vanijya Gram | Jitashatru 2. Champa Nagari | Jitashatru 3.
Ujjayini | Jitashatru 4. Sarvatobhadra Nagar | Jitashatru 5. Mithila Nagari |
Jitashatru 6. Panchal Desh | Jitashatru 7. Amalakalpa Nagari | Jitashatru 8.
Savatthi Nagari | Jitashatru 9. Vanarasi Nagari | Jitashatru 10. Alabhiya Nagari
| Jitashatru 11. Polaspur | Jitashatru  **(8) Dharini Devi**  Dharini Devi was
the queen of King Shrenik. The name Dharini is found abundantly in the Agamas.
In Sanskrit literature, the epithet 'Devi' is often used before the name of the
king's eldest queen, which means the greatest anointed queen, i.e., the chief
queen.   King Shrenik had many queens, among them Dharini was the main one.
Therefore, the epithet 'Devi' has been used before Dharini. Devi means
'worshipful'.  Meghakumar was the son of this Dharini Devi, who took initiation
from Lord Mahavira.  **(9) Mahabalkumar**  Mahabalkumar was the son of King Bal.
He was the soul of Sudarshan Seth. There was a city called Hastinapur. The king
there was Bal and the queen was Prabhavati. One night, in a state of semi-
consciousness, the queen saw:  "A lion descending from the sky and entering her
mouth."

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 180] [ antakRddazA prakAra jaina granthoM meM prAyaH jitazatru rAjA kA nAma AtA
hai| jitazatru ke sAtha prAyaH dhAriNI kA bhI nAma AtA hai| kisI bhI kathA ke
prArambha meM kisI na kisI rAjA kA nAma batalAnA kathAkAroM kI purAtana paddhati
rahI hai| isa nAma kA bhale hI koI rAjA na bhI ho, tathApi kathAkAra apanI kathA
ke prArambha meM isa nAma kA upayoga karatA hai| vaise jaina- sAhitya ke kathA-
granthoM meM jitazatru rAjA kA ullekha bahuta AtA hai| nimnalikhita nagaroM ke
rAjA kA nAma jitazatru batAyA gayA hai nagara vANijya grAma campA nagarI
ujjayanI sarvatobhadra nagara mithilA nagarI pAMcala deza 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7.
AmalakalpA nagarI sAvatthI nagarI vANArasI nagarI AlabhiyA nagarI 8. 9. 10. 11.
polAsapura (8) dhAriNI devI - rAjA jitazatru "" " :::::: "" zreNika rAjA kI
paTarAnI thii| dhAriNI kA ullekha Agamo meM pracura mAtrA meM pAyA jAtA '
saMskRta sAhitya ke nATakoM meM prAyaH rAjA kI sabase bar3I rAnI ke nAma ke Age
'devI' vizeSaNa lagAyA jAtA hai, jisakA artha hotA hai rAniyoM meM sabase bar3I
abhiSikta rAnI, arthAt paTarAnI  /  rAjA zreNika ke aneka rAniyAM unameM dhAriNI
mukhya thI  /  isIlie dhAriNI ke Age 'devI' vizeSaNa lagAyA gayA hai| devI kA
artha hai- pUjyA  /  meghakumAra isI dhAriNI devI kA putra thA, jisane bhagavAn
mahAvIra ke pAsa dIkSA grahaNa kI thii| (9) mahAbalakumAra bala rAjA kA putra  /
sudarzana seTha kA jIva mahAbalakumAra  /  hastinApura nAmaka nagara thA  /
vahAM kA rAjA bala aura rAnI prabhAvatI thii| eka bAra rAta meM ardhanidrA meM
rAnI ne dekhA 1 'eka siMha AkAza se utara kara mukha meM praveza kara rahA hai|'
siMha kA svapna dekhakara rAnI jAga uThI, aura rAjA bala ke zayana kakSa meM
jAkara svapna sunaayaa| rAjA ne madhura svara meM kahA

Page #222 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Appendix 2] 'The dream is very good. You will become the mother of a brilliant
son.' In the morning, the king also asked the dream interpreters about the
meaning of the dream in the royal court. The dream interpreters said, 'O King!
There are 42 common and 30 great dreams in the science of dreams, thus a total
of 72 dreams are mentioned.' The Tirthankara mothers and Chakravarti mothers see
these 14 dreams out of the 30 great dreams: 1. Elephant 2. Lion 3. Bull 4.
Lakshmi 5. Moon 6. Flag 7. Lotus Pond 8. Sun 9. Pitcher 10. Sea 11. Heap of
Jewels 12. Aeroplane 13. Smoke-free fire 14. Garland of Flowers O King!
Pravathi Devi has seen this great dream. Therefore, its result will be wealth
gain, enjoyment gain, son gain and kingdom gain. In due course, a son was born,
who was named Mahabalkumar. Mahabal became skilled by practicing 72 arts with
the art teacher. Mahabalkumar was married to eight princesses. Mahabalkumar
became engrossed in material pleasures. Once, Dharmaghoṣa Muni, a disciple of
Tirthankara Vimalaṇāth, came to Hastinapur. Mahabal became detached after
listening to the teachings. He became a Shraman, a monk, after taking initiation
from Dharmaghoṣa Muni. Mahabal Muni studied the 14 previous births. He performed
various types of austerities, after observing the Shraman paryay for 12 years,
he became a god in the Brahma Lok Kalpa in due course of time. (10) Meghakumar
He was the son of Magadha Emperor Shrenik and Dharini Devi, who had taken
initiation from Bhagwan Mahavira. Once, Bhagwan Mahavira came to the Gunashila
garden of Rajgriha. Meghakumar also listened to the teachings. He took
initiation from Bhagwan after taking permission from his parents. On the day he
took initiation, that very night, Megha Muni became anxious and restless due to
the movement of the monks, the dust from their feet and the bumping of their
feet. Bhagwan gave him teachings on patience in restraint, reminding him of his
past lives, due to which Megha Muni became stable in restraint. He performed a
one-month Sanlekhana. He was born in the form of a god in the Sarvarthasiddha
aeroplane. He will become a Siddha from Mahavidehavas.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pariziSTa 2] 'svapna bahuta acchA hai| tejasvI putra kI mAtA bnogii|' prAta:
rAjasabhA meM rAjA ne svapnapAThakoM se bhI svapna kA phala puuchaa|
svapnapAThakoM ne kahA- 'rAjan ! svapnazAstra meM 42 sAmAnya aura 30 mahAsvapna
haiM, isa prakAra kula 72 svapna kahe haiM  /  ' tIrthaMkaramAtA aura
cakravartImAtA 30 mahAsvapnoM meM se ina 14 svapnoM ko dekhatI haiM: gaja siMha
1. vRSabha 3. lakSmI 5. candra 7. dhvajA 9. 10. padmasarovara 11. 12. vimAna 13.
14. nirdhUma ani rAjan ! prabhAvatI devI ne yaha mahAsvapna dekhA hai| ataH
isakA phala arthalAbha, bhogalAbha, putralAbha aura rAjyalAbha hogaa| puSpamAlA
sUrya kumbha samudra ratnarAzi [181 2. 4. 6. 8. kAlAntara meM putra kA janma
huA, jisakA nAma mahAbalakumAra rakhA gyaa| kalAcArya ke pAsa 72 kalAoM kA
abhyAsa karake mahAbala kuzala ho gyaa| ATha rAjakanyAoM ke sAtha mahAbalakumAra
kA vivAha kiyA gyaa| mahAbalakumAra bhautika sukhoM meM lIna ho gyaa| eka bAra
tIrthaMkara vimalanAtha ke praziSya dharmaghoSa muni hastinApura pdhaare|
upadeza sunakara mahAbala ko vairAgya ho gyaa| dharmaghoSa muni ke pAsa dIkSA
lekara vaha zramaNaM bana gayA, bhikSu bana gyaa| mahAbala muni ne 14 pUrva kA
adhyayana kiyA  /  aneka prakAra kA tapa kiyA, 12 varSa kI zramaNaparyAya
pAlakara, kAla ke samaya kAla karake brahmaloka kalpa meM deva banA  /  ( 10 )
meghakumAra magadha samrATa zreNika aura dhAriNI devI kA putra thA, jisane
bhagavAn mahAvIra ke pAsa dIkSA grahaNa kI thI  /  eka bAra bhagavAn mahAvIra
rAjagRha ke guNazIlaka udyAna meM pdhaare| meghakumAra ne bhI upadeza sunA  /
mAtA-pitA se anumati lekara bhagavAn ke pAsa dIkSA grahaNa kii| jisa dina dIkSA
grahaNa kI, usI rAta ko muniyoM ke yAtAyAta se, pairoM kI raja aura Thokara
lagane se megha muni vyAkula gayA, azAnta bana gyaa| bhagavAn ne pUrvabhavoM kA
smaraNa karAte hue saMyama meM dhRti rakhane kA upadeza diyA, jisase megha muni
saMyama meM sthira ho gayA  /  eka mAsa kI saMlekhanA kI  /  sarvArthasiddha
vimAna meM devarUpa se utpanna huA  /  mahAvidehavAsa se siddha hogA  /

Page #223 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Skandaka Muni (11)  Skandaka Muni was a Sannyasi from Shravasti, a disciple
of the Gadbhal Parivajak and a former friend of Gautam Swami. He was unable to
answer the questions of Pingalak Nirgranth, a disciple of Lord Mahavira. Upon
hearing from the people of Shravasti that Lord Mahavira was staying in the
Chatra-Palash garden outside Kritangala Nagar, Skandaka went to see him. After
finding his answers, he became a disciple of the Lord.  Skandaka Muni studied
the 11 Angas while living with the Sthaviras. He practiced and worshipped the 12
Pratimas of a Bhikku in order. He performed the Gunaratna Samvatsar Tapa, which
weakened, emaciated, and disabled his body. Finally, he went to Vipulgiri near
Rajgriha and performed a one-month Sanlekhana. After his time, he went to the
12th Devaloka. From there, he will become a Siddha through the Chayaka
Mahavidehavas.  Skandaka Muni's initiation period was 12 years.  ## Sudharma
Swami (12)  Sudharma Swami was a Brahmin from Kollag Sannivesh, belonging to the
Agnivaishyayana gotra. His father was Dhammil and his mother was Bhaddhila. Five
hundred students studied under him. At the age of fifty, he took Pravjaya along
with his disciples. He remained in the Chhadmavastha for forty-two years. After
twelve years of Mahavira's Nirvana, he became a Kevali and remained in the
Kevali state for eight years.  Sudharma was the longest-living among all the
Ganadharas of the Shraman Bhagwan. At the time of their Nirvana, other
Ganadharas dedicated their respective ganas to Sudharma.  Twelve years after
Mahavira's Nirvana, Sudharma attained Kevalgyan. Twenty years later, at the age
of one hundred, he attained Nirvana in the Gunshil Chaitya of Rajgriha after a
month of Anashan.  ## Shrenik Raja (13)  Shrenik Raja was the emperor of the
Magadh country. He became a devout follower of Lord Mahavira after being
enlightened by Anathi Muni. This is a popular belief.  The description of King
Shrenik is found in abundance in Jain and Buddhist scriptures. Historians say
that King Shrenik belonged to the Haihaya clan and the Shishunaga dynasty.  In
Buddhist scriptures, two names are found: 'Seniya' and 'Bimbisara'. In Jain
scriptures, the names 'Seniya, Bhimbhisara, and Bhambhasara' are available.  1.
(a) "Jivante Cheva Bhattare Navahin Janehi Ajja Sudhammas Ganho Nikkhitto
Dihauggetit Natum." - Kalpasutra Churni 201. (b) "Parinivvuy Ganahara Jivante
Nayae Nav Jana U, Indabhui Suhammo A, Rayagihe Nivvuae Vire." - Aavashyak
Niyukti Ga. 658. 2. Aavashyak Niyukti, 655.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 182] [antakRddazA (11) skandaka muni skandaka saMnyAsI zrAvastI nagarI ke
rahane vAle gaddabhAli parivrAjaka kA ziSya thA aura gautama svAmI kA pUrva
mitra thaa| bhagavAn mahAvIra ke ziSya piGgalaka nirgrantha ke praznoM kA uttara
nahIM de sakA; phalataH zrAvastI ke logoM se jaba sunA ki bhagavAn mahAvIra
kRtaMgalA nagara ke bAhara chatra-palAza udyAna meM padhAre haiM, to skandaka
bhI bhagavAn ke pAsa jA phuNcaa| apanA samAdhAna milane para vahIM para bhagavAn
kA ziSya ho gyaa| skandaka muni ne sthaviroM ke pAsa rahakara 11 aMgoM kA
adhyayana kiyaa| bhikSu kI 12 pratimAoM kI krama se sAdhanA kI, ArAdhanA kii|
guNaratnasaMvatsara tapa kiyaa| zarIra durbala, kSINa aura azakta ho gyaa| anta
meM rAjagRha ke samIpa vipulagiri para jAkara eka mAsa kI saMlekhanA kii| kAla
karake 12veM devaloka meM gyaa| vahA~ se cayakara mahAvidehavAsa se siddha
hogaa| skandaka muni kI dIkSA-paryAya 12 varSa kI thii| (12) sudharmA svAmI ye
kollAga saMniveza ke nivAsI agnivaizyAyana gotrIya brAhmaNa the| inake pitA
dhammila the aura mAtA bhaddilA thiiN| pAMca sau chAtra inake pAsa adhyayana
karate the| pacAsa varSa kI avasthA meM ziSyoM ke sAtha pravajyA lii| bayAlIsa
varSa paryanta chadmAvasthA meM rhe| mahAvIra ke nirvANa ke bAda bAraha varSa
vyatIta hone para kevalI hue aura ATha varSa taka kevalI avasthA meM rhe|
_zramaNa bhagavAn ke sarva gaNadharoM meM sudharmA dIrghajIvI the, anyAnya
gaNadharoM ne apane-apane nirvANa ke samaya apane-apane gaNa sudharmA ko
samarpita kara diye the| mahAvIra-nirvANa ke 12 varSa bAda sudharmA ko
kevalajJAna prApta huA aura bIsa varSa ke pazcAt sau varSa kI avasthA meM mAsika
anazana-pUrvaka rAjagRha ke guNazIlacaitya meM nirvANa prApta kiyaa| (13)
zreNika rAjA magadha deza kA samrAT thaa| anAthI muni se pratibodhita hokara
bhagavAn mahAvIra kA parama bhakta ho gayA thaa| aisI eka jana-zruti hai| rAjA
zreNika kA varNana jaina granthoM tathA bauddha granthoM meM pracura mAtrA meM
milatA hai  /  itihAsakAra kahate haiM ki zreNika rAjA haihaya kula aura
zizunAga vaMza kA thaa| bauddha granthoM meM 'seniya' aura 'biMbisAra' ye do
nAma milate haiN| jaina granthoM meM 'seNiya, bhiMbhisAra aura bhaMbhAsAra'-ye
nAma upalabdha haiN| 1. (ka) jIvaMte ceva bhaTTArae NavahiM jaNehiM ajja
sudhammassa gaNo Nikkhitto dIhAuggetti NAtuM  /  _ -kalpasUtra cUrNi 201. (kha)
parinivvuyA gaNaharA jIvaMte nAyae nava jaNA u, iMdabhUI suhammo a, rAyagihe
nivvue viire| -Avazyaka niyukti gA. 658. 2. Avazyaka niyukti, 655.

Page #224 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Appendix 2] [183 How did the names Bhimbisar and Bhambasar come about? A
beautiful incident from the life of Shrenik in this regard. King Prasenajit, the
father of Shrenik, ruled in Kushagpur. One day, a fire suddenly broke out in the
royal palace. Every prince ran out with his favorite thing. Some took elephants,
some took horses, some took jewels. But Shrenik only took out a 'Bhambha'.
Seeing Shrenik, the other brothers were laughing, but father Prasenajit was
happy; because Shrenik had left everything else and protected only the symbol of
the kingdom. Therefore, King Prasenajit named him Bhimbisar. Bhimbisar probably
later became Bimbisar due to a change in pronunciation. Geographical
Introduction This book mentions many countries, cities, mountains and rivers.
The names of the countries and cities in the time of Lord Arishtanemi and Lord
Mahavira have changed drastically today. They were prosperous at that time, but
today they have become mere ruins, and many have been completely destroyed.
Archaeologists have done a lot of research on many cities. Here we are briefly
describing the main places. (1) Kankdi This was a very famous city in North
India during the time of Lord Mahavira. At that time, Jitashatru was the ruler
there. There was Sahasramravan outside the city, where the Lord used to reside
whenever he visited there. Many seekers like Dhanya, Sunaksha, Kshemak and
Dhritidhara, the sons of Bhadra Sarthavahi, took initiation from Lord Mahavira.
According to Pandit Munishri Kalyanvijayji, the present Kankdi Tirth east of
Lachhuaad is not the site of ancient Kankdi. Kankdi was in North India. The
Digambar Jain consider the place two miles from Nunkhar station and thirty miles
southeast of Gorakhpur, which they call Kishkidha or Khukhundoji Tirth, to be
the ancient Kankdi. (2) Gunasil There was a famous garden called Gunasil outside
Rajgriha. Lord Mahavira had held Samavasaran here more than a hundred times.
More than a hundred people had taken up the path of asceticism and the path of
character here. Lord Mahavira's chief disciples, the Ganadharas, attained
nirvana here by fasting. The present Gunava, which is about three miles from
Nawada station, is the Gunasil of Mahavira's time. 1. Bheri, a special musical
instrument that signifies victory in battle.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pariziSTa 2] [183 bhibhasAra aura bhaMbhAsAra nAma kaise par3A? isa sambandha
meM zreNika ke jIvana kA eka sundara prasaMga zreNika ke pitA rAjA prasenajita
kuzAgrapura meM rAjya karate the| eka dina kI bAta hai, rAjaprAsAda meM sahasA
Aga laga gii| hareka rAjakumAra apanI-apanI priya vastu ko lekara bAhara
bhaagaa| koI gaja lekara, to koI azva lekara, koI ratna-maNi lekara  /  parantu
zreNika mAtra eka 'bhaMbhA lekara hI bAhara nikalA thaa| zreNika ko dekhakara
dUsare bhAI haMsa rahe the, para pitA prasenajita prasanna the; kyoMki zreNika
ne anya saba kucha chor3akara ekamAtra rAjya-cihna kI rakSA kI thii| isa para
rAjA prasenajita ne usakA nAma bhiMbhisAra rkhaa| bhiMbhisAra hI saMbhavataH Age
calakara uccAraNa-bheda se biMbisAra bana gyaa| bhaugolika paricaya prastuta
grantha meM aneka dezoM, nagaroM, parvatoM va nadiyoM kA ullekha huA hai|
bhagavAn ariSTanemi aura bhagavAn mahAvIra ke yuga meM jina dezoM va nagaroM ke
jo nAma the Aja unake nAmoM meM atyadhika parivartana ho cukA hai| usa samaya ve
samRddha the to Aja ve khaNDahara mAtra raha gaye haiM, aura kitane hI pUrNa
rUpa se naSTa bhI ho cuke haiN| kitane hI nagaroM ke sambandha meM
purAtattvavettAoM ne kAphI khoja kI hai| hama yahAM para pramukhapramukha
sthaloM kA saMkSepa meM varNana kara rahe haiN| (1) kAMkadI bhagavAn mahAvIra ke
samaya yaha uttara bhArata kI bahuta hI prasiddha nagarI thii| usa samaya vahA~
kA adhipati jitazatru thaa| nagara ke bAhara sahasrAmravana thA, bhagavAn jaba
kabhI vahA~ para padhArate taba vahA~ para virAjate the| bhadrA sArthavAhI ke
putra dhanya, sunakSatra tathA kSemaka aura dhRtidhara Adi aneka sAdhakoM ne
bhagavAna mahAvIra ke pAsa dIkSA grahaNa kI thii| paNDita munizrI
kalyANavijayajI ke abhimatAnusAra vartamAna meM lachuADa se pUrva meM kAkandI
tIrtha hai, vaha prAcIna kAkandI kA sthAna nahIM hai| kAkandI uttara bhArata meM
thii| nUnakhAra sTezana se do mIla aura gorakhapura se dakSiNa-pUrva tIsa mIla
para digambara jaina jisa sthala ko kiSkidhA athavA khukhuMdojI nAmaka tIrtha
mAnate haiM vahIM prAcIna kAkandI honI caahie| (2) guNazIla rAjagRha ke bAhara
guNazIla nAmaka eka prasiddha bagIcA thaa| bhagavAn mahAvIra ke zatAdhika bAra
yahA~ samavasaraNa lage the| zatAdhika vyaktiyoM ne yahA~ para zramaNadharma va
cAritradharma grahaNa kiyA thaa| bhagavAn mahAvIra ke pramukha ziSya gaNadharoM
ne yahIM para anazana kara nirvANa prApta kiyA thaa| vartamAna kA guNAvA, jo
navAdA sTezana se lagabhaga tIna mIla para hai, vahIM mahAvIra ke samaya kA
guNazIla hai| 1. bherI, saMgrAma-vijaya-sUcaka vaady-vishess|

Page #225 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[184] [Antakrid Dasha (3) Champa] Champa was the capital of the Anga country.
Cunningham wrote - There is a stone ghat just 24 miles from Bhagalpur. This is
where Champa should be located. There is a large village to the west of it,
called Champanagar, and a small village called Champapur. It is possible that
these two are indicative of the true location of the ancient capital Champa. Fa-
Hien considered Champa to be located 18 yojanas east of Pataliputra on the south
bank of the Ganga. From the perspective of the Mahabharata, the ancient name of
Champa was 'Malini'. Maharaja Champ renamed it Champa. Champa is also one of the
ten capitals mentioned in the Stananga and one of the six great cities described
in the Dirghanikaya. It is described in detail in the Aupapatik Sutra. Acharya
Shayambhav composed the Dasha Vaikalik Sutra here. After the death of Emperor
Shrenik, Kunik (Ajatashatru) did not like to stay in Rajgriha and settled in
Champanagar after seeing the beautiful gardens of Champa. According to Ganin
Kalyanvijayji, Champa was about one hundred kos east (slightly south) of Patna.
Nowadays it is called Champanala. This place is three miles west of Bhagalpur.
To the north-east of Champa was a beautiful chaitya called Purnabhadra, where
Bhagwan Mahavira stayed. Champa was a major center of trade in that era, where
merchants from far and wide came to buy goods, and merchants from Champa also
went to Mithila, Ahikshetra, and Pihuṇḍ (a region of Chikakoṭ and Kalingapattam)
for trade. There was a distance of sixty yojanas between Champa and Mithila. 2.
1. The Ancient Geography of India, pp. 546-547 Travels of Fa-Hien, p. 65.
Mahabharata 12/5/134 Stananga 10/717 Aupapatik, Champa description Jain Agam
Literature in Indian Society, p. 464 7. Vividh Tirthakalp, p. 65 8. Shraman
Bhagwan Mahavira, p. 369 9. (a) Jnatadharmakatha 8, p. 97, 9, p. 121-15 p. 157
(b) Uttaradhyayanasutra 21/2

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 184] [antakRddazA (3)campA campA aMga deza kI rAjadhAnI thii| kaniMghama ne
likhA hai- bhAgalapura se ThIka 24 mIla para pattharaghATa hai| yahIM isake Asa-
pAsa campA kI upasthiti honI caahie| isake pAsa hI pazcima kI ora eka bar3A
gAMva hai, jise campAnagara kahate haiM aura eka choTA-sA gAMva hai, jise
campApura kahate haiN| saMbhava hai, ye donoM prAcIna rAjadhAnI campA kI sahI
sthiti ke dyotaka hoN| phAhiyAna ne campA ko pATilaputra se 18 yojana pUrva dizA
meM gaMgA ke dakSiNa taTa para sthita mAnA mahAbhArata kI dRSTi se campA kA
prAcIna nAma 'mAlinI' thaa| mahArAjA campa ne usakA nAma campA rkhaa| sthAnAMga
meM jina dasa rAjadhAniyoM kA ullekha huA hai aura dIrghanikAya meM jina chaha
mahAnagariyoM kA varNana kiyA gayA hai, unameM eka campA bhI hai|
aupapAtikasUtra meM isakA vistAra se nirUpaNa hai| dazavaikAlika sUtra kI racanA
AcArya zayyaMbhava ne yahIM para kI thii|6 samrAT zreNika ke nidhana ke pazcAt
kUNika (ajAtazatru) ko rAjagRha meM rahanA acchA na lagA aura eka sthAna para
caMpA ke sundara udyAna ko dekhakara campAnagara bsaayaa| gaNi kalyANavijayajI
ke abhimatAnusAra campA paTanA se pUrva (kucha dakSiNa meM) lagabhaga sau kosa
para thii| Ajakala ise campAnAlA kahate haiN| yaha sthAna bhAgalapura se tIna
mIla dUra pazcima meM hai| campA ke uttara-pUrva meM pUrNabhadra nAma kA
ramaNIya caitya thA, jahA~ para bhagavAn mahAvIra Thaharate the| campA usa yuga
meM vyApAra kA pramukha kendra thA, jahA~ para mAla lene ke lie dUra-dUra se
vyApArI Ate the aura campA ke vyApArI bhI mAla lekara mithilA, ahicchatrA aura
pihu~Da (cikAkoTa aura kaliMgapaTTama kA eka pradeza) Adi meM vyApArArtha jAte
the| campA aura mithilA meM sATha yojana kA antara thaa| 2. 1. dI enziyaNTa
jyogrAphI oNpha iNDiyA, pR.546-547 Traivelsa oNpha phAhiyAna, pR. 65.
mahAbhArata 12/5/134 sthAnAMga 10/717 aupapatika, campA varNana jaina Agama
sAhitya meM bhAratIya samAja, pR. 464 7. vividha tIrthakalpa, pR. 65 8. zramaNa
bhagavAna mahAvIra, pR. 369 9. (ka) jJAtAdharmakathA 8, pR97, 9, pR. 121-15 pR.
157 (kha) uttarAdhyayana 21/2

Page #226 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Appendix 2] (4) Jambudvipa  From the perspective of Jain Agamas, Jambudvipa is
located in the center of this vast universe. It spans one lakh yojanas and is
the smallest. It is surrounded by the Lavanasamudra (Salt Ocean). The
Dhatukikhandadvipa surrounds the Lavanasamudra. Similarly, there is another
island and another ocean beyond, and the number of all these islands and oceans
is countless. The name of the last ocean is Swayambhuraman Samudra. The
Lavanasamudra is twice the size of Jambudvipa, and the Dhatukikhandadvipa is
twice the size of the Lavanasamudra. In this way, the islands and oceans
continue to be twice the size of each other.  This island is named Jambudvipa
because of the eternal Jambubhumi tree that exists here. In the center of
Jambudvipa is the Sumeru mountain, which is one lakh yojanas high.  The diameter
of Jambudvipa is one lakh yojanas. Its circumference is 3,16,227 yojanas, 3
kosas, 128 dhanush, 13 angulas, 5 yavas, and 1 yuka. Its area is 7,90,56,94,150
yojanas, 1 kosa, 15 dhanush, and 2 hathas.  The Srimad Bhagavata describes seven
islands, with Jambudvipa being the first.  From the Buddhist perspective, there
are four continents, with Sumeru at their center. To the east of Sumeru is Puvva
Videha, to the west is Apargoyan or Apar Godan, to the north is Uttar Kuru, and
to the south is Jambudvipa.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pariziSTa 2] (4) jambUdvIpa jainAgamoM kI dRSTi se isa vizAla bhUmaNDala ke
madhya meM jambUdvIpa hai| isakA vistAra eka lakSa yojana hai aura yaha sabase
laghu hai| isake cAroM ora lavaNasamudra hai  /  lavaNasamudra ke cAroM ora
dhAtakIkhaNDa dvIpa hai| isI prakAra Age bhI eka dvIpa aura eka samudra hai aura
una saba dvIpoM aura samudroM kI saMkhyA asaMkhyAta hai|' antima samudra kA nAma
svayaMbhUramaNa samudra hai| jambUdvIpa se dUnA vistAra vAlA lavaNasamudra aura
lavaNasamudra se dugunA vistRta dhAtakIkhaNDa hai| isa prakAra dvIpa aura
samudra eka dUsare se dUne vistRta hote cale gaye haiN| isameM zAzvata
jambUvRkSa hone ke kAraNa isa dvIpa kA nAma jambUdvIpa par3A  /  jambUdvIpa ke
madhya meM sumeru nAmaka parvata hai jo eka lAkha yojana UMcA hai| 7 jambUdvIpa
kA vyAsa eka lAkha yojana hai|' isakI paridhi 3,16,227 yojana, 3 kosa 128
dhanuSa, 13  //  aMgula, 5 yava aura 1 yUkA hai| isakA kSetraphala
7,90,56,94,150 yojana 1  /   /   /  kosa, 15 dhanuSa aura 2  /  /  hAtha hai  /
10 zrImadbhAgavata meM sAta dvIpoM kA varNana hai  /  usameM jambUdvIpa prathama
hai  /  11 bauddha dRSTi se cAra mahAdvIpa haiM, una cAroM ke kendra meM sumeru
hai| sumeru ke pUrva meM puvva videha 12 pazcima meM aparagoyAna athavA apara
godAna 13 uttara meM uttara kuru14 aura dakSiNa meM jambUdvIpa hai  / 15 1. 2.
3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. [185 lokaprakAza sarga 15, zloka 6 vahI. zloka 18 vahI. zloka
26 vahI. zloka 28 9. vahI. 15 / 31-32 jambUdvIpaprajJapti saTIka vakSaskAra 4,
sU. 103, patra 359 - 360 vahI. 4 / 113. patra 359 / 2 (ka) samavAyAMga sUtra
124, patra 207/2, pra. jaina dharma pracAraka sabhA, bhAvanagara (kha)
jambUdvIpaprajJapti saTIka vakSaskAra 1/10/67 (ga) harivaMzapurANa 5 / 4-5. (ka)
lokaprakAza 15/34-34. (kha) harivaMzapurANa 5/4-5. 10. (ka) lokaprakAza 15/36-37
(kha) harivaMzapurANa 5 / 6-7 11. zrImadbhAgavata pra. khaNDa, skaMdha 4, a. 1,
pR. 546 12. DikzanarI Ava pAlI prApara nemsa, khaNDa 2, pR. 236 13. vahI. khaNDa
1, pR. 117 14. vahI. khaNDa 1, pR. 355 15. vahI. khaNDa 1 pR. 941

Page #227 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[186] According to the Buddhist tradition, this Jambudvipa is ten thousand
yojanas in size. It is called the ocean because it is filled with water for four
thousand yojanas, and humans live in three thousand yojanas, while the remaining
three thousand yojanas are occupied by the Himavan mountain, which is adorned
with eighty-four thousand peaks (peaks) and is higher than the 500 rivers
flowing around it. _ It is clear from the above description that what we know as
India is known as Jambudvipa among the Buddhists. (5) Dwaraka (Dwaravati) _
Dwaraka has held a special place among the ancient famous cities of India. Both
the Shraman and Vedic literatures discuss Dwaraka in detail. (1) According to
Jnatadharmakatha and Antagadadasao, Dwaraka was in Saurashtra. It was twelve
yojanas long from east to west and nine yojanas wide from north to south. It was
itself built by Kubera with a golden rampart, which had Kapishirshak-Kanguri
adorned with various gems of five categories. It was very beautiful, like
Alkapuri and directly like Devalok. It was a magnificent and exemplary sight. To
the north-east of it was a mountain called Raivatak. Near it was a beautiful
garden called Nandavan, which was laden with fruits and flowers throughout the
year. In that garden was a Yaksha temple called Surapriya. In that Dwaraka, Shri
Krishna Vasudeva lived with his entire royal family. According to Brihatkalpa,
there was a stone rampart around Dwaraka. The same description of Dwaraka is
found in Vanhidasaao.11 _ Acharya Hemchandra, while describing Dwaraka, wrote
that it was twelve yojanas in size and nine yojanas wide. It was made of gems.
Around it was 18 hands high, 9 hands underground and 12 hands 5. Ibid. Vol. 1,
p. 941 6. Ibid. Vol. 2, p. 1325-1326 7. (a) India As Described In Early Texts Of
Buddhism And Jainism p.1, Written by Vimalacharan Law, (b) Jataka First Volume,
p. 282, Ishanchandra Ghosh (c) Outline of Indian History Bha.1 p. 4, Author-
Jayachandra Vidyalaankar (d) Pali English Dictionary p.112, T.W. Rhys Davids and
William Stede (e) Introduction to Suttanipata-Dharmarakshit p.1 (f) Jataka-Map-
Bhadant Anand Kaushalyayan 8. (a) Jnatadharmakatha 1/16, Sutra 113 (b)
Antagadadasao 9. Jnatadharmakatha 1/16, Sutra 58 10. Brihatkalpa Part 2, p. 251
11. Vanhidasaao

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 186] [antakRddazA bauddha paramparA ke anusAra yaha jambUdvIpa dasa hajAra
yojana bar3A hai| isameM cAra hajAra yojana jala se bharA hone ke kAraNa samudra
kahA jAtA hai aura tIna hajAra yojana meM mAnava rahate haiM, zeSa tIna hajAra
yojana meM caurAsI hajAra kUToM (coTiyoM) se suzobhita cAroM ora bahatI 500
nadiyoM se U~cA himavAna parvata hai| _ ullikhita varNana se spaSTa hai ki jise
hama bhArata ke nAma se jAnate haiM vahI bauddhoM meM jambUdvIpa ke nAma se
vikhyAta hai| (5) dvArakA (dvAravatI) _bhArata kI prAcIna prasiddha nagariyoM
meM dvArakA kA apanA viziSTa sthAna rahA hai| zramaNa aura vaidika donoM hI
saMskRtiyoM ke vAGmaya meM dvArakA kI vistAra se carcA hai| (1) jJAtAdharmakathA
va antagaDadasAo ke anusAra dvArakA saurASTra meM thii| vaha pUrva-pazcima meM
bAraha yojana lambI aura uttara-dakSiNa meM nava yojana vistIrNa thii| vaha
svayaM kubera dvArA nirmita sone ke prAkAra vAlI thI, jisa para pAMca vargoM ke
nAnA maNiyoM se susajjita kapizIrSaka-kaMgUre the| vaha bar3I suramya,
alakApurI-tulya aura pratyakSa devaloka-sadRza thii| vaha prAsAdika darzanIya
abhirUpa tathA pratirUpa thii| usake uttara-pUrva meM raivataka nAmaka parvata
thaa| usake pAsa samasta RtuoM meM phala-phUloM se ladA rahanevAlA nandanavana
nAmaka suramya udyAna thaa| usa udyAna meM surapriya yakSAyatana thaa| usa
dvArakA meM zrIkRSNa vAsudeva apane sampUrNa rAjaparivAra ke sAtha rahate the|
bRhatkalpa ke anusAra dvArakA ke cAroM ora patthara kA prAkAra thaa| vaNhidasAo
meM bhI yahI dvArakA kA varNana milatA hai|11 _ AcArya hemacandra ne dvArakA kA
varNana karate hue likhA hai ki vaha bAraha yojana AyAma vAlI aura nava yojana
vistRta thii| vaha ratnamayI thii| usake AsapAsa 18 hAtha UMcA, 9 hAtha
bhUmigata aura 12 hAtha 5. vahI. khaNDa 1, pR. 941 6. vahI. khaNDa 2, pR.
1325-1326 7. (ka) iNDiyA aija DeskrAibDa ina arlI TeksaTsa Ava buddhijma aiMDa
jainijma pR1. vimalacaraNa laoN likhita, (kha) jAtaka prathama khaNDa, pR. 282,
IzAnacandra ghoSa (ga) bhAratIya itihAsa kI rUparekhA bhA.1 pR. 4, lekhaka-
jayacaMdra vidyAlaMkAra (gha) pAlI iMgaliza DikzanarI pR.112, TI. DablyU rIsa
Devisa tathA viliyama sTeDa (Ga) suttanipAta kI bhUmikA-dharmarakSita pR.1 (ca)
jAtaka-mAnacitra-bhadanta Ananda kauzalyAyana 8. (ka) jJAtAdharmakathA 1/16,
sUtra 113 (kha) antagaDadasAo 9. jJAtAdharma kathA 1/16, sUtra 58 10. bRhatkalpa
bhAga 2, pR. 251 11. vaNhidasAo

Page #228 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Appendix 2] [187] The fort was surrounded by a moat on all sides. There were
many palaces and forts in all directions. Near the palace of Rama-Krishna was an
assembly called Prabhasa. To the east of it was the Raivatak Giri, to the south
was the Malyaavan Shail, to the west was the Saumanas Parvat, and to the north
was the Gandhamadana Giri. [3] _Acharya Hemchandra, Acharya Sheelank,
Devprabhasuri, Acharya Jinsen, Acharya Gunabhadra, etc., both Svetambara and
Digambara writers, as well as the Vedic Harivansh Purana, Vishnu Purana and
Shrimad Bhagavat [11], etc., have considered Dwarka to be on the seashore, and
many writers have described the construction of Dwarka with twelve yojanas of
land from the sea. Shakrajnya Vaishramana created a city of jewels. Twelve
yojanas long and nine yojanas wide. [399] Eighteen hastas high and nine hastas
underground. He made a beautiful moat twelve hastas wide. [400] -Trishakti.
Parva 8, Sarg 5, p. 92 Trishakti, Parva 8, Sarg 5, p. 92
Chauppannamahapurishcharit, Pandavcharitra, Sadyo Dwaravati, Kubera created the
supreme city. The city is twelve yojanas long and nine yojanas wide. With a
diamond wall and surrounded by a sea moat. -Harivansh Purana 41.18-19. Mounting
the horse-shaped god, he went into the ocean. In the middle, there was a city of
twelve yojanas. [20] Thus said by Naigama with his voice, Madhusudan. He created
it thus, being certain, in that holy place, who is his friend? [21] The sea,
like a fearsome enemy, divided itself into two. -Uttara Purana 71.20-23, p. 376
9. Harivansh Purana 2.54 10. Vishnu Purana 5.23.13 11. Thus, having consulted,
the Lord created a city of twelve yojanas. A wonderful city, entirely within the
sea. -Shrimad Bhagavat 10.50.50 (a) That place, given by the earth, is the city
of the four. You are the one who has established the abode of Vasudeva on the
banks of the Sindhu. -Bhav-Bhavana 2537

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pariziSTa 2] [187 caur3A saba ora se khAI se ghirA huA kilA thaa| cAroM dizAoM
meM aneka prAsAda aura kile the| rAma-kRSNa ke prAsAda ke pAsa prabhAsA nAmaka
sabhA thii| usake samIpa pUrva meM raivataka giri, dakSiNa meM mAlyavAna zaila,
pazcima meM saumanasa parvata aura uttara meM gaMdhamAdana giri the|3 _AcArya
hemacandra, AcArya zIlAGka, devaprabhasUri, AcArya jinasena', AcArya guNabhadra
Adi zvetAmbara va digambara granthakAroM ne tathA vaidika harivaMzapurANa,
viSNupurANa aura zrImadbhAgavata11 Adi meM dvArakA ko samudra ke kinAre mAnA hai
aura kitane hI granthakAroM ne samudra se bAraha yojana dharatI lekara dvArakA
kA nirmANa kiyA batAyA hai| zakrAjJayA vaizramaNazcakre ratnamayI puriim|
dvAdazayojanAyA navayojanavistRtAm  //  399  /  /
tuMgamaSTAdazahastAnnavahastAMzca bhuugtm| vistIrNa dvAdazahastAMzcakre vapraM
sukhaatikm|| 400 //  -triSaSTi. parva 8,sarga5, pR. 92 triSaSTi, parva 8, sarga
5, pR. 92 cauppannamahApurisacariyaM pANDavacaritra sadyo dvAravatI cakre
kuberaH paramAM puriim| nagarI dvAdazAyAmA, nvyojnvistRtiH| vajraprAkAra-valayA,
smudr-prikhaavRtaa|| -harivaMzapurANa 41 / 18-19. azvAkRtidharaM devaM samAruhya
pyonidheH| gacchataste'bhavenmadhye, puraM dvaadshyojnm||20|| ityukto
naigamAkhyena svareNa mdhusuudnH| cakre tathaiva nizcitya sati puNye na kaH
sakhA  /  21  //  dvedhA bhedamayAt vArdhirbhayAdiva hare rayAt  /  /
-uttarapurANa 71 / 20-23, pR. 376 9. harivaMzapurANa 2 / 54 10. viSNupurANa 5  /
23  /  13 11. iti saMmantraya bhagavAn durga dvaadsh-yojnm| antaH samudre
nagaraM kRtsnAdbhutamacIkarat  //  -zrImadbhAgavata 10 a.50|50 (ka) tA jaha
puTvi dinnaM ThANaM nayarIe AimacauNhaM  /  tumae tiviTThapamuhANaM vAsudevANaM
siMdhutaDe  /  /  -bhava-bhAvanA 2537

Page #229 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[188] In the Mahabharata, Shri Krishna told Yudhishthira about his arrival in
Dwaraka: "Leaving Mathura, we came to a city called Kushalasthali, adorned by
the Raivata mountain. There, we built an impregnable fort, which was called
Dwaravati or Dwaraka because of its many gates." ... In the Mahabharata Jana-
Parva, Neelakantha has interpreted Kushavarta as Dwaraka. In 'Braj ka Sanskritik
Itihas', Prabhudayal Mittal has written that the Yadavas' arrival in the
Shursena Janapada led to the great progress of the small kingdom of Dwaraka.
There, an impenetrable fort and a vast city were built, and it was organized as
a powerful Yadava kingdom of the Andhaka-Vrishni clan. That strong kingdom on
the coast of India also became a vigilant sentinel of the country against the
invasion of foreign non-Aryans. In the Gujarati language, 'Dwar' means port.
Thus, Dwaraka or Dwaravati means the city of ports. From those ports, the
Yadavas traveled to distant seas and earned vast wealth. In Dwaraka, there was
no person who was poor, unfortunate, weak in body, or impure in mind. (1) Rhys
Davids has written that Kamboja was the capital of Dwaraka. (2) In Petavaththu,
Dwaraka is considered a city of Kamboja. Dr. Malashekhara, explaining this
statement, has written that it is possible that this Kamboja is 'Kansabhoj',
which was the country of the ten sons of Andhaka-Vrishni. (2) Dr. Motichandra
considers Kamboja to be the Pamir region and calls Dwaraka the city of
'Darvaaj', located north of the Vadarvansha. "Kushalasthali Puri, beautiful,
adorned by Raivata. There, we built a dwelling, O King! || 50 || ... And also a
fort, impregnable even to the gods. Even women would fight there, what to speak
of the Vrishni warriors! || 51 || ... Leaving Mathura, we went to Dwaravati
Puri. || 67 ||" -Mahabharata Sabhaparva, Chapter 14 (a) Mahabharata Janaparva,
Chapter 160, Verse 50 (b) Atit ka Anavaran, Page 163. 3. Second Volume, Braj ka
Itihas, Page 47. 4. Harivansha Purana 2.5.65. Buddhist India, P. 28 Kamboja was
the adjoining country in the extreme North-West, with Dvaraka as its Capital. 6.
Petavaththu Part 2, Page 9. 7. The Dictionary of Pali Proper Names, Part 1, Page
1126. 8. Geographical and Economic Studies in the Mahabharata, Pages 32-40.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 188] [antakRddazA ..mahAbhArata meM zrIkRSNa ne dvArakAgamana ke bAre meM
yudhiSThira se kahA-mathurA ko chor3akara hama kuzalasthalI nAmaka nagarI meM
Aye jo raivataka parvata se upazobhita thii| vahAM durgama durga kA nirmANa
kiyA, adhika dvAroM vAlI hone ke kAraNa dvAravatI athavA dvArakA khlaaii|1 ....
mahAbhArata jana-parva meM nIlakaMTha ne kuzAvarta kA artha dvArakA kiyA hai| _
'braja kA sAMskRtika itihAsa' meM prabhudayAla mittala ne likhA hai zUrasena
janapada se yAdavoM ke A jAne ke kAraNa dvArakA ke usa choTe se rAjya kI bar3I
unnati huI thii| vahAM para durbhedya durga aura vizAla nagara kA nirmANa karAyA
gayA aura use aMdhaka-vRSNi saMgha ke eka zaktizAlI yAdava rAjya ke rUpa meM
saMgaThita kiyA gyaa| bhArata ke samudra-taTa kA vaha sudRr3ha rAjya videzI
anAryoM ke AkramaNa ke lie deza kA eka sajaga praharI bhI bana gayA thaa|
gujarAtI bhASA meM 'dvAra' kA artha baMdaragAha hai| isa prakAra dvArakA yA
dvAravatI kA artha huA baMdaragAhoM kI ngrii|' una baMdaragAhoM se yAdavoM ne
sudUra-samudra kI yAtrA kara vipula sampatti arjita kI thii| dvArakA meM
nirdhana, bhAgyahIna, nirbala tana aura malina mana kA koI bhI vyakti nahIM
thaa| (1) rAyasa DeviDsa ne kamboja ko dvArakA kI rAjadhAnI likhA hai| (2)
petavatthu meM dvArakA ko kamboja kA eka nagara mAnA hai| DaoNkTara malazekhara
ne prastuta kathana kA spaSTIkaraNa karate hue likhA hai saMbhava hai-yaha
kamboja hI 'kaMsabhoja' ho, jo ki aMdhakavRSNi ke dasa putroM kA deza thaa| (2)
DaoN. motIcandra kamboja ko pAmIra pradeza mAnate haiM aura dvArakA ko
vadaravaMzA se uttara meM avasthita 'daravAja' nAmaka nagara kahate haiN|
kuzalasthalI purIM ramyAM raivtenopshobhitaam| tato nivezaM tasyAM ca kRtavanto
vayaM nRpa!  //  50  //  . tathaiva durga-saMskAraM devairapi duraasdm|
striyo'pi yasyAM yudhyeyuH kimu vRSNi mahArathAH  // 51 //  ... mathurAM
saMparityajya gatA dvaarvtiipuriim||67|| -mahAbhAratasabhAparva, a. 14 (ka)
mahAbhArata janaparva, a. 160 zloka 50 (kha) atIta kA anAvaraNa, pR. 163. 3.
dvitIya khaNDa braja kA itihAsa, pR. 47 4. harivaMzapurANa 2 / 5  /  65.
Buddhist India, P. 28 Kamboja was the adjoining country in the extreme North-
West, with Dvaraka as its Capital. 6. petavatthu bhAga 2, pR. 9 7. di DikzanarI
oNpha pAlI praoNmara nemsa, bhAga 1, pR. 1126 8. jyogrAphikala eNDa ikonaoNmika
sTaDIja ina dI mahAbhArata, pRSTha 32-40

Page #230 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Appendix 2] **(189 (4))** The Ghat Jataka states that on one side of Dwaraka,
the vast ocean was frolicking, while on the other side stood a towering
mountain. Dr. Malashekhara also holds this view. **(5)** According to Upadhyaya
Bharatsingh, Dwaraka was a city in Saurashtra. Currently, twenty miles beyond
the town of Dwaraka, in the Gulf of Kutch, there is a small island. There is
another Dwaraka there, known as 'Bet Dwaraka'. It is believed that Lord Krishna
used to visit this place for excursions. Both Dwaraka and Bet Dwaraka have
temples dedicated to Radha, Rukmini, Satyabhama, etc. **(6)** In the Bombay
Gazetteer, several scholars have speculated that Dwaraka was located in Punjab.
**(7)** Dr. Anant Sadashiv Altekar has written - Ancient Dwaraka sank into the
sea, therefore, it is doubtful to determine the location of Dwaraka.  **(6)**
Dootipalash Chaitya The garden called Dootipalash was outside the commercial
town. Here, Lord Mahavira initiated Anand Gathapati, Sudarshan Shreshthi, etc.,
into the Shravak Dharma. **(7)** Purnabhadra Chaitya This was a famous garden in
Champa. Here, Lord Mahavira initiated over a hundred people into the Shraman and
Shravak Dharma. King Kunik went to pay homage to the Lord with great pomp and
ceremony. **(8)** Bhaddilpur Bhaddilpur was the capital of Malayadesh. It is
counted among the most important regions. According to Muni Kalyanvijayji, near
the villages of Harria and Dantara in Gaya district, about one hundred miles
south of Patna and twenty-eight miles southwest of Gaya, was the ancient
Bhaddilnagari, which in the past was a sacred pilgrimage site for Jains known as
Bhaddilpur.  According to the necessary sutra, Shraman Lord Mahavira spent a
Chaturmas in Bhaddilpur. Dr. Jagdishchandra Jain believes that the village
called Bhadia in Hazaribagh district was Bhaddilpur. This place is six miles
from Hunterganj, near the Kulua hill.  1. Jataka (Fourth Volume) p. 284 2. The
Dictionary of Pali Proper Names, Part 1, p. 1125. 3. Buddhist Period Indian
Geography, p. 487 4. Bombay Gazetteer Part 1 Part 1, p. 11 Note 1 5. Indian
Antiquary, 1925, Supplement p. 25. 6. Shraman Lord Mahavira, p. 380 7. Jain Agam
Literature in Indian Society, p. 477

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pariziSTa 2] [189 (4) ghaTa jAtaka kA abhimata hai ki dvArakA ke eka ora virAT
samudra aThakheliyAM kara rahA thA to dUsarI ora gaganacumbI parvata thaa| DaoN.
malazekhara kA bhI yahI abhimata rahA hai| (5) upAdhyAya bharatasiMha ke
mantavyAnusAra dvArakA saurASTra kA eka nagara thaa| samprati dvArakA kasbe se
Age bIsa mIla kI dUrI para kaccha kI khAr3I meM eka choTA-sA TApU hai| vahAM eka
dUsarI dvArakA hai jo 'beTa dvArakA' kahI jAtI hai| mAnA jAtA hai ki yahAM para
zrIkRSNa paribhramaNArtha Ate the| dvArakA aura beTa dvArakA donoM hI sthaloM
meM rAdhA, rukmiNI, satyabhAmA Adi ke mandira haiN| (6) baoNmbe gejeTIara meM
kitane hI vidvAnoM ne dvArakA kI avasthiti paMjAba meM mAnane kI saMbhAvanA kI
hai| (7) DaoN. anantasadAziva altekara ne likhA hai- prAcIna dvArakA samudra meM
DUba gaI, ataH dvArakA kI avasthiti kA nirNaya karanA saMzayAspada hai|5 (6)
dUtipalAza caitya dUtipalAza nAmaka udyAna vANijyagrAma ke bAhara thaa| jahA~
para bhagavAn mahAvIra ne Ananda gAthApati, sudarzana zreSThI Adi ko zrAvaka
dharma meM dIkSita kiyA thaa| (7) pUrNabhadra caitya campA kA yaha prasiddha
udyAna thaa| jahAM para bhagavAn mahAvIra ne zatAdhika vyaktiyoM ko zramaNa va
zrAvaka dharma meM dIkSita kiyA thaa| rAjA kUNika bhagavAn ko bar3e ThATha-bATha
se vandana ke liye gayA thaa| (8) bhaddilapura bhaddilapura malayadeza kI
rAjadhAnI thaa| isakI parigaNanA atizaya kSetroM meM kI gaI hai| muni
kalyANavijaya jI ke abhimatAnusAra paTanA se dakSiNa meM lagabhaga eka sau mIla
aura gayA se naiRtya dakSiNa meM aTThAIsa mIla kI dUrI para gayA jile meM
avasthita harariyA aura dantArA gAMvoM ke pAsa prAcIna bhaddilanagarI thI, jo
pichale samaya meM bhaddilapura nAma se jainoM kA eka pavitra tIrtha rahA hai|6
Avazyaka sUtra ke nirdezAnusAra zramaNa bhagavAn mahAvIra ne eka cAturmAsa
bhaddilapura meM kiyA thaa| DaoN. jagadIzacandra jaina kA mantavya hai ki
hajArIbAga jile meM bhadiyA nAmaka jo gA~va hai, vahI . bhaddilapura thaa| yaha
sthAna haMTaragaMja se chaha mIla ke phAsale para kuluhA pahAr3I ke pAsa hai| 1.
jAtaka (caturtha khaNDa) pR. 284 di DikzanarI oNpha pAlI praoNmara nemsa, bhAga
1, pR.1125. 3. bauddhakAlIna bhAratIya bhUgola, pR. 487 4. baoNmbe gejeTIara
bhAga 1 pArTa 1, pR.11 kA TippaNa 1 5. iNDiyana enTikverI, san 1925, saplimeNTa
pR. 25. zramaNa bhagavAn mahAvIra, pR. 380 7. jaina Agama sAhitya meM bhAratIya
samAja, pR. 477

Page #231 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  [190] **Antakrid Dasha (9) Bharat Kshetra**  The landmass at the southern
end of Jambudvipa is known as Bharat Kshetra. It is crescent-shaped. According
to Jambudvipaprajnapti, it is surrounded by the Lavanasamudra (salt sea) on the
east, west, and south. In the north, it is bordered by the Chulhaimvant
mountain. The length of Bharat Kshetra from north to south is 526 yojanas and 6
kala, and from east to west, it is 14471 yojanas and slightly less than 6 kala.
Its area is 53,80,681 yojanas, 17 kala, and 17 vikala.  The boundaries of Bharat
Kshetra are marked by the Chulhaimvant mountain in the north, the Ganga river in
the east, and the Sindhu river in the west. In the middle of Bharat Kshetra lies
the Vaitalya mountain, which is 50 yojanas wide. The Lavanasamudra lies to the
east and west of this mountain. The Vaitalya mountain divides Bharat Kshetra
into two parts, known as Uttar Bharat (North Bharat) and Dakshin Bharat (South
Bharat). The Ganga and Sindhu rivers, which originate from the Chulhaimvant
mountain, flow through the Vaitalya mountain and then empty into the
Lavanasamudra. Due to these rivers, Uttar Bharat is divided into three parts,
and Dakshin Bharat is also divided into three parts.  The three parts of Uttar
Bharat are called Anarya. The parts of Dakshin Bharat that are adjacent to the
Anarya regions are also inhabited by Anarya people. The middle part of Dakshin
Bharat is considered to be inhabited by Aryas, and it is divided into 25
countries. Uttar Bharat is 238 yojanas and 3 kala from north to south, and
Dakshin Bharat is also 238 yojanas and 3 kala from north to south.  According to
Jinasena, the following countries are located in Bharat Kshetra: Sukoshal,
Avanti, Pundr, Ashmak, Kuru, Kashi, Kalinga, Anga, Bang, Suhm, Samudraka,
Kashmir, Ushinar, Anart, Vatsa, Panchal, Malava, Dasharna, Kachchh, Magadh,
Vidarbha, Kurujangal, Karhat, Maharashtra, Surashtr, Abhir, Konkan, Vanavas,
Andhra, Karnatak, Kaushal, Chola, Kerala, Das, Abhisar, Sauvir, Shurasen,
Aparantaka, Videh, Sindhu, Gandhar, Yavan, Chedi, Pallava, Kamboj, Aratt,
Valhik, Turushk, Shak, and Kekaya.  In Buddhist literature, the names of the
following sixteen Janapadas are found: Anga, Magadh, Kashi, Kaushal, Vajji,
Malla, Cheti, Vatsa, Kuru, Panchal, Matsya, Shurasen, Ashmak, Avanti, Gandhar,
and Kamboj.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 190] [antakRddazA (9) bharatakSetra jambUdvIpa kA dakSiNI chora kA bhUkhaNDa
bharatakSetra ke nAma se vizruta hai| yaha ardhacandrAkAra hai|
jambUdvIpaprajJapti ke anusAra isake pUrva, pazcima tathA dakSiNa dizA meM
lavaNasamudra hai| uttara dizA meM cUlahimavaMta parvata hai| uttara se dakSiNa
taka bharatakSetra kI lambAI 526 yojana 6 kalA hai aura pUrva se pazcima kI
lambAI 14471 yojana aura kucha kama 6 kalA hai| isakA kSetraphala 53,80,681
yojana, 17 kalA aura 17 vikalA hai| bharatakSetra kI sImA meM uttara meM
cUlahimavaMta nAmaka parvata se pUrva meM gaMgA aura pazcima meM sindhu nAmaka
nadiyAM bahatI haiM  /  bharatakSetra ke madhya bhAga meM 50 yojana vistAravAlA
vaitADhya parvata hai| jisake pUrva aura pazcima meM lavaNasamudra hai| isa
vaitADhya se bharata-kSetra do bhAgoM meM vibhakta ho gayA hai jinheM uttara
bharata aura dakSiNa bharata kahate haiN| jo gaMgA aura sindhu nadiyA~
cUlahimavaMta parvata se nikalatI haiM ve vaitADhya parvata meM se hokara
lavaNasamudra meM giratI haiN| isa prakAra ina nadiyoM ke kAraNa, uttara bharata
khaNDa tIna bhAgoM meM aura dakSiNa bharata khaNDa bhI tIna bhAgoM meM vibhakta
hotA hai| ina chaha khaNDoM meM uttarArddha ke tIna khaNDa anArya kahe jAte haiM
/  dakSiNa ke agala-bagala ke khaNDoM meM bhI anArya rahate haiN| jo
madhyakhaNDa hai usameM 25  //  deza Arya mAne gaye haiN| uttarArddha bharata
uttara se dakSiNa taka 238 yojana 3 kalA hai aura dakSiNArddha bharata bhI 238
yojana 3 kalA hai| jinasena ke anusAra bharata kSetra meM sukozala, avantI,
pUNDra, azmaka, kuru, kAzI, kaliMga, aMga, baMga, suhma, samudraka, kAzmIra,
uzInara, Anarta, vatsa, paMcAla, mAlava, dazArNa, kaccha, magadha, vidarbha,
kurujAMgala karahATa, mahArASTra, surASTra, AbhIra, koMkaNa. vanavAsa. Andhra.
karNATaka. kauzala. cola. kerala dAsa, abhisAra, sauvIra, zUrasena, aparAntaka,
videha sindhu, gAndhAra, yavana, cedi, pallava, kAmboja, AraTTa, vAlhIka,
turuSka, zaka aura kekaya Adi dezoM kI racanA mAnI gaI haiN| bauddha sAhitya meM
aMga, magadha, kAzI, kauzala, vajja, malla, ceti, vatsa, kuru, paMcAla, matsya,
zUrasena, azmaka, avantI, gaMdhAra aura kamboja ina solaha janapadoM ke nAma
milate haiN|10 1. jambUdvIpaprajJapti, saTIka, vakSaskAra 1, sUtra 10, pR.652 2.
vhii.1|1|65-2 3. lokaprakAza, sarga 16, zloka 30-31 4. lokaprakAza, sarga 16,
zloka 33-34 5. vahI. 16  /  48 6. vahI. 16  /  35 7. vahI. 16  /  36 8.
AdipurANa 16  /  152-156 9. (ka) vahI. 16, zloka 44 (kha) bRhatkalpabhASya 1,
3263 vRtti, tathA 1, 3275-3281. 10. aMguttaranikAya; pAliTeksTa sosAyaTI
saMskaraNa: jilda 1, pR. 213, jilda 4, pR. 252

Page #232 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Appendix 2] [191 (10) Rajgir The capital of Magadha was Rajgir, which was also
known by many other names such as Magadhapur, Kshitipratisthata, Chanakpur,
Rishabhpur, and Kushagrapur. According to the Aavashyak Churni, fires frequently
broke out in Kushagrapur. Therefore, King Shrenik established Rajgir. During the
Mahabharata era, Jarasandha ruled in Rajgir. In the Ramayana era, the twentieth
Tirthankara, Munisuvrat, was born in Rajgir. According to Digambar Jain texts,
Bhagwan Mahavira's first sermon and the establishment of the Sangha took place
in Rajgir. The birthplace and nirvana place of the last Kevali, Jambu, was also
Rajgir. Dhanna and Shalibhadra, wealthy Kubera, were residents of Rajgir.6 The
great and courageous devotee Seth Sudarshan also lived in Rajgir. Rajgir had the
honor of giving birth to many great souls like Abhaykumar, a personification of
talent. Surrounded by five hills, it was also called Giribraj. The names of
these hills are different in Jain, Buddhist, and Vedic traditions. These hills
are still present in Rajgir today. The Vaibhar and Vipul hills are specifically
mentioned in Jain texts. They were lush green with trees and so on. Many Jain
Shramanas attained nirvana there. Below the Vaibhar hill were Tapoda and
Mahatapopanir Prabha. 1. Aavashyak Churni 2, p. 158 2. Bhagwan Arishtanemi and
Karmayogi Shri Krishna: An Investigation, 3. (a) Rajighe Munisuvvaydeva Pauma
Sumittra Raahim. -Tiloaypannatti (b) Harivansh Purana, Sarg 60 (c). Uttar
Purana, Parva 67 4. (a) Harivansh Purana, Sarg 2, Shlok 61-62 (b) Padma Purana,
Parva 2, Shlok 113 (c) Maha Purana, Parva 1, Shlok 196 5. Uttar Purana, Parva 76
Jambu Sami Chariyam, Parva 5-13 6. Trishashti. 10.1.90. 136-148 7.
Antakritdasang Trishashti 9. Jain-Vipul, Ratna, Uday, Swarg, and Vaibhar Vedic-
Vaihar, Baraah, Vrishabh, Rishigiri, and Chaityak Buddhist-Chandan, Mijjhakut,
Veebhar, Isgiti, and Vepunn. -Suttanipata's Atthakatha 2, p. 382

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pariziSTa 2] [191 (10) rAjagRha magadha kI rAjadhAnI rAjagRha thI, jise
magadhapura, kSitipratiSThata, caNakapura, RSabhapura aura kuzAgrapura Adi aneka
nAmoM se pukArA jAtA rahA hai| Avazyaka cUrNi ke anusAra kuzAgrapura meM prAyaH
Aga laga jAtI thii| ataH rAjA zreNika ne rAjagRha bsaayaa| mahAbhArata yuga meM
rAjagRha meM jarAsaMdha rAjya karatA thaa| rAmAyaNa kAla meM bIsaveM tIrthaMkara
munisuvrata kA janma rAjagRha meM huA thaa| digambara jaina granthoM ke anusAra
bhagavAn mahAvIra kA prathama upadeza aura saMgha kI saMsthApanA rAjagRha meM
huI thii| antima kevalI jambU kI janmasthalI nirvANasthalI bhI rAjagRha rahI
hai| dhannA aura zAlibhadra jaise dhana kubera rAjagRha ke nivAsI the|6 parama
sAhasI mahAn bhakta seTha sudarzana bhI rAjagRha kA rahane vAlA thaa|
pratibhAmUrti abhayakumAra Adi aneka mahAn AtmAoM ko janma dene kA zreya
rAjagRha ko thaa| pAMca pahAr3iyoM se ghire hone ke kAraNa use giribraja bhI
kahate the| una pahAr3iyoM ke nAma jaina, bauddha, aura vaidika ina tInoM hI
paramparAoM meM pRthak-pRthak rahe haiN| ye pahAr3iyAM Aja bhI rAjagRha meM
haiN| vaibhAra aura vipula pahAr3iyoM kA varNana jaina granthoM meM vizeSa rUpa
se AyA hai| vRkSAdi se ve khUba harI-bharI thiiN| vahAM aneka jaina-zramaNoM ne
nirvANa prApta kiyA thaa| vaibhAra pahAr3I ke nIce hI tapodA aura
mahAtapopanIraprabha 1. Avazyaka cUrNi 2, pR. 158 2. bhagavAna ariSTanemi aura
karmayogI zrIkRSNa : eka anuzIlan, 3. (ka) rAjagihe muNisuvvayadevA paumA
sumitta rAehiM  /  -tiloyapaNNatti (kha) harivaMzapurANa, sarga 60 (ga).
uttarapurANa, parva 67 4. (ka) harivaMzapurANa, sarga 2, zloka 61-62 (kha)
padmapurANa, parva 2, zloka 113 (ga) mahApurANa, parva 1, zloka 196 5.
uttarapurANa, parva 76 jambUsAmI cariyaM, parva 5-13 6. triSaSTi. 10 / 1 / 90  /
136-148 7. antakRtdazAMga triSaSTi 9. jaina-vipula, ratna, udaya, svarga aura
vaibhAra vaidika-vaihAra, bArAha, vRSabha, RSigiri aura caityaka bauddha-
candana, mijjhakUTa, vebhAra, isagiti aura vepunna  /  -suttanipAta kI aTTakathA
2, pR. 382

Page #233 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[192] There was a vast pond of hot water called Antakrid Dasha. It is still
famous in Rajgir as Tapovan. - Bhagwan Mahavir spent many Chaturmas there. The
Agam literature mentions more than two hundred instances of his Samavasaran
there. There were gardens like Gunashil, Mandicuchch and Moggaripaani. Bhagwan
Mahavir often stayed in Gunashil (now called Gunava) garden. Rajgir was a major
center of trade. Merchants used to come from far and wide. There were routes
from there to famous cities of India like Taxila, Pratistan, Kapilvastu,
Kushinara, etc. [6] Buddhist texts describe the beautiful paddy fields there.
Agam literature describes Rajgir as a direct Devlok and similar to Alakapuri.
Maha Kavi Pushpadant wrote - Rajgiri made of gold and silver appeared as if
Alakapuri from heaven had come to earth. Ravishena Acharya called Rajgir the
youth of the earth. Many other poets have elaborated on the importance of
Rajgir. Not only Jains but also Buddhists had a sweet relationship with Rajgir.
It is clear from Vinayapitaka that Buddha came to Rajgir after leaving home.
Then King Shrenik encouraged him to stay in Rajgir with him. But Buddha did not
agree. Buddha came to Rajgir many times to preach his religion. 1. (a)
Vyakhyaprajnapti, 2.5, p. 141 (b) Brihatkalpa Bhashya, Vritti 2. 3429 (c)
Vayupuran, 1.4.5 (a) Kalpasutra, 4. 123 (b) Vyakhyaprajnapti, 7.4, 5.9, 2.5 (c)
Aavashyak Niyukti, 473. 492. 518 3. (a) Jnatadharmakatha, p. 47 (b) Dasha Shruta
Skandh, 109. p. 364 (c) Upasak Dasha, 8. p. 51 4. Vyakhyaprajnapti, 15. 5.
Antakrid Dashaang 6, p. 31 Jain Agam Literature in Indian Society, p. 462 7.
Pacchakkham Devlokabhuya evam Alakapurisaankasa. Tahim Paruvaru Name Rayagihhu
Kanayarayan Kodihim Ghadiu. Baliband Gharam Taho Sukhaihim Suranayaru
Gayanpadiu. - Nayakumar Chariu, 6 Tatrasti Sarvatah Kantam Namna Rajagriham
Puram. Kusumamodasubhagam Bhuvanasyava Yauvanam. Padma Puran 33.2

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 192] [antakRddazA nAmaka uSNa pAnI kA eka vizAla kuNDa thaa| vartamAna meM bhI
vaha rAjagira meM tapovana nAma se prasiddha hai| - bhagavAn mahAvIra ne aneka
cAturmAsa vahAM vyatIta kiye| do sau se adhika bAra unake samavasaraNa hone ke
ullekha Agama sAhitya meM milate haiN| vahA~ para guNazIla3 maMDikuccha aura
moggaripANi Adi udyAna the| bhagavAn mahAvIra prAyaH guNazIla (vartamAna meM
jise guNAvA kahate haiM) udyAna meM ThaharA karate the| rAjagRha vyApAra kA
pramukha kendra thaa| vahAM para dUra-dUra se vyApArI AyA karate the| vahAM se
takSazilA, pratiSThAna, kapilavastu, kuzInAlA, prabhRti bhArata ke prasiddha
nagaroM meM jAne ke mArga the|6 bauddha granthoM meM vahAM ke sundara dhAna ke
khetoM kA varNana hai| Agama sAhitya meM rAjagRha ko pratyakSa devalokabhUta
evaM alakApurI sadRza kahA hai| mahAkavi puSpadanta ne likhA hai-sone, cAMdI se
nirmita rAjagRhI aisI pratibhAsita hotI thI ki svarga se alakApurI hI pRthvI
para A gaI hai| raviSeNAcArya ne rAjagRha ko dharatI kA yauvana kahA hai| anya
aneka kaviyoM ne rAjagRha ke mahattva para vistAra se prakAza DAlA hai| jainiyoM
kA hI nahIM apitu bauddhoM kA bhI rAjagRha ke sAtha madhura saMbaMdha rahA hai|
vinayapiTaka se spaSTa hai ki buddha gRhatyAga kara rAjagRha aae| taba rAjA
zreNika ne unako apane sAtha rAjagRha meM rahane kI preraNA dI thii| para buddha
ne vaha bAta nahIM maanii| buddha apane mata kA pracAra karane ke lie kaI bAra
rAjagRha Aye the| 1. (ka) vyAkhyAprajJapti, 2 / 5, pR. 141 (kha)
bRhatkalpabhASya, vRtti 2  /  3429 (ga) vAyupurANa, 1 / 4 / 5 (ka) kalpasUtra, 4
/  123 (kha) vyaakhyaaprjnypti,7|4,5|9, 2 / 5 (ga) Avazyakaniyukti, 473 /  492
/  518 3. (ka) jJAtAdharmakathA, pR. 47 (kha) dazAzrutaskaMdha, 109  /  pR. 364
(ga) upAsakadazA, 8. pR.51 4. vyAkhyAprajJapti, 15. 5. antakRddazAMga 6, pR. 31
jaina Agama sAhitya meM bhAratIya samAja, pR. 462 7. paccakkhaM devalogabhUyA
evaM alkaapuriisNkaasaa| tahiM paruvaru NAme rAyagihu kaNayarayaNa koDihiM
ghddiu| balibaMDa gharaM taho sukhaihiM suraNayaru gayaNapaDiu  //  -NAyakumAra
cariu, 6 tatrAsti sarvataH kAMtaM nAmnA rAjagRhaM purm| kusumAmodasubhagaM
bhuvanasyeva yauvnm| padmapurANa 33 / 2

Page #234 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Appendix 2] [193] They often stayed in the Gridhrakuta mountain, Kalandaka
Nivaaya and the bamboo forest. Once, when the Buddha was in the mango grove of
Jivaka Kumarabhritya, Abhayakumar discussed the relationship between violence
and non-violence with him. When they were in the bamboo forest, Abhayakumar had
a discussion with them. Sadhu Sakalodayi also had a conversation with the Buddha
here. Once, the Buddha stayed in the Tapodaram where there were hot water
springs. After the Buddha's Nirvana, Rajgriha began to decline. When the Chinese
traveler Xuanzang came here, Rajgriha was not the same as before. Today, its
residents are poor and destitute. Nowadays, Rajgriha is known as 'Rajgir'.
Rajgir is located in the state of Bihar, east of Patna and northeast of Gaya.
(11) Raivatak - Parjitar identifies Raivatak with the Vardha mountain in the
western part of Kathiawar. According to the Jnatasutra, there was a mountain
called Raivatak in the north-east of Dwarka. The same is described in
Antakritdasha. According to the Trishatishalaka Purushcharitra, near Dwarka,
there is Raivatak Giri in the east, Malyaavan Shail in the south, Saumanas
mountain in the west and Gandhamadana Giri in the north. From the perspective of
the Mahabharata, Raivatak was near Kushasthali. According to the Vedic Harivansh
Purana, the Yadavas left Mathura and went to Sindh and settled Dwarka near the
sea, not too far or too close to the Raivatak mountain. The Agam literature
gives a very natural description of the Raivatak mountain. Lord Arishtanemi set
out for his departure, he mounted the Shivikaratna surrounded by gods and humans
and stayed on the Raivatak mountain. 11 Rajimati also went to the Raivatak
mountain from Dwarka with restraint. my 3 , 1. Majjhimanikaya, (Sarnath 1633) 2.
Majjhimanikaya, Abhayarajakumar Suttanta, p. 234 Majjhimanikaya, Chalasaklodayi,
Suttanta, p. 305. 4. History of Dharmashastra, Volume 4, pp. 794-95. 5.
Jnatadharmakatha, 1/5, Su. 58 6. Antakritdasha Tasyah:puro
Raivatako'pachyamasiittu Malyaavan. Somanaso'drih pratichyamudichaam
Gandhamadana. -Trishatishti, Parva 8, Sarga 5, Shloka 418 8. Kushasthali Purim
ramyam Raivatenoposhobhitam. -Mahabharata, Sabhaparva, A. 14, Shloka 50 9.
Harivansh Purana 2/55. 10. Jnatadharmakatha 1/5, Sutra 58 11. Dev-Manuss-
Parivudo, Siyarayanam Tao Samarudo. Nikkhamiy Bargao, Revayami Thio Bhagavan.
-Uttaraadhyayana 22.22

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pariziSTa 2] [193 ve prAyaH gRddhakUTa parvata, kalandakanivAya aura veNuvana
meM Thaharate the| eka bAra buddha jIvaka kaumArabhRtya ke Amravana meM the taba
abhayakumAra ne unase hiMsA-ahiMsA ke sambandha meM carcA kI thii| jaba ve
veNuvana meM the taba abhayakumAra ne unase vicAra-carcA kI thii| sAdhu
sakalodAyi ne bhI buddha se yahAM para vArtAlApa kiyaa| eka bAra buddha ne
tapodArAma jahAM garma pAnI ke kuMDa the vahA~ para vihAra kiyA thaa| buddha ke
nirvANa ke pazcAt rAjagRha kI avanati hone lgii| jaba cInI yAtrI hvenasAMga
yahA~ para AyA thA taba rAjagRha pUrva jaisA nahIM thaa| Aja vahA~ ke nivAsI
daridraM aura abhAvagrasta haiN| Ajakala rAjagRha 'rAjagira' ke nAma se vizruta
hai  /  rAjagira bihAra prAnta meM paTanA se pUrva aura gayA se pUrvottara meM
avasthita hai| (11) raivataka - pArjiTara raivataka kI pahacAna kAThiyAvADa ke
pazcima bhAga meM varadA kI pahAr3I se karate haiN| jJAtAsUtra ke anusAra
dvArakA ke uttara-pUrva meM raivataka nAmaka parvata thaa| antakRtdazA meM bhI
yahI varNana hai| triSaSTizalAkA puruSacaritra ke anusAra dvArakA ke samIpa
pUrva meM raivataka giri, dakSiNa meM mAlyavAna zaila, pazcima meM saumanasa
parvata aura uttara meM gaMdhamAdana giri haiN| mahAbhArata kI dRSTi se
raivataka kuzasthalI ke sannikaTa thaa| vaidika harivaMzapurANa ke anusAra
yAdava mathurA chor3akara sindhu meM gaye aura samudra kinAre raivataka parvata
se na atidUra aura na adhika nikaTa dvArakA bsaaii| Agama sAhitya meM raivataka
parvata kA svarvathA svAbhAvika varNana milatA hai| bhagavAn ariSTanemi
abhiniSkramaNa ke lie nikale, ve deva aura manuSyoM se parivRta zivikAratna meM
ArUr3ha hue aura raivataka parvata para avasthita hue|11 rAjImatI bhI saMyama
lekara dvArakA se raivataka parvata para my 3 , 1. majjhimanikAya, (sAranAtha
1633) 2. majjhimanikAya, abhayarAjakumAra suttanta, pR. 234 majjhimanikAya,
calasakalodAyI, suttanta, pR. 305. 4. hisTrI oNva dharmazAstra, jilda 4,
pR.794-95. 5. jJAtAdharmakathA, 1/5, sU. 58 6. antakRddazAMga tasyA:puro
raivatako'pAcyAmAsIttu mAlyavAn  /  somanaso'driH pratIcyAmudIcyAM gNdhmaadnH|
-triSaSTi, parva 8, sarga 5,zloka 418 8. kuzasthalI purIM ramyAM
raivtenopshobhitaam| -mahAbhArata, sabhAparva, a. 14, zloka 50 9.
harivaMzapurANa 2/55. 10. jJAtAdharmakathA 1/5, sUtra 58 11. deva-maNussa-
parivuDo, sIyArayaNaM tao smaaruuddho| nikkhamiya bAragAo, revayammi Thio
bhagavaM  /  /  -uttarAdhyayana 22 / 22

Page #235 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Translation:  [194] Antakritdasha was on her journey.  In the middle of her
journey, she was caught in the rain and took shelter in a cave to dry her
clothes. This cave is still identified today as the Rajimati cave. The Revatak
mountain in Saurashtra still exists today. It is possible that ancient Dwarka
was situated at its foot.   The Revatak mountain is also known as Urjayant. It
is mentioned in the Girnar inscriptions of Rudradaman and Skandagupta. There was
a Nandavan (heavenly garden) there, which housed the Yakshayatan of the Yaksha
Surapriya. This mountain was adorned with many birds and creepers. There were
also waterfalls here, and every year thousands of people gathered here to
perform Sankhadi (feast, Jimenwar). Lord Arishtanemi attained Nirvana here.
According to the Digambar tradition, Acharya Dharasen performed penance in the
Chandragupha of the Revatak mountain. It was here that the Acharyas Bhootbali
and Pushpadanta ordered the remaining Shrutagyan to be written down.   The
Mahabharata mentions a battle between the Pandavas and the Yadavas on the
Revatak.  In Jain scriptures, this mountain is referred to by names like
Revatak, Ujjayant, Ujjwal, Girinal, and Girnar. The Mahabharata also mentions
another name for this mountain, Ujjayant.  (12) Vipulgari Mountain A mountain
near the city of Rajgriha. It is mentioned in the Agamas at many places. Severe
ascetics would come here under the supervision of the Sthaviras and perform
Sanlekhana.  1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8.  These five mountains are mentioned in Jain
scriptures:  - Vaibhargiri 1. 2. Vipulgari  "Girin Revayam Janti, Vasenu Ulla
Antara. Vasante Andhyarammi Anto Layanas Sa Thiya."  - Vividh Tirthakalp, 3.19 -
Jain Agam Sahitya mein Bharatiya Samaj, p. 472 - Brihatkalp Bhashya Vritti,
1.2922 - (a) Aavashyak Nirukti, 307 - (b) Kalpasutra, 6.174, p. 182 - (c)
Jnatadharmakatha, 5, p. 68 - (d) Antakritdasha, 5, p. 28 - (e) Uttaradhyayana
Teeka, 22, p. 280 - Jain Agam Sahitya mein Bharatiya Samaj, p. 473 - Adipurana
mein Bharat, p. 109 - B. Mahavir Ni Dharmakathaao, p. 216, Pan. Bechradasji

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 194] [ antakRddazA jA rahI thii| bIca meM vaha varSA se bhIga gaI aura kapar3e
sukhAne ke lie vahIM eka guphA meM ThaharI', jisakI pahacAna Aja bhI rAjImatI
guphA se kI jAtI hai  /  2 raivataka parvata saurASTra meM Aja bhI vidyamAna
hai| saMbhava hai prAcIna dvArakA isI kI talahaTI meM basI ho  /  raivataka
parvata kA nAma Urjayanta bhI hai| rudradAma aura skaMdhagupta ke giranAra zilA-
lekhoM meM isakA ullekha hai| vahAM para eka nandanavana thA, jisameM surapriya
yakSa kA yakSAyatana thA  /  yaha parvata aneka pakSiyoM evaM latAoM se
suzobhita thaa| yahAM para pAnI ke jharane bhI bahA karate the aura prativarSa
hajAroM loga saMkhaDi (bhoja, jImanavAra) karane ke lie ekatrita hote the| yahAM
bhagavAn ariSTanemi ne nirvANa prApta kiyA thaa| digambara paramparA ke anusAra
raivatakaM parvata kI candraguphA meM AcArya dharasena ne tapa kiyA thA aura
yahIM para bhUtabali aura puSpadanta AcAryoM ne avaziSTa zrutajJAna ko
lipibaddha karane kA Adeza diyA thaa| 6 mahAbhArata meM pANDavoM aura yAdavoM kA
raivataka para yuddha hone kA varNana AyA hai| jaina granthoM meM raivataka,
ujjayaMta, ujjvala, giriNAla aura giranAra Adi nAma isa parvata ke Aye haiN|
mahAbhArata meM bhI isa parvata kA dUsarA nAma ujjayaMta AyA hai  / " (12)
vipulagiri parvata rAjagRha nagara ke samIpa kA eka parvata  /  AgamoM meM aneka
sthaloM para isakA ullekha milatA hai| sthaviroM kI dekha-rekha meM ghora
tapasvI yahAM Akara saMlekhanA karate the  /  1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. jaina
granthoM meM ina pAMca parvatoM kA ullekha milatA hai - . vaibhAragiri 1. 2.
vipulagira giriM revayayaM jantI, vAseNullA u antarA  /  vAsante andhayAraMmi
anto layaNassa sA ThiyA  //  vividha tIrthakalpa, 3  /  19 jaina Agama sAhitya
meM bhAratIya samaja, pR. 472 bRhatkalpabhASyavRtti, 1  /  2922 (ka)
Avazyakaniryukti, 307 (kha) kalpasUtra, 6  /  174, pR. 182 (ga)
jJAtAdharmakathA, 5, pR. 68 (gha) antakRtdazA 5, pR. 28 (Ga) uttarAdhyayana
TIkA, 22, pR. 280 jaina Agama sAhitya meM bhAratIya samAja pR. 473 AdipurANa meM
bhArata, pR. 109. bha. mahAvIra nI dharmakathAo, pR. 216, paM. becaradAsajI

Page #236 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Appendix 2  [195 3. Udayagiri 4. Suvarnagiri 5. Ratnagiri]  The names of the
five mountains in the Mahabharata are - Vaibhar, Varaha, Vrishabha, Rishigiri
and Chaityak. The Vayupurana also mentions five mountains. For example -
Vaibhar, Vipul, Ratnakoot, Girivraja and Ratnachal. The Bhagavati Sutra, Shatak
2, Uddeshya 5, mentions a hot water spring called Mahatapopetirpraभव, located at
the foot of the Vaibhar mountain in Rajgriha. This spring still exists today. In
Buddhist texts, this spring is called 'Tpaade', which is probably derived from
'Taptodak'. The Chinese traveler Fa-Hien also saw it. (13) Sahasramravan Garden
The Agamas mention this garden extensively. There was also a beautiful garden of
the same name outside the city of Kakand, where Dhanakumar and Sunakshastrakumar
were initiated. The Sahasramravan is also mentioned outside the following
cities: 1. Outside Kakand 2. On Mount Girnar 3. Outside the city of Kampilya 4.
Outside Pandu Mathura 5. Outside the city of Mithila 6. Outside Hastinapur -
etc. (14) Saketa An ancient city of India. It was the capital of the Kosala
country. Acharya Hemchandra has called Saketa, Kosala and Ayodhya all the same.
Near Saketa was a beautiful garden called 'Uttarakuru', which had a Yaksha
shrine called 'Pashamriga'. The king of Saketa was named Mitranandi and the
queen was named Shrikant. The ancient Saketa will be near present-day Ayodhya,
located on the southern bank of the Sarayu river, six miles northeast of
Faizabad in the present-day Faizabad district. (15) Sravasti It was the capital
of the Kosala kingdom. Modern scholars have identified it with Saher-Maher.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pariziSTa 2] [195 3. udayagiri 4. suvarNagiri 5. ratnagiri mahAbhArata meM
pAMca parvatoM ke nAma ye haiM -vaibhAra, vArAha, vRSabha, RSigiri aura caityk|
vAyupurANa meM bhI pAMca parvatoM kA ullekha milatA hai| jaise-vaibhAra, vipula,
ratnakUTa, girivraja aura rtnaacl| bhagavatIsUtra ke zataka 2 uddeza 5 meM
rAjagRha ke vaibhAra parvata ke nIce mahAtapopatIraprabhava nAma ke uSNajalamaya
prasravaNa-nirjhara kA ullekha hai| yaha nirjhara Aja bhI vidyamAna hai| bauddha
granthoM meM isa nirjhara kA nAma 'tapAde' milatA hai, jo sambhavataH
'taptodaka' se banA hogaa| cInI yAtrI phAhiyAna ne bhI isako dekhA thaa| (13)
sahasrAmravana udyAna AgamoM meM isa udyAna kA pracura ullekha milatA hai|
kAkandI nagarI ke bAhara bhI isI nAma kA eka sundara udyAna thA, jahAM para
dhanyakumAra aura sunakSatrakumAra kI dIkSA huI thii| sahasrAmravana kA ullekha
nimnalikhita nagaroM ke bAhara bhI AtA hai1. kAkandI ke bAhara 2. giranAra
parvata para 3. kAmpilya nagara ke bAhara 4. pANDu mathurA ke bAhara 5. mithilA
nagarI ke bAhara 6. hastinApura ke baahr-aadi| (14) sAketa bhArata kA eka
prAcIna ngr| yaha kozala deza kI rAjadhAnI thaa| AcArya hemacandra ne sAketa,
kozala aura ayodhyA-ina tInoM ko eka hI kahA hai| sAketa ke samIpa hI
'uttarakuru' nAma kA eka sundara udyAna thA, usameM 'pAzAmRga' nAma kA eka
yakSAyatana thaa| sAketa nagara ke rAjA kA nAma mitranandI aura rAnI kA nAma
zrIkAntA thaa| vartamAna meM phaijAbAda jilA meM phaijAbAda se pUrvottara chaha
mIla para sarayU nadI ke dakSiNI taTa para sthita vartamAna ayodhyA ke samIpa hI
prAcIna sAketa hogaa| (15) zrAvastI yaha kauzala rAjya kI rAjadhAnI thii|
Adhunika vidvAnoM ne isakI pahacAna sahera-mahera se kI hai|

Page #237 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[196] [ Antakrid Dasha ] Sahehr is in Gonda district and Maher is in Bahraich
district. Maher is in the north and Sahehr is in the south. This place is ten
miles away from the road that goes from Balrampur station of the North Eastern
Railway. It is located 29 miles from Bahraich. According to scholar B. Smith,
Sravasti is in the Khajura province of Nepal and it is in the north of Balpur
and near the north-east of Nepalganj. 2 Yuan Chuang has considered Sravasti as a
Janpad and its extent is six thousand li, its capital is called 'Prasad Nagar',
whose extent is considered to be twenty li. 3 Jain perspective, this city was
situated on the banks of the Achiravati (Rapti) river. There was very little
water in it, which Jain monks used to cross for alms. Sometimes there were very
heavy floods in it. Sravasti has been a center of Buddhist and Jain culture. The
historical dialogue between Keshi and Gautam took place here. Many historical
events are associated with that land. Bhagwan Mahavira had spent his tenth
Chaturmas in the state of Chhadmasthav in Sravasti. Even after attaining
Kevalgyan, he had visited there many times and had given Pravrajya to hundreds
of people and made thousands of people devotees. In the Kosthakodyan of
Sravasti, Goshalak had killed Sunakshatra and Sarvanubhuti Munis from
Tejoleyshya and had also projected Tejoleyshya on Bhagwan Mahavira. Goshalak's
supreme devotee Ayampul and Halahal Kumharin were residents of this place. 1. 2.
3. 4. 5. 6. 7. The Ancient Geography of India, pp. 469-474. Journal of Royal
Asiatic Society, Part 1, Jan. 1900 Yuan Chuang's Travels in India, Part 1, p.
377 (a) Kalpasutra (b) Brihatkalpa Sutra, 4 | 33. (c) Brihatkalpa Bhashya, 4 |
5639, 5653, (a) Aavashyak Churni, p. 601 (b) Aavashyak Haribhadriya Vritti, p.
465. (c) Aavashyak Malayagiri Vritti, p. 567 (d) Tauni's Katha Kosh, p. 6.
Uttaraadhyayana See the present text.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 196] [ antakRddazA sahera goMDA jile meM hai aura mahera baharAIca jile meM  /
mahera uttara meM hai aura sahera dakSiNa meM  /  yaha sthAna uttara-pUrvIya
relave ke balarAmapura sTezana se jo sar3aka jAtI hai, usase dasa mIla dUra hai
/  baharAIca se vaha 29 mIla para avasthita hai| vidvAna bI0 smitha ke
abhimatAnusAra zrAvastI nepAla deza ke khajUrA prAnta meM hai aura vaha bAlapura
kI uttara dizA meM tathA nepAlagaMja ke sannikaTa uttara pUrvIya dizA meM hai| 2
yuAna cuADga ne zrAvastI ko janapada mAnA hai aura usakA vistAra chaha hajAra
lI, usakI rAjadhAnI ko 'prAsAda nagara' kahA hai, jisakA vistAra bIsa lI mAnA
hai  /  3 thA, jaina dRSTi se yaha nagarI acirAvatI (rAptI) nadI ke kinAre basI
thii| jisameM bahuta kama pAnI rahatA jise pAra kara jaina zramaNa bhikSA ke lie
jAte the| kabhI-kabhI usameM bahuta teja bAr3ha bhI A jAtI thI  /  zrAvastI
bauddha aura jaina saMskRti kA kendrasthAna rahA hai| kezI aura gautama kA
aitihAsika saMvAda yahIM huA  /  aneka aitihAsika prasaMga usa bhUmi se jur3e
hue haiN| bhagavAn mahAvIra ne chadmasthAvasthA meM dasavA~ cAturmAsa vahAM para
kiyA thA  /  kevalajJAna hone para bhI ve aneka bAra vahA~ para padhAre the aura
saikar3oM vyaktiyoM ko pravrajyA pradAna kI thI aura hajAroM ko upAsaka banAyA
thA  /  zrAvastI ke koSThakodyAna meM gozAlaka ne tejolezyA se sunakSatra aura
sarvAnubhUti muniyoM ko mArA thA aura bhagavAn mahAvIra para bhI tejolezyA
prakSipta kI thii| gozAlaka kA parama upAsaka ayaMpula va hAlAhalA kuMbhArina
yahIM ke rahane vAle the  /  1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. dI enziyaNTa jyogrAphI oNpha
iMDiyA, pR. 469-474. jarnala oNpha raoNyala eziyATika sosAyaTI, bhAga 1, jana.
1900 yuAna cuAGgasa Trevelsa ina iMDiyA, bhAga 1 pR. 377 (ka) kalpasUtra (kha)
bRhatkalpa sUtra, 4  /  33. (ga) bRhatkalpa bhASya, 4  /  5639, 5653, (ka)
Avazyaka cUrNi, pR. 601 (kha) Avazyaka hAribhadrIyA vRtti, pR. 465. (ga)
Avazyaka malayagiri vRtti, pR. 567 (gha) TaunI kA kathAkoza, pR. 6.
uttarAdhyayana dekhie prastuta grantha.

Page #238 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Aagam Prakashan Samiti, Byawar**  **List of Benefactor Members with their
Contributions**  **Patron**  1. Shri Seth Mohanmalji Chordia, Madras 2. Shri
Seth Khivrajji Chordia, Madras 3. Shri Sayaramalji Jethamalji Chordia, Madras 4.
Shri S. Kishanchandraji Chordia, Madras 5. Shri Gumanmalji Chordia, Madras 6.
Shri Kanwarlalji Betala, Guwahati 7. Shri Pukharajji Shishodia, Byawar 8. Shri
Premrajji Bhanwarlalji Shrisrimal, Durg 9. Shri Gulabchandji Mangilalji Sarana,
Bagalkot  **Column**  1. Shri Hira Lalji Pannalalji Chopra, Byawar 2. Shri
Deepchandji Chandanmalji Chourdia, Madras 3. Shri Gyanrajji Mootha, Pali 4. Shri
Khubchandji Gadia, Byawar 5. Shri Ratanchandji Uttamchandji Modi, Byawar 6. Shri
Pannalalji Bhagchandji Bothra, Changatola 7. Shri Mishrilalji Dhanrajji
Vinaykia, Byawar 8. Shri Premrajji Jatanrajji Mehta, Medta 9. Shri Jadavamalji
Manakchandji Betala, Secunderabad  **Column**  1. Shri Bastimalji Mohanlalji
Bohra (K.G.F.) 2. Shri Jasrajji Ganeshmalji Sancheti, Jodhpur 3. Shri
Amarchandji Fatehchandji Parkh, Jodhpur 4. Shri Poosalalji Kisturchandji Surana,
Balaghat 5. Shri Tilokchandji Sagarmalji Sancheti, Madras 6. Shri J.
Doolichandji Chordia, Madras 7. Shri Hirachandji Chordia, Madras 8. Shri S.
Ratanchandji Chordia, Madras 9. Shri Vardhman Industries, Kanpur 10. Shri S.
Sayarchandji Chordia, Madras 11. Shri S. Badalchandji Chordia, Madras 12. Shri
S. Rikhabchandji Chordia, Madras 13. Shri R. Parsanchandji Chordia, Madras 14.
Shri Annarajji Chordia, Madras 15. Shri Deepchandji Bokardia, Madras 16. Shri
Mishrilalji Tilokchandji Sancheti, Durg 17. Shri Mohanrajji Walia, Ahmedabad 18.
Shri Chetanmalji Surana, Madras  **Column**  1. Shri Nemichandji Lalwani,
Changatola 2. Shri Birdichaandji Prakashchandji Telesara, Pali 3. Shri
Sirekanwar Bai, wife of late Shri Sumanchandji Jhamar, Madurantakam 4. Shri
Moolchandji Chordia, Katangi 5. Shri Thanchandji Mehta, Jodhpur 6. Shri
Moolchandji Sujanmalji Sancheti, Jodhpur 7. Shri Lalchandji Mohanlalji Kothari,
Gothan 8. Shri Bherudanji Labhchandji Surana, Dhowri and Nagaur 9. Shri
Ravatmalji Bhikhamchandji Pagaria, Balaghat 10. Shri Sagarmalji Noratmalji
Pincha, Madras 11. Shri Dharmichaandji Bhagchandji Bohra, Jhutha 12. Shri
Motichandji, Madras 13. Shri Motichandji, Madras 14. Shri Motichandji, Madras
15. Shri Motichandji, Madras 16. Shri Motichandji, Madras 17. Shri Motichandji,
Madras 18. Shri Motichandji, Madras 19. Shri Motichandji, Madras 20. Shri
Motichandji, Madras 21. Shri Motichandji, Madras 22. Shri Motichandji, Madras
23. Shri Motichandji, Madras

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama prakAzana samiti, byAvara arthasahayogI sadasyoM kI zubha nAmAvalI
mahAstambha saMrakSaka 1. zrI seTha mohanamalajI corar3iyA, madrAsa 1. zrI
hIrAlAlajI pannAlAlajI caupar3A, byAvara 2. zrI seTha khIMvarAjajI corar3iyA,
madrAsa 2. zrI dIpacaMdajI candanamalajI caurar3iyA, madrAsa 3. zrI sAyaramalajI
jeThamalajI coraDiyA, madrAsa 3. zrI jJAnarAjajI mUthA, pAlI 4. zrI esa.
kizanacandrajI corar3iyA, madrAsa 4. zrI khUbacandajI gAdiyA, byAvara 5. zrI
gumAnamalajI corar3iyA, madrAsa 5. zrI ratanacaMdajI uttamacaMdajI modI, byAvara
6. zrI kaMvaralAlajI betAlA, gohATI 6. zrI pannAlAlajI bhAgacandajI botharA,
cAMgATolA 7. zrI pukharAjajI zizodiyA, byAvara 7. zrI mizrIlAlajI dhanarAjajI
vinAyakiyA, 8. zrI premarAjajI bhaMvaralAlajI zrIzrImAla, durga byAvara 9. zrI
gulAbacandajI mAMgIlAlajI sarANA. 8. zrI premarAjajI jatanarAjajI mehatA, meDatA
9. zrI jar3AvamalajI mANakacandajI betAlA, sikandarAbAda stambha bAgalakoTa 10.
zrI bastImalajI mohanalAlajI boharA 1. zrI jasarAjajI gaNezamalajI saMcetI,
jodhapura (K.G.F.) TO HIGH 2. zrI amaracaMdajI phatehacaMdajI pArakha, jodhapura
11. zrI kezarImalajI jaMvarIlAlajI tAlerA, pAlI 3. zrI pUsAlAlajI kistUracaMdajI
surANA, 12. zrI nemIcaMdajI lalavANI, cAMgATolA . bAlAghATa 13. zrI
biradIcaMdajI prakAzacaMdajI talesarA, pAlI 4. zrI mUlacaMdajI corar3iyA,
kaTaMgI 14. zrI sireka~vara bAI dharmapatnI sva. zrI sumanacaMda 5. zrI
tilokacaMdajI sAgaramalajI saMcetI, madrAsa jI jhAmar3a, madurAntakam 6. zrI je.
dulIcaMdajI coraDiyA, madrAsa 15. zrI thAnacaMdajI mehatA, jodhapura 7. zrI
hIrAcaMdajI corar3iyA, madrAsa 16. zrI mUlacaMdajI sujAnamalajI saMcetI,
jodhapura 8. zrI esa. ratanacandajI corar3iyA, madrAsa 17. zrI lAlacaMdajI
mohanalAlajI koThArI, goThana 9. zrI vardhamAna iNDasTrIja, kAnapura 18. zrI
bherudAnajI lAbhacaMdajI surANA, dhovar3I tathA 10. zrI esa. sAyaracaMdajI
corar3iyA, madrAsa nAgaura 11. zrI esa. bAdalacaMdajI coraDiyA, madrAsa 19. zrI
rAvatamalajI bhIkamacaMdajI pagAriyA, . 12. zrI esa. rikhabacaMdajI corar3iyA,
madrAsa bAlAghATa 13. zrI Ara. parasanacaMdajI corar3iyA, madrAsa 20. zrI
sAgaramalajI noratamalajI pIMcA, madrAsa 14. zrI annarAjajI corar3iyA, madrAsa
21. zrI dharmIcaMdajI bhAgacaMdajI boharA, jhUThA 15. zrI dIpacaMdajI bokar3iyA,
madrAsa 22. zrI mohanarAjajI vAliyA, ahamadAbAda 16. zrI mizrIlAlajI
tilokacaMdajI saMcetI, durga 23. zrI cetanamalajI surANA, madrAsa

Page #239 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[198] [Antakrid Dasha 24. Shri Ganeshmalji Dharmicandji Kankaria, Nagaur 6. Shri
Ratnalalji Chatar, Byaver 25. Shri Badalchandji Mehta, Indore 7. Shri
Janvarilalji Amarchandji Kothari, Byaver 26. Shri Harkachandji Sagarchandji
Betala, Indore 8. Shri Mohanlalji Gulabchandji Chatar, Byaver 27. Shri
Suganchandji Bokardia, Indore 9. Shri Badarmalji Pukharajji Bant, Kanpur 28.
Shri Inderchandji Baid, Rajnandgaon 10. Shri K. Pukharajji Bafna, Madras 29.
Shri Mangilalji Dharmicandji Chordia 11. Shri Pukharajji Budhrajji Bohra,
Pipaliya Changatola - 12. Shri Champalalji Budhrajji Bafna, Byaver 30. Shri
Raghunathmalji Likhmichandji Lodha, 13. Shri Nathmalji Mohanlalji Luniya,
Changatola. Chandaval 31. Shri Bhanvarlalji Mulchandji Surana, Madras 14. Shri
Mangilalji Prakashchandji Runwal, Bar 32. Shri Siddhakarnaji Baid, Changatola
15. Shri Mohanlalji Mangalchandji Pagaria, Raipur 33. Shri Jalmachandji
Rikhbachandji Bafna, Agra 16. Shri Bhanvarlalji Gautamchandji Pagaria, 34. Shri
Bhanvarimalji Chordia, Madras Kushalapura 35. Shri Hiralalji Pannalalji Chopra,
Ajmer 17. Shri Dule Rajji Bhanvarlalji Kothari, 36. Shri Ghevarchandji
Pukharajji, Guwahati Kushalapura. 37. Shri Mangilalji Chordia, Agra Tha, Agra
18. Shri Phoolchandji Gautamchandji Kanthad, Pali 38. Shri Bhanvarlalji Gothi,
Madras 19. Shri Rupchandji Jodhrajji Mootha, Pali 39. Shri Gunachandji
Dallichandji Kataria, Bellary 20. Shri Pannalalji Motilalji Surana, Pali 40.
Shri Amarchandji Bothra, Madras 21. Shri Devkarnaji Shrichandji Dosi, Medtacity
41. Shri Chhogmalji Hemrajji Lodha, Dondi Lohara 22. Shri Manakrajji
Kishenrajji, Medtacity 42. Shri Mohanlalji Parsamalji Pagaria, 23. Shri
Amritrajji Jaswantrajji Mehta, Medta Bangalore City 43. Shri Jadavamalji
Suganchandji, Madras 24. Shri V. Gajrajji Bokardia, Salem 44. Shri Pukharajji
Vijayrajji, Madras 25. Shri Bhanvarlalji Vijayrajji Kankaria, 45. Shri
Jabarchandji Gelda, Madras _ Villipuuram 46. Shri Surajmalji Sajjanrajji Mehta,
Kuppal 26. Shri Kanakrajji Madanrajji Golia, Jodhpur सहयोगी सदस्य 27. Shri
Harkarajji Mehta, Jodhpur 1. Shri Poonamchandji Nahta, Jodhpur 28. Shri
Sumermalji Medtiya, Jodhpur 2. Shri Amarchandji Balchandji Modi, Byaver 29. Shri
Ghevarchandji Parsamalji Tantia, Jodhpur 3. Shri Champalalji Mithalalji
Saklecha, 30. Shri Ganeshmalji Nemichandji Tantia, Jodhpur Jalna 31. Shri
Champalalji Hiralalji Bagrecha, 4. Shri Chhaganibai Vinaykia, Byaver Jodhpur 5.
Shri Bhanvarlalji Chopra, Byaver 32. Shri Mohanlalji Champalalji Gothi, Jodhpur

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 198] [antakRddazA 24. zrI gaNezamalajI dharmIcaMdajI kAMkariyA, nAgaura 6. zrI
ratanalAlajI catara, byAvara 25. zrI bAdalacaMdajI mehatA, indaura 7. zrI
jaMvarIlAlajI amaracaMdajI koThArI, byAvara 26. zrI harakacaMdajI sAgaracaMdajI
betAlA, indaura 8. zrI mohanalAlajI gulAbacaMdajI catara, byAvara 27. zrI
suganacandajI bokar3iyA, indaura 9. zrI bAdaramalajI pukharAjajI baMTa, kAnapura
28. zrI indaracaMdajI baida, rAjanAMdagAMva 10. zrI ke. pukharAjajI bAphanA,
madrAsa 29. zrI mAMgIlAlajI dharmIcaMdajI coraDiyA 11. zrI pukharAjajI
budharAjajI boharA, pIpaliyA cAMgATolA - 12. zrI campAlAlajI budharAjajI
bAphaNA, byAvara 30. zrI raghunAthamalajI likhamIcaMdajI lor3hA, 13. zrI
nathamalajI mohanalAlajI lUNiyA, caaNgaattolaa| caNDAvala 31. zrI bhaMvaralAlajI
mUlacaMdajI surANA, madrAsa 14. zrI mAMgIlAlajI prakAzacaMdajI rUNavAla, bara
32. zrI siddhakaraNajI baida, cAMgATolA 15. zrI mohanalAlajI maMgalacaMdajI
pagAriyA, rAyapura 33. zrI jAlamacaMdajI rikhabacaMdajI bAphanA, AgarA 16. zrI
bhaMvaralAlajI gautamacaMdajI pagAriyA, 34. zrI bhaMvarImalajI corar3iyA,
madrAsa kuzAlapurA 35. zrI hIrAlAlajI pannAlAlajI caupar3A, ajamera 17. zrI dule
rAjajI bhaMvaralAlajI koThArI, 36. zrI ghevaracaMdajI pukharAjajI, gohATI
kushaalpuraa| 37. zrI mAMgIlAlajI corar3iyA, AgarA thA, AgarA 18. zrI
phUlacaMdajI gautamacaMdajI kAMTheDa, pAlI 38. zrI bhaMvaralAlajI goThI, madrAsa
19. zrI rUpacaMdajI jodharAjajI mUthA, pAlI 39. zrI guNacaMdajI dallIcaMdajI
kaTAriyA, bellArI 20. zrI pannAlAlajI motIlAlajI surANA, pAlI 40. zrI
amaracaMdajI botharA, madrAsa 21. zrI devakaraNajI zrIcaMdajI DosI, mer3atAsiTI
41. zrI chogamalajI hemarAjajI lor3hA, DoMDIlohArA 22. zrI mANakarAjajI
kizanarAjajI, mer3atAsiTI 42. zrI mohanalAlajI pArasamalajI pagAriyA, 23. zrI
amRtarAjajI jasavantarAjajI mehatA, mer3atA baiMgalora siTI 43. zrI
jar3AvamalajI suganacaMdajI, madrAsa 24. zrI vI. gajarAjajI bokar3iyA, selama
44. zrI pukharAjajI vijayarAjajI, madrAsa 25. zrI bhaMvaralAlajI vijayarAjajI
kAMkariyA, 45. zrI jabaracaMdajI gelar3A, madrAsa _ villIpuram 46. zrI
sUrajamalajI sajjanarAjajI mehatA, kuppala 26. zrI kanakarAjajI madanarAjajI
goliyA, jodhapura sahayogI sadasya 27. zrI harakarAjajI mehatA, jodhapura 1. zrI
pUnamacaMdajI nAhaTA, jodhapura 28. zrI sumeramalajI mer3atiyA, jodhapura 2. zrI
amaracaMdajI bAlacaMdajI modI, byAvara 29. zrI ghevaracaMdajI pArasamalajI
TAMTiyA, jodhapura 3. zrI campAlAlajI mIThAlAlajI sakalecA, 30. zrI gaNezamalajI
nemIcaMdajI TAMTiyA, jodhapura jAlanA 31. zrI campAlAlajI hIrAlAlajI bAgarecA,
4. zrI chaganIbAI vinAyakiyA, byAvara jodhapura 5. zrI bhaMvaralAlajI caupar3A,
byAvara 32. zrI mohanalAlajI campAlAlajI goThI, jodhapura

Page #240 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Upaliyam **Members List**  1. Shri Jasrajji Janvarilalji Dhariawal, Jodhpur
2. Shri Bhanwarlalji Motha, Jaipur Jodhpur 3. Shri Sardarmallji Surana, Bhilai
4. Shri Mulchandji Parkh, Jodhpur 5. Shri Bhanwarlalji Dungarmallji Kankaria,
Bhilai 6. Shri Asumal & Co., Jodhpur 7. Shri Devrajji Lalchandji Medtiya,
Jodhpur 8. Shri Ganeshmallji Hemrajji Soni, Bhilai 9. Shri Ravtamallji Chajed,
Bhilai 10. Shri Ghevarchandji Kishorimallji Parkh, Jodhpur 11. Shri Hira Lalji
Hastimallji, Bhilai 12. Shri Pukharajji Bohra, Jodhpur 13. Shri Pukharajji
Chhallani, Karan Guddi 14. Shri Bachhrajji Surana, Jodhpur 15. Shri Lalchandji
Siremallji Bala, Jodhpur 16. Shri Premrajji Mithalalji Kamdar, Chawandia 17.
Shri Tarachandji Kevalchandji Karnavat, Jodhpur 18. Shri Mishrilalji
Likhmichandji Sand, Jodhpur 19. Shri Bhanwarlalji Manakchandji Surana, Madras
20. Shri Uttamchandji Mangilalji, Jodhpur 21. Shri Bhanwarlalji Navratanmallji
Sankhla, Jodhpur 22. Shri Mangilalji Rekchandji Parkh, Jodhpur 23. Shri
Udayrajji Pukharajji Sancheti, Jodhpur 24. Shri Suraj Karanji Surana, Lamba 25.
Shri Sardarmall & Co., Jodhpur 26. Shri Ratnalalji Lakhpatrajji, Jodhpur 27.
Shri Harakchandji Jugrajji Bafna, Bangalore 28. Shri Raychand Mohanlalji,
Jodhpur 29. Shri Lalchandji Motilalji Gadiya, Bangalore 30. Shri Nemichandji
Dakalia, Jodhpur 31. Shri Ghevarchandji Ruparajji, Jodhpur 32. Shri Sampatrajji
Kataria, Jodhpur 33. Shri Munnilalji, Mulchandji, Pukharajji Gulechha, Jodhpur
34. Shri Pukharajji Kataria, Jodhpur 35. Shri Chiman Singhji Mohansinghji Lodha,
Byawar 36. Shri Akhechandji Bhandari, Kolkata 37. Shri Mangilalji Chordia,
Kuchera 38. Shri Sundarbai Gothi, Mahamandir 39. Shri Pukharajji Lodha, Jodhpur
40. Shri Balchandji Dhanmallji Bhurat (Kuchera), Kolkata 41. Shri Indrachandji
Mukundchandji, Indore 42. Shri Bhanwarlalji Bafna, Indore 43. Shri Chandanmallji
Premrajji Modi, Bhilai 44. Shri Jethamallji Modi, Indore 45. Shri Tilakchandji
Premprakashji, Ajmer 46. Shri Bhikmachandji Ganeshmallji Choudhary, Dhullia 47.
Shri Sohnalalji Sojatiya, Thanwala 48. Shri Suganchandji Sancheti, Rajnandgaon
49. Shri Vijaylalji Premchandji Golechha, Rajnandgaon 50. Shri Jeevrajji
Bhanwarlalji, Bhaisanda 51. Shri Motilalji Madanlalji, Bhaisanda 52. Shri
Jeevrajji Parsamallji Kothari, Medta City 53. Shri Gheesulalji Lalchandji Parkh,
Durg 54. Shri Asakaranji Jasrajji Parkh, Durg 55. Shri Bhivraji Wagmar, Kuchera
56. Shri Okhchandji Hemrajji Parkh, Durg 57. Shri Gangaramji Inderchandji Bohra,
Kuchera 58. Shri Fakirchandji Kamalchandji Shrisrimal, Kuchera

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 upAliyama sadasya nAmAvalI] [199 . 33. zrI jasarAjajI jaMvarIlAlajI dhArIvAla,
63. zrI bhaMvaralAlajI mUthA, jayapura jodhapura 64. zrI saradAramalajI surANA,
bhilAI 34. zrI mUlacaMdajI pArakha, jodhapura 65. zrI bhaMvaralAlajI
DUMgaramalajI kAMkariyA, 35. zrI Asumala eNDa kaM., jodhapura bhilAI 36. zrI
devarAjajI lAlacaMdajI mer3atiyA, jodhapura 66. zrI gaNezamalajI hemarAjajI
sonI, bhilAI 37. zrI ghevaracaMdajI kizoramalajI pArakha, jodhapura 67. zrI
rAvatamalajI chAjer3a, bhilAI 38. zrI pukharAjajI boharA, jodhapura  /  68. zrI
hIrAlAlajI hastImalajI, bhilAI 39. zrI baccharAjajI surANA, jodhapura 69. zrI
pukharAjajI challANI, karaNaguDDI 40. zrI lAlacaMdajI siremalajI bAlA, jodhapura
70. zrI premarAjajI miThAlAlajI kAmadAra, 41. zrI tArAcaMdajI kevalacaMdajI
karNAvaTa, jodhapura cAMvaDiyA 42. zrI mizrIlAlajI likhamIcaMdajI sA~Da,
jodhapura 71. zrI bhaMvaralAlajI mANakacaMdajI surANA, madrAsa 43. zrI
uttamacaMdajI mAMgIlAlajI, jodhapura 72. zrI bhaMvaralAlajI navaratanamalajI
sAMkhalA, 44. zrI mAMgIlAlajI rekhacaMdajI pArakha. jodhapara 45. zrI
udayarAjajI pukharAjajI saMcetI, jodhapura 73. zrI sUrajakaraNajI surANA, lAmbA
46. zrI saradAramala eNDa kaM., jodhapura 74. zrI ratanalAlajI lakhapatarAjajI,
jodhapura 47. zrI rAyacaMda mohanalAlajI, jodhapura 75. zrI harakacaMdajI
jugarAjajI bAphanA, baiMgalora 48. zrI nemIcaMdajI DAkaliyA, jodhapura 76. zrI
lAlacaMdajI motIlAlajI gAdiyA, baiMgalora 49. zrI ghevaracaMdajI rUparAjajI,
jodhapura 77. zrI sampatarAjajI kaTAriyA, jodhapura  /  50. zrI munnIlAlajI,
mUlacaMdajI, pukharAjajI 78. zrI pukharAjajI kaTAriyA, jodhapura gulecchA,
jodhapura 79. zrI cimmanasiMhajI mohanasiMhajI lor3hA, byAvara 51. 'zrI
sundarabAI goThI, mahAmandira 80. zrI akhecaMdajI bhaNDArI, kalakattA 52. zrI
mAMgIlAlajI corar3iyA, kucerA 81. zrI bAlacaMdajI dhAnamalajI bhUraTa (kucerA),
53. zrI pukharAjajI lor3hA, jodhapura kalakattA 54. zrI indracandajI
mukandacandajI, indaura 82. zrI candanamalajI premarAjajI modI, bhilAI 55. zrI
bhaMvaralAlajI bAphaNA, indaura 83. zrI tilokacaMdajI premaprakAzajI, ajamera
56. zrI jeThamalajI modI, indaura 84. zrI sohanalAlajI sojatiyA, thAMvalA 57.
zrI bhIkamacaMdajI gaNezamalajI caudharI, dhUliyA 85. zrI jIvarAjajI
bhaMvaralAlajI,bhaisaMdA 58. zrI suganacaMdajI saMcetI, rAjanAMdagA~va 86. zrI
motIlAlajI madanalAlajI, bhaisaMdA 59. zrI vijayalAlajI premacaMdajI golecchA,
87. zrI jIvarAjajI pArasamalajI koThArI, mer3atA rAjanAMdagA~va sittii| 60. zrI
ghIsUlAlajI lAlacaMdajI pArakha, durga 88. zrI bhIvarAjajI vAgamAra, kucerA 61.
zrI AsakaraNajI jasarAjajI pArakha, durga 89. zrI gaMgArAmajI indaracaMdajI
boharA, kucerA 62. zrI okhacaMdajI hemarAja jI pArakha, durga 90. zrI
phakIracaMdajI kamalacaMdajI zrIzrImAla, kucerA

Page #241 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[200] [Antakrid Dasha] 91. Shri Sohनलालजी लूणकरणजी सुराणा, Kucheara Badi 92.
Shri Prakashचंदजी Jain, Nagaur 111. Shri Maangilalजी शांतिलालजी Ruणwal, 93. Shri
Bhanvarlalजी Rikhbachandजी Nahata, Nagaur Harsolav 94. Shri Gudarmalजी
Champalalजी, Gothan 112. Shri Kamalakavnr Lalvani Dharmpatni Shri Sw. 95. Shri
Parsamalजी Mahavirchandजी Bafna, Gothan Parsamalजी Lalvani, Gothan 96. Shri
Ghisulalजी, Parsamalजी, Janvarilalजी 113. Shri Lakshmichandजी AshokKumarजी
Shrisrimal, Kucheara _ Kothari, Gothan 114. Shri Bhanvarlalजी Maangilalजी
Betala, Deh 97. Shri Mohनलालजी Dhаriwal, Pali 115. Shri Kanchandevi v
Nirmaladevi, Madras 98. Shri Kanmalजी Kothari, Dadia 116. Shri Pukharajजी
Naharmalजी Lalvani, Madras 99. Shri Vardhaman Sthanakvasi Jain, Shravak Sangh,
Dalli 117. Shri Chandmalजी Dhanrajजी Modi, Ajmer Rajhara 100. Shri Janvarilalजी
ShantiLalजी Surana, 118. Shri Maangilalजी Uttamchandजी Bafna, Bangalore 119.
Shri Inderchandजी Jugrajजी Bafna, Bangalore 101. Shri Faterajजी Nemichandजी
Karnavat, Calcutta 120. Shri Champalalजी Manakchandजी Singhi, Kucheara 102. Shri
Riddkarणजी Ravtamलजी Bhurt, Guwahati 121. Shri Sanchalalजी Bafna, Aurangabad
103. Shri Jugrajजी Barmecha, Madras 122. Shri Bhuramलजी Dulleechandजी Bokardia,
Medta 104. Shri Kushalchandजी Rikhbachandजी Surana, Bularam City 105. Shri
Manakchandजी Ratnalalजी Munot, Nagaur 106. Shri Sampatrajजी Chordia, Madras 123.
Shri. Pukharajजी Kishnarajजी Tateड़, Secunderabad 107. Shri Kundanmalजी
Parsamalजी Bhandari, Bangalore 124. Shrimati Ramkunvar Dharmpatni Shri
Chandmalजी 108. Shri Ramprasann Gyan Prasar Kendra, Chandrapur Lodha, Mumbai.
109. Shri Tejarajजी Kothari, Mangaliya Vas 125. Shri Bhikamchandजी Manakchandजी
Khabia 110. Shri Amarchandजी Champalalजी Chajeder, Padu (Kudaloor), Madras
Bularam

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 200] [antakRddazA 91.zrI sohanalAlajI lUNakaraNajI surANA, kucerA bar3I 92.zrI
prakAzacaMdajI jaina, nAgaura 111.zrI mA~gIlAlajI zAMtilAlajI ruNavAla, 93.zrI
bhaMvaralAlajI rikhabacaMdajI nAhaTA, nAgaura harasolAva 94.zrI gUdar3amalajI
campAlAlajI, goThana 112.zrI kamalAkavaMra lalavANI dharmapatnI zrI sva. 95.zrI
pArasamalajI mahAvIracaMdajI bAphanA, goThana pArasamalajI lalavANI, goThana
96.zrI ghIsUlAlajI, pArasamalajI, jaMvarIlAlajI 113.zrI lakSmIcaMdajI
azokakumArajI zrIzrImAla, kucerA _ koThArI, goThana 114.zrI bhaMvaralAlajI
mAMgIlAlajI betAlA, Deha 97.zrI mohanalAlajI dhArIvAla, pAlI 115.zrI kaMcanadevI
va nirmalAdevI, madrAsa 98.zrI kAnamalajI koThArI, dAdiyA 116.zrI pukharAjajI
nAharamalajI lalavANI, madrAsa 99. zrI vardhamAna sthAnakavAsI jaina,
zrAvakasaMgha, dallI 117.zrI cAMdamalajI dhanarAjajI modI, ajamera rAjaharA
100.zrI jaMvarIlAlajI zAMtilAlajI surANA, 118.zrI mA~gIlAlajI uttamacaMdajI
bAphanA, baiMgalora 119.zrI indaracaMdajI jugarAjajI bAphanA, baiMgalora 101.zrI
phaterAjajI nemIcaMdajI karNAvaTa, kalakattA 120.zrI campAlAlajI mANakacaMdajI
siMghI, kucerA 102.zrI riddhakaraNajI rAvatamalajI bhuraTa, gohATI 121.zrI
saMcAlAlajI bAphanA, auraMgAbAda 103.zrI jugarAjajI baramecA, madrAsa 122.zrI
bhUramalajI dullIcaMdajI bokar3iyA, mer3atA 104.zrI kuzAlacaMdajI rikhabacaMdajI
surANA, bulArama siTI 105.zrI mANakacaMdajI ratanalAlajI muNota, nAgaura 106.zrI
sampatarAjajI coraDiyA, madrAsa 123.zrI. pukharAjajI kizanarAjajI tAter3a,
sikandarAbAda 107.zrI kundanamalajI pArasamalajI bhaNDArI, baiMgalora
124.zrImatI rAmakuMvara dharmapatnI zrI cAMdamalajI 108.zrI rAmaprasanna jJAna
prasAra kendra, candrapura lor3hA, mumbii| 109.zrI tejarAjajI koThArI,
mAMgaliyAvAsa 125.zrI bhIkamacandajI mANakacandajI khAbiyA 110.zrI amaracaMdajI
campAlAlajI chAjer3a, pAdU (kuDAlora), madrAsa bulArama

Page #242 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Anadhyayakala [Quoted from Nandī Sūtra edited by Ācārya Pravara Śrī
Ātmārāmaji M.]  One should study the scriptures only during the time prescribed
in the Āgamas for study. Studying during Anadhyayakala is prohibited.  The
Manusmṛti and other Smṛtis also describe Anadhyayakala in detail. Vedic people
also mention the Anadhyayas of the Vedas. Similarly, other Ārya scriptures are
also considered Anadhyaya. Since the Jain Āgamas are also Sarvajñokta,
Devādhiṣṭhita, and Svaravidyā combined, their Anadhyayakala is also described in
the Āgamas, such as:  **Ten Anadhyayas related to the sky:**  1. **Ukkāvāte** -
If there is a great fall of stars, one should not study for one prahara. 2.
**Disidāghe** - As long as the direction is red, as if there is fire in the
direction, one should not study. 3. **Gajjite** - Do not study for two praharas
when there is thunder. 4. **Nigghāte** - Do not study for one prahara when there
is lightning. 5. **Juvate** - Do not study for two praharas when there is a loud
thunder without clouds, or thunder with clouds. 6. **Yakṣādīpta** - When there
is a light in a direction, like lightning, that appears intermittently, it is
called Yakṣādīpta. One should not study as long as the Yakṣa-like light is
visible in the sky. 7. **Jakkhālitte** - Do not study for one prahara when there
is a sudden flash of light. 8. **Dhūmita** - Do not study for one prahara when
there is smoke in the sky. 9. **Mahita** - Do not study for one prahara when
there is a great cloud in the sky. 10. **Rayugghaate** - Do not study for one
prahara when there is a great wind in the sky.  **Ten Anadhyayas related to the
body:**  1. **Aṭhi** - Do not study when there is a bone in the body. 2.
**Mansaṁ** - Do not study when there is flesh in the body. 3. **Soṇite** - Do
not study when there is blood in the body. 4. **Asutisāmante** - Do not study
when there is a discharge of urine. 5. **Susāṇasāmante** - Do not study when
there is a discharge of feces. 6. **Candovarāte** - Do not study when there is a
discharge of semen. 7. **Sūrovarāte** - Do not study when there is a discharge
of menstrual blood. 8. **Paḍane** - Do not study when there is a fall. 9.
**Rāyavuggahe** - Do not study when there is a loss of consciousness. 10.
**Uvassayassa Anto Orālie Sarīrage** - Do not study when there is a discharge of
any other bodily fluid.  **Four Mahāpratipadā:**  1. **Āṣāḍhapratipadā** 2.
**Indamahāpratipadā** 3. **Kattiyāpratipadā** 4. **Sugimhapratipadā**  **Four
Mahāpratipadā Pūrṇimā:**  1. **Āṣāḍha Pūrṇimā** 2. **Inda Pūrṇimā** 3. **Kattiyā
Pūrṇimā** 4. **Sugimha Pūrṇimā**  **Four Sandhyā:**  1. **Paḍimāte** - Evening
2. **Paccimāte** - Night 3. **Majjhaṇhe** - Midday 4. **Aḍṭeratte** - Dawn
Thus, there are thirty-two Anadhyayas, which are described briefly as follows:
**Ten Anadhyayas related to the sky:**  1. **Ukkāvāte** - If there is a great
fall of stars, one should not study for one prahara. 2. **Disidāghe** - As long
as the direction is red, as if there is fire in the direction, one should not
study. 3. **Gajjite** - Do not study for two praharas when there is thunder. 4.
**Nigghāte** - Do not study for one prahara when there is lightning. 5.
**Juvate** - Do not study for two praharas when there is a loud thunder without
clouds, or thunder with clouds. 6. **Yakṣādīpta** - When there is a light in a
direction, like lightning, that appears intermittently, it is called Yakṣādīpta.
One should not study as long as the Yakṣa-like light is visible in the sky. 7.
**Jakkhālitte** - Do not study for one prahara when there is a sudden flash of
light. 8. **Dhūmita** - Do not study for one prahara when there is smoke in the
sky. 9. **Mahita** - Do not study for one prahara when there is a great cloud in
the sky. 10. **Rayugghaate** - Do not study for one prahara when there is a
great wind in the sky.  **However, the Anadhyayas of thunder and lightning
should not be considered during Cāturmās, as they are often due to the nature of
the season. Therefore, Anadhyaya is not considered from Ārdrā to Svāti
Nakshatra.**  **Note:** The text mentions that the Anadhyayas related to the sky
should not be considered during Cāturmās, as they are often due to the nature of
the season. Therefore, Anadhyaya is not considered from Ārdrā to Svāti
Nakshatra. This is a significant point to remember when applying the rules of
Anadhyayakala.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 anadhyAyakAla [sva. AcAryapravara zrI AtmArAmajI ma. dvArA sampAdita nandIsUtra
se uddhRta] svAdhyAya ke lie AgamoM meM jo samaya batAyA gayA hai, usI samaya
zAstroM kA svAdhyAya karanA caahie| anadhyAyakAla meM svAdhyAya varjita hai|
manusmRti Adi smRtiyoM meM bhI anadhyAyakAla kA vistArapUrvaka varNana kiyA gayA
hai| vaidika loga bhI veda ke anadhyAyoM kA ullekha karate haiN| isI prakAra
anya ArSa granthoM kA bhI anadhyAya mAnA jAtA hai| jainAgama bhI sarvajJokta,
devAdhiSThita tathA svaravidyA saMyukta hone ke kAraNa, inakA bhI AgamoM meM
anadhyAyakAla varNita kiyA gayA hai, jaise ki dasavidhe aMtalikkhite asajjhAe
paNNatte, taM jahA- ukkAvAte, disidAghe, gajjite, nigghAte, juvate, jakkhAlitte,
dhUmitA, mahitA, ryugghaate| dasavihe orAlite, asajjhAtite, taM jahA-aThi,
maMsaM, soNite, asutisAmaMte, susANasAmaMte, caMdovarAte, sUrovarAte, paDane,
rAyavuggahe, uvassayassa aMto orAlie sriirge| -sthAnAGga sUtra, sthAna 10 no
kappati nigmaMthANa vA, niggaMthINa vA cauhi mahApADivaehiM sajjjhAyaM karittae,
taM jahAAsADhapADivae, iMdamahApADivae kattiapADivae, sugimhpaaddive| no kappai
niggaMthANa vA niggaMthINa vA, cauhiM saMjhAhiM sajjjhAyaM karettae, taM jahA-
paDimAte, pacchimAte, majjhaNhe, aDTaratte  /  kappai niggaMthANaM vA
niggaMthINa vA, cAukkAlaM sajjjhAyaM karettae, taM jahA-puvvaNhe, avaraNhe,
paose, pccuuse| _ -sthAnAGga sUtra, sthAna 4, uddeza 2 uparokta satra pATha ke
anasAra dasa AkAza se sambandhita. dasa audArika zarIra se sambandhita. cAra
mahApratipadA, cAra mahApratipadA kI pUrNimA aura cAra sandhyA, isa prakAra
battIsa anadhyAya mAne gae haiN| jinakA saMkSepa meM nimna prakAra se varNana
hai, jaiseAkAza sambandhI dasa anadhyAya 1. ulkApAta-tArApatana- yadi mahat
tArApatana huA hai to eka prahara paryanta zAstra svAdhyAya nahIM karanA caahie|
2. diggadAha-jaba taka dizA raktavarNa kI ho arthAt aisA mAlUma par3e ki dizA
meM Aga sI lagI hai, taba bhI svAdhyAya nahIM karanA caahie| 3. garjita-bAdaloM
ke garjana para do prahara paryanta svAdhyAya na kre|| 4. vidyuta-bijalI
camakane para eka prahara paryanta svAdhyAya nahIM karanA caahie| kintu garjana
aura vidyuta kA asvAdhyAya cAturmAsa meM nahIM mAnanA caahie| kyoMki vaha
garjana aura vidyuta prAyaH Rtu svabhAva se hI hotA hai| ataH ArdrA meM svAti
nakSatra paryanta anadhyAya nahIM mAnA jaataa| rghAta-binA bAdala ke AkAza meM
vyantarAdikata ghora garjana hone para, yA bAdaloM sahita AkAza meM kar3akane
para do prahara taka asvAdhyAya kAla hai| 6. yUpaka-zukla pakSa meM pratipadA,
dvitIyA, tRtIyA ko sandhyA candraprabhA ke milane ko yUpaka kahA jAtA hai| ina
dinoM prahara rAtri paryanta svAdhyAya nahIM karanA caahie| 7. yakSAdIpta-kabhI
kisI dizA meM bijalI camakane jaisA, thor3e thor3e samaya pIche jo prakAza hotA
hai vaha yakSAdIpta kahalAtA hai| ata: AkAza meM jaba taka yakSAkAra dIkhatA
rahe taba taka svAdhyAya nahIM karanA caahie|

Page #243 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Translation:  8. **Dhūmikā:** The period from Krishna-Kārttik to Māgh is the
womb-month of the clouds. During this time, a subtle, smoky-colored, water-like
mist falls, which is called Dhūmikā-Krishna. As long as this mist falls, one
should not engage in svādhyāya. 9. **Mihikā-Śveta:** In the winter, a subtle,
white-colored, water-like mist falls, which is called Mihikā. As long as this
falls, it is a time of asvādhyāya. 10. **Rāja Udghata:** Due to the wind, dust
spreads all over the sky. As long as this dust remains spread, one should not
engage in svādhyāya.  The above ten reasons are related to the sky and are
considered asvādhyāya. The following ten reasons are related to the material
world and are also considered asvādhyāya.  11-13. **Bones, Flesh, and Blood:**
If the bones, flesh, and blood of a five-sensed, non-human being are visible,
then asvādhyāya continues until these objects are removed. The commentator
considers asvādhyāya to be present within a radius of sixty cubits from these
objects.  Similarly, asvādhyāya is considered for the bones, flesh, and blood of
a human being. However, the duration of asvādhyāya is one hundred cubits and one
day and night. For a woman's menstrual cycle, asvādhyāya lasts for three days.
For the birth of a boy and a girl, asvādhyāya lasts for seven and eight days
respectively. 14. **Impurity:** Asvādhyāya continues until excrement and urine
are visible. 15. **Cremation Ground:** Asvādhyāya is considered to be present
within a radius of one hundred cubits around a cremation ground. 16. **Lunar
Eclipse:** During a lunar eclipse, asvādhyāya should not be performed for eight,
twelve, or sixteen praharas, depending on the severity of the eclipse. 17.
**Solar Eclipse:** During a solar eclipse, asvādhyāya is also considered to be
present for eight, twelve, or sixteen praharas, depending on the severity of the
eclipse. 18. **Fall:** When a great king or a national leader dies, asvādhyāya
should not be performed until his cremation is completed. Alternatively,
asvādhyāya should be performed gradually until a new leader takes over. 19.
**Royal Conflict:** When there is a war between nearby kings, asvādhyāya should
not be performed until peace is restored. Even after peace is restored,
asvādhyāya should not be performed for one day and night. 20. **Material Body:**
If a five-sensed being dies within a shelter, asvādhyāya should not be performed
until the body is removed. If the lifeless body is lying within a radius of one
hundred cubits, asvādhyāya should not be performed.  The above ten reasons are
related to the material body and are considered asvādhyāya.  21-28. **Four
Festivals and Four Mahā-Pratipadās:** The four festivals are Āṣāḍha-Pūrṇimā,
Āśvina-Pūrṇimā, Kārttika-Pūrṇimā, and Chaitra-Pūrṇimā. The pratipadā that comes
after these pūrṇimās is called Mahā-Pratipadā. Asvādhyāya is prohibited during
these periods. 29-32. **Morning, Evening, Midday, and Midnight:** Asvādhyāya
should not be performed one ghaḍī before and one ghaḍī after sunrise. Asvādhyāya
should not be performed one ghaḍī before and one ghaḍī after sunset. Asvādhyāya
should not be performed one ghaḍī before and one ghaḍī after midday. Asvādhyāya
should not be performed one ghaḍī before and one ghaḍī after midnight.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 8. dhUmikA kRSNa-kArtika se lekara mAgha taka kA samaya meghoM kA garbhamAsa
hotA hai| isameM dhUmra varNa kI sUkSma jalarUpa dhuMdha par3atI hai| vaha
dhUmikA-kRSNa kahalAtI hai| jaba taka yaha dhuMdha par3atI rahe, taba taka
svAdhyAya nahIM karanA caahie| 9. mihikAzveta-zItakAla meM zveta varNa kA sUkSma
jalarUpa dhundha mihikA kahalAtI hai| jaba taka yaha giratI rahe, taba taka
asvAdhyAya kAla hai| 10. raja udghAta-vAyu ke kAraNa AkAza meM cAroM ora dhUli
chA jAtI hai| jaba taka yaha dhUli phailI rahatI hai| svAdhyAya nahIM karanA
caahie| uparokta dasa kAraNa AkAza sambandhI asvAdhyAya ke haiN| audArika
sambandhI dasa anadhyAya 11-12-13. haDDI, mAMsa aura rudhira- paMcedriya
tiryaMca kI haDDI mAMsa aura rudhira Adi sAmane dikhAI deM, to jaba taka vahA~
se yaha vastue~ uThAI na jAe~ taba taka asvAdhyAya hai| vRttikAra Asa pAsa ke 60
hAtha taka ina vastuoM ke hone para asvAdhyAya mAnate haiN| isI prakAra manuSya
sambandhI asthi mAMsa aura rudhira kA bhI anadhyAya mAnA jAtA hai  /  vizeSatA
itanI hai ki inakA asvAdhyAya sau hAtha taka tathA eka dina rAta kA hotA hai|
strI ke mAsika dharma kA asvAdhyAya tIna dina tk| bAlaka evaM bAlikA ke janma kA
asvAdhyAya kramazaH sAta evaM ATha dina paryanta kA mAnA jAtA hai| 14. azuci-
mala-mUtra sAmane dikhAI dene taka asvAdhyAya hai| 15. zmazAna- zmazAnabhUmi ke
cAroM ora sau-sau hAtha paryanta asvAdhyAya mAnA jAtA hai| 16. candragrahaNa-
candragrahaNa hone para jaghanya ATha, madhyama bAraha aura utkRSTa solaha
prahara paryanta svAdhyAya nahIM karanA caahie| 17. sUryagrahaNa-sUryagrahaNa
hone para bhI kramazaH, ATha, bAraha aura solaha prahara paryanta asvAdhyAyakAla
mAnA gayA hai| 18. patana-kisI baDe mAnya rAjA athavA rASTa puruSa kA nidhana
hone para jaba taka usakA dAhasaMskAra na ho taba taka svAdhyAya na karanA
caahie| athavA jaba taka dUsarA adhikArI sattArUDha na ho taba taka zanaiHzanaiH
svAdhyAya karanA caahie| 19. rAjavyudgraha-samIpastha rAjAoM meM paraspara
yuddha hone para jaba taka zAnti na ho jAe, taba taka usake pazcAt bhI eka dina-
rAtri svAdhyAya nahIM kreN| 20. audArika zarIra-upAzraya ke bhItara paMcendriya
jIva kA vadha ho jAne para jaba taka kalevara par3A rahe, taba taka tathA 100
hAtha taka yadi nirjIva kalevara paDA ho to svAdhyAya nahIM karanA caahie|
asvAdhyAya ke uparokta 10 kAraNa audArika zarIra sambandhI kahe gaye haiN| 21-28
cAra mahotsava aura cAra mahApratipadA-ASADha-pUrNimA, Azvina-pUrNimA, kArtika-
pUrNimA aura caitra-pUrNimA ye cAra mahotsava haiN| ina pUrNimAoM ke pazcAt Ane
vAlI pratipadA ko mahApratipadA kahate haiN| inameM svAdhyAya karane kA niSedha
hai| 29-32. prAtaH sAyaM madhyAhna aura ardharAtri-prAtaH sUrya ugane se eka
ghar3I pahile tathA eka ghar3I piiche| sUryAsta hone se eka ghar3I pahile tathA
eka ghar3I piiche| madhyAhna arthAt dopahara meM eka ghar3I Age aura eka ghar3I
pIche evaM ardharAtri meM bhI eka ghar3I Age tathA eka ghar3I pIche svAdhyAya
nahIM karanA caahie|

Page #244 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Life Sketch of Yuvacharya Shri Mishrimalji M.Sa. 'Madhukar' Muni  **Birth:**
* **Father:**   * **Date:**  Margashirsha Shukla Chaturdashi, Vikram Samvat 1970
* **Place:**  Tinwari Nagar, Jodhpur District, Rajasthan  **Mother:**  Shrimati
Tulsibai  **Family:**  Shri Jamnalalji Dhaadiwal  **Initiation:** * **Date:**
Vaishakh Shukla 10, Vikram Samvat 1980 * **Place:**  Bhinay Gram, Ajmer District
* **Initiation Guru:**  Shri Joravarmalji M.Sa. * **Teaching Guru (Guru-
Bhrata):**  Shri Hazarimlalji M.Sa.  **Acharya Parampara:**  Poojya Acharya Shri
Jaymallji M.Sa.  **Acharya Pad:** * **Jay Gachch:**  Vikram Samvat 2004 *
**Renunciation of Acharya Pad for the unity of the Shraman Sangh:**  Vikram
Samvat 2009  **Upadhyaya Pad:**  Vikram Samvat 2033  **Yuvacharya Pad:** *
**Announcement:**  Shravan Shukla 1, Vikram Samvat 2036 (July 25, 1979),
Hyderabad * **Chadar Mahotsav:**  Chaitra Shukla 10, Vikram Samvat 2037 (March
23, 1980), Jodhpur  **Nirvana:**  Mrigasira Vad 7, Vikram Samvat 2040 (November
26, 1983), Nasik (Maharashtra)  **Personality and Knowledge:**  *
**Appearance:**  A glorious, majestic, and radiant forehead, bright large eyes,
a smile that illuminated his face, a gentle and affectionate voice, a radiance
of spiritual energy, immense devotion to his Gurus, humility along with
knowledge, wisdom along with authority, and a disciplined Shraman. *
**Knowledge:**  He was proficient in Prakrit, Sanskrit, Grammar, Prakrit
Grammar, Jain Agamas, Nyaya Darshan, etc. * **Skills:**  He was a highly skilled
orator, novelist, storyteller, and commentator.  **Published Works:**  *
**Pravachan Sangrah (Discourse Collections):**     1. Antar Ki Aur, Part 1 & 2
2. Sadhana Ke Sutra     3. Paryushana Parva Pravachan     4. Anekanta Darshan
5. Jain-Karmasiddhanta     6. Jain Tattva-Darshan     7. Jain Sanskrit-Ek
Vishleshan     8. Grihasth Dharma     9. Aparigraha Darshan     10. Ahimsa
Darshan     11. Tap Ek Vishleshan     12. Adhyatma-Vikas Ki Bhoomika * **Katha
Sahitya (Story Literature):**  Jain Katha Mala, Part 1 to 51 * **Upanyas
(Novels):**     1. Pinjare Ka Panchhi     2. Ahimsa Ki Vijay     3. Talash
4. Chhaya     5. Aan Par Balidan * **Other Books:**     1. Agam Parichay     2.
Jain Dharma Ki Hazar Shikshaen     3. Jiyo To Aise Jiyo  **Special:**  He was
the coordinator and chief editor of Agam Battisi.  **Disciple:**  He had one
disciple: Muni Shri Vinaykumarji 'Bheem'.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
yuvAcArya zrI mizrImalajI ma.sA. 'madhukara' muni kA (jIvana paricaya pitA janma
tithi vi.saM. 1970 mArgazIrSa zuklA caturdazI janma-sthAna tiMvarI nagara, jilA-
jodhapura (rAja.) . mAtA zrImatI tulasIbAI zrI jamanAlAlajI dhAr3IvAla dIkSA
tithi vaizAkha zuklA 10 vi.saM. 1980 dIkSA-sthAna bhiNAya grAma, jilA-ajamera
dIkSAguru zrI jorAvaramalajI ma.sA. zikSAguru (gurubhrAtA) zrI hajArImalajI
ma.sA. AcArya paramparA pUjya AcArya zrI jayamallajI ma.sA. AcArya pada jaya
gaccha-vi.saM. 2004 zramaNa saMgha kI ekatA hetu AcArya pada kA tyAga
vi.saM.2009 upAdhyAya pada vi.saM. 2033 nAgaura (varSAvAsa) yuvAcArya pada kI
ghoSaNA zrAvaNa zuklA 1 vi.saM. 2036 dinAMka 25 julAI 1979 (haidarAbAda)
yuvAcArya pada-cAdara mahotsava vi.saM. 2037 caitra zuklA 10 dinAMka 23-3-80,
jodhapura svargavAsa vi.saM. 2040 migasara vada 7 dinAMka 26-11-1983, nAsika
(mahArASTra) ApakA vyaktitva evaM jJAna : 1. gauravapUrNa bhavya tejasvI lalATa,
camakadAra bar3I A~kheM, mukha para smita kI khilatI AbhA aura sneha tathA
saujanya varSAti komala vANI, AdhyAtmika teja kA nikhAra, gurujanoM ke prati
agAdha zraddhA, vidyA ke sAtha vinaya, adhikAra ke sAtha viveka aura anuzAsita
zramaNa the| prAkRta, saMskRta, vyAkaraNa, prAkRta vyAkaraNa, jaina Agama, nyAya
darzana Adi kA praur3ha jJAna munizrI ko prApta thaa| Apa uccakoTi ke
pravacanakAra, upanyAsakAra, kathAkAra evaM vyAkhyAkAra the| Apake prakAzita
sAhitya kI nAmAvalI pravacana saMgraha : 1. antara kI ora, bhAga 1 va 2,2.
sAdhanA ke sUtra, 3. paryuSaNa parva pravacana, 4. anekAnta darzana, 5. jaina-
karmasiddhAnta, 6. jainatattva-darzana, 7. jaina saMskRta-eka vizleSaNa, 8.
gRhasthadharma, 9. aparigraha darzana, 10. ahiMsA darzana, 11. tapa eka
vizleSaNa, 12. AdhyAtma-vikAsa kI bhuumikaa| kathA sAhitya : jaina kathA mAlA,
bhAga 1 se 51 taka upanyAsa : 1. piMjare kA paMchI, 2. ahiMsA kI vijaya, 3.
talAza, 4. chAyA, 5. Ana para blidaan| anya pustakeM : 1. Agama paricaya, 2.
jainadharma kI hajAra zikSAe~, 3. jiyo to aise jiyo| vizeSa : Agama battIsI ke
saMyojaka va pradhAna smpaadk| ziSya : Apake eka ziSya haiM- 1. muni zrI
vinayakumArajI 'bhIma'

