Catalog link: https://jainqq.org/explore/003449/1

Page #1 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
In memory of the revered Gurudev Shri Joravarmalji Maharaj Coordinator and Chief
Editor Yuvacharya Shri Madhukar Muni Anuttarauṣapātikaśā Original - Translation
- Analysis - Notes - Appendix - Youth

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 W M sva. pUjya gurudeva zrI jorAvaramalajImahArAja kI smRti meM Ayojita
saMyojaka evaM pradhAna sampAdaka yuvAcArya zrI madhukara muni
anuttarauSapAtikazA ti mU la-anuvAda-vivecanA-TippaNa-pariziSTa-yuvata )

Page #2 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
ॐ Arhat Jinagam-Granthamala: Granthank - 6 [Organized in the auspicious memory
of Param Shraddhey Gurudev Pujya Shri Joravarmalji Maharaj] Pancham Ganadhar
Bhagavat Sudharmaswami-Pranit: Navam Ang Anuttaroupapatikadasang [Original Text,
Hindi Translation, Discussion, Appendix Included] Inspiration Up-Pravartak
Shasansevi Sw. Swami Shri Brajlalji Maharaj First Coordinator and Chief Editor
(Sw.) Yuvacharya Shri Mishrimalji Maharaj 'Madhukar' Translator - Discussant
Sadhvi Muktiprabhaji M.A., P-H.D. [Disciple of Acharya Samrat Shri Anandrishiji
M. and Antavasini of Mahasati Shri Ujjvalkumariji] Publisher Shri Agam Prakashan
Samiti, Byawar (Rajasthan)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 OM arha jinAgama-granthamAlA : granthAGka - 6 [parama zraddheya gurudeva pUjya
zrI jorAvaramalajI mahArAja kI puNyasmRti meM Ayojita ] paMcama gaNadhara
bhagavat sudharmasvAmi-praNIta : navama aMga anuttaraupapAtikadazAMga [ mUla
pATha, hindI anuvAda, vivecana, pariziSTa yukta ] preraNA upapravartaka
zAsanasevI sva. svAmI zrI brajalAlajI mahArAja Adya saMyojaka tathA pradhAna
sampAdaka (sva.) yuvAcArya zrI mizrImalajI mahArAja 'madhukara' anuvAdaka -
vivecaka sAdhvI muktiprabhAjI ema.e., pI-eca.DI. [AcAryasamrAT zrI AnandaRSijI
ma. kI suziSyA aura mahAsatI zrI ujjvalakumArIjI kI antevAsinI ] prakAzaka zrI
AgamaprakAzana samiti, byAvara (rAjasthAna )

Page #3 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Jinagam-Granthamala : Granthank-6 Nirdéshan Sadhvi Shri Umravkunvar Ji M.Sa.
'Archana' Sampadak Mandal Anuyogpravartak Muni Shri Kanhaiyalalji 'Kamal'
Acharya Shri Devendramuni Ji Shastri Shri Ratnamuni Ji Pan. Shobhachandra Ji
Bharill Samprerak Muni Shri Vinaykumar 'Bhim' Sanshodhan Shri Devkumar Jain
Tritiya Sanskaran Veer Nirvan San. 2525 Vikram San. 2056 E. San. 1999 Prakashan
Shri Agam Prakashan Samiti Braj-Madhukar Smriti Bhavan Pipaliya Bazaar, Byawer
(Rajasthan)-305901 Durbhash: 50087 Mudrak Shrimati Vimlesh Jain Ajantā Paper
Converters Lakshmi Chauk, Ajmer-305001 Computerized Type Setting Sunrise
Computers Nahar Mohalla, Ajmer-305011 Muly: 41/- Rupees

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 jinAgama-granthamAlA : granthAGka-6 nirdezana sAdhvI zrI umarAvakuMvara jI
ma.sA. 'arcanA' sampAdaka maNDala anuyogapravartaka muni zrI kanhaiyAlAlajI
'kamala' AcArya zrI devendramunijI zAstrI zrI ratanamunijI paM. zobhAcandra jI
bhArilla sampreraka muni zrI vinayakumAra 'bhIma' saMzodhana zrI devakumAra
jaina tRtIya saMskaraNa vIra nirvANa saM0 2525 vikrama saM0 2056 I0 san 1999
prakAzaka zrI AgamaprakAzana samiti braja-madhukara smRti bhavana pIpaliyA
bAjAra, byAvara (rAjasthAna)-305901 dUrabhASa : 50087 mudraka zrImatI vimaleza
jaina ajantA pepara kanvarTarsa lakSmI cauka, ajamera-305001 kampyUTarAijDa
TAipa saiTiMga sanarAIja kampyUTarsa nahara mohallA, ajamera-305011 mUlya : 41/-
rupaye

Page #4 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Guvacharya Shri Madhukar Muni ji M.Sa. 卐 Maha Mantra Namo Arihantaanam, Namo
Siddhanam, Namo Ayariyanam, Namo Uvvajhayanam, Namo Loesavva Sahoonanam, Eso
Panch Namo-kkaro' Savvapavapanasano. Mangalanam Cha Savvesim, Padham Havai
Mangalam.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 guvAcArya zrI madhukara munIjI ma.sA. Wan  mahAmaMtra Namo arihaMtANaM, Namo
sidhdANaM, Namo AyariyANaM, Namo uvajjhAyANaM, Namo loesavva sAhUNaM, eso paMca
NamokkAro' savvapAvapaNAsaNo  /  maMgalANaM ca savvesiM, paDhama havai maMgalaM
/  /

Page #5 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The five great vows (Mahavratas) are: 1. **Ahimsa** (non-violence) 2. **Satya**
(truthfulness) 3. **Asteya** (non-stealing) 4. **Brahmacharya** (continence) 5.
**Aparigraha** (non-attachment)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================


Page #6 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Published on the Holy Remembrance occasion of Rev. Guru Shri Joravarmalji
Maharaj Fifth Ganadhara Sudharma Swami Compiled Ninth Anga ANUTTAROVAVĀIA-DASÃO
[Original Text, Hindi Version, Notes, Annotations and Appendices etc.) Proximity
Up-Pravartaka Shasansevi Rev. (Late) Swami Sri Brijlalji Maharaj Convener &
Founder Editor Yuvacharya (Late) Sri Mishrimalji Maharaj 'Madhukar' Translator &
Annotator Sadhwi Muktiprabha M.A., Ph.D. Publishers Shri Agam Prakashan Samiti
Beawar (Raj.)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Published on the Holy Remembrance occasion of Rev. Guru Shri Joravarmalji
Maharaj Fifth Ganadhara Sudharma Swami Compiled Ninth Anga ANUTTAROVAVAIA-DASAO
[Original Text, Hindi Version, Notes, Annotations and Appendices etc.) Proximity
Up-Pravartaka Shasansevi Rev. (Late) Swami Sri Brijlalji Maharaj Convener &
Founder Editor Yuvacharya (Late) Sri Mishrimalji Maharaj 'Madhukar' Translator &
Annotator Sadhwi Muktiprabha M.A., Ph.D. Publishers Shri Agam Prakashan Samiti
Beawar (Raj.)

Page #7 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Jinagam Granthmala Publication No. 6 Direction Sadhwi Shri Umrav Kunwar
'Archana' Board of Editors Anuyoga-Pravartaka Muni Sri Kanhaiyalal Ji 'Kamal'
Acharya Sri Devendra Muni Ji Shastri Sri Ratan Muni Ji Pandit Shobha Chand Ji
Bharil Promotor Muni Sri Vinay Kumar 'Bhima' Corrections and Supervision Sri Dev
Kumar Jain Third Edition Vir-Nirvana Samvat 2525 Vikram Samvat 2056 1999
Publishers Sri Agam Prakashan Samiti, Brij-Madhukar Smriti Bhawan, Pipalia
Bazar, Beawar (Raj.) - 305 901 Phone-50087 Printers Smt. Vimlesh Jain Ajanta
Paper Converters Laxmi Chowk, Ajmer-305 001 Laser Type Setting by: Sunrise
Computers Ajmer-305 001 Price: Rs. /- 41/

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Jinagam Granthmala Publication No. 6 Direction Sadhwi Shri Umrav Kunwar
'Archana' Board of Editors Anuyoga-Pravartaka Muni Sri Kanhaiyalal Ji 'Kamal'
Acharya Sri Devendra Muni Ji Shastri Sri Ratan Muni Ji Pandit Shobha Chand Ji
Bharil Promotor Muni Sri Vinay Kumar 'Bhima' Corrections and Supervision Sri Dev
Kumar Jain Third Edition Vir-Nirvana Samvat 2525 Vikram Samvat 2056 1999
Publishers Sri Agam Prakashan Samiti, Brij-Madhukar Smriti Bhawan, Pipalia
Bazar, Beawar (Raj.) - 305 901 Phone-50087 Printers Smt. Vimlesh Jain Ajanta
Paper Converters Laxmi Chowk, Ajmer-305 001 Laser Type Setting by: Sunrise
Computers Ajmer-305 001 Price: Rs. /- 41/

Page #8 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Dedication**  When the inquisitive seekers of Agam-study, the Agam-Swadhyaya-
premi, yearned for the study of Agams, in that era, the entire thirty-two who,
as solitary and helpless individuals, translated and rendered a great service to
the Sangha and the Shaasana, and created other vast literature, establishing a
new era, who were the Agam-Yug-Pravartak in the present time, who were the
living symbols of simplicity, humility, and scholarship, whose sacred memory
still evokes reverence and devotion in the hearts of the noble,  To those most
revered Acharyas, Shri Amolkarishiji Maharaj, at the lotus feet of Madhukar
Muni.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 samarpaNa jaba Agama-svAdhyAyapremI jijJAsu - -jana AgamoM ke adhyayana ke lie
tarasate the, usa yuga meM sampUrNa battIsI kA jinhoMne ekAkI -asahAyaka rUpa
meM anuvAda karake saMgha aura zAsana kA mahAn upakAra kiyA tathA anya vipula
sAhitya kI racanA kI - nUtana yuga kI pratiSThA kI, jo adyatanakAla meM Agama-
yugapravartaka the, jo saralatA, vinamratA aura vidvattA ke sajIva pratIka the,
jinakA pAvana smaraNa Aja bhI bhavya janoM kI antarAtmA meM zraddhA aura bhakti
upajAtA hai, una paramapUjya AcAryavarya zrI amolakaRSijI mahArAja ke kara-
kamaloM meM madhukara muni -

Page #9 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The five great vows (Mahavratas) are: 1. **Ahimsa** (non-violence) 2. **Satya**
(truthfulness) 3. **Asteya** (non-stealing) 4. **Brahmacharya** (continence) 5.
**Aparigraha** (non-attachment)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================


Page #10 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
This is the third edition of the Anuttaraupapatikadasanga Sutra being published
after the publication of the third edition of the Prakashakaya Acharanga 1, 2
parts, Upasakadasanga, Jnatadharmakathanga, Antakriddasanga Sutras.
Anuttaraupapatikadasanga Sutra is the ninth Anga Agama among the Anga-entered
Agamas. It describes the life of the famous Jain emperor Shrenik's princes Jali,
Mayali, etc., and the life of Dhannya, the son of Bhadra Sarthavahi, filled with
sadhana. This makes it clear that the enjoyment of worldly pleasures cannot be
the goal of man, but the success of human life lies in striving towards the
ultimate goal of all beings - liberation (moksha). This is the objective of this
Agama. Lovers of self-study should study it with this perspective. The editing
and translation of this Agama has been done with utmost diligence by the learned
Mahasati Shri Muktiprabhaji M. M.A., Ph.D., making it comprehensive. Along with
this, Acharya Shri Devendramuni Ji M. Shastri has revealed the inner secrets of
the scriptures in his preface and guided the readers. The committee expresses
its heartfelt gratitude and appreciation to Sadhviji and Acharya Shriji for
this. The plan to publish Agama Battisi was initiated under the able guidance of
the late Yuvacharya Shri Madhukar Muni Ji, keeping in mind the publication of
original Jain literature. At this time, all kinds of gentlemen contributed to
making this laborious plan successful, and with the publication, the circle of
readers expanded, becoming like a drop of water turning into an ocean. For this
reason, the committee is trying to publish the third edition of all its
inaccessible texts. We are pleased to request that this holy ritual of Agama
publication is the result of the inspiration of our collaborators, and it is
only through the grace of the all-auspicious late Yuvacharya Shriji's reign,
devotion to the Agamas, and love for literature that we have received this
fortune. Sagarmal Baitala, President Ratanchand Modi, Working President Shri
Agama Prakashan Samiti, Byawar (Rajasthan) Sayaramal Chordia, General Secretary
Gyanchand Binayakiya, Secretary

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prakAzakIya AcArAMga 1, 2 bhAga, upAsakadazAMga, jJAtAdharmakathAMga,
antakRddazAMga sUtroM ke tRtIya saMskaraNa prakAzita karane ke anantara
anuttaraupapAtikadazAMgasUtra kA yaha tRtIya saMskaraNa prakAzita kara rahe
haiN| anuttaraupapAtikadazAMgasUtra aMgapraviSTa AgamoM meM nauvAM aMga Agama
hai| isameM jaina itihAsa ke suprasiddha samrAT zreNika ke jAli, mayAli Adi
rAjakumAroM, bhadrA sArthavAhI ke putra dhanya Adi ke sAdhanAmaya jIvana kA
varNana kiyA gayA hai| isase yaha spaSTa hotA hai ki kAmabhogoM kA upabhoga
mAnava kA dhyeya nahIM ho sakatA hai, kintu prANimAtra ke antima lakSya
paramanizreyas - mokSaprApti ke prati prayatnazIla rahane meM hI mAnavajIvana kI
saphalatA hai| yahI udbodhana denA isa Agama kA abhidheya hai  /
svAdhyAyapremiyoM ko isI dRSTi se isakA adhyayana karanA caahiye| prastuta Agama
kA sampAdana aura anuvAda viduSI mahAsatI zrI muktiprabhAjI ma. ema. e., pI-eca.
DI. ne pUrNa parizrama se karake ise sarvAMgINa banAyA hai| sAtha hI
zramaNasaMgha ke AcArya zrI devendramunijI ma. zAstrI ne apanI prastAvanA meM
zAstra ke antarrahasya ko udghATita kara pAThakoM ko mArgadarzana karAyA hai|
etadartha samiti sAdhvIjI va AcAryazrIjI kA sadhanyavAda AbhAra mAnate hue
abhinandana karatI hai| maulika jaina sAhitya ke prakAzana ko dhyAna meM
rakhakara sva. yuvAcArya zrI madhukara munijI ke kuzala nirdezana Agama battIsI
ke prakAzana kI yojanA prArambha huI thii| isa samaya va zramasAdhya yojanA ko
saphala banAne meM sabhI prakAra ke sajjanoM kA sahayoga milA aura prakAzana ke
sAtha hI pAThakoM kA dAyarA bar3hatA gayA ki bindu sindhu rUpa meM pariNata ho
gii| isI kAraNa samiti apane sabhI aprApya hote jAne vAle granthoM ke tRtIya
saMskaraNa prakAzita karane ke lie prayatna kara rahI hai  /  hameM nivedana
karate hue prasannatA ho rahI hai ki Agama prakAzana kA yaha paramapunIta
anuSThAna sahayogiyoM kI preraNA kA suphala hai aura sarvatobhadra sva.
yuvAcArya zrIjI kI zAsanaprabhAvanA, Agamabhakti aura sAhityAnurAga kI pAvana
bhAvanA se hI hameM yaha saubhAgya prApta huA hai| sAgaramala baitAlA adhyakSa
ratanacanda modI kAryAdhyakSa zrI AgamaprakAzana samiti, byAvara (rAjasthAna )
sAyaramala coraDiyA mahAmantrI jJAnacaMda binAyakiyA mantrI

Page #11 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The five great vows (Mahavratas) are: 1. **Ahimsa** (non-violence) 2. **Satya**
(truthfulness) 3. **Asteya** (non-stealing) 4. **Brahmacharya** (continence) 5.
**Aparigraha** (non-attachment)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================


Page #12 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Introduction (From the First Edition)  The fundamental basis of Jain
religion, philosophy, and culture is the word of the Vitaraga Sarvagna. Sarvagna
means one who has self-realization. Only those who have complete self-
realization can have a complete vision of the world. Those who know the whole
can truly explain the essence of knowledge. They can truly preach the ultimate
good, the liberation.  The essence of knowledge, self-knowledge, and proper
conduct as stated by the Sarvagnas is known as 'Agam Shastra' or Sutra.  The
word of the Tirthankaras is like a shower of liberated flowers. The great wise
Ganadharas compile it in the form of Sutras and give it the form of a systematic
'Agam'.  What we call 'Agam' today was known as 'Ganipitaka' in ancient times.
'Ganipitaka' includes the entire Dvadasangi. Later, its parts, sub-parts, roots,
holes, etc. were divided into many categories.  When there was no tradition of
writing, the Agams were preserved through the Guru-Parampara based on memory.
For almost a thousand years after Bhagwan Mahavira, the 'Agam' followed the
tradition of memory. Due to weakness of memory, the break in the Guru-Parampara,
and many other reasons, the knowledge of Agam gradually disappeared. The water
of the great lake dried up and only a small puddle remained. Then, Devarddigni
Kshamashraman called a meeting of the Shramans and made a historic attempt to
preserve the knowledge of Agam, which was disappearing due to memory lapses, and
to preserve the word of the Jinas. He compiled the word of the Jinas into a book
and did an invaluable service to the future generations. This was an amazing
initiative to keep the stream of Jain religion, philosophy, and culture flowing.
This first compilation of the Agams was completed 980 or 993 years after the
Nirvana of the Veer.  After being compiled into books, the form of the Jain
Agams was preserved in its original form. However, due to the passage of time,
external attacks, internal differences of opinion, conflicts, weakness of
memory, and negligence, the pure stream of Agam knowledge, the correct Guru-
Parampara of understanding, gradually weakened. Many important references,
words, and profound meanings of the Agams became fragmented. The Agams that were
written were not completely pure, and those who could give the correct meaning
of the Agams were rare. Due to many other reasons, the stream of Agam knowledge
became narrow.  In the sixteenth century Vikram, Lokashah made a revolutionary
effort. A bold initiative to explain the pure and true meaning of the Agams was
started again. But after some time, obstacles arose again. Communal hatred,
theoretical conflicts, and the lack of knowledge of language among the scribes
became a major obstacle in the achievement of the Agams and their correct
understanding.  1. "The meaning is explained by the Arha, the Sutras are
compiled by the wise Ganadharas." [9]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Amukha (prathama saMskaraNa se) jaina dharma, darzana va saMskRti kA mUla
AdhAra vItarAga sarvajJa kI vANI hai| sarvajJa arthAt AtmadRSTA  /  sampUrNa
rUpa se Atmadarzana karane vAle hI vizva kA samagra darzana kara sakate haiN| jo
samagra ko jAnate haiM, ve hI tattvajJAna kA yathArtha nirUpaNa kara sakate
haiN| paramahitakara niHzreyasa kA yathArtha upadeza kara sakate haiN| sarvajJoM
dvArA kathita tattvajJAna, AtmajJAna tathA AcAra-vyavahAra kA samyak paribodha-
'AgamazAstra' yA sUtra ke nAma se prasiddha hai| tIrthaMkaroM kI vANI mukta
sumanoM kI vRSTi ke samAna hotI hai, mahAn prajJAvAna gaNadhara use sUtra rUpa
meM grathita karake vyavasthita 'Agama' kA rUpa dete haiN| Aja jise hama Agama'
nAma se abhihita karate haiM, prAcIna samaya meM ve 'gaNipiTaka' kahalAte
the--'gaNipiTaka' meM samagra dvAdazAMgI kA samAveza ho jAtA hai| pazcAdvartI
kAla meM isake aMga, upAMga, mUla, cheda Adi aneka bheda kiye gye| jaba likhane
kI paramparA nahIM thI, taba AgamoM ko smRti ke AdhAra para guru-paramparA se
surakSita rakhA jAtA thaa| bhagavAn mahAvIra ke bAda lagabhaga eka hajAra varSa
taka 'Agama' smRti-paramparA para cale Aye the| smRti-durbalatA, guru-paramparA
kA viccheda tathA anya aneka kAraNoM se dhIre-dhIre AgamajJAna bhI lupta hotA
gyaa| mahAsarovara kA jala sUkhatA-sUkhatA goSpada mAtra hI raha gyaa| taba
devarddhigaNI kSamAzramaNa ne zramaNoM kA sammelana bulAkara smRti-doSa se lupta
hote AgamajJAna ko, jinavANI ko surakSita rakhane ke pavitra uddezya se
lipibaddha karane kA aitihAsika prayAsa kiyA aura jinavANI ko pustakArUr3ha
karake Ane vAlI pIr3hI para avarNanIya upakAra kiyaa| yaha jaina dharma, darzana
evaM saMskRti kI dhArA ko pravahamAna rakhane kA adbhuta upakrama thaa| AgamoM
kA yaha prathama sampAdana vIra-nirvANa ke 980 yA 993 varSa pazcAt sampanna
huaa| pustakArUr3ha hone ke bAda jaina AgamoM kA svarUpa mUla rUpa meM to
surakSita ho gayA, kintu kAladoSa, bAharI AkramaNa, Antarika matabheda, vigraha,
smRti-durbalatA evaM pramAda Adi kAraNoM se Agama-jJAna kI zuddhadhArA,
arthabodha kI samyak guruparamparA dhIre-dhIre kSINa hone se nahIM rukii| AgamoM
ke aneka mahattvapUrNa sandarbha, pada tathA gUr3ha artha chinna-vicchinna hote
cale ge| jo Agama likhe jAte the, ve bhI pUrNa zuddha nahIM hote the, unakA
samyak artha-jJAna dene vAle bhI virale hI rahe  /  anya bhI aneka kAraNoM se
Agama-jJAna kI dhArA saMkucita hotI gyii| vikrama kI solahavIM zatAbdI meM
lokAzAha ne eka krAntikArI prayatna kiyaa| AgamoM ke zuddha aura yathArtha
artha-jJAna ko nirUpita karane kA eka sAhasika upakrama punaH cAlU huaa| kintu
kucha kAla bAda punaH usameM bhI vyavadhAna A ge| sAmpradAyika dveSa,
saiddhAntika vigraha tathA lipikAroM kI bhASAviSayaka alpajJatA AgamoM kI
upalabdhi tathA unake samyaka arthabodha meM bahuta bar3A vighna bana ge| 1.
atthaM bhAsai arahA suttaM gaMthaMti gaNaharA nitthnnaa| [9]

Page #13 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
In the early stages of the nineteenth century, when the tradition of printing
Agamas began, readers found some convenience. When the ancient commentaries,
Churnis and Niyuktis of the Agamas were published and based on them, the simple
and clear understanding of the Agamas was printed and made available to the
readers, the study of Agam knowledge naturally increased, hundreds of curious
people developed a tendency towards Agam self-study and Jain and non-Jain
scholars from India and abroad also started practicing the Agamas. It is
difficult to mention the names of all the scholars and wise Shramans who did
historical work in the publication, editing and printing of the Agamas, due to
lack of sufficient material. Nevertheless, I will definitely mention the names
of some great monks of the Stanakwasi tradition. Reverend Shri Amolkarishiji
Maharaj was a great courageous and determined monk of the Stanakwasi tradition,
who, with the strength of meager resources, translated all thirty-two Sutras
into Hindi and made them accessible to the masses. The editing and publication
of all thirty-two was a historical work, which benefited the entire Stanakwasi
and Terapanthi society. A resolution of Gurudev Pujya Swami Shri Joravarmalji
Maharaj - When I was studying the Agamas under the guidance of Gurudev Late
Swami Shri Joravarmalji Maharaj, some Agamas published by the Agamoday Committee
were available. Gurudev used to make me study based on them. Seeing them,
Gurudev felt that although these editions are quite laborious and are also quite
pure in the available editions so far, yet many places are unclear. There is
also a difference somewhere in the original text and its commentary, somewhere
the commentary is very brief. Gurudev Swami Shri Joravarmalji Maharaj himself
was a great scholar of Jain Sutras. His intellect was very learned and
argumentative. Seeing this state of Agam literature, he was very pained and many
times he also expressed that if the Agamas were published in a pure, beautiful
and universally useful way, then many people would be benefited, due to some
circumstances, his resolution remained limited to just a feeling. Meanwhile,
Acharya Shri Jawaharlalji Maharaj, Jain Dharmadiwakar Acharya Shri Atmaramji
Maharaj, Pujya Shri Ghasilalji Maharaj etc. learned monks have fulfilled this
deficiency by writing beautiful explanations and commentaries of the Agamas or
by getting them written under their guidance. At present, Acharya Shri Tulsi of
the Terapanth sect has also started this Herculean effort and their Agam work is
going on at a good level. Muni Shri Kanhaiyalalji 'Kamal' is making a unique and
important effort to classify the statements of the Agamas into Anuyogas. The
learned Shraman Late Muni Shri Punyavijayji of the Shwetambar Murtipujak
tradition had started a very systematic and excellent work in the direction of
Agam editing. After his demise, this beautiful effort is going on under the
guidance of Muni Shri Jambhuvijayji. After taking a panoramic view of all the
above works, a resolution arose in my mind. Today, somewhere the original of the
Agamas is being published and somewhere the vast explanations of the Agamas are
being done. One is incomprehensible for the reader, while the other is complex.
There should be such an effort to reveal the essence of Agamvani by following
the middle path, which is also understandable, simple, concise, but meaningful
and easy. Gurudev wanted the same. Keeping that feeling in mind, I started
thinking about this subject 4-5 years ago. [१०]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 unnIsavIM zatAbdI ke prathama caraNa meM jaba Agama-mudraNa kI paramparA calI
to pAThakoM ko kucha suvidhA huii| AgamoM kI prAcIna TIkAe~, cUrNi va niyukti
jaba prakAzita huIM tathA unake AdhAra para AgamoM kA sarala va spaSTa
bhAvabodha mudrita hokara pAThakoM ko sulabha huA to AgamajJAna kA paThana-
pAThana svabhAvataH bar3hA, saikar3oM jijJAsuoM meM Agama svAdhyAya kI pravRtti
jagI va jainetara dezI-videzI vidvAn bhI AgamoM kA anuzIlana karane lge| AgamoM
ke prakAzana-sampAdana-mudraNa ke kArya meM jina vidvAnoM tathA manISI zramaNoM
ne aitihAsika kArya kiyA, paryApta sAmagrI ke abhAva meM Aja una sabakA
nAmollekha kara pAnA kaThina hai| phira bhI maiM sthAnakavAsI paramparA ke kucha
mahAn muniyoM kA nAma grahaNa avazya hI kruuNgaa| pUjya zrI amolakaRSijI
mahArAja sthAnakavAsI paramparA ke ve mahAn sAhasI va dRr3ha saMkalpabalI muni
the, jinhoMne alpa sAdhanoM ke bala para bhI pUre battIsa sUtroM ko hindI meM
anUdita karake jana-jana ko sulabha banA diyaa| pUre battIsI kA sampAdana-
prakAzana eka aitihAsika kArya thA, jisase sampUrNa sthAnakavAsI va terApaMthI
samAja upakRta huaa| gurudeva pUjya svAmI zrI jorAvaramalajI mahArAja kA eka
saMkalpa - maiM jaba gurudeva sva. svAmI zrI jorAvaramalajI mahArAja ke
tattvAvadhAna meM AgamoM kA adhyayana kara rahA thA taba Agamodaya samiti dvArA
prakAzita kucha Agama upalabdha the| unhIM ke AdhAra para gurudeva mujhe
adhyayana karAte the| unako dekhakara gurudeva ko lagatA thA ki yaha saMskaraNa
yadyapi kAphI zrama-sAdhya haiM, evaM aba taka ke upalabdha saMskaraNoM meM
kAphI zuddha bhI haiM, phira bhI aneka sthala aspaSTa haiN| mUla pATha meM evaM
usakI vRtti meM kahIM-kahIM antara bhI hai, kahIM vRtti bahuta saMkSipta hai|
gurudeva svAmI zrI jorAvaramalajI mahArAja svayaM jaina-sUtroM ke prakANDa
paMDita the| unakI medhA bar3I vyutpanna va tarkaNApradhAna thii| Agama sAhitya
kI yaha sthiti dekhakara unheM bahuta pIr3A hotI aura kaI bAra unhoMne vyakta
bhI kiyA ki AgamoM kA zuddha,sundara va sarvopayogI prakAzana ho to bahuta logoM
kA kalyANa hogA, kucha paristhitiyoM ke kAraNa unakA saMkalpa, mAtra bhAvanA
taka sImita rhaa| isI bIca AcArya zrI javAharalAlajI mahArAja,
jainadharmadivAkara AcArya zrI AtmArAmajI mahArAja, pUjya zrI ghAsIlAlajI
mahArAja Adi vidvAn muniyoM ne AgamoM kI sundara vyAkhyAe~ va TIkAe~ likhakara
athavA apane tattvAvadhAna meM likhavAkara isa kamI ko pUrA kiyA hai| vartamAna
meM terApaMtha sampradAya ke AcArya zrI tulasI ne bhI yaha bhagIratha prayatna
prArambha kiyA hai aura acche stara se unakA Agama-kArya cala rahA hai| muni zrI
kanhaiyAlAlajI'kamala' AgamoM kI vaktavyatA ko anuyogoM meM vargIkRta karane kA
maulika evaM mahattvapUrNa prayAsa kara rahe haiN| zvetAmbara mUrtipUjaka
paramparA ke vidvAn zramaNa sva. muni zrI puNyavijayajI ne Agama-sampAdana kI
dizA meM bahuta hI vyavasthita va uttamakoTi kA kArya prArambha kiyA thaa| unake
svargavAsa ke pazcAt muni zrI jambUvijayajI ke tattvAvadhAna meM yaha sundara
prayatna cala rahA hai| ukta sabhI kAryoM kA vihaMgama avalokana karane ke bAda
mere mana meM eka saMkalpa utthaa| Aja kahIM to AgamoM kA mUla mAtra prakAzita
ho rahA hai aura kahIM AgamoM kI vizAla vyAkhyAe~ kI jA rahI haiN| eka, pAThaka
ke lie durbodha hai to dUsarI jttil| madhyama mArga kA anusaraNa kara AgamavANI
kA bhAvodghATana karane vAlA aisA prayatna honA cAhie jo subodha bhI ho, sarala
bhI ho, saMkSipta ho, para sArapUrNa va sugama ho| gurudeva aisA hI cAhate the|
usI bhAvanA ko lakSya meM rakhakara maiMne 4-5 varSa pUrva isa viSaya meM
cintana prArambha kiyaa| [10]

Page #14 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
After long contemplation, on the 10th day of the bright fortnight of Vaishakh,
Vikram Samvat 2036, the day of Mahavira's Kaivalya, I made a firm decision to
begin the work of editing and interpreting the Agam-Battissi. Now, the Agam
texts are gradually reaching the hands of the readers, and I am extremely happy
about it.  This historic work of Agam editing has been undertaken in the
auspicious memory of our revered Gurudev. Today, the remembrance of his virtues
is filling my heart with joy. At the same time, the inspirations of my venerable
Guru-brother, the revered Swami Shri Hazarimallji Maharaj, his devotion to the
Agams, his profound knowledge of the Agams, and his ancient beliefs have been my
strength. Therefore, I am overwhelmed with the auspicious memory of both these
celestial souls.  The guidance of Shasansevi Swami Shri Brajlallji Maharaj, his
encouragement, the companionship and strength of the service-minded disciples
Muni Vinaykumar and Mahendramuni, their service and cooperation, and the humble
inspiration of Mahasati Shri Kanakunvarji, Mahasati Shri Jhankaakunvarji, and
the highly learned Sadhvi Shri Umravkunvarji 'Archana' have always helped me to
remain motivated and dedicated to my work.  I have firm faith that in completing
this long and arduous task of editing the Agam-vani, I will continue to receive
full cooperation from all my colleagues, listeners, and scholars, and I will
remain dynamic in reaching my goal.  With this hope... – Muni Mishrimal
'Madhukar' [11]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 sudIrgha cintana ke pazcAt vi.saM. 2036 vaizAkha zuklA 10, mahAvIra kaivalya-
divasa ko dRr3ha nirNaya karake Agama-battIsI kA sampAdana-vivecana kArya
prArambha kara diyA aura aba pAThakoM ke hAtha meM Agama-grantha kramazaH
pahuMca rahe haiM, isakI mujhe atyadhika prasannatA hai| Agama-sampAdana kA yaha
aitihAsika kArya pUjya gurudeva kI puNya-smRti meM Ayojita kiyA gayA hai| Aja
unakA puNyasmaraNa mere mana ko ullasita kara rahA hai| sAtha hI mere vandanIya
guru-bhrAtA pUjya svAmI zrI hajArImalajI mahArAja kI preraNAe~, unakI Agama-
bhakti tathA Agama sambandhI talasparzI jJAna, prAcIna dhAraNAe~, merA sambala
banI haiM  /  ataH maiM una donoM svargIya AtmAoM kI puNyasmRti meM vibhora
huuN| zAsanasevI svAmIjI zrI brajalAlajI mahArAja kA mArgadarzana, utsAha-
saMvardhana, sevAbhAvI ziSya muni vinayakumAra va mahendramuni kA sAhacarya-
bala, sevA-sahayoga tathA mahAsatI zrI kAnakuMvarajI, mahAsatI zrI
jhaNakArakuMvarajI, paramaviduSI sAdhvI zrI umarAvakuMvarajI 'arcanA' kI vinamra
preraNA mujhe sadA protsAhita tathA kAryaniSTha banAye rakhane meM sahAyaka rahI
hai| mujhe dRr3ha vizvAsa hai ki Agama-vANI ke sampAdana kA yaha sudIrgha
prayatna-sAdhya kArya sampanna karane meM mujhe sabhI sahayogiyoM, zrAvakoM va
vidvAnoM kA pUrNa sahakAra milatA rahegA aura maiM apane lakSya taka pahu~cane
meM gatizIla banA rhuuNgaa| isI AzA ke sAtha .... - muni mizrImala 'madhukara'
[11]

Page #15 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Shri Agam Prakashan Samiti, Bayar (Executive Committee) President Vice-President
Vice-President Indore Bayar Bayar Madras Jodhpur Madras Durg General Secretary
Secretary Joint Secretary Treasurer Shri Sagarmalji Baitala Shri Ratanchandji
Modi Shri Dhanrajji Vinayakia Shri Bhanwarlalji Gothi Shri Hukmichandji Parkh
Shri Dulichandji Chordia Shri Jasrajji Parkh Shri G. Sayermalji Chordia Shri
Gyanchandji Vinayakia Shri Gyanrajji Mootha Shri Prakashchandji Chopra Shri
Janvarilalji Shishodia Shri R. Prasannachandji Chordia Shri Manakchandji
Sancheti Shri Tejarajji Bhandari Shri S. Sayermalji Chordia Shri Mulchandji
Surana Shri Motichandji Chordia Shri Amarchandji Modi Shri Kishnalalji Baitala
Shri Jatanrajji Mehta Shri Devrajji Chordia Shri Gautamchandji Chordia Shri
Sumermalji Medtiya Shri Asulalji Bohra Shri Budhrajji Bafna Advisors Members
Madras Bayar Pali Bayar Bayar Madras Jodhpur Jodhpur Madras Nagaur Madras Bayar
Madras Medta City Madras Madras Jodhpur Jodhpur Bayar

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI Agama prakAzana samiti, byAvara (kAryakAriNI samiti adhyakSa kAryAdhyakSa
upAdhyakSa indaura byAvara byAvara madrAsa jodhapura madrAsa durga mahAmantrI
mantrI sahamantrI koSAdhyakSa zrI sAgaramala jI baitAlA zrI ratanacandajI modI
zrI dhanarAjajI vinAyakiyA zrI bhaMvaralAlajI goThI zrI hukmIcandajI pArakha zrI
dulIcandajI coraDiyA zrI jasarAjajI pArakha zrI jI. sAyaramalajI coraDiyA zrI
jJAnacandajI vinAyakiyA zrI jJAnarAjajI mUthA zrI prakAzacandajI caupar3A zrI
jaMvarIlAlajI zizodiyA zrI Ara. prasannacandajI coraDiyA zrI mANakacandajI
saMcetI zrI tejarAjajI bhaNDArI zrI esa. sAyaramalajI coraDiyA zrI mUlacandajI
surANA zrI motIcandajI coraDiyA zrI amaracandajI modI zrI kizanalAlajI baitAlA
zrI jatanarAjajI mehatA zrI devarAjajI coraDiyA zrI gautamacandajI coraDiyA zrI
sumeramalajI mer3atiyA zrI AsUlAlajI boharA zrI budharAjajI bAphaNA
parAmarzadAtA sadasya madrAsa byAvara pAlI byAvara byAvara madrAsa jodhapura
jodhapura madrAsa nAgaura madrAsa byAvara madrAsa mer3atA siTI madrAsa madrAsa
jodhapura jodhapura byAvara

Page #16 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Editorial (From the First Edition)  **Name:** Anuttaroupapatikadasha is the
ninth anga of the Dvadasanga. According to the meaning of the words, the word
Anuttaroupapatikadasha is formed from the words 'Anuttar, Upapat and Dasha'.
Anuttar means - Anuttar Vimana, Upapat means - to be born and Dasha means -
state or indication of the number ten. Since this sutra has ten studies, the
word Dasha should be used. It describes those seekers who have completed their
lifespan here and taken birth in the Anuttar Vimana and will then attain
liberation after taking birth as humans. Samavayangasutra mentions its ten
studies but does not give the names of the ten studies. According to the
Stanangasutra, their names are as follows - Rishi Das, Dhanya, Sunaksha, Kartik,
Swasthana, Shalibhadra, Anand, Tetali, Dasharnabhadra and Atimukta. According to
Tattvarthrajwartik, their names are as follows - Rishi Das, Vanya, Sunaksha,
Kartik, Nand, Nandan, Shalibhadra, Abhay, Varishen, Chilatputra. In Angpannatti,
their names are as follows - Rishi Das, Shalibhadra, Sunaksha, Abhay, Dhanya,
Varishen, Nandan, Nand, Chilatputra, Kartik. In Dhavala, the names Kartikeya and
Anand are found in place of Kartik and Nand respectively.  Currently, the
presented Agam is divided into three sections, which have 10, 13 and 10 studies
respectively. Thus, 33 studies describe 33 great souls in brief. Of these, 23
princes are the sons of Shrenik.  The form of Anuttaroupapatikadasha that is
currently available is different from the readings of Stananga and Samavayanga.
Acharya Abhaydev has called it a different reading in Stanangavritti.  **Subject
Matter:** Samavayanga Sutra mentions the subject described in Anuttaroupapatik
Sutra and its verse-quantity, word count, etc. as follows:  Soudharm, Ishana,
etc. are considered to be twelve heavens. Above the twelfth heaven come the nine
Graivaik Vimana and above them come the five Anuttar Vimana - Vijay, Vaijayant,
Jayant, Aparajit and Sarvarth Siddha. These Vimana are called Anuttar Vimana
because there are no other Vimana above them that are superior in the north.
Those seekers who attain birth (Upapat) in these Vimana through their excellent
penance and restraint are called 'Anuttaroupapatik'.  Anuttaroupapatik describes
the cities, gardens, chaityas, forest tracts, Samavasaran, contemporary kings,
parents, religious teachers, Dharmacharayas, Dharmakatha, worldly prosperity,
enjoyment and consumption, penance, renunciation, pravrajya, utsarga,
sanlekhana, final time's padopgaman (Santhara), etc. of the Anuttaroupapatik,
birth (Upapat) in the Anuttar Vimana, birth in a noble family from there,
attainment of enlightenment and final actions, etc. 1. Stananga 10/114. 2.
Tattvarthrajwartik 1/20, p. 73. 3. Angpannatti 55. 4. Shatkhandagam 1/1/2. [13]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 sampAdakIya (prathama saMskaraNa se) nAma: anuttaraupapAtikadazAsUtra
dvAdazAMgI kA navavAM aMga hai| zabdArtha ke anusAra 'anuttara, upapAta aura
dazA' zabdoM se anuttaraupapAtikadazA zabda banA hai  /  anuttara arthAt -
anuttara vimAna, upapAta arthAt utpanna honA aura dazA arthAt - avasthA yA daza
saMkhyA kA suucn| isa sUtra ke daza adhyayana hone se dazA aisA zabda prayukta
honA caahie| isameM aise sAdhakoM kA varNana hai jinhoMne yahA~ se AyuSya pUrNa
kara anuttara vimAnoM meM janma liyA aura phira manuSya janma pAkara mokSa
prApta kreNge| samavAyAMgasUtra meM isake daza adhyayanoM kA sUcana kiyA gayA
hai kintu daza adhyayanoM ke nAmoM kA nirdeza nahIM milatA hai| sthAnAMgasUtra
ke anusAra unake nAma isa prakAra haiM - RSidAsa, dhanya, sunakSatra, kArtika,
svasthAna, zAlibhadra, Ananda, tetalI, dazArNabhadra aura atimukt|'
tattvArtharAjavArtika ke anusAra unake nAma isa prakAra haiM - RSidAsa, vAnya,
sunakSatra, kArtika, nanda, nandana, zAlibhadra, abhaya, vAriSeNa, cilAtaputra
/  aMgapaNNattI meM unake nAma isa prakAra haiM-RSidAsa, zAlibhadra, sunakSatra,
abhaya, dhanya, vAriSeNa, nandana, nanda, cilAtaputra, kArtika  /  dhavalA meM
kArtika ke sthAna para kArtikeya aura nanda ke sthAna para Ananda nAma prApta
hote haiN| vartamAna meM prastuta Agama 3 vargoM meM vibhakta hai, jinameM
kramazaH10,13 aura 10 adhyayana haiN| isa prakAra 33 adhyayanoM meM 33 mahAn
AtmAoM kA saMkSepa meM varNana kiyA gayA hai| inameM 23 rAjakumAra to zreNika ke
putra haiN| anuttaraupapAtikadazA kA jo svarUpa vartamAna meM upalabdha hai vaha
sthAnAMga aura samavAyAMga kI vAcanA se pRthak hai| AcArya abhayadeva ne
sthAnAMgavRtti meM ise vAcanAntara kahA hai| viSaya-vastu : samavAyAMga sUtra
meM anuttaraupapAtika sUtra meM varNita viSaya kA nirdeza tathA usakA zloka-
parimANa padasaMkhyA Adi kA kathana isa prakAra hai saudharma IzAna Adi nAma
vAle bAraha svarga mAne gae haiN| bArahaveM svarga ke Upara nava graivaiyaka
vimAna Ate haiM aura unake Upara vijaya, vaijayanta, jayanta, aparAjita evaM
sarvArthasiddha-ye pA~ca anuttara vimAna Ate haiN| ina vimAnoM se uttara-
uttamapradhAna anya vimAna na hone ke kAraNa inako anuttara vimAna kahate haiN|
jo sAdhaka apane utkRSTa tapa aura saMyama kI sAdhanA se inameM upapAta (janma)
pAte haiM, unako 'anuttaraupapAtika' kahate haiN| anuttaraupapAtika meM
anuttaraupapAtikoM ke nagara, udyAna, caitya, vanakhaNDa, samavasaraNa,
tatkAlIna rAjA, mAtA-pitA, dharmaguru, dharmAcArya, dharmakathA, saMsAra kI
Rddhi, bhoga-upabhoga kA tathA tapa, tyAga, pravrajyA, utsarga, saMlekhanA,
antima samaya ke pAdopagamana (saMthArA) Adi, anuttaravimAna meM upapAta
(janma), vahA~ se zreSThakula meM janma, bodhi-lAbha tathA antakriyA Adi kA
varNana kiyA gayA hai| 1. sthAnAMga 10/114. 2. tattvArtharAjavArtika 1/20, pR.
73. 3. aMgapaNNattI 55. 4. SaTkhaMDAgama 1/1/2. [13]

Page #17 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Samvayanga and Nandī Sūtra introduce the Anuttaraupapātika, stating, "This
Sūtra is described as such." This means that the Anuttaraupapātika has countless
Anuyogadwār, countless Vedha, countless Śloka, countless Niyukti, countless
Sangrahaṇī, and countless Pratipatti. This Sūtra contains one Śruta Skandha,
three Varga, ten Adhyayana, countless Akshara, infinite Gam, and infinite
Paryaya.  This Sūtra describes a finite number of Trasa Jīvas and an infinite
number of Sthāvara Jīvas. All these substances are described in their essence
and are also organized through examples and reasons. All these substances are
also presented in the Sūtra through names, establishment, etc. Thus, the soul
who understands this Sūtra becomes the knower, the cognizer, and the seer of
these subjects. In this way, the Sūtra presents the form of Charanakaran.  The
Nandī Sūtra also presents the subjects in a similar way to the Samvayanga Sūtra.
However, the Nandī Sūtra does not mention the number of Adhyayana. According to
the Nandī Sūtra, the Uddesana of the Anuttaraupapātika takes place in three
days, while according to the Samvayanga, it takes ten days. The Nandī Sūtra
mentions this subject as follows: "Ege Suyakkhande, Tinni Vagga, Tinni
Uddesanakala." This means, "In this ninth Anga, there are three Varga and three
Uddesana Kala." It is clear that the name Adhyayana is not mentioned here.
However, the Samvayanga mentions ten Adhyayana. The commentators of the
Samvayanga write that the reason for this difference is not known: "Iha tu
Dṛśyante Daśa-iti Atra Abhiprāyo Na Jñāyate Iti." This difference clearly shows
that the order or flow of our Āgama Śāstra has been particularly fragmented.
The Sthānānga Sūtra only mentions ten Adhyayana. According to the Tattvārtharāja
Vārtika, this Āgama describes ten Anuttaraupapātika Śramaṇa who appear in the
time of each Tīrthankara. The Kaṣāya Pāhuḍ also supports this.  What is the
difference between this Sūtra available today and the one available in ancient
times? The answer is as follows:  The existence of three Varga is not mentioned
in the four texts, including the Rāja Vārtika. Some of the names mentioned in
the Sthānānga and Rāja Vārtika are available in the current Sūtra. For example,
the name Vāriṣeṇa (Rāja Vārtika) is in the first Varga. Similarly, the three
names Dhanya, Sunakṣatra, and Ṛṣidasa (Sthānānga and Rāja Vārtika) are mentioned
in the third Varga. These four names are available in the current Sūtra, but no
other names are mentioned. The other names mentioned in the current text are not
found in the Sthānānga or the Rāja Vārtika. The commentator of the Sthānānga
Sūtra, Śrī Abhaydeva Sūri, states that the names mentioned in the Sthānānga may
be found in another recitation of the current Sūtra. The current recitation is
different from that recitation.  The number of words in the current Sūtra is
mentioned as countless lakhs in the Samvayanga Sūtra, and its commentary
mentions forty-six lakhs and eight thousand (46,08,000) words. The original
Nandī Sūtra mentions countless thousands of words. The commentary also mentions
countless thousands of words. The Dhavala and Jaya-Dhavala mention 92,44,000
(ninety-two lakhs forty-four thousand) words. The Rāja Vārtika does not mention
the number of words anywhere.  The current Anuttaraupapātika Sūtra is slightly
different from the ancient Anuttaraupapātika Sūtra. The first Varga has ten
Adhyayana.  1. Nandī Sūtra p. 233, Sū. 54 2. Samvayanga Vṛtti p. 114 [14]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 samavAyAMga tathA nandIsUtra meM jahA~ anuttaraupapAtika kA paricaya diyA gayA
hai, vahA~ kahA gayA hai-'isa sUtra kI aisA batAyA gayA hai|' arthAt
anuttaraupapAtika ke anuyogadvAra saMkhyeya haiM, usameM veDha saMkhyeya haiM,
zloka nAma ke chanda saMkhyeya haiM, usakI niyukti saMkhyeya haiM, usakI
saMgrahaNI saMkhyeya haiM tathA pratipattiyA~ saMkhyeya haiN| isa sUtra meM eka
zrutaskandha hai, tIna varga haiM, adhyayana daza haiM, akSara asaMkhyeya haiM,
gama ananta haiM aura paryAya bhI ananta haiN| isa sUtra meM parimita trasa
jIvoM kA aura ananta sthAvara jIvoM kA varNana hai tathA ukta saba padArtha
svarUpa se kahe gaye haiM aura hetu udAharaNa dvArA vyavasthita bhI kiye gae
haiN| nAma, sthApanA Adi dvArA bhI ve saba padArtha ukta sUtra meM prastuta kiye
gae . haiN| isa prakAra isa sUtra ko samajhane vAlA AtmA ukta viSayoM kA jJAtA-
vijJAtA aura dRSTA hotA hai| isa prakAra isa sUtra meM caraNakaraNa kI prarUpaNA
kI gaI hai| _ nandIsUtra meM bhI samavAyAMga sUtra ke anurUpa viSayoM kI
prarUpaNA prApta hotI hai| hA~, nandIsUtra meM adhyayanoM kI saMkhyA kA nirdeza
nahIM hai| nandIsUtra ke anusAra anuttaraupapAtika kA uddezana tIna dina meM
hotA hai jabaki samavAyAMga ke pAThAnusAra dasa dina kA samaya uddezana ke lie
hotA hai| nandIsUtra meM isa viSaya meM isa prakAra ullekha hai-"ege
suyakkhaMdhe, tiNNi vaggA, tiNNi uddesnnkaalaa"|' arthAt-isa navama aMga meM
tIna varga haiM aura tIna uddezana kAla haiN| spaSTa hai ki yahA~ adhyayana kA
nAma hI nahIM hai| kintu samavAya meM isake dasa adhyayana batAe haiN| samavAya
ke vRttikAra likhate haiM ki isa bheda kA hetu avagata nahIM hai -"iha tu
dRzyante daza-iti atra abhiprAyo na jJAyate iti"| uparyukta vibhinnatA se spaSTa
hai ki hamAre AgamazAsana kA krama yA pravAha vizeSa rUpa se khaNDita ho gayA
hai| sthAnAMgasUtra meM kevala daza adhyayanoM kA varNana hai|
tattvArtharAjavArtika ke abhimatAnusAra prastuta Agama meM pratyeka tIrthaMkara
ke samaya meM hone vAle 10-10 anuttaraupapAtika zramaNoM kA varNana hai|
kaSAyapAhuDa meM bhI isI kA samarthana huA hai| vartamAna meM upalabdha yaha
sUtra aura prAcInakAla meM upalabdha vaha sUtra - ina donoM meM kyA vizeSatA hai
? isakA uttara isa prakAra hai tIna varga kA honA rAjavArtika Adi cAroM granthoM
meM hI nahIM batAyA gayA hai| sthAnAMga aura rAjavArtika meM jina vizeSa nAmoM
kA nirdezana hai, unameM se kucha nAma vartamAna sUtra meM upalabdha haiN|
jaise-vAriSeNa (rAjavArtika) nAma prathama varga meM hai| isI bhA~ti dhanya,
sunakSatra tathA RSidAsa (sthAnAMga tathA rAjavArtika) ye tIna nAma tRtIya varga
meM varNita haiN| - ye cAra nAma hI vartamAna sUtra meM upalabdha hote haiM,
anya kisI bhI nAma kA nirdeza nahIM hai| jina anya nAmoM kA nirdeza vartamAna
pATha meM upalabdha hai, ve nAma na to sthAnAMga meM haiM aura na rAjavArtika
meM haiM  /  sthAnAMga sUtra ke vRttikAra zrI abhayadevasUri isa sambandha meM
sUcita karate haiM ki sthAnAMga meM kathita nAma prastuta sUtra kI kisI anya
vAcanA meM honA sambhAvita haiN| vartamAna vAcanA usa vAcanA se bhinna hai|
prastuta sUtra ke padoM kA pramANa samavAyAMga sUtra meM saMkhyeya lAkha pada
batAyA hai aura usakI vRtti meM chiyAlIsa lAkha aura ATha hajAra (46,08,000)
pada batAe haiN| nandIsUtra ke mUla meM saMkhyeya hajAra pada batAe haiN| vRtti
meM bhI saMkhyeya hajAra pada prApta hote haiN| dhavalA tathA jaya-dhavalA meM
92,44,000 (bAnavai lAkha cavAlIsa hajAra) padaparimANa batalAyA gayA hai|
rAjavArtika meM pada saMkhyA kA kahIM ullekha nahIM hai| prastuta
anuttaraupapAtika sUtra kI sthiti prAcIna anuttaraupapAtika sUtra se kucha
bhinna hai| prathama varga meM 10 adhyayana haiM, 1. nandIsUtra pR. 233, sU. 54
2. samavAya vRtti pR. 114 [14]

Page #18 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The **Anuttaraupapatik Sutra** describes the lives of 33 great souls
(**Mahapurasha**) in three sections.  **Section One:** This section details the
lives of ten princes: Jali, Mayali, Upajali, Purusha-sena, Varisen, Dirghadant,
Lashtdant, Vehall, Vehayas, and Abhayakumar. It provides information about their
parents, cities, births, and the kings and gardens of their time. These ten
princes embraced **sannyasa** (renunciation) under the guidance of Lord
Mahavira, engaged in intense **tapasya** (austerities), and attained the
**Anuttaravimana** (highest celestial realm). From there, they will be reborn as
humans and ultimately achieve **siddha** (perfection), **buddha**
(enlightenment), and **moksha** (liberation).  **Section Two:** This section
narrates the lives of thirteen princes: Dirghase-na, Maha-sena, Lashtdant,
Gudhadant, Shuddhadant, Hall, Drum, Drum-sena, Maha-gum-sena, Singh, Singh-sena,
Maha-singh-sena, and Punyase-na. Their stories are similar to that of Jali-
kumar, highlighting their luxurious lives and subsequent **tapasya**. These
princes also attained the five **Anuttaravimana** and will eventually be reborn
as humans to achieve **siddha**, **buddha**, and **moksha**.  **Section Three:**
This section focuses on ten princes: Dhanyakumar, Sunaksha-trakumar, Rishi-das,
Pell-ak, Rampu-tra, Chandrik, Prisht-imatrik, Pedhal-putra, Posht-ill, and
Vehall. It depicts their luxurious lives followed by their **tapasya**.
Dhanyakumar's story is elaborated upon.  Dhanyakumar, the son of Bhadra
Sarthavahi of Kak-andi, was blessed with immense wealth and pleasures. He lived
a life of luxury until he heard Lord Mahavira's teachings on **tyaga**
(renunciation) and **vairagya** (detachment). This inspired him to renounce his
worldly possessions and become a **muni** (ascetic).  His **tapasya** after
becoming a **muni** was extraordinary. He vowed to perform **chhath-chhath**
(six-day) **parana** (fasting) for the rest of his life, consuming only **ruksha
bhojan** (dry food) with strict self-imposed restrictions. His intense
**tapasya** reduced his body to mere bones.  Dhanyakumar was a remarkable
**tapasvi** (ascetic) during Lord Mahavira's time, known for his **maha-dushkar-
karak** (greatly difficult) and **maha-nirjara-karak** (greatly destructive)
**tapasya**. Lord Mahavira himself declared Dhanyakumar to be the epitome of
**tapasya** among fourteen thousand **shramanas** (ascetics). Through his
intense **sadhana** (spiritual practice) over nine months, Dhanyakumar attained
the **Sarvarth-siddha Vimana** (celestial realm of complete fulfillment). He
will be reborn as a human and achieve **siddha**, **buddha**, and **moksha**
through his **tapasya**.  Sunaksha-trakumar, Dhanyakumar's younger brother, had
a similar life story. The remaining eight princes also followed a similar path
of indulgence and **tapasya**.  The **Anuttaraupapatik Sutra** provides insights
into the lives of these 33 **Mahapurasha**, reflecting the social and cultural
context of ancient times. It holds historical significance due to its depiction
of this period.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dvitIya varga meM 13 adhyayana haiM, aura tRtIya varga meM 10 adhyayana haiN|
isa prakAra tInoM vargoM kI adhyayana saMkhyA 33 hotI hai| pratyeka adhyayana
meM eka-eka mahApuruSa kA jIvana varNita hai| prathama varga : prathama varga
meM jAli, mayAli, upajAli, puruSasena, vAriseNa, dIrghadanta, laSTadanta,
vehalla, vehAyasa aura abhayakumAra ina daza rAjakumAroM kA, unake mAtA-pitA,
nagara, janma Adi kA tathA vahA~ ke rAjA, udyAna Adi kA paricaya diyA gayA hai
tathA ukta dazoM rAjakumAra bhagavAn mahAvIra ke pAsa saMyama svIkAra karake
tathA utkRSTa tapa-tyAga kI ArAdhanA kara anuttara vimAna meM deva hae aura
vahAM se cayakara mAnava zarIra dhAraNa kara siddha, buddha aura mukta hoNge|
dvitIya varga: dvitIya varga meM dIrghasena, mahAsena, laSTadanta, gUDhadanta,
zuddhadanta, halla, druma, drumasena mahAgumasena, siMha, siMhasena,
mahAsiMhasena aura puNyasena-ina teraha rAjakumAroM ke jIvana kA varNana bhI
jAlikumAra ke jIvana kI bhA~ti hI saMkSepa meM kiyA gayA hai| isa varga meM
varNita mahApuruSoM kA jIvana bhogamaya tathA tapomaya thA aura sabhI rAjakumAra
apanI tapa-sAdhanA ke dvArA pA~ca anuttara vimAnoM meM gae haiM tathA vahA~ se
cayakara manuSya janma pAkara siddha, buddha aura mukta hoNge| tRtIya varga :
tRtIya varga meM dhanyakumAra, sunakSatrakumAra, RSidAsa, pellaka, rAmaputra,
candrika, pRSTimAtRka, peDhAlaputra, poSTilla tathA vehalla ina daza kumAroM ke
bhogamaya jIvana ke pazcAdvartI tapomaya jIvana kA sundara citraNa kiyA gayA
hai| ukta daza kumAroM meM dhanyakumAra kA varNana vistArapUrvaka hai|
anuttaraupapAtikasUtra kA pramukha pAtra dhanyakumAra kAkandI kI bhadrA
sArthavAhI kA putra thaa| aparimita dhana-dhAnya aura sukha-upabhoga ke sAdhanoM
se sampanna thaa| dhanyakumAra kA lAlana-pAlana bar3e U~ce stara para huA thaa|
vaha sAMsArika sukhoM meM lIna thaa| eka dina zramaNa bhagavAn mahAvIra ke
tyAga-vairAgya saMyukta divya pAvana pravacana sunakara vairAgya kI bhAvanA
jAgRta ho gaI aura tadanusAra vaha apane vipula vaibhava ko chor3akara muni bana
gyaa| munijIvana prApta karane ke pazcAt jo tyAga aura tapomaya jIvana kA
prArambha huA vaha zramaNasamudAya meM adbhuta thaa| tapomaya jIvana kA aisA
adbhuta aura sarvAMgINa varNana zramaNa-sAhitya meM anyatra upalabdha nahIM hotA
to itara sAhitya meM upalabdha ho hI kaise sakatA hai ? anagAra banate hI dhanya
ne jIvana bhara ke lie chaTha-chaTha ke tapa se pAraNA karane kI pratijJA kii|
pAraNA meM AcAmlavrata arthAt kevala rUkSa bhojana karate the| isameM bhI
anekAneka pratibandha unhoMne svecchayA svIkAra kie the| isa prakAra utkRSTa
tapa karane se unakA zarIra kevala asthipaMjara raha gayA thaa| isa prakAra
anuttaraupapAtikasUtra meM bhagavAn mahAvIrakAlIna ugra tapasviyoM meM
mahAduSkarakAraka aura mahAnirjarAkAraka dhanya anagAra hI the| svayaM bhagavAn
mahAvIra ne samrAT zreNika ko batAyA thA ki caudaha hajAra zramaNoM meM dhanya
anagAra utkRSTa tapomUrti haiN| isa prakAra dhanya anagAra nava mAsa kI
svalpAvadhi meM utkRSTa sAdhanA kara sarvArthasiddha vimAna meM deva rUpa se
utpanna hue| vahA~ se cyavanakara ve manuSyajanma pAkara tapa:sAdhanA ke dvArA
siddha, buddha aura mukta hoNge| . kAkandI kI bhadrA sArthavAhI kA dvitIya putra
sunakSatrakumAra thaa| usakA varNana bhI dhanyakumAra kI taraha hI samajhanA
caahie| zeSa ATha kumAroM kA varNana prAyaH bhoga-vilAsa meM tathA tapa-tyAga
meM sunakSatra ke samAna hI samajhanA caahie| isa prakAra prastuta
anuttaraupapAtikasUtra meM tetIsa mahApuruSoM kA paricaya diyA gayA hai| yaha
varNana sampUrNa prakAra se prAcIna samaya kI paristhiti kA dyotaka hai| ataeva
aitihAsika dRSTi se bhI mahattvapUrNa hai| [15]

Page #19 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Although the young Acharya of the Shraman Sangha, the learned and venerable
Pandit R. Munishri Mishrilalji M.S. 'Madhukar', under whose leadership the
publication of Agambattisi is taking place, has personally reviewed it and
Bharillalji has revised it, I am therefore at ease. This present sutra provides
a brief introduction to the original Agam-vani and its explanatory literature,
so that enlightened readers can understand the importance of the Agam. For many
years, my heart and soul, every atom of my being, has been deeply devoted to
Agam seva. The study of the Agam is a panacea for separating oneself from the
karma-vargana. The profound secrets that are found in the pure words of the
omniscient, dispassionate Supreme Being cannot be found in the words of the
ignorant. The grace of a knowledgeable guru is absolutely essential to know the
true facts. Without a knowledgeable guru, it is impossible for the ignorant to
understand the deep secrets of the Agams. Even after obtaining the company of a
guru, as long as there is a state of delusion, there is always a possibility of
errors. Therefore, due to my lack of knowledge of the profound secrets, if there
are any errors in meaning in this translation, please forgive me. Despite not
being fully capable, I have been able to complete this work due to the grace of
the most revered Sadguru, Anuyoag-Pravartak Shri Kanhaiyalalji M. 'Kamal', and
the most benevolent and worshipful Mother Goddess Shri Manekkunwarji M., the
inspiration of Pandit Shobhachandji Bharill, the learned assistance of the most
venerable Pujya Atmaramji M.S. and Shri Vijaymuniji M., and the immense support
of my fellow Sadhvi-Samavay. May their support continue to be with me, and may I
continue to receive the invaluable benefit of Agam seva in the future, this is
my heartfelt wish. I not only hope, but I have complete faith, that this Agam
will generate deep devotion towards the dispassionate Supreme Being in the inner
minds of all people. It will destroy the darkness of ignorance and spread the
light of knowledge. With this hope and joy, I dedicate this Agam to the
enlightened readers and experience immense joy. [ 16 ] Sadhyasadhika Sadhvi
Muktiprabha

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 yadyapi zramaNasaMgha ke yuvAcArya vidvadvareNya paM. ra. munizrI mizrIlAlajI
ma.sA. 'madhukara' ne, jinake netRtva meM AgamabattIsI kA prakAzana ho rahA hai,
ise akSaraza: avalokana kara liyA hai aura bhArillajI ne saMzodhana kara diyA
hai, ataeva maiM nizcinta hU~  /  prastuta sUtra meM mUla Agama-vANI kA evaM
usake vyAkhyA - sAhitya kA saMkSepa meM paricaya diyA gayA hai, jisase prabuddha
pAThakoM ko Agama kI mahattA kA parijJAna ho ske| kaI varSoM se AgamasevA ke
prati mere mana ke kaNa-kaNa meM, aNu-aNu meM gaharI niSThA rahI hai|
karmavargaNA se pRthak hone Agama kA svAdhyAya eka rAmabANa auSadha hai|
sarvajJa vItarAga paramAtmA kI pAvana vANI meM jo tAttvika rahasya prApta hotA
hai, vaha alpajJoM kI vANI meM kadApi nahIM mila sktaa| vAstavika tathyoM ko
jAnane ke lie tattvajJa guru kA anugraha parama Avazyaka hai| jJAnI guru ke binA
AgamoM ke gahana rahasyoM ko samajhanA alpajJoM ke lie azakya 1 guru kA saMyoga
prApta hone para bhI jaba taka chadmasthadazA hai, taba taka truTiyoM kI
sambhAvanA banI hI rahatI hai| ataeva gahana rahasyoM se anabhijJa hone se
prastuta anuvAda meM kahIM artha kI truTiyA~ rahI hoM to pAThaka kSamA kreN| isa
prakAra pUrI taraha samartha na hone para bhI parama zraddheya sadguruvarya,
anuyoga-pravartaka zrI kanhaiyAlAlajI ma. 'kamala' evaM paramopakArI pUjanIyA
mAtezvarI mahAsatI zrI mANekakuMvarajI ma. kI pAvanI kRpA se tathA paNDita
zobhAcandrajI bhArilla kI ananya preraNA se tathA paramAdaraNIya pU. AtmArAmajI
ma.sA. evaM zrI vijayamunijI ma. kI zruta sahAyatA se evaM mere sahayogI anya
sAdhvI-samavAya ke parama sahayoga se yaha kArya sampanna karane meM samartha
huI huuN| ina sabhI kA sahayoga nirantara milatA rahe aura bhaviSya meM bhI
Agama-sevA kA alabhya lAbha mujhe milatA rahe, yahI hArdika kAmanA  /  mujhe AzA
hI nahIM sampUrNa vizvAsa hai ki prastuta Agama jana-jana ke antarmAnasa meM
vItarAga paramAtmA ke prati gaharI niSThA utpanna kregaa| ajJAna andhakAra ko
naSTa karake jJAnaprakAza phailaaegaa| isI AzA aura ullAsa ke sAtha prastuta
Agama prabuddha pAThakoM ko samarpita kara atyanta Ananda kA anubhava karatI hU~
/  [ 16 ] sAdhyasAdhikA sAdhvI muktiprabhA

Page #20 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Introduction Anuttaropapatikadasha: A Contemplation (From the First Edition)
Jain Agam literature is a precious part of the vast treasure of Indian
literature. It is available in the form of Angapravesht and Angabahya. The
Angapravesht literature is considered original and authentic because its author
is Ganadhar in the form of sutras and the interpreter is the Tirthankar himself.
Dvadasangi is Angapravesht. The literature that the Sthavir creates based on the
meaning interpreted by the Tirthankars is Angabahya. All the Agam literature
besides Dvadasangi is Angabahya, it is also called Angabahya. Jinabhadragani
Kshamasraman has also mentioned that to solve the strong curiosity of the
Ganadharas, the Tirthankar gives the teachings of Tripdi-Utpada, Vyaya and
Dhrauvya. The literature created based on that Tripdi is Angapravesht and the
literature created based on the liberated grammar of the Bhagwan is Angabahya.
This division is the oldest in the Shwetambar literature like Sthananga, Nandi 2
etc. In Digambar literature also, there are these two divisions of Agams -
Angapravesht and Angabahya. There is some difference in the names of Angabahya.
The nature of Angapravesht is always fixed at the time of all Tirthankars. It is
fixed, constant, eternal. It is also called Dvadasangi or Ganipitaka. Ang-
literature is divided into twelve parts - (1) Achar (2) Sutrakrut (3) Sthan (4)
Samavay (5) Bhagwati (6) Jnatadharmakatha (7) Upasakadasha (8) Antakriddasha (9)
Anuttaropapatikadasha (10) Prashnavyakaran (11) Vipak (12) Drishtivad.
Drishtivad is currently unavailable.  Anuttaropapatikadasha is the ninth Ang.
This Agam mentions such great tapasvidhi sadhakas who, after completing their
lifespan by performing the most excellent tapasya-aradhana, took birth in the
Anuttara Vimanas. Vijay, Vaijayant, Jayant, Aparajit and Sarvarthasiddhi are
these five Anuttara Vimanas. They are called 'Anuttara' Vimanas because they are
superior to all other Vimanas. Those born in Anuttara are called
Anuttaropapatik. There are ten studies in the first category, hence it is called
Anuttaropapatikadasha. 1. Ganahar Therakayam Va, Aesa Mukta-Vagarano Va. Dhruv-
Chal Visheso Va Anganangesu Nanattam || - Visheshavashyak Bhashya, Ga. 552 Nandi
Sutra, 43. 3. (a) Shatkhandagam Bhag 9, p. 96 (b) Sarvarthasiddhi Pujyapad 1-20
(c) Rajavartika-Akalank 1-20 (d) Gommatasar Jivakand, Nemichandra, p. 134. (a)
Samavayang, Samavay 148, Muni Kanhaiyalalji M. Edited, p. 138. (b) Nandi Sutra,
57. Samavayang Prakirnak Samavay Sutra 88. Tatranuttareshu
Vimanavishesheshupapato-Janma Anuttaropapata:sa Vidhyate Yesham
Te'nuttaropapatikastapratipadika Dasha:
Dashadhyayanapratibandhaprathamavargayogaddasha: Grantha-
Vishesho'nuttaropapatikadashastaasan Cha Sambandhasutram. -
Anuttaropapatikadasha Abhaydevavritti [17]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prastAvanA anuttaraupapAtikadazA : eka anucintana (prathama saMskaraNa se)
jaina Agama sAhitya bhAratIya sAhitya kI virAT nidhi kA eka anamola bhAga hai|
vaha aMgapraviSTa aura aMgabAhya ke rUpa meM upalabdha hai| aMgapraviSTa sAhitya
ke sUtra rUpa meM racayitA gaNadhara haiM aura artha ke prarUpaka sAkSAt
tIrthaMkara hone ke kAraNa vaha maulika va prAmANika mAnA jAtA hai| dvAdazAMgI-
aMgapraviSTa hai| tIrthaMkaroM ke dvArA prarUpita artha ke AdhAra para sthavira
jisa sAhitya kI racanA karate haiM vaha anaMgapraviSTa hai| dvAdazAMgI ke
atirikta jitanA bhI Agama sAhitya hai vaha anaMgapraviSTa hai, use aMgabAhya bhI
kahate haiN| jinabhadragaNI kSamAzramaNa ne yaha bhI ullekha kiyA hai ki
gaNadharoM kI prabala jijJAsAoM ke samAdhAna hetu tIrthaMkara tripadI-utpAda,
vyaya aura dhrauvya kA upadeza pradAna karate haiN| usa tripadI ke AdhAra para
jo sAhitya-nirmANa kiyA jAtA hai vaha aMgapraviSTa hai aura bhagavAn ke mukta
vyAkaraNa ke AdhAra para jisa sAhitya kA sRjana huA hai vaha anaMgapraviSTa hai|
sthAnAGga, naMdI 2 Adi zvetAmbara sAhitya meM yahI vibhAga prAcInatama hai|
digambara sAhitya meM bhI AgamoM ke yahI do vibhAga upalabdha hote haiM -
aMgapraviSTa aura aNgbaahy| aMgabAhya ke nAmoM meM kucha antara hai|
aMgapraviSTa kA svarUpa sadA sarvadA sabhI tIrthaMkaroM ke samaya niyata hotA
hai| vaha dhruva hai, niyata hai, zAzvata hai| use dvAdazAMgI yA gaNipiTaka bhI
kahate haiN| aMga-sAhitya bAraha vibhAgoM meM vibhakta hai 5 - (1) AcAra (2)
sUtrakRta (3) sthAna (4) samavAya (5) bhagavatI (6) jJAtAdharmakathA (7)
upAsakadazA (8) antakRddazA (9) anuttaraupapAtikadazA (10) praznavyAkaraNa (11)
vipAka (12) dRssttivaad| dRSTivAda vartamAna meM anupalabdha hai|
anuttaraupapAtikadazA nauvAM aMga hai| prastuta Agama meM aise mahAn taponidhi
sAdhakoM kA ullekha hai jinhoMne utkRSTatama tapa kI sAdhanA-ArAdhanA kara Ayu
pUrNa hone para anuttara vimAnoM meM janma grahaNa kiyaa| vijaya, vaijayanta,
jayanta, aparAjita aura sarvArthasiddha ye pA~ca anattara vimAna haiN| anya
sabhI vimAnoM meM zreSTha hone se inheM 'anattara' vimAna kahA hai| anatta
utpanna hone vAle anuttaraupapAtika kahe jAte haiN| prathama varga meM dasa
adhyayana haiM, isalie ise anuttaraupapAtikadazA kahA hai| 1. gaNahara
therakayaM vA, AesA mukta-vAgaraNao vaa| dhuva-cala visesao vA aMgANaMgesu
nANattaM  //  - vizeSAvazyaka bhASya, gA. 552 naMdIsUtra, 43. 3. (ka)
SaTkhaNDAgama bhAga 9, pR. 96 (kha) sarvArthasiddhi pUjyapAda 1-20 (ga)
rAjavArtika-akalaMka 1-20 (gha) gommaTasAra jIvakANDa, nemicandra, pR. 134. (ka)
samavAyAMga, samavAya 148, muni kanhaiyAlAlajI ma. sampAdita, pR. 138. (kha)
nandIsUtra, 57. samavAyAMga prakIrNaka samavAya sUtra 88. tatrAnuttareSu
vimAnavizeSeSUpapAto-janma anuttaropapAta:sa vidyate yeSAM
te'nuttaraupapAtikAstapratipAdikA dazA:
dazAdhyayanapratibaddhaprathamavargayogAddazAH grantha-
vizeSo'nuttaraupapAtikadazAstAsAM ca sambandhasUtram  /  - anuttaraupapAtikadazA
abhayadevavRtti [17]

Page #21 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
In other words, this state is called Anuttaraupapatikadsha because it describes
the condition or state of such humans. A characteristic of Anuttar Vimānavāsī
Devas is that they are parītasansārī. After being expelled from there, they are
born in human form once or twice and attain nirvana.  The ancient Āgama and
Āgametara texts mention that the Anuttaraupapatikadsha currently available has
neither description nor characters. It is inexplicable when this change
occurred. Navāngī commentator Ācārya Abhaydeva has called it a vācanāntara. I
have discussed this in detail in my book "Jain Āgama Sahitya Manan aur Mīmānsā",
so interested readers should refer to it.  The currently available Āgama is
divided into three categories, which have ten, thirteen and ten studies
respectively. Thus, in thirty-three studies, there is a very brief description
of thirty-three great souls. The events and narratives that have come in it are
not elaborated, they are only indicative. In the first category, the character
of Jālikumāra and in the third category, the character of Dhanyakumāra has come
in some detail. The remaining characters only have information. But all the
characters who have come in this Āgama are of great historical importance, which
shed light on the untouched aspects of history.  The present Āgama describes the
life of twenty-three princes, namely Jāli, Mayāli, Upjāli, Puruṣasen, Vārisen,
Dīrghadant, Laṣṭadant, Vihall, Vehāyas, Abhayakumāra, Dīrghaṣen, Mahāṣen,
Laṣṭadant, Gūḍhadant, Ṣuddhadant, Hall, Dum, Drumṣen, Mahādrumṣen, Simha,
Simhaṣen, Mahāsimhaṣen, Puṇyaṣen, of Emperor Śreṇik.  Emperor Śreṇik was the
ruler of the Magadha empire. There are sufficient discussions about Śreṇik in
all three traditions, Jain, Buddhist and Vedic. According to the Bhāgavata
Mahāpurāṇa, he was born in the Śiśunāgavanshi clan. The great poet Aśvaghoṣa has
written his clan as Haryang. Ācārya Haribhadra has considered his clan to be
Yāhik. Rāyachoudhury believes that the Haryang clan mentioned in Buddhist
literature is indicative of the Nāgavanshi. Kovilll has interpreted Haryang as
Simha. But its meaning is also Nāga. Professor Bhāṇḍārkar has also included
Bimbisāra in the Nāga Dashak and considered the lineage of all those kings to be
Nāgavanshi. In Buddhist literature, this clan is called Śiśunāgavanshi. The
Vāhik clan mentioned in Jain texts is also Nāgavanshi. The Vāhikjanapad was the
main center of the Nāga tribe. Its area of operation was mainly Takṣaśilā, which
was in the Vāhikjanapad. Therefore, it is not incongruous to consider Śreṇik as
Śiśunāgavanshi.  7. (a) Nandī Sūtra 89 (b) Ṣṭhānāṅga 10/114 (c) Samvāyāṅga
Prakīrṇaka Samvāya 97 (a) Tattvārtharājavārtika 1/20, p. 73 (b) Kaṣāyapāhuḍ Part
1, p. 130 (c) Aṅgapāṇṇattī 55 (d) Ṣaṭkhaṇḍāgama 1/1/2 Tadevam ihāpi
vācanāntarāpekṣayā'dhyayanavibhāgaḥ ukto, na punarupalabhyamānāvācanāpekṣayeti.
Bhāgavata Purāṇa, Dvi. Kh. p. 903 Jātasya hayangakule viṣāle-Buddhacaritra,
Sarga 11, Śloka 2 12. Āvashyak Haribhadrīyā Vṛtti Patra 677 13. Studies in India
Antiquities, p. 216 14. Mahāvaṃsa Gāthā 27-32 [18] - -Ṣṭhānāṅgavṛtti Patra 483

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dUsare zabdoM meM yoM kaha sakate haiM ki aise mAnavoM kI dazA yAnI avasthA kA
varNana hone se bhI ise anuttaraupapAtikadazA kahA hai| anuttara vimAnavAsI
devoM kI eka vizeSatA yaha hai ki ve parItasaMsArI hote haiN| vahAM se cyuta
hokara eka yA do bAra mAnava-rUpa .. meM janma lekara nirvANa prApta karate
haiN| prAcIna Agama va Agametara granthoM meM prastuta Agama ke sambandha meM jo
ullekha samprApta hote haiM, unake anusAra vartamAna meM upalabdha
anuttaraupapAtikadazA meM na varNana hai aura na ve caritra hI haiN| yaha
parivartana kaba huA, yaha anveSanIya hai| navAMgI TIkAkAra AcArya abhayadeva ne
ise vAcanAntara kahA hai| maiMne apane "jaina Agama sAhitya manana aura mImAMsA"
grantha meM isa sambandha meM vistAra se vivecana kiyA hai, ataH vizeSa jijJAsu
use dekheN| vartamAna meM prastuta Agama tIna vargoM meM vibhakta hai, jinameM
kramazaH dasa, teraha aura dasa adhyayana haiN| isa prakAra tetIsa adhyayanoM
meM tetIsa mahAn AtmAoM kA bahuta hI saMkSepa meM varNana hai| jo ghaTanAeM aura
AkhyAna isameM Aye haiM, ve pallavita nahIM haiM, kevala saMketamAtra haiN|
prathama varga meM jAlikumAra kA aura tRtIya varga meM dhanyakumAra kA caritra
hI kucha vistAra se AyA hai| zeSa caritroM meM to kevala sUcana hI hai| para isa
Agama meM jo bhI pAtra Aye haiM unakA aitihAsika dRSTi se atyadhika mahattva
hai,jo itihAsa ke anachue pahaluoM para prakAza DAlate haiN| prastuta Agama meM
samrAT zreNika ke jAli, mayAli, upajAli, puruSasena, vArisena, dIrghadanta,
laSTadanta, vihalla, vehAyasa, abhayakumAra, dIrghasena, mahAsena, laSTadanta,
gUDhadanta, zuddhadanta, halla, duma, drumasena, mahAdrumasena, siMha,
siMhasena, mahAsiMhasena, puNyasena, ina tevIsa rAjakumAroM ke sAdhanAmaya
jIvana kA varNana hai| samrAT zreNika magadha sAmrAjya kA adhipati thaa| jaina,
bauddha aura vaidika, ina tInoM paramparAoM meM zreNika ke sambandha meM
paryApta carcAeM prApta hotI haiN| bhAgavata mahApurANa ke anusAra vaha
zizunAgavaMzIya kula meM utpanna huA thaa| mahAkavi azvaghoSa ne usakA kula
haryaGga likhA hai| " AcArya haribhadra ne unakA kula yAhika mAnA hai| 12
rAyacaudharI kA mantavya hai 13 ki bauddhasAhitya meM jo haryaGga kula kA
ullekha hai, vaha nAgavaMza kA hI dyotaka hai| kovilla ne haryaGga kA artha
siMha kiyA hai| para usakA artha nAga bhI hai| prophesara bhANDArakara ne nAga
dazaka meM bimbisAra kI bhI gaNanA kI hai aura una sabhI rAjAoM kA vaMza bhI
nAgavaMza mAnA hai| bauddha-sAhitya meM isa kula kA nAma zizunAgavaMza likhA
hai| jaina granthoM meM varNita vAhika kula bhI nAgavaMza hI hai| vAhikajanapada
nAga jAti kA mukhya kendra rahA hai| usakA kArya-kSetra pramukha rUpa se
takSazilA thA, jo vAhika janapada meM thaa| isaliye zreNika ko zizunAgavaMzIya
mAnanA asaMgata nahIM hai| 7. (ka) nandIsUtra 89 (kha) sthAnAGga 10/114 (ga)
samavAyAMga prakIrNaka samavAya 97 (ka) tattvArtharAjavArtika 1/20, pR.73 (kha)
kaSAyapAhuDa bhAga 1, pR. 130 (ga) aMgapaNNattI 55 (gha) SaTkhaNDAgama 1/1/2
tadevamihApi vAcanAntarApekSayA'dhyayanavibhAgaH ukto, na
punruplbhymaanvaacnaapekssyeti| bhAgavatapurANa, dvi. kha. pR. 903 jAtasya
hayaMgakule vizAle-buddhacaritra, sarga 11, zloka 2 12. Avazyaka haribhadrIyA
vRtti patra 677 13. sTaDIja ina iNDiyA enTikvITIja, pR. 216 14. mahAvaMza gAthA
27-32 [18] - -sthAnAGgavRtti patra 483

Page #22 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Pandit Geiger and Bhandarkar have distinguished the Bimbisara and Sisunaga
dynasties according to the Pali lineage of Ceylon. Bimbisara was before
Sisunaga. 15 Dr. Kashi Prasad opines that the ancestors of Shrenik had a
paternal relationship with the royal dynasty of Kashi, where Tirthankara
Parshvanath was born. Therefore, Shrenik's family religion was Nirgranth (Jain)
religion. Acharya Hemchandra has also written that King Shrenik's father
Prasenjit was a Shravak of the tradition of Lord Parshvanath. 16  What was the
birthplace of Shrenik? Jain, Buddhist and Vedic tradition texts are silent on
this matter. In Jain Agamas, the names of Shrenik are found as Bhambasar,
Bhimbasar, Bhimbisar. 17 Shrenik was a child, at that time there was a fire in
the palace. All the princes fled with various precious items. But Shrenik
considered only the Bhanbha as essential in the form of a royal insignia and
accepted it. Therefore, his name became Bhambasar. "Abhidhan - Chintamani, 19
Upadeshamala, 20 Rishimandala Prakaran, 21 Bharateshwarbahubali Vritti, 22
Aavashyakachurni, 23 etc. Prakrit and Sanskrit texts have mainly used the word
Bhambasar. Bhanbha, Bhimbha and Bhimbi all these words have been used in the
sense of a war drum. 24  In the Buddhist tradition, Shrenik's name is prevalent
as Bimbisara. 25 The meaning of Bimbi is "gold". Due to his golden complexion,
his name became "Bimbisara". 26 The Tibetan tradition believes that Shrenik's
mother's name was Bimbi, hence he is called Bimbisara. 27  The Jain tradition
believes that his name became Shrenik from establishing military ranks. The
Buddhist tradition 28 15. Studies in Indian Antiquities, pp. 215-216 16.
Trishashti 10/6/8 17. a - b c - - Senie Bhambasare Gnatadharmakatha, Shruta. 1
a. 13 Dashashruta Skandha Dasha 10, Sutra - 1 - Senie Bhambasare, Senie
Bhimbasare d - 18. a - - • Senie Bhimbasare Thanang Sutra, Sthan. 9, Patra 458 -
Seniyakumarena Punyo Jayadhakka Kaddiya Pavisiunam Pithana Tuttthen Tao Bhanio
So Bhambasaro. b - • Sthanang Vritti, Patra 461-1 c - Trishashtishakalaka-
10/6/109-112 19. Abhidhanchintamani Kand 3, Shlok 376 Upadeshamala, Satikapatra
324 20. 21. Rishimandala Prakaran, Patra 143 22. Bharateshwarbahubali Vritti-
patra Vibhag 122 23. Aavashyakachurni Uttarardha Patra 158 • Uvvai Sutra, Su 7 –
p. 23, Su 6 - p. 19 24. Paiy-sadd - Mahannavo, p. 794-807 25. Indian Historical
Quarterly, Vol. 14, No. 2, June 1938, p. 415 26. (a) Udan Atthakatha 104 (b)
Pali English Dictionary p. 110 27. Indian Historical Quarterly, Vol. 14, No. 2,
June 1938, p. 413 28. Shreni: Kayati Shreniko Magadheshwarah. Upadeshamala
Satik, Patra 334-1 - • Abhidhan Chintamani Svopgyavritti, Martyakand Shlok 376
[19]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paNDita gegara aura bhANDArakara ne silona ke pAlI vaMzAnukrama ke anusAra
bimbasAra aura zizunAga vaMza ko pRthak batAyA hai| bimbasAra zizunAga ke pUrva
the| 15 DAkTara kAzIprasAda kA mantavya hai ki zreNika ke pUrvajoM kA kAzI ke
rAjavaMza ke sAtha paitrika sambandha thA, jahA~ para tIrthaMkara pArzvanAtha ne
janma grahaNa kiyA thA  /  isalie zreNika kA kuladharma nirgrantha (jaina)
dharma thA  /  AcArya hemacandra ne bhI rAjA zreNika ke pitA prasenajita ko
bhagavAn pArzvanAtha kI paramparA kA zrAvaka likhA hai| 16  /  zreNika kA janma-
sthAna kyA thA ? isa sambandha meM jaina, bauddha aura vaidika paramparA ke
grantha mauna haiN| jaina AgamoM meM zreNika ke bhaMbhasAra, bhiMbhasAra,
bhiMbhIsAra ye nAma milate haiN| 17 zreNika bAlaka thA, usa samaya rAjamahala
meM Aga lgii| sabhI rAjakumAra vividha bahumUlya vastueM lekara bhAge  /  kintu
zreNika ne bhaMbhA ko hI rAjacihna ke rUpa meM sArabhUta samajhakara grahaNa
kiyA  /  etadartha usakA nAma bhaMbhasAra pdd'aa| " abhidhAna - cintAmaNi, 19
upadezamAlA, 20 RSimaNDala prakaraNa, 21 bharatezvarabAhubalI vRtti, 22
AvazyakacUrNi, 23 prabhRti prAkRta aura saMskRta ke granthoM meM bhaMbhAsAra
zabda mukhya rUpa se prayukta huA hai| bhaMbhA, bhiMbhA aura bhiMbhI ye sabhI
zabda bherI ke artha meM prayukta hue haiM  /  24 bauddhaparamparA meM zreNika
kA nAma bimbisAra pracalita hai| 25 bimbi kA artha "suvarNa" hai| svarNa ke
sadRza varNa hone ke kAraNa unakA nAma "bimbisAra " par3A ho| 26 tibbatI
paramparA mAnatI hai ki zreNika kI mAtA kA nAma bimbi thA ataH vaha bimbasAra
kahA jAtA hai| 27 jaina paramparA kA mantavya hai ki sainika zreNiyoM kI
sthApanA karane se usakA nAma zreNika pdd'aa| bauddha paramparA kA 28 15.
sTaDIja ina iNDiyana enTikvITIja, pR. 215 - 216 16. triSaSThi 10/6/8 17. ka -
kha ga - - seNie bhaMbhasAre jJAtAdharmakathA, zruta. 1 a. 13 dazAzrutaskandha
dazA 10, sUtra - 1 - seNie bhaMbhasAre, seNie bhiMbhasAre gha - 18. ka - - *
seNie bhiMbhasAre ThANAMga sUtra, sthAM. 9, patra 458 - seNiyakumAreNa puNo
jayaDhakkA kaDDhiyA pavisiUNaM piThaNA tuTTheNa tao bhaNio so bhaMbhAsAro  /
kha - * sthAnAMga vRtti, patra 461-1 ga - triSaSThizalAkA- 10/6/109-112 19.
abhidhAnacintAmaNi kANDa 3, zloka 376 upadezamAlA, saTIkapatra 324 20. 21.
RSimaNDalaprakaraNa, patra 143 22. bharatezvarabAhubalI vRtti-patra vibhAga 122
23. AvazyakacUrNi uttarArdha patra 158 * uvavAI sUtra, sU 7 - pR. 23, sU 6 - pR.
19 24. pAiya-sadda - mahaNNavo, pRSTha 794-807 25. iNDiyana hisTorikala
kvArTarlI, bhAga 14, aMka 2, jUna 1938, pR. 415 26. (ka) udAna aTThakathA 104
(kha) pAlI iMgliza DikzanarI pR. 110 27. iNDiyana hisTorikala kvArTarlI, bhAga
14, aMka 2, jUna 1938, pR. 413 28. zreNI: kAyati zreNiko magadhezvaraH  /
upadezamAlA saTIka, patra 334-1 - * abhidhAna cintAmaNi svopajJavRtti,
martyakANDa zloka 376 [19]

Page #23 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
It is believed that he was called Bimbisara because he was made the master of
eighteen categories by his father. 29 There are frequent discussions about
categories and sub-categories in Jain, Buddhist and Vedic literature. The number
of categories is considered to be eighteen in Jambudvipapannatti 30 Jataka
Mugappakhajataka. The Mahavastu 32 mentions thirty categories. The Yajurveda 33
mentions thirty-three. Some believe that his name was Shrenik because of his
large army or because he belonged to the Seniya gotra. 34 In the Srimad
Bhagavata Purana, Shrenik is also called Ajatashatru 5 Vidhisara. In other
places, he is also mentioned as Vindhyasen and Suvindhu. 37 35 According to the
Aavashyak Haribhadriyaavritti 38 and Trishatshtisalaakapurushcharitra 9,
Shrenik's father was Prasenajit. Digambar Acharya Harishena has written the name
of Shrenik's father as Upshrenik. 40 Acharya Gunabhadra has written the name of
Shrenik's father as Kunik in the Uttarapurana 1, which is not consistent with
other Agamas and non-Agama texts. He is not the father of Shrenik but his son.
42 In other texts, the names of Shrenik's father are found as Mahapadma, Hemjit,
Kshetroja, Kshetraproja. XI In Jain literature, the names of twenty-six queens
of Shrenik are available. There is also a description of their 35 sons. In the
Jnatasutra 45 Antakriddasha Nirayavali, 47 Aavashyakchurni, Nishitchurni,
Trishatshtisalaakapurushcharitra, Upadeshamala Doghatti Tika, Shrenik Charitra
etc., there are mentions of most of their sons, grandsons and maharanis taking
pravrjya from Bhagwan Mahavira. They all attain heaven by practicing knowledge,
meditation and excellent tapas-jap. Due to fear of expansion, we are not
mentioning all of them. 29. Sa pitraastadasha-shreni-shvagtaaritah Ato'sya
shreyo bimbisar iti khyatah (?) 30. Jambudvipapannatti, Vakshaskara 3, Patra 193
31. Jataka, Mugappakhajataka, Bhag 6 32. 33. (a) Mahavastu Bhag 3, (b)
Rishabhdev: Ek Parisheelan, Le. Devendra Muni (Parisheeshta 3, Pr. 15) Dwi.San.
Shri Tarak Guru Jain Granthalaya, Udaipur (Raj.) (a) Yajurveda ka 30 vaa adhyaya
(b) Vaigyanik Vikas ki Bharatiya Parampara, Pr. 27-30 Dhammpaal- Udaan Tika, Pr.
140 34. 35. Srimad Bhagavata, Dvitiya Kand, Pr. 903 36. Srimad Bhagavata 12 / 1
37. Bharatavarsh ka Itihaas, Pr. 252, Bhagavadatta Aavashyak
Haribhadriyaavritti, Patra 671 38. 39. Trishatshti 10/6/1 40. Vridhatkathakoosh,
Katha 55, Shlo. 1-2 41. Uttarapurana 74/4/8, Pr. 471 42. Aupapattikasutra 43.
Political History of Ancient India, Pr. 205 44. Dekhiye Bhagwan Mahavira • Ek
Anusheelan, Pr. 473- 474 Devendramuni Shastri 45. Jnatasutra 1/1 46.
Antakriddasha, Varga-7, A-1 se 13 47. Nirayavaliya - Pratham Shrutaskandha,
Pratham Varga, Vinayapitak, Gilgit Maanskript Dusra Varga [20]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 abhimata hai ki pitA ke dvArA aThAraha zreNiyoM ke svAmI banAye jAne ke kAraNa
vaha zreNika bimbasAra kahalAyA  /  29 jaina, bauddha aura vaidika vAGmaya meM
zreNI aura prazreNI kI yatra-tatra carcAeM AI haiN| jambUdvIpapaNNatti 30 jAtaka
mUgapakkhajAtaka meM zreNI kI saMkhyA aThAraha mAnI hai| mahAvastu meM 32 tIsa
zreNiyoM kA ullekha hai| yajurveda meM 33 trepana kA ullekha hai| kisI-kisI kA
abhimata hai ki mahatI senA hone se yA seniya gotra hone se usakA nAma zreNika
par3A  /  34 zrImadbhAgavata purANa meM zreNika ke ajAtazatru 5 vidhisAra nAma
bhI Aye haiN| dUsare sthaloM meM vindhyasena aura suvindu nAma ke bhI ullekha
hue haiN| 37 35 Avazyaka haribhadrIyAvRtti 38 aura triSaSThizalAkApuruSacaritra
9 ke anusAra zreNika ke pitA prasenajita the  /  digambara AcArya hariSeNa ne
zreNika ke pitA kA nAma upazreNika likhA hai| " AcArya guNabhadra ne
uttarapurANa 1 meM zreNika ke pitA kA nAma kuNika likhA hai jo anyAnya Agama
aura Agametara granthoM se saMgata nahIM hai| vaha zreNika kA pitA nahIM kintu
putra hai| 42 anyatra granthoM meM zreNika ke pitA kA nAma mahApadma, hemajit,
kSetrojA, kSetprojA bhI milate haiN| XI jaina sAhitya meM zreNika kI chabbIsa
rAniyoM ke nAma upalabdha hote haiN| unake 35 putroM kA bhI varNana milatA hai|
jJAtAsUtra 45 antakRddazA nirayAvalikA, 47 AvazyakacUrNi, nizIthacUrNi,
triSaSThizalAkApuruSacaritra, upadezamAlA doghaTTI TIkA, zreNika caritra
prabhRti meM unake adhikAMza putra, pautra aura mahArAniyoM ke bhagavAn mahAvIra
ke pAsa pravrajyA lene ke ullekha haiN| ve sabhI jJAna, dhyAna va utkRSTa tapa-
japa kI sAdhanA kara svargavAsI hote haiN| vistArabhaya se hama una sabhI kA
ullekha nahIM 29. sa pitrASTAdazasu zreNiSvagtAritaH ato'sya zreyo bimbisAra iti
khyAtaH (?) 30. jambUdvIpapaNNatti, vakSaskAra 3, patra 193 31. jAtaka,
mUgapakkhajAtaka, bhAga 6 32. 33. (ka) mahAvastu bhAga 3, (kha) RSabhadeva : eka
parizIlana, le. devendra muni (pariziSTa 3, pR. 15) dvi.saM. zrI tAraka guru
jaina granthAlaya, udayapura (rAja.) (ka) yajurveda kA 30 vA~ adhyAya (kha)
vaijJAnika vikAsa kI bhAratIya paramparA, pR. 27-30 dhammapAla- udAna TIkA, pR.
140 34. 35. zrImadbhAgavata, dvitIya kANDa, pR. 903 36. zrImadbhAgavata 12 / 1
37. bhAratavarSa kA itihAsa, pR. 252, bhagavaddatta Avazyaka haribhadrIyAvRtti,
patra 671 38. 39. triSaSThi 10/6/1 40. vRhatkathAkoSa, kathA 55, zlo. 1-2 41.
uttarapurANa 74/4/8, pR. 471 42. aupapAtikasUtra 43. paoNliTikala hisTrI oNpha
enzienTa iNDiyA, pR. 205 44. dekhiye bhagavAn mahAvIra * eka anuzIlana, pR. 473-
474 devendramuni zAstrI 45. jJAtAsUtra 1/1 46. antakRddazA, varga-7, a-1 se 13
47. nirayAvaliyA - prathama zrutaskandha, prathama varga, vinayapiTaka, gilagita
mAMskRpTa dUsarA varga [20]

Page #24 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Mala ya are doing. According to Uttaradhyayana, King Shrenik accepted Jainism
after understanding the profound secrets of Nath and Anath from Anathi Muni. 48
King Shrenik was a holder of क्षायिक-सम्यक्त्व. He also bound the karma of being
a Tirthankara, although he was neither a Bahushruta nor a knower of Agamas like
Prajnapti, yet due to Samyaktva, he will attain the glorious position like a
Tirthankara. 49 According to Buddhist texts, Shrenik had five hundred queens. 5.
They have considered him a devotee of the Tathagata Buddha. Many scholars
believe that he was a Jain in the first half of his life and became a Buddhist
in the latter half, hence Jain texts mention his going to hell. But this belief
of those scholars is not correct. We have already written earlier that in the
coming twenty-four, he will be the first Tirthankara named Padmabh. 59 In our
view, it is possible that when King Prasenajit exiled Shrenik, he first took
rest in Nandigram. The leading Brahmins there, fearing the king's wrath, neither
gave him food nor provided him with accommodation for rest. Forced, he had to
stay in the Buddhist vihara outside Nandigram and the Buddhist monks there may
have shown him affection, which may have awakened a natural affection for
Buddhism in his inner mind. Therefore, even though he was a supreme devotee of
Nirgranth (Jainism), he also had affection for Tathagata Buddha, and due to that
affection, he may have had religious discussions with Buddha. In the above
lines, we have seen that Shrenik was a very brilliant ruler. He was going to
influence the Jain religion greatly. He also passed the test conducted by the
gods. 52 His unique work was going to add to the glory and dignity of Jainism.
This Agama describes the princes of King Shrenik, and there are discussions
about their life incidents here and there. Vihallkumar is related to the
incident of the elephant Har, with the great war Mahashila of that era, but due
to fear of expansion, we are not mentioning all of them, but here we are
presenting some thoughts about Abhaykumar. Abhaykumar was a man of great talent.
Both Jain and Buddhist traditions consider him their follower. According to Jain
Agama literature, he accepts Ahati initiation from Lord Mahavira, and according
to Tripitaka literature, he becomes a monk under Buddha. From the perspective of
Jain literature, he was the son of Shrenik's queen Nanda. 53 Nanda was the
daughter of Dhanavah, the best of Vennaatapur. 54 Shrenik had reached there in
his youth and had taken Nanda's hand in marriage. Abhaykumar stayed with his
mother in his maternal home for eight years and after that, he came to Rajgriha.
55 48. Uttaradhyayana Sutra, A. 20 49. Na Senio Asi Taya Bahussuo, Na Yavi
Pannaattidharo Na Vayago. So Agamissai Jino Bhavisasai; Samikkha Pannai Varan
Khu Dansanam || 50. Vinayapitaka Mahavagga 9/1/15 51. Jao Khaigassammiditthi
Tumang Agamissae Ya Ussappinee Ya Tattho Uvattitta Padmanabhanamo
Padmatitthayaro Bhavisassi. - Mahavira Charitra (Gunachandra) 52. (a) Trishashti
10/9. (b) Nirayavaliya Tika Patra-5-1 53. (a) Jnatadharmakatha 1/1 (b)
Nirayavaliya-23 (c) Anuptaroppapatik 1/1 54. This city should be located where
the Krishna river of the south meets the eastern sea, See- Bhagwan Mahavira: An
Exercise: Devendramuni Shastri 55. Bharateshwar-Bahubali, Vritti Patra 36 [21]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 mAlA yA kara rahe haiN| uttarAdhyayana ke anusAra zreNika samrAT ne anAthI muni
se nAtha aura anAtha ke guru-gaMbhIra rahasya ko samajhakara jaina dharma
svIkAra kiyA thaa| 48 samrAT zreNika kSAyika-samyaktva-dhArI the| unhoMne
tIrthakara nAmakarma prakRti kA bhI baMdha kiyA thA, yadyapi ve na to bahuzruta
the aura na prajJapti jaise AgamoM ke vettA hI the, tathApi samyaktva ke kAraNa
hI ve tIrthakara jaise gauravapUrNa pada ko prApta kreNge| 49 bauddha granthoM
ke anusAra zreNika kI pA~ca sau rAniyA~ thiiN| 5. unhoMne use tathAgata buddha
kA bhakta mAnA hai| kitane hI vidvAnoM kI yaha dhAraNA hai ki jIvana ke
pUrvArdha meM vaha jaina thA aura uttarArdha meM bauddha bana gayA thA, isaliye
jaina granthoM meM usake naraka jAne kA ullekha hai| para una vidvAnoM kI yaha
dhAraNA ucita nahIM hai| hama pUrva hI likha cuke haiM ki AgAmI caubIsI meM ve
padmanAbha nAmaka prathama tIrthakara hoNge| 59 hamArI dRSTi se yaha ho sakatA
hai ki jaba rAjA prasenajita ne zreNika ko nirvAsita kiyA thA, usa samaya
unhoMne prathama vizrAma nandIgrAma meM liyA thaa| vahA~ ke pramukha brAhmaNoM
ne rAjakopa ke bhaya se na unheM bhojana diyA aura na vizrAnti ke liye AvAsa hI
pradAna kiyaa| vivaza hokara nandIgrAma ke bAhara bauddha-vihAra meM unheM
rukanA par3A aura vahA~ ke bauddha bhikSuoM ne unheM sneha pradAna kiyA ho,
jisase unake antarmAnasa meM bauddhadharma ke prati sahaja anurAga jAgrata huA
ho| isaliye nirgrantha (jainadharma) kA parama upAsaka hone para bhI tathAgata
buddha ke prati bhI usameM sneha rahA ho aura usa sneha ke kAraNa hI unhoMne
buddha se dhArmika carcAeM bhI kI hoN| uparyukta paMktiyoM meM hamane dekhA hai
ki zreNika eka bahuta tejasvI zAsaka thaa| vaha jinazAsana kI mahAn prabhAvanA
karane vAlA thaa|devoN ke dvArA kI gaI parIkSA meM bhI vaha samuttIrNa huA thaa|
52 usakA anUThA kRtitva jainadharma kI gaurava-garimA meM cAra cA~da lagAne vAlA
thaa| prastuta Agama meM zreNika samrAT ke rAjakumAroM kA varNana hai, unake
jIvana-prasaMgoM ke sambandha meM bhI yatra-tatra carcAeM AI haiN| vihallakumAra
kA sambandha hAra hAthI ke prasaMga ko lekara usa yuga ke mahAn saMgrAma
mahAzilA se hai kintu vistArabhaya se hama una sabhI kA ullekha na kara
abhayakumAra ke sambandha meM hI yahA~ kucha cintana prastuta kara rahe haiN|
abhayakumAra prabala pratibhA kA dhanI thaa| jaina aura bauddha donoM hI
paramparAeM use apanA anuyAyI mAnatI haiN| jaina Agama sAhitya ke anusAra vaha
bhagavAn mahAvIra ke pAsa AhatI dIkSA svIkAra karatA hai aura tripiTaka sAhitya
ke anusAra vaha buddha ke pAsa pravrajita hotA hai| jaina sAhitya kI dRSTi se
vaha zreNika kI nandA nAmaka rAnI kA putra thaa| 53 nandA vennAtaTapura 54 ke
zreSThI dhanAvaha kI putrI thii| kumArAvasthA meM zreNika vahA~ pahuMce the aura
unhoMne nandA ke sAtha pANigrahaNa kiyA thaa| ATha varSa taka abhayakumAra apanI
mA~ ke sAtha nanihAla meM rahe the aura usake pazcAt ve rAjagRha A gye| 55 48.
uttarAdhyayana sUtra, a. 20 49. na seNio Asi tayA bahussuo, na yAvi
pannattidharo na vaaygo| so AgamissAi jiNo bhavissaI; samikkha pannAI varaM khu
daMsaNaM  //  50. vinayapiTaka mahAvagga 9/1/15 51. jao khAigasammadiTThI tumaM
AgamissAe ya ussappiNIe tatto uvaTTittA paThamanAbhanAmo paDhamatitthayaro
bhvisssi| - mahAvIra caritra (guNacandra) 52. (ka) triSaSThi 10/9. (kha)
nirayAvaliyA TIkA patra-5-1 53. (ka) jJAtAdharmakathA 1/1 (kha) nirayAvaliyA-23
(ga) anuptaropapAtika 1/1 54. yaha nagara dakSiNa kI kRSNAnagarI nadI jahA~
pUrva ke samudra se milatI hai vahA~ honA cAhie, dekhiye- bhagavAn mahAvIra :
eka anuzIlana : devendramuni zAstrI 55. bharatezvara-bAhubalI, vRtti patra 36
[21]

Page #25 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Abhaya was extremely handsome. He was proficient in the policies of Sama, Dama,
Danda, Bheda, Pradan, and Vyapar. He was skilled in Iha, Apoha, Margana,
Gaveshana, and Arthashastra. He was endowed with all four types of intelligence.
He was a true advisor for every act of the Shrenikan emperor. He was the one who
would bear the burden of the state. He took good care of the state (governance),
nation (country), treasury, granary (food storehouse), army, vehicles, city, and
inner palace. 56 Abhayakumar was the appointed minister of King Shrenikan. 57 He
would solve even the most complex problems in a moment with his sharp intellect.
He had fulfilled the wishes of Meghakumar's mother Dharini 58 and Kunik's mother
Chelna 59 with his sharp intellect. He had also happily arranged the marriage of
his younger mother Chelna and Shrenikan. Many incidents of the wonders of his
intelligence are recorded in Jain literature. He had freed Shrenikan from the
severe political crisis of King Chandrapradyot of Ujjayini. 60 Abhayakumar knew
very well that it is extremely difficult to embrace the Shraman Dharma. Once a
Drumak (woodcutter) took Pravrajya from Ganadhar Sudharma. People ridiculed him.
When Abhayakumar came to know about it, he had three piles of one crore gold
coins each placed in a public place and announced that anyone who renounced
women, fire, and conscious water for life could take these three crore gold
coins. Everyone's mind was tempted by the sight of the gold coins, but no one
came forward after hearing the condition. Abhayakumar said to all those critics
- How great is the Drumak Muni, who has renounced women, fire, and conscious
water for life. You are ridiculing him. Everyone was impressed by the great
sacrifice of Drumak Muni and they came to know the importance of Shraman Dharma.
61 - According to Sutrakrutanga-Niyukti 62 and Trishashtisalakapurushcharitra 3,
Abhayakumar had sent Ardhakumar as a Dharma-Upakarana gift, due to which he
became enlightened and became a Shraman. 63 Only after coming in contact with
Abhayakumar did the son of Kalashokar, the cruel butcher of Rajgriha,
Sulaskumar, become a devout follower of Bhagwan Mahavira. 64 Many examples of
Abhayakumar's religious spirit are highlighted in Jain literature. The
storytellers say - Once Abhaya asked Bhagwan Mahavira a question - who will be
the last king to attain Moksha? Bhagwan said - Udayan, the king of Vitabhaya,
who has already accepted restraint near me. Hearing this, Abhaya thought to
himself - If I become king, I will not be able to attain Moksha. Therefore, I
should take initiation in my youth. He humbly requested Emperor Shrenikan to
grant him permission. Shrenikan said - You are not yet old enough to take
initiation. I am the one who is old enough to take initiation. You become king
and enjoy the 56. Jnatadharmakatha 1/1 57. Bharateshwar Bahubali, Vritti Patra
38 58. Jnatadharmakatha 1/1 59. Nirayavaliya 1 60. (a) Aavashyakachurni,
Uttarardha, Patra 159, 163 (b) Trishashti 10-11-124 to 293 Dharmaratnaprakaran -
Abhayakumar Katha 1/30 61. 62. Sutrakrutanganiryukti with commentary 1/6/136 63.
Trishashti 10/7/177-179, Indian History: A Perspective, page 67 64. Yogashastra-
Svopgyavritti - 1/30, page 91 to 95 Acharya Hemchandra - [22]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 abhaya kA rUpa atyadhika sundara thaa| ve sAma, dAma, daNDa, bheda, pradAna,
vyApAra nIti meM niSNAta the| IhA, apoha, mArgaNA, gaveSaNA aura arthazAstra meM
kuzala the| cAroM prakAra kI buddhiyoM ke dhanI the  /  ve zreNika samrAT ke
pratyeka kArya ke lie sacce parAmarzaka the| ve rAjyadhurA ko dhAraNa karane
vAle the| ve rAjya (zAsana), rASTra (deza), koSa, koThAra (annabhaNDAra), senA,
vAhana, nagara aura antaHpura kI acchI taraha dekhabhAla karate the  /  56
abhayakumAra rAjA zreNika ke manonIta mantrI the| 57 ve jaTila se jaTila
samasyAoM ko apanI kuzAgra buddhi se eka kSaNa meM sulajhA dete the| unhoMne
meghakumAra kI mAtA dhAriNI 58 aura kuNika kI mAtA celanA 59 kA dohada apanI
kuzAgra buddhi se sampanna kiyA thaa| apanI laghumAtA celaNA aura zreNika kA
vivAha sambandha bhI sAnanda sampanna karAyA thaa| unakI buddhi ke camatkAra kI
aneka ghaTanAeM jaina sAhitya meM aMkita haiN| ujjayinI ke rAjA caNDapradyota ke
vikaTa rAjanaitika saMkaTa se zreNika ko mukta kiyA thA  /  60 zramaNadharma ko
grahaNa karanA atyadhika kaThina hai, yaha abhayakumAra acchI taraha se jAnate
the| eka bAra eka drumaka ( lakar3ahAre ne gaNadhara sudharmA ke pAsa pravrajyA
grahaNa kii| logoM ne usakA parihAsa kiyaa| abhayakumAra ko jJAta hone para
unhoMne sArvajanika sthAna para tIna eka-eka karor3a svarNamudrAoM kA ambAra
lagAyA aura yaha udghoSaNA karavAyI ki ye tInakoTi svarNamudrAeM vaha vyakti le
sakatA hai jo jIvana bhara ke liye strI, agni aura sacitta pAnI kA parityAga
kre| svarNa mudrAoM ko nihAra kara sabhI kA mana lalacAyA, kintu zarta ko
sunakara koI bhI Age nahIM bar3ha skaa| abhayakumAra ne una sabhI AlocakoM ke
sAmane kahA- drumaka muni kitanA mahAn hai, jisane jIvana bhara ke liye strI,
agni aura sacitta pAnI kA parityAga kiyA hai  /  Apa usa kA upahAsa karate haiN|
sabhI drumaka muni ke mahAn tyAga se prabhAvita huye aura unheM zramaNa dharma
kA mahattva jJAta huA  /  61 - sUtrakRtAMga- niyukti 62 tathA triSaSThizalAkA-
puruSacaritra 3 ke anusAra abhayakumAra ne ArdrakumAra ko dharmopakaraNa upahAra
ke rUpa meM preSita kiye the, jisase vaha pratibuddha hokara zramaNa banA thA  /
abhayakumAra ke saMsarga meM Akara hI rAjagRha kA krUra kasAI kAla zaukarika kA
putra sulasakumAra bhagavAn mahAvIra kA paramabhakta banA thA  /  64
abhayakumAra kI dhArmika bhAvanA ke aneka udAharaNa jaina sAhitya meM uTTaGkita
haiN| kathAkAra kahate haiM - eka bAra abhaya ne bhagavAn mahAvIra ke samakSa
jijJAsA prastuta kI ki antima mokSagAmI rAjA kauna hogA ? bhagavAn ne kahA -
vItabhaya kA rAjA udAyana jo mere nikaTa saMyama svIkAra kara cukA hai| bhagavAn
kI yaha bAta sunakara abhaya mana hI mana socane lagA - -yadi maiM rAjA bana
gayA to mokSa nahIM jA sakUMgA  /  ataH kumArAvasthA meM hI dIkSA grahaNa kara
luuN| usane samrAT zreNika se anumati pradAna karane ke hetu namra nivedana kiyA
/  zreNika ne kahA - - abhI tumhArI umra dIkSA lene kI nahIM hai| dIkSA lene kI
umra merI hai| tuma rAjA banakara Ananda kA 56. jJAtAdharmakathA 1/1 57.
bharatezvara bAhubalI, vRtti patra 38 58. jJAtAdharmakathA 1/1 59. nirayAvaliyA
1 60. (ka) AvazyakacUrNi, uttarArdha, patra 159, 163 (kha) triSaSThi 10 -11-124
se 293 dharmaratnaprakaraNa - abhayakumAra kathA 1/30 61. 62.
sUtrakRtAMganiryukti TIkA sahita 1/6/136 63. triSaSThi 10/7/177-179, bhAratIya
itihAsa : eka dRSTi, pRSTha 67 64. yogazAstra- svopajJavRtti - 1/30, pRSTha 91
se 95 AcArya hemacandra - [22]

Page #26 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Consume. At the insistent request of Abhaykumar, Shrenik said, "On the day I
angrily tell you to get away, don't show me your face; on that day you shall
become a Shraman."  Some time later, Bhagwan Mahavira arrived in Rajgriha. After
seeing Bhagwan, the king was returning with Queen Chelna. On the bank of the
river, King Shrenik saw a Muni meditating. The cold was very intense. The
Queen's hand was outside the garment she was wearing in her sleep and her hand
was shivering. She woke up and remembering the Muni, suddenly said, "What will
they be doing!" The Queen's words created disbelief in the King's mind. In the
morning, he went to see Bhagwan. While leaving, he ordered Abhaykumar to burn
Chelna's palace, as immorality flourishes here. Abhaykumar removed the queens
and precious items from the palace and set it on fire. King Shrenik questioned
Mahavira. Mahavira said, "Chelna and all the other queens are completely devoted
to their husbands and virtuous." King Shrenik began to repent in his heart. He
quickly returned from the Samavasaran and headed towards the royal palace. On
the way, he met Abhaykumar. When the king asked, Abhaykumar told him about
burning the palace. The king said, "Did you not act with your intelligence?"
Abhay said, "O King! I knew very well how terrible it is to break the king's
order."  The king was angry at his unwise act. He could not control his anger
and words came out of his mouth, "Get out of here. Don't show me your face ever
again." Abhaykumar was waiting for these words. He bowed to the king and reached
Bhagwan's feet and took initiation.  King Shrenik reached the palaces. Seeing
all the queens and precious items safe, he was deeply saddened by his words. He
went to Bhagwan. But Abhay had already become a disciple before King Shrenik
arrived. 65  _In the Antakrid Dasang Sutra, there is a mention of Abhay's mother
Nanda also becoming a disciple and attaining liberation. 16 Abhaykumar Muni
studied the eleven Angas, worshipped Gunaratnatap. His body became very thin.
However, the extraordinary brilliance of his practice was shining on his face.
Abhaykumar had a strong intellect. He was rich in sharp intelligence. The
meaningfulness of intelligence lies in the contemplation of the self-principle.
-"Buddhe phalam tattvavicharnam cha" Even today, the merchant class remembers
Abhay's intelligence. On the occasion of the new year, a wish is made in writing
in the account books to obtain intelligence like Abhay's.  In Buddhist
literature, Abhaykumar's name is found as Abhayrajakumar. His mother was
Padmavati, a courtesan of Ujjayini. When Shrenik Bimbisara heard about her
extraordinary beauty, he was attracted to her. He told his mind's desire to the
royal priest. The priest worshipped a Yaksha named Kumpir. That Yaksha took
Shrenik Bimbisara to Ujjayini. There, he came into contact with Padmavati, the
prostitute. Abhayrajakumar stayed with his mother for seven years and then came
to Rajgriha with his father. " 65. Bharateshwar Bahubali Vritti Patra 38 to 40
66. Antakrid Dasang Sutra, Class-7 67. Anuttaraupapatik Sutra 1/10 68. According
to the Gilgit Manuscript, he was the son of Bimbisara born from Amrapali, a
courtesan of Vaishali. (Volume 3, 2 p. 22) Theragatha-Atthakatha 64 mentions the
name of Amrapali's son born from Shrenik as "Vimal Kodanj" in the original Pali
literature, who later became a Buddhist monk. 69. Therigatha Atthakatha 31-32
[23]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 upabhoga karo  /  abhayakumAra ke atyadhika Agraha para zreNika ne kahA-jisa
dina ruSTa hokara maiM tumheM kaha dUM-dUra haTa jA, mujhe apanA muMha na dikhA;
usI dina tU zramaNa bana jaanaa| kucha samaya ke pazcAt bhagavAn mahAvIra
rAjagRha meM pdhaare| bhagavAn ke darzana kara mahArAnI celanA ke sAtha rAjA
lauTa rahA thaa| saritA ke kinAre rAjA zreNika ne eka muni ko dhyAnastha dekhaa|
sardI bahuta hI teja thii| mahArAnI kA hAtha nIMda meM or3hane ke vastra se
bAhara raha gayA aura hAtha ThiThura gayA thaa| usakI nIMda ucaTa gaI aura muni
kA smaraNa Ane para acAnaka muMha se nikala par3A-'ve kyA karate hoMge !'rAnI ke
zabdoM ne rAjA ke mana meM avizvAsa paidA kara diyaa| prAtaHkAla vaha bhagavAna
ke darzana ko cala diyaa| calate samaya abhayakumAra ko yaha Adeza diyA ki
celanA ke mahala ko jalA do, yahA~ para durAcAra panapatA hai| abhayakumAra ne
rAjamahala meM se rAniyoM ko aura bahumUlya vastuoM ko nikAla kara usameM Aga
lagA dii| rAjA zreNika ne mahAvIra se prazna kiyaa| mahAvIra ne kahA-celanA Adi
sabhI rAniyA~ pUrNa pativratA aura zIlavatI haiN| rAjA zreNika mana hI mana
pazcAttApa karane lgaa| vaha punaH samavasaraNa se zIghra lauTakara rAjabhavana
kI ora cala diyaa| mArga meM abhayakumAra mila gyaa| rAjA ke pUchane para
abhayakumAra ne mahala ko jalA dene kI bAta khii| rAjA ne kahA-tumane apanI
buddhi se kAma nahIM liyA? abhaya bolA-rAjan ! rAjAjJA ko bhaMga karanA kitanA
bhayaMkara hai yaha mujhe acchI taraha se jJAta thaa| rAjA ko apane avivekapUrNa
kRtya para krodha A rahA thaa| ve apane krodha ko vaza meM na rakha sake aura
unake muMha se sahasA zabda nikala par3e-'yahAM se calA jaa| bhUlakara bhI mujhe
muMha na dikhaanaa|' abhayakumAra to ina zabdoM kI hI pratIkSA kara rahA thaa|
usane rAjA ko namaskAra kiyA aura bhagavAn ke caraNoM meM pahuMcakara dIkSA
grahaNa kara lii| rAjA zreNika mahaloM meM phuNcaa| sabhI rAniyA~ aura bahumUlya
vastueM surakSita dekhakara use apane vacanoM ke lie apAra duHkha huaa| vaha
bhagavAn ke pAsa phuNcaa| para abhaya rAjA zreNika ke pahuMcane ke pUrva hI
dIkSita ho cukA thaa| 65 _antakRddazAMga sUtra meM abhaya kI mAtA nandA ke bhI
dIkSita hokara mokSa jAne kA ullekha hai| 16 abhayakumAra muni ne gyAraha aMgoM
kA adhyayana kiyA, guNaratnatapa kI ArAdhanA kii| unakA zarIra atyanta kRza ho
gyaa| tathApi sAdhanA kA apUrva teja unake mukha para camaka rahA thaa|
abhayakumAra meM prabala pratibhA thii| kuzAgra buddhi ke ve dhanI the| buddhi
kI sArthakatA isI meM hai ki Atma-tattva kI vicAraNA kI jaay| -"buddhe phalaM
tattvavicAraNaM ca" Aja bhI vyApArI varga abhaya kI buddhi ko smaraNa karatA
hai| nUtana varSa ke avasara para bahIkhAtoM meM likhita rUpa se abhaya kI-sI
buddhi prApta karane kI kAmanA kI jAtI hai| bauddha sAhitya meM abhayakumAra kA
nAma abhayarAjakumAra milatA hai| usakI mAtA ujjayinI kI gaNikA padmAvatI thii|
jaba zreNika bimbisAra ne usake adbhuta rUpa kI bAta sumI to vaha usake prati
AkRSTa ho gyaa| usane apane mana kI bAta rAjapurohita se khii| purohita ne
kumpira nAmaka yakSa kI ArAdhanA kii| vaha yakSa zreNika bimbisAra ko lekara
ujjayinI gyaa| vahA~ padmAvatI vezyA ke sAtha samparka huaa| abhayarAjakumAra
apanI mAtA ke pAsa sAta varSa taka rahA aura usake pazcAt apane pitA ke pAsa
rAjagRha A gyaa|" 65. bharatezvarabAhubalI vRtti patra 38 se 40 66.
antakRdazAMgasUtra varga-7 67. anuttaraupapAtika sUtra 1/10 68. gilgiTa
menuskripTa ke abhimatAnusAra vaha vaizAlI kI gaNikA AmrapAlI se utpanna
bimbisAra kA putra thaa| (khaNDa 3, 2 pR. 22) theragAthA-aTThakathA 64 meM
zreNika se utpanna AmrapAlI ke putra kA nAma mUla pAlI sAhitya meM "vimala
koDaJja" AtA hai jo Age calakara bauddha bhikSu bnaa| 69. therIgAthA aTThakathA
31-32 [23]

Page #27 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Even though he was a prince, Abhay was skilled in chariot warfare. Once, he
solved a complex issue of boundary dispute with his exceptional talent, which
pleased Bimbisara so much that he gifted him a very beautiful dancer. In the
Abhaykumarasutta of Majjhimanikaya 72, there is an incident - once the Tathagata
Buddha was wandering in the Veluvana Kalandaka residence of Rajagriha. At that
time, Prince Abhay reached Niganth Nayaputta. Niganth Nayaputta said to Abhay,
"Prince! If you debate with the Shraman Gautam, your fame will spread throughout
the universe and people will talk about how Abhay debated with the great Shraman
Gautam." Abhay asked, "Bhanta! How should I start the debate?" Niganth Nayaputta
said, "You should ask the Buddha if the Tathagata can speak words that are
unpleasant to others? If they agree, then ask what is the difference between a
worldly being (samsari jiva) and the Tathagata? If they give a negative answer,
then ask why did you predict that Devadatta will be a sinner, a nirayika, a
hell-dweller for kalpas, and incurable? He is angry with your prediction. By
asking questions from both sides, Shraman Gautam will neither be able to swallow
nor spit. Just like a man's throat gets stuck with an iron rod, he cannot
swallow or spit, the same will be the situation of the Buddha." Prince Abhay
saluted Niganth Nayaputta and went to the Buddha. He saluted and sat on one
side, but it was not the time for debate. So Abhay thought, "Tomorrow I will
invite the Tathagata Buddha home and debate with him!" He invited the Buddha for
a meal and went to his royal palace. The next day at noon, wearing his robe and
carrying his bowl, the Buddha reached Abhay's royal palace. Abhay offered him
the best food with his own hands. When the Buddha was fully satiated, Prince
Abhay sat down on the seat below and started the debate - "Bhanta! Can the
Tathagata speak words that are unpleasant to others?" Buddha - "It cannot be
said so in isolation." Hearing this, Prince Abhay exclaimed, "Bhanta! Niganth is
destroyed." When the Buddha asked, he explained, "Bhanta! I went to Niganth
Nayaputta. He encouraged me to ask you this tricky question. His opinion was
that by asking such questions, Gautam would neither be able to swallow nor
spit." A little child was sitting in Prince Abhay's lap, playing. Aiming at him,
the Buddha said, "Prince, if your (or your nurse's) carelessness causes this
child to put a piece of wood or a stone in his mouth, what will you do?" "I will
take it out, Bhanta! If he doesn't let me take it out directly, I will hold his
head with my left hand and bend my finger with my right hand and take it out
even with blood! Because I have affection for him." Buddha - "Prince! The
Tathagata does not speak untrue, meaningless, and unpleasant words. Even if the
words are true, if they are harmful, he does not speak them. The words that are
true and meaningful, whether pleasant or unpleasant, are spoken by the Kalagya
70. Majjhimanikaya Abhayrajakumarasutta 71. Dhammapada Atthakatha 13-4 72.
Majjhimanikaya Abhayakumarasutta Chapter-76 [24]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 abhaya rAjakumAra hone para bhI rathavidyA meM nipuNa thaa| deg eka bAra usa ne
prakRSTa pratibhA se sImAvivAda ke jaTila prazna ko sulajhAyA thA, jisase
prasanna hokara bimbisAra ne eka atyanta sundarI nartakI use upahAra ke rUpa meM
pradAna kii| majjhimanikAya 72 ke abhayakumArasutta meM eka prasaMga hai-eka
bAra tathAgata buddha rAjagRhI ke veNuvana kalandaka nivAsa meM vicaraNa kara
rahe the| usa samaya rAjakumAra abhaya nigaNTha nAyaputta ke pAsa phuNcaa|
nigaNTha nAyaputta ne abhaya se kahA'rAjakumAra ! zramaNa gautama ke sAtha tuma
zAstrArtha karo to tumhArI kIrti-kaumudI didiganta meM phaila jAyegI aura janatA
meM yaha carcA hogI ki abhaya ne itane maharddhika zramaNa gautama ke sAtha
zAstrArtha kiyA hai|' abhaya ne pUchA-'bhante ! maiM zAstrArtha kA prArambha
kaise karU~?' nigaNTha nAyaputta ne kahA-'tuma buddha se pUchanA ki kyA
tathAgata aise vacana bola sakate haiM jo dUsaroM ko apriya hoM? yadi ve svIkAra
kareM to pUchanA ki phira pRthag-jana (saMsArI jIva) aura tathAgata meM kyA
antara hai ? yadi ve nakArAtmaka uttara deM to pUchanA ki Apane devadatta ke
durgatigAmI, nairayika, kalpabhara-narakavAsI, acikitsaka kI bhaviSyavANI kyoM
kI? vaha Apa kI prastuta bhaviSyavANI se kupita huA hai| isa taraha donoM ora se
prazna pUchane para zramaNa gautama na ugala sakegA aura na nigala skegaa| jaise
kisI puruSa ke gale meM lohe kI vaMzI phaMsa jAye to vaha na ugala sakatA hai
aura na nigala sakatA hai, yahI sthiti buddha kI hogii|' abhaya rAjakumAra
nigaNTha nAyaputta ko abhivAdana kara buddha ke pAsa phuNcaa| abhivAdana kara
eka ora baiTha gayA, para zAstrArtha kA samaya nahIM thaa| ataH abhaya ne socA-
kala tathAgata buddha ko ghara para bulavAkara hI zAstrArtha karUMgA ! usane
buddha ko bhojana kA nimantraNa diyA aura apane rAjaprAsAda meM calA aayaa|
dUsare dina madhyAhna meM cIvara pahana kara aura pAtra lekara buddha abhaya ke
rAjaprAsAda meM phuNce| buddha ko apane hAthoM se usane zreSTha bhojana
samarpita kiyaa| jaba buddha pUrNa rUpa se tapta ho gaye to rAjakumAra abhaya
nIce Asana para baiTha gaye aura unhoMne vAda prArambha kiyA-bhante ! kyA
tathAgata aise vacana bola sakate haiM jo dUsaroM ko apriya hoM? buddha-ekAnta
rUpa se aisA nahIM kahA jA sktaa| yaha sunate hI abhaya rAjakumAra bola uThA-
bhante ! nigaNTha naSTa ho gyaa| buddha ke pUchane para usane spaSTIkaraNa
karate hue kahA- bhante ! maiM nigaNTha nAyaputta ke pAsa gayA thaa| unhoMne hI
mujhe Apa se yaha dudhArA prazna pUchane ke lie utprerita kiyA thaa| unakA yaha
mata thA ki isa prakAra prazna pUchane para gautama na ugala sakegA aura na
nigala skegaa| abhaya rAjakumAra kI goda meM eka nanhA-munnA baiThA huA krIr3A
kara rahA thaa| use lakSya meM lekara buddha ne kahArAjakumAra, tumhAre (yA
dhAya ke) pramAda se yaha zizu kadAcit muMha meM kASTha kA Tukar3A yA DhelA DAla
le to tuma kyA karoge? maiM use nikAlU~gA bhante ! yadi vaha sIdhI taraha se
nikAlane nahIM degA to bAyeM hAtha se usakA sira pakar3a kara dAhine hAtha se
aMgulI Ter3hI karake rakta sahita bhI nikAla dUMgA ! kyoMki usa para merA sneha
hai| buddha-rAjakumAra ! tathAgata atathya, anarthayukta aura apriya vacana
nahIM bolte| tathya sahita hone para bhI yadi anartha karane vAlA vacana ho to
use bhI nahIM bolte| jo vacana tathyayukta sArthaka hotA hai, phira bhale hI
priya ho yA apriya, kAlajJa 70. majjhimanikAya abhayarAjakumArasutta 71.
dhammapada aTThakathA 13-4 72. majjhimanikAya abhayakumArasutta prakaraNa-76
[24]

Page #28 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
That is what they call a Tathagata. Because they have compassion for beings.
Abhaya prince - Venerable! Do you already have this thought in your mind that if
I ask this kind of question - I will give this answer? Buddha - You are an
expert in chariot-knowledge. Which part of the chariot is this, if someone asks
you, will you - Do you already have the answer to that in mind? Or does it come
to you at the time? - - Venerable! I am an expert in chariots. Therefore, I know
it at that time. Abhayakumar Buddha — Prince! The Tathagata also knows it at
that moment, because his mind is well-established. Abhaya - Wonderful,
Venerable! You have illuminated the Dharma in many ways. I take refuge in you.
May the Dharma and the Sangha accept me as a refuge with folded hands. The
Samyutta Nikaya also mentions Abhayakumar's meeting with the Buddha. He asks the
Buddha a question related to the belief of Purna Kashyapa. According to the 73
Dhammapada Atthakatha, Abhayakumar attained the Sotapanna fruit 74 at that time
when he went to the Buddha, saddened by the death of the dancer, and the Buddha
gave a Dharma talk. 75 According to the Theragatha Atthakatha, Abhaya attained
the Sotapanna fruit when the Tathagata gave the Talachchigulupamasutta
discourse. 76 He went to the Buddha, deeply saddened by the death of King
Bimbisara, took ordination, and attained the Arhathood. After becoming a monk,
he also enlightened his mother Padmavati, and she became a nun and attained
Arhathood. 78 In light of Jain and Buddhist evidence, it is clear that
Abhayakumar and Abhayaprinc were two different individuals, because from the
Jain perspective, his mother is a merchant's daughter, he is the chief minister
of King Shrenik, and he takes initiation from Mahavira, while from the Buddhist
perspective, he is the son of a prostitute, a successful charioteer, abandons
the Niganth Dharma and accepts Buddhism, and finally becomes a monk with the
Buddha. If Abhaya were the same person, how could he have taken initiation from
both Mahavira and the Buddha? It is possible that King Shrenik had many sons,
one of whom was named Abhaya and the other Abhayaprinc. 79 The mention of Jain
initiation is in the present Agam, which has been dated by scholars like
Panditpravar Dalsukh Malvaniya, etc. 73. Samyutta Nikaya, Abhayasutta 44 / 6 / 6
74. Sotapanna - Entering the stream. Being established in the path of Nirvana,
where there is no possibility of falling. A monk who practices yoga, when he
breaks the three bonds of sakkayaditthi, vicikiccha, and silabbataparamsaka, is
called a Sotapanna. A Sotapanna person takes birth at most seven times, then he
surely attains Nirvana. 1 75. Dhammapada - Atthakatha 13/4 76. Theragatha-
Atthakatha 1/58 77. (a) Theragatha - 26 (b) Theragatha - Atthakatha Volume 1,
pp. 83-84 78. Theragatha - Atthakatha 31-32 79. (a) Agam and Tripitaka: An
Exploration, p. 359 (b) Bhagwan Mahavira: An Exploration 80. Anuttaraupapatik -
1 / 10 [25]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 tathAgata use bolate haiN| kyoMki unakI prANiyoM para dayA hai| abhaya
rAjakumAra - bhante ! kyA Apa pahale se hI mana meM yaha vicAra kara rakhate
haiM ki isa prakAra kA prazna karane para - maiM aisA uttara dUMgA ? buddha -
tuma ratha - vidyA ke niSNAta ho  /  ratha kA yaha kauna sA aMga-pratyaMga hai,
yadi koI tuma se yaha pUche to kyA tuma - usakA pahale se hI uttara soca-samajha
kara rakhate ho ? yA samaya para hI tumheM bhAsita ho jAtA hai ? - - bhante !
maiM ratha kA vizeSajJa huuN| isalie mujhe usI samaya jJAta ho jAtA hai|
abhayakumAra buddha -- rAjakumAra ! tathAgata ko bhI usI kSaNa bhAsita ho jAtA
hai, kyoMki unakA mana acchI taraha se sadhA huA hai| abhaya - Azcarya bhante !
Apane aneka paryAya se dharma ko prakAzita kiyA hai| maiM ApakI zaraNa meM AtA
huuN| dharma aura bhikSu saMgha mujhe aMjalibaddha zaraNAgata svIkAra kareM  /
saMyukta nikAya meM bhI abhayakumAra kA buddha se sAkSAtkAra hone kA ullekha
hai| vaha buddha se pUrNa kAzyapa kI mAnyatA se sambandhita eka prazna karatA
hai| 73 dhammapada aTThakathA ke anusAra abhayakumAra ko srotApattiphala 74 usa
samaya prApta hotA hai jaba vaha nartakI kI mRtyu se khinna hokara buddha ke
pAsa gayA aura buddha ne dharmopadeza diyaa| 75 theragAthA aTThakathA ke anusAra
abhaya ko strotApattiphala usa samaya prApta huA jaba tathAgata ne
tAlacchigulupamasutta kA upadeza diyA thaa| 76 vaha zreNika bimbisAra kI mRtyu
se atyanta udAsa hokara buddha ke pAsa pahu~cA, pravrajyA grahaNa kI aura arhat
pada prApta kiyaa| bhikSu banane ke pazcAt usane apanI mAtA padmAvatI ko bhI
udbodhana diyA aura usane bhikSuNI banakara arhat pada prApta kiyaa| 78 jaina
aura bauddha sAkSyoM ke Aloka meM yaha spaSTa parijJAta hotA hai ki abhayakumAra
aura abhayarAjakumAra ye donoM pRthakpRthak vyakti rahe hoMge kyoMki jaina dRSTi
se usakI mAtA vaNik kanyA hai, vaha rAjA zreNika kA pradhAnamantrI hai aura
mahAvIra ke pAsa dIkSA grahaNa karatA hai jabaki bauddha dRSTi se vaha eka
gaNikA kA putra hai, saphala rathika hai, nigaNTha dharma kA parityAga kara
bauddha dharma ko svIkAra karatA hai aura anta meM buddha ke pAsa bhikSu banatA
hai| yadi abhaya eka hI vyakti hotA to mahAvIra aura buddha ina donoM ke pAsa
vaha kisa prakAra dIkSA le sakatA thA ? yaha sambhava hai ki rAjA zreNika ke
aneka putra the, unameM eka kA nAma abhaya rahA ho aura dUsare kA nAma
abhayarAjakumAra rahA ho| 79 jaina dIkSA kA ullekha prastuta Agama " meM hai,
jisakA racanAkAla paNDitapravara dalasukha mAlavaNiyA prabhRti vijJoM ne 73.
saMyuktanikAya, abhayasutta 44 / 6 / 6 74. srotApatti - dhArA meM A jaanaa|
nirvANa ke mArga meM ArUDha ho jAnA, jahAM se girane kI koI saMbhAvanA na ho  /
yogasAdhanA karane vAlA bhikSu jaba satkAyadRSTi, vicikitsA aura zIlavrata
parAmarzaka, ina tIna baMdhanoM ko tor3a detA hai taba vaha srotApana kahA jAtA
hai  /  srotApanna vyakti adhika se adhika sAta bAra janma letA hai, phira
avazya hI nirvANa prApta karatA hai| 1 75. dhammapada - aTThakathA 13/4 76.
theragAthA- aTThakathA 1/58 77. (ka) theragAthA - 26 (kha) theragAthA -
aTThakathA khaNDa 1, pR. 83-84 78. theragAthA - aTThakathA 31-32 79. (ka) Agama
aura tripiTaka : eka anuzIlana, pR. 359 (kha) bhagavAn mahAvIra : eka anuzIlana
80. anuttaraupapAtika - 1 / 10 [25]

Page #29 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
It is believed that the second century BCE is the time of Abhaya. The mention of
Buddhist ordination is found in 'Theragatha' and 'Atthakatha'. In the Pitaka
literature, 'Theragatha' is considered to be the latest composition and
'Atthakatha' is even later than that. Therefore, it is more logical and
evidence-based that Abhaya was a Jain. The seventh study in the first section of
the present Agam is of the prince Lishtadant and the third study in the second
section is also of the prince Lishtadant. Both have Dharini as their mother and
Shrenik as their father. What is the consistency of this? It is worth
investigating. It is possible that there were two princes named Lishtadant, one
first and one second. Mahasati Muktiprabhaji has considered this in the
commentary. The third section describes ten Kumaras: Dhanyakumar,
Sunakshastrakumar, Rishi Das, Pellka, Ramputra, Chandrika, Prishtmatri,
Pedhalputra, Pottill and Vehall. Dhanyakumar was the son of Bhadra Sarthavahi of
Kakand. All around him was splendor and revelry. But, inspired by the
renunciation and detachment of Lord Mahavira, he listened to the holy sermons
and, like a valiant warrior, advanced on the arduous path of self-control. The
wonderful description of his ascetic life is given here. Who will not bow their
head in reverence after reading the description of Dhany's asceticism? In the
Mahasinghanadasutta 4 of the Majjhimanikaya, the Tathagata Buddha had performed
such excellent ascetic practices in one of his previous births. The penance that
Buddha had performed for six years is also somewhat similar to this. Kavikulguru
Kalidasa has also vividly described the fierce penance of Parvati in
Kumarsambhava 5. After reading all those descriptions, when we read the
description of Dhanyakumar, it seems clear that the description of Dhanyakumar
is more vivid. He had vowed to perform penance for six years. He would only take
coarse food in the form of Achaml Vrat in the Parana. He would take the food
that a householder was about to throw away and wash it 21 times with water and
then consume it and use the same water. His body had become a skeleton due to
penance. See the figurative description of his penance - in which practical
similes have been used and the subject matter has become vivid. His presented
statement shows sufficient meaning - 'Akkhasuttamala Vivaganajjamanaihin
Pittikarandagasandhihin, Gangatarangabhuenam Urakaadagadesabhaeanam,
Sukasappasamanaihin Baahahin, Sidhilkadali-Viv Lambantehi Ya Aggahatthehi,
Kampamanavaiye Viv Vevamaniye Sisaghadiye' i.e. 'The bones of the back of the
ascetic Dhany Muni could be counted one by one like a rosary. The bones of the
chest were visible separately like the waves of the Ganges. The arms had become
thin like a dried snake. The hands were hanging loosely like a horse's muzzle
bag and the head was shaking like the head of a person suffering from wind
disease.' In this way, it is full of many similes and illustrations. Many people
believe that Agam literature is dull. The stories of the Agams, with their
monotonous style, similarity of subject matter, and lack of imagination and
artistry, do not captivate readers. They are full of supernatural elements. But
this belief of theirs is not entirely correct. There may be some truth in it.
This notion may have arisen due to reading the Agam superficially, but when we
delve deeper, new facts emerge from those stories. They have made an
unprecedented contribution to the structure of Indian culture and the
development of Indian oriental studies. 81. Jain Philosophy of the Agam Age, p.
28, Publisher - Sanmati Gyanapith, Agra 82. Theragatha: Bhaddiyavago,
Abhayatherapadanan 83. Khudaknikaya Volume 7, Nalanda, Bhikshu Jagdish Kashyap
84. Bodhirajakumarasutta, Digha Nikaya Kassapasinhnaadasutta 85. Kumarsambhava
Sarga - Parvatiprakaran [26]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 vikrama pUrva dUsarI zatAbdI mAnA hai| bauddha dIkSA kA ullekha'therAapadAna'
va aTThakathA meM hai| piTaka sAhitya meM therAapadAna kI racanA sabase bAda kI
mAnI jAtI hai aura aTThakathA to usase bhI bAda kI racanA hai| 83 ataH abhaya kA
jainadharmI honA hI adhika tarkasaMgata va pramANa purassara hai| prastuta Agama
ke prathama varga ke daza adhyayanoM meM se sAtavA~ adhyayana laSTadanta
rAjakumAra kA hai aura dvitIya varga meM bhI tIsarA adhyayana laSTadanta
rAjakumAra kA hai| donoM kI mAtA dhAriNI aura pitA zreNika samrAT hai| isakI
saMgati kyA hai ? yaha anveSaNIya hai| sambhava hai laSTadanta nAma ke do
rAjakumAra rahe hoM, eka prathama aura eka dvitiiy| mahAsatI muktiprabhAjI ne
TippaNa meM isa sambandha meM vicAra kiyA hai| tRtIya varga meM dhanyakumAra,
sunakSatrakumAra, RSidAsa, pellaka, rAmaputra, candrika, pRSTimAtrika,
peDhAlaputra, poTTilla aura vehalla ina daza kumAroM kA varNana hai|
dhanyakumAra kAkandI kI bhadrA sArthavAhI ke putra the| cAroM ora vaibhava
aThakheliyA~ kara rahA thaa| kintu bhagavAn mahAvIra ke tyAga-vairAgya se
chalachalAte hue pAvana pravacanoM ko zravaNa kara saMyama ke kaThora-mArga para
eka vIra senAnI kI bhA~ti bar3hate haiN| unake tapomaya jIvana kA adbhuta
varNana isameM kiyA gayA hai| dhanya anagAra ke tapavarNana ko par3hakara kisa
kA sira zraddhA se nata nahIM hogA ! majjhimanikAya ke mahAsiMhanAdasutta 4 meM
tathAgata buddha ne apane kisI eka pUrvabhava meM isa prakAra kI utkRSTa
tapa:sAdhanA kI thii| buddha ne chaha varSa taka jo tapa tapA thA vaha bhI kucha
isa taraha se milatA-julatA hai| kavikulaguru kAlidAsa ne bhI kumArasambhava 5
meM pArvatI ke ugra tapa kA sajIva varNana kiyA hai| una sabhI varNanoM ko
par3hane ke pazcAt jaba hama dhanyakumAra ke varNana ko par3hate haiM to aisA
spaSTa lagatA hai ki dhanyakumAra kA varNana adhika sajIva hai| unhoMne
jIvanabhara cha?-cha? tapa karane kI pratijJA kI thii| pAraNe meM kevala AcAmla
vrata ke rUpa meM rUkSa bhojana grahaNa karate the| koI gRhastha jisa anna ko
bAhara pheMkane ke lie prastuta hotA use lekara 21 bAra pAnI se dhokara ve use
grahaNa karate aura usI pAnI kA upayoga krte| tapa se unakA zarIra asthipaMjara
ho gayA thaa| dekhiye unake tapa kA AlaMkArika varNana-jisameM vyAvahArika
upamAoM kA prayoga huA hai aura varNya viSaya meM sajIvatA A gaI hai| unake
prastuta kathana meM paryApta sArthakatA ke darzana hote haiM--'akkhasuttamAlA
vivagaNejjamANehiM piTTikaraMDagasaMdhIhi, gaMgAtaraMgabhUeNaM
urakaDagadesabhAeNaM, sukasappasamANehi bAhAhiM, siDhilakaDAlI-viva laMbaMtehi
ya aggahatthehiM, kaMpamANavAie viva vevamANIe sIsaghaDIe' arthAt 'tapasvI
dhanya muni kI pITha kI haDDiyA~ akSamAlA kI bhAMti eka-eka ginI jA sakatI thIM.
vakSaHsthala kI haDiyAM gaMgA kI laharoM ke samAna alaga-alaga dikhalAI paDatI
thiiN| bhajAyeM sUkhe hue sAMpa kI taraha kRza ho gaI thiiN| hAtha ghor3e ke
mu~ha bA~dhane ke tobare ke samAna zithila hokara laTaka gaye the aura sira
vAtarogI ke sira kI bhA~ti kA~patA rahatA thaa|' isa taraha isameM aneka upamAe~
aura dRSTAnta bhare par3e haiN| kitane hI logoM kA mAnanA hai ki Agama-sAhitya
nIrasa hai| AgamoM kI kathAe~ eka-sI zailI, varNyaviSaya kI samAnatA tathA
kalpanA aura kalAtmakatA ke abhAva meM pAThakoM ko mugdha nahIM karatI haiN|
unameM atiprAkRtika tattvoM kI bharamAra hai| para unakA yaha mAnanA pUrNa rUpa
se ucita nahIM hai| usameM AMzika saccAI ho sakatI hai| Upara-Upara se Agama ko
par3hane ke kAraNa hI unameM yaha dhAraNA paidA huI ho, para jaba hama gaharAI
meM avagAhana karate haiM to una kathAoM se nUtana-nUtana tathya upATita hote
haiN| bhAratIya saMskRti kI saMracanA aura bhAratIya prAcya vidyAoM ke vikasana
meM unakA apUrva yogadAna rhaa| 81. Agamayuga kA jainadarzana, pR. 28,
prakAzaka-sanmati jJAnapITha, AgarA 82. therAapadAna : bhaddiyavago,
abhayattheraapadAnaM 83. khudakanikAya khaNDa 7, nAlandA, bhikSu jagadIza
kAzyapa 84. bodhirAjakumArasutta, dIrghanikAya kassapasiMhanAdasutta 85.
kumArasambhava sarga - pArvatIprakaraNa [26]

Page #30 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Although they may not be as interesting as modern stories and novels, and may
not hold the reader's attention, they have been a source of profound inspiration
for life upliftment and are a unique cultural heritage. This Agam, from the
perspective of the subject division, falls under the category of
Dharmakathaanuyoag. It also represents Charanakarananuyoag. This Agam analyzes
Tapasya according to the Jain tradition. In Jain culture, the practice of
Tapasya has been paramount. All the Tirthankaras have embraced renunciation with
Tapasya, attained Kevalgyan-Kevaldarshan with Tapasya, and begun their first
sermons with Tapasya. Bhagwan Mahavira was a unique great soul, a master of
Tapasya. He harmonized the external Tapasya of body-suppression prevalent in his
time with internal practice. Mahavira himself and his disciples practiced
excellent Tapasya. We find mention of it in this Agam and other Agams as well.
This is why the Buddhist literature refers to Mahavira's disciples as Tapasvi
and Dirgha Tapasvi. In Aavashyakaniyukti, "Anugar is called a hero in Tapasya."
The renowned commentator Malayagiri, while defining Tapasya, wrote: "He who
tempers the eight types of karma, who is capable of destroying them, is
Tapasya." Tapasya destroys karma and reveals hidden powers. Just as the dark,
sooty clouds hovering in the endless sky are shattered in an instant by the
southern wind, so too do the clouds of karma, like clouds, begin to disperse
with the wind of Tapasya. — — This Agam presents an excellent practical
depiction of Anashan Tapasya. Only a seeker who has little attachment to the
body can perform Anashan Tapasya. In Anashan, not only is food abandoned, but
also desires, passions, and worldly desires. Initially, the seeker abandons food
and drink for a period of time, which is known as Itvarik Tapasya. In the final
stages of life, he abandons food and drink for the rest of his life, which is
called Yavatkathith Tapasya. Dhannya Anugar and other Anugars practiced both
these types of Tapasya. Sanlekhana is a process of Jain practice. Only a seeker
who has practiced deep spirituality, who has understood the nuances of
discrimination, can choose death through Sanlekhana and Samadhi. The abandonment
of food and drink at the time of death does not involve a desire for death. All
the actions of a restrained seeker are for restraint. A body that has become an
obstacle rather than an aid in practice, which, when carried, does not lead to
the purification and growth of spiritual qualities, becomes something to be
abandoned. At that time, death is chosen voluntarily. There is a misconception
that Santhara is suicide, but this is not true. Suicide is committed by a person
who is oppressed by circumstances, whose desires are not fulfilled, who has been
greatly insulted, or who has had a conflict, and who has become distraught due
to intense anger. Such a person ends his life through various means. He commits
suicide. His inner mind is filled with fear, desires, lusts, excitement, and
passions. But in Santhara, all of these are absent, there is a strong desire to
manifest the inherent qualities of the soul. Therefore, if there has been any
ill will or discord with anyone in the past, he himself seeks forgiveness and
also grants forgiveness on his part. In Santhara, there is neither a desire for
fame nor any desire, therefore it is not suicide but a blessed and holy path of
practice. 89 86. (a) Samavayanga -1, 9-8. (b) Aavashyakaniyukti, verse 150. (c)
Uttarapurana 51/70, page 30 87. Tavsura Anagara - Aavashyakaniyukti, verse 450
88. Aavashyak Malayagiri Vritti, Volume - 2 Chapter 1 89. See the author's
article on Sanlekhana in Jainachar-Granth (unpublished). [27]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Adhunika kahAniyoM va upanyAsoM kI bhA~ti bhale hI ve dilacaspa na hoM,
pAThakoM ke mana ko bhale hI pakar3akara na rakhate hoM, kintu unameM
jIvanotthAna kI prazasta preraNAe~ rahI huI haiM, ve sAMskRtika dRSTi se apUrva
dharohara ke rUpa meM hai  /  prastuta Agama viSaya-vibhAga kI dRSTi se
dharmakathAnuyoga ke antargata AtA hai| yoM caraNakaraNAnuyoga kA bhI
pratinidhitva karatA hai| prastuta Agama meM jaina- paramparA ke anusAra tapa kA
vizleSaNa kiyA gayA hai| jainasaMskRti meM tapa kI utkRSTa-sAdhanA pradhAna rahI
hai| jitane bhI tIrthakara hue haiM ve tapa ke sAtha hI pravrajyA grahaNa karate
haiM, tapa ke sAtha hI kevalajJAna - kevaladarzana prApta karate haiM aura tapa
ke sAtha hI apanA prathama upadeza prArambha karate haiN| bhagavAn mahAvIra
tapovijJAnI advitIya mahApuruSa the  /  unhoMne apane samaya meM pracalita koI
dehadamana rUpa bahirmukha tapa kA Antarika sAdhanA ke sAtha sAmaJjasya sthApita
kiyA thA  /  mahAvIra ne svayaM bhI aura unake ziSya-ziSyAoM ne bhI utkRSTa tapa
kI ArAdhanA kI thii| usakA ullekha hama isa Agama meM pAte haiM aura anya AgamoM
meM bhii| yahI kAraNa hai ki mahAvIra ke ziSyoM ke lie bauddha vAGmaya meM
tapasvI aura dIrgha tapasvI vizeSaNa milate haiN| Avazyakaniyukti meM " anagAra
ko tapa meM zUra kahA hai| suprasiddha TIkAkAra malayagiri ne tapa kI paribhASA
karate hue likhA hai. * jo ATha prakAra ke karma ko tapAtA hai. - use naSTa
karane meM samartha hotA hai, vaha tapa haiN| " tapa se karma naSTa hote haiM
aura Acchanna zaktiyA~ prakaTa ho jAtI haiN| dAkSiNAtya pavana calate hI ananta
gagana meM maNDarAtI huI kAlI kajarAlI ghaTAe~, eka kSaNa meM chinna-bhinna ho
jAtI haiM vaise hI tapa rUpI pavana se karma rUpI bAdala cha~Tane lagate haiN|
-- - prastuta Agama meM anazana tapa kA utkRSTa kriyAtmaka citraNa huA hai|
anazana tapa vahI sAdhaka kara sakatA hai jisakI zarIra para Asakti kama ho|
anazana meM azana kA tyAga to kiyA hI jAtA hai, sAtha hI icchAoM, kaSAyoM aura
viSaya-vAsanAoM kA tyAga bhI kiyA jAtA hai| prArambha meM sAdhaka kucha samaya
ke lie AhAra Adi kA parityAga karatA hai, jo itvarika tapa ke nAma se vizruta
hai| jIvana ke antimakAla meM vaha jIvana paryanta ke lie AhAra Adi kA tyAga
kara detA hai, jo yAvatkathita tapa kahalAtA hai| dhanya anagAra aura anya
anagAroM ne ina donoM hI prakAra ke tapoM kI ArAdhanA kI thI  /  saMlekhanA
jaina-sAdhanA-vidhi kI eka prakriyA hai| jisa sAdhaka ne adhyAtma kI gahana
sAdhanA kI hai, bheda-vijJAna kI bArIkiyoM ko acchI taraha se samajhA hai, vahI
saMlekhanA aura samAdhi ke dvArA maraNa ko varaNa kara sakatA hai| maraNa ke
samaya jo AhAra Adi kA tyAga kiyA jAtA hai, usa parityAga meM mRtyu kI cAha
nahIM hotii| saMyamI sAdhaka kI sabhI kriyAe~ saMyama ke lie hotI haiN| jo
zarIra sAdhanA meM sahAyaka na raha kara bAdhaka bana gayA ho, jisako vahana
karane se AdhyAtmika guNoM kI zuddhi aura vRddhi na hotI ho vaha tyAjya bana
jAtA hai| usa samaya svecchA se maraNa ko varaNa kiyA jAtA hai| eka bhrAnta
dhAraNA hai ki saMthArA AtmahatyA hai, para yaha satya nahIM hai| AtmahatyA vaha
vyakti karatA hai jo paristhitiyoM se utpIDita hai, jisakI manokAmanA pUrNa
nahIM hotI ho, jisakA ghora apamAna huA ho, yA kalaha huA ho aura jo tIvra
krodha ke kAraNa vikSipta-sA ho gayA  /  vaha vyakti vividha prakAra ke prayoga
kara jIvana kA anta karatA hai| vaha AtmahatyA karatA hai| usake antarmAnasa meM
bhaya, kAmanAe~, vAsanAe~, uttejanAe~ aura kaSAya rahA huA hotA hai| kintu
saMthAre meM ina sabhI kA abhAva hotA hai, AtmA ke nija-guNoM ko prakaTa karane
kI tIvratara bhAvanA hotI hai| isIlie yadi pUrva kAla meM kisI ke sAtha
durbhAvanAe~ yA vaimanasya huA ho to vaha svayaM kSamA-yAcanA karatA hai aura
apanI ora se kSamA pradAna bhI karatA hai| saMthAre meM na kisI prakAra kI kIrti
kI kAmanA hI hotI hai aura na koI cAhanA hI hotI hai, isaliye vaha AtmahatyA
nahIM hai apitu sAdhanA kA maMgalamaya pAvana patha hai  /  89 86. (ka)
samavAyAMga -1, 9-8. (kha) Avazyakaniryukti, gAthA 150. (ga) uttarapurANa 51/70,
pRSTha 30 87. tavasUrA aNagArA - Avazyakaniryukti, gAthA 450 88. Avazyaka
malayagiri vRtti, khaNDa - 2 adhyAya 1 89. dekhie lekhaka kA jainaAcAra-grantha
meM saMlekhanA lekha (aprakAzita)  /  [27]

Page #31 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
This Agam is written in a very simple language and deals with a simple subject.
Therefore, no commentaries, annotations or summaries were written on it. Acharya
Abhaydev was the first to write a commentary on it in Sanskrit, which is
primarily based on word meanings and touches upon the sutras. The commentary
consists of 192 verses. It was published in 1920 by the Agamoday Samiti, Surat,
and earlier in 1875 by Dhanpatsingh from Calcutta. The English translation of
this Agam was published in 1907 by L.D. Barnett. P.L. Vaidya published it in
1932 with a preface. In 1921, only the original text was published by the
Atmanand Sabha, Bhavnagar. In Vikram Samvat 1990, a Gujarati translation was
published from Bhavnagar along with the Abhaydev commentary. In Veer Samvat
2446, Acharya Amolkarishi published it along with the publication of 32 Agams in
Hindi. In 1940, Gopaldas Jiwabhai Patel published it from the Jain Sahitya
Prakashan Samiti, Ahmedabad, and the Shramani Vidyapeeth, Ghatkopar, Bombay,
along with a Gujarati translation of the original text. Acharya Shri Ghasilalji
M. published a Hindi and Gujarati translation along with a Sanskrit commentary
in 1959 from the Jain Shastroddhar Samiti, Rajkot (Saurashtra). Acharya Shri
Atmaramji M. published a brilliant edition with commentary from the Jain
Shastramala Karyalaya, Lahore, in 1936. Shri Vijaymuni Shastri published a
captivating edition with the original text, Hindi commentary and commentary.
Thus, many editions of Anuttaraupapatikadasha have been published till date,
each with its own significance.  This edition is a new edition of
Anuttaraupapatikadasha. It contains the pure original text, meaning and a brief
commentary, which clarifies the essence of the Agam. The appendix contains notes
which are very comprehensive. The glossary, invariable words, verbs, and word
meanings make it easy to understand the profound mysteries of the Agam.  The
Jain community is well acquainted with the name of the highly learned
Sadhviratna, the late Mahasati Shri Ujvalkumariji. Sadhvi Muktiprabaji is her
disciple. Like her Guru, she is also talented. Her talent is evident in this
Agam edited by her. This edition has its own uniqueness. It is a successful
attempt to give concrete form to the sweet concept of the highly respected
Yuvacharya Shri Madhukaramuniji. This first attempt of Bahin Muktiprabaji is
commendable. It also clearly reflects the vast scholarship of the learned pen-
wielder Shri Shobhachandraji Bharill.  For years, the wise and learned Munis of
the Shraman Sangh had the concept of presenting the profound mysteries of the
Agam in a simple and easy-to-understand language, suitable for the times. The
Agam-Batteesi should be published in a grand manner, so that researchers and
seekers can benefit from it. My highly respected Gurudev, Upadhyay Shri
Pushkarmuniji M., who is an integral part of Yuvacharya Shri Madhukaramuniji,
has been inspiring me from time to time. When Yuvacharya Shri decided to
complete this Herculean task, Gurudev Shri was overjoyed. With the unprecedented
support of the saints and sages of the Shraman Sangh and the learned, this work
is progressing under the skillful guidance of Yuvacharya Shri. I have not only
hope but firm belief that this commendable work of Shrutaseva by Yuvacharya Shri
will make him famous for ages to come. This Anuttaraupapatikadasha is a
beautiful and precious gem of the Agam Mala, which will provide divine light to
the lost and wandering humans. It will establish Adhyatmavad in place of
materialism. Like the previously published Acharang, Upasakadasha and
Jnatadharmakatha, this Agam will also captivate the minds of the people, gain
due recognition among scholars and general inquisitive people, this is the
auspicious wish. Jain Sthanak -Devendramuni Shastri Neemuch City (Madhya
Pradesh) Dated 20-3-1981 [28]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prastuta Agama kI bhASA aura viSaya atyadhika sarala hone ke kAraNa usa para na
niyuktiyA~ likhI gayIM, na bhASya likhA gayA aura na cUrNiyA~ hii| sarvaprathama
AcArya abhayadeva ne hI isa para saMskRta bhASA meM vRtti likhI hai, jo
zabdArthapradhAna aura sUtrasparzI hai, vRtti kA granthamAna 192 zloka pramANa
hai| vaha vRtti san 1920 meM Agamodaya samiti sUrata se prakAzita huI aura usake
pUrva san 1875 meM kalakattA se dhanapatasiMha ne prakAzita kI thii| isa Agama
kA aMgrejI anuvAda 1907 meM, L.D. Bar Nett se prakAzita huA hai| pI. ela. vaidya
ne prastAvanA ke sAtha san 1932 meM isakA prakAzana krvaayaa| san 1921 meM isakA
kevala mUlapATha AtmAnanda sabhA bhAvanagara se prakAzita huA hai| vikrama
saMvat 1990 meM bhAvanagara se hI abhayadevavRtti ke sAtha gujarAtI anuvAda kA
eka saMskaraNa niklaa| vIra saMvat 2446 meM AcArya amolakaRSi ne hindI meM
battIsa AgamoM ke prakAzana ke sAtha isakA bhI prakAzana karavAyA thaa| 1940 meM
gopAladAsa jIvAbhAI paTela ne jaina sAhitya prakAzana samiti ahamadAbAda se aura
zramaNI vidyApITha ghATakopara, bambaI se isake mUla ke sAtha gujarAtI anuvAda
prakAzita hue haiN| AcArya zrI ghAsIlAlajI ma. ne saMskRta TIkA ke sAtha hindI
aura gujarAtI anuvAda san 1959 meM jaina zAstroddhAra samiti, rAjakoTa
(saurASTra) se prakAzita krvaayaa| AcArya zrI AtmArAmajI ma. ne vivecana yukta
eka zAnadAra saMskaraNa 'jaina zAstramAlA kAryAlaya, lAhaura' se san 1936 meM
prakAzita kiyA hai| zrI vijayamuni zAstrI ne mUla hindI TippaNa va vRtti ke
sAtha sampAdita kara eka manamohaka saMskaraNa prakAzita kiyA hai| isa prakAra
Aja taka anuttaraupapAtikadazA ke aneka saMskaraNa prakAzita hue haiM jinakI
apanI mahattA hai| prastuta saMskaraNa anuttaraupapAtikadazA kA eka abhinava
saMskaraNa hai| isameM zuddha mUlapATha hai, artha tathA saMkSepa meM vivecana
bhI hai, jo Agama ke mUlabhAva ko spaSTa karatA hai| pariziSTa meM TippaNa diye
gaye haiM jo bahuta hI sampUrNa haiN| pAribhASikazabdakoSa, avyayapada,
kriyApada, zabdArtha dene se Agama ke gurugaMbhIra rahasya sahaja rUpa se
samajhe jA sakate haiN| paramaviduSI sAdhvIratna svargIyA mahAsatI zrI
ujvalakumArIjI ke nAma se jaina samAja bhalIbhAMti paricita hai| unhIM kI
suziSyA haiM dharmabhaginI sAdhvI muktiprbhaajii| guruNI kI taraha unameM bhI
pratibhA hai| unake dvArA sampAdita prastuta Agama meM unakI pratibhA yatra-
tatra prasphuTita huI hai| isa saMskaraNa kI apanI eka viziSTatA hai| isameM
paramAdaraNIya yuvAcArya zrI madhukaramunijI kI madhura parikalpanA ko mUrtarUpa
dene kA saphala prayAsa kiyA gayA hai| bahina muktiprabhAjI kA yaha prathama
prayAsa prazaMsanIya hai| isameM vidvadvareNya kalamakalAdhara zrI zobhAcandrajI
bhArilla kA prakANDa pANDitya bhI spaSTa rUpa se pratibimbita huA hai| zramaNa-
saMgha ke manISI mUrdhanya munigaNoM kI varSoM se yaha parikalpanA thI ki Agama
ke gurugaMbhIra rahasyoM ko yugAnukUla sarala-sarasa bhASA meM prastuta kiyA
jaay| Agama-battIsI ko zAnadAra rUpa se prakAzita kiyA jAe, jisase zodhArthiyoM
ko aura AtmArthiyoM ko lAbha ho| mere parama zraddheya gurudeva upAdhyAya zrI
puSkaramunijI ma., jo yuvAcArya zrI madhukaramunijI ke abhinna sAthI haiM,
samaya-samaya para mujhe preraNA pradAna karate rahe haiN| jaba yuvAcAryazrI ne
isa bhagIratha kArya ko sampanna karane kA dRr3ha saMkalpa kiyA to gurudevazrI
ko hArdika AhlAda huaa| zramaNasaMgha ke santa va satIvRnda tathA vijJoM ke
apUrva sahayoga se yaha kArya yuvAcAryazrI ke kuzala nirdezana se Age bar3ha
rahA hai| mujhe AzA hI nahIM apitu dRr3ha vizvAsa hai ki yuvAcAryazrI kA yaha
prazasta zrutasevA kA kArya yuga-yuga taka unheM yazasvI bnaaegaa| prastuta
anuttaraupapAtikadazA Agama-mAlA kI eka sundara bahumUlya maNi hai jo bhUle-
bhaTake mAnavoM ko divya Aloka pradAna kregii| bhautikavAda ke sthAna para
adhyAtmavAda kI pratiSThA kregii| pUrva prakAzita AcArAMga, upAsakadazA aura
jJAtAdharmakathA kI bhA~ti yaha Agama bhI jana-jana ke mana ko lubhAyegA,
vidvAnoM evaM sarvasAdhAraNa jijJAsujanoM meM samucita pratiSThA prApta karegA,
yahI maMgala kAmanA hai| jaina sthAnaka -devendramuni zAstrI nImaca
siTI(madhyapradeza) di0 20-3-1981 [28]

Page #32 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Table of Contents First Class First Study Introduction Jali Kumar 2-10 Study
Mayali Adi Kumar Second Class 1-13 Study Introduction Dirghasean Adi Kumar Third
Class First Study Introduction Dhanyakumar Seventy-two Arts Dowry (Dowry)
Dhanyakumar's Pravrajya-Proposal Pravrajya-Sammati Dhany Muni's Tapascharya
Dhany Muni's Physical Condition Description of Feet and Fingers Dhany Muni's
Shanks, Knees and Thighs Description of Waist, Abdomen and Ribs Dhany Muni's
Arms, Hands, Fingers, Neck, Beard, Lips and Tongue Dhany Muni's Nose, Eyes and
Head Dhany Muni's Inner Radiance Praise by Bhagwan Mahavir Praise of Dhany Muni
by Shrenik Dhany Muni's Sarvarth Siddha Gaman [29]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 viSayAnukrama prathama varga prathama adhyayana utkSepa jAlI kumAra 2-10
adhyayana mayAlI Adi kumAra dvitIya varga 1-13 adhyayana utkSepa dIrghasena Adi
kumAra tRtIya varga prathama adhyayana utkSepa dhanyakumAra bahattara kalAe~
dAya (daheja) dhanyakumAra kA pravrajyA-prastAva pravrajyAsammati dhanya muni kI
tapazcaryA dhanya muni kI zArIrika dazA paira aura aMguliyoM kA varNana dhanya
muni kI jaMghAe~, jAnu aura urU kaTi, udara evaM pasaliyoM kA varNana dhanya
muni ke bAhu, hAtha, uMgalI, grIvA, dADhI, hoTha evaM jihvA dhanya muni ke
nAsikA, netra evaM zIrSa dhanya muni kI Antarika tejasvitA bhagavAn mahAvIra
dvArA prazaMsA zreNika dvArA dhanya muni kI stuti dhanya muni kA
sarvArthasiddhagamana [29]

Page #33 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Second Study Sunakṣatra 3-10 Study Isidas etc. Appendix Notes - Rājagṛha,
Sudharmā, Jambū, Anga, Antakṛddasā, Anuttaraupapātikadasā, Guṇasīla Caitya,
Śreṇika Rāja, Dhāriṇī Devī, Siṃhasvapna, Meghakumāra, Skandaka, Gautama,
Indrabhūti, Cellanā, Nanda, Vipulagiri, Ukameṇam Sesā, Laṭṭhadanta, Guṇasīlak,
Kākaṇḍī, Sahassambavaṇa, Jitaśatru Rāja, Bhadrā Sārthavāhī, Pañcadhātrī,
Mahābala, Koṇika, Jamālī, Thāvaccaputra, Kṛṣṇa, Mahāvīra, Silesaguliyā, Dhanya
Anagāra, Cauranta, Vāṇijyagrāma, Hastināpura, Ṣaṣṭhabhakta, Āyambil, Samsṛṣṭa,
Ujjhita-Dharmika, Ucca-Nīca-Madhyama Kula, Vilamiva Panagabhūeṇam,
Sāmaiyamāiyāī. 53-68 Tap: Koṣṭhaka Śabdakosa Avyayapadasankalana
Kriyapadasankalana Śabdārtha [30]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dvitIya adhyayana sunakSatra 3-10 adhyayana isidAsa Adi pariziSTa TippaNa-
rAjagRha, sudharmA, jaMbU, aMga, antakRddazA, anuttaraupapAtikadazA, guNazIla
caitya, zreNika rAjA, dhAriNI devI, siMhasvapna, meghakumAra, skandaka, gautama,
indrabhUti, cellaNA, nandA, vipulagiri, ukameNaM sesA, laTThadanta, guNazilaka,
kAkandI, sahassaMbavaNa, jitazatru rAjA, bhadrA sArthavAhI, paMcadhAtrI,
mahAbala, koNika, jamAlI, thAvaccAputra, kRSNa, mahAvIra, silesaguliyA, dhanya
anagAra, cAuranta, vANijyagrAma, hastinApura, SaSThabhakta, AyaMbila, saMsRSTa,
ujjhita-dharmika, ucca-nIca-madhyama kula, vilamiva panagabhUeNaM,
saamaaiymaaiyaaii| 53-68 tapa:koSThaka zabdakoSa avyayapadasaMkalanA
kriyApadasaMkalanA zabdArtha [30]

Page #34 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Name Acharangasutra [ Two Parts Upasak Dasangasutra Jnatadharmakathangasutra
Ankrid Dasangasutra Anuttarovvaiayasutra Sthanangasutra Samavayangasutra Agam
Prakashan Samiti, Byawar by Published Agam-Sutra Sutrakrit Vipaksutra Nandisutra
Aupapatik Sutra Vyakhyaprajnaptisutra [ Four Parts ] Rajaprashniyasutra
Prajnapanasutra [ Three Parts ] Prashnavyakaranasutra Uttaradhyayanasutra
Nirayavalikasutra Dasavaikalikasutra Aavashyak Sutra Jambudvipaprajnaptisutra
Anuyogadwarasutra Suryaprajnapti, Chandraprajnaptisutra Jivajivabhigamsutra [
Two Parts ] Nishitasutra Chhedasutraani Shri Kalpasutra (Patrakar) Shri Antkrid
Dasangasutra (Patrakar) Translator-Editor Shri Chandra Surana 'Kamal' Dr.
Chaganlal Shastri (M. A. P-H. D.) Pt. Shobhachand Bharill Sadhvi Divyaprabha (M.
A., P.H. D) Sadhvi Muktiprabha (M.. A., P.H. D ) Pt. Hiralal Shastri Pt. Hiralal
Shastri Shri Chandra Surana 'Surana' Anu. Pt. Roshanlal Shastri Sampa. Pt.
Shobhachand Bharill Anu. Sadhvi Umravakumar 'Archana' Sampa. Kamala Jain 'Gigi'
M. A. Dr. Chaganlal Shastri Shri Amarmuni Vani Bhushan Ratnamuni, San. Devkumar
Jain Jainbhushan Gyanmuni Anu. Muni Pravin Rishi Sampa. Pt. Shobhachand Bharill
Shri. Rajendramuni Shastri Shri Devkumar Jain Mahasati Pushpavati Mahasati
Suprabha (M. A. P.H. D. ) Dr. Chaganlal Shastri Upadhyay Shri Kevalmuni, San.
Devkumar Jain, Sampa. Muni Shri Kanhaiyalalji 'Kamal' Shri Rajendra Muni
Munishri Kanhaiyalal Ji 'Kamal', Shri Tilakmuni Munishri Kanhaiyalal Ji 'Kamal',
Shri Tilakmuni Upadhyay Muni Shri Pyarchand Ji Maharaj Upadhyay Muni Shri
Pyarchandji Maharaj For Special Information Contact Agam Prakashan Samiti Shri
Braj- Madhukar Smriti Bhavan, Pipaliya Bazaar, Byawar - 305901

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 nAma AcArAMgasUtra [ do bhAga upAsaka dazAMgasUtra jJAtAdharmakathAMgasUtra
ankRddazAMgasUtra anuttarovavAiyasUtra sthAnAMgasUtra samavAyAMgasUtra Agama
prakAzana samiti, byAvara dvArA prakAzita Agama-sUtra sUtrakRta vipAkasUtra
nandIsUtra aupapAtikasUtra vyAkhyAprajJaptisUtra [ cAra bhAga ]
rAjapraznIyasUtra prajJApanAsUtra [ tIna bhAga ] praznavyAkaraNasUtra
uttarAdhyayanasUtra nirayAvalikAsUtra dazavaikAlikasUtra Avazyaka sUtra
jambUdvIpaprajJaptisUtra anuyogadvArasUtra sUryaprajJapti, candraprajJaptisUtra
jIvAjIvAbhigamasUtra [ do bhAga ] nizIthasUtra chedasUtrANi zrI kalpasUtra
(patrAkAra) zrI antakRddazAMgasUtra (patrAkAra) anuvAdaka-sampAdaka zrI candra
surAnA 'kamala' DaoN. chaganalAla zAstrI (ema. e. pI-eca. DI.) paM. zobhAcandra
bhArilla sAdhvI divyaprabhA (ema. e., pIeca. DI) sAdhvI muktiprabhA (ema.. e.,
pI-eca. DI ) paM. hIrAlAla zAstrI paM. hIrAlAla zAstrI zrI candra surAnA
'surANA' anu. paM. rozanalAla zAstrI sampA. paM. zobhAcanda bhArilla anu. sAdhvI
umarAvakuMvara 'arcanA' sampA. kamalA jaina 'jIjI' ema. e. DaoN. chaganalAla
zAstrI zrI amaramuni vANIbhUSaNa ratanamuni, saM. devakumAra jaina jainabhUSaNa
jJAnamuni anu. muni pravINaRSi sampA. paM. zobhAcandra bhArilla zrI.
rAjendramuni zAstrI zrI devakumAra jaina mahAsatI puSpavatI mahAsatI suprabhA
(ema. e. pIeca. DI. ) DaoN. chaganalAla zAstrI upAdhyAya zrI kevalamuni, saM.
devakumAra jaina, sampA. muni zrI kanhaiyAlAlajI 'kamala' zrI rAjendra muni
munizrI kanhaiyAlAla jI 'kamala', zrI tilokamuni munizrI kanhaiyAlAla jI
'kamala', zrI tilokamuni upAdhyAya muni zrI pyAracaMda jI mahArAja upAdhyAya
muni zrI pyAracaMdajI mahArAja vizeSa jAnakArI ke liye samparkasUtra Agama
prakAzana samiti zrI braja- madhukara smRti bhavana, pIpaliyA bAjAra, byAvara -
305901

Page #35 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The five great vows (Mahavratas) are: 1. **Ahimsa** (non-violence) 2. **Satya**
(truthfulness) 3. **Asteya** (non-stealing) 4. **Brahmacharya** (continence) 5.
**Aparigraha** (non-attachment)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================


Page #36 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Panchamagana-hara - Sri Sudharma-svami-virayam navam anga
Anuttaroupapattikadasao Panchamagana-dhara - Sri Sudharma-svami-virachitam navam
angam Anuttaroupapattikadasa

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paMcamagaNahara - sirisuhammasAmiviraiyaM navamaM aMga anuttarovavAiyadasAo
paJcamagaNadhara - zrIsudharma-svAmiviracitaM navama aGgam anuttaraupapAtikadazA

Page #37 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The five great vows (Mahavratas) are: 1. **Ahimsa** (non-violence) 2. **Satya**
(truthfulness) 3. **Asteya** (non-stealing) 4. **Brahmacharya** (continence) 5.
**Aparigraha** (non-attachment)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================


Page #38 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
In that time and at that time, there was a city called Rajagriha. Aryasudharma
arrived there. The assembly came to listen to the Dharmadeshana and after
listening to the Dharmadeshana, [they carried it in their hearts and returned to
the same direction] from which they had come. Aryajambhu, an ascetic, was
dwelling near Aryasudharma Swami, practicing restraint and austerity,
cultivating his mind.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 aha~ paDhamo vaggo prathama adhyayana jAlI utkSepa 1- teNaM kAleNaM teNaM
samaeNaM rAyagihe nyre| ajasuhammassa smosrnnN| parisA niggayA jAva [dhammaM
soccA, nisamma jAmeva disaM pAubbhUyA tAmeva disaM pddigyaa|] jambU pajuvAsai,
jAva [jambU NAmaM aNagAre kAsavagotteNaM sattussehe, samacauraMsa-saMThANa-
saMThie, vajarisaha-nArAyasaMghayaNe kaNaga-pulaganighasa-pamhagore, uggatave
dittatave tattatave mahAtave orAle, ghore, ghoraguNe, ghoratavassI,
ghorabaMbhaceravAsI, ucchUDhasarIre saMkhitta-viula-teulese, coddasapuvvI,
cauNANovagae, savvakkhara-sannivAI ajasuhammassa therassa adUrasAmante u8jANU
ahosire jhANa-koTThovagae, saMjameNaM tavasA appANaM bhAvemANe vihri| tae NaM
aja-jambU NAmaM aNagAre jAyasaDDe jAyasaMsae jAyakouhalle, saMjAyasaDDe
saMjAyasaMsae saMjAyakouhalle, uppannasaDDe uppannasaMsae uppannakouhalle,
samuSpannasaDDe samuppanna-saMsae samuppannakouhalle uThAe uTheti, uThettA
jeNAmeva ajasuhamme there teNAmeva uvAgacchai, uvAgacchittA ajasuhamme there
tikkhutto AyAhiNaM payAhiNaM kareti, karittA vaMdati, namasati, vaMdittA,
namaMsittA ajasuhammassa therassa naccAsanne nAidUre sussUsamANe NamaMsamANe
abhimuhe paMjaliuDe viNaeNaM] pajjuvAsamANe evaM vayAsI_jai NaM bhaMte !
samaNeNaM jAva[bhagavayA mahAvIreNaM AigareNaM, titthayareNaM,
sayaMsaMbuddheNaM, purisuttameNaM, purisasIheNaM, purisavarapuMDarIeNaM,
purisavaragaMdhahatthiNA, logamuttameNaM, loganAheNaM, logahieNaM, logapaIveNaM,
logapajoyagareNaM, abhayadaeNaM, saraNadaeNaM, cakkhudaeNaM, maggadaeNaM,
bohidaeNaM, dhammadaeNaM, dhammadesaeNaM, dhammanAyageNaM dhammasArahiNA,
dhammavaracAuraMta-cakkavaTTiNA, appaDihayavara-nANa-dasaNa-dhareNaM,
viyadRchaumeNaM, jiNeNaM, jAvaeNaM, tineNaM, tAraeNaM, buddheNaM, bohaeNaM,
mutteNaM, moageNaM, savvanneNaM, savvadarisaNeNaM
sivamayalamaruamaNaMtamakkhayamavvAbAhamapuNarAvittiaMsAsayaM ThANaM]
saMpatteNaM aTThamassa aMgassa aMtagaDhadasANaM ayamaDhe paNNatte, navamassa NaM
bhaMte! aMgassa aNuttarovavAiyadasANaM jAva' saMpatteNaM ke aTe paNNatte? usa
kAla aura usa samaya meM rAjagRha nAmaka eka nagara thaa| Arya sudharmA kA vahAM
Agamana huaa| dharmadezanA sunane ke lie pariSad AI aura dharmadezanA sunakara
[hRdaya meM dhAraNa kara jisa dizA (ora) se AI thI, usI dizA meM] lauTa gii|
Arya jambU anagAra Arya sudharmAsvAmI ke pAsa saMyama aura tapa se AtmA ko
bhAvita 1. 2. jJAtA. zruta. 1, a.1 meM saMpatteNa ke sthAna para 'uvagaeNaM'
zabda diyA gayA hai| pUrvavat sU. 1.

Page #39 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The [**Anuttaroupapatikadsha**] (**Vasit**) were dwelling while [**Arya Jambu
Kashyap**] was of the [**Gotra**]. His body was seven [**Hasta**] high, and when
sitting cross-legged, the height and width of the body were equal, he was of
[**Samachaturasrasansthan**], his [**Vajrarishbhanaraach**] was [**Sanhanan**],
he was like a line of gold and like a [**Padmarag**] (lotus-dust) in color, he
was a fierce ascetic, a radiant ascetic, a heated ascetic, a great ascetic,
generous, fearless in destroying his own enemies, a severe ascetic, a keeper of
the terrible and dreadful [**Brahmacharyavrata**], one who absorbed the vast
brilliance he had attained into his own body, a knower of the fourteen
[**Purvas**], a holder of the four knowledges of [**Matijnanaadi**], a knower of
all [**Aksharasanyog**], situated in a [**Utkutuk Asan**], facing downwards,
having entered the [**Kosthak**] of [**Dharma**] and [**Shukla Dhyan**],
dwelling while affecting the soul with [**Samyam**] and [**Tap**].]  Then
[**Arya Jambu Swami**] arose from his seat, having arisen from
[**Jatasraddha**], [**Jatasanshay**], [**Jatakoutuhala**], having arisen from
[**Sanjatasraddha**], [**Sanjatasanshay**], [**Sanjatakoutuhala**], having
arisen from [**Utpannashraddha**], [**Utpannashanshay**], [**Utpannkoutuhala**],
having arisen from [**Samutpannashraddha**], [**Samutpannashanshay**], and
[**Samutpannkoutuhala**], and came to where [**Sudharma Swami**] the elder was
seated, and having arrived, he circumambulated [**Shri Sudharma Swami**] three
times from the south, and having circumambulated, he praised and bowed, and
having praised and bowed, he sat down in front of [**Arya Sudharma Swami**], not
too far, not too near, serving and bowing, and with folded hands, he worshipped
him with humility and spoke thus:  "O [**Bhagavan**]! If [**Shrautdharma**] is
the beginning, [**Guruupadesh**] is the self-realization, [**Purusha**] is the
best, [**Karma-Shatru**] is the destruction of the powerful, [**Purusha**] is
like a lion, [**Purusha**] is like a [**Pundarika**] - the best white lotus,
[**Purusha**] is like a [**Gandhasti**], that is, just as other elephants flee
from the smell of a [**Gandhasti**], in the same way, by the virtuous influence
of whom [**Iti**], [**Bhiti**], etc. are destroyed, [**Lok**] is the best,
[**Lok**] is the lord, [**Lok**] is the benefactor, [**Lok**] is like a lamp,
[**Lok**] is a special endeavor, [**Abhay**] is the giver, [**Sharanadata**] is
the giver, [**Shraddha**] is the giver of the eye, [**Dharma**] is the preacher,
[**Dharma**] is the leader, [**Dharma**] is the charioteer, [**Dharma**] is the
emperor of the four [**Gatis**], the destroyer of the four [**Gatis**], the
holder of [**Kevalgyan-Darshan**], the destroyer of the [**Ghatikarma**] form of
deception, the conqueror of [**Ragaadi**] and the conqueror of other beings by
[**Upadesh**], the one who has crossed the ocean of the world himself and who
saves others, the one who has attained [**Bodh**] himself and who gives
[**Bodh**] to others, the one who is free from [**Karmabandhan**] himself and
who frees others by [**Upadesh**], the [**Sarvagya**], the [**Sarvadarshi**],
the one free from [**Shivu-padrava**], the one free from [**Achal-chalan**],
etc., the one free from the pain of [**Aruj**] - physical and mental ailments,
the infinite, the inexhaustible, the unimpeded, and the one free from
[**Apunaraavritti-punaraagaman**], the one who has attained the eternal abode
called [**Siddhi Gati**], the [**Shraman Bhagavan Mahavir Swami**] has said this
meaning of the eighth [**Ang**] [**Antakritdasha**], then [**Bhanta**]! What
meaning has the [**Bhagavan**] said of the ninth [**Ang**]
[**Anuttaroupapatikadsha**]?"  **Discussion:**  The [**Antakrit Sutra**] is the
eighth and the [**Anuttaroupapatikadsha Sutra**] is the ninth [**Ang**] in the
eleven [**Angas**]. The reason why the [**Anuttaroupapatikadsha Sutra**] comes
after the [**Antakrit Sutra**] is that both [**Sutras**] describe the life of
the great men, their splendor and luxury, their enjoyment and their penance and
renunciation. The only difference is that the [**Antakrit Sutra**] describes 92
great men who have attained liberation through their penance, while the
[**Anuttaroupapatikadsha Sutra**] describes 33 great men who have gone to the
[**Anuttar Vimanas**] through their penance. Therefore, it is appropriate for
this [**Ang**] to come after the [**Antakrit**]. 1. There are six
[**Sanhanans**]. This [**Sanhanan**] is the strongest.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 anuttaropapAtikadazA (vAsita) karate hue viharaNa kara rahe the| [Arya jambU
kAzyapa gotra vAle the| unakA zarIra sAta hAtha pramANa UMcA thA, pAlathI
mArakara baiThane para zarIra kI UMcAI aura caur3AI barAbara ho, aise
samacaturasrasaMsthAna vAle the, unakA vajraRSabhanArAca  /  saMhanana thA,
suvarNa kI rekhA ke samAna aura padmarAga (kamala-raja) ke samAna gaura varNa
vAle the, ugratapasvI, dIptatapasvI, taptatapasvI, mahAtapasvI, udAra, Atma-
zatruoM ko vinaSTa karane meM nirbhIka, ghoratapasvI, dAruNa-bhISaNa
brahmacaryavrata ke pAlaka, prApta vipula tejolezyA ko apane hI zarIra meM samA
lene vAle, caudaha pUrvo ke jJAtA, matijJAnAdi cAra jJAnoM ke dhAraka, samasta
akSarasaMyoga ke jJAtA, utkuTuka Asana se sthita, adhomukhI, dharma evaM zukla
dhyAna rUpa koSThaka meM praveza kie hue, saMyama aura tapa se AtmA ko bhAvita
karate hue vicarate the|] tatpazcAt Arya jambUsvAmI jAtazraddha jAtasaMzaya
jAtakautUhala, saMjAtazraddha saMjAtasaMzaya saMjAtakautUhala, utpannazraddha
utpannasaMzaya utpannakautUhala, samutpanna zraddha samutpannasaMzaya aura
samutpannakautuhala hokara apane sthAna se uThakara khar3e hote haiM, khar3e
hokara jahAM sudharmAsvAmI sthavira virAjamAna the, vahAM para Ate haiM, Akara
unhoMne zrI sudharmAsvAmI ko dakSiNa ora se tIna bAra pradakSiNA (parikramA) kI,
pradakSiNA karake stuti aura namaskAra kiyA, stuti-namaskAra karake ve Arya
sudharmAsvAmI ke na adhika dUra, na adhika samIpa zuzrUSA aura namaskAra karate
hue sAmane baiThe aura hAtha jor3akara vinaya-pUrvaka unakI upAsanA karate hue
isa prakAra bole bhagavan ! yadi zrutadharma kI Adi karane vAle, gurUpadeza ke
binA svayaM hI bodha ko prApta, puruSoM meM uttama, karma-zatruoM kA vinAza
karane meM parAkramI hone ke kAraNa puruSoM meM siMha ke samAna, puruSoM meM
puMDarIka - zreSTha zveta kamala ke samAna, puruSoM meM gaMdhahastI ke samAna,
arthAt jaise gaMdhahastI kI gaMdha se hI anya hastI bhAga jAte haiM, usI prakAra
jinake puNya prabhAva se hI Iti, bhIti Adi kA vinAza ho jAtA hai, loka meM
uttama, loka ke nAtha, loka kA hita karane vAle, loka meM pradIpa ke samAna,
loka meM vizeSa udyota karane vAle, abhaya dene vAle, zaraNadAtA, zraddhArUpa
netra ke dAtA, dharma ke upadezaka, dharma ke nAyaka, dharma ke sArathi, cAroM
gatiyoM kA anta karane vAle dharma ke cakravartI, kahIM bhI pratihata na hone
vAle kevalajJAna-darzana ke dhAraka, ghAtikarma rUpa chadma ke nAzaka, rAgAdi ko
jItane vAle aura upadeza dvArA anya prANiyoM ko jitAne vAle, saMsAra-sAgara se
svayaM tire hue aura dUsaroM ko tArane : vAle, svayaM bodhaprApta aura dUsaroM
ko bodha dene vAle, svayaM karmabandhana se mukta aura upadeza dvArA dUsaroM ko
mukta karane vAle, sarvajJa, sarvadarzI, ziva-upadravarahita, acala-calana Adi
kriyA se rahita, aruja - zArIrika mAnasika vyAdhi kI vedanA se rahita, ananta,
akSaya, avyAbAdha aura apunarAvRtti-punarAgamana se rahita siddhi gati nAmaka
zAzvata sthAna ko prApta zramaNa bhagavAn mahAvIra svAmI ne AThaveM aMga
antakRddazA kA yaha artha kahA hai, to bhante ! navame aGga
anuttaraupapAtikadazA kA bhagavAn ne kyA artha kahA hai ? vivecana - gyAraha
aMgoM meM antakRtasUtra AThavAM aura anuttaraupapAtikadazAsUtra nauvAM aMga hai|
aMtakRtsUtra ke pazcAt anuttaraupapAtikasUtra kA krama isalie hai ki donoM
sUtroM meM mahApuruSoM ke jIvana kA, unake vaibhava-vilAsa, bhoga aura tapa-
tyAga kA sundara varNana kiyA gayA hai| antara itanA hI hai ki aMtakRtsUtra meM
92 mahApuruSoM kA varNana hai aura ve apanI tapa-sAdhanA ke dvArA mukta hue
haiM, jabaki anuttaraupapAtikasUtra meM varNita 33 mahApuruSa apanI tapasAdhanA
ke dvArA anuttara vimAnoM meM gae haiN| ataH antakRt ke anantara hI isa aMga kA
AnA ucita hai| 1. saMhanana chaha hote haiN| yaha saMhanana sabase adhika
balavAna hotA hai|

Page #40 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## First Chapter  This Sutra's introduction is based on a question asked by
Jambuswami. After the liberation of the Shraman Bhagwan Mahavira, Jambuswami
felt curious about the meaning explained by Shraman Bhagwan Mahavira in the
ninth Anga. Seeing his curiosity, Shridharmaswami explains the subject of this
Sutra.  The current eleven Angas are the contribution of Shridharmaswami.
Because in the Angasutras, texts are found where Dhananagari studied eleven
Angas, and this Sutra mainly describes Dhananagari in detail, therefore the
question arises that which ninth Anga did he study? Currently, in the
Anuttaroupapattik Anga, the complete description of Dhananagari from his birth
through his death by fasting and his rebirth in the Anuttar Vimana is found.
Therefore, it is undoubtedly proven that this is the recitation of
Shridharmaswami, and it was done only after the attainment of Nirvana by Shraman
Bhagwan Mahavira.  Even in the handwritten copies of this Sutra, there are
variations in the text, such as:  "Teṇam kāleṇam teṇam samaeṇam rāyagihe nayare
hotthā. Tassa ṇam rāyagihe nāma nayarasya seṇie nāmaṁ rāyā hotthā, vaṇṇao.
Celanāe devī. Tattha ṇam rāyagihe nāmaṁ nayare bahiya uttar-puratthime disībhāe
guṇaselae nāmaṁ ceie hotthā. Teṇam kāleṇam teṇam samaeṇam rāyagihe nāmaṁ nayare
aj-suhamme nāma there jāva guṇaselae nāmaṁ ceie teṇeve samosaḍhe, parisā
niggayā, dhammo kahiō, parisā paḍigayā?"  "Teṇam kāleṇam teṇam samaeṇam jambū
pajjuvāsāmāṇe evaṁ vayāsī"  Here, the first text appears inconsistent both
linguistically and in terms of meaning. Because this Sutra was composed only
after the Nirvana of Shraman Bhagwan Mahavira, and King Shrenik had already
passed away during the lifetime of Bhagwan. Therefore, the original Sutra in the
pure copy obtained by the Shastroddhar Samiti appears to be correct.  The Sutra
is adorned with the parables of Dhananagari, providing specific details. The
remaining Sutras are considered simple and left without description. These
Agamas, though easy to understand from the perspective of meaning, are of great
importance historically.  In this Agama, only the name of the city of Rajgriha
is mentioned. The detailed description of the city is found in the Aupapattik
Sutra. Therefore, those who are curious to know should refer to the Aupapattik
Sutra.  2- "Therefore, that Suhamme Anugare said to Jambū Anugare: "Thus, Jambū!
By the Shraman, up to the attainment of the ninth Anga, the
Anuttarovavaiyadasana, three sections are established.  "If, Bhante! By the
Shraman, up to the attainment of the ninth Anga, the Anuttarovavaiyadasana,
three sections are established, then Bhante! In the first section of the
Anuttarovavaiyadasana, how many teachings are established by the Shraman, up to
the attainment?  "Thus, Jambū! By the Shraman, up to the attainment of the
Anuttarovavaiyadasana, in the first section, ten teachings are established. For
example:  Jali-Mayali-Uvayali Purisaseṇe Ya Varisēṇe Ya. 1. 2. 3. 4. - See Sutra
1.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prathamavarga isa sUtra kI utthAnikA zrI jambUsvAmI ke prazna se kI gaI hai|
jaba zramaNa bhagavAn mahAvIra svAmI mokSa ko prApta ho cuke taba jambUsvAmI ke
citta meM jijJAsA utpanna huI ki zramaNa bhagavAn mahAvIra ne nauveM aMga meM
kyA artha varNana kiyA hai ? unakI isa jijJAsA ko dekhakara zrI sudharmAsvAmI
isa sUtra kA viSaya-varNana karate haiN| vartamAna gyAraha aMga sudharmAsvAmI kI
dena haiN| kyoMki aGgasUtroM meM aise bhI pATha prApta hote haiM ki dhannA
anagAra ne ekAdaza aGgoM kA adhyayana kiyA thA aura prastuta sUtra meM mukhya
rUpa se dhannA anagAra kA hI vizada vivaraNa prApta hotA hai, ataH prazna
samAdhAna cAhatA hai ki unhoMne nauveM kauna se aGga kA adhyayana kiyA hogA ?
isa samaya jo anuttaraupapAtika-aMga hai usameM to dhannA anagAra kA
pAdapopagamana anazana se nidhana paryanta aura anuttara vimAna meM utpanna hone
taka kA saMpUrNa varNana milatA hai| ataH nirvivAda siddha hotA hai ki yaha
sudharmAsvAmI kI hI vAcanA hai aura vaha bhI zramaNa bhagavAn mahAvIra svAmI ke
nirvANapada-prApti ke anantara hI kI gaI hai| isa sUtra kI hastalikhita pratiyoM
meM bhI pATha-bheda milate haiM, jaise - "teNaM kAleNaM teNaM samaeNaM rAyagihe
nayare hotthaa| tassa NaM rAyagihe nAma nayarasya seNie nAmaM rAyA hotthA,
vnnnno| celaNAe devii| tattha NaM rAyagihe nAmaM nayare bahiyA uttara-puratthime
disIbhAe guNaselae nAmaM ceie hotthaa| teNaM kAleNaM teNaM samaeNaM rAyagihe
nAmaM nayare aja-suhamme nAma there jAva guNaselae nAmaM ceie teNeva samosaDhe,
parisA niggayA, dhammo kahio, parisA paDigayA ?" "teNaM kAleNaM teNaM samaeNaM
jambU pajjuvAsamANe evaM vayAsI" yahA~ prathama pATha bhASAdRSTi se bhI aura
arthadRSTi se bhI asaMgata pratIta hotA hai| kyoMki isa sUtra kI racanA zramaNa
bhagavAn mahAvIra ke nirvANa ke anantara hI huI hai aura zreNika mahArAja to
bhagavAn ke vidyamAna hote hue hI mRtyu ko prApta ho cuke the| ataH
zAstroddhAra-samiti dvArA prApta zuddha prati meM jo mUla sUtra hai, vaha ThIka
pratIta hotA hai| sUtra meM vizeSa vivaraNa dhannA anagAra kI upamAoM se
alaMkRta huA hai| zeSa sUtroM ko sarala jAnakara binA vivaraNa ke chor3a diyA
gayA hai| ye Agama artha kI dRSTi se sugama hone para bhI aitihAsika dRSTi se
bar3e mahattva ke haiN| prastuta Agama meM rAjagRha nagara kA kevala nAma hI
diyA gayA hai| nagara kA vizeSa varNana aupapAtikasUtra meM AtA hai| ataH jAnane
kI icchA vAle jijJAsu ke lie aupapAtikasUtra hI dekhanA caahie| 2-tae NaM se
suhamme aNagAre jambU aNagAraM evaM vayAsI-evaM khalu jambU ! samaNeNaM jAva'
saMpatteNaM navamassa aMgassa aNuttarovavAiyadasANaM tiNNi vaggA pnnnnttaa| jai
NaM bhaMte ! samaNeNaM jAva saMpatteNaM navamassa aMgassa aNuttarovavAiyadasANaM
tao vaggA paNNattA, paDhamassa NaM bhaMte ! vaggassa aNuttarovavAiyadasANaM
samaNeNaM jAva saMpatteNaM kai ajjhayaNA paNNattA? evaM khalu jambU ! samaNeNaM
jAva saMpatteNaM aNuttarovavAiyadasANaM paDhamassa vaggassa dasa ajjhayaNA
pnnnnttaa| taM jahA jAli-mayAli-uvayAlI purisaseNe ya vAriseNe ya  /  1. 2.3.4.
- dekhie sU. 1

Page #41 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
6 **Dīrghdante ya Laṭṭhadante ya Vehalle Vehāyase Abhae i ya Kumāre.** "O
Venerable One! The Samanas, by means of their attainment, have established ten
studies in the first division of the Anuttaropapātika-daśā. Venerable One! What
eight things have the Samanas, by means of their attainment, established in the
first study of the Anuttaropapātika-daśā?"  Anantara Sudharma Anagāra Jambū
Anagāra said thus: "Jambū! The Samanas, by means of their attainment of Nirvāṇa,
the Bhagavān Mahāvīra, has spoken of three divisions of the Anuttaropapātika-
daśā in the ninth Anga. Venerable One! If the Samanas, by means of their
attainment of Nirvāṇa, the Bhagavān Mahāvīra, has spoken of three divisions of
the Anuttaropapātika-daśā in the ninth Anga, then Venerable One! How many
studies has the Bhagavān Mahāvīra, by means of his attainment of Nirvāṇa, spoken
of in the first division of the Anuttaropapātika-daśā?"  Anuttaropapātika-daśā —
"Jambū! The Samanas, by means of their attainment of Nirvāṇa, the Bhagavān
Mahāvīra, has spoken of ten studies in the first division of the
Anuttaropapātika-daśā, which are as follows: - 1. Jāli Kumāra, 2. Mayāli Kumāra,
3. Upajāli Kumāra, 4. Puruṣaseṇa Kumāra, 5. Vāriṣeṇa Kumāra, 6. Dīrghdante
Kumāra, 7. Laṣṭadante (Laṭṭharāṣṭradante) Kumāra, 8. Vehalle Kumāra, 9. Vehāyasa
Kumāra, 10. Abhaya Kumāra. Venerable One! If the Samanas, by means of their
attainment of Nirvāṇa, the Bhagavān Mahāvīra, has spoken of ten studies in the
first division, then Venerable One! What has the Bhagavān Mahāvīra, by means of
his attainment of Nirvāṇa, spoken of as the meaning of the first study in the
first division of the Anuttaropapātika-daśā?" -  **Discussion** - The subject
matter of this sūtra is very concise. Jambū Svāmī has expressed his curiosity to
Ārya Sudharma Svāmī about how many divisions of the Anuttaropapātika-sūtra have
been established. Ārya Sudharma Anagāra has established the said sūtra in three
divisions and has listed the names of the ten studies in the first division. The
names are as follows in order: 1. Jāli Kumāra, 2. Mayāli Kumāra, 3. Upajāli
Kumāra, 4. Puruṣaseṇa Kumāra, 5. Vāriṣeṇa Kumāra, 6. Dīrghdante Kumāra, 7.
Laṣṭadante Kumāra, 8. Vehalle Kumāra, 9. Vehāyasa Kumāra, and 10. Abhaya Kumāra.
If we consider how the meaningfulness or purposefulness of this sūtra is
established, it appears that those auspicious beings who are unable to
completely destroy their karmas in their present birth can, after this birth,
experience the supreme, pleasant, vedanīya-born pleasures of the five Anuttara-
vimānas and attain Nirvāṇa in the next birth. 1. 2.  These sūtras also imply
that knowledge acquired through respectful study can be successful. The teacher
fills the disciple who wants to acquire knowledge respectfully from the teacher
with perfect knowledge. And the one whose soul is filled with knowledge can
easily be able to liberate other souls. Therefore, this sūtra proves that the
knowledge of the scriptures is obtained only through devotion to the teacher.
See sū. 1.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 6 dIhadaMte ya laTThadaMte ya vehalle vehAyase abhae i ya kumAre  //  jar3a NaM
bhaMte! samaNeNaM jAva' saMpatteNaM paDhamassa vaggassa dasa ajjhayaNA paNNattA,
paDhamassa NaM bhaMte! ajjhayaNassa aNuttarovavAiyadasANaM samaNeNaM jAva'
saMpatteNaM ke aTThe paNNatte ? anantara sudharmA anagAra jambU anagAra se isa
prakAra kahane lage jambU ! zramaNa yAvat nirvANasaMprApta bhagavAn mahAvIra ne
navame aMga. anuttaraupapAtikadazA ke tIna varga kahe haiN| bhaMte ! yadi
zramaNa yAvat nirvANasaMprApta bhagavAn mahAvIra ne navame aMga
anuttaraupapAtikadazA ke tIna varga kahe haiM to bhante ! anuttaraupapAtikadazA
ke prathama varga zramaNa yAvat nirvANasaMprApta mahAvIra bhagavAn ne kitane
adhyayana kahe haiM ? anuttaraupapAtikadazA -- jambU ! zramaNa yAvat
nirvANasaMprApta bhagavAn mahAvIra ne anuttaraupapAtikadazA ke prathama varga ke
daza adhyayana kahe haiM, jo isa prakAra haiM. - 1. jAli kumAra, 2. mayAli
kumAra, 3. upajAli kumAra, 4. puruSasena kumAra, 5. vAriSeNa kumAra, 6.
dIrghadanta kumAra, 7. laSTadanta (laTTharASTradAnta) kumAra, 8. vehalla kumAra,
9. vehAyasa kumAra, 10. abhaya kumAra  /  bhante ! yadi zramaNa yAvat
nirvANasaMprApta bhagavAn mahAvIra ne prathama varga ke daza adhyayana kahe
haiM, to bhante ! zramaNa yAvat nirvANasaMprApta bhagavAn mahAvIra ne
anuttaraupapAtikadazA ke prathama varga ke prathama adhyayana kA kyA artha kahA
hai ? - vivecana - prastuta sUtra meM viSaya atyaMta saMkSipta hai| jambU svAmI
ne atyaMta utkRSTa bhAva se Arya sudharmA svAmI ke samakSa
anuttaraupapAtikasUtra ke kitane varga pratipAdita kiye haiM, isa viSaya meM
jijJAsA prakaTa kI hai| Arya sudharmA anagAra ne ukta sUtra ko tIna varga meM
pratipAdita kiyA hai aura prathama varga ke dasa adhyayanoM ke nAma ginAye haiN|
nAma krama se nimnalikhita haiM 1. jAli kumAra, 2. mayAli kumAra, 3. upajAli
kumAra, 4. puruSasena kumAra, 5. vAriSeNa kumAra, 6 . dIrghadanta kumAra, 7.
laSTadanta kumAra, 8. vehalla kumAra, 9. vehAyasa kumAra aura 10. abhaya kumAra
/  prastuta sUtra kI sArthakatA yA saprayojanatA kisa prakAra siddha hotI hai,
isa viSaya meM dRSTipAta kareM to pratIta hotA hai ki jo bhavya jIva apane
vartamAna janma meM karmoM kA sampUrNa rUpa se kSaya karane meM asamartha hoM,
ve isa janma ke anantara pAMca anuttaravimAnoM ke parama sAtA - vedanIya-janita
sukhoM kA anubhava karake AgAmI bhava meM nirvANa-pada prApta kara sakate haiM
/  1. 2. ina sUtroM se yaha bhI phalita hotA hai ki vinayapUrvaka adhyayana kiyA
huA jJAna hI saphala ho sakatA hai| jo ziSya vinayapUrvaka guru se jJAna prApta
karanA cAhatA hai usako guru samyak jJAna se paripUrNa kara dete haiM  /  tathA
jisakA AtmA jJAna se paripUrNa hotA hai, vaha sahaja hI anya AtmAoM kA uddhAra
karane meM samartha ho sakatA hai  /  ata: isa sUtra siddha hai ki gurubhakti se
hI zruta jJAna kI prApti hotI hai| dekhie sU. 1

Page #42 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## First Chapter ## Jali Kumar  - - And indeed, Jambū! At that time, in that
era, there was a city called Rājagṛha. It was prosperous, stable, and wealthy.
There was a virtuous Caitya (shrine) there. The king was Śreṇika, and his queen
was Dhāriṇī. Dhāriṇī saw a lion in her dream. After some time, the queen gave
birth to Jali Kumar, who was like Megha Kumar. Jali Kumar married eight
daughters, like Megha Kumar, and gave them eight-eight dowries; as per the
stories, you should understand it as eight-eight crore Hiranya (silver), eight-
eight crore Suvarna (gold), etc.  And eight-eight Prekṣaṇakāriṇī (actresses) or
Peṣaṇakāriṇī (grinders), and also abundant wealth, gold, gems, jewels, pearls,
conch shells, coral, red gems, etc., the best of the essence, which was enough
to give as charity, to enjoy, and to distribute for seven generations. - Then,
Jali Kumar gave each of his wives one crore Hiranya, one crore Suvarna, etc.,
and one Prekṣaṇakāriṇī or Peṣaṇakāriṇī. In addition, he gave them abundant
wealth, gold, etc., which was enough to give as charity, to enjoy, and to
distribute for seven generations. - Then, Jali Kumar lived in a magnificent
palace, as if the faces of the drums were bursting, with thirty-two bound plays
performed by excellent women, singing, playing, and enjoying the abundance of
pleasing words, touch, taste, form, and fragrance, the pleasures of human life.
- - The assembly was full. Śreṇika left. Just as Megha left, so did Jali. He
left in the same way. Eleven Angas were present. - Your virtue is like a sword.
Just as the sword is to be used, so is this contemplation, this questioning. It
is difficult to understand even with the elders. Sixteen years after receiving
the Samanna-Pariyāga, the time... - See this same committee's publication
Antagaḍ, page 27, and the present Sutra, page 19. - 1.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prathama varga jAlI kumAra - - evaM khalu jaMbU ! teNaM kAleNaM teNaM samaeNaM
rAyagihe nayare, riddhatthimiyasamiddhe  /  guNasilae ceie| seNie rAyA, dhAriNI
devI  /  sIho sumiNe  /  jAlI kumAro  /  jahA meho aTThaTThao dAo jAva [ "aTTha
hiraNNakoDIo, aTTha suvaNNakoDIo, gAhAnusAreNa bhANiyavvaM jAva pesaNakAriyAo,
annaM ca vipulaM dhaNa-kaNaga-rayaNa-maNi-mottiya saMkha-silappavAla-
rattarayaNa-saMtasAra-sAvatejjaM alAhi jAva AsattamAo kulavaMsAo pakAmaM dAuM
pakAmaM bhottuM pakAmaM pribhaaueN| taNaM se jAlIkumAre egamegAe bhAriyAe
egamegaM hiraNNakoDiM dalayati, egamegaM suvannakoDiM dalayati jAva egamegaM
pesaNakAriM dalayati, annaM ca vipulaM dhaNakagaNa jAva paribhAeuM dalayati ]  /
3 se jAlI kumAre uppiM pAsAya jAva [ "varagae phuTTamANehiM muiMgamatthaehiM
varataruNi-saMpauttehiM battIsaibaddhaehiM nADaehiM uvagijjamANe uvagijjamANe
uvalAlijjamANe uvalAlijjamANe saha-pharisa-rasarUva-gaMdhaviule mANussae
kAmabhoge paccaNubhavamANe viharati " ]  /  "jambU !" isa prakAra saMbodhita
kara kahA - -usa kAla aura usa samaya meM rAjagRha nAma kA nagara thaa| vaha
Rddha, stimita (sthira) aura samRddha thA  /  vahA~ guNazIlaka caitya thA  /
vahA~ kA rAjA zreNika thA aura usakI dhAriNI nAma kI rAnI thii| dhAriNI rAnI ne
svapna meM siMha ko dekhaa| kucha kAla ke pazcAt rAnI ne megha kumAra ke samAna
jAlI kumAra ko janma diyA  /  jAlI kumAra kA megha kumAra ke samAna ATha kanyAoM
ke sAtha vivAha huA aura ATha-ATha vastuoM kA daheja diyA; yAvat ATha karor3a
hiraNya (cAMdI), ATha karor3a suvarNa, Adi gAthAoM ke anusAra samajha lenA
cAhie' yAvat ATha-ATha prekSaNakAriNI (nATaka karane vAlI) athavA peSaNakAriNI
(pIsane vAlI) tathA aura bhI vipula dhana kanaka ratna maNi motI zaMkha mUMgA
raktaratna (lAla) Adi uttama sArabhUta dravya diyaa| jo sAta pIr3hI taka dAna
dene ke lie, upabhoga karane ke lie aura ba~TavArA karane ke lie paryApta thA  /
tatpazcAt usa jAlI kumAra ne pratyeka patnI ko eka-eka karor3a hiraNya diyA,
eka-eka karor3a suvarNa diyA yAvat eka-eka prekSaNakAriNI yA peSaNakAriNI dI  /
isake atirikta anya vipula dhana kanaka Adi diyA, jo yAvat dAna dene,
bhogopabhoga karane aura ba~TavArA karane ke lie sAta pIr3hiyoM taka paryApta
thA  /  tatpazcAt jAlI kumAra zreSTha prAsAda ke Upara rahA huA, mAno mRdaMgoM
ke mukha phUTa rahe hoM, isa prakAra uttama striyoM dvArA kiye hue battIsabaddha
nATakoM dvArA gAyana kiyA jAtA huA tathA krIr3A karatA huA manojJa zabda,
sparza, rasa, rUpa aura gandha kI vipulatA vAle manuSya sambandhI kAmabhogoM ko
bhogatA huA rahane lagA  /  4 -sAmI samosaDhe  /  seNio niggo| jahA meho tahA
jAlI vi niggo| taheva nikkhaMto jahA ho  /  ekkArasa aMgAI ahijjh| guNaM tavokam
jahA khaMdagassa  /  evaM jA ceva khaMdagassa vattavvayA, sA caiva ciMtaNA,
ApucchaNA  /  therehiM saddhiM viDalaM taheva durUhai  /  navaraM solasa vAsAI
sAmaNNa-pariyAgaM pAuNittA kAlamAse kAlaM dekhie isI samiti dvArA prakAzita
antagaDa pR. 27 tathA prastuta sUtra pR. 19. 1.

Page #43 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Anuttaroppapatikadasha Kiccha udram chandimasoh ammi sana jav ["sanankumar-
mahend-bhamb-lantg-mahasukk-sahasraranyapanayarannaccuae kappe
navagevejayvimamapatthade udde durram veeivatta"] vijay-vimaane devattaa
uvvanae. Tae nan theraa bhagawantaa jalim anagaaram kalagayam janitta
parinivvanavattiyam kaussaggam karentti, karitta pattacivarain gehnanti. Tahevu
uttaranti jav[jenev samane bhagawan mahaavire tenev uvagacchanti, samanam
bhagawan mahaaveeram vandamti namasanati, vanditta namasaitta evam vayaasi evam
khalu devaanuppiyaanam atevaasi jaali naam anagaare pagai bhaddae pagai vinieae
pagai uvsante pagai payanu koha-maan-maya-lobhe miumaddavasampanne alline
bhaddae vinieae. Se nan devaanuppiehi abbanunnaae samane sayamev panch
mahavvayaani arovita, samanaa ya samaniyo ya khameetta, amhehim saddihim vipulam
pavvayam tan cev niravasesam jav aanupuvieae kalagae,] ime ya se ayarabhandae.
"Bhantae"! tti bhagawan goyame jav["samana bhagawan mahaaveeram vandai namasai,
vanditta namansitta"] evam vayaasi Bhagavan Mahavir arrived in Rajagriha city.
King Shrenik, knowing this, went to see Bhagavan. Jali Kumar, like Megha Kumar,
also set out to see Bhagavan. After seeing Bhagavan, like Megha Kumar, Jali
Kumar also accepted the order of renunciation after taking permission from his
parents. He studied the eleven angas while staying in the service of the elders.
He performed the tapas named Gunaratnasamvatsar like Skandak Muni. Thus, the
statement (description) that is in the Bhagavati Sutra regarding contemplation
and questioning should also be understood in relation to Jali Kumar. He went to
Vipulagiri with the elders. Notably, Jali Kumar followed the Shraman path for
sixteen years. At the end of his life, he attained death and ascended to the
Chandra Saudharma Ishana (as far as Sanatkumar Mahendra Brahmalok Lantak
Mahashukra Sahasrar Anat Pranat Aran and Achyut Kalpas and beyond the
Navgraiveyak Vimana) and was born in the form of a deva in the Vijay, an Anuttar
Vimana. At that time, the Bhagavan elders, knowing that Jali Anagar had passed
away, performed Kayotsarga for his Parinirvana. After that, they (the elders)
took Jali Anagar's bowl and robes and then descended from Vipulagiri. (As they
descended, they came to where Shraman Bhagavan Mahavir was seated. After bowing
and paying homage to Bhagavan, those elder Bhagavants said this: Bhagavan! Your
disciple Jali Anagar, who was naturally good, humble, peaceful, with little
anger, pride, delusion, and greed, gentle and polite, with the qualities of
softness and humility, who controlled his senses, good and polite, he, following
your command, himself took on the five great vows, forgave the monks and nuns,
and went with us to the Vipula mountain, until he passed away and attained the
law of time.) These are his tools (clothes, bowls). After that, Gautam Swami
bowed and paid homage to Shraman Bhagavan Mahavir and asked: "Evam khalu
devaanuppiyaanam antevaasi jaali naam anagaare pagai bhaddae. Senam jaali
anagaare

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 anuttaropapAtikadazA kiccA udraM candimasohammIsANa jAva ["saNaMkumAra-mAhiMda-
baMbha-laMtaga-mahAsukka-sahassArANayapANayAraNaccue kappe
navagevejayavimANapatthaDe uDDhe dUraM vIIvaittA"] vijaya-vimANe devattAe
uvvnnnne| tae NaM therA bhagavaMtA jAliM aNagAraM kAlagayaM jANittA
pariNivvANavattiyaM kAussaggaM kareMti, karittA pattacIvarAiM gennhNti| taheva
uttaraMti jAva[jeNeva samaNe bhagavaM mahAvIre teNeva uvAgacchaMti, samaNaM
bhagavaM mahAvIraM vaMdaMti namasaMti, vaMdittA namasaittA evaM vayAsI evaM
khalu devANuppiyANaM atevAsI jAlI nAmaM aNagAre pagaibhadae pagaiviNIe
pagaiuvasaMte pagaipayaNukoha-mANa-mAyA-lobhe miumaddavasaMpanne allINe bhaddae
vinniie|se NaM devANuppiehi abbhaNuNNAe samANe sayameva paMca mahavvayANi
ArovittA, samaNA ya samaNIo ya khAmettA, amhehiM saddhiM vipulaM pavvayaM taM
ceva niravasesaM jAva ANupuvvIe kAlagae,] ime ya se aayaarbhNdde| "bhaMte"! tti
bhagavaM goyame jAva["samaNaM bhagavaM mahAvIraM vaMdai namasai, vaMdittA
namaMsittA"] evaM vayAsI bhagavAn mahAvIra rAjagRha nagarI meM padhAre  /  rAjA
zreNika yaha jAnakara bhagavAn ke darzana karane ke lie claa| jAlI kamAra ne bhI
megha kamAra kI taraha bhagavAna ke darzana karane ke lie prasthAna kiyaa|
darzana karane ke pazcAt megha kumAra kI taraha jAlI kumAra ne bhI mAtA-pitA kI
anumati lekara pravrajyA svIkAra kara lii| sthaviroM kI sevA meM raha kara
gyAraha aMgoM kA adhyayana kiyaa| usane skandaka muni kI taraha
guNaratnasaMvatsara nAmaka tapa kiyaa| isa prakAra cintanA tathA ApRcchanA ke
saMbaMdha meM jo vaktavyatA (varNana) bhagavatIsUtra meM hai, vahI vaktavyatA
jAlI kumAra ke sambandha meM bhI samajhanI caahie| vaha sthaviroM ke sAtha
vipulagiri para gyaa| vizeSa yaha hai ki solaha varSoM taka jAlI kumAra ne
zramaNa paryAya kA pAlana kiyaa| AyuSya ke anta meM maraNa prApta karake vaha
Urdhvagamana karake candra saudharma IzAna (yAvat sanatkumAra mAhendra
brahmaloka lAntaka mahAzukra sahasrAra Anata prANata AraNa aura acyuta kalpoM ko
aura navagraiveyaka vimAnoM ko lAMghakara) vijaya nAmaka anuttara vimAna meM
devarUpa se utpanna huaa| usa samaya bhagavanta sthaviroM ne jAlI anagAra ko
divaMgata jAnakara unakA parinirvANanimittaka kAyotsarga kiyaa| isake pazcAt
unhoMne (sthaviroM ne) jAlI anagAra ke pAtra evaM cIvaroM ko grahaNa kiyA aura
phira vipulagiri se nIce utara aaye| (yAvat utarakara jahA~ zramaNa bhagavAn
mahAvIra virAje hue the vahA~ aaye| bhagavAn ko vandanAnamaskAra karake una
sthavira bhagavantoM ne isa prakAra kahA- bhagavan ! Apake ziSya jAlI anagAra,
jo ki prakRti se bhadra, vinayI, zAnta, alpa krodha-mAna-mAyA-lobhavAle,
komalatA aura namratA ke guNoM se yukta, indriyoM ko vaza meM rakhane vAle,
bhadra aura vinIta the, ve ApakI AjJA lekara svayameva pA~ca mahAvratoM kA
AropaNa karake sAdhusAdhviyoM ko khamA kara hamAre sAtha vipula parvata para
gaye the yAvat ve saMthArA karake kAladharma ko prApta ho gaye haiN|) ye unake
upakaraNa (vastra, pAtra) haiN| isake bAda gautamasvAmI ne zramaNa bhagavAn
mahAvIra ko vandanA-namaskAra karake isa prakAra pUchA5 - "evaM khalu
devANuppiyANaM antevAsI jAlI nAmaM aNagAre pgibhhe|sennN jAlI aNagAre

Page #44 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
First Class "Where has the time gone, where has Jali gone?" "Gautama! My Jali,
who was an ascetic, is like a Skandaka. Just as he, with my permission, took
upon himself the five great vows, and then, after performing Sanlekhana-
Santhara, attained Samadhi, and then, in the course of time, became time itself,
he ascended above the moon, sun, planets, constellations, and stars, passing
through many yojanas, many hundreds of yojanas, many thousands of yojanas, many
lakhs of yojanas, many crores of yojanas, and many kodi-kodi yojanas, and then,
going up, he was born as a deva in the Vijay Maha-Vimana, having passed through
the Saudharma, Ishana, Sanatkumar, Mahendra, Brahma, Lant, Maha-Shukra,
Sahasrar, Anant, Pranat, Aran, and Achyut devlokas, as well as the three hundred
and eighteen Navgraiveyak Vimana-Avasas." "Bhanta! How long is Jali's time
there?" "Gautama! His time is thirty-two Sagaropama." "Bhanta! Where will Jali
go, where will he be born, when his time, his existence, and his position are
exhausted in that devloka?" "Gautama! He will attain Siddhi from there, by
leaving the Maha-Videha Vas." This is the first lesson of the first chapter of
the Anuttaropavaiyadasana, as narrated by the Jamboo Samana.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prathama varga kAlagae kahiM gae, kahiM uvavaNNe ?" evaM khalu goyamA ! mamaM
antevAsI taheva jahA khaMdayassa jAva ["abbhaNuNNAe samANe sayameva paMca
mahavvayAiM AruhettA, taM ceva savvaM avasesiyaM neyavvaM, jAva jAlI aNagAre"]
kAlagae uDDhe caMdima jAva[sUra-gahagaNa-nakkhatta-tArArUvANaM-bahUiM joyaNAI,
bahUI joyaNasayAI, bahUI joyaNasahassAiM, bahUiM joyaNasayasahassAI, bahUiM
joyaNakoDIo, bahUiMjoyaNakoDAkoDIo uDDe dUraM uppaittA
sohammIsANasaNaMkumAramAhiMdabaMbhalaMtagamahAsukkasahassArANayapANayAraNaccue
tinni ya aTThArasuttare gevejavimANAvAsasae vIIvaittA] vijae mahAvimANe devattAe
uvvnnnne| "jAlissa NaM bhaMte ! devassa kevaiyaM kAlaM ThiI paNNattA ?" "goyamA
! battIsaM sAgaropamAI ThiI pnnnnttaa|" "se NaM bhaMte ! tAo devaloyAo
AukkhaeNaM, bhavakkhaeNaM, ThiikkhaeNaM kahiM gacchihii, kahiM uvavajihii ?"
"goyamA ! mahAvidehe vAse sijjhihii|" nikSepa "evaM khalu jambU samaNeNaM jAva
saMpatteNaM aNuttarovavAiyadasANaM paDhamassa vaggassa paDhamassa ajjhayaNassa
ayamaDhe pnnnntte|" gautama svAmI ne pUchA - "bhante ! ApakA antevAsI jAlI
anagAra jo prakRti se bhadra thA, vaha apanA AyuSya pUrNa karake kahA~ gayA hai
? aura kahA~ utpana huA hai ?" bhagavAn ne uttara diyA - gautama ! merA antevAsI
jAlI anagAra, ityAdi kathana skaMdaka ke samAna jAnanA, yAvat merI anumati
lekara, svayameva pAMca mahAvratoM kA AropaNa karake yAvat saMlekhanA-saMthArA
karake, samAdhi ko prApta hokara kAla ke samaya meM kAla karake Upara
candra,sUrya, grahagaNa, nakSatra aura tArA rUpa jyotiSacakra se bahuta yojana,
bahuta saikar3oM yojana, bahuta hajAroM yojana, bahuta lAkhoM yojana, bahuta
karor3oM yojana aura bahuta koDAkoDI yojana lAMghakara, Upara jAkara saudharma
IzAna sanatkumAra mAhendra brahmaloka lAntaka mahAzukra sahasrAra Anata prANata
AraNa aura acyuta devalokoM ko tathA tIna sau aThAraha navagraiveyaka
vimAnAvAsoM ko lAMgha kara, vijayanAmaka mahAvimAna meM deva ke rUpa meM utpanna
huA hai| prazna - "bhante ! jAlIdeva kI vahA~ kAla-sthiti (AyumaryAdA) kitanI
hai ?" uttara - "gautama ! usakI kAlasthiti battIsa sAgaropama kI hai|". prazna
- "bhante ! usa devaloka se Ayu-kSaya hone para, bhava-kSaya hone para aura
sthiti-kSaya hone para vaha jAlIdeva kahA~ jAyegA? kahA~ utpanna hogA?" uttara -
"gautama ! vahA~ se cyavana kara vaha mahAvideha vAsa se siddhi prApta kregaa|"

Page #45 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter 10: The Unparalleled Descent (Anuttaroupapatikadasha)  **Deposit**
Jambū! Thus, the Arhat, the liberated Lord Mahāvīra, has explained the meaning
of the first study of the first category of the Unparalleled Descent.
**Discussion:**  Here, the story of Jālī Kumāra is presented. This description
is brief because the subject matter of this sūtra is similar to the first study
of the *Jñātasūtra*, which deals with Megha Kumāra. Just as the first study of
the *Jñātasūtra* describes Megha Kumāra, so too should this sūtra's first study
be understood to describe Jālī Kumāra.  A question arises: Why is Megha Kumāra,
like Jālī, born in the Unparalleled Plane, yet his story is found in the
*Jñātasūtra* and not the *Anuttaroupapatikadasha*? The answer is that Megha
Kumāra's story is included in the sixth *Anga* because it narrates the
instructive life events of righteous individuals. Megha Kumāra's life contains
many events that can greatly benefit everyone. However, the
*Anuttaroupapatikadasha* only describes the fruits of following the right
conduct. Therefore, to highlight the special qualities of Megha Kumāra's
character, his story is placed in the sixth *Anga* instead of the ninth.
**Studies 2-10: Mayālī and other Kumāras**  * Six of them are to be described in
this way. Seven are the sons of Dhāriṇī Rānī. Vehall and Vehāyas are the sons of
Chelna. Abhaya is the son of Nandā. * The first five Kumāras have a Shramaṇa-
paryāya of sixteen years each, three have a Shramaṇa-paryāya of twelve years
each, and two have a Shramaṇa-paryāya of five years each. * The first five
Anugāras are born in the following planes, in order of their descent: Vijay,
Vaijayanta, Jayanta, Aparājita, and Sarvārthasiddha.  **Note:** See Sūtra 1,
page 1.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 10 anuttaraupapAtikadazA nikSepa jambU ! isa prakAra zramaNa yAvat
nirvANasaMprApta bhagavAn mahAvIra ne anuttaraupapAtikadazA ke prathama varga ke
prathama adhyayana kA yaha artha kahA hai| vivecana- yahA~ jAlI kumAra kA
varNana pratipAdita kiyA gayA hai| vaha varNana yahA~ saMkSepa meM kiyA gayA
hai, kyoMki isa sUtra meM kathita viSaya 'jJAtAsUtra' ke prathama adhyayana ke -
jisameM megha kumAra ke viSaya meM kahA gayA hai-- viSaya ke samAna hI hai|
arthAt 'jJAtAsUtra' ke prathama adhyayana meM jisa prakAra megha kumAra ke
viSaya meM pratipAdana kiyA gayA hai, usI prakAra isa sUtra ke prathama
adhyayana meM jAlI kumAra ke viSaya meM bhI pratipAdana samajha lenA caahie|
yahA~ prazna upasthita hotA hai ki- megha kumAra jAlI anagAra ke samAna anuttara
vimAna meM hI utpanna huA thA tathApi megha kumAra kA varNana
anuttaraupapAtikasUtra meM nahIM hai aura jJAtAsUtra meM hai, aisA kyoM ? uttara
yaha hai ki megha kumAra kA varNana chaThe aMga meM isalie kiyA gayA hai ki
usameM dharmayukta puruSoM kI zikSAprada jIvana-ghaTanAoM kA varNana hai| megha
kumAra ke jIvana meM kitanI hI aisI ghaTanAe~ varNana kI gaI haiM, jinake
par3hane se pratyeka vyakti ko atyanta lAbha ho sakatA hai| kintu
anuttaraupapAtikasUtra meM kevala samyakcAritra pAlana karane kA phala batAyA
gayA hai| ataH meghakumAra ke caritra meM vizeSatA dikhAne ke lie usakA caritra
naveM aGga meM na dekara chaThe hI aGga meM de diyA gayA hai| 2-10 adhyayana
mayAlI Adi kumAra 6 - evaM sesANaM vi navaNhaM bhANiyavvaM  /  navaraM satta
dhaarinnisuaa| vehallavehAyasA cellnnaae| abhao nndaae| AillANaM paMcaNhaM
solasa vAsAiM saamnnnnpriyaao| tiNhaM bArasa-bArasa vaasaaiN| doNhaM paMca
vaasaaiN| AillANaM paMcaNhaM ANupuvvIe uvavAyo vijae vejayaMte jayaMte aparAjie
svvtttthsiddhe| dIhadaMte svvtttthsiddhe| ukkameNaM sesaa| abhao vije| sesaM
jahA pddhme| abhayassa nANattaM, rAyagihe nayare, seNie rAyA, naMdA devI, sesaM
thev| "evaM khalu jaMbU ! samaNeNaMjAva saMpatteNaM aNuttarovavAiyadasANaM
paDhamassa vaggassa ayamaDhe pnnnntte|" zeSa nau adhyayanoM kA varNana bhI isI
prakAra kA hai| vizeSatA itanI hai ki dhAriNI rAnI ke sAta putra haiN| vehalla
aura vehAyasa celanA ke putra haiM  /  abhaya nandA kA putra hai| Adi ke pA~ca
kumAroM kA zramaNa-paryAya solaha-solaha varSa kA hai, tIna kA zramaNa-paryAya
bAraha varSa kA hai, tathA do kA zramaNa-paryAya pA~ca varSa kA hai| Adi ke
pA~ca anagAroM kA upapAta-janma anukrama se vijaya, vaijayanta, jayanta,
aparAjita aura sarvArthasiddha vimAna meM huA hai| 1. dekhie sU. 1 pR. 1.

Page #46 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## First Class  The first, **Dīrghdant Sarvārthasiddha**, was born in the
**Anuttaraupapātika** state. The rest, in reverse order, were born in
**Aparājita** etc., and **Abhaya** was born in the **Vimāna** state. The
remaining descriptions should be understood as similar to the first study.
**Abhaya**'s special characteristic is that he was born in the city of
**Rājagṛha**, his father was King **Śreṇika**, and his mother was **Nandādevī**.
The remaining descriptions are the same as mentioned above.  **11** "**Jambū!**
In this way, the **Śramaṇa**, the **Jina Mahāvīra**, who has attained
**Nirvāṇa**, has explained the meaning of the first class of the
**Anuttaraupapātika** state."  **Discussion:** This sūtra describes the
remaining nine studies of the first class. Their subject matter is also largely
similar to the first study. The only difference is that seven of them were sons
of **Dhāriṇī Devī**, while **Vehall Kuṁāra** and **Vehāyas Kuṁāra** were sons of
**Cēlāṇā Devī**, and **Abhaya Kuṁāra** was born from the womb of **Nandā Devī**.
The first five followed the **Samyama** path for sixteen years, three for twelve
years, and the remaining two for five years. The first five were born in the
five **Anuttar Vimānas** in sequence, and the last five were born in the five
**Anuttar Vimānas** in reverse order. This is the result of the intense
**Samyama** practice of these ten **Muni**s that they were born in the
aforementioned **Vimānas** as **Ekāvatārī**s. This proves that following
**Samyak Cāritra** always yields the best results. The smooth description of
that result is given here. Anyone who practices **Samyak Cāritra** cannot be
deprived of auspicious results. Therefore, **Samyak Cāritra** is beneficial for
everyone.  **|| First Class Ends ||**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prathama varga dIrghadanta sarvArthasiddha meM utpanna huaa| zeSa utkrama se
aparAjita Adi meM utpanna hue tathA abhaya vijaya vimAna meM utpanna huaa| zeSa
varNana prathama adhyayana ke samAna samajha lenA caahie| abhaya kI vizeSatA
yaha hai ki rAjagRha nagara, pitA rAjA zreNika aura mAtA nandAdevI hai| zeSa
varNana ukta prakAra se hI hai  /  11 "jambU ! isa prakAra zramaNa yAvat
nirvANasaMprApta bhagavAn mahAvIra ne anuttaraupapAtikadazA ke prathama varga kA
yaha artha kahA hai|" vivecana - isa sUtra meM prathama varga ke zeSa nau
adhyayanoM kA varNana kiyA gayA hai| inakA viSaya bhI prAyaH pahale adhyayana ke
sAtha milatA-julatA hai| vizeSatA kevala itanI hai ki inameM se sAta to dhAriNI
devI ke putra the aura vehalla kumAra aura vehAyasa kumAra celaNA devI ke tathA
abhaya kumAra nandA devI udara se utpanna huA thA  /  pahale ke pA~coM ne solaha
varSa saMyama-paryAya kA pAlana kiyA thA, tIna ne bAraha varSa taka aura zeSa do
ne pA~ca varSa taka  /  pahale pA~ca anukrama se pA~ca anuttara vimAnoM meM
utpanna hue aura pichale utkrama se pA~ca anuttara vimAnoM meM  /  yaha ina daza
muniyoM ke utkaTa saMyama pAlana kA phala hai ki ve ekAvatArI hokara ukta
vimAnoM meM utpanna hue  /  siddha yaha huA ki samyak cAritra kA pAlana karane
kA sadaiva uttama phala hotA hai| usa phala kA hI yahA~ sucAru rUpa se varNana
kiyA gayA hai  /  jo bhI vyakti samyak cAritra kA ArAdhana karegA vaha zubha
phala se vaJcita nahIM raha sakatA  /  ataH samyakcAritra pratyeka vyakti ke lie
upAdeya hai|  //  prathama varga samApta  //

Page #47 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Second Group 1-13 Study Introduction Jambū asked, "If, Bhante, the Arhat,
the Jina, the Perfect One, has explained the meaning of the first group of the
Anuttaropapātika-daśā, then, Bhante, what is the meaning of the second group of
the Anuttaropapātika-daśā, as explained by the Arhat, the Jina, the Perfect
One?" Sudharma replied, "Jambū, the Arhat, the Jina, the Perfect One, has
explained thirteen studies of the second group of the Anuttaropapātika-daśā.
They are: Dīrghasen, Mahāsen, Laṭṭhadant, Gūḍhadant, Suddhadant, Halle, Dume,
Dumesen, Mahādume-sen, Sīha, Sīhasen, Mahāsīhasen, and Puṇṇasen. These thirteen
are the studies." Jambū asked, "If, Bhante, the Arhat, the Jina, the Perfect
One, has explained thirteen studies of the second group of the Anuttaropapātika-
daśā, then, Bhante, what is the meaning of the first study of the second group
of the Anuttaropapātika-daśā, as explained by the Arhat, the Jina, the Perfect
One?" Sudharma replied, "Jambū, at that time, in that era, in the city of
Rājagṛha, in the Guṇasila cave, there was a king named Seniya, a queen named
Dhāriṇī, and a lion named Sīha. The birth, childhood, and arts of Dīrghasen
Kumāra were as follows: It is true, as it happened, until the end, it is said.
Thus, in Rājagṛha, there were thirteen kings. The king was Seniya, the queen was
Dhāriṇī. All thirteen kings ruled for sixteen years. There were two victories,
two defeats, two victories, two undefeated, and five Mahādume-sen, all of whom
were perfect. Jambū, this is the meaning of the second group of the
Anuttaropapātika-daśā, as explained by the Arhat, the Jina, the Perfect One.
This is the summary of the second group of the Anuttaropapātika-daśā.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 docco vaggo 1-13 adhyayana utkSepa jai NaM bhaMte ! samaNeNaM jAva' saMpatteNaM
aNuttarovavAiyadasANaM paDhamassa vaggassa ayamaDhe paNNatte, doccassa NaM
bhaMte ! vaggassa aNuttarovavAiyadasANaM samajeNaM jAva' saMpatteNaM ke aTe
paNNatte ? evaM khalu jambU ! samaNeNaM jAva saMpatteNaM aNuttarovavAiyadasANaM
doccassa vaggassa terasa ajjhayaNA pnnnnttaa| taM jahA dIhaseNaM mahAseNaM
laTThadaMte ya gUDhadaMte ya suddhadaMte y| halle dume dumaseNe mahAdumaseNe ya
Ahie  //  sIhe ya sIhaseNe ya mahAsIhaseNe ya aahie| puNNaseNe ya bodhavve
terasame hoi ajjhayaNe  //  "jai NaM bhaMte ! samaNeNaM jAva saMpatteNaM
aNuttarovavAiyadasANaM doccassa vaggassa terasa ajjhayaNA paNNattA, doccassa NaM
bhaMte ! vaggassa paDhamassa ajjhayaNassa samaNeNaM jAva' saMpatteNaM ke aTe
paNNatte ?" dIrghasena Adi evaM khalu jaMbU ! teNaM kAleNaM teNaM samaeNaM
rAyagihe nayare, guNasilae ceie|sennie raayaa|dhaarinnii devii| sIho suminne|
jahA jAlI tahA jammaM, bAlattaNaM, klaao| navaraM dIhaseNe kumaare| sacceva
vattavvayA jahA jAlissa jAva aMtaM kaahie| evaM terasa vi raaygihe| seNio piyaa|
dhAriNI maayaa| terasaNhaM vi solasa vAsA priyaao| ANupuvvIe vijae doNNi,
vejayaMte doNNi, jayaMte doNNi, aparAjie doNNi, sesA mahAdumaseNamAI paMca
svvtttthsiddhe| evaM khalu jaMbU ! samaNeNaM jAva' aNuttarovavAiyadasANaM
doccassa vaggassa ayamaDhe pnnnntte| mAsiyAe saMlehaNAe dosu vi vaggesu tti|
jambU svAmI ne prazna kiyA-- bhante ! yadi zramaNa yAvat nirvANasaMprApta
bhagavAn mahAvIra ne anuttaraupapAtikadazA ke prathama varga kA yaha artha kahA
hai, to bhante ! anuttaraupapAtikadazA ke dvitIya varga kA zramaNa yAvat
nirvANasaMprApta bhagavAn mahAvIra ne kyA artha kahA hai ? sudharmA svAmI uttara
dete haiM -- jambU ! zramaNa yAvat nirvANasaMprApta bhagavAn mahAvIra ne
anuttaraupapAtikadazA ke 1-5. dekhie varga 1, sUtra 1. 6. savveva - ema.sI. modI
7. dekhie varga 1, sUtra 1.

Page #48 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Second Class  There are thirteen studies in the Second Class, which are as
follows:  1.  **Dīrgha-sena**, 2. **Mahā-sena**, 3. **Laṣṭa-danta** (Laṭṭha-
danta), 4. **Gūḍha-danta**, 5. **Śuddha-danta**, 6. **Halla**, 7. **Druma**, 8.
**Druma-sena**, 9. **Mahā-druma-sena**, 10. **Siṁha**, 11. **Siṁha-sena**, 12.
**Mahā-siṁha-sena**, 13. **Puṇya-sena** (Puṇya-sena or Pūrṇa-sena).  Venerable
Sir! If the Śramaṇa, the Jina Mahāvīra, who attained Nirvāṇa, has spoken of
thirteen studies in the Second Class of the Anuttaraupapātika-daśā, then,
Venerable Sir! What meaning has the Śramaṇa, the Jina Mahāvīra, who attained
Nirvāṇa, spoken of for the first study in the Second Class? Dīrgha-sena, etc.
Jambū! In that time and at that time, there was a city called Rājagṛha. There
was a Guṇasīlaka Caitya. The king there was Śreṇika. The queen was Dhāriṇī Devī.
She saw a dream of a lion. One should know the birth, childhood, and acquisition
of arts, etc., similar to Jālī Kumāra. The special thing is that the Kumāra's
name was Dīrgha-sena.  The rest of the description is the same as Jālī Kumāra.
Until he ends all suffering.  In this way, there were thirteen princes in the
city of Rājagṛha. Their father was Śreṇika and their mother was Dhāriṇī. The
initiation ceremony of the thirteen Kumāras was at the age of sixteen. In
sequence, they were born in two Vijaya Vimānas, two Vaijayanta Vimānas, two
Jayanta Vimānas, two Aparājita Vimānas, and the remaining five, Mahā-druma-sena,
etc., in the Sarvārtha-siddha Vimāna.  Jambū! In this way, the Śramaṇa, the Jina
Mahāvīra, who attained Nirvāṇa, has spoken of this meaning for the Second Class
of the Anuttaraupapātika-daśā.  One should understand that there is a one-month
Sanlekhanā in both classes.  **Discussion** - After the completion of the First
Class, Śrī Jambūsvāmī respectfully requested Śrī Sudharmasvāmī - Bhagavan! What
meaning has the Śramaṇa, the Jina, who attained liberation, expounded for the
Second Class of the Anuttaraupapātika-daśā? In response to the question,
Sudharmasvāmī said - O Jambū! The Śramaṇa, the Jina, who attained liberation,
has expounded thirteen studies in the Second Class of the Anuttaraupapātika-
daśā. The thirteen princes were the sons of King Śreṇika and Queen Dhāriṇī Devī.
These thirteen Maharshis practiced restraint for sixteen years each and were
born in the Anuttar Vimānas.  The description taken here is taken in brief,
because the description here is similar to that of Meghakumāra in the
'Jñātādharmākathāṅgasūtra'. The details about this have already been given in
the first study. Therefore, those who wish to know more should study the first
study of the said sūtra.  One thing to note here is that the twenty-three monks
mentioned in both classes of this sūtra performed a one-month Pādap-op-agaman
Anashan and then they were born in the said Anuttar Vimānas.  1.  Dīrgha-sena
and Mahā-sena 2.  Laṣṭa-danta and Gūḍha-danta 3.  Śuddha-danta and Halla 4.
Druma and Druma-sena

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dvitIya varga dvitIya varga ke teraha adhyayana kahe haiM, jo isa prakAra haiM
- 1. dIrghasena, 2. mahAsena, 3. laSTadanta (laTThadanta), 4. gUDhadanta, 5.
zuddhadanta, 6. halla, 7. druma, 8. drumasena, 9. mahAdrumasena, 10. siMha, 11.
siMhasena, 12. mahAsiMhasena, 13. puNyaseNa (puNyasena athavA puurnnsen)| bhante
! yadi zramaNa yAvat nirvANasaMprApta bhagavAn mahAvIra ne anuttaraupapAtikadazA
ke dvitIya varga ke teraha adhyayana kahe haiM, to bhante ! dvitIya varga ke
prathama adhyayana kA zramaNa yAvat nirvANasaMprApta bhagavAn mahAvIra ne kyA
artha kahA hai ? dIrghasena Adi jambU ! usa kAla aura usa samaya meM rAjagRha
nAma kA nagara thaa| guNazIlaka caitya thaa| vahA~ kA rAjA zreNika thaa| dhAriNI
devI rAnI thii| usane siMha kA svapna dekhaa| jAlI kumAra ke sadRza janma,
bAlyakAla aura kalA-grahaNa Adi jAna lenA caahie| vizeSa yaha hai ki kumAra kA
nAma dIrghasena thaa| zeSa samasta varNana jAlI kumAra ke samAna hai| yAvat vaha
saba duHkhoM kA anta kregaa| isa taraha teraha hI rAjakumAroM kA nagara rAjagRha
thaa| pitA zreNika thA aura mAtA dhAriNI thii| teraha hI kumAroM kI dIkSAparyAya
solaha varSa thii| anukrama se ve do' vijaya meM, do vaijayanta meM, do jayanta
meM, do aparAjita meM aura zeSa mahAdrumasena Adi pA~ca sarvArthasiddha vimAna
meM utpanna hue| jambU ! isa prakAra zramaNa yAvat nirvANasaMprApta bhagavAn
mahAvIra ne anuttaraupapAtikadazA ke dvitIya varga kA yaha artha kahA hai| donoM
vargoM meM eka-eka mAsa kI saMlekhanA samajhanI caahie| vivecana - prathama
varga kI samApti ke anantara zrI jambUsvAmI ne zrI sudharmAsvAmI se savinaya
nivedana kiyA-- bhagavan ! mokSa ko prApta hue zramaNa bhagavAn ne
anuttaraupapAtikadazA ke dvitIya varga kA kyA artha pratipAdana kiyA hai ?
prazna ke uttara meM sudharmAsvAmI ne kahA- he jambU ! mokSa ko prApta hue
zramaNa bhagavAn ne anuttaraupapAtikadazA ke dvitIya varga ke teraha adhyayana
pratipAdana kiye haiN| teraha hI rAjakumAra zreNika rAjA aura dhAriNI devI ke
Atmaja arthAt putra the| ye teraha maharSi solaha-solaha varSa taka saMyama kA
pAlana kara anuttaravimAnoM meM utpanna hue| yahA~ jo vivaraNa liyA gayA hai
vaha saMkSipta meM liyA gayA hai, kyoMki 'jJAtAdharmakathAGgasUtra' ke
meghakumAra ke samAna hI yahA~ kA varNana hai| isake viSaya meM prathama
adhyayana meM vivaraNa A cukA hai| ataH vizeSa jAnane kI icchA vAloM ko ukta
sUtra ke hI prathama adhyayana kA svAdhyAya karanA caahie| yahA~ eka bAta vizeSa
jJAtavya hai ki isa sUtra ke donoM vargoM meM ullikhita teIsa muniyoM ne eka-eka
mAsa kA pAdapopagamana anazana kiyA thA aura tadanantara ve ukta anuttara
vimAnoM meM utpanna hue| 1. dIrghasena aura mahAsena 2. laSTadanta aura
gUDhadanta 3. zuddhadanta aura halla 4. druma aura drumasena

Page #49 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 14. Anuttaroupapatikadasha  This section reveals the auspicious fruits of
practicing the right conduct (Samyakcharitra) with right faith (Samyagdarshan)
and right knowledge (Samyagjnana). It is universally acknowledged that only the
right actions performed with right faith and right knowledge can lead to the
destruction of karmas.  Some variations in the text are found in different
manuscripts, but they are not mentioned here as the Jnatadharmakathang Sutra
serves as the authoritative source. Curious readers should refer to it for
further information.  ## End of the Second Section

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 14 anuttaraupapAtikadazA isa varga meM samyagdarzana aura samyagjJAnapUrvaka
samyakcAritrArAdhanA kA zubha phala dikhAyA gayA hai| yaha bAta sarva-siddha hai
ki samyagdarzana aura samyagjJAna-pUrvaka ArAdhanA kI huI samyak kriyA hI karmoM
ke kSaya karane meM samartha ho sakatI hai| vibhinna hastalikhita pratiyoM meM
katipaya pAThabheda dekhane meM Ate haiM, tathApi jJAtAdharmakathAGgasUtra kA
pramANa hone se ve yahA~ nahIM dikhAye gaye haiN| jijJAsuoM ko vahIM se jAna
lenA caahie| ||dvitiiy varga samApta  //

Page #50 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
This is the first chapter of the study. **Blessed Outpouring** 1- Jambuswami
asked Sudharmaswami - "Bante! If the Shraman, having attained Nirvana, the great
Mahavira, has said this meaning of the second category of the
Anuttaraupapatikadasha, then Bante! What meaning has the Shraman, having
attained Nirvana, the great Mahavira, said for the third category of the
Anuttaraupapatikadasha?" Sudharmaswami replied - "Jambū! The Shraman, having
attained Nirvana, the great Mahavira, has said ten studies for the third
category of the Anuttaraupapatikadasha, which are as follows - 1. Dhanyakumar,
2. Sunakshatra, 3. Rishiadas, 4. Pellāk, 5. Ramputra, 6. Chandrik, 7.
Pristimatrik, 8. Pedhalputra, 9. Postill, 10. Vehall. Jambuswami then asked -
"Bante! If the Shraman, having attained Nirvana, the great Mahavira, has said
ten studies for the third category of the Anuttaraupapatikadasha, then Bante!
What meaning has the Shraman, having attained Nirvana, the great Mahavira, said
for the first study of the third category of the Anuttaraupapatikadasha?"
**Dhanyakumar** 2- "Jambū! At that time, in that era, there was a city named
Kayandi, prosperous and wealthy. It was full of gardens, with all kinds of
flowers and fruits, and a king named Jiyasattu." 1-2-3-4-5 – Sutra 2, Page 1

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 tacco vaggo prathama adhyayana dhanya utkSepa 1- jai NaM bhaMte ! samaNeNaM
jAvasaMpatteNaM aNuttarovavAiyadasANaM doccassa vaggassa ayamaDhe paNNatte,
taccassa NaM bhaMte ! vaggassa aNuttarovavAiyadasANaM samajeNaM jAva'
saMpatteNaM ke aTe paNNatte? evaM khalu jaMbU ! samaNeNaM jAva saMpatteNaM
aNuttarovavAiyadasANaM taccassa vaggassa dasa ajjhayaNA pnnnnttaa| taM jahA
dhaNNe ya suNakkhatte ya isidAse a Ahie  /  pellae rAmaputte ca caMdimA
piTThimAi ya  //  peDhAlaputte aNagAre navame poTThile vi ya  /  vehalle dasame
putte ime ya dasa AhiyA  //  jai NaM bhaMte ! samaNeNaM jAva saMpatteNaM
aNuttarovavAiyadasANaM taccassa vaggassa dasa ajjhayaNA paNNattA, paDhamassa NaM
bhaMte ! ajjhayaNassa samaNeNaM jAva' saMpatteNaM ke aTe paNNatte ? - jambUsvAmI
ne zrI sudharmAsvAmI ke samakSa jijJAsA prastuta kI - bhante ! yadi zramaNa
yAvat nirvANasaMprApta bhagavAn mahAvIra ne anuttaraupapAtikadazA ke dvitIya
varga kA yaha artha kahA hai, to bhante ! zramaNa yAvat nirvANasaMprApta
bhagavAn mahAvIra ne anuttaraupapAtikadazA ke tRtIya varga kA kyA artha kahA hai
? _ sudharmAsvAmI ne samAdhAna kiyA--jambU ! zramaNa yAvat nirvANasaMprApta
bhagavAn mahAvIra ne anuttaraupapAtikadazA ke tRtIya varga ke daza adhyayana
kahe haiM, jo isa prakAra haiM - 1. dhanyakumAra, 2. sunakSatra, 3. RSidAsa, 4.
pellaka, 5. rAmaputra, 6. candrika, 7. pRSTimAtRka, 8. peDhAlaputra, 9.
poSTilla, 10. vehll| jambUsvAmI ne phira pUchA- bhante ! yadi zramaNa yAvat
nirvANasaMprApta bhagavAn mahAvIra ne anuttaraupapAtikadazA ke tRtIya varga ke
daza adhyayana kahe haiM, to bhante ! zramaNa yAvat nirvANasaMprApta bhagavAn
mahAvIra ne anuttaraupapAtikadazA ke tRtIya varga ke prathama adhyayana kA kyA
artha kahA hai ? dhanyakumAra 2-evaM khalu jaMbU ! teNaM kAleNaM teNaM samaeNaM
kAyaMdI nAmaM nayarI hotthA, riddhsthimiysmiddhaa| sahasaMbavaNe ujjANe savvauu
jAva[puSpha-phala-samiddhe] jiyasattU raayaa| 1-2-3-4-5 - sUtra 2, pR. 1

Page #51 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Here is the English translation, preserving the Jain terms:  In that place, in
the city named Kakanadi, there lived a virtuous caravan leader (sarthavahi)
named Bhadra. She was endowed with [extensive and spacious buildings, beds,
seats, vehicles and conveyances, abundant wealth, jewels and gems, equipped with
requisites and utensils, having discarded cooked food and drinks, with many male
and female servants, cows, buffaloes, goats and sheep, respected by many
people].  This caravan leader Bhadra had a son named Dhanna, who was [endowed
with a five-sensed body, marked with auspicious signs and virtues, perfect in
human dignity and stature, beautiful in all his limbs, moon-like in appearance,
lovely to behold, handsome] and possessed the five types of attachments.  That
is, just as the wet-nurse was extremely powerful up to seventy-two arts, in the
same way, the young prince Dhanna was adorned in the womb itself, in the third
month of gestation, by the teacher of arts. Then that teacher of arts trains and
teaches Dhanna in (1) writing, (2) arithmetic, (3) painting, (4) dancing, (5)
singing, (6) instrumental music, (7) archery, (8) swimming, (9) keeping time,
(10) gambling, (11) public speaking, (12) magic, (13) eight-limbed (grammar,
logic, etc.), (14) poetry, (15) ten types of wrestling, (16) other arts, (17)
types of food, (18) types of clothes, (19) types of cosmetics, (20) types of
beds, (21) goat, (22) riddles, (23) Magadhi, (24) verses, (25) songs, (26)
Siloka, (27) gold-craft, (28) silver-craft, (29) conch-craft, (30) types of
ornaments, (31) treatment of young women, (32) characteristics of women, (33)
characteristics of men, (34) characteristics of horses, (35) characteristics of
elephants, (36) characteristics of cows, (37) characteristics of chickens, (38)
characteristics of umbrellas, (39) characteristics of sticks, (40)
characteristics of swords, (41) characteristics of gems, (42) characteristics of
crows, (43) knowledge of objects, (44) measuring of shoulders, (45) measuring of
cities, (46) array, (47) counter-array, (48) march, (49) counter-march, (50)
wheel-array, (51) bird-array, (52) chariot-array, (53) war, (54) non-war, (55)
super-war, (56) eight-fold war, (57) fist-fight, (58) arm-fight, (59) wrestling,
(60) archery, (61) javelin-throwing, (62) bow-shooting, (63) gold-craft, (64)
silver-craft, (65) thread-weaving, (66) mat-weaving, (67) reed-weaving, (68)
leaf-cutting, (69) knife-cutting, (70) animate, (71) inanimate, (72) listening
to music.  Then that prince Dhanna became skilled in the sixty-two arts, well-
versed in the nine canonical texts, proficient in various languages, an expert
in singing, music, and dance, skilled in horse-riding, elephant-riding, and
archery, capable of enjoying pleasures, courageous and adventurous.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 anuttaraupapAtikadazA tattha NaM kAyaMdIe nayarIe bhaddA nAmaM satthavAhI
parivasai aDDA jAva [ dittA vittA vitthiNaviula-bhavaNa-sayaNAsaNa-jANavAhaNA
bahudhaNa-jAyarUva-rayayA Aoga-paoga-saMpauttA vicchaDDiya-paurabhattapANA
bahudAsI-dAsa-go-mahisa-gavelaga-ppabhUyA bahujaNassa apribhuuyaa]| tIse NaM
bhaddAe satthavAhIe putte dhaNNe nAmaM dArae hotthA, ahINa jAva
[paMciMdiyasarIre lakkhaNavaMjaNa-guNovavee
mANummANapamANapaDipuNNasujAyasavvaMgasuMdaraMge sasisomAkAre kaMte piyadaMsaNe
surUve] pNcdhaaiiprigghie|tN jahA--khIradhAIe jahA mahabbalo jAva bAvattari
kalAo ahIe, tahA dhaNNaM kumAra ammApiyaro sAtiregaTThavAsajAyagaM ceva
gabbhaTThame vAse sohaNaMsi tihikaraNa-nakkhatta muhuttaMsi kalAyariyassa
uvnnenti| tate NaM se kalAyarie dhaNNaM kumAraM lehAiyAo gaNitappahANAo
sauNarutapajavasANAo bAvattari kalAo suttao a atthao akaraNao ya sehAveti,
sikkhaaveti| taM jahA-(1) lehaM (2) gaNiyaM (3) rUvaM (4) naTTe (5) gIyaM (6)
vAiyaM (7) saragayaM (8) pokkharagayaM (9) samatAlaM (10) jUyaM (11) jaNavAyaM
(12) pAsayaM (13) aTThAvayaM (14) porekaccaM (15) dagamaTTiyaM (16) annavihiM
(17) pANavihiM (18) vatthavihiM (19) vilevaNavihiM (20) sayaNavihiM (21) ajaM
(22) paheliyaM (23) mAgahiyaM (24) gAhaM ( 25) gIiyaM (26) siloyaM (27)
hiraNNajuttiM (28) suvannajuttiM (29) cunajuttiM (30) AbharaNavihiM (31)
taruNIpaDikammaM (32) ithilakkhaNaM (33) purisalakkhaNaM (34) hayalakkhaNaM (35)
gayalakkhaNaM (36) goNalakkhaNaM (37) kukkuDalakkhaNaM (38) chattalakkhaNaM (39)
daMDalakkhaNaM (40) asilakkhaNaM (41) maNilakkhaNaM (42) kAgaNilakkhaNaM (43)
vatthuvijaM (44) khaMdhAramANaM (45) nagaramANaM (46) vUhaM (47) paDivUhaM (48)
cAraM (49) paDicAraM (50) cakkavUhaM (51) garulavUhaM (52) sagaDavUhaM (53)
juddhaM (54) nijuddhaM (55) juddhAtijuddhaM (56) aThijuddhaM (57) muThijuddhaM
(58) bAhujuddhaM (59) layAjuddhaM (60) IsatthaM (61) charuppavAyaM (62)
dhaNuvveyaM (63) hirannapArga (64) suvannapAgaM (65) suttakheDaM (66)
vaTTakheDaM (67) nAliyAkheDaM (68) pattacchejaM (69) kaDagacchejjaM (70) sajIvaM
(71) nijIvaM (72) sunnruamiti| tae NaM se dhaNNe kumAre bAvattarikalApaMDie
NavaMgasuttapaDibohie aTThArasavihippagAradesIbhAsAvisArae gIiraI
gaMdhavvanaTTakusale hayajohI gayajohI bAhujohI bAhuppamahI alaM bhogasamatthe
sAhasie viyAlacArI jAe yAvi hotthaa| sudharmAsvAmI ne uttara diyA - jambU ! isa
prakAra usa kAla aura usa samaya meM kAkandI nAmaka eka nagarI thii| vaha nagarI
Rddha stimita (sthira) aura samRddha thii| vahA~ sahasrAmravana nAma kA eka
udyAna thA, jisameM samasta RtuoM ke phala aura phUla sadA rahate the| usa
samaya vahA~ jitazatru nAmaka rAjA rAjya karatA thaa| usa kAkandI nagarI meM
bhadrA nAmaka eka sArthavAhI rahatI thii| vaha dhanI tejasvI vistRta aura vipula
bhavanoM, zayyAoM; AsanoM, yAnoM aura vAhanoM vAlI thI tathA sonA cA~dI Adi
dhana kI bahulatA se yukta thii| adhamarNoM (RNa 1. dekhie varga 1, sUtra 1.

Page #52 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Third Class 17  She was skilled in conducting transactions (with those who
took). Even after many people had eaten at her place, a lot of food and water
would still be left over. Her house had many servants, including male and female
slaves, and animals like cows, buffaloes, and goats. She was not defeated by
many and was respected by the people.  This noble merchant had a son named
Dhanyakumar, who was endowed with a body free from defects and complete with all
five senses. That is, his body was free from flaws (in terms of characteristics)
and complete (in terms of form). He possessed auspicious marks like the
swastika, and had features like sesame seeds and lentils. He had all his limbs
perfectly formed and beautiful, complete in measure, weight, and size. His form
was gentle like the moon, his appearance was radiant and pleasing. Thus, his
appearance was very beautiful.  Like Mahabal Kumar, five wet nurses, including
the one who breastfed him, nurtured him. Just as Mahabal had studied seventy-two
arts, similarly, his parents sent Dhanyakumar to an art teacher on an auspicious
day, in a favorable time and moment. Afterward, the art teacher taught
Dhanyakumar seventy-two arts, including mathematics, which is the main one, and
writing, up to omens and bird calls, proving them through sutras, meaning, and
practice.  These arts are as follows: (1) Writing (2) Mathematics (3) Changing
form (4) Drama (5) Singing (6) Playing musical instruments (7) Knowing the notes
(8) Tuning musical instruments (9) Knowing the same rhythm (10) Gambling (11)
Debating with people (12) Playing with dice (13) Playing chaupar (14) Protecting
the city (15) Creating objects from a combination of water and soil (16) Growing
grain (17) Producing fresh water, purifying and heating water (18) Making,
dyeing, sewing, and wearing new clothes (19) Identifying, preparing, and
applying ointments (20) Making beds, knowing the method of sleeping, etc. (21)
Recognizing and creating Arya Chanda (22) Creating and solving riddles (23)
Creating stories, etc. in Magadhika, the language of the Magadha country (24)
Creating stories, etc. in Prakrit language (25) Creating Geeti Chanda (26)
Creating Shlokas (Anushtup Chanda) (27) Making gold, making ornaments from it,
wearing them, etc. (28) Making new silver, making ornaments from it, wearing
them, etc. (29) Making and using powders like gulal, abir, etc. (30) Making and
wearing ornaments, etc. (31) Serving a young woman, applying cosmetics (32)
Knowing the characteristics of a woman (33) Knowing the characteristics of a man
(34) Knowing the characteristics of a horse (35) Knowing the characteristics of
an elephant (36) Knowing the characteristics of a cow and a bull (37) Knowing
the characteristics of a hen (38) Knowing the characteristics of an umbrella
(39) Knowing the characteristics of a staff (40) Knowing the characteristics of
a sword (41) Knowing the characteristics of a gem (42) Knowing the
characteristics of a Kakani Ratna (43) Vastu Vidya - the science of buildings
like houses, shops, etc. (44) Knowing the evidence of an army's encampment, etc.
(45) The art of establishing a new city, etc. (46) Vyuha - forming a battle
formation (47) Forming a battle formation for one's army in front of the enemy's
formation (48) Conducting military operations (49) Leading one's army in front
of the enemy's army (50) Chakravyuha - forming a battle formation in the shape
of a wheel (51) Forming a battle formation in the shape of a Garuda (52)
Creating a Shakatvyuha (53) Conducting a general war (54) Conducting a special
war (55) Conducting a very special war (56) Fighting with a stick or bone (57)
Fighting with fists (58) Fighting with arms.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 tRtIya varga 17 lene vAloM) ko vaha lena-dena karane meM kuzala thii| usake
yahA~ bhojana karane ke anantara bhI bahuta-sA anna-pAnI bAkI baca jAtA thaa|
usake ghara meM bahuta se dAsa-dAsI Adi sevaka aura gAya-bhaiMsa aura bakarI Adi
pazu the| vaha bahutoM se bhI parAbhava ko prApta nahIM hotI thI aura janatA meM
sammAnanIya thii| usa bhadrA sArthavAhI ke dhanyakumAra nAmakA eka putra thA, jo
ahIna evaM paripUrNa pA~coM indriyoM se yukta zarIravAlA thaa| arthAt usakA
zarIra (lakSaNa kI apekSA) khAmiyoM se rahita aura (svarUpa kI apekSA) paripUrNa
thaa| vaha svastika Adi lakSaNa, tila maSa Adi vyaMjana aura guNoM se yukta
thaa| mApa, bhAra aura AkAra-vistAra se paripUrNa aura sundara bane hue samasta
aMgoM vAlA thaa| usakA AkAra candra ke samAna saumya aura darzana kAnta aura
priya thaa| isa prakAra usakA rUpa bahuta sundara thaa| _ mahAbala kumAra kI
taraha kSIradhAtrI (dUdha pilAne vAlI dhAya) Adi pAMca dhAyeM usakA pAlana-
poSaNa Adi karatI thIM tathA jisa prakAra mahAbala ne bahattara kalAoM kA
adhyayana kiyA usI prakAra dhanyakumAra ko mAtA-pitA ne zubha tithi, karaNa aura
muhUrta meM kalAcArya ke pAsa bhejaa| tatpazcAt kalAcArya ne dhanya (dhannA)
kumAra ko gaNita jina meM pradhAna hai, aisI lekha Adi zakuniruta (pakSiyoM ke
zabda) taka kI bahattara kalAe~ sUtra se, artha se aura prayoga se siddha
karavAI tathA sikhlaaiiN| ve kalAe~ isa prakAra haiM - (1) lekhana (2) gaNita
(3) rUpa badalanA (4) nATaka (5) gAyana (6) vAdya bajAnA (7) svara jAnanA (8)
vAdya sudhAranA (9) samAna tAla jAnanA (10) juA khelanA (11) logoM ke sAtha
vAdavivAda karanA (12) pAsoM se khelanA (13) caupar3a khelanA (14) nagara kI
rakSA karanA (15) jala aura miTTI ke saMyoga se vastu kA nirmANa karanA (16)
dhAnya nipajAnA (17) nayA pAnI utpanna karanA, pAnI ko saMskAra karake zuddha
karanA evaM uSNa karanA (18) navIna vastra banAnA, raMganA, sInA aura pahananA
(19) vilepana kI vastu ko pahacAnanA, taiyAra karanA, lepana karanA Adi (20)
zayyA banAnA, zayana karane kI vidhi jAnanA Adi (21) AryAchanda ko pahacAnanA
aura banAnA (22) paheliyA~ banAnA aura bUjhanA (23) mAgadhikA arthAt magadha
deza kI bhASA meM gAthA Adi banAnA (24) prAkRta bhASA meM gAthA Adi banAnA (25)
gIti chanda banAnA (26) zloka (anuSTap chanda) banAnA (27) suvarNa banAnA, usake
AbhUSaNa banAnA, pahananA Adi (28) naI cA~dI banAnA, usake AbhUSaNa banAnA,
pahananA Adi (29) cUrNa-gulAla, abIra Adi banAnA aura usakA upayoga karanA (30)
gahane ghar3anA pahananA Adi (31) taruNI kI sevA karanA, prasAdhana karanA (32)
strI ke lakSaNa jAnanA (33) puruSa ke lakSaNa jAnanA (34) azva ke lakSaNa jAnanA
(35) hAthI ke lakSaNa jAnanA (36) gAya, baila ke lakSaNa jAnanA (37) murgI ke
lakSaNa jAnanA (38) chatra-lakSaNa jAnanA (39) daMDa-lakSaNa jAnanA (40) khaDga-
lakSaNa jAnanA (41) maNi ke lakSaNa jAnanA (42) kAkaNIratna ke lakSaNa jAnanA
(43) vAstuvidyA - makAna-dukAna Adi imAratoM kI vidyA (44) senA ke par3Ava kA
pramANa Adi jAnanA (45) nayA nagara basAne Adi kI kalA (46) vyUha-- morcA banAnA
(47) virodhI ke vyUha ke sAmane apanI senA kA morcA racanA (48) sainya saMcAlana
karanA (49) praticArazatrusenA ke samakSa apanI senA ko calAnA (50) cakravyUha--
cAka ke AkAra meM morcA banAnA (51) garuDa ke AkAra kA vyUha banAnA (52)
zakaTavyUha racanA (53) sAmAnya yuddha karanA (54) vizeSa yuddha karanA (55)
atyaMta vizeSa yuddha karanA (56) aTTi (yaSTi yA asthi) se yuddha karanA (57)
muSTiyuddha karanA (58) bAhuyuddha karanA

Page #53 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(59) Engaging in vine combat (60) Showing much as little and little as much (61)
Making the hilt of a sword, etc. (62) Possessing the skill of archery (63)
Preparing silver alloy (64) Preparing gold alloy (65) Piercing threads (66)
Plowing fields (67) Piercing the stem of a lotus (68) Cutting leaves (69)
Piercing hard earrings, etc. (70) Reviving the dead and unconscious (71) Making
the living dead (or lifeless) and (72) Recognizing the speech of crows, owls,
and other birds.  In this way, Dhanyakumara became proficient in seventy-two
arts. His nine limbs - two ears, two eyes, two nostrils, tongue, skin, and mind
- which were dormant and had an indistinct consciousness in childhood, became
awakened. He became skilled in eighteen regional languages. He became adept in
horse-combat, elephant-combat, chariot-combat, and hand-to-hand combat. He
gained the ability to crush his opponents with his own arms. He acquired the
capacity to enjoy sensual pleasures. Due to his courage, he became a night-
wanderer, i.e., one who can travel even in the middle of the night.  Explanation
- After the completion of the second chapter, Jambusvami again asked
Sudharmasvami - "Venerable one! I have heard the meaning of the second chapter.
Now, kindly enlighten me about the meaning of the third chapter as well, so that
I may also understand it."  In response, Sri Sudharmasvami expounded - "O Jambu!
The omniscient ascetic Lord Mahavira, who attained liberation, has expounded ten
studies in the third chapter. The first study is about the life story of
Dhanyakumara."  By reading this study, we come to know about the advanced state
of the female gender at that time. The women of that era were not dependent on
men like the women of the present age, but rather they themselves engaged in
trade and other activities, being equal to men. They had complete knowledge
about trade and other matters. Here, the merchant woman named Bhadra herself
conducted the trade business, and the remarkable thing is that she was not
subdued by anyone - she was not suppressed. This description paints a picture of
the female gender having reached the pinnacle of progress. They also attained
liberation like the men.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 18 anuttaropapAtikadazA (59) latAyuddha karanA (60) bahuta ko thor3A aura
thor3e ko bahuta dikhalAnA (61) khaDga kI mUTha Adi banAnA (62) dhanuSa-bANa
saMbaMdhI kauzala honA (63) cAMdI kA pAka banAnA (64) sone kA pAka banAnA (65)
sUtra kA chedana karanA (66) kheta jotanA (67) kamala ke nAla kA chedana karanA
(68) patrachedana karanA (69) kar3A kuMDala Adi kA chedana karanA (70) mRta-
mUcchita ko jIvita karanA (71) jIvita ko mRta (mRtatulya) karanA aura (72) kAka
ghUka Adi pakSiyoM kI bolI phcaannaa| isa prakAra dhanyakumAra bahattara kalAoM
meM paMDita ho gyaa| usake nau aMga-do kAna, do netra, do nAsikA, jihvA, tvacA
aura mana bAlyAvasthA ke kAraNa jo soye-se the - avyakta cetanA vAle the, ve
jAgRta ho gye| vaha aThAraha prakAra kI dezI bhASAoM meM kuzala ho gyaa| vaha
azvayuddha, gajayuddha, rathayuddha aura bAhuyuddha karane vAlA bana gyaa| apanI
bAhuoM se vipakSI kA mardana karane meM samartha ho gyaa| bhoga bhogane kA
sAmarthya usameM A gyaa| sAhasI hone ke kAraNa vikAlacArI arthAt AdhI rAta meM
bhI cala par3ane vAlA bana gyaa| vivecana - dvitIya varga kI samApti hone para
jambUsvAmI ne sudharmAsvAmI se punaH prazna kiyA - bhagavan! dvitIya varga kA
artha maiMne zravaNa kiyaa| aba mujha para asIma kRpA karate hue tRtIya varga kA
artha bhI sunAie, jisase mujhe usakA bhI bodha ho jAya  /  isake uttara meM zrI
sudharmAsvAmI ne pratipAdana kiyA - he jambU ! mokSa ko prApta hue zramaNa
bhagavAn mahAvIra ne tRtIya varga ke dasa adhyayana pratipAdana kiye haiN|
unameM se prathama adhyayana dhanyakumAra ke jIvana-vRttAnta ke viSaya meM hai|
isa adhyayana ke par3hane se hameM usa samaya kI strIjAti kI unnata avasthA kA
patA lagatA hai| usa samaya kI striyA~ vartamAna yuga ke samAna puruSa para
nirbhara na rahatI huIM, svayaM unakI barAbarI meM vyApAra Adi kArya karatI
thiiN| unheM vyApAra Adi ke viSaya meM saba taraha kA pUrA jJAna hotA thaa|
yahA~ bhadrA nAma kI sArthavAhI vyApAra kA kAma svayaM karatI thI aura vizeSatA
yaha ki vaha kisI se parAbhata nahIM hotI thI - dabatI nahIM thii| yaha ullekha
unnati ke zikhara para pahu~cI huI strIjAti kA citra hamArI A~khoM ke sAmane
khIMcatA hai| unhoMne puruSoM ke samAna hI mokSagamana bhI kiyaa| 3 - tae NaM sA
bhaddA satthavAhI dhaNNaM dArayaM ummukkabAlabhAvaM jAva [viNNAyapariNayamittaM
jovvaNagamaNupattaM bAvattarikalApaMDiyaM NavaMgasuttapaDibohayaM
aTThArasavihadesippagArabhAsAvisArayaM gIyaraiM gaMdhavva-NaTTa-kusalaM
siMgArAgAracAruvesaM saMgayagaya-hasiya-bhaNiya-ciTThiya-vilAva-
niuNajuttovayAra-kusalaM hayajohiM gayajohiM rahajohiM bAhujohiM bAhuppamahiM]
alaM bhogasamatthaM yAvi jANittA battIsaM pAsAyavaDiMsae kArei, abbhugayamUsie
jAva[pahasie viva maNikaNagarayaNabhatticitte, vAudbhUta-
vijayavejayaMtIpaDAgAchattAicchattakalie, tuMge,
gagaNatalamabhilaMghamANasihare, jAlaMtararayaNapaMjarummilliyavva
maNikaNagathUbhiyAe, viyasiyasayapattapuMDarIe tilayarayaNaddhacaMdaccie
nAnAmaNimayadAmAlaMkie, aMto bahiM ca saNhe tavaNijaruilabAluyApatthaDe,
suhaphAse sassirIyarUve pAsAdIe jAva pddiruuve]| tesiM mAjhe egaM bhavaNaM
aNegakhaMbhasayasaMniviTuM jAva lIlaTThiyasAlabhaMjiyAge abbhuggayasukayavairave
iyAtoraNavararaiyasAlabhaMjiyAsusiliTThavisiTThalaTThasaMThitapasatthaveruliyakh
aMbhanANAmaNikaNagarayaNakhacitaujjalaM
bahusamasuvibhattaniciyaramaNijabhUmibhAgaM IhAmiya, jAva bhatticittaM
khaMbhuggayavaira veiyA

Page #54 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Third Chapter (The merchant-caravan leader) takes the hand of the thirty-two
excellent maidens in a single day. The thirty-two gifts are as follows: [thirty-
two gold coins, thirty-two gold coins, thirty-two excellent crowns, thirty-two
excellent pairs of earrings, thirty-two excellent necklaces, thirty-two
excellent half-necklaces, thirty-two excellent single-strand garlands, similarly
excellent pearl garlands, similarly excellent gold garlands, similarly excellent
gem garlands, thirty-two excellent bracelets, similarly excellent anklets,
thirty-two excellent pairs of silk garments, similarly excellent pairs of cotton
garments, similarly excellent pairs of muslin garments, thirty-two excellent
sashes, similarly excellent modesty, similarly excellent wisdom, fame,
intelligence, prosperity, thirty-two excellent ornaments, thirty-two excellent
maidens, similarly excellent beds, thirty-two excellent couches, all-gem, the
best of the palace, thirty-two excellent seats, thirty-two excellent beds with
ten thousand mattresses, thirty-two excellent palanquins, thirty-two excellent
horses, all-gem, the best of the palace, thirty-two excellent elephants, all-
gem, the best of the palace, thirty-two excellent chariots, thirty-two excellent
war chariots, thirty-two excellent horses, thirty-two excellent elephants,
thirty-two excellent villages with ten thousand households, thirty-two excellent
male servants, similarly excellent female servants, similarly excellent
attendants, similarly excellent cooks, similarly excellent water-bearers,
similarly excellent elders, thirty-two excellent golden lamps, thirty-two
excellent silver lamps, thirty-two excellent gold-and-silver lamps, thirty-two
excellent golden plates, thirty-two excellent silver plates, thirty-two
excellent gold-and-silver plates, thirty-two excellent golden cups three times,
thirty-two excellent golden bowls three, thirty-two excellent golden pitchers
three, thirty-two excellent golden platters three, thirty-two excellent golden
ladles three, thirty-two excellent golden spittoons three, thirty-two excellent
golden vases three, thirty-two excellent golden footstools three, thirty-two
excellent golden cushions three, thirty-two excellent golden beds three, thirty-
two excellent golden couches three, thirty-two excellent swan-seats, similarly
excellent peacock-seats, similarly excellent eagle-seats, similarly excellent
lion-seats, similarly excellent elephant-seats, thirty-two excellent lotus-
seats, thirty-two excellent seats facing the directions, thirty-two excellent
oil-containers, as in the case of the royal palace, up to thirty-two excellent
similar oil-containers, thirty-two excellent stools, as in the case of the
celestial beings, up to thirty-two excellent similar stools, thirty-two
excellent parasol-bearers, thirty-two excellent chowrie-bearers, thirty-two
excellent fans, thirty-two excellent milk-maids, up to thirty-two excellent lap-
sitters, thirty-two excellent body-massagers, thirty-two excellent hair-
dressers, thirty-two excellent make-up artists, thirty-two excellent perfume-
sprinklers, thirty-two excellent powder-sprinklers, thirty-two excellent
garment-folders, thirty-two excellent water-carriers, thirty-two excellent seat-
arrangers, thirty-two excellent flower-bearers, thirty-two excellent hand-
bearers, thirty-two excellent offering-makers, thirty-two excellent bed-makers,
thirty-two excellent attendants.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 tatIya varga 19 parigayAbhirAmaM vijAharajamalajuyalajuttaM piva accIsahassa
mAlaNIyaM rUvagasahassakaliyaM bhisamANaM bhibbhisamANaM cakkhulloyaNalesaM
suhaphAsaM sassirIyarUvaM kaMcaNamaNirayaNathUbhiyAgaM
nANAvihapaMcavannaghaMTApaDAgaparimaMDiyaggasikharaM dhavalamarIcikavayaM
viNimmuyaMta lAulloiyamahiyaM jAva gaMdhavaTTibhUyaM pAsAdIyaM darisaNijaM
abhirUvaM pddiruuvN]| (tae NaM bhaddA satthavAhI) battIsAe ibbhavarakaNNagANaM
egadivaseNaM pANiM gennhaavei| battIsao dAo jAva[battIsaM hiraNNakoDIo, battIsaM
suvaNNakoDINo, battIsaM mauDe mauDappavare, battIsaM kuMDalajue
kuMDalajuyalappavare, battIsaM hAre hArappavare, battIsaM addhahAre
addhahArappavare, battIsaM egAvalIo egAvalippavarAo, evaM muttAvalIo, evaM
kaNagAvalIo, evaM rayaNAvalIo, battIsaM kaDagajoe kaDagajoyappavare, evaM
tuDiyajoe, battIsaM khomajuyalAI khomajuyalappavarAI, evaM paDagajuyalAiM, evaM
paTTajuyalAiM, evaM dugullajuyalAiM, battIsaM sirIo, battIsaM hirIo, evaM dhiIo,
kittIo, buddhIo, lacchIo, battIsaM NaMdAiM, battIsaM bhadAI battIsaM tale
talappavare, savvarayaNAmae, NiyagavarabhavaNakeU, battIsaM jhae jhayappavare,
battIsaM vaye vayappavare dasagosAhassieNaM vaeNaM, battIsaM NADagAI
NADagappavarAI battIsabaddhaNaM NADaeNaM, battIsaM Ase Asappavare,
savvarayaNAmae, sirigharapaDirUvae, battIsaMhatthI hatthippavare, savvarayaNAmae
sirigharapaDirUvae, battIsaM jANAiM jANappavarAI, battIsaM jugAiM jugappavarAI,
evaM siviyAo, evaM saMdamANIo, evaM gillIo thillIo, battIsaM viyaDajANAI
viyaDajANappavarAI, battIsaM rahe pArijANie, battIsaM rahe saMgAmie, battIsaM
Ase Asappavare, battIsaM hatthI hatthipavare, battIsaM gAme gAmappavare,
dasakulasAhassieNaM gAmeNaM, battIsaM dAse dAsappavare, evaM ceva dAsIo, evaM
kiMkare, evaM kaMcuije, evaM varisadhare, evaM mahattarae, battIsaM sovaNNie
olaMbaNadIve, battIsaM ruppAmae olaMbaNadIve, battIsaM suvaNNaruppAmae
olaMbaNadIve, battIsaM sovaNNie ukkaMcaNadIve, battIsaM paMjaradIve, evaM ceva
tiNNi vi, battIsaM sovaNNie thAle, battIsaM ruppamae thAle, battIsaM
suvaNNaruppamae thAle, battIsaM sovaNiyAo pattIo 3 x, battIsaM sovaNNiyAiM
thAsayAI 3, battIsaM sovaNiyAiM mallagAiM 3, battIsaM sovaNiyAo taliyAo3,
battIsaMsovaNiyAo kAvaiAo 3, battIsaMsovaNNie avaeDae 3, battIsaMsovaNiyAo
avayakkAo 3, battIsaM sovaNNie pAyapIDhae 3, battIsaM sovaNiyAo bhisiyAo 3,
battIsaM sovaNNiyAo karoDiyAo 3, battIsaM sovaNNie pallaMke 3, battIsaM
sovaNiyAo paDisejjAo 3, battIsaM haMsAsaNAI, battIsaM koMcAsaNAI, evaM
garulAsaNAI, uNNayAsaNAI, paNayAsaNAI, dIhAsaNAI, bhaddAsaNAI, pakkhAsaNAI,
magarAsaNAI, battIsaM paumAsaNAiM, battIsaM disAsovatthiyAsaNAiM, battIsaM
tellasamugge, jahA rAyappaseNaijje, jAva battIsaM sarisavasamugge, battIsaM
khujAo, jahA uvavAie, jAva battIsaM pArisIo, chatte, battIsaM chattadhAriNIo
ceDIo, battIsaM cAmarAo, battIsaM cAmaradhAriNIo ceDIo. battIsaM tADiyaMTe.
battIsaM tAliyaMTadhAriNIo ceDIo. battIsaM karoDiyAo. battIsaM karoDiyAdhAriNIo
ceDIo, battIsaM khIradhAIo, jAva battIsaM aMkadhAIo, battIsaM aMgamahiyAo,
battIsaM ummahiyAo, battIsaM pahAviyAo, battIsaM pasAhiyAo, battIsaM
vaNNagapesIo, battIsaM cuNNapesIo, battIsaM kodrAgArIo, battIsaM davakArIo,
battIsaM uvatthANiyAo, battIsaM NADaijjAo, battIsaM koDuMbiyaNIo, battIsaM
mahANasiNIo, battIsaM bhaMDAgAriNIo, battIsaM ajjhAdhAriNIo, battIsaM
puSphadhAraNIo, battIsaMpANidhAraNIo, battIsaM balikArIo, battIsaMsejjAkArIo,
battIsaM abhitariyAo

Page #55 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Anuttaropapatikadashā Parihārī, thirty-two Bāhiriyā Parihārī, thirty-two
Mālākarī, thirty-two Pesanakārī, and other things, such as much gold, silver,
bronze, or lead, up to the essence of the essence, and also up to the most
excellent families, were to be given, to be eaten, to be enjoyed. Then those
wealthy young men gave each other a koți of gold, a koți of silver, a garland, a
garland of flowers, and so on, up to giving each other a Pesanakār, and other
things, such as much gold, up to being enjoyed. Then those wealthy young men,
having risen from the state of childhood, up to the state of being mature, up to
the state of being youthful, became skilled in seventy-two arts, their nine
senses (two ears, two eyes, two nostrils, one tongue, one touch, and one mind)
became awakened, they became proficient in eighteen languages, they became
passionate about music and love, they became skilled in Gandharva music and
dramatic performance, and they became adorned with beautiful clothes like the
house of love. They became skilled in proper behavior, proper enjoyment, eye-
related defects, proper conversation, and proper speech, and they became skilled
in proper conduct. They became skilled in fighting with horses, fighting with
elephants, they became chariot warriors, they became arm warriors, they became
arm fighters, they became able to break even hard objects with their arms, and
they became able to enjoy. Knowing this, the noble Sārthavāhī built thirty-two
beautiful palaces, which were vast and lofty. Those buildings seemed to laugh
with their group of bright lights. They were strange in their construction of
jewels, gold, and gems. They were adorned with victory flags that fluttered in
the wind and announced victory, and with umbrellas upon umbrellas. They were so
high that their peaks surpassed the sky. In the middle of their lattices, there
were cages of gems that seemed like their eyes. They had mounds of jewels and
gold. They had blooming lotus flowers, either real or painted. They were adorned
with tilak gems and half-moons, or they had inscriptions of sandalwood and other
things on their walls. They were adorned with various kinds of jewel garlands.
They were smooth inside and out. Their courtyards were paved with fine golden
sand. Their touch was pleasant. Their form was very beautiful. They filled the
mind with joy when they were seen. They were palaces, very beautiful. In the
middle of those palaces, a superior building was constructed, which was
supported by many hundreds of pillars. In it, many playful statues were
installed. In it, there was a high and well-made pedestal of diamond, and there
were toranas. There were excellent, thick, and spacious pillars of vaidurya gem,
with beautiful statues. It appeared bright because it was inlaid with various
kinds of jewels, gold, and gems. Its ground was perfectly level, vast, paved,
and beautiful. In that building, there were paintings of deer, bulls, horses,
humans, and makara. It appeared beautiful because it was adorned with a pedestal
of diamond on its pillars. Pairs of vidyadharas, situated in the same row,
appeared to be moving by means of a machine. That building was radiant and full
of thousands of rays and thousands of paintings.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 anuttaraupapAtikadazA paDihArIo, battIsaM bAhiriyAo paDihArIo, battIsaM
mAlAkArIo, battIsaM pesaNakArIo, aNNaM vA subahuM hiraNNaM vA suvaNNaM vA kaMsaM
vA dUsaM vA viuladhaNakaNaga0 jAva saMtasArasAvaejaM, alAhi jAva AsattamAo
kulavaMsAo pakAmaM dAuM, pakAmaM bhottuM, pakAmaM pribhaaeuN| tae NaM se dhanne
kumAre egamegAe bhajAe egamegaM hiraNNakoDiM dalayai, egamegaM suvaNNakoDiM
dalayai, egamegaM mauDaM mauDappavaraM dalayai, evaM taM ceva savvaM jAva
egamegaM pesaNakAra dalayai, aNNaM vA subahuM hiraNNaM vA jAva pribhaaeuN| tae
NaM se dhanne kamAre uppi pAsAya] jAva' phuTUMtehi jAva vihrdd'| _ anantara
dhanyakumAra ko bAla-bhAva se unmukta jAnakara, yAvat vijJAna jisakA zIghratA se
paripakva avasthA meM pahu~ca gayA hai, yauvanAvasthAzAlI huA,72 kalAoM meM
vizeSa rUpa se niSNAta huA, jisake nau aMga (do kAna, do netra, do nAsikA
chidra, eka jIbha, eka sparzana evaM eka mana) vyakta-jAgRta ho gae, aThAraha
prakAra kI bhASAoM meM vizArada huA, gIta evaM rati meM anurAgayukta huA,
gAndharva gAna meM evaM nATya kriyA meM pAraGgata huA, tathA zRGgAra ke gRha kI
taraha sundara veSa se yukta huA, samucita ceSTA meM - samucita vilAsa meM -
netrajanita vikAra meM, samucita saMlApa meM evaM samucita kAkubhASaNa meM dakSa
huA, tathA - samucita vyavahAroM meM kuzala huA, azvayuddha karane meM kuzala
huA, gajayuddha karane meM kuzala huA, rathayodhI huA, bAhuprayodhI huA,
bAhupramardI huA -- bAhu se bhI kaThora vastu ko cUra-cUra karane meM samartha
huA tathA bhoga meM samartha huA, aisA jAnakara bhadrA sArthavAhI ne battIsa
sundara prAsAda banavAe jo vizAla aura uttuGga the| [ve bhavana apanI ujjvala
kAnti ke samUha se ha~sate hue se pratIta hote the| maNi, suvarNa aura ratnoM kI
racanA se vicitra the| vAyu se phaharAtI huI aura vijaya ko sUcita karane vAlI
vaijayantI -- patAkAoM se tathA chatrAtichatroM (eka-dUsare ke Upara rahe hue
chatroM) ye yukta the| ve itane U~ce the ki unake zikhara AkAzatala ko
ullaMghana karate the| unakI jAliyoM ke madhya meM ratnoM ke paMjara aise
pratIta hote the, mAno unake netra hoN| unameM maNiyoM aura kanaka kI thUbhikAe~
(stUpikAe~) banI thiiN| unameM sAkSAt athavA citrita kiye hue zatapatra aura
puNDarIka kamala vikasita ho rahe the| ve tilaka ratnoM evaM arddha candroM--eka
prakAra ke sopAnoM se yukta the, athavA bhittiyoM meM candana Adi ke Alekha
(hAthe) carcita the| nAnA prakAra kI maNimaya mAlAoM se alaMkRta the| bhItara
aura bAhara se cikane the| unake AMgana meM suvarNa kI rucira bAlukA bichI thii|
unakA sparza sukhaprada thaa| rUpa bar3A hI zobhana thaa| unheM dekhate hI citta
meM prasannatA hotI thI yAvat ve mahala pratirUpa the atyanta manohara the| una
prAsAdoM ke madhya meM eka uttama bhavana kA nirmANa karavAyA jo aneka saikar3oM
stambhoM para AdhArita thaa| usameM lIlAyukta aneka putaliyA~ sthApita kI huI
thiiN| usameM U~cI aura sunirmita vajraratna kI vedikA thI aura toraNa the|
manohara nirmita putaliyoM sahita uttama, moTe evaM prazasta vaiDUryaratna ke
stambha the vaha vividha prakAra ke maNiyoM suvarNa tathA ratnoM se khacita hone
ke kAraNa ujjvala dikhAI detA thaa| usakA bhUmibhAga bilkula sama, vizAla, pakkA
aura ramaNIya thaa| usa bhavana meM IhAmRga, vRSabha, turaga, manuSya, makara
Adi ke citra citrita kiye hue the| stambhoM para banI vajraratna kI vedikA se
yukta hone ke kAraNa ramaNIya dikhAI par3atA thaa| samAna zreNI meM sthita
vidyAdharoM ke yugala yaMtra dvArA calate dIkha par3ate the| vaha bhavana
hajAroM kiraNoM se vyApta aura hajAroM citroM se yukta hone se dedIpyamAna aura
1-2. aNuttarovavAiyadazA sUtra 3.

Page #56 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Third Varga 21 It was extremely radiant. Merely by seeing it, the eyes of the
spectators would get glued to it. Its touch was pleasurable, and its form was
endowed with beauty. It had stupas (reliquaries) of gold, gems, and jewels built
into it. Its main spire was adorned with various kinds of five-colored flags
along with bells. It was radiating clusters of dazzling rays all around. It was
plastered, washed, and adorned with canopies, so much so that it appeared like a
temple lamp emitting fragrance. It was pleasing to the mind, visually appealing,
beautiful, and a reflection of beauty—extremely enchanting.  Thereafter, the
chief merchant Bhadra arranged the marriage (panigraha) of Dhanyakumara with the
daughters of thirty-two Ibhyavara (eminent merchants) in a single day. He
provided them with thirty-two sets of items, such as: [32 crore silver coins, 32
crore gold coins, 32 excellent crowns, 32 excellent pairs of earrings, 32
excellent necklaces, 32 excellent half-necklaces, 32 excellent single-strand
necklaces, 32 pearl necklaces, 32 golden necklaces, 32 jeweled necklaces, 32
pairs of excellent bracelets, 32 pairs of excellent armlets, 32 excellent sets
of silk garments, 32 excellent sets of cotton garments, 32 sets of Tussah silk
garments, 32 sets of sashes, 32 sets of fine muslin, 32 Shri (goddesses of
prosperity), 32 Hri (goddesses of modesty), 32 Dhrti (goddesses of fortitude),
32 Kirti (goddesses of fame), 32 Buddhi (goddesses of intellect), and 32 Lakshmi
(goddesses of wealth) statues, 32 Nanda (auspicious objects), 32 Bhadra
(auspicious objects), 32 palm trees, all of which are to be understood as jewel-
like. The 32 excellent flags as the insignia (ketu) of his palace, 32 excellent
cattle-pens (gokula) according to the count of ten thousand cows, 32 excellent
dramas performed by thirty-two persons, 32 excellent horses, all of which are to
be understood as jewel-like. Thirty-two excellent elephants, like a treasure-
house, 32 excellent vehicles, all jewel-like, 32 excellent palanquins, 32
excellent chariots, 32 excellent gillis (elephant's howdah), 32 excellent thilli
(horse's saddle), 32 excellent open vehicles, 32 pleasure chariots, 32 war
chariots, 32 excellent horses, 32 excellent elephants, 32 villages according to
the count of ten thousand families living in each, 32 excellent male servants,
32 excellent female servants, 32 excellent attendants, 32 doorkeepers, 32
eunuchs (antahpura guards), 32 ministers (mahattarakas), 32 golden, 32 silver,
and 32 gold-silver hanging lamps, 32 golden, 32 silver, and 32 gold-silver
standing lamps, similarly, 32 golden, 32 silver, and 32 gold-silver panjara-dipa
(lamps with stands), as well as 32 golden, 32 silver, and 32 gold-silver plates,
32 bowls, 32 cups, 32 saucers, 32 spoons, 32 chamber pots, 32 griddles, 32
footstools, 32 special seats, 32 water pots, 32 beds, 32 small beds, 32 goose-
shaped seats, 32 crane-shaped seats, 32 eagle-shaped seats, 32 elevated seats,
32 lowered seats, 32 long seats, 32 auspicious seats, 32 wing-shaped seats, 32
crocodile-shaped seats, 32 lotus-shaped seats, 32 crossed-leg seats, as well as
32 oil containers, etc., all are to be understood according to the Rajaprasniya-
sutra, up to 32 mustard-seed containers, 32 hunchbacked female servants, etc.,
all are to be understood according to the Aupapātika-sūtra, up to 32 female
servants from the Parasa country, 32 umbrellas, 32 umbrella-bearing female
servants, 32 chāmaras (yak-tail fans), 32 chāmara-bearing female servants, 32
fans, 32 fan-bearing female servants, 32 betel-nut containers, etc.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 tRtIya varga 21 atIva dedIpyamAna thaa| use dekhate hI darzaka ke nayana usameM
cipaka-se jAte the| usakA sparza sukhaprada thA aura rUpa zobhA-sampanna thaa|
usameM suvarNa, maNi evaM ratnoM kI stUpikAe~ banI huI thiiN| usakA pradhAna
zikhara ghaMTAoM sahita nAnA prakAra kI pA~ca varNoM kI patAkAoM se suzobhita
thaa| vaha cahu~ ora dedIpyamAna kiraNoM ke samUha ko phailA rahA thaa| vaha
lipA thA, dhulA thA aura caMdove se yukta thA yAvat vaha bhavana gaMdha kI vattI
jaisA jAna par3atA thaa| vaha citta ko prasanna karane vAlA, darzanIya, abhirUpa
aura pratirUpa thA--atIva manohara thaa| isake pazcAt bhadrA sArthavAhI ne yAvat
eka dina meM battIsa ibhyavaroM (zreSThipravaroM) kI kanyAoM ke sAtha
dhanyakumAra kA pANigrahaNa--vivAha sampanna kraayaa| unako battIsa-battIsa
vastue~ pradAna kii| yathA-- [battIsa koTi hiraNya (cA~dI ke sikke), battIsa
koTi sonaiye (sone ke sikke), battIsa zreSTha mukuTa, battIsa zreSTha
kuNDalayugala, battIsa uttama hAra, battIsa uttama arddhahAra, battIsa uttama
ekasarA hAra, battIsa muktAvalI hAra, battIsa kanakAvalI hAra, battIsa ratnAvalI
hAra, battIsa uttama kar3oM kI jor3I, battIsa uttama truTita (bAjUbanda) kI
jor3I, uttama battIsa rezamI vastrayugala, battIsa uttama sUtI vastrayugala,
battIsa Tasara vastrayugala, battIsa paTTayugala, battIsa dukulayugala, battIsa
zrI, battIsa hrI, battIsa dhRti, battIsa kIrti, battIsa buddhi aura battIsa
lakSmI deviyoM kI pratimA, battIsa nanda, battIsa bhadra, battIsa tAr3a vRkSa,
ye saba ratnamaya jAnane caahie| apane bhavana ke ketu (cihnarUpa) battIsa
uttama dhvaja, daza hajAra gAyoM ke eka vraja (gokula) ke hisAba se battIsa
uttama gokula, battIsa manuSyoM dvArA kiyA jAne vAlA eka nATaka hotA hai--aise
battIsa uttama nATaka, battIsa uttama ghor3e, ye saba ratnamaya jAnanA caahie|
bhANDAgAra samAna battIsa ratnamaya uttamottama hAthI, bhANDAgAra zrIdhara
samAna sarva ratnamaya battIsa uttama yAna, battIsa uttama yugya (eka prakAra kA
vAhana), battIsa zivikAeM, battIsa syandamAnikAeM, battIsa gillI (hAthI kI
ambAr3I), battIsa thilli (ghor3e ke palANa-kAThI), battIsa uttama vikaTa (khule
hue) yAna, battIsa pAriyAnika (krIDA karane ke) ratha, battIsa sAMgrAmika ratha,
battIsa uttama azva, battIsa uttama hAthI, dasa hajAra kula-parivAra jisameM
rahate hoM aise gA~va ke hisAba se battIsa gA~va, battIsa uttama dAsa, battIsa
uttama dAsiyA~, battIsa uttama kiMkara, battIsa kaMcukI (dvArarakSaka), battIsa
varSadhara (antaHpura ke rakSaka khojA), battIsa mahattaraka (antaHpura ke kArya
kA vicAra karane vAle), battIsa sone ke, battIsa cA~dI ke, battIsa sone-cA~dI ke
avalambanadIpaka (laTakane vAle dIpaka haNDiyA~), battIsa sone ke, battIsa cA~dI
ke, battIsa sone-cA~dI ke utkaJcana dIpaka (daNDa yukta dIpaka mazAla), isI
prakAra sone, cA~dI aura sone-cA~dI ina tInoM prakAra ke battIsa paJjara-dIpaka
diye tathA sone, cA~dI aura sone-cA~dI ke battIsa thAla, battIsa thAliyA~,
battIsa mallaka (kaTore), battIsa talikA (rakAbiyA~), battIsa kalAcikA
(cammaca), battIsa tApikAhastaka (saMDAsiyA~), battIsa tave, battIsa pAdapITha
(paira rakhane ke bAjauTha), battIsa bhiSikA (Asana vizeSa), battIsa karoTikA
(loTA), battIsa palaMga, battIsa pratizayyA (choTe palaMga), battIsa haMsAsana,
battIsa krauMcAsana. battIsa garuDAsana, battIsa unnatAsana, battIsa
avanatAsana, battIsa dIrghAsana, battIsa bhadrAsana, battIsa pakSAsana, battIsa
makarAsana, battIsa padmAsana, battIsa diksvastikAsana, battIsa tela ke Dibbe
ityAdi sabhI rAjapraznIyasUtra ke anusAra jAnanA cAhie, yAvat battIsa sarSapa ke
Dibbe, battIsa kubjA dAsiyA~ ityAdi sabhI aupapAtikasUtra ke anusAra jAnanA
cAhie, yAvat battIsa pArasa deza kI dAsiyA~, battIsa chatra, battIsa
chatradhAriNI dAsiyA~, battIsa cAmara, battIsa cAmaradhAriNI dAsiyA~, battIsa
paMkhe, battIsa paMkhAdhAriNI dAsiyA~, battIsa karoTikA (tAmbUla ke

Page #57 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter 22: The Unparalleled State of Abundance  The king gave thirty-two
**Karondī** (female attendants), thirty-two **Karotīkādhārīṇī** (attendants who
hold the Karotīkā, a type of fan), thirty-two **Dhātrī** (wet nurses), thirty-
two **Aṅkadhātrī** (attendants who massage the body), thirty-two **Aṅgamardīkā**
(attendants who gently massage the body), thirty-two attendants who bathe,
thirty-two attendants who adorn with ornaments, thirty-two attendants who grind
sandalwood, thirty-two attendants who grind **tāmbūla** (betel nut) powder,
thirty-two attendants who guard the storehouse, thirty-two attendants who
entertain, thirty-two attendants who stay close in the assembly, thirty-two
attendants who perform plays, thirty-two **Kautumbīka** (attendants who
accompany), thirty-two attendants who cook, thirty-two attendants who guard the
treasury, thirty-two young women, thirty-two **Mālinī** (attendants who carry
flowers), thirty-two attendants who fetch water, thirty-two attendants who
perform sacrifices, thirty-two attendants who prepare the bed, thirty-two
**Abhyantara** (inner) and thirty-two **Bāhya** (outer) **Pratihārī** (guards),
thirty-two attendants who make garlands, and thirty-two attendants who grind. In
addition, he gave a great deal of gold, silver, bronze, cloth, and abundant
wealth, including **Kanaka** (gold) and other essential wealth, enough to give
and enjoy for seven generations. Then, Dhanayakumāra gave each wife one
**Hiranyakoṭi** (a crore of gold coins), one **Svarṇakoṭi** (a crore of gold
coins), and all the other aforementioned items, including one **Peṣaṇakārī**
(grinding) female attendant, and divided a great deal of gold, silver, etc.,
until he was immersed in pleasures in his high palaces where **Mṛdaṅga** (drums)
were being played.  **Discussion:** This chapter describes Dhanayakumāra's
childhood, education, marriage ceremony, and experience of worldly pleasures.
This description is similar to the first or fifth study of the **Jñātā Sūtra**,
so those who are curious should refer to it for more information.
**Dhanayakumāra's Proposal to Renounce the World**  At that time, the **Samana**
(ascetic) **Bhagavan Mahāvīra** was in the vicinity. The king's entourage
departed. The king, like a **Jīvasattū** (living being), also departed. Then,
Dhanayakumāra, like a **Jamālī** (a type of bird), also departed. He went with a
**Pāyacāra** (attendant) until he reached the **Uttarasanga** (northern part of
the assembly hall). After reaching there, he stood with folded hands, with a
pure heart, and with great respect, and approached the **Samana** **Bhagavan
Mahāvīra**. After approaching, he bowed to the **Samana** **Bhagavan Mahāvīra**
with great respect, and then performed the **Triviha** (threefold)
**Pajjuvāsana** (prostration). Then, the **Samana** **Bhagavan Mahāvīra** spoke
to Dhanayakumāra, praising his great qualities and explaining the **Dharma**
(righteousness). The entourage also listened.  Then, Dhanayakumāra, in the
presence of the **Samana** **Bhagavan Mahāvīra**, contemplated the **Dharma**,
his heart filled with determination and unwavering resolve. He stood up and
bowed, and then, with great respect, addressed the **Samana** **Bhagavan
Mahāvīra** and said:  "I am ready, **Bhanta** (venerable sir), to become a
**Niggantha** (Jain ascetic). I am ready, **Bhanta**, to become a **Niggantha**.
I am ready, **Bhanta**, to become a **Niggantha**. I am ready, **Bhanta**, to
become a **Niggantha."  "So be it, **Bhanta**! So be it, **Bhanta**! It is not
in vain, **Bhanta**! It is not in vain, **Bhanta**! ... I will ask you what I
should do. Then, I will go to the **Devāṇuppiyāṇa** (heavenly beings) ... I will
renounce my home and become a **Niggantha**."

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 22 anuttaraupapAtikadazA karaNDie), battIsa karoTikAdhAriNI dAsiyA~, battIsa
dhAtriyA~ (dUdha pilAne vAlI dhAya) yAvat battIsa aGkadhAtriyA~, battIsa
aGgamardikA (zarIra kA alpa mardana karane vAlI dAsiyA~), battIsa snAna karAne
vAlI dAsiyA~, battIsa alaGkAra pahanAne vAlI dAsiyA~, battIsa candana
ghisanevAlI dAsiyA~, battIsa tAmbUlacUrNa pIsane vAlI, battIsa koSThAgAra kI
rakSA karane vAlI, battIsa parihAsa karane vAlI, battIsa sabhA meM pAsa rahane
vAlI, battIsa nATaka karane vAlI, battIsa kauTumbika (sAtha jAne vAlI), battIsa
rasoI banAne vAlI, battIsa bhaNDAra kI rakSA karane vAlI, battIsa taruNiyA~,
battIsa puSpa dhAraNa karane vAlI (mAline), battIsa pAnI bharane vAlI, battIsa
bali karane vAlI, . battIsa zayyA bichAne vAlI, battIsa Abhyantara aura battIsa
bAhya pratihAriyA~, battIsa mAlA banAne vAlI aura battIsa peSaNa karane (pIsane)
vAlI dAsiyA~ diiN| isake atirikta bahuta-sA hiraNya, suvarNa, kAMsya, vastra
tathA vipula dhana, kanaka yAvat sArabhUta dhana diyA, jo sAta pIr3hI taka
icchApUrvaka dene aura bhogane ke lie paryApta thaa| taba dhanyakumAra ne
pratyeka patnI ko eka-eka hiraNyakoTi, eka-eka svarNakoTi, ityAdi pUrvokta sabhI
vastue~ de dIM yAvat eka-eka peSaNakArI dAsI tathA bahuta-sA hiraNya-suvarNa Adi
vibhakta kara diyA yAvat U~ce prAsAdoM meM jinameM mRdaMga baja rahe the, yAvat
dhanyakumAra sukhabhogoM meM lIna ho gyaa| vivecana ukta sUtra meM dhanyakumAra
ke bAlakapana, vidyAdhyayana, vivAhasaMskAra aura sAMsArika sukhoM ke anubhava
ke viSaya meM kathana kiyA gayA hai| yaha saba varNana jJAtAsUtra ke prathama
athavA pA~caveM adhyayana ke sAtha milatA hai, ataH jijJAsu vahIM se adhika jAna
leN| dhanyakumAra kA pravrajyA-prastAva 4 teNaM kAleNaM teNaM samaeNaM samaNe
jAva (bhagavaM mahAvIre) smosddhe| parisA niggyaa| rAyA jahA koNio tahA
jiyasattU niggo| tae NaM tassa dhaNNassa taM mahayA jahA jamAlI tahA niggo|nvrN
pAyacAreNaM jAva[egasADiyaM uttarAsaMgaM karei, ega0 karittA AyaMte cokkhe,
paramasuibbhUe, aMjalimauliyahatyo jeNeva samaNe bhagavaM mahAvIre teNeva
uvAgacchai, uvAgacchittA samaNaM bhagavaM mahAvIraM tikkhutto AyAhiNapayAhiNaM
karei, karettA jAva tivihAe pajjuvAsaNAe pajjuvAsai  /  tae NaM samaNe bhagavaM
mahAvIre dhaNNassa kumArassa tIse ya mahatimahAliyAe isi0 jAva dhammakahA0 jAva
parisA pddigyaa| tae NaM dhaNNe kumAre samaNassa bhagavao mahAvIrassa aMtie
dhammaM soccA, Nisamma haTTha-tuTu jAva hiyae, uTThAe uDhei, uThettA samaNaM
bhagavaM mahAvIraM tikkhutto jAva NamaMsittA evaM vayAsI sahAhAmi NaM bhaMte !
NiggaMthaM pAvayaNaM  /  pattiyAmiNaM bhaMte ! NiggaMthaM pAbayaNaM  /  roemiNaM
bhaMte ! NiggaMthaM pAvayaNaM  /  abbhuDemi NaM bhaMte ! NiggaMthaM pAvayaNaM  /
evameyaM bhaMte ! tahameyaM bhaMte ! avitahameyaM bhaMte ! asaMdiddhameyaM
bhaMte ! jAva se jaheyaM tubbhe vayaha, jaM] navaraM ammayaM bhadaM satthavAhiM
aapucchaami| tae NaM ahaM devANuppiyANaM aMtie jAva[muMDe bhavittA agArAo
aNagariyaM] pvvyaami|

Page #58 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Third Chapter  23. Devānupriyā! Do not delay.  Just as Jamālī inquired, so he
asked [Then, that noble prince, having heard the words of the Samana Bhagavan
Mahāvīra, was delighted and satisfied. He bowed to the Samana Bhagavan Mahāvīra
with great respect, and went to his mother and father. Having gone to them, he
greeted his mother and father with victory and joy. Having greeted them with
victory and joy, he spoke to them in this way: "Oh, my mother and father! I have
heard the Dharma from the Samana Bhagavan Mahāvīra, and it is pleasing to me, I
desire it, I accept it, I am delighted with it." Then, that noble prince's
mother and father spoke to him in this way: "Oh, dear son! You are blessed! You
are fulfilled, dear son! You are virtuous, dear son! You are auspicious, dear
son! You have heard the Dharma from the mouth of the Samana Bhagavan Mahāvīra,
and it is pleasing to you, you desire it, you accept it, you are delighted with
it."  Then, that noble prince's mother and father, again and again, spoke to him
in this way: "Oh, my mother and father! I have heard the Dharma from the Samana
Bhagavan Mahāvīra, and it is pleasing to me, I desire it, I accept it, I am
delighted with it." Then, I, oh my mother and father! Being terrified of the
cycle of birth and death, fearing birth, old age, and death, I desire, oh my
mother and father! To be ordained by you, to become a monk, to leave the
household and become a homeless one, to go to the Samana Bhagavan Mahāvīra.  _At
that time, the Śramaṇa Bhagavan Mahāvīra, having attained Nirvāṇa, arrived in
the city of Kākaṇḍī. The assembly came out. Like a Konika, the king Jitasatru
also came out to see him. Like Jamālī, the noble prince Dhanayakumāra also came
out with adornments. The special thing is that Dhanayakumāra walked on foot to
reach the service of the Bhagavan.  Having heard the Dharma from the Śramaṇa
Bhagavan Mahāvīra and having held it in his heart, Dhanayakumāra, with a joyful
and satisfied heart, stood up and circumambulated the Śramaṇa Bhagavan Mahāvīra
three times, offering salutations and prostrations. And he spoke in this way:
"Oh Bhagavan! I have faith in the Nirgrantha teachings. Oh Bhagavan! I believe
in the Nirgrantha teachings. Oh Bhagavan! I am interested in the Nirgrantha
teachings. Oh Bhagavan! I am eager to act according to the Nirgrantha teachings.
Oh Bhagavan! This Nirgrantha teaching is true, factual, and unquestionable, as
you say.  Oh Bhagavan! I want to leave my home, shave my head, and accept the
homeless Dharma from you, with the permission of my mother, Bhadra Sārthavāhi.
The Bhagavan said, "Devānupriyā! Do whatever pleases you, do not be negligent
even for a moment in the work of Dharma."  When the Śramaṇa Bhagavan Mahāvīra
spoke to Dhanayakumāra in the aforementioned way, Dhanayakumāra was delighted
and satisfied. He circumambulated the Bhagavan three times, offering salutations
and prostrations. Then he went to his parents and, tying them with the words
"victory and joy," spoke in this way: "Oh mother and father! I have heard the
Dharma from the Śramaṇa Bhagavan Mahāvīra. That Dharma is pleasing to me, very
pleasing to me, and...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 tRtIya varga 23 ahAsuhaM devANuppiyA ! mA pddibNdhN| jAva jahA jamAlI tahA
Apucchai [tae NaM se dhaNNe kumAre samaNeNaM bhagavayA mahAvIreNaM evaM vutte
samANe haTTha-tuDhe samarNa bhagavaM mahAvIraM tikkhutto jAvaNamaMsittA, jAva
jeNeva ammA-piyaro teNeva uvAgacchai, uvAgacchittA ammA-piyaro jaeNaM vijaeNaM
vaddhAvei, jaeNaM vijaeNaM vaddhAvittA evaM vayAsI evaM khalu ammayAo! mae
samaNassa bhagavao mahAvIrassa aMtiyaM dhamme NisaMte, se vi ya me dhamme
icchie, paDicchie, abhiruie| taeNaM dhaNNaM kumAraM ammA-piyaro evaM vayAsI-
dhaNNe siNaM tumaM jAyA ! kayatthe siNaM tumaM jAyA ! kayapuNNe si NaM tumaM
jAyA ! kayalakkhaNe si NaM tumaM jAyAM ! jaM NaM tume samaNassa bhagavao
mahAvIrassa aMtiyaM dhamme NisaMte, se vi ya dhamme icchie, paDicchie, abhiruie|
tae NaM se dhaNNe kumAre ammA-piyaro doccaMpi taccaM pi evaM vayAsI-evaM khalu
mae ammayAo! samaNassa bhagavao mahAvIrassa aMtie dhamme NisaMte, jAva abhiruie|
tae NaM ahaM ammayAo ! saMsArabhayauvvigge, bhIe jamma-jarA-maraNeNaM, taM
icchAmi NaM ammayAo ! tubbhehiM abbhaNuNNAe samANe samaNassa bhagavao
mahAvIrassa aMtiyaM muMDe bhavittA agArAo aNagAriyaM pvvitte| _usa kAla aura usa
samaya meM zramaNa yAvat nirvANasaMprApta bhagavAn mahAvIra kAkaMdI nagarI meM
pdhaare| pariSad niklii| koNika kI taraha jitazatru rAjA bhI darzanArtha niklaa|
jamAlI ke samAna dhanyakumAra bhI sAja-sajjA ke sAtha niklaa| vizeSa yaha hai ki
dhanyakumAra paidala cala kara hI bhagavAn kI sevA meM phuNcaa| zramaNa bhagavAn
mahAvIra svAmI ke pAsa dharma sunakara aura hRdaya meM dhAraNa karake
dhanyakumAra harSita aura santuSTa hRdaya vAlA huA yAvat khar3e hokara zramaNa
bhagavAn mahAvIra svAmI ko tIna bAra pradakSiNA karake vandana-namaskAra kiyA
aura isa prakAra kahA he bhagavan ! maiM nirgrantha pravacana para zraddhA
karatA huuN| he bhagavan ! maiM nirgrantha pravacana para vizvAsa karatA huuN|
he bhagavan ! maiM nirgrantha pravacana para ruci karatA huuN| he bhagavan !
maiM nirgrantha-pravacana ke anusAra pravRtti karane ko tatpara huA huuN| he
bhagavan ! yaha nirgrantha-pravacana satya hai, tathya hai, asaMdigdha hai,
jaisA ki Apa kahate haiN| he bhagavan ! maiM apanI mAtA--bhadrA sArthavAhI kI
AjJA lekara, gRhavAsa kA tyAga karake, muNDita hokara Apake pAsa anagAra-dharma
svIkAra karanA cAhatA huuN| bhagavAn ne kahA devAnupriya ! jaise tumheM sukha ho
vaisA karo, dharma-kArya meM samayamAtra bhI pramAda mata kro| jaba zramaNa
bhagavAn mahAvIra ne dhanyakumAra se pUrvokta prakAra se kahA to dhanyakumAra
harSita aura santuSTa huaa| usane bhagavAn ko tIna bAra pradakSiNA karake
vandana-namaskAra kiyaa| phira vaha apane mAtA-pitA ke pAsa AyA aura jaya-vijaya
zabdoM se badhAkara isa prakAra bolA he mAtA-pitA ! maiMne zramaNa bhagavAn
mahAvIra svAmI se dharma sunA hai| vaha dharma mujhe iSTa, atyanta iSTa aura
rucikara huA hai| taba mAtA-pitA ne dhanyakumAra se kahA--beTA ! tuma dhanya ho
! tuma kRtArtha ho, beTA ! tuma puNyazAlI ho, beTA! tuma sulakSaNa ho ki tumane
bhagavAn ke mukha se dharma zravaNa kiyA aura vaha dharma tumheM priya, atizaya
priya aura

Page #59 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 24 ## The Unparalleled State of Non-Arising  Dhanayakumar found it pleasing.
Then, for the second and third time, Dhanayakumar spoke to his parents in the
same way, saying, "O parents! I am troubled by the fear of the world, terrified
by birth, old age, and death. Therefore, O parents! With your permission, I wish
to accept the homeless dharma by becoming a monk, getting my head shaved, and
renouncing my household life near the Lord Mahavira."  ## Acceptance of
Renunciation  Then, the virtuous Kumar's mother, hearing those unpleasant,
unwelcome, disagreeable, displeasing, unpalatable, and unheard-of words,
fainted. After regaining consciousness, there was a conversation and counter-
conversation. She cried, wailed, grieved, and lamented, as Mahabala had said.
"O Dhanayakumar! You are our only son, our beloved, our dear, our treasure, our
jewel, our pride, our trust, our agreement, our respect, our acceptance, our
treasure trove, our precious jewel, our life's breath, our heart's joy, our
delight, our rare flower, our precious gem! Why should you go? Why should you
leave us? We do not want you to leave us even for a moment. Stay, my dear! As
long as we live, we will arrange your marriage after our death. You will become
a monk, get your head shaved, and renounce your household life and become a
homeless one, following the teachings of the Lord Mahavira, the great one, who
is the source of our lineage, our family tree, our birth, and our existence."
Then, Dhanayakumar said to his mother and father, "O mother! What you are saying
to me, you are saying it because you are my mother. I am your only son, your
beloved, and so on. But I will renounce my household life. O mother! In the
human existence, there are countless births, old age, death, disease, bodily and
mental suffering, desires, pain, sorrow, and constant fear of being overwhelmed.
It is impermanent, unstable, and unreliable. It is like a mirage, a water
bubble, a drop of dew, a dream, a lightning flash, unstable, impermanent, and
subject to decay, destruction, and annihilation. It will surely be abandoned,
either in this life or in the next. Who knows, O mother! Whether one will go to
hell or heaven? Therefore, O mother! I wish to renounce my household life and
become a monk with your blessings."  Then, the virtuous Dhanayakumar, the good
and wise, went to the king, the protector of the dharma, and asked him, "O king!
I wish to renounce my household life. I wish to have an umbrella, a crown, and a
fly whisk for my departure."  Then, the king, the protector of the dharma, said
to the virtuous one, "O protector of the dharma! You are a virtuous person. I
will personally arrange for the departure of Dhanayakumar, the renunciant,
without any delay."  The king himself arranged for the departure, just as he had
done for the departure of his own son, Kanha. Then, Dhanayakumar, the
renunciant, himself performed the five-fold prostration, and then he renounced
his household life.  Then, Dhanayakumar, the homeless one, went to the forest,
where he practiced austerities and became a silent monk.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 24 anuttaraupapAtikadazA rucikara lgaa| taba dhanyakumAra ne dUsarI aura tIsarI
bAra bhI apane mAtA-pitA se isI prakAra kahA, sAtha hI kahA ki he mAtA-pitA !
maiM saMsAra ke bhaya se udvigna huA hU~, janma, jarA aura maraNa se bhayabhIta
huA huuN| ataH he mAtA-pitA ! maiM ApakI AjJA hone para zramaNa bhagavAn
mahAvIra svAmI ke nikaTa muNDita hokara, gRhavAsa kA tyAga karake anagAra-dharma
svIkAra karanA cAhatA huuN| pravrajyA-sammati 5-tae NaM sAdhaNNassa
kumArassamAyA taM aNiTuM, akaMtaM, appiyaM amaNuNNaM amaNAmaM, asuyapuvvaM giraM
soccA mucchiyaa| vuttapaDivuttayA jahA mhbble|[roymaannii] kaMdamANI, soyamANI,
vilavamANI jAva[dhaNNaM kumAraM evaM vayAsI tumaM siNaM jAyA ! amhaM ege putte
iTe, kaMte, pie, maNNuNe, maNAme, theje, vesAsie, sammae, bahumae, aNumae,
bhaMDakaraMDagasamANe rayaNe rayaNabhUe, jIviyaussAse hiyayaNaMdijaNaNe
uMbarapuSphamiva dullahe savaNayAe kimaMga ! puNa pAsaNayAe ! taM No khalu jAyA
! amhe icchAmo tubbhaM khaNamavi vippaogaM sahittae, taM acchAhi tAva jAyA !
jAva tAva amhe jIvAmo, tao pacchA amhehiM kAlagaehiM samANehiM pariNayavaye,
vaDDiyakulavaMsataMtukajammiNiravayakkhe samaNassa bhagavao mahAvIrassa aMtiyaM
muMDe bhavittA agArAo aNagAriyaM pvvihisi| tae NaM dhaNNe kumAre ammA-piyaro
evaM vayAsI taheva NaM taM ammayAo ! jaM NaM tubbhe mamaM evaM vayaha, tumaM
siNaM jAyA ! amhaM ege putte iDhe kaMte ceva, jAva pavvaihisi; evaM khalu
ammayAo ! mANussae bhave aNegajAi-jarA-maraNa-roga-sArIramANasapakAmadukkha-
veyaNa-vasaNa-saovaddavAbhibhUe, adhuve, aNiie, asAsae saMjjhabbharAgasarise,
jalabubbuyasamANe, kusaggajalabiMdusaNNibhe,suviNagadasaNovame, vijulayAcaMcale,
aNicce, saDaNapaDaNaviddhaMsaNadhamme, puTviM vA pacchA vA avassa vippajahiyavve
bhavissai, se kesa NaM jANai ammayAo ! ke puTviM gamaNayAe, ke pacchA gamaNayAe?
taM icchAmi NaM ammayAo ! tubbhehiM abbhaNuNNAe samANe samaNassa jaav-pvvitte|
tae NaM taM dhaNNaM kumAraM bhaddA satthavAhI jAhe No saMcAei jAva jiyasattuM
Apucchai, icchAmi NaM devANuppiyA! dhaNNassa dArayassa NikkhamamANassa chatta-
mauDa-cAmarAo ya vidinaao| tae NaM jiyasattU rAyA bhaI satthavAhiM evaM vayAsI--
acchAhi NaM tuma devANuppie ! sunivRttavIsatthA, ahaNNaM sayameva dhaNNassa
dArayassa nikkhamaNasakkAraM krissaami| sayameva jitasattU nikkhamaNaM karei,
jahA thAvaccAputtassa knnho| tae NaM dhaNNe dArae sayameva paMcamuTThiyaM loyaM
karei jAva pavvaie  /  tae NaM dhaNNe dArae aNagAre jAe IriyAsamie jAva
guttbNbhcaarii| _ dhanyakumAra kI mAtA usake uparyukta aniSTa, akAnta, apriya,
amanojJa, mana ko apriya, azrutapUrva (jo pahale kabhI nahIM sunI) aisI
(AghAtakAraka) vANI sunakara, mUrchita ho gii| tatpazcAt hoza meM Ane para unakA
kathana aura pratikathana huaa| vaha rotI huI, Akrandana karatI huI,zoka karatI
huI aura vilApa karatI huI mahAbala ke kathana

Page #60 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Third Chapter  The mother, similar to the third category, began to speak in
this way: "Oh son! You are my beloved, dear, cherished, pleasing, agreeable,
fundamental, trustworthy, accepted, majority, permitted, like a box of
ornaments, a jewel, a jewel-like, like the breath of the living, and a joy to
the heart, my only son. Even hearing your name is as rare as the flower of the
Udumbara (Gular) tree, so what to say about seeing you? Therefore, oh son! I
cannot bear your separation for even a moment. So, as long as we are alive, stay
at home and increase the family lineage. When we attain the law of time and your
age becomes mature, then, after increasing the family lineage, you should become
free and accept the religion of the homeless by getting your head shaved in the
presence of the holy Shraman Bhagwan Mahavir."  Then Dhanayakumar said to his
parents: "Oh parents! What you just said, 'Oh son! You are our beloved, dear,
etc., and when we pass away, you should accept initiation,' etc. But, oh
parents! This human life is afflicted with immense pain from birth, death,
illness, disease, many physical and mental sufferings, and hundreds of
afflictions. It is impermanent, impermanent, and non-eternal. Like the colors of
the evening, like the bubbles of water, like the water drop that remains on the
sharp edge, like a dream vision, and like the flash of lightning, it is fickle
and impermanent. To rot, to fall, to melt, and to be destroyed is its nature
(characteristic). One day, sooner or later, one must leave; so, oh parents! Who
can decide who will go first (die) and who will go later? Therefore, oh parents!
Please give me your permission. With your permission, I wish to accept
initiation in the presence of Shraman Bhagwan Mahavir."  When Dhanayakumar's
mother, Bhadra Sार्थवाही, was unable to convince him, she gave him permission to
take initiation. Just as the mother of Thavacchaputra requested a canopy, a fly
whisk, etc., from Krishna, similarly, Bhadra also requested a canopy, a fly
whisk, etc., from King Jitashatru. Then King Jitashatru said to Bhadra
Sार्थवाही: "Devanpriye! Be at ease. I myself will perform the initiation
ceremony of Dhanayakumar." Afterwards, King Jitashatru himself performed the
initiation ceremony of Dhanayakumar, just as Krishna had performed the
initiation ceremony of Thavacchaputra.  After that, Dhanayakumar himself
performed the Panchmustik Loch and accepted initiation. Dhanayakumar also became
homeless after becoming initiated. He became a secret celibate, equipped with
the Eirya-Samiti and the Bhasha-Samiti.  ## Discussion  This chapter describes
how Dhanayakumar developed detachment. When Shraman Bhagwan Mahavir arrived in
Kakandini Nagar, Dhanayakumar, along with the city council, was present in his
service to see him and drink the nectar of his teachings. The teachings had such
an impact on Dhanayakumar that he immediately renounced all worldly pleasures
and became homeless.  In this chapter, we find four examples. Two of them are
about Dhanayakumar, and the other two are about King Jitashatru's relationship
with King Konik, and the fourth is about the initiation ceremony performed by
Krishna Vasudeva for Thavacchaputra. All of these are taken from the 'Aupapatik
Sutra', 'Bhagavati Sutra', and 'Jnatadharmakathang Sutra'. A detailed
description of all of them can be found in these Sutras. Therefore, the
inquisitive should definitely study these Agamas once. All these Agamas are very
useful from a historical perspective. There is no need to repeat the
descriptions here.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 tatIya varga ke sadRza isa prakAra kahane lagI "he putra ! tU mujhe iSTa,
kAnta, priya, manojJa, manAma (managamatA), AdhArabhUta, vizvAsapAtra, sammata,
bahumata, anumata, AbhUSaNoM kI peTI ke tulya, ratnasvarUpa, ratnatulya, jIvita
ke ucchvAsa ke samAna aura hRdaya ko AnandadAyaka eka hI putra hai| udumbara
(gUlara) ke puSpa ke samAna terA nAma sunanA bhI durlabha hai, to terA darzana
durlabha ho isameM to kahanA hI kyA ? ataH he putra ! terA viyoga mujhase eka
kSaNa bhI sahana nahIM ho sktaa| isalie jaba taka hama jIvita haiM taba taka
ghara hI raha kara kula vaMza kI abhivRddhi kara  /  jaba hama kAladharma ko
prApta ho jAe~ aura tumhArI umra paripakva ho jAya taba, kula vaMza kI vRddhi
karake tuma nirapekSa hokara zramaNa bhagavAn mahAvIra svAmI ke pAsa muNDita
hokara anagAra dharma ko svIkAra krnaa|" taba dhanyakumAra ne apane mAtA-pitA se
isa prakAra kahA "he mAtA-pitA ! abhI Apane jo kahA ki he putra ! tU hameM iSTa,
kAnta, priya Adi hai yAvat hamAre kAlagata hone para tU dIkSA aMgIkAra karanA
ityaadi| parantu he mAtA-pitA ! yaha manuSya jIvana janma, maraNa, roga, vyAdhi,
aneka zArIrika aura mAnasika duHkhoM kI atyanta vedanA se aura saiMkar3oM
vyasanoM (kaSToM) se pIr3ita hai| yaha adhruva anitya aura azAzvata hai  /
sandhyAkAlIna raMgoM ke samAna, pAnI ke parapoTe (budabude) ke samAna, kuzAgra
para rahe hue jala-bindu ke samAna, svapna-darzana ke samAna tathA bijalI kI
camaka ke samAna caMcala aura anitya hai| sar3anA, par3anA, galanA aura vinaSTa
honA isakA dharma (svabhAva) hai| pahale yA pIche eka dina avazya hI chor3anA
par3atA hai; to he mAtA-pitA ! isa bAta kA nirNaya kauna kara sakatA hai ki
hamameM se kauna pahale jAyagA (maregA) aura kauna pIche jAyagA ? isalie he
mAtA-pitA ! Apa mujhe AjJA diijiye| ApakI AjJA hone para maiM zramaNa bhagavAn
mahAvIra ke pAsa pravrajyA aMgIkAra karanA cAhatA huuN|" jaba dhanyakumAra kI
mAtA bhadrA sArthavAhI use samajhAne-bujhAne meM samartha nahIM huI, taba usane
dhanyakumAra ko pravrajyA lene kI AjJA de dii| jisa prakAra thAvaccAputra kI
mAtA ne kRSNa se chatra cAmarAdi kI yAcanA kI, usI prakAra bhadrA ne bhI
jitazatra rAjA se chatra cAmara Adi kI yAcanA kI, taba jitazatru rAjA ne bhadrA
sArthavAhI se kahA-'devAnapriye! tuma nizcinta rho| maiM svayaM dhanyakumAra kA
dIkSA-satkAra kruuNgaa| tatpazcAt jitazatru rAjA ne svayaM hI dhanyakumAra kA
dIkSA-satkAra kiyaa| jisa prakAra kRSNa ne thAvaccAputra kA dIkSAmahotsava
sampanna kiyA thaa| tatpazcAt dhanyakumAra ne svayaM hI paMcamuSTika loca kiyA
yAvat pravrajyA aMgIkAra kii| dhanyakumAra bhI pravrajita hokara anagAra ho
gyaa| IryA-samiti, bhASA-samiti se yukta yAvat guptabrahmacArI ho gyaa| vivecana
isa sUtra meM dhanyakumAra ko kisa prakAra vairAgya utpanna huA, isa viSaya kA
varNana kiyA gayA hai| jaba zramaNa bhagavAn mahAvIra svAmI kAkandI nagarI meM
padhAre to nagara kI pariSad ke sAtha dhanyakumAra bhI unake darzana karane aura
unase upadezAmRta pAna karane ke lie unakI sevA meM upasthita huaa| upadeza kA
dhanyakumAra para aisA prabhAva par3A ki vaha tatkAla hI sampUrNa sAMsArika
bhoga-vilAsoM ko Thokara mAra kara anagAra bana gyaa| isa sUtra meM hameM cAra
udAharaNa milate haiN| unameM se do dhanyakumAra ke viSaya meM haiM aura zeSa do
meM se eka jitazatra rAjA kA koNika rAjA se tathA cauthA dIkSA-mahotsava kA
kRSNa vAsudeva dvArA kiye hue thAvaccAputra ke dIkSA-mahotsava se haiN| ye saba
'aupapAtikasUtra', 'bhagavatIsUtra' tathA 'jJAtAdharmakathAGgasUtra' se lie gae
haiN| ina saba kA ukta sUtroM meM vistRta varNana milatA hai| ataH jijJAsu ko
ina AgamoM kA eka bAra avazya svAdhyAya karanA caahie| ye saba Agama aitihAsika
dRSTi se bhI atyanta upayogI haiN| yahA~ ukta varNanoM ko doharAne kI AvazyakatA

Page #61 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 26  **Briefly explained.**  The text in brackets, which is given in the
original text and its meaning, is related to Jamali's context, therefore it
mentions 'Ammapiyaro' (parents), but it does not occur in the context of Dhanya
Kumar, therefore only the mother should be considered here. The father is not
mentioned anywhere in this incident. Readers should keep this in mind.
**Anuttara-upapaatika-dasha**  **Dhanya Muni's Tapascharya**  6A. On the day
when Dhanya Anagaara became a monk, having renounced his household life [having
renounced his household life], he bowed and prostrated to the Shraman Bhagavan
Mahavira, and after bowing and prostrating, he spoke thus:  "Bhanta! With your
permission, I wish to live for the rest of my life, constantly engaged in the
sixth-fold austerity, with an unblemished mind, and with the acceptance of
Ayambila. In the observance of the sixth-fold austerity, I wish to accept
Ayambila, but not Anayambila. I wish to accept it with hands that have been in
contact with things, but not with hands that have not been in contact with
things. I wish to accept it if it is Ujjhitadharma (fit to be discarded), but
not if it is Anujjhitadharma. I wish to accept it if it is food and drink that
many other Shramans, Brahmanas, guests, miserly people, and beggars do not
desire."  The Devana-priya (beloved of the gods) said: "Do as it pleases you,
but do not be careless."  Then, Dhanya Anagaara, with the permission of Bhagavan
Mahavira, lived for the rest of his life, constantly engaged in the sixth-fold
austerity, with a joyful and contented mind, and with the acceptance of
Ayambila.  **Explanation:** This sutra particularly describes Dhanya Anagaara's
detachment from food and the body, and his restraint of the sense of taste.
After receiving initiation, he became so engrossed in Dharma that from the day
of his initiation, his inclination was towards intense austerity. On that very
day, he decided and requested Bhagavan: "Bhagavan! With your permission, I will
observe the sixth-fold austerity with the acceptance of Ayambila for the rest of
my life." His such Dharma-interest...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 26 na jAna kara saMkSepa kara diyA gyaa| dIkSA kI anumati prApta karane ke
prasaMga meM braikeTa meM jo pATha-mUla aura artha meM diyA gayA hai vaha jamAlI
ke prasaMga kA hai, ataeva unameM 'ammApiyaro' (mAtA-pitA) kA ullekha hai kintu
dhanya kumAra ke viSaya meM ghaTita nahIM hotA, ataH yahA~ kevala mAtA kA hI
grahaNa karanA caahie| isa prakaraNa meM pitA kA kahIM ullekha nahIM hai|
pAThakoM ko yaha dhyAna meM rakhanA cAhie  /  anuttaraupapAtikadazA dhanya muni
kI tapazcaryA 6e NaM se dhaNe aNagAre jaM ceva divase muMDe bhavittA jAva [
agArAo aNagAriyaM ] pavvaie, taM caiva divasa samaNaM bhagavaM mahAvIraM vaMdai
namasai, vaMdittA namaMsittA evaM vayAsI-- evaM khalu icchAmi NaM bhaMte !
tubbhehiM abbhaNuNNAe samANe jAvajjIvAe chaTThachaTTeNaM aNikkhitteNaM
AyaMbilapariggahieNaM tavokammeNaM appANaM bhAvemANe viharittae  /  chaTThassa
vi ya NaM pAraNayaMsi kappei me AyaMbilaM paDigAhettae no ceva NaM aNAyaMbilaM
/  taM pi ya saMsaTTaM no ceva NaM asaMsaGkaM  /  taM piyaNaM ujjhiya- dhammiyaM
no ceva NaM aNujjhiyadhammiyaM  /  taM piya jaM aNNe bahave samaNa - mAhaNa -
atihi-kivaNavaNImagA nAvakaMkhaMti  /  ahAsuhaM devANuppiyA ! mA paDibaMdhaM
kareha  /  taNaM se dhaNe aNagAre samaNeNaM bhagavayA mahAvIreNaM abbhaNuNNAe
samANe haTTha-tuTTha jAvajjIvAe chaTThachaTTeNaM aNikkhitteNaM tavokammeNaM
appANaM bhAvemANe viharai  /  tadanantara dhanya anagAra jisa dina pravrajita
hue yAvat gRhavAsa tyAga kara agehI bane, usI dina zramaNa bhagavAn mahAvIra ko
vaMdana kiyA, namaskAra kiyA tathA vaMdana aura namaskAra karake isa prakAra
bole bhaMte! Apa se anujJAta hokara jIvana paryanta nirantara SaSTha-belA tapa
se tathA AyaMbila ke pAraNe se maiM apanI AtmA ko bhAvita karate hue vicaraNa
karanA cAhatA huuN| SaSTha tapa ke pAraNA meM bhI mujhe AyaMbila grahaNa karanA
kalpatA hai, parantu anAyaMbila grahaNa karanA nahIM kalpatA  /  vaha bhI
saMsRSTa hAthoM Adi se lenA kalpatA hai, asaMsRSTa hAthoM Adi se lenA nahIM
kalpatA  /  vaha bhI ujjhitadharma vAlA (tyAga dene pheMka dene yogya) grahaNa
karanA kalpatA hai, anujjhitadharma vAlA nahIM kalpatA  /  usameM bhI vaha
bhakta-pAna kalpatA hai, jise lene kI anya bahuta se zramaNa, mAhaNa (brAhmaNa),
atithi, kRpaNa aura vanIpaka ( bhikhArI) icchA na kreN| dhanya anagAra se
bhagavAn ne kahA-- he devAnupriya ! jaise tumheM sukhakara ho, vaisA karo,
parantu pramAda mata kro| anantara vaha dhanya anagAra bhagavAn mahAvIra se
anujJAta hokara yAvat harSita evaM tuSTa hokara jIvana paryanta nirantara SaSTha
tapa se apane AtmA ko bhAvita karate hue vicarane lage  /  vivecana -- isa sUtra
meM dhanya anagAra kI AhAra aura zarIra viSayaka anAsakti kA tathA
rasanendriyasaMyama kA vizeSa rUpa se pratipAdana kiyA gayA hai| ve dIkSA prApta
kara isa prakAra dharma meM tallIna ho gaye ki dIkSA ke dina se unakI pravRtti
ugra tapa karane kI ora ho gii| usI dina nirNaya kara unhoMne bhagavAn se
nivedana kiyA - bhagavan ! maiM ApakI AjJA se jIvana bhara SaSTha (bele) tapa kA
AyaMbila pUrvaka pAraNA kruuN| unakI isa taraha kI dharmaruci

Page #62 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Third Class 27 Seeing this, the Lord granted permission. The blessed Anāgāra,
according to his vow, accepted the austerity. He is called 'Ujjhit-Dharmic', who
eats food that is particularly unwanted. The commentary states, "Ujjhiy-
Dhammiyanti, Ujjhitam - Parityaagaha sa eva Dharmaha - Paryayo yasyaastiti
Ujjhitadharmaha", meaning that food which is completely worthy of being
abandoned or thrown away is called 'Ujjhit-Dharma'. On the day of Ayambila, the
blessed Anāgāra used to eat such food. 7 Therefore, the blessed Anāgāra, on the
first day of the sixth-month fast, performed the first watch of study. Just as
Gautama asked the Lord, so too did the blessed Anāgāra ask the Lord, until [in
the second Pौरिसी he meditated, in the third Pौरिसी he was free from bodily
haste, mental restlessness, anxiety and curiosity, 1. Anuttaropavaiya Class 3,
Sutra 6.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 tRtIya varga 27 dekha kara zrI bhagavAn ne anumati de dii| dhanya anagAra ne
apanI pratijJA ke anusAra tapa aMgIkAra kara liyaa| 'ujjhita-dharmika' use
kahate haiM, jisa anna ko vizeSatayA koI nahIM cAhatA ho| TIkA meM kahA
hai"ujjhiya-dhammiyaM ti, ujjhitaM--parityAgaH sa eva dharmaH -paryAyo
yasyAstIti ujjhitadharmaH" arthAt jo anna sarvathA tyAga kara dene yogya yA
pheMka dene ke yogya ho, vaha 'ujjhita-dharma' hotA hai| AyaMbila ke dina dhanya
anagAra aisA hI AhAra kiyA karate the| 7 tae NaM se dhaNNe aNagAre
paDhamachaTThakhamaNapAraNayaMsi paDhamAe porisIe sajjhAyaM krei| jahA
goyamasAmI taheva Apucchai, jAva [bIyAe porisIe jhANaM jhiyAyai, taiyAe porisIe
aturiyamacavalamasaMbhaMte muhapottiyaM paDilehei, paDilehittA bhAyaNAI vatthAI
paDilehei, paDilehittA bhAyaNAI pamajai, pamajjittA bhAyaNAI uggahei uggahittA,
jeNeva samaNe bhagavaM mahAvIre teNeva uvAgacchai, uvAgacchittA samaNaM bhagavaM
mahAvIraM vaMdai namasai, vaMdittA namaMsittA evaM vayAsI icchAmi NaM bhaMte !
tubbhehiM abbhaNuNNAe chaTThakkhamaNapAraNagaMsi kAyaMdIe nayarIe ucca-nIya-
majjhimAiM kulAiM gharasamudANassa bhikkhAyariyAe additte| ahAsuhaM devANuppiyA!
mA paDibaMdhaM  /  tae NaM dhaNNe aNagAre samaNeNaM bhagavayA mahAvIreNaM
abbhaNuNNAe samANe samaNassa bhagavao mahAvIrassa aMtiyAo sahasaMbavaNAo ujANAo
paDinikkhamai, paDinikkhamittA aturiyamacavalamasaMbhaMte jugaMtarapaloyaNAe
diTThIe purao riyaM sohamANe sohamANe ] jeNeva kAyaMdI NagarI teNeva uvAgacchai,
uvAgacchittA kAyaMdIe NayarIe ucca0 jAva [nIya-majjhimAiM kulAiM
gharasamuyANassa bhikkhAyariyaM] aDamANe AyaMbilaM, no aNAyaMbilaM jAva'
naavkNkhNti| tae NaM se dhaNNe aNagAre tAe abbhujayAe payayAe payattAe
paggahiyAe esaNAe esamANe jai bhattaM labhai, to pANaM na labhai, aha pANaM
labhai to bhattaM na lbhi| tae NaM se dhaNNe aNagAre adINe avimaNe akaluse
avisAdI aparitaMtajogI jayaNaghaDaNajogacaritte ahApajattaM samudANaM paDigAhei,
paDigAhittA kAyaMdIo nayarIo paDiNikkhamai, paDiNikkhamittA jahA goyame jAva
[jeNeva samaNe bhagavaM mahAvIre teNeva uvAgacchai, uvAgacchittA samaNassa
bhagavao mahAvIrassa adUrasAmante gamaNAgamaNAe paDikkamai esaNamaNesaNaM Aloei,
AloettA bhattapANaM] pddidNsei| tae NaM se dhaNNe aNagAre samaNeNaM bhagavayA
abbhaNuNNae samANe amucchie jAva[agiddhe agaDhie] aNajhovavaNNe bilamiva
paNNagabhUeNaM appANeNaM AhAraM AhArei, AhArittA saMjameNa tavasA jAva appANaM
bhAvemANe vihri| anantara dhanya anagAra ne prathama SaSTha tapa ke pAraNA ke
dina prathama prahara meM svAdhyAya kiyaa| jisa prakAra gautama ne bhagavAn se
pUchA, usI prakAra pAraNA ke lie dhanya anagAra ne bhI bhagavAn se pUchA, yAvat
[dUsarI paurisI meM dhyAna dhyAyA, tIsarI paurisI meM zArIrika zIghratA rahita,
mAnasika capalatA rahita, AkulatA aura utsukatA rahita hokara 1. aNuttarovavAiya
varga 3, sUtra 6.

Page #63 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter 28: The State of Unwavering Resolve  The Blessed One, having cleansed
the mouth-cloth, then cleansed the bowls and the clothes. After cleansing the
bowls, he took them and went to where the Lord Mahavira was seated. Arriving
there, he bowed and prostrated himself before the Lord and said, "Lord, today is
the day of my fast-breaking. So, with your permission, I wish to go to the city
of Kakanda to beg for alms, following the rules of begging in high, low, and
middle-class families."  The Lord Mahavira said to the Blessed One, "O Beloved
of the Gods! Do as you please, do not delay."  Having received permission, the
Blessed One left the Lord and departed from the Sahasramravan garden. He walked
with a steady pace, free from bodily haste and mental agitation, without anxiety
or eagerness, observing the earth with equanimity. He arrived in the city of
Kakanda. There, he wandered through the high, low, and middle-class families,
accepting only the coarse food offered to him. He did not desire any delicious
food.  Afterwards, the Blessed One, with a well-directed, excellent effort,
guided by the instructions of his teachers and fully accepting the principles of
right conduct, searched for alms. If he found food, he did not find water, and
if he found water, he did not find food.  (Even in such a situation) the Blessed
One remained humble, without resentment, joyful, free from passions, without
sorrow, and constantly in meditation. He followed the path of conduct, striving
in the practices he had attained and making efforts to attain the practices he
had not yet attained. He accepted the alms he received and left the city of
Kakanda. He returned to the Lord, and after performing the necessary rituals for
his journey, he reflected on the faults he had committed while begging. He
showed the Lord the food and water he had received.  Then, with the Lord
Mahavira's permission, the Blessed One, free from fainting and greed, ate the
food without attachment, just as a snake enters a hole without touching the
sides, but only the middle. The Blessed One ate without any attachment to taste,
just as a snake enters a hole directly. After eating, he continued to wander,
cultivating his soul through restraint and austerity.  **Commentary:** Here, the
author describes the unwavering resolve of the Blessed One. After taking the
vow, when he went to the city to beg for alms, he wandered through the houses of
the rich, poor, and middle class, accepting whatever food and water he found. He
received alms that were difficult to obtain, guided by the instructions of his
teachers, and accepted with enthusiasm, but he found food without water and
water without food. Yet, the Blessed One never felt humility, sorrow, anger, or
any other defilement or sorrow. Instead, he remained constantly in meditation,
practicing the practices he had attained and striving to attain the practices he
had not yet attained. He accepted whatever he received while begging.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 28 anuttaraupapAtikadazA mukhavastrikA kI pratilekhanA kI, phira pAtroM kI aura
vastroM kI pratilekhanA kii| tatpazcAt pAtroM kA pramArjana kiyA, pramArjana
karake pAtroM ko lekara jahA~ zramaNa bhagavAna mahAvIra virAjamAna the, vahA~
Aye, vahA~ Akara bhagavAna ko vandana-namaskAra karake isa prakAra nivedana
kiyA-bhagavana ! Aja mere bele ke pAraNe kA dina hai. so ApakI AjJA kandI nagarI
meM U~ca, nIca aura madhyama kala meM bhikSA kI vidhi ke anusAra bhikSA lene ke
lie jAnA cAhatA huuN| zramaNa bhagavAn mahAvIra ne dhanya anagAra se kahA--he
devAnupriya ! jisa prakAra tumheM sukha ho usa prakAra karo, vilamba na kro| na
kI AjJA prApta ho jAne para dhanya anagAra bhagavAna ke pAsa se, sahasrAmravana
udyAna se nikle| nikala kara zArIrika tvarA (zIghratA) aura mAnasika capalatA se
rahita evaM AkulatA va utsukatA se rahita yuga (dhUsarA) pramANa bhUmi ko
dekhate hue IryAsamitipUrvaka kAkandI nagarI meM aaye| vahA~ ucca, nIca aura
madhyama kuloM meM yAvat ghUmate hue AyaMbila-svarUpa rUkSa AhAra hI dhanya
anagAra ne grahaNa kiyaa| yAvat sarasa AhAra grahaNa karane kI AkAMkSA nahIM
kii| anantara dhanya amagAra ne suvihita, utkRSTa prayatna vAlI gurujanoM dvArA
anujJAta evaM pUrNatayA svIkRta eSaNA se gaveSaNA karate hue yadi bhakta prApta
kiyA, to pAna prApta nahIM kiyA aura yadi pAna prApta kiyA to bhakta prApta
nahIM kiyaa| (aisI avasthA meM bhI) dhanya anagAra adIna, avimana arthAt
prasannacitta, akaluSa arthAt kaSAyarahita, aviSAdI arthAt viSAdarahita,
aparizrAntayogI arthAt nirantara samAdhiyukta rhe| prApta yogoM (saMyama-
vyApAroM) meM yatanA (udyama) vAle evaM aprApta yogoM kI ghaTanA-prAptyartha
yatna jisameM hai isa prakAra ke cAritra kA unhoMne pAlana kiyaa| vaha
yathAprApta samudAna arthAt bhikSAnna ko grahaNa kara kAkandI nagarI se bAhara
nikale, bhagavAn ke nikaTa Ae, yAvat zramaNa bhagavAn mahAvIra svAmI kI sevA meM
upasthita hokara gamanAgamana sambandhI pratikramaNa kiyA, bhikSA lene meM lage
hue doSoM kA Alocana kiyaa| unheM AhAra-pAnI dikhlaayaa| anantara dhanya anagAra
ne zramaNa bhagavAn mahAvIra se anujJAta hokara amUrchita yAvat gRddhi-rahita
bhojana meM rAga se rahita arthAt anAsakta bhAva se isa prakAra AhAra kiyA, jisa
prakAra sarpa bila meM praveza karate samaya bila ke donoM pArzva bhAgoM ko
sparza na karake madhyabhAga se hI usameM praveza karatA hai| arthAt dhanya
anagAra ne sarpa jaise sIdhA bila meM praveza karatA hai usa taraha svAda kI
Asakti se rahita hokara AhAra kiyaa| AhAra karake saMyama aura tapa se yAvat
AtmA ko bhAvita karate hue vicarane lge| vivecana yahA~ sUtrakAra ne dhanya
anagAra ke dRDha pratijJA-pAlana kA varNana kiyA hai| pratijJA grahaNa karane ke
anantara vaha jaba bhikSA ke lie nagara meM gae to U~ca, madhya aura nIca arthAt
sadhana, nirdhana evaM madhyama gharoM meM AhAra-pAnI ke lie aTana karate hue
jahA~ ujjhita AhAra milatA thA vahIM se grahaNa karate the| unheM bar3e udyama
se prApta hone vAlI, guruoM se AjJapta, utsAha ke sAtha svIkAra kI huI eSaNA-
samiti se yukta bhikSA meM jahA~ bhojana milA, vahA~ pAnI nahIM milA tathA jahA~
pAnI milA vahA~ bhojana nahIM milaa| isa para bhI dhanya anagAra kabhI dInatA,
kheda, krodha Adi kaluSatA aura viSAda anubhava nahIM karate the, pratyuta
nirantara samAdhi-yukta hokara, prApta yogoM meM abhyAsa bar3hAte hue aura
aprApta yogoM kI prAti ke lie prayatna karate hue jo kucha bhI bhikSAvRtti meM
prApta hotA thA

Page #64 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Third Class 29 They used to accept it. - In this way, they remained firm on
their vow and, making their soul steadfast and immovable, they continued to
wander joyfully on the path of self-control. Whatever food they obtained in
alms, they ate it with such detachment as a snake directly enters its burrow,
that is, they did not eat the food with relish, but their only desire was to
protect the body for the sake of self-control. The commentator explains the
meaning of the phrase "like a snake in its burrow" as follows - "Just as a snake
enters the burrow without touching the sides, so this one accepts the food
without any attachment, as if touching it with the mouth." That is, just as a
snake enters the burrow without touching the sides, in the same way, the blessed
monks made their soul steadfast in the practices of self-control without any
attachment. Not only this, but they were also always striving to attain the
unknown knowledge and the like. Then the ascetic, the venerable Mahavira,
withdraws from another city, Kakundika, with its thousand mango groves, and
dwells in the outskirts. Then that blessed houseless monk studies the eleven
angas (scriptures) with the elders of the venerable Mahavira, and then,
practicing self-control and austerity, he continues to wander. Then that blessed
houseless one, with that great austerity, becomes like Skandaka [i.e., extremely
emaciated] up to [being endowed with generosity, vastness, dedication, firmness,
auspiciousness, welfare, blessedness, prosperity, splendor, exalted, elevated,
supreme, noble, and of great power. He is shriveled, fleshless, his bones
covered with skin, making a rattling sound as he walks. He walks and stands by
the power of the soul alone, speaks with difficulty, and is about to speak].

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 tRtIya varga 29 usako grahaNa karate the| - isa prakAra ve apanI pratijJA para
dRDha rahe aura usI ke anusAra AtmA ko dRDha aura nizcala banAkara saMyamamArga
meM prasannacitta hokara vicarate rahe  /  bhikSA meM unako jo kucha bhI AhAra
prApta hotA thA usako ve itanI anAsakti se khAte the jaise eka sarpa sIdhA hI
apane bila meM ghusa jAtA hai arthAt ve bhojana ko svAda lekara na khAte the,
pratyuta saMyamanirvAha ke lie zarIrarakSA hI unako abhISTa thii| "bilamiva
paNNagabhUteNaM' zabda kA vRttikAra yaha artha karate haiM--"yathA bile pannagaH
pArzva saMsparzanAtmAnaM pravezayati tathAyamAhAraM mukhena saMspRzanniva
rAgavirahitatvAdAhArayati" arthAt jaise sarpa pArzvabhAga kA sparza na karake hI
bila meM praveza karatA hai, usI prakAra dhanya muni binA kisI Asakti ke AhAra
karake saMyama ke yogoM meM apanI AtmA ko dRDha karate the| itanA hI nahIM balki
aprApta jJAna Adi kI prApti ke lie bhI sadA prayatnazIla rahate the| 9-tae NaM
samaNe bhagavaM mahAvIre aNNayA kayAi kAyaMdIo nayarIo sahasaMbavaNAo ujANAo
pddinnikkhmi| paDiNikkhamittA bahiyA jaNavaya-vihAraM vihri| tae NaM se dhaNNe
aNagAre samaNassa bhagavao mahAvIrassa tahArUvANaM therANaM aMtie sAmAiyamAiyAI
ekkArasa aMgAiM ahijjai, ahijjittA saMjameNaM tavasA appANaM bhAvemANe vihri|
tae NaM se dhaNNe aNagAre teNaM urAleNaM jahA khaMdao jAva [viuleNaM payatteNaM
paggahieNaM kallANeNaM siveNaM dhanneNaM maMgalleNaM sassirIeNaM udaggeNaM
udatteNaM uttameNaM udAreNaM mahANubhAgeNaM tavokammeNaM sukkelukkhe nimmaMse
aTThi-cammAvaNaddhe kiDikiDiyAbhUe kise dhamaNisaMtae jAe yAvi hotthA,
jIvaMjIveNaM gacchai, jIvaMjIveNaM ciTThai, bhAsaM bhAsittA vi gilAi, bhAsaM
bhAsamANe gilAi, bhAsissAmIti gilaayi|se jahAnAmae kaTThasagaDiyA i vA
pattasagaDiyA i vA patta-tila-bhaMDagasagaDiyA i vA eraMDakaTThasagaDiyA i vA
iMgAlasagaDiyA i vA uNhe diNNA sukkA samANI sasaI gacchai, sasaI ciTThai,
evAmeva dhaNNe vi aNagAre sasaI gacchai, sasaiM ciTThai, uvacie taveNaM, avacie
maMsa-soNieNaM, huyAsaNe viva bhAsarAsi-paDicchaNNe taveNaM, teeNaM, tava-
teyasirIe aIva aIva uvasobhemANe ] uvasobhemANe citttthi| anantara zramaNa
bhagavAn mahAvIra anyadA kadAcit kAkandI nagarI ke sahasrAmravana udyAna se
nikale aura bAhara janapadoM meM vihAra karane lge| dhanya anagAra ne zramaNa
bhagavAn mahAvIra ke tathArUpa sthaviroM ke pAsa sAmAyika Adi gyAraha aGgoM kA
adhyayana kiyA aura isake pazcAt vaha saMyama aura tapa se apane AtmA ko bhAvita
karate hue vicarane lge| taba vaha dhanya anagAra usa udAra tapa se skandaka kI
taraha yAvat [udAra, vipula, pradatta, pragRhIta, kalyANarUpa, zivarUpa,
dhanyarUpa, maMgalarUpa, zrIsampanna, uttama udagra-uttarottara vRddhiyukta,
udAtta-ujjvala, uttama udAra aura mahAn prabhAvazAlI tapa se zuSka ho gaye,
rUkSa ho gaye, mAMsa rahita ho gaye, unake zarIra kI haDDiyA~ camar3e se DhakI
huI raha giiN| calate samaya haDDiyA~ khar3akhar3a karane lgiiN| ve kRza dubale
ho gye| unakI nAr3iyA~ sAmane dikhAI dene lgiiN| ve kevala apane Atmabala se hI
gamana karate the, Atmabala se hI khar3e hote the tathA ve isa prakAra durbala
ho gaye ki bhASA bolakara thaka jAte the, bhASA bolate samaya thaka jAte the
aura bhASA bolane ke pahale, 'maiM bhASA bolUMgA' aisA vicAra

Page #65 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Even the mere act of performing *Anuttaraupapatikadashā* would exhaust them.
Just as a cart loaded with dry wood, a cart loaded with leaves, a cart loaded
with leaves, sesame seeds, and dry goods, a cart loaded with castor oil wood, a
cart loaded with coal, all these carts, when well dried in the sun, move with a
rattling sound and stand with a rattling sound, similarly, when the blessed
*Anugār* walked, their bones rattled and even when they stood still, they
rattled. Although they were weak in body, they were strong in austerity. Their
flesh and blood had become depleted. Like fire buried in a pile of ashes, they
were adorned with austerity, brilliance, and the splendor of austerity.  The
*Vivechana Sūtra* is clear. Its entire subject can be easily understood from the
original meaning itself. It is only noteworthy that although the blessed
*Anugār*’s body had become emaciated by the test of austerity and restraint,
their soul had become supernaturally strong, due to which the brilliance of
their face was increasing day by day, shining like fire.  **The Physical
Condition of the Blessed Muni: Description of the Feet and Toes**  10. The feet
of the blessed *Anugār* had become of this kind of form and color: just as the
dry bark of a tree, or wooden sandals, or old shoes, so also the feet of the
blessed *Anugār* were dry, rough, and devoid of flesh. They were recognized only
by the bones, skin, and veins. Due to the depletion of flesh and blood, their
feet were not recognizable.  The toes of the blessed *Anugār* had become of this
kind of form and color: just as the pods of peas, the pods of mung beans, the
pods of black gram, and when these tender pods are broken and put in the sun,
they become dry and withered, so also the toes of the blessed *Anugār* had
become dry, rough, and devoid of flesh, that is, they had withered. Only the
bones, skin, and veins remained in them, flesh and blood were not (generally)
present in them.  Here, the *Sūtrakār* has described how much change had come
about in the physical condition of the blessed *Anugār*. Due to performing
austerity, his two feet had become dry like the dry bark of a tree, wooden
sandals, or old dry shoes. In their feet, flesh and blood were not even visible
in name. Only bones, skin, and veins were visible. The same was the condition of
the toes. They were also like peas, mung beans, black gram…

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 anuttaraupapAtikadazA karane mAtra se bhI thaka jAte the| jaise sUkhI
lakar3iyoM se bharI huI gAr3I, pattoM se bharI huI gAr3I, patte, tila aura sUkhe
sAmAna se bharI huI gAr3I, eraMDa kI lakar3iyoM se bharI huI gAr3I, koyale se
bharI huI gAr3I, ye saba gAr3iyA~ dhUpa meM acchI taraha sukhAkara jaba calatI
haiM, khar3a-khar3a AvAja karatI huI calatI haiM aura AvAja karatI huI khar3I
rahatI haiM, isI prakAra jaba dhanya anagAra calate, to unakI haDDiyA~
khar3a-khar3a AvAja karatIM aura khar3e rahate hue bhI khar3a-khar3a AvAja
krtiiN| yadyapi ve zarIra se durbala ho gaye the, tathApi ve tapa se puSTa the|
unakA mAMsa aura khUna kSINa ho gayA thaa| rAkha ke Dhera meM dabI huI agni kI
taraha ve tapa se, teja se aura tapasteja kI zobhA se atIva-atIva] zobhita ho
rahe the| vivecana sUtra spaSTa hai| isakA sampUrNa viSaya sugamatayA mUlArtha
se hI jJAta ho sakatA hai| ullekhanIya kevala itanA hai ki yadyapi tapa aura
saMyama kI kasauTI para car3hakara dhanya anagAra kA zarIra avazya kRza ho gayA,
kintu usase unakA AtmA alaukika balazAlI ho gayA thA, jisake kAraNa unake mukha
kA pratidina bar3hatA huA teja agni ke samAna dedIpyamAna ho rahA thaa| dhanya
muni kI zArIrika dazA : paira aura aMguliyoM kA varNana 10-dhaNNassa NaM
aNagArassa pAyANaM ayameyArUve tavarUvalAvaNNe hotthA - se jahAnAmae sukkachallI
i vA kaTThapAuyA i vA jaraggaovAhaNA ivA, evAmeva dhaNNassa aNagArassa pAyA
sukkA lukkhA nimmaMsA aTThicammachirattAe paNNAyaMti, no cevaNaM mNssonniyttaae|
dhaNNassa NaM aNagArassa pAyaMguliyANaM ayameyArUve tavarUvalAvaNNe hotthA se
jahAnAmae kalasaMgaliyA i vA muggasaMgaliyA i vA mAsasaMgaliyA i vA, taruNiyA
chiNNA, uNhe diNNA, sukkA samANI milAyamANI ciTThati, evAmeva dhaNNassa
pAyaMguliyAo sukkAo [lukkhAo nimmaMsAo aTThicammachirattAe paNNAyaMti, no
cevaNaM maMsa] sonniyttaae| dhanya anagAra ke pairoM kA tapojanita rUpa-lAvaNya
(dekhAva) isa prakAra kA ho gayA thA-- jaise- vRkSa kI sUkhI chAla ho, kATha kI
khar3AUM ho athavA purAnA jUtA ho| isa prakAra dhanya anagAra ke paira sUkhe the
--rUkhe aura nirmAMsa the| asthi (haDDi), carma aura zirAoM se hI ve pahicAne
jAte the| mAMsa aura zoNita (rakta) ke kSINa ho jAne se unake pairoM kI pahicAna
nahIM hotI thii| dhanya anagAra ke pairoM kI aMguliyoM kA tapojanita rUpa-
lAvaNya isa prakAra kA ho gayA thA--jaise-- kalAya (maTara) kI phaliyA~ hoM,
mUMga kI phaliyA~ hoM, ur3ada kI phaliyA~ hoM, aura ina komala phaliyoM ko
tor3akara dhUpa meM DAla dene para jaise ve sUkhI aura murzAyI ho jAtI haiM,
vaise hI dhanya anagAra ke pairoM kI aMguliyA~ bhI sUkha gaI thIM, rUkSa ho gaI
thIM aura nirmAMsa ho gaI thIM, arthAt murajhA gaI thiiN| unameM asthi, carma
aura zirAe~ hI zeSa raha gaI thIM, mAMsa aura zoNita unameM (prAyaH) nahIM raha
gayA thaa| vivecana yahA~ sUtrakAra ne dhanya anagAra kI zArIrika dazA meM
kitanA parivartana ho gayA thA, isa viSaya kA pratipAdana kiyA hai| tapa karane
se usake donoM caraNa isa prakAra sUkha gaye the jaise sUkhI huI vRkSa kI chAla,
lakar3I kI khar3AUM athavA purAnI sUkhI huI jUtI ho| unake pairoM meM mAMsa aura
rudhira nAma mAtra ke lie bhI dikhAI nahIM detA thaa| kevala haDDI, camar3A aura
naseM hI dekhane meM AtI thiiN| pairoM kI aMguliyoM kI bhI yahI dazA thii| ve
bhI kalAya, mUMga

Page #66 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Third Class  They had become like the pods of the Udda plant, which have been
plucked while tender and laid out in the sun to wither. They too had no flesh
and blood left. The thighs, knees and upper thighs of the Blessed Ascetic  11-
The thighs of the Blessed Ascetic had become of a colour like that of wood, like
the thigh of a crow, or the thigh of a Kank bird, or the thigh of a Dhenik bird,
and so on [until they were dry, withered, fleshless, and only bones, skin and
veins remained, and there was no flesh and blood left]. The knees of the Blessed
Ascetic had become of a colour like that of wood, like the joint of a Kali
plant, or the joint of a peacock, or the joint of a Dhenik bird, and so on
[until the knees of the Blessed Ascetic were dry, fleshless, and only bones,
skin and veins remained, and there was no flesh and blood left]. The upper
thighs of the Blessed Ascetic had become of a colour like that of wood, like the
tender shoots of a Vadari, a Salyaki, or a Samali tree, which have been plucked
and laid out in the sun to wither. In the same way, the upper thighs of the
Blessed Ascetic [had become dry, withered, and there was no flesh and blood
left].  **Explanation:**  This Sutra describes the thighs, knees and upper
thighs of the Blessed Ascetic. Due to the intense heat of his austerities, the
Blessed Ascetic's thighs had become so devoid of flesh and blood that they
appeared like the stems of the Kakajanga plant, which is naturally dry. Or, you
could say that they had become as thin and fleshless as the thighs of a crow.
They are also compared to the thighs of the Kank and Dhenik birds. Similarly,
his knees had become as dry as the joints of the Kakajanga plant, or the joints
of the peacock and Dhenik birds. Both his upper thighs had become dry and
withered due to the lack of flesh and blood, like the tender shoots of the
Priyangu, Vadari, Karkandhu, Salyaki or Samali plants, which wither when they
are plucked and laid out in the sun to dry.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 tRtIya varga yA ur3ada kI una phaliyoM ke samAna ho gaI thiiN| jo komala-komala
tor3akara dhUpa meM DAla dI gaI hoM murajhA gaI hoN| unameM bhI mAMsa aura
rudhira nahIM raha gayA thaa| dhanya muni kI jaMghAe~, jAnu aura urU
11-dhaNNassa aNagArassa jaMghANaM ayameyArUve tavarUvalAvaNNe hotthA se
jahAnAmae kAkajaMghA ivA, kaMkajaMghA i vA, DheNiyAliyAjaMghA i vA jAva[sukkAo
lukkhAo nimmaMsAo aTThicammachirattAe paNNAyaMti, no cevaNaM maMsa] sonniyttaae|
dhaNNassa aNagArassa jANUNaM ayameyArUve tavarUvalAvaNNe hotthA se jahAnAmae
kAlipore i vA mayUrapore i vA DheNiyAliyApore ivA evaM jAva[dhaNNassaaNagArassa
jANU sukkA nimmaMsA aTThicammachirattAe paNNAyaMti, no cevaNaM maMsa]
sonniyttaae| dhaNNassa urussa ayameyArUve tavarUvalAvaNNe hotthA se jahAnAmae
borIkarIle i vA sallaikarIle i vA, sAmalikarIle i vA, taruNie uNhe jAva [ diNNe
sukke samANe milAyamANe] ciTThai, evAmeva dhaNNassa aNagArassa UrU jAva[sukkA
lukkhA nimmaMsA aTThicammachirattAe paNNAyaMti, no ceva NaM maMsa] sonniyttaae|
_ dhanya anagAra kI jaMghAoM (piMDaliyoM) kA tapojanita rUpa-lAvaNya isa prakAra
kA ho gayA thA--jaise--kAka pakSI kI jaMghA ho, kaMka pakSI kI jaMghA ho,
DheNika pakSI (TiDDe) kI jaMghA ho| yAvat [dhanya anagAra kI jaMghA sUkha gaI
thIM rUkSa ho gaI thIM, nirmAMsa ho gaI thIM arthAt murajhA gaI thiiN| unameM
asthi, carma aura zirAe~ hI zeSa raha gaI thIM, mAMsa aura zoNita unameM prAyaH
nahIM raha gayA thaa|] dhanya anagAra ke jAnuoM (ghuTanoM) kA tapojanya rUpa-
lAvaNya isa prakAra kA ho gayA thA--jaise--kAlI nAmaka vanaspati kA parva
(sandhi yA jor3a) ho, mayUra pakSI kA parva ho, DheNika pakSI kA parva ho| yAvat
[dhanya anagAra ke jAnu sUkha gae the, rUkSa ho gae the, nirmAMsa ho gae the,
arthAt murajhA gae the| unameM asthi, carma aura zirAe~ hI zeSa raha gaI thIM,
mAMsa aura zoNita unameM prAyaH nahIM raha gayA thaa|] dhanya anagAra kI urUoM-
sAMthaloM kA tapojanya rUpa-lAvaNya isa prakAra kA ho gayA thA jaise- vadarI,
zalyakI tathA zAlmalI vRkSoM kI komala kopaleM tor3a kara dhUpa meM DAlane se
sUkha gaI hoM murajhA gaI hoN| isI prakAra dhanya anagAra kI urU bhI [sUkha gaI
thIM, murajhA gaI thIM, unameM mAMsa aura zoNita nahIM raha gayA thaa]| vivecana
prastuta sUtra meM dhanya anagAra kI jaGghA, jAnu aura urUoM kA varNana kiyA
gayA hai| tIvratara tapa ke prabhAva se dhanya anagAra kI jAeM mAMsa aura
rudhira ke abhAva meM aisI pratIta hotI thIM mAno kAkajanA nAmaka vanaspati kI--
jo svabhAvataH zuSka hotI hai--nAla hoN| athavA yoM kahie ki ve kauve kI javAoM
ke samAna hI kSINa nirmAMsa ho gaI thiiN| unakI upamA kaGka aura DhaMka pakSiyoM
kI javAoM se bhI dI gaI hai| isI prakAra unake jAnu bhI ukta kAkajaGghA
vanaspati kI gAMTha ke samAna athavA mayUra aura DhaMka nAmaka pakSiyoM ke
sandhi-sthAnoM ke samAna zuSka ho gaye the| donoM urU mAMsa aura rudhira ke
abhAva meM sUkha kara isa taraha murajhA gaye the jaise priyaMgu vadarI,
karkandhU, zalyakI yA zAlmalI vanaspatiyoM kI komala-komala koMpale tor3akara
dhUpa meM sukhAne se murajhA jAtI haiN|

Page #67 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The term "Anuttaroupapatikadasha" signifies that the blessed renunciates, due to
the sole cause of their intense penance, became so absorbed in their austerities
that they became detached even from their own bodies. They were completely free
from any attachment to their bodies. They embraced the most rigorous forms of
penance. As a result, no flesh or blood remained in any part of their bodies.
Only bones, skin, and a network of veins were visible. Despite having a physical
body, they attained a state of being bodiless.  The description of their waist,
abdomen, and ribs:  * **Waist:** The waist of the blessed renunciates, due to
their penance, had become as beautiful as the leg of a camel, the leg of an old
bull, or the leg of an old buffalo. Only bones, skin, and veins remained; flesh
and blood were no longer present. * **Abdomen:** The abdomen of the blessed
renunciates, due to their penance, had become as beautiful as a dry gourd, a pot
for roasting chickpeas, or a kneading trough. Similarly, the abdomen of the
blessed renunciates had dried up. Flesh and blood were no longer present. *
**Ribs:** The ribs of the blessed renunciates, due to their penance, had become
as beautiful as a row of pillars, a row of cups, or a row of stakes. Just as
these objects can be counted, so too could the ribs of the blessed renunciates
be counted. Only bones, skin, and veins remained; flesh and blood were no longer
present. * **Back:** The upper part of the spine of the blessed renunciates had
become as beautiful as the rims of crowns, a row of round stones stuck together,
or a row of circles.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 anuttaraupapAtikadazA kahane kA tAtparya yaha ki dhanya anagAra karmanirjarA ke
ananya kAraNa tapazcaraNa meM isa prakAra tanmaya ho gae ki apane zarIra se bhI
nirapekSa ho ge| unako zarIra kA moha bhI lezamAtra nahIM rhaa| unhoMne kaThora
se kaThora tapa aMgIkAra kiye| ataH unake kisI aGga meM bhI mAMsa aura rudhira
avaziSTa nahIM rhaa| sarvatra kevala asthi, carma aura nasAjAla hI dekhane meM
AtA thaa| sadeha hokara bhI ve videha dazA prApta karane meM samartha ho ge|
kaTi, udara evaM pasaliyoM Adi kA varNana 12-thaNNassa kaDipattassa imeyArUve
jAva' se jahA jAva' uTTapAde i vA jaraggapAe i vA mahisapAe i vA jAva
sonniyttaae| dhaNNassa uyarabhAyaNassa imeyArUve jAva se jahA jAva' sukkadie i
vA, bhajaNayakabhalle i vA kaTThakolaMvae i vA evAmeva udaraM sukkaM jaav|
dhaNNassa pAsuliyAkaDayANa imeyArUve jAva se jahA jAva' thAsayAvalI i vA,
pANAvalI i vA, muMDAvalI i vA jaav| dhaNNassa piTThikaraMDayANaM imeyArUve jAva
se jahA jAva kaNNAvalI i vA golAvalI i vA vaTTayAvalI i vA evAmeva jaav|
dhaNNassa urakaDayassa ayameyArUve jAva se jahA jAva" cittakaTTare i vA
vINayapatte i vA tAliyaMTapatte i vA evAmeva jaav| dhanya anagAra kI kaTipatra
(kamara) kA tapasyAjanita rUpa-lAvaNya isa prakAra kA ho gayA thA-- jaise--U~Ta
kA paira ho, bUr3he baila kA pairA ho aura bUr3he mahiSa (bhaiMse) kA paira ho
/  usameM asthi, carma aura zirAe~ hI zeSa raha gaI thIM, mAMsa aura zoNita
usameM nahIM raha gayA thaa| dhanya anagAra ke udara-bhAjana (peTa) kA tapojanya
rUpa-lAvaNya isa prakAra kA ho gayA thA-- jaise sUkhI ka ho, caNakAdi bhUnane kA
khappara ho, ATA gUMdane kI kaThautI ho| isI prakAra dhanya anagAra kA peTa bhI
sUkha gayA thaa| usameM mAMsa aura zoNita nahIM raha gayA thaa| dhanya anagAra
kI pasaliyoM kA tapasyA ke kAraNa lAvaNya isa prakAra kA ho gayA thA-- jaise
sthAsakoM kI AvalI ho arthAt jaise DhalAna para eka-dUsare ke Upara rakkhI huI
darpaNoM ke AkAra kI paMkti ho, pANAvalI ho arthAt eka-dUsare para rakhe hue
pAna-pAtroM (gilAsoM) kI paMkti ho, muNDAvalI arthAt sthANu-vizeSa prakAra ke
khUToM kI paMkti ho| jisa prakAra ukta vastue~ ginI jA sakatI haiM. usI prakAra
dhanya anagAra kI pasaliyA~ bhI ginI jA sakatI thiiN| unameM asthi, carma aura
zirAe~ hI zeSa raha gaI thiiN| mAMsa aura zoNita unameM nahIM raha gayA thaa|
dhanya anagAra ke pRSThakaraNDa (rIDha kA UparI bhAga) kA svarUpa aisA ho gayA
thA-- jaise mukuToM ke kAMThe arthAt mukuToM kI kinAriyoM ke koroM ke bhAga hoM,
paraspara cipakAe hue gola-gola pattharoM kI paMkti ho, athavA 1 se 15 - varga
3, sUtra 10.

Page #68 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Third Section  The children's toys made of lac were like the bones of the
blessed Anugara, which had dried up and were devoid of flesh and blood. Only
bones and skin remained.  The chest of the blessed Anugara, due to the
austerity, had become like the bottom part of a basket made of bamboo, or a fan
made of bamboo strips, or a fan made of palm leaves. In this way, the chest of
the blessed Anugara had become thin, dry, devoid of flesh and blood, and only
bones, skin, and veins remained.  This sutra describes the waist, abdomen, ribs,
back, and chest of the blessed Anugara using similes. Their waist, due to
austerity, was devoid of flesh and blood and appeared like the hoof of a camel
or an old bull. Similarly, their abdomen had dried up. It had become like a dry
gourd, a vessel for roasting chickpeas, or a special vessel called Kolomb.  This
means that the abdomen of the blessed Anugara had dried up so much that it
appeared hollow like the aforementioned objects. Similarly, their ribs had dried
up and become like thorns. They could be counted like a row of mirrors, a row of
vessels for grazing animals, or a row of nails used to tie them. There was no
flesh or blood to be seen in them. The same was the case with the back. It was
also devoid of flesh and blood and appeared like a row of crowns, round stones,
or children's toys made of lac. Due to the austerity, the chest of the blessed
Anugara had also changed. It was also devoid of flesh and blood, and the row of
ribs appeared like pieces of Kiliñj, or a fan made of bamboo or palm leaves.
The description of all these parts, as mentioned earlier, is done using similes.
This not only adds beauty to the description but also makes it easier for the
readers to understand the reality. The subject matter presented with examples is
understood by even the least intelligent without any effort.  One thing to note
here is that although the body of the blessed Anugara had dried up and become
like thorns, their spiritual brilliance had increased immensely. The arms,
hands, fingers, neck, beard, lips, and tongue of the blessed Muni...  13 - The
arms of the blessed Anugara, from the shoulder to the fingertips, were like...
(continued) The hands of the blessed Anugara, from the wrist to the fingertips,
were like... (continued) The fingers of the blessed Anugara, from the base to
the tip, were like... (continued) 1-9 - See Section 3, Sutra 7.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 tRtIya varga lAkha ke bane hue bAlakoM ke khelane ke gole hoN| isa prakAra
dhanya anagAra kA rIDha-pradeza sUkhakara mAMsa aura zoNita se rahita ho gayA
thA, asthi , carma hI unameM zeSa raha gayA thaa| dhanya anagAra ke ura:kaTaka
(vakSasthala) arthAt chAtI kA tapojanya rUpa-lAvaNya isa prakAra kA ho gayA
thA-- jaise--bAMsa kI banI TokarI ke nIce kA hissA ho, bAMsa kI banI khapacciyoM
kA paMkhA ho athavA tAr3apatra kA banA paMkhA ho| isa prakAra dhanya anagAra kI
chAtI ekadama patalI hokara sUkha kara mAMsa aura zoNita se rahita hokara asthi
carma aura zirA-mAtra zeSa raha gae the| vivecana isa sUtra meM dhanya anagAra
ke kaTi, udara, pAMsulikA, pRSTha-pradeza aura vakSaHsthala kA upamAoM dvArA
varNana kiyA gayA hai| unakA kaTi-pradeza tapa ke kAraNa mAMsa aura rudhira se
rahita ho kara aisA pratIta hotA thA, jaise--U~Ta yA bUr3he baila kA khura ho|
isI prakAra unakA udara bhI sUkha gayA thaa| usakI sUkhakara aisI hAlata ho gaI
thI jaisI sUkhI mazaka, cane Adi bhUnane kA pAtra (bhAr3a) athavA kolamba nAmaka
pAtra-vizeSa kI hotI hai| kahane kA tAtparya yaha hai ki dhanya anagAra kA udara
itanA sUkha gayA thA ki ukta vastuoM ke samAna bIca meM khokhalA jaisA pratIta
hotA thaa| isI prakAra unakI pasaliyA~ bhI sUkhakara kAMTA ho gaI thiiN| unako
isa taraha ginA jA sakatA thA jaise sthAsaka (darpaNa kI AkRti) kI paMkti ho yA
gAya Adi pazuoM ke carane ke pAtroM kI paMkti athavA unake bA~dhane kI kIloM kI
paMkti ho| unameM mAMsa aura rudhira dekhane ko bhI na thaa| yahI dazA pRSTha-
pradezoM kI bhI thii| unameM bhI mAMsa aura rudhira nahIM raha gayA thA aura
aise pratIta hote the mAno mukaToM kI koroM, pASANa ke golakoM kI athavA lAkha
ke bane hue baccoM ke khilaunoM kI paMkti khar3I kI huI ho| usa tapa ke kAraNa
dhanya anagAra ke vakSaHsthala (chAtI) meM bhI parivartana ho gayA thaa| usase
bhI mAMsa aura rudhira sUkha gayA thA aura pasaliyoM kI paMkti aisI dikhAI de
rahI thI mAnoM ye kiliJja Adi ke khaNDa hoM athavA yaha bAMsa yA tAr3a ke pattoM
kA banA huA paMkhA ho| ina saba avayavoM kA varNana, jaisA pahale kahA jA cukA
hai, upamAlaGkAra se kiyA gayA hai| isase eka to svabhAvataH varNana meM cArutA
A gaI hai, dUsare par3hane vAloM ko vAstavikatA samajhane meM sugamatA hotI hai|
jo viSaya udAharaNa dekara ziSyoM ke sAmane rakhA jAtA hai, usako atyalpabuddhi
bhI binA kisI parizrama ke samajha jAtA hai| yahA~ dhyAna rakhane yogya eka bAta
vizeSa hai ki dhanya anagAra kA zarIra yadyapi sUkhakara kA~TA ho gayA thA kintu
unakI Atmika tejasvitA atyadhika bar3ha gaI thii| dhanya muni ke bAhu hAtha
aMgulI grIvA dADhI hoTha evaM jihvA 13-dhaNNassa NaM aNagArassa bAhANaM jAva' se
jahAnAmae jAva' samisaMgaliyA i vA bAhAyAsaMgaliyA i vA, agatthiyasaMgaliyA i
vA, evAmeva naav| dhaNNassa NaM aNagArassa hatthANaM jAva se jahA jAva'
sukchagaNiyA i vA, vaDapatte i vA, palAsapatte ivA, evAmeva jaav| dhaNNassa NaM
aNagArassa hatthaMguliyANaM jAva' se jahA jAva kalasaMgaliyA ivA, muggasaMgaliyA
i vA, mAsasaMgaliyA ivA, taruNiyA chiNNA Ayave diNNA sukkA samANI evAmeva jaav|
1-9. --dekhie varga 3, sUtra 7.

Page #69 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
34 The state of the neck of the Dhannya Anugara was like that of a Karaggiva, a
Kundia Giva, or an Ucchaṭṭhavaṇa. The state of the jaw of the Dhannya Anugara
was like that of a Lauya Phala, a Hakuva Phala, or an Amba Gaṭṭhia. The state of
the Dhannya Anugara's rising (i.e., the upper part of the body) was like that of
a Sukka Jaloiya, a Silesa Gulia, or an Alatta Gulia. The state of the Dhannya
Anugara's tongue was like that of a Vaḍa Patte, a Palasa Patte, or a Saga Patte.
The Dhannya Anugara's arms, from the shoulders down, had become emaciated due to
austerity, like the dry pods of a Khajri tree, the dry pods of an Amaltas tree,
or the dry pods of an Agati tree. Similarly, the Dhannya Anugara's arms had
become dry, devoid of flesh and blood, leaving only bones, skin, and veins. The
Dhannya Anugara's hands, from the elbows down, had become emaciated due to
austerity, like dry cow dung, dry leaves of a Banyan tree, or dry leaves of a
Flamboyant tree. Similarly, the Dhannya Anugara's hands had become dry, devoid
of flesh and blood, leaving only bones, skin, and veins. The Dhannya Anugara's
fingers had become emaciated due to intense austerity, like dry peas, dry mung
beans, or dry black gram. Just as these tender pods become dry and withered when
broken and dried in the sun, so too had the Dhannya Anugara's fingers become
dry, devoid of flesh and blood, leaving only bones, skin, and veins. The Dhannya
Anugara's neck had become emaciated due to austerity, like the neck of a Karaka
(a type of water vessel), the neck of a small Kundia (a water pitcher), or the
neck of a tall water jug. Similarly, the Dhannya Anugara's neck had become dry
and long, devoid of flesh and blood. The Dhannya Anugara's jaw had become
emaciated due to austerity, like the dry fruit of a Tumbe, the dry fruit of a
Rakuba (a type of plant), or the dry kernel of a mango. Similarly, the Dhannya
Anugara's jaw had become dry, devoid of flesh and blood. The Dhannya Anugara's
lips had become emaciated due to austerity, like a dry leech, a dry mucus ball,
or a long, wax-like stick of incense. Similarly, the Dhannya Anugara's lips had
become dry, devoid of flesh and blood. 1-12.—See Section 3, Sutra 7.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 34 anuttarIpapAtikadazA dhaNNassa gIvAe jAva' se jahA jAva' karagagIvA i vA,
kuMDiyAgIvA i vA uccaTThavaNae i vA evAmeva jaav| dhaNNassa NaM aNagArassa
haNuyAe jAve se jahA jAva lAuyaphale i vA, hakuvaphale i vA, aMbagaTThiyA ivA,
evAmeva jaav| dhaNNassa NaM aNagArassa uTThANaM jAva' se jahA jAva sukkajaloyA i
vA, silesaguliyA i vA, alattaguliyA i vA evAmeva jaav| dhaNNassa NaM aNagArassa
jibbhAe jAva se jahA jAva vaDapatte i vA palAsapatte i vA, sAgapatte i vA
evAmeva jaav| dhanya anagAra kI bAhu arthAt kaMdhe se nIce ke bhAga (bhujAoM) kA
tapojanya rUpa-lAvaNya isa prakAra kA ho gayA thA-- jaise zamI (khejar3I) vRkSa
kI sUkhI huI lambI-lambI phaliyA~ hoM, bAhAyA (amalatAsa) vRkSa kI sUkhI huI
lambI-lambI phaliyA~ hoM, athavA agastika (agatiyA) vRkSa kI sUkhI huI phaliyA~
hoN| isI prakAra dhanya anagAra kI bhujAe~ bhI mAMsa aura zoNita se rahita
hokara, sUkha gaI thiiN| unameM asthi, carma aura zirAe~ hI zeSa raha gaI thIM,
mAMsa aura zoNita unameM nahIM raha gayA thaa| dhanya anagAra ke kuhanI se nIce
ke bhAgarUpa hAthoM kI avasthA tapa ke kAraNa isa prakAra kI ho gaI thIjaise
sUkhA chANa (kaMDA) ho, vaDa kA sUkhA pattA ho yA phlAza kA sUkhA pattA ho  /
isI prakAra dhanya anagAra ke hAtha bhI sUkha gaye the, mAMsa aura zoNita se
rahita ho gae the| unameM asthi, carma aura zirAe~ hI zeSa raha gaI thiiN| mAMsa
aura zoNita unameM nahIM thaa| dhanya anagAra ke hAthoM kI aMguliyoM kA ugra
tapa ke kAraNa isa prakAra kA svarUpa ho gayA thA--jaisekalAya arthAt maTara kI
sUkhI phaliyA~ ho, mUMga kI sUkhI phaliyA~ hoM athavA ur3ada kI sUkhI phaliyA~
hoN| una komala phaliyoM ko tor3a kara, dhUpa meM sukhAne para jisa prakAra ve
sUkha jAtI haiM, kumhalA jAtI haiM, usI prakAra dhanya anagAra ke hAthoM kI
aMguliyA~ bhI sUkha gaI thIM, unameM mAMsa aura zoNita nahIM raha gayA thaa|
asthi, carma aura zirAe~ hI zeSa raha gaI thiiN| dhanya anagAra kI grIvA
(gardana) tapa ke kAraNa isa prakAra kI ho gaI thI-- jaise--karaka (karavA--
jalapAtra vizeSa) kA kAMThA (gardana) ho, choTI kuNDI (pAnI kI jhArI) kI gardana
ho, ucca sthApanaka surAhI kI gardana ho| isI prakAra dhanya anagAra kI gardana
mAMsa aura zoNita se rahita hokara sUkhI-sI aura lambI sI ho gaI thii| dhanya
anagAra kI hanu arthAt Thor3I kA tapojanya rUpa-lAvaNya isa prakAra kA ho gayA
thA-- jaise--tumbe kA sUkhA phala ho, rakuba nAmaka eka vanaspati arthAt hiMgoTe
kA sUkhA phala ho athavA Ama kI sUkhI guThalI ho| isa prakAra dhanya anagAra kI
hanu arthAt Thor3I bhI mAMsa aura zoNita se rahita hokara sUkha gaI thii| dhanya
anagAra ke oSThoM kA arthAt hoThoM kA tapojanya rUpa-lAvaNya isa prakAra kA ho
gayA thA-- jaise sUkhI joMka ho, sUkhI zleSma kI guTikA arthAt golI ho, alate kI
guTikA arthAt agarabattI ke samAna lAkha ke rasa kI lambI battI ho| isI prakAra
dhanya anagAra ke hoTha sUkhakara mAMsa aura zoNita se rahita ho gae the| 1-12.
--dekhie varga 3, sUtra 7.

Page #70 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Third Chapter ## 35  Due to the penance of the blessed ascetic's tongue, it
had become like a dry leaf of a banyan tree, a dry leaf of a Palasha tree, or a
dry leaf of a Shaka tree. Similarly, the blessed ascetic's tongue had also dried
up, it had no flesh left, and no blood remained.  **Discussion:** This sutra
describes the arms, hands, fingers, neck, chin, lips, and tongue of the blessed
ascetic using the simile (Upma) alankara. Their arms, like other limbs, had
dried up due to penance and appeared like the dried pods of Shami, Agastik, or
Bahaya trees.  It is difficult to determine the meaning of the word 'Bahaaya'.
It is difficult to say which tree it is and in which country it is prevalent.
The Vrittikara Shri Abhaydevsuri has also written its meaning as a particular
tree. It is possible that this name was prevalent in some province at that time.
The same condition was with the hands of the blessed ascetic. Their flesh and
blood had also dried up and they appeared like dry dung (Chana-Kanda) or dry
leaves of Banyan and Palasha trees. The fingers had also become extremely thin.
The fingers, once full of blood and flesh, were now dry and had taken on a
peculiar dryness and thinness. Due to drying, they had become like a Kalaay,
Mung, or Masha (Urad pod - which is picked when tender and dried in the sun).
The previous flesh and blood were no longer visible in them. If anyone could
recognize them, it was only by the bones and skin that remained in them.
Although the word 'Bahuu' is Ukarant in Sanskrit, it becomes Akarant in Prakrit
when it is intended to be feminine. Therefore, the word 'Bahaanam' in the sutra
is correct from the point of view of Prakrit grammar.  The sutra is as follows:
**Bahooraat || 8 || 1 || 36 || Bahushbadsya striyaamakaarantaadesho bhavati,
bahaaaye jena dhariao ekkaaye || striyaamityeva. Vaame aro bahoo' |**  The neck
also lacked flesh and blood like other limbs. Therefore, it naturally appeared
long. The sutrakar has compared it to long-mouthed pitchers like Surahi etc. For
this, the word 'Ucchastapanaak' has come in the sutra, which is a similar type
of vessel.  This was the condition of the blessed ascetic's chin. The chin,
which was once full of flesh and blood, had become like a dry Tumbe or Hakub (a
type of plant) fruit due to penance, or it appeared like a mango pit.  The lips,
which were previously red like a Bimba fruit, had dried up and become completely
pale due to penance. Their shape had now become like a dried henna bud. The
tongue had also dried up and become dull and dry like a leaf of a Banyan tree or
a leaf of a Palasha (Dhak) tree.  **Prakrit Grammar by Acharya Hemchandra**
**1.**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 tRtIya varga 35 dhanya anagAra kI jIbha kI tapasyA ke kAraNa aisI avasthA ho
gaI thI-- jaise--vaDa kA sUkhA pattA ho, palAza kA sUkhA pattA ho, zAka arthAt
sAgavAna vRkSa kA sUkhA pattA ho| isI prakAra dhanya anagAra kI jIbha bhI sUkha
gaI thI, usameM mAMsa nahIM raha gayA thA aura zoNita bhI nahIM raha gayA thA  /
vivecana -- isa sUtra meM dhanya anagAra kI bhujAoM, hAthoM, hAtha kI aMguliyoM,
grIvA, cibuka, hoThoM aura jihvA kA upamA alaMkAra se varNana kiyA gayA hai|
unakI bhujAe~ anyAnya aMgoM ke samAna hI tapa ke kAraNa sUkha gaI thIM aura aisI
dikhAI detI thIM jaisI zamI, agastika athavA bAhAyA vRkSoM kI sUkhI huI phaliyA~
hotI haiN| 'bAhAyA' zabda ke artha kA nirNaya karanA kaThina hai| yaha kisa
vRkSa kI aura kisa deza meM pracalita saMjJA hai, kahanA muzkila hai  /
vRttikAra zrI abhayadevasUri ne bhI isakA artha vRkSavizeSa hI likhA  /
sambhavataH usa samaya kisI prAMta meM yaha nAma lokapracalita rahA ho  /  yahI
dazA dhanya anagAra ke hAthoM kI bhI thii| unakA bhI mAMsa aura rudhira sUkha
gayA thA tathA ve isa taraha dikhAI dete the jaisA sUkhA gobara ( chANA - kaMDA
) hotA hai athavA sUkhe hue vaTa aura palAza ke patte hote haiN| hAtha kI
aMguliyoM meM bhI atyanta kRzatA A gaI thii| aMguliyA~ kabhI rakta aura mAMsa se
paripUrNa thIM, ve aba sUkhakara eka nirAlI rUkSatA evaM kSINatA dhAraNa kara
rahI thiiN| sUkha jAne se unakI yaha hAlata ho gaI thI jaise--eka kalAya, mUMga
athavA mASa (ur3ada kI phalI -- jise komala avasthA meM hI tor3akara dhUpa meM
sukhA diyA gayA ho| pahale vAlA mAMsa aura rudhira unameM dekhane ko bhI zeSa
nahIM raha gayA thaa| yadi unako koI pahacAna sakatA thA to kevala asthi aura
carma se hI, jo unameM avaziSTa raha gaye the  /  'bAhu' zabda yadyapi saMskRta
bhASA meM ukArAnta hai, tathApi prAkRta bhASA meM strIliMga kI vivakSA hone para
vaha AkArAnta ho jAtA hai| ataH sUtra meM AyA huA 'bAhANaM' pada
prAkRtavyAkaraNa kI dRSTi se zuddha hai| sUtra isa prakAra hai-- bAhorAt  //  8
//  1  //  36  //  bAhuzabdasya striyAmAkArAntAdezo bhavati, bAhAe jeNa dhario
ekkAe  //  striyAmityeva  /  vAme aro bAhU' | grIvA meM bhI anya avayavoM ke
samAna mAMsa aura rudhira kA abhAva ho gayA thA  /  ataH vaha svabhAvataH lambI
dikhAI detI thI  /  sUtrakAra ne usako upamA lambe mukha vAle surAhI Adi pAtroM
kI dI hai| isake lie sUtra meM eka 'uccasthApanaka' pada AyA hai, jo isI prakAra
kA eka pAtra hotA hai| yaha dazA dhanya anagAra ke cibuka kI thii| jo cibuka
kabhI mAMsa aura rudhira se paripUrNa thA, usakI tapazcaryA kAraNa yaha dazA ho
gaI thI ki jaise--eka sUkhe hue tumbe yA hakuba (eka prakAra kI vanaspati) ke
phala kI hotI hai athavA vaha aisI dikhAI detI hai, jaise--eka Ama kI guThalI ho
/  jo oTha pahale bimbaphala ke samAna rakta varNa the ve tapa ke kAraNa
sUkhakara bilkula vivarNa ho gaye the| unakI AkRti aba isa prakAra ho gaI thI
jaisI sUkhI huI meMhadI kI guTikA hotI hai| jihvA bhI sUkhakara vaTavRkSa ke
patte ke samAna athavA palAza (DhAka) ke patte ke samAna nIrasa aura rUkhI ho
gaI thii| AcArya hemacandrakRta prAkRtavyAkaraNa 1.

Page #71 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Anuttara-upapaatika-dasha  This discussion clearly shows that the tapasya-
anushtana of the blessed Anugara was only for self-purification. They were
completely free from the attachment to the body. This description also proves
that excellent tapasya alone has the power to purify the self and through it,
the karmas can also be destroyed. It is important to remember here that
appropriate tapasya can only be done with samyag-gyan and samyag-darshan.
Tapasya done without samyag-gyan and samyag-darshan is balatapasya. It may lead
to the attainment of koti-devagati, but not even the high devagati like
vaimanika. In such a situation, how can it lead to the attainment of the most
excellent, lokoत्तर and anupam pad like liberation?  ## Blessed Muni's Nose,
Eyes and Head  14. The nose of the blessed Anugara was like a dry stalk of
mango, or a dry stalk of amratak (a particular fruit), or a dry stalk of
matuling (a type of seed). Just as these tender stalks, when cut and dried in
the sun, wither and shrink, so too the nose of the blessed Anugara dried up,
devoid of flesh and blood.  The eyes of the blessed Anugara were like the holes
of a veena, or the holes of a bansuri (flute), or a faint star in the morning.
Thus, the eyes of the blessed Anugara also sank inwards, devoid of flesh and
blood, and became devoid of light and radiance. Only a faint flicker remained in
the eyes.  The ears of the blessed Anugara were like the peeled skin of a root,
or the peeled skin of a cucumber, or the peeled skin of a bitter gourd.
Similarly, the ears of the blessed Anugara also dried up. They were devoid of
flesh and blood.  The head of the blessed Anugara was like a dry, withered, and
lifeless tree, with only skin and bones remaining. It was not covered in flesh
and blood.  This was the case everywhere. The mouth, tongue, ears, and nose, all
eight, were not covered in flesh and blood, but only skin and bones remained.
1-12. See Section 3, Sutra 10.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 anuttaraupapAtikadazA ukta vivecana se spaSTa hotA hai ki dhanya anagAra kA
tapa-anuSThAna Atmazuddhi ke liye hI thA  /  zarIramoha se ve sarvathA mukta ho
gaye the  /  yaha bhI isa varNana se siddha hotA hai ki utkRSTa tapa hI Atma
zuddhi kI sAmarthya rakhatA hai aura isI ke dvArA karmoM kI nirjarA bhI ho
sakatI hai| yahA~ yaha avazya smaraNIya hai ki samIcIna tapa samyagjJAna aura
samyagdarzanapUrvaka hI ho sakatA hai| samyagjJAna aura samyagdarzana ke abhAva
meM kiyA jAne vAlA tapa bAlatapa hai| usase hI koTi kI devagati bhale prApta ho
jAe kintu vaimAnika jaisI ucca devagati bhI prApta nahIM hotI  /  aisI sthiti
meM usase mukti jaise sarvotkRSTa, lokottara evaM anupama pada kI prApti to ho
hI kaise sakatI hai| 36 dhanya muni kI nAsikA netra evaM zIrSa 14--dhaNNassa NaM
aNagArassa nAsAe jAva' se jahA jAva' aMbagapesiyA i vA, aMbADagapesiyA i vA,
mAuluMgapesiyA i vA taruNiyA evAmeva jAvare  /  dhaNNassa NaM aNagArassa
acchINaM jAva' se jahA jAva' vINAchiDDe i vA, vaddhIsagachiDDe i vA,
pabhAiyatArigA i vA evAmeva jAva'  /  dhaNNassa kaNNANaM jAva' se jahA jAva'
mUlAchalliyA i vA, vAluMkachalliyA i vA kArellayachalliyA ivA, evAmeva jAva'  /
dhaNNassa sIsassa jAva" se jahA jAva" taruNagalAue i vA, taruNagaelAlue i vA
siNhAlae i vA taruNae jAva [ chiNNe Ayave diNNe sukke samANe milAyamANe ]
ciTThar3a, evAmeva jAvara sIsaM sukkaM lukkhaM nimmaMsaM aTTha-camma- chirattAe
paNNAyai, no ceva NaM maMsa-soNiyattAe  /  evaM savvattha  /  navaraM, uyara -
bhAyaNa - kaNNa- jIhA - uTThA eesiM aTThI na bhaNNai, camma chirattAe paNNAyai
tti bhaNNai  /  dhanya anagAra kI nAsikA kA tapojanya rUpa lAvaNya isa prakAra
kA gayA thA-- jaise-- Ama kI sUkhI phA~ka ho, AmrAtaka arthAt eka phala vizeSa
(AmaDe) kI sUkhI phA~ka ho, mAtuliMga arthAt bijaure kI sUkhI phA~ka ho--una
komala phA~koM ko kATa kara, dhUpa meM sukhAne para, jisa prakAra ve murajhA
jAtI haiM, sikur3a jAtI haiM, usI prakAra dhanya anagAra kI nAka bhI mAMsa aura
zoNita se rahita hokara sUkha gaI thii| dhanya anagAra kI A~khoM kA tapojanya
rUpa lAvaNya isa prakAra kA ho gayA thA jaise vINA kA chidra ho, vaddhIsaka
arthAt bAMsurI kA chidra ho, prAbhAtika tAraka arthAt prabhAtakAla kA prabhAhIna
tArA ho| isa prakAra dhanya anagAra kI A~kheM bhI mAMsa aura zoNita se rahita ho
kara andara kI ora dha~sa gaI thIM tathA ve prakAza-hIna- tejohIna ho gaI thiiN|
arthAt A~khoM meM kIkI kI mAtra TimaTimAhaTa hI dikhalAI detI thii| dhanya
anagAra ke kAnoM kA tapojanya rUpa lAvaNya isa prakAra kA ho gayA thA-- jaise-
mUle kI kaTI huI lambI-patalI chAla ho, kakar3I (cIbhar3A) kI kaTI huI lambI-
patalI chAla ho yA karele kI kaTI huI lambIpatalI chAla ho| isI prakAra dhanya
anagAra ke kAna bhI sUkha gae the| unameM mAMsa aura zoNita nahIM raha gayA thA
/  1 - 12. dekhie varga 3, sUtra 10.

Page #72 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Third Class The ascetic form and beauty of the blessed Anagara's head (skull)
had become like this - as if it were a dried gourd, a dried yam, a dried
watermelon - when these tender fruits are cut and dried in the sun, they shrivel
and wither away, similarly, the blessed Anagara's head also dried up and
withered away due to the absence of flesh and blood. Only the bones, skin, and
veins remained.  This is the general description of all the limbs of the blessed
Anagara's purified body. The specialty is that the description of bones should
not be given for the abdomen, ears, tongue, and lips. Their identification was
only through the skin and veins.  In this sutra, the description of the nose,
ears, eyes, and head is made through the simile ornament, similar to the
aforementioned limbs of the blessed Anagara. The meaning is clear from the
original text itself.  In this sutra, the limbs of the blessed Anagara are
compared to various types of tubers, roots, and fruits. Among them, Amrataka,
Mulaka Balunki, and Karellaka are the names of specific tubers and fruits.
Aluka is a type of tuber, which is famous in the present age by the name
'potato'.  In this way, the author has described all the limbs of the blessed
Anagara from foot to head. The only specialty mentioned here is that the word
'bone' should not be associated with the abdomen, tongue, ears, and lips, as
there are no bones in them. All other limbs should be used with adjectives like
'dry', 'emaciated', 'devoid of flesh', etc.  The inner radiance of the blessed
ascetic  The blessed Anagara, with his dry, emaciated, and rough legs and
thighs, his waist like a cracked pot, his back sunken, his abdomen visible
through the protruding ribs, his spine-joints countable like a rosary of
rudrakshas, his chest area prominent like the waves of the Ganga, his arms like
withered creepers, his hands hanging loosely, his head shaking like a leaf in
the wind, his lotus-like face sunken, his eyes deep-set, goes, stands, speaks,
and swallows with great difficulty, as if he is a living corpse. As the fire in
the funeral pyre, so he stands, completely covered by the radiance of his
intense asceticism, shining and resplendent.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 tRtIya varga dhanya anagAra ke zIrSa (mastaka) kA tapojanya rUpa-lAvaNya isa
prakAra kA ho gayA thA-- jaise--sUkhA tumbA ho, sUkhA sUraNakanda ho, sUkhA
tarabUja ho--ina komala phaloM ko kATa kara dhUpa meM sukhAne para jaise ye
sUkha jAte haiM, murajhA jAte haiM, vaise hI dhanya anagAra kA mastaka bhI mAMsa
aura zoNita se rahita hone ke kAraNa sUkha gayA thA, murajhA gayA thaa| usameM
asthi, carma aura zirAe~ hI zeSa raha gaI thiiN| dhanya anagAra ke tapaHpUta
deha ke samasta aGgoM kA yaha sAmAnya varNana hai| vizeSatA yaha hai ki peTa,
kAna, jIbha, aura hoTha ina avayavoM meM asthi kA varNana nahIM kahanA caahie|
kevala carma aura zirAoM se hI inakI pahicAna hotI thii| vivecana isa sUtra meM
dhanya anagAra ke pUrvokta aGgoM ke samAna hI upamA alaGkAra se nAsikA, kAna,
netroM aura zira kA varNana kiyA gayA hai| artha mUla pATha se hI spaSTa hai||
isa sUtra meM aneka prakAra ke kandoM, mUloM aura phaloM se dhanya anagAra ke
avayavoM kI upamA dI gaI hai| unameM se AmrAtaka, mUlaka bAluMkI aura kArellaka
ye kanda aura phala vizeSoM ke nAma haiM  /  Aluka eka prakAra kA kanda hotA
hai, jo vartamAna yuga meM AlU' ke nAma se prasiddha hai| isa prakAra sUtrakAra
ne dhanya anagAra ke paira se lekara zira taka saba aGgoM kA varNana kara diyA
hai isameM vizeSatA kevala itanI hI batalAI gaI hai ki udara-bhAjana, jihvA,
kAna, aura oThoM ke sAtha asthi zabda kA anvaya nahIM karanA cAhie kyoMki inameM
asthiyA~ nahIM hotI haiN| zeSa saba aMgoM ke sAtha sukkaM, lukkhaM, NimmaMsaM,
ityAdi saba vizeSaNoM kA prayoga karanA caahie| dhanya muni kI Antarika
tejasvitA 15-dhaNNe NaM aNagAre sukkeNaM bhukkeNaM lukkheNaM pAyajaMghoruNA,
vigayataDikarAleNaM kaDikaDAheNaM, piTThimavassieNaM udarabhAyaNeNaM
joijamANehiM pAsuliyakaDaehiM, akkhasuttamAlA iva gaNejamANehiM
piTTikaraMDagasaMdhIhiM, gaMgAtaraMgabhUeNaM urakaDaga-dezabhAeNaM,
suksappasamANehiM bAhAhiM, siDhilakaDAlI viva laMbatehi ya aggahatthehiM,
kaMpaNavAie viva vevamANIe sIsaghaDIe pavvAyavayaNa-kamale ubbhaDaghaDamuhe
ucchuddhaNayaNakose jIvaMjIveNaM gacchai, jIvaMjIveNaM ciTThai, bhAsaM bhAsittA
gilAi, bhAsaM bhAsamANe gilAi, bhAsaM bhAsissAmi tti gilaai|se jahAnAmae
iMgAlasagaDiyA i vaa| jahA khaMdao tahA, jAva' huyAsaNe iva bhAsarAsipalicchaNNe
taveNaM teeNaM aIva aIva tavateyasirIe uvasobhemANe uvasobhemANe citttthi| ghora
tapasvI vaha dhanya anagAra mAMsa Adi ke abhAva ke kAraNa sUkhe aura bhUkha ke
kAraNa bubhukSita evaM paira Adi avayavoM ke kRzatara ho jAne ke kAraNa rUkSa
dikhAI dete the| unakA kaTibhAga kaTAha (kacchapa kI pITha athavA bhAjanavizeSa
--kar3hAI) sarIkhA vikRta evaM mAMsahIna hone ke kAraNa haDDiyAM Upara dikhAI
dene se vikarAla dRSTigocara hotA thaa| mAMsa-majjA aura zoNita ke abhAva meM
pITha se lage peTa se, nirmAMsa hone ke kAraNa spaSTa dikhalAI dene vAlI
pasaliyoM se, mAMsa aura majjArahita hone se rudrAkSa kI mAlA ke maNakoM ke
samAna spaSTa gine jAne yogya pRSTa-karaDaMga (rIr3ha) kI sandhiyoM se, gaGgA kI
taraGgoM ke tulya spaSTa dikhane vAlI asthiyoM ke kAraNa unake vakSasthala kA
bhAga 1. dekhie aNuttarovavAiyadasA varga 3, sUtra 8.

Page #73 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Translation:  38 The state of *Anuttaraupapatikadasha* was evident. Their
arms were long and dry, like a dried-up serpent. Their forearms trembled like an
iron horse bridle. Their head shook like a patient suffering from *Kampilanvata*
(tremor). Their lotus-like face was withered. Their lips were dry, making their
mouth appear distorted like a broken pot. Their eyeballs were sunken. Weakened
by prolonged austerities, the blessed *Anugara* walked not by the strength of
their body, but by the strength of their soul. They stood and sat by the
strength of their soul. They grew weary from speaking, even the act of speaking
caused them fatigue, even the thought of "I will speak" exhausted them. When
they walked, their bones made a sound like a cart filled with charcoal.  The
state that had befallen *Skandaka* had also befallen the blessed *Anugara*. Yet,
they were radiant with inner spiritual fire, like fire covered with ashes. The
blessed *Anugara* was adorned with austerity, brilliance, and the splendor of
the aura of austerity (they were steadfast, unwavering, and unmoving in their
practice).  Here, in a single thread, the sutra-maker has described all the
limbs of the blessed *Anugara* in a different way. The blessed *Anugara's* feet,
shanks, and thighs were extremely dry due to the lack of flesh and had become
completely rough due to constant hunger. There was no trace of oiliness left in
them. Their waist was like a *kataha* (tortoise shell or a special vessel used
by confectioners). Due to the depletion of flesh and the protrusion of bones, it
appeared terrifying, like the high banks of a river - high on both sides and
deep in the middle. Their stomach was completely dry. The liver and spleen had
also withered within it. Therefore, it had naturally merged with the back. The
flesh on the ribs had also dried up completely, and they could be counted
individually. The same was the case with the elevated regions of the back. They
too could be counted individually, as if strung together like beads of a
*rudraksha* garland. The chest region appeared like the waves of the Ganges. The
arms had dried up like dried-up snakes. The hands were not under their control
and moved on their own, like a loose horse bridle. The stability of the head was
also lost. It trembled like the head of a man suffering from *Kampilanvata*
(tremor), being devoid of strength. Due to this intense austerity, the face that
once shone like a blooming lotus, was now withered. The lips had become
distorted due to dryness. This made the mouth appear terrifying, like the mouth
of a broken pot. Both their eyes were sunken. Physical strength had completely
weakened. They walked and stood only by the power of their soul. Due to this
complete weakness, their body had reached such a state that even speaking caused
them great pain and fatigue. Even if they spoke, it was with great difficulty.
The body was generally so weak that when they walked, the rubbing of bones
against each other produced a sound like a moving cart filled with charcoal.
The implication is that just as the body of *Skandaka* Muni had become extremely
weak due to austerity, so too had the body of the blessed *Anugara* become weak,
emaciated, and feeble. But even with the depletion of their body, their
spiritual radiance was increasing. Their state had become like fire covered with
ashes. Their soul was acquiring an extraordinary beauty from the brilliance of
austerity and the radiance it produced.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 38 anuttaraupapAtikadazA dikha par3atA thaa| unakI bhujAe~, sUkhe hue sarpa ke
tulya lambI evaM sUkhI thiiN| lohe kI ghor3e kI lagAma ke tulya unake agrahasta
kAMpate hae the| kampanavAta-grasta rogI ke tulya unakA mastaka kAMpatA rahatA
thaa| unakA mukha-kamala mlAna ho gayA thaa| hoThoM ke sUkha jAne se unakA mukha
TUTe mukhavAle ghar3e ke samAna vikRta dRSTigocara hotA thaa| unake nayanakoSa
andara kI ora dhaMsa gaye the| dIrgha tapa se isa prakAra kSINa hokara vaha
dhanya anagAra apane zarIra ke bala se nahIM; parantu apane Atmabala se hI
gamana karate the| apane Atmabala se hI khar3e hote the aura baiThate the| bhASA
bolakara ve thaka jAte the, bolate samaya bhI unheM thakAvaTa kA anubhava hotA
thA, yahA~ taka 'maiM bolUMgA' isa vicAra mAtra se hI ve thaka jAte the| jisa
samaya vaha calate to unake zarIra kI haDDiyAM aisI zabda karatI thIM jaise koI
koyaloM se bharI gAr3I ho, ityaadi| jo dazA skandaka kI ho gaI thI, vahI dazA
dhanya anagAra kI bhI ho gaI thii| phira bhI ve rAkha ke Dhera se DhaMkI Aga ke
samAna andara hI andara Atma-teja se pradIpta ho rahe the| vaha dhanya anagAra
tapa se, teja se aura tapasteja kI zobhA-AbhA se atyanta suzobhita hokara (apanI
sAdhanA meM sthira the, aDiga the aura aDola the)| vivecana yahA~ eka hI sUtra
meM sUtrakAra ne prakArAntara se dhanya anagAra ke saba avayavoM kA varNana kiyA
hai| dhanya anagAra ke paira, jaGghA aura urU mAMsa Adi ke abhAva meM atyanta
sUkha gaye the aura nirantara bhUkhe rahane ke kAraNa bilkula rUkSa ho gaye the|
cikanAhaTa una meM nAma mAtra ke liye bhI zeSa nahIM thii| kaTi mAno kaTAha
(kacchapa kI pITha athavA bhAjana-vizeSa--halavAI Adi kI kar3hAI) thaa| vaha
mAMsa ke kSINa hone se tathA asthiyoM ke Upara uTha jAne se itanA bhayaGkara
pratIta hotA thA jaise nadI ke U~ce taTa hoM--donoM ora U~ce aura bIca meM ghre|
peTa bilakula sUkha gayA thaa| usa meM se yakRt aura plIhA bhI kSINa ho gaye
the| ataH vaha svabhAvataH pITha ke sAtha mila gayA thaa| pasaliyoM para kA bhI
mAMsa bilkula sUkha gayA thA aura ve eka-eka alaga-alaga ginI jA sakatI thii|
yahI hAla pITha ke unnata pradezoM kA bhI thA  /  ve bhI rudrAkSa kI mAlA ke
dAnoM ke samAna sUtra meM piroye hue bhI jaise alaga-alaga gine jA sakate the|
ura ke pradeza aise dikhAI dete the, jaisI gaGgA kI taraGge hoN| bhujAe~ sUkha
kara sUkhe hue sA~pa ke samAna ho gaI thiiN| hAtha apane vaza meM nahIM the aura
ghor3e kI DhIlI lagAma ke samAna apane Apa hI hilate rahate the| zira kI
sthiratA bhI lupta ho gaI thii| vaha zakti se hIna hokara kampana-vAyu roga vAle
puruSa ke zira ke samAna kAMpatA hI rahatA thaa| isa atyugra tapa ke kAraNa jo
mukha kabhI khile hue kamala ke samAna zobhAyamAna thA, aba murajhA gayA thaa|
oMTha sUkhane ke kAraNa vikRta-se ho gaye the| isase mukha phUTe hue ghar3e ke
mukha ke samAna vikarAla dikhAI detA thaa| unakI donoM A~kheM bhItara dhaMsa gaI
thiiN| zArIrika bala bilakula zithila ho gayA thaa| ve kevala Atmika zakti se hI
calate the aura khar3e hote the| isa prakAra sarvathA durbala hone ke kAraNa
unake zarIra kI yaha dazA ho gaI thI ki bhASaNa karane meM bhI unako atIva kheda
pratIta hotA thA, thakAvaTa hotI thii| kucha kahate bhI the to atyanta kaSTa ke
saath| zarIra sAdhAraNataH isa prakAra khacapacA gayA thA ki jaba ve calate the
to asthiyoM meM paraspara ragar3a lagane ke kArA calatI huI koyaloM kI gAr3I ke
samAna zabda utpanna hone lagatA thaa| tAtparya yaha hai ki jisa prakAra
skandaka muni kA zarIra tapa ke kAraNa atyanta kSINa ho gayA thA, usI prakAra
dhanya anagAra kA zarIra bhI kSINa, kRza evaM nirbala ho gayA thaa| kintu zarIra
kSINa hone para bhI unakI Atmika dIpti bar3ha rahI thii| unakI avasthA aisI ho
gaI thI jaise bhasma se AcchAdita agni hotI hai| unakA AtmA tapa ke teja se aura
utpanna kAnti se alaukika sundaratA dhAraNa kara rahA

Page #74 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Third Varga They were radiant with spiritual splendor. In this sutra, the
commentator has explained the term 'udbhataghanamukheti' as follows - 'udbhatam
- fierce, whose face is like that of a pot, i.e., emaciated due to severe
austerities.' Does this statement not prove that a face-covering (mukhavastrika)
was worn? Such a doubt arises. The solution is that here the sutra-maker's
intention is only to describe the emaciated body due to austerities, not the
description of religious accessories. If they had described other bodily
accessories and not the face-covering, then this doubt could have arisen. But
here, no accessory has been described at all. Therefore, it is clear that the
sutra-maker intends to describe their austerities independent of the body and
the effect on the limbs of the body. If this is not accepted, then the
description of the waist, etc. should have been accompanied by the description
of the cloak, etc. Therefore, the description of the thinness of the face or
lips does not in any way prove the absence of a face-covering on their face.
Praise by Lord Mahavira 16 - At that time, in the city of Rajagriha, in the
Gunasila temple, there was a king named Seni. At that time, the ascetic Lord
Mahavira arrived. The assembly went out. Seni also went out. There was a
discourse on the Dharma. The assembly returned. Then that king, after hearing
and understanding the Dharma from the ascetic Lord Mahavira, worships and pays
obeisance to the ascetic Lord Mahavira, and after worshipping and paying
obeisance, speaks thus - 'O Lord! Which of these fourteen thousand ascetic
leaders, the Indrabhutas, is the most difficult to perform austerities and the
greatest in attaining Nirjara (shedding of karmas)?' 'Indeed, Seni! Of these
fourteen thousand ascetic leaders, the Indrabhutas, the ascetic is the most
difficult to perform austerities and the greatest in attaining Nirjara.' 'O
Lord! Why is it said that of these [fourteen thousand ascetic leaders, the
Indrabhutas], the ascetic is the most difficult to perform austerities and the
greatest in attaining Nirjara?' 'Indeed, Seni! At that time, in the city of
Kayandi, a great palace-like dwelling is being inhabited.' 39 Then, another one,
wandering from village to village, comes to the Sahsambavana garden near the
city of Kayandi. After arriving, 'I will take an appropriate vow and live with
self-control and austerity.' The assembly went out, and in the same way, 'he
became an ascetic' and 'lives on alms like a heron.' The radiance of the body of
that ascetic, from head to foot, was all... shining, shining, standing.  1.
Anuttaroavadayadas Varga 3, Sutra 4. 2. Anuttaroavadayadas Varga 3, Sutras
4-5-6. 3. Anuttaroavadayadas Varga 3, Sutra 7. 4. Anuttaroavadayadas Varga 3,
Sutras 7 to 15.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 tRtIya varga thaa| ve Atmika dIpti se dedIpyamAna the  /  isa sUtra meM
'ubhaDaghaDamuhe tti' pada kI vyAkhyA vRttikAra ne isa prakAra kI hai--
'udbhaTaM - vikarAlaM, kSINaprAyadazAnacchadatvAd ghaTakasyeva mukhaM yasya sa
tthaa|' isa kathana se mukha para mukha- pattI baMdhI huI siddha nahIM hotI ?
aisI zaMkA upasthita hotI hai| samAdhAna yaha hai ki yahA~ para sUtrakAra kA
tAtparya kevala tapa ke kAraNa kSINa zarIra ke varNana se hI hai,
dharmopakaraNoM ke varNana se nahIM  /  yadi ve zarIra sambandhI anya
dharmopakaraNoM kA varNana karate aura mukhavastrikA kA na karate to yaha zaGkA
upasthita ho sakatI thI  /  parantu yahA~ to kisI bhI upakaraNa kA varNana nahIM
kiyA gayA hai| ataH spaSTa hai ki yahA~ sUtrakAra ko unakI zarIra-nirapekSa
tapazcaryA kA aura usake kAraNa zarIra ke aMgopAMgoM para par3ane vAle prabhAva
kA varNana karanA hI abhipreta hai| yadi aisA na mAnA jAya to unake kaTi Adi
aGgoM ke varNana ke sAtha colapaTTa Adi kA bhI varNana avazya miltaa| ataeva
mukha athavA hoThoM kI kRzatA Adi ke varNana se unake mukha para mukhavastrikA
kA abhAva kisI bhI prakAra siddha nahIM hotA  /  bhagavAn mahAvIra dvArA
prazaMsA 16--teNaM kAleNaM teNaM samaeNaM rAyagihe nayare, guNasilae ceie, seNie
rAyA  /  teNaM kAleNaM teNaM samaeNaM samaNe bhagavaM mahAvIre samosaDhe  /
parisA niggyaa| seNie nigge| dhmmkhaa| parisA paDigayA  /  tae se se yA
samaNassa bhagavao mahAvIrassa aMtie dhammaM soccA nisamma samaNaM bhagavaM
mahAvIraM vaMdai namaMsai, vaMdittA namaMsittA evaM vayAsI-- ', imAsiM NaM
bhaMte! iMdabhUi-pAmokkhANaM coddasaNhaM samaNasAhassINaM kayare aNagAre
mahAdukkarakArae ceva mahANijjarayarAe ceva ? evaM khalu seNiyA! imAsiM iMdabhUi
- pAmokkhANaM coddasaNhaM samaNasAhassINaM dhaNNe aNagAre mahAdukkarakArae ceva
mahANijjarayarAe ceva  /  sekeNadveNaM bhaMte! evaM vuccai imAsiM jAva [ imAsiM
iMdabhUr3a-pAmokkhANaM coddasahaM samaNasAhassINaM ] dhaNe aNagAre
mahAdukkarakArae ceva mahANijjarayarAe ceva ? evaM khalu seNiyA! teNaM kAleNaM
teNaM samaeNaM kAyaMdI nAmaM nayarI jAva [ dhaNNe dArae ] uppiM pAsAyavaDiMsae
viharai  /  39 taNaM aNNA kayAI puvvANupuvvIe caramANe gAmANugAmaM dUijjamANe
jeNeva kAyaMdI nayarI jeNeva sahasaMbavaNe ujjANe teNeva uvaage| uvAgamittA
ahApaDirUvaM uggahaM uggiNhAmi saMjameNaM jAva [ tavasA appANaM bhAvemANe ]
viharAmi  /  parisA niggayA, tahevaM jAva' pavvaie jAva' bilamiva jAvara AhArei
/  dhaNassa NaM aNagArassa pAdANaM zarIravaNNao savvo jAva' uvasobhemANe -
uvasobhemANe ciTThA | 1. aNuttarovavAiyadasA varga 3, sUtra 4. 2.
aNuttarovavAiyadasA varga 3, sUtra 4-5-6. 3. aNuttarovavAiyadasA varga 3, sUtra
7. 4. aNuttarovavAiyadasA varga 3, sUtra 7 se 15 taka  /

Page #75 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
40 From the *Anuttaroppapatikadashā*, thus it is said, O Seniya! These fourteen
thousand ascetics, headed by Indra-bhūti, are indeed *dhana* *anagāra*, the
great doer of difficult deeds, and the great destroyer of impurities.  In that
time and at that time, there was a city called Rājagṛha. There was the Guṇasilka
Caitya. Śreṇika was the king there. In that time and at that time, the Śramaṇa
Bhagavān Mahāvīra arrived. The assembly went out. King Śreṇika also went out.
There was a discourse on Dharma. The assembly returned. Afterwards, King
Śreṇika, having heard the Dharma in the presence of Śramaṇa Bhagavān Mahāvīra,
having reflected, bowed to Śramaṇa Bhagavān Mahāvīra, and prostrated himself.
Having bowed and prostrated himself, he said to the Bhagavān thus:  "Bhanta!
Among these fourteen thousand ascetics, headed by Indra-bhūti, who is the
*anagāra* who is the great doer of difficult deeds, and the great destroyer of
impurities?"  The Bhagavān replied, "Śreṇika! Among these fourteen thousand
ascetics, headed by Indra-bhūti, *dhana* *anagāra* is indeed the great doer of
difficult deeds, and the great destroyer of impurities."  Śreṇika asked again,
"Bhanta! From what perspective do you say that among these fourteen thousand
ascetics, headed by Indra-bhūti, *dhana* *anagāra* is indeed the great doer of
difficult deeds, and the great destroyer of impurities?"  In reply, the Bhagavān
said thus: "Śreṇika! In that time and at that time, there was a city called
Kākaṇḍī. There, *dhana* *kumāra* was immersed in pleasures in high palaces.
Afterwards, I, moving in sequence, dwelling in one village after another, came
to where the city of Kākaṇḍī was, and where the Sahasrāmrāvana garden was.
Arriving, I requested a place suitable for a sage. I remained, moved by
restraint and austerity. The assembly went out, *dhana* *kumāra* became an
ascetic. He ate without attachment. *Dhana* *anagāra*, from his feet to his
head, the description of his entire body, as before, the Bhagavān told Śreṇika,
you should understand, he is adorned with the intense brilliance of austerity.
Śreṇika! From this perspective, I say that among these fourteen thousand
ascetics, headed by Indra-bhūti, *dhana* *anagāra* is indeed the great doer of
difficult deeds, and the great destroyer of impurities."  Praise of *Dhana* Muni
by Śreṇika  17. Then, O Seniya, the king, at the end of the Śramaṇa Bhagavān
Mahāvīra, with a mind filled with joy, went to the Śramaṇa Bhagavān Mahāvīra,
and performed the *tikkhutta* *āyāhiṇa-payāhiṇa*, having performed it, he bowed
and prostrated himself. Having bowed and prostrated himself, he went to *dhana*
*anagāra*, having gone to *dhana* *anagāra*, he performed the *tikkhutta*
*āyāhiṇa-payāhiṇa*, having performed it, he bowed and prostrated himself. Having
bowed and prostrated himself, he said thus:  "Dhana, you are indeed a
*devāṇuppiya*! Well-born, well-intentioned, with excellent qualities, well-
obtained, indeed a *devāṇuppiya*! Your human birth, life, and fruits!" Thus, he
bowed and prostrated himself. Having bowed and prostrated himself, he went to
the Śramaṇa Bhagavān Mahāvīra, having gone to the Śramaṇa Bhagavān Mahāvīra, he
performed the *tikkhutta* *āyāhiṇa-payāhiṇa*, having performed it, he bowed and
prostrated himself. Having bowed and prostrated himself, he went to...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 40 anuttaropapAtikadazA se teNadveNaM seNiyA ! evaM vuccai imAsiM caudasaNhaM
samaNasAhassINaM dhaNNe aNagAre mahAdukkarakArae mahANijjarayarAe cev| usa kAla
aura usa samaya meM rAjagRha nAmakA nagara thaa| guNazilaka caitya thaa| zreNika
vahA~ kA rAjA thaa| usa kAla aura usa samaya meM zramaNa bhagavAn mahAvIra
pdhaare| pariSadA niklii| rAjA zreNika bhI niklaa| dharmakathA huii| pariSadA
vApisa calI gii| anantara usa zreNika rAjA ne zramaNa bhagavAn mahAvIra ke
sAnnidhya meM dharma ko sunakara, vicAra kara zramaNa bhagavAn mahAvIra ko
vandana kiyA,namaskAra kiyaa| vandana namaskAra karake, bhagavAn se isa prakAra
kahA bhaMte ! Apake ina indrabhUti-pramukha caudaha hajAra zramaNoM meM kauna
anagAra mahAduSkarakAraka hai, evaM mahAnirjarAkAraka hai ? bhagavAn ne uttara
diyA zreNika ! ina indrabhUti-pramukha caudaha hajAra zramaNoM meM dhanya
anagAra hI mahAduSkarakAraka hai aura mahAnirjarAkAraka hai| zreNika ne punaH
prazna kiyA-bhaMte ! kisa dRSTi se Apane yaha kahA ki ina indrabhUti-pramukha
caudaha hajAra zramaNoM meM dhanya anagAra hI mahAduSkarakAraka hai,
mahAnirjarAkAraka hai| uttara meM bhagavAn ne isa prakAra kahA--zreNika ! usa
kAla aura usa samaya meM kAkandI nAma kI nagarI thii| yAvat vahA~ U~ce mahaloM
meM dhanyakumAra bhogoM meM lIna thaa| anantara maiM anukrama se calatA huA, eka
grAma se dUsare grAma meM vihAra karatA huA, jahA~ kAkandI nagarI thI aura jahA~
para sahasrAmravana udyAna thA vahA~ aayaa| Akara yathApratirUpa (sAdhujanocita)
sthAna kI yAcanA kii| saMyama yAvata tapa se bhAvita hokara rhaa| pariSadA
nikalI, dhanyakumAra pravrajita huaa| yAvat vaha anAsakti se AhAra karatA thaa|
dhanya anagAra ke paira se lekara mastaka taka sAre zarIra kA varNana pUrvavat
bhagavAn ne zreNika ko kaha sunAyA, aisA samajha lenA cAhie, yAvat vaha tapa ke
prakhara teja se suzobhita ho rahA hai| zreNika ! isa dRSTi se maiM yaha kahatA
hU~ ki ina indrabhUti-pramukha caudaha hajAra zramaNoM meM dhanya anagAra
mahAduSkarakAraka hai aura mahAnirjarAkAraka hai| zreNika dvArA dhanya muni kI
stuti 17-tae NaM se seNie rAyA samaNassa bhagavao mahAvIrassa aMtie eyamaTuM
soccA misamma haTTha jAva[tuDhe] samaNaM bhagavaM mahAvIraM tikkhutto AyAhiNa-
payAhiNaM karei, karittA, vaMdai namasai, vaMdittA namaMsittA jeNeva dhaNNe
aNagAre teNeva uvAgacchai, uvAgacchittA dhaNNaM aNagAre tikkhutto
AyAhiNapAyAhiNaM karei, karittA vaMdai namasai, vaMdittA namaMsittA evaM vayAsI
"dhaNNe si NaM tumaM devANuppiyA! supuNNe sukayatthe kayalakkhaNe suladdhe NaM
devANuppiyA! tava mANussae jammajIviyaphale"-tti kaTTa vaMdai, namasai, vaMdittA
namaMsittA jeNeva samaNe bhagavaM mahAvIre teNeva uvAgacchai, uvAgacchittA
samaNaM bhagavaM mahAvIraM tikkhutto vaMdai namasai, vaMdittA namaMsittA jAmeva

Page #76 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Third Chapter  The Digambara, he himself went to that direction.  After
hearing this meaning from the Shraman Bhagwan Mahavira, King Shrenik, after
contemplating and being pleased, circumambulated Shraman Bhagwan Mahavira
thrice, paid obeisance and offered salutations. After paying obeisance and
offering salutations, he went to where the blessed Digambara was. Arriving
there, he circumambulated the blessed Digambara, paid obeisance and offered
salutations. After paying obeisance and offering salutations, he began to speak,
"O Devānupriya! You are blessed, you are virtuous, you are fulfilled, you are of
good deeds, O Devānupriya! You have made human birth and human life successful."
Saying this, he paid obeisance and offered salutations to the blessed Digambara.
After paying obeisance and offering salutations, he went back to where Shraman
Bhagwan Mahavira was. Reaching there, he paid obeisance and offered salutations
to Shraman Bhagwan Mahavira and then went in the direction from which he had
come.  **Discussion:** The meaning of this Sutra is clear from the original text
itself. However, it is necessary to say that one should describe the qualities
of a person without hesitation and encourage the virtuous person with gratitude,
as Shraman Bhagwan Mahavira did. He described the extremely intense penance of
the blessed Digambara truthfully and praised him.  From all this description, we
learn another lesson, that once the attachment to the world is abandoned, one
should definitely purify oneself through right penance. Because penance is the
only main way to destroy karma. This is the fruit of renouncing worldly
pleasures. A person who becomes a Sadhu but remains trapped in attachment should
not expect any success from that renunciation. By doing so, he becomes nowhere
and both his this world and the next world are ruined. The blessed Digambara has
presented an ideal example before us. When he once renounced all the pleasures
of a householder and embraced the life of a Sadhu, he performed the most
excellent penance to make it successful and showed the monks through his duty
how self-purification happens through penance and how the soul is adorned
through that penance.  The third lesson we learn from this is that when praising
a person, one should describe only the qualities that are actually present in
him. This means that it is appropriate to praise by keeping in mind only the
qualities that are present in that person, not by attributing other non-existent
qualities. Because such praise sometimes becomes ridiculous. Therefore, one
should not falsely praise someone and make them feel superior. Excessive praise
can lead to self-deception in the person being praised, and can hinder his
progress. These are the three lessons we learn from this Sutra.  The blessed
Muni truly proved to be a true name. Who else can be more blessed than the one
whom the Tirthankara Dev himself praises profusely from his lotus mouth?

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 tRtIya varga disaM pAubbhUe, tAmeva disaM pddige| tadanantara zreNika rAjA ne
zramaNa bhagavAn mahAvIra se isa artha ko sunakara, usa para vicAra kara evaM
tuSTa hokara zramaNa bhagavAn mahAvIra kI tIna bAra pradakSiNA kI, vandana kiyA
tathA namaskAra kiyaa| vandana karake tathA namaskAra karake jahA~ dhanya
anagAra the, vahA~ aayaa| Akara dhanya anagAra kI pradakSiNA kI, unheM vandana
kiyA, namaskAra kiyaa| vandana karake, namaskAra karake vaha isa prakAra kahane
lagA "he devAnupriya ! Apa dhanya ho, Apa puNyazAlI ho, Apa kRtArtha ho, Apa
sukRtalakSaNa ho, he devAnupriya! Apane manuSya-janma aura manuSya-jIvana ko
saphala kiyaa|" yaha kahakara usane dhanya anagAra ko vandana kiyA, namaskAra
kiyaa| vandana karake, namaskAra karake, jahA~ zramaNa bhagavAn mahAvIra the,
punaH vahA~ phuNcaa| pahu~ca kara zramaNa bhagavAn mahAvIra ko vandana tathA
nama vandana tathA namaskAra karake jisa dizA se AyA thA, usI dizA kI ora calA
gyaa| vivecana isa sUtra kA artha mUla pATha se hI spaSTa hai| phira bhI
vaktavya itanA avazya hai ki jisameM jo guNa hoM unakA nisaGkoca-bhAva se
varNana karanA cAhie aura guNavAn vyakti kA dhanyavAda Adi se utsAha bar3hAnA
cAhie, jaise zramaNa bhagavAn mahAvIra ne kiyaa| unhoMne dhanya anagAra ke ati
ugratara tapa kA yathAtathya varNana kiyA aura usakI sarAhanA kii| isa saba
varNana se dUsarI zikSA hameM yaha milatI hai ki eka bAra jaba saMsAra se
mamatva-bhAva tyAga diyA to samyak tapa ke dvArA Atma-zuddhi avazya kara lenI
caahie| kyoMki tapazcaraNa hI karma-nirjarA kA ekamAtra pradhAna upAya hai| yahI
saMsAra ke sukhoM ko tyAgane kA phala hai| jo vyakti sAdhu bana kara bhI mamatva
meM phaMsA rahe, usako usa tyAga se kisI prakAra kI bhI saphalatA kI AzA nahIM
karanI caahie| aisA karane se to vaha kahIM kA nahIM rahatA aura usake iha-loka
aura para-loka donoM hI bigar3a jAte haiN| dhanya anagAra ne hamAre sAmane eka
Adarza udAharaNa upasthita kiyA hai| unhoMne jaba eka bAra gRhastha ke sAre
sukhoM ko tyAga kara sAdhu-vRtti aMgIkAra kara lI to usako saphala banAne ke lie
utkRSTa se utkRSTa tapa kiyA aura munijanoM ko apane karttavya dvArA batA diyA
ki kisa prakAra tapa ke dvArA Atma-zaddhi hotI hai aura kaise ukta tapa se AtmA
sazobhita kiyA jAtA hai| tIsarI zikSA jo hameM isase milatI hai, vaha yaha ki
jaba kisI vyakti kI stuti karanI ho to usa meM vAstava meM jitane guNa hoM unhIM
kA varNana karanA caahie| kahane kA abhiprAya yaha hai ki jitane guNa usa vyakti
meM vidyamAna hoM unhIM ko lakSya meM rakha kara stuti karanA ucita hai, na ki
aura avidyamAna guNoM kA AropaNa karake bhii| kyoMki aisI stuti kabhI-kabhI
hAsyAspada bana jAtI hai| ataH jhUThI prazaMsA kara nirarthaka hI kisI ko bA~soM
para nahIM car3hAnA caahie| atyuktipUrNa prazaMsA se prazaMsanIya vyakti ko
AtmabhrAnti ho sakatI hai, usake vikAsa kI gati avaruddha ho sakatI hai| yahI
tIna zikSAe~ haiM, jo hameM isa sUtra se milatI haiN| dhanya muni vAstava meM
yathArthanAmA siddha hue| svayaM tIrthaMkara deva apane mukhAravinda se jisakI
bhUri-bhUri prazaMsA kareM usase adhika dhanya anya kauna ho sakatA hai?

Page #77 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter 42: The Blessed Ascetic's Journey to Perfect Bliss  **18.**  Then,
that blessed ascetic, due to his previous virtuous conduct, experienced a
spiritual awakening in the following manner:  He thought, "I have become
emaciated through this austere practice," and so on, just as the Skandaka had
thought. He questioned, and ascended the Great Mountain with the elders. He
performed a one-month Sanlekhana. He observed the nine-month Diksha Paryaya, and
then, after a period of time, he ascended above the moon, and beyond the sun,
planets, constellations, and stars, and the nine celestial vehicles, and
finally, he attained the state of a Deva in the Sarvarthasiddha Vimāna.  The
elders, after the blessed ascetic's departure to heaven, descended from the
Great Mountain and said, "These are the religious articles of the blessed
ascetic."  "Bhanta!" said Bhagavan Gautama, and asked Bhagavan Mahavira the same
question as Skandaka had asked.  Bhagavan Mahavira replied, "Bhanta! The blessed
Deva's state is said to last for thirty-three Sagaropama." "Bhanta! Where do
those Devas go? Where do they attain liberation?" "Gautama! They attain
liberation in the Mahavideha."  Thus, this is the account of the first teaching,
as narrated by the Samanas, and as recorded in the scriptures.  **End of the
First Teaching.**  **Note:** The text uses several Jain terms, including:  *
**Anuttaropapatikadasha:** The state of a liberated soul. * **Anugara:** An
ascetic. * **Sarvarthasiddha:** A state of perfect bliss. * **Vimāna:** A
celestial vehicle. * **Deva:** A celestial being. * **Sanlekhana:** A fast unto
death. * **Diksha Paryaya:** A period of intense spiritual practice. *
**Sagaropama:** A unit of time, equivalent to a vast period. * **Mahavideha:**
The state of liberation.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 42 anuttaraupapAtikadazA dhanya anagAra kA sarvArthasiddha-gamana 18-tae NaM
tassa dhaNNassa aNagArassa aNNayA kayAi puvvarattAvarattakAlasamayaMsi dhamma-
jAgarariyaM0 imeyArUve ajjhathie jAva samuppajitthA evaM khalu ahaM imeNaM
urAleNaM jAva [tavokkameNaM dhamaNisaMtae jAe] jahA khaMdao taheva ciNtaa|
aapucchnnN| therehiM saddhiM viulaM duruuhi| mAsiyA sNlehnnaa| navamAsA pariyAo
jAva[pAuNittA] kAlemAse kAlaM kiccA u8 caMdima jAva [sUra-gahagaNa-nakkhatta-
tArArUvANaM jAva] navayageveje vimANa-patthaDe uddhaM dUraM vIIvaittA
savvaTThasiddhe vimANe devattAe uvvnnnne| therA taheva oyaraMti jAva' ime se
aayaarbhNdde| bhaMte ! tti bhagavaM goyame taheva Apucchati, jahA khaMdayassa
bhagavaM vAgarei, jAva' savvaTThasiddhe vimANe uvvnnnne| "dhaNNassa NaM bhaMte !
devassa kevaiyaM kAlaM ThiI paNNattA ?" "goyamA ! tettIsa sAgarovamAI ThiI
pnnnnttaa|" "se NaM bhaMte ! tAo devalogAo kahiM gacchihii ? kahiM uvavajihii ?"
"goyamA ! mahAvidehe vAse sijjhihii|" taM evaM khalu jaMbU ! samaNeNaM jAva
saMpatteNaM paDhamassa ajjhayaNassa ayamaDhe pnnnntte| ||pddhmN ajjhayaNaM
samattaM . tatpazcAt kisI dina rAtri ke madhya bhAga meM dhanya anagAra ke mana
meM dharma-jAgarikA (dharma-viSayaka vicAraNA) karate hue aisI bhAvanA utpanna
huI maiM isa prakAra ke udAra tapaHkarma se zuSka-nIrasa zarIra vAlA ho gayA
hU~, ityAdi yAvat jaise skandaka ne vicAra kiyA thA, vaise hI cintanA kI,
ApRcchanA kii| sthaviroM ke sAtha vipulagiri para ArUDha hue, eka mAsa kI
saMlekhanA kii| nau mAsa kI dIkSAparyAya yAvat pAlana kara kAla karake candramA
se Upara yAvat sUrya graha nakSatra tArA navagraiveyaka vimAna-prastaToM ko pAra
kara sarvArthasiddha vimAna meM devarUpa se utpanna hue| dhanya muni ke svarga-
gamana hone ke pazcAt paricarcA karane vAle sthavira muni vipulaparvata se nIce
utara yAvat 'dhanya muni ke ye dharmopakaraNa haiM' unhoMne bhagavAn se isa
prakAra khaa| bhagavAn gautama ne 'bhaMte !' aisA kaha kara bhagavAn se usI
prakAra prazna kiyA, jisa prakAra skandaka ke adhikAra meM kiyA thaa| bhagavAn
mahAvIra ne usakA uttara diyA, yAvat dhanya anagAra sarvArthasiddha vimAna meM
deva rUpa se utpanna huA hai| "bhaMte ! dhanya deva kI sthiti kitane kAla kI
kahI hai ?" "he gautama ! tetIsa sAgaropama kI sthiti kahI hai|
aNuttarovavAiyadasA, varga 1. sUtra 4 aNuttarovavAiyadasA varga 1, sUtra 4 2.

Page #78 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Third Section  "Bhanta! Where will the blessed deva go, where will he be
born, after leaving that deva-loka?"  "He Gautama! He will be born as a Siddha
in Mahavidehavarsha."  43  Shree Sudharmaswami said - O Jambu! Thus, the
Shraman, the liberated Bhagwan Mahavira, has explained the meaning of the first
study of the third section.  || First Study Ends ||  **Discussion** - This sutra
describes the final samadhi of the blessed anagaara, and the sutrakar has
compared him to a Skandaka Sannyasi. The blessed anagaara, immersed in
knowledge, meditation, austerity, and renunciation, one night while meditating,
thought to himself, "I still have the strength to rise, and the Shasanapati
Shraman Bhagwan Mahavira is still present, so why not complete the ultimate
practice of this life while all these favorable conditions are present?" As soon
as this thought arose, he received the permission of Shraman Bhagwan in the
morning and, for self-purification, recited the five great vows again. He then
sought forgiveness from the present Shramans and Shramanis and, along with the
Tatha-rupa sthaviras, slowly ascended the Vipulagiri. Upon reaching there, he
spread a layer of darbha grass on a black-colored earth-stone slab, sat in
padmasana, joined his hands, and circled them over his head. Facing the east, he
first saluted all the Siddhas with the chant "Namotthunan," and then saluted
Shree Shraman Bhagwan Mahavira with the same chant. He said, "Bhagwan! You, who
are seated there, are seeing everything, so please accept my salutations. I had
already renounced the eighteen sins in your presence. Now, in your presence, I
renounce them again for the rest of my life. Along with this, I also renounce
food, drink, edibles, and palatable substances for the rest of my life. I also
finally relinquish my body, which has been my aid in restraint. Now, I am taking
the vow of Anashan called Padupopagaman." Thus, he saluted Shree Shraman
Bhagwan, made him a witness, and took Santhara, and began to live accordingly.
He studied the eleven Angas, starting with Samayika, remained in the
Dikshaparaya for nine months, and spent one month in the Anashan Vrat. He
achieved the ultimate samadhi-death after sixty bhakta anashan-chedan, with
introspection and repentance.  Here, it is said that the blessed muni renounced
sixty bhakta. One might wonder what a bhakta is? The answer is that each day's
two bhakta are the food or meals. Thus, there are sixty bhakta in a month. In
this regard, the Vrittikar says, "The renunciation of two meals each day makes
sixty bhakta renounced in thirty days." Thus, when the blessed anagaara took
Anashan for a month, there is no doubt about the renunciation of sixty bhakta.
After that, the blessed anagaara, after relinquishing his body, was born in the
most excellent divine realm, the Sarvarth Siddha Vimana, etc. This is clear.
When the sthaviras who went with him saw that the blessed anagaara had completed
his earthly play and attained heaven, they performed Parinirvana-pratyayika
kayotsarga, meaning, "Parinirvana is death, the dissolution of the body is also
Parinirvana, the belief that is the cause of this is Parinirvana-pratyaya." The
meaning is that after death, the meditation that is done...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 tRtIya varga "" 'bhaMte ! usa devaloka se cyavana kara dhanya deva kahA~
jAyagA, kahA~ utpanna hogA ?" " he gautama! mahAvidehavarSa se siddha hogA  /  "
43 zrI sudharmAsvAmI ne kahA-- he jambU ! isa prakAra zramaNa yAvat
nirvANasaMprApta bhagavAn mahAvIra ne tRtIya varga ke prathama adhyayana kA yaha
artha kahA hai| || prathama adhyayana samApta  //  vivecana --- prastuta sUtra
meM dhanya anagAra kI antima samAdhi kA varNana kiyA gayA hai aura usake lie
sUtrakAra ne dhanya anagAra kI skandaka saMnyAsI se upamA dI hai| jJAna dhyAna
tapa tyAga meM lIna bane hue dhanya anagAra ko eka samaya madhya rAtri meM
jAgaraNa karate hue vicAra utpanna huA ki mujhameM abhI taka uThane kI zakti
vidyAmAna hai aura zAsanapati zramaNa bhagavAn mahAvIra bhI abhI taka vidyamAna
haiM, ataH yaha saba anukUla suvidhAe~ rahate hI maiM isa jIvana kI carama
sAdhanA kyoM na kara luuN| isa vicAra ke Ate hI unhoMne prAtaHkAla zramaNa
bhagavanta kI AjJA prApta kI aura Atma-vizuddhi ke lie paJca mahAvratoM kA punaH
pATha par3hA tathA upasthita zramaNoM aura zramaNiyoM se kSamA yAcanA kara
tathArUpa sthaviroM ke sAtha zanaiH zanaiH vipulagiri para car3ha gye| vahA~
pahuMcakara unhoMne kRSNa-varNI pRthivI - zilApaTTa para pratilekhanA kara
darbha kA saMstAraka bichAyA aura padmAsana lagAkara baiTha gye| phira donoM
hAtha jor3e aura unase zira para Avartana kiyaa| isa prakAra pUrva dizA kI ora
mukha kara 'namotthuNaM' ke pATha dvArA pahale saba siddhoM ko namaskAra kiyA,
phira usI se zrI zramaNa bhagavAn mahAvIra ko bhI namaskAra kiyaa| kahA- "
bhagavan ! vahA~ virAjamAna Apa saba kucha dekha rahe haiM, ataH merI vandanA
svIkAra kreN| maiMne pahale hI Apake samakSa aSTAdaza pApoM kA tyAga kiyA thaa|
aba maiM Apa kI sAkSI se unakA phira se jIvana bhara ke lie parityAga karatA hU~
/  sAtha hI sAtha aba azana, pAna, khAdya aura svAdya padArthoM kA bhI AjIvana
parityAga karatA huuN| apane saMyama sahAyaka zarIra kA bhI antima rUpa se
vyutsarga karatA huuN| aba pAdapopagamana nAmaka anazana dhAraNa karatA huuN|"
isa prakAra zrI zramaNa bhagavAn ko vandana kara aura unako sAkSI banA kara
saMthArA grahaNa kiyA aura usI ke anusAra vicarane lge| unhoMne sAmAyika Adi se
lekara ekAdaza aGgoM kA adhyayana kiyA, nava mAsa paryanta dIkSAparyAya meM rahe
aura eka mAsa taka anazana vrata meM vyatIta kiyA  /  sAThabhakta azana- chedana
kara AlocanA-pratikramaNapUrvaka uttama samAdhimaraNa prApta kiyaa| yahA~ kahA
gayA hai ki dhanya muni ne sATha bhaktoM kA parityAga kiyA to jijJAsA ho sakatI
hai ki bhakta kise kahate haiM ? uttara yaha hai ki pratyeka dina ke do bhakta
arthAt AhAra yA bhojana hote haiN| isa prakAra eka mAsa ke sATha bhakta ho jAte
haiM  /  isa viSaya meM vRttikAra kA kahanA hai ki " pratidinaM bhojanadvayasya
parityAgAttriMzata dinaiH SaSThirbhaktAnAM tyaktA bhavati  / " isa prakAra jaba
dhanya anagAra ne eka mAsa paryanta anazana dhAraNa kiyA to sATha bhaktoM ke
parityAga meM koI sandeha nahIM rahatA  /  tatpazcAt zarIra kA parityAga kara
dhanya anagAra sarvotkRSTa divyaloka sarvArthasiddha vimAna meM utpanna hue
ityAdi kathana spaSTa hai| jaba unake sAtha gae sthaviroM ne dekhA ki dhanya
anagAra apanI iha - lIlA saMvaraNa kara svarga ko prApta ho gaye haiM to unhoMne
parinirvANa - pratyayika kAyotsarga kiyA arthAt 'parinirvANam-maraNaM yatra,
yaccharIrasya pariSThApanaM tadapi parinirvANameva, tadeva pratyayo - heturyasya
sa parinirvANapratyaya:' bhAva yaha hai ki mRtyu ke anantara jo dhyAna kiyA jAtA

Page #79 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
44 The state of Anuttaroppapatikadasha is called Kayotsarga with the perception
of Parinirvana. The disposal of the body of a deceased Sadhu is also called
Parinirvana. Here, the nearby Sthaviras, seeing the death of the blessed
Anagara, performed this Kayotsarga (meditation). Then they brought his clothes,
utensils, and other equipment and came to the Shraman Bhagwan Mahavira and told
him the whole story of the Anagara's death in Samadhi. They sang his praises,
praised his Upasham-bhava, and handed over his clothes and other equipment to
Sri Bhagwan. At that time, Gautam Swami bowed to Shraman Bhagwan Mahavira and
asked him, "O Bhagwan! Where has your humble disciple, the blessed Anagara, gone
after attaining Samadhi-death? Where has he been born? How long will his state
be there, and where will he be born after that?" In reply, Shraman Bhagwan said,
"O Gautam! My humble disciple, the blessed Anagara, has attained Samadhi-death
and has been born in the Sarvarth Siddha Vimana. There, his state will be for
thirty-three Sagaropama. From there, he will be born in the Mahavideha Kshetra
and attain Moksha, that is, he will become Siddha, Buddha, and Mukta, and attain
Parinirvana, ending all suffering." From this Sutra, we learn that every Sadhak
should face death with Samadhi, by performing actions like criticism, etc., so
that he remains a true devotee until his last breath and becomes eligible for
Moksha, either directly or through tradition.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 44 anuttaropapAtikadazA hai usako parinirvANa-pratyaya kAyotsarga kahate haiN|
mRta sAdhu ke zarIra kA pariSThApana karanA bhI parinirvANa kahA jAtA hai| yahA~
samIpastha sthaviroM ne dhanya anagAra kI mRtyu dekhakara yahI kAyotsarga
(dhyAna) kiyaa| phira unake vastra-pAtra Adi upakaraNa uThAkara lAye aura
zramaNa bhagavAn mahAvIra ke pAsa Akara aura unako dhanya anagAra ke
samAdhimaraNa kA samasta vRttAnta sunA diyaa| unake guNoM kA gAna kiyaa| unake
upazama-bhAva kI prazaMsA kI tathA unake vastra Adi upakaraNa zrI bhagavAn ko
sauMpa die| usa samaya gautama svAmI ne zramaNa bhagavAn mahAvIra ko vandanA kI
aura unase prazna kiyA ki he bhagavan ! ApakA vinIta ziSya dhanya anagAra
samAdhimaraNa prApta kara kahA~ gayA, kahA~ utpanna huA hai ? vahA~ kitane kAla
taka usakI sthiti hogI aura tadanantara vaha kahA~ utpanna hogA? uttara meM
zramaNa bhagavAn ne kahA he gautama ! merA vinayI ziSya dhanya anagAra
samAdhimaraNa prApta kara sarvArthasiddha vimAna meM utpanna huA hai| vahA~
usakI tetIsa sAgaropama kI sthiti hai| vahA~ se cyuta hokara vaha mahAvideha
kSetra meM utpanna hokara mokSa prApta karegA, arthAt siddha, buddha aura mukta
hokara parinirvANa prApta kara sarva duHkhoM kA anta kara degaa| isa sUtra se
hameM yaha zikSA prApta hotI hai ki pratyeka sAdhaka ko AlocanA Adi kriyA karake
samAdhi-pUrvaka mRtyu kA sAmanA karanA cAhie, jisase vaha antima zvAsocchvAsa
taka saccA ArAdhaka rahe aura sAkSAt yA paramparA se mokSAdhikArI bana ske|

Page #80 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Second Study: Sunakṣatra  "If, Venerable Sir, the first study of the third
section has this meaning (as stated before), then what is the meaning of the
second study?" Jambū asked Ārya Sudharma.  Ārya Sudharma replied to Jambū, "Oh
Jambū! In that time and at that time, there was a city called Kākaṇḍī. The king
there was Jitasatru. In that Kākaṇḍī city, there lived a merchant woman named
Bhaddā. She was prosperous and respected. This Bhaddā, the merchant woman, had a
son named Sunakṣatra. He was handsome, with perfect limbs and features. He was
nurtured with five kinds of nourishment. Like Dhanna, he was given a dowry of
thirty-two. He lived in the palace, indulging in pleasures."  "At that time and
at that time, the Samosaraṇa (the preaching of the Dharma) took place. Like
Dhanna, Sunakṣatra also went out to hear the Dharma. Like Thavaccaputra, he left
his home and became an Anugāra (a renunciant). He became an Īryāsamita (a
celibate) and a Brahmacārī (a monk)."  "Then, Sunakṣatra, on the very day he was
shaved and ordained by the Lord Mahāvīra, took the Abhigraha (vow). He ate
without attachment. He lived in restraint and practiced the right conduct. He
practiced the eleven Angas (parts of the Jain path) and lived in restraint,
cultivating his own self."  "Then, Sunakṣatra, like a tree, grew in that way."

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dvitIya adhyayana sunakSatra 19-"jai NaM bhaMte ! jAva" ukkhevo| evaM khalu
jaMbU ! teNaM kAleNaM teNaM samaeNaM kAyaMdI nyrii| jiyasattU raayaa| tattha NaM
kAyaMdIe nayarIe bhaddA nAmaM satthavAhI parivasai, addddaa| tIse NaM bhaddAe
satthavAhIe putte suNakkhatte nAmaM dArae hotthA ahINa jAva'
suruuve|pNcdhaaiprikkhitte jahA dhaNNo tahA battIsao dAo jAva' uppiM
pAsAyavaDiMsae vihri| teNaM kAleNaM teNaM samaeNaM smosrnnN| jahA dhaNNo tahA
suNakkhatto vi niggo|jhaa thAvaccAputtassa tahA nikkhamaNaM jAva aNagAre jAe
IriyAsamie jAva' bNbhyaarii| tae NaM se suNakkhatte aNagAre jaM ceva divasaM
samaNassa bhagavao mahAvIrassa aMtie muMDe jAva pavvaie taM ceva divasaM
abhiggahaM  /  taheva jAva' bilamiva jAva AhArei, saMjameNaM jAva' viharai jAva
bahiyA jaNavaya-vihAraM vihrdd| ekkArasa aMgAI ahijjai jAva saMjameNaM tavasA
appANaM bhAvemANe vihri| tae NaM se suNakkhatte teNaM urAleNaM jAvara jahA
khNdo| . jambU anagAra ne Arya sudharmA se pUchA--bhante ! yadi zramaNa bhagavAn
mahAvIra ne tIsare varga ke prathama adhyayana kA yaha (pUrvokta) artha kahA hai
to dUsare adhyayana kA kyA artha kahA hai ? Arya sudharmA ne jambU se isa
prakAra kahA-- he jambU ! usa kAla aura usa samaya meM kAkandI nAma kI eka
nagarI thii| vahA~ kA rAjA jitazatru thaa| usa kAkandI nagarI meM bhadrA nAma kI
eka sArthavAhI rahatI thii| vaha sampanna yAvat aparibhUtA thii| usa bhadrA
sArthavAhI ke sunakSatra nAmaka eka putra thaa| vaha ahIna aGgopAGga vAlA yAvat
surUpa thaa| paJcadhAtrIparipAlita thaa| dhanyakumAra kI taraha use bhI battIsa
kA daheja diyA gayA yAvat vaha mahaloM meM bhogoM meM lIna hokara rahane lgaa|
usa kAla aura usa samaya meM bhagavAn mahAvIra vahA~ pdhaare| dhanyakumAra kI
taraha sunakSatra bhI dharmadezanA zravaNa karane ke lie niklaa| thAvaccAputra
kI taraha niSkramaNa huA yAvat vaha anagAra ho gyaa| IryAsamita yAvat brahmacArI
ho gyaa| _ anantara vaha sunakSatra, jisa dina bhagavAn mahAvIra ke pAsa muNDita
huA yAvat pravrajita huA usI dina se usane abhigraha (pratijJA) kiyA, yAvat
anAsakta hokara AhAra kiyaa| saMyama meM yAvat sthira hokara vicaraNa kiyaa| 1.
aNuttarovavAiyadasA varga 1, sUtra 2 2. aNuttarovavAiyadasA varga 3, sUtra 2 3.
aNuttarovavAiyadasA varga 3, sUtra 2, 3 4. aNuttarovavAiyadasA varga 3, sUtra
4-5 5. aNuttarovavAiyadasA varga 3, sUtra 5 aNuttarovavAiyadasA varga 3, sUtra 5
7-8. aNuttarovavAiyadasA varga 3, sUtra 7 aNuttarovavAiyadasA varga 3, sUtra 7
10. aNuttarovavAiyadasA varga 3, sUtra 9 aNuttarovavAiyadasA varga 3, sUtra 9
12. aNuttarovavAiyadasA varga 3, sUtra 9

Page #81 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter 46: The State of Anuttaropapathika  The text describes the travels of
the monk Sunakṣatra in various regions. He studied the eleven Angas and, through
self-discipline and austerity, cultivated his soul. As a result, he became
emaciated like a Skandaka, a type of ascetic known for their extreme austerity.
The author here begins to describe the remaining studies of the third category.
This chapter focuses on the story of Sunakṣatra, a monk who renounced worldly
life. The meaning of the chapter is clear from the original text. For example,
the author mentions Thavaccaputra and Dhanya, both monks who renounced worldly
life. To learn more about Thavaccaputra, readers should refer to the fifth study
of the *Jñatadharmakathāṅgasūtra*. The story of Dhanya has already been
discussed in the first study of this category.  The chapter begins with the
phrase "Ukkhevo-utkṣepaḥ," which means that the following text should be
connected to the previous chapters. In other words, the reader should understand
the context of the following text in relation to the previous chapters.  The
text then asks: "If, Venerable Sir, the Blessed Lord Mahāvīra, while attaining
the ninth Anga, the state of Anuttaropapathika, had this study as the first
study of that category, then what study would be the second study of the ninth
Anga, the state of Anuttaropapathika, of that category?"  This type of question
appears at the beginning of almost every study. It is called "Ukkhevo" or
"Utkṣepa," which means introduction or beginning. To shorten the text, the word
"Ukkhevo" is used here. The same style is followed in other chapters.  Just as
Dhanya, after being initiated by the Blessed Lord Mahāvīra, observed the
Ācāṁlavrata on the day of his initiation, so did Sunakṣatra. Similarly, just as
Skandaka, in the second century of the *Vyākhyāprajñapti*, after being initiated
by the Blessed Lord, emaciated his body through austerity, so did Sunakṣatra.
This chapter teaches us that when someone sets a suitable goal, they should
always strive to achieve it. They should be determined to overcome any obstacle,
no matter how great, and never waver in their efforts. Without such
determination, one cannot reach their goal. However, those who strive with a
focused mind to achieve their objective will surely succeed, and quickly.  At
that time, in the city of Rājagṛha, there was a caitya called Guṇasilka. The
king was Śreṇika. The Blessed Lord Mahāvīra arrived. The assembly came out. The
king also came out. There was a discourse on Dharma. The king returned. The
assembly also...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 46 anuttaropapAtikadazA bAhara janapadoM meM vihAra kiyaa| gyAraha aGgoM kA
adhyayana kiyaa| saMyama tathA tapa se AtmA ko bhAvita kara vicaraNa karane
lgaa| anantara vaha sunakSatra muni usa udAra tapa se skandaka kI taraha kRza ho
gyaa| vivecana yahA~ se sUtrakAra tIsare varga ke zeSa adhyayanoM kA varNana
karate haiM  /  isa sUtra meM sunakSatra anagAra kA varNana kiyA gayA hai| sUtra
kA artha mUlapATha se hI spaSTa hai| udAharaNa ke lie sUtrakAra ne thAvaccAputra
aura dhanya anagAra ko liyA hai| pAThakoM ko thAvaccAputra ke viSaya meM jAnane
ke lie 'jJAtAdharmakathAGgasUtra' ke pAMcaveM adhyayana kA adhyayana karanA
caahie| dhanya anagAra kA varNana isI varga ke prathama adhyayana meM A cukA
hai| _ isa sUtra meM prArambha meM "ukkhevao-utkSepaH" pada AyA hai| usakA
tAtparya yaha hai ki isake sAtha ke pATha kA pichale sUtroM se AkSepa kara lenA
cAhie arthAt usake sthAna para nimnalikhita pATha par3hanA cAhie jai NaM bhaMte
! samaNeNaM bhagavayA mahAvIreNaM jAva saMpatteNaM navamassa aMgassa
aNuttarovavAiyadasANaM taccassa vaggassa paDhamassa ajjhayaNassa ayamaDhe
paNNatte navamassa NaM bhaMte ! aMgassa aNuttarovavAiyadasANaM taccassa vaggassa
vitiyassa ajjhayaNassa ke aDhe paNNatte ? isa prakAra kA pATha prAyaH pratyeka
adhyayana ke prArambha meM AtA hai| ise 'ukkhevao yA utkSepa' kahate haiM,
jisakA Azaya hai bhUmikA yA praarmbh| pATha ko saMkSipta karane ke lie yahA~
'ukkhevao' pada de diyA jAtA hai| dUsare sUtroM meM bhI isI zailI kA anusaraNa
kiyA gayA hai| jisa prakAra zramaNa bhagavAn mahAvIra ke pAsa dIkSita hokara
dhanya anagAra ne pAraNA ke dina hI AcAmlavrata dhAraNa kiyA thA isI prakAra
sunakSatra anagAra ne bhI kiyaa| jisa prakAra 'vyAkhyAprajJapti' ke dvitIya
zataka meM skandaka anagAra ne zramaNa bhagavAn ke pAsa dIkSita hokara tapa
dvArA apanA zarIra kRza kiyA thA, usI prakAra sunakSatra anagAra kA zarIra bhI
tapa se kRza ho gyaa| isa sUtra se hameM yaha zikSA milatI hai ki jaba koI apanA
samIcIna lakSya sthira kara le to usakI prApti ke lie usako sadaiva prayatnazIla
rahanA cAhie aura dRr3ha saMkalpa kara lenA cAhie ki vaha usa pada kI prApti
karane meM bar3e se bar3e kaSTa ko bhI tuccha samajhegA aura apane prayatna meM
koI bhI zithilatA nahIM Ane degaa| jaba taka koI aisA dRr3ha saMkalpa nahIM
karatA taba taka vaha lakSya taka nahIM pahuMca sktaa| kintu jo apane dhyeya kI
prApti ke lie ekAgra citta se prayatna karatA hai vaha avazya aura zIghra
saphalatA prApta kara letA hai| 20 teNaM kAleNaM teNaM samaeNaM rAyagihe nayare,
guNasilae ceie| seNie raayaa|saamii smosddhe| parisA niggyaa|raayaa
niggo|dhmmkhaa| rAyA pddigho| parisA pddigyaa| taeNaM tassa suNakkhattassa
aNNayA kayAi puvyarattAvarattakAlasamayaMsi dhamma-jAgariyaM jahA khNdyss| bahu
vAsA priyaao| goym-pucchaa| taheva kahei jAva savvaTThasiddhe vimANe devattAe
uvvnnnne| tettIsaM sAgarovamAI tthiii| se NaM bhaMte ! jAva mahAvidehe
sijjhihii| usa kAla aura usa samaya meM rAjagRha nAma kA eka nagara thaa|
guNazilaka nAmaka caitya thaa| zreNika rAjA thaa| bhagavAn mahAvIra pdhaare|
pariSadA niklii| rAjA bhI niklaa| dharmakathA huii| rAjA vApisa calA gyaa|
pariSadA bhI

Page #82 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Third Class 47  She went back. Sunakṣatra took the vow of *pravrajyā*.
Afterwards, Sunakṣatra, at some other time, in the middle of the night, while
engaged in *dharma-jāgaraṇa*, pondered, just as Skandaka had done. For many
years, she practiced *samyama*. Gautama's inquiry. As long as Sunakṣatra was an
*anagāra*, she was born from a *deva-rūpa* in the *sarvārtha-siddh* aircraft.
The state of thirty-three *sāgara-upamas* occurred. Gautama asked, "O Bhagavan!
Where will that Sunakṣatra deva be born after leaving the *deva-loka*?" As long
as, "Gautama! She will be a *siddh* from the *Mahā-Videha-varṣa*."
**Discussion:** In this sūtra, the word "pūrva-rātra-para-rātra-kāla" appears,
which means midnight. This is the time when the atmosphere is completely calm.
Therefore, the minds of those engaged in *dharma-jāgaraṇa* become focused at
this time, and complete stability is present in them. At such a time, thoughts
are very clear, and very high thoughts arise in the mind. This is the reason why
the thoughts of Dhanya and other *anagāras* at that time led them towards the
righteous path.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 tatIya varga 47 vApisa calI gii| sunakSatra ne pravrajyA aMgIkAra kii| anantara
sunakSatra ne anya kisI samaya madhya rAtri meM dharmajAgaraNa karate hue
vicAraNA kI, jisa prakAra skandaka ne kI thii| bahuta varSoM taka saMyama kA
pAlana kiyaa| gautama kI pRcchaa| yAvat sunakSatra anagAra sarvArthasiddha
vimAna meM devarUpa se utpanna hue| tetIsa sAgaropama kI sthiti huii| gautama ne
pUchA "bhagavan ! vaha sunakSatradeva devaloka se cyavana kara kahA~ paidA
hogA?" yAvat "gautama ! mahAvidehavarSa se siddha hogaa|" vivecana isa sUtra meM
pUrvarAtrApararAtrakAla' zabda AyA hai jisakA artha madhyarAtri hai| yahI samaya
eka aisA hai jaba vAtAvaraNa ekadama prazAnta rahatA hai| ataH dharma-jAgaraNa
karane vAloM kA citta isa samaya ekAgra ho jAtA hai aura usameM pUrNa sthiratA
vidyamAna hotI hai| aise hI samaya meM vicAradhArA bahuta svaccha rahatI hai
aura mastiSka meM bahuta U~ce vicAra utpanna hote haiM  /  yahI kAraNa hai ki
dhanya Adi anagAroM ke usa samaya ke vicAra unako sanmArga kI ora le gye|

Page #83 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
3-10 Study Isidas etc. 21- And the remaining eight Kumaras should also be
understood like Sunakṣatra.  The special thing is that in sequence, two were
born in Rājagṛha, two in Sāketa, two in Vāṇijyagrāma, the ninth in Hastināpura
and the tenth in Rājagṛha.  The mother of nine was Bhadrā.  Nine were given a
dowry of thirty-two each.  The renunciation of nine should be known like
Thāvaccaputra.  The renunciation of Vehalla was done by his father.  The
initiation period of Vehalla was six months, and the initiation period of Dhanya
was nine months.  The initiation period of the rest was for many years.  The
Sanlekhanā of all was for one month.  Birth in the Sarvārthasiddha Vimāna.  All
will become Siddhas from the Mahāvideha region.  Thus, ten studies are complete.
Discussion: Here, it is only necessary to say that in the present Āgama,
Skandaka Anagāra is repeatedly presented as an example.  Where do we get his
description?  And the same can be said about Thāvaccaputra.  The answer is that
the description of the first, i.e., Skandaka Muni, is found in the second Śataka
of the fifth Anga Bhagavati, and the description of Thāvaccaputra is found in
the fifth study of the sixth Anga.  This 'Anuttaraupapātika Sūtra' is the ninth
Anga.  Therefore, the Sūtrakara did not consider it appropriate to repeat the
same description here, and instead, he simply mentioned both and ended the
matter.  Readers should definitely study the aforementioned Sūtras to gain
complete knowledge about them.  Here, the subject of going to hear the Dharma-
kathā from Śrī Śramaṇa Bhagavān Mahāvīra, the birth of vairāgya there, the
Dikshā Mahotsava, the highest level of tapas karma, the body becoming thin, the
feeling of the Anashana Vrata arising due to it, while doing Dharmajagaran in
the middle of the night, becoming born in the Sarvārthasiddha Vimāna after doing
Anashana, being born in the Mahāvideha region in the future and attaining
Siddhagathi, etc., has been briefly stated.  Nikkṣepa  • 22- Thus, Jambū! By the
Samana Bhagavān Mahāvīra, the Āigara, the Tīrthagara, the Sayamsambuddha, the
Logaṇāha, the Logapadīva, the Logapajoyagara, the Abhayadaya, the Saraṇadaya,
the Chakkhudaya, the Maggadaya, the Dhammadaya, the Dhamma-desaya, the
Dhammavarachauraṇtachakwattīṇā, the Appadhiha-vara-ṇāṇa-daśaṇadhara, the Jina,
the Jāva, the Buddha, the Boha, the Mutta, the Moya, the Tiṇṇa, the Tāra, the
Siva, the Ayala, the Aruya, the Ananta, the Akkhaya, the Avvābāha, the
Apuṇarāvattaya, the Siddhigaināmādheya, the Thāna.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 3-10 adhyayana isidAsa Adi 21-evaM suNakkhatta-gameNaM sesA vi aTTha
bhaanniyvvaa| navaraM ANupuvvIe doNNi rAyagihe, doNNi sAee, doNNi vaanniyggaame|
navamo htthinnaapure| dasamo raaygihe| navaNhaM bhaddAo jaNaNIo, navaNhaM vi
battIsao daao|nvnnhN NikkhamaNaM thAvaccAputtassa sarisaM, vehallassa piyA karei
(NikkhamaNaM) chammAsA vehlle| nava dhnnnne| sesANaM bahU vaasaa| mAsaM
sNlehnnaa|svvtttthsiddhe savve mahAvidehe sijjhissNti| evaM dasa ajjhynnaanni|
isa prakAra sunakSatra kI taraha zeSa ATha kumAroM kA varNana bhI samajha lenA
caahie| vizeSa yaha hai ki anukrama se do rAjagRha meM, do sAketa meM, do
vANijyagrAma meM, navavA~ hastinApura meM aura dasavA~ rAjagRha meM utpanna
huaa| nau kI jananI bhadrA thii| nau ko battIsa-battIsa kA daheja diyA gyaa| nau
kA niSkramaNa thAvaccAputra kI taraha jAnanA caahie| vehalla kA niSkramaNa usake
pitA ne kiyaa| chaha mAsa kI dIkSA paryAya vehalla kI, nau mAsa kI dIkSA paryAya
dhanya kI rhii| zeSa kI paryAya bahuta varSoM kI rhii| sabakI eka mAsa kI
sNlekhnaa| sarvArthasiddha vimAna meM upapAta (jnm)| saba mahAvideha kSetra se
siddha hoNge| isa prakAra dasa adhyayana pUrNa hue| vivecana yahA~ kahanA kevala
itanA hI hai ki prastuta Agama meM bAra-bAra skandaka anagAra ko udAharaNarUpa
meM upasthita kiyA gayA hai| unakA varNana hameM kahA~ se prApta ho ? tathA
thAvaccAputra ke viSaya meM bhI yahI kahA jA sakatA hai| uttara yaha hai ki
prathama arthAt skandaka muni kA varNana paJcama aGga bhagavatI ke dvitIya
zataka meM AyA hai aura thAvaccAputra kA varNana chaThe aGga ke paJcama
adhyayana meM hai| yaha 'anuttaraupapAtikasUtra' nauvA~ aGga hai| ataH sUtrakAra
ne usI varNana ko yahA~ para doharAnA ucita na samajha kara kevala donoM kA
ullekhamAtra karake bAta samApta kara dI hai| pAThakoM ko inake viSaya meM pUrA
jJAna prApta karane ke lie ukta sUtroM kA avazya adhyayana karanA caahie| yahA~
zrI zramaNa bhagavAn mahAvIra ke pAsa dharma-kathA sunane ko jAnA, vahA~
vairAgya kI utpatti, dIkSAmahotsava, parama uccakoTi kA tapaHkarma, zarIra kA
kRza honA, usI ke kAraNa ardharAtri meM dharmajAgaraNa karate hue anazana vrata
kI bhAvanA kA utpanna honA, anazana kara sarvArthasiddha vimAna meM utpanna
honA, bhaviSya meM mahAvidehakSetra meM utpanna hokara siddhagati prApta karanA
ityAdi viSaya kA saMkSepa meM kathana kiyA gayA hai| nikSepa * 22-evaM khalu
jaMbU ! samaNeNaM bhagavayA mahAvIreNaM AigareNaM titthagareNaM
sayaMsaMbuddheNaM logaNAheNaM logapadIveNaM logapajoyagareNaM abhayadaeNaM
saraNadaeNaM cakkhudaeNaM maggadaeNaM dhammadaeNaM dhamma-desaeNaM
dhammavaracAuraMtacakvaTTiNA appaDihaya-vara-NANa-dasaNadhareNaM jiNeNaM
jAvaeNaM buddheNaM bohaeNaM mutteNaM moyaeNaM tiNNeNaM tAraeNaM, sivaM ayalaM
aruyaM aNaMtaM akkhayaM avvAbAhaM apuNarAvattayaM siddhigaiNAmadheyaM ThANaM

Page #84 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Third Class  This is the meaning of the third class of the
Anuttaropapatikadasa, as stated by the Shraman Bhagwan Mahavira.
**Commentary:**  This sutra is in the form of a conclusion. From this sutra, we
first understand that every disciple should have complete devotion towards the
Dev-Guru-Dharma and should manifest good qualities through Guru-Bhakti. Just as
in the final sutra, Shri Sudharmaswami, while concluding, has revealed the
virtues of Shraman Bhagwan Mahavira. He says to his disciple Jambu, "O Jambu!
This sutra has been expounded by those Bhagwans who are the Adikar, that is, the
interpreters of the scriptures related to Shruta-Dharma, who are Tirthankaras,
that is, (Taranti Yena Sansarasagaramiiti, Tirtham-Pravachanam,
Tadavyatirekaadihi Sangha Titham, Tasyakaranashiilatvaat Tirthakarastena) by
whom people cross the ocean of Samsara, that is called Tirth. That Tirth is
Bhagwat Pravachan and the Sangha, being inseparable from it, is also called
Tirth. The great person who established it has shed light on the meaning of this
sutra. By revealing this, the authenticity of the Agam has been revealed. With
this purpose, Sudharmaswami Bhagwan shows all the qualities displayed in
'Namotthu Nam' here. When a person becomes Sarvagya and Sarvadarshi, at that
time he becomes the bearer of infinite and unparalleled qualities. The one who
follows his path can also one day become transformed in the same way. Therefore,
every person should try to emulate them as much as possible. Bhagwan is the one
who grants us fearlessness in the ocean of Samsara and is the one who gives
refuge, that is, (Sharanam-Tranam, Ajnanophatanaam Tadrakshaasthanam, Taccha
Paramartatho Nirvanam, Taddadati Iti Sharanadah) the one who gives Nirvana, the
only place of protection for ignorant and deluded individuals, by attaining
which the soul becomes established in its own realm in the Siddha-pad. Bhagwan
has also been described as 'Aapratihat-Gyan-Darshan-Dhar'. Its meaning is
(Aapratihate Katakudyaparvatadaibhiraskhaliite'visanvadake Va Kshayikatvaad
Vare-Pradhane Gyan-Darshane Kevalalaksane Dharayatiiti-Aapratihatavargyan-
Darshanadharastena) that is, the Sarvagya and Sarvadarshi Bhagwan, who holds the
supreme Kevalgyan and Kevaldarshan, which is not in any way fallible, when
worshipped with a pure heart, the soul will surely attain Nirvana-pad and become
one with it. Remember that for attaining this position, the practice of
Samyaggyan-Darshan and Charitra is absolutely necessary. When we worship a
person, our goal should always be to become like them. Only then can we succeed
in it. It has already been said that karma is the cause of Samsara. Their
destruction should be the first goal of the seeker of liberation. As long as
karma remains, then...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 tRtIya varga saMpatteNaM aNuttarovavAiyadasANaM taccassa vaggassa ayamaDhe
pnnnntte| Arya sudharmA ne kahA he jambU ! dharma kI Adi karane vAle, dharma-
tIrtha kI sthApanA karane vAle, svayaM hI samyag bodha ko pAne vAle, loka ke
nAtha, loka meM pradIpa, loka meM pradyota karane vAle, abhaya dene vAle, zaraNa
ke dAtA, netra dene vAle, dharma-mArga ke dAtA, dharma ke dAtA, dharma ke
upadezaka, dharma ke uttama AcaraNa dvArA cAra gati kA anta karane vAle
dharmacakravartI, apratihata tathA zreSTha jJAna-darzana ke dhartA, svayaM rAga-
dveSa ke vijetA. anyoM ko rAgadveSa para vijaya dilAne vAle, svayaM bodha ko
pAne vAle tathA dUsaroM ko bodha dene vAle, svayaM mukta tathA dUsaroM ko mukta
karane vAle, svayaM tire hue tathA dUsaroM ko tArane vAle tathA upadrava rahita,
acala, roga-rahita, anta-rahita, akSaya, bAdhA-rahita evaM panarAgamana se
rahita. siddhigatinAmaka sthAna ko samIcInatA se prApta karane vAle zramaNa
bhagavAna mahAvIra ne anuttaraupapAtikadazA ke tRtIya varga kA yaha artha kahA
hai| vivecana prastuta sUtra upasaMhAra-rUpa hai| isa sUtra se sarvaprathama
yahI bodha milatA hai ki pratyeka ziSya ko deva-guru-dharma ke prati pUrNarUpa
se anurAga honA cAhie aura guru-bhakti dvArA sadguNoM ko prakaTa karanA caahie|
jaise antima sUtra meM zrI sudharmAsvAmI ne, upasaMhAra karate hue, zramaNa
bhagavAn mahAvIra ke sadguNoM ko prakaTa kiyA hai| ve apane ziSya jambU se
kahate haiM ki he jambU ! isa sUtra ko una bhagavAn ne pratipAdita kiyA hai jo
Adikara haiM arthAt zruta-dharma-sambandhI zAstroM ke arthapraNetA haiM,
tIrthaGkara haiM arthAt (taranti yena saMsArasAgaramiti, tIrtham-pravacanam,
tadavyatirekAdiha saGghaH tIrtham, tasya karaNazIlatvAttIrthakarastena) jisake
dvArA loga saMsAra rUpI sAgara se pAra ho jAte haiM usako tIrtha kahate haiN|
vaha tIrtha bhagavatpravacana hai aura usase abhinna hone ke kAraNa saMgha bhI
tIrtha kahalAtA hai| usakI sthApanA karane vAle mahApuruSa ne hI isa sUtra ke
artha kA prakAza kiyA hai| yaha prakaTa karake Agama kI prAmANikatA prakaTa kI
hai| isI uddezya se sudharmAsvAmI bhagavAn ke 'namotthu NaM' meM pradarzita saba
guNoM kA digdarzana yahAM karAte haiN| jaba koI vyakti sarvajJa aura sarvadarzI
ho jAtA hai, usa samaya vaha ananta aura anupama guNoM kA dhAraNa karane vAlA ho
jAtA hai| usake patha kA anusaraNa karane vAlA bhI eka dina usI rUpa meM
pariNata ho sakatA hai| ataH pratyeka vyakti ko unakA anukaraNa yathAzakti
avazya karanA caahie| bhagavAna hameM saMsArasAgara meM abhaya pradAna karane
vAle haiM aura zaraNa dene vAle haiM arthAt (zaraNam-trANam, ajJAnopahatAnAM
tadrakSAsthAnam, tacca paramArthato nirvANam, taddadAti iti zaraNadaH) ajJAna-
vimUDha vyaktiyoM kI ekamAtra rakSA ke sthAna nirvANa ko dene vAle haiM, jisako
prApta kara AtmA siddha-pada meM apane pradeza meM sthita ho jAtA hai| bhagavAn
ko 'apratihata-jJAna-darzana-dhara' bhI batAyA gayA hai| usakA abhiprAya yaha
hai (apratihate kaTakuDyaparvatAdibhiraskhalite'visaMvAdake vA kSAyikatvAd vare-
pradhAne jJAna-darzane kevalalakSaNe dhArayatIti-apratihatavarajJAna-
darzanadharastena) arthAt kisI prakAra se bhI skhalita na hone vAle sarvottama
kevalajJAna aura kevaladarzana ko dhAraNa karane vAle sarvajJa aura sarvadarzI
bhagavAn kI jaba zuddha citta se bhakti kI jAyegI to AtmA avazya hI nirvANa-pada
prApta kara tanmaya ho jaayegaa| dhyAna rahe ki isa pada kI prApti ke lie
samyagjJAna-darzana aura cAritra ke sevana kI atyanta AvazyakatA hai| jaba hama
kisI vyakti kI bhakti karate haiM to hamArA dhyeya sadaiva usIke samAna banane
kA honA caahie| tabhI hama usameM saphala ho sakate haiN| pahale kahA jA cukA
hai ki karma hI saMsAra ke kAraNa haiN| unakA kSaya karanA mumukSu kA pahalA
dhyeya honA caahie| jaba taka karma avaziSTa rahate haiM taba taka

Page #85 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Anuttaropapatikadasa  The state of Anuttaropapatikadasa does not allow for
the attainment of the transcendental state of Nirvana. Their decay occurs either
through the experience of Vipaka (consumption) or through the fire of Tapas
(austerity). If one solely relies on consumption, their complete destruction is
impossible, as new karmas accumulate alongside the consumption of existing ones.
Therefore, their decay must be achieved through the fire of Tapas. It is clear
that along with Samyagdarshan (right faith), Samyagjnana (right knowledge) and
Samyakcharitra (right conduct), and especially Tapas (austerity) are essential.
**50**  Thus, with the help of knowledge and conduct, blessed Anugars and other
great men like them either attain liberation upon the complete exhaustion of
their karmas, or if some karmas remain and their lifespan ends, they are born as
Devas in the Anuttara Vimanas. Those born in these Vimanas are bound to attain
liberation in one or two births. Therefore, this Agam describes those great
individuals who have been born in these Vimanas.  The final lesson in this Sutra
is that these great sages, even while performing intense austerities, studied
the Ekadasanga Sutras. Therefore, every seeker should strive to study the
scriptures with competence, so that they can attain the state of Nirvana in due
course.  **Epilogue**  Anuttaropapatikadasa is a Shruta-Skandha. It has three
sections. It is taught over three days. The first section has ten Uddesakas, the
second section has thirteen Uddesakas, and the third section has ten Uddesakas.
The remaining details, which are not explicitly mentioned in this Anga, should
be understood in the same way as the Jnatadharmakathasutra.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 anuttaraupapAtikadazA nirvANa-rUpa alaukika pada kI prApti nahIM ho sktii|
unakA kSaya yA to vipAkAnubhava (upabhoga) se hotA hai yA tapa rUpI agni ke
dvArA  /  upabhoga ke Upara hI nirbhara rahA jAya to unakA sarvathA nAza kabhI
nahIM ho sakatA, kyoMki unake upabhoga ke sAtha-sAtha naye-naye karma saJcita
hote rahate haiM  /  ataH tapo'gni se hI unakA kSaya karanA caahie| ataH spaSTa
hai ki samyagdarzana ke sAtha-sAtha samyagjJAna aura samyak cAritra kA tathA
vizeSataH tapa kA Asevana Avazyaka hai| 50 isa prakAra jJAna aura cAritra kI
sahAyatA se dhanya anagAra aura unake samAna anya mahApuruSa yA to sampUrNa
karmoM ke kSINa hone para mukti prApta karate haiM athavA kucha karma zeSa raha
jAe~ aura AyuSya samApta ho jAe to anuttara vimAnoM meM deva rUpa se utpanna
hote haiN| jo ina vimAnoM meM utpanna hote haiM ve avazya hI eka-do bhavoM meM
mokSa-gAmI hote haiN| ataeva prastuta Agama meM unhIM mahAn vyaktiyoM kA varNana
kiyA gayA hai, jo ukta vimAnoM meM utpanna hue haiN| isa sUtra meM antima zikSA
yaha prApta hotI hai ki ukta maharSiyoM ne mahAghora tapa karate hue bhI
ekAdazAGga sUtroM kA adhyayana kiyaa| ataH pratyeka sAdhaka ko yogyatApUrvaka
zAstrAdhyayana meM prayatnazIla honA cAhie, jisase vaha anukrama se nirvANa-pada
kI prApti kara sake  /  parizeSa aNuttarovavAiyadasANaM ego suykkhNdho| tiNNi
vaggA  /  tisu ceva divasesu uddisijjaMti  /  tattha paDhame vagge dasa uddegaa|
viie vagge terasa uddesagA  /  taie vagge dasa uddesgaa| sesaM jahA
nAyAdhammakahANaM tahA neyavvaM  /  anuttaraupapAtikadazA kA eka zruta-skandha
hai| tIna varga haiN| tIna dinoM meM uddiSTa hotA hai-- arthAt par3hAyA jAtA
hai| usake prathama varga meM daza uddezaka haiM, dvitIya varga meM teraha
uddezaka haiM, tRtIya varga meM daza uddezaka haiN| zeSa varNana jo prastuta
aMga meM sAkSAt rUpa se nahIM kahA gayA hai, use jJAtAdharmakathAsUtra ke samAna
samajha lenA cAhie  /

Page #86 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Appendix 000000 O Note Brackets - First Class, Second Class and Third Class
Technical Terms - Lexicon Indeclinable-Word-Compilation Verb-Word-Compilation O
Word Meanings

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pariziSTa 000000 O TippaNa koSThaka - prathama varga, dvitIya varga evaM tRtIya
varga pAribhASika zabda - koSa avyaya-pada-saMkalanA kriyA-pada-saMkalanA O
zabdArtha

Page #87 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The five great vows (Mahavratas) are: 1. **Ahimsa** (non-violence) 2. **Satya**
(truthfulness) 3. **Asteya** (non-stealing) 4. **Brahmacharya** (continence) 5.
**Aparigraha** (non-attachment)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================


Page #88 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Notes **Rajgriha**  Rajgriha was a beautiful, prosperous, and glorious city
in India. It was the capital of the Magadha kingdom and a major center of Jain
and Buddhist culture. In this holy and sacred city, Lord Mahavira spent 14 years
of his life and over 200 Samavasaranas were held here. Thousands and millions of
people listened to Lord Mahavira's teachings here and accepted the Shravak
Dharma and Shraman Dharma. This city was known as Kshitipratisthita in ancient
times. After its decline, the city of Rishabhpur was established there. After
its destruction, the city of Kushagrapur was established. When this city also
burned down, King Shrenik's father, King Prasenjit, established Rajgriha, which
is currently known as "Rajgir". Its other name was Girivraja, because it is
surrounded by five mountains. Rajgir is located in the state of Bihar, southeast
of Patna and northeast of Gaya. Rajgriha is frequently mentioned in Buddhist
texts.  **Sudharma**  Sudharma was the fifth Ganadhara of Lord Mahavira and the
guru of Jambuswami. His previous life is as follows: He was a Brahmin of the
Agnivaishyayana gotra, residing in the Kollag Sannivesh. His father's name was
Dhammil and his mother's name was Bhaddhila. He was a profound scholar of the
Vedas and a master of many sciences. He was the revered, worshiped, and
respected guru of five hundred disciples. He believed in the doctrine of rebirth
and similarity (Janmantara-Sadrisyavad). "Puruso vai purushatvamashrute
pashavaha pashutvam" - meaning, in the afterlife, a man remains a man and an
animal is born as an animal. Sudharma also found supporting statements for the
doctrine of rebirth and similarity in the Vedas, such as - "Shrigala vai esha
jayate, yah sapurisho dahyate". Sudharma was confused by these contradictory
statements. Lord Mahavira reconciled the contradictory statements of the Vedas
and proved the doctrine of rebirth and similarity. After his doubts were
resolved, Lord Mahavira explained to Sudharma using the Vedic scriptures and
dispelled his misconceptions. He took initiation at the age of 50 and remained
in the state of Chhadmastha for 42 years. He became a Kevali 12 years after
Mahavira's Nirvana and remained in the Kevali state for 18 years.  Sudharma
Swami was the fifth among the Ganadharas. He was the longest-lived among all the
Ganadharas. Therefore, Lord Mahavira entrusted his Gan to him, and other
Ganadharas also entrusted their respective Gans to Sudharma Swami at the time of
their Nirvana. Sudharma is frequently mentioned in the Agamas.  **Jambhu**
Jambhu was the chief disciple of Ary Sudharma and the one who awakened Ary
Prabhava. Jambhu is often portrayed as a highly inquisitive person in the
Agamas.  Jambhu was the son of a wealthy and prosperous Seth of Rajgriha. His
father's name was Rishabhadatta and his mother's name was Dharini. Before
Jambhu's birth, his mother saw a Jambu tree in a dream, hence the son was
named...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 TippaNa rAjagRha rAjagRha, bhArata kA eka sundara, samRddha aura vaibhavazAlI
nagara thaa| magadha janapada kI rAjadhAnI tathA jainasaMskRti aura bauddha-
saMskRti kA mukhya kendra thaa| isa puNyadhAma pAvana nagara meM bhagavAn
mahAvIra ne 14 varSAvAsa kiye the tathA do sau se adhika samavasaraNa hue the|
hajAroM-lAkhoM mAnavoM ne yahA~ para bhagavAn mahAvIra kI vANI zravaNa kI thI
aura zrAvakadharma tathA zramaNadharma svIkRta kiyA thaa| yaha nagara prAcIna
yuga meM kSitipratiSThita nAma se prasiddha thA, usake kSINa hone ke bAda vahIM
para RSabhapura nagara bsaa| usake naSTa hone para kuzAgrapura nagara basA  /
jaba yaha nagara bhI jala gayA taba rAjA zreNika ke pitA rAjA prasenajita ne
rAjagRha basAyA, jo vartamAna meM "rAjagira" nAma se prasiddha hai| isakA dUsarA
nAma girivraja bhI thA, kyoMki isake Asa-pAsa pA~ca parvata haiM  /  rAjagira
bihAra prAnta meM paTanA se pUrvadakSiNa aura gayA se pUrvottara meM sthita hai
/  bauddha granthoM meM bhI rAjagRha kA bAra-bAra ullekha upalabdha hotA hai|
sudharmA bhagavAn mahAvIra ke paMcama gaNadhara aura jambUsvAmI ke guru the|
unakA pUrva paricaya isa prakAra hai ve kollAga saMniveza ke rahane vAle,
agnivaizyAyana gotrIya brAhmaNa the| inake pitA kA nAma dhammila tathA mAtA kA
nAma bhaddilA thaa| ve veda ke prakhara jJAtA aura aneka vidyAoM ke parama
vijJAtA the| pA~ca-sau ziSyoM ke pUjanIya, vandanIya aura AdaraNIya guru the|
janmAntara-sAdRzyavAda meM unako vizvAsa thaa| "puruSo vai puruSatvamazrute
pazavaH pazutvam" arthAt maraNottara jIvana meM puruSa, puruSa hI hotA hai aura
pazu, pazu rUpa meM hI janma letA hai| sAtha hI sudharmA ko vedoM meM janmAntara
vaisAdRzyavAda ke samarthaka vAkya bhI milate the, jaise-- "zRgAlo vai eSa
jAyate, yaH sapurISo dhyte"| sudharmA donoM prakAra ke paraspara viruddha vAkyoM
se saMzayagrasta ho gaye the| bhagavAn mahAvIra ne pUrvApara veda-vAkyoM kA
samanvaya karake janmAntara-vaisAdRzya siddha kara diyaa| apanI zaMkA kA samyak
samAdhAna ho jAne para sudharmA ko bhagavAn ne vedavAkyoM se hI samajhAyA, unakI
bhrAnti kA nivAraNa kara diyaa| 50 varSa kI Ayu meM unhoMne dIkSA lI, 42 varSa
taka ve chadmastha rhe| mahAvIranirvANa ke 12 varSa bAda ve kevalI hue aura 18
varSa kevalI avasthA meM rhe| gaNadharoM meM sudharmAsvAmI kA pAMcavAM sthAna
thaa| ve sabhI gaNadharoM meM dIrgha-jIvI the| ataH bhagavAn ne to unheM gaNa-
samarpaNa kiyA hI thA kintu anya gaNadharoM ne bhI apane-apane nirvANa samaya
para apane-apane gaNa sudharmAsvAmI ko samarpita kie the| Agama meM prAyaH
sarvatra sudharmA kA ullekha milatA hai| jambU Arya sudharmA ke parama ziSya
tathA Arya prabhava ke prtibodhk| AgamoM meM prAyaH sarvatra jambU eka parama
jijJAsu ke rUpa meM pratIta hote haiN| jambU rAjagRha nagara ke samRddha,
vaibhavazAlI-ibhya-seTha ke putra the| pitA kA nAma RSabhadatta aura mAtA kA
nAma dhAriNI thaa| jambUkumAra kI mAtA ne jambUkumAra ke janma se pUrva svapna
meM jambUvRkSa dekhA thA, ataH putra kA nAma

Page #89 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 54 ## Anuttaroupapatikadasha ## Jambhukumar  Jambhukumar was named by
Sudharma Swami.  Jambhukumar's mind was awakened to detachment by the divine
words of Sudharma Swami.  Although Jambhukumar was unattached, he was forced to
accept marriage due to the intense insistence of his parents.  He was married to
the daughters of eight wealthy merchants.  On the first night of his marriage,
Jambhukumar was giving advice to his eight newlywed wives.  At that time, a
thief named Prabhav came to steal.  He was also enlightened by hearing
Jambhukumar's words of detachment.  501 thieves, 8 wives, 16 parents of the
wives, 2 parents of Jambhukumar, and Jambhukumar himself - a total of 528 people
took initiation together from Sudharma.  Jambhukumar lived as a householder for
16 years, as a recluse for 20 years, and in the Kevali state for 44 years.
After living for 80 years, Jambhuswami established Prabhav on his seat and
became a Siddha, Buddha, and liberated.  He was the last Kevali of this
Avasarpini.  ## Anga  The Jain scriptures directly spoken by the Jinas and
compiled by the Ganadharas are called Angas.  Eleven Angas, from Acharanga to
Vipakshrut, still exist today.  However, the twelfth Anga, called "Drishtivad",
is currently unavailable.  After the fourteenth Purvadhara Acharya Bhadrabahu
and the tenth Purvadhara Vajraswami, all the previous scriptures, that is, all
of "Drishtivad", were lost.  ## Antakrid Dasha  This is the eighth Anga-sutra,
which beautifully describes the life of ascetics who achieve complete self-
realization in their present lifetime by developing their soul to the fullest
and ultimately become liberated.  ## Anuttaroupapatikadasha  This is the ninth
Anga-sutra, which beautifully describes the life of ascetics of the thirty-three
Mahapurushas.  It gives a detailed account of the great ascetic practices of the
blessed Anugara.  The men described in this Anga are Anuttaroupapati, meaning
they were born in the Vijay etc. Anuttar Vimanas and will achieve Siddha,
Buddha, and liberation in the future after one birth, that is, a human birth.
## Gunashilka (Gunashil) Chaitya  There was a Chaitya (garden) outside the city
of Rajgriha in the Ishaan direction.  There will be many other gardens outside
Rajgriha, but Lord Mahavira resided only in the Gunashilka garden.  Hundreds of
Shramans and Shramanis and thousands of Shravaks and Shravikas gathered here in
front of the Lord.  The present-day "Gunava", which is about three miles from
the Nawada station, is believed to be the ancient Gunashilka Chaitya.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 54 anuttaraupapAtikadazA jambUkumAra rkhaa| sudharmAsvAmI kI divya vANI se
jambUkumAra ke mana meM vairAgya jaagaa| anAsakta jambU ko mAtA-pitA ke atyanta
Agraha se vivAha svIkRta karanA par3A aura ATha ibhya-vara seThoM kI kanyAoM ke
sAtha vivAha karanA pdd'aa| vivAha kI prathama rAtri meM jambUkumAra apanI ATha
nava vivAhitA patniyoM ko pratibodha de rahe the| usa samaya eka cora corI
karane ko aayaa| usakA nAma prabhava thaa| jambUkumAra kI vairAgyapUrNa vANI
zravaNa kara vaha bhI pratibuddha ho gyaa| 501 cora, 8 patniyA~, patniyoM ke 16
mAtA-pitA, svayaM ke 2 mAtA-pitA aura svayaM jambUkumAra--isa prakAra 528 ne eka
sAtha sudharmA ke pAsa dIkSA grahaNa kii| jambUkumAra 16 varSa gRhastha meM
rahe, 20 varSa chadmastha rahe, 44 varSa kevalI paryAya meM rhe| 80 varSa kI Ayu
bhoga kara jambUsvAmI apane pATa para prabhava ko sthApita kara siddha, buddha
aura mukta hue| isa avasarpiNI kAla ke yahI antima kevalI the| aMga sAkSAt
jinabhASita evaM gaNadhara-nibaddha jaina sUtra-sAhitya aMga kahalAtA hai|
AcArAMga se lekara vipAkazruta taka ke gyAraha aMga to abhI taka bhI vidyamAna
haiM, parantu vartamAna meM bArahavA~ aMga anupalabdha hai, jisakA nAma
'dRSTivAda' hai| 'dRSTivAda'-caturdaza pUrvadhara AcArya bhadrabAhu tathA daza
pUrvadhara vajrasvAmI ke bAda meM sArA pUrva sAhitya arthAt sArA 'dRSTivAda'
vicchinna ho gyaa| antakRddazA yaha AThavA~ aMga-sUtra hai, jisameM apanI AtmA
kA adhikAdhika vikAsa karake apane vartamAna jIvanakAla meM hI sampUrNa Atma-
siddhi kA lAbha pAne vAle aura antataH mukta hone vAle sAdhakoM kI jIvana-caryA
kA tapomaya sundara varNana hai| anuttaraupapAtikadazA yaha navama aMga-sUtra
hai, jisameM tetIsa mahApuruSoM kI tapomaya jIvana-caryA kA sundara varNana hai|
dhanya anagAra kI mahatI tapomayI sAdhanA kA sAMgopAMga varNana hai| isameM
varNita puruSa anuttaraupapAtI hue haiM, arthAt vijayAdi anuttara vimAnoM meM
utpanna hue haiM aura bhaviSya meM eka bhava arthAt --manuSya-bhava pAkara
siddha, buddha aura mukta hoNge| guNazilaka (guNazIla) caitya rAjagRha nagara ke
bAhara IzAnakoNa meM eka caitya (udyAna) thaa| rAjagRha ke bAhara anya bahuta se
udyAna hoMge, parantu bhagavAn mahAvIra guNazilaka udyAna meM hI virAjita hote
the| yahA~ para bhagavAn ke samakSa saikar3oM zramaNa aura zramaNiyA~ tathA
hajAroM zrAvaka-zrAvikAe~ banI thiiN| vartamAna meM 'guNAvA' jo navAdA sTezana
se lagabhaga tIna mIla para hai, prAcIna kAla kA yahI guNazilaka caitya mAnA
jAtA hai|

Page #90 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Appendix - Notes King Shrenik He was the emperor of the Magadha country. He
became a devout follower of Lord Mahavira after being enlightened by Anathi
Muni. This is a popular belief. The description of King Shrenik is found in
abundance in Jain scriptures and Buddhist scriptures. Historians say that King
Shrenik belonged to the Haihaya clan and the Shishunaga dynasty. In Buddhist
scriptures, two names are found: 'Seniya' and 'Bimbisara'. In Jain scriptures,
the names Seniya, Bhimbhasara and Bhambhasara are available. 55 How did the
names Bhansar and Bhambhasara come about? There is a beautiful incident in
Shrenik's life in this regard - Shrenik's father, King Prasenajit, ruled in
Kushagara. One day, a fire suddenly broke out in the royal palace. Every prince
ran out with his favorite thing. Some took elephants, some took horses, some
took jewels. But Shrenik only took a 'bhambha' outside. Seeing Shrenik, the
other brothers were laughing, but father Prasenajit was happy, because Shrenik
had left everything else and protected only the symbol of the kingdom. On this,
King Prasenajit named him 'Bhimbhasara', or 'Bhambhasara'. The word Bhimbhasara
probably later became Bimbisara due to pronunciation differences. Dharini Devi
She was the queen of King Shrenik. Dharini is mentioned in abundance in the
Agamas. In the plays of Sanskrit literature, the name of the king's eldest queen
is often preceded by the epithet 'Devi', which means - the greatest anointed
queen among the queens, that is, the queen consort. King Shrenik had many
queens, among them Dharini was the main one. That is why the epithet 'Devi' is
used before Dharini. Devi means - worshipable. Meghakumar was the son of this
Dharini Devi, who took initiation from Lord Mahavira. Lion Dream When a great
man is born in the womb, his mother sees a great dream. This kind of description
is full of Indian literature. There are abundant descriptions of this kind in
Jain literature and Buddhist literature. Maya Devi, the mother of Buddha, saw a
silver elephant with six tusks when Buddha was born in her womb. The mother of a
Tirthankara and a Chakravarti sees 14 great dreams. The mother of Vasudeva sees
any seven of the fourteen dreams. The mother of Baldev sees four dreams.
Similarly, the mother of a Mandalik king sees one great dream. The dream of a
lion is considered to be a sign of bravery and auspicious. Meghakumar He was the
son of Magadha emperor Shrenik and Dharini Devi, who took initiation from Lord
Mahavira.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pariziSTa - TippaNa zreNika rAjA magadha deza kA samrAT thA  /  anAthI muni se
pratibodhita hokara bhagavAn mahAvIra kA parama bhakta ho gayA thA  /  aisI eka
jana - zruti hai  /  rAjA zreNika kA varNana jaina granthoM tathA bauddha
granthoM meM pracura mAtrA meM milatA hai  /  itihAsakAra kahate haiM ki zreNika
rAjA haihaya kula aura zizunAga vaMza kA thA  /  bauddha granthoM meM 'seniya'
aura 'biMvisAra' ye do nAma milate haiN| jaina granthoM meM seNiya, bhiMbhasAra
aura bhaMbhAsAra nAma upalabdha haiN| 55 bhaMsAra aura bhaMbhAsAra nAma kaise
par3A ? isa sambandha meM zreNika ke jIvana kA eka sundara prasaMga hai--
zreNika ke pitA rAjA prasenajita kuzAgrapura meM rAjya karate the  /  eka dina
kI bAta hai, rAjaprAsAda meM sahasA Aga laga gii| hara eka rAjakumAra apanI-
apanI priya vastu lekara bAhara bhaagaa| koI gaja lekara, to koI azva lekara,
koI ratnamaNi lekara  /  parantu zreNika mAtra eka 'bhaMbhA' lekara hI bAhara
nikalA thA  /  zreNika ko dekhakara dUsare bhAI ha~sa rahe the, para pitA
prasenajita prasanna thA, kyoMki zreNika ne anya saba kucha chor3akara ekamAtra
rAjyacihna kI rakSA kI thI  /  isa para rAjA prasenajita ne usakA nAma
'bhiMbhasAra', yA 'bhaMbhAsAra' rkhaa| bhiMbhasAra zabda hI saMbhavataH Age
calakara uccAraNa-bheda se biMbasAra bana gyaa| dhAriNI devI zreNika rAjA kI
paTarAnI thI  /  dhAriNI kA ullekha AgamoM meM pracura mAtrA meM pAyA jAtA hai|
saMskRta sAhitya ke nATakoM meM prAyaH rAjA kI sabase bar3I rAnI ke nAma ke Age
'devI'- vizeSaNa lagAyA jAtA hai, jisakA artha hotA hai-- rAniyoM meM sabase
bar3I abhiSikta rAnI, arthAt paTarAnI  /  rAjA zreNika kI aneka rAniyA~ thI,
unameM dhAriNI mukhya thI  /  isIlie dhAriNI ke Age 'devI' vizeSaNa lagAyA jAtA
hai| devI kA artha hai-- pUjyA  /  meghakumAra isI dhAriNI devI kA putra thA,
jisane bhagavAn mahAvIra ke pAsa dIkSA grahaNa kI thii| siMha - svapna kisI
mahApuruSa ke garbha meM Ane para usakI mAtA koI zreSTha svapna dekhatI hai| isa
prakAra kA varNana bhAratIya sAhitya meM bharA par3A hai| jaina sAhitya meM aura
bauddha sAhitya meM isa prakAra ke varNana pracura mAtrA meM haiM  /  buddha kI
mAtA mAyAdevI ne buddha ke garbha meM Ane para rajata - rAzi jaisA SaDdanta gaja
dekhA thA  /  tIrthaMkara evaM cakravartI kI mAtA 14 mahAsvapna dekhatI hai|
vAsudeva kI mAtA 14 meM se koI bhI sAta svapna dekhatI hai| baladeva kI mAtA koI
cAra svapna dekhatI hai| isI prakAra mANDalika rAjA kI mAtA eka mahAsvapna
dekhatI hai  /  siMha kA svapna vIratAsUcaka aura maMgalamaya mAnA hai|
meghakumAra magadha samrAT zreNika aura dhAriNI devI kA putra thA, jisane
bhagavAn mahAvIra ke pAsa dIkSA grahaNa kI thI  /

Page #91 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Anuttaroppapatikadsha once Bhagwan Mahavir arrived at the Gunashilka garden in
Rajgriha. Meghakumar also preached. After taking permission from his parents, he
took initiation from Bhagwan. On the day he took initiation, that very night,
Meghamuni became distressed due to the movement of the monks, the dust from
their feet, and the stumbling. Bhagwan reminded him of his past lives and
preached to him to be patient in his restraint, which made Meghamuni stable in
his restraint. He performed a one-month Sanlekhana. He was born in the Devarupa
form in the Sarvarthasiddha Vimana. He will become a Siddha from Mahavidehavas.
- Jnatasutra, Study 1 Skandaka Skandaka Sannyasi was a resident of Shravasti
Nagar, a disciple of the Gadbhal Paribrajak, and a former friend of Gautam
Swami. He was a disciple of Bhagwan Mahavir, Pingalak Nirgranth, who could not
answer his questions; therefore, when he heard from the people of Shravasti that
Bhagwan Mahavir had arrived here, he went to him. Upon finding a solution, he
became a disciple of Bhagwan. Skandaka Muni studied the 11 Angas while staying
with the elders. He practiced the 12 images of the Bhikshu in order. He
worshipped. He performed the Ganaratnasamvatsar tapas. His body became weak,
thin, and disabled. Finally, he went to Vipalgiri near Rajagah and performed a
one-month Sanlekhana. He passed away and went to the 12th Devaloka. He will
become a Siddha from Mahavidehavas. Skandaka Muni's initiation was for 12 years.
- Bhagavati, Shatak 2, Uddeshak 1. Gautam (Indrabhuti) Your original name is
Indrabhuti, but by lineage, you are known as Gautam by the young and old. Gautam
was the greatest disciple of Bhagwan Mahavir. He was a skilled teacher of
Dharma-Shastra in Bhagwan's presence, the first Ganadhar. He was the eldest son
of Vasubhuti, a Brahmin of the Gautam gotra, who lived in the village of Gover
in the Magadh country. His mother's name was Prithvi. Indrabhuti was a sharp
scholar of Vedic Dharma, a serious thinker, and a great philosopher. Once,
Indrabhuti went to the Yajna festival in Pava Puri at the invitation of Arya
Somil. On the same occasion, Bhagwan Mahavir was also present in the Mahasen
garden outside Pava Puri. Seeing the glory of Bhagwan, Indrabhuti came to
Bhagwan's Samavasaran with the intention of defeating him. But he himself was
defeated. After the doubts in his mind were cleared, he became a disciple of
Bhagwan along with his five hundred disciples. Gautam became the first Ganadhar.
A lot is written about Gautam's life in the Agamas and post-Agama literature.
Indrabhuti Gautam was 50 years old at the time of his initiation. He remained in
the Sadhu Paryaya for 30 years and in the Kevali Paryaya for 12 years. At the
time of his Nirvana, he handed over his Gan to Sudharma and attained Nirvana at
the age of 92 years after 12 years of Bhagwan's Nirvana by performing a monthly
fast in the Gunashilka Chaitya.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 anuttaropapAtikadazA eka bAra bhagavAn mahAvIra rAjagRha ke guNazilaka udyAna
meM padhAre  /  meghakumAra ne bhI upadeza sunA  /  mAtA-pitA se anumati lekara
bhagavAn ke pAsa dIkSA grahaNa kii| jisa dina dIkSA grahaNa kI usI rAta ko
muniyoM ke yAtAyAta se, pairoM kI raja aura Thokara lagane se meghamuni vyAkula
ho ge| bhagavAn ne unheM pUrvabhavoM kA smaraNa karAte hue saMyama meM dhRti
rakhane kA upadeza diyA, jisase meghamuni saMyama meM sthira ho ge| eka mAsa kI
saMlekhanA kii| sarvArthasiddha vimAna meM devarUpa se utpanna hue|
mahAvidehavAsa se siddha hoNge| -jJAtAsUtra, adhyayana 1 skandaka skandaka
saMnyAsI zrAvastI nagarI ke rahane vAle gaddabhAli parivrAjaka ke ziSya aura
gautama svAmI ke pUrva mitra the| bhagavAn mahAvIra ke ziSya piMgalaka
nirgrantha ke praznoM kA uttara nahIM de sake; phalataH zrAvastI ke logoM se
jaba sunA ki bhagavAn mahAvIra yahA~ padhAre haiM to unake pAsa jA phuNce|
samAdhAna milane para vaha bhagavAn ke ziSya ho ge| skandaka muni ne sthaviroM
ke pAsa rahakara 11 aMgoM kA adhyayana kiyaa| bhikSu kI 12 pratimAoM kI krama se
sAdhanA kI. ArAdhanA kii| gaNaratnasaMvatsara tapa kiyaa| zarIra darbala.kSINa
aura azakta ho gyaa| anta meM rAjagaha ke samIpa vipalagiri para jAkara eka mAsa
kI saMlekhanA kii| kAla karake 12veM devaloka meM ge| mahAvidehavAsa se siddha
hoNge| skandaka muni kI dIkSA paryAya 12 varSa kI thii| -bhagavatI, zataka 2,
uddezaka 1. gautama (indrabhUti) ApakA mUla nAma indrabhUti hai, parantu
gotrataH gautama nAma se AbAla-vRddha prasiddha haiN| gautama, bhagavAna
mahAvIra ke sabase bar3e ziSya the| bhagavAn ke pAsa dharma-zAsana ke yaha
kuzala zAstA the, prathama gaNadhara the| magadha deza ke govara grAma ke rahane
vAle, gautama gotrIya brAhmaNa vasubhUti ke yaha jyeSTha putra the| inakI mAtA
kA nAma pRthivI thaa| indrabhUti vaidika dharma ke prakhara vidvAn the, gaMbhIra
vicAraka the, mahAn tattvavettA the| eka bAra indrabhUti Arya somila ke
nimantraNa para pAvApurI meM hone vAle yajJotsava meM gae the| usI avasara para
bhagavAn mahAvIra bhI pAvApurI ke bAhara mahAsena udyAna meM padhAre hue the|
bhagavAn kI mahimA ko dekhakara indrabhUti unheM parAjita karane kI bhAvanA se
bhagavAn ke samavasaraNa meM aaye| kintu ve svayaM hI parAjita ho ge| apane mana
kA saMzaya dUra ho jAne para ve apane pAMca-sau ziSyoM sahita bhagavAn ke ziSya
ho ge| gautama prathama gaNadhara huye| AgamoM meM aura Agamottara sAhitya meM
gautama ke jIvana ke sambandha meM bahuta kucha likhA milatA hai| indrabhUti
gautama dIkSA ke samaya 50 varSa ke the| 30 varSa sAdhu paryAya meM aura 12
varSa kevalI paryAya meM rhe| apane nirvANa ke samaya apanA gaNa sudharmA ko
sauMpakara guNazilaka caitya meM mAsika anazana karake bhagavAn ke nirvANa se 12
varSa bAda 92 varSa kI avasthA meM nirvANa ko prApta hue|

Page #92 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Appendix - Notes**  The scriptures describe Ganadhara Gautama as follows: He
was the senior disciple of the Lord. He was seven hands tall. His physique and
strength were excellent. He had a fair complexion like a golden line. He was a
fierce ascetic, a great ascetic, a severe ascetic, a strict celibate, and
possessed immense radiance. He was detached from the body. He was a fourteen-
time previous holder of the body. He was the holder of four knowledges - Mati,
Shruta, Avadhi, and Manahparyaya. He was a master of all letters. He used to sit
near Lord Mahavira with his head bowed in the Ukad posture. He would wander,
meditating in a state of stillness, influencing the soul with restraint and
austerity.  A specific incident from the life of Ganadhara Gautama is mentioned
as follows:  The Upasakadasanga mentions that when Anand Shravak told him that
he had attained Avadhi knowledge up to a certain limit, he said, "A Shravak
cannot attain Avadhi knowledge up to that limit." Then Anand said, "I see it so
clearly. Therefore, my statement is true." Hearing this, Ganadhara Gautama
became doubtful and went to the Lord to resolve his doubt. The Lord confirmed
Anand's statement and asked Ganadhara Gautama to apologize to Anand Shravak.
Ganadhara Swami went to Anand and apologized.  The Vipaksutra describes the life
of Prince Mrigaputra. It states that he was afflicted with a terrible disease.
His body emitted an unbearable stench, due to which he was kept in a basement.
Once, Ganadhara Gautama went to see Mrigaputra. Seeing his repulsive diseased
state, Ganadhara Gautama, the holder of four knowledges, the fourteen-time
previous holder of the body, and the originator of the twelve-part speech, said,
"I have not seen hell, but this is hell." - Vipaksutra  Another incident related
to Gautama is prevalent, which is not mentioned in the original text but in
later literature.  The 10th study of the Uttaradhyayanasutra states that Lord
Mahavira said, "The Ashtapadi is a Siddha mountain, therefore, only the one who
has attained the ultimate body can climb it, not another." When the gods came
out of the Dev Samavasaran after hearing the Lord's statement, they were
discussing among themselves, "The Ashtapadi is a Siddha mountain." Ganadhara
Gautama heard this conversation of the gods. The disciples who were enlightened
by Ganadhara Gautama attained Kevalgyan, but Gautama did not. This made Gautama
upset. Then the Lord said, "Gautama! After I leave my body, you and I will
become equal. Don't be impatient."  Gautama was not satisfied with the Lord's
statement and remained impatient. Even after hearing the Lord's words, Ganadhara
Gautama went to the Ashtapadi and when he returned to the Lord, the Lord said,
"Kin Devanam Vaynam Gijjham Ahava Jinavaranam?"  Meaning, "Is the word of the
gods acceptable, or the word of the Jinas?"  Hearing this statement of the Lord,
Gautama apologized for his conduct. - Paiya Tika, p. 323  The commentator of the
Uttaradhyayanasutra, Acharya Nemichandra, has also quoted this story of Gautama
related to the Ashtapadi. He writes: "Tath Goyamassamiss
Sammattamohaniyakammodayavasen Chinta Jaya'ma Nan Sejjhijjami' fa"I  Nemichandra
Tika, p. 154

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pariziSTa- TippaNa zAstroM meM gaNadhara gautama kA paricaya isa prakAra kA
diyA gayA hai| ve bhagavAn ke jyeSTha ziSya the| sAta hAtha U~ce the| unake
zarIra kA saMsthAna aura saMhanana utkRSTa prakAra kA thA  /  suvarNa rekhA ke
samAna gaura varNa the  /  ugratapasvI, mahAtapasvI, ghoratapasvI,
ghorabrahmacArI aura vipula tejolezyA se sampanna the| zarIra meM anAsakta the|
caudaha pUrvadhara the  /  mati, zruta, avadhi aura mana: paryAya--cAra jJAna ke
dhAraka the| sarvAkSarasannipAtI the| ve bhagavAn mahAvIra ke samIpa meM ukaDa
Asana se nIcA sira karake baiThate the| dhyAnamudrA meM sthira rahate hue,
saMyama aura tapa se AtmA ko bhAvita karate vicarate the  /  gaNadhara gautama
ke jIvana kI eka viziSTa ghaTanA kA ullekha isa prakAra hai upAsakadazAMga meM
varNana hai ki jaba Ananda zrAvaka ne apane ko amuka maryAdA taka ke avadhijJAna
prApti kI bAta unase kahI to unhoMne kahA- itanI maryAdA taka kA avadhijJAna
zrAvaka ko nahIM ho sktaa| taba Ananda ne kahA-- mujhe itanA spaSTa dikha rahA
hai| ataH merA kathana sadbhUta hai| yaha sunakara gaNadhara gautama zaMkita ho
gae aura apanI zaMkA kA nivAraNa karane ke lie bhagavAn ke pAsa phuNce| bhagavAn
ne Ananda kI bAta ko sahI batAyA aura Ananda zrAvaka se kSamApanA karane ko
khaa| gautamasvAmI ne Ananda ke samIpa jAkara kSamAyAcanA kii| vipAkasUtra meM
mRgAputra rAjakumAra kA jIvana varNita hai| usameM use bhayaMkara rogagrasta
kahA gayA hai| usake zarIra se asahya durgandha AtI thI, jisase use talaghara
meM rakhA jAtA thaa| eka bAra gaNadhara gautama mRgAputra ko dekhane ge| usakI
bIbhatsa rugNa avasthA dekhakara cAra jJAna ke dhAraka, caturdazapUrvI aura
dvAdazAMga vANI ke praNetA gaNadhara gautama ne kahA"maiMne naraka to nahIM
dekhe, kintu yahI naraka hai|" -- vipAkasUtra gautama ke sambandha meM eka aura
ghaTanA pracalita hai, jisakA ullekha mUla meM to nahIM, kintu uttarakAlIna
sAhitya meM hai  /  57 uttarAdhyayanasUtra ke 10 veM adhyayana kI niyukti meM
bhagavAn mahAvIra ke mukha se isa prakAra kahalavAyA gayA hai 'aSTApada
siddhaparvata hai, ataH jo carama zarIrI hai, vahI usa para car3ha sakatA hai,
dUsarA nahIM," bhagavAn kA ukta kathana sunakara jaba deva samavasaraNa se
bAhara nikale, taba 'aSTApada siddhaparvata hai' aisI Apasa meM carcA kara rahe
the  /  gautama gaNadhara ne devoM kI yaha bAtacIta sunii| gaNadhara gautama
dvArA pratibodhita ziSyoM ko kevalajJAna ho jAtA thA, para gautama ko nahIM hotA
thA, isase gautama khinna ho ge| taba bhagavAn ne kahA- " gautama ! mere zarIra
tyAga ke pazcAt maiM aura tuma samAna ho jaaeNge| tU adhIra mata bana  /  " isa
prakAra bhagavAn ke kahane para gautama ko saMtuSTi na huI, adhRti banI hI rhii|
bhagavAn kI ukta bAta sunane para bhI gaNadhara gautama aSTApada para gae aura
jaba vahA~ se lauTakara bhagavAn ke pAsa Ae, taba bhagavAn ne kahA-- " kiM
devANaM vayaNaM gijjhaM ahavA jiNavarANaM ?" arthAt devoM kA vacana mAnya hai,
athavA jinavaroM kA ? bhagavAn ke isa kathana ko sunakara gautama ne apane
AcaraNa ke lie kSamA maaNgii| -- pAiya TIkA, pR. 323 uttarAdhyayana ke TIkAkAra
AcArya nemicandra ne bhI gautama kI aSTApada sambandhI ukta kathA kA avataraNa
liyA hai| usameM likhA hai :-" tattha goyamasAmissa
sammattamohaNIyakammodayavaseNa ciMtA jAyA'mA NaM na sejjhijjAmi' fa"I
nemicandra TIkA, pR. 154 44

Page #93 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  58  Even after receiving definite assurance from the Bhagwan (the
enlightened one), Ganadhar Gautam was troubled by the arising of
Samyaktvamohaniya karma (karma that obscures right knowledge) and thought,
"Perhaps I will not be able to attain Siddha-pada (the state of liberation)." To
overcome this anxiety, he went to Ashtapad (a place of pilgrimage).  There are
many accounts available about Ganadhar Gautam's life. Scholars and researchers
should investigate the facts of these accounts from a historical perspective.
Whatever the case may be, it is a definite fact that Indra-bhuthi Gautam was a
great seeker of truth. He forgot everything else and completely dedicated
himself to the Bhagwan's feet.  Chellana was the queen of King Shrenik and the
daughter of Chetak, the ruler of Vaishali.  Chellana was a beautiful, virtuous,
intelligent, and pious woman. She played a significant role in making King
Shrenik religious and devoted to Jainism.  The "Niryaavlika" provides evidence
of Chellana's deep affection for King Shrenik.  Konik, Hall, and Vihall were the
three sons of Chellana.  - Jain Agam Katha Kosh, Nanda  She was the queen of
Shrenik. She took initiation from Bhagwan Mahavira. She studied the 11 Angas
(Jain scriptures). She practiced restraint for 20 years. Finally, she attained
liberation through Santhara (a Jain practice of voluntary fasting unto death).
Vipulgiri is a mountain near Rajgriha city. It is mentioned in many places in
the Agamas. Many ascetics performed Sanlekhana (a Jain practice of gradual
fasting) and Santhara here. Under the supervision of the elders, severe ascetics
would come here and perform Sanlekhana.  Five mountains are mentioned in Jain
texts: 1. Vaibhargiri 2. Vipulgiri 3. Udaygiri 4. Suvarnagiri 5. Ratnagiri.  The
Mahabharata mentions five mountains: Vaibhar, Varaha, Vrishabha, Rishigiri, and
Chaityak.  The Vayupurana also mentions five mountains: Vaibhar, Vipul,
Ratnakoot, Girivraja, and Ratnachal.  The Bhagavati Sutra, Shatak 2, Uddesh 5,
mentions a hot spring called Mahatapo-pitir-Prabhav at the foot of Vaibhargiri
in Rajgriha, which still exists today.  Buddhist texts refer to this spring as
"Tapod," which is probably derived from "Taptodak" (hot water). The Chinese
traveler Fa-Hien also saw it.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 58 anuttaropapAtikadazA bhagavAn ke nizcita AzvAsana dene para bhI gaNadhara
gautama ko samyaktvamohanIya karma ke udaya se isa prakAra kI cintA ho gaI thI
ki kadAcit maiM siddhapada na pA skuuNgaa| ukta cintA ke nivAraNa ke lie ve
aSTApada para ge| gaNadhara gautama ke jIvana-sambandha meM aneka varNana
upalabdha haiN| vidvAn vicArakoM evaM saMzodhakoM ko ukta prasaMgoM ke
tathyAtathya kA aitihAsika dRSTi se anusaMdhAna karanA caahie| _ kucha bhI ho
kintu yaha eka sunizcita tathya hai ki indrabhUti gautama satya ke mahAn zodhaka
the| apanA saba kucha bhUlakara vaha bhagavAn ke caraNoM meM hI sarvatobhAva se
samarpita ho gae the| cellaNA rAjA zreNika kI rAnI aura vaizAlI ke adhipati
ceTaka rAjA kI putrii| cellaNA sundarI, guNavatI, buddhimatI, dharmaprANA nArI
thii| zreNika rAjA ko dhArmika banAne meM jainadharma ke prati anurakta karane
meM cellaNA kA bahuta bar3A yoga thaa| cellaNA kA rAjA zreNika ke prati kitanA
pragAr3ha anurAga thA isakA pramANa "nirayAvalikA" meM milatA hai| koNika, halla
aura vihalla--ye tInoM cellaNA ke putra the| - jainAgamakathAkoSa nandA zreNika
kI rAnI thii| usane bhagavAn mahAvIra ke pAsa dIkSA grahaNa kii| 11 aMgoM kA
adhyayana kiyaa| 20 varSa taka saMyama kA pAlana kiyaa| anta meM saMthArA karake
mokSa prApta kiyaa| vipulagiri rAjagRha nagara ke samIpa kA eka prvt| AgamoM meM
aneka sthaloM para isakA ullekha milatA hai| bahuta se sAdhakoM ne yahA~ para
saMlekhanA va saMthArA kiyA thaa| sthaviroM kI dekharekha meM ghora tapasvI
yahA~ Akara saMlekhanA karate the| jaina granthoM meM ina pA~ca parvatoM kA
ullekha milatA hai1. vaibhAragiri 2. vipulagiri 3. udayagiri 4. suvarNagiri 5.
ratnagiri mahAbhArata meM pAMca parvatoM ke nAma ye haiM vaibhAra, vArAha,
vRSabha, RSigiri aura caityk| vAyupurANa meM bhI pAMca parvatoM kA ullekha
milatA hai  /  jaise--vaibhAra, vipula, ratnakUTa, girivraja aura rtnaacl|
bhagavatIsUtra ke zataka 2, uddeza 5 meM rAjagRha ke vaibhAraparvata ke nIce
mahAtapopatIraprabhava nAma ke uSNajala prasravaNa--nirjhara kA ullekha hai, jo
Aja bhI vidyamAna hai| bauddha granthoM meM isa nirjhara kA nAma 'tapoda' milatA
hai, jo sambhavataH taptodaka' se banA hogaa| cInI yAtrI phAhiyAna ne bhI isako
dekhA thaa|

Page #94 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Appendix **Ascending and Descending Order**  "Ascending and Descending".
Ascending order means increasing from bottom to top, and descending order means
decreasing from top to bottom. Ascending order is called (In Serial Order) and
descending order is called (In the Upward Order).  - - **Note** 44 59 In the
first study of the first category of *Anuttaraupapatikadasha*, the *Devalok*
related *upapat* (Rebirth) description of the ten princes is given, which is as
follows:  - Jali, Mayali, Upajali, Purusha-sena and Varishena were born in
Vijay, Vaijayant, Jayant, Aparajit and Sarvarthasiddha respectively in ascending
order.  Dirghadant was born in Sarvarthasiddha.  The remaining four were born in
descending order, such as Lashtdant in Aparajit, Behall in Jayant, Vehayas in
Vaijayant, and Abhay in Vijay.  The remaining descriptions related to the ten
princes should be understood as similar to the description of Jalikumara
mentioned in the first study.  Lashtdant • This name has already been mentioned
in the first category. There, the mother is Dharini and the father is Shrenik,
and the *upapat* is mentioned in the Jayant Vimana. In the second category, the
name Lashtdant is also mentioned, and there too, the mother is Dharini and the
father is Shrenik, and the *upapat* is mentioned in the Vaijayant Vimana. The
question arises, is this Lashtdant the name of the same person or different
people? If it is the name of one person, it cannot be consistent in any way. One
person cannot have different *upapats*, and the number should be 23, combining
10 from the first category and 13 from this category. How can this be possible
if it is one person? The author of "Shraman Bhagwan Mahavira", archaeologist
Acharya Kalyanvijayji, has written on page 93 of his aforementioned book in the
chapter on the life of the Tirthankara - "Shrenik's aforementioned declaration
had a great and beautiful effect. In addition to other citizens, Jalikumara,
Mayali, Upajali, Purusha-sena, Varishena, Dirghadant, Lashtdant, Behall,
Vehayas, Abhay, Dirghasean, Maha-sena, Lashtdant, Gudhadant, Shuddhadant, Hall,
Drum, Drum-sena, Maha-drum-sena, Singh, Singh-sena, Maha-singh-sena and Purn-
sena - these twenty-three sons of Shrenik and Nanda, Nandamati, Nandottra, Nand-
seniya, Maruya, Sumaruta, Maha-maruta, Marudeva, Bhadra, Subhadra, Sujata,
Sumana and Bhootdatta, the thirteen queens of Shrenik, took initiation and
entered the Shraman Sangha of Bhagwan Mahavira." Thus, the name Lashtdant
appearing in different places cannot be of one person, but of different people,
only then can the mention in the sutras be consistent.  In this regard, the
consistency that has been found after thinking seriously is as follows:  Prakrit
words can have different pronunciations in Sanskrit: for example, the Sanskrit
transformation of 'kay' is Kaj, Kach, Krit. 'Kai' is Kapi, Kavi. 'Punna' is Puny
or Purn. Similarly, it is not inconsistent for the word 'Lashtdant' to have
different pronunciations. For example, Lashtdant and Rashtradant. Lashtdant
means - one who has beautiful teeth. Another pronunciation

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pariziSTa ukkameNaM sesA : utkrameNa zeSA 'anukrama aura utkrama"  /  anukrama
kA artha hai, nIce se Upara kI ora kramazaH bar3hanA, tathA utkrama kA artha hai
Upara se nIce kI ora kramazaH utaranA  /  anukrama ko (In Serial Order) kahate
haiM tathA utkrama ko (In the Upward Order) kahate haiM  /  - - TippaNa 44 59
anuttaraupapAtikadazA ke prathama varga ke prathama adhyayana meM daza kumAroM
ke devaloka sambandhI upapAta=janma (Rebirth) varNana kiyA gayA hai, jo isa
prakAra hai - jAli, mayAli, upajAli, puruSasena tathA vAriSeNa anukrama -
vijaya, vaijayanta, jayanta, aparAjita aura sarvArthasiddha meM utpanna hue  /
dIrghadanta sarvArthasiddha meM utpanna huaa| zeSa cAra utkrama se utpanna hue,
jaise ki aparAjita meM laSTadanta, jayanta meM behalla, vaijayanta meM vehAyasa,
vijaya meM abhaya  /  ukta daza kumAroM ke sambandha meM zeSa varNana prathama
adhyayana meM varNita jAlikumAra ke varNana ke samAna samajha lenA caahie|
laTThadanta * isa nAma kA ullekha prathama varga meM bhI A cukA hai  /  vahA~
mAtA dhAriNI tathA pitA zreNika haiM aura upapAta jayaMtavimAna meM batAyA '  /
dvitIya varga meM bhI laTThadanta nAma kA ullekha AtA hai aura vahA~ bhI mAtA
dhAriNI tathA pitA zreNika hI haiM tathA upapAta vaijayanta vimAna meM batAyA
hai| prazna hotA hai, ki kyA yaha laTThadanta eka hI vyakti kA nAma hai yA
bhinna vyaktiyoM kA eka hI nAma hai ? eka vyakti kA nAma hone para kisI bhI
taraha saMgati nahIM baiTha sakatI  /  eka vyakti kA alaga-alaga upapAta nahIM
ho sakatA aura saMkhyA prathama varga kI 10 aura isa varga kI 13 donoM milakara
23 honI cAhie, yaha bhI eka vyakti mAnane para kaise ho sakatA hai ? 'zramaNa
bhagavAn mahAvIra' ke lekhaka purAtattvavettA AcArya kalyANavijayajI ne apanI
ukta pustaka ke pR. 93 para tIrthaMkara jIvana vAle prakaraNa meM likhA hai - "
zreNika kI uparyukta ghoSaNA kA bar3A sundara prabhAva par3A  /  anyAnya
nAgarikoM ke atirikta jAlikumAra, mayAli, upayAli, puruSasena, vAriSeNa,
dIrghadanta, laSTadanta, vehalla, vehAyasa, abhaya, dIrghasena, mahAsena,
laSTadanta, gUDhadanta, zuddhadanta, halla, druma, drumasena, mahAdrumasena,
siMha, siMhasena, mahAsiMhasena tathA pUrNasena -- zreNika ke ina teIsa putroM
aura nandA, nandAmatI, nandottarA, nandaseNiyA, maruyA, sumarutA, mahAmarutA,
marudevA, bhadrA, subhadrA, sujAtA, sumanA aura bhUtadattA nAma kI zreNika kI
teraha rAniyoM ne pravrajita hokara bhagavAn mahAvIra ke zramaNasaMgha meM
praveza kiyaa|" astu vibhinna sthaloM para AyA laSTadanta nAma kisI eka vyakti
kA na hokara bhinna vyakti kA hone se hI sUtrokta ullekha saMgati pA sakatA hai|
isa sambandha meM vizeSa gambhIratA se socane para jo saMgati mAlUma huI hai,
vaha isa prakAra hai-- prAkRta zabda ke saMskRta meM bhinna-bhinna uccAraNa ho
sakate haiM : jaise 'kaya' kA saMskRtarUpAntara kaja, kaca, kRta  /  'kai' kA
kapi, kavi  /  'puNNa' kA puNya athavA pUrNa  /  isI prakAra 'laTThadanta' zabda
ke bhinna-bhinna uccAraNa honA asaMgata nhiiN| jaise ki laSTadanta evaM
rASTradanta  /  laSTadanta kA artha hai - manohara dAMta vaalaa| dUsare uccAraNa

Page #95 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 60 ## Anuttaroupapatikadasha  "Rashtradant" means one who has suppressed the
nation, i.e., one who has brought the nation under his control. Another name
that comes up is "Punnaseen," just as there is no inconsistency in the
pronunciations "Punnaseen" or "Poornaseen," similarly, there is no inconsistency
in the different pronunciations "Latthadant" and "Rashtradant" appearing in the
first and second categories. Considering this, the possibility of two
individuals named "Latthadant" can be considered, and similarly, there can be
consistency in the number 23.  There is another approach in this regard, which
is that the father's name is indeed "Shrenik," but the mothers of both could be
different. Although the name of both mothers is given as "Dharini" in the
original text, there could be two queens named "Dharini." It is undeniable that
King Shrenik had many queens, so it is not impossible for two queens to have the
same name. Even today, this is very possible in many families. In a Punjabi Jain
family we know, two brothers' wives have the same name "Nirmala," so they manage
by distinguishing them as "Big Nirmala" and "Small Nirmala." Similarly, if we
assume that King Shrenik had two queens with the same name, then the mother of
the "Latthadant" in the first category was "Dharini," and the mother of the
"Latthadant" in the second category was another "Dharini," then it is not
inconsistent, but rather consistent and possible, for the sons to have the same
name and the mothers to be different. Or, there could be two sons named
"Latthadant" of the same "Dharini." The point is that there should be two
"Latthadants" in any case.  If any expert presents another solution in this
regard, it will be welcomed.  ## Gunasil: Gun-Shilak  It should be noted that
the "shi" in "Shilak" in the word "Gun-Shilak" is short. The meaning of the word
"Gunashil" or "Gun-Shilak" should be:  "Gunapradhanam Shilan Yat Tat
Gunashilkam." "Shil" means to collect the grains - the grains of the crop that
have fallen in the field.  There are some among those who are renunciants,
monks, munis, and ascetics, who collect and live on the grains of the crop that
have fallen naturally in the field.  This type of conduct reduces the burden of
the sadhu-sannyasi on society. Where the "Gun-Shilak" is found, it is "Gun-
Shilak." The name of living by "Shil" is "Rit."  There was a sage named "Kanad"
who lived by "Shil." His name "Kanad" is actually "Kanon ko - Anaj ke Danon ko
ektrit karke, 'Ad' khane wala."  "Uncham Shilan Tu Ritam" - Amar Kosh, 19
Vaishya Varga, Kand 2, Shlok 2. "Kanishadyajanam Shilan, Rit Tat" - Abhidhan,
Martyaka, Shlok 865-866.  Another etymology of the word "Gunasil" can be done as
follows: "Gunah Shirasi Yasya Yasmin Va Tat Gunashirah." Its Prakrit form
"Gunasil" is naturally evident. The word "Gunashil" is also used for this
garden. Because the qualities of the garden are always present, it is also
called "Gunashil."

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 60 anuttaraupapAtikadazA rASTradanta kA artha hai, jisane rASTra kA damana kiyA
huA hai arthAt jisane rASTra deza ko apane vaza meM kiyA huA hai| eka nAma
'puNNaseNa' bhI AtA hai, jisa prakAra usake puNyasena athavA pUrNasena aise do
uccAraNa asaMgata nahIM, isI prakAra prastuta prathama varga meM aura dvitIya
varga meM Ae hue 'laTThadanta' tathA 'rASTradanta' aise bhinna-bhinna uccAraNa
asaMgata nhiiN| isa prakAra vicAra karane se laTThadanta nAma ke do vyaktiyoM kI
sambhAvanA kI jA sakatI hai aura isI taraha se 23 kI saMkhyA meM saMgati ho
sakatI hai| isake sambandha meM eka dUsarI yukti bhI hai, vaha yaha hai pitA kA
nAma to eka zreNika hI ThIka hai, parantu mAtAe~ ina donoM kI alaga-alaga ho
sakatI haiN| yadyapi donoM kI mAtA kA nAma dhAriNI mUlapATha meM diyA huA hai,
parantu ye dhAriNI nAma vAlI do rAniyA~ bhI ho sakatI haiN| zreNika rAjA ke kaI
rAniyA~ thIM yaha to nirvivAda hai, to do rAniyoM kA samAna nAma bhI honA
asaMbhava nhiiN| vartamAna meM bhI kaI kuTumboM meM aisA honA bahuta sambhavita
hai| hamAre eka paricita paMjAbI jaina gharAne meM do bhAIyoM kI patniyoM kA eka
hI nAma 'nirmalA' hai, taba eka bar3I nirmalA aura eka choTI nirmalA aisA
vibhAga karake vyavahAra calAyA jAtA hai| isI prakAra rAjA zreNika ke samAna
nAma vAlI do rAniyA~ mAna lene se prathama varga ke laTThadanta kI mAtA dhAriNI
thI aura dvitIya varga ke laTThadanta kI mAtA koI dUsarI dhAriNI thI, aisA
samajha lene para eka jaisA nAma putroM kA ho aura mAtAeM alaga-alaga hoM yaha
samAdhAna bhI asaMgata nahIM balki saMgata aura saMbhava hai| athavA eka dhAriNI
ke hI laTThadaMta nAma ke do putra ho sakate haiM  /  tAtparya yaha ki kisI bhI
prakAra se do laTThadanta hone caahie| vizeSajJa isa sambandha meM anya koI
samAdhAna upasthita kareMge to usakA svAgata hogaa| guNasilae : guNa-zilaka
'guNa-zilaka' zabda meM zilaka kA 'zi' hrasva hai, yaha dhyAna meM rhe|
'guNazila' athavA 'guNa-zilaka' zabda kA artha isa prakAra honA cAhie
'guNapradhAnaM zilaM yatra tat gunnshilkm'| 'zila' arthAt kheta meM par3e hue
anAja ke kaNoM ko - dAnoM ko - ekatrita krnaa| jo loga tyAgI, bhikSu, muni aura
saMnyAsI hote haiM, unameM kucha aise bhI hote haiM ki ve anAja ke jo dAne kheta
meM svataH gire hue milate haiM, unako hI ekatrita karake apanI AjIvikA calAte
rahate haiN| isa prakAra kI caryA se sAdhu saMnyAsI kA bojha samAja para kama
par3atA hai| guNa pradhAna zila jahA~ milatA ho vaha 'guNa-zilaka' hai| zila ke
dvArA jIvana calAne kA nAma Rta hai| zila dvArA apanA jIvana vyatIta karane vAle
'kaNAda' nAma ke eka RSi ho gae haiN| unakA 'kaNAda' nAma, 'kaNoM ko- anAja ke
dAnoM ko ekatrita karake, 'ada' khAnevAlA yathArtha hai| 'uJchaM zilaM tu Rtam'
- amara koza, 19 vaizya varga, kANDa 2, zloka 2  /  'kaNizAdyajainaM zilam, Rta
tat' - abhidhAna, martyakA0, zloka 865-866  /  'guNasila' zabda kI dUsarI
vyutpatti isa prakAra bhI kI jA sakatI hai-- 'guNAH zirasi yasya yasmin vA tat
gunnshirH|' isakA prAkRta rUpa guNasila sahaja siddha hai| 'guNazIla' zabda bhI
isa udyAna ke lie prayukta hotA hai| udyAna ke guNoM ke sadA vidyamAna rahane ke
kAraNa use 'guNazIla' bhI kahA jAtA hai|

Page #96 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Appendix - Notes - Kakandī The capital of King Jitashatru and the birthplace of
the blessed Anāgāra, a great ascetic. This was an ancient and famous city in
North India. During the time of Lord Mahāvīra, King Jitashatru ruled this city.
Outside the city of Kakandī was a beautiful garden called 'Sahasrāmrvana'. The
Samvasarana of the Lord was held here. The initiation of the blessed Anāgāra
also took place in this garden. Currently, Kakandī would have been somewhere two
miles from Nūnkhār station, thirty miles southeast of Gorakhpur. Sahasrāmrvana
Sahasrāmrvana. This garden is mentioned extensively in the Āgamas. There was
also a beautiful garden of the same name outside the city of Kakandī, where the
initiation of Dhanayakumāra and Sunakṣatrakuṁāra took place. Sahasrāmrvana is
also mentioned outside the following cities: 1. Outside Kakandī. 2. On Mount
Girnār. 3. Outside the city of Kāmpilya. 4. Outside Pāṇḍu Mathurā. 5. Outside
the city of Mithilā. 6. Outside Hastināpura, etc. King Jitashatru The one who
conquers enemies. Just as the name of King Brahmadatta often appears in Buddhist
Jātakas, so too does the name of King Jitashatru often appear in Jain texts. The
name Dhāriṇī is also often associated with Jitashatru. It has been an ancient
practice of storytellers to mention the name of some king at the beginning of
any story. Even if there was no king by this name, the storyteller uses this
name at the beginning of his story. However, the name of King Jitashatru is
mentioned a lot in the story-texts of Jain literature. The following cities are
said to have been ruled by a king named Jitashatru: 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. City
Vāṇijyagrāma Cāmpānagarī Ujjayinī Sarvatobhadra Nagar Mithilā Nagarī Pāñcāla
Deśa Āmalakalpā Nagarī King Jitashatru Jitashatru Jitashatru 61 Jitashatru
Jitashatru Jitashatru

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pariziSTa - TippaNa - kAkandI jitazatru rAjA kI rAjadhAnI aura ghora tapasvI
dhanya anagAra kI janmabhUmi  /  yaha uttara bhArata kI prAcIna aura prasiddha
nagarI thii| bhagavAn mahAvIra ke samaya meM isa nagarI meM jitazatru rAjA rAjya
karatA thaa| kAkandI nagarI ke bAhara 'sahasrAmravana' nAma kA eka sundara
udyAna thA  /  bhagavAn kA samavasaraNa yahIM para lagA thaa| dhanya anagAra kI
dIkSA bhI isI udyAna meM huI thii| vartamAna meM gorakhapura se dakSiNa-pUrva
tIsa mIla para nUnakhAra sTezana se do mIla para kahIM kAkandI rahI hogii|
sahassaMbavaNa shsraamrvn| AgamoM meM isa udyAna kA pracura ullekha milatA hai|
kAkandI nagarI ke bAhara bhI isI nAma kA eka sundara udyAna thA, jahA~ para
dhanyakumAra aura sunakSatrakumAra kI dIkSA huI thI  /  sahasrAmravana kA
ullekha nimnalikhita nagaroM ke bAhara bhI AtA hai-- 1. kAkandI ke bAhara  /  2.
giranAra parvata para  /  3. kAmpilya nagara ke bAhara  /  4. pANDu mathurA ke
bAhara  /  mithilA nagarI ke bAhara  /  5. 6. hastinApura ke bAhara Adi  /
jitazatru rAjA zatru ko jItane vaalaa| jisa prakAra bauddha jAtakoM meM prAya:
brahmadatta rAjA kA nAma AtA hai, usI prakAra jainagranthoM meM prAyaH jitazatru
rAjA kA nAma AtA hai| jitazatru ke sAtha prAyaH dhAriNI kA bhI nAma AtA hai|
kisI bhI kathA ke prArambha meM kisI na kisI rAjA kA nAma batalAnA kathAkAroM kI
purAtana paddhati rahI hai| isa nAma kA bhale hI koI rAjA na bhI ho, tathApi
kathAkAra apanI kathA ke prArambha meM isa nAma kA upayoga karatA hai| vaise
jaina sAhitya ke kathA-granthoM meM jitazatru rAjA kA ullekha bahuta AtA hai|
nimnalikhita nagaroM ke rAjA kA nAma jitazatru batAyA gayA hai 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7.
nagara vANijyagrAma campAnagarI ujjayanI sarvatobhadra nagara mithilA nagarI
pAMcAla deza AmalakalpA nagarI rAjA jitazatru jitazatru jitazatru 61 jitazatru
jitazatru jitazatru jitazatru

Page #97 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## English Translation:  **62** 8. 9. 10. 11. Bhadra Sarthavahi Savathi Nagari
Vanarasi Nagari Alabhiya Nagari Polaspur The resident of Kakandhi Nagari,
Dhanakumar and Sunakshastrakumar's mother. Bhadra Sarthavahi was honored in
Kakandhi Nagari. Bhadra's husband is not mentioned. The epithet Sarthavahi
attached to Bhadra proves that she was not only involved in ordinary trade but
also played a significant role in public works and engaged in large-scale trade
both within and outside the country. Panchadhatri Five types of foster mothers
who nurture the infant. Raising a child is an art of human life. It is also a
great responsibility. Just giving birth to a child does not make the parents
glorious. The true glory of parents can be assessed only by the method of
raising the child. 1. Dhiradhatri - The one who breastfeeds. 2. Majjandhaatri -
The one who bathes. 3. Mandandhatri 4. Kriddhadhatri 5. Ankdhatri - The one who
adorns. - The one who plays and entertains. - The one who holds in the lap. The
study of ancient literature reveals that in ancient times, foster mothers,
called Dhatri, were kept in royal households and wealthy homes for raising
children. There were five types of foster mothers: 1. Gaj 2. Vrishabha - -
Anuttaroupapatikadasha Jitashatru Jitashatru Jitashatru Jitashatru Mahabal Bal
Raja's son. Sudarshan Seth's life, Mahabalkumar. The king of Hastinapur was Bal
and his queen was Prabhavati. Once at night, in a state of semi-sleep, the queen
saw 'a lion descending from the sky and entering her mouth.' Seeing the lion in
her dream, the queen woke up and went to King Bal's bedroom and told him about
the dream. The king said in a sweet voice, 44 Son "The dream is very good. You
will become a mother." In the morning, in the royal court, the king asked the
dream interpreters, "O King! There are 42 common and 30 great dreams in the
science of dreams, this 46 Tirthankara Mata and Chakravarti Mata see these 14
dreams out of the 30 great dreams. - -

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 62 8. 9. 10. 11. bhadrA sArthavAhI sAvatthI nagarI vANArasI nagarI AlabhiyA
nagarI polAsapura kAkandI nagarI ke vAsI dhanyakumAra aura sunakSatrakumAra kI
mAtA  /  kAkandI nagarI meM bhadrA sArthavAhI kA bahumAna thA  /  bhadrA ke pati
kA ullekha nahIM miltaa| bhadrA ke sAtha lagA sArthavAhI vizeSaNa yaha siddha
karatA hai ki vaha sAdhAraNa vyApAra hI nahIM apitu . sArvajanika kAryoM meM bhI
mahattvapUrNa bhAga letI hogI aura deza tathA paradeza meM bar3e paimAne para
vyApAra karatI rahI hogii| paMcadhAtrI zizu kA lAlana-pAlana karane vAlI pAMca
prakAra kI dhAya mAtAeM  /  zizu-pAlana bhI mAnavajIvana kI eka kalA hai| eka
mahAn dAyitva bhI hai| kisI zizu ko janma dene mAtra se mAtA-pitA kA gaurava
nahIM hotaa| mAtA-pitA kA vAstavika gaurava zizu ke lAlana-pAlana kI paddhati se
hI AMkA. jA sakatA hai| 1. dhIradhAtrI - dUdha pilAne vAlI  /  2. majjanadhAtrI
- snAna karAne vaalii| 3. maNDanadhAtrI 4. krIDAdhAtrI 5. aMkadhAtrI prAcIna
sAhitya ke adhyayana se jJAta hotA hai ki prAcIna kAla meM rAjagharAnoM meM aura
sampanna gharoM meM zizupAlana ke lie dhAya mAtAeM rakhI jAtI thIM, jinheM
dhAtrI kahA jAtA thA  /  dhAya mAtAeM pA~ca prakAra kI huA karatI thIM 1. gaja
2. vRSabha - - sAja-siMgAra karAne vAlI  /  anuttaraupapAtikadazA jitazatru
jitazatru jitazatru jitazatru - khela - kUda karAne vAlI, manoraMjana karAne
vAlI  /  * goda meM rakhane vAlI  /  - mahAbala bala rAjA kA putra  /  sudarzana
seTha kA jIva mahAbalakumAra  /  hastinApura nAmaka nagara kA rAjA bala aura
rAnI prabhAvatI thii| eka bAra rAta meM ardhanidrA meM rAnI ne dekhA 'eka siMha
AkAza se utara kara mukha meM praveza kara rahA hai|' siMha kA svapna dekhakara
rAnI jAga uThI aura rAjA bala ke zayanakakSa meM jAkara svapna sunaayaa| rAjA ne
madhura svara meM 44 putra kahA 'svapna bahuta acchA hai| tejasvI svapna kA
phala pUchA  /  svapna- pAThakoM ne kahA prakAra kula 72 svapna kahe haiN| " kI
tuma mAtA bnogii|" prAtaH rAjasabhA meM rAjA ne svapna - pAThakoM se 'rAjan !
svapnazAstra meM 42 sAmAnya aura 30 mahAsvapna haiM, isa 46 tIrthaMkaramAtA aura
cakravartImAtA 30 mahAsvapnoM meM se ina 14 svapnoM ko dekhatI haiM -

Page #98 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Appendix-Note 63 3. Lion 4. Lakshmi 5. Garland of Flowers 6. Moon 7. Sun 8. Flag
9. Pot 10. Lotus Pond 11. Ocean 12. Airplane 13. Treasure 14. Smokeless Fire
King! Queen Prabhavati had a great dream. Therefore, its result will be wealth
gain, enjoyment gain, son gain and kingdom gain. .. In due course, a son was
born, who was named Mahabalkumar.  Mahabal became skilled by practicing 72 arts
with Kalacharya.  Mahabalkumar was married to eight princesses. Mahabalkumar
became engrossed in material pleasures.  He became a disciple by listening to
the teachings of the Lord and embraced the monastic dharma. Thereafter, Mahabal
Muni studied the 14 Purvas. He performed many kinds of austerities. After
observing the Shramanaparyaya for 12 years, he was born as a deity in the Brahma
Lok Kalpa. - Bhagavati, Shatak 11, Uddes 11 Konik  The son of Queen Chellanana
of King Shrenik, the ruler of Champanagari, the capital of Angadesh, a devout
devotee of Lord Mahavira.  Konik Raja is a famous king. His description is found
in many places in Jain Agamas in many ways. Bhagavati, Aupapatik and Niryaavlika
have detailed descriptions of Konik.  Due to his greed for the kingdom, he had
imprisoned his father Shrenik. After Shrenik's death, Konik made Champanagari
his capital in Angadesh.  He also fought a fierce battle with his maternal
grandfather Chetak to snatch the elephant Har and Sechanak from his brothers
Hall and Vihall. The Konik-Chetak war is famous. —Jain Agam Katha Kosh

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pariziSTa-TippaNa 63 3. siMha 4. lakSmI 5. puSpamAlA 6. candra 7. sUrya 8.
dhvajA 9. kumbha 10. padmasarovara 11. samudra 12. vimAna 13. ratnarAzi 14.
nirdhUma agni rAjan ! prabhAvatI devI ne eka mahAsvapna dekhA hai| ataH isakA
phala arthalAbha, bhogalAbha, putralAbha aura rAjyalAbha hogaa| .. kAlAntara meM
putra kA janma huA, jisakA nAma mahAbalakumAra rakhA gyaa| kalAcArya ke pAsa 72
kalAoM kA abhyAsa karake mahAbala kuzala ho gyaa| ATha rAjakanyAoM ke sAtha
mahAbalakumAra kA vivAha kiyA gyaa| mahAbalakumAra bhautika sukhoM meM lIna ho
gyaa| bhagavAn kA upadeza zravaNa kara dIkSita ho munidharma aMgIkAra kiyaa|
tatpazcAt mahAbala muni ne 14 pUrvo kA adhyayana kiyaa| aneka prakAra kA tapa
kiyaa| 12 varSa zramaNaparyAya pAlakara, brahmaloka kalpa meM deva rUpa meM
janma huaa| -bhagavatI, zataka 11, uddeza 11 koNika rAjA zreNika kI rAnI cellaNA
kA putra, aMgadeza kI rAjadhAnI campAnagarI kA adhipati, bhagavAn mahAvIra kA
parama bhkt| koNika rAjA eka prasiddha rAjA hai| jainAgamoM meM aneka sthAnoM
para usakA aneka prakAra se varNana milatA hai| bhagavatI, aupapAtika aura
nirayAvalikA meM koNika kA vistRta varNana hai| rAjyalobha ke kAraNa isane apane
pitA zreNika ko kaida meM DAla diyA thaa| zreNika kI mRtyu ke bAda koNika ne
aMgadeza meM campAnagarI ko apanI rAjadhAnI banAyA thaa| apane sahodara bhAI
halla aura vihalla se hAra aura secanaka hAthI ko chInane ke lie apane nAnA
ceTaka se bhayaMkara yuddha bhI kiyA thaa| koNika-ceTakayuddha prasiddha hai|
--jainAgamakathAkoSa

Page #99 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Anuttaraupapatikadasha  **Jamali** was a prince from the Kshatriya Kund of
Vaishali. Once, the Lord arrived in the village of Kshatriya Kund. Jamali also
came to listen to the sermon.  Abandoning his eight wives, he took initiation
from the Lord along with five hundred Kshatriya Kumaras. Jamali had made a
declaration against the Lord's principles. Therefore, he was called **Nihnav**.
- **Bhagavati, Shatak 9, Uddesh 33 Thavacchaputra**  The son of the wealthy
Thavaccha Gathapattni of Dwarka Nagari, who took initiation from Lord Nemnath
along with a thousand men. The initiation ceremony was performed by Shri
Krishna.  Thavacchaputra studied the fourteen Purvas. He performed many types of
austerities. In the end, he became a Siddha, Buddha, and liberated, ending all
kinds of suffering.  — **Jnatasutra, Adhyayan 5 Krishna**  **Krishna Vasudeva**.
His mother's name was Devaki, and his father's name was Vasudeva. Krishna was
born in Mathura, in the prison of his maternal uncle Kansa.  Due to the troubles
of Jarasandha, Shri Krishna left the land of Braj and settled in the distant
Saurashtra, establishing the city of Dwarka.  Shri Krishna was a devout follower
of Lord Nemnath. In the future, he will be the Tirthankara named 'Amam'. In Jain
literature, the life of Shri Krishna is found in detail in both Sanskrit and
Prakrit languages.  After the destruction of Dwarka, Shri Krishna died at the
hands of Jarakumar. — **Jainagamakthakosh Mahavir**  **Mahavira** is the last
Tirthankara of the current Avasarpini Kalchakra. In Agam literature and post-
Agam texts, Lord Mahavira is known by many names:  1. Vardhaman, 2. Mahavira, 3.
Mahashraman, 4. Charam Tirthakrit, 5. Sanmati, 6. Mahativira, 7. Videhadinna, 8.
Vaishalik, 9. Jnatputra, 10. Devary, 11. Dirghatapasvi, etc.  Lord Mahavira's
parents were followers of the Parsvanathiya tradition of Shramanas.  Lord
Mahavira was born in Vaishali, which is famous as 'Basar' or 'Basad', 27 miles
north of Patna.  _Mahavira's father was King Siddhartha, his mother was
Trishaladevi, and his elder brother was Nandivardhan. Mahavira's mother
Trishaladevi was the sister of Chetak, the chief king of the Vaishali republic.
After the death of his parents, Mahavira took initiation at the age of thirty,
with permission from Nandivardhan._

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 anuttaraupapAtikadazA jamAlI vaizAlI ke kSatriyakuNDa kA eka rAjakumAra thaa|
eka bAra bhagavAn kSatriyakuNDa grAma meM pdhaare| jamAlI bhI upadeza sunane ko
aayaa| apanI ATha patniyoM kA tyAga karake usane pAMca-sau kSatriya kumAroM ke
sAtha bhagavAn ke pAsa dIkSA lii| jamAlI ne bhagavAn ke siddhAnta ke viruddha
prarUpaNA kI thii| ataeva vaha nihnava khlaayaa| -bhagavatI, zataka 9, uddeza 33
thAvaccAputra dvArakA nagarI kI samRddha thAvaccA gAthApatnI kA putra, jisane
eka sahasra manuSyoM ke sAtha bhagavAn neminAtha se dIkSA grahaNa kii| dIkSA
mahotsava zrIkRSNa ne kiyaa| thAvaccAputra ne 14 pUrvo kA adhyayana kiyaa| aneka
prakAra kA tapa kiyaa| anta meM sarva prakAra ke duHkhoM kA anta karake siddha,
buddha aura mukta ho gyaa| --jJAtAsUtra, adhyayana 5 kRSNa kRSNa vaasudev| mAtA
kA nAma devakI, pitA kA nAma vasudeva thaa| kRSNa kA janma apane mAmA kaMsa kI
kArA meM mathurA meM huaa| jarAsandha ke upadravoM ke kAraNa zrIkRSNa ne braja-
bhUmi ko chor3akara sudUra saurASTra meM jAkara dvArakA nagarI bsaaii| zrIkRSNa
bhagavAn neminAtha ke parama bhakta the| bhaviSya meM vaha 'amama' nAma ke
tIrthaMkara hoNge| jaina sAhitya meM saMskRta aura prAkRta ubhaya bhASAoM meM
zrIkRSNa kA jIvana vistRta rUpa meM milatA hai| dvArakA kA vinAza ho jAne para
zrIkRSNa kI mRtyu jarAkumAra ke hAthoM se huii| --jainAgamakathAkoSa mahAvIra
vartamAna avasarpiNI kAlacakra ke 24 tIrthaMkaroM meM carama tiirthNkr| Agama-
sAhitya aura Agamottara granthoM meM bhagavAn mahAvIra ke itane nAma prasiddha
haiM - 1. vardhamAna, 2. mahAvIra, 3. mahAzramaNa, 4. carama tIrthakRt, 5.
sanmati, 6. mahativIra, 7. videhadinna, 8. vaizAlika, 9. jJAtaputra, 10.
devArya, 11. dIrghatapasvI aadi| bhagavAn mahAvIra ke mAtA-pitA pArzvanAthIya
paramparA ke zramaNopAsaka the| bhagavAn mahAvIra kA janma vaizAlI meM, jo
paTanA se 27 mIla uttara meM basAra' yA 'basAr3a' nAma se prasiddha hai, huA
thaa| _ mahAvIra ke pitA rAjA siddhArtha, mAtA trizalAdevI, jyeSTha bhrAtA
nandivardhana the| mahAvIra kI mAtA trizalAdevI vaizAlI-gaNatantra ke pramukha
rAjA ceTaka kI bahina thii| mAtA-pitA ke divaMgata ho jAne ke bAda nandivardhana
se anumati lekara tIsa varSa kI avasthA meM mahAvIra ne dIkSA grahaNa kii|

Page #100 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Appendix-Note 65 12|| He performed severe austerities for twelve years. He
practiced rigorous penance. After attaining omniscience, he preached Dharma for
the welfare of the people for 42 years. He attained Nirvana at the age of 72 in
Pavapuri. In the texts of Buddhist literature, Lord Mahavira is called the long-
austerity Niggantha Nataputta. Elder, old. Three types of elders are mentioned
in the scriptures - (1) Vayasthavir - a monk aged 60 years or more is a
Vayasthavir. (2) Pravrajyastavir - a monk who has been initiated for 20 years or
more is a Pravrajyastavir. (3) Srutastavir - a monk who knows the Stananga,
Samavayanga, etc. is called a Srutastavir. Siles-Gulia: Slesh-Gutika The actual
meaning of the word 'Slesh' is - to stick, to stick. When two pieces of paper
are to be glued together, then glue etc. is used. That is Slesh. It appears that
in the present context, the meaning of the word 'Slesh' is glue etc. sticking
substance. 'Slesh' means a lump of glue, i.e. a vatka (wick). It means - a long
wick of glue. This meaning fits here. The commentator has interpreted it as
'Sleshmano Gutika'. According to this, if the meaning of 'lump of phlegm' is to
be applied in the present context, then it will have to be reduced in this way -
as if a long wick-like lump of phlegm is lying somewhere, it is pale. Similarly,
Dhyan Kumar's lips had become. But the word 'Slesh' is not found to be
indicative of the meaning of phlegm. The Amarakoshkar and Acharya Hemachandra
have given the synonyms of phlegm as follows - Mayu: Pittam Kapah Sleshma. -Dwi.
Kan. 16, Manushya Varga Shlok 62. Pittam Mayu: Kapah Sleshma Valash: Snehabhu:
Kharah. _-Abhi. Martya Ka., Shlok 462. According to Acharya Hemachandra - Kapah,
Sleshman, Valash, Snehabhu and Khar, these five names are of Sleshma. The word
'Slesh' does not appear in it. Dhyan Anugar: Dhyandev A creature who is born in
the Deva-gati from the human gait or the animal gait does not have a new name
there. But the name of his previous birth continues. Dhyan Muni's name was Dhyan
Dev. When Dardur died and became a Dev, his name also became Dardur Dev. It
seems that there is no custom of naming in the Deva caste like the human caste.
There is only the practice of the name created by humans or the name famous in
the animal world. Chaurant: Chaturant The meaning of the word 'Chaurant' is -
four ends. The whole earth comes in four directions. Just as a Chakravarti king,
while following the Kshatriya-dharma in the best way, ends those four directions
- conquers the four directions, establishes his dominion over the whole earth,
in the same way Lord Mahavira, while following the real Lokottara Dharma, on the
four-ended - human gait, Deva-gati, animal gait and hell gait form - the world

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pariziSTa-TippaNa 65 12 //  varSoM taka ghora tapa kiyaa| kaThora sAdhanA kii|
kevalajJAna pAkara 42 varSoM taka jana-kalyANa ke lie dharmadezanA kii| 72 varSa
kI Ayu meM pAvApurI meM bhagavAn kA parinirvANa huaa| bauddha sAhitya ke
granthoM meM bhagavAn mahAvIra ko dIrghatapasvI niggaNTha nAtaputta kahA gayA
hai| sthavira, vRddha  /  zAstroM meM tIna prakAra ke sthavira kahe gae haiM -
(1) vayaHsthavira -60 varSa yA isase adhika kI Ayu vAlA bhikSu vayaHsthavira
hai| (2) pravrajyAsthavira - 20 varSa yA isase adhika dIkSAparyAya vAlA bhikSu
pravrajyAsthavira hai| (3) zrutasthavira - sthAnAMga, samavAyAMga Adi ke jJAtA
bhikSu ko zrutasthavira kahate haiN| silesa-guliyA : zleSa-guTikA 'zleSa' zabda
kA vAstavika artha hai - cipakanA, coMTanA  /  jaba kisI kAgaja ke do Tukar3oM
ko cipakAnA hotA hai taba goMda Adi kA upayoga kiyA jAtA hai| vaha zleSa hai|
pratIta hotA hai, ki prastuta prasaMga meM 'zleSa' zabda kA artha goMda Adi
cipakAne vAlI vastu hai| 'zleSa' arthAt goMda kI guTikA arthAt vaTikA (bttii)|
isakA artha huA-- goMda kI lambI-sI battI  /  yaha artha yahA~ para saMgata
baiThatA hai| TIkAkAra ne isakA 'zleSmaNo guTikA' artha kiyA hai| isake anusAra
yadi 'kapha kI guTikA' kA artha prastuta meM lAgU karanA ho to isa prakAra
ghaTAnA hogA - jaise kapha kI koI lambI battI-sI guTikA kahIM par3I huI phIkI-sI
hotI hai vaise hI dhanyakumAra ke hoMTha ho gae the| kintu 'zleSa' zabda, kapha
artha kA vAcaka nahIM miltaa| amarakoSakAra ne tathA AcArya hemacandra ne kapha
ke jo paryAya batAye haiM, ve isa prakAra haiM - mAyuH pittaM kaphaH shlessmaa|
-dvi. kAM. 16, manuSya varga zloka 62. pittaM mAyuH kaphaH zleSmA valAzaH
snehabhUH khrH| _-abhi. martya kA., zloka 462. AcArya hemacandra ke
kathanAnusAra - kapha, zleSman, valAza, snehabhU aura khara, ye pA~ca nAma
zleSma ke haiN| isameM 'zleSa' zabda nahIM AyA hai| dhanya anagAra : dhanyadeva
manuSya gati yA tiryaMca gati se jo prANI devagati meM janma letA hai, usakA
vahA~ koI nayA nAma nahIM hotaa| parantu usake pUrva janma kA hI nAma calatA
rahatA hai| dhanya muni kA nAma dhanya deva pdd'aa| dardura marakara deva huA,
to usakA nAma bhI dardura deva huaa| mAlUma hotA hai, ki deva jAti meM mAnava
jAti ke samAna nAmakaraNa-saMskAra kI koI prathA nahIM hai| vahA~ para manuSya-
kRta athavA pazuyoni-prasiddha nAma kA hI pracalana hai| cAuraMta : caturanta
'cAuraMta' zabda kA artha-cAra anta  /  sArI pRthvI cAra dizAoM meM A jAtI hai|
jisa prakAra cakravartI rAjA kSatriya-dharma kA uttama rIti se pAlana karatA
huA, una cAroM dizAoM kA anta karatA hai-cAroM dizAoM para vijaya pAtA hai, sArI
pRthvI para apanA prabhutva sthApita karatA hai, usI prakAra bhagavAn mahAvIra
ne cAra anta vAle - manuSyagati, devagati, tiryaMcagati aura narakagati rUpa -
saMsAra para, vAstavika lokottara dharma kA pAlana karate hue

Page #101 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## English Translation:  66 He attained victory over the Anuttaroppapatikadashā.
By conquering his inner enemies, such as attachment, aversion, anger, pride,
delusion, and greed, he achieved complete victory through the transcendent
Kshatriya-Dharma.  Here, a Maha-bhogi Chakravarti is compared to a Maha-yogi
(Lord Mahavira). Lord Mahavira is the Chakravarti of Dharma, so this comparison
is appropriate.  **Vanijyagram** An ancient city in the Magadha country. It was
the capital of the Kosala country. Acharya Hemchandra has considered Saketa,
Kosala, and Ayodhya as one and the same.  Near Saketa, there was a beautiful
garden called "Uttarakuru," which had a Yaksha shrine called "Pashamriga."  The
king of Saketa was named Mitranandi, and his queen was named Shrikantā.
Historians believe that ancient Saketa must have been located near present-day
Ayodhya, on the southern bank of the Sarayu River, six miles northeast of
Faizabad in the Faizabad district.  **Hastinapur** The name of a famous ancient
city in India. It was a beautiful and important city of Kurukshetra during the
Mahabharata period. Many names of this city are found in ancient Indian
literature: (1) Hastini, (2) Hastinapur, (3) Hastinapur, (4) Gajpur, etc.
Today, Hastinapur is located on the southern bank of the Budhi Ganga River, 22
miles northeast of Meerut and southwest of Bijnor.  **Shashtha (Chhath)** Not
eating for six days (fasting for the first day, fasting for the second and third
days, and fasting again on the fourth day, this is called Chhath (Bela)).
Similarly, not eating for eight days is called Attham (Tela). Not eating for
four days is called Chauthabhat; that is, fasting.  This explanation suggests
that the practice of Dharana and Parana was not prevalent in that era, as it is
today. The current practice of Dharana and Parana is not scripturally
appropriate, either in comparison to the practice of austerity or in comparison
to the explanation of Chauthabhat, Chhath, etc., as prescribed in the
scriptures.  **Ayambil** The word "Ayambil" is a compound word. It consists of
two words: Ayam and Amla. Ayam means "Mand" or "Osaman." Amla means "sour"
(fourth taste). The food made by combining these two is called Ayam-Amla; that
is, Ayambil. Ayambil is made from three grains: Odan, Urad, and Sattu. This is
the Jain definition.  In Pravachana-saroddhara, the word "Acham" is used in
place of the word "Ayam."

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 66 anuttaropapAtikadazA vijaya prApta kii| usa lokottara kSAtra-dharma se apane
antaraMga vairI rAga-dveSa tathA krodha, mAna, mAyA, lobha Adi ko jItakara,
pUrNa rUpa se vijaya prApta kii| yahA~ para eka mahAbhogI cakravartI ke sAtha
eka mahoyogI (bhagavAn mahAvIra) kI tulanA kI gaI hai| bhagavAn dharma ke
cakravartI haiM, ataH yaha upamA ucita hI hai| vANijyagrAma magadha deza kA eka
prAcIna ngr| yaha kozala deza kI rAjadhAnI thaa| AcArya hemacandra ne sAketa,
kozala aura ayodhyA - ina tInoM ko eka hI kahA hai| sAketa ke samIpa hI
"uttarakuru" nAma kA eka sundara udyAna thA, usameM "pAzAmRga" nAma kA eka
yakSAyatana thaa| sAketa nagara ke rAjA kA nAma mitranandI aura rAnI kA nAma
zrIkAntA thaa| vartamAna meM phaijAbAda jile meM, phaijAbAda se pUrvottara chaha
mIla para sarayU nadI ke dakSiNI taTa para sthita vartamAna ayodhyA ke samIpa hI
prAcIna sAketa honA cAhie, aisI itihAsajJoM kI mAnyatA hai| hastinApura bhArata
ke prasiddha prAcIna nagara kA nAma  /  mahAbhArata kAla ke kurukSetra kA yaha
eka sundara evaM mukhya nagara thaa| bhArata ke prAcIna sAhitya meM isa nagara
ke aneka nAma upalabdha haiM - (1) hastinI, (2) hastinapura, (3) hastinApura,
(4) gajapura aadi| Ajakala hastinApura kA sthAna meraTha se 22 mIla pUrvottara
aura bijanaura se dakSiNa-pazcima ke koNa meM bUDhI gaMgA nadI ke dakSiNa kUla
para sthita hai| SaSTha (chaTTha) chaha TaMka nahIM khAnA (pahale dina ekAzana
karanA, dUsare dina evaM tIsare dina upavAsa karanA, tathA cauthe dina phira
ekAzana karanA, isa prakAra chaha bAra na khAne ko chaTTha (belA) kahate haiN|
isI prakAra ATha bAra nahIM khAne ko aTThama (telA) kahate haiN| cAra bAra nahIM
khAne ko cautthabhatta; arthAt upavAsa kahate haiN| isa vyAkhyA se pratIta hotA
hai ki usa yuga meM dhAraNA aura pAraNA karane kI paddhati kA pracalana nahIM
thA, jo Aja vartamAna meM cala rahI hai| vartamAna meM jo dhAraNA aura pAraNA kI
paddhati hai, vaha tapasyA kI apekSA se tathA cautthabhatta, chaTThabhatta
ityAdika kI jo vyAkhyA zAstra meM vihita hai, usakI apekSA se bhI zAstrAnukUla
nahIM hai| AyaMbila 'AyaMbila' zabda eka sAmAsika zabda hai| usameM do zabda
haiM -AyAma aura amla  /  AyAma kA artha hai - mAMDa athavA osAmaNa  /  amla kA
artha hai - khaTTA (caturtha rs)| ina donoM ko milAkara jo bhojana banatA hai,
usako AyAmAmla; arthAt AyaMbila kahate haiM  /  odana, ur3ada aura sattU ina
tIna annoM se AyaMbila kiyA jAtA hai| yaha jaina paribhASA hai|
pravacanasAroddhAra meM AyAma' zabda ke sthAna meM AcAma' zabda kA prayoga kiyA
gayA hai|

Page #102 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Appendix - Note 67 Acharya Haribhadra uses the terms Ayamāml, Ācāml and Ācāmāml.
It is known from the old commentaries that Ayambil used to include rice, black
gram and sattu as food and was suitable from the point of view of taste. Today,
almost twenty things are used in Ayambil. How is this scripturally ordained?
This is worth considering. It is necessary for wise seekers who practice taste-
joy to pay attention to the scriptural explanation. But what is the connection
of the word 'amla' which has been used and its meaning of the fourth taste, with
food? This is not clear. Scholarly researchers should consider this. Because
there seems to be no connection of sourness in the ingredients of Ayambil food,
therefore, from the word amla, it seems that before Shri Haribhadrasuri, there
may have been a connection of buttermilk in Ayambil. | The Buddhist text
Majjhimanikaya, in the 12th Mahasīhanādasutta, describes the severe penance of
the Buddha. There, the Buddha is called 'Ayāmbhakṣī' or 'Ācāmbhakṣī'. There, the
word Ayām means gruel. This ancient mention shows that the word Ayām meant gruel
and the ascetics called Ayāmbhakṣī only drank gruel. In Jain terminology, the
word Ayām is taken as rice, black gram and sattu. But these three do not fit in
the meaning of Ayām. It should be remembered that Acharya Haribhadra etc. have
explained the main meaning of Ayām as gruel. - Āvश्यकनिर्युक्तिवृत्ति, Gāthā
1603 - Acharya Siddhasena's Pravachana Sāroddhāra Vṛtti - Ārya Devendra's
Śrāddhapratikramāṇa Vṛtti If a householder is eating food and a monk arrives at
the householder's house for alms, then while eating, the donor's hand is stained
with greens, lentils, rice etc. or with its juicy water - it is stained and that
donor is ready to give alms with that stained hand, then such alms food is
called stained food. The present text is about the intention of accepting such
stained food given by a blessed homeless person. The scriptures have discussed
this in detail by breaking it down into many parts. Ujjhatdharmik Food and drink
that is only fit to be thrown away, which no one likes to eat or drink, such
food or drink is called Ujjhatdharmik. High, Low, Middle Caste In the present
text, the words high, low or middle are not intended with respect to any caste
or lineage, only people call a wealthy family a high caste, a poor family a low
caste and an ordinary family a middle caste. If it were intended for caste or
lineage, then the word middle would not be consistent in the present text. In
Jainism, caste-based high-low feelings are not acceptable from the point of view
of conduct and principles. Jainism is based on qualities, any person of any
caste can practice Jainism. The present text mentions alms-begging in high, low
and middle castes.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pariziSTa - TippaNa 67 AcArya haribhadra AyAmAmla, AcAmla evaM AcAmAmla zabdoM
kA prayoga karate haiM  /  ukta purAnI vyAkhyAoM se jJAta hotA hai, ki AyaMbila
meM odana (cAvala), ur3ada aura sattU ina tIna annoM kA bhojana ke rUpa meM
prayoga hotA thA aura svAdajaya kI dRSTi se yaha upayukta thaa| Aja to prAyaH
AyaMbila meM bIsoM cIjoM kA upayoga kiyA jAtA hai| yaha kisa prakAra
zAstravihita hai ? yaha vicArane yogya hai  /  svAda-jaya kI sAdhanA karane vAle
vivekI sAdhakoM ko zAstrIya vyAkhyA para dhyAna denA Avazyaka hai| parantu ukta
zabda 'amla' zabda kA jo prayoga kiyA gayA hai, aura usakA jo caturtha rasa
artha batAyA gayA hai, usakA bhojana ke sAtha kyA sambandha hai ? yaha mAlUma
nahIM par3atA  /  saMzodhaka vidvAn isa para vicAra kreN| kyoMki AyaMbila
bhojana kI sAmagrI meM khaTAI kA koI sambandha mAlUma nahIM par3atA, ataH amla
zabda se jAna par3atA hai ki zrI haribhadrasUri se bhI pUrva samaya meM AyaMbila
meM kadAcit chAcha kA sambandha rahA ho| | bauddhagrantha majjhimanikAya meM 12
veM mahAsIhanAdasutta meM buddha kI kaThora tapasyA kA varNana hai  /  usameM
buddha ko 'AyAmabhakSI' athavA 'AcAmabhakSI' kahA gayA hai| vahA~ AyAma zabda kA
artha mAMDa kiyA gayA hai| isa prAcIna ullekha se mAlUma hotA hai, ki AyAma kA
mAMDa artha thA aura AyAmabhakSI kahe jAne vAle tapasvI kevala mAMDa hI pIte
the| jaina paribhASA meM AyAma zabda se odana, ur3ada evaM sattU liyA gayA hai|
parantu ye tIna AyAma ke artha meM nahIM smaate| yAda rakhanA cAhie ki zrI
haribhadra Adi AcAryoM ne AyAma kA mukhya artha mAMDa hI batAyA hai| -
AvazyakaniryuktivRtti, gAthA 1603 - AcArya siddhasenakRta pravacanasAroddhAra
vRtti --Arya devendrakRta zrAddhapratikramaNa vRtti saMsRSTa gRhastha bhojana
kara rahA ho aura munirAja gocarI ke lie gRhastha ke ghara pahu~ce, taba bhojana
karate hue dAtA kA hAtha sAga, dAla, cAvala vagairaha se yA usake rasadAra jala
se lipta ho - saMsRSTa ho aura vaha dAtA usI saMsRSTa hAtha sebhikSA dene ko
tatpara ho to aise bhikSAnna ko saMsRSTa anna kahate haiM  /  prastuta meM
dhanya anagAra ko aise saMsRSTa hAtha se die hue anna ke lene kA saMkalpa hai|
zAstroM meM isakA aneka bhaMga karake vivecana kiyA gayA hai| ujjhatadharmika jo
khAdya tathA peya vastu kevala pheMkane lAyaka hai, jisako koI bhI khAnA-pInA
pasanda nahIM karatA, aise khAdya yA peya ko ujjhitadharmika kahA jAtA hai  /
ucca, nIca, madhyama kula prastuta meM ucca, nIca vA madhyama zabda koI jAti yA
vaMza kI apekSA se vivakSita nahIM haiM, mAtra sampattimAn kula ko loga ucca
kula kahate haiM, sampattivihIna kula ko nIca kahate haiM aura sAdhAraNa kula ko
madhyama kahA jAtA hai  /  jAti yA vaMza kI vivakSA hotI to prastuta meM
madhyama zabda kI saMgati nahIM ho sktii| jaina zAsana meM AcAra tathA tattva kI
dRSTi se jAtIyatA apekSita ucca-nIca bhAva sammata nahIM hai| jaina zAsana
guNamUlaka hai, kisI bhI jAti kA vyakti jaina dharma kA AcaraNa kara sakatA hai|
prastuta meM ucca, nIca aura madhyama kula meM bhikSAbhramaNa kA jo ullekha hai

Page #103 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter 68: The State of Uninterrupted Descent  This clearly indicates the
general rule of the Muni's [Jain monk] ability to go to all families without any
discrimination based on caste. This has been the system of the eternal Jain
tradition from the beginning.  **Like a Snake Entering a Hole**  Just as a
snake, when entering a hole, descends directly into it, similarly, a Muni,
desiring to conquer the taste buds, swallows the received food immediately upon
putting it in his mouth, but does not chew it by moving it from one jaw to the
other. This means that they swallow without savoring the taste of the food. This
is the meaning of the phrase "Bilmiv Pannang" [like a snake entering a hole].
The main point is that a Muni should not have any attachment to food. There
should not be even a trace of desire for taste. He should only eat for the
purpose of sustaining his body, following restraint.  **Samaiyamiai**  This
phrase indicates that the study of the eleven Angas [Jain scriptures] starting
from Samayik [a Jain ritual] was done. The first name in the eleven Angas is the
Acharanga Sutra. Therefore, in the present context, "Ayaramiai" [Acharanga etc.]
should be the correct reference for the eleven Angas. Why then is the reference
"Samaiyamiai"? Here is the solution:  - From the very first verse of the
Acharanga, there is a discussion of Anarambha [non-beginning], and here in
Samayik, there is also a discussion of Anarambha and the emphasis is on Charya
[conduct]. Therefore, there is an extraordinary similarity, a unity, between the
Acharanga and Samayik. Hence, the reference "Samaiyamiai" instead of "Ayaramiai"
is not inappropriate.  - Or, the Muni first accepts Samayik, and in it, the
Acharanga, which embodies the principles of Anarambha Dharma, is also included.
For this reason, this reference does not seem inappropriate.  - Or, "Sam" means
Samayik and "Azaiyan" means Acharanga Sutra. In the verse where the Acharanga is
established, the words "Ayar", "Achal", etc. are described as synonyms for
"Achar". In the same verse, the word "Ajati" is also described as a synonym for
the Acharanga. Therefore, "Samaiy" means Samayik and Acharanga, etc. (eleven
Angas) combined together. By planning in this way, Samayik will be included, and
so will the Acharanga. Along with this, the word "Ai" will bring in the other
remaining Angas, starting from the first.  - Or, the meaning of this phrase
should be understood as follows: "Samayikadicani" [Samayik and the rest of the
eleven Angas]. The "ma" between the two words is alakshanik [non-significant],
like the use of "Annam Annam" [food, food].

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 68 anuttarIpapAtikadazA vaha spaSTatayA munirAja ke jAti nirapekSa hokara saba
kuloM meM gocarI jAne ke sAmAnya niyama kA sUcaka hai| sanAtana jainazAsana kI
pahale se hI yaha praNAlI rahI hai| vilamiva pannagabhUeNaM jaise pannaga -
sarpa jaba bila meM praveza karatA hai to sIdhA hI usameM utara jAtA hai, ThIka
usI prakAra svAdendriya ke Upara jaya pAne ke icchuka munirAja prApta prAsuka
khAdya vastu ko mukha meM DAlate hI nigala jAte haiM, parantu eka jabar3e se
dUsare jabar3e kI tarapha le jAkara cabAte nahIM; arthAt khAdya kA rasa na lene
ke kAraNa ve nigala jAte haiN| aisA abhiprAya 'bilamiva pannaga' ityAdi vAkya kA
hai| isakA mUla Azaya yahI hai ki muni kI bhojana meM Asakti nahIM honI caahie|
lezamAtra bhI rasa - lolupatA nahIM honI caahie| kevala saMyama pAlana ke lie
zarIra nirvAha ke lakSya se hI use AhAra karanA cAhie  /  sAmAiyamAiyAI isa
vAkya se sUcita hotA hai ki sAmAyika se lekara gyAraha aMgoM kA adhyayana kiyaa|
gyAraha aMgoM meM prathama nAma AcArAMga sUtra kA AtA hai| ataH prastuta meM
'AyAramAiyAiM' arthAt AcArAMga vagairaha gyAraha aMgoM kA nirdeza honA ucita
hai, taba 'sAmAiyamAiyAI' aisA nirdeza kyoM ? isakA samAdhAna isa prakAra hai. -
AcAra aMga ke prathama vAkya se hI anAraMbha kI carcA hai aura idhara sAmAyika
meM bhI anAraMbha kI carcA tathA caryA pradhAna hai; ata: AcAra aMga tathA
sAmAyika donoM meM asAdhAraNa sAmya hai, ekarUpatA hai, ataH 'AyAramAiyAI ' ke
sthAna meM 'sAmAiyamAiyAI' aisA nirdeza asaMgata nahIM hai| athavA munirAja
prathama sAmAyika svIkAra karatA hai aura usameM anAraMbhadharmaprarUpaka AcAra
aMga kA bhI samAveza ho jAtA hai; isa kAraNa bhI aisA nirdeza asaMgata pratIta
nahIM hotA  /  athavA sAma arthAt sAmAyika tathA AjAiyaM arthAt AcArAMgasUtra  /
AcArAMga kI niyukti meM jisa gAthA meM AyAra, AcAla ityAdi zabdoM ko 'AcAra' kA
paryAya batAyA gayA hai, usI gAthA meM ' AjAti' zabda ko bhI AcAra aMga kA
paryAya batAyA hai| ataH 'sAmAiya' kA artha sAmAyika aura AcArAMga ityAdi
(gyAraha aMga ) barAbara saMghaTita hotA hai  /  isa prakAra yojanA karane se
'sAmAyika' kA grahaNa ho jAegA aura AcAra aMga bhii| sAtha hI 4 'Aiya' zabda se
Adika arthAt dUsare zeSa aMga bhI A jaayeNge| athavA isa pada kA artha isa
prakAra karanA cAhie -sAmAyika se prArambha karake gyAraha aMga sAmAyikAdikAni
/  donoM padoM ke bIca meM jo makAra hai vaha 'annamannaM ' prayoga kI taraha
alAkSaNika hai|

Page #104 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
First Class - Bracket . Guru Diksha | Tapas Order | Person | Mother | Father |
Place | Sanlekhana | Place | Plane | Moksha. 1. Jalikumar | Dharini | Shrenik |
Rajgriha | Bhagwan Mahavira | 16 years Gunaratna. One month | Vipul | Vijay |
Mahavideha Appendix - First Class - Bracket 2. | Mayali Vaijayant Upjali Jayant
Purushaisen Aparajit 5. Varishen Sarvarth Siddha 6. Dirghadant 7. Lashtdant
Aparajit Vehallkumar | Chelna | " Jayant 9. | Vehayaskumar | " | " | " Vaijayant
10. Abhaykumar Nandadevi " | " Vijay

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prathama varga- koSThaka . guru dIkSA | tapa krama| vyakti | mAtA | pitA |
sthAna | saMlekhanA| sthAna | vimAna | mokSa  /  1. jAlikumAra | dhAriNI |
zreNika | rAjagRha | bhagavAn mahAvIra | 16 varSa guNaratna. eka mAsa | vipula |
vijaya | mahAvideha pariziSTa-prathama varga-koSThaka 2. | mayAli vaijayanta
upajAli jayanta puruSasena aparAjita 5. vAriSeNa sarvArthasiddha 6. dIrghadanta
7. laSTadanta aparAjita vehallakumAra | celaNA | " jayanta 9. | vehAyasakumAra |
" | " | " vaijayanta 10. abhayakumAra nandAdevI " | " vijaya

Page #105 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Order  **Second Class - Bracketed Person** | **Mother** | **Father** |
**Place** | **Guru Initiation** | **Austerity Sanlekhana Place** | **Vimana** |
**Moksha Dirghaseen Dharini** | **Shrenik** | **Rajagriha** | **Bhagwan
Mahavira** | **16 Years** | **Gunaratna. One Month** | **Vipul** | **Vijay**
**Mahaseen** : FEE : : : : : 3. **Lashtdant** **Vaijayant** : " **Gudhdant** :
5. **Shuddhdant** **Jayant** : 6. **Hallkumar** : **Drumkumar** **Aparajit** |
**Drumseen** : | **Mahadrumseen** : **Sarvarth Siddha** : " | **Singhseen** : :
: : : : : : : | **Mahasinghseen** **Anuttaroupapattikadasha** **Punysen** :

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 krama dvitIya varga -- kroSThaka vyakti | mAtA | pitA | sthAna | guru dIkSA |
tapa saMlekhanA sthAna | vimAna | mokSa dIrghasena dhAriNI | zreNika | rAjagRha
| bhagavAn mahAvIra | 16 varSa | guNaratna. eka mAsa | vipula | vijaya mahAsena
: FEE : : : : : 3. laSTadanta vaijayanta : " gUr3hadanta : 5. zuddhadanta
jayanta : 6. hallakumAra : drumakumAra aparAjita | drumasena : | mahAdrumasena :
sarvArthasiddha : " | siMhasena : : : : : : : : : | mahAsiMhasena
anuttaraupapAtikadazA puNyasena :

Page #106 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Third Category - Bracketed Order | Person | Mother | Father | Place | Guru |
Diksha | Tapas | Sanlekhana Place | Vimana | Moksha  1. **Dhanayakumar** |
Bhadra | - Kakkandi | Bhagwan Mahavira | 9 Months | Gun | One Month | Vipul |
Sarvarthasiddha | Mahavideha **Appendix - Third Category - Bracketed** 2. |
Sunakshatra | Rishi Das | Rajgriha |  4. | Pelluk |  5. | Ramputra | | Saketa |
Chandrikumar |  7. | Prishtimatrik | | Vanijya Gram |  8. | Pedhalputra |  9. |
Postill | Hastinapur |  10. | Vehallkumar | Rajgriha | 6 Months

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 tRtIya varga - koSThaka krama| vyakti | mAtA | pitA | sthAna | guru  /  dIkSA |
tapa saMlekhanA sthAna | vimAna | mokSa 1. dhanyakumAra bhadrA | - kAkandI |
bhagavAn mahAvIra | 9 mAsa guNa0 eka mAsa | vipula | sarvArthasiddha |
mahAvideha pariziSTa-tRtIya varga-koSThaka 2. | sunakSatra RSidAsa rAjagRha 4. |
pellaka 5. | rAmaputra | sAketa candrikumAra 7. | pRSTimAtRka |vANijya grAma 8.
| peDhAlaputra 9. | poSTilla hastinApura 10. vehallakumAra rAjagRha 6 mAsa

Page #107 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## English Translation:  1. 2. 4. **Antagadadasa** The 8th Angasutra. It
describes the lives of those who end their worldly existence with their final
breath - the sadhakas. - 3. 5. 6. 7. **Anga** Jain Agamic literature compiled by
Ganadhara. According to the Drishtivada, there are twelve Angas. 8. **Glossary**
**Anagaar** One who has no "agar" - home - a renunciant, sadhu, bhikshu.
**Aparitant Yogi** A yogi free from sorrow, one who has attained sorrowless
samadhi, a sadhaka who does not tire in the practice of restraint. **Abhiggah**
Vow, a limit imposed on oneself regarding food and other things, a specific type
of rule. **Ayar-Bhanday** Tools for observing conduct - vessels, face coverings,
and cleaning materials, etc. **Ayambil** A specific type of austerity, consuming
rough food, practice of taste control. 10. **Uvvay** **Aukkhaya, Bhavakkhaya,
Thikkhaya** The decay of the karmic particles of lifespan. The end of existence,
the end of the present human, naraka, etc. states. The state of the lifespan
karma being consumed, i.e., the end of the time limit. 9. [Drishtivada is lost.]
**Iryasamiy** One who uses (discretion) in walking, coming and going, i.e., one
who walks with care and caution. The soul is aupapatik, born in the deva and
naraka realms. 11. **Ujjhiyaddhammiy** A substance that is contemptible, i.e.,
worthy of being abandoned, which has been abandoned by others. - Attaining
liberation 12. **Kaussagg** Kayotsarga, the abandonment of bodily attachment,
and the abandonment of bodily functions.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 1. 2. 4. antagaDadasA 8 vA~ aGgasUtra  /  isameM usI bhava antima zvAsocchvAsa
ke sAtha saMsAra kA anta karane vAle karane vAle - sAdhakoM ke jIvana kA varNana
hai| - 3. 5. 6. 7. aMga gaNadharapraNIta jaina AgamasAhitya  /  AcArAMga se
dRSTivAda taba bAraha aMga haiN| 8. pAribhASika zabdakoSa aNagAra jisake agAra
-- ghara - na ho, tyAgI, sAdhu, bhikSu  /  aparitaMta jogI kheda-rahita yoga
vAlA, khedazUnya-samAdhi vAlA, saMyama-sAdhanA meM na thakane vAlA sAdhaka  /
abhiggaha pratijJA, bhojana Adi lene meM padArthoM kI maryAdA bA~dhanA, vizeSa
prakAra kA niyama lenA  /  AyAra-bhaMDaya AcAra pAlane ke upakaraNa - pAtra,
mukhavastrikA aura rajoharaNa Adi  /  AyaMbila tapavizeSa, rUkSa AhAra grahaNa
karanA, svAdajaya kI sAdhanA  /  vAlA  /  10. uvavAya Aukkhaya, bhavakkhaya,
Thikkhaya Ayu-karma ke dalikoM kA kSaya  /  bhava kA kSaya, vartamAna nara,
nAraka Adi paryAya kA anta  /  bhujyamAna Ayukarma kI sthiti arthAt kAlamaryAdA
kI samApti  /  9. [ dRSTivAda lupta hai  /  ] IriyAsamiya calane-phirane meM,
Ane-jAne meM upayoga (viveka) rakhane vAlA, arthAt yatanA - sAvadhAnI se gamana
karane AtmA aupapAtika hai, deva aura nAraka bhava meM utpatti  /  11.
ujjhiyadhammiya aisA padArtha jo heya arthAt chor3ane yogya ho, jise dUsaroM ne
tyAga diyA ho  /  - mokSa prApta 12. kAussagga kAyotsarga, kAyika mamatva kA
parityAga, evaM zArIrika kriyAoM kA parityAga  /

Page #108 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Appendix - Glossary of Terms  **13. Gunarayan Tavokamma** Gunaratan Tapa.
This tapa is for 16 months, with one fast in the first month, two in the second,
and so on, increasing to 16 fasts in the 16th month.  **14. Guttabhambhayari** A
Brahmacharin monk who controls his mind, speech, and body.  **15. Chhatt** Two
fasts together, meaning abstaining from all food for two days and then eating
only once a day for the next six days, thus abstaining from food six times.
**16. Jayan-Ghadhan Jog-Charitt** Yatan - effort, exertion, discernment,
protecting beings. Ghatan - effort, endeavor, striving. Yog - union, joining. A
person with this type of character or conduct, who has exertion and endeavor.
**17. Tuv Tapa:** Wherein there is destruction of karmas, suppression of
desires.  **18. Ther** Sthavir, elder. The Agamas describe three types of
Sthavir: (1) Vayastavir - a monk who is 60 years old. (2) Pravrajyastavir - a
monk who has been initiated for 20 years. (3) Shrutastavir - a knower of the
Stananga etc.  **19. Patt - Chivar** Patra - vessel, Chivar - cloth.  **20.
Parinivvanavattiy** The performance of Kayotsarga (a posture of complete
relaxation) upon the death of a Shraman.  **21. Porisi** One watch of time. The
time of a man's shadow.  **22. Samyam** Control, restraint, suppression of the
senses, diligent abandonment of violence towards living beings etc.  **23.
Samudhan** High, low, and middle class alms, gochari.  **24. Sajjhay** Self-
study, reading and repetition of scriptures etc.  **73** Relationship.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pariziSTa -- pAribhASika zabdakoSa 13. guNarayaNa tavokamma guNaratna tapa  /
yaha tapa 16 mAsa kA hai, jisameM prathama mAsa meM eka upavAsa, dUsare meM do
aura kramazaH bar3hate 16 veM meM 16 upavAsa hote haiM  /  14. guttabaMbhayArI
mana, vacana aura kAya ko saMyata karane vAlA brahmacArI bhikSu  /  15. chaTTa
eka sAtha do upavAsa arthAt do dina saMpUrNa AhAra kA parityAga evaM agale-
pichale dina ekAzana karake chaha bAra ke bhojana Adi kA tyAga karanA  /  16.
jayaNa-ghaDaNa joga-caritta .yatana - - yatna, yatanA, viveka, prANI-rakSA
krnaa| ghaTana prayatna, udyama, puruSArtha  /  yoga milApa, jor3anA  /  jisameM
yatanA aura udyama hai, isa prakAra ke cAritra yA caritra vAlA vyakti  /  17.
tuva tapaH, 18. thera . jisameM karmoM kA kSaya hotA hai, icchAnirodha  /
sthavira, vRddha  /  Agama meM sthavira ke tIna prakAra batAye haiM (1)
vayaHsthavira 60 varSa kI Ayu vAlA bhikSu  /  (2) pravrajyAsthavira 20 varSa kI
dIkSA paryAya vAlA bhikSu  /  (3) zrutasthavira - sthAnAMga Adi kA jJAtA  /  19.
patta - cIvara pAtra - bhAjana, cIvara - 22. saMyama eka pahara kA samaya  /
puruSa pramANa chAyA-kAla  /  vastra | 20. pariNivvANavattiya zramaNoM ke deha-
tyAga ke nimitta se kAyotsarga kA kiyA jAnA  /  21. porisI 23. samudANa ucca,
24. sajjhAya - manonirodha, indriya - nigraha, yatnapUrvaka jIvahiMsAdi kA tyAga
/  , nIca aura madhyama kula kI bhikSA, gocarI  /  - svAdhyAya, zAstra kA
paThana Avartana ityAdi  /  73 - sambandha,

Page #109 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
74 Anuttaroppapatikadasha 25. Saman Shraman - Shramshil Muni, Nirgranth. 26.
Sanlehana Sanlekhana, to make the body and mind lean by austerities and to
eliminate kshaya and other mental defilements. Fasting before death, Santhara.
27. Samann-Pariyay Shramanya-paryaya, the time of sainthood, the practice of
restraint. 28. Samosaran Samavasaran, the arrival of the Tirthankara. The
meeting of 12 types of assemblies. The special creation made by the gods where
the Lord resides. 29. Sagaroavam Sagaropama, a specific time, Dasha Kodakodi
Palyopamaparimit Kala, by which the lifespan of Narakas and Devas is measured.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 74 anuttaropapAtikadazA 25. samaNa zramaNa - zramazIla muni, nirgrantha  /  26.
saMlehaNA saMlekhanA, zArIrika aura mAnasika tapa se kaSAya Adi AtmavikAroM ko
tathA kAya ko kRza krnaa| maraNa se pUrva anazana vrata, saMthArA krnaa| 27.
sAmaNNa-pariyAya zrAmaNyaparyAya, sAdhutA kA kAla, sNym-vRtti| 28. samosaraNa
samavasaraNa, tIrthaGkara kA padhAranA  /  12 prakAra kI sabhA kA milanA  /
jahAM bhagavAn virAjita hote haiM, vahAM devoM dvArA kI jAne vAlI viziSTa rcnaa|
29. sAgarovama sAgaropama, kAla vizeSa, daza koDAkoDI palyopamaparimita kAla,
jisake dvArA nArakoM aura devoM kA AyuSya nApA jAtA hai|

Page #110 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Avyaya-pada-sankalana (Collection of Indeclinable Words)  **A**  25.
**Chev** -  Exactly, precisely  **Thik hi** -  Exactly, precisely  1. 2. **De**
-  (Indeclinable particle used in various contexts)  26. **Jai** -  If, when
**Antam** -  End, termination, death  **Antiye** -  End, termination, death
**Annayā** -  Otherwise, at some other time  **Alan** -  Able, capable, complete
**Avi** -  Also, too  **Ah** -  (Indeclinable particle used in various contexts)
**Ahapajjattā** -  With ease, comfortably  **Ahapaḍirūrv** -  With ease,
comfortably  **Ahasuhā** -  With ease, comfortably  28. **Jayā** -  Which, who
29. **Jahā** -  As, like  30. **Jahānāmae** -  As named, as it is  31. **Jāmev**
-  Which, who  32. **Jāv** -  Until, as long as  33. **Jāvjjīvāe** -  As long as
life lasts  34. **Jāhe** -  When  35. **Jeṇev** -  Which, who  **Ā**  11.
**Āṇupuvvīe** -  In sequence, in order  **Jisa ora** -  Towards which, in which
direction  **Ṇ**  12. **I, iti** -  End, completion  13. **Imeyarūve** -  In
this way, thus  14. **Ucchaṁ** -  High, elevated  15. **Uḍḍe** -  Above, upwards
16. **Uppin** -  Above, upwards  36. **Ṇaṁ** -  Thus, in this way  37. **Ṇ** -
(Indeclinable particle used in various contexts)  38. **Ṇavarāṁ** -  High,
elevated  39. **Ṇāṇattāṁ** -  Knowledge, wisdom  40. **Ṇāmaṁ** -  Name  41.
**Ṇo** -  Not  **Vākyālaṁkāra** -  Figure of speech  **Nāhi** -  Not  **Viśeṣa**
-  Special, particular  **Nānātva** -  Diversity, variety  **Bhinnatā** -
Difference, distinction  **Nāma** -  Name  **Ūpara** -  Above, upwards  42.
**Tae** -  Therefore, hence  17. **Evaṁ** -  Thus, in this way  18. **Ev** -
Thus, in this way  19. **Evāmev** -  Exactly, precisely  **Taṁ jahā** -  As it
is, in this way  **Anantar** -  After, afterwards  **Vaha** -  That, he, she, it
**Tathā** -  Thus, in this way  **Usi prakar** -  In the same way  **Usi** -
The same  20. **Kai** -  How many, how much  21. **Kadāi, Kayāi** -  Sometimes,
ever  **Kahi** -  Where  23. **Kevayāṁ** -  How many, how much  44. **Taththa**
-  There, in that place  45. **Tahā** -  Thus, in this way  **Taheva** -  Thus,
in this way  47. **Tāmev** -  That, he, she, it  48. **Tik?** -  (Indeclinable
particle used in various contexts)  50. **Teṇāṁ** -  By that, by him, by her, by
it  51. **Teṇeva** -  By that, by him, by her, by it  **Ti** -  End, completion
**Samapt** -  Finished, completed  **Is prakar karake** -  By doing this, in
this way  **Us** -  That, he, she, it  **Us ora** -  Towards that, in that
direction  **Kha**  24. **Khalu** -  Certainly, indeed

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 avyaya-pada-saMkalanA a 25. ceva ThIka hI 1. 2. doe 26. jai yadi a antaM aMtie
aNNayA alaM avi aha ahApajjattaM ahApaDirUrva ahAsuhaM aura anta, avasAna, mRtyu
samIpa, pAsa anyadA, kisI samaya samartha, pUrNa bhI atha, pakSAntara, Arambha .
paryApta, kAphI yathAyogya sukha se, ArAma se 28. jayA 29. jahA 30. jahAnAmae
31. jAmeva 32. jAva 33. jAvajjIvAe 34. jAhe 35. jeNeva jisa jaba jaise
yathAnAma, jaise ki - jisa yAvat, taka jIvanaparyanta A jaba 11. ANupuvvIe
anukrama se jisa ora Na 12. i, iti 13. imeyArUve 14. uccaM 15. uDDe 16. uppiM
samApti, pUrNa 36. NaM isa prakAra 37. Na 38. NavaraM U~cA 39. NANattaM 40.
NAmaM Upara 41. No 4 4 ... 4 4 vAkyAlaMkAra nahIM vizeSa nAnAtva, bhinnatA nAma
nahIM Upara 42. tae 17. evaM 18. eva 19. evAmeva isa prakAra hI, nizcaya isI
prakAra taM jahA anantara vaha isa prakAra vahA~ tathA, usI prakAra usI prakAra
usI 20. kai 21. kadAi, kayAi kahi 23. kevaiyaM kitane kabhI kahA~ kitane 44.
tattha 45. tahA taheva 47. tAmeva 48. tika? 50. teNaM 51. teNeva ... ti samApta
isa prakAra karake usa usa ora kha 24. khalu nizcaya

Page #111 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Anuttaroppapatikadasha Far 58. Or 59. Or Alternative also, fear Special name
Same 60. Truly 61. With 62. Self 63. Everywhere 64. That Together self, by
itself Everywhere No, negation That, then And 65. Indeed, surely Certainty

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 anuttaropapAtikadazA dUra 58. vA 59. vAvi vikalpa api, bhI vizeSa nAma vahI 60.
sacceva 61. saddhiM 62. sayaM 63. savvattha 64. se sAtha svayaM, apane Apa
sarvatra nahIM, niSedha vaha, atha aura 65. hu, khalu nizcaya

Page #112 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Verb Compilation**  **To Move Around** * **Ghumana** * **Jana** * **Adhi
Adamanne Ahijj Ahijjai Ahijjitta Ahie (Adhitah)** * **Niggaya Gachch Gachchai
Gachchitta Gachchihi Gachchittae Uvagachchai Ganeez** * **Ganeezmane 10. Genh**
* **Uggindhami 11. Gil** * **Charamane 13. Char** * **Ghumana**  **To Do** *
**Kar** * **Karana** * **Karei** * **Ginna** * **Grahan Karna** * **Glani
Karna** * **Gilai** * **Grahan Karna** * **Karenti Kareh Karei Kahi Karitta
Karittae Kiccha Katte Kah Kahei Kapp Kappi Kam Nikkhamai Nikkhamitta
Padinikkhamai Padinikkhamitta Nikkhanto Veeivitta (Vi Ati Vraj) Lang Kar** *
**Chalna** * **Thaharna** * **Genhti Genhavei Kahna Padhigahitte** *
**Padhigahitta Yogya**  **To Stay** * **12. Gih**  **To Speak** *
**Padhigahitta**  **To Know** * **14. Chitt** * **Chitt'ai 15. Jan** * **Janitta
16. Joijj** * **Joijjmane 17. Tar Jana** * **Uttaranthi Avyaranthi** *
**Oyaranti 18. Duijj** * **Duijmane**  **To See** * **Janna** * **Dikhai Dena**
**To Go** * **Gati Karna** * **Gam** * **Uvagae Uvagamitta Padigaye Padigaya**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 kriyA-pada-saMkalanA ghUmanA jAnA adhyayana karanA aDa aDamANe ahija ahijjai
ahijjittA ahIe (adhItaH) niggayA gaccha gacchai gacchittA gacchihii gacchittae
uvAgacchai gaNejja gaNejjamANe 10. geNha uggiNhAmi 11. gila kara karanA karei
ginanA grahaNa karanA glAni karanA gilAi grahaNa karanA karenti kareha kArei
kAhi karittA karittae kiccA kaTTa kaha kahei kappa kappai kama nikkhamai
nikkhamittA paDinikkhamai paDinikkhamittA nikkhaMto vIIvaittA (vi ati vraja)
lAMgha kara calanA ThaharanA 12. giha geNhati geNhAvei kahanA paDigAhittate
paDigAhittA yogya 13. cara caramANe ghUmanA 14. ciTTha ciTThai 15. jANa jANittA
16. joijja joijjamANe 17. tara jAnA uttaraMti avayaraMti oyaraMti 18. dUijja
dUijamANe jAnanA dikhAI denA gati karanA gama uvAgae uvAgamittA paDigae paDigayA
ghUmanA

Page #113 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 78 Anuttaripapatikadasha  **Speaking** To speak To stay To go To be able To
be accomplished To show To tell Etc. is intended To be spoken 20. Dansas To show
35. Vay padidamse To bow, to greet To bow 36. Vas namansitta To serve (pari, up,
as) To serve 37. Vay pajjuvasai To serve To serve 23. Pannay To recognize To
recognize 38. Sanchae 24. Paoun To follow To follow 39. Sijjh 25. Pannatte
(Prajnapta) To say To say 26. Puccha To ask To ask To ask To ask 40. Samm 27.
Bhan To say To hear 41. Soccha-Shrutva Bhaniyaavam 42. Sobh To be happy To be
43. Samosadhe (Sam, Av, Srut) Bhavitta 44. Har Bhas To speak To speak To be
tired To be tired 31. Ruh To climb To climb 32. Labh To obtain To obtain 45. Ho
To hear To hear To be happy To be Various To come, to arrive To take To take To
bow 46. To take 33. Vand To bow To bow 34. Vagar To be To be To say

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 78 anuttarIpapAtikadazA bolanA rahanA jAnA sakanA siddha honA disa batalAnA
vAgarei uddissai vAgarittA 20. daMsa dikhalAnA 35. vaya paDidaMsei vayAsI
namaMsa namaskAra karanA vadAsI namasai 36. vasa namaMsittA parivasai pajjuvAsa
(pari, upa, Asa) sevA karanA 37. vaya pajjuvAsai pavvayAmi pajjuvAsittA
pavvaittA 23. pannAya pahacAnanA pavvaie pannAyaMti 38. saMcAe 24. pAuNa pAlana
karanA saMcAei pAuNittA 39. sijjha 25. paNNatte (prajJapta) kahA sijjhai 26.
puccha pUchanA sijjhaittA pucchai sijjhihii ApucchAmi sijjhisaMti ApucchittA 40.
samma 27. bhaNa kahanA nisamma (nizamya) 41. soccA-zrutvA bhANiyavvaM 42. sobha
uvasobhamANe bhavamANe 43. samosaDhe (sam, ava, sRtaH) bhavittA 44. hara bhAsa
bolanA AhArei bhAsissAmi AhArittA 30. milAya mlAna honA viharei milAyamANI
viharittA 31. ruha car3hanA viharittae 32. labha prApta karanA 45. ho sunanA
bhannai sunakara zobhita honA bhava nAnA Ae, padhAre lenA labhai hoi vandana
karanA 46. le jAnA 33. vanda vandai vandittA 34. vAgara hotthA ne, Ne neyavvA
NeyavvA kahanA

Page #114 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Word Meanings:  a - and aṇagāre - anāgāra (renouncer) aṅgass- - of the body
aṇajjhovvaṇṇe - unattached to objects aṅgāi- - body (plural) aṇāyambilṁ -
anācāṁla, a type of tapasya (austerity) antaṁ - end, death ante - near, close
aṇikkhiṭṭeṇaṁ - anikṣipta (continuous), without any antevāsi - disciple amb-
guṭṭhia - mango seed aṇujjhiya-dhammiyaṁ - useful, worth keeping ambagapeśia -
mango branch aṇuttarovavaiya-dasāṇaṁ - having the characteristics of the
Anuttaropapātika-daśā (the ninth stage of spiritual development) ambaḍaga-peśia
- mango branch akaluse - free from defilements like anger aṇega-
khambasayasannviṭuṁ - adorned with hundreds of pillars akkhayaṁ - imperishable
akkha-sutta-mālā - Rudraksha mala (rosary) aṇṇaya - anyada, at some time
agatthiya-saṅgalia - wood of the Agastik tree adīṇe - free from humility
aggahatthehiṁ - with the palms of the hands apara-jite - in the Aparajita, a
type of vimāna (flying vehicle) acchīṇa - of the eyes aparitaṁta-jogi -
tireless, constantly in samadhi ajja - Ārya (noble one) ajjhayaṇass- - of study
aparibhūa - not despised, not looked down upon ajjhayaṇa - study ajjhayaṇe - in
study apuṇarāvattaṁ - from which there is no return aṭṭha - eight appaḍihaya-
vara-nāṇa-daśaṇa-dha-reṇaṁ - having unhindered (unobstructed) supreme knowledge
and vision aṭṭhao - eight-eight aṭṭaṇhaṁ - of the eight (in relation to)
aṭṭhamaśś- - of the eighth appāṇaṁ - one's own soul aṭṭhi-camma-chiraṭṭāe -
bones, skin, and nerves appāṇeṇaṁ - by the soul aṭṭhī - bone abbhaṇuṇṇāte - upon
being commanded, upon receiving a command aṭe - meaning abbhatthite - thought
arising within aḍamaṇe - revolving abbhuggata-mussite - large and high aḍḍa -
prosperity, wealth abbhujatāe - enterprising aṇantaṁ - endless abhao -
Abhayakumāra aṇagāraṁ - to the renouncer abhaya-daeṇaṁ - one who gives
fearlessness aṇagārass - - of the renouncer - one who has renounced the world,
abandoning māyā (illusion) and mamatā (attachment) abhayass - - of Abhayakumāra
abhye - Abhayakumāra

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zabdArtha a - aura aNagAre - anagAra aMgassa- aMga kA aNajjhovavaNNe - viSayoM
meM anAsakta aMgAI-aMga (ba. vacana) aNAyaMbilaM-anAcAmla, AyaMbila nAmaka tapa
vizeSa aMtaM - anta, avasAna, mRtyu se rahita aMtie - samIpa, pAsa, najadIka
aNikkhitteNaM - anikSipta (nirantara), binA kisI aMtevAsI - ziSya bAdhA ke aMba-
guTThiyA - Ama kI guThalI aNujjhiya-dhammiyaM - upayogI, rakhane yogya
aMbagapesiyA - Ama kI phA~ka aNuttarovavAiyadasANaM- anuttaraupapAtikadazA nAma
vAle aMbADaga-pesiyA - AmrAtaka- ambAr3e kI phA~ka nauveM aMgazAstra kA akaluse
- krodha Adi kaluSoM se rahita aNega-khaMbhasayasanniviTuM- aneka saikar3oM
stambhoM se akkhayaM-kabhI nAza na hone vAlA yukta akkhasutta-mAlA - rudrAkSa kI
mAlA aNNayA - anyadA, kisI samaya agatthiya-saMgaliyA - agastika vRkSa kI
lakar3I adINe - dInatA se rahita aggahatthehiM - hAtha ke paMjoM se aparAjite -
aparAjita nAmaka anuttara vimAna meM acchINa - A~khoM kA aparitaMtajogI -
avizrAnta arthAt nirantara ajja - Arya samAdhi-yukta ajjhayaNassa- adhyayana kA
aparibhUA - atiraskRta, nIcA na dekhane vAlI ajjhayaNa - adhyayana ajjhayaNe -
adhyayana apuNarAvattayaM - jisase vApisa na lauTanA par3e aTTha-ATha
appaDihaya-vara-nANa-dasaNa-dhareNaM - apratihata aTThao-ATha-ATha (vighna-bAdhA
se rahita) zreSTha jJAna aura darzana aTThaNhaM - ATha ke (viSaya meM) ko
dhAraNa karane vAle aTThamassa-AThaveM kA appANaM - apane AtmA ko aTThi-camma-
chirattAe - haDDI, camar3A aura nasoM se appANeNaM - AtmA se aTThI- asthi, haDDI
abbhaNuNNAte - AjJA hone para, AjJA mila jAne para aTe- artha abbhatthite -
andara utpanna huA vicAra aDamANe-ghUmatA huA abbhuggata-mussite - bar3e aura
U~ce aDDA - samRddhA, aizvarya vAlI abbhujatAe - udyama vAlI aNaMtaM - anta
rahita abhao - abhayakumAra aNagAraM - anagAra ko abhaya-daeNaM - abhaya dene
vAle aNagArassa - anagAra - mAyA-mamatA ko chor3akara abhayassa - abhayakumAra
kA ghara kA tyAga karane vAle sAdhu ko abhaye - abhayakumAra

Page #115 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 80 Anuttaraupapatikadasha Ayahiṇam-Ādakṣiṇa Ayahiṇam-Pāyāhiṇam - Starting
from the south direction Hui Pradakṣiṇā Spādāṇā Abhiggaham - The limit of making
vows, taking food, etc. Bāndhanā Amucchite - Without any desire. Anāsakta
Ammayam - Mother to Ayam - This Ayalam - Immovable, stable Aruyam - Free from
disease, ailment Alam - Complete Alattaga-Guliya- Mahendi (Mahāvar) nodules
Avakankhanati – Want Avi - Also Avimaṇe-Without a sorrowful mind Avisādī -
Without sorrow (regret) Avvābāham - Free from obstacles Asansatṭha- Without full
hands Asi-Is Ah(ham)-I Ah - Ath, an indeclinable word indicating a change of
side or beginning Ahā-Pajjattam - As needed Ahāpaḍirūvam - As appropriate,
proper Ahāsuham - According to happiness Ahijjati - Studies Ahie - Read, learned
Ahiṇ - Free from inferiority, complete Aigareṇam- The one who starts Aillāṇam -
Of the beginning, of the first Aukkhaeṇam - Due to the decay of life Āṇupuvvīe –
In sequence Āpucchai (ti) — Asks, asks Āpucchaṇam- Asking Āpucchāmi-I ask
Āyambilam- A type of penance Āyambila-Pariggahieṇam - Taken by the method of
Āyambila penance Āyave - In the sun Āyār-Bhaṇḍae - Instruments for observing
restraint Āraṇṇaccuae - Āraṇ- Eleventh heaven, Acyuta-Twelfth heaven Āharati –
Eats Āhāram - Food Āhāreti – Eats Āhite - It has been said I- Iti, an
indeclinable word indicating introduction or ending Ingāl-Sagḍiyā – Wagon of
cuckoos Indabhūti-Pāmokkhāṇam – In Indrabhūti etc. Icchāmi – I want Iti - An
indeclinable word indicating ending, introductory indeclinable word Ibhavar-
Kannagāṇam - Of the daughters of wealthy, noble people Imāsin - In these Ime-
These Imeṇam - By this Imeyārūve- Of this type Isidāse - Ṛṣidāsa Kumāra Īriyā-
Samite – One who walks with effort, with care Ukkameṇam - In reverse order, from
bottom to top Ukkhevao- Objection, taking the meaning of unsaid sentences from
later sentences Ugghaham - Respect, honor, worship, etc. Ucca.- (Ucca-Majjhama-
Niya) High, medium and Low kalas from Uccatṭhavṇate – A special vessel with a
high neck Ujjāṇāto- From the garden, from the orchard Ujjāṇe – Garden, orchard
Ujjhiya-Dhammīyam-Useless, fit to be thrown away Uṭṭ-Pāda - Camel's foot
Uṭṭhāṇam- Lips

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 80 anuttaraupapAtikadazA AyAhiNaM-AdakSiNa AyAhiNaM-pAyAhiNaM - dakSiNa dizA se
Arambha kI huI pradakSiNA SPAdANA abhiggahaM - pratijJA, AhAra Adi karane kI
maryAdA bA~dhanA amucchite -binA kisI lAlasA ke. anAsakta ammayaM -mAtA ko ayaM
- yaha ayalaM - acala, sthira aruyaM - Adhi vyAdhi se rahita alaM - pUrNa
alattaga-guliyA- maheMdI (mahAvara) kI gaTikA avakaMkhaMti - cAhate haiM avi -
bhI avimaNe-binA duHkhita citta ke avisAdI - binA viSAda (kheda) ke avvAbAhaM
-bAdhA se rahita asaMsaTTha- binA bhare hAthoM se asi-hai aha(haM)-maiM aha -
atha, pakSAntara yA prArambha sUcaka avyaya ahA-pajjattaM - AvazyakatAnusAra
ahApaDirUvaM - yathAyogya, ucita ahAsuhaM - sukha ke anusAra ahijjati -
adhyayana karatA hai ahIe - paThita, sIkhA ahINa - hInatArahita, pUrA AigareNaM-
prArambha karane vAle AillANaM - Adi ke, pahale ke AukkhaeNaM - Ayu ke kSaya
hone se ANupuvvIe - anukrama se Apucchai (ti) -- pUchatA hai, pUchatI hai
ApucchaNaM- pUchanA ApucchAmi-pUchatA hU~ AyaMbilaM- eka prakAra kA tapa
AyaMbila-pariggahieNaM - AyaMbila tapa kI rIti se grahaNa kiyA huA Ayave - dhUpa
meM AyAra-bhaMDae - saMyama pAlane ke upakaraNa AraNNaccue - AraNa- gyArahavAM
devaloka, acyuta-bArahavAM devaloka Aharati - AhAra karatA hai AhAraM - bhojana
AhAreti - bhojana karatA hai Ahite - kahA gayA hai i- iti, paricaya yA samApti-
sUcaka avyaya iMgAla-sagaDiyA - koyaloM kI gAr3I iMdabhUti-pAmokkhANaM -
indrabhUti Adi meM icchAmi - cAhatA hU~ iti -samApti-bodhaka-avyaya,
paricayAtmaka avyaya ibbhavara-kannagANaM - dhanI zreSThiyoM kI kanyAoM kA
imAsiM - inameM ime-ye imeNaM - isase imeyArUve- isa prakAra ke isidAse -
RSidAsakumAra IriyA-samite - IryAsamiti vAlA, yatnAcArapUrvaka calane vAlA
ukkameNaM - utkrama se, ulTe krama se nIce se Upara ukkhevao- AkSepa, na kahe
hue vAkyoM kA pIche ke vAkyoM se grahaNa karanA uggahaM - avagraha, sammAna,
pUjA Adi ucca.- (ucca-majjhama-nIya) ucca, madhyama aura nIca kaloM se
uccaTThavaNate - U~ce gale kA pAtra vizeSa ujjANAto- udyAna se, bagIce se ujjANe
- udyAna, bagIcA ujjhiya-dhammiyaM-nirupayogI, pheMka dene yogya uTTa-pAda -U~Ta
kA paira uTThANaM- oThoM kI

Page #116 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Appendix - Udduṁ – High, they in the summer udaram. Stomach — - - Meaning Udara-
Bhayan Udara- Bhayanenaṁ - Ūrussa Ūrū - Udara- Bhayanassa Uppi — Above Ubbaḍ -
Ghaṭāmukhe – Like the mouth of a pot, fierce Gone are - - Mouth-like Ummuka-
Bālhabhāvaṁ • Having crossed childhood, one who has passed childhood Uyaranti -
Ura- Kaḍga - Desa - Bhāyeṇaṁ Chaṭāī ke Vibhāgōṁ se • Descend - Chest (chest)
like Ura- Kaḍyassa – Chest-like mat Uvayāli - Upajālikumāra Uvvajjhihinti - Will
be born Uaaṇe, Ne - Born Upapāta, Origin Uvavāyo Uvasobhemāṇe Uvāgachchati •
Comes - Uvāgave – Came Uvvūḍ - Yaṇakōse - Whose eyes are sunken inward - -
Udara-Bhājana, - From Udara-Bhājana Udara Bhājana ki - - - Shining Stomach-like
vessel - Of the thighs - Both thighs Asiṁ - About them, their - Eleven
Ekkārasaegadivaseṇaṁ Evaṁ Isa Yāve - Evaṁ - Thus Eva – Only, an indeclinable
word indicating certainty Evāmeva – In the same way Eṣaṇāe In one day • This
kind of - Eṣaṇā - Samiti – By the use of food, etc. Oyaranti Orāleṇaṁ Kai – How
many - The thigh of the bird called Kank - Kank- Jaṅghā Kampana-Vātiyo - A
person suffering from the disease of trembling air Kaṭṭha-Kolambaē – Wooden
Kolomb - Kaṭṭha- Pāṭhayā- - Wooden sandals Kaḍikaḍāheṇaṁ. - Kaṭi (waist) like
Kaṭāhi ne Kaḍipattassa - - Kaṭi-patra ki, waist ki - Special vessel - - Descend
Karenti Kareti Kareha - Generous Kaṇṇa - Ear Kaṇṇāṇaṁ Kaṇhō Katare . Which one -
Kadāti - Sometimes, perhaps Kannavali Kappati Kappe — - Of the ears - Krishna
Vasudeva - A row of ear ornaments – Is fit, is suitable — - Kalpa, the Sudharma
- etc. airplanes of the celestial beings Chief - Kaya-Lakkhaṇa - Successful sign
Kayai (ti) — Perhaps, sometimes Karga - Gīvā - Karve (small earthen vessel) ki
Grīvā i.e. neck - - Do - Does - Do Kala - Sangaliya Kalātō – Arts Kalāya -
Sangaliya Kahiṁ—Kahaṁ Kaheti - ८१ - Kalāya - A special kind of grain pod •
Kalāya pod - Says Kaussaggṁ - Kāyotsarga, Dharma-Dhyāna Kākaṁ (gaṁ) Dī - The
city of Kākandi Kākajāṅghā - - Crow's thigh, a special medicine called Kāka-
Jaṅghā Kāgandi - In the city of Kākandi

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pariziSTa - uDDuM - U~ce unhe garmI meM udaraM . peTa -- - - zabdArtha udara-
bhAyaNa udara- bhAyaNeNaM - Urussa UrU - udara- bhAyaNassa uppi -- Upara ubbhaDa
- ghaTAmuhe - ghar3e ke mukha ke samAna vikarAla gaI haiM - - mukha vAlA ummuka-
bAlabhAvaM * bAlakapana se atikrAnta, jisane bacapana pAra kiyA ho uyaraMti -
ura- kaDaga - desa - bhAeNaM caTAI ke vibhAgoM se * utarate haiM - vakSasthala
(chAtI) rUpI ura- kaDayassa - chAtI rUpI caTAI kI uvayAli - upajAlikumAra
uvavajjihiMti - utpanna hoMge uaaNe, ne - utpanna huA upapAta, utpatti uvavAyo
uvasobhemANe uvAgacchati * AtA hai - uvAgave - AyA uvvuDa - yaNakose - jisakI
A~kheM bhItara dha~sa - - udara-bhAjana, - udara-bhAjana se udara bhAjana kI - -
- zobhAyamAna hotA huA peTa rUpI pAtra - UruoM kA - donoM UrU eesiM - inake
viSaya meM, inakA - gyAraha ekkArasaegadivaseNaM evaM isa yAve - evaM - isa
prakAra eva - hI, nizcayArtha bodhaka avyaya evAmeva - isI prakAra esaNAe eka hI
dina meM * isa prakAra kA - eSaNA - samiti - upayogapUrvaka AhAra Adi kI
gaveSaNA se oyaraMti orAleNaM kai - kitane - kaGka nAmaka pakSI kI jaMghA -
kaMka- jaMghA kaMpaNa-vAtiyo - kampanavAyu ke roga vAlA vyakti kaTTha-kolaMbae -
lakar3I kA kolaMba - kaTTha- pAThayA- - lakar3I kI khar3AU~ kaDikaDAheNaM. -
kaTi (kamara) rUpI kaTAhI ne kaDipattassa - - kaTi-patra kI, kamara kI - pAtra
vizeSa - - utarate haiM kareMti kareti kareha - udAra kaNNa - kAna kaNNANaM
kaNho katare . kaunasA - kadAti - kabhI, kadAcit kannAvalI kappati kappe -- -
kAnoM kI - kRSNa vAsudeva - kAna ke bhUSaNoM kI paMkti - kalpatA hai, yogya hai
-- - kalpa, vaimAnika devoM ke saudharma - Adi vimAna pradhAna - kaya-lakkhaNa -
saphala lakSaNa vAlA kayAi (ti) -- kadAcit, kabhI karaga - gIvA - karave (miTTI
ke choTe-se pAtra) kI grIvA arthAt galA - - karate haiM - karatA hai - karo kala
- saMgaliyA kalAto - kalAe~ kalAya - saMgaliyA kahiM--kahA~ kaheti - 81 - kalAya
- dhAnya vizeSa kI phalI * kalAya kI phalI - kahatA hai kAussaggaM - kAyotsarga,
dharmadhyAna kAkaM (gaM) dI - kAkandI nAma kI nagarI kAkajaMghA - - kauve kI
jA~gha, kAka- jaMghA nAmaka auSadhi vizeSa kAgaMdI - kAkandI nagarI meM

Page #117 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 82 Anuttaraupapatikadasha Kayandiyo - Kakandī nagarī se Kāreti - causes
Karallay - Challiya - Bitter gourd peel 1. Kālam - time, period 2. Kālam - death
(from) Kāla-gate - attained death Kālagayam - attained death Kāla-māse - at the
time of death Kāli-porā - Kāli - a particular type of plant Perv (Sandhi-sthān)
Kāleṇam - by time, by period (in) Kāhiti - will do Kicchā - by doing Kuṇḍiyā-
gīvā - the neck of a Kamandalu Kumāre - Kumāra's - which Keṇṭeṇ - for what
reason Kevatiyam - how many Koṇito - Koṇika king Khandao (to) - Skandaka
Sannyasi Khandag-vattavvyā - Skandaka related statement Khandayass - Skandaka
Sannyasi's Khalu - certainly Khir - dhāti - milk-feeding nurse Ganga - tarang -
bhūeṇam - like the waves of the Ganga Gachchati - goes Gachchihiti - will go
Gaṇij-mālā - counting mala Gaṇejj-māṇehim - counted Gate - gone Gāmanugāmam -
from one village to another Gilāti - feels sorrow, is distressed Gīvāe - of the
neck, of the throat Guṇarayaṇ - Guṇaratna named tapas Guṇasilae (te) - Guṇ-śila
named garden Gūḍhadante - Gūḍhadantkumāra Geṇhanti - take Geṇhāveti - causes to
take (s/he) Gevejjavimānapatthade - Graiveyak devās' dwelling place from the
boundary part Gotampuccha - Gautama's questioning Gautamasāmī - Gautama Swami,
Śrī Mahāvīra Swami the main disciple Got(ya)mā - he Gautama! Gotame - Gautama
Swami Goyame - Gautama Swami Golāvalī - a type of round stones' row Chaudasanh -
fourteen's Chandim - Chandravimāna Chandimā - Chandrikākumāra Chakkhudaeṇam -
giving knowledge-eye Chammchchhirattāe - due to skin and veins Chare māṇe -
walking, roaming Chalantehi - walking, moving Chintaṇā - Dharmacinta Chintā -
thought Chitthati - is situated, stays, remains Chitta-katare - below the cow's
grazing pond part Chetiye (te) - Chaitya, garden, orchard Chellaṇāe - Chellaṇā
rānī's Chev - this, rightly Chōdasanh - fourteen's Chhatuṃchhade - sixth sixth
tapas from, time to time Chhatthasvi - on the sixth (devotee) also
Chhattachāmarāto - by umbrella and chamaras Chhamāsā - six months Chinnā -
broken Jan - which Janghāṇam - of the thighs Jambum - Jambūsvāmī to

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 82 anuttaraupapAtikadazA kAyaMdIo - kAkandI nagarI se kAreti -karavAtA hai
kArallaya-challiyA- karele kA chilakA 1. kAlaM-kAla, samaya 2. kAlaM - mRtyu
(se) kAla-gate-mRtyu ko prApta kAlagayaM - mRtyu ko prApta hue ko kAla-mAse -
mRtyu ke samaya kAli-porA - kAli - vanaspati vizeSa kA parva (sandhi-sthAna)
kAleNaM- kAla se, samaya se (meM) kAhiti-karegA kiccA - karake kuMDiyA-gIvA -
kamaNDalu kA galA kumAre - kumAra ke-kaunasA keNaTeNa - kisa kAraNa kevatiyaM-
kitane koNito-koNika rAjA khaMdao (to)- skandaka saMnyAsI khaMdaga-vattavvayA-
skandaka sambandhI kathana khaMdayassa-skandaka saMnyAsI kA khalu -nizcaya se
khIra-dhAtI - dUdha pilAne vAlI dhAya gaMgA-taraMga-bhUeNaM-gaMgA kI taraMgoM ke
samAna hue gacchati - jAtA hai gacchihiti-jAegA gaNija-mAlA - ginatI karane kI
mAlA gaNejja-mANehiM - gine jAte hue gate- gayA gAmAnugAmaM - eka gA~va se
dUsare gA~va gilAti - kheda mAnatA hai, duHkhita hotA hai gIvAe - grIvA kI,
gardana kI guNarayaNa - guNaratna nAmaka tapa guNasilae (te) - guNa-zila nAmaka
udyAna gUDhadaMte - gUDhadantakumAra geNhaMti - grahaNa karate haiM geNhAveti-
grahaNa karAtA (tI) hai gevejjavimANapatthaDe-graiveyaka devoM ke nivAsa-sthAna
ke prAnta bhAga se gotamapucchA - gautama kA pUchanA gautamasAmI - gautama
svAmI, zrI mahAvIra svAmI ke mukhya ziSya gota(ya)mA-he gautama ! gotame -
gautama svAmI goyame - gautama svAmI golAvalI- eka prakAra ke gola pattharoM kI
paMkti caudasaNhaM -caudaha kA caMdima-candravimAna caMdimA-candrikAkumAra
cakkhudaeNaM- jJAnacakSu pradAna karane vAle cammacchirattAe-camar3A aura zirAoM
ke kAraNa caremANe - calate hue, vihAra karate hue calaMtehi calate hue, hilate
hue ciMtaNA-dharmacintA ciMtA-cintA ciTThati - sthita hai, rahatA hai, rahatI
hai citta-kaTare - gau ke carane ke kuNDa ke nIce kA hissA cetie (te)- caitya,
udyAna, bagIcA cellaNAe-cellaNA rAnI ke ceva - hI, ThIka hI codasaNhaM -caudaha
kA chaTuMchaDe - SaSTha SaSTha tapa se, bele-bele chaTThassavi - chaThe (bhakta)
para bhI chattacAmarAto- chatra aura cAmaroM se chamAsA- chaH mahIne chinnA-
tor3I huI jaM- jisa jaMghANaM-jaMghAoM kA jaMbuM- jambUsvAmI ko

Page #118 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Appendix - Glossary 83 Jambu - Jambu Swami, the main disciple of Sudharma Swami
Jenev - towards Jananio - mothers Joijjamanhehin - visible Janavayvihar - in the
country Vihar Than - place Jdha - like Thiti - position Jamali - Jamalikumar
Dhenalia - thigh - Dhenik bird's thigh Jamm - birth Dhenaliapora - Dhenik bird's
joint Jammjivifale - fruit of birth and life N - no, negative particle Jayante -
in Jayant Vimana Nagari - city Jayanghardanjogcharitte - Jayan (effort in
acquired yogas) Nagarie - in the city (from) Ghatan (effort to acquire
unacquired yogas) and Nagari to - from the city Yog (restraint of mind etc.
senses) with Nagare - city character Namansati - salutes Jargg-Ovanha - dry shoe
Navaran - special - indicative particle Jargg-pad - old bull's foot (hoof)
Nanatt - diversity, difference Jaha - like, as Naam - name Jahaaname (te) -
Yatha-named, anything named Naam - named Ja - like Nikkhanto - came out, became
a monk after leaving household life Janeen - knowing Gaya Januun - knowing
Nikkhaman - exit, becoming a monk Janeta - knowing Niggata (ya) - came out -
child Niggate - came out - became Niggato (o) - came out - which Nimmans -
meatless Jali - Jali to the homeless No - no. Negative particle Jali - Jalikumar
Tae - thereafter Jalis - Jali's Tao - three Jalikumaro - Jalikumar Tan - that
Javjjivae - for life Tan Jaha - like Jahe - when Tacchas - third Jinen - Jin who
has completely conquered anger and hatred Tate - thereafter Bhagwan Tato -
thereafter Jiyasattu - Jitshatru king Tarunae (te) - tender Jibbaae - tongue's,
tongue's Tarungae Lalue - tender Aal Jiven - by the power of the soul Tarung -
Lauae - tender Tumba Jiha - tongue, tongue Tarunika - small, tender

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pariziSTa - zabdArtha 83 jaMbU - jambUsvAmI, sudharmAsvAmI ke mukhya ziSya
jeNeva - jisa ora jaNaNIo - mAtAe~ joijjamANehiM - dikhAI detI huI
jaNavayavihAra - deza meM vihAra ThANaM-sthAna ko jadhA- jaise ThitI-sthiti
jamAli - jamAlikumAra DheNAliyA-jaMghA - DheNika pakSI kI jaMghA jamma-janma
DheNAliyAporA-DheNika pakSI ke sandhisthAna jammajIviyaphale - janma aura jIvana
kA phala Na-nahIM, niSedhArthaka avyaya jayaMte - jayanta vimAna meM NagarI-
nagarI jayaNaghaDaNajogacaritte - jayana (prApta yogoM meM udyama) NagarIe -
nagarI meM (se) ghaTana (aprApta yogoM kI prApti kA udyama) aura NagarIto-nagarI
se yoga (mana Adi indriyoM ke saMyama) se yukta Nagare-nagara caritra vAlA
NamaMsati - namaskAra karatA hai jaragga-ovANahA- sUkhI jUtI NavaraM-vizeSatA-
bodhaka avyaya jaragga-pAda - bUr3he baila kA paira (khura) NANattaM-nAnAtva,
bhinnatA jahA- jaisA, jaise NAma-nAma jahANAmae (te)-yathA-nAmaka, kucha bhI
nAma vAlANAma-nAma vAlA jA- jaisI NikkhaMto- nikalA, gRhasthI chor3akara dIkSita
ho jANaeNaM-jAnane vAle gayA jANUNaM- jAnuoM kA NikkhamaNaM-niSkramaNa, dIkSA
honA jANettA-jAnakara NiggatA (yA)-nikalI jAte- bAlaka Niggate - nikalA jAte-ho
gayA Niggato (o)-nikalA jAmeva -jisa NimmaMsa-mAMsa-rahita jAlI-jAli anagAra ko
No-nahIM. niSedhArthaka avyaya jAli - jAlikumAra tae - isake anantara jAlissa -
jAli kI tao-tIna jAlIkumAro- jAlikumAra taM -usa jAvajjIvAe - jIvanaparyanta taM
jahA-- jaise jAhe - jaba taccassa - tIsare jiNeNaM - rAga-dveSa ko sarvathA
jItane vAle jina tate - isake anantara bhagavAn ne tato - isake anantara
jiyasattuM - jitazatru rAjA ne tattha-vahAM jiyasattU - jitazatru nAma kA rAjA
taruNae (te)-komala jibbhAe -jihvA kI, jIbha kI taruNagaelAlue-komala Ala jIveNa
- jIva kI zakti se taruNaga-lAue-komala tumbA jIhA-jihvA, jIbha taruNikA-choTI,
komala

Page #119 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
84 tava - - your tava tey - Siri tava - ruv-lavanne tavasa - - by tapas — tavo-
kammam tavo-kammenaṁ - tassa - - his taha - in the same way taha-ruvaṇam. - -
Sadhus endowed with virtues • By the wealth of tapas and tejas - - tapas kriya
taheva - in the same way - by tapas-karma - tae – that tao that tameva that
taraeṇam- - those who liberate others taliyant-patte ti – ti kattu - by doing
this tinni - tikkhutto – three times - three tinham - three's titthagareṇam
teṇadveṇam. teneva - tetiśam teras - . thirteen - - beauty born of tapas -
tatha-rupa, described in the scriptures - palm tree - iti ending or introductory
adverb - - teeṇam – by tejas - teṇam by that dvara tineṇam - crossed the ocean
of samsara tise him • by you tubbheṇam you - of the one who established the four
tirthas in the same direction - tetiś leaves of the palm tree for this reason
terashavi - thirteen - - terasame – thirteenth terasavi - thirteen's - tesim-
their to - then tti - iti - thavaccaputtassa – son of Thavaccaputra, son of
Thavacca, a gathapattini who took initiation with a thousand men thavaccaputto.
thasayavali – row of mirrors - Thavaccaputra thera - sthavira Bhagavan theranam.
therehiṁ - das - dasame dasamo dao - sthavira Bhagavants - of the sthaviras (by)
· ten - tenth, dasham - - - - dasham, tenth - dowry - darae balak darayam dinna
- given divasam - day disam-direction dihadante – dirghadantkumar - - dihaseṇe –
dirghaseṇakumar dumaseṇe dume - drumkumar - drumasen - child - duruhanți –
ascend, climb - ascends, climbs duruhati - duram – far devassa - of the deva
anuttarīpapapātikadaśā - in the form of a deva devattae - deva- logao – from the
devaloka devāppiyaṇam – beloved of the devas (you) devāppiya – beloved of the
devas (you) - devi – queen, consort deve – deva -

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 84 tava - - terA tava teya - sirIe tava - rUva-lAvanne tavasA - - tapa se
taveNaM * tapa se -- tavo-kammaM tavo-kammeNaM - tassa - - usakA tahA - usI
taraha tahA-rUvANaM. - - guNoM se yukta sAdhuoM kA * tapa aura teja kI lakSmI se
- - tapaHkriyA taheva - usI prakAra - tapa-karma se - tAe - usa tAo usa tAmeva
usI tAraeNaM- - dUsaroM ko tArane vAle tAliyaMTa-patte ti - ti kaTTu - isa
prakAra karake tiNNi - tikkhutto - tIna bAra - tIna tinhaM - tIna kA
titthagareNaM teNadveNaM. teNeva - tettIsaM terasa - . teraha - - tapa ke kAraNa
utpanna huI sundaratA -tathA-rUpa, zAstroM meM varNana kiye hue - tAr3a - iti
samApti yA paricayabodhaka avyaya - - teeNaM - teja se - teNaM usa dvArA tineNaM
-saMsAra sAgara se pAra hue tIse use * Apa se tubbheNaM tuma - cAra tIrthoM kI
sthApanA karane vAle ke usI ora - tetIsa ke patte kA paMkhA isa kAraNa
terasahavi - terahoM ko - - terasame - terahavA~ terasavi - teraha kI - tesiM-
unake to - to tti - iti - thAvaccAputtassa - thAvaccAputra kI, thAvaccA nAmaka
gAthApatnI kA putra, jisane eka sahasra manuSyoM ke sAtha dIkSA lI
thAvaccAputto. thAsayAvalI - darpaNoM (ArasiyoM) kI paMkti - thAvaccAputra therA
- sthavira bhagavAn therANaM. therehiM - dasa - dasame dasamo dAo - sthavira
bhagavantoM kA - sthaviroM ke (se) * daza - dazavA~, dazama - - - - dazama,
dazavA~ - daheja - dArae bAlaka dArayaM dinnA - dI huI divasaM - dina disaM-dizA
ko dIhadaMte - dIrghadantakumAra - - dIhaseNe - dIrghasenakumAra dumaseNe dume -
drumakumAra - drumasena - bAlaka ko - durUhaMti - ArohaNa karate haiM, car3hate
haiM - ArohaNa karatA hai, car3hatA hai durUhati - dUraM - dUra devassa - deva
kI anuttarIpapAtikadazA - deva-rUpa se devattAe - deva- logAo - devaloka se
devAppiyANaM - devoM ke priya (Apa) kA devAppiyA - devoM ke priya (tuma) - devI
- rAja- mahiSI, paTarAnI deve - deva -

Page #120 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Appendix-Glossary  Doccasssa - other Pancha-dhaati-pariggahita - taken by five
dhatis Donhan-do ka - of two Doni-do ka - of two Pagati-bhaeae - of good, gentle
nature from prakriti Dhannssa - of the blessed Kumar or the blessed Anugara
Paggahiyaa - accepted, taken Dhanne (nne) - blessed Kumar or Anugara Pajjuvasati
- serves Dhanne - blessed Padigeae - went away Dhanno (no) - blessed Anugara
Padig'o - went away Dhan - blessed Kumar Padigata - went away Dhannssa - blessed
Kumar or Anugara Padigaya - went away Dhamma-kaha - dharma-katha Padig'aheti -
takes Dhamma-jagariyam - dharma-jagaran Padiggahittate - to take Dhamma-daenam -
giver of dharma in the form of shruti and charitra Padinikkhmati - comes out
Dhamma-desae'nam - preacher of dharma Padidanseti - shows Dhamma-var-chaurant-
chakkavatti'na - the best dharma ruling in all four directions Padibandha -
restriction, obstacle, delay Padham-chhatth-kkhaman-paranganssi - first sixth
vrata (bele) chakravarti Dharini - queen of the Shrenik king Padhamssa - first
Dharini-su'a - Dharini Devi Padhamae - first Nandadevi - queen with this name
Padhame - first (study) Nagari - city Pann'aga-bhueten'nam - like a serpent
Nagari'e - in the city Pann'a (n) tta - have been expounded Nagare - city Pann'a
(tr) tte - has been expounded, said Nav - nine Pann'a (na) yanti - are
recognized Navan'han - nine Patta-chivara'i - vessels and clothes Navan'havi -
nine Payyay'a'e - with great effort Navamssa - ninth Parinivvan'a-vattiyam -
done in the context of death Nav-mas-pariyato - nine months of restraint Navame
- ninth Pariyato - state of restraint or sadhu-vrutti Navamo - ninth Parivasai
(ti) - stays (was) Navaran - special-indicating adverb Paris'a - parishad, group
of listeners Nama - name Palas-patte - palas (dhaak) leaf Nasa'e - of the nose
Pavvai (ti) te - became a monk Nissamma - listening attentively Pavvay'ami - I
have become a monk, I take initiation Pancha - five Pavvay'a-vadan-kamale -
whose mouth-lotus Panchan'han - five Murjha gaya ho - has withered Pancha-
dhaati-parikkhitto - surrounded by five dhatis Pau'nitta - nurture

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pariziSTa-zabdArtha doccassa - dUsare paMca-dhAti-pariggahita - pA~ca dhAiyoM
dvArA grahaNa doNhaM-do kA kiyA huA doni-do kA pagati-bhahae - prakati se
bhadra.saumya svabhAva vAlA dhaNNassa-dhanyakumAra yA dhanya anagAra kA
paggahiyAe - grahaNa kI huI, svIkAra kI huI dhaNNe (nne)-dhanya kumAra yA
anagAra pajjuvAsati-sevA karatA hai dhaNNe -dhanya hai paDigae-calA gayA dhaNNo
(no)-dhanya anagAra paDigao-calA gayA dhanna-dhanyakumAra kA nAma paDigatA -
calI gaI dhannassa-dhanya kumAra yA anagAra kA paDigayA-calI gaI dhamma-kahA-
dharma-kathA paDigAheti - grahaNa karatA hai dhamma-jAgariyaM-dharma-jAgaraNa
paDiggahittate - grahaNa karane ke lie dhamma-daeNaM-zruta aura cAritra rUpa
dharma dene vAle paDiNikkhamati - bAhara nikalatA hai dhamma-desaeNaM-dharma kA
upadeza karane vAle paDidaMseti-dikhAtA hai dhamma-vara-cAuraMta-cakkavaTTiNA-
uttama cAroM dizAoM paDibaMdha - pratibandha, vighna, derI para akhaMDa zAsana
karane vAle uttama dharma ke paDhama-chaTTha-kkhamaNa-pAraNagaMsi-pahale SaSTha
vrata (bele) cakravartI ke pAraNe meM dhAriNI-zreNika rAjA kI eka rAnI
paDhamassa - pahale dhAriNI-suA-dhAriNI devI ke putra paDhamAe - pahalI
naMdAdevI - isa nAma vAlI rAnI paDhame- pahale (adhyayana) meM nagarI-nagarI
paNNaga-bhUteNaM-sarpa ke samAna nagarIe-nagarI meM paNNa (na) ttA - pratipAdana
kiye haiM nagare-nagara paNNa (tra) tte - pratipAdana kiyA hai, kahA hai nava-
nau paNNA (nA) yaMti - pahacAne jAte haiM navaNhaM-nau kI patta-cIvarAI-pAtroM
aura vastroM ko navaNhavi-nauvoM kI payayayAe - adhika yatna vAlI navamassa-
nauveM kA parinivvANa-vattiyaM - mRtyu ke upalakSya meM kiyA nava-mAsa-pariyAto-
nau mahIne kI saMyamavRtti jAne vAlA navame-nauvA~ pariyAto - saMyama avasthA yA
sAdhu-vRtti navamo-nauvA~ parivasai (ti)- rahatA hai (thI) navaraM - vizeSatA-
sUcaka avyaya parisA-pariSad, zrotR-samUha nAma-nAma vAlA palAsa-patte-palAza
(DhAka) kA pattA nAsAe - nAsikA kI, nAka kI pavvai(ti)te - pravrajita huA
nisamma - dhyAnapUrvaka sunakara pavvayAmi - pravajita huA hU~, dIkSA grahaNa
karatA hU~ paMca-pA~ca pavvAya-vadaNa-kamale-jisakA mukha-kamala paMcaNhaM -
pA~ca kA murajhA gayA ho paMca-dhAti-parikkhitto- pA~ca dhAiyoM se ghirA huA
pAuNittA - pAlana kara

Page #121 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
86 Pabbhute Appeared Paansuli - Kadaehin . - From the row of ribs Paansuliya-
Kadaaṇam - - The joints of the bones (bones) of the sides   Paaṇam - Water
Paaṇavali Paaṇi – Hand Paat - Janghorunaa – Foot, shin and thighs from Paadaaṇam
- Of the feet Paaṇ - - A row of a type of vessels - Paabhaatiya-Taariga •
Morning star Paayanguliyaanam - Of the toes Paay - Chaareṇam. - By walking Paaya
- Foot - - - - Paaraṇayansi Paaraṇ to do, in Paaraṇaa Paasaayavaḍiṁ(ḍeṁ)sae (te)
In the best palace Also Pi Piṭṭhi - Karanḍaga- Sandhihin - - The joints of the
back-Karanḍaka (of the elevated regions of the back) Piṭṭhi - Karanḍayaaṇam
regions of - - The elevated regions of the bones of the back - Piṭṭhi -
Mavassieeṇam. - Joined with the back - Piṭṭhimaaiyaa - Pṛṣṭhimaatṛkakumaar -
Pitaa (yaa) - Father - Asks Pucchati Poṭṭhile – Poṣṭillkumaar Putte - – Son
Punnaseṇe – Puṇyaseṇakumaar Purisaseṇe – Puruṣaseṇakumaar -
Puvvarattaavarattkaalasamayansi - - In the time of midnight - - In midnight
Puvvarattaavarattkaale Puvvaaṇupuvvīe- In order Peḍaalputte - Peḍaalputrakumaar
Pellae – Pellakkumaar Porisiie – Paurauṣī, Prahar day or night's fourth part
Anuttaripapaatikadaśaa Fuṭṭantehin - With the sound of Mṛdaṅga etc. instruments
being played loudly Naad se yukta - Brahmacārī Bhambhayarī - Battisam - Thirty-
two Battisaae - Battisaao - Thirty-two - Thirty-two - Baddhisaga - Chiddḍe –
Hole of the instrument called Baddhisaka Bahve. - Many Bahiya - - Outside Bahū
Baaras - Twelve Baalatṭaṇam Baavattaram - Seventy-two Baahaanam Bhattaṁ - Much
Bhaddam - Of the arms Bahaaya - Sangaliya - Fruit of the tree called Bahaya
Bilamiv . Like a hole - Bīṇaa - Chiddḍe - Hole of the Veena Buddheṇam – Buddha,
knowledgeable Boddhhavvve - - Should know Boori-Karill bud of the jujube tree
Bohaṇam – Those who teach others Bhanṭe – O Bhagavan! - Bhagavam - Bhagavan
Bhagavantaa Bhagavan Bhagavataa (yaa) Bhagavato Bhajjaṇayakabhalle Bhaat, food -
- - Childhood - - - Ne Bhagavan Of Bhagavan • Frying pan for roasting chickpeas
etc. - To Bhadraa Sārthavaahī Bhaddā - Bhadraa named - - Bhaddāae - Of Bhadraa
Sārthavaahī Bhaddāo Bhadraa named by Bhanṇati - It is said Bhavanaṁ Building

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 86 pAbbhUte prakaTa huA pAMsuli - kaDaehiM . - pasaliyoM kI paMkti se
pAMsuliya-kaDANaM - -pArzvabhAga kI asthiyoM ( haDDiyoM) ke kaTakoM ko pANaM -
pAnI pANAvalI pANi - hAtha pAta - jaMghoruNA - paira, jaMghA aura uruoM se
pAdANaM - pairoM kI pANa - - eka prakAra ke bartanoM kI paMkti - pAbhAtiya-
tArigA * prAtaHkAla kA tArA pAyaMguliyANaM - pairoM kI a~guliyoM kA pAya -
cAreNaM. - paidala cala kara pAyA - paira - - - - pAraNayaMsi pAraNa karane
para, pAraNA meM pAsAyavaDiM(DeM)sae (te) zreSTha mahala meM bhI pi piTThi -
karaMDaga- saMdhIhiM - -pRSTha-karaNDaka (pITha ke unnata pradezoM) kI sandhiyoM
se piTThi - karaMDayANaM pradezoM kI - - pITha kI haDDiyoM ke unnata - piTThi -
mavassieNaM. - pITha ke sAtha mile hue - piTThimAiyA - pRSThimAtRkakumAra - pitA
(yA) - pitA - pUchatA hai pucchati poTThile - poSTillakumAra putte - - putra
punnaseNe - puNyasenakumAra purisaseNe - puruSasenakumAra -
puvvarattAvarattakAlasamayaMsi - - madhyarAtri ke samaya meM - - madhyarAtri meM
puvvarattAvarattakAle puvvANupuvvIe- krama se peDhAlaputte - peDhAlaputrakumAra
pellae - pellakakumAra porisIe - pauruSI, prahara dina yA rAta kA cauthA bhAga
anuttarIpapAtikadazA phuTTaMtehiM - bar3e jora se bajAte hue mRdaGga Adi vAdyoM
nAda se yukta - brahmacArI baMbhayArI - battIsaM - battIsa battIsAe - battIsAo -
battIsa - battIsa - baddhIsaga - chiDDe - baddhIsaka nAmaka bAje kA cheda
bahave. - bahuta se bahiyA - - bAhara bahU bArasa - bAraha bAlattaNaM bAvattaraM
- bahattara bAhANaM bhattaM - bahuta bhaddaM - bhujAoM kI bAhAyA - saMgaliyA -
bAhAya nAma vAle vRkSavizeSa kI phalI bAhAhiM - bhujAoM se bilamiva . bila ke
samAna - bINA - chiDDe - vINA kA cheda buddheNaM - buddha, jJAnavAn boddhavve -
- jAnanA cAhie borI-karIlla bera kI koMpala bohaNaM - dUsaroM ko bodha karAne
vAle bhaMte - he bhagavan ! - bhagavaM - bhagavAn bhagavaMtA bhagavAn bhagavatA
(yA) bhagavato bhajjaNayakabhalle bhAta, bhojana - - - bAlakapana - - - ne
bhagavAn bhagavAn kA * cane Adi bhUnane kI kar3hAI - bhadrA sArthavAhI ko bhaddA
- bhadrA nAma vAlI - - bhaddAe - bhadrA sArthavAhI kA bhaddAo bhadrA nAma vAlI
se bhannati - kahA jAtA hai bhavaNaM bhavana

Page #122 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Appendix - Glossary - Bhavitta - becoming - Bhaaniyavvam, vva – should be said,
meaning "speaking while feeling" Bhasha, Bhasam - Bhas - Rasi - Palicchhinne
Bhasissami – I will speak, from hunger. - From hunger Bhog- Samathe – Bhog,
capable of enjoying - - — Mans - Soniyattaae – due to flesh and blood,
Maggadaeṇam - showing the path to liberation Majjhe – in the middle - Maman -
mine Mayali – Mayalikumar Mayur - Pora – peacock's feathers (joint-place) - very
heavy Mahta • Mahabalakumar — Mahabbale Mahanijjaratraae - one who destroys many
karmas, Maha- Dukkar- Karae - • one who performs very difficult austerities,
Mahadumaseṇamaati - Mahadrumasena etc. Mahadumaseṇe – Mahadrumasenakumar
Mahavidehe – in Mahavideha (region) Mahaviran - • Lord Mahavira Swami,
Mahavirass Mahavira Swami's - Mahavire - Mahavira Swami Mahavireṇam. - by
Mahavira - Mahaasihaseṇe - Mahasinhaseṇakumar Mahaseṇe – Mahasena Kumar Ma- -
no, negative particle Maṇussae - related to humans Matulungpesiya – branch of
Matulung-Bijapur Maya (ta) – mother Mas - Sangaliya Masika Milayamaani Mundavali
- • row of pillars - wilting - - - covered with a pile of ashes - - Urad pod One
month's Munde - shaved Mugga- Sangaliya - mung pod Muchhiya - fainted
Mulachhalliya - radish peel Meho– Meghakumar Mukkeṇam – self-liberated Moyaeṇam.
- giver and Ya - Raayagihe - liberating others from the ocean of samsara - Raya
- king Ridd (dhi?) Tthimiy- Samiddhe, Riddhi Laṣṭadanta Kumar Laṭṭadante Labhati
- obtains. Lauy-phale wealth-grain filled with, fearless and endowed with all
kinds of wealth - Rajagriha city - Lukkha - rough Log- Naheṇam - lord of the
three worlds Log - Pajjoyagareṇam – Lokoudhyotkar, in the world or world Vandati
Vaggass - Vagga   - class - one who illuminates Log- Ppdiveṇam – like a lamp in
the worlds, light - doer Vad - leaves Va - - Vattavvyaya Vayasi - fruit of the
gourd • salutes Vaṭṭayaavali. - row of toys made of lac etc. for children Vad
leaf - statement, subject - started to speak, spoke - alternative meaning-
indicative particle - . of the class ८७ - Warisenē – Warisenakumar Valunk -
Challiya - bark of the chirberry Vavi (va+avi) also Vasa year

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pariziSTa - zabdArtha - bhavittA - hokara - bhANiyavvaM, vvA - kahanA cAhie
bhAvemANe "bhAvanA karate hue , bola bhASA, bhAsaM - bhAsa - rAsi - palicchinne
bhAsissAmi - bolUMgA bhukkheNaM. - bhUkha se bhoga- samatthe - bhoga bhogane meM
samartha - - -- maMsa - soNiyattAe - mAMsa aura rudhira ke kAraNa maggadaeNaM -
mukti-mArga dikhAne vAle majjhe - bIca meM - mamaM - merA mayAli - mayAlikumAra
mayUra - porA - mora ke parva (sandhi-sthAna ) - bar3e bhArI mahatA *
mahAbalakumAra -- mahabbale mahANijjaratarAe - bahuta karmoM kI nirjarA karane
vAlA mahA- dukkara- kArae - * atyanta duSkara tapa karane vAlA mahAdumaseNamAtI
- mahAdrumasena Adi mahAdumaseNe - mahAdrumasenakumAra mahAvidehe - mahAvideha
(kSetra) meM mahAvIraM - * bhagavAn mahAvIra svAmI ko mahAvIrassa mahAvIra svAmI
kA - mahAvIre - mahAvIra svAmI mahAvIreNaM. - mahAvIra se - mahAsIhaseNe -
mahAsiMhasenakumAra mahAseNe - mahAsenakumAra mA- - nahIM, niSedhArthaka avyaya
mANussae - manuSya sambandhI mAtuluMgapesiyA - mAtuluMga-bIjapUraka kI phA~ka
mAyA (tA) - mAtA mAsa - saMgaliyA mAsikA milAyamANI muMDAvalI - * khambhoM kI
paMkti - murajhAtI huI - - -rAkha ke Dhera se DhakI huI - - ur3ada kI phalI eka
mAsa kI muMDe - muNDita mugga- saMgaliyA - mUMga kI phalI mucchiyA - mUrcchita
mUlAchalliyA - mUlI kA chilakA meho- meghakumAra mukkeNaM - svayaM mukta hue
moyaeNaM. - dilAne vAle aura ya - rAyagihe - dUsaroM ko saMsAra-sAgara se mukti
- rAyA - rAjA riddha (ddhi ?) tthimiya- samiddhe, riddhi laSTadantakumAra
laTThadaMte labhati - prApta karatA hai| lAuya-phale dhana-dhAnya se yukta,
bhayarahita aura saba prakAra ke aizvarya se yukta - rAjagRha nagara - lukkha -
rUkSa loga-nAheNaM - tInoM lokoM ke svAmI loga - pajjoyagareNaM -
lokaudyotakara, loka meM yA loka vaMdati vaggassa - vaggA - varga - ko prakAzita
karane vAlA loga- ppadIveNaM - lokoM meM dIpaka ke samAna prakAza - karane vAle
vaDa - patte vA - - vattavvayA vayAsI - tumbe kA phala * vandanA karatA hai
vaTTayAvalI. - lAkha Adi ke bane hue baccoM ke khilaunoM kI paMkti var3a kA
pattA - vaktavya, viSaya - kahane lagA, bolA - vikalpArtha- bodhaka avyaya - .
varga kA 87 - vAriseNe - vArisenakumAra vAluMka - challiyA - cirbharI kI chAla
vAvi (vA+avi) bhI vAsA varSa

Page #123 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
88 Vasai, (Tin) Vasse - in the field - Viulan - Vipulgiri mountain past - Tadi -
Karale Nam praant bhagon se Vijay (Ye) Vijay Vimaan mein Vijay - Vimaane Viyan -
leaves — . Year till Vipulan - Vipulgiri named mountain Vimaane - in the plane -
Bamboo etc. fan - Viharati - wanders Viharami - I wander Viharitte - to wander -
- Vativatiita Vyatikrant kar, Atikraman kar, - - River bank like terrible - -
Vijay named plane Laangkar - It is said Vucchati Vruttapdiviutthaya - Vutte - It
is said Vejayante - Vaibjayant plane - - - - Ukti - Pratyukti Vehallass -
Vehallkumar's Vehalle - Vehallkumar - Vehayase - Vehayaskumar - Sanchaaeti - is
capable - Sanjame Sanjamena Sampattenam - attained liberation - Sanlehana -
Sanlekhana, physical and mental penance - In restraint, in virtuous conduct -
With restraint Destruction of passions etc., fasting vow Sansadvam - given by
food-stained (hands) etc. Sachcheva - the same - Satt - seven Saththavahim -
Sarthavahi to Saththavahi - Sarthavahi, skilled woman in business Sadhim - with
Samaena Samanam - In time (in) Shraman to ――――― Saman-Mahan- Atihi-Kivan -
Vanimaga - Shraman, Mahan (Shravak), Atithi, Kripana and Vanipka (special
beggar) Vevamaanie - trembling - Shalya tree's bud Vehall-Vehayasa - Vehallkumar
and Vehayaskumar Savvatth Siddhe - Sarvarth Siddha plane - Samnass Shraman
Bhagwan's - Samane - Shraman Bhagwan Samanena. Samaani - on being Samaane - on
being — Sami - Sangaliya Samosadhe Samosaranam Sayam • by itself - ―― Shraman
Bhagwan has • Shami tree's fruit - Arrived, resided Arrival, Tirthankar's
arrival - Anuttaroupapattikadasha Sayam-Sambuddhena - self-enlightened - - Same
Saran-Daena - Sarisan Sarira - Vannao Sallati-Karille - Shelter giver - Body's
description — Savath - - Everywhere, about everything Savvo all Savvodue - green
in all seasons Sahasambavane - Sahasramravan named garden Sahassambavanato —
Sahasramravan garden from Sa - that Sae - in Saketapur Sag - leaves - vegetable
leaf Sagarovamai. - Sagaropama, a division of time Sam - Karille - Priyangu
tree's bud Samann- Pariyagan - Sadhu's synonym, Sadhu's feeling, - - Sanjam-
Vritti Samann- Pariyato - Sanjam - Vritti Samali - Karille - - - Semal tree's
bud

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 88 vAsAI, (tiM) vAse - kSetra meM - viulaM - vipulagiri parvata vigata- taDi
-karAleNaMprAnta bhAgoM se vijae (ye) vijaya vimAna meM vijaya- vimANe viyaNa -
patte -- . varSa taka vipulaM - vipulagiri nAmaka parvata vimANe - vimAna meM -
bA~sa Adi kA paMkhA - viharati - vicaraNa karatA hai viharAmi - vicaraNa karatA
hU~ viharittate - vihAra karane ke lie - - vAtivatittA vyatikrAnta kara,
atikramaNa kara, - -nadI ke taTa ke samAna bhayaMkara - - vijaya nAmaka vimAna
meM lAMghakara - kahA jAtA hai vuccati vRttapaDivuttayA - vutte - kahA gayA hai
vejayaMte - vaijayaMta vimAna meM - - - - ukti - pratyukti vehallassa -
vehallakumAra kA vehalle - vehallakumAra - vehAyase - vehAyasakumAra - saMcAeti
- samartha hotA hai - saMjame saMjameNaM saMpatteNaM - mokSa ko prApta hue -
saMlehaNA - saMlekhanA, zArIrika va mAnasika tapa dvArA - saMyama meM,
sAdhuvRtti meM - saMyama se kaSAyAdi kA nAza karanA, anazana vrata saMsadvaM -
bhojana se lipta (hAthoM) Adi se diyA huA sacceva - vahI - satta - sAta
satthavAhiM - sArthavAhI ko satthavAhI - sArthavAhI, vyApAra meM nipuNa strI
saddhiM - sAtha samaeNaM samaNaM - samaya se (meM) zramaNa ko ---------- samaNa-
mAhaNa- atihi-kivaNa - vaNImagA - zramaNa, mAhana (zrAvaka), atithi, kRpaNa aura
vanIpaka ( yAcaka vizeSa) vevamANIe - kA~patI huI - zalya vRkSa kI koMpala
vehalla-vehAyasA - vehallakumAra aura vehAyasakumAra savvaTThasiddhe -
sarvArthasiddha vimAna meM - samaNassa zramaNa bhagavAn kA - samaNe - zramaNa
bhagavAn samaNeNaM. samANI - hone para samANe - hone para -- sami- saMgaliyA
samosaDhe samosaraNaM sayaM * apane Apa - ---- zramaNa bhagavAn ne * zamI vRkSa
kI phalI - padhAre, virAjamAna hue padhAranA, tIrthaMkara kA padhAranA -
anuttaraupapAtikadazA sayaM-saMbuddheNaM- apane Apa bodha prApta karane vAle - -
samAna saraNa-daeNaM - sarisaM sarIra - vannao sallati-karille - zaraNa dene
vAle - zarIra kA varNana -- savattha - - sarvatra, saba ke viSaya meM savvo saba
savvodue - saba RtuoM meM harA-bharA rahane vAlA sahasaMbavaNe -sahasrAmravana
nAma vAlA eka bagIcA sahassaMbavaNAto -- sahasrAmravana udyAna se sA- vaha sAe -
sAketapura meM sAga- patte - zAka kA pattA sAgarovamAI. - sAgaropama, kAla kA
eka vibhAga sAma - karille - priyaMgu vRkSa kI koMpala sAmanna- pariyAgaM -
sAdhu kA paryAya, sAdhu kA bhAva, - - saMyama-vRtti sAmanna- pariyAto - saMyama
- vRtti sAmalI- karille - - - semala vRkSa kI koMpala

Page #124 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Appendix-Glossary  Samaiyamāiyāi - Samayik etc. Sami-Swami Sāhassiṇam - in
thousands (of thousands) Sijjhaṇā - Siddhi Sijjhahīti - will be Siddhi Siḍhil-
kaḍālī - loose reins Siṇhāl'ae - Sefalak, a special fruit Siddhi-gati-nāmadheyam
- named Siddhi-Gati Silēs-guliyā - phlegm nodules Sivam - auspicious form Sīs -
head Sīs-ghaḍi'ae - from the head-shaped pot Sīsass - of the head Sīhsen'e -
Singhsenakumar Sīhe - Singhkumar Sīho - lion Sukayatte - for the sake of good
deeds, successful Sukkam - dried Sukkam-chagaṇiyā - dried dung, cow dung Sukkam-
chhallī - dried bark Sukkadī'e - dried musk Sukkam-sapp-samāṇāhiṁ - like a dried
snake Sukkā - dried, dried Sukkāto - from the dried Sukkeṇam - dried Suṇakkhatt-
gamēṇam - like Sunakshatra Suṇakkhattass - of Sunakshatra Suṇakkhatte -
Sunakshatra Kumar Supuṇṇe - with good merit Sumine - in a dream Surūpe -
beautiful, with good form Sul'addhe - obtained well Suhammass - of Sudharma, a
Ganadhar Suhammē - Sudharmaswami Suhuy⁰ (Suhuy-huyas'aṇ iv) - like a well-lit
fire Suddadante - from Shuddhadantkumar Se - he, from him Se - ath, beginning-
indicating particle Seṇi'e (te) - from the king Shrenik Seṇi'o - king Shrenik
Seṇiyā - O Shrenik! Sesam - remainder (description), rest Sesā - remainder
Sesāṇam - of the remainders Sesāṇavi - also of the remainders Sesāvi - also the
remainder Sochchā - hearing Soṇiyattā'e (te) - due to blood Solas - sixteen
Sohammīsāṇ - Saudharma and Ishana, the first and second Devaloka Haku-phale -
fruit of the Haku plant Haṭṭh-tuṭṭh - happy and satisfied Haṇuyā'e - chin, jaw
Hatthanguliyāṇam - of the fingers of the hands Hatthāṇam - of the hands
Hatthiṇāpure - in Hastinapur Halle - Hallkumar Huyas'aṇe (iv) - like fire Hoti -
are Hotthā - was, were

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pariziSTa-zabdArtha sAmAiyamAiyAI - sAmAyika Adi sAmI-svAmI sAhassINaM-
sahasroM meM (sahasroM kA) sijjhaNA - siddhi sijjhahiti-siddha hogA siDhila-
kaDAlI - DhIlI lagAma siNhAlae-sephAlaka nAmaka phala vizeSa siddhi-gati-
nAmadheyaM-siddhi gati nAma vAle silesa-guliyA- zleSma kI guTikA sivaM-
kalyANarUpa sIsa -zira sIsa-ghaDIe - zirarUpI ghaTa se sIsassa -zira kI sIhaseNe
-- siMhasenakumAra sIhe -siMhakumAra sIho-siMha, zera sukayatthe - sukRtArtha,
saphala sukkaM-sUkhA huA sukkaM-chagaNiyA-sUkhA huA gobara, gohA-chANA sukka-
challI-sUkhI huI chAla sukkadie - sUkhI huI mazaka sukka-sappa-samANAhiM -sUkhe
hue sarpa ke samAna sukkA-sUkhI huI, sUkhe hue sukkAto-sUkhI huI se sukkeNaM-
sUkhe hue suNakkhatta-gameNaM-sunakSatra ke samAna suNakkhattassa-sunakSatra ke
suNakkhattesunakSatrakumAra supuNNe - acche puNya vAlA sumiNe-svapna meM surUpe
- sundara, acche rUpa vAlA suladdhe-acchI taraha se prApta suhammassa-sudharma
nAmaka gaNadhara kA suhamme-sudharmasvAmI suhuya0 (suhuya-huyAsaNa iva)- acchI
taraha se jalI huI agni ke samAna suddhadaMte - zuddhadantakumAra se- vaha,
usake se-atha, prArambha-bodhaka avyaya seNie (te)-zreNika rAjA seNio- zreNika
rAjA seNiyA-he zreNika ! sesaM-zeSa (varNana), bAkI sesA-zeSa sesANaM-zeSoM kA
sesANavi-zeSoM kA bhI sesAvi- zeSa bhI soccA-sunakara soNiyattAe (te)-rudhira ke
kAraNa solasa-solaha sohammIsANa - saudharma aura IzAna nAmaka pahalA aura
dUsarA devaloka hakuba-phale - hakuba vanaspati vizeSa kA phala haTTha-tuTTha-
prasanna aura santuSTa haNuyAe -cibuka, Thor3I kI hatthaMguliyANaM- hAthoM kI
aMguliyoM kI hatthANaM- hAthoM kI hatthiNApure - hastinApura meM halle -
hallakumAra huyAsaNe (iva) - agni ke samAna hoti - hote haiM hotthA-thA, thI

Page #125 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Anadhyayakala  [ Excerpted from Nandī Sūtra, edited by Acharya Pravara Shri
Atmaramji Maharaj ]  One should study the scriptures only during the time
prescribed in the Agamas for study. Studying during the Anadhyayakala is
prohibited.  The Manusmriti and other Smritis also describe the Anadhyayakala in
detail. Vedic people also mention the Anadhyayas of the Vedas. Similarly, other
Ārya texts are also considered Anadhyayas. Since the Jain Agamas are also
considered to be Sarvajñokta, Devadhiṣṭhita, and Svaravidyā, their Anadhyayakala
is also described in the Agamas, such as:  **Ten Anadhyayas related to the
sky:**  1. **Ukkavāte** - Meteor shower: If there is a large meteor shower, one
should not study the scriptures for one prahar. 2. **Disidāghe** - Red sky: As
long as the sky is red, as if it is on fire, one should not study. 3.
**Gajjite** - Thunder: One should not study for one prahar after thunder. 4.
**Vijuute** - Lightning: One should not study for one prahar after lightning. 5.
**Nigghāte** - Strong wind: One should not study during a strong wind. 6.
**Juvate** - Earthquake: One should not study during an earthquake. 7.
**Jakkhālitte** - Eclipse: One should not study during an eclipse. 8.
**Dhūmita** - Smoke: One should not study during smoke. 9. **Mahita** - Fog: One
should not study during fog. 10. **Rayugghaate** - Hailstorm: One should not
study during a hailstorm.  **Ten Anadhyayas related to the body:**  1. **Aṭṭhi**
- Bones: One should not study when bones are exposed. 2. **Mansaṁ** - Flesh: One
should not study when flesh is exposed. 3. **Soṇite** - Blood: One should not
study when blood is exposed. 4. **Asucisamānte** - Unclean place: One should not
study in an unclean place. 5. **Susāṇasamānte** - Cemetery: One should not study
in a cemetery. 6. **Candovārāte** - Lunar eclipse: One should not study during a
lunar eclipse. 7. **Sūrovārāte** - Solar eclipse: One should not study during a
solar eclipse. 8. **Paḍane** - Falling: One should not study when falling. 9.
**Rāyavugghe** - Death: One should not study after death. 10. **Uvassayassa anto
orālie sarīrage** - End of life: One should not study when the body is at the
end of life.  **Four Mahapratipadās:**  1. **Āsāḍhapratipadā** - The first day
of the Āsāḍha month. 2. **Indamahapratipadā** - The first day of the Indramaha
month. 3. **Kattiyapratipadā** - The first day of the Kattiya month. 4.
**Sugimhapratipadā** - The first day of the Sugimha month.  **Four Mahapratipadā
Purnimās:**  1. **Āsāḍhapratipadā Purnimā** - The full moon of the Āsāḍha month.
2. **Indamahapratipadā Purnimā** - The full moon of the Indramaha month. 3.
**Kattiyapratipadā Purnimā** - The full moon of the Kattiya month. 4.
**Sugimhapratipadā Purnimā** - The full moon of the Sugimha month.  **Four
Sandhyās:**  1. **Puvvaṇhe avaranhe** - Dawn. 2. **Paose** - Morning. 3.
**Paccose** - Evening. 4. **Paccūse** - Night.  According to the above Sūtra
text, there are thirty-two Anadhyayas: ten related to the sky, ten related to
the body, four Mahapratipadās, four Mahapratipadā Purnimās, and four Sandhyās.
These are briefly described as follows:  **Ten Anadhyayas related to the sky:**
1. **Ukkavāte** - Meteor shower: If there is a large meteor shower, one should
not study the scriptures for one prahar. 2. **Disidāghe** - Red sky: As long as
the sky is red, as if it is on fire, one should not study. 3. **Gajjite** -
Thunder: One should not study for one prahar after thunder. 4. **Vijuute** -
Lightning: One should not study for one prahar after lightning. 5. **Nigghāte**
- Strong wind: One should not study during a strong wind. 6. **Juvate** -
Earthquake: One should not study during an earthquake. 7. **Jakkhālitte** -
Eclipse: One should not study during an eclipse. 8. **Dhūmita** - Smoke: One
should not study during smoke. 9. **Mahita** - Fog: One should not study during
fog. 10. **Rayugghaate** - Hailstorm: One should not study during a hailstorm.
**Ten Anadhyayas related to the body:**  1. **Aṭṭhi** - Bones: One should not
study when bones are exposed. 2. **Mansaṁ** - Flesh: One should not study when
flesh is exposed. 3. **Soṇite** - Blood: One should not study when blood is
exposed. 4. **Asucisamānte** - Unclean place: One should not study in an unclean
place. 5. **Susāṇasamānte** - Cemetery: One should not study in a cemetery. 6.
**Candovārāte** - Lunar eclipse: One should not study during a lunar eclipse. 7.
**Sūrovārāte** - Solar eclipse: One should not study during a solar eclipse. 8.
**Paḍane** - Falling: One should not study when falling. 9. **Rāyavugghe** -
Death: One should not study after death. 10. **Uvassayassa anto orālie
sarīrage** - End of life: One should not study when the body is at the end of
life.  **Four Mahapratipadās:**  1. **Āsāḍhapratipadā** - The first day of the
Āsāḍ

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 anadhyAyakAla [ sva. AcAryapravara zrI AtmArAmajI ma. dvArA sampAdita
nandIsUtra se uddhRta ] svAdhyAya ke lie AgamoM meM jo samaya batAyA gayA hai,
usI samaya zAstroM kA svAdhyAya karanA cAhie  /  anadhyAyakAla meM svAdhyAya
varjita hai  /  manusmRti Adi smRtiyoM meM bhI anadhyAyakAla kA vistArapUrvaka
varNana kiyA gayA hai| vaidika loga bhI veda ke anadhyAyoM kA ullekha karate
haiN| isI prakAra anya ArSa granthoM kA bhI anadhyAya mAnA jAtA hai| jainAgama
bhI sarvajJokta, devAdhiSThita tathA svaravidyA saMyukta hone ke kAraNa, inakA
bhI AgamoM meM anadhyAyakAla varNita kiyA gayA hai, jaise ki dasavidhe
aMtalikkhite asajjhAe paNNatte, taM jahA -ukkAvAte, disidAghe, gajjite, vijjute,
nigghAte, juvate, jakkhAlitte, dhUmitA, mahitA, rayaugghAte  /  dasavihe orAlite
asajjhAtite, taM jahA aTThI, maMsaM, soNite, asucisAmaMte, susANasAmaMte,
caMdovarAte, sUrovarAte, paDane, rAyavuggahe, uvassayassa aMto orAlie sarIrage
/  - - - -- - sthAnAGgasUtra, sthAna 10 - no kappati niggaMthANa vA niggaMthINa
vA cauhiM mahApADivaehiM sajjhAyaM karittae, taM jahA - AsADhapADivae,
iMdamahapADivae kattiapADivae sugimhapAr3ivae  /  no kappai niggaMthANa vA
niggaMthINa vA, cauhiM saMjhAhiM sajjhAyaM karettae, taM jahA - - paDhimAte,
pacchimAte, majjhaNhe addddrte| kappaI niggaMthANa vA, niggaMthINa vA, cAukkAlaM
sajjhAyaM karettae, taM jahA - puvvaNhe avaraNhe, paose, paccUse  /  - - -
sthAnAGgasUtra, sthAna 4, uddeza 2 uparokta sUtrapATha ke anusAra dasa AkAza se
sambandhita, dasa audArika zarIra se sambandhita, cAra mahApratipadA, cAra
mahApratipadA kI pUrNimA aura cAra sandhyA, isa prakAra battIsa anadhyAya mAne
gae haiM, jinakA saMkSepa meM nimna prakAra se varNana hai, jaise AkAza
sambandhI dasa anadhyAya 1. ulkApAta- tArApatana - yadi mahat tArApatana huA hai
to eka prahara paryanta zAstra svAdhyAya nahIM karanA cAhie  /  2. digdAha -
jaba taka dizA raktavarNa kI ho arthAt aisA mAlUma par3e ki dizA meM Aga sI lagI
hai, taba bhI svAdhyAya nahIM karanA caahie| 3. garjita - bAdaloM ke garjana
para eka prahara paryanta svAdhyAya na kare  /  4. vidyuta - bijalI camakane
para eka prahara paryanta svAdhyAya na kare  /

Page #126 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Anadhyaya Kaal  **But the thunder and lightning should not be considered as
Anadhyaya during Chaturmas. Because thunder and lightning are often due to the
nature of the season. Therefore, from Ardra to Swati Nakshatra, it is not
considered Anadhyaya.**  **5. Nirghat - When there is a loud thunder in the sky
without clouds, or when there is a clap of thunder in the sky with clouds, it is
Anadhyaya for two Praharas.**  **6. Yupaka - The evening of Pratipada, Dwitiya,
and Tritiya in the Shukla Paksha, when the moonlight is visible, is called
Yupaka. During these days, one should not study from Prahara to night.**  **7.
Yakshadeepta - Sometimes, a light appears in a direction, like lightning, which
appears in intervals. This is called Yakshadeepta. Therefore, one should not
study as long as the Yaksha-like light is visible in the sky.**  **8. Dhumika -
The time from Krishna-Kartik to Magh is the womb month of the clouds. During
this time, a fine, water-like mist of smoky color falls. This is called Dhumika-
Krishna. One should not study as long as this mist falls.**  **9. Mihika Shweta
- In winter, a fine, water-like mist of white color is called Mihika. One should
not study as long as this falls.**  **10. Raj-Udghāt - Due to the wind, dust
spreads all over the sky. One should not study as long as this dust remains
spread.**  **The above ten reasons are related to the sky. The following ten
Anadhyayas are related to the generous.**  **11-12-13. Bone, Flesh, and Blood -
If the bone, flesh, and blood of a five-sense Tiryanch are visible, it is
Anadhyaya until those things are removed from there. The commentator considers
it Anadhyaya if these things are present within 60 hands around.**  **Similarly,
Anadhyaya is considered for the bone, flesh, and blood of a human being. The
difference is that their Anadhyaya is for 100 hands and one day and night. The
Anadhyaya for a woman's menstrual period is for three days. The Anadhyaya for a
boy and a girl is considered for seven and eight days respectively.**  **14.
Ashuchi - It is Anadhyaya until the excrement and urine are visible.**  **15.
Shmashan - Anadhyaya is considered for 100 hands around the cremation ground.**
**16. Chandra Grahan - During a lunar eclipse, one should not study for eight
Praharas for the lowest, twelve Praharas for the medium, and sixteen Praharas
for the highest.**  **17. Surya Grahan - During a solar eclipse, Anadhyaya is
considered for eight, twelve, and sixteen Praharas respectively.**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 anadhyAyakAla kintu garjana aura vidyuta kA asvAdhyAya cAturmAsa meM nahIM
mAnanA caahie| kyoMki vaha garjana aura vidyuta prAyaH Rtu svabhAva se hI hotA
hai| ataH ArdrA se svAti nakSatra paryanta anadhyAya nahIM mAnA jaataa| 5.
nirghAta - binA bAdala ke AkAza meM vyantarAdikRta ghora garjana hone para, yA
bAdaloM sahita AkAza meM kar3akane para do prahara taka asvAdhyAya kAla hai| 6.
yUpaka- zukla pakSa meM pratipadA, dvitIyA, tRtIyA kI sandhyA, candraprabhA ke
milane ko yUpaka kahA jAtA hai| ina dinoM prahara rAtri paryanta svAdhyAya nahIM
karanA caahie| 7. yakSAdIpta-kabhI kisI dizA meM bijalI camakane jaisA,
thor3e-thor3e samaya pIche jo prakAza hotA hai vaha yakSAdIpta kahalAtA hai|
ataH AkAza meM jaba taka yakSAkAra dIkhatA rahe taba taka svAdhyAya nahIM karanA
caahie| 8.dhUmikA-kRSNa-kArtika se lekara mAgha taka kA samaya meghoM kA
garbhamAsa hotA hai| isameM dhUmra varNa kI sUkSma jalarUpa dhuMdha par3atI hai|
vaha dhUmikA-kRSNa kahalAtI hai| jaba taka yaha dhuMdha par3atI rahe, taba taka
svAdhyAya nahIM karanA caahie| 9. mihikAzveta - zItakAla meM zveta varNa kA
sUkSma jalarUpa dhundha mihikA kahalAtI hai| jaba taka yaha giratI rahe, taba
taka asvAdhyAya kAla hai| 10. raja-udghAta - vAyu ke kAraNa AkAza meM cAroM ora
dhUli chA jAtI hai| jaba taka yaha dhUli phailI rahatI hai, svAdhyAya nahIM
karanA caahie| uparokta dasa kAraNa AkAza sambandhI asvAdhyAya ke haiN| audArika
sambandhI dasa anadhyAya 11-12-13. haDDI, mAMsa aura rudhira - paMcendriya
tiryaMca kI haDDI, mAMsa aura rudhira yadi sAmane dikhAI deM, to jaba taka vahA~
se vaha vastue~ uThAI na jAe~, taba taka asvAdhyAya hai| vRttikAra Asa-pAsa ke
60 hAtha taka ina vastuoM ke hone para asvAdhyAya mAnate haiN| isI prakAra
manuSya sambandhI asthi, mAMsa aura rudhira kA bhI anadhyAya mAnA jAtA hai|
vizeSatA itanI hai ki inakA asvAdhyAya sau hAtha taka tathA eka dina-rAta kA
hotA hai| strI ke mAsika dharma kA asvAdhyAya tIna dina tk| bAlaka evaM bAlikA
kA asvAdhyAya kramazaH sAta evaM ATha dina paryanta kA mAnA jAtA hai| 14. azuci-
mala-mUtra sAmane dikhAI dene taka asvAdhyAya hai| 15. zmazAna- zmazAnabhUmi ke
cAroM ora sau-sau hAtha paryanta asvAdhyAya mAnA jAtA hai| 16. candragrahaNa-
candragrahaNa hone para jaghanya ATha, madhyama bAraha aura utkRSTa solaha
prahara paryanta svAdhyAya nahIM karanA caahie| 17. sUryagrahaNa - sUryagrahaNa
hone para bhI kramazaH ATha, bAraha aura solaha prahara paryanta asvAdhyAyakAla
mAnA gayA hai|

Page #127 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Anuttaraupapatikadasha 18-32:  **18. Patan:** When a great king or national
leader dies, one should not perform *svadhyaya* until their cremation is
completed. Alternatively, one should gradually resume *svadhyaya* after the ten
officials take charge.  **19. Rajavyudgraha:** When there is a war between
nearby kings, one should not perform *svadhyaya* for one day and night, even
after peace is restored.  **20. Audarik Sharira:** When a five-sense being dies
within the *upaashraya*, one should not perform *svadhyaya* as long as the body
remains there. If the lifeless body remains within a hundred *haath* (cubits),
*svadhyaya* should be avoided.  The above ten reasons for avoiding *svadhyaya*
are related to the *audarik sharira* (physical body).  **21-28. Four Mahotsav
and Four Mahapratipada:** The four *mahotsav* (festivals) are Ashadh Purnima,
Ashwin Purnima, Kartik Purnima, and Chaitra Purnima. The *pratipada* (first day)
following these full moons are called *mahapratipada*. *Svadhyaya* is prohibited
during these days.  **29-32. Pratah, Sayam, Madhyahna, and Ardharatri:** One
should not perform *svadhyaya* one *ghadi* (hour) before and after sunrise, one
*ghadi* before and after sunset, one *ghadi* before and after midday, and one
*ghadi* before and after midnight.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 anuttaraupapAtikadazA 18. patana-kisI bar3e mAnya rAjA athavA rASTrapuruSa kA
nidhana hone para jaba taka usakA dAhasaMskAra na ho taba taka svAdhyAya nahIM
karanA caahie| athavA jaba taka dasarA adhikArI sattArUDha na ho taba taka
zanaiH zanaiH svAdhyAya karanA caahie| 19. rAjavyudgraha-samIpastha rAjAoM meM
paraspara yuddha hone para jaba taka zAnti na ho jAe, taba taka usake pazcAt bhI
eka dina-rAtri svAdhyAya nahIM kreN| 20.audArika zarIra- upAzraya ke bhItara
paMcendriya jIva kA vadha ho jAne para jaba taka kalevara par3A rahe, taba taka
tathA 100 hAtha taka yadi nirjIva kalevara par3A ho to svAdhyAya nahIM karanA
caahie| asvAdhyAya ke uparokta 10 kAraNa audArika zarIra sambandhI kahe gaye
haiN| 21-28. cAra mahotsava aura cAra mahApratipadA- ASADhapUrNimA,
AzvinapUrNimA, kArtikapUrNimA aura caitrapUrNimA ye cAra mahotsava haiN| ina
pUrNimAoM ke pazcAt Ane vAlI pratipadA ko mahApratipadA kahate haiN| inameM
svAdhyAya karane kA niSedha hai| 29-32. prAtaH sAyaM madhyAhna aura ardharAtri-
prAtaH sUrya ugane se eka ghar3I pahile tathA eka ghar3I piiche| sUryAsta hone
se eka ghar3I pahile tathA eka ghar3I piiche| madhyAhna arthAt dopahara meM eka
ghar3I Age aura eka ghar3I pIche evaM ardharAtri meM bhI eka ghar3I Age tathA
eka ghar3I pIche svAdhyAya nahIM karanA caahie|

Page #128 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Shri Agam Prakashan Samiti, Byawar** **List of Benefactor Members** **Maha
Stambh** 1. Shri Seth Mohanmalji Chordia, Madras 2. Shri Gulabchandji Mangilalji
Surana, Secunderabad 3. Shri Pukharajji Shishodia, Byawar 4. Shri Sayermalji
Jethamalji Chordia, Bangalore 5. Shri Premrajji Bhanwarlalji Shrisrimal, Durg 6.
Shri S. Kishanchandji Chordia, Madras 7. Shri Kanwarlalji Baitala, Guwahati 8.
Shri Seth Khivrajji Chordia, Madras 9. Shri Gumanmalji Chordia, Madras 10. Shri
S. Badalchandji Chordia, Madras 11. Shri J. Doolichandji Chordia, Madras 12.
Shri S. Ratanchandji Chordia, Madras 13. Shri J. Annarajji Chordia, Madras 14.
Shri S. Sayerchandji Chordia, Madras 15. Shri R. Shanti Lalji Uttamchandji
Chordia, Madras 16. Shri Siremalji Hirachandji Chordia, Madras 17. Shri J.
Hukumchandji Chordia, Madras **Stambh Members** 1. Shri Agarchandji Fatechandji
Parkh, Jodhpur 2. Shri Jasrajji Ganeshmalji Sancheti, Jodhpur 3. Shri
Tilokchandji Sagarmalji Sancheti, Madras 4. Shri Poosalalji Kisturchandji
Surana, Katangi 5. Shri R. Prasannachandji Chordia, Madras 6. Shri Deepchandji
Chordia, Madras 7. Shri Moolchandji Chordia, Katangi 8. Shri Vardhman
Industries, Kanpur 9. Shri Mangilalji Mishrilalji Sancheti, Durg **Patrons** 1.
Shri Birdichaandji Prakashchandji Telesara, Pali 2. Shri Gyanrajji Kevalchandji
Motha, Pali 3. Shri Premrajji Jatanrajji Mehta, Medta City 4. Shri Sh.
Jadavmalji Manakchandji Baitala, Bagalkot 5. Shri Hiralalji Pannalalji Chopra,
Byawar 6. Shri Mohanlalji Nemichandji Lalwani, Changaitola 7. Shri Deepchandji
Chandanmalji Chordia, Madras 8. Shri Pannalalji Bhagchandji Bothra, Changaitola
9. Shrimati Sirekunwar Bai, wife of Late Shri Suganchandji Jhamar, Madurantakam
10. Shri Bastimalji Mohanlalji Bohra (KGF) Jadan 11. Shri Thanchandji Mehta,
Jodhpur 12. Shri Bhairaudanji Labhchandji Surana, Nagaur 13. Shri Khoobchandji
Gadiya, Byawar 14. Shri Mishrilalji Dhanrajji Vinaykia, Byawar 15. Shri
Indrachandji Baid, Rajnandgaon 16. Shri Ravatmalji Bhikmachandji Pagaria,
Balaghat 17. Shri Ganeshmalji Dharmichaandji Kankaria, Tangla 18. Shri
Suganchandji Bokdia, Indore 19. Shri Harkachandji Sagarmalji Baitala, Indore 20.
Shri Raghunathmalji Likhmichandji Lodha, Changaitola 21. Shri Sidhkarannji
Shikharchandji Baid, Changaitola

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI AgamaprakAzana samiti, byAvara arthasahayogI sadasyoM kI zubha nAmAvalI
mahAstambha 1. zrI seTha mohanamalajI corar3iyA, madrAsa 2. zrI gulAbacandajI
mAMgIlAlajI surANA, sikandarAbAda 3. zrI pukharAjajI zizodiyA, byAvara 4. zrI
sAyaramalajI jeThamalajI corar3iyA, baiMgalora 5. zrI premarAjajI bhaMvaralAlajI
zrIzrImAla, durga 6. zrI esa. kizanacandajI corar3iyA, madrAsa 7. zrI
kaMvaralAlajI baitAlA, gohATI 8. zrI seTha khIMvarAjajI corar3iyA madrAsa 9. zrI
gumAnamalajI corar3iyA, madrAsa 10. zrI esa. bAdalacandajI corar3iyA, madrAsa
11. zrI je. dulIcandajI corar3iyA, madrAsa 12. zrI esa. ratanacandajI corar3iyA,
madrAsa 13. zrI je. annarAjajI corar3iyA, madrAsa 14. zrI esa. sAyaracandajI
corar3iyA, madrAsa 15. zrI Ara. zAntilAlajI uttamacandajI corar3iyA, madrAsa 16.
zrI siremalajI hIrAcandajI corar3iyA, madrAsa 17. zrI je. hukmIcandajI
corar3iyA, madrAsa stambha sadasya 1. zrI agaracandajI phatecandajI pArakha,
jodhapura 2. zrI jasarAjajI gaNezamalajI saMcetI, jodhapura 3. zrI
tilokacaMdajI, sAgaramalajI saMcetI, madrAsa 4. zrI pUsAlAlajI kistUracaMdajI
surANA, kaTaMgI 5. zrI Ara. prasannacandajI corar3iyA, madrAsa 6. zrI
dIpacandajI corar3iyA, madrAsa 7. zrI mUlacandajI corar3iyA, kaTaMgI 8. zrI
varddhamAna iNDasTrIja, kAnapura 9. zrI mAMgIlAlajI mizrIlAlajI saMcetI, durga
saMrakSaka 1. zrI biradIcaMdajI prakAzacaMdajI talesarA, pAlI 2. zrI jJAnarAjajI
kevalacandajI mUthA, pAlI 3. zrI premarAjajI jatanarAjajI mehatA, mer3atA siTI
4. zrI za. jar3AvamalajI mANakacandajI betAlA, bAgalakoTa 5. zrI hIrAlAlajI
pannAlAlajI caupar3A, byAvara 6. zrI mohanalAlajI nemIcandajI lalavANI,
cAMgATolA 7. zrI dIpacaMdajI candanamalajI corar3iyA, madrAsa 8. zrI pannAlAlajI
bhAgacandajI botharA, cAMgATolA zrImatI sireku~vara bAI dharmapatnI sva. zrI
suganacandajI jhAmar3a, madurAntakam 9. 10. zrI bastImalajI mohanalAlajI boharA
(KGF) jAr3ana 11. zrI thAnacandajI mehatA, jodhapura 12. zrI bhairUdAnajI
lAbhacandajI surANA, nAgaura 13. zrI khUbacandajI gAdiyA, byAvara 14. zrI
mizrIlAlajI dhanarAjajI vinAyakiyA, byAvara 15. zrI indracandajI baida,
rAjanAMdagAMva 16. zrI rAvatamalajI bhIkamacandajI pagAriyA, bAlAghATa 17. zrI
gaNezamalajI dharmIcandajI kAMkariyA, TaMgalA 18. zrI suganacandajI bokar3iyA,
indaura 19. zrI harakacandajI sAgaramalajI betAlA, indaura 20. zrI
raghunAthamalajI likhamIcandajI lor3hA, cAMgATolA 21. zrI siddhakaraNajI
zikharacandajI baida, cAMgATolA

Page #129 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Member List | 22. Shri Sagarmalji Nortamlaji Pincha, Madras 7. Shri B. Gajrajji
Bokdia, Salem 23. Shri Mohanrajji Mukanchandji Baliya, 8. Shri Phoolchandji
Gautamchandji Kanted, Pali Ahmedabad 9. Shri K. Pukharajji Bafna, Madras 24.
Shri Keshrimalji Janvarilaji Talesara, Pali 10. Shri Rupraji Jodhrajji Mootha,
Delhi 25. Shri Ratanchandji Uttamchandji Modi, Byawar 11. Shri Mohanlalji
Mangalchandji Pagaria, 26. Shri Dharmicandji Bhagchandji Bohra, Jhutha Raipur
27. Shri Chhogmalji Hemrajji Lodha Dondi Lohara 12. Shri Nathmalji Mohanlalji
Lunia, 28. Shri Gunchandji Dalichandji Kataria, Bellary Chandawal 29. Shri
Mulchandji Sujanmalji Sancheti, Jodhpur 13. Shri Bhanvarlalji Gautamchandji
Pagaria, 30. Shri C. Amarchandji Bothra, Madras Kushalpura 31. Shri Bhanvarlalji
Mulchandji Surana, Madras 14. Shri Uttamchandji Mangilalji, Jodhpur 32. Shri
Badalchandji Jugrajji Mehta, Indore 15. Shri Mulchandji Parkh, Jodhpur 33. Shri
Lalchandji Mohanlalji Kothari, Gothan 16. Shri Sumermalji Medtiya, Jodhpur 34.
Shri Hiralalji Pannalalji Chopra, Ajmer 17. Shri Ganeshmalji Nemichandji Tantia,
Jodhpur | 35. Shri Mohanlalji Parsamalji Pagaria, 18. Shri Udayrajji Pukharajji
Sancheti, Jodhpur Bangalore 19. Shri Badarmalji Pukharajji Bant, Kanpur 36. Shri
Bhanvarimalji Chordia, Madras 20. Smt. Sundarbai Gothi Dharmpatnishri
Tarachandji 37. Shri Bhanvarlalji Gotha, Madras Gothi, Jodhpur 38. Shri
Jalmachandji Rikhbachandji Bafna, Agra. 21. Shri Raychandji Mohanlalji, Jodhpur
39. Shri Ghevarchandji Pukharajji Bhurat, Guwahati 22. Shri Ghevarchandji
Rupraji, Jodhpur 40. Shri Jabarchandji Gelda, Madras 23. Shri Bhanvarlalji
Manakchandji Surana, Madras 41. Shri Jadavmalji Suganchandji, Madras 24. Shri
Janvarilaji Amarchandji Kothari, 42. Shri Pukharajji Vijayrajji, Madras Byawar
43. Shri Chenmalji Surana Trust, Madras 25. Shri Manakchandji Kishnalalji,
Medtacity 44. Shri Lunakaranji Rikhbachandji Lodha, Madras 26. Shri Mohanlalji
Gulabchandji Chatar, Byav 45. Shri Surajmalji Sajjanrajji Meheta, Koppal 27.
Shri Jasrajji Janvarilaji Dhariawal, Associate Member Jodhpur 1. Shri Devkaranji
Shrichandji Dosi, Medtacity 28. Shri Mohanlalji Champalalji Gothi, Jodhpur 2.
Smt. Chhaganibai Vinaykia, Byawar 29. Shri Nemichandji Dakalia Mehta, Jodhpur 3.
Shri Poonamchandji Nahata, Jodhpur 30. Shri Tarachandji Kevalchandji Karnavat,
Jodhpur 4. Shri Bhanvarlalji Vijayrajji Kankaria, 31. Shri Asumal & Co., Jodhpur
Villipuuram 32. Shri Pukharajji Lodha, Jodhpur 5. Shri Bhanvarlalji Chopra,
Byawar 33. Smt. Suganibai Dharmpatni Shri Mishrilalji 6. Shri Vijayrajji
Ratnalalji Chatar, Byawar Sand, Jodhpur Ppur

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 sadasya- nAmAvalI | 22. zrI sAgaramalajI noratamalajI pIMcA, madrAsa 7. zrI bI.
gajarAjajI bokaDiyA, selama 23. zrI mohanarAjajI mukanacandajI bAliyA, 8. zrI
phUlacandajI gautamacandajI kAMTheDa, pAlI ahamadAbAda 9. zrI ke. pukharAjajI
bAphaNA, madrAsa 24. zrI kezarImalajI jaMvarIlAlajI talesarA, pAlI 10. zrI
rUparAjajI jodharAjajI mUthA, dillI 25. zrI ratanacandajI uttamacandajI modI,
byAvara 11. zrI mohanalAlajI maMgalacaMdajI pagAriyA, 26. zrI dharmIcandajI
bhAgacandajI boharA, jhUThA rAyapura 27. zrI chogAmalajI hemarAjajI lor3hA
DoMDIlohArA 12. zrI nathamalajI mohanalAlajI lUNiyA, 28. zrI guNacaMdajI
dalIcaMdajI kaTAriyA, bellArI caNDAvala 29. zrI mUlacandajI sujAnamalajI
saMcetI, jodhapura 13. zrI bhaMvaralAlajI gautamacandajI pagAriyA, 30. zrI sI.
amaracandajI botharA, madrAsa kuzAlapurA 31. zrI bhaMvaralAlajI mUlacandajI
surANA, madrAsa 14. zrI uttamacaMdajI mAMgIlAlajI, jodhapura 32. zrI
bAdalacaMdajI jugarAjajI mehatA, indaura 15. zrI mUlacandajI pArakha, jodhapura
33. zrI lAlacaMdajI mohanalAlajI koThArI, goThana 16. zrI sumeramalajI
mer3atiyA, jodhapura 34. zrI hIrAlAlajI pannAlAlajI caupar3A, ajamera 17. zrI
gaNezamalajI nemIcandajI TAMTiyA, jodhapura | 35. zrI mohanalAlajI pArasamalajI
pagAriyA, 18. zrI udayarAjajI pukharAjajI saMcetI, jodhapura baiMgalora 19. zrI
bAdaramalajI pukharAjajI baMTa, kAnapura 36. zrI bhaMvarImalajI corar3iyA,
madrAsa 20. zrImatI sundarabAI goThI dharmapatnIzrI tArAcaMdajI 37. zrI
bhaMvaralAlajI goThA, madrAsa goThI, jodhapura 38. zrI jAlamacaMdajI
rikhabacaMdajI bAphanA, AgarA.21. zrI rAyacandajI mohanalAlajI, jodhapura 39.
zrI ghevaracaMdajI pukharAjajI bhuraTa, gohATI 22. zrI ghevaracandajI
rUparAjajI, jodhapura 40. zrI jabaracandajI gelar3A, madrAsa 23. zrI
bhaMvaralAlajI mANakacaMdajI surANA, madrAsa 41. zrI jar3AvamalajI
suganacandajI, madrAsa 24. zrI jaMvarIlAlajI amaracandajI koThArI, 42. zrI
pukharAjajI vijayarAjajI, madrAsa byAvara 43. zrI cenamalajI surANA TrasTa,
madrAsa 25. zrI mANakacaMdajI kizanalAlajI, mer3atAsiTI 44. zrI lUNakaraNajI
rikhabacaMdajI lor3hA, madrAsa 26. zrI mohanalAlajI gulAbacandajI catara, byAva
45. zrI sUrajamalajI sajjanarAjajI mahetA, koppala 27. zrI jasarAjajI
jaMvarIlAlajI dhArIvAla, sahayogI sadasya jodhapura 1. zrI devakaraNajI
zrIcandajI DosI, mer3atAsiTI 28. zrI mohanalAlajI campAlAlajI goThI, jodhapura
2. zrImatI chaganIbAI vinAyakiyA, byAvara 29. zrI nemIcaMdajI DAkaliyA mehatA,
jodhapura 3. zrI pUnamacandajI nAhaTA, jodhapura 30. zrI tArAcaMdajI
kevalacaMdajI karNAvaTa, jodhapura 4. zrI bhaMvaralAlajI vijayarAjajI kAMkariyA,
31. zrI AsUmala eNDa kaM. , jodhapura villIpuram 32. zrI pukharAjajI loDhA,
jodhapura 5. zrI bhaMvaralAlajI caupar3A, byAvara 33. zrImatI suganIbAI
dharmapatnI zrI mizrIlAlajI 6. zrI vijayarAjajI ratanalAlajI catara, byAvara
sAMDa, jodhapura papura

Page #130 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
34. Shri Bachhrajji Surana, Jodhpur 35. Shri Harkachandji Mehta, Jodhpur 36.
Shri Devrajji Labhchandji Medtiya, Jodhpur 37. Shri Kanakrajji Madanrajji Golia,
Jodhpur 38. Shri Ghevarchandji Parsamalji Tantia, Jodhpur 39. Shri Mangilalji
Chordia, Kuchera 40. Shri Sardarmalji Surana, Bhilai 41. Shri Okchandji Hemrajji
Soni, Durg 42. Shri Surajkaranji Surana, Madras 43. Shri Ghisulalji Lalchandji
Parkh, Durg 44. Shri Pukharajji Bohra, (Jain Transport Co.) Jodhpur 45. Shri
Champalalji Saklecha, Jalna 46. Shri Premrajji Mithalalji Kamdar, Bangalore 47.
Shri Bhanwarlalji Mootha & Sons, Jaipur 48. Shri Lalchandji Motilalji Gadia,
Bangalore 49. Shri Bhanwarlalji Navratnamalji Sankhla, Mettupalayam 50. Shri
Pukharajji Chhallani, Karanguli 51. Shri Asakaranji Jasrajji Parkh, Durg 52.
Shri Ganeshmalji Hemrajji Soni, Bhilai 53. Shri Amritrajji Jaswantrajji Mehta,
Medtacity 54. Shri Ghevarchandji Kishoramalji Parkh, Jodhpur 55 Shri Mangilalji
Rekchandji Parkh, Jodhpur 56. Shri Munnilalji Mulchandji Gulechha, Jodhpur 57.
Shri Ratnalalji Lakhpatrajji, Jodhpur 58. Shri Jivrajji Parsamalji Kothari,
Medtacity 59. Shri Bhanwarlalji Rikhabchandji Nahata, Nagaur 60. Shri Mangilalji
Prakashchandji Runwal, Mysore 61. Shri Pukharajji Bohra, Pipaliya Kalan 62. Shri
Harkachandji Jugrajji Bafna, Bangalore  Members - List 63. Shri Chandanmalji
Premchandji Modi, Bhilai 64. Shri Bhimrajji Baghmar, Kuchera 65. Shri
Tilokchandji Premprakashji, Ajmer 66. Shri Vijaylalji Premchandji Gulechha,
Rajnandgaon 67. Shri Ravatmalji Chajed, Bhilai 68. Shri Bhanwarlalji Dungarmalji
Kankaria, Bhilai 69. Shri Hira Salalji Hastimalji Deshlhara, Bhilai 70. Shri
Vardhaman Sthanakwasi Jain Shravak Sangh, Dalli - Rajhara 71. Shri Champalalji
Budhrajji Bafna, Byawer 72. Shri Gangaramji Indachandji Bohra, Kuchera 73. Shri
Fatehrajji Nemichandji Karnavat, Calcutta 74. Shri Balchandji Thanchandji Bhurt,
Calcutta 75. Shri Sampatrajji Kataria, Jodhpur 76. Shri Javrilalji Shantillali
Surana, Bolaram 77. Shri Kanmalji Kothari, Dadia 78. Shri Pannalalji Motilalji
Surana, Pali 79. Shri Manakchandji Ratnalalji Munot, Tangla 80. Shri
Chimmansinghji Mohansinghji Lodha, Byawer 81. Shri Riddhakaranji Ravatmalji
Bhurt, Guwahati 82. Shri Parsamalji Mahavirchandji Bafna, Gothan 83. Shri
Fakirchandji Kamalchandji Shrisrimal, Kuchera 84. Shri Mangilalji Madanlalji
Chordia, Bhairunda 85. Shri Sohनलालजी लूणकरणजी सुराणा, Kuchera 86. Shri
Ghisulalji, Parsamalji, Javrilalji Kothari, Gothan 87. Shri Sardarmalji &
Company, Jodhpur 88. Shri Champalalji Hiralalji Bagrecha, Jodhpur

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 34. zrI baccharAjajI surANA, jodhapura 35. zrI harakacandajI mehatA, jodhapura
36. zrI devarAjajI lAbhacaMdajI mer3atiyA, jodhapura 37. zrI kanakarAjajI
madanarAjajI goliyA, jodhapura 38. zrI ghevaracandajI pArasamalajI TAMTiyA,
jodhapura 39. zrI mAMgIlAlajI corar3iyA, kucerA 40. zrI saradAramalajI surANA,
bhilAI 41. zrI okacaMdajI hemarAjajI sonI, durga 42. zrI sUrajakaraNajI surANA,
madrAsa 43. zrI ghIsUlAlajI lAlacaMdajI pArakha, durga 44. zrI pukharAjajI
boharA, (jaina TrAnsaporTa kaM.)jodhapura 45. zrI campAlAlajI sakalecA, jAlanA
46. zrI premarAjajI mIThAlAlajI kAmadAra, baiMgalora 47. zrI bhaMvaralAlajI
mUthA eNDa sansa, jayapura 48. zrI lAlacaMdajI motIlAlajI gAdiyA, baiMgalora 49.
zrI bhaMvaralAlajI navaratnamalajI sAMkhalA, meTTUpaliyama 50. zrI pukharAjajI
challANI, karaNagullI 51. zrI AsakaraNajI jasarAjajI pArakha, durga 52. zrI
gaNezamalajI hemarAjajI sonI, bhilAI 53. zrI amRtarAjajI jasavantarAjajI mehatA,
mer3atAsiTI 54. zrI ghevaracaMdajI kizoramalajI pArakha, jodhapura 55 zrI
mAMgIlAlajI rekhacaMdajI pArakha, jodhapura 56. zrI munnIlAlajI mUlacaMdajI
gulecchA, jodhapura 57. zrI ratanalAlajI lakhapatarAjajI, jodhapura 58. zrI
jIvarAjajI pArasamalajI koThArI, mer3atAsiTI 59. zrI bhaMvaralAlajI
rikhabacaMdajI nAhaTA, nAgaura 60. zrI mAMgIlAlajI prakAzacandajI rUNavAla,
maisUra 61. zrI pukharAjajI boharA, pIpaliyA kalAM 62. zrI harakacaMdajI
jugarAjajI bAphanA, baiMgalora sadasya - nAmAvalI 63. zrI candanamalajI
premacaMdajI modI, bhilAI 64. zrI bhIMvarAjajI bAghamAra, kucerA 65. zrI
tilokacaMdajI premaprakAzajI, ajamera 66. zrI vijayalAlajI premacaMdajI gulecchA
rAjanAMdagA~va 67. zrI rAvatamalajI chAjer3a, bhilAI 68. zrI bhaMvaralAlajI
DUMgaramalajI kAMkariyA, bhilAI 69. zrI hIrAsalAlajI hastImalajI dezalaharA,
bhilAI 60. zrI varddhamAna sthAnakavAsI jaina zrAvakasaMgha, dallI - rAjaharA
71. zrI campAlAlajI buddharAjajI bAphaNA, byAvara 72. zrI gaMgArAmajI
indacaMdajI boharA, kucerA 73. zrI phateharAjajI nemIcaMdajI karNAvaTa,
kalakattA 74. zrI bAlacaMdajI thAnacandajI bhuraTa, kalakattA 75. zrI
sampatarAjajI kaTAriyA, jodhapura 76. zrI javarIlAlajI zAMtilAlI surANA,
bolArama 77. zrI kAnamalajI koThArI, dAdiyA 75. zrI pannAlAlajI motIlAlajI
surANA, pAlI 79. zrI mANakacaMdajI ratanalAlajI muNota, TaMgalA zrI
cimminasiMhajI mohanasiMhajI loDhA, byAvara 81. zrI riddhakaraNajI rAvatamalajI
bhuraTa, gauhATI 82. zrI pArasamalajI mahAvIracaMdajI bAphanA, goThana 83. zrI
phakIracaMdajI kamalacaMdajI zrIzrImAla, kucerA 80. 84. zrI mA~gIlAlajI
madanalAlajI corar3iyA, bhairUMdA 85. zrI sohanalAlajI lUNakaraNajI surANA,
kucerA 86. zrI ghIsUlAlajI, pArasamalajI, jaMvarIlAlajI koThArI, goThana 87. zrI
saradAramalajI eNDa kampanI, jodhapura 88. zrI campAlAlajI hIrAlAlajI bAgarecA,
jodhapura

Page #131 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Member - Name List 89. Shri Pukharajji Kataria, Jodhpur 90. Shri Indrachandji
Mukanchandji, Indore 91. Shri Bhanwarlalji Bafna, Indore 92. Shri Jethamalji
Modi, Indore 93. Shri Balchandji Amarchandji Modi, Byawar 94. Shri Kundanmalji
Parsamalji Bhandari, Bangalore 95. Smt. Kamalakunwar Lalwani, wife of Shri
Parsamalji Lalwani, Gothan 96. Shri Akhechandji Loonkaranji Bhandari, Kolkata
97. Shri Suganchandji Sancheti, Rajnandgaon 98. Shri Prakashchandji Jain, Nagaur
99. Shri Kushalchandji Rikhabchandji Surana, Bolaram 100. Shri Laxmichandji
Ashok Kumarji Shrisrimal, Kuchehra 101. Shri Guddarmalji Champalalji, Gothan
102. Shri Tejarajji Kothari, Mangliyawas 103. Shri Sampatrajji Chordia, Madras
104. Shri Amarchandji Chajed, Padu Bari 105. Shri Jugrajji Dhanrajji Barmecha,
Madras 106. Shri Pukharajji Naharmalji Lalwani, Madras 107. Smt. Kanchandevi and
Nirmala Devi, Madras 108. Shri Dulairajji Bhanwarlalji Kothari, Kushalpura 109.
Shri Bhanwarlalji Mangilalji Betala, Deh 110. Shri Jivrajji Bhanwarlalji
Chordia, Bhairunda 111. Shri Mangilalji Shanti Lalji Runwal, Harsolav 112. Shri
Chandmalji Dhanrajji Modi, Ajmer 113. Shri Ramprasanna Gyanprasar Kendra,
Chandrapur. 114. Shri Bhurmalji Dulichandji Bokardia, Medtacity 115. Shri
Mohanlalji Dhariawal, Pali 116. Smt. Ramkunwarbai, wife of Shri Chandmalji
Lodha, Bombay 117. Shri Mangilalji Uttamchandji Bafna, Bangalore 118. Shri
Sanchalalji Bafna, Aurangabad 119. Shri Bhikhamchandji Manakchandji Khabia,
(Kuddalore) Madras 120. Smt. Anopkunwar, wife of Shri Champalalji Sanghvi,
Kuchehra 121. Shri Sohनलालji Sojatiya, Thanwala 122. Shri Champalalji Bhandari,
Kolkata 123. Shri Bhikhamchandji Ganeshmalji Chaudhary, Dhullia 124. Shri
Pukharaji Kishनलालji Tated, Secunderabad 125. Shri Mishrilalji Sajjanlalji
Kataria, Secunderabad 126. Shri Vardhaman Sthanakwasi Jain Shravak Sangh, Bagar
Nagar 127. Shri Pukharajji Parsamalji Lalwani, Bilara 128. Shri T. Parsamalji
Chordia, Madras 129. Shri Motilalji Asulalji Bohra & Co., Bangalore 130. Shri
Sampatrajji Surana, Manmad 17

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 sadasya - nAmAvalI 89. zrI pukharAjajI kaTAriyA, jodhapura 90. zrI indracandajI
mukanacandajI, indaura 91. zrI bhaMvaralAlajI bAphanA, indaura 92. zrI
jeThamalajI modI, indaura 93. zrI bAlacandajI amaracandajI modI, byAvara 94. zrI
kundanamalajI pArasamalajI bhaMDArI, baiMgalora 95. zrImatI kamalAkaMvara
lalavANI dharmapatnI svaH 115. zrI mohanalAlajI dhArIvAla, pAlI 116. zrImatI
rAmakuMvarabAI dharmapatnI zrI cAMdamalajI . loDhA, bambaI 117. zrI mA~gIlAlajI
uttamacaMdajI bAphaNA, baiMgalora 118. zrI sAMcAlAlajI bAphaNA, auraMgAbAda119.
zrI bhIkhamacandajI mANakacandajI khAbiyA, (kuDAlora) madrAsa 120. zrImatI
anopakuMvara dharmapatnI zrI campAlAlajI saMghavI, kucerA 121. zrI sohanalAlajI
sojatiyA, thAMvalA 100. zrI lakSmIcaMdajI azokakumArajI zrIzrImAla, 122. zrI
campAlAlajI bhaNDArI, kalakattA kucerA 123. zrI bhIkhamacandajI gaNezamalajI
caudharI, dhUliyA 124. zrI pukharAjI kizanalAlajI tAter3a, sikandarAbAda 125.
zrI mizrIlAlajI sajjanalAlajI kaTAriyA, sikandarAbAda 126. zrI varddhamAna
sthAnakavAsI jaina zrAvaka saMgha, bagar3Inagara zrI pArasamalajI lalavANI,
goThana 96. zrI akhecandajI lUNakaraNajI bhaNDArI, kalakattA 97. zrI
suganacandajI saMcetI, rAjanAMdagA~va 98. zrI prakAzacaMdajI jaina, nAgaura 99.
zrI kuzAlacaMdajI rikhabacandajI surANA, bolArama 112. zrI cAMdamalajI
dhanarAjajI modI, ajamera 113. zrI rAmaprasanna jJAnaprasAra kendra, candrapura.
114. zrI bhUramalajI dulIcaMdajI bokar3iyA, mer3atAsiTI 101. zrI gUdar3amalajI
campAlAlajI, goThana 102. zrI tejarAjajI koThArI, mAMgaliyAvAsa 103. zrI
sampatarAjajI corar3iyA, madrAsa 104. zrI amaracaMdajI chAjer3a, pAdu bar3I 105.
zrI jugarAjajI dhanarAjajI baramecA, madrAsa 206. zrI pukharAjajI nAharamalajI
lalavANI, madrAsa 107. zrImatI kaMcanadevI va nirmalA devI, madrAsa 108. zrI
dulairAjajI bhaMvaralAlajI koThArI, kuzAlapurA 909. zrI bhaMvaralAlajI
mAMgIlAlajI betAlA, Deha 110. zrI jIvarAjajI bhaMvaralAlajI corar3iyA, bhairUMdA
111. zrI mA~gIlAlajI zAMtilAlajI rUNavAla, harasolAva 127. zrI pukharAjajI
pArasamalajI lalavANI, bilAr3A 128. zrI TI. pArasamalajI corar3iyA, madrAsa 129.
zrI motIlAlajI AsUlAlajI boharA eNDa kaM., baiMgalora 130. zrI sampatarAjajI
surANA, manamAr3a 17

Page #132 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Life Sketch of Yuvacharya Shri Mishrimalji M.Sa. 'Madhukar' Muni  **Birth:**
Margashirsha Shukla Chaturdashi, Vikram Samvat 1970 (1913 CE), Tinwari Nagar,
Jodhpur District, Rajasthan. **Parents:** Mother - Shrimati Tulsibai, Father -
Shri Jamnalalji Dhaadiwal. **Initiation:**  Vaishakh Shukla 10, Vikram Samvat
1980 (1923 CE), Bhinay Gram, Ajmer District. **Initiation Guru:** Shri
Joravarmalji M.Sa. **Teaching Guru (Guru-Bhrata):** Shri Hazarimlalji M.Sa.
**Acharya Parampara:** Pujya Acharya Shri Jaymallji M.Sa. **Acharya Pad:** Jay
Gachchh, Vikram Samvat 2004 (1947 CE). **Resignation from Acharya Pad:** Vikram
Samvat 2009 (1952 CE) for the unity of the Shraman Sangh. **Upadhyaya Pad:**
Vikram Samvat 2033 (1976 CE). **Declaration of Yuvacharya Pad:** Shravan Shukla
1, Vikram Samvat 2036 (1979 CE), July 25, 1979, Hyderabad. **Yuvacharya Pad
Chadar Mahotsav:** Chaitra Shukla 10, Vikram Samvat 2037 (1980 CE), March 23,
1980, Jodhpur. **Nirvana:**  Mrigasira Vad 7, Vikram Samvat 2040 (1983 CE),
November 26, 1983, Nasik (Maharashtra).  **Personality and Knowledge:**  Muni
Shri possessed a glorious, majestic, and radiant forehead, bright large eyes, a
smile that illuminated his face, and a gentle voice that showered affection and
courtesy. He was a shining example of spiritual brilliance, profound devotion to
his Gurus, humility alongside knowledge, wisdom alongside authority, and a
disciplined Shraman. He was well-versed in Prakrit, Sanskrit, Grammar, Prakrit
Grammar, Jain Agamas, Nyaya Darshan, etc. He was a highly skilled orator,
novelist, storyteller, and commentator.  **Published Works:**  **Pravachan
Sangrah (Discourse Collection):**  1. Antar Ki Aur, Part 1 & 2 2. Sadhana Ke
Sutra 3. Paryushana Parva Pravachan 4. Jain-Karmasiddhanta 5. Jain Tattva-
Darshan 6. Jain Sanskrit - Ek Vishleshan 7. Grihasth Dharma 8. Aabha Aur Sneha
9. Ahimsa Darshan 10. Tap Ek Vishleshan 11. Adhyatma-Vikas Ki Bhoomika  **Katha
Sahitya (Story Literature):**  1. Jain Katha Mala, Part 1 to 51 2. Upanyas
(Novels):     * Pinjare Ka Panchhi     * Ahimsa Ki Vijay     * Talash     *
Chhaya     * Aan Par Badhi  **Other Books:**  1. Agam Parichay 2. Jain Dharma Ki
Hazar Shikshaen 3. Jiyo To Aise Jiyo  **Special:**  * He was the coordinator and
chief editor of Agam Battisi.  **Disciple:**  * Muni Shri Vinaykumarji 'Bheem'

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
yuvAcArya zrI mizrImalajI ma.sA. 'madhukara' muni kA (jIvana paricaya janma
tithi vi.saM. 1970 mArgazIrSa zuklA caturdazI janma-sthAna tiMvarI nagara, jilA-
jodhapura (rAja.) mAtA zrImatI tulasIbAI pitA zrI jamanAlAlajI dhAr3IvAla dIkSA
tithi vaizAkha zuklA 10 vi.saM. 1980 dIkSA-sthAna bhiNAya grAma, jilA-ajamera
dIkSAguru zrI jorAvaramalajI ma.sA. zikSAguru (gurubhrAtA) zrI hajArImalajI
ma.sA. AcArya paramparA pUjya AcArya zrI jayamallajI ma.sA. AcArya pada jaya
gaccha-vi.saM. 2004 zramaNa saMgha kI ekatA hetu AcArya pada kA tyAga
vi.saM.2009 upAdhyAya pada vi.saM. 2033 nAgaura (varSAvAsa) yuvAcArya pada kI
ghoSaNA zrAvaNa zuklA 1 vi.saM. 2036 dinAMka 25 julAI 1979 (haidarAbAda)
yuvAcArya pada-cAdara mahotsava vi.saM. 2037 caitra zuklA 10 dinAMka 23-3-80,
jodhapura svargavAsa vi.saM. 2040 migasara vada 7 dinAMka 26-11-1983, nAsika
(mahArASTra) ApakA vyaktitva evaM jJAna : gauravapUrNa bhavya tejasvI lalATa,
camakadAra bar3I A~kheM, mukha para smita kI khilatI AbhA aura sneha tathA
saujanya varSAti komala vANI, AdhyAtmika teja kA nikhAra, gurujanoM ke prati
agAdha zraddhA, vidyA ke sAtha vinaya, adhikAra ke sAtha viveka aura anuzAsita
zramaNa the| prAkRta, saMskRta, vyAkaraNa, prAkRta vyAkaraNa, jaina Agama, nyAya
darzana Adi kA praur3ha jJAna munizrI ko prApta thaa| Apa uccakoTi ke
pravacanakAra, upanyAsakAra, kathAkAra evaM vyAkhyAkAra the| Apake prakAzita
sAhitya kI nAmAvalI Tirup | pravacana saMgraha : 1. antara kI ora, bhAga 1 va 2,
2. sAdhanA ke sUtra, 3. paryuSaNa parva pravacana, 4. a 5. jaina-karmasiddhAnta,
6. jainatattva-darzana, 7. jaina saMskRta-eka vizleSaNa, 8. gRhasthadharma, 9 /
AbhA Ara snaha 10. ahiMsA darzana, 11. tapa eka vizleSaNa, 12. AdhyAtma-vikAsa
kI bhuumikaa| 'agAdha zraddhA, vidyA ke kathA sAhitya : jaina kathA mAlA, bhAga
1 se 51 taka upanyAsa : 1. piMjare kA paMchI, 2. ahiMsA kI vijaya, 3. talAza, 4.
chAyA, 5. Ana para bar3hi jJAna munizrI ko prAra anya pustakeM : 1. Agama
paricaya, 2. jainadharma kI hajAra zikSAe~, 3. jiyo to aise jiyo| the| vizeSa :
Agama battIsI ke saMyojaka va pradhAna smpaadk| ziSya: Apake eka ziSya haiM-1.
muni zrI vinayakumArajI 'bhIma'

