Catalog link: https://jainqq.org/explore/001170/1

Page #1 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Ap Devagam Praparnaam MOVIEODORArrareer Aptmeemaansa Jugalkishor Mukhtar
-..reencameramonERSIDDLEASINIRMIRCHIRAINBIRSINHILAIsraereumments
NEListereonsecurniaRIENDSHRSeestamsssistianSTRAILERIRRIORRBIRRORDERSIRSIBILI
20.05ammutnesssanaSamosaaSHRIRanamURTELEmauERINARIDABHAIBHIMIRELES
aareaseemsasuraroresertBRDERBenearerESTIREDMRIBlastamataramse.nare.ai.sase.ac...
Watesiaasana.m.reinstsIDIO.sassiussaURRBusinesirmisInstaBINOBHBIRHEDiasBHRAIL
Veer Seva Mandir Trust - Prakashan

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 apa devAgama praparanAma MOVIEODORArrareer AptamImAMsA jugalakizora mukhtAra
-..reencameramonERSIDDLEASINIRMIRCHIRAINBIRSINHILAIsraereumments
NEListereonsecurniaRIENDSHRSeestamsssistianSTRAILERIRRIORRBIRRORDERSIRSIBILI
20.05ammutnesssanaSamosaaSHRIRanamURTELEmauERINARIDABHAIBHIMIRELES
aareaseemsasuraroresertBRDERBenearerESTIREDMRIBlastamataramse.nare.ai.sase.ac...
Watesiaasana.m.reinstsIDIO.sassiussaURRBusinesirmisInstaBINOBHBIRHEDiasBHRAIL
vIrasevAmandiraTrasTa-prakAzana

Page #2 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Srimat Swami Samantabhadracharya-virachit Devagama Aparanama Apta-Mimamsa
Anuvadak Jagal Kishor Mukhtar 'Yugavir' [Vishad Prakash on Jain Literature and
History, Shasanabhed of Jain Acharyas, Granthapariksha (four parts), Yugavir-
Bharato, Yugavir-Nibandhawali etc. writer; Swayambhu-Stotra, Yuktyanusasan,
Samichin Dharma Shastra, Adhyatma Rahasya, Tattvanusasan, Yogasara Prabhrit,
Kalyan Kalpadrum etc. special translator, commentator and commentator; editor of
many letters like Anekanta etc., books like Samadhi Tantra etc. and compiler-
editor of Prakrit Padyanukramanee] Veer Seva Mandir Trust-Prakashan

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrImatsvAmi-samantabhadrAcAryavayaM-viracita devAgama aparanAma Apta-mImAMsA
anuvAdaka jagalakizora mukhtAra 'yugavIra' [jaina sAhitya aura itihAsapara
vizada prakAza, jainAcAryoMkA zAsanabheda, granthaparIkSA (cAra bhAga),
yugavIra-bhArato, yugavIra-nibandhAvalI Adike lekhaka; svayambhU-stotra,
yuktyanuzAsana, samIcInadharmazAstra, adhyAtmarahasya, tattvAnuzAsana,
yogasAraprAbhRta, kalyANakalpadruma Adike viziSTa anuvAdaka, TIkAkAra evaM
bhASyakAra; anekAnta Adi patroM, samAdhitantra Adi granthoMke sampAdaka aura
prAkRtapadyAnukramaNIke saMyojaka-sampAdaka] vIrasevAmandiraTrasTa-prakAzana

Page #3 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Published by Dr. Darbarilal Kothia, Secretary, Veer Seva Mandir Trust, Chameli
Kutir, 1/128, Dumraon Kaloni, Assi, Varanasi 5 (U.P.) First Edition: One
thousand copies, June 1967 Second Edition: 1100 copies, Ashadhi Ashtahnika, Veer
Nirvan Samvat 2504, July 1978 Price: Rs. 5 Printed by Babulal Jain, Faguull
Mahavir Press, Bhelupur, Varanasi

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prakAzaka DaoN0 darabArIlAla koThiyA, maMtrI, vIrasevAmandira-TrasTa, camelI-
kuTIra, 1/128, DumarAMva kAlaunI, assI, vArANasI5 ( u0 pra0 ) prathama
saMskaraNa : eka hajAra pratiyA~ jUna 1967 dvitIya saMskaraNa : 1100 pratiyA~
ASAr3hI aSTAhnikA, vIra nirvANa saMvat 2504 julAI 1978 mUlya : 5 ru0 mudraka
bAbUlAla jaina phAgulla mahAvIra presa, bhelUpura, vArANasI

Page #4 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
1. **Samarpana** 2. **Prakashkiy** Granthanukrama 3. **Dhannyavad** 4.
Anuvaadkiy Vaktavya 5. **Prastavana** 6. Vishay-Soochi 7. Moolgranth: Anuvaad
Sahith 8. **Karikanukramanika** 9. **Praamukhashbad** - Soochi  Page 5 8 1-47 49
1-107 108-111

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 1. samarpaNa 2. prakAzakIya granthAnukrama 3. dhanyavAda 4. anuvAdakIya
vaktavya 5. prastAvanA 6. viSaya-sUcI 7. mUlagrantha : anuvAda sahita 8.
kArikAnukramaNikA 9. pramukhazabda - sUcI pRSTha 5 8 1-47 49 1-107 108 111

Page #5 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The story of the great one, who is not a source of wonder for whom? He is known
by the Devagama, and is still shown today. - Vadirajsuri, Samantabhadra,
Bhadrartha, may he be the ornament of India. The Devagama is revealed here by
him, the Devagama is made. - Shubachanda Acharya, Pashvanathcharit

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 smAminazcaritaM tasya kasya no vismayAvaham  /  devAgamena sarvajJo yenA'dyApi
pradazyate  /  /  -vAdirAjasUriH samantabhadro bhadrArtho bhAtu bhAratabhUSaNaH
/  devAgamena yenA'tra vyakto devA''gamaH kRtaH  /  /  -zubhacandAcArya,
pAzvanAthacarita

Page #6 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Dedication**  Your creation, O Lord! is dedicated to you. O Adorable Gurudev
Swami Samantabhadra! This unique and unparalleled work of yours, Devagam
(Aptmimamsa), was received by me about 70 years ago. Since then, it has been my
constant study material, and I have been engaged in acquiring a proper
understanding of it through its study, contemplation, and understanding of its
essence. How far I have been able to achieve that understanding, and to what
extent I have been able to comprehend the deep and profound meaning of the words
and phrases of this text, can be known in brief from the translation of the
text, which is greatly indebted to the AshtaSahasri commentary of your devoted
follower, Acharya Shrividyanandaji. You alone can know it fully. I only
understand that the vision I have gained by worshipping you, to whom I am
greatly indebted, and the understanding I have gained through that vision, by
whatever means, is the result of this work. Since it reflects your thoughts, it
is truly your creation, and therefore, it is dedicated to you with reverence.
You are the embodiment of public welfare. If this work, by your grace, can
contribute in any way to public welfare, I will consider myself somewhat
relieved of my debt to you.  **With humility** Jugalkishor

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 samarpaNa tvadIyaM vastu bhoH svAmin ! tubhyameva samarpitam  /  he ArAdhya
gurudeva svAmI - samantabhadra ! ApakI yaha apUrva anupama kRti devAgama
(AptamImAMsA) mujhe Ajase koI 70 varSa pahale prApta huI thI  /  usa vakta
barAbara yaha merI pAThya vastu banI huI hai aura maiM isake adhyayana-manana
tathA marmako samajhane ke prayatna dvArA isakA samucita paricaya prApta
karanemeM lagA rahA hUM  /  vaha paricaya mujhe kahA~ taka prApta ho sakA hai
aura maiM kitane aMzoM meM isa granthake gUDha tathA gambhIra pada-vAkyoMkI
gaharAI - meM sthita arthako mAlUma karanemeM samartha ho sakA hU~, yaha saba
saMkSepameM granthake anuvAdase, jo Apake ananyabhakta AcArya zrIvidyAnandajIkI
aSTasahasrI - TIkAkA bahuta kucha AbhArI hai, jAnA jA sakatA hai, aura use pUre
taurapara to Apa hI jAna sakate haiN| maiM to itanA hI samajhatA hU~ ki ApakI
ArAdhanA karate hue, jinakA maiM bahuta RNI hU~, mujhe jo dRSTizakti prApta huI
hai aura usa dRSTi zaktike dvArA maiMne kisIkA bhI nimitta pAkara jo kucha
arthakA avalokana kiyA hai, yaha kRti usIkA pratiphala hai  /  isameM Apake hI
vicAroMkA pratibimba honese vAstavameM yaha ApakI hI vastu hai aura isaliye
Apako hI sAdara samarpita hai  /  Apa lokahitakI mUrti haiM, Apake prasAdase isa
kRti dvArA yadi kucha bhI lokahitakA sAdhana ho sakA to maiM apaneko Apake RNase
kucha uRNa huA samajha~gA  /  vinamra jugalakizora

Page #7 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Please provide the text you would like translated. I need the text to translate
it into English.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================


Page #8 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
** प्रकाशकीय **  In 1964, the Veer Seva Mandir Trust published
"Samadhimaranotsah Deepak" and now the present work, "Devagam (Aaptamimamsa)" by
Swami Samantabhadra is being printed along with its Hindi commentary. This Hindi
commentary has been written by the renowned scholar of literature and history,
and a devoted follower of Swami Samantabhadra, the learned Pandit Jugalkishorji
Mukhtar, the Superintendent of the Veer Seva Mandir Trust. It is not unknown to
the learned readers that almost all the available works of Swami Samantabhadra
are extremely profound, difficult and complex. Only "Ratnakarandaka
Shravakaachar" is a work that is relatively simpler than the others. But it is a
theoretical work and therefore its simplicity is natural. The teachings of
religion should be in simple language. Among the remaining works of
Samantabhadra, "Stuti-Vidya" is a high-quality work of poetry and poetics, which
reveals Samantabhadra's scholarship in this field. Devagam, Yuktyanusasan and
Swayambhustotra are all philosophical works, which are the representative works
of Jain philosophy and which illuminate the entire Jain literature.  It is a
matter of joy that Mukhtarsahb has been blessed to be the commentator of the
remaining four works, excluding Stuti-Vidya. He himself studied, pondered and
practiced these works for years and then wrote commentaries on them. Although he
did not learn these works from a guru, yet he understood their essence as well
as he presented it in his commentaries, perhaps even someone who learned them
from a guru could not do so well. He wrote these commentaries based on
commentaries, dictionaries and other texts and he had to work hard for it. As a
result, he has proved to be a successful commentator and a deep scholar of these
texts.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prakAzakIya san 1964 meM vIrasevAmandira-TrasTa-dvArA
'samAdhimaraNotsAhadIpaka' kA prakAzana huA thA aura aba prastuta svAmI
samantabhadrakRta devAgama ( AptamImAMsA ) kA usake hindI-bhASyake sAtha mudraNa
ho rahA hai  /  yaha hindI-bhASya prasiddha sAhitya aura itihAsavettA tathA
svAmI samantabhadrake ananyabhakta evaM unakI kRtiyoMke marmajJa zraddheya
paNDita jugalakizorajI mukhtAra adhiSThAtA vIrasevAmandira-TrasTadvArA racA gayA
hai  /  vijJa pAThakoMse yaha avidita nahIM hai ki svAmI samantabhadrakI prAyaH
sabhI upalabdha kRtiyA~ atyanta gambhIra, durUha aura duravagAha haiN| eka
'ratnakaraNDakazrAvakAcAra' hI aisI kRti hai jo anya kRtiyoMse apekSAkRta sarala
hai| para vaha saiddhAntika racanA hai aura isalie usakA sarala honA svAbhAvika
hai| dharmakA upadeza sarala bhASAmeM honA hI caahie| samantabhadrakI zeSa
kRtiyoMmeM 'stuti-vidyA' kAvya-zAstrakI ucca koTikI racanA hai jo
samantabhadrake tatsambandhI vaiduSyako prakaTa karatI hai| devAgama,
yuktyanuzAsana aura svayambhUstotra ye tInoM dArzanika racanAeM haiM, jo jaina
darzanakI apratinidhi kRtiyA~ haiM aura jinase samagra jaina vAGamaya pradIpta
hai  /  prasannatAkI bAta hai ki stuti-vidyAko chor3akara zeSa cAroM kRtiyoMkA
vyAkhyAtA honekA saubhAgya mukhtArasAhabako prApta hai| unhoMne ina kRtiyoMkA
varSAM taka svayaM adhyayana, manana aura anuzIlana kiyA aura taba unapara
vyAkhyAna likhe haiM  /  yadyapi unhoMne ina kRtiyoMko gurumukhase par3hA nahIM,
phira bhI unhoMne inake marmako jitanI acchI taraha samajhA tathA apane
bhASyoMmeM use prastuta kiyA utanI acchI taraha guru-mukhase unheM par3hanevAlA
bhI sambhavataH nahIM kara sktaa| TIkAoM, koSoM aura granthAntaroMke AdhArase
unhoMne ina bhASyoMko likhA hai aura isameM unheM kaThora parizrama karanA par3A
hai| phalataH ve ina granthoMke taladRSTA evaM saphala vyAkhyAtA siddha hue haiM
/

Page #9 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Prakashkoy The present Devagama-Bhashya is presented in the same order. Like the
Swayambhustotra, Yuktyanusasan, etc., they have given a good meaning-explosion
of each word-sentence, etc., and have succeeded in presenting the heart of the
author. They are grateful to the society, especially the scholars, for
presenting this important work. _We had promised to write its preface. But we
are very sorry that we could not write it soon, due to which there has been a
delay of one and a half years in its publication. We apologize to the readers
for this. The patience and affection of Mukhtar Sahib were instrumental in
writing the preface, so we are also grateful to him._ Here we want to reveal
that this book had to be printed in two presses for some reasons. The original
text (pp. 1-112) was printed in Manohar Press and the rest in Mahavira Press. We
cannot forget to thank Mahavira Press for its promptness. We hope that the
readers will be happy to receive this important work and forget the
inconvenience caused by the delay. 11 April 1967, Darbarilal Jain Kothia Chaitra
Shukla 2, Vi. Sa. 2024. Minister, Veersevamandhir-Trust

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prakAzakoya prastuta devAgama-bhASya usI kramameM sanniviSTa hai|
svayambhUstotra, yuktyanuzAsana AdikI taraha isake bho pratyeka pada-vAkyAdikA
unhoMne acchA artha-sphoTa kiyA hai aura granthakArake hArdako prastuta karane
meM saphala hue haiN| isa mahattvapUrNa racanAko upasthita karaneke lie ve
samAjake vizeSatayA vidvAnoMke dhanyavAdAha haiM  /  _isakI prastAvanA likhanekA
vAyadA hamane kiyA thaa| parantu hameM atyanta kheda hai ki hama use zIghra na
likha sake aura jisake kAraNa Der3ha varSa jitanA vilamba isake prakAzanameM ho
gyaa| isake lie hama pAThakoMse kSamA-prArthI haiM  /  mukhtAra sAhabakA dhairya
aura sneha hI prastAvanAke likhAne meM nimitta hue, ataH hama unake bhI kRtajJa
haiM  /  yahA~ itanA aura hama prakaTa kara denA cAhate haiM ki yaha grantha
kucha kAraNoMse do presoMmeM chapAnA pdd'aa| mUla grantha (pR0 1-112 ) to
manohara presameM chapA aura zeSa saba mahAvIra presameM  /  mahAvIra presakI
tatparatAke lie hama use dhanyavAda denA nahIM bhUla sakate  /  AzA hai pAThaka
isa mahattvapUrNa kRtiko prAptakara prasanna hoMge aura vilambajanya kaSTako
bhUla jAveMge  /  11 apraila 1967, darabArIlAla jaina koThiyA caitra zuklA 2,
vi0 saM0 2024  /  mantrI, vIrasevAmandira-TrasTa

Page #10 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Translational Statement  Translation refers to the rendering of a statement
in accordance with the original. A translation that does not follow the original
closely, goes beyond the original's scope, or includes extraneous points
unrelated to the subject matter, is not worthy of being called a translation.
The text being translated here is the 'Devagama', an unparalleled work by the
great Acharya, like a Swami, whose words are said to be rarer than the
acquisition of large, round, smooth pearls that adorn the necks of noble men. It
depicts the worldly beings as rare as the human birth while wandering through
the cycle of births and deaths, and declares it as radiant as the words of Lord
Mahavira. The name 'Devagama' is related to the word 'Devagama' at the beginning
of the text; just as the texts like 'Bhaktamar', 'Kalyanmandir',
'Swayambhustotra', etc. have taken their names according to the initial word,
similarly, this text, which is actually an extraordinary type of stotra-granth,
has been called 'Devagama' according to its initial word. Its other name is
'Aptmimamsa', which takes into account the examination of the words of the Aptas
- those who are omniscient - and the determination of the truth and falsehood of
their opinions. All the texts of Samantabhadra have two names; for example, the
other name of 'Jinshatak' is 'Stutivijya' and the other name of 'Yuktyanushasan'
is 'Veerajinastotra', which is written in praise of Shri Veerajina after
examining all the Aptas - omniscients - after the Devagama. The name of any text
of Samantabhadra is not only based on the initial word but also has a quality
suffix, Devagama is also such a name, it is not only indicative of the arrival
of the gods according to the original author but also indicative of the meaning
by which the arrival of the Jinenra Dev is expressed.  The original verses of
Devagama are 194 in total, seemingly simple to understand...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 anuvAdakIya vaktavya mUlake anukUla vAda-kathanako anuvAda kahate haiM  /  jo
anuvAda mUlakA ThIka-ThIka anusaraNa na kare, mUlakI sImAse bAhara nikala jAya
athavA bIca-bIca meM idhara-udharakI kucha aisI dUsarI bAtoMko apane meM
samAviSTa kare, jinakA prakRta viSayake sAtha koI sambandha na ho vaha anuvAda
kahalAneke yogya nahIM  /  anuvAdya-grantha yahA~ 'devAgama' hai, jo svAmI jaise
una advitIya mahAn AcAryakI apUrva kRti hai jinake vacanoMko uttama puruSoM ke
kaNThoMkA AbhUSaNa bananevAlI bar3e-bar3e gola-suDaula motiyoMkI mAlAoMkI
prAptise adhika durlabha batalAyA hai  /  bhava-bhramaNa karate hue saMsArI
prANiyoMko manuSya-bhavake samAna durlabha darzAyA hai aura bhagavAn mahAvIra-
vANIke samakakSa daidIpyamAna ghoSita kiyA hai  /  devAgama yaha nAma granthake
'devAgama' zabdase prArambha honese sambandha rakhatA hai; jaise bhaktAmara,
kalyANamandira, svayambhUstotrAdi grantha prArambhika zabdake anurUpa apane-
apane nAmoMko lie hue haiM usI prakAra yaha grantha bhI, jo vastutaH eka
asAdhAraNa koTikA stotra-grantha hai, apane prArambhika zabdAnusAra 'devAgama'
kahA gayA hai  /  isakA dUsarA nAma 'AptamImAMsA' hai, jo AptoM-sarvajJa kahe
jAnevAloMke vacanoMkI parIkSAdvArA unake matoMke satyAsatyanirNayakI dRSTiko lie
hue hai  /  samantabhadrake sabhI grantha do-do nAmoMko lie hue haiM; jaise
'jinazataka' kA dUsarA nAma 'stutividyA' aura yuktyanuzAsanakA dUsarA nAma
'vIrajinastotra' hai, jo devAgamake bAda saba AptoM-sarvajJoMkI parIkSA kara
leneke anantara-zrIvIrajinakI stutimeM likhA gayA hai  /  samantabhadrake kisI
bhI granthakA nAma kevala prArambhika zabdake AdhArapara hI nahIM hai kintu
sAthameM guNapratyaya bhI hai, devAgama bhI aisA hI nAma hai vaha
mUlakArikAnusAra devoMke AgamanakA vAcaka hI nahIM balki jinendra devakA Agamana
jisake dvArA vyakta hotA hai usa arthakA bhI vAcaka hai  /  devAgamako mUla
kArikAe~ kula 194 haiM, dekhanemeM prAyaH sarala jAna

Page #11 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Devagam  While Devagam doesn't seem particularly difficult from a general
perspective, it becomes very profound and rich in meaning when considered from
the viewpoint of special and consequential meanings. Almost all the verses are
in the form of sutras. Many verses contain several sutras bound together. The
sutra style is generally a style of expression in a very concise form, and
therefore, to explain the meaning of the sutras or verses in the form of sutras,
one has to go through many things, which can help understand the situation in
front of the sutra-maker, any particular opinion or question that was present,
which led to its manifestation. Shri Akalankdev has explained the meaning of
Devagam in his Ashtshati (equivalent to eight hundred verses) commentary in the
form of sutras. But from the point of view of the subject, these sutras have
become so difficult and inaccessible that even good scholars, let alone ordinary
scholars, cannot easily understand them. Taking the aforementioned Ashtshato-
bhashya, Shri Vidyānandācārya has written an ornamentation called Ashtsahasri
(eight thousand verses) on Devagam, which makes the sutra-meaning of Ashtshati
clear and reveals its depth and complexity. This Ashtsahasri-tika is also full
of difficult words from the point of view of the subject, and therefore, a
scholar Yashvijay (Shvetambara Acharya) had to write a commentary on it, which
also became equivalent to eight thousand verses. This makes it even clearer how
profound, deep and rich in meaning the original text is.  Vidyānandācārya
himself has called Ashtsahasri 'Kastsahasri', meaning that its creation was done
by enduring thousands of hardships, and this is not hidden from those
knowledgeable readers who create such research-oriented important texts, they
experience that hardship at every step - it is not something that ordinary
knowledgeable readers can understand. It is true, what is the pain of childbirth
to a barren woman? Acharya Mahāśaya has said one thing in this Ashts...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 devAgama par3atI haiM-sAmAnya arthakI dRSTise koI khAsa kaThinAI mAlUma nahIM
par3atI; parantu vizeSArtha aura phalitArthakI dRSTime jaba vicAra kiyA jAtA hai
to bahuta kucha gahana-gambhIra tathA arthagauravako lie hue jAna par3atI haiM
/  sabhI kArikAe~ prAyaH sUtrarUpameM haiM  /  aneka kArikAoMmeM to kitane hI
sUtra ekasAtha nibaddha ho rahe haiM  /  sUtrazailI prAyaH atisaMkSiptarUpase
kathanako zailI hai aura isalie sUtroM athavA sUtrarUpa kArikAoMkA artha spaSTa
karaneke lie kitanI hI bAtoMkA Uparase lenA-lagAnA hotA hai, jinase yaha mAlUma
ho sake ki sUtrakArake sAmane kyA paristhiti thI, koI mata-vizeSa athavA prazna-
vizeSa upasthita thA, jise lekara isakA avatAra huA hai  /  zrI akalaMkadevane
apane aSTazatI ( AThasau zlokoMke parimANa jitane )-bhASyameM devAgamakI
arthadRSTiko sUtrarUpameM hI kholA hai  /  parantu viSayakI dRSTi se ve sUtra
itane kaThina aura durgama ho gaye haiM ki sAdhAraNa vidvAnkI to bAta hI kyA,
acche vidvAn bhI use sahajameM nahIM lagA sakate haiM  /  ukta aSTazato-bhASyako
apanAkara zrIvidyAnandAcAryane devAgamapara jo aSTasahasrI ( ATha-hajAra zloka
parimANa ) nAmakI alaGkRti likhI hai usase aSTazatIkA sUtrArtha spaSTa
avabhAsita hotA hai aura usakI gambhIratA evaM jaTilatAkA patA cala jAtA hai  /
yaha aSTasahasrI-TIkA bhI viSayakI dRSTise kaThina zabdoMkI bharamArako lie hue
hai aura isalie eka vidvAn yazovijaya ( zvetAmbarAcArya ) ko isapara TippaNa
likhanA par3A hai, jisakA parimANa bhI ATha hajAra zloka jitanA ho gayA hai  /
isase mUlagnantha kitanA adhika gahana, gambhIra tathA arthagauravako lie hue
hai, yaha aura bhI spaSTa ho jAtA hai| aSTasahasrIko svayaM vidyAnandAcAryane
'kaSTasahasrI' likhA hai arthAt usakA nirmANakArya sahasroM kaSTa jhelakara huA
hai aura yaha bAta una vijJa pAThakoMse chipI nahIM, jo ese khojapUrNa
mahattvake granthoMkA nirmANakArya karate haiM unheM pada-padapara usa kaSTakA
avabhAsana hotA hai-sAdhAraNa vijJa pAThakoMke vazakI vaha bAta nhiiN| ThIka
hai, prasava meM jo bhArI vedanA hotI hai use bA~jha kyA jAne ? bhAcArya
mahodayane eka bAta isa aSTa

Page #12 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Translation:  **Translational** **11**  It is further written in the
*Vishesh* of the *Ashta Sahasri* that, "What is the use of listening to a
thousand scriptures when one should listen to the *Ashta Sahasri*, which alone
reveals the true nature of both the present and the past times?" This is not
merely a statement written in praise of its own text, but a reflection of the
true state of affairs. Once, Seth Pan. Mewaramji of Khurja told me that a German
scholar had said to him, "One who has not read the *Ashta Sahasri* is not a
Jain, and one who has read the *Ashta Sahasri* and has not become a Jain has not
understood the *Ashta Sahasri*." How significant this statement is, and how much
it exalts the glory of the *Ashta Sahasri* coming from the mouth of an
experienced scholar! Truly, the *Ashta Sahasri* is an unparalleled work, and it
unveils the essence of the *Devaagam*. It is a pity that till today, no Hindi
translation of such an important work has been published in a manner befitting
its grandeur. Those who have studied the art of praise know how much mastery
Samantabhadra had over words. To reverse the second line of a verse, to reverse
the first half of a verse, and to reverse the entire verse and create another
verse was child's play for him. He would present two verses with two meanings,
keeping the letters of a single verse exactly the same, by combining them or
placing them separately. In praise of Shri Veer Bhagwan, there is a line in a
verse, "Shrimete Vardhamanaya Namo Namitavidvishe." This same line is also the
second line of the next two verses. However, the meaning of the three verses is
mostly different from each other. All these things express the importance of the
composition. The present *Devaagam* is also not untouched by such artistic
significance. In it, a *karika* placed in one place has one meaning, placed in
the middle of some other *karikas* in another place has a different meaning, and
placed in a third place...  **The art of...**  1. **Shrotavyashta Sahasri
Shrute: Kimanyai: Sahasrasankhyanai: |** **Vijnayet Yayaiva** **Swasamaya-
Parasamaya Sadbhavah ||**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 anuvAdakIya 11 sahasrI ke viSaSameM aura bhI likhI hai aura vaha yaha ki
'hajAra zAstroMke sunane se kyA, eka aSTasahasrIko sunanA cAhie, jisa akelI se
hI svasamaya aura parasamaya donoMkA yathArtha bodha hotA hai'  / ' yaha mAtra
apane granthakI prazaMsA meM likhA huA vAkya nahIM hai, balki saccI
vastusthitikA dyotaka hai| eka bAra khurjAke seTha paM0 mevArAmajIne batalAyA
thA ki jarmanIke eka vidvAn ne unase kahA hai ki 'jisane aSTasahasrI nahIM
par3hI vaha jainI nahIM aura jo aSTasahasrI ko par3hakara jainI nahIM huA usane
aSTasahasrIko samajhA nahIM  / ' kitane mahattvakA yaha vAkya hai aura eka
anubhavI vidvAnke mukhase nikalA huA aSTasahastrIke gauravako kitanA adhika
khyApita karatA hai  /  sacamuca aSTasahasrI aisI hI eka apUrva kRti hai aura
vaha devAgamake marmakA udghATana karatI hai  /  kheda hai ki Aja taka aisI
mahattvakI kRtikA koI hindI anuvAda grantha- gaurava ke anurUpa hokara prakAzita
nahIM ho sakA  /  jinhoMne stuti-vidyAkA adhyayana kiyA hai ve jAnate haiM ki
samantabhadrako zabdoMke Upara kitanA adhika ekAdhipatya prApta thA  /  ilokake
eka caraNako ulaTakara dUsarA caraNa, pUrvArdhako ulaTakara uttarArdha aura sAre
zlokako ulaTakara dUsarA zloka banA denA to unake bAe~ hAthakA khela thA  /  ve
eka hI zlokake akSaroMko jyoM-kA-tyoM sthira rakhate hue unheM kucha milAkara yA
alagase rakhakara do arthoke vAcaka do zloka prastuta karate the  /  zrIvIra
bhagavAnkI stuti meM eka pathakA uttarArdha hai 'zrImate varddhamAnAya namo
namitavidviSe  / ' yahI uttarArdha agale do padyoMkA bhI uttarArdha hai  /
parantu artha tInoM padyoMke dUsare se prAyaH bhinna hai  /  ye saba bAteM
racanAke mahattva pUrNatAko vyakta karatI haiM  /  prastuta devAgama bhI aise
kalApUrNa mahattvase achUtA nahIM, usameM eka kArikAko eka jagaha rakhanepara
eka artha, dUsarI jagaha kucha kArikAoMke madhya rakhanepara dUsarA artha aura
tIsarI jagaha uttarArdhIkA ekaaura unakI kalA - 1. zrotavyASTasahasrI zruteH
kimanyaiH sahasrasaMkhyAnaiH  /  vijJAyeta yayaiva svasamaya-parasamayasadbhAvaH
//

Page #13 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 12 ## Devagam  The third meaning arises when it is kept. It is the karika
named 'Virodhannobhayekaatmya', which is placed in 9 places in the text and has
a different meaning in each place from the perspective of the text reference -
the meaning that occurs in one place does not occur in another.  It is a matter
of wonder that a person like me, who has neither received a systematic education
in any school-college and obtained a degree, nor studied the text directly from
the Guru, would translate such a profound, serious and meaningful text by such a
great Acharya! Yet, my devotion to Swami Samantabhadra and his words is making
all this wonderful work possible for me. 'Tvadbhaktireve Mukharikurute Balanmam'
- this saying of Mantunga Acharya is apt here. Inspired by this devotion, I have
previously presented translations of three texts of Swami Ji - Swayambhustotra,
Yuktyanusasan and Samichin Dharmashastra, which have been found interesting by
scholars. In this regard, it would not be inappropriate to quote a sentence from
Late Nyayaacharya Pt. Mahendrakumarji here, which he wrote in the 'Praakkathana'
of Tattvanusasan regarding the translation of the text:  "The beautiful
translation of a complex and profound text like Yuktyanusasan, presented by
Samantabhadra Swami's devoted devotee, literature-tapasvi Pt. Jugalkishorji
Mukhtar, with such unimaginable simplicity, will be a light for the authorities
of Nyaya Vidya." - I have been encouraged by such scholarly statements and I
have been constantly moving forward in my work.  I received Devagam about 70
years ago in Jaipur, written in the Jaipur language of 60 Jayachandji, along
with a commentary. After self-study, I lovingly copied it for my own reading on
good, strong paper in script form, which has 90 pages and was completed on
Mangsir Badi Saptami, Samvat 1955.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 12 devAgama rakhanepara tIsarA artha ho jAtA hai  /  vaha kArikA hai
'virodhAnnobhayekAtmyaM' nAmakI, jise granthameM 9 sthAnoMpara rakhA gayA hai
aura grantha-sandarbhakI dRSTise apane-apane sthAnapara usakA alaga-alaga artha
hotA hai-eka sthAnapara jo artha ghaTita hotA hai vaha dUsare sthAna para
ghaTita nahIM hotA  /  aise mahAn AcAryake itane gahana, gaMbhIra tathA
arthagauravako lie hue kalApUrNa granthakA anuvAda mere jaisA vyakti kare,
jisane na kisI vidyAlaya-kAlejameM vyavasthita zikSA grahaNa kara DigrI prApta
kI hai aura na sAkSAt gurumukhase hI granthakA adhyayana kiyA hai, yaha
AzcaryakI hI bAta hai ! phira bhI svAmI samantabhadra aura unake vacanoMke prati
merI jo bhakti hai vahI yaha saba kucha adbhuta kArya mujhase karA rahI
hai'tvadbhaktireva mukharIkurute balAnmAm' mAnatuGgAcAryakA yaha vAkya yahA~
ThIka ghaTita hotA hai  /  isI bhaktise prerita hokara maiMne isase pahale
svAmIjIke tIna granthoM-svayambhUstotra, yuktyanuzAsana aura samIcIna
dharmazAstrake anuvAdAdi prastuta kiye haiM jo vidvAnoMko rucikara jAna par3e
haiM  /  isake kie sva0 nyAyAcArya paM0 mahendrakumArajIkA eka vAkya yahA~
uddhRta kara denA anucita na hogA, jo unhoMne tattvAnuzAsanake 'prAkkathana' meM
granthake-anuvAda-viSayameM likhA hai 'yuktyanuzAsana jaise jaTila aura
sAragarbha mahAn granthakA sundaratama anuvAda samantabhadra svAmIke
ananyaniSThabhakta sAhitya-tapasvI paM0 jugalakizorajI mukhtArane jisa
akalpanIya saralatAse prastuta kiyA hai vaha nyAyavidyAke adhikAriyoMke lie
Aloka degaa|" - isa prakArake vidvadvAkyoMse mujhe protsAhana milatA rahA aura
maiM barAbara apane kArya meM agrasara hotA rahA huuN| devAgamakI prApti mujhe
Ajase koI 70 varSa pahale jayapurake 60 jayacandajIkI jayapurI bhASAmeM likhI
TokA-sahita huI thI, jisakI meMne svAdhyAyake anantara nija paThanArtha
premapUrvaka pratilipi bhI acche puSTa kAgajake zAstrAkAra khule patroMpara kI
thI, jisakI patrasaMkhyA 90 hai aura jo maMgasira badI saptamI saMvat 1955 ko
likhakara samApta huI thii|

Page #14 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
This handwritten manuscript is still safely preserved in my collection. This
commentary inspired me to look at other commentaries for more information about
the text and to solve the puzzles that this commentary could not solve, and I
have been constantly searching for them. In 1975, the first fascicle of the
Sanatana Jain Granthamala was published from Bombay, which contained a
commentary (Sanskrit commentary) by Vasunandī Ācārya. This commentary seemed to
be useful in terms of word meanings. At the end, the Ācārya has mentioned Svāmī
Samantabhadra with epithets like 'Tribhuvanalabdhajayapatāka', 'Pramannayacakṣu'
and 'Syādvādaśarīra' and has written himself as 'Śrutavismaranśīla' and
'Jaḍamati' and has indicated that this commentary was written for 'Ātmopakāra'.
About 10 years later, in 1915, the Aṣṭasahasrī was also published from Bombay.
It also has the Aṣṭaśatī memorized and includes many annotations. Since then,
they have been the subject of my study and have solved every puzzle.  My present
translation is mainly based on the Aṣṭasahasrī, for which I am very grateful to
Śrīvidyānandācārya. The credit for whatever good is in my translation goes
mainly to Svāmī Samantabhadra and the aforementioned Ācārya Mahādeva, who is his
devoted devotee. Wherever there is any error, it is my own. I have exploited the
Aṣṭasahasrī along with all the commentaries and extracted the thick butter
(ghee) from it, which I have considered to be extremely useful and beneficial
for my readers, and it has been compiled in the form of translation, etc.
Readers who are interested in knowing very subtle things should establish their
direct connection with the Aṣṭasahasrī. The meaning that naturally flows and is
experienced from the original verses has been placed in black type in the form
of a literal translation. The explanation of that meaning, as far as possible,
has been given after a dash (-) or within two dashes, and the things that had to
be taken from above to connect the statement have been placed within a circle -
somewhere -

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 anuvAdakoya yaha hastalikhita prati Aja bhI mere saMgrahameM surakSita hai| isa
TokAse mujhe granthako adhikAdhika jAnakArIke lie aura jo gutthiyA~ isa TIkAse
nahIM sulajha sakI unheM sulajhAneke lie dUsarI TIkAoMko dekhane kI preraNA milI
aura mai barAbara unakI talAzameM rahA  /  san 1975 meM sanAtana jaina
granthamAlAkA prathama gucchaka bambaIse prakAzita huA, jisameM vasunandi
AcAryakI eka vRtti (saMskRta-TIkA) dekhaneko milii| yaha vRtti zabdArthako
dRSTise acchI upayogI jAna pdd'ii| isake antameM AcAryane svAmI samantabhadrako
'tribhuvanalabdhajayapatAka', 'pramANanayacakSu' aura 'syAdvAdazarIra' jaise
vizeSaNoMke sAtha ullekhita kiyA hai aura apaneko 'zrutavismaraNazIla' tathA
'jaDamati' likhA hai aura 'AtmopakAra' ke lie isa TIkAkA likhA jAnA sUcita kiyA
hai| isase koI 10 varSa bAda san 1915 meM aSTasahasrIkA prakAzana bhI bambaIse
huaa| vaha aSTazatIko bhI hRdayaMgama kiye hue hai aura aneka TippaNoMko bhI
sAthameM lie hue hai| tabhIse ve mere adhyayanakA viSaya banI rahI haiM aura
unase pratyeka ulajhane sulajho haiM  /  merA prastuta anuvAda mukhyataH
aSTasahasrIke AdhArapara avalambita hai, jisake lie maiM zrIvidyAnandAcAryakA
bahuta AbhArI huuN| mere anuvAdameM jo kucha khUbI hai usakA pramukha zreya
svAmI samantabhadra aura unake ananyabhakta ukta AcArya mahodayako prApta hai,
jahA~ kahIM koI truTi hai vahA~ merI apanI hI hai| maiMne saba TIkA-TippaNoMke
sAtha aSTasahasrIkA dohana kara jo moTA navanIta (makkhana) nikAlA hai aura jise
maiMne apane pAThakoMke lie parama upayogI tathA hitakara samajhA hai usIko
anuvAdAdike rUpameM nibaddha kiyA gayA hai, jo pAThaka vizeSa sUkSma bAtoMko
jAnane ke icchuka hoM ve aSTasahasrose apanA sIdhA sambandha sthApita kareM  /
mUla kArikAoMparase jo artha sahaja phalita tathA anubhata hotA hai use
mUlAnugAmo anuvAdake rUpameM blaika-TAipameM rakhA gayA hai, usa arthakA
yathAzakya spaSTokaraNa Daiza (-) ke anantara athavA do DaizoMke bhItara diyA
gayA hai aura jo bAteM kathanakA sambandha biThalAneke lie Uparase lenI par3I
haiM gola kaTake bhItara rakhA gayA hai-kahIM-kahIM

Page #15 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter 14: Devagam  Another synonym for a word has also been included within
the brackets. Also, in order to explain the meaning of some of the verses in
more detail, explanations have been included. For example, the explanation of
verse 8. More such explanations would have been good to include, but time and
energy did not permit it. From this, the entire situation of the original text
and the translation can be understood well.  One more thing needs to be
clarified here, and that is that the **Āpta** whose examination is done in this
Devagam is the **Āpta** who is the subject of the praise composed in the
beginning of the **Tattvārthādhigamasūtra** as a mangalācaraṇa; as is evident
from the following mangalashloka verse of Vidyānanda ji, while starting the
**Aṣṭasahasrīkā**:  "**Śāstrāvatāraracitastu gocarāpta mīmāsitam kṛtir
alakriyate mayā'sya.**"  Meaning, the **Āpta** who is the subject of the praise
("**Mokṣamārgasya netāram**" etc.) composed at the time of the
**Tattvārthaśāstra**'s revelation, I adorn this work (**Āpta Mīmāṃsā**) by
taking up the examination of that **Āpta**. Vidyānanda has further clarified
this point at the end of his **Āpta Pariksha** through the following verse:
"**Śrīmattattvārthaśāstrāddhata salilnidher iddharatnodbhavasya, prottānāram
bhakalē sakalamalabhide śāskārāih kṛtam yat. Stotra tīrthopamānaṁ prathita
pṛthupathaṁ svāmī mīmāṁsitam tat, Vidyānandaaih svaśaktyā katham api kathitam
satyavākyārtha sidhyam.**"  The essence of what is shown in this is that the
**Tīrthopamāna Stotra** which was composed by the **Sūtrakara** for
mangalācaraṇa at the beginning of the creation of the wonderful ocean called
**Tattvārthaśāstra**, its examination was done by **Svāmī Samantabhadra**, and I
have written this examination for the sake of proving the meaning of the true
words.  The mangal-stotra mentioned above is the following verse:

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 14 devAgama kisI arthakA dUsarA paryAya zabda bhI baikaTake bhItara rakhA gayA
hai  /  sAtha hI kisI-kisI kArikAke arthako aura vizada karaneke lie vyAkhyAko
bhI apanAyA gayA hai| jaise kArikA 8 kI vyAkhyA  /  aisI vyAkhyAe~ aura adhika
likhI jAtIM to acchA hotA  /  parantu samaya aura zaktine yathAvasara ijAjata
nahIM dii| isase mUlagrantha aura anuvAdakI sArI sthitiko bhale prakAra samajhA
jA sakatA hai  /  yahA~ eka bAta aura prakaTa kara denekI hai aura vaha yaha ki
prastuta devAgamameM jisa AptakI mImAMsA kI gaI hai vaha Apta vaha hai jo
tattvArthAdhigamasUtrakI AdimeM maMgalAcaraNarUpase racita stutikA viSayabhUta
hai; jaisA ki aSTasahasrIkA prArambha karate hue vidyAnandajIke nimna
maMgalazlokavAkyase prakaTa hai : 'zAstrAvatAraracitastugocarAptamImAsitaM
kRtiralakriyate mayA'sya  / ' arthAt tattvArthazAstrake avatAra samaya racI gaI
jo stuti ('mokSamArgasya netAram' ityAdi) usakA viSayabhUta jo Apta hai usa
AptakI mImAMsAko lie hue samantabhadrakI kRti (AptamImAMsA) ko maiM alaMkRta
karatA hai  /  isI bAtako vidyAnandane apanI AptaparIkSAke anta meM nimna padya
dvArA aura bhI spaSTa kara diyA hai :
zrImattattvArthazAstrAddhatasalilanidheriddharatnodbhavasya, protthAnArambhakAle
sakalamalabhide zAskAraiH kRtaM yat  /  stotra tIrthopamAnaM prathitapRthupathaM
svAmimImAMsitaM tat, vidyAnandaiH svazaktayA kathamapi kathitaM
satyavAkyArthasiddhayaM  //  isameM jo kucha darzAyA hai usakA sAra itanA hI hai
ki tattvArthazAstra nAmakA jo adbhuta samudra hai usake nirmANake prArambhakAla
meM maMgalAcaraNake lie jo tIrthopamAna stotra sUtrakAradvArA racA gayA hai
usakI svAmI samantamadrane mImAMsA kI hai aura maiMne yaha parIkSA
satyavAkyArthakI siddhike lie likhI hai| Upara jisa maMgala-stotrakI carcA hai
vaha padya isa prakAra hai :

Page #16 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Translation:**  **Anuvaadakiya**  I bow to the leader of the path to
liberation, the destroyer of the karmic afflictions, the knower of all
realities, for the attainment of those qualities.  This verse mentions three
qualities of an Aapta (liberated soul) and praises them for the attainment of
those qualities. The three qualities are: leadership of the path to liberation,
destruction of the karmic afflictions (moha, etc.), and knowledge of all
realities. The order in which these qualities develop in an Aapta is as follows:
first, the destruction of the karmic afflictions (mountains) leading to the
absence of attachment, aversion, etc.; second, the absence of knowledge-
obscuring karma, etc., leading to the knowledge of all realities; and third,
becoming the leader of the path to liberation as an Agamesh (revealer of
scriptures). This is evident from the following verse in Swami's Saminchana
Dharma Shastra (Ratnakaranda):  "One must become free from all karmic
afflictions, omniscient, and a revealer of scriptures. There is no other way to
attain liberation."  **Question:**  Why are the qualities of the Aapta mentioned
in the above mangala stotra (auspicious hymn) in a different order, with the
third quality being placed first?  **Answer:**  The Tattvartha Sutra is also
known as "Moksha Shastra" (science of liberation), and it is often referred to
by this name. Since this is the mangala charana (auspicious invocation) of the
Moksha Shastra, the phrase "leader of the path to liberation" has been given
prominence. This seems to be the reason for the change in the order of the
qualities. It also clearly indicates that this is the auspicious verse of the
Moksha Shastra.  **Acknowledgement:**  This translation has been carefully
reviewed by Nyayaacharya Pandit Darbarilalji Jain Kothia. He has also done a lot
of proofreading and provided valuable advice. I am very grateful to him for his
help. He has also written a preface on the subject of this mangala charana,
which has been published in various articles in Anekant Varsh 5, 6-7, and 11-12.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 anuvAdakIya mokSamArgastha netAraM bhettAraM karmabhUbhRtAm  /  jJAtAraM
vizvatattvAnAM vande tadguNalabdhaye  //  isameM Aptake tIna guNoMkA ullekha hai
aura una guNoMkI prAptike lie hI AptakI vandanA kI gaI hai  /  ve tIna guNa haiM
mokSamArgakA netRtva, mohAdikarmabhUbhRtoM kA bhetRtva aura vizvatattvoMkA
jJAtRtva 1 ye guNa Apta meM jisa kramase vikAsako prApta hote haiM vaha hai
pahale mohAdikarmabhUbhRtoM ( parvatoM ) kA bhedana hokara rAga-dveSAdi doSoMkA
abhAva honA, dUsare jJAnAvaraNAdikA abhAva hokara vizvatattvoMkA jJAtA honA aura
tIsare Agameza ke rUpa meM mokSamArgakA praNetA honA; jaisA ki svAmIjI ke
samIcInadharmazAstra ( ratnakaraNDa) ke nimna vAkyase prakaTa hai :
AptenotsannadoSeNa sarvajJenAgamezinA  /  bhavitavyaM niyogena nAnyathA hyAptatA
bhavet  //  15 taba ukta maMgala stotra meM Aptake vizeSaNoMko kramabhaMga
karake kyoM rakhA gayA hai - tRtIya vizeSaNako prathama sthAna kyoM diyA gayA
hai ? yaha eka prazna paidA hotA hai  /  isake uttarameM itanA hI nivedana hai
ki tattvArtha sUtrako 'mokSazAstra' bhI kahate haiM, jagaha-jagaha 'mokSazAstra'
nAmase usakA ullekha hai  /  mokSazAstrakA maMgalAcaraNa hone se hI isameM
'mokSamArgasya netAram' padako pradhAnatA dI gaI haiM aura yahI bAta
vizeSaNapadoMko kramabhaMga karake rakhanekA kAraNa jAna par3atI hai  /  tathA
isa bAta ko spaSTa sUcita karatI hai ki yaha mokSazAstrakA maMgala-padya hai  /
" astu 1 isa anuvAdako nyAyAcArya paNDita darabArIlAlAjI jaina koThiyAne pUrNa
manoyoga ke sAtha par3ha jAnekI kRpA kI hai aura kitanA hI prUpharIDiMga Adi bhI
kiyA hai  /  do-eka jagaha samucita parAmarza bhI diyA hai  /  isa saba kRpAke
lie maiM unakA bahuta AbhArI hU~  /  sAtha hI unhoMne prastAvanA 1. isa
maMgalAcaraNa-viSayakA vizeSa UhApoha nyAyAcArya paNDita darabArIlAlajIkI
prastAvanA tathA una lekhoM meM kiyA gayA hai jo anekAnta varSa 5 ki0 6-7 va ki0
11-12 meM prakAzita hue haiM  /

Page #17 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The kindness shown in writing the Devagam is worthy of special gratitude.
Although they have experienced an unexpected delay in writing the preface due to
certain circumstances, which they have acknowledged in their publication, I
believe that the publication of the book was not possible before this, and this
is the reason for the delay. Thus. I hope that the readers will now be happy to
receive this translation, etc., and will forget the pain of waiting and will be
able to fulfill their long-standing desire. Eta, Lokahitakanksho 7 May 1967
Jugalkishor Mukhtar

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 devAgama likha deneko jo kRpA kI hai vaha vizeSa AbhArake yogya hai  /  yadyapi
prastAvanAke likhane meM unheM apanI kucha paristhitiyoMke vaza AzAtIta vilamba
huA hai, jise unhoMne apane prakAzakIyameM svIkAra kiyA hai phira bhI maiM to
yahI samajhatA hU~ ki pustakake prakAzanakA yoga isase pahale nahIM thA aura
isIse vilamba huA hai  /  astu  /  AzA hai pAThakagaNa aba isa anuvAdAdiko
pAkara prasanna hoMge aura pratIkSAjanya kaSTako bhUla jAyeMge tathA apanI cira
kAlIna icchAko pUrA karane meM samartha ho skeNge| eTA, lokahitAkAMkSo 7 maI
1967 jugalakizora mukhtAra

Page #18 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Introduction to Devagam and Samantabhadra  1. Devagam: (a) Name This work is
called 'Devagam'. Ancient authors have often referred to it by this name.
Akalankadeva, in the beginning of his commentary (Ashta Shatī-Bhāṣya), while
promising to write his commentary on it, has given it this name and called it
'Bhagavatstava' (Praise of the Lord). Vidyānanda, in 'Ashta Sahasrī' (p. 294),
while explaining the 'Svōktapariccheda' verse of Akalankadeva's Ashta Shatī, has
accepted its name as 'Devagam' by saying 'Devagāmākhye Shāstre'. Vādirāja,
Hastimalla, and other authors have also referred to it by this name in their
works as a notable work of Samantabhadra. It is not surprising that just as
'Kalyāṇamandira', 1. 'Kṛtvā viviyate stavo Bhagavatām Devagamāstatkṛtiḥ.' -Ashta
Shatī, Initial Verse 2. 2. 'Iti Devagāmākhye Svōktaparicchede Shāstre....'
-Ashta Shatī, p. 294. 3. 'Svāminashcharitam tasya kasyano vismayāvaham |
Devagamenā sarvajño yenādyāpi pradarśyate ||' -Pārśva Ch. 4. 'Devagamanasūtrasya
śrutya saddarśanānvitah.' -Vikrant Kau. Pr.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prastAvanA devAgama aura samantabhadra 1. devAgama: (ka) nAma prastuta kRtikA
nAma 'devAgama' hai| prAcIna granthakAroMne prAyaH isI nAmase isakA ullekha kiyA
hai  /  akalaGkadevane isapara apanA vivaraNa (aSTazatI-bhASya) likhane kI
pratijJA karate hue usake ArambhameM isakA yahI nAma diyA hai aura use
'bhagavatstava' (bhagavAnkA stotra) kahA hai| vidyAnanda ne bhI 'aSTasahastrI'
(pR0 294) meM akalaGkadevake aSTazatIgata 'svoktaparicchede' padakI vyAkhyA
'devAgamAkhye zAstre' karake isakA 'devAgama' nAma svIkAra kiyA hai| vAdirAja,
hastimalla Adi granthakAroMne bhI apane granthoMmeM samantabhadrakI ullekhanIya
kRtike rUpameM isakA isI nAmase nirdeza kiyA hai| Azcarya nahIM ki jisa prakAra
'kalyANamandira', 1. kRtvA viviyate stavo bhagavatAM devaagmsttkRtiH|' -aSTaza0
prArambhika padya 2 /  2. 'iti devAgamAkhye svoktaparicchede shaastre....|'
-aSTasa0 pR0 294  /  3. 'svAminazcaritaM tasya kasya no vismayAvaham  /
devAgamena sarvajJo yenAdyApi pradarzyate  /  / ' -pArzva0 ca0  /  4.
devAgamanasUtrasya zrutyA saddarzanAnvitaH  / ' -vikrAnta kau0 pr0|

Page #19 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Devagam - Aapta-Mimamsa  The stotra (hymn) 'Bhaktamar', 'Ekibhav', etc. are
known by those names because they begin with the words 'Kalyanamandhir',
'Bhaktamar', 'Ekibhav', respectively. Similarly, this stotra begins with the
word 'Devagam', and therefore it is more widely known as 'Devagam'. This is why
the authors have specifically mentioned it by this name. The author of the
stotra has named it 'Aapta-Mimamsa', which Akalankadev has called 'Sarvajnya-
Vishesha-Pariksha'. Vidyānandan, in his works, has used both the name 'Devagam'
and 'Aapta-Mimamsa'. This indicates that this work is renowned in Jain
literature as 'Devagam', but also as 'Aapta-Mimamsa'. Thus, this important
composition is known by both names.  (b) Introduction:  This work is divided
into ten chapters, and these chapters are self-explanatory in terms of subject
division, as stated by the author. The author's concept of these ten chapters
reminds us of the ten chapters of Acharya Gṛddhpiṭṭhaka's Tattvartha Sutra and
the ten chapters of Maharshi Kanada's Vaisheshika Sutra. The only difference is
that these Sutra texts are written in prose and in the style of a treatise,
while Devagam is written in verse and in a philosophical style. At that time,
philosophical works were often written in the form of aphorisms and in praise of
the chosen deity. The works of Nagarjuna, Vasubandhu, and other philosophers are
available in this form. Samantabhadra, too, has composed his three stotras
(Svayambhu, Yutkyanusasan, and Devagam) in a philosophical and aphoristic style,
in keeping with the demands of the time.  1. 'Itiyamaapta-Mimamsa vihita
hitamichchhatam.' - Devagam, verse 114. 2. Ashta-Sha, Devagam, verse 114. 3.
Ashta-Sha, page 1, Aapta-Pariksha, page 233, 262. Dariyaganj, Delhi. 4.
'Svookta-Paricchedhe...>'  Veer Seva Mandir, 'Ashta-Sha, Devagam, verse 114.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 devAgama - AptamImAMsA 'bhaktAmara', 'ekIbhAva' Adi stotra 'kalyANamandira',
'bhaktAmara', 'ekIbhAva', jaise Adya padoMse Arambha honeke kAraNa ve una nAmoM
se khyAta haiM usI prakAra yaha stava bhI 'devAgama' padase Arambha honese
'devAgama' nAmase adhika prasiddha rahA ho aura isIse granthakAroM dvArA vaha
isI nAmase vizeSa ullikhita huA ho  /  stavakArane ' isakA 'AptamImAMsA' nAma
diyA hai, jise akalaGkadevane' 'sarvajJavizeSaparIkSA' kahA hai  /
vidyAnandanaM 3 apane granthoMmeM 'devAgama' nAmake atirikta isa 'AptamImAMsA'
nAmakA bhI upayoga kiyA hai  /  isase mAlUma par3atA hai ki yaha kRti jahA~
'devAgama' nAmase jaina sAhitya meM vizruta hai vahA~ vaha 'AptamImAMsA' nAmase
bhI  /  aura isa taraha yaha mahattvapUrNa racanA donoM nAmoMse prakhyAta hai  /
(kha) paricaya : yaha daza paricchedoM meM vibhakta hai aura ye pariccheda
viSaya-vibhAjanakI dRSTise svayaM granthakArokta haiM  /  granthakArakI yaha
daza-saMkhyaka paricchedoMkI kalpanA hameM AcArya gRddhapicchake tattvArthasUtra
ke daza adhyAyoM aura maharSi kaNAdake 'vaizeSikasUtra' ke daza adhyAyoMkA
smaraNa dilAtI hai  /  antara itanA hI hai ki ye sUtra -grantha gadyAtmaka tathA
siddhAntazailImeM racita haiM aura devAgama padyAtmaka evaM dArzanika zailImeM
racA gayA hai  /  usa samaya dArzanika racanAe~ prAyaH kArikAtmaka tathA
iSTadevakI stutirUpameM racI jAtI thIM  /  nAgArjuna, vasubandhu Adi dArzanikoM
kI racanAe~ isI prakArakI upalabdha hotI haiM  /  samantabhadrane bhI samayakI
mA~gake anurUpa apane tIna '( svayambhU, yutkyanuzAsana aura devAgama) stotra
dArzanika evaM kArikAtmaka zailI meM race haiM  /  1. 'itIyamAptamImAMsA vihitA
hitamicchatAm  / ' - devAgama kA0 114  /  2. aSTaza0 devAgama kA0 114  /  3.
aSTasa0 pR0 1, AptaparIkSA pR0 233, 262 dariyAgaMja, dillI  /  4.
'svoktaparicchede ..> vIrasevAmandira, 'aSTaza0, devAgama kA0 114  /

Page #20 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Introduction  **First Chapter:**  This text contains 114 verses divided into
ten chapters. The first chapter comprises verses 1-23. Verses 1-3 discuss the
characteristics that lead to the acceptance of an "āpta" (reliable authority).
Verse 4 explores the possibility of an individual who is free from any flaws.
Verse 5 establishes the existence of a universal "āpta" (omniscient being)
through inference, based on a cause that is inseparable from the effect and free
from any flaws. Verse 6 logically concludes that this universal "āpta" is the
"Arhat" (liberated being), as their teachings (exposition of reality) are not
contradicted by any evidence. Verse 7 describes how the teachings of those who
advocate for a singular reality are contradicted by direct perception. Verse 8
explains how the teachings of those who advocate for a singular reality are
contradicted by direct perception. Since they are self-contradictory, they
cannot establish the nature of merit, demerit, etc. Verses 9-11, through three
verses, criticize the denial of the four types of absence (prāgabhāva,
pradhvamsābhāva, anyonyābhāva, and atyantabhāva) when accepting the existence of
an object as solely a form of existence (vidhi). It is explained that denying
prāgabhāva (prior absence) would lead to the non-existence of any production,
making the effect eternal. Denying pradhvamsābhāva (absence of destruction)
would lead to the non-existence of any destruction, making the object eternal.
Denying anyonyābhāva (mutual absence) would make it impossible to determine
"this is that, this is not that," leading to everything becoming everything. And
denying atyantabhāva (absolute absence) would lead to the object losing its own
distinct nature. This would completely disrupt the entire system of objects.
Verse 12 criticizes those who consider an object as solely absence (śūnya). It
states that accepting an object as absence would require knowledge (bodha) to
know it oneself, and means of communication (vacana) to inform others. It would
also require both of these to identify and inform others about the flaws in an
object that is not desired.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prastAvanA prathama pariccheda : isake dasa paricchedoM meM kula 114 kArikAe~
haiN| prathama paricchedameM 1-23 kArikAe~ haiN| 1-3 taka una vizeSatAoMkA
ullekha karake mImAMsA kI gaI hai jinase Apta mAnanekI bAta kahI jAtI hai|
4thImeM aise vyakti-vizeSakI sambhAvanA kI hai jo nirdoSa ho sakatA hai  /  5vIM
meM aise hetuse sAmAnya Apta (sarvajJa) kA saMsthApana (anumAna) kiyA hai jo
sAdhyakA avinAbhAvI tathA nirdoSa hai  /  6ThImeM vaha sAmAnya Aptatva
yuktipUrvaka arhatmeM paryavasita kiyA gayA hai aura kahA gayA hai ki cUMki
unakA zAsana ( tattvaprarUpaNa ) pramANAviruddha hai, ataH vahI Apta pramANita
hote haiN| 7vIMmeM varNita hai ki jo ekAnta tattvake prarUpaka haiM unakA vaha
ekAnta prarUpaNa pratyakSa-viruddha hai  /  8vImeM yaha batAyA gayA hai ki
ekAntavAdiyoMkA vaha tattva-prarUpaNa pratyakSa-viruddha kaise hai| yataH
ekAntavAdI svaparavairI haiM, ataH unakA puNya-pApAdi prarUpaNa unake yahA~
sambhava nahIM hai  /  9-11 taka tIna kArikAoM dvArA vastuko sarvathA bhAva
(vidhi) rUpa svIkAra karanepara prAgabhAva Adi cAroM abhAvoMke apahnavakA doSa
diyA gayA hai| batAyA gayA hai ki prAgabhAvakA apalApa karane para kisIkA utpAda
nahIM ho sakegA-arthAt kArya anAdi ho jAyegA, pradhvaMsAbhAvake na rahanepara
kisIkA nAza nahIM hogA-arthAt kAryadravya ananta ho jAyegA, anyonyAbhAvake
niSedha karanepara 'yaha amuka hai, amuka nahIM' aisA nirdhAraNa nahIM ho
sakegA-arthAt saba sabarUpa ho jaayegaa| aura atyantAbhAvake lopa ho jAnepara
vastukA apanA pratiniyata svarUpa na rhegaa| isa taraha sArI vastuvyavasthA
caupaTa ( samApta ) ho jaaygii| kArikA 12 dvArA unheM doSa diyA gayA hai jo
vastuko sarvathA abhAva ( zUnya ) rUpa mAnate haiN| kahA gayA hai ki abhAvarUpa
vastu svIkAra karanepara use svayaM jAnaneke lie bodha ( jJAna ) aura dUsaroMko
janAnebatAneke lie vacanarUpa sAdhana-pramANoM tathA anabhimata bhAvarUpa
vastuko svayaM doSapUrNa jAnane aura dUsaroMko doSapUrNa batAneke lie ukta donoM

Page #21 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Devagam-Aapta-Mimamsa  (Bodha and Vachanaroopa) It is necessary to accept the
arguments against (dushan-pramanas) which are completely impossible in absolute
nihilism, because both are in the form of existence (bhav). - In the 13th, it
has been shown that accepting the object as both absolute existence and absolute
non-existence leads to contradiction, and accepting it as completely
inexpressible (anirvachaneeya) leads to the fault of not being able to express
it even with the word 'inexpressible'.  From 14-22, through 9 karikas, the
object is established as anekantaatmak (multifaceted) by Syadvadnaya
(relativism), meaning it possesses both existence (vidhi) and non-existence
(nishedha) in contradictory pairs, making it saptabhangatmak (seven-faceted).
The 23rd karika suggests applying the saptabhangi (seven-facetedness) to the
object by considering contradictory pairs like one-many, eternal-non-eternal,
etc.  Thus, this first chapter examines the one-sided beliefs regarding
existence and non-existence that were prevalent and deeply rooted during the
author's time. It also establishes the saptabhangi-anekanta by harmonizing them
with the Nay-vivksha (relativistic perspective).  ## Second Chapter:  The second
chapter contains 13 karikas from 24-36. The first four karikas (24-27) review
Advaitaikant (absolute monism) and state that accepting the object as absolutely
one makes it impossible to have differences in action, differences in agents,
karma-dvaita (duality of karma) in the form of merit and demerit, phala-dvaita
(duality of fruits) in the form of happiness and sorrow, loka-dvaita (duality of
realms) in the form of this world and the next, jnana-dvaita (duality of
knowledge) in the form of knowledge and ignorance, and the two states of the
soul, pure and impure, in the form of bandha-moksha (bondage and liberation).
Besides this, when proving Advaita through reason, it is not only necessary but
also mandatory to accept the duality of means and ends. If Advaita is accepted
without reason, then duality should also be accepted without reason.
Additionally, in Advaita, it is also worth considering whether the word 'dvaita'
in the word 'advaita' refers to duality or not? Because the object named by a
word...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 devAgama-AptamImAMsA ( bodha aura vacanarUpa ) dUSaNa-pramANoMko svIkAra karanA
Avazyaka hai, jo sarvathA abhAvavAdameM sambhava nahIM, kyoMki ve donoM
bhAvarUpa haiN| - 13 meM sarvathA bhAva aura sarvathA abhAva donoMrUpa vastuko
mAnanepara virodha tathA use sarvathA avAcya (anirvacanIya) svIkAra karanepara
usakA 'avAcya' zabdase bhI kathana na kara sakanekA doSa dikhAyA gayA hai  /
14-22 taka 9 kArikAoM dvArA syAdvAdanaya (apekSAvAda) se vastuko anekAntAtmaka
arthAt bhAva ( vidhi ) aura abhAva ( niSedha ) rUpa virodhI yugalako lekara use
saptabhaGgAtmaka ( saptadharmarUpa ) siddha kiyA hai ! 23vIM kArikA dvArA eka-
aneka, nitya-anitya Adi virodhI yugaloMko lekara bhI vastumeM saptabhaMgI (
saptabhaGgAtmakatA ) kI yojanA karanekI sUcanA kI gaI hai| isa taraha isa
prathama paricchedameM bhAva aura abhAvake sambandhameM una ekAnta mAnyatAoMkI
mImAMsA kI gaI hai jo granthakArake samayameM carcita evaM baddhamUla thiiN|
sAtha hI unakA naya-vivakSAse samanvaya karake unameM saptabhaGgI-anekAntakI
sthApanA kI hai| dvitIya pariccheda : dvitIya paricchedameM 24-36 taka 13
kArikAe~ haiM  /  24-27 taka cAra kArikAoM dvArA advaitaikAnta ( sarvathA
ekavAda ) kI samIkSA kI gaI hai aura kahA gayA hai ki vastuko sarvathA eka
mAnanepara kriyA-bheda, kAraka-bheda, puNya-pAparUpa karmadvaita, sukha-
duHkharUpa phaladvaita, ihaloka-paralokarUpa lokadvaita, vidyA-avidyArUpa
jJAnadvaita aura bandha-mokSarUpa jIvakI zuddhAzuddha do avasthAe~ ye saba
advaitameM sambhava nahIM haiN| isake sivAya hetuse advaita kI siddhi karanepara
sAdhana aura sAdhyakA dvaita svIkAra karanA Avazyaka hI nahIM, anivArya hai|
yadi binA hetuke hI advaita mAnA jAya, to dvaitako bhI binA hetuke mAna lenA
caahie| isake atirikta advaitavAdameM yaha bhI vicAraNIya hai ki 'advaita'
padameM jo 'dvaita' zabda par3A huA hai usakA vAcya dvaita hai yA nahIM ? kyoMki
nAmavAlI vastukA

Page #22 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Introduction  Negation cannot exist without accepting its existence, and
accepting duality completely eliminates the acceptance of non-duality. In
reality, non-duality is the negation of duality, and how can duality, which is
not accepted in the absolute non-dualistic standpoint, be considered as the
negation of absolute non-duality?  ## Criticism of Vaisheshika's Pluralism
Through Karika 28, the Vaisheshika's pluralism, which advocates for complete
duality (many), is criticized. It is argued that the quality of separateness,
which is used to define substances like matter as separate (many), is either
inseparable from them or separate. It cannot be said to be inseparable from
them, because that is not their doctrine. If it is said to be separate from
them, then that quality of separateness cannot maintain its existence, because
it maintains its existence only by residing in the many. Thus, when the
foundation of the Vaisheshika's pluralism (the quality of separateness)
collapses, the edifice of pluralism built upon it also crumbles.  ## Criticism
of Buddhist Pluralism  Buddhists are also pluralists. However, their pluralism
differs from that of the Vaisheshika. They do not accept a unity based on
analogy, but rather accept completely separate, distinct moments as the reality.
This belief is also reviewed in three Karikas (29-31). It is argued that without
accepting a unity based on analogy in moments, like the thread in a garland,
there cannot be progeny, similarity, community, and the state of being after
death, because moments do not have a relationship of unity with each other. In
addition, by considering both knowledge and the object of knowledge as different
from 'being', both become non-being. And in that situation, there will be no
state of knowledge, nor will there be an external and internal object of
knowledge in the form of internal reality. Their position cannot be established
by words either, because words refer only to the general (anvayapoha), which is
non-existent, not to the particular (svalakshyatmaka vastu), and in such a
situation, all words are not truly indicative of reality, and are therefore
false.  ## Criticism of Accepting Both Unity and Plurality  Karika 32 criticizes
the acceptance of both complete unity and complete plurality (ubhaya) of
reality, arguing that it leads to contradiction and inexpressibility (anubhaya).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prastAvanA niSedha usake astitvako svIkAra kiye binA nahIM ho sakatA aura
dvaitako svIkAra karanepara sarvathA advaitakI mAnyatA samApta ho jAtI hai  /
yathArthameM advaita dvaitakA niSedha hai aura dvaita vastubhUta
advaitaikAntameM svIkRta na hone se usakA niSedharUpa sarvathA advaita kase mAnA
jA sakatA hai ? kArikA 28 ke dvArA sarvathA dvaita (aneka) vAdI vaizeSikoMke
anekavAdakI AlocanA karate hue pratipAdana kiyA gayA hai ki jisa pRthaktva
guNase dravyAdi padArthoM ko pRthak ( aneka ) kahA jAtA hai vaha unase apRthak
hai yA pRthak ? use unase apRthak to kahA nahIM jA sakatA, kyoMki vaisA unakA
siddhAnta nahIM hai| yadi use unase pRthak kahA jAya to vaha pRthaktva guNa
apanI sattA kAyama nahIM rakha sakatA, kyoMki vaha anekoMmeM rahakara hI apane
astitvako sthira rakhatA hai| isa prakAra vaizeSikoMke anekavAdakI mAnyatAkA
AdhAra-stambha ( pRthaktvaguNa ) jaba Dhaha jAtA hai to usapara AdhArita
anekavAdakA prasAda bhI dharAzAyI ho jAtA hai  /  bauddha bhI anekavAdI haiN|
para unakA anekavAda vaizeSikoMke anekavAdase bhinna haiN| ve anvayarUpa ekatva
na mAnakara sarvathA pRthaka-pRthak aneka visadRza kSaNoMko hI vastu svIkAra
karate haiN| unakI isa mAnyatAkI bhI 29-31 taka tIna kArikAoM dvArA samIkSA kI
gaI hai| kahA gayA hai ki mAlAke dAnoMmeM sUtakI taraha kSaNoMmeM anvayarUpa
ekatva na mAnanepara unameM santAna, sAdRzya, samudAya aura pretyabhAva Adi
nahIM bana sakate, kyoMki kSaNoMkA eka-dUsarese ekatvarUpa sambandha nahIM hai|
isake atirikta jJAna aura jJeya ina donoMko 'sat' kI apekSAse bhI bhinna
mAnanepara donoM hI asat ho jaaveNge| aura usa hAlatameM na jJAnakI sthiti
rahegI aura na bAhya tathA antastattvarUpa Abhyantara jJeya hI bana sakegA  /
vacanoMse bhI unakI sthiti nahIM ropI jA sakatI hai, kyoMki vacana sAmAnya
(anyApoha) mAtrako kahate haiM, jo avastu hai, vizeSa ( svalakSAtmaka vastu ) ko
nahIM aura aisI dazAmeM samasta vacana yathArthataH vastuke vAcaka na honese
mithyA ( asatya ) hI haiN| kArikA 32 ke dvArA vastuko sarvathA eka aura sarvathA
aneka donoM ( ubhaya ) rUpa aGgIkAra karanepara virodha tathA avAcya ( anubhaya
)

Page #23 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The term 'avachya' has been used to demonstrate the flaw in accepting the
Devagam-Aaptamimansa, as it cannot be defined.  Through four karikas (33-36),
the concept of Saptabhangi is established by using the Syadvadnaya
(Kathanchidvad) and its expectation of the opposing pair of 'one' and 'many'.
This establishes the Anekanta of 'sometimes one' and 'sometimes many' in the
object.  In this way, in the second chapter, the established one-sided views of
'one' (Advaita) and 'many' (Dvaita) are criticized, and the object is proven to
be Saptabhangatmak (Anekanta) in relation to this pair.  **Third Chapter:**  The
third chapter contains 24 karikas (37-60). In four karikas (37-40), the one-
sided eternalism of the Sankhya philosophy is criticized. It is stated that if
Pradhana and Purusha are accepted as completely eternal, then there is no
possibility of any kind of change in them. Because before creation, neither can
be called a cause, nor can anything be called evidence before knowledge. After
creation, which is the form of taking on the nature of a cause by leaving behind
the nature of a non-cause, and after knowledge, which is the form of taking on
the nature of a knower by leaving behind the nature of a non-knower, the
behavior of a knower (evidence) occurs. Due to being one, no action like
creation, knowledge, etc. is possible from the one-sided eternal (Pradhana and
Purusha), and therefore it cannot be called a cause or evidence.  The belief
that just as the senses express the meaning of objects like pots, in the same
way, the Pradhana, as a cause or evidence, expresses the meaning of Mahat, etc.,
is also not justified. Because both as evidence and as a cause, Pradhana is
completely eternal, so its activity for expression is also not possible.
Otherwise, by leaving behind the nature of being unexpressed before expression
and acquiring the state of taking on the nature of being expressed, it would
have to be considered non-eternal. Therefore, Mahat, etc. cannot be expressed
(changed) by Pradhana.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 devAgama-AptamImAMsA svIkAra karanepara 'avAcya' zabda dvArA bhI usakA
nirvacana na ho sakanekA doSa pradarzita kiyA gayA hai  /  33-36 taka 4 kArikAoM
dvArA syAdvAdanaya ( kathaJcidvAda ) se eka aura anekake virodhI yugalakI
apekSAse saptabhaGgIkI yojanA karake vastumeM kathaMcit eka aura kathaMcit
anekake anekAntakI sthApanA kI isa prakAra dUsare paricchedameM eka ( advaita )
aura aneka (dvaita ) ke bAremeM rUr3ha ekAnta dhAraNAoMkI samAlocanA karake isa
yugalakI apekSA bastuko saptabhaGgAtmaka ( anekAntarUpa ) siddha kiyA gayA hai
/  tRtIya pariccheda : tRtIya paricchedameM 37-60 taka 24 kArikAe~ haiN| 37-40
taka cAra kArikAoM dvArA sAMkhyadarzanake ekAnta nityavAdako AlocanAmeM kahA
gayA hai ki pradhAna evaM puruSako sarvathA nitya svIkAra karane para unameM
kisI bhI prakArake vikArakI sambhAvanA nahIM hai| kyoMki utpattise pUrva na
kisIko kAraka kahA jA sakatA hai aura na jJaptise pUrva kisIko pramANa kaha
sakate haiN| akArakasvabhAva chor3akara kArakasvabhAva grahaNa karane rUpa
utpatti hone ke bAda kAraka aura ajJApakasvabhAva chor3akara jJApakasvabhAva
grahaNa karanerUpa jJapti honeke anantara jJApaka ( pramANa ) vyavahAra hotA
hai| ekarUpa rahane ke kAraNa ekAnta nitya ( pradhAna va puruSa ) se kisIkI
utpatti athavA jJapti AdirUpa koI bhI kriyA sambhava nahIM hai aura isalie use
na kAraka kahA jA sakatA hai aura na pramANa  /  indriyoMse jaise ghaTAdi
arthakI abhivyakti hotI hai vaise hI pradhAnarUpa kAraka yA pramANase mahadAdikI
abhivyakti hotI hai, isa prakArakI mAnyatA bhI yukta nahIM hai, kyoMki pramANa
tathA kAraka donoMrUpa pradhAna sarvathA nitya honese usakA abhivyaktike lie bhI
vyApAra sambhava nahIM hai| anyathA abhivyaktise pUrva rahanevAle anabhivyaJjaka
svabhAvako chor3ane tathA vyaJjaka svabhAvako grahaNa karanerUpa avasthAntarako
prApta karanese use anitya mAnanA pdd'egaa| ataH mahadAdi pradhAnase abhivyaMgya
(vikArya)

Page #24 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Introduction  Just as a solitary, eternal entity cannot be the cause of any
action, similarly, in the view of an eternal, unchanging soul (Purusha), neither
the origin nor the manifestation of virtuous actions is possible. This is
because an eternally existing entity cannot undergo any transformation, be it
creation or manifestation.  Concepts like merit, demerit, rebirth
(Paryayaantara), bondage, and liberation are all outcomes of change, which are
impossible in the context of a solitary, eternal (Aparinaami Purusha) entity. If
the eternal is always unchanging (Kutasya), then it cannot undergo any
modification. Without modification, how can concepts like merit, demerit, etc.,
which are specific states occurring at different times, be possible? This is a
point worth considering.  From verses 41 to 54, fourteen verses present
arguments against the view of a solitary, non-eternal entity (Kshanikavada). It
is argued that even if we accept the complete impermanence (Kshanika) of an
entity, the aforementioned concepts of rebirth, etc., cannot arise. This is
because, due to the lack of connection (Dhrauvyatmaka Bandhana - strong bond)
between past and future moments, the flow of knowledge, such as recognition,
memory, experience, desire, etc., cannot occur. In such a scenario, neither can
the past moment be considered the cause nor the future moment the effect. In the
view of complete impermanence, neither the origin of virtuous actions, nor the
cause-effect relationship, nor the relationship of the aggressor and the victim,
nor the relationship of teacher and student, nor the relationship of husband and
wife, nor the relationship of mother and son, nor the state of bondage and
liberation, nor the lineage of the five aggregates can be established.  Verse 55
demonstrates the contradiction in accepting both complete eternity and complete
impermanence (Ubhayakaanta) and the inability to express the view of neither
complete eternity nor complete impermanence (Anubhayakaanta) using the term
"unspeakable."  Verses 56 to 60, through five verses, establish the seven-fold
predication (Saptabhangi) of an entity as being partly eternal, partly non-
eternal, partly both, partly neither, etc., using the logic of Syadvada. Thus,
in this section, the seven-fold predication is presented in relation to the
opposing pair of eternal and non-eternal, as in the previous sections. It is
noteworthy that two important examples (worldly and transcendental) are
presented...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prastAvanA bhI nahIM ho sakate  /  isI taraha ekAnta nitya pakSameM puruSakI
taraha satkAryakI na utpatti sambhava hai aura na abhivyakti, kyoMki sadA
vidyamAna rahane se usameM kisI bhI tarahakA pariNamana ( parivartana), cAhe
vaha utpattirUpa ho aura cAhe abhivyaktirUpa, nahIM bana sakatA hai  /  puNya,
pApa, pretyabhAva ( paryAyAntara ), bandha aura mokSa ye saba pariNAma bhI
ekAnta nitya ( apariNAmI puruSavAda ) meM asambhava haiM  /  nitya jaba sadA
ekarUpa ( kUTasya ) rahegA to usameM koI vikRti nahIM ho sakatI  /  tathA binA
vikRtike puNyapApAdi, jo bhinna kAloMmeM honevAlI avasthAvizeSa haiM, kaise
sambhava haiM, yaha vicAraNIya hai  /  41-54 taka caudaha kArikAoM dvArA ekAnta
anityapakSa ( kSaNikavAda) meM doSa diye gaye haiM  /  kahA gayA hai ki vastuko
sarvathA anitya (kSaNika) svIkAra karanepara bhI ukta pretyabhAvAdi nahIM bana
sakate, kyoMki pUrvApara kSaNoMmeM paraspara anvaya ( dhrauvyAtmaka bandhana -
kar3I ) na honeke kAraNa pratyabhijJA, smaraNa, anubhava, abhilASA Adi
jJAnadhArA pravAhita nahIM ho sktii| aisI dazA meM na pUrva kSaNako kAraNa aura
na uttara kSaNako kArya kahA jA sakatA hai  /  sarvathA kSaNikavAdameM na
asatkArya kI utpatti, na kAryakAraNabhAva, na hiMsyahiMsakabhAva, na
guruziSyabhAva, na patipatnIbhAva, na mAtRputrabhAva, na baddhamuktabhAva aura
na skandhasantatiyA~ hI bana sakatI haiM  /  55 ke dvArA sarvathA nitya aura
sarvathA anitya donoM (ubhayaikAnta) ke svIkAra meM virodha aura na sarvathA
nitya tathA na sarvathA anitya donoMke niSedharUpa ( anubhayaikAnta) meM
'avAcya' zabdase usakA kathana na kara sakane - kA doSa pradarzita kiyA gayA hai
/  56-60 taka 5 kArikAoM dvArA syAdvAdanayase vastuko kathaJcit nitya, kathaJcit
anitya, kathaJcit ubhaya, kathaJcit anubhaya Adi saptabhaGgAtmaka anekAnta
siddha kiyA hai  /  isa prakAra isa pariccheda meM nityAnityake virodhI yugalakI
apekSA pUrvavat saptabhaGgI dikhAyI gaI hai  /  ullekhanIya hai ki do
mahattvapUrNa dRSTAntoM (laukika evaM lokottara)

Page #25 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Devagam - Aapta-Mimamsa**  It is shown by the **Devagam - Aapta-Mimamsa** that
both **nityata** (permanence) and **anityata** (impermanence) are present in all
things. **Chapter Four:**  **8**  Chapter Four contains 12 **karikas**
(aphorisms) from 61 to 72, which discuss the concepts of **bheda** (difference)
and **abheda** (non-difference). The first six **karikas** (61-66) examine the
**ekanta bheda** (absolute difference) view of the Vaisheshika school. It is
argued that if absolute difference is assumed between the cause and effect, the
quality and the qualified, and the general and the particular (**dravya-guna-
karma**), then it is not possible for one (the effect, the constituent, etc.) to
reside (**vriti**) in many (the causes, the constituents, etc.). This is because
the question arises: does the one reside in each of the many as a part or as a
whole? The first option is not correct because the one is considered to be
**niransha** (without parts). The second option is also not correct because
there would have to be as many effects (constituents) as there are causes
(constituents). If we assume parts in the one, which is contrary to the actual
principle, then how can it be called one? It should be called **sansha** (many).
In this way, the **vriti** (residence) defect is inevitable in the theory of
absolute difference. It cannot be overcome.  Similarly, in this theory of
difference, the **samanya** (general) and **samavaya** (inherence), which are
considered to be distinct substances, cannot reside in their **ashraya**
(substrates). This is because the **samanya** and **samavaya** are considered to
be **nitya** (permanent) and **nishkriya** (inactive), residing in each
individual as a whole. Since they are inactive, they cannot move to other
individuals during the destruction or creation of the perishable and impermanent
individuals (like a pot, a cloth, a cow, etc.). And since they are permanent,
they cannot be destroyed or created along with the individual. Therefore, ...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 devAgama - AptamImAMsA dvArA bhI vastumeM nityatA ( dhrauvya ) aura anityatA (
utpAda vyaya) donoMko pratItisiddha batalAyA gayA hai  /  caturtha pariccheda :
8 cauthe pariccheda meM 61-72 taka 12 kArikAe~ haiM, jinake dvArA bheda aura
abhedakA vicAra kiyA gayA hai  /  61-66 taka 6 kArikAoM meM bheda ( anyatA )
vAdI vaizeSikoMkI ekAnta bheda - mAnyatAkI samIkSA kI gaI hai  /  kahA gayA hai
ki yadi kArya aura kAraNameM, guNa aura guNImeM tathA - sAmAnya aura
sAmAnyavAnoM ( dravya-guNa-karma ) meM sarvathA anyatva ( bheda ) mAnA jAya to
eka (kArya - avayavI Adi) kA anekoM (kAraNoM - avayavoM Adi) meM rahanA ( vRtti)
sambhava nahIM hai; kyoMki prazna uThatA hai ki vaha eka anekoMmeM pratyeka meM
aMzarUpase rahatA hai yA sampUrNarUpase ? prathama pakSa to ThIka nahIM, kAraNa
ki usa ekake aMzoMko nahIM mAnA hai-- use niraMza svIkAra kiyA gayA hai  /
dvitIya pakSa bhI ThIka nahIM hai, kyoMki jitane kAraNa (avayava) hoMge utane hI
kArya ( avayavI ) mAnanA par3eMge  /  yadi usa eka ( avayavI ) meM aMza- kalpanA
kareM, jo yathArtha meM svakIya siddhAntaviruddha hai, to phira use eka kaise
kahA jA sakatA hai-- use sAMza ( aneka ) hI pratipAdana karanA caahie| isa
taraha sarvathA bhedavAda meM yaha vRtti - doSa anivArya hai-- jise dUra nahIM
kiyA jA sakatA hai  /  isI prakAra isa bhedavAda meM sAmAnya va
samavAyasambandhakI, jinheM bhinna padArtha svIkAra kiyA hai, apane AzrayoMmeM
vRtti nahIM banatI  /  kAraNa yaha hai ki jina nAzazIla evaM utpAdazIla
vyaktiyoM ( ghaTa-paTa gau Adi ) meM una donoM kI sthiti svIkAra kI gaI hai
unake nAza yA utpAda honepara una donoMkA na nAza hotA hai aura na utpAda | aisI
sthiti meM Azrayake binA AzrayI (sAmAnya tathA samavAya) kahA~ aura kaise
raheMge ? jaba ki unheM pratyeka vyakti meM sampUrNa rUpase rahanevAlA tathA
nitya aura niSkriya mAnA gayA hai  /  niSkriya honese ve nAzazIla vyaktike nAza
aura utpAdazIla vyaktike utpAda ke samaya anyatra ( dUsare vyaktiyoM meM ) jA
nahIM sakate tathA nitya honese ve vyakti ke sAtha na naSTa ho sakate haiM aura
na utpanna | ataH www.jainelibrary:org

Page #26 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Introduction  Their statement, "Both went into duality, neither Maya nor Rama
was found," exemplifies the proverb. That is, both the general and the specific
are wavering in discrimination. In addition, since a mutual relationship between
the general and the specific is not possible, a relationship with substance,
quality, and karma is also not possible. Why is a mutual relationship between
the general and the specific not possible? The reason is that since they are not
substances, the Vaisheshikas themselves do not accept the relationship of
conjunction in them. Samvaya is also not possible in them because they are not
accepted in the form of part-whole, quality-qualified, etc. The general is the
universal of the specific, thus, the possibility of a qualifier-qualified
relationship is also not there because the Vaisheshikas do not accept any other
samvaya except one. Otherwise, it cannot be free from the fault of infinite
regress. Yes, the concept of one-meaning samvaya could have been conceived, but
that too cannot be done because even after the general like potness remains in
the pot, etc., by samvaya, samvaya is not present in them. It is clear that the
Vaisheshikas did not accept another samvaya for the existence of samvaya. They
accepted only one samvaya. In this way, when a mutual relationship is not
possible in both the general and the specific, they remain unconnected and
cannot be related to substance, etc. As a result, all three (general, specific,
and substance, etc.) remain like useless flowers without any relationship.  ##
On the Vaisheshika View of Atoms  Among the Vaisheshikas, some believe that
cooking (combination with fire) takes place in atoms, and the resulting dyads,
etc., become cooked in turn. Others do not accept cooking (combination with
fire) in atoms because they believe that atoms do not undergo any kind of
transformation. They only accept cooking in dyads, etc. (constituents). Those
who do not accept cooking in atoms say that atoms are eternal (unchanging,
unproduced, stable, and uniform). Therefore, they remain uniform in all states,
from dyads onwards. They do not undergo any kind of otherness (transformation in
the form of different forms). They always have non-duality (uniformity). This
belief (of some Vaisheshikas) is called "the absolute non-duality of atoms" by
A. Samantabhadra.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prastAvanA unakA vidhAna 'duvidhAmeM donoM gaye mAyA milI na rAma' kahAvatako
caritArtha karatA hai  /  arthAt sAmAnya aura samavAya donoMkI sthiti
bhedavAdameM DavA~Dola hai  /  isake atirikta sAmAnya aura samavAyameM paraspara
sambandha sambhava na honese unase dravya, guNa aura karmakA bhI sambandha
sambhava nahIM hai| sAmAnya aura samavAyameM paraspara sambandha kyoM sambhava
nahIM hai ? isakA kAraNa yaha hai ki ve dravya na honese unameM saMyogasambandha
to svayaM vaizeSikoMko bhI iSTa nahIM hai  /  samavAya bhI unameM sambhava nahIM
hai, kyoMki unheM avayava-avayavI, guNa-guNI Adi rUpameM svIkRta nahIM kiyA
gyaa| sAmAnya samavAyi-sAmAnya samavAyavAlA hai, isa prakArase unameM vizeSaNa-
vizeSya sambandhakI bhI sambhAvanA nahIM hai, kyoMki eka samavAyake sivAya anya
samavAyAntara vaizeSikoMne nahIM mAnA  /  anyathA anavasthA doSase vaha mukta
nahIM ho sakatA hai| hA~, unameM ekArthasamavAyakI kalpanA kI jA sakatI thI,
para vaha bhI nahIM kI jA sakatI, kyoMki ghaTatvAdi sAmAnya ghaTAdimeM
samavAyase raha jAnepara bhI samavAya unameM samaveta nahIM hai  /  spaSTa hai
ki vaizeSikoMne samavAyake rahaneke lie anya samavAya nahIM svIkAra kiyAeka hI
samavAya unhoMne mAnA hai| isa taraha jaba sAmAnya aura samavAya donoMmeM
paraspara sambandha sambhava nahIM hai to ye asambaddha rahakara dravyAdise
sambandhita nahIM ho sakate  /  phalataH tInoM (sAmAnya, samavAya aura dravyAdi)
binA sambandhake khapuSpa tulya Thaharate haiM  /  vaizeSikoMmeM koI
paramANuoMmeM pAka ( agnisaMyoga ) hokara dvayaNukAdi avayavImeM kramazaH pAka
mAnate haiM aura koI paramANuoMmeM kisI bhI prakArakI vikRti na honese unameM
pAka (agnisaMyoga) na mAnakara kevala dvayaNukAdi ( avayavI ) meM pAka svIkAra
karate haiM  /  jo paramANuoMmeM pAka nahIM mAnate unakA kahanA hai ki paramANu
nitya ( apracyuta-anutpanna-sthiraikarUpa ) haiM aura isaliye ve dvayaNakAdi
sabhI avasthAoMmeM ekarUpa bane rahate haiMunameM kisI bhI prakArakI anyatA (
bhinnarUpatArUpa pariNati ) nahIM hotI unameM sarvadA ananyatA ( ekarUpatA )
vidyamAna rahatI hai| isI ( kinhIM vaizeSikoMkI ) mAnyatAko A0 samantabhadrane
'aNuoMkA ananyataikAnta'

Page #27 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter 10: Devagam - Aapta-Mimamsa  **It has been said and reviewed by
Karika 67.** They have pointed out the flaws in this belief by stating that if
the atoms, diatoms, etc., remain in the same state of aggregation as they are at
the time of division (because there is no other difference in form, otherwise
there would be the occasion of impermanence in them), then they will remain
unmixed (unmixed - without being mixed) and in that state, the constituent
earth, etc., four elements will be illusory (false). And when the constituent
earth, etc., become illusory, their generating atoms also become illusory by
their very nature, because the effect certainly informs about the corresponding
cause. In this way, in the Vaisheshika's theory of non-dualism, neither the real
earth, etc., constituent elements are formed, nor are their real cause-like
atoms proven, and when neither of these two are formed, the qualities residing
in them, the species (general), the special, the samvaya, and the karma, none of
these substances are formed.  **Further, Karika 68 criticizes the Sankhya's
theory of non-dualism (abhedaikant) by saying that if there is complete non-
duality (abheda) in both the effect (mahadadhi) and the cause (praadhan), then
one of them will exist, the other will be absent.** Consequently, even that one
will not be able to exist in the absence of the other, being inseparable from
it. In addition, in this abhedaikant, the duality of effect and cause, which is
well-known in the world, will never be available. If it is accepted by
convention, then that convention is false, and therefore there is no difference
between convention and emptiness.  **Karika 70 shows the contradiction in
accepting both complete difference and complete non-difference, and the
impossibility of representing it by the word 'avachya' in accepting neither
complete difference nor complete non-difference, i.e., anubhaya (avachya).**
**1. In Ashta-Sahasri (p. 222), the commentator, while commenting on the initial
'Aparaha Praah' word of the utthanika vakya of this 67th Karika, has given its
meaning as 'Saugata', which is not correct.** Here, the whole context is of
Vaisheshika, not of Saugatas.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 10 devAgama - AptamImAMsA kahA hai aura kArikA 67 ke dvArA usakI bhI samIkSA kI
hai  / ' unhoMne isa mAnyatAmeM doSodghATana karate hue batAyA hai ki yadi aNu
dvayaNu kAdi saMghAtadazA meM bhI usI prakArake bane rahate haiM jisa prakAra ve
vibhAgake samaya haiM; ( kyoMki unameM anyatA bhinnarUpatA nahIM hotI, anyathA
unameM anityatAkA prasaMga AyegA ), to ve asaMhata ( amizra - binA mile ) hI
raheMge aura usa hAlata meM avayavIrUpa pRthivI Adi cAroM bhUta bhrAnta ( mithyA
) hI hoMge  /  aura jaba pRthivI Adi avayavIrUpa kArya bhrAnta Thaharate haiM to
unake janaka paramANu bhI bhrAnta svataH siddha ho jAte haiM, kyoMki kArya
nizcaya hI anurUpa kAraNakI hI sUcanA karatA hai  /  isa taraha vaizeSikoMke
ananyataikAntameM na vAstavika pRthivyAdirUpa avayavI banatA hai aura na
vAstavika unake kAraNarUpa paramANu hI siddha hote haiM tathA ina donoMke na
bananepara unameM rahanevAle guNa, jAti ( sAmAnya ), vizeSa samavAya aura karma
ye koI bhI padArtha ghaTita nahIM hote  /  Age kArikA 68ke dvArA sAMkhyoMke
ananyataikAnta ( abhedaikAnta ) kI bhI AlocanA karate hue kahA gayA hai ki yadi
kArya ( mahadAdi ) aura kAraNa ( pradhAna ) donoMmeM sarvathA ananyatA ( abheda
) ho, to unameMse ekakA astitva rahegA, dUsarekA abhAva ho jAyegA  /  phalataH
vaha eka bhI dUsarekA avinAbhAvI honese usake abhAva meM na raha sakegA  /
isake atirikta isa abhedaikAntameM kArya aura kAraNakI lokaprasiddha
dvitvasaMkhyA kabhI bhI upalabdha na hogI  /  yadi use saMvRtise mAnA jAya to
vaha saMvRti mithyA hI hai aura isalie saMvRti tathA zUnyatA donoMmeM koI antara
nahIM hai  /  kArikA 70 ke dvArA sarvathA bheda aura sarvathA abheda donoMke
svIkAra meM virodha tathA na sarvathA bheda aura na sarvathA abheda arthAt
anubhaya (avAcya ) mAnane meM 'avAcya' zabda dvArA bhI usakA nirUpaNa na ho
sakanekA doSa pradarzita kiyA gayA hai  /  1. aSTasahasrI ( pR0 222 ) meM isa
67vIM kArikAke utthAnikAvAkyake Arambhika 'aparaH prAha' padapara TippaNa dete
hue TippaNakArane jo usakA artha 'saugataH' diyA hai vaha ThIka nahIM hai  /
yahA~ sArA sandarbha vaizeSika kA hai, saugatoMkA nahIM  /

Page #28 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Introduction  In sections 71-72, the concept of *anekanta* (non-absolutism)
is established by examining the various relationships between elements and their
components, qualities and their possessors, etc. This is done by applying the
seven-fold *saptabhangi* process, which demonstrates how these relationships can
be characterized by both unity (non-difference) and difference (plurality).
This chapter critiques various one-sided views (like *bhedaikanta* - absolute
difference, *abhedaikanta* - absolute non-difference) held by different schools
of thought regarding difference and non-difference. It then establishes the
*anekanta* view through the application of *syadvada* (conditional logic).  ##
Chapter Five  This chapter, through three *karikas* (aphorisms) 73-75, examines
the views of those who assert the nature of reality based solely on dependence
or solely on independence.  * **Karika 73** states that if the validity of
dharma (object) and dharmi (subject), visheshana (modifier) and visheshya
(modified), karya (effect) and karana (cause), and pramana (proof) and prameya
(object of proof) is solely dependent, then their establishment is impossible.
This is because they would be mutually dependent, like two swimmers drowning in
a river, each relying on the other for support, leading to the demise of both.
Conversely, if their validity is solely independent, then statements like "this
is the cause of that," "this is the dharma of that," "this is the modifier of
that," "this is the proof of that," and "this is the general of that" would be
impossible. This is because all these relationships are established through
mutual dependence.  * **Karika 74** criticizes the views of those who hold
absolute dualism (*ubhayakanta*) and absolute non-dualism (*anubhayakanta*). It
points out the contradiction inherent in the former and the inability of the
latter to express itself using the term "anubhaya" (non-dual).  * **Karika 75**
demonstrates the establishment of the nature of reality through *syadvada*. It
states that the relationships of dharma-dharmi, karya-karana, visheshana-
visheshya, and pramana-prameya are established through dependence. However,
their nature is inherently established. In reality, the nature of effect in
effect, cause in cause, proof in proof, and object of proof in object of proof
is inherently established and not dependent on anything else.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prastAvanA 71-72 dvArA una avayava-avayavI, guNa-guNI AdimeM kazcit bheda,
kathaJcit abheda Adi saptabhaGgI-prakriyAkI yojanA karake unameM anekAnta siddha
kiyA hai aura yaha dikhAyA hai ki kisa taraha unameM abheda ( ekatva) hai aura
kisa taraha unameM bheda ( nAnAtva ) Adi hai|| isa prakAra isa paricchedameM
bheda aura abhedako lekara vibhinna vAdiyoM dvArA mAnya bhedaikAnta,
abhedaikAnta Adi ekAntoMkI AlocanA aura syAdvAdanayase unameM anekAntakI
vyavasthA kI gaI hai| paJcama pariccheda : isa pariccheda meM 73-75 taka tIna
kArikAoM dvArA una vAdiyoMkI mImAMsA karate hue naina dRSTi prastuta kI gaI hai
jo sarvathA apekSAse yA sarvathA anapekSA Adise vastusvarUpako siddha mAnate
haiN| kArikA 73 meM kahA gayA hai ki yadi dharma aura dharmIkI, vizeSaNa aura
vizeSyakI, kArya aura kAraNakI tathA pramANa aura prameya AdikI siddhi sarvathA
apekSAse mAnI jAya to unakI kabhI bhI vyavasthA nahIM ho sakatI, kyoMki ve usI
prakAra anyonyAzrita raheMge jisa prakAra kisI nadImeM DUbate hue do tairAka eka
dUsareke Azraya hote haiM aura phalataH donoM hI DUba jAte haiM  /  yadi unakI
siddhi sarvathA anapekSAse ( svataH ) hI svIkAra kI jAya to amuka kAryakAraNa
haiM, amuka dharma-dharmI haiM, amuka vizeSaNa-vizeSya haiM, amuka
pramANaprameya haiM aura amuka sAmAnya-vizeSa haiM, isa prakArakA vyavahAra
nahIM bana sakegA, kyoMki ye saba vyavahAra parasparakI apekSAse hote haiN|
kArikA 74 meM sarvathA ubhayavAdiyoMke ubhayakAntameM virodha aura sarvathA
anubhayavAdiyoMke anubhayakAntameM 'anubhaya' zabda dvArA bhI kathana na ho
sakanekA doSa diyA gayA hai  /  75 dvArA syAdvAdanayase vastusvarUpako siddhi
pradarzita kI gaI hai| kahA gayA hai ki dharmarmibhAva, kAryakAraNabhAva,
vizeSaNavizeSyabhAva aura pramANaprameyabhAvakA vyavahAra to apekSAse siddha
hotA hai| parantu unakA svarUpa svataH siddha hai| yathArthameM kAryameM
kAryatA, kAraNameM kAraNatA, pramANameM pramANatA, prameyameM prameyatA Adi
svayaM siddha hai vaha parApekSa nahIM

Page #29 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Devagam-Aapta-Mimamsa  It is only through the principle of *anekanta* (non-
absolutism) that the true nature of things can be understood. Otherwise, no
object can have its own independent form. For example, the nature of the agent
is not independent of the action, and the nature of the action is not
independent of the agent. Similarly, the nature of the knower is not independent
of the known, and the nature of the known is not independent of the knower.
However, their interaction is certainly interdependent. In the same way, the
nature of dharma, dharmi, etc. is self-evident, but their interaction is
interdependent. Thus, in this chapter, the principle of *anekanta* is
established by applying the seven-fold scheme of *saptabhangi* to the opposing
pair of *apeksha* (dependence) and *anapeksha* (independence).  ## Sixth Chapter
The sixth chapter, through three karikas (76-78), exposes the flaws in the
absolute views of *hetuvad* (reasoning) and *ahetuvad* (non-reasoning) and
establishes their harmony (anekanta-sthapan) through the application of
*saptabhangi*.  Karika 76 argues that accepting the truth of objects solely
through *hetuvad* leads to the absurdity of denying the knowledge of objects
through direct perception and other proofs. Similarly, accepting everything as
true based on *agama* (scriptural authority) leads to the absurdity of accepting
contradictory principles and their corresponding elements as true.  Karika 77
demonstrates the flaws in both *ubhayakanta* (dualistic view) and
*avachyatekanta* (view of the inexpressible) by showing that the term "avachya"
itself cannot express the inexpressible.  The final karika (78) of this chapter,
while pointing out that the truth of objects can be established through both
*hetuvad* and *ahetuvad*, demonstrates the *anekanta* nature of truth through
*saptabhangi*. It states that where there is no authoritative speaker, the truth
of the object is established through reasoning and is called *hetu-sadhit*
(reason-established). However, where there is an authoritative speaker, the
truth of the object is established through their words and is called *agama-
sadhit* (scripture-established). Thus, the means of establishing the truth of an
object (*upaya-tattva*) - *hetuvad* and *ahetuvad* - are also *anekanta* in
nature.  ## Seventh Chapter  This chapter contains nine karikas (79-87) that
expose the flaws in accepting individual absolute views like *jnanakanta*
(absolute view of knowledge) and *bahyarthakanta* (absolute view of external
objects) and establish the faultless *anekanta*.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 devAgama-AptamImAMsA hai| anyathA kisI bhI vastukA apanA svataMtra svarUpa
nahIM bana skegaa| jaise kartAkA svarUpa karmApekSa aura karmakA svarUpa
katrapekSa nahIM hai tathA bodhakakA svarUpa bodhyApekSa aura bodhyakA svarUpa
bodhakApekSa nahIM hai  /  para unakA vyavahAra avazya paraspara-sApekSa hai|
usI prakAra dharmadharmI AdikA svarUpa to svayaM siddha hai kintu unakA
vyavahAra paraspara sApekSa hotA hai| isa taraha isa paricchedameM apekSA aura
anapekSAke virodhI yugalameM bhI saptabhaGgIkI yojanA karake anekAntakI
vyavasthA kI gaI hai| SaSTha pariccheda SaSTha paricchedameM 76-78 taka tIna
kArikAoM dvArA hetuvAda aura ahetuvAdakI ekAnta mAnyatAoMmeM doSodghATana karate
hue unameM saptabhaGgIyojanApUrvaka samanvaya (anekAntasthApana) kiyA gayA hai|
kArikA 76 meM sarvathA hetuvAdase vastusiddhi mAnane para pratyakSAdi pramANoMse
vastujJAnake abhAvakA prasaGga tathA Agamase sarvasiddhi svIkAra karanepara
paraspara viruddha siddhAntoMke pratipAdaka vacanoMse bhI virodhI tattvoMkI
siddhikA prasaGga diyA gayA hai  /  kArikA 77 meM pUrvavat ubhayakAntameM
virodha aura AvAcyataikAntameM 'avAcya' zabdadvArA bhI usakA nirvacana na kara
sakanekA doSa pradarzita hai  /  isa paricchedakI antima 78 vIM kArikAmeM
hetuvAda aura ahetuvAda donoMse vastusiddhi honekA nirdeza karate hue
saptabhaGgAtmaka anekAnta pradarzita kiyA gayA hai  /  kahA gayA hai ki jahA~
Apta vaktA na ho vahA~ hetuse sAdhyakI siddhi kI jAtI hai aura usa siddhiko
hetu-sAdhita kahA jAtA hai tathA jahA~ Apta vaktA ho vahA~ usake vacanase
vastukI siddhi hotI hai aura vaha siddhi Agama-sAdhita kahI jAtI hai  /  isa
prakAra vastu-siddhikA aGga upAyatattva ( hetuvAda aura ahetuvAda ) bhI
anekAntAtmaka hai  /  saptama pariccheda : isa paricchedameM 79-87 taka 9
kArikAe~ haiM, jinake dvArA jJAnaikAnta aura bAhyArthaMkAnta Adi eka-eka
ekAntoMke svIkAra karanemeM AnevAle doSoMko dikhalAte hue nirdoSa anekAntakI
sthApanA kI gaI hai  /

Page #30 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Introduction  **13**  Karika 79 states that if only the knowledge principle
exists and no external meaning, then all intellects and all statements would be
false, because the validity of both depends on external meaning. Those whose
known external meaning is true are called evidence, and those whose meaning is
not true are called apparent evidence. But in the theory of knowledge-only,
because external meaning is not accepted, the certainty of any intellect and any
statement cannot be determined, and therefore they will be called false. And
when they are false, they are included in the category of apparent evidence. But
how can they be called apparent evidence without evidence? The implication is
that if only the knowledge principle is accepted, then neither evidence nor
apparent evidence is formed. And if they are not formed, how can knowledge alone
be proved real and external meaning unreal?  Karika 80 shows the futility of
trying to prove the principle of knowledge-only through the understanding of the
object and the means, because such a proof leads to the fault of the proposition
and the fault of the reason. It is clear that those who believe in the principle
of knowledge-only have neither the object nor the reason. Otherwise, the
consequence of duality would arise.  Karika 81 criticizes those who accept only
external meaning and do not accept internal meaning (knowledge). It is said that
if only external meaning exists and no knowledge, then there will be no doubt,
no error, and no indecision. Not only that, the determination of truth and
falsehood will also not be possible. Consequently, even those who advocate the
opposite meaning will achieve their goals of liberation, etc. In addition,
because dream intellects are not connected with self-interest, they cannot be
called non-convincing.  Karika 82 shows the fault of complete dualism in the
contradiction and the fault of complete non-dualism in the inability to express
it with the word 'non-dual'.  Karika 83 shows that there is no fault in
arranging the reality of things through Syadvada, saying that there is no need
for a perception of the nature of things, because...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prastAvanA 13 kArikA 79 ke dvArA batalAyA gayA hai ki yadi sarvathA jJAnatattva
hI ho, bAha artha na ho to sabhI buddhiyAM aura sabhI vacana mithyA ho jAyeMge,
kyoMki donoMkA prAmANya bAhya arthapara nirbhara hai| jinakA jJAta bAhyArtha
satya nikalatA hai unheM pramANa aura jinakA satya nahIM nikalatA unheM
pramANAbhAsa kahA jAtA hai  /  parantu jJAnakAntavAdameM bAhyArthako svIkAra na
karane ke kAraNa kisI bhI buddhi aura kisI bhI vacanako pramANatAkA nizcaya
nahIM ho sakatA aura isaliye unheM mithyA hI kahA jAvegA aura jaba ve mithyA
haiM to ve pramANAbhAsakI koTimeM praviSTa haiN| kintu binA pramANake unheM
pramANAbhAsa bhI kaise kahA jA sakatA hai| tAtparya yaha ki sarvathA
jJAnatattvake hI svIkAra karanepara pramANa aura pramANAbhAsa donoM hI nahIM
banate aura unake na bananepara kisa taraha jJAnamAtrako vAstavika aura
bAhyArthako avAstavika siddha kiyA jA sakatA hai  /  80 ke dvArA sAdhya aura
sAdhanakI vijJaptise vijJaptimAtratattvakI siddhike prayAsako bhI nirarthaka
batalAyA gayA hai, kyoMki ukta prakArase siddhi karane para pratijJAdoSa aura
hetudoSa Ate haiN| spaSTa hai ki vijJaptimAtratattvako mAnane vAloMke yahA~ na
sAdhya hai aura na hetu  /  anyathA dvatakA prasaGga aayegaa| 81 ke dvArA unheM
doSa diyA gayA hai jo kevala bAhyArtha svIkAra karate haiM, antaraGgArtha (
jJAna ) ko nahIM mAnate  /  kahA gayA hai ki yadi sarvathA bAhyArtha hI ho,
jJAna na ho, to na saMzaya hogA, na viparyaya aura na anadhyavasAya  /  itanA hI
nahIM, satyAsatyakA nirNaya bhI nahIM kiyA jA skegaa| phalataH jo virodhI
arthakA pratipAdana karate haiM unake bhI mokSAdi kAryoMkI siddhi ho jaaygii|
isake atirikta svapnabuddhiyoMkA svArthake sAtha sambandha na honese unheM
asaMvAdI nahIM kahA jA skegaa| kArikA 82 ke dvArA sarvathA ubhayavAdameM virodha
aura sarvathA anubhayavAdameM 'anubhaya' zabdase bhI usakA kathana na ho
sakanekA doSa pUrvavata dikhAyA gayA hai| _ kArikA 83 dvArA syAdvAdase
vastuvyavasthA karanepara koI doSa nahIM AtA, yaha dikhalAte hue kahA gayA hai
ki svarUpasaMvedanakI apekSA koI

Page #31 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter 14: Devagama-Aapta-Mimamsa  Knowledge is not a proof-like appearance
(pramanaabhas). However, it is both a proof (pramana) and a proof-like
appearance in relation to external objects (baahya prameya). Knowledge that
becomes available after the external object is known is a proof, and knowledge
that does not become available after the external object is known, but something
else is found, is a proof-like appearance. In this way, all knowledge is a proof
in relation to the perception of its own nature (swaroopasanvedan), and none is
a proof-like appearance. But in relation to the truth of the external object, it
is a proof, and in relation to its falsity, it is a proof-like appearance.
Therefore, the arrangement of proof and proof-like appearance is established by
accepting both the internal meaning (knowledge) and the external meaning, not by
accepting only one. This is the principle of anekanta (many-sidedness) which is
established by syadvad (conditional logic).  By verse 84, those (Buddhists) who
do not accept external meaning, but only accept its verbal (imaginary)
perception, are resolved. It is said for them that whatever word there may be,
its meaning is necessarily an external object. For example, take the word 'jiva'
(soul). Its meaning is necessarily an external object because it is a noun.
Whatever is a noun, its meaning is necessarily an external object, just as the
word 'hetu' (cause) carries its meaning, the external object of the form of a
cause. It is also noteworthy that the word 'jiva' is not used in the body or in
the group of senses, etc., because there is no such common usage. The common
usage is fixed in the context where it is used as 'the jiva went, the jiva is
present'. No one uses this in the body, because it is inanimate, nor in the
senses, because they are merely means of enjoyment, nor in objects like words,
because they are enjoyed. He uses 'jiva' in the soul, the enjoyer. Therefore,
the word 'jiva' is associated with the external meaning of the form of jiva.
Maya, avidya, aprama, etc., which are nouns indicating delusion, are also
associated with their respective meanings of maya, avidya, aprama, etc. For
example, the noun 'prama' (knowledge) is associated with its meaning of the form
of prama. These nouns cannot be said to be merely indicative of the speaker's
intention, because the rule of the listener's inclination towards that
particular action after hearing those nouns (names) is observed.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 14 devAgama-AptamImAMsA jJAna pramANAbhAsa nahIM hai  /  para bAhya prameyakI
apekSA pramANa aura pramANAbhAsa donoM hai  /  jisa jJAnakA bAhya prameya jJAta
honeke bAda vahI upalabdha hotA hai vaha pramANa hai tathA jisakA bAhya prameya
jJAta honeke bAda vahI upalabdha nahIM hotA, apitu anya milatA hai vaha
pramANAbhAsa hai| isa taraha svarUpasaMvedanakI apekSA sabhI jJAna pramANa hai,
koI pramANAbhAsa nahIM haiN| kintu bAhya prameyakI satyatAse pramANa aura
asatyatAse pramANAbhAsa haiN| ataH pramANa aura pramANAbhAsakI vyavasthA
antaraGgArtha (jJAna) aura bAhyArtha donoMko svIkAra karanese hotI hai, kisI
ekase nhiiN| yahI anekAntarUpa vastutattva hai jisakI syAdvAdase ukta prakAra
vyavasthA hotI hai  /  kArikA 84 ke dvArA una (bauddhoM) kA samAdhAna kiyA gayA
hai jo bAhyArtha nahIM mAnate, kevala usakI zAbdika (kAlpanika) pratIti svIkAra
karate haiN| unake lie kahA gayA hai ki koI bhI zabda kyoM na ho, usakA vAcya
bAhyArtha avazya hotA hai| udAharaNArtha jIvazabdako hI lIjie, usakA vAcya
bAhyArtha avazya hai kyoMki baha eka saMjJA hai| jo saMjJA hotI hai usakA vAcya
bAhyArtha avazya hotA hai, jaise hetuzabda apane vAcya heturUpa bAhyArthako lie
hue hai| yaha bhI ullekhanIya hai ki jIvazabdakA prayoga zarIrameM yA indriyoM
Adike samUhameM nahIM hotA, kyoMki aisI lokarUDhi nahIM hai  /  'jIva gayA, jIva
maujUda hai' isa prakArakA jisameM vyavahAra hotA hai usImeM yaha lokarUr3hi
niyata hai| koI bhI vyakti yaha vyavahAra na zarIrameM karatA hai, kyoMki vaha
acetana hai, na indriyoMmeM karatA hai, kyoMki ve mAtra upabhogakI sAdhana haiM
aura na zabdAdi viSayoMmeM karatA hai, kyoMki ve bhogya rUpase vyahata hote haiM
/  vaha to bhoktA AtmAmeM 'jIva' yaha vyavahAra karatA hai| ataH 'jIva' zabda
jIvarUpa bAhyArtha sahita hai| mAyA, avidyA, apramA Adi jo bhrAntisUcaka
saMjJAyeM haiM ve bhI mAyA, avidyA, apramA Adi apane bhAvAtmaka arthoMse sahita
haiN| jaise pramAsaMjJA apane pramArUpa arthase sahita hai| ina saMjJAoMko mAtra
vaktAke abhiprAyako sUcikA bhI nahIM kahA jA sakatA, kyoMki zrotAoMkI jo una
saMjJAoM (nAmoM) ko sunakara usa-usa arthakriyAmeM pravRttikA niyama dekhA jAtA
hai vaha abhiprayA |

Page #32 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Introduction  It is not possible. Therefore, one should not consider nouns
(words) as indicative of meaning, but should accept them as indicative of truth
(external meaning).  In the next three verses (85-87), the author strongly
supports his aforementioned statement by stating that every object has three
nouns: Buddhisanjna, Shabdasanjna, and Arthasanjna. These three nouns are
respectively the speakers of Buddhi, Shabda, and Artha, and from them the
listener receives three types of knowledge: reflective Buddhi, Shabda, and
Artha. Therefore, the word "Jiva" is not only the speaker of Jivabuddhi or
Jivashabda, but also the speaker of Jivaartha, Jivashabda, and Jivabuddhi. In
reality, the three types of knowledge that are reflected in them make it clear
that the three nouns have three meanings. The implication is that every object
is of three types: Buddhi-atmak, Shabda-atmak, and Artha-atmak. And the three
nouns that are the speakers of these three are mentioned above. In this way, all
nouns (words) are with their meanings.  Although the argument (of being a noun)
mentioned above is invalid for the scientist, because for him there is no noun
(word) other than science. For him, the author says that when we speak, listen,
or know, we are called the speaker, listener, or knower, and these three are
different, not one. And the three have different functions. The speaker speaks
the sentence by knowing the object, the listener listens to it and understands
it, and the knower defines the object in the form of word and meaning. These
three are completely different functions of the three. How can a scientist dare
to misinterpret these experienced objects? In such a situation, he cannot say
that the argument is invalid or has other flaws. If he calls these experienced
objects (object, speaker who is the receiver of the object, and listener) as
illusions, then how can his science and supporting evidence escape being
classified as illusions?

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prastAvanA se sambhava nahIM hai  /  ataH saMjJAoM ( zabdoM) ko abhiprAyakA
sUcaka nahIM mAnanA cAhie, kintu unheM satyArtha ( bAhyArtha ) kA sUcaka svIkAra
karanA caahie| agalI 85-87 taka tIna kArikAoMke dvArA granthakAra apane ukta
kathanakA sabala samarthana karate hue pratipAdana karate haiM ki pratyeka
vastukI tIna saMjJAyeM hotI haiM  /  buddhisaMjJA, zabdasaMjJA aura arthasaMjJA
/  tathA ye tInoM saMjJAyeM buddhi, zabda aura artha ina tInakI kramazaH vAcikA
haiM aura tonoMse zrotAko unake pratibimbAtmaka buddhi, zabda aura artharUpa
tIna bodha hote haiM  /  ataH 'jIva' yaha zabda kevala jIvabuddhi yA jIvazabdakA
vAcaka na hokara jIvaartha, jIvazabda aura jIvabuddhi ina tInoMkA vAcaka hai  /
vAstavameM unake pratibimbAtmaka tIna bodha honese una tInoM saMjJAoMke
vAcyArtha tIna haiM, yaha dhyAna denepara spaSTa ho jAtA hai  /  tAtparya yaha
ki pratyeka padArtha tIna prakArakA hai-buddhayAtmaka, zabdAtmaka aura
arthAtmaka  /  aura tInoMkI vAcikA tIna saMjJAyeM haiM, jinakA ullekha Upara
kiyA jA cukA hai aura isa taraha samasta saMjJAyeM (zabda) apane artha sahita
haiM  /  _ yadyapi vijJAnavAdIke lie Upara kahA gayA hetu ( saMjJA honese )
asiddha hai, kyoMki usake yahA~ vijJAna ke alAvA saMjJA (zabda) nahIM hai| usake
lie granthakAra kahate haiM ki jaba hama kucha kahate yA sunate yA jAnate haiM
to hama vaktA, zrotA yA pramAtA kahe jAte haiM aura ye tInoM bhinna-bhinna haiM,
eka nahIM hai  /  tathA ina tInoMke tIna kArya bhI alaga-alaga hote haiM  /
vaktA abhidheyakA jJAna karake vAkya bolatA hai, zrotA usako zravaNa kara usakA
bodha karatA hai aura pramAtA zabda aura artharUpa prameyakI paricchitti (pramA)
karatA hai| ye tInoM hI una tInoMke bilakula judejude kArya haiN| vijJAnavAdI
ina anubhavasiddha padArthoMkA apahrava karanekA sAhasa kaise kara sakatA hai|
aisI dazAmeM vaha hetuko asiddhAdi doSoMse yukta nahIM kaha sktaa| yadi vaha ina
anubhavasiddha padArthoM ( abhidheya, abhidheyake grAhaka vaktA aura zrotA ) ko
vibhrama kahe to usakA vijJAnavAda aura sAdhaka pramANa bhI vibhrama koTimeM
Anese kaise baca sakate haiN|

Page #33 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
If the *Devaagam-Aapta-Mimamsa* and the evidence are mistaken, then both the
desired internal object (knowledge) and the undesired external object, which are
considered as evidence and non-evidence respectively, will be proven to be
mistaken. In such a situation, how can the knowledge of the principle of the
desirable and undesirable be possible in pure knowledge-ism?  If we say that the
evidence is infallible, then the acceptance of external reality is necessary for
it. Without it, the arrangement of evidence and pseudo-evidence is not possible;
because only those knowledges and words have evidence which have external
reality and those which do not have external reality are considered as pseudo-
evidence. In reality, the intellect which obtains the known meaning is called
true and the one which does not obtain the known meaning is called false.
Similarly, the word which has the denoted meaning is considered true and the one
which does not have the denoted meaning is considered false. Thus, the intellect
and the word are called evidence and pseudo-evidence only in the existence and
non-existence of external reality. This arrangement of evidence and pseudo-
evidence is not possible in pure knowledge-ism. Therefore, the external reality
is definitely proven in the said way and after its proof, the speaker, etc.
three and their understanding, etc. three are also proven. Therefore, the said
'designation' reason is not faulty due to non-proof, etc.  Thus, in this
chapter, the principle of the means of knowledge has also been made multi-
faceted by planning the seven-fold theory and proved by the *Syadvada* approach.
Eighth Chapter:  This chapter contains four verses from 88 to 91. By the 88th
verse, showing the fault in the acceptance of pure divineism, it has been said
that if the production of desired and undesired objects is accepted only from
God, then the question arises, from whom is the producer God produced? Its
production cannot be accepted from human effort, because the acceptance of 'all
objects are produced from God' is terminated.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
  /  devAgama-AptamImAMsA aura pramANake vibhrama honepara use jo iSTa antarjeya
( jJAna ) hai vaha aura jo use iSTa nahIM hai aisA bahirjeya donoM hI, jinheM
tAdRza (pramANarUpa ) aura itara-anyAdRza ( apramANarUpa ) mAnA jAtA hai,
vibhrama hI siddha hoNge| aisI hAlatameM sarvathA vijJAnavAdameM heyopAdeyakA
tattvajJAna kaise ho sakatA hai ? yadi pramANako abhrAnta kaheM to usake lie
bAhyArthakA svIkAra Avazyaka hai  /  usake binA pramANa aura pramANAbhAsakI
vyavasthA sambhava nahIM hai; kyoMki unhIM jJAnoM tathA zabdoMmeM pramANatA hotI
hai jinakA bAhyArtha hotA hai aura jinakA bAhyArtha nahIM hotA unheM
pramANAbhAsa mAnA jAtA hai  /  yathArthameM jisa buddhikA jJAta artha prApta
hotA hai use satya aura jisakA jJAta artha prApta nahIM hotA use asatya kahA
jAtA hai  /  isI prakAra jisa zabdakA abhihita artha milatA hai vaha satya aura
jisakA abhihita artha nahIM milatA use asatya mAnA jAtA hai| isa prakAra
bAhyArthake sadbhAva aura asadbhAvameM hI buddhi aura zabda pramANa evaM
pramANAbhAsa kahe jAte haiN| sarvathA jJAnakAntameM yaha pramANa aura
pramANAbhAsakI vyavasthA sambhava nahIM hai| ataH ukta prakArase bAhyArtha
avazya siddha hotA hai aura usake siddha ho jAnepara vaktA Adi tIna aura unake
bodhAdi tIna bhI siddha ho jAte haiM  /  ataeva ukta 'saMjJAtva' hetu asiddhAdi
doSa yukta nahIM hai  /  isa prakAra isa paricchedameM jJApakopAyatattvameM bhI
saptabhaGgIkI yojanA karake use syAdvAdanayase anekAntAtmaka siddha kiyA gayA
hai  /  aSTama pariccheda : isa paricche dameM 88-91 taka cAra kArikAyeM haiM  /
88vIM kArikAke dvArA sarvathA daivavAdakI mAnyatAmeM doSa dikhalAte hae kahA hai
ki yadi ekAntataH devase hI iSTAniSTa vastuoMkI niSpatti svIkAra kI jAya to
unakA niSpAdaka daiva kisase niSpanna hotA hai, yaha prazna upasthita hotA hai ?
usakI niSpatti pauruSase to mAnI nahIM jA sakatI, kyoMki saba padArthoMkI siddhi
devase hI hotI hai' isa mAnyatAko samApti ho jAtI hai  /

Page #34 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Introduction  If its origin is attributed to another deity, then liberation
can never be attained by anyone, because it would be born from a previous deity,
and that previous deity would be born from an even earlier deity, and in this
way, the chain of previous deities would continue indefinitely, rendering human
effort futile.  The 89th Karika, while completely refuting the theory of human
effort, states that if all desirable and undesirable things are solely the
result of human effort, then from where does human effort originate? It cannot
be said to originate from a deity, because the assertion that "all things are
achieved through human effort" would be contradicted. If its origin is
attributed to another human effort, then the effort of no being should be futile
- everyone's effort should be successful. However, this is not observed.
Therefore, just like the theory of divine determinism, the theory of human
effort is also flawed and hence unacceptable.  The 90th Karika, as before,
points out the contradiction in both the theories of divine determinism and
human effort, and the fact that the term "experience" in the theory of
experience-based determinism cannot establish its validity.  The 91st Karika
establishes the validity of the theory of Syadvada in explaining the origin of
things. Where the occurrence of desirable and undesirable things happens without
the involvement of the intellect, their attainment is due to a deity, and where
their occurrence happens with the involvement of the intellect, it is due to
human effort. _Thus, in this chapter, while refuting the flaws in the theories
of divine determinism, human effort, and other such singular theories, the
theory of Syadvada is established as the correct explanation for the origin of
things. Here too, the seven-fold predication scheme is evident. Ninth Chapter: _
This chapter examines the two aspects of the principle of divine intervention,
namely, virtue and vice, and their impact on the state of beings. Virtue.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prastAvanA yadi usakI niSpatti anya daivase kahI jAya to mokSa kabhI kisIko ho
hI nahIM sakegA, kyoMki vaha anya daiva pUrva devase utpanna hogA aura vaha
pUrva daiva bhI aura pUrvavartI devase hogA aura isa taraha pUrva-pUrva devoMkA
jahAM tAMtA banA rahegA vahA~ pauruSa niSphala siddha hogaa| 89 vIM kArikAke
dvArA sarvathA pauruSavAdako bhI doSapUrNa batalAte hue kahA gayA hai ki yadi
sarvathA pauruSase hI sabhI iSTAniSTa vastuoMkI niSpatti ho to pauruSa kisase
utpanna hotA hai, yaha batAyA jAya ? daivase to usakI utpatti kahI nahIM jA
sakatI; kyoMki 'pauruSase hI saba padArthoMkI siddhi hotI hai' yaha pratijJA
TUTa jAtI hai  /  agara anya pauruSase usakI niSpatti kahI jAya to kisI bhI
prANIkA pauruSa (prayatna ) niSphala nahIM honA cAhie- sabhIkA pauruSa saphala
honA cAhie  /  para aisA dRSTigocara nahIM hotA  /  ataH devaikAntakI taraha
pauruSakAnta bhI sadoSa hai aura isalie vaha bhI grAhya nahIM hai| kArikA 90 ke
dvArA ubhayaikAntameM virodha aura anubhayaikAntameM 'anubhaya' zabdase bhI
usakA pratipAdana na ho sakanekA doSa pUrvavat batAyA gayA hai| kArikA 91 ke
dvArA syAdvAdase padArthoMkI siddhi kI gaI hai| jahA~ iSTAniSTa vastuoMkA
samAgama buddhivyApArake binA milatA hai vahA~ unakI prApti devase hai aura
jahA~ unakA gamAgama buddhivyApArapUrvaka hotA hai vahA~ pauruSakRta hai| _isa
prakAra isa paricchedameM devaikAnta, pauruSaikAnta Adi ekAntoMko truTipUrNa
batalAte hue unameM syAdvAdase vastusiddhikI vyavasthA kI gaI hai aura yahA~ bhI
pUrvavat saptabhaGgIkI yojanA dikhalAI hai| navama pariccheda : _ isa
paricchedameM pichale paricchedameM varNita daivakArakopAyatattvake puNya aura
pApa ye do bheda karake unakI sthitipara vicAra kiyA gayA haiN| puNya  /

Page #35 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter 18  This chapter discusses the reasons for **Devaagam-Aapta-Mimamsa**
(the examination of the scriptures by the liberated soul) and the causes of
**paap** (sin). This is because there are definitive beliefs regarding **punya**
(merit) and **paap**.  This chapter contains four **karikaas** (verses). The
92nd **karika** examines the belief that causing suffering to others leads to
**paap-bandh** (bondage of sin) and causing happiness to others leads to
**punya-bandh** (bondage of merit). However, this belief is not valid because it
would imply that milk and other things that cause happiness to others, and
thorns and other things that cause suffering to others, would also be subject to
**punya-bandh** and **paap-bandh**. If it is argued that only **chetana**
(conscious beings) are subject to **bandh** (bondage), and not **achetana**
(non-conscious beings) like milk and thorns, then even **vitraag** (those free
from **kṣayā** (passions)) would be bound by **punya** and **paap**, because
they are instrumental in causing happiness to their devotees and suffering to
their non-devotees. If it is argued that they do not have the intention to cause
them happiness or suffering, then the definitive belief that "causing happiness
to others leads to **punya-bandh** and causing suffering to others leads to
**paap-bandh**" would not hold true.  The 93rd **karika** examines the arguments
of those who say that causing suffering to oneself leads to **punya-bandh** and
causing happiness to oneself leads to **paap-bandh**. It is argued that if this
principle is accepted, then **vitraag** **muni** (liberated sages) and
**vidwaan** **muni** (learned sages) would be bound by **punya** and **paap**
due to the suffering caused by **kaayaklesh** (physical pain) and the happiness
caused by **tattvajnan** (knowledge of reality), respectively. As a result, they
would never be able to escape the bondage of the world. Therefore, this
definitive belief also does not seem to be valid.  The 94th **karika**
demonstrates the contradiction in both **ubhayekant** (both-sided view) and
**anubhayekant** (experience-based view), and the fact that the term
"**anubhay**" cannot be used to define it.  The 95th **karika** establishes the
nature of **punya** and **paap** through **syadvad** (the doctrine of maybe). It
is logically argued that happiness and suffering, whether caused to oneself or
others, are subject to **syadvad**. If they are caused by **vishuddhi** (purity,
leading to auspicious results) or **sanklesh** (impurity, leading to
inauspicious results), or if they are the cause of these results, then...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 18 devAgama-AptamImAMsA kina kAraNoMse hotA hai aura pApa kina bAtoMse, yahI
isa paricchedakA viSaya hai, kyoMki puNya aura pApake sambandhameM bhI aikAntika
mAnyatAe~ haiM  /  isameM cAra kArikAe~ haiN| 92 vIM kArikAke dvArA usa
mAnyatAkI samIkSA kI hai jisameM dUsaremeM duHkha utpanna karanese pApa bandha
aura sukha utpanna karanese puNya bandha svIkRta hai| para yaha mAnyatA yukta
nahIM hai, kyoMki aisA mAnanepara dUdha Adi dUsaremeM sukha tathA kaNTakAdi
duHkha utpanna karaneke kAraNa unake bhI puNyabandha aura pApabandha mAnanA
pdd'egaa| yadi kahA jAya ki cetana hI bandhayogya haiM, acetana dugdhAdi evaM
kaNTakAdi nahIM, to vItarAga ( kaSAya rahita ) bhI puNya aura pApase ba~dheMge,
kyoMki ve apane bhaktoMmeM sukha aura abhaktoMmeM duHkha utpanna karane meM
nimitta par3ate haiM  /  yadi kahA jAya ki unakA unheM sukha-duHkha utpanna
karanekA abhiprAya na honese unheM puNya-pApabandha nahIM hotA to 'parameM sukha
utpanna karanese puNya aura duHkha utpanna karanese pApa bandha hotA hai' yaha
ekAnta mAnyatA nahIM rhtii| 93vIM kArikAke dvArA una vAdiyoMkI bhI mImAMsA kI
hai jo kahate haiM ki apanemeM duHkha utpanna karanese to puNya aura sukha
utpanna karanese pApakA bandha hotA hai| kahA gayA hai ki aisA siddhAnta
mAnanepara vItarAga muni aura vidvAn muni bhI kramazaH kAyaklezAdi duHkha tathA
tattvajJAnAdi sukha apanemeM utpanna karaneke kAraNa puNya-pApase bNdhege|
phalataH ve kabhI bhI saMsAra-bandhanase chuTakArA na pA skeNge| ataH yaha
ekAnta bhI saMgata pratIta nahIM hotaa| 94 ke dvArA ubhayaikAntameM virodha aura
anubhayaikAntamai 'anubhaya' zabdase bhI usakA nirvacana na ho sakanekA doSa
pUrvavat pradarzita kiyA gayA hai| kArikA 95 ke dvArA syAdvAdase puNya aura
pApakI vyavasthA kI gaI hai| yuktipUrvaka kahA gayA hai ki sukha-duHkha, cAhe
apanemeM utpanna kiye jAyeM aura cAhe parameM  /  yadi ve vizuddhi ( zubha
pariNAmoM ) athavA saMkleza (( azubha pariNAmoM ) se paidA hote haiM yA una
pariNAmoMke janaka haiM to

Page #36 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Introduction  From them, respectively, there is the inflow of merit
(punyaasrava) and the inflow of demerit (paapasrava). If this is not the case,
then the faults mentioned above are inevitable. In reality, merit and demerit
are not merely caused by bringing happiness or suffering to oneself or others,
but depend on their auspicious and inauspicious consequences. Those happiness
and suffering that are born from auspicious consequences or are their
generators, from them there is the inflow of merit, and those that are born from
inauspicious consequences or are their generators, they are by rule the cause or
effect of the inflow of demerit. This is the state of affairs. Thus, the system
of merit and demerit is established only in Syadvada, not in Ekantvada. Chapter
Ten:  In this final chapter, there are twenty karikas from 96 to 114. Through
karika 96, the principle of the Samkhya philosophy, which states that "bondage
is due to ignorance and liberation is due to knowledge," is reviewed. But this
principle is not valid, because the objects of knowledge are infinite and
therefore ignorance of some object of knowledge will remain. In such a
situation, no man can ever become a Kevali. Similarly, considering liberation as
being due to partial knowledge (mere discrimination between nature and the self)
is also not valid, because along with partial knowledge, there will also be much
ignorance. In such a situation, there will only be bondage, liberation will
never be possible. Considering this, both these Ekant views are faulty and
therefore not acceptable.  Through karika 97, the fault of contradiction in
Ubhayakant and the inability to even indicate it through the word "unspeakable"
in Avacyataikant is given.  Through karika 98, while explaining the system of
bondage and liberation through Syadvada, it is said that bondage occurs due to
ignorance accompanied by delusion, not due to ignorance without delusion.
Similarly, liberation is possible due to partial knowledge without delusion, and
not due to partial knowledge with delusion. Therefore, the cause of bondage is
not only ignorance, and the cause of liberation is not only partial knowledge.
In reality, bondage is established by concomitance and difference in the
presence of delusion, and liberation is established in the absence of delusion.
Ignorance is associated with bondage, and knowledge is...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prastAvanA kramazaH unase puNyAsrava aura pApAsrava hotA hai| yadi aisA nahIM
hai to jo doSa Upara diyA gayA haiM usakA honA dunivAra hai  /  yathArthameM
puNya aura pApa apaneko yA parako sukha-duHkha pahu~cAne mAtrase nahIM hote
haiM, apitu apane zabhAzubha pariNAmoMpara unakA honA nirbhara hai| jo sukha-
duHkha zubha pariNAmoMse janya haiM yA unake janaka haiM unase to puNyakA Asrava
hotA hai aura jo azubhapariNAmoMse janya yA unake janaka haiM ve niyamase
pApAsravake aura kAraNa yA kArya haiM  /  yaha vastuvyavasthA hai| isa prakAra
syAdvAdameM hI puNya pApakI vyavasthA banatI haiM, ekAntavAdameM nahIM  /
dazama pariccheda : isa antima paricchedameM 96-114 taka bIsa kArikAyeM haiM  /
kArikA 96 ke dvArA sAMkhyadarzanake usa siddhAntakI samIkSA kI gaI hai jisameM
kahA gayA hai ki 'ajJAnase bandha hotA hai aura jJAnase mokSa'  /  parantu yaha
siddhAnta yukta nahI hai, kyoMki jJeya ananta haiM aura isalie kisI-na-kisI
jJeya kA ajJAna banA rahegA  /  aisI sthiti meM kabhI bhI koI puruSa kevalI
nahIM ho sktaa| isI prakAra alpajJAna ( prakRti-puruSakA viveka mAtra ) se mokSa
mAnanA bhI yukta nahIM hai, kyoMki alpajJAnake sAtha bahuta-sA ajJAna bhI rahegA
/  aisI dazAmeM bandha hI hogA, mokSa kabhI na ho sakegA  /  isa prakAra vicAra
karanepara ye donoM hI ekAnta doSapUrNa haiM aura isalie ve grAhya nahIM hai| 97
ke dvArA ubhayakAntameM virodha aura AvAcyataikAntameM 'avAcya' zabdake dvArA
bhI usakA nirdeza na ho sakanekA doSa diyA gayA hai| 98 ke dvArA syAdvAdase
bandha aura mokSakI vyavasthA batalAte hue kahA hai ki mohasahita ajJAnase
bandha hotA hai, moharahita ajJAnase nahIM  /  isI taraha moharahita alpajJAnase
mokSa sambhava hai aura mohasahita alpajJAnase nhiiN| ataH bandhakA kAraNa
kevala ajJAna nahIM hai aura na mokSakA kAraNa kevala alpajJAna hai  /
yathArthameM mohake sadbhAvameM bandha aura mohake abhAvameM mokSa anvaya-
vyatirekase siddha hote haiM  /  ajJAnakA bandhake sAtha aura jJAnakA

Page #37 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Devagam - Aapta Mimamsa  **Moksha** (liberation) does not have **anvaya**
(co-existence) or **vyatireka** (difference) with **anvaya vyabhichar**
(deviation from co-existence) and **vyatireka vyabhichar** (deviation from
difference). When there is no **anvaya vyatireka** (co-existence and difference)
between them, then **karyakaranabhav** (cause and effect relationship) cannot be
established. Therefore, **bandha** (bondage) due to **moha** (delusion) and
**agyan** (ignorance) and **moksha** (liberation) due to even a little **gyan**
(knowledge) without **moha** (delusion) should be considered as the established
order.  **Karika 99** reviews the view of those who consider the diverse
creations of beings, including their desires, to be the work of **Ishwar**
(God). They do not accept it as a result of their **shubha** (auspicious) and
**ashubha** (inauspicious) **karma** (actions). The author states that the
diverse creations of beings, including their desires, are according to their own
**karma** (actions), and **Ishwar** (God) is not the creator. And their
**karma** (actions) are acquired through their **shubha** (auspicious) and
**ashubha** (inauspicious) results, because all worldly beings are divided into
two parts based on the expectation of **shuddhi** (purity) and **ashuddhi**
(impurity).  The mentioned **shuddhi** (purity) and **ashuddhi** (impurity) are
the powers that are **paakya** (ripe) and **apaakya** (unripe) in them, as
stated in **Karika 100**.  Both are like the natural powers of beings.  **Karika
101** specifies the nature of **Jain praman** (Jain proof) and its two
divisions: **akramabhavi** (non-sequential) and **kramabhavi** (sequential).
**Karika 102** points out the **pramanphal** (fruit of proof) and describes it
as two types: **saakshaatphal** (direct fruit) and **paramparaphal**
(traditional fruit). The **saakshaatphal** (direct fruit) of **akramabhavi**
(non-sequential) **praman** (proof) is **agyannivritti** (removal of ignorance)
and the **paramparaphal** (traditional fruit) is **upeksha** (absence of
attachment and aversion to objects). The **saakshaatphal** (direct fruit) of
**kramabhavi** (sequential) **praman** (proof) is also **agyannaash**
(destruction of ignorance) and the **paramparaphal** (traditional fruit) is
**hanabuddhi** (understanding of destruction), **upaadanabuddhi** (understanding
of attachment), and **upekshabuddhi** (understanding of detachment).  **Karika
103** states that in every statement of the speaker, the **syat** (maybe)
particle, which indicates the speaker's intention, is present either explicitly
or implicitly. It acts as a **vachak** (indicator) of one **dharma** (truth)
while indicating many other **dharmas** (truths) (**anekant**). This is true for
ordinary speakers as well as...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 devAgama - AptamImAMsA mokSake sAtha anvayavyabhicAra tathA vyatirekavyabhicAra
honese unakA unake sAtha na anvaya haiM aura na vyarireka  /  aura jaba unakA
unake sAtha anvayavyatireka nahIM hai to unameM kAryakAraNabhAva bhI nahIM bana
sakatA  /  ataH mohasahita ajJAnase bandha aura moharahita thoDese bhI jJAnase
mokSako vyavasthA mAnI jAnI cAhie  /  20 kArikA 99 meM unakI samIkSA antarnihita
hai jo prANiyoMkI aneka prakArakI icchAdi sRSTiko IzvarakRta mAnate haiM-- use
unake zubhAzubhakarmajanya svIkAra nahIM karate  /  granthakAra kahate haiM ki
prANiyoMkI icchA di vicitra sRSTi unake svakarmAnusAra hotI hai, Izvara usakA
karttA nahIM hai  /  aura unakA vaha karma unake zubhAzubha pariNAmoMse arjita
hotA hai, kyoMki samasta saMsArI jIva zuddhi (zubha pariNAma) aura azuddhi
(azubha pariNAma ) kI apekSAse do bhAgoM meM vibhakta haiM  /  ullikhita zuddhi
aura azuddhi ye zaktiyA~ haiM jo unameM pAkya aura apAkya haiM, yaha kArikA 100
meM pratipAdana hai  /  donoM jIvoMkI eka prakArakI zaktiyoMkI taraha naisargika
hotI kArikA 101 meM jaina pramANakA svarUpa aura usake akramabhAvi tathA
kramabhAvi ye do bheda nirdiSTa haiM  /  kArikA 102 meM pramANaphalakA nirdeza
karate hue use do prakArakA batalAyA hai--eka sAkSAtphala aura dUsarA
paramparAphala  /  akramabhAvi ( kevala ) pramANakA sAkSAtphala ajJAnanivRtti
aura paramparAphala upekSA ( vastuoM meM rAgadveSakA abhAva ) hai  /  kramabhAvi
pramANakA bhI sAkSAtphala ajJAnanAza hai aura paramparAphala hAnabuddhi,
upAdAnabuddhi tathA upekSAbuddhi hai | kArikA 103 meM sUcita kiyA hai ki vaktA
ke pratyeka vAkyameM usake AzayakA bodhaka 'syAt' nipAtapada prakaTa yA aprakaTa
rUpa meM avazya vidyamAna rahatA hai jo eka dharma ( bodhya ) kA bodhaka
(vAcaka) hotA huA anya aneka dharmoM (anekAnta) kA dyotaka hotA hai  /  yaha
bAta sAmAnya vaktAke

Page #38 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Introduction  21 Not only in sentences, but also in the sentences of Kevalis,
the 'syāt' particle is inherent, and being the representative of one (intended)
dharma, it reveals the existence of all other (unintended) dharmas.  In Karika
104, the same 'syāt's' argument (belief), i.e., Syādvāda, is explained. It is
said that what is established by the words 'kiñcit' and 'kathañcit', which does
not have the smell of singularity, and which is the establisher of the intended
(upadeya) and the negator (sanmātrasūcak) of the unintended (hayas - remaining
dharmas) through the seven-fold predication, is Syādvāda. Kathañcitvāda,
kiñcitvāda are synonyms of this.  In Karika 105, while declaring the importance
of Syādvāda, it is said that Syādvāda has the same importance in the revelation
of truth as Kevalajñāna. Both are the revealers of all truths. If there is any
difference between them, it is only that Kevalajñāna is the direct revealer of
all truths, and Syādvāda is the indirect (parokṣa) revealer of them.  In Karika
106, it is stated that the mentioned revelation of truth happens not only
through Syādvāda (śruta-ahetuvāda-āgama) but also through nay, and in nay, hetu
is intended. What is the cause of the particular (dharma) of the meaning known
through Syādvāda, and which has the similarity of the affirmative side and the
dissimilarity of the negative side (anyathānupannatva), i.e., being inseparable
from the object, is the cause of the object. The commentators have explained
that the author has also mentioned the characteristics of nay in this Karika.
According to their explanation, nay is that important means of knowledge of
truth which makes one aware of each dharma of anekanta, which is measured by
Syādvāda. The knowledge that is the receiver of the whole is pramana, and the
knowledge that is the receiver of the non-whole is nay. This is the difference
between the two.  In Karika 107, the nature of the Jain-accepted object
(pramaya) is also described. Nay has been mentioned above. The collection
(samaṣṭi) of the trikālavarti dharmas (guṇa-paryāyas) which are the subject
matter of it and its divisions and sub-divisions (upanayas) is called dravya
(vastu-pramaya). This collection...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prastAvanA 21 vAkyoMke viSayameM hI nahIM hai, kevaliyoMke bhI vAkyoMmeM 'syAt'
nipAtapada nihita rahatA hai aura vaha eka ( vivakSita ) dharmakA prarUpaka hotA
huA anya sabhI ( avivakSita ) dharmokA astitvaprakAzaka hotA hai  /  kArikA 104
meM usI 'syAt' ke vAda (mAnyatA) arthAt syAdvAda ko spaSTa kiyA gayA hai| kahA
gayA hai ki kiJcit, kathaJcit zabdoMse jisakA vidhAna hotA hai aura jisameM
ekAntakI gandha nahIM hai tathA jo saptabhaGgInayase vivakSita ( upAdeya ) kA
vidhAyaka evaM avivakSitoM (hayoM -zeSa dharmoM) kA niSedhaka ( sanmAtrasUcaka )
hai vaha syAdvAda hai  /  kathaJcidvAda, kiJcidvAda isIke paryAya haiM  /
kArikA 105 meM syAdvAdakA mahattva ghoSita karate hue kahA gayA hai ki
tattvaprakAzanameM syAdvAdakA vahI mahattva hai jo kevalajJAnakA hai| donoM hI
samasta tattvoMke prakAzaka haiN| unameM yadi antara hai to itanA hI ki
kevalajJAna sAkSAt samasta tattvoMkA prakAzaka hai aura syAdvAda asAkSAta (
parokSa ) unakA prakAzaka hai  /  kArikA 106 meM pratipAdana hai ki ullikhita
tattvaprakAzana syAdvAda ( zruta-ahetuvAda-Agama ) ke atirikta nayase bhI hotA
hai aura nayase vahA~ hetu vivakSita hai  /  jo syAdvAdake dvArA jAne gaye
arthake vizeSa (dharma ) kA gamaka hai tathA sapakSake sAdharmya evaM vipakSake
vaidharmya (anyathAnupapannatva) ko lie hue haiM arthAt sAdhyakA avinAbhAvI hotA
huA sAdhyakA sAdhaka hai vaha hetu hai| vyAkhyAkAroMne isa kArikAmeM granthakAra
dvArA nayalakSaNake bhI kahe jAnekA vyAkhyAna kiyA hai  /  unake vyAkhyAnake
anusAra naya tattvajJAnakA vaha mahattvapUrNa upAya hai jo syAdvAdadvArA pramita
anekAntake eka-eka dharmakA bodha karAtA hai| samagrakA grAhaka jJAna to pramANa
hai aura asamagrakA grAhaka naya hai  /  yahI ina donoMmeM bheda hai| kArikA 107
meM jaina sammata vastu ( prameya ) kA bhI svarUpa nirUpita hai| Upara nayakA
nirdeza kiyA jA cukA hai| usake tathA usake bhedoMupabhedoM ( upanayoM ) ke
viSayabhUta trikAlavartI dharmoM ( guNa-paryAyoM ) ke samuccaya ( samaSTi ) kA
nAma dravya ( vastu-prameya ) hai| yaha samuccaya

Page #39 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Devagam-Aapta-Mimamsa  The relationship of *samyoga* etc. is not in the form
of a relationship, but rather in the form of an inseparable relationship
(identity). No dharma of a substance is completely different from its other
dharmas, nor is it completely inseparable. All dharmas are present in the
substance with a sense of friendship, and they are all the soul (nature) of the
substance. This kind of co-existent relationship is called *avishvagbhav
sambandh*. A substance, while being one in relation to *satsamanya*, is also
multi-faceted due to the distinction between dharma and dharmi. Or, to put it
another way, it is neither completely one nor completely many, but rather a
*jatyantara* form of one-many.  In *karika* 108, a solution is presented to the
doubt that in Jain philosophy, the group of *ekantas* is called *anekanta*, and
*ekanta* is considered *mithya* (false). Therefore, their group (*anekanta*)
will also be called *mithya*. Many falsehoods cannot come together to form one
truth. Therefore, the *anekanta* in the form of the above-mentioned group of
*ekantas*, which has been called a substance, is not *samyak*? While resolving
this doubt, the author says that if the group of absolute *ekantas* is called
*mithya*, then it is acceptable to us; because in the view of the *syadvadis*,
there is no absolute *ekanta* in a substance. The *syadvadis* accept relative
*ekantas* and consider their group to be *anekanta*, not the group of absolute
*ekantas*. They have clearly called absolute *nayas* (*ekantas*) *mithya*
(false) and relative ones *vastu* (*samyak* - true), because they are the ones
that are meaningful.  In *karika* 109, the nature of the speaker is also
arranged from the perspective of *syadvad*. While reviewing those who consider a
*vidhivakya* to be only a *vidhi* and a *nishedhavakya* to be only a *nishedha*,
it is said that whether it is a *vidhivakya* or a *nishedhavakya*, both convey
the knowledge of the *anekanta* nature of the substance in the form of *vidhi*
and *nishedha*. When a *vidhivakya* is spoken, it not only conveys the knowledge
of its intended *vidhi* dharma, but also acknowledges the silent existence of
the *pratisedha* dharma - it does not convey only the knowledge of *vidhi* by
negating or eliminating it. Similarly, ...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 devAgama-AptamImAMsA saMyogAdi sambandharUpa na hokara kathaJcit
avibhrADbhAvasambandha (tAdAtmya) rUpa hai| vastukA koI bhI dharma usake zeSa
dharmo se na sarvathA bhinna hai aura na sarvathA abhinna  /  sabhI dharma
paraspara maitrIbhAvake sAtha vastumeM vartamAna haiM aura ve sabhI vastukI AtmA
( svarUpa ) haiN| isa prakArake saha astitvAtmaka sambandhako
aviSvagbhAvasambandha kahate haiN| vastu satsAmAnyakI apekSAse eka hotI huI bhI
dharma-dharmIke bhedase anekarUpa bhI hai  /  athavA yoM kaheM ki vaha na
sarvathA eka hai aura na sarvathA aneka hai, apitu ekAnekAtmaka jAtyantararUpa
hai| kArikA 108 meM usa zaGkAkA samAdhAna prastuta hai jisameM kahA gayA hai ki
jainadarzanameM ekAntoMke samUhakA nAma anekAnta hai aura ekAntako mithyA
(asatya) mAnA gayA hai  /  ataH unakA samUha (anekAnta) bhI mithyA kahA
jaayegaa| aneka asatya milakara eka satya nahIM bana sktaa| isa lie ukta
ekAntasamuccayarUpa anekAntako jo Upara vastu kahA gayA hai vaha samyaka nahIM
hai ? isa zaGkAkA samAdhAna karate hue granthakAra kahate haiM ki nirapekSa
ekAntoMke samUhako yadi mithyA kahA jAtA hai to vaha hameM iSTa hai; kyoMki
syAdvAdiyoMke yahA~ vastumeM nirapekSa ekAntatA nahIM hai| syAdvAdI sApekSa
ekAntako svIkAra karate tathA unake hI samUhako anekAnta mAnate haiM, nirapekSa
ekAntoMke samUhako nhiiN| unhoMne spaSTatayA nirapekSa nayoM ( ekAntoM ) ko
mithyA ( asatya ) aura sApekSoMko vastu ( samyak -satya ) kahA hai, kyoMki ve hI
arthakriyAkArI haiM  /  _ kArikA 109 meM vAcakake svarUpakI bhI syAdvAdadaSTise
vyavasthA kI gaI hai| jo vidhivAkyako kevala vidhikA aura niSedhavAkyako kevala
niSedhakA niyAmaka mAnate haiM unakI samIkSA karate hue kahA gayA hai ki cAhe
vidhivAkya ho, cAhe niSedhavAkya, donoM hI vidhi aura niSedharUpa anekAntAtmaka
vastukA bodha karAte haiM  /  jaba vidhivAkya bolA jAtA hai to usake dvArA apane
vivakSita vidhi dharmakA pratipAdana honeke sAtha pratiSedha dharmakA bhI mauna
astitva svIkAra kiyA jAtA hai-usakA nirAkaraNa yA lopa karake vaha mAtra vidhikA
hI bodha nahIM kraataa| isI

Page #40 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Introduction  A propositional sentence, even while expressing its intended
prohibitive dharma, also implicitly conveys the dharma of its inseparable
existence. It does not merely indicate the prohibition by negating or ignoring
the latter. This is because every object possesses infinite dharmas,
encompassing both "tad" and "atad" - opposing dharmas. Therefore, no sentence
can arbitrarily disregard this inherent nature. However, it primarily conveys
its intended meaning and secondarily the rest. To present this fact, the
Syadvada philosophy asserts that the word "syat" is always present, either
explicitly or implicitly, in every sentence uttered by the speaker. If a
prescriptive or prohibitive sentence were only a regulator of prescription or
prohibition, then the negation of the other opposing dharma would also lead to
the absence of its inseparable implied dharma. Consequently, the object would
become devoid of any dharma (attribute) and thus become indistinguishable
(empty).  Through four karikas (verses) from 110 to 113, the author examines the
beliefs of the Ekantvadins (those who hold the doctrine of one-sidedness)
regarding the nature of speech and establishes the nature of speech from the
perspective of Syadvada. The author states that every utterance (sentence)
refers to an object in its "tad" and "atad" forms, as we have seen above.
Therefore, a statement claiming "only 'tad' is the object" is not true. And when
it is not true, how can the truth (the real object) be taught through false
statements? The Vidhivadins (those who hold the doctrine of prescription) should
seriously consider this.  The belief that every sentence only indicates "not
other" is also not valid. This is because the nature of speech is to negate the
meaning conveyed by other sentences while also conveying its own general
meaning. Speech that does not possess this characteristic is like a flower
without fragrance - false.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prastAvanA prakAra pratiSedhavAkya bhI apane vivakSita pratiSedha dharmakA
kathana karaneke sAtha avinAbhAvI vidhi dharmakA bhI mauna jJApana karatA hai
usakA nirAsa yA upekSA karake kevala niSedhako hI sUcita nahIM krtaa| isakA
kAraNa yaha hai ki pratyeka vastu anantadharmA hai-tad aura atad ina virodho
dharmoM ko apanemeM samAye hue hai  /  ataH koI bhI vAkya usake isa svarUpakA
lopa karake manamAnI nahIM kara sakatA  /  hA~, vaha apane vivakSita vAcyakA
mukhyatayA aura zeSakA gauNarUpase avagama karAtA hai| isI tathyako prastuta
karaneke lie syAdvAdadarzanameM vaktA dvArA bole gaye pratyeka vAkyameM 'syAt'
nipAta-pada kahIM prakaTa aura kahIM aprakaTa rUpase avazya rahatA hai| yadi
vidhivAkya yA niSedhavAkya kevala vidhi yA kevala niSedhake hI niyAmaka hoM to
anya virodhI dharmakA lopa honese usakA avinAbhAvI abhidheya dharmakA bhI abhAva
ho jAyegA aura taba vastumeM koI bhI dharma ( vizeSaNa ) na rahane para vaha
avizeSya ( zUnya ) ho jaaygii| 110-113 taka cAra kArikAoMke dvArA vAcyake
svarUpameM aGgIkRta ekAntavAdiyoMke abhinivezoMkI samIkSA karate hae syAdvAdase
vAcyake bhI svarUpakI sthApanA kI hai| granthakAra kahate haiM ki pratyeka
vacana (vAkya) tad aura atad rUpa vastuko kahatA hai, yaha hama Upara dekha cuke
haiM, to 'tadpa hI vastu hai' aisA kathana karane vAlA vacana satya nahIM hai
aura jaba vaha satya nahIM taba asatya vAkyoMke dvArA tattvArtha ( yathArtha
vastu) kA upadeza kaise ho sakatA hai ? vidhivAdiyoMko isapara gambhIratAse
vicAra karanA caahie| 'anya nahIM' itanA hI pratyeka vacana sUcana karate haiM,
yaha ekAnta mAnyatA bhI yukta nahIM haiM, kyoMki vANIkA svabhAva hai ki vaha
anya vacana dvArA pratipAdya arthakA niSedha karatI haI apane artha sAmAnyakA
bhI pratipAdana karatI hai| jo vANI aisI nahIM hai vaha khapuSpake samAna mithyA
hai|

Page #41 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Devagam - Aapta-Mimamsa  The statement that speech only conveys the general
(common) in the form of other-exclusion (anya-apoha), not the particular
(svalakshana), is also not correct. Because other-exclusion, being false, cannot
be the meaning of the word. The meaning of a word is that which is perceived,
obtained, and towards which there is an inclination, by that particular word.
Trivial other-exclusion is neither known nor obtained by any word, nor is there
any inclination towards it. Therefore, it is not the denotation of the word.
Since the words "pot", "cloth", etc., convey the perception and attainment of
the particular objects intended by them, and the listener, upon hearing those
words, has an inclination towards them, therefore, the denotation of the words
"pot", etc., is the particular object intended, not the exclusion of non-pot,
etc. Therefore, only those statements marked by the word "syat" are indicative
and illuminating of truth. Statements not marked by the word "syat" cannot
illuminate truth.  24  That which is the cause of the desired meaning and is
inseparable from the prohibited (opposite) is the predicate of the word, and
that is the object of injunction and its prohibited is the object of rejection.
In reality, the speaker uses words to say what is desirable and to prohibit what
is not desirable. And that for which the word is used is its denotation.
Therefore, the other-exclusion (prohibition) of the word is complete, and the
object is its denotation. Thus, denotation, etc., are inherently syadvada - not
completely affirmative, nor completely negative, but both (anekanta-rupa). All
things - evidence, object of knowledge, speaker, marked by the seal - are
anekantarupa.  This last chapter ends with the 114th verse. In it, the author
concludes the work by demonstrating the purpose of his writing. He says that he
has written this Aapta-Mimamsa for those who are interested in the particles, so
that they may know, have faith, and practice that the correct statement is such
and such, and the false statement is such and such, and thus they may be able to
determine the truth and desirability of the correct statement and the falsity
and rejection of the false statement. From this, the Acharya...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 devAgama - AptamImAMsA vANI kevala anyavyAvRttirUpa ( anyApoha ) sAmAnyakA
pratipAdana karatI hai, vizeSa (svalakSaNa) kA nahIM, yaha kathana bhI samyak
nahIM hai, kyoMki anyavyAvRtti mRSA honese vaha zabdakA artha nahIM ho sakatI  /
jisa zabdase jisa arthavizeSakI pratIti, prApti aura jisameM pravRtti ho vahI
usa zabdakA artha hai  /  tuccharUpa anyavyAvRtti kisI bhI zabdase jJAta yA
prApta nahIM hotI aura na usameM kisIkI pravRtti hotI hai  /  ataH vaha zabdakA
vAcya nahIM hai  /  cU~ki ghaTapaTAdi zabdoMse ghaTapaTAdi vizeSa abhipretoMkI
pratIti evaM prApti hotI hai aura una zabdoMko sunakara zrotAkI unhIM meM
pravRtti hotI hai, ataH ghaTAdizabdoMkA vAcya ghaTAdi abhipretavizeSa hai,
aghaTAdivyAvRtti nahIM | ataH 'syAt ' padase aGkita vacana hI satyake sUcaka
evaM prakAzaka haiM  /  jo vacana 'syAt' padase aGkita nahIM ve satyakA
prakAzana nahIM kara sakate  /  24 jo abhIpsita arthakA kAraNa hai aura
pratiSedhya ( virodhI ) kA avinAbhAvI hai vahI zabdakA vidheya hai aura vahI
Adeya tathA usakA pratiSedhya heya hai  /  yathArthameM vaktA ke liye jo iSTa
hai use kahane tathA jo iSTa nahIM usake niSedha karaneke liye hI usake dvArA
zabdakA prayoga kiyA jAtA hai| aura jisake liye zabda prayoga hai vahI usakA
vAcya hai | ataH zabdakA sarvathA anyavyAvRtti (niSedha) hai, vastu usakI vAcya
hai  /  isa prakAra vAcya Adi svabhAvataH syAdvAda - vAcya na sarvathA vidhi hai
aura na apitu ubhayAtmaka ( anekAntarUpa ) sabhI vastue~ - pramANa, prameya,
vAcaka, mudrAGkita haiM  /  isa antima paricchedakI antima kArikA 114 haiM  /
isameM granthakA upasaMhAra karate hue granthakArane apanI prastuta kRtikA
prayojana pradarzita kiyA hai  /  kahA hai ki hamane yaha AptamImAMsA kaNake
icchuka logoMke liye kI hai, jisase ve yaha jAna sakeM, zraddhA kara sakeM aura
samAcaraNa bhI kara sakeM ki samyak kathana amuka hai aura mithyA kathana amuka
hai aura isa taraha samyak kathanakI satyatA evaM upAdeyatA tathA mithyA
kathanakI asatyatA evaM heyatAkA unheM avadhAraNa ho ske| isase AcArya mahodaya

Page #42 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Introduction  25  This provides an introduction to the compassionate hearts
of those who are inclined towards the welfare of others, and their high ideals
such as clarity of vision, affection for the scriptures, and guidance on the
path. (c) Explanations of the Devagama:  Above, some introduction to the
Devagama and its subject matter has been given. Now, an attempt is made to
introduce its explanations.  There are three available explanations of the
Devagama: 1. Devagama-Vivriti (Ashta-Shathi-Bhashya), 2. Devagama-Alankar (Apta-
Mimamsa-Alankar-Ashta-Sahasri), and 3. Devagama-Vritti. 1. Devagama-Vivriti:
Its author is Ao. Akalanka Dev. This is the oldest and most difficult
explanation available of the Devagama. The concluding verses found at the end of
the chapters, in which its Apta-Mimamsa is found,   1. Ao. Vidyānanda, at the
end of the Ashta-Sahasri, before the concluding benediction of Ao. Akalanka Dev,
has given a concluding benediction verse of a commentator of the Devagama with
the words 'Kechit' (some). From this, it appears that before Akalanka Dev, there
was an explanation of the Devagama by some Acharya, which was available to
Vidyānanda or he had knowledge of it, and from that, he has given the mentioned
concluding benediction verse. Laghu-Samantbhadra (13th century CE) has mentioned
in the Ashta-Sahasri-Tippana (101) that Vadisinha explained the Devagama (Apta-
Mimamsa). But that is also unavailable today. Considering the importance and
fame of the Devagama, it is not surprising that various commentaries and
annotations were written on it in different times. Akalanka Dev, in the Ashta-
Shathi (commentary on verse 33), has used the words 'Patha-Antar-Midam Bahu
Sangrihitam Bhavati' (This variant reading is collected from many sources),
clearly indicating the variant readings of the Devagama and its many
explanations.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prastAvanA 25 ke parahitasampAdanapravaNa hRdayakA aura unakI darzanavizuddhi,
pracanavAtsalya tathA mArgaprabhAvanA jaisI ucca bhAvanAoMkA paricaya milatA
hai| . (ga) devAgamakI vyAkhyAe~ : Upara devAgama aura usake pratipAdya viSayakA
kucha paricaya diyA gayA hai  /  aba usakI vyAkhyAoMkA bhI paricaya denekA
prayAsa kiyA jAtA hai| devAgamapara tIna vyAkhyAe~ upalabdha haiM'-1. devAgama-
vivRti (aSTazatI-bhASya), 2. devAgamAlaGkAra (AptamImAMsAlaGkAra-aSTasahasrI)
aura 3. devAgamavRtti  /  1. devAgama-vivRti : isake racayitA A0 akalaGka deva
haiN| yaha devAgamakI upalabdha vyAkhyAoMmeM sabase prAcIna aura atyanta durUha
vyAkhyA hai| paricchedoMke antameM jo samApti-puSpikAvAkya pAye jAte haiM unameM
isakA AptamImAMsA 1. A0 vidyAnandane aSTasahasrIke antameM A0 akalaGkadevake
samAptimaGgalase pUrva 'kecit' zabdoMke sAtha devAgamake kisI vyAkhyAkArakA
'jayati jagati' Adi samApti-maGgala padya diyA hai| usase pratIta hotA hai ki
akalaGkadevase pUrva bhI devAgamapara kisI AcAryakI vyAkhyA rahI hai, jo
vidyAnandako prApta thI yA usakI unheM jAnakArI thI aura usaparase hI unhoMne
ullikhita samApti-maGgalapadya diyA hai| laghusamantabhadra (vi0 saM0 13vIM
zatI) ne vAdIsiMhadvArA devAgama ( AptamImAMsA) ke upalAlana-vyAkhyAna karanekA
ullekha aSTasahasrI-TippaNa (10 1) meM kiyA hai| para vaha bhI Aja anupalabdha
hai| devAgamake mahattva aura vizrutiko dekhate hue Azcarya nahIM ki usapara
vibhinna kAloMmeM vividha TIkA-TippaNAdi likhe gaye hoN| akalaGkadevane aSTazatI
( kA0 33 kI vivRti ) meM eka sthAnapara 'pAThAntaramidaM bahu saMgRhItaM
bhavati' zabdoMkA prayoga karake devAgamake pAThabhedoM aura usakI aneka
vyAkhyAoMkI ora spaSTa saMketa kiyA hai  /

Page #43 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The commentary on the *Devāgama* by Ācārya Akalaṅka is known by three names in
Jain literature: *Devāgama-vivṛti*, *Āpta-mīmāṃsā-bhāṣya* (*Devāgama-bhāṣya*),
and *Aṣṭaśatī*. The verse in the third chapter of the *Aṣṭahasrī* by Ācārya
Vidyānanda, which praises the text, also refers to it as *Aṣṭaśatī*. It is
likely that he called it *Aṣṭaśatī* because it contains eight hundred verses. It
seems that he wrote his commentary, *Devāgamālaṅkṛti*, with this *Aṣṭaśatī* in
mind, making it eight thousand verses long and naming it *Aṣṭasahasrī*. Whatever
the case may be, Akalaṅka's commentary is known by these three names in Jain
literature. Almost every part of it is so complex and difficult to understand
that ordinary scholars cannot comprehend it. Its essence and secrets can only be
understood with the help of the *Aṣṭasahasrī*. It is rare to find a commentary
of this kind in Indian philosophical literature. Just as the study of the
*Aṣṭahasrī* is a difficult task, the study of this *Aṣṭaśatī* is also a
difficult task for its students, verse by verse. 2. *Devāgamālaṅkṛti*: This is
an unparalleled and important work by Ācārya Vidyānanda. It is also mentioned in
literature by the names *Āpta-mīmāṃsālaṅkṛti*, *Āpta-mīmāṃsālaṅkāra*, and
*Devāgamālaṅkāra*. Because it contains eight thousand verses, the author himself
called it *Aṣṭasahasrī*. 3. Among all the commentaries available on the
*Devāgama*, this is the most extensive and comprehensive commentary. It contains
a detailed explanation of the *Devāgama*. 1. "Thus ends the tenth chapter of the
*Āpta-mīmāṃsā-bhāṣya*. || 6. ||" 2. "The *Aṣṭaśatī* is well-known, and the
*Aṣṭasahasrī* is a concise version of it. It should be understood with the help
of the explanations given by Akalaṅka." - *Aṣṭasahasrī*, p. 178. 3. "One should
study the *Aṣṭasahasrī* and understand the harmony between the present and the
past." - *Aṣṭasahasrī*, p. 157.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 devAgama-AptamImAMsA bhASya (devAgama-bhASya) ke nAmase ullekha huA hai  / ' A0
vidyAnandane aSTahasrIke tRtIya paricchedake ArambhameM jo grantha-prazaMsAmeM
padya diyA hai usameM unhoMne isakA 'aSTazatI' nAma bhI nirdiSTa kiyA hai  /
sambhavataH AThasau zlokapramANa racanA honese ise unhoMne 'aSTazatI' kahA hai|
lagatA hai ki isa aSTazatIko dhyAnameM rakhakara hI apanI 'vevAgamAlaMkRti'
vyAkhyAko unhoMne ATha hajAra zlokapramita banAyA aura 'aSTasahalI' nAma rakhA
/  jo ho, isa taraha yaha akalaGkadevakI vyAkhyA devAgama-vivRti, AptamImAMsA-
bhASya ( devAgama-bhASya ) aura aSTazatI ina tInoM nAmoMse jaina vAGmayameM
vizruta hai| isakA prAyaH pratyeka sthala itanA jaTila evaM duravagAha hai ki
sAdhAraNa vidvAnoMkA usameM praveza sambhava nahIM hai  /  usake marma evaM
rahasyako aSTasahasrIke sahAre hI jJAta kiyA jA sakatA hai  /  bhAratIya
darzana-sAhityameM isakI jor3akI racanA milanA durlabha hai  /  aSTahasrIke
adhyayanameM jisa prakAra kaSTasahasrIkA anubhava hotA hai usI prakAra isa
aSTazatIke abhyAsameM bhI kaSTa zatIkA anubhava usake abhyAsIko padapadapara
hotA hai| 2. devAgamAlaMkatti : . yaha A0 vidyAnandakI apUrva evaM mahattvapUrNa
racanA hai| ise AptamImAMsAlaMkRti, AptamImAMsAlaGkAra aura devAgamAlaGkAra ina
nAmoMse bhI sAhityameM ullikhita kiyA gayA hai| ATha hajAra zloka pramANa honese
ise lekhakane svayaM 'aSTasahasrI' bhI kahA hai  / 3 devAgamakI jitanI vyAkhyAe~
upalabdha haiM unameM yaha vistRta aura prameyabahula vyAkhyA hai  /  isameM
devA1. 'ityAptamImAMsAbhASye dazamaH paricchedaH  /  /  cha  / ' 2. aSTazatI
prathitArthA sASTasahasrI katApi saMkSepAt  /  vilasadakalaGkadhiSaNaiH
prapaJcanicitAvaboddhavyA  //  -aSTasa. pR. 178  /  3. zrotavyASTasahasrI
zrutaiH kimanyaiH sahasrasaMkhyAnaiH  /   /  vijJAyeta yayaiva svasamaya-
parasamayasadbhAvaH  /  /  -aSTasa0 pR0 157  /

Page #44 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Introduction  This text provides a detailed explanation of the *Gamki
Karikas* and their individual verses and phrases. It also presents a detailed
meaning and essence of each verse and phrase in the *Ashta Shatika*. The *Ashta
Shatika* has been assimilated into the *Ashta Sahasri* in such a way that if
both are not kept separate in distinct types, it is difficult for the reader to
know which part belongs to the *Ashta Shatika* and which to the *Ashta Sahasri*.
Vidyananda has interwoven the *Ashta Shatika* into the *Ashta Sahasri* using the
*Mani-Praval* principle by adding necessary and meaningful contextual phrases
before, after, and in the middle of the *Ashta Shatika*, showcasing his
extraordinary brilliance.  Indeed, if Vidyananda had not composed this
*Devagamalankriti*, the profound secrets of the *Ashta Shatika* would have
remained hidden within it, and it would have remained mysterious for the
intelligent.  In addition to the commentaries on the *Devagam* and the *Ashta
Shatika*, Vidyananda has also presented many new thought-provoking propositions
and unprecedented discussions. The commentator, proclaiming the importance of
his commentary, wrote: "Reading and listening to a thousand scriptures is one
thing, and studying this single work is another; because by practicing this
alone, one gains knowledge of both this time and the next." This declaration by
the commentator is neither boastful nor exaggerated. The *Ashta Sahasri* itself
is its judge.  Since there are ten chapters in the *Devagam*, there are also ten
chapters in the *Ashta Sahasri* as its commentary. Each chapter begins and ends
with a profound verse.  *Lghusamantabhadra* (13th century) wrote a commentary
called "Ashta Sahasri-Visham Padataatparyatokha" and the Svetambar scholar
Yashovijay (17th century) wrote "Ashta Sahasri Taatparya Vivaran", which explain
the unusual verses, phrases, and passages of the *Ashta Sahasri*. This
*Devagamalankriti* was published once in 1915 by Seth Natharangji Gandhi, but it
is now unavailable. Now, a second, corrected edition with modern editing should
be published.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prastAvanA 27 gamakI kArikAoM aura unake pratyeka pada-vAkyAdikA vistArapUrvaka
arthodghATana kiyA hai  /  sAtha hI uparyukta aSTazatIke pratyeka padavAkyAdikA
bhI vizada artha evaM marma prastuta kiyA hai| aSTazatIko aSTasahasrImeM isa
taraha AtmasAt kara liyA gayA hai ki yadi donoMko bheda-sUcaka pRthak-pRthak
TAipoMmeM na rakhA jAya to pAThakako yaha jAnanA kaThina hai ki yaha aSTazatIkA
aMza hai aura yaha assttshsriikaa| vidyAnandane aSTazatIke Age, pIche aura
madhyakI Avazyaka evaM arthopayogI sAndarbhika vAkyaracanA karake aSTazatIko
aSTasahasrImeM maNi-pravAla nyAyase anusyUta kiyA hai aura apanI talasparzinI
adbhuta pratibhAkA camatkAra dikhAyA hai| vastutaH yadi vidyAnanda yaha
devAgamAlaMkRti na racate to aSTazatIkA gUr3ha rahasya aSTazatImeM hI chipA
rahatA aura medhAviyoMke lie vaha rahasyapUrNa banI rhtii| devAgama aura
aSTazatIke vyAkhyAnoMke atirikta isameM vidyAnandane kitanA hI nayA vicArapUrNa
prameya aura apUrva carcAeM bhI prastuta kI haiM  /  vyAkhyAkArane apanI isa
vyAkhyAke mahattvako udghoSaNA karate hue likhA hai'hajAra zAstroMkA par3hanA-
sunanA eka tarapha hai aura ekamAtra isa kRtikA adhyayana eka ora hai; kyoMki
isa ekake abhyAsase hI svasamaya aura parasamaya donoMkA jJAna ho jAtA hai|'
vyAkhyAkArakI yaha ghoSaNA na madokti hai aura na atizayokti  /  aSTasahasrI
svayaM isakI nirNAyikA hai  /  devAgamameM yataH daza pariccheda haiM ataH usake
vyAkhyAnasvarUpa aSTasahasrImeM bhI daza pariccheda haiM  /  pratyeka
paricchedakA Arambha aura samApti donoM ekaeka gambhIra padya dvArA kiye gaye
haiN| isapara laghusamantabhadra (13vIM zatI) ne 'aSThasahasrI-
viSamapadatAtparyaTokA' aura zvetAmbara vidvAn yazovijaya (17vIM zatI) ne
'aSTasahasrItAtparyavivaraNa' nAmakI vyAkhyAe~ likhI haiM, jo aSTasahasrIke
viSamapadoM, vAkyoM aura sthaloMkA spaSTIkaraNa karatI haiN| yaha
devAgamAlaMkRti koI 52 varSa pUrva san 1915 meM seTha nAthAraGgajI gAMdhI dvArA
eka bAra prakAzita ho cukI hai| para vaha aba aprApya hai  /  aba Adhunika
sampAdanake sAtha isakA dUsarA zuddha saMskaraNa prakaTa honA chiye|

Page #45 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Devagam - Aapta-Mimamsa  **3. Devagam-Vritti -** This is a concise
explanation of the Devagam. It is neither as difficult as the Ashta-Shathi nor
as extensive and profound as the Ashta-Sahasri. The commentary on the karikas is
also not lengthy, nor is it a philosophical elaboration. Only the word-meaning
and sometimes the implied meaning of the karikas and their words are presented
in a very concise manner! However, this Vritti is quite useful for understanding
the meaning of the karikas. Its author is A. Vasunandi, who himself wrote at the
end of the Vritti that 'I am a dull-witted and forgetful person. I have written
this concise description of the Devagam for my own benefit.' This clear self-
introduction of the Vritti-kar reveals the brevity of this Vritti and its
purpose. It is noteworthy that Vasunandi, even though he had access to the
Ashta-Shathi and Ashta-Sahasri commentaries on the 114 karikas of the Devagam,
and knowing the concluding mangal-padya of a Devagam-vyakhya by a previous
Acharya, as mentioned by Vidyānanda in the karikas like 'Jayati Jagati', etc.,
on what basis did he consider the 115th karika of the Devagam and describe it?
This is a matter of thought. We believe that in ancient times, there was a
tradition among the sadhus of reciting the Devagam and memorizing it. Vasunandi
must have memorized the Devagam from such a copy, which, along with the original
114 karikas of the Devagam, also included the concluding mangal-padya of the
said unknown Devagam-vyakhya, and marked it with the number 115. Vasunandi must
have written this Devagam-Vritti to memorize the meaning of the Devagam without
referring to the Ashta-Shathi and Ashta-Sahasri commentaries, and in it, he must
have described all (115) the memorized karikas. This is the reason...  28 1.
'Srimat Samantabhadracharyasya Devagamakhyah Kriteh Sanksepabhutum Varnanam
Kritam Shrutavismaranashilena Vasunanadina Jadamatina Atmopakaraya' - Vasunandi,
Devagamvritti p. 50, Sanatan, Jain Granthamaala.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 devAgama - AptamImAMsA 3. devAgama-vRtti - yaha devAgamakI laghuparimANako
vyAkhyA hai | yaha na aSTazatIkI taraha durUha hai aura na aSTasahasrI ke samAna
vistRta evaM gambhIra hai  /  kArikAoMkA vyAkhyAna bhI lambA nahIM hai aura na
dArzanika vistRta UhApoha hai | mAtra kArikAoM aura unake pada-vAkyoMkA
zabdArtha aura kahIM-kahIM phalitArtha atisaMkSepameM prastuta kiyA gayA hai !
para hA~, kArikAoM kA artha samajhane ke liye yaha vRtti paryApta upayogI hai  /
isake racayitA A0 vasunandi haiM, jinhoMne vRttike antameM svayaM likhA hai' ki
'maiM mandabuddhi aura vismaraNazIla vyakti hU~  /  maiMne apane upakArake lie
hI isa devAgamakA saMkSipta vivaraNa kiyA hai  / ' vRttikArake isa spaSTa
Atmanivedanase isa vRttikI laghurUpatA aura usakA prayojana avagata ho jAtA hai
/  ullekhanIya hai ki vasunandike samakSa devAgamakI 114 kArikAoM para hI
aSTazatI aura aSTasahasrI upalabdha hote hue tathA 'jayati jagati' Adi kArikAko
vidyAnandake ullekhAnusAra kisI pUrvavartI AcAryakI devAgama - vyAkhyAkA samApti
- maGgala-padya jAnate hue bhI unhoMne use devAgamakI 115vIM kArikA kisa
AdhArapara mAnA aura usakA vivaraNa kiyA ? yaha cintanIya hai  /  hamArA vicAra
hai ki prAcIna kAlameM sAdhuoMmeM devAgamakA pATha karane aura use kaNThastha
rakhanekI paramparA rahI hai  /  vasunandine devAgamako aisI pratiparase
kaNThastha kiyA hogA, jisameM mUlamAtra devAgamakI 114 kArikAoMke sAtha ukta
ajJAta devAgama - vyAkhyAkA samAptimaGgala-padya bhI aGkita kara diyA gayA hogA
aura usapara 115 kA aGka DAla diyA hogA  /  vasunandine aSTazatI aura
aSTasahasrI TIkAoMparase jAnakArI evaM anusandhAna kiye binA devAgamakA artha
hRdayaGgama rakhaneke liye yaha devAgama-vRtti likhI hogI aura usameM kaNThastha
sabhI ( 115) kArikAoM kA vivaraNa likhA hogA  /  yahI kAraNa 28 1.
'zrImatsamantabhadrAcAryasya devAgamAkhyAH kRteH saMkSepabhUtaM vivaraNaM kRtaM
zrutavismaraNazIlena vasunandinA jaDamatinA''tmopakArAya ' - vasunandi,
devAgamavRtti pR0 50, sanAtana, jaina granthamA 0

Page #46 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
29 It is stated that the present commentary does not contain any reference to
the Ashta Shatika, its verses, or words, nor to the Ashta Sahasri. However, this
Devagam Vritti was published once in 1914 by the Sanatan Jain Granthamala of
Calcutta. It should now be reprinted in a good edition. (d) Devagam - Basis of
Composition: After introducing the Devagam and its commentaries above, its basis
of composition is also considered here. Introduction A. Vidyānanda holds a
respected place in Jain literature and his works are considered to be like the
words of an omniscient being. According to these Vidyānanda, Swami Samantabhadra
composed the Devagam at the beginning of the Tattvartha Sutra for the purpose of
examining the omniscient being. His references are as follows: (1)
'Shastravatara-rachita-stuti-gochara-apta-mimamsa-ishyam kriti ...... Ashta-s.
Aadi-mangala-shlo. 1, p. 1. (2) 'Shastra-arambhe-abhishtuta-syapta-syamoksha-
marga-pranetrutaya karma-bhu-bhritrutaya visva-tattva-naam jnatrutaya cha
bhagavad-arhat-sarvajnasya eva anya-yoga-vyavachchedhena vyavasthapan-para-
pariksheyam vihita.' " Ashta-s. p. 294. (3) Shrimant-Tattvartha-shastrad-
bhutasalila-nidher-iddha-ratno-dbhavasya, proththana-arambha-kale sakala-mala-
bhide shastra-karais-kritam yat. Stotram tirtha-upamana-prathita - prithu-patham
swami-mimamsitam tat vidyanandaha swashakt-ya 11 Apta-p. ka. 123, p. 265. (4)
'''''Iti sanksepatah shastra-dau parameshthi-guna-stotrasya muni-pungavai -
vidhiyamanasyanvayaha sampradaya-vyavachchedha-lakshanaha padartha-ghatana-
lakshanaha va lakshaniyaha, prapanchatas-tad-anvayasya-akshepa-samadhana-
shrimant-Samantabhadra-swamibhir-devagama-khya-apta-mimamsayaam - Apta-p. ka.
120, p. 261-262. lakshanasya prakasanat. '

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 29 hai ki prastuta vRtti meM na kahIM aSTazatIke padavAkyAdikA nirdeza milatA
hai aura na kahIM aSTasahastrIke  /  astu  /  yaha devAgamavRtti kalakattAkI
sanAtana jaina granthamAlA dvArA san 1914 meM eka bAra prakAzita ho cukI hai  /
yaha aba acche saMskaraNa ke rUpameM punaH mudrita honA cAhie  /  (gha) devAgama
- racanAkA mUlAdhAra : Upara devAgama aura usakI vyAkhyAoMkA paricaya deneke
bAda usakI racanAke mUlAdhArapara bhI yahA~ vicAra kiyA jAtA hai  /  prastAvanA
A. vidyAnandakA jaina vAGmayameM sammAnapUrNa sthAna hai aura unakI kRtiyoMko
Apta-vacana jaisA mAnA jAtA hai  /  ina vidyAnandake ullekhAnusAra svAmI
samantabhadrane devAgamakI racanA tattvArtha sUtrake ArambhameM stuta AptakI
mImAMsA ke liye kI thI  /  unake ve ullekha nimna prakAra haiM :( 1 ) '
zAstrAvatAraracitastutigocarAptamImAMsizaM kRti ...... aSTasa. AdimaGgalazlo. 1,
pR. 1  /  ( 2 ) 'zAstrArambhe'bhiSTutasyAptasya mokSamArgapraNetRtayA
karmabhUbhRdbhetRtayA vizvatattvAnAM jJAtRtayA ca
bhagavadarhatsarvajJasyaivAnyayogavyavacchedena vyavasthApanaparA parIkSeyaM
vihitA  / ' " aSTasa. pR0 294  /  ( 3 )
zrImattattvArthazAstrAdbhutasalilanidheriddharatnodbhavasya, protthAnArambhakAle
sakalamalabhide zAstrakAraiH kRtaM yat  /  stotraM tIrthopamAnaM prathita -
pRthu-pathaM svAmi-mImAMsitaM tat vidyAnandaH svazaktyA 11 Aptapa0 kA. 123, pR0
265  /  ( 4 ) '''''iti saMkSepataH zAstrAdau parameSThiguNastotrasya
munipuGgavai - vidhIyamAnasyAnvayaH sampradAyAvyavacchedalakSaNa:
padArthaghaTanAlakSaNo vA lakSaNIyaH, prapaJcatastadanvayasyAkSepa
samAdhAnazrImatsamantabhadrasvAmibhirdevAgamAkhyAptamImAMsAyAM - Aptapa0 kA 0
120, pR0 261-262  /  lakSaNasya prakAzanAt  /  '

Page #47 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Devagam-Aapta-Mimamsa  These references clearly show that in the beginning of
the Tattvarthashastra (Tattvarth, Tattvarthsutra, Nishreyashastra or Moksha
Shastra), the author, Aacharya Umaswami, has praised the Aapta with three
extraordinary epithets like "Mokshamargasya Netaram". Swami Samantabhadra has
examined these epithets (Soppaatti Vicharana) in the Aapta-Mimamsa. The
implication is that the Mangalastotra of the Tattvarthsutra, starting with
"Mokshamargasya Netaram", is the foundation of the Aapta-Mimamsa.  The words
like "Shastravatarachitastutigocaraaptamimaansitam", "Shastrakaraaih Krtam Yat
Stotram...Swamimimaansitam Tat", "Shastraadou Paramesthigunastotrasya
Munipungavaividhiyamaanasya...Tadanvayasyaakshepa-samaadhanaalakshanasya
Shrimatsamantabhadra Swaamibhirdevaagamaakhyaaptamimaansaayaam Prakaashanaat"
found in the above mentioned references of Vidyānanda are significant and
deserve special attention. These words clearly declare that the Aapta-Mimamsa is
an explanation of the Mangalastotra of the Tattvarthsutra.  To make his
statement more substantiated and traditional, Vidyānanda has also corroborated
it with the statement of Akalankadev in his Ashtshati. In this statement,
Akalankadev, while answering the accusations of lack of faith and knowledge of
the qualities of the Aapta made against Samantabhadra for examining the Aapta,
says that the author has accepted the examination of the special qualities of
the Supreme Soul, which is the subject of the praise starting with
"Mokshamargasya Netaram" done in the Mangalapurvak of Devagama, etc. This
automatically implies that he has both faith and knowledge of the qualities,
because without either of them, the examination is not possible. It is certain
that the author has followed the Shastra-nyaya (the method of the
Tattvarthashastra - the creation of the Shastra with Mangalavidhanapurvak) while
undertaking the creation of the Aapta-Mimamsa. This clearly shows that the
author has both faith and knowledge of the qualities. The statement of Akalanka
is as follows:  "Devagamaadityadimangalapurvassarasthavavishaya parmaatma
gunaatishya parikshamupakshipataiva svayam shraddhaguna jnaataalakshanam
prayojanam aakshitam lakshyate. Tadanvatarapyaaye arth..."

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 devAgama-AptamImAMsA _ina ullekhoMse spaSTa hai ki tattvArthazAstra (
tattvArtha, tattvArthasUtra, niHzreyazAstra yA mokSazAstra ) ke ArambhameM jina
'mokSamArgasya netAram' Adi tIna asAdhAraNa vizeSaNoMse AptakI vandanA
zAstrakAra A0 umAsvAmIne kI hai unhIM vizeSaNoMkI mImAMsA ( sopapatti vicAraNA)
svAmI samantabhadrane AptamImAMsAmeM kI hai  /  tAtparya yaha ki
tattvArthasUtrakA 'mokSamArgasya netAram' Adi maGgalastotra aptamImAMsAkI
racanAkA mUlAdhAra hai| vidyAnandake ukta ullekhoMmeM Aye hue
'zAstrAvatAraracitastutigocarAptamImAMsitaM', 'zAstrakAraiH kRtaM yat
stotraM."svAmimImAMsitaM tat', zAstrAdau parameSThiguNastotrasya
munipuGgavaividhIyamAnasya ..."tadanvayasyAkSepa-samAdhAnalakSaNasya
zrImatsamantabhadrasvAmibhirdevAgamAkhyAptamImAMsAyAM prakAzanAt' jaise spaSTa
aura arthagarbha zabda vizeSa dhyAna dene yogya haiM jo AptamImAMsAko
tattvArthasUtrake maGgalastotrakA vyAkhyAna asandigdha ghoSita kara rahe haiN|
vidyAnandane apane isa kathanako sAdhAra aura paramparAgata batalAne ke lie use
akalaGkadevake aSTazatIgata usa pratipAdanase bhI pramANita kiyA hai jisameM
akalaGkadevane AptakI mImAMsA (parIkSA) karaneke kAraNa samantabhadrapara kiye
jAne vAle azraddhAlutA aura aguNajJatAke AkSepoMkA uttara dete hue kahA hai ki
granthakArane devAgamAdi maGgalapUrvaka kI gaI 'mokSamArgasya netAram' Adi
stavake viSayabhUta paramAtmAke guNavizeSoMkI parIkSAko svIkAra kiyA hai, isase
unameM zraddhA aura guNajJatA donoM bAteM svayaM Apanna ho jAtI haiM, kyoMki
unameM ekakI bhI kamI rahane para parIkSA sambhava nahIM hai| nizcaya hI
granthakArane zAstranyAya ( tattvArthazAstrakI paddhati-maGgalavidhAnapUrvaka
zAstrakaraNa ) kA anusaraNa karake hI AptamImAMsAkI racanAkA upakrama kiyA hai
aura isase sahaja hI jAnA jA sakatA hai ki granthakArameM zraddhA aura guNajJatA
donoM haiN| akalaGkakA vaha pratipAdana isa prakAra hai : 'devAgamatyAdimaMgalap
urassarastavaviSayaparamAtmaguNAtizayaparIkSAmupakSipataiva svayaM
zraddhAguNajJatAlakSaNaM prayojanamAkSiptaM lakSyate  /  tadanyatarApAye'rtha

Page #48 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Introduction  **Syanupapatteh**.  According to the principles of scriptures
and the way it is explained, 'Astasahasri (page 2).  Vidyananda and Akalankadeva
have also coordinated this exposition and their statement in the same
Astasahasri (page 3) and in this way they have established the authenticity of
their exposition by making it traditional. (d) 'Mokshamargasya Netaram' is the
Mangalacharan of the Tattvarth Sutra.  Where it is proven by the above mentioned
references of Vidyananda and Akalankadeva that Swami Samantabhadra's Aptmimamsa
was written in the commentary of the 'Mokshamargasya Netaram' etc. stotra, it is
also clear from the same references of Vidyananda that he considers the said
stotra as the Mangalacharan of Tattvarth or Tattvarthshastra. And by Tattvarth
or Tattvarthshastra, he means the Dashadhyayi Tattvarthsutra composed by Acharya
Giddhapiccha.  There has been enough speculation and detailed discussion about
this elsewhere. But some scholars, misinterpreting the meaning of Vidyananda's
above mentioned references, attribute it to the work of Pujyapada-Devanandi, the
author of Sarvarth Siddhi.  1. (a) How can Tattvarth be a scripture, if the
supreme being is worshipped at its beginning?  Because it is the characteristic
of the scripture.  "That is the Tattvarth scripture, which is in the form of
Dashadhyayi." - Tattvarth Sutra (page 2). (b) "Thus, the Muni-Indra is the
subject of the stotra at the beginning of the Tattvarthshastra." - Aptmimamsa
124. (c) When the Tattvarth, which is divided into ten chapters, is read, the
result of fasting is spoken by the Muni-Pungava.  2. "Mangalacharan of
Tattvarthsutra" - Title of the author's two articles, Anekanta Varsh 5, Kiran
6-7, 10-11.  3. "Mokshamargasya Netaram, Who is the author, Pujyapada
Devanandi?" - Title of the article, Muni Hazarimala Smriti Granth, page 563.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prastAvanA syAnupapatteH  /  zAstranyAyAnusAritayA tathaivopanyAsAt  / '
aSTaza0 aSTasa0 pR0 2  /  vidyAnandane akalaGkadevake isa pratipAdana aura apane
ukta kathanakA isI aSTasahasrI (pR0 3) meM samanvaya bhI kiyA hai aura isa
taraha apane nirUpaNako unhoMne paramparAgata siddha karake usameM prAmANya
sthApita kiyA hai| (Ga) 'mokSamArgasya netAram' stotra tattvArthasUtrakA
maGgalAcaraNa : jahA~ vidyAnanda aura akalaGkadevake uparyukta ullekhoMse siddha
hai ki svAmI samantabhadrakI AptamImAMsA 'mokSamargasya netAram' Adi stotrake
vyAkhyAnameM likhI gaI hai vahA~ vidyAnandake hI ukta ullekhoMparase yaha bhI
spaSTa hai ki ve ukta stotrako tattvArtha athavA tattvArthazAstrakA
maMgalAcaraNa mAnate haiN| tathA tattvArtha athavA tattvArthazAstrase unheM
AcArya gRddhapiccharacita dazAdhyAyI tattvArthasUtra hI vivakSita hai|' isa
sambandhameM paryApta UhApoha evaM vistArapUrvaka vicAra anyatra kiyA jA cukA
hai  /  parantu kucha vidvAna vidyAnandake ukta ullekhoMkA sAbhiprAya
arthaviparyAsa karake use sarvArthasiddhikAra pUjyapAda-devanandikI racanA
batalAte haiM  /  1. (ka) kathaM punastattvArthaH zAstraM yena tadArambhe
parameSThinAmAdhyAnaM vidhIyata iti cet tallakSaNayogatvAt |'"tcc tattvArthasya
dazAdhyAyIrUpasyAstIti zAstraM tattvArthaH  / ' -ta0 zlo0 pR0 2  /  (kha) 'iti
tattvArthazAstrAdau munIndrastotragocarA |'-aapt0 124  /  (ga) dazAdhyAye
paricchinne tattvArthe paThite sati  /  /  phalaM syAdupavAsasya bhASitaM
munipuGgavaH  //  2. 'tattvArthasUtrakA maGgalAcaraNa' zIrSaka lekhakake do
lekha, anekAnta varSa 5, kiraNa 6-7, 10-11  /  3. 'mokSamArgasya netAram, ke
kartA pUjyapAda devanandi', zIrSaka lekha, muni hajArImala smRtigrantha pR0 563
/

Page #49 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Devagam-Aptmimamsa  This is an attempt to prove that the renowned historian,
Pandit Jugalkishorji Mukhtar, through his exploratory and diverse evidence, has
established that the time of Swami Samantabhadra, which is considered to be the
2nd-3rd century Vikram Samvat, is actually the 7th-8th century Vikram Samvat.
Here, we will examine his findings in detail:  (1) Experiments conducted in
Aptpariksha prove that the term "Sutrakara" was not only used for Acharya
Umaswami, but also for other Acharyas.  (2) The discussion on the non-existence
of the first sutra of Tattvarth Sutra in Tattvarthshloka Vartika and its
solution clearly indicates that the verse "Mokshamargasya Netaram" was not
present at the beginning of Tattvarth Sutra in front of Vidyānanda.  (3) Some
specific mentions in Ashta Sahasri and Aptpariksha prove that Samantabhadra
discussed the Apt whose subject is this verse in his Aptmimamsa.  **Review:**
These three findings are reviewed here. No evidence from Vidyānanda's works is
presented in support of the first finding, where he has called any other Acharya
besides Umaswami as Sutrakara or Shastrakara. The fact is that Vidyānanda has
not written any other author as Sutrakara or Shastrakara except Umaswami in any
of his works. Wherever he has given quotations from other authors, he has
mentioned them by their names or by the name of the book or simply by saying
"Taduuktam", not by the name of Sutrakara or Shastrakara. The term Sutrakara or
Shastrakara is used only for Umaswami. In this regard, we have searched through
Vidyānanda's works and found 33 quotations as examples...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 devAgama-AptamImAMsA unakA prayAsa hai ki prasiddha itihAsavettA paM0
jugalakizorajI mukhtAra dvArA khojapUrNa anekavidha pramANoMse nirNIta svAmI
samantabhadrake vikrama saM0 dUsarI-tIsarI zatAbdIke samayako vi0 saM0 sAtavIM-
AThavIM zatAbdI siddha kiyA jAya  /  yahA~ unakI sthApanAoMko dekara unapara
sUkSma aura gaharAIse vicAra kiyA jAtA hai : (1) AptaparIkSAgata prayogoMse
siddha hai ki 'sUtrakAra' zabda kevala A0 umAsvAmIke lie hI prayukta nahIM hotA
thA, dUsare AcAryoMke lie bhI usakA prayoga kiyA jAtA thaa| (2)
tattvArthazlokavArtikagata tattvArthasUtrake prathama sUtrakI
anupapattiupasthApana aura usake parihArakI carcAse spaSTa phalita hotA hai ki
vidyAnandake sAmane tattvArthasUtrake prArambhameM 'mokSamArgasya netAram' zloka
nahIM thaa| (3) aSTasahasrI tathA AptaparIkSAke kucha vizeSa ullekhoMse siddha
hotA hai ki isI zlokake viSayabhUta AptakI mImAMsA samantabhadrane apanI
AptamImAMsAmeM kii| samIkSA : ina tInoM sthApanAoMkI yahA~ samIkSA kI jAtI hai
/  prathama sthApanAke samarthanameM vidyAnandake granthoMse koI aisA ullekha-
pramANa prastuta nahIM kiyA, jisameM unhoMne umAsvAmIke atirikta anya kisI
AcAryako sUtrakAra yA zAstrakAra kahA ho| tathya to yaha hai ki vidyAnandane
apane kisI bhI granthameM umAsvAmIke sivAya anya kisI granthakartAko sUtrakAra
yA zAstrakAra nahIM likhA  /  jahA~ kahIM anya granthakartAoMke unhoMne
avataraNa diye haiM unheM unhoMne unake nAmase yA grantha nAmase yA kevala
'taduktam' kahakara ullekhita kiyA hai, sUtrakAra yA zAstrakArake nAmase nhiiN|
sUtrakAra yA zAstrakAra zabdakA prayoga kevala umAsvAmIke lie kiyA hai  /  isa
sambandha meM hamane vidyAnandake granthoMparase khojakara 33 avataraNa
udAharaNArtha

Page #50 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Introduction 33. It is clear from the context that Vidyananda did not
consider other Acharyas as Sutrakaras or Shastrakaras. He used these terms only
for Umaswami. He has quoted a definition of Sutra from some source, "Sutra hi
satyam sayuktikam chochyate...", with the intention of proving that the Sutras
in Tattvartha Sutra are indeed Sutras according to this definition. This does
not imply that he considered other authors as Shastrakaras or Sutrakaras.  The
argument that the Mangalashlok is not part of Tattvartha Sutra because it is not
explained by the commentators is also not valid. It is not necessary for
commentators to explain the Mangalacharan of the text they are commenting on.
For example, consider the second Karmagrantha, "Karmastav", and the fourth
Karmagrantha, "Shadashiti", of the Shvetambar tradition. They both have
Mangalacharan, but their commentators have not explained them in their
commentaries. Nevertheless, these Mangalacharans are considered part of those
texts. Another example is the 31 Sambandhakarikas found with the Shvetambar
Tattvarthadhigam Sutra Mula. They are not explained in the Swopagna Bhashya, but
are still considered to be written by the Sutrakar. The point is that
commentators explain only those verses and sentences that are difficult or about
which they want to say something specific. They leave the easy ones
unexplainded, either by saying "Sugam" or without saying anything. The
"Mokshamargasy..." shlok is also easy, hence it was not explained by the
commentators. Therefore, the fact that the shlok is not explained does not prove
that it was not written by the Sutrakar.  1, 2. "Tattvartha Sutra ka
Mangalacharan", Anekanta Varsh 5, Kiran 6-7, page 232.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prastAvanA 33. anyatra diye haiM jinase spaSTa hai ki vidyAnandakI prakRti anya
AcAryoMko sUtrakAra yA zAstrakAra likhane ko nahIM rahI, kevala umAsvAmIke lie
hI ina donoM zabdoMkA unhoMne prayoga kiyA hai  /  kisI lekhakakA jo
sUtralakSaNa 'sUtraM hi satyaM sayuktikaM cocyate...' unhoMne kahIMse uddhRta
kiyA hai usase itanA hI siddha karanA unheM abhipreta hai ki isa lakSaNAnusAra
bhI tattvArthasUtrake sUtroMmeM sUtratA hai  /  usase yaha abhiprAya kadApi
nahIM nikAlA jA sakatA hai ki unhoMne anya lekhakako bhI zAstrakAra yA sUtrakAra
kahA hai  /  dusarI sthApanAke samarthana meM jo yaha kahA gayA hai ki ukta
maGgalazlokakI vyAkhyAkAroM dvArA vyAkhyA na honese vaha tattvArthasUtrakA
maGgalapadya nahIM hai vaha bhI yukta nahIM hai| kyoMki vyAkhyAkAroMko yaha
Avazyaka nahIM hai ki ve vyAkhyeya granthake maGgalAcaraNakI bhI vyAkhyA kreN|
udAharaNArtha zvetAmbara 'karmastava' nAmaka dvitIya karmagrantha aura
'SaDazIti' nAmake caturtha karmagranthako liijie| inameM maGgalAcaraNa upalabdha
haiM  /  para unake bhASyakAroMne apane bhASyoMmeM unakA bhASya yA vyAkhyAna
nahIM kiyaa| phira bhI ve maGgalAcaraNa unhIM granthoMke mAne jAte haiM  /  eka
anya udAharaNa aura lIjie, zvetAmbara tattvArthAdhigamasUtramUlake sAtha jo 31
sambandhakArikAe~ pAyI jAtI haiM unakA svopajJa bhASyameM koI vyAkhyAna yA
bhASya nahIM kiyA gyaa| phira bhI unheM sUtrakAra-racita mAnA jAtA hai  /  bAta
yaha hai ki vyAkhyAkAra mUlake unhIM padoM aura vAkyoMkI vyAkhyA karate haiM jo
kaThina hote haiM yA jinake sambandhameM vizeSa kahanA cAhate haiN| jo
padavAkyAdi sugama hote haiM unheM ve 'sugamam' kahakara yA binA kahe avyAkhyAta
chor3a dete haiN| 'mokSamArgasya." zloka bhI sugama hai| isIse usakI
vyAkhyAkAroMne vyAkhyA nahIM kI  / 2 ataH ukta zlokako avyAkhyAta honese
sUtrakArakRta asiddha nahIM kahA jA sktaa| 1, 2. 'tattvArthasUtrakA
maMgalAcaraNa' zIrSaka lekha, anekAnta varSa 5, kiraNa 6-7, pRSTha 232 /

Page #51 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Devaagam - Aaptameemaansa**  In support of this establishment, it has also
been said that if Vidyānanda had intended the said Mangala Stotra to be composed
by Umāsvāmī, then he would not have refuted the inconsistency by the phrase
"Prabuddhaāśeṣa tattvārthe..." etc. and instead would have directly referred to
it here. In this regard, we only want to ask how the establisher derived the
said meaning from the verses including the said Uthānīkā phrase? Because
Vidyānanda here has only presented the inconsistency arising from the context
and refuted it, in which the proponent of the inconsistency has said that when
there is neither a specific proponent of the path to liberation nor a specific
subject matter, then the composition of the first sūtra is incongruous? While
refuting this inconsistency, he says that the Muniindra (sūtrakāra) has proven
by the Mangala Stotra "Mokṣamārgasya netāram" etc. that there is a specific
proponent of the path to liberation and also a specific subject matter. And
therefore, it is appropriate for the sūtrakāra to compose the first sūtra when
the soul, possessing the nature of knowledge and perception, desires to know the
path to liberation, which is conducive to future welfare. The entire passage of
Vidyānanda is as follows:  "Nan ca tattvārthaśāstrasya avisūtra tāvadanupannāṁ
pravaktuviśeṣasyābhāve5pi pratipādyaviśeṣasya ca kasyacitpratipitṣāyāmeva
pravṛttatvādityanupattichodanāyāmuttaramāha 34 Supery Prabuddhaāśeṣa tattvārthe
sāksātprakṣīṇakalmaṣe | Siddhe muniindrasamstute moksamārgasya netari || Satyām
tatpratipitṣāyāmupayogātmakātmanaḥ | Śreyasā yokṣyamāṇasya pravṛttaṁ sūtraṁ
ādimam || Tenopannāmeveti tātparyam |" T0 śloka 0 pṛ. 4.  Vidyānanda here has
mentioned the qualities of the one who is praised by the phrases "Prabuddhaāśeṣa
tattvārthe", "Sākṣātprakṣīṇakalmaṣe" and "Mokṣamārgasya netari".

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 devAgama - AptamImAMsA isa sthApanAke samarthanameM eka bAta yaha bhI kahI gaI
hai ki vidyAnandako yadi ukta maGgala stotra umAsvAmI praNIta abhipreta hotA to
ve 'prabuddhAzeSatattvArthe .." Adi sotthAnikA vAkya dvArA anupapattisthApana
aura usakA parihAra na kara usIkA yahA~ nirdeza karate  /  isa sambandha meM
hama itanA hI pUchanA cAhate haiM ki sthApanAkArane ukta utthAnikAvAkya sahita
padyoMse ukta artha kaise nikAlA ? kyoMki vidyAnandane yahA~ kevala usa
prasaGgopAtta anupapattiko prastuta karake usakA parihAra kiyA hai jisameM
anupapattikArane kahA hai ki jaba na koI mokSamArgakA pravaktAvizeSa hai aura na
koI pratipAdyavizeSa, taba prathama sUtrako racanA asaMgata hai ? isa
anupapattikA parihAra karate hue ve kahate haiM ki munIndra ( sUtrakAra ) ne
'mokSamArgasya netAram' Adi maGgala-stotra dvArA sarvajJa, vItarAga aura
mokSamArgake netAkI stuti karake siddha kara diyA hai ki mokSamArgakA
pravaktAvizeSa hai aura pratipAdyavizeSa bhI  /  aura isalie bhAvI zreyase yukta
honevAle jJAna - darzanasvarUpa AtmAkI mokSamArgako jAnanekI abhilASA honepara
sUtrakAradvArA prathama sUtrakA racA jAnA saMgata hai  /  vidyAnandakA vaha pUrA
sthala isa prakAra hai 'nana ca tattvArthazAstrasyAvisUtra tAvadanupapannaM
pravaktuvizeSasyAbhAve5pi pratipAdyavizeSasya ca kasyacitpratipitsAyAmeva
pravRttatvAdityanupapatticodanAyAmuttaramAha 34 Supery prabuddhAzeSa tattvArthe
sAkSAtprakSINakalmaSe  /  siddhe munIndrasaMstutye mokSamArgasya netari  //
satyAM tatpratipitsAyAmupayogAtmakAtmanaH  /  zreyasA yokSyamANasya pravRttaM
sUtramAdimam  //  tenopapannameveti tAtparyam  / ' ta0 zloka 0 pR0 4  /
vidyAnandane yahA~ 'prabuddhAzeSatastvArthe', sAkSAtprakSINakalmaSe' aura
'mokSamArgasya netari' padoMke dvArA Asake jina guNoMkA ullekha kiyA hai

Page #52 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Introduction  35  They are the same ones who are mentioned in the
'Mokshamargasya Netaram Adi Stotra' - they have translated (repeated) the same
here. By the phrase 'Sidhe Muniindrasamstuty', they have made it clear that
Muniindra (the Sutrakar) composed the Adi Sutra only after praising the Aapta
with the aforementioned epithets. We are surprised why the mentions of
Vidyānanda, which are not even remotely supportive of the establishment-maker,
but are 'Swavadhay Krityotthapan' for them, are being presented.  There is no
dispute in the third establishment about the statement that the aforementioned
Stotra was written as an interpretation of Atma-Mimamsa. But when that Stotra is
attempted to be proven by the mentions of Vidyānanda, which are not even
remotely supportive of the establishment-maker's intention, to be the work of
Pujyapada-Devanandika, it causes great surprise. The direct and relevant meaning
of the word 'Prottanarabhakale' from the Aapta Pariksha is - at the time of the
beginning of the effort or at the time of the beginning of the descent. But
without accepting this direct meaning, its meaning has been interpreted as 'The
meaning of the word 'Uththan' is a book, therefore the meaning of the word
'Prottan' is excellent Uththan, meaning a commentary or interpretation,
therefore the meaning of 'Prottanarabhakale' is 'Vyakhyanarambhakale'. The
question is how the commentary or interpretation was taken from the excellent
knowledge? Because it is not supported by any dictionary or any traditional
source. If Vidyānanda wanted to show the aforementioned Stotra as the commentary
(Sarvarth Siddhi) of Pujyapada-Devanandika, then he would not have made such an
intellectual effort and would not have confused the readers and instead of
writing 'Prottanarabhakale', he could have written 'Vyakhyanarambhakale'.
Similarly, instead of 'Shastrakaraiah Krtam', he could have given 'Vrittikaraiah
Krtam'. This would not have caused any damage to the composition of the verse.
But Vidyānanda did not want all this. He undoubtedly considered the
aforementioned Stotra to be the Tattvarth Shastra and accepted it as composed by
the Shastrakar - not the Vrittikar, and by Shastrakar or Sutrakar, he meant A.
Giddhapiccha (Umaswami).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prastAvanA 35 ve vahI haiM jo 'mokSamArgasya netAram Adi stotra meM abhihita
haiM --usIkA yahA~ unhoMne anuvAda ( doharAnA ) kiyA hai| 'siddhe
munIndrasaMstutye' padake dvArA to unhoMne spasTa kara diyA hai ki munIndra (
sUtrakAra ) ne ukta vizeSaNoM se AptakI stuti karaneke bAda hI AdisUtra rcaa|
hameM Azcarya hai ki vidyAnandake jo ullekha sthApanAkArake raMcamAtra bhI
sAdhaka na hokara unake lie 'svavadhAya kRtyotthApana' rUpa haiM unheM prastuta
karanekA sAhasa kyoM kiyA jAtA hai  /  tIsarI sthApanAmeM jo ukta stotra ke
vyAkhyAnasvarUpa AtamImAMsAke likhe jAne kI bAta kahI gaI hai usameM koI vivAda
nahIM hai  /  para jaba usa stotrako vidyAnandake ullekhoM dvArA, jo
sthApanAkAra ke abhiprAyake lezamAtra bhI sAdhaka nahIM haiM, pUjyapAda -
devanandikA siddha karanekI asaphala ceSTA kI jAtI hai taba bhArI Azcarya hotA
haiM  /  'protthAnArambhakAle' isa AptaparIkSAgata padakA sIdhA aura
prakaraNasaMgata artha hai - prayatnArambhasamaya meM athavA
avataraNArambhasamaya meM  /  parantu isa sIdhe arthako aGgIkAra na kara usakA
artha kiyA gayA hai ki 'utthAna zabdakA artha hai pustaka, ataeva protthAna
zabdakA artha huA prakRSTa utthAna arthAt vRtti yA vyAkhyAna, ataeva
'protthAnArambhakAle' kA artha huA vyAkhyAnArambhakAle'  /  prazna hai ki
prakRSTajJAnase vRtti yA vyAkhyAnakA grahaNa kaise kara liyA gayA ? kyoMki usakA
samarthana na kisI koSase hotA hai aura na paramparAgata kisI srotase  /  yadi
vidyAnandako ukta stotra pUjyapAda - devanandikI vRtti ( sarvArthasiddhi ) kA
batAnA iSTa hotA to ve itanA buddhivyAyAma na kara pAThakoM ko ulajhanameM na
DAlate aura 'protthAnArambhakAle' na likhakara 'vyAkhyAnArambhakAle' likha
sakate the  /  isI taraha 'zAstrakAraiH kRtaM' ke sthAnapara 'vRttikArai: kRtaM'
de sakate the  /  isase zlokakI racanAmeM koI kSati bhI nahIM hotI  /  kintu
vidyAnandako yaha saba iSTa hI nahIM thA  /  ve asandigdha rUpameM ukta
strotrako tattvArthazAstrakA mAnate the aura use zAstrakAra - na ki vRttikAra
racita svIkAra karate the aura zAstrakAra yA sUtrakArase unheM A0 gRddhapiccha (
umAsvAmI ) hI abhipreta the  /

Page #53 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The above-mentioned reference to the *mangala-sloka* in *Vidyananda's*
*Tattvartha-aptamimamsa*, the statement in the *Astasahastree* "
*Shastrarambhe'bhishtutasya aptasya mokshamargapranetrutvaya...* ", and the
reference in *Apt-pariksha* " *Shrimadtattvarthashadbhutasalilnidheh....
proththanarambhakale 'shastrakarair krtam yat. Stotra...*, *iti
tattvarthashastravo munindra stotragochara.* " clearly indicate that they
consider the author of the *shastra* to be the one who composed the
*mokshamargasya netaram* *stotra*, and by " *shastrakara* " they mean only the
author of the *Tattvarth Sutra*, *A. Grdhapichchha*, not *Poojyapada-Devanandi*,
the author of *Sarvarthasiddhi*. *Vidyananda* has used the terms " *shastrakara*
" and " *sutrakar* " only for the author of the *Tattvarth Sutra* in all his
works. Similarly, the terms *Tattvartha*, *Tattvarthashastra*, or
*Nishreyasshastra* have also been used only for his *Tattvarth Sutra*, not in a
broader or other sense, as we have seen above.  Apart from the above-mentioned
references of *Vidyananda*, another very clear and unambiguous reference has
been found which attributes the *mangala-sloka* to the *sutrakar* -
*Grdhapichchha-Umasvami*. It is as follows: " *Grdhapichchaacharyenaapi
tattvarthashastrasyadau 'mokshamargasya netaram' ityadina arhannmaaskarasyaiv
parammangalataya prathamamuktatvat.* "  *Go. Ji. Ma. Pra. Ti. Pr. 14*. This
reference is from *Siddhantchakravarti Acharya Abhayachandra* (12th-13th
century), the author of the *Mandaprabodhika Tika* of the *Gommatasar
Jivakanda*, which is seven to eight hundred years old. In it, he has clearly
stated that the *mangala-stotra* was composed by *Grdhapichchhaacharya* and that
it was composed by him at the beginning of the *Tattvarthashastra* (*Tattvarth
Sutra*). He has not called it the *Tattvarthavrittika* of *Poojyapada-
Devanandi*. This shows that even seven to eight hundred years ago, the *mangala-
stotra* was considered to be the *Tattvarth Sutra* of *Grdhapichchhaacharya*.
One more thing to note about this reference is that in ancient times, the
*Tattvarthashastra* was referred to as the *Tattvarth Sutra*, and by that, the
*Tattvarth Sutra* composed by *Acharya Grdhapichchha* was meant.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 devAgama-AptamImAMsA ataH vidyAnandake tattvArthazlokavAkittagata ukta ullekha,
aSTasahasrImeM Aye 'zAstrArambhe'bhiSTutasyAptasya mokSamArgapraNetRtayA...' Adi
nirdeza aura AptaparIkSAgata 'zrImattasvArthazAdbhutasalilanidheH....
protthAnArambhakAle 'zAstrakAraiH kRtaM yat  /  stotra ...', 'iti
tatvArthazAstrAvo munIndra stotrgocraa|' 'ullekhoMse asandigdha hai ki ve
'mokSamArgasya netAram' stotrakA kartA zAstrakArako mAnate haiM aura
'zAstrakAra' se unheM ekamAtra tattvArthasUtrakAra A0 gRDhapiccha hI vivakSita
haiM, sarvArthasiddhikAra pUjyapAda-devanandi nhiiN| vidyAnandane apane sabhI
graMthoMmeM 'zAstrakAra' aura 'sUtrakAra' padoMkA prayoga kevala
tattvArthasUtrake kartAke lie kiyA hai| isI prakAra tattvArtha, tattvArthazAstra
yA niHzreyasazAstra zabdoMkA prayoga bhI unhIMke tattvArthasUtra ke lie huA hai,
vyApaka yA anya arthameM nahIM, yaha hama Upara dekha cuke haiN| vidyAnandake
uparyukta ullekhoMke alAvA ukta maGgalazlokako sUtrakAra-gRddhapiccha-umAsvAmI
kRta batalAne vAlA eka ati spaSTa, evaM abhrAnta ullekha aura prApta huA hai  /
vaha nimna prakAra hai :_'gaddhapicchAcAryeNApi tattvArthazAstrasyAdau
'mokSamArgasya netAram' ityAdinA arhannamaskArasyaiva paramamaMgalatayA
prathamamuktatvAt  / ' go0 jI0 ma0pra0 TI0 pR0 14  /  yaha ullekha sAta-AThasau
varSa prAcIna gommaTasAra jIvakANDakI mandaprabodhikA TIkAke racayitA
siddhAntacakravartI AcArya abhayacandra ( 12vIM-13vIM sadI ) kA hai| isameM
unhoMne ukta maGgalastotrako gRddha picchAcAryakRta spaSTa likhA hai aura use
tattvArthazAstra ( tattvArthasUtra ) ke ArambhameM unake dvArA racA gayA
batalAyA hai, use pUjyapAda-devanandikI tattvArthavRttikA nahIM kahA  /  isase
prakaTa hai ki Ajase sAtasau-AThasau varSa pUrva bhI vaha gRddhapicchAcAryake
tattvArthasUtrakA maGgala-stotra mAnA jAtA thaa| isa ullekhakI eka bAta aura
dhyAtavya hai  /  vaha yaha ki prAcIna samayameM tattvArthazAstra
tattvArthasUtrako hI kahA jAtA thA aura usase AcArya gRddhapiccha racita
tattvArthasUtra hI liyA jAtA thaa|

Page #54 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 37 After discussing Devagam and its commentaries, we now consider its author.
**Introduction** 2. Samantabhadra: The author of this valuable and important
work is Acharya Samantabhadra, who is found adorned with the title 'Swami' in
literature and inscriptions, signifying his special respect. After Acharya
Kundakunda and Gṛddhpiṭcha, it was this Swami Samantabhadra who most influenced
and brought fame to Jain literature. His praise is widely available in
inscriptions and the works of prominent authors of literature. Akalankadeva
called him the influencer of Syadvada Tirtha and the protector of the Syadvada
path, Vidyānanda called him the leading proponent of the Syadvada path,
Malayagiri called him the first eulogist, and inscription writers called him the
one who increased the thousandfold virtues of Virashasana, the propagator of
Shrutakevali lineage, the repository of all knowledge, the scholar, and the
protector of the Kaliyuga. In reality, when the determination of truth became
absolute and was considered as such, and the Arhat tradition, the system of
truth established by the Tirthankaras like Rishabha, began to be forgotten, it
was this great Acharya who revived and influenced it. Therefore, it is no
surprise that such a great sage, who influenced the Shasana and spread the
knowledge of truth, is praised by scholars.  A detailed introduction and
determination of his time, etc., has been given by the revered Pandit
Jugalkishorji Mukhtar in his historical work 'Swami Samantabhadra'. It is so
well-documented, accurate, and research-oriented that even after 42 years, there
seems to be no scope for revision, change, or addition. It is still completely
new and thought-provoking. It contains so much material that researchers can
write many research papers on it. Therefore, instead of repeating the
introduction of Samantabhadra here, we will try to shed light on his
achievements.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 37 devAgama aura usakI vyAkhyAoMke prasaGgase itanI carcA karaneke uparAnta aba
usake karttA ke sambandha meM bhI vicAra kiyA jAtA hai  /  prastAvanA 2.
samantabhadra : isa mUlyavAn aura mahattvapUrNa kRtike upasthApaka AcArya
samantabhadra haiM, jo sAhitya aura zilAlekhoM meM viziSTa sammAnake pradarzaka
'svAmI' padase vibhUSita milate haiM  /  A0 kundakunda aura gRddhapicchake
pazcAt jaina vAGmayako jisa manISIne sarvAdhika prabhAvita kiyA aura yazobhAjana
huA vaha yahI svAmI samantabhadra haiM  /  inakA yazogAna zilAlekhoM tathA
vAGmayake mUrdhanya granthakAroMke granthoMmeM bahulatayA upalabdha hai  /
akalaGkadevane syAdvAdatIrthakA prabhAvaka aura syAdvAdamArgakA paripAlaka,
vidyAnandane syAdvAdamArgAgraNI vAdirAjane sarvajJakA pradarzaka, malayagirine
AdyastutikAra tathA zilAlekhakoMne vIrazAsanakI sahasraguNI vRddhi karanevAlA,
zrutakevalisantAnonnAyaka, samastavidyAnidhi, zAstrakarttA evaM
kalikAlagaNadhara kahakara unakA kIrtigAna kiyA hai  /  yathArthameM jaba
tattvanirNaya aikAntika hone lagA aura use utanA hI mAnA jAne lagA tathA Arhata-
paramparA RSabhAdi tIrthaMkaroM dvArA pratipAdita tattva vyavasthApaka
syAdvAdanyAyako bhUlane lagI, to isI mahAn AcAryane use ujjIvita evaM prabhAvita
kiyA  /  ataH aise zAsana prabhAvaka aura tattvajJAnaprasAraka mUrdhanya
manISIkA vidvAnoM dvArA guNagAna ho to koI Azcarya nahIM  /  inakA vistRta
paricaya aura samayAdikA nirNaya zraddheya paM0 jugalakizorajI mukhtArane apane
'svAmI samantabhadra' nAmaka itihAsa- grantha meM diyA hai  /  vaha itanA
pramANapUrNa, avikala aura zodhAtmaka hai ki 42 varSa bAda bhI usameM
saMzodhana, parivartana yA parivardhanakI guMjAiza pratIta nahIM hotI  /  vaha
Aja bhI bilkula nayA aura cintanapUrNa hai  /  usameM itanI sAmagrI hai ki
usapara zodhArthI aneka zodha-prabandha likha sakate haiM  /  ataeva yahA~
samantabhadra ke paricayAdikI punarAvRtti na karake kevala unakI upalabdhiyoM
para prakAza DAlanekA prayAsa kareMge  /

Page #55 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 38 **(a) The Era Before Samantabhadra**  According to Jain scriptures, there
have been twenty-four Tirthankaras in succession over vast periods of time. The
first Tirthankara was Rishabhadeva, the twenty-second was Arishtanemi, the
twenty-third was Parshvanatha, and the twenty-fourth was Vardhamana Mahavira.
These Tirthankaras are both historical and widely known. The teachings given by
these Tirthankaras are called Dvadasanga. Just as the teachings of Buddha are
called Tripitaka, the Dvadasanga scriptures are divided into two parts: 1. Anga
Pravist and 2. Anga Bahya. These two divisions are due to the specific speaker.
The scriptures spoken by the Tirthankaras and their chief and direct disciples
are Anga Pravist. And those composed by later speakers based on these are Anga
Bahya. Anga Pravist and Anga Bahya are further divided into twelve and fourteen
categories respectively. One of the twelve categories of Anga Pravist is
Drishtivad, which is the twelfth scripture. This twelfth Drishtivad scripture
presents and reviews the singular views and beliefs of various schools of
thought, harmonizing them with Syadvad Nyaya. Samantabhadra has expressed this
fact in his works using phrases like "Syadvadino Nath Tavaiva Yuktam" and has
called all Tirthankaras Syadvadis (proponents of Syadvad). Akalankadeva has also
identified them as proponents of Syadvad and their teachings as marked by the
infallible seal of Syadvad.   1. ....Eshan Drashtishatanam Trayanam Shashti
Uttaranam Prarupanam Nigrahashcha Kriyate. - Vira Sena, Dhavala Pustak 1, p.
108. Bandhashcha Mokshashcha Tayo Shcha Hetu, Baddhashcha Muktashcha Phalam Cha
Mukte. Syadvadino Nath! Tavaiva Yuktam, Naikantardrishte Tvamato'si Shasta. ||
Swayambhustava, Shloka 14. 3. (a) Dharma Tirthankarebhyo'stu Syadvadhibhyo Namo
Namaha. Rishabhad Mahaviraantebhyah Swatmopa labdhayai. || Devagama-Aapta
Mimamsa 2.  Laghiyaka 0  -1.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 38 (ka) samantabhadrase pUrvakA yuga jaina anuzruti ke anusAra jainadharmake
pravarttaka kramazaH kAlake antarAlako lie caubIsa tIrthaMkara hue haiM  /
inameM prathama tIrthaGkara RSabhadeva, vAIsaveM ariSTanemi, teIsaveM
pArzvanAtha aura caubIsaveM varddhamAna mahAvIra to aitihAsika aura
lokaprasiddha bhI haiM  /  ina tIrthakaroMke dvArA jo upadeza diyA gayA vaha
dvAdazAGga kahA gayA hai  /  jaise buddha ke upadezako tripiTaka kahA jAtA hai
/  vaha dvAdazAGgazruta do bhAgoM meM vibhakta hai - aGga praviSTa aura 2.
aGgabAhya  /  ye do bheda pravaktAvizeSake kAraNa haiM  /  jo zruta tIrthaGkaroM
tathA unake pradhAna evaM sAkSAt ziSyoMdvArA ukta hai vaha aGgapraviSTa haiM  /
tathA jo isake AdhArase uttaravartI pravaktAoM dvArA racA gayA vaha aGgabAhya
hai  /  aGgapraviSTa aura aGgabAhyake bhI kramazaH bAraha aura caudaha bheda
haiM | aGgapraviSTake bAraha bhedoMmeM eka dRSTivAda hai jo bArahavA~ zruta hai
/  isa bArahaveM dRSTivAdazrutameM' vibhinna vAdiyoMkI ekAnta dRSTiyoM evaM
mAnyatAoMke nirUpaNa aura samIkSAke sAtha unakA syAdvAdanyAya se samanvaya kiyA
gayA hai | isa tathyako samantabhadrane apanI kRtiyoM meM 'syAdvAdino nAtha
tavaiva yuktam' jaise padaprayogoM dvArA vyakta kiyA hai aura sabhI tIrthaGkako
syAdvAdI (syAdvAda - pratipAdaka ) kahA hai  /  akalaGkadevane bhI unheM
syAdvAdakA pravaktA tathA unake zAsana - upadezako syAdvAda ke amogha lAMchanase
cinhita batalAyA hai  /  3 1. ....eSAM draSTizatAnAM trayANAM SaSTyuttarANAM
prarUpaNaM nigrahazca kriyate  /  - vIrasena, dhavalA pustaka 1, pR0 108 |
bandhazca mokSazca tayozca hetU baddhazca muktazca phalaM ca mukteH  /
syAdvAdino nAtha ! tavaiva yuktaM naikAntadRSTestvamato'si zAstA ||
svayambhUsto0 zlo0 14  /  3. (ka) dharmatIrthakarebhyo'stu syAdvAdibhyo namo
namaH  /  RSabhAdimahAvIrAntebhyaH svAtmopalabdhaye  //  devAgama-AptamImAMsA 2.
laghIya0 kA 0 -1  /

Page #56 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Introduction  Although the *Shatkhandagama* does not contain a separate
discussion on *Syadvada*, the principle is definitely found in the use of the
word 'Syat' (Sya). For example, while explaining humans as both sufficient and
insufficient, it is stated that 'Sya Pajjata, Sya Apajjata', meaning humans are
*Syat* sufficient, *Syat* insufficient. Similarly, other topics of the *agama*
are also presented in this way.  In the *Agama*, Kundakunda has clearly
mentioned seven types of statements for the description of *dravya* (substance),
combining the two types of statements (affirmation and negation) with five other
types. As stated:  "Sya Atthi Patthi Uhayam Avvattavam Puno Ya Tattiviyam.
Davvam Khu Sattabhang Aavesavasen Sambhavavi." *Panchaastikaya* Ga. 14.  This
refers to the seven *bhangas* (categories of truth) and instructs us to describe
*dravya* according to the *adesha* (instruction) or *naya* (perspective).
Kundakunda also states that if a *dravya* is only *sadrupa* (real), then it
cannot be destroyed. And if it is only *asadrupa* (unreal), then its creation is
not possible. However, since we observe that a *jiva* (soul) is destroyed in the
human state, born in the divine state, and remains constant as a general *jiva*,
it is therefore characterized by creation, destruction, and permanence.  (b)
"Shrimatiparamgambhirasyaavadamoghalanchanam. Jiyat Trailokyanathasya Shasanam
Jinashasanam." *Pramanasam* 1-1.  (c) "Vanditva Paramahatam Samudayam Gan
Saptabhangavidhi Syadvadamritabhini Pratihatakantandhakarodiyam." *Ashtaash*
Mangalashloka 1.  *Panchaastikaya* Ga. 15, 17.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prastAvanA SaTkhaNDAgamameM yadyapi syAdvAdakI svataMtra carcA nahIM milatI,
phira bhI siddhAnta-pratipAdana 'syAt' (siyA) zabdako liye hue avazya milatA
hai| udAharaNArtha manuSyoMko paryAptaka tathA aparyAptaka donoM batalAte hue
kahA gayA hai ki 'siyA pajjattA, siyA apajjatA' arthAt manuSya syAt paryAptaka
haiM, syAt aparyAptaka haiN| isI prakArase Agamake kucha dUsare viSayoMkA bhI
pratipAdana upalabdha hotA hai| A0 kundakundane ukta do ( vidhi aura niSedha)
vacana-prakAroMmeM pA~ca vacana-prakAra aura milAkara sAta vacanaprakAroMse
vastu ( dravya ) nirUpaNakA spaSTa ullekha kiyA hai  /  yathA siya atthi patthi
uhayaM avvattavvaM puNo ya tattivayaM  /  davvaM khu sattabhaMga AvesavaseNa
saMbhavavi  /  /  paMcAstikAya gA0 14  //  'syAvasti dravya syAnnAsti dravyaM
syAdubhayaM syAdavaktavyaM syAdastyavaktavyaM syAnnAstyavaktavyaM
syAdastinAstyavaktavyaM  / ' ina sAta bhaGgoMkA yahA~ ullekha huA hai aura unako
lekara AdezavazAt ( nayavivakSAnusAra ) dravya-nirUpaNa karanekI sUcanA kI hai
/  kundakundane yaha bhI pratipAdana kiyA hai ki yadi sadrUpa hI dravya ho to
usakA vinAza nahIM ho sakatA aura yadi asadrUpa hI ho to usakA utpAda sambhava
nahIM hai aura cUki yaha dekhA jAtA hai ki jIva manuSyaparyAyase naSTa,
devaparyAyase utpanna aura jIvasAmAnyase dhra va rahanese vaha utpAda-vyaya-
dhrauvyasvarUpa hai  /  (kha ) zrImatparamagambhIrasyAvAdAmoghalAMchanam  /
jIyAt trailokyanAthasya zAsanaM jinazAsanam  //  pramANasaM0 1-1  /  (ga)
vanditvA paramAhatAM samudayaM gAM saptabhaGgovidhi syAdvAdAmRtabhiNI
pratihatakAntAndhakArodayAm  //  . aSTaza0 maGgalazlo0 1  /  1 paMcAstikAya gA0
15, 17 /  /

Page #57 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  40 ## Devagam-Aaptamimamsa  This suggests that during Kundakunda's time,
Jain literature had begun to take on the form of philosophy, but it had not yet
fully developed.  In the Tattvartha Sutra of A. Gṛddhapichcha, we find some
growth in the form of philosophy presented by Kundakunda.  Firstly, he
transformed the method of presenting principles in Prakrit into Sanskrit prose
sutras.  Secondly, he began to present principles with reasoning.  Thirdly, he
gave the term "pramana" (proof) to the knowledge of the path of knowledge,
including opinions, etc., as presented in the Agamas.  He divided it into two
categories: direct and indirect.  He called memory, recognition, and inference,
which are accepted as separate proofs in other philosophies, "mati-jnana"
(knowledge of opinion) and included them in indirect proof through the sutra
"Aady Paroksham" (T.S. 1-11).  He also began new thinking by suggesting that
Nayas like Naigama, etc., are means of understanding meaning.  Despite all this,
the philosophy did not find a logical solution to the monisms, conflicts, and
uncertainties that were the subject of discussion at that time. (b) The
situation at that time:  The second and third centuries CE were a time of
philosophical revolution in the history of India.  During this time, there were
many revolutionary scholars in various philosophies.  In both the Shraman and
Vedic traditions, there emerged rival scholars like Ashvaghosha, Matrichit,
Nagarjuna, Kanada, Gautama, and Jaimini, all of whom were engaged in defending
their own views and refuting those of others.  There was a flood of debates.
The main topics of discussion were the four opposing pairs: Sad-Asadvad
(existence-non-existence), Shashvatvad-Uchchedvad (eternalism-annihilationism),
Advaita-Dvaita (non-dualism-dualism), and Avaktvyavad-Vaktvyavad (indescribable-
describable).  These were discussed in four categories.  The proponents insisted
on accepting only one category (side) that they favored.  This tug-of-war led to
uncertainty (ignorance).  1. "Sadekanityavaktvyastadvipakshascha ye nayah |
Sarvatheti pradusyanti pushyanti syad itiha te || Swayambhu. Sloka 101.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 40 devAgama-AptamImAMsA isase pratIta hotA hai ki kundakundake samayameM
jainavAGmayameM darzanakA rUpa to Ane lagA thA, para usakA abhI vikAsa nahIM ho
sakA thaa| A0 gRddhapicchake tattvArthasUtrameM kundakundadvArA pradarzita
darzanake rUpameM kucha vRddhi milatI hai| eka to unhoMne prAkRtameM siddhAnta-
pratipAdanakI paddhatiko saMskRta-gadya sUtromeM badala diyaa| dUsare,
upapattipUrvaka siddhAntoMkA nirUpaNa Arambha kiyaa| tIsare, Agama-pratipAdita
jJAnamArgaNAgata matyAdi jJAnoMko pramANa-saMjJA denA. usake pratyakSa aura
parokSa do bheda karanA, darzanAntaroMmeM pathaka pramANarUpameM svIkRta smRti,
pratyabhijJAna aura anumAnako matijJAna kahakara unakA 'Adya parokSam' (ta0 sU0
1-11) sUtradvArA parokSapramANameM hI antarbhAva karanA aura naigamAdi nayoMko
arthAdhigamakA upAya batAnA Adi nayA cintana prArambha kiyaa| itanA honepara bhI
darzanameM una ekAntavAdoM, saMgharSoM aura anizcayoMkA tArkika samAdhAna nahIM
A pAyA thA, jo usa samayakI carcAke viSaya the| ( kha ) tatkAlIna sthiti :
vikramakI dUsarI-tIsarI zatAbdIkA samaya bhAratavarSake itihAsameM dArzanika
krAntikA samaya rahA hai| isa samaya vibhinna darzanoMmeM aneka krAntikArI
vidvAna hue haiM  /  zramaNa aura vaidika donoM paramparAoMme azvaghoSa,
mAtRceTa, nAgArjuna, kaNAda, gautama, jaimini jaise pratidvandvI vidvAnoMkA
AvirbhAva huA aura ye sabhI apane maMDana aura dUsareke khaMDanameM laga gye|
zAstrArthoM kI bAr3ha-sI A gii| sadAda-asadvAda, zAzvatavAda-ucchedavAda,
advaitavAda-dvaitavAda aura avaktavyavAda-vaktavyavAda ina cAra virodhI
yugaloMko lekara tattvakI mukhyatayA carcA hotI thI aura unakA cAra koTiyoMse
vicAra kiyA jAtA thA  /  tathA vAdiyoMkA apanI iSTa eka-eka koTi (pakSa) ko hI
mAnanekA Agraha rahatA thaa| isa khIMcatAnake kAraNa anizcaya ( ajJAna ) 1.
'sadekanityavaktavyAstadvipakSAzca ye nayAH  /  sarvatheti praduSyanti puSyanti
syAditIha te  /  /  svayambhU0 zlo0 101 /

Page #58 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
41 The followers of Sanjaya, the Vadi, were stating the uncertainty of the
Tattva. The four categories that were applied to the above pairs were as
follows: 1. Sad-Asadvad (1) Tattva is Sat. (2) Tattva is Asat. (3) Tattva is
Ubhayan. (4) Tattva is Anubhayan. 2. Shashvat-Ashashvatvad Introduction (1)
Tattva is Shashvat. (2) Tattva is Ashashvat. (3) Tattva is Ubhayan. (4) Tattva
is Anubhayan. 3. Dvait-Advaitvad (1) Tattva is Dvait. (2) Tattva is Advait. (3)
Tattva is Ubhayan. (4) Tattva is Anubhayan. 4. Vaktavya-Avaktavya-vad (1) Tattva
is Vaktavya. (2) Tattva is Avaktavya. (3) Tattva is Ubhayan. (4) Tattva is
Anubhayan. 1. In the Digha Nikaya Samannalamutta, Sanjaya's opinion is found as
'Amaraviksepavad'. Amar is the name of a type of fish. To have the same Viksepa
(fluctuation - instability) - to believe is Amaraviksepavad.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 41 vAdI saMjayake anuyAyI tattvako anizcita hI batalAte the  /  uparyukta
yugaloMmeM laganevAlI cAra koTiyA~ isa prakAra hotI thIM 1. sadasadvAda ( 1 )
tattva sat hai | ( 2 ) tattva asat hai  /  3 ) tattva ubhaya hai  /  ( 4 )
tattva anubhaya hai  /  2. zAzvata - azAzvatavAda prastAvanA ( 1 ) tattva
zAzvata hai  /  ( 2 ) tattva azAzvata hai | ( 3 ) tattva ubhaya hai  /  ( 4 )
tattva anubhaya hai  /  3. dvaita-advaitavAda ( 1 ) tattva dvaita hai  /  ( 2 )
tattva advaita hai  /  ( 3 ) tattva ubhaya hai  /  ( 4 ) tattva anubhaya hai  /
4. vaktavyAvaktavyavAda ( 1 ) tattva vaktavya hai  /  ( 2 ) tattva avaktavya hai
/  ( 3 ) tattva ubhaya hai  /  ( 4 ) tattva anubhaya hai  /  1. dIghanikAya
sAmaJJaphalamuttameM saMjayakA mata 'amarAvikSepavAda' ke rUpa meM milatA hai  /
amarA eka prakArakI machalIkA nAma hai  /  usake samAna vikSepa ( caMcalatA -
asthiratA ) kA honA - mAnanA amarAvikSepavAda hai  /

Page #59 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 42 ## Devagam-Aptmimamsa **(c) Samantabhadra's Contribution**  Samantabhadra
asserted that the Tattva (Reality) does not end at the aforementioned four
categories, but is complete in seven categories. He clarified that Tattva is of
the nature of Anekanta (multi-faceted) - not Ekant (one-sided) - and is a
collection of seven Dharmas (attributes) that come to light through the reliance
on pairs of opposing Dharmas (Sat-Asat, Shashwat-Ashashwat, Ek-Anek, etc.). And
such infinite collections of Sapta-Dharma (seven Dharmas) are like infinite
waves in the vast ocean of Anekanta-atmak Tattva, filling it with infinite
Sapta-kotis (seven categories, seven-fold predication). However, the observer
must be vigilant and have a balanced perspective. They should remember that when
the speaker or knower describes or understands Tattva from a particular
category, that Dharma in Tattva, while present from that perspective, does not
negate other Dharmas. It is merely due to the intention of the speaker.   1.
Syadvadah sarvathaikantatyagat kimvrittachidvidhih | Saptabhangnayapeckso
heyadayaviseshakah || Aptmimamsa Ka 104 || 2. (a) 'Tattvam tv anekantam
ashesharoopam' - Yuktyanuk 46 | (b) Ekantdrishtipratisedhi tattvam praman सिद्धं
tadatat swabhavam | Swayambhu 41 | (c) Na sacch nasacch na drishtam ekamatmantam
sarvanishedhagamyam | Drishtam vimishram tadupaadhi bhedat svapne'pi naitat tva
drish pareshaam || - Yuktyanuk 32 | 3. (a) Vidhinisedho'nabhilapyata cha
trirekashashtridvish ek ev | Trayo vikalpaastava saptadha'ami syachchabdaneyah
sakale'rthabhede || - Yuktyanuk 45 | (b) Vidheyam varya cha anubhayam ubhayam
mishram api tat Visheshaih praatyekam niyamavishayashcha aparimetai |
Sadanyonyapecksah sakal bhuvanajyeshthaguruna Tvaya gitam tattvam
bahunayavivakshetaravashaat || Swayambhu 118 ||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 42 devAgama-AptamImAMsA (ga) samantabhadrakI dena samantabhadrane pratipAdana
kiyA ki tattva ukta cAra hI koTiyoMmeM samApta nahIM haiM, apitu sAta koTiyoMmeM
vaha pUrNa hotA hai  /  unhoMne spaSTa kiyA ki tattva to anekAntarUpa hai-
ekAntarUpa nahIM aura anekAnta virodhI do dharmoM ( sat-asat, zAzvata-azAzvata,
eka-aneka Adi ) ke yugalake Azrayase prakAzameM AnevAle vastugata sAta dharmIkA
samuccaya hai| aura aise-aise ananta saptadharma-samuccaya virATa anekAntAtmaka
tattva-sAgarameM ananta laharoMkI taraha laharA rahe haiM aura isIse usameM
ananta saptakoTiyA~ ( saptabhaGgiyA~) bharI par3I haiN| hA~, draSTAko sajaga
aura samadRSTi honA caahie| use yaha dhyAna rahe ki vaktA yA jJAtA tattvako jaba
amuka eka koTise kahatA yA jAnatA hai to tattvameM vaha dharma amuka apekSA se
rahatA huA bhI anya dharmokA niSedhaka nahIM hai| kevala vaha vivakSAvaza 1.
syAdvAdaH sarvathaikAntatyAgAt kiMvRttacidvidhiH  /  saptabhaGganayApekSo
heyAdeyavizeSakaH  /  /  AptamI0 kA0 104  /  2. (a) 'tattvaM
tvanekAntamazeSarUpama'-yuktyanu0 46  /  (A) ekAntadRSTipratiSedhi tattvaM
pramANasiddhaM tadatatsvabhAvam  /  svayambhU0 41  /  (i) na sacca nAsacca na
dRSTamekamAtmAntaraM sarvaniSedhagamyam  /  dRSTaM vimizraM tadupAdhibhedAt
svapne'pi naitattvadRSaH pareSAm  /  /  -yuktya0 32  /  3. (ka)
vidhiniSedho'nabhilApyatA ca trirekazastridviza eka eva  /  trayo vikalpAstava
saptadhA'mI syAcchabdaneyAH sakale'rthabhede  //  -yuktya 0 45  /  (kha)
vidheyaM vArya cAnubhayamubhayaM mizramapi tat vizeSaiH pratyekaM
niyamaviSayazcAparimitaiH  /  sadanyonyApekSaH sakalabhuvanajyeSThaguruNA .
tvayA gItaM tattvaM bahunayavivakSetaravazAt  /  /  svayambhU0 118  /

Page #60 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Introduction  The main religion is primary and other religions are secondary.
To understand this, they recommended using the 'syāt' particle with each
category (type of negation) and explained the meaning of 'syāt' as 'kathāñcit' -
from one perspective, from one expectation. They also specified the use of the
'evakāra' word with each sentence to reveal the decisiveness of each category,
so that the reality of that category is proven, not hypothetical or
conventional. They also gave a new name to these seven categories of truth-
presentation. That name is Bhaṅginī Prakriyā-Saptabhaṅgī or Saptabhaṅganaya.
Samantabhadra's refined Saptabhaṅga is presented as follows:  1. (a)
Vidhiniṣedhaśca kathāñcidiṣṭau vivakṣayā mukhyaguṇavyavasthā. _ Svayambhū 25.
(b) Vivakṣito mukhya itiṣyate'nyo guṇo'vivakṣo na nirātmaka te. Svayambhū 53.
2. (a) Vākyeṣbanekaantadyotī gamyaṁ prati viśeṣaṇam. Syānnipāto'rthayogitvāttava
kevalināmapi. _ Āptāmī 103. (b) Tadyotanah syād guṇato nipātah. Yuktyo 43.   3.
Syādvādaḥ sarvathaikaantatyāgāt kimvṛttacidvidhiḥ. Āptāmī 104.   4. (a)
Yadevakāropahitam padam tad asārthataḥ svārtham avacchinatti. Yuktyo 41. (b)
Anuktatulyaṁ yad anevakāram vyāvṛttyabhāvān niyama dve'pi. Yuktyo 42.   5.
Prakṛiyāṁ bhaṅginīmenāṁ nayana yaviśāradaḥ. _ Āptāmī 23.   6.
'Saptabhaṅganayāpekṣaḥ ....." Āptāmī 104.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prastAvanA mukhya aura anya dharma gauNa haiM  /  ise samajhaneke liye unhoMne
pratyeka koTi (bhaGga-vacanaprakAra) ke sAtha 'syAt' nipAta-pada lagAnekI
siphAriza kI aura 'syAt' kA artha 'kathaJcit'-kisI eka dRSTi-kisI eka apekSA
btlaayaa| sAtha hI unhoMne pratyeka koTikI nirNayAtmakatAko prakaTa karaneke lie
pratyeka vAkyake sAtha evakAra padakA prayoga bhI nirdiSTa kiyA, jisase usa
koTikI vAstavikatA pramANita ho, kAlpanikatA yA sAMvRtikatA nahIM  /
tattvapratipAdanakI ina sAta koTiyoMko unhoMne eka nayA nAma bhI diyA  /  vaha
nAma hai bhaGginI prakriyA-saptabhaGgI athavA saptabhaGganaya  /
samantabhadrakI vaha pariSkRta saptabhaGgo isa prakAra prastuta huI1. (ka)
vidhiniSedhazca kathaJcidiSTau vivakSayA mukhyaguNavyavasthA  /  _ svayambhU0 25
/  (kha) vivakSito mukhya itISyate'nyo guNo'vivakSo na nirAtmakaste  /
svayambhU0 53  /  2. (a) vAkyeSbanekAntadyotI gamyaM prati vizeSaNam  /
syAnnipAto'rthayogitvAttava kevalinAmapi  /  /  _AptamI0 kA0 103  /  (A)
tadyotanaH syAd guNato nipAtaH yuktya0 43  /  3. syAdvAdaH sarvathaikAntatyAgAt
kiMvRttacidvidhiH  /  AptamI0 104  /  4. (ka) yadevakAropahitaM padaM
tadasvArthataH svArthamavacchinatti  /  yuktya0 41  /  (kha) anuktatulyaM
yadanevakAraM vyAvRttyabhAvAnniyamadvaye'pi  /  yuktya0 42  /  5. prakriyAM
bhaGginImenAM nayanayavizAradaH  /  _ AptamI0 23  /  6. 'saptabhaGganayApekSaH
....." AptamI0 104  /

Page #61 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 44 ## Devagam-Aaptamimamsa ## Sad-Asadvad (1) It may be that the truth is of
the nature of being (sad). (2) It may be that the truth is of the nature of non-
being (asad). (3) It may be that the truth is of the nature of both being and
non-being. (4) It may be that the truth is of the nature of neither being nor
non-being (avaktāvya). (5) It may be that the truth is of the nature of being
and neither being nor non-being. (6) It may be that the truth is of the nature
of non-being and neither being nor non-being. (7) It may be that the truth is of
the nature of being, non-being, and neither being nor non-being.  In this
Saptabhangi, the first bhang is with respect to the substance, space, time, and
mode of the object itself (svadravyakshetrakalabhava), the second is with
respect to the substance, space, time, and mode of another object
(paradravyakshetrakalabhava), the third is with respect to both of these, the
fourth is because both being and non-being cannot be said together, the fifth is
a combination of the first and fourth, the sixth is a combination of the second
and fourth, and the seventh is a combination of the third and fourth. Each bhang
has a separate purpose, as is evident from the following statement of
Samantabhadra:  "One may desire all things as being, due to the fourfold nature
of being. Non-being is not established due to contradiction. The second bhang is
due to the two extremes, and the third is due to the inability to speak
together. The remaining three bhangs are due to their own reasons. In dharma,
the meaning is different for each dharma, and for the infinite dharmins. The
remaining bhangs are dependent on the first bhang, as the limbs are dependent on
the body."  Aaptamimamsa, 15, 16, 21.  1. "Sometimes it is desired as being,
sometimes as non-being. Thus, both and neither can be said, not absolutely, due
to the logic of nayas." Aaptamimamsa, 14.  2. "The remaining three bhangs are
due to their own reasons." Aaptamimamsa, 16.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 44 devAgama-AptamImAMsA sadasadvAda (1) syAt sadrUpa hI tattva hai| 1 (2) syAt
asadrUpa hI tattva hai  /  (3) syAt ubhayarUpa hI tattva hai  /  (4) syAt
anubhaya (avaktavya) rUpa hI tattva hai  /  (5) syAt sad aura avaktavyarUpa hI
tattva hai  /  (6) syAt asad aura avaktavyarUpa hI tattva hai  /  (7) syAt sad
aura asad tathA avaktavya rUpa hI tattva hai| isa saptabhaGgImeM prathama bhaGga
svadravya-kSetra-kAla-bhAvakI apekSAse, dvitIya paradravya-kSetra-kAla-bhAvakI
apekSAse, tRtIya donoMkI sammilita apekSAoMse, caturtha donoM (sattva-asattva)
ko eka sAtha kaha na sakanese, paMcama prathama-caturthake saMyogase, SaSTha
dvitIya-caturthake melase aura saptama tRtIya-caturtha ke mizrarUpase vivakSita
haiM aura pratyeka bhaGgakA prayojana pRthakra thak hai  /  jaisA ki
samantabhadrake nimna pratipAdanase prakaTa hai : sadeSa sarva ko
necchetsvarUpAdicatuSTayAt  /  asadeva viparyAsAnna cenna vyavatiSThate  /
kramApitadvayAt dvataM sahAvAcyamazaktitaH  /  avaktavyottarAH zeSAstrayo
bhaGgAH svhetutH|| dharme dharme'nya evArtho dharmiNo'nantarmiNaH  /
aGgitve'nyatamAntasya zeSAntAnAM tdnggtaa|| AptamI0 kA0 15, 16, 21  /  1.
kathaMcitte sadeveSTaM kathaJcidasadeva tat  /  tathobhayamavAcyaM ca
nayayogAnna sarvathA  /  _ AptamI0 14  /  2. avaktavyottarAH zeSAstrayo bhaGgAH
svahetutaH  //  AptamI0 16  /

Page #62 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Introduction  Samantbhadra, like the Sad-Asadvada, also expressed his views
on the one-sided doctrines of Advaita-Dvaita, Shashvata-Ashashvata, Vaktavya-
Avaktavya, Anyata-Ananyata, Apeksha-Anapeksha, Hetu-Ahetu, Vigyan-Bahrirth,
Daiv-Purushartha, Pap-Punya, and Bandha-Moksha-Karanavada. He established
Syadvada by applying the Saptabhangi (seven categories) to these doctrines. In
this way, he provided thinkers with the Syadvada perspective (method of
philosophical inquiry) and played a significant role in resolving the
intellectual conflicts of his time. He also created the necessary elements for
philosophy, elevating Arhat philosophy not only to the level of other
philosophies but also making it glorious.  The elements he created and provided
to Jain philosophy are as follows:  1. The self-illuminating characteristic of
proof. 2. The concept of the non-sequential and sequential aspects of proof. 3.
The description of the direct and traditional fruits of proof. 4. The subject of
proof. 5. The nature of Nay. 6. The nature of Hetu. 7. The nature of Syadvada.
8. The nature of the spoken. 9. The nature of the speaker.  1. Aaptamimansa,
Chapter 23, 113. 2. Swayambhustotra, Chapter 63. 3. Aaptamimansa, Chapter 101.
4. Upeksha phalamadyasyaseshyadana-hana-dhih. Purva-ava-ajnana-nasho va
sarvasyasyasvagochare. || Aaptamimansa 102. 5. Aaptamimansa 107. 6, 7.
Aaptamimansa 106. 8. Aaptamimansa 104. 9. Aaptamimansa 111, 112. 10.
Aaptamimansa 109.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prastAvanA samantabhadrane sadasadvAdakI taraha advaita-dvaitavAda, zAzvata-
azAzvatavAda, vaktavya-avaktavyavAda, anyatA-ananyatAvAda, apekSA-anapekSAvAda,
hetuahetuvAda, vijJAna-bahirarthavAda, daiva-puruSArthavAda, pApa-puNyavAda aura
bandhamokSakAraNavAda ina ekAnta vAdoMpara bhI vicAra prakaTa kiyA tathA ukta
prakArase unameM bhI saptabhaGgI ( saptakoTiyoM) kI yojanA karake syAdvAdakI
sthApanA kii| isa taraha vicArakoMko unhoMne syAdvAda-dRSTi ( tattvavicArako
paddhati ) dekara tatkAlIna vicAra-saMgharSako miTAne meM mahattvapUrNa yogadAna
kiyaa| sAtha hI darzanake lie jina upAdAnoMkI AvazyakatA hotI hai unakA bhI
unhoMne sRjana kiyA tathA Arhata darzanako anya darzanoMke samakakSa hI nahIM,
use gauravapUrNa bhI banAyA  /  jina upAdAnoMkI unhoMne sRSTi karake unheM jaina
darzanako pradAna kiyA ve isa prakAra haiM : 1. pramANakA svaparAvabhAsi lakSaNa
/  2. pramANake akramabhAvi aura kramabhAvi bhedoMkI parikalpanA  /  3.
pramANake sAkSAt aura paramparA phaloMkA nirUpaNa'  /  4. pramANakA viSaya 5.
nayakA svarUpa 6. hetukA svarUpa 7. syAdvAdakA svarUpa 8. vAcyakA svarUpa 9.
vAcakakA svarUpa 1. AptamI0 kA0 23, 113  /  2. svayambhUstotra kA0 63  /  3.
AptamImAMsA kA0 101  /  4. upekSA phalamAdyasya zeSasyAdAna-hAna-dhIH  /
pUrvA'vA'jJAnanAzo vA sarvasyAsya svagocare  //  AptamI0 102  /  5. AptamI0 107
/  6., 7. AptamI0 106  /  8. AptamI0 104  /  9. AptamI0 111, 112  /  10. AptamI0
109  /

Page #63 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  English Translation:  **46** Devagama - Aapta-Mimamsa 10.  Niroopana and
Bhavantera - Katha of the Dharmas of a Non-Existent Object  11.  Tattvaka's
Anekanta Rupa Praatipadan 12.  Anekanta's Swaroop 13.  Anekanta's Yojana within
Anekanta 14.  Avastuka's Swaroop in Jain Darshan 15.  Syat Nipata's Swaroop 16.
Siddhi of Sarvagya through Anuman 17.  Vyavastha of Syadvad through Yukti 18.
Aapta's Tarkik Swaroop 19.  Swaroop of Vastu (Dravya - Prameya)  Samantbhadra is
called the Aady Pravartak of Jain Nyaya because of the presentation and
development of these elements of Jain Nyaya.  **(d)  Kritis**  **50** Five
Kritis of Samantbhadra are available:  1.  Devagama - The present Kriti. 2.
Swayambhu Stotra - This contains the philosophical praise of the 24
Tirthankaras. It has 143 padya. 3.  Yuktyanusasan - This also contains
philosophical analysis under the guise of praise for Vira. It ends in 64 padya.
4.  Aapta-Mimamsa - This contains the philosophical analysis of Aapta. It has
113 padya.  **References:**  1.  Yuktyanusasan 23 2.  Yuktyanusasan 59 3.
Swayambhu Stotra 103 4.  Aapta-Mimamsa 107, 108 5.  Aapta-Mimamsa 48, 105 6.
Swayambhu Stotra 102 7.  Aapta-Mimamsa 5 8.  Aapta-Mimamsa 113 9.  Jain Darshan,
Syadvadank, Varsh 2, Ank 4-5, p. 170 10.  Aapta-Mimamsa Ka 4, 5, 6 11.  Aapta-
Mimamsa 107

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 46 devAgama - AptamImAMsA 10. abhAvakA vastudharma - nirUpaNa evaM bhAvAntara -
kathana ' 11. tattvakA anekAntarUpa pratipAdana 2 12. anekAntakA svarUpa u 5 .6
13. anekAnta meM bhI anekAntakI yojanA 4 14. jainadarzana meM avastukA svarUpa
15. syAt nipAtakA svarUpa 16. anumAnase sarvajJakI siddhi 7 17. yuktiyoMse
syAdvAda kI vyavasthA' 18. AptakA tArkika svarUpa 19. vastu ( dravya - prameya )
kA svarUpa .5 jaina nyAyake ina upAdAnoMkA upasthApana athavA vikAsa karane ke
kAraNa hI samantabhadrako jaina nyAyakA Adya pravartaka kahA gayA hai  / " (gha)
kRtiyA~ 50 samantabhadrakI 5 kRtiyA~ upalabdha haiM : 1 1. devAgama -- prastuta
kRti hai  /  2. svayambhU stotra -- isameM caubIsa tIrthaMkaroMkA dArzanikazailI
meM guNastavana hai  /  isameM 143 padya haiM  /  1. 'bhavatyabhAvo'pi ca
vastudharmaH, 3. yuktyanuzAsana - isameM bhI vIrakI stutike bahAne dArzanika
nirUpaNa hai  /  yaha 64 padyoM meM samApta hai  /  2. yuktyanu0 23  //  4.
svayambhUsto0 103  /  bhAvAntaraM bhAvavadarhataste  /  yuktyanu0 59  /  3.
AptamI0 107, 108  /  5. AptamI0 48, 105  /  6. svayambhU0 102  /  7. AptamI0 5
/  8. AptamI0 113  /  9. jaina darzana, syAdvAdAGka, varSa 2, aGka 4-5, pR0 170
/  10. AptamI kA0 4, 5, 6  /  11. AptamI0 107  /

Page #64 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Introduction 4. **Jin-Shatak (Stuti-Vidya)** - This is an unparalleled poetic
composition of 116 verses. It praises the twenty-four Tirthankaras. 5.
**Ratnakarandaka Shravakaachar** - This is a very ancient and important
theoretical work on the conduct of devotees, consisting of 150 verses.  47 Among
these, the first three are philosophical, the fourth is poetry, and the fifth is
religious. Besides these, there are mentions of some of their works like
**Jivasiddhi**, but they are unavailable.  ## Conclusion This introduction sheds
light on the relationship between Devagam and Swami Samantabhadra. In this
context, it also presents reflections on the interpretations of Devagam and the
source of its creation. Although the introduction has become quite lengthy, the
thoughts presented in it will be beneficial to the readers.  ## Kashi Hindu
University 29 March, 1967  Finally, I would like to commend the translator and
editor of this book, and the scholar of Jain literature and history, the
venerable Pandit Jugalkishorji Mukhtar, for this translation of Devagam. By
presenting a Hindi adaptation of this difficult philosophical text, Devagam,
with great effort, he has greatly benefited the devotees of Samantabhadra
Bharati. It is a matter of great joy that even at the age of 90, he is still
engaged in government service. We wish him a hundred years of life from the
bottom of our hearts.  ## Darbarilal Kothia 1. It is with regret that we inform
you of the passing of this great literary figure on December 22, 1968. -
Publisher, Second Edition.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prastAvanA 4. jina - zataka ( stuti - vidyA ) - yaha 116 padyoMkI AlaMkArika
apUrva kAvya-racanA hai  /  caubIsa tIrthaMkaroMko isameM stuti kI gaI hai | 5.
ratnakaraNDakazrAvakAcAra - - yaha upAsakAcAra viSayaka 150 padyoMkI atyanta
prAcIna aura mahattvapUrNa saiddhAntika kRti hai  /  47 inameM AdikI tIna
dArzanika, cauthI kAvya aura pA~cavIM dhArmika kRtiyA~ haiM  /  inake atirikta
bhI inakI jIvasiddhi jaisI kucha kRtiyoMke ullekha milate haiM para ve
anupalabdha haiM  /  upasaMhAra prastuta prastAvanA meM devAgama aura svAmI
samantabhadrake sambandha meM prakAza DAlA gayA hai  /  isI sandarbhameM
devAgamakI vyAkhyAoM aura usakI racanAke preraNAsrotapara bhI anucintana
prastuta kiyA gayA hai| prastAvanA yadyapi adhika lambI ho gaI hai tathApi
usameM kiyA gayA vicAra pAThakoMko lAbhaprada hogA  /  kAzI hindU vizvavidyAlaya
29 mArca, 1967 antameM prastuta granthake anuvAdaka evaM sampAdaka tathA jaina
sAhitya va itihAsa ke vettA zraddheya paM0 jugalakizorajI mukhtArake isa
devAgamaanuvAdako sarAhanA karU~gA  /  devAgama jaise duravagAha darzana-
granthakA bar3e parizramake sAtha granthAnurUpa hindI rUpAntara prastuta karake
samantabhadrabhAratIke upAsakoM ko unhoMne bar3A lAbha pahu~cAyA hai  /  parama
pramodakA viSaya hai| ki ve 90 varSakI vayameM bhI zAsana sevAmeM saMlagna haiM
/  hama unake zatavarSI honekI hRdayase kAmanA karate haiM  /  darabArIlAla
koThiyA 1. kheda hai ki isa mahAn sAhityakArakA 22 disambara 1968 ko nidhana ho
gayA  /  - prakAzaka, dvitIya saMskaraNa  /

Page #65 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Please provide the text you would like translated. I need the text to translate
it into English.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================


Page #66 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Table of Contents  **Topic** | **Page** | **Topic** | **Page** ------- |
-------- | -------- | -------- Transcendental-Auspicious-Vow | 2 | The
Immaculate Method of the Solitaries, Devagamas, etc. | 18 The Solitaries'
Immaculate Method | 4 | The Authority of the Aapta (Perfect Being) is not due to
Gravity The Immaculate Method of Sat-Asat-Manayata | 4 | The Authority of the
Aapta is not due to Gravity The Immaculate Method of Ubhayanaya and
Avaktanyaanaya | 5 | The Authority of the Aapta is not due to Gravity The
Immaculate Method of Astitvadharma and Nastitvadharma | 7 | The Authority of the
Aapta is not due to Gravity The Immaculate Method of Avinabhavi | 20 | The
Immaculate Method of Avinabhavi | 20 The Immaculate Method of Avinabhavi | 20 |
Who is the Omniscient and How? The Immaculate Method of Sabdagocara-Vishesya-
Vidhi | 21 | The Immaculate Method of Sarvathaikantvadi Aaptas The Immaculate
Method of Nishidhatmaka-Hetuse | 21 | The Immaculate Method of Sarvathaikantvadi
Aaptas The Immaculate Method of Shesh-Bhang | 22 | The Immaculate Method of
Sarvathaikantvadi Aaptas The Immaculate Method of Vastuka-Arthakriyakaaritva | 9
| The Immaculate Method of Sarvathaikantvadi Aaptas The Immaculate Method of
Karmadik-Na-Banate | 9 | The Immaculate Method of Sarvathaikantvadi Aaptas The
Immaculate Method of Dharma-Dharma-Arthabhinntata | 15 | The Immaculate Method
of Sarvathaikantvadi Aaptas The Immaculate Method of Bhavaikant-Sadoshata | 15 |
The Immaculate Method of Sarvathaikantvadi Aaptas The Immaculate Method of
Dharmonki-Mukhya-Gaunata | 23 | The Immaculate Method of Sarvathaikantvadi
Aaptas The Immaculate Method of Pragabhava-Pravdhvansabhava-Vilop | 23 | The
Immaculate Method of Sarvathaikantvadi Aaptas The Immaculate Method of Anekaadi-
Vikalponmen-Anyonyabhava-Atyantaabhava-Vilop | 23 | The Immaculate Method of
Sarvathaikantvadi Aaptas The Immaculate Method of Advaita-Ekant-Sadoshata | 24 |
The Immaculate Method of Sarvathaikantvadi Aaptas The Immaculate Method of
Abhavaikant-Sadoshata | 24 | The Immaculate Method of Sarvathaikantvadi Aaptas
The Immaculate Method of Karmaphaladhika-Koi-Bhi-Dvait | 25 | The Immaculate
Method of Sarvathaikantvadi Aaptas The Immaculate Method of Ukt-Ubhayanaya-
Avaktanyaanaya-Na-Banata | 25 | The Immaculate Method of Sarvathaikantvadi
Aaptas The Immaculate Method of Ekantonki-Sadoshata | 25 | The Immaculate Method
of Sarvathaikantvadi Aaptas The Immaculate Method of Hetu-Adi-Se-Advait-
Sidhhimen | 25 | The Immaculate Method of Sarvathaikantvadi Aaptas

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 viSaya-sUcI viSaya pRSTha viSaya pRSTha anuvAdakIya-maMgala-pratijJA 2 ukta
ekAntoMkI nirdoSa-vidhidevAgamAdi vibhUtiyA~ Apta- vyavasthA 18 gurutvakI hetu
nahIM sat-asat-mAnyatAkI nirdoSa vidhi bahirantavigrahAdimahodaya Apta-gurutvakA
hetu nahIM 4 ubhaya tathA avaktavyakI nirdoSa mAnyatAmeM hetu tIrthakaratva bhI
Apta-gurutvakA 20 astitvadharma nAstitvake sAtha hetu nahIM; taba guru kauna ? 5
avinAbhAvI 20 doSoM tathA AvaraNoMkI pUrNataH  /  nAstitvadharma astitvake sAtha
hAni saMbhava sarvajJa-saMsthiti 7 avinAbhAvI nirdoSa sarvajJa kauna aura kisa
/  zabdagocara-vizeSya vidhi niSedhAtmaka hetuse ? 21 sarvathaikAntavAdI AptoMkA
zeSa bhaMga bhI naya-yogase sveSTa pramANa-bAdhita avirodharUpa 22
sarvathaikAnta-raktoMke zubhA'zubha  /  vastukA arthakriyAkAritva kaba banatA
hai karmAdika nahIM banate 9 dharma-dharmameM arthabhinnatA aura . bhAvaikAntakI
sadoSatA 15 dharmoMkI mukhya-gauNatA 23 prAgabhAva-pradhvaMsAbhAvake vilopa ukta
bhaMgavatI prakriyAkI ekAmeM doSa 'nekAdi vikalpoMmeM bhI anyo'nyAbhAva-
atyantAbhAvake yojanA 23 vilopameM doSa 16 advata-ekAntakI sadoSatA 24
abhAvaikAntakI sadoSatA 17 karmaphalAdikA koI bhI dvaita  /  ukta ubhaya aura
avaktavya nahIM banatA  /  ekAntoMkI sadoSatA 17 hetu Adise advaita-siddhimeM 22
25

Page #67 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 50 **Topic** **Dvaita-apatti** Dvaita without Advaita is not possible 26
Separateness - The fault of the Ekant of isolation 27 In the absence of oneness,
progeny etc. are not formed Knowledge is completely different from the knowable
Faults in believing Faults in considering the words as general meaning The fault
of the said both and unsaid Ekants Separateness-oneness Ekants Non-existence-
existence Oneness - Separateness Ekants' faultless arrangement Devaagama Page
Topic 25 27 28  28 29 30 30 Vivaksha and Avivaksha are only real 31 The method
of non-contradiction of difference and non-difference in one thing 31 The fault
of the Ekant of eternal 33 How is the reaction if the evidence and factors are
eternal? 34 If the work is completely real, then birth etc. are not formed In
the Ekant of eternal, merit-demerit etc. are not formed The fault of the Ekant
of momentary 36 Fault in the complete non-existence of work 34 36 37 Page The
cause-effect etc. are not formed in the momentary Ekant The state of convention
and main meaning 37 38 The unsaid of the four-cornered alternative 38 The
Buddhist belief in the unsaid Faults in the said belief in the unsaid 39
Negation is real, not unreal 40 The unsaidness of the non-existent and the non-
existence of the existent If all religions are unsaid, then their statement is
not formed The cause of the unsaid is inability, absence or ignorance? In the
momentary Ekant, the irony of violence, the violent etc. 42 43  41 44 45 Fault
in considering destruction as causeless Fault in the belief of cause for the
beginning of deformed work The birth, existence and destruction of the body etc.
are not formed 46 The fault of the said both and unsaid Ekants The faultless
arrangement method of the eternal-momentary Ekants 47 49 49

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 50 viSaya dvaitApatti dvaita binA advaita nahIM hotA 26 pRthaktva - ekAntakI
sadoSatA 27 ekatvake lopameM santAnAdika nahIM banate jJAnako jJeyase sarvathA
bhinna mAnane meM doSa vacanoMko sAmAnyArthaka mAnanemeM doSa ukta ubhaya tathA
avaktavya ekAntoMkI sadoSatA pRthaktva-ekatva ekAntoMkA avastutva-vastutva
ekatva - pRthaktva ekAntoMkI nirdoSa vyavasthA devAgama pRSTha viSaya 25 27 28
28 29 30 30 vivakSA tathA avivakSA satkI hI hotI hai 31 eka vastumeM bheda aura
abhedakI avirodha vidhi 31 nityatva - ekAntakI sadoSatA 33 pramANa aura
kArakoMke nitya honepara vikriyA kaisI ? 34 kAryake sarvathA sat hone para
utpatti Adi nahIM banatI nityatvakAnta meM puNya-pApAdi nahIM bana kSaNika
-ekAntakI sadoSatA 36 kAryake sarvathA asat honepara doSApatti 34 36 37 pRSTha
kSaNikAntameM hetu - phalabhAvAdi nahIM banate saMvRti aura mukhyArthakI sthiti
37 38 catuSkoTi-vikalpake avaktavya 38 kI bauddha-mAnyatA avaktavyakI ukta
mAnyatAmeM doSa 39 niSedha satkA hotA hai asatkA nahIM 40 avastukI avaktavyatA
aura vastukI avastutA sarvadharmoke avaktavya honepara unakA kathana nahIM
banatA avAcyakA hetu azakti, abhAva yA abodha ? kSaNikAnta meM hiMsA hiMsakAdi
42 43 kI viDambanA 41 44 45 nAzako nirhetuka mAnanepara doSApatti
virUpakAryArambhake lie hetukI mAnyatA meM doSa skandhAdike sthityutpattivyaya
nahIM banatA 46 ukta ubhaya tathA avaktavya ekAntoMkI sadoSatA nitya-kSaNika -
ekAntoMkI nirdoSa vyavasthAvidhi 47 49 49

Page #68 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Page Table of Contents Page Subject The subject of product-expenditure is not
general, but the special nature of the cause and the scripture is faultless from
the perspective of the fifty Siddhis. 71 The difference between production, etc.
and the inner meaning-absoluteness - when it is independent of the Buddhist, the
non-existence. 72 The destruction-production state of a single substance - in
the absoluteness of mere cognition, the origination of different views. 73 The
triad nature of the essence of reality. 74 The absolute faultiness of the
external meaning-absoluteness in the work-cause. 75 The fault of the
absoluteness of difference. 76 The fault of the absoluteness of non-otherness
mentioned above and the unmentionable mentioned difference absoluteness. 78
Resolution of the doubt of the unity and plurality of the Vijnanadvaita school
in the cause of the name. 80 The faultiness of the mentioned both and the
unmentionable absoluteness of the siddhi from the divine depends on whether it
exists or not. 84 The faultiness of the mentioned both and the unmentionable
absoluteness of the divine-personal effort. 85 Faultless method.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pRSTha viSaya-sUcI viSaya pRSTha viSaya utpAda-vyaya sAmAnyakA nahIM, hetu
tathA Agamase nirdoSa vizeSakA hotA hai 50 siddhikI dRSTi 71 utpAdAdikI bhinnatA
aura antaraMgArthatA-ekAntakI bauddhanirapekSa honepara avastutA 51 mAnyatA
sadoSa 72 eka dravyakI nAzotpAdasthiti- vijJapti-mAtratAke ekAntameM meM bhinna
zAvoMkI utpatti 52  /  /  sAdhya-sAdhanAdi nahIM banate 73 vastutattvakI
trayAtmakatA 53  /  /  bariraMgArthatA-ekAntakI kArya-kAraNoMkI sarvathA
sadoSatA 74 bhinnatAkA ekAnta 54 ukta ubhaya tathA avaktavya ukta
bhinnataikAntameM doSa 56  /  ekAntoMkI sadoSatA 75 ananyatA-ekAMtakI sadoSatA
60 ukta donoM ekAntoMmeM apekSAkAryakI bhrAntise kAraNako bhedase sAmaMjasya
bhrAMti tathA ubhayAbhAvAdika 61 jIvazabda saMjJA honese kArya-kAraNAdikA ekatva
sabAhyArtha hai mAnanepara doSa saMjJAtva-hetumeM vyabhicAra-doSakA ukta ubhaya
tathA avaktavya nirAkaraNa ekAntoMkI sadoSatA 63 saMjJAtva-hetumeM
vijJAnAdaitavAdI ekatA aura anekatAkI kI zaMkAkA nirasana 78 nirdoSa vyavasthA
buddhi tathA zabdakI pramANatA aura siddhike ApekSika-anApekSika satyA'natakI
vyavasthA bAhyArthake ekAntoMko sadoSatA 66 hone na hone para nirbhara 80 ukta
ubhaya tathA avaktavya daivase siddhike ekAntakI ekAntIkI sadoSatA 68 sadoSatA
ukta ApekSikAdi ekaantoNkii| pauruSase siddhike ekAntakI nirdoSa-vyavasthA 68
sadoSatA sarvathA hetusiddha tathA Agama- ukta ubhaya tathA avaktavyasiddha
ekAntoMkI sadoSatA 69 ekAntoMkI sadoSatA 84 ukta ubhaya tathA avaktavya daiva-
puruSArtha-ekAntoMkI ekAntoMkI sadoSatA 70 nirdoSa-vidhi 85 76 77

Page #69 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Devagam Subject Page Subject On the page, the economic system of the syad-nipat
of sin-virtue from suffering-happiness 97 The inherent flaw of ekant 85 The
nature of syadvad 98 The syadvad of virtue-sin from suffering-happiness in
oneself and the inherent flaw of ekant in kevalgyan 88 Distinction-indication
The characteristics of the nay-hetu of the said both and the unsaid The inherent
flaw of ekants 90 The nature of dravya and the flawless system of virtue-sin of
distinctions 90 Information 100 The bondage from ignorance and the ekant of
liberation from knowledge of the relative and absolute nays 93 Situation 100 The
said both and the unsaid object is regulated by the law-sentence etc. The
inherent flaw of ekant 94 Regulated by the law-sentence etc. 101 Bondage-
liberation from ignorance-little knowledge - The speech that says the object of
that form is of that form is not true 102 The world is of various forms
according to karma-bondage and the bound jiva is of purity-impurity, the said-
different-sentence is non-existent 103 From distinction, two forms of
distinction. . The attainment of the intended-special is the purity-impurity of
the two powers, the sadi-anadi individual 95 The true means . 104 The
characteristics of the evidence and its syadvad-establishment distinction. . 96
The objective of apt-momamsa 106 The fruit of evidence 96 Translational-final-
auspiciousness ,, 105 .

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 devAgama viSaya pRSTha viSaya pRSTha parameM duHkha-sukhase pApa-puNyake
syAnipAtakI artha-vyavasthA 97 ekAntakI sadoSatA 85 syAdvAdakA svarUpa 98 svameM
duHkha-sukhase puNya-pApake syAdvAda aura kevalajJAnameM ekAntakI sadoSatA 88
bheda-nirdeza ukta ubhaya tathA avaktavya naya-hetukA lakSaNa ekAntoMkI sadoSatA
90 dravyakA svarUpa aura bhedoMkI pUNya-pApakI nirdoSa vyavasthA 90 sUcanA 100
ajJAnase bandhakA aura alpa- nirapekSa aura sApekSa nayoMkI jJAnase mokSakA
ekAnta 93 sthiti 100 ukta ubhaya aura avaktavya vastuko vidhi-vAkyAdi-dvArA
ekAntAkA sadASatA 94 niyamita kiyA jAtA hai 101 ajJAna-alpajJAnase bandha-mokSa
- tadatadrUpa vastuko tadrUpa hI kahanekI nirdoSa-vidhi 94 vAlI vANI satya nahIM
102 karmabandhAnusAra saMsAra vividharUpa aura baddha jIva zuddhi-azuddhike
taddhinna-vAkya avastu 103 bhedase do bhedarUpa  /  abhipreta-vizeSako prAptikA
zuddhi-azuddhi do zaktiyoMkI sAdi-anAdi vyakti 95 saccA sAdhana . 104 pramANakA
lakSaNa aura usake syAdvAda-saMsthiti bheda  /  96 Apta-momAMsAkA uddezya 106
pramANoMkA phala 96 anuvAdakIya-antya-maMgala ,, 105 .

Page #70 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Srimat Swami Samantabhadracharya Virachit Devagama [ Jindevagama-Jnapak- Stotra
] Aparanama Apta-Mimamsa [ Samyagmithyopavesa'rthavisesha - pratipattirūpa ]
Spashṭārthādīyukta-mūlānugāmī anuvādasē bhūṣita

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrImatsvAmi-samantabhadrAcArya viracita devAgama [ jinadevAgama-jJApaka- stotra
] aparanAma Apta-mImAMsA [ samyagmithyopavezA'rthavizeSa - pratipattirUpA ]
spaSTArthAdiyukta-mUlAnugAmI anuvAdase bhUSita

Page #71 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Salutations to Shri Samantabhadra Maharshi.  With auspicious intentions, I bow
to Shri Vardhamana, the embodiment of pure conduct, the one whose words are free
from fault, and whose nature is pure and auspicious.  For the benefit, peace,
and wisdom of the world, I explain the unparalleled *Devaagama*, a scripture of
supreme knowledge, which reveals the true meaning of right and wrong teachings.
This scripture is a unique work of Swami Samantabhadra.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI-samantabhadra-maharSaye namaH  /  anuvAdakIya-maMgala-pratijJA
zrIvartamAnamabhinamya samantabhadraM sadbodha-cArucaritA-'naghavAnasvarUpam  /
devAgama tadanupamaM vara-bodha-zAstraM vyAkhyAmi loka-hita-zAnti-viveka-
vRddhayai  /  /  'jo samyagjJAnamaya haiM, saccAritrarUpa haiM aura jinake
vacana nirdoSa haiM una samantabhadra (saba orase bhadrarUpa-maMgalamaya )
zrIvarddhamAna (bhagavAna mahAvIra ) ko tathA zrIvarddhamAna ( vidyAvibhUti,
kIrti Adi lakSmIse vRddhiko prApta hue ) samantabhadra( svAmI samantabhadrAcArya
) ko (alaga-alaga tathA eka sAtha ) namaskAra karake, maiM ( unakA vinamra
sevaka jugalakizora ) laukikajanoMko hita-vRddhi, zAnti-vRddhi aura viveka-
vRddhike liye usa 'devAgama' kI ( spaSTArtha Adise yukta hindI anuvAdarUpa )
vyAkhyA karatA hU~, jo ki uttama jJAnakI zAsti-zikSAko liye hue-samyak tathA
mithyA upadezake arthavizeSakI pratipattijAnakArI karAnevAlA-anupama zAstra hai
aura svAmI samantabhadrakI eka advitIya kRti hai|'

Page #72 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The first chapter, the glories of the arrival of the gods, etc., are not the
reasons for your being a revered teacher. The glories of the arrival of the
gods, aerial travel, and the use of fly whisks, etc., are seen even in
magicians. Therefore, you are not a great being. (1) (O Veerajina!) The gods
come to you on the occasion of your birth and other auspicious events, because
of the arrival of the gods. You travel through the sky effortlessly, without the
aid of any aircraft, because of your natural ability to do so. And the glories
of fly whisks, etc., such as fly whisks, umbrellas, thrones, divine drums,
showers of flowers, Ashoka trees, celestial discs, and divine sounds, as well as
the other glories of the Samavasarana, manifest themselves for you or on your
behalf. Because of this, you are not a revered teacher or a liberated soul for
us, those who are primarily concerned with testing, even though other people in
society or other worldly people may consider you a teacher, revered, or
liberated because of these extraordinary glories of the arrival of the gods,
etc. Because these extraordinary glories are also seen in magicians, who perform
illusions like the fulfillment of desires, etc. If you are a teacher, revered,
or liberated because of these glories, then those magicians are also teachers,
revered, and liberated; but they are not. Therefore, the aforementioned reasons
are tainted by the fault of contradiction and are therefore non-absolute
reasons. They do not separate your greatness and uniqueness.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prathama pariccheda devAgamAdi vibhUtiyA~ Apta-gurutvakI hetu nahIM davAgama-
nabhoyAna-cAmarAdi-vibhUtayaH  /  mAyAviSvapi dRzyante nAtastvamasi no mahAn  //
1 //  (he vIrajina !) devoMke Agamanake kAraNa-svargAdikake deva Apake janmAdika
kalyANakoMke avasarapara Apake pAsa Ate haiM isalie-AkAzameM gamanake kAraNa-
gaganameM binA kisI vimAnAdikI sahAyatAke ApakA sahaja-svabhAvase vicaraNa hotA
hai isa hetu-aura cAmarAdi-vibhUtiyoMke kAraNa-cuMvara, chatra, siMhAsana,
devadundubhi, puSpavRSTi, azokavRkSa, bhAmaNDala aura divyadhvani-jaise aSTa
prAtihAryoMkA tathA samavasaraNakI dUsarI vibhUtiyoMkA Apake athavA Apake
nimitta prAdurbhAva hotA hai isakI vajahase Apa hamAre-mujha-jaise parIkSA-
pradhAniyoMke-guru-pUjya athavA AptapuruSa nahIM haiM bhale hI samAjake dUsare
loga yA anya laukika jana ina devAgamanAdi atiziyoMke kAraNa Apako guru, pUjya
athavA Apta mAnate hoN| kyoMki ye atizaya mAyAviyoMmeM-maskaripUraNAdi
indrajAliyoMmeM ... bhI dekhe jAte haiN| inake kAraNa hI yadi Apa guru, pUjya
athavA Apta hoM to ve mAyAvI indrajAliye bhI guru, pUjya tathA Apta Thaharate
haiM; jaba ki ve vaise nahIM haiN| ataH ukta kAraNa-kalApa vyabhicAra-doSase
dUSita honeke kAraNa anaikAntika hetu hai, usase ApakI gurutA evaM viziSTatAko
pRthaka

Page #73 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
"Samantbhadra-Bharati [cannot be perceived in form and cannot be propagated to
others.'] (If it is said that these Maya-vis are not truly real - they are
artificial and your relationship with them is true, then who is the regulator
and judge? If the Agam is said to be the regulator and judge, then the Agam is
also of those Maya-vis - they, by their word-form Agam, declare those Ati-shyas
to be true even though they are Maya-char-jan-ya. And if your own Agam (Jain
Agam) is taken as evidence in this matter, then the said reason is Agam-ashrit,
and by it alone others cannot be convinced and made to believe in the true state
of affairs. Therefore, the said reason-kala-rupa reason is unable to express
your greatness and Aapta-ta and is therefore, in a way, negligible for those
like me.) Bahirant-vigraha-adi-mahodaya is not the reason for Aapta-gurutava,
Adhyatma Bahir-apy-esha vigraha-adi-mahodaya. Divya satyo div-aukassvapy-asti
raga-adi-matsu sah. ||2|| 'This which is your great rise of the inner and outer
body, the absence of body, hunger, thirst, old age, disease, untimely death,
etc. in the inner, and the radiant, unparalleled beauty, with the flow of white
color, blood, sweatlessness, fragrance and purity in the outer, which is also
divine, superhuman and true, not false in the form of Maya, but real and not
found in Maya-vis, (if you are considered great, venerable and Aapta-purusha
because of it, then this reason is also tainted by the fault of Vyabhichar;
because) it (vigraha-adi-mahodaya) is associated with raga-adi - raga"

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 samantabhadra-bhAratI [ pariccheda 1 rUpase lakSita nahIM kiyA jA sakatA aura
na dUsaroMpara use khyApita hI kiyA jA sakatA hai|' (yadi yaha kahA jAya ki una
mAyAviyoMmeM ye atizaya sacce nahIM hote-banAvaTI hote haiM aura Apake sAtha
inakA sambandha saccA hai to isakA niyAmaka aura nirNAyaka kauna ? Agamako yadi
niyAmaka aura nirNAyaka batalAyA jAya to Agama una mAyAviyoMkA bhI hai-ve apane
vacanarUpa Agamake dvArA una atizayoMko mAyAcArajanya honepara bhI satya hI
pratipAdita karate haiN| aura yadi apane hI Agama ( jainAgama ) ko isa viSayameM
pramANa mAnA jAya to ukta hetu AgamAzrita ThaharatA hai, aura eka mAtra usIke
dvArA dUsaroMko yathArtha vastu-sthitikA pratyaya evaM vizvAsa nahIM karAyA jA
sktaa| ataH ukta kAraNa-kalAparUpa hetu ApakI mahAnatA evaM AptatAko vyakta
karanemeM asamartha hai aura isIse mere jaisoMke lie eka prakArase upekSaNIya
hai  /  ) bahirantavigrahAdimahodaya Apta-gurutvakA hetu nahIM adhyAtma
bahirapyeSa vigrahAdi-mahodayaH  /  divyaH satyo divaukassvapyasti rAgAdimatsu
saH  /  / 2 /  /  'yaha jo Apake zarIrAdikA antarbAhya mahAn udaya
haiantaraMgameM zarIra kSudhA-tRSA-jarA-roga-apamRtyu Adike abhAvako aura
bAhyameM prabhApUrNa anupama saundaryake sAtha gaura-varNa-rudhirake saMcAra-
sahita niHsvedatA, surabhitA evaM nirmalatAko lie hue hai-jo sAtha hI divya
haiamAnuSika hai tathA satya haimAyAdirUpa mithyA na hokara vAstavika hai aura
mAyAviyoMmeM nahIM pAyA jAtA-, ( usIke kAraNa yadi Apako mahAn, pUjya evaM
AptapuruSa mAnA jAya, to yaha hetu bhI vyabhicAra-doSase dUSita hai; kyoMki )
vaha ( vigrahAdi-mahodaya ) rAgAdise yukta-rAga

Page #74 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  [Verse 3]  **Devagam** (divine knowledge) is found even in the gods of
heaven who are overwhelmed by the **kṣayās** (afflictions) of hatred, lust,
anger, pride, delusion, and greed. If this were the cause of greatness and
**āptatā** (perfection), then the gods of heaven, who are attached to passion,
hatred, lust, and anger, and are tainted by the **kṣayā**-faults, would also be
great, worthy of worship, and perfect. But they are not like that. Therefore,
even though this '**antar-bāhya-vigrahādi-mahodaya**' (greatness of inner and
outer form) is not found in the illusory beings, it is present in the gods who
have passion, etc., and therefore it is not a cause of distinction. Therefore,
even from this, there can be no separate understanding of you, like the perfect
ones.  (If it is said that the kind of **vigrahādi-mahodaya** that manifests in
you due to the absence of inferior actions is not present in the gods who are
attached to passion, etc., then what is the proof? The **vigrahādi-mahodaya** of
both is not directly perceived, so it cannot be compared. If one's own **āgama**
(scripture) is considered as proof in this matter, then this reason also becomes
dependent on the **āgama**, and only from this, others cannot be convinced of
the true state of affairs. Therefore, this **vigrahādi-mahodaya** reason is also
incapable of expressing your greatness, and therefore it is negligible for those
like me.)  **Tīrthankaratva** (being a Tīrthankara) is also not the cause of
**āpta-gurutva** (perfection and being a teacher); then who is the teacher?
**Tīrthankṛtsamyānām ca paraspara-virodhatah |** **Sarveṣām āptatā nāsti, kaścid
eva bhaved guruḥ || 3 ||**  (If it is said that you are a **Tīrthankara** - the
originator of the **āgama**-**tīrtha** (scripture-ford) as a means of crossing
over from the world, and therefore you are great because you are
**āpta**-**sarvajña** (perfect and omniscient), then this also does not seem
appropriate; because other **sugatas** (liberated ones) are also called
**Tīrthankaras**, and they also cross over from the world or attain liberation.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 kArikA 3] devAgama dveSa-kAma-krodha-mAna-mAyA-lobhAdi kaSAyoMse abhibhUta-
svargake devoMmeM bhI pAyA jAtA hai-vahI yadi mahAnatA evaM AptatAkA hetu ho to
svargoMke rAgI, dvaSI, kAmI tathA krodhAdi-kaSAya-doSoMse dUSita deva bhI mahAn
pUjya evaM Apta ThahareM; parantu ve vaise nahIM haiM, ataH isa 'antarbAhya-
vigrahAdi-mahodaya' vizeSaNake mAyAviyoMmeM na pAye jAnepara bhI rAgAdimAn
devoMmeM usakA sattva honeke kAraNa vaha vyAvRtti-hetuka nahIM rahatA aura
isalie usase bhI Apa-jaise Apta-puruSoMkA koI pRthak bodha nahIM ho sktaa|' _ (
yadi yaha kahA jAya ki ghAtiyA karmoMkA abhAva honepara jisa prakArakA
vigrahAdi-mahodaya Apake prakaTa hotA hai usa prakArakA vigrahAdi-mahodaya
rAgAdiyukta devoMmeM nahIM hotA to isakA kyA pramANa ? donoMkA vigrahAdi-
mahodaya apane pratyakSa nahIM hai, jisase tulanA kI jA sake  /  yadi apane hI
Agamako isa viSayameM pramANa mAnA jAya to yaha hetu bhI AgamAzrita ThaharatA
hai aura eka mAtra isIse dUsaroMko yathArtha vastu-sthitikA pratyaya evaM
vizvAsa nahIM karAyA jA sakatA  /  ataH yaha vigrahAdi-mahodaya hetu bhI ApakI
mahAnatA vyakta karane meM asamartha honese mere jaisoMke lie upekSaNIya hai|)
tIrthakaratva bhI Apta-gurutvakA hetu nahIM; taba guru kauna ?
tIrthakRtsamayAnAM ca prspr-virodhtH| sarveSAmAptatA nAsti, kazcideva
bhavedguruH  /  / 3 /  /  '( yadi yaha kahA jAya ki Apa tIrthaMkara haiM-
saMsArase pAra utaraneke upAyasvarUpa Agama-tIrthake pravartaka haiM aura isalie
Apta-sarvajJa honese mahAna haiM, to yaha kahanA bhI samucita pratIta nahIM
hotA; kyoMki tIrthaMkara to dUsare sugatAdika bhI kahalAte haiM aura ve bhI
saMsArase pAra utarane athavA nirvRti prApta karaneke

Page #75 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Samantabhadra-Bharati  [ **Chapter 1**  If the propagators of the Agam
Tirthas are considered to be Upayasvarupa, then they are all Aapta-Sarvajnas.
Therefore, the Tirthankarattva is also tainted by the Vyabhichar-dosha. And if
all the Tirthankaras are considered to be Aapta or Sarvajnas, then this also
does not work; because] there is mutual contradiction in the Agamas of the
Tirthankaras, which should not be the case if they are all Aapta. Therefore, due
to this contradiction, the Aaptata-Nirdosha-Sarvajnatva of all the Tirthankaras
is not established.  [ If it is accepted and asked whether there is any Aapta
among all the Tirthankaras who are the propagators of these mutually
contradictory Agamas, and if so, who is he? The answer is simply that] there may
be an Aapta Tirthankara among them, and he may be the one who has achieved the
full development of Chit-Chaitanya, i.e., in whom the doshas and avaranas have
been completely eliminated, and pure Chaitanya has emerged.  The complete
elimination of doshas and avaranas is possible due to exaggeration. [ **Verse
4** ]  "Sometimes, just as external and internal impurities are eliminated from
their causes,..."  [ If it is said that there is no such man in whom the
complete elimination of doshas like ignorance, attachment, etc., and their
causal karmic avaranas is possible, then this is also not correct; because] the
complete elimination of doshas and their causes is seen in many men. In many
men, there is a gradual decrease in doshas like ignorance, attachment, aversion,
desire, anger, etc., and their causes. Therefore, it is possible for a
particular man to have a complete absence of these opposing causes, just as (in
gold, etc.) external and internal impurities are eliminated due to opposing
causes.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 samantabhadra-bhAratI [ pariccheda 1 upAyasvarUpa AgamatIrthake pravartaka mAne
jAte haiM, taba ve saba bhI Apta-sarvajJa Thaharate haiM, ataH tIrthakaratva
hetu bhI vyabhicAra-doSase dUSita hai| aura yadi sabhI tIrthaMkaroMko Apta
athavA sarvajJa mAnA jAya to yaha bAta bhI nahIM banatI; kyoMki ) tIrthaMkaroMke
AgamoMmeM paraspara virodha pAyA jAtA hai, jo ki sabhIke Apta honepara na honA
caahie| ataH isa virodhadoSake kAraNa sabhI tIrthaMkaroMke AptatA-nirdoSa-
sarvajJatA-ghaTita nahIM hotii| (ise ThIka mAnakara yadi yaha pUchA jAya ki kyA
una . paraspara-viruddha Agamake prarUpaka sabhI tIrthaMkaroMmeM koI eka bhI
Apta nahIM hai aura yadi hai to vaha kauna hai ? isakA uttara itanA hI hai ki )
unameM koI tIrthakara Apta avazya ho sakatA hai aura vaha vahI puruSa ho sakatA
hai jo cit hI ho-caitanyake pUrNa vikAsako lie hue ho, arthAt jisameM doSoM
tathA AvaraNoMkI pUrNataH hAni hokara zuddha caitanya nikhara AyA ho  / ' doSoM
tathA AvaraNoMkI pUrNataH hAni saMbhava doSA''varaNayorhAniniHzeSA'styatizAyanAt
/  kvacidyathA svahetubhyo bahirantarmalakSayaH  /  / 4 /  /  '( yadi yaha kahA
jAya ki aisA koI bhI puruSa nahIM hai jisameM ajJAna-rAgAdika doSoM tathA unake
kAraNabhUta karma-AvaraNoMkI pUrNataH hAni sambhava ho to yaha bhI ThIka nahIM
haiM; kyoMki ) doSoM tathA doSoMke kAraNoMkI kahIM-kahIM sAtizaya hAni dekhane
meM AtI haianeka puruSoMmeM ajJAna tathA rAga-dveSa-kAma-krodhAdika doSoMkI evaM
unake kAraNoMkI uttarottara bahuta kamI pAI jAtI hai aura isalie kisI puruSa-
vizeSameM virodhI kAraNoMko pAkara unakA pUrNataH abhAva honA usI prakAra
sambhava hai jisa prakAra ki ( suvarNAdikameM ) mala-virodhI kAraNoMko pAkara
bAhya aura antaraMga

Page #76 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Karika 5  The karma-mala, which is in the form of both substance and
emotion, is completely destroyed. Just as gold, bound by impurities like soot,
becomes free from all external and internal impurities and transforms into its
pure gold form by obtaining suitable means like fire, similarly, the bhavya
jiva, bound by karma-mala, becomes free from it completely by the power of
suitable means like samyag-darshan, and transforms into its pure atma form.
Therefore, it is not impossible for a particular person to completely lose their
faults and their causes. The person who completely loses these faults and
coverings is the apt, or the faultless, omniscient, and the world-teacher.  The
omniscient state is directly perceived, just as the subtle, the distant, and the
hidden are perceived. The omniscient state is inferred, just as fire is
inferred.  (If it is said that even after the complete loss of faults and
coverings, a person cannot directly know all things related to the past and
future, all present things that are very distant, and all subtle things, then
that is not correct; because) subtle things like atoms, which are different in
nature, distant things like Rama and Ravana, which are separated by time, and
distant things like Mount Meru and the Himalayas, which are separated by space,
are all inferable (the subject of inference or proof) and therefore are directly
perceived by someone.   1. The subject of proof is called 'pramaya'. According
to the statement of Vasunanda Acharya, 'anumeya' means 'those who are to be
known by inference are 'anumeya' and 'pramaya'. Thus, the reason for 'anumeya'
is also implied in the reason for 'pramaya'.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 kArikA 5 ] devAgama malakA pUrNataH kSaya ho jAtA hai-arthAt jisa prakAra
kiTTakAlimAdi malase baddha huA suvarNa agniprayogAdirUpa yogya sAdhanoMko
pAkara usa sAre bAharI tathA bhItarI malase vihIna huA apane zuddha
suvarNarUpameM pariNata ho jAtA hai usI prakAra dravya tathA bhAvarUpa
karmamalase baddha huA bhavya jIva samyagdarzanAdi yogya sAdhanoMke balapara usa
karmamalako pUrNarUpase dUra karake apane zuddhAtmarUpameM pariNata ho jAtA hai|
ataH kisI puruSa-vizeSameM doSoM tathA unake kAraNoMkI pUrNataH hAni honA
asambhava nahIM hai  /  jisa puruSameM doSoM tathA AvaraNoMkI yaha niHzeSa hAni
hotI hai vahI puruSa Apta athavA nirdoSa sarvajJa evaM lokaguru hotA hai|'
sarvajJa-saMsthiti sUkSmAntarita-dUrArthAH pratyakSAH kasyacidyathA  /
anumeyatvato'gnyAdiriti sarvajJa-saMsthitiH  /  / 5 /  /  ( yadi yaha kahA jAya
ki doSoM tathA AvaraNoMkI pUrNataH hAni honepara bhI koI manuSya atIta-
anAgatakAla-sambandhI saba padArthoMko, atidUravartI sAre vartamAna padArthoM ko
aura sampUrNa sUkSmapadArthoMko sAkSAt rUpase nahIM jAna sakatA hai to vaha
ThIka nahIM hai; kyoMki, ) sUkSmapadArtha-svabhAvaviprakarSi paramANu Adika-,
antarita padArtha-kAlase antarako liye hue kAlaviprakarSi rAmarAvaNAdika-, aura
dUravartI padArtha kSetrase antarako liye hue kSetraviprakarSi meru-
himavAnAdika-, anumeya ( anumAnakA athavA pramANakA viSaya' ) honese kisI-na-
kisIke pratyakSa jarUra haiM; 1. pramANakA viSaya 'prameya' kahalAtA hai|
anumeyakA artha 'anugataM meyaM mAnaM yeSAM te anumeyAH prameyA ityarthaH' isa
vasunaMdyAcAryake vAkyAnusAra 'prameya' bhI hotA hai aura isa taraha anumeyatva
hetumeM prameyatva hetu bhI garbhita hai  /

Page #77 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Samantabhadra-Bharati [Chapter 1: Just as fire and other substances are the
subject of inference or proof, they are certainly the object of someone's direct
perception. The one whose subtle, internal, and distant objects are directly
perceived is omniscient. Thus, the omniscient one's correct state, arrangement,
or attainment is well-established.]  "O valiant Jina! You are the faultless one,
devoid of ignorance and passions like attachment, free from attachment, and
omniscient - you are the very Self. Because you are 'Yukti-Shastra-Avirodi-Vak'
- your speech (on any subject) does not contradict reason and scriptures. And
this non-contradiction is evident in that your 'Ista' - the desired truth, the
doctrine of Anekanta - is not contradicted by the 'Prasiddha' - by proof or by
the established 'Ekant' of others. Whereas the 'Ista' of others (like Kapila,
Sugata, etc.) - their 'Ekant' views of absolute permanence, impermanence, etc. -
are contradicted not only by direct perception but also by the established
'Anekanta'. Therefore, none of the proponents of these absolute 'Ekant' views
are 'Yukti-Shastra-Avirodi-Vak', and hence, none are faultless and omniscient."
"The 'Ista' of those who are completely attached to their own views, the
'Aapta's', is contradicted by proof. The 'Ista' of those who are completely
'Ekant' proponents, who are outside your nectar-like doctrine, is contradicted
by perception. Those who are consumed by their own 'Aapta' pride, their 'Ista'
is contradicted by what is seen."

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 samantabhadra-bhAratI [pariccheda 1 jaise agni Adika padArtha jo anumAna yA
pramANakA viSaya haiM ve kisIke pratyakSa jarUra haiN| jisake sUkSma, antarita
aura dUravartI padArtha pratyakSa haiM vaha sarvajJa haiN| isa prakAra
sarvajJako samyaka sthiti, vyavasthA athavA siddhi bhale prakAra sughaTita hai|'
nirdoSa sarvajJa kauna aura kisa hetuse sa tvamevA'si nirdoSo yukti-
zAstrAvirodhivAk avirodho yadiSTaM te prasiddhena na bAdhyate  // 6 //  (he vIra
jina !) vaha nirdoSa-ajJAna tathA rAgAdidoSoMse rahita vItarAga aura sarvajJa-
Apa hI haiM, kyoMki Apa yukti-zAstrA'virodhivAk haiM-ApakA vacana ( kisI bhI
tattvaviSayameM ) yukti aura zAstrake virodhako liye hue nahIM hai| aura yaha
avirodha isa tarahase lakSita hotA hai ki ApakA jo iSTa hai-mokSAditattvarUpa
abhimata-anekAntazAsana hai-vaha prasiddhase-pramANase athavA para-prasiddha
ekAntase-bAdhita nahIM hai; jaba ki dUsaroMkA (kapila-sugatAdikakA) jo sarvathA
nityavAdaanityavAdAdirUpa ekAnta abhimata ( iSTa ) hai vaha pratyakSapramANase
hI nahIM kintu para-prasiddha anekAntase bhI bAdhita hai aura isalie una
sarvathA ekAntamatoMke nAyakoMmeMse koI bhI yukti-zAstrAvirodhivAk na honese
nirdoSa evaM sarvajJa nahIM haiN|' sarvathaM kAntavAdI AptoMkA sveSTa pramANa-
bAdhita tvanmatA'mRta-bAhyAnAM sarvathaikAnta-vAdinAm  /  AptAbhimAna-dagdhAnAM
svaSTaM dRSTena bAdhyate  /  / 7 /  /  'jo loga Apake matarUpI amRtase-
anekAntAtmaka-vastutattvake pratipAdaka Agama ( zAsana ) se, jo ki
duHkhanivRtti-lakSaNa paramAnandamaya mukti-sukhakA nimitta honese amRtarUpa
hai-bAhya

Page #78 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Verse 7-8]  They do not accept the teachings of the Devagamas and hold aversion
towards them. They are completely one-sided, in terms of their own nature, the
nature of others, and in terms of rules and prohibitions. They hold and
propagate only one religion, believing in eternalism and other such doctrines.
They are burnt by the pride of being an "apta" (knowledgeable person), even
though they are not truly "apta" or omniscient. They are like those who are
burnt or scorched by the ego of "we are aptas." Their own cherished belief,
which is completely one-sided, is contradicted by direct evidence. In direct
perception, no object is seen as completely eternal or non-eternal, completely
one or many, completely existent or non-existent, etc. Or, in other words, their
belief is invalid because it is in direct conflict with the reality of objects,
which is established by direct perception as being multi-faceted.  Those who are
completely one-sided in their views, O valiant Lord, do not produce good or bad
karma, nor do they experience the afterlife (another birth).  Those who are
attached to one-sided views, O Lord, are enemies of themselves and others. [8]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 kArikA 7-8] devAgama haiMuse na mAnakara usase dvaSa rakhate haiM, sarvathA
ekAntavAdI haiM-svarUpa-pararUpa tathA vidhi-niSedharUpa sabhI. prakAroMse eka
hI dharma nityatvAdiko mAnane evaM pratipAdana karanevAle haiM aura
AptA'bhimAnase dagdha haiM-vastutaH Apta-sarvajJa na hote hue bhI 'hama Apta
haiM' isa ahaMkArase bhune hue athavA jale hueke samAna haiM-,unakA jo apanA
iSTa haiM-sarvathA ekAntAtmaka abhimata hai-vaha pratyakSa pramANase bAdhita
hai- pratyakSameM koI bhI vastu sarvathA nitya yA anityarUpa, sarvathA eka yA
anekarUpa, sarvathA bhAva yA abhAvarUpa ityAdi najara nahIM AtI-athavA yoM
kahiye ki pratyakSa-siddha anekAntAtmaka vastu-tattvake sAtha sAkSAt virodhako
liye hue honeke kAraNa amAnya hai|' sarvathaikAnta-raktoMke zubhA'zubhakarmAdika
nahIM banate kuzalA'kuzalaM karma paralokazca na avacit  /  ekAnta-graha-rakteSu
nAtha sva-para cairiSu  /  / 8 /  /  'jo loga ekAntake grahaNa-svIkaraNama
Asakta haiM, athavA ekAntarUpa grahake vazIbhUta hue usIke raMgame raMge haiM--
sarvathA ekAnta-pakSake pakSapAtI evaM bhakta bane hue haiM aura anekAntako
nahIM mAnate, vastuMmeM aneka guNa-dharmoM (antoM) ke hote hue bhI use eka hI
guNa-dharma ( anta ) rUpa aMgIkAra karate haiM-( aura isIse ) jo sva-parake
bairI haiM-dUsaroMke siddhAntoMkA virodha kara unhoMke zatru nahIM, kintu apane
eka siddhAntase apane dUsare siddhAntoMkA virodha kara aura isa taraha apane
kisI bhI siddhAntako pratiSThita karane meM samartha na hokara apane bhI zatru
bane hue haiM-, unameMse prAyaH kisIke bhI yahA~ athavA kisIke bhI matameM, he
vIra bhagavan ! na to koI zubha karma banatA hai, na azubha karma, na paraloka (
anya janma ) banatA hai aura ( cakArase ) yaha loka

Page #79 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
10 Samantabhadra-Bharati [Chapter 1 (Birth) does not even form, the fruits of
good and bad karmas do not form either, and neither do bondage and liberation
form - the correct arrangement of any principle or substance does not sit. And
in this way, their opinion is not only directly obstructed, but it is also an
obstruction to their own beloved from their own beloved.] Explanation: In
reality, every object is anekantaatmak - it has many ant-dharmas, guna-
svabhavas, angas or anshas. A person who sees any object from one side, who
looks at only one of its ant-dharmas or guna-svabhavas, cannot be called a
samyagdrasht (one who sees-recognizes it correctly). To be a samyagdrasht, one
must see the object from all sides and look at all its ends, angas, dharmas or
svabhavas. A person who judges a coin by seeing only one side of it, does not
understand that coin when he sees it lying on its other side, and therefore is
deceived. For this reason, anekanta-drishti is called samyagdristi and ekanta-
drishti is called mithyadristi. A person who sees only one end, anga, dharma or
guna-svabhavas of an object and considers it to be of that very nature - does
not accept another form - and in this way creates his own ekanta-धारणा and keeps
it nourished somehow, is called 'ekanta-graharakt', ekanta-pakshapaati or
sarvatha ekanta-vaadi. Such people, like the blind-born men who make the law of
the elephant's form, fight among themselves and become enemies of each other,
where they become enemies, they consider themselves to be the elephant's 1.
Anekantaatmadrististe sati shunyyo viparyayaha. Tatah sarva mrishuktam syat
tadayuktam svaghatatah || - Swayambhustotra

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 10 samantabhadra-bhAratI [pariccheda 1 ( janma ) bhI nahIM banatA, zubha-azubha
karmoMkA phala bhI nahIM banatA aura na bandha tathA mokSa hI banate haiM-kisI
bhI tattva athavA padArthakI samyak vyavasthA nahIM baitthtii| aura isa taraha
unakA mata pratyakSase hI bAdhita nahIM, balki apane iSTase apane iSTakA bhI
bAdhaka hai|' vyAkhyAvAstavameM pratyeka vastu anekAntAtmaka hai-usameM aneka
anta-dharma, guNa-svabhAva, aMga athavA aMza haiN| jo manuSya kisI bhI vastuko
eka taraphase dekhatA haiusake eka hI antadharma athavA guNa-svabhAvapara dRSTi
DAlatA haivaha usakA samyagdraSTA ( use ThIka taurase dekhane-pahacAnanevAlA )
nahIM kahalA sktaa| samyagdraSTA honeke liye use usa vastuko saba orase dekhanA
cAhiye aura usake saba antoM, aMgoM, dharmoM athavA svabhAvoMpara najara DAlanI
cAhiye  /  sikkeke eka hI mukhako dekhakara sikkekA nirNaya karanevAlA usa
sikkeko dUsare mukhase par3A dekhakara vaha sikkA nahIM samajhatA aura isaliye
dhokhA khAtA hai| isIse anekAntadRSTiko samyagdRSTi aura ekAntadRSTiko
mithyAdRSTi kahA hai| jo manuSya kisI vastuke eka hI anta, aMga, dharma athavA
guNa-svabhAvako dekhakara use usa hI svarUpa mAnatA hai-dUsare rUpa svIkAra
nahIM karatA-aura isa taraha apanI ekAnta-dhAraNA banA letA hai aura use hI
jaise taise pUSTa kiyA karatA hai, usako 'ekAnta-graharakta', ekAntapakSapAtI
athavA sarvathA ekAntavAdI kahate haiN| aise manuSya hAthIke svarUpakA vidhAna
karanevAle janmAndha puruSoMkI taraha ApasameM lar3ate-jhagar3ate haiM aura eka
dUsarese zatrutA dhAraNa karake jahA~ parake bairI banate haiM vahA~ apaneko
hAthIke 1. anekAntAtmadRSTiste satI zUnyo viparyayaH  /  tataH sarva mRSoktaM
syAttadayuktaM svaghAtataH  //  -svayambhUstotra

Page #80 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Karika 8] Devagama 11 Like those blind by birth who, without understanding the
true nature of things, pursue their own harm and are never able to properly
utilize an elephant for the work of an elephant, those who remain ignorant of
the true nature of things pursue their own harm and are unable to properly
utilize a substance without abandoning or disregarding their own beliefs. And if
they do abandon or disregard their beliefs in order to properly utilize a
substance, they end up contradicting their own principles. In both ways, they
become their own enemies.  An example is provided to further clarify this: A
person observes a physician administering poison to a patient, and also hears
the physician claim that the poison is life-giving, intoxicating, and enhancing
vitality. The person also experiences the patient becoming healthy and robust
after consuming the poison. From this, the person forms the firm belief that the
poison is life-giving, intoxicating, and enhancing vitality. However, the person
is unaware that the poison also has the quality of killing and destroying life,
and its use cannot be generalized to all diseases and conditions. The person
also does not know that the physician was aware of the poison's lethal quality
and would administer it along with other medicines to suppress its harmful
effects, or use it to eliminate the organisms harming the patient's vitality.
Thus, the person, based on their one-sided belief, ends up administering the
poison to many patients, driven by the urge to quickly cure them.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 kArikA 8 ] devAgama 11 viSaya meM ajJAnI rakhakara apanA bhI ahita sAdhana
karanevAle tathA kabhI bhI hAthIse hAthIkA kAma lene meM samartha na ho
sakanevAle una janmAndhoM kI taraha, apaneko vastusvarUpa se anabhijJa rakhakara
apanA bhI ahita sAdhana karate haiM aura apanI mAnyatAko chor3e athavA usakI
upekSA kiye binA kabhI bhI usa vastuse usa vastukA ThIka kAma lene meM samartha
nahIM ho sakate aura ThIka kAma leneke liye mAnyatAko chor3ane athavA usakI
upekSA karanepara svasiddhAntavirodhI Thaharate haiM; isa taraha donoM hI
prakAra se ve apane bhI vairI hote hai  /  nIce eka udAharaNa dvArA isa bAtako
aura bhI spaSTa karake batalAyA jAtA haiM eka manuSya kisI vaidyako eka rogIpara
kucalekA prayoga karatA huA dekhatA hai aura yaha kahate hue bhI sunatA hai ki
'kucalA jIvanadAtA hai, rogako nazAtA hai aura jIvanI zaktiko bar3hAtA hai  / '
sAtha hI, vaha yaha bhI anubhava karatA hai ki vaha rogI kucale - ke khAnese
acchA tandurusta tathA hRSTa-puSTa ho gayA  /  isaparase vaha apanI yaha ekAnta
dhAraNA banA letA hai ki kucalA jIvanadAtA haiM, roga nazAtA hai aura jIvanI
zaktiko bar3hAkara manuSyako hRSTapuSTa banAtA hai'  /  use mAlUma nahIM ki
kucalemeM mAranekA-jIvanako naSTa kara denekA - bhI guNa hai, aura usakA prayoga
saba rogoM tathA saba avasthAoMmeM samAnarUpase nahIM kiyA jA sakatA; na use
mAtrAkI ThIka khabara hai, aura na yahI patA hai ki vaha vaidya bhI kucaleke
dUsare mArakaguNase paricita thA, aura isaliye jaba vaha use jIvanI zaktiko
bar3hAneke kAma meM lAtA thA taba vaha dUsarI davAiyoMke sAtha meM usakA prayoga
karake usakI mAraka zaktiko dabA detA thA athavA use una jIva-jantuoMke ghAtake
kAma meM letA thA jo rogI ke zarIra meM jIvanI zaktiko naSTa kara rahe hoM  /
aura isaliye vaha manuSya apanI usa ekAnta dhAraNAke anusAra aneka rogiyoM ko
kucalA detA hai tathA jaldI acchA karanekI dhuna meM

Page #81 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 12 ## Samantabhadra-Bharati [ Chapter 1  **Gives too much even.** As a
result, the patients die or suffer more pain and agony, and that person, not
knowing the proper use of the poison, suffers punishment due to its misuse, and
sometimes even consumes the poison himself and loses his life. In this way, just
as one who is obsessed with poison is an enemy to himself and others, so too
should those who are obsessed with one-sidedness be considered enemies to
themselves and others.  To tell the truth, those who are averse to **anekanta**
are also averse to their own one-sidedness; because without **anekanta**, they
cannot establish one-sidedness - without **anekanta**, the existence of one-
sidedness cannot come about in the same way that the existence of the particular
cannot come about without the general, or the existence of the **paryaya**
cannot come about without the **dravya**. Just as the general and the
particular, existence and non-existence, and eternal and non-eternal qualities
are mutually interdependent, without one the other cannot exist - in the same
way, there is also a mutual interdependence between one-sidedness and
**anekanta**. All these qualities with their opposites exist in the same object,
mutually dependent on each other. For example, the ring finger is both small and
large; it is larger than the little finger and smaller than the middle finger.
In this way, both smallness and largeness are relative qualities in the ring
finger, or there are two interdependent qualities of smallness in the form of
existence and non-existence of smallness - without relativity, neither quality
exists. Similarly, each bank of a river has both the qualities of this side and
that side, and they remain non-contradictory only because they are relative.
Qualities that exist in the same object, mutually dependent on each other, are
beneficial (friends) to themselves and others, and they are also...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 12 samantabhadra-bhAratI [ pariccheda 1 adhika mAtrAmeM bhI de detA hai| natIjA
yaha hotA hai ki ve rogI mara jAte haiM yA adhika kaSTa tathA vedanA uThAte haiM
aura vaha manuSya kucalekA ThIka prayoga na jAnakara usakA mithyA prayoga
karaneke kAraNa daNDa pAtA hai, tathA kabhI svayaM kucalA khAkara apanI
prANahAni bhI kara DAlatA hai  /  isa taraha kucaleke viSaya meM ekAnta Agraha
rakhanevAlA jisa prakAra sva-para-vairI hotA hai usI prakAra dUsarI vastuoMke
viSaya meM bhI ekAnta haTha pakar3anevAloM ko sva-para-vairI samajhanA cAhiye  /
saca pUchiye to jo anekAntake dvaSI haiM ve apane ekAntake bhI dveSI haiM;
kyoMki anekAntake binA ve ekAntako pratiSThita nahIM kara sakate - anekAntake
binA ekAntakA astitva usI taraha nahIM bana sakatA jisa taraha ki sAmAnyake binA
vizeSakA yA dravya ke binA paryAyakA astitva nahIM banatA  /  sAmAnya aura
vizeSa, astitva aura nAstitva tathA nityatva aura anityatva dharma jisa prakAra
paraspara meM avinAbhAva- sambandhako liye hue haiMekake binA dUsarekA sadbhAva
nahIM banatA -- usI prakAra ekAnta aura anekAnta meM bhI paraspara avinAbhAva -
sambandha hai  /  ye saba sapratipakSadharma eka hI vastumeM paraspara apekSAko
lie hue hote haiM  /  udAharaNa ke taurapara anAmikA aMgulI choTI bhI hai aura
bar3I bhI kaniSThAse vaha bar3I hai aura madhyamAse choTI hai  /  isa taraha
anAmikAmeM choTApana aura bar3Apana donoM dharma sApekSa haiM, athavA choTI hai
aura choTI nahIM hai aise choTepanake astitva aura nAstitvarUpa do avinAbhAvI
dharma bhI usameM sApekSarUpase pAye jAte haiM- apekSAko chor3a denepara
donoMmeMsa koI bhI dharma nahIM banatA  /  isI prakAra nadIke pratyeka taTameM
isa pArapana aura usa pArapanake donoM dharmaM hote haiM aura ve sApekSa honese
hI avirodharUpa rahate haiM  /  jo dharma eka hI vastumeM paraspara apekSAko
liye hue hote haiM ve apane aura dUsareko upakArI ( mitra ) hote haiM aura apanI
tathA

Page #82 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Karika 8  Devaagama states that entities exist due to the existence of
others. And those religions that are not mutually dependent are harmful to
themselves and others (enemies), they are self-destructive, and therefore cannot
sustain their own existence or that of others.  Therefore, in his
*Svayambhustotra*, Swami Samantabhadra clearly states this principle through the
following verses:  "Mithaanapeshah sva-para-pranashinah" "Parasparekshah sva-
paropakarinah"  You declare the absolute Nayas as false and the relative Nayas
as true. In your opinion, the subject of absolute Nayas is non-existent because
it is not a cause of action, while the subject of relative Nayas is real because
it is a cause of action (purposeful). The subject of absolute Nayas is 'mithya
ekant' and the subject of relative Nayas is 'samyak ekant'. And this 'samyak
ekant' is inseparably connected with the presented anekanta. Those who are
devotees of 'mithya ekant' are called 'ekantgraharavat', they are called
'sarvatha ekantvadi' and they should be considered 'sva-para-vairi' here. Those
who are devotees of 'samyak ekant' are not called 'ekantgraharakt', their leader
is the word 'syat', they accept that ekant in some way, therefore they are not
completely attached to it, nor do they oppose or negate the opposing dharma.
When considering in a relative state, there is no expectation of the opposing
dharma, so there is a kind of neglect towards it, but there is no opposition or
negation. And therefore, they cannot be called 'sva-para-vairi'. Therefore,
Swami Samantabhadra is absolutely correct in saying that "those who are
'ekantgraharakt' are 'sva-para-vairi'."  1.  Nirapeksha naya mithya: saapeksha
vastu te'rthkrut. - Devaagama 108

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 kArikA 8 ] devAgama dusarekI sattAko banAye rakhate haiN| aura jo dharma
paraspara apekSAko liye hue nahIM hote ve apane aura dUsareke apakArI ( zatru )
hote haiMsva-para-praNAzaka hote haiM, aura isaliye na apanI sattAko kAyama
rakha sakate haiM aura na duusrekii| isIse svAmI samantabhadrane apane
svayaMbhUstotrameM bhI "mithA'napekSAH sva-para-praNAzinaH" "parasparekSA sva-
paropakAriNaH" ina vAkyoMke dvArA isI siddhAntakI spaSTa ghoSaNA kI hai| Apa
nirapekSa nayoMko mithyA aura sApekSa nayoMko samyak batalAte haiM  /  Apake
vicArase nirapekSa nayoMkA viSaya arthakriyAkArI na honese avastu hai aura
sApekSa nayoMkA viSaya arthakRt ( prayojanasAdhaka ) honese vastutattva hai',
nirapekSa nayoMkA viSaya 'mithyA ekAnta' aura sApekSa nayoMkA viSaya 'samyak
ekAnta' hai| aura yaha samyak ekAnta hI prastuta anekAntake sAtha
avinAbhAvasambandhako liye hue hai  /  jo mithyA ekAntake upAsaka hote haiM
unheM hI 'ekAntagraharavata' kahA gayA hai, ve hI 'sarvathA ekAntavAdI' kahalAte
haiM aura unheM hI yahA~ 'svaparavairI' samajhanA cAhiye  /  jo samyak ekAntake
upAsaka hote haiM unheM 'ekAntagraharakta' nahIM kahate, unakA netA 'syAt' pada
hotA hai, ve usa ekAntako kathaMcit rUpase svIkAra karate haiM, isaliye usameM
sarvathA Asakta nahIM hote aura na pratipakSa-dharmakA virodha athavA nirAkaraNa
hI karate haiMsApekSAvasthAmeM vicArake samaya pratipakSa-dharmakI apekSA na
honese usake prati eka prakArakI upekSA to hoto hai kintu usakA virodha athavA
nirAkaraNa nahIM hotaa| aura isIse ve 'sva-para-vairI' nahIM kahe jA sakate  /
ataH svAmI samantabhadrakA yaha kahanA bilkula ThIka hai ki 'jo ekAntagraharakta
hote haiM ve svaparavairI hote haiN|' 1. nirapekSA nayA mithyAH sApekSA vastu
te'rthakRt  //  -devAgama 108

Page #83 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Samantabhadra-Bharati [Chapter 1] Now, let's see how the system of
auspicious-inauspicious karma, karma-phala, happiness-suffering, birth-death
(loka-paraloka), and bondage-liberation cannot be established in the views of
such self-and-other-enemy, one-sided thinkers. The matter is quite clear: since
all these systems are dependent on Anekanta - without the support of Anekanta,
these seemingly contradictory relative states cannot form any independent
reality or system - therefore, those who are averse to Anekanta - who hold
animosity towards the Anekanta principle - cannot have these systems well-
established in their views.   The denial of Anekanta leads to the denial of
order-disorder; because order-disorder is inherently connected with Anekanta.
When Anekanta itself is absent, how can the system of order-disorder be
established? Just as there can be no system of qualities-modifications in the
absence of substance, and no system of Sheesham, Jamun, Neem, Mango, etc. in the
absence of a tree, similarly, there can be no system of order-disorder in the
absence of Anekanta.   The absence of the system of order-disorder leads to the
denial of अर्थक्रिया (arthakriya); because अर्थक्रिया is inherently connected
with order-disorder. And in the absence of अर्थक्रिया, karma, etc. cannot be
established; because karma, etc. are inherently connected with अर्थक्रिया. When
auspicious-inauspicious karma itself cannot be established, then how can their
fruits, happiness-suffering, the realm of fruit-enjoyment, birth-death (loka-
paraloka), and the matter of being bound and liberated from karma be
established?   In essence, without the support of Anekanta, all these
auspicious-inauspicious karma, etc. become unsupported, and therefore, in the
views of one-sided thinkers who believe in eternalism, etc., there cannot be any
proper system of these. If they believe in these and want to acquire good karma
through practices like penance, etc., and enjoy their good fruits, or want to be
liberated from karma, then they hinder their own desires by opposing Anekanta,
and in this way, they prove themselves to be self-and-other-enemies.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 samantabhadra-bhAratI [ pariccheda 1 aba dekhanA yaha hai ki aise sva-para-
vairI ekAntavAdiyoMke matameM zubha-azubha-karma, karmaphala,-sukha-duHkha,
janma-janmAntara (lokaparaloka ) aura bandha-mokSAdikI vyavasthA kaise nahIM
bana sktii| bAta bilkula spaSTa hai, ye saba vyavasthAe~ cU~ki anekAntAzrita
haiM-anekAntake Azraya binA ina paraspara viruddha mAlUma par3anevAlo sApekSa
avasthAoMko koI svatantra sattA athavA vyavasthA nahIM bana sakato- isaliye jo
anekAntake varI haiM-anekAntasiddhAntase dveSa rakhate haiM-unake yahA~ ye saba
vyavasthAeM sughaTita nahIM ho sakatI  /  anekAntake pratiSedhase krama-akramakA
pratiSedha ho jAtA hai; kyoMki krama-akramakI anekAntake sAtha vyApti hai| jaba
anekAnta hI nahIM taba krama-akramakI vyavasthA kaise bana sakatI hai ? arthAt
dravyake abhAvameM jisa prakAra guNa-paryAyakI aura vRkSake abhAvameM zIzama,
jAmana, nIma, AmrAdikI koI vyavasthA nahIM bana sakatI usI prakAra anekAntake
abhAvameM krama-akramakI bhI vyavasthA nahIM bana sktii| krama-akramakI
vyavasthA na bananese arthakriyAkA niSedha ho jAtA hai; kyoMki arthakriyAkI
krama-akramake sAtha vyApti hai| aura arthakriyAke abhAvameM karmAdika nahIM
bana sakatekarmAdikakI arthakriyAke sAtha vyApti hai| jaba zubhaazubha-karma hI
nahIM bana sakate taba unakA phala sukha-duHkha, phalabhogakA kSetra janma-
janmAtara (loka-paraloka ) aura karmose ba~dhane tathA chUTanekI bAta to kaise
bana sakatI hai ? sArAMza yaha ki anekAntake Azraya binA ye saba zubhA'zubha-
karmAdika nirAzrita ho jAte haiM, aura isalie sarvathA nityatvAdi
ekAntavAdiyoMke matameM inakI koI ThIka vyavasthA nahIM bana sktii| ve yadi
inheM mAnate haiM aura tapazcaraNAdike anuSThAna-dvArA satkarmoMkA arjana karake
unakA satphala lenA cAhate haiM athavA karmoMse mukta honA cAhate haiM to ve
apane isa iSTako anekAntakA virodha karake bAdhA pahu~cAte haiM, aura isa taraha
bhI apaneko sva-para-vairI siddha karate haiN| .

Page #84 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Verse 9] Anekanta is truly the right path, it eliminates the contradictions of
one-sided views like existence-non-existence, eternal-non-eternal, difference-
non-difference, etc., and establishes the true nature of reality. It is the
right guide for worldly conduct. Without the support of Anekanta, worldly
conduct cannot be right, nor can mutual enmity and conflict be eliminated.
Therefore, Anekanta is called the seed of the supreme path and the unique
teacher of the world - it is the guide to the right path for all. It is also the
foundation of Jain ethics. Those who truly embrace Anekanta never become enemies
of themselves or others, they do not commit sins, they are not afflicted by
calamities, and they always remain elevated, generous, and victorious in the
world.  The flaw of Bhavaikanta is that it negates the absence of things. It
considers all things to be eternally existent, without any non-existence. This
leads to the loss of the characteristics of things, such as their absence in the
past, absence in destruction, mutual absence, and complete absence. The loss of
these characteristics makes the true nature of reality (completely)
beginningless, endless, all-pervading, and formless, which is not your desire -
it contradicts direct perception, etc., and is not your opinion.  (The
explanation of what happens or what flaws arise from the loss of which absence
is given below) 1. Anekanta, the right path, destroys the conflict of ethics and
guides worldly conduct. It is the seed of the supreme path, the unique teacher
of the world, and it conquers all.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 kArikA 9] devAgama vastutaH anekAnta, bhAva-abhAva, nitya-anitya, bheda-abheda
Adi ekAntanayoMke virodhako miTAkara, vastutattvakI samyak-vyavasthA karanevAlA
hai; isIse loka-vyavahArakA samyak pravartaka haibinA anekAntakA Azraya liye
lokakA vyavahAra ThIka banatA hI nahIM, aura na parasparakA vaira-virodha hI
miTa sakatA hai| isIliye anekAntako paramAgamakA bIja aura lokakA advitIya guru
kahA gayA hai-vaha saboMke liye sanmArga-pradarzaka hai  /  jainI nItikA bhI
vahI mUlAdhAra hai| jo loga anekAntakA sacamuca Azraya lete haiM ve kabhI sva-
para-vairI nahIM hote, unase pApa nahIM banate, unheM ApadAe~ nahIM satAtIM,
aura ve lokameM sadA hI unnata udAra tathA jayazIla bane rahate haiN|
bhAvakAntakI sadoSatA bhAvaikAnte padArthAnAmabhAvAnAmapahnavAt  /
sarvAtkamanAdyantamasvarUpamatAvakam  /  / 9 /  /  '(he vIra bhagavan ! ) yadi
padArthoMke bhAva ( astittva ) kA ekAnta mAnA jAyayaha kahA jAya ki saba
padArtha sarvathA sat rUpa hI haiM, asat ( nAstitva ) rUpa kabhI koI padArtha
nahIM hai to isase abhAva padArthoMkAprAgabhAva, pradhvaMsAbhAva, anyonyAbhAva
aura atyantAbhAvarUpa vastu-dharmoMkAlopa ThaharatA hai, aura ina vastu-
dharmoMkA lopa karanese vastutatva ( sarvathA ) anAdi, ananta, sarvAtmaka aura
asvarUpa ho jAtA hai, jo ki ApakA iSTa nahIM hai-pratyakSAdike viruddha honese
ApakA mata nahIM hai|' (kisa abhAvakA lopa karanese kyA ho jAtA athavA kyA doSa
AtA hai, usakA spaSTIkaraNa Age kiyA gayA hai ) 1. nIti-virodha-dhvaMsI
lokavyavahAravartakaH samyak  /  paramAgamasya bIjaM
bhuvanaikagurujayatyanekAntaH  /  /

Page #85 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Samantabhadra-Bharati [Chapter 1:  The fault in denying the absence of prior
existence and the absence of destruction is that the object of action would be
beginningless and endless.  If the absence of prior existence is denied, then
the object of action, such as a pot or sound, would be beginningless. But it is
evident that everything has a beginning. If the absence of destruction is
denied, then the object of action, such as a pot or sound, would be
indestructible. But it is evident that everything is destructible. Therefore,
denying the absence of prior existence and the absence of destruction, and
claiming that the object of action is eternally unchanging, is a contradiction
to experience. Therefore, denying the absence of prior existence and the absence
of destruction is not appropriate. These absences must be accepted.  The fault
in denying the absence of otherness and the absence of totality is that
everything would be one and the same, and there would be no distinction between
things.  If the absence of otherness is denied, then there would be no
distinction between one thing and another. For example, there would be no
difference between a pot and a cloth. But this is clearly not the case.
Therefore, the absence of otherness must be accepted.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 samantabhadra-bhAratI [pariccheda 1 prAgabhAva-pradhvaMsAbhAvake vilopameM doSa
kArya-dravyamanAdi syAtprAgabhAvasya nilave  /  pradhvaMsasya ca dharmasya
pracyave'nantatAM vrajet  // 10 //  'prAgabhAvakA yadi lopa kiyA jAya-kAryarUpa
dravyakA apane utpAdase pahale usa kAryarUpameM abhAva thA, isa bAtako na mAnA
jAya-to vaha kAryarUpa dravya-ghaTAdika athavA zabdAdikaanAdi ThaharatA hai-aura
anAdi vaha hai nahIM, eka samaya utpanna huA, yaha bAta pratyakSa hai  /  yadi
pradhvaMsa dharmakA lopa kiyA jAyakAryadravyameM apane usa kAryarUpase vinAzakI
zakti hai aura isalie vaha bAdako kisI samaya pradhvaMsAbhAvarUpa bhI hotA hai,
isa bAtako yadi na mAnA jAya-to vaha kAryarUpa dravya-ghaTAdika athavA
zabdAdika-anantatA-avinAzitAko prApta hotA hai-aura avinAzI vaha hai nahIM, yaha
pratyakSa siddha hotA hai, pratyakSameM ghaTAdika tathA zabdAdika kAryokA vinAza
hote dekhA jAtA hai| ataH prAgabhAva aura pradhvaMsAbhAvakA lopa karake
kAryadravyako utpatti aura vinAza-vihIna sadAse eka hI rUpameM sthira ( sarvathA
nitya ) mAnanA pratyakSa-virodhake doSase dUSita hai aura isalie prAgabhAva
tathA pradhvaMsAbhAvakA lopa kisI taraha bhI samucita nahIM kahA jA sakatA  /
ina abhAvoMko mAnanA hI hogaa|' anyo'nyAbhAva-atyantAbhAvake vilopame doSa
sarvAtmakaM tadekaM syAdanyA'poha-vyatikrame  /  anyatra samavAye na
vyapadizyeta sarvathA  /  / 11 /  /  'yadi anyA'pohakA-anyonyAbhAvarUpa
padArthakA-vyatikrama kiyA jAya-vastuke eka rUpakA dUsare rUpameM athavA eka
vastukA dUsarI vastumeM abhAva hai, isa bAtako na mAnA jAya to vaha

Page #86 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  [Verse 11]  The proponents of the Devagam doctrine posit that their
respective cherished principle, being a single entity (with the harmonious
presence of undesirable elements within it), is non-dual and all-encompassing.
Therefore, it cannot be categorized separately. If the complete absence of
something is eliminated – the complete absence of one substance in another is
not accepted – then the relationship of Samavaya (identity) between one
substance and another is acknowledged. If this is the case, then there cannot be
any designation (statement) of that one entity as being completely distinct,
such as "this is conscious," "this is unconscious," etc.  ## [Verse 12]  The
doctrine of complete non-existence is flawed. Even those who advocate for
complete non-existence, who claim that all things are completely unreal, have no
basis for knowledge (bodha) or scripture (vakya). Without the existence of both,
there can be no proof (such as self-inference, inference for others, etc.). How
then can they establish their doctrine of complete non-existence and refute the
arguments of those who believe in existence? Without the ability to establish
their own position and refute the opposing view, the proponents of complete non-
existence cannot achieve any validation or standing. Consequently, they cannot
be considered omniscient or great.  ## [Verse 13]  Both extremes, of complete
affirmation and complete negation, are flawed. Due to contradiction, there
cannot be a common ground for those who are hostile to the doctrine of Syadvada
(the doctrine of maybe). Even in the case of complete silence, it is not
appropriate to say that something is unspeakable.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 kArikA 11] devAgama pravAdiyoMkA vivakSita apanA-apanA iSTa eka tattva (
aniSTatattvoM kA bhI usameM sadbhAva honese ) abhedarUpa sarvAtmaka ThaharatA
haiaura isalie usakI alagase koI vyavasthA nahIM bana sktii| yadi atyantAbhAvakA
lopa kiyA jAya-eka dravyakA dUsare dravyameM sarvathA abhAva hai, isako na mAnA
jAya-to eka dravyakA dUsaremeM samavAya-sambandha ( tAdAtmya ) svIkRta hotA hai
aura aisA honepara yaha cetana hai, yaha acetana hai ityAdi rUpase usa eka
tattvakA sarvathA bhedarUpase koI vyapadeza ( kathana ) nahIM bana sktaa|'
abhAvaikAntakI sadoSatA abhAvaikAnta-pakSe'pi bhAvA'panhava-vAdinAm  /  bodha-
vAkyaM pramANaM na kena sAdhana-dUSaNam  /  / 12 /  /  'yadi abhAvaikAntapakSako
svIkAra kiyA jAya-yaha mAnA jAya ki sabhI padArtha sarvathA asat-rUpa haiM to
isa prakAra bhAvoMkA sarvathA abhAva kahanevAloMke yahA~ ( matameM ) bodha (
jJAna) aura vAkya (Agama ) donoMkA hI astitva nahIM banatA aura donoMkA astitva
na bananese ( svArthAnumAna, parArthAnumAna Adike rUpameM ) koI pramANa bhI
nahIM banatA; taba kisake dvArA apane abhAvaikAnta pakSakA sAdhana kiyA jA
sakatA aura dUsare bhAvavAdiyoMke pakSameM dUSaNa diyA jA sakatA hai ?svapakSa-
sAdhana aura parapakSa-dUSaNa donoM hI ghaTita na honese
abhAvaikAntapakSavAdiyoMke pakSakI koI siddhi athavA pratiSThA nahIM banatI aura
vaha sadoSa ThaharatA hai; phalataH abhAvaikAntapakSake pratipAdaka sarvajJa
evaM mahAn nahIM ho skte|' ubhaya aura avaktavya ekAntoMkI sadoSatA
virodhAnnobhayakAtmyaM syAdvAda-nyAya-vidviSAm  /
avAcyataikAnte'pyuktirnA'vAcyamiti yujyate  // 13 //

Page #87 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
"Samantbhadra-Bharati - [Chapter 1 (Seeing faults in both the separate beliefs
of Bhavaikant and Abhavaikant)] If the unity of both Bhava and Abhava
(Ubhayakant) is accepted, then it does not become unity in the eyes of the
opponents of Syadvad-Nyaya; because it leads to the fault of contradiction -
Bhavaikant and Abhavaikant being completely opposed to each other, unity cannot
occur between them. '(Seeing faults in the acceptance of all three Aikanta -
Bhava, Abhava and Ubha) If the Aikanta of Avacyata (Avaktvy) is accepted - it is
said that the reality is completely Avacy (unspeakable or Avaktvy) - then it
does not become possible to say that the reality is 'Avacy' - by saying this, it
becomes 'Vacy', it does not remain 'Avacy'; because in the acceptance of
complete Avacy, no Vachanvyavhar can occur. 'The faultless method-system of the
above Aikanta - in some way it is Sat-rupa, in some way it is Asat-rupa, in some
way it is Ubhayarupa, in some way it is Avaktvyrupa (by Chakar) in some way it
is Sat and Avaktvy, in some way it is Asat and Avaktvy, in some way it is Sad-
Asat and Avaktvy; and all this is by the Yoga of Nayas - taking the special
intention of the speaker, which is the Saptabhangatmak Nay"

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 samantabhadra-bhAratI - [pariccheda 1 (bhAvaikAnta aura abhAvaikAnta donoMkI
alaga-alaga mAnyatAmeM doSa dekhakara ) yadi bhAva aura abhAva donoMkA ekAtmya
(ubhayaikAnta) mAnA jAya, to syAdvAda-nyAyake vidveSiyoMke yahA~una logoMke
matameM jo astitva-nAstitvAdi sapratipakSa dharmoMmeM pArasparika apekSAko na
mAnakara unheM svatantra dharmoke rUpameM svIkAra karate haiM aura isa taraha
syAdvAda-nItike zatru bane hue haiM-vaha ekAtmya nahIM banatA; kyoMki usase
virodha doSa AtA hai-bhAvaikAnta abhAvaikAntakA aura abhAvaikAnta bhAvaikAntakA
sarvathA virodhI honese donoMmeM ekAtmatA ghaTita nahIM ho sktii|' '( bhAva,
abhAva aura ubhaya tInoM ekAntoMkI mAnyatAmeM doSa dekhakara ) yadi avAcyatA (
avaktavya ) ekAntako mAnA jAya-yaha kahA jAya ki vastutattva sarvathA avAcya
(anirvacanIya yA avaktavya ) hai-to vastutattva 'avAcya' hai aisA kahanA bhI
nahIM banatA-isa kahanese hI vaha 'vAcya' ho jAtA hai, 'avAcya' nahIM rahatA;
kyoMki sarvathA avAcyakI mAnyatAmeM koI vacanavyavahAra ghaTita hI nahIM ho
sktaa|' ukta ekAntoMkI nirdoSa vidhi-vyavasthA kathaJcitte sadeveSTaM
kathaJcidasadeva tat  /  tathobhayamavAcyaM ca naya-yogAnna sarvathA  // 14 //
'( syAdvAda-nyAyake nAyaka he vIra bhagavan ! ) Apake zAsanameM vaha vastutattva
kathaJcit ( kisI prakArase ) sat-rUpa hI hai, kathaJcit asat-rUpa hI hai,
kathaJcit ubhayarUpa hI hai, kaJcit avaktavyarUpa hI hai (cakArase) kathaJcit
sat aura avaktavya, rUpa ho hai; kathaJcit asata aura avaktavyarUpa hI hai,
kathaJcit sadasat aura avaktavyarUpa hI hai; aura yaha saba nayoMke yogase hai-
vaktAke abhiprAya-vizeSako lie hue jo saptabhaMgAtmaka naya

Page #88 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Karika 13, 14] Devagam "Except for the Nayadristi, there is no entity that is
established in all respects, either from the perspective of its definition or
from the perspective of its perception. It is not established in all respects."
## Sat-Asat - The Faultless Method of Belief "One should accept everything - the
animate and inanimate, the substance and its modes, the true and the false, or
even what is desirable and undesirable for oneself - as real from the
perspective of the fourfold nature (svarupadi-chatushtaya) - with respect to its
own substance, its own field, its own time, and its own nature. And one should
accept everything as unreal from the perspective of the fourfold other
(pararupadi-chatushtaya) - with respect to the other substance, the other field,
the other time, and the other nature. || 15 ||"  ## 19 "(O valiant Jina!) Who is
there who does not accept everything - the animate and inanimate, the substance
and its modes, the true and the false, or even what is desirable and undesirable
for oneself - as real from the perspective of the fourfold nature (svarupadi-
chatushtaya) - with respect to its own substance, its own field, its own time,
and its own nature. And who does not accept everything as unreal from the
perspective of the fourfold other (pararupadi-chatushtaya) - with respect to the
other substance, the other field, the other time, and the other nature? - No
worldly person, no examiner, no Syadvadi, no absolute monist, or any sentient
being can deny this, because they are unable to eliminate perception. If someone
does not accept this (even though they perceive it, but are influenced by a
false understanding or prejudice), then they are not established or situated in
any of their desired entities. They have no established system of entities.
Because only through the establishment of accepting the own nature and rejecting
the other nature, is the establishment of reality in an entity well-formed, not
otherwise. If, like the own nature, the other nature is also considered real,
then the implication arises that consciousness, etc., are non-conscious, etc.
And if, like the other nature, the own nature is also considered unreal, then
the objection of absolute nothingness arises. Or, if reality is considered in
the same way as unreality, and unreality is considered in the same way as
reality, then nothing..."

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 kArikA 13, 14 ] devAgama vikalpa haiM unakI vivakSAse athavA dRSTise hai -
sarvathArUpase nahIMnayadRSTiko chor3akara sarvathArUpameM athavA sarvaprakArase
ekarUpa meM koI bhI vastutattva vyavasthita nahIM hotA  / ' sat-asat - mAnyatAkI
nirdoSa vidhi sadeva sarvaM ko necchetsvarUpAdi-catuSTayAt  /  asadeva
viparyAsAnna cenna vyavatiSThate || 15 || 19 ' ( he vIra jina ! ) aisA kauna hai
jo sabako - cetanaacetanako, dravya - paryAyAdiko bhrAnta-abhrAntako athavA
svayaMke lie iSTa-aniSTako - svarUpAdicatuSTaya kI dRSTise - svadravya,
svakSetra, svakAla aura svabhAvakI apekSAse - sat rUpa hI, aura
pararUpAdicatuSTayako dRSTise - paradravya, parakSetra, parakAla aura
parabhAvakI apekSAse -asat rUpa hI aMgIkAra na kare ? - koI bhI laukikajana,
parIkSaka, syAdvAdI, sarvathA ekAntavAdI athavA sacetana prANI aisA nahIM hai,
jo pratItikA lopa karanemeM samartha na honeke kAraNa isa bAtako na mAnatA ho  /
yadi ( svayaM pratIta karatA huA bhI kunayake vaza viparItabuddhi athavA
durAgrahako prApta huA ) koI aisA nahIM mAnatA hai to vaha ( apane kisI bhI
iSTa-tattva meM ) avasthita athavA vyavasthita nahIM hotA haiusakI koI bhI
tattvavyavasthA nahIM bntii| kyoMki svarUpake grahaNa aura pararUpake tyAgakI
vyavasthAse hI vastumeM vastutvakI vyavasthA sughaTita hotI hai, anyathA nahIM
/  svarUpakI taraha yadi pararUpase bhI kisIko sat mAnA jAya to cetanAdike
acetanatvAdikA prasaMga AtA hai  /  aura pararUpakI taraha yadi svarUpase bhI
asat mAnA jAya, to sarvathA zUnyatAkI Apatti khar3I hotI hai  /  athavA jisa
rUpase sattva hai usI rUpase asattvako aura jisa rUpase asattva hai usI rUpase
sattvako mAnA jAya, to kucha bhI

Page #89 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 20 Samantabhadra-Bharati  [Chapter 1 is not included. Therefore, if we assume
otherwise, there is no arrangement of truth or object, and this presents a
serious flaw.]  **Due to the two-fold arrangement of reasons in the faultless
acceptance of both and the inexpressible, duality is inseparable from the
inexpressible.** **The remaining three [categories] - the responses to the
inexpressible - are broken down due to their own reasons.** || 16 ||  "The truth
of the object is inexpressible due to the inability to speak about it, because
it is in some way dependent on the four-fold [categories] of self, other, both,
and neither, in the form of duality (both) - the form of being and non-being -
or the form of existence and non-existence. And in some way, it is dependent on
the four-fold [categories] of self, other, both, and neither, simultaneously.
(In addition to these four) the remaining three categories - sadavaktavya,
asadavaktavya, and ubayavaktavya - which are responses to being, non-being, and
both, are also well-defined in some way due to their own reasons. That is,
although the truth of the object is in some way unstable in relation to the
four-fold [categories] of self, other, both, and neither, it is also
inexpressible due to the inability to speak about it simultaneously in relation
to the four-fold [categories] of self, other, both, and neither. Therefore, it
is syadastyaavaktavya. Similarly, one should also know the two categories of
syannaastyaavaktavya and syadasti-naasti-avaktavya."  **The dharma of existence
is inseparable from the dharma of non-existence in a single dharma, because it
is a qualifier. Just as a qualifier is inseparable from its opposite dharma (the
dharma it qualifies).** || 17 ||  In a single dharma, the dharma of existence is
inseparable from the dharma of non-existence - the dharma of existence cannot
exist without the dharma of non-existence - because it is a qualifier. A
qualifier is inseparable from its opposite dharma (the dharma it qualifies),
just as (in the use of reason) there is samanyatva...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 20 samantabhadra-bhAratI [ pariccheda 1 ghaTita nahIM hotaa| ataH anyathA
mAnane meM tattva yA vastukI koI vyavasthA banatI hI nahIM, yaha bhArI doSa
upasthita hotA hai|' ubhaya tathA avaktavyakI nirdoSa mAnyatAmeM hetu
kramArpita-dvayAd dvaitaM sahA'vAcyamazaktitaH  /  avaktavyottarAH zeSAstrayo
bhaGgAH svahetutaH  // 16 //  'vastutattva kathaJcit krama-vivakSita sva-para-
catuSTayakI apekSA dvaita-( ubhaya ) rUpa-sadasadrUpa athavA
astitvanAstitvarUpa-hai aura kathaJcit yugapat vivakSita sva-paracatuSTayako
apekSA kathanameM vacanakI azakti-asamarthatAke kAraNa avaktavyarUpa hai| ( ina
cAroMke atirikta ) sat, asat aura ubhayake uttarameM avaktavyako lie hue jo zeSa
tIna bhaMgasadavaktavya, asadavaktavya aura ubhayAvaktavya-haiM ve ( bhI )
apaneapane hetuse kathaJcit rUpameM sughaTita haiM-arthAt vastutattva yadyapi
svarUpAdi-catuSTayakI apekSA kathaJcit astirUpa hai tathApi yugapat sva-para-
catuSTayakI apekSA kahA na jA sakaneke kAraNa avaktavyarUpa bhI hai aura isalie
syAdastyavaktavyarUpa hai; isI taraha syAnnAstyavaktavya aura syAdasti-nAsti-
avaktavya ina do bhaMgoMko bhI jAnanA caahie|' _ astitvadharma nAstitvake sAtha
avinAbhAvI astitvaM pratiSedhyenAvinAbhAvyeka-dharmiNi  /  vizeSaNatvAtsAdhayaM
yathA bheda-vivakSayA  // 17 //  eka dharmomeM astitvadharma nAstitvadharmake
sAtha avinAbhAvI hai-nAstitvadharmake binA astitvadharma nahIM banatA-kyoMki
vaha vizeSaNa hai-jo vizeSaNa hotA hai vaha apane pratiSedhyake
(pratipakSadharmake) sAtha avinAbhAvI hotA hai jaise ki (hetu-prayogameM)
sAdharmya

Page #90 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 21 **Karika 16, 17**  The relation of non-difference (anvaya-hetu) exists
with the difference (vaidharmya or vyatireka hetu) - without difference
(vaidharmya), there is no sameness (anvaya), and without sameness, there is no
difference.  **Karika 18**  Similarly, in a single dharma, the dharma of non-
existence is inseparable from its opposite (existence) - without the dharma of
existence, it cannot exist - because it is a qualifier. Whatever is a qualifier
is inseparable from its opposite (counterpart) dharma, just as (in the use of
hetu) vaidharmya (vyatireka hetu) exists in an inseparable relation with abheda-
vivaksha (sādharmya or anvaya-hetu) - without anvaya (sādharmya), there is no
vyatireka (vaidharmya), and without vyatireka, there is no anvaya.  **Karika
19**  The object of speech (vishesya) is the object of both affirmation and
negation - it is the object of both the affirmation of existence and the
negation of non-existence, because it is the object of speech. Whatever is the
object of speech is the object of both affirmation and negation. Just as the
dharma of the sadhya, from one perspective, is the hetu (means), from another
perspective, it is also the ahetu (non-means). For example, the sadhya...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 21 kArikA 16, 17 ] devAgama ( anvaya-hetu ) bheda-vivakSA ( vaidharmya athavA
vyatireka hetu ) ke sAtha avinAbhAva-sambandhako lie rahatA hai-vyatireka
(vaidharmya ) ke binA anvaya ( sAdharmya ) aura anvayake binA vyatireka ghaTita
nahIM hotaa| nAstitvadharma astitvake sAtha avinAbhAvI nAstitvaM
pratiSedhyenAvinAbhAvyekadharmiNi  /  vizeSaNatvAdvaidhaya yathA'bheda-vivakSayA
// 18 //  ( isI taraha ) eka dharmImeM nAstitvadharma apane pratiSedhya( astitva
) dharmake sAtha avinAbhAvI hai-astitvadharmake binA vaha nahIM banatA-kyoMki
vaha vizeSaNa hai-jo vizeSaNa hotA hai vaha apane pratiSedhya ( pratipakSa )
dharmake sAtha avinAbhAvI hotA hai-jaise ki ( hetu-prayogameM) vaidharmya (
vyatireka hetu ) abhedavivakSA ( sAdharmya yA anvaya-hetu ) ke sAtha avinAbhAva
sambandhako lie rahatA hai-anvaya ( sAdharmya ) ke binA vyatireka ( vaidharmya )
aura vyatirekake binA anvaya ghaTita hI nahIM hotaa|' zabdagocara-vizeSya vidhi-
niSedhAtmaka vidheyapratiSedhyAtmA vizeSyaH zabdagocaraH  /  sAdhyadharmoM yathA
heturahetuzcApyapekSayA  // 19 //  'jo vizeSya ( dharmI yA pakSa ) hotA hai vaha
vidheya tathA pratiSedhya-svarUpa hotA hai-vidhirUpa astitvadharma aura
niSedharUpa nAstitvadharma donoMko apanA viSaya kiye rahatA hai; kyoMki vaha
zabdakA viSaya hotA hai-jo-jo zabdakA viSaya hotA hai vaha saba vizeSya vidheya-
pratiSedhyAtmaka haA karatA hai| jaise ki sAdhyakA jo dharma eka vivakSAse hetu
( sAdhana ) rUpa hotA hai vaha dUsarI vivakSAse ahetu ( asAdhana ) rUpa bhI hotA
hai| udAharaNake lie sAdhya

Page #91 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Samantabhadra-Bharati  **Chapter 1**  When the object is fiery, smoke is
capable of proving it through the means of inference. When the object is watery,
smoke is incapable of proving it through the means of inference. In this way,
just as smoke possesses both the qualities of being a cause and not being a
cause, similarly, any object that is the object of words possesses both the
qualities of existence and non-existence.  **Remaining Bhangas**  The remaining
Bhangas, which are Avaktavya, Asti-avaktavya, Nasty-avaktavya, and Asti-nasty-
avaktavya, should also be understood through the proper application of Nayas, as
explained. Just as the first three Bhangas were explained with examples, showing
the inseparable relationship with their opposites due to the quality of being a
qualifier, similarly, these remaining Bhangas are also worthy of being known or
planned. (The arrangement of these Bhangas) O Muni-indra, the master of the
Jinas, Virajinendra! There is no contradiction in your teachings (doctrine),
because reality is Anekanta.  **The Meaning of a Thing**  When does a thing
become capable of performing an action? And when is it not established by rules
and prohibitions? It is not so, just as the action is established by external
and internal characteristics.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 samantabhadra-bhAratI [ pariccheda 1 jaba agnimAn hai to dhUma usakA sAdhana-
anumAna-dvArA use siddha karane meM samarthaM-hotA hai aura sAdhya jaba jalavAn
hai to dhUma usakA asAdhanaanumAna-dvArA use siddha karane meM asamarthahotA
hai| isa taraha dhUmameM jisa prakAra hetutva aura ahetutva donoM dharma haiM
usI prakAra jo koI bhI zabdagocara vizeSya hai vaha saba astitva aura nAstitva
donoM dharmoko sAthameM lie hue hotA hai|' zeSa bhaMga bhI naya-yogase
avirodharUpa zeSabhaMgAzca netavyA yathokta-naya-yogataH  /  na ca
kazcidvirodho'sti munIndra ! tava zAsane  // 20 //  _ 'zeSa bhaMga jo avaktavya,
astyavaktavya, nAstyavaktavya aura asti-nAstyavaktavya haiM ve bhI yathokta
nayake yogase netavya haiMpahale tIna bhaMgoMko jisa prakAra 'vizeSaNatvAt
hetuse apane pratipakSIke sAtha avinAbhAvasambandhako lie hue udAharaNa-sahita
batalAyA gayA hai usI prakAra ye zeSa bhaMga bhI jAnane athavA yojanA kiye
jAneke yogya haiN| ( ina bhaMgoMkI vyavasthA ) he munIndra-jIvAdi tattvoMke
yAthAtmyakA manana karanevAle muniyoMke svAmI vIrajinendra !-Apake zAsana ( mata
) meM koI bhI virodha ghaTita nahIM hotA hai kyoMki vastu anekAntAtmaka hai  / '
vastukA arthakriyAkAritva kaba banatA haievaM vidhi-
niSedhAbhyAmanavasthitamarthakRt  /  . neti cenna yathA kArya
bahirantarUpAdhibhiH  /  / 21 /  /  'isa prakAra vidhi-niSedha-dvArA jo vastu
avasthita (avadhArita) nahIM hai-sarvathA astitvarUpa yA sarvathA nAstitvarUpase
nirdhArita

Page #92 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  [Kārikā 20, 21] Devāgama  23. And it is not accepted that it is the doer of
the action - it is the object. If this is not accepted, then the accomplishment
of the action by external and internal causes, which has been accepted, does not
come about - a completely real or completely unreal object is incapable of
performing an action, no matter how many causes are present, and in the absence
of an action, the object itself does not come about.  ## [Kārikā 22]  "In the
dharma-dharma, there is a different meaning for each dharma, and the main and
secondary nature of the dharmas is different. Each dharma of the dharmi has a
different purpose. When one dharma becomes the anga (principal) of the others,
the remaining dharmas become its anga (secondary) at that time. The remaining
dharmas are intended as its anga or secondary at that time."  ## [Kārikā 23]
"The one who is skilled in nayas should also apply this bhāngavati
(saptabhāgavati) process in the future, in the context of one-many and other
alternatives, such as: the entire reality is sometimes one, sometimes many,
sometimes one-many, sometimes inexpressible, sometimes one-inexpressible,
sometimes many-inexpressible, and sometimes one-many-inexpressible. There is an
inseparable relationship between oneness and manyness, and between manyness and
oneness, and...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 kArikA 20, 21] devAgama 23 evaM parigRhIta nahIM hai-vaha artha-kriyAkI
karanevAlI hotI hai| yadi aisA nahIM mAnA jAya to bAhya aura antaraMga kAraNoMse
kAryakA niSpanna honA jo mAnA gayA hai vaha nahIM banatA-sarvathA sat-rUpa yA
sarvathA asat-rUpa vastu artha-kriyA karane meM asamartha hai, cAhe kitane bhI
kAraNa kyoM na mileM, aura artha-kriyAke abhAvameM vastutaH vastutva banatA hI
nhiiN|' dharma-dharmameM arthabhinnatA aura dharmokI mukhya-gauNatA dharma
dharma'nya evArtho dharmiNo'nanta-dharmiNaH  /  aGgitve'nyatamAntasya zeSAntAnAM
tada(dA)GgatA  // 22 /  /  'anantadharmA dharmoke dharma-dharmameM anya hI artha
saMnihita haidharmIkA pratyeka dharma eka jude hI prayojanako lie hue hai| una
dharmoM se kisI eka dharmake aGgI ( pradhAna ) honepara zeSa dharmokI usake
athavA usa samaya aGgatA ( apradhAnatA ) ho jAtI haiparizeSa saba dharma usake
aGga athavA usa samaya apradhAna rUpase vivakSita hote haiN| ukta bhaMgavatI
prakriyAkI ekA'nekAdivikalpoMmeM bhI yojanA ekA'neka-vikalpAdAvRttaratrApi
yojayet  /  prakriyAM bhaGginImenAM nayanaya-vizAradaH  // 23 //  'jo naya-
nipuNa hai vaha ( vidhi niSedhameM prayukta ) isa bhaMgavatI (saptabhaGgavatI)
prakriyAko Age bhI eka-aneka jaise vikalpAdikameM nayoMke sAtha yojita kare-
jaise sampUrNa vastutattva kathaMcit ekarUpa hai, kathaMcit anekarUpa hai,
kathaMcit ekA'nekarUpa hai, kathaMcit avaktavyarUpa hai, kathaMcit
ekAvaktavyarUpa hai, kathaMcidanekAvaktavyarUpa hai aura
kathaMcidekA'nekA'vaktavyarUpa hai| ekatvakA anekatvake sAtha aura anekatvakA
ekatvake sAtha avinAbhAvasambandha hai, aura

Page #93 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
24 Samantabhadra-Bharati [Chapter 2 Therefore, without oneness, multiplicity
does not arise, and without multiplicity, oneness does not arise; nor is the
reality established in either complete oneness or complete multiplicity, it is
unestablished in both, and only then is it the agent of action-meaning; when one
dharma becomes predominant, the other dharma becomes non-predominant.] [Further,
taking the one-sided views of non-duality etc., and showing their faults, the
explanation of the subject in accordance with the reality-establishment will be
done.] Thus ends the first chapter of the Devagama-Aptamimamsa. Second Chapter
The Flaw of the One-Sided View of Non-Duality Even in the one-sided view of non-
duality, the observed difference is contradictory. The agents and actions do not
arise from a single source. ||24|| 'If the one-sided view of non-duality is
taken - it is assumed that reality is one and the same, completely devoid of
duality (secondness) - then the difference (multiplicity) of agents and actions,
which is known by direct evidence or is clearly visible and well-known (truth),
is met with contradiction (becomes false). The seven agents, in the form of the
agent, object, instrument, etc., which have taken on their countless and
infinite differences, do not become those differences. And neither do the
actions of moving-stopping, arising-perishing, digesting-burning, contracting-
expanding, eating-drinking, and seeing-knowing, etc.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 24 samantabhadra-bhAratI [pariccheda 2 isaliye ekatvake binA anekatva aura
anekatvake binA ekatva nahIM banatA; na vastutattva sarvathA ekarUpameM yA
sarvathA anekarUpameM vyavasthita hI hotA hai, donoMmeM vaha anavasthita hai
aura taba hI artha-kriyAkA kartA hai; ekatvAdi kisI ekadharmake pradhAna
honepara dUsarA dharma apradhAna ho jAtA hai|' [isake Age advaitAdi
ekAntapakSoMko lekara, unameM doSa dikhalAte hue, vastu-vyavasthAke anukUla
viSayakA spaSTIkaraNa kiyA jaaygaa|] iti devAgamAptamImAMsAyAM prathamaH
paricchedaH  /  dvitIyapariccheda advata-ekAntakI sadoSatA advaitaikAnta-
pakSe'pi dRSTo bhedo virudhyate  /  kArakANAM kriyAyAzca naikaM svasmAtprajAyate
// 24 //  'yadi advaita ekAntakA pakSa liyA jAya-yaha mAnA jAya ki vastutattva
sarvathA duI ( dvitIyatA ) se rahita eka hI rUpa hai to kArakoM aura kriyAoMkA
jo bheda ( nAnApana ) pratyakSapramANase jAnA jAtA athavA spaSTa dikhAI denevAlA
lokaprasiddha ( satya ) hai vaha virodhako prApta hotA ( mithyA ThaharatA )
haikartA, karma, karaNAdi-rUpase jo sAta kAraka apane asaMkhya tathA ananta
bhedoMko liye hue haiM unakA vaha bheda-prabheda nahIM banatA aura na kriyAoMkA
calanA-ThaharanA, upajanA-vinazanA, pacAnAjalAnA, sakoDanA-pasAranA, khAnA-pInA
aura dekhanA-jAnanA Adi |

Page #94 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Karika 24]  The concept of a deity as a form becomes a mere alternative;
consequently, all worldly conduct is disrupted. (If it is said that the one who
is one becomes transformed into various agents and actions, then it is not
correct; because) the one who is one - completely alone and helpless - does not
arise from itself. - Its origin and cause of birth, etc., are something else.
Without the existence and cause of the other, it cannot transform itself into
various agents and actions.  ## Karika 25]  No duality arises in karma-phala,
etc. - duality of karma, duality of fruit, and duality of the world do not
exist. Duality of knowledge and ignorance, and duality of bondage and liberation
do not exist. ||25|| (If the principle of complete non-duality is accepted) the
pair of karma-duality - good and bad karma, the pair of fruit-duality - virtuous
and sinful fruits, and the pair of world-duality - the place of experiencing
fruits, this world and the next world - do not exist. (Similarly) the duality of
knowledge and ignorance, and the duality of bondage and liberation do not exist.
Accepting any of these dualities contradicts the absolute non-duality. And if
one element of each pair is eliminated and only the other is accepted, then the
elimination of the other element also becomes necessary; because without one,
the other cannot exist, and in this way, all conduct is eliminated.  ## Karika
26]  If the non-duality is established from the cause, etc., then there is a
contradiction of duality. If the non-duality is established from the cause, then
there is duality in the cause and the object. If the non-duality is established
without the cause, then it is merely a matter of words, is it not? ||26||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 kArikA 24 ] devAgama rUpa koI vikalpa hI banatA hai; phalataH sArA loka-
vyavahAra bigar3a jAtA hai| ( yadi yaha kahA jAya ki jo eka hai vahI vibhinna
kArakoM tathA kriyAoMke rUpameM pariNata hotA hai to yaha kahanA ThIka nahIM
hai; kyoMki ) jo koI eka hai-sarvathA akelA evaM asahAya hai-vaha apanese hI
utpanna nahIM hotaa|-uskaa usa rUpameM janaka aura janmakA kAraNAdika dUsarA hI
hotA hai, dUsareke astitva evaM nimittake binA vaha svayaM vibhinna kArakoM
tathA kriyAoMke rUpameM pariNata nahIM ho sktaa| karma-phalAdikA koI bhI dvaita
nahIM banatA karma-dvaitaM phala-dvaitaM loka-dvaitaM ca no bhavet  /
vidyA'vidyA-dvayaM na syAdbandha-mokSa-dvayaM tathA  /  / 25 //  '( sarvathA
advata siddhAntake mAnanepara ) karma-dvaita-zubhaazubha karmakA jor3A, phala-
dvata-puNya-pAparUpa acche-bure phalakA jor3A aura loka-dvaita-phala bhoganeke
sthAnarUpa ihaloka paralokakA jor3A-nahIM bntaa| ( isI taraha ) vidyA-avidyAkA
dvaita ( jor3A ) tathA bandha-mokSakA dvata ( jor3A ) bhI nahIM bntaa| ina
dvatoM ( jor3oM) meM se kisI bhI dvaitake mAnanepara sarvathA advata kA ekAnta
bAdhita hotA hai  /  aura yadi pratyeka jor3ekI kisI eka vastukA lopakara dUsaro
vastukA hI grahaNa kiyA jAya to usa dUsarI vastuke bhI lopakA prasaMga AtA hai;
kyoMki ekake binA dUsarIkA astitva nahIM banatA, aura isa taraha bhI sAre
vyavahArakA lopa ThaharatA hai|' hetu Adise advaita-siddhi meM dvaitApatti
hetoradvaita-siddhizcedvaitaM syAddha tu-saadhyyoH| hetunA cedvinA siddhidvaitaM
vAGmAtrato na kim  // 26 //

Page #95 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter 2  **26** **Samantbhadra-Bharati**  (Besides this, the question
arises: Is the realization of non-duality achieved through a cause or simply by
words without any cause? In response:) If it is said that the realization of
non-duality is achieved through a cause, then the acceptance of both cause
(means) and effect (goal) leads to the establishment of duality - non-duality
does not remain absolute - and if realization is said to be achieved without any
cause, then doesn't the mere use of words lead to duality? - The goal of non-
duality and the words by which the realization of the goal is declared, both
exist, and therefore non-duality does not remain. And it is not possible for
something that does not exist itself to prove the existence of something else or
to declare its realization. Therefore, the realization of absolute non-duality
cannot be achieved in any way, it remains only a mere imagination.  **Non-
duality cannot exist without duality** *Advaitam na bina dvaitaad heturiva
hetuna | Sanjnanaha pratishedo na pratisheadhyadrute kvacit ||27||*  (One more
thing needs to be explained, and that is) Non-duality cannot exist without
duality, just as a cause cannot exist without a non-cause; because nowhere does
the negation of a named entity - the negation of something that is negated -
occur without the existence of the thing being negated - the word "duality" is a
named entity, and therefore the word "non-duality", which is its negation,
cannot exist without the acceptance of the existence of duality.)  [Thus, the
doctrines like Brahma-Dvaita, Sanvedana, and Shabdat, which advocate absolute
non-duality, are found to be flawed and contradicted.]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 26 samantabhadra-bhAratI [ pariccheda 2 ' ( isake sivAya yaha prazna paidA hotA
hai ki atI siddhi kisI hetuse kI jAtI hai yA binA kisI hetuke vacanamAtrase ho
?uttarameM ) yadi yaha kahA jAya ki advaitakI siddhi hetuse kI jAtI hai to hetu
( sAdhana ) aura sAdhya dokI mAnyatA honese dvatApatti khar3I hotI hai -
sarvathA adva etakA ekAnta nahIM rahatA - aura yadi binA kisI hetuke hI siddhi
kahI jAtI hai to kyA vacanamAtrase dvaitApatti nahIM hotI ? - sAdhya advaita
aura vacana, jisake dvArA sAdhyakI siddhiko ghoSita kiyA jAtA hai, donoMke
astitva se advaitatA nahIM rahatI  /  aura yaha bAta to banatI hI nahIM ki
jisakA svayaM astitva na ho usake dvArA kisI dUsareke astitvako siddha kiyA jAya
athavA usakI siddhikI ghoSaNA kI jAya  /  ataH advaita ekAntakI kisI taraha bhI
siddhi nahIM banatI, vaha kalpanAmAtra hI raha jAtA hai  / ' dvaita ke binA
advaita nahIM hotA advaitaM na binA dvaitAdaheturiva hetunA | saMjJanaH
pratiSedho na pratiSedhyAdRte kvacit ||27|| ( eka bAta aura bhI batalA denekI
hai aura vaha yaha ki ) dvaita binA advaita usI prakAra nahIM hotA jisa prakAra
ki hetuke binA ahetu nahIM hotA; kyoMki kahIM bhI saMjJIkA -
nAmavAlekApratiSedha pratiSedhyake binA -- jisakA niSedha kiyA jAya usake
astitva- binA - nahIM banatA - dvaita zabda eka saMjJI hai aura isaliye usake
niSedharUpa jo advaita zabda hai vaha dva etake astitvako mAnyatA - binA nahIM
banatA  /  ) [isa prakAra advaita ekAntakA pakSa lenevAle brahmAdva aita,
saMvedanAaura zabdAta jaise mata sadoSa evaM bAdhita Thaharate haiM  /  ] :

Page #96 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Devagam  **Pṛthaktva - Ekāntakī Sadoshatā**  **Pṛthaktva-ekānta-pakṣe'pi
pṛthaktvāda-pṛthaktu tau | Pṛthaktvena pṛthaktvaṁ syād anekastho hy asau guṇaḥ
||28||**  [Kārikā 26, 27]  (Seeing faults in the Advaita Ekānta) If the Ekānta
side of Pṛthaktva is taken - it is assumed that the real essence is completely
different from each other - then there is also a fault in this and the question
arises: are the substance and the quality separate or inseparable by the quality
of Pṛthaktva? If they are inseparable, then the Ekānta of Pṛthaktva does not
remain - it is obstructed. And if they are separate, then there is no quality
called Pṛthaktva (which the Vaisheshikas have separately counted in the number
of 24 qualities) because it is considered to be located in many while being one,
and it has no separate movement - its location in a separate form is neither
seen nor accepted, therefore, to say separate would be to say its absence.
[This Kārikā is spoken targeting the Pṛthaktva-Ekānta side of the Vaisheshikas
and the Naiyāyikas, who respectively consider 6 and 16 substances and declare
them to be completely separate from each other. In the next Kārikā, the
Pṛthaktva-Ekānta side of the Kṣaṇika-Ekānta Buddhists is declared to be faulty.]
**27**  **Ekatva ke lopame santānādik nahīṁ bante santānaḥ samudāyaśca
sādharmhyañca nirankuśaḥ | Pretya bhāvaśca tat sarvaṁ na syādekatva-nive
||29||**  'If the Ekatva is completely eliminated - the commonality, similarity,
identity, or the substance-ness residing in all synonyms is not considered -
then the offspring, community, and similarity, and the Pretya-bhāva (passing to
the afterlife after death) which is unrestricted - is considered without
obstruction...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 devAgama pRthaktva - ekAntakI sadoSatA  /  pRthaktvaikAnta-pakSe'pi
pRthaktvAdapRthaktu tau  /  pRthaktvena pRthaktvaM syAdanekastho hyasau guNaH
||28|| kArikA 26, 27 ] ' ( advaita ekAnta meM doSa dekhakara ) yadi pRthakpanakA
ekAntapakSa liyA jAya - yaha mAnA jAya ki vastutattva eka dUsarese sarvathA
bhinna hai - to isameM bhI doSa AtA hai aura yaha prazna paidA hotA hai ki
pRthaktva - guNase dravya aura guNa pRthak haiM yA apRthak ? yadi apRthak haiM
taba to pRthaktvakA ekAnta hI na rahA- vaha bAdhita ho gayA aura yadi pRthaka
haiM to pRthaktva nAmakA koI guNa hI nahIM banatA ( jise vaizeSikoMne guNoMkI 24
saMkhyA meM alagase ginAyA hai ) kyoMki vaha eka hote hue bhI anekoMmeM sthita
mAnA gayA hai aura isakI koI pRthakaragati nahIM hai - pRthak rUpameM usakI
sthiti na to dRSTa hai aura na svIkRta hai, ataH pRthak kahanepara usakA abhAva
hI kahanA hogA  /  [ yaha kArikA vaizeSikoM tathA naiyAyikoMke pRthaktvakAnta
pakSako lakSya karake kahI gayI hai, jo kramazaH 6 tathA 16 padArtha mAnate haiM
aura unheM sarvathA eka dUsarese pRthak batalAte haiM  /  agalI kArikAmeM
kSaNikAntavAdI bauddhoMke pRthaktvakAntapakSako sadoSa batalAyA jAtA hai  /  ] I
27 ekatva ke lopameM santAnAdika nahIM banate saMtAnaH samudAyazca sAdharmyaJca
niraMkuzaH  /  pretya bhAvazca tat sarvaM na syAdekatva -nive ||29|| 'yadi
ekatvakA sarvathA lopa kiyA jAya - sAmAnya, sAdRzya, tAdAtmya athavA sabhI
paryAyoMmeM rahanevAle dravyatvako na mAnA jAya - to jo saMtAna, samudAya aura
sAdharmya tathA pretyabhAva ( marakara paralokagamana ) niraMkuza hai-- nirbAdha
rUpa se mAnA

Page #97 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter 2: It Does Not Become All  **28** Samantbhadra-Bharati [Chapter 2] It
does not become all - that is, the sequential flow of **paryayas** (stages of
existence) with their progressive results does not occur. The simultaneous
existence of **sahabhavi dharmas** (co-existent qualities) like form, taste,
etc., which are produced and destroyed together, does not occur either. The
unity of **sahadharmis** (co-existent qualities) with the same result does not
occur, nor does dying and going to the afterlife, or a single being taking on
another birth or body. Similarly, the existence of a single being in the stages
of childhood, youth, and old age does not occur. And (with the use of the
conjunction "cha") knowledge based on similarity and unity, like
**pratyabhijnana** (recognition), does not occur either.  **30** "If knowledge
is considered completely different from the object of knowledge, both are false.
If there is no knowledge, how can the object of knowledge, both external and
internal, exist? (O valiant Jina!) How can it exist for those who hate you - for
the **Vaisheshika** and others who hold the view of complete separation?"
**31** "If words are considered to have only general meaning, then there is no
room for specific meaning. Without general meaning, all words are false."

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 28 samantabhadra-bhAratI [ pariccheda 2 jAtA hai-vaha saba nahIM banatA-arthAt
kramabhAvI paryAyoMmeM jo uttarottara pariNAma-pravAharUpa anvaya hai vaha
ghaTita nahIM hotA, rUpa-rasAdi jaise sahabhAvI dharmoM meM jo yugapat utpAda-
vyayako liye hue ekatra avasthAnarUpa samudAya hai vaha bhI nahIM banatA,
sahadharmiyoM meM samAna pariNAmakI jo ekatA hai vaha bhI nahIM banatI aura na
marakara paralokameM jAnA athavA eka hI jIvakA dUsarA bhava yA zarIra dhAraNa
karanA hI banatA hai| isI taraha bAlayuvA-vRddhAdi avasthAoMmeM eka hI jIvakA
rahanA nahIM banatA aura (cakArase ) pratyabhijJAna-jaise sAdRzya tathA ekatvake
jor3arUpa jJAna bhI nahIM bnte|' jJAnako jJeyase sarvathA bhinna mAnane meM doSa
sadAtmanA ca bhinnaM cejjJAnaM jJeyAd dvidhA'pyasat  /  jJAnA'bhAve kathaM
jJeyaM bahirantazca te dviSAma  /  / 30 //  ( isI taraha ) jJAnako ( jo ki apane
caitanyarUpase jJeyaprameyase pRthak hai ) yadi satsvarUpase bhI jJeyase pRthak
mAnA jAyaastitvahIna svIkAra kiyA jAya-to jJAna aura jJeya donoMkA hI abhAva
ThaharatA hai-jJAnakA abhAva to usake astitva-vihIna honese ho gayA aura jJeyakA
abhAva jJAnAbhAvake kAraNa bana gayA; kyoMki jJAnakA jo viSaya ho use hI jJeya
kahate haiM-jJAnake abhAvameM bAhya tathA aMtaraMga kisI bhI jJeyakA astitva (
he vIra jina ! ) Apase dveSa rakhanevAloMke yahA~-sarvathA pathaktvaikAntavAdI
vaizeSikAdikoMke matameM-kaise bana sakatA hai ?-unake matase usakI koI bhI
samIcIna vyavasthA nahIM bana sktii| vacanoMkoM sAmAnyArthaka mAnane meM doSa
sAmAnyA'rthA giro'nyeSAM vizeSo nA'bhilaSyate  /  sAmAnyA'bhAvatasteSAM mRSaiva
sakalA giraH  // 31 //

Page #98 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Karika 29, 30] Devagam  "In the opinion of the Buddhists, statements are
general in meaning; because, according to their belief, they do not constitute a
statement of a specific characteristic, which is the nature of a particular
entity. (Since statements are only general in meaning, they do not constitute
any object - they are not considered objects by the Buddhists, and in the
absence of the specific, the general also does not have any existence anywhere.
In this situation, the absence of the general also arises.) Due to the absence
of the general as an object, all their (Buddhists') statements are false - even
those statements that they present as true are not true."  ## Karika 32
"(Seeing faults in both the 'non-dual' and 'separate' ekantas individually) If
the non-dual (unity) and the separate (plurality) are both considered to be one
(ekanta), then this unity does not arise in the opinion of those who are hostile
to the Syadvada-naya - those who do not accept the mutual dependence of opposing
doctrines like non-dualism and pluralism, but accept them as independent
doctrines, and thus become enemies of the Syadvada-naya. (Just as the unity of
existence and non-existence does not arise); because it (like a barren woman's
son) leads to the fault of contradiction - the non-dual ekanta is completely
opposed to the separate ekanta, and the separate ekanta is completely opposed to
the non-dual ekanta, so unity cannot occur between the two."  "(Seeing faults in
the acceptance of all three ekantas - non-dual, separate, and both) If the
ekantas of 'unspeakable' (avaktvyata) is accepted - it is said that the true
nature is completely unspeakable (undefinable or avaktvy) in the form of unity
or plurality, then the true nature..."

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 kArikA 29, 30 ] devAgama 'dUsaroMke yahA~-bauddhoMke matameM-bacana
sAmAnyArthaka haiM; kyoMki unake dvArA ( unakI mAnyatAnusAra )
vizeSakAyAthAtmyarUpa svalakSaNakA-kathana nahIM banatA hai| ( vacanoMke mAtra
sAmAnyArthaka honese ve koI vastu nahIM rahate-bauddhoMke yahA~ unheM vastu mAnA
bhI nahIM gayA aura vizeSake abhAvameM sAmAnyakA bhI kahIM koI astitva nahIM
banatA, aisI hAlatameM sAmAnyake bhI abhAvakA prasaMga upasthita hotA hai )
sAmAnyakA avasturUpa abhAva honese una ( bauddhoM) ke sampUrNa vacana mithyA hI
Thaharate haiM-ve vacana bhI satya nahIM rahate jinheM ve satyarUpase
pratipAdana karate haiN|' ubhaya tathA avaktavya ekAntoMkI sadoSatA
virodhAnnobhayakAtmyaM syAdvAda-nyAya-vidviSAm  /  avAcyataikAnte'pyukti
jvAcyamiti yujyate  // 32 //  '(advata aura pRthaktva donoM ekAntoMkI alaga-
alaga mAnyatAmeM doSa dekhakara ) yadi advata ( ekatva ) aura pRthaktva donoMkA
ekAtmya ( ekAnta ) mAnA jAya to syAdvAda-nyAyake vidveSiyoMke yahA~-una logoMke
matameM jo advata pRthaktvAdi sapratipakSa dharmoM meM pArasparika apekSAko na
mAnakara unheM svataMtra dharmo ke rUpameM svIkAra karate haiM aura isa taraha
syAdvAda-nyAyake zatru bane hue haiM-vaha ekAtmya nahIM banatA ( usI prakAra
jisa prakAra ki astitva-nAstitvakA ekAtmya nahIM banatA); kyoMki usase (
bandhyA-putrakI taraha ) virodha doSa AtA hai-advatakAMta pRthaktvaikAMtakA aura
pRthaktvaikAMta advatakAMtakA sarvathA virodhI honese donoMmeM ekAtmatA ghaTita
nahIM ho sktii|' (advata, pRthaktva aura ubhaya tInoM ekAntoMkI mAnyatAmeM doSa
dekhakara ) yadi avAcyatA ( avaktavyatA ) ekAntako mAnA jAya-yaha kahA jAya ki
vastutattva ekatva yA pRthaktvake rUpameM savathA avAcya ( anirvacanIya yA
avaktavya ) hai to vastutattva

Page #99 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Samantabhadra-Bharati  **Chapter 2**  "To say 'it is unutterable' is not
possible either, because by saying that, it becomes 'utterable', not remaining
unutterable. Because in the acceptance of the completely 'unutterable', no
speech-behavior can occur."  **[Verse 33]**  "The separateness and oneness,
being independent, are non-existent due to two reasons. Separateness does not
exist without oneness, and oneness does not exist without separateness.
Therefore, oneness and separateness, not being opposed to each other due to
their relativity, are real in the same way as the means (cause) is real due to
its relativity with its own nature, existence in the similar, and difference
from the dissimilar, as well as the difference in the form of affirmation and
negation."  **[Verse 34]**  "(If it is said that due to the direct refutation of
oneness and the refutation of separateness by its inherent nature, there is no
object for perception, then how can oneness and separateness be experienced in
all substances? This is not correct, because) from the point of view of equality
in existence, all (living beings and other substances) are one. Therefore,
oneness is not without an object because its object of perception is the common
essence of existence. And from the point of view of the difference in
substances, etc., - substance, quality, and karma, or substance, space, time,
and..."

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 samantabhadra-bhAratI [ pariccheda 2 'avAcya hai' aisA kahanA bhI nahIM banatA-
isa kahanese hI vaha 'vAcya' ho jAtA hai, avAcya nahIM rahatA; kyoMki sarvathA
'avAcya' kI mAnyatAmeM koI vacana-vyavahAra ghaTita hI nahIM ho sktaa|'
pRthaktva-ekatva ekAntIkA avastutva-vastutva anapekSye pRthaktvaikye hyavastu
dvy-hetutH| tadevaikyaM pathaktvaM ca svabhedaiH sAdhanaM yathA  /  / 33 /  /
'eka dUsareko apekSA na rakhanevAle pRthaktva aura ekatva ca ki hetudvayase
avastu haiM-ekatva-nirapekSa honese pRthaktvakA aura pRthaktva-nirapekSa honese
ekatvakA kahIM koI astitva nahIM banatAataH ekatva aura pRthaktva sApekSarUpameM
virodhako prApta na honese usI prakAra vastatvako prApta hai jisa prakAra ki
sAdhana (hetu )sAdhana apane pakSadharmatva, sapakSameM sattva aura vipakSase
vyAvRttirUpa bhedoM tathA anvaya-vyatirekarUpa bhedoMke sAtha sApekSatAke kAraNa
virodhako na rakhate hue vastutvako prApta hai|' ekatva-pRthaktva ekAntoMkI
nirdoSavyavasthA satsAmAnyAtta sarvaikyaM pRthagdravyAdi-bhedataH  /
medA'bheda-vivakSAyAmasAdhAraNa-hetuvat  /  / 34 //  '( yadi yaha kahA jAya ki
ekatvake pratyakSa-bAdhita honeke kAraNa aura pRthaktvake sadAdyAtmakatAse
bAdhita honeke kAraNa pratItikA nirviSayapanA hai taba saba padArtho meM ekatva
aura pRthaktvako kaise anubhUta kiyA jA sakatA hai ? to yaha kahanA ThIka nahIM
hai; kyoMki ) sattA-astitvameM-samAnatA honekI dRSTise to saba ( jIvAdi
padArtha) eka haiM-isaliye ekatvakI pratItikA viSaya satsAmAnya honese vaha
niviSaya nahIM hai aura dravyAdike bhedako dRSTise-dravya, guNa aura karmakI
athavA dravya, kSetra, kAla aura

Page #100 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  31 ## Karika 33] Because all (jivadi substances) are distinct due to
different expectations of the bhavas of the devas, therefore, the subject of the
perception of distinctness is not the substance, etc., because of the difference
in substance, etc. Just as the extraordinary cause is one from the point of view
of non-duality and many from the point of view of duality, in the same way,
distinctness is well-established in all substances due to the intention of
difference, and oneness is well-established due to the intention of non-duality.
##  Intention and non-intention are only of the real, not of the unreal. ##
**विवक्षा तथा अविवक्षा सत्की ही होती है विवक्षा चाविवक्षा च
विशेष्येऽनन्त-धर्मिणि ।** **सतो विशेषणस्याऽत्र नाऽसतस्तैस्तदर्थिभिः ॥३५॥** '(If
it is said that the subject of intention and non-intention is unreal, then how
can the establishment of the truth be justified on their basis? This is not
correct; because) intention and non-intention, which are made in the infinite-
natured qualified, are made only of the real, not of the unreal, and this is
done by those who are the meaning or non-meaning of that qualifier - the
meaning-seeker intends and the non-meaning-seeker does not intend. In the case
of what is completely unreal, there is no meaning-seeking or non-meaning-seeking
- it is like the horns of a donkey, a non-existent thing, because it is devoid
of all meaning-activity.' ##  Difference and non-difference in one thing are not
conventional, but are real, being the object of proof. ##  **एक वस्तुमें भेद और
अभेदकी अविरोध-विधि प्रमाण-गोचरौ सन्तौ भेदाभेदौ न संवृती। तावेकत्राविरुद्धौ ते
गुण-मुख्य-विवक्षया ॥३६॥** (O valiant Jina!) Difference (distinctness) and non-
difference (oneness-non-duality) are both (dharmas) real - they are the ultimate
truth - they are not the subject of convention - they are not merely imagined or
conventional; because they are the object of proof - (therefore) in your
opinion, they are both non-contradictory in one thing

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 31 kArikA 33 ] devAgama bhAvakI judI-judI apekSAko lekara-saba ( jIvAdi
padArtha ) pRthak haiM-isaliye pRthaktvakI pratItikA viSaya dravyAdi-bheda
honese vaha niviSaya nahIM hai  /  jisa prakAra asAdhAraNa hetu abhedakI dRSTi
se ekarUpa aura bhedakI dRSTise anekarUpa hai usI prakAra saba padArtho meM
bhedako vivakSAse pRthaktva aura abhedako vivakSAse ekatva sughaTita hai|
vivakSA tathA avivakSA satkI hI hotI hai vivakSA cAvivakSA ca vizeSye'nanta-
dharmiNi  /  sato vizeSaNasyA'tra nA'satastaistadarthibhiH  // 35 //  '( yadi
yaha kahA jAya ki vivakSA aura avivakSAkA viSaya to asatrUpa hai taba unake
AdhArapara tattvakI vyavasthA kaise yukta ho sakatI hai to aisA kahanA ThIka
nahIM hai; kyoMki ) anantadharmA vizeSyameM vivakSA tathA avivakSA jo kI jAtI
hai vaha sat vizeSaNako hI kI jAtI hai asatkI nahIM aura yaha unake dvArA kI
jAtI hai jo usa vizeSaNake arthI yA anarthI haiM--arthI vivakSA karatA hai aura
anarthI avivkssaa| jo sarvathA asat hai usake viSayameM kisIkA arthIpanA yA
anarthIpanA banatA hI nahIM-vaha to sakala-arthakriyAse zUnya honeke kAraNa
gadheke sIMgake samAna avastu hotA hai|' eka vastumeM bheda aura abhedakI
avirodha-vidhi pramANa-gocarau santau bhedAbhedau na sNvRtii| tAvekatrAviruddhau
te guNa-mukhya-vivakSayA  // 36 //  (he vIra jina ! ) bheda (pRthaktva) aura
abheda (ekatva-advaita) donoM (dharma) satarUpa haiM-paramArthabhUta haiM-
saMvRtike viSaya nahIM-kalpanAropita athavA upacAramAtra nahIM haiM; kyoMki
donoM pramANake viSaya haiM-( isIse ) Apake matameM ve donoM eka vastu meM

Page #101 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Samantbhadra-Bharati [ Chapter 2: The meaning of the secondary and primary is
only non-contradictory - therefore, those who consider difference and non-
difference to be mutually independent in their opinion, they do not obtain and
form contradictions. ' (In such a situation (1) the completely different
Buddhists, who accept the difference of objects as the ultimate truth - not non-
difference; they consider non-difference to be conventional (imagined) truth and
otherwise imagine contradiction; (2) the completely non-different Brahmavadis
etc., who consider the non-difference of objects to be essential - not
difference; they consider difference to be imagined and otherwise imagine
contradiction between the two; (3) the completely nihilistic Buddhists, who do
not accept either difference or non-difference as the ultimate truth but
consider them to be the subject of conventional imagination; and (4) the
dualistic Naiyayikas, who accept both difference and non-difference as truth,
but consider both to be mutually independent; all four are not truthful who
expound the true object-reality. From the point of view of all these, the
meaning of this verse is explained as follows: _ 'Non-difference is the true
nature - not the subject of convention (imagination); because it is the object
of proof like difference. Difference is the true nature - not the conventional
nature, because it is the object of proof, like non-difference. Both difference
and non-difference are true natures - not the subject of convention, because
they are the object of proof, like their desired reality; and in this way
another side is also collected; because those who consider both of them to be
conventional and those who consider the object to be void of all dharma
(nihilists) 1. This explanation has been given by Shrividyanandacharya in his
Ashta Sahasri-tika with the phrase "iti karikaayamarthasangrahaḥ".

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 samantabhadra-bhAratI [ pariccheda 2 gauNa aura mukhyakI vivakSAko liye hue
ekamAtra avirodharUpase rahate haiM-phalataH jinake matameM bheda aura abhedako
paraspara nirapekSa mAnA hai unake yahA~ ve virodhako prApta hote haiM aura
banate hI nhiiN|' ( aisI sthitimeM (1) sarvathA bhedavAdI bauddha, jo padArtho
ke bhedako hI paramArtha satke rUpameM svIkAra karate haiM-abhedako nahIM;
abhedako saMvRti ( kalpanAropita ) sat batalAte haiM aura anyathA virodhakI
kalpanA karate haiM; (2) sarvathA abhedavAdI brahmAdvatI Adi, jo padArtho ke
abhedako hI tAttvika mAnate haiM-bhedako nahIM; bhedako kalpanAropita batalAte
haiM aura anyathA donoMmeM paraspara virodhakI kalpanA karate haiM; (3) sarvathA
zUnyavAdI bauddha, jo bheda aura abheda donoMmeMse kisIko bhI paramArtha satke
rUpameM svIkAra nahIM karate kintu unheM saMvRti-kalpanAkA viSaya batalAte hai;
aura (4) ubhayavAdI naiyAyika. jo bheda aura abheda donoMko satarUpameM mAnate
to haiM, parantu donoMko paraspara nirapekSa batalAte haiM; ye cAroM hI
yathArtha vastu-tattvakA pratipAdana karanevAle satyavAdI nahIM haiN| ina sabakI
dRSTise isa kArikAke arthakA spaSTIkaraNa nimna prakAra hai:_ 'abheda sat
svarUpa hI hai-saMvRti ( kalpanA ) ke viSayarUpa nahIM; kyoMki vaha bhedakI
taraha pramANa-gocara hai| bheda satrUpa hI hai-saMvRtirUpa nahIM, pramANa-
gocara honese, abhedakI trh| bheda aura abheda donoM sat rUpa haiM-saMvRtike
viSayarUpa nahIM, pramANagocara honese, apane iSTa tattvakI taraha; aura isa
prakAra eka anya pakSa bhI saMgrahIta hotA hai; kyoMki una donoMko saMvRtirUpa
batalAnevAloM evaM vastuko samasta dharmose zUnya mAnanevAloM (zUnyavAdiyoM) 1.
yaha spaSTIkaraNa zrIvidyAnandAcAryane apanI aSTasahasrI-TIkAmeM "iti
kArikAyAmarthasaMgrahaH" isa vAkyake sAtha diyA hai  /

Page #102 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Karika 37]  **Agreement is also found in the Devagama.** (Here, in the
inferences of these sides, whatever examples are there are not devoid of the
sadhya-sadhana-dharma; because the distinction, non-distinction, both and
neither, are found in the followers of the one-sided views, like the
Syadvadins.) In this way, O valiant Bhagavan! In your view, both distinction and
non-distinction in one object are not contradictory in the form of ultimate
truth, because they are the object of proof due to the intention of the primary
and secondary, like your own desired principle. And therefore, it is also
inferred with certainty that those which are absolutely distinct and non-
distinct are contradictory, because they are not the object of proof, like the
distinction-only view, etc.  **Thus ends the second chapter of the Devagama-
aptamimamsa.**  **Third Chapter**  **The defect of the eternal-only view**  Even
in the eternal-only view, change is not possible. If there are no causes, where
is the proof and where is its result? ||37||  'If the eternal-only view is taken
- it is assumed that the object is eternally unchanging, always remaining in the
same form - then change cannot be established. Transformation from one state to
another, movement, vibration, or any kind of change cannot occur in the object.
The absence of causes - agent, action, instrument, etc. - is already present
(before the emergence of the effect). Where there is no change of state, their
existence cannot be established.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 kArikA 37 ] devAgama kA bhI sadbhAva pAyA jAtA hai| ( yahA~ ina pakSoMke
anumAnoMmeM jo-jo udAharaNa haiM sAdhya-sAdhana-dharmase vikala ( rahita ) nahIM
haiM; kyoMki bheda, abheda, ubhaya aura anubhaya ekAntoMke mAnanevAloMmeM usakI
prasiddhi syAdvAdiyoMkI taraha pAI jAtI hai|) isa taraha he vIra bhagavan !
Apake yahA~ eka vastumeM bheda aura abheda donoM dharma paramArthasatke rUpameM
viruddha nahIM haiM, mukhya-gauNakI vivakSAke kAraNa pramANa-gocara honese,
apane iSTatattvakI trh| aura isaliye sAmarthyase yaha anumAna bhI phalita hotA
hai ki jo bheda aura abheda paraspara nirapekSa haiM ve viruddha hI haiM,
pramANa-gocara na honese, bhedaikAntAdikI taraha  / ' iti dedAgamAptamImAMsAyAM
dvitIyaH paricchedaH  /  tRtIya pariccheda nityatva-ekAntakI sadoSatA
nityatvaikAnta-pakSe'pi vikriyA nopapadyate  /  prAgeva kArakA'bhAvaH kva
pramANaM kva tatphalam  /  / 37 //  'yadi nityatva ekAntakA pakSa liyA jAya-yaha
mAnA jAya ki padArtha sarvathA nitya hai, sadA apane eka hI rUpameM sthira
rahatA hai-to vikriyAkI upapatti nahIM ho sakato-avasthAse avasthAntararUpa
pariNAma, halana-calanarUpa parispanda athavA vikArAtmaka koI bhI kriyA
padArthameM nahIM bana sakatI; kArakoMkA-kartA, karma, karaNAdikA-abhAva pahale
hI (kAryotpattike pUrva hI) hotA haijahA~ koI avasthA na badale vahA~ unakA
sadbhAva banatA hI nahIM

Page #103 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Samantabhadra-Bharati [Chapter 3] When there is an absence of factors, and
consequently an absence of the knower, where can proof and the fruit of proof,
which is pramiti (samyagjnapti - true knowledge), be formed? - They cannot be
formed. In the absence of these and the knower, the establishment of the jiva-
tattva does not occur in the Sankhyas who take the side of eternalism and
monism, and the arrangement of any other tattva does not sit right.  What is the
reaction to the eternality of proof and factors?  "If the proof and factors are
clearly manifest, like the sense organs and their objects, and they are eternal,
then what kind of transformation can there be? They are outside the bounds of
your teachings." (38)  (If the Sankhya-mat-vaadis say that the unmanifest
substance, which is the cause, is completely eternal, and the manifest
substance, which is the effect, is not eternal, but we consider it to be non-
eternal, and therefore transformation occurs in our system, then such a
statement is not correct; because) just as the sense organs manifest their
objects, the 'proofs and factors' by which the unmanifest is shown to be
manifest, both these proofs and factors, when considered completely eternal,
what kind of transformation can they produce? No action in the form of
transformation can be produced by something completely eternal, nor can any non-
eternal effect occur. O Sadho! - O Vira Bhagavan! - Outside the bounds of your
teachings, outside the limits of the anekantavada that you have accepted, there
is no place for transformation in the complete monism of eternality - the
production or manifestation of non-eternal effects from completely eternal
causes cannot occur, and therefore the aforementioned idea is based on delusion.
If the effect is completely real, then there is no production etc. "If the
effect is completely real, then it is not worthy of being produced. The
fulfillment of the result and the satisfaction of the cause are both obstacles
to the monism of eternality." (39)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 samantabhadra-bhAratI [pariccheda 3 aura jaba kArakoMkA abhAva hai taba (
pramAtAkA bhI abhAva honese ) pramANa aura pramANakA phala jo pramiti
(samyagjJapti-yathArtha jAnakArI ) hai, ye donoM kahA~ bana sakate haiM ?-nahIM
bana skte| inake tathA pramAtAke abhAvameM 'nityatva ekAntakA pakSa lenevAle
sAMkhyoMke yahA~ jIvatattvakI siddhi nahIM banatI aura na dUsare hI kisI
tattvakI vyavasthA ThIka baiThatI hai|' pramANa aura kArakoMke nitya honepara
vikriyA kaisI ? pramANa-kArakairvyaktaM vyaktaM cedindriyA'rthavat  /  te ca
nitye vikArya kiM sAdhoste zAsanAdbahiH  /  / 38 /  /  ( yadi sAMkhyamata-
vAdiyoMkI orase yaha kahA jAya ki kAraNarUpa jo avyakta padArtha hai vaha
sarvathA nitya hai, kAryarUpa jo vyakta padArtha hai vaha nitya nahIM, use to
hama anitya mAnate haiM aura isalie hamAre yahA~ vikriyA banatI hai, to aisA
kahanA ThIka nahIM hai; kyoMki ) indriyoMke-dvArA unake viSayakI abhivyaktike
samAna jina 'pramANoM tathA kArakoMke dvArA avyaktako vyakta huA batalAyA jAtA
hai ve pramANa aura kAraka donoM hI jaba sarvathA nitya mAne gaye haiM taba
unake dvArA vikriyA banatI kauna-sI hai ? sarvathA nityake dvArA koI bhI
vikArarUpa kriyA nahIM bana sakatI aura na koI anitya kArya hI ghaTita ho sakatA
hai| he sAdho !-vIra bhagavan !-Apake zAsanake bAhya-Apake dvArA abhimata
anekAntavAdakI sImAke bAharajo nityatvakA sarvathA ekAntavAda hai usameM
vikriyAke liye koI sthAna nahIM hai-sarvathA nitya kAraNoMse anitya kAryoMkI
utpatti yA abhivyakti bana hI nahIM sakatI aura isaliye ukta kalpanA
bhramamUlaka hai|' kAryake sarvathA sat honepara utpatti Adi nahIM banatI yadi
satsarvathA kArya puMvannotpattumarhati  /  pariNAma-praktRptizca
nityatvaikAnta-bAghinI  /  / 39 /  /

Page #104 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Karika 38, 39] Devagam (If the Sankhyas argue that we accept the cause-effect
relationship - mahat etc. are effects and pradhan is their cause - therefore
there is no obstacle in the formation of vikriya in our system, then this is an
unthoughtful statement in the form of an unanalyzed principle; because there is
no third movement besides these two alternatives of the existence and non-
existence of the effect.) If the effect is considered to be completely real,
then it does not become fit for creation like the conscious Purusha - due to
being immutable, there is no such thing as creation in it, just as there is not
in Purusha. In other words, what is completely real does not become an effect
like consciousness, consciousness is not an effect, otherwise the effect of the
Purusha, which is considered to be conscious, will also arise. Therefore, just
as consciousness is not an effect due to being completely real, in the same way,
the effect of mahat etc. does not arise. When there is no new creation of the
effect, then how can there be vikriya? And if the effect is considered to be
completely unreal, then it leads to a contradiction in the principle; because
the Sankhyas, who imagine the cause-effect relationship, have considered the
effect to be real - not unreal like a sky-flower. 'If it is said that the
transformation, which is the change from one state to another in the object, is
the effect, then this makes the object a result' and the imagination of the
result in the object is an obstacle to the singularity of eternity - there is no
kind of result, change or transformation in the singularity of complete
eternity. ' 1. 'Asadkaranadupaadanagrahanatsarvasambhavabhavat. Shaktyasya
(karyasya) shakyakaranat karanabhavaccha satkaryam" || iti hi sankhyanam
siddantah. ' - Ashta Sahasri p. 181

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 kArikA 38, 39] devAgama _( yadi sAMkhyoMkI orase yaha kahA jAya ki hama to
kAryakAraNa-bhAvako mAnate haiM-mahadAdi kArya haiM aura pradhAna unakA kAraNa
hai-isalie hamAre yahA~ vikriyAke banane meM koI bAdhA nahIM AtI, to yaha kahanA
anAlocita siddhAntake rUpameM avicArita hai; kyoMki kAryakI sat aura asat ina do
vikalpoMke atirikta tIsarI koI gati nhiiN| ) kAryako yadi sarvathA sat mAnA jAya
to vaha caitanya puruSakI taraha utpattike yogya nahIM ThaharatA- kUTastha
honese usameM utpatti jaisI koI bAta nahIM banatI, jisa prakAra ki puruSameM
nahIM bntii| dUsare zabdoMmeM yoM kahiye ki jo sarvathA sat hai usake caitanyakI
taraha kAryatva nahIM banatA, caitanya kArya nahIM hai, anyathA caitanyarUpa jo
pUruSa mAnA gayA hai usake bhI kAryatvakA prasaMga AegA  /  ataH jisa prakAra
sarvathA satrUpa honese caitanya kArya nahIM hai usI prakAra mahadAdikake bhI
kAryatva nahIM bntaa| jaba naI kAryotpatti hI nahIM taba vikriyA kaisI? aura
kAryako yadi sarvathA asat mAnA jAya to usase siddhAnta-virodha ghaTita hotA
hai; kyoMki kArya-kAraNabhAvakI kalpanA karanevAle sAMkhyoMke yahA~ kArya ko
satrUpameM hI mAnA hai-gagana-kusumake samAna asatrUpameM nhiiN|' . ( yadi yaha
kahA jAya ki vastumeM avasthAse avasthAntara hone rUpa jo vivarta hai-pariNAma
hai-vahI kArya hai to isase vastu pariNAmI ThaharI ) aura vastumeM pariNAmakI
kalpanA hI nityatvake ekAntako bAdhA pahuMcAnevAlI hai- sarvathA nityatvake
ekAntameM koI prakArakA pariNAma, parivartana athavA avasthAntara banatA hI
nhiiN|' 1. 'asadakaraNAdupAdAnagrahaNAtsarvasaMbhavAbhAvAt  /  zaktasya
(kAryasya) zakyakaraNAt kAraNabhAvAcca satkAryam"  //  iti hi sAMkhyAnAM
siddhAntaH  / ' -aSTasahasrI pR0 181

Page #105 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Samantabhadra-Bharati [Chapter 3]  **Verse 40:** "In the extreme view of
eternalism, there is no action of merit or demerit, no action of mind, speech,
or body, no good or bad tendencies, no creation or destruction. Without action,
there is no afterlife, and without an afterlife, how can there be any fruit?
And without fruit, there is no bondage or liberation.  So, in the extreme view
of eternalism, who would be worthy of respect, and for what reason? There is no
attraction or cause for any examiner to have a respectful attitude towards it."
**Verse 41:** "(Having seen the flaws in the extreme view of eternalism), if one
takes the side of the extreme view of momentariness - relying on the Buddhists'
extreme view of complete impermanence, saying that all things are destroyed
moment by moment, and nothing is permanent - even then, the afterlife, bondage,
liberation, and so on, are impossible. (Furthermore, knowledge like recognition,
remembrance, and inference are also impossible.) Without knowledge like
recognition, the beginning of action is impossible, and without the beginning of
action, how can there be any fruit (in the form of happiness, suffering, merit,
or demerit)?"

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 samantabhadra-bhAratI [pariccheda 3 nityatvaikAntameM puNya-pApAdi nahIM banate
puNya-pApa-kriyA na syAtpretyabhAvaH phalaM kutaH  /  bandha-mokSau ca teSAM na
yeSAM tvaM nAsi nAyakaH  // 40 //  '(aisI sthitimeM he vIrajina !) jinake Apa
(anekAntavAdI) nAyaka ( svAmo ) nahIM haiM una sarvathA nityatvaikAntavAdiyoMke
yahAM ( matameM ) puNya-pApakI kriyA-mana-vacana-kAyakI zubha yA azubha
pravRttirUpa athavA utpAdavyayarUpa koI kriyA-nahIM banatI, (kriyAke abhAvameM)
paraloka-gamana bhI nahIM banatA, ( sukha-duHkharUpa ) phalaprAptikI to bAta hI
kahA~se ho sakatI hai ?-vaha bhI nahIM bana sakatI-aura na bandha tathA mokSa hI
bana sakate haiN| taba sarvathA nityatvake ekAntapakSameM kauna parIkSAvAn
kisalie AdaravAn ho sakatA hai ? usameM sAdara-pravRttike liye kisI bhI
parIkSakake vAste koI bhI AkarSaNa athavA kAraNa nahIM hai|' kSaNika-ekAntakI
sadoSatA kSaNikaikAnta-pakSe'pi pretyabhAvAdyasambhavaH  /
pratyabhijJAdyabhAvAnna kAryArambhaH kutaH phalam  // 41 //  (nityatvaikAntameM
doSa dekha kara ) yadi kSaNika ekAntakA pakSa liyA jAya-bauddhoMke sarvathA
anityatvarUpa ekAntavAdakA Azraya lekara yaha kahA jAya ki sarva padArtha kSaNa-
kSaNameM niranvayavinAzako prApta hote rahate haiM, koI bhI unameM sthira nahIM
haito bhI pretyabhAvAdika asaMbhava Thaharate haiM-paralokagamana aura bandha
tathA mokSAdika nahIM bana sakate  /  ( isake sivAya pratyabhijJAna, smaraNa
aura anumAnAdi jaise jJAna bhI nahIM bana sakate ) pratyabhijJAnAdi jaise
jJAnoMkA abhAva honese kAryakA Arambha nahIM banatA aura jaba kAryakA Arambha hI
nahIM taba usakA ( sukhaduHkhAdirUpa athavA puNya-pApAdirUpa ) phala to kahA~se
ho sakatA

Page #106 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Karika 42, 43] Devagam  **37. Is it possible?** - No, it is not possible.
Therefore, **Kshanikaikant** (momentary existence) is not worthy of respect for
those who are examining (the truth).  **Karika 42:** If the **karma** (action)
is completely **asat** (non-existent), then it is like a flower in the sky. If
**asat** is also considered to be produced, then there is no rule for the
**upadan** (material cause) and there is no belief in the birth of **karma**.
(If we sow wheat, we cannot expect wheat to grow according to the rule of the
**upadan** cause. Due to the production of **asat**, chickpeas, barley, or peas
can also grow, and therefore we cannot be certain about any production work. All
social behavior is disrupted, and this is against direct experience.)  **Karika
43:** (Furthermore) In **Kshanikaikant**, **hetu-phal-bhava** (cause-effect-
state) etc. are not formed, because there is no complete **anvaya** (connection)
between them.  There is a complete **anyabhava** (difference) between them, like
**santananantara** (successive births). (If it is said that the **santana**
(lineage) of the previous and subsequent moments is one, then this is not
correct, because what is one **santana**...)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 kArikA 42, 43 ] devAgama 37 hai ?--nahIM ho sktaa| ataH sarvathA kSaNikaikAnta
bhI parIkSAvAnoM ke liye AdaraNIya nahIM hai|'  /  . kAryake sarvathA asat
honepara doSApatti yadyasatsarvathA kArya tanmAjani kha-puSpavat  /  mopAdAna-
niyAmo'bhUnmA''zvAsaH kArya-janmani  // 42 /  /  '(kSaNikaikAntameM kAryakA sat-
rUpase utpAda to banatA hI nahIM; kyoMki usase siddhAnta-virodha ghaTita hotA
hai-kSaNika ekAntameM kisI bhI vastuko sarvathA sat-rUpa nahIM mAnA gayA hai|
taba kAryako asat hI kahanA hogaa| ) yadi kAryako sarvathA asat kahA jAya to
vaha AkAzake puSpa-samAna na hone rUpa hI hai| yadi asatkA bhI utpAda mAnA jAya
to phira upAdAna kAraNakA koI niyama nahIM rahatA aura na kAryako utpattikA koI
vizvAsa hI banA rahatA hai-gehU~ bokara upAdAna kAraNake niyamAnusAra hama yaha
AzA nahIM rakha sakate ki usase gehU~ hI paidA hoMge, asadutpAdake kAraNa usase
cane, jau yA maTarAdika bhI paidA ho sakate haiM aura isalie hama kisI bhI
utpAdana-kAryake viSayameM nizcita nahIM raha sakate; sArA hI loka-vyavahAra
bigar3a jAtA hai aura yaha saba pratyakSAdikake viruddha hai|' kSaNikaikAntameM
hetuphala-bhAvAdi nahIM banate na hetu-phala-bhAvAdiranyabhAvAdananvayAt  /
santAnAntaravannakaH santAnastadvataH pRthak  // 43 //  ( isake sivAya )
kSaNikaikAntameM pUrvottarakSaNoMke hetubhAva aura phalabhAva Adi kabhI nahIM
banate; kyoMki sarvathA anvayake na honeke kAraNa una pUrvottara kSaNoM meM
santAnAntarako taraha sarvathA anyabhAva hotA hai| ( yadi yaha kahA jAya ki
pUrvottara-kSaNoMkA santAna eka hai to yaha ThIka nahIM hai; kyoMki jo
ekasantAna hotA

Page #107 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Samantabhadra-Bharati [Chapter 3]  "He is not separate from the lineage - his
existence does not arise at all in a completely separate form."  "This
convention of using the word 'ananya' (non-dual) in relation to others is not
false. How can it be? The primary meaning is not convention, and convention
cannot exist without the primary meaning." [44]  "If (from the Buddhist
perspective) it is said that this use of the word 'ananya' in relation to
others, which refers to completely different moments of consciousness that are
called 'lineage', 'non-dual', 'indivisible', or 'one soul', is a convention - a
fabrication or a formality, not real - then, being completely conventional, why
is it not false? It is certainly false, and therefore, no entity like a lineage-
soul can be established based on it. If the lineage is considered as the primary
meaning, then the primary meaning is not completely conventional. And if it is
considered as conventional, then convention cannot exist without the primary
meaning - there is no possibility of formality without the primary. Just as a
lion's picture cannot exist without the lion's essence."  "The Buddhist belief
that the fourfold alternative is inexpressible due to its inability to encompass
all aspects is incorrect. The truth of the difference between the lineage and
the lineage-possessor is inexpressible." [45]  "If (from the Buddhist
perspective) it is said that since the fourfold alternative is not applicable in
all religions - it cannot be said about any religion that it is real, unreal,
both real and unreal, or neither real nor unreal - because saying it is
completely real..."

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 samantabhadra-bhAratI [ pariccheda 3 hai vaha santAnIse pRthaka nahIM hotA-
sarvathA pRthakarUpameM usakA astitva banatA hI nahIM  / ' saMvRti aura
mukhyArthakI sthiti anyeSvananyazabdo'yaM saMvRtirna mRSA katham  /  mukhyArthaH
saMvRtirna syAd vinA mukhyAnna saMvRtiH  // 44 //  'yadi ( bauddhoMkI orase )
yaha kahA jAya ki anyoMmeM ananya zabdakA yaha jo vyavahAra haisarvathA bhinna
citta-kSaNoMko jo santAnake rUpameM ananya, abhinna athavA eka AtmA kahA jAtA
hai-vaha saMvRti hai-kAlpanika athavA aupacArika hai, vAstavika nahIM to
sarvathA saMvRtirUpa honese vaha mithyA kyoM nahIM hai ? avazya hI mithyA hai,
aura isaliye usake AdhArapara santAna AtmA jaisI koI vastu vyavasthita nahIM
bntii| yadi saMtAnako mukhya arthake rUpameM mAnA jAya to mukhyArtha hotA hai
vaha sarvathA saMvRtirUpa nahIM hotA aura yadi saMvRtirUpameM use mAnA jAya to
sAMvRtti binA mukhyArthake banatI nahIM-mukhyake binA upacArakI pravRtti hotI hI
nahIM; jaise siMhake sadbhAva-binA siMhakA citra nahIM bntaa|' catuSkoTi-
vikalpake avaktavyako bauddha-mAnyatA catuSkoTervikalpasya sarvAnteSaktyayogataH
/  tattvA'nyatvamavAcyaM cettayoH santAnatadvatoH  // 45 //  'yadi ( bauddhoMkI
orase ) yaha kahA jAya ki cUMki saba dharmoMmeM catuSkoTivikalpake kathanakA
ayoga hai-sattva-ekatvAdi kisI bhI dharmake viSayameM yaha kahanA nahIM bana
sakatA ki vaha sat-rUpa hai yA asat-rUpa hai athavA sat asat donoM ( ubhaya )
rUpa hai yA donoMrUpa nahIM ( anubhayarUpa ) hai; kyoMki sarvathA sat kahane
para  /

Page #108 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Karika 46:  **Devaagam**  If we say that the origin of a thing is completely
non-existent, then the fault attributed to the "nothingness" side arises. If we
say that it is completely both (existent and non-existent), then both faults
arise. If we say that it is completely experienced, then the thing becomes
objectless, formless, without nature, or without any characteristics, and then
the origin of any alternative does not arise. Therefore, the essence (unity-non-
duality) and the otherness (diversity-duality) of those offspring and
progenitors also become inexpressible (because they are dharma). Accordingly,
the duality-experience dharma also becomes inexpressible (because they are
dharma); because if we say that the dharma of a thing is completely non-
different (inseparable) from the thing, then only the thing arises. If we say
that it is completely different (separate) from the thing, then the designation
does not succeed, i.e., it cannot be said that this is the dharma of that thing.
If we say that it is completely both (different and non-different), then both
faults arise. If we say that it is completely non-experienced (neither different
nor non-different), then the thing becomes without characteristics and without
nature. From this, nothing can be said about the dharma of offspring and
progenitors. (Therefore, this statement is not correct; because)  "In the said
acceptance of inexpressibility, the fourfold alternative of inexpressibility
should not be said either. Because everything would be non-existent, without any
specific characteristic or qualifier." || 46 ||  Then (to the Buddhists) "the
fourfold alternative is inexpressible" should not be said either; because if we
take the side of completely inexpressible (unspeakable) by showing the
unsuitability of expression in all dharmas, then saying "the fourfold
alternative is inexpressible" does not become possible. Saying it would lead to
the possibility of expressibility, and not saying it would not make others
understand it. In such a situation, its transcendence of all alternatives
results. That which transcends all alternatives is devoid of all dharmas, and
that which is devoid of all dharmas is non-existent (like a sky-flower); because
its specific characteristic...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 kArikA 46 ] devAgama usakI utpattike sAtha virodha AtA hai, sarvathA asat
kahanepara zUnya-pakSameM jo doSa diyA jAtA hai vaha ghaTita hotA hai, sarvathA
ubhayarUpa kahanepara donoM doSoMkA prasaMga AtA hai aura sarvathA anubhaya
pakSake lenepara vastu niviSaya, nIrUpa, niHsvabhAva athavA nirupAkhya Thaharato
hai aura taba usameM kisI bhI vikalpakI utpatti nahIM banatI-ataH una santAna
santAnIkA bhI tattva ( ekatvaabheda ) dharma tathA anyatva ( nAnAtva-bheda )
dharma (dharma honese ) avAcya ThaharatA hai| tadanusAra ubhayatva-anubhayatva
dharma bhI (avAcya Thaharate haiM); kyoMki vastuke dharmako vastuse sarvathA
ananya (abhinna) kahanepara, vastumAtrakA prasaMga AtA hai, vastuse sarvathA
anya (bhinna) kahanepara vyapadezakI siddhi nahIM hotI arthAt yaha kahanA nahIM
banatA ki amuka vastukA yaha dharma hai, sarvathA ubhaya ( bhinnAbhinna ) kahane
para donoM doSa Ate haiM aura sarvathA anubhaya ( na bhinna aura na abhinna )
kahanepara vastu nirupAkhya evaM niHsvabhAva ThaharatI haiisase santAna-
santatike dharma-viSayameM kucha bhI kahanA nahIM banatA; ( to yaha kathana
ThIka nahIM hai; kyoMki )' avaktavyakI ukta mAnyatAmeM doSa
avaktavyacatuSkoTivikalpo'pi na kathyatAm  /  asarvAntamavastu syAdavizeSya-
vizeSaNam  /  / 46 //  'taba to ( bauddhoMko) 'catuSkoTivikalpa avaktavya haiM
yaha bhI nahIM kahanA cAhiye; kyoMki saba dhoMmeM uktikA ayoga batalAne arthAt
sarvathA avaktavya ( anabhilApya ) kA pakSa lenepara 'catuSkoTivikalpa avaktavya
hai' yaha kahanA bho nahIM banatA, kahanese kathaMcit vaktavyatvakA prasaMga
upasthita hotA hai aura na kahanese dUsaroMko usakA bodha nahIM karAyA jA sktaa|
aisI sthitimeM usake sarvavikalpAtItva phalita hotA hai| jo sarva vikalpAtIta
hai vaha asarvAnta ( saba dharmose rahita ) hai aura jo asarvAnta hai vaha (
AkAza-kusumake samAna ) avastu hai; kyoMki usake vizeSya

Page #109 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter 3: The Nature of Qualification  **40** Samantbhadra-Bharati
[“Qualification does not arise, nor is it the qualified, nor the qualifier.”]
(And if it is said that the truth is manifested by self-awareness without
qualification and the qualified, that is not correct; because even in self-
awareness, the existence (being) of the qualified is perceived through the
particularity of the qualifier. In the alternative consciousness that arises
after self-awareness, the “awareness of oneself” is perceived as a qualifier-
qualified relationship, not in the nature of self-awareness. If it is said that
self-awareness is in the form of the unqualified and the qualifier, and that it
is self-manifested, then this also proves the qualifier-qualified relationship
in self-awareness; because by saying so, the unqualified and the qualifier
itself becomes the qualifier.)  **47** Negation is of the existent, not of the
non-existent. Negation is of the existent, in relation to other substance,
space, and time. The non-existent is not a state, it is the place of injunction
and prohibition. (If the qualifier-qualified relationship is considered to be
completely non-existent, then its negation does not arise; because) negation is
of the existent (in relation to other substance, space, and time), not of the
non-existent. A completely non-existent entity is not even the subject of
injunction and prohibition – an entity that is non-existent in relation to other
substance, space, and time, and also non-existent in relation to its own
substance, space, and time, is completely non-existent. What injunction can
there be for it? What has no injunction, has no negation; because negation
arises after injunction. And therefore, what is existent and can be spoken of in
some way in relation to its own substance, etc., is rightly considered to be
unspeakable (in relation to other substance, etc.) due to its negation. And what
is existent and is in some way in the form of the qualified and the qualifier in
relation to its own substance, etc., is rightly considered to be in the form of
the unqualified and the qualifier (in relation to other substance, etc.).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 40 samantabhadra-bhAratI [ pariccheda 3 vizeSaNabhAva nahIM banatA-na vaha
vizeSya hai aura na vizeSaNa  / ' (aura yadi yaha kahA jAya ki svasaMvedanase
vizeSaNavizeSyarahita hI tattva pratibhAsita hotA hai to vaha ThIka nahIM;
kyoMki svasaMvedanake bhI sattva (astitva) vizeSaNakI viziSTatAse vizeSya kA hI
avabhAsana hotA hai| svasaMvedanake uttarakAlameM honevAle vikalpabuddhimeM
'svakA saMvedana' isa prakAra vizeSaNa-vizeSyabhAva avabhAsita hotA hai-
svasaMvedanake svarUpa meM nahIM  /  yadi yaha kahA jaba ki svasaMvedana
avizeSya-vizeSaNarUpa hai aura vaha svataH pratibhAsita hotA hai to isase ( bhI
) svasaMvedanameM vizeSaNa-vizeSyabhAva siddha hotA hai; kyoMki vaisA kahanepara
avizeSaNavizeSyatva hI vizeSaNa ho jAtA hai|) niSedha satkA hotA hai asatkA
nahIM dravyAdyantarabhAvena niSedhaH saMjJinaH sataH  /  asadbhedo na bhAvastu
sthAnaM vidhi-niSedhayoH  // 47 //  'yadi vizeSaNa-vizeSyabhAvako sarvathA asat
mAnA jAya to usakA niSedha nahIM banatA; kyoMki ) jo saMjJI ( svadravya-
kSetrakAla-bhAvakI apekSA ) sat hotA hai usIkA paradravya-kSetra-kAlabhAvakI
apekSA niSedha kiyA jAtA hai, na ki astkaa| sarvathA asat padArtha to vidhi-
niSedhakA viSaya hI nahIM hotA-jo padArtha paradravya-kSetra-kAla-bhAvakI
apekSAke samAna svadravya-kSetra-kAla-bhAvakI apekSAse bhI asat hai vaha
sarvathA asat hai, usakI vidhi kaisI ? jisakI vidhi nahIM usakA niSedha nahIM
banatA; kyoMki niSedha vidhi-pUrvaka hotA hai| aura isaliye jo sat hokara apane
dravyAdikI apekSA kathaMcit vaktavya hai usIke ( paradravyAdikI apekSA niSedha
honese ) avaktavyapanA yakta ThaharatA hai| aura jo satapadArtha svadavyAdikI
apekSA kathaMcit vizeSaNa-vizeSyarUpa hai usIke ( paradravyAdikI apekSA )
avizeSya-vizeSaNapanA ThIka ghaTita hotA

Page #110 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Karika 48] Devagam  41. Therefore, Buddhists should know that no object is
inexpressible or non-qualifier-qualified in isolation. ... The inexpressibility
of non-existence and the non-existence of existence.  That which is devoid of
all qualities is non-existent - not being the object of any proof - and that
which is non-existent is (completely) inexpressible (unspeakable), not the
existent; because that which exists is established (confirmed) by proof and
therefore is not completely inexpressible.  _(If it is said that the non-
existent, devoid of all qualities, is not accepted by the Syadvadins, then their
statement that 'non-existent is inexpressible' does not seem to be justified,
then it is not correct to say so; because the statement of the non-existent,
devoid of all qualities, as inexpressible is related only to the hypothetical
assumption, not to the strength of proof), the strength of proof is obtained
only by the object, the non-existence is obtained by the object, due to the
reversal or change of the process, i.e., when the process of the four
characteristics of a substance, etc., of an object, which is taken in any form,
changes - it takes on the expectation of another substance, field, time, and
state - then that object itself becomes non-existent. For example, the non-
existence of a pot in the form of a cloth, etc., in relation to the forms of the
cloth, etc., in the pot, which is established by its own nature.  (If it is said
that it is contradictory to call an object non-existent; because the state of
existence and non-existence is mutually exclusive - existence is not non-
existence and non-existence never becomes existence, then it is not correct to
say so; because even by the utterance of words denoting absence, the meaning of
absence is conveyed; for example,

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 kArikA 48] devAgama 41 ataH ekAntase koI vastu avaktavya yA avizeSya-
vizeSaNarUpa nahIM hai, aisA bauddhoMko jAnanA cAhiye  / ' ... avastukI
avaktavyatA aura vastukI avastutA avastvanabhilApyaM syAtsarvAntaH parivarjitam
/  vastvevA'vastutAM yAti prakriyAyA viparyayAt  /  / 4 /  /  'jo sarvadharmose
rahita haiM vaha avastu hai-kisI bhI pramANakA viSaya na honese-aura jo avastu
hai vaha (hI sarvathA) anabhilApya ( avAcya ) hai na ki vasta; kyoMki jo vastu
hai vaha pramANake dvArA pariniSThita ( pratiSThita ) hotI hai aura isaliye
sarvathA anabhilApya nahIM hotii| _( yadi yaha kahA jAya ki sakala-dharmose
rahita nirupAkhya vastu syAdvAdiyoMke dvArA svIkRta nahIM hai taba unakA yaha
vacana ki 'avastu anabhilApya hai' yukta nahIM jAna par3atA, to yaha kahanA
ThIka nahIM hai; kyoMki sarvadharmoMse rahita avastukA anabhilApyarUpameM
kathana para-parikalpanAmAtrase sambandha rakhatA hai, na ki pramANabalase),
pramANabalase to vastu hI avastutAko prApta hotI hai, prakriyAke viparIta ho
jAne athavA badala jAnese arthAt jaba kisI vastukI svadravyAdicatuSTayalakSaNa-
prakriyA, jo ki kathaMcidrUpako liye hue hotI hai, badala jAtI hai-paradravya-
kSetra-kAla-bhAvakI apekSAko dhAraNa karatI hai-taba vaha vastu hI avastu bana
jAtI hai| jaise svarUpasiddha ghaTake paTAdi-pararUpoMkI apekSA-paTAdike kisI
bhI rUpako ghaTa mAnanekI dRSTise-aghaTapanA hai| ( yadi yaha kahA jAya ki
vastuko ho avastu batalAnA paraspara viruddha hai; kyoMki vastu aura avastukI
sthiti eka-dUsareke parihArarUpa hai-vastu avastu nahIM hotI aura na avastu
kabhI vastu banatI hai to yaha kahanA ThIka nahIM hai; kyoMki abhAva-vAcaka
zabdoMke vacana-dvArA bhI bhAvakA abhidhAna ( kathana ) hotA hai; jaise

Page #111 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter 3: "Bring the Non-Brahmins"  In the phrase "Bring the Non-Brahmins,"
the term "Non-Brahmin" signifies the absence (negation) of Brahmin-qualities.
However, it does not indicate the absence of other qualities like Kshatriya,
etc., but rather their presence. Therefore, the phrase implies that "Brahmins
are not being called, but Kshatriyas, etc., are." Accordingly, Kshatriyas, etc.,
are brought and presented.  In this way, Brahmin, being a quality, is referred
to as "Non-Brahmin," implying a certain absence of that quality, not a complete
absence. Therefore, the meaning of "Non-Brahmin" here should be understood as an
"unintended quality." An unintended (secondary) quality cannot exist without the
intended (primary) quality (the secondary is not seen without the primary), nor
is it itself devoid of existence.  This is why there is no contradiction in the
Jain philosophy of Syadvada in calling a quality "Non-quality" - the system of
primary and secondary qualities, through the process of substance, space, time,
and existence, allows for the transformation of one into the other. This is why
no quality is entirely present, as it also involves the aspect of absence
through its relation to other qualities; and no quality is entirely absent, as
it also involves the aspect of presence through its own nature.  To consider a
quality as entirely present or entirely absent would lead to a complete
breakdown of the system of qualities. Every quality, like presence, also carries
the aspect of absence, and this too is a part of the system of qualities.
Without it, the system of qualities cannot be established. Therefore, in
Syadvada, qualities are presented as having both aspects of presence and
absence, depending on the perspective.  If all religions were to be considered
as completely invalid, then there would be no point in discussing them: "If all
were to be invalid, then what would be the point of discussing them? This is
just a conventional view, contradictory to the ultimate truth." (49)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 42 samantabhadra-bhAratI [ pariccheda 3 'abrAhmaNako lAo' isa vAkyameM
'abrAhmaNa' zabda brAhmaNa-vastuke abhAva ( niSedha ) kA vAcaka hote hue bhI
brAhmaNase bhinna anya kSatriyAdivastuke abhAvakA vAcaka nahIM kintu unake
bhAvakA hI vAcaka hai aura isaliye ukta vAkyake dvArA yaha samajhA jAtA hai ki
'brAhmaNako nahIM kintu kSatriyAdikako bulAyA jA rahA hai;' tadanusAra hI
kSatriyAdikako lAkara upasthita kiyA jAtA hai| isa taraha brAhmaNa koI vastu hai
usIko 'abrAhmaNa' zabdake dvArA kathaMcit avastu kahA gayA hai, sarvathA
abhAvarUpa avastu nahIM; aura isaliye avastukA Azaya yahA~ avivakSita vastu
samajhanA caahiye| avivakSita ( gauNa ) vastu vivakSita ( mukhya ) vastuke
astitva ( bhAva ) ke binA nahIM banatI ( mukhyAhate gauNa-vidhirna dRSTaH ) aura
na svayaM astitva-vihIna hotI hai| isIse arhanmatAnuyAyI syAdvAdiyoMke yahA~
vastuko hI, avastu kahane meM koI virodha nahIM AtA-mukhya-gauNako
vyavasthAvidhise dravya-kSetra-kAla-bhAvarUpa prakriyAke svase para aura parase
sva-rUpameM badala jAnese yaha saba sughaTita hotA hai| isIse koI vastu sarvathA
bhAvarUpa nahIM hai, svarUpakI taraha pararUpase bhI bhAvakA prasaMga Anese;
aura na sarvathA abhAvarUpa hI hai, pararUpakI taraha svarUpase bhI abhAvakA
prasaMga upasthita honese  /  vastuko sarvathA bhAva yA sarvathA abhAvarUpa
mAnanese vastukI koI vyavasthA hI nahIM bntii| pratyeka vastu bhAvakI taraha
abhAva-dharmako bhI sAthameM liye hue hai aura vaha bhI vastukI vyavasthAkA aMga
hai| use chor3a denepara vastu-vyavasthA bana hI nahIM sktii| isIliye
syAdvAdiyoMke yahA~ apekSAvaza kathaMcit bhAvA'bhAvarUpase vastukA pratipAdana
kiyA jAtA hai|) sarva dharmoke avanavya honepara unakA kathana nahIM banatA
sarvAntAzcedavaktavyAsteSAM kiM vacanaM punaH  /  saMvRtizcenmaSaivaiSA
paramArtha-viparyayAt  // 49 //

Page #112 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Translation:  **[Rika 50] Devagam**  43. "If (by the momentary, solitary
Buddhists) it is said that 'all religions are inexpressible' - completely beyond
the reach of words, then what about their Dharma-deshana (religious discourse) -
their words in the form of advocating their own side and criticizing the other
side? - It cannot be formed in any way, and one will have to take refuge in
silence alone; because the statement 'all religions are inexpressible' contains
the fault of self-contradiction in the same way as if someone were to declare
from their own mouth to others, 'I am forever silent'; because at that time they
are speaking, therefore their being forever silent is itself obstructed by that
very statement. If all religions are completely inexpressible, then there can be
no discussion or conversation about them, it does not even become possible to
call them inexpressible, calling them inexpressible also makes them
expressible."  "If it is said that the aforementioned statement is in the form
of *sanvṛti* - taken as a remedy for the purpose of promoting conduct, then how
can the truth be established by this *sanvṛti* statement? It cannot; because
*sanvṛti* is considered false even by the Buddhists themselves, being contrary
to *paramārtha* - against reality. When all religions are completely
inexpressible, then they cannot be made expressible even by the statement 'they
are inexpressible', and neither can others be made to understand them and their
inexpressibility."  **Avacyaka Hetu Ashakti, Abhava Ya Abodh? Asakyatvādavaacyam
Kimbhavatkimbodhatah. Adhantokti-dvayam Na Syaki Vyajenochyatam Sphutam.
||50||**  "Here, the momentary, solitary Buddhists are asked: On what basis is
your statement of complete inexpressibility based? Is it due to *ashakti* - the
inability to speak?

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 kA rikA 50 ] devAgama 43 'yadi (kSaNika ekAntavAdI bauddhoMke dvArA ) yaha kahA
jAya ki 'sarva dharma avaktavya haiM'-sarvathA vacanake agocara haiM to phira
unakA dharma-dezanA-rUpa tathA svapakSake sAdhana aura para-pakSake dUSaNarUpa
vacana kaisA ?-vaha kisI taraha bhI nahIM bana sakegA aura ekamAtra maunakA hI
zaraNa lenA hogA; kyoMki 'sarva dharma avaktavya haiM' isa kathanameM svavacana-
virodhakA doSa usI taraha sughaTita hotA hai jisa taraha ki koI apane mukhase
dUsaroMko yaha pratipAdana kare ki 'maiM sadAke liye maunavratI hU~'; kyoMki usa
samaya vaha bola rahA hai isaliye usakA sadAke liye maunavratI honA svayaM usake
usa vacanase hI bAdhita ho jAtA hai| sarva dharmoke sarvathA avaktavya honepara
unakI koI carcA-vArtA nahIM bana sakatI, unheM avaktavya kahanA bhI nahIM
banatA, avaktavya kahanA bhI unheM vaktavya ThaharAtA hai|' 'yadi yaha kahA jAya
ki ukta vacana saMvRtirUpa hai-vyavahArake pravartanArtha upacArarUpako liye hue
hai to isa saMvRtirUpa vacanase satya kA pratipAdana kaise ho sakatA hai ? nahIM
ho sakatA; kyoMki saMvRti paramArthake viparIta-yathArthatAke virUddha-honese
svayaM bauddhoMke yahA~ mithyA mAnI gaI hai| sarvadharma jaba sarvathA avaktavya
haiM taba ve 'avaktavya haiM' isa vacanake dvArA bhI vaktavya nahIM bana sakate
aura na dUsaroMko unakA tathA unakI avaktavyatAkA pratyaya ( bodha ) karAyA jA
sakatA hai|' avAcyakA hetu azakti, abhAva yA abodha ? azakyatvAdavAcyaM
kimabhAvAtkimabodhataH  /  Adhantokti-dvayaM na syAki vyAjenocyatAM sphuTam  //
50 /  /  'yahA~ kSaNika ekAntavAdI bauddhoMse pUchA jAtA hai ki tumhArA yaha
sarvathA avaktavya kathana kisa hetupara avalambita hai| kyA azaktike
kAraNa?-kathana karanekI sAmarthya na honese

Page #113 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  44 Samantabhadra-Bharati [Chapter 3] Is it unutterable? - Due to what
absence? - Is it unutterable due to the non-existence of the dharma of things?
Or due to ignorance? - Is it unutterable due to the lack of knowledge of the
dharma of things? (There cannot be any other reason besides these three; because
reasons like the vow of silence, lack of purpose, fear, and shame, etc., which
are the causes of the inability of the activity of sense perception, etc., are
included in the inability itself.) Of these three, the statement of the two
reasons of beginning and end (inability and ignorance) does not hold; because
the Buddhists consider the Great Being Buddha to be omniscient in the form of
Prajnaparamita and have accepted ten powers in him, namely, forgiveness,
friendliness, meditation, charity, effort, conduct, wisdom, compassion, means,
and joy. In such a situation, how can the statement of the said two reasons be
made? It cannot be made. Then the third reason remains. Therefore, what is the
point of making an excuse of unutterability? Clearly say that there is a
complete absence of reality - there is no existence of any thing anywhere. By
clearly saying this, there will be no fault of Maya-chara, which hinders the
attainment of Buddha, and then there will be no difference between this
unutterability and the complete absence, the voidism.  "In momentary
annihilation, the irony of violence-nonviolence is that which is without the
intention to harm harms, that which is with the intention to harm does not harm.
The mind that has not intended or resolved to harm, and has not harmed, attains
bondage, and the mind that attains bondage does not attain liberation.
Liberation is..."

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 44 samantabhadra-bhAratI pariccheda 3] avaktavya hai ?-yA abhAvake kAraNa
?-vastu-dharmakA astitva na honese avaktavya hai ? athavA ajJAnake kAraNa
?-vastudharmoMkI anabhijJatA-ajAnakArIse avaktavya hai ? (ina tIna kAraNoMse
bhinna anya koI kAraNa nahIM ho sakatA; kyoMki maunavrata, prayojanAbhAva, bhaya
aura lajjAdika jaise kAraNoMkA, jo ki indriyatAlvAdikaraNavyApArakI azaktimeM
nimittakAraNa hote haiM, azaktimeM hI antarbhAva hai  /  ) ina tInoMmeM Adi aura
antake do kAraNoMkA (azakti tathA ajJAna ) kA kathana to banatA nahIM; kyoMki
bauddhoMne mahAtmA buddhako prajJApAramitAke rUpameM sarvajJa mAnA hai aura
usameM kSamA, maitrI, dhyAna, dAna, vIrya, zIla, prajJA, karuNA, upAya aura
pramoda nAmake dasa bala aMgIkAra kiye haiN| aisI sthitimeM ukta do kAraNoMkA
kathana kaise bana sakatA hai ? nahIM bana sktaa| taba tIsarA kAraNa hI zeSa
raha jAtA hai  /  ataH avaktavyakA bahAnA banAnese kyA ? spaSTa kahiye ki
vastutattvakA savathA abhAva hai-kisI bhI vastukA kahIM koI astitva nahIM hai|
aisA spaSTa kahanese mAyAcArakA doSa nahIM rahegA, jo ki . buddhake AptatvameM
bAdhaka par3atA hai, aura taba isa avaktavyavAda aura sarvathA abhAvarUpa
zUnyavAdameM koI antara nahIM rhegaa|' kSaNikaikAntameM hiMmA-ahiMsAdikI
viDambanA hinastyanabhisaMdhAta na hinastyabhisaMdhimat  /  badhyate tavayApetaM
cittaM baddhaM na mucyate  // 51 //  '( bauddhoMke kSaNa-kSaNameM niranvaya-
vinAzarUpa siddhAntake anusAra ) jo citta hiMsAke abhiprAyase rahita hai vaha to
hisA karatA hai, jo hiMsA karaneke abhiprAyase yukta hai vaha hiMsA nahIM
karatA, jisane hiMsAkA koI abhiprAya athavA saMkalpa nahIM kiyA aura na hiMsA hI
kI vaha citta bandhanako prApta hotA hai aura jo citta bandhanako prApta hotA
hai usakI mukti nahIM hotImukti anya

Page #114 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Verse 52]  The liberation of the unattached mind is not possible; because the
mind that intends to commit violence is destroyed at the moment of intending,
and in the next moment, a different mind, which has no intention, thought, or
resolution of violence, performs the act of violence. Upon the immediate
destruction of that violent mind, in the third moment, a third mind, which
neither intended nor performed the act of violence, receives the bondage from
the act of violence of the second mind. And upon the immediate destruction of
that third mind, which received the bondage, it does not attain liberation from
the bondage of that sinful act. Then, whose liberation is it? Does the
liberation of the unattached mind become possible? It does not. Since liberation
is dependent on bondage, when there is no bondage, how can there be liberation,
which is the release from bondage? In this way, the destruction of the fruit of
action and the enjoyment of the fruit of inaction arise in the context of the
Buddhists - that is, the one who performed the action does not enjoy its fruit,
and the one who did not perform the action enjoys the fruit of that action,
which is a subject of ridicule. Besides this, when the liberation of the bound
mind does not occur, then the practice of Yama-Niyama, etc., for liberation
becomes futile.  _The destruction is considered without a cause, because the
destruction is without a cause, the violence is not the cause of the violent.
The destruction of the lineage of the mind, which is considered liberation, is
not based on the eightfold path._  (According to the momentary, isolated
Buddhist doctrine, destruction happens on its own, it has no cause. When there
is no cause for destruction, then the violent is not the cause of violence - it
is not possible to call anyone violent. Similarly, the liberation that is
considered to be the destruction of the lineage of the mind is not based on the
eightfold path. In the Buddhist doctrine, liberation (Nirvana) is considered to
be the right view, perception, perceiver, speech, body, action, effort, and
mindfulness.)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 kArikA 52] devAgama abaddha-cittakI hotI hai; kyoMki hiMsAkA abhiprAya
karanevAlA citta vaisA abhiprAya karaneke kSaNameM hI naSTa ho jAtA hai aura
uttarakSaNameM dUsarA citta, jisane hiMsAkA koI irAdA, vicAra athavA saMkalpa
nahIM kiyA, usa hiMsA-kAryako karatA hai, usa hiMsaka cittake tatkSaNa naSTa ho
jAnepara tIsare kSaNameM tIsarA hI citta, jisane na to hiMsAkA koI saMkalpa kiyA
aura na hiMsAkArya hI kiyA, usa dvitIya cittake hiMsAkarmase bandhanako prApta
hotA hai aura bandhako prApta hue usa tRtIya cittake bhI tatkSaNa naSTa ho
jAnepara use usa pApakarmake bandhanase muktikI prApti nahIM hotI-taba mukti
kisakI hotI hai ? kyA abaddha-cittakI bhI mukti banatI hai ? nahIM bntii|
muktike bandhapUrvaka honese jaba bandhana hI nahIM taba bandhanase chuTakArA
pAnerUpa mukti kaisI ? isa taraha bauddhoMke yahA~ kRtakarmake phalakA nAza aura
akRtakarmake phala-bhogakA prasaMga upasthita hotA hai-arthAt jisane karma kiyA
vaha usake phalakA bhoktA nahIM hotA aura jisane karma nahIM kiyA use usa
karmakA phala bhoganA hotA hai, jo ki eka upahAsakA viSaya hai| isake sivAya
jaba baddha-cittakI mukti nahIM hotI taba muktike liye yama-niyamAdikA anuSThAna
vyartha ThaharatA hai|' _ nAzako nirhetuka mAnanepara doSApatti
ahetukatvAnnAzasya hiMsAheturna hiMsakaH  /  citta-santati-nAzazca mokSo
nASTAGga hetukaH  // 52 //  _(kSaNika ekAntavAdI bauddhamatake anusAra nAza
svayaM hotA hai, usakA koI kAraNa nahIM hotA, jaba nAzakA koI kAraNa nahIM hotA
taba hiMsaka hiMsAkA hetu nahIM ThaharatA--kisIko hiMsaka kahanA nahIM bntaa|
isI taraha citta-santatike nAzarUpa jo mokSa mAnA gayA hai vaha bhI
aSTAGgahetuka nahIM banatA  /  bauddhoMke yahA~ mokSa (nirvANa ) ko jo
samyaktva, saMjJA, saMjJI, vAkkAya

Page #115 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 46 Samantabhadra-Bharati [Chapter 3 Karma, Antarvyayam, Ajiva, Smriti, and
Samadhi]  It is said that destruction is caused by these eight factors. Since it
is said to be without a cause, it is as contradictory as saying that the Sugata
is both omniscient and not omniscient.  If the Buddhists accept the existence of
a cause for the beginning of the transformation of action, then the cause of
violence is the violent (killer) and the cause of liberation is the practice of
the eight limbs, such as right faith. This cause is the cause of both
destruction and production, and therefore it is the support of both. Therefore,
it is not different from its support, which is both destruction and production.
Just as the blow of a hammer is the cause of the destruction of a pot and the
production of shards, so too is the cause of both actions not different.
Therefore, just as the cause of the head and the tree is the same, so too is the
cause of both actions the same. This is a flaw in the Buddhist view that
destruction is without a cause. If there is no cause for destruction, then there
is no cause for production either. Because there is no difference between
destruction and production from the point of view of action, it is not logical
to say that one is without a cause and the other is with a cause.
**Explanation:** The question for the Buddhists is: If destruction is without a
cause, ...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 46 samantabhadra-bhAratI [pariccheda 3 karma, antarvyAyAma, ajIva, smRti, aura
samAdhi ina ATha hetuoMse huA batalAyA jAtA hai vaha nAzake nirhetuka honese uso
taraha bAdhita ThaharatA hai jisa taraha sugatake sarvajJatA aura asarvajJatA
donoMkA kathana viruddha ThaharatA hai|' virUpakAryArambha ke liye hetukI
mAnyatAmeM daMSa virUpa-kAryArambhAya yadi hetu-samAgamaH  /
AzrayibhyAmananyo'sAvavizeSAdayuktavat  /  / 53 //  . _ '( bauddhamatameM
anvayake abhAva athavA niranvaya-vinAzake svIkAra karanese svarUpa-sadRzakArya
koI hotA nahIM, taba ) yadi bauddhoMke dvArA visadRzakAryake Arambhake liye
hetukA samAgama iSTa kiyA jAtA hai-hiMsAke heturUpa hiMsaka ( vadhaka ) kA aura
mokSake heturUpa samyaktvAdi aSTa-aMgakA vyApAra mAnA jAtA hai to vaha hetu-
samAgama nAza tathA utpAda donoMkA kAraNa honese unakA AzrayabhUta hai aura
isaliye apane AzrayI nAza aura utpAdarUpa donoM kAryoMke sAtha ananyarUpa hai-jo
mudgaraprahAra ghaTanAza-kAryakA hetu hai vahI kapAloM ( ThIkaroM) ke utpAda-
kAryakA bhI hetu hai, donoM kAryoMkA hetu bhinna-bhinna na honese donoMke liye
ayuktakI bhA~ti-tAdAtmyako prApta zIzamapanA aura vRkSapanAke kAraNa-kalApakI
tarahaeka hI hetukA vyApAra ThIka ghaTita hotA hai aura isase bauddhoMkA nAza-
kArya bhI sahetuka ThaharAtA hai, jise ve nirhetuka batalAte haiM, yaha eka
hetu-doSa isa hetu-samAgamako mAnyatAmeM upasthita hotA hai| yadi vinAzake liye
hetukA samAgama nahIM, to utpAdake liye bhI hetukA samAgama mata mAnoM; kyoMki
kAryakI dRSTisenAza aura utpAda donoM meM koI bheda na honese-ekako nirhetuka
aura dUsareko sahetuka batalAnA yukti-saMgata nahIM kahA jA sktaa|' . vyAkhyA-
bauddhoMse prazna hai ki yadi vinAza nirhetuka hai,

Page #116 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Karika 54:  **If there is no cause for the Devagama, which occurs
spontaneously, then for whom do the causes (violent, non-violent, and the
eightfold path leading to liberation) operate?**  They answer this question by
saying that the causes operate for the production of dissimilar effects. But
this solution is not correct; because the operation of causes is the source of
both destruction and production, and the source is inseparable from its
dependent, not different. This is because there is no difference between them.
Just as there is no difference in the operation of causes in the case of
inseparable substances. The operation of causes is not different for the
inseparable substances like the Shinsapa and the tree, and the knowledge of
painting and the blue, etc., colors. One group of causes leads to their self-
realization. In reality, the destruction of the previous form is the production
of the subsequent form. Therefore, the cause of both is the same material, not
different. Otherwise, the Vaisheshika doctrine would be relevant. How surprising
it is that the cause of destruction is not different from the cause of the
production of dissimilar effects, so it is accepted as causeless, but the cause
of production is not different from the cause of destruction, so it is not
considered causeless! Therefore, since there is no difference between
destruction and production, both should be considered caused or uncaused. It is
not logical to consider one uncaused and the other caused.  **The aggregates,
etc., do not become the cause of origination, existence, and destruction,
because they are continuous and uncreated. Their origination, existence, and
destruction are not like the horn of a rhinoceros.** (54)  (When the momentary,
absolute Buddhists accept the coming together of causes for the beginning of a
dissimilar effect, this question arises...)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 kArikA 54 ] devAgama usakA koI kAraNa nahIM hai, vaha svarasataH hotA hai, to
kAraNoM( hiMsAjanaka hiMsaka aura mokSahetu samyaktvAdi aSTAGga ) kA vyApAra
kisake lie hotA hai ? isa praznakA ve yaha samAdhAna karate haiM ki visadRza-
kAryake utpAdake lie kAraNoMkA vyApAra hotA hai| parantu unakA yaha samAdhAna
ThIka nahIM hai; kyoMki kAraNoMkA vyApAra nAza tathA utpAda donoMkA janaka
honese Azraya hai aura Azraya apane AzrayIseutpAda-nAzaseananya-abhinna hotA
hai, bhinna nhiiN| kAraNa ki una donoMmeM paraspara koI antara nahIM hai| ThIka
usI prakAra jisa prakAra ki apRthak-siddha padArthoke kAraNa-vyApArameM bheda
nahIM hotaa| ziMzapA aura vRkSa tathA citrajJAna aura nIlAdi-nirbhAsa ina
apRthak-siddha padArthoMse unakA kAraNa-vyApAra bhinna nahIM hai| eka kAraNa-
samUhase hI unakA AtmalAbha hotA hai| vAstavameM jo pUrvAkArakA vinAza hai vahI
uttarAkArakA utpAda hai| ataH donoMkA kAraNa eka hI sAmagrI hai, bhinna nhiiN|
anyathA, vaizeSika matakA prasaMga aavegaa| kaisA Azcarya hai ki visadRzakAryake
utpAdaka kAraNoMse vinAzake kAraNa bhinna na honese use to nirhetuka svIkAra
kiyA jAtA hai, aura vinAzake kAraNoMse utpAdake kAraNa bhinna na honese use
nirhetuka nahIM mAnA jAtA ! ataH nAza aura utpAdameM koI antara na honese
donoMko sahetuka yA ahetuka mAnanA caahie| ekako ahetuka aura dUsareko sahetuka
mAnanA yuktiyukta nahIM hai| skandhAdike sthityutpattivyaya nahIM banatA
skandha-santatayazcaiva saMvRtitvAdasaMskRtAH  /  sthityutpattivyayAsteSAM na
syuH khara-viSANavat  // 54 //  '( jaba kSaNika ekAntavAdI bauddhoMke dvArA
virUpa-kAryArambhake liye hetukA samAgama mAnA jAtA hai taba yaha prazna paidA
For

Page #117 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter 48: Samantabhadra-Bharati  **[The question arises: Are atomic moments
or aggregates generated by a cause? The first view, that atomic moments are
generated, leads to a contradiction similar to the contradiction between the
established and the establisher, and the destructible and the destroyer. How can
there be a generation with a cause? In the absence of cause and effect, these
states, generation, and destruction, are contradictory, because atoms are
indivisible. The 43rd verse already negated the existence of cause and effect in
the context of momentary existence with the statement "Not because of cause and
effect, nor because of other causes."  **  **Just as there is no state without
an establisher, and no destruction without a destroyer, similarly, there is no
generation without cause and effect. How can there be a generation with a cause?
If the second view is accepted, that aggregates are generated, then aggregates
are not real in the ultimate sense according to Buddhists, and are therefore
uncreated and without a cause. How can there be a cause for them? In the absence
of the object, there is no means. Therefore, the five aggregates of Buddhists
(form, feeling, perception, volition, and consciousness) are not real in the
ultimate sense, but are mere conceptual constructs. Their states, generation,
and destruction are like the horn of a donkey. Just as the horn of a donkey does
not exist, and therefore cannot have a state, generation, or destruction,
similarly, the aggregates of form, feeling, perception, volition, and
consciousness, which are composed of atoms of form, feeling, smell, and touch,
are not real, but are conceptual constructs. Therefore, their states,
generation, and destruction do not occur. **

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 48 samantabhadra-bhAratI [ pariccheda 3 hotA hai ki usa hetuse paramANu-kSaNa
utpana hote haiM yA skandha-santatiyA~ ? prathama pakSa paramANu-kSaNoMkA
utpanna honA mAnanese sthApyasthApaka aura vinAzya-vinAzakabhAvakI taraha hetu-
phalabhAvakA bhI virodha upasthita hotA hai  /  taba sahetukA utpatti kaise bana
sakatI hai ? kArya-kAraNake abhAva honepara ye sthiti, utpatti aura vyaya dharma
virodhako prApta hote haiM, kyoMki paramANu niraMza hote haiN| "na hetu-
phalabhAvAdiranyabhAvAdananvayAt' isa vAkya-dvArA 43vIM kArikAke antargata
kSaNika-ekAntameM pahale hI kAryakAraNa-bhAvakA niSedha kiyA jA cukA hai| sthiti
aura vinAzakI taraha ahetukA utpatti bhI nahIM banatI; kyoMki sthApya-sthApakake
abhAvameM jisa prakAra sthitikA aura vinAzya-vinAzakake abhAvameM jisa prakAra
vinAzakA abhAva hotA hai usI prakAra hetu-phalabhAvake abhAvameM utpattikA bhI
abhAva hotA hai, taba sahetukA utpattikI kalpanA kaisI ? yadi dUsarA pakSa-
skandha-santatiyoMkA utpanna honA-mAnA jAya to) skandha-sannatiyA~ bauddhoMke
yahA~ paramArthasat na honese asaMskRta haiM-akAryarUpa haiM-taba unake liye
hetukA samAgama kaisA? sAdhyake abhAvameM sAdhanakA bhI abhAva hotA hai| ataH
(rUpa, vedanA, vijJAna, saMjJA aura saMskAra rUpameM mAne gaye) bauddhoMke jo
pA~ca skandha haiM ve koI pAramArthika sat na hokara saMvRtirUpakalpanA-mAtra
haiM unake sthiti, utpatti aura vinAzakA vidhAna gadheke soMgakI taraha nahIM
banatA |-gdheke sIMgakA sadbhAva na honese jaise usameM sthiti, utpatti aura
vinAza ye tInoM ghaTita nahIM hote vaise hI paraspara asaMbaddha rUpa-rasa-
gandha-sparzake paramANurUpa 'rUpaskandha', sukha-duHkhAdirUpa, 'vedanAskandha'
savikalpaka aura nirvikalpaka jJAnake bhedarUpa vijJAnaskandha, vRkSAdi
vastuoMke nAma (zabda) rUpa saMjJAskandha aura jJAna-puNya-pApakI vAsanArUpa
saMskAraskandha jaba vAstavika na hokara kAlpanika haiM to unake sthitiutpatti
aura vinAza ye tInoM ghaTita nahIM hote aura inake ghaTita

Page #118 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Karika 55, 56] Devagam  **49. If they do not exist, then there is no action
for them, so the concept of cause and effect is futile.**  **55.** The fault of
both [the eternal and non-eternal] and the inexpressible [as sole realities]
lies in their contradiction. The unity of both [eternal and non-eternal] is the
hatred of the Syadvada-naya-knowers [i.e., those who reject the theory of
Syadvada]. Even in the inexpressible, it is appropriate to speak of the
speakable.  **(If the identity of both extremes is accepted, then both eternity
and non-eternity will either become eternal or non-eternal; because in the state
of identity, the contradictory situation ceases to exist and becomes a single
situation. When there is only one extreme, either eternity or non-eternity, then
the acceptance of both extremes simultaneously becomes contradictory.)**  **(If,
out of fear of the presence of contradiction in the acceptance of both extremes
of eternity and non-eternity, the extreme of inexpressibility (unspeakability)
is accepted, then that too does not work; because accepting the principle of
complete inexpressibility, the Buddhists, who say "the truth is completely
inexpressible," face self-contradiction - just as the man who says "I am always
silent" faces contradiction; because his saying so contradicts his vow of
perpetual silence.)**  **56.** The faultless arrangement of the eternal and
momentary extremes is that the eternal is always recognized, not suddenly and
without interruption. The momentary is due to the difference in time, and the
fault of the wandering of the intellect.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 kArikA 55, 56 ] devAgama 49 na honese ve koI kArya nahIM rahate taba unake liye
hetu-samAgamakI kalpanA hI vyartha ThaharatI hai|' ubhaya tathA avaktavya
ekAntoMkI sadoSatA virodhAnnobhayaikAtmyaM syAdvAda-nyAya-vidviSAm  /
avAcyataikAnte'pyukti vAcyamiti yujyate  /  / 5 /  /  'yadi nityatva aura
anityatva donoM ekAntapakSoMko eka rUpameM mAnA jAya to yaha bAta
syAdvAdanyAyake vidveSiyoMke-sarvathA ekAntavAdiyoMke-yahAM banatI nahIM; kyoMki
isa mAnyatAmeM virodha doSa AtA hai-jaisA ki eka sAtha jIne-maranemeM virodha
hai vaisA hI virodha yahA~ bhI ghaTita hotA hai|'  /  (yadi donoM ekAntoMkA
tAdAtmya mAnA jAya to nityatva aura anityatva donoM yA to nityatvarUpa meM
pariNata ho jAya~ge yA anityatvarUpameM; kyoMki tAdAtmyAvasthA meM virodhI
sthiti na rahakara eka hI sthiti ho jAtI hai| jaba nityatva-anityatvarUpa donoM
ekAntoMmeMse kisI eka hI ekAntakI sthiti rahI taba yugapat ubhaya ekAntoMkI
mAnyatA viruddha ThaharatI hai|) 'yadi ( nityatva va anityatva donoM ekAntoMkI
mAnyatAmeM virodhakI upasthitike bhayase) avAcyatA ( anabhilApyatA) kA ekAnta
mAnA jAya to vaha bhI nahIM banatA; kyoMki sarvathA avAcyakA siddhAnta
mAnanepara 'tattva sarvathA anabhilApya hai' aisA abhilApa (vacana-vyavahAra )
karanevAle bauddhoMke svavacanavirodha upasthita hotA hai-usI prakAra jisa
prakAra ki usa puruSake upasthita hotA hai jo yaha kahe ki 'maiM sadA maunavratI
hU~'; kyoMki usakA vaisA kahanA usake sadA mauna-vratakA virodhI hai|' nitya-
kSaNika-ekAntoMkI nirdoSa vyavasthAvidhi nityaM
tatpratyabhijJAnAnnAkasmAttadavicchidA  /  kSaNikaM kAlabhedAtte
buddhayasaMcaradoSataH  // 56 /  /

Page #119 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Samantabhadra-Bharati [ Chapter 3 (O Arhan Bhagavan, the leader of Syadvada-
Nyaya) ]  In your opinion, the true nature of all beings (including souls) is in
some way eternal; because it is recognized - it is the same as what was seen
before. This oneness of perception in the past, present, and future proves its
eternality. And this recognition is not sudden, without any cause, and illusory;
because it is experienced without any interruption, in an uninterrupted form.
(If it is considered to be an obstacle to direct perception, then it is not
correct, because the object of direct perception is the present, changing
reality, and therefore it does not become a factor in the perception of oneness,
which encompasses past and future changes. What is not its object, has no
obstacle or supporter, like the knowledge of the eye in the knowledge of the
ear.)  And in your opinion, the true nature is in some way momentary,
impermanent; because it is found to change with the difference of time. The
object changes from moment to moment, which are in some way different from each
other. Even with this change of transformations and the continuous production
and destruction of the object from moment to moment, the object never perishes
due to its inherent qualities. From this perspective of transformations, the
object is in some way momentary - not completely momentary. If the object is
considered completely momentary and completely eternal, then the flow of
knowledge will not be possible, this will be a flaw. The flow of knowledge is
evident only in the acceptance of Anekanta.  Production and destruction are not
of the general, but of the particular. The general does not arise, nor does it
perish, because of the association with the particular. The particular arises
and perishes, because it is associated with the general. (57)  (O Bhagavan!) In
your opinion, the general form - all...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 samantabhadra-bhAratI [ pariccheda 3 (he syAdvAdanyAya-nAyaka arhan bhagavan )
Apake matameM ( sampUrNa jIvAdi ) vastutattva kathaMcit nitya hai; kyoMki usakA
pratyabhijJAna hotA hai-yaha vahI hai jo pahale dekhA thA, aisA
pUrvottaradazAmeM jo ekatvakA bodha hotA hai vaha usake nityatvako siddha karatA
hai  /  aura yaha pratyabhijJAna akasmAt-binA kisI kAraNake niviSaya tathA
bhrAntarUpa-nahIM hotA; kyoMki aviccheda rUpase binA kisI bAdhAke anubhavameM
AtA hai| ( yadi pratyakSako bAdhaka mAnA jAya to vaha ThIka nahIM hai, kyoMki
pratyakSakA viSaya vartamAna paryAyAtmaka vastU honese pUrvA'para-paryAyavyApI
ekatvalakSaNa pratyabhijJAnake viSayameM usakI pravatti nahIM bntii| jo apanA
viSaya nahIM, usameM koI bAdhaka yA sAdhaka nahIM hotA, jaise zrotraindriyake
jJAna-viSayameM cakSuindriyakA jnyaan|) aura Apake matameM vastutattva kathaMcit
kSaNika haianitya hai; kyoMki usameM kAlake bhedase pariNAma-bheda pAyA jAtA
haikSaNa-kSaNameM vastuko paryAyeM palaTatI rahatI haiM, jo kathaMcit
ekadUsarese bhinna hotI haiN| paryAyoMke isa palaTana ( parivartana ) evaM
'pariNamanase vastumeM pratikSaNa utpAda-vyayake hote rahanepara bhI vastukA
apane dhrauvya guNake kAraNa kabhI nAza nahIM hotaa| isI paryAyadRSTise vastu
kathaMcit kSaNika hai-sarvathA kSaNika nhiiN| vastuko sarvathA kSaNika tathA
sarvathA nitya mAnanepara jJAnakA saMcAra nahIM bana sakegA, yaha doSa aaegaa|
jJAnakA saMcAra anekAntakI mAnyatAmeM hI pratItigocara hotA hai|' utpAda-vyaya
sAmAnyakA nahIM, vizeSakA hotA hai na sAmAnyAtmanodeti na vyeti vyaktamanvayAt
/  vyetyudeti vizeSAtte sahaikatrodayAdi sat  /  / 57 /  /  (he bhagavan ! )
Apake matameM sAmAnya svarUpase-sarva

Page #120 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Karika 58  **From the perspective of the substance, which is present in all
states or in the states of the past, present, and future, there is neither
production nor destruction.** Because the manifestation is in the form of
anuvaya (inherence), the general nature of the substance, which is the nature of
the substance, remains constant in all its states.  (If it is said that the cut
nails and hair grow again, then there is a contradiction in the perception of
anuvaya, because both production and destruction are seen in them, whereas they
should not be there due to anuvaya. It is not correct to say so, because the
qualifier 'vyakti' (individual) is attached to anuvaya, which indicates that it
should not be contradicted by the ekatanvaya (one-ness) proof. Here, these
nails, etc., are the same, which is contradicted by the ekatanvaya proof,
because the produced nails, etc., are not the same but are similar to those that
have been cut.)  **From the perspective of the specific state or difference, the
object is destroyed and produced.** The simultaneous presence of production,
destruction, and permanence in one object is called 'sat' (being), as is known
from the sutrakar's statement 'utpada-vyaya-dhrauvya-yuktam sat' (being is that
which is endowed with production, destruction, and permanence).  The difference
of production, etc., and being independent, is the production of the object, the
destruction is due to the cause, and the rule is different from the
characteristic. They are not independent of the state of the species, etc., like
a flower on a tree. || 58 ||  (If it is said that the production of the object
is due to the cause, and the destruction is without a cause, then it is
contradicted by the rule that the cause of the production of the object is also
the cause of the destruction of the material cause. This contradicts the
Buddhists' claim that production is caused and destruction is uncaused.)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 kArikA 58 ] devAgama avasthAoM athavA pUrvottara-paryAyoMmeM sAdhAraNa
svabhAvarUpase rahanevAle dravyako dRSTise-na to koI vastu utpanna hotI hai aura
na vinAzako prApta hotI hai| kyoMki prakaTa anvayarUpa hai-vastukA sAmAnya
svarUpa jo dravyasvabhAva hai vaha usakI saba avasthAoMmeM sadA sthira rahatA
hai|' ( yadi yaha kahA jAya ki kATe hue nakha-keza phirase upajate haiM, unameM
anvayake darzana-dvArA vyabhicAra-doSa AtA hai, kyoMki unameM utpatti aura
vinAza donoM dikhAI par3ate haiM jaba ki anvayake kAraNa ve donoM na hone cAhiye
the, to aisA kahanA ThIka nahIM hai; kAraNa ki anvayake sAtha 'vyakta' vizeSaNa
lagA huA hai, jo isa bAtakA sUcaka hai ki ekatvAnvaya pramANase bAdhita nahIM
honA cAhiye  /  yahA~ ye nakhAdika ve hI haiM aisA ekatvAnvaya prakaTa-pramANase
bAdhita hai, kyoMki utpanna nakhAdika ve hI na hokara unake sadRza haiM jo kaTa
cuke haiN| ) 'vizeSarUpase-paryAya athavA vyatirekakI dRSTise-vastu vinazatI
tathA upajatI hai| eka vastumeM yugapat utpAda, vyaya aura dhrauvyakA honA 'sat'
kahalAtA haijaisAki sUtrakArake utpAda-vyaya-dhrauvyayuktaM sat' isa vacanase
bhI jAnA jAtA hai|' utpAdAdikI bhinnatA aura nirapekSa honepara avastutA
kAryotpAdaH kSayo hetorniyamAllakSaNAtpRthak  /  na tau
jAtyAdyavasthAnAdanapekSAH khapuSpavat  // 58 /  /  'hetukAupAdAnakAraNakA-jo
kSaya haipUrvAkArase vinAza hai-vaha uttarAkArarUpa kAryakA utpAda hai; kyoMki
donoMke eka hetukA niyama hai-jo hetu utpAdarUpa kAryake utpAdakA hai vahI
upAdAnake vinAzakA hetu hai| isase bauddhoMkA utpAdako sahetuka aura vinAzako
nirhetuka batalAnA bAdhita ThaharatA hai| ( isa para yadi

Page #121 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 52  It is not correct to say that production and destruction have the same
cause and are therefore inseparable, because production and destruction are
distinct from each other due to their different characteristics. The
characteristic of the cause of production is the acquisition of form, and the
characteristic of the cause of destruction is the loss of nature. Thus, being
characterized by different characteristics, they are distinct from each other,
though not entirely different.  Due to the state of existence of things like
species, destruction and production are not only different but also inseparable.
For example, without clay, etc., the destruction of a pot and the production of
a bowl cannot occur. Destruction and production are dependent on each other, not
on the existence of the substance itself, which is the state of existence of the
species, etc. The substance is clay, etc., and it is clearly seen that it is
destroyed in the form of a pot and produced in the form of a bowl.  If
production, destruction, and permanence are not interdependent, then all three
would be like flowers in the sky, non-existent. Without permanence, there is no
production; without destruction and production, there is no permanence; and
without permanence and production, there is no destruction. This clearly shows
that what is real is endowed with production, destruction, and permanence,
otherwise it would not be real, it would be like a flower in the sky, non-
existent.  ## 59  (When a golden pot is broken and made into a crown) The
individual who is the object of the pot experiences sorrow (grief), the
individual who is the object of the crown experiences joy, and the individual
who is the object of the gold experiences a neutral state, free from both sorrow
and joy, due to the destruction, production, and permanence of the pot, crown,
and gold respectively.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 52 samantabhadra-bhAratI [ pariccheda 3 yaha kahA jAya ki utpAda aura vinAza
donoMkA eka hI hetu honepara donoM abhinna Thaharate haiM, to yaha ThIka nahIM,
kyoMki utpAda aura vinAza donoM lakSaNabhedake kAraNa eka dUsarese kathaMcit
bhinna haiM-kAryotpAdakA lakSaNa svarUpalAbha hai aura hetukSayakA lakSaNa
svabhAvapracyuti hai| isa taraha bhinna lakSaNase lakSita honeke kAraNa donoM
kathaMcit bhinna haiMsarvathA bhinna nhiiN| jAti Adike avasthAnake kAraNa nAza
aura utpAda donoM bhinna hI nahIM, kathaMcit abhinna bhI haiM; kyoMki miTTI Adi
dravyake binA ghaTakA nAza aura kapAlakA utpAda nahIM banatA-nAza aura utpAda
donoM paryAyakI apekSAse haiM, jAtyAdike avasthAnarUpa saddravyakI apekSAse
nhiiN| sadravya miTTI Adi hai, vahI ghaTAkAra rUpase naSTa huI aura kapAlake
rUpase utpanna huI, aisA spaSTa pratIta hotA hai| yadi utpAda, vyaya aura
dhrauvya paraspara apekSA na rakheM, to tInoM hI AkAzake puSpake samAna avastu
ThahareMsthiti aura vinAzake binA kevala utpAda nahIM banatA, nAza aura utpAdake
binA sthiti nahIM banatI aura sthiti tathA utpAdake binA vinAza nahIM bntaa|
isase yaha spaSTa phalita hotA hai ki jo sat hai vaha utpAda-vyaya-dhrauvyase
yukta hai, anyathA usakA satva hI nahIM banatA, vaha AkAzakusumake sadRza avastu
ThaharatA hai|' eka dravyako nAzotpAdasthitimeM bhinna bhAvoMkI utpatti ghaTa-
mauli-suvarNArthI nAzotpAdasthitiSvayam  /  zoka-pramoda-mAdhyasthyaM jano yAti
sahetukam  /  / 59 /  /  '( suvarNa ghaTako tor3akara mukuTake banAye jAnepara )
nAza utpAda aura sthitikI jo avasthAe~ hotI haiM, unameM yaha ghaTakA arthI jana
zoka (viSAda) ko, mukuTakA arthI harSako aura suvarNakA arthI zoka tathA harSase
rahita madhyastha-bhAvako prApta hotA hai aura

Page #122 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Karika 58]  All of this in the realm of the gods is with a cause - the cause
of the sorrow of the *ghatarthi* is the destruction of the *ghata*, the cause of
the joy of the *mukutarthi* is the production of the *mukuta*, and the cause of
the neutral feeling of the *suvarnarthi* is the state of the gold - that which
was in the form of the *ghata* is now present in the form of the *mukuta*, thus
there is no cause for sorrow or joy for it. Without a cause, the sorrow etc. of
those *ghatarthi*, *mukutarthi*, and *suvarnarthi* cannot arise.  (The statement
of the Buddhists that there is no cause for sorrow etc., but that sorrow etc.
arises only from the *vasana* of previous sorrow etc., is not correct; because
even if there is only the *vasana* of previous sorrow etc. as the cause, the
rule of those sorrow etc. is not possible.)  Thus, it is proven from the
difference in the perception of worldly people regarding the subject of
production etc., that the object is arranged in three forms - production,
destruction, and permanence. Now, this subject is further clarified by another
example.  ## Karika 60]  "The one who has vowed to take milk - 'I will take only
milk today' - does not eat yogurt, the one who has vowed to take yogurt does not
drink milk, and the one who has vowed not to take *gorasa* does not eat either
milk or yogurt. From this, it is known that the true nature is tripartite -
simultaneously in the form of production, destruction, and permanence."
_Explanation_ - The multiplicity of perception in the same object appears to be
the proof of the destruction, production, and permanence (permanence) of that
object - that which is being destroyed in the form of milk is the same that is
being produced in the form of yogurt and is present (permanent) in the form of
*gorasa*; because milk and ...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 kArikA 58] devAgama yaha saba sahetuka hotA hai-ghaTArthIke zokakA kAraNa
ghaTakA nAza hai, mukuTA ke harSakA kAraNa mukuTakA utpAda hai aura suvaNArthIke
madhyastha-bhAvakA kAraNa suvarNakI sthiti hai-jo suvarNa ghaTake rUpameM thA
vahI mukuTake rUpameM vidyamAna hai, isase usake liye zoka tathA harSakA koI
kAraNa nahIM rhtaa| binA hetuke una ghaTa-mukuTasuvarNArthiyoMke zokAdikI
utpatti nahIM bntii|' (bauddhoMkA jo yaha kahanA hai ki viSAdAdike koI hetu
nahIM hote; kintu pUrvaviSAdAdike vAsanAmAtra-nimittase viSAdAdika utpanna hote
haiM, vaha ThIka nahIM; kyoMki pUrvaviSAdAdike vAsanAmAtra nimittake hote hue
bhI una viSAdAdike niyamakA saMbhava nhiiN| )  /  isa taraha laukika janoMkI
utpAdAdi-viSayaka-pratItike bhedase yaha siddha hai ki vastu utpAda, vyaya aura
dhrauvya aise tIna rUpameM vyavasthita hai  /  aba eka dUsare dRSTAnta-dvArA isa
viSayako aura spaSTa kiyA jAtA hai| vastutattvakI trayAtmakatA payovrato na
dadhyatti na payoti dadhivrataH  /  agorasavato nobhe tasmAttattvaM trayAtmakam
/  /  60  /  /  "jisake dugdha lenekA vrata hai-Aja maiM dUdha hI lU~gA aisI
pratijJA hai-vaha dahI nahIM khAtA, jisake dahI lenekA vrata hai vaha dugdha
nahIM pItA aura jisakA gorasa na lenekA vrata hai vaha dUdha-dahI donoM hI nahIM
khaataa| isase mAlUma hotA hai ki vastutattva trayAtmaka hai-yugapat utpAda-
vyaya-dhrauvyarUpa hai|' _ vyAkhyA-eka hI vastumeM pratItikA nAnApana usa
vastuke vinAza, utpAda aura sthiti ( dhrauvya ) kA sAdhaka jAna par3atA hai-jo
dUdharUpase nAzako prApta ho rahA hai vahI dadhirUpase utpadyamAna aura
gorasarUpase vidyamAna (dhrauvya ) hai; kyoMki dUdha aura

Page #123 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter 4  54.  Both curd and milk are forms of *gorasa*.  Even though
*gorasa* is one, curd is not milk, and milk is not curd.  This distinction is
made by practitioners of *vrat* due to their different perceptions of the
substance.  If there were no three-fold perception, then the rejection of one
would not lead to the acceptance of the other.  In this way, the true nature of
reality, through its three-fold means, does not become subject to the opposition
of eternal, non-eternal, and both.  Because in the same object, through the
establishment of permanence, it is somehow eternal, and through the
establishment of destruction and production, it is somehow non-eternal.
Therefore, it is rightly said that the entire group of objects is somehow
eternal, somehow non-eternal, somehow both, somehow inexpressible, somehow
eternally inexpressible, somehow non-eternally inexpressible, and somehow both
inexpressible.  And this process of establishing the seven-fold predication
should be applied in the same way as it is done for the seven-fold predication
of *bhaava* etc. and *eka* etc.  Thus ends the third chapter of the
*Devaagamaaptamimaamsa*.  ## Chapter 4  **The complete difference of cause and
effect, the distinct difference of cause and effect, the difference of quality
and qualified, and the difference of the general and the particular, if these
are all accepted as absolute.**  61.  If (according to the Vaisheshika school,
which accepts the absolute difference of cause and effect, the difference of
quality and qualified, and the difference of the general and the particular),

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 54 samantabhadra-bhAratI [ pariccheda 4 dahI donoM hI gorasarUpa haiN| gorasakI
ekatAke hote hue bhI jo dadhirUpa hai vaha dugdharUpa nahIM; jo dugdharUpa hai
vaha dadhirUpa nahIM; aisA vratiyoMke dvArA dravya-paryAyakI vibhinna pratIti-
vaza bheda kiyA jAtA hai| yadi pratItimeM trirUpatA na ho to ekake grahaNameM
dUsare kA tyAga nahIM bntaa| _ isa taraha vastutattvake trayAtmaka sAdhana-dvArA
usakA prastuta nitya-anitya aura ubhaya-sAdhana bhI virodhako prApta nahIM hotA;
kyoMki eka hI vastumeM sthiratAke vyavasthApana-dvArA yaha kathaMcit nitya aura
nAzotpAdake pratiSThApana-dvArA kathaMcit anitya siddha hotA hai aura isaliye
yaha ThIka kahA jAtA hai ki sampUrNa vastusamUha kathaMcit nitya hI hai,
kathaMcit anitya hI hai, kathaMcit ubhayarUpa hI hai, kathaMcit avaktavya hI
hai, kathaMcit nityAvaktavya hI hai, kathaMcit anityAvaktavya hI hai aura
kathaMcit ubhayAvaktavya hI hai| aura isa saptabhaMgIkI vyavasthApana prakriyAko
usI prakArase nayapramANakI apekSAse yojita karanA cAhiye jisa prakAra ki vaha
bhAvAdi tathA ekAdi saptabhaMgiyoMkI vyavasthAke liye kI gaI hai| iti
devAgamAptamImAMsAyAM tRtIyaH paricchedaH caturtha pariccheda kArya-kAraNAdikI
sarvathA bhinnatAkA ekAnta kArya-kAraNa-nAnAtvaM guNa-guNyanyatApi ca  /
sAmAnya-tadvadanyatvaM caikAntena yadISyate  // 61 /  /  'yadi
(vaizeSikamatAvalambiyoMke matAnusAra ekAntase-sarvathA rUpameM-kArya-kAraNakA
bheda mAnA jAtA hai, guNa-guNIkI bhinnatA svIkAra kI jAtI aura sAmAnya tathA
sAmAnyavAn jo dravya-guNa

Page #124 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Karika 61]  The trika of **devaagama** and **karma** is considered to be
different from each other. (The obstacle that arises in this is explained
further.)  **Explanation:** Here, according to the Vaisheshika school, the word
"**karma**" refers to actions like walking, etc., the word "**kaaran**" refers
to the cause, the word "**guna**" refers to the eternal qualities, the word
"**gunee**" refers to the substance that is the support of the qualities, the
word "**saamaanya**" refers to the universal, and the word "**saamaanyaavaan**"
refers to the meaning of substance, quality, and karma.  The Vaisheshika school
states that there is complete difference between action and the actor, between
**samaavaaya** and the **samaavaayee**, between the part and the whole, between
the quality and the qualified, between the attribute and the attributed, between
the universal and the universalized, and between the absence and the absent.
This is because they appear different, like the Sahyadri and Vindhyachala
mountains.  An attempt has been made to prove this "difference in appearance"
without any flaws like invalidity, contradiction, etc. In this attempt, it has
also been said that the characteristics of the effect, cause, etc., are
different from each other, and this difference in characteristics is the reason
for the difference in appearance. If the object is one, then it will not appear
different due to different characteristics. This does not contradict the reason
for the difference in appearance, because the opposite, which is characterized
by different characteristics, lacks existence in it.  Another point that has
been made is that those who believe that the effect and cause, the quality and
the qualified, and the universal and the universalized are identical, are wrong.
This is because their **desha** (field) is not different. Those who are not
identical, their **desha** is not different, like the Sahyadri and Vindhyachala
mountains. The **desha** of the effect, cause, etc., is the same. Therefore,
they are identical. And through this inference, they conclude that the effect,
cause, etc., are...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 kArikA 61 ] devAgama karmarUpa trika hai usakA eka-dUsarese anyatva iSTa kiyA
jAtA hai ( to usameM jo bAdhA AtI hai use Age batalAyA jAtA hai| ) _ vyAkhyA-
yahA~ vaizeSikamatAnusAra 'kArya' zabdase calanAdi kriyArUpa karmakA, tantu Adi
avayavarUpa kAraNake avayavIkA, saMyogAdirUpa anitya guNakA aura
pradhvaMsAbhAvakA grahaNa hai, 'kAraNa' zabda samavAyIkA, samavAyivAnkA (
karmavAnkA, anityaguNavAnkA, paTAdi avayavoMkA ) aura pradhvaMsake prati
kAraNakA vAcaka hai; 'guNa' zabda nitya-guNakA, 'guNI' zabda guNake AzrayabhUta
dravyakA, 'sAmAnya' zabda para-apara-jAtikA aura 'sAmAnyavAn' zabda dravyaguNa-
karmarUpa arthakA bodhaka hai| vaizeSikamatakA kathana hai ki kriyA-kriyAvAnkA;
samavAya-samavAyIkA, avayava-avayavIkA, guNa-guNIkA, vizeSaNa-tadvizeSyakA,
sAmAnya-tatsAmAnyavAnkA aura abhAva-tadvizeSyakA eka-dUsarese sarvathA
bhinnapanA hI hai; kyoMki unakA bhinna pratibhAsa hotA hai, sahyAcala-
vindhyAcalakI trh| apane isa 'bhinnapratibhAsatva' hetuko asiddha-viruddhAdi
doSoMse rahita siddha karanekA prayatna kiyA gayA hai aura usa prayatnameM eka
bAta yaha bhI kahI gaI hai ki kArya-karaNAdikA lakSaNa eka dUsarese bhinna hai
aura vaha bhinna-lakSaNa bhinna pratibhAsakA hetu hai, vastu yadi eka hai to
usakA bhinna-lakSaNase pratibhAsa nahIM hotaa| isase bhinna-pratibhAsa hetu
viruddha nahIM hai, kyoMki bhinnalakSaNalakSita vipakSameM usako vRttikA abhAva
hai| dUsarI bAta yaha bhI kahI gaI hai ki jinakA aisA anumAna hai ki kArya-
kAraNakA, guNa-guNIkA tathA sAmAnya-sAmAnyavAnkA eka-dUsareke sAtha tAdAtmya
haiabheda hai; kyoMki unakA deza (kSetra) abhinna hai| jinakA tAdAtmya nahIM
hotA unakA deza abhinna nahIM hotA, jaise ki sahyAcala aura vindhyAcalakA  /
prakRta kArya-kAraNAdikA deza abhinna hai  /  ataH unakA tAdAtmya hai; aura isa
anumAnase ve kArya-kAraNAdikI For Pin

Page #125 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 56 ## Samantabhadra-Bharati ## Chapter [4  It is not correct to state that
the principle of distinctness is absolute. This is because there are two types
of non-differentiation: one is scriptural and the other is worldly. The
scriptural non-differentiation of cause and effect, etc., is not valid. From the
perspective of scripture, the cloth, etc., as an effect, has its own cause, the
group of threads, and the threads have their own cause, cotton, etc. In this
way, everything is differentiated from its own cause and effect. The worldly
non-differentiation of space, soul, etc., is flawed because it leads to
contradiction. Even though space and soul, etc., do not have distinct locations
from the perspective of the worldly, they are not identical.  ## 1 ## Flaws in
the aforementioned principle of distinctness  If one thing has multiple
functions, it is not due to the absence of parts, nor is it due to the presence
of multiple parts. If it is due to the presence of parts, then its oneness is
not established. This is a flaw in the function, as it is not appropriate. || 62
||  (If, according to the Vaisheshika school of thought, cause and effect,
quality and qualified, and universal and particular are considered to be
completely distinct from each other, then) the function of one - the cloth,
etc., as an effect, in the form of its constituent parts, in the many - the
cause, etc. - does not arise. This is because the absence of parts in that one
thing implies that it is without parts, while it should have parts. Otherwise,
the contradiction between cause and effect, etc., will arise in the same way as
the contradiction between the non-cause and effect relationship of the thread
and the pot, and the clay and the pot. If the function of one (constituent
parts, etc.) is considered to be based on the parts, then the oneness of that
one thing is not established. It becomes divided and transformed into many
forms. Besides this, the question arises: does the function of one in many occur
with respect to the characteristics of the thread, etc., as a basis, in a single
location, or in a universal way? It does not occur in a single location, because
the cloth, etc., as an effect, is without a specific location, and therefore the
thread...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 56 samantabhadra-bhAratI pariccheda [ 4 bhinnatAke ekAntako bAdhita ThaharAte
haiM, vaha ThIka nahIM hai; kyoMki dezA'bheda do prakArakA hai - eka zAstrIya
aura dUsarA laukika  /  kArya-kAraNAdikA zAstrIya dezA'bheda asiddha hai -
zAstrakI apekSAse paTAdirUpa kAryakA svakIya kAraNa tantusamUha aura tantuoMkA
kAraNa kapAsAdi isa taraha sabakA sva- anya kAraNadezakI dRSTise dezabheda hI
hai  /  laukika dezA'bhedakA AkAza - AtmAdike sAtha vyabhicAradoSa ghaTita hotA
hai; kyoMki laukika dezakI apekSA AkAza aura AtmAdike bhinna dezakA abhAva hone
para bhI unakA tAdAtmya nahIM hai  /  1 ukta bhinnataikAnta meM doSa ekasyAsneka
vRttirna bhAgAbhAvAdbahUni vA  /  bhAgitvAdvA'sya naikatvaM doSo vRtteranArhate
|| 62 || ( yadi vaizeSikamatAnusAra kArya-kAraNa, guNa-guNI aura sAmAnya
sAmAnyavAnko sarvathA eka dUsare se bhinna mAnA jAya to ) ekakI-- paTAdi
avayavIrUpa kArya dravyAdikI - ( apane Arambhaka tantu Adi) anekoM meM -
kAraNAdikameM vRtti - pravRtti nahIM banatI; kyoMki usa ekake vibhAga ke
abhAvase niraMzapanA mAnA gayA hai- jabaki vRtti honI cAhiye; anyathA kArya-
kAraNabhAvAdikA virodha usI taraha ghaTita hogA jisa taraha akArya-kAraNarUpa
tantu-ghaTakA aura mRtpiNDa paTakA kArya kAraNabhAva viruddha hotA hai| yadi (
avayavI Adi ) ekako bhAgitvarUpa Azrita karake vRtti mAnI jAya to isase ekakA
ekatva sthira nahIM rahatA- vaha vibhakta hokara bahurUpameM pariNata ho jAtA
hai  /  isake sivAya yaha prazna paidA hotA hai ki ekakI aneka meM vaha vRtti
tantu Adike lakSaNa AdhArake prati ekadezarUpase hotI haiM yA sarvAtmaka rUpase
? eka dezarUpase vaha nahIM banatI; kyoMki eka paTAdi kAryadravyake niSpradeza
honese tantu

Page #126 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Devagam Karika 63:  **It is not possible for a single entity to be present in
multiple locations simultaneously, and if it were to be present in all
locations, then the concept of multiplicity of parts would arise.**  For
example, if there are multiple parts, then there would be multiple parts, and if
there are multiple qualities like conjunction, then there would be multiple
qualities present in multiple parts. Similarly, if there are multiple entities
with common characteristics, then they should all be common. However, this is
not the case. Therefore, assuming that a single entity is present in multiple
locations simultaneously, or that it is present in all locations, leads to
contradictions in the Arhat path, which is completely distinct from other paths.
In this way, both accepting and rejecting the presence of a single entity in
multiple locations leads to contradictions. There is no other type of presence
besides being present in a specific location or being present in all locations.
**(If, according to the Vaisheshika philosophy, the relationship of Samavaya is
considered as a different type of relationship, and it is said that the presence
of parts, etc., in the whole, etc., is due to the relationship of Samavaya, and
that without the relationship of Samavaya, there is no meaning of presence, then
this is also not correct. Because the same question arises here: Is the presence
of Samavaya in the whole, etc., in the parts, etc., specific or universal? And
accepting either type of Samavaya presence leads to the same contradictions
mentioned above.)**  **Even if we consider the difference between parts, etc.,
and the whole, etc., to be absolute, then we would have to accept a difference
between them in terms of space and time.** This would lead to the acceptance of
presence (Samavaya relationship) in separate locations, like the presence of a
pot and a tree in separate locations, which are both considered to be separate
entities.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 devAgama kArikA 63 ] Adi aneka adhikaraNoMmeM usakA vartanA nahIM banatA aura
pratyekameM sarvAtmakarUpase vRttike hone para eka avayavI Adike bahutvakA
prasaMga upasthita hotA hai-jitane avayava utane hI avayavI Thaharate haiM,
jitane saMyogI Adi guNI utane hI aneka avayavoMmeM sthita saMyogAdi guNa
Thaharate haiM aura jitane sAmAnyavAn artha utane hI sAmAnya hone cAhiye  /
parantu aisA nahIM hai| ataH ekakI anekameM sarvAtmaka athavA sarvadeza vRtti
mAnanese, Arhatamatase bhinna jo sarvathA ekAntamata hai usameM doSa AtA hai|
isa taraha ekakI anekameM vRttikA mAnanA aura na mAnanA donoM hI sadoSa
Thaharate haiM  /  ekadezarUpa aura sarvAtmaka vRttise bhinna vRttikA anya koI
prakAra nahIM hai|' ( yadi vaizeSikamatakI mAnyatAnusAra samavAya-sambandhako
prakArAntara mAnA jAya-yaha kahA jAya ki samavAya-sambandhake kAraNa avayavI Adi
avayavAdikameM vartatA hai, binA samavAyasambandhake vartanake arthakA abhAva
hai to yaha kahanA bhI ThIka nahIM hai; kyoMki yahA~ bhI vahI prazna paidA hotA
hai ki avayavI AdikI avayavAdikameM vaha samavAyavRtti ekadeza hai athavA
sarvAtmaka ? aura donoMmeM se kisI bhI prakArakI samavAyavRttiko mAnane para
vahI doSa ghaTita hotA hai, jise Upara batalAyA gayA hai|) deza-kAla-vizeSe'pi
syAvRttiyuta-siddhavat  /  samAna-dezatA na syAnmUrtakAraNa-kAryayoH  // 63 /  /
( yadi avayavAdi aura avayavI AdimeM sarvathA bheda svIkAra kiyA jAya to) deza
aura kAlakI apekSAse bhI unameM-avayavAdi aura avayavI AdimeM-bheda mAnanA
par3egA aura taba yuta-siddhake samAna-pRthak-pRthak AzrayameM rahane vAle
ghaTa-vRkSakI tarahaunameM bhI vRtti ( samavAya-sambandhakI vartanA) mAnanI
hogii|

Page #127 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 58 Samantbhadra-Bharati Chapter 4 (Result) The sameness (non-difference) of
location and time, which is seen in the cause and effect of a form, will not be
able to form. _ Explanation - If one assumes a complete difference between the
constituent and the constituted, etc., then one will have to assume a difference
in location and time between them, and their relationship will be like that of
the yut-siddhas; then how can non-difference of location be formed in them? This
is something for the Vaisheshikas to think about.  Although there is a great
difference between the soul and space, there is neither a difference in location
nor in time between them, and therefore this great difference is not a regulator
of the difference in location and time of cause and effect. However, the great
difference between the soul and space in terms of being, substance, etc., is not
established. Therefore, there is no obstacle to their being non-different in
location and non-different in time. Aashraya-aashrayi-bhavana-n svaatantryam
samavayinaam. Ityayaktash sa sambandha na yaktash samavayibhih. ||64|| 'If it is
said that in the samavayis - the constituent-constituted (thread-cloth) etc. -
there is no independence due to the aashraya-aashrayi-bhavana (relationship of
dependence) by the samavaya, which would lead to the formation of vritti
(samavaya-relationship-functioning) even when there is a difference in location
and time, then this is not correct. (Because then the question arises whether
that samavaya is self-related in the samavayis or related by another samavaya.
If it is self-related, then the constituted will also be self-related in its
constituents, what is the result of the unnecessary assumption of a separate
samavaya for it? If it is related by another samavaya, then that other samavaya
will also have to be considered related to another third, and the third to
another fourth, and in this way, the assumption of many samavayas will lead to
an infinite regress.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 58 samantabhadra-bhAratI pariccheda 4 ( phalataH ) mUrtika kAraNa aura kArya
meM jo samAna ( abhinna ) dezatA-ekakAla-dezatA-dekhI jAtI hai vaha nahIM bana
skegii|' _ vyAkhyA-avayavAdi aura avayavI AdimeM sarvathA bheda mAnane para
unameM dezabheda aura kAlabheda bhI mAnanA par3egA aura unakA sambandha yuta-
siddhoM jaisA hogA; taba unameM abhinnadezatA kaise bana sakatI hai ? yaha bAta
vaizeSikoMko socanekI hai||  /  yadyapi AtmA aura AkAzameM atyanta bheda hone
para bhI unameM na dezabheda hai aura na kAlabheda hai aura isaliye yaha
atyantabheda kArya-kAraNake deza aura kAlake bhedakA niyAmaka nahIM hai, tathApi
sat, dravyatva Adi rUpase AtmA aura AkAzameM bhI atyantabheda asiddha hai| ata
eva unake abhinnadeza aura abhinnakAlake hone meM koI bAdhA nahIM hai|
AzrayA''zrayi-bhAvAnna svAtantryaM samavAyinAm  /  ityayaktaH sa sambandho na
yaktaH samavAyibhiH  /  / 64 //  'yadi aisA kahA jAya ki samavAyiyoMmeM-avayava-
avayavI ( tantu-paTa ) AdimeM-( samavAyake dvArA) AzrayA''zrayIbhAva honeke
kAraNa svatantratA nahIM hai, jisase deza va kAla kI apekSA bheda honepara bhI
vRtti ( samavAya-sambandha-vartanA ) banatI, to yaha kahanA ThIka nahIM hai| (
kyoMki taba yaha prazna uThatA hai ki vaha samavAya samavAyioMmeM svataH
vartatA-sambandhita hotA hai yA anya samavAyase vartita-sambandhita hotA hai|
yadi svataH sambandhita hotA hai to phira avayavI bhI apane avayavoMmeM svataH
sambaddha ho jAyagA, usake liye eka alaga samavAyakI vyartha-kalpanAse kyA
natIjA ? yadi anya samavAyase vaha sambandhita hotA hai to vaha anya samavAya
bhI anya tRtIyase aura tRtIya bhI anya caturthase sambandhita mAnanA par3egA
aura isa taraha aneka samavAyoMkI kalpanA

Page #128 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Karika 65:  **Devaagam**  If it is said that Samavaya, being independent,
does not require any other relation, but remains unconnected, then this is not
appropriate; because how can that which is itself unconnected (without relation)
establish a relation between one (component) and another (component)? How can it
remain with another (substance, etc.) in a state of being unconnected? It
cannot.  **Verse 65:**  "Just as a general principle cannot exist without a
substratum, so also Samavaya cannot exist without a substratum. When both the
general principle and Samavaya are fully realized in each eternal individual
substance, how can their harmonious existence be established in the case of
impermanent actions that are destroyed and produced? - It cannot be
established."  **Explanation:**  Where there is the production of an individual,
there is neither a general principle nor Samavaya beforehand; because they have
no substratum there, and both of them cannot exist without a substratum.
Otherwise, the possibility of being without a substratum will arise. It is also
not possible that they come from another individual in a complete or partial
form; because there will be a lack of a foundation and the possibility of
partiality in the general principle and Samavaya. Their own production later is
also not possible, otherwise they will be considered impermanent. Even when the
substratum is destroyed, they are not destroyed; because they are eternal and
surprisingly, they are fully present in each. In short, both the general
principle and Samavaya...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 kArikA 65 ] devAgama karanepara eka samavAyakI mAnyatA bAdhita ThaharegI aura
anavasthAdoSakA prasaMga bhI upasthita hogA  /  ) 59 ( yadi yaha kahA jAya ki
samavAya anAzrita honese sambandhAntarakI apekSA nahIM rakhatA, kintu asambaddha
hI rahatA hai, to yaha kahanA ucita nahIM; kyoMki ) jo svayaM asambaddha (
sambandha rahita ) hai vaha eka ( avayavo ) kA dUsare ( avayavoM ) ke sAtha
sambandha kaise karA sakatA hai ? sambandha rahita honekI hAlata meM vaha dUsare
( dravyAdi ) ke sAtha kaise raha sakatA hai ? nahIM raha sakatA  / ' sAmAnyaM
samavAyazcA'pyekaikatra samAptitaH  /  antareNA''zrayaM na syAnnAzotpAdiSu ko
vidhiH  //  65  //  'jisa prakAra sAmAnya Azrayake binA nahIM rahatA, usI
prakAra samavAya bhI Azrayake binA nahIM rahatA  /  jaba sAmAnya aura samavAya
donoM kI pratyeka dravyAdi nitya vyaktiyoMmeM samApti - pUrNatA hotI hai taba
nAza hue tathA utpanna hue anitya kAryoMmeM unake sadbhAvako vidhi-vyavasthA
kaise bana sakatI hai ? - nahIM bana sakatI  / ' vyAkhyA - jahA~ eka vyaktikA
utpAda huA vahA~ pahalese na sAmAnya hai aura na samavAya; kyoMki unakA vahA~
koI Azraya nahIM hai aura ye donoM binA Azrayake nahIM rahate  /  anyathA
anAzrita honekA prasaMga AyegA  /  yaha bhI sambhava nahIM ki ve anya vyakti se
pUrNarUpameM yA aMzarUpa meM Ate haiM; kyoMki pUrvAdhArakA abhAva tathA sAmAnya
evaM samavAya meM sAMzapanekA prasaMga AvegA  /  svayaM pIche unakA utpAda bhI
sambhava nahIM hai, anyathA ve anitya mAne jAyeMge  /  Azrayake nAza honepara
bhI unakA nAza nahIM hotA; kyoMki ve nitya haiM aura Azcarya yaha ki pratyekameM
pUrNa rUpase rahate haiM  /  sArAMza yaha ki sAmAnya aura samavAya ina donoM 1

Page #129 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Samantabhadra - Bharati [ Chapter 4  Even though the eternal nature of
substances is established in eternal individuals, their existence in non-eternal
individuals is not established. While Vaisheshika considers both eternal,
pervasive, and completely pervading in each and every one, which is clearly
against reason and perception.  **Complete non-relation of universal and
inherence.**  There is no relation of any kind, like conjunction, between the
universal and inherence. Therefore, there is no relation of the substance,
quality, and action, which is the object, with both of them. (And therefore) the
universal, inherence, and object, these three are like empty space-flowers,
because the non-existent and the non-object cannot have any form like the
tortoise-hair.  **The flaw of non-duality and absoluteness.**  If (according to
the Buddhist view) the non-duality of atoms - the absence of otherness in the
form of transformation of form in all states - is considered absolute, then even
when they come together in the form of aggregates, there will be a lack of
connection between them due to the illusion of non-meeting. And if this happens,
the fourfold error propounded by the Buddhists - the action of atoms as the four
aggregates of earth, water, fire, and air - will be illusory (and not real). (If
the four elements are not considered illusory, then the transformation of atoms
in the state of aggregation will have to be accepted, and if that is accepted,
the absoluteness of non-duality will not be possible.)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 samantabhadra - bhAratI [ pariccheda 4 padArthoMkA nitya vyaktiyoMmeM satva
siddha hone para bhI anitya vyaktiyoMmeM unakA sadbhAva siddha nahIM hotA;
jabaki vaizeSika ina donoMko nitya, vyApaka aura eka evaM pratyekameM
pUrNarUpase vyApta mAnate haiM, jo spaSTataH yukti aura pratItike viruddha hai
/  sarvathA'nabhisambandhaH sAmAnya- samavAyayoH  /  tAbhyAmartho na
sambaddhastAni trINi kha- puSpavat || 66 || ( vaizeSika matAnusAra ) jaba
sAmAnya aura samavAya donoMke sarvathA anabhisambandha hai - paraspara meM ekakA
dUsareke sAtha saMyogAdirUpa koI prakArakA bhI sambandha nahIM hai-taba una
donoMke sAtha dravya, guNa aura karmarUpa jo artha hai usakA bhI sambandha nahIM
rahatA  /  ( aura isaliye ) sAmAnya, samavAya tathA artha ye tInoM hI AkAza-
puSpake samAna avastu Thaharate haiM, kyoMki asatkA aura avastukA kUrma -
romAdikI taraha koI bhI svarUpa nahIM bana sakatA  / ' ananyatA-ekAntakI
sadoSatA 60 ananyataikAnte'NUnAM saMghAte'pi vibhAgavat  /  asaMhatatvaM
syAdbhUtacatuSka - bhrAntireva sA ||67 || 'yadi ( bauddha matAnusAra )
paramANuoMkI ananyatAkA -- sarva avasthAoMmeM svarUpAntarapariNamanarUpa
anyatAke abhAvakA-- ekAnta mAnA jAya to skandharUpa meM unake milanepara bhI na
milanekI bhrAnti meM paraspara asambaddhatA rahegI aura aisA hone para
bauddhoMke dvArA pratipAdita jo bhUlacatuSka hai- paramANuoMkA pRthvI, jala,
agni aura vAyu aise cAra skandhoMke rUpameM jo kArya haiM - vaha ( vAstavika na
hokara ) bhrAntarUpa hI ThaharegA  /  ( yadi bhUtacatuSTayako bhrAntirUpa na
mAnA jAyagA to paramANuoMkA saMghAtAvasthA meM svarUpAntara mAnanA hogA aura
vaisA mAnane para sarvathA ananyatAkA ekAnta nahIM bana sakegA  /  ) ' *

Page #130 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Karika 68, 69] Devagam  **68**  The error in the effect leads to the error in
the cause, and the error in both leads to the error in the effect. The cause is
the mark of the effect, and it is not present in the absence of the effect, nor
is it a quality, species, or other such thing.   **Explanation:** If the effect
is considered to be an error, then the cause, the atom, will also be considered
an error. This would mean that they would not exist in reality, because the
cause is known or inferred from the effect. If both the cause and effect are
considered to be errors, then the qualities, species, actions, etc., that reside
in them would also not exist. This is similar to how there is no smell of
celestial flowers because they do not exist.  **69** If the cause and effect are
considered to be one and the same (as per the Sankhya philosophy), then the
absence of one will lead to the absence of the other. If the cause, the
Pradhana, is accepted, then the effect, the Mahat, etc., will not have a
separate existence, because they are one and the same. Similarly, if the effect
is absent, then the cause will also be absent, because the cause is inseparable
from the effect. The cause depends on the effect, and without the effect, it
cannot exist. This leads to the absence of everything. Moreover, if it is said
that the effect, the Mahat, etc., enters into the cause, the Pradhana, then
there will be no need for a subsequent creation, and the existence of the effect
will be separate.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 kArikA 68, 69 ] devAgama 61 kAryakI bhrAntise kAraNakI bhrAnti tathA
ubhayAbhAvAdika kArya-bhrAntaraNu-bhrAntiH kArya-liGgaM hi kAraNam  /
ubhaMyA'bhAvatastatsthaM guNa-jAtItaracca na  // 6 //  'bhUtacatuSkarUpa-kAryake
bhrAntirUpa honese tatkAraNa paramANu bhI bhrAntirUpa ThahareMge-taba vastutaH
unakI astitva-siddhi hI nahIM bana sakegI; kyoMki kAraNa kArya-liGgaka hotA hai-
kAryase hI use jAnA jAtA athavA anumAna kiyA jAtA hai| kArya-kAraNa donoMke
bhrAntirUpa abhAvase unameM rahanevAle guNa-jAti-kriyAdika bhI nahIM bana
sakeMge-jaise gaganakusumoMke abhAvameM unakI koI gandha bhI nahIM bana sktii|'
kArya-kAraNAdikA ekatva mAnanepara doSa ekatve'nyatarAbhAvaH
zeSA'bhAvo'vinAbhuvaH  /  dvitva-saMkhyA-virodhazca saMvRtizcenmRSaiva sA  /  /
69 /  /  'yadi ( sAMkhyamatAnusAra ) kArya-kAraNAdikA sarvathA ekatva mAnA jAya-
kArya jo mahat Adi aura kAraNa jo pradhAna donoMkA tAdAtmya aMgIkAra kiyA jAya-
to ekako mAnyatApara dUsarekA abhAva ThaharegA-pradhAnarUpa kAraNakI mAnyatApara
mahat AdirUpa kAryakI pRthak koI mAnyatA nahIM bana sakegI, donoMke sarvathA eka
honese  /  sAtha hI kAryake abhAvapara zeSa jo kAraNa usakA bhI abhAva
ThaharegA; kyoMki kAryakA kAraNake sAtha avinAbhAva-sambandha hai, kAraNa
kAryakI apekSA rakhatA hai, sarvathA kAryakA abhAva honepara kAraNatva bana
nahIM sakatA aura isa taraha sarvake abhAvakA prasaMga upasthita hotA hai| isake
sivAya, ( yadi yaha kahA jAya ki mahat Adi kAryakA pradhAnarUpa-kAraNameM
anupraveza ho jAnese uttara-sRSTikramakI apekSA pRthaksattArUpa |

Page #131 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Samantbhadra Bharati [Chapter 4 Even though there is no difference, there is
still one cause - because of its eternal nature, it does not cease to exist,
then) there is a contradiction in the number two - if the action and cause are
completely one, then this is the action and this is the cause, such a number two
cannot be indicated; just as in the case of a thing being completely one, there
is no action-cause relationship. If the duality-number is considered to be a
kind of convention or formal, then this convention (being contrary to the
ultimate truth) is false, then the duality-number also becomes false - in such a
situation, how can the knowledge of the principal be obtained? It cannot be done
directly; because the principal is not the object of direct perception. It
cannot be done by inference either; because there is no infallible linga. It
cannot be done by scripture either; because the word is also considered to be
false; and from a false linga, the proof of an infallible sadhya does not occur,
and if it is considered to be proved, then the fallacy of atiprasanga arises.
(Similarly, if the unity of the man and the consciousness, which are the support
and the supported, is accepted, then the absence of each other is established;
if the consciousness enters the man, then there is the occasion of only the man,
and if the man enters the consciousness, then there is the occasion of only the
consciousness, and from this, in the case of the followers of Samkhya, the
absence of one of the two, the man and the consciousness, is proved on the
acceptance of complete unity. If one of the two is absent, then the other is
also absent; because there is an inseparable relationship between the two. The
man is the support and the consciousness-nature is its supported - without the
support, there is no existence of the supported, and without the supported,
there is no existence of the support. If the two are completely one, then the
duality-number also does not arise, and if the convention is imagined in the
duality-number, then the occasion of emptiness arises; because

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 samantabhadra bhAratI [pariccheda 4 bhedakA abhAva honepara bhI kAraNa to eka
rahatA ho hai-nitya honese usakA abhAva nahIM hotA, to ) doko saMkhyAkA virodha
upasthita hotA hai-kArya aura kAraNa sarvathA eka honepara yaha kArya hai aura
yaha kAraNa hai aise dokI saMkhyAkA nirdeza nahIM bana sakatA; jaise ki vastuke
sarvathA eka honepara usameM kArya-kAraNabhAva nahIM banatA  /  yadi dvitva-
saMkhyAko saMvRtirUpa kalpita athavA aupacArika hI mAnA jAya to yaha saMvRti (
paramArthake viparIta hAnese ) jaba mRSA hI hai taba dvitva-saMkhyA bhI mRSA hI
ThaharatI hai-aisI sthitimeM pradhAnakI jAnakArI taba kaise ho sakegI?
pratyakSase vaha ho nahIM sakatI; kyoMki pradhAna pratyakSakA viSaya nhiiN|
anumAnase bhI nahIM ho sakatI; kyoMki abhrAnta liGgakA abhAva hai| Agamase bhI
nahIM bana sakatI; kyoMki zabdake bhI bhrAntatva mAnA gayA hai; aura
bhrAntaliGgase abhrAnta sAdhyakI siddhi hotI nahIM, siddhi mAnane para
atiprasaMga-doSa upasthita hotA hai|' ( isI prakAra puruSa aura caitanya jo
Azraya-AzrayIrUpa haiM unakI ekatA mAnanepara eka dUsarekA abhAva ThaharatA hai;
puruSa meM caitanyake anupravezapara puruSamAtrakA aura caitanyameM puruSake
anupravezapara caitanyamAtrakA prasaMga upasthita hotA hai aura isase
sAMkhyamatAnuyAyioMke yahA~ sarvathA ekatvakI mAnyatApara puruSa aura caitanya
ina domeMse kisI ekakA abhAva siddha hotA hai| domeMse ekakA abhAva honepara
zeSakA bhI abhAva ThaharatA hai; kyoMki donoMmeM paraspara avinAbhAva-sambandha
hai| puruSa Azraya hai aura caitanyasvabhAva usakA AzrayI hai-Azrayake binA
AzrayIkA aura AzrayIke binA AzrayakA koI astitva nahIM bntaa| donoMke sarvathA
eka honepara dvitva-saMkhyA bhI nahIM banatI aura dvitvasaMkhyAmeM saMvRtikI
kalpanA karanepara zUnyatAkA prasaMga AtA hai; kyoMki

Page #132 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Karika 70] **Devaagama**  From the ultimate perspective, there is no
possibility of a thing that is devoid of all qualities, including the number
two, the number of non-duality, the individual, and consciousness. Therefore,
the Sankhya's concept of non-duality, which is based on the principle of cause
and effect, cannot be established in the same way as the Vaisheshika's concept
of otherness.  The above-mentioned concepts of duality and non-duality, as well
as the concept of inexpressibility, are all flawed. They cannot coexist because
they contradict each other. This is the view of those who oppose the Syadvada-
naya, the proponents of absolute monism. Even if we accept the concept of
inexpressibility, it cannot be expressed, for by expressing it, it becomes
expressible. If it cannot be expressed, how can the concept of inexpressibility
be established? It cannot.  (If the Buddhists argue that from the ultimate
perspective, no object or principle can be expressed through words, and that it
can only be expressed through conventional means, then how can the truth be
established through conventional means, which are inherently false? It cannot.
Therefore, even if we try to establish the concept of inexpressibility through
conventional language, it cannot be sustained.)  **A flawless system of unity
and non-unity**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 kArikA 70 ] devAgama paramArthataH dvitvasaMkhyAke abhAvapara saMkhyeya jo
puruSa aura caitanya unakI bhI koI vyavasthA nahIM banatI-aisI koI vastu hI
sambhava nahIM jo sakaladharmose zUnya ho| ataH sAMkhyoMkA yaha kArya-kAraNAdikI
ananyatAkA ekAnta bhI vaizeSikoMke anyatA ekAntakI tarahase nahIM bana sktaa|'
ukta ubhaya tathA avaktavya ekAntoMkI sadoSatA virodhAnnobhayakAtmyaM syAdvAda-
nyAya-vidviSAm  /  avAcyataikAnte'pyuktirnA'vAcyamiti yujyate  /  / 7 /  /
'yadi kArya-kAraNAdikI anyatA aura ananyatAke donoM ekAnta eka sAtha mAne jA~ya
to ve syAdvAda-nyAyake vidveSiyoMke-sarvathA ekAntavAdiyoMke-yahA~ yugapat nahIM
bana sakate; kyoMki unameM paraspara virodha honese unakA ekAtmya athavA
tAdAtmya asaMbhava hai| yadi avAcyatA ( anabhilApyatA ) kA ekAnta mAnA
jAyakArya-kAraNAdikA bheda-abheda sarvathA avAcya hai aisA kahA jAyato yaha
kahanA bhI nahIM bana sakatA; kyoMki isa kahanese vaha vAcya ( abhilApya ) ho
jAtA hai| aura jaba yaha kahanA bhI nahIM bana sakatA taba avAcyataikAnta-
siddhAntakA parako pratipAdana kaise bana sakatA hai ? nahIM bana sktaa| ( yadi
bauddhoMke dvArA yaha kahA jAya ki paramArthase to vacanadvArA kisI bhI padArtha
athavA siddhAntakA pratipAdana nahIM banatAsaMvRtike dvArA hI banatA hai, to
saMvRtike svayaM mithyA honese usake dvArA satyasiddhAntAdikA pratipAdana kaise
bana sakatA hai ? nahIM bana sktaa| ataH saMvRtirUpa-vacanake dvArA pratipAdana
karanepara bhI avAcyatAkA ekAnta sthira nahIM raha sktaa|) ekatA aura anaikatAkI
nirdoSa vyavasthA

Page #133 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter 4: Samantabhadra-Bharati  64  **Samantabhadra-Bharati**  [Chapter 4]
**They are not entirely different.**  **The unity of dravya and paryaya is due
to the difference in parinaama (transformation) and shakti (power) and shakti-
bhaava (power-state).** ||71||  **The difference in sajnjaa (name), sankhya
(number), and vishesha (specific characteristic) is due to the difference in
svakshana (own characteristic). The difference in prayojana (purpose) and other
things is due to the difference in kaala (time) and pratibhaasa (appearance).**
||72||  'Dravya and paryaya are both (in some way) one; because they are not
entirely different (even though there is a difference in their appearance) - due
to the impossibility of separating them, there is no complete difference. And
dravya and paryaya are (in some way) different - they are different from each
other; because there is a difference in parinaama (transformation) and parinaami
(transformed), a difference in shaktiman (powerful) and shaktibhaava (power-
state), a difference in sajnjaa (name), a difference in sankhya (number), a
difference in svakshana (own characteristic), and a difference in prayojana
(purpose) and other things (like time and appearance). Therefore, dravya and
paryaya are not entirely one, nor are they entirely different - both have a
certain degree of difference and non-difference, which is the principle of
anekanta (many-sidedness).'  **Explanation:** Here, the word 'dravya' refers to
guna (quality), saamaanya (universality), and upaadaanakaarana (material cause),
and the word 'paryaya' refers to guna (quality), vyakti vishesh (individual
particular), and kaaryadravya (effect-substance). The word 'avyatireka' refers
to the impossibility of separation, which means that one dravya cannot be made
into another dravya, or one dravya's paryaya cannot be made into another
dravya's paryaya, or the intended dravya cannot be completely separated from its
paryaya, or the intended paryaya cannot be completely separated from its dravya.
In this way, dravya and paryaya are both one thing; like the knowledge of the
object and the knower, which cannot be completely separated even though there is
a difference in their appearance.  If, according to the belief of the
Brahmavaidya (monistic) philosophers, paryaya is considered unreal and dravya is
considered real, and paryaya is considered to be...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 64 samantabhadra-bhAratI [ pariccheda 4 tayoravyatirekataH  /  dravya -
paryAyayoraikyaM pariNAma- vizeSAcca zaktimacchakti-bhAvataH ||71 || saMjJA -
saMkhyA - vizeSAcca svakSaNa- vizeSataH  /  prayojanAdibhedAcca tannAnAtvaM na
sarvathA  //  72  //  'dravya aura paryAya donoM ( kathaMcit ) eka haiM; kyoMki
inake ( pratibhAsakA bheda honepara bhI ) avyatirekapanA hai - azakyavivecana
honese sarvathA bhinnatAkA abhAva hai  /  tathA dravya aura paryAya (kathaMcit)
nAnArUpa haiM - eka dUsarese bhinna haiM; kyoMki donoMmeM pariNAma- pariNAmIkA
bheda hai, zaktimAna - zaktibhAvakA bheda hai, saMjJA ( nAma ) kA bheda hai,
saMkhyAkA bheda hai, svalakSaNakA bheda hai aura prayojanakA tathA Adi zabdase
kAla evaM pratibhAsakA bheda hai  /  isase dravya aura paryAya donoM sarvathA
ekarUpa nahIM aura na sarvathA nAnArUpa hI haiM- donoMmeM kathaMcit
bhedA'bhedarUpa anekAntatva pratiSThita hai  / ' vyAkhyA - yahA~ 'dravya'
zabdase guNI, sAmAnya tathA upAdAnakAraNakA aura 'paryAya' zabdase guNa, vyakti
vizeSa tathA kAryadravyakA grahaNa hai  /  'avyatireka' zabda azakya- vivecanakA
vAcaka hai, jisakA abhiprAya yaha hai ki eka dravyako anya dravyarUpa tathA eka
dravyakI paryAyako anya dravyakI paryAyarUpa nahIM kiyA jA sakatA athavA
vivakSita dravyako usakI paryAyase aura vivakSita paryAya ko usake dravyase
sarvathA alaga nahIM kiyA jA sakatA  /  isa taraha dravya aura paryAya donoM eka
vastu haiM; jaise vedya aura vedakakA jJAna, jise pratibhAsakA bheda honepara
bhI sarvathA bhedarUpa nahIM kiyA jA sakatA  /  yadi brahmAdvaitavAdiyoMkI
mAnyatAnusAra paryAyako avAstava aura dravyako vAstava batalAkara paryAyakA
tathA bauddhoMkI mAnyatA

Page #134 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  [Karika 71, 72] Devagama  **65** If we consider substance (dravya) as unreal
and mode (paryaya) as real, as per the 65th sutra, then neither substance nor
mode can be considered as having any existence. This is because, without modes,
substance cannot be the cause of any action or function, and without substance,
modes cannot be the cause of any action or function. If we consider either of
them as the cause, it will contradict the principle of sequential and
simultaneous existence (kram-yogapady). A substance or mode, being of a single
nature, cannot have sequential and simultaneous existence. Without sequential
and simultaneous existence, there cannot be any action or function, and without
action or function, there will be no existence of the object, only non-
existence. Therefore, if we eliminate either substance or mode, the other will
also be eliminated, and there will be no order or arrangement of the reality.
The characteristic of substance is that it has qualities (guna) and modes
(paryaya), as stated in the Tattvartha Sutra, "dravyaṁ guna-paryaya-vat".
Qualities are simultaneous (yugapat) and modes are sequential (krama). The
characteristic of mode is "tad-bhavaḥ pariṇāmaḥ", which means it is the specific
form of the substance, which occurs sequentially and simultaneously. Sequential
transformation is called "paryaya" and simultaneous transformation is called
"guna". This difference in characteristics of substance and mode proves their
distinct nature.  Thus, substance and mode are distinct in some ways due to
their different characteristics, they are one in some ways due to the
impossibility of separating them, they are both in some ways due to the
intention of arranging them sequentially, and they are neither in some ways due
to the perspective of their simultaneous existence. The remaining three aspects
should also be understood in the same way.  **This concludes the fourth chapter
of the Devagama-Apta-Mimamsa.**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 kArikA 71, 72 ] devAgama 65 nusAra dravyako avAstava aura paryAyako vAstava
batalAkara dravyakA abhAva mAnA jAya to dravya-paryAya donoMmeMse kisIkA bhI
sadbhAva nahIM bana sakegA-arthakriyA-lakSaNa-vastumeM padArthakI taba koI
upapatti athavA vyavasthA hI nahIM bana sakegI; kyoMki paryAyanirapekSa kevala
dravya aura dravyanirapekSa kevala paryAya artha-kriyAkA nimitta nahIM hotA,
nimitta mAnanepara krama-yogapadyakA virodha upasthita hogA sarvathA
ekasvabhAvarUpa dravya yA paryAyake kramayogapadya ghaTita nahIM hotA, krama-
yogapadyake ghaTita na honepara arthakriyA nahIM banatI aura artha-kriyAke na
bananepara vastukA astitva na rahakara abhAva ThaharatA hai| ataH dravya aura
paryAya donoMmeMse kisIkA bhI lopa karanepara dUsarekA bhI lopa upasthita hotA
hai aura vastutattvakI koI vyavasthA nahIM bana skegii| dravyakA lakSaNa guNa-
paryAyavAn hai; jaisA ki 'guNa-paryayavad dravyam' isa tattvArthasUtrase jAnA
jAtA hai, jisameM guNa sahabhAvI ( yugapat ) aura paryAya kramabhAvI hote haiN|
paryAyakA lakSaNa 'tadbhAvaH pariNAmaH' sUtrake anusAra tadbhAva-usa usa
prativiziSTarUpase honA hai, jo ki kramA'kramarUpameM hotA hai  /  kramazaH
pariNamanako 'paryAya' aura akrama ( yugapat ) pariNamanako 'guNa' kahate haiN|
dravya aura paryAya donoMkI yaha lakSaNa-bhinnatA donoMke kathazcit nAnApanako
siddha karatI hai  /  isa taraha dravya aura paryAyameM kathaMcit nAnApanA hI
hai, svalakSaNake bhedase; kathaMcit ekapanA hI hai, azakya-vivecanake kAraNa;
kathaMcit ubhayapanA hI hai, donoMkI kramArpita-vivakSAse; kathaMcit
avaktavyapanA hai, donoMke sahArpaNakI dRssttise| zeSa tIna bhaMgoMko bhI isI
prakArase ghaTita kara lenA caahiye| iti devAgamApta-mImAMsAyAM caturthaH
paricchedaH  /

Page #135 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Samantabhadra-Bharati [ Chapter 5 Fifth Chapter The Flaw in the Absolute and
Relative Nature of Siddhi If there were relative siddhi, then duality would
stand. In absolute siddhi, there is no generality and particularity. ||73||  'If
siddhi, the certainty of the existence of dharma-dharmi, karya-karana, etc., is
considered to be relative, i.e., entirely dependent on each other, then neither
the relative nor the absolute can stand. There is no certainty of either, and
both are absent. And if siddhi is considered to be entirely absolute, i.e.,
independent of anything, then there is no generality and particularity. Because
both generality, which is anvay or non-difference, and particularity, which is
vyatireka or difference, are dependent on each other. Their siddhi is dependent
on each other, they cannot exist without mutual dependence. That is, non-
difference cannot exist without difference, and difference cannot exist without
non-difference.'  Explanation - (The first half of this karika mentions the
belief of the Buddhists and its flaw, and the second half mentions the belief of
the Yogis and its flaw. The Buddhists believe that in nirvikalpa pratyaksha
jnana, there is no appearance of anything like dharma-dharmi, etc., like near
and far. The subsequent vikalpa-buddhi, through which the distinctions of
visheshana-visheshyatva, samanya-visheshatva, guna-gunitva, kriya-kriyavatva,
karya-karanatva, sadhya-sadhanatva, grahya-grahakatva are all imagined, are not
real, but are all relative.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 samantabhadra-bhAratI [ pariccheda 5 paMcama pariccheda siddhike ApekSika-
anApekSika ekAntoMkI sadoSatA yadyApekSika-siddhi syAnna dvayaM vyavatiSThate  /
anApekSika-siddhau ca na sAmAnya-vizeSatA  /  / 73 /  /  'yadi siddhiko-dharma-
dharmI, kArya-kAraNAdirUpa padArthoMkI siddhi-nizcitiko-(ekAntataH) ApekSiko-
sarvathA eka dUsarekI apekSA rakhanevAlI-mAnA jAya to ApekSya aura ApekSika
donoMmeMse kisIkI bhI avasthiti nahIM banatI-kisI bhI ekakA nizcaya na hokara
donoMkA abhAva ThaharatA hai  /  aura siddhiko ( sarvathA ) anApekSikI-kisIkI
bhI apekSA na rakhanevAlI-mAnanepara sAmAnya-vizeSabhAva nahIM banatA-kyoMki
anvaya athavA abhedarUpa jo sAmAnya aura vyatireka athavA bhedarUpa jo vizeSa
donoM anyo'nyA'pekSa haiM-unakI siddhi eka dUsarekI apekSAko lie hue haiM,
pArasparika apekSAke binA vyavasthita nahIM hote arthAt abheda binA bhedake aura
bheda binA abhedake vyavahRta nahIM banatA hai|' vyAkhyA-( isa kArikAke
pUrvArdhameM bauddhoMkI mAnyatA aura usakI sadoSatAkA, tathA uttarArddha meM
yaugoMko mAnyatA aura usakI sadoSatAkA ullekha hai| bauddhoMkI yaha mAnyatA hai
ki nirvikalpa pratyakSa jJAnameM dUra-nikaTAdikI taraha dharma-dharmI Adi kisIkA
bhI pratibhAsa nahIM hotA, tatpRSTha-bhAvI vikalpa-buddhike dvArA
vizeSaNavizeSyatva, sAmAnya-vizeSatva, guNa-guNitva, kriyA-kriyAvatva, kArya-
kAraNatva, sAdhya-sAdhanatva, grAhya-grAhakatva ye saba bheda upakalpita haiM
aura isaliye pAramArthika na hokara sarvakSA ApekSika

Page #136 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Karika 73  **Devaagam** states that there is no inherent order in anything.
If we accept this relative truth, then both **Neel-lakshana** (blue
characteristic) and **Neel-gyaan** (knowledge of blue) are also without order,
because both are relative like a qualifier and the qualified.    Those who are
entirely relative in their existence have no order, just like two people
drowning in a river, holding onto each other, have no order (both are drowning).
Similarly, **Neel** and **Neel-gyaan** are entirely relative in their existence.
**Neel** cannot be established without **Neel-gyaan**, because without it, the
possibility of **Agyeyatva** (unknowability) arises, and it becomes **Tatha-
sanvedan-nishtha** (dependent on perception). And **Neel-gyaan** cannot be
established without **Neel**, because **Neel-gyaan** gains its self-benefit from
**Neel**, otherwise it becomes **nivishayatva** (object of knowledge), and
Buddhists do not consider knowledge as an object.   Thus, the absence of one
leads to the absence of the other, resulting in the absence of both **Neel** and
**Neel-gyaan**. When both knowledge and the object of knowledge cease to exist,
the possibility of **Sarva-shunyata** (absolute emptiness) arises.  Seeing the
flaws in this relative truth, if **Yog-matvadi** (follower of Yoga philosophy)
argues that "**Dharma-dharmi** (object and its attribute) are not entirely
relative but are **anapeksha** (non-relative), because **Dharma-dharmi** is the
subject of **pratinayat-buddhi** (constant intellect), like the nature of
**Nola** (a specific type of flower), and without **anapeksha** (non-
relativity), **pratinayat-buddhi** cannot be the subject," then this argument is
not correct. Because even in **anapeksha** (non-relativity), **anvaya-
vyatireka** (affirmation and negation) do not occur. **Anvaya** refers to the
general, and **vyatireka** refers to the specific. Both exist only in relation
to each other. If we accept their **anapeksha** (non-relativity), then neither
the general nor the specific remains stable.   Even in **pratinayat-buddhi**
(constant intellect) subjects, **pratinayat-padarthata** (constant objectness)
exists relatively, like **Neel** (blue) and **Peet** (yellow). If we accept
**Neel** and **Peet** as **anapeksha** (non-relative), then we cannot determine
that this is **Neel** and this is **Peet**.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 kArikA 73 ] devAgama haiM-vastutaH inameM koI bhI vyavasthita nahIM hotaa| isa
tarahakI ApekSikI siddhi mAnanepara nIla-svalakSaNa aura nIlajJAna ye donoM bhI
vyavasthita nahIM hote; kyoMki donoM vizeSaNa-vizeSyakI taraha ApekSika haiN|
jinakI sarvathA ApekSika-siddhi hotI hai unakI koI vyavasthA nahIM hai, jaise
paraspara eka dUsareko pakar3e hue nadImeM DUbanevAle do manuSyoMkI koI
vyavasthA nahIM banatI-( donoM hI DUbate haiM  /  ) vaise hI nIla aura nIla-
jJAnameM sarvathA apekSAkRtasiddhikI bAta hai-nIlajJAnake vinA nIla siddha nahIM
hotA, ajJeyatvakA prasaMga Anese aura tathA-saMvedana-niSTha honese, aura nIlakI
apekSAke vinA nIlajJAna siddha nahIM hotA; kyoMki nIlajJAnake nIlase AtmalAbha
banatA hai, anyathA nIlajJAnake niviSayatvakA prasaMga AtA hai aura bauddhoMne
jJAnako niviSaya mAnA nhiiN| isa taraha ekake abhAvameM dUsarekA bhI abhAva
honese nIla aura nIlajJAna donoMkA hI abhAva ThaharatA hai| jaba jJAna aura
jJeya donoM hI na rahe taba sarva-zUnyatAkA prasaMga upasthita hotA hai|
_ApekSika-siddhike ekAntameM doSa dekhakara yadi yauga-matavAdI yaha kahe ki
'dharma-dharmIkI sarvathA ApekSika-siddhi nahIM kintu anApekSika-siddhi hai;
kyoMki dharma-dharmIke pratiniyata-buddhikA viSayapanA hai, nolAdike svarUpakI
trh| sarvathA anApekSikatvakA abhAva honepara pratiniyata-buddhikA viSayapanA
nahIM banatA, to yaha kahanA ThIka nahIM hai; kyoMki sarvathA anapekSA-pakSameM
bhI anvayavyatireka ghaTita nahIM hote| anvaya sAmAnyako aura vyatireka vizeSako
kahate haiM, donoM paraspara apekSAke rUpameM hI tiSThate haiM, donoMkI sarvathA
anApekSika-siddhi mAnanepara na sAmAnya sthira rahatA hai aura na vizeSa  /
pratiniyatabuddhi-viSayoMmeM bhI pratiniyatapadArthatA sApekSarUpameM hotI hai,
nIla-pItakI trh| nIla aura pItako anApekSika-siddhi mAnanepara yaha nIla hai,
yaha pIta hai aisA nizcaya nahIM bntaa|

Page #137 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  68 ## Samantabhadra-Bharati ## [ Chapter 5  The statement that both relative
and absolute truths are one-sided is not acceptable to those who are averse to
the Syadvada-naya, because there is contradiction between the two one-sided
views.  The statement that both are one-sided is not acceptable to those who are
averse to the Syadvada-naya, because there is contradiction between the two one-
sided views.  Even in the case of the absolute truth, it is not appropriate to
say that it is unutterable, because by saying so, it becomes utterable to some
extent, and this contradicts the principle of absolute unutterability.  The
statement that both relative and absolute truths are one-sided is not acceptable
to those who are averse to the Syadvada-naya, because there is contradiction
between the two one-sided views.  Even in the case of the absolute truth, it is
not appropriate to say that it is unutterable, because by saying so, it becomes
utterable to some extent, and this contradicts the principle of absolute
unutterability.  The statement that both relative and absolute truths are one-
sided is not acceptable to those who are averse to the Syadvada-naya, because
there is contradiction between the two one-sided views.  Even in the case of the
absolute truth, it is not appropriate to say that it is unutterable, because by
saying so, it becomes utterable to some extent, and this contradicts the
principle of absolute unutterability.  The statement that both relative and
absolute truths are one-sided is not acceptable to those who are averse to the
Syadvada-naya, because there is contradiction between the two one-sided views.
Even in the case of the absolute truth, it is not appropriate to say that it is
unutterable, because by saying so, it becomes utterable to some extent, and this
contradicts the principle of absolute unutterability.  The statement that both
relative and absolute truths are one-sided is not acceptable to those who are
averse to the Syadvada-naya, because there is contradiction between the two one-
sided views.  Even in the case of the absolute truth, it is not appropriate to
say that it is unutterable, because by saying so, it becomes utterable to some
extent, and this contradicts the principle of absolute unutterability.  The
statement that both relative and absolute truths are one-sided is not acceptable
to those who are averse to the Syadvada-naya, because there is contradiction
between the two one-sided views.  Even in the case of the absolute truth, it is
not appropriate to say that it is unutterable, because by saying so, it becomes
utterable to some extent, and this contradicts the principle of absolute
unutterability.  The statement that both relative and absolute truths are one-
sided is not acceptable to those who are averse to the Syadvada-naya, because
there is contradiction between the two one-sided views.  Even in the case of the
absolute truth, it is not appropriate to say that it is unutterable, because by
saying so, it becomes utterable to some extent, and this contradicts the
principle of absolute unutterability.  The statement that both relative and
absolute truths are one-sided is not acceptable to those who are averse to the
Syadvada-naya, because there is contradiction between the two one-sided views.
Even in the case of the absolute truth, it is not appropriate to say that it is
unutterable, because by saying so, it becomes utterable to some extent, and this
contradicts the principle of absolute unutterability.  The statement that both
relative and absolute truths are one-sided is not acceptable to those who are
averse to the Syadvada-naya, because there is contradiction between the two one-
sided views.  Even in the case of the absolute truth, it is not appropriate to
say that it is unutterable, because by saying so, it becomes utterable to some
extent, and this contradicts the principle of absolute unutterability.  The
statement that both relative and absolute truths are one-sided is not acceptable
to those who are averse to the Syadvada-naya, because there is contradiction
between the two one-sided views.  Even in the case of the absolute truth, it is
not appropriate to say that it is unutterable, because by saying so, it becomes
utterable to some extent, and this contradicts the principle of absolute
unutterability.  The statement that both relative and absolute truths are one-
sided is not acceptable to those who are averse to the Syadvada-naya, because
there is contradiction between the two one-sided views.  Even in the case of the
absolute truth, it is not appropriate to say that it is unutterable, because by
saying so, it becomes utterable to some extent, and this contradicts the
principle of absolute unutterability.  The statement that both relative and
absolute truths are one-sided is not acceptable to those who are averse to the
Syadvada-naya, because there is contradiction between the two one-sided views.
Even in the case of the absolute truth, it is not appropriate to say that it is
unutterable, because by saying so, it becomes utterable to some extent, and this
contradicts the principle of absolute unutterability.  The statement that both
relative and absolute truths are one-sided is not acceptable to those who are
averse to the Syadvada-naya, because there is contradiction between the two one-
sided views.  Even in the case of the absolute truth, it is not appropriate to
say that it is unutterable, because by saying so, it becomes utterable to some
extent, and this contradicts the principle of absolute unutterability.  The
statement that both relative and absolute truths are one-sided is not acceptable
to those who are averse to the Syadvada-naya, because there is contradiction
between the two one-sided views.  Even in the case of the absolute truth, it is
not appropriate to say that it is unutterable, because by saying so, it becomes
utterable to some extent, and this contradicts the principle of absolute
unutterability.  The statement that both relative and absolute truths are one-
sided is not acceptable to those who are averse to the Syadvada-naya, because
there is contradiction between the two one-sided views.  Even in the case of the
absolute truth, it is not appropriate to say that it is unutterable, because by
saying so, it becomes utterable to some extent, and this contradicts the
principle of absolute unutterability.  The statement that both relative and
absolute truths are one-sided is not acceptable to those who are averse to the
Syadvada-naya, because there is contradiction between the two one-sided views.
Even in the case of the absolute truth, it is not appropriate to say that it is
unutterable, because by saying so, it becomes utterable to some extent, and this
contradicts the principle of absolute unutterability.  The statement that both
relative and absolute truths are one-sided is not acceptable to those who are
averse to the Syadvada-naya, because there is contradiction between the

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 68 samantabhadra-bhAratI [ pariccheda 5 ukta ubhaya tathA avaktavya ekAntoMkI
sadoSatA virodhAnnobhayaikAtmyaM syAdvAda-nyAya-vidviSAm  /
avAcyataikAnte'pyukti 'vAcyamiti yujyate  // 74 /  /  'yadi ApekSika-siddhi aura
anApekSika-siddhi donoMkA ekAnta mAnA jAya to vaha syAdvAdanyAyase dveSa
rakhanevAloMke-usa nyAyakA Azraya na lenevAle sarvathA ekAntavAdiyoMke-yahA~
nahIM banatA; kyoMki donoM ekAntoMmeM paraspara virodha hai-unakI yugapat
vivakSA sadasat ( bhAvA'bhAva ) ekAntakI taraha nahIM bntii| yadi ( virodhake
bhayAdise ) avAcyatAkA ekAnta mAnA jAyasiddhiko sarvathA avAcya kahA jAya to
yaha avAcya kahanA bhI nahIM banatA; kyoMki isa kathanase hI vaha kathaMcit
vAcya ho jAtI hai, aura usase sarvathA avAcyatAkA siddhAnta bAdhita ThaharatA
hai|' ukta ApekSikAdi ekAntoMkI nirdoSa-vyavasthA dharma-dharmyavinAbhAvaH
siddhayatyanyo'nya-vIkSayA  /  na svarUpaM svato hyetat kAraka-jJApakA'Ggavat  /
/ 75 /  /  'dharma aura dharmIkA avinAbhAva-sambandha hI eka dUsarekI apekSAse
siddha hotA hai na ki svarUpa-svarUpa to apane kAraNakalApase dharma-dharmIkI
vivakSAse pUrva hI siddhatvako prApta hai; kyoMki vaha svataH siddha hai, kAraka
aura jJApakake aGgoMkI taraha-jaise kArakake do aMga ( avayava ) kartA-karma
aura jJApakake do aMga bodhya-bodhaka ( vedya-vedaka athavA prameya-pramANa ) ye
apane apane svarUpa-viSayameM dUsare aMgakI ( kartA karmakI aura karma kartAkI
bodhya-bodhakakI, bodhaka bodhyakI ) apekSA nahIM rakhateanyathA apekSA-dvArA
ekake svarUpako dUsareke Azrita mAnanepara donoMke hI abhAvakA prasaMga
upasthita hotA hai| parantu kartA-karmakA aura jJApya-jJApakakA vyavahAra
paraspara eka dUsarekI apekSAke binA

Page #138 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Karika 76]  "Devagama is not formed - mutual expectation is necessary for
behavior, not for essence." _ In this way, the relative truth of all substances,
which are the essence of dharma, is established from the perspective of
behavior, which is non-difference; the absolute truth is established from the
perspective of the previously known essence; the relative and absolute truth is
established from the perspective of the sequential order of both dharmas,
expectation and non-expectation; the inexpressible truth is established from the
perspective of the simultaneous statement of both dharmas. The remaining
categories of "relative", "inexplicable", etc. should also be arranged in this
way, thus establishing the seven-fold predication process here, which is
consistent with the specific Nayas as before.  Thus ends the fifth chapter of
the Devagama-Mimamsa.  The sixth chapter: If all things are established solely
by reason (as per the view of the Buddhist logicians), and the establishment of
any truth, such as cause and effect, is not accepted without reason, then there
will be no movement, establishment, or knowledge attainable through perception,
etc. (and if this is the case, then inferential knowledge based on reason will
also not be possible; because for inference, the object of inference,

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 kArikA 76 ] devAgama nahIM banatA-vyavahArake liye pArasparika apekSA Avazyaka
haisvarUpake liye nhiiN|' _ isa taraha dharma-dharmibhUta sakala padArthoMkI
kathaMcit ApekSikI siddhi hai-avinAbhAvarUpa vyavahArakI dRSTise; kathaMcit
anApekSikI siddhi hai-pUrva prasiddha svarUpakI dRSTise; kathaMcit ubhayI siddhi
hai-apekSA-anapekSArUpa donoM dharmoMke kramApitakI dRSTise; kathaMcit avaktavyA
siddhi hai-ukta donoM dharmoMke sahArpita ( yugapatkathana ) kI dRSTise  /  zeSa
'ApekSikI' aura 'avaktavyA' Adi bhaMgoMko bhI isI prakAra ghaTita karake yahA~
bhI saptabhaMgI prakriyAkI yojanA kara lenI cAhiye, jo ki nayavizeSakI dRSTise
pUrvavat aviruddha hai| iti devAgamApta-mImAMsAyAM paMcamaH paricchedaH  /
SaSTha pariccheda sarvathA hetusiddha tathA Agamasiddha ekAntoMkI sadoSatA
siddhaM ceddhatutaH sarva na pratyakSAdito gatiH  /  siddhaM cedAgamAtsarva
viruddhArtha-matAnyapi  /  / 76 /  /  'yadi ( kevala anumAnavAdI bauddhoMke
matAnusAra ) saba kucha ( ekAntataH ) hetuse hI siddha mAnA jAya-hetuke binA
kisI bhI kArya-kAraNAdirUpa tattvakI siddhi-nizcitiko aMgIkAra na kiyA jAya-to
pratyakSAdise phira koI gati-siddhi, vyavasthiti athavA jJAnako prApti-nahIM
bana sakegI ( aura aisA honepara hetumUlaka anumAnajJAna bhI nahIM bana sakegA;
kyoMki anumAnake liye dharmIkA,

Page #139 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 70 Samantbhadra-Bharati [Chapter 6 Direct knowledge of the means and examples
is necessary. Without direct knowledge of the virtuous, etc., no inference can
be established.  To imagine an inference-antecedent for the sake of inferential
knowledge leads to the fault of infinite regress and no inference can be formed.
And then, the scriptural instruction in the form of parārthanumāna also becomes
useless - it becomes pointless; because even in the case of a familiar object,
if the proof is not accepted from direct perception, then knowledge of words and
linga (reason) will not be formed; and in this way, both svārthanumāna and
parārthanumāna will not be formed.) If the validity of the entire group of
principles is accepted from the scriptures alone, then these contradictory views
(which are independent of reasoning) will also attain validity because from the
perspective of the scriptures alone, there is no difference between the two
scriptures and the presentation of the principles is contradictory to each
other. Accepting both as valid or certain from the perspective of the scriptures
will lead to the validity of contradictory meanings from the perspective of the
principles, and then there will be no real order of any principle, nor will
social conduct be well-organized. The above-mentioned duality and the fault of
the inexpressible extremes is the unity of contradiction, which is the hatred of
the Syadvada-Nyaya-scholars. Even in the inexpressible extreme, it is not
appropriate to say that it is inexpressible. ||77|| _ If both reason and
scripture are considered to be one, then that too will not be possible; because
there is mutual contradiction between the two. The coexistence of two completely
contradictory principles is impossible for those who hate Syadvada-Nyaya and do
not accept the validity of reason and scripture in any way. If (through both the
extremes of reason and scripture, there is a contradiction in the validity of
the principles

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 70 samantabhadra-bhAratI [pariccheda 6 sAdhanakA tathA udAharaNakA
pratyakSajJAna honA Avazyaka hai, dharmI Adike pratyakSajJAnake binA koI anumAna
pravartita nahIM hotaa| . anumAna-jJAnake liye anumAnAntarakI kalpanA karanese
anavasthAdoSa upasthita hotA hai aura kahIM koI bhI anumAna nahIM bana paataa|
aura taba phira parArthAnumAnarUpa zAstropadezakA bhI koI prayojana nahIM
rahatA-vaha vyartha ThaharatA hai; kyoMki abhyastaviSayameM bhI yadi pratyakSase
siddhi nahIM mAnI jAyagI, to phira zabda tathA liGga ( hetu ) kA bhI jJAna nahIM
bana sakegA; aura isa taraha svArthAnumAna tathA parArthAnumAna donoM hI nahIM
bana skeNge| ) yadi Agamase hI sarvatattva-samUhakI siddhi mAnI jAya to ye
paraspara viruddha arthakA pratipAdana karanevAle ( yukti-nirapekSa ) mata bhI
siddhiko prApta hoMgekyoMki AgamamAtrakI dRSTise donoMke AgamoMmeM koI vizeSa
nahIM hai aura tattvaprarUpaNa ekakA dUsareke viruddha hai, donoMko AgamakI
dRSTise siddha athavA nizcitarUpase ThIka mAnanepara viruddhArthake bhI
tattvarUpase siddhikA prasaMga upasthita hogA aura taba kisI tattvakI bhI koI
yathArtha vyavasthA nahIM bana sakegI aura na loka-vyavahAra hI sughaTita ho
skegaa|' ukta ubhaya tathA avaktavya ekAntoMkI sadoSatA virodhAnnobhayekAtmyaM
syAdvAda-nyAya-vidviSAm  /  avAcyataikAnte'pyuktirnA'vAcyamiti yujyate  /  /
77|| _ hetu aura Agama donoM ekAntoMkA yadi ekAtmya mAnA jAya to vaha bhI nahIM
bana sakegA; kyoMki donoMmeM paraspara virodha haisarvathA viruddha do
siddhAntoMkA ekatra avasthAna unake sarvathA asambhava hai jo syAdvAda-nyAyase
dveSa rakhate haiM aura kathaMcit rUpase hetu tathA AgamakI mAnyatAko svIkAra
nahIM karate  /  yadi ( hetu tathA Agama donoM ekAntoM-dvArA tattvasiddhimeM
virodha-doSa

Page #140 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Karika 78]  If we consider the "unspeakable" (avachya) as a state of
isolation, then it would not be possible to say that "truth is unspeakable"
because by saying so, it would become speakable, leading to a contradiction.
**He who is not an authority, the truth is established by reason. He who is an
authority, the truth is established by scripture.**  **Explanation:** Here, it
is important to understand the nature of an authority (apta) and a non-authority
(anapta). The nature of an authority has been explained in detail in the earlier
verses of this text. In essence, an authority is one who is free from attachment
(vitraga), omniscient (sarvagna), and a proponent of the true nature of reality
without contradicting the principles of logic. A non-authority is one who
deviates from or contradicts the characteristics of an authority.  The act of
revealing the truth is called "non-contradiction" (avisamvad), which arises from
right knowledge (samyagjnana). One who reveals the true nature of reality is a
"non-contradictor" and therefore possesses right knowledge. Right knowledge is
characterized by uninterrupted activity (avabadhit-vyavsayarupa) and has two
aspects: direct (sakshya) and indirect (asakshya). Doubt, error, and indecision
are the three forms of ignorance that are eliminated by right knowledge.  In
such a situation, the words of an authority who possesses the aforementioned
characteristics...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 kArikA 78 ] devAgama dekhakara ) avAcyatAkA ekAnta mAnA jAya to tatvasiddhi
nizcayase 'avAcya' hai aisA kahanA bhI nahIM bana sakegA--aisA kahanese hI vaha
vAcya ho jAneke kAraNa svavacana-virodhakA prasaMga upasthita hotA hai|' hetu
tathA Agamase nirdoSasiddhikI dRSTi vaktaryanApte yaddhetoH sAdhyaM taddhatu-
sAdhitam  /  Apte vaktaritadvAkyAtsAdhyamAgama-sAdhitam  /  / 78 //  'vaktAke
Apta na honepara jo ( tattva ) hetuse sAdhya hotA hai vaha hetu-sAdhita (
yuktisiddha ) kahA jAtA hai aura vaktAke Apta honepara jo tattva usa Aptake
vAkyase sAdhya hotA hai use AgamasAdhita ( zAstrasiddha ) samajhanA caahiye|'
vyAkhyA-yahA~ Apta aura anAptake svarUpako mukhyatAse dhyAna meM lenekI jarUrata
hai| AptakA svarUpa isa granthake prArambhakI kucha kArikAoMmeM vistArake sAtha
batalAyA jA cukA hai, jisakA phalita-rUpa itanA hI hai ki jo vItarAga tathA
sarvajJa honese yuktizAstrake avirodharUpa yathArtha vastutattvakA pratipAdaka
evaM avisaMvAdaka hai vaha Apta hai aura jo Aptake isa svarUpase bhinna athavA
viparItarUpako liye hue visaMvAdaka hai vaha Apta nahIManApta hai| tattvake
pratipAdanakA nAma avisaMvAda hai, jo samyagjJAna se banatA hai| jo tattvakA-
yathArtha vastutattvakA-pratipAdana karatA hai vaha avisaMvAdaka hai aura
isaliye usakA jJAna samyakjJAna honA cAhie, jo ki abAdhita-vyavasAyarUpa hotA
hai aura jisake pratyakSa ( sAkSAt ) tathA parokSa ( asAkSAt ) aise do bheda
haiM  /  saMzaya, viparyaya aura anadhyavasAya ina tonoM ajJAnoMkA nAza isa
samyagjJAnakA phala hai| aisI sthitimeM ukta-lakSaNa-AptakA vacana

Page #141 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
72 Samantbhadra-Bharati Chapter 7 When established, Agamasiddha is proven in the
same way as Hetusiddha. Thus ends the sixth chapter of Devagamapt-Mimamsa.
Seventh Chapter The Buddhist belief of Antarangaarthata-Ekanta is flawed.
Antarangaarthata-Ekanta is flawed, the intellect and scripture are all false. It
is merely an appearance of proof, how can it be proof without proof? ||71|| 'If
(according to the Buddhist view of Vijnanavadins) the Ekanta of Antarangaarthata
is accepted - the Antaranga, which is self-evident knowledge, is accepted as its
reality, and the Bahiranga, which is inert and unfit for perception, is not
accepted as its reality, then the intellect, which is in the form of inference,
and the scripture, which is in the form of Agama, are all false. When they are
false, then they are merely appearances of proof; because proof is characterized
by truth, and an appearance of proof is characterized by falsehood (Mrusha). And
how can the use of an appearance of proof be possible without accepting the
existence of proof? - It cannot be possible. Therefore, the belief in the Ekanta
of Antarangaarthata is flawed. It cannot be proven by any proof, such as
inference, etc.; and when it cannot be proven, it cannot be made known to
others.' (That which is in the form of the perceiver and the perceived is all
illusory, such a belief of the Sanvedanavadins makes even Sanvedana illusory;
because knowledge of the true nature also occurs when there is an absence of the
characteristics of Vedya-Vedaka.)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 72 samantabhadra-bhAratI pariccheda 7 siddha honepara Agamasiddha usIprakArase
pramANa hotA hai jisa prakAra ki hetusiddha  /  iti devAgamApta-mImAMsAyAM
SaSThaH paricchedaH  /  saptama pariccheda antaraMgArthatA-ekAntakI bauddha-
mAnyatA sadoSa antaraGgArthataikAnte buddhi-vAkyaM mRSAkhilam  /
pramANAbhAsamevAtastat pramANAdRte katham  // 71 /  /  'yadi ( vijJAnAdvaitavAdI
bauddhoMke matAnusAra ) antaraMgArthatAkA ekAnta mAnA jAya-antaraMga jo
svasaMvidita jJAna usIke vastutA svIkAra kI jAya aura bahiraMga jo pratibhAsake
ayogya jar3a hai usake vastutA na mAnI jAya to buddhirUpa anumAna aura vAkyarUpa
Agama saba mithyA Thaharate haiN| jaba mithyA Thaharate haiM taba ve
pramANAbhAsa hI hue; kyoMki pramANa satyase aura pramANAbhAsa mithyA( mRSA )se
vyApta hotA hai| aura pramANAbhAsakA vyavahAra binA pramANakA astitva aGgIkAra
kiye kaise bana sakatA hai ?-nahIM bana sakatA  /  ataH antaraMgArthatAke
ekAntakI mAnyatA dUSita hai| use anumAnAdi kisI bhI pramANase siddha nahIM kiyA
jA sakatA; aura jaba siddha nahIM kiyA jA sakatA to dUsaroMko usakI pratIti bhI
nahIM karAI jA sktii|' ( jo grAhya-grAhakArarUpa hai vaha saba bhrAnta hai, aisI
saMvedanAdvatakI mAnyatAse saMvedanAta bhI bhrAnta ThaharatA hai; kyoMki
svarUpakA jJAna bhI vedya-vedaka-lakSaNakA abhAva honepara ghaTita :

Page #142 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 73 ## Karika 80]  Devagam does not occur. Even if everyone is deluded,
knowledge of the object and means is not possible. If it is possible in its true
form, it does not constitute the establishment of universal delusion.
**Explanation:**  If the object and means are considered to be mere knowledge
(vijnana-matrata), then the object, means, and so on, do not arise. If the
object and means are mere knowledge (vijnana-matrata), then there is no object,
no means, and no illustration (due to the fault of the proposition and the
reason).  **Commentary:**  The statement about the side with the object is
called the "proposition" and the statement about the means is called the
"reason." The "Samvedadvaitavadis" (Buddhists) argue that the blue object and
the knowledge of blue are non-dual, because they are experienced together
(sahopalambha-niyama). Just as a person with eye disease sees two moons, but the
moon is actually one, so too the blue object and the knowledge of blue are not
two, but one thing, the form of knowledge.  In this statement, the fault of the
proposition that occurs is self-contradiction. This is because it contradicts
the distinction between the object and the knower, which is stated by them, and
the distinction between the reason and the illustration, both of which are non-
dual. This statement cannot be made in the context of complete non-duality.
Therefore, the statement of the non-duality of knowledge, which is the form of
the distinction between the object and the means, is a fault of the proposition,
which is self-contradiction.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 73 kArikA 80 ] devAgama nahIM hotaa| sabake bhrAnta honepara sAdhya-sAdhanakA
jJAna bhI sambhava nahIM ho sktaa| usake satyarUpameM sambhava honepara
sarvavibhramakI siddhi nahIM banatI  /  ) vijJapti-mAtratAke ekAntameM sAdhya-
sAdhanAdi nahIM banate sAdhya-sAdhana-vijJapteryadi vijJapti-mAtratA  /  na
sAdhyaM na ca hetuzca pratijJA-hetu-doSataH  /  / 8 /  /  'yadi sAdhya aura
sAdhana ( hetu ) ko vijJapti ( jJAna ) ke vijJaptimAtratA mAnI jAya-jJAnake
atirikta anya kucha nahIM aisA kahA jAya to sAdhya, hetu aura dvitIya cakArase
dRSTAnta ye tInoM nahIM banate; kyoMki aisA kahane meM pratijJAdoSa aura
hetudoSa upasthita hotA hai-pratijJAse svavacana-virodha AtA hai aura
hetuprayoga asiddhAdi doSoMse dUSita ThaharatA hai  / ' vyAkhyA-sAdhya-yukta
pakSake vacanako 'pratijJA' aura sAdhanake vacanako 'hetu' kahate haiN|
saMvedAdvaitavAdI (bauddha) apane saMvedanAdvaitatattvako siddha karaneke liye
kahate haiM ki nIlA padArtha aura nIlekA jJAna ye abheda rUpa haiM; kyoMki inakI
eka sAtha upalabdhikA niyama hai ( sahopalambha-niyamAt ) /  jaise netravikArIke
do candramAkA darzana hote hue bhI candramA vAstavameM eka hI hai vaise hI nIlA
padArtha aura nIlajJAna do na hokara jJAnAdva tarUpa eka hI vastu hai  /  isa
kathanameM pratijJA-doSa jo ghaTita hotA hai vaha svavacana-virodha hai; kyoMki
apane dvArA kahe hue nIlA-padArtharUpa dharma-dharmIke bhedakA aura hetu tathA
dRSTAnta donoMke bhedakA advatake sAtha virodha hai| sarvathA advata-ekAntakI
mAnyatAmeM inakA kahanA nahIM banatA aura isaliye sAdhya-sAdhanAdike bhedarUpa
jJAnake abhedarUpa vijJAnAdvatatAkA kathana karanevAleke svavacana-virodharUpa
pratijJA-doSa sughaTita hotA hai|

Page #143 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 74 Samantabhadra-Bharati [Chapter 7] The fallacy of the reason is that it
proves the absence of difference between blue and the knowledge of blue, due to
the absence of separate attainment of blue and the knowledge of blue. This is
not proven; because the relationship between the two absences is not proven -
the absence of relationship is like the absence of relationship between a donkey
and a horn. A reason that does not have an inseparable relationship with the
object to be proven is not capable of proving the object and is therefore called
an invalid reason.  If it is said that 'just as the absence of smoke is proven
by the absence of fire, and the absence of the contained (Sisam) is proven by
the absence of the container (tree); in the same way, the absence of difference
between blue and the knowledge of blue is proven by the absence of their
separate attainment, therefore our reason is not invalid', then this is not
correct. Because the absence of the effect is proven only when the relationship
of cause and effect between smoke and fire is proven, and the absence of the
contained is proven only when the relationship of contained and container
between Sisam and the tree is proven, otherwise not - that is, if the existence
of cause and effect and contained and container is not already proven, then the
absence of the effect in the absence of the cause and the absence of the
contained in the absence of the container is not proven. In this way, since the
relationship between difference and separate attainment is not proven due to the
opposing argument of the proponents of knowledge-only, the absence of separate
attainment (in the form of the rule of co-occurrence) cannot prove the absence
of difference, therefore their stated reason in the form of the absence of
separate attainment is not certain - it is invalid.  The external meaning is
always flawed because it is a mere semblance of proof, as it would lead to the
success of all actions by those who speak contradictory meanings. ||81||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 74 samantabhadra-bhAratI [paricchada 7 hetu-doSa yaha ghaTita hotA hai ki ukta
hetu nIla aura nIlajJAnakI pRthak upalabdhike abhAvase nIla aura nIlajJAna-
bhedake abhAvako siddha karatA hai. jo ki asiddha hai; kyoMki donoM abhAvoMmeM
paraspara sambandha siddha nahIM hai-sambandhakA abhAva usI prakAra hai jisa
prakAra ki gadhe aura sIMgameM sambandhakA abhAva hai| jo hetu sAdhyake sAtha
avinAbhAva-sambandha na rakhatA ho vaha sAdhyako siddha karane meM samartha
nahIM hotA aura isaliye asiddhahetu kahalAtA hai| yadi yaha kahA jAya ki 'jisa
prakAra agnike abhAvase dhUmakA abhAva aura vyApaka ( vRkSa ) ke abhAvase vyApya
( zIzama )kA abhAva siddha kiyA jAtA hai; usI prakAra nIla aura nIlajJAnakI
pRthak upalabdhike abhAvase donoMka bhedakA abhAva siddha kiyA jAtA hai, isaliye
hamArA hetu asiddha nahIM hai' to yaha kahanA ThIka nahIM hai| kyoMki dhUma aura
agnikA kArya-kAraNabhAvasambandha siddha honepara hI kAraNake abhAvameM kAryakA
abhAva siddha hotA hai tathA zozama aura vRkSake vyApya-vyApaka-sambandha
honepara hI vyApakake abhAvameM vyApyakA abhAva siddha hotA hai, anyathA nahIM-
arthAt kArya-kAraNakA aura vyApya-vyApakakA yadi pahalese astitva siddha nahIM
hai to kAraNake abhAvameM kAryakA aura vyApakake abhAvameM vyApyakA abhAva
siddha nahIM hotaa| isa prakAra bheda aura pRthak upalabdhikA sambandha cU~ki
vijJAnAdva tavAdiyoMke virodhadoSake kAraNa siddha nahIM banatA; jisase pRthak
upalabdhikA abhAva ( sahopalambha-niyamarUpa ) hetu bhedA'bhAvako siddha kare
isaliye unakA ukta pRthak upalabdhikA abhAvarUpa hetu nizcita nahIM-asiddha hai|
bahiraMgArthatA-ekAntako sadoSatA bahiraGgArthatakAnte pramANAbhAsa-nihnavAt  /
sarveSAM kAryasiddhiH syAviruddhArthA'bhidhAyinAm  /  / 81 //

Page #144 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Karika 82, 83] Devagam  75. "If only external objects are considered real,
and no ultimate reality is attributed to knowledge, then this leads to the
elimination of false knowledge, such as doubt arising from apparent evidence.
With the elimination of apparent evidence, the arguments of those who advocate
contradictory views will be validated. This would mean that those who hold views
like *sanvedana-advaita* (non-duality of perception), *brahma-advaita* (non-
duality of Brahman), or any other monistic view, or those who contradict direct
perception, would not be considered as holding false views or being dishonest.
This would be a flaw."  The above-mentioned duality and non-expressible monism
are flawed due to their contradiction. Both are one and the same for those who
hate the Syadvada logic. Even in the case of non-expressible monism, the
statement "it is non-expressible" is not valid, as it contradicts the non-
expressible monism. || 82 ||  "The unity (mutual acceptance) of both internal
and external objects of knowledge, as monism, is against the Syadvada logic and
therefore does not constitute a valid theory. Considering both internal and
external objects of knowledge as non-expressible monism, the statement "it is
non-expressible" also becomes invalid, as it contradicts the non-expressible
monism."  In the above-mentioned two monisms, there is a harmony due to the
difference in their respective objects. In the case of internal objects, the
evidence is self-awareness, while in the case of external objects, the evidence
is sensory perception. Both evidence and apparent evidence arise, where there is
a contradiction or obstacle, apparent evidence arises, and where there is no
contradiction,

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 kArikA 82, 83] devAgama 75 'yadi bahiraMgArthatAkA ekAnta mAnA jAya-jJAnako koI
paramArtha vastu na mAnakara bAhya padArthako hI vastu mAnA jAya to isase
pramANAbhAsakA-saMzayAdirUpa mithyAjJAnakA-lopa hotA hai; aura pramANAbhAsake
lopase sabhI virUddha arthakA pratipAdana karanevAloMke kArya-siddhi ThaharegI-
saMvedanA'dvaitavAdI, brahmA'dvaitavAdI Adi kisI bhI ekAntavAdI athavA
pratyakSAdike sarvathA viruddha kathana karanevAloMko taba mithyAdRSTi yA
asatyavAdI nahIM kahA jA sakegA, yaha doSa aaegaa|' ukta ubhaya tathA avaktavya
ekAntoMkI sadoSatA virodhAnnobhayaikAtmyaM syAdvAda-nyAya-vidviSAm  /
avAcyataikAnte'pyuktirnA'vAcyamiti yujyate  /  / 82 /  /  'antaraMga aura
bahiraMga jJeyarUpa donoM ekAntoMkA ekAtmya ( sahA'bhyupagama ) syAdvAda-nyAyake
vidveSiyoMke viruddha hai aura isaliye unake ubhaya-ekAntakA siddhAnta nahIM
bntaa| antaraMgArtha aura bahiraMgArtha donoM ekAntoMko avAcyatAkA ekAnta
mAnanepara 'avAcya hai' yaha ukti bhI nahIM banatIavAcyataikAntake viruddha
par3atI hai|' ukta donoM ekAntoMme apekSA-bhedase sAmaMjasya bhAva-
prameyA'pekSAyAM pramANAbhAsa-nihnavaH  /  bahiHpremAyA'pekSAyAM pramANaM
nannibhaM ca te  /  / 83 /  /  ( he arhan bhagavan ! ) Apake matameM
bhAvaprameyakI apekSAsvasaMvedana-pramANake dvArA saba kucha pratyakSa honepara-
aura bAhyaprameyakI apekSA-indriyajJAnake dvArA pratyakSa honepara-pramANa tathA
pramANAbhAsa donoM banate haiM-jahA~ visaMvAda hotA hai athavA bAdhA AtI hai
vahA~ pramANAbhAsa banatA hai aura jahA~ visaMvAda na hokara

Page #145 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Samantabhadra-Bharati [ Chapter 7: Where there is uninterruptedness, there is
proof. In this way, there is no contradiction in the arrangement of proof and
non-proof; because due to the absence of a particular covering of the same
living being, the attainment of the sensory result in the form of true-false-
appearance is established in the same way as the excellent-inferior result of
gold is established due to the absence of a particular covering of dirt-
blackness. If someone says that the living being is not an object, then this
cannot be said; because there is the existence of the proof of the receiver
(indicator of existence) of the living being, which is explained in the next
verses.  The word 'Jiva' is a noun, therefore it has an external meaning. The
word 'Jiva' has an external meaning because it is a noun, like the word 'Hetu'.
The nouns of illusion like Maya etc. are like their own pronouncements. || 84 ||
The word 'Jiva' is associated with an external meaning - the meaning of the word
'Jiva' in the external is the living being object, which is specific in form and
characteristics - because this word is a noun (name), and the word which is in
the form of a noun or name does not exist without an external meaning, like the
word 'Hetu' used in the inference of 'Agnimaan' etc., the noun-like 'Hetu' word
like 'Dhuma' (smoke) etc. does not exist without the existence of the external
object named 'Dhuma' etc., all the 'Hetuvadi' consider the 'Hetu' word to be
associated with an external meaning; otherwise, there cannot be any difference
between 'Hetu' and 'Hetvabhas'.  (If someone says here that there are nouns of
illusion like Maya (illusion) etc., which do not have any external meaning,
therefore the noun-making is anekantic - vyabhichari - then it will not be
necessary for the word 'Jiva' to have an external meaning, then this is not
correct because) the nouns of illusion like Maya etc. are also carrying their
meaning along with them, like the pronouncements of proof. Just as the
knowledge-characteristic of the proof-statement is the external meaning, in the
same way, the external meaning of the nouns of illusion like Maya etc. is
also...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 samantabhadra-bhAratI [ pariccheda 7 nirbAdhatA hotI hai vahA~ pramANa banatA
hai| isa taraha pramANaapramANakI vyavasthArUpase koI virodha nahIM AtA; kyoMki
eka hI jIvake AvaraNake abhAvavizeSake kAraNa satya-asatya-pratibhAsarUpa
saMvedana-pariNAmakI siddhi usI prakAra banatI hai jisa prakAra ki kiTTa-
kAlimAke abhAvavizeSake kAraNa suvarNakA utkRSTa-jaghanya pariNAma banatA hai|'
yadi koI kahe ki jIva koI vastu hI nahIM hai to yaha kahanA nahIM bana sakatA;
kyoMki jIvake grAhaka ( astitva-sUcaka ) pramANakA sadbhAva hai, usIko agalI
kArikAmeM batalAyA jAtA hai| jIva zabda saMjJA honese sabAhyArtha hai jIva-
zabdaH sabAhyArthaH saMjJAtvAddhetu-zabdavat  /  mAyAdi-bhrAnti-saMjJAzca
mAyAdyaH svaiH pramoktivat  /  / 84 /  /  jIva-zabda bAhyArtha-sahita hai-
bAhyameM jIvazabdakA vAcya artha svarUpa-lakSaNa-viziSTa jIva-vastu hai- kyoMki
yaha zabda saMjJA ( nAma ) hai, jo zabda saMjJA yA nAmarUpa hotA hai vaha bAhya
arthake binA nahIM hotA, jaise hetu-zabda agnimAn Adike anumAnameM prayukta huA
dhUma ( dhuA~ ) Adi saMjJAtmaka hetu-zabda dhuA~ Adi nAmadhArI bAhya-padArthake
astitvake binA nahIM hotA, saba hI hetuvAdI hetu-zabdako bAhyArtha-sahita mAnate
haiM; anyathA hetu aura hetvAbhAsameM koI bheda nahIM bana sktaa| ( yadi yahA~
koI kahe ki mAyA ( indrajAla ) Adi bhrAntikI saMjJAe~ haiM, jinakA koI bAhyArtha
nahIM hai ataH saMjJApanA hetu anekAntika hai-vyabhicArI hai-usase jIva-zabdakA
bAhyArtha honA anivArya (lAz2imI) nahIM ThaharegA, to yaha kahanA Thoka nahIM
hai kyoMki ) mAyAdi jo bhrAMtikI saMjJAe~ haiM ve bhI pramANoktike samAna apane
arthako sAthameM liye hue haiN| jisa prakAra pramANa-vacanakA jJAna-lakSaNa
bAhyArtha hai usI prakAra mAyAdi bhrAnti-saMjJAoMkA bhI

Page #146 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Karika 85:  **Specific understanding regarding the fallacy of external
objects:** If the meaning of the fallacious terms is considered to be devoid of
the fallacious form, then the fallacious term will not be able to produce the
fallacious understanding, and the absence of this production will lead to the
emergence of the understanding of proof. In other words, it will be necessary to
consider the fallacy as correct knowledge, which is not desirable and
unobstructed. This will hinder the absence of meaning in words like
"kharvishaan" (horn of a donkey) and "khapushp" (sky flower). Their meaning is
absent, and if this is not accepted, then the emergence of the meaning of
"kharvishaan" etc. will be inevitable. Therefore, there is no contradiction in
the said reason for the term with these "kharvishaan" etc.  **Devagam:**  **The
elimination of the fault of contradiction in the reason for the term:** The
three are intellect, word, and meaning, which are indicative of intellect etc.
The three are intellect etc. knowledge, which are reflections of the three.
||85||  **77:**  (If a Mimamsa follower says that meaning, word, and knowledge
are all equal terms), then in the case of the term "Jeev" being applied to the
"Jeev" meaning, "Jeev" word, and "Jeev" intellect, the "Jeev" word, which is the
meaning of the object, is known to be external, while the intellect and word are
not. In such a situation, the contradiction fault arises due to the
pervasiveness of the reason for the term in the opposite direction; because the
reason for the term has been stated in a general form without any specific
qualification of intellect, word, and meaning etc., then those who say so are
not realists; because) the terms of intellect, word, and meaning, and the three
knowledges related to intellect etc. arising from the terms of intellect etc.,
are all reflections of the object of intellect etc. other than themselves. The
definite knowledge that arises from the uttered word (without contradiction) is
its meaning, otherwise the word will be...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 kArikA 85 ] bAhyArtha bhrAnti-viSayaka viziSTa pratipatti hai - bhrAnti-
saMjJAoMkA bhrAntirUpa arthakA abhAva mAnanepara bhrAnti-saMjJAse bhrAnti-
pratipattikA yoga nahIM bana sakegA aura usa yogake na bananese
pramANatvapratipattikA prasaMga upasthita hogA  /  arthAt bhrAntiko bhI
samyakjJAna mAnanA par3egA jo iSTa tathA abAdhita nahIM  /  isase kharaviSANa (
gadhe ke sIMga ), khapuSpa ( gaganakusuma ) Adi zabdoM kA bhI svArtharahita honA
bAdhita ho jAtA hai  /  unakA svArtha abhAva hai, usako na mAnanepara khara -
viSANAdike bhAvakA prasaMga upasthita hogA  /  ataH ina kharaviSANAdike sAtha
bhI ukta saMjJAtva-hetukA vyabhicAra nahIM hai  / ' devAgama saMjJAtva hetumeM
vyabhicAra-doSakA nirAkaraNa buddhi-zabdArtha-saMjJAstAstisro buddhyAdivAcikAH
/  tulyA buddhayAdibodhAzca trayastatprativimbikAH ||85 || 77 ' ( yadi koI
mImAMsaka - matAnusArI yaha kahe ki artha, zabda aura jJAna ye tInoM barAbarakI
saMjJAe~ haiM', jIva-arthaM jIva- zabda aura jIva-buddhi tInoMkI 'jIva' saMjJA
honepara artha padArthaka jIvazabda hI sabAhyArtha prasiddha hai - buddhi-
padArthaMka tathA zabda-padArthaMka nahIM, aisI sthiti meM saMjJApanA hetuke
vipakSameM bhI vyApanese vyabhicAra doSa AtA hai; kyoMki saMjJAtva-hetuko
buddhi, zabda aura arthAdika vizeSaNa se rahita sAmAnya rUpase hetu kahA gayA
hai, to aisA kahanevAle bhI yathArthavAdI nahIM haiM; kyoMki ) buddhi, zabda
aura artha tInoMkI sajJAe~ aura buddhi-AdisaMjJA-janita buddhi-AdiviSayaka tInoM
bodha bhI sarvatra svavyatirikta buddhayAdi viSayake pratibimbaka hote haiM-
uccArita zabdase jo ( avyabhicarita ) nizcita - bodha hotA hai vahI usakA
svArtha hai, anyathA zabdake 1. arthA'bhidhAna- pratyayAstulyanAmAnaH iti  /

Page #147 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Samantabhadra-Bharati [Canto 7]  The elimination of conventional usage is
established. Just as from the word 'jiva' (living being) in the sentence 'one
should not kill a jiva', the meaning of jiva arises as a reflection, similarly
from the word 'jiva' denoting the cognitive entity, the meaning of cognition
(buddhi) arises as a reflection, and from the word-meaning 'jiva', the
reflection of the word itself is cognized. Since three types of cognition arise
from a word, the three designations (samjna) of buddhi (cognition) etc. each
have three meanings, due to which there is no scope for the defect of
irregularity in the cause of designation (sanjnatva-hetu).  Refutation of the
doubt of the Vijnanavadin (Yogacara Buddhist) The pramanas (means of valid
knowledge) of the speaker, listener, and knower are distinct. In delusion alone,
the pramanas and the pramana-defective (pramabhrantau) are external to each
other. [86]  (If a Vijnanavadin Buddhist were to argue that your reasoning for
the cause of designation is not established with respect to the Vijnanavadin
view, since there is no separate existence of designation apart from cognition,
and the example of 'hetu-sabdavat' is also incomplete, as there is absence of
another hetu-word distinct from the cognition of the hetu-word form, then, in
order to address the doubt of such opponents, Acarya Swami Samantabhadra says:)
The cognition that arises in the manifestation of designation (samjna) - whether
it is considered as the hetu (reason) or not - is not defective like the
cognition of a dream-form, in which there is the cognition of the word-form but
the absence of the external object.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 samantabhadra-bhAratI [ pariccheda 7 vyavahArakA vilopa ThaharatA hai  /  jaise
arthapadArthaka jIva- zabdase 'jIvako nahIM mAranA cAhiye' isa vAkyameM jIva
arthakA pratibimbaka Mata utpanna hotA hai vaise hI buddhipadArthaka jIva-
zabdase 'jIva bodhako prApta hotA hai ityAdi buddhisvarUpa jIva - zabda se
buddhi- arthakA pratibimba bodha hotA hai aura 'jIva' kahA jAtA hai isa
zabdapadArthaka jIva-zabdase zabdakA pratibimbaka bodha hotA hai  /  isa taraha
zabdase cU~ki tIna prakArakA bodha utpanna hotA hai isaliye buddhi Adi tInoM
saMjJAoMmeMse pratyekake tIna artha jAne jAte haiM, jisase saMjJAtvahetu meM
vyabhicAradoSa ke liye koI sthAna nahIM rahatA  / ' saMjJAtva- hetumeM
vijJAnAdvaitavAdIkI zaMkAkA nirasana 78 1 vaktR-zrotR-pramAtRRNAM bodha-vAkya-
pramAH pRthak  /  bhrAntAveva pramAbhrAntau bAhyArthI tAdRzetarau  /  /  86  /
/  ( yadi koI vijJAnAdvaitavAdI - yogAcAramatAnuyAyI bauddhakA pakSa lekara yaha
kahe ki 'ApakA saMjJApanA hetu vijJAnAdvaitavAdIke prati asiddha hai; kyoMki
saMjJAkA vijJAnase pRthak koI astitva nahIM hai. dRSTAnta jo 'hetu zabdavat'
diyA gayA hai vaha bhI sAvana - vikala hai, hetu zabdake tadAkArajJAnase bhinna
dUsare hetu zabdakA abhAva hai  /  saMjJAke avabhAsana meM jo jJAna pravRtta
hotA hai usa saMjJAbhAsajJAnako hetu mAnanepara arthAt yaha kahanepara ki
'jIvazabda sabAhyArtha haiM' saMjJAbhAsa ( zabdAkAra ) jJAnake honese to yaha
hetu zabdAbhAsa ( zabdAkAra ) svapnajJAnake sAtha vyabhicArI hai, jisameM
zabdAkArake jJAnake hote hue bhI bAhyArthakA abhAva hotA hai' to aisI zaMkA
karanevAloMke samAdhAnArtha AcAryazrI svAmI samantabhadra kahate haiM -- )
'vaktAkA ( abhidheya-viSayaka ) bodha ( jA vAkyakI pravRtti meM kAraNa hotA hai
), zrotAkA vAkya ( jo use abhidheya parijJAnake

Page #148 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Karika 86:  **Verse 86:**  The speaker, the listener, and the knower (who
determines the truth or falsity of the speaker's intended meaning based on the
heard statement) are all distinct and appear differently. In such a situation,
the non-duality of knowledge is not hindered, the fallacy of the 'non-existence
of the reason' (asiddha) does not arise, and the 'fallacy of the example' (hetu-
shabdavat) does not occur.  **Explanation:**  If it is argued that the speaker,
listener, and knower are not distinct from the mind (knowledge) due to the
absence of an external meaning, and that the speaker, etc., are merely
manifestations of the mind, and that the meaning of the statement also does not
exist without the mind, and that the proof itself is in the form of knowledge,
then the fallacies of non-existence of the reason, etc., would arise. However,
this argument is not valid because:  * If we imagine the speaker and listener as
mere perceptions of form, etc., and the proof as a mere product of knowledge,
then the perception of form, etc., becomes completely invalid. This invalidity
contradicts the acceptance of the non-duality of knowledge. * The perception of
form, etc., the intended meaning, and the speaker and listener as mere
perceptions, would not lead to a product of knowledge that is dependent only on
its own essence (sva-ansha). This is because knowledge dependent only on its own
essence cannot be communicated, and there would be no distinction between the
knowledge of the statement and the knowledge of the intended meaning. * If
knowledge dependent only on its own essence is also considered a perception,
then the proof would not be established. This is because Buddhists consider
infallible knowledge as proof.  **Note:**  The text refers to the Jain concept
of "knowledge dependent only on its own essence" (sva-ansha-matra-avalambi).
This refers to a type of knowledge that is not dependent on external objects or
perceptions. The text also mentions the Buddhist concept of "infallible
knowledge" (abhrant-jnana) as proof.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 kArikA 86 ] devAgama liye sunaneko milatA hai ) aura pramAtAkA pramANa ( jo
sune hue vAkyake arthAvabodhako lekara vaktAke abhidheya-viSayameM yogyaayogya
athavA satya-asatyakA nirNaya karatA haiM ) ye tInoM eka dUsarese pRthak jAne
jAte haiM-bhinna-bhinna pratibhAsita hote haiM.. aisI sthitimeM vijJAnAdvaitatA
bAdhita ThaharatI hai, 'saMjJAtvAt' hetuke asiddhatAkA doSa nahIM AtA aura na
'hetu-zabdavat' isa dRSTAntake sAdhya-vikalatAkA prasaMga hI upasthita hotA hai|
(isapara yadi yaha kahA jAya ki bAhya arthakA abhAva honese vaktA, zrotA aura
pramAtA ye tInoM buddhi ( jJAna ) se pRthakbhUta nahIM haiM; vaktAdike AbhAsa-
AkArarUpa pariNata huI buddhike hI vaktA AdikA vyavahAra hotA hai, vAkyake
avatArakA bhI bodha ( buddhi ) ke binA kahIM koI astitva nahIM banatA aura
pramANa svayaM bodharUpa hai hI  /  ataH ( vaktAditrayake buddhise pRthagbhUta
na honeke kAraNa ) ukta hetuke asiddhatAdi doSa barAbara ghaTita hotA hai, to
yaha kahanA ThIka nahIM hai; kyoMki ) rUpAdigrAhaka vaktA tathA zrotAke,
vyatirikta-vijJAnasantAna-kalApake aura svAMza ( jJAna )-mAtrAvalambI pramANake
vibhramako kalpanA kiye jAnepara rUpAdikI pUrNataH asiddhi hotI hai aura usa
asiddhise antarjeya jo jJAnAdvaita hai usakI mAnyatA viruddha par3atI hai-
rUpAdikakI, abhidheyakI, grAhaka vaktA tathA zrotAkI vibhramarUpa kalpanA kiye
jAnepara vyatirikta-vijJAnakA jo santAnakalApa hai vaha svAMzamAtragrAhI siddha
nahIM hotA; kyoMki svAMzamAtrAvalambI jJAnoMke paraspara asaMcAra hai-svarUpakA
gamakatva nahIM banatAjisase abhidhAna-jJAna aura abhidheya-jJAnakA bheda hove
/  svAMzamAtrAvalambI jJAnako bhI yadi vibhrama rUpa mAnA jAve to pramANakI
siddhi nahIM banatI; kyoMki bauddhoMke yahA~ abhrAnta jJAnako pramANa mAnA gayA
hai  /  pramANakI bhI vibhrama-rUpase kalpanA kiye 1. pratyakSa
kalpanApoDhamabhrAntamiti vacanAt  /

Page #149 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Samantabhadra-Bharati [ Chapter 7 How can the assertion that the object of
knowledge (Jnana-dvaita) is the ultimate reality not be contradictory? If we
accept the assertion based on other proofs, then everyone will be able to assert
their own preferred view, and there will be no way to refute it. If the proof is
faulty, then the external object, its similarities and dissimilarities, the
objects of knowledge, the internal and external objects, the desirable and
undesirable, will all be considered faulty. From the perspective of the knower,
both the internal and external objects are external, and they become illusory
and faulty due to the faulty proof. In such a situation, how can the distinction
between the desirable and undesirable be made if we accept only the internal
object (Jnana-dvaita)? It cannot be made. And if we consider the proof to be
infallible, then we must accept the external object; because without the
external object, there can be no system of proof and apparent proof, as
explained in the next verse. 80 The validity of intellect and words, and the
system of truth and falsehood, depend on the existence or non-existence of the
external object. The validity of intellect and words depends on the existence of
the external object, not on its non-existence. The system of truth and falsehood
is thus justified in the case of obtaining and not obtaining the object. ||87||
(For self-understanding) the validity of intellect-based knowledge and (for
understanding others) the validity of words depends on the existence of the
external object (which is knowledge or ignorance from the perspective of the
knower), not on its non-existence. In the absence of the external object, there
is only apparent proof. Similarly, the system of truth and falsehood of both
intellect and words (which are self-other-side-means-fault-based) is justified
depending on the existence or non-existence of the external object. The
existence of the external object leads to the truth of both, while its non-
existence leads to their falsehood. (In such a situation, the establishment of
the external object leads to the 'speaker-listener-knower'

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 samantabhadra-bhAratI [ pariccheda 7 jAnepara antarjJeya (jJAnadvaita) hI
tattva hai, yaha abhyupagama kaise viruddha nahIM par3egA ? pramANAntarase
abhyupagama mAnanepara sabhIke apane iSTake abhyupagamakA prasaMga upasthita
hogA, usameM bAdhA nahIM dI jA skegii| pramANake bhrAnta honepara bAhyArthI,
tAdRza-atAdRzoM, prameyoM, antarjJeya - bahirjeyoM, iSTA'niSToM kA vivecana bhI
bhrAnta ThaharegA - svajJAna-grAhakakI apekSAse antarjJeya aura bahirjJeya donoM
hI bAhyArtha haiM aura ve grAhaka - pramANake bhrAnta honese vibhramarUpa
bhrAnta hI Thaharate haiM aisI sthiti meM antarjJeya ( jJAnAdvaita ) kA ekAnta
mAnane para heyopAdeyakA viveka kisa AdhArapara bana sakatA hai ? nahIM bana
sakatA  /  aura yadi pramANako abhrAnta mAnA jAya to bAhyarthako svIkAra kiyA
jAnA cAhiye; kyoMki bAhyArthake abhAvameM pramANa-pramANabhAsakI koI vyavasthA
nahIM bana sakatI; jaisA ki agalI kArikA meM spaSTa kiyA gayA hai  / ' 80 buddhi
tathA zabdakI pramANatA aura satyAnRtakI vyavasthA bAhyartha ke hone na honepara
nirbhara buddhi-zabda-pramANatvaM bAhyArthe sati nA'sati  /
satyA'nRtavyavasthaivaM yujyate'rthAptyanAptiSu ||87| ( svapratipattike liye )
buddhirUpa - jJAnakI aura ( parapratipattike liye ) zabdako pramANatA bAhya
arthake ( jo ki grAhakakI apekSAse jJAnarUpa vA ajJAnarUpa hai ) honepara
avalambita hai, na honepara vaha nahIM banatI - taba pramANAbhAsatA hotI hai  /
isI prakAra bAhya arthake hone na honepara buddhi aura zabda donoMkI ( jo ki
sva-para-pakSa-sAdhana-dUSaNAtmaka hote haiM ) satya aura asatyakI vyavasthA
yukta hotI hai-bAhyArtha ke honepara donoMke satyakI aura na honepara asatyakI
vyavasthA banatI hai|' ( aisI sthiti meM bAhyArthakI siddhi honese 'vaktR-zrotR-
pramAtRNAM

Page #150 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Karika 88]  This Karika establishes the speaker, listener, and knower, as
well as their respective knowledge, speech, and proof, as distinct entities.
Therefore, the flaw of non-validity and non-absoluteness of the meaning of the
word "Jiva" in the external means of knowledge does not arise. Similarly, the
flaw of "Saadhanadharma Vaikalya" (inconsistency in the means of knowledge) as
seen in the example of the word "Hetu" (reason) does not occur. This ensures the
validity of the Jiva. The Jiva is validated by both the reason and the example.
Understanding the meaning of the Jiva leads to the validation of the agreement
and disagreement of those who engage in discourse.  Thus ends the seventh
chapter of the Devagama Aapta-Mimamsa.  ## Eighth Chapter  If the validity of
the divine (Daiva) is considered absolute, then how can the validity of the
divine be attributed to human effort (Paurusha)? If the divine is not
liberation, then human effort becomes futile.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 kArikA 88 ] devAgama bodha-vAkya-pramAH pRthak' isa kArikAmeM kahe gaye vaktA,
zrotA, pramAtA tInoM aura inake bodha-vAkya-pramANa ye tInoM bhI siddha hote
haiM, aura isaliye jIva-zabdake bAhyArtha-sAdhanameM diye gaye saMjJAtvahetuke
asiddhatA tathA anaikAntikatAkA doSa ghaTita nahIM hotA aura na hetuzabdavat'
isa dRSTAntake sAdhanadharmavaikalya hI ghaTita hotA hai, jisase jIvakI siddhi
na hovejIvako siddhi ukta hetu aura dRSTAnta donoMse hotI hai| jIvake arthako
jAnakara pravRtti karanevAleke saMvAda-visaMvAdako siddhi siddha hotI hI hai|)
iti devAgamA''pta-mImAMsAyAM saptamaH paricchedaH  /  aSTama pariccheda daivase
siddhike ekAntakI sadoSatA devadevArthasiddhizcedaivaM pauruSataH katham  /
daivatazcedanirmokSaH pauruSaM niSphalaM bhavet  /  / 88 /  /  _ 'yadi (
mImAMsakamatAnusAra ) daivase hI arthakI-saMpUrNaprayojana rUpa kAryakI-siddhi
mAnI jAya to phira daivarUpa kAryako siddhi pauruSase-kuzalA'kuzala-samAcaraNa-
lakSaNa-puruSavyApArase-kaise kahI jA sakatI hai ?nahIM kahI jA sakatI; kyoMki
vaisA kahanese pratijJAko hAni pahu~catI hai arthAt yaha kahanA bAdhita hotA hai
ki 'sarva-arthakI siddhi daivase hotI hai| yadi pauruSase daivakI siddhi na
mAnakara daivAntarase daivakI siddhi mAnI jAya to phira mokSakA abhAva ThaharatA
hai kyoMki pUrva pUrva devase uttarottara daivakI pravRtti taba samApta nahIM ho
sakegI-aura mokSake abhAvase tatkAraNabhUta pauruSa niSphala ho jAtA athavA
vyartha ThaharatA hai|'

Page #151 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 82 Samantabhadra-Bharati  [Chapter 8 (If it is said that liberation is
achieved by the destruction of fate through human effort, then human effort
cannot be called futile, then the same contradiction arises - the promise that
liberation is achieved through human effort is not stable, it is contradicted by
the promise that everything is produced (achieved) by fate. If the Mimamsakas
say that liberation is achieved by fate because the cause of liberation is also
created by fate, then there is no contradiction in the promise, then this is not
correct; because then human effort is proved to be created by fate, so fate does
not remain stable alone. Secondly, the sole acceptance of the achievement of
prosperity and liberation through Dharma is contradicted. And thirdly, the
context of the futility of the desire of Maheshwara (the desire to create)
arises - that is, if creation is dependent on God, then it is not right to say
things like 'this ignorant creature is unable to obtain happiness and sorrow, he
goes to heaven or hell only by the will of God'.)]  If the sole existence of
achievement through human effort is accepted, then the question arises: how is
the work of human effort achieved? If it is said to be achieved by fate - by the
dependence on the divine wealth of merit and demerit, then how can this be said
while accepting the aforementioned sole existence? It cannot be said; because
this leads to the contradiction of the promise, and the aforementioned sole
principle is contradicted and does not remain stable. If intellect-reasoning...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 82 samantabhadra-bhAratI [pariccheda 8 ( yadi yaha kahA jAya ki puruSArthase
daivakA kSaya honepara mokSakI siddhi hotI hai ataH puruSArthako niSphala nahIM
kahA jA sakatA, to phira vahI pratijJA-hAni upasthita hotI hai-puruSArthase
mokSaprAptiko svIkAra kara lenepara saba kucha daivase utpanna (siddha ) hotA
hai isa prakArakI jo pratijJA hai vaha sthira nahIM rahatIbAdhita ThaharatI hai|
isapara yadi mImAMsakoMke dvArA yaha kahA jAya ki mokSa-kAraNa-pauruSake bhI
daivakRta honese paraMparAse mokSa bhI daivakRta siddha hotA hai, isameM
pratijJA-hAnikI koI bAta nahIM, to yaha kahanA ThIka nahIM; kyoMki taba
pauruSase hI vaise daivakA siddha honA ThaharatA hai, isaliye daivakA ekAnta
sthira nahIM rhtaa| dUsare, dharmase hI abhyudaya tathA niHzreyasa-siddhi kI jo
ekAntamAnyatA hai vaha bAdhita ThaharatI hai  /  aura tIsare, unake dvArA mAnya
mahezvarakI sisRkSA ( sRSTi racanekI icchA ) ke vyartha honekA prasaMga
upasthita hotA hai-arthAt sRSTiko utpattike devAdhIna honese isa prakArake
vacanoMkA kahanA nahIM banatA ki 'yaha ajJa prANI apaneko sukha-duHkha prApta
karane meM asamartha hai, IzvarakI icchAse prerita huA hI svarga yA narakako
jAtA hai'  / ) pauruSase siddhike ekAntakI sadoSatA pauruSAdeva siddhizceta
pauruSaM daivataH katham  /  . pauruSAccedamoghaM syAt sarva-prANiSu pauruSam  /
/ 8 /  /  'ryAda pauruSase hI saba kucha siddhikA ekAnta mAnA jAya to yaha
prazna paidA hotA hai ki pauruSarUpa kAryako siddhi kaise ? use yadi daivase
kahA jAya-puNya-pAparUpa daivI sampattike Azrita batalAyA jAya to yaha kahanA
ukta ekAntako mAnanepara kaise bana sakatA hai ? nahIM bana sakatA; kyoMki isase
pratijJA-hAnikAsvIkRta ekAntasiddhAntako bAdhA pahu~canekA-prasaMga upasthita
hotA hai tathA ukta ekAnta sthira nahIM rhtaa| yadi buddhi-vyava

Page #152 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Karika 89  If the success of *devaagama* (divine knowledge) and *saayatmika
pourusha* (human effort) is attributed solely to *pourusha* (human effort), then
*pourusha* would be considered infallible in all beings. In such a scenario, no
one's *pourusha* would ever be rendered fruitless (due to the absence of any
other hindering cause). However, this contradicts direct observation. We witness
that even those who exert equal *pourusha* experience varying outcomes, with one
succeeding while the other fails. This inconsistency exposes a flaw in this
belief.  If it is argued that *pourusha* is of two types - one guided by right
knowledge (*samyaggyaan*) and the other by false knowledge (*mithyaagyaan*) -
and that while *mithyaagyaan* based *pourusha* may be flawed or unsuccessful,
*samyaggyaan* based *pourusha* always succeeds, then this argument is also
flawed. This is because even in *samyaggyaan* based *pourusha*, the Charvaka
school of thought observes flaws in the material causes of success. For
instance, even with complete knowledge of the factors contributing to a
successful harvest, some farmers may still fail to achieve it.  Furthermore, the
knowledge of unseen causes (invisible factors) is impossible for those with
limited knowledge. Therefore, their *pourusha* cannot be considered effective.
If we accept the possibility of acquiring such knowledge through inference or
other means of proof, then two possibilities arise: either the unseen cause is a
specific aspect of causal power or a specific aspect of merit and demerit
(karma).  If we consider it a specific aspect of causal power, then even with
complete knowledge of this specific power, *pourusha* can still be flawed. For
example, even with complete knowledge of the specific medicinal power required
to cure a person with a weak constitution, the effort of administering the
medicine may still prove ineffective. This does not establish the infallibility
of *pourusha* in all beings.  If we consider the unseen cause to be a specific
aspect of merit and demerit, then it implies the assistance of fate (divine
intervention).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 kArikA 89 ] devAgama sAyAtmaka pauruSa (puruSArtha ) kI siddhiko pauruSase hI
mAnA jAya to saba prANiyoMmeM pauruSa amogha ThaharegA-kisIkA bhI pauruSa taba (
bAdhaka kAraNAntarake na honese ) niSphala nahIM jAyagA-parantu yaha pratyakSake
viruddha hai; kyoMki samAna-puruSArtha karanevAloMke bhI ekakA puruSArtha
saphala aura dUsarekA niSphala hotA dekhA jAtA hai, aise isa mAnyatAmeM
vyabhicAra-doSa AtA hai|' - ( yadi yaha kahA jAya ki puruSArtha do prakArakA
hai-eka samyagjJAnapUrvaka aura dUsarA mithyAjJAnapUrvaka  /  mithyAjJAnapUrvaka
puruSArthameM vyabhicAra Ane athavA usake saphala na honepara bhI
samyagjJAnapUrvaka jo puruSArtha hai vaha saphala hotA hai ataH saccA (
samyagjJAnapUrvaka ) puruSArtha saphala hI hotA hai, to yaha kahanA bhI ThIka
nahIM hai; kyoMki aisA kahanevAle cArvAkamatavAloMke dRSTakAraNasAmagrIke
samyagjJAnapUrvaka puruSArthameM bhI vyabhicAra-doSa dikhalAI par3atA hai-khetI
AdikI saphalatAke dRSTa-kAraNoMkA samyagjJAna hote hue bhI kisIko tatpUrvaka
khetI Adi karanepara saphalatA nahIM miltii| aura adRSTatAko prApta ( adRzya )
kAraNa-kalApa pratyakSarUpase samyagjJAna alpajJoMke asambhava hai ataH
tatpUrvaka pUruSArtha unake banatA nhiiN| yadi anumAnAdi-pramANAntarase usa
jJAnakA sambhava mAnA jAya to isameM do vikalpa utpanna hote haiM-eka to yaha ki
vaha adRzya-kAraNakalApa kAraNa-zaktikA vizeSa hai athavA puNya-pApakA vizeSa
hai| yadi use kAraNa-zaktikA vizeSa kahA jAya to usa zakti-vizeSakA samyagjJAna
hone para bhI tatpUrvaka puruSArthake vyabhicAra doSa dikhalAI par3atA hai;
jaise kSINAyuSkamanuSyameM auSadhazakti-vizeSake samyagjJAnapUrvaka bhI usa
auSadhiko pilAne AdikA jo puruSArtha kiyA jAtA hai vaha upayogI nahIM hotA-
niSphala jAtA hai| isase sarva-prANiyoMmeM puruSArthake amoghatvakI siddhi nahIM
bntii| aura yadi usa adRzya-kAraNakalApako puNya-pApAdikA vizeSa mAnA jAya to
daivakI sahAyatAse

Page #153 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Samantabhadra-Bharati  [Chapter 8: The attainment of the fruit is established
only through effort. On the one hand, the arrangement of the object of
attainment through the right knowledge of destiny, and on the other hand, the
attainment of the fruit even without the knowledge of destiny, is seen. From
this, the sole existence of effort with right knowledge is not correct.]  Both
and the inexpressible - the sole existence of both is not the same for the
knowers of the Syadvada-Nyaya; because there is mutual contradiction in them.
Even in the sole existence of the inexpressible, it is appropriate to speak of
the expressible. ||9|| 'The knowers of the Syadvada-Nyaya do not consider the
destiny and effort to be the same; because there is mutual contradiction in
them. Accepting the sole existence of the inexpressible, it is not appropriate
to call them inexpressible - because it would contradict one's own words.  The
faultless method of the sole existence of destiny and effort - what is desired
or undesired, favorable or unfavorable, happens or arises without the
expectation of one's own intellect, should be considered as caused by one's own
destiny - because in it, effort is secondary and destiny is primary. And what is
desired or undesired, favorable or unfavorable, happens or arises with the
expectation of one's own intellect, should be considered as caused by one's own
effort; because in it, destiny is secondary and effort is primary. ||9||
Explanation - The arrangement of both destiny and effort is taken together with
the expectation of each other. In the absence of one, the arrangement of the
other does not happen. In reality, the attainment of the fruit happens only
through the combination of both.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 samantabhadra-bhAratI [pariccheda 8 hue pauruSase hI phalakI siddhi tthhrii|
idhara daivake samyagjJAnapUrvaka upAyase upeyakI vyavasthiti aura udhara
daivake aparijJAnapUrvaka bhI kadAcit phalakI upalabdhi dekhane meM AtI hai,
isase samyagjJAnapUrvaka puruSArthakA ekAnta bhI ThIka nahIM hai  /  ) ubhaya
tathA avaktavya-ekAntoMkI sadopatA virodhAnnobhayaikAtmyaM syAdvAda-nyAya-
vidviSAm  /  . avAcyataikAnte'pyukti jvAcyamiti yujyate  /  / 9 /  /
'syAdvAdanyAyake vidveSiyoMke daiva aura pauruSa donoM ekAntoMkA ekAtmya nahIM
banatA; kyoMki inameM paraspara virodha hai ( ina donoM ekAntoMkI ) avAcyatAkA
ekAnta mAnanepara unheM avAcya kahanA bhI nahIM banatA hai-kahanese svavacana-
virodha. ghaTita hotA hai| daiva-puruSArtha-ekAntoMkI nirdoSa-vidhi
abuddhipUrvA'pekSAyAmiSTAniSTaM svadaivataH  /  buddhipUrvavyapekSAmiSTA'niSTaM
svapauruSAt  /  / 9 /  /  'jo iSTa yA aniSTa anukUla vA pratikUla-kArya apane
buddhi-vyApArako apekSA rakhe binA hI ghaTita athavA upasthita hotA hai use
svadaivakRta samajhanA cAhiye- kyoMki usameM pauruSa gauNa aura daiva pradhAna
haiN| aura jo iSTa yA aniSTa kArya apane buddhivyApArako apekSA rakhakara
ghaTita athavA upasthita hotA hai use svapauruSakRta samajhanA cAhiye; kyoMki
usameM deva gauNa aura pauruSa pradhAna hai|' vyAkhyA-daiva aura puruSArtha
donoMkI vyavasthA eka dUsarekI apekSAko sAthameM liye hue hai, ekake abhAvameM
dUsarekI vyavasthA nahIM bntii| vastutaH donoMke saMyogase hI kAryasiddhi hotI
hai,

Page #154 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Karika 92]  Devagama does not become otherwise. Therefore, neither of the two
is right in isolation, but the **anekanta** view, which is the **syadvada**
ethic, is more beneficial - it pacifies all disputes regarding **daiva** and
**paurusha**. Therefore, everything is somehow **daiva**-created, from an
unintelligent perspective; somehow **paurusha**-created, from an intelligent
perspective; somehow created by both, from the perspective of both **daiva** and
**paurusha** working together; somehow **daiva**-created and inexpressible, from
an unintelligent perspective and from the perspective of **daiva** and
**paurusha** working together; somehow **paurusha**-created and inexpressible,
from an intelligent perspective and from the perspective of **daiva** and
**paurusha** working together; somehow created by both and inexpressible, from
the perspective of both **daiva** and **paurusha** working together, and from
the perspective of **daiva** and **paurusha** working together. In this way, the
**saptabhangi** process is to be understood here as before.  Thus ends the
eighth chapter of the **Devagama** interpretation.  The ninth chapter will
discuss the flaw of **ekanta** in relation to **duhkha** (suffering) and
**sukha** (happiness), **papa** (sin) and **punya** (merit) (The **daiva** that
is the means to the desired and undesired is of two types: one is **punya** and
the other is **papa**. The Acharya writes, demonstrating and resolving the
dispute regarding how these two types of **daiva** arise: - )  "If **papa** is
definitely (**ekanta**-ly) bound due to the production of suffering in the
other, and **punya** is definitely (**ekanta**-ly) bound due to the production
of happiness in the other,

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 kArikA 92 ] devAgama anyathA vaha nahIM bntii| ataH donoMmeMse kisIkA bhI
ekAnta ThIka na hokara syAdvAda-nItiko liye hue anekAnta-dRSTi hI zreyaskara
hai-daiva-pauruSa-viSayaka sAre vivAdako zAnta karanevAlI hai  /  aura isaliye
saba kucha kathaMcit daivakRta hai, abuddhipUrvakI apekSAse; kathaMcit
pauruSakRta hai, buddhipUrvako apekSAse; kathaMcit ubhayakRta hai, kramArpita
daiva-pauruSa donoMkI apekSAse; kathaMcit daivakRta aura avaktavyarUpa hai,
abuddhipUrvakI apekSA tathA sahApita daiva-pauruSakI apekSAse; kathaMcit
pauruSakRta aura avaktavyarUpa hai, buddhipUrvakI apekSA tathA sahArpita-daiva-
pauruSakI apekSAse; kathaMcit ubhaya aura avaktavyarUpa hai, kramArpita-daiva-
pauruSa aura sahArpitadeva-pauruSakI apekssaase| isa taraha saptabhaMgI prakriyA
yahA~ bho pUrvavat jAnanI  /  iti devAgamA''ptamImAMsAyAmaSTamaH paricchedaH  /
navama pariccheda para meM duHkha-sukhase pApa-puNyake ekAntakI sadoSatA ( iSTa-
aniSTake sAdhanarUpa jo daiva hai vaha do prakArakA haieka puNya aura dUsarA
paap| yaha donoM prakArakA daiva kaise utpanna hotA hai, isa viSayake vivAdakA
pradarzana aura nirAkaraNa karate hue AcAryamahodaya likhate haiM :- ) pApaM
dhruvaM pare duHkhAt puNya ca sukhato yadi  /  acetanA'kaSAyau ca badhyeyAtAM
nimittataH  /  / 92 //  'yadi parameM duHkhotpAdanase nizcita ( ekAntataH )
pApabandhakA honA aura sukhotpAdanase ( ekAntataH ) puNyabandhakA honA mAnA For
Priva

Page #155 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Samantabhadra-Bharati ## Chapter 9  If it is said that inanimate substances
like thorns and milk, and even liberated souls in the state of *Akashaya* (non-
attachment) like monks, who are the cause of suffering and happiness for others,
are bound by karma, then how can they be considered unbound? (If it is argued
that they do not have any intention or resolve to cause suffering or happiness
to others, and therefore they are not bound by karma, then it cannot be
definitively stated that the production of suffering and happiness in others is
the sole cause of karmic bondage.)  **Explanation:** If the production of
happiness and suffering in others is the sole cause of karma, then why are
inanimate substances like milk and cream, and thorns, which cause happiness and
suffering to others, not considered bound by karma? However, no one considers
these to be bound by karma. A thorn pricking someone's foot and causing them
pain does not make the thorn sinful, nor do karmic particles attach to it or
bind it. Similarly, milk and cream bring joy to many, but this joy does not make
them virtuous, nor do karmic particles enter them or associate with them in a
way that would cause them to experience the consequences in the future. This
clearly shows that the aforementioned theory is flawed.  If it is argued that
"only sentient beings are capable of being bound by karma, not inanimate
objects," then how can the objection regarding liberated souls be addressed?
They too cause happiness and suffering to others in various ways. For example,
when a monk initiates a seeker into monastic life, it causes sorrow to many of
his relatives. When he teaches his disciples and the public, it brings happiness
to them. Even while walking with utmost care on the path of liberation,

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 samantabhadra-bhAratI pariccheda 9 jAya to acetana padArtha-kaNTakAdika tathA
dugdhAdika-aura akaSAya-pariNata jIva-vItarAga-avasthAmeM sthita muni AdibhI
duHkha-sukhakA nimitta honese bandhako prApta hoMge-unheM taba abandhaka kaise
mAnA jA sakatA hai ? ( isa para yadi yaha kahA jAya ki unake dUsaroMko duHkha vA
sukha denekA koI abhisaMdhAna yA saMkalpa nahIM hotA isaliye ve bandhako prApta
nahIM hote, to phira parameM duHkha-sukhakA utpAdana nizcitarUpase pApa-puNyake
bandhakA hetu hai aisA ekAnta nahIM bana sktaa|) vyAkhyA-jaba parameM sukha-
duHkhakA utpAdana hI puNya-pApakA eka mAtra kAraNa hai to phira dUdha-malAI
tathA viSa-kaNTakAdika acetana padArtha, jo dUsaroMke sukha-duHkhake kAraNa
banate haiM, puNyapApake bandhakartA kyoM nahIM ? parantu inheM koI bhI puNya-
pApake bandhakartA nahIM mAnatA-kA~TA paira meM cubhakara dUsareko duHkha
utpanna karatA hai, itane mAtrase use koI pApI nahIM kahatA aura na pApa-
phaladAyaka karmaparamANu hI usase Akara cipaTate athavA bandhako prApta hote
haiN| isI taraha dUdha-malAI bahutoMko Ananda pradAna karate haiM; parantu unake
isa Anandase dUdha-malAI puNyAtmA nahIM kahe jAte aura na unameM puNya-
phaladAyaka karma-paramANuoMkA aisA koI praveza athavA saMyoga hI hotA hai
jisakA phala unheM ( dUdhamalAIko ) bAdako bhoganA pdd'e| isase ukta ekAnta
siddhAnta spaSTa sadoSa jAna par3atA hai| _ yadi yaha kahA jAya ki 'cetana hI
bandhake yogya hote haiM. acetana nahIM', to phira kaSAya-rahita vItarAgiyoMke
viSayameM Apattiko kaise TAlA jAyagA? ve bhI aneka prakArase dUsaroMke sukha-
duHkhake kAraNa banate haiN| udAharaNake taurapara kisI mumukSuko munidIkSA dete
haiM to usake aneka sambandhiyoMko duHkha pahu~catA hai  /  ziSyoM tathA
janatAko zikSA dete haiM to usase una logoMko sukha milatA hai  /  pUrNa
sAvadhAnIke sAtha IryApatha zodhakara calate hue bhI

Page #156 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Karika 92:  **Devaagam**  Sometimes, a living being outside the field of
vision suddenly jumps and falls under one's feet, and dies being crushed by that
foot. Even when one is in a state of meditation with complete control over one's
body, if a living being flies rapidly and collides with their body and dies,
then in this way too, they become the cause of its suffering by being an
obstacle in its path. Many righteous, detached ascetics with subdued passions
and supernatural powers, merely by the touch of their body or by the air that
has touched their body, cure the sick and make them experience great happiness.
There are many other ways in which they become the cause of others' happiness
and suffering. If the very act of becoming the cause of others' happiness and
suffering leads to the inflow and bondage of merit and demerit in the soul, then
how can such passionless ascetics escape the bondage of merit and demerit in
such a situation? If they too fall into the bondage of merit and demerit, then
there can be no arrangement for liberation or moksha; because the root cause of
bondage is passion. It is also said, "Passion is the root of all bondage." "Due
to the presence of passion, the soul attracts karmic particles, and that is
bondage." Therefore, the absence of passion is the cause of liberation. When the
absence of passion itself becomes the cause of bondage, then there is no cause
left for liberation. In the absence of a cause, the effect also disappears, thus
leading to the absence of liberation. And in the absence of liberation, there
can be no arrangement for bondage either, because bondage and liberation, being
mutually contradictory principles, are inseparably connected - one cannot exist
without the other. This has been clearly explained in the commentary on the
previous Karika. When there can be no arrangement for bondage, then the story of
the bondage of merit and demerit becomes mere talk. Therefore, from the
perspective of sentient beings, the aforementioned singular arrangement of merit
and demerit is flawed.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 kArikA 92 ] devAgama w kabhI-kabhI dRSTipathase bAharakA koI jIva acAnaka
kUdakara paira-tale A jAtA hai aura unake usa pairase dabakara mara jAtA hai|
kAyotsargapUrvaka dhyAnAvasthAmeM sthita honepara bhI yadi koI jIva tejIse
ur3A-calA Akara unake zarorase TakarA jAtA hai aura mara jAtA hai to isa taraha
bhI usa jIvake mArgameM bAdhaka honese ve usake duHkhake kAraNa banate haiN|
aneka nijitakaSAya RddhidhArI vItarAgI sAdhuoMke zarIrake sparzamAtrase athavA
unake zarIrako sparza kI huI vAyuke laganese hI rogIjana niroga ho jAte haiM
aura yatheSTa sukhakA anubhava karate haiN| aise aura bhI bahutase prakAra haiM
jinameM ve dUsaroMke sukha-duHkhake kAraNa banate haiM  /  yadi dUsaroMke sukha-
duHkhakA nimitta kAraNa bananese hI AtmAmeM puNya-pApakA Asrava-bandha  /  hotA
hai to phira aisI hAlatameM ve kaSAya-rahita sAdhu kaise puNyapApake bandhase
baca sakate haiM ? yadi ve bhI puNya-pApake bandhanameM par3ate haiM to phira
nirbandha athavA mokSako koI vyavasthA nahIM bana sakatI; kyoMki bandhakA
mUlakAraNa kaSAya hai| kahA bhI hai"kaSAyamUlaM sakalaM hi bandhanam"
"sakaSAyatvAjjIvaH karmaNo yogyAn pudgalAnAdatte sa bandhaH  / " aura isaliye
akaSAyabhAva mokSakA kAraNa hai  /  jaba akaSAyabhAva bhI bandhakA kAraNa ho
gayA taba mokSake lie koI kAraNa nahIM rhtaa| kAraNake abhAvameM kAryakA abhAva
ho jAnese mokSakA abhAva ThaharatA hai| aura mokSake abhAva meM bandhakI bhI koI
vyavasthA nahIM bana sakatI, kyoMki bandha aura mokSa jaise sapratipakSa dharma
parasparameM avinAbhAvasambandhako liye hote haiM-ekake binA dUsarekA astitva
bana nahIM sakatA, yaha bAta isase pUrva kArikAko vyAkhyAmeM bhalI prakAra
spaSTa kI jA cukI hai  /  jaba bandhakI koI vyavasthA nahIM bana sakatI taba
puNya-pApake bandhakI kathA hI pralApamAtra ho jAtI hai| ataH cetana-prANiyoMkI
dRSTise bhI puNya-pApako ukta ekAnta-vyavasthA sadoSa hai|

Page #157 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Samantabhadra-Bharati [ Chapter 9 ]  If it is said that those who are free
from the eight karmas (akshaya-jivas) do not have any intention or desire to
cause happiness or suffering to others, and they have no attachment to such
matters, therefore they do not acquire karma due to being the instrumental cause
in the creation of happiness or suffering in others; then how can the principle
that "causing suffering to others is the cause of sin and causing happiness is
the cause of merit" be an absolute truth? - Due to the absence of intention,
causing suffering will not lead to sin and causing happiness will not lead to
merit in other situations as well; rather, due to the opposite intention,
causing suffering will lead to merit and causing happiness will lead to sin. For
example, a doctor performs surgery on a boil with utmost care, intending to
bring about happiness, but while cutting the boil, he also causes some
unavoidable suffering to the patient. The doctor will not acquire sin due to
causing this suffering; rather, due to his intention to alleviate suffering,
this suffering will become a cause of merit. Similarly, a person, under the
influence of passions (kṣayābhāva), kicks a hunchback with the intention of
causing suffering. As soon as the kick lands, the hunchback's hunchback
disappears, and he begins to experience happiness. There is a saying, "A
hunchback gets his due by a kick." So, the person who kicked the hunchback will
not receive merit for this experience of happiness - he will only acquire sin
due to his intention to cause suffering. Therefore, the absolute principle that
"causing happiness or suffering to others is the cause of merit or sin" is
completely flawed, and therefore cannot be considered as the truth in any way.
88 The absolute principle of merit and sin arising from happiness and suffering
in oneself is flawed. Merit is certainly due to suffering, and sin is due to
happiness. A wise and dispassionate monk should connect these two with the
cause. || 93 ||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 samantabhadra-bhAratI [ pariccheda 9 yahA~ para yadi yaha kahA jAya ki una
akaSAya-jIvoMke dUsaroMko sukha-duHkha pahu~cAne kA koI saMkalpa yA abhiprAya
nahIM hotA, usa prakAra kI koI icchA nahIM hotI aura na usa viSaya meM unakI koI
Asakti hI hotI hai, isaliye dUsaroMke sukha-duHkhakI utpattimeM nimittakAraNa
honese ve bandhako prApta nahIM hote; to phira 'dUsaroM meM duHkhotpAdana pApakA
aura sukhotpAdana puNyakA hetu hai' yaha ekAnta siddhAnta kaise bana sakatA hai
? - abhiprAyAbhAvake kAraNa anyatra bhI duHkhotpAdanase pApakA aura
sukhotpAdanase puNyakA bandha nahIM ho sakegA; pratyuta isake virodhI
abhiprAyake kAraNa duHkhotpattise puNyakA aura sukhotpattise pApakA bandha bhI
ho sakegA  /  jaise eka DAkTara sukha pahu~cAneke abhiprAyase pUrNa sAvadhAnI ke
sAtha phor3ekA oNparezana karatA hai parantu phor3eko cIrate samaya rogIko kucha
anivArya duHkha bhI pahu~cAtA hai, isa duHkhake pahu~canese DAkTarako pApakA
bandha nahIM hogA itanA hI nahIM, balki usakI duHkhavirodhinI bhAvanA ke kAraNa
yaha duHkha bhI puNya-bandhakA kAraNa hogA  /  isI taraha eka manuSya
kaSAyabhAvake vazavartI hokara duHkha pahu~cAne ke abhiprAya se kisI kuchar3eko
lAta mAratA hai, lAtake lagate hI acAnaka usakA kubar3Apana miTa jAtA hai aura
vaha sukhakA anubhava karane lagatA hai, kahAvata bhI hai - "kubar3e guNa lAta
laga gaI"- to kubar3eke isa sukhAnubhavase lAta mAranevAleko puNyaphalako prApti
nahIM ho sakatI - use to apanI sukhavirodhinI bhAvanAke kAraNa pApa hI lagegA  /
ataH yaha ekAnta siddhAnta ki 'parameM sukha-duHkhakA utpAdana puNya-pApakA hetu
hai' pUrNatayA sadoSa hai, aura isaliye use kisI taraha bhI vastutattva nahIM
kaha sakate  /  88 svameM duHkha-sukha se puNya pApake ekAntavI sadoSatA puNyaM
dhruvaM svato duHkhAtpApaM ca sukhato yadi  /  vItarAgo munirvidvAMstAbhyAM
yuMjyAnnimittataH  //  93||

Page #158 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Devagam, Karika 93  "If it is definitively accepted that the binding of karma
(punya) arises from the production of suffering within oneself, and the binding
of sin (papa) arises from the production of happiness, then even the liberated
(kṣayārahita) and wise monks (muni) should be bound by karma and sin; because
they too are the cause of the production of their own happiness and suffering."
**Explanation:**  The liberated and wise monks experience suffering in the form
of bodily afflictions (kāyakleśa) and happiness in the form of contentment
arising from the knowledge of truth, through their practices like trikāla-yoga.
If the binding of karma and sin arises solely from the production of happiness
and suffering within oneself, then how can these non-passionate beings
(akṣayajīva) remain free from the binding of karma and sin? If they are also
bound by karma and sin, then there would never be an opportunity for the absence
of karma and sin, and no one would be eligible for liberation. Liberation cannot
occur without the absence of both karma and sin. And without liberation, the
system of binding, etc., cannot remain stable, as explained earlier. If
liberation is accepted without the absence of karma and sin, then it would lead
to the absence of samsara (the cycle of birth and death) or worldly life, which
is not desirable for anyone who believes in the system of karma and sin. In this
situation, this singular principle of the binding of karma and sin through self-
produced happiness and suffering is also flawed.  Here, if it is argued that the
liberated and wise do not experience the binding of karma and sin even though
they experience happiness and suffering within themselves, because they do not
have any intention, desire, or attachment towards the production of their
happiness and suffering, then this would actually prove the principle of
anekanta (non-absolutism) and not the singular principle mentioned above. This
means that the production of happiness and suffering with intention leads to the
binding of karma and sin.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 devAgama kArikA 93 ] 'yadi apanemeM duHkhotpAdanase puNyakA aura sukhotpAdanase
pApakA bandha dhruva hai-nizcitarUpase hotA hai-aisA ekAnta mAnA jAya, to phira
vItarAga ( kaSAyarahita ) aura vidvAn munijana bhI puNya-pApase ba~dhane cAhiye;
kyoMki ye bhI apane sukhaduHkhakI utpattike nimittakAraNa hote haiN|' vyAkhyA-
vItarAga aura vidvAn munike trikAla-yogAdike anuSThAna-dvArA kAyaklezAdirUpa
duHkhakI aura tattvajJAnajanya santoSalakSaNarUpa sukhakI utpatti hotI hai| jaba
apane meM duHkhasukhake utpAdanase hI puNya-pApa ba~dhatA hai to phira ye
akaSAyajIva puNya-pApake bandhanase kaise mukta raha sakate haiM ? yadi inake
bhI puNya-pApakA dhruva bandha hotA hai to phira puNya-pApake abhAvako kabhI
avasara nahIM mila sakatA aura na koI mukta honeke yogya ho sakatA hai-puNya-
pAparUpa donoM bandhoMke abhAvake binA mukti hotI hI nhiiN| aura muktike binA
bandhanAdikakI bhI koI vyavasthA sthira nahIM raha sakato; jaisA ki Upara
batalAyA jA cukA hai| yadi puNya-pApake abhAva binA bhI muvita mAnI jAyago to
saMsRtike-saMsAra athavA sAMsArika jIvanake-abhAvakA prasaMga AegA, jo puNya-
pApakI vyavasthA mAnanevAloMmeMse kisIko bhI iSTa nahIM hai| aisI hAlatameM
Atma-sukha-duHkhake dvArA pApa-puNyake bandhanakA yaha ekAnta siddhAnta bhI
sadoSa hai  /  _yahA~ para yadi yaha kahA jAya ki apane meM duHkha-sukhakI
utpatti hone para bhI tattvajJAnI vItarAgiyoMke puNya-pApakA bandha isaliye
nahIM hotA ki unake duHkha-sukhake utpAdanakA abhiprAya nahIM hotA, vaisI koI
icchA nahIM hotI aura na usa viSayameM Asakti hI hotI hai, to phira isase to
anekAnta siddhAntakI hI siddhi hotI hai-ukta ekAntakI nhiiN| arthAt yaha natIjA
nikalatA hai ki abhiprAyako liye hue duHkha-sukhakA utpAdana puNya-pApakA

Page #159 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Samantabhadra-Bharati [Chapter 9: The reason for suffering and happiness is
not the cause of merit and demerit. Therefore, both of the aforementioned one-
sided doctrines are refuted by evidence, contradict the desired outcome, and
therefore cannot be considered correct. The flawed nature of both the "both" and
"unspeakable" one-sided doctrines is due to the opposition of the Syadvada-naya-
vidvisha. Even in the "unspeakable" one-sided doctrine, it is not appropriate to
say that it is "unspeakable." ||94|| (Seeing the flaws in the separate beliefs
of the two one-sided doctrines regarding the bondage related to merit and
demerit. If the "both" one-sided doctrine, which is the same as both doctrines,
is accepted, it does not become a cause of opposition due to the hatred of those
who oppose the Syadvada-naya. Even in accepting the one-sided doctrine of
"unspeakable," it is not appropriate to say that it is "unspeakable," because by
using the word "unspeakable," it becomes "speakable," and then the one-sided
doctrine of "unspeakable" will not remain at all. If the pure and impure aspects
are the cause of happiness and suffering, either for oneself or for others, then
happiness and suffering are the cause of the flow of merit and demerit, which
leads to bondage. And if neither purity nor impurity is the cause, then (O Arhan
Bhagavan!) according to your opinion, it is considered useless - it has no
fruit. Otherwise, the bondage of those mentioned in the previous verse (93) -
"Aketana Akashaya" and "Vitraga Muni Vidvan" - will also arise. Explanation:
Here, "Samklesha" refers to the agitated, fierce, and meditative...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 samantabhadra-bhAratI [pariccheda 9 hetu hai, abhiprAyavihIna duHkha-sukhakA
utpAdana puNya-pApakA hetu nahIM hai| ataH ukta donoM ekAnta siddhAnta pramANase
bAdhita haiM, iSTake bhI viruddha par3ate haiM aura isaliye ThIka nahIM kahe jA
sakate  /  ubhaya tathA avaktavya ekAntoMkI sadoSatA virodhAnnobhayakAtmyaM
syAdvAda-nyAya-vidviSAm  /  /  avAcyataikAnte'pyuktirnA'vAcyamiti yujyate  // 94
/  /  ( pApa-puNyake bandha-sambandhI prastuta donoM ekAntoMkI alaga mAnyatAmeM
doSa dekhakara  /  yadi donoM siddhAntoMke ekAtmarUpa ubhaya ekAntako mAnA jAya
to vaha syAdvAda-nyAyase dveSa rakhanevAloMke virodha-doSake kAraNa nahIM bntaa|
avAcyatAkA ekAnta mAnane meM bhI avAcya' hai yaha kahanA yukta nahIM ThaharatA
hai, kyoMki 'avAcya' zabdake dvArA vaha 'vAcya' ho jAyagA aura taba sarvathA
avAcyatA kA ekAnta nahIM rhegaa| puNya-pApakI nirdoSa vyavasthA vizuddhi-
saMklezAGga cet mvaparasthaM sukhAsukham  /  puNya-pApAsravau yuktau na
cedvayarthastavA'hetaH  // 95 /  /  . 'yadi sva-parastha-apanA athavA parakA-
sukha-duHkha vizuddhi tathA saMklezakA aGga hai-tatkAraNa-kArya vA svabhAvarUpa
hai-to vaha sukha-duHkha yathAkrama puNya-pApake Astrava-bandhakA hetu hai aura
yadi vizaddhi tathA saMkleza donoMmeMse kisIkA bhI aGga-kAraNa-
kAryasvabhAvarUpa-nahIM hotA hai to ( he arhan bhagavan ! ) Apake matameM vaha
vyartha kahA hai-usakA koI phala nhiiN| anyathA, pUrvakArikA ( 93 ) meM kahe hue
'aketanA'kaSAyau' aura 'vItarAgo munividvAn' padoMmeM jinakA ullekha hai unake
bhI bandhakA prasaMga upasthita hogaa|' vyAkhyA-yahA~ 'saMkleza' kA abhiprAya
Arta-raudradhyAnake

Page #160 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Karika 9] 91 1 Akalankadeva clearly states in his 'Ashta Shatika' commentary
that "Atam Raudra Dhyana Parinam: Sankleshah" (The result of Raudra Dhyana is
Sanklesha). Shrividyananda has adopted this in his 'Ashta Sahasri'. Due to the
use of the word 'Sanklesha' in opposition, the word 'Vishuddhi' refers to the
'absence of Sanklesha' ("Tada Bhavah Vishuddhih" - Akalanka). It does not refer
to the Kshayika Lakshana (characteristics of destruction) or the Avinashwari
Paramashuddhi (indestructible ultimate purity) which is the absence of all Raga
(attachment) etc. In that Vishuddhi, there is no place for Puny (merit) or Papa
(demerit) and their binding. Therefore, the meaning of Vishuddhi here is the
auspicious result free from Atam Raudra Dhyana. This result occurs due to the
nature of Dharmya Dhyana (righteous meditation) and Shukla Dhyana (pure
meditation). Only when such a result occurs, does the Atma (soul) attain its own
nature, its own state, regardless of the degree. Therefore, Akalankadeva, in his
commentary, has described this Vishuddhi, which is the absence of Sanklesha, as
"Atmanah Swatmanyavasthanam" (the soul's dwelling in its own nature). This leads
to the conclusion that the aforementioned Vishuddhi, which is the cause of Puny,
is helpful in the development of the Atma, while Sanklesha Parinam (result of
Sanklesha) cannot lead to the development of the Atma. Being the cause of Papa,
it leads to the downfall of the Atma. Therefore, Puny is called auspicious Karma
(action) and Papa is called inauspicious Karma.  Devagam The cause, effect, and
nature of Vishuddhi are called 'Vishuddhi Anga'. Similarly, the cause, effect,
and nature of Sanklesha are called 'Sanklesha Anga'. If the happiness and sorrow
of oneself and others are due to Vishuddhi Anga, then it is the cause of
auspicious binding in the form of Puny. If it is due to Sanklesha Anga, then it
is the cause of inauspicious binding in the form of Papa. Otherwise, it is not.
In the Tattvarth Sutra, "Mithyadarshana Avirat Pramada Kashaya Yoga Bandha
Hetava" (False perception, non-restraint, carelessness, passions, and their
combination are the causes of binding), the causes of binding are mentioned as
Mithyadarshana, Avirati, Pramada, Kashaya, and Yoga, all of which are results of
Sanklesha.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 kArikA 9 ] 91 1 pariNAmase hai - "AtaM raudra dhyAnapariNAmaH saMklezaH " aisA
akalaMkadevane 'aSTazatI' TIkAmeM spaSTa likhA hai aura zrIvidyAnandane use
'aSTasahasrI' meM apanAyA haiM  /  'saMkleza' zabdake sAtha pratipakSarUpase
prayukta honeke kAraNa 'vizuddhi' zabdakA abhiprAya 'saMklezA'bhAva' hai ( "
tadabhAvaH vizuddhiH" ityakalaMka: ) usa kSAyikalakSaNA tathA avinazvarI
paramazuddhikA abhiprAya nahIM hai jo niravazeSa- rAgAdike abhAvarUpa hotI hai,
usa vizuddhimeM to puNya-pApa-bandhake liye koI sthAna nahIM hai  /  aura isalie
vizuddhikA Azaya yahA~ AtaMraudradhyAna se rahita zubhapariNatikA hai| vaha
pariNati dharmyadhyAna tathA zukladhyAnake svabhAvako liye hue hotI hai  /  aisI
pariNati honepara hI AtmA svAtmAmeM - svasvarUpameMsthitiko prApta hotA hai,
cAhe vaha kitane hI aMzoMmeM kyoM na ho  /  isIse akalaMkadevane apanI
vyAkhyAmeM, isa saMklezAbhAvarUpa vizuddhiko "AtmanaH svAtmanyavasthAnam" rUpase
ullikhita kiyA hai aura isase yaha natIjA nikalatA hai ki ukta puNya prasAdhikA
vizuddhi AtmA ke vikAsa meM sahAyaka hotI hai, jaba ki saMklezapariNati meM
AtmAkA vikAsa nahIM bana sakatA - vaha pApa-prasAdhikA honese AtmA ke
adhaHpatanakA kAraNa banatI hai  /  isIlie puNyako prazasta aura pApako
aprazasta karma kahA gayA hai  /  devAgama vizuddhike kAraNa, vizuddhike kArya
aura vizuddhike svabhAvako 'vizuddhiaMga' kahate haiM  /  isI taraha saMklezake
kAraNa, saMklezake kArya tathA saMklezake svabhAvako 'saMklezAGga' kahate haiM
/  sva- parastha sukhaduHkha yadi vizuddhiaMgako liye hue hotA hai to vaha
puNya-rUpa zubhabandhakA aura saMklezAGkako lie hue hotA hai to pApa-rUpa
azubhabandhakA kAraNa hotA hai, anyathA nahIM  /  tattvArthasUtra meM,
"mithyAdarzanA'viratapramAdakaSAyayogA bandhahetavaH " isa sUtra ke dvArA
mithyAdarzana, avirati, pramAda, kaSAya aura yogarUpase bandhake jina kAraNoMkA
nirdeza kiyA hai ve saba saMklezapariNAma hI haiM;

Page #161 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 92 Samantbhadra-Bharati [ Chapter 9  Because they are included in the
'Samkleshang' due to the results of Artha-Roudradhyana, such as the actions of
violence, etc., being the work of Samklesha, they are embedded in the
Samkleshang. Therefore, there is no contradiction to the above Sutra from this
statement of Swami Samantbhadra. Similarly, the statement made by the three
Sutras, 'Kayavangmanah Karma Yoga:', 'Sa Asrava:', 'Shubhah Punyasyashubhah
Papasya', which establishes the reason for the Shubhakaya, etc., activities as
Punyasrava and the Ashubha-kaya, etc., activities as Papasrava, is also not
against this; because the Kayadi-Yoga also has the arrangement of Samkleshatva
and Vishuddhitva due to the cause-effect-nature of purity and Samklesha. The
cause-effect-nature of Samklesha has been explained above. The causes of purity
are Samyagdarshana, etc., Dharmyadhyana and Shukladhyana are its nature, and
Vishuddhiparinam is its effect. In such a situation, if the Kayadi actions,
which are the cause of self-other suffering, have the cause-effect-nature of
Samklesha, then due to being Samkleshang, they become the cause of the
connection of beings with Ashubhaphaladayak Pudgalas, like the Kayadi actions of
poison consumption, etc.; and if they have the cause-effect-nature of Vishuddhi,
then due to being Vishuddhyang, they become the cause of the connection of
beings with Shubhaphaladayak Pudgalas, like the Kayadi actions of healthy diet,
etc. The Shubhaphaladayak Pudgalas are Punyakarma, the Ashubhaphaladayak
Pudgalas are Papakarma, and there are many divisions of these Punyakarma and
Papakarma. Thus, in brief, this Karika has indicated the cause of Asrava-Bandha
of all Shubhaashubharoop Punyappap-Karmas. From this, the knowledgeable reader
can understand how mysterious this Karika is for explaining the arrangement of
Punyappap.  The summary of all this statement is this - both happiness and
suffering, whether they are physical or mental, whether they are for oneself or
for others, are the cause of Punyaroop Asrava-Bandha, due to being an Anga of
Vishuddhi;

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 92 samantabhadra-bhAratI [ pariccheda 9 kyoMki Arta - raudradhyAnarUpa
pariNAmoMke kAraNa honese 'saMklezAGga'meM zAmila haiM; jaise ki hiMsAdi kriyA
saMklezakArya honese saMklezAGgameM garbhita hai  /  ataH svAmI samantabhadrake
isa kathanase ukta sUtrakA koI virodha nahIM hai  /  isI taraha 'kAyavAGmanaH
karma yoga :', 'sa AsravaH', 'zubhaH puNyasyA'zubhaH pApasya' ina tIna sUtroMke
dvArA zubhakAyAdi vyApArako puNyAsravakA aura azubha- kAyAdi vyApArako
pApAsravakA jo hetu pratipAdita kiyA hai vaha kathana bhI isake viruddha nahIM
par3atA; kyoMki kAyAdi-yogake bhI vizuddhi aura saMklezake kAraNa-kArya-
svabhAvake dvArA saMklezatva vizuddhitva kI vyavasthiti hai  /  saMklezake
kAraNa-kArya-svabhAva Upara batalAe jA cuke haiM  /  vizuddhike kAraNa
samyagdarzanAdika haiM, dharmyadhyAna tathA zukladhyAna usake svabhAva haiM aura
vizuddhipariNAma usakA kArya hai  /  aisI hAlata meM sva-para-duHkhako hetubhUta
kAyAdi kriyAe~ yadi saMkleza-kAraNa-kArya-svabhAvako lie hue hotI hai to va
saMklezAGgatvake kAraNa, viSabhakSaNAdirUpa kAyAdikriyAoMkI taraha, prANiyoM ko
azubhaphaladAyaka pudgaloMke sambandhakA kAraNa banatI haiM; aura yadi vizuddhi-
kAraNa-kArya-svabhAvako lie hue hotI haiM to vizuddhayaGgatvake kAraNa, pathya
AhArAdirUpa kAyAdikriyAoMkI taraha, prANiyoM ke zubhaphaladAyaka pudgaloMke
sambandhakA kAraNa hotI haiM  /  jo zubhaphaladAyaka pudgala haiM ve puNyakarma
haiM, jo azubhaphaladAyaka pudgala haiM ve pApakarma haiM, aura ina puNya-pApa
karmoM ke aneka bheda haiM  /  isa prakAra saMkSepase isa kArikA meM sampUrNa
zubhAzubharUpa puNyapApa-karmoM ke Asrava-bandhakA kAraNa sUcita kiyA hai  /
isase puNya pApakI vyavasthA batalAne ke liye yaha kArikA kitanI rahasyapUrNa
hai, ise vijJapAThaka svayaM samajha sakate haiM  /  sArAMza isa saba kathanakA
itanA hI hai ki - sukha aura duHkha donoM hI, cAhe svastha hoM yA parastha -
apaneko hoM yA dUsaroMkokathaMcit puNyarUpa Asrava-bandhake kAraNa haiM,
vizuddhi ke aGga honese;

Page #162 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Kārikā 10] Devāgama  93. In some cases, pāpa (sin) is the cause of āśrava-
bandha (influx-bondage) because it is an aspect of saṃkleśa (affliction). In
some cases, both puṇya (merit) and pāpa are the cause of āśrava-bandha because
they are aspects of kramarpita viśuddhi-saṃkleśa (gradually purified
affliction). In some cases, they are avakta (unspeakable) because they are
aspects of saharpita viśuddhi-saṃkleśa (simultaneously purified affliction). And
when they are not aspects of viśuddhi-saṃkleśa, they are not the cause of
bondage. Thus, only through the anekanta-mārga (path of non-absolutism) with its
nayas (perspectives) and vivakṣās (interpretations) can the system of puṇya and
pāpa be properly understood. It cannot be understood by relying on an ekānta-
pakṣa (absolutist view). The ekānta-pakṣa is flawed, as explained above, and
therefore cannot be a proper arbiter of puṇya and pāpa.  Thus ends the ninth
chapter of the Devāgama's Āptā-Mīmāṃsā.  ## Tenth Chapter: Bondage from
Ignorance and Liberation from Limited Knowledge  96. "If (as the Sāṃkhya school
believes) bondage is necessarily caused by ignorance, then due to the infinity
of objects of knowledge, no one could become a Kevali (omniscient) who is free
from all errors and possesses true knowledge without the help of any other
knowledge. If liberation is caused by limited knowledge, then due to the
abundance of ignorance, bondage would always be present and liberation would not
be possible because it could not be stopped."

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 kArikA 10] devAgama 93 kathaMcit pAparUpa Asrava-bandhake kAraNa haiM,
saMklezake aGga honese; kathaMcit puNya-pApa ubhayarUpa Asrava-bandhake kAraNa
haiM, kramArpita vizuddhi-saMklezake aGga honese; kathaMcit avaktarUpa haiM,
sahArpitavizuddhi-saMklezake aGga honese| aura vizuddhi-saMklezakA aGga na
honepara donoM hI bandhake kAraNa nahIM haiN| isa prakAra naya-vivakSA- . ko lie
hue anekAntamArgase hI puNya-pApakI vyavasthA ThIka baiThatI haiM- sarvathA
ekAntapakSakA Azraya lenese nhiiN| ekAnta pakSa sadoSa hai; jaisA ki Upara
batalAyA jA cukA hai aura isaliye vaha puNya-pApakA samyak vyavasthApaka nahIM
ho sktaa| iti devAgamA'ptamImAMsAyAM navamaH paricchedaH  /  dazama pariccheda
ajJAnase bandhakA aura alpajJAnase mokSakA ekAnta ajJAnAcceddhavo bandho
jJeyA'nantyAnna kevalI  /  jJAnastokAdvimokSazcedajJAnAdbahuto'nyathA  /  / 96 /
/  'yadi ( sAMkhyamatAnusAra ) ajJAnase bandhakA honA avazyaMbhAvI mAnA jAya to
jJeyoMkI anantatAke kAraNa koI bhI kevalIsakalaviparyaya-rahita tathA
jJAnAntarakI sahAyatA-rahita tattvajJAnarUpa kevalase yukta-na ho skegaa| yadi
alpajJAnase mokSakA honA mAnA jAya to ajJAnake bahata honeke kAraNa bandhakA
prasaMga barAbara upasthita rahegA aura usakA nirodha na ho sakanese mokSakA
honA nahIM bana skegaa|'

Page #163 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter 10 of Samantabhadra Bharati: The Flawed Nature of Both Extremes and
the Incompatibility of the Two  **Verse 17:**  Those who oppose Syadvada and
Nyaya cannot prove the non-contradiction of the two extremes of bondage due to
great ignorance and liberation due to little knowledge. Therefore, due to mutual
contradiction, they cannot be considered as two extremes. Even if one accepts
the extreme of "unspeakable," it is not appropriate to say "unspeakable" because
it contradicts the previous statement.  **Verse 98:** The faultless explanation
of bondage and liberation due to ignorance and little knowledge is as follows:
Bondage occurs due to ignorance accompanied by delusion, which is characterized
by the nature of karma and is capable of producing its own results. Ignorance
devoid of delusion is not the cause of bondage. Liberation occurs due to little
knowledge devoid of delusion; however, little knowledge accompanied by delusion
leads to bondage.  **Verse 99:**  The cycle of existence is diverse in form, and
the bound soul is purified according to the bondage of karma. The diversity of
impurities is of two types: the karma-bondage that is in accordance with the
origin of desires, etc., and the bondage of substance and karma. Souls are
purified or impure according to their own causes.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 a - samantabhadra bhAratI pariccheda 10 ubhaya aura avaktavya ekAntoMkI
sadoSatA virodhAnnobhayaikAtmyaM syAdvAda-nyAya-vidviSAm  /
avAcyataikAnte'pyukti 'vAmiti yujyate  /  / 17 /  /  ( sarvAtmarUpase eka
vyaktike eka kAlameM ) alpajJAnase mokSa aura bahuta ajJAnase bandha ina do
ekAntoMmeM syAdvAda-nyAyake vidveSiyoMke avirodha siddha nahIM hotA, ataH
paraspara virodhake kAraNa ubhaya ekAnta nahIM bntaa| avAcyatAkA ekAnta mAnane
meM bhI 'avAcya' hai yaha kahanA hI nahIM banatA-isase pUrvavat svavacanavirodha
ghaTita hotA hai| ajJAna-alpajJAnase bandha-mokSakI nirdoSa-vidhi ajJAnAnmohino
bandhA nAjJAnAdvIta-mohataH  /  jJAnastokAcca mokSaH
syaadmohaanmohino'nythaa||98|| 'moha-sahita ajJAnase bandha hotA hai-jo ajJAna
mohanIya. karmaprakRti-lakSaNase yukta hai vaha sthiti-anubhAgarUpa
svaphaladAnasamartha karma-bandhakA kartA hai| jo ajJAna mohase rahita hai vaha
( ukta phaladAna-samartha ) karma-bandhakA kartA nahIM hai| aura jo alpajJAna
mohase rahita hai usase mokSa hotA hai; parantu mohasahita alpajJAnase
karmabandha hI hotA hai| karmabandhAnusAra saMsAra vividharUpa aura baddha jIva
zuddhi azuddhike bhedame do bhedarUpa kAmAdi-prabhavazcitraH
karmabandhA'nurUpataH  /  tacca karma svahetubhyo jIvAste zuddhayazuddhitaH  //
99 /  /  'kAmAdikake utpAdarUpa jo bhAvasaMsAra kArya hai vaha vicitra hai aura
karmabandhako anurUpatAse hotA hai-dravya-karmokA bandhana

Page #164 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Karika 100] **Devagam** **95**  Just as knowledge-veil, vision-veil,
delusion, etc., are of many kinds due to the peculiarity and diversity of
nature, region, state, and section, in the same way, its function in the time of
arising is also of various forms due to the peculiarity of ignorance, non-
vision, delusion, attachment, aversion, lust, anger, pride, deceit, greed,
pleasure, pain, and bodily structure, etc. And from this, it follows that the
one who is considered to be the eternal God of the nature of self, and his will
or knowledge, cannot be the doer of this diverse-natured world, nor can he be
the efficient cause. A detailed discussion of this topic has been given in the
Ashta Sahasri with much speculation.  -  And that karma-bondage is according to
its causes - the emotions of attachment, etc. Those beings who are bound by
karma are of two types, due to the difference of purity and impurity - Bhavya
and Abhavya. Beings who possess the capacity to become pure in nature, like
right-faith, etc., are called 'Bhavya', and those who do not possess that
capacity and always remain in the impure state of wrong-faith, etc., are called
'Abhavya'. Only those who are endowed with the power of purity can attain
liberation in due course, not the others.  **Purity - Impurity are two powers,
like the capacity of mung, urad, etc., to be digested or undigested - in the
form of Bhavya-Abhavya nature - two powers, whose manifestation is respectively
Sadi-Anadi. The manifestation of purity is Sadi, and the manifestation of
impurity is Anadi; because the expressions of purity, like right-faith, etc.,
are Sadi, and...**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 kArikA 100 ] devAgama 95 jisa prakAra prakRti, pradeza, sthiti aura anubhAgakI
vizeSatA evaM nAnA-rUpatAke kAraNa vicitratAko lie hue jJAnAvaraNa,
darzanAvaraNa, mohanIyAdi aneka prakArakA hotA hai usI prakAra udayakAlameM
usakA kArya bhI ajJAna, adarzana, moha, rAga, dveSa, kAma, krodha, mAna, mAyA,
lobha, sukha, duHkha aura zArIrika racanAdikI vicitratAko liye hue nAnArUpa hotA
hai  /  aura isase yaha phalita hotA hai ki jo eka svabhAvarUpa nitya Izvara
mAnA jAtA hai vaha tathA usakI icchA yA jJAna isa nAnA - svabhAvarUpa jagatakA
koI kartA nahIM ho sakatA aura na nimittakAraNa hI bana sakatA hai  /  isa
viSayakI vizeSa carcAko aSTasahasrI meM bahuta UhApoha ke sAtha sthAna diyA gayA
hai  /  - aura vaha karmabandhana apane kAraNoMke - rAgAdika bhAvoMke - anurUpa
hotA hai  /  jinheM karmabandha hotA hai ve jIva zuddhi aura azuddhike bheda se
do prakArake haiM- bhavya aura abhavya  /  samyagdarzanAdi zuddhasvabhAvarUpa
pariNata honekI yogyatAkI vyakti rakhanevAle jIva 'bhavya' kahalAte haiM aura
jinameM vaha yogyatAkI vyakti na hokara sadA mithyAdarzanAdirUpa azuddhapariNati
banI rahatI hai ve 'abhavya' kahe jAte haiM  /  jo zuddhi-zakti se yukta haiM
unhIMkI kAla pAkara mukti ho sakatI hai, zeSakI nahIM  / ' zuddhi - azuddhi do
zaktiyoMkI sAdi-anAdi vyakti zuddhayazuddhI punaH zaktI te pAkyApAkya zaktivat
/  sAdhanAdI tayorvyaktI svabhAvo'tarkagocaraH || 100  //  'aura ve zuddhi -
azuddhi donoM (mUMga, ur3ada Adike ) pacane apacanekI yogyatAke samAna- -bhavya-
abhavya-svabhAvake rUpameM-- do zaktiyA~ haiM, jinakI vyakti - prAdurbhUti
kramazaH sAdi-anAdi hai zuddhikI prAdurbhUti sAdi aura azuddhikI prAdurbhUti
anAdi hai; kyoMki zuddhike abhivyaMjaka samyagdarzanAdika sAdi hote haiM aura -

Page #165 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 96 ## Samantabhadra-Bharati ## [ Chapter 10 The lineage of false views, such
as the manifestation of impurities, is endless and continues from the
beginningless time. And this is the nature of things, which is not the subject
of logic - that is, in its nature, there is no reasoning of the form "why does
this happen?".  ## The characteristics and divisions of proof ##  "**(O Arhan
Bhagavan!)** In your opinion, what is the proof of true knowledge? That
(knowledge of the true form) proof-knowledge is one, the simultaneous
manifestation of all (kevalgyan) direct knowledge, and the other is the gradual
manifestation (mati etc.) indirect knowledge. The knowledge that is gradually
manifested is cultivated by syadvada and nayas - it is manifested by the
syadvada form of proof and the nayas like naigama etc."  ## Explanation -
Knowledge that knows the true (yatharth) form is called proof. It is of two
types - one is akramabhavi and the other is kramabhavi. The one that manifests
all things simultaneously is akramabhavi and it is completely in the form of
proof. But the one that manifests things gradually is kramabhavi and it is both
in the form of syadvada (proof) and nayas (partial naigama etc.).  ## The fruit
of proofs "The fruit of the first, which is the simultaneous manifestation of
all, is indifference. The fruit of the remaining, which is the gradual
manifestation, is the thought of gain and loss. The destruction of previous
ignorance or the attainment of its own sphere for all."

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 96 samantabhadra-bhAratI [ pariccheda 10 azuddhike abhivyaMjaka
mithyAdarzanAdiko santati anAdise calI AtI hai  /  aura yaha vastu-svabhAva hai
jo tarkakA viSaya nahIM hotA - arthAt svabhAvameM yaha hetuvAda nahIM calatA ki
'aisA kyoM hotA hai  / ' pramANakA lakSaNa aura usake bheda  /  tatvajJAnaM
pramANaM te yugapatsarvabhAsanam  /  kramabhAvi ca yajjJAnaM syAdvAda -naya-
saMskRtam  //  101  //  ' ( he arhan bhagavan ! ) Apake mata meM tattvajJAnako
pramANa kahA hai  /  vaha ( tattvarUpase jAnanerUpa ) pramANajJAna eka to
yugapat sarvabhAsanarUpa ( kevalajJAna ) pratyakSajJAna hai aura dUsarA kramazaH
bhAsanarUpa ( mati Adi ) parokSajJAna hai  /  jo kramazaH bhAsanarUpa jJAna hai
vaha syAdvAda tathA nayoMse saMskRta hai-- syAdvAdarUpa pramANa tathA naigamAdi
nayoMke dvArA saMskArako prApta hai - prakaTa hotA hai  / ' vyAkhyA- - tattva (
yathArtha ) rUpase jAnanevAlA jJAna pramANa kahalAtA hai  /  vaha do prakArakA
hotA hai- eka akramabhAvi aura dUsarA kramabhAvi  /  jo yugapat samasta
padArthoMkA prakAzana karatA hai vaha akramabhAvi hai aura vaha pUrNatayA
pramANarUpa hotA hai  /  kintu jo kramazaH padArthoM kA prakAzana karatA hai
vaha kramabhAvi hai tathA vaha syAdvAda ( pramANa ) aura naya ( aMzAtmaka
naigamAdi ) donoM rUpa hotA hai  /  pramANoM kA phala upekSA- phalamAssdyasya
zeSasyA''dAna - hAna-dhIH  /  pUrvA vAjJAnanAzo vA sarvasyAsya svagocare  //
102  //  'yugapatsarvabhAsanarUpa jo Adya pramANa kevalajJAna hai usakA (
vyavahita ) phala upekSA hai  /  zeSa kramazaH bhAsanarUpa jo pramANa

Page #166 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Karika 103] Devagam  **97** The fruit of the group of knowledge, beginning
with perception, is the understanding of acceptance and rejection, and the
disregard mentioned earlier is also its (interrupted) fruit, and the destruction
of ignorance about its own subject is the (uninterrupted or direct) fruit of
this entire group of knowledge, which is in the form of proof.  **103** The word
'syāt' (an indeclinable) used in the sentences of both you (Arhan) and the
Shruta Kevalis, is considered to be indicative of anekanta due to its connection
with meaning, and also indicative of the intended meaning (gamya-bodhya).
Otherwise, the understanding of the meaning of anekanta would not be possible.
**Explanation:** The characteristic of rejecting all absolute affirmations, such
as 'sat' (being), 'asat' (non-being), 'nitya' (eternal), 'anitya' (non-eternal),
etc., is called 'anekanta'. And the name 'vakya' (sentence) is given to the
collection of words that are relative to each other within the sentence and
independent of the words in other sentences. Any other sentences that are
conceived by the opponents, which are different from this characteristic of
vakya, are not faultless but are full of contradictions. In Vakyapadi (2, 1-2),
while informing about the contradictions and different opinions of the logicians
regarding vakya, ten types of vakyas are mentioned, whose names are (1)
Akhyatashabda, (2) Sanghata, (3) Jati Sanghatavartini,  **1.** 'Dyotakasch
bhavanti nipatah' (Ashta Sahasri) - that is, the indeclinable words are not only
indicative but also indicative of (meaning different from the original meaning).
**2.** Vakyantaargatapadanirapeksha (Ashta Sahasri, page 285 note).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 kArikA 103 ] devAgama 97 matyAdi jJAna-samUha hai usakA ( vyavahita-paraMparA )
phala grahaNa aura tyAgako buddhi hai tathA pUrva meM kahI huI upekSA bhI usakA
( vyavahita ) phala hai aura apane viSayameM ajJAnakA nAza honA isa sAre hI
pramANarUpa jJAnasamUhakA (avyavahita athavA sAkSAt) phala hai|' syAt nipAtakI
artha-vyavasthA vAkkyeSvanekAntayotI gamyaM prati vizeSaNam  /  syAnnipAto'rtha-
yogitvAttava kevalinAmapi  // 103 /  /  ( 'he arhan ! ) Apake tathA
zrutakevaliyoMke bhI vAkyoMmeM prayukta honevAlA 'syAt' nipAta ( avyaya ) zabda
arthake sAtha sambaddha honese anekAntakA dyotaka' aura gamya-bodhya ( vivakSita
) kA bodhaka-sUcaka ( vAcaka ) mAnA gayA hai-anyathA anekAnta arthakI pratipatti
nahIM bntii|' vyAkhyA-sat-asat-nitya-anityAdi sakala sarvathaikAntoMke
pratikSepa lakSaNako 'anekAnta' kahate haiN| aura apane vAkyake paraspara
sApekSa padoMke tathA vAkyAntarake padoMse nirapekSa samudAyakA nAma 'vAkya'
hai| vAkyake isa lakSaNase bhinna jo paravAdiyoMke dvArA prakalpita anyathA
vAkya haiM ve nirdoSa na hokara bAdhAsahita haiN| vAkyapadI (2, 1-2) meM vAkyake
prati nyAya-vidoMkI bAdhA-bhinnamatikI sUcanA karate hue dasa prakArake vAkyoMkA
ullekha hai, jinake nAma haiM(1) AkhyAtazabda, (2) saMghAta, (3) jAti
saMghAtavartinI, 1. 'dyotakAzca bhavanti nipAtAH' iti vacanAt ( aSTasahasrI)
arthAt-nipAta zabda kevala vAcaka hI nahIM kintu ( prakRta arthase bhinna
arthake ) dyotaka bhI hote haiM  /  2. vAkyAntaragatapadanirapekSaH (
aSTasahasrI, pRSTha 285 TippaNa ) /

Page #167 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 98 Samantbhadra-Bharati [ Chapter 10 (4) Ekonavayavashabd, (5) Kram, (6)
Buddhi, (7) Anusanhruti, (8) Adya-pad, (9) Antya-pad, (10) Sapeksha-pad. In
these types of sentences, from the perspective of the aforementioned
characteristics of a sentence (as described by Akalankdeva), which sentences can
be considered flawed and which can be considered flawless? Shri Vidyānanda
Āchārya has discussed this in detail with reasoning in the Ashta-sahasri.  **The
nature of Syadvada** Syadvada, being a complete rejection of absolutes, is a way
of knowing that is born from the word 'kim' (what). It is a marker of the
distinctions between the undesirable and the desirable, dependent on the seven-
fold negation and the Nayas. || 104 ||  'Syat' - the word, being a complete
rejection of absolutes, is a way of knowing that is born from the word 'kim'
(what), and thus is a word that indicates 'somehow' or 'in some way'. Therefore,
words like 'somehow' are synonyms for Syadvada. This Syadvada is dependent on
the seven-fold negation and the Nayas, and is a marker of the distinctions
between the undesirable and the desirable (a differentiator). Without Syadvada,
there is no proper arrangement of the undesirable and the desirable.'
**Explanation** - The seven-fold negation mentioned here refers to the seven
negations of 'asti' (exists), 'nasti' (does not exist), 'avaktavya'
(indescribable), etc., which have been discussed earlier in the text. As for the
Nayas, there are many variations of them, such as the fundamental Nayas of
'dravya' (substance) and 'paryaya' (attribute), and the fundamental Nayas of
'nishcaya' (certainty) and 'vyavahar' (practical) from the perspective of the
soul. From the perspective of purity and impurity, there are also two divisions
of Nayas, such as 'shuddha-dravya-arthic' (pure substance), 'ashuddha-dravya-
arthic' (impure substance), 'shuddha-paryaya-arthic' (pure attribute),
'ashuddha-paryaya-arthic' (impure attribute), 'shuddha-nishcaya' (pure
certainty), 'ashuddha-nishcaya' (impure certainty), 'sad-bhuta-vyavahar'
(practical based on reality), 'asad-bhuta-vyavahar' (practical not based on
reality), etc. The further divisions of 'dravya-arthic' are three - 'naigama'
(general), 'sangraha' (collection), and 'vyavahar' (practical). The further
divisions of 'paryaya-arthic' are four - 'rijusutr' (straight thread), 'shabd'
(word), 'samabhirud' (common understanding), and 'evambhuta' (such). The first
four divisions of these seven Nayas...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 98 samantabhadra- bhAratI [ pariccheda 10 (4) ekonavayavazabda, (5) krama, (6)
buddhi, (7) anusaMhRti, (8) Adyapada, (9) antyapada, (10) sApekSapada  /  ina
vAkyaprakAroMmeM vAkyake ( akalaMkadevakRta ) ukta lakSaNakI dRSTise kauna vAkya
bheda sadoSa aura kauna nirdoSa kahA jA sakatA hai, isakA aSTasahasrI meM
zrIvidyAnandAcArya ne sahetuka vistRta vicAra kiyA hai  /  syAdvAdakA svarUpa
syAdvAdaH sarvathaikAnta-tyAgAt kiMvRttacidvidhiH  /  saptabhaMga - nayApekSo
heyA''deya vizeSakaH  //  104  //  'syAt - zabda sarvathA ekAntakA tyAgI hone se
'ki' zabdaniSpanna cit prakArake rUpameM kathaMcit kathaMcana AdikA vAcaka hai--
aura isaliye kathaMcit Adi zabda syAdvAda ke paryAya nAma haiM  /  yaha syAdvAda
saptabhaMgoM aura nayoMkI apekSAko liye rahatA tathA heya - upAdeyakA vizeSaka (
bhedaka ) hotA hai - syAdvAda ke binA heya aura upAdeyakI vizeSarUpase vyavasthA
nahIM banatI !' vyAkhyA - jina saptabhaMgoM kA yahA~ ullekha hai una asti -
nAstiavaktavyAdi-rUpa sAta bhaMgoMkA nirdeza grantha meM isase pahale A cukA hai
/  rahI nayoMkI bAta, so nayoMke mUlottara - bhedAdike rUpameM bahuta vikalpa
haiM  /  jaise dravya-paryAyakI dRSTise dravyArthika paryAyArthika ye do mUla
naya haiM; adhyAtmadRSTise nizcaya aura vyavahAra ye do bhI mUla na haiM  /
zuddhi - azuddhikI dRSTise bhI nayoMke do-do bheda kiye jAte haiM; jaise
zuddhadravyArthika azuddhadravyArthika zuddhaparyAyArthika, azuddhaparyAyArthika
zuddhanizcaya, azuddhanizcaya sadbhUtavyavahAra, asadbhUtavyavahAra ityAdi  /
dravyAthika ke uttarabheda tIna - naigama, saMgraha aura vyavahAra;
paryAyArthikake uttarabheda cAra - RjusUtra, zabda, samabhirUr3ha aura evaMbhUta
/  ina saptanayoMmeM prathama cAra bheda , 1

Page #168 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Karika 105-106] Devagam 99  'Arthanaya' and the remaining three divisions are
called 'Shabdnaya'. There are countless divisions of these, one after another.
In short, there are as many divisions of Nayas as there are paths of speech -
divisions of words - and alternatives of knowledge. This subject of Nayas is
very profound and deep. The specific details of their characteristics, etc., are
to be known from texts like Nayachakra, etc.  **Distinction between Syadvada and
Kevalgyan - Instruction**  Syadvada - illuminates all principles in Kevalgyan.
The difference is that it is either directly or indirectly, or neither. || 105
||  Syadvada and Kevalgyan are both illuminators of all principles (like Jiva,
etc.). There is a difference (distinction) in their illumination - direct and
indirect (indirect). Kevalgyan is the direct and simultaneous illuminator of the
seven principles - Jiva, Ajiva, Asrava, Bandha, Samvara, Nirjara, Moksha - while
Syadvada, in the form of Shrutagyan, is the indirect (indirect) illuminator of
these principles, one by one. Whatever is not illuminated or spoken of by any of
these two knowledges is 'Avasthu' (non-existent).  The characteristic of the
Nay-Hetu is that it is the same as the object to be proved, by virtue of its
similarity to the object to be proved, and by virtue of its non-contradiction.
Syadvada - the Nay which is the special meaning of the divided object - the
object to be proved - the object of dispute - the object to be proved - which is
expressed by the same Dharma - example - by the similarity of the object to be
proved and by the non-contradiction (of the opposite) - is the Gamak or the
knower. || 106 ||  'The object to be proved is led or known by this, hence Nay'.
From this etymology, the word 'Nay' here is the indicator of the Hetu, and it is
also situated in the view of the general Nay, which is the proponent of one
Dharma out of many Dharmas.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 kArikA 105-106 ] devAgama 99 'arthanaya' aura zeSa tIna bheda 'zabdanaya' kahe
jAte haiM  /  ina sabake uttarottara bheda asaMkhya haiM  /  saMkSepameM kahA
jAya to jitane vacanamArga haiM - zabdabheda haiM- tathA apane-apane jJAna ke
vikalpa haiM utane utane nayoMke bheda haiM  /  nayoMkA yaha viSaya bar3A hI
gahana-gaMbhIra hai  /  inake lakSaNAdikA vizeSa kathana nayacakrAdi granthoMse
jAnane yogya hai  /  syAdvAda aura kevalajJAnameM bheda - nirdeza syAdvAda -
kevalajJAne sarvatattva - prakAzane  /  bhedaH sAkSAdasAkSAcca hyavastvanyatamaM
bhavet  //  105  /  /  syAdvAda aura kevalajJAna donoM ( jIvAdi ) saba tattvoMke
prakAzaka haiN| donoMke prakAzanameM sAkSAt aura asAkSAt (parokSa) - kA bheda (
antara ) hai - kevalajJAna jIva, ajIva, Asrava, bandha, saMvara, nirjarA, mokSa
ina sAta tattvoMkA pratyakSataH evaM yugapat prakAzaka hai aura syAdvAdarUpa
zrutajJAna ina padArthoMkA apratyakSataH ( parokSarUpa se ) kramazaH prakAzaka
hai  /  ina donoM jJAnoMmeMse jo kisI bhI jJAnake dvArA prakAzita athavA usakA
vAcya nahIM vaha avastu hotI hai  / ' naya-hetukA lakSaNa sadharmaNaiva
sAdhyasya sAdharmyAdavirodhataH  /  syAdvAda - pravibhaktA'rtha - vizeSa -
vyaJjako nayaH  //  106 //  'syAdvAdarUpa paragamAgamase vibhakta hue
arthavizeSakA - zakyaabhipreta aprasiddharUpa vivAdagocara sAdhyakA - jo
sadharmA-- dRSTAntake dvArA, sAdhyake sAdharmyase aura ( vipakSake) avirodharUpa
se vyaJjaka hai - gamaka athavA bodhaka hai-usako naya - nayavizeSarUpa hetu -
kahate haiM - ' nIyate gamyate sAdhyo'rtho'nena iti naya:' isa niruktise 'naya'
zabda yahA~ hetukA vAcaka hai aura aneka dharmomeMse eka-dharmapratipAdaka
sAmAnya nayakI dRSTimeM bhI vaha sthita hai  / ' .

Page #169 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Samantbhadra-Bharati. [Chapter 10 Information about the nature and distinctions
of dravyas, the collection of nayas, upanayas, and ekantas of the three times.
The inseparable relationship of dravya is one and many. ||107|| 'The collection
of nayas, upanayas, and ekantas of the three times, which is the inseparable
relationship (identity) of the particular characteristics, is the dravya-
substance, and it is one and many in its distinctions.' The position of absolute
and relative nayas is not a group of falsehoods, nor is there any falsehood in
the ekantas. Absolute nayas are false, relative nayas are the objects of truth.
||108|| 'If it is said that (since you call ekantas false, then the collection
of nayas and upanayas, which are ekantas, is dravya, then it is a false
collection), the collection of falsehoods is itself false (therefore, dravya is
not a substance), then this is not correct, because (O Jinadeva!) in your
opinion, and therefore in ours (because of the acceptance of relative nayas),
there is no falsehood in the ekantas. The nayas (which are absolutely negating
the opposing dharma) are false nayas (durnayas), the relative nayas (which
ignore or make the opposing dharma secondary) are not false but true nayas,
their objects are the agents of action, and therefore the substantiality of
their collection is well-established.' Explanation-Here, the opponent of
anekanta has objected that when ekantas are called false, then the collection of
nayas and upanayas, which are ekantas, which is the anekanta and identical
reality, is also false; because the collection of falsehoods is itself false. To
this, the author says that this

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 samantabhadra-bhAratI . [pariccheda 10 dravyakA svarUpa aura bhedoMkI sUcanA
nayopanayaikAntAnAM trikAlAnAM samuccayaH  /  avibhrADbhAvasambandho
dravyamekamanekadhA  // 107 //  'trikAlavati nayoM-upanayoMke ekAnta-viSayoMkA-
paryAyavizeSoMkA-jo apRthakasvabhAva ( tAdAtmya ) sambandhako liye hue
samuccaya-samUha hai vaha dravya-vastu hai aura vaha eka aneka bhedarUpa hai|'
nirapekSa aura sApekSa nayoMkI sthiti mithyA-samUho mithyA cenna
mithyakAntatAsti naH  /  nirapekSA nayA mithyA sApekSA vastu te'rthakRt  // 108
/  /  'yadi yaha kahA jAya ki ( ekAntoMko to Apa mithyA batalAte haiM taba nayoM
aura upanayoM-rUpa ekAntoMkA jo samUha dravya hai vaha mithyA-samUha ThaharA )
mithyAoMkA jo samUha vaha to mithyA hI hotA hai ( ataH dravya koI vastu na rahA
) to yaha kahanA ThIka nahIM hai, kyoMki (he jinadeva ! ) Apake matameM aura
isaliye hamAremeM ( sApekSa nayoMkA grahaNa honese ) mithyA ekAntatA nahIM hai,
jo naya ( pratipakSI dharmake sarvathA nirAkaraNarUpa) nirapekSa hote haiM ve hI
mithyAnaya ( durnaya ) hote haiM sApekSa naya ( jo ki pratipakSI dharmakI upekSA
athavA use gauNa kiye hote haiM ) mithyA na hokara samyakanaya hote haiM, unake
viSaya artha-kriyAkArI hote haiM aura isaliye unake samUhake vastupanA sughaTita
hai| vyAkhyA-yahA~ anekAntake pratipakSI-dvArA yaha Apatti kI gaI hai ki jaba
ekAntoMko mithyA batalAyA jAtA hai taba nayoM aura upanayoM-rUpa ekAntoMkA
samUha jo anekAnta aura tadAtmaka vastutattva hai vaha bhI mithyA ThaharatA hai;
kyoMki mithyAoMkA samUha mithyA hI hotA hai| isapara granthakAramahodaya kahate
haiM ki yaha .

Page #170 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 101 **Karika 109**  Devagam (divine revelation) is not correct; because in
our system, no object is truly one-sided (mithya ekant). When an object's one
dharma (characteristic) does not consider another dharma, it rejects it, and is
then called mithya. When it considers the other dharma and does not reject it,
it is considered samyak (right). In reality, an object is not truly one-sided,
as the absolute one-sided view (ekantvadi) believes. It is relatively one-sided,
and the collection of these relative one-sided views is called anekanta (many-
sidedness). How then can it, or the object itself, be called mithya? It cannot
be.  An object is regulated by rules, such as injunctions (vidhi) and
prohibitions (varana).  **"The object is regulated by injunctions, prohibitions,
or otherwise. It is necessarily otherwise."** (109)  (If someone doubts how an
object, being anekanta, can be regulated by injunctions, leading to a common
understanding of the regulated object, the answer is this:) An object, being
anekanta, is regulated by injunctions or prohibitions. The object is necessarily
both in the form of the injunction or prohibition that regulates it, and in the
opposite form, because there is an inseparable connection between injunction and
prohibition. Therefore, the injunction or prohibition that regulates the object
is primary at that time, and the opposite injunction is secondary. If this is
not accepted, if the necessary existence of the object in the form of injunction
and prohibition is not accepted, then the object (visheshya) cannot be formed by
only an injunction or only a prohibition. Because a prohibition without an
injunction, or an injunction without a prohibition, cannot be a characteristic
(visheshana), and an object without both injunction and prohibition is like a
sky-flower (non-existent).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 101 kArikA 109 ] devAgama Apatti ThIka nahIM hai; kyoMki hamAre yahA~ koI bhI
vastu mithyA ekAntake rUpameM nahIM hai| jaba vastukA eka dharma dUsare dharmakI
apekSA nahIM rakhatA-usakA tiraskAra kara detA hai to vaha mithyA kahA jAtA hai
aura jaba vaha usakI apekSA rakhatA haiusakA tiraskAra nahIM karatA-to vaha
samyak mAnA jAtA hai  /  vAstavameM vastu nirapekSa ekAnta nahIM hai, jise
sarvathA ekAntavAdI mAnate haiM; kintu sApekSa ekAnta hai aura sApekSa ekAntoMke
samUhakA nAma hI anekAnta hai, taba use aura tadAtmaka vastuko mithyA kaise kahA
jA sakatA hai ? nahIM kahA jA sktaa| vastuko vidhi-vAkyAdi-dvArA niyamita kiyA
jAtA hai niyamyate'rtho vAkyena vidhinA vAraNena vA  /  tathA'nyathA ca
so'vazyamavizeSyatvamanyathA  // 109 /  /  ( yadi koI yaha zaMkA kare ki
vastutattva jaba anekAntAtmaka hai taba vAkyake dvArA use kaise niyamita kiyA
jAya, jisase pratiniyata viSayameM lokakI pravRtti bana sake, to usakA samAdhAna
yaha hai ki ) anekAntAtmaka vastutattva vidhivAkya athavA niSedha-vAkyake dvArA
niyamita kiyA jAtA hai| vidhi yA niSedharUpa jisa vAkyake dvArA vaha niyamita
kiyA jAya usarUpa tathA usase anyathAvipakSarUpa vaha avazya hotA hai, kyoMki
vidhi-niSedhakA paraspara avinAbhAva-sambandha hai aura isase jisa vidhi yA
niSedha-vAkyake dvArA vaha niyamita kiyA jAtA hai vaha usa samaya mukhya hotA
hai aura pratipakSI vAkyakA viSaya gauNa | yadi aisA na mAnA jAyavidhi-
niSedharUpase usakA avazyaMbhAvIpanA svIkAra na kiyA jAyato usa kevala vidhi yA
kevala niSedha-vAkyase jo vizeSya (vastutattva ) hai vaha nahIM bana sakegA;
kyoMki pratiSedharahita vidhike aura vidhirahita pratiSedhake vizeSaNapanA nahIM
banatA aura vidhipratiSedha donoMse rahitake gagana-kusumake samAna vizeSyapanA
nahIM

Page #171 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 102 Samantabhadra-Bharati [Chapter 10 is formed. And in this way, it is
observed that in sentences like 'sat' (being) and 'asat' (non-being), there is a
secondary and primary role of injunction and prohibition.]  "Speech that calls
an object by its own form is not true. Speech that describes an object as 'that'
itself, instructs accordingly. A sentence like 'it is a fly' cannot be true. How
can it be a declaration of the true meaning? [110]"  _(If it is said that
sentences regulate the truth of objects only through injunction, then this is
completely incorrect; because)_ "An object is 'that' and 'not that' - it is of
the form of anekanta (many-sidedness) with the inseparable connection of the
difference of perspective - 'sat' (being) and 'asat' (non-being), 'nitya'
(eternal) and 'anitya' (non-eternal) etc. - a sentence (speech) that declares it
completely as 'that' - 'sat' (being), 'nitya' (eternal) etc. - is not its
opponent, but its contradictor, having made the inseparable dharma (principle)
secondary. It is not true. Then, how can such false sentences be a declaration
(statement) of the true meaning - the true nature of the object? - It cannot
be."  **Explanation:** Although all (injunction and prohibition) sentences
declare both injunction and prohibition forms of an object, if it is said that
they only instruct according to injunction, then this statement is not true
(real) - it is false. And a true statement of the nature of the object cannot be
made through false sentences. Therefore, whether sentences are in the form of
injunction or prohibition, they all declare both injunction and prohibition
forms of the object. The only difference is that through an injunction sentence,
the declaration of injunction is primarily made and the declaration of
prohibition is secondarily made, and through a prohibition sentence, the
declaration of prohibition is primarily made and the declaration of injunction
is secondarily made. This is the true declaration of the truth.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 102 samantabhadra-bhAratI [ pariccheda 10 banatA hai| aura isa taraha sat asat
Adi vAkyoMmeM vidhi-niSedhakI gauNa tathA pradhAnarUpase vRttikA honA lakSita
hotA hai|' tadatadrUpa vastuko tadrUpa hI kahanevAlI vANI satya nahIM
tadatadvastu vAgeSA tadevetyanuzAsatI  /  na satyA syAnmaSA-vAkyaH kathaM
tattvArtha-dezanA  // 110 /  /  _( yadi yaha kahA jAya ki vAkya vidhike dvArA hI
vastutattvakA niyamana karatA hai to yaha sarvathA ekAnta ThIka nahIM hai;
kyoMki) vastu tat-atatrUpa hai-dRSTi-bhedake sAtha avinAbhAvasambandhako liye
hue sat-asat, nitya-anityAdi anekAntarUpa hai-jo vAkya ( vANI ) use sarvathA
tatrUpa-sat-nityAdirUpa-hI pratipAdana karatA hai-usake pratipakSI avinAbhAvI
dharmako gauNa kiye hue na hokara usakA virodhaka hai-vaha satya nahIM hotA taba
( aise ) mithyA-vAkyoMse tattvArthakI-yathArtha vastusvarUpakI-dezanA ( kathanI
) kaise bana sakatI hai ?-nahIM bana sktii|' vyAkhyA-yadyapi sabhI (vidhi aura
pratiSedha) vAkya vidhi aura pratiSedha donoM-rUpa vastukA pratipAdana karate
haiM phira bhI yadi kahA jAya ki ve kevala vidhikA hI anuzAsana ( upadeza )
karate haiM to yaha kathana satya (yathArtha) nahIM-mithyA hai aura mithyA-
vAkyoMke dvArA vastusvarUpakA yathArtha kathana nahIM bana sakatA  /  ataH vAkya
cAhe vidhirUpa hoM aura cAhe niSedharUpa, sabhI vidhi tathA pratiSedha donoMrUpa
vastukA pratipAdana karate haiN| antara kevala itanA hI hai ki vidhi-vAkyake
dvArA vidhikA kathana mukhyarUpase aura pratiSedhakA kathana gauNarUpase tathA
pratiSedha-vAkyake dvArA pratiSedhakA kathana mukhyarUpase aura vidhikA kathana
gauNarUpase kiyA jAtA hai  /  yahI yathArtha tattva-dezanA hai|

Page #172 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Karika 111: Devagam  **103. The nature of speech is to negate the meaning of
other sentences while establishing its own general meaning. Such a sentence is
like a flower in the sky.**  (If, as the Buddhists believe, sentences only
function through negation, this is not correct. For) the nature of a sentence is
to establish its own general meaning while negating the meaning of other
sentences without restriction. For example, the sentence "Bring a pot"
inherently negates the meaning of other sentences like "Bring a cloth," "Bring a
pitcher," "Bring a watch," "Bring a table (chair)," etc.    The kind of sentence
that the Buddhists propose, which is based on negation alone, is like a flower
in the sky, a non-existent thing, or equivalent to an unsaid statement. This is
because a general without a particular, or a particular without a general, is
never found anywhere (inside or outside). When such a thing is not found, how
can it be claimed that a general without a particular, or a particular without a
general, is the nature of reality? How can one deceive oneself and others with
such an argument? One should not be deceived.  **Explanation:** The Buddhists
believe that all sentences are based on negation, not affirmation. The Acharya
says: The nature of speech (words) is to negate the meaning of other sentences
without restriction and to affirm its own general meaning. If only negation were
possible, then such a sentence would be like a flower in the sky, a non-existent
thing. We never find a general without a particular, or a particular without a
general. When such a sentence is not found, how can it be claimed that a general
without a particular, or a particular without a general, is the nature of
reality?

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 kArikA 111 ] devAgama 103 vAk-svabhAva-nirdeza, tadbhinna vAkya avastu
baaksvbhaavo'nyvaagrth-prtissedh-nirngkushH| Aha ca svArtha-sAmAnyaM tAdRgvAkyaM
kha-puSpavat  /  / 111 /  /  '( yadi bauddhoMkI mAnyatAnusAra yaha kahA jAya ki
vAkya pratiSedhake dvArA hI vastutattvakA niyamana karatA hai to yaha ekAnta bhI
ThIka nahIM hai; kyoMki ) vAkyakA yaha svabhAva hai ki vaha apane artha-
sAmAnyakA pratipAdana karatA haA anya-vAkyoMke artha-pratiSedhameM niraMkuza
hotA hai-binA kisI roka-Tokake dUsare saba vAkyoMke viSayakA niSedha karatA hai;
jaise 'ghaTa lAo' yaha vAkya paTa lAo, loTA lAo, ghar3I lAo, meja ( kursI ) lAo
ityAdi para-vAkyoMke arthakA svabhAvase niSedhakarUpa hai| isa vAk-svabhAvase
bhinna bauddhoMkA jo usa prakArakA anyApohAtmaka vAkya hai vaha AkAzake puSpa-
samAna avastu haikahA-na-kahAke barAbara athavA anuktatulya hai, kyoMki vizeSa-
rahita sAmAnya aura sAmAnya-zUnya vizeSa kahIM bhI ( bAhara-bhItara ) upalabdha
nahIM hotaa| jaba upalabdha nahIM hotA taba vizeSa-rahita sAmAnya hI athavA
sAmAnya-zUnya vizeSa hI vastukA svarUpa hai, isa prakArake Agraha-dvArA sva-
parako kaise ThagA jAya ? nahIM ThagA jAnA caahiye| vyAkhyA-bauddhoMkI mAnyatA
hai ki koI bhI vAkya hoM ve saba anyApoha-rUpa pratiSedhakA hI pratipAdana
karate haiM, vidhikA nhiiN| isa para AcArya kahate haiM :-vAkya ( vANI) kA yaha
svabhAva hai ki vaha anya vAkyoM dvArA pratipAdita arthakA nirbAdharUpase
pratiSedha karatA hai aura apane vidhirUpa artha-sAmAnyakA bhI kathana karatA
hai| yadi kevala anyApoharUpa pratiSedha hI vAcya ho to ukta prakArakA vAcya
AkAza-puSpakI taraha asat hai| hameM vizeSako chor3akara kevala sAmAnya aura
sAmAnyako chor3akara kevala vizeSa kahIM upalabdha nahIM hotaa| jaba ukta
prakArakA vAcya upalabdha

Page #173 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 104 Samantabhadra-Bharati  [If section 10 were not there, then why would we
engage in such an attachment, thinking that by means of a sentence, only
affirmation (vidhi) or negation (anyapoha) is spoken? Why would we engage in a
deceptive tendency or deceive others? Therefore, just as affirmation (vidhi)
alone is not established by means of a sentence, in the same way, negation
(anyapoha) alone is not established. But both are established, and this is the
nature of speech (vani).  **Abhipret-visheshaki prapti ka saccha sadhan
samanyavagvisheshe chenn shabdartho mrishha hi sa. Abhipret-visheshapte:
syatkara satya-lanchanah. ||112||**  'If it is said that a general sentence
(like 'asti') exists in the particular negation (anyapoha) of the other - it
indicates that, then this is not correct; because the general sentence is not in
the particular form of the word-meaning - it does not know or indicate the
particular situated in the intention - and therefore it is not true but a false
sentence. The true sign or mark of obtaining the particular situated in the
intention is 'syatvada' (statement preceded by the word 'syat') - when a
general-particular object is stated mainly in a general form, then its
particular form becomes secondary and is situated in the speaker's intention,
which is expressed or indicated by the word 'syat' used along with it. And
therefore, 'syatkara' is the true means and path of knowing the intended
particular. The intended is that which is real by means of its own form etc.
(svadravy-kshetra-kal-bhav) - not by means of the other's form etc.'
**Explanation:** The Buddhists say that the sentence that speaks of the general
in the form of affirmation also indicates the particular (anyapoha) - its
tendency is in that. But their statement is not consistent...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 104 samantabhadra-bhAratI [ pariccheda 10 nahIM hotA to hama aisA abhiniveza
karake ki vAkyake dvArA sva (vidhi) athavA para (pratiSedha-anyApoha ) hI kahA
jAtA hai, kyoM bhrAmaka pravRtti kareM yA dUsaroMko ThageM  /  ataH jisa prakAra
vAkyake dvArA kevala vidhikA hI niyamata nahIM hotA usI taraha kevala pratiSedha
( anyApoha ) kA bhI niyamana nahIM hotA  /  kintu ubhayakA niyamana hotA hai
aura yaha vAkya ( vANI ) kA svabhAva hai| abhipreta-vizeSakI prAptikA saccA
sAdhana sAmAnyavAgvizeSe cenna zabdArtho mRSA hi sA  /  abhipreta-vizeSApteH
syAtkAraH satya-lAJchanaH  /  / 112 /  /  'yadi yaha kahA jAya ki ( 'asti' jaisA
) sAmAnya vAkya parake abhAvarUpa ( anyApoha ) vizeSameM vartatA hai-use
pratipAdita karatA hai to yaha ThIka nahIM hai; kyoMki sAmAnyavAkya vizeSameM
zabdArtharUpa nahIM hai-abhiprAyameM sthita vizeSako nahIM janAtA athavA
pratipAdita nahIM karatA-aura isaliye satyarUpa na hokara mithyA-vAkya hai|
abhiprAyameM sthita jo vizeSa usakI prAptikA saccA lakSaNa athavA cinha
syAdvAda' ( syAt zabdapUrvaka bAda-kathana ) hai-sAmAnya-vizeSAtmaka vastukA
jaba mukhyataH sAmAnyarUpase kathana kiyA jAtA hai taba usakA vizeSarUpa gauNa
hokara vaktAke abhiprAyameM sthita hotA hai, jise sAthameM prayukta 'syAt' zabda
vyakta athavA sUcita karatA hai| aura isaliye 'syAtkAra' abhipreta-vizeSake
jAnanekA saccA sAdhana evaM mArga hai| abhipreta vahI hotA hai jo svarUpAdi (
svadravya-kSetra-kAla-bhAva ) ke dvArA sat hotA hai-pararUpAdike dvArA sat
nhiiN|' vyAkhyA-bauddhoMkA kathana hai ki vidhirUpa sAmAnyako kahanevAlA vAkya
bhI vizeSa ( anyApoha ) kA hI pratipAdana karatA hai-usImeM usakI pravRtti hotI
hai| para unakA yaha kathana saMgata

Page #174 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Karika 113: Devagam  **105 is not correct; because it does not establish the
meaning of the term "Anyapoha". The meaning of a word is considered to be that
which has its own inherent nature. There is no inherent nature in Anyapoha. In
such a situation, the sentence that speaks of the general rule in the form of a
law also becomes false according to your opinion. In reality, those sentences
are true which lead to the attainment of the specific meaning intended by them,
and such a sentence is possible only with the word "Syat" and it is through this
that truth (real meaning) is recognized. Because it enables people to attain the
specific meaning intended. Other (sentences devoid of Syatkara) do not lead to
the attainment of specific meaning. This is the special difference between
Syadvada and other philosophies.**  **Syadvada-samsthiti is that which is the
predicate, is the part of the desired meaning, is not contradictory to the
prohibited, and is the cause of the desired meaning. Similarly, the being-
worthy-of-being-taken-up and the being-worthy-of-being-given-up are also
Syadvada-samsthiti. ||113||**  **(Asti, etc.) which is the predicate - which is
intended by the mind, not due to fear, etc. - and is the cause of the desired
meaning, is non-contradictory to the prohibited - non-existence, etc. - that
which is not non-contradictory to non-existence, etc. cannot be the cause of the
desired meaning; because there is an inseparable relationship between law and
prohibition, without law there is no existence of prohibition, and without
prohibition there is no existence of law. And just as the predicate, being non-
contradictory to the prohibited, is established as the part-cause of the desired
meaning, in the same way, the being-worthy-of-being-taken-up and the being-
worthy-of-being-given-up of a thing is also established, otherwise not; because
if the predicate is absolute, there is a contradiction to the being-worthy-of-
being-given-up of something. If the prohibited is absolute, there is a
contradiction to the being-worthy-of-being-taken-up of something; according to
the opinion of the Syadvadi, the predicate is never absolutely prohibited; in
some way, there is a harmony between law and the prohibited.**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 kArikA 113] devAgama 105 nahIM hai; kyoMki isase anyApoha-zabdakA artha siddha
nahIM hotaa| zabdakA vahI artha mAnA jAtA hai jisameM usa zabdakI pravRtti ho  /
anyApohameM kisI bhI zabdakI pravRtti nahIM hotii| aisI sthitimeM vidhirUpa
sAmAnyako kahanevAlA vAkya bhI Apake matAnusAra mithyA ThaharatA hai  /
vAstavameM vahI vAkya satya haiM jisake dvArA apane abhipreta artha-vizeSakI
prApti hotI hai aura aisA vAkya 'syAt' zabdase yukta hI saMbhava hai aura usIse
satya ( yathArtha artha ) kI pahacAna hotI hai| kyoMki vaha logoMko abhipreta
artha-vizeSakI prApti karAtA hai| anya (syAtkArase rahita ) vAkyoMse
arthavizeSakI prApti nahIM hotii| yahI syAdvAda aura anyavAdoMmeM vizeSa antara
hai| syAdvAda-saMsthiti vidheyamIpsitArthAGgaM pratiSedhyA'virodhi yat  /
tathaivA''deya-heyatvamiti syAdvAda-saMsthitiH  // 113 //  '( asti ityAdirUpa )
jo vidheya hai-manake abhiprAyapUrvaka jisakA vidhAna kiyA jAtA hai, kisoke
bhayAdivaza nahIM-aura Ipsita-arthakriyAkA kAraNa hai vaha pratiSedhyaka-
nAstitvAdike sAtha avirodharUpa hai-jo nAstitvAdike sAtha avirodharUpa nahIM
vaha Ipsita-arthakriyAkA kAraNa bhI nahIM ho sakatA; kyoMki vidhi-pratiSedhake
paraspara avinAbhAva-sambandha hai, vidhike binA pratiSedhakA aura pratiSedhake
binA vidhikA astitva nahIM bntaa| aura jisa prakAra vidheya pratiSedhyakA
avirodhI Ipsita arthakriyAkA aMga-kAraNa siddha hai usI prakAra vastukA Adeya-
heyapanA hai, anyathA nahIM; kyoMki vidheyakA ekAnta honepara kisIke heyatvakA
virodha hotA hai| pratiSedhyakA ekAnta honepara kisIke AdeyatvakA virodha hotA
hai; syAdvAdIke abhiprAyAnusAra sarvathA vidheya hI pratiSedhya nahIM hotA;
kathaMcit vidhi-pratiSedhyake tAdAmya

Page #175 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Translation:  **106** **Samantbhadra-Bharati** [Chapter 10 has been
considered. Therefore, due to the special nature of affirmation and negation,
the Saptabhangi is being applied, leading to Syadvada. Thus, this is the correct
position of Syadvada (because it does not contradict any logic or scripture).
And therefore, O valiant Bhagavan! The conclusion we have reached, that "you are
the infallible and authoritative source due to your statements that do not
contradict logic or scripture," is impeccable - free from all objections.]  The
purpose of Aapta-Mimamsa is as follows: This Aapta-Mimamsa is prescribed for
those who desire the good. For the understanding of the specific meaning of
correct and incorrect teachings. ||114||  "Thus (in the scripture called
'Devagama', which has ten chapters), this Aapta-Mimamsa - the examination of the
omniscient - is intended for those who desire the good - primarily for the
Bhavyajivas who aspire for liberation and the three jewels (right faith, right
knowledge, and right conduct) that are its cause - for the understanding of the
specific meaning of correct and incorrect teachings. And thus, it is for the
attainment of faith, knowledge, and conduct." Thus ends the tenth chapter of the
Devagama Aapta-Mimamsa.  **Concluding Benediction for the Translator** Whose
righteous teachings in this world are marked by the infallible sign of Syadvada
- not absolute monism but relative pluralism, hence never failing - full of
compassion for all beings, possessing self-control, renunciation, and
meditation. ||1|| Whose teachings are enriched by logic and evidence, free from
all objections, and incomparable to all others. To that valiant one, we offer
our salutations. ||2|| [Whose righteous teachings in this world are marked by
the infallible sign of Syadvada - not absolute monism but relative pluralism,
hence never failing - full of compassion for all beings, possessing self-
control, renunciation, and meditation. ||1|| Whose teachings are enriched by
logic and evidence, free from all objections, and incomparable to all others. To
that valiant one, we offer our salutations. ||2||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 106 samantabhadra-bhAratI [pariccheda 10 mAnA gayA hai| ataH vidheya-
pratiSedhAtmaka vizeSake kAraNa saptabhaMgIke samAzrayase syAdvAda prakriyamANa
hotA hai| isa prakAra syAdvAdakI ( sarvatra yakti-zAstrA'virodhake kAraNa ) yaha
samyaka sthiti hai| aura isaliye he vIra bhagavan ! hamane jo yaha nizcaya kiyA
hai ki 'yukti-zAstrA'virodhivAkyake kAraNa Apa hI nidoSa Apta hai' vaha anavadya
hai-sarvaprakArase bAdhA-rahita hai|' Apta-mImAMsAkA uddezya itIyamAptamImAMsA
vihitA hitamicchatAm  /  samyagmithyopadezArtha-vizeSa-pratipattaye  // 114 //
'isa prakAra ( 'devAgama' nAmake svokta daza-paricchedAtmaka zAstrameM ) yaha
AptamImAMsA-sarvajJa-vizeSa-parIkSA-hita cAhane vAloMke-mukhyataH mokSa aura
usakA kAraNa samyagdarzanAdirUpa ratnatrayake abhilASI bhavyajIvoMke-samyak
upadeza aura mithyA upadezake artha-vizeSako pratipattike liyeupAdeya tathA
heyarUpase zraddhAna, jJAna aura samAcaraNakI prAptike liekI gaI hai|' iti
devAgamA''ptamImAMsAyAM dazamaH paricchedaH  /  anuvAdakIya-antya-maMgala yasya
sacchAsanaM loke syAdvAdA'mogha-lAJchanam  /  sarvabhUta-dayopetaM dama-tyAga-
samAdhibhRt  //  1 //  naya-pramANa-sampuSTaM sarva-bAdhA-vivarjitaM  /
sArvamanyairajavyaM ca taM vIraM praNidadhmahe  /  /  2  /  /  [jinakA samIcIna
zAsana isa lokameM syAdvAdarUpa amogha lakSaNase lakSita hai-sarvathA
ekAntavAdarUpa na hokara anekAntavAdAtmaka hai, isIse kabhI asaphala na honevAlA
hai-sarvaprANiyoMkI

Page #176 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  **Kārikā 114] Devāgama**  **107** I bow down to those glorious Vīra
Bhagavāns who are filled with compassion, subdue the senses, renounce
possessions, are eager for meditation and absorption, are replete with their
teachings, well-established by Nayas and Pramanas, free from all obstacles,
beneficial to all, and invincible by all other solitary rulers - no one can
conquer them.  **3** May the glorious Samantabhadra, the hero of this age, be
auspicious for us, whose praises are sung by great Munis like Akalankadeva,
Vidyānanda, Bhagavatzinaseṇa, and Vādirāja, the foremost, with their divine
words, who are immersed in devotion to him. May we, through his grace or by
worshipping him with joy, attain more and more of our own glory - the light of
our inner Lakshmi, the brilliance of our beauty, the wealth of our prosperity,
the power of our Saraswati, and the abundance of our Siddhi.  Thus ends the
Devāgama, also known as Āptā Mīmāṃsā Śāstra, composed by the incomparable, the
master of the twelve branches of knowledge, the jewel in the crown of all
logicians, the one adorned with the multitude of virtues like faith, knowledge,
and excellence, the Siddhasārasvata Swami Samantabhadra Ācārya, which is a
special understanding of the meaning of the right and wrong teachings. It is
completed with the clear meaning and translation by the hero of the age, the
youthful prince, the liberated sun, Muktāravi.  1. The word "Śrī" is used in all
the meanings expressed in the explanation of "nijasro" and which are intended
here.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 kArikA 114 ] devAgama 107 dayAse yukta hai, indiya-damana, parigraha-tyajana
aura dhyAna-samAdhikI tatparatAko lie tathA unakI zikSAoMse paripUrNa hai, nayoM
tathA pramANoMse bhale prakAra puSTa hai, sarvabAdhAoMse vivarjita hai, sabake
hitarUpa hai aura anya samasta ekAnta-zAsanoMke dvArA ajeya haikoI bhI use jIta
nahIM sakatA-una zrIvIra bhagavAnko maiM natamastaka hotA huuN|] yadbhaktibhAva-
niratA munayo'kalaMkavidyAdinanda-jinasena-suvAdirAjAH  /  gAyanti divya-
vacanaiH suyazAMsi yasya bhUyAcchiyai sa yugavIra-samantabhadraH  /  / 3 /  /
[jinakI bhaktimeM lIna hue akalaMkadeva, vidyAnandasvAmI, bhagavajjinasena aura
vAdirAja pramukha jaise mahAmuni apane divyavacanoM dvArA jinake suyazoMkA gAna
karate haiM ve yugavIra-isa yugake pradhAna puruSa-zrIsamantabhadrasvAmI hamArI
zrI'vRddhike lie nimittabhUta hoveM-unake prasAdase athavA prasannatApUrvaka
ArAdhanase hameM nijazrIkI-AtmIya lakSmI-jyoti, zobhA-prabhA sampatti-vibhUti,
zakti-sarasvatI aura siddhi-samRddhikI-adhikAdhika prApti hove  / ] iti
zrIniravadyasyAdvAdavidyAdhipati - sakalatArkikacakracUDAmaNi-
zraddhAguNajJatAdisAtizayaguNagaNavibhUSita-siddhasArasvata-
svAmisamantabhadrAcAryapraNItaM samyagmithyopadezArthavizeSapratipattirUpaM
devAgamA'paranAmA''ptamImAMsAzAstraM . yugavIra-jugalakizora-mukhtAraviracita-
spaSTArthAdiyuktA'nuvAdasamanvitaM samAptam  /  1. 'zrI' zabda una sabhI
arthoMmeM prayukta hotA hai jinheM 'nijazro' kI vyAkhyAmeM vyakta kiyA gayA hai
aura jo yahA~ vivakSita haiM  /

Page #177 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Devagam-Karika Anukramanika (Index of Verses) with Half-Verse Numbering
**Ka. Page No.** | **Ka. Page No.** ------- | -------- Ajnanaache vo bandho 96 |
93 | Evam vidhinisedhabhyam 21 | 22 Ajnanaanmohinobandho 98 | 94 | Kathanchitte
sadeveshttam 14 | 18 Advaitam na vina dvatad 27 | 26 | Karma-dvaitam phala-
dvaitam 25 | 25 Advatakantpakshe'pi 24 | 24 | Kamadiprabhavaschitram 99 | 94
Adhyatma bahirapyesha 2 | 4 | Karya-karana-nanatvam 61 | 54
Ananyataikante'nuunam 67 | 60 | Karya-bhrantena-bhrantih 68 | 61 Anapekshe
prithaktvaikyem 33 | 30 | Karya-dravyama naadi syat 10 | 16
Antarangaarthataikante 79 | 72 | Karyotpadah kshayo heto 58 | 51
Anyeshvananyashabdo'yam 44 | 38 | Kushala'kushalam karma 8 | 9
Abuddhipoorva'apekshaya 91 | 84 | Kramapitdvayad dvaitam 16 | 20
Abhavaikantpakshe'pi 12 | 17 | Kshanikaikant-pakshe'pi 41 | 36
Avaktvyachatushkatati 46 | 39 | Ghat-mouli-suvarnaarthi 59 | 52
Avastvanabhilapam syat 48 | 41 | Chatushkotevikalpasya 45 | 38
Asakyatvavadavacyam kim 50 | 43 | Jivashabda satrahyartha 84 | 76 Astitvam
pratishehyena 17 | 20 | Tattvajnanam pramanam te 101 | 96 Ahetukatvannasasya 52
| 45 | Tadatadvastu vagesha 110 | 102 Ashraya'ayi bhavana 64 | 58 |
Tirthakritsamayanam cha 3 | 5 Ittiyamaptanimamsa 114 | 114 | Tvammatamrita-
bahyanam 7 | 8 Upeksha phalamadhyasya 102 | 96 | Devagam-nabhoyan 13 |
Ekatve'nyatarabhava 69 | 61 | Desha-kala-visheshe'pi 63 | 57
Ekasya'anekavrittirna 62 | 56 | Daivadevaarth-siddhi shed 88 | 81 Eka'anek-
vikalpada 23 | 23 | Dosha'avaranayorhani 46 |

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 devAgama-kArikA'nukramaNikA kArikA''dhacaraNa kramAGkasahita kA0 pRSThAMka kA0
pRSThAMka ajJAnAcce vo bandho 96 93 evaM vidhiniSedhAbhyAM 21 22 ajJAnAnmohino
bandho 98 94 kathaMcitte sadeveSTaM 14 18 advaitaM na vinA dvatAd 27 26 karma-
dvaitaM phala-dvaitaM 25 25 advatakAntapakSe'pi 24 24 kAmAdiprabhavazcitra. 99
94 adhyAtma bahirapyeSa 2 4 kArya-kAraNa-nAnAtvaM 61 54 ananyataikAnte'NUnAM 67
60 kArya-bhrAnteraNa-bhrAntiH 68 61 anapekSe pRthaktvaikye 33 30 kArya-
dravyamanAdi syAt 10 16 antaraMgArthataikAnte 79 72 kAryotpAdaH kSayo heto- 58
51 anyeSvananyazabdo'yaM 44 38 kuzalA'kuzalaM karma 8 9 abuddhipUrvA'pekSAyA- 91
84 kramApitadvayAd dvaitaM 16 20 abhAvaikAntapakSe'pi 12 17 kSaNikaikAnta-
pakSe'pi 41 36 avaktavyacatuSkATi- 46 39 ghaTa-mauli-suvarNArthI 59 52
avastvanabhilApyaM syAt 48 41 catuSkoTevikalpasya 45 38 azakyatvAdavAcyaM kim 50
43 jIvazabdaH satrAhyArthaH 84 76 astitvaM pratiSedhyenA- 17 20 tattvajJAnaM
pramANaM te 101 96 ahetukatvAnnAzasya 52 45 tadatadvastu vAgeSA 110 102
AzrayA''yibhAvAnna 64 58 tIrthakRtsamayAnAM ca 3 5 ittIyamAptamImAMsA 114 114
tvanmatAmRta-bAhyAnAM 7 8 upekSA phalamAdyasya 102 96 devAgama-nabhoyAna- 1 3
ekatve'nyatarAbhAvaH 69 61 deza-kAla-vizeSe'pi 63 57 ekasyA'nekavRttirna 62 56
daivAdevArtha-siddhizced 88 81 ekA'neka-vikalpAdA- 23 23 doSA'varaNayorhAni- 4 6

Page #178 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  71 64 47 40 68 33 50 **Dravya-paryaya-yor-aikyam dravyadyantar-bhaavena
dharma-dharmyavinabhaavah** 75 **dharme dharme'nya evaartho** 22 **nayo-
panayaikaantaanaam** 107 100 **na saamaanyaatmano-deti** 57 **na hetu-phala-
bhaavaadi** 43 37 **naastitvam pratishe-dhyena** 18 21 **nityatvaikaanta-
pakshepa** 37 33 **nityam tat-pratyabhijnaanaat** 56 49 **niyamyaate'rtho
vaakyena** 109 101 **payovrato na dadhyatti** 60 53 **paapam dhruvam pare
duhkhaat punyam dhruvam svato duhkhaat** 93 88 **punya-paapa-kriyaa na syaat**
40 36 **prithaktvaikaanta-pakshe'pi** 28 27 92 85 **paurushaadeva siddhisvet**
89 82 **pramaana-kaarakair-vyakt** 38 34 36 31 81 74 **pramaana-gocarau santau
bahirangaarthat-aikaante buddhi-shabda-pramaanatvam buddhi-shabdaarth-
sanjnaasta** 85 77 **bhaavaprameyaa'pekshyaayam** 83 75 87 80 9 15
**bhaavaikaante padarthaanaam mithyaasamooho mithyaa** **Kaarika-
anukramaanikaa** **Chen** **yadi satsarvathaa kaarya satsarvathaa kaaryam
yadyaapekshika-siddhih syaat** 73 66 42 37  109 **vaktar-yanaapte yad-veto** 78
71 **vaktru-shrotru-pramaatrunaam** 86 78 **vaakyeshv-anekanta-dyoti** 103 97
**vaak-svabhaavo'nyavaag-artha** 111 103 **vidheya-pratishe-dhyaatmaa** 19 22
**vidheya-mipsitaarthaangaam** 113 105 **virupa-kaaryaarambhaaya** 53 46 13 17
32 29 70 63 77 70 **virodhaanno-bhayaikaatmyam virodhaanno-bhayaikaatmyam
virodhaanno-bhayaikaatmyam** 55 49 **virodhaanno-bhayaikaatmyam virodhaanno-
bhayaikaatmyam** 74 68 **virodhaanno-bhayaikaatmyam virodhaanno-bhayaikaatmyam**
82 75 **virodhaanno-bhayaikaatmyam** 90 84 **virodhaanno-bhayaikaatmyam** 94 90
**virodhaanno-bhayaikaatmyam** 97 94 **vivakshaa chaa'vivakshaa cha** 35 31
**vishuddhi-sankleshaangaam cet** 95 90 **shuddhyashuddhi punah shakti** 100 95
**shesh-bhangaracha netavyaah** 20 22 108 100 39 34 **sanjnaa-sankhya-
visheshaacha sa tvamevaasi nirdhosho** 31 28 **satsaamaanyaattu sarvaikyam
sadaatmana cha bhinnam cet** 30 28 **sadeva sarvam ko nechet sadharmanaiva
saadhyasya** 15 19 106 99 **santanah samudaaya-scha** 29 27  72 64 68

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 71 64 47 40 68 33 50 dravya - paryAyayoraikyaM dravyAdyantarabhAvena dharma-
dharmyavinAbhAvaH 75 dharme dharme'nya evArtho 22 nayopanayaikAntAnAM 107 100 na
sAmAnyAtmanodeti 57 na hetu-phala- bhAvAdi- 43 37 nAstitvaM pratiSedhyenA- 18 21
nityatvaikAnta-pakSepa 37 33 nityaM tatpratyAbhijJAnAt 5649 niyamyate'rtho
vAkyena 109101 payovrato na dadhyatti 60 53 pApaM dhruvaM pare duHkhAt puNyaM
dhruvaM svato duHkhAt 93 88 puNya-pApa-kriyA na syAt 40 36 pRthaktvaikAnta-
pakSe'pi 28 27 9285 pauruSAdeva siddhizvet - 89 82 pramANa-kArakairvyakta 38 34
36 31 81 74 pramANa - gocarau santau bahiraMgArthataikAnte buddhi-zabda-
pramANatvaM baddhi-zabdArtha-saMjJAstA- 85 77 bhAvaprameyA'pekSAyAM 83 75 8780 9
15 bhAvekAnte padArthAnAm mithyAsamUho mithyA kArikAnukramANikA cena yadi
satsarvathA kArya satsarvathA kAryaM yadyApekSika-siddhiH syAt 73 66 4237 109
vaktaryanApte yadvetoH 78 71 vaktR-zrotR-pramAtRNAM 86 78 vAkyeSvanekAnta-dyotI
10397 vAksvabhAvo'nyavAgartha - 111103 vidheya-pratiSedhyAtmA 19 22
vidheyamIpsitArthAGgaM 113 105 virUpa- kAryArambhAya 53 46 13 17 3229 70 63.
7770 virodhAnnobhayaikAtmyaM virodhAnnobhayaikAtmyaM virodhAnnobhayaikAtmyaM 55
49 virodhAnnobhayaikAtmyaM virodhAnnobhayaikAtmyaM 74 68 virodhAnnobhayaikAtmyaM
virodhAnnobhayaikAtmyaM 8275 virodhAnnobhayakAtmyaM 9084 virodhAnnobhayaikAtmyaM
9490 virodhAnnobhayaikAtmyaM 9794 vivakSA cA'vivakSA ca 35 31 vizuddhi-
saMklezAGgaM cet 9590 zuddhayazuddhI punaH zaktI 100 95 zeSabhaMgAraca netavyAH
20 22 108100 39 34 saMjJA - saMkhyA - vizeSAcca sa tvamevA'si nirdoSo 31 28
satsAmAnyAttu sarvaikyaM sadAtmanA ca bhinnaM cet 30 28 sadeva sarvaM ko necchet
sadharmaNaiva sAdhyasya 1519 106 99 santAnaH samudAyazca 29 27 7264 68

Page #179 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
110 Samantabhadra-Bharati Sarvatha-anabhisambandhaḥ 66 60 Siddham ced hetutaḥ
sarva 76 69 Sarvatmakam tad ekam syāt 11 16 Sakṣmāntarita-dūrārthāḥ 5 7 Sarvān
tāś ced avaktavya- 49 42 Skandha-santatayaś caiva 54 47 Sādhya-sādhana-vijñapte-
80 73 Syādvada-kevalajñāne 105 99 Sāmānyavāgviśeṣe cet 112 111 Syādvadaḥ
sarvathaikānta- 104 98 Sāmānyam samavāyaś ca 65 59 Hinasty anabhisandhāt 51 44
Sāmānyārthā giro 'nyeṣām 31 28 Hetor advaita-siddhiś ced- 26 25

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 110 samantabhadra-bhAratI sarvathA'nabhisambandhaH 66 60 siddhaM ceddhetutaH
sarva 76 69 sarvAtmakaM tadekaM syAt 11 16 sakSmA'ntarita-dUrArthAH 5 7
sarvAntAzcedavaktavyA- 49 42 skandhasantatayazcaiva 54 47 sAdhya-sAdhana-
vijJapte- 80 73 syAdvAda-kevalajJAne 105 99 sAmAnyavAgvizeSe cet 112 111
syAdvAdaH sarvathaikAnta- 104 98 sAmAnyaM samavAyazca 65 59
hinastyanabhisaMdhAta 51 44 sAmAnyA'rthA giro'nyeSAM31 28 hetoradvaita-
siddhizceda- 26 25

Page #180 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Devagamiki Pramukh - Shabd-Soochi Karika - Sankhyank Sahith  **A**  *
**Akashay** * **Akasmat Akushalakarma** * **Agoras-Vrat** * **Achetana** *
**Ajnan, Nash** (12, 96, 98, 102) * **Bhranti Atarkagochar** * **Adhyatma** *
**Anantata** * **Atavak** * **Atishayan** * **Advait Siddhi** * **Advetakant
Paksh** * **Anant Dharma-Dharmi Ananya, -Taikant** * **Ananvaya** * **Anapekshe,
Kshy** * **Anabhilapya** * **Anabhisandhimat Anavasthit** (92) * **Anapt** (56)
* **Anadi** (8) * **Anadyant** (60) * **Anapekshik Siddhi** (92) * **Anarh**
(68) * **Anirmukch** (100) * **Anishta** (16, 24, 27) * **Anumeya** (26) *
**Anushachat Anekant Dyot** (24) * **Ant** (2) * **Antar** (10) *
**Antarangaarth Taikant** (22, 35) * **Antaritatha** (44, 53, 67) * **Anyatha**
(73) * **Anyapoh-Vyatikram** (78) * **Anvaya** (62) * **Apahnv** (88) *
**Apakya-Shakti** (91) * **Aprithak** (51) * **Ap** (43, 47) * **A** (79) *
**A** (5) * **A** (96, 98, 109) * **A** (11) * **A** (56) * **A** (9, 12) *
**A** (100) * **A** (28)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 devAgamakI pramukha - zabda-sUcI kArikA - saMkhyAGka sahita a akaSAya akasmAt
akuzalakarma agorasa-vrata acetana ajJAna, nAza 12,96,98,102 bhrAnti
atarkagocara adhyAtma anantatA atAvaka atizAyana a advaitasiddhi
advetakAntapakSa anantadharmA-dharmI ananya, -taikAnta ananvaya anapekSe, kSya
anabhilApya anabhisaMdhimat anavasthita 92 56 8 anApta 60 92 68 100 16,24,27 26
24 2 10 22,35 44,53,67 anAdi anAdyanta anApekSikasiddhi 43 33,58 48 51 21
anArhat anirmokSa aniSTa anumeya anuzAzat anekAntadyotI anta antara 110 103 7,8
- 10,12,13, 22 32,45,48,50,55,70, 74,77,82,90, 94, 97 103. antaraMgArthataikAnta
antaritArtha anyathA anyApoha-vyatikrama anvaya apahnava apAkya-zakti apRthak
9,10,100 73 78 62 88 91 51 43,47 79 5 96,98, 109 11 56 9,12 100 28

Page #181 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 112 Samantbhadra Expectation 19 Avatavyacaturkotivikalpa 46 Apoha 11 Avastu
33, 46, 48, 105 Abodha 50 Avacya, Avacyataikanta 13, 14, Abuddhipoorvaapeksha 91
32, 50, 55, 70, 74, 82, Abhava 9, 10, 12, 30, 31, 37 90, 94, 27 41, 50, 62
Avichchhid Abhavapadarth Avinabhava 75 Abhavaikantapaksa 12 Avinabhaavi, -bhu
17, 18, 69 Abheda 17, 34, 36 Avibhradabhava sambandh 107 Abhisandhimat Aviruddha
Amogha Avirodha, -dhi 6, 106, 113 Amoha 98 Avivaksha Ayukta 53 Avishesha,
Avisheshyatva 53, 109 Ayoga 45 Avisheshya-visheshana artha, -sanjna 5, 9, 21,
22, 31, Avyatireka 44, 66, 76, 79 Ashakti, -ashakyatva 16, 50 81, 84, 88, 102
Ashuddhi 99, 100 103, 108-114 Asat 14, 15, 30, 35, 42, Arthakrit 21, 108 47, 87
Arthayogitva 103 Asvarupa Artha-vishesha-pratipatti 114 Ashtaanghetuka Artha-
vishesha-vyanjak Asancharadosha Arthasiddhi 88 Asarvanta Arthi 35, 60 Asanskruta
54 Apit Asanhatatva Aham 95 Asakshta 105 Avatavya 16, 46, 49 Asadharanahetu
Avatavyottarabhang 16 Asukha 16 Asaha 34

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 112 samantabhadra apekSA 19 avaktavyacatuSkoTivikalpa 46 apoha 11 avastu
33,46,48,105 abodha 50 avAcya, avAcyataikAnta 13,14, abuddhipUrvApekSA 91
32,50,55,70,74,82, abhAva 9,10,12,30,31,37 90,94,27 41,50,62 avicchid
abhAvapadArtha avinAbhAva 75 abhAvaikAntapakSa 12 avinAbhAvi,-bhU 17,18,69
abheda 17,34,36 avibhrADbhAvasambandha 107 abhisandhimat aviruddha amogha
avirodha,-dhi 6,106,113 amoha 98 avivakSA ayukta 53 avizeSa, avizeSyatva 53,109
ayoga 45 avizeSya-vizeSaNa artha,-saMjJA 5,9,21,22,31, avyatireka 44,66, 76, 79
azakti ,-azakyatva 16,50 81,84,88,102 azuddhi 99,100 103,108-114 asat
14,15,30,35,42, arthakRt 21,108 47,87 arthayogitva 103 asvarUpa artha-vizeSa-
pratipatti 114 aSTAGgahetuka artha-vizeSa-vyaJjaka asaMcaradoSa arthasiddhi 88
asarvAnta arthI 35,60 asaMskRta 54 apita asaMhatatva ahaMn 95 asAkSAt 105
avaktavya 16,46,49 asAdhAraNahetu avaktavyottarabhaMga 16 asukha 16 asahA 34 |

Page #182 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Word List **102** **78** Ahetu, Katva 19, 27, 52 Upaadan-Niyam A Upaadhi
Aagam **1, 76, 78** Upeksha Aagam-Sadhit Ubhayekatmya 13, 32, 55, 70, Atman-Tma
19, 30, 57 **74, 77, 82, 90, 94, 97.** Aadan-Hanadhi, Aady 102 Aananty Aadey-Tva
. 104, 113 Ekasantana Apekshik-Siddhi Ekant , 9, 12, 13, 24, 28 Apt,-ta 3, 7,
78, 114 **33, 37, 39, 41, 55** Apt-Mimamsa **114** **61, 67, 70, 74, 77** Apt-
Bhiman-Dagdh **78, 81, 82, 90, 94, 97, 104, 107, 108** Aabhas 79, 81, 83 Aavaran
**4** Ekant-Graha-Rakt Aashray **64, 65** Ekant-Paksh 12, 24, 28, 37, 41 Aashray
Aashrayayi-Bhav Aiky **33, 34, 71** Aashrayi Asrav . 95 Kathanchit **14** Karma
**8, 25, 96** Indriy-Arth Karma-Dvat Isht **6, 7, 14, 91** Karma-Bandhan-Anuroop
Ipsit-Arth-Ang **113** Kamadi-Prabhav 13, 32, 45, 50, 55, Karak 24, 37, 38, 75
**70, 75, 77, 82, 84, 90, 94, 97** Karan **61, 64, 68** Karak-Gyapaka-Ang 75
Utpad **58, 59** Kary 10, 21, 39, 41, 42, **2, 57** **53, 58, 61, 63, 68, 81**
Upanay-Ekant **38** Ukti **25** Uday

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zabda-sUcI 102 78 ahetu, katva 19,27,52 upAdAna-niyAma A upAdhi Agama 1,76,78
upekSA AgamasAdhita ubhayaikAtmya 13,32,55,70, Atman-tmA 19,30,57 74,77,82,90,
AdAna-hAnadhI, Adya 102 94,97. Anantya Adeya-tva . 104,113 ekasantAna
ApekSikasiddhi ekAnta ,9,12,13,24,28 Apta,-tA 3,7,78,114 33,37,39,41,55
AptamImAMsA 114 61,67,70,74,77 AptabhimAnadagdha 78,81,82,90,94, AbhAsa 79,81,83
97,104,107,108 AvaraNa 4 ekAntagraharakta Azraya 64,65 ekAntapakSa
12,24,28,37,41 AzrayAyibhAva aikya 33,34,71 AzrayI Asrava . 95 kathaMcit 14
karma 8,25,96 indiyArtha karmadvata iSTa 6,7,14,91 karmabandhAnurUpa
IpsitArthAGga 113 kAmAdiprabhava 13,32,45,50,55, kAraka 24,37,38,75
70,75,77,82,84, kAraNa 61,64,68 90,94,97 kAraka-jJApakAGga 75 utpAda 58,59 kArya
10,21,39,41,42, 2,57 53,58,61,63,68, upanayaikAnta 81 38 25 ukti udaya |

Page #183 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 114 Samantbhadra-Bharati 68 o Nov 0 Y 15 58 Jāv 56 105 Jñeya
Kāryakāraṇanānātva 61 Chatuṣṭaya Kāryajanma 42 Cāmarādivibhūti Kāryadravya 10
Citta,-Santatināśa 51, 52 Kāryabhranti Citra Kāryaling Cideva Kāryasiddhi 81
Jāti 58, 68 Kāryotpada Jīva,-Śabda 84, 99 Kālabheda Jñāna 30, 96, 98, 101, 105
Kimvattaciddvidhi 104 Jñānāstoka Kuśalakarma Jñāpaka 75 Kevalajñāna 30, 16
Kevali Jñeyānantyā Kramabhavi Kramarpitadva Tattva 45, 60, 101, 105, Kriyā 110
24, 40 Tattvajñāna 101 Kṣaṇika 11, 13, 41, 56 Tattvānyatva Kṣaṇikaikāntapaksa 41
Tattvārthadeśanā Kha, Ga Tadtadvastu Khapuṣpa 42. 58, 66, 111 Tannimbham Khar-
Viṣāṇa 54 Tarkagochara Gati, Gamy 76, 103 Tīrtha-Tīrthakṛtsamaya Girā Tyāga Guṇa
28, 36, 61, Guṇa-Guṇyanayatā Dadhivat Guṇa-Mukhya-Vivakṣā Divaukas, Divya 0 W0 0
0 2 Guru Com Dūrārtha Catuṣkoṭi-Vikalpa 45, 46 Dūṣaṇam WW

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 114 samantabhadra-bhAratI 68 o Nov 0 Y 15 58 jAva 56 105 jJeya
kAryakAraNanAnAtva 61 catuSTaya kAryajanma 42 cAmarAdivibhUti kAryadravya 10
citta,-santatinAza 51, 52 kAryabhrAnti citra kAryaliGga cideva kAryasiddhi 81
jAti 58, 68 kAryotpAda jIva,-zabda 84, 99 kAlabheda jJAna 30, 96, 98, 101, 105
kiMvattacidvidhi 104 jJAnastoka kuzalakarma jJApaka 75 kevalajJAna 30, 16 kevalI
jJeyAnantya kramabhAvi kramArpitadvaya tattva 45, 60, 101, 105, kriyA 110 24, 40
tattvajJAna 101 kSaNika 11, 13, 41, 56 tattvAnyatva kSaNikaikAntapakSa 41
tattvArthadezanA kha, ga tadatadvastu khapuSpa 42. 58, 66, 111 tannibhaM khara-
viSANa 54 tarkagocara gati, gamya 76, 103 tIrtha-tIrthakRtsamaya girA tyAga guNa
28, 36, 61, guNa-guNyanyatA dadhivata guNa-mukhya-vivakSA divaukas, divya 0 W0 0
0 2 guru Com dUrArtha catuSkoTi-vikalpa 45, 46 dUSaNaM WW

Page #184 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 115 29, 111 . 47 30 **Word List** **Dṛṣṭa-dṛṣṭabheda** 7, 24 **Niraṅkuśa**
deva-, devāgama 1 **Nirapeksa-naya** 108 **Deśa-kāla-viśeṣa** 63 **Nirdosa**
daiva 88, 89, 91 **Niṣedha** dosa 4, 6, 56, 62, 80 **Niṇhava** 10, 29, 81, 83
**Dravya** 10, 34, 47, 71, 107 **Nyāya** 13, 32, 55, 70, **Dravyādyantarabhāva**
77, 82, 90, 94, **Viṭ (ṣ)** **Dvitvasaṅkhyāvirodha** - **Pakṣa** 12, 24, 28,
**Dvat** 24, 26, 27 **Payovrata** **Paramārthaviparyaya** **Dharma** 10, 19, 22,
75 **Paraloka** **Dharma-dharmyavinābhāva** 75 **Parastha** **Dharmī** 17, 18,
22, 75 **Pariṇāma,-viśeṣa** 39, **Dhruva** 92, 93, 96 **Pariṇāmapraklumpti**
**Paryāya** **Nabhoyāna** **Pākyashakti** **Pāpa,-pāpāsrva** 40, 92, 93,
**Naya** 14, 23, 101, 106, 108 **Nayayoga** 14, 20 **Puṇya-pāpa-kriyā**
**Nayaviśārada** **Puṇya-,puṇyāsrva** 9, 93, 95 **Nayāpekṣa** **Pṛthaktva**
(pṛthak) 28, 33, 34, **Nayapanayakaṇṭa** 43, 58 **Nāśotpāda,-di** 59, 65
**Pṛthaktvaikaṇṭapaksa** . 28 **Nānātva** 61, 72 **Pauraṣa** 88, 89, 91
**Nityatvaikaṇṭa-pakṣa** 37, 39 **Prakriyā** 23, 48 **Nipāta** 103
**Pratijñāhetudoṣa** 80 **Nimitta** 92, 93 **Pratiṣedha** 27, 52, 111 **Niyama,
niyāma** 58, 100, 42 **Pratiṣedhya** 17, 19, 27, 113 40 23 < 107 r
iARMERAPHinment

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 115 29, 111 . 47 30 zabda-sUcI dRSTa-dRSTabheda 7, 24 niraMkuza deva-,devAgama
1 nirapekSa-naya 108 deza-kAla-vizeSa 63 nirdoSa daiva 88, 89, 91 niSedha doSa
4, 6, 56, 62, 80 ninhava 10, 29, 81, 83 dravya 10, 34, 47, 71, 107 nyAya 13, 32,
55, 70, dravyAdyantarabhAva 77, 82, 90, 94, viT (Sa) dvitvasaMkhyAvirodha -
pakSa 12, 24, 28, dvata 24, 26, 27 payovrata paramArthaviparyaya dharma 10, 19,
22, 75 paraloka dharmadharmyavinAbhAva 75 parastha dharmI 17, 18, 22, 75
pariNAma,-vizeSa 39, dhruva 92, 93, 96 pariNAmapraklupti paryAya nabhoyAna
pAkyazakti pApa,-pApAsrava 40, 92, 93, naya 14, 23, 101,106, 108 nayayoga 14, 20
puNya-pApa-kriyA nayavizArada puNya-,puNyAsrava 9,93, 95 nayApekSa pRthaktva
(pRthak) 28, 33, 34, nayapanayaikAnta 43, 58 nAzotpAda,-di 59, 65
pRthaktvaikAntapakSa . 28 nAnAtva 61, 72 pauruSa 88, 89, 91 nityatvaikAnta-pakSa
37, 39 prakriyA 23, 48 nipAta 103 pratijJAhetudoSa 80 nimitta 92, 93 pratiSedha
27, 52, 111 niyama, niyAma 58, 100, 42 pratiSedhya 17, 19, 27, 113 40 23 < 107 r
iARMERAPHinment

Page #185 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##    **10** **S** **A** **M** **86** **M** **116** Samantbhadra-Bharati
Pratisedhyavirodhi 113 Buddhipramanatva **87** Pratibimbaka **85**
Buddhyasancharadosha Pratyaksha-adi 5,76 Bodha **12,85,86** Pratyabhijna-, na
41-56 Pradhvansadharma-Prachyava Bhang, Bhangini 16,20,22,104 Prama-Promokti
**1.86** Bhagaabhava, Bhagitva 62 Praman-Phal 12,36,38,79,81, _ Bhava
9,10,12,24,29,40,41, 83,87,102 43,47,64,71,83 Pramanagocara **36**
Bhavaprameyaapeksha Pramanabhasa-Ninhava 79,81,83 Bhavaapanhavavadi Pramata,
Pramabhranti Bhavaikanta Prameya Bhutachatuska Pramoda **59** Bheda
17,18,24,33,34,36,47, Prayojanadhibheda 56,72,105 Bhedabhedavivaksha Prasiddha
**34,36** Bhranti-Sanjna 67,68,84,86 Pragabhava Mat, Matamrita 7,76,100
Pratyabhava **29,40,41** Mahan F, V Madhyasthya Phal-Dwaita **1,44,84** Bandha
25,40,96,98,99 Mayadhibhrantisanjna 84 Bandha-Mokshadvaya (Dvat) 25 Mayavi
Bahirantarmalakshaya **4** Mithya-Samuha **108,114** Bahirangarthataikanta 81
Mithyaikantata **108** Bahihprameyaapeksha 84,86 Mithyopadesha Bahirantarupaadhi
**40** Mukhya, Mukhyartha Bahyartha **86,87** Murta-Karana-Karyya Buddhi, Sanjna
56,79,85,87,91 Mrusha 31,44,49,69,79,110, Buddhipurvavyapeksha 112    | **25**
Maya

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 10 s ` m 86 m 116 samantabhadra-bhAratI pratiSedhyAvirodhi 113 buddhipramANatva
87 pratibimbaka 85 buddhayasaMcaradoSa pratyakSa-Adi 5,76 bodha 12,85,86
pratyabhijJA-, na 41-56 pradhvaMsadharma-pracyava bhaMga, bhaMginI 16,20,22,104
pramA-pramokti 1.86 bhAgAbhAva, bhAgitva 62 pramANa-phala 12,36,38,79,81, _
bhAva 9,10,12,24,29,40,41, 83,87,102 43,47,64,71,83 pramANagocara 36
bhAvaprameyApekSA pramANAbhAsa-ninhava 79,81,83 bhAvApanhavavAdI pramAtA,
pramAbhrAnti bhAvaikAnta prameya bhUtacatuSka pramoda 59 bheda
17,18,24,33,34,36,47, prayojanAdibheda 56,72,105 bhedAbhedavivakSA prasiddha
34,36 bhrAnti-saMjJA 67,68,84,86 prAgabhAva mata, matAmRta 7,76,100 pratyabhAva
29,40,41 mahAn pha, va mAdhyasthya phala-dvaita 1,44,84 bandha 25,40,96,98,99
mAyAdibhrAntisaMjJA 84 bandha-mokSadvaya (dvata) 25 mAyAvI bahirantarmalakSaya 4
mithyA-samUha 108,114 bahiraGgArthataikAnta 81 mithyaikAntatA 108
bahiHprameyApekSA 84,86 mithyopadeza bahirantarupAdhi 40 mukhya, mukhyArtha
bAhyArtha 86,87 mUrta-kAraNa-kArya buddhi, saMjJA 56,79,85,87,91 mRSA
31,44,49,69,79,110, buddhipUrvavyapekSA 112 | 25 mAyA

Page #186 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 117 **Yukta** **63** **Vimokṣa** **Word-List** **110** **Vidya-vidyadvaya
(dvat)** **25** **Mokṣa** **25, 40, 52, 98** **Vidvān** **Moha, -mohi** **98**
**Vidvit** **13, 32, 55, 70, 72, 77, Y, R, L** **82, 90, 94, 97** **95**
**Vidhi** **21, 47, 65, 109** **Yukti** **6** **Vidheya-pratiṣedhyātmā** **19**
**Yuktiśāstrāvirodhīvāk** **6** **Viparyaya, Viparȳāsa** **48, 49, 15**
**Yugapat-sarvabhāsana** **101** **Vibhūti** **Yuta-siddhī** **Yoga, Yogitva**
**14, 20, 103** **Viruddhārthamata** **Rāga** **2, 93** **Viruddhārthābhidhāyī**
**Rūpa** **9, 15** **Virūpakāryārambha** **Lakṣaṇa-viśeṣa** **58, 72**
**Virodha** **3, 6, 13, 20, 32, 55, 69** **Loka-dvat** **25.** **70, 74, 77, 82,
90, 94, 97** **Vivakṣā** **17, 18, 34, 36** **Vaktā** **86** **Viśuddhayanga**
**Vastu** **48, 108, 110** **Viśeṣa-tā** **31, 57, 63, 71, 73,** **Vāk (vāc)**
**6, 26, 110, 112** **106, 111, 112, 114** **Vākya** **12, 78, 79, 86, 103,**
**Viśeṣaka** **104** **109, 110** **Viśeṣaṇa** **17, 18, 35, 46, 103**
**Vāksvabhāva** **111** **Viśeṣavyajñaka** **Vādin, -vādī** **7, 12**
**Viśeṣya** **19, 35, 46** **Vāraṇa** **109** **Vihita** **114** **Vikalpa**
**23, 45, 46** **Vītamoha** **Vikārya** **38** **Vītarāga** **Vikīyā** **37**
**Vṛtti-doṣa** **62, 63** **Vigrahādimāhodaya** **2** **Vaidharmya** **Vi
jñapti-mātratā** **80** **Vyakt, Vyakti** **38, 57, 100** **98** **93** **18**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 117 yukta 63 vimokSa zabda-sUcI maSAvAkya 110 vidyAvidyAdvaya (dvata) 25 mokSa
25,40,52,98 vidvAn moha,-mohI 98 vidviT 13,32,55,70,72,77, ya, ra, la
82,90,94,97 95 vidhi 21,47,65,109 yukti 6 vidheya-pratiSedhyAtmA 19
yuktizAstrAvirodhivAk 6 viparyaya, viparyAsa 48,49,15 yugapatsarvabhAsana 101
vibhUti yutasiddhi yoga, yogitva 14,20,103 virudvArthamata rAga 2,93
virudvArthAbhidhAyI rUpa 9,15 virUpakAryArambha lakSaNa-vizeSa 58,72 virodha
3,6,13,20,32,55,69 loka-dvata 25. 70,74,77,82,90,94,97 vivakSA 17,18,34,36 vaktA
86 vizuddhayaGga vastu 48,108,110 vizeSa-tA 31,57,63,71,73, vAk (vAc)
6,26,110,112 106,111,112,114 vAkya 12,78,79,86,103, vizeSaka 104 109,110
vizeSaNa 17,18,35,46,103 vAkasvabhAva 111 vizeSavyaMjaka vAdin,-vAdI 7,12
vizeSya 19,35,46 vAraNa 109 vihita 114 vikalpa 23,45,46 vItamoha vikArya 38
vItarAga vikiyA 37 vRtti-doSa 62,63 vigrahAdimahodaya 2 vaidharmya vijJapti-
mAtratA 80 vyakta, vyakti 38,57,100 98 93 18

Page #187 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 118 Samantbhadra-Bharati Vyatikama 11 Satyanritavyavastha Vyapēksha 91
Sadātma Vyārtha 95 Sadharma Vyāja 50 Santati Santāna-, Vān Shakti 16, 71, 100
Santānāntara Shaktimacchhaktibhāva 71 Saptabhanganyāpēksha Shabda-, Sanjñā 19,
44, 84, 85, 87, 52, 54 29, 43, 45 Sh 4 104 112 Samaya Tur M Shabdagochara 19
Samavāya, Yī 11, 65, 66 Shabdapramānatva 87 Samāgama Shabdārtha 112
Samānadeshatā Shuddhi Samudāya Shēsha 4, 16, 20, 22, 69, 102 Samyagupadēsha
Shoka 59 Sarvam 3, 5, 7, 9, 11, 14, 34, Shrotā 86 39, 42, 45, 47, 49, 66, 72,
76, 81, 89, Sanklēsha-, Sanklēshānga 95 101, 104, 105 Sankhyā-, Viśēsha 69, 72
Sarvajña-Sansthiti Sanghāta 67 Sarvatattvaprakāshan 105 Sanjñā-Viśēsha 72, 84,
85 Sarvathā 7, 11, 14, 39, 42, 66, 72 Sanjñātva 84 Sarvathāikānta-Tyāga 7, 104
27, 47 Sarvātmika 9.11 .. Sat 14, 15, 30, 34, 36, Sarvaikya 39, 42, 47, 57, 87
Sahā’vāchya Satsāmānya 34 Sahētuka Satya . 2, 110 Samvṛtti-, Samvṛttitva 36, 44,
49, Satyalāñchana 54, 69 Sanjñī in aer

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 118 samantabhadra-bhAratI vyatikama 11 satyAnRtavyavasthA vyapekSA 91 sadAtmA
vyartha 95 sadharmA vyAja 50 santati santAna-,vAna zakti 16,71,100 santAnAntara
zaktimacchaktibhAva 71 saptabhaMganayApekSa zabda-,saMjJA 19,44,84,85,87, 52,54
29,43,45 za 4 104 112 samaya Tur ma zabdagocara 19 samavAya, yI 11,65,66
zabdapramANatva 87 samAgama zabdArtha 112 samAnadezatA zuddhi samudAya zeSa
4,16,20,22,69,102 samyagupadeza zoka 59 sarvaM 3,5,7,9,11,14,34, zrotA 86
39,42,45,47,49, 66,72,76,81,89, saMkleza-,saMklezAGga 95 101,104,105
saMkhyA,-vizeSa 69,72 sarvajJa-saMsthiti saMghAta 67 sarvatattvaprakAzana 105
saMjJA-vizeSa 72,84,85 sarvathA 7,11,14,39,42,66,72 saMjJAtva 84 sarvathaikAnta-
tyAga 7,104 27,47 sarvAtmaka 9.11 .. sat 14,15,30,34,36, sarvaikya
39,42,47,57,87 sahA'vAcya satsAmAnya 34 sahetuka satya . 2,110
saMvRtti-,saMvRtitva 36, 44, 49, satyalAJchana 54, 69 saMjJI in aer

Page #188 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Entity** Directly, Directly Means Means-pollution, Means-cognition Similarity
Common cause Object, Object-attribute, Object-means-cognition 12, 13, 33, 80
Word-list 5, 113 Syadvada-non-modified 105 Syadvada-logic-knowledgeable 100
Relative General (soul) - ta Syatkara  Syadvada-entity Self-domain 17, 29, 106
Self-other-enemy, Self-fate-self-effort 34 19, 26, 78, 80, 106 Nature 19 Form 80
Form-etc-fourfold, Self-characteristic - special 108 31, 34 57, 61, 65, 66, 73,
111, 112 12 80 General-that-otherness General-speech General-meaning, General-
absence, Proven, Proof Happiness Subtle-meaning Skandha, Skandha-series State,
State-origin-decay 54 Cause-conjunction Syat, Syadvada 13, 31, 55, 70, Cause-
proven 74, 77, 82, 90, 94, 97, Cause-object 61 112 31 26, 63, 76 92, 93, 95
Self-other-state, Self-cause, Self-independence 55, 70, 74, 77, 82, 90, Self-
meaning, General Self-desired Violence, Cause Cause 54 Cause-word 54, 59 Cause-
decay H 119 101, 103, 106 Heya-tva 112 Yadeya-special 101 13, 32, 94, 97 113 102
8 91 100, 111 9, 15, 75 15 72 95 4, 16, 99 64 111 4, 16, 19, 26, 27, 33 34, 52,
53, 58, 76 78, 80, 84, 99 52 84 58 53 78 26, 78 104, 113 104

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 saMsthiti sAkSAt sAdi sAdhana sAdhanadUSaNa sAdhanavijJapti sAdharmya
sAdhAraNahetu sAdhya sAdhyadharma sAdhyasAdhanavijJapti 12,13,33,80 zabda-sUcI
5,113 syAdvAdanayasaMskRta 105 syAdvAdanyAya-vidviT 100 sApekSa sAmAnya (nyAtmA
) - tA syAtkAra syAdvAdasaMsthiti svagocara 17,29,106 sva-para-vairI svadaiva-
svapauruSa 34 19,26,78,80,106 svabhAva 19 svarUpa 80 svarUpAdicatuSTaya
svalakSaNa - vizeSa 108 31, 34 57,61,65,66,73, 111, 112 12 80
sAmAnyatadvadanyatva sAmAnyavAk sAmAnyArtha, sAmAnyAbhAva siddha, siddhi sukha
sUkSmArtha skandha, skandhasantati sthiti sthityutpattivyaya 54 hetusamAgama
syAt, syAdvAda 13,31,55,70, hetusAdhita 74,77,82,90,94,97, hetusAdhya 61 112 31
26,63,76 92, 93,95 sva-para-stha svahetu svAtaMtrya 55,70,74,77,82,90, svArtha
sAmAnya sveSTa hiMsA hetu hetu 54 hetuzabda 54,59 hetukSaya ha 119 101, 103, 106
heya-yatva 112 yAdeya vizeSaka 101 13,32, 94,97 113 102 8 91 100,111 9,15,75 15
72 95 4,16,99 64 111 4,16,19,26,27,33 34,52,53, 58, 76 78,80,84,99 52 84 58 53
78 26,78 104,113 104

Page #189 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Please provide the text you would like translated. I need the text to translate
it into English.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================


Page #190 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Printer: Mahavira Press, Bhelupur, Varanasi-221001 For Private & Personal use
only

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
mudraka : mahAvIra presa, bhelUpura, vArANasI-221001 For Private &Personal use
only

