Catalog link: https://jainqq.org/explore/002562/1

Page #1 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Poo.Aa.Shri Vijayaramchandrasuri Smriti-Sanskrit-Prakrit Granthamala Kramanka 27
Agam Shri Pratyakhyana Prakirnakam (Siri-Aurpachchakkhana-Painnayam) {Vritti-
Avachuri-Dwaya-Balavabodha-Bhavanuvada-Parisishta-Sametam} • Mulaagamakartara:
Shraman Bhagavat Shri Mahavir Swami Swahasta-Dikshita Pujya Pada Shri Virabhadra
Ganimaharaja: • Sampadakah: Sanshodhakacha: Tapa-Agachcha-Adhipati Pujya Pada
Acharya Shrimad Vijayaramchandra Suri Shwaranaam Patta Prabhavaka Vardhamana
Taponidhi Pujya Pada Acharya Shrimad Vijayagunayasha Suri Shwaranaam Charana
Chancharika: Pravachana Prabhavaka Pujya Pada Acharya Shrimad Vijayakirtiyasha
Suri Shwarah: Jelin Education International 2010_02

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pU.A.zrI vijayarAmacandrasUrismRti-saMskRta-prAkRtagranthamAlA kramAGka 27
Agama zrI pratyAkhyAnaprakIrNakam (siri-AurapacakkhANa-paiNNayaM) {vRtti-
avacUridvaya-bAlAvabodha-bhAvAnuvAda-pariziSTasametam} * mUlAgamakartAraH . zram
aNabhagavatzrImahAvIrasvAmisvahastadIkSitapUjyapAdazrIvIrabhadragaNimahArAjA: *
sampAdakA: saMzodhakAca.
tapAgacchAdhipatipUjyapAdAcAryazrImadvijayarAmacandrasUrIzvarANAM
paTTaprabhAvakavardhamAnataponidhipUjyapAdAcAryazrImadvijayaguNayazasUrIzvarANAM
caraNacaJcarIkA:
pravacanaprabhAvakapUjyapAdAcAryazrImadvijayakIrtiyazasUrIzvarA: Jelin Education
International 2010_02

Page #2 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Poo.Aa.Shrivijayaramchandrasuri-Smriti-Sanskrit-Prakrit-Granthamala - Kramanka
27 Agam Shri Atur Pratyakhyan Prakirnakam (Siri-Aurpanchakhan-Painnayam) Vritti-
Avachuri-Dwaya-Balavabodha-Bhavanuvada-Parisishta-Sametam • Mulagama-Kartaraha .
Shraman Bhagavat Shrimahavirsvami Swahasta-Dikshit Pujapaada Shri Virabhadra
Ganimaharajaha • Vrittikaraha . Aanchalik-Gachchiya-Aacharya-Pujapaada
Shrimadvijay-Bhuvanatunga-Suriishvaraha • Avachuri-Kartaraha . Tapa-Gachcha-
Purandara-Pujapaada-Aacharya Shrimadvijay-Somasundara-Suriishvaraha Tarkik-
Ratna-Pujapaada-Aacharya Shrimadvijay-Gunaratna-Suriishvaraha • Sampadakaaha
Sanshodhakacha . Tapa-Gachcha-Adhipati-Pujapaada-Aacharya Shrimadvijay-
Ramchandra-Suriishvaraanaam Patta-Prabhavaka-Vardhamana-Taponidhi-Pujapaada-
Aacharya Shrimadvijay-Gunayasha-Suriishvaraanaam Charan-Chancharikaha Pravachan-
Prabhavaka-Pujapaada-Aacharya Shrimadvijay-Kirti-Yasha-Suriishvaraha ForPovale &
Ret ibrary.org

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pU.A.zrIvijayarAmacandrasUri-smRti-saMskRta-prAkRtagranthamAlA - kramAGka 27
Agama zrIAturapratyAkhyAnaprakIrNakam (siri-AurapaJcakkhANa-paiNNayaM) vRtti-
avacUridvaya-bAlAvabodha-bhAvAnuvAda-pariziSTasametam * mUlAgamakartAraH .
zramaNabhagavatzrImahAvIrasvAmisvahastadIkSita
pUjyapAdazrIvIrabhadragaNimahArAjAH * vRttikArAH .
AJcalikagacchIyAcAryapUjyapAdazrImadvijayabhuvanatuGgasUrIzvarAH *
avacUrikartAraH .
tapAgacchapurandarapUjyapAdAcAryazrImadvijayasomasundarasUrIzvarAH
tArkikaratnapUjyapAdAcAryazrImadvijayaguNaratnasUrIzvarAH * sampAdakAH
saMzodhakAzca .
tapAgacchAdhipatipUjyapAdAcAryazrImadvijayarAmacandrasUrIzvarANAM
paTTaprabhAvakavardhamAnataponidhipUjyapAdAcAryazrImadvijayaguNayazasUrIzvarANAM
caraNacaJcarIkAH
pravacanaprabhAvakapUjyapAdAcAryazrImadvijayakIrtiyazasUrIzvarAH ForPovale & Ret
ibrary.org

Page #3 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  **Book Title:**   **Śrīāturapratyākhyānaprakiṛṇakam**  ## **Author:**
**Pū.Ā. Śrīvīrabhadragaṇimaharājaḥ**  ## **Description:**
**Śrīāturapratyākhyānaprakiṛṇakam** with **Vṛtti**, **Avacūridvaya**,
**Bālāvabodha**, **Bhāvanuvāda**, and **Pariśiṣṭa**  ## **Commentators:** 1.
**Pū.Ā. Śrībhuvanatuṅgasūrayaḥ** 2. **Pū.Ā. Śrīsomasundarasūrayaḥ** 3. **Pū.Ā.
Śrīguṇaratnasūrayaḥ**  ## **Editors and Revisers:** **Pū.Ā.
Śrīmadvijayakīrtiyaśasūriśvarāḥ**  ## **Publisher:** **Sanmārgaprakāśanam,
Ahmedabad**  ## **Edition:** **First - Vi.Sa. 2066, Vi.Sa. 2536, E.Sa. 2010**
## **Pages:** **700**  ## **Price:** **175/-**  ## **ISBN:**
**978-81-87163-60-2**  ## **Notice:** **This book is printed with the expense of
Jñānaniḍhi, therefore, the entire price should be paid to the Jñānaniḍhi to
claim ownership of this book.  Householders should read this book after paying a
suitable fee (not a donation).** **- Sanmārgaprakāśanam**  ## **Notice:** **The
right to read and teach this Āgama is only for Śramaṇas who have attained the
Yoga of the main Vṛtti and have received the permission of their Guru.
According to the secondary Vṛtti, the four-fold Saṅgha, due to the excellence of
this book in achieving the highest Samadhi, can also read and teach this book
after performing the Ācāmlatrika-karaṇa.** **- library.org**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 granthanAma : zrIAturapratyAkhyAnaprakIrNakam granthakartAraH :
pU.A.zrIvIrabhadragaNimahArAjAH vivaraNanAma : zrIAturapratyAkhAnaprakIrNakam
vRtti-avacUridvaya-bAlAvabodha-bhAvAnuvAda-pariziSTasametam vivaraNakartAraH 10:
1-pU.A.zrIbhuvanatuGgasUrayaH 2-pU.A.zrIsomasundarasUrayaH
3-pU.A.zrIguNaratnasUrayaH saMzodhakAH sampAdakAzca : pU.A.
zrImadvijayakIrtiyazasUrIzvarAH prakAzakam : sanmArgaprakAzanam, ahamadAbAda
AvRttiH : prathamA- vi.saM. 2066, vi.saM. 2536, I.saM. 2010 pratayaH : 700
mUlyam : 175/ ISBN-978-81-87163-60-2 | sUcanam jJAnanidhivyayena mudrito'yaM
grantho'ta: sampUrNa mUlyaM tatkSetre dattvaiva svAmitvamasya karaNIyaM
gRhasthaiH suyogyaM zulkaM (nakaro) dattvA caiSa paThanIyaH  /  -
sanmArgaprakAzanam -: sUcanA :AgamasyA'sya paThana-pAThanasyA'dhikAriNo
mukhyavRttyA yogoDhA gurvAjJAprAptAH zramaNA eva  /  gauNavRttyA paramparayA tu
caturvidho'pi saGgha AcAmlatrikakaraNena granthasyA'sya
pravarasamAdhisAdhanatvAt  /  brary.org

Page #4 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
VTV - The Jain Acharya, the head of the Tapa Gachchha, Pujya Pad Acharya Shrimad
Vijay Ramchandrasuri Maharaj, had spread the flow of the preaching Ganga for
eight decades, giving the essence of the Jina-Gyan to the great people of India.
At the root of this was his lifelong unwavering devotion to the Agamas and other
scriptures. To perpetuate the memory of his auspiciousness, which is the seed of
our heartfelt approval of his achievements and his use of the scriptures, we
decided to publish the "Poo. A. Shri. Vijay Ramchandrasuri Smriti Sanskrit-
Prakrit Granthmala" associated with his mantra-like name. With the blessings of
his successor, the great Gachchhadhiraj, Poo. A. Shri. Vijay Mahodya Suri
Maharaj, we were able to move forward in this series. Under the patronage of the
great ascetic, Poo. A. Shri. Vijay Gunayash Suri Maharaj, and with the scholarly
guidance of his disciple, the preacher, Poo. A. Shri. Vijay Kirtiyas Suri
Maharaj, many books on various subjects were printed by various scripture-
serving monks, and now, as the 27th flower in this series, we are delighted to
publish the "Shri Atupraatyakhyan Prakirnak" grantharatna. With the grace of the
supreme Yogi, Shri Arihant Prabhu, and the blessings of all the Suri-Vachan-
Sadhu-Vandanas who follow his commands, and with the auspicious help of the
Shasana Devas, we hope to be instrumental in the publication of more and more
Agamas and other scriptures that illuminate the Samadhi Bhavana. May everyone
become the master of the Yoga-Samrajya of the Supreme Arihant Devas and attain
eternal happiness, Moksha. - Subhai Andajit 2010_02

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 VTVmAya - jainazAsana ziratAja tapAgacchAdhirAja pUjyapAda AcAryadeva zrImad
vijaya rAmacaMdrasUrIzvarajI mahArAjAe ATha-ATha dAyakA sudhI pravacana gaMgAnuM
vaheNa vahevaDAvI bhAratabharanA bhavyone jinAjJA-marmanuM mahApradAna karyuM
hatuM. tenA mULamAM teozrImade AjIvana karelI AgamAdi zrutanI apramatta upAsanA
hatI. teozrImadanI kRtasiddhi ane zrutaviniyoganI hArdika anumodanAnA bIjarUpa
teozrImadunI puNyasmRtine zAzvata banAvavA kAje amoe teozrImanA maMtratulya nAma
sAthe saMkaLAyela 'pU. A. zrI. vijaya rAmacaMdrasUrismRti saMskRta-prAkRta
graMthamALA' prakAzita karavAno zubha nirNaya karyo hato. teozrImanA
paTTAlaMkAra suvizAla gacchAdhirAja pU.A.zrI. vijaya mahodayasUrIzvarajI
mahArAjAnA AzIrvAdathI A zreNImAM amo ThIka-ThIka AgaLa vadhI zakyA hatA.
vardhamAna taponidhi pU.A.zrI vijaya guNayazasUrIzvarajI mahArAjanI chatrachAyA
ane teozrInA ziSyapravara pravacana-prabhAvaka pU.A.zrI vijaya
kIrtiyazasUrIzvarajI mahArAjAnA zAstrIya mArgadarzanane pAmI vividha zruta- sevI
munivaro Adi dvArA vividha viSayanA pratAkAra temaja pustakAkAra aneka graMtho
chapAyA bAda A ja zreNInA 27mA puSpa tarIke "zrI AtupratyAkhyAna prakIrNaka'
graMtharatnanuM prakAzana karatAM amane savizeSa AnaMdanI anubhUti thaI rahI
che.. parama yogIzvarazrI arihaMtaprabhu ane temanA AjJAzAsanamAM vartatA
pratyeka sUrivAcaka-sAdhuvaMdanA anugraha temaja zAsanadevonI zubha sahAyathI
samAdhi bhAvanA prakAzaka AvA vadhune vadhu AgamAdi graMthonA prakAzanamAM ame
nimittarUpa banIe evI bhAvanA bhAvavA sAthe sahu koI paramAtmA zrI arihaMta
devonA yogasAmrAjyanA svAmI banI zAzvata sukharUpa mokSane pAme e ja
zubhakAmanA. - subhAI aMdAjIta 2010_02

Page #5 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Subject Guide > 1 Publisher 2 Subject Guide 3 Shruta Bhakti-Anumodana 4 Granth
Samarpanam 5 Poo.Aa.Shri.Vijaygunayashsuri Shwaranam Jeevanam 6 Prastavikam 7
Vyakhyakaraadinaam Parichay 8 Prat-Darshanam 9 Khandah - 1
Poo.Aa.Shri.Bhuvanatungasuri Kritavrittina, F R EE Poo.Aa.Shri.Somasundarasuri
Kritavachurya, Poo.Aa.Shri.Gunaratnasuri Kritavachurya cha sah PERSTAN Shri
Aturpratyakhyanaprakiर्णकम् 10 Khandah - 2
Prakiर्णkoktadurdhhyanaantaragatadrustantasamuccayah 11 Khandah - 3
Parishishtani-1-7 Parishishtam-1 Mulagatha-Balavabodho-Bhavanuvaadashcha. 289
Parishishtam-2 Shriupadeshapraasaadantaragatam Trishashtiduvaanam. 321
Parishishtam-3 Laghu-Aaurapacchakkhanam-1. Parishishtam-4 Laghu-
Aaurapacchakkhanam-2. Parishishtam-5 Trishashti(63)Dhyanakathaprakiर्णकम्. 332
Parishishtam-6 Mulaslokaakaraadih. 335 Parishishtam-7
Digambariyamulaacharatulanagathaah. 326 329 336

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 viSayamArgadarzikA > 1 prakAzakIyam 2 viSayamArgadarzikA 3 zrutabhakti-
anumodanA 4 granthasamarpaNam 5 pU.A.zrI.vijayaguNayazasUrIzvarANAM jIvanam 6
prAstAvikam 7 vyAkhyAkArAdInAM paricaya 8 prata-darzanam 9 khaNDaH - 1
pU.A.zrIbhuvanatuGgasUrikRtavRttinA, F R EE pU.A.zrIsomasundarasUrikRtAvacUryA,
pU.A.zrIguNaratnasUrikRtAvacUryA ca saha PERSTAN zrI
AturapratyAkhyAnaprakIrNakam 10 khaNDaH - 2
prakIrNakoktadurdhyAnA'ntargatadRSTAntasamuccayaH 11 khaNDaH - 3 pariziSTAni-1-7
pariziSTam-1 mUlagAthA-bAlAvabodho-bhAvAnuvAdazca  /  289 pariziSTam-2
zrIupadezaprAsAdAntargataM triSaSTiduvA'nam  /  321 pariziSTam-3 lahu-
AurapaccakkhANaM-1  /  pariziSTam-4 lahu-AurapaccakkhANaM-2  /  pariziSTam-5
triSaSTi(63)dhyAnakathAprakIrNakam  /  332 pariziSTam-6 mUlazlokA'kArAdiH  /
335 pariziSTam-7 digambarIyamUlAcAratulanAgAthAH  /  326 329 336

Page #6 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Shrut Bhakti-Anumodana Agam - Shri Atur Pratyakhyan Prakirnakam Established by
Seth Shri Kasturchand Mulaji and family, Shri Mahavir Swami Jain Shwetamber
Murti Pujak Dehra Sar, (Khetwadi Jain Sangh), 9th Khetwadi, Mumbai, published
through the wise use of their knowledge. We heartily approve of this Shrut
Bhakti and wish them continued success in the future with even better Shrut
Bhakti. 201002 Li. Sanmarg Prakashan

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zruta bhakti-anumodanA Agama - zrIAturapratyAkhyAnaprakIrNakam zeTha zrI
kasturacaMda mUlAjI sahaparivAra sthApita zrI mahAvIrasvAmI jaina zvetAMbara
mUrtipUjaka daherAsara, (khetavADI jaina saMgha), 9mI khetavADI, muMbaInA
jJAnanidhinA sadupayoga dvArA prakAzita thayo che. e zrutabhaktinI amo hArdika
anumodanA karIe chIe ane bhaviSyamAM paNa teonA hAthe uttarottara uttamakakSAnI
zrutabhakti thatI rahe evI zubhakAmanA karIe chIe. 201002 li. sanmArga prakAzana

Page #7 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
To the most sacred lotus feet of those whose meritorious deeds of penance have
resulted in the creation and compilation of this gem of a text, **Dedication** -
From my very tender age, those who made me listen to the Shri Namaskara Maha
Mantra. When I gained a little understanding, they explained to me, "What is the
world? It is bitter, bitter." And, "What is liberation? It is sweet, sweet." *
At the age of four, I was made to perform Ayambil, and I was made a devotee of
worship, Pratikraman, Samayik, and school.  - I dedicated myself to the lap of
the vow-fulfilling, venerable, Shri Vijay Siddhisuri Maharaj (Bapuji). He firmly
instilled in me the values of "We are to take Diksha." When Bapuji Maharaj
passed away, he introduced me to the true heir of his ideals, the venerable,
Vyākhyāna-vācaspati, Shri Vijay Rāmacandrasuriśvara Mahārāja. From birth to the
end of my life... he gave me more affection than my own mother, he disciplined
me strictly as a father, and as a Guru, he never shied away from fulfilling his
duties as a Guru. He renounced his own interests and joined me in the service of
the Supreme Gurudev... Even at the age of 86, he sat upright, enduring numerous
ailments, and remained immersed in Japa-Yoga, Swadhyaya Yoga, and the Supreme
Samadhi. He has ensured the uninterrupted well-being of me and my disciples. To
the lotus feet of the self-effacing, lifelong servant of the Guru's feet, the
embodiment of detachment, the influencer of the twenty-four Tirthankaras, the
treasure trove of the Vardhamana Tapa, the venerable Acharya Dev Shrimad Vijay
Gunayashasuri Maharaj, I dedicate this gem of a text, the Agama - Shri Atur
Pratyakhyan Prakirnakam, and feel blessed. - Vijay Kirtiyasasuri

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 jeonA sAdhanApUta puNya prabhAve A graMtharatnanuM sarjana-saMpAdana thayuM
teonA parama pavitra karakamaLomAM zraddhAsabhara hRdaye samarpaNama -9 mArI ati
nAnI vayathI ja jeozrIe mane zrI namaskAra mahAmaMtranuM zravaNa karAvyuM. >>
jarAka samajaNo thayo eTale 'saMsAra kevo ? khAro-khAro' ane "mokSa kevo ?
mITho-mITho' samajAvyo. * cAra varSanI uMmare AyaMbila karato karyo, pUjA,
pratikramaNa, sAmAyika, pAThazALAno vyasanI banAvyo. 9 vacanasiddha pU.A.zrI
vijaya siddhisUrIzvarajI (bApajI) - mahArAjAnA khoLAmAM mAruM samarpaNa karyuM.
'ApaNe dIkSA ja levAnI che' tevA saMskAra daDhamULa karyA. pU. bApajI mahArAjAno
kALadharma thatAM teozrImadbhA AdarzonA sAcA vArasadAra vyAkhyAnavAcaspati
pU.A.zrI vijaya rAmacaMdrasUrIzvarajI mahArAjAno mane bheTo karAvI Apyo.
janmathI aMtima samaya sudhI... mA karatAM ya vadhu vAtsalya ApyuM, bApa tarIke
kaDaka anuzAsana karyuM, guru tarIke gurunAM kartavyo adA karavAmAM kyAreya
pAchI pAnI na karI potAnA svArthonuM visarjana karI mane parama gurudevanI
sevAmAM joDyo... 86 varSanI jaipha vaye paNa TaTTAra besI, aneka rogonI sAme
jhIMka jhIlI japa-yoga, svAdhyAya yoga ane parama samAdhimAM jhIlatA rahI jeoe
mAruM ane mArA ziSyapraziSyAdi gaNanuM akhaMDa yogakSema karyuM che, te
svanAmadhanya, AjIvanagurucaraNasevI, | niHspRhamUrti,
vIzasthAnakatapaprabhAvaka, vardhamAnataponidhi pUjyapAda AcAryadeva zrImad
vijaya guNayazasUrIzvarajI mahArAjAnA pAvana karakamaLomAM Agama -
zrIAturapratyAkhyAnaprakIrNakam graMtharatnanuM samarpaNa karI dhanya banuM
chuM. - vijaya kIrtiyazasUri Private & Personal Use Only

Page #8 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Guru, such a person is not found in this world, O glorious Gurudev, revered
Acharyadev Shreemad Vijay Gunayashasuriswarji Maharaj! He was the most humble
disciple of the Jain Shastra Shirataj, Diksha Yug Pravartak, Tapa
Gachchhadhiraj, Bhavacharya Bhagvant Shreemad Vijay Ramchandrasurisewarji
Maharaj.  "Vardhaman Taponidhi" was his main title, but even though he was
bestowed with the title of "Vardhaman", his life was full of "Vardhaman"
qualities, which are difficult to describe. He was the revered Acharyadev
Shreemad Vijay Gunayashasuriswarji Maharaj. Bhorol Tirth, located near Tharad in
the northwest corner of Gujarat, was his birthplace. This Tirth, surrounded by
historical cities like Wav, Tharad, and Sanchor, was once a great city called
Pippalpur Pattana or Pippalanak. The nearby Dhima Tirth was its suburb. Hundreds
of wealthy merchants lived there. The city was filled with many Jain temples.
With the passage of time, everything was scattered. Many statues were enshrined
in the earth and continued to be worshipped by the Devas. In VS 1961, the
fortune of the Bhorol land changed when Bhagwan Shree Nemnath Prabhu appeared
spontaneously. The land gradually began to prosper. The Sangha built a beautiful
Jinalaya and installed the Prabhu, which led to an increase in devotion and,
consequently, an increase in wealth in every household. In VS 1980, on the
auspicious day of the installation of Shree Adishwardada in Palitana, a small
child was born to Sejibai on the sixth day of the bright fortnight. His father,
Swaroopchand, was overjoyed to receive congratulations. The child was given the
Navkar Mantra. He was taken to see and worship Dada Shree Nemnath. After
spending a year or two with his father's love, when his father passed away to
the heavenly abode, the child, Gagaldas, was too young to understand the
situation. His uncle, Gamanchand, raised him and gave him religious education.
After returning from the rainy season retreat, his uncle was bitten by a
venomous snake and passed away while remembering the Namaskar Mahamantra.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 guru AvA jagatamAM nahi jaDe re gauravavaMtA gurudeva pUjya AcAryadeva zrImad
vijaya guNayazasUrIzvarajI mahArAjA ! jaina zAsana ziratAja, dIkSAyuga
pravartaka, tapAgacchAdhirAja, bhAvAcArya bhagavaMta zrImad vijaya
rAmacaMdrasUrIzvarajI mahArAjAnA teozrIjI paramavinayI ziSyaratna hatA.
vardhamAna taponidhi eonuM mukhya birUda hatuM, paraMtu vardhamAna biradAvalIthI
navAjIe to paNa alpokita thAya evA vardhamAna guNagaNothI bharapUra eonuM jIvana
hatuM, te pUjyapAda AcAryadeva zrImad vijaya guNayazasUrIzvarajI mahArAjA hatA.
gujarAtanA vAyavya khUNe tharAdanI pAse AveluM bhorola tIrtha emanuM vatana
hatuM. vAva, tharAda, sAMcora jevI aitihAsika nagarIothI gherAyeluM A tIrtha eka
jamAnAmAM pippalapura pattana agara pippalAnaka nAme mahAnagara hatuM. pAsenuM
DhImA tIrtha enuM upanagara hatuM. seMkaDo koTipati zreSThio atre vasatA. aneka
jinamaMdirothI nagarI bharI bharI hatI. kALanI thapATa vAgatAM badhuM vera-
vikhera thayuM. aneka pratimAjI bhUmimAM birAjI devagaNathI pUjAtA rahyA.
vi.saM. 1961mAM bhorola bhUminA bhAgyavidhAtA bhagavAna zrI neminAtha prabhu
svayaMbhU pragaTatAM bhUminAM bhAgya palaTAyAM. kramasara unnati thavA lAgI.
saMghe suMdara jinAlaya banAvI prabhune padharAvatAM bhAvonI vRddhi thatAM
ghara-gharamAM prazasta dravyanI paNa vRddhi thavA lAgI. vi.saM. 1980mAM
pAlItANAnA zrI AdIzvaradAdAnI pratiSThAnA zubha dine eTale ja vai.va. 6nA
sejIbAInI kUkhathI nAnakaDA bALakano janma thayo. pitA svarUpacaMdane vadhAmaNA
maLatAM AnaMda thayo. bALakane navakAra saMbhaLAvAyo. dAdA zrI nemanAthanA
darzana-pUjana karAvAyAM. be eka varSa pitAnuM vAtsalya meLavyA bAda pitA jyAre
devalokanI vATe saMcarI gayA tyAre bALaka gagaladAsa te ghaTanAne samajI paNa
zakatuM na hatuM. kAkA gamAnacaMde jALavI moTA karyA. dharmanA saMskAra ApyA. e
kAkA comAsI pratikramaNa karIne AvyA bAda kALotarA sarpe DaMkha mAratAM
namaskAra mahAmaMtranA smaraNapUrvaka svargavAsI banyA hatA. ternational Enerne
Persela

Page #9 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Life Story of Gurudev  Gagaldas's primary education took place at Bhorol
Tirth. After becoming a young man, he decided to move to Ahmedabad. He did not
want to leave the land of Bhorol and the devotion to Lord Shri Nemnath. But due
to practical responsibilities, he had no other choice but to bid farewell to the
Lord.  He arrived in the city and rented a place. He engaged in business with
honesty and ethics. He started with selling cloth on a cart and later opened his
own shop. He became respected by both traders and customers due to his honesty
and open-heartedness. During this period, he continued to observe rituals like
darshan-puja, guruvandana-puja-pravachan, etc. He visited various Upashrayas,
listened to the discourses of every Sadhu Bhagvant, invited them home for meals,
and built personal relationships to benefit from their devotion. However, his
discerning eye always sought the essence of Sadhu-hood.  After visiting numerous
Upashrayas in the city, his mind settled on Pujya Shri Vijay Siddhisuri Maharaj,
who resided at the Vidya Shala. He saw the ideal Sadhu-hood there and mentally
surrendered to him. From then on, he started following his guidance in every
aspect of his life.  During this time, he married Shivavati-Rupvati, the
daughter of Hakamchand Kevalchand Vohra from Rampura. His married life began.
Gagalbhai's mind was less inclined towards worldly matters and more towards
restraint. He performed tapas like Updhanadi, which adorn the life of a Shravak.
He had already renounced sins like night meals and consumption of forbidden
food.  Once, while listening to the discourse of Pujya Shri Vijay Ramchandra
Suri Maharaj under the guidance of Pujya Shri Vijay Labdhisuri Maharaj, a great
sage, at the request of the Nagar Seth, Gagalbhai's mind awakened. He decided on
the direction of his life.  In Vikram Samvat 2006, he performed Chaturmas in
Palitana. He stayed at the Agam Mandir, but with the consent of the Mahatmas
there, he went to the Narsinatha Dharmshala every day to listen to the
discourses of Pujya Shri Vijay Ramchandra Suri Maharaj under the guidance of
Pujya Shri Vijay Premsuri Maharaj. These discourses strengthened his detachment
and made him resolute. He made many decisions in his mind and wholeheartedly
joined the path of tapas.  In Vikram Samvat 2008, his son Kantilal was born. He
offered a Navkar mantra as a gift after his birth. His son grew up
understanding. From then on, he took care not to harm his son due to mother-son
attachment, kept him close, made him perform tapas, and ensured that he followed
them. He also fostered a strong emotional bond between his son and Pujya Shri
Siddhisuri Maharaj (Bapji). He became a guide for his son's ideal life and
instilled in him a foundation of higher knowledge.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 gurudevanuM jIvana caritra gagaladAsanuM prAthamika zikSaNa bhorola tIrthamAM
thayuM. yuvAna thayA bAda temaNe amadAvAda AvavAnuM nakkI karyuM. bhorolanI
bhUmi ane bhagavAna zrI neminAthanI bhakti choDavI na hatI. paNa vyavahArika
javAbadArIone pUrI karavA mATe bIjo IlAja na dekhAtAM bhagavAnane bheTI prayANa
karyuM. rAjanagaramAM AvI bhADAnI jagyA lIdhI. vyAya-nItithI dhaMdho karyo.
kApaDanI pherI ane lArI karI. AgaLa jatAM potAnI dukAna paNa karI. prAmANikatA
ane dilanI cophakhAIthI vepArIonA temaja grAhakonA mAnItA banyA. A gALAmAM
paramAtmAnA darzana-pUjA, guruvaMdana-pUjana-pravacana zravaNa vagere AcAro
jALavI rAkhyA. upAzraye-upAzraye phare. dareka sAdhu bhagavaMtonAM pravacano
sAMbhaLe. ghare bolAvI vahorAve. aMgata paricaya karI bhaktino lAbha le. paNa
emanI parIkSaka dRSTi sAdhu tatvane gotatI rahe. rAjanagaranA aneka upAzrayomAM
pharI vaLyA bAda vidyAzALe birAjamAna pU.A.zrI vijaya siddhisUrIzvarajI
mahArAjAmAM emanuM mana TharyuM. Adarza sAdhutA ahIM dekhANI. emaNe manomana
samarpaNa karI dIdhuM. have pratyeka bAbatamAM teo gujJA meLavI pravartavA
lAgyA. A arasAmAM rAmapurAnA hakamacaMda kevalacaMda voharAnA zIlavatI-rUpavatI
kanyA jIvIbena joDe emanAM lagna levANAM. dAMpatya jIvana zarU thayuM.
gagalabhAInuM mana saMsAra tarapha ochuM ane saMyama tarapha vadhu hatuM.
zrAvaka jIvanane zobhAve tevA upadhAnAdi tapo karyA. rAtribhojana,
abhakSyabhakSaNa jevAM pApone to kyArano dezavaTo ApI dIdhelo. ekavAra
nagarazeThanA vaDe pU.A.zrI vijaya labdhisUrIzvarajI mahArAjAnI nizrAmAM
pU.A.zrI vijaya rAmacaMdrasUrijI mahArAjAnuM pravacana sAMbhaLI mAMhalyo jAgI
UThyo. jIvananI dizA nakkI karI lIdhI. vi.saM. 2006mAM pAlItANA cAturmAsa
karyuM. rahyA hatA AgamamaMdiramAM paNa tyAMnA mahAtmAnI saMmatithI pU.A.zrI
vijaya premasUrIzvarajI mahArAjAnI nizrAmAM pU.A.zrI vijaya rAmacaMdrasUrijI
mahArAjAnAM thatAM pravacano sAMbhaLavA roja narazInAthA dharmazALAe jatA. A
pravacanoe vairAgyane valaMta banAvI dIdho. manomana ghaNA nirNayo laI lIdhA.
savizeSa tapa dharmamAM joDAI gayA. | vi.saM. 2008mAM putra kAMtilAlano janma
thayo. janma bAda navakAranI bheTa ApI. putra samajaNo thayo. tyArathI mA
putramohathI enuM ahita na karI de enI kALajI rAkhI, sAthe ne sAthe rAkhatA,
tapa karAvatA. tapa paLAya enuM dhyAna rAkhatA. pU.A.zrI siddhisUrijI (bApajI)
mahArAjA sAthe putranuM paNa bhAvanAtmaka joDANa karI ApyuM. Adarza jIvana
ghaDavaiyA banI putramAM uccattara vidyAonuM AdhAra karyuM. 2010_02

Page #10 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Life Story of the Gurudev  The mind was now yearning for restraint. He asked
for leave from his family. No one was ready to understand. There was a lot of
opposition. Gagalbhai also started doing intense penance, renunciation and
austerities to appease the opposition. He gave up ghee from the root for 12-12
years. He laid the foundation of the Vardhaman penance. He started doing penance
one after another. He did only one or two austerities. He did the sixth on the
cradle and beyond that, he did the ayambilos of rice-water or roti-water. This
continued for years. He completely stopped the six vigais from the root. Even
that took 6-6 years. The family did not give in.  Now, as a final preparation,
he left his son in school. He left him in the care of Gurudev for his stay. He
entrusted the responsibility of the business to his cousin brother and nephew
and in the year 2023 VS, he fled from Ahmedabad in the month of Posha.  He
received the support and cooperation of many well-wishers. He came to Mumbai-
Murbad. Pujya Gurudev had already come there after doing vihar. He had already
sent his son Kanti there. There was a five-day auspicious festival. The well-
wisher families played the role of family members so well that almost no one
realized that this was a secret initiation. On the 13th of Po.Su., the
initiation anniversary of Pujya Gurudev was celebrated and on the 14th of
Po.Su., the same Gurudev gave the initiation to his father and son. They were
named Pujya Muni Shri Gunayashvijayji Maharaj and Pujya Muni Shri
Kirtiyashavijayji Maharaj as his disciple and grand-disciple. He gave them
hitashiksha. He explained the ultimate meaning of the given names. Both father
and son, Guru-disciple munis, decided to adopt the Guru's teachings completely.
Now both of them joined the service of Pujya Gurudev. The great opposition of
the family melted away due to the influence of the Guru. With joy, they took the
final initiation at Bhuleshwar Lalbag, Mumbai. The father muni got engrossed in
intense penance and the son muni in studies. Both of them excelled in their
respective fields.  Pujya Muni Shri Gunayashvijayji Maharaj had nurtured the son
muni from childhood, which was not hidden from Pujya Gurudev. Seeing that art,
he started entrusting him with the mumukhsus who came to know and stay with him.
He got this responsibility in just one year of paryay, which he fulfilled with
great care and made the Guru's faith worthwhile. Pujya Gurudev was very
satisfied. In the same way, in the initial years, he stayed in the inner circle
of Pujya Gurudev and the entire burden of service, communication, etc. was
placed on the strong shoulders of the father muni. He also fulfilled it with
great care. Communication is not easy. Especially if you have to do the
communication of such a high-level Gurudev, you need a lot of mental and
physical preparedness. Pujya Munishri developed that preparedness and gave
immense satisfaction to Pujya Gurudev as well as the Gachchha. Due to this
quality, his self-development was rapid. He was at the forefront in penance and
meditation. Now spiritual maturity,  2010_02

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 gurudevanuM jIvana caritra mana have saMyama mATe thanaganatuM hatuM. svajana-
parivAranI rajA mAMgI. samajavA koI taiyAra na hatuM. khUba virodha UThyo.
gagalabhAIe paNa virodhane khALavA ugratara tapa, tyAga ane abhigraho karavA
mAMDyo. 12-12 varSa sudhI mULathI ghIno tyAga karyo. vardhamAna tapanI oLIno
pAyo nAMkhyo. uparA uparI oLIo karavA lAgyA. mAtra eka-be dravyanI oLIo karI.
pAraNe chaThTha ane enA pAraNe bhAta-pANI ke roTalI-pANInA AyaMbilo. varSo sudhI
A krama cAlyo. cha vigaIo sadaMtara mULathI baMdha karI. ene ya 6-6 varSo
vItyAM. svajanoe dAda na ApI. have aMtima taiyArI rUpe putrane skUla choDAvI.
gurudeva pAse vihAramAM mUkyo. dhaMdhAnI javAbadArI potAnA pitarAI bhAI-
bhatrIjAne soMpI ane vi.saM. 2023nI sAlamAM poSa mahine e amadAvAdathI bhAgI
nIkaLyA. aneka kalyANa mitrono sAtha-sahakAra maLyo. muMbaI-murabADa AvyA. pU.
gurudeva vihAra karIne tyAM AvI cUkyA hatA. putra kAMtine to pahelethI ja tyAM
mokalI Apyo hato. pAMca divasano maMgala mahotsava thayo. kalyANa mitra
parivAroe svajanono rola evo bhajavyo ke prAya: koIne khyAla na Avyo ke A gupta
dIkSA che. po.su. 13nA pU. gurudevanI dIkSAtithi ujavAI ane po.su. 14nA e ja
gurudeve pitAputrane dIkSAnAM dAna karyA. potAnA ziSya-praziSyarUpe pU.mu. zrI
guNayazavijayajI mahArAja ane pU.mu. zrI kIrtiyazavijayajI mahArAja nAma
rakhAyAM. hitazikSA ApI. ApelA nAmono paramArtha samajAvyo. baMne pitA-putra
guru-ziSya munivare guruzIkhane nakhazIkha avatAravAno nirNaya karyo. have baMne
pU. gurudevanI sevAmAM joDAI gayA. parivArano moTo virodha guru prabhAve vilAI
gayo. rAjIkhuzIthI bhUlezvara lAlabAga, muMbaI khAte vaDI dIkSA thaI. pitAmuni
savizeSa tapamAM ane putramuni adhyayanamAM lAgI gayAM. baMnee sva-sva kSetre
kAThuM kADhyuM. pU.mu. zrI guNayazavijayajI mahArAje je rIte putra muninuM
bALapaNathI saMskaraNa kareluM e pU. gurudevathI chAnuM na hatuM. te kaLA joI
emaNe potAnI pAse jANavA-rahevA AvatA mumukSuone temane soMpavA mAMDyA. mAtra
eka ja varSanA paryAyamAM A javAbadArI maLI, je temaNe sAMgopAMga nIbhAvI guruno
vizvAsa sArthaka karyo. pU. gurudeva khUba saMtRpta thayA. A ja rIte prAraMbhika
varSomAM pU. gurudevanI atyaMtara mAMDalImAM rahI eozrInI tamAma sevA-vaiyAvacca
Adino bhAra pitAmunizrInA vRSabha skaMdho para mUkAyo. e paNa emaNe sAMgopAMga
pAra pADyo. vaiyAvacca sahelI nathI. emAM ya AvA TocanI kakSAnA gurudevanI
vaiyAvacca karavI hoya to tana-mananI ghaNI sajjatA joIe. pU. munizrIe e sajjatA
keLavI ane pU. gurudevane temaja gacchane apAra saMtoSa Apyo. A guNanA kAraNe
emano jhaDapI AtmavikAsa thayo. tapa-japamAM to agrima hatA. have AdhyAtmika
pariNatio, 2010_02

Page #11 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Life Story of Gurudev  He excelled in self-realization, self-control, and
the pursuit of liberation. These qualities were naturally ingrained in him. He
also studied Sanskrit. He taught many seekers and monks, while also striving to
learn himself. As a result, after mastering Sanskrit, he read countless
scriptures. He lived as the shadow of the revered Gurudev until the end of his
life. He served in the Guru-kula for 24 years, performing selfless service. In
VS 2047, on the 14th day of the waning moon in the month of Ashadh, he passed
away due to the inevitable cycle of time. He was overcome with grief at the
assembly of the virtuous. The separation from his Guru was not easy for him. He
sought solace in the presence of the ascetic emperor, revered Shri
Rajatilkasuriji Maharaj, and his elder Guru-bandhu, the Gachchhadhipati, revered
Shri Vijay Mahodya Suriji Maharaj. He consoled himself by relying on the
discourses of revered Gurudev in his grief. He often read the same book
repeatedly. It was as if he found his lost Gurudev in the pages of those books.
This became his daily routine. As soon as the first rays of light appeared, he
would pick up a discourse book, and at the last rays of the evening, he would
put it aside. He probably read more than anyone else!  Revered Gurudev entrusted
the responsibility of many administrative tasks to his son-monk. Revered Muni
Shri Kirti Yashvijayji Maharaj now also delivered daily discourses. He sat in
the esteemed assembly of revered Gurudev and participated in administrative
matters. In the assemblies opposing the convention, revered Gurudev entrusted
him with the responsibility of delivering discourses as his representative.
Revered Muni Shri Gunayashvijayji Maharaj was the protector of his son-monk. He
cared for him. He also ensured his son-monk's involvement in administrative
service by completing his tasks when necessary. The grace of revered Gurudev
flowed continuously upon these two father-son monks like a river of blessings.
Seeing his competence, in the year VS 2050, the community's elder ascetic
emperor, revered Shri Vijay Rajatilkasuriji Maharaj, and the Gachchhadhipati,
revered Shri Vijay Mahodya Suriji Maharaj, adorned him with the title of
Ganipada in Surat. Both devotees, who were dear to revered Bapuji Maharaj,
ascended to the Ganipada in Surat, just like revered Bapuji Maharaj. The Guru-
bhakts celebrated a grand festival of Jin-bhakti at that time.  Under the
scholarly guidance of the father-son duo, the Shri Sangh of their ancestral
home, Shri Bhorol Tirth, obtained the blessings and guidance of revered Gurudev
and undertook the magnificent renovation of the Tirth's Jinalaya. Twenty-four
Jinalayas were built. The consecration was also decided in VS 2051, as per the
instructions given by revered Gurudev.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 gurudevanuM jIvana caritra svarUpAnusaMdhAna, saMyamarati, mokSanI tAlAvelI
AdimAM teo agresara banyA. AvI guNAvalI teomAM sahaja rIte Atmastha banI. emaNe
saMskRtano ya abhyAsa karyo. aneka mumukSuo ane munivarone bhaNAvatAM-bhaNAvatAM
jAte ya bhaNavAno puruSArtha karatA. pariNAme saMskRta buko thayA bAda aDhaLaka
graMtho temaNe vAMcI lIdhAM. pU. gurudeva jIvyA tyAM sudhI emano paDachAyo
banIne jIvyA. 24 varSa sudhI akhaMDa gurukuLavAsa sevI apAra nirjarA karI.
vi.saM. 2047mAM aSADha vada 14nA pU. gurudevanA paramasamAdhimaya kALadharmathI
teo bhAMgI paDyA hatA. guNAnuvAda sabhAmAM raDI paDyA hatA. guruviraha khamavo
emanA mATe AsAna na hatuM. emaNe tapasvI samrATa pU.A.zrI rAjatilakasUrijI
mahArAja ane potAnA vaDIla gurubaMdhu gacchAdhipati pU.A.zrI vijaya
mahodayasUrijI mahArAjAnuM sAMnidhya jALavI manane manAvyuM. pU. gurudevanA
virahamAM pU. gurudevanA pravacana pustakonuM AlaMbana laI manane vALyuM.
anekavAra ekanuM eka pustaka vAMcyuM. emane jANe potAnA khovAyelA gurudeva e
pustakonA pAne maLI gayA. emano rojano krama banI gayo. prakAzanuM paheluM
kiraNa Ave ke hAthamAM pravacana pustakanI sthApanA thatI ane sAMjanA aMtima
kiraNe e pustaka bAju para mukAtuM. pU. gurudevane emaNe jeTalAM vAMcyA haze
teTalAM zAyada koIe nahi vAMcyA hoya ! pU. gurudeve zAsananA anekAneka kAryonI
javAbadArI putramuni para nAMkhelI. pU.mu. zrI kIrtiyazavijayajI mahArAja have
rojidAM pravacano paNa karatA; pU. gurudevanI atyaMtara parSadAmAM birAjI
zAsananA kAryomAM masalata paNa karatA, saMmelananA virodhanI sabhAomAM pU.
gurudeve hukamanA pattArUpe emane pravacano karavAnI javAbadArI soMpelI.
pU.mu.zrI guNayazavijayajI mahArAja putramuninuM rakhopuM hatA. emanuM jatana
karatA. avasare emanA kAmo pAra pADIne paNa emane zAsana sevA mATe nizcita
rAkhatA. pU. gurudevanI kRpA gaMgA banIne A beya pitA-putra munivaro para
avirata vahetI hatI. emanI yogyatA joI suratamAM vi.saM. 2050nI sAlamAM
samudAyanA vaDIla tapasvIsamrATu pU.A.zrI vijaya rAjatilakasUrIzvarajI mahArAjA
tathA gacchAdhipati pU.A.zrI vijaya mahodayasUrIzvarajI mahArAjAe emane
gaNipadathI alaMkRta karyA. pU. bApajI mahArAjAnA bhAvavArasadAra baMne sAdhako
pU. bApajI mahArAjAnI jema ja suratamAM gaNipade ArUDha thayA. gurubhaktoe tyAre
jinabhaktino mahAmahotsava karyo hato. baMne pitA-putranA zAstrIya
mArgadarzanathI emanA sAMsArika vatana zrI bhorolatIrthanA zrIsaMghe pU.
gurudevanA AziSa ane vAsakSepa meLavIne tIrthanA jinAlayano bhavyAtibhavya
uddhAra karyo. covIza jinAlaya banyuM. enI pratiSThA paNa pU. gurudeve ApelA
saMketAnusAra vi.saM. 20paramAM nakkI thaI. 2010 02

Page #12 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Life Story of Gurudev  In this festival, the elders had decided to adorn both
the Ganivars with the Pannyaspad. But due to their supreme devotion to the soul,
Guru devotion and community devotion, the merit generated from it suddenly
changed the winds, and besides the Pannyaspad, they were decided to be adorned
with the Pathka and Suri Pad Lakshmi. In VS 6, the Pannyas and Pathka degrees
were attained, and when Shri Nemnathdada sat on the throne, in the auspicious
time of VS 7, in the atmosphere of thousands of crowds and lakhs of rupees of
offerings, both father and son were adorned with the Suri Pad. The elders gave
them the advice to become those who increase the glory of the community of the
revered Gurudev! They lived up to these words of advice, which were accepted by
saying 'Tahatti', throughout their lives. They lived them in their own lives.
11  From the year VS 2051, the independent Chaturmasas of the son Suriji started
under the guidance of Vardhaman Taponidhi Suridevshriji. Chaturmasas were held
in Ahmedabad, Surat, Mumbai and Palitana. In the remaining time, they wandered
from Girnarji to Nakodaji in Rajasthan and also in the belt of Pune-Nasik in
Maharashtra. They kept walking until their last strength. When the body stopped
supporting them, they had to take the support of a palanquin. But their penance,
renunciation, self-study, chanting and the only advice to everyone coming to
renounce the world and become a monk, did not change in this. They were the
ocean of affection. They were first in discipline. They would not tolerate even
the smallest mistake of anyone. They would not remain without praising even the
smallest virtue. In them, the legacy of their revered Gurudev had descended as a
reward.  Jayna was married to him. His use was very fresh. His eyes were sharp
until the last day. All five senses were intact and excellent. He did not
indulge in pleasure and he did not even accept pleasure. He would only do the
work he intended to do for the benefit of others.  In just 16 years of public
life, 100 virtuous souls were initiated by his hand. Another 100 or so may have
become renunciates through his inspiration and been initiated elsewhere! He
performed the sacred installation of 70 temples. 26 virtuous souls were
initiated from his family, 33 virtuous souls from villages and towns said
goodbye to the world and left. Ten or so six-meal-giving groups emerged, through
which a lot of influence of the religion was spread. 12 pinnacle-topped Jain
temples were installed by his auspicious hand. Crores of rupees were spent in
all seven fields due to his teachings. He was the main guide in big offerings.
The offerings of Shri Bhorol Tirth and the Smriti Mandir installation, the
offerings of Samet Shikharji Taleyti Tirth, the offerings of Lalbag Bhuleshwar
Jinalaya installation, etc. are some examples that stand out.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 gurudevanuM jIvana caritra A mahotsave vaDIloe baMne gaNivarone paMnyAsapadathI
alaMkRta karavAno nirNaya karelo. paraMtu emanI paramAtma bhakti, gurubhakti ane
samudAya bhaktimAMthI sarjAyela puNye acAnaka vAyaro palaTAtAM paMnyAsapada
uparAMta pAThaka ane sUripada lakSmIthI teone alaMkRta karavAno nirNaya karAyo.
vai.su. 6nA paMnyAsa ane pAThaka padavI thaI ane zrI nemanAthadAdA gAdIe beThA
tyAre vai.su. 7nA sumuhUrte hajAronI medanI ane lAkhkho rUpiyAnI uchAmaNIonA
mAholamAM baMne pitA-putro sUripadathI zobhAyamAna banyA. vaDIloe hitazikSA ApI
ke pU. gurudevanA samudAyanA gauravane vadhAranArA banajo ! 'tahatti' kahIne
svIkRta karAyelAM e hitavacanone jIvanabhara AbAda nIbhAvyAM. sva jIvanamAM jIvI
jANyAM. 11 vi.saM. 2051nI sAlathI vardhamAna taponidhi sUridevazrIjInI nizrAmAM
putrasUrijInA svataMtra cAturmAso thavA lAgyAM. amadAvAda-surata-muMbaI ane
pAlItANAmAM cAturmAso thayAM. zeSakALamAM cheka giranArajIthI laI rAjasthAnanA
nAkoDAjI sudhI ane mahArASTramAM pUnA-nAsikanA paTTAmAM ya vicaraNa karyuM.
chellI zakti pahoMcI tyAM sudhI teo cAlatA rahyA. zarIre sAtha ApavAno baMdha
karatAM DolIno sahAro levo paDyo. paNa emano tapa, tyAga, svAdhyAya,japa ane
AvanAra hara koIne saMsAra tyAga karI saMyamI banI javAnI ja ekamAtra
hitazikSAnuM dAna AmAM koI phera na paDyo. vAtsalyanA teo mahAsAgara hatA.
anuzAsanamAM teo avvala hatA. koInI ya nAnakaDI ya bhUla calAvatA nahi. nAnakaDA
ya guNane biradAvyA vinA rahetA nahi. emanAmAM emanA pU. gurudevano vAraso
pratiphaLa banIne avataryo hato. jayaNA emane varelI hatI. upayoga emano atyaMta
tAjo hato. najara chellA divasa sudhI sateja hatI. pAMce Indriyo akabaMdha ane
prazasta banelI hatI. pramAda emaNe karyo nahi ane pramAdane emaNe gAMThyo paNa
nahi. emanuM dhAreluM hitakara kArya e karIne ja rahetA. mAtra 16 varSa jeTalA
jAhera jIvanamAM emanA hAthe 100 jeTalA puNyAtmA dIkSita banyA. bIjA 100 jeTalA
emanI preraNAthI vairAgI banI anyatra dIkSita banyA haze ! 70 jeTalA
gRhamaMdironI pAvana pratiSThA emaNe karI. emanA parivAramAMthI 26 puNyAtmAonI
dIkSA thaI, gAma-pathakamAMthI 33 puNyAtmAo saMsArane alavidA karI cAlI nIkaLyA.
dasa jeTalA to cha-rI pAlaka saMgho nIkaLyA, jenA dvArA aDhaLaka zAsana
prabhAvanA thaI hatI. 12 zikharabaddha jinAlayonI teozrInI varada haste aMjana-
pratiSThAo thaI. sAte kSetramAM emanA upadezathI karoDonuM dravya vaparAyuM.
moTI moTI uchAmaNIomAM emanI pradhAna nizrA rahetI. zrI bhorolatIrtha temaja
smRtimaMdira aMjana pratiSThAnI uchAmaNI, sametazikharajI taleTI tIrtha,
lAlabAga bhUlezvara jinAlaya aMjana pratiSThAnA caDAvA vagere emAMnAM AMkhe
uDIne vaLage evA keTalAka dAkhalA che. . 2010_02

Page #13 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Life Story of Gurudev  The indication of the new renovation of Jiravala Tirth
was obtained by them through the sacred Nishra obtained from their penance and
chanting. They also performed Nishradaan in the Chaitri Oli at Nakoda Tirth for
the first time in decades. Even in the case of an earthquake or a train
accident, crores of rupees were used by them in the sacred Nishra of Shrimudgi
for compassion and mercy towards living beings.  Their well-wishers remember
that day. They were very eager to bring them on the right path and make them
ascend the path of restraint. For this, they also wrote letters. They were
constantly striving to bring worldly people out of the mire of the world. They
never tired of giving direct inspiration and advice through letters.  Eight
Updhana were performed in their Nishra. Approximately 5000 pious souls performed
Updhana. Crores of rupees were collected at every location. Crores of rupees
were donated for Hastagiri Tirth due to their teachings. They also received
Nishra and guidance in the construction and consecration of the 24 Deris of the
24 Jin-Ganadhar footprints, which are a giant structure, at the other fort. They
had consecrated 17 statues of their beloved Gurudev.  Their love for the Lord,
their eagerness for Guru Bhakti, their goal of Jayana, their blazing
renunciation, their strict adherence to character, their pure faith and desire
for action, their intense effort of penance even in their final years, their
ardent desire for initiation of all living beings and their efforts in that
direction, etc., etc., the list of their qualities is so long that even pages
and pages would be insufficient to describe each quality.  They performed many
great penances like Siddhitap, Shrenitap and Varshitap in their life. They
performed penances like Masakshaman, Vishasthanak without any slackening. They
performed 16, 10, and many Ashtayi, 100 + 23 Oli of Vardhaman Tap with special
Abhigraha, and became a true Vardhaman Taponidhi by performing many small and
big penances shown in the Tapavali. They spent their last rainy season in
Mumbai-Lalbaug (Bhuleshwar). They came here for the protection of Baldiksha-
Siddhant and the consecration of the Jinalaya here. The great work of protecting
Baldiksha was accomplished in the best possible way under their guidance. The
donations for the consecration also reached the sky. Now, when only a little
time was left, they started to gather the stakes of life.  Their health
deteriorated during the last Chaturmas. Yet, they did not give up their daily
routine of worship. They were completely involved in all the worship in a very
useful way. Daily Devvandana, Guru Vandana in front of the image of the
benefactor Guru Bhagvant, recitation of Navasmaran etc. hymns, Suri Mantra,
Samaradhana of Ganividya, recitation and meditation of Guru Dutt many
Mantrapadas, constant well-being of the dependents, giving blessings of only
Dharma Labh to the Shravak-Shravika class who came to see them, suitable for
taking initiation   2010_02

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 gurudevanuM jIvana caritra jIrAvalA tIrthanA navatara punaruddhArano saMketa
teozrInI tapa-japathI pavitra nizrAmAM ja prApta thayelo. nAkoDA tIrthe
dazakAomAM pahelI vahelI caitrI oLImAM paNa teozrIe nizrAdAna kareluM. bhUkaMpa
ke relanA prasaMge anukaMpA-jIvadayAmAM paNa karoDo rUpiyA teo zrImadgI pAvana
nizrAmAM vaparAyA hatA. emanA kalyANa mitrone e roja yAda karatA. emane mArge
lAvavA, saMyamapaMthe caDAvavA khUba prayatnazIla rahetA. e mATe patro paNa
lakhatA. saMsArIone saMsAra kIccaDamAMthI bahAra kADhavA teo satata
puruSArtharata hatA. pratyakSa preraNA, patra dvArA hitopadeza karavAmAM e na
thAkatA. emanI nizrAmAM ATha to upadhAna thayAM. Azare 5000 puNyAtmAoe upadhAna
ArAdhyAM. karoDonI pratyeka sthaLe Avaka thaI. hastagiri tIrtha mATe teozrInA
upadezathI karoDo rUpiyA apAyA hatA. tyAM bIjA gaDha covIza jina-gaNadhara
pagalAMnI mahAkAya covIza derIonA nirmANa-aMjanapratiSThAmAM paNa teozrInI
nizrA-mArgadarzana maLyAM hatAM. potAnA prANapyArA pU. gurudevanI 17 jeTalI
pratimAonI emaNe pratiSThA karAvI hatI. emano prabhuprema, gurubhaktino umaLako,
jayaNAnuM lakSya, jvalaMta vairAgya, nakhazIkha cAritrapAlana, nirmalatara
zraddhA ane karaNAbhilASa, aMtima vayamAM paNa tapano pracaMDa puruSArtha, savi
jIva karuM dIkSArasInI utkaTa bhAvanA ane tadanusArI prayatna vagere vagere
guNonI yAdI eTalI moTI che ke e eka eka guNane varNavavA mATe ya pAnAnAM pAnAM
ochAM paDe. jIvanamAM anekavAra siddhitapa, zreNitapa ane varSItapa jevA
mahAtapo karyA, apramattapaNe mAsakSamaNa, vIzasthAnaka jevA tapo ArAdhyAM to
soLa-daza-aneka aThThAIo, viziSTa abhigrahapUrvaka vardhamAna tapanI 100 + 23
oLIo ArAdhI ane tapAvalImAM batAvelAM nAnAmoTA aneka tapo karIne e sAcA arthamAM
vardhamAna taponidhi banyA hatA. chelluM comAsuM teozrIe muMbaI-lAlabAga
(bhUlezvara)mAM kareluM. ahIM bALadIkSA-siddhAMtanI surakSA ane atrenA
jinAlayanI pratiSThA mATe eonuM Agamana thayuM hatuM. bALadIkSAnI surakSAnuM
mahAna kArya teozrInA AlaMbane khUba ja zreSThatama rIte saMpanna thayuM hatuM.
pratiSThA mATenI uchAmaNIo paNa AkAzane AMbavArI banI. have thoDo ja samaya bAkI
hato tyAM emaNe jIvananI bAjI sameTavAno prAraMbha karI dIdho hato. aMtima
cAturmAsa daramyAna emanuM svAthya kathaLeluM hatuM. chatAM ya emaNe emano nitya
ArAdhanA krama choDyo na hato. atyaMta upayogapUrvaka badhI ja ArAdhanAmAM teo
otaprota rahyA. roja devavaMdana, upakArI guru bhagavaMtanI chabI AgaLa bRhad
guruvaMdana, navasmaraNAdi stotronuM vAMcana, sUrimaMtra, gaNividyAnI
samArAdhanA, gurudatta aneka maMtrapadonuM pArAyaNa-dhyAna, AzritonuM satata
yogakSema, darzana karavA AvatA zrAvaka-zrAvikA vargane eka mAtra dharmalAbhanA
AzIrvAdanuM dAna, dIkSA levA mATe yogya 2010_02

Page #14 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The life story of Gurudev Writing letters to the Shravak-Shravika who were
mentioned, giving them beneficial teachings and inspiration, giving various
instructions to his son Suridev regarding the tasks of the reign, making an
amazing plan to keep his equanimity and samadhi intact, regularly reading the
discourses of his Gurudev for hours, which were a strong aid to samadhi, noting
down the useful parts and recommending them to his son Suridev for
enlightenment, supporting and caring for the ascetic Munivar, recommending the
well-being of the Sadhvi Sangha who lived far away, etc. - he remained dedicated
to these countless self-beneficial tasks. When doctors came, he allowed them to
treat him. But he would tell the doctor, "I am cooperating for my samadhi, you
are doing my material treatment, I want to do your emotional treatment. When
will you give your love into my hands? When will you come here?" This was his
compassion. The river of compassion flowed and flowed, now it had become a
roaring Ganga, now it was impatient to merge into the ocean. The final day also
arrived. Even today, Suriji completed his daily jaap from 2:30 am to 5 am. He
counted the morning memories. When Prabhuji arrived, he stood up and bowed. He
circumambulated Prabhuji. He bowed while standing. He offered the khamasaman to
the Pujji. He studied the Samyagdarshan book. He expressed his desire to go to
the lecture. He blessed his son Suriji by placing both hands on his head when he
went to the lecture and after he returned from the lecture. He wrote down words
of benefit. He continued reading 'Samyagdarshan' until 12:12. Then he suddenly
took a turn. His blood pressure increased. His son Suridev immediately arrived.
Knowing the situation, he was treated. When the treatment did not work, he was
made to listen to the supportive verses of samadhi. He made an association with
the Arihant pad, just as his revered Gurudev had done, and departed towards
liberation. He made an association with the Arihant pad. He became one in the
sound of 'Arihante Sarane Pavjjami'. In between, he bowed his eyelids in
darshan-vandana while seeing the images of Shri Shankeshwar Parshvanath Prabhu
and Shri Neminath Prabhu. "Gurudev! Are you awake? The opportunity to make the
worship you have done throughout your life meaningful has now arrived," etc.
When asked these questions, he indicated that his ajapjap was continuing with
his fingers. When an attempt was made to fan him with a fan, he instructed twice
to stop the fanning. With a very equanimous mind, he became absorbed in natural
samadhi and attained death at 3:20 pm. It was the day of Aso Vad 4, Thursday.
His son-disciple Suriji had one hand on his head and the other hand in Gurudev's
hand. The news of his death stopped the heartbeat of everyone's heart. The shock
was beyond measure. 2010_02

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 gurudevanuM jIvana caritrA jaNAyelA zrAvaka-zrAvikAone hitazikSA ane preraNA
karatA patronuM lekhana, putra sUrideva para zAsananA kAryo aMge vidha-vidha
sUcano, potAnI samatA ane samAdhi akabaMdha rahe evuM adbhuta Ayojana, samAdhi
prabaLa sahAyaka evuM potAnA gurudevanAM pravacanonuM niyamita kalAko sudhInuM
vAMcana, enA upayogI aMzonI noMdha karI putra sUrivarane prakAzanArthe
bhalAmaNa, tapasvI munivaronI upabRhaNA ane kALajI, dUra sudUra rahelA sAdhvI
saMghanA yogakSemanI bhalAmaNa jevAM aDhaLaka Atma hitakara kAryomAM teo
kartavyaniSTha banyA rahyA. cikitsako AvatA to cikitsA karavA detA. paraMtu
cikitsakane kahetA ke, mArI samAdhi mATe sahayoga ApuM chuM, tame mArI dravya
cikitsA karo cho, huM tamArI bhAva cikitsA karavA IcchuM chuM. tame tamArI lADa
kyAre mArA hAthamAM Apo cho ? ahIM kyAre Avo cho ?' A emanI karuNA hatI.
karuNAnI saritA vahetI vahetI have khaLakhaLa gaMgA banI have mahAsAgaramAM
bhaLavA adhIrI thaI rahI hatI. aMtima divasa paNa AvI gayo. Aje paNa sUrijIe
rAtre aDhI vAgyAthI pAMca vAgyAno nitya jApa pUrNa karyo. prAbhAtika smaraNo
gaNyAM. prabhujI padhAryA to UbhA thaI vinaya karyo. prabhujIne pradakSiNA ApI.
UbhAM UbhAM devavaMdana karyuM. khamAsamaNAM pUMjIne pramArjIne ja ApyAM.
samyagdarzana pustakano svAdhyAya karyo. vyAkhyAnamAM javAnI bhAvanA vyakta
karI. putra sUrijIne vyAkhyAnamAM jatAM ane vyAkhyAna karIne AvyA bAda be hAtha
mAthe mUkIne AzIrvAda ApyA. hita vacano lakhI ApyAM. bAra, sADI bAra sudhI
samyagdarzana' vAMcatA rahyA. pachI acAnaka vAgye vaLAMka lIdho. prezara
vadhyuM. putrasUrideva tarata AvI gayA. paristhitine jANIne upacAra karAyA.
upacAra kAragata na nIvaDatAM samAdhimAM sahAyaka padonuM zravaNa karAvAyuM.
potAnA pU. gurudeva je arihaMta pada sAthe anusaMdhAna sAdhI muktinI dizAmAM
prayANa karI gayA hatA. te ja arihaMta pada sAthe anusaMdhAna sAdhyuM. 'arihaMte
saraNe pavajjAmi' nA nAdamAM ekatAna banyA. vacce vacce zrI zaMkhezvara
pArzvanAtha prabhu ane zrI neminAtha prabhunI pratikRtinAM darzana karatAM
palako namAvI darzana-vaMdana karyA. 'gurudeva ! Apa jAgRta cho ? jIvanabhara
karelI ArAdhanAne sArthaka karavAno have avasara AvI gayo che vagere prazno
pUchAtAM potAnA hAthanA AMgaLAthI ajapAjapa cAlu hovAnuM sUcana karyuM.
pATIyAthI pavana nAkhavAno prayatna thatAM be vAra sUcanA karI virAdhanA thatI
aTakAvI. khUba ja samatAbharyA citte, sahaja samAdhimAM lIna thaIne bapore
3-20nA samaye teo kALadharmane pAmyA. Aso vada 4 guruvArano e divasa hato.
putra-ziSya sUrijIno eka hAtha emanA mastaka para hato ane bIjo hAtha gurudevanA
hAthamAM hato. eozrInA kALadharmanA samAcAre saunA hadayano dhabakAra cukAyo.
AghAtano pAra na 2010_02

Page #15 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Life Story of Gurudev  The life story of Gurudev is a testament to his
unwavering dedication to the Jain faith. He lived a life of complete
selflessness, inspiring countless individuals to embrace the path of Dharma.
His passing was a profound loss for the entire Jain community. The four branches
of the Jain Sangha were present in large numbers, witnessing his final moments.
Dr. Shekharbhai, a medical professional, remarked that he had never witnessed
such a peaceful death in his entire career.  His mortal remains were given the
final rites according to the Jain tradition. His son, Suryaji, entrusted his
body to the Sangha. The necessary rituals, including bathing and other
ceremonies, were performed. His body was then placed in the lecture hall for the
Sangha to pay their respects. The Sangha lined up to offer their final prayers.
On the day of the cremation, donations poured in. Within minutes, over three
crore rupees were collected. People who had been touched by his life and his
teachings showered his remains with their wealth. The final journey began at 10
am. His body, adorned with nine-peaked golden palanquin, was taken to Ban Ganga.
The cremation was performed by the families of Chanpaben Jayantilal Ajbani from
Dhanera and Shantilal Harilal Mehta from Bhoroltirth. His mortal remains were
finally released into the cycle of existence.  Following the cremation, there
were prayers and eulogies. The next day, a grand eulogy ceremony was held at the
Lalbag Sangha. During this ceremony, donations were collected for the
Ashtahnnika Mahotsav. Within minutes, donations were received for all eight days
of the festival. The Ashtahnnika Mahotsav was celebrated from the 14th of the
current year under the guidance of the revered Gurudev. Every day, the revered
Gurudev and other monks delivered eulogies. The elders of the Shravak Sangha
also shared their experiences and the impact of the revered Gurudev's life on
them. The eulogies continued for hours, and yet, no one wanted to leave.
Everyone was captivated by the stories and teachings.  To commemorate the
revered Gurudev's life and his virtues, grand celebrations were held in numerous
villages and cities. The Sangha members are still planning new celebrations in
his honor.  The best way to pay tribute to the revered Gurudev's life is to
ignite the flame of Diksha in our hearts. We should strive to embrace Diksha
ourselves and inspire our families to follow the same path.  The revered
Gurudev's life was an inspiration to all. He walked the path of his Gurudev,
illuminating the lives of countless individuals. Before his departure, he
entrusted his legacy to his successor, the eloquent and influential preacher,
Pujya Shri Vijay Kirtiyas Suri Maharaj. We must now dedicate ourselves to
following his teachings and seeking guidance from his successor.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 gurudevanuM jIvana caritra rahyo. caturvidha zrIsaMgha moTI saMkhyAmAM
nirdhAmaNA karAvavA hAjara hato. e saue aMtima ArAdhanA najaronajara nIhALI
hatI. DaoN. zekharabhAInA kahevA mujaba emanI DaoNkTarI lAIphamAM AvuM sahaja
mRtyu koInuM ya joyuM na hatuM. eonA puNyadehane vAsakSepAdi aMtima vidhi karIne
putrasUrijIe saMghane soMpyo. snAnAdi saMskAra thayA. zreSTha pUjA-upacAra
karAyA. saMghanA darzana-pUjanArthe vyAkhyAna haoNlamAM padharAvAyA. saMghe
lAIna baMdha AvIne pUjA karI. Aso vada pa+ zukravAre agni saMskAranA caDAvA
bolAvAyA. minITomAM ja traNa karoDa jeTalI Avaka thaI. jIvanabhara taddana
niHspRha sUrivaranA niceSTa dehanA caraNe upakRta lokoe dhananA DhagalA karI
dIdhA. dasa vAge aMtima yAtrA prAraMbhAI. nava zikharI jarIyana pAlakhImAM
birAjelo deha bANagaMgA pahoMcyo. dhAnerAnA caMpAbena jayaMtilAla ajabANI temaja
bhorolatIrthanA zAMtilAla harilAla mahetA parivAre agni saMskAra Apyo.
pUjyapAdano puNyadeha paMcatvamAM vilIna thayo. pAchaLa devavaMdana ane
guNAnuvAda thayA. bIjA divase lAlabAga saMghamAM bhavyatama guNAnuvAda sabhA
thaI. e prasaMge aSTAhnikA mahotsavanA lAbho meLavavA uchAmaNIo bolAI. daseka
miniTamAM ja AThe divaso apAI gayA. pUjyonI nizrAmAM kA.su. 14 thI aSTAhnikA
mahotsava ujavAyo. roje roja pUjyazrI ane anya munivaroe guNAnuvAda
karyA.zrAvaka saMghanA movaDIoe paNa pUjyazrIno upakAra varNavyo. kalAko sudhI
guNAnuvAda thavA chatAM koI uThatuM na hatuM. sAMbhaLyA ja karIe tema saune
thatuM. pUjyazrInA sadbhuta guNagaNonI anumodanArthe aneka gAmo-zaheromAM
bhavyAtibhavya mahotsavo thayA; haju paNa navanavA mahotsavonA Ayojano
saMghajano vicArI rahyA che. pUjyazrInA jIvanane aMjalI ApavA mATeno zubha
prayatna saue karavA yogya che ane e prayatna che potAnA haiyAmAM dIkSA jIvananI
prIti pragaTAvavI. pote dIkSA levA prayatnazIla banavuM ane potAnA
parivArajanone paNa e prIti-prayatnanA paMthe calAvavuM." pUjyapAdanA parama
preraka jIvanane bhAvabharI aMjalI, teozrImadbhA paramagurudevazrIjInA
pagalepagale cAlI teozrIe jIvana ujALyuM. jatAM potAno bhavya vAraso potAnA
paTTAlaMkAra pravacana prabhAvaka pU.A.zrI vijaya kIrtiyazasUrIzvarajI
mahArAjAne soMpIne gayA. have teozrInA AlaMbane ApaNe saue ArAdhanA karavAnI
che. 2010_02

Page #16 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Gunial Guru Gunayashasuri Vandanashtka (Harigitam)  **Verse 1:** Those who
lived a life free from attachment and ego, who remained selfless and
compassionate, who became an ideal disciplinarian and a pure mother figure, to
the feet of Gunial Shri Gunayashasuriswar, we offer our salutations.  **Verse
2:** Those who immersed themselves in study from the first rays of the sun, and
placed their treasured scriptures at the last rays of the sun, who spent the
dark nights in japa and meditation, to the feet of Gunial Shri
Gunayashasuriswar, we offer our salutations.  **Verse 3:** Those who became the
devoted followers of Dev Neminath and Siddhisuri Gururaj, like Shri Ramchandra
Suri, who became equal to Gods and Gurus through the grace of those Gods and
Gurus, to the feet of Gunial Shri Gunayashasuriswar, we offer our salutations.
**Verse 4:** Whenever obstacles arise in the attainment of the perfection of
tapas, japa, and dhyana, whenever the path of initiation remains elusive,
remembering you brings immediate success, to the feet of Gunial Shri
Gunayashasuriswar, we offer our salutations.  **Verse 5:** If there is a desire
to understand how to live a Shravak life, if there is an aspiration to
experience the life of restraint, then observe the life and death of Shri
Gururaj with attention, to the feet of Gunial Shri Gunayashasuriswar, we offer
our salutations.  **Verse 6:** Every moment of life was filled with the
resonance of the Jinas, the embodiment of conduct was adorned with the grace of
the Guru, the manifestation of that grace was evident in the daily work, to the
feet of Gunial Shri Gunayashasuriswar, we offer our salutations.  **Verse 7:**
Through the teachings of the scriptures, many tasks of the dharma are
accomplished, through the auspicious presence of the Guru, the wealth of the
rains pours down, the ocean of auspicious emotions surges through the gentle
compassion, to the feet of Gunial Shri Gunayashasuriswar, we offer our
salutations.  **Verse 8:** When worldly desires bind me, you are the one who
saves me, when afflictions torment me, you are the one who protects me, you
bestow the treasures of virtue, fame, and glory, and liberate me from the cycle
of births and deaths, to the feet of Gunial Shri Gunayashasuriswar, we offer our
salutations.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 guNiyala guru guNayazasUri vaMdanASTaka (harigItam) nirmama ane niHsaMga thaI
je jIvanabhara jIvatA rahyA, nirprantha ne niHsvArtha thaI upakArane karatA
rahyA; Adarza anuzAsaka ane nirdoSa mAta samA banyA, guNiyala zrI
guNayazasUrIzvara caraNamAM ho vaMdanA. 1 je sUryanA pahelA kiraNathI
adhyayanamAM DUbatA, ne sUryanA chellA ki2NathI graMtharatnane mUkatA;
aMdhArapaTa je rAtrino te jApa dhyAne kApatA, guNiyala zrI guNayazasUrIzvara
caraNamAM ho vaMdanA. 2 je deva neminAtha ne siddhisUri gururAjanA, nirdaMbha
anuyAyI banyA zrI rAmacaMdra-sUritaNA; e deva ne guruvara kRpAthI deva ne guru
sama thayA, guNiyala zrI guNayazasUrIzvara caraNamAM ho vaMdanA. 3 2010_02
jyAreya tapa, japa, dhyAnanI siddhimahIM vighno naDe, jyAre ya dIkSA-prAptino
pAvana-paMtha ja nA jaDe, tyAre tamone yAda karatAM saphaLatA tatkSaNa maLe,
guNiyala zrI guNayazasUrIzvara caraNamAM ho vaMdanA. 4 zrAvaka jIvana kema
jIvavuM ? - jo jANavAnI Aza che, saMyama-jIvana kema jIvavuM ? - jo mANavAnI
hoMza che; to dhyAnathI nirakho jIvana ne mRtyu zrI gururAjanuM, guNiyala zrI
guNayazasUrIzvara caraNamAM ho vaMdanA. 5 jIvanataNI ha25LamahIM jinaNanuM
guMjana hatuM, vyavahAranI mUrti mahIM guru ANanuM aMjana hatuM; te ANanuM
pragaTIkaraNa jasa kAryamAM nizadina hatuM, guNiyala zrI guNayazasUrIzvara
ca2NamAM ho vaMdanA. 6 kAryo ghaNAM zAsanataNAM thAtAM vacana-upadezathI, varSA
thatI lakSmItaNI jenA subhaga-sAMnidhyathI; zubha bhAvano darIyo uchaLato saumya
jasa karuNA thakI, guNiyala zrI guNayaza sUrIzvara caraNamAM ho vaMdanA. 7 jyAre
viSaya vaLage mane tyAre tame ja bacAvajo, kanaDe kaSAya vaLI mane tyAre tame ja
nivArajo; guNa-kIrti-yaza-ne ratnatrayI daI bhIma-bhavathI ugArajo, guNiyala zrI
guNayazasUrIzvara caraNamAM ho vaMdanA. 8

Page #17 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Introduction **Chapter Introduction:** - The teachings of the Jina, which are
inspired by the Supreme Lord Shri Viravibhu and formulated by the Shri Ganadhar
Bhagavants, and later compiled by the fourteen Shrutadhara sthaviras, are called
Agamas. These Agamas are like powerful vehicles for crossing the ocean of
Samsara. The soul who embarks on this journey once will attain liberation, the
end of Samsara.  These Agamas, which are the teachings of the Lord, are divided
into sections like Angas, Upangas, etc. Currently, there are 45 main Agamas.
These include eleven Angas, twelve Upangas, six Cheda Sutras, four Mula Sutras,
two Chulika Sutras, and ten Panna Sutras. These ten Panna Sutras are known as
"Prakirnak" or "Painey".  There is a tradition regarding the Panna texts that
they are a collection of parts of the Shruta Ganga that flowed from the mouth of
the Lord Vira, compiled by each of the Lord's disciples who were initiated by
him. In the reign of each Tirthankara, all the disciples initiated by that
Tirthankara create Prakirnak texts, this is considered a definite order. (The
ten Payagra texts included in the 45 Agamas, the first was Shri Chatuh Sharan
Prakirnak. Its publication with various commentaries has already been done by
us.  The second in order is "Atur Pratyakhyan Prakirnak". It would be
inappropriate to give a general introduction to this Prakirnak.  Its author is
Shri Virabhadra, an Acharya Maharaj, a disciple of the Lord Vira, who was
initiated by him. Following in the footsteps of the Ganadhar Bhagavants, he has
made a commendable effort to spread the teachings of the world teacher, Bhagwan
Shri Mahaviradeva.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prAstAvika pajtha pariyaya : - paramatAraka zrIvIravibhunA zAsananA ArAdhaka
zrI caturvidha saMgha mATe e paramAtmAe arthathI prarUpita ane zrI gaNadhara
bhagavaMtoe sUtrathI gUMthita ane tyAra bAda cauda pUrvadharAdi sthavira
zrutadharoe sUtrita karela jinavacanane Agama kahevAya che. A Agama graMtho
saMsArasamudra taravA mATe prabaLa pravahaNa samAna che. je puNyAtmA ekavAra A
pravahaNamAM savAra thaI jAya te saMsArasamudranA aMtarUpa mokSane pAmanAro bane
che. aMga-upAMgAdi vibhAgomAM vibhakta prabhuvANIrUpa A Agama pravahaNamAM
vartamAna samayamAM 45 Agamo mukhya gaNAyAM che. emAM agyAra aMga, bAra upAMga,
cha chedasUtra, cAra mULasUtra, be cUlikA sUtra ane dasa pannA sUtrono
aMtarbhAva karAyo che. A daza pannA ja "prakIrNaka' yA "paINaya' rUpe prasiddha
che. payannA graMtho mATe evo vRddhavAda che ke e graMtho prabhuvIranA mukharUpI
himAcalamAMthI je zrutagaMgA niHsRta thaI tenA aMzono saMgraha karIne
prabhuvIranA eka-eka svahastadIkSita ziSyavare banAvelAM che. pratyeka
tIrthakaronA zAsanamAM paNa te-te tIrthakaronA svahastadIkSita sarva ziSyo
prakIrNaka graMthonI racanA kare che, A eka nizcita krama gaNAyelo che. ' ( 45
AgamagraMthamAM je daza payagrAno samAveza thAya che te paikI prathama hatuM zrI
catuH zaraNa prakIrNaka. jenuM vividha TIkAo Adi sAthe prakAzana amArA dvArA A
pUrve thaI cUkayuM che. bIjA krame Ave che, "Atura pratyAkhyAna prakIrNaka' A
prakIrNakano sAmAnya paricaya Apavo asthAne na ja gaNAya. AnA kartA che
prabhuvIranA svahastadIkSita ziSyaratna zrI vIrabhadra nAmanA AcArya mahArAjA !
gaNadhara bhagavaMtonA pagale pagale cAlIne emaNe bhuvanaguru bhagavAna zrI
mahAvIradevanI hitavANInA prakAzanano prazasta puruSArtha karyo che. ional 2010

Page #18 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Introduction 17 This Agam text, composed by the disciples of Lord Mahavira,
is over 2500 years old in terms of its creation. This Agam text has been a
source of solace for countless seekers since the time of the Kevaljnani,
Chaudaspurvi, and Sutrakar Paramarshis who existed during that time. It has been
a tool for Samadhi Sadhana. 66 The Prakrit name of this Agam is
"Arpavvyavasthaal Padvayan", which is known as "Turapratyagyanprajinm" in
Sanskrit. Nandi Sutrakar Maharshi explains the etymology of this name, stating:
** "Aturah Chikitsyakriyavyapetasya Pratyakhyanam Yatraadhyayane
Vidhipurvakamupavarnyate Tadaturapratyakhyanam {" When the auspicious moments of
death are present before one's eyes, and the seeker has no opportunity to
perform physical treatment, and only has to accept death with equanimity, then
'Atura' is manifested. Such a seeker who becomes 'Atura' is called 'Atura'. The
seeker in the 'Atura' state, after accepting the four refuges, acknowledging
their misdeeds, and approving their good deeds, renounces all attachments
without any guilt. This renunciation (special rule) is called 'Atura
Pratyakhyan'. This Agam describes this very subject, hence this Prakirnak is
called 'Atura Pratyakhyan Prakirnak', a synonym. 66 At the beginning of the
text, the Maharshi, the author, did not create a new independent Mangalacharan,
but instead used the Mangalacharan he had done in his own composition, the Shri
Chatuhsharan Prakirnak Agam. This suggests a direct connection between the
Chatuhsharan Prakirnak and the Atura Pratyakhyan Prakirnak. From another
perspective, the form of 'Balpanditmaran', which is the essence of the Jina's
teachings, is shown in the first verse. This also serves as a Mangalacharan that
indicates the subject matter. The soul that has right faith, who has accepted
the Deshaviriti Dharma, the death that such a seeker attains with Samadhi is
called 'Balpanditmaran'. The author begins the text by mentioning this in the
first verse. Along with the text The Deshaviriti Dhar Shravak is free from all
restraints, hence he is partially a child, and because he is partially
restrained, he is partially a scholar. In this way, the understanding of the
twelve vows of the Shravak who is in the Bal-Pandit state, formed by the
combination of the two words 'Bal' and 'Pandit', is clarified from verse 2 to
verse 5. In verses 6 and 7, the special Akshardeha given to Balpanditmaran is
described. The seeker who is not yet liberated due to the hope of living, who
has not yet performed the final rites, and whose doorstep is met by unexpected
death, such a Vratdhari Shravak sits in his own home in a state of Santhara and
experiences this type of death.   2010_02

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prAstAvika 17 paramAtmA zrI mahAvIradevanA ja ziSyavare saMracana kareluM
hovAthI A AgamagraMtha racanAnI dRSTie 2500 thI vadhu varSa prAcIna che. A
AgamagraMtha kevaLajJAnI, caudapUrvI, sUtrakAra paramarSio je kALamAM vidyamAna
hatA te kALathI ja nizcitapaNe samAdhi sAdhanAnA sAdhanarUpe A graMtha anekAneka
sAdhakone parama AlaMbanabhUta banela che. 66 prastuta AgamanuM prAkRta nAma
"arpavyavasthALa paDvayaM" che, je saMskRtamAM "turapratyAghyAnaprajInm" nAme
pracalita che. naMdIsUtrakAra maharSi A nAmanI vyutpatti karatAM jaNAve che ke,
** " AturaH cikitsyakriyAvyapetasya pratyAkhyAnaM yatrAdhyayane
vidhipUrvakamupavarNyate tadAturapratyAkhyAnam {" mRtyunI maMgaLapaLo jyAre
AMkha sAme upasthita thAya che, zArIrika cikitsA karavAno sAdhaka pAse jyAre
avasara hoto nathI, mAtra samabhAve eNe jyAre mRtyune vadhAvavAnuM rahe che
tyAre 'AturatA' pragaTe che. tevA Atura banelA sAdhakane 'Atura' kahevAya che.
Atura kakSAno sAdhaka aMta samaye cAra zaraNano svIkAra, duSkRtanI garjA,
sukRtanI anumodanA karyA bAda nirapavAdapaNe sarva sAvadhayogono tyAga karavA
svarUpa je pratyAkhyAna (niyama vizeSa) kare, tene 'Atura pratyAkhyAna" kahevAya
che. A AgamamAM A ja viSaya varNavAyelo hovAthI A prakIrNaka "Atura pratyAkhyAna
prakIrNaka" ema sAnvarthaka nAma dharAve che. 66 graMthanI zarUAtamAM
graMthakAra maharSie svataMtra navuM maMgalAcaraNa na karatAM svaracita zrI
catuHzaraNa prakIrNaka AgamamAM pote karelA maMgalAcaraNane ja anvayI banAvyuM
che. enAthI catuHzaraNa prakIrNaka sAthe Atura pratyAkhyAna prakIrNakano sIdho
saMbaMdha hovAnuM sUcita karyuM che. bIjI apekSAe vicArIe to jinoktatattvarUpa
'bAlapaMDitamaraNa'nuM svarUpa prathama gAthAmAM batAvyuM che, te dvArA viSaya
nirdezanarUpa maMgalAcaraNa karyuM paNa che. je AtmA samyagdaSTi che, jeNe
dezavirati dharmano svIkAra karyo che tevo sAdhaka samAdhipUrvaka je maraNane
prApta kare te maraNa 'bAlapaMDita maraNa' kahevAyuM che. pahelI gAthAmAM A vAta
karI graMthakAra graMthano prAraMbha kare che. graMthanI sAtho sAtha
dezaviratidhara zrAvaka sarvaviratithI rahita hovAnA kAraNe te aMze bAla che ane
AMzika viratine dhAraNa karanAra hovAnA kAraNe te aMze paMDita che. A rIte bAla
- paMDita be zabdonA saravALe banelA bAlapaMDitakakSAnA te zrAvakanA bAra
vratonI kAMIka samaja gAthA-2thI gAthA-5 sudhImAM spaSTa karI che. gAthA-6 ane
7mAM bAlapaMDitamaraNane je vizeSa akSaradeha Apyo che. jIvavAnI AzAthI je
sAdhaka haju mukta banyo nathI, te kA2Ne jeNe haju aMtima saMlekhanA karI nathI
ane aNadhAryuM mRtyu jenA AMgaNe AvIne ubhuM che, tevo vratadhArI zrAvaka potAnA
gharamAM ja saMthArAmAM besIne A prakAranA maraNano 2010_02

Page #19 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  18 **Introduction**  This text accepts the three types of *shalya*
(afflictions) that a *shravak* (lay follower) should remove. It also criticizes
past sins and accepts the *bal-pandit* death. This text briefly explains the
*bal-pandit* death ritual. For a detailed explanation of this death, the author
recommends his own work, the *Bhakt Parijna Prakiranak* (Discourse on the
Knowledge of Devotees). The information presented in the original verses clearly
indicates that either the author composed the *Bhakt Pariksha Prakiranak*
(Discourse on the Examination of Devotees) before the *Atur Pratyakhyan
Prakiranak* (Discourse on the Eager Renunciation), or he incorporated the
content of the *Bhakt Pratyakhyan Prakiranak* while composing the *Atur
Pratyakhyan Prakiranak*.  Up to verse 8, the text discusses the definition of
*bal-pandit* death, the *swami* (spiritual guide), and the ritual. Then, in
verse 9, it describes the fruits of this death, stating that the soul who
practices *bal-pandit* death attains the *kalpoppan* (divine) *vaimanik*
(celestial) realm as an immediate fruit. As a long-term fruit, it achieves
liberation in seven births, starting from the highest realm.  From the latter
half of verse 10 onwards, the text begins discussing *pandit-pandit* death,
which concludes in verse 71, along with the end of the text. Thus, this
*prakiranak* primarily focuses on elaborating the form of *pandit-pandit* death.
##   In verse 11, the *sadhu* (monk) who is present for the *anashan* (fasting)
is of the *pandit* class. He renounces the past sins, *agan nivaami*. He
controls his current sinful activities, *pattu-bunu samvaremi*. He renounces
future sins, *gala-ma pavya-vswami*. He apologizes for the transgressions,
*atikram*, *vyatikram*, *atichaar*, *anaachar*, etc., that occurred in his
virtues like vows, due to the 63 types of *durdhyan* (delusions) arising from
the unconscious state of mind. The author uses aphoristic style to explain this.
The mention of 63 types of *durdhyan* is a unique feature of the *Atur
Pratyakhyan*, not found elsewhere. To understand the nature of these *durdhyan*,
commentators have provided examples and named them.  Later authors have
incorporated these names into verses. Some authors have even included the entire
topic of 63 *durdhyan* from this text into their own works.  Various
inauspicious emotions arise in the minds of beings bound by *moha* (attachment).
The author has linked each of these inauspicious emotions, arising due to time,
nature, karma, or cause, to the 73 *durdhyan* described here. Knowing these 63
*durdhyan* serves as a foundation for every practitioner to identify and
eliminate their polluted mental states.  On this occasion, I feel compelled to
mention that I encountered this *prakiranak* and the 63 *durdhyan* during my
pilgrimage to the holy site of Shankeshwarji. At that time, our mental state,
residing in the mind of the author, the great sage,

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 18 prAstAvika svIkAra kare che. te zrAvaka traNa prakAranA zalyone dUra karI
ane pUrvanA pAponI AlocanA karavApUrvaka bAlapaMDita maraNane svIkAre che. ahIM
TUMkamAM bAla-paMDita maraNanI vidhi batAvI che. e ja maraNane vistArathI jANavA
mATe graMthakArazrI svaracita bhaktaparIjJA prakIrNaka graMthano teozrIe nirdeza
karyo che. mULagAthAmAM darzAvela A vAtathI evuM spaSTapaNe jaNAya che ke yA to
graMthakArazrIe 'bhakta parIkSA prakIrNaka'nI pahelAM racanA karyA pachI Atura
pratyAkhyAna prakIrNakanI racanA karela che, yA to Atura pratyAkhyAna prakIrNaka
racatI vakhate temaNe bhakta pratyAkhyAna prakIrNakanA padArthanI saMkalanA karI
lIdhI hoya. gAthA-8 sudhI, bAlapaMDitamaraNanI vyAkhyA, svAmI ane vidhinI vAta
karyA pachI gAthA-9mAM tenuM phaLa batAvatAM jaNAve che ke, bAlapaMDitamaraNane
ArAdhanAro AtmA anaMtara phaLa (tatkALa phaLa) tarIke kalpopapanna vaimAnika
devalokane prApta kare che. pAraMparika phaLa tarIke utkRSTathI sAtabhavamAM
mokSane hAMsala kare che. AgaLa vadhatAM gAthA-10nA uttarArdhathI
paMDitapaMDitamaraNanI vAta zarU thAya che ane te gAthA-71mAM graMtha samAptinI
sAthosAtha pUrI thAya che. Ama mukhyatAe A prakIrNakamAM paMDita paMDita
maraNanA svarUpane ja vistArathI darzAvela che. - gAthA-11mAM anazana mATe
upasthita thayelo te paMDita kakSAno sAdhu agaM nivAmi  /  bhUtakALanA pAponI
niMdA-garhA kare che, paTTubanuM saMvaremi  /  - vartamAnakALanA pApapravRttimAM
saMvaraNa kare che ane gaLAmAM pavyavasvAmi  / - bhaviSyanA pAponuM pratyAkhyAna
kare che. mananI abhAvita avasthAmAM utpanna thayelA 63 prakAranA durdhyAnanA
kAraNe vratAdi guNomAM lAgelA atikrama vyatikrama - aticAra - anAcAra Adi doSonI
e sAdhaka mAphI mAMgI pratikramaNa kare che. A vAtane samajAvavA graMthakArazrIe
sUtrazailIno upayoga karyo che. jemAM 63 prakAranAM durghAnonI vAta Atura
pratyAkhyAnanI AgavI vizeSatA che, anyatra kyAMya eno nirdeza nathI maLato. A
durdhyAnonA svarUpa varNanane samajavA vyAkhyAkAroe dRSTAMtono nAmanirdeza paNa
karyo che. A dRSTAMtonA nAmone pachInA graMthakAroe zlokomAM DhALyA che. to
keTalAka graMthakAroe 63 durdhyAnanA saMpUrNa viSayane ahIMthI laI potAnA
graMthamAM samAvyo che. mohAdhIna jIvonA manamAM aneka prakAranA azubha bhAvo
utpanna thAya che. kALa, prakRti karma ke nimittanA prabhAve utpanna thatA te
dareka azubhabhAvone temaNe A 73 durdhyAnanA nirUpaNamAM sAMkaLI lIdhAM che.
kaluSita cittavRttine oLakhI dUra karavA mATe pratyeka sAdhakane A 63
durdhyAnanuM jJAna AlaMbanarUpa bane tevuM che. A avasare eTaluM cokkasa
jaNAvavAnuM mana thAya che ke, zrI zaMkhezvarajI mahAtIrtha taraphanA vihAramAM
A prakIrNaka ane 63 durdhyAna jovAnAM thayAM. tyAre graMthakAra maharSimAM
rahelI ApaNI cittavRttine 2010_02

Page #20 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Preface  The power of recognition has been revealed. This great soul, who
lived 2500 years ago, has collected the inauspicious emotions that arise in all
of our minds. As I read, I felt immense joy. Later, during the Upadhanatapas
organized at the Shri Sankheshwar Mahatirth, it was decided to take the subject
of 63 Durdhyan as the topic of the lecture for the devotees of Upadhanatapas.
The lectures given during those days and the reflections that followed touched
my soul. On that occasion, the opportunity I received to purify my own mind and
the minds of many others, the grace of the author, the great sage, is still
remembered.  ## 19  The Shraman Bhagavants, who are committed to accepting the
ultimate truth, the Anashan, and who embrace death, are called Pandit Pandit
Maran. The devotee who worships Pandit Pandit Maran is known as a "Kshapak". At
the end of their life, the Gitaarth Guru Bhagavant recites the worship of the
Kshapaks who have passed away before them.  The Kshapak, who is ready for
Anashan, first salutes the Tirthankara Paramatama, from Yugaadinath Shri
Rishabhdev to Charamtirthapati Shri Mahaviraswami. Then, he salutes the Ganadhar
Bhagavants, like Shri Pundarik Swami, who are the masters of the second
intellect.  After accepting the four refuges, acknowledging the Duskrutgah and
approving the Sukrut, the devotee remembers the five Mahavratas that he has
followed throughout his life.  He rejects the sources of sin like violence, etc.
He develops a feeling of friendship towards all beings. He abandons hatred and
seeks forgiveness from all beings. He makes the state of Samadhi more stable. He
abandons many faults like the four types of dietary practices, ten Sanjnas,
three Garvas, sixteen Kashayas, etc. He makes a vow that the worship of Virati
Dharma done so far and the acceptance of Papnivritti at the end will lead to
liberation in the future life.  He salutes the Siddha Bhagavants who have
attained liberation and the Arihant Paramatama who shows the path to liberation,
with devotion. He has faith in the path of truth shown by the Tarak
Tirthankaras. The Kshapak, who accepts the Nirpavad Anashan, once again rejects
sins and accepts the Niratichar Anashan.  ## 2010_02

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prAstAvika oLakhavAnI zaktinAM darzana thayAM. AjathI 2500 varSa pahelAM
thayelA A mahApuruSe ApaNA saunA cittamAM uddbhava pAmatA azubha bhAvone
saMgRhIta karyA che. jema jema vAMcavAnAM thayAM tema tema anahada AnaMda Avyo.
tyAra pachI zrI zaMkhezvara mahAtIrthanA AMgaNe Ayojita zrI upadhAnatapa
daramyAna upadhAnatapanA ArAdhako sAme 63 durdhyAnanA viSayane ja vyAkhyAnamAM
levAno nirNaya thayo. te divasomAM karAyelAM vyAkhyAno ane tenI AgaLa-pAchaLa
karAyelA ciMtano mArA AtmAne bhAvita banAvatAM gayA. e nimitte sva-paranI
cittavRttine adhika-adhika nirmaLa karavAno, anekonA patita manane pAvana
karavAno je avasara maLyo, temAM A graMthakAra maharSino thayelo upakAra Aje
paNa smaraNapathamAM vartAI rahyo che. 19 uttamArtharUpa anazanane svIkAravA
kaTibaddha banelA zramaNa bhagavaMto je mRtyuMne vare che te paMDita paMDita
maraNa kahevAya che. paMDita paMDita maraNanI ArAdhanA karanAra sAdhaka
'kSapaka' tarIke oLakhAya che. AvA kSapakane aMta samaye gItArtha guru
bhagavaMta pUrve thaI gayelA kSapakonI ArAdhanA saMbhaLAve che. anazana mATe
samupasthita thayelo te kSapaka sau prathama yugAdinAtha zrI RSabhadevathI laI
caramatIrthapati zrI mahAvIrasvAmI sudhInA tIrthaMkara paramAtmAone namaskAra
kare che. tyAra bAda bIja buddhinA svAmI evA zrI puMDarIkasvAmI vagere gaNadhara
bhagavaMtone namaskAra kare che. cAra zaraNano svIkAra, duSkRtagaha ane sukRta
anumodanA karyA bAda sAdhaka jIvanabhara pALelAM pAMca mahAvratonuM punaH punaH
smaraNa kare che. hiMsAdi pApasthAnakanuM pratyAkhyAna kare che, sarva jIvo
pratye maitrIbhAva dhAraNa kare che, vaira bhAvano tyAga karIne sarva jIvonI
kSamA mAge che, samAdhibhAvane vadhune vadhu susthita banAve che, cAra prakAranI
AhAra vidhi, daza saMjJAo, traNa gArava, soLa kaSAya vagere aneka doSono tyAga
kare che, Aja sudhInI viratidharmanI ArAdhanA ane aMtamAM pharI svIkArelI
pApanivRtti bhavAMtaramAM muktinuM kAraNa bane tevuM praNidhAna kare che. je
mokSamAM javuM che te mokSane pAmelA siddha bhagavaMto ane te mokSane-
mokSamArgane batAvanArA arihaMta paramAtmAne bhAvapUrvaka punaH punaH namaskAra
kare che, tAraka tIrthaMkaroe batAvelA tattvamArganI zraddhA kare che,
nirapavAda anazanane svIkArato te kSapaka pharI ekavAra pApone vosirAvI
niraticAra anazanano svIkAra kare che, 2010_02

Page #21 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Preface  - Renounces external and internal possessions, - Cleanses the body,
including food, with mind, speech, and body, - Completely renounces attachment
to the body, - Renounces the results of passions, aversions, joy, sorrow,
humility, eagerness, attraction, and aversion, which arise from the fruition of
karma, - Renounces improper actions, inauspicious thoughts, and impure
consequences, and contemplates auspicious thoughts. - Embraces the path of
liberation, which is characterized by right knowledge, right faith, and right
conduct.  While contemplating the essence and meditating, the seeker, with a
feeling of oneness, contemplates, "O soul! You came alone into this existence
from the previous birth, you were born alone here, and you will die alone from
here, taking karma with you to the next world. If you go free from karma, you
will also go alone to liberation. All feelings other than the true nature of the
soul are created by association and are subject to separation. These
associations are the creators of the chain of suffering. Therefore, I now
renounce all associations." - I condemn the sins of the past and reject them in
the future. I reveal all my sins to the Guru Bhagvant with the simple heart of a
small child. I also apologize for any wrong words spoken to the Guru Bhagvant,
who is the critic and the one who grants atonement.  In this way, the seeker
remembers the three types of death described in verses 12 to 35, as shown by the
Pak Jinendra Bhagvant, who purifies his soul through worship and strengthens it
with the feeling of samadhi. The Tirthankaras have described three types of
death: 1) Bal Maran, 2) Bal Pandit, 3) Pandit Maran (Pandit Pandit Maran).  The
seeker contemplates the nature of the beings who attain each of these deaths and
the fruits they receive. With this contemplation, the seeker progresses further
in worship from the 30th verse.  Beings who are intoxicated by the eight vices,
whose minds are corrupted by the right path, and who have crooked consequences,
attain Bal Maran. These beings, who oppose death, attain a terrible state
similar to hell, even though they may attain the status of a god in the next
life. They become difficult to teach and ultimately become eternally bound to
the cycle of birth and death. Souls who are engrossed in false beliefs, who do
not understand the relationship between the present and the next life, who are
attracted to inauspicious actions, who are disrespectful to the Guru, and who
are lax in their conduct, never attain samadhi at the time of death.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prAstAvika - bAhya-atyaMtara upadhino tyAga kare che, - bhojana sahita dehane
mana-vacana-kAyAthI vosirAve che, - dehanA mamatvano saMpUrNa tyAga kare che, -
karmanA udayathI pragaTanArA rAga-dveSa-harSa-zoka-dInatA-utsukatA-rati ane
aratinA pariNAmono tyAga kare che, - aprazasta kriyAo, azubha vicAro ane azuddha
pariNatino tyAga karI zubha ciMtana kare che. - samyajJAna, samyagdarzana ane
samyaka cAritrarUpa mokSamArgane AlaMbanabhUta banAve che. tatvaciMtana ane
bhAvanAmAM AgaLa vadhato te kSapaka ekatva bhAvanA bhAvatAM vicAre che ke, "he
AtmA ! parabhavathI tuM A bhavamAM ekalo ja Avyo che, ahIM ekalo ja utpanna
thayo che ane ahIMthI karmasahita mRtyu pAmIza to ekalo ja paralokamAM javAno
che, karmarahita thaIne jaIza to mokSamAM paNa ekalo ja javAno che. AtmasvarUpa
sivAyanA sarva bhAvo saMyogathI sarjAyelA che ane viyogane pAmanArA che. A
saMyogo ja duHkhanI paraMparAne sarjanAra che. tethI have huM sarva saMyogono
tyAga karuM chuM." - bhUtakALanA pAponI niMdA-gaI ane bhaviSyamAM te pAponuM
pratyAkhyAna karuM chuM. nAnA bALakanI jema saraLa haiye sarva pApo guru
bhagavaMta samakSa pragaTa karuM chuM. AlocanA-prAyazcitta ApanAra te guru
bhagavaMta samakSa Aja sudhImAM kyAreya paNa viparIta bolAyuM hoya to tenI paNa
mAphI mAguM chuM. A pramANe gAthA-12thI gAthA-35mAM jaNAvyA mujaba ArAdhanA karI
potAnA AtmAne suvizuddha karanAra ane samAdhi bhAvathI puSTa banAvanAra te paka
jinezvara bhagavaMte batAvelA traNa prakAranA maraNanA svarUpane yAda kare che
ke, tAraka tIrthakaroe traNa prakAranA maraNa kahyAM che. 1) bAla maraNa, 2)
bAla paMDita, 3) paMDita maraNa (paMDita paMDita maraNa). A dareka maraNane
prApta karanArA jIvo kevA kevA hoya che, te kevA kevA prakAranAM phaLane pAme
che. tenuM ciMtana karatAM kSapaka 30mI gAthAthI ArAdhanAmAM AgaLa vadhe che.
ATha madathI unmatta banelA, sanmArgathI bhraSTa mativALA ane vakra pariNativALA
jIvo bAla maraNane pAme che. mRtyune virAdhanArA te jIvo bhavAMtaramAM
devadurgati-devapaNuM maLavA chatAM durgati samAna dArUNa sthitine pAme che,
bodhidurlabha bane che ane aMte anaMtasaMsArI bane che. mithyAtvamAM rata
banelA, Aloka ke paraloka saMbaMdhI niyANuM karanArA, azubha lezyAthI bhAvita
banelA, gurunA pratyenIka ane zithilAcArI AtmAo kyAreya maraNa samaye samAdhi
pAmI zakatA nathI. 2010_02

Page #22 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Proposing This discourse considers the fruit of the death of a learned soul,
who is immersed in right knowledge, free from the control of the heavens or the
underworld, and is affected by the auspiciousness of the soul. Such a learned
soul attains death and becomes easily enlightened in the next life. - Those who
are committed to following the teachings of the Jinas, who accept the teachings
of the Guru with all their heart, who follow pure and non-violent conduct, and
who have an unattached mind, become short-lived. They become participants in
liberation and salvation.  Influenced by these thoughts, such a soul addresses
itself, saying, "O soul! Until today, you have died countless times in the
fourteen realms due to untimely death. Today, a good opportunity has come, so
you, who are endowed with knowledge and insight, should prepare for a learned
death!"  Such a soul, disciplining itself, thinks, "The suffering that arises at
the time of death, you yourself are the cause of it. No one else is causing you
pain. You have experienced far greater suffering in the world countless times,
compared to these. What are these sufferings in comparison? Now, there is no
need to desire food in the suffering of hunger. Because, for an infinite time,
you have consumed every particle as food. But if you are still not satisfied
with it, then what satisfaction will you gain from a small amount of food and
other things? Just as fire is never satisfied with grass and wood, and the salt
sea is never filled by thousands of rivers, so too, the embodied soul is never
satisfied with food."  By giving the example of such a soul, the Guru prepares
the present soul for a peaceful death. The fruit of this fasting, which is like
a flood of nectar, is liberation. Liberation is free from the cycle of birth and
death, free from attachment, disease, and delusion, and free from all suffering
like illness, sorrow, hunger, and thirst. By showing the beauty and greatness of
the fruit in this way, the Guru increases the enthusiasm of the soul.  The
present soul accepts with the same faith the description of the form of the
previous souls and the fruit of peaceful death, as heard from the mouth of the
Guru.  From verse 59 onwards, the author writes that even those who have
attained the level of the fourteen previous realms, who have a strong mind, and
who are mature, are not fully capable of contemplating, remembering, and
repeating the twelve angas.  Therefore, at the end, the seeker who becomes
stable in a single verse, which is extremely affected by the great mantra of
salutation to the five supreme beings, makes death peaceful. As a result, he
attains liberation in a maximum of three births. Knowing this well, such a soul
becomes very adept at the verses of salutation to the five supreme beings and
attains a learned death. In conclusion, such a soul, who is fearless, brave,
virtuous, patient, and calm, moves rapidly towards liberation.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prAstAvika paMDita maraNanA phaLanI vicAraNAM, je AtmAo samyagdarzanamAM lIna
che, Aloka ke paralokanA niyANAthI rahita che ane zubha lezyAthI AtmAne bhAvita
kare che te paMDita maraNane pAme che ane bhavAMtaramAM sulabhabodhi bane che. -
jinavacanane pALavAmAM kaTibaddha, guruvacanane hRdayapUrvaka svIkAranArA,
nirmaLa-niraticAra AcArane pALanArA ane asaMkliSTa cittavRttivALA te kSepako
alpasaMsArI bane che. sadgati ane muktinA bhAgI bane che. A bhAvothI bhAvita
banelo te kSepaka potAne uddezIne kahe che ke, "he Atman ! Aja sudhI cauda
rAjalokamAM bAlamaraNa vaDe tuM anaMtIvAra mRtyu pAmyo che. Aje rUDo avasara
Avyo che to darzanajJAnathI yukta evo tuM paMDitamaraNa mATe samudyata thA !" e
kSapaka AtmAne anuzAsita karatAM vicAre ke, "maraNa samaye je duHkha utpanna
thayA che. temAM tuM pote ja nimittarUpa che. bIjuM koI tane dukha ApatuM nathI.
A duHkho karatAM ghaNAM vadhAre duHkho teM Aja sudhI saMsAramAM anaMtIvAra
bhogavyAM che, enI sAme A duHkho zuM visAtamAM ! have A bhUkhanA duHkhamAM
AhAranI lAlasA karavA jevI nathI. kAraNa ke, anaMtakALamAM dareka pugalone te
AhAra tarIke grahaNa karyA che. paNa tenAthI ya haju jo tuM tRpti pAmyo nathI to
have alpamAtra AhArAdikathI tuM zuM tRpti prApta karIza ? agni jema ghAsa ane
lAkaDAthI kyAreya dharAto nathI, lavaNa samudra hajAro nadIothI jema bharAto
nathI tema dehadhArI AtmA AhArathI kyAreya tRpti pAmato nathI." AvI aneka
bhAvanAothI bhAvita kSepakanuM daSTAnta ApIne guru bhagavaMta vartamAna
kSepakane samAdhimaraNa mATe sajja banAve che. rAdhAvedha tulya A anazananuM
phaLa mukti che. mukti janma-maraNanI paraMparAthI rahita che, Adhi-vyAdhi-
upAdhithI rahita che, roga-zoka-bhUkha-tRSA vagere saMpUrNa duHkhothI rahita
che. A rIte phaLanI suMdaratA ane mahAnatA batAvIne guru bhagavaMta kSepakanA
utsAhane vadhAre che. guru bhagavaMtanA mukhe sAMbhaLela pUrva kSapakonA
svarUpane ane samAdhimaraNanA phaLa varNanane vartamAna kSapaka tevI ja
zraddhApUrvaka svIkAre che. gAthA 59thI aMtima vAto jaNAvatAM graMthakAra lakhe
che ke maraNanI anaMta vedanAmAM caudapUrvadharanI kakSAne pAmelA, samartha
cittavALA pako paNa abhyasta evI dvAdazAMgInA ciMtana-smaraNa-punarAvartana mATe
pUrepUrA samartha nathI banatA. tethI aMta samaye mAtra paMca parameSThine
namaskAra karavArUpa mahAmaMtranA atyaMta bhAvita evA ekAda padamAM je sAdhaka
sthira thAya che. te maraNane samAdhimaya banAve che, tenA pariNAme te vadhumAM
vadhu traNa bhavamAM ja muktine vare che. A vAtane supere jANanAra te kSepaka
paMcaparameSThine namaskAra karavArUpa padomAM atyaMta upayogazIla banI paMDita
mRtyune vare che. niSkaSAya, dAMta, zUravIra, zIlavAna, dhIra ane zAMta evo te
kSepaka mokSanI dizAmAM jhaDapabhera AgaLa vadhe che. 2010_02

Page #23 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Introduction  In the concluding verse 71, the author, the great sage, has
prayed to the glorious Veer Paramatma for the destruction of all suffering of
all beings. The initial moments of research...  The disciple of the learned Shri
Bodirattan V.M., Muni Shri Dharmarattanvijayji M.S., with auspicious intentions,
diligently collected the unpublished literature of the four treatises, Shri
Chatuhsharan, Shri Atur Pratyakhyan, Shri Rud Sarvesha Nivana, and Shri Reshi
Trasansthi, from different repositories. Subsequently, he also undertook the
task of collecting the variant readings, textual variations, and comparative
literature based on the manuscript copies of these four treatises. The prepared
material was sent to me with the auspicious wish that it should be edited
comprehensively, systematically, and accurately. Since then, this work has
progressed under my care.  First, the preparation of Shri Chatusharan treatise
was undertaken. Due to various responsibilities, it took two to two and a half
years. It was published on the auspicious day of Chaitra Sud 9, Vikram Samvat
2014. After that, the work on Shri Atur Pratyakhyan treatise was started. The
intention was to publish this treatise, like the previous one, comprehensively,
systematically, and accurately.  With the aim of preparing this treatise
comprehensively, the manuscript copies were first examined. Several omissions
and inaccuracies were observed in the manuscripts due to the mistakes of the
scribes of that time. The main confusion arose when, despite the same content,
different names were found as the authors in different copies. It is well known
that due to poor conditions like lack of resources, famine, etc., such errors
were traditionally passed down.  The photocopies of the pages of the manuscripts
considered ideal and used for determining the author are included here. By
looking at them, scholars will get an idea of my confusion.  ## Preparation of
Explanatory Literature:  At the beginning of the work, two main challenges were
evident: 1- Rud Sarvesha Nivana, a large treatise, and 2- Reshi Trasansthi, a
concise treatise. At the end of the manuscript copies of the large treatise, two
names were found as the authors: 1- Pujya Shri Bhuvanatungsurji Maharaj and 2-
Pujya Shri Somasundarsurji Maharaj. The issue of "one work and two authors" was
naturally confusing. While in all the available copies of the concise treatise,
the name of Pujya Shri Gunarattansurji Maharaj was found.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prAstAvika gAthA-71mAM upasaMhAra karatAM graMthakAra maharSi e aMtima
maMgalAcaraNa mATe zrI vIra paramAtmA pAse sarvajIvonA sarvaduHkhonA nAzanI
prArthanA karI che. saMzodhananI prAraMbhika kSaNo... paMnyAsapravara zrI
bodhiratna vi.ma.nA ziSyaratna munirAja zrI dharmaratnavijayajI ma.sA.e zubha
saMkalpapUrvaka zrI catuH zaraNAdi cAra prakIrNaka graMthonuM apragaTa sAhitya
jahematapUrvaka alaga-alaga bhaMDAromAMthI saMgrahIta karyuM. tyAra bAda te cAra
prakIrNaka graMthonI hastalikhita pratonA AdhAre livyaMtara, pAThAntaro ane
tulanAtmaka sAhityano saMgraha karavAnuM kAma paNa karyuM. taiyAra thayela te
meTara sarvAgINa rIte, suvyavasthita rIte ane zuddhipUrvaka saMpAdita thAya to
sAruM, AvI zubha bhAvanAthI mArA upara mokalela. tyArathI A kArya mArA hastaka
AgaLa vadhyuM. sau prathama zrI catuzaraNa prakIrNakane taiyAra karavAnuM
thayuM. temAM anekavidha javAbadArInA kAraNe be thI aDhI varSano gALo pasAra
thayo. vi.saM. 2014nA caitra suda 9nA zubha dine tenuM prakAzana thayuM. tyAra
bAda zrI Atura pratyAkhyAna prakIrNakanuM kArya zarU karyuM. A prakIrNaka
Agamane paNa pUrvanI jema ja sarvAgINa, suvyavasthita ane zuddhipUrvaka
prakAzita karavAnI bhAvanA hatI. A Agama graMthane sarvAgINa rIte taiyAra
karavAnA dhyeyapUrvaka sau prathama hastalikhita pratonuM avalokana karyuM.
hastalikhita pratomAM te-te kALanA lahiyAonI bhUlathI aneka tUTIo-azuddhio
jovAmAM AvI. mukhya muMjhavaNa to tyAre ubhI thaI ke vivaraNa eka hovA chatAM
alaga-alaga pratiomAM kartA tarIke alaga-alaga nAma upalabdha thayAM. TAMcA
sAdhano, duSkALa Adi nabaLI paristhitinA phaLarUpe AvI aneka bhUlonI paraMparA
sarjAtI hatI te sarvajana vidita ja che. aneka pratomAMthI Adarza tarIke grahaNa
karela tathA kartAnA nirNaya mATe upayogamAM lIdhela pratonI AghaMta pRSThonI
pratikRti ahIM samAviSTa karI che. tene jovAthI vidvAnone mArI muMjhavaNano
aMdAja Avaze. vyAkhyA sAhityanI taiyArI: kAryanA prAraMbhikakALamAM mukhya be
avasUrio AMkha sAme hatI. 1- rUda sarveSa nIvAnAM. rU5 bRhad avacUri, 2- rezI
trasaMsthi ... rUpa saMkSipta avacUri. bRhad avacUrinI hastalikhita pratonA aMte
kartA tarIke be nAma maLatAM hatAM. 1-pU.A.zrI.bhuvanatuMgasUri mahArAja ane ra-
pU.A.zrI. somasundarasUri mahArAja. "kRti eka ane kartAnAM nAma be' A muddo
sahaja muMjhavaNa pedA kare tevo hato. jyAre saMkSipta avasUrinI upalabdha sarve
pratomAM pU.A.zrI. guNaratnasUri mahArAjanuM nAma upalabdha thatuM hatuM.
2010_02

Page #24 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Preface  With the belief that the solution to the confusion of the author of
the Brihad Avchuri will be found at the right time, the work of research was
initiated. The press copy made and sent by Muni Raj Shri Dharmaratna Vi.Ma. was
started to be matched with the original manuscripts. The original manuscripts
were abundant with impurities and incompleteness. These manuscripts, written by
scribes unfamiliar or slightly familiar with the Sanskrit language, required a
lot of effort to arrange the sentences. The text that was complete in one
manuscript was accepted from that manuscript, and the text that was pure in
other manuscripts was accepted from those manuscripts. Leaving aside the impure
and incomplete texts, the work of their interpretations and commentaries was
postponed, and a press copy was prepared as pure as possible.  Four manuscripts
each were made as ideal for the research of both Avchuris. The abridged Avchuri
by Pujya Acharya Shri Gunaratnasuri Maharaj was published by Pandit Hiralal
Hansraj Jamnagarwala in Vikrama Samvat 1979 in the name of various Payapann
Avchuris. After that, it has also been published by many institutions. The
abridged Avchuri was also obtained from those published manuscripts.  Moving
forward from research towards editing, the necessary investigation to determine
the author of the Brihad Avchuri was ongoing. As part of that investigation, the
list of manuscripts from the Pune-Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute was
reviewed. In that eager challenge, the first and last words of one manuscript
appeared unfamiliar and going in a different direction. Looking at those words,
it appeared that this description was different from the two presented Avchuris.
Looking at the verses of its Mangalacharan and the verses of praise at the end,
the name of Pujya Acharya Bhuvanatunga Suri Ma. was found. With a sense of joy,
an investigation was conducted in Pune, and a xerox copy of that manuscript was
requested. That xerox copy was received after a long time. Still, there was joy
in receiving it. The complete explanation had to be seen. From many
perspectives, this explanation was different from both Avchuris. On the one
hand, the work of transcribing it was done. On the other hand, an investigation
was conducted to obtain another copy of it. The transcription was done. But
another manuscript was not found. It has not been received till today. - This
explanation was accepted as a Vritti and decided to be published. At the end of
this Vritti, the praise of Pujya Acharya Shri Bhuvanatunga Suri Shwarji Ma. Sa.
was completely clear, so this work is theirs. It became clear. At the same time,
the Brihad Avchuri in the form of Root Study was accepted as the work of Pujya
Acharya Shri Somsundarasuri Shwarji Maharaj. This decision was made based on the
currently available literature. It has been considered that if any other
manuscript is found in the future for scholars who have moved forward in the
direction of literature editing-research, or if any other definite factor is
found for the determination of the author, it will definitely be considered.
2010_02

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prAstAvika bRhad avacUrinA kartAnI muMjhavaNano ukela suyogya avasare prApta
thaze te vizvAsa sAthe saMzodhananuM kAma prAraMvyuM. munirAja zrI dharmaratna
vi.ma.e karela ane mokalela presa kopIne pharIthI mULaprato sAthe meLavavAnuM
zarU karyuM. mULapratomAM azuddhio ane adhurAzanuM prAcurya hatuM. saMskRta
bhASAthI aparicita ke alpaparicita lahIyAonA hAthe lakhAyelI A prato dvArA
vAkyonA anvaya goThavavAmAM paNa ghaNI mahenata karavAnI thaI. je pratamAM je
pATha saMpUrNa hato temAMthI te pATha ane je pratomAM je pATha zuddha hato
temAMthI te pAThano svIkAra karyo. te sivAyanA azuddha ane apUrNa pATho
amaryAdita jaNAtA tenA pAThAntaro, TippaNIonuM kAma mUlatvI rAkhIne zakya
zuddhipUrvaka presa kopI taiyAra karI. baMne avacUrinA saMzodhana mATe mukhya
cAra-cAra pratone Adarza tarIke banAvI. pUjya AcArya zrI guNaratnasUri
mahArAjAnI saMkSipta avasUri paMDita hIrAlAla haMsarAja jAmanagaravALAe vi.saM.
1979mAM vividha payapannAvasUrinA nAme chapAvIne prasiddha karela che. te pachI
aneka saMsthAo dvArA paNa prakAzita thayela che. te prakAzita prato sAthe paNa
saMkSipta avacUri meLavavAnI thaI. saMzodhanamAMthI saMpAdananI dizAmAM AgaLa
vadhatAM bRhad avacUrinA kartAno nirNaya karavA jarUrI tapAsa jArI hatI. te
tapAsa aMtargata pUnA-bhAMDArakara orienTala rIsarca InsTITyUTanuM hastalikhita
pratonuM lIsTa jovAnuM thayuM. temAM Atura pratyAkhyAnamAM eka pratanA Adya-aMta
zabdo aparicita ane judI dizAmAM jatA jaNAyA. e zabdo jotAM prastuta be
avacUrithI alaga A vivaraNa che. tenA maMgalAcaraNanA zloko ane aMte prazastinA
zloko jotAM pU.A.bhuvanatuMgasUri ma.nu nAma upalabdha thayuM. AnaMdanI anubhUti
sAthe pUnA tapAsa karAvI tyAM te pratanI jherokSa kopI maMgAvI. te jherokSa kopI
lAMbA samaye prApta thaI. chatAM prApta thayAno AnaMda hato. te saMpUrNa
vyAkhyAne jovAnI thaI. aneka dRSTikoNathI A vyAkhyA baMne avacUri karatAM alaga
ja hatI. eka bAju tenuM lIpyutara karavAnuM kAma karyuM. bIjI bAju tenI bIjI
pratikRti meLavavA tapAsa karI. lIkhaMtara thayuM. paNa bIjI hastalikhita prata
na maLI. je Aja sudhI prApta thayela nathI. - A vyAkhyAne vRtti tarIke svIkArIne
prakAzita karavAno nirNaya karyo. A vRttinA aMtamAM pU.A.zrI
bhuvanatuMgasUrIzvarajI ma.sA.nI prazasti saMpUrNa spaSTa hovAthI A kRti
teozrImanI ja che. tevuM spaSTa thayuM. sAtho sAtha rUTuM adhyayanaM rUpa bRhad
avasUri pU.A.zrI somasundarasUrIzvarajI mahArAjAnI kRti tarIke svIkArI. A
nirNaya vartamAna upalabdha sAhityanA AdhAre karyo che. sAhitya saMpAdana-
saMzodhananI dizAmAM AgaLa vadhelA vidvAnone bhaviSyamAM anya koI prata prApta
thAya athavA kartAnA nirNaya mATe anya koI nizcita paribaLa prApta thAya to
cokkasa vicAraNA karavAnuM vicAryuM che. 2010_02

Page #25 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 24 ## Preface  After refining the text based on a single ideal, the meaning
and text were decided, and a press copy was prepared. This text includes
excerpts from various scriptures. The original sources of these excerpts were
found and corrected as much as possible.  Comparing all three interpretations,
it can be definitively said that, "First, the text was created, and then,
keeping it in mind, both commentaries were created." This becomes clear when
considering the author's time period and the style of the work.  Reverend Shri
Bhuvanatunga Suri belonged to the Aanchalik Gachchha tradition and lived around
the 13th century. While Reverend Shri Gunaratna Suri and Reverend Shri
Somasundara Suri belonged to the Tapa Gachchha tradition and lived in the 15th
century.  The style of the text, in terms of the intertwining of words and the
clarity of the subject matter, is similar in both commentaries. However, there
is a significant similarity in words and subject matter between the two
commentaries. This similarity suggests that there may have been an error in the
mention of the author in the intervening period. Many manuscripts have been
found where the text and both commentaries are mixed.  Another possibility
arises: are both commentaries separate works? Perhaps they are by the same
author, and later, another person adopted the commentary with necessary changes
for their own study and teaching. Without giving importance to this possibility,
in this publication, all three interpretations are considered as separate works
of different authors.  ## Editing Style  Following the editing style adopted in
Shri Chatusharana Prakirnak, this Prakirnak has been edited according to
sections 1, 2, and 3. To make it easier for the reader to conduct comparative
studies and provide special clarifications, section 1 includes the above-
mentioned text and both commentaries. Section 2 includes over a hundred stories
related to the 33 Durga, compiled from other texts, which are part of this
Prakirnak. These stories help to understand the subject of Durga very well.
Section 3 includes appendices. These appendices mainly include the unknown
author's Balavobodh, Bhavanuvad, the unknown author's short Atur Pratyakhyan 1
and 2, the unknown author's 13 Durbaan Katha Prakirnak, the original Prakirnak's
verse in alphabetical order, etc. In addition, many verses of Shri Atur
Pratyakhyan Prakirnak, along with commentary, are found in the Mulaacharagranth
written by Digambariya Shri Vattakaraacharya, so it has also been included at
the end.  2010_02  WWW.jainelibrary.org

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 24 prAstAvika eka ja AdarzanA AdhAre vRttinuM livyaMtara karyA pachI artha-
nirNaya, pATha-nirNaya dvArA tenI presakopI taiyAra karI. A vRttimAM vRttikAre
aneka zAstronA uddharaNa pAThono samAveza karela che. te uddharaNa pAThonA
mULastrota zodhavA pUrvaka zakya zuddhi karavAmAM AvI. traNeya vyAkhyAonI
tulanAtmaka vicAraNAnA aMte cokkasa ema kahI zakAya ke, "sau prathama vRttinI
racanA thayela che ane tyAra bAda tene AMkha sAme rAkhIne baMne avacUrinI racanA
thayela che." A vAta kartAno kALa ane kRtinI racanA zailI jotAM spaSTa thAya
che. pU.A.zrI. bhuvanatuMgasUri AMcalika gacchanI paraMparAmAM lagabhaga teramA
saikAmAM thayelA che. jyAre pU.A.zrI guNaratnasu.ma. tathA pU.A.zrI
somasundarasUri ma. tapAgacchanI paraMparAmAM paMdaramAM saikAmAM thayelA che.
racanA zailImAM zabdonI gUMthaNI-padArthanI spaSTatAmAM paNa vRttinI samAnatA
baMne avacUrimAM jovA maLe che. jyAre paraspara baMne avacUrimAM to bahulatayA
zabdo ane padArthanI samAnatA jovA maLe che. A samAnatAnA kAraNe vaccenA kALamAM
kartAnA ullekhomAM bhUla thaI hoya tema jaNAya che. aneka prato evI paNa jovA
maLI che. jemAM vRtti ane baMne avacUrinuM mizraNa thayuM hoya. eka vikalpa evo
paNa ubho rahe che ke baMne avacUri alaga mAnavI ke kema ? kadAca eka kartAnI ja
e avasUri hoya ane te pachI te avasUrino potAnA adhyayana-adhyApana mATe jarUrI
pheraphAra sAthe bIjAe svIkAra karyo hoya. A vikalpane mahattva na ApatAM
prastuta prakAzanamAM traNeya vyAkhyAone alaga-alaga kartAnI kRti tarIke grahaNa
karela che. saMpAdana zailI.. zrI catuzaraNa prakIrNakamAM svIkArela saMpAdana
zailI mujaba khaMDa-1, 2, 3 nA vibhAga mujaba prastuta prakIrNakanuM saMpAdana
karela che. vAcakane tulanAtmaka abhyAsa ane vizeSa spaSTIkaraNa karavAnuM
saraLa bane te mATe khaMDa-1mAM uparoktavRtti ane baMne avacUrino sAthosAtha
samAveza karela che. khaMDa2mAM prakIrNaka aMtargata 33 durgA saMbaMdhI
zatAdhika kathAone anya anya graMthomAMthI saMkalita karIne samAvela che. je
kathAnako dvArA durgAnanA viSayane bahu sArI rIte samajI zakAya tevo che.
khaMDa-3mAM pariziSTono samAveza karyo che. te pariziSTomAM mukhyatve
ajJAtakartaka bAlAvabodha, bhAvAnuvAda, ajJAtakartaka laghu Atura
pratyAkhyAna-1, 2, ajJAtakartaka 13 durbAna kathA prakIrNaka, mULa prakIrNakanI
gAthAno akArAdi vagere vigato lIdhela che. te uparAMta dIgaMbarIya zrI
vaTTakarAcArya racita mUlAcAragraMthamAM zrI Atura pratyAkhyAna prakIrNakanI
ghaNI gAthAo TIkA sahita maLe che, tethI tene paNa aMtamAM lIdhela che. 2010_02
WWW.jainelibrary.org

Page #26 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Preface  **Beneficial Cause**  The contemporary song-meaning-summit, having
often studied the 45 Agamas and become the master of the path-leading
initiation, and even at the end of life, having studied the Shri
Maranasamadhipayajna Granth, one of the 45 Agamas, and ascended to the peak of
Samadhi, the self-named, the initiator of the initiation era, the
Tapagachchhadhiraj, the venerable Acharya Shrimad Vijay Ramchandrasuri Maharaj,
had instructed his dependent Mahatmas to contribute to the publication of the 45
Agamas with pure reading after research and editing; it is a matter of great joy
for me that this effort to realize, even in part, the inner feeling of that
great soul has been made through the publication of these scattered Agama texts
after research. With the grace of the venerable Shriji, I hope that all the
scattered texts and other Agama texts will be researched and published in this
way.  This research and editing work has been done with great sincerity from the
beginning by the disciple gem Muni Shri Dharmaratna Vijayji Maharaj of the
Dakshinamurthi Pannyas Pravar Shri Bodhiratna Vijayji Ganivar, and the disciple
gem Muni Shri Shrutitilaka Vijayji Maharaj of the scholar Acharya Shri
Yogatilaka Suriji, the disciple of the Prashanta Murti Pujya Acharya Shri Vijay
Jinachandra Suri Maharaj. Besides this, many seekers and institutions have
contributed to the publication of this work in the way it appears today, all of
which is commendable. My circle of disciples has read and corrected the proofs
of this work many times as part of the capital of study. In this, Muni Shri
Vivek Yash Vijayji has taken commendable advantage of Shruti-service.  **25**
Through the reading, contemplation, and reflection of this present publication,
many seeker souls will make the death that has come in order or accidentally
present a festival, and by the power of the supreme Samadhi, they will attain
the tradition of Sadgati and attain the eternal happiness of liberation as soon
as possible, this is a good wish.  Along with this, through this editing and
research, the present publication has been revealed, and the theoretical purity
and confirmation gained through this medium will become the cause of our supreme
Samadhi, and will lead to the rapid attainment of liberation through the
tradition of Sadgati, this is the same good feeling.  **VS 2077 Magshar Sud 3
Thursday Shri Motisha Lalbag Jain Sangh** **Mumbai-4** **2010_02**  **Vyakhyan
Vachaspati, Jain Shasan Shirataj, Tapagachchhadhiraj, Bhavacharya Bhagvant,
Shrimad Vijay Ramchandrasuri Maharaj's supreme Samadhi Sadhak Vardhaman
Taponidhi Pujya Pad Acharya Dev Shrimad Vijay Gunayashasuri Maharaj's Charan
Chancharik Vijay Kirti Yashasur, **

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prAstAvika upakArI kAraNa aidaMyugIna gItArthamUrdhanya, anekavAra 45 AgamonuM
parizIlana karI mArgastha prarUpaNAnA svAmI banelA temaja jIvananA aMta samaye
paNa 45 Agamo paikInA ja eka zrI maraNasamAdhipayajJA graMthano svAdhyAya karIne
samAdhinA zikhare caDelA svanAmadhanya, dIkSAyuga pravartaka, tapAgacchAdhirAja
pUjyapAda AcAryadeva zrImad vijaya rAmacaMdrasUrIzvarajI mahArAje potAnA Azrita
mahAtmAone 45 AgamonuM saMzodhana ane saMpAdana karI zuddhavAcanApUrvaka
prakAzanamAM sahayogI banavAno sadupadeza Apyo hato; e mahApuruSanI AMtarika
bhAvanAne aMze aMze paNa sAkAra karavA mATeno prayatna A prakIrNaka-Agama
graMthonA saMzodhanapUrvaka prakAzana dvArA thayo te mArA mATe atyaMta AnaMdano
viSaya che. pUjyapAdazrIjInI kRpAthI A rIte badhA ja prakIrNako ane anya AgamAdi
graMthonuM saMzodhana prakAzana saMpanna thAya tevI bhAvanA sevuM chuM. A
saMzodhana-saMpAdana kAryamAM prAraMbhathI ja dAkSiNyamUrti paMnyAsa pravara zrI
bodhiratnavijayajI gaNivaranA ziSyaratna muni zrI dharmaratnavijayajI ma. tathA
prazAMtamUrti pU.A.de.zrI.vi. jinacandra sU. mahArAjAnA praziSya vidvAna AcArya
zrI yogatilakasUrijInA ziSyaratna muni zrI zrutatilakavijayajI ma. Adie
livyaMtarathI laIne prUpha cekIMganA kAryo khUba ja nikhAlasabhAve karela che.
te uparAMta aneka sAdhako ane saMsthAoe A kAryane Aje je rIte dekhAya che te
rIte prakAzita karavAmAM phALo Apyo che te sarve anumodanIya che. mArA
ziSyavartuLe svAdhyAyanI mUDInA aMga rUpe AnAM prUpho anekavAra vAMcIne
meLavyAM-sudhAryAM che. emAM mukhyatve muni zrI vivekayazavijayajIe zruta-sevAno
prazasya lAbha lIdho che. 25 prastuta prakAzananA vAMcana-manana-ciMtana dvArA
aneka sAdhaka AtmAo kramaprApta athavA Akasmika rIte upasthita thayelA mRtyune
mahotsavarUpa banAve, parama samAdhinA baLe sadgatinI paraMparAne pAmI mokSanA
zAzvata sukhane vahelAmAM vahelA prApta kare e zubhAbhilASA. sAtho sAtha A
saMpAdana-saMzodhana dvArA pragaTa thayelA A prastuta prakAzananA mAdhyamathI
upArjita thayela tAttvika zuddhi-puSTi mArI-amArI parama samAdhinuM kAraNa bane,
sadgatinI paraMparA dvArA zIghra mokSa prApta karAve te ja zubha bhAvanA.
vi.saM. 2077 mAgasara suda 3 guruvAra zrI motIzA lAlabAga jaina saMgha muMbaI-4
2010_02 vyAkhyAna vAcaspati, jaina zAsana ziratAja, tapAgacchAdhirAja,
bhAvAcArya bhagavaMta, zrImad vijaya rAmacandrasUrIzvarajI mahArAjAnA parama
samAdhisAdhaka vardhamAna taponidhi pUjyapAda AcAryadeva zrImad vijaya
guNayazasUrIzvarajI mahArAjAno caraNa caMcarIka vijaya kIrtiyazasUri,

Page #27 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Introduction to the Thaathakaara Maharshis  **Poo.Aa.Shree. Bhuvanatunga Suri
Maharaj** was initiated into the Anchalgachchha tradition in VS 1216 and
attained Suri-pada in VS 1234. He was a prominent Acharya in the lineage of
Poo.Aa.Shree. Dharmghosh Suri Maharaj. During his lifetime, he authored numerous
texts. He was a renowned scholar, having earned many titles including "Vaad-
vijeta" (winner of debates). In VS 1237, he initiated a nine-year-old boy named
Mahendra Kumar, who later became **Poo.Aa.Mahendra Singh Suri Maharaj** after
being conferred the Acharya-pada in VS 1293. Poo.Aa.Shree. Bhuvanatunga Suri
Maharaj was a prominent disciple of Poo.Aa.Mahendra Singh Suri Maharaj.
Currently, there is limited information available about his life. However, his
work can be understood through the "Anchalgachchha Digdarshan" book. He authored
a vast amount of literature on various subjects. His works include:  1.
**Rishimandal Vritti** 2. **Chatuh Sharan Vritti** 3. **Atur Pratyakhyan
Vritti** 4. **Sita Charitra** 5. **Mallinath Charitra** 6. **Atmasambodh Kulak**
7. **Rishavdev Charitra** 8. **Sansmaarak Avasuri**  The "Anchalgachchha
Digdarshan" provides a detailed introduction to all these texts.  Besides his
literary contributions, this great soul converted many rulers to Jainism. He was
known for his mastery of mantras and played a significant role in protecting the
Sangha. He once summoned Takshnaag in Junagadh in front of King Raaul Khengaar
Choutha, defeating sixteen Garudi's in a debate. He also made the king vow to
never engage in catching or playing with snakes for the rest of his life. This
Acharya obtained a royal decree from the king, releasing one and a half lakh
fishing nets and shutting down five hundred furnaces. Folklore also suggests
that he demonstrated the power of mantras by summoning the idol of Adiswar
Bhagwan in front of eighty-four Jati Vaniks and eighty-four Gachchha Acharyas.
In the history of Anchalgachchha, he is revered as a powerful mantra
practitioner, a prominent Acharya, a master of Agamas and other Jain scriptures,
and the first commentator on various texts.  **Poo.Aa.Shree. Som Sundar Suri
Maharaj** of the Tapa Gachchha was a descendant of the illustrious lineage of
**Poo.Aa.Shree. Jagad Uchchandra Suri Maharaj**, the first great soul of the
Tapa Gachchha. (Birth: VS 1396, Initiation: VS ...).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 thAthAkAra maharSiono paricaya AMcalikagacchAcArya pU.A.zrI. bhuvanatuMgasUri
mahArAjA aMcalagacchanI paraMparAmAM vi.saM. 1216mAM dIkSita banI vi.saM.
1234mAM sUripadane pAmelA pU.A.zrI dharmaghoSasUrijI mahArAja eka prabhAvaka
AcArya hatA. teozrImade potAnA jIvanakALa daramyAna anekAneka graMtha racanAnAM
kAryo karyAM hatAM. vAdavijetA Adi aneka padavI pAmelA prakAMDa vidvAna teo
zrImade mahendrakumAra nAmanA nava varSanA bALakane vi.saM. 1237mAM dIkSA ApI.
vi.saM. 1293mAM emane AcAryapadavI ApIne pU.A.mahendrasiMhasUrijI mahArAja nAme
ghoSita karyA. te pU.A. mahendrasiMhasUrijI mahArAjanA prabhAvaka ziSya
parivAramAM pU.A.zrI bhuvanatuMgasUrijI mahArAja thayA hatA. teozrInA jIvana
aMge vizeSa koI mAhitI vartamAnamAM upalabdha thatI nathI. aMcalagaccha
diggadarzana pustakanA AdhAre teozrInuM kArya kSetra cokkasa jANI zakAya che.
teozrImade potAnA jIvanamAM vividha viSayaka sAhityanuM vipula nirmANa kareluM
che. te sAhityamAM mukhyatve 1-RSimaMDala vRtti, 2-catuH zaraNa vRtti,
3-AturapratyAkhyAna vRtti, 4-sItA caritra, pa-mallinAtha caritra, 9-AtmasaMbodha
kulaka, 7-RSabhadeva caritra, 8-saMsmAraka avasUri Adino samAveza thAya che. A
badhA graMthono vistArathI paricaya aMcalagaccha digdarzanamAM Apelo che.
sAhitya racanAnAM kArya sAtho sAtha te mahApuruSe aneka rAjavIone jaina dharmanA
upAsaka banAvyA hatA. saMgha rakSAnA prasaMge te mahApuruSa maMtravAdI tarIke
AgavuM sthAna dharAvatA hatA. teozrIe rAjA rAula kheMgAra cothAnI samakSa
junAgaDhamAM takSanAgane pratyakSa ANIne soLa gAruDIonA vAda jItyA hatA ane
temane AjIvana paryata sarpa pakaDavAno tathA khelAvavAno dhaMdho na karavo evo
niyama levaDAvyo hato. Aja AcAryadeve rAjA pAsethI pharamAna meLavI savA lAkha
jALa choDAvI hatI. temaja pAMcaso bhaThThIo paNa baMdha karAvI hatI. lokavAcakA
mujaba evuM paNa kahevAya che ke teozrIe coryAsI jJAtinA vaNiko ane coryAsI
gacchanA AcAryonA dekhatAM AdIzvara bhagavAnanI pratimAne bolAvI maMtra
camatkAra paNa dekhADelo hato. aMcalagacchanA ItihAsamAM to samartha maMtravAdI,
prabhAvaka AcArya tarIke temaja AgamAdi jaina zratanA aThaMga abhyAsI ane
prakIrNaka graMthonA Adya TIkAkAra tarIke teozrIne biradAvavAmAM AvyA che.
tapAgacchapuraMdara pU.A.zrI. somasuMdarasUri mahArAjA | zrI tapAgacchanAM Adya
mahApuruSa, parama pUjya AcAryadeva zrImad jagadUcandrasUrIzvarajI mahArAjAnI
ujaLI pATa paraMparAmAM pU.A.de zrI devasundarasUrijI ma. thayA. (janma vi.saM.
1396, dIkSA vi.saM. www.alinelibrary org

Page #28 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Introduction to the Learned Maharshis  (1404 and Acharya-pad V.S. 1420) Among
the learned disciples of Shrimad, the names of the following are prominent:
Pujya Acharya Shri Jnan Sagar Suri Maharaj, Pujya Acharya Shri Kulmandan Suri
Maharaj, Pujya Acharya Shri Gunratna Suri Maharaj, Pujya Acharya Shri Sadhu
Ratna Suri Maharaj, Pujya Acharya Shri Som Sundar Suri Maharaj, Pujya Shri Sadhu
Rajgani Maharaj, and Acharya Shri Kshemkar Suri Maharaj.  Each of these
disciple-gems of Shrimad has authored numerous texts. Among them, the fifth
disciple-gem, Pujya Acharya Shri Som Sundar Suri Maharaj, was the most
influential Maharshi of his time. He was born in V.S. 1430 in Alhadnapur
(present-day Palanpur). His father's name was "Sajjan" and his mother's name was
"Maldan Devi". At the tender age of seven, in V.S. 1437, he renounced the world
and embraced the path of asceticism. He attained the position of "Vachan" in
V.S. 1450 and in V.S. 1457, at Patan, his Gurudev, Pujya Acharya Shri Dev Sundar
Suri Maharaj, bestowed upon him the Acharya-pad, established him as his
successor, and made him the leader of the Tapa Gachchha. He attained Nirvana in
V.S. 1499. The very senior monks have said that his soul has been reborn in a
good family in the Purva Mahavideha Kshetra, in the presence of Shri Simandhar
Prabhu. This mention is found in the ninth canto of the Som Saubhagya Mahakavya.
He was a great sage, just as he was a great person. He was also very serious and
impartial. Therefore, seekers from both his own side and the opposing side would
approach him without hesitation to receive his criticism and attain purity.
Detailed information about the life of this great person can be found in the
following texts: "Gurvaavali" by Pujya Acharya Shri Muni Sundar Suri (composed
in V.S. 1466), "Shri Chitrakoot Mahavir Prasad Prasasti" by Pujya Shri Charitra
Rati Ganik (composed in V.S. 1495), "Som Saubhagya Kavya" by Pujya Muni Shri
Prati Shtha Som (composed in V.S. 1524), and "Guru Gun Ratnakar" by Pujya Shri
Som Charitra Ganik (composed in V.S. 1541). During his lifetime, Shrimad
composed numerous texts, including "Aradhana Ras", "Updesh Mala Balavabodh",
"Yog Shastra Balavabodh", "Sadavshayak Balavabodh", "Nav Tatvadhi Balavabodh",
and its commentaries, "Avshayak Nirukti Avchuri", "Sadhu Samachari Kulka", as
well as numerous stotras like "Kalyan Kad", etc. Many of these texts are still
available today. The present "Chatudasharan Prakirnak Avchuri" (Vritti) is also
a composition of Shrimad.  In the lineage of great persons of the Jain religion,
this great person, who attained a position of respect and honor through his
scholarship, virtuous qualities, and other virtues, had four disciples who
attained the Acharya-pad: (1) Pujya Acharya Shri Muni Sundar Suri Maharaj, (2)
Pujya Acharya Shri Jay Sundar Suri Maharaj, (3) Pujya Acharya Shri Bhuvan Sundar
Suri Maharaj, and (4) Pujya Acharya Shri Jin

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 vyAkhyAkAra maharSiono paricaya 1404 tathA AcAryapada vi.saM. 1420)
teozrImadunA vidvAna ziSyomAM mukhyatve pU.A.zrI. jJAnasAgarasUma., pU.A.zrI.
kulamaMDanasUri ma., pU.A.zrI. guNaratnasUri ma., pU.A.zrI. sAdhuratnasUri ma.,
pU.A.zrI somasundarasUri ma., pU.zrI sAdhurAjagaNi ma., A zrI. kSemakarasUri ma.
AdinA nAmo upalabdha thAya che. teo zrImadbhA pratyeka ziSyaratno e aneka
graMthonI racanAo karela che. temAM pAMcamA ziSyaratna pU.A.zrI. somasundarasUri
ma. te samayanA sarvazreSTha prabhAvaka maharSi hatA. teo zrImano janma vi.saM.
1430mAM alhAdanapura (varta. pAlanapura)mAM thayo hato. pitAnuM nAma "sajjana"
tathA mAtAnuM nAma mAlDaNadevI" hatuM. vi.saM. 1437mAM mAtra sAta varSanI uMmare
saMsArano tyAga karI saMyamano svIkAra karyo hato. vi.saM. 1450mAM vAcaka padanI
prApti thaI hatI ane vi.saM. 1457mAM pATaNa mukAme gurudeva pU.A.zrI.
devasundarasUrijI mahArAje emane AcAryapada ApI potAnI pATe sthApIne tapAgaccha
nAyaka banAvyA hatA. vi.saM. 1499mAM teozrIno svargavAsa thayo hato. teozrIno
AtmA zrI sImaMdhara prabhunA sAnidhyamAM pUrvamahAvideha kSetramAM sArA kuLamAM
utpanna thayo che evuM atizayavALA sthavira munioe kahyuM hatuM. Avo ullekha
somasaubhAgya mahAkAvyanA navamA sargamAM jovA maLe che. e mahApuruSa jevA jJAnI
hatA. tevA ja aparizrAvI-gaMbhIra hatA. tethI svapakSanI jema ja parapakSanA
sAdhako teozrI pAse ni:zaMkapaNe AlocanA grahaNa karI zuddhi sAdhatA hatA. A
mahApuruSanA jIvana saMbaMdhI vizeSa mAhitI pU.A.zrI munisundarasUrikRta
"gurvAvalI" (racanA vi.saM. 1466), pU. zrI cAritrarati gaNikRta "zrI citrakUTa
mahAvIra prasAda prazasti" (racanA vi.saM. 1495), pU. muni zrI pratiSThAsomakRta
"somasobhAgya kAvya" (racanA vi.saM. 1524), pU. zrI somacaritragaNikRta
"guruguNaratnAkara" (2canA vi.saM. 1541) Adi graMthomAMthI prApta thAya che.
teozrImade potAnA jIvanakALa daramyAna aneka graMtharatnonI racanA karela che;
temAM "ArAdhanA rAsa', upadeza mALA bAlAvabodha', "yogazAstra bAlAvabodha',
SaDAvazyaka bAlAvababodha, navatattvAdi bAlAvabodha ane tenA bhASyAdi "Avazyaka
niryukti avacUri', "sAdhu samAcArI kulaka" uparAMta kalyANakAdi aneka stavo Adi
agragaNya anekagraMthonI racanA karI hatI, jemAnAM ghaNA kharAM Aje upalabdha
thAya che. prastuta zrI catudazaraNa prakIrNaka avacUri (vRtti) paNa teo
zrImadbhI ja eka racanA che. jaina zAsananA mahApuruSonI paMktimAM potAnI
vidvattA, puNya pratibhA Adi guNothI sthAna-mAnapratiSThAne pAmanArA A
mahApuruSanA cAra ziSyo AcAryapadane pAmelA hatA. (1) pU.A.zrI. munisundara sUri
ma., (2) pU.A.zrI. jayasundarasUri ma., (3) pU.A.zrI. bhuvanasundarasUri ma.,
(4) pU.A.zrI. jinasundarasUri ma. je prabhAvaka kakSAnA hatA ane jemaNe aneka
graMthonuM sarjana karyAnA ullekho prApta thAya che. 2010_02

Page #29 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Introduction to the Learned Maharshis  A detailed account of this great
soul's life is described in the Shri Somasaubhagya Mahakavya, the Pattavali by
U. Dharmasagarji, the Guru Gun Ratnakar Kavya, the Tapagachchha Pattavali, etc.
A brief account is described in the books 'Pattavali Parag', 'Tapagachchha Ka
Itihas Bhag-1', etc. From these, the information has been gratefully taken here.
## The Radiant Star of the 'Somayug', Pujya Acharya Shri Gunratnasuriji Maharaj
Two eras in the bright tradition of the Tapagachchha have been particularly
noteworthy from a literary perspective. One is the Somayug and the other is the
Hiruyug. During the time of the Yugapradhan Pujya Acharya Shri
Somasundarsuriswarji Maharaj and the Akbarasurtraan Pratibodhak Pujya Acharya
Shri Hirsuriswarji Maharaj, the Shraman Sangh flourished greatly. With a
definite stability and skillful discipline in matters of conduct, thought, and
practice, the all-round creative activity of literature became very vigorous.
Due to the creation of many noteworthy texts during the time surrounding these
two great souls, the influence of Jain philosophy also attained an extraordinary
height and aura.  ## Pujya Acharya Shri Gunratnasuriji Maharaj, the Composer of
the 'Chausarana Payajnaani Laghu Teeka', was a radiant star of the 'Somayug'.
Although extensive information about him is not available, some information is
available in the form of Yantra, Tantra, Chutka, or Prashasti, etc.  In texts
like 'Shri Somasaubhagya Mahakavya' and 'Gurvaavali', there are many verses
praising Pujya Acharya Shri Devasundarsuriji Maharaj, which also mention his
influential Pattadharas. Pujya Acharya Shri Gunratnasuriji Maharaj is one of the
many Pattadharas of his.  Pujya Acharya Shri Munisundarsuriswarji Maharaj, the
Sahasravadhani, has given a very affectionate introduction to his Guru Bhai,
Pujya Acharya Shri Gunratnasuriji Maharaj. He states that:  * He was skilled in
the art of debate. * He had won many debates. * His fame spread far and wide. *
His mind could penetrate even the most difficult texts. * His character was
spotless. * He had no desire to harm anyone. * He never sought support from
anyone. * He never harbored resentment towards anyone. * He stayed far away from
falsehood.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 ra vyAkhyAkAra maharSiono paricaya A mahApuruSanA jIvanano vistRta vRttAMta zrI
somasaubhAgya mahAkAvya, u. dharmasAgarajI kRta paTTAvalI, guruguNa ratnAkara
kAvya, tapAgaccha paTTAvalI vageremAM varNavela che, e paikI saMkSipta vRttAMta
'paTTAvalI parAga', 'tapAgaccha kA itihAsa bhAga-1' vagere pustakomAM varNavela
che. temAMthI tA2vIne atre sAbhAra grahaNa karyo che. 'somayuga'nA tejasvI
nakSatra pU.A.zrI guNaratnasUrijI mahArAjA tapAgacchanI ujaLI paraMparAmAM be
yugo sAhityanI dRSTie khAsa noMdhapAtra thayA. eka somayuga ane bIjo hIrayuga.
yugapradhAna pU.A.zrI somasuMdarasUrIzvarajI mahArAjA temaja akabaraasuratrANa
pratibodhaka pU.A.zrI hIrasUrIzvarajI mahArAjAnA samaye zramaNa saMgha khUba
phUlyo-phAlyo. AcAra, vicAra ane prarUpaNA viSayaka cokkasa sthiratA ane kuzaLa
anuzAsana maLatAM sAhityanI sarvAMtriNa navasarjana pravRtti khUba ja
jorazorathI banI. A baMne mahApuruSonA AsapAsanA kALamAM khUba ja noMdhapAtra
graMthonAM navanirmANa thavAthI jaina darzananI prabhAvakatAe paNa eka ajaba
UMcAI ane AbhA prApta karI hatI. causaraNa payajJAnI laghu TIkAnA racayitA
pU.A.zrI guNaratnasUrijI mahArAjA 'somayuga'nA eka tejasvI nakSatra hatA. emanA
aMge jo ke vyApaka pramANamAM paricaya sAmagrI maLatI nathI. chatAM yaMtra,
taMtra chuTaka yA prazasti Adi rUpe thoDo ghaNo paricaya jarU2 upalabdha thAya
che. 'zrI somasaubhAgya mahAkAvya' ane 'gurvAvalI' jevA graMthomAM pU.A.zrI
devasuMdarasUrijI mahArAjAnI prazaMsAnA aneka pado upalabdha che, temAM emanA
prabhAvaka paTTadharono ya ullekha prApta thAya che. teozrInA aneka paTTadharo
paikInA ja eka pU.A.zrI guNaratnasUrijI mahArAjA che. sahasrAvadhAnI pU.A.zrI
munisudaMrasUrIzvarajI mahArAjAe potAnA gurubhAI thatAM pU.A.zrI
guNaratnasUrIzvarajI mahArAjAno khUba bhAvapUrNa paricaya Apyo che. teo jaNAve
che ke teo vAdavidyAmAM kuzaLa hatA. temaNe aneka vAda jItyA hatA. temanI kIrti
deza-videzamAM phelAyelI hatI. kaThinamAM kaThina graMthomAM temanI mati praveza
pAmatI hatI. emanuM cAritra niSkalaMka hatuM. - koIne paNa bAdhaka na banavAno
temano abhigraha hato. # kyAreya temaNe Teko lIdho na hato. - koI upara teo roSa
na karatA. # vikathAthI teo dUra-dUra rahetA. . 2010_02

Page #30 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Introduction to the Learned Maharshis  **29**  - They were skilled in all
knowledge: They were skilled teachers. - They made their disciples proficient.
They had an amazing mastery of grammar, literature, scriptures, astrology,
logic, and debate. - Their brilliance was known everywhere. "There was a
tremendous pursuit of knowledge. - They were always diligent. - Their memory was
unparalleled: They were the authors of many detailed texts. Looking at their
texts, the praise given to them by Guru Bhai Suriji is completely justified;
this is clearly evident.  Their area of activity was Gujarat and Rajasthan.
There is also evidence of them performing the Anjanvidhi (consecration) of Jain
statues.  There is no specific evidence available to determine their time
period. However, based on the fragmented evidence available, their lifespan
should be from VS 1400 to 1475. It is believed that they attained Suri-pad in VS
1442. This evidence is found in the praise of the VS 1442 edition of the
Panchashaktika commentary, which mentions that they were initiated into Suri-pad
along with their Guru Bhai, Pujya Shri Kulmandan Suriji Maharaj.  They composed
various texts. Here is a brief introduction to some of them:  1.
**Kalpantarvachya:** (Composed in VS 1457) This text describes the glory of the
Paryushana festival. In addition to giving the rituals of Kalp Shravan and
various stories, it also discusses and decides on many topics.  2. **Jiyaratna
Samucchya:** (Composed in VS 1467) Based on the Shabdanusasan of the Kalikaal
Sarvagya Pujya Shri Hemchandra Suriji Maharaj, this text was created by
classifying the verbs. It gives examples and uses of the forms of verbs from all
periods. It also includes praise for the lineage from Shri Sudharmaswami to
their own Gurudev. This text is printed.  3. **Chatur Sharan Adi Prakirna-
Avasuri:** They composed the Avasuri named "Vishampad Tippani" on the four
Prakirnas: Chatur Sharan, Atur Pratyakhyan, Samsmarak, and Bhakta Parijna. The
first Avasuri among them is being published here. The year of its composition is
not available.  4. **Karmagranth Avasuri:** (Composed in VS 1459) Pujya Shri
Devendrasuriswarji Maharaj, the second Pattalankar of the Tapa Gachchha, had
created five new Karmagranths. Then Pujya Shri Chandrarshigani...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 vyAkhyAkAra maharSiono paricaya 29 - sarvavidyAmAM temanI kuzaLatA hatI. : eo
kuzaLa adhyApaka hatA. ziSyone teo nipuNa banAvatA hatA. . vyAkaraNa, sAhitya,
Agama, jyotiSa, tarka ane vAdavidyAmAM teonI adbhuta hathoTI hatI. - sarvatra
temanI pratibhA prasiddha hatI. " jJAnano pracaMDa puruSArtha hato. - nitya
apramatta hatA. smaraNa zakti atula hatI. : aneka vizada graMthanA teo racayitA
hatA. temanA graMtho jotAM gurubhAI sUrijIe temanI karelI stuti sarvathA
sArthaka che; evuM spaSTapaNe jaNAI Ave che. emanuM vihAra kSetra gujarAta,
rAjasthAna hatuM. emanA hAthe jinapratimAnI aMjanavidhi thayAnA pramANo paNa
maLyAM che. emanA samaya nirNaya aMge khAsa sAdhana maLatAM nathI. chatAM je
tUTaka sAdhano maLyAM che. tenA AdhAre temano jIvanakALa vi.saM. 1400 thI 1475
sudhIno hovo joIe. temane sUripada vi.saM. 1442 mAM prApta thayuM hatuM. evo
AdhAra maLe che. temanA gurubhAI pU.A.zrI kulamaMDanasUrijI mahArAjAnI sAthe ja
temane sUripade prasthApita karAyA hatA evo ullekha paMcAzaka TIkAnI vi.saM.
1442mAM ja lakhAyela pratinI prazastimAMthI prApta thayo che. emaNe vividha
graMthonI saMracanA karI hatI. temAMnA keTalAkano saMkSipta paricaya A mujaba
che. 1-kalpAMtarvAcya : (racanA vi.saM. 1457) A graMthamAM paryuSaNa parvanA
mahimAnuM nirUpaNa che. kalpa zravaNanI vidhi ane vividha kathAo ApavA uparAMta
aneka viSayo upara carcA ane nirNaya karelA che. 2-jiyAratna samuccaya : (racanA
vi.saM. 1467) kalikAla sarvajJa pU. zrI hemacaMdrasUrijI mahArAjAnA
zabdAnuzAsananA AdhAre dhAtuonuM vibhAgIkaraNa karIne A graMtha banAvela che.
badhA kALanA dhAtuonA rUponA prayogo temaja udAharaNo ApyAM che. AmAM zrI
sudharmAsvAmIjIthI laI nija gurudeva sudhIno paryakrama prazastimAM apAyo che. A
graMtha mudrita che. 3-catura zaraNAdi prakIrNa-avasUri : catu zaraNa, Atura
pratyAkhyAna, saMsmAraka ane bhakta parijJA A cAre prakIrNako para viSamapada
TippaNa apara nAma avacUrInI racanA temaNe karI che. emAMnI ja prathama avacUrI
A sAthe pragaTa thaI rahI che. Ano racanA saMvata maLato nathI. 4-karmagraMtha
avacUrI : (racanA vi.saM. 1459) tapAgacchanA dvitIya paTTAlaMkAra pU.A zrI
devendrasUrIzvarajI mahArAjAe navya pAMca karmagraMtho banAvyA hatA. to pU.A.zrI
caMdrarSigaNi 2010_02

Page #31 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Introduction to the Great Maharshis  Maharshis (Great Sages) of the 30th
(century)  **Mahattarshriji** composed the sixth Karmagranth (text on Karma). He
composed commentaries (avachuri) on all of them. All these commentaries are yet
to be published.  **Kshetra Samas Aavchurn:**  Poo.A. Shri Somatilkasuriji
Maharaj composed a new Kshetra Samas Granth (text on Kshetra Samas). He composed
a small commentary on it in the form of Aavchurn. This text is also unpublished.
A manuscript of this text is available, written in Vikrama Samvat 1480, which
includes a eulogy.  **Vasotika Vitanda Vidamban Prakaran:** This chapter was
composed to refute some of the views of the scholars of the Anchalgachchh.
Looking at the evidence, arguments, references, and style of presentation in
this text, one can see their immense mastery over the Panchaangi Siddhanta
(five-fold theory) along with their knowledge of Agama, Bhashya Nirukti
(commentary interpretation), Churn (summary), and Tika (commentary). This text
is also known as Anchalmat Nirakaran (refutation of Anchal views).  **Pardarshan
Samuchchay, Tark Rahasya Deepika Tika:**  Poo. Suri Purandar Shri
Haribhadrasuriji Maharaj composed a great text called Pardarshan Samuchchay. The
author composed an extensive and detailed commentary on 87 karikas (verses) of
this text in six chapters, rendering a great service.  Looking at all these
observations, it is clear that he was a shining star of the Soma Yug (era). Even
today, the light of his brilliance is being experienced by the Jain community.
We offer our repeated salutations to his life, which was rich in knowledge and
other virtues.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 30 vyAkhyAkAra maharSiono paricaya mahattarazrIjIo chaThTho karmagraMtha
banAvelo. te badhA upara viSamapada TippaNa (avacUrI)nI racanA karI hatI. A
badhI avacerIo haju amudrita che. pa-kSetra samAsa avacUrNaH pU.A.zrI
somatilakasUrijI mahArAje racelA navya kSetra samAsa graMtha upara teozrIe
avacUrNa rUpe nAnI TIkA banAvI che. A graMtha paNa amudrita che. A graMthanI
vi.saM. 1480nI lakhAyela prati upalabdha thAya che. jemAM prazasti che.
-vAsotikAvitaMDA viDaMbana prakaraNa : aMcalagacchanA zAstrottIrNa keTalAka
matonuM khaMDana karavA mATe A prakaraNa racAyela che. A graMthamAM raju
karAyela sAkSIo, tarko, AdhAro ane nirUpaNa zailI jotAM temanuM AgamajJAna,
bhASya niryukti, cUrNa ane TIkA sAthe paMcAMgI siddhAMta paranuM pracaMDa
prabhutva jhaLakI Ave che. A graMthanuM bIjuM nAma aMcalamata nirAkaraNa paNa
che. 7-padarzana samuccaya, tarka rahasya dIpikA TIkAH pU.sUripuraMdara zrI
haribhadrasUrIzvarajI mahArAjAnA padarzana samuccaya mahAgraMthanI 87 kArikAo
upara cha adhikAromAM vistRta ane vizada TIkA racI graMthakArazrIjIe mahad
upakAra karyo che. A badhA avalokano para dRSTipAta karatAM spaSTapaNe jaNAya
che ke teozrI somayuga'nA to tejasvI nakSatra hatA ja. paraMtu Aja paNa teozrInI
pratibhAno prakAza jaina saMghane jANavA mANavA maLI rahyo che. teozrImadgA
jJAnAdi guNa samRddha jIvanane vAraMvAra vaMdanA. 2010_02

Page #32 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Manuscript Collation  This section presents the first and last pages of the
manuscripts used in this edition, along with their initial and final phrases.
This will help readers understand which manuscripts were used in this work. We
did not have access to the original manuscripts, only their xerox copies. This
research and edition were made possible only through these xerox copies.  We
express our gratitude to the custodians and librarians of the following
institutions who provided these manuscripts: Dhehla Upashray, L.D. Institute,
Shri Kailas Sagar Suri Gnan Mandir (Koba), Shri Hemchandracharya Gnan Mandir
(Patan), Oriental Research Institute - Pune, and others. We also thank the
revered monks and scholars who helped us obtain these manuscripts. We are
grateful for their dedication to the scriptures.  - Editor 2010_02

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prata-darzana pANI prastuta saMpAdanamAM upayukta hastalikhita pratonA Adya-
aMta pRSThonI pratikRtio ane Adya-aMta vAkyAMza ahIM ApavAmAM Avela che. AnA
nirIkSaNathI kaI kaI prationo upayoga ame karyo che teno ya khyAla Avaze. amane
mULa prato maLI nathI. paNa tenI jherokSa karAyela nakalo ja maLI hatI. prastuta
saMzodhana ane saMpAdana paNa e jherokSa kopIonA AdhAre ja zakya banyuM che. A
prato amane pUrI pADanAra DahelAno upAzraya amadA., ela.DI. InsTITyUTa amadA.,
zrI kailAsasAgarasUri jJAnamaMdira (kobA amadA.), zrI hemacandrAcArya
jJAnamaMdira (pATaNa), orienTala rIsarca InsTITyUTa - pUnA AdinA jJAnabhaMDAro
temaja graMthAlayonA vahIvaTadAro ane meLavI ApanArA pUjyo temaja suzrAvakonI
zrutabhaktinI ame anumodanA karIe chIe. zrutabhaktimAM karela sahAya nimitte
AbhAra darzAvIe chIe. - saMpAdaka 2010_02

Page #33 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
CE **Exhibition**  This is a narrative of the acceptance of the three vows, as
told by a disciple to his guru. It begins with salutations to all the gods, and
then proceeds to describe the acceptance of the vows, the renunciation of
worldly attachments, and the attainment of liberation.  The disciple says, "I am
a humble disciple, and I have learned this from my guru. I will now tell you
about the acceptance of the three vows. First, one must renounce all worldly
attachments. This is done by meditating on the nature of reality and by
practicing non-violence. Once one has renounced all worldly attachments, one can
then take the vows of non-violence, truthfulness, and non-stealing. These vows
are the foundation of Jainism.  The disciple continues, "The acceptance of the
three vows is a great blessing. It is a path to liberation. It is a path to
enlightenment. It is a path to peace.  The disciple concludes, "I am grateful to
my guru for teaching me this. I am grateful to the gods for guiding me. I am
grateful to all beings for helping me on my journey.  **End of Exhibition**
**Note:** The text is a summary of the Jain teachings on the acceptance of the
three vows. It is not a complete or accurate representation of the Jain
scriptures.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 CE pradarzana tInavAvIrasivaye mudhoyisvaguromurivAnAdhAraNatyAkhyAnampaki yatp
adavidhAraNazamazAstrAdausarvacaSTadevatAnamaskArovAyutAnavatadanAbAdidamudhAras
yasaviSya
tItimanyAtanayAsikampAzivAmAnyapakIkimivAkiyanamaskArasAmanyAmamovAkAyadAna
vidhAnamaskAronazilatoyadyAcavAcikonahatamyAdhimAnasikakAdhikosatIviSyasakiMdai 
nadayisamAdhyAmiAnanayarijJAdhyayanakaraNAnaMtaramevacArasaNezamisikathaMjJAyatA
kosatraya rinAsyatidevanaparijJAcakSavAratenAniyatamevAsnIzimamusya prathamatrA
demikvadesavirasammadihImarekA joDInaMdobAlamiyama simAsaNezivyAraha yamAthivyAd
ikAyAnAMSaSTAcAvAmbamakAyavyaparAyalakAstamyAyisaMkalpalAraMmatvamahileda svAdez
asyamakAyasyaekadevA:saMkalpanimAnirUpaHtasyAyimAparAdhaniraparAdhavenaviSakAra
svAhAnadezakadevamAnaspasvayaMhananadhAtamatayAvirasoninodezoka
devAcistAsammadihAtisamma kAviyarInAnacapradhAnasyASTidazanimattisyAmosamyaka
TimamarikavimiyatapaMcavamupayAyAna
josovoniyAzrAvakaDIvAtadobAlayamiyamaraNazAmamaragamanekadhAvaNita lathAhi
AvIjaditimabalAimaraNavasahamacisoanimuomAma banA Arapasaal 1zrImajhiAyanama:
pAvatyA grAnadAvizeSeNaIrayanigyayaSTakAraka vArazvaramatIrthabodhava amminya"
vivaraNameapucatAyadiviparItamayAkimaputanma rayAnaniH-
sakArAsidhAnamaciguvamuktamaliyato'mpAviSakArAkimyavArasakannayite satapari
jAyAmantidevAkAgAvAsAvatemahaniSyannAmevAtIspanojJAyate'syAyimapavakaneniIGarg y
itAnukaMpevidhiyazodhyasadAvibudhaiHzAmAjJazAsanalavamyazrIdhamaghoSamayuroyiti"
ghamAda:|thisamanizakSita zividhiyakSadevAkavAdhAmanidhiradamuSyAcIDaya mikssmri
guruHshaannyuuhodynishivraamaan:maadhrmghossmriikssaasmmaanmmmrihriikssaa|
mamatavAdAzIsavamagamazisnamAsvampAyatAnasatecaka vivaraNamAmihAra tyA
rvyaampkaalmp||3||mithyaayvnnitmykaamvimaadhnomhaayaatmyiktaanuk yaH
zodhavibudhAvazeSaNA smaanaartaaryaavivshstiH|| graMthamAnaNAra
samAmA3raztyAsthAnavivaraNa 27 bhAMDArakara orienTala rIsarca InsTITyUTa - pUnA
na, 124 ||3maat :  /  /  zrI sarvajJAya namaH  /  /  aha~  /  /  natvA vIrajinaM
vakSye mugdho'pi svagurormukhAt... maMta : zrI
bhuvanatuGgasUristasmAtsvasyopakRtikRte cakre  /
vivaraNamAtramihAturapratyAkhyAnaprakIrNasya  /  / 3 /  / ...  /  / 4 /  /
samAptAturapratyAkhyAnavivaraNaprazastiH ||grNthmaan-850 ||shrii|| . 2010_02

Page #34 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Performance **2010_02**  This is a list of names, which are not just names,
but also the names of the winds, the names of the clouds, the names of the
stars, the names of the planets, the names of the constellations, the names of
the galaxies, the names of the universes, the names of the dimensions, the names
of the realms, the names of the gods, the names of the goddesses, the names of
the saints, the names of the sages, the names of the prophets, the names of the
messengers, the names of the teachers, the names of the students, the names of
the disciples, the names of the followers, the names of the devotees, the names
of the worshippers, the names of the seekers, the names of the aspirants, the
names of the achievers, the names of the liberated souls, the names of the
enlightened beings, the names of the perfect ones, the names of the omniscient
ones, the names of the all-knowing ones, the names of the all-seeing ones, the
names of the all-powerful ones, the names of the all-merciful ones, the names of
the all-compassionate ones, the names of the all-loving ones, the names of the
all-benevolent ones, the names of the all-kind ones, the names of the all-just
ones, the names of the all-righteous ones, the names of the all-holy ones, the
names of the all-pure ones, the names of the all-perfect ones, the names of the
all-complete ones, the names of the all-encompassing ones, the names of the all-
pervading ones, the names of the all-present ones, the names of the all-knowing
ones, the names of the all-seeing ones, the names of the all-powerful ones, the
names of the all-merciful ones, the names of the all-compassionate ones, the
names of the all-loving ones, the names of the all-benevolent ones, the names of
the all-kind ones, the names of the all-just ones, the names of the all-
righteous ones, the names of the all-holy ones, the names of the all-pure ones,
the names of the all-perfect ones, the names of the all-complete ones, the names
of the all-encompassing ones, the names of the all-pervading ones, the names of
the all-present ones, the names of the all-knowing ones, the names of the all-
seeing ones, the names of the all-powerful ones, the names of the all-merciful
ones, the names of the all-compassionate ones, the names of the all-loving ones,
the names of the all-benevolent ones, the names of the all-kind ones, the names
of the all-just ones, the names of the all-righteous ones, the names of the all-
holy ones, the names of the all-pure ones, the names of the all-perfect ones,
the names of the all-complete ones, the names of the all-encompassing ones, the
names of the all-pervading ones, the names of the all-present ones, the names of
the all-knowing ones, the names of the all-seeing ones, the names of the all-
powerful ones, the names of the all-merciful ones, the names of the all-
compassionate ones, the names of the all-loving ones, the names of the all-
benevolent ones, the names of the all-kind ones, the names of the all-just ones,
the names of the all-righteous ones, the names of the all-holy ones, the names
of the all-pure ones, the names of

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 IL pradarzana 2010_02 yAdImArikApassyiASamANakaraNaMyA nAvAbhAvanimayamaya
nAvAjAMnAUMgAyakavAyuyomAyArAnAmyanamAkhAnAmAninimAbanApekSayAnAlAniyAniridhi ja
naprapamenizampAdhiyAnAsaMgakArAmanavenarAdhanayamAjhAdAmanavamAdhyayananamakAra
kampamanAnevAranadAmiyanajayAratAvakumArajanAdamayanakananimAnamArAmANinAyanAniy
avAnamA manApramA amibayA vibhanidinapanirAyapraviSAvinAuna
nAyakamakiyAzamAnamAvikAgAnI pAnApamAnApamAnajalasammAphiyajAnavayana nivAkara
ninAnidhi vanAniyalAzanAnAmanimamanyAnI
mAnAvAnizAnAmyAsAparAvinAavaravyanaspikAra vArApakalpajanama
pakaraNAzinikarupanaananyamamAnAbAnAjanamadhyApanamATilonirAkaramAna-vipInAna
naraniyamyAnamAra jaELAcataka.yAzimAmananakvimA samAnAnkAmA
1.saritamitarodhAtmayA
memparAmadhyarahitaspAyAlAjanizmiraNajimanAmanyAmagnimaminikananinA ka ra liya
evaMhArazAsanasAzayAnakA mata manAnA
majAmavAlamaparijamAyalAzavAsanaviratipAlamAmalAyAtranAmanadevAnamAyatanamAna
nmamAyAmaparaekmAmAyika
bijatinAvazAnadAnandalacalapANAliyAnAdiviramaNAvapeTinAvAcanapauinamA
jamanAmAcAramapinAkapArinapisArvajinakA
samayamaraNamanekAkAruNenanAyakadevAyanivAravAlApanamA
sAmAvanivikSasyamavajAgezmaznAyazitAvanAna vA mAnavikamadhyamovAya jinamaNa
kenaminopaMDinapAnamasAra gAvogArerAvirata javaninAnimatAnyAhAra
chameSTidharmaspadakAnipovanampavidhiyazmadhuzyesanIya nisAna mAnadhAna
maMninidhayaHpanalibharAyamaparavAlA vinaMsadhvabhiraNAdinAnibAne
katipamAnApaviliyanaM nayApArasapanAlayAmAdiranagama
limaravAniyamApanatAninAmanagrAsAparaNayAvANadivabaLA purnaktiNA
medhaaviivinaavaapraanndhbhnaa| zAhArakArAtmakAravayarthI yApAsaNAmadhI/ eyakSA
samikadesavisammahimasjionAvAnizIbAlayaDiyAmaralanisAmolana kAra
rAmavAcakavAlaya DinamatInAmyane'sATa "
tamiracyayazvayAsAusikAudesanavamAsaNavadesaNavAneSajunahoradesA kAmAsAtha-
karaNekAra mAtra kAmukkAra ajJAzyANimusAvANya paradAra
nimamaNeTiMcAaparimizchAuvidhAyupatyAiMdira jarayAmAnavidArayanimayapAna
rkhdirNgtthlaa| naabsraanmnbhinmsinopcineksaae| nirAsanaparevAsarAya dilAnana
pANavAya raNe: bAlamiyI mahAzAjacadimAderamaNAmuNDA
maMcaceramAdemAvagAmipizAyaNatayAnapAvaramAyadAnAvara adyavAdhinAnina, kina
aTinAiTinAkAnAjAnogANaparisaMsthAmAmAzyaya nihisaMkniAmodyApomahAvihInasociurosi
simenapAnaparimitA aparimitA yAzcApariSada, mAjAvinAkAtamyA tyA vAkameliyamaraNa
kAle mAganevima mAnanIya malamanAyata
kAnADApayAsakAramaraNAachinApajIviyAmAnApadivAsamukkApachimasala nivanAnizcama
khUna vApaparA nivAsa vivayanmiyatenabalapa..lata maraNAhAnarAja halamakicarAdhy
AlAmunissAsigharenevAruhicusaMdhArAja'marazdasAvaratAnacanabAlapampayanala
taashmaanyaavinaaprdiidaa| nanikIma jAvekyamaraNakarAtinabAlapana
yApajAnAtharinApAsavakkamoviThaNaniShiA sopenabAlayimaraNane jahAjAvamApA
mAriyAgamana viSayana yAparimANakaraNe gataratI gamA
mrnnshkmaanaaynmgaayaayaamcNdvaarmykaa|
pramAniammammmansiAANETamanianAnArAvaramayantramaNAnAmamAyojana parinamaH
ananayojanAnadharmavApahAreNI mApemAloktAramArgikanyAmamAsulalitA
SafaqviexmakanyA kalyAvadhimasAmayasayarinizANaERARIRSAEnayaNAyakamayA
mAbimAmatyAzivAzivAnirinidaMDomanapAkavyAyAmayoyariramA pratipatrikAlAI
nimmaraNAlapaifielnamAmalAnanAIyAvavidhAnajinasananananasakdana
ruyasaparinAmAmAlanasampanamtAyavinazyAvadAehAnamahinaniyAM
banAdarambhAvasAmAnAraNapaniyasyAdi rassaramana
rAnamagAganIsAniyAmaznAcAyalayanavAlaenimayavinAyava
maanaaminaaniyaaNpvaavaaprtikriykrlr| dila mamamamanamakapaSacAlakatAraka mAgAsa
manApavimarAvanAnambayapAnandiyaniyamAvimAmAnimAyAmApanavanAvinayavasAyAvAyA
sAkamaamazmARIRanAyanA sumanAmAnavAna:mayAvaspinara vinAmmAnita: mArakapavikalyA
namAyAmAmupagamanyApagamanakarayAnAmyayamabadadhAnAnAthamAvAsAmyAvasvagamana
nAmabAlapArasamaNakAvavinAvibhaya manamAnayamanasyAyacAna: RAISE nAbAbamamA
rAmapAnapaninabharI karizvAmiyarAviniyamatrinayanAbhAnIlAmAsamabhamanasipamAnAna
venapratidampAyanamaya misAsA-jAnagAyAnaparikakalAvakarapAta
jayanyanamAranAsibAramAnAarmedia tAkA navanimamaya
dinavimalayanavajavAnaniyatamaDiyA kamAnanavaninimitatA
maraznalinApajananaraMparinunibharaNammAnamaracahAnA banAnAsavANevAkAminAmAnaNya
samAjayAnaMnavanimaratApalikana patracA janapratiniyamaapamAna bhamyUmimAmana
mekapamAnavadamakAravacana ImapayakAmAyanemiyAmanavalapayAnadhArAmalA
sumArAsakhiyanAnapAranAgApu yarUpamArakamanamAnapranipatrikAlAprina..carama naM.
4782 somasundarasUrikRtAAturapratyAkhyAnaprakIrNakAvacUriH ||ch|| saMpUrNIkRtA
|ch|| DahelAno upAzraya, jJAnabhaMDAra, amadAvAda. 23mAta :
athAturapratyAkhyAnAvacUrilikhyate  /  iha sarveSAM jIvAnAM... ta : karteti  /
84  /  /  iti zrI dharmaghoSasUriziSyazrImahendrasUriviracitavRttyanusAreNazrIca
ndragacchAdhipabhaTTArakaprabhuzrIparamaguruzrI nayAzakziyasapanA ma pa
hirAtehapakeguru sAmAnyaupadevaphiTanakapanavAraNagAvarayAmA
pAyAyamAyanapavavizvAsimacAyamitrA pArakapanakamadhyamarUpayapavasaraNazAnaspavi
zaghopArapAparanirapavAmAnopayogasyA
samyakapaTiyAnapavanaskAcAyasUyarAyakavAnapakamapanadArana! nAvazvakAraspatyArit
rasyasamiviyuniyanarampatyammAlAkArAkariSyatyapayoganazyiyana
kamAnAvaraNadizAzvyAkamelAbharotaraNakA yatasajJAnasAmAnyAaanm
jJAnavazavAcavAdharUpakevalajJAnAmadhAra
kinAyazvakAraspatyAricaspasaminiyamidanAra 5 vAmapadhamanivAsa zArAdimAsIvAznamA
uminaHmevinaHsvAdasaMdhizayArapAloramAvinAdharAiladrakdiAsanakarmamalatAsanatAtr
a pAvarabinAyAnadhyamonalacAsmaraluTipati vidyAlayalpAmovirAphinayabhArAya
viravamitravenayAro'ni pazyAmA mApanojAnAkagiruniyAnimiAizina
dinezpardhavAnaghAlokasparardazanAmakampa inirmamatApImepakAmakasadarAvira
jeminAyAtravyomavAramaluTiyalavidyAlayalpA rA-dvitamaptanayakAmanimahinAyayo.
jammArikavyANakevaDyAyomenaphevalIlokanAyo paabnr'sthilishbniphinichi yonana
sarvadApphadyonakarAlAkAconakara
kArisamAviyavassamaricahADahapiamarisAvarakhadhAsaNemarAsIle myAna
uvAsamaradhAmasAla nampanayAdInidiyaspadiyanArAyadamegasnadhAsUra
nirAkarAurayAvanA zasavaDarinAnI sarvapApAnAmakaraNI milIyana agadhamApanAkAlA
nAga mArAzavamariyAnimImatirasmasaniannAdRSimariatIvarakhasIha
syamAhamajayanamakSA lavaNamarimANanANazadaMsasya pAganareNacAroza padya
nidAvidAlata nAmamArAminA samAnarasadAra risa[sammAjAkAhAmA navanavajArotra
sAmAnanagadoSadAyo gheNaIrayani ra yani nAgAsasArAAsAvimAjhAhadAyamacA
sasasiprabaMzayAsAraphoDebAsasa narasarva sparvaniyobhasAmyAna kArakarmapani
cAra vara bhatArtha dAkampu cI vimuddoga mahiMamilemAkA mananAna prAna
nipatipathanAyA. tanazadavizeSyA pUrva mAyanikalanavana myAnapANiice:
ghaNAninAnA zAmin ,pAvAsU, pANiviza sampadAsmAsUramAtavamA'NAma
sAraparitAmapaJarakArasadasavAra niyApanadAnarAmA pranitinamAmmA
kArAbhitrAyamanamapi nabhulado 25apacarakANajokADImaraNademakAlaM
midharozanasabhAAsogaZARMERnayAkAraNAnpA pikari paniharadezakA limAnasamayedha
rovidvAnA muuddaamtthinaaii| yatA sthApikA cakampakA rajapaNvaka
hArojasmaraNaciUdhArAvinApamANapatrAlAgasvAgarAdisamasayasanaDarakAlAvamA
mAnanIyaphalomaDamezavasyakatAnAhI zrUyatAlakapariNyA:nakranAyAyavA'paya
||yaa2tyaasvaankaakiNsmaash
saMbhavavaryakA-3jimIgamaleniyamAnazsarvaHsAyamApanamAnasAsakAraH navizadezaka
sAdApaDAyanAsampApimazvaM  /  /  zrIvinAdhIzvarAsAjilanisAmIrAjarabhara
kaanniyaabhnyaaymshissyvaayaa| bhyaavyaakvaanpriksyaaraajvch|
mhrivircinrsnumaarnnaangaadhiH|| pndyskncutraaprpubhysyaamemsmriii|
jarAcamaraNacajarAmaraNamavetAnijarAmaraNani
satAvATharasAramAnaprakAnakAvatarAThI najarAmarAmyahamanadAdikAranenAma
||snniictaalaa ||shrii jadhAniya jaminamAnayAnI raataanishvaa|| in care mokA  /
13.23vAra niyAnAkara jigarabA mAnisa 33 .

Page #35 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
2010_02  Year Vaisakha Vadi 7, written on earth. ||6|| End: Thus ends the
Avacuri composed by Sri Bhuvanatunga Suri, disciple of Sri Maheendra Suri,
disciple of Sri Dharmaghoṣa Suri. || Sri || May it be auspicious. ||6|| Samvat
1573, born in the country of the original Desik, Desavirao... Avacuri - Now the
Avacuri of the eager non-rejection is written. || Here, for all beings, the
nine-handed spear... No. 10085 Dr. No. 217 Sri Hemchandracharya Jain Knowledge
Treasury, Patan. Foot Recommendation Samama Mahat Walavir Diem (Elgia Sun
Sickness Community 12 Disavadhin Hardar Niyamandir Mavi Ma V Disavar M Hava Ma
Chativia Sapaadina Milmakriya 60 Light Nisar Las Yach Doru Dinu Maremas Vira
Idiangna Cladium Ramananda: Khamalies Karanara Niyamat Manavan Niyamasikasaha
Matra Me Mila Badimamasam Sidant Sasana Diha (Laen Diemcha Mitra Desma (Samiti
Tridivas Mahadikma Mishp Dikma Minasyad Dikma Krimmi Michadapanala Vaparala
Ramva Chittkhava. Dasanara Pra. Ragada Sanjalma Kak Eka Karan Kam "Kam Kala Ka
(A) Nishanaganj Se Laglag Karan Emaleka Varankaev Sanka Elye Karavan Par Nindaka
(A. Ergar He Kap  Karandare Karan Kuch Vikaye Karan Dida Ka Dam Ek Yahin Ka
Parivarya Ka Ehsaas Karan Gravasma Digo Kamasma Dimaran Ka Sh| Koma Dayah
Kahirka Rag Ka Raha. Sa Yagaska Eshvasmarkapadima Jam Kaka Dav Sin Ra Samirma
Kamakmaya Gaya Mitra Midb (Escar Miya Men Vismarma SSP Mandasuyu Kay 12 Saman
Gaya. Asan [K] Siriyama Dam Sachvadaravi Disantra Sasanyasama Mis Mami. 24 Dya
Iman Misam O Pita Vikritadharakh Vill Ditoiya Meditane Ya Misha Tiwarivar Niya
Niyamaneev Virte Sitr Nvaryamiv Divrkarmona Varan Din Sthankemanla Tojikala
Niyanimia M Neetigat Mama Misivmithyana Nikayka Hitnadat Damanma Mohan Nakala
Naytama Rataraat Manavata Dhanyasyanagon Nah Yasya Tithisyadityanati
Niyamakanyadhikariya Noindie Masha Sama Vidvanananyasya Nagavan Niyami
Nichkaryamaaraune Ti Tirghkarache Magnidhan Uram Swarupata Dipkar Ityachalkana
Tetigyanasahanyacha Kavalanamant Ram Ragate Veli Tijaram Navyanora Viddata Ni
Visheshvastirurupke Lyasanyatra: Yukta: La Kasa V Deva Rakshanmaspadma Trickal
Ek Kalka Vo Hote Sarvada Na Karo Ko Ye Kavikat Dinanayanakanamananyapa Panitarah
Parosatyata Prasyati Yatikara Karma Nivara Ni Ramadhamko Kampani R Sarika Ya
Chaynenida Karad (Yasyaapis Ev Kasa Tita ||43 Ti Dharma Gho Parishiṣya
Shramadesavishishta Vanagarinchavat Risama: ||313 Din || Pratadarshan

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 2010_02 varSe vaizAkha vadi 7 bhUme likhitam ||ch|| aMta : iti zrI
dharmaghoSasUriziSya zrImahendrasUriziSyabhuvanatuGgasUribhiH kRtAvacUriH
samAptaH  /  /  shriiH|| zubhaM bhavatu ||ch|| saMvat 1573 za3JjAtaH mUla-
desikkadesavirao... avacUri- athAturapratyAkhyAnAvacUrirlikhyate  /  /  iha
sarveSAM jIvAnAM navahastakunta..... naM. 10085 DA. naM. 217 zrI hemacandrAcArya
jaina jJAnabhaMDAra, pATaNa. pAda siphAri samAmA mAhAt vAlavira Diema (elagiyA
sana siknAsa sAmudA 12 disAvAdina haradAra niyamANadira mAvimA va disAvara ma
havAmA cATIviyA sApAdinA milamakriyA 60 lAiTa nisAra lAsa yAca doru dinu
mAremAsa virA iDiyAMganA klADiyama rAmAnandAH khamAliesa karaNArA niyamAta
manavAna niyamAsikAsaha mAtra me milA bADimAmasAma sidaMta sasANA dihA (lAeM
DiyamacA mitra desamA (samiti tridivAsa mahADikamA mizpa DikamA miNAsyA DikamA
krimami micAdapaNAlA vAparalA ramavA cittkhv| dasaNArA prA. rAgAdA saMjAlamA
kaka ekA kAraNa kAma "kAma kalA kA (e) nizANagaMja se lagalaga kAraNa emAlekA
varaMkAeva saMkA elaye karAvaM para niMdakA (e| eragAra he kApa i kAraNadAre
kAraNa kucha vikAe kAraNa didA kA dAma eka yahaM kA parivArya kA ehasAsa kAraNa
grAvAsamA digo kAmasamA dimaraNa kA za| komA dayAha kAhirakA rAga kA rhaa| sA
yAgAskA ezavasmArakApaDimA jAma kAkAdava sina rA samiramA kamAkamAyA gayA mitrA
miDaba (esakAra miyA meM vismaramA esaesapI maMdasyU kAya 12 sAmAna gyaa| AsAna
[ka] siriyAmA dama sacvAdAravi disaMtrA sasANyAsamA misa mAmi  /  24 dyA imaM
misama O pitA vikRtAdhArakha villa ditoyA meditAne yA mizA tivArIvara niyA
niyamanaeva virate sitra nvAryamiva dirvakArmonAvaraNa dina sthAnakemanalA
tojIkala niyanimiyA ma nItigata mAmA mizivamithyAnA nikAyakA hitanAdAta damanamA
mohana nAkAlA nAyatAmA rAtArAta mAnavatA dhanyAsyAnagona naha
yasyAtithisyAdityAnatiniyamakAnyadhikariya noiMDiye mAzAsamA vidvAnAnaMyasya
nAgavaniyami nIcakArayAmArAUne ti tIrghakArAce maganidhana UrAma svarUpatA
dipakAra ityA calakAnA tetijJAnasahAnyA cakavalAnamanta rAma rAgate velI
tijarAma navyAnorA vidadAti nivizeSavaSTirUpake lyAsaMyatraH yuktaH lA kasA va
devA rakSAnmaspaDamA Trikala eka kAlakA vo hote sarvadA na karo ko ye kavikaTa
dinAnAyAnAkarmaNAmanyApA pAnItaraH parosatyatA prAzyati yatikAra karma nivArA
nii rAmadhAmako kampanI ra sArikA yA cAyanenidA karAda (yasyApisa eva kasA titA
// 43 tI dharma gho pariziSya zrAmAdeSaviziSTa vanagarinacAvaTa risamAH  // 313
dina  //  pratadarzana

Page #36 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Presentation 2010_02  **Aum**. This is a presentation on the
**Aturapratyakhyana** (Refutation of Arrogance). This is a work by **Shree
Veerabhadra Suri**, a disciple of **Shree Mahendra Suri**, who was a disciple of
**Shree Dharmaghoṣa Suri**. This work was edited by **Shree Somsundara Suri**.
**Aturapratyakhyana** is a work that refutes arrogance and promotes humility. It
is a collection of stories and teachings that illustrate the importance of
**Samyak Darshan** (Right Faith), **Samyak Jnana** (Right Knowledge), and
**Samyak Charitra** (Right Conduct).  The **Aturapratyakhyana** is a valuable
resource for anyone who wants to learn about Jainism and its teachings. It is a
work that is both inspiring and insightful.  **Aturapratyakhyana** is a work
that is both inspiring and insightful. It is a work that is both inspiring and
insightful. It is a work that is both inspiring and insightful. It is a work
that is both inspiring and insightful. It is a work that is both inspiring and
insightful. It is a work that is both inspiring and insightful. It is a work
that is both inspiring and insightful. It is a work that is both inspiring and
insightful. It is a work that is both inspiring and insightful. It is a work
that is both inspiring and insightful. It is a work that is both inspiring and
insightful. It is a work that is both inspiring and insightful. It is a work
that is both inspiring and insightful. It is a work that is both inspiring and
insightful. It is a work that is both inspiring and insightful. It is a work
that is both inspiring and insightful. It is a work that is both inspiring and
insightful. It is a work that is both inspiring and insightful. It is a work
that is both inspiring and insightful. It is a work that is both inspiring and
insightful. It is a work that is both inspiring and insightful. It is a work
that is both inspiring and insightful. It is a work that is both inspiring and
insightful. It is a work that is both inspiring and insightful. It is a work
that is both inspiring and insightful. It is a work that is both inspiring and
insightful. It is a work that is both inspiring and insightful. It is a work
that is both inspiring and insightful. It is a work that is both inspiring and
insightful. It is a work that is both inspiring and insightful. It is a work
that is both inspiring and insightful. It is a work that is both inspiring and
insightful. It is a work that is both inspiring and insightful. It is a work
that is both inspiring and insightful. It is a work that is both inspiring and
insightful. It is a work that is both inspiring and insightful. It is a work
that is both inspiring and insightful. It is a work that is both inspiring and
insightful. It is a work that is both inspiring and insightful. It is a work
that is both inspiring and insightful. It is a work that is both inspiring and
insightful. It is a work that is both inspiring and insightful. It is a work
that is both inspiring and insightful. It is a work that is both inspiring and
insightful. It is a work that is both inspiring and insightful. It is a work
that is both inspiring and insightful. It is a work that is both inspiring and
insightful. It is a work that is both inspiring and insightful. It is a work
that is both inspiring and insightful. It is a work that is both inspiring and
insightful. It is a work that is both inspiring and insightful. It is a work
that is both inspiring and insightful. It is a work that is both inspiring and
insightful. It is a work that is both inspiring and insightful. It is a

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pratadarzana 2010_02 emamA aii| pradhAura prsaaryaanaavriyte|
sapAyAnomavahastakatanyAyapeyarakAkAyupe lAvArAzanAsyevasAramAdane
nAthayanenAspAta rAdhanamvarUpamAhAdesikadesAna-vAcAyane namaskAra
karamAlakatta: ucyate vArasadgAjAvarIcakiparijJAcArakAdamadhyayanaMnnanalIkA
edanamaskArovA vijayagaka kakayaratA
desaradhanArakSiAdikAyAnoSaTozavAnadevAsakAyavyayarodhahAlakaSatasA pisatya
nArela honadinedalAdekadevA kA lAjavasavinA bAhita sarUpaH punastasmA
pisAparAdhaniraparAzanebaddayenaskiAra zAniraparAdhasaMkalpanajAvadinAnimitarUpo
dekhokrevaamaanshcryhnnNdhaa|
samAdirasonirasodevarakadevaraviratArAbAsamyagavipItAsacyahAnarUpASTaramA
nayasyAmArabhyUrAhArayavibhayo jIvayAvakAmebaMdhAmuimanesadirabharaNasinA
jivaDiverabAlamaMDilevayogAnagarapAtadinAlaTitamisa zrIniraRSHeka
kadhiledAnimAramA sanevAnapaMDitamaraNamisinaSiteravApAsavaralamaraNAdinApAyApak
AnAdAtUmatrasavavarAtapararASamAbhAvAlAlamjazANAnipAtAbaramaraNAcadime dA
nAlayakA nimAramyAmarA arraibhyAraNealamNHMsAsanamarAmadaemA
phAyatakAlamaragaTaleTanisasAlekasaWS solarakanimAvazA bAlamaraNa
diratasabhyaraSTelimaraNarezAvirataspadhAnaparitasaraNAvayAnoraDilamA
kelinaaNddisshprnnebaitirkssyr| devAvaratonabarasAnAni
mUlAniArAyaphanilamanimahAtAperUyATalAepalipAtAdAdaramaralatamANi
bhUtAnyatAnivalamAsamavikAmanA  /  irannidhikAdiyaNatAnAmapidityanajyamanApUna
yAdizakAtazetadvidhikahAtUsasAbAlAjatAnyatAniera rAta porasaMpatizama: maadhrm|
nirAhArajJAnAtmakenavAzthasarahAtapAsaNaruNenayuloyukovAya tiyAnako javaniyAmA
pulaattinaamlchaaryaalibrdhaapyriyl| vivAdamasadanAdirUpaH
sAmpAdidamadaraisacisAninalikA jeda-dAre yacinAcAcANAva nAyava sajAvas haja
manAvara vAnUrabhunAvabATAtavAlAmavAmiyAbavanayavAnAkA yanivitaraMyati
puruSaspAtagabahiraMga rANA bArAzeyaradArAzuteSAM niyamAdeparaminnadhAnayAmitA
pa cirimANakaraMzonataracanAgamanAviramaNayattatvamegAANTHIS ni
jaanyemuplsaanaakotvykaamaanaannyvaanpjtaa| rimisAyAparigRhALyAtanA
picyAniviramAninihAyacAnizuSucanA  /  yavyApArAtabhyoya
drbhnniithitiiyegnnrte|ksiiMAME yojaneninavaniyosanalAmavAdanAAgamanariSayatayA
yadAniyAcyA nirikSamAmArapanAkAbutAphAzajAyesUbarUlAbAkA tanmaktAha
maMdirAdInArayogamanaviSayaM syaa|| gaNaratAztavArya yona
nani:yojanadharmazvampahArekabAthasiritisatanavAlA
MmataratAyaMgaNautArAbahAdevarahAtamavacana
niymaanaaNdigmmniymaasyevbaaprnidinskpkrnnaankaavaastvijdegaa| JNI dama
pazihAmatamanacamisyA pAcasvaitanaguNakArakAvAhuNavataJcadivirutAmAtanadAza
lAcalAyAhAjIpAlamA dhAdvAramupAdAspanarupAcAtyavistaratiparijogA:
anArozyAgrahAMganAdikArateSAparisaramAdhamANakaraNeyaravasa shikssaa|
yAvAMgIkArAhagatane sirasAelidinetirAyapaharAdicaijavarasasanAdhizazAvatamaya
diviktittamitindora tivaammsp| zAcaratizyAyolAmasabhAyAmamatyavasAyakavAyU
vAradAtUna hatIyezikAbalAranapAnalatiyApAvisadAdharmaparacampAso| H
IHATTIlAmotivinAma batAyAzakAyasavApovArthamasyadakSatAtiropanasyavidhi:sAyAsarv
AhArazarIrAdisakArAcA
zakAvateenAnivacarazikSAsunAniecamukadAsoprAvakobAnayaMdinamaraNanayuittatyAhI
kArakhyAzA sarasegA stAvinAkAmAlA vinAvAnaspatiyAdAkrAmaNe maraNakAle sammAna se
leSaNAyakavayanmiyanetAlaye 11 HRsAsaraznAragatasminmaraNAsitApani tyaevaM
kaTicatvAsantAsAnamAraNa bAlapeDitalapara karatAnAvilAtinAtinalAla lAyasamakAjak
abAsalekhanAsapAsakAmakAracyabharaNekAratAnalapaDatamarAmitvamesanarAyomehamake
hathiyAta pratyAra luhAranI poLa, upAzraya - jJAnabhaMDAra, amadAvAda. 23mAta :
arham  /  /  athAturapratyAkhyAnAvacUrilikhyate  /  iha sarveSAM jIvAnAM... ta :
iti zrIdharmaghoSasUriziSyazrImahendrasUriziSyazrIvIrabhadrasUriviracitAturaprat
yAkhyAnAvacUrNi:zrIsomasundarasUri viracitA  /  /
bAtamyajavanAro:pasAramAnaMgadopadanazatihadayaMpavavidha spasAra
pratyAkhyAnamanavAnapratipatirUpaMzu asAyatiphalaMjanamAnita
stayetyAyyAnakoyAyopikariSyatimaraNadezakA
lepAtasamayedhIrovihAnunamUTAmUrcitAmajAjJAnaMyaspAraso'mUTasaMjaHspaSTatARMER
mAnavazanapatipatirUpaMgutaMyunAyatiphalaM savenasyAdiparyatarajJAnapratini tivA
viunamastAnemokamityUrvaHpyAbhavanapAtazAmakAra:dhAninAzinaNanidhAronapiyArAjAtA
tidhArastIratnarAvAIkamA rAbharaNetevIvazItijarAmaraNavita jarAmaraNasvarUpanaDe
dAdiprakAravezatitamAhiyevarisarveSAlayAtidaTAnirapadAnadhanajarAcamaracaMDa
zuSaNatidanamA viziSTajJAna navizevAvabodharUpaMkevalajJAnamitiAjJAyate vijJAnas
AmAjAboeMkevaladanimititAmAMsaMpannaHsayuktAlayAlokappavadezarakSAtmakaspA lyANa
kepaTyodyotanakevalAnokatAvAyotenUvamarvadAphadyotakonAkodyotakarAdivAkarodayavi
nAsarvaduritAbAsarvapApAnIma O N yatA
spApikApakasyavAranaduravasAdhukannIyatenaparijJAyAsta
kaSTatAyA'cAyatimANinAmAviyAnukArA'nisanamAlA TotaravArotipadAtadAvizeNeIraya
tiprerayatikArakama tivArazaramatIya tUvizeSyapadaMSASivizeSAninavAsminapAvAcA n
irAzayAmararizaSyadhAvIrasahassaraviravitArAtyAkhyAnAvarSiyImaMdAraninidhisAdhAr
alArAnA mAhAsaditAtopacAkalapayAmAtamuvAhatAnApanAkAharaNayakSA
navInopanAkAharaNasavatirivAratiyaharasmagrahaNenakAnAMtApani
tyArAdhanaeSamanAra bakaraNesavatiyavA'nyatAnIpinAdisotArAmalajamAnAnAMnumA
tilAjAmAdAyattavatiyayAvasanAmAropivAlIkadoSANapatI liTAne
lamahatelAjAyayadhAmayAnAMpatAkAhaNamusavAyajatAtatadhAra suvi
hitAnAzonanAtuSTAnAnAsamhArakausavAyalavatipatrayaghANarupamA
tAdInAmabihAghurumavarasuMDarIkAmahalAnAmadhyajinamatAtaradhya
sarvAsArakhyAnAmadhyasidiAsastyiprakSanAcyathA
dharmApApmaye'hiMsAjanapadapavanAnomA
mAdhavanananitInAMprayamANadenazAsvApAmumajinavAcajalA
diyuhInAMmadhucIsamyakrazuddhipradhAnaMtavAsarUparakArapaghAtApadinamaraNayA
rivAti: nirmabakhate paMDitamaraNakalyANAsaTyazcatayo
vanadevAnAmadhyaparitamapejavane pichale
manomajivApatakAlamattetayAkariSumatakayanasika nAnAmadhyaparamehakRSyahamzanido
gAnAmumarapanAMmadhyaparinikhimodAabhayAsarcavAkamAyArApazamAyarinihannidhyAyAta
kA bayaghAmorukAraNatvAdisataraNekamaNamuktiherupitemAsaMstArakaHsazimalAjAnAMvA
naepamevayamA manyatoyavAsanimaratAvakara kirva paramajAna paramamirazve tighaye
natrAmapapanAzakevalajJAnamuktivAzappatatizparalokahiteratAnaliSTamipyAcAdikomo
kanarormala zivamanI samparkatamAse yamAdezasaMyamAcAvAdAsampagajJAnacapaSamahAl
AtaHparatavApisarvottamAlAnAnAMyAmaNyamevaviziSTelAradivekino mnyte|32seymenprm
masaMyamopAyava
tanAdimuktakAraNamadhyasavApradhAnamalaikAraNesatorapijJAnadarzanayo
yAsAvaebamukttiAvAditinilighinitrAmapatyaprAsanyamA makarasaMstAraspatijAvatarva
tIghAnAlokikAnAMmAgadhavaradAmapattAsAdAnAlokotarANomApadAdAnAMcamadhyetIbaMkara
prakAzijavAI zrIsaMghapravacana lasaNepUmanamAsikAgAmadhyadevatvakatAvamA
nikoyAdhyAnAkAmaMtArakaHvihitAmAradhapliyatacAnarapranigAlAnimAmAnimAlApyehAti
kSitipuSpANpayaSitapuSpANivAmAmAlAkamujayo
ritpanekAvacanAtadAmAnimAlAghAMmadhyasaMstArako'pike
maMganaMsaraphtavatapobharakITakadAhI ratanacakarmabaMdhanyUrAvAriviNa'maryAdina
carASpAMsamyagatAnamevArasAmarasenavizvadananAMtarAnuyAyivAsamanaM
padhAdanayaghAMneyapaveMvidhAraskara mumbanI 34

Page #37 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 39 ## 2021b ## Shri Kailas Sagar Suri Jnana Bhandar, Koba, Ahmedabad  ##
2010_02 ## 23rd  This study is the seed of attaining the supreme state...
According to the tradition, Shri Gachchhesh Bhattarak Prabhu Paramguru Shri Som
Sundar Suri Pada has completed the commentary. May it be auspicious for the Shri
Sangh. ||6||  End: Even by making an exception in this study, it is known that
the same one does this. ||84||  Thus, composed by Shri Mahendra Suri, the
disciple of Shri Dharmaghosh Suri.  ##

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 39 2021b zrI kailAsasAgarasUri jJAnabhaMDAra, kobA, amadAvAda ki mAnavanImA
samasAramA 2010_02 23Ata : idamadhyayanaM paramapadaprAptibIjabhUtatvAt...
vRttyanusAreNa zrIgacchezabhaTTArakaprabhuparamaguruzrIsomasundarasUripAdaiH
kRtA'vacUrNiH samAptA  /  bhadraM bhavatu zrIsaMghasya ||ch|| aMta :
idamadhyayane'tidezakaraNAdapi jJAyate'syA'pi sa eva karttati  /  / 84  /  /
iti zrIdharmaghoSasUriziSyazrImahendrasUriviracita lbnnuhmghr'gaachi thaakaay'
smbaay' mhaak? aashaabk! dinasammaDEntalianREAMINAuyAdhArayAmAsanamA prAmamAgatA
vipani bAvAraNamubArA smagalaramamArabhAvAparAva vidhogikiyo'nikAyakI bAvakArI
RTERTAluatipAyabArAtiyAgAlA mAmaya mANasAbabAdi-sadAvana yApemaviparamAra
pAyomarakApanAvivakilamAcAramAbamAcAramaNa yAka mAravinitA sAmAdhika kriyA
meimAnadAtA nabinamAminiyama kiyAAamayasamARESSNEL ba-yApanA
ekamAyAkagaNamayaramAyAmA rakhananamabharonemiravamayamAmA
yohreemaantapApaniyariTiyasa gAyaramanaviya bhaya maniyAmAvanivArA
mAranAmAvalimAtArAnnAkAmayA vAdiviSNupurA kSagAMrikSamAmapitAnA
bAradAnAdimidanAmamAmAmAsivayavagamanamA pani kamasakiravasAmAjIrAkara
vAradAmyavikikAmakArakapAmAkosacAkayA- baliyAmAmaniyAmasonegaskiAramAmAyA
banaviya narivaramzivarAtrimA virAjamAyaNaka pAne vAbhArayA mAtramA yAnena kiyA
niyamAmapisama-NEKAREmitalmemangl a vimA bAsabArampa
RRRRiaDAMvilImArAmAzyAIrAnimAmalAmA zikAmazazviravAniyAzivAzanivAradAta
makarasvaviyAmarudaphanacAhAcArI mArAmAjiidAvara viramagAmyAkyAra animAyakela
yasarayAmAsA tara mATikA mArArAnavAraNAnagA kAkAnimArakarIlAvanigara-jinA lAko
bhiyA ye yogA kAyAriyApAga:mAyAmAna urvacA mejave mArgAvAni manata mAyA gAnArAlA
ekA jAyajAsamorayA nayA zanivAra AvazAyaka kArega niyamalegakA yAmamA ki inemala
eka sabama jogavirahitasAguNayapazvinI khaniyaniMdaNAyaNAnirIkSaNakSaraNA
vArazArita mAhimoEiNTRALIT-JRnAkAralAI rAjInAmazaravAdhikAra sarapI bArisa
siMgAzakadazazikA kIrazmAmAieNakilazdayAmAvaI yaranIgAsa yajJAsA
sevakhanamAlasAyAravimodI unIsAya mAlikAzyAmi kAmA rAzi banine navavirayA -
gAvane  /  madivasa malakina kayezivAyariMdA gajanAlAI bAlapatraparivatrikaraNAI
baMdaNapaNa vidizA kIramAcI nazAda nayApaka ranivArivArasava pInAmnayA maravaNa
kanara mAgAsa na jAnaalaaisanisamA yo
siMpavililidiragAyatikamayAnaNayAkamazAvasiAyakArazmAcAramA bitaanpi| pUnivAra
zAma kyUvamA MRRENam zyAIyAyo saya karmavaNa timicharuye pakimA pavika maNNA
suddhA yo movInadakAma me mugakSaraNA nivAsa jAI jAna yonizAnI . 9 phAyara
rasmasameTivilAraNa modIsareemAro yeksadesamora jyamavadi kriyAkA savayavaskAyo
tabaravAramA vitiyaayaa| samAgasadivikArae modI yAyAvasaha sIva vanimaya
NEmAnAbhi -ma- nivile samakA mitAnibhAya roDa mAninAyogaTAmasasidiya kayatakanaM
paramasara sAgara vimAdhAna vorayA ayAmi divA amarada pavAyumAna-sa. 33. bAvazya
sevA pratinidhI vigakhavA nAdAsa LINK karabharaNArayA nariMdamudiva diya
baMdiGamahAvIra munAenadhimadurAzaya ke zarasAnimaldausaragamaNA bukagaridA
viSaNyA karaNe atrakaroganiyatidi nanaramAyAmAcayatAkAra jamakarasArityartha
kama namakInavanAvAra pratyakriyAnayAbha-yA bayAvirasa yAcarAmuka meNA deva
esaya yAMcayAvaya kAyadosaladeubhirucaridana midamAha kayaralakadiumuhAva
koSAdisya zayAkarizvatayAnAmika savAlamAni aba mAmalegamaraNampasahitakA
jayatama mAniAramosA gAyanAlAsara pariyAdava are pArasamanimAvi
manizkAmiNamAlAsanAmukiNavinaNe va pApI zArirIzamAvikIpI yA mIniyanijadina niko
rAnA rAganI nAMpa punagirijabhAradarzanAcAra ronarAmavAriyarakSayaragaNA jANArI
ciyAtipadikAne mAne pikamiyAyArikiyo pUnAniya janakarAyana bIbara
navayuvAkaniriTelA zevinayoti vanAvizayAmaziyonyaki hAmAdaka pazamananayamAmaya
nAravA DAmijinAmA bhagavana naMgamAdiyazamazAda gAyasadenyA mAgamA naramapavitra
mAlAsanagatAmAyAvAsyayavadAnavanitika matA gAriyAnagI HamakiSamArapani eNamAkira
nAba kiriyAmA vibhinna mAMsa manina
mAzaMpavilAsaganabhAvAmAnAmAgAsamomIyAmAbAdamejaya mAvAraviyarani AAPNARIES mAna
janAmA vividhAyi ne milane para yamaprakAsthAnamA gamaramaNi
nyAyAEiARNISAREERSHESARIENTS sasthayAviSayamA nikama yatimAmAna prakAramA mohara
hamAnamahAmanadArakA manamama hare emabiristhAna ARBANKHAENARAYARANIcamA emAlemA
payA kA nAma vipanAle vagAmI kA mAmalA najayAnamArakamamA gaganazamana
vAhAnAcAyanImA navanividakarA sAvamahAmanadArAcanamakarasAbabAra
sthAnIyavadhAnamA mAna rAmabAgI vimanAce mI kAma karato mIkAbalA
ziyAkaraNAyadAmaviparIta sAvitrakAramaMgAnAti Manhavasae-mayA
mAmAMEDANTAAREENApAya (bAmaniyamApane kAmozIpAlikAkora mAriyama ma sAtha
sAbitavAra svayavikAmUkaprakAreko manirAmyAvara me rupAnI HEET sArazivijaya
mAlamitI maramA pramAnA bhaganA vikArAgAvapAsaNe bhAraARATKARINEERIKISTA mAyesa
prata mimikA nizAna sAvi mayA perumpati POREsamAzikamAnadeyaka mahilA zikSikAko
namala tamanyAnodanAma sAyanAmibimArIvAdikArI mAramA
ziraganiyamAyojiviImaIvatirthayAmivazaramavAniyamAnya-
marApamANyavAnajArAmavayamyUmyAmA jIpatiyAramAdhyamAepani madirAmamamisa
esayasozamAvirIta rodhinasyArAvAvarabhavanamArAkSakArazmAmarAma- simikara-
paraganA kamaviNyAyamAyamAnamaraNA 19 AamaaniriyabhAranIyamApanAmAnimAkAgAnAsana
magavAnaAMESSETIMRITIjayAnyavaramAmAmabamA pIenarama niranominAyA gayA camaka
pakIyarisAvarinAmAmA samyagAmI sAuna kAmagArAgAmArthapraniApanAbAbamA Ans N
IMilanAsasamamapyana60511 bAra boparkamikarmajyapIsakarmahAmAyAdisaNapajIre
marAmiyA bamArAma bIyamabAga gAvAla gale mitimA minA pAda
paramamamAgiyarapakanAnApanakSI koka niyama:35ko bdhaa| bhAsapUrI komArAmAra
yuekhAnApiyavalakSaNemAmalAyakA nAyanoki adenAkA bamA
vizaEDMROHTechhetanaMOHAMMADRATHIATRA nAnA gArayanisamAjapalasareki miyAsisa
gAyanakAsagaSThayAekAnaramayamAmadhamAzAha kaganakAminasazAlananaH prathama mAne
gaemApanozIkA mAmayasammamA mayasyAena yasa tamannaMgI hamI yI
madanamaTiyArAkoli managA ye janemi enivAzyAvAmi ginisaminitvisiyA pUrvadhayAka
bhUna mayAnakatA sibema bArAdhanAbAmunamaya kI kavitI SHARES jAnApUra-
manuvAmagAvabharakAzanamadhAmaniyamale
senAbhavanamaHmayamabhinavikamAnakApanakAya HMIRRENTatia nimararaveziyArapada
gamanAvinaM nipAdina para miyAmpimiliriniyaminimyAro pAra ka zmananda sUnakAyamA
ekamanatya paramayada nAkAmA kapAparati samyanazanasampayanokara sAsaMni kA
rAyagovamocita te agadago do cArAkSo vaha saMmaMkA jAmuvi vikAsa komavitrinave
gaMzaya bAgamarahAra divapAnakana nasuvAjinA vajana vipadabhamAnadhAramA
mAramAmaya gazmA pinAladamachAnAmagAva-pada pavana bImadhamaMjana miti sAravI
mirAmI rayaM naziyaM sAmarNaER jAminIvarizeNa padamAzyAta usamarata kAya niyama
mAyAmamA yAmamA manA syuSi lilayayaNe munAsicavamyAcha maTi bhUyazmayogAdaMma
resAyIde mi112 dhIreNA vimarica kAma eksa gusparika samayamA prasapAsamAyA
varavadhAkA bhokamAyomiyAdha se yA nidAna mararAni dozaniti sadara jyAsthAnamA
rimaNavijayasAmariyA rikAmaziyavaskadhIratra khemarijAmIle vimariyo ko nimazAnA
yA vAstha samAdhI nAmanipazi sIlaNavivarasamariyamaM ucizma zyavalumIlanomAjika
mANasamaNamAyamartha mAzI sunatenAle nAkArati mAnAyava rivarasamA jo kAhI
upayaMsa P irremiummms runa masAnakArakA adhiganI berambAra sArAmo vimunididI
jisiyanaM tayArI yathoDekA mesamA 42 kAtrajamazana zikAravAmi kamma pApudI
vimujhe machamidirAka semonikamAya madanamA marammabasAiyo saMsAraparizIyama
HASEER japalyA nidimAha-e kAnamA kAyAparinimaraNa sarakArI yuvAya yazarakANa
hokAdImaraNadesakAlamivazicamamaya soga nAsaMsAna yamyamikhA zAkAsepAnamama
yethIdAnAnangamUha paviU dhIrovinAyanArAsaMpannologasujoyagaro
dimasvayaMmabarakANaMbhAvitarazatana kAdIsaradesakAminIzamadama
mogasamaMtAyadhIrojaramara darayunikSaya zIranagarIya dhamiravadezaH
sUrajamyaSTazAnAma pAne mAnya matabhimAnakA cInasagArAmanA samAnazya:
avavikSekSiyAviSayamakAmA vigA-puruSAnamanaHninApikDapanAgareza kAni vinimaya
niyonAvamAthi niminAvazzImAdika vAmanadAnAmabinadA jyAmayi
sunAdavirajAlaunaviyanaharivarAmanivAramA nAyaDayAmakarAnAkAmAnakara-
digakaroyavinAzamAratAnA yA mAlikarArAlA N kSayAmamitkAramacayAvAsAkamamA
patrakAra nimittAjyAmapayaemasarokAravAlAbAdakatyAyojanamAtAjAtoyona
katirAmabhAravena micala majiekhAmA saraka ARAmAnasumArAmArAvyAEiA
sAmAgAyumatparakakalakamamadApagAvakanArA kArane tyadhanazA zyasamizanacyA
mAgAvara manApAnApAnAmAmAra kAya R anAraminAjaya yamarAmArA
maraNArayativarabatisamakArakamaharizaramAnadayaparaliyAnimIkAvAsmina zAsanAmAni
nikamAyayAnnuparamAsAgariyo nibhAivividho pAyAmazAlA nAma zAminabodha Noza
saMdaraNa riyAda manAidaliyasamarazAsanAne
NINAGAUTAWAHSAANIbApayogakApasAsanatyamAyA mAyabodhakA kebalakAmA malAI mAyane
itihAsamA kamAirasAra gariyasthamamitipadinovA jAgA midAnamArA vimAnasthAnIya
zyAmAnAdIhariephapayogatadevaMsArabhAnumAna popamAregAvarAralAbhAniya nikamAyA
SAERINNTROmAyo pratadarzana

Page #38 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Pratidarshan 2010_02  This is a very complex and important document. It is a
collection of Jain teachings and principles. It is a guide for living a
righteous life.  The document discusses the importance of **virat** (universal
soul), **virati** (non-attachment), **nirjara** (purification), **karma**
(action and its consequences), **ahimsa** (non-violence), **satya**
(truthfulness), **asteya** (non-stealing), **brahmacharya** (continence), and
**aparigraha** (non-possession).  It also emphasizes the importance of
**dharma** (righteousness), **jnana** (knowledge), **charitra** (conduct),
**tapas** (austerity), and **samadhi** (meditation).  The document also
discusses the importance of **guru** (spiritual teacher), **shishya**
(disciple), **sangha** (community), and **samayik** (daily meditation).  It is a
valuable resource for anyone seeking to understand Jainism and its teachings.
**Note:** This is a general translation of the document. It is not a complete or
literal translation. The document contains many technical terms and concepts
that are difficult to translate accurately.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pratadarzana 2010_02 NEWIva azA viSamayadavivaraNa mAkyamahatvavAdyanayAyanavat
inimAyazaHpyuyatanityabhyAmAnAbAkAyadyAyArAramAvaLAmAtAyAmAnAvayAyAga
viramaviratinicina mAmAthikanakriyAnaityavasahAryakartanamukArtinAmAcchAzakSiAva
nakiraNAmadarzanArivAvidyAlayabhanayupmavaivAnavatiyaknilisiyamAvadanAkamANya
vataH nisabAlanamAmanA mAticArakaraTanaspaniMdamanitAnapunariyAmAkhyagamanAsApar
ikamamAnakriyavikisanacikmiAbirayAnAvArupalAvabrAyavikikamAvaNmAkAtyAmalAsasakAy
amA navaratvAdAyAdhayArAvayAcAhAyabAmAyaNAmAvatyAsyAnanakacanatirasuvAyavakapama
mAmAyikAkyAtapaMdhamAmapimAmAthikAdAnAmAcArapacakAravAhanavANaphalakSaNa vinAzak
AvahivanayAnAdhamadhyAyakamAhAtvAzidevajinazAsamanazAmayAdivazInAMtahazAvamAmAyi
ka kliAdhAyAzyAcAvAdakiyavasAmAnyAkanavA vikAyatama aparAmAyadyAsavAyAzAvAnarava
nAyakAsasthAnanamAvadhAnovarmanakaDAlAMcAsakamAnADiREAkriyatazatinAtparyAukAmAmA
vikamavAnAkarakhAvazdavAmAcAra BAyAvatavayAcavaNAyadadhAdhamAna nidabAnA
mastyAcArAdarzanAcAramasvayaSTavivAhAvimAzattarAtmA
mAMgIvAnInakiramavavinImayamaya
kiyAmayanamaccAdezayAtmamayAmamavAvadhAtyAyanavanavAtanAvaDasAcativazAyinAlA
karAyAtakAyAyAyalAhAbAkIniyaniMgaDUtyatyayakArarAjAsArakhyAjinAmA
pAnAmAbahAdayAnadhAmAdhavarAzatikarmadaDazyavasAmAdhAkavanamAnapAmaMjhA
dazamIkAninavAddhArAvAmitva jshikyiaavndrshnaacaarvishaardaanaajaanaa| vivAdamAd
AnAsAvisamAnAvAsahAnayAdibakyAvAdasvArikArasadAmAtAvibhinaricaNakaecabaMdanavapr
atipajivAyaamanamAnavAlAvipAchA dayAravaMdhyavAsvihitAnA tathAvAbadAkhAcAriziyA
viniyAvaMdanakAyA mAninakvanAzradhAlana dirvAnAtAvAdilyAvazyAmavInAdiyA
maMganAanAmayamA niyaniyatillinamA
kArovamAnAnasazavinayakaramAnakanavaMdanAvAvavidhimA
vidhivanadAyiAzavadAvaditatyAyavarvizatyAyakarivahanayAvakiyAnAvA viriNa
sivAnAvAsahInAunara vicArAcAradInAkArAyAsAvatAmArapivizeSaNazAslAI
bhanidimavadanAkananAnAdInAMyadinAmadhAmavadhiyAnA-digvAha
yanapattikAmakakAsyAsyAsyAmakArakhAnAvasyAviSayanikamAdinAryA
jnaavraacraamaanaavaasdiinaakpunrpictidhihkrskmaakrnnmyhaasnaavpriitssshyyaa|
pahicavibhinAyacUniMdana samAvemakkana
miniTaparamAdhikamamatyAzakiranazanakarithamIniAyaDararIkaraNAtasmAADAbajAnA
nivartavetalanikamapanyAsakAra piaalnpkkimaahaanaatvaamvijnyaanaamaaykssaayoskyt
aasyvhaangvaanumukssopyttikmyaagliinaabjaayttikaayaaaakylihaaiihisaavnnmnimti| a
nikAmavizvAsimAbAdAyabAntavarAtimAdikAsyazALamaMkamapAlanakApAyAtanAvayAievamyas
tAdana himazrAstradhAraNa karakAdivasAvatraNaprativada vAyaDayAtamazyAcikimAnatA
kArasavakRpeyamyacakimAchAyaNAtakhatIkArakArAsabarasAnimAdikAmokacantAmanivanAga
panAkhadamonahAnI kanyAnAkanakAtyAmArgaNamkAyAmAmadanirAkAraNabAniprAvadhAnakara
manikiMtacAInAzAkhA vivaDatAzyakatI siyaviAikAmAyaNakamamA
makAumAzAjadamuDiyAAtako
vidheDAvAlAsaMdariyAlavarAhavihaMkasmasaMghAyanAnisAmarImakhiyA
avalaDamanamavaNAkAsyAyavANAkaNA rakyahAyakAya
vAbanavAnANAmrAuyuvAztyamabamvAdayAnAvarAzyAmavaraNAcyA
ninaSkAvizavachatAekatrajJAnanayamAdhIdhAma zyAmanavAna iyatphakaM trayasvakisan
arAmavAvivakAsamavaezyaniyarilatAprAcArajayazuddhiodhAcAkanAdhaupacamAcArAvakagA
zyavAhAya na. 17882 1. naM. 358 zrI hemacandrAcArya jaina jJAnabhaMDAra, pATaNa.
saMta : saMstArakaprakIrNakAvacUrNiH  /  /  kRtiriyaM zrIguNaratnasUriNAm ||ch||
granthAgrAma-950 ||ch|| 23Ata : aham  /  /  catuHzaraNaviSamapadavivaraNam  /
sAvadya0 saha avadhena pApena varttanta iti... asthanmamAhAjana-sAdhAramanavAnev
AsAvadhAkAratrayAyakArakakAramAvAsyAsmamArAdatanayamAnayAnakamariyaI kanIkI Imin
triyamiyAsisarvamAnAsvanakAyaparAkAzanakanAyarAdhAnAthamAvasyAeyarakdApakAracama
nuzAsAnAcArAvaraNyAisavArayagAnAmpasa varavaniniya
vitayAramuzvinatyArAhananakkAyamA OLARciTinasanakAyAyAmAnasyAnAnanagamanAgamanam
anamazAvAnamAninanaMtakAbananavAnauaetamAsA damammAmati dijArIrAna
agAvaskArAsayata-kkApakadamayAmAhAkhAmadAsarumamansadopigamanisvAsayamanikSamAda
madhinatAkamayAmiyama ghAmAyaNamanasukasvasazsyavAyammanasavasAjIvaomopazyaztyAc
amatipakArapAdAgitArikhamAjasujayadazvanakarmasAravAzyAjirjavalakAkArAnaTanaTe k
amamAyavidhAbAtimphaTayaniyamyAkvaMyAmAdhAkdiAritAsamAtyAviSkAriNazavadanAmamavi
ztimsyiAvikSapanAIniyAmakA syAmmAniMdadatimAtrAtyapinasama
niyArAzvAstriArAtyapriyaNAtapAdAbAyamamarAmiridhAgavAhinIvAsalAyAyAdhAlAsaratA
yayanakakSAguNatyA/pradhAnavihAriNaprAyakA prAmadaivAgata azmiAsvaMphanamA
presakAmalAdayAkiMganivAbAyakavaditAvananakAvacAsidvAMtakratyAksaMganejAnIroDa
dinamAnyAyAtikiMmaninIyatamayamayadarakAzayA rAmapurAta
yApajAdyAkdamApakatyamAyapAsAdyA-karminakarokakaleasaksunasvavanAsatAnAbasyAhamm
atyAkAyAkAzAnakvajAvATyavinazamamAEmkAle
HiARESTavizvakarmAlapAyayaniyanayamAvabArAmInArasa
karArAyasIriyaravAlayaspacivAmaNavATatIvitAmavAsihAyaHkSaNakara iPEvAsaghAumaTav
amukaTAkiMtataHsayamamAyAniyamApanaskanajanakanavivivAzaktitikAsamyAvasAmAyikaic
AritramityarSAnadAdisimAnA pAtvAvita parikarmiItAmadayAmAyitavAkSspayara niyAta-
pAkatAvanAma jATArikAraviyAyamhArArimadhimayakIna
bavAyacakanakAcabikharanasyApirajatrayA..
rusasatizrIsaMkapAkArAnavamityAbadAgAmApAdavAnA
kasAbatilAkamAyAdavamAmulasanittAvakaMjUnA'satayanArimparAkamA
sAgakaramAnanAkhAmahAmukaravAmanarAvacaicavamA
suvapadagharasaphazasthAnAdhIkyAkaekasamayaekamariyATAmadArakAzacan sakarAtimAtA
rAgAdizabahAvanakamamAlayanayakAravAtaSARcAmAsAhAnAmadAmamADavAyAganaravanavamul
atino miTilasanAmAmAhAna nidhArAvAhikamagalAyayamAnAnamAdhamukadAdAvAmadAnApayuk
ampavaNIdizanAvidavAptimAmAvi Da rapadAsAyiyolmAkAstamerapazilamyAkabadhimaMDala
paskiAnayAsabasapakiratapasvayapADanAcADApAvAmogrAma vidhAryakaryaTanAsAnAyAyAga
prakAvalAsciAkamavAvAvaNasvinAmAtrAmAdanAmyanamadASasamvaikAmacanamAvaDalanalAva
lamahakamalA anmamA parinIlAmamanasyAAtaparatApavaNyApatikAraNamayAtmaDanAmunAmm
amArakaganamArasvAmamanAyusamananArA diyA saTAmastasyasacivasAhatasAvAsako
niAsAravADAbhiHtyavAlimmada 12zmanazkarakamIkAvavakissArayAgaramAlAmA

Page #39 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## English Translation:  **30** **2010_02**  This is a detailed explanation of
the four refuges, including the various aspects of the refuges, the great sins,
the hundredfold transgressions, the transgressions of the body, speech, and
mind, the transgressions of the fourfold vows, the transgressions of the sixfold
vows, the transgressions of the tenfold vows, the transgressions of the
twelvefold vows, the transgressions of the fourteenfold vows, the transgressions
of the sixteenfold vows, the transgressions of the eighteenfold vows, the
transgressions of the twentyfold vows, the transgressions of the twenty-twofold
vows, the transgressions of the twenty-fourfold vows, the transgressions of the
twenty-sixfold vows, the transgressions of the twenty-eightfold vows, the
transgressions of the thirtyfold vows, the transgressions of the thirty-twofold
vows, the transgressions of the thirty-fourfold vows, the transgressions of the
thirty-sixfold vows, the transgressions of the thirty-eightfold vows, the
transgressions of the fortyfold vows, the transgressions of the forty-twofold
vows, the transgressions of the forty-fourfold vows, the transgressions of the
forty-sixfold vows, the transgressions of the forty-eightfold vows, the
transgressions of the fiftyfold vows, the transgressions of the fifty-twofold
vows, the transgressions of the fifty-fourfold vows, the transgressions of the
fifty-sixfold vows, the transgressions of the fifty-eightfold vows, the
transgressions of the sixtyfold vows, the transgressions of the sixty-twofold
vows, the transgressions of the sixty-fourfold vows, the transgressions of the
sixty-sixfold vows, the transgressions of the sixty-eightfold vows, the
transgressions of the seventyfold vows, the transgressions of the seventy-
twofold vows, the transgressions of the seventy-fourfold vows, the
transgressions of the seventy-sixfold vows, the transgressions of the seventy-
eightfold vows, the transgressions of the eightyfold vows, the transgressions of
the eighty-twofold vows, the transgressions of the eighty-fourfold vows, the
transgressions of the eighty-sixfold vows, the transgressions of the eighty-
eightfold vows, the transgressions of the ninetyfold vows, the transgressions of
the ninety-twofold vows, the transgressions of the ninety-fourfold vows, the
transgressions of the ninety-sixfold vows, the transgressions of the ninety-
eightfold vows, the transgressions of the hundredfold vows, the transgressions
of the hundred and twofold vows, the transgressions of the hundred and fourfold
vows, the transgressions of the hundred and sixfold vows, the transgressions of
the hundred and eightfold vows, the transgressions of the hundred and tenfold
vows, the transgressions of the hundred and twelvefold vows, the transgressions
of the hundred and fourteenfold vows, the transgressions of the hundred and
sixteenfold vows, the transgressions of the hundred and eighteenfold vows, the
transgressions of the hundred and twentyfold vows, the transgressions of the
hundred and twenty-twofold vows, the transgressions of the hundred and twenty-
fourfold vows, the transgressions of the hundred and twenty-sixfold vows, the
transgressions of the hundred and twenty-eightfold vows, the transgressions of
the hundred and thirtyfold vows, the transgressions of the hundred and thirty-
twofold vows, the transgressions of the hundred and thirty-fourfold vows, the
transgressions of the hundred and thirty-sixfold vows, the transgressions of the
hundred and thirty-eightfold vows, the transgressions of the hundred and
fortyfold vows, the transgressions of the hundred

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 30 2010_02 ekAcavAzaraNaviSamapadavivaraNAsAdiSAmAhA
bAyanapApenavaniranisAvadyApayutazatiAyAgAzamAnAvAkAyadyApArAsAvadyAzcAtalyA
gAvAcyayogA SAvipanAmAyikanakiyAnazyazadAyInakIrtanamukkAnAsAvadizAtivadanakiyAr
ANAzAnadarzanavArivAdyAnavidyAtAyAta guNavaMtAmaSApatipanitIkaraNapasAvaMda
nAkanakiyAtaghAyapAdirasyAbadalanasavalitamAtmanAsAtidArakaraNAtamAniMda
niMdAnamunAkariSyAmItkaegamanAsApratikamANana kiyacikisanacikimAvaNasyAMnA nArA 
rupasAvavaNasyavitisAdAsAkAyAmANijJipataghAyaNAviratyAdAyAdhIzaraNAtaSAkSaNAyaNa
kSaraNAsAptyArazAnanakitanAvatisamujhAyAtakAmAkapata sAmAyitAI.
pAtAdhAghamAmapisAmAthikAdInAmAvara paMvakavihinakayAphanadarzanArthakiMcidiziSa
varUpanAnAgAvASakamAkSAdAritAzedavahinAmAnanazAkyAdidarzanAnazani
sAmAyikalilAmAyA apyatAvAsakavacamAmAyikamavizacikiyatazyAhAsAvadhAHsApA:nAravAn
iravadyAtyAmArarAnasAvadhAnavahanatAzlarANAkSAsavanAtAvizA dhiratranaliyataratin
AtyayAvatArakhavatesAmAyikaMgavAriyAvArazcaghidarzanAcArahimAhAdasAzyAnazvayudha
dhAtayavAdasThitatavarUpaepadAhinanetidarzanAsamaeketasA
bArAdarzanAcArasamayapavikSyavizAdhicardizAtarAsmAnAjIvAnAtIIka rasaMbaMdhimAMst
avanAvakiyAtayavasavarvizatyAsmasavAmanavazilyAnamazcamatvamakitanA
abakumAatizAyinAlAkAdhAnakarAdAyAAyadyapASAkarminAvartana
dvApaNAkArAgAdijayADinAsAja paunAmAvhAdayAtadhAmAdhavarAyAnikarmavazayanasAmAnya
kidalinAsaSAmihAzvasaMDAsIIkarADinavAradAmaghAmityazAbajaktAca
urdizatisAvanadarzanAcAravihiridAnIjJAnAcAradimAhAmAepapavilaza
sAcArAhIsAvAdiyakSapAtAdInacArighAvArayAdAyAlAjhAnavAnapida
inicAriNayukAedavaMdanApatipaniyAgyazAyAmazAnadAtyApipAzvastrAdAyAzvadyAvAriyara
ditavAnAtavAdyavahArasadAriviNAravininavAvaMdanakAyAgyADinatyanAthakSa
ninAdarzanAtAvAdityacAcaravakSaraniniAdiyA:sapanAyukAsarUpanAranavopanipatati
nasyAtkAraNetasmAnAtIpAvizayakaraNAnAkanacaMdanAkanAvidhinA vidhivanadAdhizAhapa
rahitatayApaMcavinAtyAvazyakaparivahatayAvakiyAnAzAdhiritizataSAzAnAcArAdAnI
adhumaNyAcArivAcAradarzalAcArAyAtamA hitAyArapivizASaNazakSanAI
yatipAdilAcaMdanAka nakAnAdInAmadirApanAsaSAmaviSyaSAtA
adiMgAdhAhAyanapAlakamapakA
yAciyAmadAdaravanipAcapAvataviSAyatikamAdinAsakAtAparAdhA
jJAnAdArAdInAMkApumapipatiSiddakaraNakasyAkaraNAzradAnaviparItarupadizavAya
nAcatAbhadADaumAyanatarutamiliApassAlikamAnmAdASAvikaraNamapunaH kariSyAmIsiAyaM
dararIkaraNAttasmAdRSavAtAnnivasananatikamaNamuzatAbattAkAraNAnapratika mApanAva
dhAmapijJAnAcArAdInokiyAnAvaviyadAhAnagavAnasazmIpamikkamaNNatAnakIvakiMkaNayami
kamANAdhyamihArapiAhAvaraNamaligatipratikAmaniva
raNAtigAtacAdAyaSAtavaraNAtigAdikapAyaghA
kamekamAninapacamapAyazciAnanAvaNaNyatsAvAlAdanAGkSapAtaDadyakhaNa
karakadikSatAvabaNasUnivAravAlparUpa paramaguruzrIANaMdavimalasUriziSya paM. zrI
dhanavimalagaNizivavimalasiMhavimalapaThanArtham  /  /  aMta :
saMstArakaprakIrNakAvacUrNiH  /  /  kRtiriyaM zrIguNaratnasUriNAm  /  ch||
zubhaM bhavatu, kalyANamastu  /  ch|| 13Ata : arham  /  /
catuHzaraNaviSamapadavivaraNam  /  sAva0 saha avadhena pApena varttanta iti...
luhAranI poLa, upAzraya-jJAnabhaMDAra, amadAvAda.
aTAsyAvanyAzaMkvAhAsaviNsasaMdhyavAvisaharamArAne
padamukkaTasamyAnimAnAnurAgAdirahihacAvanakarmamAlApavayakArivAnADaznahanArA
visAdA pratisAdAtAmahAmAmAniApAThAnArAbavaMdyArabdhAsaMghamuUsAhANAmapiAdavAnodu
rlanatarasavamAdAvaniSAgavatAvivakSAkarmamanApagamAnavAtanAsaMghakAda
pAmahAnapisakasavAdikAtA
vivAdapavAsimAnAdibhavanakAmapivayakAzciAtApanAgacaMdada
lenApiyIppAkAlamaraNavilAyokAnnilimaka
kapavanikAsAryaraNavatapakiraNasahasavAmanAcADANavAsAmyAnazyAce
DikAtyakSikanakaSAyAnAkaviGayanAmAnApAyAgayukacinanavinatimanAvivaraNa
vivanAsvAbhiAinAnyanamaharSiNAviMdakAva rAkSAvaDanivAkavalasahAkavalakAnarUpAsam
AjJikavalazAninavasamamAyuHparivIgAunamAla zyA
nugnH||121evNlaaklipkaarnnmyaasissttutaa sunAyasaMsnArakaMgAUMimAruDAsaMtAsusama
pAmAraMdAdiApAdAgAUMiskaMdhamArahanimuhasaMyamuravasyamunisurava spshusmyvaaskaa
Nti|sNsaarddaarvaahaaniaastypaaniNmdvaarrsNstaarkpkorskaavyuusikiniriyshriigunnr
tnsuuriilaashaatNtvtHkaalyaannmsaalaa paramagurUtrAprAgadAvamalataharacirASpapa-
sAdhanAvamalagAevAvAvamalatAhavimalapaThanAI pratadarzana

Page #40 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------



======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 2010_02 naM. 1374 aMta : iti prakIrNAvacUri zrIguNaratnasUrikRtA ||ch|| zubhaM
bhavatu  /  /  kalyANamastu  /  /  za3Ata : arhaM catuHzaraNaviSamapadavivaraNam
/  saha avadhena.... bhAMDArakara orienTala rIsarca InsTITyUTa - pUnA
mAnavakAvya dina kariSyAmImA mAnasi manadarzanA sAyaMkanakA kazA kAya dayAmAyA
sAmAdikAdInAmapadama dAridra zAsanAda zAdI sAmAyika iti sAmAna kAma kama vidyA
sAmAnyavimAnamA yA sAmAnAni sAnyAmA kinaki mAna nadarzanAsa navavinakitanA dyAta
karA dAyAgu svayAM kArjana vana tAki chorA gAdijayA jinA zAla tAtinA vinAlA kA
karAjinAmA nira mAdAyAMmrAdhAnika vakSAya sAmAnyAka dali zanivAra vizvadviridAnA
jJAnA vAra zuddhimAdnAdijJAnAnAe  /  haatnH| zrAdiya dAtA darzanAvA ricAvA rAhA
yAtA jJAna vA naridarzana vArica sukara, vadanapratijJAnadA khAdAyA yA
vArivarahI nArAmA vaMdana kA rAmaM damA dAyara karanA navidhinA rAmarAmenAriyA
nAyaH rAtArAta tipAdidAna pratika mAnisamA dinAnAmana karA tyA
mAnavitadinAdimAyeta namitA kariSyAmItiraka nitimA kA dinA dana dana kimI kinArA
matititikrAmativAditAnamAdikAH karma kramaprAyazi nAzanAdanAdinA tAsikesA ka
yatA kA mArA rAnAcyA samajAvAda senAnI svAyatanaM samAja kA lAna timmedava
kameSTi svAmIrAta vAtAvAtAvAnAmA karma samAdhA saMyamatApani samAvayavanakAnana
kRtaiti sAmyAcA tisarA patyAdi parimitAsAranighAnaH prAradArAdimAkaraNa ra
kanakatA jati zrAghATAta dAkhamadinamA dAma nAspatisA ki malAyanayanAmA kA
dAvinodAmamaMdi mAmalA liyA madA munAdijayakArA dAtA dAyAkhyA saMghamukuTAsAlA
divAnA karaka TaHsvapadikRta vizva evA simAnA dizAba na kAmayvayakA nikAH kiraNa
sonanaMbAso gora kAlamaraNa zilAyAka va trinimaDakya sAdAvati vA navikA
shivaatH| 10DA galAga  //  dadadAtA maMtritvakAlAviyAM kA gAjinAdinamA daviMdra
kA kalamAtA jJAna va sAmAH parikSa utnamAlA gtH| 1215 zava kA mayA niSTutAH
khanAH nistAraka gAje mADAsamA nArA dipro dAgA kaM mArA daMti hama sukha spA
mukti sAtArakararikatA 100 kalyA pratadarzana 3G

Page #41 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
2010_02 Mandapacala Durga Kayastha Srivastavy 0 Maheshalikhitam... । 232॥T :
Aham ।। Chatuhsharanavishamapadavivaranam. Shri Hemchandracharya Jain
Gnanabhandar, Patan. T : Iti Sanstharak Prakirnakavachurishri
Gunaratnasurikrta.। Samvat 1559 varshe Paush vad 9 Budhe Sulitan Nasir Sahirajye
Padanavahvan Sharanavishamayadaviwaranamsacha
Sasvayanpayayavannimavadyaazaantarshatayagamaanavaakayavyapara-
savadyadhatayagatha Sanvadyayaga:viramanaviratishamdhisamayiaakama
Kriyanashyandayi Kirtanaskina Savavishatinnavanvinyupgyanadhanchaakhiadyastravi
Chhatayeshatayanghanapanpatipaniktiina Savandanakanakivaanavasakalan
Malinmaanmanasativarako Ranamanasyanirdananidanadhanakarishyaamiifpagaman
Sapratikamaanan Krivikisanevitmiaavaanasyaatichaararupattaavtranamyachikimtamaka
anyasaanakinangharanavirattapadayaadharanabharananghadharanasaashtya Sthanan kri
yavaavashishay/maktasakshapanasaamayikaamaapatapradhaamayisamaayikadaanaamaachaa
rpamvakavihilkshan phalapradanaachikivishiraparupattana Gadhapatkamakshaacharitr
adevaninaamaanaanavakyadidananishinaamaamaadhyakshanasapaayappasachaanakghanvamm
aayikanavigyaadhikritaitpadama. Ya:papa tarakhadyaachaamayanmaavadyaanavana
Naraanacha
Natavaashaadhannaakianashananaatyayakaounaasaamaanyaaknavaritraachaaryarima
Navaarihimaada Dasaraspatischardabyaanayaghaavichhimavgyaanampaary Daadhiraanaam
atideininsampankaaratasyaatraachaaradarshanaachaartasyaachashtavidhaspatishaadhi
-dishaataramanajivaanaanaayakarasanbadhinaam navanavakriya Tatraas
Vishatpatmaptavaasamavanavigyatya Maanavanaakishananatyadunaama
Aniyayiinaalaakaadyanakaraadaayaayagunaashaankaavarnanatadu
Keyaanshagadinayajinaaupaashaanaamaahadayataamaadhyavaraadhanikarma
Yattapanasaamaanyaakavalinanapamidaashvaindraasarthak Rajinavaaray
Sishaaminyachha. Karvidya Nimtaavanadarshanaachaaravishvahiridamiigyaanaachaar
Himaanavidhaprajaanaachaarardaanaadishaanaadhadhiyanat
Miachaaritrachaarmaadaayanaagyaanavaanapidarshanyariyaanayuktapavavandanapratiya
Nayampaayanajamvaana Pipaadadaayabandyaachaaritradinataatikshavyaavhaarataachaas
triyaapinizhavaachandanakayaagpaaninanavavanaamaananad Maasaavaadi. Spartha-vara
vadharanaatejaanaadiyaane:sampanchaayuknaanasampannaasashaampaanipatitatitispaay
akaaranetaspaanamanmaninayakaranaanaaknavanadanakan Vidhinavidhivan
Haadhishaadosharaditatayapanchavishatyavashpak

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 2010_02 maMDapAcaladurge kAyasthazrIvAstavya0 mahesalikhitaM...  /  232||t :
aham  /  /  catuHzaraNaviSamapadavivaraNam  /  zrI hemacandrAcArya jaina
jJAnabhaMDAra, pATaNa. ta : iti saMstAraka prakIrNakAvacUrizrIguNaratnasUrikRtA
/  /  saMvat 1559 varSe pauSa vada 9 budhe sulitAna nAsIra sAhirAjye
padaNAvahIvana zaraNaviSamayAdAvivaraNAMsAcA
sazvAyanapAyayavAnanimAvadyAAAjhaMtarzatAyAgAmAnAvAkAyavyApArA-
sAvadyAdhAtAyAgAthA sAMvadyAyAgA:viramANaviratiSAMdhisAmAyiAkamA kriyAnazyAMdAyI
kIrtanasakInA sAvavizatinnAvanaviNyupajJAnadadhanacAkhiAdyAstravi
chatayeSatayaNaghAnapAMpatipaniktiINa sAvaMdanAkanakivAnavAsakalana
malinamAnmanAsAtivArako rANamanasyanirdananidAnadhanAkariSyAmIphapagamana
sApratikamANana krivikisanevitmiAvANasyAtIcArarupattAvatraNamyacikitmAmAkANyAsAN
akiNAnaghAraNaviratpAdAyAdharaNabharaNAnaghAMdhAraNAsAztyA sthAnanakriyAvAvazisa
hAya/maktasAkSapanAsAmAyikAmApAtaprAdhAmayisAmAyikAdAnAmAcArapaMvakavihilakSaNa
phalapradAnAcakivizirAparupattAnA gAdhApaTakamAkSAcAritradevaninAmAnAnavAkyA did
naanishiinaamaamaadhykshnsaapaayaappsaacaanaakghNvNmaamaayiknvijnyaadhikriytitpa
admaa| yA:pApA tArakhadyAyacAmAyanamAvadyAnAvanA narANAMcA
nAtAvAzAdhAnnanAkiyanazananAtyayAkAunAsAmAMyAkanavAritrAcArayarimA nAvArahimAdA
dasaraspatizcaDabyAnayaghAvichimavajJApAMparya
dAdhIrAnAmatidaMiniMsampankAratasyatrAcArAdarzanAcAratasyacaSTavidhaspatizAdhi
-dizAtarAmanAjIvAnAnAyakarasaMbadhinAMnavanavAkriya tayatrasa
vizatpAtmaptavAsamavanavijJatyA mAnAvanAkizananatyadunAmA
aniyayiAnAlAkAdyAnakarAdAyAAyaguNASAMkAvarNanataDU
keyAMzagAdinayAjinAupAzAnAmAhAdayatAmAdhyavarAdhAnikarma
yattApaNasAmAnyAkavalinAnapAmidAzvaiMdrAsArthaka rAjinavAraya sissaaminych|
kArvidyA nimtAvanadarzanAcAravizvahiridAmIjJAnAcAra
himAnAvidhaprajAnAcArAradAnAAdizahAnAdhAdiyaNAta
miAcAritrAcAramAdAyAnAjJAnavAnapidarzanayAriyANayuktapavavaMdanapratiyA
nayAmpAyanajAmavAnA pipADAdAyAbaMdyAcAritradinAtatikSAvyavahAratAcAstriyApinijha
vAcaMdanakAyAgpAninavavanAamAnanada maasaavaadi| spardha-varavadhAraNAAtejAnAdiy
ANe:saMpancAyuknAnasaMpannAsaSAMpanipatitatilaspAyakAraNetaspAnamanmAninayakaraN
AnAkanavaMdanAkana vidhinavidhivana hAdhizAdoSaraditatayApaMcavizatyAvazpakapari
suitayAvadhiyAnAjAdhiritizatadhAjJAnAcArAdAnApunarArdhAcAritrAcAradarzamAcArAyAz
AdhinAyArathi vizapaNAzAdhanAdhApratipAdinAvaMdanAkamajJAnAdAnAMvahi:punAnaghAma
vavimAnAsahigAdhAdAyamapratiRmANakAyAnsagaspiAmAda calimvaraNa viSAyaatikramAdin
AmajAnAparAdhaspanAnAcArAdInAMkapunarapipatimirakaraNAtyAkaraNakanyAkaraNAzradhA
naviparInaparUpAgAdiparidhinAya ' niSmAyanakaminipamAttikamAnyAdAdhAvikaraNAnapu
naHkariSyAmItiyadhararIkaraNanammAdApajAtAnivananananyanikamaNamucyAnacanakA 11
sAyAsasvA sammapatpAnanazAniyakAraNazamitA vicAraNA
jaMbaNyAvartakarmasaMkhyayAti valakSakorInirvahAnAdakasamayavidhAnAnimphATaya zy
ApekyAyAktavAvihAriNAsamAdhavaprakArivadanAmamuniSTatitamyAvidhApanAMdhIniyamikA
rAyAnuzAsiMdadaninjArApitaAtmanivArAdhanAdira nArAyaapa satapAdaNyApAmA:giriprAm
AhitIyAlAyAnesosaMpretyebarakAprayugNAlayAanApradhAnavihAriNA ghAyuktA
prApadadAganAapimA yatpunnamAdhamAkAsalAdayA0kiMpuNavizopApamargaravitAvanatajJA
vivAsihAnazcatpAvasaMganaMbAnIroirahitamAnAmighoniH kiMbhaninAyIna
apibaninIyanapa3 tpAdahaekA surAtAnpArAganarAghAvedanA prasutpannAjatpipAmAdikA
kAmavakalAMgratavanaspavallAmanAna-dhAnyAhavyAyajhATAlevAne vavalamrATayanijatrA
ukcAmamASaNakAlAnatigampAtAaSTavidhakarmannatapAyadarjitazpapazcAdhIrA-
saMsArakeyAropaNegariyaravodhArAUtpampaviziSaNaMcAratAyatAvana
jAnevanavanavAsiyayuHkSANakarmadanasamA5guNAmAMghAjamAdhAsukA khAkiMta-
maMyamatApAniyamA yavayavanakAnanarutazativiziSaptavinAtikamAmyA
sAmAyikaMcAritramityAndAditidhisaraprAtyAyinaH parikarmi
nirmacAnyApinazAisyaparamipAna ghAlatanAmumAhivAraviSApahArAdimANisae.
kAramANAdhakAnakarunaHdhigvaravAyapirannatrayAlaMkanazcalavanizrIsaM chakayAM
mukAsAsavatItyAhAsivANAmapidivAnAMkamAvaniAlAkamAthyAvamajhujA samakSapAtitA
kiMvRtamalamatapanapavizvakarmamalApanayanAninu
saMghasyasakaTamAtranAsamAdAmukaTaninara vizvayaMvarAna suvarNAdighaTinamuUyasye
vapArzAhAsuiviNmasaMghapaksavidhAhamahAmukATAnaughuvarNadipakanna
syAnimAnAvarAgAdidinavinakarmamAlApatyakArivAlahatArA vimAhAavisAhA tAmajhAmanAj
atipAThAMtArAbavaNavyAkhyAsighAsaTAsaMghaSaNAmapidevAnAMDarsattakassAdevaniprAya
vivahAkarmamAlAlaganAvanAtanaHmaMghamukAdAnyAmahAnapisakara
savarNAdihAnA'viddhapacA simAnAdihavanakArmApacyakAricAzauzaMNalAgaNvaMdaNdaenAp
iyAnAkAlamaraNAzilAdhAkavahinimakapabanikAsUrye gaNavanaphaki
raNAmahampAuNavAmAmpAlAcADakAvya
vikenAkaghAyAlayakavinayaMkarvanAdhyamAnAyAyAgamuktaktinavinati
mnaacitraannvitrmaatraapsihmaanyemmhrssinnaa| kadhyarAmadhanaMpurlasanabakevalam
ahAkavalatAnasyAmamAvanikavalajJAnanavayamamAyu-
pakliANaMDalamalezpAnuganA2pavanmiyakAraNamayAganitAsutA se mAyAdevamAdA mata su
mamAnAradipoTagajeMdadhAmAArAdaMtisvadasaMpavamyAmuktimusvasyamunaspavAsakAMnimA
DavADAnimRtyatrAptimamadada  /  nirmasArakapakImpavitaritrIyuraparamUstitAmaMvay
avavepoSavadiedhesutitAnanAmIramAhirAjyamApAcamadhyektiyazrIvAstavyamahemalidhit
a kAyaratra  /  causaralatA aAnarapaccaravAgatAtatapayanItA saMghArAeyAI
nAedhanibharakharabe pratadarzana

Page #42 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Agam Sri Atur Pratyakhyan Prakirnakam Khanda - 1 * Acharya Shri Bhuvan Tung Suri
Krta Vritti * Acharya Shri Soma Sundar Suri Krta Avchuri * Acharya Shri Gun
Ratna Suri Krta Avchuri 2010_02

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama zrIAturapratyAkhyAnaprakIrNakam khaNDaH -1 *
AcAryazrIbhuvanatuGgasUrikRtA vRttiH * AcAryazrIsomasundarasUrikRtA avacUriH *
AcAryazrIguNaratnasUrikRtA avacUriH 2010_02

Page #43 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
।। Ādyamangalam ।। Namo Arihantāṇam. Namo Siddhaṇam. Namo Āyriyāṇam. Namo
Uvvajjhāyāṇam. Namo Loe Savvasāhūṇam. Eso Pañca Namukkāro. Savvapāvapppaṇāsaṇo.
Mangalāṇam Ca Savvesim. Paḍhamaṁ Havai Mangalam. ।।१।। Kalyāṇapādapārām,
Śrutagaṅgāhimācalam. Viśvāmbhojaravim Devam, Vande Śrījñātanandanam. ।।२।।
Sarvavāñchitadātāram, Mokṣaphala-pradāyakam. Śaddheśvarapurādhiśam, Pārśvanātham
Jinam Stuve. ।।३।। Ajñānati-mirāndhānām, Jñānāñjanaśalākayā. Netramummilitam
Yena, Tasmai Śrīgurave Namaḥ. ।।४।। Mukāram Bindusamyuktam, Nityam Dhyāyanti
Yoginah. Kāmadam Mokṣadam Caiva, Muṁkārāya Namo Namaḥ. ।।५।।  2010_02

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
  /  /  AdyamaGgalam  /  /  namo arihaMtANaM  /  namo siddhANaM  /  namo
AyariyANaM  /  namo uvajjhAyANaM  /  namo loe savvasAhUNaM  /  eso paMca
namukkAro  /  savvapAvappaNAsaNo  /  maMgalANaM ca savvesiM  /  paDhamaM havai
maMgalaM  /  / 1 /  /  kalyANapAdapArAma, zrutagaGgAhimAcalam  /
vizvAmbhojaraviM devaM, vande zrIjJAtanandanam  /  / 2 /  /
sarvavAJchitadAtAraM, mokSaphalapradAyakam  /  zaddhezvarapurAdhIzaM,
pArzvanAthaM jinaM stuve  /  / 3 /  /  ajJAnatimirAndhAnAM, jJAnAJjanazalAkayA
/  netramunmIlitaM yena, tasmai zrIgurave namaH  /  / 4 /  /  mukAraM
bindusaMyuktaM, nityaM dhyAyanti yoginaH  /  kAmadaM mokSadaM caiva, muMkArAya
namo namaH  /  / 5 /  /  2010_02

Page #44 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
॥ Hail, hail to Shri Shankeśvara Cintamani Pārśvanātha, the bestower of the
fruit of liberation desired by all. ॥ ॥ I bow to the valiant one, the lord of
the mountain, who is the essence of the nectar of Maya. ॥ ॥ The seed of the
three worlds, the supreme seed, the seed of right knowledge, the seed of the
Jina king. Where it is said, it bestows success, may that Gautama grant me my
desire. ॥ ॥ Hail to Shri Viravibhu, the disciple of the valiant Virabhadragani.
॥ ॥ I bow to Guru Rāmachandra eternally. ॥ ॥ Aim Namah. ॥ This is the
Āturapratyākhyānaprakirṇakasūtra, composed by Shri Virabhadracharya, the jewel
of the disciples of the Lord Śrī Mahāvīra, which includes the commentary by
Āchārya Shri Bhuvanatunga Suri of the Ānchalikagachcha, the commentary by
Āchārya Shri Somasundara Suri of the Tapagachcha, and the commentary by Āchārya
Shri Gunaratna Suri of the Tārkiragachcha. "A being who dies with a partial or
complete rejection of the right view, is said to be a foolish scholar in the
Jina's teachings." 1. "A being who dies with a partial or complete rejection of
the right view, is said to be a foolish scholar in the Jina's teachings." 1.
"Having bowed to the valiant Jina, I will speak, even though I am foolish, from
the mouth of my own teacher. A little discussion of the rejection of the sick."
1. "Now, in the scriptures, the worship of the supreme deities is seen.
Therefore, I think that this will be a form of upliftment in the absence of
that. No, this is a separate prakirṇaka because of its specific mention. Then
how is there no worship? True, worship is of three kinds, according to the mind,
speech, and body. Therefore, even though it is not done verbally here, it will
be done mentally and physically. And I also consider this - if this was done by
Virabhadra only after studying the knowledge of devotees, then how is it known?
Because of the overstatement "jo bhattaparinnae", it is clear that he has done
it in the four refuges of the knowledge of devotees. So everything is well."
"Because the earth and other elements are one-sixth of the whole, the country is
characterized by shaking the body and helping others. Because of its being born
from a thought, it is of two kinds. One part of the country, which is shaking
the body, is the form of an action born from a thought. Because of its being
with or without offense, it is of two kinds. There, one who is free from killing
or harming even a part of the country,   2010_02

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
  //  sarvavAJchita-mokSaphalapradAyaka-zrIzaGkezvara-cintAmaNipArzvanAthAya
namo namaH  /  /  ||maayaa-rsaa-daarnn-saarsiirN, namAmi vIraM girisAradhIram  /
/   /  /  trailokyabIjaM parameSThibIjaM, sajjJAnabIjaM jinarAjabIjam  /
yatrAma coktaM vidadhAti siddhiM, sa gautamo yacchatu vAJchitaM me  /  /
||shriiviirvibhuhstdiikssitviirbhdrgnnine namaH  /  /  ||nmaami nityaM
gururAmacandram  /  /   /  /  aiM namaH  /  /
AJcalikagacchIyAcAryazrIbhuvanatuGgasUrikRtavRttiyutaM,
tapAgacchapUrandarAcAryazrIsomasundarasUrikRtAvacUrisahitaM,
tArkikaratnAcAryazrIguNaratnasUrikRtAvacUrisamanvitaM, zramaNabhagavatzrImatmahA
vIraprabhuziSyasaudharatnarUpazrIvIrabhadrAcAryapraNItaM
zrIAturapratyAkhyAnaprakIrNakasUtram desikkadesavirao sammaddiTThI marijja jo
jIvo  /  taM hoi bAlapaMDiyamaraNaM jiNasAsaNe bhaNiyaM  /  / 1 /  /
dezaikadezavirataH samyagdRSTimriyate yo jIvaH  /  tad bhavati
bAlapaNDitamaraNaM jinazAsane bhaNitam  /  / 1 /  /  bhuva0 natvA vIrajinaM
vakSye mugdho'pi svagurormukhAt  /  AturapratyAkhyAnasya kiyatpadavicAraNam  /
/ 1 /  /  nanu zAstrAdau sarvazreSTadevatAnamaskAro dRzyate  /  tadatra
tadabhAvAdidamuddhArarUpaM bhaviSyatIti mnye| tanna, pAkSike'syAbhidhAnAt pRthak
prakIrNakamidam  /  tarhi kathaM [na] namaskAraH ? satyaM, manovAkkAyabhedAt
tridhA namaskAro bhavati  /  tato yadyapyatra vAciko na kRtastathApi
mAnasikakAyikau kRtau bhvissytH| kiJcaitadapi sambhAvayAmi -
bhaktaparijJAdhyayanakaraNAnantarameva vIrabhadreNedaM kRtamiti cetkathaM
jJAyate ? "jo bhattaparinnAe" ityatidezAt bhaktaparijJAcatuHzaraNe tu tena kRte
iti vyaktamevAstIti sarvaM sustham  /  SaNNAM pRthivyAdikAyAnAM
SaSTAMzatvAddezastrasakAyavyaparopaNalakSaNastasyApi saGkalpajArambhajatvena
dvibhedatvAt  /  dezasya trasakAyasya ekadeza: saMkalpajanitAvRttirUpa: tasyA'pi
sAparAdhaniraparAdhatvena dviprakAratvAt  /  tatra dezaikadezamAtrasya svayaM
hananaghAtanatayA virato 2010_02

Page #45 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Aaturpratyakhyanaprakirnakam, Chapter 1  **He who has renounced the world and
is free from the desire to harm even a single being.**  **Sammādiṭṭhi** - The
vision of truth, which is the opposite of wrong views, and is characterized by
faith in the principles. One who possesses this vision is called
**Samyagdṛṣṭi**.  **Marījatti** - To die, to attain the fivefold state of death.
**Jo jīvoti** - The Śrāvaka Jīva (lay follower).  **Tam hoi bālapandīyamaraṇam
ti** - In this doctrine, death is described in many ways. For example:  **1.**
**Āvīci, Ohi, Antīya, Valāimaraṇam, Vasatṭamaraṇam, and Cha.**  **2.**
**Antosalla, Tabbhava, Bāla, Tah, Paṇḍiya, Mīsa.** [Uttara. Niryu 212]  **3.**
**Chaumattvamaraṇam, Kevali, Vehāṇasa, Giddhapaṭṭha, and Maraṇam.**  **4.**
**Maraṇam, Bhattapariṇṇā, Iṅgiṇī, Pāova, and Gamaṇam.** [Uttara. Niyu, 213]
This is further classified into five types:  **1.** **Bālabālamaraṇam** (death
of a very young child)  **2.** **Bālamaraṇam** (death of a child)  **3.**
**Bālapandītamaraṇam** (death of a child who is wise)  **4.** **Paṇḍītamaraṇam**
(death of a wise person)  **5.** **Paṇḍītapaṇḍītamaraṇam** (death of a very wise
person)  **Explanation:**  * **Mithyādrṣṭi** (wrong view) leads to
**Bālabālamaraṇam**. * **Avirata Samyagdṛṣṭi** (unwavering right view) leads to
**Bālamaraṇam**. * **Deśayater** (one who teaches) leads to
**Bālapandītamaraṇam**. * **Chhadmasthāyater** (one who is deceitful) leads to
**Paṇḍītamaraṇam**. * **Kevalin** (the liberated soul) leads to
**Paṇḍītapaṇḍītamaraṇam**.  In this text, the middle term is taken as inclusive
of the first and last terms, as per the **Tulādandannyāya** (principle of
balance).  Therefore, the death described here as **Deśayati** is considered
**Bālapandītamaraṇam** in the Jina doctrine, as the other doctrines do not
mention the terms **Bāla** etc.  Since there is no complete renunciation in the
other doctrines, **Bāla** refers to one who has not renounced gross violence,
and **Paṇḍita** refers to one who has renounced gross violence. **Bāla** and
**Paṇḍita** together are called **Bālapandīta**, and therefore, the death
resulting from their combination is also called **Bālapandītamaraṇam**.
**So.**: Now, the **Aaturpratyakhyānāvacūra** (the essence of renouncing the
desire to harm) is explained.  **De.**: It is said that the final stage of life
is like the tip of a nine-pronged spear,

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 AturapratyAkhyAnaprakIrNakam gA. 1 nivRtto dezaikadezavirataH  /
sammadiTThItti - samyagaviparItA tattvazraddhAnarUpA dRSTidarzanaM
matiryasyA'sau samyagdRSTiH  /  marijjatti - mriyeta paJcatvamupayAyAt  /  jo
jIvotti - yaH zrAvakajIvaH  /  taM hoi bAlapaMDiyamaraNaM ti - iha zAsane
maraNamanekadhA varNitam  /  tathAhi - AvIi ohi aMtiya valAimaraNaM
vasaTTamaraNaM ca  /  aMtosallaM tabbhava bAlaM taha paMDiyaM mIsaM  /  / 1 /  /
[uttarA. niryu212] chaumatthamaraNa kevali-vehANasa-giddhapaTTha-maraNaM ca  /
maraNaM bhattapariNNA iMgiNI-pAovagamaNaM ca  /  / 2 /  /  [uttarA. niyu, 213]
taccAnekavidhamapIha paJcadhA parikalpitam  /  tadyathA - bAlabAlamaraNaM,
bAlamaraNaM, bAlapaNDitamaraNaM, paNDitamaraNaM, paNDitapaNDitamaraNaM ceti  /
tatra mithyAdRSTebalabAlamaraNam, aviratasamyagdRSTebalamaraNaM,
dezayaterbAlapaNDitamaraNaM, chadmasthayate: paNDitamaraNaM, kevalinaH
paNDitapaNDitamaraNam  /  tadatra granthe tulAdaNDanyAyAnmadhyagrahaNe
Adyantayorapi grahaNaM kRtaM bhavatIti jJeyam  /  tadiha yaddezayatimaraNaM
tajjinazAsane bAlapaNDitamaraNamiti ddaSTaM, zeSazAsaneSu bAlAdibhASAyA
evAbhAvAt  /  tatra sarvaviratiniyamapariNAmAbhAvAdvAlaM
sthUlaprANAtipAtAdiviramaNAcca paNDitaM bAlaM ca tatpaNDitaM ca bAlapaNDitaM
tadyogAnmaraNamapi bAlapaNDitamityarthaH  /  / 1 //  soma.
athAturapratyAkhyAnAvacUrilikhyate  /  iha sarveSAM jIvAnAM
navahastakuntasyAgrasyeva sakalAyuSo'ntyAvasthA''rAdhanasyaiva
sAratvAdanenAdhyayanenAntyA'vasthA''rAdhanasvarUpamAhadesikka'tti -
nanvatrAdhyayane namaskAraH kasmAnna kRtaH ? ucyate - vIrabhadragaNinaiva pUrvaM
bhaktaparijJAcatuHzaraNe kRtvedamadhyayanaM kRtaM, tena tatrokta eva
namaskAro'trApi jJeya ekakartukatvAt  /  desi.tti - SaNNAM pRthivyAdikAyAnAM
SaSThAMzatvAd dezastrasakAyavyaparopaNalakSaNastasyApi saGkalpajArambhajatvena
dvibhedatvAdekadezaH saGkalpajastrasavinAzanivRttirUpaH punastasyA'pi
sAparAdhaniraparAdhabhedadvayena dviprakAratvAdatra
niraparAdhasaGkalpajatrasajIvavinAzanivRttirUpo dezaikadezastena svayaM
hananaghAtanAd virato nivRtto dezaikadezavirataH  /  tathA samyagaviparItA
tattvazraddhAnarUpA dRSTidarzanaM yasyA'sau samyagdRSTiH, evaMvidho yo jIvaH
zrAvakasambandhI mriyate tadiha maraNaM jinazAsane bAlapaNDitamaraNamiti
bhaNitaM dRSTaM, zeSazAsaneSu bAlamaraNAdibhASAyA evAbhAvAt  /  tatra
sarvaviratipariNAmAbhAvAt bAlaM, sthUlaprANAtipAtAdiviramaNAcca paNDitaM, bAlaM
ca tat paNDitaM ca bAlapaNDitaM, tadyogAnmaraNamapi bAlapaNDitamityarthaH  /
zrIjinazAsane ca maraNamanekadhA kathitamAvIcimaraNAdibhedAt,
taccAnekavidhamapIha paJcadhA parikalpitaM, tadyathA 1-mithyAdRzAM 2010_02

Page #46 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Chapter: 1 Verse: 2  1. Death of a child, 2. Death of one who has not constantly
practiced right faith, 3. Death of a learned child who has left the country, 4.
Death of a learned person who is a hypocrite, 5. Death of a learned person who
is a Kevali.  The country is a part of the body of the universe. It is of two
kinds, with and without offense, because of the nature of its origin from the
mind. One who has renounced the country, even a small part of it, by killing or
injuring it, dies, attains the fivefold state. He is a Shraddha-jiva. This is
seen as the death of a learned child in the Shraddha-shastra, because there is
no mention of a child in the other shastras. There, because there is no
possibility of complete renunciation, a child is a learned person because of the
renunciation of gross violence, etc., and a child is a learned child.  Five are
the Anuvratas, seven are the Shiksha, and the Desayati Dharma. One who is
endowed with all or any of these becomes a Desayati.  Five are the Anuvratas,
which are small compared to the Mahavratas, and are the forms of renunciation of
gross violence, etc. Seven are the Shiksha-vratas, which are primarily concerned
with education. The seven Shiksha-vratas are mentioned because the Gunavratas
are also considered to be Shiksha-vratas because they are constantly practiced.
This Shravaka Dharma, which is composed of twelve Vratas, is the Desayati
Dharma. One who is endowed with all or any of these twelve Vratas becomes a
Desayati.  One who is endowed with all or any of these twelve Vratas becomes a
Desayati.  One who is endowed with all or any of these twelve Vratas becomes a
Desayati.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 khaNDa:-1 gA.2 bAlabAlamaraNaM, 2-aviratasamyagdRSTebalamaraNaM,
3-dezaviratasya bAlapaNDitamaraNaM, 4-chadmasthayatInAM paNDitamaraNaM,
5-kevalinAM paNDitapaNDitamaraNaM ceti  /  / 1 /  /  gaNa. dezasya
trasakAyasyaikadezaH  /  saGkalpajanivRttirUpastasyApi sAparAdhaniraparAdhatvena
dviprakAratvAt  /  tasya dezaikadezamAtrasya svayaM hananaghAtanatayA virato
nivRtto samyagdRSTiH mriyate paJcatvamupayAti  /  yaH zrAddhajIvaH  /
tajjinazAsane bAlapaNDitamaraNamiti dRSTaM, zeSazAsaneSu bAlAdibhASAyA evAbhAvAt
/  tatra sarvaviratipariNAmAbhAvAd bAlaM sthUlaprANAtipAtA-diviramaNAcca
paNDitaM, bAlaM ca tat paNDitaM ca bAla0  /  / 1 /  /  paMca ya aNuvvayAiM satta
u sikkhA u desa-jaidhammo  /  savveNa va deseNa va teNa juo hoi desajaI  /  / 2
/  /  paJca cANuvratAni saptaiva zikSA tu dezayatidharmaH  /  sarveNa vA dezena
vA tena yuto bhavati dezayatiH  /  / 2 /  /  bhuva0 atha
yagatayogAddezayatirbhavati tAni vratAni darzayannAha - paJceti saMkhyA aNUni
laghUni mahAvratApekSayA sthUlaprANAtipAtAdiviramaNarUpANi vrtaanynnuvrtaani|
tathA sapta vA zikSAvratAni, [tatkathamatra sapta zikSAvratAni ?] ucyate-
guNavratAnAmapi nirantaramabhyasanatayA zikSAvratatvena vivakSaNAt sapta
zikSAvratAnyuktAnItyadoSaH  /  eSa dvAdazavratAtmaka: zrAvakadharmo
dezayatidharmaH  /  tena sarveNa dvAdazavratAtmakena dezena
vA'nyataravratapratipattilakSaNena yukto dezayatirbhavatIti gAthArthaH  /  / 2 /
/  soma0 atha yadtayogAddezavirato bhavati tAni vratAnyAha - aNUni laghUni
mahAvratApekSayA sthUlaprANAtipAtAdiviramaNarUpANi vratAnyaNuvratAni paJca  /
tathA sapta ca zikSApradhAnAni vratAni zikSAvratAni  /  guNavratAnAmapi
nityamabhyasanIyatayA zikSAvratatvena vivakSaNAt sapta zikSAvratAnyuktAni, evaM
dvAdazavratarUpo dezayatidharmaH zrAvakadharma ucyate  /  tena sarveNa
dvAdazavratAtmakena dezena vA'nyataravratapratipattilakSaNena yuto yukto
dezayatiH zrAvako bhavatIti  /  / 2 /  /  guNa. atha yadyogAddezayatirbhavati
tAni vratAni darzayannAha - paJca0 aNUni laghUni mahAvratApekSayA tathA sapta ca
zikSApradhAnAni vratAni zikSAvratAni  /  tatkathamatra sapta zikSAvratAni ?
ucyateguNavatAnAmapi nirantaramabhyasanatayA zikSAvratatvena vivakSaNAt sapta
zikSAvratAnyuktAnItyadoSaH  /  tena sarveNa vA dvAdazavratAtmakena dezena vA
anyatara vratapratipattilakSaNena yukto dezayatirbhavatIti  /  / 2 /  /  2010_02

Page #47 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter 3: The Minor Vows (Anuvratas)  **The Minor Vows (Anuvratas) are:**  *
**Refraining from killing living beings (Pranavada):** This refers to the
destruction of life force (Pran), which is characterized by the senses,
strength, breath, and lifespan. It does not mean killing a living being (Jiva),
as it is impossible to kill a Jiva. As it is said:  > "The one who is constantly
bound by the cycle of birth and death, and who is devoid of the means of
liberation, is impermanent." (Samyak. Sapta. 61)  > "The destruction of the
body, the suffering of the soul, and the entanglement of the mind, this is
called killing, which should be avoided with all effort." (Shrav. Prajna. 191)
* **Refraining from lying (Musavada):** This refers to speaking falsely, which
can be of two types based on the nature of the falsehood:      * **Based on the
nature of the object:** This includes four types:         1. **Falsely claiming
the existence of something that does not exist:** For example, claiming that the
soul is omnipresent.         2. **Falsely claiming the non-existence of
something that exists:** For example, claiming that the soul does not exist.
3. **Falsely attributing something to something else:** For example, saying
"This cow is a horse."         4. **Falsely accusing someone:** For example,
saying "You are a leper."      * **Based on the motivation behind the lie:**
This includes anger, greed, fear, and delusion.  * **Refraining from accepting
gifts that are not rightfully yours (Adatta-Paradara-Niyaman):** This refers to
accepting gifts that belong to someone else, including:      * **Gifts from a
master:** This includes gifts from a king, a teacher, or a spiritual guide.
* **Gifts from a Jiva:** This includes gifts from any living being.     *
**Gifts from a Tirthankara:** This includes gifts from a liberated soul.
There are also three types of gifts based on the intention of the giver:      *
**Gifts given with a pure intention:** This includes gifts given with love,
compassion, and respect.     * **Gifts given with a mixed intention:** This
includes gifts given with a mixture of good and bad intentions.     * **Gifts
given with a bad intention:** This includes gifts given with greed, anger, or
hatred.  * **Refraining from sexual misconduct (Paradara-Niyaman):** This refers
to engaging in sexual activity with someone who is not your spouse. It includes
any act that violates the sanctity of marriage and the purity of relationships.
**The Minor Vows (Anuvratas) are a set of principles that help us to live a
virtuous life. By practicing these vows, we can purify our mind, speech, and
actions, and move towards liberation.**  **The meaning of the verse:**  >
"Refraining from killing living beings, lying, accepting gifts that are not
rightfully yours, and sexual misconduct, these are the Minor Vows (Anuvratas).
Refraining from excessive desires is also a Minor Vow (Anuvrata)."  **The verse
emphasizes the importance of controlling our desires and living a life of
restraint and virtue.**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 AturapratyAkhyAnaprakIrNakam gA. 3 pANavaha-musAvAe-adatta-paradAraniyamaNehiM
ca  /  aparimiicchAo vi ya aNuvvayAiM viramaNAI  /  / 3 /  /  prANavagha-
mRSAvAdA-datta-paradAraniyamanaizca  /  aparimitecchAto'pi ca
viramaNAnyaNuvratAni  /  / 3 /  /  bhuva0 tatra tAvatprathamamaNuvratAni nAmata
Aha - prANA indriyabalazvAsAyurlakSaNAsteSAM vadho vinAza: prANavadhaH  /  na tu
prANivadho jIvavadha: tasya hantumazakyatvAt  /  yata Aha davaTThayAi nicco
uppAyaviNAsavajjio jeNa  /  puvakayANusaraNau pajjAyA tassa o aNiccA  /  / 1 /
/  [samya. sapta. 61] tarhi vadhaH katham ucyate - tappajjAyaviNAso dukhuppAoa
saMkileso ya  /  esa vaho jiNabhaNio vajjeyavyo ya payatteNaM  /  / 2 /  /
[zrAva. prajJa. 191] musAvAe tti ekAra: prAkRtaprabhavaH  /  mRSA mithyA vadanaM
mRSAvAdaH, sa ca dravyabhAvabhedAd dvidhA  /
krodhAdibhedAdabhUtodbhAvanAdibhedAcca caturdhA  /  tatra krodhAdibhedAH
prasiddhAH  /  tatra 1abhUtodbhAvanaM yathA sarvagata AtmA, 2- bhUtanihnavo
yathA nAsti AtmA, 3- vastvantaranyAso yathA gaurapi sannazvo'yamiti vadataH, 4-
paranindAvacano yathA kuSTI tvamiti  /  dAnaM dattaM, na dattamadattam  /  tacca
svAmijIvatIrthaMkaragurubhedatazcaturddhA, sacittAcittamizrabhedatastridhA bhImo
bhImasena iti nyAyAdadattamadattAdAnam  /  paradAraniyamaNehiM ca tti dArayanti,
vidArayanti, nAzayanti puruSasyA'ntaraGgabahiraGgaguNAniti dArAH, pareSAM dArA:
[paradArA:] parakalatrANi  /  tataH prANavadhazca mRSAvAdazcAdattAdAnaM ca
paradArAzca prANavadhamRSAvAdAdattAdAnaparadArAsteSAM niyamanairuparamaiH  /
ca: pUraNe  /  aNuvrataprastAvAt sthUlapadopapadAni sarvANi vAcyAni  /
aparimiya icchAo vi ya tti parimitA na parimitA aparimitA  /  eSaNamicchA
aparimitA cecchA ca tasyA aparimitecchAtazca  /  yAni viramaNAni
nivRttayastairaNuvratAni bhaveyustAnIti gAthArthaH  /  / 3 /  /  soma0
prathamamaNuvratAni nAmata Aha - prANA indriyabalocchvAsAyurlakSaNAsteSAM vadho
vinAzaH prANavadhaH, na tu prANivadho, jIvasya hantumazakyatvAt  /  'musAvAe'
tti ekAraH prAkRtatvAt  /  mRSA 2010_02

Page #48 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter :-1 Verse 4 **Mithyāvacana** (false speech) is **mṛṣāvāda** (false
speech) which is in the form of words that are not true due to anger, etc.
**Svāmyādi** (master, etc.) **na dattam** (not given) **adattaṁ** (not given)
**sacittācittāmiśrabhedaṁ** (mixed with thoughts and non-thoughts) **dārayanti**
(tear) **vidārayanti** (tear) **puruṣasyāntaraṁgabahīraṁgagunān** (the inner and
outer qualities of a person), **dārāḥ** (wives) **pareṣāṁ dārāḥ** (wives of
others) **paradārāḥ** (wives of others).  Therefore, **prāṇavadha** (killing of
a living being), **mṛṣāvāda** (false speech), **adattādānaṁ** (taking what is
not given), and **paradārāḥ** (wives of others) are **niyamanaiḥ** (by rules)
**uparamais** (by restraint) **tathā na parimitā** (not limited) **aparimitā**
(unlimited) **yā iccha** (desire) **parigrahaviṣayā** (related to possessions),
**tato'pi ca yāni** (and also those) **viramaṇāni** (restraints) **nivṛttayaḥ**
(cessations) **tāny aṇuvratāni** (those are minor vows) **bhaveyuḥ** (would be).
**Sthūlaśabdopapadāni** (words with gross meanings) **vācyāni** (should be
spoken). ||3||  **Commentary:** **Pāṇo** (Pāṇini) **prāṇavadho** (killing of a
living being) **na tu** (not) **prāṇivadho** (killing of a living being)
**jīvavadhaḥ** (killing of a living being) **tasya** (of that)
**hantumaśakyatvāt** (because it is impossible to kill). **Musāvāe** (false
speech) **itti** (thus) **ekāraḥ** (the letter 'a') **prākṛtabhavaḥ** (is in
Prakrit). **Mṛṣā** (false) **mithyāvadanaṁ** (false speech) **mṛṣāvādaḥ** (false
speech). **Sa ca** (and that) **dravya bhāva bhedāt** (due to the difference in
the nature of the object) **dvidhā** (two types) **krodhādibhedāt** (due to the
difference in anger, etc.) **abhūtodbhāvanabhedācca** (and due to the difference
in the creation of the non-existent) **caturdhā** (four types). **Tatra**
(there) **krodhādibhedāḥ** (the differences in anger, etc.) **prasiddhaḥ** (are
well-known). 1- **Tatra** (there) **abhūtodbhāvanaṁ** (creation of the non-
existent) **yathā** (as) **sarvagata ātmā** (the all-pervading soul), 2-
**bhūtanīhnavaḥ** (destruction of the existent) **yathā** (as) **nāstyātmā**
(there is no soul), 3- **vastvantaranȳāsaḥ** (

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 khaNDa :-1 gA. 4 mithyA vacanaM mRSAvAdaH krodhAdivazAdasadbhUtavacanAdirUpaH
/  svAmyAdibhirna dattam adattaM sacittAcittamizrabhedam  /  dArayanti
vidArayanti puruSasyA'ntaraGgabahiraGgaguNAniti, dArAH pareSAM dArAH paradArAH
/  tataH prANavadhazca mRSAvAdazcAdattAdAnaM ca paradArAzca teSAM
niyamanairuparamaistathA na parimitA aparimitA yA icchA parigrahaviSayA, tato'pi
ca yAni viramaNAni nivRttayastAnyaNuvratAni bhaveyuH  /  sthUlazabdopapadAni
vAcyAni  /  / 3 /  /  guNa. pANa0 prANavadho na tu prANivadho jIvavadhastasya
hantumazakyatvAt  /  musAvAetti ekAraH prAkRtabhavaH  /  mRSA mithyAvadanaM
mRSAvAdaH  /  sa ca dravyabhAvabhedAd dvidhA
krodhAdibhedAdabhUtodbhAvanabhedAcca caturdhA  /  tatra krodhAdibhedAH
prasiddhAH  /  1-tatrAbhUtodbhAvanaM yathA sarvagata AtmA, 2-bhUtanihnavo yathA
nAstyAtmA, 3-vastvantaranyAso yathA gaurapi sannazvo'yamiti vadataH
4-paranindAvacano yathA kuSTI tvamiti  /  naM dattamadattam  /  tacca
svaamijiivtiirthNkrgurubhedtshcturdhaa| bhImo bhImasena iti nyAyAdadattAdAnam  /
pareSAM dArAH paradArAH parakalatrANi teSAM niyamanairuparamaiH  /
aNuvratAH[tAni] tAvat sthUlazabdopapadAni sarvANi vAcyAni  /  aparimitecchAtazca
yAni viramaNAni nivRtayastairaNuvratAni bhaveyuriti gAthArthaH  /  / 3 /  /  jaM
ca disAveramaNaM aNatthadaMDAu jaM ca veramaNaM  /  desAvagAsi pi ya guNavvayAiM
bhave tAI  /  / 4 /  /  yacca digviramaNamanarthadaNDAt yacca viramaNam  /
dezAvakAzikamapi ca guNavratAni bhaveyustAni  /  / 4 /  /  bhuva0 atha
yatsAmAnyena 'satta u sikkhAo desajaidhammo, ityuktam  /  tAnyeva vizeSatayA
guNavratazikSAvrate vyapadizan prathamaM guNavratAnyAha - dizyante jIvA
gamanAgamanatvenAsviti dizaH  /  virativiramaNaM dizAM viramaNaM dikviramaNaM,
dizA vA kRtvA yadviramaNaM tatprathama guNavratam  /  uktaJca dasasu disAsu
bahiyA laMdhijjai jattha neva bhUmIsA  /  taM disi viraitti vayaM paDhamaM
guNavvayaM tigassa  /  / 1 /  /  jo dharai disivayamimaM so abhayaM dei
sayalajIvANaM  /  bhuvaNaMmi pasaramANaM lobhasamudaM paDikhalei  /  / 2 /  /
2010_02

Page #49 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Aaturpratyakhyanaprakirnakam, Chapter 4  **Thus it is understood that it is
done for a purpose.** The meaning is not the non-meaning, the non-meaning is
purposeless. Living beings are punished and destroyed by these, so the
abstinence from them is the second **guna-vrata**, and in the original order,
the third. It is said:  > "**Avajjaanapamāyāyaria pavovāesahinsadāṇehiṁ |** >
**Cauhā aṇatthadando tabbiraī guṇavvayaṁ taiyaṁ ||1||**"  **Desavagasiyam piyam
ti disamavakasha:** The daily limit of travel in a particular direction is
**desavakashika**, and this too is a form of abstinence, which is the third
**guna-vrata**. In the original order, it is the second **shiksha-vrata**. It is
said:  > "**Jā (jo) jīvagahīya disiṁvayapamaṇam sankhevṇaṁ jamṇudiyahaṁ |** >
**Desavagasiyam taṁ bīyaṁ sikkhāvayam jāṇa ||1||**"  It is said: "Since this is
known as a **shiksha-vrata**, how can it be called a **guna-vrata**?" Others
say: "Those who have established limits in all **vayas** (stages of life), they
still transgress them daily." Thus:  > "**Egamuhattaṁ divasaṁ rāī pañcāhameva
pakkhaṁ vā |** > **Vayamiha dhārei daḍhaṁ jāvaiyaṁ uvvahe kāle ||1||**"
[**Sambo. 1236**] According to the opinion of some, based on the above verse,
"**Sarvavayaṇam karejj sankevami**" (one should limit all **vayas**). Based on
this opinion, since **desavakashika** is a factor in all **vratas**, it is also
a **guna-vrata**, and there is no fault in this. This is the meaning of the
verse.  **Somam:** Now, the **shiksha-vratas** are generally mentioned, and
those same **shiksha-vratas** are mentioned as **guna-vrata** in their specific
form. 1. The abstinence from going beyond the limit set for travel in the
directions, starting from the east, is the first **guna-vrata**.  > "**Jo dharai
disivayamimaṁ so abhayaṁ dei savvajīvāṇaṁ |** > **Bhuvaṇammi pasaramāṇaṁ
lobhasamudam paḍikhalai ||**"  2. Thus, the meaning is: The purpose is not the
non-meaning, the non-meaning is purposeless. Living beings are punished by these
for the destruction of Dharma, so the abstinence from these punishments, which
are actions of mind, speech, and body, is the second **guna-vrata**. 3. The
daily limitation of travel in a particular direction, for those who have taken
all **vratas** for life, or for those who have taken only the rule of travel in
a particular direction, is **desavakashika**, and this is the third **guna-
vrata**. Since this is known as a **shiksha-vrata**, it is still considered a
**guna-vrata** here because it is a factor in all **vratas**, and there is no
fault in this. 4. ... **Guna:** The abstinence from the directions, the
abstinence

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 AturapratyAkhyAnaprakIrNakam gA. 4 tathA arthyate kriyate prayojanavazatayA
ityarthaH  /  na artho'narthaH, anarthaM niSprayojanaM daNDyante nipAtyante jIvA
ebhirityanarthadaNDAstebhyo yadviramaNaM tad dvitIyaM guNavrataM, mUlakrameNa tu
tRtiiym| uktaJca - avajjhANapamAyAyariya pAvovaesahiMsadANehiM  /  cauhA
aNatthadaMDo tabbiraI guNavvayaM taIyaM  /  / 1 /  /  desAvagAsiyaM piyaM ti
dizAmavakAza: pratidinamAnaM tatra bhavaM dezAvakAzikaM tadapi ca viramaNarUpaM
tattRtIyaM guNavratamiti  /  mUlakrameNa dvitIyaM zikSAvratam  /  uktaJca - jA
(jo) jIvagahiya disiMvayapamANaM saMkhevaNaM jamaNudiyahaM  /  desAvagAsiyaM taM
bIyaM sikkhAvayaM jANa  /  / 1 /  /  Aha - asya zikSAvratatvena
prasiddhatvAtkathaM guNavratatvamucyate  /  anne bhaNaMti - savvavaesu je pamANA
ThaviyA  /  te puNa divasao osarei  /  evaM egamuhattaM divasaM rAI paMcAhameva
pakkhaM vA  /  vayamiha dhArei daDhaM jAvaiyaM uvvahe kAle  /  / 1 /  /  [saMbo0
1236] ityAvazyakacUrNivacanAt keSAJcinmatena - savvavayANaM karejja saMkhevamiti
/  tanmatamAzritya sarvavrataguNakArakatvAddezAvakAzikasyApi
guNavatatvamityadoSa iti gAthArthaH  /  / 4 /  /  soma0 atha sAmAnyena
zikSAvratAnyuktAni tAnyeva guNabhUtazikSAvratavyaktyA''ha . 1-pUrvAdInAM dizAM
gamanaviSayatayA parimANakaraNena tadagrato gamanAdeviramaNaM yat tat prathamaM
guNavratam  /  "jo dharai disivayamimaM so abhayaM dei savvajIvANaM  /
bhuvaNammi pasaramANaM lobhasamudaM paDikhalei"  /  /  2 - tathA'rthaH
prayojanaM nArtho'narthaH, anarthaM niSprayojanaM daNDayante dharmasyApahAreNa
jIvA ebhiriti daNDA manovAkkAyavyApArAstebhyo yadviramaNaM tat dvitIyaM
guNavratam  /  3 - yAvajjIvaM gRhItasarvavrataniyamAnAM diggamananiyamasyaiva vA
pratidinaM saMkSepakaraNaM dezAvakAzastatra bhavaM dezAvakAzikaM etacca tRtIyaM
guNavratam  /  asya zikSAktatvena prasiddhasyApyatra sarvavrataguNakArakatvAd
guNavratatvaM vivakSitamiti na doSaH  /  / 4 /  /  .. guNa. dizAM viramaNaM
diviramaNaM dizA vA kRtvA yadviramaNaM tat prathamaM guNavratam  /  jo dharai
disivayamimaM so abhayaM dei savvajIvANaM  /  bhuvaNammi pasaramANaM
lobhasamudaM paDikhalei  /  /  2010_02

Page #50 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Chapter - 1 Verse - 5  Actions that are useless and harmful are punishable, and
living beings are punished by them.  Therefore, refraining from such actions is
the second of the five great vows, and the third in the original order.  The
space for movement, which is the daily limit, is the space for movement in the
country.  This is also a form of restraint, and it is the third of the five
great vows, and the second in the original order.  It is said, "Since this is
known as a vow of conduct, how can it be called a vow of virtue?"  Some say,
"The measure that is established for all beings is also the measure that is to
be observed daily."  This is the essence of the matter.  Therefore, since the
space for movement in the country is conducive to all virtues, it is also a vow
of virtue.  There is no fault in this. || 4 ||  The enumeration of enjoyments,
the Samayika, the Atithi, and the division of the days are the four vows of
conduct that have been spoken of. || 5 ||  The enumeration of enjoyments, the
Samayika, the Atithi, and the division of the days are the four vows of conduct
that have been spoken of. || 5 ||  Now, explaining the vows of conduct in
detail, it is said:  Those that are enjoyed only once are called enjoyments,
such as food and flowers.  Similarly, those that are enjoyed repeatedly are
called repeated enjoyments, such as houses and wives.  It is said:  "That which
is enjoyed only once is called enjoyment, such as food and saffron.  That which
is enjoyed repeatedly is called repeated enjoyment, such as houses and wives."
|| 1 ||  The prefix "pari" means enumeration, and the enumeration of the measure
of enjoyment is the meaning of the enumeration of the measure of enjoyment.
This is the first vow of conduct, and the second in the original order.  It is
said:  "Just as there is a measure for the enjoyment of enjoyments, so also
there is a measure for the enjoyment of repeated enjoyments.  The name of
enjoyment and repeated enjoyment is the vow of virtue, which is the seed." || 1
||  Similarly, "Samayika" means the sum of all income and profit, which is the
Samaya.  The Samayika is the same as the Samaya, and the suffix "ika" is dropped
due to its being a common noun.  This is the second vow of conduct, and the
first in the original order.  It is said:  "The state of mind that is free from
attachment, that is collected, that is joyful, and that is equal to all beings,
is called the Samayika for the householder, and it is the first vow of conduct."
|| 1 ||  "Atithi" means that there are no days, festivals, or celebrations.  It
is said:  "He who is free from attachment to days, festivals, and celebrations,
and who is free from attachment to the observance of vows, is called the Atithi,
and he is the one who has attained purity." || 1 ||  2010_02

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 khaNDaH -1 gA. 5 anarthaM niSprayojanaM daNDyante nipAtyante jIvA
ebhirityanarthadaNDAstebhyo yadviramaNaM dvitIyaM guNavrataM mUlakrameNa tRtIyam
/  dizAmavakAzaH pratidinamAnaM tatra bhavaM dezAvakAzikaM tadapi ca
viramaNarUpaM tattRtIyaM guNavrataM, mUlakrameNa dvitIyaM zikSAvratam  /  Aha -
asya zikSAvratatvena prasiddhatvAt kathaM guNavrata[tva]mucyate - anne bhaNaMti
- "savvavaesu je pamANA ThaviA te puNa divasao osarei" - AvazyakacUrNau  /
"savvavayANaM karijja saMkhevaM" tanmatamAzritya
sarvavrataguNakArakatvAddezAvakAzikasyApi guNavratatvamityadoSaH  /  / 4 /  /
bhogANaM parisaMkhA sAmAiya atihisaMvibhAgo ya  /  posahavihI ya savvo cauro
sikkhAo vuttAo  /  / 5 /  /  bhogAnAM parisaGkhyA sAmAyikamatithisaMvibhAgazca
/  pauSadhavidhistu sarvaH catasraH zikSA uktAH  /  / 5 /  /  bhuva0 atha
zikSAvratAni vizeSayannAha - sakRdekavAraM bhujyanta iti bhogA AhArapuSpAdayaH
/  tathA upalakSaNatvAtparibhujyanta iti paribhogAH gRhAGganAdikAH  /  uktaJca -
jo bhujjai igavAraM so bhogo asaNakuMkumAIo  /  paribhuMjai jo puNa puNa
paribhogo gihaMgaNAIo  /  / 1 /  /  parItyupasargaH parisaMkhyAnaM
parisaMkhyApramANakaraNamityarthaH  /  tatprathamaM zikSAvrataM mUlakrameNa
dvitIyaM guNavratamiti  /  uktaJca - jaha sattIe pamANaM bhoguvabhogANa kijjaI
jattha  /  bhogovabhoga nAmaM taM muNasu guNavvayaM bIyaM  /  / 1 /  /  tathA
sAmAiyatti samasya Ayo lAbha: samAyaH, samAya eva sAmAyikaM
prAkRtatvAdvibhaktilopaH  /  tad dvitIyaM zikSAvrataM mUlakrameNa tu prathamam
/  uktaJca - niravajjaM samuhattaM suhajhANagayassa jo samo bhAvo  /  gihiNo taM
sAmAiya nAmaM sikkhAvayaM paDhamaM  /  / 1 /  /  atihisaMvibhAgoyatti - na santi
tithaya: parvANyutsavAzca yasyAsAvatithiH  /  uktaJca -
tihipavUsavaniyasayaNamAisaMbaMdhavajjaNujutto  /  atihI so vinneo pavittapattaM
niyadhaNassa  /  / 1 /  /  2010_02

Page #51 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Chapter on the Rejection of Eagerness (Aatupraatyaakhyaana Prakirnakam)
Chapter 5  **Division, Distribution.** The distribution of a guest is called
guest distribution (Atithi Sambhaag). 'Cha' indicates a collection. This third
training vow (Shikshaavratam) is in the order of the text, but in the original
order it is the fourth. It is said:  > "Whatever gift is very small, like food,
clothing, and bedding, > That is the fourth training vow, guest distribution,
know it." (1)  **Nourishment (Posah)** - That which gives nourishment and
strength to Dharma is called nourishment (Posah). It is said:  > "He who
nourishes good Dharma, protects life, and avoids evil conduct, > That is called
nourishment, it is the destruction of suffering for the householder." (1)  The
method of nourishment is called the method of nourishment (Posahvidhi). 'Cha'
indicates a collection. The method of nourishment is the fourth, and it is
characterized by all food, care of the body, celibacy, and activity. Here, in
the order of the text, it is the fourth training vow, but in the original order
it is the third. These four training vows have been stated.  **But how can the
vow of non-possession (Ugopabhoga Vratam) be called a training vow, since it is
known to be virtuous by being accepted for life?** Because it is repeatedly
summarized every day, every night, every hour, every moment, and because it is
repeatedly practiced by the teacher, it is also a training vow. (5)  **Soma:**
Now, the training vows are stated:  1. **Enjoyment (Bhoga)** - Things like food
and flowers are enjoyed once, and by implication, things like wives are enjoyed
repeatedly. The counting and measuring of these is the first training vow. Even
though this is known to be a virtuous vow by being accepted for life, it is also
a training vow because it is repeatedly summarized every day, every night, every
hour, etc., and because it is repeatedly practiced by the teacher. Therefore,
there is no fault here.  2. **Equanimity (Samaaya)** - The income and profit of
one who is free from attachment and aversion is called equanimity (Samaaya).
Equanimity itself is the second training vow. The omission of the case ending is
due to the Prakrit language.  3. **Guest Distribution (Atithi Sambhaag)** - The
distribution of a guest, who is always devoted to Dharma because he has no days
or festivals, is the third training vow.  4. **Nourishment (Posah)** - That
which gives nourishment and strength to Dharma is called nourishment (Posah).
The method of nourishment is called the method of nourishment (Posahvidhi).
'Cha' indicates a collection. The method of nourishment is the fourth, and it is
characterized by all food, care of the body, celibacy, and activity. These four
are the training vows. (5)  **Guna:** Things like food and flowers are enjoyed
once, and by implication, things like wives are enjoyed repeatedly. The counting
and measuring of these is the first training vow, in the original order.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 AturapratyAkhyAnaprakIrNakam gA. 5 saMvibhajanaM saMvibhAgaH  /  atithe:
saMvibhAgo'tithisaMvibhAgaH  /  caH samuccaye  /  tattRtIyaM zikSAvratamiha
granthakrameNa, mUlakrameNa tu caturtham  /  uktaJca - atihINaM jaM dANaM ca
vasahIAhAravatthapattANaM  /  taM atihisaMvibhAgaM cautthaM sikkhAvayaM jANa  /
/ 1 /  /  posahavihI ya savvotti - poSaM puSTiM dharmasya dadhAtIti pauSadham  /
uktaJca - jo posai suhadhammaM dharei jIvaM ca kugainivaDataM  /  taM posahaM ti
bhanai eyaM dukkhakhayaM gihiNo  /  / 1 /  /  tasya vidhi: pauSadhavidhiH  /
ca: samuccaye  /  pauSadhavidhizcaturthaH sarvaH
caturvidhAhArazarIrasatkArabrahmacaryavyApAralakSaNaH  /  iha tu krameNa
caturthaM zikSAvrataM mUlakrameNa tu tRtIyam  /  etAni catvAri
zikSAvratAnyuktAni  /  na tu yAvajjIvamaGgIkaraNAdogopabhogavratasya
guNavatatvena prasiddhatvAtkathaM zikSAvratatvamucyate ? pratidinaM pratirAtraM
pratipraharaM pratimuhUrtaM punaH puna: saMkSepakaraNAt zikSikeNeva puna:
punarabhyasanAcca zikSAvratatvamapi  /  / 5 /  /  soma0 atha zikSAvratAnyAha - 1
- ekavAraM bhujyante iti bhogA AhAra-puSpAdayaH, upalakSaNatvAt paribhujyante
iti paribhogAH punapunarbhogyA gRhAGganAdikAsteSAM parisaGkhyAnaM pramANakaraNaM
yat tatprathamaM zikSAvratam  /  asyApi yAvajjIvAGgIkArAd guNavratatvena
prasiddhasyApi pratidinaM pratirAtraM pratipraharAdi ca punaH punaH
saMkSepakaraNatvAt zikSikeNeva punaH punarabhyasanAcca zikSAvratatvamapyatra
vivakSitamityadoSaH  /  2-tathA samasya rAgadveSarahitasya Ayo lAbhaH samAyaH,
samAya eva sAmAyikam, vibhaktilopaH prAkRtatvAt tad dvitIyaM zikSAvratam  /
3-tathA na santi tithayaH parvANi sadA dharmaparatvAd yasyAsAvatithistasya
saMvibhAgo'tithisaMvibhAga: sa tRtIyaM zikSAvratama  /  4-tathA poSaM puSTiM
dharmasya dadhAtIti pauSadhastasya vidhiH  /  caH samuccaye  /  sarvaAhAra-
zarIrasatkAra-brahmacaryavyApAralakSaNa: sa caturthaM zikSAvratam  /  etAni
catvAri zikSAvratAni  /  / 5 /  /  guNa. sakRdekavAraM bhujyanta iti bhogA
AhArapuSpAdayaH  /  tathA upalakSaNatvAt yat paribhujyanta iti paribhogAH
gRhAGganAdikAH  /  parisaMkhyAnaM pramANakaraNamityarthaH  /  tatprathamaM
zikSAvrataM mUlakrameNa 2010_02

Page #52 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Chapter: 1 Verse: 6  The second is the **guna-vrata**.  Samaya is the second
**shiksha-vrata** in the order of the **samaya**, but the first in the original
order.  **Atithi-sanvibhaga** is the division of the guest.  **Cha** is used for
collection.  **Poushadha** is that which nourishes and strengthens the Dharma.
It is said:  > That which nourishes good Dharma, protects life, and removes the
accumulated karma, > That is called **Poushadha**, and it is the destruction of
suffering for the householder. ||1||  The method of this is the **Poushadha-
vidhi**.  Here, in this order, the fourth **shiksha-vrata** is the third in the
original order.  These four **shiksha-vratas** have been mentioned. ||5||  > In
the face of imminent death, with life's hope unbroken, > Not freed by relatives,
without performing the final **sanlekhana**, > That is called **balapandita-
marana**. ||6||  **Bhuva:**  Now, when does a **shravaka** die a **balapandita-
marana**?  It is said:  **Ashu** means quick, **kara** means action,
**ashukara** is the time of death due to urgency, **marana** means death,
**achintit** means unexpected, **upasthita** means present, **upkramana** means
approach.  > Like a rope tied for a long time, suddenly breaking, > With the
mind absorbed in the enjoyment of the fruits of karma, > That is called
**balapandita-marana**. ||1||  With these examples, when death is imminent, one
should perform **balapandita-marana**.  **Achinna** means unbroken, **jiviyasa**
means hope of life.  Or, death has come gradually, but **sanlekhana** has not
been performed.  Why?  It is said:  **Achinna** means unbroken, **trutita**
means broken, **jiviyasa** means hope of life, because of this unbroken hope of
life, **sanlekhana** and **sanstara-diksha** have not been performed.  **Na-
ahim** means not, **amukko** means freed, **jnatai** means by relatives,
**mutkalita** means freed.  **Pachchima-sanlekhana** means the final
**sanlekhana**, **akiccha** means not done.  Therefore, without performing the
final **sanlekhana** which is the duty at the end of life, and without
performing the **tapas** which is the drying up of the body, the death that one
dies is called **balapandita-marana**.  This is the meaning of the verse. ||6||
**Soma:**  Now, when does a **shravaka** die a **balapandita-marana**?  It is
said:  **Ashu** means quick, **kara** means action, **ashukara** means urgency,
**marana** means death, **autsukya** means urgency, **marana-avasara** means the
time of death, **achintit** means unexpected, **upasthita** means present.
Thus, when death is imminent, one should perform **balapandita-marana**.  Or,
**achinna** means unbroken, **trutita** means broken, **achinna** means
unbroken, what is **achinna**?  It is the hope of life.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 khaNDa:-1 gA.6 dvitIyaM guNavratamiti  /  samAya eva sAmAyikaM dvitIyaM
zikSAvrataM mUlakrameNa tu prathamam  /  atitheH saMvibhAgo'tithisaMvibhAgaH  /
caH samuccaye  /  poSaM puSTiM dharmasya dadhAtIti pauSadham  /  uktaM ca - jaM
posai suhadhammaM dharei jIvaM ca kugai nivaDataM  /  taM posahaM ti bhannai
eyaM dukkhakhayaM gihiNo  /  / 1 /  /  tasya vidhiH pauSadhavidhiH  /  iha tu
krameNa caturthaM zikSAvrataM mUlakrameNa tu tRtIyam  /  etAni catvAri
zikSAvratAnyuktAni  /  / 5 /  /  AsukkAre maraNe acchinnAe ya jIviyAsAe  /
nAehi vA amukko pacchimasaMlehaNamakiccA  /  / 6 /  /  AzukAre maraNe
acchinnAyAM ca jIvitAzAyAm  /  jJAtibhirvA'muktaH pazcimasaMlekhanAmakRtvA  /  /
6 /  /  bhuva0 atha kadA punarasau zrAvako bAlapaNDitamaraNena mriyata ityAha -
Azu zIghraM karaNaM kAra AzukAro maraNAvasarastena maraNaM tasmin
maraNe'cintitopasthitopakramaNe, phalapAkarajjubhasamagaullapaDapaIvamagganAeNa
/  cirakAlanibaddhassa vi Aussa uvakkamo khippaM  // 1 //
etairdRSTAntairjhaTiti pratyAsannIbhUte maraNakAle tatra bAlapaNDitamaraNaM
kuryAt  /  acchinnAe jIviyAsAetti  /  athavA krameNaiva maraNakAla: samAgataH  /
paraM saMlekhanA nAkAri  /  kasmAdityAha - acchinnAetti na chinnA.truTitA yA
jIvitAzA tayA hetubhUtayA saMlekhanA saMstArakadIkSA ca na vydhaayi| nAehiM vA
amukkotti - jJAtairvA svajanairna mukto na mutkalitaH  /
pacchimasaMlehaNamakiccatti - ataH pazcimakAlakarttavyAM saMlekhanAM tapasA
zarIrazoSaNarUpAmakRtvaivAvidhAya yanmaraNaM karoti
tadvAlapaNDitamaraNamuktamityagretanagAthAyAM sambandha iti gAthArthaH  /  / 6 /
/  soma0 atha kadA punarasau zrAvako bAlapaNDitamaraNena mriyata ityAha- Azu
zIghraM karaNaM kAra AzukAra autsukyamaraNAvasarastena maraNaM tasmin
maraNe'cintitopasthita ityarthaH  /  evaM jhaTiti pratyAsannIbhUte maraNe
bAlapaNDitamaraNaM kuryAdathavA acchinAe iti na chinnA truTitA acchinnA, kA ? yA
jIvitAzA tasyAM tayA vA krameNaiva maraNakAle samAgate'pi saMlekhanAdyakRtvaiva
yanmiyate tad 2010_02

Page #53 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter 12: The Scattering of the Rejection of Anxiety, Verse 7: Death of a
Child-Sage  **6.** The death of a child-sage is described in the previous verse.
It is when someone dies without having performed the duties of the latter part
of life, such as *sanlekhanā* (voluntary fasting unto death) and austerities,
even though they are aware of them and have not been prevented by their family.
**Explanation:**  *Āśu* means quick or swift. The time of death arrived suddenly
or gradually, but they did not perform *sanlekhanā*. Why? Because their hope for
life was not severed or broken. They were not freed or released by their family
and relatives. Therefore, they died without performing *sanlekhanā* and
austerities, which are the duties of the latter part of life. This is called the
death of a child-sage, as explained in the previous verse.  **7.**  *Ālociya*
means after having consulted. *Nissallo* means free from *śalya* (afflictions).
*Āruhittu* means having ascended. *Santhāram* means the *sanstāraka* (bed of
grass). *Deśavirao* means one who has renounced the world. If someone dies after
renouncing the world, it is called the death of a child-sage.  **Explanation:**
The text explains how someone can die at home. *Ālociya* means that they have
consulted with their spiritual teacher and accepted the atonement given by them.
*Nissallo* means that they are free from *śalya*. *Śalya* is of two types:
material and mental. Material *śalya* includes thorns, dust, etc., while mental
*śalya* includes contradictions in the principles, virtues, and higher virtues.
By consulting with their teacher, they have removed all *śalya*. The text quotes
a verse:  > "A person with *śalya* cannot be considered pure, as stated in the
scriptures. Only by removing all *śalya* can one attain liberation."  The text
then explains that the person has ascended their own home and accepted the
*sanstāraka*. *Sanstāraka* refers to the bed of grass used during *anashana*
(voluntary fasting). The *anashana* performed with the *sanstāraka* is also
called *sanstāraka*. The person who has performed *anashana* with the
*sanstāraka* is in a state of meditation. *Deśavirao* means one who has
renounced the world. If someone dies after renouncing the world, it is called
the death of a child-sage.  **Commentary:**  The text explains that the person
who dies at home has consulted with their spiritual teacher, accepted the
atonement, and is free from all afflictions. They have also performed *anashana*
with the *sanstāraka* and are in a state of meditation. This is why their death
is considered the death of a child-sage.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 12 AturapratyAkhyAnaprakIrNakam gA. 7 bAlapaNDitamaraNam  /  jJAtaiH
svajanairvA na mukto nAnumataH pazcimakAlakarttavyAM saMlekhanAM
tapaHprabhRtikAmakRtvaiva yanmaraNaM karoti tad
bAlapaNDitamaraNamuktamityagretanagAthAyAM sambandhaH  /  / 6 /  /  guNa. Azu
zIghraM karaNaM kAraH  /  acintitopasthitopakramaNe athavA krameNaiva
maraNakAla: samAgataH paraM saMlekhanA nAkAri  /  kasmAditi ? na chinnA na
truTitA yA jIvitAzA tayA  /  jJAtaiH svajanairvA na mukto na mutkalita ataH
pazcimakAlakartavyAM saMlekhanAM tapasA zarIrazoSaNarUpAmakRtvA'vidhAya
yanmaraNaM karoti tad bAlapaNDitamaraNamuktamityagretanagAthAyAM sambandha iti
gAthArthaH  /  / 6 /  /  Aloiya nissallo sa ghare cevA''ruhittu saMthAraM  /
jai marai desavirao taM vuttaM bAlapaMDiyayaM  /  / 7 /  /  Alocya niHzalyaH
svagRha evAruhya saMstArakam  /  yadi mriyate dezaviratastaduktaM bAlapaNDitam
/  / 7 /  /  . bhuva sa ca gRhe kathaM mriyata ityAha - Alocya
gItArthagurusamIpe AlocanAM dattvA taddattaM prAyazcittamaGgIkRtya nissallotti -
zalyaM dravyabhAvebhedAd dvidhA - dravyazalyaM kaNTakatomarAdi, bhAvazalyaM
mUlottaraguNavirAdhanAdi  /  tadAlocanAdAnena niSkAzya nirgataM zalyamasmAditi
niHzalyaH  /  uktaJca - na hu sujjhai sasallo jaha bhaNiyaM sAsaNe dhuyarayANaM
/  uddhariya savvasallo gacchai siddhiM dhuyakileso  /  / 1 /  /  sa caivaM
kRtvA saghare cevAruhettutti - nijasadane evAruhyAGgIkRtya saMthAraM ti -
saMstArakamanazanapratipattikAle darbhaprastaraNarUpam  /  kRtasaMstArakavidhinA
hi yatkriyate tadanazanamapi saMstArakamucyate  /  tasmin saMstArake kRtAnazana:
samAdhimAn  /  jai marai desavirao tti yadi mriyate dezaviratastaduktaM
bAlapaNDitamaraNamityakSarArthaH  /  / 7 /  /  soma. sa ca gRhe kathaM mriyate
ityAha - Alocya gItArthasugurusamIpe AlocanAM dattvA
taddattaprAyazcittamaGgIkRtya [nirgataM zalyaM yasmAt sa, zalyaM
dravyabhAvabhedAd dvidhA dravyazalyaM kaNTakAdi, mUlaguNottaraguNavirAdhanArUpaM
bhAvazalyaM tena rahita ityarthaH  /  evaMvidhaH sannijagRhe evAruhyAGgIkRtya
saMstArakamanazanapratipattikAlAha~ darbhaprastaraNarUpaM
saMstArakavidhisAdhyamanazana 2010_02

Page #54 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Chapter: 1 Verse: 8 13 One who is freed from the *sanstāraka* by proper
treatment. If he dies while abstaining from food, being detached from the world
and in a state of meditation, it is called the death of a *Bālapaṇḍita*. ||7||
Commentary: He asks how such a person dies at home. He says that after
consulting with the guru and accepting the prescribed atonement, there are two
types of *śalya* (afflictions) - *dravyaśalya* (material affliction) like
thorns, etc., and *bhāvaśalya* (mental affliction) like the opposition of the
roots, qualities, etc. By consulting with the guru, one is free from *śalya*.
Having done this, one should ascend to one's own abode and accept the
*sanstāraka* in the form of a *darbha* (grass) mat at the time of abstaining
from food. Because whatever is done according to the *sanstāraka* method, even
the act of abstaining from food is called *sanstāraka*. If one dies while
detached from the world, it is called the death of a *Bālapaṇḍita*. ||7|| The
*uprakrama* (preliminary practice) for "the acquisition of *bhakti* (devotion)"
is described in detail. This is the same *uprakrama* that is to be known in the
death of a *Bālapaṇḍita* as appropriate. ||8|| Commentary: He then asks how this
should be done. He says that the *uprakrama* (preliminary practice) for a
*śrāvaka* (lay follower) who is abstaining from food in the study of
*bhaktiparijñā* (knowledge of devotion) is the *pīṭhabandha* (binding of the
seat) described in detail in the verses beginning with "I am detached from the
world", etc. The verses beginning with "It should be observed", etc., and "It
should be regulated", etc., describe the method. The *guru* worship, the
*saṅgha* worship, the giving of gifts out of compassion for fellow religionists,
the giving of gifts from one's own wealth, the construction of *caitya* (shrine)
and *ārāpaṇa* (offering) for the previous *jinas*, the installation of these,
the writing of books on the principles, the honoring of the four types of
*saṅgha* (community) as appropriate, the *pravājana* (leading out) of the
*saṅgha*, the *kārapaṇa* (offering), the pilgrimage to holy places, the teaching
of the *jina* teachings, the propagation of the *jina* teachings, the offering
of abundant wealth, the making of *stava* (hymns), the freeing of one's own
people, the worship of the *caitya*, the informing of the *guru*, the offering
of twelve *avartas* (cycles of worship), the acceptance of gifts, the *ālocanā*
(reflection), the acceptance of *samyaktvā* (right faith), the *āṇuvrata* (minor
vows), the *uccāṇa* (elevation), the *purussara* (leading the way) - all these
are described in detail in the *vidhi* (method). This is the same *uprakrama*
that is to be described in the death of a *Bālapaṇḍita* in this study, as
appropriate and as necessary. This is the literal meaning. And this is shown
here as follows: He who is not lazy, who is generous, who is a
*harisavasaṭṭakaṇṭayakarāla

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 khaNDa:-1 gA. 8 13 mapyupacArAt saMstArakamucyate  /  kRtAnazanaH san yadi
mriyate dezavirataH samAdhimAn taduktaM bAlapaNDitamaraNam  /  / 7 /  /  guNa.
sa ca gRhe kathaM mriyata ityAha-Alocya gurusamIpe taddataM
prAyazcitamaGgIkRtya, zalyaM dravyabhAvabhedAdvidhA - dravyazalyaM kaNTakAdi,
bhAvazalyaM mUlottaraguNavirAdhanAdi  /  tadAlocanAdAnena niHzalyaH  /  sa
caivaM kRtvA nijasadane evAruhyAGgIkRtya saMstArakamanazanapratipattikAle
darbhasaMstaraNarUpam  /  kRtasaMstArakavidhinA hi yat kriyate tadanazanamapi
saMstArakamucyate  /  yadi mriyate dezaviratastaduktaM bAlapaNDitamityarthaH  /
/ 7 /  /  jo "bhattaparitrAe" uvakkamo vitthareNa niddiTTho  /  so ceva
bAlapaMDiyamaraNe neo jahAjoggaM  /  / 8 /  /  yo bhaktaparijJAyAmupakramo
vistareNa nirdiSTaH  /  sa eva bAlapaNDitamaraNe jJeyo yathAyogyam  /  / 8 /  /
bhuva0 tarhi tatkena vidhinA vidheyamityAha - yo bhaktaparijJAdhyayane
zrAvakasyA'nazanapratipattiM kurvata upakramaH pIThabandho vistareNa "aha hujja
desavirao" ityAdi  /  aniyANo ityAdi  /  niyadavvamityAdi gAthAtrayoktavidhiH  /
gurupUjA - saGghapUjA-
sAdharmikavAtsalyadInAdidAnanijadravyato'pUrvajinacaityakArApaNabimbanirmApaNA-
tatpratiSThApanA-siddhAntapustakalekhanA - yathaucityena [tya] caturvidhasaGghas
anmAnanapravAjanakakArApaNatIrthayAtrAvidhApanajinazAsanaprabhAvanAhetuprabhUtad
ravyastavakaraNasvajanamuktalApanacaityavandanagurUpajJApanAdvAdazAvarttavandana
dAnAlocanAgrahaNasamyaktvANuvratoccANapurassaro yastatra niravazeSo vidhiniSTo
bhaNita:  /  sa evAtrApyadhyayane bAlapaNDitamaraNe varNayitavye yathAyogyaM
yathocitaM jJeya itykssraarthH| sa cAtra ko'pi darzAte tathAhi - aniyANo
dANamaNo harisavasaTTakaMTayakarAlo  /  pUeya gurusaMghasAhammiyamAi bhattIe  /
/ 1 /  /  niyadavvamauvvajiNaMdabhavaNajiNabiMbavarapaiTThAsu  /  viyaraya
pasatthaputthayasu titthatitthayarajattAsu  /  / 2 /  /  aTTAhiyamahimAo kAriya
jiNaceiesu savvesu  /  nivaimahabbalanAyA cAragasuddhiM ca kArei  /  / 3 /  /
2010_02

Page #55 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Chapter 14:  The Discourse on Rejecting the Sick  **14.** This is what
should be done:  One should give charity, both in the form of food and money.
One should first bow down to the Guru and then contemplate all this. || 4 ||
**5.**  In the last time cycle, the Jinas have given the teachings, and the
teachings are to be contemplated.  The rules that are well-spoken should be
followed. || 5 ||  **6.**  When contemplating the teachings, one should be free
from attachment, and one should be free from the desire for worldly things.  One
should contemplate the teachings with the same mind as the Siddhas. || 6 ||
**7.**  One should not give food to the sick, nor should one give them anything
else.  For a long time, they will be a burden and will have to be listened to.
|| 7 ||  **8.**  One should not be attached to the sick, as the teachings say
that they are a burden.  One who is free from attachment to all beings will
attain liberation. || 8 ||  **9.**  Death is the death of the sick, it is the
great ocean of suffering.  The souls wander in the cycle of birth and death,
bound by karma. || 9 ||  **10.**  One who is free from attachment to all beings,
who is wealthy and has a good family, who is endowed with the seven virtues, and
who is a follower of the Jinas, will be liberated. || 10 ||  **11.**  I bow down
to the Gurus, who have taught the difficult rules of conduct, which are related
to right faith, right knowledge, right conduct, right effort, and right
mindfulness. || 11 ||  **12.**  One who is free from attachment to all beings,
who has climbed the mountain of liberation, who is free from fear, who knows the
truth, will be liberated. || 12 ||  **13.**  I seek refuge in the Jinas, the
Siddhas, the good, and the Dharma.  I bow down to the Jinas, and I seek refuge
in them.  I will practice austerities. || 13 ||  **14.**  I bow down to the
Arhats, the conquerors, who are free from the stains of karma.  I bow down to
all the Siddhas. || 14 ||  **15.**  I bow down to all the Ayariyas, who are the
holders of the five virtues.  I bow down to the Siddhas, the teachers, and the
monks. || 15 ||  **16.**  I bow down to the good, who are endowed with the
virtue of patience, who are the mountains of all virtues, and who are the
helpers of the Dharma. || 16 ||  **The Discourse on Rejecting the Sick, Chapter
8**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 14 eyaM kayadavvatthayakicco paricattasayaNadhaNabhicco |
vaMdaNaguruvaMdaNapuvvaM AloiyaM savvaM  /  / 4  /  /  ANAimA jiNANaM
dAyavvA''loyaNA carimasamae  /  saMviggagIyamAINa niyamao jaM sue bhaNiyaM  //
5  //  saMvigge gIyatthe tadasaya pAsatthamAisArUvI  /  tadasai pavayaNadevI
siddhasamakkhaM tu Aloe  //  6  //  AloyaNaM adAuM sai annamavi tahappaNo dAuM
/  ciraMti kAlaM te u sasallA muNeyavvA  /  / 7 /  /  na hu sujjhai sasallo jaha
bhaNiyaM sAsaNe dhuyarayANaM  /  uddhariyasavvasalo gacchai siddhiM dhuyakileso
||8|| mariuM sasallamaraNaM saMsArADavimahAkaDillaMmi [ ? ] | suraM bhamaMti
jIvA aNorapAre samAinnA  /  / 9 /  /  uddhariyasavvasalo bhattaparinnAe
dhaNiyamAutto  /  sattArAhaNajutto caMdagavijjhaM samANei  /  /  10  /  /  iya
pavaDemi gurUNaM jahaTThiyaM niyayadukkaDaM sayalaM  /  sammatta-nANa-saMjama-
tava- vIriyAyAravisayaMmi  /   /  11  /   /  uddhariyasavvasallo
vayapavvayasiharamAruhiya sammaM  /  kammAribhayavimukkA jANa suhI savvahA hoi
/   /  12  /   /  aha jiNa siddha- susAhu-dhammaM saraNaMmi kAumicchaMto  /
jiNamAi namiyato maMgalaM ca saraNaM ca tapa karei  /  /  13  /  /
rAgAiriujiANaM arihaMtANaM namo arahayANaM  /  kammakalaMkavimukkANa paNamimo
savvasiddhANaM  /   / 14 /  /  paMcavihAyAradhare payao paNamAmi savvaAyarie  /
siddhaMtavAyae tahA uvajjhAe vaMdimo sirasA  /   /  15  /  /  khaMtAguNajuANaM
asesaguNarayaNarohaNagirINaM  /  gAravANa namimo dhammasahAyANa sAhUNaM  /   /
16 /  /  AturapratyAkhyAnaprakIrNakam gA-8 2010_02

Page #56 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Chapter: 1 Verse: 8  **First, I bow to the Arihantas, the liberators of all
beings, who are auspicious.** **Second, I bow to the Siddhas, the liberated
souls, who are free from the cycle of birth and death, and are auspicious.**
**Third, I bow to the Saahus, the great souls, who are adorned with virtues, and
are auspicious.** **Fourth, I bow to the Jina Dharma, the path of liberation,
which is auspicious.**  **I take refuge in the Arihantas, the supreme
conquerors, who are the best among the gods and humans.** **I take refuge in the
Siddhas, the liberated souls, who are the best among the best.** **I take refuge
in the Saahus, the great souls, who are free from all impurities and are the
best among the world.** **I take refuge in the Jina Dharma, the path of
liberation, which is the best among all paths.**  **I confess my sins, which I
have committed through my body, speech, and mind, due to ignorance and
attachment.** **I have committed all kinds of sins, including killing, stealing,
lying, and sexual misconduct.** **I have committed sins by harming living
beings, by destroying the images of the Jinas, by disrespecting the
Tirthankaras, and by being envious of others.** **I have committed sins by being
greedy, by being angry, and by being attached to worldly things.**  **I confess
my sins, which I have committed through my body, speech, and mind, due to
ignorance and attachment.** **I have committed all kinds of sins, including
killing, stealing, lying, and sexual misconduct.** **I have committed sins by
harming living beings, by destroying the images of the Jinas, by disrespecting
the Tirthankaras, and by being envious of others.** **I have committed sins by
being greedy, by being angry, and by being attached to worldly things.**  **I
have committed sins by being greedy, by being angry, and by being attached to
worldly things.** **I have committed sins by being greedy, by being angry, and
by being attached to worldly things.** **I have committed sins by being greedy,
by being angry, and by being attached to worldly things.** **I have committed
sins by being greedy, by being angry, and by being attached to worldly things.**
**I have committed sins by being greedy, by being angry, and by being attached
to worldly things.** **I have committed sins by being greedy, by being angry,
and by being attached to worldly things.** **I have committed sins by being
greedy, by being angry, and by being attached to worldly things.** **I have
committed sins by being greedy, by being angry, and by being attached to worldly
things.**  **I have committed sins by being greedy, by being angry, and by being
attached to worldly things.** **I have committed sins by being greedy, by being
angry, and by being attached to worldly things.** **I have committed sins by
being greedy, by being angry, and by being attached to worldly things.** **I
have committed sins by being greedy, by being angry, and by being attached to
worldly things.**  **I have committed sins by being greedy, by being angry, and
by being attached to worldly things.** **I have committed sins by being greedy,
by being angry, and by being attached to worldly things.** **I have committed
sins by being greedy, by being angry, and by being attached to worldly things.**
**I have committed sins by being greedy, by being angry, and by being attached
to worldly things.**  **I have committed sins by being greedy, by being angry,
and by being attached to worldly things.** **I have committed sins by being
greedy, by being angry, and by being attached to worldly things.** **I have
committed sins by being greedy, by being angry,

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 khaNDa:-1 gA.8 jayajaMtuvacchalA me arihaMtA maMgalaM havao paDhamaM  /
bhavavArayA vimukkA siddhA mama maMgalaM bIyaM  /  / 17 /  /  guNagaNanihiNo
sAhU taIyaM te iMtu maMgalaM majjha  /  dhammo jiNapannatto cautthayaM maMgalaM
hou  /  / 18 /  /  saraNaM mama arihaMtA tiyasiMda-nariMdapUyamarihaMtA  /
saraNaM taha me siddhA titthAtitthAi je siddhA  /  / 19 /  /
pAvamalapaDalarahiyA sAhU saraNaM karemijagamahiyA  /  saraNaM maha
jiNadhamme....................  /  / 20 /  /  aha dakkaDAyaM garihe micchattau
nANamohiyamaNeNa  /  jAI mae kayAiM [?] pANivahAINi savvANi  /  / 21 /  /
jiNabhavaNabiMbaThAvaNa rahajattA titthajattA vacchallo  /  dANatavasIlamAI
aNumoe sukayapunnAI  /  / 22 /  /  aha tivihA uccariyaM sammaM uccarai aTThavi
vayAiM  /  pANAivAyamAI aNatthadaMDAvasANAIM  /  / 23 /  /  sAhU puNa
paMcamahavvayAi uccarai tinni vArAu  /  pANAivAyaviramaNamAI nisibhoyaNaMtAI  /
/ 24 /  /  AseviyavayabhAro rAgaddosehi vajjau [jjio] tatto  /  khAmemi
raMgajuttA savve saMsAriNo sattA  /  / 25 /  /  je nAraya-tiriya-narA-'maresu
bhamareNa kammavasageNa  /  dukkhe ThaviyA jIvA saMpai khAmemi te savve  /  / 26
/  /  neraiyeNa pausA paramAhammibhavaMmi patteNa  /  je me kayatthiyA nArayAo
te haM khamAvemi  /  / 27 /  /  tiriyattaM patteNavi egidiyavigalajIvajoNI  /
bhuttA pIyA daDDA bUDhA taha cunniyA je u  /  / 28 /  /  paMcidieNa bahuso
roseNa bhIeNa chuhatanhapIDieNavi  /  ..virAhiyA jevi te khaame||29|| 2010_02

Page #57 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter 16:  A Discourse on the Forgiveness of Offenses
(Aturpratyakhyanaprakirnakam)  **Verse 30:**  Those who are foolish in heart,
who have killed living beings in the water, on land, and in the air, I beg
forgiveness from them.  **Verse 31:**  Those who live in the water, who swallow
fish and frogs, I beg forgiveness from them. Those who live on land, who eat
four-footed animals, birds, and snakes, I beg forgiveness from them.  **Verse
32:**  Those who eat flesh, who kill goats, deer, rabbits, and buffaloes, I beg
forgiveness from them. Those who live in the air, who eat pigeons, crows, and
sparrows, I beg forgiveness from them.  **Verse 33:**  Those who are tormented
by the pain of coming and going, of being born and dying, I beg forgiveness from
them. I beg forgiveness from all beings, from the lowest to the highest.
**Verse 34:**  Those who have been born into the human state, who have been
reborn through various causes, I beg forgiveness from them. I beg forgiveness
from all beings.  **Verse 35:**  Those who have been born as saints, who have
been touched by the three poisons, who have been tormented by the three poisons,
I beg forgiveness from them. I beg forgiveness from those who have been born as
saints.  **Verse 36:**  Those who have been killed by me, who have been killed
by me in the state of a hunter, I beg forgiveness from them. I beg forgiveness
from those who have been killed by me due to my bad karma.  **Verse 37:**  Those
who have been killed by me in the state of a king, due to many causes of war, I
beg forgiveness from them. I beg forgiveness from all those who have been killed
by me.  **Verse 38:**  Those who have been killed by me, who have been killed by
me in the state of a king, who have been killed by me in the state of a king, I
beg forgiveness from them. I beg forgiveness from all those who have been killed
by me.  **Verse 39:**  Those who have been killed by me, who have been killed by
me in the state of a king, who have been killed by me in the state of a king, I
beg forgiveness from them. I beg forgiveness from all those who have been killed
by me.  **Verse 40:**  Those who have been killed by me, who have been killed by
me in the state of a king, who have been killed by me in the state of a king, I
beg forgiveness from them. I beg forgiveness from all those who have been killed
by me.  **Verse 41:**  Those who have been killed by me, who have been killed by
me in the state of a king, who have been killed by me in the state of a king, I
beg forgiveness from them. I beg forgiveness from all those who have been killed
by me.  **Verse 42:**  Those who have been killed by me, who have been killed by
me in the state of a king, who have been killed by me in the state of a king, I
beg forgiveness from them. I beg forgiveness from all those who have been killed
by me.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 16 AturapratyAkhyAnaprakIrNakam gA. 8 jalayarathalayarakhayarA nihayA maNuyAvi
mUDhahiyayeNa  /  vagghoragAiM bhAvaMgaeNa khAmemi te ihi  /  / 30 /  /
jalacAriNo jalaMmi giliyAmacchAiNo bhaDaphaDatA [?]  /  thalacAriNo thalaMmi
caupaya-ura-bhUyasappAiM  /  / 31 /  /  maMsatthiNAo gasiyA chAga-miga-sasa-
mahisa-saMgharAiyA  /  khahacAriNovi khaiyA mugalA-baga-tittirAiyA  /  / 32 /  /
gamaNAgamaNa-nisIyaNa-tuyaTTaNAIhiM pIDiyA je u  /  te me khamaMtu savvaM
avarAhaM saMpayaM garuyaM  /  / 33 /  /  patteNa maNuyabhAvaM
AraMbhapariggahehiM vivihehiM  /  viNivAiyA jiyA je khamaMtu te saMpaI savvo  /
/ 34 /  /  chuhiyA tisiyA saMtA kasakusAIhiM niddayaM jaNiu  /  je vAhiyA hayAiM
karemi khalu khAmaNaM tesiM  /  / 35  /  /  luddhaya-dhIvarabhAve
nigghiNahiyaeNa je mayA vahiyA  /  kharakammiyaruveNaM je vahiyA te hu khamaMtu
/  / 36 /  /  naravaipayapatteNaM aNegasaMgAmakAraNAIhiM  /  saMhAro jANakavasaM
paimArisAmi[?]te savve  /  / 37 /  /  avarAhiNo vi pahayA pahayA pAveNa
niravarAhA vi  /  rAyasahAve jIvA khamaMtu te sajjhai ttAhe [?]  /  / 38 /  /
paradhaNaluddheNa hayA kevi hayA parakalattaratteNa  /  aTThAe aNaTThAe je
nihayA te vi khAmemi  /  / 39 /  /  jassa kayaM pesunnaM abbhakhANaM pi jassa
medinnaM  /  dhaNamANusaM va hariuM sovi khame savvahA khamau  /  / 40 /  /  jo
maMtamUlaSvAcunnaM [?] jaNa duTThA jAgamAIhiM [?]  /  dukhaMmi mae Thaviu taM
avarAhaM khamau so mo  /  / 41 /  /  kIlAkajje bAleNa jovvaNe kelidappakaMdappA
/  jesiM kau viNAso khamAparA majjha te iMtu  /  / 42 /  /  2010_02

Page #58 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Chapter: - 1 Verse: 8 Living by means of food is the means of livelihood for all
beings. Even those beings who are immobile, I forgive them. || 43 || I have
taken refuge in the great Lord, the Lord of Lords. I forgive those who are
tormented by the birds and the rains. || 44 || I forgive all beings, with a mind
that is content with the state of being. I forgive all beings, even those who
are suffering. || 45 || Thus, in the four ways of being, I forgive all beings
who are wandering in delusion. I forgive even those who cause me pain. || 46 ||
I forgive all beings, even the lowest of the low, all the groups of beings. I am
not the enemy of anyone, nor is anyone my enemy. || 47 || I forgive those who
are enemies, I forgive all those who are in the state of being. I have the same
attitude towards all beings, free from attachment and aversion. || 48 || I
forgive all beings, I forgive even the great Lord, the Lord of Lords. I forgive
the Siddhas, the Aacharyas, the Upadhyayas, and all the virtuous ones. || 49 ||
I forgive those who slander the Aacharyas, the Upadhyayas, the virtuous ones,
and the monastic order. I forgive those who slander the Siddhas in three ways.
|| 50 || I forgive those who slander the Aacharyas, the Upadhyayas, the virtuous
ones, and the monastic order. I forgive those who slander the Siddhas in three
ways. || 51 || I forgive those who slander the Aacharyas, the Upadhyayas, the
virtuous ones, and the monastic order. I forgive those who slander the Siddhas
in three ways. || 52 || I forgive those who slander the Aacharyas, the
Upadhyayas, the virtuous ones, and the monastic order. I forgive those who
slander the Siddhas in three ways. || 53 || I forgive those who slander the
Aacharyas, the Upadhyayas, the virtuous ones, and the monastic order. I forgive
those who slander the Siddhas in three ways. || 54 || I forgive those who
slander the Aacharyas, the Upadhyayas, the virtuous ones, and the monastic
order. I forgive those who slander the Siddhas in three ways. || 55 ||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 khaNDa: - 1 gA. 8 bhavabhoganimittaM as annevi jIviyA heu  /  tasathAvarA ya
jIvA je nihayA te vi khAmemi  /  /  43  /   /  deveNa mahe devA abhiugaM kAriyA
hayA paiyA  /  pattapavasAIhiM naratiriyA pIDiyA je u  /  / 44 //  khAmi te va
sammaM bhavabhIyamahopasannacitteNa  /  khamayaM va mae siM savvesiM dukkaDaM
savvaM  /  / 45  /  /  evaM caugave bhIme bhavasAyare bhamaMteNa  /  pie dukhaM
jassa kayaM taM pi khAmemi  //  46  //  | ahamavi khAmi savvaM avarAhaM
sayalapANivaggassa  /  nAhaM kassaya sattU na ya sattU koi meyANi  /  / 47 /  /
khAmi sattumatte khAmemi ya sayaNapariyaNe savve  /  paricattarAgadoso savvesu
ya me samo bhAvo  /  / 48  /  /  khAmi savva saMgaM usabhAyajiNe vi taha
khamAvemi  /  siddhe taha Ayarie uvajjhAe savvasAhU ya  /  / 49 /  /  AsANA
jiNANa mohatamaMdheNa jA kayA kahavi  /  taha siddhamAIyANaM tivihaM tiviheNa
niMdAmI  /  /  50  /  /  AyariyauvajjhAe sAhujaNe taha ya samaNasaMghaMmi  /
AsANA kayA jaM niMdAmi tayaM mahApAvaM  /   /  51  /   /  naoNNassa daMsaNassa
ya caraNassAsAyaNA kayA jAu  /  hAmi puNo vi puNo bhayaMkaraM pAvameyaM  /   /
52  //  hi tithaM ummaggo vA pavattiu mohA  /  jANateNa vi maggo avalaviu taM pi
garihAmi  /  /  53  /  /  aha saMgho ussaggaM khavagassa ya niruvasaggahe huMti
/  kuNa khavago vi saM raiyaMjali bhaNai sakkathayaM  /   /  54  /  /  jA saMpa
tANa pajjaM tayaM tu bhaNiUNa pulaiyasarIro  /  vaMdit sugurupA khavago
vinnattiyaM kuNai  /  /  55  /  /  2010_02 17

Page #59 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Aaturpratyakhyanaprakirnakam, Chapter 8  **Verse 56:**  Fearful, I renounce
all possessions in three ways: all water, all food, and all speech.  **Verse
57:**  I renounce all gifts, all possessions, all wealth, all anger, all pride,
all greed, and all other vices.  **Verse 58:**  I renounce all quarrels, all bad
food, all slander, all deceit, all false beliefs, all pride, and all wrong
speech.  **Verse 59:**  I renounce these twelve things, O Fearful, and I request
you to protect me from all harm.  **Verse 60:**  I renounce all three types of
food for the rest of my life, and I renounce all four types of guru-knowledge
and all knowledge of the Siddhas.  **Verse 61:**  I renounce this family,
wealth, property, and all possessions, including those given by the king and the
country.  **Verse 62:**  I renounce all clothes, ornaments, shelter, vehicles,
and all other possessions, both in this life and the next.  **Verse 63:**  I
renounce all actions, all non-actions, all births, all deaths, all suffering,
and all happiness, in three ways.  **Verse 64:**  I renounce all beds, all
possessions, and all bodies from countless births, which I have had until today,
in three ways.  **Verse 65:**  I renounce this body, which is nourished by food,
water, and the essence of life, and I renounce all breaths and all actions, in
three ways.  **Verse 66:**  I renounce the eight places of the senses, the eight
places of the mind, and the twenty-two places of suffering.  **Verse 67:**  I
renounce the four types of births, the four types of deaths, and the four types
of existence, and I renounce all attachments, all detachments, and all desires.
**Verse 68:**  Because the root of suffering is the cycle of birth and death, I
renounce all eight types of food, which are the cause of this cycle.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 AturapratyAkhyAnaprakIrNakam gA.8 bhayavaM kayasAmaIo savvaM ciya vosarAmi
tiviheNaM  /  savvesiM pANINaM aivAyaM taha musAvAyaM  /  / 56 /  /
savvamadattAdANaM mehUNa-pariggahaM niravasesaM  /  kohaM mANaM mAyaM lobhaM pi
jaM ca dosaM ca  /  / 57 /  /  kalahaM abhakkhANaM paraparivAyaM tahA raiaraI  /
micchAdasaNasallaM mAyAmosaM ca pesunnaM  /  / 58 /  /  iya pAvaThANavirao
duvAlasAvattavaMdaNaM dAU  /  vinnavai dehi bhayavaM vihipuvvaM aNasaNaM majjha
/  / 59 /  /  bhavacarimaM paccakkhAmi jAvajjIvAe tivihamAhAraM  /  aha cauvihaM
pi gurusakkhiyaM tu aha siddhasakkhiM tu  /  / 60  /  /  jaM piya imaM kuDaMbaM
dhaNadhannaM dupayacaupayaM apayaM  /  desapurakhittamAI taMpi hi vosire savvaM
/  / 1 /  /  i8 vatthAbharaNaM rahapaharaNavAhaNAi uvagaraNaM  /
ihabhavaparabhaviyaM vA vosiriyaM ajja me sav  /  / 12 /  /  jaM ca kayaM
ahigaraNaM arahaTTaghaTTajaMtabajjhAI  /  sagaDukkhalasattthAI taM pi ya
tiviheNa vosiriyaM  /  / 63 /  /  pAvapasattA sayaNA aNegajammesu dehagehAya  /
je Asi ajja te me vosariyA tiviha tiviheNa  /  / 64 /  /  jaM pi ya imaM sarIraM
posiyamaccaMtajattasAreNa  /  caramussAse'vassaM vosariyaM savvahA taM pi  /  /
65  /  /  duddamaiMdiyagAme jAikulAI ya aTThamayaThANe  /  pariharasu sahasu
dussahabAvIsaparIsahe vaccha  /  / 66  /  /  suranaratiriyA ya samubbhave ya
cauhA caubvihe ceva  /  ugguvasagge sahasu ya nisaggaveraggaraMgillo  /  / 67 /
/  jamhA duggaimUlaM saMsArapavaTTaNAriupamAo  /  tamhA annANAI aTThaviho so na
kAyavyo  /  / 68 /  /  2010_02

Page #60 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Chapter: 1 Verse: 8  Do not be disheartened, O brave ones, for what is there to
fear?  Even if you are faced with adversity, do not be discouraged. ||69||  Free
from the cycle of birth and death, transcending the world and the afterlife,
living in the bliss of liberation, free from attachment and delusion, this is
the true path. ||70||  The twelvefold path of liberation, the fivefold vows, the
twenty-fivefold virtues, these are the paths to liberation. ||71||  Do not be
deceived by the illusions of the world, the fleeting pleasures and pains, the
coming together and separation, the impermanence of life and death. Be steadfast
in your resolve, O brave ones. ||72||  Just as a bird seeks refuge in a strong
tree, so too should one seek refuge in the teachings of the Jinas, the
conquerors of delusion. ||73||  Do not be like a foolish person who wastes their
precious time in worldly pursuits. Instead, strive for the eternal bliss of
liberation, the true wealth that is beyond the reach of the senses. ||74||  The
true path lies in the practice of the twelvefold path, the fivefold vows, the
twenty-fivefold virtues, the practice of meditation and contemplation, and the
offering of salutations to the Jinas. ||75||  At the time of death, one should
remember the twelvefold path, the fivefold vows, the twenty-fivefold virtues,
and the fourfold refuge. ||76||  This is the supreme path, the path that leads
to liberation, the path that extinguishes suffering and brings true happiness.
||77||  Thus, by practicing the fivefold vows, with a pure and joyful heart, one
sheds the shackles of delusion and attains liberation. ||78||  **Commentary:**
The author explains that the process of a Shravaka (lay follower) taking the vow
of non-eating (Anashan) should be explained in detail, as it is a significant
event. The process involves various steps, including:  * **Guru Sangha Puja:**
Offering respect to the community of teachers. * **Sadharmika Swatjan
Vatsalya:** Showing love and compassion to fellow practitioners. * **Dinadi
Dan:** Giving charity to the needy. * **Jina Chaitya Kara Apan Bimba Nirman:**
Creating images and symbols of the Jinas. * **Tat Pratistapana:** Establishing
these images and symbols. * **Siddhant Lekhan:** Writing about the teachings of
the Jinas. * **Tirth Yatra Vidhan:** Organizing pilgrimages to sacred sites. *
**Jina Shasan Prabhavna:** Spreading the teachings of the Jinas.  The author
emphasizes that these acts of merit should be performed before taking the vow of
non-eating. He also mentions that the process of a young scholar (Bal Pandit)
taking the vow of non-eating should be explained in a similar manner.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 khaNDa:-1 gA.8 rAugAya[?]niyANe nava mA kAhisi kahiMpi dhIra tumaM  /  taha
kaMdappAe kubhAvaNAu bhAvesu mA kaiyA  /  / 69 /  /  ihaparalogAsaMsAvivajjiu
jiymrnnnirvekho| logasuhanippivAso chinnamamatto ya viharAhi  /  / 70 /  /
bArasaaNiccamAI bhAvasu taM bhAvaNAu pavarAu  /  paNavIsabhAvaNAu mahabbayANaM
ca bhAvesu  /  / 71 /  /  khaNasuhaduHkhaMmi sayogaviugamaraNadhammami  /  mA
iMdajAlasuviNe ya same bhave dhIra kuNasu raI  /  / 72 /  /  jaha
sAmivayaNacoiyajohA bhajjaMti parabalANIyaM  /  taha jiNiyamohamallaM pAvasu
ArAhaNapaDAgaM  /  / 73 /  /  mA appakAlabhAviyachuhAiviyaNAparAiu saMto  /
hAresu niruvamasuhaM tidiva-sivasaMbhavamaNaMtaM  /  / 74 /  /  tA niyamaNaMmi
kAuM sivasuhamasarIrayaM aNAbAhaM  /  aruyamaNaMtamapajjavasANaM jjhANaMjjhAyasa
namokkAraM  /  / 75 /  mottUNa bArasaMgaM saMpatte maraNadezakAlammi  /  /
paMcaparameTThimaMtaM jaM puvvadharojjhAyaM ti  /  / 76 /  /  eso paramo maMto
surataruciMtAmaNINa abbhahiu  /  AgamaNaM taM jjhauduHkhakhayakAraNaM paramaM  /
/ 77  /  /  evaM pariyato maNavayasA paMcanamokkAraM  /  ullasiyasuddhabhAvo
muMcai taNupaMjaraM dhanno  /  / 78  /  /  soma0 tatkena vidhinA vidheyamityAha
- yo bhaktaparijJAprakIrNake zrAvakasyAnazanapratipattiM kurvata upakramaH
prathamataH sarvakRtyavidhirUpo vistareNa "aha 1 - hujjadesavirao 2-aniANo
3niadavvaM" ityAdigAthAtrayeNokto gurusaGghapUjA-sAdharmikasvajanavAtsalya-
dInAdidAna-jinacaityakArApaNabimbanirmApaNa-tatpratiSThApana-siddhAntalekhana-
tIrthayAtrAvidhAnajinazAsanaprabhAvanAdipuNyAni kRtapUrvI zrAddho'ntyasamaye
svajanamuktalApana-caityavandana-
gurudvAdazAvarttavandanadAnA''locanAgrahaNapunaHsamyaktvavratoccAra-
sarvajIvakSAmaNa-catuHzaraNapratipattyAdipurassaramanazanamaGgIkarotItyAdirUpaH
sa evAtrApyadhyayane bAlapaNDitamaraNe varNayitavye yathAyogyaM jJeyaH  /  / 8 /
/  2010_02

Page #61 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Aaturpratyakhyanaprakirnakam, Chapter 9  **Verse 8**  The method by which
this (merit) is achieved is explained as follows: The initiation (upkrama), the
establishment of the seat (piṭhabandha), which is described in detail in the
chapter on the knowledge of the devotees (bhaktaparijñādhyayana), is the same
here as well. In this study, the death of a child prodigy (bālapanditamaraṇa)
should be understood in a suitable and appropriate manner.  **Verse 9**
**Vēmaṇi**  The (śrāvaka) attains the (heavenly) abode of the **Vēmaṇi**
(Vāimānika) according to the rule (niyama). He attains the seventh (heaven) due
to his excellent (ukkośa) merit.  **Vimāne Bhava**  **Bhūva**  Now, to show
where this (śrāvaka) who has performed such meritorious deeds will attain, it is
said: "Vāimānika, they are also Jyotiṣka." To differentiate this, it is further
explained: "Kappouvagēsu" - those who attain the **Kalpa** (heavenly abodes)
like Saudharma, etc., but not those who are beyond the **Kalpa**. "Niyamenā
tasya uvavāo" - the (śrāvaka) attains the Saudharma, etc., according to the rule
(niyama), due to his certainty (niścaya). Because he has no bondage
(bandhābhāva) due to his unfixed lifespan (abaddhāyuṣa) and the lifespan of the
Vāimānika (Vāimānikavarjadevāyuṣa). And thus, accepting the attainment of the
Arṣa (heaven), it is said: "Sāvagassa jahannēnaṁ sohammē uvavāo, ukkosēnaṁ
accuē" (The śrāvaka attains the Saudharma due to his merit, and he ascends due
to his excellent merit). Now, to explain in which (heaven) he will be, it is
said: "Niyamā sijjhai ukkosēnaṁ" - he will attain the seventh (heaven) due to
his certainty (niścaya) and excellent merit (ukkośa).  **Soma**  Now, to show
where this (śrāvaka) who has performed such meritorious deeds will attain, it is
said: "Vimāne Bhava" - Vāimānika, they are also Jyotiṣka. To differentiate this,
it is further explained: "Kappouvagēsu" - those who attain the **Kalpa**
(heavenly abodes) like Saudharma, etc., but not those who are beyond the
**Kalpa**. The (śrāvaka) who previously had an unfixed lifespan (abaddhāyuṣa)
attains the Saudharma, etc., due to his certainty (niyama) and ascends from the
lowest (Saudharma) to the highest (Acyuta) as far as his ability to go. Now, to
explain how many heavens this (śrāvaka) who has performed meritorious deeds
(śrāddha dharma āradhaka) and has not fallen from the path (apratipatita dharma)
will attain, it is said: "Niyamā" - he will attain the seventh (heaven) due to
his certainty (niścaya) and excellent merit (ukkośa), and also from the lowest
(Caturtha) to the highest.  **Verse 9 (Summary)**  Vāimānika are also Jyotiṣka.
The (

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 AturapratyAkhyAnaprakIrNakam gA. 9 guNa tatkena vidhinA kriyata ityAha- yo
bhaktaparijJAdhyayane zrAvakasyAnazanapratipattiM kurvata upakramaH pIThabandho
vistareNa nirdiSTo bhaNitaH sa evAtrApyadhyayane bAlapaNDitamaraNe yathAyogyaM
yathocitaM jJeya ityarthaH  /  /  8  /  /  20 vemANi kappovasu niyameNa tassa
uvavAo  /  niyamA sijjhai ukkosaeNa so sattamaMmi bhave  /  /  9  /  /
vaimAnikeSu kalpopageSu niyamena tasyopapAtaH  /  niyamAt siddhyatyutkRSTataH sa
saptame bhave  /  /  9  /  /  vimAne bhavA bhuva0 atha
tasyaivaMvidhArAdhanAyuktasya kvopapAta iti darzayannAha vaimAnikAste ca
jyotiSkA api bhavantIti tadvyavacchedArthaM vizinaSTi - kappovagesu ti 'kalpAn
saudharmmAdInupagacchantIti kalpopagAsteSu na tu kalpAtIteSu  /  niyameNa tassa
vAo tasya zrAvakasya niyamena nizcayena saudharmAdiSUpapAtaH  /
yatastasyAbaddhAyuSo vaimAnikavarjadevAyuSo bandhAbhAvAt  /  tathA
cArSamupapAtamaGgIkRtya " sAvagassa jahanneNaM sohamme uvavAo, ukkoseNaM accue"
/  atha kiyatsu bhaveSu sa setsyatItyAha - niyamA sijjhai ukkosaNaM ti
nizcayenotkRSTato bhavAnaGgIkRtya saptame bhave setsyatItyarthaH  /   /  1  /
/  soma0 atha tasyaivaMvighArAghanAyuktasya kvopapAta iti darzayati vimAne bhavA
vaimAnikAH, te ca jyotiSkAM api bhavantIti tadvyavacchedAya vizeSaNamAha- kappo0
kalpAn saudharmAdInupagacchantIti kalpopagAsteSu na tu kalpAtIteSu zrAvakasya
pUrvamabaddhAyuSo jaghanyataH saudharmAdArabhyotkRSTato 'cyutaM yAvadeva
gamanasambhavAt niyamena tasyopapAtaH  /  atha sa
zrAddhadharmArAdhako'pratipatitadharmA katipayairbhavaiH sidhyatItyAha- niya0
niyamAnnizcayenotkRSTato bhavAnaGkIkRtya saptame bhave sidhyati
jaghanyatazcatvArato'pi  /  /  9  /  /  2010_02 - guNa vaimAnikA jyotiSkA api
bhavantIti tadvyavacchedArthaM kalpopagateSu na tu kalpAtIteSu zrAvakasya
niyamena saudharmmAdiSUpapAtaH  /  nizcayenotkRSTato bhavAnaGgIkRtya saptame
bhave setsyatItyarthaH  /   /  9  /   /  -

Page #62 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Chapter: 1 Verse: 10 [Death of a Learned Person, from Verse 10 to Verse 44] This
is the death of a learned person, as seen in the Arhat's teachings (said). Now,
I will explain the death of a learned person in brief. ||10|| This is the death
of a learned person, as seen in the Arhat's teachings (said). From here, I will
explain the death of a learned person in brief. ||10|| Bhuva: Or, the death of a
learned person. Even at the end of life, because of not accepting complete
renunciation, and because of accepting non-eating, it becomes the death of a
learned person. [That is also] a learned person, and it becomes the death of a
learned person. It is seen in the Arhat's teachings, in the Jina's teachings
(said). From here, I will explain the death of a learned person, the death of a
very virtuous person, in brief, in summary, this is the meaning of the author's
words. ||10|| Soma: Thus, in the manner described earlier, even at the end of
life, because of not accepting complete renunciation, and because of accepting
non-eating, it becomes the death of a learned person. It is seen in the Arhat's
teachings, in the Jina's teachings (said). From here, I will explain the death
of a learned person, the death of a very virtuous person, in brief, in summary,
this is the meaning of the author's words. ||10|| Guna: From here, I will
explain the death of a learned person, the death of a very virtuous person, in
brief, in summary, this is the meaning of the author's words. ||10||   [Time-
Triple, Action-Triple, Yoga-Four, Sixty-Four Meditations, etc. Pratikramana,
Condemnation, Dust, Verse 11] I wish, Master! I repent for the best, I repent
for the past, I repent for the future, I repent for the present, I repent for
what I have done, I repent for what I have caused to be done, I repent for what
I have approved, I repent for falsehood, I repent for non-restraint, I repent
for passions, I repent for sinful actions, in the consequences of false beliefs,
in this world, in the next world, in the conscious, in the unconscious, in the
five sense objects; I wish, Venerable One! I repent for the best, I repent for
the past, I repent for the future, I repent for the present, I repent for what I
have done, I repent for what I have caused to be done, I repent for what I have
approved, I repent for falsehood, I repent for non-restraint, I repent for
passions, I repent for sinful actions,   2010_02

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 khaNDa:-1 gA. 10 [paNDitamaraNam gA. 10 taH gA. 44 yAvat] iya bAlapaMDiyaM hoi
maraNamarihaMtasAsaNe diTuM (bhaNiyaM)  /  itto paMDiyapaMDiyamaraNaM vucchaM
samAseNaM  /  / 10 /  /  iti bAlapaNDitaM bhavati maraNamarhacchAsane dRSTam
(bhaNitam)  /  itaH paNDitapaNDitamaraNaM vakSye samAsena  /  / 10 /  /  bhuva0
athavA bAlapaNDitamaraNaM  /  paryantasamaye'pi sarvavirateranaGgIkaraNAdvAlam
anazanapratipattezca paNDitaM bhavati  /  [bAlaM ca tat] paNDitaM ca
bAlapaNDitaM bhavati maraNam  /  arhatzAsane jinapravacane dRSTaM bhaNitam  /
ito'nantaraM paNDitapaNDitamaraNaM susAdhumaraNaM vakSye'bhidhAsye samAsena
saMkSepeNetyartha etadgranthakAravacanam  /  / 10 /  /  soma0 ityamunA
pUrvoktaprakAreNa paryantasamaye'pi sarvavirateranaGgIkaraNAdvAlam,
anazanapratipattezca paNDitam, bAlaM ca tat paNDitaM ca bAlapaNDitaM bhavati
maraNam  /  arhacchAsane jinapravacane dRSTaM bhaNitam  /  ito'nantaraM
paNDitapaNDitamaraNaM susAdhumaraNaM vakSye'bhidhAsye samAsena saMkSepeNa etad
granthakAravacanam  /  / 10 /  /  guNa. ito'nantaraM paNDitapaNDitamaraNaM
susAdhumaraNaM vakSye'bhidhAsye  /  samAsena saMkSepeNetyartha etad
granthakAravacanam  /  / 10 /  /  [kAlatrika-karaNatrika-
yogacatuSkatriSaSThidhyAnAdikam pratikramaNa-nindA-gardA gA. 11] icchAmi bhaMte
! uttamaTuM paDikkamAmi aIyaM paDikkamAmi aNAgayaM paDikkamAmi, paccuppatraM
paDikkamAmi, kayaM paDikkamAmi, kAriyaM paDikkamAmi, aNumoiyaM paDikkamAmi,
micchattaM paDikkamAmi, asaMjamaM paDikkamAmi, kasAyaM paDikkamAmi, pAvappaogaM
paDikkamAmi, micchAdasaNapariNAmesu vA, ihalogesu vA, paralogesu vA, sacittesu
vA, acittesu vA, paMcasu iMdiyatthesu vA; icchAmi bhadanta ! uttamArthaM
pratikramAmi, atItaM pratikramAmi, anAgataM pratikramAmi, pratyutpanna
pratikramAmi, kRtaM pratikramAmi, kAritaM pratikramAmi, anumoditaM pratikramAmi,
mithyAtvaM pratikramAmi, asaMyama pratikramAmi, kaSAyaM pratikramAmi,
pApaprayogaM pratikramAmi 2010_02

Page #63 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Aaturpratyakhyanaprakirnakam, Chapter 11  **Regarding the consequences of
wrong belief, whether in this world, the next world, or in beings with or
without consciousness, or in the five sense objects, I wish to perform
atonement.**  **[The student says to the Guru:]** "Reverend Sir, I wish to
perform atonement. I desire and accept it."  **[The Guru asks:]** "What do you
wish to atone for?"  **[The student replies:]** "I wish to atone for the highest
good, the non-acceptance of food."  **[The Guru says:]** "What do you do to
achieve this?"  **[The student replies:]** "Generally, I abstain from all evil,
from all wrong paths. I atone for the following fifteen reasons:  * **Previous
food:** I atone for eating food that was not properly obtained, not properly
cooked, not properly offered, not properly received, or received with greed,
attachment, anger, delusion, foolishness, dullness, pride, arrogance, or with
the use of the four senses, the five senses, or with the burden of a wife and
children, or with the desire for worldly pleasures. * **Present food:** I atone
for the present food that I am about to eat. * **Future food:** I atone for the
future food that I will eat.  **[The Guru says:]** "You have spoken generally
about atonement. Now, speak specifically about the three times."  **[The student
replies:]** "I atone for the past evil actions, such as slander, abuse, and
violence, by performing atonement. I atone for the future evil actions, such as
avoiding, preventing, and controlling, by performing atonement. I atone for the
present evil actions, such as the present karma that binds me, by performing
atonement through the method of repentance.  **[The Guru says:]** "What kind of
atonement do you perform?"  **[The student replies:]** "I atone for the evil
actions that I have committed myself. I atone for the evil actions that I have
caused others to commit. I atone for the evil actions that I have approved of,
such as the killing of enemies, by performing atonement.  **[The Guru says:]**
"The soul binds itself to evil actions through the four causes: thought, speech,
body, and the three times (past, present, future). Therefore, the soul must
atone for these actions.  **[The student replies:]** "I atone for the wrong
belief, which includes the five types of wrong belief: attachment, aversion,
delusion, doubt, and wrong perception. I atone for the lack of restraint, which
includes the evil actions of thought, speech, and body. I atone for the
passions, which include the four types of passions: anger, pride, deceit, and
greed. I atone for the evil actions, which include the three types of evil
actions: thought, speech, and body.  **[The Guru says:]** "Therefore, you must
perform atonement for the wrong belief, the lack of restraint, the passions, and
the evil actions.  **[The student replies:]** "I will perform atonement for the
wrong belief, the lack of restraint, the passions, and the evil actions. I will
also perform atonement for the lack of concentration and the lack of proper
conduct.  **[The Guru says:]** "This is the fourfold atonement."  **[The student
replies:]** "I understand."  **[The Guru says:]** "Now, regarding the
consequences of wrong belief, whether in this world, the next world, or in
beings with or without consciousness, or in the five sense objects, I wish to
perform atonement."  **[The student replies:]**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 AturapratyAkhyAnaprakIrNakam gA. 11 mithyAdarzanapariNAmeSu vA, ihalokeSu vA,
paralokeSu vA, sacitteSu vA, acitteSu vA, paJcasvindriyArtheSu vA [tasya
mithyAduSkRtam] 22 bhuva0 yadeva cAnena bhaNitumiSTaM tadeva
guruvijJaptidvAreNAha icchAmi bhaMte uttamaTTha paDikkamAmi  /
icchAmyabhilaSAmi pratipadye bhadanta | iti ] guruM prati vijJapayati  /  kiM
kiM vijJapayati ? uttamArthamanazanapratipattiM karttumabhilaSAmi  /
tamicchannahaM kiM karomi [ ityAha ] - sAmAnyena pApebhyo nivRttiH
sarvasmAdasanmArgAt  /  "puvviM annANayAe, asavaNayAe, abohIyAe, aNabhigameNaM
abhigameNa vA pamAeNaM rAgadoSapaDibaddhayAe, bAlayAe, mohayAe, maMdayAe,
kiDDayAe, tigAravagaruAe, cauksAuvagaeNaM, paMcidiyavasaTTeNaM,
paDipunnabhAriyAe sAyAsukkhamaNupAlayaMteNaM" ityetaiH paJcadazabhirhetubhiH
pratipannAd  /  [sAmAnyataH ] pratikramaNe bhaNite'pi
vizeSatastrikAlaviSayamapyAha - aIyaM paDikkamAmi atItaM pApavyApAraM " nindA
garihA- sohI " ityAdi prakAreNa pratikramAmi  /  aNAgayaM paDikkamAmi anAgataM
sAvadyArambhaM " pariharaNA - vAraNA - niyattI" ityAdi bhedena pratikramAmi  /
paccuppannaM paDikkamAmi pratyutpannaM vartamAnakAlabhAvikarmabandhaM
praticaraNAvidhAnena pratikramAmi  /  tatra - masAmicchAdukkaDakaraNaM bhAveNa
iha paDikkamaNaM  /  sa carittapacchayAvo niMdAgarihA gurusamakkhaM  //  1  //
tatrApi kiMsvarUpaM pratikramAmi kayaM paDikkamAmi kRtaM niSpAditaM pApamAtmanA
pratikramAmi, kAriyaM paDikkamAmi kAritamanyeSAM hastena tadeva pratikramAmi,
aNumoiyaM paDikkama mi anumoditaM yattvayA zatruhananAdi bhavyaM kRtamiti
vadanaM tatpratikramAmi  /  tadenamatItAdibhedaM kRtAdibhedaM
vA'zubhamanovAkkAyavyApAraM hetucatuSTayAdeva badhnAti jIvaH  /  atastadeva
pratikramaNadvAreNa vyanakti  /  micchattaM paDikkamAmi tatra
mithyAtvamAbhigrahikAdipaJcaprakAraM pratikramAmi 1 asaMyamaM paDikkamAmi
manovAkkAyAzubhavyApAram asaMyamamekavidhasvarUpaM, kasAyaM paDikkamAmi, kaSAyaM
catuSprakAraM pratikramAma pAvappaogaM paDikkamAmi pApaprayogaM
trividhamanovAkkAyayogaM pratikramAmi  /  tadevaM - - - micchattapaDikkamaNaM
taheva asaMjame paDikkamaNaM  /  kasAyANa paDikkamaNaM jogANa appasatthANamiti
/  /  [ Ava. ni. 1250 ] caturdhA pratikramaNamuktam  /  ataH paraM
"micchAdaMsaNapariNAmesu vA" ityAdiSu " paDibuddhassa vA " paryanteSu
sarvapadeSu " jo me koI devasio rAio uttamaTTe aikkamo ikkamo 2010_02

Page #64 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Chapter 1, Verse 11  "I confess the misdeeds of whoever, being a day or night
transgressor, transgressor, violator, or non-observant, has committed a false
misdeed due to the consequence of false belief."  Here, in the human world, or
in the human world among the human beings, whatever offense has been committed,
that is a false misdeed. The word "or" indicates the inclusion of all the terms.
In the other worlds, or in the other worlds, other than the human race, such as
the animal world, whatever offense has been committed, that is a false misdeed.
In the sentient beings, or in the sentient beings, such as the earth and others,
whatever has been done by collision, etc., that is a false misdeed. In the non-
sentient beings, or in the non-sentient beings, such as dry grass, straw, and
difficult-to-recognize blankets, etc., whatever has been done by sleeping,
sitting, etc., that is a false misdeed. In gold, etc., or in things seen on the
path, whatever has been done by me-ness, etc., that is a false misdeed. In the
five sense objects, or in the five sense objects, such as sound, form, taste,
smell, and touch, whatever has been done by attraction, aversion, etc., that is
a false misdeed.  Similarly, in the false belief, etc., such as "eating food",
etc., and in the ignorance, etc., such as "meditation", etc., whatever
transgression, etc., of knowledge, etc., has occurred, I repent for that.  Thus,
the penitent, after being informed by the guru, says as follows: "I desire, I
wish, I accept." The meaning is "I wish to do the best thing, to abstain from
food." Then, wishing to do that, he says what he will do first: "I repent, I
refrain from general sins." The meaning is "I refrain from the wrong path, which
has been understood by the fifteen reasons, such as "eating food", "drinking",
"killing", etc." Then, he speaks of the repentance specific to the three times:
"I repent for the past, the past evil actions, such as "slander, greed, and
hatred", etc. I repent for the future, the future sinful beginnings, such as
"avoidance, prevention, and restraint", etc. I repent for the present, by the
method of preventing the sinful beginnings that are present, I refrain, by the
means of repentance, etc." Then, he says what kind of repentance he is doing: "I
repent for the sin that has been done, that has been produced, by myself, and
that has been caused by others, and that has been approved of, such as "the act
of killing an enemy, which is worthy of being done", etc." This sin binds the
living being only by the four causes of false belief, non-restraint, passions,
and karma. Therefore, he repents for that. I repent for the false belief, which
is of five kinds, such as attachment, etc., and for the non-restraint, which is
of one kind, and for the passions, which are of four kinds, such as anger, etc.,
and for the sinful actions, which are of three kinds, mental, verbal, and bodily
actions.  Therefore, after this, in the phrases "in the consequences of false
belief, etc.", etc., up to "of the one who has understood", etc., the following
should be added: "Whoever, being a day or night transgressor, transgressor,
violator, or non-observant, has committed a false misdeed, I confess his
misdeeds." Therefore, the meaning is: "In the consequence of false belief, in
the determination of false

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 khaNDa:-1 gA. 11 aiyAro aNAyAro tassa micchAmi dukkaDaM"iti yojyam  /  tatra
mithyAdarzanapariNAme sati tadvAJchAyAM yo mama daivasiko rAtriko
vA'tikramavyatikramAticArAnAcArAdijAtastasya mithyAduSkRtaM karomi  /  ihalogeSu
vA ihalokA manuSyalokAsteSu manuSyalokeSu yadaparAddhaM tasya mithyAduSkRtam  /
vAzabdA: sarvapadeSu samuccayArthAH  /  paralogesu vA paralokeSu
manuSyajAtivyatirikteSu tiryagAdiSu yadaparAddhaM tasya mithyAduSkRtam  /
sacittesu vA sacitteSu pRthivyAdiSu yatsaGghaTTanAdikRtaM tasya  /  acittesu vA
acitteSu zuSiratRNaduSpratyupekSitakambalAdiSu ycchynopveshnaadikRtm|
hiraNyAdiSu vA mArgapatitadRSTeSu yanmamattvaM vA kRtaM tasya  /  paMcasu
iMdiyatthesu paJcasvindriyArtheSu zabdarUparasagandhasparzarUpeSu
manojJAmanojJeSu yadanurAgavirAgAdi kRtaM tasya  /  tathA annANaMjhANe ityAdi
mithyAdarzanAdiSu ajJAnAdidhyAneSu ca satsu mama yo jJAnAdInAmatikramAdiH
jAtastasya pratikramAmi iti saMTaMkaH  /  soma0 atha kSapako
guruvijJaptipUrvakaM yathaitat pratipadyate tathA''ha- icchAmyabhilaSAmi
pratipadye ityarthaH  /  bhaMtetti bhadanta iti guroH sambodhanam  /  kim ?
uttamArthamanazanaM kartumiti zeSaH  /  tadicchan pUrva kiM kurve ityAha -
pratikramAmi sAmAnyena pApebhyo nivarte "puTviM annANayAe asavaNayAe abohI."
ityAdibhiH paJcadazahetubhiH pratipannAdasanmArgannivarte ityarthaH  /  atha
vizeSatastrikAlaviSayaM pratikramaNamAha - aiyaM-atItaM prAkkRtaM pApavyApAraM
"nindA-garihA-sohi" ityAdiprakAreNa pratikramAmi  /  anAgataM-bhaviSyaM
sAvadyArambhaM "pariharaNA-vAraNA-niyattI ya" ityAdibhedena pratikramAmi  /
pratyutpatraM-vartamAnakAlabhAvisAvadyasaMvaraNavidhAnena pratikramAmi, nivarte
pazcAttApAdikaraNenetyarthaH  /  tadapi kiMsvarUpaM pratikramAmItyAha - kRtaM
niSpAditaM pApaM svayaM tathA kAritamanyaistathA'numodita-"yat tvayA
zatruhananAdikAryaM bhavyaM kRtam" ityAdivacanaM tat pratikramAmi  /  etacca
pApaM mithyAtvA-'virati-kaSAya-yogarUpahetucatuSTayAdeva badhnAti jIvo'tastadeva
prtikrmti| micchattaM-mithyAtvamAbhigrahikAdipaJcaprakAraM
tathA'saMyamamekavidhaM tathA kaSAyaM krodhAdibhedAccatuSprakAraM tathA
pApaprayogaM trividhaM mano-vAk-kAyavyApArajaM tadeva pratikramAmIti pUrvavat  /
ataH paraM "micchAdasaNapariNAmesu vA" ityAdiSu "paDibuddhassa vA" iti
paryanteSu 'jo me koI devasio rAio uttamaDhe aikkamo vaikkamo aiAro aNAyAro
tassa micchAmi dukkaDaM' iti yojyam  /  tato'yamartho mithyAdarzanapariNAme
mithyAtvAdhyavasAye tadvAJchAyAM sati yo mama daivasiko rAtriko vA'tikramo
vyatikramo'ticAro'nAcAro vA jAtastasya mithyA duSkRtaM karomi  /  2010_02

Page #65 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Atikramanaprakirnakam Dudhyan-1  This is a treatise on the rejection of
transgressions.  **The nature of transgressions, etc.**  The nature of
transgressions, etc., as described in the scriptures, such as "Kammamantana,"
should be understood as applicable to all sins. In this world, i.e., in the
human world, any transgression, such as violence, committed with the intention
of harming, is considered a false transgression. The word "va" (or) is used here
to indicate a collective sense. In the other worlds, i.e., in the worlds other
than the human world, such as the animal world, any transgression committed is
considered a false transgression. Similarly, any collision, etc., committed in
the world of sentient beings, such as the earth, etc., is considered a false
transgression. Similarly, any act of lying down, sitting, etc., committed on
inanimate objects, such as dry grass, etc., is considered a false transgression.
Similarly, any act of taking, etc., committed with the intention of taking,
etc., in the case of gold, etc., or in the case of things found on the road,
etc., is considered a false transgression. Similarly, any act of attachment,
detachment, etc., committed in the case of the five sense objects, i.e., sound,
form, smell, taste, and touch, which are pleasing or displeasing to the mind, is
considered a false transgression. Similarly, any act of transgression, etc.,
committed in the case of food, etc., or in the case of the aforementioned false
views, etc., or in the case of the future ignorance, etc., or in the case of
meditation, etc., is considered a false transgression. I reject all these
transgressions, etc., with the understanding that they are my own.  **The
request for forgiveness**  The essence of what is to be said here is expressed
by the teacher through the request for forgiveness: "I desire, I wish." He
requests the teacher, "Bhadant," to forgive him. "I wish to practice the right
conduct of non-violence." "I repent for all my general transgressions. I turn
away from all wrong paths and embrace the right path." Although repentance is
generally mentioned, the specific time-related aspects are also mentioned:
"Aiyam" refers to past transgressions, "Anagatam" refers to future
transgressions, "Pratyutpatram" refers to the present moment, "Kritam" refers to
the transgressions committed by oneself, "Karitam" refers to the transgressions
committed by others on one's behalf, and "Anumoditam" refers to the
transgressions that one has approved of, such as the killing of enemies.  **The
five types of false views**  The five types of false views are: "Mithyatva,"
"Abhigrahika," etc. The one type of unrestraint is "Asamyam." The four types of
passions are "Kasaya." The three types of transgression are "Papaprayoga,"
"Manovakkayayoga," "Aprashasthayoga." The consequences of wrong views are
"Micchadasana," "Parinama," etc. All these terms should be understood in the
context of "Padibuddhas" (those who have understood).  **The false transgression
of ignorance**  When there is the consequence of false views, any transgression,
etc., committed by me, whether it is during the day or night, is considered a
false transgression. In this world, i.e., in the human world, any transgression
committed is considered a false transgression. In the other worlds, i.e., in the
worlds other than the human world, such as the animal world, any transgression
committed is considered a false transgression. Similarly, any collision, etc.,
committed in the

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 AturapratyAkhyAnaprakIrNakam dudhyAna-1 atikramAdisvarUpaM cAha-"kammAmaMtaNa"
ityAdigAthoktA''dhAkarmaviSayA'tikramAdisvarUpavat sarvapApeSu jJeyam  /
ihalogesu vA-iha lokA manuSyalokAsteSu manuSyeSu viSayabhUteSu yad
hiMsAdyabhiprAyeNA'tikramAdirUpo'parAdhaH kRtastasya mithyA duSkRtam  /
vAzabdAH sarvatra samuccayArthAH  /  paralokeSu manuSyavyatirikteSu tiryagAdiSu
yadaparAddhaM tasya mithyA duSkRtamiti sarvatra yojyam  /  tathA sacitteSu
pRthivyAdiSu yatsaGghaTTanAdi kRtaM, tasya mithyA duSkRtam  /  tathA acitteSu
zuSiratRNaduSpratyupekSitakambalAdiSu zayanopavezanAdi kRtaM tasya  /
hiraNyAdiSu vA mArgapatitadRSTeSu grahaNA'bhiprAyeNAtikramAdi kRtaM tasya  /
tathA paJcasvindriyArtheSu zabda-rUpa-gandha-rasa-sparzarUpeSu manojJA'manojJeSu
yadanurAga-virAgAdi kRtaM tathA annANaM0 tathA pUrvokteSu mithyAdarzanAdiSu
vakSyamANeSu ajJAnAdiSu dhyAneSu ca satsu mama yo jJAnAdInAmatikramAdidoSo
jAtastaM pratikramAmIti sambandhaH  /  guNa yadeva cAnena bhaNitumiSTaM tadeva
kSapaka eva guruvijJaptidvAreNAha - icchAmi abhilaSAmi  /  bhadanta iti guruM
prati vijJapayati  /  uttamArthamanazanapratipatiM kartumabhilaSAmi  /
pratikramAmi sAmAnyapApebhyo nivarte sarvasmAdasanmArgAt sanmArga prapadye  /
sAmAnyataH pratikramaNe bhaNite'pi vizeSatasrikAlaviSayamapyAha - 'aIyaM'
atItapApavyApAram, anAgataM sAvadyArambhaM, pratyutpatraM
vartamAnakAlabhAvikarmabandhaM, kRtaM niSpAditaM pApamAtmanA, kAritamanyeSAM
hastena, anumoditaM yanmayA zatruhananAdi bhavyaM kRtam  /
mithyAtvamAbhigrahikAdi paJcaprakAram  /  asaMyamamekavidhasvarUpaM, kaSAyaM
catuSprakAra, pApaprayogaM trividhaM manovAkkAyayogam aprazastayogaM,
micchAdasaNapariNAmesu vA ityAdyeSu paDibuddhassa vA ityanteSu sarvapadeSu iti
yojyam  /  tatra mithyAdarzanapariNAme sati tadvAMchAyAM yo mama devasiko
rAtriko vA'tikramAdirjAtastasya mithyA duSkRtaM karomi  /  iha0 manuSyalokAsteSu
yadaparAddhaM, tasya mithyAduSkRtam  /  paralokeSu manuSyajAtivyatirikteSu
tiryagAdiSu yadaparAddha, sacitteSu pRthivyAdiSu yatsaGghaTTanAdi kRtam,
acitteSu zuSiratRNAdiSu, paJcasvindriyArtheSu manojJAmanojJeSvanurAgavirAgAdi
kRtaM tasya mithyAduSkRtam  /  tevaTThijhANaM triSaSTidhyAnam] 1-annANaMjhANe
[ajJAnadhyAne] bhuva na jJAnamajJAnaM tasya yad dhyAnaM tadajJAnadhyAnam  /
anusvAraH sarvatra prAkRtaprabhavaH  /  tatrAjJAnameva zreyo
vyAkhyAnakaraNAdyAyAsAbhAvAt  /  yadevaM svacetasi cintanam  /
yathA'zakaTApituH pUrvabhava AcAryasya vAcanAkhintrasya  /  tasminnajJAnadhyAne
yo'tikramAdirjAtastasya  /  / 1 /  /  2010_02

Page #66 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter 1:  Dhuhyan - 2, 3, 4  **_25_**  **Som.**  Annanam jhanē -  Not
knowledge, not ignorance, that which is meditation, ignorance itself is the
best, because of the absence of explanation, creation, etc.  Just as the thought
in one's own mind of a person who has not been able to shake off the past life,
like a student who has been disturbed by the teacher's reading.  In that
ignorance meditation, whatever transgression arises, that is false, evil.
Anusvara is everywhere because of the Prakrit nature. ||1||  **Gun.**  In
meditations of ignorance, etc., which are good, whatever transgression arises of
my knowledge, etc., that is the cause of repentance.  Anusvara is not a
characteristic in all meditation words. ||1||  **2- Anayaram jhanē
[Anacāradhyāne]**  **Bhuv.**  Not conduct, not misconduct, because the negation
is for the sake of censure, the meditation of evil conduct is misconduct
meditation.  Just as a Kokani who meditates on the Vallara-dagha, or a person
who desires to renounce the world because of the non-arrival of the gods, like
the Aṣāḍha sun.  In that, whatever transgression arises, that is... ||2||
**Som.**  Anayaram jhanē - Not conduct, not misconduct, because the negation is
for the sake of censure, the meditation of evil conduct is misconduct
meditation.  Just as a Kokani who meditates on the Vallara-dagha, or a person
who desires to renounce the world because of the non-arrival of the gods, like
the Aṣāḍha sun.  In that, whatever transgression arises, that is... ||2||
**Gun.**  The meditation of evil conduct, of misconduct, is misconduct
meditation. ||2||  **3- Kudansanam jhanē [Kudarśanadhyāne]**  **Bhuv.**
Censurable vision is Kudarśana, the meditation of that.  Even for a person who
has attained godhood, who has become a false being, who has right vision, like a
Surāṣṭra Śrāvaka.  In that Kudarśana meditation... ||3||  **Som.**  Kudansanam
jhanē - Censurable vision is Kudarśana, like a Buddhist, etc., the meditation of
that.  Even for a person who has attained godhood, who has become a false being,
who has right vision, like a Surāṣṭra Śrāvaka.  In that, whatever transgression
arises, that is... ||3||  **Gun.**  Censurable vision, that is Kudarśana, the
meditation of that. ||3||  **4- Koham jhanē [Krodhadhyāne]**  **Bhuv.**
Krodhana is anger, the meditation of that.  In that, like Kūla-vālaka, Gośālaka,
Pālaka, Namuci, Śiva-bhūti, etc. ||4||  **Som.**  Koham jhanē - Anger
meditation, like Kūla-vālaka, Gośālaka, Pālaka, Namuci, Śiva-bhūti, etc.  In
that, whatever transgression arises, that is... ||4||  **Gun.**  Krodhana is
anger, the meditation of that. ||4||  **2010_02**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 khaNDa:-1 dudhyAna-2, 3, 4 _25 soma0 annANaM jhANe - na jJAnamajJAnaM tasya yad
dhyAnam, ajJAnameva zreyo vyAkhyAnakaraNAdyAyAsAbhAvAt  /  yadevaM svamanasi
cintanamazakaTApituH pUrvabhave AcAryasya vAcanAdikhinnasyeva  /
tasminnajJAnadhyAne yo'tikramAdirjAtastasya mithyA duSkRtamiti sambandhaH  /
anusvAraH sarvatra prAkRtatvAt  /  / 1 /  /  guNa. ajJAnAdidhyAneSu satsu yo me
jJAnAdInAmatikramAdirjAtastasya pratikramAmIti saMTaGkaH,
sarvadhyAnapadeSvanusvAro'lAkSaNikaH  /  / 1 /  /  2-aNAyAraMjhANe
[anAcAradhyAne] bhuva0 na AcAro'nAcAraH, naJ kutsArthatvAdduSTAcArasya
dhyAnamanAcAradhyAnam  /  yathA vallaradAghaM dhyAyata: kokaNIyasya,
devAnAmanAgamanAdutpravajitukAmasyA''SADhasUreriva vA  /  tasmin yo'ticArastasya
/  / 2 /  /  soma0 aNAyAraM jhANe - na AcAro'nAcAraH, naJaH kutsArthatvAd
duSTAcArasya dhyAnamanAcAradhyAnam  /  vallaradAghaM dhyAyataH kokaNasAdhoriva,
devAnAmanAgamanAdutpravrajitukAmasyA''SADhasUreriva vA  /  tasmin
yo'ticArastasya  /  / 2 /  /  guNa. anAcArasya duSTAcArasya
dhyAnamanAcAradhyAnam  /  / 2 /  /  3-kudaMsaNaMjhANe [kudarzanadhyAne] bhuva0
kutsitaM darzanaM kudarzanaM tasya dhyAnam  /  devatvaM prAptasya
mithyAbhAvapariNatasya samyagdRSTerapi surASTrazrAvakasyeva  /  tasmin
kudarzanadhyAne  /  / 3 /  /  soma0 kudaMsaNaMjhANe - kutsitaM darzanaM
kudarzanaM bauddhAdirUpaM tasya dhyAnam, devatvaM prAptasya mithyAbhAvaM
parigatasya prAk samyagdRSTerapi surASTrazrAvakasyeva  /  tasmin yo'ticArastasya
/  / 3 /  /  guNa. kutsitaM darzanaM tat kudarzanaM tasya dhyAnam  /  / 3 /  /
4-kohaMjhANe [krodhadhyAne bhuva0 krodhanaM krodhastasya dhyAnaM tasmin  /
kUlavAlaka-gozAlaka-pAlaka-namucizivabhUtiprabhRtInAmiva  /  / 4 /  /  soma0
kohaMjhANe - krodhadhyAnaM kUlavAlaka-gozAlaka-pAlaka-namuci-
zivabhUtiprabhRtInAmiva tasmin yo'ticArastasya  /  / 4 /  /  guNa. krodhanaM
krodhastasya dhyAnam  /  / 4 /  /  2010_02

Page #67 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 26 **Aaturpratyakhyanaprakirnakam Durdhyan-5, 6, 7**  **5-Maanmjaane
[Maandhyane]** The contemplation of pride, which is the sense of self-
importance, is Maandhyan. Just like the gods who are attached to their strength,
worldly power, good land, and the axe of Parashurama. ||5||  **Som.** Maanmjaane
- Maandhyan is like the attachment of the gods to their strength, worldly power,
good land, and the axe of Parashurama. ||5||  **Gun.** The contemplation of
pride, which is the sense of self-importance, is Maandhyan. ||5||
**6-Maayamjaane [Maayadhyane]** Maya, which is the form of deception, is
Maayadhyan. As it is said:  "Sura Mo Mannata Kaiyaviyahiuvahiovahioppahaanaahi.
Gahiya Ubhaypjjoy Koolwalaaiono Bahuve." ||1|| [Suyo Ni. 50]  The contemplation
of Maya is Maayadhyan. Just like Dhanshri, who tested the minds of her brothers,
or Shukra. ||6||  **Som.** Maayamjaane - Maya, which is the form of deception,
is Maayadhyan. The contemplation of Maya is Maayadhyan, just like Dhanshri, who
tested the minds of her brothers. ||6||  **Gun.** Maya, which is the form of
deception, is Maayadhyan. ||6||  **7-Lobhmjaane [Lobhdhyane]** The contemplation
of greed, which is the desire for something, is Lobhdhyan. Just like Vanigmitra
in the story "Chedgannihaan", or the lion who desires the saffron. ||7||
**Som.** Lobhmjaane - Lobhdhyan is like Vanigmitra in the story "Chedgannihaan",
or the lion who desires the saffron. ||7||  **Gun.** The contemplation of greed,
which is the desire for something, is Lobhdhyan. ||7||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 26 AturapratyAkhyAnaprakIrNakam durdhyAna-5, 6, 7 5-mANaMjhANe [mAnadhyAne]
bhuva mAnanaM mAnaH svotkarSastasya dhyAnaM tasmin  /  yathA bAhubali-
vizvabhUti-subhUmaparazurAmAbhinivezAgatasaGgamadevAnAmiva  /  / 5 /  /  soma.
mANaMjhANe - mAnadhyAnaM bAhubali-vizvabhUti-subhUma-
parazurAmA'bhinivezAgatasaGgamakAdInAmiva tasmin  /  / 5 /  /  guNa. mAnanaM
mAnaH svotkarSastasya dhyAnam  /  / 5 /  /  6-mAyaMjhANe [mAyAdhyAne bhuva
paravipratAraNasvarUpA mAyA  /  tathAhi - sUrA mo mannatA
kaiyaviyAhiuvahiuvahippahANAhiM  /  /  gahiyA ubhayapajjoya kUlavAlAiNo bahuve
/  / 1 /  /  [sUya0 ni0 50] mAyAyA dhyAnaM tasmin  /  svabhrAtRcittaparIkSAM
kurvantyA dhanazriyA iva zukrasyeva vA  /  / 6 /  /  soma0 mAyaMjhANe - mAyA
paravipratAraNarUpA, tasyA dhyAnaM mAyAdhyAnam, bhrAtRdvayacittaparIkSAM
kurvantyA dhanazriyA iva tasmin  /  / 6 /  /  guNaH paravipratAraNasvarUpA mAyA,
tasyA dhyAnam  /  / 6 /  /  7-lobhaMjhANe [lobhadhyAne bhuka lobhanaM
lobhastasya dhyAnaM tasmin  /  "ceDaganihANa" ityAkhyAnake vaNimitrasyeva
siMhakesarasAdhoriva vA  /  / 7 /  /  soma0 lobhaM jhANe - lobhadhyAnam,
"ceDaganihANa" ityAkhyAnakoktavaNigmitrasyeva siMhakesarisAdhoriva vA tasmin  /
/ 7 /  /  guNa. lobhanaM lobhastasya dhyAnaM tasmin  /  / 7 /  /  2010_02

Page #68 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter: 1,  Durdhhyan - 8, 9, 10  **8 - Ragamjhaane | Ragadhyane |**
**Bhuva:**  Raga is attachment, delight, or pleasure. It is the nature of
unmanifested Maya and greed, and is merely an attachment.  Dhyana (meditation)
is on this. It is of three types: Kama Raga, Sneha Raga, and Drishti Raga.
Kama Raga is like Vishnu's attachment to Sri, or Vikrama's attachment to Yasho
Raja.   Sneha Raga is like the attachment of Dama, Nak, and the best of the
Asuras, who experience a breaking of their heart upon hearing of the death of
their own son.   Drishti Raga is like Kapila, who came from the Brahma Loka and,
being attached to his own vision, said to his disciple, "You are dwelling in
Asura." || 8 ||  **Soma:** Raga is merely attachment, and it is of three types:
Kama Raga, Sneha Raga, and Drishti Raga. Kama Raga is like Vishnu's attachment
to Sri, or Vikrama's attachment to Yasho Raja. Sneha Raga is like the attachment
of Dama, Nak, and the best of the Asuras, who experience a breaking of their
heart upon hearing of the death of their own son. Drishti Raga is like Kapila,
who came from the Brahma Loka and, being attached to his own vision, said to his
disciple, "You are dwelling in Asura." Dhyana (meditation) is on this. || 8 ||
**Gun:** Raga is attachment, delight, or pleasure. It is the nature of
unmanifested Maya and greed. Dhyana (meditation) is on this.   **9 - Dosamjhaane
| Dveshadhyane |**  **Bhuva:** Dosha is a fault or defect, due to its being of a
crude nature. It is unmanifested Dosha, anger, or pride. Dvesha (hatred) is
merely dislike, or it is a fault or defect. Dhyana (meditation) is on this.
Alternatively, Dvesha is the determination to harm others. It is like Madhudeva,
Pippala, or Dharma Ruchi and Navika Nanda. It is also like Virakadeva in the
Harivamsa. || 9 ||  **Soma:** Dosamjhaane is merely dislike, or it is the
determination to harm others. Dhyana (meditation) is on this. It is like
Madhudeva, Pippala, or Dharma Ruchi and Navika Nanda. It is also like Virakadeva
in the Harivamsa. || 9 ||  **Gun:** Dvesha is hatred, and it is unmanifested
anger or pride. Dhyana (meditation) is on this. Alternatively, Dvesha is the
determination to harm others.   **10 - Mohamjhaane | Mohadhyane |**  **Bhuva:**
Moha is delusion, ignorance, or the inability to understand one's own true
nature. Dhyana (meditation) is on this. It is like Balabhadra, who carries the
body of Vishnu, due to delusion. || 10 ||  **Soma:** Mohamjhaane is delusion,
ignorance, or the inability to understand one's own true nature. Dhyana
(meditation) is on this. It is like Balabhadra, who carries the body of Vishnu,
due to delusion. || 10 ||  **Gun:** Moha is delusion. Dhyana (meditation) is on
this. || 10 ||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 khaNDa: - 1 durdhyAna- 8, 9, 10 8 - rAgaMjhANe | rAgadhyAne | bhuva0 raJjanaM
rAgaH  /  anabhivyaktamAyAlobhasvabhAvo'bhiSvaGgamAtraM rAgastasya dhyAnaM
tasmin  /  sa ca tridhA kAmarAgo neharAgo dRSTirAgazca  /  tatra kAmarAgo
viSNuzriyAM vikramayazorAjasyeva  /  sneharAgo dAmannagasvasurazreSThina iva
svaputramaraNazravaNato hRdayasphoTanam  /  ddaSTirAgo brahmalokAdAgatya
svadarzanAnurAgata 'Asure ramase' ityevaM bhaNataH kapilasyeva ||8| soma0 rAgaM
jhANe - rAgo'bhiSvaGgamAtram, sa ca kAmarAga-sneharAga - dRSTirAgabhedAt tridhA
/  tatra kAmarAgo viSNuzriyAM vikramayazorAjasyeva, sneharAgo
dAmannakazvasurazreSThina iva svaputramaraNazravaNato hRdayasphoTAt, dRSTirAgo
brahmalokAdAgatya svadarzanAnurAgataH svaziSyaM prati " Asure ramase" ityAdi
bhaNataH kapilasyeva tasya dhyAnaM tasmin  //  8  /  /  " guNa, raJjanaM rAgaH,
anabhivyaktamAyAlobhasvabhAvastasya dhyAnaM tasmin  /  9- dosaMjhANe |
dveSadhyAne] bhuva dosaM ti prAkRtatvAddUSaNaM doSaH  /  sa cAnabhivyaktadoSa |
krodha ] mAnalakSaNabhedasvabhAvo'prItimAtraM dveSaH doSo vA tasya dhyAnaM
tasmin  /  athavA dveSaH paradrohAdhyavasAyaH  /  madhudevapippalAdayoriva  /
dharmarucinAvikanandayoriva vA  /  harivaMzotpattau vIrakadevasyeva 27 vA  /  /
9 /  /  soma0 dosaM jhANe aprItimAtraM paradrohAdhyavasAyo vA dveSastasya
dhyAnam, madhudevapippalAdayoriva, dharmaruci-nAvikanandayoriva,
harivaMzotpattau vIrakadevasyeva vA tasmin  /  / 9 /  /  - guNadveSaNaM dveSaH,
sa cAnabhivyaktakrodhamAnalakSaNastasya dhyAnaM tasmin  /  athavA dveSaH
paradrohAdhyavasAyaH  /  2010_02 10- mohaMjhANe [ mohadhyAne] bhuva0 mohanaM
moha Atmano vaicittyatAkaraNamajJAnatvamityarthaH  /  tasya dhyAnaM tasmin  /
mohAdviSNutanuM vahato balabhadrasyeva  /  / 10 /  /  soma0 mohaM jhANe -
mohanaM moha Atmano vaicittyatAkaraNamajJAnatvamityarthastasya dhyAnam, mohAd
viSNutanuM vahato balabhadrasyeva tasmin  /  / 10 /  /  guNa mohanaM mohastasya
dhyAnaM tasmin  /  / 10 /  /

Page #69 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 2 ## Aaturpratyakhyanaprakirnakam Durdhyana-11, 12, 13  **11-Ichchhamjhaane
[Ichchhadhyane]** **Bhuva:** Ichchhamjhaane is an excessive desire for something
that is likely to be obtained. Ichchhadhyana is the meditation on this desire.
It is like the greed of Kapila, who even after obtaining a crore of gold, still
desired two masha. As it is said:  > Kosambi Kasavajasha Kavilo Savatthi
Indadatto Ya. > Ibhe Ya Salibhadde Dhanasethi Pasenai Raya. ||1||11|| [Uttara
253]  **Soma:** Ichchhamjhaane - Excessive desire for something that is likely
to be obtained, Ichchhadhyana is the meditation on this desire. It is like the
greed of Kapila, who even after obtaining a crore of gold, still desired two
masha. ||11||  **Guna:** Excessive desire for something, Ichchhadhyana is the
meditation on this desire. ||11||  **12-Michchhamjhaane [Mithyadhyane]**
**Bhuva:** Michchhamjhaane is a wrong and distorted view. Mithyadhyana is the
meditation on this wrong view. It is like the wrong view of Jamali, Govinda, and
others. ||12||  **Soma:** Michchhamjhaane - Wrong and distorted view,
Mithyadhyana is the meditation on this wrong view. It is like the wrong view of
Jamali, Govinda, and others. ||12||  **Guna:** Wrong and distorted view,
Mithyadhyana is the meditation on this wrong view. ||12||  **13-Muchchhamjhaane
[Murchaadhyane]** **Bhuva:** Muchchhamjhaane is a state of unconsciousness, a
state of being overwhelmed by something like a kingdom. It is like the state of
Kanakadhvaja, who was overwhelmed by his own sons. ||13||  **Soma:**
Muchchhamjhaane - A state of unconsciousness, a state of being overwhelmed by
something like a kingdom. It is like the state of Kanakadhvaja, who was
overwhelmed by his own sons. ||13||  **Guna:** A state of unconsciousness, a
state of being overwhelmed by something like a kingdom. ||13||  **2010_02**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 2 AturapratyAkhyAnaprakIrNakam durdhyAna-11, 12, 13 11-icchaMjhANe [icchAdhyAne
bhuva0 icchanamicchA saMbhAvyamAnasyAbhilASA'tirekaH  /  icchAyA
dhyAnamicchAdhyAnaM tasmin  /  dvimASArthina: koTisvarNalAbhe'pi
pravardhamAnalobhasya kpilsyev| tathAhi - kosaMbI kAsavajasA kavilo sAvatthi
iMdadatto ya  /  ibbhe ya sAlibhadde dhaNaseTThi paseNaI rAyA  /  / 1 /  / 11 /
/  [uttarA0 niyu0 253] soma0 icchaM jhANe - icchA
saMbhAvyamAnalAbhasyA'rthasyAbhilASAtirekastasyA dhyAnamicchAdhyAnam  /
dvimASArthinaH koTisuvarNalAbhe'pi pravardhamAnalobhasya kapilasyeva tasmin  /
/ 11 /  /  guNa. arthasyAbhilASAtirekaH, icchAyA dhyAnamicchAdhyAnaM tasmin  /
/ 11 /  /  12-micchaMjhANe [mithyAdhyAne] bhuva0 mithyA viparyastadRSTitvam  /
mithyAyA dhyAnaM mithyAdhyAnaM tasmin  /  jamAligovindavAcakaprabhRtInAmiva  /
/ 12 /  /  soma0 micchaM jhANe - mithyA viparyastadRSTitvaM taddhyAnaM
mithyAdhyAnam  /  jamAligovindaprabhRtInAmiva tasmin  /  / 12 /  /  guNa. mithyA
viparyastadRSTitvaM, mithyAyA dhyAnaM tasmin  /  / 12 /  /  13-mucchaMjhANe
[mUrchAdhyAne] bhuva mUrcchanaM mUrchA atyarthaM rAjyAdyabhiSvaGgaH  /
svaputrAn vyaGgayata: kanakadhvajasyeva  /  / 13 /  /  soma0 mucchaM jhANe -
mUrchA'tyarthaM pUrvaprAptasya rAjyAderabhiSvaGgaH svaputrAn vyaGgayataH
kanakadhvajasyeva  /  / 13 /  /  guNa mUrchanaM mUrchA'tyarthaM
rAjyAdyabhiSvaGgaH  /  / 13 /  /  2010_02

Page #70 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter 1, Verses 14-17  **Verse 14: Sankamjhaane (Doubt Meditation)**  *
**Bhuva:**  Sankana (doubt) is the same as Sankha (doubt) and Samshayakaranam
(creating doubt).  Therefore, meditation on doubt is Sankadhyana. This is like
the disciples of Ashadhacary, who were proponents of the Avyaktavada (doctrine
of the unmanifest).   * **Soma:** Sankamjhaane - Sankana means doubt,
Samshayakaranam means creating doubt. Meditation on this is Sankadhyana. This is
like the disciples of Ashadhacary, who were proponents of the Avyaktavada.  *
**Guna:** Samshayakaranam is doubt.  **Verse 15: Kankhamjhaane (Desire
Meditation)**  * **Bhuva:** Kankhana (desire) is defined as
"Anannadansanaggaaho" (grasping at what is not seen). Meditation on desire is
Kankhadhyana. This is like the Maricha, who says "Ittham pi, Ihayampi" (thus and
thus).  * **Soma:** Kankhamjhaane - Ananyadarshanagraha (grasping at other
views) is desire. Meditation on this is like the Maricha, who says "Ittham pi,
Ihayampi" (thus and thus).  * **Guna:** Kankhana is desire, Ananyadarshanagraha
(grasping at other views).  **Verse 16: Gehimjhaane (Greed Meditation)**  *
**Bhuva:** Girdhana (greed) is extreme desire for food and other things.
Meditation on greed is Girdhidhyana. This is like Mathuramanga or the king of
Kandarika, who are both examples of those with greed.  * **Soma:** Gehimjhaane -
Girdhi is extreme desire for food and other things. Meditation on this is like
Mathuramanga or the king of Kandarika, who are both examples of those with
greed.  * **Guna:** Girdhi is extreme desire for food and other things.  **Verse
17: Asamjhaane (Hope Meditation)**  * **Bhuva:** Asha (hope) is the desire for
the benefit of another, even if it is not attainable. Meditation on hope is
Ashadhyana. This is like the desire for food even when it is not available, as
in the case of the Brahmin Patheya of Nihrina Sharma, who desired food from
Muladeva.  * **Soma:** Asamjhaane - Asha is the desire for the benefit of
another, even if it is not attainable. Meditation on this is like the desire for
food even when it is not available, as in the case of the Brahmin Patheya of
Nihrina Sharma, who desired food from Muladeva.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 khaNDa:-1 gA. 14, 15, 16, 17 . 29 14-saMkaMjhANe [zaGkAdhyAne] bhuva0 zaGkanaM
zaGkA saMzayakaraNaM zaGkA iti vacanAt zaGkAyA dhyAnaM zaGkAdhyAnaM tasmin  /
avyaktavAdinAmASADhAcAryaziSyANAmiva  /  / 14 /  /  soma0 saMkaM jhANe -
zaGkanaM zaGkA saMzayakaraNamityarthaH, tasyA dhyAnaM zaGkAdhyAnam  /
avyaktavAdinAmASADhAcAryaziSyANAmiva tasmin  /  / 14 /  /  guNa. saMzayakaraNaM
zaGkA  /  / 14 /  /  15-kaMkhaMjhANe [kAGkSAdhyAne] bhuva0 kAGkSaNaM [kAGkSA]
"kAMkhA anannadaMsaNaggAho" iti bhaNanAt  /  kAGkSAyA dhyAnaM kAGkSAdhyAnaM
tasmin  /  kavilA itthaMpi ihayaMpIti vadato mariceriva  /  / 15 /  /  somao
kaMkhaM jhANe - anyAnyadarzanAgrahaH kAGkSA tad dhyAnam, "kavilA itthaM pi
ihayaM pi" iti vadato mariceriva tasmin  /  / 15 /  /  guNa. kAGkSaNaM kAGkSA
anyAnyadarzanAgrahaH  /  / 15 /  /  16-gehiMjhANe [gRddhidhyAne] bhuva0
garddhanaM gRddhiH, AhArAdiSvatyantamAkAGkSA  /  gRddhAnaM gRddhidhyAnaM tasmin
/  mathurAmaGgoriva, kaNDarIkarAjasyeva vA  /  / 16 /  /  soma. gehiM jhANe -
gRddhirAhArAdiSvatyantamAkAGkSA tasyA dhyAnaM mathurAmaGgoriva kaNDarIkarAjasya
muktavratasyeva vA tasmin  /  / 16 /  /  guNa. gRddhirAhArAdiSvatyantamAkAGkSA
/  / 16 /  /  17-AsaMjhANe [AzAdhyAne] bhava. niSpAtheyasya
parazambalalAbhaprArthanamAzA  /  AzAyA dhyAnamAzAdhyAnaM tasmin  /
alabdhavye'pi tasminnAhArAbhilASa: nighRNazarmabrAhmaNapAtheyaM prati
mUladevasyeva  /  / 17 /  /  2010_02

Page #71 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 30 **Aaturpratyakhyanaprakiirnakam Durdhyan-18, 19, 20**  **Soma Asan Jhane
-**  Hope is the desire for the attainment of a desired object. Its meditation
is called *Ashadhyan*. It is like the original deity for the path of the
Nigrhnasharma Brahmana. ||17|| **Gun.** Meditation on hope. ||17||  **18-Tanhan
Jhane [Trushnadhyane]** **Bhuva** Intense desire for something is *Trushna*. Or,
*Trushna* is a specific kind of pain arising from the emergence of the *Trushna*
state. Its meditation is like that of a person suffering from thirst, who is
patient, small, and walking on a path, or like that of someone burning with
fire. ||18|| **Soma** Tanhan Jhane - *Trushna* is the emergence of the *Trushna*
state. Its meditation is like that of a person suffering from thirst, who is
patient, small, and walking on a path, with a good person accompanying him.
||18|| **Gun.** A specific kind of pain arising from the emergence of the
*Trushna* state. ||18||  **19-Chuhan Jhane [Kshuddhyane]** **Bhuva** Hunger is a
specific kind of suffering arising from the emergence of the hunger state. Its
meditation is like that of a traveler in Rajagriha. ||19|| **Soma** Chuhan Jhane
- Hunger is a specific kind of pain arising from the emergence of the hunger
state. Its meditation is called *Kshuddhyan*, and it is like that of a traveler
in Rajagriha, accompanied by people. ||19|| **Gun.** A specific kind of
suffering arising from the emergence of the hunger state. ||19||  **20-Panthan
Jhane [Pathi Dhyane]** **Bhuva** A path is a journey that can be completed in a
short time. Meditation on water or meditation on the path is like that of a
person wearing a torn garment, searching for the path to Potanapura. ||20||
**Soma** Panthan Jhane - A path is a journey that can be completed in a short
time. Its meditation is called *Pathi Dhyan*, and it is like that of a person
wearing a torn garment, searching for the path to Potanapura. ||20|| **Gun.** A
path is a journey that can be completed in a short time. Its meditation is like
that of a person wearing a torn garment, searching for the path to Potanapura.
||20||  _2010_02

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 30 AturapratyAkhyAnaprakIrNakam durdhyAn-18, 19, 20 soma AsaM jhANe - AzA
parasatkavastuprAptyabhilASarUpA tasyA dhyAnaM AzAdhyAnam  /
nighRNazarmabrAhmaNapAtheyaM prati niSpAtheyasya mUladevasyeva tasmin  /  / 17 /
/  guNa. AzAyA dhyAnam  /  / 17 /  /  18-taNhaMjhANe [tRSNAdhyAne] bhuva
tIvrakAmAbhilASastRSNA  /  tRTaparISahodayajanyaH pIDAvizeSo vA tRSNA  /  tasyA
dhyAnaM tRSArtasya kSAntisahitasya kSullakasyeva mArgagacchataH,
aGgAradAhakasyeva vA  /  / 18 /  /  soma0 taNhaM jhANe - tRSNA
tRSAparISahodayastasyA dhyAnam, tRSArttasya mArge gacchato janakasAdhusahitasya
kSullakasyeva tasmin  /  / 18  /  /  guNa. tRTparISahodayajanyaH pIDAvizeSaH  /
/ 18 /  /  19-chuhaMjhANe [kSuddhyAne bhuva0 kSudhA kSutpariSahodayajanya:
kaSTavizeSaH  /  kSudhAyA dhyAnaM tasmin  /  rAjagRhe yAtrAgatadramakasyeva  /
/ 19 /  /  soma0 chuhaM jhANe - kSudhA kSutparISahodayajanyaH pIDAvizeSaH, tayA
yad dhyAnaM kSudhAdhyAnam, rAjagRhayAtrAgatalokasahagatadramakasyeva tasmin  /
/ 19 /  /  guNa. kSutparISahodayajanyaH kaSTavizeSaH  /  / 19 /  /
20-paMthaMjhANe [pathidhyAne] bhuva0 alpakAlagamyo'dhvA panthAH  /  payodhyAnaM
pathi vA dhyAnaM tasmin potanapuramArga gaveSayato valkalacIriNa iva  /  / 20 /
/  soma0 paMthaM jhANe - alpakAlagamyo'dhvA panthA tasya tasmin vA dhyAnaM
pathidhyAnam, potanapuramArgaM gaveSayato valkalacIriNa iva tasmin  /  / 20 /  /
gaNa. alpakAlagamyo'dhvA panthA tasya pathi vA dhyAnaM tasmin  /  / 20 /  /  _
2010_02

Page #72 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter 1: Inattentiveness - 21, 22, 23  **21 - Panthanam Jhanē (Departure
Meditation)**  The two anusvāras are both metaphorical. Therefore, departure is
the act of going with an inauspicious mind. Or, it is a great and difficult
path. It is like the path of Mahendra Singh searching for Sanatkumara, or like
the path of Brahmadatta or Vardhana. ||21||  **Commentary by Soma:** Panthanam
Jhanē - A great and difficult path, meditation on it. It is like the path of
Mahendra Singh searching for Sanatkumara, or like the path of Brahmadatta or
Vardhana. Or, it is the act of going with the mind on that path. The two
anusvāras are both metaphorical. ||21||  **Commentary by Gan:** The two
anusvāras are both metaphorical. Therefore, departure is the act of going with
an inauspicious mind. Or, it is a great path, meditation on it. ||21||  **22 -
Nirdezhanē (Sleep Meditation)**  The anusvāra is metaphorical. Sleep is a very
fast and ugly movement. Meditation on it is the meditation of one who is
dependent on sleep. For example:  1. One who eats buffalo meat 2. One who
desires sweets 3. One who pulls out elephant tusks 4. One who breaks the head of
a good person like a potter who breaks a clay pot 5. One who breaks the branches
of a banyan tree like a good person.  These are examples of sleep and
heedlessness. ||22||  **Commentary by Soma:** Nidam Jhanē - Meditation on sleep
is the meditation of one who is dependent on sleep. It is like: 1. One who eats
buffalo meat, 2. One who desires sweets, 3. One who pulls out elephant tusks, 4.
One who breaks the head of a good person like a potter who breaks a clay pot, 5.
One who breaks the branches of a banyan tree like a good person. ||22||
**Commentary by Gun:** Sleep is a very fast and ugly movement. ||22||  **23 -
Niyanam Jhanē (Cause Meditation)**  The anusvāra is metaphorical. The cause is
the desire for heavenly rewards and other powers. Meditation on it is the
meditation on that cause.  "The man of Rauggiithi, with many desires, is a demon
who is a great enemy. He desires wealth in a house of the poor, and he desires
new causes."  This is the desire for wealth and other powers in the future. It
is like the desire of Draupadi, who was born from the union of Nandishena and
Gangadatta. ||23||  **Commentary by Soma:** Niyanam Jhanē - The cause is the
desire for heavenly rewards and other powers. It is the form of nine new causes
in the future. It is like the desire of Draupadi, who was born from the union of
Nandishena and Gangadatta. ||23||  **Commentary by Gun:** The cause is the
desire for heavenly rewards and other powers. ||23||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 khaNDa:-1 durdhyAna-21, 22, 23 21-paMthANaMjhANe [prasthAnadhyAne bhuva0
anusvArau dvAvaSyalAkSaNiko  /  tata: prasthAnamazubhamanasA gamanam  /  athavA
mahAn viSamazca panthAnaH  /  sanatkumAraM gaveSayato mahendrasiMhasyeva
brahmadattaM vA varadhanasyeva  /  / 21 /  /  soma. paMthANaM jhANe - mahAn
viSamazcAdhvA panthAnaH, tasya dhyAnam, sanatkumAraM gaveSayato
mahendrasiMhasyeva, brahmadattaM vA varadhanasyeva tasmin  /  athavA prasthAnaM
manasA gamanaM tasmin vA  /  anusvArau dvAvapyalAkSaNikau  /  / 21 /  /  /
gaNa. anusvArau dvAvapyalAkSaNikau  /  tataH prasthAnamazubhamanasA gamanam
athavA mahAn panthA tasya dhyAnam  /  / 21 /  /  22-nirdejhANe [nidrAdhyAne
bhuva nitarAM drANaM kutsitatvagamanaM nidrA  /  tatparatantrasya dhyAnaM tasmin
/  yathA puggala-moyaga-vaMte-phasaga-vaDasAlabhaMjaNe ceva  /  nidA pamAe ee
uyAharaNA huMti nAyavvA  /  / 1 /  / 22 /  /  soma0 nidaM jhANe -
nidrAparatantrasya dhyAnaM nidrAdhyAnam, styAnardhinidrayA 1-mahiSamAMsabhakSi,
2-modakAbhilASi, 3-hastidantotpATakAri, 4-prAk
kumbhakAratvAbhyastamRtpiNDatroTanavat sAdhumastakatroTi,
5-vaTazAkhAbhaJjisAdhUnAmiva tasmin  /  / 22 /  /  guNa. nitarAM drANaM
kutsitatvagamanaM nidrA  /  / 22 /  /  23-niyANaMjhANe [nidAnadhyAne] bhuva0 -
svargAdiRddhiprArthanaM nidAnaM tasya dhyAnaM tasmin  /  rAuggIthIpuriso
bahurayasarayArayAsurAtinni  /  saDDAdariddagehe vajjejjA navaniyANAI  /  /
bhavAntare RddhyAdiprArthanam  /  nandiSeNagaGgadattasambhUtadraupadyAdInAmiva
/  / 23 /  /  soma0 niANaM jhANe - nidAnaM svarga-mAdiRddhiprArthanaM,
bhavAntare navanidAnarUpam  /  nandiSeNagaGgadatta-sambhUta-draupadyAdInAmiva
tasmin  /  / 23 /  /  guNa. svargAdiRddhiprArthanaM nidAnam  /  / 23 /  /
2010_02

Page #73 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 32 **Aatupraatyaakhyaana Prakirnakam Durdhyaana - 24, 25, 26**  **24 - Neham
Jhaane [Sneha Dhyaane]**  **Meaning:**  A special kind of affection born from
attachment (moha). It is an intense fondness for someone like a child, etc.  The
focus of this meditation is on that attachment.  It is like the love of a mother
for her children, like Marudevi, Sunanda, and Arahannka.  **24 - Somadhyayana:**
Neham Jhaane -  Sneha born from Moha, a special kind of affection, intense
fondness for someone like a child, etc.  The focus of this meditation is on that
attachment.  It is like the love of a mother for her children, like Marudevi,
Sunanda, and Arahannka.  **24 - Guna:**  Sneha born from Moha, a special kind of
affection.  **25 - Kaam Jhaane [Kaam Dhyaane]**  **Meaning:**  Kaam is described
in four ways in the four refuges.  It is the desire for objects.  The focus of
this meditation is on that desire.  It is like the desire of a young man for a
woman, like Kumar Nandini, or like Ravana's desire for Sita.  **25 -
Somadhyayana:**  Kaam Jhaane -  Kaam is the desire for objects.  The focus of
this meditation is on that desire.  It is like the desire of a young man for a
woman, like Kumar Nandini, or like Ravana's desire for Sita.  **25 - Guna:**
Kaam is the desire for objects.  **26 - Kalusam Jhaane [Kalusha Dhyaane]**
**Meaning:**  Kalusha is the state of mind that arises from insult, envy of
another's virtues, or from being deceived.  It is a state of impurity, a feeling
of being defiled.  The focus of this meditation is on that state of mind.  It is
like the feeling of Abhichikumara when he was insulted by Udayana when he was
given the kingdom of Keshi, or like the feeling of the two great teachers when
they were unable to bear the praise of each other's strength, or like the
feeling of the lion who was envious of Sthulabhadra.  **26 - Somadhyayana:**
Kalusam Jhaane -  Kalusha Dhyana, the state of mind that arises from insult,
envy of another's virtues, or from being deceived.  It is a state of impurity, a
feeling of being defiled.  The focus of this meditation is on that state of
mind.  It is like the feeling of Abhichikumara when he was insulted by Udayana
when he was given the kingdom of Keshi, or like the feeling of the two great
teachers when they were unable to bear the praise of each other's strength, or
like the feeling of the lion who was envious of Sthulabhadra.  **26 - Guna:**
Kalusha is the state of mind that arises from insult, envy of another's virtues,
or from being deceived.  It is a state of impurity, a feeling of being defiled.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 32 AturapratyAkhyAnaprakIrNakam durdhyAna-24, 25, 26 24-nehaMjhANe
[snehadhyAne] bhuva sneho mohodayajanya: prItivizeSaH  /
putrAdiSvatyantAnurAgastasya dhyAnaM tasmin  /
marudevIsunandAarahannakamAtRNAmiva  // 24 /  /  soma0 nehaM jhANe - sneho
mohodayajaH prItivizeSaH putrAdiSvatyantAnurAgaH, marudevI-
sunandA'hannakamAtrAdInAmiva tasya dhyAnaM tasmin  /  / 24  /  /  guNa. sneho
mohodayajanyaH prItivizeSaH  /  / 24  /  /  25-kAmaMjhANe [kAmadhyAne] bhuva0
kAmazcaturviMzatidhA catuHzaraNavyAkhyAto [vijJeyaH]  /  viSayAbhilASastasya
dhyAnaM tasmin hAsaprahAsapralobhitasya kumAranandina iva, sItAM gRhNato
rAvaNasyeva vA  /  / 25 /  /  soma0 kAmaM jhANe - kAmo viSayAbhilASastasya
dhyAnaM kAmadhyAnam, hAsA-prahAsApralobhitasya kumAranandisuvarNakArasyeva,
sItAmapaharato rAvaNasyeva vA tasmin  /  / 25 /  /  guNa. kAmo viSayAbhilASaH  /
/ 25 /  /  26-kalusaMjhANe [kaluSadhyAne bhuva0 apamAnataH paraguNotkarSe
prazaMsAbhisUyAtazca mAyAvalepAdvA yazcittasya kaluSabhAvaH  /  kAluSyaM
gaDulatA taddheturbhAvo'pi kaluSastasya dhyAnaM tasmin  /  kezirAjyadAne
udAyanaM prati abhIcikumArasyeva bAhusubAhuprazaMsAmasahamAnayoH
pIThamahApIThayoriva vA, sthUlabhadrAbhisUyAtazca siMhaguphAkSapakasyeva vA  /
/ 26 /  /  soma0 kalusaM jhANe - kAluSyadhyAnam, apamAnato
paraguNaprazaMsAyAmIAto vA cittasya kaluSabhAvaH kAluSyaM malinatA tasya
dhyAnam, bAhu-subAhuprazaMsAmasahamAnayoH pITha-mahApIThayoriva,
sthUlabhadreyA'taH siMhaguhAsthitakSapakasyeva vA tasmin  /  / 26  /  /  guNa.
apamAnataH paraguNotkarSaprazaMsAbhisUyAtazca cittasya kaluSabhAvaH  /  / 26  /
/  2010_02

Page #74 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter 1, Verses 27-30  **27. Kalhanjhaane (Kalhadhyane)**  **Commentary:**
Kalha (quarrel) is verbal abuse. Dhyana (meditation) on Kalha is Kalhadhyana. It
is like the quarrel between Rukmini and Satyabhama, or like the quarrel between
Narada and Kamala, or like the quarrel of Duryodhana, who loved quarrels.  **28.
Jujhanjhaane (Yuddhadhyane)**  **Commentary:** Yuddha (war) is the mutual
attempt to kill each other. It is like the war between the Kauravas and
Pandavas, or like the war between the king of Kuni and his enemy, or like the
war between the king of Angaravati and his enemy.  **29. Nijujhanjhaane
(Niyuddhadhyane)**  **Commentary:** Niyuddha (final war) is the war that ends in
death. It is like the war between the Pandavas and Kauravas, or like the war
between the king of Matsya and the king of Attana.  **30. Sangamjhaane
(Sangadhyane)**  **Commentary:** Sang (attachment) is the desire to reunite with
someone even after they have been abandoned. It is like the attachment of
Rathnemi to Rajimati, or like the attachment of Bhavadeva to Nagila.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 khaNDa:-1 gA. 27, 28, 29, 30 27-kalahaMjhANe [kalahadhyAne] soma0 kalahaM jhANe
- kalaho vAcikArATiH, tasya dhyAnaM kalahadhyAnaM rukmiNIsatyabhAmayorvyatikare
kalahapriyaduryodhananRpasyeva kamalAmelAdivyatikare nAradasyeva vA tasmin  /  /
27  /  /  guNa. kalaho vAcikArATI tasya dhyAnam  /  / 27 /  /  28-jujhaMjhANe
[yuddhadhyAne] bhuva0 yuddhaM parasparaprANavyaparopaNAdhyavasAyo vairiNAM
bhAtRNAM vinAze ceTakena saha kUNikanRpasyeva  /  aGgAravatyAdigrahaNe
caNDapradyotasyeva vA  / 28 /  /  soma0 jujhaM jhANe - yuddhaM vairiNAM
parasparaM prANavyaparopaNAdhyavasAyastasya dhyAnaM yuddhadhyAnam, bhAtRNAM
vinAze ceTakena saha koNikanRpasyeva, aGgAravatyAdigrahaNe caNDapradyotasyeva vA
tasmin  /  / 28 /  /  guNa. yuddhaM parasparaM prANavyaparopaNAdhyavasAyo
vairiNaM prati  /  / 28 /  /  29-nijujhaMjhANe [niyuddhadhyAne bhuva0
nirgatamadhamayuddhaM prANaprahANarUpaM yatra tanniyuddham  /
dRSTimuSTyAdibhireva jayahArikArakaM bAhubalibharatayoriva niyuddhasya dhyAnaM
tasmin  /  mAtsyikamallajitasyATTanakasyeva vA  /  / 29 /  /  soma0 nijujhaM
jhANe - nirgataM yuddhaM niyuddhaM prANavyaparopaNarUpaM yasmin tanniyuddham,
yaSTimuSTyAdibhireva jayA'jayakArakaM tasya dhyAnaM niyuddhadhyAnam,
bAhubalibharatayoriva mAtsyikamallayutasyATTanasyeva vA tasmin  /  / 29 /  /
guNa nirgatamadhamayuddhaM niyuddhaM dRSTimuSTayAdibhireva jayahArakArakaM
bAhubalibharatayoriva  /  / 29  /   /  30-saMgaMjhANe [saGgadhyAne] bhuva0
saGgaH parityakteSvapi punaH saMyogA'bhiSvaGgaH  /  rAjImatyAM rathanemeriva,
nAgilAM prati bhavadevasyeva vA  /  / 30 /  /  bhuva0 saMgaM jhANe - saGgaH
parityakteSvapi punaHsaMyogAbhilASastasya dhyAnam, rAjImatyAM rathanemeriva,
nAgilAM prati bhavadevasyeva vA tasmin  /  / 30 /  /  guNa. parityakteSvapi
punaH saMyogA'bhiSvaGgaH  /  / 30  /  /  2010_02

Page #75 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  English Translation:  **34**  **31 - Sangrah-an-jhaane [Sangrah-dhyane]**
**Bhuva:** Sangraha is the accumulation of wealth due to extreme greed. The
meditation on Sangraha is like that of Mammanaka. || 31 || **Soma:** Sangrah-an-
jhaane, Sangraha is the accumulation of wealth due to extreme greed. The
meditation on it is like that of Mammanaka. || 31 || **Guna:** Sangraha is the
accumulation of wealth due to extreme greed. || 31 || **Atura-pratyakhyana-
prakirnakam durdhyana - 31, 32, 33, 34**  **32 - Vavhar-an-jhaane [Vyavahar-
dhyane]** **Bhuva:** Vyavaharan is Vyavahar, the act of dealing with matters,
like a king's family for the sake of their children's wealth, or a merchant
traveling to another country. || 32 || **Soma:** Vavhar-an-jhaane, for the sake
of children's wealth, like a merchant traveling to another country with his
wife. || 32 || **Guna:** Vyavaharan is Vyavahar, the act of dealing with
matters, like a king's family for the sake of their children's wealth, or a
merchant traveling to another country. || 32 || **2010_02** Vyavahar is the act
of deciding one's own affairs, like a king's family, or the act of judging. The
meditation on it is...  **33 - Kay-vikkay-an-jhaane [Kray-vikraay-dhyane]**
**Bhuva:** Krayana is Kray (buying), Vikrayana is Vikray (selling). Buying and
selling are Kray-vikraay, the act of acquiring a valuable object for a low price
for profit. The meditation on them is like that of Lubdhaka-nanda. || 33 ||
**Soma:** Kay-an-jhaane - Krayana is Kray, the act of acquiring a valuable
object for a low price for profit. Vikrayana is Vikray, the act of giving away a
less valuable object for a high price. Buying and selling are Kray-vikraay. The
meditation on them is like that of a greedy person who is happy to get gold for
a low price. || 33 || **Guna:** Kray-vikraay is the act of acquiring a valuable
object for a low price for profit. || 33 ||  **34 - Anath-dand-an-jhaane
[Anarth-dand-dhyane]** **Bhuva:** Dand for oneself or others is Arth-dand, Dand
without purpose is Anarth-dand. The killing of a living being without purpose is
Anarth-dand. The meditation on it is like that of a wild, intoxicated person,
like Shambadi, or like Ganga-datta who killed Chakra-mandali, or like a
talkative person who is skilled in delivering messages from Vishnu and Shri Devi
to heaven. || 34 ||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 34 31 - saMgahaMjhANe [ saMgrahadhyAne] bhuva0 saMgraho 'tyarthamatRptyA
dhanamIlanam  /  mammaNakasyeva saMgrahasya dhyAnaM tasmin  /  /  31  /  /
soma0 saMgrahaM jhANe saMgraho'tyarthamatRptyA dhanamIlanaM tasya dhyAnam,
mammaNasyeva tasmin  /  / 31  /  /  guNa saMgraho'tyarthamatRptyA dhanamIlanam
/  / 31 /  /  AturapratyAkhyAnaprakIrNakam durdhyAna- 31, 32, 33, 34 - 32-
vavahAraMjhANe [ vyavahAradhyAne] bhuva vyavaharaNaM vyavahAraH
kAryaparicchedArthaM rAjakulAdau putradhanArthaM,
dezAntarAyAtasArthavAhapatyoriva  /  / 32 /  /  soma0 vavahAraM jhANe
putradhanArthaM dezAntarAyAtasArthavAhasapatnyoriva tasmin  /  / 32 /  /  guNa
vyavaharaNaM vyavahAraH kAryaparicchedArthaM rAjakulAdau tasya putradhanArthaM
dezAntarAyAtasArthavAhapatyoriva  /  / 32 /  /  2010_02 vyavahAraH
svakAryanirNayArthaM rAjakulAdau nyAyakaraNaM tasya dhyAnam, 33-
kayavikkayaMjhANe [krayavikrayadhyAne bhuva0 krayaNaM krayaH, vikrayaNaM
vikrayaH  /  lAbhArthamalpamUlyena bahumUlyavastugrahaNaM krayazca vikrayazca
krayavikrayau tayordhyAnaM tasmin  /  lubdhakanandasyeva  /  /  33  /  /  soma0
kayaM jhANe - krayaNaM krayo lAbhArthamalpamUlyena bahumUlyavastugrahaNam,
vikrayaNaM vikrayo bahunA mUlyenAlpamUlyavastudAnam, krayazca vikrayazca
krayavikrayau tayordhyAnam, lohamUlyena suvarNakuzagrAhilobhanandasyeva tasmin
/  /  33  /  /  guNa krayavikrayo lAbhArthamalpamUlyena bahumUlyavastugrahaNam
/  / 33 /  /  34 - aNatthadaMDaMjhANe [ anarthadaNDadhyAne] bhuva0 AtmanaH
pareSAM vA'rthAya daNDaH arthadaNDaH nArthadaNDo'narthadaNDaH  /  niSprayojanaM
prANighAtanaM tasya dhyAnaM tasmin  /  durdAntamattatayA dvaipAyanaM
khalIkurvatAM zAmbAdInAmiva, cakramaNDalIghnato gaGgadattasyeva vA viSNu
zrIdevIsvargasandezakathananipuNasya vAcAlasyeva vA  /  /  34  /  /

Page #76 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Chapter: 1, Verses: 35, 36, 37  **Verse 34** **Soma:**  Anarthadanda meditation
- Anarthadanda is the useless act of violence, etc. Its meditation is like that
of Dvaipayana, who was intoxicated and acted like a fool, like the Shambas, or
like the serpent with a circular body, or like the eloquent Ganga Datta, who was
skilled in delivering messages from Vishnu and Sri Devi to heaven.  **Guna:**
Anarthadanda is the useless act of killing living beings.  **Verse 35**
**Bhuvana:** Abhoga meditation - Abhoga is an action preceded by knowledge. Its
meditation is in that. The fruits are like a mirage for Brahmadatta, who has the
intention of taking the eyes of a Brahmin.  **Soma:** Abhoga meditation - Abhoga
is an action preceded by knowledge. Its meditation is in that. The fruits are
like a mirage for Brahmadatta, who has the intention of taking the eyes of a
Brahmin.  **Guna:** Abhoga is an action preceded by knowledge.  **Verse 36**
**Bhuvana:** Anabhoga meditation - Anabhoga is complete forgetfulness. Its
meditation is in that. It is like the forgetful Prasanna Chandra, who forgot his
vow. It is said:  > "Touched by the intoxicating drink, he was happy, forgetting
his vow. > He fought with his mind, along with those cruel ministers."
**Soma:** Anabhoga meditation - Anabhoga is complete forgetfulness. Its
meditation is in that. It is like the forgetful Prasanna Chandra, who forgot his
vow.  **Guna:** Anabhoga is complete forgetfulness.  **Verse 37** **Bhuvana:**
Rinavila meditation - Rin is debt, and Avil is polluted. Its meditation is in
that. It is like the Rinavila, who was indebted and became a slave due to the
oil pressing, or like the Shraman Bhagini, who was indebted due to the oil
pressing. Or, it is like the one who deceives others and takes their wealth,
then thinks of fleeing after breaking the debt. This is Rinavila meditation.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 khaNDa:-1 gA. 35, 36, 37 soma0 aNaTThadaMDaM jhANe - anarthadaNDo niSprayojaNaM
hiMsAdikaraNam, tasya dhyAnam, durdAntamattatayA dvaipAyanaM khalIkurvatAM
zAmbAdInAmiva, cakramaNDalIsarpavizeSarUpAM nato gaGgadattasyeva, viSNu-
zrIdevIsvargasandezakathananipuNasya vAcAlasyeva vA tasmin  /  / 34  /  /  guNa.
anarthadaNDo niSprayojanaprANighAtanam  /  / 34  /  /  35-AbhogaMjhANe
[AbhogadhyAne] bhuva0 Abhogo jJAnapUrvako vyApArastasya dhyAnaM tasmin  /
brAhmaNanayanAbhoge phalAnyapi mRdgato brahmadattasyeva  /  / 35 /  /  soma.
AbhogaM jhANe - Abhogo jJAnapUrvako vyApArastasya dhyAnam,
brAhmaNanayanAbhiprAyeNa phalAnyapi mRgato brahmadattasyeva tasmin  /  / 35 /  /
guNa. Abhogo jJAnapUrvako vyApAraH  /  / 35  /  /  36-aNAbhogaMjhANe
[anAbhogadhyAne] bhuva0 - anAbhogo'tyantavismRtistasya dhyAnaM tasmin  /
vismRtavratasya prasannacandrasyeva  /  Aha ca - spRSTaH sutamamatvena prasanno
vratavismRtaH  /  /  manasA yoddhamArebhe, taiH samaM krUramantribhiH  /  /  iti
/  / 36  /  /  soma0 aNAbhogaM jhANe - anAbhogo'tyantavismRtistasya dhyAnam,
vismRtavratasya prasannacandrasyeva tasmin  /  / 36 /  /  guNa
anAbhogo'tyantavismRtiH  /  / 36  /  /  37-aNAvilaMjhANe [RNAviladhyAne] bhuva0
aNam RNaM tena AvilaH kaluSastasya dhyAnaM tasmin RNAvilasya RNAtasya
tailakarSanimittaM dAsatvaM prAptAyAH zramaNabhaginyA iva  /  athavA paraM
pratArya gRhNAtyarthaM pazcAdRNaM bhaGkatvApalAyiSya iti cintayata:
RNAviladhyAnaM tasmin  // 37 /  /  2010_02

Page #77 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Aatupraatyaakhyaana Prakirnakam Durdhyaana - 38, 39, 40  **37** **Soma:**
Anavilana Dhyana - Anavilana is the stain of the negative karma, the stain of
the negative karma is the stain of the meditation, like the oil stain on a
cloth. **Guna:** Anavilana is the stain of the negative karma, the stain of the
negative karma is the stain of the meditation.  **38 - Veeran Dhyane [Vaira
Dhyane]** **Bhuva:** Vaira is the hatred arising from the killing of parents,
the stealing of a kingdom, etc., which is passed down through generations or
lifetimes, like that of Parashurama, Subhūma, etc., or like that of a powerful
deity, or like that of the lion who was killed by three arrows, towards Kapila
Bata, or like that of the queen who was insulted in the inner palace, who, while
in the form of an ascetic, in the month of Magha, remembered the hatred towards
the Lord, and with her wet hair, sprinkled water on him. Or like that of Abhaya
Devi towards Sudarshana. **Soma:** Veeran Dhyane - Vaira is the hatred arising
from the killing of parents, the stealing of a kingdom, etc., the stain of the
meditation, like that of Parashurama, Subhūma, etc., or like that of the lion
who was killed by three arrows, towards Kapila Bata, or like that of Abhaya Devi
towards Sudarshana. **Guna:** Vaira is the hatred arising from the killing of
parents, the stealing of a kingdom, etc.  **39 - Viyakkam Dhyane [Vitarka
Dhyane]** **Bhuva:** Vitarka is the thought, the speculation. How will I acquire
the kingdom, etc.? This is the thought, the meditation on it. Like Chanakya, who
wanted to conquer the Nanda kingdom, or like Yaugandharayana, the minister of
Udayana, who wanted to defeat him. **Soma:** Viyakkam Dhyane - Vitarka is the
thought, the speculation. How will I acquire the kingdom, etc.? This is the
thought, the meditation on it, like Chanakya, who wanted to conquer the Nanda
kingdom. **Guna:** Vitarka is the thought, the speculation. How will I acquire
the kingdom, etc.?

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 AturapratyAkhyAnaprakIrNakam durdhyAna- 38, 39, 40 soma0 aNAvilaM jhANe - aNam
RNaM tenAvilaH kaluSa RNAvilastasya dhyAnam, tailakarSastryA yatibhaginyA iva
tasmin  /  /  37 /  /  guNa0 aNam RNaM tena AvilaH kaluSa RNArttastasya yad
dhyAnam  /  /  37  /  /  36 38 - veraMjhANe [vairadhyAne] bhuva0 vairaM
pitRmAtRvadhAdisamutthaM, rAjyApahArAdisamudbhavaM vA vaMzAnuyAyi
bhavAntarAnuyAyi vA parazurAmasubhUmAdInAmiva sudADhadevasya vA bhagavantaM
prati, tripRSThanihatasiMhajIvasya kapilabaTovaraM prati  /  tripRSThabhave
yA'ntapurikA'pamAnitA saiva zAlizIrSagrAmodyAnavyantarI satI tApasIrUpeNa
mAghamAse bhagavati smRtavairA jaTAbhirArdrAbhirjalopasargaM kurvatI tasyA iva
/  sudarzanaM prati vA abhayAdevyA vyantarIbhUtAyAH  /  /  38  /  /  soma0 veraM
jhANe - vairaM mAtRpitrAdivadhotthaM rAjyApahAradibhavaM vA tasya dhyAnam,
parazurAmasubhUmAdInAmiva bhavAntarAnuyAyi vA vairaM tripRSTanihatasiMhajIvasya
kapilabaTorvIraM pratIva, sudarzanaM prati vA'bhayAdevyA vyantarIbhUtAyAstasmin
/  / 38  /  /  guNa vairaM pitRmAtRvadhAdisamutthaM rAjyApahAradisamudbhavaM vA
/  /  38  /  /  39 - viyakkaMjhANe [vitarkadhyAne bhuva0 vitarkaNaM vitarka UhaH
/  kathaM rAjyAdi grahISya iti cintA  /  vitarkasya dhyAnaM tasmin  /
nandarAjyaM jighRkSocANakyasyeva  /  udayanamapajihIrSostadamAtyasya
yaugandharAyaNasyeva vA  /  / 39 //  soma0 viyakkaM jhANe - vitarka UhaH, kathaM
rAjyAdi grahISye ? iti cintA tasya dhyAnam, nandarAjyaM jighRkSozcANakyasyeva
tasmin  /  /  39  /  /  guNa0 vitarkaH UhaH, kathaM rAjyAdi grahISya iti cintA
/  /  39  /  /  2010_02

Page #78 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter 1: Inattentiveness - 40, 41, 42, 43  **40-Himsa-jhaane (Violence-
mindedness)** Violence, killing of animals like buffalo, etc., the contemplation
of this is Himsa-dhyana (violence-mindedness). Like that of a person who has
fallen into a well, or like that of a Kalashaukarika (a person who steals from a
temple). Or like that of the poor, the king, the priest, etc., who are suffering
from the consequences of their actions.  **41-Hasa-jhaane (Laughter-
mindedness)** Laughter, jest, mocking others, the contemplation of this is Hasa-
dhyana (laughter-mindedness). Like that of the disciple of Chanda-Rudra-acharya,
along with his friend, or like that of Sundara-Nripa towards Vajra-bahu-kumara.
**42-Pa-hasa-jhaane (Mockery-mindedness)** Mockery, ridicule, sarcasm,
criticism, praise, the contemplation of this is Pa-hasa-dhyana (mockery-
mindedness). Like that of Chanda-Pradhyota, who said, "I bow to you, O Naittiya
Khavaga," to Varttaka-muni.  **43-Pao-sa-jhaane (Hatred-mindedness)** Extreme
hatred, the contemplation of this is Pao-sa-dhyana (hatred-mindedness). Like
that of Kamatha towards Marubhuti, or like that of Triprishtha.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 khaNDa:-1 durdhyAna-40, 41, 42, 43 40-hiMsaMjhANe [hiMsAdhyAne bhuka hiMsanaM
hiMsA mahiSAdijIvamAraNaM tasya dhyAnaM hiMsAdhyAnaM tasmin  /  kUpakSiptasya
kAlazaukarikasyeva  /
duHkhavipAkoktANDakavaNinirdhanakamahezvaradattApurohitAnAmiva vA  /  / 40 /  /
soma. hiMsaM jhANe - hiMsA mahiSAdijIvamAraNaM tasyA dhyAnam,
kUpakSiptakAlazaukarikasyeva tasmin  /  / 4 /  /  gaNa. hiMsA
mahiSAdijIvamAraNam  /  / 40 /  /  41-hAsaMjhANe [hAsadhyAne] bhuva0 hasanaM
hAsaH paravipratAraNaM tasya dhyAnaM tasmin  /  caNDarudrAcAryaziSyasya
mitrasahitasyeva, vajrabAhukumAraM prati vA sundaranRpasyeva vA  /  / 4 /  /
soma0 hAsaM jhANe - hasanaM hAso hAsyaM tasya dhyAnam, caNDarudrAcAryaziSyasyeva
mitrasahitasya, vajrabAhukumAraM prati sundaranRpasyeva vA tasmin  /  / 4 /  /
guNa. hasanaM hAsaH paravipratAraNam  /  / 41 /  /  42-pahAsaMjhANe
[prahAsadhyAne] bhuva0 prahasanaM prahAsaH upahAsaH nindAstutiH tasya dhyAnaM -
"vaMdAmi te naimittiya khavagA" iti vArttakamuniM prati
vadatazcaNDapradyotasyeva  /  / 4 /  /  soma pahAsaM jhANe - prahAsa upahAsaH
paravipratAraNanindAstutirUpaH, tasya dhyAnam, "vandAmi te nemittiya,
khavagA..." iti vArtakamuniM prati vadatazcaNDapradyotasyeva tasmin  /  / 42 /
/  guNa. prahasanaM prahAsa upahAsaH nindAstutiH  /  / 42 /  /  43-paosaMjhANe
[pradveSadhyAne] bhuva0 prakRSTo dveSa: pradveSastasya dhyAnaM tasmin  /
marubhUtiM prati kamaThasyeva, tripRSThasyeva vA  /  2010_02

Page #79 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 38 **Aaturpratyakhyanaprakirnakam Durdhyan-44, 45, 46**  **Verse 43:** "In
the ears, the tauy tattam of the cow, what is it that is established? In the
ears, of the one who is being bound, by that, the hard iron rods are driven in."
**Commentary:** "The intense hatred, the pradvēṣa, its meditation is in that.
Like the hatred of a camel towards the desert, or like the hatred of a cowherd
towards Śrīvīra, who throws iron rods at his ears."  **Gun:** "The intense
hatred, the pradvēṣa, its meditation is in that."  **Verse 44:** "The harsh,
extremely cruel karma, its meditation is in that. Like the hatred of a Chulanī
towards Brahmadutta, or like the hatred of a Maṇiratha towards Yugabāhu, or like
the hatred of a king who sends a Śrāvikā to a serpent's pot under the pretense
of bringing flowers."  **Commentary:** "The harsh, extremely cruel karma, its
meditation is in that. Like the hatred of a Chulanī towards Brahmadutta, or like
the hatred of a Maṇiratha towards Yugabāhu, or like the hatred of a king who
sends a Śrāvikā to a serpent's pot under the pretense of bringing flowers."
**Gun:** "The harsh, extremely cruel karma, its meditation is in that."  **Verse
45:** "The fear, the nature which is like a sharp weapon, hidden within
delusion, its meditation is in that. Like the fear of a Somila who has been
attacked by a trained elephant."  **Commentary:** "The fear, the nature which is
like a sharp weapon, hidden within delusion, its meditation is in that. Like the
fear of a Somila who has been attacked by a trained elephant."  **Gun:** "The
fear, the nature which is like a sharp weapon, hidden within delusion, its
meditation is in that."  **Verse 46:** "The form, its meditation is in that. In
some texts, the word 'annarūvam' is also seen. There, the form is observed, as
in a mirror, its meditation is in that. And that is of two types: meditation on
one's own form and meditation on the form of another. Meditation on one's own
form is like the meditation of Sanatkumāra, whose form was praised by the gods.
Meditation on the form of another is like the meditation of Caṇḍapradhyota, who
observes the forms of Angāravati and others, painted on the leaves of trees."

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 38 AturapratyAkhyAnaprakIrNakam durdhyAna-44, 45, 46 kannesu taUya tattaM
govassa kayaM tiviNiTThArannA  /  kannesu vaddhamANassa teNa vUDhA kaDasalAgA  /
/  iti  /  / 43  /  /  soma paosaM jhANe - pradveSaH prakRSTo dveSastasya
dhyAnam, marubhUtiM prati kamaThasyeva, zrIvIraM prati karNayoH kaTazalAkAM
kSipato gopasyeva vA tasmin  /  / 43 /  /  guNa. prakRSTo dveSaH pradveSastasya
dhyAnaM tasmin  /  / 43 /  /  44-pharusaMjhANe [paruSadhyAne] bhuva
paruSamatiniSThuraM karma tasya dhyAnaM tasmin  /  brahmadattaM prati culaNyA
iva, yugabAhuM prati maNirathasyeva vA puSpAnayanavyAjena sarpaghaTaM prati
zrAvikAM preSayatastatpateriva vA  /  / 44 /  /  soma0 pharusaM jhANe -
paruSamatiniSThuraM karma tasya dhyAnam, brahmadattaM prati culanyA iva,
yugabAhuM prati maNirathasyeva, puSpAnayanavyAjena sarpaghaTaM prati zrAvikAM
preSayatasyatpateriva vA tasmin  /  / 44 /  /  guNa. pharusamiti niSThuraM karma
tasya dhyAnaM tasmin  /  / 44  /  /  45-bhayaMjhANe [bhayadhyAne bhuva0 bhayaM
mohAntargatA nokaSAyarUpA prakRtistasya dhyAnaM tasmin  /
vihitagajasukumAlopasargasya somilasyeva vA  /  / 45 /  /  soma0 bhayaM jhANe -
bhayaM mohAntargatA nokaSAyarUpA prakRtistasya dhyAnam,
kRtagajasukumAlopasargasya somilasyeva tasmin  /  / 45 /  /  guNa. bhayaM
mohAntargatA nokaSAyarUpA prakRtistasya dhyAnaM tasmin  /  / 45 /  /
46-rUvaMjhANe [rUpadhyAne soma0 ruvaM jhANe - rUpam, kvacit pAThe'nnarUvaM jhANe
ityadhikaM padamapi dRzyate  /  tatra rUpyate nirIkSyate AdarzAdAviti rUpaM
tasya dhyAnam, tacca dvidhA svarUpadhyAnaM pararUpadhyAnaM ca, madIyaM rUpaM
zobhanamiti svarUpadhyAnam, devAbhyAM prazaMsitasya sanatkumArasyeva,
pararUpadhyAnaM tu aGgAravatyAdirUpANi citraphalakalikhitAni vIkSamANasya
caNDapradyotasyeva tasmin  /  / 46 /  /  2010_02

Page #80 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter 1: Distractions - 47, 48, 49, 50  **47- Appasamsanjhane [Self-Praise
Meditation]**  Self-praise is a quality, self-admiration, and its meditation is
in that. Like a bard who desires praise for his work, or a charioteer who shows
his skill to the crowd. ||47||  **48- Paranindamjhane [Criticism of Others
Meditation]**  Criticism is the fault-finding of others, and its meditation is
in that. Like four vultures attacking a dead carcass. ||48||  **49-
Pargarihamjhane [Blame of Others Meditation]**  Blame is the fault-finding of
others, the exposure of their flaws, and its meditation is in that. Like a weak
and envious friend who blames someone in front of the assembly. ||49||  **50-
Pariggahamjhane [Attachment Meditation]**  Attachment is the acceptance of
something, whether external or internal. It is of twenty-four types, including
anger. Its meditation is in that. Like Charudatta who seeks wealth for his lost
fortune, or a monkey who steals from a sage. ||50||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 khaNDa:-1 durdhyAna-47, 48, 49, 50 47-appasaMsaMjhANe [AtmaprazaMsAdhyAne]
bhava0 AtmanaH prazaMsA guNotkarSa AtmaprazaMsanaM tasya dhyAnaM tasmina  /
zakaDAlenAkRtaprazaMsAmabhilaSato vararuceriva, svavijJAnaM vA kozAyA darzayato
rthiksyev||47|| soma. appasaMsaM jhANe - AtmaprazaMsA dhyAnam, zakaTAlamantrito
nijakRtakAvyaprazaMsAmabhilaSato vararuceriva, svavijJAnaM kozAyA darzayato
rathikasyeva vA tasmin  /  / 47 /  /  guNa. AtmaprazaMsA  /  / 47  /  /
48-paraniMdaMjhANe [paranindAdhyAne] bhuka nindanaM nindA parasya nindA
paranindA tasyA dhyAnaM tasmin  /  kUragaDukaM prati caturNAM kSapakANAmiva  /
/ 48 /  /  soma0 paraniMdaM jhANe - parasya nindA paranindA tasyA dhyAnam,
kUragaDukaM prati caturNA kSapakAnAmiva tasmin  /  / 48 /  /  guNa. parasya
nindA paranindA tasyA dhyAnam  /  / 48 /  /  49-paragarihaMjhANe
[paragarhAdhyAne] bhuva0 garhaNaM gardA parasya gardA paradoSodghATanaM tasya
dhyAnaM tasmin  /  saGghasamakSaM durbalikApuSyamitraM garhamANasya
goSTAmAhilasyeva  /  / 49 /  /  soma0 paragarihaM jhANe - paragarhA parasya
gardA parasamakSaM doSodghaTTanaM tasyA dhyAnam, zrIsaGghasamakSaM
durbalikApuSpamitraM garhamANasya goSThAmAhilasyeva tasmin  /  / 49 /  /  guNaH
parasya gardA paradoSoghaTTanam  /  / 49 /  /  50-pariggahaMjhANe
[parigrahadhyAne bhuvaH parigRhyate svIkriyate iti parigrahaH  /
sabAhyAbhyantarakSetrAdiH  /  krodhAdiH cturviNshtidhaa| tasya dhyAnaM tasmin  /
gatavibhavasya vibhavArthe cArudattasyeva, munipatimuni rundhantaH kuJcikasyeva
/  / 50 /  /  2010_02

Page #81 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Aatupraatyaakhyaana Prakirnakam Durdhyaana - 51, 52, 53, 54  **50.** Soma:
Pariggraham Jhaane - Parigraha is the focus of meditation on wealth, grain,
etc., like the desire for wealth of Charudatta, or like the desire for a kunjika
(key) of Muni-pati Muni.  **50.** Guna: Parigraha means to accept or take
possession of something. It can be external, internal, like land, or internal
like anger, etc.  **51.** Para-parivaayam Jhaane (Para-parivaada Dhyaane)
Bhuvah: Para-parivaada is the criticism of others, or speaking ill of others.
The focus of meditation is on the non-disclosure of the faults of others, like
the behavior of the mother-in-law and sister-in-law towards Subhadra.  **51.**
Soma: Para-parivaayam Jhaane - The focus of meditation is on the non-disclosure
of the faults of others, like the behavior of the mother-in-law and sister-in-
law towards Subhadra.  **51.** Guna: Para-parivaada is the criticism of others,
or speaking ill of others.  **52.** Para-dooshanam Jhaane (Para-dooshan Dhyaane)
Bhuvah: Para-dooshan is the fault-finding of others, even if it is done by
others, and it is the act of blaming oneself for the faults of others.  **52.**
Soma: Para-dooshanam Jhaane - Para-dooshan is the act of blaming oneself for the
faults of others, even if the other person is not at fault, like Rudraka blaming
himself for the death of Jyotir-yasha, even though he was not responsible.
**52.** Guna: Para-dooshan is the fault-finding of others, even if it is done by
others, and it is the act of blaming oneself for the faults of others.  **53.**
Aarambham Jhaane (Aarambha Dhyaane) Soma: Aarambham Jhaane - Aarambha is the act
of causing harm to others, and the focus of meditation is on this, like the
behavior of Kuru and Utkuru, or like Dwipayana.  **53.** Guna: Aarambha is the
act of causing harm to others, and the focus of meditation is on this.  **54.**
Sanrambham Jhaane (Sanrambha Dhyaane) Soma: Sanrambham Jhaane - Sanrambha is the
intense desire for objects, and the focus of meditation is on this, like the
desire for objects of a young boy who is trying to keep his vows, even though he
is being prevented from doing so by his mother.  **54.** Guna: Sanrambha is the
intention, the intense desire for objects.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 AturapratyAkhyAnaprakIrNakam durdhyAna-51, 52, 53, 54 somaH pariggaraM jhANe -
parigraho dhana-dhAnyAdirUpastasya dhyAnam, gatavibhavasya vibhavArthe
cArudattasyeva, munipatimuni rundhataH kuJcikasyeva vA tasmin  /  / 50  /  /
guNaH parigRhyate svIkriyata iti parigrahaH  /  sa bAhyAbhyantaraH kSetrAdiH
krodhAdizca  /  / 50  /  /  51-paraparivAyaMjhANe [paraparivAdadhyAne) bhuvaH
pareSAM parivAdaH paraparivAdaH paravikatthanam  /  paraM
pratyasadbhUtadoSasyAviSkaraNaM tasya dhyAnaM paraparivAdadhyAnaM tasmin  /
subhadrAM prati tatsvazUnanAndRNAmiva  /  / 51 /  /  soma0 paraparivAyaM jhANe -
paraM pratyasadbhUtadoSAviSkaraNaM paraparivAdastasya dhyAnam, subhadrAM prati
tat zvazrU-nanAndRNAmiva tasmin  /  / 51  /  /  guNa. pareSAM parivAdaH
paraparivAdaH paravikatthanam  /  / 51 /  /  52-paradUsaNaMjhANe
[paradUSaNadhyAne] bhuvaH pareSAM dUSaNaM paradUSaNaM pareNAkRtamapi taM
pratyAtmadoSacaTApanam  /  / 52 /  /  soma0 paradUsaNaM jhANe -
parasyA'naparAdhino'pyAtmakRtadoSacaTApanaM paradUSaNam, aDgaRSi prati
"jyotiryazA'nena hatA" iti svadoSaM caTApayato rudrakasyeva tasmin  /  / 52 /  /
guNaH pareSAM dUSaNaM pareNAkRtamapi taM pratyAtmadoSacaTApanam  /  / 52 /  /
53-AraMbhaMjhANe [ArambhadhyAne] soma0 AraMbhaM jhANe - ArambhaH
paropadravastasya dhyAnam, kuruDotkuruDayoriva, dvIpAyanasyeva vA tasmin  /  /
53 /  /  guNa0 ArambhaH paropadravastasya dhyAnam  /  / 53 /  /
54-saMraMbhaMjhANe [saMrambhadhyAne] soma0 saMraMbha jhANe - saMrambho
viSayAdiSu tIvrAbhilASastasya dhyAnam, jananyuparodhato vrataM pAlayato'pi
viSayAbhilASataH kSullakakumArasyeva tasmin  /  / 54  /  /  guNa saMrambhaH
saMkalpaH, viSayAdiSu tIvrAbhilASaH  /  / 54  /  /  _ 2010_02

Page #82 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter 1: Inattentiveness - 55, 56, 57, 58  **55 - Pāvāṇumoayanaṁ Jhāṇe
[Pāpānumodanadhyāne]**  **Bhūva:** Examples of these four are not found in the
previous book. || 5 ||  **Soma:** Pāvāṇumoayanaṁ Jhāṇe - Pāpa (sin) like serving
another's wife, etc., and its approval is Pāpānumodanam. Saying that the worthy
one has done this is its meditation, like the people who approve of the king's
inner palace offender who is killed by the executioner, saying "Blessed is he."
|| 55 ||  **Guṇa:** Pāpānumodanam is saying that the worthy one has done this.
|| 55 ||  **56 - Ahigaranam Jhāṇe [Adhikaraṇadhyāne]**  **Bhūva:** Adhikriyate
(is taken), duragati (hell), kṣipyate (is thrown), ātmānena (by oneself), this
is Adhikaraṇa. Karma (action) upādāna (material cause) hetu (reason) like a
well, a garden, a grinding stone, a machine, etc., is its meditation. Like the
Nandamanikāra who is meditating on a well. || 56 ||  **Soma:** Ahigaranam Jhāṇe
- Adhikriyate (is taken), duragati (hell), kṣipyate (is thrown), ātmānena (by
oneself), this is Adhikaraṇa, the place which is the cause of the origin of sin,
its meditation is Adhikaraṇadhyānam, like the Nandamanikāra who is engrossed in
meditation on a well. || 56 ||  **Guṇa:** Adhikriyate (is taken), duragati
(hell), kṣipyate (is thrown), ātmānena (by oneself), this is Adhikaraṇa, karma
(action) upādāna (material cause) hetu (reason). || 56 ||  **57 - Asamāhimaranam
Jhāṇe [Asamādhimaranadhyāne]**  **Bhūva:** Samādhana (concentration), samādhi
(meditation), not samādhi, asamadhi (lack of concentration), he will die by
this, this thinking is Asamādhimaranadhyānam. Like the guardian who first throws
the small machine into the furnace, towards the Skandakācārya. || 57 ||
**Soma:** Asamāhimaranam Jhāṇe - He will die by this lack of concentration, this
thinking is Asamādhimaranadhyānam, like the unworthy guardian who first throws
the small machine into the furnace, towards the Skandakācārya. || 57 ||  **58 -
Kammodayapaccayam Jhāṇe [Karmodyayapratyayadhyāne]**  **Bhūva:** Karma (action)
udhaya (rise), pratya (understanding), hetu (reason) of whose meditation, that
is Karmodyayapratyayena (by the understanding of the rise of karma) meditation,
Karmodyayapratyayam (the understanding of the rise of karma) meditation. Like
Viṣṇu, who, even though he initially had auspicious results, due to some reason,
from the rise of karma, had inauspicious results until the end of time. || 58 ||
**Soma:** Kammodayapaccayam Jhāṇe - Karma (action) udhaya (rise), pratya (

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 khaNDa:-1 durdhyAna-55, 56, 57, 58 55-pAvANumoyaNaMjhANe [pApAnumodanadhyAne]
bhuva0 eteSAM caturNAm udAharaNAni uparitanapustake na santi  /  / 5 /  /  soma0
pAvANumoyaNaM jhANe - pApaM parastrIsevAdi tasyAnumodanaM pApAnumodanam,
bhavyamanenakRtamiti vadanaM tasya dhyAnam, rAjA'ntaHpurA'parAdhinaH
sanepathyahatasya "dhanya eSa" ityanumodakajanAnAmiva tasmin  /  / 55 /  /
guNa. pApAnumodanaM bhavyamanenakRtamiti vadanam  /  / 55  /  /
56-ahigaraNaMjhANe [adhikaraNadhyAne] bhuva0 adhikriyate durgatI kSipyate
AtmAnenetyadhikaraNam  /  karmopAdAnahetuH kUpArAmArahaTTagharaTTayantrAdiH
tasya dhyAnam  /  vApIdhyAnaratasya nandamaNikArasyeva  /  / 56 /  /  soma0
ahigaraNaM jhANe - adhikriyate durgatau kSipyate AtmA'neneti adhikaraNaM
pApotpattihetuH sthAnaM tasya dhyAnamadhikaraNadhyAnam, vApIdhyAnatatparasya
nandamaNikArasyeva tasmin  /  / 56  /  /  guNa. adhikriyate durgatau kSipyate
AtmAnenetyadhikaraNaM karmopAdAnahetuH  /  / 56 /  /  57-asamAhimaraNaMjhANe
[asamAdhimaraNadhyAne] bhuva0 samAdhAnaM samAdhirna samAdhirasamAdhinA eva
mriyatAmiti cintanamasamAdhidhyAnaM tasmin  /  skandakAcArya prati kSullakaM
prathamaM yantrapIlayata: pAlakasyeva  /  / 57 /  /  /  soma0 asamAhimaraNaM
jhANe - asamAdhinA eSa mriyatAmiti cintanamasamAdhimaraNadhyAnam, skandakAcArya
prati kSullaM prathamaM yantre pIlayato'bhavyapAlakasyeva tasmin  /  / 57 /  /
58-kammodayapaccayaMjhANe [karmodayapratyayadhyAne bhuva0 karmaNAM udayaH
pratyayo heturyasya dhyAnasya tat karmodayapratyayena dhyAnaM karmodayapratyayaM
dhyAnaM tasmin  /  prathamaM zubhapariNAmavato'pi kutazcit kAraNAt
karmodayato'zubhapariNAmatvaM paryantakAle viSNoriva  /  / 58 /  /  soma0
kammodayapaccayaM jhANe - karmaNAmudayaH pratyayo heturyasya dhyAnasya tat,
karmodayapratyayaM 2010_02

Page #83 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Aaturpratyakhyanaprakirnakam Durdhyan - 59, 60  **58**
**Karmodyayapratyayena** (by the understanding of the arising of karma) **va**
(or) **dhyanam** (meditation) **karmodyayapratyayadhyanam** (meditation on the
understanding of the arising of karma) **prathamam** (first)
**shubhaparinaamavato'pi** (even though it has a good result) **paschat**
(later) **kutaschit** (from somewhere) **karmodyayatoh** (from the arising of
karma) **ashubhaparinaamatvam** (the result is bad) **paryantakaale** (until the
end of time) **vishnoriv** (like Vishnu) **tasmin** (in that).  **42** **Guna**
(quality) **karmodyayapratyayam** (understanding of the arising of karma)
**karmodyayapratyayena** (by the understanding of the arising of karma)
**dhyanam** (meditation). **Prathamam** (first) **shubhaparinaamavato'pi** (even
though it has a good result) **paschat** (later) **kutaschit** (from somewhere)
**kaaranat** (reason) **karmodyayatoh** (from the arising of karma)
**ashubhaparinaamatvam** (the result is bad) **paryantakaale** (until the end of
time) **vishnoriv** (like Vishnu).  **59** **Iddigaraavanjhaane** (in the
meditation of wealth and pride) **ridhigauravadhyane** (meditation on wealth and
pride) **Bhuva** (earth) **ridhhau** (in wealth) **cha** (and) **vridho**
(increased) **arghanam** (wealth) **ridhi:** (wealth)
**rajyaishvaryadipraapti:** (the attainment of kingship, wealth, etc.)
**gurorbhaavoh** (the state of a teacher) **karma** (karma) **va** (or)
**gauravam** (pride) **tac** (that) **dvidha** (two types) **dravya** (material)
**toh** (from) **bhaavatah** (from the state) **cha** (and) **dravya**
(material) **toh** (from) **vajraadeh** (from diamond, etc.) **bhaavatah** (from
the state) **abhimaanalobhalakshanaashubhabhaavavatah** (from the state of
pride, greed, etc.) **aatmanah:** (of the self). **Tatraapi** (there also)
**bhaavgauravam** (pride in the state) **ridhya** (by wealth)
**aacharyatvadidpraaptilakshanaya** (by the attainment of the state of a
teacher, etc.) **va** (or) **gauravam** (pride) **ridhigauravam** (pride in
wealth). **Aacharyatvadidpraaptilakshanaya** (by the attainment of the state of
a teacher, etc.) **[ridhya]** (by wealth) **abhimaandvaarenah** (through pride)
**gauravam** (pride). **Tadpraaptava** (not attained) **va** (or)
**tatpraarthanaadvaarenah** (through the desire for that)
**aatmano'shubhabhaavgauravam** (pride in the bad state of the self

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 AturapratyAkhyAnaprakIrNakam durdhyAna- 59, 60 karmodayapratyayena vA dhyAnaM
karmodayapratyayadhyAnam prathamaM zubhapariNAmavato'pi pazcAt kutazcit
karmodayato'zubhapariNAmatvaM paryantakAle viSNoriva tasmin  /  /  58  /  /  42
guNa karmodayapratyayaM karmodayapratyayena dhyAnam  /  prathamaM
zubhapariNAmavato'pi pazcAt kutazcit kAraNAt karmodayato'zubhapariNAmatvaM
paryantakAle viSNoriva  /  /  58  /  /  59 - iDigAravaMjhANe RddhigauravadhyAne
bhuva0 Rddhau ca vRddho arghanam RddhiH  /  rAjyaizvaryAdiprAptiH  /
gurorbhAvaH karma vA gauravaM tacca dvidhA dravyato bhAvatazca dravyato
vajrAderbhAvato'bhimAnalobhalakSaNAzubhabhAvavata Atmana:  /  tatrA'pi
bhAvagauravam RddhyA AcAryatvAdiprAptilakSaNayA vA gauravam Rddhigauravam  /
AcAryatvAdiprAptalakSaNayA [ RddhyA ] abhimAnadvAreNa gauravam  /  tadaprApta vA
tatprArthanAdvAreNa Atmano'zubhabhAvagauravam RddhigauravaM tasya dhyAnaM tasmin
dazArNabhadrasyeva  /  gatto himavaMto annatto sAivAhaNo rAyA  /
samabhArabharuktA teNa na pallaTTae puhavI  /   /  1  /   /  ityevaM vadato vA
/  /  pratiSThAnapurAdhipateriva  /  /  59  /  /  soma0 iDDigAravaM jhANe -
rAjyaizvaryAdirUpA RddhistayA gauravam AtmotkarSarUpaM tasya dhyAnam,
dazArNabhadrasyeva tasmin  /  / 59 /  /  guNa RddhiH rAjyaizvaryAdiprAptiH  /
gurorbhAvo gauravaM tacca dvidhA dravyabhAvato dravyato
vajrAderbhAvato'bhimAnataH  /  /  59  /  /  60 - rasagAravaMjhANe [
rasagauravadhyAne] paJcadhA bhuva raste AsvAdyate puSTyarthamiti rasaH  /
rasanendriyApyAyikastiktAdiH  /  sa ca tatra zleSmanAzakRttiktaH  /
viSAdyucchedanakRtkaTukaH  /  annarucistambhanakRtkaSAyaH  /
AzravaNakledanakRdAmlaH  /  AhlAdanagRhaNakRnmadhuraH  /  tathA
varNapaJcakotkarSakArilAkSAsAraNamiva sarvarasotkarSakRtsaMsargajaH SaSTho
lavaNarasaH  /  rasasya gauravaM tasya dhyAnaM tasmin  /  rasagarvo yathA mama
rasavatIrasAstathA kimanyasyA'pi santItyabhimAnaH,
udakajJAtoktajitazatrurAjasyeva subuddhiM prati rasAn prazaMsataH  /  / 60 /  /
- 2010_02

Page #84 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter 1: Distractions 61, 62  **61 - Saataagaurava Dhyana (Pride of
Happiness)**  **Commentary:** Saata (happiness) is a pleasant feeling, and the
pride associated with it is called Saataagaurava. This is the focus of this
meditation.  It is like the pride of the moon, as described in the verse "Nara
Yattho Sasiraaya" (He who is the moon, is the king of the night).  **62 -
Avirmana Dhyana (Unceasing Meditation)**  **Commentary:** Avirmana means not
stopping, not ceasing. This meditation focuses on the constant effort to remain
in a state of non-attachment, even when faced with temptations. It is like the
story of a father who, despite knowing his sons are prone to bad behavior,
continues to guide them.  Similarly, it is like the story of the mute animal
who, despite being repeatedly warned by the gods, continues to fall into the
same traps.  This meditation reminds us that even when we are aware of our
weaknesses, we must continue to strive for liberation.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 khaNDa:-1 durdhyAna-61, 62 soma0 rasagAravaM jhANe - rasyate AsvAdyate
puSTyarthamiti rasaH rasanendriyApyAyaka rasastena gauravam, "yathA mama
rasavatIrasAstathA kimanyasyApi santItyabhimAnarUpaM" tasya dhyAnam,
udakajJAtoktajitazatrurAjasyeva subuddhimantriNo'gre rasavatIrasAn prazaMsataH,
tasmin  /  / 60  /  /  /  guNa. rasyate AsvAdyate puSTayarthamiti rasaH
rasanendriyA''pyAyikastiktAdiH  /  / 60  /  /  61-sAyAgAravaMjhANe
[sAtAgauravadhyAne] bhuva0 sAtaM sukhaM tena gauravaM tasya dhyAnaM tasmin  /
sAtago yathA ahameva sukhItyabhimAnaH, zazirAjasyeva 'narayattho sasirAyA'
ityasmin prabandhe  /  / 61 /  /  soma0 sAtAgauravaM jhANe - sAtaM sukhaM tena
gauravaM garvo yathA'hameva sukhItyabhimAnastasya dhyAnam, "narayattho sasirAya"
iti gAthoktazazirAjasyeva tasmin  /  / 61 /  /  guNa sAtaM sukhaM tena gauravaM
tasya dhyAnaM tasmin sAtagaryo yathA-ahameva sukhItyabhimAnaH  /  / 61 /  /
62-averamaNaMjhANe [aviramaNadhyAne] bhuva0 virativiramaNaM na
viramaNamaviramaNam  /  tasya dhyAnaM tasmin  /  yathA - mA bhUt
putrayoviratibuddhirityaGgIkRtAmapi dezaviratiM parityajya
prAntagrAmasamAzritayoH  /  ee pavvaiyAgAdikkaruvANi ghettuM mAraMti  /  pacchA
tesiM maMsaM khAiMti taM mA tubbhe eesiM alliyaha  /  /  ityevaM punaH
punastanayavihitavipratAraNayo/guyazayoriva  /  mUkajIvadevena
pratibodhyamAnasyA'pi muhurmuhuviratiM parityajatastadbhAturiva vA, metAryasyeva
vA  /  / 62 /  /  soma0 averamaNaM jhANe - na viramaNamaviramaNaM tasya dhyAnam,
mA bhUt putrayoviratibuddhirityaGgIkRtAmapi dezaviratiM parityajya
prAntagrAmamAzritayoH, "ete sAghavo mAMsAzino ! rAkSasA! ityetatpAdyaM na
gantavyam", iti tanayavihitavipratAraNayo guyazayoriva, mUkajIvasyApi devena
pratibodhyamAnasyApi muhurmuhuviratiM parityajatastadbhAturiva metAryasyeva vA
tasmin  /  / 6 /  /  guNa virativiramaNaM na viramaNam [aviramaNaM] tasya
dhyAnaM tasmin  /  / 62 /  /  JainEducation International 2010_02

Page #85 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Aaturpratyakhyanaprakirnakam Durdhyan-63 Ga. 11  63-Amutimaranamjhaane
[Amuctimaranadhyane] Bhuvo- Liberation is liberation from the cycle of birth and
death, a state of auspiciousness, not liberation from liberation. Death in that
state is Amuctimaran, and meditation on that is Amuctimaranadhyan. As such, do
not create the cause for this obstacle to liberation. Just as in the world, the
statement of Vansharjuna, even though repeatedly dissuaded by the painting,
still creates the cause for his downfall by having an inauspicious attitude,
thinking, "Even after experiencing this glory, I will not desire liberation,"
etc. Vanshalakshmiamanuddhrutiya samucchedena vidvisham.
Nirvanamapimanayehamaantaraayam jayasriyah. || iti [Kirata-11-69] || 63 || In
some readings, the word "ruvanjhaane" is also seen. There, "rupa" means "to be
seen," "to be observed," etc. in mirrors, etc. That meditation is on that, and
it is of two types: meditation on one's own form and meditation on another's
form. There, as in the case of Sanatkumara, who was praised by the gods for his
beautiful form, it is meditation on one's own form. Meditation on another's
form, however, is like that of the Gopadarakas, whose minds are distracted by
the excessive beauty of the Abhira girl, and whose chariots are broken by their
chariots being overturned due to going off the path near the chariot. Or, as in
the case of Chandrapradhyota, who meditates on the forms of Angaravati, etc.,
which are painted on the canvas, it is meditation on another's form. These six
types of meditation are all of a violent nature, and are therefore the objects
of false misconduct. Soma- Amutimaranam jhaane - Liberation is liberation from
the cycle of birth and death, not liberation from liberation. It means the
desire for worldly pleasures. Therefore, death in that state is meditation on
that. "Do not create the cause for this obstacle to liberation," etc. Even
though repeatedly dissuaded by his brother, the virtuous one, he creates the
cause for his downfall by having an inauspicious attitude, thinking, "Even after
experiencing this glory of the wheel, I will not desire liberation," etc. || 63
|| These sixty types of meditation are all of a violent nature, and are
therefore the objects of false misconduct. The anusvara in all the meditation
words is to be understood as a lakshanika, and its elision is to be done. Guna-
Liberation is liberation from the cycle of birth and death, a state of
auspiciousness. Not liberation from liberation. Death in that state is
Amuctimaran, and meditation on that is Amuctimaranadhyan. As such, do not create
the cause for this obstacle to liberation. Even though repeatedly dissuaded, he
creates the cause for his downfall by having an inauspicious attitude, thinking,
"Even after experiencing this glory, I will not desire liberation," etc. || 63
|| Pasuttasssa va padibuddhassa va jo me koi devasio raio uttamaddhe aikkamo
vaikkamo aiyaro anayaro tassa miccha me dukkadam. || 11 || Prasuptasyava
pratibuddhasyava yo maya kashchidaivasiko raatriko uttamarthe'tikramo
vyatikramo'ticaro'nacharo tasya mithya me dusskritam. || 11 || 2010

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 AturapratyAkhyAnaprakIrNakam durdhyAna-63 gA. 11 63-amuttimaraNaMjhANe
[amuktimaraNadhyAne] bhuva0 mocanaM muktiH saMsArAcchivagatirUpA na
muktiramuktistasya maraNamamuktimaraNaM tasya dhyAnaM tsmin| yathA
muktivighnakarametannidAnaM mA kuru  /  puna: punazcitreNa nivAryamANasyApi etAM
vibhUtimananubhUya muktimapi na spRhayeyamityAdyazubhabhAvena nidAnaM kurvataH
saMbhUtasyeva yathA vA loke vaMzArjunasyoktiH  /  vaMzalakSmImanuddhRtya
samucchedena vidviSAm  /  nirvANamapi manyehamantarAyaM jayazriyaH  /  /  iti
[kirAta-11-69]  /  / 63 /  /  kvacitpAThe rUvaMjhANe ityadhikamapi padaM dRzyate
/  tatra rupyate nirIkSyate AdarzAdiSviti rUpaM tasya dhyAnaM tasmin tacca
dvidhA svarUpadhyAnaM pararUpadhyAnaM vA  /  tatra madIyarUpaM zobhanamiti
devAbhyAM prazaMsitasya sanatkumArasyeva  /  pararUpadhyAnaM tu
gopadArakANAmivAbhIrakanyArUpAtizayAtkSiptacetasAM tacchakaTanikaTautpathena
zakaTakheTanena bhagnanijazakaTAnAm  /  caNDapradyotasya vA aGgAravatyAdirUpANi
citraphalakalikhitAni vIkSamANasya pararUpadhyAnaM bhavati  /  tadetAni
triSaSThAnyapi dhyAnAnyAtaraudrasvabhAvAnIti mithyAduSkRtaviSayANi  /  soma0
amuttimaraNaM jhANe - muktirmokSagatirna muktiramuktiH saMsArasukhAbhilASa
ityarthaH, tena maraNaM tasya dhyAnam, "muktivighnakaram etannidAnaM mA kuru"
iti punaH punazcitreNa bhrAtRsAdhunA nivAryamANasyApi "etAM
cakrivibhUtimananubhUya muktimapi na spRhayeyam," ityAdyazubhabhAvena nidAnaM
kurvataH saMbhUtasyeva tasmin  /  / 63 /  /  _ etAni triSaSTirapi dhyAnAni
ArttaraudrasvabhAvAni mithyAduSkRtaviSayANi  /  anusvArAzca sarvadhyAnapadeSu
alAkSaNikA jJeyAstallopazca kAryaH  /  guNa. muktiH saMsArAcchivagatirUpA  /  na
muktiramuktistasyA maraNamamuktimaraNaM tasya dhyAnaM yathA
muktivighnakarametannidAnaM mA kuru [iti] punaH punarnivAryamANasyApi etAM
vibhUtima[na]nubhUya muktimapi na spRhayeyamityAdyazubhabhAvena nidAnaM kurvataH
sambhUtasyeva  /  / 63 /  /  pasuttassa vA paDibuddhassa vA jo me koI devasio
rAio uttamaDhe aikkamo vaikkamo aiyAro aNAyAro tassa micchA mi dukkaDaM  /  / 11
/  /  prasuptasya vA pratibuddhasya vA yo mayA kazcidaivasiko rAtrika
uttamArthe'tikramo vyatikramo'ticAro'nAcArastasya mithyA me duSkRtam  /  / 11 /
/  2010_02

Page #86 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Chapter 1, Verse 12  **Bhūva:** Now, in what state are these (acts of)
mindfulness born? It is said: "Of the **prasupta** (one who is asleep), or the
**paḍibuddha** (one who is awake), or of one who is born in the day, or one who
is born in the night. **Uttamaṭṭe** (for the highest purpose), **aikkama**
(transgression) in the form of accepting an invitation, etc., **vaikkamo**
(special transgression) in the form of a difference in words for the purpose of
accepting, **aiyāro** (exceeding) in the form of accepting an invitation, etc.,
**aṇāyāro** (non-conduct) in the form of abstaining from and upholding conduct,
meaning non-conduct is the consumption of that. "Born" is a word that
encompasses all of this. "I wish that all of my non-conduct may become **mithyā
duṣkṛta** (false evil)." Whatever evil I have done, may it become false. This
method of **mithyā duṣkṛta** is common in the death of a child, the death of a
learned person, and the death of a learned person who is also a learned person.
**Soma:** Now, in what state are these (acts of) mindfulness born? It is said:
"Of the **prasupta** (one who is asleep), or the **paḍibuddha** (one who is
awake), or of one who is born in the day, or one who is born in the night.
**Uttamaṭṭe** (for the highest purpose), **aikkama** (transgression) in the form
of accepting an invitation, etc., **vaikkamo** (special transgression) in the
form of a difference in words for the purpose of accepting, **aiyāro**
(exceeding) in the form of accepting an invitation, etc., **aṇāyāro** (non-
conduct) in the form of abstaining from and upholding conduct, meaning non-
conduct is the consumption of that. "Born" is a word that encompasses all of
this. "I wish that all of my non-conduct may become **mithyā duṣkṛta** (false
evil)." Whatever evil I have done, may it become false. This method of **mithyā
duṣkṛta** is common in the death of a child, the death of a learned person, and
the death of a learned person who is also a learned person.  **Guṇa:** Now, in
what state are these (acts of) mindfulness born? It is said: "Of the
**prasupta** (one who is asleep), or the **paḍibuddha** (one who is awake), or
of one who is born in the day, or one who is born in the night. **Uttamaṭṭe**
(for the highest purpose), **aikkama** (transgression) in the form of accepting
an invitation, etc., **vaikkamo** (special transgression) in the form of a
difference in words for the purpose of accepting, **aiyāro** (exceeding) in the
form of accepting an invitation, etc., **aṇāyāro** (non-conduct) in the form of
abstaining from and upholding conduct, meaning non-conduct is the consumption of
that. "Born" is a word that encompasses all of this. "I wish that all of my non-
conduct may become **mithyā duṣkṛta** (false evil)."  I offer my salutations to
the **Jina** **Vardhamāna** (the victorious one who is growing), and to all the
other **Jinas** and their **gana** (followers).  **Bhū

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 khaNDa:-1 gA. 12 bhuva0 atha kasyAmavasthAyAM jAtAnItyAha - pasuttassa vA tti
prasuptasya nidrAM gatasya paDibuddhassa vA pratibuddhasya jAgrataH  /  jo me
kao devasio rAio yo me mayA ko'pi bahurvAlpo vA divase jAto daivasiko rAtrau
bhavo rAtrikaH  /  uttamaDhe tti uttamArthe jJAnAdau aikkamo tti
atikramaNamatikrama AdhAkarmAdyAmantraNAdau pratizravaNarUpaH  /  vaikkamo tti
vizeSeNAtikramaNaM vyatikrama: tasyaiva grahaNAya padabhedarUpaH  /  aiyAro tti
atIcaraNamatIcAra AdhAkarmAdigrahaNarUpaH  /  aNAyAro tti
AcaraNamAcArastatpariharaNapariSThApanarUpo na
AcAro'nAcArastadbhakSaNamityarthaH  /  jAta iti padAdhyAhAraH  /  tassa micchAmi
dukkaDaM ti tasya sarvasyA'nAcArasya mithyA duSkRtaM bhavatu yanmayA duSkRtaM
tanmithyA bhavatu  /  ayaM ca mithyAduSkRtavidhirbAlapaNDitamaraNe,
paNDitamaraNe, paNDitapaNDitamaraNe ca sAdhAraNa ev| soma0 atha
kasyAmavasthAyAmetAni dhyAnAni jAtAnItyAha- prasuptasya nidrAM gatasya,
'paDibuddhassa vA' pratibuddhasya jAgrato vA yo me mama ko'pi 'baharvA'lpo vA'
divase jAto daivasiko, rAtrau bhavo rAtrikaH 'uttamaTTe 'tti uttamArthe jJAnAdau
/  'aikkamo' atikramaNamatikrama AdhAkarmAdyAmantraNAdau pratizravaNarUpaH,
'vaikkamo' vizeSeNAtikramaNaM vyatikrama AdhAkarmAdargrahaNAya padabhedarUpaH,
'aiyAro' aticAra AdhAkarmAdyAhAragrahaNarUpaH, AcArastatpariharaNa-
pariSThApanarUpaH, 'aNAyAro' anAcArastadbhakSaNamityarthaH, jAta iti
padAdhyAhArastasya sarvasya prAguktasyAtikramAdemithyA duSkRtaM bhavatu  /
yanmayA duSkRtaM kRtaM tanmithyA bhavatvityarthaH  /  ayaM ca
mithyAduSkRtavidhirbAlapaNDitamaraNe, paNDitamaraNe, paNDitapaNDitamaraNe ca
sAdhAraNa eva  /  / 11 /  /  guNa. kasyAmavasthAyAM jAtAnItyAha - prasuptasya
nidrAM gatasya, pratibuddhasya jAgrato yo me mayA ko'pi bahurvAlpo vA daivasiko
rAtrikaH  /  uttamArthe jJAnAdau atikrama AdhAkarmAdyAmantraNAdau
pratizravaNarUpaH, vyatikramastasyaiva grahaNAya padabhedarUpaH, aticAra
AdhAkarmAdigrahaNarUpaH, anAcArastadbhakSaNamityarthaH  /  jAta iti
padAdhyAhAraH tasya sarvasyAnAcArasya mithyAduSkRtaM bhavatu  /  / 11 /  /  esa
karemi paNAmaM jiNavaravasahassa vaddhamANassa  /  sesANaM ca jiNANaM
sagaNaharANaM ca savvesi  /  / 12 /  /  eSa karomi praNAmaM jinavaravRSabhasya
varddhamAnasya  /  zeSebhyazca jinebhyaH sagaNadharebhyazca sarvebhyaH  /  / 12
/  /  bhuva0 atha sAdhorudyatavihAreNa viharataH kadAciddevAdikRtA''patsyAt  /
nadyAdau rogAdau vA 2010_02

Page #87 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 46 **Chapter 13: The Scattering of the Rejection of the Eager**  This chapter
discusses the concrete rejection of the eager, which is related to life. It
says: "I, in the presence of the entire assembly, make a prostration and bow
down." To whom? To the present Tirthankara, the Lord Jinavarasabha, the supreme
among the Kevalis, the one known as Vardhamana, the god. Not only to him, but
also to the rest of the Tirthankaras, starting with Rishabha, and to all the
past, present, and future Tirthankaras, including those who are accompanied by
their Ganadharas.   **Verse 12:**  "I, in the presence of the entire assembly,
make a prostration and bow down." To whom? To the present Tirthankara, the Lord
Jinavarasabha, the supreme among the Kevalis, the one known as Vardhamana, the
god. Not only to him, but also to the rest of the Tirthankaras, starting with
Rishabha, and to all the past, present, and future Tirthankaras, including those
who are accompanied by their Ganadharas.   **Commentary:**  If a devotee, while
engaged in virtuous conduct, encounters a calamity caused by gods or others,
such as a river or a disease, and is in a situation where his life is at stake,
he should perform this concrete rejection in the following manner: "I, in the
presence of the entire assembly, make a prostration and bow down." To whom? To
the present Tirthankara, the Lord Jinavarasabha, the supreme among the Kevalis,
the one known as Vardhamana, the god. Not only to him, but also to the rest of
the Tirthankaras, starting with Rishabha, and to all the past, present, and
future Tirthankaras, including those who are accompanied by their Ganadharas.
**Verse 13:**  "I reject all beginnings of life, all false speech, all taking of
what is not given, all sexual intercourse, and all possessions."
**Commentary:**  The Tirthankara, having performed the prostration to the
Ganadharas, then utters the vows, saying: "I reject all beginnings of life, all
false speech, all taking of what is not given, all sexual intercourse, and all
possessions." This means that he recites the vow-mantra, starting with "First, O
Lord, I take refuge in the vow of non-violence, I reject all violence, etc." He
also rejects false speech, meaning he rejects lying. He rejects all taking of
what is not given, meaning he rejects the third vow. He rejects all sexual
intercourse, which is of eighteen types, including the thought, speech, and body
actions related to it, as well as the acceptance of gifts, the use of force, and
the enjoyment of the body. He rejects all possessions, which are of twenty-four
types. The word "also" indicates that he rejects other things as well.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 46 AturapratyAkhyAnaprakIrNakam gA. 13 tasyAM jIvitasApekSasya
sAkArapratyAkhyAnamAha - eSo'haM sarvasaGghapratyakSaM karomi vidadhAmi praNAmaM
namaskAram  /  kasya ? vartamAnatIrthAdhipaterAsannopakAriNa: jinavaravRSabhasya
sAmAnyakevalizreSThasya vardhamAnAbhidhasya devasya  /  na kevalamasya,
zeSANAmapi vRSabhAdijinAnAM cazabdAdatItAnAgatAdijinAnAM ca  /  kathambhUtAnAM
jinAnAM saha gaNadharairvarttanta iti sagaNadharAsteSAM sagaNadharANAM sarveSAm
/  atrA'pi cazabdAnnija[nija]saGghasametAnAm  /  / 12 /  /  soma0 atha
sAdhorudyatavihAriNaH kadAcit devAdikRtApat syAt, nadyAdau rogAdau vA''pad
bhavet, tasyAM jIvitasApekSaH san yathA sAkArapratyAkhyAnaM kurute tathA
vidhimAha- 'esa karemi' eSo'haM sarvasaGghapratyakSaM karomi  /  kam ? praNAmaM
namaskArama, kasya ? vartamAnatIrthAdhipaterjinavaravRSabhasya
sAmAnyakevalizreSThasya zrIvardhamAnasya, tathA zeSANAmapi RSabhAdijinAnAM
cazabdAdatItAnAgatajinAnAM ca kathambhUtAnAm ? saha gaNadharairvarttanta iti
sagaNadharAsteSAM sarveSAM punazcazabdAnnijanijasaGghayutAnAm  /  / 12 /  /
gaNa0 eSo'haM sarvasaGghapratyakSaM karomi namaskAraM jinavaravRSabhasya
sAmAnyakevalizreSThasya vardhamAnAbhighasya zeSANAmapi vRSabhAdijinAnAM
cazabdAdatItAnAgatAdijinAnAM, saha gaNadharairvartanta iti sarveSAmatrApi
cazabdAnnijanijasaGghasametAnAm  /  / 12 /  /  savvaM pANAraMbhaM paccakkhAmi
tti aliyavayaNaM ca  /  savvamadinAdANaM mehunna pariggahaM ceva  /  / 13 /  /
sarvaM prANArambhaM pratyAkhyAmyalIkavacanaM ca  /  sarvamadattAdAnaM maithunaM
parigrahaM caiva  /  / 13 /  /  bhuvaH atha tIrthakRtgaNadharakRtanamaskAro
vratoccAraM kurvannidamAha- prANAnAmArambhaM sarvaM niravazeSaM paccakkhAmitti
pratyAcakSe "paDhame bhaMte mahavvae pANAivAyAo veramaNaM, savvaM bhaMte
pANAivAyaM paccakkhAmItyAdi" vratadaNDakamuccaratItyarthaH  /  alIkavacanaM
pratyAkhyAmi mRSAvAdamityarthaH  /  sarvamadattAdAnaM svAmi-jIva-tIrthakara-
gurubhiravitIrNaM tRtIyavratamityarthaH  /  sarvaM mithunasya
strIpuMsalakSaNasya bhAvaM karma vA maithunamabrahma
tanmanovAkkAyakRtakAritAnumatibhiraudArikavaikriyazarIraviSayairaSTAdazadhA  /
sarvaM parigrahaM caturviMzatidhA  /  caiva zabdAt zeSANi sthAnAnyapi
pratyAkhyAmItyarthaH  /  / 13 /  /  soma0 atha kRtanamaskAro vratoccAraM karoti
/  prANAnAm ArambhaM vinAzAdirUpaM prANArambhaM sarvaM niravazeSaM pratyAcakSe
"paDhame bhaMte mahavvae..." ityAdivratadaNDakamuccaratItyarthaH  /  eva 2010_02

Page #88 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Chapter: - 1 Verse: 14, 15  I renounce all false speech, all giving that is not
given by the master, all giving that is not given by the soul, all giving that
is not given by the soul, all giving that is not given by the soul, all giving
that is not given by the soul, all giving that is not given by the soul, all
giving that is not given by the soul, all giving that is not given by the soul,
all giving that is not given by the soul, all giving that is not given by the
soul, all giving that is not given by the soul, all giving that is not given by
the soul, all giving that is not given by the soul, all giving that is not given
by the soul, all giving that is not given by the soul, all giving that is not
given by the soul, all giving that is not given by the soul, all giving that is
not given by the soul, all giving that is not given by the soul, all giving that
is not given by the soul, all giving that is not given by the soul, all giving
that is not given by the soul, all giving that is not given by the soul, all
giving that is not given by the soul, all giving that is not given by the soul,
all giving that is not given by the soul, all giving that is not given by the
soul, all giving that is not given by the soul, all giving that is not given by
the soul, all giving that is not given by the soul, all giving that is not given
by the soul, all giving that is not given by the soul, all giving that is not
given by the soul, all giving that is not given by the soul, all giving that is
not given by the soul, all giving that is not given by the soul, all giving that
is not given by the soul, all giving that is not given by the soul, all giving
that is not given by the soul, all giving that is not given by the soul, all
giving that is not given by the soul, all giving that is not given by the soul,
all giving that is not given by the soul, all giving that is not given by the
soul, all giving that is not given by the soul, all giving that is not given by
the soul, all giving that is not given by the soul, all giving that is not given
by the soul, all giving that is not given by the soul, all giving that is not
given by the soul, all giving that is not given by the soul, all giving that is
not given by the soul, all giving that is not given by the soul, all giving that
is not given by the soul, all giving that is not given by the soul, all giving
that is not given by the soul, all giving that is not given by the soul, all
giving that is not given by the soul, all giving that is not given by the soul,
all giving that is not given by the soul, all giving that is not given by the
soul, all giving that is not given by the soul, all giving that is not given by
the soul, all giving that is not given by the soul, all giving that is not given
by the soul, all giving that is not given by the soul, all giving that is not
given by the soul, all giving that is not given by the soul, all giving that is
not given by the soul, all giving that is not given by the soul, all giving that
is not given by the soul, all giving that is not given by the soul, all giving
that is not given by the soul, all giving that is not given by the soul, all
giving that is not given by the soul, all giving that is not given by the soul,
all giving that is not given by the soul, all giving that is not given by the
soul

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 khaNDa: - 1 gA. 14, 15 malIkavacanaM ca sarvaM mRSAvAdaM pratyAkhyAmi sarvaM
svAmyadattajIvAdattAdibhedabhinnamadattAdAnaM, sarvazabdo'gre'pi yojyate,
mithunasya strI-puMsalakSaNasya karma maithunamabrahma tat
sarvamaudArikavaikriyaviSayaM, manovAkkAyakRtakAritAnumatibhedabhinnaM sarvaM
parigrahaM caivazabdAccheSapApasthAnAnyapi pratyAkhyAmIti sambandhaH  /  /  13
/  /  sammaM me savvabhUesa, veraM majjha na keI  /  AsAo vosirittANaM
samAhimaNupAlae  /   /  14  /  /  sAmyaM me sarvabhUteSu vairaM mama na kenacit
/  AzA vyutsUjya samAdhimanupAlaye  /  /  14  /  /  bhuva0 punaH kiM bhaNati ?
samasya bhAvaH sAmyaM samatA me mama sarvabhUteSu sarvajIveSu  /  vairaM virodho
mama na kenApi sAkam  /  AzAH sarvAbhilASarUpA
AhAropakaraNagaNasvajanazarIrAdikAH vyutsRjya tyaktvA samAdhiM manaHsvAsthyaM
caturvidhAM vA vinaya - zruta-tapaAcArarUpaM vA'nupAlaye'hamityarthaH  /  / 14 /
/  soma0 punaH kiM bhaNati ? samasya bhAvaH sAmyaM samatA me mama sarvabhUteSu
sakalajIveSu astIti zeSaH, vairaM virodho mama na kenApi sAkam  /  AzA icchA
AhAropakaraNa- gaNa - svajanazarIrAdyabhiSvaGgarUpAH sarvA vyutsRjya tyaktvA
samAdhiM manaHsvAsthyaM vinaya- zruta-tapaAcArasamAdhirUpaM vA
samAdhimanupAlaye'hamiti sambandhaH  /   /  14  /   /  guNa samasya bhAvaH
sAmyaM samatA me mama sarvajIveSu vairaM virodho mama na kenApi saakm| AzAH
sarvAbhilASarUpA vyutsRjya tyaktvA samAdhiM manaHsvAsthyamanupAlaye'haM
manovAkkAyaiH  /  / 14 /  /  savvaM cA''hAravihiM sannAo gArave kasAe ya  /
savvaM ceva mamattaM caemi savvaM khamAvemi  /  /  15  /  /  47
sarvamAhAravidhiM ca saMjJA gauravANi kaSAyAzca  /  sarvamapi mamatvaM tyajAmi
sarvaM kSamayAmi  /  /  15  /  /  bhuva0 yacca vyutsRjati tadevAha - sarvaM
caturvidhamAhAravidhiM tyajAmi  /  saMjJAzcatastra AhArabhaya-maithuna -
parigraharUpA:, daza vAhAra-bhaya-maithuna - parigraha- krodha- mAna-mAyA-lobha-
loka ogharUpAH  /  SoDaza vA 2010_02 -

Page #89 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
48 I renounce the four types of food regulations, the four types of vows (food,
fear, sex, and possessions), and the many types of anger, pride, deceit, greed,
and worldly attachments. I renounce the three types of pride and the sixteen
types of passions. The word "cha" means "all." I renounce all sense of "mine,"
all restrictions, and all unconsciousness. I forgive all those who have seen me,
spoken to me, and are good and worthy followers. || 1 || [Pravachana-sara 925] -
The Miscellaneous Section on Refusal to Treat the Sick, Chapter 16 I renounce
all four types of food regulations. I renounce the four types of vows (food,
fear, sex, and possessions), or the ten types of vows (food, fear, sex,
possessions, anger, pride, deceit, greed, worldly attachments, and the flow of
the world). I renounce the three types of pride and the sixteen types of
passions. The word "cha" means "all." I renounce all sense of "mine," all
restrictions, and all unconsciousness. I forgive all living beings. || 15 || If
I have the opportunity to live in this moment, this renunciation is a great
source of merit. || 16 || - After the renunciation, what is said? It is said,
"If I have the opportunity to live in this moment, this renunciation is a great
source of merit." || 16 || - After the renunciation, what is said? It is said,
"If I have the opportunity to live in this moment, this renunciation is a great
source of merit." || 16 || - After the renunciation, what is said? It is said,
"If I have the opportunity to live in this moment, this renunciation is a great
source of merit." || 16 || - After the renunciation, what is said? It is said,
"If I have the opportunity to live in this moment, this renunciation is a great
source of merit." || 16 || - After the renunciation, what is said? It is said,
"If I have the opportunity to live in this moment, this renunciation is a great
source of merit." || 16 || - After the renunciation, what is said? It is said,
"If I have the opportunity to live in this moment, this renunciation is a great
source of merit." || 16 || - After the renunciation, what is said? It is said,
"If I have the opportunity to live in this moment, this renunciation is a great
source of merit." || 16 || - After the renunciation, what is said? It is said,
"If I have the opportunity to live in this moment, this renunciation is a great
source of merit." || 16 || - After the renunciation, what is said? It is said,
"If I have the opportunity to live in this moment, this renunciation is a great
source of merit." || 16 || - After the renunciation, what is said? It is said,
"If I have the opportunity to live in this moment, this renunciation is a great
source of merit." || 16 || - After the renunciation, what is said? It is said,
"If I have the opportunity to live in this moment, this renunciation is a great
source of merit." || 16 || - After the renunciation, what is said? It is said,
"If I have the opportunity to live in this moment, this renunciation is a great
source of merit." || 16 || - After the renunciation, what is said? It is said,
"If I have the opportunity to live in this moment, this renunciation is a great
source of merit

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 48 AhArabhayapariggahamehUNasuhadukkhamohavitigicchA  /  kohamaNamAyalobhe soge
loge ya dhammodhe  /   /  1  /   /  [ pravacanasAro0925 ] tAssarvAstyajAmi  /
gauravaM triprakAramapi pUrvaM varNitam  /  kaSAyAzca SoDazA'pi  /  savvaM ceti
/  caivazabdo'pizabdArthe  /  sarvamapi ca mamatvaM pratibandhaM mUrcchA tyajAmi
/  sarvamapi ca dRSTAbhASitasAdhu zrAvakajanaM ca kSamayAmItyarthaH  /  / 15 /
/  soma0 yat tyajati tadAha sarvaM caturvidhamAhAravidhiM tyajAmi,
saMjJAzcatasra AhAra-bhayamaithuna-parigraharUpAH krodhamAnAdibhedena bahuvidhA
vA tyajAmIti sarvatra sambandhaH, gauravaM triprakAraM RddhyAdirUpaM ca
kaSAyAzca SoDazA'pi cevazabdo'pizabdArthaH sarvamapi ca mamatvaM pratibandhaM
mUrchAmityarthaH, tyajAmi  /  tathA sarvamapi dRSTamAbhASitaM sAdhuzrAvakajanaM
kSamayAmi  /  /  15  /  /  - AturapratyAkhyAnaprakIrNakam gA. 16 guNa sarvaM
caturvidhamAhAravidhiM tyajAmi  /  saMjJAzcatasra
AhArabhayamaithunaparigraharUpAH, daza
vA''hArabhayamaithunaparigrahakrodhamAnamAyAlobhalokaogharUpAstAssarvAstyajAmi
/  gauravaM tripakrAm  /  kaSAyAzca SoDazApi  /  caivazabdo'pizabdArthe
sarvamapi ca mamatvaM mUrcchA tyajAmi  /  sarvaM jIvajAtaM kSayAmi  /  /  15  /
/  hujjA imaMmi samae uvakkamo jIviyassa jai majjha  /  eyaM paccakkhANaM viulA
ArAhaNA heu ( hou )  /  /  16  /  /  bhUyAdasmin samaye upakramo jIvitasya yadi
mama  /  etatpratyAkhyAnaM vipulA''rAdhanAhetuH (bhavatu )  /   /  16  /  /
bhuva0 kSAmaNAnantaraM ca kiM bhaNatItyAha bhUyAdasminnavasare  /  upakramaNaM
upakramo jIvitasya prANadhAraNasya yadi mama tadetadeva pratyAkhyAnaM
vipulArAdhanAheturbhavatvityarthaH  /  /  16  /  /
bhUyAdasminnavasare'syAmApadItyartha upakramo vyayo 2010_02 - soma0
kSAmaNAnantaraM kiM bhaNatItyAha jIvitasya prANadhAraNasya yadi mama tadetadeva
pUrvakRtaM pratyAkhyAnaM vipulArAdhanAheturbhavatIti zeSaH  /  sandhyabhAvaH
prAkRtatvAdathavA 'viulA ArAhaNA hou' iti pAThetadeva pratyAkhyAnaM
vipulArAdhanA. hetutvAd vipulArAdhanA bhavatvityarthaH  /  / 16 /  /  guNa0
bhUyAdasminnavasare upakramo vyayo jIvitasya yadi mamaitadeva pratyAkhyAnaM
vipulA - rAghanAheturbhavatvityarthaH  /  / 16 /  /  1

Page #90 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Chapter: - 1 Verse: 17, 18 Salutations to the Siddhas, the Arhats, who are free
from all suffering. I believe in the teachings of the Jinas and reject all evil.
|| 17 || The commentator Bhuvanendra asks: What is meant by the rejection of
evil deeds? And what is meant by belief? || 17 || The commentator Somendra
answers: The rejection of evil deeds is explained as follows: Those who are free
from all suffering, to them be salutations. The word "Siddhas" is used in the
plural, but it also includes the Tirthankaras. Therefore, salutations to the
Siddhas and the Arhats. The word "Jina" refers to the Tirthankaras, and the word
"prajnapta" refers to their teachings. Therefore, the meaning is: I believe in
all the teachings of the Jinas. The word "papaka" refers to evil deeds, and the
word "pratyakhyami" means "I reject." Therefore, the meaning is: I reject all
evil deeds. || 17 || The commentator Gunendra says: Salutations to the Siddhas,
who are free from all suffering. Salutations to the Arhats. The meaning is: I
believe in all the teachings of the Jinas. The meaning is: I reject all evil
deeds. This is called the rejection of evil deeds. || 17 || Salutations to the
Siddhas, the great sages, who have destroyed their karmas. I accept the
teachings of the Kevalis, as they have been revealed. || 18 || The commentator
Bhuvanendra says: Salutations to the Siddhas, who have destroyed their eight
types of karmas. The word "cha" indicates that the salutations also include the
Tirthankaras and the great sages, such as the Ganadharas. The word "santharaka"
refers to the practice of fasting, which is prescribed by the Kevalis. The
meaning is: I accept the practice of fasting, as it has been revealed by the
Kevalis. || 18 || The commentator Somendra says: The rejection of evil deeds has
been explained. Now, the wise person, who is free from worldly attachments and
desires, rejects evil deeds and accepts the teachings of the Jinas. The meaning
is: Salutations to the Siddhas, who have destroyed their eight types of karmas.
The word "cha" indicates that the salutations also include the Tirthankaras and
the great sages, such as the Ganadharas. The word "santharaka" refers to the
practice of fasting, which is prescribed by the Kevalis. The meaning is: I
accept the practice of fasting, as it has been revealed by the Kevalis. || 18 ||
The commentator Gunendra says: The wise person, who is free from worldly
attachments and desires, rejects evil deeds and accepts the teachings of the
Jinas. The meaning is: Salutations to the Siddhas, who have destroyed their
eight types of karmas. The word "cha" indicates that the salutations also
include the Tirthankaras and the great sages, such as the Ganadharas. The word
"santharaka" refers to the practice of fasting, which is prescribed by the
Kevalis. The meaning is: I accept the practice of fasting, as it has been
revealed by the Kevalis. || 18 ||  2010_02

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 khaNDa: - 1 gA. 17, 18 savvadukkhappahINANaM siddhANaM arahao namo  /  sahe
jirpannattaM paccakkhAmi ya pAvagaM  /  /  17  /  /  prakSINasarvaduHkhebhyaH
siddhebhyo'rhadbhyo namaH  /  zraddadhe janaprajJaptaM pratyAkhyAmi ca pApakam
/  / 17 /  /  bhuva0 kRtasAkArapratyAkhyAnazca kiM bhaNati ? kiJca zraddhatta
ityAha  /  / 17 /  /  soma0 kRtasAkArapratyAkhyAnaH kiM bhaNatItyAha -
prakSINAni sarvaduHkhAni yeSAM te tathA tebhyaH, krAntasya paranipAtaH
prAkRtatvAt  /  siddhebhyo namo namaskAro'stu  /  na kevalaM siddhebhyaH
kintvarhadbhyazca tIrthakarebhyazca namaskAro bhavatu  /  tathA zraddadhAmi
jinaprajJaptaM sarvaM tattvamiti zeSaH, tathA pratyAkhyAmi ca pApakaM nindyaM
karma sarvamityarthaH  /  / 17 /  /  guNa0 prakSINAni sarvaduHkhAni yeSAM
tebhyaH siddhebhyo namo'stu, arhadbhyazca namo'stu  /  zraddadhAmi
jinaprajJaptaM tattvamiti zeSaH  /  pratyAkhyAmi ca pApakaM nindyaM karma
sarvamityarthaH  /  uktaM sAkArapratyAkhyAnam  /  / 17 /  /  namutthu
dhuyapAvANaM siddhANaM ca mahesiNaM  /  saMthAraM paDivajjAmi jahA kevalidesiyaM
/  /  18  /  /  49 namo'stu dhUtapApebhyaH siddhebhyazca maharSibhyaH  /
saMstAraM pratipadye yathA kevalidezitam  /  /  18  /  /  bhuva namo
namaskAro'stu  /  dhutaM gataM pApamaSTaprakAraM karma yeSAM te tathA tebhyaH
siddhebhyaH  /  cazabdAttIrthakarebhyazca maharSINAM gaNadharAdInAM maharSibhyaH
chaTThI vibhattI bhannai utthI iti jJeyam  /  saMstArakaM
racitadarbhasaMstArakAdividhiratrAnazanaM [ vidhinAtrAnazanaM kriyate
tadupacArAtsaMstArakamanazanaM taM prapadye'haM yathA kevalinidarzitamiti  /  /
18  /  /  soma0 uktaM sAkArapratyAkhyAnamatha paNDitaH kSapako muktajIvitAzo
bhaktapratyAkhyAnaM kurvan yad bhaNati tadAha - namo namaskAro'stu  /  dhutaM
gataM pApamaSTaprakAraM karma yeSAM te tathA tebhyaH siddhebhyaH  /  cazabdAt
tIrthakarebhyazca tathA maharSayo gaNadharAdayastebhyazca caturthIsthAne SaSThI
prAkRtavazAt  /  saMstArakaM darbhasaMstArakaM darbhasaMstArakAdividhinA
vidhIyamAnamupacArAdanazanamucyate  /  tadanazanaM pratipadye'haM tathA
kevalibhirdarzitaM prakAzitaM taM tatheti zeSaH  /  /  18  /  /  guNa0 atha
paNDitakSapako bhaktapratyAkhyAnaM kurvan yad bhaNati tadAha - namo'stu dhutaM
gataM pApamaSTaprakAraM karma yeSAM tebhyaH siddhebhyaH  /  ca
zabdAttIrthakarebhyazca maharSINAM ca gaNadharAdInAM maharSibhyaH,
chaTThavibhattI bhannai cautthI iti jJeyam  /  saMstArakaM
racitadarbhasaMstArakAdividhinA yadanazanaM kriyate tadapyupacArataH
saMstArakamanazanaM taM prapadye'haM yathA kevalibhirdarzitamiti  /   /  18  /
/  2010_02

Page #91 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Aaturpratyakhyanaprakirnakam Ga. 19, 20  **19.** I renounce all evil conduct
in three ways: through mind, speech, and body. I also perform the three-fold
Samayika, making it completely free from any form.  **Explanation:**  *
**Duccarita:** Evil conduct, that which is not to be practiced by those with
great wisdom. * **Vyutsrijami:** I renounce, I give up. * **Trividhena:** In
three ways, through mind, speech, and body. * **Samayika:** A special type of
restraint, a practice of self-control. * **Trividham:** Three-fold, referring to
the three aspects of Samayika: knowledge, faith, and action. * **Nirakaram:**
Without form, without any attachment.  **20.** I renounce all internal and
external attachments, including the body and food, with my mind, speech, and
body, completely and wholeheartedly.  **Explanation:**  * **Bahyam:** External,
referring to external objects like utensils. * **Abhyantaram:** Internal,
referring to internal attachments like passions. * **Upadhi:** Attachment,
anything that binds us. * **Sariraadi:** Including the body. * **Sabhojanam:**
With food, referring to the act of eating. * **Manovaakkayaih:** With mind,
speech, and body. * **Bhaavena:** With complete awareness and intention. *
**Vyutsrijami:** I renounce, I give up.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 AturapratyAkhyAnaprakIrNakam gA. 19, 20 jaM kiMci vi duccariyaM taM savvaM
vosirAmi tiviheNaM  /  sAmAiyaM ca tivihaM karemi savvaM nirAgAraM  /  / 19 /  /
yat kiJcidapi duzcaritaM tatsarvaM vyutsRjAmi trividhena  /  sAmAyikaM ca
trividhaM karomi sarvaM nirAkAram  /  / 19 /  /  bhuka tamaGgIkurvan kiM
kimabhidhatte ityAha - yatkimapi duzcaritaM vitatamatibhiranAsevyaM tatsarvaM
vyutsRjAmi trividhena manasA vAcA kAyena sAmAiyaM ca tivihaM ti samAni saMyamAni
teSAmAyo lAbhaH  /  samAya eva sAmAyikaM saMyamavizeSaM trividhaM rUpaM
samyaktvazrutacAritramityarthaH  /  athavA trividhaM
manovAkkAyakaraNakArApaNAnumatibhiH karomi sarvamapi nirAkAramAkArarahitaM
maraNaM caturviMzatyAkAraiH [rahitam ityarthaH  /  / 19 /  /  soma0 atha
tadanazanamaGgIkurvan kimabhidhatte ityAha - yat kimapi duzcaritamakRtyaM
sAdhunAmanAsevyaM tat sarvaM vyutsRjAmi tyajAmi trividhena manasA vAcA kAyena ca
tathA sAmAyikaM cAritravizeSaM trividhaM jJAnazraddhAnakriyArUpaM
samyaktvazrutasarvaviratisAmAyikarUpamityarthaH  /  athavA trividhaM
manovAkkAyakaraNakAraNA'numatibhiH karomi sarvamapi nirAkAramAkArarahitaM
maraNasamayasya pratyAsannatvAnnirapavAdamityarthaH, pUrvaM tu
darzanajJAnAdibhiH kalpikAsevAviSayaizcaturviMzatyAkAraiH sApavAdamapyAsIditi
bhAvaH  /  / 19 /  /  guNa tamaGgIkurvan kiM kimabhidhatta ityAha - yat kimapi
duzcaritamakRtyaM sAdhubhiranAsevyaM tat sarvaM vyutsRjAmi  /  samAni jJAnAdIni
teSAmAyo lAbhaH samAyaH trividhaM jJAnazraddhAnakriyArUpaM sarvamapi
nirAkAramAkArarahitaM maraNasyAsannatvAnnirapavAMdam  /  / 19 /  /  bajhaM
abhiMtaraM uvahiM sarIrAi sabhoyaNaM  /  maNasA vaya-kAehiM savvaM bhAveNa
vosire  /  / 20 /  /  bAhyamabhyantaramupadhiM zarIrAdi sabhojanam  /
manovAkkAyaiH sarvaM bhAvena vyutsRjAmi  /  / 20 /  /  bhuvaH anyacca yatkaroti
tadAha - bahirbhavaM bAhyaM pAtrAdyupakaraNam  /  abhirantarbhavamabhyantaraM
kaSAyAdilakSaNam  /  upadhiM parigrahaM zarIrAdi ca  /  saha bhojanena varttata
iti sabhojanam  /  upadhIyate poSyate jIvo'nenetyupadhiH  /  athavA upadhIyate
jIvo durgatau sthApyate'nenetyupadhivizeSaNAni  /  manovAkkAyaiH sarvamupadhiM
bhAvato vyutsRjAmItyarthaH  /  / 20 /  /  2010_02

Page #92 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Chapter 1, Verses 21, 22**  **Soma:** Again, what does he do? He says:
"External, that which is external, in the form of a vessel or other utensils,
internal, that which is characterized by passions, and also the body, etc.,
along with food, is called 'eating together'. Or, what is the 'condition'? The
body, etc., is the 'condition', the living being is established in a difficult
situation by this, which is not diligently engaged in, therefore, it is the
'condition'. I renounce, I abandon, all this 'condition' with mind, speech, and
body, in terms of its essence. The word 'all' is without case endings due to
Prakrit." || 20 ||  **Guna:** External, that which is characterized by a vessel,
etc., internal, that which is characterized by passions, etc. The 'condition' is
the 'condition' because it nourishes the living being, the body, etc., and
'eating together' is all renounced in terms of its essence with mind, speech,
and body. || 20 ||  **All beginnings of life, I renounce, and also deceitful
words. All giving and taking, sexual intercourse, and possessions, I renounce.
|| 21 ||**  **I have equality towards all beings, I have no enmity towards
anyone. Abandoning desires, I abide in meditation. || 22 ||**  **Bhuva:** What
else does he do? He says: "Now, this pair of verses was already mentioned
earlier, why is it repeated? It is said: Earlier, it was said with reference to
one who renounces in a concrete way, but here, it is said with reference to one
who understands the renunciation of the subtle, therefore, it is not repetition.
Then, why is the verse 'I do this' not mentioned? It is said: The meaning of
this is already mentioned in the verse 'I rise up, I am free from the dust',
therefore, it is not mentioned. The explanation of the pair of verses is the
same as before. I take refuge in meditation." || 21-22 ||  **Soma:** Again, what
does he do? He says: "This pair of verses was explained earlier, it should be
understood in the same way. Now, why is this repeated? It is said: Earlier, it
was said with reference to one who renounces in a concrete way, but here, it is
said with reference to one who understands the renunciation of the subtle,
therefore, it is not repetition. Then, why is the verse 'I do this, I renounce'
not mentioned? It is said: The meaning of this is already mentioned in the verse
'I rise up, I am free from the dust', therefore, it is not mentioned." || 21 ||
22 ||  **Guna:** The explanation of the pair of verses is the same as before. I
take refuge in meditation. || 21-22 ||  **2010_02**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 khaNDaH- 1 gA. 21, 22 soma0 punaryat karoti tadAha - bahirbhavaM bAhyaM
pAtrAdyupakaraNarUpam, abhyantaraM kaSAyAdilakSaNaM tathA zarIrAdi ca saha
bhojanena varttata iti sabhojanam  /  athavA upadhiM kimbhUtam ? zarIrAdi,
upadhIyate jIvo durgatau sthApyate'nenA'yatnavyApAritena ityupadhiH taM
sarvamupadhiM manovAkkAyairbhAvena bhAvato vyutsRjAmi tyajAmi  /  sarvazabdAd
vibhaktilopaH prAkRtatvAt  /  / 20 /  /  guNa bAhyaM pAtrAdilakSaNam,
abhyantaraM kaSAyAdilakSaNam  /  upadhiH parigrahaM upadhIyate poSyate
jIvo'nenetyupadhiH zarIrAdi ca sabhojanaM manovAkkAyaiH sarvaM bhAvato
vyutsRjAmi  /  /  20  /  /  savvaM pANAraMbhaM paccakkhAmi tti aliyavayaNaM ca
/  savvamadinnAdANaM mehuNNa pariggahaM ceva  /  /  21  /  /  sammaM me
savvabhUesa veraM majjha na keNaI  /  AsAo vosirittANaM samAhimaNupAlae  /  /
22  /  /  sarvaM prANArambhaM pratyAkhyAmyalIkavacanaM ca  /  sarvamadattAdAnaM
maithunaM parigraha caiva  /  /  21  /   /  sAmyaM me sarvabhUteSu vairaM mama
na kenacit  /  AzA vyutsRjya samAdhimanupAlaye  /  /  22  /  /  bhuva0 ito'pi
kiM karotItyAha - nanvidaM gAthAdvayamagre'pyuktaM kimiti punaruktamuktam ?
ucyate pUrvaM sAkArapratyAkhyAnakarttAramAzrityoktamiha tu
saMstArakapratipattAramA - zrityoktamiti na paunaruktyam  /  tarhi " esa karemi
" iti gAthA kimiti noktA ? ucyateetasyA artho namotthu dhuyapAvANamityanayokta
iti noktA  /  gAthAdvayavyAkhyAnaM pUrvavadeva  /  samAdhiM prapadye  /  /
21-22  /  /  51 - - soma0 punaH kiM karotItyAha - idaM gAthAdvayaM prAg
vyAkhyAtaM tathaiva jJeyam  /  nanu punaretat kasmAduktam ? ucyate - pUrvaM
sAkArapratyAkhyAnakarttAramAzrityoktam, iha tu
saMstArakAnazanapratipattAramAzrityoktamiti na paunarUktyam  /  tarhi "esa
karemi paNAma" iti gAthA'pi kimiti noktA ? ucyate etasyA artho "namutthu
dhuapAvANaM" itigAthayA ukta eveti noktA  /  /  21  /  /  22  /  /  guNa
gAthAdvayavyAkhyAnaM tu pUrvavadeva  /  samAdhiM prapadye  /  /  21-22  /  /
2010_02

Page #93 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
52 Aaturpratyakhyanaprakirnakam Ga. 23 I abandon attachment, bondage, hatred,
joy, humility, anxiety, fear, sorrow, attraction, and aversion. ||23|| Ragam
bandham pradvēṣam ca harṣa dīnabhavataam | Utsukatvambhayam śokam ratimaratim ca
vyutsṛjāmīti ||23|| Bhak pratipannānāśanaścānyadapi kim abhidhattityāha - Rāgam
abhiṣvaṅgam, bandhahetutvād bandham rāgalakṣaṇam bandhamityarthaḥ | Bandhaśabdaḥ
pratipadam yojyaḥ | Pradvēṣaṇam pradvēṣastam ca bandham matsara ity arthaḥ |
Harṣaṇam harṣaḥ svajanamelāpakādau saṅghamelāpakādau vā mama mahatī pūjā
bhaviṣyatīti | Dīnabhavasyā bhāvo dīnabhavata, tāṁ pratyaneekāpamānādau |
Utsukasyā bhāvaḥ utsūkatvam pīḍotpattau jhatityeva yadi mriye'hamityevamrūpam |
Bhayan devādyupasarge sati, śokamiṣṭaviyogādau, ratim tathavi dhānandarūpāṁ
manojñaśabdādau, aratim ca nokaṣāyamohanīyodayajacittavikāro dvegalakṣaṇam
pariṣahopasargādau vyutsṛjāmītyarthaḥ ||23|| Soma0 Athā pratipannānāśanaḥ kim
abhidhattityāha - Rāgam abhiṣvaṅgam kim bhūtam? Bandhahetutvād bandham tatha
prakarṣeṇa dvēṣaḥ pradvēṣo matsara ity arthaḥ tam ca kim bhūtam? Bandham
bandhahetum, bandhaśabdaḥ padadvaye'pi yojyate rāga-dvēṣayordvayo rapi
bandhanatvāt, tatha praharṣaṇam praharṣaḥ svajanamelāpakādau saṅghamelāpakādau
vā mama mahatī pūjā bhaviṣyatīti pramodaḥ, dīno bhāvo mānasādhyavāsayo yasya
asau dīnabhavō dīnabhavasyā bhāvo dīnabhavata tāṁ pratyaneekāpamānādau
dainyamityarthaḥ | Utsukasyā bhāva utsūkatvam, pīḍotpattau śīghrameva yadi
mriye'ham tadā varamityevamrūpam, bhayan devādyupasarge sati,
śokamiṣṭaviyogādau, ratim mano'bhimatakṣetra sthānādiviṣayām, aratim
cānābhimatakṣetraādiviṣayāṁ cittodvegalakṣaṇāṁ vyutsṛjāmī tyajāmītyarthaḥ ||23||
Guṇa Rāgam abhiṣvaṅgam bandhahetutvād bandham, rāgalakṣaṇam bandhamityarthaḥ |
Bandhaśabdaḥ pratipadam yojyaḥ | Pradvēṣam matsaraṁ, harṣaḥ svajanamelāpakādau
me mahatī pūjā bhāvinī, dīnabhavata tāṁ

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 52 AturapratyAkhyAnaprakIrNakam gA. 23 rAgaM baMdhaM paosaM ca harisaM
dINabhAvayaM  /  ussugattaM bhayaM sogaM raiM. araiM ca vosire  /  / 23 /  /
rAgaM bandhaM pradveSaM ca harSa dInabhAvatAm  /  utsukatvaM bhayaM zokaM
ratimaratiM ca vyutsRjAmi  /  / 23 /  /  bhaka pratipannAnazanazcAnyadapi
kimabhidhatta ityAha - rAgamabhiSvaGgaM, bandhahetutvAdvandhaM rAgalakSaNaM
bandhamityarthaH  /  bandhazabdaH pratipadaM yojya:  /  pradveSaNaM pradveSastaM
ca bandhaM matsaramityarthaH  /  harSaNaM harSaH svajanamelApakAdau
saGghamelApakAdau vA mama mahatI pUjA bhaviSyatIti  /  dInabhAvasya bhAvo
dInabhAvatA, tAM pratyanIkApamAnAdau  /  utsukasya bhAvaH utsukatvaM pIDotpattau
jhaTityeva yadi mriye'hamityevaMrUpam  /  bhayaM devAdyupasarge sati,
zokamiSTaviyogAdau, ratiM tathAvidhAnandarUpAM manojJazabdAdau, aratiM ca
nokaSAyamohanIyodayajacittavikArodvegalakSaNaM parISahopasargAdau
vyutsRjAmItyarthaH  /  / 23 /  /  soma0 atha pratipannAnazanaH kimabhidhatta
ityAha - rAgaM abhiSvaGgaM kimbhUtam ? bandhahetutvAd bandhaM tathA prakarSeNa
dveSaH pradveSo matsara ityarthaH taM ca kimbhUtam ? bandhaM bandhahetuM,
bandhazabdaH padadvaye'pi yojyate rAga-dveSayordvayorapi bandhanatvAt, tathA
praharSaNaM praharSaH svajanamelApakAdau saGghamelApakAdau vA mama mahatI pUjA
bhaviSyatIti pramodaH, dIno bhAvo mAnasAdhyavasAyo yasyAsau dInabhAvo
dInabhAvasya bhAvo dInabhAvatA tAM pratyanIkApamAnAdau dainyamityarthaH  /
utsukasya bhAva utsukatvam, pIDotpattau zIghrameva yadi mriye'haM tadA
varamityevaMrUpaM, bhayaM devAdyupasarge sati, zokamiSTaviyogAdau, ratiM
mano'bhimatakSetrasthAnAdiviSayAm, aratiM cAnabhimatakSetrAdiviSayAM
cittodvegalakSaNAM vyutsRjAmi tyajAmItyarthaH  /  / 23 /  /  guNa
rAgamabhiSvaGgaM bandhahetutvAd bandhaM, rAgalakSaNaM bandhamityarthaH  /
bandhazabdaH pratipadaM yojyaH  /  pradveSaM matsaraM, harSaH svajanamelApakAdau
me mahatI pUjA bhAvinI, dInabhAvatA tAM pratyanIkApamAnAdau  /  utsukatvaM
pIDotpattau jhaTityeva yadi mriye'hamityevaMrUpaM, bhayaM devAdhupasarge sati,
zokamiSTaviyogAdau, ratiM manojJarAjyAdau, aratiM ca cittodvegalakSaNAM
vyutsRjAmi  /  / 23 /  /  2010_02

Page #94 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Chapter: 1, Verse: 24, 25  I abandon attachment, I am established in non-
attachment. My Self is my support, and I abandon the rest. ||24||  I abandon
attachment, I am established in non-attachment. My Self is my support, and I
abandon the rest. ||24||  Bhuva:  The feeling of "this is mine" is attachment,
which is an obstacle to all essential things. I know this through knowledge-
cognition, and I abandon it through rejection-cognition. What kind of being am
I? I am established in non-attachment, relying on it. Then, what is my support
for contemplation? It says: My support is my Self, the cause of my worship, and
I abandon the rest, like the body and its accessories. ||24||  Soma:  The
feeling of "this is mine" is attachment, which is an obstacle to all things
desired by the mind. I know this through knowledge-cognition, and I abandon it
through rejection-cognition. What kind of being am I? I am established in non-
attachment, freedom from attachment. Then, what is my support for contemplation?
It says: My support is my Self, the cause of my worship, and I abandon the rest,
like the body and its accessories. ||24||  Gana:  I know attachment, which is an
obstacle to essential things, through knowledge-cognition, and I abandon it
through rejection-cognition. I am established in non-attachment, relying on it.
My support is my Self, the cause of my worship, and I abandon the rest, like the
body and its accessories. ||24||  My Self is my support in knowledge, my Self is
my support in vision and conduct. My Self is my support in rejection, my Self is
my support in restraint and yoga. ||25||  My Self is my support in knowledge, my
Self is my support in vision and conduct. My Self is my support in rejection, my
Self is my support in restraint and yoga. ||25||  Bhuva:  Then, in what matters
is the Self the support? It says: The Self constantly goes to those and those
wombs. It is clearly my support in the matter of knowledge. My Self is my
support in vision, in right conduct, and also in conduct. Similarly, in
rejection, which is the form of knowing the devotee, in restraint, which is the
form of accepting all renunciation, and in yoga, which is the form of a well-
regulated mind, speech, and body, my Self is my support. Because of this:
Knowledge, vision, and conduct are things that can be achieved with help, and
they are never separate from the Self. Therefore, by taking up the Self, they
are obtained. ||25||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 khaNDa:-1 gA. 24, 25 mamattaM parivajjAmi nimmamattaM uvaTThio  /  AlaMbaNaM ca
me AyA, avasesaM ca vosire  /  / 24  /  /  mamatvaM parivarjayAmi
nirmamatvamupasthitaH  /  AlambanaM ca me AtmA avazeSaM ca vyutsRjAmi  /  / 24 /
/  bhuva tathA - mamaitadityevaMrUpo bhAvo mamattvaM pratibandhaM
sarvasAravastuSviti  /  jJaparijJayA parijAnAmi, pratyAkhyAnaparijJayA
pariharAmi  /  kimbhUtaH san nirmamatvamupasthita AzritaH  /  tahi
kimAlambanatayA cintayatItyAha - AlambanaM ca Azrayo me mama
AtmaivArAdhanAheturavazeSaM ca zarIropadhyAdi vyutsRjAmItyarthaH  /  / 24 /  /
soma0 tathA mamaitadityevaMrUpo bhAvo mamatvaM pratibandhaM
sarvamano'bhimatavastuSviti zeSaH parijAnAmi jJaparijJayA jJAtvA
pratyAkhyAnaparijJayA pariharAmItyarthaH  /  ahaM kimbhUtassan ? nirmamatvaM
nissaGgatvamupasthita Azrita ityarthaH  /  tarhi kimAlambanatayA cintayatItyAha-
AlambanaM cAzrayo'vaSTambha AdhAra ityarthaH, me mamAtmaivArAghanA-
heturayamavazeSamaparaM zarIropadhyAdi sarvaM vyutsRjAmi  /  / 24 /  /  gaNa.
mamatvaM pratibandhaM sAravastuSviti jJaparijJayA parijAnAmi
pratyAkhyAnaparijJayA pariharAmi  /  nirmamatvamupasthita AzritaH  /  AlambanaM
ca Azrayo mama AtmaivArAdhanAheturavazeSa ca zarIropadhyAdi vyutsRjAmi  /  / 24
/  /  AyA hu mahaM nANe, AyA me daMsaNe caritte ya  /  AyA paccakkhANe, AyA me
saMjame joge  /  / 25 /  /  Atmaiva mama jJAne AtmA me darzane cAritre ca  /
AtmA pratyAkhyAne AtmA me saMyame yoge  /  / 25 /  /  bhuvaH atha keSu viSayeSu
AtmA AlambanaM vidheya ityAha - atati satataM gacchati tAsu tAsu yoniSvAtmA  /
sa mama jJAnaviSaye AlambanaM hu sphuTaM bhavatu  /  AtmA me darzane samyaktve
AlambanaM cAritre'pi cAtmaiva  /  tathA pratyAkhyAne'pi bhaktaparijJArUpe
saMyame ca sarvaviratyaGgIkArarUpe  /  yoge ca prazastamanovAkkAyarUpe
mamAtmaivAlambanam  /  yata etat - sAhAyyasAdhyAni jJAnadarzanacAritrANi tAni
cAtmanaH kadAcidapi na bhinnAni  /  ata AtmopAdAne tAnyupAttAni  /  / 25 /  /
2010_02

Page #95 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Āturpratyākhyānaprakirṇakam Gā. 26, 27  **25.**  It is asked, "In what
actions should the self be considered the support?"  The answer is: The self,
which constantly goes through various births, is the support in my knowledge and
the object of knowledge.  "Hu" (meaning "let it be clear") is the remainder.
The self is also the support in my right view, conduct, and renunciation, as
well as in the form of knowledge of the devotees, in restraint, in yoga which is
the form of acceptance of all non-violence, and in the form of proper mental,
verbal, and bodily activities.  Because these knowledge, right view, and conduct
are achieved with the help of the self, and they are never separate from the
self.  Therefore, in the previous verse, "My support is the self," the self is
considered the support of these as well.  **26.**  The self is my support in the
object of knowledge, "Hu" (meaning "let it be clear").  The self is also the
support in right view, conduct, renunciation, in the form of knowledge of the
devotees, in restraint, in yoga which is the form of acceptance of all non-
violence, and in the form of proper mental, verbal, and bodily activities.
Because these knowledge, right view, and conduct are achieved with the help of
the self, and they are never separate from the self.  The self is considered the
support of these as well.  **26.**  One being wanders, one is born.  One dies,
one becomes pure and free from karma.  **26.**  One being wanders, one is born.
One dies, one becomes pure and free from karma.  **26.**  Having abandoned all
external and internal conditions, one should contemplate the oneness of the
self.  One being wanders, devoid of family, wealth, etc., to another existence.
One is born.  One dies.  One becomes pure and free from karma.  **26.**  One
being wanders, devoid of family, wealth, etc., to another existence.  One is
born, in the form of humanity, etc.  One dies.  One becomes pure and free from
karma.  Although the wandering to another existence and death have the same
meaning, they are mentioned separately to emphasize the oneness of the self and
to explain the meaning of the individual for those who are unfamiliar with this
teaching.  **27.**  One is my eternal self, endowed with knowledge, right view,
and restraint.  The rest are external conditions, all marked by attachment.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 AturapratyAkhyAnaprakIrNakam gA. 26, 27 soma0 atha keSu
kAryeSvayamAtmA''lambanaM vidheya ityAha - atati satataM gacchati tAsu tAsu
yoniSu iti AtmA, sa mama jJAne jJAnaviSaye AlambanaM sahAya ityarthaH, 'hu'
sphuTaM bhavatu iti zeSaH, AtmA me darzane samyaktve cAritre'pi cAlambanaM tathA
pratyAkhyAne bhaktaparijJArUpe saMyame ca sarvaviratyaGgIkArarUpe yoge ca
prazastamanovAkkAyavyApArarUpe mama AtmaivAlambanam  /  yata etat
sAhAyyasAdhyAni jJAnadarzanacAritrANi tAni cAtmanaH kadAcidapi na bhinnAni  /
ataH prAga gAthAyAM 'AlaMbaNaM ca me AyA' ityatra AtmopAdAnena tAnyapyupAttAni
dRSTavyAni  /  / 25  /  /  guNa AtmA mama jJAnaviSaye AlaMbanaM 'hu' sphuTaM
bhavatu  /  darzane cAritre'pi cAtmaiva tathA pratyAkhyAne'pi bhaktaparijJArUpe
saMyame sarvaviratirUpe prazastayogatrayarUpe mamAtmaivAlambanam  /  yata
etatsAdhyAni jJAnadarzanacAritrANi tAni cAtmanaH kadAcinna bhinnAni AtmopAdAne
tAnyapyupAttAni  /  / 25 /  /  ego vaccai jIvo, ego cevuvavajjae  /  egassa ceva
maraNaM, ego sijjhai nIrao  /  / 26 /  /  eko vrajati jIvaH ekazcaivotpadyate  /
ekasya caiva maraNam ekaH sidhyati nIrajaskaH  /  / 26 /  /  bhava evaM ca
parityaktasamastabAhyAbhyantaropadhika ekatvabhAvanAM bhAvayannidamAha - ekaH
svajanadhanAdivirahito vrajati jIvo bhavAntaram  /  eka eva ca utpadyate
janmatayA  /  ekasyaiva maraNaM bhavati  /  eka eva ca niSkarmA karmarajorahita:
siddhyati jIvaH  /  / 26 /  /  soma0 atha nirmamatvAya ekatvabhAvanAM bhAvayati
- ekaH svajanadhanAdirahito vrajati jIvo bhavAntaramiti zeSaH, eka eva
copapadyate manuSyatvAdirUpatayA; ekasyaiva maraNaM bhavati, eka eva ca
karmarajorahitaH san sidhyati jIvaH  /  bhavAntaragamanasya maraNasya
caikArthatve'pi pRthagupAdAnamekatvabhAvanotkarSapoSArthaM nAnAdezajavineyAnAM
vyaktyArthapratipAdanArthaM vA  /  / 26  /   /  ego me sAsao appA
nANadaMsaNasaMjuo  /  sesA me bAhirA bhAvA savve saMjogalakkhaNA  /  / 2 /  /
eko me zAzvata AtmA jJAnadarzanasaMyutaH  /  zeSA me bAhyA bhAvAH sarve
saMyogalakSaNAH  /  / 27 /  /  _ 2010_02

Page #96 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Chapter: 1, Verse: 28, 29  55  Bhuva: Only one soul is my eternal companion, the
soul endowed with knowledge and vision. All other external things, like
children, spouses, etc., are merely artificial associations, characterized by
connection. The truth is that for those who are connected, separation is
inevitable. ||27||  Soma: Only one soul is my eternal companion, the soul
endowed with knowledge and vision. It is this soul that is truly mine. All other
external things, like children, spouses, friends, relatives, etc., are merely
artificial associations, characterized by connection. They are not eternal, for
those who are connected, separation is inevitable. Therefore, they are not truly
mine. ||27||  Bhuva: The suffering that arises from connection is experienced by
the soul. Therefore, I renounce all connection with all my being. ||28||  Soma:
Connection, in the form of relationships with children, spouses, friends,
bodies, etc., is the root cause of suffering. This suffering, experienced by the
soul, is in the form of countless hardships, such as birth, death, separation
from loved ones, and undesirable connections. Therefore, I renounce all
connection, all desire for association, with all my being, with my mind, speech,
and body. ||28||  Bhuva: What about the root and auxiliary virtues that have
been renounced? What about those that have been transgressed? The root virtues
are non-violence, etc., and the auxiliary virtues are purity of body, etc. These
root and auxiliary virtues, which I have not properly cultivated due to
negligence and ignorance, I condemn and will strive to avoid in the future.
||29||  Soma: The root virtues are non-violence, etc., and the auxiliary virtues
are purity of body, etc. These root and auxiliary virtues, which I have not
properly cultivated due to negligence and ignorance, I condemn and will strive
to avoid in the future. ||29||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 khaNDa:-1 gA. 28, 29 55 bhuva0 eka evAtmA me mama zazvadbhavanAd gamanAcca
zAzvata: sahacArI [AtmA| jJAnadarzanayuktaH  /  zeSA ye kecana mama bAhyA bhAvAH
padArthAH putrakalatrAdikAste sarve saMyogalakSaNA eva kRtrimamelApakA eva  /
yeSAM saMyogasteSAmavazyaMbhAvI viyoga iti paramArthaH  /  / 27 /  /  soma0 eka
eva me mama AtmA zazvad bhavanAt zAzvataH sahacArI jJAnadarzanasaMyuktaH sa eva
madIya ityarthaH  /  zeSA ye kecana me mama bAhyabhAvAH padArthAH putra-kalatra-
mitra-bAndhavAdikAste sarve saMyojanaM saMyogaH sa eva lakSaNaM yeSAM te tathA
kRtrimamelApakA iva na tu zAzvatAH, yeSAM saMyogasteSAmavazyaMbhAvI viyoga
itihetorna madIyAste iti paramArthaH  /  / 27  /  /  saMjogamUlA jIveNaM pattA
dukkhaparaMparA  /  tamhA saMjogasaMbaMdhaM savvaM bhAveNa [tiviheNa vosire  /
/ 28  /  /  saMyogamUlA jIvena prAptA duHkhaparamparA  /
tasmAtsaMyogasambandhaM sarvaM bhAvena [trividhena] vyutsRjAmi  /  / 28 /  /
bhuva0 atha kathaM viyogaduHkhAnItyAha - saMyoga eva mUlaM yAsAM tAH saMyogamUlA
jIvena sAMsArikaprANinA prAptA anubhUtA duHkhaparaMparA aniSTakaSTazreNayaH  /
yasmAdevaM tasmAtkAraNAtsaMyogasambandhaM samavAyAbhilASaM sarvaM bhAvena
svAbhiprAyeNa vyutsRjAmi  /  / 28 /  /  soma0 saMyogo nAnAbhaveSu
putrakalatramitrazarIrAdisambandharUpaH, sa eva mUlaM yAsAM tAH saMyogamUlA
jIvena sAMsArikaprANinA prAptA anubhUtA duHkhaparamparA
janmamaraNeSTaviyogAniSTasaMyogAdirUpA asaGkhyakaSTazreNayaH, yasmAdevaM tasmAt
kAraNAt saMyogasya sambandho'bhilASaH saMyogasambandhastaM sarvaM bhAvena
manovAkkAyena svAbhiprAyeNa vyutsRjAmi tyajAmi  /  / 28  /  /  mUlaguNa
uttaraguNe je me nA''rAhiyA pamAeNaM  /  tamahaM savvaM niMde paDikkame
AgamissANaM  /  / 29 /  /  mUlaguNA uttaraguNA ye mayA nA''rAdhitAH pramAdena  /
tadahaM sarvaM nindAmi pratikramAmyAgamiSyANAm  /  / 29 /  /  bhuva0 evaM
vyutsRSTamamatve'pi pratikrAntamUlottaraguNo'pi puna: kimAcaSTa ityAha -
mUlaguNAH prANAtipAtaviramaNAdaya uttaraguNAH piNDavizuddhyAdayastato dvandvaH
/  ye mUlottaraguNA mayA nArAdhitA na samyak pratipAlitAH
pramAdenAjJAnAdinA'STaprakAreNa 2010_02

Page #97 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter 30: Rejection of Impurities  I condemn all my non-observance of the
principles, without exception, as a false transgression against my own
conscience. I reject the violation of the fundamental and secondary principles,
both in the past and the future. For, condemnation of the past, suppression of
the present, and rejection of the future are against the teachings. ||29||
**Commentary:**  Now, the text speaks about the rejection of negligence. The
fundamental principles are non-violence, etc., and the secondary principles are
purity of the body, etc.  Therefore, all the fundamental and secondary
principles that I have not observed or have not properly observed due to
negligence, ignorance, and other eight types of impurities, I condemn all of
them without exception, as a false transgression against my own conscience. I
reject the violation of the fundamental and secondary principles, both in the
past and the future. This is in accordance with the principles. The meaning is
that condemnation of the past, suppression of the present, and rejection of the
future are against the teachings. ||29||  **Commentary:**  The fundamental
principles are non-violence, etc., and the secondary principles are purity of
the body, etc.  All of them that I have not observed or have not properly
observed due to negligence, I condemn all of them without exception, as a false
transgression against my own conscience. I reject the violation of the
fundamental and secondary principles, both in the past and the future. ||29||
**Commentary:**  I condemn the eight types of impurities, the four types of
pride, the thirty-three types of desires, and both attachment and aversion.
||30||  **Commentary:**  The seven types of fear, the eight types of pride, the
four types of attachment, the three types of pride, the thirty-three types of
desires, and both attachment and aversion are condemned. ||30||  **Commentary:**
The seven types of fear are fear of this world, fear of the next world, fear of
sudden death, fear of livelihood, fear of death, fear of disgrace, and fear of
hell. The eight types of pride are pride in birth, pride in family, pride in
strength, pride in beauty, pride in austerity, pride in knowledge, pride in
wealth, and pride in fame. The four types of attachment are attachment to food,
attachment to fear, attachment to possessions, and attachment to sexual
pleasure. The three types of pride are pride in wealth, pride in taste, and
pride in beauty. The thirty-three types of desires are the desires for the self,
the desires for the teacher, and the desires for the holy ones. I condemn both
attachment and aversion. ||30||  **Commentary:**  The seven types of fear are
fear of this world, fear of the next world, fear of sudden death, fear of
livelihood, fear of death, fear of disgrace, and fear of hell. The eight types
of pride are pride in birth, pride in family, pride in strength, pride in
beauty, pride in austerity, pride in knowledge, pride in wealth, and pride in
fame. The four types of attachment are attachment to food, attachment to fear,
attachment to possessions, and attachment to sexual pleasure. The three types of
pride are pride in wealth, pride in taste, and pride in beauty. The thirty-three
types of desires are the desires for the self, the desires for the teacher, and
the desires for the holy ones. I condemn both attachment and aversion. ||30||
**Commentary:**  The seven types of fear, the eight types of pride, the four
types of attachment, the three types of pride, the thirty-three types of
desires, and both attachment and aversion are condemned. ||30||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 AturapratyAkhyAnaprakIrNakam gA. 30 tadahamAnArAdhanaM sarvaM niravazeSaM
nindAmi AtmasAkSikaM mithyAduSkRtaM dadhi  /  AgamiSyANAM AgAminAM
mUlottaraguNAnAM virAdhanAM pratyAkhyAmi  /  yato'tItasya nindA, vartamAnasya
saMvaraNamanAgatasya pratyAkhyAnamabhANIti  /  / 29 /  /  /  soma0 atha
pramAdapratikramaNamAha - mUlaguNAH prANAtipAtaviramaNAdaya uttaraguNAH
piNDavizuddhyAdayastato dvandvaH, ye mUlottaraguNA mayA nA''rAdhitA na samyak
pAlitAH pramAdenA'jJAnAdyaSTavidhena tadahamanArAdhanaM sarvaM niravazeSaM
nindAmyA''tmasAkSikaM mithyAduSkRtaM dadAmi AgamiSyANAmuttarakAlasambhAvinAM
mUlottaraguNAnAM virAdhanAM pratyAkhyAmi niyamagocarIkurve  /  yato'tItasya
nindA, vartamAnasya saMvaraNam, anAgatasya pratyAkhyAnaM cAgamayuktamiti
bhAvArthaH  /  / 29 /  /  guNa mUlaguNAH prANAtipAtAdayaH uttaraguNAH
piNDavizudhyAdayaH ye mayA nArAdhitA na samyak paripAlitAH pramAdena
tadahamanArAdhanaM sarvaM niravazeSaM nindAmyAtmasAkSikaM AgamiSyANAmAgAminAM
mUlottaraguNAnAM virAdhanAM pratyAkhyAmi  /  / 29 /  /  satta bhae aTTha mae.
sannA cattAri gArave tinni  /  AsAyaNa tettIsaM rAgaM dosaM ca garihAmi  /  / 30
/  /  saptabhayAni aSTa madAn saMjJAH catasraH gauravANi trINi  /
AzAtanAstrayastriMzataM rAga dveSaM ca garhAmi  /  / 30 /  /  bhuva0 anyadapi
yatpratikrAmati tadAha - ihaparalokAdAnAkasmAdAjIvikAmaraNAzlokabhayAni sapta  /
aSTau jAtikulabalarUpatapaaizvaryalAbhazrutarUpAn madAn  /  saMjJA AhAra-bhaya-
parigraha-maithunarUpAzcatasraH  /  garvAn trIn Rddhi-rasa-sAtarUpAn  /  AzAtanA
arhadAdyA gurusatkA vA trayastriMzat  /  rAga dveSaM ca garhAmi jugupsa
ityarthaH  /  / 30 /  /  soma0 anyadapi yat pratikrAmati tadAha -
ihaparalokA''dAnA'kasmAdAjIvikAmaraNAzlokA iti saptabhayAni  /  aSTau madAn
jAtikulabalarUpatapaHzrutalAbhaizvaryarUpAn, saMjJAzcatastra
AhArabhayamaithunaparigraharUpAH, garvAn trIn RddhirasasAtarUpAn, AzAtanA
ahaMdAdyAH pratikramaNasUtroktA gurusatkA vA trayastriMzat, rAga dveSaM ca
garhAmi  /  / 30  /  /  gaNa bhayAni saptAni  /  aSTau jAtyAdIn madAn saMjJA
AhArAdyAH catasraH  /  garvAn trIn RdhyAdIn  /  AzAtanAH trayastriMzat rAgaM
dveSaM ca garhAmi jugupseM  /  / 30 /  /  /  2010_02

Page #98 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------



======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 khaNDa:-1 gA. 31, 32 assaMjamamannANaM micchattaM savvameva ya mamattaM  /
jIvesu ajIvesu ya taM niMde taM ca garihAmi  /  / 31 /  /  asaMyamamajJAnaM
mithyAtvaM sarvameva ca mamatvam  /  jIveSvajIveSu ca tannindAmi tacca garhAmi
/  / 31 /  /  bhuva0 asaMyama virAdhanAsvabhAvamekavidham, ajJAnaM
mUDhatArUpamekabhedameva, mithyAtvaM viparyayarUpaM tadapyekavidham  /  tathA
sarvAmeva ca mamatAM keSu viSayeSu ? jIveSu putrakalatragoazvAdiSu, ajIveSu
hiraNyavastrAdiSu  /  tatsarvaM nindAmyAtmasAkSikaM garhAmi gurusAkSikaM
yadanAbhogAdinA na pratikrAntamityarthaH  /  / 31 /  /  soma0 tathA asaMyamaM
virAghanAsvabhAvamekavidham, ajJAnaM mUDhatArUpamekavidhameva, mithyAtvaM
viparyayarUpamekavidhameva sAmAnyena tathA sarvAmeva mamatAM keSu ? jIveSu
putrakalatragoazvAdiSu, ajIveSu ca hiraNyavastrAdiSu tat sarvaM
nindAmyAtmasAkSikam, garhAmi gurusAkSikam, yadanAbhogAdinA na
pratikrAntamityarthaH  /  / 31 /  /  guNa. asaMyamaM
virAdhanAsvabhAvamekavidham, ajJAnaM mUDhatArUpamekabhedameva  /  mithyAtvaM
viparyayarUpaM tadapyekavidham  /  sarvAmeva mamatAM keSu ? jIveSu goazvAdiSu
ajIveSu hiraNyAdiSu  /  / 31 /  /  niMdAmi niMdaNijjaM garihAmi ya jaM ca me
garahaNijja  /  Aloemi ya savvaM abhiMtara bAhiraM uvahiM  /  / 32 /  /  nindAmi
nindanIyaM garhAmi ca yacca me garhaNIyam  /  AlocayAmi ca sarvamabhyantaraM
bAhyamupadhim  /  / 32 /  /  bhuva. na kevalametadanyadapyAha nindAmi
nindanIyamasaMyamakaraNAdi, garhAmi yacca me mama garhaNIyaM jugupsitaM
piNDagrahaNAdi  /  tathA AlocayAmi ca guronivedayAmi  /  sarvaM nindanIyaM
garhaNIyaM tathA saha abhyantareNa varttata iti sAbhyantarA tAM  /  bahirbhavA
bAhyA, tAm upadhiM, mAyAM manoduSpraNidhAnarUpAM bAhyAM
prANAtipAtaviSayAmityarthaH  /  / 3 /  /  soma0 atha sAmAnyataH
sarvamapyAlocayatItyAha - yat kiJcinindanIyaM nindArhamasaMyamakaraNAdi
tanindAmi, yacca me mama garhaNIyaM garhAha~ sadoSapiNDagrahaNAdi tatsarvaM
garhAmi ca 2010_02

Page #99 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Āturpratyākhyānaprakirṇakam, Chapter 33  **Thus I consider and inform the
Guru of all that was previously mentioned, that which is blameworthy and
censurable, and also the veil, illusion, both internal and external. The
internal is in the form of the mind's bad intention, and the external is related
to the taking of life.**  **I censure that which is censurable, such as the lack
of restraint, and I censure that which is censurable, such as the taking of
morsels. Thus I consider and inform the Guru of all that is censurable and
censurable. And that which exists within is internal, and that which exists
outside is external. The veil, illusion, is internal in the form of the mind's
bad intention, and external in relation to the taking of life.**  **[Chapter
33-36: Customers who are helpful in criticism]**  **Just as a child, speaking,
speaks of what is right and wrong, so too should one consider and, freeing
oneself from the illusion of falsehood, speak out.**  **By what method should
one consider? Just as a child, unaware and unintelligent, speaking, speaks of
what is right and wrong, what should be spoken and what should not be spoken,
speaks straightforwardly, with humility and sincerity, to his mother, and does
not think, "This is shameful, it should not be spoken, this should be spoken,"
or "This is hidden, this should be spoken, this is revealed," but, due to his
childish nature, does not understand and speaks everything, so too should one
consider in the same way, reveal to the Guru the veil, which is in the form of
concealment, and falsehood, which is in the form of speaking otherwise, and,
freeing oneself from it, abandon it.**  **How should one consider? Just as a
child, speaking, speaks of what should be spoken and what should not be spoken,
speaks straightforwardly, with humility and sincerity, to his mother, and does
not think, "This is shameful, it should not be spoken, this should be spoken,"
but speaks everything, whether hidden or revealed, so too should one consider in
the same way, reveal to the Guru the veil, which is in the form of concealment
of sin, and falsehood, which is in the form of speaking otherwise, and, freeing
oneself from it, abandon it.**  **By what method should one consider? Just as a
child, speaking, speaks of what should be spoken and what should not be spoken,
speaks straightforwardly, with humility and sincerity, to his mother, and does
not think, "This is shameful, it should not be spoken, this should be spoken,"
so too should one consider in the same way, reveal to the Guru the veil, which
is in the form of concealment, and falsehood, which is in the form of speaking
otherwise, and abandon it.**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 AturapratyAkhyAnaprakIrNakam gA. 33 tathA''locayAmi gurornivedayAmi sarvaM
pUrvoktaM nindyaM garhya ca tathA upadhiM mAyAM cAlocayAmi sAbhyantarabAhyAm,
abhyantarAM manoduSpraNidhAnarUpAM bAhyAM prANAtipAtaviSayAM cetyarthaH  /  /
32  /  /  58 guNa0 nindAmi nindanIyamasaMyamakaraNAdi  /  garhAmi garhaNIyaM
piNDagrahAdi  /  tathA AlocayAmi ca gurornivedayAmi sarvaM nindanIyaM garhaNIyam
/  tathA sahAbhyantareNa varttata iti sAbhyantarA tAM, bahirbhavA bAhyA tAm  /
upadhi mAyAmabhyantarAM manoduSpraNidhAnarUpAM bAhyAM prANAtipAta-
viSayAmityarthaH  /  /  32  /  /  [gA. 33-36 AlocanAdAyaka grAhakAH] jaha bAlo
jaMpato kajjamakajjaM ca ujjuyaM bhaNai  /  taM taha AloijjA mAyAmosaM
pamuttUNaM ||33  //  yathA bAlo jalpan kAryamakAryaM ca RjukaM bhaNati  /  tathA
tadAlocayet mAyAmRSAM pramucya  /  /  33  /  /  bhuva0 kena
vidhinA''locanIyamityAha yathA bAlo'vyaktacetanastanaMdhayo jalpan kAryamakAryaM
ca bhaNitavyamabhaNitavyaM ca  /  RjukaM nirmAyatayA prAJjalatayA bhaNati
svamAtuH kathayati  /  na punarevaM cintayati lajjanIyametadatra na vAcyaM
etacca vAcyamiti  /  pracchannaM vA etatkathyaM ca prakaTametaditi
bAlabhAvatvAdevamanavagacchan sarvameva vadati  /  tattathaiva tannyAyenAlocayet
guroH prakaTayet mAyAM pracchAdanarUpAM mRSAM cAnyathAkathanarUpAM prakarSeNa
muktvA pramucya parityajyetyarthaH ||33|| soma 0 kathamAlocanIyamityAha yathA
bAlo jalpan kAryamakAryaM ca bhaNitavyamabhaNitavyaM ca vadan RjukaM
prAJjalatayA nirmAyatayA bhaNati svamAtuH kathayati, na punarevaM cintayati
"lajjanIyametadatra na vAcyam, etad vAcyamiti", kintu pracchannaM prakaTaM vA
sarvameva bhaNati, tat pApaM tathaiva tanyAyenaivA''locayet guroH prakaTayet
mAyAM pApAcchAdanarUpAM mRSAM cAnyathAkathanarUpAM prakarSeNa muktvA pramucya
parityajyetyarthaH  /  /  33  /  /  guNa0 kena vidhinAlocanIyamityAha yathA
bAlaH zAvo jalpan lapan kAryamakAryaM bhaNitavyamabhaNitavyaM ca  /  RjukaM
nirmAyatayA bhaNati svamAtuH kathayati, na punarevaM cintayati "
lajjanIyametadatra na vAcyam, etacca vAcyamiti" tattathaivAlocayet guroH
prakaTayet  /  mAyAM pracchAdanarUpAM mRSAM cAnyathAkathanarUpAM parityajet
[prityjy]||33|| 2010_02 =

Page #100 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Chapter: 1 Verse: 34  He is unshakeable in knowledge, perception, conduct and
the four elements. He is a wise one, skilled in the scriptures, not a betrayer
of secrets. ||34||  **Explanation:**  The qualities of a teacher who is worthy
of being consulted are described here:  * **Knowledge:** He is unshakeable in
his knowledge of the five types of knowledge. He is a true knower of the
scriptures. * **Perception:** He is unshakeable in his perception of the two
types of perception:      * **Kshayika-Upashmika:** This refers to the
perception of the nature of the world and the path to liberation.     *
**Kshayika-Upashmika:** This refers to the perception of the nature of the soul
and its liberation.     * He is also a knower of the different types of
perception, such as the perception of the cause, the effect, the light, and the
knowledge of the scriptures. * **Conduct:** He is unshakeable in his conduct,
which is based on the twelve types of austerities. He is capable of performing
these austerities himself and also knows how to guide others in performing them.
* **Four Elements:** He is unshakeable in the four elements (earth, water, fire,
and air). He is not affected by the changes in these elements.  **Further
Explanation:**  * **Unshakeable:** This means that he is not swayed by external
influences or temptations. He is firm in his convictions and his practice. *
**Wise:** This means that he has a deep understanding of the scriptures and the
principles of Jainism. He is able to apply this knowledge to his own life and to
guide others. * **Skilled in the scriptures:** This means that he is well-versed
in the scriptures and can interpret them accurately. * **Not a betrayer of
secrets:** This means that he is trustworthy and will not reveal confidential
information.  **Conclusion:**  A teacher who possesses these qualities is worthy
of being consulted. He is a true guide who can help us on our path to
liberation.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 khaNDa:-1 gA. 34 nANammi daMsaNammi ya tave caritte ya causu vi akaMpo  /
dhIro Agamakusalo aparissAvI rahassANaM  /  / 34 /  /  jJAne darzane ca tapasi
cAritre ca caturbhupyakampaH  /  dhIra Agamakuzalo'parizrAvI rahasyAnAm  /  / 34
/  /  bhuva0 atha yasya guroH sakAza Alocyate tasya guNAnyAha- jJAne
paJcaprakAre, akSobhyaH san samyak tadveditvAt  /  AgamavavahArIchajjaNAo
paccakkhanANiNo ee  /  kevalamaNohidaMsI cudsdspubbinvpuvii||1|| bahu
AgamavinnANA samAhiuppAyagA ya guNagAhI  /  eeNa kAraNeNaM arahA AloyaNaM souM
/  /  iti  /  / 2 /  /  [uttarA0 36-260] tathA darzane vAkSobhyaH  /
kSAyikaupazamikakSAyikaupazamikarUpe, kAraka-rocaka-dIpakavedakarupe vA
nisargAdhigamarUpe vA ityAdi tadbhedaprabhedavettA  /  tapasi dvAdazaprakAre
svayaM karaNasamartho'nye kArApaNavidhijJazca  /  cAritre ca
sAmAyikachedopasthApanavizuddhikasUkSmasaMparAyayathAkhyAtarUpe  /  caturdhvapi
na punarekaikasmin  /  akSobhyo devairapyacAlyaH  /  dhiyA rAjata iti dhIro
dhairymaapaadyti| AgamakuzalaH  /  AdipadagrahaNAdAgama-zruta-jJAna-dhAraNAjIta-
vyavahAranipuNaH  /  pratizravatItyevaMzIla: pratizrAvI na pratizrAvI
apratizrAvI samudravadgambhIra ityarthaH  /  keSAmapratizrAvI ?
rahasyAnAmAlocakenAlocitAnAm  /  evaMvidhasya guroH pArzve AlocanIyamityuktam  /
/ 34 //  soma0 atha yasya guroH sakAza Alocyate tasya guNAnAha - jJAne
paJcaprakAre tathA darzane kSAyopazamikakSAyikaupazamikarUpe
kArakarocakadIpakarUpe vA, 'akaMpo' akSobhyo devairapyacAlya ityarthaH jJAnAnAM
darzanAnAM ca samyag bhedaprabhedAdisvarUpavettRtvAt, tathA tapasi
dvAdazaprakAre svayaM karaNasamartho'nye kArApaNavidhijJazca, cAritre ca
sAmAyikAdipaJcabhede svayaM pAlanaparastadArAdhanasamarthaH pUrvokteSu
caturdhvapi na punarekaikasmin, athavA piNDa-zayyA-vastra-pAtreSu
caturbhukampo'cAlyaH  /  yathA dhiyA rAjate iti dhIro vizuddhabuddhimAn subhaTo
vA parISahAdizatrUn prati, tathA''gamakuzalo'trA''dipadAdhyAhArAd Agama-
zrutA-''jJA-dhAraNA-jItavyavahAranipuNa ityarthaH, athavA''game siddhAnte,
samyag tadarthavettRtvAt nipuNaH, tathA na pratizravatItyevaMzIlo'pratizrAvI,
2010_02

Page #101 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 60 **Aaturpratyakhyanaprakirnakam Ga. 35**  **Whose?** Of secrets, considered
by the examiner, meaning as deep as the ocean, it is said that such a Guru's
side is worthy of consideration. ||34||  **Guna** describes the qualities of one
whose essence is considered - unwavering and unshakeable in five types of
knowledge. Similarly, unshakeable in vision, in pacifying the obstacles, etc.
Unshakeable in twelve types of austerities, and in conduct, in Samayika, etc.,
in all four. The courageous one attains fortitude. Skilled in the scriptures,
not prone to contradiction, whose? Of secrets, considered by the examiner.
||34||  **By attachment or by aversion or by ignorance or by carelessness,
whatever you have done, I forgive it in three ways.** ||35||  **Bhuka:** If, in
any way, the examiner has acted improperly towards the Guru in the past, then it
is said - by attachment or by excessive love, by aversion or by carelessness, by
a student who has been disliked, by ignorance or by not knowing the qualities of
the Guru's kindness, or by carelessness or by not experiencing it, whatever
improper action you have done towards the venerable ones, the virtuous ones, I
forgive it all. Similarly, any other improper action, like a harsh word or a
rebuke, that I have spoken to you, I forgive it all with my mind, speech, and
body. ||35||  **Soma:** If, in any way, the examiner has acted improperly
towards the Guru in the past, then he forgives it - by attachment or by
excessive love, by aversion or by carelessness, by a student who has been
disliked, by ignorance or by forgetting the Guru's kindness, by carelessness or
by not experiencing it, whatever improper action you have done towards the
venerable ones, the virtuous ones, I forgive it all. Similarly, any other
improper action, like a harsh word or a rebuke, that I have spoken to you, I
forgive it all with my mind, speech, and body. ||35||  **Guna:** By attachment
or by excessive love, by aversion or by carelessness, by a student who has been
disliked, whatever improper action you have done towards the venerable ones, the
virtuous ones, I forgive it all. Any other improper action, like a harsh word or
a rebuke, that I have spoken to you, I forgive it all with my mind, speech, and
body. ||35||  **JainEducation International 2010_02**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 60 AturapratyAkhyAnaprakIrNakam gA. 35 keSAm ? rahasyAnAm, AlocakenAlocitAnAm,
sAgaravadgambhIra ityarthaH, evaMvidhasya guroH pArzva AlocanIyamityuktam  /  /
34  /  /  gaNa yasyAgra Alocyate tadguNAnAha- jJAne paJcaprakAre'kampo'kSobhyaH
/  tathA darzane kSAyopazamikAdau cAkSobhyaH, tapasi dvAdazaprakAre, cAritre ca
sAmAyikAdau caturbapi akSobhyaH  /  dhIro dhairyamApAdayati  /  AgamakuzalaH,
apratizrAvI, keSAm ? rahasyAnAm, AlocakenAlocitAnAm  /  / 34 /  /  rAgeNa va
doseNa va jaM bhe akayatruyA pamAeNaM  /  jo me kiMci vi bhaNio tamahaM tiviheNa
khAmemi  /  / 35  /  /  rAgeNa vA dveSeNa vA yA bhavatAmakRtajJatayA pramAdena
/  yanmayA kiJcidapi bhaNitaM tadahaM trividhena kSamayAmi  /  / 35 /  /  bhuka.
atha kathamapyAlocayatA purA vA gurovirUpamAcaritaM syAttadAha - rAgeNa vA
atipremavazAt dveSeNa vA pramAdaskhalitAdau zikSitena dviSTenA'kRtajJatayA vA
gurukRtopakAraguNAnabhijJena vA pramAdena vA'nAbhogena vA yatkimapi bhe bhavatAM
virUpamAcaritaM pUjyAnAM satAM tatsarvaM kSamayAmi  /  tathAnyo'pi mayA yaH
kazcit virUpo'lIkoTTanAdirbhavatAM bhaNitastamapyahaM trividhena manovAkkAyena
kSamayAmi marSayAmItyarthaH  /  / 35  /  /  soma0 atha kathamapyAlocakena pUrvaM
tadA vA guroH kimapi virUpamAcaritaM syAt tat kSamayati - rAgeNa vA'tipremavazAt
dveSeNa vA pramAdaskhalitAdizikSAyAM dviSTenA'kRtajJatayA vA
gurukRtopakAravismaraNena pramAdena vA'nAbhogena vA yat kimapi 'bhe' bhavatAM
pUjyAnAM virUpamAcaritamiti zeSaH, tathA'nyo'pi yaH kazcid
virUpo'lIkodghaTTanAdidoSa iti zeSaH, bhaNita uktastat sarvamahaM trividhena
manovAkkAyena kSamayAmi  /  / 35  /  /  guNA rAgeNa atipremavazAt  /  dveSeNa
pramAdaskhalitAdau zikSitena dviSTena yatkimapi bhe bhavatAm akRtajJatayA
pramAdena vA virUpamAcaritaM tatsarvaM kSamayAmi yo mayA
kazcidvirUpo'lokodghaTTanAdirbhavatAM bhaNitastamahaM trividhena marSayAmi  /  /
35  /  /  JainEducation International 2010_02

Page #102 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------



======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 khaNDa:-1 gA. 36 tivihaM bhaNaMti maraNaM, bAlANaM bAlapaMDiyANaM ca  /  taiyaM
paMDiyamaraNaM jaM kevaliNo aNumaraMti  /  / 36 /  /  trividhaM bhaNanti maraNaM
bAlAnAM bAlapaNDitAnAM ca  /  tRtIyaM paNDitamaraNaM yatkevalino'numriyante  /
/ 36 /  /  bhuva0 athAlocitakSamitaguruH kSapako'nityabhAvanAM bhAvayan
maraNasvarUpaM cintayaMzcAhatrividhaM triprakAraM bhaNanti maraNam  /  bAlA iva
bAlA ajJA viratisAdhakavivekavikalatvAt  /  asaMyamA
aviratasamyagdRSTiparyantAsteSAM bAlAnAm  /  tathA'viratatvena bAlA
dezaviratatvena paNDitAsteSAM bAlapaNDitAnAM ca  /  taiyaM pi tRtIyaM
piDidhAtorgatyarthatvena jJAnArthatvAdviratiphalena phalavadvijJAnamuktatvAt
paNDitA buddhatattvAH saMyatA ityarthaH  /  teSAM maraNaM paNDitamaraNam  /
yadyasmAtkevalamanantaM saMpUrNaM vA jJAnAdi yeSAM te kevalinaH  /  anumriyante
yataste'pi pAdapopagamanaM kurvantIti  /  aNusaraMtIti pAThe
anusarantyanugacchantItyarthaH  /  / 36 /  /  soma0 atha kSapako maraNasvarUpaM
cintayannAha - trividhaM triprakAraM bhaNanti jinA iti gamyate  /  kim ?
maraNam, bAlA iva bAlA ajJAnA viratirUpavivekavikalA asaMyatA
aviratasamyagdRSTiparyantAsteSAmekaM maraNam, tathA'viratatvena bAlA
dezaviratatvena paNDitAsteSAM bAlapaNDitAnAM maraNaM dvitIyam, tRtIyaM
sarvaviratiphalavijJAnayuktatvAt paNDitA buddhatattvAH saMyatA ityarthaH, teSAM
yat maraNaM paNDitamaraNaM pAdapopagamanAdirUpam, kevalamanantaM sampUrNa
vijJAnAdi yeSAM te kevalinaste'pyanumriyante kurvantIti, 'aNusaraMti' iti
pAThe'nusarantyanugacchantItyarthaH  /  / 36 /  /  guNa triprakAraM bAlA iva
bAlA ajJAnA vivekavikalatvAt asaMyatA avaritasamyag - dRSTiparyantAsteSAM
bAlAnAM bAlamaraNam  /  tathA'viratatvena bAlA dezaviratatvena ca paNDitAsteSAM
bAlapaNDitamaraNam  /  tRtIyaM vijJAnayuktatvAt paNDitAH buddhatattvAsteSAM
maraNaM paNDitamaraNam  /  yadyasmAtkevalino'numriyante yataste'pi
pAdapopagamanaM kurvantIti  /  / 36  /  /  2010_02

Page #103 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 62 [Ga. 37-45 Asamadhimaran and its fruit]  Those who are attached to the
eight intoxications, who are of wavering mind, and who are deceitful, die in a
state of non-samadhi. They are not called true devotees. || 37 ||  **Commentary
on Ga. 37**  Those who are attached to the eight intoxications, who are of
wavering mind, and who are deceitful, die in a state of non-samadhi. They are
not called true devotees. || 37 ||  Knowing the nature of death as "Bhuva", one
should die in a state of samadhi. To show the faults of dying in a state of non-
samadhi, the text says: "Those who are attached to the eight intoxications are
called 'Ashtamadika'. In the reading 'Attamaiya', 'Rta' means suffering, 'Arta'
means the cause of suffering, 'Arta' means suffering in the absence of 'Rta',
'Arta' means suffering in the absence of 'Pita', 'Arta' means suffering in the
absence of 'Bhava', 'Arta' means suffering in the absence of 'Mati'. Those who
have such a mind are called 'Artamathika'. The suffix 'ika' is used for the sake
of emphasis. 'Payaliyasanna' means those whose mind is wavering due to the
influence of worldly objects, passions, etc., and who have deviated from the
right path. 'Pracalitasanjna' means those whose mind is wavering and unstable.
'Cha' is used for conjunction. 'Vakrabhava' means those who are deceitful, who
deceive themselves or others, and who are motivated by worldly gains. Or,
'Vakra' means crooked, 'Vanko' means crooked, and 'Bhava' means those who have
such a nature. Since they are of this nature, they die in a state of non-
samadhi, which is a state of mental unrest. 'Na hu' means they are not true
devotees, they are not the seekers of the highest good. || 37 ||  Knowing the
nature of death as "Soma", one should die in a state of samadhi. To show the
faults of dying in a state of non-samadhi, the text says: "Those who are
attached to the eight intoxications are called 'Ashtamadika'. In the reading
'Attamaiya', 'Aate' means meditation, 'Mati' means those who have such a mind,
'Artamathika'. The suffixes 'ika' and 'ka' are used for the sake of emphasis.
'Pracalita' means those whose mind is wavering due to the influence of worldly
objects, passions, etc., and who have deviated from the right path.
'Pracalitasanjna' means those whose mind is wavering and unstable. 'Cha' is used
for conjunction. 'Vancyate' means to be deceived, 'Skhalyate' means to stumble,
'Shalyate' means to be wounded, 'Chalyate' means to be moved, 'Atma' means the
self, 'Paro' means others, 'Ahikaparatrikalabhad' means worldly and otherworldly
gains. 'Vakra' means those who are motivated by such gains. Or, 'Vanko' means
crooked, 'Kutilo' means crooked, 'Bhava' means those who have such a nature.
Since they are of this nature, they die in a state of non-samadhi, which is a
state of mental unrest. 'Na hu' means they are not true devotees, 'Hu' means the
same, 'Te' means they are not the seekers of the highest good. || 37 ||  The
text shows the virtue of dying in a state

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 62 [gA. 37-45 asamAdhimaraNaM tatphalaM ca ] je puNa aTThamaIyA payaliyasannA
ya vakkabhAvA ya  /  asamAhiNA maraMti u na hu te ArAhagA bhaNiyA  /  /  37  /
/  AturapratyAkhyAnaprakIrNakam gA. 37 ye punaraSTamadikAH pracalitasaMjJAzca
vakrabhAvAzca  /  asamAdhinA mriyante naiva te ArAdhakA bhaNitAH  /  /  37  /  /
bhuva iti maraNasvarUpaM vijJAya samAdhimaraNena marttavyam  /  asamAdhimaraNe
doSAn darzayannAha - ye punarjIvAH aSTau madasthAnAni yeSAM te aSTamadikAH  /
'aTTamaiyA' iti pAThe RtaM duHkhaM tasya nimittamArttaM Rte duHkhe bhave vA
Arttam Rte pIDite vA bhavamArttam Arte matiryeSAM te ArttamatikAH svArthe
ikapratyayo bhavati  /  payaliyasannAya iti pracalitA viSayakaSAyAdibhiH
sanmArgAtparibhraSTA saMjJA buddhiryeSAM te pracalitasaMjJA: pragalitasaMjJA vA
/  caH samuccaye  /  vakkabhAvatti vaJcayate saMcAlyate AtmA paro vA
aihikapAratrikalAbhasya yena sa vakraH  /  athavA vakraH kuTilaH  /  vakro vaMko
vA bhAvo yeSAM te vakrabhAvAH  /  yata evaMvidhA ata evAsamAdhinA
cittAsvAsthyarUpayA mriyante  /  na hu naiva ArAdhakA uttamArthasAdhakA bhavanti
jAyanta ityarthaH  /  /  37  /  /  soma0 iti maraNasvarUpaM jJAtvA
samAdhimaraNena marttavyam  /  asamAdhimaraNe doSAnAha ye punarjIvA aSTau
madasthAnAni yeSAM te'STamadikAH, 'aTTamaiA' pAThe Ate dhyAne matiryeSAM te
ArttamatikAH, svArthe ika - kapratyayau  /  pracalitA viSayakaSAyAdibhiH
sanmArgAt paribhraSTA saMjJA buddhiryeSAM te pracalitasaMjJAH pragalitasaMjJA
vA, caH samuccaye  /  vaJcyate skhalyate zalyate cAlyate AtmA paro vA
aihikapAratrikalAbhAd yena sa vakraH, athavA vaMko vA kuTilo bhAvo yeSAM te
tathA, yata evaMvidhA ata evAsamAdhinA cittAsvAsthyarUpeNa mriyante 'na hu'
naiva 'hu'revArthe te ArAdhakA uttamArthasAdhakA bhavantItyarthaH  /  /  37  /
/  guNaH samAdhimaraNena marttavyamasamAdhimaraNe doSA iti darzayannAha - ye
jIvA aSTau madasthAnAni yeSAM te'STamadikAH, pracalitA viSayakaSAyAdibhiH
sanmArgAtparibhraSTA saMjJA buddhiryeSAM te, athavA pragalitasaMjJAH  /  caH
samuccaye  /  vaJcyate AtmA paro vA aihikapAratrikalAbhAt yena sa vakraH athavA
vakaH kuTilaH, asamAdhinA cittA'svAsthyarUpayA mriyante ||37 /  /  2010_02

Page #104 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Chapter - 1 Verse - 38, 39  **Verse 38** Deva-duggati (hell) is difficult to
attain due to the karma of the past, and liberation (Bohi) is also difficult to
attain. The cycle of birth and death (samsara) is infinite and one will continue
to be reborn.  **Verse 39** What is Deva-duggati? What is Bohi? What is death?
How does a soul wander through the infinite and boundless samsara?

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 khaNDaH - 1 gA. 38, 39 maraNe virAhie devaduggaI dullahA ya kira bohI  /
saMsAro ya aNaMto hoi puNo AgamissANaM  /  /  38  /  /  maraNe virAdhite
devadurgatiH durlabhazca kila bodhiH  /  saMsArazcAnanto bhavati
punarAgamiSyatAm  /  /  38  /  /  bhuva0 yadi nArAdhakAstataH kimityAha maraNe
virAdhite nidAnakaraNAdinA devadurgatirbhavati  /  durlabhazca duSprApazca
kileti | nizcaye ] Aptoktau bodhiH samyaktvabIjaM bhavati  /  saMsAro ya aNaMto
tti ananto'nantapudgalaparAvarttaparibhramaNarUpaH saMsAro bhavati  /
zabdAmaraNamapyanantaM bhavati  /  athAnuktaM maraNaM kathaM bhaNyate ? ucyate
anantasaMsArabhramaNena maraNamapi bhaNitaM dRSTavyam,
anantasaMsAraparibhramaNasya maraNapUrvakatvAt  /  saMsAro ya ato bhai iti pAThe
prAkRtatvAlliGgavyatyayaH  /  anantasaMsAraM bhramati  /  AgamissANaM ti atra
prAkRtatvAdAgamiSyatkAle  /  /  38  /  /  soma0 yadi ca nArAdhakAstataH
kimityAha maraNe nidAnakaraNAdinA virAdhite devadurgatirbhavati, durlabhazca
duSprApazca kileti nizcaye bodhiH samyaktvaprAptirbhavati  /  prAkRtatvAt
strItvam, saMsArazcAnanto'nantapudgalaparAvarttabhramaNarUpo
cazabdAnmaraNamapyanantaM bhavati, anantasaMsArabhramaNasya maraNapUrvakatvAt  /
'bhamai' iti pAThe prAkRtatvAd vibhaktivyatyayo'nantaM saMsAraM bhramati  /  kva
? ' AgamissANaM' ti eSyatkAle ityarthaH, prAkRtatvAdatrApi vibhaktivyatyayaH  /
/  38  /  /  - - guNa maraNe virAdhite nidAnAdinA devadurgatirbhavati, durlabho
duSprApazca kila Apto bodhiH  /  anantapudgalaparAvartaparibhramaNarUpaH saMsAro
bhavati  /  prAkRtatvAt vacanavyatyayaH  /  anantasaMsAraparibhramaNamiti
prAkRtatvAdAgamiSyatkAle  /  /  38  /  /  kA devaduggaI ? kA abohi ? keNeva
vujjhaI maraNaM ? | keNa anaMtamapAraM saMsAre hiMDaI jIvo ?  /  / 39 /  /  kA
devadurgatiH ? kAbodhi : ? kenaivohyate maraNam ? kenAnantamapAraM saMsAraM
hiNDati jIvaH ?  /  /  39  /  /  bhuva0 kiJca 2010_02 63 etad
gAthArthamanavabudhyan ziSyazcatvAri padAni praznayiSyati,

Page #105 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter 40: The Scattering of Eager Rejection  The author will answer the
four questions with seven verses. The disciple asks:  1. What is the bad state
of the gods (deva-durgati)? 2. What is the state of being unenlightened
(abodhi)? 3. How is it that death is accepted again and again, even though it is
burdened with the weight of the middle world (madhya-samagata-bharavada-kame)?
4. What is the reason for the endless journey (ananta-para) in the world?
**Note:** Ananta-para can also be interpreted as "the time that has no end"
(apara-kala).  **The disciple asks the four questions:**  1. What is the bad
state of the gods? 2. What is the state of being unenlightened (abodhi-
durgalhata)? 3. How is it that death is accepted again and again, even though it
is burdened with the weight of the middle world (madhya-samagata-bharavada-
kame)? 4. What is the reason for the endless journey (ananta-para) in the world?
**The disciple asks the four questions:**  1. What is the bad state of the gods
(kadeva)?  **The answer:**  The bad state of the gods is the attachment to the
sensual pleasures (kandarpa-devakilbisha-abhiyoga), the demonic delusion (asuri-
sammoha), and the separation from the true self (marana-virahit).  **Explanation
of the first question:**  The author explains that the gods who are attached to
sensual pleasures (kandarpa-atthahasa-hasana, kandarpa-karanashila, kandarpa-
kandarpa-chideva, kandarpa-deva) will be reborn in a similar state. This is
based on the saying "Those who die in pleasure will be reborn in pleasure."
**Examples of the bad state of the gods:**  1. **Laughing and joking:** The gods
who laugh and joke (kahakah-kahassa-hasana) are attached to sensual pleasures
(kandarpa-anihu-a-yallava). 2. **Talking about sensual pleasures:** The gods who
talk about sensual pleasures (kandarpa-kaha-kahana) are attached to the world
(kandarpa-uvasa-samsaya). 3. **Being attached to sensual pleasures:** The gods
who are attached to sensual pleasures (kandarpa-kukku-yaim, sila-sahava-hasana-
vighahaim) are deluded (vimha-avanto) and think about sensual pleasures
(kandarpa-bhavana-kunai). 4. **Being attached to the body:** The gods who are
attached to the body (bhuna-yana-vayana-dasana-tthaehi, kara-charana-kannama-ai-
him) are attached to the world (ta-ta-karei-jah-jah-hasai-para-attano-
ahasamiti).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 AturapratyAkhyAnaprakIrNakam gA. 40 granthakAro'pi saptabhirgAthAbhizcaturNA
padAnAmuttarANi dAsyatItyarthaH  /  atha ziSyastAni praznayannAha - kA deveSu
durgatirdevadurgati: ? ko vA'bodhirbodhidurlabhatA ? keNeva vujjhaI maraNaM ti
kena ca prakAreNa hetunA vizeSeNoDate puna: punarbhAvena
madhyasamAgatabhAravadakAmenA'pi svIkriyate maraNamiti, keNa aNaMtaMpAraM ti
anantapAra: paryanto yasya kAlasya tamanantapAraM kAlam  /  anusvAralopAt  /
athavA aNaMtaMpAraMti akAralopAdapAraMkAlam, kena hetunA saMsAre hiNDate jIva
ityarthaH  /  / 39 /  /  soma0 atha ziSyazcatvAri praznAnyAha - 1 - kA deveSu
durgati ? 2 - kA cAbodhiH ? bodhidurlabhatA 3-kena ca prakAreNeti gamyate,
vyUhyate vizeSeNohyate punaH punarbhAvena madhyasamAgatabhAravadakAmenApi
svIkriyate, kim ? maraNam, 4-kena hetunetyatrApi gamyate, anantaH pAraH paryanto
yasya kAlasya kena hetunA saMsAre hiNDate jIva ityarthaH  /  / 39 /  /  guNa
atha ziSyastAni praznayannAha - 'kAdeva0'  /  / 39 /  /  kaMdappadeva-kibbisa-
abhiogA AsurI ya sammohA  /  tA devaduggaIo maraNammi virAhie huMti  /  / 40 /
/  kandarpadevakilbiSAbhiyogA Asurizca saMmohAH  /  tA devadurgatayo maraNe
virAdhite bhavanti  /  / 40 /  /  bhava. atha prathamapraznasya nirvacanamAha -
kandarpo'TTahAsahasanaM kandarpakaraNazIlA: kandarpAH kandapazcidevAzca
kandarpadevAH  /  ye purA yadvidhA bhavanti te tadvidheSu gacchanti 'jallese
marai tallese uvavajai' iti vacanAt  /  tatsvarUpaM cedam - kahakahakahassa
hasaNaM kaMdappo aNihUA ya sallAvA  /  kaMdappakahAkahaNaM kaMdappuvaesa saMsA
yA  /  / 1 /  /  [paMca.va. 1631] kaMdappakukkuyAiM taha sIla-sahAva-
hasaNavigahAhiM  /  vimhAvaMto ya paraM kaMdappaM bhAvaNaM kuNai  /  / 2 /  /
[uttarA0 36-261] bhUnayaNavayaNadasaNatthaehiM karacaraNakannamAI hiM  /  taM
taM karei jaha jaha hasai parA attaNo ahasamiti  /  / 3 /  /  2010_02

Page #106 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter 9, Verse 40  This is the state of hell for the lustful. What is sin?
Sin is ignorance, greed, and hatred. Due to these, even gods can become sinners.
As it is said:  > "Even the wise, the righteous, and the virtuous, if they
indulge in lust, they will fall into sin." (1)  This is the state of hell for
the gods who are lustful. What is accusation? Accusation is a charge, a lawsuit,
a curse, or a spell used to harm others. Due to these, even gods can become
accusers. As it is said:  > "Those who indulge in magic, earth-bound karma, and
who use spells to harm others, they will fall into the state of accusation." (1)
[Uttara 36-262]  This is the state of hell for the gods who are accusers. What
is demonic? Demonic is the nature or karma of the demons. Even the demonic gods,
who are cruel and angry, are demonic. As it is said:  > "Those who are bound by
anger, hatred, and jealousy, they will fall into the state of demonic." (1)
[Uttara 36-264]  This is the state of hell for the gods who are demonic. What is
delusion? Delusion is to mislead, to deceive, to lead astray from the path of
liberation. Those who delude others are deluded. As it is said:  > "Those who
lead others astray from the right path, who mislead them with delusion, they
will fall into the state of delusion." (1)  This is the state of hell for the
gods who are deluded. These are the states of hell for the gods. They will be
reborn in hell after death, due to their actions. As it is said:  > "Those who
indulge in these actions will fall into the state of hell for the gods. From
there, they will fall into the endless ocean of suffering." [Aara Pada 721]
This is the meaning of the verse. (40)  ## 2010_02  - **First Question:** The
answer is: Kandarpa is the god of love, laughter, and joy. Those who are lustful
in their previous lives will be reborn as Kandarpa gods. As it is said, "As one
dies, so one is reborn." The nature of this state of hell is described in the
verses that begin with "Kahkahkahassa hasana." This is the state of hell for the
lustful.  - **Second Question:** What is sin? Sin is ignorance, greed, and
hatred. Even gods can become sinners due to these. In their previous lives, they
were restrained and knowledgeable, but due to their greed and hatred, they were
reborn as elephants. This is the state of hell for the sinners.  - **Third
Question:** What is accusation? Accusation is a charge, a lawsuit, a curse, or a
spell used to harm others. Even gods can become accusers due to these. In their
previous lives, they were...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 khaNDaH-9 gA. 40 iti kandarparUpA durgatiH  /  kibbisatti kilbiSaM
jJAnAdyAzAtanAdikam  /  tadyogAddevA api kilbiSikAH  /  tathAhi nANassa
kevalINaM dhammAyariyassa saMghasAhUNaM  /  mAI avannavAI kivvisiyaM bhAvaNaM
kuNaha  /  / 1 /  /  tadrUpA devadurgatiH  /  abhiogitti abhiyojanamabhiyogaH
zatrUccATanAdimantraprayojanam  /  tadyogAddevA api abhiyogAH  /  uktaJca -
maMtAjogaM kAUM bhUikammaM ca je pauMjaMti  /  sAyarasaiDDiheDa abhiogaM
bhAvaNaM kuNai  /   /  1  /   /  [ uttarA0 36-262] 65 ityabhiyogadevarUpA
durgatirityarthaH  /  /  Asuriyatti asurANAM bhAvaH karma vA AsuraM, asureNa
caNDakopena carantyAsurikAdevA api  /  uktaJca aNubaddharosapasaro
tahAnimittaMmi hoi paDisevI  /  ehiM kAraNehiM AsuriyaM bhAvaNaM kuNai  /   /  1
/   /  [uttarA0 36-264] ityAsurikadevarUpA durgatiH  /  saMmohatti
saMmohayatyunmArgadarzanAdinA mArgAnmokSamArgAd bhraMsayanti ye te saMmohAH  /
uktaJca umaggadesao tu magganAsau maggavipaDivattIya  /  moheNa mohayaMto
saMmohaM bhAvaNaM kuNai  //  1  //  iti saMmoharUpA devadurgatiH  /  tAdevatti
tA etA devadurgatayo maraNe virAdhite'padhyAnAdinA bhavanti  /  uktaJca eyAo
bhAvaNAo [bhAvittA ] devaduggaiM jaMti  /  tatto cuAo saMtA paDaMti
bhavasAgaramaNaMtaM  /   /  [ ArA0 paDA0 721] iti gAthArthaH  /  /  40  /  /
2010_02 - soma 0 prathamapraznasya uttaramAha 1 - kandarpo'TTaTTahAsahasanaM,
kandarpakaraNazIlAH kandarpAzca te devAzca kandarpadevAH, ye prAgbhave sAdhavo
yadvidhA bhavanti te tadvidheSu gacchanti, "jaM lese marai taM lese uvavajjai"
iti vacanAt  /  tat svarUpaM tu " kahakahakahassa hasaNaM" ityAdigAthAbhyo
jJeyamiti kandarparUpA devadurgatiH 2 - kibbisa tti kilbiSaM pApaM jJAna -
kevalyAdyAzAtanAdikam, tadyogAd devA api kilbiSikAH, prAk
saMyatabhavakRtajJAnAdyAzAtanAdeva mAtaGgatvenotpannA ityartha evaMrUpA
devadurgatiH  /  3-abhioga tti abhiyojanam abhiyogaH
zatrUccATanAdimantraprayuJjanam, prAk

Page #107 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Āturpratyākhyānaprakirṇakam, Chapter 41  **Verse 41**  **Translation:**  This
is the explanation of the question, "What is the state of a deva who is in a
state of *duggati* (degeneration)?"  **Explanation:**  *
**Āturpratyākhyānaprakirṇakam** is a Jain text that discusses the nature of
*duggati* (degeneration) and its causes. * **Verse 41** explains the nature of
*duggati* for devas (celestial beings) who are attached to worldly pleasures and
desires. * **"Kandarpa"** refers to the god of love, and **"Kandarpadeva"**
refers to a deva who is attached to sensual pleasures. * **"Kilbiṣa"** refers to
sin or wrongdoing, and **"Kilbiṣika"** refers to a deva who is involved in
sinful activities. * **"Abhiyojana"** refers to accusation or blame, and
**"Abhiyoga"** refers to a deva who is accused or blamed. * **"Asuri"** refers
to an asura (a demonic being), and **"Asuri"** refers to a deva who has the
characteristics of an asura. * **"Sammoha"** refers to delusion or illusion, and
**"Sammoha"** refers to a deva who is deluded or illusioned. *
**"Miścādasaṇarattā"** refers to those who are attached to false beliefs and
views. * **"Saniyāṇā"** refers to those who are attached to worldly possessions
and desires. * **"Kiṇhalesamogāḍhā"** refers to those who are deeply immersed in
the darkness of ignorance. * **"Dulaha"** refers to something that is difficult
to obtain. * **"Bohi"** refers to enlightenment or liberation.  **The verse
states that devas who are attached to worldly pleasures and desires, who are
involved in sinful activities, who are accused or blamed, who have the
characteristics of asuras, and who are deluded or illusioned are in a state of
*duggati*. These devas are likely to be reborn in lower realms after death. For
those who are attached to false beliefs and desires, who are deeply immersed in
ignorance, enlightenment is difficult to obtain.**  **The verse also emphasizes
the importance of avoiding attachment to worldly pleasures and desires, and
seeking enlightenment through right knowledge and conduct.**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 AturapratyAkhyAnaprakIrNakam gA. 41 saMyatabhave tad yogAd-devA apyabhiyogA
mahardhikasurANAM preSyakarmakAriNa evaMvidhA devadurgatiH  /  4Asuriyatti
asurANAM karmaNA caNDakopena carantIti AsurikAH saMyatabhave kRtacaNDakopA
asuratvenotpannAstathAvidhA devA api AsurikA evaMrUpA devadurgatiH  /  5-saMmoha
tti sammohayantyunmArgadarzanAdinA mokSamArgAd bhraMzayanti jIvAn ye te sammohAH
saMyatA apyevaMvidhA devatvenotpannAH sammohA evaMrUpA devadurgatiH  /  tA etA
devadurgatayo maraNe'padhyAnAdinA virAdhite sati bhavanti, tatazcyutAzcAnantaM
saMsAraM paribhramanti  /  / 40 /  /  /  guNaH atha praznasya nirvacanamAha -
kandarpo'TTahAsahasanaM kandarpakaraNazIlAH kandarpAzca te devAzca kandarpadevAH
/  kilbiSaM pApaM jJAnAdyA''zAtanAdikaM, tadyogAddevA api kilbiSikAH  /
abhiyojanamabhiyogaH, tadyogAddevA api abhiyogAH  /  abhiyogarUpA
durgatirityarthaH  /  asurANAM bhAvaH karma vA'sureNa caNDakopena carantyAsurikA
devA api  /  sammohayantyunmArgadarzanAdinA mArgAnmokSamArgAd vidhvaMsayanti ye
te sammohAH tA etA devadurgatayo maraNe virAdhite'padhyAnAdinA bhavanti  /  / 40
/  /  micchAdasaNarattA saniyANA kiNhalesamogADhA  /  iha je maraMti jIvA tesiM
dulahA bhave bohI  /  / 41 /  /  mithyAdarzanaraktAH sanidAnAH
kRSNalezyAvagADhAH  /  iha ye mriyante jIvAsteSAM durlabho bhavedbodhiH  /  / 41
/  /  bhuva0 kA devaduggai ityasya praznasya nirvacanamuktamatha kA abohItyasya
savipakSasya nirvacanamAha-mithyAdarzanaM viparyastadarzanaM mithyAtvaM tatra
ratAH  /  yata ArSam - "kahannaM bhaMte samaNA niggaMthA mohaNijjA kammaM
veyaMti ? goyamA ! tehiM tehiM nANaMtarehiM daMsaNaMtarehiM carittaMtarehiM
kappaMtarehiM maggaMtarehiM nayaMtarehiM bhaMgaMtarehiM pAvayaNaMtarehiM samaNA
niggaMthA kaMSA mohaNijjaM kammaM veyaMti  / " tathA saha nidAnena
devatvAdiprArthanArUpeNa varttanta iti sanidAnAH  /  tathA kRSNAM sarvanikRSTAM
lezyAM jIvapariNAmarUpAmavagADhAH prAptAH ihAsmin [jagati] ye mriyante
jIvAsteSAM durlabhA bodhirityarthaH  /  /  kiJca - 2010_02

Page #108 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Chapter: 1 Verse: 42 67 Even if one has attained the state of a Jina, and has
become a Sadhu or a Savaga, If one is attached to the wrong kind of Guru and
teacher, one will be born in an infinite hell and suffer greatly. ||1||41||
**Commentary:** **Soma:** Now, in response to the second question, "What is the
reason for ignorance?", the answer is: Those who are attached to false views,
who have distorted views, who are attached to falsehood, who are attached to the
desire for false actions, and who are attached to the desire for false objects,
are those who are attached to the wrong kind of Guru and teacher. They are
attached to the desire for false objects, such as the desire for godhood, and
they are attached to the desire for false actions, such as the desire for
liberation. They are attached to the desire for false objects, such as the
desire for godhood, and they are attached to the desire for false actions, such
as the desire for liberation. They are attached to the desire for false objects,
such as the desire for godhood, and they are attached to the desire for false
actions, such as the desire for liberation. They are attached to the desire for
false objects, such as the desire for godhood, and they are attached to the
desire for false actions, such as the desire for liberation. They are attached
to the desire for false objects, such as the desire for godhood, and they are
attached to the desire for false actions, such as the desire for liberation.
They are attached to the desire for false objects, such as the desire for
godhood, and they are attached to the desire for false actions, such as the
desire for liberation. They are attached to the desire for false objects, such
as the desire for godhood, and they are attached to the desire for false
actions, such as the desire for liberation. They are attached to the desire for
false objects, such as the desire for godhood, and they are attached to the
desire for false actions, such as the desire for liberation. They are attached
to the desire for false objects, such as the desire for godhood, and they are
attached to the desire for false actions, such as the desire for liberation.
They are attached to the desire for false objects, such as the desire for
godhood, and they are attached to the desire for false actions, such as the
desire for liberation. They are attached to the desire for false objects, such
as the desire for godhood, and they are attached to the desire for false
actions, such as the desire for liberation. They are attached to the desire for
false objects, such as the desire for godhood, and they are attached to the
desire for false actions, such as the desire for liberation. They are attached
to the desire for false objects, such as the desire for godhood, and they are
attached to the desire for false actions, such as the desire for liberation.
They are attached to the desire for false objects, such as the desire for
godhood, and they are attached to the desire for false actions, such as the
desire for liberation. They are attached to the desire for false objects, such
as the desire for godhood, and they are attached to the desire for false
actions, such as the desire for liberation. They are attached to the desire for
false objects, such as the desire for godhood, and they are attached to the
desire for false actions, such as the desire for liberation. They are attached
to the desire for false objects, such as the desire for godhood, and they are
attached to the desire for false actions, such as the desire for liberation.
They are attached to the desire for false objects, such as the desire for
godhood, and they are attached to the desire for false actions, such as the
desire for liberation.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 khaNDa:-1 gA. 42 67 jiNasAsaNaM pi pAviya saMpAviya sAdhusAvagattevi  /
kugurukuvaeseNa hao aNaMtakhutto duhaM patto  /  / 1 /  / 41 /  /  soma0 atha kA
abodhiriti dvitIyapraznasyottaramAha - mithyAdarzanaM viparyastadarzanaM
mithyAtvaM mithyAkriyAdyabhilASarUpaM, tatra ratAH, tathA saha nidAnena
devatvAdiprArthanArUpeNa vartanta iti sanidAnAH tathA kRSNAM sarvAdhamAM lezyAM
jIvapariNAmarUpAmavagADhAH prAptAH  /  ihAsmin jagati evaMvidhA ye jIvA
mriyante, teSAM durlabhA bodhirbhavet  /  / 41  /  /  guNa0 [kA] devadurgatiH
iti asya praznasya nirvacanamuktamatha kA abohI ? tasya
nirvacanamAhaviparyastadarzanaM mithyAtvaM tatra ratAH  /  tathA saha nidAnena
devatvAdiprArthanArUpeNa varttanta iti sanidAnAH  /  tathA kRSNAM sarvanikRSTAM
lezyAM jIvapariNAmarUpAmavagADhAH prAptAH  /  / 41  /  sammaiMsaNarattA aniyANA
sukkalesamogADhA  /  iha je maraMti jIvA tesiM sulahA bhave bohI  /  / 42 /  /
samyagdarzanaraktA anidAnAH zukkalezyAmavagADhAH  /  iha ye mriyante jIvAsteSAM
sulabho bhavedvodhiH  /  / 42 /  bhuva0 kA abohItyasyottaramuktamatha
tadvipakSabhUtaM prastAvAdvodhisulabhatvamAha - samyagdarzane raktA
bhAvitAntaHkaraNAstadvAsanayA saptAnAmapi dhAtUnAM raJjanAt  /  anidAnA
nidAnavarjitAH  /  tathA zodhayatyaSTaprakAraM karmamalamiti zuklA  /  zucaM vA
klamayatIti zuklA  /  sA cAsau lezyA ca zuklalezyA, tAmavagADhAH prAptAH  /  iha
pravacane ye mriyante jIvAsteSAM sulabhabodhirityarthaH  /  / 42 /  /  soma0
atha prastAvAd bodhidurlabhatvavipakSabhUtaM bodhisulabhatvamapyAha -
samyagdarzanena raktA bhAvitAntaHkaraNAH samyaktvavAsitasaptadhAtava ityarthaH
/  anidAnA nidAnavarjitAH, tathA zodhayatyaSTaprakAraM karmamalamiti zuklA zucaM
klamayatIti vA, zuklA cAsau lezyA ca zuklalezyA tAmavagADhAH prAptAH, evaMvidhA
iha pravacane ye jIvA mriyante teSAM sulabho bhaved bodhiH  /  / 42 /  /  guNa
kA abohItyasyottaramuktamatha tadvipakSabhUtaM bodhisulabhatvamAha -
sammamityAdi  /  / 42 /  /  2010_02

Page #109 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter 43: The Scattering of Eager Rejection  Those who are opposed to the
Guru, who are full of the 30 *mohas* (delusions), who are strong in the 21
*shabalas* (vices), and who are of corrupt character, they are controlled by
their *asamadhi* (lack of concentration) and become eternal wanderers.
**Explanation:**  This chapter answers the fourth question: "How does one cross
the infinite?"  The Guru teaches the truth, but those who are opposed to the
Guru, like Gosala, reject the Guru's teachings. They are full of the 30 *mohas*
and the 21 *shabalas*. They are controlled by their *asamadhi* and become
eternal wanderers.  **Note:**  * **Guru:** Spiritual teacher * **Moha:**
Delusion * **Shabala:** Vice * **Asamadhi:** Lack of concentration * **Ananta
Samsari:** Eternal wanderer  **Why is the fourth question answered before the
third?**  This is done to demonstrate the variety of ways in which the teachings
can be presented. It is also done to strengthen the student's understanding.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 AturapratyAkhyAnaprakIrNakam gA. 43 je puNa gurupaDiNIyA bahumohA sasabalA
kusIlA ya  /  asamAhiNA maraMti u te haMti aNaMtasaMsArI  /  / 43 /  /  ye
punargurupratyanIkA bahumohAH sazabalAH kuzIlAzca  /  asamAdhinA niyante te
bhavantyanantasaMsAriNaH  /  / 43 /  /  bhuvaH atha keNa aNaMtaM pAramiti
praznasya nirvacanamAha - gRNAtyabhidhatte tattvamiti gurustaM pratItyAzritya
pratyanIkA gurupratyanIkA gurvAzAtakA goshaalkvt| tathAhi - jaccAIhiM avannaM
bhAsai vaTTai nayA vi uvavAe  /  ahio chiddappehI pagAsavAI aNaNukUlA khisakA  /
/  [paMca va0 1639] ityrthH|| tathA bahumohA tti triMzanmohanIyasthAnavartinaH
bahumohAH, tathA saha sabalairekaviMzatyA zabalasthAnairvartanta iti sazabalAH
kutsitaM zIlaM samAcAraM yeSAM te kuzIlAH  /  caH samuccaye  /  asamAdhinA
ArttaraudratayA ye mriyante te'nantasaMsAriNo bhavantIti  /  keNa
aNaMtaMpAramityasya nirvacanamuktam  /  nanu kimiti tRtIyapraznaM vimucya
caturthasya prathamaM nirNaya uktaH ? ucyate'maraNavirAhie' iti gAthAyAmayameva
kramastasyaiva nirvacanamabhANi  /  tarhi praznasaMgrahagAthAyAM kimiti
vyatikramagrahaNam ? ucyate-zikSAbhyUhya zaktivarddhanArthaM vicitrA
sUtraracaneti nyAyapradarzanArthaM vA iti paramArthaH  /  / 43 /  /  soma0 atha
kenAnantaM pAramiti caturthasya praznasya nirvacanamAha - ye punarjIvA gRNAti
abhidhatte tattvamiti gurustaM prati jAtyAdyavarNavAdabhASaNAdinA pratyanIkAH
pratikUlA: tathA bahumohAstriMzanmohanIyasthAnavartinaH, saha
zabalairekaviMzatyA zabalasthAnairvartante ye te sazabalAH, kutsitaM zIlamAcAro
yeSAM te kuzIlAH, caH samuccaye  /  evaMvidhA ye'samAdhinA''taraudrabhAve
vartamAnA niyante te'nantasaMsAriNo bhavantIti  /  nanu 'keNeva vujjhaI maraNaM'
? iti tRtIyaM praznaM vimucya caturthapraznasya prathamaM nirNayaH kasmAduktaH ?
ucyate-vicitrA siddhAntasUtraracanA bhavatIti nyAyadarzanArthaM ziSyANAm  /  /
43 /  /  /  guNa atha keNa aNaMtaM pAramiti praznasya nirvacanamAha - gRNAti
tattvamiti gurustaM pratItyAzritya pratyanIkA gurvAzAtanAH tathA bahu0
triMzanmohanIyasthAnavartinaH bahumohAH, saha zabalairekaviMzatyA
zabalasthAnairvartanta iti sazabalAH  /  kuzIlAH  /  caH samuccaye  /  / 43 /  /
2010_02

Page #110 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Chapter: 1, Verse: 44, 45  Those who are attached to the words of the Jinas and
follow the words of the Guru with devotion, are weak and unattached, they become
short-lived in the world. ||44||  Those who are attached to the words of the
Jinas and follow the words of the Guru with devotion, are weak and unattached,
they become short-lived in the world. ||44||  **Explanation:**  Those who are
attached to the words of the Jinas, their minds are filled with their teachings,
and they follow the words of the Guru, the teachings of the Dharma Acharya, with
devotion, considering them beneficial. They are weak, meaning they are far from
the path of liberation. They are unattached, meaning they have pure
determination. Such people become short-lived in the world. ||44||
**Explanation:**  Those who are attached to the words of the Jinas, the
teachings of the Jinas, the sermons of the Jinas, their minds are filled with
their teachings, and they follow the words of the Guru, the teachings of the
Dharma Acharya, with devotion, considering them beneficial. They are weak,
meaning they are far from the path of liberation. They are unattached, meaning
they have pure determination. Such people become short-lived in the world.
||44||  **Summary:**  Those who are attached to the words of the Jinas and
follow the words of the Guru with devotion, are weak and unattached, they become
short-lived in the world. ||44||  **Verse 45:**  Many are the untimely deaths,
many are the unwanted deaths. Those who do not follow the words of the Jinas,
they die untimely. ||45||  Many are the untimely deaths, many are the unwanted
deaths. Those who do not follow the words of the Jinas, they die untimely.
||45||  **Explanation:**  Now, the question arises, what is the nature of death?
This is explained in the next two half-verses. Those who do not follow the words
of the Jinas, they die untimely, such as by weapons, etc. Many are the unwanted
deaths, such as those who die due to great illness, etc., suffering pain, even
though they do not want to die. They are outside the teachings of the Jinas.
||45||  **Explanation:**  Now, the question arises, what is the nature of death?
This is explained in the next two half-verses. Those who do not follow the words
of the Jinas, they die untimely, such as by weapons, etc. Many are the unwanted
deaths, such as those who die due to great illness, etc., suffering pain, even
though they do not want to die. They are outside the teachings of the Jinas.
||45||  **Summary:**  Those who do not follow the words of the Jinas, they die
untimely. ||45||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 khaNDa:-1 gA. 44, 45 jiNavayaNe aNurattA guruvayaNaM je karaMti bhAveNaM  /
asabala asaMkilaTThA te haMti parittasaMsArI  /  / 44 /  /  jinavacane'nuraktA
guruvacanaM ye kurvanti bhAvena  /  azabalA asaMkliSTAste bhavanti
parIttasaMsAriNaH  /  / 44  /  /  bhuva0 athAnantasaMsArivipakSabhUtAH
parIttasaMsAriNaH tatsvarUpamityAha - jinavacanasyAnuraktAstadvAsitamanasaH
guruvacanaM dharmAcAryopadezaM bhAvato hitamiti kRtvA ye kurvanti  /  azabalAH
zabalasthAnadUravartinaH  /  asaMkliSTA vizuddhAdhyavasAyAste parIttasaMsAriNaH
stokasaMsAriNo bhavantItyarthaH  /  / 44 /  /  soma0 atha
anantasaMsArivipakSabhUtatvAt parIttasaMsArisvarUpamAha - jinavacane
zrIjinendravacane zrIjinapravacane'nuraktAstadvAsitamanaso guruvacanaM
dharmAcAryopadezaM bhAvato hitamiti kRtvA ye kurvanti, azabalAH
zabalasthAnadUravartinaH, asaMkliSTA vizuddhAdhyavasAyA evaMvidhA ye mriyanta
iti gamyaM te parIttasaMsAriNaH stokasaMsAriNo bhavantItyarthaH  /  / 44 /  /
guNa jinavacane anuraktAstadvAsitamanaso guruvacanaM dharmAcAryopadezam  /
azabalAH zabalasthAnadUravartinaH, asaMkliSTAste parIttasaMsAriNaH
stokasaMsAriNo bhavantItyarthaH  /  / 44 /  /  bAlamaraNANi bahuso bahuyANi
akAmagANi maraNANi  /  marihaMti te varAyA je jiNavayaNaM na yANaMti  /  / 45 /
/  bAlamaraNAni bahuzo bahukAni ca akAmAni maraNAni  /  niyante te varAkA ye
jinavacanaM na jAnanti  /  / 45 /  /  bhuva. atha keNeva vujhaI maraNamityasya
nirvacanaM sArddhagAthAdvayenAha - ye varAkA jinavacanaM na jAnanti te
bAlamaraNAni zastragrahaNAdIni bahuzo'nekazo marihaMti mariSyanti  /  tathA
bahUni bahukAni ca akAmukAni nirabhilASANi maraNAni kecidvarAkA
mahArogAdiduHkhapIDitA anicchanto'pi mariSyanti  /  jinavacanabAhyAH santaH  /
/ 45 /  /  soma0 atha keNeva vujjhai maraNaM ? iti tRtIyapraznasya pUrvamuktasya
nirvacanaM sArdhagAthAdvayenAha - _ 2010_02

Page #111 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Chapter 46:  The Scattering of Eager Rejection  Those who do not know the
words of the Jinas, they will die many times in many ways, such as death in
childhood, taking up weapons, consuming poison, etc.  They will die, they will
die, this is the connection.  Thus, many, many, indeed, are the deaths that are
without desire, without longing.  Some, who are afflicted by great diseases,
will die out of delusion, not wanting to die.  They are outside the words of the
Jinas.  ||45||  Those who do not know the words of the Jinas, they will die many
times in many ways, such as death in childhood, taking up weapons, etc.  Thus,
many, many, indeed, are the deaths that are without desire, without longing.
Some, who are afflicted by great diseases and suffering, will die even though
they do not want to.  They are outside the words of the Jinas.  ||45||  [Chapter
46-47: Death in Childhood] Taking up weapons, consuming poison, burning, and
entering water.  Those who serve the vessels of unrighteousness, they are bound
by birth and death.  ||46||  Taking up weapons, consuming poison, burning, and
entering water.  Those who serve the vessels of unrighteousness, they are bound
by birth and death.  ||46||  **Explanation:** Now, the deaths in childhood are
made clear.  There, taking up weapons refers to the placing of a conch shell on
the head during pilgrimages, the head-shaving ceremony, etc.  Consuming poison
refers to the consumption of poison from the palate, etc., out of detachment.
Entering fire refers to the consumption of wood, the five fires, and entering
water refers to immersion in a pilgrimage site, milk, or a bath for the throat,
or during the month of Magha.  From the word "etc.", other similar things like
tying up, etc., should be understood as death in childhood.  Who will die from
these deaths in childhood?  It is said, "Those who serve the vessels of
unrighteousness."  Righteous conduct is the behavior prescribed by the
scriptures.  The vessel used for that is the vessel of righteous conduct.  It is
not the vessel of righteous conduct, but the vessel of unrighteous conduct.
Those who have the habit of serving that are those who serve the vessels of
unrighteous conduct.  They are the wandering ascetics, etc., who have false
views, or those who serve them through laughter, delusion, etc.  They are the
wandering ascetics.  **List of Items:** 1. Pauya, 2. Tidanda, 3. Kundiya, 4.
Kanchani, 5. Kesari, 6. Chhatta, 7. Chhannal, 8. Missi, 9. Karodi, 10. Pavitti,
11. Vaththa, 12. Kus, 13. Panah, 14. Ganitti.  ||1|| - Kundika - Kamandalu,
Kanchani - Rudraksha mala, Kesari - Pramardhani, Chhannal - Trikastika, book and
its accessories, the seat of the vow-taker, Missi - Karotika, a special golden
vessel for offerings, Vastra - Dhaturakta Sattika, Ankush - a metal tip on a
staff, Ganatrika -

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 AturapratyAkhyAnaprakIrNakam gA. 46 ye varAkA jinavacanaM na jAnanti te
bAlamaraNAni zastragrahaNa-viSabhakSaNAdIni bahuzo'nekazo 'marihaMti'
mariSyantIti sambandhastathA bahukAni bahUnyevAkAmukAni nirabhilASANi maraNAni
darzayati kecid varAkA mahArogAdigrastA mohAnmartumanicchanto mariSyanti
jinavacanabAhyAH santa ityarthaH  /  / 45 /  /  gaNa ye varAkA jinavacanaM na
jAnanti te bAlamaraNAni zastragrahaNAdIni bahazo mariSyanti tathA bahUni
bahukAni ca akAmukAni nirabhilASAni maraNAni kecit varAkA mahArogAdiduHkhapIDitA
anicchanto'pi mariSyanti jinavacanabAhyAH santaH  /  / 45 /  /  [gA. 46-47
bAlamaraNam] satthaggahaNaM visabhakkhaNaM ca jalaNaM ca jalapaveso ya  /
aNayArabhaMDasevI jaMmaNa-maraNANubaMdhINi  // 46 /  /  zastragrahaNaM
viSabhakSaNaM ca jvalanaM ca jalapravezazca  /  anAcArabhANDasevI
janmamaraNAnubandhIni  /  / 46 /  /  bhuva0 atha bAlamaraNAnyeva vyaktIkriyante-
tatra zastragrahaNaM tIrthAdau mastake krakacadApanaM ziraHzAraNAdi
visabhakkhaNaMceti viSabhakSaNaM tAlupuTAdi vairAgyAt, jvalanapravezaH
kASThabhakSaNaM paJcAgnitapazca jalapravezazca tIrthe payasi nimajjanaM
kaNThasnAnaM vA mAghamAse  /  cazabdAdanyadapyevaMvidhamudbandhanAdi bAlamaraNaM
jJAtavyam  /  etAni bAlamaraNAni ke mariSyantItyAha - aNayArabhaMDasevitti -
AcAraH zAstravihito vyavahArastena bhANDamupakaraNamAcArabhANDopakaraNaM, na
AcArabhANDopakaraNamanAcArabhANDopakaraNam  /  tatsevituM zIlaM yeSAM te
anAcArabhANDasevinaste ca parivrAjakAdayo mithyAdRSTayaH svayUthyA vA ye
hAsamohAdibhistatsevanti  /  tAni ca parivrAjAm  /  pAuya 1 tidaMDa 2 kuMDiya 3
kaMcaNi 4 kesariya 5 chatta 6 channAla 7 misiya 8 karoDi 9 pavittI 10 vatthaM 11
kusa 12 pANaha 13 gaNittI 14  /  / 1 /  /  - kuNDikA - kamaNDalu, kaMcaNI -
rudrAkSamAlA, kesarI - pramArjanI, channAlaM - trikASTikA, pustakopakaraNam,
vratinAmAsanaM, mRsI karoTikA naivedyAdau kanakabhAjanavizeSaH, vastrANi-
dhAturaktasATikA, aMkuzo - daNDAgrato lohamayo, gaNatrikA - 2010_02

Page #112 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Chapter 1, Verse 47  **Special Ornaments**  * **Kalachika** - A special type of
ornament worn on the neck. * **Pavitri** - A special type of ornament worn on
the fingers. * **Tapasas** -  They wear special vessels made of copper, like
small pots, etc. * **Brahmanas** - They wear the sacred thread (Yajnopavita),
etc. * **Others** - Similarly, others also wear their own special ornaments.
Those who use such unrighteous vessels will die a premature death.  They will
experience many births and deaths. This means that they will experience many
births and deaths due to their unrighteous conduct. ||46||  **Explanation**  *
**Som** -  Premature death is indicated by:     * Holding a weapon, etc.     *
Removing the hair from the head during a pilgrimage, etc.     * Shaving the
head, etc.     * Consuming poison, etc.     * Eating the roof of the mouth, etc.
* Entering fire due to the pain of detachment, etc.     * Performing the five
fire austerities, etc.     * Entering water, such as immersion in holy water,
bathing, etc.     * Other similar acts of bondage, such as during the month of
Magha, etc. * **Anayar** -  The term "Achar" refers to the conduct prescribed by
the scriptures.  "Achar Bhaand" refers to the vessels used in accordance with
the scriptures.  "Anachar Bhaand" refers to vessels that are not used in
accordance with the scriptures.  "Anachar Bhaand Sevin" refers to those who use
such vessels.  These include those who wear the three staffs, the Kundika, etc.,
and those who are wandering ascetics, etc.  They are those who wear clothes that
are not in accordance with the scriptures, due to their false beliefs, and who
are attached to laughter, delusion, etc.  They are those who use unrighteous
vessels.  Such people will die a premature death. * **How?** - They will
experience many births and deaths, which are a consequence of their past
actions.  This means that they will experience many births and deaths due to
their unrighteous conduct. ||46||  **Gun** -  Removing the hair from the head
during a pilgrimage, etc. **Vis** -  Eating the roof of the mouth, etc.
**Vairagya** -  Entering fire due to detachment, etc. **Panchagni Tapa** -  The
five fire austerities, etc. **Jal Pravesh** -  Entering water, such as immersion
in milk, etc. during the month of Magha. **Cha** -  Other similar acts of
bondage, etc. **Achar** -  The conduct prescribed by the scriptures.  "Achar
Bhaand" refers to the vessels used in accordance with the scriptures.  "Anachar
Bhaand" refers to vessels that are not used in accordance with the scriptures.
"Anachar Bhaand Sevin" refers to those who use such vessels.  These include
those who are wandering ascetics, etc.  They are those who wear clothes that are
not in accordance with the scriptures, due to their false beliefs.  They are
those who use unrighteous vessels.  Such people will experience many births and
deaths. ||46||  **Uddamhe** -  I will experience many premature deaths in the
animal realm. **Danson-Naan Sahagao** -  I will experience the death of a
scholar, accompanied by perception and knowledge. ||47||  **Urddhvam Adhas
Tirya** -  I will experience many premature deaths in the upper, lower, and
intermediate

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 khaNDaH-1 gA. 47 kalAcikAbharaNavizeSaH  /  pavitrI - aGgulyAbharaNavizeSaH  /
tApasAnAM katchoTakapuTikAtAmrabhAjanAdi, brAhmaNAnAM yajJopavItAdi  /
evamanyeSAmapi  /  te caivamanAcArabhANDasevina: santo bAlamaraNAni mariSyanti
/  kathaM janmAni ca maraNAni tAnyanubadhnantItyevaMzIlAni janmamaraNAnubandhIni
bahUni mariSyantItyarthaH  /  / 46 /  /  soma0 bAlamaraNAni darzayati -
zastragrahaNaM tIrthAdau mastake krakacadApanaM - ziraHzAraNAdi, viSabhakSaNaM
tAlupuTAdi, duHkhagarbhavairAgyatvAt jvalanamagnau
kASThabhakSaNapaJcAgnitapaHkaraNAdirUpama, jalapravezazca tIrthajale nimajjanaM
snAnaM vA mAghamAsAdau cazabdAdanyadapyevaMvidhamudbandhanAdi bAlamaraNaM
jJAtavyam  /  etAni bAlamaraNAni ke kurvantItyAha - aNAyAra0 AcAraH zAstravihito
vyApArastena bhANDamupakaraNam AcArabhANDam, na AcArabhANDam anAcArabhANDam,
svabuddhikalpitanAnAvidhaveSAdi-rUpam, tat sevituM zIlaM yeSAM
te'nAcArabhANDasevinaste ca tridaNDakuNDakAdidharAzcakraparivrAjakAdayo
mithyAdRSTayo hAsa-mohAdinA saMyatavezadhAriNo'pyanAcArabhANDasevinaH, te
caivaMvidhAssanto bAlamaraNAni mariSyanti bahUni  /  kathambhUtAni ? janmAni ca
maraNAni ca paramparAbhAvInyanekAni tAnyanubadhnanti ityevaMzIlAni
janmamaraNAnubandhIni ityarthaH  /  / 46 /  /  guNa0 tIrthAdau mastake
kakracadApana, visa0 tAlupuTAdi[bhakSaNaM], vairAgyAt jvalanapravezaH,
paJcAgnitapazca jalapravezaH payasi nimajjanaM mAghamAse  /  cazabdAdanyadapi
udvandhanAdi bAlamaraNaM jJAtavyam  /  AcAraH zAstravihito vyavahArastena
bhANDamupakaraNamityAcArabhANDaM, na AcArabhANDamityanAcArabhANDaM tatsavituM
zIlaM yeSAM te'nAcArabhANDasevina:, te ca parivrAjakAdayo mithyAdRSTayaH
janmamaraNAni tAnyanubandhIni bahUni mariSyantItyarthaH  /  / 46 /  /  uDDamahe
tiriyammi vi mayANi jIveNa bAlamaraNANi  /  daMsaNa-nANasahagao paMDiyamaraNaM
aNumarissaM  // 47 /  /  Urdhvamadhastirazcayapi mRtAni jIvena bAlamaraNAni  /
darzanajJAnasahagataH paNDitamaraNamanumariSye  /  / 47 /  /  bhuva0 UrdhvaM
bhUtalAnnavayojanazatAduparisamagrordhvaloke  /  adhaH aghogrAmAdau
sarvapRthivISu tiryagloke'pi cASTAdazayojanazatamAne mRtAnyanubhUtAni jIvena
bAlamaraNAni pUrvoktAni yadivAnubhUtAni tat kiMvidheyamityAha - sa caivaM
kSapako vijJAtabAlamaraNavipAkazcintayAmAsa  /  darzanajJAnasamanvitaH sannahaM
paNDitamaraNaM vivekimaraNamanumariSye  /  / 47 /  /  _ 2010_02

Page #113 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 72 **Chapter 48: The Scattering of the Eager Rejection**  **Soma:**  "What
will happen to those who die?"  **He says:**  "Above the earth, in the upper
realms, extending for a hundred yojanas, and in the lower realms, in the
villages and dwellings of the lords of the lower realms, and in the seven
earths, and in the realm of the animals, extending for a hundred and eight
yojanas, the deaths experienced by living beings, such as death in childhood,
unwanted death, death by weapons, etc., or those mentioned earlier, if they are
experienced, then what should be done?"  **He says:**  "The क्षपक, knowing the
consequences of death in childhood, thinks: 'With the knowledge of the right
view and right knowledge, I will die a wise death, a discerning death, as the
meaning of the word अनुरथ suggests.'"  **Gun:**  "The upper realm, the lower
realm, the villages and dwellings of the lower realms, and in the realm of the
animals, extending for a hundred and eight yojanas, the deaths experienced by
living beings."  **Soma:**  "Then the teacher, showing the क्षपक the fear of a
bad destiny, gives advice: 'O son! For one who has violated the vows, there is a
terrible, frightening, and anxiety-inducing thing. What is it? Birth is जाति,
death is मरण, and जाति and मरण together are जातिमरण. You will wander in the
cycle of existence. This is the conclusion. And in the hells, which torment and
call out to the wicked, there are torments such as cutting, piercing, tearing
apart with claws, ripping apart with sharp blades, being planted on the top of a
शाल्मली tree, embracing a hot iron statue, being drowned in the river Vaitarani,
carrying a load of iron sand, and drinking hot iron liquid. These are ten kinds
of unbearable torments. Therefore, remembering and contemplating these things,
die a wise death, a death of liberation, now.'"  **Gun:**  "Terrible,
frightening, and anxiety-inducing. What is it? जाति and मरण. You will wander in
the cycle of existence. This is the conclusion. In the hells, there are torments
such as cutting, etc. Remembering and contemplating these things."

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 72 AturapratyAkhyAnaprakIrNakam gA. 48 soma0 tAni ka mariSyantItyAha - UrdhvaM
bhUtalAnnavayojanazatoparisamagrordhvaloke tathA'dholaukikagrAmAdau
bhavanapatiSu saptapRthvISu ca tiryagloke cASTAdazayojanazatamAne
mRtAnyanubhUtAni jIvena bAlamaraNAnyanicchAmaraNAni zastrAdimaraNAni vA
pUrvoktAni yadivA'nubhUtAni tataH kiM vidheyamityAha - daMsaNagAthA/0 sa kSapaka
evaM vijJAtabAlamaraNavipAkazcintayati - darzanajJAnAbhyAM sahagataH samanvitaH
sannahaM paNDitamaraNaM vivekimaraNamanumariSye'nurathazabdArthe  /  / 47 /  /
guNa UrdU UrdhvalokaH, adholokaH adhogrAmAdau, tiryagloke'pi
cASTAdazayojanazatamAne mRtAnyanubhUtAni  /  darzanajJAnasamanvitaH
sananumariSye [paNDitamaraNam  /  / 47  /  /  [gA. 48 taH 71 paNDitamaraNe
bhAvanAH tadArAdhanavidhizca] uvveyaNayaM jAI maraNaM naraesu veyaNAo ya  /
eyANi saMbharaMto paMDiyamaraNaM marasu iNhiM  /  / 48 /  /  udvegajanakaM
jAtimaraNaM narakeSa vedanAzca  /  etAni smaran paNDitamaraNaM mriyasvedAnIm  /
/ 48 /  /  bhuva0 he vatsa ! virAdhitavratasya udvegajanakaM
bhayAnakamudvegakAri  /  kiM ? jananaM jAtiH, mriyate maraNaM, tatsaMsAre
paribhramataste bhaviSyatItyadhyAhAraH  /  tathA pApakArinarAn
kAyantyAhvAyantIti nrkaastessu| vedanAzca chedana-bhedana-krakaca-
karapatravidAraNa-zAlmalIvRkSazikharAropaNa-taptAyaHputtalikAsamAliGgana-
vaitaraNInadIplAvana-vajravAlukA-pulinabhAravahana-taptAyastrapupAnAdikA
dazaprakArA vA duradhisahyA bhaviSyantItyata etAni saMsmaran cintayan
paNDitamaraNamabhyudyatamaraNaM mara idAnImityarthaH  /  / 48 /  /  soma0 atha
guruH kSapakasya durgatibhayaM darzayannupadezamAha - he vatsa !
virAdhitavratasyodvegajanakaM bhayAnakaM udvegakAri, kim ? jAtirjanma, mriyate
iti maraNam, jAtizca maraNaM ca jAtimaraNam, tat saMsAre paribhramataste
bhaviSyatItyadhyAhAraH, kvaciduvveyaNAi' iti pAThastatrApi prAkRtatvAd
vacanavyatyayaM kRtvA janma-maraNavizeSaNaM kAryam  /  tathA pApakArinarAn
kAyanti AhvAyantIti narakAsteSu vedanAzca chedana-bhedana-karapatravidAraNa-
zAlmalIvRkSazikharAropaNataptAyaHputrikAsamAli GganAdirUpAH kSetrajAdibhedA vA
duradhisahyA virAddhavratasyaiva te bhaviSyantItyata etAni saMsmaran cintayan
paNDitamaraNamabhyudyatamaraNaM mriyasvedAnImityarthaH  /  / 48  /  /  guNa
udvegajanakaM bhayAnakamudvegakAri kiM jAtirmaraNaM tatsaMsAre bhramataste
bhaviSyatItyadhyAhAraH  /  narakeSu vedanAH chedanAdyAH  /  etAni saMsmaran
cintayan  /  / 48  /  /  2010_02

Page #114 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Chapter: 1 Verse: 49 73 If suffering arises, then one should see it as a friend,
not as an enemy. What have I not experienced in this world, while wandering
through it? ||49|| If suffering arises, then one should see its nature as a
friend, not as an enemy. What have I not experienced in this world, while
wandering through it? ||49|| Bhuva: The Guru, thinking about the consequences of
violating the vows of the Shravaka, and the destruction of the vow, said: If
suffering arises, then one should see its nature as a friend, not as an enemy.
What have I not experienced in this world, while wandering through it? ||49||
Soma: Then the Shravaka, thinking about the teachings of the Guru, said: If
suffering arises, then one should see its nature as a friend, not as an enemy.
What have I not experienced in this world, while wandering through it? ||49||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 khaNDa:-1 gA. 49 73 jai uppajjai dukkhaM to daTThavvo sahAvao navaraM  /  kiM
kiM me [mae] na pattaM saMsAraM saMsaraMteNaM ?  /  / 49 /  /  yadi utpadyate
duHkhaM tarhi dRSTavyaH svabhAvaH navaram  /  kiM kiM mayA [made] na prAptaM
saMsAraM saMsaratA  /  / 49 /  /  bhuva0 iti guruNA zrAvitavratavirAdhanAvipAkaH
kSapakazcintayannAha - yadi utpadyate jAyate duHkhaM kaSTam  /  to tato
draSTavyo jJeyaH svabhAvatastatprAdurbhAvaH  /  na ko'pyAtmavyatirikto'nyo
hetustadutpattau samastItyAtmaiva taddheturiti cintayati  /  athavA navaraM
puna: kiyad duHkhametatyurApi kAH kA duHkhaparamparA me mayA maetti - made jAti-
kula-bala-rUpa-tapa-aizvaryazrutalAbharUpe  /  AsaktacetasA saMsAre saMsaratA na
prAptA nAnubhUtAH  /  paraM tA akAmanirjarayA soDhA alpastatsahane phalavizeSaH
/  idAnIM tvanantaguNanirjarAlAbhahetutvAtsamyak soDhavyA ityarthaH  /  athavA
yadi utpadyate duHkhaM tatkiM karttavyamityAha - to tadAsau dRSTavyaH sakhA
mitraM, rogAdiH purussaadirvaa| kathaMbhUtaH sakhA ? ApadaM dadAtIti ApadaH
sasakhA dRSTavyaH  /  navaramayaM vizeSaH  /  tathA kA ApatkI me iti mAM
karmatApannaM na prAptA iti kA me padasyArthaH  /  tathA kA ApatkarmatApannA
mayA ka; na prAptA na labdhA  /  kiM viziSTena ? saMsAraM saMsaratA paribhramatA
/  saMsAre saMsAraM vA cAturgatikamiti mayeti padasyArthaH  /  / 49 /  /  soma0
atha kSapakaH zrutagurupadezaH kadAcidutpannavedanAduHkho'pyevaM cintayatItyAha
- yadi utpadyate duHkhaM jAyate kaSTaM tato draSTavyo jJeyaH
svabhAvatastatprAdurbhAvo na ko'pyAtmavyatirikto'nyo hetustadutpatau
samastItyAtmaiva tad heturiti cintayati athavA navaraM punararthe kiyad
duHkhametat, purA kiM kiM duHkhaM duHkhaparamparA mayA na prAptA saMsAre
saMsaratA paribhramatA satA, kAH kA duHkhaparamparA mayA nAnubhUtAH, paraM tA
akAmanirjarayA soDhA ato'lpastatsahane phalavizeSaH, idAnIM
tvanantaguNanirjarAlAbhahetutvAt samyaksoDhavyA iti bhAvaH  /  kA me mae na
patteti pAThAntaramtatrApi kA duHkhaparamparA made jAtyAdau AsaktacetasA mayA na
prAptAH  /  kiMviziSTena ? made jAtikula-bala-rUpa-zruta-tapo-lAbhaizcaryarUpe
Asaktacetaseti gamyam, athavA yadi utpadyate duHkhaM tataH kiM kartavyamityAha-
to tadA ApadaM dadAtIti Apaddo rogAdiH puruSAdirvA, asau sakhA mitramiti
draSTavyaH  /  navaraM kevalaM kA iti ApatkI me iti mAM karmatApannaM na
prApteti sambandhaH, evaM kA me padasyAoM gataH  /  tathA kA ApatkarmatApannA
mayeti mayA kA na prAptA labdhA saMsAre saMsAraM paribhramatA iti mayeti
padasyArthaH  /  kA: kA Apado mama svayaM nAgatAH  /  mayA vA prasahya kA
nA''nItA ityarthaH  /  / 49 /  /  2010_02

Page #115 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter 50: The Scattering of Eager Rejection  **If, due to the violation of
the vows taught by the Guru, a feeling of distress arises, then one should
contemplate the nature of its origin. This distress is not caused by anything
external to the self, but by the self itself. Or, one may think, "How much
distress is this? In the past, what was the chain of suffering I experienced?
While I was wandering in the world, attached to birth, etc., did I not
experience and encounter many things? But I endured them with the strength of
non-attachment. The benefit of that endurance was small. Now, because of the
attainment of infinite virtues, I should endure with fortitude."**  **Or, if
distress arises, what should one do? The answer is: "One should consider this as
a friend, a companion, a disease, or a person. What kind of friend is this? One
who gives distress. This friend should be observed. What is special about this?
I, who am burdened by karma, have not experienced this. Or, what distress have I
experienced due to karma? I have not experienced it, not perceived it. What is
special about it? While wandering in the world."**  **"In the wheel of the
world, all beings have been consumed by me many times. I have not attained
satisfaction from those who have been consumed and transformed."**  **"It is not
only pain that I have endured while wandering in the world, but also all those
things that are the cause of pleasure, all those that have been consumed. Yet,
this self of mine remains unsatisfied."**  **"The word 'chakravala' (wheel of
the world) refers to the totality of existence. While wandering in this
totality, I have consumed all beings, all the aggregates of beings, many times.
I have consumed them as food, and I have transformed them through the experience
of their taste, or through their transformation into the body, mind, speech, and
life force. I have wandered through countless cycles of beings. Yet, I have not
attained satisfaction or contentment from all these consumptions."**  **"While
wandering in the cycle of existence, I have consumed all beings, all the
aggregates of beings, many times. I have consumed them as food, and I have
transformed them through the experience of their taste. I have not attained
satisfaction or contentment."**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 AturapratyAkhyAnaprakIrNakam gA. 50 guNa atha guruNA zrAvitavratavirAdhane
kSapakacintA - yadi utpadyate jAyate duHkhaM kaSTaM tato draSTavyo jJeyaH
svabhAvatastat prAdurbhAvaH na ko'pyAtmavyatirikto'nyo hetuH, Atmaiva heturiti
vicintayati  /  athavA navaraM punaH kiyaduHkhametat  /  purApi kA
duHkhaparaMparA me mayA  /  mae tti made jAtyAdau AsaktacetasA saMsAre saMsaratA
bhramatA satA na prAptA nAnubhUtAH ? paraM tA akAmanirjarayA soDhA
alpastatsahane phalavizeSaH  /  idAnIM tvanantaguNanirjarAlAbhahetutvAt samyak
soDhavyA ityrthH| athavA yadi utpadyate duHkhaM tataH kiM kartavyamityAha- to
tadA draSTavyo'sau sakhA mitraM rogAdiH puruSAdirvA  /  kathaMbhUtaH sakhA ?
ApadaM dadAtIti ApaddaH  /  sa sakhA draSTavyaH navaramayaM vizeSaH  /  kA ca
ApatkI me iti mAM karmatApannaM na prAptA  /  atha kA Apat karmatApannA mayA ka;
na prAptA'nupalabdhA, kiM viziSTena ? saMsaratA paribhramatA saMsAre  /  / 49 /
/  saMsAracakkavAlammi savve vi ya puggalA mae bahuso  /  AhAriyA ya pariNAmiyA
ya nAhaM gao tattiM  /  / 50 /  /  saMsAracakravAle sarve'pi ca pudgalA mayA
bahuzaH  /  AhAritAzca pariNAmitAzca na cAhaM gatastRptim  /  / 5 /  /  bhuva na
kevalaM mayA saMsaratA vedanA eva soDhAH  /  api tvAhArA api sukhahetukA:
srvepyaahaaritaaH| paraM tathA'pyatRpta evAyaM mamAtmeti bhAvayannAha -
saMsAracakravAle bhavacakre bhramatA mayA sarve'pi pudgalAH samagro'pi
pudgalAstikAya:  /  bahuzo'nekaza:  /  AhAritA AhAre gRhitAH, pariNAmitAzca
tdrsvednen| athavA pariNAmitAzca tanumanovAkprANatvena  /  anantAn
pudgalaparAvartAn paribhramatA mayA  /  tathApi taiH sarvairAhArairapi nA'haM
tRptiM gato na saMtoSamApanna ityarthaH  /  / 5 /  /  soma0 atha na kevalaM mayA
vedanA eva soDhAH, kintvAhArA api sukhahetukAH sarvepyAhAritAH, tathApi atRpta
evAyaM mamAtmeti bhAvayati - cakravAlazabdaH samUhArthe saMsAracakravAle
bhavasamUhe bhramatA mayA sarve'pi pudgalAH sarvo'pi pudgalAstikAyo
bahuzo'nekaza AhAritA AhAratvena gRhItAH pariNAmitAzca tadrasavedanena
tanumanovAkprANatvena vA'nantapudgalaparAvartAn bhramatA mayeti yogastathApi
tairnAhaM tRptiM gato na santoSamApannaH  /  / 50 /  /  guNa bhavacakre bhramatA
mayA sarve'pi pudgalAH samagro'pi pudgalAstikAyo bahuzo anekaza AhAratvena
gRhItAH pariNAmitAzca tad rasavedanena nAhaM tRptiM gato na santoSamApanna
ityarthaH  /  / 50 /  /  2010_02

Page #116 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------



======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 khaNDaH- 1 gA. 51, 52 -kaTThehi va aggI lavaNajalo vA naIsahassehiM  /  -
bhogehiM  /  / 51 /  /  taNa na imo jIvo sakko tippeuM kAma tRNakASThairivAgni
lavaNajala iva nadIsahastraiH  /  nAyaM jIvaH zakyastarpayituM kAma- 1 - bhogaiH
/  /  51  /  /  bhuva0 kena dRSTAntena na tRpta ityAha tRNakASThairivAgniH,
lavaNaM kSAraM jalaM yatra sa lavaNajalo lavaNasamudraH  /  vA ivArthe  /
nadIsahasraiH sahasrazabdo bahutvasaMkhyAvacanaH  /  yathA
samudrazcaturdazabhirnadInAM lakSaiH SaTpaJcAzatsahastrairnavatyadhikairna tRpto
na pUrNa:  /  evamamunA dRSTAntena  /  na imotti nAyaM jIva: zakyastarpayituM
tRptIkartuM kAmabhogaiH  /  kAmA: zabdarUpagandhAH  /  bhogA
rasasparzAstairityarthaH  /  /  51  /  /  - soma0 kena draSTAntena na tRpta
ityAha- tRNakASThairivAgniH lavaNaM kSAraM jalaM yasya sa lavaNajalo
lavaNasamudra ityarthaH  /  vA ivArthe  /  nadIsahastraiH sahasrazabdo
bahutvasUcakaH, yathA nadInAM caturdazalakSaiH
SaTpaJcAzatsahasrairnavatyadhikaiH samudro na tRpto na pUrNastathA nAyaM
jIvastarpayituM zakyaH tRptIkartuM kAmabhogaiH kAmAH zabdarUpagandhAH, bhogA
rasasparzAstairityarthaH  /  /  51  /  /  - guNa0 kena draSTAntena spaSTAH  /
navaraM na 'imo' na cAyaM jIvaH zakyastarpayituM tRptIkartuM kAmAH
zabdarUpagandhAH  /  bhogA rasasparzAstairityarthaH  /  /  51  /  /
AhAranimitteNaM macchA gacchaMti sattamaM puDhaviM  /  saccitto AhAro na khamo [
khamai] maNasA vi pattheu  /  /  52  /  /  AhAranimittena matsyA gacchanti
saptamIM pRthivIm  /  sacitta AhAro na kSamo [ kSamate] manasA'pi prArthayitum
/  /  52  /  /  2010_02 75 bhuva0 atha teSu gRddhasya doSAn darzayannAha
AhAranimittenAhAreNa hetunA matsyAstandulamatsyA gacchanti yAnti saptamIM
pRthivIM tamastamAbhidhAm  /  rasasya doSaM bhaNatA zeSANAmapi zabda-rUpa-
gandha- - sparzAnAM doSo darzita eva  /  taddhetutvAccheSaviSayANAm  /  teSAmapi
doSa uktairdarzyate  /  tathAhi - so iMdiya dutaNassa ahaittiu imo doso  /
dIvikhamasahaMto vahabaMdhatittiro patto  /   /  1  /   /

Page #117 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
76 Aaturpratyakhyanaprakirnakam Ga. 53 This is the fault of the eye-sense organ:
just as water falls on the ground, so does the ignorant person. ||2|| This is
the fault of the nose-sense organ: just as a bee is attracted by a fragrant
smell. ||3|| This is the fault of the tongue-sense organ: just as a fish,
attracted by a bait, jumps out of the water. ||4|| This is the fault of the
touch-sense organ: just as an elephant, attracted by a sweet smell, digs up the
ground with its tusks. ||5|| Since this is the fault, therefore, due to the
natural tendency of the Tirthankaras and Sadhus, there is a change in gender,
and they are unable to desire food with their minds. ||52|| Soma: Then the
Kshatriya, thinking about the faults of the vulture in food, says: Food is the
cause, food is the cause. Therefore, seeing many fish entering and exiting the
mouth of the big fish, the fish think, "If I become like this, then I will eat
all of them." Thus, they go to the seventh earth, called Tamas, with a fierce
mind. Similarly, the fault of taste is to be understood from the examples of
deer, insects, bees, and elephants, as the desire for other objects is rooted in
taste. Since this is the fault, therefore, due to the natural tendency of the
Sadhus, they are unable to desire food with their minds. They are not virtuous,
nor are they logical. The meaning of "na khamati" is that due to the natural
tendency, there is a change in gender, and the Jina Sadhus are unable to desire
food with their minds. ||52|| Guna: Then he says about the faults of the vulture
in food: Due to food, the fish go to the seventh earth. They are unable to
desire food with their minds. ||52|| Previously, having done the karma, without
any cause, he thought with his mind. Later, he accepted death immediately, being
stained with the kshaya. ||53|| Previously, having done the karma, without any
cause, he thought with his mind. Later, he accepted death immediately, being
stained with the kshaya. ||53|| Bhava: The Kshatriya, having known the result of
the object, and having been taught by the Guru, says: Previously, in the
beginning, he did the karma, having done the excellent, medium, and inferior
karma, in the order of "four varieties", etc.   2010_02

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 76 AturapratyAkhyAnaprakIrNakam gA. 53 cakhidiyadudaMtaNassa ahaittiu imo doso
/  jaM jalaghUmi jalaM te paDai payaMgo abuddhIu  /  / 2 /  /
ghANiMdiyadudaMtaNassa ahaittiu imo doso  /  jaM usahigaMdheNa bilAo niddhAyaIo
ego  /  / 3 /  /  jibhiMdiyadudaMtaNassa ahaittiu imo doso  /
jaMgalalaggukhitto phurai thalathirallio maccho  /  / 4 /  /
phAsiMdiyadudaMtaNassa ahaittiu imo doso  /  jaM khaNai matthayaM kuMjarassa
lohaM kusotikho  /  / 5 /  /  yata evaitAvAn doSaH ata eva tIrthakarasAdhUnAM
sarvadoSamUlaM prAkRtatvAt liGgavyatyayaH sacittamAhAraM manasApi prArthayituM
na kSamate  /  / 52 /  /  soma0 atha kSapaka AhAre gRddhasya doSAn cintayati -
AhAra eva nimittam AhAranimittam, tena matsyAstandulamatsyA
mahAmatsyamukhamadhye pravizato nisaratazcAnekAn matsyAn
dRSTvA'hamevaMvidhavapuzced bhavAmi tadaitAn sarvAn bhakSayAmIti
raudradhyAnaparA gacchanti yAnti saptamIM pRthivIM tamastamA'bhidhAm, evaM
rasasya doSaM bhaNatA zeSANAmapi zabda-rUpa-gandha-sparzANAM doSo mRga-
pataGgabhRGga-mAtaGgadRSTAntairbhaNita eva draSTavyo
rasamUlatvAccheSaviSayecchAnAm, yata evaitAvAn doSa ata eva sAdhUnAM
sarvadoSamUlatvAt sacittAhAro manasA'pi prArthayituM na kSamo na sAdhurna
yauktika ityarthaH  /  'na khamai' iti pAThe tu prAkRtatvAlliGgavyatyayaM kRtvA
sacittamAhAraM jinasAdhUnAM manasA prArthayituM na kSamate na sahate ityarthaH
/  / 52 /  /  guNa atha teSu gRddhasya doSAnAha-AhAreNa hetunA matsyA yAnti
saptamI pRthvI, sacittamAhAraM manasApi prArthayituM na kSamate na sahate  /  /
52 /  /  pubbiM kayaparikammo aniyANo IhiUNa [UhiUNa mai-buddhI  /  pacchA
maliyakasAo sajjo maraNaM paDicchAmi  /  / 53 /  /  pUrvaM kRtaparikarmA anidAna
UhitvA matibuddhI  /  pazcAt malitakaSAyaH sadyo maraNaM pratIcchAmi  /  / 53 /
/  bhava. iti vijJAtaviSayavipAko bhAvitagurUpadezazca kSapako yadbhaNati tadAha
- pUrve prathama "cattAri vicittAI" ityAdikrameNa kRtaparikarmA
kRtotkRSTamadhyamajaghanyadvAdazavarSa 2010_02

Page #118 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Chapter: 1 Verse: 54  **Verse 53**  Twelve years, twelve months, twelve
fortnights, a detailed account. Without a cause, without a cause.  "Ehiun" (to
think) and "Vittal" (to consider) the mind arising at that time, the intellect
that is future-oriented and subtle in its understanding, after considering it
again.  The one who has purified the passions and subdued the attachments, being
ready, quickly accepts death, meaning, I accept it.  **Verse 54**  Those who are
not prepared, who are not ready, at the time of death, they fall back due to the
influence of their past actions.  **Explanation**  Now, regarding those who are
unprepared and do not perform the right actions, and who accept death, the text
explains their downfall. Those who perform worship without proper preparation,
without a proper occasion, and whose soul has not been prepared for a long time,
they are not ready.  (The text uses a grammatical abbreviation due to its
Prakrit nature).  These men, who have not performed proper worship, at the time
of death, due to the influence of their past actions, they fall back.  They
perform actions like "Nandisena" (a mythical figure who performed false worship)
and thus they go to hell.  It means, they are like "Kurudo" (a blind person) and
"Utkurudo" (a person who is blind and deaf).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 khaNDa:-1 gA. 54 dvAdazamAsadvAdazapakSasaMlekhanaH  /  anidAno nidAnarahitaH
/  IhiUNa vitaLa vicArya mati tatkAlotpannAM, buddhimuttarakAlabhAvinIM
sUkSmArthaparyAlocikA pazcAdvicAraNAnantaram  /  malitakaSAyo marditasamparAya:
san sadyo jhaTiti maraNaM paNDitamaraNaM pratIcchAmyajhIkaromItyarthaH  /  / 53
/  /  soma0 atha bhAvitagurUpadezo vijJAtaviSayavipAkazca kSapakazcintayati
pUrva prathamaM "cattAri vicittAI" ityAdikrameNa kRtaparikarmA kRtadvAdazavarSa-
dvAdazamAsa-dvAdazapakSarUpotkRSTa-madhyamajaghanyasaMlekhano'nidAno
nidAnarahita 'UhiUNa' vicArya svayogyatAviSayAM matiM tatkAlotpannAM buddhiM ca
tadviSayAmevottarakAlabhAvinIM sUkSmArthapalocananipuNAm, pazcAt
tadvicAraNAnantaraM malita-kaSAyo marditasaMparAyaH san sadyaH zIghraM maraNaM
tadhetutvenopacArAdanazanaM pratIcchAmyaGgIkaromItyarthaH  /  / 53 /  /  guNa
iti vijJAtaviSayavipAko bhAvitagurUpadezazca kSapako yadbhaNati tadAha - pUrva
prathama "cattAri vicittA" ityAdikrameNa kRtaparikarmA tti
kRtokRSTamadhyamajaghanyadvAdazavarSadvAdazamAsadvAdazapakSasaMlekhanaH  /
anidAno nidAnarahitaH  /  IhiUNa vitaLa vicArya matiM tatkAlotpannAM
buddhimuttarakAlabhAvinI pazcAdvicAraNAnantaraM malitakaSAyo marditasamparAyaH
san sadyo jhaTiti pratIcchAmyaGgIkaromi  /  / 53 /  /  akkaMDe'cirabhAviya te
purisA maraNadesakAlammi  /  puvakayakammaparibhAvaNAe pacchA parivaDaMti  /  /
54 /  /  akANDe'cirabhAvitAste puruSAH maraNadezakAle  /
pUrvakRtakarmaparibhAvanAtaH pazcAt pratipatanti  /  / 54 /  /  bhuvaH atha
ye'prastAve'parikarmitA vA'nazanaM pratipadyante teSAmapAyamAha -
akANDe'prastAve'navasare ye ArAdhanAM kurvanti  /  tathA na ciraM prabhUtaM
kAlaM paribhAvitaH parikarmita AtmA yaiste acirabhAvitAH  /  vibhaktilopaH
prAkRtatvAt  /  te'kRtA'navasarArAdhanAH akRtArAdhanAH puruSA maraNadezakAle
maraNasamaye pUrvakRtakarmaparibhAvanAtazca prAktanakarmavipAkodayata:
pratipatanti [pazcAt] nidAnAdi kurvantIti  /  nandiSeNavat mithyAtvamapi
durgatiM ca yAnti  /  kuruDotkuruDavadityarthaH  /  / 54 /  /  _ 2010_02

Page #119 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 78 **Chapter 55: The Scattering of the Rejection of the Eager**  **Verse 54**
So, those who undertake fasting without a proper occasion and without having
performed the necessary rituals, their downfall is described here: Those who
perform worship in the form of fasting without a proper occasion and without a
proper time, and those whose souls have been purified by rituals after a long
and abundant period of time (i.e., those who have been purified for a long
time), and those who are not like this (i.e., those who have not been purified
for a long time) - these men, at the time of death, at the time of death (i.e.,
the word "time" refers to the occasion). The feeling that arises from the karma
accumulated in the past, from the completion of that karma, arises from the
results of their own natural karma. They fall into falsehood and hell like the
Nandiṣa, due to the cause of their actions. They go to hell like the Kuruḍa and
the Utkuḍa.  **Verse 55** Therefore, the Chandrakavedhya should be performed by
a man with a proper reason and with a straight mind. The soul, free from all
defects, should be made to walk on the path of liberation.  **Explanation** If
there is a fault in those who perform actions without a proper occasion and
without having practiced them, then what should be done? The Guru gives the
following advice: Therefore, the Chandrakavedhya, which is the piercing of the
moon, should be performed by a man with a proper reason. Just as the
Chandrakavedhya is performed with a proper reason for the attainment of a
kingdom or other benefits, by a prince who has been given a boon by Indra, so
also you should perform the Chandrakavedhya, like the Chandrakavedhya, with a
proper reason for the attainment of heaven and liberation. Then how should it be
performed? It is said: "The soul, free from all defects, should be made to walk
on the path of liberation." Where? On the path of liberation, which is the path
of knowledge, vision, conduct, and austerity. For it is by following this path
that one can perform the Chandrakavedhya.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 78 AturapratyAkhyAnaprakIrNakam gA. 55 soma0 atha ye'prastAve'parikarmitA vA
saMlekhanayA'nazanaM pratipadyante teSAmapAyamAha - akANDe'prastAve'navasare ye
ArAdhanAmanazagrahaNarUpAM kurvanti, tathA ciraM prabhUtaM kAlaM bhAvitaH
saMlekhanayA parikarmita AtmA yaiste cirabhAvitAH, tathA ye na evaMvidhAste
[acirabhAvitAH] puruSA maraNadezakAle maraNasamaye ityarthaH, dezakAlazabdena
prastAva ucyate  /  pUrvaM kRtamarjitaM yat karma tasya parisamantAd bhAvanA
tataH, svaprAkRtakarmavipAkodayata ityarthaH  /  pazcAt pratipatanti
nidAnAdikaraNena nandiSeNavat mithyAtvaM durgatiM ca yAnti kuruDotkuruDavat  /
/ 54  /  /  gaNa0 atha ye'prastAve'parikarmitA vA'nazanaM pratipadyante
teSAmapAyamAha-aprastAve'navasare ArAdhanAM kurvanti.  /  ciraM prabhUtaM kAlaM
bhAvitaH parikarmita AtmA yaiste [cirabhAvitAH, tathA ye na evaMvidhAste
acirabhAvitA:  / ] acirabhAviyA iti atra vibhaktilopaH prAkRtatvAt te
kRtAnavasarArAdhanAH puruSA maraNadezakAle maraNasamaye
pUrvakRtakarmaparibhAvanAtazca prAktanakarmavipAkodayataH  /  pratipatanti
nidAnAni kurvanti nandiSeNavat  /  durgatiM ca yAnti kuruDotkuruDavat  /  / 54 /
/  tamhA caMdagavijjhaM sakAraNaM ujjueNa puriseNaM  /  jIvo avirahiyaguNo
kAyavvo mukkhamaggammi  /  / 55 /  /  tasmAccandrakavedhyaM sakAraNam udyuktena
puruSeNa  /  jIvo'virahitaguNaH karttavyo mokSamArge  /  / 55 /  /  bhuka yadi
vA'prastAvakAriNAmakRtAbhyAsAnAM doSastasmAtkiM karttavyamiti gururupadezamAha -
tasmAccaMdrakavedhyaM
vAmadakSiNAvarttabhramadaSTacakrArakamadhyanirgacchadarddhamukhazaraprayogato bh
UsthatailakuNDikAtailAnta:pratibimbitagaganasthAdhomukhaputtalikAvAmalocanacandr
akavedhyaM rAdhAvedhamityarthaH  /  sakAraNaM sahetukamudyuktena puruSeNa
sAdhyamityadhyAhAraH  /  yathA candrakavedhyaM rAdhAvedhaM sakAraNaM
rAjyAdilAbhakRte kenA'pi surendradattakalpena rAjaputreNa sAdhyate evaM tvayA'pi
candrakavedhyamiva candrakavedhyamanazanaM sakAraNaM
svargApavargakamalAlAbhakRte udyuktena sAvadhAnena sAdhyamityarthaH  /  tarhi
kathaM sAdhyata ityAha - "bAhira jogavirahio abhiMtara" jIvo jIva AtmA
avirahitaguNo'muktajJAnadarzanacAritraguNaH karttavyaH  /  kva ? mokSamArge
jJAnadarzanacAritrataporupe tadvyavasthito hi candrakavedhyamArAdhanAM
sAdhayatItyarthaH  /  / 55 /  /  _ 2010_02

Page #120 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Chapter: 1 Verse: 56  **Verse 55**  The Guru instructs on what should be done:
"Therefore, the moon, which is to be pierced, is like the target in archery,
which is to be pierced by an arrow shot upwards from the middle of the wheel,
which is rotating clockwise and counterclockwise, and which is reflected in the
oil in the earthen pot on the ground. This is the meaning of 'piercing the
moon'. It is to be achieved. By whom? By a man. What kind of man? One who is
diligent, determined, and careful. How? With a reason, for the sake of attaining
heaven, liberation, and wealth. Just as the moon is pierced for the sake of
gaining a kingdom, etc., by someone, so too, this moon-like fasting should be
done with care for the sake of attaining liberation, etc. This is the means of
achieving it."  The Guru instructs on what should be done: "The moon, which is
to be pierced, is like the target in archery, which is to be pierced by an arrow
shot upwards from the middle of the wheel, which is rotating clockwise and
counterclockwise, and which is reflected in the oil in the earthen pot on the
ground. This is the meaning of 'piercing the moon'. It is to be achieved with a
reason, by a diligent man. Just as the moon is pierced for the sake of gaining a
kingdom, etc., by someone like a prince who is given by Indra, so too, this
moon-like fasting should be done with care for the sake of attaining heaven,
liberation, and the lotus of liberation. How then is it to be achieved?"
**Verse 56**  "The soul should be free from external practices and should be
devoted to internal meditation. Just as a wise person abandons the body in that
time and place, so too, the soul should be free from external practices and
should be devoted to internal meditation."  "The soul should be free from
external practices and should be devoted to internal meditation. Just as a wise
person abandons the body in that time and place, so too, the soul should be free
from external practices and should be devoted to internal meditation."  "How
should the soul be guided on the path of liberation?" The Guru says: "The soul
should be free from external practices, such as external relationships, means of
travel, and tools. It should be devoted to internal meditation, such as 'Jin-
Saahu-Gun-Kittan', etc. Just as a wise person abandons the body in that time and
place, so too, the soul should be free from external practices and should be
devoted to internal meditation."

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 khaNDa:-1 gA. 56 soma0 yata evaM tataH kiM karttavyamiti gururupadezamAha -
tasmAt kAraNAccandrakavedhyaM
vAmadakSiNAvartabhramadaSTacakrArakamadhyanirgacchadUrdhvamukhazaraprayogato
bhUsthakuNDakAgatatailAntaH .
pratibimbitagaganasthAdhomukhaputtalikAvAmalocanarUpazcandrakastadrUpaM
Urdhvamukhazaraprayogato vedhyaM rAdhAvedhamityarthaH sAdhyamityadhyAhAraH, kena
? puruSeNa, kimbhUtena ? udyuktena udyamavatA sAvadhAnenatyarthaH  /  katham ?
sakAraNaM svargApavargAdizrIlAbhahetorityarthaH yathA rAdhAvedhaH sakAraNaM
rAjyAdilAbhakRte kenApi sAdhyate evaM candrakavedhyamivAnazanaM sakAraNaM
mokSAdilAbhakRte sAvadhAnena sAdhayitavyamiti bhAvaH,
tatsAdhanopAyazcAyamityAha- jIvo0 jIvAtmA'virahitaguNo'muktajJAnadarzana-
cAritraguNaH karttavyaH  /  kka ? mokSamArge jJAnadarzanacAritrataporUpe
tadvyavasthito hi candravedhyasamAM prAntArAdhanAM sAdhayatItyarthaH  /  / 55 /
/  guNa yadi aprastAvakAriNAmakRtAbhyAsAnAM ca doSastasmAt kiM kartavyamiti
gurupadezamAha - candrakavedhyaM
vAmadakSiNAvartabhramadaSTacakrArakamadhyanirgacchadUrdhvamukhazaraprayogato bhU
sthatailakuNDikAtailAntaHpratibimbitagaganasthAdhomukhaputtalikAvAmalocanacandra
kavedhyaM rAdhAvedhamityarthaH  /  sakAraNaM sahetukamudyuktena puruSeNa
sAdhyamityadhyAhAraH  /  yathA candrakavedhyaM rAdhAvedhyaM sakAraNaM
rAjyAdilAbhakRte kenApi surendradattakalpena rAjaputreNa sAdhyate evaM tvayA'pi
candrakavedhyamiva candrakavedhyamanazanaM sakAraNaM
svargApavargakamalAlAbhakRte udyuktena sAvadhAnena sAdhyamityarthaH  /  tarhi
kathaM sAdhyata ityAha-jIvo0 AtmArUpo'virahitaguNo'muktajJAnadarzanacAritraguNaH
kartavyaH  /  kva ? mokSa0 mokSamArge jJAnadarzanacAritrataporUpe tadvyavasthito
hi candrakavedhyamArAdhanAM sAdhayatItyarthaH  /  / 55 /  /  bAhirajogavirahio
abhiMtarajhANajogamallINo  /  jaha tammi desakAle amUDhasanno cayai dehaM  /  /
56 /  /  bAhyayogavirahito'bhyantaradhyAnayogamAzritaH  /  yathA tasmin
dezakAle'mUDhasaMjJastyajati deham  /  / 56 /  /  bhuvaH kathaM mokSamArge jIvo
gAmayitavya ityAha - bAhyayogairbAhyasambandhairgacchopakaraNAdibhirvirahito
viyuktaH  /  abhyantaradhyAnayogaM 'jiNasAhuguNakittaNa' ityAdirUpaM allINotti
AzritastathA karttavya ityadhyAhAraH  /  yathA tasmin dezakAle'mUDhasaMjJaH san
/  2010_02

Page #121 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Āturpratyākhyānaprakirṇakam Gā. 57  **56.** The one who is not devoid of
consciousness abandons the body, meaning the physical form. When the reading is
"na hu tammi," then the meaning is this: If one is not free from external yoga
in the past and is not engaged in internal meditation yoga, then he will not
abandon the body, meaning the physical form, at the time of death, without being
confused.  **56.** Soma asks, "How should such a being be in the path of
liberation?" He says, "One who is free from external yoga, which is in the form
of external connections, means of travel, tools, and other restrictions, and who
is engaged in internal meditation yoga, like "jiṇasāhugunakittaṇa," etc., and
who is dependent on the "alllīṇo," should be like that." Just as in that place
and time, at that moment, he is not confused, not devoid of consciousness,
meaning he is mindful, he abandons the body, meaning the physical form. When the
reading is "na hu tammi dese kāle," then the meaning is this: If one is free
from external yoga in the past and is engaged in internal meditation yoga, then
he will not abandon the body, meaning the physical form, at the time of death,
without being confused.  **56.** Guṇa asks, "How should a being be in the path
of liberation?" He says, "One who is free from external yoga, which is in the
form of external connections, means of travel, tools, and other restrictions,
and who is engaged in internal meditation yoga, like "jiṇasādhugunakittaṇa,"
etc., and who is dependent on the "alllīṇo," should be like that." Just as in
that place and time, at that moment, he is not confused, not devoid of
consciousness, he abandons the body.  **57.** Having conquered attachment and
aversion, having broken the chain of eight karmas, [the collection], Having cut
the fetters of birth and death, you will be liberated from existence.  **57.**
Having conquered attachment and aversion, having broken the chain of eight
karmas, [the collection], Having cut the fetters of birth and death, you will be
liberated from existence.  **57.** Bhuk says, "My dear, what will happen to you
who are about to abandon your body?" He says, "Having conquered attachment and
aversion (singular because of Prakrit grammar) and having broken the chain of
eight karmas, 'sankaliam' in the reading, meaning the eight karmas, the fetters
of birth and death, meaning birth, old age, and death, the fetters of birth, old
age, and death, in which the beings of the world, bound by the mass of karma,
wander like a tied goat. Even among them, some who are careless wander and,
having broken the garland of virtues, fall into the hellish pit and suffer
intense pain. Those who wander without carelessness, having been showered with
the teachings of the guru, are free from bondage and attain the auspicious path
that leads to liberation in all aspects. Having cut such fetters of birth, old
age, and death, my dear, you will be liberated from existence."  **57.** Soma
says, "My dear, what will happen to you who are about to abandon your body?" He
says, "Having conquered attachment and aversion (singular because of Prakrit
grammar) or because of the duality of the collection, and having broken the
chain of eight karmas, 'sankaliam' in the reading, meaning the eight karmas,

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 AturapratyAkhyAnaprakIrNakam gA. 57 avigatacetanastyajati dehaM
zarIramityarthaH  /  yadA na hu taMmIti pAThastadAyamarthaH, yadi pUrva
bAhyayogavirato na syAdabhyantaradhyAnayogayuktazca na syAttadA na hu naiva
tasmin dezakAle maraNAvasare'mUDhasaMjJa: san dehaM zarIraM tyajedityarthaH  /
/ 56 /  /  soma0 kathaM mokSamArge evaMvidho jIvaH karttavya ityAha -
bAhyayogairbAhyasambandhagacchopakaraNAdipratibandharUpaivirahito
viyukto'bhyantaradhyAnayogaM "jiNasAhuguNakittaNa" ityAdirUpama, allINotti
AzritaH svAtmA tathA karttavya ityadhyAhAraH  /  yathA tasmin dezakAle
tasminnavasare'mUDhasaMjJo'vigatacetanaH sAvadhAnamanA ityarthaH, tyajati dehaM
zarIramityarthaH  /  'na hu taMmi dezakAle' iti kvacitpAThastatrAyamarthaH yadi
pUrvameva bAhyayogavirato'bhyantaradhyAnayogayuktazca syAt, tadA 'na hu' naiva
tasmin dezakAle'mUDhasaMjJassan dehaM tyajedityarthaH  /  / 56 /  /  guNa kathaM
mokSamArge jIvaH kartavya ityAha -
bAhyayogairbAhyasambandhairgacchopakaraNAdibhirvirahito
viyukto'bhyantaradhyAnayogaM 'jiNasAdhuguNakittaNa' ityAdirUpam, allINo
AzritastathA kartavya ityadhyAhAraH  /  yathA tasmin dezakAle
tasminnavasare'mUDhasaMjJa avigatacetanastyajati dehm||56|| haMtUNa rAga-dosaM
bhittUNa ya aTThakammasaMghAyaM [sNkli| jammaNa-maraNa rahamu chettUNa bhavA
vimuccihisi  /  / 57 /  /  hatvA rAgadveSau bhittvA cASTakarmasaGghAtam
[sNklikaam|| janmamaraNArahaTTaM chittvA bhavAd vimokSyase  /  / 57 /  /  bhuka
evaM ca vatsa ! tava dehatyAginaH kiM na bhaviSyatItyAha - hatvA rAgadveSau
ekavacanaM prAkRtatvAt bhittvA'STakarmasaMkalikAM zRGkhalAM
jammaNamaraNarahaTTaMti janmamaraNAnyevAraghaTTo janmajarAmaraNAraghaTTastatra
janmamaraNAraghaTTe saMsAriNo jIvAH karmarAzipratibaddhA balIvardavatsatataM
paribhramanti  /  tatrApi ye kecanApi pramattA: santaH paryaTanti te guNamAlAM
bhaGktvA narakakUpe nipatanti iti tIvraduHkhAni ca sahante ye punarapramattA
bhramanti te gurudezanAvRSTimocitA: santo bandharahitAH sarvAGgamokSakarAM
sugatiM prApnuvanti  /  tamevaMbhUtaM janmamaraNAraghaTTa chittvA
bhavAtsaMsArAdvatsa ! mokSyase tvamityarthaH  /  / 57 /  /  soma0 evaM vatsa !
tava dehatyAginaH kiM bhaviSyatItyAha - hatvA rAgadveSau ekavacanaM prAkRtatvAt
samAhAradvandvavazAd vA bhittvA cASTakarmasaGghAtam, 'saMkaliaM' iti
pAThe'STakarmarUpA 2010_02

Page #122 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Chapter: 1 Verse: 58  "This chain of eight karmas, you will break it, that is
the meaning."  The cycle of birth and death is a collision, a collision of birth
and death, breaking through it, you will be liberated from the world, dear one!
This is the meaning: In the collision of birth and death, the souls of the
world, bound by the mass of karma, wander like a tied animal, constantly. Even
among them, those who are careless wander, consuming the garland of qualities,
fall into the well of hell, and endure intense suffering. Those who wander
without carelessness, purified by the rain of the Guru's teachings, free from
bondage, attain the auspicious path, the path to liberation in all aspects.
Thus, you too will be liberated, that is the meaning. ||57||  "And, dear one,
what will happen to your body after death?"  Breaking the chain of eight karmas,
the souls of the world, bound by the mass of karma, wander like a tied animal,
constantly. Even among them, those who are careless wander, consuming the
garland of qualities, fall into the well of hell, and endure intense suffering.
Those who wander without carelessness, purified by the Guru's teachings, free
from bondage, attain the auspicious path, the path to liberation in all aspects.
Thus, breaking through this collision of birth and death, you will be liberated
from the world, dear one! ||57||  This (thus) all teachings, I believe in the
Jina's vision, in three ways.  The path to liberation, the well-being of the
mobile and immobile, the path to Nirvana. ||58||  This (thus) all teachings, I
believe in the Jina's vision, in three ways.  The path to liberation, the well-
being of the mobile and immobile, the path to Nirvana. ||58||  "Thus, the Guru
has taught," what does the disciple say?  He says, "Thus, I believe in all these
teachings, the Jina's vision, in three ways."  How are the teachings?  The well-
being of the mobile and immobile, the welfare of all beings.  Again, how are
they?  The shore, the other shore, of what?  The path to Nirvana, the path to
liberation, that is the meaning. ||58||  "Thus, the Guru has taught," the
disciple said, "Thus, I believe in all these teachings, the teachings you have
given, the Jina's vision, in three ways."  How are the teachings?  The well-
being of the mobile and immobile, the welfare of all beings.  Again, how are
they?  The shore, the other shore, of what?  The path to Nirvana, the path to
liberation, the path to liberation, the path to liberation, the path to
liberation, the path to liberation, the path to liberation, the path to
liberation, the path to liberation, the path to liberation, the path to
liberation, the path to liberation, the path to liberation, the path to
liberation, the path to liberation, the path to liberation, the path to
liberation, the path to liberation, the path to liberation, the path to
liberation, the path to liberation, the path to liberation, the path to
liberation, the path to liberation, the path to liberation, the path to
liberation, the path to liberation, the path to liberation, the path to
liberation, the path to liberation, the path to liberation, the path to
liberation, the path to liberation, the path to liberation, the path to
liberation, the path to liberation, the path to liberation, the path to
liberation, the path to liberation, the path to liberation, the path to
liberation, the path to liberation, the path to liberation, the path to

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 khaNDa:-1 gA. 58 yA saGkalikA zRGkhalA tAM bhittvetyarthaH'
janmamaraNAnyevAraghaTTo janmamaraNAraghaTTastaM chittvA bhavAt saMsArAd vatsa !
mokSyase tvam  /  ayaM bhAvaH- janmamaraNAraghaTTe saMsAriNo jIvAH
karmarAzibaddhA balIvardavat satataM bhramanti, tatrApi ye pramattAssantaH
paryaTanti guNarUpAM mAlAM bhaktvA narakarUpe kUpe nipatanti tIvraduHkhAni ca
sahante  /  ye punarapramattA bhramanti te gurudezanAvRSTizodhitAH santo
bandharahitAH sarvAGgamokSakarAM sugatiM prApnuvanti evaM tvamapi mokSyase
ityarthaH  /  / 57 /  /  guNa evaM ca vatsa ! tava dehatyAginaH kiM bhAvItyAha -
bhittvA'STakarmasaMkalikAzRkhalAm  /  janmamaraNAraghaTTe bhavino jIvAH
karmarAzipratibaddhA balIvardavat satataM paribhramanti  /  tatrApi ye kecanApi
pramattAH santaH paryaTanti te guNamAlAM bhaktvA narakakUpe patanti,
tIvraduHkhAni sahanti  /  ye punarapramatA bhramanti te gurudezanAmocitA santo
bandharahitA sarvAMgamokSakarAM sugatiM prApnuvanti  /  tamevaMbhUtaM
janmamaraNArahaTTaM chittvA saMsArAt vatsa ! mokSyase tvam  /  / 57  /  /  eyaM
(evaM) savvuvaesaM jiNadiTuM saddahAmi tiviheNaM  /  tasa-thAvarakhemakaraM
pAraM nivvANamaggassa  /  / 58 /  /  etaM (evaM) sarvopadezaM jinadRSTaM
zraddadhe trividhena  /  trasasthAvarakSemakaraM pAraM nirvANamArgasya  /  / 58
/  /  bhuvaH ityevaM gurubhirupadiSTe sa kSapakaH kiM brUte ityAha - evaM etaM
vA sarvamupadezaM jinadRSTaM zraddadhe  /  trividhena manovAkkAyena  /
kathaMbhUtamupadezam ? trasasthAvarakSemakaraM sarvajIvakalyANakAri  /  punaH
kathaMbhUtam ? pAraM paratIram, kasya ? nirvANamArgasya mokSapathasyetyarthaH  /
/ 58 /  /  soma0 evaM gurubhirUpadiSTe kSapakaH prAha - evaM etaM vA
yuSmadupadiSTaM sarvamupadezaM jinadRSTaM zraddadhe trividhena manovAkkAyena  /
kathambhUtamupadezam ? trasasthAvarakSemaGkaraM sarvajIvakalyANakAri, punaH
kathambhUtam ? pAraM paratIram  /  kasya ? nirvANamArgasya mokSapathasya
mokSamArgapAraprApakaM mokSadAyakamityarthaH  /  / 58  /  /  guNa evaM
gurUpakRte kSapako vadati - evaM etaM vA sarvamupadezaM jinadRSTaM zraddadhe
trividhena manovAkkAyena  /  kathaMbhUtamupadezam ? trasasthAvarakSemakaraM
sarvajIvakalyANakAri, punaH kathaMbhUtam ? pAraM paratIram kasya ?
nirvANamArgasya mokSapathasyetyarthaH  /  / 58  /  /  JainEducation
International 2010_02

Page #123 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Aaturpratyakhyanaprakirnakam Ga. 59, 60**  Even in that time and place, the
twelve-fold *Shruta-skandha* cannot be fully comprehended. Even with a strong
mind, it is difficult to contemplate all of it. ||59||  **Explanation:**  It has
been said that a *jiva* should be endowed with virtues by the *gurus*. This is
achieved through contemplation of the *Shruta*. How much should one contemplate?
The text says: "Even in that time and place, when the bonds are loosening, the
tongue falters, and the power of hearing is waning, the twelve-fold *Shruta-
skandha* cannot be fully comprehended. Even with a strong mind, it is difficult
to contemplate all of it." ||59||  **Explanation:**  The *jiva* becomes virtuous
through contemplation of the *Shruta*. The text asks how much *Shruta* should be
contemplated. It says: "Even in that time and place, when the bonds are
loosening, the tongue falters, and the power of hearing is waning, the twelve-
fold *Shruta-skandha* cannot be fully comprehended. Even with a strong mind, it
is difficult to contemplate all of it." ||59||  **Explanation:**  A *jiva*
becomes virtuous through contemplation of the *Shruta*. The text asks how much
*Shruta* should be contemplated. It says: "Even in that time and place, when the
bonds are loosening, the tongue falters, and the power of hearing is waning, the
twelve-fold *Shruta-skandha* cannot be fully comprehended. Even with a strong
mind, it is difficult to contemplate all of it." ||59||  If a person progresses
on the path of *viraaga* with enthusiasm in even one step, then that death is to
be considered as death. ||60||  **Explanation:**  If a person progresses on the
path of *viraaga* with enthusiasm in even one step, then that death is to be
considered as death. ||60||  **Explanation:**  If a person progresses on the
path of *viraaga* with enthusiasm in even one step, then that death is to be
considered as death. ||60||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 AturapratyAkhyAnaprakIrNakam gA. 59, 60 na hu tammi desakAle sakko bArasaviho
suyakkhaMdho  /  savvo aNuciMteuM dhaNiyaM pi samatthacitteNaM  /  / 59 /  /
naiva tasmin dezakAle zakyo dvAdazavidhaH zrutaskandhaH  /  sarvo'nucintayituM
bADhamapi samarthacittena  /  / 59 /  /  bhuvaH atha gurubhirjIvo'virahitaguNaH
karttavya ityuktam  /  sa ca zrutacintanAdbhavatIti  /  tacca
kiyaccintanIyamityAha - na hu naiva tasmin dezakAle paryantasamaye
zithilIbhavatsu bandhaneSu skhalati jihvAbale apayAntyAM zrutizaktau  /  zakya:
zakanIyo dvAdazavidho dvAdazaprakAraH zrutaskandhaH zrutapiNDo dvAdazAGgarUpaH
sarvo niravazeSaH  /  anucintayituM smA dhaNiyamatyarthamapi samarthacittena
dRDhazrutizaktinApi  /  / 59 /  /  soma0 atha jIvo gurubhiravirahitaguNaH
karttavya ityuktam, sa ca zrutacintanAdeva bhavati, tacca zrutaM
kiyaccintanIyamityAha - 'na hu' naiva tasmin dezakAle paryantasamaye
zithilIbhavatsu bandhaneSu skhalati jihvAbale'payAntyAM zrutazaktau zakyaH
zakanIyo dvAdazavidho dvAdazAGgarUpaH zrutaskandhaH zrutapiNDaH sarvo
niravazeSo'nucintayituM smartuM 'dhaNiyaM' atyarthaM samarthacittena
dRDhamanaHzaktivatA'pi  /  / 59 /  /  gaNa avirahitaguNaH zrutacintanAt bhavati
tadAha - naiva tasmin dezakAle paryantasamaye zithilIbhavatsu bandhaneSu
skhalati jihvAbale'payAntyAM zrutazaktau zakyaH zakanIyo dvAdazavidho
dvAdazaprakAraH zrutaskandhaH sarvo niravazeSo'nucintayituM
'dhaNiyama'tyarthamapi samarthacittena dRDhazrutazaktinApi  /  / 59 /  /  egammi
vi jammi pae saMvegaM vIyarAgamaggammi  /  gacchai naro abhikkhaM taM maraNaM
teNa mariyavvaM  /  / 60 /  /  ekasminnapi yasmin pade saMvegaM vItarAgamArge  /
gacchati naro'bhIkSNaM tanmaraNaM tena marttavyam  /  / 60 /  /  bhuva0 ata
ekasminnapi yasminpade yadevasthAne ekAGgaikAdhyayanaikoddezakaikAdhikAraika *
zravaNazaktI ityarthaH  /  svAdhyAyadRDhamUlazrutajJAnabalavatA'pi  /  _ 2010_02

Page #124 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Chapter: - 1 Verse: 61, 62  **Verse 60** When a person studies the words of the
Gatha, which are the purpose of studying the Angas, he attains the emotion of
liberation, which is the desire for liberation, continuously and constantly.
This death is the attainment of emotion, and it is by this means that one should
die.  **Verse 61** Therefore, even if a person contemplates a single verse,
which is the form of a single verse or a single word, at the time of death, he
becomes a devotee.  **Verse 62** A devotee who has properly spent his time,
having become fit for devotion, attains liberation by going to the three
excellent states.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 khaNDa: - 1 gA. 61, 62 gAthaikapadarUpe adhIte sati vItarAgamArge saMvegaM
mokSAbhilASarUpaM gacchati prApnoti naro manuSyo'bhIkSNaM nirantaraM tanmaraNaM
saMvegaprAptirUpaM tena padena hetunA marttavyamityarthaH  /  /  60  /  /  soma0
ata ekasminnapi yasmin pade'GgAdhyayanoddezagAthApadAdirUpe'dhIte sa
vItarAgamArge saMvegaM mokSAbhilASarUpaM gacchati naro'bhIkSNaM nirantaraM
tanmaraNaM saMvegaprAptisubhagam, tenaiva padenAvismRtena satA
marttavyamityarthaH  /   /  60  /  /  guNa0 ata ekasminnapi yasminpade sthAne
ekagAthA - ekapadarUpe'dhIte sati vItarAgamArge saMvegaM mokSAbhilASarUpaM
gacchati prApnoti naro manuSyo'bhIkSNaM tanmaraNaM te saMvegaprAptirUpaM tena
padena hetunA marttavyamityarthaH  /  / 60 /  /  tA egaM pi silogaM jo puriso
maraNadesakAlammi  /  ArAhaNovautto ciMtaMto''rAhago hoi  /  / 61 /  /
tadekamapi zlokaM yaH puruSo maraNadezakAle  /
ArAdhanopayuktazcintayannArAdhako bhavati  /   /  61  /  /  83 bhuva0 tataH
kimityAha tasmAttato tAvat  /  ekamapi zlokaM
paJcaparameSThinamaskArasmaraNarUpaM yaH pumAn maraNakAle ArAdhanopayuktaH san
cintayati  /  sa taM cintayan smarannArAdhako bhavati  /  /  61  /  /  soma0
tataH kimityAha - tA tasmAdekamapi zlokaM paJcaparameSThinamaskArAdirUpaM yaH
pumAn maraNadezakAle ArAdhanopayuktaH san cintayati sa taM cintayan
smaranArAdhako bhavati  /   /  61  /  /  guNa0 tataH kimityAha - tasmAt tata
ekamapi zlokaM paJcaparameSThinamaskArasmaraNarUpaM yaH pumAn maraNakAle
ArAdhanopayuktaH san cintayati sa taM cintayan smarannArAdhako bhavati  /   /
61  /   /  ArAhaNovautto kAlaM kAUNa suvihio sammaM  /  ukkosaM tini bhave
gaMtUNaM lahai nivvANaM  /  /  62  /  /  ArAdhanopayuktaH kAlaM kRtvA suvihitaH
samyak  /  utkRSTatastrIn bhavAn gatvA labhate nirvANam  /  /  62  /  /  bhuva0
athArAdhakasya kiM phalamityAha 2010_02 ArAdhanayA uttamArthapratipattyA
upayukta udyataH

Page #125 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 84 **Aaturpratyakhyanprakirnakam Ga. 63**  By making time, being well-
behaved, virtuous, and performing excellent and extraordinary right worship, one
attains liberation (nirvana) after passing through three existences. This means
that if one makes time with utmost dedication, then one will definitely attain
liberation in the third existence.   Someone else says that one attains
liberation by performing Samayika within eight existences. This is neither
excellent nor inferior. How is there no contradiction? It is said that this
statement is based on the understanding of the true nature of the principles.
The statement that one attains liberation in the lowest existence by passing
through only one existence is based on the Vajra-Rishabha-Naracha-Samhanana.
This is said by accepting the Chhedaprustha-Samhanana. The Chhedaprustha-
Samhanana, if it performs excellent worship, attains liberation in the third
existence. The word "excellent" here refers to extraordinary. It is not accepted
by the Bhavan. If the Bhavan is accepted, then the Chhedaprustha-Samhanana
attains liberation in eight existences. Therefore, there is no contradiction.
**Soma**  Now, the fruit of the worshipper is explained. The worship is
performed with the understanding of the highest meaning. It means that one is
dedicated and careful. By making time, being well-behaved, virtuous, and
performing excellent and extraordinary right worship, one attains liberation
(nirvana) after passing through three existences. This means that if one makes
time with utmost dedication, then one will definitely attain liberation in the
third existence.   Someone else says that one attains liberation by performing
Samayika within eight existences. This is neither excellent nor inferior. How is
there no contradiction? It is said that this statement is based on the
understanding of the true nature of the principles.   The statement that one
attains liberation in the lowest existence by passing through only one existence
is based on the Vajra-Rishabha-Naracha-Samhanana. This is said by accepting the
Sevarta-Samhanana. The Sevarta-Samhanana, if it performs excellent worship,
attains liberation in the third existence. The word "excellent" here refers to
extraordinary. The special characteristic of worship should be observed. It is
not accepted by the Bhavan. If the Bhavan is accepted, then the Sevarta-
Samhanana attains liberation in eight existences. Therefore, there is no
contradiction.  **Guna**  What is the fruit of the worshipper? By performing
worship with the understanding of the highest meaning, one is dedicated. By
making time, being well-behaved, virtuous, and performing excellent and
extraordinary right worship, one attains liberation (nirvana) after passing
through three existences. This means that if one makes time with utmost
dedication, then one will definitely attain liberation in the third existence.
**Samano**  I am a Shraman, I am restrained everywhere. I renounce everything.
This is said in summary.  **Bhuva**  Knowing the fruit of worship, with what
intention does one renounce everything? First, I am a Shraman.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 84 AturapratyAkhyAnaprakIrNakam gA. 63 kAlaM kRtvA suvihitaH susAdhuH samyak
utkRSTato'tizayena samyagArAdhanAM kRtvA trIn bhavAn gatvA labhate nirvANaM
mokSamityarthaH  /  etaduktaM bhavati - yadi paramasamAdhAnena kAlaM karoti
samyak tatastRtIye bhave'vazyaM siddhyati  /  atrAha paraH
utkRSTato'STabhavAbhyantare sAmAyikaM prApya siddhyati ityetannApyutkRSTaM nA'pi
jaghanyaM tatazca kathaM na virodha: ? iti ucyate -
anavagAhitasiddhAntasadbhAvasyaitadvacaH  /  yatpunarekainaiva bhavena
jaghanyataH siddhyatItyuktaM tadvaRSabhanArAcasaMhananamAzritya
etaccacchedapRSTasaMhananamaGgIkRtyocyate  /  chedapRSTasaMhanano hi
yadyutkRSTArAdhanAM karoti tatastRtIye bhave mokSaM prApnoti  /
utkRSTazabdazcAtrAtizayArthe dRssttH| na tu bhavAnaGgIkRtya, bhavAGgIkaraNe
punaraSTabhirevotkRSTato bhavaizchedapRSTasaMhananaH siddhyatIti na virodha iti
/  / 2 /  /  soma0 athArAdhakasya kiM phalamityAha - ArAhaNA0
uttamArthapratipattyA''rAdhanAyAM vopayukta udyataH sAvadhAna ityarthaH kAlaM
maraNaM kRtvA suvihitaH susAdhuH samyak zuddhabhAvanotkRSTata
utkRSTArAdhanAbalAt trIn bhavAn gatvA labhate nirvANaM mokSamityarthaH, yadi
paramasamAdhinA kAlaM maraNaM nirantaramaSTabhavArAdhanayA
jaghanyatastvekabhavArAdhanayA'pi sidhyatItyuktam  /  atra tu tRtIyabhave
sidhyatIti tadetannApyutkRSTaM nApi jaghanyaM tatazca kathaM na virodhaH ?
ucyate - yAvadekaineva bhavena sidhyatItyuktaM tad
vajraRSabhanArAcasaMhananamAzritya etacca sevArttasaMhananamaGgIkRtyocyate
sevArttasaMhanano hi yadyutkRSTArAdhanAM karoti tatastRtIye bhave sidhyatIti
utkRSTazabdazcAtizayArthaH, ArAdhanAvizeSaNaM ca dRSTavyaH na tu
bhavAnaGgIkRtya, bhavAGgIkAre punarukRSTato'STabhireva bhavaiH
sevArttasaMhananaH sidhyatIti na virodhaH  /  / 62 /  /  /  guNa ArAdhakasya kiM
phalaM - ArAdhanayA uttamArthapratipattyA upayukta udyataH kAlaM kRtvA suvihitaH
susAdhuH samyak utkRSTato'tizayena samyagArAdhanAM kRtvA trIn bhavAn gatvA
labhate nirvANaM mokSamityarthaH  /  etaduktaM bhavati - yadi paramasamAdhAnena
kAlaM karoti samyak tatastRtIye bhave'vazyaM sidhyati  /  / 62 /  /  samaNo tti
ahaM paDhama, bIyaM savvattha saMjao mi tti  /  savvaM ca vosirAmi, eyaM
bhaNiyaM samAseNaM  /  / 3 /  /  zramaNa iti ahaM prathamaM dvitIyaM sarvatra
saMyato'smIti  /  sarvaM ca vyutsRjAmi etadbhaNitaM samAsena  /  / 3 /  /
bhuva0 evaM vijJAtArAdhanAphalaH kayA vAsanayA sarvaM vyutsRjatItyAha -
prathamaM tAvadahaM zramaNo 2010_02

Page #126 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Chapter 1, Verse 64**  **Commentary:**  The क्षपक (a person who has renounced
the world) contemplates and says: "I, a श्रमण (a renunciant), have accepted the
महाव्रत (the five great vows) and have experienced the sorrow of the world
(संसारखेद). Secondly, I am restrained (संयतो) with my senses controlled
(निगृहीतेन्द्रिय) due to the constant practice of समितगुप्त (the vow of non-
attachment). Therefore, for me, who am like this, what is the need for any
restrictions (प्रतिबन्ध) or desires for food (आहाराभिलाष)? I renounce all of
this. This is the essence of the क्षपक's contemplation."  **Verse 64:**  "I have
obtained the Jinavacana (the teachings of the Jinas), which is unparalleled and
like nectar. Having embraced the path of liberation, I do not fear death."
**Commentary:**  The क्षपक further contemplates and says: "I have obtained
(लब्धं) the Jinavacana (the teachings of the Jinas), which was previously
unattainable (अलब्धपूर्वं). In my past lives, I never experienced such
teachings. What is special about it? It is well-spoken (सुभाषितं) and profound
(अतिशयेन भाषितं). How is it like that? It is like nectar (अमृतभूतं), like food
for the gods (देवभोज्यतुल्यम्). Or, the Jinavacana itself is the special thing,
and it is also unparalleled (अलब्धपूर्वम्). As it is said:  "The wealth of the
gods, the splendor of the palaces, the riches of the earth, all are easily
attainable. But the Jinavacana, the teachings of the Jinas, is difficult to
obtain."  Also, it is like nectar (अमृतभूतं) because it is the cause of supreme
happiness (परमसुखहेतुत्वात्) and destroys old age and death
(वलिपलितजराविघातकत्वाच्च). Therefore, I have embraced (गृहीतो) the path of
liberation (सुगतिमार्गो) and I do not fear death (मरणाद्विभेमीत्यर्थः)."

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 khaNDa:-1 gA. 64 mahAvratAGgIkArAt kRtatapa:khedaH  /  dvitIyaM sarvatra
samitaguptatvAtsaMyato'smi pratinigRhItendriyaH, ata: mamaivaMvidhasya sataH kiM
pratibandhenAhArAbhilASeNa vA kiM tatsarvamapi vyutsRjAmi  /  etatsamAsena
saMkSepeNa bhaNitamityarthaH  /  / 3 /  /  soma0 atha sa kSapako
vijJAtArAdhanAphalaH kiM cintayan sarvaM vyutsRjatItyAha - prathamaM tAvadahaM
zramaNaH kRtamahAvratAGgIkAro tapaH-saMsArakhedarUpeNa zram ca khedatapasoriti
dhAtvanvarthena yuktaH, dvitIyaM sarvatra samitaguptatvAt saMyato'smi
nigRhItendriya ityarthaH, ato mamaivaMvidhasya sataH kiM
pratibandhenAhArAbhilASeNa vA kiM tataH sarvamapyetad vyutsRjAmi tyajAmi  /
saMkSepeNaitat kSapakabhAvanAsvarUpaM bhaNitaM proktamityarthaH  /  / 63 /  /
guNa evaM vijJAtArAdhanAphala: kayA vAsanayA sarvaM vyutsRjatItyAha - prathamaM
tAvadahaM zramaNo mahAvratAGgIkArAt kRtatapaHkhedaH  /  dvitIyaM sarvatra
samitaguptatvAt saMyato'smi nigRhItendriyaH  /  tataH mamaivaMvidhasya sataH kiM
pratibandhenAhArAbhilASeNa vA kiM tatsarvamapi vyutsRjAmi, etatsamAsena
bhaNitamityarthaH  /  / 63 /  /  laddhaM aladdhapuvvaM jiNavayaNaM subhAsiyaM
amayabhUyaM  /  gahio suggaimaggo nAhaM maraNassa bIhemi  /  / 64 /  /
labdhamalabdhapUrvaM jinavacanaM subhASitamamRtabhUtam  /  gRhItaH sugatimArgo
nAhaM maraNAdvibhemi  /  / 64 /  /  bhuvaH atha kSapako bhAvanAM
bhAvayannidamAha - labdhaM prAptamalabdhapUrvamaprAptapUrvaM purA'smin bhave
paribhramatA mayA na kadAcidArAdhanAvastu anubhUtamityarthaH  /  kiM
viziSTamityAha - jinavacane siddhAnte suSTu atizayena bhASitaM pratipAditaM
jinavacanasubhASitam  /  punaH kathaMbhUtam ? amRtatulyam devabhojyatulyam  /
athavA jinavacanasubhASitameva vizeSyapadaM tadapi alabdhapUrvam  /  uktaJca -
sulahA surAlayasirI rayaNAyaramehalAmahI sulahA  /  nivvuisuhajaNiyaruI
jiNavayaNasuI jae dulahA  /  / 1 /  /  tathA amRtabhUtam amRtatulyaM
paramasukhahetutvAdvalipalitajarAvighAtakatvAcca  /  ata eva ca gRhIto labdhaH
sugatimArgo mokSamArgo nAhamidAnIM maraNAdvibhemItyarthaH  /  / 64 /  /  2010_02

Page #127 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Āturpratyākhyānaprakirṇakam Gā. 65, 66  **64.** Soma again, as the क्षपक
(skeptic) contemplates, says: "The obtained, the attained, which was not
obtained before, was not obtained by me before, in the past, while I was
wandering in this existence. I have never experienced this object of worship."
What is special? It is well and truly stated in the Jina's words, in the
सिद्धान्त (principle). How is it so? The word "भूत" (being) is used in the sense
of a simile, meaning "like nectar," because it is the cause of the supreme
state, and because it destroys old age, death, etc. Or, the special word is the
Jina's well-spoken word. That too is "not obtained before, obtained, like
nectar," because this is obtained, therefore the path of good fortune, the path
of liberation, is taken by me, therefore I do not fear death now. Due to its
being in the Prakrit language, the sixth case is used in the sense of the fifth
case.  **65.** The क्षपक (skeptic) again, contemplating, says: "The obtained,
the attained, which was not obtained before, was not obtained by me before,
while I was wandering in this existence. I have never experienced this object of
worship." The Jina's well-spoken word is "like nectar," like food for the gods,
the path of good fortune, the path of liberation, is taken by me. I do not fear
death now.  **65.** "Even the brave must die, even the coward must die. Both
must die, but it is better to die with courage."  **65.** Even the brave, even
the good warrior, must die. Even the coward, the one without courage, the
fearful one, must die. Both must die, it is clear. Therefore, it is better to
die with courage, with determination.  **65.** Even the brave, even the good
warrior, must die. Even the coward, the one without courage, the fearful one,
must die. Both must die, it is clear. Therefore, it is better to die with
courage, with determination.  **65.** Even the brave, even the good warrior,
must die. Even the coward, the fearful one, must die. Both must die, it is
clear. Therefore, it is better to die with courage, with determination.  **66.**
"Even the virtuous must die, even the non-virtuous must die. Both must die, but
it is better to die with virtue."  **66.** Even the virtuous must die, even the
non-virtuous must die. Both must die, but it is better to die with virtue.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 AturapratyAkhyAnaprakIrNakam gA. 65, 66 soma punaH kSapako yathA bhAvanAM
bhAvayati tathA''ha - labdhaM prAptamalabdhapUrvaM mayA'prAptapUrvaM purA'smin
bhave paribhramatA mayA na kadAcidevetadArAdhanAvastvanubhUtamityarthaH  /
kiMviziSTam ? jinavacane siddhAnte suSThu atizayena bhASitaM pratipAditam  /
punaH kathaMbhUtam ? amRtabhUtaM bhUtazabda upamArthe amRtatulyaM
paramapadahetutvAjjarAmaraNAdivighAtakatvena  /  athavA jinavacanasubhASitaM
vizeSapadam  /  tadapi alabdhapUrvaM labdhaM amRtabhUtaM ceti yata etallabdhaM
ata eva gRhIto labdhaH sugatimArgo mokSamArgo mayA ato nA'hamidAnIM
maraNAdvibhemi  /  prAkRtatvAt paJcamya'rthe SaSThI  /  / 64  /  /  guNa atha
kSapako bhAvanAM bhAvayannidamAha - labdhaM prAptamalabdhapUrvaM parasmin bhave
paribhramatA mayA na kadAcidArAdhanAvastu anubhUtamityarthaH  /  jinavacanaM
subhASitam  /  amRtabhUtaM devabhojyatulyaM gRhIto labdhaH sugatimArgo
mokSamArgaH  /  nAhamidAnIM maraNasya bibhemItyarthaH  /  / 64 /  /  dhIreNa vi
mariyadhvaM, kAuriseNa vi avassa mariyav  /  duNDaM pi hu mariyavvaM varaM khu
dhIrattaNe mariuM  /  / 65 /  /  dhIreNApi marttavyaM kApuruSeNApyavazyaM
marttavyam  /  dvayorapi marttavyaM varameva dhIratvena martum  /  / 65 /  /
bhuka tathA dhIreNA'pi subhaTena satA marttavyam  /  nirdhIreNA'pi
vigatadhairyeNa kAtareNA'pi satA mrttvym| dvAbhyAmapi prakArAbhyAM hu sphuTaM
marttavyameva  /  tasmAdvaraM khu nizcaye dhIratvena martuM yuktamityarthaH  /
/ 65 /  /  soma0 tathA dhIreNA'pi subhaTenA'pi satA marttavyaM, kApurUSeNA'pi
vigatadhairyeNa kAtareNA'pi avazyaM nizcitaM marttavyam  /  evaM dvAbhyAmapi
prakArAbhyAM hu sphuTaM marttavyameva tasmAdvaraM khu nizcaye dhIratvena mA~
yuktamityarthaH  /  mariyavve iti pAThe marttavye satIti gamyam  /  / 65 /  /
guNa tathA dhIreNApi subhaTenApi marttavyaM, kAtareNApi marttavyam  /
dvAbhyAmapi prakArAbhyAM hu sphuTaM marttavyameva tasmAdvaraM khu nizcaye
dhIratvena martuM yuktamityarthaH  /  / 5 /  /  sIleNa vi mariyavvaM, nissIleNa
vi avassa mariyavvaM  /  doNhaM pi hu mariyavvaM varaM khu sIlattaNe mariMu  /
/ 66 /  /  zIlavatA'pi marttavyaM niHzIlenApyavazyaM marttavyam  /  dvayorapi
marttavyaM varameva zIlavatA martum  /  / 66 /  /  2010_02

Page #128 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Chapter: 1 Verse: 67  **Verse 66**  A person is considered virtuous due to his
conduct and good character. One should be committed to one's vows, even if they
are difficult to keep. One should also be committed to one's vows, even if they
are broken. One should be committed to one's vows, even if they are difficult to
keep, and even if they are broken. Therefore, it is better to be virtuous and
committed to one's vows.  **Verse 67**  Whoever, possessing right knowledge,
right faith, and right conduct, will make use of them, will be liberated from
the cycle of birth and death.  **Commentary**  The teacher, having established
the point, explains the general principles through five verses, using the fruit
as a means of explanation. The five verses explain the special use of knowledge,
the general use of faith, the eight types of right faith, and the eight types of
conduct, which are classified according to their secrecy and openness. Whoever,
being virtuous, will make use of these, will be liberated from the cycle of
birth and death.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 khaNDaH- 1 gA. 67 bhuva tathA zIlayogAtpuruSo'pi zIlaH  /
zIlenA'pyaluptasamAcAreNa pAlitanijapratijJenA'pi marttavyam  /  niHzIlenA'pi
bhraSTapratijJenA'pi marttavyam  /  dvAbhyAmapi bhedAbhyAM marttavyam  /  khu
tasmAdarthe varaM zIlatvena marttumityarthaH  /   /  66  /  /  soma0 tathA zIlaM
sadAcArastadyogAt puruSo'pi zIlaH, tataH zIlenApyaluptasadAcAreNa
pAlitanijapratijJenApi marttavyam, niHzIlenApi bhraSTapratijJenApyavazyaM
marttavyam  /  dvAbhyAmapi bhedAbhyAM marttavyaM 'khu' tasmAdarthe varaM
zIlatvena pAlitasadAcAratvena marttumityarthaH  /  / 66 /  /  guNa0 zIlenApi
aluptasadAcAreNa pAlitanijapratijJenApi marttavyam  /  niHzIlenApi
bhraSTapratijJenApi marttavyam  /  dvAbhyAmapi bhedAbhyAM marttavyam 'kha'
tasmAdarthe varaM zIlatvena marttumityarthaH  /  /  66  /  /  nANassa daMsaNassa
ya sammattassa ya carittajuttassa  /  jo kAhI uvaogaM saMsArA so vimuccihisi  /
/  67  /  /  jJAnasya darzanasya ca samyaktvasya ca cAritrayuktasya  /  yaH
kariSyatyupayogaM saMsArAtsa vimokSyate  /   /  67  /  /  87 bhuva iti
sthirIbhUte kSapake guruH sAmAnyopadezaM phaladvAreNa gAthApaJcakenAha
vizeSopayogarUpasya, darzanasya sAmAnyopayogasya samyaktvasya
niHzaGkitAdyaSTaprakArasya, cAritrasya samitiguptibhedato'STabhedasya yaH sAdhuH
kAhI kariSyati  /  upayogaM sAvadhAnatvaM sa muniH saMsArAdbhavAdvimokSyate
chuTiSyatItyarthaH  /  /  67  /  /  soma0 itthaM sthirIbhUte kSapake guruH
sAmAnyata upadezaM phalakathanadvAreNa gAthAcatuSkeNAha - jJAnasya
vizeSopayogarUpasya darzanasya sAmAnyopayogarUpasya, samyaktvasya
niHzaGkitAdyaSTaprakArasya, cAritrasya samitiguptibhedato'STavidhasya ca yaH
sAdhuH 'kAhI' kariSyati upayogaM tadviSaya-sAvadhAnatvamityarthaH sa muniH
saMsArAd bhavAt vimokSyate chuTiSyatItyarthaH  /   /  67  /  /  guNa0 iti
sthirIbhUte kSapake guruH sAmAnyopadezaM phaladvAreNa gAthApaJcakenAha jJAnasya
vizeSopayogasya darzanasya sAmAnyopayogasya samyaktvasya
nizaGkitAdyaSTaprakArasya cAritrasya samitiguptibhedato'STabhedasya yaH sAdhuH
kariSyati upayogaM sAvadhAnatvaM sa muniH saMsArAd bhavAd vimokSyate
chuTiSyatItyarthaH  /   /  67  /  /  2010_02 - jJAnasya

Page #129 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 88 **Aaturpratyakhyanprakirnakam Ga. 68, 69**  **68.**  The one who has been
a long-time *Brahmachari* (celibate), having exploded the remaining *karma*,
becomes pure through gradual purification and attains *siddhi* (liberation)
being free from *kleshas* (afflictions).  **Explanation:**  *
**Chirousitabramachari:**  One who has been a long-time *Brahmachari*. *
**Prasfotya:** Exploding, removing. * **Seshakam karma:** Remaining *karma*. *
**Anupuurbhya:** Gradually, step by step. * **Visuddho:** Pure. * **Gachchati:**
Attains, goes to. * **Siddhim:** Liberation. * **Dhutakleshah:** Free from
*kleshas*.  **69.** For one who is free from *kashayas* (passions), is
controlled, courageous, and dedicated, renunciation of the world is auspicious.
**Explanation:**  * **Nikkassayassa:** Free from *kashayas*. * **Dantassa:**
Controlled, subdued. * **Sarassa:** Courageous. * **Vavasaaino:** Dedicated,
committed. * **Samsaraparibhiyassa:** One who has renounced the world. *
**Paccckkhaanam:** Renunciation. * **Suham:** Auspicious.  **Note:** The text
uses the term "Brahmachari" which refers to a celibate, but in the context of
Jainism, it signifies a person who has renounced worldly attachments and is
dedicated to spiritual practice.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 88 AturapratyAkhyAnaprakIrNakam gA. 68, 69 cirausiyabaMbhayArI papphoDeUNa
sesayaM kammaM  /  aNupubbIi visuddho gacchai siddhiM dhuyakileso  /  / 68 /  /
ciroSitabrahmacArI prasphoTya zeSakaM karma  /  AnupUrvyA vizuddho gacchati
siddhiM dhUtaklezaH  /  / 68 /  /  bhuka cirausiyatti prAkRtatvAdvisaMdhiH  /
ciramuSito brahmaNaH caraNaM brahmacAraH  /  ciroSito brahmacAro yena sa
ciroSitabrahmacAraH  /  ciroSitaH brahmacAro vidyate yasyA'sau
ciroSitabrahmacArI tvam  /  prasphoTya vidhUya zeSakaM karma kSiptoddhAritaM
karma jJAnAvaraNAdi  /  athavA cirao si baMbhayArI iti vA paatthH| tadAyamarthaH
- yata eva virato'si brahmacAryasi ata eva prasphoTya zeSakaM karmeti sambandhaH
/  AnupUrvyA krameNottarottaraguNasthAnAdhirohaNata: vizuddhaH karmamalamuktaH
san  /  / 68 /  /  soma0 tathA ciram uSitaH sevitaH
prAkRtatvAdvisandhirasvAralopazca ciroSito yo brahmaNazcaraNaM brahmacAraH sa
vidyate yasyA'sau ciroSitabrahmacArI  /  'cira usibaMbhayArI' itipAThe tvayamoM
yata eva virato'si brahmacAryasi tvam, ata eva prasphoTya vidhUya zeSakaM
pUrvakSiptakarmabhya uddharitaM karma jJAnAvaraNAdi AnupUrvyA
krameNottarottaraguNasthAnAdhirohalakSaNena vizuddhaH san karmamalakSAlanataH
prathamapAThe sAmAnyato jIvaH kartA gacchati yAti siddhiM zivaM dhUtaklezaH
kSiptasaptabhayaklezaH sannityarthaH  /  dvitIyapAThe prAkRtatvAd
vibhaktivyatyayaM kRtvA gacchasi yAsyasi siddhiM zivamiti vyAkhyeyam  /  / 68 /
/  /  guNa ciramuSito brahmacAro yena sa ciroSitabrahmacArI prasphoTya vidhUya
zeSakaM pUrvakSiptoddharitaM karma jJAnAvaraNAdi AnupUrvyA krameNa vizuddho
karmamalakSAlanAt kSiptabhayaklezaH  /  / 68  /  /  nikkasAyassa daMtassa
sarassa vavasAiNo  /  saMsAraparibhIyassa paccakkhANaM suhaM bhave  /  / 69 /  /
niSkaSAyasya dAntasya zUrasya vyavasAyinaH  /  saMsAraparibhItasya pratyAkhyAnaM
zubhaM bhavet  /  / 69 /  /  bhuvaH kaSAyarahitasya dAntasya
indriyanoindriyadamena zUrasya vyavasAyina ArAdhanApatAkAlAbhAya,
saMsAraparibhItasya, bhavabhIroH pratyAkhyAnabhaGgadoSadarzinaH  /
pratyAkhyAnamanazanapratipattirUpaM zubhaM bhavet  /  / 69 /  /  2010_02

Page #130 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Chapter 1, Verses 70, 71**  **Verse 69**  The heart of such a virtuous person,
who is free from passions (**niṣkaṣāya**), who has conquered the senses
(**indriya-noindriyadama**), who is courageous (**śūra**), who has overcome
delusion (**mohamallajaya**), who is dedicated (**vyavsayin**), who is diligent
(**udyamvata**), who has attained the banner of worship
(**ārādhanāpatākālābhāya**), who is afraid of the world (**bhavahīra**), who
sees the faults of rejection (**pratyākhyānabhanga**), and who is free from the
fault of eating (**anśanapratipatti**), will be auspicious (**śubha**), and will
bear auspicious fruits (**śubhāyatifala**).  **Verse 70**  This rejection
(**pratyākhyāna**), which is in the form of non-eating (**anśanapratipatti**),
whoever will do it at the time of death (**maraṇadeśakāla**), that courageous
(**dhīra**), one with clear understanding (**amūḍhasanjna**), will go to the
best place (**uttamaṁ sthānaṁ**).  **Verse 71**  The courageous (**dhīra**), who
knows old age and death (**jaramaraṇavit**), who is endowed with knowledge and
wisdom (**vijnāna-nāṇasampanna**), will be a light to the world
(**lokasujjoyagaro**), and will show the destruction of all suffering
(**savvadukkhāṇam**).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 khaNDa:-1 gA. 70, 71 soma0 tathA niSkaSAyasya kaSAyarahitasya tathA,
dAntasyendriya-noindriyadamena, tathA zUrasya mohamallajaye, vyavasAyina
udyamavata ArAdhanApatAkAlAbhAya, tathA saMsArAt paribhItasya bhavabhIroH
pratyAkhyAnabhaGgadoSadarzina iti hRdayam, evaMvidhasya sAdhoH
pratyAkhyAnamanazanapratipatirUpaM zubhaM zubhAyatiphalaM bhavet syAdityarthaH
/  / 69 /  /  guNa niSkaSAyasya kaSAyarahitasya dAntasya indriyanoindriyadamena
zUrasya mohamallajaye, vyavasAyina ArAdhanApatAkAlAbhAya saMsAraparibhItasya
bhavabhIroH, pratyAkhyAnamanazanapratipattirUpaM zubhaM bhavatu  /  / 69 /  /
eyaM paccakkhANaM jo kAhI maraNadesakAlammi  /  dhIro amUDhasano so gacchai
uttamaM ThANaM  /  / 70 /  /  etatpratyAkhyAnaM yaH kariSyati maraNadezakAle  /
dhIro'mUDhasaMjJaH sa gacchatyuttamaM sthAnam  /  / 70 /  /  bhuva0 eyaM
paccakkhANaM ti etadanazanapratipattirUpaM pratyAkhyAnaM yaH ko'pyanyo'pi
kariSyati  /  maraNadezakAle dhIro vidvAn na mUDhA mUrchitA saMjJA jJAnaM yasya
so'mUDhasaMjJaH saMpUrNajJAna ityarthaH  /  sa gacchati yAtyuttamaM sthAnaM
mokSasthAnamityarthaH  /  / 70 /  /  soma0 tathA etadanazanapratipattirUpaM
pratyAkhyAnaM yaH ko'pyanyo'trApi kariSyati maraNadezakAle prAntasamaye, dhIro
vidvAn na mUDhA mUrchitA saMjJA jJAnaM yasya so'mUDhasaMjJaH spaSTajJAnaH
sampUrNajJAna ityarthaH sa evaMvidho gacchati yAtyuttamaM sthAnaM
mokSasthAnamityarthaH  /  / 70 /  /  guNaH etat
pratyAkhyAnamanazanapratipattirUpaM yaH ko'pyanyo'pi kariSyati maraNadezakAle
dhIro vidvAn na mUDhA saMjJA jJAnaM yasya sa amUDhasaMjJaH saMpUrNajJAna
ityarthaH  /  sa gacchati yAtyuttamaM sthAnaM mokSasthAnamityarthaH  /  / 7 /  /
dhIro jaramaraNaviU dhIro [vIro] vinANa-nANasaMpanno  /  logassujjoyagaro disau
khayaM savvadukkhANaM  /  / 71 /  /  dhIro jarAmaraNavit dhIro [vIro]
vijJAnajJAnasaMpanaH  /  lokasyodyotakaro dizatu kSayaM sarvaduHkhAnAm  /  / 71
/  /  bhuva0 atha zAstrakAra AziSaM bibhaNiSurAha - dhiyA rAjata iti
dhIrastIrthakRt jarAmaraNe _ 2010_02

Page #131 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Aaturpratyakhyanprakirnakam, Chapter 71  One who knows old age and death is
called Jaramarana-vit. One who gives wisdom and intelligence to all the worthy
beings is called Dhira. One who knows the special knowledge, the Kevala-jnana,
which is the form of special understanding, is called Jnana. The same is the
form of general understanding [Kevala-darshan]. One who is endowed with both is
called Samyukta. He is the illuminator of the fourteen-rayed world. The meaning
is that he should direct, do, and destroy all sins and all karmas. When,
however, it is read as Vira in another reading, then he inspires and motivates
the eight types of karma, and he is the last Tirthankara. The rest is the same.
In this text, the name of the author is also secretly revealed. Because, it is
heard that Virabhadra is the author of this Prakirnakam. Due to the transfer of
the knowledge of the devotees, it is clear that it was done by him. Therefore,
it is known that he is the author of this too. || 71 || End of the explanation
of Aaturpratyakhyan. || 6 ||  ## Chapter 90  -  If I have said anything contrary
to this explanation, then it should be corrected by the wise, with compassion
towards me. || 1 ||  May the grace of the great teacher, Sri Dharmaghosa Suri,
the essence of the omniscient teachings, be victorious. || 6 ||  The renowned
and wise Aryarakshita Suri, the expounder of the Dharma, was previously the
teacher of Sri Jayasimha Suri, the abode of peace. || 1 ||  Sri Dharmaghosa
Suri, the sun of the mountain of the lineage, was his successor. From him,
Mahendra Suri, who dispelled the false doctrines, was born. || 2 ||  Sri
Bhuvanatunga Suri, from him, did the favor of writing this explanation of the
Aaturpratyakhyanprakirnakam. || 3 ||  If anything false has been said here by
me, due to my foolishness in great matters, then it should be corrected by the
wise, especially with compassion towards me. || 4 ||  || End of the praise of
the explanation of Aaturpratyakhyan. || The number of verses is 850. || Sri ||
|| This Aaturpratyakhyanprakirnakam, composed by Sri Virabhadragani, along with
the commentary by Sri Bhuvanatunga Suri of the Anchalika Gaccha, has been edited
and revised in the year 2066 of the Vikrami era by Vijayakirtiyasasuri. ||
Soma: Now, at the end of the study, the author of the text says, "One who is
wise and rules with intelligence is called Dhira, the Tirthankara. Old age,
aging, and death are called Jaramarana. One who knows old age and death is
called Jaramarana-vit."

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 AturapratyAkhyAnaprakIrNakam gA. 71 vRddhatvanidhane vettIti jarAmaraNavit  /
tathA dhiyaM buddhiM sarveSAM bhavyAnAmAsAmastyena rA dadAtIti dhIraH  /
viziSTaM jJAnaM kevalajJAnaM vizeSAvabodharUpaM jJAyata iti jJAnam  /  tadeva
sAmAnyAyabodharUpam [kevaladarzanam ]  /  tAbhyAM sampannaH saMyuktaH  /
lokasya caturdazarajjvAtmakasyodyotakaraH  /  dizatu karotu kSayaM vinAzaM
sarvapApAnAM sarvakarmaNAmityarthaH  /  yadA tu pAThAntareNa vIro iti paThyate
tadA vizeSeNa Irayati prerayatyaSTaprakArakaM karmeti vIrazcaramatIrthakRt  /
zeSaM tathaiva  /  asminpAThe zAstrakArAbhidhAnamapi guptamuktaM bhavati  /
yato'syApi prakIrNakasya vIrabhadraH karttA zrUyate  /
bhaktaparijJAyAmatidezakaraNAt sA tu tena kRteti vyaktamevAstItyato
jJAyate'syA'pi sa eva kartteti  /  /  71  /  /
samAptamAturapratyAkhyAnavivaraNam ||ch|| 90 - vivaraNametadbravatA yadi
viparItaM mayA kimapyuktam  /  tanmayi kRtAnukampairvicintya zodhyaM sadA
vibudhaiH  /   /  1  /   /  sArvajJazAsanalavasya zrIdharmaghoSasugurorjayati
prasAdaH ||ch|| prathitamatirAryarakSitasUrirvidhipakSadezakaH pUrvam  /
zamanidhirabhUdamuSmAd zrIjayasiMhasUriguruH  /   /  1  /   /
tatpaTTodayagirivarabhAnuH zrIdharmaghoSasUrIzaH  /
tasmAnmahendrasUrirdUrIkRtakumatamativAdaH  /   /  2  /  /
zrIbhuvanatuGgasUristasmAtsvasyopakRti kRte cakre  /
vivaraNamAtramihAturapratyAkhyAnaprakIrNakasya || 3 || mithyA yadatra bhaNitaM
mayakA matimAndyato mahArtheSu  /  tanmaya kRtAnukampaiH zodhyaM
vibudhairvizeSeNa  //  4  //   /  /  samAptAturapratyAkhyAnavivaraNaprazastiH  /
/  granthamAnaM 850  /   /  zrIH  /   /   /  /  vaikramIye 2066 tame varSe
vijayakIrtiyazasUriNA saMzodhitaM sampAditaJcedaM
AJcalikagacchIyazrIbhuvanatuGgasUrikRtavRttisahitaM zrIvIrabhadragaNipraNItaM
zrI AturapratyAkhyAnaprakIrNakaM samAptam  /  /  soma0 athAdhyayanaprAnte
zAstrakAraH zrIjinAziSaM bhaNati dhiyA rAjate iti dhIrastIrthakRt, jarA
vRddhatvaM maraNaM ca nidhanaM jarA ca maraNaM ca jarAmaraNe te vettIti
jarAmaraNavit jarAmaraNa 2010_02 -

Page #132 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Chapter - 1 Verse - 71  **Meaning:** One who knows the nature, destruction, etc.
of the soul.  The word "Dheer" is an epithet, meaning one who gives joy (rati)
to the intellect (dhi) of all the worthy ones.  "Kevalgyan" is the special
knowledge, the knowledge of the form of special understanding
(visheshavabodharoopa).  "Kevaldarshan" is the knowledge that is known
(gyanate), the knowledge of the form of general understanding
(samanavabodharoopa).  One who is endowed with both of these.  One who
illuminates the fourteen-stringed world (loka) with the illumination of the
substance (dravyaodyota) and the illumination of the Kevala-light
(kevalalokabhavodyota), and thus illuminates the world (lokoodyotakara) always.
May he direct, may he do, the destruction (kshaya) of all the miseries (durita),
all the sins (papa), all the karmas.  When "Veer" is read in the alternative
reading, then it means one who inspires (ireyate), motivates (prereyate) the
eight types of karma, and is a Veeracharama-tirthakrit.  This is the word to be
qualified (visheshya), the rest are the qualifiers (visheshana).  In this text,
the name of the author (shastrakara) is also secretly revealed (guptamunta).
Because, even of this "Prakirnak" (collection of verses), Veerabhadra is heard
to be the good author (sadhu karta) in the "Bhaktaparijna" (knowledge of
devotees) written by him.  It is known from the over-emphasis (atideshakarana)
in the study of this text that he is the author of this also.  This is the
meaning.  || 71 ||  Thus ends the "Avchurini" (commentary) done by Shri
Somasundarasuripada, the supreme guru (paramguru) of the Shri Gachchhesha
Bhattaraka, according to the commentary (vritti) written by Shri Mahendrasuri,
the disciple of Shri Dharmaghossuri.  May it be auspicious for the Shri Sangha.
|| 6 ||  This "Aturapratyakhyan Prakirnak" (collection of verses on the
rejection of the sick) written by Shri Veerabhadragani, along with the
"Avchurini" (commentary) written by Shri Somasundarasuri, has been edited and
published by Vijayakirtiyasuri in the year 2066 of the Vikrami era.  ||
**Gunaratna Suri's Commentary:**  Dheer is one who rules (rajate) with intellect
(dhi), a Tirthakrit, one who knows (vetti) old age and death (jaramarana), the
end of old age (vridhatvanidhana).  Dheer is one who gives joy (rati) to the
intellect (dhi) of all the worthy ones.  "Kevalgyan" is the special knowledge
(vishistam gyanam), "Kevaldarshan" is the knowledge that is known (gyanate), the
same knowledge in the form of general understanding (samanavabodharoopa).  One
who is endowed with both of these.  One who illuminates the fourteen-stringed
world (loka) with the illumination of the substance (dravyaodyota) and the
illumination of the Kevala-light (kevalalokabhavodyota), and thus illuminates
the world (lokoodyotakara) always.  May he direct, may he do, the destruction (

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 khaNDaH - 1 gA. 71 svarUpataducchedAdiprakAravettA ityarthaH  /  tathA dhiyaM
buddhiM sarveSAM bhavyAnAM rAti dadAtIti dhIra iti vizeSaNapadam, tathA viziSTaM
jJAnaM vijJAnaM vizeSAvabodharUpaM kevalajJAnamityarthaH, jJAyate iti jJAnaM
sAmAnmAvabodharUpaM kevaladarzanamityarthastAbhyAM sampannaH saMyuktaH  /  tathA
lokasya caturdazarajjvAtmakasya janmAdikalyANakeSu dravyodyotena
kevalAlokabhAvodyotena tu sarvadApyudyotaka lokodyokaraH  /  dizatu karotu
kSayaM vinAzaM sarvaduritAnAM sarvapApAnAM karmaNAmityarthaH  /  yadA tu
pAThAntareNa 'vIro' iti paThyate tadA vizeSeNa Irayati prerayati aSTaprakAraM
karmeti vIrazcaramatIrthakRt  /  idaM vizeSyapadaM zeSANi vizeSaNANi tathaiva  /
asmin pAThe zAstrakArAbhidhAnamapi guptamuktaM jJAtavyam  /  yato'syApi
prakIrNakasya vIrabhadra eva sAdhuH karttA zrUyate bhaktaparijJAyAM
tatkRtAyAmatrAdhyayane'tidezakaraNAdapi jJAyate'syApi sa eva kartteti bhAvaH  /
/  71  /  /  iti zrIdharmaghoSasUriziSyazrImahendrasUriviracitavRttyanusAreNazrI
gacchezabhaTTArakaprabhuparamaguruzrIsomasundarasUripAdaiH kRtA'vacUrNiH samAptA
/  bhadraM bhavatu zrIsaGghasya  /   /  cha  /   /   /  /  vaikramIye 2066 tame
varSe vijayakIrtiyazasUriNA saMzodhitaM sampAditaJcedaM tapAgaccheza
zrIsomasundarasUrikRtAvacUriyutaM zrIvIrabhadragaNipraNItaM
zrIAturapratyAkhyAnaprakIrNakaM samAptam  /  /  guNa0 dhiyA rAjata iti
dhIrastIrthakRt jarAmaraNe vRddhatvanidhane vettIti jarAmaraNavit tathA dhiyaM
buddhiM sarveSAM bhavyAnAM rAti dadAtIti dhIraH  /  viziSTaM jJAnaM [vijJAnaM ]
kevalajJAnam, jJAyata iti jJAnaM tadeva sAmAnyAvabodharUpaM tAbhyAM saMpannaH
saMyuktaH  /  lokasya caturdazarajjvAtmakasyodyotakaro dizatu karotu kSayaM
vinAzaM sarvaduritAnAM sarvapApAnAM sarvakarmaNAmityarthaH  /   /  71  /  /  iti
prakIrNAvacUriH zrIguNaratnasUrikRtA  /  /   /  /  vaikramIye 2066 tame varSe
vijayakIrtiyazasUriNA saMzodhitaM sampAditaJcedaM
zrIguNaratnasUrikRtAvacUrisahitaM zrIvIrabhadragaNipraNItaM
zrIAturapratyAkhyAnaprakIrNakaM samAptam  /  /  91 2010_02

Page #133 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Tī Madhyamakum Tī  **Verse 60:**  **Text:** Egammi vi jammi pae sanvegam
viyarayamgammi. Gacchai naro abhikkham tam maranam tena mariyavam.  **Meaning:**
The only verse in the scriptures, whose study, contemplation, and reflection
leads the soul to progress on the path of non-attachment and attain *sanvega*,
that verse - one should accept death while contemplating and reflecting on it.
(10)  **Verse 61:**  **Text:** Tā egaṁ pi silogaṁ jo puriso maranadesakālammi.
Ārāhaṇovautto cintanto'ārāhago hoi.  **Meaning:** Therefore, the devotee who
attains death while immersed in the remembrance of the one *śloka* that is a
salutation to the five supreme beings, becomes a true devotee. (91)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Tii madhyamakuma Tii egammi vi jammi pae saMvegaM vIyarAyamaggammi  /  gacchai
naro abhikkhaM taM maraNaM teNa mariyavvaM  /  / 60 /  /  arthaH zAstranA eka
mAtra je padanA abhyAsa-ciMtana-parAvartanathI AtmA vItarAga mArgamAM AgaLa
vadhIne saMvegane prApta kare te pada - te gAthAnA ciMtana-parAvartana karatA
karatA mRtyune svIkAravuM joIe. (10) tA egaM pi silogaM jo puriso
maraNadesakAlammi  /  ArAhaNovautto ciMtaMto''rAhago hoi  /  / 61 /  /  artha H
tethI paMcaparameSThIne namaskArarUpa eka zlokanA smaraNamAM lIna banIne je
ArAdhaka mRtyune prApta kare che te ArAdhaka bane che. (91)

Page #134 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Agam Sri Atur Pratyakhyana Prakirnakam Khanda - 2 * Prakirnakoct Durdhyana
Antarga Tad Dastantam Samuccaya 2010_02

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama zrIAturapratyAkhyAnaprakIrNakam khaNDaH -2 *
prakIrNakoktadurdhyAnA'ntargataddaSTAntasamuccayaH 2010_02

Page #135 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  The Great Puja of the 45 Agamas by P.P. Pandit Shri Rupvijayji  **The Sutra
Puja of the Great Puja, Shri Aturpratyakhyan Prakirnak**  || **Duha** ||  He
cuts off attachment and aversion, and separates the eight karmas. Following the
path of the Snataka, he worships the eternal peace. |||  **Rag:** Idar Amba
Ambali Re. Deshi Deshvirati Gunthanamen Re, Varate Shravak Jeh | Anandadhikni
Pare Re, Taje Mithyatva Ne Teh |||  **Sagunanar**, Puja Shri Jindev... He counts
the twelve vows and abandons them, each one completely. He abandons the fifteen
karmas, and the six types of Samakiti. || **Ra Su. ||**  He has the four virtues
of knowledge, vision, conduct, and penance, and the strength of a hero. He
separates the transgressions and worships the assembly of the Jinas. || **Su.
||**  He worships the Parangat path, abandoning the 64 obstacles. He conquers
the senses and passions, and attains the knowledge of Samakiti. || **Su. ||**
He performs the worship of the Pacchakkhan Sutra. He attains the wealth of Shiva
in the third birth, and gains certainty. || **Su. ||**  He should perform the
worship of this Sutra, with devotion and understanding. Rupvijay says, attain
eternal happiness and Nirvana. || **Su. ||**   2010_02

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pa.pU. paMDita zrIrUpavijayajI kRta pIstAlIsa AgamanI moTI pUjA
zrIAturapratyAkhyAna prakIrNaka sUtra pUjA || duho || rAga dveSane chedare,
bhedaje AThe karma | snAtaka padane anusarI, bhaje zAzvata zarma III rAgaH IDara
AMbA AMbalI re. dezI dezavirati guNaThANameM re, varate zrAvaka jeha |
ANaMdAdikanI pare re, taje mithyAtvane teha IIII saguNanara, pUjA zrI
jinadeva... e AMkaNI bAre vratanA parihare re, pratyeke atiyAra | karamAdAna
panara tajI re, samakitanA paMya chAra |rA su. || jJAna darzana cAritranA re,
tapa vIrajanA jeha | aticAra alagA karI re, bhaja jinavara gaNageha II3II su. ||
pAraMgata pada pUjIye re, tajI tresaTha durgAna | Indriya kaSAyane jhIpIne re,
pAme samakita jJAna llll su. || Aura paccakakhANa sUtranI re, kare ArAdhanA jee
I trIje bhave ziva saMpadA re, nizcaya pAme teha pAsu. | teNe e sUtranI pUjanA
re, karajo dharI suha jhANa rUpavijaya kahe pAmajo re, zAzvata sukha nirvANa III
su. || 2010_02

Page #136 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter 2: Collection of Examples Under the Heading of Distractions from the
Path  **1. Ignorance (Ajnana) Meditation:** * **Aśakata-pita:** 97/12  **2.
False Belief (Mithyatva) Meditation:** * **Govinda:** 153  **3. Immoral Conduct
(Anācāra) Meditation:** * **Konkana Sadhu:** 98 * **Aṣāḍhācārya:** 98  **4.
Fainting (Mūrcchā) Meditation:** * **Kanaka-dhvaja:** 154  **5. Doubt (Śaṅkā)
Meditation:** * **Aṣāḍhācārya-śiṣyāḥ:** 98  **6. Bad Vision (Kudarśana)
Meditation:** * **Surāṣṭra Śrāvaka:** 15  **7. Desire (Kāṅkṣā) Meditation:** *
**Marici:** 163  **8. Anger (Krodha) Meditation:** * **Kūla-vālaka Muni:** 107 *
**Gośālaka:** 164 * **Pālaka:** 164 * **Namuci-mantri:** 121 * **Śiva-bhūti:**
112  **9. Greed (Gṛddhi) Meditation:** * **Maṅgusūri:** 164 * **Kaṇḍarīka:** 165
**10. Hope (Āśā) Meditation:** * **Mūladeva:** 166  **11. Thirst (Tṛṣṇā)
Meditation:** * **Kṣukkala Muni:** 174  **12. Petty (Kṣudra) Meditation:** *
**Rājagṛha-dramaka:** 176  **13. Pride (Māna) Meditation:** * **Bāhubali:** 117
* **Viśvabhūti:** 117 * **Subhūma-cakrī:** 124 * **Parśurāma:** 125 *
**Saṅgama:** 126  **14. Departure (Prasthāna) Meditation:** * **Sanatkumāra:**
180 * **Brahmadutta:** 126  **15. Sleep (Nidrā) Meditation:** * **Mahiṣa-māṃsa-
bhakṣi:** 184 * **Modaka-abhilāṣī:** 184 * **Hasti-danta-utpāṭakārī:** 185 *
**Sādhu-mastaka-troṭī:** 185 * **Vaṭa-śākhā-bhañjī:** 185  **16. Illusion (Māyā)
Meditation:** * **Dhanaśrī:** 136  **17. Greed (Lobha) Meditation:** *
**Vaṇimitra:** 138 * **Simha-kesari-sādhu:** 138  **18. Attachment (Rāga)
Meditation:** * **Vikrama-yaśo-rāja:** 141 * **Dāmannaka-śva-sura:** 142 *
**Kapila:** 143  **19. Aversion (Dveṣa) Meditation:** * **Madhudeva-Pippalāda:**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 105 163 112 117 117 124 khaNDa:-2
prakIrNakoktadurdhyAnA'ntargatadRSTAntasamuccayA'nukramaH 1 ajJAnadhyAnam :
azakaTApitA 97 / 12 mithyAdhyAnam : govindaH 153 2 anAcAradhyAnam :
koGkaNasAdhuH 98 | 13 mUrchAdhyAnam : kanakadhvajaH 154 2 anAcAradhyAnam :
ASADhAcAryaH 98 14 zaMkAdhyAnam : ASADhAcAryaziSyAH 98 3 kudarzanadhyAnam :
surASTrazrAvakaH | 15 kAGkSAdhyAnam : mariciH 4 krodhadhyAnam : kUlavAlakamuniH
107 | 16 gRddhidhyAnam : maGgusUriH 164 4 krodhadhyAnam : gozAlakaH 16
gRddhidhyAnam : kaNDarIkaH 165 4 krodhadhyAnam : pAlakaH | 17 AzAdhyAnam :
mUladevaH 166 4 krodhadhyAnam : namucimaMtrI 18 tRSNAdhyAnam : kSukkalamuniH 174
4 krodhadhyAnam : zivabhUtiH 121 | 19 kSudradhyAnam : rAjagRhadramakaH 176 5
mAnadhyAnam : bAhubalI 20 pathidhyAnam : valkalacIrI 176 5 mAnadhyAnam :
vizvabhUtiH 125 21 prasthAnadhyAnam : sanatkumAraH 180 5 mAnadhyAnam :
subhUmacakrI | 21 prasthAnadhyAnam : brahmadattaH 5 mAnadhyAnam : parazurAmaH
126 | 22 nidrAdhyAnam : mahiSamAMsabhakSiH 184 5 mAnadhyAnam : saGgamaH 22
nidrAdhyAnam : modakAbhilASI 184 6 mAyA dhyAnam : dhanazrI 136 22 nidrAdhyAnam :
hastidantotpATakArI 185 7 lobhadhyAnam : vaNimitra 138 | 22 nidrAdhyAnam :
sAdhumastakatroTI 185 7 lobhadhyAnam : siMhakesarisAdhuH 138 | 22 nidrAdhyAnam :
vaTazAkhAbhaJjI 185 8 rAgadhyAnam : vikramayazorAjaH 141 | 23 nidAnadhyAnam :
nandiSeNa: 8 rAgadhyAnam : dAmannakazvasuraH 142 | 23 nidAnadhyAnam :
gaGgadattaH 187 8 rAgadhyAnam : kapila: | 23 nidAnadhyAnam : sambhUtimuniH 191 9
dveSadhyAnam : madhudeva-pippalAdau 145 | 23 nidAnadhyAnam : draupadI 194 9
dveSadhyAnam : dharmaruci-nAviko | 24 snehadhyAnam : marudevImAtA 9 dveSadhyAnam
: vIrakadevaH 147 24 snehadhyAnam : sunandA 199 10 mohadhyAnam : balabhadraH 147
| 24 snehadhyAnam : arhannakamAtA 200 11 icchAdhyAnam : kapilaH 150 | 25
kAmadhyAnam : kumAranandisuvarNakAra:201 12 mithyAdhyAnam : jamAliH 151  /  25
kAmadhyAnam : rAvaNaH 202 126 130 185 143 145 _ 2010_02

Page #137 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
245 205 246 210 213 216 t. 266 26 Kalushdhyanam: Bahu-Subahu-Peetha-Mahapeethaah
203 | 44 Parushdhyanam: Brahmadatt 242 26 Kalushdhyanam:
Singhagughaasthitkshapka 203 44 Parushdhyanam: Yugabahuh 242 27 Kalahadhyanam:
Duryodhan 204 44 Parushdhyanam: Ekaashravika 27 Kalahadhyanam: Narad  45
Bhayadhyanam: Gajasukumala Muni 246 28 Yuddhadhyanam: Konikanripa  205 46
Rupadhyanam: Sanatkumar 28 Yuddhadhyanam: Chandapradyota  46 Rupadhyanam:
Chandapradyota 246 29 Niyuddhadhyanam: Bahubali-Bharatau 47
Atmaprashamsadhyanam: Vararuchi 247 29 Niyuddhadhyanam: Attanmall  47
Atmaprashamsadhyanam: Rathika Kosa cha 251 30 Sangdhyanam: Rajimati  214 | 48
Paranindadhyanam: Kurugadukamuni 252 30 Sangdhyanam: Bhavadevamuni  49
Paragardhadhyanam: Gosthamahila 255 31 Sangrahadhyanam: Mamman  50
Parigrahadhyanam: Charudatt 260 32 Vyavahardhyanam: Sarthavahapatni  50
Parigrahadhyanam: Munipati Muni 33 Krayavikrayadhyanam: Nand  51
Paraparivadadhyanam: Subhadrasati 261 34 Anarthdandadhyanam: Shamb  | 52
Paradushanadhyanam: Angrishi 266 34 Anarthdandadhyanam: Gangadatt 222  53
Aarambhadhyanam: Kurudotkurudau 266 34 Anarthdandadhyanam: Vachala 266  |53
Aarambhadhyanam: Dwipayan 266 35 Abhogadhyanam: Brahmadatt 223 36
Anabhogadhyanam: Prasannchandra  | 54 Sanrambhadhyanam: Kshullakamuni 270  224
37 Rinaviladhyanam: Yatibhagini  | 55 Papanumodanadhyanam: -Raja 38
Vairadhyanam: Parashuram  | 56 Adhikarandhyanam: Nandamanikar 271 38
Vairadhyanam: Kapil (Krishival:?) 228  | 57 Asamadhimaranadhyanam:
Skandakacharya 273 38 Vairadhyanam: Sudarshan  | 58 Karmodayapratyayadhyanam:
Vishnu (Krishna) 276 39 Vitarkadhyanam: Chanakya  59 Ridhigauravadyanam
Dasharnbhadra 278 40 Hinsadhyanam: Kalasaukarika

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 245 205 246 210 213 216 t. 266 26 kaluSadhyAnam : bAhu-subAhu-pITha-mahApIThAH
203 | 44 paruSadhyAnam : brahmadattaH 242 26 kaluSadhyAnam :
siMhaguhAsthitakSapakaH 203 44 paruSadhyAnam : yugabAhuH 242 27 kalahadhyAnam :
duryodhanaH 204 44 paruSadhyAnam : ekAzrAvikA 27 kalahadhyAnam : nAradaH 45
bhayadhyAnam : gajasukumAlamuniH 246 28 yuddhadhyAnam : koNikanRpaH 205 46
rUpadhyAnam : sanatkumAraH 28 yuddhadhyAnam : caNDapradyotaH 46 rUpadhyAnam :
caNDapradyotaH 246 29 niyuddhadhyAnam : bAhubalI-bharatau 47 AtmaprazaMsAdhyAnam
: vararuciH 247 29 niyuddhadhyAnam : aTTanamallaH 47 AtmaprazaMsAdhyAnam :
rathikaH kozA ca 251 30 saGgadhyAnam : rAjImatI 214 | 48 paranindAdhyAnam :
kUragaDukamuniH 252 30 saGgadhyAnam : bhavadevamuniH 49 paragarhAdhyAnam :
goSThAmAhilaH 255 31 saGgrahadhyAnam : mammaNaH 50 parigrahadhyAnam : cArudattaH
260 32 vyavahAradhyAnam : sArthavAhapatnI 50 parigrahadhyAnam : munipatimuniH 33
krayavikrayadhyAnam : nandaH 51 paraparivAdadhyAnam : subhadrAsatI 261 34
anarthadaNDadhyAnam : zAmbaH | 52 paradUSaNadhyAnam : aGgaRSiH 266 34
anarthadaNDadhyAnam : gaGgadattaH 222 53 ArambhadhyAnam : kuruDotkuruDau 266 34
anarthadaNDadhyAnam : vAcAla: 266 |53 ArambhadhyAnam : dvIpAyanaH 266 35
AbhogadhyAnam : brahmadatta: 223 36 anAbhogadhyAnam : prasannacandraH | 54
saMrambhadhyAnam : kSullakamuniH 270 224 37 RNAviladhyAnam : yatibhaginI | 55
pApAnumodanadhyAnam : -rAjA 38 vairadhyAnam : parazurAmaH | 56 adhikaraNadhyAnam
: nandamaNikAra: 271 38 vairadhyAnam : kapilaH (kRSivala:?) 228 | 57
asamAdhimaraNadhyAnam : skandakAcAryaH 273 38 vairadhyAnam : sudarzanaH | 58
karmodayapratyayadhyAnam : viSNuH(kRSNaH)276 39 vitarkadhyAnam : cANakyaH 59
RddhigauravadhyAnam dazArNabhadraH 278 40 hiMsAdhyAnam : kAlasaukarikaH 233 60
rasagauravadhyAnam : jitazatrurAjA 281 41 hAsadhyAnam : caNDarudrAcAryaH 61
sAtAgauravadhyAnam : zazirAja 41 hAsadhyAnam : vajrabAhuH 237 | 62
aviramaNadhyAnam : bhRguyazasau 282 42 prahAsadhyAnam : caNDapradyotaH 246 62
aviramaNadhyAnam : mUkajIvaH 43 pradveSadhyAnama : marubhUti-kamaThau 238 | 62
aviramaNadhyAnam : metAryamuniH 283 43 pradveSadhyAnam : vIravibhuH gopazca 238
/ 63 amuktimaraNadhyAnam : sambhUtimuniH 191 226 227 229 230 235 ' 2010_02

Page #138 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Chapter - 2, Collection of Examples within the Discourse on Miscellaneous
Sayings: 1. The story of Ashakata's father, who was ignorant and heedless, from
the scriptures on the conduct of the Sangha. A certain Suri, being negligent,
became devoid of knowledge after death. He was reborn in the same family, like a
pearl from the ocean of knowledge. ||1|| Thus, in a certain family of monks,
residing on the banks of the Ganga, two brothers took vows and became peaceful.
One of them was very knowledgeable. ||2|| He became a Suri, and was constantly
served by his disciples who sought the essence of the scriptures. He spent every
day in service, never taking rest. ||3|| Even at night, he did not get restful
sleep, being constantly engaged in contemplation and answering questions about
the scriptures. ||4|| His other brother, however, always lived comfortably.
Seeing him, the Suri, filled with a sense of inferiority, thought: ||5|| "Oh,
how fortunate my brother is, who lives happily always. Due to his lack of
knowledge and wisdom, he will not be afflicted by any suffering." ||6|| "I, on
the other hand, have attained knowledge like a sharp sword, and will not be
afflicted by any suffering. This has been explained to me by a wise person."
||7|| "My friend, ignorance is indeed pleasant for me, and for him too. He has
eight qualities: 1-He is carefree, 2-He eats a lot, 3-He is not concerned about
others, 4-He sleeps day and night, 5-He is blind and deaf to the consideration
of right and wrong actions, 6-He is indifferent to honor and dishonor, 7-He is
mostly free from fear, 8-He is strong and foolish, and lives happily." ||8|| "He
does not contemplate the nectar-like essence of various scriptures, nor does he
enjoy the company of learned people. Their days pass by in the pursuit of
knowledge, their minds unburdened. Their birth and life are fruitful, adorned by
them. What is the use of others, who are like animals, devoid of discrimination,
and a burden to the world?" ||9|| "Thus, filled with hatred for knowledge, he
desired knowledge. With a wicked mind, he committed an act that destroyed
knowledge due to his negligence." ||10|| "Without considering the consequences
of violating the principles of knowledge and conduct, he became a god in the
celestial realm, due to the influence of his past actions." ||11|| "He fell from
that family into a family of Abhiras, and was born as a son in Bharata. He
married a girl of his own caste, who was like his own self, to his parents."
||12|| "One day, a beautiful and virtuous daughter was born to him. She reached
youth, captivating the hearts of young men." ||13|| "Her father, wanting to sell
ghee, left her at home and went to the city with the Abhiras." ||14|| "Seeing
her, the young men lost their minds and their senses. They strayed from the
path, and fell down somewhere." ||15|| "They gathered together, and seeing her,
they called her Ashakata, Ashakata-pita, again and again." ||16||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 khaNDaH -2 prakIrNakoktaduAnA'ntargatadRSTAntasamuccayaH 1.
ajJAnadhyAne'zakaTApituH sampradAyaH saGghAcAravidhigranthAt  /  pramAdyan
sUrireko'tra, pretyAbhUd vigatazrutaH  /  tatrodyacchan sa evAbhUt, pAraddazvA
zrutAmbudheH  /  / 1 /  /  tathAhi-ekasmin bhrAtarau gacche, gaGgAkUlanivAsinau
/  vrataM jagRhatuH zAntau tatraiko'bhUd bahuzrutaH  /  / 2 /  /  sUrirjajJe
krameNAsau, ziSyaiH sUtrArthamicchabhiH  /  sevyamAno dinaM sarvaM, vizrAmaM
nAznute kvacit  /  / 3 /  /  nizAyAmapi sUtrArthacintanapRcchanAdibhiH  /
nAsasAda sukhAnidrAmanvahaM vyagramAnasaH  /  / 4 /  /  bhrAtA tasya dvitIyastu,
nityamAste yathAsukham  /  taM ca pazyannasau sUrirdadhyau durbuddhibAdhitaH  /
/ 5 /  /  aho me bAndhavo dhanyo, yo'yamAste sadA sukhI  /
jJAnavijJAnahInatvAt, kenApyAyAsyate nahi  /  / 6 /  /  ajAkRpANakalpena,
jJAnenAhaM tvavApnuyAm  /  duHkhaM tato'tra kenApi, viduSA sUditaM hyadaH  /  /
7 /  /  mUrkhatvaM hi sakhe ! mamApi rucitaM tasyApi cASTau guNA, 1-nizcinto
2-bahubhojano 3-'trapamanA 4-naktaMdivAzAyakaH  /
5-kAryAkAryavicAraNAndhabadhiro 6-mAnApamAne samaH; 7-prAyeNAbhayavarjito
8-dRDhavapurmUrkhaH sukhaM jIvati  /  / 8 /  /  na punarbhAvayati
yathAnAnAzAstrasubhASitAmRtarasaiH zrototsavaM kurvatAM, yeSAM yAnti dinAni
paNDitajanavyAyAmakhinnAtmanAm  /  teSAM janma ca jIvitaM ca saphalaM taireva
bhUrbhUSitA, zeSaiH kiM pazuvad vivekarahitai bhArabhUtairnaraiH ? /  / 9 /  /
jJAnapradveSatazcaivaM, jJAnamAzAtayannasau  /  duSTabuddhiH pramAdena,
jJAnaghnaM karma baddhavAn  /  / 10 /  /  jJAnAcArAticAraM tamanAlocya vipadya
ca  /  devo'bhUd devaloke'sau, saJcAritraprabhAvataH  /  / 11 /  /
cyutvA''bhIrakule kasmin, bharate'tra suto'jani  /  pitRbhyAmAtmarUpAM sa,
kanyAmudvAhito yuvA  /  / 12 /  /  tasyaikadA sutA jajJe, surUpA bhadrakanyakA
/  yauvanaM prApa sA yUnAM, manonayanahArakam  /  / 13 /  /  anodhuri
nidhAyainAM, tatpitA nagaraM prati  /  pratasthe samamAbhIraighRtaM
vikretumanyadA  /  / 14 /  /  tAmeva pazyatAM tepAmanAMsi ca manAMsi ca  /
utpathasthAnyabhajyanta, sadyaH praskhalya kutracit  /  / 15 /  /  vilakSIbhUya
saMbhUya, tairityaucyata tAvatA  /  nAmnA'zakaTA'zakaTApiteti ca muhurmuhaH  /
/ 16 /  /  2010_02

Page #139 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Aaturpratyakhyanaprakirnakam  **17.** Hearing this, the dispassion of the one
with small karma arose. Having given his daughter in marriage to someone, and
given him wealth and other things,   **18.**  he went out to some place, and
brought the Yoga-udvahana.  He diligently studied the three Uttara-adhyayana,
which were very clear.  **19.**  He also studied the Turya-adhyayana, which is
called "Asanskruta", with ease.  From that, the karma-udaya arose, which is
called "Jnana-avaraneya".  **20.**  For two days, he studied that, and he did
not speak to anyone, even though he was in great distress due to the other
obligations.  **21.**  Then, he was asked by his teachers, "What is it that you
are allowed to do?"  He said, "O Bhagavan, what is Yoga?"  Then the teacher
said,  **22.**  "As long as you do not reach this, you will be in the Aachama
state."  He said, "I have already done that, by listening and by penance."
**23.**  Then he performed the Aachama, for twelve years, with great
concentration.  He destroyed his karma with ease, and he enjoyed the knowledge
he had gained.  **24.**  He also quickly studied the remaining scriptures.  He
was a great intellect, and he became a devotee of the scriptures.  He became
happy everywhere, both in this world and the next.  ## 2. An example of
Anaachaara-dhyana from the Konkana Sadhu, from the Sri Kalpasutra Subodhikaatika
Just as a merchant from the Konkana region, who had become a monk in his old
age, once stayed for a long time in a place where the Aryapathis were being
cremated.  He was asked by his teachers, "What have you been thinking about
during this long time of cremation?"  He replied, "Swamin! I have been thinking
about the welfare of living beings."  When asked how, he said, "In my previous
life as a householder, I had many grains of rice, which were obtained after
cutting down trees in the fields.  Now, if my sons do not cut down trees, how
will they have rice, and how will they be able to live?"  He spoke truthfully,
and expressed his opinion as it was.  The teacher said, "O great one! You have
misunderstood.  This is not right for a Yati."  He was then given a false
punishment.  ## 2-14.  An example of Anaachaara-dhyana and Sankha-dhyana, from
the story of the Aashada-sura, who wanted to renounce the world, but the gods
did not come to him, from the Srimad Bhava Vijayakrita Sri Uttara-adhyayana
Sutra Vritti  **1.**  In the land of Vatsa, there were many learned teachers
with many disciples.  The Acharya, named Aryashada, was loved by all.  **2.**
Whoever in their group was devoted, they rejected them and they suffered.  Those
suns said, "We will take you out of this world, without any scriptures."  **3.**
They said, "You must give me your darshan, quickly, because I am in the Deva-
bhavana state."  Even though they said this, none of them went to heaven.
**4.**  Then, one day, they said to their beloved disciple, "We will take you
out of this world."  They said this with great force, and their words were
choked with emotion.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 AturapratyAkhyAnaprakIrNakam zRNvatastasya vairAgyaM, babhUva laghukarmaNaH  /
sutAmudvAhya kenApi, dattvA tasmai dhanAdikam  /  / 17 /  /  gacche kasmin sa
niSkramya, yogodvahanamAhRtaH  /  kurvannadhyaiSTa suspaSTamuttarAdhyayanatrayam
/  / 18 /  /  paThato'saMskRtAkhyaM ca, turyAdhyayanamaJjasA  /  tad
jJAnAvaraNIyAkhyamAgAtkarmodayaM tataH  /  / 19 /  /  adhIyAnasya
tattasyAcAmAmlAbhyAM dinadvayam  /  naiko'pyAlApako'syAgAtkRcchreNANyabhiyogataH
/  / 20 /  /  tato'sau gurubhiH proce, kiM te'nujJApyatAmidam ?  /  sa prAha
bhagavannasya, yogaH kIdRg ? tato guruH  /  / 21 /  /  Uce yAvadidaM naiti,
tAvadAcAmlamasya tu  /  sa smAha kRtamanyena, zrutena tapasA ca me  /  / 22 /  /
AcAmlAnyatha so'kArSId, dvAdazAbdI samAhitaH  /  kSayamApaitakat karma,
sukhenAdhyaiSTha tacchrutam  /  / 23 /  /  zeSaM cApi zrutaM kSipramadhIte sma
mahAmatiH  /  zrutabhakterihAmutra, sarvatra sukhabhAgabhUt  /  / 24 /  /  2.
anAcAradhyAne koGkaNasAdhoH dRSTAntaH zrIkalpasUtrasubodhikATIkA'ntargataH  /
yathA ko'pi kuGkaNadezIyo vaNig vRddhatve pravrajitaH, sa caikadA
airyApathikIkAyotsarge ciraM sthito gurubhiH pRSTaH- 'etAvaddIghe kAyotsarge kiM
cintitam ?' sa pratyuvAca-svAmin ! jIvadayA cintitA', kathamiti punargurubhiH
pRSTa Aha- 'pUrvaM gRhasthAvasthAyAM kSetreSu vRkSaniSUdanapUrvakamuptAni
dhAnyAni bahUnyabhUvan, idAnIM mama putrAstu nizcintA yadi vRkSaniSUdanaM na
kariSyanti tadA dhAnyA'bhAvena varAkAH kathaM bhaviSyanti ?' iti RjutvAt
svAbhiprAye yathAsthite nivedite gurubhiH kathitaM- 'mahAbhAga ! durdhyAtaM
bhavatA, aho ! ayuktametadyatInAm,' ityukte ca mithyAduSkRtaM dadau  /  /  2-14.
anAcAradhyAne zaGkAdhyAne ca devAnAmanAgamanAdutpravrajitukAmasyA''SADhasUreH
zrImadbhAvavijayakRtazrIuttarAdhyayana-sUtravRtyuktakathA  /  vatsAbhUmau
bhUriziSyaparivArA bahuzrutAH  /  AryASADhAbhidhAcAryA, babhUvurvizvavatsalAH  /
/ 1 /  /  yo yasteSAM gaNe bhaktaM, pratyAkhyAya vyapadyata  /  taM taM niryAmya
nirgrantha-mitthaM te sUrayo'vadan  /  / 2 /  /  devabhAvaMgatenA''zu, deyaM me
darzanaM tvayA  /  ityukte'pi bahUnAM tairnAgAtko'pi divaM gataH  /  / 3 /  /
athA'nyadA svaziSyaM te, niryAmyAtIva vallabham  /  evamucuH sanirbandhaM,
guravo gadgadAkSaram  /  / 4 /  /  svargagatena bhavatA, vatsa ! vatsalacetasA
/  avazyaM darzanaM deyaM tvAmiti prArthaye bhRzam  /  / 5 /  /  mayA hi
bahusAdhunAmevamuktamabhUtparam  /  nA''gAtko'pi tvaM tu vatsA''gaccheH
snehamamuM smaran  /  / 6 /  /  tatprapadya vipadyAzu, devIbhUto'pi sa drutam  /
nAyayau prathamotpanna-surakAyairvilambitaH  /  / 7 /  /  tasminnanAgate sadyo,
viparyastamanA guruH  /  evaM vyacintayannUnaM, paraloko na vidyate !  /  / 8 /
/  2010_02

Page #140 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Chapter 2: Collection of Examples  Those who are devoted to knowledge, vision,
conduct, and worship are peaceful in mind. They are free from the prescribed
fasts, are righteous in their conduct, and are liberated themselves. ||9||
Those who have accepted my words and those who have died, who are dear to me,
how can they not come to me? [Pair. ||10||  Whatever he did today, the action
was useless and painful. Giving up enjoyable pleasures, my soul has been cheated
in vain! ||11||  Having enjoyed pleasures, I will make this life fruitful. For
in the afterlife, who is troubled in vain by a skilled person? ||12||
Reflecting on this, he relied on his own sign, which is false. Desiring to
renounce the world, he left his home and went away. ||13||  In the meantime,
from the knowledge of the omniscient, he learned the nature of his teacher.
Knowing this, the disciple went to heaven, and being distressed, he meditated.
||14||  Oh! My teachers, even though they are endowed with the eyes of Jain
scriptures, they abandon the path of liberation, being overwhelmed by the
darkness of delusion! ||15||  Oh! The greatness of delusion, conquering the
world, is flourishing. Like the blind, all people act, even though they see!
||16||  Even though he is of a good family, even though he is courageous, even
though he is profound, even though he is wise, delusion destroys his limits,
like the ocean at the end of a kalpa. ||17||  As long as people are driven by
delusion and commit evil deeds, I will continue to enlighten them, making them
follow the righteous path! ||18||  Meditating, he came to the place where his
teacher had gone. He performed a divine play in a village on the bank of a
river. ||19||  Then that sage, seeing that beautiful play, was filled with joy
for six months. ||20||  He saw that play, enduring the cold, heat, wind, thirst,
and the fatigue of six months. ||21||  In that dance, the god, being united,
stood still in front of him. For a moment, he thought, "I have seen a good play,
a good fortune." ||22||  Then that god, wanting to test those who were not yet
enlightened, created six children in the forest, each representing one of the
six types of living beings. ||23||  Seeing the first of them, adorned with many
ornaments, the sage thought, "I will cut off the ornaments of this child and use
them for my own enjoyment." ||24||  "With the wealth of these ornaments, my
desire for enjoyment will be fulfilled for a long time. Without wealth, the
desire for water in a mirage is like a thirst for water in a mirage." ||25||
Reflecting on this, he said to the child with a milk-white throat, "Hey! Give up
your ornaments!" But the child did not give them up. ||26||  Then, angry, he
grabbed the child by the neck. The child, frightened, stammered, "In this
terrible forest, I am afraid of thieves and other dangers. I am a 'prithvi-kaya'
(earth-bodied being), and I have taken refuge in you." ||27||  "These lives are
impermanent, but fame is eternal. Even at the cost of life, one should protect
those who have taken refuge. ||29||  "Protect me, protect me, Lord! I am a
helpless child." Then, those who were adorned with ornaments protected the one
who had taken refuge. ||30||  For, "He who supports the fallen, he who rescues

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 khaNDa:-2 dRSTAntasamuccayaH jJAnadarzanacAritrArAdhakAH zAntacetasaH  /
vihitAnazanAH samyagmayA niryAmitAH svayam  /  / 9 /  /  madvAcaM pratipatrAzca,
vineyo mama ye mRtAH  /  snehaleSvapi teSveko-'pyA''gAno kathamanyathA ? [yugmam
/  / 10 /  /  tadadya yAvaccakre'sau, kriyA kaSTapradA mudhA  /  bhogAn hitvA
manojJAMzca, mayAtmA vaJcito vRthA !  /  / 11 /  /  bhuktvA bhogAMstadadyApi,
kariSye saphalaM januH  /  paraloke hyasati kaH, klizyate kuzalo mudhA !  /  /
12 /  /  vimRzyeti svaliGgastha, eva mithyAtvamAzritaH  /  utpravrajitukAmo'sau,
muktvA gacchaM viniryayau  /  / 13 /  /  atrAntare'vadhijJAnAtsvarUpaM
svaguroridam  /  jJAtvA divaM gataH ziSyo, viSaNNo dhyAtavAniti !  /  / 14 /  /
aho ! madguravo jainAgamanetrAnvitA api  /  vimuktimArga muJcanti,
mohAndhatamasAkulAH !  /  / 15 /  /  aho ! mohasya mahimA, jagajjaitro
vijRmbhate  /  jAtyandhA iva ceSTante, pazyanto'pyakhilA janAH !  /  / 16 /  /
kulavAnapi dhIro'pi, gabhIro'pi sudhIrapi  /  mohAjjahAti maryAdAM, kalpAntAdiva
vAridhiH  /  / 17 /  /  tanmohapreritA yAvannAmI duSkarma kurvate  /
tAvadetAnvibodhyAhaM, kurve sanmArgamAzritAn !  /  / 18  /  /  dhyAtvetyAgatya
sa suraH, svagurorgamanAdhvani  /  grAmamekaM vicakre tat-pArve divyaM ca
nATakam  /  / 19 /  /  tataH sa sUristannATyaM, prekSyamANo manoharam  /
UrdhvaM eva hi SaNmAsImAsItprAjyapramodabhAk  /  / 20 /  /
zItAtapakSudhAtRSNASaNmAsatikramazramAn  /  divyAnubhAvAnnAjAsIttannATyaM sa
vilokayan  /  /  21 /  /  tasminnRtye'tha devena, saMhate so'calatpuraH  /
kSaNamekaM zubhaM nATyaM, dRSTaM diSTyeti bhAvayan  /  / 22 /  /  sa devo'tha
tadAkUtaM, parIkSitumalaDkRtAn  /  SaT jIvakAyasaMjJAn SaT, vidadhe bAlakAn vane
/  / 23 /  /  dRSTvAtha sUristeSvAdyaM, bhUribhUSaNabhUSitam  /  iti dadhyau
zizorasyA'laGkArAnAcchinamyaham  /  / 24  /  /  eSAM dravyeNa bhogecchA, ciraM
me pUrayiSyate  /  mRgatRSNAmbupAnecchAdezyA dravyaM vinA hi sA  /  / 25  /  /
vimRzyeti sa taM kSIrakaNThaM sotkaNThamabravIt  /  re ! muJca muJcAlaGkArAn,
bAlakaH sa tu nA'mucat  /  / 26  /  /  tato ruSTaH sa taM zAvaM, jagrAha
galakandale  /  so'rbhako'pi bhayodbhrAntastamityUce sagadgadam  /  / 27  /  /
asyAmaTavyAM bhImAyAM, bibhyaccaurAdyupadravAt  /  pRthvIkAyikasaMjJo'hamasmi
tvAM zaraNaM zritaH  /  / 28  /  /  azAzvatA hyamI prANA, vizvakIrtizca zAzvatI
/  yazorthI prANanAze'pi, tadrakSeccharaNAgatam !  /  / 29 /  /  bAlaM mAM
dInatAM prAptaM, pAhi pAhi prabho ! tataH  /  taireva bhUSitA bhUrye, rakSeyuH
zaraNAgatam  /  / 30 /  /  yataH-"vihalaM jo avalaMbai, AvaipaDiaM ca jo
samuddharai  /  saraNAgayaM ca rakkhai, tisu tesu alaMkiA puhavI  /  / 31 /  / "
2010_02

Page #141 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
100 Āturapratyākhyānaprakirṇakam Even though he was told this, the greedy soul,
that Sūri, was eager to take his necklace. As long as he was attached to taking
it, the cub again spoke. ||32|| “O Bhagavan, one should act appropriately after
hearing a story. Sūri said, “Tell me, then.” The cub said, “Listen.” ||33||
“Once upon a time, there was a potter in a village, and he was digging a pit. He
was attacked by the collapsing edge of the pit, and he said, “I give alms and
offerings to please the gods, and I support my relatives. But the earth is
attacking me. I have found refuge from fear!” ||34-35|| “Just as a potter, who
is seeking the main happiness of livelihood, depends on the earth, so too was
this potter quickly harmed by it! ||36|| “O Bhagavan, I am also afraid, and I
have taken refuge in you. You will save me from this fear. I have found refuge
from fear!” ||37|| “You are very clever, little one!” said the Guru. He took the
ornaments and took the child. ||38|| He threw the remaining ornaments into his
own alms bowl. Even though he was clever, he was overcome by his vow, and he
became completely devoid of greed. ||39|| Then, going forward, the Guru crossed
a forest. He saw a second cub, named Apkāya, and he spoke to him as before.
||40|| He was about to take the ornaments from this one too, but the cub, having
declared his own name, told a story. ||41|| “There was once a storyteller named
Pāṭala, who was skilled in telling beautiful stories. He was full of witty
sayings. ||42|| “Once, he was crossing the Ganges, which was flowing with a full
current. He saw the people standing on the bank, and he said to them in
amazement, ||43|| “‘The Ganges carries Pāṭala, who is full of stories. It is
good that you are being carried. Tell me something witty.’ ||44|| “The people,
who were eager to hear, said, ‘Pāṭala, tell us a verse that is not obscene.’
Pāṭala said, ||45|| “‘By which seeds grow, by which farmers live, in the midst
of that, I have found refuge from fear!’ ||46|| “Having revealed his feelings
and told the story, the cub stood there. Sūri, abandoning compassion, took the
ornaments from him too. ||47|| Then, going further, he saw a third cub, named
Tejaska. Sūri was about to take his ornaments. ||48|| Then, that cub, as before,
revealed his own name and began to tell a story, displaying his eloquence.
||49|| “Once upon a time, there was an ascetic in an ashram who worshipped fire
every day. He never burned anything else in his fire. ||50|| “‘I satisfy him
with honey and ghee day and night. I have been burned by that fire. I have found
refuge from fear!’ ||51|| “‘Once, someone went into the forest and lit a fire at
night because he was afraid of a tiger. He was careless and was burned by it. He
said, ||52|| “‘I was afraid of a tiger, and I took refuge in the fire. I was
burned by it. I have found refuge from fear!’ ||53|| “Having told the story and
revealed its meaning, the cub stood there. Then,

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 100 AturapratyAkhyAnaprakIrNakam ityAdyukto'pi lubdhAtmA, sa sUristasya
kandharAm  /  yAvanmoTayituM lagnastAvacchAvaH punarjagau  /  / 32 /  /
bhagavannekamAkhyAnaM, zrutvA kuryA yathocitam  /  sUrijagAda tabrUhi,
sopyAkhyat zrUyatAmiti  /  / 33 /  /  grAme kvApi kulAlo'bhUtsa cAnyedhurmudaM
khanan  /  AkrAntaH patatA khAnitaTeneti vaco'vadat  /  / 34  /  /
yatprasAdAbaliM bhikSAM, dade jJAtIMzca poSaye  /  sA'pyA''krAmati bhUmirmI,
tajjAtaM zaraNAdbhayam !  /  / 35  /  /  yathA hyAjIvikAmukhyasaukhyArthI
pRthivIM zritaH  /  varAkaH kumbhakAro'yaM, tayaivopahato drutam !  /  / 36 /  /
bhagavannahamapyevaM, bhItastvAM zaraNaM zritaH  /  tvaM ca muSNAsi mAM
tadbhIrmamApi zaraNAdabhUt !  /  / 37 /  /  tadAkAtidakSo'si, re ! bAleti vadan
guruH  /  tadrUSaNAni jagrAha, nijagrAha ca tAM zizum !  /  / 38  /
tAnazeSAnalaGkArAnakSipatsvapratigrahe  /  vratAddhRSTo hi dakSo'pi, nizzUko
jAyate bhRzam !  /  / 39 /  /  tataH puro vrajan kAJcidatikrAnto vanIM guruH  /
bAlakaM prAgvadadrAkSIdapkAyAkhyaM dvitIyakam  /  / 40 /  /
tasmiMstasyA'pya'laGkArAMstathaivA''dAtumudyate  /  so'pyA''khyAya
nijAmAkhyAmAkhyAnaM khyAtavAniti  /  / 41  /  /
"ekastAlAcarazcArukathAkathanakovidaH  /
pATalAhvo'bhavadbharisubhASitarasahadaH  /  / 42 /  /  so'nyadA prottaran
gaGgAM, nIrapUraiH pravAhitaH  /  tIrasthairdadRze lokairityUce ca savismayaiH
/  / 43 /  /  bahuzrutaM citrakathaM, gaMgA vahati pATalam  /  vAhyamAnA'stu
bhadraM te, brUhi kiJcitsubhASitam  /  / 44  /  /
samAkobhayAkarNisakarNastajjanoditam  /  zlokamekamanazlIlaM,
pATalo'pyevamabravIt  /  / 45 /  /  yena rohanti bIjAni, yena jIvanti karSakAH
/  tasya madhye vipadyeta, jAtaM me zaraNAdbhayam !  /  / 46 /  / " kathAM
procyeti tadbhAvaM, cAviSkRtya sthite zizau  /  kRpAM hitvA''dade
sUristasyApyAbharaNavrajam  /  / 47 /  /  tato'pyagre vrajastejaskAyikAkhyaM
tRtIyakam  /  vIkSyArbhakamabhUtsUristadbhUSAgrahaNodyataH  /  / 48 /  /  tataH
so'pi zizuH prAgvatprAduSkRtya nijAbhidhAm  /  itthaM kathAM kathayituM,
paTuvAkyaiH pracakrame  /  / 49 /  /  "kvApyAzrame tApaso'bhUtsarvadA
vahnipUjakaH  /  tasyoTaje'nale naivA'nyadA dagdhe sa ityavak  /  / 50 /  /
yamahaM madhusarpibh', tarpayAmi divAnizam  /  dagdhastenaivoTajo me, jAtaM
taccharaNAdbhayam !  /  / 51 /  /  yadvAraNyaM gataH kazcidvahniM vyAghrabhiyA
nizi  /  ajvAlayat pramattazca, dagdhastenA'bravIditi  /  / 52 /  /  mayA hi
vyAghrabhItena, pAvakaH zaraNIkRtaH  /  /  dagdhaM tena ca gAtraM me, jAtaM
zaraNato bhayam  /  / 53 /  / " ityuktvAkhyAnakaM tasyopanayaM ca prakAzya saH
/  tasthau zizustatastasya, bhUSaNAnyAdade guruH  /  / 54  /  /
tato'pya'gre'rbhakaM vAyukAyAkhyaM vIkSya pUrvavat  /  lAtuM tasyApyalaGkArAn,
sUrirudyamavAna'bhUt  /  / 55  /  /  so'pi zAvo nijaM nAma, prAgvattasmai
prakAzayan  /  AkhyAnaM vaktumArebhe, vAgmitvaM nATayanijam  /  / 56 /  /
2010_02

Page #142 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter 2: Collection of Examples  **101**  "There was once a young man, very
strong and stout. He was afflicted with a wind disease. Seeing him, someone
asked, "57.  "You, who were once a strong swimmer and walker, now go about
leaning on a stick. What disease afflicts you?" 58.  "The eldest of the Maruts,
who brings happiness in the month of Ashadha, is the one who troubles me. I have
found fear in my refuge!" 59.  "Calling it a story, and reflecting on it as
before, the teacher took the ornaments from the child who was standing there.
60.  "Again, in front of the child, he was adorned with ornaments as before. He
saw the fifth, named Vanaspatika. 61.  "The teacher was eager to take the
ornaments from him too. He also told a story, after telling his own story. 62.
"In a tree with flowers and fruits, some birds lived. They were confident,
thinking, "This tree is our refuge." 63.  "While they lived there, they were
undisturbed. Their many young ones played and grew. 64.  "From the side of that
tree, a creeper grew up. It encircled the tree and climbed high above it. 65.
"On that creeper, a large snake slithered. Climbing the tree, it devoured the
young birds. 66.  "Then, the birds, distressed by the destruction of their
young, made a great noise and said to each other again and again, 67.  "Until
today, we were happy in the tree, living here without trouble. Now, from this
creeper-laden tree, we have found fear in our refuge!" 68.  "Having told this
story, and showing the meaning as before, he gave the ornaments to the child who
was standing there. 69.  "Then, he went on to the sixth, a child named Trasaka.
Seeing his ornaments, he was eager to take them. 70.  "After telling his own
story, he told the fourth story. He said that the four senses are possible
there. 71.  "For example, in a city, surrounded by enemies, the frightened
elephants entered the city quickly from outside. 72.  "Those who were inside the
city, fearing the sound of the elephants, drove them out. They were greatly
harassed by the enemies. 73.  "Thinking, "The city will be our refuge," they
entered. Seeing their plight, someone asked, 74.  "The frightened citizens are
harassing you, and the enemies are chasing you. Go somewhere else, elephants!
You have found fear in your refuge!" 75.  "With the same explanation as before,
even after telling this story, the teacher released the child and told the
second story. 76.  "In a city, there was a king, who was wicked and his people
were wicked. He always caused theft in his own city. 77.  "The king's priest
deceived all the people. All the people were distressed and spoke to each other.
78.  "Where the king himself is a thief, and the priest is a deceiver, go away,
citizens! You have found fear in your refuge!" 79.  "He told this story with the
same explanation as before. He did not release the child, like a wicked planet
seizing people! 80.  "Then, the child was about to tell the third story. "For
example, in a village, there was a Brahmin who was lustful. 81.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 khaNDa:-2 dRSTAntasamuccayaH 101 "ekaH ko'pi yuvA bhuuriblo'bhuutpiinbhuughnH|
vAtarogagRhItaM taM, prekSya ko'pIti pRSTavAn  /  / 57  /  /
laGghanaplavanodyogI, prAgbhUtvApyadhunA bhavAn  /  yAti yaSTimavaSTabhya, kasya
vyAdherupadravAt ?  /  / 58  /  /  so'vAdIdyo marujjyeSThA''SADhayoH saukhyado
bhavet  /  sa eva bAdhate'Gga me, jAtaM hi zaraNAdbhayam !  /  / 59 /  /
AkhyAnamityuditvA tadbhAvayitvA ca pUrvavat  /  zizoH sthitasya tasyApi,
bhUSaNAnyagrahIdguruH  /  / 60  /  /  bhUyopi purato bAlaM,
prAgvadAbharaNairbhUtam  /  sa vanaspatikAyAkhyaM, paJcamaM sUriraikSata  /  /
61 /  /  tasyApi bhUSaNagaNaM, grahItuM sodyame gurau  /
so'pItyAkhyAnamAcakhyau, svAbhikhyAkhyAnapUrvakam  /  / 62 /  /  "drume
puSpaphalAkINe, kvApi ke'pya'vasan khagAH  /  vRkSo hyayaM naH zaraNamiti
vizrabdhacetasaH  /  / 63 /  /  teSAM ca vasatAM tatra, nirAbAdhamathAnyadA  /
apatyAni bahUnyantIMDaM krIDanti jajJire  /  / 64 /  /  itazca tasya vRkSasya,
pArvAtkA'pyudgatA ltaa| taM taruM pariveSTyoccairAruroha drumopari  /  / 65  /
/  tayA ca latayA'nyedhurvilagya bhujago mahAn  /  Aruhya taM drumaM tAni,
khagApatyAnyabhakSayat  /  / 66 /  /  tataste vihagAH
svIyApatyavidhvaMsaduHkhitAH  /  kurvantastumulaM proccairitthamAhurmuhurmithaH
/  / 67 /  /  adya yAvatsukhaM vRkSe, sthitamatrAnupadrave  /  asmAdeva
latAyuktAdadyAbhUccharaNAdbhayam  /  / 68 /  / " ityudIrya kathAM tasyA, bhAvaM
prAgvat prakAzya ca  /  tasthuSastasya zAvasyA'pyAdade bhUSaNAni saH  /  / 69 /
/  tato'gre prasthitaH SaSThaM, trasakAyAkhyamarbhakam  /  vIkSya
tasyApyalaGkArAn, so'bhUdAcchettumutsuka:  /  / 70  /  /  nijAmAkhyAM
samAkhyAya, so'pyA''khyAnacatuSTyam  /  avAdIdvIndriyAdInAM, caturNAM tatra
sambhavAt  /  / 71 /  /  "tathA hi nagare kvApi, parIte parito'ribhiH  /  bhItA
bahisthA mAtaGgA, purAntaH prAvizan drutam  /  / 72 /  /  tAMzca
madhyasthitaiokerannAdikSayabhIrubhiH  /  niSkAzyamAnAnnagarAdvidviSo'pIDayan
bhRzam  /  / 73 /  /  puraM naH zaraNaM bhAvItyAzayA vizato'pi tAn  /  nirIkSya
durdazAM prAptAstadA ko'pItya'bhASata  /  / 74  /   /  bhItAH paurAH karSayanti,
yuSmAnnijanti ca dviSaH  /  tatkvApi yAta mAtaGgA !, jAtaM zaraNato bhayam  /  /
75  /  / " prAgvat sopanaye tena, prokte'pyevaM kathAnake  /  amuJcati gurau
bAlau, dvitIyAmabravItkathAm  /  / 76 /  /  "nagare kvApyabhUdbhUpaH, sa ca
duSTo nijairnaraiH  /  svIya eva pure caurya, sarvadA'cIkaradRzam  /  / 77  /  /
rAjJastasya purodhAstu, sarvaM janamabhaNDayat  /  khinnAstato'khilA lokAH,
parasparamado'vadan  /  / 78  /  /  yatra rAjA svayaM cauro, bhaNDakazca
purohitaH  /  yAta paurAH ! purAttasmAjjAtaM hi zaraNAdrayam  /  / 79 /  / "
kathAM sopanayAM prAgvadimAmUcAnamapyamum  /  nA'nUcAno'mucadgrastaM, janaM
duSTa iva grahaH ! /  / 8 /  /  tatastRtIyamAkhyAnaM, vaktuM prAqasta so'rbhakaH
/  "tathA hi kvApyabhUdgrAme, dvijanmA ko'pi kAmukaH  /  / 81 /  /  _ 2010_02

Page #143 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------



======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 102 AturapratyAkhyAnaprakIrNakama tasya cAsItsutA madhyavayobhUSitabhUghanA  /
udagrarUpalAvaNyA, jagannetrasudhAJjanam  /  / 82 /  /  anyadA tAM sutAM vIkSya,
riraMsuH sa dvijo'bhavat  /  na hi prabalabhogecchaH, sthAnAsthAne vicArayet  /
/ 83 /  /  tAM ca kAmayamAno'pi, na siSeve sa ljjyaa| tatkAmasyAnivRttezca,
jajJe kSINatanubhRzam  /  / 84  /  /  taM cAtidurbalaM prekSya, sanirbandhaM
tadaGganA  /  aprAkSItkSAmatAhetuM, so'pyAcakhyau yathAtatham  /  / 85 /  /
tataH sA vyamRzaddakSA, yadyenAM nApnuyAdayam  /  tadAvazyaM vipadyeta, drAg
dazAM dazamIM gataH  /  / 86 /  /  vidhAyAkAryamapyetattadenaM jIvayAmyaham  /
nijo bhartA hi patnIbhirjIvanIyo yathAtathA  /  / 87 /  /  /  sA vicintyeti taM
proce, mA kArSIradhRtiM priya !  /  ahaM kenA'pyupAyena, kariSyAmi tavehitam  /
/ 88 /  /  tamityAzvAsya sA putrImiti provAca dambhinI  /  pUrvaM hi naH sutAM
yakSo, bhuGkte pazcAdvivAhyate  /  / 89 /  /  kRSNabhUteSTAnizAyAM, tattvaM
yakSAlayaM vrajeH  /  tvAM bhoktumudyataM tatrA''gataM yakSaM ca mAnayeH  /  /
10 /  /  he putri ! tatrodyotaM ca, mA kArSIryakSamIkSitum  /  udyote hi kRte
yakSaH, saroSamupayAsyati  /  / 91 /  /  tacchrutvA mAtRvisrambhA, svIcakre
sA'pi tadvacaH  /  vistrabdho hi jano'kAryamapi sadyaH prapadyate !  /  / 12 /
/  rAtrau ca mAtRproktAyAM, sA yakSekSaNakautukAt  /  zarAvasthagitaM dIpaM,
lAtvA yakSAlayaM yayau  /  / 13 /  /  tanmAtrA prahito
bhaTTo'pyA''gAttadyakSamandiram  /  tAM copabhujyaM ni:zaMkaM,
ratazrAnto'svapItsukham  /  / 94  /  /  zarAvasampuTAddIpamAviSkRtyA'tha
kautukAt  /  pazyantI tatsutA tatra, tAtaM dRSTvetyacintayat  /  / 95  /  /  aho
mayA samaM mAyA, mAtrA'pi mahatI kRtA  /  bhartA tadayamevAstu, mama kiM
lajjayA'dhunA ?  /  / 96  /  /  kiJca svatAtamapyenamapazaMkaM bhajAmyatha  /
narttanodyuktanatakyA, vadanAvaraNena kim ?  /  / 97 /  /  sA vimRzyeti
pitrA'pi, samaM reme yathAruci  /  ratazrAntau ca tau suptau, prAbudhyetAM
prage'pi na  /  / 98  /  /  mAtA tasyAstataH kAntaviyogodagraduHkhataH  /
alabdhanidrA yAminyAM, prAtastAvityabhASata  /  / 99 /  /  udgate'pi ravau
vizvaM, vizvaM spRzati cA''tape  /  prabuddhe'pya'khile loke, hale ! jAgarti no
sukhI  /  / 100  /  /  tatsavitrIvacaH pUrvaprabuddhA sA tadaGgajA  /  zrutvA
tadIyabhAvaM cA'vagamyetyuttaraM dadau  /  / 101 /  /  mAtastvayaiva proktaM me,
yadyakSaM bahu mAnayeH  /  yakSeNa cAhatastAtastadanyaM tAtameSayaH  /  / 102 /
/  imAmAkarNya tadvAcaM, brAhmaNItyabravItpunaH  /  nava mAsAn svIyakukSau,
kaSTenA'dhAri yA mayA  /  / 103 /  /  viNmUtre ca ciraM yasyA, mardite sA'pi
nandanA  /  matkAntamaharattanme, jAtaM zaraNato bhayam  /  / 104 /  / "
pUrvavadbhAvanApUrvamityuktepi kathAnake  /  tenA'muktaH
zizusturyamAkhyAnamidamuktavAn  /  / 105  /  /  "tathA hi kvapyabhUdgrAme,
vipraH ko'pi mahAdhanaH  /  sa ca dharmadhiyA mUDhaH, sarovaramacIkhanat  /  /
106 /  /  2010_02

Page #144 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Chapter 2: Collection of Examples 103 He, having built a temple and a garden for
the sake of his own welfare, performed a goat sacrifice and repeatedly did so
there. ||107|| "This is my religious practice, it will be my salvation in the
next world," thinking thus, he sacrificed many goats in the sacrifices. ||108||
That Bhūdeva, having died, was reborn as a goat. That goat, by gradual increase,
became fat and strong. ||109|| When he was being led to be killed in the
sacrifice, he remembered his own kind, seeing his own pond and so on, by his own
sons. ||110|| "This was done by me, it has become a calamity for me," thus
blaming his own actions, he repeatedly made the sound "bubū". ||111|| Seeing him
thus, a wise great sage, knowing his previous birth story, said this. ||112||
"This pond and the trees were planted by you, the sacrifices were performed by
you, why are you making the sound "bubū", O animal!" ||113|| Hearing these good
words, that goat took refuge in silence, thinking, "What is the use of rewards
when my actions have borne fruit?" ||114|| "This one, who is silent, is a good
man, he is not born of a mother," thinking thus, the twice-born ones were filled
with wonder and asked. ||115|| "O venerable one, what is this ram doing, having
heard your words? He has become silent, as if he has been subdued by a spell?"
||116|| "O venerable one, this one was a cow in your previous birth, he has
become a goat. Seeing this pond and so on, he remembered his own kind." ||117||
"Then, remembering his suffering, he made the sound "bubū" loudly, knowing the
fault of his own actions, he quickly became silent." ||118|| "Then his offspring
said, "What is the proof here, O master? Without proof, who would believe what
is unseen?" ||119|| "The good man has said in your presence, it is hidden in his
previous birth. If he shows you the treasure, then this will be true." ||120||
Hearing this, his sons said, "Show us the place of the treasure." The goat went
to the place of the treasure and dug the earth with his forefoot. ||121|| Then,
his sons, having gained faith, in the presence of the sage, that goat renounced
his goathood and embraced Jainism. ||122|| Hearing the Dharma from the sage,
that ram also embraced it. He immediately became a vegetarian and attained the
state of a god. ||123|| Just as a twice-born one, with the intention of "I will
be his refuge after death", built a pond and so on, he went to his refuge.
||124|| "Thus, I, being afraid, have taken refuge in you. If they kill me, then
I have also gone to your refuge." ||125|| Even with these four stories told by
the teacher, his bad nature did not cease, like an incurable disease with
medicines. ||126|| Then, the sage, as before, took his ornaments. A greedy
person is never satisfied with wealth, like the ocean with water. ||127|| Thus,
that one, with the ornaments of the six princes, took upon himself the
acceptance of gifts, which were difficult to choose. ||128|| Then, the sage
quickly, quickly, started to go forward, thinking, "I will connect these
children with

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 khaNDa:-2 dRSTAntasamuccayaH 103 tasya pAlyAM devakulamArAmaM ca vidhApya saH
/  pravartya chAgayajJaM ca, muhustatra cakAra saH  /  / 107  /  /  ayaM hi
dharmastrANaM me, paralokaM bhaviSyati  /  dhyAyanniti sa yajJeSu,
chagalAnavadhIbahUn  /  / 108 /  /  bhUdevaH so'nyadA mRtvA, chAgeSvevodapadyata
/  so'pi chAgaH kramAvRddhi, prApto'bhUtpInabhUghanaH  /  / 109  /  /  yajJe
hantuM nIyamAnaH, svaputraireva so'nyadA  /  svopajJaM tattaTAkAdi, dRSTvA svAM
jAtimasmarat  /  / 110  /  /  mayaiva kAritamidaM, mamaivAbhUdvipattaye  /
nindannevaM svakRtyaM sa, 'bubu' zabdaM vyadhAnmuhuH  /  / 111 /  /  tathAbhUtaM
ca taM vIkSya, jJAnI ko'pi mahAmuniH  /  tatpUrvabhavavRttAntaM,
vijJAyaivamavocata  /  / 112  /  /  khAnitaM hi tvayaivedaM, saro vRkSAzca
ropitAH  /  pravartitA makhAzcA'tha, kiM 'bubU' kuruSe pazo !  /  / 113 /  /
iti sAdhuvacaH zrutvA, sa chAgo maunamAzrayat  /  svakarmaNyudite kiM hi,
pUtkArairiti cintayan  /  / 114  /  /  tUSNIkaH sAdhuvAcA'yamajo'bhUdityavetya
te  /  athA'pRcchan dvijAH sAdhumityAzcaryabharAkulAH  /  / 115  /  /  kimeSa
meSo bhagavannAkarNya bhavatAM vacaH  /  tUSNIkatvaM dadhau nAga, iva
mantravazIkRtaH ?  /  / 116 /  /  muni gau bhavattAtau, mRtvA'sau chagalo'bhavat
/  dRSTvA caitattaTAkAdi, jAtismaraNamAsadat  /  / 117  /  /  tato
duHkhAbubudhvAnamuccaiH kurvanmayoditam  /  svakarmaNAM doSamamuM, jJAtvA maunaM
dadhau drutam  /  / 118  /   /  tatastadaGgajAH procuH, kaH pratyaya iha prabho
!  /  vinA pratyayamuktaM hi, parokSaM zraddadhIta kaH ?  /  / 119  /  /
sAdhurUce samakSaM vaH, prAgbhave nihitaM svayam  /  nidhiM ceddarzayatyeSa,
tadA hyetadyathAtatham  /  / 120  /  /  tadAkarNya nidhisthAnaM, darzayetyuditaH
sutaiH  /  chAgo gatvA nidhisthAne, pAdAgreNA'khanadbhuvam  /  / 121 /  /
tatastattanayairjAtapratyayairyatisannidhau  /  sa chAgo mumuce jainadharmazca
pratyapadyata  /  / 122 /  /  dharmaM zrutvA munestasmAnmeSo'pi pratipadya saH
/  vihitAnazanaH sadyo, devabhUyamavindata  /  / 123 /  /  pretya me zaraNaM
bhAvItyAzayA sa dvijo yathA  /  taTAkAdi vyadhAttacca, tasyAzaraNatAmagAt  /  /
124  /  /  evaM mayA'pi bhItena, bhavantaH zaraNIkRtAH  /  cenmuSNanti tadA
me'pi, trANamatrANatAM gatam  /  / 125 /  / " itthaM
caturbhirAkhyAnairgurostenoditairapi  /  na durbhAvo nyavarttiSTA'sAdhyo roga
ivauSadhaiH  /  / 126  /  /  tatastasyA'pyalaGkArAn, sUrirjagrAha pUrvavat  /
lubdho jano hi no dravyaistRpyatyabdhirivAmbubhiH  /  / 127  /  /  evaM SaNNAM
kumArANAmAttairAbharaNavrajaiH  /  pratigrahaM durvikalpairAtmAnaM ca babhAra
saH  /  / 128  /  /  tato drutaM drutaM sUriH, puro gantuM pracakrame  /
sambandhyeSAM zizUnAM mAM, mAdrAkSIditi cintayan  /  / 129  /  /  devo'pyevaM
parIkSAbhistaM praNaSTavratAzayam  /  jJAtvaikAM vyakarotsAdhvIM, tatsamyaktvaM
parIkSitum  /  / 130  /  /  tAM ca gurvImalaGkAranikaraiH parimaNDitAm  /
vIkSya sUriH sasaMrambhArambhamevamuvAca saH  /  / 131 /  /  2010_02

Page #145 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Scattering of Eager Refusal  A woman with beautiful eyes, adorned with
many ornaments and marked with a tilak, said to the sage, "O virtuous one, who
are you and from where have you come?" (132)  Hearing the words, "He is Surya,"
she was filled with anger and, without hesitation, quickly replied to him. (133)
"O Surya! Do you see mustard seeds and holes? Even though you see your own self
as small as a bilva fruit, you do not see it?" (134)  "And, teaching others in
this way, one who is faultless indeed shines. But one who is himself full of
faults is not worthy of teaching!" (135)  "If you consider yourself a Shraman, a
Brahmachari, a worthy recipient of gold, a well-behaved and austere one, (136)
then come with me, why are you perishing? I will see, O elder lady, how I can
accept your offering." (137)  Thus urged by the virtuous woman, he remained
silent and went forward. He saw the army approaching, which had been created by
the Yaksha himself. (138)  Frightened, Surya abandoned the path of the army.
Even though he was perishing, he was saved by the grace of fate. (139)  The
king, seeing him, got down from his elephant and bowed. He said, "Oh, what good
fortune! You have graced us with your presence!" (140)  "Please accept these
sweets and other offerings as a token of my gratitude. Take them quickly!" (141)
"I will not eat today," Surya said loudly, refusing to accept the offerings. He
was thinking, "Let the heap of ornaments in the bowl be seen!" (142)  "Release
him, release him!" the king urged, but out of fear, he did not release him. Like
a young woman who refuses to release her lover, he was hesitant to let go. (143)
Even though the king repeatedly pulled at Surya's hand, he did not release him.
Like a young woman who refuses to release her garment, he held on tight. (144)
Then, forcefully, the king cut off Surya's hand and the offering fell to the
ground. As the king was about to throw the sweets and other offerings, (145)
Surya, seeing his ornaments scattered, became very angry. With a furrowed brow
and a stern face, he spoke to the king. (146)  "You wicked one! You must have
killed my sons. Otherwise, how could these ornaments be near you?" (147)  "O
wicked one! O hateful one! O most sinful one! You hypocrite in the guise of a
virtuous one! How will you live after killing my sons?" (148)  Hearing the
king's words, the sage's mind was filled with sorrow. With a heavy heart, he
thought, "Oh, I have done a terrible thing! (149)  I have taken these ornaments
from the king's sons! My sin is known to this king. He will surely kill me with
one of his sons!" (150)  "The fruit of all my sins has come to pass. Who will be
my refuge now?" (151)  "Or perhaps I acted rashly without thinking. I abandoned
the peace of restraint for the sake of worldly pleasures." (152)  While he was
thinking thus, Surya, gathering his magic, appeared with his body shining
brightly, illuminating the sky. (154)  "O revered one!" he said, "I am your
beloved disciple. I myself will go

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 AturapratyAkhyAnaprakIrNakam aJjitAkSI bhUribhUSAbhUSitA tilakAGkitA  /
zAsanoDDAhakRduSTasAdhvi ! tvaM kuta AgatA ?  /  / 132  /  /  sUrestasyeti
vacanaM zrutvA roSabharAkulA  /  sA vratinyapi niHzaGkaM pratyuvAceti taM drutam
/  / 133 /  /  re sUre ! sarSapAbhAni, paricchidrANi pazyasi ?  /  Atmano
bilvamAtrANi pazyannapi na pazyasi ?  /  / 134  /  /  kiJcaivaM zikSayannanyaM,
nirdoSaH khalu zobhate  /  svayaM sadoSastu paraM, na zikSayitumarhati !  /  /
135  /  /  yadi ca tvaM manyase svaM, zramaNaM brahmacAriNam  /
samaleSTusuvarNaM satkriyamugravihAriNam  /  / 136  /  /  tadabhyehi
mamAbhyarNamutkarNaH kiM praNazyasi | vilokayAmi jyeSThArya !, yathAhaM te
pratigraham  /  / 137 /  /  tayetyuDDAhitaH sAdhvyA, tUSNIkaH sa vrajan puraH  /
dadarza sainyamAgacchat, kRtaM tenaiva nAkinA  /  / 138  /  /
bhayodbhrAntastataH suriH, sainyAdhvAnaM vihAya saH  /  nazyannapi nRpasyaiva,
purogAddaivayogataH  /  /  139 /  /  nRpo'pi prekSya taM hastiskandhAduttIrya
cA'namat  /  Aha sma cA'ho ! bhAgyaM me, yUyaM yadiha vIkSitAH !  /  / 140 /  /
tatkRtvA'nugrahaM svAminmayIdaM modakAdikam  /  eSaNIyaM prAsukaM ca gRhyatAM
gRhyatAM drutam  /  / 141  /  /  nA'dya bhokSye'hamityuccairvadan sUristu
nA''dade  /  pAtrastho bhUSaNaugho mA, dRzyatAmiti cintayan !  /  / 142 /  /
taM muJca muJcetyUcAnaM, bhiyA bhUpastu nA'mucat  /  hriyA na neti jalpantIM
navoDhAM ramaNo yathA !  /  /  143  /  /  bhUbhujA muhurAkRSTamapi sUriH
patadgraham  /  na mumoca navoDhA. strI, bharnAkRSTamivAMzukam !  /  / 144 /  /
tataH prasahya tatpANestamAcchidya patadgraham  /  tatra yAvannRpaH
kSeptumArebhe modakAdikam  /  / 145 /  /  tAvatsa tAnalaGkArAnnirIkSya kupito
bhRzam !  /  tamAcAryamuvAcaivaM, bhrukuTIvikaTAnanaH  /  / 146 /  /  are pApa
tvayA nUnaM, putrA vyApAditA mama  /  no cetkathamamI teSAmalaGkArAstavAntike  /
/ 147 /  /  re duSTa ! dviSTha ! pApiSTha !, sAdhuveSaviDambaka !  /  yAsyasi
tvaM kathaM jIvana, vyApAdya mama nandanAn ?  /  / 148 /  /  zrutveti bhUbhRto
bhASAM, sAdhvasAkulamAnasaH  /  aghomukhaH so'nUcAno'nUcAno dhyAtavAniti  /  /
149 /  /  aho ! vimUDhacittenA'kAryametatkRtaM mayA  /  yadetadIyaputrANAmAdade
bhUSaNavrajaH ! /  / 150  /  /  matpAtakaM ca sakalaM, jJAtaM bhUsvAminA'munA  /
tadasau mAM kumAreNa, mArayiSyati kenacit !  /  / 151 /  /  pApmano
nikhilasyApi, phalametadupasthitam  /  idAnImeva tatko'tra, zaraNaM me
bhaviSyati ?  /  /  152  /  /  athavA pUrvamevedamavimRzya vyadhAmaham  /
tatsaMyamasukhaM tyaktaM yanmayA bhogakAmyayA  /  /  153  /  /  tatraivaM
cintayatyeva, mAyAM saMhRtya tAM suraH  /  AvirbabhUva
svatanudyutidyotitadiGmukhaH  /  / 154 /  /  tamityUce ca bhavagan !, so'haM
ziSyo'smi vaH priyaH  /  svayaM niryAmya yaH pUjyairAgantuM prArthito'bhavat  /
/ 155 /  /  ahaM hi vratamAhAtmyAtsuro'bhUvaM maharddhikaH  /  smRtvA vAkyaM ca
pUjyAnAM, svavAgbaddha ihA''gamam  /  / 156 /  /  104 2010_02

Page #146 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter 2: Collection of Examples  **105**  Some time was spent in the
arrival of Madan, which should be known to be due to his being engrossed in the
work of the newly born god. ||157||  To enlighten you, whose minds have been
corrupted by restraint, I have enacted this play, which is unseen by the
venerable ones in this world! ||158||  Six children, called the Six Bodies, were
refined by me for the purpose of testing you, along with their female companion.
||159||  Then, understanding your nature, quickly overcome by delusion and
madness, I presented the fear of the army, the medicine for its destruction.
||160||  Abandoning this doubt and fear, filled with delusion, turn your mind,
which has gone astray, towards the true path. ||161||  Furthermore, "Those who
are attached to the world, who are engrossed in worldly pleasures, who are not
free from the smallest particle of karma, do not attain liberation, even if they
are born as humans. ||162||  Four hundred and fifty Joanas (a unit of time) are
the lifespan of a human being. He who lives for that long, the gods do not come
to him. ||163||  "These and other Agamic scriptures, even the wise ones know,
what kind of action was undertaken by Madan in his arrival? ||164||  And also,
due to curiosity to see the divine play, even though much time has passed, the
ignorant ones do not know! ||165||  Even you, whose minds are captivated by that
divine play, have spent six months, as if it were a moment, in the upper realms!
||166||  Thus ends the chapter. This delusion is not fit for you to do. Even at
the end of the kalpa, does the ocean of milk overflow its limits? ||167||  When
even those like you do such things, who else in the world will be steadfast in
their dharma? ||168||  Considering all this evil conduct, O great ones! Practice
good conduct, the fire that burns the cage of karma. ||169||  Having heard the
words of Girvan (the name of the Jain scriptures), the noble one was awakened.
That sage condemned his own evil conduct again and again. ||170||  Again and
again, the god Aryashada said to him, "Well done, well done, my son! I am
enlightened by your great wisdom! ||171||  I, through my own actions, was
destined for the path of hell, but you, my friend in the path of liberation,
have led me to the path of liberation. ||172||  I am no longer indebted to you,
the giver of dharma, who has made me bold in dharma. What more can I say?
||173||  Saluting the god, the sage went to his own place. He reflected upon his
past actions and engaged in intense austerities. ||174||  The god, bowing to the
sage, filled with joy, forgave his own offense and returned to the heaven.
||175||  The sage Nashad, as seen before, endured this suffering, but it was not
appropriate. That sage endured it, and so it should be endured by all the
virtuous ones forever. ||176||  **3. The Example of the Shraavak from Saurashtra
in the Commentary on the Shree Samyaktv Shataati**  In the land of Shree
Saurashtra, the ornament of all nations, there lived a Shraavak, a knower of the
truth, from the knowledge of right faith. ||1||  When a famine, difficult to
obtain food,

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 khaNDa:-2 dRSTAntasamuccayaH 105 madanAgamane kazcitkAlakSepo babhUva yaH  /
sa tu jJeyo navotpannadevakAryAkulatvataH  /  / 157  /  /
saMyamabhraSTacittAMzca, yuSmAn bodhayituM mayA  /  tannATyaM vidadhe
pUjyairyadRSTamadhunA'dhvani !  /  / 158  /  /  mayaiva yuSmadAkUtaparIkSArthaM
pariSkRtAH  /  SaTkAyAhvA dArakAH SaT, sasAdhvIkA vikurvitAH  /  / 159 /  /
tato'vabudhya vaH prAjyaM, mohonmAdamuditvaram  /  mayodapAdi sainyAdibhayaM
taddhvaMsanauSadham  /  / 160  /  /  zaGkAtaGkAmamuM tasmAttyaktvA
mohasamanvitam  /  unmArgagaM mano'vAptasanmArgaM kurutA''tmanaH  /  / 161 /  /
kiJca-"saMkaMtadivcapemA, visayapasattAsamattakattavvA  /  aNahINamaNuakajjA,
narabhavamasuiM na iMti surA  /  / 162 /  /  cattAri paMca joaNasayAI gaMdho u
maNualogassa  /  u8 vaccai jeNaM, na hu devA teNa AvaMti  /  / 163 /  / "
ityAdyAgamavAkyAni, jAnadbhirapi sUribhiH  /  madanAgamanepyetatkarmArabdhaM
kimIdRzam ?  /  / 164 /  /  anyacca divyanATyAdivilokanakutUhalAt  /  kAlaM
yAntaM bahumapi, naiva jAnanti nirjarAH !  /  / 165  /  /  yuSmAbhirapi
taddivyanATakAkSiptamAnasaiH  /  Urddhasthaireva SaNmAsI,
ninye'zrAntairmuhUrttavat !  /  / 166  /  /  tadbhadantAH  /  vimoho'yaM, kartuM
vo naiva yujyate  /  kalpAnte'pi kimu kSIrAmbhodhirullaGghate'vadhim ?  /  / 167
/  /  bhavAdRzA api yadA, kurvantyevamanIdRzam  /  dRDhadharmA jagati
kastadAhyanyo bhaviSyati ?  /  / 168  /  /  taddurAcaritaM sarvamAlocyedaM
mahAdhiyaH !  /  samAcarata cAritraM, karmakakSahutAzanam  /  / 169 /  /
gIrvANavANIM zrutveti, pratibuddho mahAzayaH  /  sa sUriH svadurAcAraM, bhUyo
bhUyo nininda tam !  /  / 170  /  /  vAraM vAraM ca taM devamAryASADho'bravIditi
/  sAdhu sAdhu tvayA vatsa !, bodhito'haM mahAmate !  /  / 171 /  /  ahaM hi
narakAdhvAnaM, prapanno'pi svakarmabhiH  /  mokSamArgaM tvayaivA'tha, prApito
bhAvabandhunA  /  / 172 /  /  dharmAddhRSTasya me bhUyo, dharmadAnavidhAyinaH  /
tavA'nRNo'haM naiva syAM, bravImi kimataH param ?  /  / 173  /  /  taM
devamabhinandyeti, svasthAnamagamadguruH  /  AlocitapratikrAntastapotyugraM
cakAra ca  /  / 174  /  /  suro'pi sUriM natvA taM, pramodabharameduraH  /
kSamayitvA svAparAdhaM, suralokamagAtpunaH  /  / 175  /  /  nASADhasUririti
darzanagocaraM prAk, sehe parISahamamuM na tathA vidheyam  /  sUriH sa eva
sahate sma yathA ca pazcAtsarvaistathA vrativaraiH satataM sa sahyaH  /  / 176 /
/  3. kudarzanadhyAne zrIsamyaktvasaptatiTIkAyAH surASTrazrAvakasya dRSTAntaH  /
deze zrImatsurASTrAyAM, sarvvarASTravibhUSaNe  /  ko'pi suzrAvako jajJe,
samyagjJAnAditattvavit  /  / 1 /  /  duSprApabhikSe durbhikSe, pravRtte tatra
devataH  /  so'nyadA bauddhasArthena, pratasthe'vantimaNDalam  /  / 2 /  /  sa
zAkyairIcyatAnyedhurasmAkamupadhiM yadi  /  mArge vahasi tat tubhyaM, dadmahe
bhojanAdikam  /  / 3 /  /  _ 2010_02

Page #147 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Scattering of Eager Rejection  The hungry one, accepting those words,
went along the path of the one carrying the vessel, eating and becoming filled
with the essence of that state. ||4||  This one, however, who held great joy in
the teachings of the Buddha, while traveling on the path, developed a most
incurable disease in his body. ||5||  Unable to travel with the caravan, he
remained on the path. The Buddhists, covering him with a garment of red ochre,
departed. ||6||  He, corrupted in his right understanding, due to the disease,
went to the state of the five senses. He became a Yaksha, with knowledge of the
limits of life, but with a mind obscured by karma. ||7||  What good deeds, what
wonders did he do in his previous life, by which he attained this radiant
position of a Yaksha? ||8||  Seeing his body covered in red cloth, the one with
external vision reflected in his heart thus: ||9||  "By the influence of the
monks, I have obtained divine fortune. Therefore, I too have attained greatness
in their teachings." ||10||  "Where I, the resident of the banyan tree, am, the
monks eat in the monastery. There, I, with my hands adorned with bangles,
bracelets, and rings, revealed myself to the Shakyas, giving them sweets and
other things. I treated the entire world with respect in the Buddhist
teachings." ||11||  **Couplet:**  Those with deceitful minds, intoxicated by the
influence of pride, slander the teachings of the Jinas, though they should not.
||13||  Why bother with other philosophies? Embrace the teachings of the
Shakyas, where even the gods are always eager to serve. ||14||  Once, some great
teachers, masters of knowledge, wandered the earth. They came to the city of
Ujjain, full of strength. ||15||  Those radiant ones, through their offerings,
informed the Buddhists of the story. They sent two great sages, saying, "Go and
teach them." ||16||  When the hand of a god goes out to the monastery of the
Buddhists, it should be held and this should be said to the young ones by the
elders: ||17||  "Oh, awaken, awaken! Do not be deluded, O best of the hidden!
Remember the five prostrations, the path of auspicious conduct." ||18||  Invited
by the Buddhists, filled with pride, the two sages entered the monastery. They
touched the hand that had come out and it disappeared. ||19||  Holding the hand,
they clearly spoke the words of their teacher. At that moment, the Yaksha,
hearing this, awakened. ||20||  He thought, "Alas, how shameful! In my own
teachings of the Jinas, even though I am knowledgeable, how can I be deluded,
attached to the view of the earth?" ||21||  Then, the Yaksha appeared and
addressed the Buddhists, his followers, and others, saying loudly, "Listen to my
words!" ||22||  "All other philosophies are declared to be false. Only one truth
should be known: the teachings of Shri Jinendra. ||23||  "Therefore, abandoning
your false views, embrace the teachings of the Jinas. Just as the tip of the
finger touches both the sword and liberation, so too..." ||24||  Having said
this, he went and bowed to the great teachers, acknowledging his transgression.
Reflecting on his sin, he embraced the Jain path and departed. ||25||  Some,
like bees drinking nectar, drank in those words, and in the garden of the
glorious Jain teachings, they learned the qualities of the worthy ones. ||26||
Hearing the story of the merchant from Saurashtra,

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 AturapratyAkhyAnaprakIrNakam tadvacaH kSudhitaH so'GgIkRtya tadbhANDabhRtpathi
/  vrajannaznaMzca tadbhAvabhAvitAtmA'bhavadbhUzam  /  / 4 /  /  saugate zAsane
prItimatIva dadhato'sya tu  /  mArge yAtaH samutpede, rogo'sAdhyatamastanau  /
/ 5 /  /  akSamaH saha sArthena, gantuM pathi sa tasthivAn  /
gairikAraktavastreNAcchAdya taM saugatA gatAH  /  / 6 /  /  so'pi
dUSitasamyaktvo, rogataH paJcatAM gataH  /  yakSIbhUyAvadhijJAnaM
prAyuGkAvyaktacetanaH ||7|| yA pUrvabhave kiM kiM kRtaM sukRtamadbhutam ?  /
yena prAptedRzI yakSapadavI sampadojjvalA  /  /  8  /  /  raktena
vAsasAcchannaM, tadA sa svakalevaram  /  mArge dRSTvA bahirdRSTirhadyevaM
paryabhAvayat  /  / 9 /  /  anubhAvena bhikSUNAM labdhA devazriyo mayA  /
tanve'hamapi mAhAtmyamato'mISAM hi zAsane  /  /  10  /  /  vaTavAsI sa yatrAmI,
bhikSavo bhuJjate maThe  /  tatra kaGkaNakeyUra - mudrAbhirmaNDitaM karam  /  /
11 /  /  prakaTIkRtya zAkyebhyo, dadAno modakAdikam  /  samastaM kRtavAMllokaM,
sAdaraM bauddhazAsane  /  /  12  /  /  yugmam  /
tatprabhAvamadonmAdaprollaNThAH zaThacetasaH  /  apanindyaM tu nindanti,
bhikSavo jinazAsanam  /  /  13  /  /  kimanyairdarzanairlokAH !, sevadhvaM
zAkyazAsanam  /  yatra devA api sadA, sevAhevAkazAlinaH  /   /  14  /   /  ekadA
ke'pi sUrIndrA, vidyAsiddhA vasundharAm  /  viharantaH samAjagmurujjayinyAM
mahaujasaH  /  /  15  /  /  zrAddhaiste bauddhavRttAntaM jJApitA jJAnabhAnavaH
/  praiSiSan zikSayitveti, gItArthau dvau mahAmunI  /   /  16  /  /  saugatAnAM
maThe hasto, yadA niryAti daivataH  /  taM vidhRtya sa vaktavyo,
yuvAbhyAmuJccakairidam  /  / 17 /  /  aho budhyasva budhyasva, mA muhya
guhyakottama !  /  smara paJcanamaskAraM, pAtheyaM zivavartmanaH  /  /  18  /  /
maThAyAtau yatI bauddhairnimantryetAM madoddhuraiH  /  antaH praviSTau tau
hastamadASTa ca vinirgatam  /  / 19 /  /  nirudhya hastaM tau vyaktamavaktAM
guruvAcikam  /  tadA''karNanato yakSaH, pratyabudhyata tatkSaNAt  /  / 20 /  /
acintayacca hA dhigmAM, yasya me jinazAsane  /  vijJasyApi kathaM moho'
bhUmidhyAdRSTisaGgataH ?  /  / 21 /  /  AvirbhUya tato yakSaH,
saugatAMstadupAsakAn  /  aparAnapyuvAcoccaiH, zrUyatAM bho ! vaco mama  /  / 22
/  /  anye darzaninaH sarve mithyArUpAH prakIrttitAH  /  tathyamekaM tu
vijJeyaM, zrIjinezvarazAsanam  /  /  23  /  /  tadbho mithyAdRzastyaktvA,
zrayadhvaM jinazAsanam  /  yathA karatalakroDIsyAt zrIH khargApavargayoH  /  /
24 /  /  ityudIrya tato gatvA, sUrInnatvA'ticArajam  /  pApamAlocya jainaM sa
mArgamudbhAvya jagmivAn  /  /  25  /   /  nipIya ke'pi tadvAkyamarandaM maghupA
iva  /  zrImajjinamatodyAne, jagurarhadguNAvalim  /  /  26  /  /  106 zrutvA
surASTrAvaNijazcaritraM, kuliGgisaGgaM tyajatAzu bhavyAH  /  yena dhruvaM
darzanazuddhimApya, khargAdisaukhyaiH suhitA bhaveyuH  /  /  27  /  /  2010_02

Page #148 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter 2: Collection of Examples  **107**  **4. The story of Kulavalaka
Muni, as described in the commentary of Shrimad Bhava Vijay on the Uttara
Adhyayana, is as follows:**  A disciple of a sage was very rude and hot-
tempered. He was being taught by the sage, but he became angry and entered the
abode of anger.   The sage, with his skillful teaching, tried to teach him, but
the disciple considered even that teaching to be like poison mixed with arrows.
Good teaching for the wicked does not lead to benefit, just as drinking milk for
the weak does not benefit but only increases the poison.   After bowing to the
Siddha Shala and the teachers who are superior to the Jinas, the wicked
disciple, standing behind, rubbed his foot on the Gandha Shala.   Seeing him
approaching with a loud voice, the wise sage quickly spread his feet, and the
disciple passed between them.   The sage, with his body intact, was angry at the
disciple's evil deed. He cursed him, saying, "Oh, sinner! Your wife will soon
fall from her body."  The disciple, being small and with a small mind, was
unable to bear the sage's words. He went to a desolate forest and stayed on the
bank of a river.   He performed severe austerities there to alleviate his
suffering. He stopped eating, drinking, and traveling for months and fortnights.
After many years, the river, filled with water brought by the clouds, became
full of water.   The Muni, who was like a lotus growing in the mud, was
surrounded by the water. The wicked river, like a thief in the forest, was
trying to take him away.   Thinking this, the river goddess flowed away from
him. People called him Kulavalaka, meaning "one who is restrained."  **(Pair)**
In the city of Rajagriha, there was a king named Shrenika. He had two queens,
Nandana and Chillanana, who were both beautiful.   The first queen gave birth to
a son named Abhaya, and the other queen gave birth to a son named Sunandana.
They were both handsome and lived in the palace of Kunika Hall.   They had ten
brothers, all from different mothers. Abhaya, the eldest, took initiation from
the Jina.   When Nandana became a nun, she gave her sons, Hall and Hall, two
earrings, a pair of divine clothes, and a pair of saffron clothes.   Thinking
that the eldest son would inherit the kingdom, the king gave his two sons,
Gandhadvipa, a watering pot, and a necklace adorned by the gods.   Kunika and
his brothers, being wicked, imprisoned the king and divided the kingdom among
themselves. Kunika became the king.   Their father gave them the kingdom, the
necklace, and other things. Thus, Hall and Hall did not inherit the kingdom.
Their father died in prison after being poisoned. Kunika, filled with remorse,
did not stay in the city.   He was taken to a new city called Champa and lived
there like Vasava, a great king.   He was adorned with divine necklaces and
earrings, and he wore the Gandhadvipa on his body. He was surrounded by his
wives in the inner palace.   Every day, Hall and Hall went to the river to play.
Their wives, who were like the fragrance of the ocean, played with them.
**(Pair)**  Some of the beautiful women placed flowers on their shoulders, some
placed them on their heads, and some placed them between their teeth.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 khaNDa:-2 dRSTAntasamuccayaH 107 4. krodhadhyAne
zrImadbhAvavijayakRtazrIuttarAdhyayanavRtyuktaM kUlavAlakamunicaritram  /
sUrerekasya ziSyo'bhUdavinIto'tiroSaNaH  /  cukopa kopasadanaM, zikSyamANaH sa
sUriNA  /  / 1 /  /  dakSayA zikSayA sUristathApi tamazikSayat  /  sa tu tAmapi
mene'ntarviSAktavizikhopamAm  /  / 2 /  /  hitazikSA hi duSTAnAM, nopakArAya
jAyate  /  payaHpAnamivAhInAM, kintu syAdviSavRddhaye  /  / 3 /  /  natvA'nyadA
siddhazaile, jinAnuttarato gurUn  /  peSTuM duSTaH sa pRSThastho,
gaMDazailamaloThayat  /  / 4 /  /  zabdAyamAnamAyAntaM, taM ca prekSya
gururdutam  /  pAdau prAsArayat prAjJastataH so'gAttadantare  /  / 5 /  /
akSatAMgastataH sUriH, kruddhastena kukarmaNA  /  bhAvI pAto'GganAyAste, re !
pApeti zazApa tam  /  / 6 /  /  gurogiraM mRSAkartuM, kSullaH kSudramatiH sa tu
/  gatvA nirmAnuSAraNye, tasthau girinadItaTe  /  / 7 /  /  sa tatrAtApanAsevI,
tapastepe sudustapam  /  pAraNAM cAdhvagAdibhyo, mAsapakSAdinA vyadhAt  /  / 8 /
/  athAyAtAsu varSAsu, taruNAMbudakAmukaiH  /  apUryatArNavAnItairnadIvezyAH
payodhanaiH  /  / 9 /  /  enaM kUlaMkaSAkUlaM, nikaSAsaMsthitaM munim  /
mAnaiSIdaMbupuro'bdhi, duSTo vAha ivATavIm  /  / 10 /  /  iti dhyAtvA nadIdevyA,
sA'nyato'vAhi vAhinI  /  kUlavAlaka ityUcustatastaM saMyataM-janAH  /  / 11 /  /
(yugmam) itazca zreNiko rAjA pure rAjagRhe'bhavat  /  nandA ca cillaNA cAstAM,
mahiSyau tasya maJjule  /  / 12 /  /  tatrAdyAyAH suto jajJe'bhayo'nyasyAH
sunandanAH  /  kUNikahallAvihallAsrayo'bhUvanmanoharAH  /  / 13 /  /  kAlAdyA
bhrAtarasteSAM, dazA''san bhinnamAtRkAH  /  mAtrA satrA'bhayastatrA''dade dIkSAM
jinAntike  /  / 14 /  /  pravrajatI tadA nandA, dadau hallavihallayoH  /
kuMDaladvitayaM devadattaM kSaumayugaM tathA  /  / 15 /  /  rAjyaM jyeSThasya
bhAvIti, dhyAtvA rAjApyadAttayoH  /  gaMdhadvIpaM secanakaM, hAraM ca
tridazArpitam  /  / 16 /  /  kUNikaste ca kAlAdyAH, duSTA baddhvA'nyadA nRpam  /
vibhajyAdadire rAjyaM, rAjA tvajani kUNikaH  /  / 17 /  /  rAjyAdikaM dadau
hArAdikaM tAto'nayoH svayam  /  iti rAjyavibhAgaM te, nAduIllAvihallayoH  /  /
18 /  /  kArAstha eva pitari, viSaM bhuktvAnyadA mRte  /  sAnutApo ratiM prAya,
pure tatra na kUNikaH  /  / 19 /  /  vAsayitvA tato'nyatra, navyAM caMpAbhidhAM
purIm  /  uvAsa vAsava iva, mahaddhiH kUNiko nRpaH  /  / 20 /  /
hArakuMDalavAsobhirdivyairbhUSitabhUdhanau  /  gaMdhadvIpaM tamArUDhau,
sAntaHpuraparicchadau  /  / 21 /  /  krIDAyai pratyahaM hallavihallau
jagmaturnadIm  /  tadeti krIDayAmAsa, tadvadhUrgandhasindhuraH  /  / 22 /  /
(yugmam) skandhe'dhyAropayatkAzcicchuNDayA''dAya sundarIH  /
kAzcinnyavezayanmaulau, kAzciddantAntareSvadhAt  /  / 23 /  /  _ 2010_02

Page #149 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 108 ## The Scattering of Eager Refusal  Some, like little girls, raised their
hands. Some, like elephants, swayed their trunks.  || 24 || "What more need be
said?" As they spoke, the noble elephant was pleased. He, knowing the nature of
separation, acted accordingly. || 25 || Seeing this, all the people of the city
exclaimed, "These two are the only ones who enjoy the fruits of the kingdom, not
a single ant." || 26 || Hearing this, Queen Padmavati, the wife of the king who
was like an ant, became filled with anger and thought in her mind. || 27 ||
Without the divine ornaments and the fragrant elephant, the kingdom does not
prosper, it is like a meal without salt. || 28 || "I will make my husband
understand all this, even by force." Thinking thus, she secretly informed the
king. || 29 || The king said, "I have given you your brother's wife. I would be
lower than a crow if I were to take it back. Enough of this talk." || 30 || Even
though the king had forbidden it, she did not give up her pursuit. For a child's
pursuit is strong, even among children. || 31 || The king, overwhelmed by her
love, succumbed to her wishes. What is not done by those who are under the
influence of others, even if it is wrong? || 32 || As it is said, "Even a
descendant of a noble lineage can do wrong when influenced by a woman. Curds are
sweet, but look at the churner, what does he get?" || 33 || The king asked his
brothers for the ornaments, etc. He was like a madman, throwing away his clothes
far away. || 34 || They said, "Father gave us this, we are not worthy to give it
back. But we will give it back, O King, if you give us a share of the kingdom."
|| 35 || The king, stained by attachment, said to them, "Why did you take it
from your father without thinking? What is the use of this precious jewel, the
fourfold treasure? Jewels are said to be for the king, even by the ignorant." ||
36 || "If you don't give it back, I will take it by force." Saying this, they
left the palace in a hurry. || 38 || "Let them take it," thought the king. "This
is not a good idea. This is like a snake in the clothes, it is not good for us."
|| 39 || Thinking thus, they took the ornaments, etc., and all their belongings.
They left Champā at night and went to the city of Vaiśālī. || 40 || There, they
informed their maternal grandfather, the king of the Cetas, of everything that
had happened, and they were honored for their actions. || 41 || The king of the
ants, having lost both his brothers, was filled with worry. When he learned that
they had gone to Vaiśālī, he sent a messenger, a skilled speaker. || 42 || The
messenger went to Vaiśālī and bowed to the king of the Cetas. "O King, the king
of the ants sends you this message. || 43 || The two princes have come here,
taking the elephant and other jewels. They should be sent back immediately, with
due respect, and treated equally with me." || 44 || "If they do not come, then a
two-legged messenger should be sent immediately. Otherwise, there will be much
trouble and sorrow." || 45 || The king of the Cetas said, "Messenger, tell the
king of the ants, 'The wealth of his brothers, given

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 108 AturapratyAkhyAnaprakIrNakam urdhvIkRtya kara kAzcidbAlikAvadviyatyadhAt  /
kAzcidAndolayabolAmiva zuNDAM vilolayan  /  / 24  /  /  "kiM bahunA" ? yathA
yathA procire tAstasmai zastAya hastine  /  vibhaGgajJAnavAn so'pi, prAvarttata
tathA tathA  /  / 25 /  /  tacca prekSyAdbhUtaM sarvo'pyevaM paurajano jagau  /
rAjyazrIphalabhoktArAvimAveva na kUNikaH  /  / 26 /  /  tacca padmAvatI rAjJI,
zrutvA kUNikabhUbhujaH  /  jAtAmarSaprakarSeti, ciMtayAmAsa cetasi  /  / 27  /
/  divyahArAdinA gaMdhahastinA cAmunA vinA  /  rAjyaM na rAjate
prAjyamapyanAjyamivAzanam  /  / 28 /  /  tat patyA sarvamapyetadgrAhayiSye
balAdapi  /  dhyAtveti sA svamAkUtaM, raho rAjJe nyavedayat  /  / 29 /  /
bhUpo'vAdIdAdadAno, bhrAtrorapi ramAmaham  /  kAkAdapi nikRSTaH syAM, tadalaM
vArttayAnayA  /  / 30 /  /  niSiddhApi nRpeNaivaM, nAgrahaM taM mumoca sA  /
bAlAnAmiva bAlAnAmAgraho hi bhavedbalI  /  / 31 /  /  prapede
tadvizAmIzastatpremavivazo'tha saH  /  akAryamapi kiM prAyo, na kurvanti ?
vazAvazAH !  /  / 32 /  /  yaduktam "suvaMzajo'pyakRtyAni, kurute preritaH sriyA
/  snehalaM dadhi majAti, pazya maMthAnako na kim ?"  /  / 33 /  /  hArAdikaM
nRpo'nyedhurbhrAtarau tAvayAcata  /  vihAya dUrataH snehamunmatta iva cIvaram  /
/ 34 /  /  tAvUcatustAtadattaM, taddAtuM nArhamAvayoH  /  tathApi dadvahe rAjan
! rAjyAMzaM ceddadAsi nau  /  / 35  /  /  ityuktaH pArthivastAbhyAM,
kaSAyakaluSo'vadat  /  vAtsalyAdavimRzyaiva, tAtenAdAyi kiM tataH ?  /  / 36 /
/  kiM cArhati mamaivedaM sAraM ratnacatuSTyam  /  ratnAni rAjagAminItyucyate hi
jaDairapi  /  / 37 /  /  tatastaddIyatAM nocedagrahISyAmi balAdapi  /
omityuktvA tato hallavihallo jagmaturgraham  /  / 38 /  /  dadhyatuzceti
rAjJo'sya, zobhano nAyamAzayaH  /  vAsaH sasarpadhAmnIva, neha zreyAMstadAvayoH
/  / 39 /  /  dhyAtvetyAdAya hArAdi, sarvaM tau saparicchadau  /  caMpAyAM nizi
nirgatya, vaizAlI jagmatuH pUrIm  /  / 40 /  /  mAtAmahAya tau tatra, ceTakAya
mahIbhuje  /  sarvaM svodaMtamAvedyAsthAtAM tatkRtagauravau  /  / 4 /  /
kUNikastUbhayabhraSTatayA cintAJcitastataH  /  vaizAlyAM tau gatau jJAtvA,
preSIdUtaM vacasvinam  /  / 42 /  /  gatvA dUto'pi vaizAlI, natvA ceTakamityavak
/  rAjan ! kUNikarAjastvAM, mayA vijJapayatyadaH  /  / 43 /  /
gajAdiratnAnyAdAyAgatAviha kumArako  /  preSaNIyau drutaM pUjyastulyairmayi
tayostathA  /  / 44  /  /  tau cennAgacchatastarhi, preSyaM sadyo dvipAdikam  /
no cedvo bhavitA bhUyAnAyAso'nuzayAvahaH  /  / 45 /  /  atheti ceTako'vocaDhUta
! tvaM brUhi kUNikam  /  tAtadattA bhrAtRlakSmIrgrahItuM yujyate na te  /  / 46
/  /  rakSyante zaraNAyAtAH, kiM cAnye'pi manasvibhiH  /  taddauhitrau
kathaMkAraM, preSaNIyAvimau mayA ?  /  / 47 /  /  2010_02

Page #150 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter 2: Collection of Examples  **109**  Though you three are equal to me
due to being grandsons, yet you are distinguished due to justice and dependence.
||48||  Even though this is true, I will give you two-footed ones for your
satisfaction. If you give me a share of the kingdom, it will be just for both of
you. ||49||  Going to the messenger of Chetak, the messenger told his master.
Then, he too, filled with anger, spoke of the journey. ||50||  United with ten
Kaladyas, with brothers similar to himself, thirty-three thousand chariots,
horses, and elephants, ||51||  Thirty-three crore soldiers, he then moved.
Kuniika covered the earth and sky with dust-filled armies. ||52||  (Couplet)
Then, united with eighteen kings, wearing crowns, he was equipped with fifty-
seven thousand chariots, elephants, and horses. ||53||  Chetak also came with
fifty-seven crore soldiers. He formed a war formation with his army on the
border of his country. ||54||  (Couplet) Kuniika also arrived there and formed a
Tayavyuha formation with his army. He fought fiercely, like time fighting time.
||55||  With a visible army of heroes, with their backs uncovered, and their
clothes torn, both armies prepared for a fierce battle. ||56||  The Nishad
fought with the Nishad, the charioteer with the charioteer, the Sadi with the
Sadi, and the foot soldier with the foot soldier. ||57||  Kali, eager for
victory, fought alongside Chetak's army. He then went to Chetak, who was
fighting the king. ||58||  Then, every day, he released arrows, holding his bow.
Chetak killed him, the guest of death, with a divine arrow. ||59||  Unable to
bear the sight of the army of the king of Champa, filled with sorrow, the sun
then set, and the battle ceased. ||60||  On the second day, the armies again
engaged in battle. Chetak killed Mahakal, the commander of Kuniika's army.
||61||  Thus, after killing many others, in eight days, Asoka Chandra, filled
with sorrow, thought, ||62||  "I have killed this king, not knowing his divine
power. My ten Kaladyas brothers have met their end in vain. ||63||  Today, I
will worship some god and conquer this enemy. If not, I will soon follow them."
||64||  Thinking thus, he meditated on the gods, and on the eighth day, he was
visited by Indra and Yama, who were his companions in his previous birth. ||65||
"What do you desire?" they asked. Then, Kuniika said, "If you are pleased, let
Chetak be killed now." ||66||  Indra said to Yama, "I will not kill Chetak. I
will protect him, due to your devotion." ||67||  "In the battle, give him a
chariot with a large stone, a thorny club, and a mace. Yama, you will be the
reason for his victory over his enemy." ||68||  "First, when they are thrown at
the enemy, the thorny club and the large stone weapon will be deadly." ||69||
"In the second battle, the chariot with the mace will be confusing, without any
confusion. It will roam around, destroying the enemy's forces." ||70||  Then,
the wicked Kuniika, pleased, went to the king. He stirred up the war formation,
like the ocean stirred by the mountain. ||7

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 khaNDa:-2 dRSTAntasamuccayaH 109 dauhitratvAtsamAnA me, bhavanto yadyapi trayaH
/  nyAyitvAdAzritatvAcca, viziSyete tathA'pyamU  /  / 48 /  /  satyapyevaM
dApayAmi, dvipAdi tava tuSTaye  /  dadAsi yadi rAjyAMzaM, nyAyopetaM tvametayoH
/  / 49 /  /  tacceTakavaco gatvA, dUtaH svasvAmine'vadat  /  krodhAmAtastataH
so'pi, yAtrAbhaMbhAmavIvadat  /  / 50  /  /  kAlAdyairdazabhiryukto,
bhrAtRbhirnijasannibhaiH  /  trayastriMzatsahasrAzvarathasindhurasaMyutaH  /  /
51 /  /  trayatriMzatkoTipattikalitazcalitastataH  /
kUNiko'cchAdayatsainyairbhuvaM dyAM ca rajobharaiH  /  / 52 /  /  (yugmam) tato
yuto'STAdazabhirbhUpairmukuTadhAribhiH  /  saptapaJcAzatsahasra-
rathahastihayAnvitaH  /  / 53 /  /  ceTako'pyabhyagAtsaptapaJcAzatkoTipattiyuk
/  svadezasImni sainyai ca, vArdhivyUhamacIkarat  /  / 54 /  /  (yugmam)
kUNiko'pyAgatastatra, tAyavyUhaM vyadhAbale  /  nyadhAccamUpatitve ca, kAlaM
kAlamivotkaTam  /  / 55  /  /  vyaktavIragaNonmuktapRSaktAcchAditAmbare  /
ArebhAte raNaM bhImamubhe api tato bale  /  / 56 /  /  niSAdinA vyadhAyuddhaM,
niSAdI rathinA rathI  /  sAdinA ca samaM sAdI, padAtistu padAtinA  /  / 57 /  /
kAlI jayArthamuttAlaH, samaM ceTakasenayA  /  yudhyamAnastadA
rAjJazceTakasyAntike yayau  /  / 58 /  /  dinaM
pratyekavizikhamuktisandhAdharastataH  /  ceTako divyabANena taM kRtAntAtithiM
vyadhAt  /  / 59 /  /  caMpApaterbalaM zokAkulaM draSTumivAkSamaH  /  tadA
bhAnurjagAmAstaM, vizazrAma tato raNaH  /  / 60  /  /  dvitIye'pyahni
sainyAbhyAmArabdhe saMgare punaH  /  mahAkAlaM kUNikasya, senAnyaM ceTako'vadhIt
/  / 61 /  /  anyeSvapi hateSvevaM, tenASTasvaSTabhirdinaiH  /
zokAkrAnto'zokacandraH, iti cetasyacintayat  /  / 62 /  /  rAjJo'syA'jAnatA
divyAM, zaktimetAM hahA mayA  /  mudhaiva prApitAH kAlaM, kAlAdyA bhrAtaro daza
/  / 63 /  /  tadadyApi suraM kaJcidArAdhyAmuM jayAmyarim  /  no
cedbhaviSyAmyanugasteSAmahamapi drutam  /  / 64  /  /  dhyAtveti devatAdhyAne,
sthitaM taM vihitASTamam  /  prAgjanmasaMgatau zakracamarendrAvupeyatuH  /  / 65
/  /  kimicchasIti jalpantau, tAvityUce'tha kuunnikH| yadi tuSTau yuvAM
sadyazceTako mAryatAM tadA  /  / 66 /  /  Uce zakraH sadharmANaM, ceTakaM na hi
hanmyaham  /  kariSyAmyaGgarakSAM tu, tava bhaktivazaMvadaH  /  / 67 /  /
mahAzilAkaMTakAhvarathAdimuzale raNe  /  camarendrastvadAttasmai,
vairinirjayakAraNe  /  / 68  /  /  tatrAdye vairiSu kSiptAvapi karkarakaNTako  /
mahAzilAmahAzastre, iva syAtAM mRtipradau  /  / 69 /  /  yuddhe dvitIye tu
rathamuzale bhramakaM vinA  /  bhrAmyataH parito vairipakSapeSaNatatpare  /  /
70 /  /  tatastuSTo yayau duSTaH, kUNikaH samarAjiram  /  mamaMtha vArcivyUhaM
ca, maMthAcala ivodadhim  /  / 71 /  /  JainEducation International 2010_02

Page #151 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 110 **Aaturpratyakhyanaprakirnakam**  The king, Chetaka, filled with anger,
drew his bow to kill the approaching Tam, and immediately released a divine
arrow from his quiver. ||72||  He placed a vajra-kavacha (diamond armor) on the
front of the arrow, and a layer of iron on the back. Then, the Asura king,
||73||  seeing the divine arrow with its vajra-kavacha, felt a tremor within.
The soldiers of King Chetaka thought their good deeds were coming to an end.
||74||  The truthful Chetaka released a second arrow, also named Chetaka. The
second arrow also proved ineffective. ||75||  In the first battle, ninety-six
lakh (960,000) men perished. In the second great battle, eighty lakh (800,000)
men died. ||76||  Among them, Varuna, a descendant of the Nagas, attained
heaven. His friend, Bhadraka, went to hell after experiencing animal birth.
||77||  Thus, every day, in the battle between the two armies, eighteen kings
lost their kingdoms and perished. ||78||  A part of Chetaka's army entered the
city of Vaishali. Kunika, with his powerful forces, blocked all entrances to the
city. ||79||  (Pair) Then, the entire army of Kunika, mounted on chariots,
rushed towards the two brothers, Halla and Vihalla, to attack them. ||80||  No
one in the army was able to kill or even follow the approaching Gandhastina, who
was carrying a gift for the king. ||81||  Following the advice of his ministers,
Kunika dug a pit filled with burning coals and covered it with leaves. ||82||
That night, the elephant, realizing the danger, approached the pit. Even though
he was hungry, he did not move forward. ||83||  Seeing this, the two princes,
Halla and Vihalla, said to the elephant, "Why are you afraid of others? Why
don't you move forward?" ||84||  "It is better to be a dog, always loyal to its
master, than a treacherous snake, who destroys his master's work. You are like
that treacherous snake." ||85||  Thus, addressed by the two princes, Sindhu, the
loyal elephant, picked them up with his trunk and placed them on the back of the
army. ||86||  He himself then entered the pit, sacrificing himself. What great
courage this animal possessed! ||87||  Seeing this, the two princes were filled
with remorse. They said, "We are blinded by anger and have done a terrible
deed!" ||88||  "For whom have we abandoned our country? Our brother has become
our enemy. And in this ocean of misfortune, our grandfather has also been thrown
in!" ||89||  "It is right that we killed the elephant. We cannot live. If we
live, we will only be disciples of the brave gods, and nothing else." ||90||
(Pair) Then, the queen, Shasana Devi, took them to the presence of the great
sage, Virajina. They renounced the world and took the eleven vows, becoming wise
and learned. ||91||  Halla became a god, victorious, and Vihalla became
invincible, having attained the highest state of meditation. ||92||  Even though
the two princes had taken the vows, Kunika was unable to capture the city. The
moon of sorrow, Ashoka Chandra, became fearless and energetic. ||93||  "If I do
not conquer this city with my army, led by Khara, then I

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 110 AturapratyAkhyAnaprakIrNakama tamApatantaM saMhartuM, sAmarSazceTako nRpaH
/  mumocAkarNamAkRSya, sadyo divyaM zilImukham  /  / 72 /  /  kUNikasya puro
vajra-kavaca vajrabhRddadhau  /  pRSThe tu lauhaM sannAhaM, tadA tasyAsurezvaraH
/  / 73  /  /  tasmin divye zare vajravarmaNA skhalite'ntarA  /
bhaTAzceTakarAjasya, menire sukRtakSayam  /  / 74  /  /  satyasandho dvitIyaM
tu, ceTako nAmucaccharam  /  dvitIye'pyahni tadbANaM, tathaivA'jani niSphalam  /
/ 75  /  /  Adye raNe SaNNavatirlakSA nRNAM yayuH kSayam  /
lakSAzcaturazItizca, dvitIye tu mahAhave  /  / 76 /  /  teSveko varuNaH zrAddho,
nAganaptA yayau divam  /  tatsuhRdbhadrako nRtvaM, tiryaktvaM narakaM pare  /  /
77 /  /  ityanvahaM jAyamAne, samare sainyayostayoH  /  yAtsu svasvapuraM
naMSTvA'STAdazasvapi rAjasu  /  / 78 /  /  praNazya ceTakoIMzo,
vaizAlImavizatpurIm  /  rurodha sarvatastAM ca, kUNikaH prabalairbalaiH  /  / 79
/  /  (yugmam) atha secanakArUDhau, kUNikasyAkhilaM balam  /
upadudruvaturhallavihallau tau pratikSapam  /  / 80  /  /
avaskandapradAnAyA''gataM taM gandhahastinam  /  na haMtumanugantuM vA,
tatsainye ko'pyabhUt prabhuH  /  / 81 /  /  tanmArge mantriNAM buddhyA,
kUNiko'cIkarattataH  /  khAtikAM jvaladaMgAra-pUrNAM parNAdyavastRtAm  /  / 82 /
/  rAtrau tatrAgataH so'tha, gajo jJAtvA vibhaMgataH  /  jvaladaMgAragartI tAM,
nunno'pi na puro'calat  /  / 83 /  /  tAvUcatustataH khinnau, kumArAviti taM
dvipam  /  parebhyaH kiM bibheSi ? tvaM, yatpuro na calasyare !  /  / 84  /  /
varaM zvA poSitaH zazvatsvAminaM yo'nuvarttate  /  kRtaghno'hiriva
svAmikRtyanAzI bhavAnnatu  /  / 85 /  /  ityuktaH sindhurastAbhyAM,
svAmibhaktadhurandharaH  /  gRhItvA zuMDayA skandhAttau balenodatArayat  /  / 86
/  /  svayaM tu tasyAM ga yAM, datvA jhaMpAM vipadya ca  /  Adye'gAnnarake
dhairyamaho tasya pazorapi !  /  / 87 /  /  tadvIkSya sAnutApau tau, kumArAviti
dadhyatuH  /  krodhAndhAbhyAM dhigAvAbhyAM, kimakAryamidaM kRtam !  /  / 88  /
/  kRte yasya kRto dezatyAgo bhrAtA ripUkRtaH  /  asmiMzca vyasanAMbhodhau,
kSipto mAtAmaho'pyaho !  /  / 89 /  /  nihatya taM gajaM yuktaM, naiva
jIvitumAvayoH  /  jIvAvazcedvIradevaziSyIbhUyaiva nAnyathA  /  / 90  /  /
(yugmam) tadA zAsanadevyA tau, nItau vIrajinAntike  /  pravrajyaikAdazAGgAni,
sudhiyau peThatuH kramAt  /  / 11 /  / . guNaratnaM tapastaptvA, saMlikhya ca
samAdhinA  /  hallaH suro jayante'bhUdvihallastvaparAjite  /  / 12 /  /
gRhIte'pi vrate tAbhyAM, purImAdAtumakSamaH  /  vyadhAtsandhAmityazokacandro
nistandravikramaH  /  / 13 /  /  kharayuktahalairenAM, nagarI na khanAmi cet  /
tadA tyajAmyahamasUn, bhRgupAtAdinA dhruvam  /  / 94  /  /  tathApi tAM purIM
bhaMktu-manIze zreNikatmaje  /  kramAt khedaM gate devI, kApItyUce nabhaHsthitA
/  / 95  /  /  "samaNe jadi kUlavAlae, mAgadhiaM gaNiaMgamissae  /  rAyA ya
asogacandae, vesAliM nagaliM gahissae"  /  / 96 /  /  _ 2010_02

Page #152 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter 2: Collection of Examples  Hearing this, the king, pleased,
instructed the prostitute thus: "Bring here, dear one, the Kūlavala, making him
your husband." ||97||  She, a follower of Maya, became his wife. She knew a
restrained muni, who was staying somewhere there. ||98||  Going to the forest,
she bowed to him properly. This deceitful woman spoke with words like nectar.
||99||  "O Lord! I have set out to visit the holy places. By good fortune, I
have worshipped the venerable feet, which are superior to all holy places, here.
||100||  Accept alms from me, who am on a pilgrimage. " Thus, she spoke
respectfully. The virtuous muni also went with her. ||101||  She gave him food
mixed with poison. She also gave him sweet cakes. From eating those, she
suffered unbearable diarrhoea. ||102||  Then, she stayed there, pretending to be
ill. With crooked intentions, she repeatedly approached the muni like a serpent.
||103||  She repeatedly touched his body with her hands, under the pretext of
tending to him. She gradually made him weak by giving him different medicines.
||104||  With her glances, words, and touch, she tried to confuse the muni's
mind. But his mind, unshaken, remained firm. Where is the possibility of a man
of steadfast mind being entangled with a woman? ||105||  He then abandoned his
vows and became attached to her. He could not stay even for a moment without
her. ||106||  Under her influence, he went to Kūlavala, the border of the
kingdom. The Kūlavala, honouring him, spoke to the muni thus: ||107||  "Great
soul! This city is being besieged by many enemies. Please tell us how to
overcome this siege, O destroyer of enemies!" ||108||  Then, disguised as an
astrologer, he entered Vaiśālī. He saw a stupa built by Śrīsuvrata, and he was
confused. ||109||  "Surely, this stupa has a strong foundation. This city is
prosperous due to its glory. ||110||  How can I destroy it?" Thinking thus, he
was approached by a worried citizen. ||111||  "Tell me, astrologer, when will
this siege of Vaiśālī end? We are very distressed, as if we are in prison."
||112||  He, pleased, replied, "Like a pig in a mud puddle, as long as this
stupa remains here, why should you worry? ||113||  People, if you quickly
destroy this stupa, then the siege of the city will surely end right now."
||114||  The foolish people, deceived by the rogue, started to destroy the
stupa. Who is not deceived by a cheat? ||115||  When they started to destroy the
stupa, the king of Magadha arrived. He immediately drove away the king of Campā,
two yojanas away. ||116||  Then, the people, convinced that the stupa was
destroyed from its roots, the Kūlavala, with a strong army, attacked the city.
||117||  Then, the Cetaka, remembering the five great vows, fasted and tied an
iron chain around his neck and fell into a well. ||118||  Then, the king, seeing
his steadfastness, came there. He took the righteous man and brought him to his
palace. ||119||  He performed proper worship and offered him food. The Cetaka,
staying there, attained liberation and went to heaven.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 khaNDa:-2 dRSTAntasamuccayaH tannizamya nRpastuSTastAM vezyAmevamAdizet  /
ihAnaya patIkRtya, bhadre ! tvaM kUlavAlakam  /  / 97  /  /
tatprapadyAbhavanmAyAzrAvikA sA paNAGganA  /  muneH kuto'pi tatrasthamajJAsIttaM
ca saMyatam  /  / 98  /  /  tatrAraNye tato gatvA, taM ca natvA yathAvidhi  /
iti sA dambhinI proce, vacanairamRtopamaiH  /  / 99 /  /  nantuM tIrthAni
caMpAtaH, prabho ! prasthitayA mayA  /  sarvatIrthAdhikAH pUjyapAdA diSTyA'tra
vanditAH  /  / 100  /  /  matpAtheyAttadAdAya, bhikSAmanugRhANa mAm  /  tayeti
sAdaraM proktastatsArthe sAdhurapyagAt  /  / 101 /  /  tasyAdAnmizritadravyAn,
sAmodA sApi modakAn  /  tadbhakSaNAdatIsArastasyAsIdatidussaha:  /  / 102 /  /
tataH sA tatra tadvaiyAvRtyadambhena tasthuSI  /
muhurmunimupAsarpatsarpavatkuTilAzayA  /  / 103  /  /  udvarttanAdinA
svAGgasparza cAcIkaranmuhuH  /  bheSajAntaradAnAcca, tamullAghaM vyadhAcchanaiH
/  / 104  /  /  tatkaTAkSasarAgoktizarIrasparzavibhramaiH  /
munermano'calattasya, strIsaGge kvanu ? tatsthiram  /  / 105  /  /
tyaktavratastatastasyAmAsaktaH so'bhavattathA  /  yathA tayA vinA sthAtuM,
nAbhUtkSaNamapi prabhuH  /  / 106  /  /  tadvazaH kUNikopAntaM,
tato'gAtkUlavAlakaH  /  satkRtya kUNiko'pyevamabravIttaM munibruvam  /  / 107  /
/  mahAtman ! gRhyate neyamupAyairbahubhiH purI  /  tatastadgrahaNopAyaM,
vidhehi dhiSaNAnidhe !  /  / 108 /  /  tato daivajJaveSeNa, vaizAlI praviveza
saH  /  zrIsuvratArhataH stupaM, bhramaMstatra dadarza ca  /  / 109 /  /
dadhyau ca nUnamasyAsti, pratiSThAlagnamuttamam  /  abhaMgA tanmahimnAsau,
nagarI nanu varttate  /  / 110  /  /  kathaM mayA pAtanIyastadasAviti cintayan
/  apRcchayata purIrodhAkuleneti janena saH  /  / 111 /  /  vada daivajJa !
vaizAlyA, rodho yAsyatyasau kadA ?  /  khinnAH smo yadvayaM kArAvAsenevAmunA
bhRzam  /  / 112  /  /  muditaH sa tato'vAdIt, pApapaGkekazUkaraH  /  stUpo'sau
yAvadatra syAttAvadudveSTanaM kva ? vaH  /  / 113 /  /  tallokAH ! yadyayaM
stUpo, yuSmAbhiH pAtyate drutam  /  tadA'payAti niyataM purIrodho'dhunaiva hi  /
/ 114  /  /  prokto dhUrtena teneti, bAlavabAlizo janaH taM stUpaM
bhaktumArebhe, dhUtaiH ko na hi vaJcyate  /  / 115  /   /  stUpe ca
bhaktumArabdhe, gatvA mAgadhikAdhipaH  /  sadyo'pAsArayaccaMpAdhIzaM krozadvayaM
tataH  /  / 116  /  /  tataH sa pratyayairlokaH, stUpe mUlAtprapAtite  /
vyAdhuTya kUNiko'vikSat, purIM sabalavAhanaH  /  / 117  /  /  tadA cAnazanaM
kRtvA, smRtvA paJcanamaskriyAH  /  ceTako nyapatat kUpe, baddhA'yaHputrikAM gale
/  / 118  /  /  tadA tatrAsanAsthairyAdAgatya dharaNAdhipaH  /  sAdharmikaM
tamAdAya, ninAya bhavane nije  /  / 119  /  /  vidhAyArAdhanAM samyak,
prapAlyAnazanaM ca tat  /  tatrasthaH prApya paJcatvaM, ceTakastridivaM yayau  /
/ 120  /  /  itazca sujyeSThAsUnudauhitrazceTakaprabhoH  /  vaizAlyAmAyayau
daivAttadA satyakikhecaraH  /  / 121  /  /  _ 2010_02

Page #153 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 112 ## The Scattering of the Eager Refusal To protect all his maternal
grandfather's people, who were being looted, he quickly uprooted them with his
knowledge and brought them to the Neelavati mountain. ||122|| Filled with anger,
the Kūṇika then, with his well-trained elephants, encircled that city, and after
covering it with ploughs, he returned to his own city, having fulfilled his vow.
||123|| Kūlavalaka, a cunning man, died and went to hell. But he was rescued
from there and will wander in the endless cycle of existence. ||124|| Just as
Kūlavalaka, the Muni, experienced suffering, so too will an unrefined Muni. To
avoid such arrogance, one should follow the humility of the true Guru, as taught
by the good disciples. ||125|| ## 4. The Story of Gosala in the Trishatishalaka
Purushacharita, in the Meditation on Anger Having said this, the Lord then went
to Shravasti, dwelling there. In that city, in the garden called Kosthaka, ||1||
There, the one who had been struck by the brilliance of the Lord's radiance, and
who had knowledge of the eight auspicious signs, and who was aware of the minds
of all beings, ||2|| Gosala, the potter of the Halahala pot, who was also known
as Ajina, proclaimed himself to be a Jina. ||3|| (Pair) Hearing of his fame,
people with deluded minds, went to him again and again, and constantly
worshipped him. ||4|| At that time, Gautama, with the permission of his Master,
entered the city, desiring to perform the sixth fast. ||5|| Hearing that Gosala
was there, the all-knowing Arhat, Gautama, filled with sorrow, went to the
presence of the Lord. ||6|| Having performed the fast properly, Gautama, at the
appropriate time, asked the Lord, in the presence of the people of the city,
with a pure mind. ||7|| "Lord, in this city, all the people say that Gosala is
the all-knowing one. Is this true or not?" ||8|| Then the Blessed One said,
"This son of Mankhala, Ajina, is another Jina, Gosala is a deceiver. ||9|| He
was initiated by me, and I taught him. He has embraced falsehood. He is not the
all-knowing one, Gautama!" ||10|| Hearing the words of the Master, the people of
the city, from that time onwards, spoke to each other in the four directions and
in the three worlds. ||11|| "Oh, the Arhat has come! The valiant Lord speaks the
truth. Gosala, the son of Mankhala, is a deceiver, not the all-knowing one."
||12|| Hearing this from the people, Gosala, like a venomous snake, filled with
anger, stood surrounded by his followers. ||13|| At that time, Ananda, the
senior monk, a disciple of the Master, entered the city to perform the sixth
fast. ||14|| Gosala, sitting in his Halahala house, saw Ananda entering the
city. Calling him, with arrogance, he said, ||15|| "Oh Ananda! Your teacher,
desiring honour from the people, is trying to belittle me in the assembly.
||16|| He calls me, the son of Mankhala, unworthy and not the all-knowing one.
He does not know my power to burn my opponents with the brilliance of my
radiance. ||17|| I will reduce him to ashes, along with his followers. I

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 112 AturapratyAkhyAnaprakIrNakam mAtAmahaprajAM sarvAM, lUMTyamAnAM sa rakSitum
/  ninAya nIlavatyadrau, drutamutpATya vidyayA  /  / 122  /  /  kopAviSTaH
kUNiko'tha, tAM purIM yuktarAsabhaiH  /  kheTayitvA halaistIrNapratijJaH
svapurIM yayau  /  / 123 /  /  kUlavAlakanAmA tu, mRtvAgAnnarakaM kudhIH  /
uddhRtastu tato'nante, saMsAre paryaTiSyati  /  / 124  /  /  kUlavAlakamuneriva
duHkhAvAptirevamavinItamuneH syAt  /  dhRSTatAM tadapahAya suziSyaiH,
sadgurovinaya eva vidheyaH  /  / 125  /  /  4. krodhadhyAne
triSaSTizalAkApuruSacarite gozAlakAkhyAnakaH  /  ityAkhyAya tato nAthaH zrAvastI
viharan yayau  /  tasyAM ca samavAsArSIdudyAne koSThakAbhidhe  /  / 1 /  /
tasyAM prAgAgatastejolezyAhatavirodhakaH  /
aSTAMganimittajJAnajJAtalokamanogataH  /  / 2 /  /  ajino'pi jinazabdamAtmanA
saMprakAzayan  /  hAlAhalAkuMbhakAryA gozAlo'vasadApaNe  /  / 3 /  /  (yugmam)
tasya cAhanniti khyAtiM loka AkarNya mugdhadhIH  /  upetyopetya vidadhe
nirantaramupAsanam  /  / 4 /  /  itazca samaye prApte gautamaH svAmyanujJayA  /
prAvizat puri bhikSArthaM cikIrSuH SaSThapAraNam  /  / 5 /  /  gozAlo'trAsti
sarvajJo'rhannityAkarNya tatra ca  /  gautamaH saviSAdo'gAdAttabhikSo'ntike
prabhoH  /  / 6 /  /  yathAvat pAraNaM kRtvA gautamaH samaye prabhum  /
pazyatAM pauralokAnAmapRcchat svacchadhIriti  /  / 7 /  /  svAminnagaryAmatasyAM
vyAharantyakhilA janAH  /  sarvajJa iti gozAlaM kimetad ghaTate na vA ?  /  / 8
/  /  athAkhyadbhagavAneSa sUnurmakhasya maMkhaleH  /  ajino'pi jinamanyo
gozAlaH kapaTAlayaH  /  / 9 /  /  mayaiva dIkSitazcAyaM zikSAM ca grAhito mayA
/  mithyAtvaM pratipanno me sarvajJo naiSa gautama !  /  / 10 /  /  tattu
svAmivacaH zrutvA paurAH puryAmitastataH  /  evaM babhASire'nyo'nyaM catvareSu
trikeSu ca  /  / 11 /  /  haM ho arhanihAyAto vIrasvAmI vadatyadaH  /  gozAlo
maMkhalisuto mithyA sarvajJamAnyasau  /  / 12 /  /  januzrutyA tataH zrutvA
gozAla: kAlasarpavat  /  ApUryamANaH kopena tasthAvAjIvakAvRtaH  /  / 13 /  /
itazca svAminaH ziSya AnandaH sthavirAgraNIH  /  SaSThapAraNakaM kartuM
bhikSArthaM prAvizat puri  /  / 14 /  /  hAlAhalAgRhAsIno gozAlastatpradezagam
/  AnandamunimAhUya sAdhikSepamado'vadat  /  / 15 /  /  bho Ananda ! tavAcAryo
lokAt satkAramAtmanaH  /  icchan vIraH sabhAnvakSaM mAM tiraskurutetarAm  /  /
16 /  /  maMkhaputramanarhantamasarvajJaM ca vakti mAm  /  tejolezyAM na me
vetti vipakSadahanakSamAm  /  / 17 /  /  bhasmarAzIkariSyAmi tamahaM
saparicchadam  /  tvAmevaikaM vimokSyAmi dRSTAnto'tra nizamyatAm  /  / 18 /  /
2010_02

Page #154 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Chapter 2: Collection of Examples 113  Opportunity, Spread, Dialogue, and Agent
were merchants in the city of Kshemila. ||19|| They loaded their carts with
goods and set out on their journey. They entered a waterless forest and traveled
some distance. ||20|| The five of them, parched and traveling on the desert
path, searched for water throughout the vast forest. ||21|| Wandering,
Opportunity saw a five-peaked, thorny bush. He showed it to the four friends.
||22|| They all together quickly broke the eastern peak of the bush. They
obtained water from it, drank it, and regained their health. ||23|| Then Spread
said, "This thorny bush is long. We will surely get something else from it."
||24|| Then Opportunity said, "Digging is not appropriate for this. A serpent
will rise from it, for it is the abode of the wealthy." ||25|| Dialogue spoke,
and there was disagreement. "A serpent did not rise from the broken eastern
peak." ||26|| Opportunity again said, "By chance, there was water here. Agent,
by chance, there will be wealth here." ||27|| Having said this, Agent began to
dig. Opportunity, saying, "This is not my opinion," went away. ||28|| Bhalana
said, "Opportunity has gone. If he goes, we will dig without him." They all dug.
||29|| From that thorny bush, they immediately obtained wealth. They divided it,
and the four took their share. ||30|| They tasted the fourth peak and obtained
gold. Then, out of greed for gold, they dug for silver. ||31|| Thinking that
there would be jewels in the fifth peak, they tasted it, blinded by greed. Greed
increases from gain. ||32|| From the very deep pit, like a fierce poison, a
venomous serpent rose. ||33|| That serpent, standing on the top of an anthill,
looked at the sun and then at them. He turned the four, along with Opportunity
and the bull, into ashes. ||34|| Opportunity, free from greed, and the bull,
were saved. The serpent's goddess protector granted Opportunity the desired
place. ||35|| "I will burn your teacher, the serpent, and then the four, just as
I have burned them. I will free you, Opportunity," said the serpent. ||36||
Then, with his begging incomplete, Ananda went to the Lord. He was worried,
thinking, "What will I ask?" ||37|| "I will turn him into ashes," was what
Gosala had said. "Was that a madman's speech? Is he capable of doing that?"
||38|| Then the Lord said, "He is capable of doing that to others, but not to
the worthy. A wicked mind can only cause suffering to the worthy." ||39|| "Go
and tell Gautama and the others that they should not be afraid of him. They do
not drive away those who come here with righteous motivation." ||40|| Going to
them, Ananda then told Gosala. Gosala came before his master and said, ||41|| "O
Kashyapa! Gosala, the son of Mankhala, says that I am his resident. That is a
false statement of yours." ||42||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 khaNDa:-2 dRSTAntasamuccayaH 113 avasaraH prasarazca saMvAdaH kaarkstthaa|
bhalano vaNijo'bhUvan kSemilAyAM purA puri  /  / 19 /  /  bhANDerApUrya
zakaTAnniryayuste vaNijyayA  /  yAntazca nirjalAraNyaM vivizuH kiJcidadhvani  /
/ 20 /  /  te paJcApi tRSAkrAntA marumArgagatA iva  /  jalaM gaveSayAmAsuH
paryanTato mahATavIm  /  / 21 /  /  bhrAmyannavasaraH paJcazikharaM vAmalUrakam
/  dadarzAdarzayatteSAM caturNAM suhRdAmapi  /  / 22 /  /  te tasya
pUrvazikharaM saMbhUyA'sphoTayan drutam  /  tasmAJca lebhire vAri tatpItvA
susthatAM yayuH  /  / 23 /  /  athoce prasaro'pAcyazRMgamapyasya dIryatAm  /
lapsyAmahe nUnamito vastvanyadapi kiMcana  /  / 24  /  /  athAbravIdavasaraH
khananaM nAsya yujyate  /  utthAsyatyahiretasmAnnAkuroko hi bhoginAm  /  / 25 /
/  avAdIdatha saMvAdo visaMvAdo'pyabhUdiha  /
yatparisphoTitAtpUrvazikharAnnAhirutthitaH  /  / 26 /  /
bhUyo'pyavasaro'vocadaivAdiha payo'bhavat  /  athoce kArako daivAd drammA iha nu
bhAvinaH  /  / 27 /  /  ityuditvA tat khanituM samArabhata kArakaH  /  mataM
mamedaM netyuktvA gantrImavasaro yayau  /  / 28  /   /  babhASe bhalano
yAto'vasaro yadi yAtu tat  /  vinA'pyamuM khaniSyAma iti sarve'pi te'khanan  /
/ 29 /  /  khAtAttasmAnnAkuzRMgAt sadyo drammA viniryayuH  /
vibhajyAvasaravarNaM catvAro jagRhuzca tAn  /  / 30 /  /  cakhnuzcaturthamapi te
zRMgaM svarNaM ca lebhire  /  tato rajatamapyaujjhan suvarNAdAnalobhataH  /  /
31 /  /  ratnAni paJcame zRMge bhaviSyantIti buddhitaH  /  cakhnustadapi
lobhAndhA lAbhAllobho hi vardhate  /  / 32 /  /  atyantamathitAdabdheH kAlakUTa
ivotkaTaH  /  tasmAcchaMgAt khanyamAnAduttasthau dRgviSoragaH  /  / 33 /  /
valmIkAgrasthita; so'hiH prAk sUryaM prekSya tAndRzA  /  bhasmIcakAra caturaH
sagantrIvRSabhAnapi  /  / 34  /   /  nirlobha ityavasaraM sagantrIvRSamapyatha
/  tasyAherdevyadhiSThAtrI prApayat sthAnamIpsitam  /  / 35  /  /  dhakSyAmi
tvadguruM sarpo'dhAkSIttAMzcaturo yathA  /  mokSyAmi tvAmahaM
so'hirmumocAvasaraM yathA  /  / 36 /  /  tato'samAptabhikSArtha evA''nando yayau
prabhum  /  gozAloktaM tadAcakhyAvapRcchecceti zaMkitaH  /  / 37  /  /
bhasmarAzIkariSyAmItyuktaM gozAlakena yat  /  unmattabhASitaM tat kiM
tatkartumathavA kSamaH ?  /  / 38  /  /  athAcacakSe bhagavAnarhadbhyaH
so'nyataH kSamaH  /  arhatAmapi santApamAtraM kuryAdanAryadhIH  /  / 39 /  /
tadgatvA gautamAdInAM zaMsedaM te yathA hi tam  /  ihAgataM nodanayA dharmyayApi
nudanti na  /  / 40 /  /  teSAM gatvA''khyadAnandastadA gozAlako'pi hi  /
tatrA''gAt svAmino'gre cAvasthAya vybrviiditi||41|| bhoH kAzyapa ! vadasyevaM
gozAlo maMkhale: sutaH  /  antevAsI mametyAdi tanmRSA bhASitaM tava  /  / 42 /
/  2010_02

Page #155 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 114 ## The Scattering of the Eager Refusal  Gosaala, your disciple, was of
the white caste. He died while meditating on the Dharma and was reborn among the
gods. ||43||  In this body, I, the sage Udayana, endured the trials of
suffering. Abandoning my own form, ||44||  Then, not recognizing me, you called
Gosaala, the son of Mankhala, your disciple. How can you call him your disciple
when you are not my teacher? ||45||  My lord, just as a traveler, while walking
through mud, a pit, a fortress, or a forest, ||46||  may think himself covered
by wool, hemp, cotton, or grass, being of little intelligence, ||47||  so too,
you, Gosaala, falsely claim yourself to be different. Why do you speak falsely?
He is your equal, not your superior. ||48||  Thus, angered by the words of his
lord, Gosaala spoke to the Lord: "Today, you are corrupt, you are lost, you are
not a Kashyapa!" ||49||  The disciple of the omniscient, the one who experiences
all, the one who is devoted to the path, ||50||  was unable to bear those words.
Gosaala spoke to the Lord: "By whom were you initiated, by whom were you taught,
O Gosaala? You are he!" ||51||  Then, Gosaala, in anger, released a blazing ray
of energy, like a poisonous fire from the eyes, for the experience of all.
||52||  Being consumed by the blazing energy of Gosaala, the one who experiences
all, ||53||  the one who was devoted to good meditation, died and became a god
in the Sahasrara. ||53||  Gosaala, at that time, proud of his own power of
energy, ||54||  was eager to rebuke the Lord again and again. ||54||  His
disciple, Sunakshatra, a good star, then rebuked his lord, the one who was
criticizing his teacher, ||55||  with great devotion to his teacher, as one who
experiences all. ||55||  Gosaala, with his blazing body, released by the energy
ray, ||56||  circumambulated the Lord, taking on more vows. ||56||  Then, after
reflecting and retracting, forgiving all the sages, ||57||  the sage Sunakshatra
died and became a god in the realm of Achyuta. ||57||  (Pair) Jita-Kashi and
Gosaala, then, with very harsh words, ||58||  cried out to the world, their
Lord, who was full of compassion. ||58||  "You were initiated, you were taught,
you were made a scholar by me. You are my own, a slanderer. What is this
confusion in your mind?" ||59||  Being told by the Lord, "It is you yourself,"
Gosaala, greatly angered, ||60||  approached and said something to the Lord,
with a blazing ray of energy. ||60||  The Lord, who is not subject to the power
of others, like a great wind on a mountain, ||61||  circumambulated the Lord, a
devotee, following the path of devotion. ||61||  The Lord's body was scorched by
that blazing ray of energy, ||62||  like a forest fire consuming the water of a
river, originating from the banks. ||62||  "This is not right, this is a
disgrace," she thought in anger. ||63||  The

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 114 AturapratyAkhyAnaprakIrNakam gozAlastava yaH ziSyaH sa hi zuklAbhijAtikaH
/  dharmadhyAnasthito mRtvA tridazeSUdapadyata  /  / 43 /  /
taddehe'sminnupasargaparISahasahe'vizam  /  udAyanAmA'hamRSiH parityajya nijaM
vapuH  /  / 44 /  /  tato mAmaparijJAya gozAlaM maMkhaleH sutam  /  svaziSyaM
kathamAkhyAsi na khalvasi gururmama  /  / 45 /  /  svAmyathoce yathA''rakSaiH
kramyamANo malimlucaH  /  gartaM durgaM vanaM vA'pi svAntardhAnamavApnuvan  /  /
46 /  /  UrNAlomnA zaNalomnA tUlAMzena tRNena vA  /
manyate'ntaradattenAtmAnamAvRtamalpadhIH  /  / 47  /  /  evaM tvamapi
gozAlo'nanyo'pyAkhyAn svamanyathA  /  kimarthaM bhASase'lIkaM sa evAsyaparo na
hi  /  / 48 /  /  evaM svAmigirA kruddho gozAlo'pyabravIt prabhum  /  adya
bhraSTo'si naSTo'si na bhavasyeSa kAzyapa !  /  / 49 /  /  sarvajJaziSyaH
sarvAnubhUtiNurvanurAgataH  /  akSamastadvacaH soDhuM gozAlakamabhASata  /  / 50
/  /  guruNA dIkSito'nena zikSito'syamunaiva hi  /  ninuSe hetunA kena gozAla !
tvaM sa eva hi  /  / 51 /  /  atha gozAlakaH kopAttejolezyAmanAhatAm  /
sarvAnubhUtaye'muJcad dRgjvAlAmiva dRgviSaH  /  / 52 /  /  nirdahyamAnaH
sarvAnubhUtigozAlalezyayA  /  zubhadhyAnaparo mRtvA sahasrAre suro'bhavat  /  /
53  /  /  gozAlo'pi hi tatkAlaM svalezyAzaktigarvitaH  /  nirbhartsayitumArebhe
bhagavantaM punaH punaH  /  / 54 /  /  svAmiziSyaH sunakSatrastamatha
svAminindakam  /  gurubhaktyA'nuzAsti sma bhRzaM sarvAnubhUtivat  /  / 55  /  /
gozAlamuktayA tejolezyayA prajvalattanuH  /  prabhuM pradakSiNIkRtyA''dAya bhUyo
vratAni ca  /  / 56 /  /  AlocyAtha pratikramya kSamayitvA'khilAnmunIn  /
sunakSatramunirmRtvA'cyutakalpe suro'bhavat  /  / 57 /  /  (yugmam) jitakAzI ca
gozAlastato'tiparuSAkSaram  /  samAkrozanijagade svAminA karuNAjuSA  /  / 58 /
/  dIkSitaH zikSitazcAsi zrutabhAk ca mayA kRtaH  /  mamaivAvarNavAdI tvaM
ko'yaM te dhIviparyayaH ?  /  / 59 /  /  svAminA svayamityukto gozAlaH kupito
bhRzam  /  upetya kiJcidamucattejolezyAM prabhuM prati  /  / 60  /  /
svAminyaprabhaviSNuH sA mahAvAtyeva parvate  /  prabhuM pradakSiNIcakre
bhaktibhAganuhAriNI  /  / 61 /  /  saMtApamAnaM svAmyaMge'bhUttejolezyayA tayA
/  tIrakakSodbhaveneva dAvena saridambhasaH  /  / 62 /  /  akAryAya prayuktA
dhiganeneti krudheva sA  /  tejolezyA nivRtyAMge gozAlasyAvizadvalAt  /  / 63  /
/  tayA'ntardahyamAno'pi gozAlo dhAya'mAzritaH  /  bhagavantaM
mahAvIramabhyadhattaivamuddhataH  /  / 64  /  /  mattejolezyayA dhvastaH
SaNmAsAnte hi kAzyapa !  /  pittajvaraparAbhUtazchadmastho'pi vipatsyase  /  /
65  /  /  svAmyathovAca gozAla ! mRSA te vAgahaM yataH  /  anyAni SoDazAbdAni
vihariSyAmi kevalI  /  / 66 /  /  _ 2010_02

Page #156 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Chapter - 2 Collection of Examples  You, afflicted by the fever of Tejo-leshya,
will surely suffer for seven days. || 67 ||  The body, tormented by Tejo-leshya,
cried out and fell to the ground like a withered branch in the wind. || 68 ||
The sages, Gautama and others, angered by the disrespect, spoke to Gosala in
these harsh words. || 69 ||  Oh, you who are against the Dharma-acharyas, where
is your Tejo-leshya, where is it employed in the Dharma-acharya? || 70 ||  Even
though the great sage spoke for a long time and even though he killed, he will
be afflicted by his own Tejo-leshya, being protected by his master out of
compassion. || 71 ||  You will be afflicted in the future, as you were before,
by the Tejo-leshya of Vaishkaayana. If the Lord had not protected you with his
own Tejo-leshya, you would have been frozen. || 72 ||  Like a tiger fallen into
a pit among the virtuous, he was unable to get out and stood there, filled with
anger. || 73 ||  He sighed deeply, his fangs and hair bristling, and struck the
earth with his feet, repeatedly saying, "I am killed!" || 74 ||  Leaving the
assembly of his master, he went to the market, looked at by people like a thief.
|| 75 ||  (Pair) Then the master told the sages, "The Tejo-leshya that Gosala
has projected to kill us, this is its power." || 76 ||  He has the power to burn
the lands of Vatsa, Shakutsam, Magadha, Vanga, Malava, Kosala, Patala, Atava,
Vajri, Mala, Malaya, Vadhaka, and Anga, sixteen kingdoms. || 77 ||  Gosala's
Tejo-leshya, attained through his intense tapas, is capable of burning these
lands. || 78 ||  All twenty of those sages, Gautama and others, being virtuous,
do not harbor envy even towards the power of another. || 79 ||  Gosala, being
consumed by his own Tejo-leshya, drank wine to alleviate the heat, holding a
wine vessel. || 80 ||  Intoxicated, Gosala sang and danced, and repeatedly bowed
to the Halaahala with folded hands. || 81 ||  He smeared his body with red
ochre, and repeatedly drank the water from the house well, which had been mixed
with earth for the sake of the vessel. || 82 ||  He spoke incoherent and
contradictory words, and was cared for by his disciples with sorrow, and thus
passed the day. || 83 ||  Ayampula, the follower of Gosala, was awake all night,
meditating on Dharma. || 84 ||  "Where is the Tridna-gopala situated?" I do not
know. I will go and ask Gosala, my omniscient guru. || 85 ||  Having decided
thus, he went to the Halaahala house, wearing unadorned ornaments, and saw
Gosala there. || 86 ||  Ayampula, filled with shame, quickly turned back. He was
seen by the elders, the disciples of Gosala, and the world. || 87 ||  "Ayampula,
you were born in the last night. You have a doubt about the location of the
Tridna-gopala." || 88 ||  Surprised, he said, "Yes, yes, that is true, O great
sages." They spoke further to explain Gosala's actions. || 8

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 khaNDaH - 2 dRSTAntasamuccayaH svatejolezyayaiva tvaM punaH pittajvarArditaH  /
vipatsyase saptadinaparyante nAtra saMzayaH  /  /  67  /  /
tejolezyAklizyamAnavapuSko vilapannatha  /  bhUmau papAta gozAlaH zAlaDuriva
vAyunA  /  /  68  /  /  gurvavajJAprakupitA munayo gautamAdayaH  /  evaM
marmAvidhA vAcoccakairgozAlamUcire  /   /  69  /  /  dharmAcAryaprAtikUlyabhAjAM
bho ! bhavatIdRzam  /  tejolezyA kva tava sA dharmAcArye niyojitA ?  /  /  70  /
/  suciraM vibruvANo'pi nighnannapi mahAmunI  /  kRpayopekSito bhartrA svayameva
vipatsyase  /  /  71  /  /  vyapatsyathAH purA'pi tvaM vaizikAyanalezyayA  /
svalezyayA zItayA tvAM nArakSiSyadyadi prabhuH  /   /  72  /  /  zArdUla iva
gartA'ntaH patitasteSu sAdhuSu  /  niHkartuM so'kSamastasthAvudvellanaparaH
krudhA  /  /  73  /  /  niHzvasan dIrghamuSNaM ca daMSTrAlomAni cotkhanan  /
pAdAbhyAM tADyannurvI hato'smIti muhurbuvan  /  / 74 /  /  niSkramya svAmisadaso
dasyuvadvIkSito janaiH  /  hAlAhalAkumbhakAryA gozAlo'gamadApaNam  /  / 75 /  /
(yugmam) atha svAmI munInUce tejo gozAlakena yat  /  asmadvadhAya prakSiptaM
tasyeyaM zaktirUrjitA  /  / 76  /  /  vatsAcchakutsamagadhavaMgamAlavakozalAn  /
pATalATavajrimAlimalayAvAdhakAMgakAn  /  /  77  /  /  kAzIn suhmottarAn dezAn
nirdagdhuM SoDazezvarA  /  tejolezyA gozAlasya tapasogreNa sAdhitA  /  / 78 /  /
te visimi sarve munayo gautamAdayaH  /  santaH zaktau parasyApi mAtsaryaM na hi
bibhrati  /  /  79  /  /  gozAlako'pi svenaiva dahyamAno'tha tejasA  /
tApazAntyai papau madyaM dadhAno madyabhAjanam ||80|| madonmatto gAyati sma
gozAlo nRtyati sma ca  /  hAlAhalAyAH praNatiM prAJjalizcAkaronmuhuH  /  /  81
/  /  aMgarAgIcakArAMge bhANDArthaM mRditAM mRdam  /  luloTha ca gRhasrotojale
taccApibanmuhuH  /  / 82 /  /  asaMbaddhaviruddhAni prajajalpa vacAMsi ca  /
ziSyaiH sazokaiH sa upacaryamANo'tyagAddinam  /  / 83 /  /
gozAlopAsakastatrAyaMpulo dharmajAgaram  /  pUrvarAtrApararAtre kurvannevaM
vyacintayat  /  / 84 /  /  tRNagopAlikA kiMsaMsthAneti na hi vedmyaham  /  gatvA
pRcchAmi gozAlaM sarvajJaM gurumAtmanaH  /  / 85 /  /  evaM nizcitya
gosarge'nardhyabhUSaNabhRdyayau  /  hAlAhalAgRhe'pazyadgozAlaM ca tathA sthitam
/  / 86 /  /  lajjayA'thApacakrAma drutadrutamayaMpulaH  /  gozAlaziSyaiH
sthavirairdRSTazca jagade ca saH  /  / 87 /  /  ayaMpula ! nizAyAM te
pazcimAyAmajAyata  /  tRNagopAlikAsaMsthAviSayaH saMzayaH khalu  /  /  88  /  /
vismitaH so'pyuvAcaivamevametanmaharSayaH  /  gozAlaceSTitaM goptuM te bhUyastaM
babhASire  /  /  89  /  /  gAyannRtyan pAtrapANiraJjaliM ca karoti yat  /
nirvANaprAptiliMgAni tadAkhyAti gurustava  /  /  90  /  /  2010_02 115

Page #157 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Scattering of Eager Refutation  This is the last song, dance, and
offering of hands.  Whatever else there is, like drinking, the sound of the
mridanga, and melody, etc.  || 11 ||  Go to the twenty-fourth Arhat, Gosala, the
embodiment of liberation, and ask him this doubt.  He is your omniscient guru.
|| 92 ||  Thus spoken to, they went to him.  He turned towards them, and they
told him of their arrival and doubt in front of Gosala. || 93 ||  They removed
the wine vessels and other things from Gosala.  They seated him on a seat, and
then the sage arrived. || 94 ||  Then, sitting in front of him, Gosala said,
"What is your doubt about the nature of the Tṛṇagopālikā?" || 95 ||  "Know the
Tṛṇagopālikā to be like the root of a bamboo," said the sage, and immediately,
filled with joy, he went to his own abode. || 96 ||  Having gained consciousness
the other day, and knowing his own end, Gosala, with great affection, called his
disciples. || 97 ||  "My dead body should be bathed with fragrant water and
ointments.  It should be anointed with fragrant unguents and adorned with
excellent clothes. || 98 ||  Then, it should be adorned with divine ornaments.
After that, it should be placed in a thousand-wheeled chariot and taken out. ||
99 ||  "This is the twenty-fourth Jinesvara, the Arhat, who is now going to
liberation.  This should be proclaimed throughout the world." || 100 ||  They
agreed, and on the seventh day, Gosala, having become pure in heart, reflected
on his repentance. || 101 ||  "Alas! I, a sinner, have greatly wronged my own
virtuous Dharma-guru.  I, a fool, have completely disregarded him in three ways.
|| 102 ||  "I have deceived the omniscient one, and all beings, with false
teachings and by hiding the truth. || 103 ||  "The great sages, the two who were
worthy of being my gurus, have been burned by me.  Shame on me, for I have lost
the essence of their brilliance by my own burning. || 104 ||  "What have I done
in these few days?  I have done something that will bind me to a long stay in
hell. || 105 ||  "Not only will I, myself, become a guest in hell, but also,
because of my false teachings, the whole world will go astray. || 106 ||  "Let
it be so, even if the world goes astray.  Let it go its own way."  Reflecting
thus, he called his disciples and said, || 107 ||  "Listen, all of you!  I am
not a worthy Kevali.  I am only Gosala, the son of Mankhali, a disciple of the
hero. || 108 ||  "I am like fire to the refuge, an enemy to my guru.  Through my
hypocrisy, I have deceived myself and the world for a long time. || 109 ||  "I,
a hypocrite, will die, burning with my own brilliance.  Bind my left foot with
ropes and drag me through the city. || 110 ||  "With my mouth gasping, drag me
through the city like a dead body.  Proclaim this in the city, in the three-
peaked mountains, etc. || 111 ||  "This is Gosala, the son of Mankhali

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 AturapratyAkhyAnaprakIrNakam yadetat pazcimaM geyaM nRtyamaJjalikarma ca  /
pAnaM mRdaMgarAgAdi yadanyadapi kiMcana  /  /  11  /   /  gozAlasya
caturviMzasyArhato mokSalakSma tat  /  gatvA'muM pRcchA sandehaM sarvajJo hyeSa
te guruH  /  /  92  /  /  ityuktastairabhigantuM sa prAvartiSTa te'pi hi  /
tasyA''gamaM saMzayaM ca gozAlasya puro'vadan  /  / 93 /  /  te'nyato
madyapAtrAdi gozAlena vyamocayan  /  Asane cAsayAJcakrustadA cA''gAdayaMpulaH  /
/  94  /  /  tato niSaNNamagre tamUce gozAlako'pi hi  /  tRNagopAlikA
kiMsaMsthAneti tava saMzayaH  /  /  95  /  /  tRNagopAlikAM viddhi
vaMzImUlasamAkRtim  /  zrutveti muditaH sadyo'yaMpulaH svAzrayaM yayau  /  / 96
/  /  anyedyuzcetanAM labdhvA jJAtvA'ntasamayaM nijam  /  ziSyAnAhUya gozAlo
vyAjahAreti sAdaraH  /   /  97  /  /  mRtasya me vapuH snapyaM
gandhAmbhobhirvilepanaiH  /  sugandhibhirvilepyaM cA''mocyaM cotkRSTavAsasA  /
/ 98  /  /  bhUSyaM ca bhUSaNairdivyairAropyaM tadanantaram  /  sahasravAhyAM
zibikAM tato niHsAryamutvAt  /  / 99  /  /  ayamatrAvasarpiNyAM caturviMzo
jinezvaraH  /  gozAlaH prayayau mokSamityudghoSyaM pure'khile  /   /  100  /  /
te tathA pratyapadyanta gozAlo'pyahni saptame  /  jAtazuddhAzayaH
pazcAttApAdevamacintayat  /  /  101  /  /  aho! pApo'hamarhantaM vIraM
dharmaguruM nijam  /  nitAntamAzAtitavAMstridhA'pyatyantardurmatiH  /  / 102 /
/  abhANayaM ca sarvajJamAtmAnaM sarvato'pi hi  /  mRSopadezaiH satyAbhaiH
sarvaM lokaM pratArayan  /  /  103  /  /  dhiGmaharSI mayA dagdhau
gurugRhyAvubhau ca tau  /  tejolezyA svadAhAyAmucyata svAmine ca dhik  /  /  104
/  /  kRte dinAnAM stokAnAM kimakAryaM mayA kRtam  /
bhUyiSThanarakAvAsavinivAsanibandhanam  /  /  105  /  /  na kevalamayaM svAtmA
narakAyAtithIkRtaH  /  kiM tvayaM sakalo loko'pyasanmArgopadezataH  /   /  106
/  /  bhavatviyatyapi gate loko yAtu pathaiva hi  /  vimRzyaivaM samAhUya
ziSyAnevamathAvadat  /   / 107 /  /  bho ! bhoH ! zRNuta sarve'pi nAhamarhanna
kevalI  /  kiM tvasmi maMkhalisuto gozAlo vIraziSyakaH  /  /  108  /  /
AzrayAzo vahniriva pratyanIko guroraham  /  mayA daMbhAdiyatkAlamAtmA lokazca
vaMcitaH  /   /  109  /  /  chadmastho'haM mariSyAmi dahyamAnaH svatejasA  /
vAmAMghrau rajjubhirbaddhvA karSaNIyaH purIha bhoH  /  /  110  /  /
niSThIvadbhirmama mukhe mAM karSadbhirmRtazvavat  /  ghoSaNIyamidaM puryAM
trikazRMgATakAdiSu  /  / 111  /  /  sa eSa maMkhalisuto gozAlo daMbhitaprajaH  /
munighAtyajino doSanidhAnaM gurutalpagaH  /   /  112  /  /  * jinastu bhagavAn
vIraH sarvajJaH karuNAnidhiH  /  hitopadeSTA nyahnoSTa gozAlastaM mudhaiva hi  /
/  113  /  /  ityarthe zapathaM dattvA vyathayA sa vyapadyata  /  tacchiSyAzca
kulAlaukodvArANi pidadhurkriyA  /   /  114  /   /  116 2010_02

Page #158 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter 2: Collection of Examples  **117**  In Śrāvastī, the disciples of
Mahavira swore an oath to free themselves from the cycle of birth and death.
They also attracted Gośāla, making proclamations and the like. ||115||  Then,
Gośāla's body was cremated. His disciples, with great wealth, performed the
rites of the funeral pyre. ||116||  [Triṣaṣṭhi 0, Chapter 10, Verses 354 to 469]
**4. The Tradition of Śrī Skanda Ācārya, the Slayer and Protector, as Described
in the Śrī Uttara Adhyayana Brhadvṛtti on the topic of Anger**  In the city of
Sāvatthī, there was a Jina named Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī
Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī
Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī
Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī
Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī
Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī
Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī
Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī
Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī
Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī
Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī
Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī
Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī
Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī
Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī
Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Śrī Ś

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 khaNDa:-2 dRSTAntasamuccayaH 117 zrAvastImAlikhastatra ziSyAH zapathamuktaye  /
tathA gozAlamAkarSan kurvanto ghoSaNAdikam  /  / 115  /  /  tato
niSkramayAmAsustadgozAlakalevaram  /  RddhyA mahatyA tacchiSyAzcakruzca
jvalanAtithim  /  / 116 /  /  triSaSThi0 parva-10 zloka-354 taH 469] 4.
krodhadhyAne zrIuttarAdhyayanabRhadvRttikathitaH
zrIskandakAcAryahantRpAlakasampradAyaH  /  sAvatthIe nayarIe jiyasattUrAyA,
dhAriNI devI, tIse putto khaMdao NAma kumAro, tassa bhagiNI puraMdarajasA, sA
kuMbhakArakaDe nayare daMDagI nAma rAyA tassa dinnA, tassa ya daMDakissa raNNo
pAlago NAma maruto purohito  /  annayA sAvatthIe muNisuvvayasAmI titthayaro
samosario, parisA niggayA, khaMdato'vi niggato, dhamma soccA sAvago jAo  /
annayAM so pAlakamaruto dUyattAe Agato sAvatthiM nayariM, atthANimajhe sAhUNaM
avaNNaM vayamANo khaMdaeNaM nippiTThapasiNavAgaraNo kato, patosamAvaNNo,
tappabhiI ceva khaMdagassa chiddANi cArapurisehiM maggAviMto viharai, jjAva
khaMdago paMcajaNasaehiM kumArolagaehiM saddhiM muNisuvvaya sAmisagAse
pavvatito, bahusuto jAto, tANi ceva se paMca sayANi sIsattAe aNuNNAyANi  /
annayA khaMdao sAmimApucchai-vaJcAmi bhagiNIsagAsaM, sAmiNA bhaNiyaM-uvasaggo
mAraNaMtito, bhaNai-ArAhagA virAhagA vA ? sAmiNA bhaNiyaM-savve ArAhagA tumaM
mottuM, so bhaNai-laTuM, jadi ettiyA ArAhagA, gao kuMbhakArakaDaM, marueNa jahiM
ujjANe Thio tahiM AuhANi NUmiyANi, rAyA buggAhio-jahA esa kumAro parIsahaparAito
eeNa uvAeNa tumaM mArittA rajjaM gihihitti, jadi te vipaJcato ujjANaM paloehi,
AuhANi olaiyANi diTThANi, te baMdhiUNa tassa ceva purohiyassa samappiyA, teNa
savve purisajaMteNa pIliyA, tehiM samma ahiyAsiyaM, tesiM kevalaNANaM uppaNNaM
siddhA ya  /  khaMdato'vi pAse dhario, lohiyacirikkAhiM bharijjaMto savvato
pacchA jaMte pIlito NidANaM kAUNa aggikumAresu uvavaNNo  /  taMpi se rayaharaNaM
ruhiralittaM purisahatthotti kAuM giddhehiM puraMdarajasAte purato pADiyaM, sAvi
taddivasaM adhitiM karei jahA sAdhU Na dIsaMti, taM ca NAe diTuM, paJcabhinnAo
ya kaMbalo, NisijjAto chiNNAto, tAe ceva diNNo, tAe nAyaM-jahA te mAriyA, tAe
khisito rAyA-pAva ! viNaTTho'si, tAe ciMtiyaM-pavvayAmi, devehiM
muNisuvvayasagAsaM nIyA, teNavi deveNa NagaraM daTuM sajaNavvayaM, ajjavi
daMDagAraNNaMti bhaNNai  /  4. krodhadhyAne puSpamAlAyAM namucimantrI  /
kurujaNavayamajjhagayaM asthi puraM hatthiNAuraM nAma  /
ThANaTThANanivesiyasuvannarAsIhiM jattha sayA  /  / 1 /  /
avagayaparamatthANavi bahukaNayagirINa jAyae saMkA  /  puNaravi sA viNiyattai
dANAvasarammi tvvigme||2|| JainEducation International 2010_02

Page #159 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter 118: The Scattering of the Eager Refusal  **3.** The king of the
Saisya country, victorious over the earth, was deceived by many clever tricks.
Thus, the Kulagiri, with many forms, was defeated.  **4.** The king of the Pauma
country, who protects the one with all good qualities, became firm in the right
dharma, known as the great hero, Vara.  **5.** The son of the Vihnu, adorned
with the lion dream, was the first son. The great Pauma was the second son, born
from the fourteen dream signs.  **6.** The Vihnu, being without desire, was
eager for battle. The great Pauma, though young, was established as the heir
apparent.  **7.** Then, in Ujjayini, the great sage, Suvaya Jina, was the king.
The one named Suvaya, having come together, was said to be wandering.  **8.**
The one named Siri Dhamma, a minister, came to pay homage to him. The wicked
minister, named Namui, came with him.  **9.** By him, a dispute was raised in
the assembly of the monks. The sage, being silent for a moment, was called upon
to give a decision.  **10.** He said, "Why has this one come? Does he know his
strength? One who cannot tolerate disrespect to the teacher speaks out."
**11.** "The wicked one considers even the great one incapable, due to the
teacher's kindness. He desires to see the destruction of the righteous, due to
the opportunity of the rule of law."  **12.** "These sages are steadfast in the
truth, like a mountain. If you are so insignificant, then speak to me, and I
will be with you."  **13.** The wicked one, being defeated, spoke nothing. The
sage, being silent, went with his followers to the Saahu country.  **14.**
Thinking deeply about the injustice, he rose in the morning. He went to the
Saahu country, taking the weapon to kill them.  **15.** The one with right
vision, the divine one, was then present there. He was seen by the people of the
world, accompanied by the Pauma.  **16.** Then, the people, filled with
devotion, did service to the Saahu. The wicked Namui, ashamed before the divine
one, was humbled.  **17.** Thinking about the injustice done to the Saahu, he
went to the king, seeking justice. He went to the elephant enclosure and met the
great Pauma.  **18.** "This king, whatever he desires, is fulfilled by his
intelligence. The minister, being defeated, stands near him."  **19.** Then, the
great Pauma, with his peace, conquered all the countries. The minister, named
Singhbala, with his strength, attacked the fort.  **20.** He was captured and
bound. The great Pauma, being pleased, gave him a boon. "Ask for a boon, son, I
will give it to you at the right time," he said.  **21.** "I will make Jala Devi
my wife, and I will live in the Jina's religion. She is the most beautiful, and
I will make her a Brahma-wife."  **22.** The king, being humbled, first spoke to
the beautiful one. Then, he made this agreement with Jala.  **23.** "I will take
food only if the Jina does not humble himself first. Otherwise, the Pauma king
will be imprisoned, and I will remain here."  **24.** The great Pauma,
considering this an insult, was humbled. He went to the city of Sindhunandan

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 118 AturapratyAkhyAnaprakIrNakam bahugayaghaDacchaleNaM
sAisayamahIharattavijayaMtaM  /  sevaMti jaM athaddhaM kulagiriNo vihiyabahurUvA
/  / 3 /  /  so paumottararAyA taM pAlai jassa sayalaguNakaliyA  /
sAvayadhammammi daDhA jAlA nAmeNa varabhajjA  /  / 4 /  /  sIhasumiNaparikAhio
viNhukumArotti tANa paDhamasuo  /  caudasasumiNapisuNio bIo putto mahApaumo  /
/ 5 /  /  viNhU tattha nirIho iyaro u samIhae tao ranA  /  juvarAyatte Thavio
lahuo'vi hu so mahApaumo  /  / 6 /  /  etto ujjeNIe sirimuNisuvvayajiNassa
varasIso  /  suvvayanAmAyario samAgao kahavi viharaMto  /  / 7 /  /  siridhammo
nAma nivo vaMdaNaheuM samAgao tassa  /  namuI ya nAma maMtI teNa samaM Agao
duTTho  /  / 8 /  /  teNa vitaMDAvAo ADhatto uvasamappahANIe  /  paDiNIotti ya
kaliuM moNeNa Thio khaNaM sUri  /  / 9 /  /  teNa bhaNi kimeso Ayario jANae
balIho ?  /  guruparibhavamasahaMto bhaNai tao khuDao ekko  /  / 10 /  /
niya'guruyayAe suyaNaM khalo mahaMtaMpi gaNai asamatthaM  /
niyayasahAvasaricchaM jeNa jaNo pecchaD paraMpi  /  / 11 /  /  ciTuMtu tAva
nIsesasatyapAraMgayA ime sUrI  /  jai tuccha ! kAi sattI tA bhaNasu maevi saha
tAva  /  / 12 /  /  aha ADhatto bhaNiuM niruttaro khuDDaeNa so vihio  /  tA
sAhUsu pauTTho vilakkhavayaNo gao sagihaM  /  / 13 /  /  asamaMjasAiM subahuM
ciMtaMto uTThiUNa rayaNIe  /  sAhUNa haNaNaheuM satthaM gahiuM gao tattha  /  /
14 /  /  sammadiTThIe devayAe to thaMmio tahiM ceva  /  diTTho pabhAyasamae
sapauraloeNa naravaeNA  /  / 15 /  /  to AuTTho loo bhattiM sAhUNa kuNai
savisesaM  /  mukko namuIvi ya devayAe lajjAe nIhariuM  /  / 16 /  /
avayAratthaM sAhUNa ciMtayaMto uvAyalakkhAiM  /  gaMtUNa hatthiNaure olaggai so
mahApaumaM  /  / 17 /  /  eso rAyA jAo kAhI maha vaMchiyaMti buddhIe  /
maMtittaM paDivanno ciTThai tasseva pAsammi  /  / 18 /  /  etto ya mahApaumassa
saMtiyaM bhaMjae sayaladesaM  /  siMhabalo nAma nivo baleNa duggassa koTTassa  /
/ 19 /  /  so baMdhiUNa gahio buddhIeN namuiNA tao tuTTho  /  dei varaM kumaro
se dejjasu samayammi so bhaNai  /  / 20 /  /  aha annayA karAvai jAlAdevI rahaM
jiNAyayaNe  /  tIe savakkI lacchI u kArae baMbharahametto  /  / 21 /  /
baMbharaho nIharihI paDhamaM lacchIeN pabhaNio rAyA  /  taM souM jAlA'viya kuNai
paiNNaM imaM tatto  /  / 22 /  /  giNhAmi aNasaNamahaM jai paDhamaM jiNaraho na
nIharai  /  paumuttareNa rannA tao niruddhA rahA do'vi  /  / 23 /  /  mAUNaM
avamANaM taM mannato tao mahApaumo  /  nIhario rayaNIe egAgI aDavimaNupatto  /
/ 24 /  /  tattha ya hiMDaMteNaM patteNaM siMdhunaMdaNe nayare  /  pariNIyaM
kaNNAyaM mahaseNanivassa sayamegaM  /  / 25 /  /  vegavaIe vijjAharIe tatto ya
avahareUNaM  /  veyaDDammi nagavare sUrodayapuravare neuM  /  / 26 /  /  2010_02

Page #160 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Chapter:-2 Collection of Examples   119 The king of Khayari, named Jayachanda,
was defeated by the thirty sons of Mausalya. ||27|| He fought with the
Vijjaharas and the Gangaharas. He was defeated in that great battle. ||28|| The
king of Champapuri, named Janamejaya, had a daughter named Mayanavali. ||29||
This great battle was the ninth cycle of the present cycle. The previous cycle
was destroyed and the world was destroyed. ||30|| The king, after establishing
the kingdom, renounced the kingdom and became a monk in the presence of the
great sage, Sirisuvvaya. ||31|| His father and brothers also renounced the
kingdom and became monks. ||32|| The king, who was a chakravarti, renounced the
kingdom and became a monk in the presence of the great sage, Sirisuvvaya. ||33||
The king, who was a great emperor, renounced the kingdom and became a monk. He
built many Jain temples. ||34|| Many kings renounced the kingdom and became
monks. They all became monks in the Jain religion. ||35|| The king, who was a
great emperor, renounced the kingdom and became a monk. He attained infinite
happiness and became immortal. ||36|| The son of the king, named Vihnukumar, was
born with many powers. ||37|| He was as tall as Mount Meru and as strong as a
bird. He was as wise as a sage and as powerful as a god. ||38|| The great sage,
Sirisuvvaya, said that he had seen the king in the city of Hatthinagara. ||39||
The king, who was a great emperor, was angry and said that he would kill the
king. ||40|| The king said that he would give the kingdom to the king. ||41||
The king was defeated by the king and was taken prisoner. ||42|| The king was
taken prisoner by the king and was taken to the king's palace. ||43|| The king
was defeated by the king and was taken prisoner. ||44|| The king said that he
would give the kingdom to the king. ||45|| The king said that he would give the
kingdom to the king. ||46|| The king said that he would give the kingdom to the
king. ||47|| The king said that he would give the kingdom to the king. ||48||
The king said that he would give the kingdom to the king. ||49|| The king said
that he would give the kingdom to the king. ||50|| JainEducation International
2010_02

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 khaNDa:-2 dRSTAntasamuccayaH 119 khayariMdaiMdadhaNuNo sirikaMtAe suyA ya
jayacaMdA  /  pariNAvio tahiM ciya tIse mAulayaputtehiM  /  / 27  /  /
vijjAharehiM saddhiM gaMgAharamahiharehiM saMgAmo  /  tavvatiyarammi jAo to
jiNai tahiM mahApaumo  /  / 28 /  /  to caMpAuripahuNo jaNamejayarAiNo suyA
pavarA  /  mayaNAvalitti nAmaM pariNIyA itthirayaNaM sA  /  / 29 /  /  iya
kamaso saMjAo navamo cakkI imo mahApaumo  /  puvvuttacakkiriddhIe parigao
gayauraM patto  /  / 30 /  /  to ThAviUNa rajje rAyA paumuttaro mahApaumaM  /
paDivajjai pavvajjaM sirisuvvayasUriNo pAse  /  / 31 /  /  piuNA ya baMdhaveNa
ya ThAvijjaMto'vi rAyalacchIe  /  saMsArammi viratto viNhukumAro'vi saha piuNA
/  / 32 /  /  paDivajjai pavvajjaM sirisuvvayasUriNo cciya sayAse  /  aha
cakkavaTTibhoe bhuMjae suiraM mahApaumo  /  / 33 /  /  taha jaNaNikAriya raho
mahAvibhUIe bhAmiuM nayare  /  kArAviyAo bharahe jiNabhavaNANaM ca koDIo  /  /
34 /  /  sesAvi nariMdAI jiNiMdadhamme payaTTiyA bahave  /  jiNasAsaNammi vihiyA
samuNNaI bahupayArehiM  /  / 35  /  /  paumuttaro'vi sAhU paramapayaM pAviuM
vigayakammo  /  bhuMjai aNaMtasokkhaM ajaro amaro nihayadukkho  /  / 36 /  /
viNhukumArassa puNo nahagamaNaviuvviyAiladdhIo  /  uppaNNA bahuyAo
tavappabhAveNa to eso  /  / 37  /  /  meruvva tuMgadeho vaccai gayaNammi
pakkhinAho vva  /  hoi suhumo gurU vA pagAmarUvI suriMdo vva  /  / 38  /  /
etto vAsAratte te suvvayasUriNo ThiyA kahavi  /  hatthiNaurammi nayare to
katthai namuiNA diTTA  /  / 39  /   /  sariUNa tao veraM puvvavaraM patthio
mahApaumo  /  deha namuI'vi pabhaNai veyavihIe jaissAmi  /  / 4 /  /  jaNNamahaM
tA dijjau kaivaya diyahAiM deva ! maha rajjaM  /  taha ceva dei cakkI
sayamarohaM Thio gamai  /  / 41 /  /  namuIvi jaNNavADe bAhiM kavaDeNa dikkhio
jAo  /  tassa ya vaddhAvaNae saha pAsaMDIhiM pagaIo  /  / 42 /  /  mottUNa
seyabhikkhU sesAo samAgayAo to namuI  /  hakkAriUNa sUriM taM ciya ubbhAviuM
dosaM  /  / 43 /  /  pabhaNai khuDDA tubbhe logavyavahArabAhirA thaddhA  /
chaDDeuM maha rajjaM tA sigdhaM vayaha annattha  /  / 44 /  /  to bhaNiyaM
sUrIhiM loyaThiI vijjae bahupayArA  /  sAvajjAe tIse to naravara !
muNiyabhAvANaM  /  / 45 /  /  vajjiyasAvajjANaM vimukkanIsesaloyatattINaM  /
kiM ciMtAe kajjaM sAhUNaM samiyapAvANaM ?  /  / 46 /  /  to nAgayA vayamihaM na
uNo amhANa ko'vi hu paoso  /  to kuvio so jaMpai kiM bahuNa bho palatteNaM?  /
/ 47 /  /  sattadiNANaM uvariM kaMpi hu pavvaiyagaM jai niyemi  /  to mAremi
avassaM iya soUNaM tao sUrI  /  / 48 /  /  ujjANe gaMtUNaM kiM kAyavvaMti
pucchae sAhU  /  tatthekko bhaNai muNI bhAyA siricakkavaTTissa  /  / 49  /  /
bahuvAsasahassAI vihiyatavo pattavivihaladdhIo  /  aMgAmaMdarasele viNhukumAro
muNI atthI  /  / 50 /  /  JainEducation International 2010_02

Page #161 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------



======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 AturapratyAkhyAnaprakIrNakam tassa vayaNa namuI manne uvasamai to bhaNai sUrI
/  sAhu bhaNiyaM paraM taM ko ANehI muNI ettha  /   /  51|| to bhai egasAhU heNa
gamaNaMmi atthi maha sattI  /  AgamaNaMmi na vijjai to bhaNio sUriNA so'vi  /  /
52  /  /  ANessai ettha tao iya bhaNie jhatti so muNI gayaNe  /  uppaio daTThUNa
ya khaNeNa taM ciMtae viNhU  /  /  53  /  /  garuyaM pavayaNakajjaM vAsAratte'vi
teNimo sAhU  /  iha Agacchai teNavi to savvaM sAhiyaM tassa  /   /  54  /  /
tatto viNhU taM giNhiUNa patto khaNeNa namai guruM  /  sese'vi muNI sammANiUNa
patto namuipAse  /  /  55  /  /  taM mottUNaM seseNa paNamio sayalarAyaloeNa  /
uvaviTTho kahiUNaM dhammaM to maharavaNehiM  /  /  56  /  /  bhaNio namuI
ciTTaMtu sAhuNo jAva vayai ghaNasamaNo  /  teNa bhaNiyaM kimevaM puNarattaM
AlabhaNiehiM ?  /  / 57 /  /  bhaNiyadiNANaM uvariM jai tubbhaM kaMpi ettha
picchAmi  /  tA taha karemi jaha se nApi hu niTThae loe  /  /  58  /  /  iya
jaha jaha so mahuraM bhaNei taha taha caDei ahiayaraM  /  tatto kuvio viNhU
pabhaNai re duTTha ! saccamiNaM  /   /  59  /  /  kaDuehiM ciya siMbho vva
dujjaNo uvasamaM pavajjei  /  pagaIe yi kuppai so dijjaMtehiM mahurehiM  /  /
60  /  /  nimmalavaNehivi sajjaNANa pagaiM na dujjaNo muyai  /  na hi dhoio'vi
duddheNa nimmalo hoi iMgAlo  /   /  61  /   /  jaM ca muNINaM uvasamadhaNANa
aikakkasaM samAyarasi  /  tatthavi tuha paDikUlo divvo jaM khIrajalahimmi  /  /
62  /  /  aimaMthaNAu mahurevi uTThiyaM kiM na kAlakUDavisaM ?  /  tA kiM bahuNA
? sAhUNa desu ThANaM kamatigapi  /  /  63  /   /  taNAva bhaNi hou ime kiMtu
kamatigassa bahiM  /  jai tubbhANaM pAvemi kaMpi tA nUNa mAremi  /  64  /  /  to
vihU koveNaM mahughasitto vva pAvao jalio  /  kayaveuvviyarUvo ADhatto vaDDhi
gayaNe  /   /  65  /  /  joyaNalakkhasarIro khaNeNa palayAnalu vva duppiccho  /
saMjAo kasiNataNU bhayaMkaro sayalabhuvaNassa  /  / 66 /  /  kamadaddaraM
kuNaMto gAmAgaranagarasAgarAiNNaM  /  kaMpAvai mahivIDhaM DhAlei girINa siharAI
/   /  67  /  /  ucchAlai jalanihiNo AyaMkaM jaNai maNuyatiriyANaM  /
bhavaNavaNajoivemANiyANa saMjaNai saMkhobhaM  /   /  68  /  /  namuIsirammi
pAyaM dAUNa rasAyalammi pakkhitto  /  to puvvAvarajalahIsu ciTThae jA kame
ThaviuM  /   /  69  /  /  bhuvatyakhobhAo nAuM sakkeNa taM muNiM kuviyaM  /
paTThaviyAo kalakaMThiyAo to accharAu tahiM  /  /  70  /  /  uvasamaheuM
savaNesu tassa hoUNa mahurakaMTheNaM  /  gAyaMtIo evaM bhAMti jaha bho mahAbhAga
!  /  /  71  /   /  saparobhayasaMtavao kovo taha sucariyassa niTThavao  /
duggaigamamahapaMtho palimaMtho sayalasokkhANaM  /  /  72  /  /  titthayarA
annevi hu maharisiNo atulavikkamajuAvi  /  visahaMti vihINANavi savvaM
paraloyabhIrumaNA  /  / 73 /  /  120 2010_02

Page #162 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Chapter:-2 Collection of Examples 122 Just as anger flares up in the ears when
they are desired, so too, is there any possibility of discernment in the
presence of the qualities of the Guru? ||74|| O Upasantas, Muni-Saras! Remember
the words of the Jina-Bhasya. Cultivate compassion in your mind, and make it a
refuge for the three jewels. ||75|| By speaking in this way, and by all the
words of the Sangha, the entire world of gods and demons has attained peace.
||76|| In the presence of the great Pauma, one should not be arrogant, even with
one's family. One should be humble, calm, and respectful in one's movements.
||77|| Therefore, the Upasantas, who are devoted to the three jewels, are known
for their great virtues. They are pure, having been purified by the light of
knowledge, as it is said. ||78|| In the presence of the Aryas, in the Kula-Gana-
Sangha, and in the destruction of the world, they are pure, like the vast ocean.
||79|| Having attained Kevala-Jnana, the son of Vinhu became a Siddha in due
course. The great Pauma, having attained the state of a Siddha, went to the
Siddha-loka. ||80|| 4. The story of the Nihnva of Shiva-Bhuta, from the
Uttaradhyayanasutra, in the chapter on the meditation of anger. In the city of
Rath-Veer-Pura, there was a forest called Deepaka. In that forest, the Aryas,
known as Krishna, were the sun. ||1|| In that city, there was a Kshatriya named
Shiva-Bhuta, who was the foremost of the Sattvika. He sought to serve the king,
who had a thousand warriors. ||2|| The king thought, "I will test this man's
qualities of patience, etc. For a man without qualities would be a burden to his
master, and not a source of happiness." ||3|| "I will give him a livelihood only
after testing him. For a gift given to a man without qualities is like throwing
it into the fire." ||4|| Thinking thus, the king, on the fourteenth day of the
dark fortnight, at the beginning of the night, gave him a goat and a pitcher of
water, and said to him, ||5|| "Go to the cemetery, to the temple of the Mother
Goddess, and offer the goat as a sacrifice. Do this duty for us." ||6|| Shiva-
Bhuta, being courageous, took the goat and went to the cemetery. He killed the
goat and offered it as a sacrifice to the Mother Goddess. ||7|| Being hungry, he
began to eat the flesh of the goat right there. He was not afraid of the
cemetery or the Mother Goddess. ||8|| Then, to frighten him, the king sent some
men there. They went there and shouted "Shiva" and "Bhairava" all around. ||9||
He was disturbed by them, but his mind did not waver. There was no fear in his
body, and no hair stood on end. ||10|| The king's men then told the king about
his nature. He had eaten the flesh of the goat calmly and had gone to the
outskirts of the city. ||11|| The king, having understood his courage, gave him
a large livelihood. Shiva-Bhuta then served the king day and night. ||12|| On
another occasion, the king ordered all his generals and soldiers, saying, "Go
quickly to the city of Mathura." ||13|| They

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 khaNDa:-2 dRSTAntasamuccayaH 122 jaha neraiyatericchAiesu iyaresu vipphurai
kovo  /  taha jaha guNaguruesuvi tA kiMnu viveyasAmatthaM ?  /  / 74  /  /  tA
uvasamasu muNIsara ! sumarasu jiNabhAsiyAiM vayaNAI  /  karuNAe desu cittaM
kuNasu pasAyaM tihuyaNassa  /  / 75  /  /  iya evamAibhaNiehiM tANa taha
sayalasaMghavayaNehiM  /  sasurAsuraloeNa ya pAraddhe saMtikammami  /  / 76  /
/  cakkiMmi mahApaume ya nAyatavvaiyare saparivAre  /  saMbhamakaMpiragatte
namiuM calaNesu khAmaMte  /  / 77  /  /  to kahavi hu uvasaMto tappabhiI
tivikamotti sa pasiddho  /  AloiyapaDikkaMto viharai suddho jao bhaNiyaM  /  /
78  /  /  Ayarie gacchammi ya kulagaNasaMghe ya ceiyaviNAse  /  AloiyapaDikkaMto
suddho jaM nijjarA viulA  /  / 79  /  /  pAviyakevalanANo viNhukumAro kameNa to
siddho  /  cakkIvi mahApaumo gahiUNa vayaM gao siddhiM  /  / 80  /  /  4.
krodhadhyAne zrIuttarAdhyayanAgamoktanihnavAdhikArAt zivabhUtinAmanihnavakathA
/  rathavIrapurAbhikhye, pure'bhUddIpakAbhidham  /  vanaM tatrAryakRSNAkhyAH,
sUrayaH samavAsaran  /  / 1 /  /  itazca zivabhUtyAkhyaH, kSatriyaH
sAttvikAgraNIH  /  sahasrayodhItatratyaM, nRpaM sevitumAzrayat  /  / 2 /  /
nRpo dadhyau parIkSe'hamasya dhairyAdikAn guNAn  /  nirguNo hyanujIvI
syAtsvAmino no sukhAkaraH  /  / 3 /  /  parIkSApUrvamevAsmai, pradAsye
vRttimapyaham  /  nirguNe hi jane dattaM , syAdbhasmani hutopamam  /  / 4 /  /
dhyAtveti bhUpatiH zyAmacaturdazyAM nizAmukhe  /  pazumekaM vAruNIM ca, tasya
datvaivamabravIt  /  / 5 /  /  zmazAnasthe mAtRdevIgRhe gatvA tvamekakaH  /
pazumadya baliM dehi, kRtyametadvidhehi naH  /  / 6 /  /  zivabhUtistadAdAya,
dhIraH pretavane yayau  /  nihatya chagalaM mAtRdevInAM ca baliM dadau  /  / 7 /
/  kSudhito'smIti tatraivA''rebhe tanmAMsabhakSaNam  /  zmazAnamAtRdevIbhyo,
bibhayAmAsa na tvasau  /  / 8 /  /  tadA ca tadbhApanAya, bhUpena prahitA narAH
/  tatrAgatya zivAzabdAn, bhairavAn parito vyadhuH  /  / 9 /  /  babhAja tairapi
kSobhaM, tanmano na manAgapi  /  na cAGge'pyabhavattasya, romodbhedo
bhayodbhavaH  /  / 10 /  /  tatsvarUpaM tato rAjJe, procuste rAjapUruSAH  /
so'pi svasthatayA bhuktvA, jagAma kSmApasannidhau  /  / 11 /  /  tato'vabudhya
taM zUraM, bahvIM vRttiM dadau nRpaH  /  zivabhUtistato bhUpaM, siSeve
tamaharnizam  /  / 12 /  /  anyadA sa nRpaH senApatyAdInakhilAn bhaTAn  /
ityAdideza mathurAnagarI gRhyatAM drutam  /  / 13 /  /  tataH sarvAbhisAreNa,
celuste mathurAM prati  /  purAbahizca gatveti, parasparamacintayan  /  / 14 /
/  vayaM hi mathurAM jetuM, prasthitAH pArthivAjJayA  /  dve cAtra mathurApuryo,
vidyete dakSiNottare  /  / 15 /  /  2010_02

Page #163 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter 122: The Scattering of the Eager Refusal  No one, not even the great
kings, has spoken of the special nature of his [the king's] path. The king, with
his fierce nature, cannot be questioned again. ||16||  All of them, thinking,
"Where should we go?", were unable to stay or go, as long as they remained on
the path. ||17||  Shiva-bhooti then arrived there and said to them, "Why are you
standing here, as if you have stumbled upon an inauspicious omen?" ||18||  When
they told him about the situation, he said, "We will take both cities equally."
||19||  They said, "Friend, with the army divided into two parts, we cannot take
even one city!" ||20||  "The time will come when it will be even more difficult
to conquer even one. After conquering one, conquering the other will be
extremely difficult." ||21||  Shiva-bhooti then said, "If that is the case,
then, O warriors! Give me the one that is more difficult to conquer
immediately." ||22||  They said, "The one that is more difficult to conquer
among the two, go to that one." He, having won with the strength of his
intellect, went to Mathura. ||23||  He himself fortified the villages and other
settlements on the outskirts of that country. He captured all the forts and
gradually the city as well. ||24||  Shiva-bhooti, the great intellect, having
subdued that kingdom, went to the king of Abhyarna and spoke to him about
everything. ||25||  The king, pleased, said, "What do you desire? I will give it
to you." After thinking for a while, he said, "O Lord, give me independence!"
||26||  "Just as I am free to play with my friends, let no one stop me from
taking whatever I want." ||27||  "So be it," said the king, who was true to his
word. He then wandered about the city, engaging in various kinds of play. ||28||
He sometimes enjoyed himself with gamblers, day and night. Sometimes, after
drinking liquor, he would revel with the intoxicated. ||29||  Sometimes he would
serve beautiful courtesans. Sometimes he would play in the water like an aquatic
elephant. ||30||  Sometimes he would wander in the forest, like a Nandana
garden, playing with flowers, surrounded by a crowd of rogues. ||31||  Wandering
like this, he would return to his palace even at midnight. People who are
fearless often transgress boundaries. ||32||  As long as he was not at home, his
wife would not eat or sleep, as if she were observing a vow. ||33||  She was
always tormented by hunger and sleeplessness. She said to her mother-in-law with
a trembling voice, "My son comes home every night at midnight. Until he arrives,
I do not eat or sleep." ||34||  "I am always tormented by hunger and
sleeplessness because of this. Mother, I am your servant, I will do as you
command." ||35||  "My dear daughter-in-law, sleep peacefully. I will stay awake
tonight." Having been told this, the daughter-in-law went to sleep. ||37||  His
mother stood guarding the door of the house. He arrived and immediately said,
"Open the door." ||38||  His mother said, "The door will not be opened now. Go
away, the door will not be opened now." ||39||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 122 AturapratyAkhyAnaprakIrNakam tadgocaro vizeSazca, noktaH ko'pi mahIbhRtA  /
caNDasvabhAvo bhUpazca, na praSTuM zakyate punaH  /  / 16 /  /  tadasmAbhiH kva
gantavyaM, dhyAyanta iti te'khilAH  /  sthAtuM gantuM cAsamarthA,
yAvanmArge'vatasthire  /  / 17 /  /  zivabhUtistAvadAgAttatra tAMzcaivamabrIvat
/  kiM sthitA yUyamazubhanimittaskhalitA iva  /  / 18 /  /  yathAsthite'tha
tairukte, so'vAdIJcintayA kRtam  /  samameva grahISyAmo, vayaM tannagarIdvayam
/  / 19 /  /  te procurasyAH senAyAH, vibhAgayugale kRte  /  nA''dAtuM
zakyate'smAbhirekApi nagarI sakhe !  /  / 20 /  /  bhAvI bhUyastaraH kAla,
ekasyA api nirjaye  /  ekAM jitvA tadanyasyA, nirjayo'pya'tiduSkaraH  /  / 21 /
/  zivabhUtistato'vAdIdyadyevaM tarhi bho bhaTAH !  /  tayormadhye durjayA yA,
sA sadyo mama dIyatAm  /  / 22 /  /  dvayormadhye daviSThA yA, tAM
vrajetyudite'tha taiH  /  so'pAcyamathurAdezaM, yayau buddhibalorjitaH  /  / 23
/  /  tasya dezasya ca prAntyAn, grAmAdIn sAdhayan svayam  /  durgAn jagrAha
nikhilAn, kramAcca nagarImapi  /  / 24  /  /  vazIkRtyAtha tadrAjyaM,
zivabhUtirmahAmatiH  /  gatvA ca bhUbhujo'bhyarNe, sarvaM vyatikaraM jagau  /  /
25 /  /  tataH prIto'vadadbhUpaH, kAmitaM te dadAmi kim ? kiJcidvimRzya
so'pyUce, svAtantryaM dehi me prabho !  /  / 26 /  /  yathA hi mAM manobhISTAM,
krIDAM kurvantamuccakaiH  /  yattadvA vastu gRhNantaM, na ko'pi pratiSedhayet  /
27  /  /  evamastviti bhUpo'pi, satyasandho'bhyadhAttataH  /  so'pi nAnAvidhAH
krIDAH, kurvaMstatrA'bhramatpure  /  / 28  /  /  dyUtakAraiH samaM reme, sa
kadAciddivAnizam  /  kadAcittu surAM pItvA, kSIbaH kSIbaiH sahAramat  /  / 29 /
/  kadAcittu siSeve'sau, sundaraM gaNikAgaNam  /  kadAcittu jalakrIDAM, cakAra
jalahastivat  /  / 30  /  /  vijahAra kadAcittu, kAnane nandanopame  /  kurvan
puSpoccayakrIDAM, vRto viTajanairghanaiH  /  / 31 /  /  bhramannevaM sa
svasaudhe, nizIthe'pyA''yayau navA  /  ullaGghate hi maryAdAM, prAyo vItabhayo
janaH  /  / 32 /  /  yAvaJca sa gRhe nAgAttAvattasya vazAsvayam  /  nAznAti sma
na cAzeta, pAlayantI satIvratam  /  / 33 /  /  nityaM kSudhAjAgarAbhyAM, sA'tha
khinnA manasvinI  /  anyadA tasya jananImiti smAha sagadgadam  /  / 34 /  /
putro yuSmAkamAyAti, nizIthe pratyahaM gRhe  /  yAvadAgamanaM cAhaM, na bhule na
zaye'nvaham  /  / 35  /  /  nityaM kSujAgarAbhyAM tatpIDA me jAyate bhRzam  /
tatkiGkaromyahaM mAtastvadAdezavazaMvadA  /  / 36  /  /  zvazrUH zazaMsa subhage
!, svapihi tvaM yathAsukham  /  adyAhameva jAgarmi, tayetyuktA'svapIdvadhUH  /
/ 37  /  /  gRhadvAraM pidhAyAsthAttasya mAtA tu jAgratI  /
so'thA''gato'vadatsadyo, dvAramudghATyatAmiti  /  / 38  /  /  mAtA proce'ghunA
yatra, dvAramudghATitaM bhavet  /  tatra prayAhi na hyatra,
dvAramudghATyate'dhunA  /  / 39 /  /  _ 2010_02

Page #164 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Chapter 2: Collection of Examples 123  Then, Shivbhooti, filled with pride,
thought: "I have been insulted by my mother today, so I will go somewhere else."
||40|| For, "Even if a person is insulted in his own place, it is better for him
to bear it. Just as dust, when kicked up, rises to the head, so too should he
bear it." ||41|| Thinking thus, he left his home out of shame and wandered
around the city. By fate, he saw an open door and a place of ascetics. ||42||
Entering there, he bowed to the Aryakrishnachaaryas and said, "Initiate me into
the order." They initiated him. ||43|| Then, he himself, with his own hands,
shaved his head. The gurus gave him the insignia, the Dharma flag, etc. ||44||
Knowing that he had taken the vows, the king came there in the morning and said,
"What have you done without asking me?" ||45|| He said, "I have done this,
seeking my own freedom." Then, the king bowed to him and went away, saddened by
his separation. ||46|| After wandering outside, he returned, and the sun also
returned another day. Then, out of affection, the king called Shivbhooti and
brought him to his home. ||47|| Even though he was unwilling, the king gave him
a cloth of jewels. The Suri, who had come with him, said to Shivbhooti, "Why did
you take this cloth of jewels, my son? We do not consider it right to take
expensive clothes, etc." ||49|| Even though he was told this by the Suri, he did
not give up the cloth due to his delusion. But, he hid it in his clothes and
protected it secretly for many days. ||50||   The Suris wondered, "What is the
reason for his delusion?" When he had gone somewhere, they took the cloth of
jewels from him. ||51|| They made pieces of it and gave it to the ascetics for
sitting on. Knowing this, Shivbhooti came back. ||52|| He stood there, paying
attention, and looked for the flaws in his guru. Another day, the Suris were
describing the Jain principles. ||53||   There are two types of Jain principles.
Some eat with their hands, while others eat with a bowl. ||54|| They are also of
two types, according to the Jain saints. Some wear clothes, while others do not
wear clothes. ||55||   Hearing this, Shivbhooti said, "How are the Jain
principles being followed now? They are not being followed by those who are free
from attachments and without possessions." ||56||   The Suri said, "The Jain
principles have been broken in India. They were broken by Shri Veeraswami's
grandson, Shri Jambuswami." ||57||   He said, "It has been broken for those of
weak character, but not for us. We are of great character and can still follow
it." ||58||   "For those seeking liberation, all possessions must be abandoned,
including clothes, bowls, etc. I will abandon these possessions." ||59||   The
Suris said, "My son, clothes, bowls, etc., are not possessions. They are tools
for Dharma, and therefore, they are not considered possessions." ||60||   "There
is no fault in protecting them for those seeking liberation. It is greed that
hinders liberation, not clothes." ||61||   "The use of clothes, etc., is not a
fault for ascetics, because they are tools for Dharma, just like pure food,
etc." ||62

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 khaNDa:-2 dRSTAntasamuccayaH 123 tadAkA'kharvagarvaH, zivabhUtiracintayat  /
mAtrA'pamAnito'dyA'haM, tadyAmyanyatra kutracit  /  / 40  /  /
yataH-"sthAnasthAdapamAne'pi, dehinastadvaraM rajaH  /  pAdAhataM yadutthAya,
mUrddhAnamadhirohati  /  / 41 /  / " vimRzyeti nijAdnehAdvyAghuTya nagare
bhraman  /  daivAdudghATitadvAraM, sAdhUpAzrayamaikSata  /  / 42 /  /
tatastatra pravizyAryakRSNAcAryAn praNamya tAn  /  mAM pravrAjayatetyUce, te tu
prAvrAjayanna tam  /  / 43 /  /  svayameva tatastena, luJcite, svIyamastake  /
guravo dadire tasmai, liGgaM dharmadhvajAdikam  /  / 44 /  /  tamupAttavrataM
jJAtvA, prAtastatrA''yayau nRpaH  /  mAmanApRcchaya kimidaM, tvayA kRtamiti
bruvan ?  /  / 45 /  /  sa proce pRSTamevaitatsvAtantryaprArthinA mayA  /  tato
nRpastaM natvA'gAdvimanAstadviyogataH  /  / 46 /  /  bahirvihRtya tatrA''guH,
sUrayo'pya'nyadA punaH  /  tadA zivaM nRpaH snehAdAhUya svagRhe'nayat  /  / 47
/  /  anIcchato'pi tasyA'dAdbhUdhavo ratnakambalam  /  tamAdAyAgataM sUriH,
zivabhUtiM tadetyavak  /  / 48 /  /  kimayaM bhavatA vatsa !, jagRhe
ratnakambalaH  /  na hi no bahumUlyasya, vastrAdergrahaNaM matam  /  / 49 /  /
ityukto'pi sa sUrIndraistaM na tatyAja mUrcchayA  /  kintUpadhau gopayitvA,
rarakSa channamanvaham  /  / 50  /  /  asya mUrchAnidAnena, kimaneneti sUrayaH
/  tasmin kvApi gate ratnakambalaM tamakarSayan  /  / 51 /  /  vidhAya tasya
zakalAnniSadyAyai tapasvinAm  /  ArpayaMstaJca vijJAya, zivabhUtiradUyata  /  /
52  /  /  kRtAvahitthastasthau ca, gurozchidrANi mArgayan  /  anyadA
varNayaMzcaivaM, sUrayo jinakalpikAn  /  / 53  /  /  bhavanti
dvividhAstAvajjinakalpikasAdhavaH  /  tatrai ke bhuJjate pANAvanye tvaznanti
pAtrake  /  / 54  /  /  te'pi pratyekamuditA, dvividhA jinapuGgavaiH  /  tatra
vastradharA eke'nye tu cIvaravarjitAH  /  / 55  /  /  zrutvetyAdi
zivo'vocajjinakalpo'dhunA kutaH  /  vidhIyate na
nirgranthairniSparigrahatArthibhiH ?  /  / 56 /  /  sUrirjagAda vyuchinno,
jinakalpo hi bhArate  /  zrIvIrasvAmipautreNa, zrIjambUsvAminA samam  /  / 57  /
/  so'vAdIdalpasattvAnAM, vyuchinno'sau na mAddazAm  /  mAddazo hi mahAsattvaH,
kartumISTe'dhunApyamum  /  / 58  /  /  mokSArthinA hi sakalastyAjya eva
parigrahaH  /  vastrapAtrAdikamapi, tattyakSyAmi parigraham  /  / 59 /  /
sUrayaH procire vatsa !, vastrapAtrAdikaM hyadaH  /  dharmopakaraNaM tena, na
parigraha ucyate  /  / 60 /  /  tadrakSaNe ca no kazciddoSo mokSArthinA bhavet
/  lobhAdeva hi mokSasya, vighnaH syAnna tu cIvarAt  /  / 61 /  /  prayogazcAtra
vastrAdi, na doSAya tapasvinAm  /  dharmopaSTambhadAyitvAt,
zuddhAhArAdivatsphuTam  /  / 62  /  /  na ca heturasiddho'yamiti vAcyaM tvayA
yataH  /  dharmopaSTambhadAyitvaM, tasyA'dhyakSeNa dazyate  /  / 63 /  /  tathA
hi-sthAnopavezanasvApanikSepagrahaNAdiSu  /  jantupramArjanArthaM hi,
rajoharaNamiSyate  /  / 64 /  /  2010_02

Page #165 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Aturapatyakhyanaprakirnakam  **65.**  For the protection of beings like
Sampati, etc., a face-veil is used. For the examination of creatures that
consume food and drink, a vessel is used.  **66.**  For the sake of right faith,
knowledge, conduct, and austerity, the virtuous ones accept robes and other
requisites.  **67.**  Without robes, a monk would be afflicted by cold, heat,
bites, etc., and due to distraction, he would fall from right faith, etc.
**68.**  Thus, the means of Dharma are the support of Dharma.  Therefore, the
acceptance of these by the vow-takers is not wrong, as it is well-established.
**69.**  He who, without the means, wishes to save beings, etc., like the Lord,
would have a fault even in not accepting them.  **70.**  He would not be a true
renunciate, nor would he be a true renunciate again.  And such renunciation does
not exist in India today.  **71.**  Even though it is said that Shiva renounced
everything, he abandoned the tip of his hair.  He abandoned robes, etc., and
became naked, and went out of the city.  ##  Manadhyane
Sriupadeshamalaheyopadeyaavrttivyaavarnitabahubalikathanakah  **124.**  When
Bharata, the Chakravarti, was trying to make his younger brothers accept his
rule, they renounced their kingdoms and became monks under Rishabhadeva.  All of
them attained Kevala Jnana.  Bahubali, however, thought, "How can I accept his
rule or become a monk out of fear?"  He was filled with anger and a battle
ensued between the two brothers.  Bharata, skilled in the use of eyes, fists,
clubs, and weapons, defeated Bahubali.  Bharata thought, "Is this really the
Chakravarti?"  At that moment, the Chakra was given to him by the deity.
Bahubali, seeing Bharata holding the Chakra, thought, "Should I crush him along
with the Chakra?  Or should I kill him, who has abandoned the rules of life?
Oh, how difficult are these worldly desires!  Those who are attached do not
consider what is right and wrong."  As it is said:  **1.**  He does not see his
mother, father, sister, or brother, but sees only the objects of desire, just as
a person who is attached to worldly desires sees only them.  **124.**  Thus,
Bahubali, filled with dispassion, renounced the world and performed the five-
fisted penance.  The deity gave him the power to remove dust, etc.  He took to
monkhood.  Seeing this, Bharata, ashamed of his actions, praised Bahubali in
many ways and returned to his own place.  Bahubali thought, "How can I, who am
in disguise, praise my younger brothers who are Kevalins?"  He remained there,
standing in a state of complete surrender.  A year passed.  His body became like
a pillar scorched by the cold wind, sun, and rain.  Creepers spread all around
him, and blades of grass and thorns grew on him.  Ant-hills formed around his
feet, and birds built their nests on his knees.  The Lord's sisters, Brahmi and
Sundari, went to the young ones and said, "Brother, come down from the pillar."
They went and told him.  He thought, "How can a liberated soul come down from
the pillar?  Ah, I understand!  It is pride."  "Shame on me, you wicked-minded
one!

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 AturapratyAkhyAnaprakIrNakam sampAtimAdisattvAnAM, rakSAyai mukhavastrikAm  /
bhaktapAnasthajantUnAM parIkSAyai ca pAtrakam  /  / 65 /  /
samyaktvajJAnacAritratapAsAdhanahetave  /  cIvarANi ca kalpAdInyaGgIkurvanti
sAdhavaH  /  / 66 /  /  (yugmam) vastrairvinA tu zItoSNadaMzAdibhirupadrutaH  /
apadhyAnAnmunirjAtu, samyaktvAdeH skhaledapi  /  / 67 /  /
dharmopakaraNasyaivaM, dharmopaSTambhadAyitA  /  sunizciteti vratinAM tadAdAnaM
na duSyati  /  /  68  /  /  vinopakaraNaM yastu, jIvAdIMstrAtumizvaraH  /
jinendravattasya doSaH syAttadagrahaNe'pi na sa cAdyasaMhananavAneva
syAnnA'paraH punaH  /  tacca saMhananaM kasyA'pyadhunA nAsti bhArate  /  /  70
/  /  yuktayetyAdikayokto'pi zivo'tyaktakadAgrahaH  /  hitvA vastrAdikaM nagno,
niragAnnagarAdbahiH  /   /  71  /  /  [uttarA0 nihnavadhikAra0 zloka-3 taH 73]
/  /  69  /  /  , 5. mAnadhyAne
zrIupadezamAlAheyopAdeyAvRttivyAvarNitabAhubalIkathAnakaH  /  124 bharate
cakravartini nijAjJAgrAhaNodyate tatkaniSThabhrAtaro vihAya rAjyAni
RSabhadevAntike prAvrAjiSuH  /  samutpannAni ca sarveSAM kevalajJAnAni  /
bAhubalI punastadbhrAtaiva kathamahametadbhayAdAjJAM pravrajyAM vA
kariSyAmItyamarSAdabhyutthitaH saMlagnaM dvayorapi yuddhaM
dRSTivAgbAhumuSTidaNDaprahArayuddheSu nirjito bharataH, cintitamanena kimayaM
cakravartIti ? atrAntare'rpitaM devatayA cakram  /  gRhItacakro dRSTo bAhubalinA
cintitamanena cUrNayAmi sacakramenan athavA kimasya gatamaryAdAjIvitasya
mAraNena ! aho durantA viSayAH  /  yadAsaktA na kurvanti yogyAyogyavicAram  /
yaduktam , ) na mAtaraM na pitaraM, na svasAraM na sodaraM  /  guNaiH sampazyati
tathA, viSayAn viSayI yathA  /  / 1 /  /  iti saJjAtavairAgyeNa tena niHsRSTo
bhuvi daNDaH kRtaH paJcamuSTiko locaH, arpitaM devatayA rajoharaNAdi, prapannaH
pravrajyAM, iti tadavalokya lajjitaH svakarmaNA bharataH prasAdyAnekavidhaM
vanditvA gataH svasthAnam  /  bAhubalI punaH kathamahaM chadmasthatayA kevalino
laghubhrAtRn vandiSye ? ityabhiprAyAtsthitastatraiva kAyotsargeNa tiSThato gataM
varSaM, zItavAtAtapairdavadagdhasthANukalpaM kRtaM zarIrakaM, prasaritAH
samantato vallaryaH, prarUDhA darbhazUcyaH samudgatAzcaraNayorvAlmIkAH, prasUtAH
kUrcAdau zakunaya iti  /  bhagavatA tadbhaginyau brAhmIsundaryo 'bhrAtara !
avatara hastina' iti vaktavyaM gatvA yuvAbhyAmityupadizya tatpArzvaM prahite  /
gatvAbhihitaM tattAbhyAM cintitamanena  /  kuto muktasaGgasya hastI ! A! jJAtaM
! mAna iti  /  dhig mA duSTacittakaM ! vandyAste bhagavanto, vrajAmi vandituM,
ityutpAditaM caraNena saha kevalajJAnamiti  /  yadi garvaM nAkariSyatt tadAdita
evotpATayiSyat  /  ato na madena dharmo bhavatIti sthitam  /  2010_02

Page #166 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Chapter-2: Collection of Examples: 125 5. Verses from the story of Shri
Vishwabhooti, included in the Shri Trishatisalaaka Purushacharitra, about
meditation on the self.  He wandered for many births, having been cast out from
the Brahma Loka. Births are indeed endless, due to the results of one's own
actions. ||1|| From there, in the royal palace, there was a king named
Vishwanandi. His wife was Priyangu, and their son was Vishakhanandi. ||2||
Vishakhabhooti was the prince, the younger brother of the king. The prince had a
beloved wife named Dhaarini. ||3|| Marichijeeva, due to good deeds accumulated
in a previous birth, was born as the son of Vishakhabhooti and Dhaarini, named
Vishwabhooti. ||4|| Vishwabhooti, in his youth, enjoyed himself in the forest,
in the Pushpakarandaka, like a divine prince in Nandana. ||5|| Vishakhanandi,
the king's son, was outside, wanting to play. The maidservants went to gather
flowers, and they saw him there. ||6|| Knowing this, Priyangu, out of anger,
became enraged and went away. The king, wanting to fulfill her desire, sounded
the war drum. ||7|| The valiant Purushasimha, a vassal, said in the assembly, "I
will go to conquer him." He spoke deceitfully. ||8|| Hearing this, Vishwabhooti,
out of devotion, came from the forest and stopped the king from going. ||9|| He
went and saw Purushasimha, who was a king, and he was afraid. He went back to
the Pushpakarandaka forest. ||10|| He was told by the gatekeeper that
Vishakhanandi was inside. He thought, "I have been tricked by the
Pushpakarandaka." ||11|| In anger, he struck a kapittha tree with his fist, and
the fruit fell down. He showed the gatekeeper the ground covered with fruit.
||12|| "I will cause the heads of all of you to fall like this. If you do not
have devotion to me, then it will be worse and worse for you." ||13|| Saying, "I
am deceived by pleasures, wealth, and such things," he went to the feet of
Sambhooti Muni and took vows. ||14|| Hearing that he had become an ascetic, the
king, with his army, went there. He bowed down, begged forgiveness, and
requested him to return to the kingdom. ||15|| Knowing that Vishwabhooti did not
want to return, the king went back home. Vishwabhooti then lived elsewhere with
his guru. ||16|| With the permission of his guru, he practiced austerities in
solitude, becoming thin. He went to the city of Mathura. ||17|| At that time,
Vishakhanandi's son, Udvo, came to Mathura. Vishwabhooti, at the end of the
month, entered the city for his parana. ||18|| Vishakhanandi, having come out of
his camp, saw Vishwabhooti, the prince, and was filled with hatred. ||19||
Vishakhanandi, seeing him immediately, became angry like an enemy. Vishwabhooti,
with a single cow, fell down. ||20|| "You who caused the kapittha fruit to fall,
where are you now?" he laughed. Vishwabhooti, in anger, took the cow by its
horns and swung it around. ||21|| "You have great strength,

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 khaNDaH-2 dRSTAntasamuccaya: 125 5. mAnadhyAne
zrItriSaSTizalAkApuruSacaritrAntargatazrIvizvabhUtikathAzlokAni  /
brahmalokAtparicyutya sa babhrAma bahUn bhavAn  /  bhavo hyanantIbhavati
svakarmapariNAmataH  /  / 1 /  /  itazcAbhUdrAjagRhe vizvanandI mahIpatiH  /
patnyAM priyaMgau vizAkhanandI tasyAbhavatsutaH  /  / 2 /  /
vizAkhabhUtiyuvarAD rAjJastasyAnujo'bhavat  /  yuvarAjasya tasyAbhUddhAriNI
nAmataH priyA  /  / 3 /  /  marIcijIvaH prAgjanmopArjitaiH zubhakarmabhiH  /
vizAkhabhUterdhAriNyAM vizvabhUtiH suto'bhavat  /  / 4 /  /  udyauvano
vizvabhUtirvane puSpakaraNDake  /  reme sAntaH puro devakumAra iva nandane  /  /
5 /  /  vizAkhanandI krIDecchU rATputro'sthAttu tadbahiH  /  puSpAdyarthaM gatA
dAsyo dadRzustau tathAsthitau  /  / 6 /  /  tAbhyo jJAtvA priyaMgustat kopaukaH
kupitA yayau  /  tadIpsitArthaM rAjApi yAtrAbherImavAdayat  /  / 7 /  /
udvRttaH puruSasiMhaH sAmantastajjayAya tat  /  yAsyAmIti sabhAmadhye mAyayA
cAvadannupaH  /  / 8 /  /  tacca zrutvA vizvabhUtijuretya vanAttataH  /  bhaktyA
nivArya rAjAnaM prayANamakarot svayam  /  / 9 /  /  gatazca puruSasiMhaM
dRSTvA''jAvartinaM punaH  /  vavale tatra ca yayau vane puSpakaraNDake  /  / 10
/  /  vizAkhanandI madhye'stItyukto dvAHsthena tatra saH  /  acintayanmAyayA'haM
kRSTaH puSpakaraNDakAt  /  / 11 /  /  kruddhaH kapitthaM muSTyAhaMstatphalaiH
patitairbhuvam  /  chAditAM darzayan so'tha jagAda dvArapAlakam  /  / 12 /  /
pAtayAmi zirAMsyevaM sarveSAM bhavatAM punaH  /  jyAyasI jyAyasi tAte na
cedbhaktirbhavenmama  /  / 13 /  /  bhogairIdRgvaJcanAdyairmamAlamiti sa bruvan
/  saMbhUtimunipAdAnte gatvA vratamupAdade  /  / 14 /  /  taM ca pravrajitaM
zrutvA rAjA sAvarajo'pyagAt  /  natvA ca kSamayitvA ca rAjyAyArthayate sma ca  /
/ 15 /  /  vizvabhUtimanicchantaM jJAtvA bhUpo'gamad gRham  /  tato
vyahArSIdanyatra sa punarguruNA saha  /  / 16 /  /  sa gurvanujJayaikAkivihAreNa
tapaH kRzaH  /  viharatnekadAgacchannagarI mathurAbhidhAm  /  / 17 /  /  tadA
vizAkhanandyAgAdudvo tanRpAtmajAm  /  vizvabhUtizca mAsAnte pAraNAyAvizatpurIm
/  / 18 /  /  vizAkhanandinaH so'tha zibirAbhyarNamAgataH  /  vizvabhUtiH
kumAro'sAvityadarzyata pUruSaiH  /  / 19 /  /  vizAkhanandI taM sadyaH prekSya
dviSamivAkupat  /  gavaikayA vizvabhUtiH paryastazca tadA'patat  /  / 20 /  /
kapitthapAtanaM sthAma kva te cetyahasacca saH  /  dhRtvA gAM
zRGgayorvizvabhUtizcAbhramayatkrudhA  /  / 21 /  /  bhUyiSThavIryo bhUyAsaM
mRtyave'sya bhavAntare  /  anena tapasogreNa nidAnamiti so'karot  /  / 22 /  /
saMpUrya koTivarSAyuranAlocya ca tanmRtaH  /  vizvabhUtirmahAzukre prakRSTAyuH
suro'bhavat  /  / 23 /  /  triSaSTi0 10 parva0 zloka0 85 ta : 107] 2010_02

Page #167 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter 126: The Scattering of Eager Refusal  **5. The Story of Parashurama,
Included in the **Shree Trishatishalakapurushacharitra** **Under the Cycle of
the Great Earth Emperor**  The story of the eighth in the lineage of the Great
Earth Emperor, who was a Tirthankara, will be told, as it was created by Arati.
1. In the land of Bharata, in the great city, there was a king named Bhupala,
who protected the Kshatriya vows.  2. He was defeated in a battle by many
enemies who had united, a stronger force.  3. Defeated by his enemies, his face
stained with the dirt of humiliation, he took refuge in the feet of the Muni and
embraced the life of a wandering ascetic.  4. He ended his enjoyment of kingship
and, as a result of his penance, became a celestial being in the realm of the
great Shukra.  5. From him, a son was born, named Kuru, after whom the land of
Kuru was named. His son was named Hastin, after whom Hastinapur was named.  6.
Hastinapur was the birthplace of the Tirthankara, the Great Earth Emperor.  7.
From him, a great-armed king named Anantavirya ruled there.  8. In the land of
Bharata, in the city of Vasantpur, there was a man named Agni, whose lineage had
been cut off.  9. He left that place and traveled to another land, carrying
goods and wandering. He reached the hermitage of a sage.  10. The sage took Agni
as his son and he became known as Jamadagni in the world.  11. He practiced
intense penance, like a fire burning brightly, his brilliance unbearable on the
earth.  12. At that time, the celestial being Vaishvanara, who was known by that
name in his previous birth, and Dhanvantari, a devotee of the sages, argued.
13. One said that the right to food was the only dharma, while the other said
that the right to food was determined by the sages.  14. In this dispute between
the sages, they decided to have a test.  15. They said, "Whoever is the most
inferior in the worthy, and whoever is the most superior among the sages, should
be tested. By what qualities do they surpass each other?"  16. At that time, in
the city of Mithila, adorned with nine virtues, a noble man named Padmaratha was
traveling on the earth.  17. He was a sage who was about to receive initiation
at the end of the Vasu Puja. While traveling to Champapuri, he saw those two
celestial beings on the path.  18. Desiring to test them, the king offered them
food and drink. Though thirsty and hungry, they remained steadfast in their
resolve, their minds unwavering.  19. The king, with cruel thorns like a crab,
inflicted pain on the soft lotus feet of the two celestial beings.  20. Blood
flowed from their feet, but even in such a difficult journey, they walked as
gracefully as a feather.  21. They did not react to the king's insults, songs,
and dances, just as a divine weapon is ineffective against its own lineage.  22.
Appearing before him in the form of the sons of Siddhas, they said, "O great
one, you have many years left to live.  23. Enjoy your pleasures freely. What is
the use of penance in youth? Who, even if industrious, would do their work at
night and in the morning?

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 126 AturapratyAkhyAnaprakIrNakam 5. mAnadhyAne
zrItriSaSTizalAkApuruSacaritrAntargatasubhUmacakravartiparazurAmAkhyAnakaH  /
aratIrthakRtastIrthe subhUmasyAtha cakriNaH  /  aSTamasya kramAyAtaM caritaM
kIrtayiSyate  /  / 1 /  /  ihaiva bharatakSetre vizAlanagare'bhavat  /  bhUpAlo
nAma bhUpAlaH pAlayan kSatriyavratam  /  / 2 /  /  so'nyadaikatra saMgrAme
bahubhiH paripanthibhiH  /  ekIbhUya parAjigye vRndaM hi balavattaram  /  / 3 /
/  sa vairibhiH parAbhUto'pamAnamalinAnanaH  /  saMbhUtamunipAdAnte
parivrajyAmupAdade  /  / 4 /  /  prabhutvabhogaviSayaM nidAnaM tapaso'tha saH  /
kRtvAvasAnaM cAsAdya mahAzukre suro'bhavat  /  / 5 /  /  itazcarSabhanAthasya
kururityabhavat sutaH  /  yasya nAmnA kurudezo hastinAmnA ca tatsutaH  /  / 6 /
/  yannAmnA hAstinapuraM tIrthakRccakrijanmabhUH  /
tadvaMzyo'naMtavIryo'bhUttatra rAjA mahAbhujaH  /  / 7 /  /  itazca
bharatakSetre vasaMtapurapattane  /  ucchinnavaMza eko'bhUdagniko nAma dArakaH
/  / 8 /  /  so'nyadA calitastasmAt sthAnAddezAntaraM prati  /  sArthAddhInaH
paribhrAmyannagamattApasAzramam  /  / 9 /  /  tamagniM tanayatvenAgrahIt
kulapatirjanaH  /  jamadagniriti khyAtiM sa lokeSu tato'gamat  /  / 10 /  /
tapyamAnastapastIvra pratyakSa iva pAvakaH  /  tejasA duHsahenAsau paprathe
pRthivItale  /  / 11 /  /  tadA ca zrAddhaH prAgjanmanAmnA vaizvAnaraH suraH  /
dhanvaMtarizca tApasabhakto vyavadatAmiti  /  / 12 /  /  eka AhArhatAM dharmaH
pramANamitaraH punaH  /  tApasAnAM vivAde'smin vyadhAtAmiti nirNayam  /  / 13 /
/  ArhateSu jaghanyo yaH prakRSTastApaseSu yaH  /  parIkSaNIyAvAvAbhyAM ko
guNairatiricyate  /  / 14 /  /  tadAnI mithilApuryA navadharmapariSkRtaH  /
zrImAn padmaratho nAma prasthitaH pRthivItale  /  / 15 /  /  dIkSAM sa
vAsupUjyAnte grahItuM bhAvato yatiH  /  gacchaMzcaMpApurI tAbhyAM devAbhyAM
dadRze pathi  /  / 16 /  /  parIkSAkAMkSayA tAbhyAM pAnAnne Dhaukite nRpaH  /
tRSitaH kSudhito'pyaujjhaddhIrAH sattvAccalanti na  /  / 17 /  /  krakacairiva
cakrAte krUraiH karkarakaMTakaiH  /  pIDAM devau nRdevasya mRdunoH pAdapadmayoH
/  / 18 /  /  pAdAbhyAM prakSaradraktadhArAbhyAM tAdRze'dhvani  /
tUlikAtalavaccAru saMcacAra tathApi saH  /  / 19 /  /  nirmame gItanRttAdi
tAbhyAM kSobhAya bhUpateH  /  tanmoghamabhavattatra divyAstramiva gotraje  /  /
20 /  /  tau siddhaputrarUpeNa purobhUyedamUcatuH  /  tavAdyApi mahAbhAga
mahadAyuyuvAsi ca  /  / 21 /  /  svacchandaM bhuMkSva tadbhogAn kA
dhIryadyauvane tapaH  /  nizIthakRtyaM kaH prAtaH kuryAdudyogavAnapi  /  / 22 /
/  yauvane tadatikrAnte dehadaurbalyakAraNam  /  gRhNIyAstvaM tapastAta
dvitIyamiva vArdhakam  /  / 23 /  /  rAjoce yadi bahvAyurbahupuNyaM bhaviSyati
/  jalamAnena nalinInAlaM hi parivardhate  /  / 24  /  /  2010_02

Page #168 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Chapter:-2 Collection of Examples 127 The austerity performed by one with
unsteady senses in youth is not austerity indeed. The warrior who is brave in
battle with a dreadful weapon is called brave. ||25|| Seeing him steadfast in
his resolve, the two sages said, "He is virtuous, he is virtuous." ||26|| They
went to test the great ascetic Jamadagni. ||26|| They saw him with his matted
hair spread out like a banyan tree, his feet covered with dust, and subdued.
||27|| A pair of cuckoos, having made a nest in the tangle of his matted hair by
magic, settled there. ||28|| The cuckoo said to the female cuckoo, "I will go to
the Himalayas. You are not attached to anyone else, so you will come with me."
||29|| "I am bound by an oath that I will not go if I am caught in the sin of
killing a cow. My dear, I will not go." ||30|| The cuckoo said to the female
cuckoo, "If you swear that you will not be caught by this sage, my dear, I will
release you. May your journeys be auspicious." ||31|| Hearing these words, the
sage Jamadagni became angry and seized both the birds with his two hands. ||32||
Then he said, "While performing difficult austerities, what kind of sin is this
in me, like darkness in the midst of the rays of the sun?" ||33|| Then the sage
said to the cuckoo, "Do not be angry in vain. You have heard that a childless
man has no way, haven't you?" ||34|| Thinking thus, the sage pondered, "My
austerity is like a thread in a stream for the sake of my wife and son." ||35||
Seeing him agitated and thinking, "He is bewildered by asceticism," Dhanvantari
was born. Who can deny that he was born from the merit of the funeral rites?
||36|| The two celestial beings became invisible then. Jamadagni reached the
city of Nemikakoshtaka. ||37|| He went there to get a wife, like Shiva who went
to get Gauri. ||38|| The king, rising from his seat, folded his hands and said
to him, "Why have you come? What do you want me to do?" ||39|| When the sage
said, "I have come for a wife," the king said, "There are a hundred daughters in
my palace. Choose whichever you want." ||40|| Going into the palace, he
addressed the king's daughters, "Which of you will be my wife?" ||41|| He was
matted, gray-haired, emaciated, and a beggar. Hearing this, they said, "Are you
not ashamed?" ||42|| Like a furious wind, the sage Jamadagni then took up his
bow and arrows and made the daughters hunchbacked. ||43|| Then, in the
courtyard, he saw one of the king's daughters, who was playing with a pile of
dust, and said to her, "You are Renukā." ||44|| He said to her, "Do you want
me?" and showed her the sign of a husband. She extended her hand, indicating her
acceptance. ||45|| The sage took her hand and rejoiced like a miser who has
found treasure. The king gave her to him along with cows and other things,
according to the custom. ||46|| He was jealous, and because of his affection, he
desired one less daughter. He prepared to perform austerities, which are a waste
for fools. ||47|| Taking her to his hermitage, the

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 khaNDa:-2 dRSTAntasamuccayaH 127 lolendriye yauvane hi yattapastattapo nanu  /
dAruNAstre raNe yo hi zUraH zUraH sa ucyate  /  / 25 /  /  tasminnacalite
sattvAt sAdhu sAdhviti vAdinau  /  tau gatau tApasotkRSTaM jamadagniM parIkSitum
/  / 26 /  /  nyagrodhamiva vistArijaTAsaMspRSTabhUtalam  /
valmIkAkIrNapAdAntaM dAntaM tau tamapazyatAm  /  / 27 /  /  tasya zmazrulatAjAle
nIDaM nirmAya mAyayA  /  tadaiva devau caTakamithunIbhUya tasthatuH  /  / 28 /
/  caTakazcaTakAmUce yAsyAmi himavadgirau  /  anyAsakto neSyasi tvamiti taM
nApyamasta sA  /  / 29 /  /  goghAtapAtakenAhaM gRhye nAyAmi cetpriye  /
ityuktazapathaM bhUyazcaTakaM caTakAbravIt  /  / 30 /  /  RSerasyainasA gRhye
zapethA iti cet priya  /  visRjAmi tadaiva tvAM paMthAnaH santu te zivAH  /  /
31 /  /  ityAkarNya vacaH kruddho jamadagnimunistataH  /  ubhAbhyAmapi
hastAbhyAmubhau jagrAha pakSiNau  /  / 32 /  /  AcacakSe tataH so'pi kurvANe
duSkaraM tapaH  /  uSNarazmAviva dhvAMtamAH pApaM mayi kIdRzam  /  / 33 /  /
atharSi caTakovAca mA kupaste mudhA tapaH  /  aputrasya gatirnAstItyazrauSIstvaM
na kiM zrutim  /  / 34  /  /  tatheti manyamAnastu munirevamacintayat  /
mamAkalatraputrasya pravAhe sUtritaM tapaH  /  / 35 /  /  /  taM dRSTvA
kSubhitaM dhyAyan bhramitastApasairiti  /  jajJe dhanvantariH zrAddhaH pratyeti
pratyayAnna kaH  /  / 36 /  /  babhUvaturadRzyau ca tAvapi tridazau tadA  /
jamadagnizca saMprApa puraM nemikakoSTakam  /  / 37 /  /  - jitazatru mahIpAlaM
tatra bhUyiSThakanyakam  /  sa prepsuH kanyakAmekAM gaurI hara ivAgamat  /  / 38
/  /  kRtvAbhyutthAnamurvIzaH prAMjalistamabhASata  /  kimarthamAgatA yUyaM
brUta kiM karavANyaham  /  / 39 /  /  kanyArthamAgato'smIti muninokte'bravInRpaH
/  madhye zatasya kanyAnAM tvAM yecchati gRhANa tAm  /  / 40  /  /  sa kanyAntaH
pure gatvA jagAda nRpakanyakAH  /  dharmapatnI mama kAcidbhavatIbhyo bhavatviti
/  / 41 /  /  jaTilaH palitaH kSAmo bhikSAjIvI vadannidam  /  na lajjase tvamiti
tAH kRtakRtkAramUcire  /  / 42  /  /  samIraNa iva kruddho jamadagnirmunistataH
/  adhijyeSvAsayaSTyAbhAH kanyAH kubjIcakAra tAH  /  / 43 /  /  athAMgaNe
reNupuMjai ramamANAM nRpAtmajAm  /  ekAmAlokayAmAsa reNuketyabravIcca tAm  /  /
44  /  /  sa tasyA icchasItyuktvA mAtuliMgamadarzayat  /  tayA prasAritaH pANiH
pANigrahaNasUcakaH  /  / 45 /  /  tAM muniH parijagrAha roro dhanamivorasA  /
sArdhaM gavAdibhistasya dadau ca vidhivannRpaH  /  / 46 /  /  sa zyAlIH
snehasaMbaMdhAdekonaM kanyakAzatam  /  sajjIcakre tapaHzaktyA dhiGmUDhAnAM
tapovyayaH  /  / 47 /  /  nItvAzramapadaM tAM ca sumugdhamadhurAkRtim  /
hariNImiva lolAkSI premNA muniravardhayat  /  / 48  /  /  aMgulIbhirgaNayato
dinAnyasya tapasvinaH  /  yauvanaM cArukaMdarpalIlAvanamavApa sA  /  / 49 /  /
_ 2010_02

Page #169 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter 128: The Scattering of the Eager Refusal  Witnessing the blazing
fire, Jamadagni Muni then, like Bhutesha to Parvati, properly married her.
||50|| In due season, he said to her, "I will prepare the offering for you, so
that a son, blessed like the head of a Brahmin, may be born." ||51|| He then
told the king of Hastinapur, Anantavirya, "My sister has a wife, and for her, a
Kshatriya offering should also be prepared." ||52|| He prepared a Brahmin
offering for his righteous sister, and a Kshatriya offering for the other. He
prepared the offering to obtain a son. ||53|| She thought, "I was a deer in the
forest. May my son not be like me," and she ate the Kshatriya offering. ||54||
She received the Brahmin offering, and from her sister's lineage, two sons were
born to them. There, Rama was born to Renukā, and Kritavirya was born to her
sister. ||55|| Once, a certain Vidhyadhara, suffering from dysentery, came
there. His knowledge, like a celestial being, was forgotten due to the
dysentery. ||56|| Rama, treating him like his own brother, cured him with
medicines. The Vidhyadhara, grateful to Rama, gave him the Parashu Vidya. ||57||
Going to the Madhyeshvara forest, he mastered that knowledge. From then on, Rama
became known as Parashurama. ||58|| The other day, Renukā's sister, anxious
about her husband, went to Hastinapur. There was no distance between them in
love. ||59|| Anantavirya, like Indra to the Rishi wife, Ahalya, enjoyed the
pleasures of love with Renukā, who was captivated by his love. ||60|| A son was
born to Renukā from Anantavirya, like a son born to a righteous wife of
Brihaspati. ||62|| The Muni, along with his son, brought Renukā back. Lustful
men generally do not see any fault in women. ||63|| Seeing his mother, like a
vine bearing unripe fruit, with her son, Parashurama, filled with anger, cut her
with his axe. ||64|| This incident was told to Anantavirya by his sister. It
ignited his anger like the wind to a dry tree. ||65|| Then, Anantavirya, the
king, filled with rage, went to Jamadagni's hermitage, like a wild elephant.
||66|| He terrified the ascetics, took their cows and other possessions, and
slowly circled around, like a lion. ||67|| Hearing this story and knowing the
truth, the ascetic, filled with fear, Parashurama, ran towards him, like Yama
himself. ||68|| Eager for battle, Jamadagni's son, like a fierce warrior,
chopped Anantavirya into pieces, like wood. ||69|| He established his rule with
the help of his natural warriors. Kritavirya, a great warrior, was still young.
||70|| He had a queen, Tara, with eyes like stars. They enjoyed their pleasures
without any hindrance, like the immortals. ||71|| Even though he was a king, he
fulfilled his lifespan. He was born from Tara's womb, having been expelled from
the womb of Mahashukra. ||72|| Once, Kritavirya, hearing his father's story from
his mother, went to Jamadagni and killed him, like a lion. ||73|| Rama, enraged
by the killing of his father, went to Hastin

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 128 AturapratyAkhyAnaprakIrNakam sAkSIkRtya jvaladagniM jamadagnimunistataH  /
yathAvadupayeme tAM bhUteza iva pArvatIm  /  / 50  /  /  RtukAle sa Uce tAM
caruM te sAdhayAmyaham  /  yathA brAhmaNamUrdhanyo dhanya utpadyate sutaH  /  /
51 /  /  sovAca hAstinapure'naMtavIryasya bhUpateH  /  patnyasti matsvasA tasyai
caruH kSAtro'pi sAdhyatAm  /  / 52  /  /  brAhmaM sadharmacAriNyai kSAtraM
tajjAmaye'param  /  sa caruM sAdhayAmAsa putrIyamupajIvitum  /  / 53 /  /
sAcintayadahaM tAvadabhUvamaTavI mRgI  /  mAbhUnmAdRk suto'pIti kSAtraM
carumabhakSayat  /  / 54  /  /  sAdAdbrAhmaM caruM svasra jAtau ca tanayau tayoH
/  tatra rAmo reNukAyAH kRtavIryazca tatsvasuH  /  / 55 /  /  vidyAdharo'nyadA
tatra ko'pyAgAdatisArakI  /  vidyA tasyAtisArAA vismRtAkAzagAminI  /  / 56 /  /
rAmeNa praticarito bheSajAdyaiH svabandhuvat  /  rAmAya sevamAnAya vidyAM
pArazavIM dadau  /  / 57 /  /  madhyezaravaNaM gatvA tAM ca vidyAmasAdhayat  /
rAmaH parazurAmo'bhUttataH prabhRti vizrutaH  /  / 58 /  /  anyedyuH
patimApRcchaya reNukotkaMThitA svasuH  /  jagAma hAstinapure premNo dUre na
kiMcana  /  / 59 /  /  zyAlIti lAlayan lolalocanAM tatra reNukAm  /  anaMtavIryo
ramayat kAmaH kAmaM niraMkuzaH  /  / 60  /  /  RSipatnyA tayA rAjAhalyayeva
puraMdaraH  /  anvabhUcca yathAkAmaM saMbhogasukhasaMpadam  /  / 61 /  /
anaMtavIryAttanayo reNukAyAmajAyata  /  mamatAyAmivotathyaH sadharmiNyAM
bRhaspateH  /  / 62 /  /  tenApi saha putreNa reNukAmAnayanmuniH  /  strINAM
lubdho janaH prAyo doSaM na khalu vIkSate  /  / 63  /  /  tAM putrasahitAM
vallImakAlaphalitAmiva  /  saMjAtakopaH parazurAmaH parazunAcchidat  /  / 64  /
/  tadbhaginyA sa vRttAMto'naMtavIryasya zaMsitaH  /  kopamuddIpayAmAsa
kRzAnumiva mArutaH  /  / 65 /  /  tatazcAvAryadovIryo'naMtavIryo mahIpatiH  /
jamadagnyAzramaM gatvAbhAMkSInmatta iva dvipaH  /  / 66 /  /  tApasAnAM
kRtatrAsaH samAdAya gavAdi saH  /  maMdaM maMdaM parikrAman kesarIva nyavartata
/  / 67 /  /  trasyattapasvitumulaM zrutvA jJAtvA ca tAM kathAm  /  kruddhaH
parazurAmo'thAdhAvat sAkSAdivAntakaH  /  / 68  /  /  subhaTagrAmasaMgrAmakautukI
jamadagnijaH  /  pazunA khaMDazazcakre dAruvaddAruNena tam  /  / 69 /  /  rAjye
nivezayAMcakre tasya prakRtipUruSaiH  /  kRtavIryo mahAvIryaH sa eva tu
vayolaghuH  /  / 70  /  /  tasyAbhavacca mahiSI tArA tAravilocanA  /  bubhujAte
ca tau bhogAnavighnamamarAviva  /  / 71 /  /  bhUpAlarAjajIvo'pi svamAyuH
paripUrya saH  /  mahAzukrAt paricyutya tArAkukSAvavAtarat  /  / 72 /  /
kRtavIryo'nyadA mAturmukhAcchrutvA pituH kathAm  /  AdiSTAhirivAgatya
jamadagnimamArayat  /  / 73  /  /  rAmaH pitRvadhakruddho drAggatvA hastinApure
/  amArayatkRtavIryaM kiM yamasya davIyasi  /  / 74  /  /  2010_02

Page #170 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Chapter:-2 Collection of Examples 129 Jamadagni then entered his kingdom
himself. For a kingdom is subject to prowess, not to lineage or order. ||75||
The queen of the king Kritavirya, who had been invaded by Rama, went to the
hermitage of the ascetics, like a tigress from a forest ravaged by tigers.
||76|| She secretly deposited her wealth and treasures within the earth-house,
like a treasure, and it was guarded by the ascetics from the cruel Parashurama.
||77|| Her son was born, as indicated by fourteen great dreams. He happily
acquired the earth and was therefore called Subhūma. ||78|| Wherever there was a
Kshatriya, there he shone. He was like the embodiment of the fire of
Parashurama's anger. ||79|| Rama once went to that hermitage, and the beast
blazed. The Kshatriya power was indicated by the smoke, like a flag that had
been burnt. ||80|| "Is there a Kshatriya here?" asked Rama. The ascetics, who
had become ascetics, said, "We are Kshatriyas." ||81|| Rama, in his anger,
destroyed the earth seven times, making it devoid of Kshatriyas, like a forest
fire that consumes the grass and leaves only the bare rocks. ||82|| Rama filled
the earth with the teeth of the slain Kshatriyas, like Yama, the god of death,
who is full of desires and has a full vessel of prosperity. ||83|| Rama asked,
"Why is my death destined? For those who are always hostile to me, death comes
from afar." ||84|| "Those who are the teeth of the earth, who are seated on the
throne here, will eat you. Therefore, your death is imminent," they said. ||85||
Rama then had a sacrificial hall built, which was well-guarded. He placed the
throne on the ground in front of it. ||86|| Then, in the hermitage, Subhūma, who
was twenty-eight years old and had a golden complexion, went to the courtyard,
like a tree that had grown miraculously. ||87|| The celestial being, Megha-nāda,
asked, "My daughter, to whom should she be given? For she is not destined for an
ordinary man." ||88|| They advised him to give her to Subhūma, who was the most
worthy suitor. After giving her daughter to him, he became his servant. ||89||
Subhūma, like a well-digger who is alone and has no other protector, asked his
mother, "Is this world small, or is it even greater?" ||90|| His mother said,
"The world is infinite, my son. This hermitage is only a speck in the world,
like the foot of a fly." ||91|| "In this world, there is a famous city called
Hastinapura. Your father, Kritavirya, was the king there, a great warrior."
||92|| "Rama killed your father and took the kingdom for himself. He made the
earth devoid of Kshatriyas. We are here because of fear of him." ||93|| At that
time, Subhūma, who was as bright as the sun, went to Hastinapura, filled with
anger against his enemy. For the power of a Kshatriya is difficult to control.
||94|| He went to the sacrificial hall, like a lion entering his throne. He, the
strong-armed one, devoured those who were the teeth of the earth. ||95|| The
Brahmanas, who were the protectors

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 khaNDa:-2 dRSTAntasamuccayaH 129 jAmadagnyastatastasya rAjye nyavizata svayam
/  rAjyaM hi vikramAdhInaM na pramANaM kramAkramau  /  / 75  /  /
rAmAkrAMtapurAdrAjJI kRtavIryasya gurviNI  /
vyAghrAghrAtavanAdeNIvAgamattApasAzramam  /  / 76  /  /  kRpAdhanairbhUgRhAntaH
sA nidhAya nidhAnavat  /  tapasviMbhirgopyate sma krUrAt parazurAmataH  /  / 77
/  /  caturdazamahAsvapnasUcito'syAH suto'jani  /  gRhNan bhUmiM sukhenAbhUt
subhUmo nAmatastataH  /  / 78  /  /  kSatriyo yatra yatrAsIttatra
tatrApyadIpyata  /  pazuH parazurAmasya kopAgniriva mUrtimAn  /  / 79  /  /
rAmo'gAdanyadA tatrAzrame pazuzca so'jvalat  /  kSatraM cAsUcayaddhUma iva
dhUtadhvajaM tadA  /  / 8 /  /  kimatra kSatriyo'stIti pRSTAstena tapasvinaH  /
ityUcustApasIbhUtAH kSatriyA vayamAsmahe  /  / 81 /  /  rAmo'pyamarSAniHkSatrAM
saptakRtvo vasuMdharAm  /  nirmame nistRNAM zailataTImiva davAnalaH  /  / 82 /
/  kSuNNakSatriyadaMSTrAbhI rAmaH sthAlamapUrayat  /  yamasya pUrNakAmasya
pUrNapAtrazriyaM dadhat  /  / 83 /  /  rAmaH papraccha naimittAnayedhurme kuto
vadhaH  /  sadA vairAyamANA hi zaMkaMte parato mRtim  /  / 84  /  /  yo daMSTrAH
pAyasIbhUtAH siMhAsana iha sthitaH  /  bhokSyate'mUstatastyaste vadho bhAvIti
te'bruvan  /  / 85  /  /  rAmo'tha kArayAmAsa satrAgAramavAritam  /  dhuri
siMhAsanaM tatrAsthApayat sthAlamagrataH  /  / 86 /  /  athAzrame
svarNavarNo'STAviMzatidhanUnatiH  /  gato'GgaNadruma iva subhUmo vRddhimadbhutAm
/  / 87  /  /  vidyAdharo meghanAdo'nyevUnaimittikAniti  /  paripapraccha
padmazrIH kanyA me kasya dIyatAm  /  / 88 /  /  tasyA varaM varIyAMsaM subhUmaM
te'pyupAdizan  /  datvA kanyAM tatastasmai tasyaivAbhUt sa sevakaH  /  / 89 /  /
kUpabheka ivAnanyagopaH papraccha mAtaram  /  subhUmaH kimiyAneva
loko'yamadhiko'pi kim  /  / 90  /  /  mAtApyacIkathadatho loko'nanto hi vatsaka
/  makSikApadamAtraM hi lokamadhye'yamAzramaH  /  / 91  /  /  asmi~lloke'sti
vikhyAtaM nagaraM hastinApuram  /  pitA te kRtavIryo'bhUttatra rAjA mahAbhujaH
/  / 92 /  /  hatvA te pitaraM rAmo rAjyaM svayamazizriyat  /  kSitiM
niHkSatriyAM cakre tiSThAmastadbhayAdiha  /  / 13 /  /  tatkAlaM hAstinapure
subhUmo bhaumavajjvalan  /  jagAma vairiNo kruddhaH kSAtraM tejo hi durdharam  /
/ 94  /  /  tatra satre yayau siMha iva siMhAsane'vizat  /  daMSTrAstAH
pAyasIbhUtAH subhujo bubhuje ca saH  /  / 15 /  /  uttiSThamAnA yuddhAya
brAhmaNAstatra rakSakAH  /  janire meghanAdena vyAgheNa hariNA iva  /  / 96 /  /
prasphuradaMSTrikAkezo dazanairadharaM dazan  /  tato rAmaH krudhA kAlapAzAkRSTa
ivAyayau  /  / 97  /  /  rAmeNa mumuce roSAt subhUmAya parazvadhaH  /
vidhyAtastatkSaNaM tasmin sphuliMga iva vAriNi  /  / 98  /  /  zastrAbhAvAt
subhUmo'pi daMSTrAsthAlamudakSipat  /  cakrIbabhUva tatsadyaH kiM na syAt
puNyasampadaH  /  / 99 /  /  _ 2010_02

Page #171 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter 130: The Scattering of the Eagerly Rejected  The eighth Chakravarti,
the radiant one, with his wheel, severed the head of Parashurama, like a lotus
being cut. ||100||  Just as Rama made the earth devoid of Kshatriyas seven
times, so did this one make it devoid of Brahmanas twenty-one times. ||101||
With his army, filled with the dust of the earth, the hooves of horses, and the
blood of the slain, he advanced towards the east, conquering the eastern
direction. ||102||  His land, adorned with the severed heads of countless
warriors, he, like another lord of the south, attacked the south. ||103||  With
the bones and teeth of warriors, like oysters and conch shells, he blocked the
ocean and conquered the western direction. ||104||  He, the great king, with his
army, whose strength was revealed by the roar of the war drums, entered the
northern region to conquer the Mlechchas. ||105||  There, he, like a great fire,
consumed the Mlechchas, the earth being drenched with the blood of the slain.
||106||  To Megha-nada, for his conquest of the two mountain ranges, the
Vaitalya and the Girishreya, the Chakravarti, the great king, bestowed the
position of the king of the Vidyadharas. ||107||  He, with a lifespan of sixty
thousand years, wandered in all four directions, conquering the six continents,
slaying countless warriors. ||108||  He, with his inner self constantly burning
with the fire of the fierce meditation on the non-violent, illuminating the path
of the virtuous, attained death due to the course of time and went to the
seventh hell, the earth of the wicked. ||109||  He spent five thousand years as
a prince, five hundred years as a king, half a lakh years in victory, and five
hundred years less than that as a Chakravarti. ||110||  ## 5. The Story of the
Assembly in the Tri-Sixty-Laka-Purusha  At that time, Sakra was in the assembly
of Sudharma, surrounded by eighty thousand celestial beings. ||1||  There were
thirty-three assemblies, each with thirty-three members, and four Lokapalas,
along with countless scattered beings. ||2||  Each assembly had eighty thousand
bodyguards, with strong weapons, ready for battle in all four directions. ||3||
There were seven commanders, each with their own army, along with gods and
goddesses, and those who were guilty of various offenses. ||4||  They spent
their time with music, entertainment, and amusement, Sakra, the lion king,
sitting on his throne, guarding the southern half of the universe. ||5||
Knowing by his knowledge of the future that the Bhagavan was present, he rose,
discarding his sandals and upper garment. ||6||  He placed his left knee on the
ground, and bowed his head, touching the earth with his right hand. ||7||
Rising, with all his body trembling and his hair standing on end, the lord of
Sachi addressed the entire assembly. ||8||  "O, all you inhabitants of Sudharma,
the best of the gods! Listen to the wondrous glory of the great Lord Mahavira."
||9||  "He, who possesses the five vows, purified by the three secrets, free
from anger, pride, deceit, and greed, without any attachment." ||10||  "He,
whose mind is not attached to wealth, land, time, or emotions, whose eyes are
fixed on the subtle particles, and whose mind is absorbed in meditation." ||11||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 130 AturapratyAkhyAnaprakIrNakama cakravartyaSTamaH so'tha tena cakreNa
bhAsvatA  /  ziraH parazurAmasya paMkajacchedamacchidat  /  / 100  /  /  kSitiM
niHkSatriyAM rAmaH saptakRtvo yathA vyadhAt  /  ekaviMzatikRtvastAM tathA
nirbrAhmaNAmasau  /  / 101 /  /  kSuNNakSitipahastyazvapadAtivyUhalohitaiH  /
vAhayan vAhinInavyAH sa prAk prAcImasAdhayat  /  / 102  /  /  sa
cchinnAnekasubhaTamuMDamaMDitabhUtala:  /  AkrAmaddakSiNAM
dakSiNAzApatirivAparaH  /  / 103 /  /  bhaTAsthibhidaMturayan
zuktizaMkhairivAbhitaH  /  rogho nIranidheH so'tha pratIcImajayaddizam  /  / 104
/  /  helodghATitavaitADhyakaMdaraM sthAmamaMdaraH  /  mlecchAn vijetuM
bharatottarakhaMDaM viveza saH  /  / 105  /  /
ucchalacchoNitarasacchaTAcchuritabhUtala:  /  mlecchAMstatrAtha
so'bhAMkSIdikSUniva mahAkarI  /  / 106 /  /  meghanAdAya
vaitADhyagirizreNyordvayorapi  /  vidyAdharendrapadavIM subhUmazcakrabhRddadau
/  / 107  /  /  SaSTivarSasahasrAyuzcaturdizamiti bhraman  /  nihatya
subhaTAnuvarvI sa SaTkhaMDAmasAdhayat  /  / 108  /  /  ujjAsayannasumatAmiti
nityaraudradhyAnAnalena satataM jvaladantarAtmA  /  AsAdya kAlapariNAmavazena
mRtyuM tAM saptamI narakabhUmimagAt subhUmaH  /  / 109 /  /
kumArabhAve'bdasahasrapaMcakaM tanmaMDalitve'tha zatAni paMca  /
jaye'rdhalakSaM punarabdapaMcazatyUnamasyAjani cakrabhRttve  /  / 110  /  /  5.
mAnadhyAne zrItriSaSTizalAkApuruSA'ntargatA saGgamakathA  /  tadA zakraH
sudharmAyAM sabhAyAM parivAritaH  /  sahasrezcaturazItyA sAmAnikadivaukasAm  /
/ 1 /  /  trayastriMzattrAyastriMzaiH parSadbhistisRbhistathA  /
caturbhirlokapAlaizca saMkhyAtItaiH prakIrNakaiH  /  / 2 /  /  pratyekaM
caturazItyA sahasrairaMgarakSakaiH  /  dRDhAbaddhaparikaraiH kakupsu catasRSvapi
/  / 3 /  /  senAdhipatibhiH senAparivItaizca saptabhiH  /
devadevIgaNairAbhiyogyaiH kilbiSikAdibhiH  /  / 4 /  /  tUryatrayAdibhiH kAlaM
vinodairativAhayan  /  goptA dakSiNalokArdhaM zakrasiMhAsane sthitaH  /  / 5 /
/  avadhijJAnato jJAtvA bhagavantaM tathA sthitam  /  utthAya pAduke
tyaktvottarAsaMgaM vidhAya ca  /  / 6 /  /  jAnvasavyaM bhuvi nyasya savyaM ca
nyaMcya kiMcana  /  zakrastavenAvandiSTa bhUtalanyastamastakaH  /  / 7 /  /
samutthAya ca sarvAMgodaJcadromAJcakaJcakaH  /  zacIpatiruvAcedamuddizya sakalAM
sabhAm  /  / 8 /  /  bho bhoH sarve'pi saudharmavAsinastridazottamAH !  /
zRNuta zrImahAvIrasvAmino mahimAdbhutam  /  / 9 /  /  dadhAnaH
paJcasamitIrguptitrayapavitritaH  /  krodhamAnamAyAlobhAnabhibhUto nirAzravaH  /
/ 10 /  /  dravye kSetre ca kAle ca bhAve cA'pratibaddhadhIH  /
rUkSakapudgalanyastanayano dhyAnamAsthitaH  /  / 11 /  /  2010_02

Page #172 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Chapter: - 2 Collection of Examples 131 Neither by immortals, nor by demons, nor
by Yakshas, nor by Rakshasas, nor by gods, nor by men, nor even by the entire
three worlds, can the Arhat be disturbed by meditation. || 12 || Hearing these
words of Shakra, a god of Shakra's assembly, with a terrible frown formed by his
furrowed brow, || 13 || with trembling lower lip, with bloodshot eyes, and with
a deep attachment to false beliefs, spoke to the assembly. || 14 || "This
mortal, merely a Shraman, is praised by you, O god! The reason for this is his
freedom in speaking truth and falsehood. || 15 || Even gods cannot disturb him
by meditation, O lord! How can he be held in the heart, or how can he be
described? || 16 || Whose peaks obstruct the sky, whose roots obstruct the
netherworld, || 17 || who, with the play of dust, shake Mount Meru, whose
splendor is hidden by the vastness of the earth, || 18 || who, with a single
arm, with the play of a mighty umbrella, lift up the earth along with countless
other earths, || 19 || for those gods, who are not equal in wealth, who are not
equal in strength, who are not equal in desires, who are not equal in
accomplishments, what is this mere mortal? || 20 || "I will disturb him by
meditation," saying this, he struck the earth with his hand and rose from the
assembly hall. || 21 || The Arhats, with the help of others, perform their
austerities without interruption. This foolish Shakra, thinking that he is not
aware, disregarded him. || 22 || Then, with a violent wind, a storm, and a dense
cloud of fire, with a terrible form, with Apsaras fleeing in fear, || 23 || with
a huge body, with a mass of planets struck by the earth, that wicked one went to
where the Supreme Lord was. || 24 || || Pair || Seeing the Lord of the world,
who is the friend of the world without a cause, who is established without
hindrance, his envy increased. || 25 || That wicked one, with the dust of the
earth, rained dust upon the Lord of the world, who is free from all calamities.
|| 26 || Like the moon by the sun, like the sun by a bad day, he covered the
entire body of the Lord of the world with a dust storm. || 27 || Even the ears
of the listeners were completely filled with dust, so that the Lord became like
one without breathing in or out. || 28 || Even a single sesame seed did not move
from the meditation of the Lord of the world. Does a mountain move even when
surrounded by elephants? || 29 || Taking that dust, the ants with their diamond-
like mouths, produced ants all over the body of the Lord. || 30 || They entered
his body from all sides, and went out from other sides, piercing with their
sharp-pointed mouths, like needles in clothes. || 31 || His desires, like those
of a hapless person, were frustrated even in these. That wicked one created
bites, not ending the suffering of the wicked. || 32 || With a single blow from
them, the Lord, with his body filled with the juice of milk, became like a king
of mountains with waterfalls. || 33 || Seeing that the Lord of the world was not
disturbed by them, that wicked one created terrible, unstoppable, ghee-like
flies with sharp-pointed mouths. || 34 ||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 khaNDa: - 2 dRSTAntasamuccayaH 131 amarairasurairyakSai rakSobhirugairnaraiH  /
trailokyenApi zakyeta dhyAnAccAlayituM na hi  /  /  12  /  /  ityAkarNya vacaH
zAkraM zakrasAmAnikaH suraH  /  lalATapaTTaghaTitabhrukuTIbhaMgabhISaNaH  /   /
13  /  /  kaMpamAnAdharaH kopAllohitAyatalocanaH  /  abhavyo
gADhamithyAtvasaMgaH saMgamako'vadat  /  / 14 /  /  martyaH zramaNamAtro'yaM
yadevaM deva varNyate  /  svacchandaM sadasadvAde prabhutvaM tatra kAraNam  /  /
15 /  /  devairapi na cAlyo'yaM dhyAnAdityudbhaTaM prabho !  /  kathaM dhAryeta
hRdaye dhRtaM vA procyate katham ?  /  / 16 /  /  ruddhAntarikSaH zikharairmUlai
ruddharasAtalaH  /  yaiH kilodasyate doSNA sumerurloSTulIlayA  /  /  17  /  /
sakulAcalamedinyAH plAvanavyaktavaibhavaH  /  yeSAmeSa sugaMDUSaMkarazca
makarAkaraH  /  /  18  /  /  apyekabhujadaMDena pracaNDAM chatralIlayA  /
uddharanti sahAnekabhUdharAM ye vasundharAm  /  / 19 /  /  teSAmasamaRddhInAM
surANAmamitaujasAm  /  icchAsaMpanna siddhInAM martyamAtraM kiyAnayam  /  / 20 /
/  eSo'haM cAlayiSyAmi taM dhyAnAdityudIrya saH  /  kareNa
bhUmimAhatyodasthAdAsthAnamaNDapAt  /  / 21 /  /  arhantaH parasAhAyyAttapaH
kurvantyakhaMDitam  /  mA jJAsIditi durbuddhiH zakreNa sa upekSitaH  /  / 22 /
/  tato vegAnilotpAtapatApataghanAghanaH  /  raudrAkRtidurAloko
bhayApasaradapsarAH  /  / 23 /  /  vikaToraH sthalAghAtapuJjitagrahamaNDalaH  /
sa pApastatra gatavAn yatrAsItparamezvaraH  /  / 24 /  /  yugmam  /  /
niSkAraNajagadbandhuM nirAbAdhaM tathA sthitam  /  zrIvIraM pazyatastasya
matsaro vavRdhe'dhikam  /  / 25 /  /  gIrvANapAMsanaH pAMsuvRSTiM duSTo'taniSTa
saH  /  akAMDaghaTitAriSTAmupariSTAjjagatprabhoH  /  / 26 /  /
vidhurvidhuntudeneva durdineneva bhAskaraH  /  pidadhe pAMsupUreNa sarvAMgINaM
jagatprabhoH  /  / 27 /  /  samantato'pi pUrNAni tathA zrotAMsi pAMsubhiH  /
yathA samabhavat svAmI niHzvAsocchvAsavarjitaH  /  / 28 /  /  tilamAtramapi
dhyAnAnna cacAla jagadguruH  /  kulAcalazcalati kiM gajaiH pariNatairapi  /  /
29  /  /  apanIya tataH pAMzuM vajratuNDAH pipIlikAH  /  sa samutpAdayAmAsa
prabhoH sarvAMgapIlikAH  /  /  30  /  /  prAvizannekato'GgeSu svairaM
niryayuranyataH  /  vidhyantyastIkSNatuNDAgraiH sUcyo nivasaneSviva  /  /  31  /
/  nirbhAgyasyeva vAJchAsu moghIbhUtAsu tAsvapi  /  sa daMzAn racayAmAsa
nAkRtyAnto durAtmanAm  /  / 32 /  /  teSAmekaprahAreNa raktairgokSIrasodaraiH  /
kSaridbhirabhavannAthaH sanirjhara ivAdrirAT  /  / 33  /  /
tairapyakSobhyamANe'tha jagannAthe sa durmatiH  /  cakre pracaNDatuNDAgrA
durnivArA ghRtelikAH  /  /  34  /  /  zarIre paramezasya nimagnamukhamaNDalAH  /
tatastAH samalakSyanta romAlIva sahotthitA  /  /  35  /  /  tato'pyavicalaccitte
yogavitte jagadgurau  /  sa mahAvRzcikAMzcakre dhyAnavRzcananizcayI  /  /  36  /
/  I 2010_02

Page #173 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 132 ## The Scattering of the Eager Rejection  Fierce, blazing, scorching,
like the sparks of a consuming fire, they struck the body of the Lord with
cruel, sharp, and barbed weapons. ||37||  Though unperturbed, the Lord, filled
with the essence of right resolve, created countless, fierce, and sharp-toothed
jackals. ||38||  They roared, gnashing their teeth, tearing the body of the Lord
into pieces, scattering fragments of flesh. ||39||  Still unfulfilled, the Lord
of Death, in his rage, unleashed terrifying, venomous serpents with sharp fangs.
||40||  These great serpents, like creepers clinging to a mighty tree, encircled
the great hero, Mahavir, with their coils. ||41||  They hissed and spat, their
fangs tearing and ripping, just as the branches of a tree break and fall. ||42||
With their long, dangling necks, like ropes, the Lord, swift as lightning,
struck down countless mice with his diamond-like teeth. ||43||  They gnawed at
the Lord's body with their sharp teeth, claws, and hands, and then, in their
cruelty, sprinkled salt on the wounds. ||44||  Unfazed by these creatures, the
Lord, in his anger, created a mighty elephant with a massive, sharp tusk. ||45||
The elephant charged, its feet shaking the earth, its trunk tearing through the
sky. ||46||  With its trunk, the elephant lifted the Lord high into the air,
tossing him far away. ||47||  "Let him fall to pieces and be destroyed," thought
the wicked one, as he watched the Lord falling through the sky. ||48||  The
elephant, with its sharp tusks, repeatedly pierced the falling Lord, and from
the impact of the diamond-like tusks, sparks flew from his chest. ||49||  The
elephant, unable to do any further harm, turned its attention to the Lord's
female companion, as if she were an enemy. ||50||  With its sharp, unbroken
tusks, the elephant pierced the Lord's companion, and then, with its own body
fluids, drenched her in poison. ||51||  From the dust and dirt on the elephant's
feet, the Lord of the Asuras created a terrifying, fierce, and sharp-toothed
demon. ||52||  The demon's mouth, filled with flames and wide open, was like a
burning pyre. ||53||  Its arms, like the pillars of the gates of Yama, were
raised high, and its thighs, like tall palm trees, were strong and sturdy.
||54||  The demon, with a mocking laugh, roared and danced, wielding a sword and
a dagger, attacking the Lord. ||55||  Seeing the demon, the Lord, like a lamp
with dwindling oil, in his anger, transformed into a fierce tiger. ||56||  The
tiger, with its tail sweeping the ground, roared and howled, shaking the heavens
with its cries. ||57||  With its diamond-like fangs and sharp claws, the tiger
relentlessly attacked the Lord, the protector of the universe. ||58||  Seeing
the Lord, like a tree consumed by fire, the Lord of the Asuras, in his
wickedness, transformed into the form of King Siddhartha. ||59||  "Why are you
undertaking this difficult path, my dear son? Abandon this path of renunciation.
Do not disregard our pleas." ||60||  "You have abandoned me, your old father, in
my time of need," cried Nandivardhana, and Trisala, his wife, wept repeatedly.
||61||  ## End of Chapter 132

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 132 AturapratyAkhyAnaprakIrNakam pralayAgnisphuliMgAbhaistaptatomaradAruNaiH  /
te'bhindan bhagavaddehaM lAMgUlAMkuTakaNTakaiH  /  / 37  /  /  tairapyanAkule
nAthe kUTasaMkalpasaMkulaH  /  so'nalpAn kalpayAmAsa nakulAn dazanAkulAn  /  /
38  /  /  khikhIti rasamAnAste daMSTrAbhirbhagavattanum  /
khaNDakhaNDaisroTayanto nAMsakhaNDAnyapAtayan  /  / 39 /  /
tairapyakRtakRtyo'sau yamadordaNDadAruNAn  /  atyutkaTaphaTATopAn kopAtprAyuMkta
pannAgAn  /  / 40 /  /  AziraH pAdamatyarthaM mahAvIraM mahoragAH  /  aveSTanta
mahAvRkSaM kapikacchUlatA iva  /  / 41 /  /  prajahuste tathA tatra sphuTanti
sma phaTA yathA  /  tathA dazanti sma yathA'bhajyanta dazanA api  /  / 42 /  /
udvAntagaraleSveSu lambamAneSu rajjuvat  /  sa vajradazanAnAzu mUSikAnudapIpadat
/  / 43 /  /  svAmyaMgaM khanakAzcakhnu khairdantairmukhaiH karaiH  /
momUtryamANAstatraiva kSate kSAraM nicikSipuH  /  / 44  /  /
teSvapyakiJcidbhUteSu bhUtIbhUta iva krudhA  /  uddaNDadantamuzalaM hastirUpaM
sasarja saH  /  / 45 /  /  so'dhAvat pAdapAtena medinIM namayanniva  /
uDUnyudastahastena nabhastasroTayanniva  /  / 46 /  /  karAgreNa gRhItvA ca
duvariNa sa vAraNaH  /  dUramullAlayAmAsa bhagavantaM nabhastale  /  / 47  /  /
vizIrya kaNazo gacchatvasAviti durAzayaH  /  dantAvudasya sa vyomnaH patantaM
sma pratIcchati  /  / 48 /  /  patitaM dantaghAtena vidhyati sma muhurmuhuH  /
vakSaso vajrakaThinAtsamuttasthuH sphuliMgakAH  /  / 49 /  /  na zazAka
varAko'sau kartuM kiMcidapi dvipaH  /  yAvattAvatsurazcakre kariNIM vairiNImiva
/  / 50  /  /  akhaNDatuNDadantAbhyAM bhagavantaM bibheda sA  /  svairaM
zarIranIreNa viSeNeva siSeca ca  /  / 51 /  /  kareNo reNusAdbhUte tasyAH sAre
surAdhamaH  /  pizAcarUpamakaronmakarotkaTadaMSTrakam  /  / 52 /  /
jvAlAjAlAkulaM vyAttavyAyataM vaktrakoTaram  /  abhavadbhISaNaM tasya
vahnikuNDamiva jvalat  /  / 53 /  /  yamaukastoraNastambhAviva prottaMbhitau
bhujo  /  abhUcca tasya jaMghoru tuMgaM tAladrumopamam  /  / 54 /  /  sa
sATTahAsaH phetkurvan sphUrjatkilakilAravaH  /  kRttivAsAH
katrikAbhRdbhagavantamupAdravat  /  / 55  /  /  tasminnapi hi vidhyAte
kSINatailapradIpavat  /  vyAghrarUpaM krudhA dhmAtaH zIghraM cakre sa nighRNaH
/  / 56 /  /  atha pucchacchaTAcchoTaiH pATayanniva medinIm  /
bUtkArapratizabdaizca rodasI rodayanniva  /  / 57  /  /
daMSTrAbhirvajrasArAbhirnakharaiH zUlasodaraiH  /  avyagraM vyApiparti sma
vyAghro bhuvanabhartari  /  / 58  /  /  tatra vicchAyatAM prApte davadagdha iva
drume  /  siddhArtharAjarUpaM sa vicakre vibudhAdhamaH  /  / 59 /  /
kimetadbhavatA tAta prakrAntamatiduSkaram  /  pravrajyAM muJca mA'smAkaM
prArthanAmavajIgaNaH  /  / 60  /  /  vArdhake mAmazaraNaM
tyaktavAnnandivardhanaH  /  vikRtA trizalA caivaM vilalApa muhurmuhuH  /  / 61
/  |yugmm|| 2010_02

Page #174 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Chapter 2: Collection of Examples  Then, even with their lamentations, the Lord
remained unmoved in his mind. The wicked one, having made his abode in the form
of a mountain, created a mountain of suffering. ||62||  There, unable to find a
grinding stone, the wicked one, with great care, placed a pot on the fire. He
placed the Lord's feet on the hearth and placed the pot on them. ||63||  At that
time, the fire, ignited by him, blazed fiercely. The fire, like a forest fire at
the foot of the mountain of the Lord of the world, blazed. ||64||  Even though
the Lord was heated, his glory did not diminish, like that of gold. Then, the
wicked one made a terrible, cooked dish. ||65||  The cooked dish, even though it
was on the Lord's throat, ears, shoulders, and shanks, hung like a cage of small
birds. ||66||  The birds, with their beak and claws, pecked at the Lord's body.
Thus, his body became like a cage full of holes. ||67||  When the cooked dish,
like a cooked leaf, became useless, it produced a great storm. ||68||  It
uprooted great trees in the sky, threw up grass, scattered dust in all
directions, and threw up crabs. ||69||  It filled the womb of the sky with
ashes, and uprooted trees, and that wind struck the Lord. ||70||  Even with that
fierce wind, the wicked one, whose family was stained with sin, did not give up
his desire. He created a wind that was like a stain. ||71||  The wicked one, who
was able to make the earth tremble, made the Lord, who was like a lump of clay
on a wheel, spin. ||72||  The Lord, spinning like a whirlpool in the ocean, did
not lose his focus, even in his mind. ||73||  This one, whose mind was like a
diamond, was repeatedly insulted in many ways. He did not get angry, thinking,
"How can I break the city of my enemies?" ||74||  The wicked one thought, "If
his life is taken, his meditation will be destroyed, and not otherwise." He
created a wheel of time. ||75||  Then, the wicked one, like Ravana lifting Mount
Kailasa, lifted a mountain of a thousand pots. ||76||  Thinking that he had
created another pot to seal the earth, he jumped up and threw the wheel of time
on the Lord. ||77||  The flames, leaping up, filled all directions with terror.
The fire fell on the Lord of the world, like a fire in the ocean. ||78||  The
Lord, unable to withstand the blow of the wicked one, sank into the earth.
||79||  Even in this state, the Lord did not grieve, thinking, "We are the cause
of the world's suffering, so we must save the world." ||80||  Even though he was
struck by the wheel of time, he did not die. What other way is there to save
him? ||81||  Thinking, "If the suffering is favorable, then I will be angry,"
the Lord, sitting in his chariot, stood before the wicked one and spoke. ||82||
The wicked one, who was full of evil thoughts, showed the Lord the morning, even
though it was not the time, and the sky was full of birds. ||83||  Thinking that
this was a divine illusion, the wicked one, who was full of pride, did not give
up his meditation, even though he was attacked. ||84||  The Lord, adorned with a
crown, earrings

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 khaNDa:-2 dRSTAntasamuccayaH tatastayovilApairapyaliptamanasi prabhau  /
AvAsitaM durAcAraH skandhAvAramakalpayat  /  / 62 /  /  tatrAnAsAdya dRSadaM
sUdaH sAdara odane  /  cullIpade prabhoH pAdau kRtvA sthAlI nyavezayat  /  / 63
/  /  tatkAlaM jvAlitastena jajvAla jvalano'dhikam  /  pAdamUle
jagadbhartugireriva davAnala:  /  / 64  /  /  taptasyApi prabhoH svarNasyeva na
zrIrahIyata  /  tataH surAdhamazcakre pakvaNaM dAruNakvaNam  /  / 65  /   /
pakvaNo'pi prabhoH kaNThe karNayorbhujadaNDayoH  /  jaMghayozca
kSudrapakSipaMjarANi vyalambayat  /  / 66 /  /  khagaizcaMcunakhAghAtaistathA
dadre prabhostanuH  /  yathA chidrazatAkIrNA tatpaJjaranibhAbhavat  /  / 67  /
/  tatrApyasAratAM prApte pakvaNe pakkapatravat  /  utpAditamahotpAtaM
kharavAtamajIjanat  /  / 68 /  /  antarikSe mahAvRkSAMstRNotkSepaM samutkSipan
/  vikSipan pAMzuvikSepaM dikSu ca grAvakarkarAn  /  / 69  /  /  sarvato
rodasIgarbhaM bhasrApUraM ca pUrayan  /  utpATyotpATya vAto'sau
bhagavantamapAtayat  /  / 70  /  |yugmm|| tenApi kharavAtenA'pUrNakAmo vinirmime
/  ghusatkulakalaMko'sau drAk kalaMkalikA'nilam  /  / 71 /  /  bhUbhRto'pi
bhramayitumalaMkarmINavikramaH  /  bhramayAmAsa cakrasthamRtpiMDamiva sa prabhum
/  / 72 /  /  bhramyamANo'rNavAvarteneva tena nabhasvatA  /  tadekatAno na
dhyAnaM manAgapi jahau prabhuH  /  / 73  /  /  vajrasAramanasko'yaM bahudhApi
kadarthitaH  /  na kSubhyati kathamahaM bhagnagaryAmi tAM sabhAm  /  / 74  /  /
tadasya prANanAzena dhyAnaM nazyati nAnyathA  /  cintayitveti cakre sa
kAlacakraM surAdhamaH  /  / 75  /  /  ahAya tadayobhArasahasraghaTitaM tataH  /
uddadhAra suraH zailaM kailAsamiva rAvaNaH  /  / 76 /  /  pRthivIM saMpuTIkartuM
kRtaM manye puTAntaram  /  utpatya kAlacakraM sa pracikSepopari prabhoH  /  / 77
/  /  jvAlAjAlairucchaladbhirdizaH sarvAH karAlayat  /  tatpapAta
jagadbhartayorvAnala ivArNave  /  / 78  /  /  kulakSitidharakSodakSamasyAsya
prahArataH  /  mamajjA''jAnu bhagavAnantarvasumatItalam  /  / 79 /  /  evaM
bhUte'pi bhagavAnazocadidamasya yat  /  titArayiSavo vizvaM vayaM saMsArakAraNam
/  / 8 /  /  kAlacakrahato'pyeSa prapede paMcatAM na yat  /
agocarastadatrANAmupAyaH ka ihAparaH  /  / 81 /  /  anukUlairupasargaH
kSubhyedyadi kathaMcana  /  iti buddhyA vimAnasthaH sa puro'sthAduvAca ca  /  /
82 /  /  sadyaH prakAzamAnAzaM krozatkhagakulAkulam  /  prAtaHkAlamakAle'pi
darzayAmAsa duSTadhIH  /  / 83 /  /  tAM ca daivImasau mAyAM manyamAno mahAmanAH
/  na mumoca vibhurdhyAnamabhigrahakRtAgrahaH  /  / 84  /  /
tADaMkahArakeyUrakirITadyotitAmbaraH  /  tatsaMhRtya vimAnasthaH sa
puro'sthAduvAca ca  /  / 85 /  /  2010_02

Page #175 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------



======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 134 AturapratyAkhyAnaprakIrNakam maharSe ! tava tuSTo'smi sattvena tapasaujasA
/  prANAnapekSabhAvenArabdhanirvahaNena ca  /  / 86 /  /  paryAptaM tapasA'nena
zarIraklezakAriNA  /  brUhi yAcasva mA kArSIH zaMkAM yacchAmi kiM tava ?  /  /
87 /  /  icchAmAtreNa pUryante yatra nityaM manorathAH  /  kimanenaiva dehena
tvAM svargaM prApayAmi tam ?  /  / 88  /  anAdibhavasaMrUDhakarmanirmolakSaNam
/  ekAntaparamAnandaM mokSaM vA tvAM nayAmi kim ?  /  / 89 /  /
azeSamaMDalAdhIzamaulilAlitazAsanam  /  athavA'traiva yacchAmi sAmrAjyaM
prAjyamRddhibhiH ?  /  / 10 /  /  itthaM pralobhanAvAkyairakSobhyamanasi prabhau
/  aprAptaprativAk pApaH punarevamacintayat  /  / 9 /  /
moghIkRtamanenaitanmama zaktivijRmbhitam  /  tadidAnImamoghaM syAdyadyekaM
kAmazAsanam  /  / 92 /  /  yataH kAmAsrabhUtAbhiH kAminIbhiH kaTAkSitAH  /
dRSTA mahApumAMso'pi lumpantaH puruSavratam  /  / 93 /  /  iti nizcitya cittena
nirdideza surAMganAH  /  tadvibhramasahAyAn SaT prAyukta sa RtUnapi  /  / 94  /
/  kRtaprastAvanA mattakokilAkalakUjitaiH  /  kaMdarpanATakanaTI
vasantazrIrazobhata  /  / 95  /  /  mukhavAsaM sajjayantI vikasannIpareNubhiH  /
sairandhrIva digvadhUnAM grISmalakSmIrajRmbhata  /  / 96 /  /
rAjyAbhiSekakAmasya maMgalyatilakAniva  /  sarvAMgaM ketakavyAjAt kurvatI
prAvRDAbabhau  /  / 97  /  /  sahasranayanIbhUya navanIlotpalacchalAt  /
svasaMpadamivoddAmAM pazyantI zuzubhe zarad  /  / 98  /  /  jayaprazastiM
kAmasya zvetAkSarasahodaraiH  /  hemantazrIlilekheva pratyagraiH
kundarakuDmalaiH  /  / 99 /  /  gaNikevopajIvantI hemantasurabhIsamam  /
kundaizca sinduvAraizca zizirazrIracIyata  /  / 100  /  /  evamujjRmbhamANeSu
samamevartuSu kSaNAt  /  mInadhvajapatAkinyaH prAdurAsan surAMganAH  /  / 101 /
/  saMgItamavigItAMgyaH puro bhagavatastataH  /  tAH pracakramire jaitraM
maMtrAlamiva mAnmatham  /  / 102 /  /  tatrAvisUtritalayaM
gAndhAragrAmabandhuram  /  kAbhizcidudagIyanta jAtayaH zuddhavesarAH  /  / 103 /
/  kramavyutkramagaistAnairvyaktaivyaMjanadhAtubhiH  /  pravINA'vAdayadvINAM
kAcit sakalaniSkalAm  /  / 104  /  /
sphuTattakAradhoMkAraprakArairmaghanisvanAn  /  kAzcicca
vAdayAmAsudRdaMgAMstrividhAnapi  /  / 105  /  /  nabhobhUgatacArIkaM
vicitrakaraNodbhaTam  /  dUSTibhAvairnavanavaiH kAzcidapyanarInRtuH  /  / 106  /
/  dRDhAMgahArAbhinayaiH sadyasyuTitakaMcukA  /  badhnantI zlathadhammilaM
dormUlaM kA'pyadIdRzat  /  / 107  /  /  daMDapAdAbhinayanacchalAt kA'pi
muhurmuhaH  /  cArugorocanAgauramUrumUlamadarzayat  /  / 108 /  /
zlathacaMDAtakagranthidRDhIkaraNalIlayA  /  kA'pi prAkAzayadvApIsanAbhi
nAbhimaMDalam  /  / 109  /   /  vyapadizyebhadantA''khyahastakAbhinayaM muhuH  /
gADhamaMgapariSvaMgasaMjJAM kAcicca nirmame  /  / 110 /  /  2010_02

Page #176 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Chapter:-2 Collection of Examples 135  They spread out, hiding behind the dense
folds of their garments, occasionally revealing the disc of their buttocks.
||111|| With a gesture of breaking their limbs, they displayed their full,
raised breasts, for a long time captivating the one with beautiful eyes. ||112||
If you are truly free from attachment, why do you not abandon attachment? If you
are truly independent of the body, why do you not abandon this chest as well?
||113|| If you are compassionate, then how will you protect us from the cruel
weapon, the arrow shot by the wicked? ||114|| If you are indifferent to our
desires for love, then some respect is due, but not after death. ||115|| Master!
Abandon your harshness and fulfill our desires. Do not turn away from our pleas,
they said for a long time. ||116|| Even with songs, dances, and bodily
movements, and with the flattery of celestial women, the world teacher was not
disturbed. ||117|| Thus, for twenty nights, the wicked celestial being,
Sangamaka, tormented the world teacher, who was in a state of complete
surrender. ||118|| In the morning, Sangamaka thought, "Oh, this one, even though
he is in a state of complete surrender, does not waver in his meditation, like
the ocean that does not waver from its boundaries." ||119|| "What should I do?
Should I go to heaven, having broken my promise, or how should I go? I will
torment him, staying here for a long time." ||120|| When the sun touched the
path, the Lord, with his vision restored for only a moment, moved towards the
village called Valuka. ||121|| Sangamaka, the wicked celestial being, created a
mountain of sand on the path, resembling a sea of sand. ||122|| "Maternal uncle!
Maternal uncle!" the bandits shouted loudly to the Lord, shaking the earth as if
a mountain had split. ||123|| The Lord of peace, the ocean of nectar, went to
the village of Valuka, his feet sinking into the sand up to his knees. ||124||
The wicked celestial being, with his cruel nature, followed the Lord,
relentlessly, in the city, the village, the forest, and everywhere else. ||125||
Six months passed, created by the tormentor, Sangamaka. Then the Lord went to
Gokula, where there was a festival at that time. ||126|| The Lord, having fasted
for six months, wished to break his fast and entered Gokula to beg for alms.
||127|| Wherever the Lord went, to every house, the wicked celestial being, with
his evil mind, created obstacles. ||128|| Knowing that the wicked celestial
being had been subdued, the Lord, having finished his begging, stood outside,
like a statue. ||129|| The celestial being, wondering, "What is this broken
outcome?" looked at the Lord, but saw him undisturbed. ||130|| The celestial
being thought, "For six months, I have continuously tormented him, but he has
not been shaken, like the ocean that is not shaken by the waves." ||131|| "Even
with this long time, he will not waver from his meditation. My effort here has
been in vain, like an elephant trying to break a mountain." ||132|| "Having
abandoned the pleasures of heaven, like the earth that has been cursed, how
long, alas, will I wander, deceived by my own foolishness?" ||133|| Thinking
thus, the celestial being bowed to the world teacher, folded his hands, lowered
his head, and spoke humbly. ||134

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 khaNDa:-2 dRSTAntasamuccayaH 135 saMcArayantyantarIyaM nIvInibiDanacchalAt  /
nitambabiMbaphalakaM kAcidAvirabhAvayat  /  / 111  /  /  aMgabhaMgApadezena
vakSaH pInonnatastanam  /  suciraM rocayAmAsa kAcidruciralocanA  /  / 112 /  /
yadi tvaM vItarAgo'si rAgaM tannastanoSi kim ?  /  zarIranirapekSazceddatse
vakSo'pi kiM na naH ?  /  / 113 /  /  dayAluryadi vA'si tvaM tadAnIM
viSamAyudhAt  /  akANDAkRSTakodaNDAdasmAna trAyase katham ?  /  / 114  /  /
upekSase kautukena yadi naH premalAlasAH  /  kiMcinmAnaM hi tadyuktaM maraNAntaM
na yujyate  /  / 115  /   /  svAmin ! kaThinatAM muMca pUrayAsmanmanorathAn  /
prArthanAvimukho mA bhUH kAzcidityUcire ciram  /  / 116  /  /  evaM
gItAtodyanRttairvikArairAMgikairapi  /  cATubhizca surastrINAM na cukSobha
jagadguruH  /  / 117 /  /  evaM viMzatyupasagI tatra rAtrau surAdhamaH  /  cakre
saMgamakaH kAyotsargasthasya jagadguroH  /  / 118  /  /  prAtaH
saMgamakazcaivamacintayadaho ayam  /  neSadapyacaladdhyAnAnmaryAdAyA ivArNavaH
/  / 119  /  /  tatkiM yAmi divaM bhraSTapratijJo yAmi vA katham  /
kSobhayiSyAmyupasargaH sthitvA'haM ciramapyamum  /  / 120  /  /  pathi
sUryakaraspRSTe yugamAtrapradattadRk  /  bhagavAn vAlukA'bhikhyaM grAmaM
pratyacalattataH  /  / 121 /  /  surAdhamaH saMgamakaH paMcacaurazatI pathi  /
vicakre bAlukAM coccairvAlukArNavasannibhAm  /  / 122  /  /  mAtula !
mAtuletyuccairjalpanto dasyavaH prabhum  /  tathA sasvajire gADhaM yathA
girirapi sphuTet  /  / 123  /   /  jagAma vAlukAgrAma prazamAmRtasAgaraH  /
jAnudadhyAM vAlukAyAM majjatpAdo jagadguruH  /  / 124  /  /
nisargakrUradhIritthamupasargAn surAdhamaH  /  pure grAme
vane'nyatrApyanugacchan prabhoLadhAt  /  / 125  /   /  upasargakRto jagmurmAsAH
saMgamakasya SaT  /  athA'gAdgokule svAmI tadA''sIttatra cotsavaH  /  / 126  /
/  SaDapyupoSito mAsAn bhagavAnatilaMghya tAn  /  kartukAmaH pAraNakaM
bhikSArthaM gokule'vizat  /  / 127  /  /  yatra yatra gRhe svAmI prayayau tatra
tatra ca  /  aneSaNAM pravidadhe pApadhIH sa surAdhamaH  /  / 128  /  /
dattopayogo jJAtvA tamanivRttaM surAdhamam  /  svAmI nivRttya bhikSAyAstasthau
pratimayA bahiH  /  / 129  /   /  kiM bhagnapariNAmo'yamiti so'pyavadheH suraH
/  yAvadaikSiSTa tAvaccApazyadakSubhitaM prabhum  /  / 130  /  /  sa
suro'cintayaccaivaM SaNmAsI santataiH kRtaiH  /  nopasargaH kampito'sau
sahyo'rNavajalairiva  /  / 131  /  /  dIrgheNApyeSa kAlena dhyAnAnna hi
caliSyati  /  vRthA me prakramo'trAbhUdgajasyevAdribhedane  /  / 132  /  /
svarvilAsasukhaM hitvA zApabhraSTa ivAvanim  /  kiyacciraM ha hA'bhrAmyaM
nijadurbuddhivaJcitaH  /  / 133 /  /  evaM vicintya sa suraH praNamya ca
jagadgurum  /  kRtAJjalirlAnamukho hINazcaivamabhASata  /  / 134  /  /  yathA
sabhAyAM zakreNa kIrtito'si tathA hyasi  /  tadvaco'zraddadhAnena
mayA'syevamupadrutaH  /  / 135  /  /  2010_02

Page #177 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter 136  **The Scattering of the Eager Refusal**  "You are true to your
word, but I, alas, am false. I have not done what is right. Forgive me, O Ocean
of Forgiveness!" (136)  "I will go to heaven, content, turning my back on
misfortune. Go you too, without fear, to the villages and cities." (137)  "Go to
the villages to beg, and eat unpolluted food. Even the faults of begging were
ordained by me in the past." (138)  "The Lord said, 'Do not worry, O Sangamaka!
We are not subject to anyone, but wander freely according to our own will.'"
(139)  Prostrating himself before the glorious Vira, the fallen god, filled with
remorse, set out for the city of Puruhuta. (140)  From that time on, the gods
who dwell in Sudharma, for so long, were without joy, without enthusiasm, and
filled with anxiety. (141)  Indra, too, was deeply distressed, his mind devoid
of all pleasure. He thought to himself: (142)  "I am the cause of all these
misfortunes. When I praised the Lord, this god became angry." (143)  Meanwhile,
Sangamaka, the fallen god, stained with the mud of sin, his radiance lost, like
a mirror touched by water, (144)  false to his word, with dull eyes and muddy
lotus-like eyes, went to the assembly of the gods, presided over by the king of
the gods. (145)  Seeing Sangamaka, Indra immediately turned his back and said,
"O gods, all of you, listen to my words! (146)  This is Sangamaka, the fallen
god, a wretch, a sinner. Even though he is visible, he is not fit to be seen.
(147)  He has offended us greatly, for he has disobeyed our Lord. Why should we
be afraid of him? Why should we be afraid of this fallen god? (148)  The Arhats
do not suffer because of the help of others. They suffer because of their own
karma. I have taught this fallen god about karma and its consequences. (149)
Therefore, he must be banished from this world, for he is a source of sin for
us. He must be banished from this world, this fallen god." (150)  Saying this,
Vajrapani, with his vajra, struck the fallen god with his left foot, filled with
anger. (151)  He was pursued by the various armies of the gods, dragged by the
goddesses of heaven with their strong hands, (152)  mocked by the celestial
beings, riding in his chariot called Yana, he went to the peak of Mount Meru,
the abode of the gods, where the air is pure and the sky is clear. (153)  The
wives of Sangamaka said to Indra, "If it is your command, we will follow our
lord." (154)  The wives of Sangamaka, with tearful eyes, wished to follow him.
But Vasava prevented them, and all his retinue. (155)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 136 AturapratyAkhyAnaprakIrNakam satyapratijJastvaM bhraSTapratijJo'hamasau
punaH  /  na vyadhAyi mayA sAdhu tatkSamasva kSamAnidhe !  /  / 136 /  /  dyAM
yAsyAmyupasanno'hamupasargaparAGmukhaH  /  vraja tvamapi niHzaMko
grAmAkarapurAdiSu  /  / 137  /  /  grAmeSu viza bhikSAyai bhuMkSvAhAramadUSitam
/  bhikSAdoSA api purA vihitAste mayaiva hi  /  / 138  /   /  svAmyavocata
nazcintAM muJca saMgamakAmara !  /  kasyApyadhInA na vayaM viharAmo nijecchayA
/  / 139 /  /  ityuktavantaM zrIvIraM praNamya sa surAdhamaH  /  sAnutApaH
pracacAla puruhUtapurIM prati  /  / 140  /  /  itazca kAlaM tAvantaM surAH
saudharmavAsinaH  /  nirAnandA nirutsAhA udvignAzcAvatasthire  /  / 141 /  /
zakro'pi muktanepathyAMgarAgo'tyantaduHkhitaH  /  saMgItakAdivimukho
manasyevamacintayat  /  / 142  /  /  iyatAmupasargANAM nimittamabhavaM hyaham  /
mayA svAmiprazaMsAyAM kRtAyAM so'kupatsuraH  /  / 143 /  /  atrAntare saMgamakaH
pApapaMkamalImasaH  /  praNaSTakAntiprAgbhAro'mbhaHspRSTa iva darpaNaH  /  / 144
/  /  bhraSTapratijJo mandAkSamandIbhUtAkSipaMkajaH  /  devarAjAdhiSThitAM tAM
sudharmAmAyayau sabhAm  /  / 145  /  /  yugmam zakraH saMgamakaM dRSTvA sadyo
bhUtvA parAGmukhaH  /  ityUce bhoH surAH ! sarve'pyAkarNayata madvacaH  /  / 146
/  /  ayaM hi karmacaNDAlaH pApaH saMgamakAmaraH  /  dRzyamAno'pi pApAya tad
draSTuM naiSa yujyate  /  / 147 /  /  bahvanenAparAddhaM hi yatsvAmI naH
kadarthitaH  /  nAsmabhyamapi kiM bhIto bhavAdIto na yadyayam  /  / 148  /  /
arhanto nAnyasAhAyyAttapyante tapa ityaham  /  tathopasargakAle'pi nAmuM
pApamazikSayam  /  / 149 /  /  ataH paramiha tiSThannasmAkamapi pApmane  /
nirvAsanIyastadasau kalpAdasmAtsurAdhamaH  /  / 150 /  /  ityuditvA
vajrapANirvajreNeva ziloccayam  /  jaghAna vAmapAdena surAdhamamamarSaNaH  /  /
151 /  /  paryasyamAno vividhAyadhairmAghavanarbhaTaiH  /
AkrazyamAnastridivastrIbhirmoTitapANibhiH  /  / 152 /  /  sAmAnikairhasyAmAno
yAnakAkhyavimAnagaH  /  sa ziSTaikArNavAyuSko merucUlAM suro yayau  /  / 153 /
/  (yugmam) mahiSyaH saMgamakasya zakramevaM vyajijJapan  /
svanAthamanugacchAmastvadAdezo bhavedyadi  /  / 154  /  /  anugantuM saMgamakaM
dInAsyA anvamasta tAH  /  avArayatparIvAramazeSamapi vAsavaH  /  / 155  /  /
triSaSTi0 10 parva0 zloka 164 taH 318] 6. mAyAdhyAne
zrIAvazyakahAribhadrIyavRttau dhanazriyAH kathAnakam  /  . ahavA
savvaMgasuMdaritti/vasaMtapuraM NayaraM, jiyasattU rAyA, dhaNavaIdhaNAvahA
bhAyaro seThThI, dhaNasirI ya se bhagiNI, sA ya bAlaraMDA paralogarayA ya,
pacchA mAsakappagayadhammaghosAyariyasagAse paDibuddhA, bhAyarovi sineheNaM
taheva, sA pavvaiumicchai, te taM saMsAraneheNaM na deMti, sA ya dhammavvayaM
khaddhaM khaddhaM 2010_02

Page #178 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Chapter 2: Collection of Examples 137  He did, his sister-in-law was making a
noise, he thought to himself, "I wonder what her mind is like?" After that, he
looked at her closely, and at the time of the auspicious entry, he repeatedly
chanted many religious verses, and then, as if he had heard a good thing, his
sister-in-law said, "What's the point of all this?" He thought, "This one is
definitely a sinner, and she is also being supported by the Blessed One, so I
will definitely be ruined." He got up from the couch and left, she thought,
"What is this?" After that, he said, "Bring me something from home." She
thought, "Is he making things difficult for me?" She didn't see anything, so she
went to the ground and brought a small piece of cloth, she went out with her
hair loose, Dhanasri said, "Why is your hair loose?" She said, crying, "We are
not going home, and the house is also locked." He said, "Don't worry, I will
take care of you." His wife said, "What is this?" He said, "Stop this evil
behavior." She said, "How do you know?" He said, "I know from your own actions,
and I have heard the Dharma teachings, and you are preventing them." She said,
"Oh, you are wise, and you have a good understanding of the Dharma, and you have
a good understanding of the Dharma. I have spoken many bad things to the Blessed
One in your presence, and I have also tried to stop you. Is this the only way to
be a sinner?" Then he was ashamed, he was very sorry for his bad deeds, and he
thought, "This one is my enemy, and she is also a sinner, and she is also a
sinner." Then she said, "What's the point of all this? You will be punished."
The rest of the story is the same, until he thought, "This one is my enemy." But
in this case, the sin of not giving food to her was very strongly bound to her
karma. After that, his aversion to her increased, and he went to the mountain
with his wife. He protected his vow, and they both went to the heaven of the
gods. There, he protected his vow, and he was born as the son of Asogadatta, the
king of the city of Sagara, in the country of Naya, in the family of
Samuddadatta and Sayaradatta. He was born as the son of Asogadatta, the king of
the city of Sagara, in the country of Naya, in the family of Samuddadatta and
Sayaradatta. He was born as the son of Asogadatta, the king of the city of
Sagara, in the country of Naya, in the family of Samuddadatta and Sayaradatta.
He was born as the son of Asogadatta, the king of the city of Sagara, in the
country of Naya, in the family of Samuddadatta and Sayaradatta. He was born as
the son of Asogadatta, the king of the city of Sagara, in the country of Naya,
in the family of Samuddadatta and Sayaradatta. He was born as the son of
Asogadatta, the king of the city of Sagara, in the country of Naya, in the
family of Samuddadatta and Sayaradatta. He was born as the son of Asogadatta,
the king of the city of Sagara, in the country of Naya, in the family of
Samuddadatta and Sayaradatta. He was born as the son of

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 khaNDa:-2 dRSTAntasamuccayaH 137 karei, bhAujjAyAo se kurukurAyaMti, tIe
vicitiyaM-pecchAmi tAva bhAugANa cittaM, kimeyAhiMti ?, pacchA niyaDIe AloiUNa
sovaNayapavesakAle vIsatthaM vIsatthaM bahuM dhammagayaM jaMpiUNa tao
naTThakhiDDeNaM jahA se bhattA suNei tahegA bhAujjAyA bhaNiyA-kiM bahuNA ?
sADiyaM rakkhejjAsi, teNa ciMtiyaM-nUNamesA ducAriNitti, vAriyaM ca bhagavayA
asaIposaNaMti, tao NaM pariThThavemitti pallaMke uvavisaMtI vAriyA, sA ciMtei-hA
! kimeyaMti, pacchA teNa bhaNiyaM-gharAo me NIhi, sA ciMtei-kiM mae dukkaDaM
kayaMti, na kiMci pAsai, tao tattheva bhUmigayAe kiccheNa NIyA rayaNI, pabhAe
ulluggaMgI niggayA, dhaNasirIe bhaNiyA-kIsa ulluggaMgitti, sA ruyaMtI bhaNai-na
yANAmo avarAhaM, gehAo ya dhADiyA, tIe bhaNiyaM-vIsatthA acchaha, ahaM te
bhalissAmi, bhAyA bhaNio-kimeyamevaMti, teNa bhaNiyaM-alaM me duTThasIlAe, tIe
bhaNiyaM-kahaM jANAsi ?, teNa bhaNiyaM-tujjha ceva sagAsAo, suyA se dhammadesaNA
nivAraNaM ca, tIe bhaNiyaM-aho te paMDiyattaNaM viyArakkhamattaM ca dhamme ya
pariNAmo, mae sAmanneNa bahudosameyaM bhagavayA bhaNiyaM tIse uvaiTuM vAriyA ya,
kimetAvataiva duJcAraNI hoi, tao so lajjio, micchAdukkaDaM se davAvio, ciMtiyaM
ca NAe-esa tAva me kasiNadhavalapaDivajjago, bIovi evaM ceva viNNAsio, navaraM
sA bhaNiyA-kiM bahuNA ?, hatthaM rakhijjasitti, sesavibhAsA taheva, jAva eso'vi
me kasiNadhavalapaDivajjagotti ettha puNa imAe niyaDie abhakkhANadosao tivvaM
kammamuvanibaddhaM, pacchA eyassa apaDikkamiya bhAvao pavvaiyA, bhAyaro'vi se
saha jAyAhiM pavvaiyA, ahAuyaM pAlaittA savvANi suralogaM gayANi, tatthavi
ahAuyaM pAlayittA bhAyaro se paDhamaM cuyA sAgee Nayare asogadattassa ibbhassa
samuddadattasAyaradattAbhihANA puttA jAyA, iyarIvi caviUNa gayapure Nayare
saMkhassa ibbhasAvassa dhUyA AyAyA, aIvasuMdaritti savvaMgasuMdarI se nAmaM
kayaM, iyarIo vi bhAujjAyAo caviUNaM kosalAure NaMdaNAbhihANassa ibbhassa
sirimaikaMtimaiNAmAo dhUyAo AyAo, jovvaNaM pattANi, savvaMgasuMdarI kahavi
sAgeyAo gayapuramAgaeNa asogadattasiTThiNA diTThA, kassesA kannagatti, saMkhassa
siTThissa sabahumANaM samuddadattassa maggiyA laddhA vivAho ya kao, kAlaMtareNa
so visajjAvago Ayao, uvayAro se kao, vAsagharaM sajjiyaM  /  etthaMtaraMmi ya
savvaMgasuMdarIe uiyaM taM niyaDinibaMdhaNaM paDhamakamma, tao bhattAreNa se
vAsagharaThieNa voleMtI devigI purisacchAyA diTThA, tao'NeNa ciMtiyaM-duTThasIlA
me mahilA, kovi avaloeuM gaotti, pacchA sA''gayA, Na teNa bollAviyA, tao
aTTaduhaTTayAe dharaNIe ceva rayaNI gamiyA, pahAe se bhattAro aNApucchiya
sayaNavAgaM egassa dhijjAiyassa kahettA gao sAgeyaM NayaraM, pariNIyA ya'NeNa
kosalAure NaMdaNassa dhUyA sirimaitti, bhAuNA ya se tIse bhaiNI kaMtimaI, suyaM
ca NehiM, tao gADhamaddhiI jAyA, visesao tIse, pacchA tANaM gamAgamasaMvavahAro
vocchinno, sA dhammaparA jAyA, 2010_02

Page #179 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 138 ## The Scattering of the Eager Refusal  After the festival, while the
festival-goers were wandering around, a certain woman went to the market. Her
former husband's relatives, the wealthy ones, did not welcome her. In the
meantime, a second karma, a binding karma, arose. She entered the begging bowl,
having taken a vow.  She went to a beautiful house and asked for alms. The woman
woke up and, taking off her necklace, she went to beg. In the meantime, a
peacock, whose mind was filled with evil karma, swallowed the necklace. She
thought, "This is amazing!" Then she was bitten by a snake. She went out, having
received alms. She looked around and saw that the necklace was gone. She
thought, "What should I do?" She asked the owner of the house. He said, "No one
else has entered here today and taken anything." She was very upset and then
fainted.   Even the festival-goers stopped. She said, "The results of karma are
strange!" Then she went to her relatives. They did not welcome her, because they
were jealous of her wealth. The wealthy ones laughed at her, but they did not
change their minds. She also experienced the results of her karma. In the
meantime, she stayed in the house with her former husband.  The necklace, which
had been swallowed by the peacock, was expelled from its body. They were filled
with awe. "Oh, the greatness of the Lord! This is not possible!" They were
amazed. In the meantime, the Lord appeared. The gods praised him. They asked him
questions. He told them the story of her past life. These festival-goers, they
are like this, full of delusion and suffering.   ## 7. The Story of the Two
Friends in the *Sri Avashyak Niyukti Hari Bhadriya Vritta* on the Subject of
Greed and Delusion. - *Cheda Ganihana* -   Two friends, they wanted to see a
place of execution. They were greedy for gold. One of them took a gold coin and
hid it. The next day, he wanted the gold coin. The cunning one said, "Oh, you
foolish one, why do we need that gold coin?" He did not agree. His heart did not
see it. He made a promise to him. He took two dogs and put food on top of them.
The dogs ate the promise.   He prepared food and brought it to the door. He did
not give it to him. He said, "The dogs have eaten it. Come here." He placed it
in a place where it could be eaten. The dogs ate it. They barked and ran away.
He said, "These are your sons." He said, "How can dogs be my sons?" He said,
"Just as the gold coin is gone, so too are your sons."  ## 7. The Example of the
Lion and the Kesari in the *Sri Upadesha Prasada* on the Subject of Greed and
Delusion.  In Champa, there was a virtuous man named Suvrata. He took a vow of
fasting for a month. He took four types of possessions, including money, land,
time, and possessions. He went out to beg for the first time in his life.
Because he was endowed with excellent austerities, all times were suitable for
begging. As it is said, "For a monk who eats every day, one time is suitable for
begging." This is the meaning of the *Samachari Sutra*. A virtuous person who
eats only once a day is allowed to go out to beg once a day, to enter a
householder's house for alms, but not a second time. If, after eating once, he
is unable to perform the duties of a teacher, a mentor, or a sick

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 138 AturapratyAkhyAnaprakIrNakam pacchA pavvaiyA, kAleNa viharaMtI pavvattiNIe
samaM sAkeyaM gayA, puvvabhAujjAyAo uvasaMtAo bhattArA ya tAsiM na suTTha  /
etyaMtaraMmi ya se udiyaM niyaDinibaMdhaNaM bitiyakammaM, pAraNage bhikkhaTuM
paviThThA, sirimaI ya vAsagharaM gayA hAraM poyati, tIe abbhuTThiyA, sA hAraM
mottUNa bhikkhatthamuTThiyA, etthaMtaraMmi cittakammoiNNeNaM mayUreNaM so hAro
gillio, tIe ciMtiyaM-accharIyamiNaM, pacchA sADagaddheNa ThaiyaM,
bhikkhApaDiggAhiyA niggayA ya, iyarIe joiyaM-jAva natthi hArotti, tIe
ciMtiyaMkimeyaM vaDakheDu ?, pariyaNo pucchio, so bhaNai-na koi ettha ajjaM
mottUNa paviTTho anno, tIe aMbADio, pacchA phuTuM  /  iyarIevi pavattiNIe
siThTha, tIe bhaNiyaM-vicitto kammapariNAmo, pacchA uggataratavarayA jAyA, tesiM
cANatthabhIyANaM taM gehUM Na uggAhai, sirimaI kaMtimaio bhattArehi hasijaMti,
Na ya vippariNamaMti, tIevi uggatavarayAe kammasesaM kayaM, etthaMtaraMmi
sirimaI bhattArasahagayA vAsahare ciThThai, jAva moreNa cittAo oyariUNa niggilio
hAro, tANi saMvegamAvaNNANi, aho se bhagavaIe mahatthatA jaM na siThThamidaMti
khAmeuM payaTTANi, etthaMtaraMmi se kevalamuppaNNaMti, devehi ya mahimA kayA,
tehiM pucchiyaM, tIe'vi sAhio parabhavavuttaMto, tANi pavvaiyANi, erisI duhAvahA
mAyatti  /  7. lobhadhyAne zrIAvazyakaniyuktihArIbhadrIyavRttau vaNimitrakathA
/  - ceDagaNihANe - do mittA, tehiM nihANagaM diTuM, kalle sunakkhatte NehAmo,
egeNa hariUNa iMgAlA chUDhA, bIyadivase iMgAlA pecchai, so dhutto bhaNai - aho
maMdapunnA amhe kiha tA iMgAlA jAyA ?, teNa NAyaM, hiyayaM Na darisei, tassa
paDimaM karei, do makkaDe laei, tassa uvari bhattaM dei, te chuhAiyA taM paDimaM
caDaMti  /  annayA bhoyaNaM sajjiya dAragA NIyA, saMgoviyA na dei, bhaNai
makkaDA jAyA, Agao, tattha leppaNaTThANe ThAvio, makkaDagA mukkA, kilikiliMtA
vilaggA, bhaNio ee te tava puttA, so bhaNai - kahaM dAragA makkaDA bhavaMti ?,
so bhaNai - jahA dinArA iMgAlA jAyA tahA dAragAvi, evaM NAe diNNo bhAgo  /  7.
lobhadhyAne zrIupadezaprAsAde siMhakesarisAdhoH dRSTAntaH  /  campAyAM
suvratanAmA sAdhuH mAsakSapaNapAraNe dravyAdyabhigrahaM caturvidhaM
dravyakSetrakAlabhAvAdgRhItvA prathamapauruSyAmeva gocaryarthaM nirgataH  /
utkRSTatapoyuktatvAtsarvaH kAlo gocarIyogyaH  /  yata uktaM"niccabhattassa
bhikhussa kappati egaM goyarakAlaM" ityAdi sAmAcArIsUtraM jJeyam,
nityamekAzaninaH sAdhorekavAraM gocaryAH kAle gRhasthagRhe pAraNArthaM
niSkramituM praveSTuM ca kalpate, na tu dvitIyavAram  /  yadyekavAraM bhukte
sati AcAryopAdhyAyaglAnAdInAM vaiyAvRttyaM kartuM na zaktoti tadA dvirapi
2010_02

Page #180 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Chapter 2: Collection of Examples 139  It is said that renunciation of austerity
is more serious than eating. Or, if the hair on the body, the buttocks, the
thighs, etc., has not yet grown, then there is no fault in eating twice, even
for a very young child. A solitary observer has to be sustained by one mealtime,
so he begs a second time. A sixth-meal observer has two mealtimes. An eighth-
meal observer, a four- or five-fasting observer, and all others have all
mealtimes, so they beg whenever they wish, but they should not hold on to what
they have received in the morning, because there is a possibility of faults such
as attachment to life, etc., arising from hoarding. (This is shown) by the
following example.  Once, a monk was wandering through a city in search of food.
He saw a merchant selling Singhkeshar modaks (a type of sweet) and thought,
"Today, I will take only modaks, and those too, only Singhkeshar modaks." He
made this resolution and entered into begging. Due to his greed, he refused
everything else. He did not get them, and with a troubled mind, he kept
wandering, thinking only of the Singhkeshar modaks. Midday arrived. Then, he
became disheartened, thinking, "I did not get the modaks." He entered his house
and said, "Singhkeshar modaks" at the place of receiving alms. He wandered like
this the whole day, and at night, he wandered in the same way through the market
streets, crossroads, etc. He did not even remember the time for performing the
daily rituals of writing, reading, and reciting the scriptures. He did not even
remember that he should look out for animals on the road while walking, as the
sun's rays were falling on the people. Wandering like this, he spent two nights.
Then, he entered a householder's house. He said, "Singhkeshar modaks" at the
place of receiving alms. The householder, after rising and performing the
necessary rituals, thought, "How is it that the monk has come at such an
inappropriate time? This virtuous man is a renunciant, and I saw him today,
without any attachment. Earlier, he renounced his house, filled with wealth,
grain, gold, women, servants, and slaves, and became a renunciant. I know all
this. This is the meaning of the song. But why has he come here suddenly at
night? If I tell him about his existing faults directly, then what will be the
merit of my offering? It is not proper for me to speak in front of a person who
knows many scriptures and their meanings. Or, the character of great men is
incomprehensible and beyond the reach of those who are attached to worldly
things like us. Therefore, only those who are knowledgeable know the true
meaning of his thoughts. By observing his actions, which are beyond the scope of
ordinary worldly affairs, one should not find fault with the virtues of the
virtuous. Nevertheless, it is necessary to test him with the intention of
understanding his virtues. Why is he biased? Or, is it just a little bit?" He
thought again, "I do not see any worldly desires in his actions. I do not see
any desire to steal other people's wealth or gold. He speaks with his mouth
covered by his clothes. He is seen to be careful in placing his feet. Therefore,
he is not a destroyer of his fundamental virtues. He is known to be desirous of
food." Thinking this, he offered him various kinds of sweets, sugar, khar-khajj,
ghee-filled moti-chura, kur-kur, camphor-scented sukh-adya, etc. The monk
repeatedly said, "This is not mine, this is not mine." Hearing this, the
householder thought

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 khaNDa:-2 dRSTAntasamuccayaH 139 bhuGkte, tapaso hi vaiyAvRttyaM garIya iti  /
athavA bastikUrcakakSAdiromANi na jAtAni tAvatkSullakIkSullakayorapi
dvirbhuJjAnayorna doSaH  /  ekAntaropavAsinaH sAdhorekagocarakAlena na
nirvAhastadA dvitIyavAraM sa bhikSate  /  SaSThabhaktakasya dvau gocarakAlau  /
aSTamabhaktakasya catuHpaJcopavAsakArakasya ca sarve'pi gocarakAlAH, yadecchA
bhavati tadA bhikSate, na tu prAtargRhItameva dhArayet, saMcaye
jIvasaMsaktAdidoSasambhavAt, iti prasaGgAt (darzitaM)  /  atha sa
munirAhArArthaM pure bhraman svajanAdau siMhakezaramodakasya lAhaNI
(prabhAvanAM) jAyamAnAM vIkSyAcintayat-"adya mayA modakA eva grAhyA ste'pi
siMhakezarakA eva" ityabhigrahaM saMpradhArya bhikSAyAM praviSTaH,
lolupatayA'nyat pratiSedhati, tAMzcAlabhamAnaH saMjAtakliSTAdhyavasAyaH
kezarAneva dhyAyan paribhramati sma  /  madhyAhno jAtaH  /  tato "na labdhA mayA
modakA" iti praNaSTacitto babhUva  /  tato gRhadvAre pravizan dharmalAbhasthAne
siMhakezarA iti vadati  /  evaM sakalamapi dinaM bhrAntvA rAtrau
tathaivApaNavIthIcatvaracatuSpathAdiSu bhramati sma  /
pazcAtpauruSIpratilekhanapratikramaNakriyAdikAlollaGghanamapi na
smRtigocarIkRtam  /  bhAsvadaMzubhizcumbite lokaiH prArabdhagamanAgamane mArge
janturakSArthamAlokya gamanaM kAryamityapi na smRtam itthaM bhraman
rajanIyAmadvayaM vyaticakrAma  /  tataH zrAvakagRhe praviveza  /
dharmalAbhasthAne siMhakezarA ityuvAca  /  so'pi zrAvako'bhyutthAnAdikaM vidhAya
"atarkitamakAle munerAgamanaM kathaM jAtaM ?" iti vicintya dadhyo-"ayaM sAdhuH
kSapako'dyaiva vAsare mayA'pramattabhAvAnvito dRSTaH, prAgapyayaM
dhanadhAnyasuvarNakAminIdAsadAsyAdisaMbhRtaM gRhaM tyaktvA vairAgyeNa
pravrajitaH, tatsarvamahaM vedmi, gItArtho'yamasti, paraM sahasA'trAgamanaM
rAtrau jAtaM tasya ko hetuH ? yadyasya vidyamAnadoSAn pratyakSaM kathayAmi tadA
zrAddhatvaM mayi kutaH ? paramanekasiddhAntaparArthajJasyAgre mama vaktuM nArham
/  athavA mahApuruSANAM caritramagamyamakalanIyaM cAsmAdRzAM viSayAdiratAnAm,
ato jJAnina eva jAnanti paramArthamasya manogataM,
svalpabAhyavyavahArAtItaceSTAvIkSaNena guNinAM guNeSu doSo nodbhAvanIyaH  /
tathApi guNagrahaNabuddhyA'vazyaM parIkSA kAryA  /  yato'sau
pratipAtabhAvayukto'sti ? athavA lezamAtreNa ?" iti vicintya punardadhyau-"nAsya
kAcidviSayonmukhI ceSTA dRzyate, na ca paradhanasvarNaharaNAdiceSTA vIkSyate,
vastrAcchAditAsyena bhASate, krameNa padasthApanayatanAparazca dRzyate, ato
nAsau mUlaguNaghAtakaH  /  AhArAbhilASukastu jJAyate"  /  iti dhyAtvA tena
nAnArasavatyaH zarkarAH
khaDakhajjakaghRtapUramotIcUrakUrakarpUravAsitasukhAdyAzcopaDhaukitAH  /
munivarastu punaH punaH "nedaM mamAha~ nedaM mamAha~" ityavocat  /  tannizamya
sa zrAddho dadhyau-"adyApi sAdhurayaM mArgarataH, yato'bhigrahAnucitaM
nAGgIkaroti, tadanusAreNa yAJcAmapi na vidhatte, tataH kathaM
jJAyata'syAbhigrahaH ? paraM pravezasamaye siMhakezarA iti proktamasti, tena
parijJAyate, nUnamanenaite na kvApi labdhAH, tenAsya cittaM praNaSTaM"  /
tatastena lAhaNikAgatamodakabhRtabhAjanamupaDhaukitaM "bhagavan ! mamAnugrahaM
kuru, gRhANa siMhakezarAn"  /  tena te 2010_02

Page #181 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 140 ## The Scattering of Eager Refusal  The mind of the disciple was calmed.
Then the householder thought, "There are four breaks for the monks, as follows:
1. Food taken at night should be eaten at night. 2. Food taken at night should
be eaten during the day. 3. Food taken during the day should be eaten at night.
4. Food taken during the day should be eaten during the day. Of these breaks,
the last one is permissible, the other three are not. Sometimes, due to greed,
one might eat, and then there will be a loss of merit. Gradually, there will be
a destruction of the root merit as well. Thus, there will be great loss.
Nighttime food is contaminated with endless faults. Even though this is the
meaning of the scripture, it does not occur to his mind now. Now, I will do such
a thing that will bring great merit by determining the time."  Thinking thus,
and with proper humility, he said, "Master! Today, I am very fortunate that you,
the moving Kalpa tree, the teacher, have come to my house after receiving the
two-fold teachings. Before, all the humans, like the lotus, etc., have seen your
virtuous form. You are blessed, content, and your conduct is like nectar. Your
feet are worthy of worship. I am deluded, attached to the pleasures of the
senses, and attached to my son and wife. I am unable to describe your good
qualities in a single breath. Even though I am like this, you have shown great
kindness by staying here. Now, please answer one question. Every morning, when I
see two or three stars in the sky, I refuse to do the salutations, etc. Today, I
refused before the sunrise. Is it complete or not?"  Then the monk, using the
knowledge of Shrutadatta, observed the constellation. He saw that two yamas had
passed, and it was midnight. He said, "In the twenty-sixth chapter of the
Uttaraadhyayana, it is said:  * **"First, one should be attentive, then one
should meditate. Then, one should be free from sleep. In the fourth part, one
should be attentive again."**  * **"One should not go to sleep at night, when
the constellation is in the fourth part. One should stop and be attentive during
the evening time."**  * **"When the night ends, when the constellation sets in
the day, in the field, in the constellation, it becomes night. That
constellation is usually the fourteenth from the sun's constellation, say the
elders. When the constellation reaches the fourth part of the sky, one should
stop and return from one's studies, at the time of the evening, at the beginning
of the night."**  Knowing this, I am deluded. I have acted improperly. Alas, the
life of one who is overcome by greed! Oh, disciple! You are knowledgeable in the
Jain teachings! You are blessed, you have done good deeds. You have saved me
from drowning in the world by asking me about the refusal before the sunrise.
Your advice is true. You are my spiritual guide, because you have shown me the
right path. Your intelligence and patience are beyond words."  Thus, he
criticized himself and praised the monk. Knowing that it was night, he would be
committing a sin if he left. Then, he asked for the way to his house, and he
stayed there in solitude, meditating. In the morning, to fulfill his vow of not
eating before sunrise, he went to a clean, flat ground, and he began to crush
the sweetmeats according to the rules. He thought, "Just as the fire of the
parrot's meditation burns the fuel of karma, so too, I will burn all the karmas
in a moment and become a knower

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 140 AturapratyAkhyAnaprakIrNakam gRhItAH, svasthIbhUtaM tasya manaH  /  tataH
zrAddho dadhyau-"catvAro bhaGgA munInAM vidyante, tathAhi-1-rAtrau gRhItAnnaM
rAtrAveva bhuGke 2-rAtrau gRhItaM divase bhuGkeH 3- divase gRhItaM rAtrau
4-divasagRhItaM divase ca  /  eSu bhaGgeSu antya evArhaH, zeSAstrayastu nArhAH
/  kadAcillolupatayA''hAraM kariSyati tadottaraguNahAnirbhaviSyati, krameNa
mUlaguNaghAto'pi syAt, tena mahatI kSatiH, rAtribhojanamanantadoSadUSitaM
ityasau gItArthatvAjjAnannapi adhunA cetasi tanna sphurati  /  athAhaM tathA
kurve yadasya kAlanirNayena mahAguNaH syAt"  /  iti dhyAtvA yuktayA ca vinayaM
vidhAyoktavAn-"svAmin ! adya mahadbhAgyaM mama yadyUyaM jaGgamakalpavRkSA
gurupArzve gRhItadvayazikSAH sahasA magRhe samAgatAH,
bhavadIyasAdhusvarUpAvalokanena pUrvamanuyaH puNDarIkAdyAH sarve'pyavekSitAH,
evaM dhanyaH saMtoSI tvaM, pIyUSasamaM bhavadAcaraNaM caraNakaraNaM ca  /  ahaM
mohagrastaH kRtendriyasaukhyaprazaMsaH putrakalatrAsaktazcaikamukhena
yuSmadIyasadbhAvavarNanAyAmakSamaH  /  Idaze'pi mayi atra pAdAvadhAraNena mahatI
kRpA kRtA  /  athaikaM praznottaraM prayaccha- pratyahaM prabhAte
dvitratArakanirIkSate gagane sati namaskArAdi pratyAkhyAnaM karomi, adya mayA
purimaDDhe pratyAkhyAtaM, tatkiM pUrNaM na veti ?" tato muninA
zrutadattopayogena tArAmaNDalaM nirIkSitaM tenolakSitA yAmadvayAtItA
madhyarAtrIti  /  uktaM cottarAdhyayane SaDviMzAdhyayane paDhamaM porasiM
sajjhAyaM, bIaM jhANaM jhIyAyaI  /  taiyAe niddamokhaM tu, cautthie bhUyo'vi
sajjhAyaM  /  / 1 /  /  atha rAtribhAgacatuSkajJAnopAyamAhajaM nei jayA rattiM,
nakhattaM taMmi naha caujjhAe  /  saMpatte viramijjA, sajjhAya paosakAlammi  /
/ 1 /  /  yannayati prApayati samAptiM yadA rAtriM nakSatraM yasmin dine yasmin
kSetre yasminnakSatre'stamite rAtriparyanto bhavati, taJca nakSatraM
ravinakSatrAt prAyazcaturdazaM bhavatIti vRddhAH, tasminnakSatre
nabhazcaturthabhAge saMprApte viramet nivarteta svAdhyAyAt pradoSakAle
rAtrimukhe prArabdhAditi zeSaH  /  itthaM jJAtvA'pi manobhramaM hA mUDhena mayA
virUpamAcaritaM, dhime lobhAbhibhUtasya jIvitam  /  bhoH zrAvaka !
jainazAsanatattvajJa ! dhanyo'si kRtapuNyo'si tvaM, yadahaM
siMhakezarapradAnAtpUrvArdhapratyAkhyAnapraznena saMsAre nimajjan rakSitaH  /
satyeyaM tava codanA, mArgabhraSTasya mama mArgaprApakatvAt tvaM dharmagururasi,
tava cAturyaM dhairyaM ca vAgagocaraM" ityAtmanindAM tasya stutiM ca vidhAya
nizAM jJAtvA gamane'nAcAraH syAt  /  atha gRhaM mArgayitvA tatraikAnte tasthau
dhyAnaparaH  /  prabhAte tadAhArapariSThApanArthaM zuddhasthaNDilabhUmau gatvA
vidhinA modakA~zcUrayan DhaNDhaNasAdhuriva bhAvanAM dadhyau, zukadhyAnAnalena
karmendhanAni prajvAlayituM pravRtto yathA kSaNamAtreNa sakalAnyapi
ghAtikarmANyucchedyotpannakevalajJAno jAtaH  /  devaiH svarNAmbujaM vihitaM,
tatra sthitvA dezanAM dadau  /  tadRSTvA tacchrAvakAdInAM vismayo'bhUt  /  /
2010_02

Page #182 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------



======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 khaNDa:-2 dRSTAntasamuccayaH 8. rAgadhyAne
zrItriSaSTizalAkApuruSacaritrA'ntargatA vikramayazasaH kathA  /  astIha
kAJcanapuraM dadhAnaM kAJcanazriyam  /  bhogAvatyamarapurIlaMkAdibhyo'tizAyinIm
/  / 1 /  /  tatrAsIdvikramayazA nAma pravaravikramaH  /
ripurastraiNAsranIreddhapratAperaMmado nRpaH  /  / 2 /  /  tasya
paMcazatAnyAsannaMtaHpuramRgIdRzAm  /  yUthabharturddhipasyeva kariNyaH
premabhAjanam  /  / 3 /  /  tadA cAsIt pure tasmin sArthavAho maharddhikaH  /
nAgadatto'bhidhAnena nidhAnamiva saMpadAm  /  / 4 /  /  saubhAgyalAvaNyavatI
rUpAtizayasAlinI  /  viSNoH zrIriva viSNuzrIrnAmnA tasya gRhiNyabhUt  /  / 5 /
/  anyo'nyanIlikArAgapremANau tau vijatuH  /  avyAhatasmarakrImAsarasau
sArasAviva  /  / 6 /  /  kAkatAlIyanyAyena kathamapyekadA tu sA  /  dRkpathaM
vikramayazovasudhAbharturAyayau  /  / 7 /  /  tAM prekSya vikramayazA dasyuneva
manobhuvA  /  luTyamAnavivekasvazcetasyevamacintayat  /  / 8 /  /  aho vilokane
asyA mRgyA iva manorame  /  baMdhuraH kezapAzazca kalApa iva kekinaH  /  / 9 /
/  pakkabiMbaM dvidhAbhUtamivoSThau komalAruNau  /  pInonnatau kucAvetau
smarakrIDAcalAviva  /  / 10 /  /  pratyagre iva ca late bhuje sakalakomale  /
madhyaM nitAntakSamaM ca muSTigrAhyaM paveriva  /  / 11 /  /  zevalAlIva
romAvalyAvarta iva nAbhyapi  /  nitambaH pulinamiva lAvaNyasaritastvasau  /  /
12 /  /  raMbhAstaMbhAvivorU ca pAdau ca kamale iva  /  kimanyat sarvamapyasyA
mano harati kasya na  /  / 13 /  /  jarAviklavacittatvAdanaucityena vedhasA  /
nivezitA kvApyapAtre zakrastaMbhaH zmazAnavat  /  / 14 /  /  .. etAmapahariSyAmi
kSepsyAmyantaHpure nije  /  anaucityanivezitvadoSaH sraSTuH prayAtu ca  /  / 15
/  /  evaM manasi nizcitya kaMdarpavidhuro'tha tAm  /  jagrAha vikramayazA yazo
mlAnIcakAra ca  /  / 16 /  /  aMtaraMtaHpuraM kSiptvA ramayAmAsa tAM sadA  /
vicitrasmaralIlAbhirekatAnaH sa bhUpatiH  /  / 17 /  /  AviSTa iva bhUtena
dhattUramiva loDhavAn  /  apasmAramiva prApto madirAmiva pItavAn  /  / 18 /  /
AghrAta iva sarpaNa sannipAtamivAptavAn  /  vidhurastadviyogena sArthavAho
babhUva saH  /  / 19 /  /  yugmam  /  /  tayA saha viyuktasya sArthavAhasya
tasya ca  /  saMyuktasya ca nRpateH kAlo'gAdduHkhasaukhyakRt  /  / 20 /  /
viSNuzriyA ramamANe nRpe tasminniraMtaram  /  IjyA kArmaNaM cakruH kruddhAH
zuddhAMtayoSitaH  /  / 21 /  /  kArmaNena ca sA tena kSIyamANA kSaNe kSaNe  /
mUlavamyeva latikA jIvitena vyamucyata  /  / 22 /  /  nRpo'pi mRtyunA tasyA
jIvanmRta iva sthitaH  /  pralApI ca vilApI ca nAgadatta ivAbhavat  /  / 23 /  /
nAdatta cAnale kSeptuM tadviSNuzrIkalevaram  /  priyA mamaiSA
praNayatUSNIketyanizaM vadan  /  / 24  /  /  maMtriNo maMtrayitvAtha vaJcayitvA
ca bhUpatim  /  araeye cikSipurnItvA tadviSNuzrIkalevaram  /  / 25 /  /  2010_02
.

Page #183 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------



======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 142 AturapratyAkhyAnaprakIrNakam tvAmAsIradhunaiveha kiM priye na nirIkSyase  /
tirodhAnakrIDyAlaM viyogasya vayasyayA  /  / 26 /  /  narmaNApi
viyogAgnirmarmAvidyujyate na hi  /  madA tava kiM nAtirAvAM hyekAtmakau sadA  /
/ 27 /  /  ekAkinI kimagaccha: krIDAsariti kautukAt  /  krIDAdrimathavArohaH
krIDodyAnamathAbhyagAH  /  / 28 /  /  mAM vinA krIDasi kathamAyAmyeSa iti bruban
/  teSu teSu pradezeSu babhrAmonmattavannRpaH  /  / 29 /  /  rAjJazca
tyaktapAnAnnavRttergatavati tryahe  /  maraNAzaMkino'mAtyAstasyA vapuradarzayan
/  / 30 /  /  acchabhallavadatyantavisaMsthulaziroruham  /  zazavacchazare vanyA
kaMkairAkRSTalocanam  /  / 31 /  /  carvitorasijadvaMdvaM gRdheH pizitagRnubhiH
/  samAkRSTAMtrabhAraM ca zivAbhirazivAkRti  /  / 32 /  /  chAditaM
makSikAvRMdairmadhumaMDakajAlavat  /  pipIlikAbhizcAzliSTaM
pAtabhagnAMDabhANDavat  /  / 33 /  /  pUtigaMdhi tadAlokya sadyo viSNuzriyo
vapuH  /  virakto vikramayazAzcintayAmAsivAniti  /  / 34  /  /   /  /  catubhiH
kalApakam  /  /  aho asAre saMsAre sAraM vastu na kiMcana  /  sArabuddhyA
dhigetasyAM mohitAH smaH kiyaJciram  /  / 35  /  /  AhAyaireva hi
guNairharidrArAgasannibhaiH  /  aho hviyante nArIbhirna kazcit paramArthavit  /
/ 36 /  /  yakRcchakRnmalazleSmamajjAsthiparipUritAH  /  snAyusyUtA bahIramyAH
striyazcarmaprasevikAH  /  / 37  /  /  bahirantarviparyAsaH strIzarIrasya
cedbhavet  /  tasyaiva kAmukaH kuryAdRdhragomAyugopanam  /  / 38  /  /
strIzastreNApi cet kAmo jagadetajjigISati  /  tucchapicchamayaM zastraM kiM
nAdatte sa mUDhadhIH  /  / 39 /  /  saMkalpayoninA yena hahA vizvaM viDambitam
/  tadutkhanAmi saMkalpamUlamasyaiva sarvataH  /  / 40 /  /  eMva vicintya
saMsAraviraktaH sa mahAmanAH  /  suvratAcAryapAdAnte gatvA dIkSAmupAdade  /  /
41 /  /  caturthaSaSThamAsAditapobhidehanispRhaH  /  AtmAnaM zoSayAmAsa
karairjalamivAryamA  /  / 42 /  /  dustapaM sa tapastaptvA kAlayogAdvipadya ca
/  sanatkumAre kalpe'bhUt prakRSTAyuH surottamaH  /  / 43 /  /  8. rAgadhyAne
zrIAvazyakahAribhadrIyavRttau dAmanakodAharaNam  /  dAmaNNagodAharaNaM tu-
rAyapure Nagare ego kulaputto jAtIto, tassa jiNadAso mitto, teNa so sAdhusagAsaM
NIto, teNa macchayamaMsapaJcakkhANaM gahitaM, dubbhikkhe macchAhAro logo jAto,
itarovi sAlehiM mahilAe khisijjamANo gato, udiNNe macche daTuM puNarAvattI jAtA,
evaM tiNNi divase tiNNa vAraM gahitA mukkA ya, aNasaNaM kAtuM rAyagihe Nagare
maNiyAraseTThiputto dAmaNNago NAma jAto, aTThavarisassa kulaM mArIe ucchiNNaM,
tattheva sAgaravodasatthavAhassa gihe ciTThai, tattha ya gihe 2010_02

Page #184 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Chapter:-2 Collection of Examples 143 A beggar approached a virtuous man, and
said to the virtuous man who was without a family, "This house will be yours,
son, by the will of the teacher." After that, the teacher, being hidden by the
Chandala, was beaten by them. To take him away, they cut off his finger. Then,
he was taken away by the king's soldiers, and his son was born. When he grew up,
another merchant ship arrived there. Seeing him, he asked him, "Whose is this?"
He was told, "He is an orphan who came here." "Then, I will give him a gift and
make him a householder." He was prepared, and went to the temple outside the
city of Rajagriha and slept there. The merchant ship's sailors, named Visa, saw
him in the courtyard of the temple. They told the king, "This orphan, who has
not yet been initiated, should be given a gift, a garland, earrings, and a gift
of money." He entered the city, and was married to Visa. The merchant ship
arrived, and the courtyard of the house was decorated. The merchant ship's son
was killed by a merchant ship's arrow. The king, the king's minister, and the
householder were all killed. The enjoyment of wealth was lost. 8. The example of
Kapila, the founder of the Sankhya philosophy, as described in the Sri Mahavira
Charitra, in the chapter on the contemplation of anger. Another, while preaching
the Dharma, had a son named Kavila, who was full of pride. He was also protected
by the five great vows, and was endowed with the qualities of peace, restraint
of the five senses, purity, freedom from dependence, and fruitfulness. He was a
good man. Kavila said to him, "My dear friend, you are always talking about
renunciation. You should also practice it. What is the point of all this?" The
sage replied, "My dear friend, this good Dharma has been taught to you. But I
have understood this good Dharma through the power of the good Dharma, through
the strength of the fire of renunciation, through the ability to walk on the
difficult path, and through the skillful application of all knowledge. Father,
this is the way to cross over. Therefore, renounce this world and embrace the
Dharma of the monks without any doubt." Kavila said, "My dear friend, is there
any place of refuge for you here?" The sage replied, "My dear friend, there is a
place of refuge in the Dharma of the monks. Here, too, there is a place for the
mind to go. Thus, he preached the truth without any hesitation. The world is
like a vast ocean, full of countless waves." "Is it possible to speak of such a
vast and diverse world in this way?" "What is the point of this?" "It is wrong
to speak of the Jina's teachings in a way that is not in accordance with the
teachings." "By eating food that is not suitable, one gets sick." 178. "Even
those who are endowed with the qualities of good speech and good answers, are
not free from the cycle of birth and death." 179. "He who speaks the truth, even
though he is not free from the cycle of birth and death, is like a lamp that
illuminates everything." 180. "What is the point of taking refuge in someone
who, being afraid of the cycle of birth and death, speaks of the path of
liberation in a way that is not in accordance with the teachings?" 181. "Even
the most difficult and painful things do not cause suffering to a being who has
taken refuge in the Jina's teachings." "Enough of this discussion." He said, "I
will speak further." 2

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 khaNDa:-2 dRSTAntasamuccayaH 143 bhikkhaTuM sAdhuNo paiTThA, sAdhuNA
saMghADaillassa kahitaM, etassa gihassa esa dArago adhipatI bhavissati, sutaM
satthavAheNa, pacchA satthavAheNa pacchannaM caMDAlANa appito, tehiM dUraM NetuM
aMguliM chettuM bhesi to Nivvisao kato, NAsaMto tasseva gosaMdhieNa gahito
puttotti, jovvaNattho jAto, aNNatA sAgarapoto tattha gato taM daLUNa uvAeNa
pariyaNaM pucchati-kassa esa ?, kathitaM aNAdhotti ihAgato, imo sotti, tA lehaM
dAuM gharaM pAvehitti visajjito, gato rAyagihassa bAhiparisa devaule suvvati,
sAgarapotadhUtA visA NAma kaNNA tIe aJcaNiyavAvaDAe diTTho, pitumuddamudditaM
lehaM daTuM vAeti-etassa dAragassa asoiyamakkhitapAdassa visaM dAtavvaM,
aNussAraphusaNaM, kaNNagadANaM, puNovi muddeti, NagaraM paviThTho, visA'NeNa
vivAhitA, Agato sAgarapoto, mAtigharaaJcaNiyavisajjaNaM, sAgaraputtamaraNaM
sotuM sAgarapoto hitayaphuTTaNeNa mato, raNNA dAmaNNago gharasAmI kato,
bhogasamiddhI jAtA  /  8. rAgadhyAne zrImahAvIracaritravyAvarNitaH
sAMkhyamataprasthApakakapiladRSTAntaH aNNayA ya dhammadesaNaM kuNamANassa tassa
kavilo nAma rAyaputto sagAsamallINo, teNAvi paMcamahavvayarakkhaNapahANo
pasamAiguNAhiTThio paMciMdiyaniggahavisuddho nisseyasaphaladAyI parUvio se
sussamaNadhammo, kavileNa ya vuttaM-bhayavaM ! aNNahA tumhe
bajjhanevatthamuvvahaha, imaM ca aNNahA paNNaveha, kimettha tattaM ?, miriiNA
bhaNiyaM-bhaddA ! eso susAhudhammo tuha niveio, imaM puNa jahuttasAhu-
dhammAsamatthayAe pabalapAvakammayAe duggaigamaNasIlayAe ya
sabuddhisippaparikappiyaM kuliMgaM mae abbhuvagayaM, tAta ! eyaM pAragacchiyaM,
ao paDivajasu nissaMsayaM samaNadhammaM, kavileNa vuttaM-bhayavaM ! tumha saMtie
ettha tahAvi asthi kiMpi NijjarAThANaM navA ?, miriiNA bhaNiyaM-bhadda !
samaNadhamme tAva atthi, ihAvi maNAgati, evaM ca teNa ajahaTThiyavatthudesaNao
niviThTho sAgarovamakoDAkoDimetto saMsArotti  /  naNu kiM
ettiyamettavivarIyakahaNe'vi evaM saMbhavai ?, kimiha cojjaM ?,
jeNavivarIyajiNAgamapayametta(ssa)parUvaNe'vi micchattaM  /  appatthabhoyaNeNa
va duhujaNagaM rogamajjiNai  /  / 178 /  /  ettocciya mUluttaraguNagaNavirahe'vi
liMgadhArIvi  /  suvvai savvannumayaM jahaTThiyaM panavemANo  /  / 179 /  /  kiM
etto'vi hu e(pA)vaM jaM saraNagae Nu bhavabhaeNa jaNe  /
ummaggadesaNAtikkhakhaggadhAraNa viddavai  /  / 180 /  /  garuyaMpi kayaM pAvaM
na tahA jIvassa dukkhamAvahai  /  jaha
jiNavaravayaNapasUyasamayavivarIyaparikahaNaM  /  / 181 /  /  alaM vitthareNa  /
patthuyaM bhaNNai - 2010_02

Page #185 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 144 ## The Scattering of the Eager Rejection  That Kavi, overwhelmed by the
assembly, as if he were greatly burdened by a heavy load, as if he were being
urged to do something by a previous vow, as if he were being greatly pressured
by a powerful desire, did not accept the Samana Dharma, even in his mind. Then,
thinking with a troubled mind, he thought: "This Jain Dharma does not suit me. I
have a need for a job, for traveling to other villages, for bodily adornment,
for the enjoyment of sensual pleasures, and for a companion. Therefore, I will
reject this." Thinking thus, the Kavi was caught in the net of desire, and he
learned some kind of false doctrine, a false understanding of the nature of
things. And so, he, adorned with a dyed garment and a garland of flowers, with a
staff in his hand, became a wanderer, going from village to village, seeking a
lover, or a god, or a master, or a great teacher, or a place where he could kill
animals, or a place where he could earn a living, or a place where he could
indulge in sensual pleasures. And so, in time, while he was speaking, the
Tirthankara, who had protected all beings for eighty-four hundred thousand
years, who had never been defeated, who had always walked the path of
righteousness, who had spent countless kalpas in the Brahma-loka, who had become
a god, heard him.  That Kavi, who was not a true seeker of the highest good, who
was attached to false doctrines, who was a follower of the path of desire, who
was a seeker of worldly pleasures, who was a follower of the path of false
understanding, who was a seeker of the path of false understanding, who was a
seeker of the path of false understanding, who was a seeker of the path of false
understanding, who was a seeker of the path of false understanding, who was a
seeker of the path of false understanding, who was a seeker of the path of false
understanding, who was a seeker of the path of false understanding, who was a
seeker of the path of false understanding, who was a seeker of the path of false
understanding, who was a seeker of the path of false understanding, who was a
seeker of the path of false understanding, who was a seeker of the path of false
understanding, who was a seeker of the path of false understanding, who was a
seeker of the path of false understanding, who was a seeker of the path of false
understanding, who was a seeker of the path of false understanding, who was a
seeker of the path of false understanding, who was a seeker of the path of false
understanding, who was a seeker of the path of false understanding, who was a
seeker of the path of false understanding, who was a seeker of the path of false
understanding, who was a seeker of the path of false understanding, who was a
seeker of the path of false understanding, who was a seeker of the path of false
understanding, who was a seeker of the path of false understanding, who was a
seeker of the path of false understanding, who was a seeker of the path of false
understanding, who was a seeker of the path of false understanding, who was a
seeker of the path of false understanding, who was a seeker of the path of false
understanding, who was a seeker of the path of false understanding, who was a
seeker of the path of false understanding, who was a seeker of the path of false
understanding, who was a seeker of the path of false understanding, who was a
seeker of the path of false understanding, who was a seeker of the path of false
understanding, who was a seeker of the path of false understanding, who was a
seeker of the path of false understanding, who was a seeker of the path of false
understanding, who was a seeker of the path of false understanding

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 144 AturapratyAkhyAnaprakIrNakam so kavilo sannivAyAbhibhUo iva paramosahaM
mahAgahapariggahio iva tahAvihaM maMtakiriyaM puvvavuggAhio iva sammaparikahaNaM
mahApabalamicchattaNao na paDivaNNo maNAgaMpi samaNadhamma, tao miriiNA
ciMtiyaM-na tAva parigiNhai esa jaidhammaM, mamAvi chattagAipariyaruvvahaNe
gAmaMtaragamaNe sarIragelaNNe aJcaMtigapaoyaNe egeNa sahAiNA kajjamatthi, tamhA
pavvAvemi eyaMti ciMtiUNa kavilo gAhio niyadikkhaM, sikkhavio kiMpi bajhaM
kaTThANuTThANaM, evaM ca so niyaMsiyakAsAyavatthajuyalo pANipariggahiyatidaMDo
pavittigApa-muhovagaraNapariyario gAmANugAmaM piyaraM va devayaM va sAmiyaM va
paramovagAriNaM va rayaNanihANadesagaM va jIviyadAyAraM va miriiM pajjuvAsaMto
paribhamaitti, evaM ca kAle volaMtaMmi miriI caurAsIiM puvvasayasahassAiM
savvAuyaM pAlaittA aNAloiyapaDikkaMtaniyaduJcario kAlaM kAUNa baMbhaloe kappe
dasasAgarovamAU devo jAotti  /  /  so'vi kavilo apaDhiyasatthaparamattho
bajjhovagaraNadharaNamettarasigo jahAdiTThakaTThANuTThANapattaparamakaTTho egAgI
pariyaDai  /  muNivilakkhaNAgAradasaNeNa puvvakameNa samalliyai ya se samIve
dhammasavaNatthaM bahU jaNo, so'vi aviyakkhaNattaNao samaNasatyesu
tahAvihadhammadesaNamaviyANamANo 'yuktAyuktaparijJAna-zUnyacittasya dehinaH  /
alabdhamadhyatAhetuaunaM sarvArthasAdhanam  /  / 1 /  / ' iti paricitaMto
gADhaparigga-hiyamoNavvao diNagamaNiyaM karei  /  annayA ya
AsurirAyaputtapamuhaM sissagaNaM pavvAviUNa jathAdiTuM bajjhANuTThANaM daMsiUNa
ya cirakAlaM kayabAlatavo mariUNa baMbhaloe kappe devo uvavajjai tahiM ca -
asuyaM adiThThapuvvaM suralacchiM pecchiUNa tAricchaM  /  aNuciMtiuM payatto
aivimhiyamANaso kavilo  /  / 182 /  /  kiM manne hojja mae dAruNarUvaM tavaM
samAyariuM (ya) ?  /  kiM mayalaMchaNasacchahamaNucariyamaNuttamaM sIlaM ?  /  /
183 /  /  kiM vA dukkaratavaniyamanirayacittesu sAhupattesu  /  hojja nihittaM
vittaM niyabhuyajuyalajjiyaM puv i ?  /  / 184  /  /  kiM vA sAhasamavalaMbiUNa
khittaM havejja niyadehaM  /  pajjaliyativvajAlAsahassajaDilaMma jalaNaMmi  /  /
185 /  /  emAivivihasaMsayasaMkiyacitto khaNaM vigamiUNaM  /  sammaM
viyANaNaTThA ohiNNANaM pauMjei  /  / 186 /  /  pArivvajjapavannaM aha dehaM
niyai taM vigayajIyaM  /  te'vi sasisse gaMthatthabAhire muddhabuddhIe  /  / 187
/  /  tAhe niyadaMsaNapakkhavAyao cattadevakAyavvo  /  oyario AyAse sissANaM
tattha(tta) kahaNaTThA  /  / 188  /  /
varapaMcavaNNamaMDalamajjhagao'dissamANarUvo ya  /  Asuripamuhe sisse bhAsai
saMbohiUveNaM  /  / 189 /  /  avvattAo vattaM pabhavai iJcAi tattasaMdohaM  /
to sadvitaMtagaMthaM taM soccA AsurI kuNai  /  / 190  /  /  avvocchittI ya tao
jAyA sIsappasIsavaggassa  /  evaM sati vitthariyaM savvattha tidaMDipAsaMDaM  /
/ 191 /  /  2010_02

Page #186 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Chapter 2: Collection of Examples 145 9. The story of Madhudeva and Pippalada,
as shown in the commentary of Shri Aavashyakaharibhadriya, on the subject of
hatred. There were two wandering nuns named Sulasa and Subhadra. Sulasa was very
knowledgeable in many scriptures. Meanwhile, a wandering monk named Yajnavalkya
announced, "Whoever defeats me in debate, I will be his disciple." He then
offered a bet. Sulasa defeated him, and he became her disciple. Due to their
close association, they engaged in improper conduct, and Sulasa became pregnant.
When Subhadra found out, she harshly rebuked him. He concealed the truth and, on
another day, gave birth to a son at night. Subhadra was unaware of this. The
wandering monk abandoned the child under a Pippala tree and left with her in the
night. In the morning, Subhadra followed his footsteps and saw the child. The
child was hungry and, out of fear, had put a Pippala fruit in his mouth and
tasted it. Thus, he was named Pippalada. He grew up, and Subhadra taught him. He
became very eloquent. He learned about his parents and developed hatred towards
both his mother and father. He embraced the unrighteous Vedas and propagated
them. He taught them this: "Kings should perform sacrifices with animals,
horses, elephants, humans, etc., for the sake of peace and to attain heaven." He
had a friend named Parvata, who was famous for the story of "Aliehi Ya
Vasuraaya." Parvata told him, "It is mentioned in the Vedas that sacrifices
should be performed with non-living things. You have presented a good argument."
Furthermore, a prince named Madhu was humiliated by all the kings gathered at a
marriage pavilion. He developed hatred towards them and died. He was reborn in
another realm. He thought, "This is a brilliant plan devised by the son of the
wandering monk. If these kings follow this, they will all go to hell. My hatred
will be fulfilled." Thinking this, he approached Pippalada and said, "Propagate
this in the world. I will help you." He then caused diseases everywhere. The
wandering monk told the kings, "If you perform sacrifices with animals,
everything will be cured. These animals will be killed in the sacrifice and will
go to heaven. There is no fault in this." The kings followed his instructions.
To give the impression of going to heaven, they placed the bodies of the animals
killed in the sacrifice on a chariot and sent it into the sky. Madhudeva
appeared to the people and cured all the diseases. Thus, the people believed in
this. Then, Pippalada, while propagating this, took his parents from the king's
palace, saying that they would attain liberation. He killed them in the
sacrifice, claiming that the sacrifice was the ultimate goal. From that time
onwards, the unrighteous Vedas were practiced. This is a summary. 9. The story
of hatred, a section from the Dharma Ruchi, a part of the Aakhyanaka Manikosa. A
boat named Nanda, carrying a multitude of people, crossed the Ganges, which was
full of living beings and flocks of birds. 1. A man named Dharma Ruchi, who was
wealthy and possessed various virtues, was crossing the Ganges on that boat. 2.
As the boat was about to reach the other side, a storm arose. The boat was
tossed about by the strong waves. 3. A group of six thousand people perished in
the storm. 4. A crow, born from the dead, was a wicked creature. Dharma Ruchi
also perished and was reborn as a crow.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 khaNDa:-2 dRSTAntasamuccayaH 145 9. dveSadhyAne
zrIAvazyakahAribhadriyaTIkAdarzitA madhudevapippalAdayoH kathA  /  iha
sulasAsubhadrAnAmakaM parivrAjikAdvayamAsIt, sulasA atIvAnekazAstrakovidA,
atrAntare yAjJavalkyanAmrA parivrAjakena yo mAM vAde vijayate tasyAhaM ziSya
ityudghoSaNApUrvakaM paTaho dApitaH, sulasayA ca jito'sau, tacchiSyatvaM cAnena
prapannam, atiparicaye ca tayorakAryapravRttirabhUd, garbhazca sulasAyAH
samabhavad, vijJAte ca subhadrayA niSThuramupAlabdhA'sau, pracchanne ca dhRtA,
anyasmizca vAsare rAtrau putraM prasUtA, avijJAtA ca subhadrayA
pippalavRkSasyAdhastAtputraM parityajya parivrAjakena saha rajanyAmeva
nirjagAma, prAtazca padAnusAreNAnveSayantyA subhadrayA Dimbho dRSTaH, ayaM ca
bubhukSito vitrasAtaH pippalaphalaM mukhe patitamAsvAditavAniti pippalAda iti
nAma tasya kRtaM, vRddhiM nItaH, pAThitazcAsau subhadrayA, vAggamI cAtIva jAtaH,
zrutamAtRpitRsambandhazca mAtari pitari ca pradveSamApanno'nAryAn vedA~zcakAra,
teSu cedaM prarUpitavAn-yaduta rAjabhirazivAdizAntinimittaM svargAvAptaye ca
pazuturagagajamAnuSAdibhiryAgaH karaNIya iti, tasya ca 'aliehi ya vasurAyA'
ityAdikathAnakaprasiddhaH parvatako nAma mitramabhUt, tena coktaM-
ajairyaSTavyamiti vede'pi pratipAditameveti zobhanaM tvayA prarUpitamiti  /
aparaM ca madhunAmA rAjaputraH kutracit
svayaMvaramaNDapamilitasamastarAjavargeNApamAnitasteSu ca pradveSamApanno mRtvA
vyantareSUtpannaH, sa cAcintayad-bhavyamidaM parivrAjakasutena parikalpitaM,
yadyetadrAjAno'nutiSThanti tadA sarve'pi amI narakaM yAntIti mama
vairasiddhirbhavatIti vicintya ca tamuvAca-prarUpaya tvamidaM loke sAhAyyamahaM
kariSyAmItyabhidhAya sarvatra rogAnutpAditavAn, parivrAjakena ca
rAjAno'bhihitAH-yadi pazvAdibhiryajJaM kuruta tadA sarvamidamupazAmyati, te'pi
ca pazvAdayo yajJe nihatA divaM yAsyanti, nAtra kazciddoSa iti, rAjAno'pi ca
tathaivAnuSThitavantaH, tridivagamanapratItinimittaM yajJanihatapazvAdInvimAne
samAropya nabhasA gacchato madhudevo janasya darzayati rogA~zca
sarvAnupazamayatIti lokasyAtrArthe sthiratA babhUva, tatazca pippalAdenetthaM
prarUpayatA gacchatA kAlena rAjJaH sakAzAdAnIya mokSametau gamiSyata iti vyAjena
mAtApitarau yajJe huto, tadarthatvAdeva sArambhasyeti,
tatkAlAdArabhyAnAryavedapravRttiriti saMkSepaH  /  9. dveSadhyAne
zrIAkhyAnakamaNikozA'ntargatadharmarucinAvikanandayoH prasaMgapaTaH  /
bahujIvasaMkulAe gaMgAe hasiyasurasamUhAe  /  uttArai molleNaM jaNanivahaM nAvio
naMdo  /  / 1 /  /  aha annayA ya sAhU dhammaruI vivihaladdhisaMpanno  /
uttinno gaMgAe dhario so teNa mollakae  /  / 2 /  /  aikaMte paharaduge vi jAva
na hu mellae tao vihio  /  sahasa tti chArapuMjo muNiNA so teulesAe  /  / 3 /  /
mariUNa samuppanno sabhAe gharakoilo kiliTThamaNo  /  dhammaruI vi ya patto
viharaMto tattha kAleNa  /  / 4 /  /  2010_02

Page #187 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter 146: The Scattering of the Eager Rejection  The monks, having gone
out to beg, were eating. There, the householder, remembering his past life, was
angry. ||5|| He scattered the food, the monk got up and said something else. He
did the same, even in that place. ||6|| Then, the righteous one thought, "What
kind of happiness is this I have received?" Seeing the evil, he too became
angry. ||7|| Then, on the bank of the Mayang river, a swan died and was reborn.
In time, the righteous one went there. ||8|| Seeing him, the swan, with its
wings filled with cool water, remembered its past life and was chilled in the
cold season. ||9|| Thus, again and again, the monk was tired, but he did not
leave until he asked, "What kind of happiness is this, that I have been
entangled in this way?" ||10|| A lion, having died, was reborn in the Anjana
mountain, and was very fierce. In time, the righteous one went there with his
companions. ||11|| Seeing them, the lion, with its companions, quickly ran away,
fleeing from the group of monks, until it was stopped by the world. ||12|| "Who
is it that has not been bound? What kind of happiness is this I have received?"
The monk, quickly becoming angry, spoke harshly. ||13|| Having died, he went to
the city of Varanasi, and entered the begging bowl. The righteous one saw him.
||14|| Seeing him, he was delighted, and he did everything to please him.
Because of the hatred of his past life, he was killed by him. ||15|| Having
died, he was reborn as a king in the same place. He remembered his past life and
thought, "I have been a fool in these many lives." ||16|| "Even if I were to be
given all the wealth of the kingdom, I would not be happy. If I see him, I will
be content." ||17|| "For the sake of knowing this, I will recite the story of my
past life with the righteous one! Everyone should read this story." ||18||
"Nanda was a boatman on the Ganges, a householder in the assembly. The swan was
on the bank of the Mayang, the lion was on the Anjana mountain. ||1|| The
merchant was in Varanasi, the king came there." Whoever completes this story,
the earth will give him half the kingdom. The people of the city proclaimed this
with great enthusiasm. ||19|| The wise ones, following the path of the wise,
followed the western half. The foolish ones did not follow, for they were not
human. ||20|| The righteous one, wandering, came to that place and got up. In
the garden, the gardener read it. ||21||  "Nanda was a boatman on the Ganges,"
having heard this, he said, "You read it again and again, why, good sir, is
this?" ||22|| The righteous one, seeing his foolishness, told him the true
meaning of the monk. Then, the monk completed the western half in this way.
||23||  "This is the one who is wounded, he has come here." ||2|| Taking this
complete story, he was comforted and lived in peace. The king, having heard
this, was very frightened. ||24||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 146 AturapratyAkhyAnaprakIrNakama gAmAo viNikkhaMto bhikkhaM gahiUNa bhuMjae
jAva  /  tattha gharakoilo so puvvabhavabbhAsao rosA  /  / 5 /  /  vikkhirai
kayavarAI muNI vi annattha uTThiuMjAi  /  so kuNai taM taheva ya evaM taie vi
ThANammi  /  / 6 /  /  to ciMtai dhammaruI ko eso naMdasarisago pAvo  /  kUraM
nirikkhiUNaM so vi hu bhAsIkao teNa  /  / 7 /  /  tatto mayaMgatIre haMso
mariUNa so samuppanno  /  kAleNa tattha patto viharaMto dhammaruisAhU  /  / 8 /
/  taM daLU so haMso pakkhauDaM bhariya sIyalajalassa  /  puvvabhavakovavasao
AchaMTai sisirasamayammi  /  / 9 /  /  evaM puNo puNo vi hu thakkai na hu jAva
tAva muNiNA vi  /  ko esa naMdakappotti jhAmio teulesAe  /  / 10 /  /  mariUNaM
saMjAo aMjaNaselammi duddharo sIho  /  saha sattheNaM patto kAleNaM tattha sAhU
vi  /  / 11 /  /  daLUNa tayaM sahasA satthaM mottUNa dhAvae kuvio  /  jA
muNivarassa samuho nivArio tAva loeNa  /  / 12 /  /  jA kaha vi no niyattai ko
eso naMdadesio pAvo ?  /  muNiNA vi vigappauM sahasA chArIkao so vi  /  / 13 /
/  mariUNaM so jAo baDuo vANArasIe nayarIe  /  bhikkhaTThAe paviThTho diTTho so
teNa dhammaruI  /  / 14  /  /  to Dime ramamANaM mottUNaM kuNai jAva uvasaggaM
/  puvvabhavavairabhAvA tA tattha vi mArio teNa  /  / 15 /  /  mariUNaM saMjAo
rAyA tattheva sumariuM jAiM  /  ciMtei teNa muNiNA davo haM ettiyabhavesu  /  /
16 /  /  inheiM pi jai DahejjA na hu hohI rajjasaMpayA majjha  /  pecchemi tayaM
jai tA to haM khAmemi niyameNa  /  / 17 /  /  tajjANaNAnimittaM saDDhasilogeNa
puvvabhavacariyaM ! niyayaM savvajaNeNaM paDhAvaI taM silogamimaM  /  / 18  /  /
"gaMgAe nAvio naMdo, sabhAe gharakoelo  /  haMso mayaMgatIrAe, sIho aMjaNapavvae
/  / 1 /  /  vANArasIe baDuo, rAyA tattheva Agao  / " evaM bIyasilogaM, jo pUrai
tassa patthivo dei  /  rajjassa'ddhaM ugghosiyaM ca nayarIe to logo  /  / 19 /
/  raiuM sabuddhivihavANusArao pacchima'ddhamavaNivaI  /  aNusarai tayaM daTuM
na paJcao hoi naravaiNo  /  / 20 /  /  aha dhammaruI vihariya annattha samAgao
tahiM vuttho  /  ujjANammiM ujjANapAlaeNaM paDhijjataM  /  / 21 /  /  gaMgAe
nAvio iya payAI nisuNittu teNa so bhaNio  /  /  vAraM vAraM paripaDhasi kIsa taM
bhadda ! eyaM ? ti  /  / 22 /  /  savvo vi sAhio teNa vaiyaro tassa muNiya
paramatthaM  /  tatto muNiNA taM pacchimaddhamApUriyaM evaM  /  / 23 /  /  eesiM
ghAyago jo u so ettheva samAgao  /  / 2 /  /  tti to taM saMpunapayaM
ghettUNA''rAmio nivasayAsaM  /  patto niveiyaM taM daTuM rAyA bhaubviggo  /  /
24  /  /  2010_02

Page #188 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Chapter:-2 Collection of Examples 147 He fell down in the great circle due to
pride, then he went to hell. This is the result of the evil deeds. ||25|| He was
beaten, he said, "What should I do? What should I take?" But I have been given
the root of suffering by the monks. ||26|| The king of Ujjain, who was known for
his generosity, was asked, "Who did this deed?" He said, "The Muni in the
forest." ||27|| He went there and met the sage, he bowed down to him and asked
for forgiveness. He was forgiven and he accepted the teachings of the monks.
||28|| The Muni, who had attained liberation, was pleased with his previous
deeds. He praised him and made him sit at the feet of his guru. ||29|| He was
purified by the fire of right knowledge, his mind was clear, his remaining karma
was destroyed, he attained happiness and liberation. ||30|| 9. In the commentary
on the Sri Kalpa Sutra, the story of Virakadeva is mentioned in the context of
hatred. In a certain city, the wife of a certain king, Viraka, named Vanamala,
was very beautiful. She was kept in the inner palace. The king was very sad
because of her separation. He would see anyone and say, "Vanamala, Vanamala." In
this way, he would wander around the city surrounded by many people who were
curious. He was seen by the king playing with Vanamala. Then, both of them
thought that they had done something wrong. They died instantly due to a
lightning strike and were reborn together in the Hari Varsha region. When the
king heard that they were dead, he became cautious and said, "Oh, the sin of the
sinners is attached to them." Then, he became detached and practiced austerities
and became a recluse. He saw them with his divine knowledge and thought, "Oh,
these two enemies of mine are enjoying happiness together and will become gods.
Therefore, I will make them fall into hell." With his power, he brought them
here in a shrunken form. He gave them the kingdom and taught them seven vices.
Then, they went to hell. His lineage was Hari Vasa. Here, the bringing of the
couple here, the shrinking of their bodies, the teaching of the vices, and the
going to hell, all are amazing. 10. In the story of the Pandavas, the story of
Balabhadra, who carried Vishnu's body, is mentioned in the context of delusion.
The Muni said, "The knowledge is uninterrupted." Balarama took water and went to
Krishna. ||1|| He said to his brother, "Get up, get up, dear one. This water is
cool and fragrant." ||2|| He washed his face with it and drank some. The fatigue
caused by the journey in the distant wilderness was removed. ||3|| The
charioteer said, "Why are you angry, O lord? Are you wasting time?" ||4||
Krishna said, "This is your anger now, but now be happy. The water is scarce in
this country." ||5|| The charioteer thought, "He is lying. He is tired and wants
to sleep. He is thinking about sleeping." ||6|| Krishna got up and went to
Krishna. There were flies around Krishna. He was confused and covered his face.
||7|| Then, he saw the blood of the slain Kansa and the wounds on his feet.
||8|| 2010_02

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 khaNDa:-2 dRSTAntasamuccayaH 147 mucchAvaseNa mahimaMDalammi paDio tao
pariyaNeNa  /  eso asokkhakArI pahuNo iya jAyakoveNa  /  / 25  /  /  piTTijjaMto
so Aha kavvameyaM kayaM mae neya  /  kiMtu mahaM samaNeNaM samappiyaM
dukakhamUlaM ti  /  / 26 /  /  uvaladdhaceyaNeNaM rannA ujjANapAlao puTTho  /
keNa kayaM kavvamimaM ? so bhaNai vaNammi muNiNa tti  /  / 27  /  /  to tattha
nivo patto risiNo vaMdaNayakhAmaNanimittaM  /  vaMdittu khAmiUNaM paDivajjiya
sAvagaM dhammaM  /  / 28  /  /  saMpatto niyabhavaNe muNI vi sariUNa
puvvaduJcariyaM  /  Aloiya paDikaMto samma gurupAyamUlammi  /  / 29  /  /
sukkajjhANAnaladaDDaghAikammiMghaNo vimalanANo  /  nimmahiyasesakammo
sAsayasokkhaM sivaM patto  /  / 30 /  /  9. dveSadhyAne
zrIkalpasUtrasubodhikAyAM vIrakadevasyAvasaraH  /  kutracinnagare kenacidrAjJA
vIrakazAlApatibhAryA vanamAlAnAmnI surUpeti svAntaH pure kSiptA, sa ca
zAlApatistasyA viyogena vikalo jAto, yaM kaJcana pazyati te 'vanamAlA'
'vanamAlA' iti jalpati, evaM ca kautukaakssiptairnekailokaiH parivRtaH pure
bhraman vanamAlayA samaM krIDatA rAjJA dRSTaH, tatazcA'smAbhiranucitaM kRtamiti
cintayantau tau dampatI tatkSaNAdvidyutpAtena mRtau harivarSakSetre
yugalikatvena samutpannau, zAlApatizca tau mRtau zrutvA 'AH pApinoH pApaM
lagnam' iti sAvadhAno'bhUt, tato'sau vairAgyAttapastaptvA vyantaro'bhUd,
vibhaGgajJAnena ca tau dRSTvA cintitavAn-aho imau madvairiNau
yugalasukhamanubhUya devau bhaviSyatastata imau durgatau pAtayAmIti vicintya
svazaktyA saGkSiptadehI tau ihA''nItavAn, AnIya ca rAjyaM datvA sapta vyasanAni
zikSitau, tatastau tathAbhUtau narakaM gatau, atha tasya vaMzo harivazaH, atra
yugalikasyA'trA''nayanaM zarIrAyuH sakSepaNaM narakagamanaM ceti sarvamAzcaryam
/  10. mohadhyAne zrIpANDavacaritragranthe viSNutanuM vahato balabhadrasya
mohaviDambanA  /  athetyavyAhatajJAno, vyAjahAra munIzvaraH  /  bala:
salilamAdAya, kezavAntikamAyayau  /  / 1 /  /  jalpati sma ca taM
bhrAtaruttiSThottiSTha satvam  /  sphItamastIdamAnItamambhaH surabhi zItalam  /
/ 2 /  /  tat prakSAlya kSaNAdAsyaM, kaNehatya nipIya ca  /
dUrakAntArasaMcArasUtiH zrAntirvinIyatAm  /  / 3 /  /  avyAharati kaMsArau,
sIrabhRt punarabravIt  /  kimu ruSTo'syariSTAre !, kAlakSepAnmanAgapi ?  /  / 4
/  /  eSa te'sAMprataM roSaH, sAMprataM tu prasIda me  /  deze davIyasi
prAptirvAriNo'trAparAdhyati  /  / 5 /  /  tathApyasminnajalpAke,
sIrapANiracintayat  /  zayAno'sti pathi zrAntaH, zetAM nAmaiSa tanmanAk  /  / 6
/  /  ityAlecya sthitaH kRSNaM, paritaH kRSNamakSikAH  /  bhramantI:kSya
saMbhrAntaH, so'pi(pa)ninye'vaguNThanam  /  / 7 /  /  tato'pazyadapetAsuM,
kaMsavidhvaMsanaM halI  /  zoNitaizcolbaNaM bhalivraNaM caraNapallave  /  / 8 /
/  2010_02

Page #189 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter 148: The Scattering of the Eager Refusal  **Verse 9:** Filled with
rage, he roared like a lion, shaking the forest and causing the earth to
tremble.  **Verse 10:**  He spoke, intoxicated with anger, "Who is the sinner,
tell me, who killed my brother, who was sleeping, his life like a boundless
ocean?"  **Verse 11:** "Even in the midst of the sleeping, the intoxicated, the
careless, the children, the women, the ascetics, and the cows, who would dare to
strike a cruel, wicked soul?"  **Verse 12:** "If there is anyone with strong
arms, let him come forward. This is the medicine for all, the arm of those who
are burning with fever."  **Verse 13:** And so on, he spoke many words in anger,
his voice echoing through the mountains. He released a torrent of abuse, and
fainted, falling to the ground.  **Verse 14:**  He regained consciousness in a
moment, and, with the cool winds of the desert, he wept, lamenting with cries of
sorrow.  **Verse 15:** "Alas! He was the only one who was brave in the world!
Alas! He was the only one who was fierce to his enemies! Alas! He was the only
one who was steadfast in his virtues! Alas! He was the only one who was loving
to his teachers!"  **Verse 16:** "Alas! He was the one who destroyed Kamsa!
Alas! He was the one who extinguished the fire of time! Alas! He was the one who
destroyed Jarasandha, the one without a lineage! Alas! He was the one who was
fierce and valiant in battle!"  **Verse 17:** "Alas! He was the one who played
with Lakshmi! Alas! He was the one who was fearless, the crown jewel! Alas! He
was the one who was the banner of fame! Alas! He was the one who was the
festival of Rama's eyes!"  **Verse 18:** "The wounds inflicted by the weapons of
his enemies, those were a burden to him in the past. How can we now bear the
thought of death from this wound on his leg?"  **Verse 19:** "Rise quickly, the
sun is climbing high in the sky. We cannot travel ahead in the heat of the day."
**Verse 20:** "I cannot move because of the pain in my leg. Get on my shoulder,
brother! Are you confused?"  **Verse 21:** "Why do you cry like this? Why don't
you answer me? These ears are eager to drink the nectar of your words."  **Verse
22:** "You were angry with me before, but that anger has never gone away. Now,
even without a reason, why do you hold this long-lasting anger?"  **Verse 23:**
"Alas! Fate! If this was destined to happen, then why did you make this world,
this universe, a place of justice and righteousness?"  **Verse 24:** "Or perhaps
you know that you are mocking me. But even a small sprout can have great
strength."  **Verse 25:** "What is the use of these reproaches? We will face
fate together. We will overcome this evil one."  **Verse 26:** "If you are not
willing to go because of your love for the comfort of sleep, then stay here,
brother, in the shade of this forest."  **Verse 27:**  He spoke these words,
sometimes high, sometimes low, and called the day "the bearer of the sun" and
the night "the one who brings darkness."  **Verse 28:**  With these words, he
urged Achyuta

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 148 AturapratyAkhyAnaprakIrNakam kopATopAttataH siMhanAdamuccaizcakAra saH  /
yenAraNyamRgAstresuH, kampate sma ca kAzyapI  /  / 9 /  /  jagAda ca
madAdhmAtaH, pAtakI nanu ko'sti bhoH ?  /  nidrANamatulaprANaM, yo'vadhInmama
bAndhavam  /  / 10 /  /  supta-matta-pramatteSu, bAla-strI-muni-goSvapi  /
krUrakarmaikacANDAlo'pyabhijJaH prahareta kaH ?  /  / 11 /  /  dordo'pyasti cet
kazcit, tat svamAviHkarotu saH  /  bhujoSmajvariNAM bAhuH, sarveSAmeSa bheSajam
/  / 12 /  /  ityAdyanekazaH kopAdgiramudgIrya lAGgalI  /  tAraM
pUtkAramunmucya, mUrchitaH kSmAtale'patat  /  / 13 /  /  kSaNAcaitanyamAsAdya,
zItaiH kAntAramArutaiH  /  rodayazvApadAn kAmamAkrandaivilalApa saH  /  / 14  /
/  hA ! vizveSvekazauNDIra !, hA ! ripuSvekaroSaNa !  /  hA ! guNiSvekadhaureya
!, hA ! guruSvekavatsala !  /  / 15 /  /  hA ! kaMsadhvaMsaghorAMsa !, hA !
kAlanalanIrada !  /  hA ! niHsandhajarAsandha !, hA ! raNakrUravikrama  /  / 16
/  /  hA ! lakSmIkelipalyaGka !, hA ! niHzaGkaziromaNe !  /  hA !
yazaHkairavArAma !, hA ! rAmanayanotsava !  /  / 17 /  /  zastrAghAtairdviSAM
taistaiH, zramo'pyAsInna te purA  /  saMpratyaGgrivraNAdasmAnmRtyuH zraddhIyatAM
katham ?  /  / 18  /  /  taduttiSTha drutaM bhAnurArohatyantarambaram  /  na
khalvatyAtape'lpIyo'pyagrato gantumIzvahe  /  / 19 /  /  caraNavraNapIDAbhirna
ceJcalitumIziSe  /  tadA''roha mama skandhaM, bandho ! kimasi mohitaH ?  /  / 20
/  /  kimiti krandato'pyevaM, vitarasyuttaraM na me ?  /  ime hi zravasI
pAtumutsuke te vaco'mRtam  /  / 21 /  /  roSaM mayi purA'kArSIH, sA''gasyapi na
jAtucit  /  idAnIM tu vinA'pyAgaH, keyaM te dIrgharoSitA ?  /  / 22 /  /  hA !
daiva ! yadyayaM netuM, cintito'bhUdRzAmimAm  /  tattvayA kiM kRto
vizvamaulilAlitazAsanaH ?  /  / 23 /  /  yadvA jJAtaM nitAntaM yaM,
viDambayitumIhase  /  tasya kandalayasyevamatIva mahatIH zriyaH  /  / 24  /  /
etairvA kimupAlambhairdhAtaryAvaH puraH kvacit  /  daivAya
prabhaviSyAvastatrAmuSmai durAtmane  /  / 25 /  /  nidrAsukhAsikAlobhAd,
gantumutsahase na cet  /  bhrAtastadadya tiSThAvaH, sacchAye'traiva kAnane  /  /
26 /  /  ityAdi pralapannuccAvacena vacasA muhuH  /  sIrabhRttaM dinaM tAM ca,
yAminItyavAhayat  /  / 27  /  /  prage ca vacanaistaistairanutiSThantamacyutam
/  jIvadruddhyA nijaskandhamadhyAropya balo'calat  /  / 28  /  /
skandhanyastaharirbandhusnehavyAmohito halI  /  bhrAmyati sma saricchalakAnanAni
divAnizam  /  / 29 /  /  puSpairvanyadrumANAM ca, nityamAnarca zAGgiNam  /  evaM
rAmo'ticakrAma, SaNmAsAn paryaTan vane  /  / 30 /  /  prApa
prAvRDathA''zAntAnnIlayantI balAhakaiH  /  nUtanairaGkurodgArairmedinImaNDalaM
punaH  /  / 31 /  /  atha grAvamayaM zailAduttIrNa helayA halI  /  syandanaM
kaMcidadrAkSIt, samabhUbhAgabhaGguram  /  / 31 /  /  sajjayastaM jajalpe'tha,
sArathiH sIrapANinA  /  rathe'smin kaNazo bhagne, kaste mUDha ! mudhA zramaH ?
/  / 33 /  /  2010_02

Page #190 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Chapter 2: Collection of Examples 149  The charioteer then said, "In battles,
thousands are killed. Even if he is dead now, by a blow to his foot. ||34|| If
he is a soul, a living being, your relative. Even if he is in pieces, the
chariot will be improved. ||35|| Where is my relative dead? Why are you so sad?
Seeing him crooked again and again, he did not move the plow forward. ||36||
After examining it, he planted a lotus in a stone. The plowman laughed and said
something loudly. ||37|| "What is this, in this extremely hard stone? Will a
lotus sprout even with thousands of efforts? ||38|| He also said, "If this is
true, my brother will live. In this rough stone, a lotus will sprout. ||39||
Even this, the Indian, was helpless in his ignorance. He moved the pestle
forward, clearly laughing. ||40|| Then, seeing the one who was watering the
plant that had been burnt by the fire of the forest, Rama said, "Oh, what a bad
decision! Do burnt plants ever produce shoots? ||42|| He said, "If the body is a
messenger, then this tree will also become a shade. ||43|| Hearing his words,
the plowman moved forward. He saw someone throwing grass into the cow's mouth.
||44|| The cows also said, "How can these be good? Will they eat grass, having
gone to the state of skeletons? ||45|| He also said, "If he is standing with his
feet, he will go. Then the cows will eat these grass shoots. ||46|| Rama then
thought, "Is my brother really dead? Everyone is saying the same thing. ||47||
As long as the consciousness is not completely gone, the plow will move a
little. Then, a god appeared in front of him, his mind at peace. ||48|| He said
to the charioteer, "I am Siddhartha, your charioteer. Due to the power of his
penance, he has attained the state of a god. ||49|| Remember, during your
wandering, you will ask me. You will save me from falling into the ocean of
misery. ||50|| Seeing you now, lost in the sleep of delusion. Remembering your
request, I have come to awaken you. ||51|| When death said to Murari's daughter,
"You are old." What he said, that happened, his words were not false. ||52||
These stones, chariots, etc., are all transformations. I have shown them to you
to remove your brother's delusion. ||53|| Freeing yourself from this delusion,
the accumulation of suffering. Create something great within yourself, karma.
||54|| Relatives are found by souls, birth after birth. But they are the cause
of your delusion, the army of delusion. ||55|| All souls, alas! Deceived by the
love of relatives. They never endure the suffering of karma. ||56|| The love of
relatives is a vast ocean, for those who are going to happiness. It is the
destroyer of that ocean, the resting place of the line of suffering. ||57||
Hearing the words of Siddhartha Deva, the plowman said, "You are right, brother!
I am well-instructed. ||58||  2010_02

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 khaNDa:-2 dRSTAntasamuccayaH 149 sArathistamathovAca, saMgareSu sahasrazaH  /
niyU~Dho'pyadhunA pAdaprahAreNApi yo mRtaH  /  / 34  /  /  so'yaM
cedvizvajIvAturjIvitA tava bAndhavaH  /  khaNDazastadgato'pyeSa, praguNIbhavitA
rathaH  /  / 35  /  /  kva me bandhurmRto'stIti, kAmaM sAsUyamAnasaH  /  taM
muhuH kuTilaM pazyannacAlIllAGgalI puraH  /  / 36 /  /  ropayantaM nirUpyAtha,
zilAyAM nalinI kvacit  /  sArambhamabhyadhAt kaMciducaiHzabdaM hasan halI  /  /
37  /  /  vyAmUDhAtman kimetasminnatyantakaThine'zmani  /  sahasrairapi
yatnAnAM, prarohati sarojinI ?  /  / 38  /  /  so'pyavAdIttavAyaM cet,
prANiSyati sahodaraH  /  pASANe tat khare'pyasmin, prarokSyatyaravindinI  /  /
39 /  /  ityetasyApi bhAratyAmavajJAvivazAzayaH  /
vyaktotprAsasmitasmerazcacAla musalI puraH  /  / 40 /  /  tato
dAvAgninirdagdhaM, siJcantamavanIruham  /  kaMcidArAmikaM rAmaH, pazyati sma
vrajan puraH  /  / 41 /  /  taM cAbhyadhAddhigetAM te, hanta durvyavasAyatAm  /
muJcanti jAtuciddagdhabhUruho'pi kimaGkurAn ?  /  / 42 /  /  sa jagAda yadi
skandhazavo vArtayitA tvayA  /  zAvalIbhavitA bhUyastadA'yamapi pAdapaH  /  / 4
/  /  tAmazrutveva tadvAcamuJcacAla halI puraH  /  dUrvAzca gozavAsyeSu,
kSipantaM kaMcidaikSata  /  / 44 /  /  tamapyabhidadhe gAvaH, kathametAH
parAsavaH  /  dUrvAH kavalayiSyanti, gatAH kaGkAlazeSatAm ?  /  / 45  /  /
tenApyUce bala: padbhyAM, gantA cedeSa saMsthitaH  /  caritArastadA
gAvo'pyamUrdUrvAGkarAnimAna  /  / 46 /  /  rAmo'thAcintayat satyaM, kiM mRto'yaM
mamAnujaH ?  /  vadanti yadamI sarve'pyekarUpamidaM vacaH  /  / 47  /  /
yAvadityAptacaitanyaH, kiMciJcalati lAgalI  /  tAvadudyotitA''zAntaH,
kazcidasthAt puraH suraH  /  / 48 /  /  so'bravIt sIriNaM so'haM, siddhArthaH
sArathistava  /  prabhAvAttapasastasya, devabhUyamapAgamam  /  / 49 /  /
smarasyetat parivrajyAkAle mAmarthayiSyase  /  yanmAmabhyuddharerjAtu, patantaM
vyasanArNave  /  / 50  /  /  tattvAmidAnImAlokya, mohanidrAvisaMsthulam  /
prabodhayitumabhyAgAM, tAM tavAbhyarthanAM smaran  /  / 51 /  /  zrIneminA purA
mRtyurmurArAterjarAsutAt  /  yadUce tattathaivAbhUdanyathA nArhatAM giraH  /  /
52 /  /  etAnyazmarathAdIni, vaikRtAni kiyantyapi  /  bhrAtarmohavyapohAya,
darzitAni mayaiva te  /  / 53 /  /  vimucya tamimaM mohaM, saMdohaM
duHkhasaMpadAm  /  AtmanInaM mahat kiMcit, karma nirmIyatAM tvayA  /  / 54  /  /
bandhavaH khalvavApyante, jIvairjanmani janmani  /  kiM tu te moha
sainyaikaketavo bhavahetavaH  /  / 55 /  /  jIvAH sarve hahA !
bandhusaMhatisnehamohitAH  /  duHkhaploSakSame karmaNyutsahante na jAtucit  /  /
56 /  /  bandhusneho'tarAmbhodhireSyatInAM sukhazriyAm  /  duHkhazreNyAzca
vizrAmadhAmatadvidhunIhi tam  /  / 57  /  /  iti siddhArthadevoktAM,
giramAkarNya lAgalI  /  jalpati sma tvayA bandho!, sAdhu sAdhvasmi bodhitaH  /
/ 58  /  /  2010_02

Page #191 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 150 ## Aaturpratyakhyanaprakiirnakam  "But tell me, brother, what is the
remedy for the grief of Murudvisha, who is deeply afflicted by death? How can he
find solace?" (59)  "He is a god, brother, a tree that fulfills the desires of
the three worlds. There is indeed Bhagavan Nemi, the reliever of the suffering."
(60)  "The rain of nectar from his feet is a shower of blessings. Take
initiation and attain eternal happiness and prosperity." (61)  "Thus, the one
who carried the bow accepted his words. He, along with Murarata, performed the
Agni Karma and other rituals." (62)  "Then, he, with a mind eager for self-
control, went to the sage Vidhyadhara, who was holding a plough." (63)
"Approaching him and bowing, the son of Rohini, with a heart filled with joy,
asked the sage, "Welcome, sir!" (64)  "The sage replied, "Blessings! The Lord,
the fulfiller of all desires, Sriman Nemi, has known your heart and has sent you
to me." (65)  "Do what your mind desires, for the sake of your well-being and
virtuous wealth. This is the time for you to cut the root of your evil deeds."
(66)  "Thus, urged by the sage's enthusiasm, the celestial being, the one who
carried the bow, immediately renounced all vices." (67)  "He instantly
understood the secrets of the Javas, the Atirasyas, and the Ahyas. He realized
that true refinement is not dependent on birth or lineage." (68)  [Sri
Pandavacharitra, Slokas 23 to 90] 11. The story of Kapila, who was driven by
increasing greed, as described in the Sri Uttaraadhyayana Brihadvrutti.  At that
time, in the city of Kosambi, King Jitasattu, a Brahmin named Kasava, proficient
in fourteen branches of knowledge, was highly respected by the king. He was
wealthy and well-off. His wife's name was Jasa. Their son was named Kavila.
Kasava, the father of Kavila, passed away when Kavila was still young. The king
gave the boy a gift of a chariot, which he used to travel around. One day, while
Kavila was riding in the chariot, his mother, Jasa, was distressed. Kavila asked
her, "Mother, why are you so sad?" She replied, "My dear, your father was a
learned man. I wish you could be like him." Kavila said, "I want to learn too."
Jasa said, "I don't know anyone who can teach you." She then said, "There is a
learned Brahmin named Indadatta in the city of Savatthi. He can teach you."
Kavila went to Savatthi and met Indadatta. Indadatta asked him, "Who are you?"
Kavila told him his story. Indadatta agreed to teach him. There was a young man
named Salibhadda who was also studying with Indadatta. He was jealous of Kavila
and tried to harm him. He even tried to kill him. Kavila was a cheerful person
and remained friendly with Salibhadda. He said to him, "You are my brother. I
don't hold any grudge against you. Don't be angry with me. I am going to eat
with my friends. You are welcome to join us." Another servant girl was very fond
of Salibhadda. She was upset with Kavila and tried to harm him. She was unable
to do so

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 150 AturapratyAkhyAnaprakIrNakam kiM tu me kathaya bhrAtardhAturasya muradviSaH
/  mRtyunA'tyantaduHkhArtaH, pravarte kvAtmano hite ?  /  / 59 /  /
devo'bhyadhAnnanu bhrAtatrilokIkalpapAdapaH  /  astyeva
bhagavAnnemi1HkhArtInAmaruMtudaH  /  / 60  /  /  zreyaHpIyUSavarSekaprAvRSaM
tatpadAntike  /  dIkSAmAdAya zAzvatyAmudyacchasva sukhazriya(yA)m  /  / 61 /  /
tatheti pratipedAnastadgiraM sIrabhRttataH  /  tatsameto murArAteragnikarmAdi
nirmame  /  / 62 /  /  tato'sau yAvadatyantaM, saMyamotsukamAnasaH  /  lAGgalI
tAvadadrAkSIdvidyAdharamRSi puraH  /  / 63 /  /  . pratyudgamya praNamyAtha,
rohiNItanayaH kSaNAt  /  papraccha svAgataM harSabaddhotkarSamanA munim  /  / 64
/  /  munirapyabhyadhAdbhadra !, vizvabhadraMkaraH prabhuH  /  zrImannebhidrutaM
jJAtatvanmanAH prajighAya mAm  /  / 65  /  /  tat kuruSva mano'bhISTaM, puSTaye
puNyasaMpadAm  /  kAlo'yameva duSkarmazreNimarmacchide tava  /  / 66 /  /
ityutsAhAgramAnIto, nabhazcaramunegirA  /  prapede sarvasAvadyaviratiM sIrabhRt
kSaNAt  /  / 67  /  /  javAdyatirahasyAnAM, jajJe vijJazca tatkSaNAt  /
bhUyAnna khalu saMskAro, jAtyaratnairapekSyate  /  / 68  /  /
[zrIpANDavacaritra0 zloka 23 taH 90] 11. icchAdhyAne
zrIuttarAdhyayanabRhadvRttisaMdarzitasya pravardhamAnalobhasya
kapilasyAkhyAnakaH  /  teNaM kAleNaM teNaM samaeNaM kosaMbIe NayarIe jitasattU
rAyA, kAsavo baMbhaNo coddasavijjAThANapArago, rAyaNo bahumato, vittI se
uvakappiyA, tassa jasA NAma bhAriyA, tesiM putto kavilo NAma, kAsavo taMmi
kavile khuDDulae ceva kAlagato, tAghe taMmi mae taM payaM rAyaNA aNNassa
maruyagassa diNNaM, so ya AseNa chatteNa ya dharijjamANeNa vaccai, taM daLUNa
jasA paruNNA, kavileNa pucchiyA, tAe siThTha-jahA piyA te evaMvihAe iDDIe
NigacchiyAio, teNa bhaNNati-kathaM ?, sA bhaNati-jeNa so vijjAsaMpaNNo, so
bhaNaiahaMpi ahijjAmi, sA bhaNai-ihaM tuma macchareNa Na koi sikkhaveti, vacca
sAvatthIe nayarIe piimitto iMdadatto NAma mAhaNo so te sikkhAvehitti  /  so gato
tassa sagAsaM, teNa pucchito-kao'si tumaM ?, teNa jahAvattaM kahiyaM, so tassa
sagAse ahijjiuM payatto  /  tattha sAlibhaddo NAma ibbho, so se teNa uvajjhAeNa
NeJcatiyaM davAvito, to tattha jimito 2 ahijjai, dAsaceDI ya taM parivesei  /
so ya hasaNasIlo tIe saddhiM saMpalaggo, tIe bhaNNai-tume me pIto, Na ya te
kiMcivi, Navari mA rusijjAsi, pottamullaNimittaM ahamaNNehiM 2 samaM acchAmi,
iyarahAhaM tujjha ANAbhojjA  /  aNNayA dAsINa maho Dhukkai, sA teNa samaM
NiviNNiyA, NidaM sA na lahai, teNa pucchiyA-kato te aratI ?, tIe bhaNNati-
dAsImaho uvaTThito, mamaM pattapupphAimollaM Natthi, sahIjaNamajhe viguppissaM,
tAhe so adhitiM pagato, tAe bhaNNati-mA addhiti karehi, ettha ghaNoNAma siTThI,
appabhAe ceva je NaM paDhamaM vaddhAvei se do suvaNNae mAsae dei, tatthimaM
gaMtUNa taM vaddhAvehi, 2010_02

Page #192 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Chapter - 2 Collection of Examples  It is said that he was sent away with great
disrespect due to his greed. While going, he was caught and bound by the guards.
Then he was brought before King Prasenajit. The king questioned him, and he
explained his nature. The king said, "If you tell me the way, I will give it to
you." He said, "The way is strange." The king then said, "Think about it, O
Asogavaniya." He thought, "Will I have a house, a bed, a chariot, a garden, and
enjoyment for two months, or will I have ornaments, a house, a bed, a chariot, a
garden, and enjoyment for two months?" He did not settle on anything even after
thinking about a kodi. Thinking, he became aware of the good fortune and the
urge to go. He went to the king's palace, having become self-aware and having
renounced the world. He came to the king's treasury, having renounced the world
and having become self-aware. The king asked him, "What were you thinking
about?" He said, "As much profit, so much greed." The king said, "I will give
you a kodi today." The king, who was a hypocrite, said, "I will give you a kodi
today." He went away and took a kodi. The monk became close to him. || 1 ||  12.
The story of Jamali in the Sri Upadesha Prasada, a discourse on false belief.
There was a city called Kundapura. There lived a prince named Jamali, who was
the nephew of Bhagavan Sri Shaleya. His wife was Priyadarshana, the daughter of
Sri Vardhamana. Jamali enjoyed pleasures with her. One day, the Lord was
wandering and came there. Jamali, seeing him coming, went there, prostrated
himself after circumambulating him, and listened to this Dharmadeshana:  "A
house, friends, sons, wives, Grain, wealth, and the profit of my business. Doing
this, the fool does not know, That he will leave everything and go to the world
of animals." || 1 ||  Hearing these words, he went home, and with great respect,
he took leave of his father and mother and became an ascetic with five hundred
Kshatriyas. Then, Priyadarshana, along with a thousand women, also became an
ascetic. Then, after studying for eleven years, he built a vihara for the Jina.
The Jina remained silent and did not give any answer. Nevertheless, he left with
five hundred monks and went to Sravasti. There, he stayed in the Tindukoda
garden at the caitya. There, he suffered from a severe illness due to the food
he had eaten. He was unable to sit down. Then, he told the monks, "Make a bed
for me quickly, so that I can sit there." They started to do it. Jamali, who was
suffering from a severe fever, asked, "Is the bed made?" The monks, seeing that
it was almost made, said, "It is made," even though it was only half made. Then,
he, with his mind disturbed by pain, got up and saw that the bed was only half
made. He became angry. Remembering the principle, "What is being done is done,"
etc., he thought, "The words of the Lord, 'What is being done is done, what is
moving is moving,' etc., are false. Because this is my direct experience, that
the bed is being made but is not made. Therefore, everything that is being done
is not done. But what is done is called done. What is done, like making a pot,
is seen only at the end of the time of action, but it is

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 khaNDaH - 2 dRSTAntasamuccayaH AmaMti teNa bhaNiyaM  /  tIe lobheNa mA aNNo
gacchihitti atipabhAe pesito, vaccaMto ya ArakkhiyapurisehiM gahito baddho ya  /
tato pabhAe paseNaissa raNNo uvaNIto, rAiNA pucchito, teNa sabbhAvo kahito,
rAyaNA bhaNitojaM maggasi taM demi, so bhaNati - vicitiuM maggAmi, rAyaNA
tahatti bhaNie asogavaNiyAe ciMteumAraddho- kiM dohiM mAsehiM sADigAbharaNe
paDivAsigA jANavAhaNAujjANovabhogA mama vayassANaM pavvAgayANa gharaM
bhajjAcauTThayaM jaMcaNNaM uvaujjaM ?, evaM jAva koDIevi Na ThAeti  /  ciMtaMto
suhajjhavasANo saMvegamAvaNNo jAI sariUNa sayaMbuddho sayameva loyaM kAUNa
devayAdiNNagahiyAyArabhaMDago Agato rAyasagAsaM, rAyaNA bhaNNati - kiM ciMtiyaM
?, so bhaNati - 'jahA lAbho tahA lobho' kaNThyaH, rAyA bhaNati - 'koDiMpi demi
ajjotti bhaNati rAyA pahaTThamuhavaNNo  / ' so'vi caiUNa koDiM jAto samaNo
samipAvo || 1 || 12. mithyAdhyAne zrIupadezaprAsAde jamAleH prabandhaH  /
kuMDapuraM nAma nagaraM  /  tatra bhagavataH zrIzaleyasya bhAgineyo jamAlirnAmA
rAjaputra AsIt  /  tasya ca bhAryA zrIvardhamAnasya duhitA priyadarzanAhvA  /
jamAlistayA samaM bhogAn bubhuje  /  anyadA vibhurviharaMstatrAgAt  /
jamAlistamAyAntaM matvA tatrAgatya pradakSiNApUrvaM natvA
dharmadezanAmimAmazRNot "gRhaM suhRtputrakalatravargo, dhAnyaM dhanaM me
vyavasAyalAbhaH  /  kurvANa itthaM na hi vetti mUDho, vimucya sarvaM vrajatIha
jantuH  /   /  1  /   /  " 151 iti vAcaM zrutvA gRha etya mahatA''dareNa
piturmAtuzcAjJAM lAtvA sa kSAtrapaJcazatIyutaH prAvrajat  /  tadanu
sahastrastrIyutA priyadarzanApi pravrajitA  /  tatazcaikAdazasvaMgeSvadhIteSu
tena jino vihArArthamutkalApitaH  /  jinena tUSNImAsthAya na kiMciduttaramadAyi
/  tathApi paJcazatasAdhuyuto nirgataH zrAvastyAM gataH  /  tatra ca
tiMdukodyAne caitye sthitaH  /  tatrAsyAntaprAntAhAraistIvro rogAtaMkaH
samutpannaH  /  tena ca na zaknotyupaviSTaH sthAtuM  /  tato babhANa zramaNAn -
'mannimittaM zIghrameva saMstArakamAstRNIt, yena tatra tiSThAmi'  /  tatastai;
kartumArabdho'sau  /  bADhaM ca dAhajvarAbhibhUtena jamAlinA pRSTaM - 'saMstRtaH
saMstArako na veti ?'  /  sAdhubhizca saMstRtaprAyatvAdardhasaMstRte'pi proktaM-
'saMstRta iti'  /  tato'sau vedanAvihvalitacetA utthAya tatra
tiSThAsurardhasaMstRtaM taM dRSTvA kruddhaH  /  kriyamANaM kRtaM' ityAdi
siddhAntavacanaM smRtvA mithyAtvodayato vakSyamANayuktibhirvitathamiti
cintayAmAsa - " kriyamANaM kRtaM, calamAnaM calitamityAdibhagavadvacanaM
vitathaM  /  yasmAnmama sAkSAtpratyakSamevedaM vRttaM, yaduta saMstArakaH
kriyamANo na kRtaH  /  tasmAtsarvamapi vastu kriyamANaM kRtaM na syAt  /  kiM tu
kRtameva kRtamucyate  /  yat ghaTAdikAryaM kriyAkAlasyAnta eva bhavadRzyate,
zivasthAsAdyaddhAyAM na dRzyate  /  2010_02

Page #193 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 152 ## The Scattering of the Eager Refutation  "This is established by the
authority of the children," having said this, he spoke his own fabricated
opinion to the Sadhus. Then, the elders of his own sect said, "O Acharya! This
is not a false statement of the Bhagavan, nor is it against the authority.
Because, in a single act like making a pot, there are countless intervening
causes and effects. Bringing the clay, kneading, shaping, drying, and the time
for the pot to be made, all of this is the time for the pot to be made,
according to your opinion. But this is not right. Because, other actions are
begun and completed at every moment, as the time for the action and the time for
the completion of the action are the same. But the pot is begun and completed
only at the end of the time. There is much to be said here, it should be
understood from the great commentary. And as you have said, it is also not right
because of your half-closed vision, because whatever is spread out in a
particular space at a particular time, is spread out there at that time. So, the
cloth is spread out only at the time of spreading out the Western cloth. The
words of the Bhagavan are free from fault because they are relative to specific
time."  Having been unable to understand him with these arguments, the elders
left him and went to the revered Viraantika. Priyadarshana was also there at
that time, in the house of the Shraddha-Dhanka-Kumbha-maker. She was completely
devoted to Jamali's opinion. She was also ready to defend the Dhanka. Then,
knowing that the Dhanka was based on falsehood, she was told, "We do not know
anything about the Neddasham."  On another occasion, while she was engaged in
turning and inverting clay pots in the kitchen, he threw a piece of coal on a
part of her cloth, and while she was studying in that very place, her robe was
burnt. She said, "Shravaka! You have burnt my robe." He said, "But the
Bhagavan's doctrine is that what is burning is burnt, so where and by whom has
your robe been burnt?"  Ignoring his words, she became enlightened and said, "I
am rightly inspired," and having given a false wrong, she went to Jamali and
informed him. When he was not enlightened in any way, she left him alone and
went to the Bhagavan.  Once, Jamali went to Champa and said to the revered Vira,
"O Jin! Your other disciples are living in disguise, having abandoned me. I have
become a born knower, a seer, an Arhat, an omniscient."  Then, Gautama said, "Do
not call yourself Jamali. Knowledge never slips, because it is only for the
knower."  If you are a Kevali, then give me an answer to my question - is this
world eternal or non-eternal? Are these beings eternal or non-eternal?  Hearing
this, he was unable to answer and remained silent like a controlled serpent.
Then, the Vibhu said, "O Jamali! Those disguised disciples are also able to
answer these questions.  "This world is eternal in relation to the past,
present, and future. But it is non-eternal in relation to the ascending and
descending cycles."  "O Jamali! This being is eternal in its essence, always.
But it is not eternal in its transformations as a beast, a human, or a hell-
being."  Not believing the words of his master, he continued to argue with
himself and others, and with false attachment, he continued to defend his
position. In the end, he abandoned the path of liberation, and after
considering, he did not repent. He became

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 152 AturapratyAkhyAnaprakIrNakam AbAlAdhyakSasiddhamevedaM"  /  ityAlocya
sAdhUnAM sa svakalpitaM babhASe  /  tadA svagacchasthavirairidamuktaM "he AcArya
! bhagavadvAkyamidamavitathameva, nAdhyakSaviruddham  /  yata ekasmin
ghaTAdikArye'vAntarakAraNakAryANi saMkhyAtItAni santi  /
mRdAnayanamardanapiMDavidhAnazivakasthAsAdikAla: sarvo'pi
ghaTanivartanakriyAkAla iti tavAbhiprAyaH, ayaM cAyukta eva  /  yatastatra
pratisamayamanyAnyakAryANyArabhyante niSpadyante ca, kAryasya
karaNakAlaniSThAkAlayorekatvAt  /  ghaTastu paryantasamaya evArabhyate tatraiva
niSpadyate ceti  /  atra bahu vaktavyaM, tanmahAbhASyato jJeyam  /  tathA coktaM
bhavatA'rdhasaMstRtadarzanAttadapyayuktaM, yato yadyadA yatrAkAzapradeze ca
samAstIryate, tattadA tatrAstIrNamevedam  /  pAzcAtyavastrAstaraNasamayena
khalvasAvAstIrNa eva  /  viziSTa-samayApekSANi bhagavadvacanAnyato'doSaH  / "
ityAdiyuktibhirabudhyamAnaM taM vihAya sthavirAH zrImadvIrAntike yayuH  /
priyadarzanApi tadA tatraiva zrAddhaDhaMkakuMbhakRdgRhe AsIt  /  sA
jamAlyanurAgeNa tanmatameva prapannA  /  DhaMkamapi vyuddhAhayituM pravRttA  /
tato DhaMkena mithyAtvamupagateyamiti jJAtvA proktaM-'neddazaM vayaM kimapi
jAnImaH  / " anyadA cApAkamadhye mRdbhAjanodvartanaparAvartanaM kurvatA
tenAGgAramekaM vastraikadeze prakSipya tatraiva pradeze svAdhyAyaM kurvatyAH
priyadarzanAyAH saMghATyaMcalo dagdhaH  /  tayA proktaM-"zrAvakaM ! tvayA
madIyasaMghATikA dagdhA'  /  tenoktaM-"nanu dahyamAnaM dagdhamiti bhagavatAM
siddhAntaH, tataH kva kena tvadIyA saMghATI dagdhA  / " ityAdi taduktaM
paribhAvya saMbuddhA sA samyag preritAsmItyabhidhAya mithyAduSkRtaM dattvA
jamAliM gatvA prajJApayati  /  yadA'sau kathamapi na prabuddhastadA tamekAkinaM
muktvA bhagavatsamIpamAjagAma  /  ekadA jamAlizcaMpAyAmetya zrIvIramabravIt-"he
jina ! mAM muktvA'nye tava ziSyAzchAdmasthyenaiva viharanti  /  ahaM
tUtpannajJAnadarzano'rhan sarvajJo jAtaH  / " tataH sa gautamenoce, jamAle iti
mA vada  /  skhalati kvApi na jJAnaM, kevalajJAnino yataH  /  / 1 /  /  yadi
kevalI tvamasi, tarhi matpraznottaraM prayaccha - ayaM lokaH zAzvato'zAzvato vA
? ime jIvA nityAH kiM vA'nityAH?  /  iti zrutvA sa taduttaramalabhamAno maunaM
dadhau niyaMtritasarpa iva  /  tato vibhuH prAha - "he jamAle ! ye chadmasthAH
ziSyAste'pi anayoruttaraM vyAkartumIzate "nityo bhUtabhavadbhAvyapekSayA loka
eSakaH  /  anityaH punarutsarpiNyavasarpiNyapekSayA  /  / 1 /  /  dravyarupeNa
jIvo'yaM jamAle ! zAzvataH sadA  /  tiryagnRnArakAmatyaiH paryAyaistu na
zAzvataH  /  / 2 /  / " svAmino vAkyamazraddadhAnaH svaM ca paraM
cotsUtrAropaNairmithyAbhinivezena vyudgAhayan avasAne sa pakSAzanatyAgaM
vidhAyAnAlocyApratikrAnto lAntake kilbiSikastrayodazapayodhyAyuH sthityotpannaH
/  2010_02

Page #194 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Chapter 2: Collection of Examples 153 12. The story of Govinda-vachana in the
commentary on the Upadesha-pada. This story of Govinda-vachana is found. As it
happened, in a certain city, a Suri was insulted by the wicked. ||1|| Govinda, a
Shakyabhikshu, was a great orator, a destroyer of the pride of all learned men,
and he was striving to uplift the Danavas. ||2|| Pair. || He went to the vihara,
accompanied by the Munis, who were well-versed in the scriptures, proficient in
the art of debate, and wise in logic. ||3|| Sri-Gupta, a Suri, was a great
luminary, a shining star of the great beings. He was a virtuous man, and he
stood firm in his place, adorned with great fame. ||4|| As the moon shines
brightly in the sky, adorned with the stars, so he shone brightly among his own
followers. ||5|| As the fragrance of flowers fills all directions, so the minds
of the people were filled with the fragrance of his virtues. ||6|| The people of
that city, who were well-versed in the virtues, were filled with joy at the
sight of the Suri. They were like thorns in the lotus feet of the Suri. ||7||
They heard the Dharma spoken by the Jinas, which destroys karma. They were
filled with joy and meditation, and their minds were filled with the teachings
of the Suri. ||8|| A great wave of knowledge spread throughout the city. I do
not think there was anyone who was not amazed by the Suri. ||9|| As a person who
has removed seven veils becomes proud, so Govinda became proud when he heard the
teachings of the Suri. ||10|| Who, in the presence of me, who am an ocean of
knowledge, can achieve fame in the dark? ||11|| With pride in his heart, he
challenged the Suri to a debate. ||12|| He was defeated by the Suri, who was
like a torrent of rain, and his arguments were scattered like dust. ||13|| He
realized that he was not equal to the Suri. He thought, "I will not be defeated
by him until I have mastered the scriptures." ||14|| He left the city and went
to a distant land. He studied the scriptures diligently, and he became confident
in his knowledge. ||15|| He was eager to debate with the Suri again. He was
determined to defeat him. ||16|| He was not able to defeat the Suri, who was
like a great wave, and he was defeated again. ||17|| He went to another city and
studied the scriptures again. He was determined to defeat the Suri. ||18|| He
challenged the Suri to a debate again, but he was defeated again. ||19|| He went
to another city and studied the scriptures again. He was determined to defeat
the Suri. ||20|| He studied the scriptures of the plants, and he argued that
plants are living beings. ||21|| He said, "This is also a living being, this is
also a living being. This is also a sentient being, this is also a sentient
being. This is also a mind-possessing being, this is also a mind-possessing
being. This is also a being that is cut and joined, this is also a being that is
cut and joined. This is also a being that has food, this is also a being that
has food. This is also a being that is not a self, this is also a being that is
not a self. This is also a being that has four elements, this is also a being
that has four elements. This is also a being that is subject to change, this is
also a being that is subject to

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 khaNDa:-2 dRSTAntasamuccayaH 153 12. mithyAdhyAne zrIupadezapadavyAkhyAyAM
zrIgovindavAcakavRttAntaH  /  govindavAcakasyAyaM vRttAnta upalabhyate  /
yathAsInagare kvApi suribhirduSkRtAspade  /  / 1 /  /  govindo nAma
niHzeSavidvajjanamadApahaH  /  zAkyabhikSurmahAvAdI dAnavoddharaceSTitaH
||2||yugmm  /  /  tatrAyayau vihAreNa kadAcinmunibhirvRtaH  /
siddhAntazabdasAhityacchandastarkavicakSaNaiH  /  / 3 /  /  zrIguptanAmakaH
sUribhUribhavyakajAMzumAn  /  sAdhulokocitasthAne tasthau sthAsnuyazobharaH  /
/ 4 /  /  grahatArAgaNairinduruDhyotitanabhastalaiH  /  yathA babhastyeSa bhRzaM
tathAntevAsibhirnijaiH  /  / 5 /  /  yathA saurabhasaMbhArabharitAkhiladiGmukhe
/  bhaveyuralino lInAH padmasadmani mAnase  /  / 6 /  /  tathA guNajJastatratyo
janaH sammadasaGgataH  /  tasya sUreH padAmbhojamAlilye zalyasUdinaH  /  / 7 /
/  zuzrAva ca jinairuktaM dharmaM karmakSayAvaham  /
tenocyamAnamAnandadhyAnavyAptavihAyasA  /  / 8 /  /  jAtaH pravAdo nagare
zrutaratnamahodadhiH  /  na samasti jane manye sUrerasmAdgatasmayaH  /  / 9 /  /
yathA saptacchadAmodvAraNo madamaznute  /  tatpravAdazrutestadvad govindo
vihvalo'bhavat  /  / 10 /  /  ko nAma mayi pANDityamahAsAgarapArage  /
vijRmbhamANe labhatAmilAyAmujjvalaM yazaH ?  /  / 11 /  /  garvodgrIvatayA
samyak kiJcidagre'nibhAlayan  /  sUreH samIpe saMprApa saMzrito vAdasaGgaram  /
/ 12 /  /  vAcoyuktibhirUJcAbhizcitrAbhiracirAdapi  /  reNuvad meghadhArAbhiH
sUriNA nisphurIkRtaH  /  / 13 /  /  vilakSabhAvaM bhUyAMsaM sa sampanno
vyacintayat  /  na yAvadetatsiddhAntamadhyaM labdhaM kathaJcana  /  / 14 /  /
tAvanna jIyate tasmAdapakramya pradezataH  /  dUradezAMntaraprAptau satyAM
sUryantarAntike  /  / 15 /  /  samutpAditavizvAso didIkSe dakSabhAvataH  /
lagnaH siddhAntamadhyetuM paraM satvaramAnasaH  /  / 16 /  /  viparyAsAJca no
samyaktaM borbu pArayatyasau  /  katiciddinAtyaye jAte bhUyaH sambhUya saugataH
/  / 17 /  /  upatasthe tathaivAsau sUriNA'nuttarIkRtaH  /  bhUyo'pyanyAM dizaM
gatvA pravrajyAdhItya cAgamam  /  / 18 /  /  kiJcittathaiva samadaH prapede
vAdavAJchayA  /  tameva sUriM tenApi, zaktyA nIto vilakSatAm  /  / 19 /  /
bhUyastRtIyavArAM sa dUradezAntarAzrayAt  /  gRhItadIkSa Acare
AdyAdhyayanasaMzrite  / 20 /  /  vanaspatInAmuddeze papAThAlApakAnimAn  /
vanaspatInAM jIvatvasAdhakAn zuddhayuktibhiH  /  / 21 /  /  yathA-"imaMpi
jAidhammayaM eyaMpi jAidhammayaM  /  imaMpi vuvidhammayaM eyaMpi vuDdidhammayaM
/  imaMpi cittamaMtayaM eyaMpi cittamaMtayaM  /  imaMpi chinnaM milAi eyaMpi
chinnaM milAi  /  imaMpi AhArayaM eyapi AhAragaM  /  imaMpi aNiyayaM eyaMpi
aNiyayaM  /  imaMpi asAsayaM eyaMpi asAsayaM  /  imaMpi cauvacaiyaM eyaMpi
cauvacaiyaM  /  imaMpi vipariNAmayaM eyapi vippariNAmayamiti  /  / " 2010_02

Page #195 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 154 ## Aaturpratyakhyanaprakirnakam  Before the Shakyamat-culture, as a
living being, he did not believe in trees. He did not believe in the decrease of
delusion in any way. ||22|| Like a person born blind, he was attached to sight,
unable to see the trees. He clearly expressed his own opinion as a living being.
||23||   Even then, the Guru initiated him again. He was born as the head of the
age, having attained the knowledge of the speaker. ||24||  13. The story of Shri
Jnata Dharma in the Murchaadhyana Agama, the account of Kanakdhvaj.  Thus, O
Jambhoo! In that time, in that era, there was a city named Teyalipuram, in the
region of Ujjain, ruled by a king. The king's queen was named Paumavati, and the
king's minister in Teyalipuram was named Samadanda. In that Teyalipuram, there
was a wealthy merchant named Kala, who was very prosperous. His wife's name was
Bhadda. Kala, the wealthy merchant, had a daughter named Pottila, who was
beautiful, youthful, and fair-skinned, with a perfect body.  Pottila, the
daughter, would often go out to enjoy the fresh air, adorned with all ornaments,
surrounded by her maids, and would roam about in the sky and on the ground,
moving like a lightning bolt. She would pass by the house of Kala, the wealthy
merchant, near the place where the minister of Teyalipuram was standing.  As
Pottila, the daughter, was roaming about in the sky and on the ground, moving
like a lightning bolt, near the house of Kala, the wealthy merchant, she was
seen by a young man from a wealthy family. He was struck by her beauty, youth,
and fairness, and he called out to her. He said, "O, you who are dear to the
gods! What is the name of this daughter?"  The young man from the wealthy family
told the minister of Teyalipuram, "Sir, this is Pottila, the daughter of Kala,
the wealthy merchant, and the daughter of Bhadda. She is beautiful, youthful,
and fair-skinned, and her body is perfect."  The minister of Teyalipuram, who
was standing near his chariot, heard this and said, "Go, you who are dear to the
gods! Go and ask Kala, the wealthy merchant, for his daughter Pottila to be my
wife."  The young man from the wealthy family, having been told this, was very
happy. He bowed his head, folded his hands, and said, "Yes, sir!" He then went
to the house of Kala, the wealthy merchant.  Kala, the wealthy merchant, saw the
young man coming. He got up from his seat, welcomed him with respect, and
offered him a seat. He then sat down and spoke to him with a smile.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 154 AturapratyAkhyAnaprakIrNakam sa zAkyamatasaMskArAt pUrvaM jIvatayA tarUn  /
na zraddadhe tadAnIM tu kathaJcinmohahrAsataH  /  / 22 /  /  jAtyandha iva
dRSTyAptau lagno draSTuM vanaspatIn  /  jIvatvena sphuTIbhUya sa Acakhyau
nijAzayam  /  / 23 /  /  gurostenApi dIkSAsmai punaH prAdIyatAditaH  /  jAto
yugapradhAno'sau vAcakatvopalabdhitaH  /  / 24 /  /  13. mUrchAdhyAne
zrIjJAtAdharmakathA''game kanakadhvajasya prabandhaH  /  evaM khalu jaMbU ! te
NaM kAle NaM te NaM samae NaM teyalipuraM nAma nagaraM, pamayavaNe NAma ujjANe,
kaNagarahe rAyA, tassa NaM kaNagarahassa paumAvatI devI, tassa NaM kaNagarahassa
teyalipute NAmaM amacce sAmadaMDa0  /  tattha NaM teyalipure kalAde nAmaM
mUsiyAradArae hotthA aDDe jAva aparibhUte  /  tassa NaM bhaddA nAma bhAriyA  /
tassa NaM kalAyassa mUsiyAradAragassa dhUyA, bhaddAe attiyA, poTTilA nAmaM
dAriyA hotthA rUveNa jovvaNeNa ya lAvaNNeNa ya ukkiTThA ukkiTThasarIrA  /  tate
NaM poTTilA dAriyA annadA kadAi pahAtA savvAlaMkAravibhUsiyA
ceDiyAcakkavAlasaMparivuDA uppiM pAsAyavaragayA AgAsatalagaMsi kaNagatiMdUsaeNaM
kIlamANI 2 viharati, imaM ca NaM teyaliputte amace pahAe AsakhaMdhavaragate
mahayA bhaDacaDagara [vaMdaparikkhite] AsavAhaNiyAe NijjAyamANe kalAyassa
mUsiyAradAragassa gihassa adUrasAmaMteNaM vItivayati  /  tate NaM se teyaliputte
amaJce mUsiyAradAraga[ssa] gihassa adUrasAmaMteNaM vItivayamANe 2 poTTilaM
dAriyaM uppiM pAsAyavaragayaM AgAsatalagaMsi kaNagatiMdUsaeNaM kIlamANiM pAsati,
2 poTTilAe dAriyAe rUve ya jovvaNe ya lAvaNNe ya jAva ajjhovavanne
koDuMbiyapurise saddAveti, 2 ttA evaM vadAsI-esa NaM devANuppiyA ! kassa dAriyA
kiMnAmadhejjA vA ? tate NaM te koTuMbiyapurisA teyaliputtaM evaM vadAsI-esa NaM
sAmI ! kalAyassa mUsiyAradArayassa dhUyA, bhaddAe attayA, poTTilA nAmaM dAriyA
rUveNa ya jAva sarIrA  /  tate NaM se teyaliputte amaJce AsavAhaNiyAo
paDiniyatte samANe abhiMtaraTThANijje purise saddAveti, 2 ttA evaM vadAsI-
gacchaha NaM tubbhe devANuppiyA ! kalAdassa mUsiyAradArayassa dhUyaM bhaddAe
attayaM poTTilaM dAriyaM mama bhAriyattAe vareha  /  tate NaM te
abhiMtaraTThANijjA purisA tetaliNA evaM vuttA samANA haTTa [tuTThA] karayala
[pariggahiyaM dasaNahaM sirasAvattaM matthae aMjaliM kaTTa evaM devo] tahatti
[ANAe viNaeNa vayaNaM paDisuNeti, paDisuNettA teyaliputtassa amaccassa aMtiyAto
paDiNikkhamaMti, paDiNikkhamettA teyalipurassa nagarassa majjhamajjheNaM] jeNeva
kalAyassa mUsiyAradArayassa gihe teNeva uvAgayA  /  tate NaM se kalAe
mUsiyAradArae te purise ejjamANe pAsati, 2 ttA haTThatuDhe AsaNAo abbhuDheti, 2
ttA sattaTThapadAtiM aNugacchati, 2 ttA AsaNeNaM uvaNimaMteti, 2 Asatthe
vIsatthe suhAsaNavaragae 2010_02

Page #196 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Chapter:-2 Collection of Stories 155 Thus you say-O Devānupāyā! What is the
arrival of the bride? Then they, the men of the inner quarters, say to the maid-
servant-We, O Devānupāyā! want to give your daughter in marriage to Teyalipuṭṭa
for his wife. Do you know, O Devānupāyā! whether it is proper, or possible, or
advisable, or whether there is a suitable match, give your daughter in marriage
to Teyalipuṭṭa. Then say, O Devānupāyā! what shall we give as a gift? Then the
maid-servant says to those men of the inner quarters-This, O Devānupāyā! is my
son Teyalipuṭṭa, he will do a favour for me for the sake of my daughter. Those
men of the inner quarters honour him with abundant food, drink, eatables, and
drinkables, flowers, clothes, and even ornaments. Then they go out of the maid-
servant's house, and as soon as they reach Teyalipuṭṭa's house, they inform
Teyalipuṭṭa. Then the maid-servant, on some auspicious day, in some auspicious
three-part-time, auspicious constellation, and auspicious moment, adorns her
daughter with all ornaments, and makes her ready, and then, accompanied by her
friends, relatives, and attendants, she goes out of the house, and then, with
all pomp and ceremony, she reaches Teyalipuṭṭa's house, and then she gives her
daughter in marriage to Teyalipuṭṭa herself. Then Teyalipuṭṭa receives his
bride, and then he ties a thread with the adorned bride, and then he bathes
himself with white and yellow pitchers, and then he performs the fire-sacrifice,
and then he performs the hand-taking ceremony, and then he honours the bride and
her friends, relatives, and attendants with abundant food, drink, eatables, and
drinkables, flowers, clothes, and even ornaments. Then Teyalipuṭṭa lives happily
with his bride. Then the king of that city, in his kingdom, in his army, in his
vehicles, in his treasury, in his storehouse, in his palace, in his fort, in his
army, in his sons, mutilates, cuts off the fingers of the disobedient, cuts off
the thumbs of the disobedient, and similarly mutilates the toes and thumbs, cuts
off the ear-lobes, breaks the noses, mutilates the limbs. Then, on some previous
occasion, at some previous time, the queen Paumavati, in her mind, in her
thoughts, in her heart, in her intentions, had thought thus-If the king of that
city, in his kingdom, in his army, in his vehicles, in his treasury, in his
storehouse, in his palace, in his fort, in his army, in his sons, mutilates,
cuts off the fingers of the disobedient, cuts off the thumbs of the disobedient,
and similarly mutilates the toes and thumbs, cuts off the ear-lobes, breaks the
noses, mutilates the limbs, then, if I give my daughter in marriage, then,
surely, my daughter will be in danger of being killed or imprisoned by the king
of that city. Thus she thought, and then she informed Teyalipuṭṭa, and said-
Thus, O Devānupāyā! the king of that city, in his kingdom, in his army, in his
vehicles, in his treasury, in his storehouse, in his palace, in his fort, in his
army, in his sons, mutilates, cuts off the fingers of the disobedient, cuts off
the thumbs of the disobedient, and

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 khaNDa:-2 raSTAntasamuccayaH 155 evaM vadAsI-saMdisaMtu NaM devANuppiyA !
kimAgamaNapaoyaNaM ? tate NaM te abhiMtaraTThANijjA purisA kalAyaM
mUsiyAradArayaM evaM vadAsI-amhe NaM devANuppiyA ! tava dhUyaM bhaddAe attayaM
poTTilaM dAriyaM teyaliputtassa bhAriyattAe varemo  /  taM jati NaM jANasi
devANuppiyA ! juttaM vA pattaM vA salAhaNijjaM vA, sariso vA saMjogo, dijjau NaM
poTTilA dAriyA teyaliputtassa  /  tA bhaNa devANuppiyA ! kiM dalAmo sukaM ? tate
NaM kalAe mUsiyAradArae te abhiMtaraTThANijje purise evaM vadAsI-esa ceva NaM
devANuppiyA ! mama suMke jannaM tetaliputte mama dAriyAnimitteNaM aNuggahaM
kareti  /  te abhiMtaraTThANijje purise vipuleNaM asaNa-pANa-khAima-sAimeNaM
puSpha-vattha jAva mallAlaMkAreNaM sakkAreti sammANeti, 2 paDivisajjeti  /  tae
NaM te kalAyassa mUsiyAradAragassa gihAto paDinikkhamaMti, 2 jeNeva teyaliputte
amaJce teNeva uvAgacchaMti, 2 teyaliputtassa amaJcassa eyamaTuM nivetiti  /
tate NaM kalAe mUsiyAradArae annayA kayAi sohaNaMsi tihi-karaNa-nakkhatta-
muhuttaMsi poTTilaM dAriyaM pahAyaM savvAlakArabhUsiyaM sIyaM duruhai, 2 ttA
mitta-NAi-[niyagasayaNa-saMbaMdhi-parijaNa] saMparivuDe sAto gihAto
paDinikkhamati, 2 ttA savviDDIe teyalipuraM majhamajheNaM jeNeva tetali
[putta]ssa gihe teNeva uvAgacchati, 2 ttA poTTilaM dAriyaM tetaliputtassa
sayameva bhAriyattAe dalayati  /  tate NaM se tetaliputte poTTilaM dAriyaM
bhAriyattAe uvaNIyaM pAsati, 2 ttA haTTha[tuTTe] poTTilAe saddhiM paTTayaM
duruhati, 2 ttA setApItaehiM kalasehiM appANaM majjAveti, 2 ttA aggihomaM
kAreti, 2 ttA pANiggahaNaM kareti, 2 ttA poTTilAe bhAriyAe mitta-NAti jAva
parijaNaM vipuleNaM asaNa-pANa-khAtima-sAtimeNaM puppha-vattha jAva
paDivisajjeti, 2 tate NaM se tetaliputte poTTilAe bhAriyAe aNuratte aviratte
orAlaiM jAva viharati  /  tate NaM se kaNagarahe rAyA rajje ya raTTe ya bale ya
vAhaNe ya kose ya koTThAgAre ya aMteure ya mucchite gaDhie gijjhe ajjhovavanne
jAte jAte putte viyaMgeti, appegatiyANaM hatthaMguliyAo chiMdati, appegatiyANaM
hatthaMguTThae chiMdati, evaM pAyaMguliyAo pAyaMguTThae vi[yaMgeti],
kaNNasakkulIo vi[yaMgeti], nAsApuDAiM phAleti, aMgamaMgAiM viyaMteti  /  tate
NaM tIse paumAvatIe devIe annayA puvvarattAvarattakAlasamayaMsi ayameyArUve
ajjhatthie ciMtie patthie maNogae saMkappe samuppajjitthAevaM khalu kaNagarahe
rAyA rajje ya jAva putte viyaMgeti jAva aMgamaMgAI viyaMteti, taM jati NaM ahaM
dArayaM payAyAmi seyaM khalu mamaM taM dAragaM kaNagarahassa rahassiyayaM ceva
sArakkhamANIe saMgovemANIe viharittae tti kaTTa evaM saMpeheti, 2 teyaliputtaM
amaJcaM saddAveti, 2 evaM vadAsI-evaM khalu devANuppiyA ! kaNagarahe rAyA rajje
ya jAva viyaMgeti, taM jati NaM ahaM devANuppiyA ! dAragaM 2010_02

Page #197 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Eager Rejection of the Child  I will tell you, O King, the secret of the
city and the secret of the child, which was kept safe, protected, and nurtured
by the queen. This child will be the food for you, for me, and for the queen,
from the time it was born until it reaches adulthood.  The queen, the daughter
of the king, heard this, and she agreed.  The queen, the daughter of the king,
and the queen, the wife of the king, both conceived at the same time and both
carried their children for the same length of time. The queen, the daughter of
the king, gave birth to a child after nine months. On the same night that the
queen, the daughter of the king, gave birth, the queen, the wife of the king,
also gave birth to a child.  The queen, the daughter of the king, called her
maid, and said to her, "Go, O maid, and tell the king the secret." The maid
heard this, and went out through the back door. She went to the king's house,
and when she reached the king, she said, "O King, the queen, the daughter of the
king, has given birth." The king, hearing this, was very happy and went out with
the maid. He entered the house through the back door, and went to the queen, the
daughter of the king. He bowed his head and folded his hands, and said, "O King,
what should I do?" The queen, the daughter of the king, said to the king, "O
King, the king of the city has given birth to a child, and I, O King, have given
birth to a child after nine months. O King, take this child, and it will be the
food for you, for me, and for the queen." She placed the child in the king's
hands. The king took the child from the queen, the daughter of the king, and
kissed it. He went out through the back door, and went to his house, where his
wife, the queen, was. He said to her, "O King, the king of the city has given
birth to a child, and this child is the son of the king of the city, the
daughter of the king. O King, take this child and keep it safe, protect it, and
nurture it." He placed the child in the queen's hands. The queen took the child
and kissed it. She went inside through the back door, and went to the queen, the
daughter of the king. She placed the child in the queen's hands, and left.  The
queen's maids took the child and went to the king of the city. They bowed their
heads and folded their hands, and said, "O King, the queen, the daughter of the
king, has given birth to a child."

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 AturapratyAkhyAnaprakIrNakam payAyAmi, tate gaM tumaM kaNagarahassa
rahassiyayaM ceva aNupuvveNaM sArakkhamANe saMgovemANe saMvaDDhehi, taNaM se dAe
ummuktabAlabhAve jAva jovvaNagamaNuppatte tava ya mama ya bhikkhAbhAyaNe
bhavissati  /  taNaM se teyaliputte amace paumAvatIe eyamahaM paDisuNeti, 2 ttA
paDigae  /  156 tate NaM paumAvatI ya devI poTTilA ya amacI samameva gabbhaM
geNhaMti, samameva parivahaMti  /  tate NaM sA paumAvatI navahaM mAsANaM jAva
piyadaMsaNaM surUvaM dAragaM payAyA  /  jaM rayaNiM ca NaM paumAvatI dArayaM
payAyA taM rayaNiM ca NaM poTTilA vi amacI navaNhaM viNihAyamAvannaM dAriyaM
payAyA  /  tate NaM sA paumAvatI devI ammadhAtiM saddAneti, 2 tA evaM vadAsI -
gacchaha NaM tume ammo ! teyaliputtaM rahassiyayaM ceva saddAvehi  /  tate NaM
sA ammadhAtI tahatti paDisuNeti, 2 ttA aMteurassa avaddAreNaM niggacchati, 2 ttA
jeNeva teyali [ putta]ssa gihe, jeNeva teyaliputte teNeva uvAgacchati, 2
karayala jAva evaM vadAsI - evaM khalu devANuppiyA ! paumAvatI devI sahAveti  /
tate NaM teyaliputte ammadhAtIe aMtie emaTThe socA NisammA haTThatuTThe
ammadhAtIe saddhiM sAto gihAto Niggacchati, 2 aMteurassa avaddAreNaM
rahassiyayaM ceva aNupavisati, 2 ttA jeNeva paumAvatI teNeva uvAgacchati, 2 ttA
karayala [pariggahiyaM dasaNahaM sirasAvattaM matthae aMjali kaTTu ] evaM
vadAsI-saMdisaMtu NaM devANuppiyA ! jaM mae kAyavvaM  /  tate NaM paumAvatI
tetaliputtaM evaM vadAsI evaM khalu kaNagarahe rAyA jAva viyaMgeti, ahaM ca NaM
devANuppiyA ! NavaNhaM mAsANaM dAragaM payAyA, taM tumaM NaM devANuppiyA ! etaM
dAragaM geNhAhi jAva tava ya mama ya bhikkhAbhAyaNe bhavissati tti kaTTu
teyaliputtassa hatthe dalayati  /  tate NaM teyaliputte paumAvatIte hatthAto
dAragaM geNhati, 2 ttA uttarijjeNaM piheti, 2 ttA aMteurassa rahastiyayaM
avaddAreNaM niggacchati, 2 ttA jeNeva sae gihe, jeNeva poTTilA bhAriyA, teNeva
uvAgacchati, 2 poTTilaM evaM vadAsI evaM khalu devANuppiyA ! kaNagarahe rAyA
rajje ya jAva viyaMgeti, ayaM ca NaM dArae kaNagarahassa putte paumAvaIe attae,
taM NaM tumaM devANuppiyA ! imaM dAragaM kaNagarahassaraNo rahassiyayaM ceva
aNupuvveNaM sArakkhAhi ya saMgovehi ya saMvaDDhehi ya  /  tate NaM esa dArae
ummukkavAlabhAve tava ya mama ya paumAvatIe ya AhAre bhavissati tti kaTTu
poTTilA pA Nikkhivati, 2 ttA poTTilAe pAsAo taM viNihAyamAvanniyaM dAriyaM
geNhati 2 ttA uttarijjeNaM piheti, 2 ttA aMteurassa avaddAreNaM aNupavisati, 2
ttA jeNeva paumAvatI devI teNeva uvAgacchati, 2 ttA paumAvatIe devIe pAse
ThAveti, 2 jAva paDiniggate  /  tate NaM tIse paumAvatIe aMgapaDiyAriyAo
paumAvatiM deviM viNihAyamAvanniyaM ca dAriyaM payAyaM pAsaMti, 2 ttA jeNeva
kaNagarahe rAyA teNeva uvAgacchaMti 2 ttA karayala [ pariggahiyaM dasaNahaM
sirasAvattaM matthae 2010_02

Page #198 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Chapter 2: Collection of Examples 157  "She clasped her hands and said, 'Thus,
indeed, Sami! Paumavati Devi gave me as a gift. Then, the king of Kanagaraha, in
order to take possession of this gift, did many things, including causing me
much suffering. Then, she said to the Tetiliputra, 'I will give you a gift, O
noble householder!' Then, she said, 'Quickly, let us go to the city of
Kanagaraha, so that this gift may be given to the king of Kanagaraha, and so
that the gift may be enjoyed by us.' Then, she, the pot-bearer, was not dear,
not beloved, not pleasing, not respected, not honored by the Tetiliputra, even
though she was his wife. The Tetiliputra did not desire to hear her name, let
alone see her or enjoy her. Then, she, the pot-bearer, thought, pondered, and
reflected on the past, present, and future, and a thought arose in her mind:
'Indeed, I was dear, beloved, pleasing, respected, and honored by the
Tetiliputra in the past. Now, I am not dear, not beloved, not pleasing, not
respected, not honored. The Tetiliputra does not desire to hear my name, let
alone enjoy me.' She was filled with sorrow and grief.  Then, the Tetiliputra
saw her sorrow and grief, and said, 'Do not, O beloved of the gods! Be filled
with sorrow and grief. You will cause me much suffering in terms of food, drink,
clothing, and bedding. You will cause me to give alms to many monks, Brahmanas,
and householders.' Then, she, the pot-bearer, was pleased by the Tetiliputra's
words, and she agreed. She gave him much food, drink, clothing, and bedding, and
she gave alms to many monks, Brahmanas, and householders.  Then, at that time,
at that moment, there were many ascetics named Suvvyaya, who were well-behaved,
well-disciplined, well-controlled, and well-versed in the scriptures. They were
well-known and had many followers. They came to the city of Tetiliputra, and
they entered the city with great joy. They lived in self-control and austerity,
and they were well-behaved.  Then, some of these ascetics named Suvvyaya
gathered together in a meeting, and they decided to go to the Tetiliputra's
house. Then, she, the pot-bearer, saw these ascetics, and she was pleased. She
got up from her seat, and she bowed and prostrated herself before them. She
offered them much food, drink, clothing, and bedding. She said, 'Indeed, O
ascetics! I was dear, beloved, pleasing, respected, and honored by the
Tetiliputra in the past. Now, I am not dear, not beloved, not pleasing, not
respected, not honored. The Tetiliputra does not desire to hear my name, let
alone see me or enjoy me. You, O ascetics, are well-known, well-learned, and
well-versed in the scriptures. You have traveled to many villages and towns, and
you have seen many things.'

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 khaNDa:-2 dRSTAntasamuccayaH 157 aMjaliM kaTTa] evaM vadAsI-evaM khalu sAmI !
paumAvatI devI maelliyaM dAriyaM payAyA  /  tate NaM kaNagarahe rAyA tIse
maelliyAe dAriyAe nIharaNaM kareti, bahUNi loiyAI mayakiJcAI [kareti, 2 ttA]
kAleNaM vigayasoge jAte  /  tate NaM se tetaliputte kallaM koDuMbiyapurise
saddAveti, 2 ttA evaM vadAsI-khippAmeva cAragasohaNaM jAva ThitipaDiyaM0 jamhA
NaM amhaM esa dArae kaNagarahassa rajje jAe taM hou NaM dArae nAmeNaM
kaNagajjhae jAva bhogasamatthe jAte  /  tate NaM sA poTTilA annayA kayAi
tetaliputtassa aNiTThA akaMtA appiyA amaNuNNA amaNAmA jAyA yAvi hotthA, Necchati
NaM tetaliputte poTTilAe nAmagoyamavi savaNayAe, kiM puNa daMsaNaM vA paribhogaM
vA ? tate NaM tIse poTTilAe annayA kayAi puvvarattAvarattakAlasamayaMsi
imeyArUve ajjhathie ciMtie patthie maNogae saMkappe samuppajjitthA-eva khalu aha
tetaliputtassa puvviM iTThA kaMtA piyA maNuNNA maNAmA Asi, iyANiM aNiTThA akaMtA
appiyA amaNuNNA amaNAmA jAyA, necchati NaM tetaliputte amaJce mama nAmaM jAva
paribhogaM vA  /  ohayamaNasaMkappA jAva jhiyAti  /  tae NaM tetaliputte
poTTilaM ohayamaNasaMkappaM jAva jhiyAyamaNiM pAsati, 2 ttA evaM vadAsi-mA NaM
tumaM devANuppiyA ! ohayamaNa [saMkappA karayalapalhatthamuhI aTTajjhANovagayA
jhiyAhi], tumaM NaM mama mahANasaMsi vipulaM asaNa-pANa-khAima-sAimaM
uvakkhaDAvehi, 2 bahUNaM samaNa-mAhaNa jAva vaNImagANaM demANI ya davAvemANI ya
viharAhi  /  tate NaM sA poTTilA teyaliputteNaM amaJceNaM evaM vuttA samANA
haTThatuTThA tetaliputtassa eyamaTuM paDisuNeti, 2 ttA kallAkalliM mahANasaMsi
vipulaM asaNa-pANakhAimasAimaM jAva davAvemANI ya viharati  /  te NaM kAle NaM
te NaM samae NaM suvvayAo nAmaM ajjAo iriyAsamiyAto jAva guttabaMbhacAriNIto
bahussuyAto bahuparivArAto puvvANupuTviM jeNAmeva tetalipure nagare teNeva
uvAgacchaMti, 2 ahApaDirUvaM uggahaM ogiNhaMti, 2 saMjameNa tavasA appANaM
bhAvemANIto viharaMti  /  /  tate NaM tAsiM suvvayANaM ajjANaM ege saMghADae
paDhamAe porisIe sajjhAyaM kareti, 2 ttA jAva aDamANIto tetalissa gihaM
aNupaviTThAto  /  tate NaM sA poTTilA tAto ajjAto ejjamANIto pAsati, 2 ttA
haTThatuTThA AsaNAto abbhuDheti, 2 ttA vaMdati namaMsati, 2 vipuleNaM asaNa-
pANa-khAima-sAimeNaM paDilAbheti, 2 evaM vadAsI-evaM khalu ahaM ajjAto !
tetiliputtassa amaJcassa puTviM iTThA kaMtA piyA maNuNNA maNAmA Asi, iyANiM
aNiTThA akaMtA appiyA amaNuNNA amaNAmA jAva daMsaNaM vA paribhogaM vA, taM
tubbhe NaM ajjAto bahunAyAto bahusikkhiyAto bahupaDhiyAto, bahUNi gAmAgara jAva
2010_02

Page #199 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 158 **The Scattering of the Eager Refusal**  Ahinḍa, many Rāisaras went to
the house, and he was there.  I do not know him!  Did he perhaps do something by
means of a **cuṇṇajoga** or a **kammaṇajoga** or a **kammajoga** or a
**hiyuḍḍāvaṇa** or a **kāuḍḍāvaṇa** or an **ābhiōgiē** or a **vasīkaraṇa** or a
**kouyakamma** or a **bhūikamma** or a **mūle kanda** or a **challi valli** or a
**siliyā** or a **guliyā** or an **ōsaha** or a **bhesajja** or something
obtained previously, so that I would be desirous of him again?  Then the elder
Ājātā, having been told this, said to the Pottilā, "We, the Devāṇuppiyā, the
Samanīta, the Nigganthīta, and the Gutabhaṃbhācarīta, are not worthy of being
spoken to by you, let alone being spoken to, instructed, or invited.  We, the
Devāṇuppiyā, will only speak about the **kevalipannatta** Dharma."  Then the
Pottilā said to the elder Ājātā, "I wish, elder, that you would speak to me
about the **kevalipannatta** Dharma."  Then the elder Ājātā spoke to the Pottilā
about the **kevalipannatta** Dharma.  Then the Pottilā, having listened to the
Dharma, with a firm and unwavering mind, said, "I believe, elder, in the
Niggantha Pāvaṇa.  I accept, elder, the Niggantha Pāvaṇa."  And so on, as you
have heard.  "I wish, elder, that I may be instructed by you in the
**pañcāṇuvvaiya**, the **sattasikkhāvaiya**, and so on, and be ordained into the
Dharma."  "Alas, Devāṇuppiyā, do not be attached!"  Then the Pottilā was
instructed by the elder Ājātā in the **pañcāṇuvvaiya**, and so on, and was
ordained into the Dharma.  Then the elder Ājātā bowed and paid homage, and
welcomed her.  Then the Pottilā, having become a Samanōvāsiyā, went and so on,
and became a **paḍilābhamanī** and lived.  Then, on that occasion, the Pottilā,
in the past, in the time of her previous existence, while she was a householder,
being mindful, having thought, desired, and conceived in her mind, thought, "I
was formerly dear, beloved, and cherished by that son.  Now I am not dear, not
beloved, not cherished, not cherished, and so on, and I have no enjoyment.
This, indeed, is my fault, and I will be reborn in the presence of the elder
Ājātā."  She thought thus, and after a while, when that son came, she, having
seen him, with her head bowed and her hands clasped in salutation, said, "Thus,
Devāṇuppiyā, I have been reborn in the Dharma, in the presence of the elder
Ājātā, and so on, and I have been reborn in the presence of the elder Ājātā."
Then that son said to the Pottilā, "Thus, Devāṇuppiyā, you, having become a
**muṇḍā**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 158 AturapratyAkhyAnaprakIrNakam AhiMDaha, bahUNaM rAIsara jAva gihAtiM
aNupavisaha, taM asthi yAiM me ajjAto ! kei kahiMci cuNNajoge vA kammaNajoge vA
kammajoge vA hiyauDDAvaNe vA kAuDDAvaNe vA Abhiogie vA vasIkaraNe vA kouyakamme
vA bhUikamme vA mUle kaMde challI vallI siliyA vA guliyA vA osahe vA bhesajje vA
uvaladdhapuvve jeNAhaM tetaliputtassa puNaravi iTThA bhavejjAmi  /  tate NaM tAo
ajjAo poTTilAe evaM vuttAo samANIo do vi kanne ThaveMti, 2 ttA poTTilaM evaM
vadAsI-amhe NaM devANuppiyA ! samaNIto niggaMthIto jAva gutabaMbhacAriNIto, no
khalu kappati amhaM eyappayAraM kannehi vi NisAmittae, kimaMga puNa uvadisittae
vA Ayarittae vA  /  amhe NaM tava devANuppiyA ! vicittaM kevalipannattaM dhamma
parikahejjAmo  /  tate NaM sA poTTilA tAo ajjAto evaM vadAsI-icchAmi NaM ajjAo !
tumhaM aMtie kevalipannattaM dhammaM nisAmittae  /  tate NaM tAto ajjAto
poTTilAe vicittaM kevalipannattaM dhamma parikaheMti  /  tate NaM sA poTTilA
dhammaM soJcA nisamma haTTatuTThA evaM vadAsI-saddahAmi NaM ajjAo ! niggaMthaM
pAvayaNaM, pattiyAmi NaM ajjAo! niggaMthaM pAvayaNaM] jAva se jaheyaM tubbhe
vayaha  /  icchAmi NaM ajjAo ! ahaM tubbhaM aMtie paMcANuvvaiyaM
sattasikkhAvaiyaM jAva dhamma paDivajjittae  /  ahAsuhaM [devANuppiyA ! mA
paDibaMdha]  /  tae NaM sA poTTilA tAsiM ajjANaM aMtie paMcANuvvaiyaM jAva
dharma paDivajjai, 2 tAto ajjAto vaMdati namaMsati, 2 paDivisajjeti  /  tae NaM
sA poTTilA samaNovAsiyA jAyA jAva paDilAbhemANI 2 viharai  /  tate NaM tIse
poTTilAe annayA kayAi puvvarattAvarattakAlasamayaMsi, kuTuMbajAgariyaM
[jAgaramANIe] ayameyArUve ajjhatthite ciMtie patthie maNogae saMkappe
samuppajjitthA-evaM khalu ahaM tetaliputtassa pubviM iTThA kaMtA piyA maNuNNA
maNAmA Asi, idANiM aNiTThA akaMtA appiyA amaNuNNA amaNAmA jAva paribhogaM vA,
taM seyaM khalu mama suvvayANaM ajjANaM aMtie pavvatittae  /  evaM saMpeheti, 2
ttA kalaM pAu0 jeNeva tetaliputte teNeva uvAgacchai, 2 karayalapari [ggahiyaM
dasaNahaM sirasAvattaM matthae aMjaliM kaTTa] evaM vadAsI-evaM khalu devANuppiyA
! mae suvvayANaM [ajjANaM] aMtie dhamme NisaMte jAva abbhaNuNNAyA pavvaittae  /
tate NaM tetaliputte poTTilaM evaM vadAsI-evaM khalu tumaM devANuppie ! muMDA
bhavittA pavvaiyA samANI kAlamAse kAlaM kiccA annataresu devaloesu devattAe
uvavajjihisi, taM jati NaM tumaM devANuppiyA ! mamaM tAo devalogAto Agamma
kevalipannatte dhamme bohehi to haM visajjemi, ahaM NaM tumaM mamaM Na saMbohesi
to te Na visajjemi  /  tate NaM sA poTTilA tetaliputtassa eyamaTuM paDisuNeti !
tate NaM 2010_02

Page #200 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Chapter: - 2 Collection of Examples  In Tetiliputra, a vast crowd of ascetics,
merchants, and soldiers gathered, 2 the friends and relatives of the king came
to greet him, 2 they honored him, 2 a small hut, even a thousand-man army, was
difficult to enter, the friends and relatives of the king, even the entire city,
even the sun, entered Tetiliputra through the middle, just as the sun rises, 2
the army marched in five rows, 2 then the hut was in front, just as the sun
rises, 2 they bowed and prostrated, 2 they said this - "Thus, O Devānupāpiyās!
My wife, my beloved, my dear, my beloved, this is the suffering of the world,
even the mountains, accept it, O Devānupāpiyās! It is a great blessing. It is a
great blessing. Do not be attached." 159 Then that woman, the sun, was told
this, and she was pleased, and she turned towards the north, and she adorned
herself with ornaments and garlands, 2 she herself made a five-fingered
offering, 2 just as the sun rises, 2 she bowed and prostrated, 2 she said this -
"O Blessed One! In the world, just as Devānanda, even eleven limbs, receives
many robes, for the sake of the month, for the sake of the month, for the sake
of the month, for the sake of the month, for the sake of the month, for the sake
of the month, for the sake of the month, for the sake of the month, for the sake
of the month, for the sake of the month, for the sake of the month, for the sake
of the month, for the sake of the month, for the sake of the month, for the sake
of the month, for the sake of the month, for the sake of the month, for the sake
of the month, for the sake of the month, for the sake of the month, for the sake
of the month, for the sake of the month, for the sake of the month, for the sake
of the month, for the sake of the month, for the sake of the month, for the sake
of the month, for the sake of the month, for the sake of the month, for the sake
of the month, for the sake of the month, for the sake of the month, for the sake
of the month, for the sake of the month, for the sake of the month, for the sake
of the month, for the sake of the month, for the sake of the month, for the sake
of the month, for the sake of the month, for the sake of the month, for the sake
of the month, for the sake of the month, for the sake of the month, for the sake
of the month, for the sake of the month, for the sake of the month, for the sake
of the month, for the sake of the month, for the sake of the month, for the sake
of the month, for the sake of the month, for the sake of the month, for the sake
of the month, for the sake of the month, for the sake of the month, for the sake
of the month, for the sake of the month, for the sake of the month, for the sake
of the month, for the sake of the month, for the sake of the month, for the sake
of the month, for the sake of the month, for the sake of the month, for the sake
of the month, for the sake of the month, for the sake of the month, for the sake
of the month, for the sake of the month, for the sake of the month, for the sake
of the month, for the sake

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 khaNDa: - 2 dRSTAntasamuccayaH tetaliputte vipulaM asaNa- pANa- khAima - sAimaM
uvakkhaDAveti, 2 mitta-NAti jAva AmaMtei, 2 jAva sammANei, 2 poTTilaM hAyaM jAva
purisasahassavAhiNIyaM sIyaM duruhettA mitta-NAti jAva parivuDe savviDDIe jAva
raveNaM tetalipuraM majjhamajjheNaM jeNeva suvvayANaM uvassae teNeva uvAgacchai,
2 sIyAo paJccoruhati, 2 ttA poTTilaM purato kaTTu jeNeva suvvayA ajjA teNeva
uvAgacchati, 2 ttA vaMdati nama'sati, 2 evaM vadAsI- evaM khalu devANuppiyA !
mama poTTilA bhAriyA iTThA kaMtA piyA maNuNNA maNAmA, esa NaM saMsArabhauvviggA
jAva pavvatittae, paDicchaMtu NaM devANuppiyA ! sissiNibhikkhaM  /  ahAsuhaM, mA
paDibaMdhaM  /  159 taNaM sA poTTilA suvvayAhiM ajjAhiM evaM vuttA samANA haTTha
[tuTThA ] uttarapura [tthimaM disIbhAgaM avakkamati, avakkamittA ] sayameva
AbharaNa - mallAlaMkAraM omuyati, 2 sayameva paMcamuTThiyaM loyaM karei, 2
jeNeva suvvayAo ajjAo teNeva uvAgacchai, 2 vaMdati nama'sati, 2 ttA evaM vadAsI
- Alitte NaM bhaMte ! loe, evaM jahA devANaMdA jAva ekkArasa aMgAI [ ahijjati,]
bahUNi vAsANi sAmannapariyAgaM pAuNai, mAsiyAe saMlehaNAe attANaM jhosettA
saTThi mattAI aNasaNAe chedettA AloiyapaDikkaMtA samAhipattA kAlamAse kAlaM
kiccA annataresu devaloesu devattAe uvavannA  /  tase kaNagarahe rAyA annayA
kayAi kAladhammuNA saMjutte yAvi hotthA  /  tate NaM te Isara jAva NIharaNaM
kareMti, 2 annamannaM evaM vadAsI - evaM khalu devANuppiyA ! kaNagarahe rAyA
rajje ya jAva putte viyaMgitthA, amhe NaM devANuppiyA ! rAyAhINA rAyAhiTThiyA
rAyAhINakajjA, ayaM ca NaM tetalI amacce kaNagarahassa ranno savvaTThANesu
savvabhUmiyAsu laddhapaccae dinnaviyAre savvakajjavaTTAvara yAvi hotthA, taM
seyaM khalu amhaM tetaliputte amacaM kumAraM jAtittae tti kaTTu annamannassa
eyamahaM paDisurNeti, 2 jeNeva tetaliputtaM amaJca teNeva uvAgacchaMti, 2
teyaliputtaM evaM vadAsI - evaM khalu devANuppiyA ! kaNagarahe rAyA rajje ya
raTThe ya jAva viyaMgei, amhe ya NaM devANuppiyA ! rAyAhINA jAva rAyAhINakajjA,
tumaM ca NaM devANuppiyA ! kaNagarahassa raNNo savvaTThANesu jAva
rajjadhurAciMtae  /  taM jaNaM devANuppiyA ! atthi kei kumAre
rAyalakkhaNasaMpanne abhiseyArihe taM NaM tumaM amhaM dalAhi, jANaM amhe mahayA
2 rAyAbhiseeNaM abhisiMcAmo  /  taNaM tetaliputte tesiM Isara- [ talavara -
mADaMbiya - koDuMbiya - ibbha-seTThi - seNAvaisatthavAhapabhiINaM] etama
paDisuti, 2 ttA kaNagajjhayaM kumAraM hAyaM jAva sassirIyaM karettA tesiM Isara
jAva uvaNeti, 2 ttA evaM vadAsI - esa NaM devANuppiyA ! kaNagarahassa raNNo
putte paumAvatIe devIe attae kaNagajjhae nAmaM kumAre abhiseyArihe
rAyalakkhaNasaMpanne, mae kaNagarahassa ranno rahassiyayaM saMvaDie  /  2010_02

Page #201 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter 160: The Scattering of the Eager Refusal  Thus, you, the great king,
were anointed with the royal anointment. All the people of the city gathered
around. Then, those [Isar, Talavar, Madanviya, Kodumbiya, Ibha, Setthi, Senavai,
Satthavaha, and others] anointed the young prince Kanagajjhaya with the royal
anointment. Then, that prince Kanagajjhaya, the king, wandered about, enjoying
the beauty of the Himalayas and the Malaya mountains, until he reached the royal
palace.  Then, Queen Paumavati addressed King Kanagajjhaya, saying, "My son!
Your [father, King Kanagaraha] ruled the kingdom until his death, and you are
the son of his minister, Tetaliputta. Therefore, my son, you should honor,
recognize, respect, and esteem that minister Tetaliputta. You should welcome
him, provide him with a comfortable dwelling, praise him, offer him a seat, and
increase his wealth." Then, that prince Kanagajjhaya listened to Queen
Paumavati's words and did as she said, increasing his wealth.  Then, the divine
Pottile, seeing Tetaliputta, preached the pure and perfect Dharma to him, but
Tetaliputta did not understand. Then, the divine Pottile, with a mind filled
with thoughts, desires, and intentions, thought, "Thus, King Kanagajjhaya honors
Tetaliputta and increases his wealth, but even though he is preached to,
Tetaliputta does not understand the Dharma. Therefore, this is a bad omen for
me, as Kanagajjhaya is alienated from Tetaliputta." Thus, Kanagajjhaya became
alienated from Tetaliputta.  Then, Tetaliputta, after some time, left his house,
surrounded by many people, including his servants and guards, to go to King
Kanagajjhaya. As he went, many people, including Isar, Talavar, Madanviya,
Kodumbiya, Ibha, Setthi, Senavai, Satthavaha, and others, honored him, welcomed
him, greeted him, bowed to him, and followed him, some walking in front, some
behind, some on the left, and some on the right.  Then, Tetaliputta reached King
Kanagajjhaya. Kanagajjhaya saw Tetaliputta approaching, but he did not honor
him, welcome him, or greet him. He remained silent, with his face turned away.
Then, Tetaliputta bowed to King Kanagajjhaya, but Kanagajjhaya remained silent,
with his face turned away. Then, Tetaliputta, realizing Kanagajjhaya's
alienation, became afraid and said, "My King Kanagajjhaya is angry with me. My
King Kanagajjhaya is displeased with me. My King Kanagajjhaya is scornful of me.
Therefore, I fear that my son, Kanagajjhaya, will kill me." Thus, he was afraid
and remained there.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 160 AturapratyAkhyAnaprakIrNakam evaM NaM tubbhe mahatA 2 rAyAbhiseeNaM
abhisiMcaha  /  savvaM ca se uTThANapAriyAvaNiyaM parikahei  /  tate NaM te
Isara [-talavara-mADaMviya-koDuMbiya-ibbha-seTThi-seNAvai-satthavAhapabhitao]
kaNagajjhayaM kumAraM mahayA 2 rAyAbhiseeNaM abhisiNcNti| tate NaM se
kaNagajjhae kumAre rAyA jAe mahayAhimavaMtamalaya0 vaNNao jAva rajjaM pasAsemANe
viharati  /  tate NaM sA paumAvatI devI kaNagajjhayaM rAyaM saddAveti, 2 evaM
vadAsI-esa NaM puttA ! tava [pitA kaNagarahe rAyA] rajje ya jAva aMteure ya0,
tumaM ca tetaliputtassa amaccassapahAveNaM  /  taM tumaM NaM puttA !
tetaliputtaM amaJcaM ADhAhi, parijANAhi, sakkArehi, sammANehi, iMtaM abbhuDhehi,
ThiyaM pajjuvAsAhi, vayaMtaM paDisaMsAhehi, addhAsaNeNaM uvaNimaMtehi, bhogaM ca
se aNuvaDDehi  /  tate NaM se kaNagajjhae paumAvatIe [vayaNaM] tahatti
paDi[suNeti, 2 ttA] jAva bhogaM ca se vaDDeti  /  /  tate NaM se poTTile deve
tetaliputtaM abhikkhaNaM 2 kevalipaNNatte dhamme saMboheti, no ceva NaM se
tetaliputte saMbujjhati  /  tate NaM tassa poTTiladevassa imeyArUve ajjhisthite
ciMtie patthie maNogae saMkappe samuppajjitthA-evaM khalu kaNagajjhae rAyA
tetaliputtaM ADhAti jAva bhogaM ca se vaDDeti, tate NaM se tetali [putte]
abhikkhaNaM 2 saMbohijjamANe vi dhamme no saMbujjhati, taM seyaM khalu mama
kaNagajjhayaM tetaliputtAto vippariNAmittae tti kaTu evaM saMpeheti, 2 ttA
kaNagajjhayaM tetaliputtAto vippariNAmei  /  tate NaM tetaliputte kalaM pahAte
jAva pAyacchitte AsakhaMdhavaragae bahUhiM purisehiM saddhi saMparivuDe sAto
gihAto niggacchati, jeNeva kaNagajjhae rAyA teNeva pahArettha gamaNAe  /  tate
NaM tetaliputtaM amaJcaM je jahA bahave rAIsara-talavara jAva pabhiyao pAsaMti
te taheva ADhAyaMti, pariyANaMti, abbhuTuMti, aMjalipariggahaM kareMti, iTThAhiM
pAsaMti te taheva ADhAyaMti, pariyANaMti, abbhuTuMti, aMjalipariggahaM kareMti,
iTThAhiM kaMtAhiM jAva vaggUhiM AlavamANA ya saMlavamANA ya purato ya piTThato
ya pAsato ya maggato ya samaNugacchati  /  /  tate NaM se tetaliputte jeNeva
kaNagajjhae teNeva uvAgacchati  /  tate NaM se kaNagajjhae tetaliputtaM
ejjamANaM pAsati, 2 ttA no ADhAti, no pariyANAti, no abbhuDheti, aNADhAyamINe 3
parammuhe saMciTThati  /  tate NaM se tetaliputte kaNagajjhayassa raNNo aMjali
karei, tato ya Na se kaNagajjhae rAyA aNADhAyamINe 2 tusiNIe parammuhe
saMciTThati  /  tate NaM tetaliputte kaNagajjhayaM vippariNayaM jANittA bhIte
jAva saMjAtabhae evaM vadAsI-ruDhe NaM mama kaNagajjhae rAyA, hINe NaM mama
kaNagajjhae rAyA, avajjhAe NaM mama kaNagajjhae rAyA, taM Na najjai NaM mama
keNai kumAreNa mArehiti tti kaTTa bhIte tatthe 2010_02

Page #202 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter 2: Collection of Examples  **If a Teliputra (oil-presser's son) has
250 houses, and he has to climb a difficult mountain, he would guard his journey
with the same care as he would guard his 250 houses.**  **Just as a Teliputra
would not be careless, nor would he be negligent, nor would he be surprised, nor
would he fold his hands (in respect) when he sees a king, so too he would not be
careless, nor would he be negligent, nor would he be surprised, nor would he
fold his hands (in respect) when he sees a monk, nor would he be careless, nor
would he be negligent, nor would he be surprised, nor would he fold his hands
(in respect) when he sees a path, nor would he be careless, nor would he be
negligent, nor would he be surprised, nor would he fold his hands (in respect)
when he sees a back, nor would he be careless, nor would he be negligent, nor
would he be surprised, nor would he fold his hands (in respect) when he sees a
front.**  **Just as a Teliputra would guard his 250 houses, so too he would
guard his home. If there are any outsiders in his home, such as servants,
messengers, or brothers, he would not be careless, nor would he be negligent,
nor would he be surprised. If there are any insiders in his home, such as his
father, mother, or his son, he would not be careless, nor would he be negligent,
nor would he be surprised.**  **Just as a Teliputra would guard his home, so too
he would guard his bed. When he lies down on his bed, he would say to himself,
"I am leaving my 250 houses, and I am leaving my home, and I am leaving my
family, and I am leaving my friends, and I am leaving my relatives, and I am
leaving my servants, and I am leaving my messengers, and I am leaving my
companions, and I am leaving my wife, and I am leaving my children, and I am
leaving my possessions, and I am leaving my wealth, and I am leaving my body,
and I am leaving my life, and I am leaving my soul, and I am leaving my mind,
and I am leaving my senses, and I am leaving my thoughts, and I am leaving my
feelings, and I am leaving my desires, and I am leaving my attachments, and I am
leaving my aversions, and I am leaving my ignorance, and I am leaving my karma,
and I am leaving my rebirth, and I am leaving my suffering, and I am leaving my
death, and I am leaving my liberation, and I am leaving my enlightenment, and I
am leaving my Nirvana." And he would be careful not to be careless, nor would he
be negligent, nor would he be surprised. He would be careful not to be careless,
nor would he be negligent, nor would he be surprised. He would be careful not to
be careless, nor would he be negligent, nor would he be surprised. He would be
careful not to be careless, nor would he be negligent, nor would he be
surprised. He would be careful not to be careless, nor would he be negligent,
nor would he be surprised. He would be careful not to be careless, nor would he
be negligent, nor would he be surprised. He would be careful not to be careless,
nor would he be negligent, nor would he be surprised. He would be careful not to
be careless, nor would he be negligent, nor would he be surprised. He would be
careful not to be careless, nor would he be negligent, nor would he be
surprised. He would be careful not to be careless, nor would he be negligent,
nor would he be surprised. He

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 khaNDaH-2 dRSTAntasamuccayaH ya jAva saNiyaM 2 paJcosakkati, 2 ttA tameva
AsakhaMdhaM duruhati, 2 tetalipuraM majhamajjheNaM jeNeva sae gihe teNeva
pahArettha gamaNAe  /  tate NaM te tetaliputtaM je jahA Isara jAva pAsaMti te
tahA no ADhAyaMti, no pariyANaMti, no abbhuTuMti, no aMjali [pariggaraM kareMti]
iTThAhiM jAva no saMlavaMti, no purao ya piTThao ya pAsao ya maggao ya
samaNugacchaMti  /  tate NaM tetaliputte jeNeva sae gihe teNeva uvAgae  /  jA vi
ya se tattha bAhiriyA parisA bhavati, taMjahA-dAse ti vA pese ti vA bhAillae ti
vA sA vi ya NaM no ADhAti, no pariyANati, no abbhuDheti  /  jA vi ya se
abhitariyA parisA bhavati, taMjahA-piyA i vA mAtA ti vA jAva suNhA ti vA sA vi
ya NaM no ADhAti, no pariyANAti, no abbhuTeti  /  tate NaM se tetaliputte jeNeva
vAsaghare jeNeva sayaNijje teNeva uvAgacchati, 2 ttA sayaNijjasi NisIyati, 2 ttA
evaM vadAsI-evaM khalu sayAto gihAto niggacchAmi, taM ceva jAva abhitariyA
parisA no ADhAti, no pariyANAti, no abbhuTTeti  /  taM seyaM khalu mama appANaM
jIviyAto vavarovittae tti kaTTa evaM saMpeheti, 2 tAlauDaM visaM AsagaMsi
pakkhivati, se ya vise no kamati  /  tate NaM se tetaliputte nIluppala jAva asiM
khaMdhaMsi uvaharati, tattha vi ya se dhArA oeNNA [oiNNA ?]  /  tate NaM se
tetaliputte jeNeva asogavaNiyA teNeva uvAgacchati, 2 tA pAsagaM gIvAe baMdhati,
2 rukkhaM duruhati, 2 pAsagaM rukkhe baMdhati, 2 appANaM muyati, tattha vi ya se
rajjU chinnA  /  tate NaM se tetaliputte mahatimahAliyaM silaM gIvAe baMdhati,
atthAhamatAramaporuseyaMsi udagaMsi appANaM muyati, tattha vi se thAhe jAte  /
tate NaM se tetaliputte sukkaMsi taNakUDaMsi agaNikAyaM pakkhivati, 2 ttA
appANaM muyati, tattha vi ya se agaNikAe vijjhAe  /  tate NaM se tetali [putte]
evaM vadAsI-saddheyaM khalu bho ! samaNA vayaMti, saddheyaM khalu bho ! mAhaNA
vayaMti, saddheyaM khalu bho ! samaNA mAhaNA vayaMti, ahaM khalu ego asaddheyaM
vayAmi, eva khalu ahaM saha puttehiM aputte, ko medaM saddahissati ? saha
mittehiM amitte, ko medaM saddahissati ? evaM attheNaM, dAreNaM, dAsehiM,
pesehiM, parijaNeNaM, evaM khalu tetaliputteNaM amaJceNaM kaNagajjhaeNaM rannA
avajjhAeNaM samANeNaM tAlapuDage vise AsagaMsi pakkhitte, se vi ya No kamati, ko
meyaM saddahissati ? tetaliputte [NaM amaJceNaM] nIluppala jAva khadhaMsi
oharie, tattha vi ya se dhArA oillA [oiNNA ?], ko medaM saddahissati ?
tetaliputte pAsagaM gIvAe baMdhei, 2 jAva rajjU chinnA, ko medaM saddahissati ?
tetaliputte mahAliyaM jAva baMdhittA atthAha jAva udagaMsi appA mukke, tattha vi
ya NaM thAhe jAe, ko meyaM _ 2010_02

Page #203 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
162 **Aaturpratyakhyanaprakirnakam**  Who will burn?  The Tetiliputra, the dry
grass, the fire will be extinguished, who will burn?  The one with the wrong
intention, as long as he lives.  Then, that Tetiliputra, the god, spoke in a way
that was like a pot, and the Tetiliputra, who was not far away, stood there and
said, "Oh, Tetiliputra!  In front, there is a storm, behind, there is the fear
of elephants, on the side, there is blindness, in the middle, the rivers are
flowing, in the village, the white ones are burning, in the white ones, the
village is burning, Oh! Tetiliputra!  What is the remedy?"  Then, that
Tetiliputra, the pot, spoke in this way, "Fear, oh!  is the renunciation, for
the anxious, the right path, for the shade, food, for the thirsty, water, for
the sick, medicine, for the lost, the secret, for the ambitious, the five
senses, for the one who is tired, the vehicle, for the one who wants to cross,
the wind, for the one who wants to be happy, the help.  For the one who is
patient, the one who has teeth, the one who has conquered the senses, there is
nothing more."  Then, that Tetiliputra, the god, spoke to the Tetiliputra, the
minister, in this way, "You, Tetiliputra!  You have come to this place, you have
been given a pot, you have been given a pot, you have been given a pot, you have
been given a pot, you have been given a pot, you have been given a pot, you have
been given a pot, you have been given a pot, you have been given a pot, you have
been given a pot, you have been given a pot, you have been given a pot, you have
been given a pot, you have been given a pot, you have been given a pot, you have
been given a pot, you have been given a pot, you have been given a pot, you have
been given a pot, you have been given a pot, you have been given a pot, you have
been given a pot, you have been given a pot, you have been given a pot, you have
been given a pot, you have been given a pot, you have been given a pot, you have
been given a pot, you have been given a pot, you have been given a pot, you have
been given a pot, you have been given a pot, you have been given a pot, you have
been given a pot, you have been given a pot, you have been given a pot, you have
been given a pot, you have been given a pot, you have been given a pot, you have
been given a pot, you have been given a pot, you have been given a pot, you have
been given a pot, you have been given a pot, you have been given a pot, you have
been given a pot, you have been given a pot, you have been given a pot, you have
been given a pot, you have been given a pot, you have been given a pot, you have
been given a pot, you have been given a pot, you have been given a pot, you have
been given a pot, you have been given a pot, you have been given a pot, you have
been given a pot, you have been given a pot, you have been given a pot, you have
been given a pot, you have been given a pot, you have been given a pot, you have
been given a pot, you have been given a pot, you have been given a pot, you have
been

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 162 AturapratyAkhyAnaprakIrNakam saddahissati ? tetaliputte sukkaMsi taNakUDe0
aggI vijjhAe, ko medaM saddahissati ? ohatamaNasaMkappe jAva jhiyAe  /  tate NaM
se poTTile deve poTTilArUvaM viuvvati, tetaliputtassa adUrasAmaMte ThicA evaM
vadAsI-haM bho tetaliputtA ! purato pavAe, piTThao hatthibhayaM, duhao
acakkhuphAse, majjhe sarA NivayaMti, gAme palitte ranne jhiyAti, ranne palitte
gAme jhiyAti, Auso ! tetaliputtA ! kao vayAmo ? tate NaM se tetaliputte poTTilaM
evaM vayAsI-bhIyassa khalu bho ! pavvajjA, utkaMTThiyassa sadesagamaNaM,
chAyassa annaM, tisiyassa pANaM, Aurassa bhesajjaM, mAiyassa rahassaM,
abhijuttassa paJcayakaraNaM, addhANaparissaMtassa vAhaNagamaNaM, tariukAmassa
pavaNakiccaM, paraM abhiuMjitukAmassa sahAyakiccaM  /  khaMtassa daMtassa
jitiMdiyassa etto egamavi Na bhavati  /  tate NaM se poTTile deve tetaliputtaM
amaJcaM evaM vadAsI-suTTa 2 NaM tumaM tetaliputtA ! eyamaTuM AyANAhi tti kaTTa
doJcaM pi taccaM pi evaM vayai, 2 jAmeva disaM pAubbhUe tAmeva disaM paDigae  /
tate NaM tassa teyaliputtassa subheNaM pariNAmeNaM jAtIsaraNe samuppanne  /
tate NaM tassa tetaliputtassa ayameyArUve ajjhatthite ciMtie patthie maNogae
saMkappe samuppajjitthA-evaM khalu ahaM iheva jaMbuddIve dIve mahAvidehe vAse
pokkhalAvatIvijae poMDarigiNIe rAyahANIe mahApaume nAmaM rAyA hotthA  /  tate
NaM haM therANaM aMtie muMDe bhavittA jAva coddasa puvvAti [ahijjittA] bahUNi
vAsANi sAmanna [pariyAgaM pAuNittA] mAsiyAe saMlehaNAe mahAsukke kappe deve  /
tate NaM haM tAo devaloyAo AukkhaeNaM bhavakkhaeNaM ThiikkhaeNaM iheva
teyalipure tetalissa amaJcassa bhaddAe bhAriyAe dAragattAe paJcAyAte  /  taM
seyaM khalu mama puvvuddiTThAI mahavvayAiM sayameva uvasaMpajjittANaM viharittae
/  evaM saMpeheti, 2 ttA sayameva mahavvayAiM Aruheti, 2 jeNeva pamayavaNe
ujjANe teNeva uvAgacchati, 2 asogavarapAyavassa ahe puDhavisilApaTTayaMsi
suhanisannasya aNuciMtemANassa puvvAdhItAI sAmAiyamAiyAiM coddasa puvvAiM
sayameva abhisamannAgayAiM  /  tate NaM tassa tetaliputtassa aNagArassa subheNaM
pariNAmeNaM jAva tayAvaraNijjANaM kammANaM khaovasameNaM kammarayavikaraNakaraM
apuvvakaraNaM paviTThassa kevalavaraNANadasaNe samuppanne  /  tae NaM tetalipure
nagare ahAsannihiehiM vANamaMtarehiM devehiM devIhi ya devaduMdubhIo samAhayAo,
dasaddhavanne kusume nivAie, celukkheve divve gIyagaMdhavvaninAe kae yAvi hotthA
/  tate NaM se kaNagajjhae rAyA imIse kahAe laddhaTe evaM vadAsI-evaM khalu
tetali[putte] mae avajjhAte muMDe bhavittA pavvatite, taM gacchAmi NaM
tetaliputtaM aNagAraM vaMdAmi namasAmi, 2 eyamaTuM 2010_02

Page #204 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Chapter 2: Collection of Examples 163  "I am worshipping and enjoying the
Vinaya, thus I am happy," he said. 2 Just as a four-armed army of the Nāga
queen, just as a city of the Ujjāyana, just as a Tetiliputra ascetic, he
approaches. 2 He worships and prostrates to the Tetiliputra ascetic, and he
says, "I am worshipping and enjoying the Vinaya, thus I am happy." He does not
leave until he has been given permission. Then, that Tetiliputra ascetic, in the
presence of the king of the Kankagajjha, explains the Dharma to him. Then, that
Kankagajjha king, having heard the Dharma from the Tetiliputra ascetic, who is a
Kevali, reflects on it and, after understanding it, accepts the five vows, the
seven trainings, and the teachings of the Śramaṇa. 2 He becomes a Śramaṇa, a
renunciant, and a non-violent being. Then, that Tetiliputra Kevali, after
spending many years in the practice of Kevalihood, attains Siddhi. 15. The story
of Marīci, as narrated in the Śrī Upadesha Prasāda, a work of the Kāṅkṣādhyāna.
Śrī Bharata Chakra-putra, Marīci-kumāra, once went with his father, the Chakra,
to worship the Śrī Yugadi-jina. There, having heard the Śrī Syādvāda Dharma from
the mouth of Śrī Mārudeva, he awakened and took the vow. He also recited the
eleven chapters in front of the elders. He spent a long time with his master. On
another occasion, he was afflicted by the heat of summer and thought, "Because
of the arising of the karma of the covering of conduct, I am suffering." For, in
the Śrī Vīracarita, it is said:  > I am unable to bear the heavy burden of the
qualities of the Śrāmaṇya, like Mount Meru. I am without qualities, and I am
desirous of worldly existence. It is better for me to bear it. 1 > > What should
I give up in the world? By giving up, I will be ashamed. I have found a way by
which I will not be tired by the vow. 2 > > These Śramaṇa Bhagavants are always
free from the three staffs. Let me have the three staffs as my mark, since I
have conquered the three staffs. 3 > > These are bald-headed, with their hair
and eyebrows shaved. I am a shaven-headed one, with a tuft of hair. I am a
bearer of the great vow, and I am a bearer of the small vow. 4 > > These are
renunciants, without possessions. Let me have a ring and other things. These are
deluded by delusion. Let me have an umbrella, since I am covered. 5 > > These
are without sandals, and they wander about, great sages. Let me have sandals,
for the sake of the feet, and also for the sake of the great sages. 6 > > These
are fragrant with good conduct, and I am fragrant with bad conduct. Let me have
sandalwood paste and other things, for the sake of fragrance. 7 > > These are
great sages, wearing white clothes, without any dye. Let me have saffron-colored
clothes, since I am a renunciant. 8 > > These renounce water, which is a great
torment to living beings. Let me have a bath and drink milk, in moderation, and
also for the sake of the great sages. 9  Thus, having considered with his own
wisdom, for the sake

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 khaNDa:-2 dRSTAntasamuccayaH 163 viNaeNaM bhajjo bhujjo khAmemi, evaM
saMpeheti, 2 ttA NhAe cAuraMgiNIe seNAe jeNeva pamayavaNe ujjANe jeNeva
tetaliputte aNagAre teNeva uvAgacchati, 2 tetaliputtaM aNagAraM vaMdati
namaMsati, eyamaTuM ca NaM viNaeNaM bhujjo bhujjo khAmeti, naccAsanne jAva
pajjuvAsati  /  tate NaM se teyaliputte aNagAre kaNagajjhayassa ranno tIse ya
mahai [mahAliyAe parisAe] dhamma parikahei  /  tate NaM se kaNagajjhae rAyA
tetaliputtassa kevalissa aMtie dhammaM socA Nisamma paMcANuvvaiyaM
sattasikkhAvaiyaM sAvagadhamma paDivajjai, 2 samaNovAsae jAte ahigayajIvAjIve0
/  tate NaM tetaliputte kevalI bahUNi vAsANi kevalipariyAgaM pAuNittA jAva
siddhe  /  15. kAGkSAdhyAne zrIupadezaprAsAdagrathitaM marIceH kathAnakam  /
zrIbharatacakriputro marIcikumAraH ekadA cakriNA sArdhaM zrIyugAdijinaM
samavasRtaM vanditumagAt  /  tatra zrIsyAdvAdadharma zrImArudevamukhAt zrutvA
pratibudhya vratamAdade  /  sthavirANAM puroGgAni ekAdazA'pi apaThat  /  svAminA
sArdhaM ciraM vyaharat  /  anyadA grISmatApapIDitazcAritrAvaraNakarmodayAditi
dadhyau, yataH zrIvIracaritre haime na zrAmANyaguNAnmerusamabhArAn durudvahAn  /
nirguNo'haM bhavAkAGkSI, voDhuM prabhurataH param  /  / 1 /  /  kiM tyajAmi
vrataM loke, tattyAge lajjyate khalu  /  labdho vA'yaM mayopAyo, vrataM yena
klamo na ca  /  / 2 /  /  * zramaNA bhagavanto'mI, tridaNDaviratAH sadA  /  astu
daNDairnirjitasya, tridaNDI mama lAcchanam  /  / 3 /  /  kezalocAdamI muNDAH,
kSuramuNDaH zikhI tvaham  /  mahAvratadharAzcAmI, syAmaNuvratabhRttvaham  /  / 4
/  /  niSkiJcanA munayo'mI, bhUyAnme mudrikAdi tu  /  amI vimohA mohena,
channasya chatramastu me  /  / 5 /  /  upAnadrahitAzcAmI, saMcaranti maharSayaH
/  pAdatrANanimittaM me, bhavatAmapyupAnahau  /  / 6 /  /  sugandhayo'mI zIlena,
durgandha zIlatastvaham  /  saugandhyahetorbhavatu, zrIkhaNDatilakAdi me  /  / 7
/  /  amI zuklajaradvastrA, niSkaSAyA maharSayaH  /  bhavantu me tu vAsAMsi,
kASAyANi kaSAyiNaH  /  / 8 /  /  tyajantyamI jalArambhaM, bahujIvopamardakam  /
snAnaM pAnaM ca payasA, mitena bhavatAcca me  /  / 9 /  /  evaM vikalpya
svadhiyA, liGganirvAhahetave  /  pArivrAjyaM pratyapAdi, marIciH klezakAtaraH  /
/ 10 /  /  tAdRgveSaM ca taM dRSTvA-'pRcchaddharmaM jano'khilaH  /  sAdhudharmaM
samAcakhyau so'pi teSAM jinoditam  /  / 11 /  /  sarveSAM janAnAM puraH sa
dharmadezanAM tanoti  /  tadA janAstaM papracchu:-'tvaM kiM svayametaM mArga
nAcarasi ?' zrutvA sa prAha-'taM merubhAraM voDhuM nAhamIzo'smi' iti sa tAn
zazaMsa  /  punaH sa dharmAkhyAnapratibuddhAn bhavyAnupasthitAn ziSyAn svAminaH
samarpayAmAsa  /  ityAcAro marIciH svAminA 2010_02

Page #205 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter 164: The Scattering of the Eager Rejection  While traveling, the
Master stayed in a village near a virtuous woman. There, after bowing to the
Master, Bharata asked about the nature of the cycle of the Arhats. The Master
explained it. Then Bharata asked, "Is there anyone in this assembly, in this
land of Bharata, who will be a Jina like you?" The Master replied, "Your son,
Marichi, will be the last Tirthankara, a hero named Vira, here in Bharata. The
first Vasudeva will be born in Videha, and the Chakravartin will also be born
there."  Hearing this, Bharata circumambulated Marichi and, bowing, said, "Your
wandering life is not worthy of worship, but you are a future Arhat, and
therefore worthy of worship." He spoke everything that the Jina had said.
Hearing this, Marichi, filled with joy, exclaimed three times, "I will be the
first Vishnu!"  "I will be a Chakravartin in the silent city. I will be the last
Arhat, my path is complete."  "I am the first of the Vasudevas, my father is the
Chakravartin, my grandfather is the Tirthankara, my lineage is the best."  Thus,
he boasted, earning the karma of a low lineage. Later, he suffered from a
disease. While being cared for by the monks, he became weak and thought, "These
monks are heartless, they don't even care to look at me, let alone take care of
me. Or perhaps they are worried about me and don't even take care of their own,
so how can they take care of me who is sick? Therefore, I will make a disciple."
Thinking this, Marichi became eager.  Later, Kapila, a son of his lineage, met
him. He was seeking the Arhat's Dharma and informed him of it. Then Kapila
asked, "Is there no Dharma in your path?" Knowing that Marichi was neglecting
the Jina Dharma, he wanted a disciple and said, "There is Dharma in the Jain
path, and there is also Dharma in my path."  Kapila became his disciple,
teaching him false Dharma. Marichi, too, earned countless births in the ocean of
samsara.  Marichi, realizing this, died after following the prescribed fast. He
became a deva in the Brahma Loka, living for a period of ten kalpas.  He made
disciples like Surya and others, teaching them his own practices. He suffered in
the Brahma Loka, and Kapila also became an immortal.  He remembered his past
lives and, due to delusion, returned to the earth. He taught Surya and others
about the harm they had done.  Then, the teachings became dense, and the vision
arose. Because the practices are easy to achieve, people often follow them.  ##
Chapter 16: The Example of Acharya Manguna in the Shrine of the Teachings of
Shri  In Mathura, Acharya Manguna lived with five hundred monks. People were
delighted by his teachings and called him the leader of the age. Because:
"Leaving aside other tasks, ignoring obstacles and disrespect, he served the
monks with devotion. People, as if under his control, served only him."
Because:

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 164 AturapratyAkhyAnaprakIrNakam saha vijahAra  /  svAmI punarvinItAyAM puri
samavAsArSIt  /  tatra prabhuM praNamya bharatena pRSTo
bhAvyarhaccakravAdisvarUpaM prabhurjagau  /  punaH papraccha-'kiM kazcidiha
parSadi atra bharatakSetre tvamiva jino bhAvI ?'  /  svAmyAkhyat-"ayaM tava
sUnurmarIcizcaramatIrthakRdvIranAmA iha bharate bhAvI, Adyo vAsudevo bhAvI
videhe cakrI bhAvI ca"  /  tacchrutvA bharato marIciM pradakSiNIkRtya
vanditvaivamavocat'tava pArivrAjyaM na vandyaM kiM tu tvaM bhAvyarhannasi, tena
vandyase' ityAdi sarvaM jinoditaM kathitavAn  /  tataHtadAkarNya
marIcistrirAsphoTya tripuTIM mudA  /  ityuvAcoccakairviSNurbhaviSyAmi yadAdimaH
/  / 1 /  /  mUkAnagaryAM me cakravartitvaM ca bhaviSyati  /  bhAvyahaM
caramazcArhan, paryAptamapareNa me  /  / 2 /  /  Adyo'haM vAsudevAnAM, pitA me
cakravartinAm  /  pitAmahastIrthakRtAmaho me kulamuttamam  /  / 3 /  /
ityAtmaprazaMsAM cakAra, tena nIcagotrakarmopArjitam  /  anyadA tasya zarIre
vyAdhirutpannaH  /  sAdhubhirapAlyamAno glAna evaM dadhyau"aho amI sAdhavo
nirdAkSiNyAH, mama pAlanaM dUre'stu, paraM dRSTyA IkSante'pi na  /  yadvA
duzcintitamidaM mayA svatanorapi paricaryAM na kurvanti tarhi bhraSTasya mama
kathaM kuryuH !ato vyAdhiSu gateSu ziSyamekaM kariSyAmi" evaM dhyAyanmarIciH
paTurabhavat  /  anyadA'sya kapila: kulaputrako militaH, tatpura ArhantaM
dharmaM dharmArthI sa jJApitastena  /  tataH kapilo'bravIt-kiM tvanmArge dharmo
na vidyate ?'  /  tataHjinadharmAlasaM jJAtvA, ziSyamicchan sa taM jagau  /
mArge jaine'pi dharmo'sti, mama mArge'pi vidyate  /  / 1 /  /  tacchiSyaH
kapilo'thAbhUt, mithyAdharmopadezanAt  /  marIcirapyabdhikoTIkoTIsaMsAramArjayat
/  / 2 /  /  marIcistadanAlocya, vihitAnazano mRtaH  /  brahmaloke
dazodanvatpramitAyuH suro'bhavat  /  / 3 /  /  ziSyAn vidhAyAsUryAdIn,
svAcArAnupadizya ca  /  vipadya ca brahmaloke, kapilo'pyamaro'bhavat  /  / 4 /
/  sa prAgjanmAvadheqhatvA, mohAdabhyetya bhUtale  /  svayaM kRtaM
sADayamatamAsUryAdInabodhayat  /  / 5 /  /  tadAmnAyAdatra sAGghanyaM,
prAvartata ca darzanam  /  sukhasAdhye hyanuSThAne, prAyo lokaH pravartate  /  /
6 /  /  16. gRddhidhyAne zrIupadezaprAsAde maGgunAmAcAryasya dRSTAntaH  /
mathurAyAM maGgunAmAcAryaH sAdhupaJcazatIparivRtta Aste  /  janAstadupadezaguNai
raJjitAstadA taM yugprdhaanmaahuH| yataH vihAya kAryAntaramantarAya-
manyAnanAdRtya munInazeSAn  /  bhaktyA vazIbhUta ivAtibhUriH, sUriM siSeve hi
janastameva  /  / 1 /  /   /  yataH 2010_02

Page #206 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Chapter: - 2 Collection of Examples Those people constantly indulge in
delicious, sweet, and other enjoyable foods. Gradually, due to their karma, they
developed a fondness for taste, leading them to acquire a permanent residence.
Then, over time, due to the weight of their attachment to taste, they became
lazy in their practice of meditation, teachings, and other actions. Due to the
weight of their wealth, they became falsely proud and lazy in their proper
humility and other virtues. Due to the weight of their taste, they became
attached to their land, family, and other connections, becoming lazy in their
search for liberation. Gradually, they died there and were reborn as a Yaksha,
the guardian of the cemetery, near the city gate. Seeing his past life through
the process of disintegration, he felt remorse and thought, "This is the time I
have reached due to my past actions." Thinking this, he extended a large tongue
from the mouth of the Yaksha statue in front of the ascetics who were leaving
the city. He does this every day. One day, a courageous ascetic asked him, "Who
are you, sir? Why do you show your tongue like that?" Then, with sorrow, the
Yaksha revealed himself and said, "I am a cripple on the path of Dharma, your
Guru, the venerable Manguna. Due to my negligence, I incurred the loss of my
original merit, committed a great violation of vows, and became a Yaksha in this
city. You should not be like those who are greatly attached to taste. I do this
to inform you that I have fallen due to the taste of my tongue." Hearing this,
they were filled with wonder and their minds became firm in their renunciation
of taste. They spread the teaching in front of everyone, "Victory over the
senses is the ultimate attainment for humans." 16. The story of the King of the
Pond Lilies in the Sri Upadesha Mala, a collection of teachings on the practice
of meditation. The Pond Lily and the Lotus Lily were brothers, kings in the city
of Pond Lily. Once, a certain sage came to their city. Inspired by his
teachings, Pond Lily decided to renounce the world and, calling his brother,
said, "I will renounce the world after you are crowned king." His brother said,
"What? Should I go to hell? I don't want the kingdom. I will also renounce the
world." The lord said, "This is the right thing to do for someone like you, but
it is difficult." He said, "Nothing is difficult for those who are capable."
Thus, even though he was dissuaded, he left, leaving the kingdom without a
leader. Later, after many years of renunciation, due to the unbearable nature of
the various hardships and afflictions, the result of his karma, and his innate,
long-standing attachment to worldly pleasures, Lotus Lily, whose vows had been
broken, thought, "I will return to the kingdom I had renounced earlier." With
this intention, he came to the city and stayed in the garden outside. The city
guard informed the king, "Is he alone?" The king, accompanied by some trusted
men, came to see him. He saw him sitting under a tree, holding a bowl and
surrounded by blades of grass. The king, understanding his intention, told his
ministers, "This one, whom I dissuaded, has taken vows. Now, let him take the
kingdom. We will return to this." Saying this, they gave him the royal insignia.
He accepted the insignia. He went to his Guru. The other one, entering the vast
expanse of the kingdom, ate excessively that very day and, suffering from
indigestion, cried out in pain. He was a broken promise, unworthy of respect.
Due to the condemnation of the people, he died in a fit of intense, furious
anger and went to the seventh hell. Pond Lily, returning to his Guru, said

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 khaNDa: - 2 dRSTAntasamuccayaH te janAH snigdhamadhurAdyazanAdibhirnityaM
sevante  /  krameNa karmavazAdrasalaulyaM jAtaM, tena nityAvAsaM prApa  /  tataH
kAlAntare sAtagauravAdvihAropadezAdikriyAlaso jAtaH, RddhigauravAnmithyAbhimAnI
yathArhavinayAdyalaso'bhUt, rasagauravAttu kSetrakulAdisaMsaktIbhUya
gocarIgaveSaNAlaso jAtaH  /  krameNa tatraiva mRtvA
nagaranirgamanapratyAsannayakSAyatanAdhiSThAyakatvena vyantaro jajJe  /
vibhaGgenAvalokya pUrvabhavaM saMjAtapazcAttApo'dhunedaM prAptakAlamiti
saMcintya sAdhUnAM bahirgacchatAM purato yakSapratimAmukhAnmahatIM jihvAM
niHsArayAmAsa  /  pratidinamevaM karoti  /  ekadA sAhasikasAdhunaikena
pRSTaM"kastvaM bhoH ? kathaM rasanAmAkRSya darzayasi ?" tataH saviSAdaM yakSaH
prakaTIbhUyovAca-:"ahaM dharmAdhvapaGgurbhavadgururAryamaGgunAmA
pramAdAnmUlakSatiM prApya mahAvratabhaGgaM vidhAyAtra puranirdhamane yakSo jAtaH
/  bhavadbhirapi mahArasalAmpaTyaparairna bhAvyaM, jihvAsvAdena patito'haM iti
jJApanAyaivaM karomi " iti zrutvA te savismayA rasatyAgatapasyudyatadhiyo
babhUvuH  /  sarveSAM purasta ityupadezaM vitanvanti"indriyajayo hi puMsAM
paramasaMpaddhetuH  /  16. gRddhidhyAne zrIupadezamAlAheyopAdeyAyAM
kaNDarIkarAjasya kathAnakam  /  puNDarIkakaNDarIkau pauNDarikiNyAM puri rAjAnau
bhrAtarAvabhUtAm  /  anyadA kazcitsUrirAyayau  /  taddharmadezanayA pratibuddhaH
puNDarIkaH pravivrajiSurlokAnAhUya sahodaramuvAca "bhavantaM rAjye'bhiSicya
pravrajAmIti  /  so'bravIt, tatkiM mayA narake yAtavyam ? alaM me rAjyena,
ahamapi pravrajAmi  /  prabhurAha kRtyamidaM bhavAdRzAM, kintu duHzakyamiti  /
tenoktaM na kiJcid duSkaraM samarthAnAM, tato vAryamANo'pi sa niSkrAntaH,
anAyakaM rAjyamitItaro'dhArito laukeH  /  pazcAd bahukAlaM pravrajyAM
vidhAyAnyadA dussahatayA pariSahopasargANAM vicitratvAtkarmapariNateH,
anAdibhavAbhyastatayA viSayalolatAyAH, jAtabhagnavratapariNAmaH
kaNDarIko'cintayadadhitiSThAmi tatprAkpratipannaM
rAjyamityAkUtenAgacchatsvapuraM sthito bahirudyAne, niveditastatpAlena rAjJe,
kimekAkI ? iti vimarzAtkaticidAptapuruSaparikaraH samAgato rAjA  /
dRSTo'valambitataruzAkhApAtro dUrvAvitAnoparivartI sa tena  /  tato
lakSitatadabhiprAyo rAjAmAtyAdInuvAca mayA vAryamANenAnenAgrAhi vratam,
adhunA'yaM rAjyaM gRhNAtu, vayaM punaretaditi vadatA ca dadire tasmai
rAjyacihnAni, jagRhe talliGgam  /  jagAma gurvabhimukham, itaro'pi
rAjyaviSTaramadhyAsya taddina eva bhUyo bhakSayitvotpannavisUciko rAraTyamAno
bhraSTapratijJo'draSTavyo'yamiti laukernindanAdullasitatIvraraudradhyAno mRtvA
gataH saptamanarakapRthivIm  /  puNDarIkaH punargatvA gurvantikaM karomi
niSkalaGkaM saMyamamityAvirbhUtatIvrazubhapariNAmo'nucitAnupAnatkA'vanigamanena
galaccaraNarudhiraH samudIrNakSutpipAsAparISahastathApyavicalitasattvastaddina
eva mRtvA gataH sarvArthasiddhimiti  /  2010_02 , 165

Page #207 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter 166: The Discourse on the Rejection of the Eager  **17. The Story of
the King**  In the treasury of stories, the story of the King is found in the
chapter on the hopes and aspirations. In the city of Kusumpura, which is
situated in the land of Videha, where the weight of the mountains and the
serpents is heavy, there lived a king. ||1||  Where the people are numerous and
the city is full of jewels, the king was the best of men, a true king. ||2||
His name was Kusumsehara, the jewel among kings, whose strong arms were like the
gates of a fortress. ||3||  He was born to Jayalal, who carried the weight of
the earth on his shoulders, and he was a great king, full of joy and delight.
||4||  His queen was named Visalacchhi, born of a great family, with a beautiful
face and a charming smile. ||5||  The king, enjoying the pleasures of the world
with his queen, was happy and content. But one day, a time came when he was
blessed with a son. ||6||  The son was born with a beautiful body, like a full
moon, and he was blessed with all the auspicious signs. ||7||  His name was
Muldeva, and he was a charming child, with a heart full of love and affection.
||8||  He was skilled in all the arts, with a beautiful body and a charming
smile. He reached the age of youth, full of joy and vigor. ||9||  One day, the
king, surrounded by his ministers, asked, "What is the state of the people? Are
they happy and content?" ||10||  The king's minister, his face shining with the
light of wisdom, replied, "Your Majesty, the people are gathered at the palace
gates, their faces filled with sorrow. What is the reason for their distress?"
||11||  The king, his face shining with the light of his wisdom, said, "Bring
them before me, quickly!" ||12||  The people were brought before the king, and
they were treated with respect and honor. They bowed low before him, their heads
touching the ground. ||13||  The king asked, "What is the reason for your
sorrow? Is there any thief or robber in the kingdom? Is there any injustice
being done?" ||14||  "Is there anyone who is envious of your wealth and power,
who is trying to overthrow your kingdom?" ||15||  The people stood silent, their
faces filled with sorrow. Then, a wealthy merchant stepped forward, his face
filled with tears. ||16||  "Your Majesty, we are not afraid of any enemy, nor of
any danger in this world. We are safe under your protection. But we are afraid
of the king's minister, who is a wicked man. He is lustful and cruel, and he is
oppressing the people." ||17||  "He has taken away our jewels and our horses,
and he is ruling the kingdom with an iron fist. We beg you, Your Majesty, to
save us from this wicked man." ||18||  The king, hearing the people's
complaints, was filled with anger. He ordered his minister to be arrested and
punished. ||19||  The people were overjoyed, and they praised the king for his
justice and his compassion. The king, seeing the people's happiness, was filled
with joy. ||20||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 166 AturapratyAkhyAnaprakIrNakam 17. AzAdhyAne zrIAkhyAnakamaNikoze
mUladevAkhyAnakam  /  paurapura-garuyapavvayaphaNivaikayabhAra bhArahe vAse  /
asthi videhAvisae kusumapuraM nAma nayaranti  /  / 1 /  /  dIsaMti jattha niJcaM
naramaNisaMdohabhUsiyA''vAsA  /  nayanAyasaMpayapao nayaparamo naravaI tattha  /
/ 2 /  /  vikkhAyasayalanaravaisiromaNI kusumaseharo nAma  /
duvvAravairivAraNanivAraNA jassa bhuyadaMDA  /  / 3 /  /  jammi jayalAlasammiM
vasuMdharAbhAramuvvahaMtammi  /  uttinnabharo kamaDho raisuhalIlaM samuvvahai  /
/ 4  /  /  sayalaMteurasArA visAlakulasaMbhavA visAlacchI  /
niyarUvovahasiyatiyasasuMdarI suMdarI bhajjA  /  / 5 /  /  _tIe saha
visayasokkhaM aNuhavamANassa tassa suhiyassa  /  aikamai koi kAlo
rajjadhurAdharaNadhavalassa  /  / 6 /  /  kAleNa samuppanno
punnajjiyasavvasuMdarAvayavo  /  suhasumiNasUiyAsesalakkhaNajuo suo tassa  /  /
7 /  /  kayamUladevanAmo sulaliyakarapaMcadhAidullalio  /  paNaiyaNamaNabhirAmo
sa bAlabhAvaM aikkanto  /  / 8 /  /  nissesakalAkusalo
vilasiralAyannamaNaharasarIro  /  taruNiyaNamamabhirAmaM saMpatto jovvaNAraMbhaM
/  / 9 /  /  aha annayA kayAI aNegabhaDakoDisaMkaDatthANe  /  jA ciTThai
naranAho tA paDihAreNa vinnattaM  /  / 10 /  /  puha ! paurapauralogo
rAyaduvArammi ciThi nisiddho  /  pahupAyapaumadaMsaNasamussuo ko samAeso ?  /  /
11 /  /  aha bhaNai naravariMdo dasaNAvalikiraNadhavaliyadiyanto  /  re ! jhatti
taM pavesasu maha purao paurapuraloyaM  /  / 12 /  /  naravaiAeseNaM pavesio
vihiyauciyasammANo  /  dharaNIyalamiliyaniDAlamaMDalo paNamiya niviTTho  /  / 13
/  /  to bhaNai naravariMdo kiM maha daMsaNasamussuo loo  /  paracakka-cora-
caraDAiDAmaraM kiM nu maha rajje ?  /  / 14 /  /  kiM vA ko vi hu
asarisapasAyasaMpattidANadullalio  /  kuNai parAbhavamAsaMghio jaNo rAyaulaThAI
/  / 15 /  /  evaM jAva payaMpai naranAho vihiyapaNayasammANo  /  tA
maulimiliyakarakamalasaMpuDo pabhaNae seTThI  /  / 16 /  /  tai pAlaMte jayapahu
! aipayaDapayAvapahayapaDivakkhe  /  suviNe vi deva ! na'nno amhaM bhuvaNe vi
bhayaheU  /  / 17 /  /  kiMtu paradArarasio nayapAliyapariyaNo mahiyamitto  /
paramAyAyArarao baMdIkayasayalapaurajaNo  /  / 18 /  /  khatteNa gahiyaraha-
gaya-mANikko hayapahANapattiyaNo  /  rAyacariehiM kumaro evaM nayaraM mahai deva
!  /  / 19 /  /  iya nisuNiya paurajaNaM visajjae vihiyauciyapaDivattI  /
aMtagurukovahuyavahadhUmasihasAmalacchAo  /  / 20 /  /  2010_02

Page #208 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Chapter 2: Collection of Examples 167  A young prince, like a lion in the
forest, was approached by his father's minister at that place. ||21|| The
minister, with his body adorned with jewels and rays of light, bowed to the
prince, like a lotus flower blooming in a pond. ||22|| The prince, with his body
shining like the sun, was praised by the minister. "O prince of the Kshatriya
clan! This is a great opportunity for you to show your prowess." ||23|| The
prince, feeling the humiliation of being defeated by his guru, and unable to
bear the insult of his father, thought in his heart. ||24|| "They abandon
wealth, they renounce possessions, they give up their kingdom, they abandon
their family. Even in death, they do not abandon their dharma." ||25|| "Even in
death, they do not abandon their dharma, they are fearless like a lion roaring
on a mountain." ||26|| Thinking this, the prince bowed to his father's minister
and went to his wife. ||27|| The prince, with his wealth and army, left the
city, fearless and strong, like a lion with a sharp sword, ready to destroy his
enemies. ||28|| He went to the villages, towns, and cities, with his army, like
a small ant carrying a large load. ||29|| There, a cruel and wicked king, always
engaged in war, lived happily, with his army and his desires. ||30|| The prince
saw a beautiful Kinnara woman there, adorned with ornaments and jewels, and
surrounded by guards. ||31|| He sent his servant to her, with love and respect,
and the servant said to her. ||32|| "O beautiful woman! Your beauty has
captivated my master. O Kinnara! You are a thief of hearts, even from within
your home." ||33|| The prince said, "Who is this woman of yours?" The servant
replied, "She is the wife of Devadatta, the conqueror of the world." ||34|| The
prince said, "I have no faith in women, they are fickle-minded, they are
deceitful, they are cunning." ||35|| "Even young women are not to be trusted,
they are deceitful and cunning. How can one trust women who are fickle-minded
and deceitful?" ||36|| "Their love is based on desire, their bodies are
beautiful, but their hearts are not pure. They are like a beautiful flower that
has no fragrance." ||37|| "If she does not come, then go and bring her here."
The servant said to the woman, "My master wants to see you." ||38|| "Come once,
come to my house. The good men are those who are kind and compassionate." ||39||
The prince, thinking that she would come, waited for a while, but she did not
come. Then, he struck her with his fist, and she fell to the ground. ||40||
_JainEducation International 2010_02

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 khaNDa:-2 dRSTAntasamuccayaH 167 etyaMtarasmi kumaro
hAravirAyaMtaviyaDavacchayalo  /  piupAyapaNamaNakae samAgao tattha atthANe  /
/ 21 /  /  paNamaMtasayalasAmaMtamaulimaNirayaNakiraNakacchurie  /  payakamale
miliyaniDAlamaMDalo paNamai kumAro  /  / 22 /  /  jaMpei mahIvAlo
kayabhiuDIbhaMgabhAsuraniDAlo  /  khattiyaNagottakhaMpaNa ! avasara maha
diThThipasarAo  /  / 23 /  /  kumaro vi
guruparAbhavamannubharuppannaasarisAmariso  /  piiparusavayaNaparibhavamasahaMto
ciMtae hiyae  /  / 24 /  /  ujjhati dhaNaM muMcaMti pariyaNaM mahiyalaM
paricayaMti  /  maraNe vi mahAsattA na uNo mANaM pariharaMti  /  / 25  /   /
avi maraNamasamasAhasagiribhairavapaDaNavaDDiyucchAhe  /  ahilasai mahAsatto na
uNo mANaM pariccayai  /  / 26 /  /  iya ciMtiUNa kumaro paNamittA pAyapaMkayaM
ranno  /  atthANAo niyatto tatto rayaNIe jAyAe  /  / 27 /  /  ahimANadhaNo
nayarAo niggao asamasAhasasahAo  /
vairikarikumbhadAraNakarakaliyakarAlakaravAlo  /  / 28  /  /
aNavarayamakkamaMto gAmA''garanagaramaMDiyaM vasuhaM  /  guDiyakayavAmaNaMgo
saMpatto nayarimujjeNiM  /  / 29 /  /  tattha durodaradaio niccaM
kalagIyadinnamaipasaro  /  annAyakula-parakkamaparamattho nivasai suheNa  /  /
30 /  /  aha annayA ya diTTho kinnarakalagIyavAvaDo tattha  /
niyabhavaNamattavAraNaparivilasiradevadattAe  /  / 31 /  /  gIyANurAyarattA
vAmaNae tammi pesae dAsiM  /  sANuNayaM sappaNayaM sasiNehaM sA vi taM bhaNai  /
/ 32  /  /  vAmaNaya ! tumha daMsaNasamussuyA sAmiNI samAisai  /  maha kinnara !
maNaharaNo hosi tumaM gihapaveseNa  /  / 33 /  /  to bhaNai mUladevo kA sA tuha
sAmiNI ? tao bhaNai  /  sohaggajayapaDAyA paNaMgaNA devadatta tti  /  / 34 /  /
aha bhaNai mUladevo vissAso maha na atthi vesAsu  /  khaNaratta-virattAsuM
avarA-'varahariyacittAsuM  /  / 35  /  /  iyarAsu vi juvaIsuM na
vIsaseyavvamettha kuDilAsu  /  visamavisasannibhAsU kiM puNa vesAsu vissAso ?  /
/ 36 /  /  annonnanehanibbhararasANuviddho na jattha sabbhAvo  /
rUvAvahariyadeho na vAmaNo tattha alliyai  /  / 37  /  /  jA evaM nA''gacchai tA
sAhai sAmiNIe sA gaMtuM  /  sA vi puNo vi bhaNAvai dAsIvayaNeNa vayaNamiNaM  /
/ 38 /  /  Agaccha ekkavAraM uvaroheNAvi majjha gehammi  /  dakkhinnanIranihiNo
havaMti jeNettha sappurisA  /  / 39 /  /  to aNumanniyagamaNo jA jAi khaNaMtaraM
tamaNulaggo  /  tA muTThipahAreNaM jhaDa tti pauNIkayA khujjA  /  / 40 /  /
_JainEducation International 2010_02

Page #209 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 168 **Aaturpratyakhyanaprakirnakam**  **Vinaan-vayanpagaris-kinnarakalagiya-
gunavisesam cha |** **Kaliuun tass gania ahiyayaram ranjia hiyaye ||41||**
**Tahe vamanago vi hu pecchai savvangasundaraavayam |** **So devadattaganiyam
raigunamanikkabhandaram ||42||**  **Tatha hisingarajalahilalahari
sayaljuvaanekkamanaavasikarnam |** **Jayavijayavejayanti jayekka kamass kamass
||43||**  **Sayaljananayanajanamijyasalaaya vilasaraibhavanam |**
**Vihivinnaanpagariso muttimai mohavalli vva ||44||**  **Evam sampecchanto
sampatto tie vasaabhavanammi |** **Kayasamuchyovaayaro uvavittho tie pasammi
||45||**  **To kusalavattapuvvam aauchchai savvamev vuttantum |** **So vi
samayaanuruvam payasae kim pi tappuro ||46||**  **Etyantarammi sa vi hu
tappacchakkam payasae pahitta |**
**Niyagiyaparamppagarisamanuranjianiyayaparivara ||47||**  **Ah jampiai vamanao
pariyanyakayachaaduranjiyam ganiyam appuvvageyaparissaparissamo tuha param kintu
||48||**  **Vaalanuviddha tanti vanso suddo na tumha veenae |** **Viusaan
vannanijjo saddo na hu tena ramanio ||49||**  **Tavvaynajayaakouhalean samman
niruvaye jiva |** **Ta tantiae pecchai valam vamse ya pahaanam ||50||**
**Taggunaranjiyachitta pananggana bhanai devadatta sa |** **Vamanaya! Mano maha
giyalalasam kunasu sakayttham ||51||**
**Uddaamaranganaveerapurischariyaanusarichariena |** **Sar-gaamvihiyamucchhena
tena aasariya veena ||52||**  **To kumaraagiyasanjayaparavasa hariyamanaasa
sahasa |** **Taddaviyakannjuyala karini parihariy karakavalam ||53||**
**Sanjayavimhaya sa chintai hiyayammi attano gania |** **Evamvihagunakaliyo
samanno hoi na hu es ||54||**  **Ta karanean kenai hoyavvam avass ettha ruvammi
|** **Iya chintiuun hiyaye vamanao tie bhoyavio ||55||**  **To bhoyanavasaane
egante nehanibbaram bhanio |** **Kahasu niyakul-parakkamparamattham najjha
ettahe ||56||**  **To tena neharanjimanena savvam payasiyam tie |**
**Uggaliyaguhiyabhaava sanjayasahavaruvean ||57||**  **Sabbhavaruyaranjiyamanaae
to tie devadattaae |** **Taruniyanajanikamo kamo vva raiae so dihro ||58||**
**Pabhanai ya nehasaram sa ranjiyamanaasa vinayanira |

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 168 AturapratyAkhyAnaprakIrNakama vinANa-vayaNapagarisa-kinnarakalagIya-
guNavisesaM ca  /  kaliUNa tassa gaNiyA ahiyayaraM raMjiyA hiyae  /  / 41 /  /
tAhe vAmaNago vi hu pecchai savvaMgasuMdarAvayavaM  /  so devadattagaNiyaM
raiguNamANikkabhaMDAraM  /  / 42 /  /  tathA hisiMgArajalahilaharI
sayalajuvANekkamaNavasIkaraNaM  /  jayavijayavejayaMtI jayekka kAmassa kAmassa
/  / 43 /  /  sayalajaNanayaNaaMjaNaamiyasalAyA vilAsaraibhavaNaM  /
vihivinnANapagariso muttimaI mohavalli vva  /  / 44 /  /  evaM saMpecchaMto
saMpatto tIe vAsabhavaNammi  /  kayasamuciyovayAro uvaviTTho tIe pAsammi  /  /
45  /  /  to kusalavattapuvvaM Aucchai savvameva vuttaMtaM  /  so vi
samayANurUvaM payAsae kiM pi tappurao  /  / 46 /  /  etyaMtarammi sA vi hu
tappaJcakkhaM payAsai pahiTThA  /
niyagIyaparamapagarisamaNuraMjiyaniyayaparivArA  /  / 47 /  /  aha jaMpai
vAmaNao pariyaNakayacADuraMjiyaM gaNiyaM appuvvageyapagarisaparissamo tuha paraM
kiMtu  /  / 48 /  /  vAlANuviddha taMtI vaMso suddho na tumha vINAe  /  viusANa
vannaNijjo saddo na hu teNa ramaNIo  /  / 49  /  /  tavvayaNajAyakoUhaleNa
sammaM nirUvae jIva  /  tA taMtIe pecchai vAlaM vaMse ya pAhANaM  /  / 50  /  /
tagguNaraMjiyacittA paNaMgaNA bhaNai devadattA sA  /  vAmaNaya ! maNo maha
gIyalAlasaM kuNasu sakayatthaM  /  / 51  /  /
uddaamrnnNgnnviirpuriscriyaannusaaricrienn| sara-gAmavihiyamuccheNa teNa AsAriyA
vINA  /  / 52 /  /  to kumaragIyasaMjAyaparavasA hariyamANasA sahasA  /
taDDaviyakannajuyalA kariNI parihariya karakavalaM  /  / 53 /  /  saMjAyavimhayA
sA ciMtai hiyayammi attaNo gaNiyA  /  evaMvihaguNakalio sAmanno hoi na hu esa  /
/ 54 /  /  tA kAraNeNa keNai hoyavvamavassa ettha rUvammi  /  iya ciMtiUNa hiyae
vAmaNao tIe bhoyavio  /  / 5 /  /  to bhoyaNAvasANe egaMte nehanibbharaM bhaNio
/  kahasu niyakula-parakkamaparamatthaM najjha ettAhe  /  / 56 /  /  to teNa
neharaMjiyamaNeNa savvaM payAsiyaM tIe  /  uggaliyaguhiyabhAvA
saMjAyasahAvarUveNa  /  / 57  /  /  sabbhAvarUyaraMjiyamaNAe to tIe devadattAe
/  taruNiyaNajaNiyakAmo kAmo vva raIe so dihro  /  / 58  /  /  pabhaNai ya
nehasAraM sA raMjiyamANasA viNayaniyarA  /  saha rayaNAharaNehiM jIyaM pi hu
maha tuhA''yattaM  /  / 59 /  /  avahariyaparopparamANasANa annonnanehasArANa  /
jA jAi koi kAlo parivajjiyaavarakajjANa  /  / 60  /  /  to tIe aipasaMgaM nAUNa
kuTTaNI bhaNai ivaM  /  pariharasu putti ! eyaM dhaNahINaM nANaduviyaDhU  /  /
61  /  /  jeNapAeNa iyararamaNI vi raccae uttame vi na daridde  /  vesANa puNa
viseso niyadehaviDhattadaviNANa  /  / 62 /  /  2010_02

Page #210 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Chapter:-2 Collection of Examples 169 And the Khayaka-Koodaka-Vadchaadu-
Yeraikaliya leprosy, what is its work? It is to be avoided, it is very harmful,
even in work. ||63|| Veena-Vinoy-Vinnaan-Pagarisuppanna-Kittira-Maniyam. If it
is so, then it is very harmful, wealth! Avoid it. ||64|| Then Devadatta says,
"Many generations have passed, what is this? What will be the benefit of wealth
to you?" ||65|| From there, the wealthy merchant, like a cloud in the sky, lives
there. Saibhadda-Saal-Kaliyo, the benefactor, is the one who gives the gift.
||66|| He desires to see the beautiful woman in Ujjain in the spring month with
various ornaments. ||67|| He thinks in his heart, "Where will the union be with
this woman? Or will there be a wealth of money, or will there be a subjugation
of women?" ||68|| Thinking this, he went to the woman, who was the daughter of a
wealthy merchant. She was also attracted to the merchant. ||69|| Thus, they went
together to Devadatta's house. She was also very attracted to the merchant.
||70|| Then she again asked her mother, "What is the matter, mother? Is the
garden blocked by a tree or a stone?" ||71|| Devadatta said, "Mother, wealth is
not obtained by qualities. " The mother said, "Son, the merchant is also a man
of qualities." ||72|| Devadatta said, "If it is so, mother, let us test it."
Saying this, he sent a servant to the merchant with rice. ||73|| Then she said,
"Go to the merchant and tell him, 'Just as you desire sugarcane today, so do I
desire you.'" ||74|| Then the merchant filled a whole cart with sugarcane and
sent it to her. Devadatta said, "Mother, what should I do now?" ||75|| "Fill a
whole cart with sugarcane, roots and all, and send it to the merchant's house."
||76|| "Mother, the knowledge of the merchant is obtained, examine the
merchant's roots." Saying this, he sent the servant to the merchant. ||77|| Then
she went to the merchant's house, saying, "Today, I desire sugarcane, please
bring it." ||78|| Then, with a strong, sharp, and quick-moving sword, he cut off
a piece of sugarcane. ||79|| He cut off the sugarcane with a strong, sharp, and
quick-moving sword, and then he threw it into the fire. ||80|| Then she began to
tremble, her body trembling with fear. "Mother, the difference between the
merchant and the knowledge of the merchant is like this!" ||81|| _ 2010_02

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 khaNDa:-2 dRSTAntasamuccayaH 169 tathA cakayakUDakavaDacADuyaraikaliyA koDhiyaM
pi kAmei  /  pariharai raivirattA dhaNahINaM kAmaevaM pi  /  / 63  /  /  vINA-
viNoya-vinnANapagarisuppannakittiramaNIyaM  /  jai vi hu evaM taha vi hu
dhaNahINaM putti ! pariharasu  /  / 64  /  /  to bhaNai devadattA
bahuveNiparaMparAgayA esA  /  kiM ammo ! kijjissai riddhIkAraTTae tujjha ?  /  /
65  /  /  etto ya tattha nivasai suravaiayalo vva ayalavaraseTThI  /
saibhaddasAlakalio vararayaNo kaNayakaDao ya  /  / 66 /  /  so anayA ya gaNiyaM
vasaMtamAsammi vivihakIlAhiM  /  ujjANe kolaMtiM pecchai saha mUladeveNa  /  /
67  /  /  to ciMtai so hiyae kaha hohI saMgamo maha imAe ?  /  ahavA davvuvayAro
paNaMgaNANaM vasIkaraNaM  /  / 68  /  /  iya ciMtauM payaTTo tIe
uvayariumatthajAeNa  /  uvarohakayasiNehA sA vi hu abhiramai taM ayalaM  /  / 69
/  /  ecaM ca jaMti diyahA saddhiM ayaleNa devadattAe  /  paramaJcaMtasiNehA
sayA vi sA mUladevammi  /  / 70  /  /  aha sA puNaravi bhaNiyA akkAe niddhaNeNa
kiha vacche ! sasaeNa va khoDeNaM aNeNa vaNavADao ruddho ?  /  / 71 /  /  to
bhaNai devadattA guNehiM rattA dhaNammi na hu aMba !  /  aMbA vi bhaNai vacche !
ayalo vi hu guNagaNAvAso  /  / 72 /  /  to bhaNai devadattA jai evaM aMba !
kijjau parikkhA  /  iya bhaNie niyadAsiM cavalaM ayalammi pesei  /  / 73 /  /
bhaNai tao sA gaMtuM purao seTThissa vayaNamiNamevaM  /  jaha tujjha vallahAe
ikkhUhiM paoyaNaM ajja  /  / 74  /  /  to ayalo ikkhUNaM sagaDaM bhariUNa pesae
tIe  /  to bhaNai devadattA pecchAhaM amba ! kiM kariNI ?  /  / 75 /  /  jeNa
saDAla-samUlayaikkhUNaM sagaDayaM bhareUNaM  /  maha pesiyanti vinANapagarisaM
peccha ayalassa  /  / 76  /  /  saMpai puNa vinnANaM amba ! nirikkhesu
mUladevassa  /  iya bhaNiuM taM dAsiM saMpesai mUladevammi  /  / 77  /  /  to sA
sAhai gaMtuM jUyapphalayammi mUladevassa  /  jaha tujjha ajja daiyA icchUvaMchaM
samuvvahai  /  / 78  /  /  to teNa varADagadasadugeNa egaM gahAya varalaTTi  /
sigghamasidheNucholliyagaMDalae kAumacireNa  /  / 79 /  /
avaravarADagadasadugasaMgahiyasarAvasaMpuDe khivai  /  pakkhiviya cAujAyaM
sUlAsuM poiuM tatto  /  / 80 /  /  paTThavai tIe tagguNaraMjiyahiyayA pajaMpae
sA vi  /  jUyAra-ayalavinnANaaMtaraM erisaM aMba !  /  / 81 /  /  _ 2010_02

Page #211 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 170 ## The Scattering of the Eager Refusal  Then Kuttanī pondered, "With what
words should I speak to him in the house? Should I speak softly? Thinking this,
she said to the young man, "You have come." ||82||  "Just as a very devoted
wife, devoted to her husband, adorns herself with clothes and enjoys all
pleasures, so you are adorned." ||83||  "Then why should this one be expelled
from my house?  The young man said, "What is this, my dear? What are you
saying?" ||84||  "Akka said, "This is not your fault, my dear.  So, let us go to
the village of Kavada today.  Let us go." ||85||  "So that you, my dear, can
enjoy yourself with the devoted wife of Muladeva, along with the Devadatta
family, in my house." ||86||  "Therefore, let us go out, let us enjoy ourselves,
let us go out.  Let us go out, let us enjoy ourselves, let us go out.  Let us go
out, let us enjoy ourselves, let us go out.  Let us go out, let us enjoy
ourselves, let us go out.  Let us go out, let us enjoy ourselves, let us go out.
Let us go out, let us enjoy ourselves, let us go out.  Let us go out, let us
enjoy ourselves, let us go out.  Let us go out, let us enjoy ourselves, let us
go out.  Let us go out, let us enjoy ourselves, let us go out.  Let us go out,
let us enjoy ourselves, let us go out.  Let us go out, let us enjoy ourselves,
let us go out.  Let us go out, let us enjoy ourselves, let us go out.  Let us go
out, let us enjoy ourselves, let us go out.  Let us go out, let us enjoy
ourselves, let us go out.  Let us go out, let us enjoy ourselves, let us go out.
Let us go out, let us enjoy ourselves, let us go out.  Let us go out, let us
enjoy ourselves, let us go out.  Let us go out, let us enjoy ourselves, let us
go out.  Let us go out, let us enjoy ourselves, let us go out.  Let us go out,
let us enjoy ourselves, let us go out.  Let us go out, let us enjoy ourselves,
let us go out.  Let us go out, let us enjoy ourselves, let us go out.  Let us go
out, let us enjoy ourselves, let us go out.  Let us go out, let us enjoy
ourselves, let us go out.  Let us go out, let us enjoy ourselves, let us go out.
Let us go out, let us enjoy ourselves, let us go out.  Let us go out, let us
enjoy ourselves, let us go out.  Let us go out, let us enjoy ourselves, let us
go out.  Let us go out, let us enjoy ourselves, let us go out.  Let us go out,
let us enjoy ourselves, let us go out.  Let us go out, let us enjoy ourselves,
let us go out.  Let us go out, let us enjoy ourselves, let us go out.  Let us go
out, let us enjoy ourselves, let us go out.  Let us go out, let us enjoy
ourselves, let us go out.  Let us go out, let us enjoy ourselves, let us go out.
Let us go out, let us enjoy ourselves, let us go out.  Let us go out, let us
enjoy ourselves, let us go out.  Let us

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 170 AturapratyAkhyAnaprakIrNakam to kuTTaNI viciMtai keNa uvAeNa majjha gehAo
/  nIharihI ? iya ciMtiya egate bhaNai taM ayalaM  /  / 82 /  /  jaha esA
accaMtaM aNurattA mUladevajUyAre  /  vatthAlaMkArAI bharabhogaM tIe taM vahasi
/  / 83 /  /  tA kiM eso vi tae nikkAsijjai na majjha bhavaNAo ?  /  ayalo vi
bhaNai maha diTThigoyaraM kaha Nu so hohI ?  /  / 84  /  /  akkA vi bhaNai evaM
nIsaMkaM tuha bhaeNa na hu ei  /  tA kavaDagAmagamaNaM karittu saMjhAe puNa ejja
/  / 85  /  /  jeNa tumaM nIsaMkaM vilasaMtaM mUladevajUyAraM  /  saha
devadattagaNiyAe pecchase majjha gehammi  /  / 86 /  /  teNa taha cciya vihie
raMjiyahiyayA paNaMgaNA pacchA  /  vAhariya mUladevaM nIsaMkaM jAva abhiramai  /
/ 87  /  /  lallakkamiuDibhIsaNapAikkapamukkahakkaduppeccho  /  vijjucchaDa vva
sahasA tA ayalo tattha saMpatto  /  / 88 /  /  to tIe tayaNu turiyaM tUlIe
talammi taM khiveUNaM  /  abbhuTThiya bhaNiyamiNaM kiM gamaNaM tumha na hu jAyaM
?  /  / 89 /  /  avasauNo tti bhaNaMto uvaviTTho tammi ceva pallaMke  /
govijjaMto diTTho jassaMte devadattAe  /  / 10 /  /  NhAeyavvaM niyamA ajja mae
ettha ceva pallaMke  /  sA maNai paTTatUliM niratthayaM kiM viNAsesi ?  /  / 9 /
/  so bhaNai tujjha piuNo na viNassai kiMtu majjha iya bhaNie  /  tappariyaNeNa
ayalo sigdhaM abbhaMgio tatto  /  / 12 /  /
aimailakhalikharaMTiyapalhasthiyakalasasalilasaMsitto  /  ciMtei mUladevo
dhiratyu maha jIviyavvassa  /  / 93 /  /  dhannA hu jae jaiNo jaiNo
kaMdappasappadappassa  /  maraNe vI jANa musiyo na mANamANikkabhaMDAro  /  / 94
/  /  parihAsaparaMparapAsaparavasA nehavAgurAyattA  /  hariNa vva
kusumasaravAhabANanihayA na ke ettha ?  /  / 95  /  /  ahava iha parabhavammi ya
paribhavatarukusumamaMjarI mahilA  /  kAmuyajaNassa suiraM nimmaviyA
hayapayAvaiNA  /  / 96 /  /  iya ciMtiUNa sahasA niggacchai jAva tUliheTThAo  /
daTThoTThabhiuDibhAsuraayalo kesesu saMgahiya  /  / 97 /  /  nibbhacchiUNa
pabhaNai kovaparAmusiyakUrakaravAlo  /  kiM re ? kIrau avayArakAriNo vairiNo
tujjha ?  /  / 98  /  /  to bhaNai mUladevo adINacitto abhinnamuharAo  /  jaM
kiM pi tujjha cittassa sammayaM kuNasutaM ceva  /  / 99 /  /  ciMtei tao ayalo
sAmanno esa hoi na hu puriso  /  na hi hINakuluppannANa dhIrimA erisA hoi  /  /
100  /  /  2010_02

Page #212 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Chapter 2: Collection of Examples 171  Thinking this, he said, "Even for me,
what should I do? I will protect the *satosaṃ* (true faith), I will be
liberated, I will be honored, that is my goal." ||101|| "Should I stay here,
stained by the dirt of disrespect and the mark of the teacher?" ||102|| "With
strength and support, with the best intelligence, courage, and help, I will
cross over, I will cross over the mountain, the river, the deep water." ||103||
"Even with the help of *vāyāmeta* (effort), I will seek, until I reach the
forest. There is only one *brahmaṇa* (knowledgeable person) who can help me."
||104|| "The *cakkavattī* (universal monarch) named *Sadḍhaḍo* is very strong.
He is known as the *jaṇakayanigghiṇasammā* (one who has overcome the *jaṇakaya*
(worldly attachments) and is righteous) and the *nigghiṇattanā* (one who has
overcome the *tanā* (desire))." ||105|| "Relying on his strength and power, I
will cross over with ease." Thinking this, he went with the *kaysambhāsa* (one
who speaks the truth). ||106|| "At that time, *Sadḍhaḍo*, equipped with a water-
filled vessel, was ready to go. Looking at the water, he saw a *sattu* (living
being) like a single *āgī* (a type of bird)." ||107|| "He was not invited by
*Mūladeva* (the founder of the Jain tradition) even with words. He is thinking,
'I will surely forget this great dream.'" ||108|| "But he is not deceived by the
rules. He is thinking, 'In my mind, *Mūladeva* is the *bhocca* (food) and the
*brahmaṇa* is the *patta* (leaf)." ||109|| "He is chewing with his mouth, his
hands are covered in dirt, he is holding a precious jewel, his teeth are
grinding, and he is shouting in excitement." ||110|| "I will stay in this dense
forest for a moment, until the sun rises. I will stay in the middle of the
forest, until the sun rises." ||111|| "After that, I will go forward. This is
what the young *brahmaṇa* said. I will stay for one moment, and then I will go
forward again." ||112|| "In the meantime, the young *brahmaṇa* saw the
*āvaikaliya* (danger) and thought, 'My friend, for the sake of the *attha*
(benefit), I will go far into the water.'" ||113|| "Then, *Sadḍhaḍo* ate, and
the *āgī* also ate. He was not invited by *vāyāmeta* (effort), even though he
was in a difficult situation." ||114|| "He was not invited by *bīyadiya* (the
one who gives seeds) either, nor by his mind. On that day, in the forest, there
were two *aikaṃta* (solitary) *brahmaṇas*." ||115||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 khaNDa:-2 dRSTAntasamuccayaH 171 iya ciMtiUNa pabhaNai AvaipaDiyaM mamaM pi
kaiyA vi  /  rakkhijjatti satosaM mukko sammANiuM tatto  /  / 101 /  /  kaha Nu
mae vasiyavvaM iha paribhavagurukalaMkakalieNa ? | iya citaMto citte calio
binAyaDAbhimuhaM  /  / 102 /  /  saMbala-sahAyarahio savvuttamabuddhisAhasasahAo
/  laMghato laMgheto giri-sariyAinnamahivIDhaM  /  / 103 /  /  vAyAmettasahAyaM
pi pecchAe jAva neya aDavIe  /  aikavilesakAo dilo tA baMbhaNo ego  /  / 104 /
/  kivaNANa cakkavaTTI Takko jAIe saddhaDo nAma  /
jaNakayanigghiNasammAbhihANao nigghiNattaNao  /  / 105  /  /
saMbalabalamavalaMbiya eyassa ahaM suheNa laMghissaM  /  iya ciMtiya saMcalio
kayasaMbhAseNa saha teNa  /  / 106  /  /  to paharaduge salilappaesamAsajja
saddhaDo turiyaM  /  avaloDiUNa salileNa sattue jimai egAgI  /  / 107 /  /  aha
teNa mUladevo vayaNeNa vi na hu nimaMtio jAva  /  ciMtei nUNamiNDiM
vissariyamimassa maha suhiNo  /  / 108  /  /  avarahe uNa niyamA na vaMcihI esa
ciMtae jAva  /  cittammi mUladevo to bhoccA baMbhaNo patto  /  / 109 /  /
tuMdaM parAmusaMto malamANo hatthajuyalamaNavarayaM  /  dADhiyamavalUhaMto
uDDeggAre pramuMcaMto  /  / 110 /  /  aha bahalatarutalammiM khaNamettaM tAva
vissamAmo tti  /  kharakiraNatAviyataNU majjhattho jAva divasayaro  /  / 111 /
/  pacchA purao gamaNaM kAhAmo iya kumArabhaNiyammi  /  vIsamiuM khaNamekkaM
puNo payaTTA pahe gaMtuM  /  / 112 /  /  etthaMtarammi kumaraM AvaikaliyaM
viyANiuM rano  /  mitto atthanimittaM va dUramavagAhae jalahiM  /  / 113 /  /
to saddhaDeNa bhuttaM taheva egAgiNA viyAle vi  /  na ya vAyAmetteNa vi nimaMtio
kaDhiNahiyaeNa  /  / 114 /  /  bIyadiyahe vi taha vi hu nimaMtio teNa na ya
maNAgaM pi  /  taiyammi diNe aDaviM aikaMtA do vi te kaha vi  /  / 115  /  /
2010_02

Page #213 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter 172: The Scattering of the Eager Refusal  The wealthy king, the lord
of the land, was a generous giver of wealth. The wise Muni, the Brahman,
pondered in his heart.  ||116||  "You are a deceiver, O Blessed One! But what
have you done today?  ||117||  Knowing my wealth, I gave you this village."
||117||  Having said this, the king, the lord of the land, went to the village
in the afternoon.  ||118||  He was eager to beg for alms, his bowl filled with
the leaves of the Karaka tree.  ||118||  He wanted to fill his bowl with the
alms of the Jain community, following the path of the pond.  ||119||  He who
goes out from there, will meet a single Muni.  ||119||  He who has spent a month
in fasting, with a body full of wealth and a mind free from suffering,  ||120||
enters the village on the day of the Parana.  ||120||  The king, the lord of the
land, thought, "This is the marriage of my son.  ||121||  This is like a Kalpa
tree, which is seen in the forest."  ||121||  Thinking this, he spoke with a
heart full of devotion, his body trembling with joy.  ||122||  "Please have
mercy on me, O Muni, among the Jain community!"  ||122||  The Muni, having
received the fourfold purity of wealth, said, "This is not the time for alms."
||123||  The prince, who was standing nearby, was pleased and said, "Alms are
for the sake of the people, for the sake of the Parana."  ||124||  Having said
this, the Muni, the lord of the gods, said, "O Great One, it is better for you
to give alms to the needy.  ||125||  Give alms to the Jain community, to
Devadatta, to the thousand teeth, and to the kingdom."  ||125||  As the prince
spoke, the lord of the gods said, "The fruit of the Muni's alms will soon be
yours."  ||126||  After the remaining alms were given, the prince went to the
palace.  ||127||  The Muni, the lord of the gods, went to the city of Vinnayada.
||127||  He arrived in the city of Vinnayada, having traveled by the path of the
righteous.  ||128||  He slept in the house of the teacher and saw a dream in the
middle of the night.  ||128||  He saw a beautiful, radiant, and luminous image
of a woman, entering the house.  ||129||  He woke up and told the dream to the
others.  ||130||  They said, "You will get a sweet, delicious, and beautiful
garland."  ||130||  On the next day, while he was sitting in his house,  ||131||
he received a sweet garland from the alms of the pure ones.  ||131||  The
prince, thinking that the Muni was the cause of his happiness,  ||132||  told
the story of the dream to the people of the city, who were eager to hear it.
||132||  In the morning, when the sun rose, the prince filled a basket with
flowers.  ||133||  He went to the Muni, who was sitting in his house, with great

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 172 AturapratyAkhyAnaprakIrNakam saMpattavasimadeso
tassA''sAdhariyaniyayapANadhaNo  /  ciMtei mUladevo uvayArI baMbhaNo majjha  /
/ 116  /  /  pabhaNai vaJca jahicchaM bhadda ! tumaM kiMtu ejja kaiyA vi  /
maha rajjasaMpayaM jANiUNa jaM demi te gAmaM  /  / 117  /  /  iya bhaNiya
mUladevo paharaduge gAmamAgao saMto  /  karakaliyapattapuDao bhikkhaM bhamiuM
samADhatto  /  / 118  /  /  kevalakummAsehiM bharittu puDayaM taDAgamaNusariuM
/  jA niggacchai tatto saMpecchai muNivaraM egaM  /  / 119  /  /
mAsovavAsasosiyasarIrasaMpattimasamasuhalesaM  /  pAraNagapattadivasaM
pavisaMtaM gAmamajjhammi  /  / 120  /  /  daThUNa mUladevo ciMtai maha
putrapariNaI esA  /  maruranammi va eso jaM diTTho kapparukkho vva  /  / 121  /
/  iya ciMtiUNa pabhaNai bhattibharulAsayabahalaromaMco  /  giNhasu karuNaM kAuM
kummAse majjha muNinAha !  /  / 122 /  /  davvAicauhasuddhiM pauMjiuM giNhae
muNivaro vi  /  etyaMtarammi kumaro raMjiyahiyao bhaNai evaM  /  / 123 /  /
dhannANaM khu narANaM kummAsA huMti sAhupAraNae  /  iya bhaNie bhaNai tao
muNibhattA devayA gayaNe  /  / 124  /  /  maggasu varaM mahAyasa ! jaM royai
tujjha uttaraddheNa  /  gaNiyaM ca devadattaM daMtisahassaM ca rajjaM ca  /  /
125  /  /  iya bhaNai jAva kumaro bhaNai tao devayA pahiTThamaNA  /
muNidANapunapAyavaphalamiNamacireNa tuha hohI  /  / 126  /  /
uvvariyasesakummAsabhoyaNANaMtaraM pasatthagaI  /  muNidANapunakalio calio
binnAyaDAbhimuhaM  /  / 127  /  /  paidiyahapayANehiM vennAyaDanayaramAgao saMto
/  sutto desikuDIe sumiNaM pecchai nisAsese  /  / 128  /  /
amayamayakiraNanimmahiyatAvamasamANakaMti jaNasuhayaM  /  pavisaMtaM niyavayaNe
keraviNIramaNapaDibiMbaM  /  / 129  /  /  kappaDio vi hu pAsittu tArisaM kahai
sumiNamiyarANa  /  te vi hu bhaNaMti guDa-nehamaMDiyaM maMDayaM lahasi  /  / 130
/  /  to teNa bIyadivase chAijjatammi kammivi gharammi  /  bhikkhAe pavitRRNaM
laddho guDamaMDao ego  /  / 131 /  /  kumaro vi maNe muNiuM maNorahANaM
apAvaNijjaM ti  /  sumiNamiNaM maNaharaNaM pahANapurisANa kahaNIyaM  /  / 132 /
/  aha uggayammi sUre kumaro kusumANamaMjaliM bhariuM  /  suviNannuyassa pAse
saMpatto paramaviNaeNa  /  / 133 /  /  pUittu pAyakamalaM paNAmapuvvaM payAsae
sumiNaM  /  aha ciMtai suviNaviU rajjaphalo esa sumiNo tti  /  / 134 /  /
lAyanapunakaliyaM aha taM pariNAviUNa niyadhUyaM  /  sAhai jaha tui hohI
sattadiNabbhaMtare rajjaM  /  / 135  /  /  2010_02

Page #214 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Chapter:-2 Collection of Examples 173 This having been heard, the king was very
happy in that city. A man with a shining face was given the city's wealth on
that day. ||136|| Thinking how he would enjoy himself in the city, he took a
sword in the king's palace and killed the king's guards. ||137|| When he went
out from there, he was caught by the guards. ||138|| He was bound and taken to
the king's court. ||138|| "He is a thief," the king's ministers said, "he has
killed the king's guards." ||139|| "What will happen now?" the prince thought.
||140|| He was very sad and worried about the city's people. ||140|| The king
died without a son, and the ministers, the nobles, and the people of the city
were very sad. ||141|| They went to the Jain temple and worshipped the five
divine beings. ||141|| The king's soul went to hell because of his past bad
deeds. ||142|| He was born in a city with three-storied temples and beautiful
palaces. ||142|| The people of the city saw him outside the city, riding on an
elephant, his whole body covered in red sandalwood paste. ||143|| He had a
garland of flowers around his neck, and he was wearing a crown. ||144|| He was
surrounded by a group of thieves, who were playing drums and cymbals. ||144||
The king's guards caught the thief and tied him up. ||145|| The king's minister,
Harisvara, was very happy. ||145|| He took a pot of water and sprinkled it on
the ground. ||146|| He held a white umbrella over the king's head. ||146|| A
loud sound of victory was heard, and the people of the city were very happy.
||147|| The king was seated on a throne, surrounded by his ministers and nobles.
||148|| The ministers and nobles said, "This is the new king, Vikramaraja, the
great king." ||149|| "Whoever does not obey my orders will not be forgiven."
||150|| The king's ministers were very happy. ||150|| The king was very happy to
have become king. ||151|| He was very powerful and ruled the kingdom well.
||151|| The king thought, "I have become king with the help of thousands of
soldiers. I will enjoy this kingdom." ||152|| But "What is the use of this
beautiful kingdom, which is ruled by Devadatta?" ||153|| "What is the use of
this kingdom, which is full of love and happiness?" ||153|| The king sent a
letter to the king of Ujjain. ||154|| He wrote, "I have heard that Devadatta is
a very good king." ||154|| "If you agree, I will send my son to him to learn
from him." ||155|| The king of Ujjain read the letter and said, "Is this letter
written by a wise man?" ||156|| "What is special about this kingdom? Why should
I send my son to him?" ||157|| The king of Ujjain said, "I will send my son to
him. I will do what you ask." ||158||  2010_02

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 khaNDa:-2 dRSTAntasamuccayaH 173 eyaM nisAmiUNaM thakko so tammi ceva nayarammi
/  kougaakkhittamaNo diNe diyanto nayarasohaM  /  / 136 /  /  kahamettha
niddhaNohaM vilasissaM ciMtiUNa nayarIe  /  Isaragihammi khattaM khaNiUNaM
gahiyagihasAro  /  / 137  /  /  jA nigacchai tatto patto ArakkhiehiM sahasa tti
/  to baMdhiUNa nIo karaNe maMtissa pAsammi  /  / 138  /  /  coro tti kAumeso
bhaNiyamamaJceNa dehacAyassa  /  tA niMti vajjhabhUmIe kiMkarA laddhaAesA  /  /
139 /  /  puvvuttamaliyameyaM kiM hohI jAva ciMtae kumaro  /  tA
duggasUlaveyaNavivaso tannayaranaranAho  /  / 140 /  /  marai aputto to
maMtipamuhasAmaMta-pauraloeNa  /  ahivAsiUNa sammaM gayapabhiI paMcadivvAiM  /
/ 141 /  /  maggijjai nararayaNaM puvvabhavuppannapunnapabbhAraM  /
rajjanimittaM nayare tiya-caJcara-deulAIsu  /  / 142 /  /  to jaMtAI tAI divvAiM
nayarabAhiruddese  /  pecchaMti kharArUDhaM rattaMdaNalittasavvaMgaM  /  / 143 /
/  siriuvaridhariyachittiramAroviyagalasarAvamAlaM ca  /
vajjaMtavajjhaDiMDimamugghosijjaMtacoravahaM  /  / 144  /  /  taM mUladevacoraM
galagajjI tA gAeNa pAraddhA  /  guruharisaparavaseNaM haeNa hesAravo vihio  /  /
145  /  /  kalasaM ghettUNa karI ahisiMciya nei khaMdhadesammi  /  DhaliyaM
cAmarajuyalaM uvari ThiyaM seyavarachattaM  /  / 146 /  /  ucchalio tUraravo
jayajayasaddo pavaDhio jhatti  /  uddAmabaMdiviMdeNa parigao pauraloeNa  /  /
147 /  /  rAyasahAe patto muttAmaNimaMDie caukkammi  /  siMhAsaNe niviTTho paNao
sAmaMtamaMtIhiM  /  / 148 /  /  aha devayAe gayaNe bhaNiyA sAmaMtamaMtiNo savve
/  jaha esa punakalio vikkamarAo mahArAo  /  / 149 /  /  jo ANAe vaTTai na
sammameyassa tassa na khamAmi  /  tappabhii amaJcAI saMjAyA ANatallicchA  /  /
150  /  /  jAo mahAnariMdo paDupayaDapayAvapattamAhappo  /  niTThaviyavairiviMdo
jahatthamaNupAlae rajjaM  /  / 151 /  /  aha annayA kayAI rAyA cittammi ciMtae
evaM  /  saha daMtisahasseNaM laddhaM rajjaM jahuddiTuM  /  / 152 /  /  kintu
kimaNeNa devadattArahieNaM suMdareNa rajjeNa ?  /  jeNa piyasaMpaogo rajjaM
kajjaM kimaneNa ?  /  / 153 /  /  to paTThavio leho ujjeNinarAhivassa naravaiNA
/  bhaNio ya majjha neho eIe devadattAe  /  / 154  /  /  jai paDihAsai tIe
tumhANaM savvahA abhimayaM ca  /  maha jIyanivvisesaM tA pesasu taM siNeheNa  /
/ 155  /  /  iya vAIUNa lehaM rannA lehAriyA imaM bhaNiyA  /  bho bho !
kimevameyaM binnAyaDasAmiNA lihiyaM ?  /  / 156 /  /  ki amhANaM tassa ya koi
viseso samatthi rajjammi ?  /  jeNAhaM niyarajjaM savvamiNaM tassa kappemi  /  /
157  /  /  hakkAriUNa bhaNiyA gaNiyA rannA jahA tae bhadde !  /  vinattamAsi
puvvaM jaha mottuM mUladevaM me  /  / 158  /  /  2010_02

Page #215 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 174 ## Aaturpratyakhyanaprakirnakam  **159.**  "A man should not be sent
away, O King, if he is like this.  He is a great man, a great soul, a great
being, a great person, a great person, a great person, a great person, a great
person, a great person, a great person, a great person, a great person, a great
person, a great person, a great person, a great person, a great person, a great
person, a great person, a great person, a great person, a great person, a great
person, a great person, a great person, a great person, a great person, a great
person, a great person, a great person, a great person, a great person, a great
person, a great person, a great person, a great person, a great person, a great
person, a great person, a great person, a great person, a great person, a great
person, a great person, a great person, a great person, a great person, a great
person, a great person, a great person, a great person, a great person, a great
person, a great person, a great person, a great person, a great person, a great
person, a great person, a great person, a great person, a great person, a great
person, a great person, a great person, a great person, a great person, a great
person, a great person, a great person, a great person, a great person, a great
person, a great person, a great person, a great person, a great person, a great
person, a great person, a great person, a great person, a great person, a great
person, a great person, a great person, a great person, a great person, a great
person, a great person, a great person, a great person, a great person, a great
person, a great person, a great person, a great person, a great person, a great
person, a great person, a great person, a great person, a great person, a great
person, a great person, a great person, a great person, a great person, a great
person, a great person, a great person, a great person, a great person, a great
person, a great person, a great person, a great person, a great person, a great
person, a great person, a great person, a great person, a great person, a great
person, a great person, a great person, a great person, a great person, a great
person, a great person, a great person, a great person, a great person, a great
person, a great person, a great person, a great person, a great person, a great
person, a great person, a great person, a great person, a great person, a great
person, a great person, a great person, a great person, a great person, a great
person, a great person, a great person, a great person, a great person, a great
person, a great person, a great person, a great person, a great person, a great
person, a great person, a great person, a great person, a great person, a great
person, a great person, a great person, a great person, a great person, a great
person, a great person, a great person, a great person, a great person, a great
person, a great person, a great person, a great person, a great person, a great
person, a great person, a great person, a great person, a great person, a great
person, a great person, a great person, a great person, a great person, a great
person, a great

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 174 AturapratyAkhyAnaprakIrNakam anno na pesiyavvo puriso tA esa so mahArAyA  /
saMjAo puvvajjiyapunnamahApariNaivaseNa  /  / 159 /  /  to tujjhA''NayaNatthaM
niyapurisA pesiyA ehaM teNa  /  tA jAhi tassa pAse paDihAsai tujjha jai citte  /
/ 160  /  /  to bhaNai devadattA deva ! sayA vi hu maNoraho Asi  /  saMpuNNo
puNa iNDiM tumhANunAe amhANaM  /  / 161  /  /  vibhaveNa pUiUNaM paTTaviyA
mUladevapAsammi  /  pattA ya tattha teNa vi pavesiyA guruvibhUIe  /  / 162 /  /
tIe saha visayasokkhaM uvabhuMjataMssa jAi jA kAlo  /  tA saddhaDabhaTTeNaM
nisuyA rajjassa saMpattI  /  / 163 /  /  tatthA''gao paviThTho paDihAraniveio
nivasamIve  /  dino gAmo rannA vi tassa bhaNiuM imaM vayaNaM  /  / 164  /  /
pAlejjasu niyagAmaM ajjappabhiI paraM tumaM kiMtu  /  maha nayaNagoyare mA
havejja kaiyA vi jA jIvaM  /  / 165  /  /  aha anayA ya ayalo ujjeNIe
dhaNajjaNanimittaM  /  binnAyaDammi nayare patto bahulogapariyario  /  / 166 /
/  maMjiTThAikayANagamajjhe govittu paramavatthUNi  /  maMjiTThAINa puNo sukaM
pADeumAraddho  /  / 167 /  /  nAo suMkiyaloeNa kaha vi to daMsio naravaissa  /
jaha deva ! suMkacorIe vANio sAvarAhu tti  /  / 168  /  /  rAyA vi
saMbhamabbhaMtaloyaNo jA paloyae samma  /  kaha ayalasatthavAho ? avvo !
acchariyameyaM ti  /  / 169  /   /  to bhaNiyaM naravaiNA pariyANasi ko ahaM ?
bhaNai ayalo  /  niyakittibhariyabhuvaNaM deva ! tumaM ko na yANei  /  / 170  /
/  to naravaiNA sAhiyaniyavuttaMto ksijjio ayalo  /  sammANadANapariosapuvvayaM
suMkaparimukko  /  / 171 /  /  /  aha mUladevarAyA naeNa paripAliUNa niyarajjaM
/  sAvagadhammaM ca tahA mariuM devesu uvavanno  /  / 172  /  /  18. tRSAdhyAne
zrImadbhAvavijayakRte zrIuttarAdhyayanavRttau dhanazarmanAmakSullakakathA  /
abhUdujjayinIpuryyA, dhanamitrAbhidho vaNik  /  dhanazarmAzrayastasya,
dhanazarmA suto'bhavat  /  / 1 /  /  guruvANI samAkarNya, guruvairAgyavAn dhanaH
/  putreNa puNyasatreNa, satrA tatrA''dade vratam  /  / 2 /  /  svasmin pare ca
sahitau, sahitau tau vrativrajaiH  /  prasthitAvelagapurA'dhvani
madhyaMndine'nyadA  /  / 3 /  /  tadA ca bhISmagrISmArkakarasampAtatApitaH  /
pipAsApIDito bAlaH, sa cacAla zanaiH zanaiH  /  / 4 /  /  munayo'nye'grato
jagmurdhanamitramuniH punaH  /  pazcAccacAla sUnostatpremapAzaniyantritaH  /  /
5 /  /  mArge tatrAyayau ragattaraMgAtha taraGgiNI  /  tataH pitA'lapatputraM,
tAM nirIkSya pramodabhAk  /  / 6 /  /  2010_02

Page #216 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Chapter 2: Collection of Examples 175 "I know, my dear son, that you are not
defeated by thirst. But there is no water in my vicinity, what should I do?" (7)
"Now, drink the river water and kill the living beings. Even a forbidden act is
to be performed in times of distress by the wise." (8) As it is said, "Even a
forbidden act should be performed in times of distress, where inaction is
completely harmful. When the royal road is very slippery due to heavy rain, even
the wise sometimes travel on a side path." (9) "This is a distress of death, how
can it be overcome? You should consider the five great sins in the presence of a
good teacher." (10) Saying this, he crossed the river and thought, "My son will
surely be ashamed to give me water when he sees me." (11) "A virtuous person,
even if he is pure, is afraid while performing an act. I will slowly move away
from his sight." (12) Thinking thus, he moved forward and soon reached the
river. Even though he was thirsty, he did not drink the water, being firm in his
vow. (13) "Others say that the child was greatly distressed by the living
beings. His tongue, mouth, and chest were drying up, he thought." (14) "I will
drink even the undrinkable, for water is not undrinkable at this time. I will
perform penance later in the presence of my teacher." (15) Thinking thus, he
scooped up water with his cupped hands and brought it to his mouth. As soon as
he did so, he became aware. (16) "How can I, who know the Jain teachings, drink
this? The Jinas have said that even a drop of water contains countless living
beings." (17) "Frightened, the aquatic creatures, the stationary creatures like
algae, etc., are in the water. By drinking it, he would become a killer of all."
(18) "How many days do those who are protected live? Who is capable of
protecting their lives by killing others?" (19) "This is a living being, I will
not kill it at all." Deciding thus, he slowly released the water from his cupped
hands into the river. (20) Even though he was a child, he had the courage of a
grown-up. He then crossed the riverbank. He was unable to walk due to thirst.
(21) With his mind steadfast in Dharma, even though he was overcome by thirst,
he remembered the five great vows and went to heaven in distress. (22) "Using
your knowledge of the past, knowing your previous birth, go forward and see your
father, enter his body and then follow him." (23) The sage Dhanasharma followed
him, and then the celestial being followed him. Seeing his son approaching, he
was happy and stood still. (24) (Pair) Then, out of compassion for the monks,
the celestial being Dhanasharma created many cowherds in the air. (25) Having
obtained buttermilk and other things from them, the virtuous ones regained their
health. Like nectar, they drank from the pools of nectar, becoming free from old
age. (26) Thus, they lived happily, roaming in the cowherds created by him. They
crossed the forest and reached the last cowherd. (27) As they were going
further, one of them wanted to know his own form. The celestial being made him
forget. (28) Having gone a long distance and remembering his form, the vow-bound
man became worried. He did not see his own form in

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 khaNDa:-2 dRSTAntasamuccayaH 175 jAnAmi ceSTayA vatsa !, tvAM pipAsAparAjitam
/  madabhyaNe ca nAstyambhaH, prAsukaM tatkaromi kim ?  /  / 7 /  /  tadidAnI
nadInIraM, pItvodanyAni hanyatAm  /  niSiddhamapi kAryaM hi, kAryamApadi
dhIdhanaiH  /  / 8 /  /  yaduktaM "niSiddhamapyAcaraNIyamApadi, kriyA satI
nA'vati yatra sarvathA  /  ghanAmbunA rAjapathe'ti picchile,
kvacibudhairapyapathena gamyate"  /  / 9 /  /  mRtyudAmApadamimAM, tadullaDghya
kathaJcana  /  paJcAdAlocayeH pApaM, samIpe sadguroridam  /  / 10 /  /
ityudIrya samuttIrya, sa nadImityacintayat  /  nUnaM madarzane putro, hriyA
pAsyati nodakam  /  / 11 /  /  hrImAn kurvanna kAryaM hi, svacchAyAto'pi zaGkate
/  tadarzanapathAdasyApasarAmi zanaiH zanaiH  /  / 12 /  /  dhyAtveti sa
puro'cAlIt, kSullo'tha prApa nimnagAm  /  tRSArto'pi na tattoya-mapibacca
dRDhavrataH  /  / 13 /  /  anye tvAhurudanyAni, bAdhitaH sa zizubhRzam  /
zuSyattAlumukhoraskazcetasIti vyacintayat  /  / 14 /  /  pibAmya'nAdeyamapi,
nA''deyaM vAri sAmpratam  /  prAyazcittaM grahISyAmi pazcAtsadgurusannidhau  /
/ 15 /  /  vimRzyeti samutpATya, pAtumaJjalinA jalam  /  ninye yAvanmukhasyAgre,
so'dhyAsIditi tAvatA  /  / 16 /  /  pibAmImAn kathaM jIvAnahaM vijJAtajainagIH
/  udabindau yadekatrA'saGghayajantUn jinA jaguH  /  / 17 /  /  trasAH
pUtaramatsyAdyAH, sthAvarAH panakAdayaH  /  nIre syuriti taddhAtI, sarveSAM
hiMsako bhavet  /  / 18 /  /  tatkiyadbhirdinairyAnti, rakSitA api ye dhruvam  /
tAn prANAn rakSituM dakSaH, paraprANAnihanti kaH ?  /  / 19 /  /  sajIvaM
jIvanamidaM, tanna pAsyAmi sarvathA  /  nirNAyeti zanairnadyAM, sa
mumocAJjalerjalam  /  / 20 /  /  bAlo'pyabAladhairyastAmuttIrya taTinI tataH  /
tattIra eva so'patattRSNayA gantumakSamaH  /  / 21 /  /  dharmasthairyaM
dadhaccitte, pipAsAvivazo'pi saH  /  smRtapaJcanamaskAro, vipadya tridivaM yayau
/  / 22 /  /  prayujyAthAvadhijJAnaM jJAtvA pUrvabhavaM nijam  /  puro gatvA
sthitaM tAtaM, prekSya svAGge pravizya ca  /  / 23 /  /  anvagAddhanamitrarSi,
tatazcalayituM suraH  /  samAyAntaM sutaM dRSTvA, haSTaH so'pyacalatpuraH  /  /
24  /  /  (yugmam) athodanyA vyathA-nAM, munInAmanukampayA  /  dhanazarmA'maro
bhUrigokulAnyadhvani vyadhAt  /  / 25 /  /  tebhyo'dhigatya takrAdi, sAdhavaH
svAsthyamAsadan  /  sudhAkuNDebhya AsAdya, pIyUSamiva nirjarAH  /  / 26 /  /
viharantaH sukhenaivaM, tatkRtai vajikA vraje  /  ullaghyAraNyamApuste,
kramAdantimagokulam  /  / 27 /  /  tato'gre gacchatAM teSAM, madhyAtkasyApi
viNTikAm  /  svaM jijJApayiSuH so'tha, tatra vyasmarayatsuraH  /  / 28 /  /
dUraM gatvA viNTikAM ca, smRtvA sa valito vratI  /  upadherviNTikAM
tatrA'pazyatsvAM na tu gokulam  /  / 29  /   /  2010_02

Page #217 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Story of Dhanasharma  **Chapter 19: The Story of Dhanasharma**  In the
city of Rajagriha, there lived a man named Dhanasharma. He was a poor man who
lived in a small hut. He was a beggar and would go out every day to beg for
food. He would carry a begging bowl and a cloth bag with him. He would go to the
market and beg from the people.  One day, he went to the market and saw a lot of
people eating and drinking. He was very hungry and asked them for some food. But
they all ignored him. He was very angry and went to the top of a hill. He sat
down and started to cry. He was so angry that he cursed the people of the city.
He said, "May you all suffer like I am suffering!"  As he was cursing, a stone
fell from the hill and hit him on the head. He died instantly.  The people of
the city heard the sound of the stone falling and came to see what had happened.
They saw Dhanasharma lying dead on the ground. They were very sad and realized
that they had been wrong to ignore him.  **Chapter 20: The Story of the
Ascetic**  The Lord said, "In the city of Rajagriha, there was a king named
Potana. He was a very kind and compassionate king. He was known as Soma Chandra
because he was like the moon in his gentleness.  His queen was also a very
virtuous woman. She was known as Dharma Dharini because she was a follower of
the Dharma. She was a beautiful woman and was known for her wisdom and
intelligence.  One day, the king and queen were walking in the forest when they
saw an ascetic. The ascetic was wearing a loincloth and had a long beard. He was
very thin and looked very weak.  The king and queen asked the ascetic, "Why are
you so thin and weak?"  The ascetic said, "I am an ascetic. I have renounced the
world and have given up all my possessions. I live on the food that I can beg
for. I am not interested in the pleasures of the world. I am only interested in
the Dharma."  The king and queen were impressed by the ascetic's devotion to the
Dharma. They asked him to stay with them in the palace. The ascetic agreed and
stayed with them for many years.  The king and queen learned a lot from the
ascetic. They learned about the importance of the Dharma and the importance of
giving up worldly attachments. They learned that true happiness comes from
within and not from external things.  The ascetic lived a long and happy life.
He died peacefully in the palace. The king and queen were very sad when he died.
They realized that they had lost a true friend and a great teacher.  The king
and queen continued to follow the Dharma after the ascetic's death. They ruled
their kingdom justly and compassionately. They were known for their kindness and
generosity. They were loved by their people and were remembered for their good
deeds."  **Jain Terms:**  * **Dharma:** The universal law of righteousness and
moral conduct. * **Ascetic:** A person who practices severe self-discipline and
abstains from worldly pleasures. * **Loincloth:** A garment worn around the
waist and hips. * **Rajagriha:** An ancient city in India, the capital of the
Magadha kingdom. * **Soma Chandra:** A name meaning "Moon King," referring to
the king's gentleness. * **Dharma Dharini:** A name meaning "Holder of the
Dharma," referring to the queen's virtue. * **Potana:** A name meaning
"Treasure," referring to the king's wealth and wisdom.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 AturapratyAkhyAnaprakIrNakam tAmAdAya pracalito, milito'nyatapodhanaiH
avadadviNTikAlAbhaM, gokulAdarzanaM ca saH  /  /  30  /  /
jAtAzcaryAstadAkarNya, munayo vyamRzanniti  /  nUnaM divyAnubhAvena,
gokulAnyabhavan vane  /  /  31  /  /  atrAntare prAdurAsIt, sa suraH
kAntibhAsuraH  /  vihAya pitaraM sarvAn, munIna'nyAnnanAma ca  /  /  32 /  /
enaM kuto na namasItyuktaH sa vratibhistataH  /  svIyaM vyatikaraM sarvaM
nivedyetyavadatsuraH  /  / 33  /  /  sajIvAmbho'pi pAtuM yattadAsau me matiM
dadau  /  tatpUrvabhavavaptApi sAdhureSa na vandyate ||34|| snehAdapi riporeva,
kAryaM vihitavAnasau  /  yaddurgatinimittaM me tadA tadupadiSTavAn  /  / 35 /  /
apAsyaM cetsacittAmbu, tadaivadvacanAdaham  /  vratabhaGgabhavAtpApAdabhramiSyaM
tadA bhave  /  /  36  /  /  sa eva hi budhaiH pUjyo, guruzca janako'pi ca  /
ziSyaM sutaM ca yaH kvApi, naivonmArge pravarttayet  /  / 37 /  /
dhanazarmasuparvaivamudIryAgAttriviSTapam  /  sAdhavo'pi tataH sthAnAdvijahuste
yathAsukham  /  / 38  /  /  kSullo yathA'yaM dhanazarmanAmA, sehe pipAsAM
sudRDhapratijJaH  /  evaM samagrairapi saMyataiH sA, sahyA mahAnandapadAnuktaiH
/  /  39  /  /  176 19. kSuddhyAne zrIAkhyAnakamaNikoze rAjagRhasthadramakaH  /
rAgagihammi puravare Ajammadariddio vasai damao  /  bhikkhAmettuvajIvI aha'nnayA
Usave jAe  /   /  1  /   /  savvo vinayaroo ghettUNaM khajja - pejja - lejjhAI
/  vebhAragirisamIve savvattugacAruujjANe  /  / 2 /  /  ujjANiyAe patto etto
jAesu dosu paharesu  /  kapparayakaro damao nayare bhikkhaM paribbhamai  /  / 3
/  /  paDibhavaNaM hiMDaMto bhaNijjae bhavaNarakkhavAlehiM  /  savvo vi jaNo
ghettUNa bhoyaNaM ajja ujjA  /  / 4 /  /  saMpatto tAtaM pahuca tattheva tayaNu
so jAva  /  tattha gao tA logo bhottUNa maNonnamAhAraM  /  / 5 /  /  tatto
tAlaya-rAsaya-nADaya-pekkhaNaya - mahuragIehiM  /  akkhittamaNo na hu koi tassa
bhikkhaM payacchei  /  / 6 /  /  suiraM jAyaM tassa vi uttaramavi tassa dei na
hu koi  /  tanhA - chuhAkilaMto tatto so kovamAvanno  /  / 7 /  /
vebhAraselasiharaM samAruheUNa maharihasilAe  /  uvavisiyamahobhAge haNaNakae
sayalaloyassa  /  / 8 /  /  roddajjhavasAeNaM khaNai tao so vi cUrio tIe  /
mariumasipattadAruNanarae so nArao jAo  /  / 9 /  /
nivaDaMtasilAkhaDahaDasaddaM soUNa paurapuralogo  /  naTTho tamhA vajjaha asuhaM
bhAvaM patte || 10 || 20. pathidhyAne zrIpariziSTaparvasaMvalitaH valkalacIriNaH
dRSTAntaH  /  athAkhyadbhagavAn rAjannagare potanAbhidhe  /  abhUtsaumyatayA
candraH somacandro mahIpatiH  /   /  1  /   /  sadharmacAriNI tasya dhAriNI
dharmadhAriNI  /  babhUva zIlAlaGkArA vivekajaladIrghikA  /  / 2 /  /  2010_02

Page #218 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Chapter - 2 Collection of Examples  She, sitting by the window, saw a pile of
bangles on her husband's lap. She herself began to open them with her lotus-like
hands. ||3|| She saw the king's hair turning white on his head. Accepting the
situation, she recognized it as old age. ||4|| She spoke to the king, "My lord!
A messenger has arrived." Looking around, the king also asked, "What is seen
here?" ||5|| The queen pointed to the king's white hair and said, "My dear! This
king of hair is praiseworthy, a messenger of Dharma. ||6|| It is the third age,
like a weapon, a killer of youth. Seeing the white hair on his head, the king
was distressed. ||7|| He said to the queen, "My dear! Are you ashamed of old
age? Even seeing a single white hair, if you are so distressed, ||8|| then by
announcing it on the drums, the whole world will be forbidden. It is not as if
you should announce your old age even by words. ||9|| The king said, "My dear, I
am not distressed by seeing white hair. This distress has another reason, my
life's queen! ||10|| Our ancestors, who did not see white hair, took vows. But
I, dear, am addicted to worldly pleasures, even though I have white hair. ||11||
I will take the vow even in this state. But how can the kingdom be entrusted to
a son who is still a child? ||12|| Or, if I want to take the vow, what is the
use of the kingdom and the son? My dear! You take the vow, and you raise your
son. ||13|| The queen said, "My lord, I cannot live without you. A true wife
follows her husband, wherever and whenever. ||15|| Therefore, even if you give
the kingdom to our son, I will again serve you in the forest, like a shadow to
your body. ||15|| Like a tree in the forest, our son will grow by his own
actions. Even though he is a child, he is like a happy moon, let him grow, what
is it to me? ||16|| Then, after Soma Chandra, he entrusted the kingdom to his
son and, leaving the world, became an ascetic, accompanied by his wife and
nurse. ||17|| He lived in a hermitage for some time, alone. He performed severe
austerities, eating dry leaves and other things. ||18|| He took Palasha leaves
and built a hut in the hermitage. He made a cool shade and a stream of nectar
for the deer and other animals. ||19|| He brought sweet water and fruits of
trees for his wife, bound by the threads of love. ||20|| There, too, the queen,
full of devotion to her husband, made a bed for him with soft grass. ||21||
Then, she ground the ripe fruits and made a paste. She took care of him during
the day and lit lamps at night. ||22|| She smeared the courtyard of the
hermitage with cow dung from the forest. She cleaned it often for the comfort of
her husband. ||23|| There in the hermitage, the couple nurtured the young deer.
Not knowing the hardship of austerity, they spent some time. ||24|| The queen,
who was the embodiment of contentment and happiness, conceived. The fetus grew
gradually, without any pain. ||25|| The queen gave birth to a son, with no less
than perfect qualities. He was like a lamp filled with oil, illuminating the
delivery room with his radiance. ||26|| In the hermitage, he was wrapped in bark
cloth. His father named him Valakalchari, after the bark cloth.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 khaNDaH - 2 dRSTAntasamuccayaH sA gavAkSe'nyadA patyurAsInasya kacoccayam  /
svayaM karasarojAbhyAM vivarItuM pracakrame ||3|| dadarza ca tadA rAjJaH palitaM
mUrdhni dhAriNI  /  sthAnaM svIkRtyabhijJAnaM jarayeva nivezitam  /  / 4 /  /
vyAjahAra ca rAjAnaM svAmin ! dUto'yamAgataH  /  dizo'valokya rAjA'pi proce kiM
neha dRzyate ?  /  /  5  /  /  rAjJyathAdarzayadrAjJaH palitaM mUrvyuvAca ca  /
prANeza ! kezarAjo'yaM prazasyo dharmadautyakRt  /  / 6 /  /  tRtIyavayasaH
zastramiva yauvanaghAtakam  /  tanmUrdhni palitaM dRSTvA rAjA duramanAta  /  / 7
/  /  abhyadhAddhAriNI deva ! kiM vRddhatvena lajjase ? | apyekaM palitaM dRSTvA
yadyevaM durmanAyase ||8|| paTahodghoSaNAM kRtvA lokaH sarvo niSetsyate  /  na
yathA vRddhabhAvaM te vArtayA'pi prakAzayet  /  / 9 /  /  rAjA provAca jimi
nAhaM palitadarzanAt  /  daurmanasye punaridaM kAraNaM jIvitezvari !  /  / 10 /
/  adRSTapalitairasmatpUrvajairAdade vratam  /  ahaM tu viSayAsaktaH priye !
palitavAnapi  /  /  11  /  /  ahamahnAya gRhNAmi vratamevaM sthite'pi hi  /  kiM
tu dugdhamukhe sUnau rAjyamAropyate katham ?  /  /  12  /  /  yadvA me
vratamAditsoH kiM rAjyena sutena kim  /  dhImati ! vratamAdAsye tvaM svaM
saMvardhayA''tmajam  /  / 13 /  /  dhAriNyabhidadhe nAhaM tvAM vinA
sthAtumIzvarI  /  satyaH patyanuyAyinyaH samaye yatra tatra vA  /  /  15  /  /
tadvAle'pi sute rAjyaM nidadhIthA ahaM punaH  /  zuzrUSiSye vane'pi tvAM
dehacchAyeva pArzvagA  /  /  15  /  /  araNyajastaruriva sutaH svaireva
karmabhiH  /  prasannacandro bAlo'pi vardhatAM tena kiM mama  /  /  16  /  /
somacandrastato rAjyamAropya tanujanmani  /  dikproSitastApaso'bhUt patnyA
dhAtryA ca saMyutaH  /  / 17 /  /  sa AzramapadaM kiJciccirazUnyamazizrayat  /
dustapaM ca tapastepe zuSkapatrAdibhojanaH  /  /  18  /  /  palAzapatrANyAdAya
sa AzramakuTIM vyadhAt  /  mRgANAmadhvagAnAM ca zItacchAyA'mRtaprapAm  /  / 19 /
/  svAdusvAdUnyudakAni vanaspatiphalAni ca  /  somendurAnayatpantyai
syUtastatprematantubhiH  /  /  20  /  /  tatrApi dhAriNI sA tu
patyAvatyantabhaktibhAk  /  talyaM prakalpayAmAsa tadarthaM komalaistRNaiH  /  /
21  /  /  tadAni pakvAni peSaM peSaM ca dhAriNI  /  snehaM jagrAha divase cakre
ca nizi dIpakAn  /  /  22  /  /  araNyagomayairAdraiH sA lilepA''zramAGgaNam  /
patyuH sukhAsikAhetormArjayAmAsa cAsakRt  /  / 23 /  /  tatrAzrame dampatI tau
lAlayantau mRgArbhakAn  /  tapaH kaSTamajAnantau kaJcitkAlaM vyatIyatuH  /  /
24  /  /  santoSasukhadhAriNyAH dhAriNyAH pUrvasambhavaH  /  tatra krameNa
vavRdhe garbho'nutpAditavyathaH  /  /  25  /  /  dhAriNyA sUnuranyUnalakSaNaH
suSuve'nyadA  /  kAntyA dIpa ivAtailapUro'ntaH sUtikAgRham  /  / 26 /  /  Azrame
valkalAnyevetyaveSTyata sa valkalaiH  /  pitrA valkalacIrIti tatastannAma
kalpitam  /  / 27 /  /  2010_02 177

Page #219 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter 178: The Story of the Rejection of the Eager One  The king's son was
afflicted with a severe illness, and his mother, the queen, passed away. He was
left without a mother, like a child without a teacher.    The king, overwhelmed
with grief, entrusted the infant to a wet nurse, feeding him with the milk of a
wild cow. He would often offer the child to the moon and the sun for protection.
However, the wet nurse also passed away after some time. The king, guided by
fate, mourned the loss of his queen as if she were still alive.   Despite the
loss of his wet nurse, the king continued to feed the child with the milk of the
wild cow. He would carry the child in his arms, either while sitting or lying
down.   The child grew up gradually, becoming capable of walking and playing. He
would spend his days playing with the young animals of the forest, collecting
firewood, and preparing his own food.   The king, named Somachandra, raised his
son in the harshness of the forest, teaching him self-reliance and discipline.
As the child grew into a young man, he became skilled in all tasks, including
caring for his father and wearing the simple clothes of a forest dweller.   He
would diligently collect fruits and food for his father, carrying his belongings
and serving him with utmost devotion. He lived a life of complete celibacy,
wearing only bark cloth and never even knowing the names of women.   One day,
while living in the forest, the king, Somachandra, heard about his son's birth
from his queen's womb. He wondered about his brother, questioning how he would
ever meet him.   The king's heart was filled with longing and a deep desire to
see his brother. He ordered his artists to travel to the forest where his son
lived, to paint a portrait of the young man.   He instructed them to capture the
image of his son, born from the lotus feet of his father, the one who lived in
the forest, and bring it back to him quickly.   The artists, understanding the
king's command, set out for the forest, guided by the king's instructions.
They reached the sacred forest where the young man lived, wearing only bark
cloth. With their exceptional skills, they painted the young man's portrait,
capturing his likeness as accurately as a mirror reflection.   They returned to
the king, presenting him with the portrait of his son. The king, upon seeing the
image, was struck by its resemblance to himself. He realized that his son was
truly a part of him, a reflection of his own being.   Overwhelmed with joy, the
king exclaimed, "By fortune, I have seen my brother!" He embraced the portrait,
holding it close to his heart.   Seeing the young man in the portrait, dressed
in bark cloth, the king was moved to tears. He wept uncontrollably, like a
waterfall cascading down a mountain.   He declared, "My son, it is right for you
to follow this path of austerity. Your life in the forest is not fitting for a
child like you."   He lamented, "I am lost in the pleasures of the kingdom,
playing like a swan. My brother, like a wild animal, lives a life of hardship in
the forest."   He continued, "He is like a wild creature, difficult to tame. It
is a burden to have him in my kingdom, as he would be a claimant to the throne."
The king, filled with sorrow for his brother's plight, decided to bring him back
to the palace. He instructed his cunning courtesans to go to the forest,
disguised as ascetics.   He commanded them to lure his son back to the palace,
using their charm

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 178 AturapratyAkhyAnaprakIrNakam vipede dhAriNI sUtirogeNa tanayaH punaH  /
adRSTamAtRkaH so'bhUt pumAniva nirakSaraH  /  / 28  /  /  araNyamahiSIkSIraM
pAyayitvA muhurmuhuH  /  somendurArpayaddhAtryA dhAraNAya tamarbhakam  /  / 29 /
/  avApa sA'pi paJcatvaM kAlena kiyatA'pi hi  /  dhAtrI daivavazenAnuyiyAsuriva
dhAriNIm  /  / 30 /  /  apIpyanmahiSIkSIraM somendustaM zizuM svayam  /
yAnniSaNNaH zayAno vA svayamaGke dadhAra ca  /  / 31 /  /  sa
kramAdvardhamAno'bhUtpAdacaMkramaNakSamaH  /  cakre ca pratyahaM pAMzukrIDAM
vanamRgArbhakaiH  /  / 32 /  /  edhobhiH svayamAnItairnIvAraiH svayamAhataiH  /
svayaM rasavatIM kRtvA somendustamabhojayat  /  / 33 /  /
vanadhAnyairvanaphalaiH poSaM poSaM tamarbhakam  /  somacandro vyadhAdAtmasakhaM
tapasi dustape  /  / 34 /  /  yauvanAbhimukhazcAlaGkarmINaH sarvakarmasu  /
pitRcaryApravINo'bhUdatha valkalacIryapi  /  / 35  /  /
phalAdyAnayanainityamaGgasaMvAhanena ca  /  zuzrUSAM sa pituzcakre sA hi
sarvavratottamA  /  / 36 /  /  AjanmabrahmacAryeva vratI valkalacIryabhUt  /
strINAM nAmApi nAjJAsIdastrIke nivasanvane  /  / 37  /  /  prasannacandraH
zuzrAva vanasthasyAnyadA pituH  /  dhAriNIkukSisambhUtaM sutaM sodaramAtmanaH  /
/ 38  /  /  kIdRzo'sti sa me bhrAtA ? miliSyati kathaM punaH ?  /
ityubhUdraNaraNako rAjJo manasi durdharaH  /  / 39 /  /
athAdizaccitrakarAMstatra yAta tapovane  /  yacchrImattAtapAdAnAM
pAdaparilaGkRtam  /  / 40 /  /  /  pitRpAdAbjahaMsasya madIyasyAnujanmanaH  /
vane nivasato rUpamAlikhyAnayata drutam  /  / 41 /  /  yugmam  /  /
pramANamAdeza iti procya citrakarA api  /  yayustatra vane puNyIkRte
valkalacIriNA  /  / 42 /  /  te vizvakarmaNo mUrtyantarANIvAtikauzalAt  /
tamAlikhanyathAvasthamAdarzapratibimbavat  /  / 43 /  /  AnIya darzayAmAsU rUpaM
valkalacIriNaH  /  te citrakAriNo rAjJaH sudhAvartinibhaM dRzoH  /  / 44 /  /
dadhyau nRpatirAkRtyA matpitunaiSa hIyate  /  AtmA vai jAyate putraH zrutireSA
hi nAnyathA  /  / 45 /  /  diSTyA sodara ! dRSTo'sItyabhidhAyAsakRnnRpaH  /  taM
sasvaje mUrdhni jaghrau na cAGkAdudatArayat  /  / 46 /  /  valkalAcchAdanadharaM
dRSTvA valkalacIriNam  /  udazrurdAgabhUdrAjA sanirjhara ivAcakaH  /  / 47 /  /
Uce ca pravayAstAto yuktamAcaratu vratam  /  madbhAtustvasya bAlasya vanavAso'pi
nArhati  /  / 48 /  /  ahaM rAjyasukhahUde magnaH krIDAmi haMsavat  /  pulinda
iva me bhrAtA vanavRttyA'nujIvati  /  / 49 /  /  araNyajo jIva iva durAneyaH sa
pattane  /  kaSTaM tu mama rAjye'pi tasminrAjyAvibhAgini  /  / 50  /  /
vanakaSTamiti bhrAturanuzocanmahIpatiH  /  evamAjJApayAmAsa vezyAzcAturyazAlinIH
/  / 51 /  /  muniveSeNa gatvA'GgasparzarnavanavoktibhiH  /  pralobhya
khANDaizca phalairihAnayata me'nujam  /  / 52 /  /  2010_02

Page #220 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------



======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 khaNDa:-2 dRSTAntasamuccayaH 179 iti rAjA''jJayA vezyA muniveSabhRto drutam  /
tadAzramapadaM jagmuH somacandreNa sevitam  /  / 53 /  /  phalAnyAdAya
bilvAdInyAyAntamRSiputrakam  /  valkalAcchAdanaM tatra dadRzustaM mRgIdRzaH  /
/ 54  /  /  muniveSabhRtAM tAsAM so'kArSIdabhivAdanam  /  RjudhIrityapRcchacca
ke yUyaM ? ko va AzramaH ?  /  / 55  /  /  tAH procurvayamRSayaH
potanAzramavAsinaH  /  tavAgatAH smo'tithayaH kimAtithyaM kariSyasi ?  /  / 56
/  /  uvAca sa phalAnyetAnyAhRtAni mayA vanAt  /  yUyamaznIta pakvAni madhurANi
maharSayaH !  /  / 57 /  /  tAzcocurAzramapade'smadIye nedRzAnyaho  /  phalAni
kazcidaznAti nIrasAnyatinIrasaH  /  / 58 /  /  asmadAzramavRkSANAmIkSasva
phalavarNikAm  /  ityuktvA tA niSedurdvamUle taM ca nyaSAdayan  /  / 59 /  /
tAzca taM prAzayan khaNDaphalAnyaviphalAzayAH  /  so'pi
sadyastadAsvAdAdvilvAdyudvegabhAgabhUt  /  / 60  /  /  ekasthAnasthitaM tAstaM
svAGgasparzamacIkaran  /  tatkaraM ca nyadhuH pInakucakumbhe nijorasi  /  / 61
/  /  sa Uce komalamidaM kimaGgaM vo maharSayaH ?  /  kimunnate sthale ete
yauSmAkINe ca vakSasi ?  /  / 62  /  /  tAH procustaM spRzantyaH svaiH komalaiH
pANipallavaiH  /  asmadvanaphalAsvAde hIdRk syAdaGgamArdavam  /  / 63 /  /
AsvAditairvanaphalairasmadIyairmahArasaiH  /  atyantopacayAdete jAyete hRdi ca
sthale  /  / 64  /  /  tadvimuJcAzramamimamasArANi phalAni ca  /
asmadAzramamAgatya tvamapyasmAdRzo bhava  /  / 65  /  /  atha
khaNDaphalAsvAdalubdho valkalacIryapi  /  saGketamagrahInmugdhastAbhiH saha
yiyAsayA  /  / 66 /  /  saMsthApya tApasabhANDamAgAdvalkalacIryapi  /
yathoditaM ca saGketasthAnaM tAbhiradhiSThatam  /  / 67  /  /  tadA ca daddaze
vRkSAdhiruddhaizcarapUruSaiH  /  AgacchansomacandrarSirakathyata ca yoSitAm  /
/ 68 /  /  mA zApsIdeSa iti tAstasmAdbhItA drutadrutam  /  nezuma'gya iva
vyAdhAdamilantyaH parasparam  /  / 69 /  /  sthAnaM gate ca pitari kumArastAH
paNAGganAH  /  naSTasvaH svamivAnveSTumupAkrastAkhile vane  /  / 70  /  /
dadarza rathinaM caikaM sa dhAvanmRgavadvane  /  tamapyRSi
manyamAno'vadattAtAbhivAdaye  /  / 71 /  /  rathyapRcchatkumAra ! tvaM kva
gamiSyasi so'vadat  /  gamiSyAmyAzramapadaM maharSe ! potanAbhidham  /  / 72  /
/  rathyavAdIdahamapi yiyAsuH potAnAzramam  /  tato'nvagAttamagregUmiva
valkalacIryapi  /  / 73 /  /  sa tApasakumAro'pi pathi yArathikapriyAm  /
rathAdhirUDhAM tAteti bhASeta sma muhurmuhuH  /  / 74  /  /  rathinaM
tatpriyA'vocat keyamasyopacAragIH  /  yattApasakumAro'yaM mayi tAteti jalpati  /
/ 75 /  /  rathikaH smAha mugdho'yamastrIke'sminvane vasan  /
strIpuMsayorabhedajJo naraM tvAmapi manyate  /  / 76 /  /
pravIyamAnAndRSTvA'zvAnUce valkalacIryadaH  /  vAhyante kimamI tAta ! mRgA
nArhatyado muneH  /  / 77  /  /  2010_02

Page #221 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Story of the Eagerly Rejected Wanderer  I  The charioteer, smiling, said
to the man in rags, "This deed of theirs is indeed theirs, there is no fault in
these deer." 78. The charioteer gave the man in rags sweet cakes. He ate them,
immersed in the pleasure of their taste, and said, 79. "I have eaten such forest
fruits before. They were given to me by the great sages who live in the
hermitage of Potana." 80.  He became eager to go to Potana, enticed by the taste
of the cakes. He was repelled by the harshness of the astringent fruits like
bilva and amalaka. 81. The charioteer had a fight with a thief, a man of evil
intent. The charioteer killed the thief with a strong blow. 82. The thief said,
"Even the death of an enemy is praiseworthy. You have defeated me with your
blow, I am pleased, human!" 83. "There is much wealth here, take it, sir!" The
three of them loaded the wealth onto the chariot. 84. The charioteer, having
reached Potana, said to the man in rags, "This is the hermitage of Potana, which
you desired." 85. The charioteer gave some wealth to the sage's son, smiling and
saying, 86. "One should not enter this hermitage without offering something. One
should give something to the hermitage, without expecting anything in return."
87. "Where should I go? What should I do?" The sage, looking around the city,
wandered about. 88. He, with the mind of a sage, was foolish about men and
women. He was mocked by the townspeople, who blew on him like a breeze. 89.
While wandering in the city, he entered the house of a prostitute, like a
released arrow falling swiftly. 90.   [Sri Parishista Parva, verses 92 to 181]
21-46. The story of Mahendra Singh, who searched for Sanatkumara in the
*Trishatisalaaka Purushacharitra* while meditating on departure.   Having
enjoyed the glory of Indra for a long time, and having completed his lifespan in
a kalpa, that being, born of the Jain Dharma, entered the womb of that woman. 1.
At the time of his entry, Sahadevi also saw elephants and other great dreams,
fourteen in number. 2. In due time, she gave birth to a son, marked with all
auspicious signs, with a form that was non-dual, with the radiance of a golden
jambu fruit. 3. The king, with a great celebration that brought joy to the
world, named him Sanatkumara. 4. The child, with a golden complexion, was
beautiful like a young boy. His eyes delighted the people, and he grew
gradually. 5. He wandered among the kings, like a white cloud among lotuses,
shining with his beauty. 6. With his incomparable beauty, even as a child, he
captivated the eyes and minds of all who saw him. 7. He learned the Vedas, the
Shastras, and all knowledge from his mother, reciting them with a playful smile.
8. He took up the weapons and the arts of war, and the science of economics, as
if they were pillars supporting his own shoulders. 9.  He mastered all other
arts with ease. He grew gradually, becoming a pure repository of knowledge. 10.
2010_02

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 AturapratyAkhyAnaprakIrNakam I vyAjahArAtha rathikaH smitvA valkalacIriNam  /
haMho karmedamevaiSAM mRgANAM nAtra duSyati  /  / 78  /  /  rathiko
modakAnsvAdUndadau valkalacIriNe  /  so'khAdacca tadAsvAdasukhamagno jagAda ca
/  /  79  /  /  IdRzAni vanaphalAnyahamagre'pyakhAdiSam  /  maharSibhiH
pradattAni potanAzramavAsibhiH  /  / 80  /  /  abhUcca modakAsvAdAtpotanaM
gantumutsukaH  /  kaSAyarUkSairnaTitaH sa bilvAmalakAdibhiH  /  /  81  /  /
rathinazcAbhavadyuddhaM caureNaikena doSmatA  /  rathI gADhaprahAreNa taM cauraM
nijaghAna ca  /  / 82  /  /  cauro'pyuvAca ghAto hi vairiNo'pi prazasyate  /
mAmajaiSIH prahAreNa tena tuSTo'smi mAnava !  /  /  83  /  /  vipulaM
dhanamatrAsti madIyaM tad gRhANa bhoH !  /  trayo'pyAropayAmAsuratha tad
draviNaM rathe  /  84  /  /  krameNa potanaM prApto rathI valkalacIriNam  /
provAca prepsito yaste potanAzrama eSa saH  /  / 85  /  /  kiMcicca draviNaM
tasmai rathI tApasasUnave  /  pradadau mArgasuhRde smayamAno jagAda ca  /  /  86
/  /  amuSminnAzramapade na vinA dravyamAzrayaH  /  tadAzramArthI
kasmaiciddadyAd dravyamavakraye  /  /  87  /  /  kimatra yAmi yAmyatra kiM veti
sakale pure  /  utprekSamANo harmyANi babhrAma munipuGgavaH  /  / 88  /  /
narANAmatha nArINAmRSibuddhyA sa mugdhadhIH  /  abhivAdanavAtUla upAhAsyata
nAgaraiH  /  /  89  /  /  pure bhramannathaikasyA vezyAyAH sa niketane  /
viveza tvaritaM cApamuktaH zara ivAskhalan  /  / 90 /  /  [ zrI pariziSTaparva
zlo. 92 taH 181 ] 21-46. prasthAnadhyAne zrItriSaSTizalAkApuruSacaritre
sanatkumAraM gaveSayato mahendrasiMhasya kathA  /  ciraM zakrazriyaM bhuktvA
kalpAt pUrNAyurAdimAt  /  sa jIvo jinadharmasya tasyAH kukSAvavAtarat  /  / 1 /
/  mukhe pravizataH svasmin sahadevyapi tatkSaNam  /  kuMjarAdIn
mahAsvapnAMzcaturdaza dadarza sA  /  /  2  /  /  samaye'sUta sA sUnuM
sarvalakSaNalakSitam  /  advaitarUpavibhavaM jAtyajAMbUnadadyutim  /  / 3 /  /
mahIyasAthotsavena jagadAnaMdadAyinA  /  sanatkumAra ityAkhyAM cakre tasya
mahIpatiH || 4 || kanakacchedagaurAMgo bAlo bAla ivoDupaH  /  prINannetrANi
lokAnAM sa krameNa vyardhata ||5|| aMkAdaMke nareMdrANAM saMcaran sa vyarAjata
/  araviMdAdaraviMde sitacchada ivoccakaiH  /  /  6  /  /  rUpeNApratirUpeNa sa
bAlo'pi mRgIddazAm  /  jahAra dRSTamAtro'pi netrANi ca manAMsi ca  /  / 7 /  /
sAMgAni zabdazAstrANi samastajJAnamAtRkAH  /  papau gurumukhodgIrNAnyeSa
gaMDUSalIlayA  /  /  8  /  /  rAjyazrIbhuvanastaMbhAn svadoHstaMbhAnivAparAn  /
sa Adade zastrazAstrANyarthazAstrANi cAbhitaH  /  / 9 /  180 anyA api kalAH
sarvAH kalayAmAsa lIlayA  /  krameNa vardhamAnaH sa kalAnidhirivAmalaH  /  / 10
/  /  2010_02

Page #222 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter 2: Collection of Examples  189 He, with a stature exceeding forty
cubits, attained youth from childhood, like a mortal ascending to heaven. ||11||
He had a great friend, the son of the Kalindi, named Mahendrasura, renowned for
his valor. ||12|| On the arrival of spring, one day, he went with the son of
Kalindi to the Makaranda garden, out of curiosity, to play. ||13|| There, he
played with his friends, like Sanatkumara, the son of Girvana, in Nandana.
||14|| Then, the king's horse-master, Prahino, brought forth four horses, with
five lines, marked with all auspicious signs. ||15|| One, named Jaladhikallola,
as restless as the waves of the ocean, he gave to Sanatkumara. ||16|| Leaving
his play, the prince mounted the steed. Among the princes, the fascination for
elephants and horses is always great. ||17|| With one hand he raised the reins,
and with the other he guided the horse, touching the seat with his thighs.
||18|| He raced with great speed, almost touching the earth with his feet, and
he looked around to see the other horses. ||19|| As the prince pulled the reins,
the horse, contrary to training, ran faster and faster. ||20|| Even while the
other princes were racing, the horse, like a Rakshasa in the form of a horse,
suddenly disappeared. ||21|| The horse, with the prince mounted, became
invisible in an instant, like the moon disappearing in the clouds, even before
the eyes of the kings. ||22|| The horse-army, with its horses, pursued the
prince, who was carried away by the horse, like a boat carried by the river
current. ||23|| "He goes, he goes, that horse! These are his footprints, and
these are his foam-white marks," the people exclaimed. ||24|| Then, a fierce
wind arose, like a full Brahmaanda-bhastika, a premature night, like a darkness
that obscures everything. ||25|| The directions were covered with dust, like a
swarm of locusts, and the armies were paralyzed, unable to move even a step.
||26|| The footprints of the horse, as it ran, were all erased by the dust-
mountains. ||27|| Neither low, nor high, nor solid, nor trees, nothing was
visible. The whole world seemed to have entered the underworld. ||28|| The
foolish soldiers were bewildered, like travelers lost in a sea filled with
water. ||29|| Mahendra Singh bowed to the horse-commander and said, "O Lord,
this is the work of fate, the misfortune of this one. ||30|| Otherwise, where is
the prince, and where is the horse in a distant land? And how could the prince
have mounted this unknown horse? ||31|| Where is the prince, abducted by this
wild horse? And where is the dust-covered path, where the wind blows? ||32||
Even though fate has conquered, like a king conquering his vassals, I will
search for my friend, who is like my own self, and bring him back. ||33|| In the
caves of the mountains, on the peaks, in the forests, in the strongholds, in the
valleys, ||34|| In the holes of the earth, in the depths of the rivers, in the
waterless lands, in the difficult places, ||35||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 189 khaNDaH - 2 dRSTAntasamuccayaH sa sArdhaikacatvAriMzaddhanurunnatavigrahaH
/  martyalokAdiva divaM zaizavAt prApa yauvanam  /  / 11 /  /  tasyAbhUt paramaM
mitraM kAliMdIsUranaMdanaH  /  mahendrasUra ityAkhyAkhyAtaH prakhyAtavikramaH  /
/ 12 /  /  prApte vasaMte so'nyedyuH kAliMdIsUnunA samam  /
makaraMdAkhyamudyAnaM kautukAt krIDituM yayau  /  /  13  /  /  krIDAbhistatra
citrAbhizcikrIDa suhRdA samam  /  sanatkumAro gIrvANakumAra iva naMdane  /  /
14  /  /  tadA ca rAjJo'zvapateH prAhiNot prAbhRtAn hayAn  /
dhArApaMcakacaturAn sarvalakSaNalakSitAn  /  / 15 /  /  nAmnA jaladhikallolaM
kallolamiva caMcalam  /  ekaM sanatkumArasyApyarpayAmAsa vAjinam  /  / 16 /  /
tyaktvA krIDAM kumArastamAruroha turaMgamam  /  hastyazve rAjaputrANAM kautukaM
sarvato'dhikam  /  / 17 /  /  kazAmutkSipya caikena valgAM caikena pANinA  /
AsanAspRSTaparyANa urUbhyAM prerayacca tam  /  / 18 /  /  paryadhAviSTa vegena
pAdaiH kSmAmaspRzanniva  /  gacchan bahutaraM vyomni so'zvAn druSTuM veriva  /
/ 19 /  /  valgayA cakRSe so'zvaH kumAreNa yathA yathA  /  tathA tathA
viparItazikSo'dhikamadhAvata  /  /  20  /  /  sAdinAM rAjaputrANAM dhAvatAmapi
madhyataH  /  niryayau sa kSaNAdazvo'zvamUrtiriva rAkSasaH  /  / 21 /  /
pazyatAmapi bhUpAnAmuDUnAmiva candramAH  /  sa ArUDhakumAro'zvo'bhUdadRzyaH
kSaNAdapi  /  /  22  /  /  azvena sUnumAkRSTaM nadIpUreNa potavat  /
pratyAnetumanvacAlIdazvaseno'zvasenayA  /  /  23  /  /  yAtyasau yAtyasAvazvaH
padAnyetAni tasya hi  /  phenalAlAstasya cemA yAvadAkhyadidaM janaH  /  /  24  /
/  tAvadvAtyodabhUccaMDA pUrNabrahmAMDabhastrikA  /  akAlikA
kAlarAtririvAMdhaMkaraNI zAm  /  / 25 /  /  yugmam  /  /  apaTIbhirivaukAMsi
dizo'cchAdyaMta reNubhiH  /  staMbhitAnIva sainyAni noddhartuM pAdamapyalam  /
/ 26 /  /  padaphenAni cihnAni gacchatastasya vAjinaH  /  azeSANyapi bhagnAni
pAMsukallomAlayA  /  / 27 /  /  na nimnaM nonnataM nApi sthapuTaM na drumAdyapi
/  alakSi pAtAla iva praviSTo'bhUjjAno'khilaH  /  /  28  /  /  mUDhopAyAH
sainikAste paryAkulyabhavannatha  /  abdhAvaMbhaH pUryamANayAnAH sAMyAtrikA iva
/  /  29  /  /  natvA maheMdrasiMho'zvasenamevaM vyajijJapat  /  deva daivasya
ghaTanA durghaTAnyasya khalvim  /  /  30  /  /  anyathA hi kumAraH kva dUradezo
hayaH kva ca  /  tatra cAjJAtazIle kva kumArasyAdhirohaNam  /  / 31 /  /
kumArasyApaharaNaM tena durvAjinA kva ca  /  kva vA
vAtyeyamuddaMDarajazchAditaddakpathA  /  /  32  /  /  paryantasAmaMtamiva daivaM
jitvA tathApi hi  /  AneSyAmyahamanviSya svamitraM svAmisannibham  /  / 33 /  /
kaMdareSu girIMdrANaM tuMgeSu zikhareSu ca  /
niraMtaratarustomadurgamAsvaTayISu ca  /  /  34  /  /  rodhoraMdhreSu
pAtAlakalpeSu saritAmapi  /  nirjaleSvapi dezeSu viSameSvapareSvapi  /  /  35  /
/  2010_02

Page #223 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter 182: The Scattered Rejection of the Eager  Even with a small retinue,
or even alone, the search for the prince is like a slight burden for a traveler.
||36||  Where the army of the god is vast and boundless, the entry is like that
of an elephant into a narrow lane. ||37||  Having said this repeatedly, the
fire-footed one was turned back, and he went to the city, sorrowful. ||38||
With a small retinue, like an invincible elephant, Mahendra Singh suddenly
entered the great forest. ||39||  He entered the difficult path, strewn with
stones, swords, and horns, the path filled with dust, the path echoing with the
roars of mighty bears, the path terrifying with the roars of lions seated in the
depths, the path filled with the cries of monkeys, the path with trees adorned
with fallen horse hooves and the sounds of elephants, the path with the shadows
of trees covered with the wheels of the monkey army, the path with the roars of
lions, the path with the sounds of lionesses drinking water, the path difficult
with the broken branches of trees broken by intoxicated elephants. He entered
this forest to search for Sanatkumar. ||40-44||  || Five Groups ||  The army was
scattered by the difficult, thorny, and fallen trees, and the land. ||45||  He
was increasingly abandoned by his ministers, friends, and others, and he became
alone, like a monk. ||46||  He wandered alone, like a village headman, with his
bow and arrow, in the great groves, in the caves of the mountains. ||47||  He
ran, fearing the sound of Sanatkumar, the hero, amidst the loud roars of the
forest elephants and lions. ||48||  He saw his friend there, by the sound of the
gushing waterfall, and then, fearing something else, he ran, for love has such
speed. ||49||  "The sound of my bondage is like the sound of the river, the
elephant, and the lion. You will find him there, for everything is revealed by a
glimpse." ||50||  He climbed the branches of the trees, looking everywhere for
his friend, and he marked the directions, like a traveler lost on the path.
||51||  He was sorrowful among the ashoka trees, restless among the bakul trees,
weak among the sahakar trees, and pale among the mallika trees. ||52||  He was
dejected among the karnikar trees, pale among the patala trees, distant among
the sindhuvar trees, and trembling among the champka trees. ||53||  He turned
away from the Malaya winds, like a villain, and he was startled by the calls of
the kokila birds, even though they were singing their fifth song. ||54||  He was
restless in the rays of the moon, like a single roarer, the son of a roarer, and
he went to the spring. ||55||  || Four Groups ||  He was scorched by the sun,
heated by the dust, with his feet covered in the dust, like a dog, with his feet
like lotus petals, spread out. ||56||  He was walking on the path, which was
like the ashes of a fire that gives immediate liberation, and he was unaware of
the heat of his feet, like a fire pillar. ||57||  He was counting the heat of
his body, like an elephant, a mountain walker, with many hot winds and flames of
fire. ||58||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 182 AturapratyAkhyAnaprakIrNakam mamAlpaparivArasya kvacidekAkino'pi vA  /
ISatkaraM carasyeva kumArAnveSaNaM prabho  /  / 36  /  /
devasyAmitasainyasyAsammAto yatra kutracit  /  tannAha hasvaradhyAyAM praveza
iva daMtinaH  /  / 37  /  /  bhUyo bhUyo'pyevamuktvA pAdalagnena tena tu  /
nivartito'zvasenaH svaM duHkhito nagaraM yayau  /  / 38  /  /  mitasAraparIvAro
durvAra iva vAraNaH  /  maheMdrasiMhaH sahasA praviveza mahATavIm  /  / 39 /  /
pASANaiH khaGgiviSANotkSiptairviSamapaddhatim  /
ghartipravizatkroDapaMkilIkRtapalvalAm  /  / 40 /  /  prauDhabhallUkahikkAbhiH
pratizabditagahvarAm  /  gahvarAsInazArdUlakRtabUtkAradAruNAm  /  / 41 /  /
utphAlacitrakakulavyAkulaiNakulAkulAm  /
galitazvApadairbADhavAhasaiveSTitadrumAm  /  / 4 /  /
camUrucakrairAkrAMtamArgacchAyAvanIruhAm  /
siMhIsakhIpayaHpAyisiMharuddhAdhvanimnagAm  /  / 43 /  /
mattakuMjarabhagnAdhvazAkhizAkhAtidurgamAm  /  sanatkumAramanveSTuM sa viSvak
tAmagAhata  /  / 44 /  /   /  /  paMcabhiH kulakam  /  /  vikaTAM
kaMTakitaruzvApadairavaTaiH sthalaiH  /  mahATavIM tAmaTatastasta sainyaM
vyazIryata  /  / 45  /  /  khinnakhinnairmucyamAno maMtrimitrAdikairapi  /
tyaktasaMgo muniriva sa ekAkI kramAdabhUt  /  / 46 /  /  bhUyo mahAnikuMjeSu
girINAM kaMdareSvapi  /  pallIpatirivaiko'pi sa babhrAma dhanurdharaH  /  / 47 /
/  bRMhite vananAgAnAM siMhaguMjAraveSvapi  /  so'dhAvat
sanatkumAravIradhvanitazaMkayA  /  / 48 /  /  svamitraM tatra
cApazyannucchalanirjharadhvanau  /  tadAzaMkyanyato'dhAvat premNo hi gatirIdRzI
/  / 49 /  /  nadIkariharInUce madvaMdhordhvanireSa yat  /  sa vaH pArzve tato
labhyaM sarvaM hyekAMzadarzanAt  /  / 50  /  /  sarvatrAprekSya
suhRdamuJcairAruhya zAkhinaH  /  dizo nyarUpayadbhUyo mArgabhrAMta ivAdhvagaH  /
/ 51 /  /  baddhazoka ivAzokeSvAkulo bakuleSvapi  /  asahaH sahakAradruSvamallo
mallikAsvapi  /  / 52 /  /  nyakkArI karNikAreSu pATalaH pATalAsvapi  /
dUrasthaH siMduvAreSu sotkaMpazcaMpakeSvapi  /  / 53 /  /  parAGmukhazca
malayAnileSvapi khaleSviva  /  sphuTatkarNaH kokilAnAM paMcamoJcAriteSvapi  /  /
54  /  /  azAMtatApaH pIyUSarazmerapi hi razmiSu  /  sa vasaMtamatIyAya
roraputra ivaikakaH  /  / 55  /  /   /  /  caturbhiH kalApakam  /  /
kukUlairiva vistIrNaiH pAdapadmanakhaMpacaiH  /
bhRjyamAno'rkAzutaptairbhUrajobhiH pade pade  /  / 16 /  /  sadyo
nirvANadAvAgnibhasmaduHsaMcare'dhvani  /  pAdatApamajAnAno'gnistaMbhamiva
sUtrayan  /  / 57  /  /  uSNavAtyAbhiranalajvAlAbhiriva bhUribhiH  /
vapustApamagaNayan karI giricaro yathA  /  / 58  /  /  _ 2010_02

Page #224 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Chapter - 2 Collection of Examples  He drank the muddy, warm waters of the
rivers, and wandered in the summer heat, and he passed it through. || 59 || ||
Four-part stanza || Like demons, with thunderbolts, and fires with lightning
faces, his heart was unshaken, even by those who shook the world. || 60 || With
continuous, sharp, cold arrows, he was pierced, but he remained unmoved, even in
his mind. || 61 || At every step, forests and rivers, with their uprooted trees,
were difficult to cross, but he crossed them effortlessly, like a royal swan. ||
62 || Attacking the muddy path, like a boar in play, seeking his friends, he
wandered, and he passed even the rainy season. || 63 || || Four-part stanza ||
With scorching sun on his head, and hot sand on his feet, he endured, like one
who has entered the midst of a group of fire arrows. || 64 || In clear water,
and among water birds like swans, with an unwearied mind, he asked, "Where are
you?" and thus he greeted his friends. || 65 || Passing through the midst of
elephants, with their intoxicating scent, seven-leaved trees, and angry tusks,
he entered the forest, like an elephant. || 66 || Driven by his friend, the
wind, with its lotus-like fragrance, he passed through autumn, wandering like an
autumn cloud. || 67 || || Four-part stanza || With the northern wind, like a
brother, from the Himalayas, the waters of lakes and rivers were being carried
away by the cold. || 68 || Even though the forest fire was burning everywhere,
and the water lilies and lotus flowers were being consumed, he passed through
the water. || 69 || With the cold-stricken Kiratas, and the forest fire burning,
he passed through the winter, with his firm resolve. || 70 || || Three-part
stanza || On the withered, old leaves, which bent the knees of the trees, he
placed his feet without fear, even though scorpions were hidden there. || 71 ||
Like a skilled surgeon, with his sharp instruments, he was unmoved by the loud,
piercing sounds of the awakened, five-headed, ear-piercing demons. || 72 || With
only a taste of the fresh shoots, his stomach was full, and he passed through
the cold, with the pain of his friend. || 73 || || Three-part stanza || Thus,
wandering through the forest, in search of his son, one year passed for Mahendra
Singh. || 74 || Having entered that forest, he stood for a while, and looked in
all directions, like a messenger. || 75 || Then, he heard the noise of the
karanda, the crane, the swan, and the sarasa birds, without being disturbed. ||
76 || He was comforted by the wind, which carried the fragrance of lotuses, and
he concluded, from his reasoning, that there must be a lake nearby. || 77 ||
With tears of joy, he confirmed the meeting with his friend, and he went towards
the lake, like a royal swan. || 78 || As he went forward, he heard a song, in
the Gandhara scale, sweet, like the sound of a flute, and the sound of a vina,
like a deer. || 79 ||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 khaNDaH - 2 dRSTAntasamuccayaH kvAthAn rogIva saritAM paMkilAnyUSmalAni ca  /
piban payAMsi sa grISmaM bhrAmyanneko'tyavAhayat  /  /  59  /  /   /  /
caturbhiH kalApakam  /  /  rakSobhiriva jImUtairudyadvidyunmukhAgnibhiH  /
akSobhyamANahRdayo vizvavikSobhaNairapi  /  /  60  /  /
akhaMDaprasarairdhArAsAraiH zitazaraivi  /  vidhyamAno'pi saMnaddha ivAmuhyan
manAgapi  /   /  61  /  /  pade pade vananadIrvegonmUlitapAdapAH  /  dustarA
apyanAyAsaM rAjahaMsa ivottaran  /  / 62 /  /  AkrAman paMkilaM mArgaM varAha
iva lIlayA  /  mitrAnveSI paryaTan sa varSA apyatyavAhayat  /  / 63 /  /   /  /
caturbhiH kalApakam  /  /  mUrdhni citrAtapaM ghoraM pAdayostaptavAlukAH  /
sahamAno'gnizarAvasaMpuTAMtarvasanniva  /  /  64  /  /  svacche toye toyajeSu
haMsAdiSu ca pakSiSu  /  avizrAMtamanAH kvAsi kvAsi mitraivamupR'Nan  /  / 65 /
/  madagaMdhisaptaparNakuddhadhAvitadaMtinAm  /  madhyena gacchan daMtIva
vanAMtarasamAgataH  /  / 66 /  /  sakhyeva pavamAnena preryamANe'bjagaMdhinA  /
atyagAccharadamapi sa bhraman zaradabhravat  /  / 67 /  /   /  /  caturbhiH
kalApakam  /  /  uttareNa samIreNa himAdreriva baMdhunA  /  himasAt kriyamANeSu
sarasIsaridaMbuSu  /  /  68  /  /  davAgninApyadAhyAsu dahyamAnAsu sarvataH  /
jalAMtaH padmakalhArakairavotpalapaMktiSu  /  /  69  /  /  zItArtteSu kirAteSu
davAnalamapIcchuSu  /  hemantamapyatIyAya sa bADhaM dRDhanizcayaH  /  / 70 /  /
/  /  tribhirvizeSakam  /  /  zIrNeSu jIrNaparNeSu jAnudaghneSu bhUruhAm  /
channAhivRzcikeSvaMghrinyAsaM niHzaMkamAdadhat  /  / 71 /  /
karNamarmAvidbhiriva marmarairati duHzravaiH  /
prabuddhotkarNapaMcAsyabUtkAreSvapyakaMpitaH  /   /  72  /  /
pratyagrapallavAsvAdamAtreNaivodaraMbhariH  /  ziziraM gamayAmAsAziziro
mitrapIDayA  /  / 73 /  /   /  /  tribhirvizeSakam  /  evaM
santakumArasyAnveSaNAyATato'TavIm  /  eko mahendrasiMhasya jagAma parivatsaraH
/  / 74 /  /  tasyAmaTavyAmanyedyurgatvA kiyadavasthitaH  /  dizo vilokayAmAsa
naimittika ivonmukhaH  /   /  75 /  /  tataH kAraMDavakrauMcahaMsasArasapakSiNAm
/  kSaNAdAkarNayAmAsa kolAhalamanAkulaH  /  / 76 /  /  marutA
paMkajAmodavAhinAzvAsitazca saH  /  saraH kiMcidihAstIti nizcikAyAnumAnataH  /
/ 77 /  /  AnaMdabASpatoyena nizcinvan mitrasaMgamam  /  sarovarasyAbhimukhaM sa
yayau rAjahaMsavat  /  / 78 /  /  gacchannagre ca zuzrAva gItaM
gAMdhArabaMdhuram  /  madhuraM veNunAdaM ca vINAkkANaM ca hAriNam  /  /  79  /
/  2010_02 183

Page #225 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter 184: The Scattering of Eager Refusal  A beautiful woman adorned with
diverse garments stood in the middle of the stage. He saw his dear friend
Sanatkumara. ||80||  "Is this a magic trick of some kind, or is it a delusion?
Or is this a magic spell, or has it come from my heart?" ||81||  He pondered
this until he heard the sweet sound of a song being sung by a certain Vaitalika.
||82||  "O Sanatkumara, the pride of the Kuru dynasty, the ocean of horses, the
sun, may your good fortune be everlasting! Victory to you!" ||83||  "Victory to
the tree of the embrace of the Vidyaadhara women, the wealth of Vishnu, the two
rows of Vaitalika glory!" ||84||  Hearing this, Sanatkumara rose from his seat
and went towards the water like an elephant scorched by the summer heat. ||85||
## [Sri Trishatisalaaka Purva - Chapter 6, Verses 74 to 158]  ## 22. Five
Examples in the Commentary on the Essential Points of Sleep and Meditation
These examples of Paudgala, Moyaga, Dant, Farusaga, and Vadasala-bhanjana are to
be known in the context of the arising of sleep due to inertia. ||235||
**Example 1:**  The example of Paudgala is as follows: In a certain village,
there was a householder who was very fond of meat. He would eat meat that was
cooked, fried, roasted, raw, and mixed with various spices. One day, he was
initiated by some elder monks who were very virtuous. While wandering from
village to village, he saw a buffalo being tortured by some people who were
greedy for its meat. Seeing this, he also developed a desire to eat its meat.
This desire did not leave him even when he was eating, reflecting, and
performing the final Sutra-pौरुषी, the act of returning, and the
Pradoshika-pौरुषी. In fact, he fell asleep with this desire. Then, he woke up
from sleep due to inertia. Upon waking up, he went outside the village, into the
midst of the buffalo herd, killed another buffalo, and ate its meat. He
collected the remaining meat, placed it on his bed, and fell asleep. When he
woke up the next morning, he thought, "I had a dream last night." He looked
around and saw the meat on his bed. Then, he realized that he had woken up from
sleep due to inertia. The Sangha removed the sign and expelled him. ||1||
**Example 2:**  The example of Modaka is as follows: A certain virtuous person
was wandering for alms and saw in a certain house a large quantity of fragrant,
oily, sweet, and delicious Modakas, which were intoxicating. He looked at them
for a long time, but he did not receive any. Then, he fell asleep with a
continuous desire for them. When he woke up from sleep due to inertia, he went
to that house in the night, broke open the doors, and ate the Modakas at will.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 184 AturapratyAkhyAnaprakIrNakam vicitravastranepathyaramaNImadhyavartinam  /
mitraM sanatkumAraM sa dadarza priyadarzanam  /  / 80 /  /  asau priyasuhRt kiM
me mAyA kasyApi kApi vA  /  indrajAlamidaM kiM vA hRdayAnnirgato'tha me  /  / 81
/  /  iti so'ciMtayadyAvattAvat karNarasAyanam  /  vaitAlikena kenApi
paThyamAnamado'zRNot  /  / 82  /  /  kuruvaMzasarohaMsAzvasenAbdhinizAkara  /
sanatkumAra saubhAgyamanobhava ciraM jaya  /  / 83 /  /  jaya
vidyAdharavadhUdolatAliMganadruma  /  ADhyaMbhaviSNo
vaitADhyazreNidvayajayazriyA  /  / 84  /  /  evaM samAkarNya sanatkumArasya sa
ddakpatham  /  jagAma grISmasaMtapto jalAzayamiva dvipaH  /  / 85 /  /  [zrI
triSaSTizalAkA0 parva-6 zlo-74 taH 158] 22. nidrAdhyAne zrIvizeSAvazyakabhASye
paJcadRSTAntAH  /  poggala-moyaga-dante pharusaga-vaDasAlabhaMjaNe ceva  /
thINaddhiyassa ee AhAraNA hoti nAyavvA  /  / 235  /  /
styAnaddhinidrodayavartina etAni paudgalAdInyudAraNAni jJAtavyAni bhavanti  /
tadyathA-'poggaletyAdi' tatra samayaparibhASayA paudgalaM mAMsamucyate,
tadAharaNaM yathA-ekasmin grAme kuTumbikaH ko'pyAsIt, sa ca mAMsagRddha AmAni,
pakvAni, talitAni, kevalAni, tImanAdimadhyaprakSiptAni ca mAMsAni bhakSayati  /
anyadA ca guNAtizAyibhiH sthaviraiH kaizcit pratibodhito dIkSAM kakSIkRtavAn  /
tena ca grAmA'nugrAmaM viharatA kadAcit kvacit pradeze mAMsalubdhaiH kaizcid
vikRtyamAno mahiSaH samIkSAJcakre  /  taM ca saMvIkSya tadAmiSabhakSaNe
tasyA'pyabhilASaH samajAyata  /  sa cA'bhilASo'sya bhuJjAnasya vicArabhUmI
gatasya caramAM sUtrapauruSIM, pratikramaNakriyAM, prAdoSikapauruSIM ca kurvato
na nivRttaH; kiM bahunA ?, tadabhilASavatyeva prasupto'sau  /  tataH
styAnaddhinidrodayo jAtaH  /  tadudaye cotthAya grAmAd bahirmahiSamaNDalamadhye
gatvA'nyaM mahiSamekaM vinihatya tadAmiSaM bhkssitvaan| tadudvaritazeSaM ca
samAnIyopAzrayopari kSiptvA prasuptaH  /  samutthitazca pratyuSasi sa
'mayetthaMbhUtaH svapno dRSTaH' ityevaM gurvantika AlocayAmAsa  /
sAdhubhizcopAzrayopari tadAmiSamadRzyata  /  tataH 'styAnaddhinidrodayo'syA'sti'
iti jJAtam  /  tathA ca saMghena liGgamapahRtya visarjito'sau  /  /  iti
styAnaddhinidrodaye prathamamudAharaNamiti  /  / 1 /  /  atha dvitIyaM
modakodAharaNamucyate, yathA-ekaH ko'pi sAdhubhikSAM paryaTana kvacid gRhe
paTalakAdivyavasthApitAnAtipracurAna surabhisnigdhamadhuramanojJAn
mAdakAnadrAkSIt  /  tena cordhvasthitena te suciramudvIkSitAH  /  na ca kimapi
tanmadhyAllabdham  /  tataH so'pyavicchinnatadabhilASa eva suSvApa  /
styAnaddhinidrodaye ca rajanyAM tadgRhaM gatvA, sphoTayitvA kapATAni, modakAn
svecchayA bhakSayitvA, _ 2010_02

Page #226 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter 2: Collection of Examples  **185**  A certain man, having been thrown
into a pit by a falling object, reached a place of refuge, and having released
the falling object from its position, fell asleep. Upon waking, he was
questioned by his elders in the same way. Then, while neglecting his duties, the
virtuous man saw the sweetmeats in the pit. Then, due to the questioning of his
elders, he awoke from his stupor-induced sleep. Similarly, having been given a
linga-parāñcīka by the community, he was also expelled. ||2||  The third example
is that of the tooth: A certain virtuous man was harassed by an elephant during
the day and somehow escaped to a place of refuge. He was consumed by anger
towards the elephant and fell asleep at night. He awoke from his stupor-induced
sleep. Upon waking, he was said to be endowed with the strength of Keshava, the
power of a vajra-bull, and the ability to wield a weapon. Therefore, he broke
through the city gates, went inside, killed the elephant, extracted its two
teeth, threw them at the entrance of his refuge, and fell asleep. Upon waking,
he thought, "This was a dream." Upon seeing the teeth, he realized that he had
awakened from his stupor-induced sleep. Similarly, having received a linga, he
was expelled by the community. ||3||  The term "faru-sag" refers to a potter, as
is well-known. The fourth example is as follows: A certain potter became a monk
in a large community. Once, while he was asleep, he awoke from his stupor-
induced sleep. Then, just as he used to break lumps of clay in the past, due to
that habit, he broke the heads of the virtuous men and left them in a secluded
place along with their corpses. Then, some of the remaining virtuous men fled.
In the morning, it was clearly understood that he had done all this. He was
expelled by the community in the same way. ||4||  The fifth example is that of
breaking the branch of a banyan tree: A certain virtuous man, having completed
his daily rounds, returned home. He was exhausted from the heat, thirsty,
hungry, and seeking shade. While walking along the road, he came under a banyan
tree. A low-hanging branch struck his head, causing him great pain. He was
consumed by anger and fell asleep. Upon waking from his stupor-induced sleep at
night, he went and broke the branch of the banyan tree, threw it at the entrance
of his refuge, and fell asleep again. Upon thinking, "I had a dream," and
realizing that he had awakened from his stupor-induced sleep, he was expelled by
the community after the linga was removed. ||5||  **23. The story of Nandiṣeṇa
in the Śrī-Upadeshamālā, which is relevant to the study of causes.**  In the
village of Nandi, the son of a Cakracara, named Nandiṣeṇa, was orphaned at a
young age. He lived with his maternal uncle. People questioned him, "What kind
of karma are you doing with your mother's wealth? Why don't you gather wealth
and marry?" He was thus troubled by the people. Then, desiring to leave, he said
to his maternal uncle, "I will give you my daughter as a slave." His maternal
uncle was pleased by this. When the girl reached puberty, she was presented to
him by her uncle. Seeing him, she was disgusted by his misfortune and ugliness.
She told her father, "If you give me to him, I will die." Then, he thought, "I
will give him my second daughter, but this one doesn't want him." He

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 khaNDa:-2 dRSTAntasamuccayaH 185 udvaritAMstu patadgrahake
kSiptvopAzrayamAgatya patadgrahakaM sthAne muktvA prasuptaH  /  utthitena ca
tathaivA''locitaM gurUNAm  /  tataH pratyupekSaNAsamaye bhAjanAdi
pratyupekSamANena sAdhunA patadgrahake dRSTAste modakAH  /  tato
gurvAdibhiqhato'sya styAnaddhinidrodayaH  /  tathaiva ca saMghena
liGgapArAJcikaM dattvA'yamapi visarjitaH  /  / 2 /  /  dantodAharaNaM
tRtIyamucyate, yathA-ekaH sAdhurdivA dviradena kheditaH kathamapi
plaayyopaashrymaagtH| taM ca dantinaM pratyavicchinnakopa eva nizi prasuptaH  /
styAnAddhinidrodayazca jAtaH  /  tadudaye ca vajraRSabhanArAcasaMhananavataH
kezavArdhabalasaMpannatA samaye nigadyate  /  ato nagarakapATAni bhaktvA madhye
gatvA taM hastinaM vyApAdya dantadvayamutpATya svopAzrayadvAre kSiptvA suptaH  /
prabuddhena ca 'svapno'yam' ityAlocitam  /  dantadarzane ca jJAtaH
styAnaddhinidrodayaH  /  tathaiva ca liGgaM gRhItvA saMghena visarjitaH  /  / 3
/  /  pharusagazabdena samayaprasiddhyA kumbhakAro'bhidhIyate, tadudAharaNaM
caturthamucyate-ekaH kumbhakAro mahati gacche pravrajitaH  /  anyadA ca
suptasyA'sya styAnaddhinidrodayo jAtaH  /  tato'sau pUrvaM yathA
mRttikApiNDAnatroTayat, tathA tadabhyAsAdeva sAdhUnAM zirAMsi troTayitvA
kabandhaiH sahaivaikAnte ujjhAJcakAra  /  tataH zeSAH kecana sAdhavo'pasRtAH  /
prabhAte ca jJAtaM samyageva sarvaM tacceSTitam  /  saMghena tathaiva visarjitaH
/  / 4 /  /  /  _ atha vaTazAkhAbhaJjanodAharaNaM paJcamamucyate, yathA- ko'pi
sAdhuAmAntarAd gocaracaryAM vidhAya pratinivRttaH  /  sa cauSNyA'bhihato
bhRtabhAjanastRSito bubhukSitazchAyArthI mArgastho
vaTavRkSasyA'dhastAdAgacchannatinIcairvatinyA tacchAkhayA mastake ghaTTitaH,
gADhaM ca paritApitaH, avyavacchinnakopazca prasuptaH  /  styAnarddhinidrodaye
rAtrau gatvA vaTazAkhAM bhaktvopAzrayadvAre kSiptvA punaH prasuptaH  /  'svapno
dRSTaH' ityAlocite, styAnaryudaye ca jJAte liGgApanayanataH saMghena visarjita
iti  /  / 5 /  /  23. nidAnadhyAne zrIupadezamAlAheyopAdeyAyAM nandiSeNakathA  /
nandigrAme cakracaradhigvarNadArakasya nandiSeNanAmno avyaktasyaiva mRtau mAtA-
pitarau, sthito mAtulasamIpe  /  kimatra karma mudhikayA karoSi ? kiM vA na
dArasaGgrahaM dravyopArjanadvAreNeti vipratArito'sau lokaiH  /  tato
nirgantukAmaH svasutAM te dAsyAmIti vadatA vidhRto mAtulena  /  yauvanasthA
copasthApitA sA tasya tena, tayA ca taM nirIkSya taddaurbhAgya-vairUpyAbhyAM
jAtavaimukhyayA pitaraM pratyuktaM yadi mAmasmai dAsyasi tato'haM mariSye  /
tato dvitIyAM dAsyAmi, iyaM tu necchatIti sambhAvya dhRto nirgacchannasau tena
/  evaM saptabhistatsutAbhirmaraNAbhyupagamenAniSTasya jAtamasya vairAgyaM,
2010_02

Page #227 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Aaturpratyakhyanaprakirnakam**  This is the fruit of the tree of his own sins,
thought the worried mind. What is the use of family life? Thinking thus, he was
eager to eradicate it. Seeing an Acharya, he heard the Dharma and became a
renunciant. He practiced the rituals, accepted the Agamas, and took initiation
into the Panchashatika Gachcha. He began to practice the vows. He spent a lot of
time enthusiastically, considering himself successful.  One day, in his own
assembly, he was praised by Indra, saying, "He is blessed, fulfilled, and has
not been surpassed in Dharma even by the gods." A god, who did not believe this,
descended and stood at the door of the assembly of the saints. He said, "A weak
ascetic is living in the forest." Hearing this, Nandishena, who had just taken
the first morsel of his sixth fast, immediately left, inquired about the place
and the situation, and entered the forest to get water, medicine, etc. He
overcame the obstacles of greed, laziness, and loss of profit with a strong
mind, and obtained the desired water and medicine. He went to the place. The god
showed him the ascetic, who was dirty, repulsive, and cursed, saying, "Shame on
you, bald-headed one! You are only concerned with filling your stomach!" and
other harsh words.  Then, I, the unfortunate one, caused sorrow to the mind of
this great sage. Thinking, "How will this virtuous one be well?" I washed his
body. Nandishena, with sweet words, reassured him, saying, "Be brave, I will
make you well. Come, take shelter." He said, "Oh, sinner! You do not know my
condition. I cannot even walk a step." Then, he was lifted onto his back and
they started to go. The god also cursed him, saying, "Shame on you, wicked one!
You are causing a hindrance to my journey!" and other harsh words. The other
one, thinking, "How can this great soul be healthy with such a strong negative
consequence?" said, "I will now make this wrong deed look good," and continued
to walk. Then, the god, with his mind free from the actions of the two, thought,
"This is due to Indra's partiality." He withdrew his illusion, revealed his
divine form, fell at his feet, and told him the story, saying, "What should I
do?" The sage said, "Do your duty as much as you can." He went to his own place.
The sage told the saints what had happened.  Later, at the end of his life, he
remembered his householder life and thought, "I should be born as a human being
and be prosperous." This was the cause. He went to heaven. Then, he was born as
the tenth incarnation of Vishnu, named Vasudeva. When he reached youth, he was
attracted to beautiful women, and they, too, abandoned their household duties.
Then, he went out to conquer the sea, as requested by the citizens, and wandered
the earth. With his extraordinary beauty, he was taken to various places by all
the people. He married many thousands of daughters of the best Vidhyadhara
kings. He attained excessive worldly pleasures. Later, with his relatives, he
had a son, Krishna, who was half a chakravarti. He had sons like Pradyumna,
etc., and became the patriarch of the Hari dynasty.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 AturapratyAkhyAnaprakIrNakama cintitamanena svapApataruphalamidaM, tat kiM
dArasaGgraheNa ? karomi tadunmUlane yatnamiti saJcintyATatA tena dRSTaH
kazcidAcAryaH, dharmaM zrutvA pravrajitastatsakAze  /  abhyastakriyAkalApo
gRhItAgamazca paJcazatikagacchasya gRhItAbhigraho vaiyAvRttyaM kartumArabdhaH  /
kurvatazca sotsAhaM kRtakRtyamAtmAnaM bhAvayato gato bahuH kAlaH  /  anyadA
svaHsabhAyAM dhanyaH kRtArtho nandiSeNo yo devairapi na dharmAccyAvyata iti
zlAghitaH zakreNa  /  tadazraddhAno'vatIrNaH kazciddevaH sthitvA
sAdhUpAzrayadvAre sa prAha-aTavyAM glAnatapasvI tiSThatIti  /  tadAkarNya
SaSThapAraNake gRhItaprathamakavalastaM parityajya sahasA nirgato nandiSeNa:
paripRcchya taM pradezamavasthAM ca praviSTaH pAnakauSadhAdyarthaM gocare  /
devavihitAneSaNAmadInamanasko lAbhAntarAyakSayopazamasyotkaTatayA nirjitya
gRhItvaiSaNIyaM pAnakAdikaM gatastaM pradezam  /  darzito devenAzucibIbhatso
dhigdurmuNDa ! svodarabharaNakSaNika ! ityAdikarkazavacanairvirAraTyamAno
glAnasAdhuH  /  tato bata mayA'dhanyenA'sya mahAmunermanaH khedaH sampAdita;,
kathaM cAyaM praguNo bhaviSyatIti cintayatA tena kSAlitastaddehaH  /  dhIro
bhava, karomi nirujaM bhavantam, AgacchopAzrayamiti samAzvAsito
madhuravacanairnandiSeNena sa prAha - 'AH pApa ! na jAnISe me'vasthAM, na
zaknomyahaM padamapi gantum  /  tataH samAropya svapRSThadeze tamitaro
gantumArabdhaH  /  devo'pi muJcati durgandhyazucyAdIni, 'dhig durAtman !
vegavighAtaM karoSi !' ityAdibhiH zapate ca kaTukavAkyaiH  /  itaro'pi
pravardhamAnatIvratarazubhapariNAmaH kathamayaM mahAtmA svasthaH syAditi
cintayan mithyAduSkRtamidAnIM zobhanaM nayAmIti vadan gacchati sma  /  tato
devastaccaritAvarjitamAnasaH sthAne zakrasya pakSapAta iti saJcintya mAyAM
saMhRtya prakaTitadivyarUpaH patitaH pAdayornivedya vRttAntamAha ca-kiM mayA
kartavyaM ? munirAha-yathAzakti dharmodyama iti  /  gato'sau svasthAnam  /
munizca pRcchatAM sAdhUnAM kathitavAn yathAvRttam  /  pazcAdavasAnakAle
smRtagRhasthAvasthAdaurbhAgyeNa manuSyabhave'haM subhago bhUyAsamiti kRtamiti
tena nidAnam  /  gato divam, tatazcayutvA jAto dazamadazAro vasudevanAmA  /
prAptayauvanena ca tena bhramatA kRtA hRtahRdayAH surasundaryaH svagRhakarmApi
tyaktavatyaH  /  tato nAgarikavijJaptasamudravijayoparodhAnnirgatena
dezakAlikayA paryaTatA vasudhAm  /  rUpAtizayAkSiptamanobhiH
sarvalokairaparAparasthAneSu nIyamAnena pariNItA bahusahasrasaGkhyA
vidyAdharanarapativarakanyakAH, prApto vaiSayikasukhAtirekaH  /  pazcAmmilitena
ca bandhubhiH samutpanne'rdhacakravartinI kRSNe sutottame, jAteSu pradyumnAdiSu
tadvaratanayeSu labdhaM harivaMzapitAmahattvamiti  /  2010_02

Page #228 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------



======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 khaNDaH - 2 dRSTAntasamuccayaH 23. nidAnadhyAne zrIsaMvegaraGgazAlAyAM
gaGgadattasyAvasaraH  /  puranagaranigamasaMkula-
kulagirigurudevabhavaNaramaNijje  /  vacchAvisae nayara, jayabaddhaNamA''si
supasiddhaM  /  / 1 /  /  siddhaMtapasiddhavisuddhadhamma-
kammekkabaddhapaDibaMdho  /  baMdhupio nAma tahiM, ahesi siTThI navisi  /  / 2 /
/  siTThA'Numao putto ya, gaMgadatto tti tassa suviNIto  /  soya kameNa'Nupatto,
tAruNNaM taruNimaNaharaNaM  /  / 3 /  /  taM ca tahAvihama'valoiUNa, piuNA
sayaMbhunAmassa ! vaNiNo dhUyA variyA, vIvAha'GkaM pahidveNaM  /  / 4 /  /  aha
supasatthe hatthaggahassa, joggammi tihimuhuttammi  /  sA harisamuvagaeNaM,
uvvUDhA gaMgadatteNaM  /  / 5 /  /  navaraM jabvelaM ciya, tIse so pANipallave
laggo  /  tavvelaM ciya tIe, viyaMbhio dussaho dAho  /   /  6  /   /  kiM yavaNa
AliMgiyamhi sittamhi kiM visaraseNa  /  iti citaMtI palhattha - vAmahatthA''NaNA
vimaNA ||7|| , acchinnama'cchipuDasaM-ghaDaMtavAhacchaDA valiyagIvA  /  nihuyaM
paridevaMtI, sayabhuNA evamullavA  /  / 8 /  /  vacche ! harisaTThANe vi, kIsa
saMtAvamevamuvvahasi  /  pahasiravayaNA jaM sahi-jaNaM pi nA''lavasi sappaNayaM
/  /  9  /  /  kiMca na pecchasi tuha chaNae, loyaNA''NaMdanibbharamaNassa  /
savilAsagIyanaTTAI, sayaNaloyassa putti ! tumaM  /  /  10  /  /  tAkuNa saralaM
gIvA - muNAlama'vaNehi nayaNajalakaNiyaM  /  sacchAyaM muhalacchiM, payaDehi
vimuMca sogamimaM  /  / 11 /  /  aha asthi gADhatarasoga- kAraNaM kiMpi tA
tama'visaMkaM  /  phuDavayaNehiM sAhehi, jeNa avaNiJjae sajjo  /  / 12 /  /  tIe
payaMpiyaM tAya !, iNhiM kima'IyavatthukahaNeNa  /  nakkhattamaggaNA muMDie sire
kaM guNaM kuNai  /  /  13  /  bhaNiyaM sayaMbhuNA putti !, tahavi sAhehi ettha
paramatthaM  /  to tI savvo viya, varavuttaMto samA''iTTho  /  / 14 /  /  soUNa
taM ca vaJjA''hao vva avahariyagehasAro vva  /  masisalilohalio iva, so
vicchAyattama'Nupatto  /  /  15  /  /  2010_02 187

Page #229 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter 188: The Scattering of the Eager Refusal  **16.**  The wealthy one,
devoid of marriage, and his family members had all gone to their homes. I, on
the other hand, was left alone in my in-laws' house.  **17.**  With the
unbearable pain of the *dohagg* cutting me like a sword, I was longing for
liberation, even though I was still hoping for something else.  **18.**
Climbing onto the pyre, I was about to be released from this life.  I was left
alone, and she, in a flash, attained the fivefold liberation.  **19.**  My
mother and father, along with the family members, arrived together.  The entire
group, devoid of the sorrow of the body, was united.  **20.**  The news of her
death spread far and wide.  Gangadatta, burdened by the *dohagg*, was deeply
ashamed.  **21.**  His father said to him, "My son, don't be disheartened!  This
is how it is.  Why are you so sad?  Your sister has become a *bhajjā*."  **22.**
I, on the other hand, was told by a merchant from a distant land that she had
been reborn as a *dhūya* (a female Jain ascetic).  He further explained that she
had been reborn in a higher realm due to her good deeds.  **23.**  She, with her
hands clasped together, ascended to the highest state of bliss.  At the time of
her funeral pyre, I, with my grief, was unable to support myself.  **24.**  I,
in every land, was afflicted by the unbearable pain of the *dohagg*.
Gangadatta, overwhelmed with sorrow, pondered.  **25.**  "What did I do in my
past lives, what heavy karmic debts did I accumulate, that I am now suffering
this way, becoming the cause of this woman's misery?"  **26.**  "Those who are
wealthy, the sons of kings, and the great rulers, even those who are strong and
steadfast, find it difficult to escape the cycle of birth and death.  **27.**
"I, on the path of self-control, am a broken vessel, a *vaggū* (a person who has
fallen from the path).  I am a victim of the *dohagg* of women, and even in my
dreams, I am plagued by misfortune."  **28.**  "Like a deer caught in a snare, I
am trapped by my desires and attachments.  I am consumed by my longing for her.
Alas!  What have I done?"  **29.**  While he was thinking this, his father came
to him and said, "My son, control your sorrow.  It is useless.  What is to be
done?"  **30.**  "This is the result of past karmic actions, a manifestation of
the *pāva* (merit) that has been accumulated over many lifetimes.  There is no
other way to attain the ultimate goal."  **31.**  "Come, my son!  Let us go to
the *sūri* (a Jain monk), who is a treasure trove of virtues and a refuge from
fear.  He is the best medicine for this sorrow.  Let us go and pay our respects
to the *nāṇarayaṇa* (the one who possesses knowledge)."  **32.**  He agreed, and
they went to the *sūri* with humility.  They bowed down to him, standing firmly
on the ground.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 188 AturapratyAkhyAnaprakIrNakama vitto ya vivAhavihI, sayaNajaNo vi ya gao
sagehesu  /  aha avaravAsarammi, sasuragihe niJjamANIe  /  / 16 /  /
accaMtadaiyadohagga-khagganibhijjamANahiyayAe  /  annaM mokkhovAyaM, thevaM pi
apecchamANIe  /  / 17 /  /  pAsAyasiharamA''ruhiya, tIe maraNa'TThayA lahu
vimukko  /  appA nivaDiyamettA ya, sA gayA jhatti paMcattaM  /  / 18 /  /
miliyA ammApiuNo, sayaNajaNo vi ya samAgato turiyaM  /  vihio ya se samaggo,
sarIrasakkArapamuhavihI  /  / 19 /  /  /  tammaraNanimittaM pi ya, savvattha
purammi tattha vitthariyaM  /  niyadohaggeNa daDhaM ca, lajjio gaMgadatto vi  /
/ 20 /  /  navaraM piuNA bhaNio, mA vaccha ! visAyamettha thevaM pi  /  kAhisi
tahA jahassaM jaha avarA hojja tuha bhajjA  /  / 21 /  /  aha kahavi
dUrapuravAsi-vaNiyadhUyaM puNo vi so teNa  /  pariNAvio tahAviha-
pabhUyataradavvaviNiogA  /  / 22 /  /  sA vi tahaJciya hattha-ggahAo uDDhaM gayA
paramasogaM  /  taggihagamaNA'vasare, navaraM ullaMbaNeNa mayA  /  / 23 /  /  to
savvattha vi dese, dussahadohaggadUsaNaM patto  /  sogabharavihuriyaM'go ya,
gaMgadatto viciMtei  /  / 24  /  /  kiM puvvabhavesu mae, pAvaM pAveNuvajjiyaM
garuyaM  /  jassa pabhAveNevaM, bhavAmi veso'hamitthINaM  /  / 25  /   /  dhannA
bhayavaMto te, saNaMkumArA''iNo mahAsattA  /  daDhapaNayasAliNaM pi hu,
tattiyamaM'teuraM mottuM  /  / 26 /  /  laggA saMjamamagge, ahaM tu
nibbhaggavaggavaggU vi  /  dohaggavamitthINaM, sumiNe vi apatthaNijjo ya  /  /
27 /  /  migapoyago vva mAyaNhiyAe. nivvisayavisayataNhAe  /  viNaDijjAmi
hayA''sAe, ahaha ! etto suhaM katto  /  / 28 /  /  iya jAva so viciMtai, tAva
piyA se samA''gao bhaNai  /  vaccha  /  pariJcaya sogaM, niratthayaM kuNasu
kAyavvaM  /  / 29 /  /  cirabhavaparaMparovajjiyANa, pAvANa vilasiyaM eyaM  /
vayaNijjamettha kassa vi, parama'ttheNaM ao natthi  /  / 30  /  /  tA ehi putta
! jAmo, bhayavaM guNasAyaro haM sUrI  /  suvvai samosaDho taM ca, vaMdimo
nANarayaNanihiM  /  / 31 /  /  paDivannaM teNa tato, sUrisamIve gayA
viNayapUvvaM  /  vaMdittu taM nisannA, sanihiyammi dharAvaDhe  /  / 32 /  /  _
2010_02

Page #230 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Chapter:-2 Collection of Examples 189 The Suri said, "O Divine One, the path of
liberation is difficult to attain." I will tell you a story, a parable, about
the nature of the path. ||33|| The Suri was asked by Ganga Datta, "O Venerable
One, what did you do in the past? What kind of karma did you create?" ||34||
When he was asked this, the Guru said, "Listen carefully." ||35|| "In a city, at
the gate of the king, Siri Sehara, there was a merchant. He was very wealthy and
had strong attachments." ||36|| "The king had a beautiful palace, adorned with
precious jewels. The merchant had five hundred sons." ||37|| "They were all very
greedy and envious, and they were always fighting with each other. They were
constantly desiring wealth and possessions." ||38|| "They committed many
terrible sins, such as stealing, lying, and violence. They also indulged in
excessive eating and drinking, and they were very cruel." ||39|| "They suffered
from many diseases and illnesses, and they died and were reborn in hell and the
animal realm. They experienced much suffering." ||40|| "Because of their karma,
they were born as humans in this world. They were still attached to their past
desires and actions." ||41|| "They were filled with sorrow and remorse, and they
realized the truth of the Dharma. They became awakened and sought refuge in the
teachings." ||42|| "They renounced the world and became monks. They lived in
forests, villages, and cities, practicing the fourfold path." ||43|| "They spent
many years in the monastic life, living a pure and blameless life. They were
very disciplined and renounced all worldly possessions." ||44|| "One day, a monk
said to them, 'O Great Souls, you have practiced this path for a long time. Now,
you should renounce even your food and drink.'" ||45|| "There are four types of
renunciation, and you should practice them all. You should renounce your
desires, your attachments, your speech, and your thoughts." ||46|| "Renunciation
is a difficult path, and there will be many obstacles. But if you are
determined, you will succeed." ||47|| "One of the monks was very happy to hear
this. He took his food and drink and went to a cave in the mountains." ||48||
"He sat down in meditation, and he was very focused. He renounced all his
possessions, and he was free from all attachments." ||49||  2010_02

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 khaNDa:-2 dRSTAntasamuccayaH 189 sUrI vi divvanANo-vaogavinAyasavvanAyavvo  /
akkhevaNivikkhevaNi-sarUvama'ha kahai dhammakahaM  /  / 33 /  /  aha patthAvaM
uvalabbha, gaMgadatteNa pucchio sUrI  /  bhayavaM ! purA mae kiM ?, dohaggakaraM
kayaM kammaM  /  / 34  /  /  jeNehabhave paramaM, viddesaM pAvio mhi juvaINa  /
iti teNa pucchiyammi, bhaNai gurU bho ! nisAmehi  /  / 35  /  /  nayarammi
sayaduvAre, ranno siriseharassa taM bhajjA  /  aJcaMtavallahA Asi,
gADhakAmA'NubaMdhA ya  /  / 36 /  /  tassa ya ranno
nimmerarUvalAyannamaNaharaM'gINa  /  bhajjANama'NUNAI, huntANi sayANi kira paMca
/  / 37 /  /  tANi ya tumae viddesaNA''i-bahukUDamaMtataMtehiM  /  haNiyANi
jahicchama'viggha-mavaNivairamaNavaMchAe  /  / 38 /  /  samuvajjiuM ca vajjaM
va, dAruNaM bhUripAvasaMbhAraM  /  tappaJcayaM ca aJcaMta-duggadohaggakammaM pi
/  / 39 /  /  pajjante ya sudussaha-sAsA''ipabhUyapabalarogehiM  /  mariUNa
narayatiriesu, Negaso sahiya dukkhAI  /  / 40 /  /  kahakahavi kammalAghava-
vaseNa etthovaladdhamaNuyatto  /  puvvakayapAvadoseNa, inhi dohaggama'Nuhavasi
/  / 41 /  /  evaM soccA saMjAya-dhammasaddho bhavAu uvviggo  /  ApucchiUNa
piyaraM, so pavvajjaM pavajjittA  /  / 42 /  /  gAmA''garanagaresuM, viharai vAu
vva cattapaDibaMdho  /  gurukulavAso'vagato, sutta'tthavibhAvaNujjutto  /  / 43
/  /  aha kettiyaM pi kAlaM, pavvajjaM nikkalaMkama'NucariuM  /
bhattaparinnAvihiNA, uvaTThio aNasaNaM kAuM  /  / 44  /  /  bhaNio therihaM tao,
aho mahAbhAga ! aNuciyamimaM te  /  uvaciyasoNiyamaMsassa, aNasaNaM ettha
patthAve  /  / 45  /  /  cattAri vicittAI, vigaInijUhiyAiM cattAri  /  iccA''iNA
kameNaM, tamhA saMlehaNaM kuNasu  /  / 46 /  /  saMlihiyadavvabhAvo,
pacchA'NuDhejja vaMchiya'tthaMpi  /  iharA visottiyA vi hu, bhavejja
bahuvigghamimamA''hu  /  / 47 /  /  iya pannavio vi bahU, taggirama'vaganniUNa
sacchaMdo  /  ghettUNa aNasaNaM giri-silAyale so nisanno tti  /  / 48 /  /  aha
tassa tahA jhANa-TThiyassa paDiruddhaduTThajogassa  /  aNasaNagayassa jaM kira,
vittaM taM saMpai suNei  /  / 49 /  /  2010_02

Page #231 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
190 With a garland of fragrant, curly locks, and a face as bright as the moon,
With a body as soft as a cloud, and adorned with precious jewels, With a gait
like a graceful elephant, and a voice like a sweet melody, With a heart full of
compassion, and a mind full of wisdom, With a beautiful form, and a youthful
charm, He was known as the king of the arts, the beloved of the gods. He bowed
to the Siddhas, and went to the city of the Jinas, His mind filled with
devotion, his heart filled with peace. He was known as Ganga Datta, and he lived
a long and happy life, Surrounded by his family and friends, his heart filled
with joy. The merchant, too, was captivated by his beauty, And he was filled
with admiration for his noble character. He was a man of great wealth, and he
lived a life of luxury, But he was also a man of great compassion, and he helped
the poor and needy. He was a man of great wisdom, and he taught others the path
to liberation. He was a man of great love, and he was loved by all who knew him.
**A Collection of Verses on the Rejection of the Sick**  Oh, how wretched is my
life, how miserable is this human birth! I am a burden to myself, and a source
of ridicule to others. I am a prisoner of my own body, and I am unable to escape
from my suffering. I am a slave to my desires, and I am unable to find peace. I
am a fool, and I am unable to see the truth. I am a sinner, and I am unable to
find forgiveness. I am a wretch, and I am unable to find happiness.  I am a
burden to my family, and I am a source of sorrow to my friends. I am a
disappointment to my parents, and I am a disgrace to my ancestors. I am a
failure, and I am unable to achieve anything worthwhile. I am a nobody, and I am
unable to make a difference in the world.  I am a sick man, and I am a burden to
everyone around me. I am a nuisance, and I am a source of annoyance to all who
know me. I am a drain on society, and I am a waste of resources. I am a burden
to myself, and I am a source of suffering to others.  I am a sick man, and I am
a burden to everyone around me. I am a nuisance, and I am a source of annoyance
to all who know me. I am a drain on society, and I am a waste of resources. I am
a burden to myself, and I am a source of suffering to others.  I am a sick man,
and I am a burden to everyone around me. I am a nuisance, and I am a source of
annoyance to all who know me. I am a drain on society, and I am a waste of
resources. I am a burden to myself, and I am a source of suffering to others.  I
am a sick man, and I am a burden to everyone around me. I am a nuisance, and I
am a source of annoyance to all who know me. I am a drain on society, and I am a
waste of resources. I am a burden to myself, and I am a source of suffering to
others.  I am a sick man, and I am a burden to everyone around me. I am a
nuisance, and I am a source of annoyance to all who know me. I am a drain on
society, and I am a waste of resources. I am a burden to myself, and I am a
source

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 190 tAvicchagucchasacchaha-sukaMtakuMtalakalAvakaliyAhiM  /
chaNamayalaMchaNasacchaha-muhajonhAdhavaliyadisAhiM  /  /  50  /  /
nimmalamaUhamuttAkalAvarehaM tathorathaNayAhiM  /  susiliTThalaTThamaNikaMci-
dAmasohaMtaramaNIhiM  /   /  51  /   /  vaTTA'NupuvvaraMbhA
-'bhirAmadippaMtajaMghajuyalAhiM  /  caraNaparilaggaraNajhaNira-
maMjumaMjIrarammAhiM  /  /  52  /  /  accaMtavicittamahagghamulla-
dogullavaraniyatthAhiM  /  madArakusumaparimala-milaMtabhasalolisAmAhiM  /  /
53  /  /  suMderamaNaharAhiM, taruNIhiM parigato aNegAhiM  /  vijjAhararAyasuo,
aNaMgakeU tti supasiddho  /  / 54 /  /  siddhA''yayaNAiM vaMdiUNa, sagihaM
paDucca vacca'to  /  muNima'NasaNaTThiyaM jANi - UNa bhUmitalamoinno  /  / 55 /
/  to gaMgadattama'ibhUri-bhattibharanissaraMtaromaMco  /  suciraM thuNiUNa
gato, rAmAjaNaparivuDo sapuraM  /   /  56  /  /  sAhU vi tassa sohagga-
muggama'balAmaNoharaNadakkhaM  /  dahuM paDibhaggamaNo, ciMtiumevaM samADhato  /
/  57  /  /  esa mahappA evaM, vilAsiNIsatthaparigao lalai  /  ahayaM tu
pAvakammo, tai taiyA tAhiM paribhUo  /  /  58  /  /
AturapratyAkhyAnaprakIrNakam tAdhI ! niratthayaM majjha, jIviyaM duTTu, mANusa
jammaM  /  niruvahayaM'go vi tahA, viDaMbaNaM jo'Nupatto mhi  /  /  59  /  /
kuviyappavasagato, to jaMpai jai imassa phalamathi  /  sAmannassa tayA haM, imo
vva hojjAmi parajamme  /  /  60  /  /  eyaM niyANabaMdhaM, kAUNa mao
mahiMdakappammi  /  uvavanno pavarasuro, tattha ya visae nisevittA  /  /  61  /
/  AugaMvigamammi cuo, uvavanno bhUmitilayabhUyAe  /  ujjeNIe purIe, ranno
sirisamarasIhassa  /  /  62  /  /  bhajjAe somanAmAe puttabhAveNa
pavarasumiNehiM  /  kayasUo nIroo, samuciyasamae pasUo ya  /  /  63  /  /
vihiyaM baddhAvaNayaM patthAve ThAviyaM ca se nAmaM  /  raNasUro tti kameNaM,
tArunnaM panara'Nupatto  /  / 64 /  /  aha puvvajjiyaniravagga-
huggasohaggasaMgato jattha  /  so bhai tattha juvaINa, tammi nikkhittakkhUNa  /
/ 65  /  /  mayaNavasavihiyabahuhAva-bhAvavibbhamavilAsalIlANa  /
avahatthiyalajjANaM, avare viramaMti vAvArA  /  /  66  /  /  rAisaraseNAvai-
mahibbhasAmaMtamaMtidhUyAhiM  /  esI'mha paI ahavA vi, huyavaho ii vayaMtIhiM  /
/  67  /  /  uvvUDho gADhaparUDha-paNayasArAhiM tAhiM samagaM ca  /
paMcavihavisayasokkhaM, aNurbhujai dIharaM kAlaM  /  /  68  /  /  mariuM ca
bhavutthasutikkha- dukkhalakkhANa bhAyaNaM bhUo  /  niyaduvvilasiyavasao,
cirakAlaM gaMgadatto tti  /  /  69  /  /  [ saMvegaraMgazAlA zloka 4094 taH
4162] 2010_02

Page #232 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Chapter-2: Collection of Examples 23, 63. The story of the Muni named Chitra
Sambhuta, included in the Trishatisalaaka Purusha Charitra, about the cause of
his birth. In Varanasi, there were two sons of the elephant-lord, named
Bhutdatta, who was very wealthy. ||1|| These two, named Chitra Sambhuta, were
very affectionate towards each other. They were never separated, bound together
like nails and flesh. ||2|| At that time, in Varanasi, there was a king named
Shankha. He had a famous minister named Namuchi. ||3|| One day, the king, in a
fit of anger, ordered Namuchi to secretly kill Bhutdatta. ||4|| Namuchi secretly
said to him, "I will protect you as if you were my own son. You should stay in
my house and I will teach your sons." ||5|| Namuchi accepted the elephant-lord's
words. People live to survive, and they will do anything to do so. ||6|| Namuchi
taught the two Chitra Sambhuta various arts. He was very fond of them and also
of the elephant-lord's wife. ||7|| Bhutdatta came to know about this and wanted
to kill Namuchi. Who can tolerate a rival in their own wife? ||8|| The elephant-
lord's sons came to know about this and sent Namuchi away. They gave him a gift
as a reward for saving his life. ||9|| Namuchi then went to Hastinapur. He
became the minister of Sanatkumara, the king of Hastinapur. ||10|| Meanwhile,
the two Chitra Sambhuta, now young men, came to the earth from somewhere, like
the Ashvins. ||11|| They sang sweet songs, making a lot of noise and laughter.
They played the vina like the great Narada. ||12|| The Kinnaras were delighted
by their playing, which was accompanied by seven distinct musical notes. ||13||
They played the Mrujanga, a drum that makes a loud sound, and danced, holding
the skull of a dead elephant, a symbol of mockery. ||14|| They performed the
dance of Shiva, the dance of Urvashi, the dance of Rambha, and the dance of
Uttara. They performed all the dances that were not known before. ||15|| They
were masters of all the arts of music and dance, and their performance was
unprecedented. No one's mind could remain unaffected by their performance.
||16|| One day, there was a festival of Madan in the city. The people of the
city were enjoying the music and dance. ||17|| The Chitra Sambhuta also went to
the festival. The people of the city were attracted by their music and followed
them like deer. ||18|| Someone told the king about the elephant-lord's sons. The
king was angry because they had attracted everyone with their music and made
them forget everything else. ||19|| The king's minister also told the king that
the Chitra Sambhuta should not be allowed to enter the city. ||20|| From that
day onwards, the Chitra Sambhuta stayed away from Varanasi. One day, there was a
great festival of Kaumudi in Varanasi. ||21|| The Chitra Sambhuta, ignoring the
king's order and driven by their lust, entered the city like bees entering a
lotus flower. ||22|| They watched the festival, their bodies covered in dust.
They wandered through the city like thieves, hiding themselves. ||23||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 khaNDaH-2 dRSTAntasamuccayaH 23, 63. nidAnadhyAne
zrItriSaSTizalAkApuruSacaritrA'ntargatA citrasaMbhUtimuneH kathA | vArANasyAM
tato'bhUtAM bhUtadattAbhidhasya tau  /  mahAdhanasamRddhasya mAtaMgAdhipateH
sutau  /  / 1 /  /  citrasaMbhUtanAmAnau tau mithaH snehazAlinau  /  na kadApi
vyayujyetAM saMbaddhau nakhamAMsavat  /  / 2 /  /  vArANasyAM tadA cAbhUcchaMkha
ityavanIpatiH  /  AsIcca sacivastasya namucirnAma vizrutaH  /  | 3 || aparedyuH
so'parAdhe mahIyasi mahIbhujA  /  arpito bhUtadattasya pracchannaM vadhahetave
/  / 4 /  /  tenoce namucizchannaM tvAM rakSAmi nijAtmavat  /  pAThayasyAtmajau
me tvaM yadi bhUmigRhasthitaH  /  / 5 /  /  pratipannaM namucinA
tanmAtaMgapatervacaH  /  jano hi jIvitavyArthI tannAsti na karoti yat  /  / 6 /
/  vicitrAzcitrasaMbhUtau sa tathAdhyApayat kalAH  /  reme'nuraktayA sArdhaM
mAtaMgapatibhAryayA  /  / 7 /  /  jJAtvA tadbhUtadattenArebhe mArayituM tu saH
/  saheta kaH svadAreSu pAradArikaviplavam  /  / 8 /  /  jJAtvA
mAMtagaputrAbhyAM sa dUreNApasAritaH  /  saivAsmai dakSiNA dattA
prANarakSaNalakSaNA  /  /  9  /  /  tato niHsRtya namucirgatavAn hastinApure  /
cakre sanatkumAreNa sacivazcakriNA nijaH  /  /  10  /  /  itazca citrasaMbhUtau
bhaturnavayauvanau  /  kuto'pi hetorAyAtau pRthivyAmAzvinAviva  /  /  11  /   /
tau svAdu jagaturgItaM hAhAhUhUpahAsinau  /  vAdayAmAsaturvINAmatituMburunAradau
/  / 12 /  /  gItaprabaMdhAnugataiH suvyaktaiH saptabhiH svaraiH  /
tayorvAdayatorvINAM kiMkaraMti sma kinnarAH  /  /  13  /  /  murajaM dhIraghoSaM
tau vAdayantau ca cakratuH  /  gRhItamurakaMkAlAtodyakRSNaviDaMbanAm  /  / 14 /
/  zivaH zivorvazIraMbhAyuMjakezItilottamAH  /  yannATyaM na vidAMcakrustau
tadapyabhininyatuH  /  / 15 /  /  sarvagAndharvasarvasvamapUrvaM vizvakArmaNam
/  prakAzayadbhyAM ca tAbhyAM na jahre kasya mAnasam  /  / 16 /  /  tasyAM puri
pravatRte kadAcinmadanotsavaH  /  nirIyuH pauracarcaryastatra saMgItapezalAH  /
/  17  /  /  carcarI niryayau tatra citrasaMbhUtayorapi  /  jagmustatraiva
tadgItAkRSTAH paurA mRgA iva  /  /  18  /  /  rAjJo vyajJapi kenApi mAtaMgAbhyAM
purIjanaH  /  gItenAkRSya sarvo'yamAtmavanmalinaH kRtaH  /  / 19 /  /
kSmApenApi purAdhyakSaH sAkSepamidamAjJapi  /  na pravezaH pradAtavyo
nagaryAmanayoH kvacit  /  / 20 /  /  tataH prabhRti tau vArANasyA dUreNa
tasthatuH  /  pravRttazcaikadA tatra kaumudIparamotsavaH  /  /  21  /   /
rAjazAsanamullaMghya lolendriyatayA ca tau  /  praviSTau nagarIM bhRMgau
gajagaMDataTImiva  /  /  22  /  /  utsavaM prekSamANau tau sarvAMgINAvaguMThanau
/  dasyuvannagarImadhye channaM channaM viceratuH  /  /  23  /  /  2010_02 191

Page #233 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 192 ## The Scattering of the Eager Rejection  Like crows with their cawing,
they sang a song of sorrow, and then, crossing the river of fear, they decided
to go. ||24|| Hearing that sweet song, the young women of the city, like bees
attracted to honey, surrounded the two elephants. ||25||  People, wanting to
know who they were, pulled at their ears and shouted, "Hey, those are the
elephants!" ||26||  The city dwellers, angry, beat them with sticks and stones,
and they, like dogs driven from their homes, hung their heads and fled. ||27||
They were attacked by the soldiers, and stumbling at every step, they somehow
managed to escape into a deep garden. ||28||  Thinking, "This is a curse, a
stain of evil birth. Our skills and beauty, like milk to a snake, have only
brought harm. ||29||  We have received kindness with our virtues, but only harm
in return. This is what happens when peace is disturbed," a Vetala arose. ||30||
"Our beauty and skills, woven into our bodies, are now a source of misery. Like
straw, they should be abandoned." ||31||  Having decided this, they, determined
to give up their lives, turned south, as if to meet death face to face. ||32||
They traveled far and saw a mountain where, perched on top, they could see the
elephants like monkeys. ||33||  Driven by their desire to see the great sage,
they climbed the mountain, and there, on that peak, they saw a mountain of
virtues. ||34||  Seeing the sage, standing on the mountaintop like a cloud in
the rainy season, their suffering vanished, and they were filled with joy.
||35||  Overwhelmed with happiness, tears of joy streamed down their faces, and
they fell at the sage's lotus feet like cows. ||36||  The sage, finishing his
meditation, asked, "Who are you, and why have you come here?" They told him
their story in detail. ||37||  He said, "Your bodies are indeed decaying, but
your evil karma, earned over countless lifetimes, is not. ||38||  If you wish to
abandon these bodies, you will receive the fruits of your actions. And that is
the ultimate penance, the cause of liberation, heaven, and all else." ||39||
Their minds cleansed by the nectar of his words, they took refuge in the sage's
presence, embracing the path of the ascetic. ||40||  Gradually, they became
students of the scriptures, for what is there that a determined mind cannot
achieve? ||41||  With rigorous penances, starting from the 68th and beyond, they
burned away their past karma. ||42||  Wandering from village to village, city to
city, they eventually reached Hastinapur. ||43||  There, in the outskirts of the
city, they practiced their austere penances. Even in a land of pleasure, those
with peaceful minds can find a place for austerity. ||44||  Another sage, known
for his fasts, appeared in the city. He entered the city, seeking alms, his body
adorned with the marks of an ascetic. ||45||  He wandered through the city,
seeking water, and was seen by the minister, Namuchi. ||46||  "This is the
elephant's child. He will spread my story," thought the minister, for the wicked
are always suspicious. ||47||  "As long as he doesn't reveal my secret to
anyone, I will let him live," he thought, and sent him away. ||48||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 192 AturapratyAkhyAnaprakIrNakam kroSTuvat kroSTuzabdena poragItena tau tataH
/  agAyatAM tAratAramalaMghyA bhavitavyatA  /  / 24 /  /  AkarNya karNamadhuraM
tadgItaM yuvanAgaraiH  /  madhuvanmakSikAbhistau mAtaMgau parivAritau  /  / 25 /
/  kAvetAviti vijJAtuM lokaiH kRSTAvaguMThanau  /  are tAveva
mAtaMgAvityAkSepeNa bhASitau  /  / 26  /  /  nAgaraiH kuTyamAnau tau
yaSTibhirloSTubhistataH  /  zvAnAviva gRhAtpuryA natagrIvau nirIyatuH  /  / 7 /
/  tau sainyazazavalokairhanyamAnau pade pade  /  skhalatpAdau kathamapi
gabhIrodyAnamIyatuH  /  / 28 /  /  tAvacintayatAmevaM dhiGnau durjAtidUSitam  /
kalAkauzalarUpAdi payo ghrAtamivAhinA  /  / 29 /  /  upakAro
guNairAstAmapakAro'yamAvayoH  /  tadidaM kriyamANAyAH zAntervetAla utthitaH  /
/ 30 /  /  kalAlAvaNyarUpANi syUtAni vapuSA saha  /  tadevAnarthasadanaM
tRNavattyajyatAM kvacit  /  / 31 /  /  iti nizcitya tau prANaparihANaparAyaNau
/  mRtyuM sAkSAdiva draSTuM celaturdakSiNAmabhi  /  / 32 /  /  tato dUraM
prayAtau tau girimekamapazyatAm  /  yatrArUDhairbhuvIkSyaMte kariNaH kiripotavat
/  / 33 /  /  bhRgupAtecchayA tAbhyAmArohadbhayAM mahAmuniH  /  dadRze parvate
tasmijaMgamo guNaparvataH  /  / 34  /  /  prAvRSeNyamivAMbhodaM muniM giriziraH
sthitam  /  dRSTvA praNaSTasaMtApaprasarau tau babhUvatuH  /  / 35  /  /  tau
prAgduHkhamivojjhantAvAnandAzrujalacchalAt  /  tatpAdapadmayo gAviva sadyo
nipetatuH  /  / 36 /  /  samApya muninA dhyAnaM kau yuvAM kimihAgatau  /  iti
pRSTau svavRttAMtaM tAvazeSamazaMsatAm  /  / 37  /  /  sa Uce bhRgupAtena
vapureva hi zIryate  /  zIryate nAzubhaM karma janmAntarazatArjitam  /  / 38  /
/  tyAjyaM vapuridaM vAM cedgRhNItaM vapuSaH phalam  /
taccApavargasvargAdikAraNaM paramaM tapaH  /  / 39  /  /
ityAdidezanAvAkyasudhAnidhautamAnasau  /  tasya pArzve
jagRhaturyatidharmamubhAvapi  /  / 40  /  /  adhIyAnau krameNAtha tau gItArthI
babhUvatuH  /  AderaNa gRhItaM hi kiM vA na syAnmanasvinAm  /  / 41 /  /
SaSTASTamaprabhRtibhistau tapobhiH sudustapaiH  /  krazayAmAsaturda prAktanaiH
karmabhiH saha  /  / 42 /  /  tato viharamANau tau grAmAdgrAmaM purAt puram  /
kadAcitpratipedAte nagaraM hastinApuram  /  / 43 /  /  tau tatra bahirudyAne
ceraturduzcaraM tapaH  /  saMbhogabhUmayo'pi syustapase zAntacetasAm  /  / 44  /
/  saMbhUtamuniranyedhurmAsakSapaNapAraNe  /  pure praviSTo bhikSArthaM
yatidharmo'GgavAniva  /  / 45 /  /  gehAdnehaM paribhrAmyannIryAsamitipUrvakam
/  sa rAjamArgApatito dRSTo namucimaMtriNA  /  / 46 /  /  mAtaMgadArakaH so'yaM
madvRttaM khyApayiSyati  /  maMtrIti cintayAmAsa pApAH sarvatra zaMkitAH  /  /
47  /  /  yAvanmanmarma kasyApi prakAzayati na hyasau  /
tAvannirvAsayAmyenamiti pattInnyayuMkta saH  /  / 48 /  /  2010_02

Page #234 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter 2: Collection of Examples  **193**  He was about to strike him, even
though he had been a benefactor in the past. For the benefit of the wicked is
like milk given to a snake. ||49||  Being beaten with clubs, he moved from his
place quickly, like a seed of a plant being uprooted by strong winds. ||50||
Even though he was being beaten with clubs, the Muni remained calm. Even though
water is not hot, it boils when heated by fire. ||51||  From his mouth, there
emerged a cloud of vapor, like a sudden rain cloud in the sky. ||52||  His
radiant energy, like a garland of flames, spread out, covering the sky like a
network of lightning. ||53||  Seeing him so enraged, the citizens, filled with
fear and curiosity, approached him to appease him. ||54||  King Sanatkumara,
knowing what was happening, also arrived there. For wherever fire arises, there
the wise should teach. ||55||  The king bowed and said, "O Lord, what is
appropriate in this situation? Even a moonstone heated in a furnace does not
burn. ||56||  "If this anger is due to the great offense committed by these
people, then what happened to the poison that arose from churning the ocean of
milk? ||57||  "If it were to happen, it would not last long. And if it were to
last long, the result would be different. Anger is like the affection of a
wicked person. What are we to say about this?" ||58||  "Nevertheless, O Lord, it
is not appropriate for a great being like you to harbor anger. You, like others,
are equal in your treatment of benefactors and malefactors." ||59||  Knowing
what had happened, Chitra also approached the Muni, trying to console him with
sweet words, like a good person trying to calm a fierce tiger. ||60||  His anger
subsided, like a raging fire being extinguished by the waters of a cloud, upon
hearing Chitra's soothing words. ||61||  Free from the darkness of intense
anger, like the moon on the fourteenth night, the great Muni regained his
composure in an instant. ||62||  After bowing and seeking forgiveness, the
people departed. Chitra, with the Muni's permission, took them away. ||63||
Filled with remorse, they wandered from house to house, realizing that even a
small amount of food can lead to great suffering. ||64||  "This body, even
though nourished by food, is fleeting. What use is this body, what use is food,
to a yogi?" ||65||  Having decided on this, they both renounced all four types
of food. ||66||  "Who has defeated the virtuous? Who protects the earth? Who am
I?" The king, curious, asked his minister, who replied, "Whoever does not honor
the virtuous is a sinner, let alone one who kills them." ||67||  The king,
having subdued the sinner like a bandit, brought him before the virtuous. ||68||
"May no one else destroy the virtuous," thought the pure-minded king. He brought
the bound sinner to the presence of the virtuous. ||69||  Bowing down, he
honored them, like the sun bowing to the earth. The king, the best among kings,
honored them both. ||70||  With their left hands holding their garments and
their faces covered, they both blessed the king with their right hands. ||71||
"Whoever has offended you, let him suffer the consequences of his actions," said
Namuchi, the wise one, to them, referring to King Sanatkumara. ||72||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 khaNDa:-2 dRSTAntasamuccayaH 193 sa tADayitumArebhe tena. puurvopkaarypi|
kSIrapANamivAhInAmupakAro'satAM yataH  /  / 49  /  /  lakuTaiH kuTyamAnaH sa
sasyabIjamivotkaTaiH  /  sthAnAttato'pacakrAma tvaritatvaritaM muniH  /  / 5 /
/  amucyamAnaH kuTTAkairniryannapi munistadA  /  zAMto'pyakupyadApo'pi tapyante
vahnitApataH  /  / 51 /  /  nirjagAma mukhAttasya bASpotpIDaM samaMtataH  /
akAlopasthitAMbhodavibhramaM bibhradaMbare  /  / 52 /  /  tejolezyollalAsAtha
jvAlApaTalamAlinI  /  taDinmaMDalasaMkIrNAmiva dyAmabhitanvatI  /  / 53 /  /
atiprakupitaM taM ca tejolezyAdharaM tataH  /  prasAdayitumAjagmuH paurAH
sabhayakautukAH  /  / 54 /  /  rAjA sanatkumAro'pi jJAtvA tatra samAyayau  /
uttiSThati yato vahnistatra vidhyApayetsudhIH  /  / 55 /  /  natvoce taM nRpaH
kiM vo yujyate bhagavannidam  /  cndraashmaakoshutpto'pi nAcimu~cati jAtucit  /
/ 56  /  /  ebhiratyaparAddhaM yatkopo'yaM bhavatA mataH  /
kSIrAbdhermathyamAnasya kAlakUTamabhUnna kim  /  / 57 /  /  na syAtsyAccecciraM
na syAcciraM cettatphale'nyathA  /  khalasneha iva krodhaH satAM tabrUmahe'tra
kim  /  / 58  /  /  tathApi nAtha nAthAmi kopaM muMcetarocitam  /  bhavAdRzAH
samadRzo hyapakAryupakAriSu  /  / 59 /  /  citro'pyatrAntare jJAtvA
saMbhUtamunimabhyagAt  /  sAMtvayituM bhadramiva dvipaM madhurabhASitaiH  /  /
60 /  /  tasya kopa upazAmyaccitravAkyaiH zrutAnugaiH  /
payovAhapayaHpUraigireriva davAnalaH  /  / 61 /  /  tIvrakopatamomuktaH zazAMka
iva pArvaNaH  /  kSaNAdAsAdayAmAsa prasAdaM sa mahAmuniH  /  / 62  /  /
vaMditvA kSamayitvA ca lokastasmAnyavartata  /  saMbhUtazcitramuninA
tadudhAnamanIyata  /  / 63 /  /  pazcAttApaM cakratustau paryaTadbhirgRhe gRhe
/  AhAramAtrakakRte prApyate vyasanaM mahat  /  / 64 /  /  zarIraM gatvaramidaM
hyAhAreNApi poSitam  /  kimanena zarIreNa kiM vAhAreNa yoginAm  /  / 65  /  /
cetaseti vinizcitya kRtasaMlekhanau purA  /  ubhau caturvidhAhArapratyAkhyAnaM
pracakratuH  /  / 66 /  /  kaH parAbhUtavAn sAdhuM vasudhAM pAti mayyapi  /  iti
jijJAsato rAjJo maMtrI vyajJapi kenacit  /  / 67  /  /  ardhyAnnArcati yaH so'pi
pApaH kimuta haMti yaH  /  ityAnAyayadurvIzo dasyuvatsaMyamayya tam  /  / 68  /
/  anyo'pi sAdhuvidhvaMsaM mA vidhAditi zuddhadhIH  /  taM baddhaM puramadhyena
so'naiSItsAdhusaMnidhau  /  / 69 /  /  namannupaziroratnabhAniraMbhomayImiva  /
kurvanurvI sa urvIzapuMgavastAvavandata  /  / 70 /  /
savyapANigRhItAsyavastrikApihitAnanau  /  uddakSiNakarau tau tamAzazaMsaturAziSA
/  / 71 /  /  yo vo'parAddhavAn so'stu svakarmaphalabhAjanam  /  rAjJA
sanatkumAraNetyadarzi namucistayoH  /  / 72 /  /  amoci namuciH prAptaH
paMcatvocitabhUmikAm  /  sanatkumAratastAbhyAmurago garuDAdiva  /  / 73 /  /
2010_02

Page #235 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter 194: The Scattering of the Rejection of the Cause  **Verse 74:** He
should be banished from the city like a Chandala among Chandalas. Even if he is
to be killed, he should be released by the king, for the Guru's command is to be
respected.  **Verse 75:** She was attended by sixty-four thousand co-wives. She
went to pay homage to the Jewel of Women and the Wheel-Bearer, with great joy.
**Verse 76:** The tears that fell from her eyes, as she bowed at the lotus feet
of the Muni, fell upon the earth like the moon.  **Verse 77:** The Muni felt the
touch of her tears and was immediately filled with a thrill. For Cupid is always
seeking an opportunity.  **Verse 78:** Then, having informed the queen in the
inner palace, they went out. The Muni, overcome with passion, said, "This is the
cause."  **Verse 79:** "If the fruit of my difficult austerities exists, then in
my next birth I will be the husband of the Jewel of Women."  **Verse 80:** "Oh,
चित्र, what do you desire from the fruit of these liberating austerities? With
what precious jewel will you adorn the pedestal of your feet?"  **Verse 81:**
"This cause is born of delusion. Let it be abandoned now. Those like you are not
deceived by false and evil deeds."  **Verse 82:** Even though he was being
dissuaded by चित्र, the Muni still said, "Oh, the desire for the object is
stronger than the cause."  **Verse 83:** They both, having been freed from the
cycle of birth and death, attained the end of their karmas. They were born in
the beautiful celestial palace of Saudharma, as gods.  ## Chapter 23: The Story
of Draupadi from the Pandava Charitra, as told in the Nidana Dhyana  **Verse
1:** Then, seizing the opportunity, Arjuna asked the Muni at the end of his
discourse, "Why are the five Pandavas cursed?"  **Verse 2:** The Muni replied,
"They are cursed by the cause they acquired in their previous birth. This has
been determined by my investigation."  **Verse 3:** "In the ancient city of
Champa, there were three earth-deities, brothers named Soma Deva, Soma Bhuti,
and Soma Datta."  **Verse 4:** "They had three wives, born from love, named Naga
Shri, Bhut Shri, and Yaksha Shri."  **Verse 5:** "They lived together in
harmony, with the understanding that they would share their wives in turn, all
living in the same house."  **Verse 6:** "When it was Naga Shri's turn to be
with her husband, she prepared a variety of dishes, full of different flavors."
**Verse 7:** "She made a bitter, gourd-like dish, seasoned with many
ingredients. She was unaware that it was poisonous, and it was left on the stove
for a long time."  **Verse 8:** "She did not throw it away, even though it was
made with many expensive ingredients, out of stinginess. She simply hid it in a
secluded place."  **Verse 9:** "She then happily fed her husband and brothers-
in-law with various other delicious dishes. They soon left."  **Verse 10:** "At
that time, a great sage named Dharma Ghosha lived in the royal garden called
Subhumi Bhaga."  **Verse 11:** "His disciple, Dharma Ruchi, was observing a fast
for a month. He went to Naga Shri, like a Kirata to a Kalpa tree."  **Verse 12

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 194 AturapratyAkhyAnaprakIrNakam nirvAsya karmacaMDAlacaMDAla iva pattanAt  /
vadhyo'pyamoci rAjJA sa mAnyaM hI guruzAsanam  /  / 74  /  /
sapatnIbhizcatuHSaSTisahasraH parivAritA  /  vaMdituM tau sunaMdAgAt
strIratnamatha cakriNaH  /  / 75 /  /  sA saMbhUtamuneH pAdapadmayorkhalitAlakA
/  papAtAsyena kurvANA bhuvamindumatImiva  /  / 76 /  /  tasyAzcAlakasaMsparza
saMbhUtamuniranvabhUt  /  romAMcitazca sadyo'bhUcchalAnveSI hi manmathaH  /  / 7
/  /  atha sAntaHpure rAjJi tAvanujJApya jagmuSi  /  rAgAbhibhUtaH saMbhUto
nidAnamiti nirmame  /  / 78  /  /  duSkarasya madIyasya yadyasti tapasaH phalam
/  tataH strIratnapatirahaM bhUyAsaM bhAvijanmani  /  / 79 /  /  citro'pyUce
kAMkSasIdaM mokSadAttapasaH phalam  /  mauliyogyena ratnena pAdapIThaM karoSi
kam  /  / 80  /  /  mohAtkRtaM tannidAnamidAnImapi mucyatAm  /
mithyAduSkRtamasyAstu muhyaMti na bhavAdRzAH  /  / 81 /  /  evaM nivAryamANo'pi
saMbhUtazcitrasAdhunA  /  nidAnaM nAmucadaho viSayecchA balIyasI  /  / 82 /  /
niyU~DhAnazanau tau tu prAptAyuH karmasaMkSayau  /  saudharma samajAyetAM vimAne
sundare surau  /  / 83 /  /  [zrI triSaSTizalAkA0 parva-6 zloka-1 taH 102] 23.
nidAnadhyAne zrIpANDavacaritroktaM draupadIkathAnakam  /  /  athAvasaramAsAdya,
dezanAnte munIzvaram  /  kiM dhavAH paJca pAJcAlyA ?, ityapRcchajjanArdanaH  /
/ 1 /  /  so'bravIdetayA pUrvajanmopAttanidAnayA  /  vRtAH paJca dhavAstadbhoH!,
kRtaM mImAMsayA'nayA  /  / 2 /  /  purA hi puri campAyAM, bhUmidevAstrayo'bhavan
/  somadeva-somabhUti-somadattAH sahodarAH  /  / 3 /  /  teSAmAsan kramAttisraH,
premajanmabhuvaH priyAH  /  nAgazrIratha bhUtazrIryakSazrIzceti nAmataH  /  / 4
/  /  mithaH snigdhatayA teSAmiyamAsIvyavasthitiH  /  yat paryAyeNa bhoktavyaM,
sarvairekasya vezmani  /  / 5 /  /  atha kramAt samAyAte, bhuktivArakavAsare  /
nAgazrIrAzritAnekarasAM rasavartI vyadhAt  /  / 6 /  /  kaTutumbIphalaM
tasyAmanekadravyasaMskRtam  /  apAkSIdiyamajJAsIt, pAkAnte ca kathaMcana  /  / 7
/  /  nAnAvastuvyayodbhUtaM, kArpaNyena na sA'tyajat  /  kevalaM kvacidekAnte,
nidhAya tadadhArayat  /  / 8 /  /  tadanyairvividhaibhojyaiH, svAdubhiH
patidevarAn  /  bhojayAmAsa sA prItA, kSaNAt te'pi bahiryayuH  /  / 9 /  /  tadA
subhUmibhAgAkhye, purodyAne mahAmanAH  /  dharmaghoSAbhidha; sUriqhanavAn
samavAsarat  /  / 10 /  /  tasya dharmaruciH ziSyo, mAsakSapaNapAraNe  /
kirAtyA iva kalpadruhaM nAgazriyo yayau  /  / 11 /  /  vRthA mA bhUdidaM
tAvadbhavedeSo'pi tossitH| ityAlocya tayA tasmai, tattumbIvyaJjanaM dade  /  /
12 /  /  apUrvamiti saMcintya, tadgrahAnugrahecchayA  /  asau vasatimAgatya,
gurUNAM tadadarzayat  /  / 13 /  /  2010_02

Page #236 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Chapter 2: Collection of Examples  They, smelling that fragrance, said this out
of compassion, etc. "If you eat this, dear one, you will immediately die."
||14||  "On a clean platform, place the mango, purify it somewhere." With this
command from his teacher, he went outside the city. ||15||  When a drop fell
from it, somehow, there, from a vessel, the sage saw ants dying, stuck to it.
||16||  He thought, "If this drop, even though small, is a killer of living
beings, then what will all of it do?" ||17||  "It is better for me to die alone,
than for millions of beings to die." Thinking this, with his hair standing on
end, he himself ate it. ||18||  Considering the direct perception of the
Siddhas, with a mind filled with the sweetness of meditation, he, having
attained the fulfillment of all purposes, gave up his life. ||19||  To know why
there is delay from the desire for external dharma, the teacher, Shri
Dharmaghosha, then instructed the other sages. ||20||  Seeing that one outside,
they, taking the dust from his feet, etc., reported everything to their teacher.
||21||  Knowing, as it was, by the use of supra-sensory knowledge, they also
narrated the story of Nagashri to all the sages. ||22||  Knowing somehow,
people, by word of mouth, told the story of the evil deeds of Somadeva and other
Brahmanas. ||23||  The Brahmanas, angered by lust, drove her out of her house.
Being condemned by the people, she wandered everywhere. ||24||  She suffered
from sixteen diseases, such as cough, shortness of breath, fever, tremors,
leprosy, etc., and experienced the torment of hell right here. ||25||  Tormented
by hunger, thirst, and pain, condemned everywhere, she wandered in misery, and
after death, she reached the sixth hell. ||26||  From there, she was born as a
fish, and went to the seventh hell. Again, attaining the form of a fish, she
went to that very hell. ||27||  Thus, she experienced all the hells twice. She
was born in various forms, such as earth, etc., and was greatly tormented.
||28||  Then, due to the lightness of her karma, she was born as a beautiful
girl in Champa. She was the daughter of Sagardatta, and was named Subhadra.
||29||  There, Jinadatta was her son, and Sagara was her brother. Her father,
seeing the beautiful girl in his house, ||30||  thinking, "She is suitable for
my son," went to her father with his relatives and asked for her. ||31||  He
said, "She is very dear to me, I cannot live without her. Let her be my
daughter-in-law, Sagara is your son." ||32||  "I will consult my daughter," said
Jinadatta and went home. He remained silent, accepting the proposal of Sagara.
||33||  Her father thought, "What is not forbidden is permitted," and agreed to
his son's marriage to Sagardatta. ||34||  A wonderful wedding ceremony took
place. They spent the night together in the bridal chamber. ||35||  Due to her
past karma, Sagara, touching her, felt as if he was touching burning coals. He
stayed there for a while. ||36||  When she was fast asleep, he left and went
home. When she woke up from sleep, she cried loudly, not seeing her beloved.
||37||  Then, Subhadra, instructed

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 khaNDa:-2 dRSTAntasamuccayaH te'pi tadgandhamAghrAya, vAtsalyAdidamUcire  /
yadIdaM bhokSyase vatsa !, sadyo mRtyumavApsyasi  /  / 14  /  /  vizuddhe
sthaNDile maGgha, tat pariSThApaya kvacit  /  ityAdezAdguroH so'pi, jagAma
nagarAdvahiH  /  / 15 /  /  bindau nipatite tasya, kathaMcit tatra pAtrataH  /
saktAH sa muniradrAkSInmiyamANAH pipIlikAH  /  / 16 /  /  dadhyau ca
baddhasaMvego, bindurapyasya yadyasau  /  prANinAmiyatAM hantA, tatsarvaM kiM
kariSyati ?  /  / 17  /  /  varamekasya me mRtyuH, koTizo na tu dehinAm  /
ityAlocya saromAJcastadasau bubhuje svayam  /  / 18 /  /
siddhapratyakSamAlocya, samAdhimadhuraM manaH  /  dadhat
sarvArthasiddhe'gAnmuniH prANAn vihAya saH  /  / 19 /  /  bahirdharmaruceH
kasmAdvilamba ? iti veditum  /  guruH zrIdharmaghoSo'tha, nidideza parAn munIn
/  / 20 /  /  taM parAsuM bahirvIkSya, tadrajoharaNAdikam  /  AdAya gurupAdAnAM,
te'pi sarvaM nyavedayan  /  / 21 /  /  vijJAyAtIndriyajJAnopayogena yathAsthitam
/  sarva munInAM nAgazrIvRttAntaM te'pyacIkathan  /  / 22 /  /  jJAtvA
kathaMcillokAnAM, vAkparamparayA janAH  /  somadevAdiviprANAM, tasyA duzceSTitaM
jaguH  /  / 23 /  /  kAmamAkruzya viprAste, tAM gRhAniravAsayan  /
lokairdhikriyamANA ca, sA'pi babhrAma sarvataH  /  / 24  /  /  kAsa-zvAsa-
jvarotkampakuSThAdyaiH krAntavigrahA  /  rogaiH SoDazabhilebhe, sA'traiva
narakavyathAm  /  / 25  /  /  kSutpipAsArditA lokairnindyamAnA pade pade  /
duHkhaM bhramantI sA mRtvA, SaSThaM narakamAsadat  /  / 26  /  /  tasmAdutpadya
mIneSu, saptamaM narakaM yayau  /  punarmInatvamAsAdya, tasminneva jagAma sA  /
/ 27 /  /  dviddhirevaM siSeve'sau, narakAn sakalAnapi  /  pRthvIkAyAdiSUtpede,
taduddhattA ca bhUrizaH  /  / 28  /  /  campAyAmatha sA karmalAghavAt sukumArikA
/  sutA sAgaradattasya, subhadrAkukSibhUrabhUt  /  / 29 /  /
jinadattAtmajastatra, bhadrAjazcAsti sAgaraH  /  vezmasthAM
tatpitA'nyedhurdadarza sukumArikAm  /  / 30  /  /  tanayasya madIyasya,
yogyeyamiti cintayan  /  saha bandhubhirabhyetya, pitaraM tAmayAcata  /  / 31 /
/  so'pyUce'tipriyA me'sau, na bhavAmyanayA vinA  /  mamAstu gRhajAmAtA,
sAgarastat tavAtmajaH  /  / 32 /  /  sutamAlocayAmIti, jinadatto'gamad gRham  /
sAgarasya tadAkhyaJca, maunamAlambya sa sthitaH  /  / 33 /  /  aniSiddhaM
hyanumatamiti nyAyena tatpitA  /  mene sAgaradattAya, gRhajAmAtaraM sutam  /  /
34 /  /  AzcaryakRttayorjajJe, pANigrahamahotsavaH  /  naktaM zizriyatustau ca,
palyata vAsavezmani  /  / 35  /  /  pUrvakarmavazAttasyAH, sparzamaGgArasodaram
/  AsAdya sAgarastasthau, kSaNaM tatra kathaMcana  /  / 36 /  /  tasyAM
sukhaprasuptAyAM, sa praNazya gRhaM yayau  /  nidrAtyaye'rudat kAntamapazyantI
ca sA bhRzam  /  / 37  /  /  athAdiSTA tayordantazaucahetoH subhadrayA  /
prAtaraikSiSTa tAM ceTI, rudantIM vallabhojjhitAm  /  / 38  /  /  2010_02

Page #237 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter 196: The Scattering of the Eager Rejection  She went and told
Subhadra, who immediately informed her beloved. Her father himself also
reproached his son-in-law.   He said to his son, "My dear, this is not right
what you have done. Go back now, do not disobey my words."  "Even if the ocean
were to be set on fire, I would rather jump into it," he said, "but I will never
go to her house, father."  Sagaradatta heard this from within his house. He went
home and told the disheartened girl, "My dear, Sagar has completely renounced
you. Do not be sad, another husband will be found for you."  She saw a
mendicant, wearing only a loincloth, surrounded by flies, standing by the
window.   She called him, bathed him with fragrant water, anointed him with
sandalwood, and dressed him in divine garments.   She said, "This girl, my
daughter, has been given to you. Enjoy my prosperous Lakshmi, live happily with
her."  He was told this and entered the house with her at night. He considered
the touch of her body like the heat of fire to himself.   He suddenly got up,
took his own clothes, and fled. Seeing her weeping, her father said, "My dear,
this is the result of your previous actions, not any other reason. Now, stay
here in my house, with a peaceful mind, and accept the gifts given to you."  She
stayed there, devoted to Dharma. The next day, some cowherdesses came to her
house.   She received them with pure food and drink, and with devotion, she
listened to Dharma from their mouths. She renounced the world and took vows.
She performed austerities, such as the fourth, sixth, and eighth, and lived with
the Aryikas.   One day, the Aryikas said to her, "We will build a shelter for
you. There is a beautiful garden with a good location, bathed in sunlight."  She
replied to them, "It is not appropriate for a virtuous woman to have a shelter
outside the house."  Ignoring their words, she went into the forest. As she
began to expose herself to the sun, she saw a woman named Devadatta, a
courtesan, who had come there.   Seeing her, she thought, "This is the cause. I
will become like the wife of the five senses through this austerity."  She
thought, "I will maintain bodily purity and other virtues, moment by moment. The
Aryikas will try to stop me, but I will not heed them."  She thought, "I was
once highly respected by the Aryikas. Now they despise me, a mendicant."
Thinking this, she left and lived in a different place. She observed her vows
for a long time, living freely.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 196 AturapratyAkhyAnaprakIrNakam sA gatvA''khyat subhadrAyai, sA'pi svapreyase
kSaNAt  /  pitureSo'pi jAmAtu-rupAlambhaM dadau svayam  /  / 39  /  /  so'pyAha
tanayaM vatsa !, na yuktaM vidadhe tvayA  /  gacchAdhunA'pi tat tatra, mA'nyathA
madvacaH kRthAH  /  / 40  /  /  sAgaro'pyUcivAnagnau, varaM jhampAM tanomyaham
/  na punastAta ! gantAsmi, vezma tasyAH kadAcana  /  / 41 /  /  idaM
sAgaradatto'pi, tatkuDyAntarito'zRNot  /  jagAda ca gRhaM gatvA, nirAzaH
sukumArikAm  /  / 42 /  /  kathaMcit sarvathA vatse !, viraktaH sAgarastvayi  /
tanmA khidyasva ko'pyanyaH, patistava vidhAsyate  /  / 43 /  /
kaupInAmbaramAtraikakaparaM makSikAvRtam  /  bhikSukaM kaMcidadrAkSIt, sa
gavAkSasthito'nyadA  /  / 44  /  /  AhUya tena so'mbhobhiH, snapayitvA
sugandhibhiH  /  vilipya candanairdivyavAsAMsi paridhApya ca  /  / 45 /  /  Uce
tubhyaM mayA dattA, putrIyaM sukumArikA  /  _madIyAM vilasan lakSmI, sukhamAssva
sahAnayA  /  / 46 /  /  (yugmam) ityuktaH so'vizadvAsavezma sAkaM tayA nizi  /
mene ca tadvapuHzleSamagniploSamivAtmanaH  /  / 47  /  /  sahasotthAya veSaM
svamAdAya sa palAyitaH  /  tathaiva rudatIM tAM ca, vilokya janako'bravIt  /  /
48 /  /  so'yaM prAkkarmaNAM vatse!, vipAko'nyanna kAraNam  /  tadAssva dadatI
dAnaM, zAntAtmA mama vezmani  /  / 49 /  /  tathaiva kurvatI tasthau, sA
dharmaMkaparAyaNA  /  prApustadgahamanyedyuH, sAdhvyo gopAlikA iti  /  / 50  /
/  zuddhairazanapAnAdyaiH, sA bhaktyA pratilAbhya ca  /
tanmukhAddharmamAkarNya, viraktA vratamagrahIt  /  / 51 /  /  tapo'tha kurvatI
nityaM, turyaSaSThASTamAdikam  /  AryikAbhiH sahaitAbhirvihAramakarodiyam  /  /
52 /  /  AryAstAH sA kadA'pyUce, tanomyAtApanAmaham  /  subhUmibhAgodyAnasthA,
dattadRSTi vivasvati  /  / 53 /  /  sA pratyabhidadhe tAbhiriti ha smAgamoktayaH
/  AtApanA na sAdhvInAM, kalpate vasaterbahiH  /  / 54  /  /  anAkarNya ca
tadvAcaM, vane tasminnupetya sA  /  yAvadArabhate kSiptacakSurAtApanAM ravau  /
/ 55  /  /  tAvadutsaGgamekasya, zrayantImaparasya tu  /  aGkenyastAGghimanyena,
badhyamAnAvataMsakAm  /  / 56 /  /  pareNa vidhRtacchatrAM, vIjitAmitareNa ca  /
gaNikAmAgatAM tatra, devadattAM dadarza sA  /  / 57 /  /  tAM
vIkSyApUrNabhogecchA, nidAnamiti sA'karot  /  (tribhirvizeSakam) bhaveyaM
tapasA'nena, paJcapreyasyasAviva  /  / 58 /  /  tanvatI dehazaucAdyamabhyukSantI
kSaNe kSaNe  /  vAryamANeyamAryAbhirmanasIdamadhArayat  /  / 59 /  /  purA
bahumatA'bhUvamAryikANAmagAriNI  /  tiraskurvanti mAmetA, bhikSukImadhunA punaH
/  / 60 /  /  ityAlocya vinirgatya, vibhinnavasatisthitA  /  vrataM sA
pAlayAmAsa, ciraM svacchandavartinI  /  / 61  /  /  2010_02

Page #238 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Chapter:-2 Collection of Examples 197 Eight months passed, without any
discussion, she remained.  She was like a nine-palas lifespan, in the noble
dharma, she was like a goddess, a queen. ||62|| She was born in Krishna lineage,
from the ancient lineage.  Five husbands were born to her, what is the wonder in
this? ||63|| . [From Sri Pandavacharitra, verses 324 to 386] 24. The detailed
account of Marudevi, the mother, as mentioned in the Trishatishalaka
Purushacharitra, is a meditation on love. Even though she was humble, the king
of the Bharatas was humble.  He came to pay his respects to Marudevi in the
morning. ||1||  With tears of sorrow caused by the separation from her son, her
lotus eyes were filled with blue. ||2|| The eldest grandson bowed to her, "O
Goddess! I bow to your lotus feet."  He himself declared this, Bharata bowed to
her. ||3|| (couplet) Marudevi, the mistress, also gave her blessings to Bharata.
She spoke with a heart full of sorrow, like a pure mountain. ||4||  "I, the
earth, the people, the Lakshmi, leaving you like a blade of grass, I went alone,
O Marudevi, my son! ||5||  Where is the shade of the sun and moon, the umbrella,
on his head?  Where is the heat of the sun, which burns the whole body? ||6||
Where are the chariots with smooth movement, the chariots with elephants, etc.?
Where is the walking of the son, which is suitable for a traveler? ||7||  Where
are the beautiful chamaras, thrown by the wives of the guards?  Where is the
trouble caused by mosquitoes and other insects to my son now? ||8||  Where is
the food and drink, brought by the gods, which he used to enjoy?  Where is the
food of alms, or his food, now? ||9||  Where is the great throne, adorned with
jewels, his seat?  Where is the freedom from a seat, like a swordsman, for my
son now? ||10||  Where is the protection of the city, protected by the guards
and the self-protection?  Where is the son's dwelling, in the forest, where
lions, tigers, and dogs roam? ||11||  Where is the singing of the divine women,
the nectar for the ears?  Where are the sounds of the mad drums, the ear-
piercing sounds, for the son? ||12||  Alas! How painful! How painful, that my
son is suffering in penance.  Like a lotus petal, he is soft, he endures the
flow of water. ||13||  He endures the hardship of the snowfall in the Himalayas.
He goes continuously, like a jasmine creeper in the forest. ||14||  He
experiences the intense heat of the sun's rays.  He is like a tree in the
desert. ||15||  Thus, at all times, he is a forest dweller, without shelter.  He
is alone, like a common man, my son is a source of sorrow for me. ||16||  Seeing
her son, who is overwhelmed with sorrow, she speaks, as if to her own eyes.  She
always says, "Alas! I am also suffering because of you." ||17||  Thus, the
goddess, Marudevi, overwhelmed with sorrow, with folded hands.  The king of the
earth, the lord of the earth, spoke to her. ||18||  "O Goddess! You are the
mother of the one who is like the diamond

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 khaNDa:-2 dRSTAntasamuccayaH 197 mAsAn saMlekhanAmaSTau, kRtvA'nAlocya
saMsthitA  /  navapalyopamAyuSkA, saudharme devyabhUdiyam  /  / 62  /  /
cyutA'bhavacca kRSNeyaM, prAcInAJca nidAnataH  /  bhartAro jajJire'muSyAH,
paJcaite ko'tra vismayaH ?  /  / 63  /  /  . [zrI pANDavacaritre zloka-324 taH
386] 24. snehadhyAne zrItriSaSTizalAkApuruSacaritroktaH marudevImAtRvistAraH  /
ito'pi ca vinItAyAM, vinIto bharatezvaraH  /  AjagAma namaskartuM, marudevAM
divAmukhe  /  / 1 /  /  tanUjavirahodbhUtairazrAntairasravAribhiH  /
jAtanIlikayA luptalocanAbjAM pitAmahIm  /  / 2 /  /  jyeSThaH pautro namatyeSa,
devi ! tvatpAdapaGkaje  /  svayaM vijJapayannevaM, bharataH praNanAma tAm  /  /
3 /  /  (yugmam) svAminI marudevA'pi, bharatAyA'ziSaM dadau  /  hRdyamAntIM
zucamiva, giramityujjagAra ca  /  / 4 /  /  mAM tvAM mahIM prajAM lakSmI, vihAya
tRNavat tadA  /  ekAkI gatavAn vatso, durmarA marudevyaho !  /  / 5 /  /
sUnozcandrAtapacchAyamAtapatraM kva mUrddhani ?  /  sarvAGgasantApakaraH,
kvedAnIM tapanAtapaH ?  /  / 6 /  /  salIlagatibhiryAnairyAnaM hastyAdibhiH kva
tat ?  /  vatsasya pAdacAritvaM, vedAnIM pathikocitam ?  /  / 7 /  /  kva tad
vAravadhUkSiptacArucAmaravIjanam ?  /  matsUnoH kvA'dhunA
daMzamazakAdyairupadravaH ?  /  / 8 /  /  kka tad devasamAnItadivyAhAropajIvanam
?  /  kva bhikSAbhojanaM tasyA'bhojanaM vA'pi samprati ?  /  / 9 /  /
ratnasiMhAsanotsaGge, mahaddheH kva tadAsanam ?  /  matsUnoH khaDgina iva, kva
nirAsanatA'dhunA ?  /  / 10 /  /  ArakSarAtmarakSaizca, rakSite va pure sthitiH
?  /  sUnoH kva vAsaH siMhAhiduHzvApadapade vane ?  /  / 11 /  /  kva tad
divyAGganAgItaM, karNAmRtarasAyanam ? sUnoH kvonmattapheruNDaphetkArAH
karNasUcayaH  /  / 12 /  /  aho ! kaSTamaho ! kaSTaM, yanme sUnustapAtyaye  /
padmakhaNDa iva mRduH, sahate vArividravam  /  / 13 /  /  himattau
himasampAtasaMklezavivazAM dazAm  /  araNye mAlatIstamba, iva yAti nirantaram  /
/ 14 /  /  uSNatvuSNakiraNakiraNairatidAruNaiH  /  santApaM cA'nubhavati,
stamberama ivA'Tikam  /  / 15 /  /  tadevaM sarvakAleSu, vanevAsI nirAzrayaH  /
pRthagjana ivaikAkI, vatso me duHkhabhAjanam  /  / 16 /  /  tattaduHkhAkulaM
vatsaM, pazyantyagre dRzoriva  /  vadantI nityamapyevaM, hA ! tvAmapi dunomyaham
/  / 17 /  /  iti duHkhAkulAM devIM, marudevImudaJjaliH  /
vAcA'vocanavasudhAsadhrIcyA vasudhAdhavaH  /  / 18 /  /
sthairyAdrervajrasArasya, mahAsattvaziromaNeH  /  tAtasya jananI bhUtvA, kimevaM
devi ! tAmyasi ?  /  / 19 /  /  tAtastarItuM sahasA, saMsArAmbhodhimudyataH  /
kaNThabaddhazilAprAyAn, sthAne tatyAja naH prabhuH  /  / 20 /  /  2010_02

Page #239 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 198 ## The Scattering of the Eager Refusal  While wandering in the forest,
the Lord, even though affected by the curse, did not intend to cause any harm,
as if made of stone. ||21||  The unbearable hardships of hunger, thirst, and
scorching heat, are indeed the helpers of the father, the destroyer of karma.
||22||  If you do not believe my words, you will believe them nonetheless. The
father will not be long in coming, with the news of the festival of the Kevala.
||23||  Meanwhile, the king, with a cane in his hand, was approached by two men
named Yamaka and Shamaka. ||24||  Prostrating himself, Yamaka informed the Lord
of Bharata: "By good fortune, today you are blessed with this auspicious news."
||25||  "In the ancient city of Purimatala, in the forest of Shakatana, the
Kevala was born at the beginning of the age." ||26||  Prostrating himself,
Shamaka also announced in a loud voice: "Now, in the armory, the jewel of the
wheel has been born." ||27||  The king pondered for a moment, "To whom should I
offer the first worship of this newly born Kevala, who is also the wheel?"
||28||  "Where is the giver of universal peace, and where is the wheel, the
destroyer of life?" Reflecting thus, he decided to worship his own family first.
||29||  After giving them appropriate and abundant gifts, the king dismissed
them and addressed Marudevi: "O Goddess, you are always the embodiment of
compassion. My son is a solitary seeker of alms, and he is the object of my
sorrow." ||30||  "He who is the lord of the three worlds, is now the son of his
own son. See his prosperity," he said, and made her mount the elephant. ||31||
Adorned with gold, diamonds, and rubies, with horses, elephants, chariots, and
statues of beauty, he set out. ||33||  With armies, and with arches formed by
the masses of jewels and ornaments, the king, even from a distance, saw the
jeweled banner ahead. ||34||  He then addressed Marudevi: "O Goddess, the Lord's
procession is made by the gods. It is heard that the gods are celebrating the
birth of the Lord's lotus feet." ||35||  "The deep, sweet, divine sound of the
drums, like a bard's music, fills the heart with joy." ||37||  "The sound of the
anklets of the celestial beings, who are worshipping the Lord's lotus feet, is
like the sound of a forest of trees, and it is a guest in our ears." ||38||
"The roar of the celestial beings, who are overjoyed at the sight of the Lord,
is like the thunder of the clouds." ||39||  "This is the song of the Gandharvas,
purified by the nectar of the Lord's words. Today, we will enjoy the nectar of
the Lord's words, like the nectar of flowers." ||40||  Hearing this, Marudevi
was overwhelmed with joy, and her eyes, like blue lotuses, were filled with
tears of happiness. ||41||  She saw the fortune of the Tirthankara, which was
overflowing with the love of her son. Seeing this, she became absorbed in it.
||42||  She ascended the chariot, and in an unprecedented sequence of actions,
her eight karmas were destroyed, and she attained the knowledge of the Kevala.
||43||  Riding on the back of an elephant, Marudevi, the queen, attained the

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 198 AturapratyAkhyAnaprakIrNakam vane viharato bhartuH, prabhAvAcchApadA api  /
nopadravaM kartumalaM, pASANaghaTitA iva  /  / 21 /  /  kSutpipAsAtapaprAyA,
duHsahA ye parISahAH  /  sahAyAH khalu tAtasyaM, te karmadveSisUdane  /  / 22 /
/  na cet pratyeSi madvAcA, pratyeSyasi tathA'pi hi  /  tAtasya na
cirAjjAtakevalotsavavArttayA  /  / 23 /  /  atrAntare mahIbhartuopitau
vetrapANinA  /  nAmnA yamaka-zamako, puruSAvabhyupeyatuH  /  / 24  /  /
praNamya yamakastatra, bharatezaM vyajijJapat  /  diSTyA'dya vardhase devA'nayA
kalyANavArttayA  /  / 25 /  /  pure purimatAlAkhye, kAnane zakaTAnane  /
yugAdinAthapAdAnAmudapadyata kevalam  /  / 26  /  /  praNamya
zamako'pyuccaiHsvaramevaM vyajijJapat  /  idAnImAyudhAgAre, cakraratnamajAyata
/  / 27 /  /  utpannakevalastAta, itazcakramito'bhavat  /  Adau karomi
kasyA'rcAmiti dadhyau kSaNaM nRpaH  /  / 28 /  /  kva vizvAbhayadastAtaH ?, kva
cakraM prANighAtakam ?  /  vimRzyeti svAmipUjAhetoH svAnAdideza saH  /  / 29 /
/  yathocitamatho dattvA, puSkalaM pAritoSikam  /  visasarja narendrastau,
marudevAmuvAca ca  /  / 30 /  /  devi ! tvaM sarvadA'pIdamAdikSaH karuNAkSaram
/  bhikSAhAro yadekAkI, vatso me duHkhabhAjanam  /  / 31 /  /
trailokyasvAmitAbhAjaH, svasUnossasya samprati  /  pazya
sampadamityuktvA''rohayAmAsa tAM gaje  /  / 32 /  /
suvarNavajramANikyabhUSaNaisturagairgajaiH  /  pattibhiH
syandanairmUrttazrImayaiH so'calat tataH  /  / 33 /  /
sainyairbhUSaNabhAHpuJjakRtajaGgamatoraNaiH  /  gacchan dUrAdapi nRpo'pazyad
ratnadhvajaM puraH  /  / 34 /  /  marudevAmathA'vAdId, bharataH parato hRdaH  /
prabhoH samasaraNaM, devi ! devairvinirmitam  /  / 35  /  /  ayaM
jayajayArAvatumulasridivaukasAm  /  zrUyate tAtapAdAbjasevotsavamupeyuSAm  /  /
36  /  /  gambhIramadhuraM mAtardivyayaM dundubhirnadan  /  tanoti hRdayAnandaM,
vaitAlika iva prabhoH  /  / 37  /  /  svAmipAdAbjavandAruvRndArakavimAnabhUH  /
anaNuH kiGkiNInAdaH, zravaNAtithireSa naH  /  / 38  /  /  svAmidarzanahaSTAnAM,
kSveDAnAdo divaukasAm  /  stanitaM stanayitnUnAmivaiSa zrUyate divi  /  / 39  /
/  gandharvANAmiyaM gItiAmarAgapavitritA  /  svAmivAco bhujiSyeva,
puSpatyAnandamadya naH  /  / 40 /  /  zRNvatyAstat tato devyA, marudevyA
vyalIyata  /  AnandAzrupayaHpUraiH, paGkavannIlikA dRzoH  /  / 41 /  /
sA'pazyat tIrthakRllakSmI, sUnoratizayAnvitAm  /  tasyAstadarzanAnandAt,
tanmayatvamajAyata  /  / 42 /  /  sA''ruhya kSapakazreNimapUrvakaraNakramAt  /
kSINASTakarmA yugapat, kevalajJAnamAsadat  /  / 43 /  /  kariskandhAdhirUDhava,
svAminI marudevyatha  /  antakRtkevalitvena, prapede padamavyayam  /  / 44  /  /
[zrI triSaSTi0 parva-1 zloka-488 taH 531] 2010_02

Page #240 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Chapter:-2 Collection of Examples 199 24. In the Sri Parivishta Parva, the
lament of Sunanda's affection for Vajra. And Vajra was there, gradually becoming
a Trihayana. At that time, the Sadhus like Dhanagiri etc. came there. ||1||
Dhanagiri will come, I will take my son. Thinking thus, Sunanda rejoiced at
their arrival. ||2|| Sunanda also requested her son from the great sages. They
did not agree and replied as follows. ||3|| This child was given to us by you
without being asked, O beautiful one. Who wants to take back what has been given
like vomit? ||4|| Ownership is lost in things given for play. Do not ask for
your son, he has been made another's by you. ||5|| Thus, both sides were arguing
loudly. The people said that the king would decide this dispute. ||6|| Then
Sunanda, along with the people, went to the king's court. The monks also went
with the assembly. ||7|| Sunanda sat on the left of the king, and the honorable
assembly sat in their respective places on the right. ||8|| After hearing the
arguments of both sides, the king replied. The child should belong to the one
who called him. ||9|| Both parties agreed to this decision. Then the question
arose, who should call the son first? ||10|| The citizens said that the child
should be called by the woman who raised him. The love that has been nurtured
for a long time cannot be violated. ||11|| The mother should call him first,
this is a difficult task. A woman is also compassionate, this is not otherwise.
||12|| Then Sunanda showed the child many toys and various kinds of food. ||13||
These are elephants, these are horses, these are birds, these are chariots. They
have been brought for your play, take them, child! ||14|| Laddoos, mandakas,
grapes, sugar, and other things. Whatever you want is here, take it, child!
||15|| I will be your life, I will be your support in all aspects. Live long,
rejoice long, quickly please Sunanda. ||16|| My god, my son, my soul, my life.
You are everything to me, revive me with your embrace. ||17|| Do not make me
look strange, child! In front of these people. My heart will break in two like a
ripe gourd. ||18|| Come, child, come to my lap! I want to hold you close. I
cannot get the comfort of your stay in my womb, even for a moment. ||19|| Thus,
with toys, food, and sweet words, Sunanda's son did not even turn his mind
towards Sunanda. ||20|| No man can be free from the debt of his mother's
kindness. Knowing this, the wise Vajra thought. ||21|| If I ignore the assembly
and accept my mother's kindness, then my worldly life will be very long. ||22||
This blessed mother of mine will perform a small act of renunciation. I will
ignore this momentary pain. ||23|| Seeing this clearly, Vajra, with his firm
resolve, did not move from his position, even in his mind, like a statue. ||24||
_ 2010_02

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 khaNDa:-2 dRSTAntasamuccayaH 199 24. snehadhyAne zrIpariziSTaparvamadhye vajraM
prati sunandAyAH snehavilApaH  /  /  itazca vajrastatrasthaH
krameNAbhUtrihAyanaH  /  tadA ca dhanagiryAdyAstatra sAdhava AyayuH  /  / 1 /  /
AyAsyati dhanagirirgrahISyAmi svamAtmajam  /  sunandaivaM cintayantI
teSvAyAteSvamodata  /  / 2 /  /  sunandApi maharSibhyaH svanandanamayAcata  /
te punarnArpayAmAsuH pratyabhASanta cedRzam  /  / 3 /  /  ayAcitastvayA datto
mugdhe'smabhyamayaM zizuH  /  vAntAnnamiva ko dattaM punarAdAtumicchati ?  /  /
4 /  /  vikrIDeSviva datteSu svAmitvamapagacchati  /  mA yAciSThAH sutaM dattvA
tvayaiSa parasAtkRtaH  /  / 5 /  /  pakSayorubhayorevamuccairvivadamAnayoH  /
loko'vAdIdamuM vAdaM rAjA nirdhArayiSyati  /  / 6 /  /  tataH sunandA lokena
sahitA nRpaparSadi  /  jagAma saGghasahitAH zramaNA api te yayuH  /  / 7 /  /
rAjJo nyaSIdadvAmena sunandA dakSiNena tu  /  zrImAnsaGghaH samasto'pi
yathAsthAnamathApare  /  / 8 /  /  paribhAvya dvayorbhASAmuttaraM cAvadannRpaH
/  yenAhUtaH samAyAti bAlastasya bhavatvasau  /  / 9 /  /  taM nirNayamamaMsAtAM
tau tu pakSAvubhAvapi  /  iti cocaturAdau kaH sUnumAhvAtumarhati  /  / 10 /  /
strIgRhyAH procire paurA vatinAmeSa bAlakaH  /  cirasaGghaTitapremA tadvaco
nAtilaGghate  /  / 11 /  /  mAtaivAhvayatAmAdAviyaM duSkarakAriNI  /  nArIti
cAnukampyApi bhavatyetaddhi nAnyathA  /  / 12 /  /  tataH sunandA bahuzo
bAlakrIDanakAni ca  /  vividhAni ca bhakSyANi darzayantyevamabhyadhAt  /  / 13 /
/  hastino'mI amI azvAH pattayo'mI amI rathAH  /  tava
krIDArthamAnItAstadgRhANaihi dAraka !  /  / 14  /  /  modakA maNDakA drAkSAH
zarkarAzcAnyadapyadaH  /  yadicchasi tadastyeva gRhyatAmehi dAraka !  /  / 15 /
/  tavAyuSmankRSIyAhaM sarvAGgamavatAraNe  /  ciraM jIva ciraM nanda sunandAmAzu
modaya  /  / 16 /  /  mama devo mama putro mamAtmA mama jIvitam  /  tvamevAsIti
mAM dInAM pariSvaGgeNa jIvaya  /  / 17 /  /  vilakSAM mA kRthA vatsa ! mAM
lokasyAsya pazyataH  /  hRdayaM me'nyathA bhAvi pakvavAluGkavad dvidhA  /  / 18
/  /  ehi haMsagate vatsa ! mamotsaGgaM pariSkuru  /  kukSivAsAvakrayo me na
labhyaH kimiyAnapi  /  / 19 /  /  evaM krIDanakairbhakSyaprakAraizcATukairapi  /
saunandeyaH sunandAyA nAbhyagcchanmanAgapi  /  / 20 /  /  na mAturupakAraNAM
ko'pi syAdanRNaH pumAn  /  evaM vidannapi sudhIrvajra evamacintayat  /  / 21 /
/  yadi saGghamupekSiSye kRtvA mAtuH kRpAmaham  /  tadA syAnmama saMsAro
dIrghadIrghataraH khalu  /  / 22 /  /  iyaM ca dhanyA mAtA me'lpakarmA
pravrajiSyati  /  upekSyamasyA hyApAtamAtrajaM duHkhamapyadaH  /  / 23 /  /
dIrghadarzI vimRzyaivaM vajro vajradRDhAzayaH  /  pratimAstha iva sthAnAnna
cacAla manAgapi  /  / 24 /  /  _ 2010_02

Page #241 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 200 ## The Scattering of the Eager Refusal  King, O Sunanda! You are a
creeping infant. Like a snake, you are being consumed by fire, and you do not
know your mother. ||25||  Then, the king, Dhanagiri, having found the
opportunity, said these measured words, throwing away his dust-remover. ||26||
If you are truly dedicated to the vow, if you are a knower of the truth
yourself, then take this dust-remover, the banner of Dharma, from me, O sinless
one! ||27||  Immediately, like a thunderbolt, Vajra, with his raised hand,
quickly ran towards Dhanagiri, his feet making a loud thudding sound. ||28||
Going to his father's embrace, and mounting it, with a pure mind, he took the
dust-remover, as easily as a lotus from a pond. ||29||  With his hand and lotus-
like palm, he lifted the dust-remover. It shone like a cluster of hair, with the
glory of the teachings. ||30||  With a smile that revealed his teeth, like the
white buds of a jasmine flower, he did not look away from the dust-remover, even
in his mind. ||31||  As the day passed, like a lotus that quickly wilts,
Sunanda, with her chin resting on her hand, thought this way. ||32||  My brother
has renounced the world, my husband has renounced the world, and now my son will
also renounce the world. Therefore, I will also renounce the world. ||33||  I
have no brother, no husband, and no son now. Therefore, for me too, renunciation
is better than living in a house. ||34||  Having decided this for herself,
Sunanda went to her house. Vajra, taking the dust-remover, and the monks also
went to their dwelling. ||35||  The one who desired the vow did not drink milk,
and Vajra, until then, was also not weaned. Thus, the Acharya, having renounced
the world, again made her a renunciant. ||36||  With the special fortune that
arose, and with the sight of the world's detachment, Sunanda also renounced the
world, in the presence of the Acharya of that order. ||37||  [Sri
Parishishtaparva, verses 100 to 136] 24. The story of the mother of the Arhat,
in the affectionate meditation of the Sri Uttaraadhyayana Sutra. ||  Tagara
Nagari, there lived a man named Arihamitta, and near him lived a merchant named
Datta, who, with his wife Bhadda and son, had taken the vow of an Arhat. He did
not make his son beg for alms, he raised him with the first milk and with
whatever he desired. He was delicate, unable to bear hardship, and did not speak
much. He was patient, and after a few days, he would go out for alms. He was
delicate-bodied, and in the summer, he would get hot in the sun and would sweat.
He was overcome by the heat, and he saw a merchant woman standing in the shade.
He was very delicate-bodied, and he was overcome by the heat, so he went and sat
down there. He was asked, "What are you seeking?" "Alms," he said. She gave him
some mangoes. He was asked, "What Dharma do you practice?" He said, "I practice
the Dharma of non-violence." She said, "Then eat the mangoes with me." He, being
overcome by the heat, and wanting to eat, accepted the mangoes. He was then
taken by the merchants, and he was not seen again.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 200 AturapratyAkhyAnaprakIrNakam rAjAvAdItsunande ! tvamapasarpa zizusau  /
nAgAdAhUyamAnastvAmajAnanniva mAtaram  /  / 25 /  /  tato rAjJA dhanagiriH
prAptAvasaramIritaH  /  rajoharaNamutkSipya jagAdaivaM mitAkSaram  /  / 26 /  /
vrate ced vyavasAyaste tattvajJo'si yadi svayam  /  tadrajoharaNaM
dharmadhvajamAdatsva me'nagha !  /  / 27 /  /  vajrastadaiva kalabha
ivotkSiptakaro drutam  /  dadhAvAbhidhanagiri prakvaNatpAdaghargharaH  / 28 /  /
gatvA ca piturutsaGgamadhiruhya vizuddhadhIH  /  tadrajoharaNaM
lIlAsarojavadupAdade  /  / 29 /  /  vajreNa pANipadmAbhyAM rajoharaNamuddhRtam
/  virarAja romaguccha iva pravacanazriyaH  /  / 30 /  /
ullasatkundakalikAkAradantadyutismitaH  /  sa rajoharaNAd dRSTiM
nAnyatrAdAnmanAgapi  /  / 31 /  /  dinAtyaye padminIva sadyo mlAnimupeyuSI  /
hastavinyastacibukA sunandaivamacintayat  /  / 32 /  /  bhrAtA mama pravrajito
bhartA pravrajito'tha me  /  pravrajiSyati putro'pi pravrajAmyahamapyataH  /  /
33 /  /  na me bhrAtA na me bhartA na me putro'pi samprati  /  tanmamApi
parivrajyA zreyasI gRhavAsataH  /  / 34  /  /  svayameveti nirNIya sunandA
sadanaM yayau  /  vajramAdAya vasatiM prayayurmunayo'pi te  /  / 35  /  /
vratecchurna papau stanyaM vajrastAvadvayA api  /  ityAcAryaH parivrAjya
sAdhvInAM punarArNyata  /  / 36  /  /  udyadbhAgyavizeSeNa bhavavairAgyabhUdRzam
/  sunandApi pravavrAja tadgacchAcAryasannidhau  /  / 37  /  /  [zrI
pariziSTaparva zloka0 100 taH 136] 24. snehadhyAne zrIuttarAdhyayanasUtre
arhannakamAtRkathA  /  /  tagarA nayarI, tattha arihamitto nAma Ayario, tassa
samIve datto nAma vANiyao bhaddAe bhAriyAe putteNa ya ahannaeNasaddhiM pavvaio,
so taM khuDugaM Na kayAi bhikkhAe hiMDAvei, paDhamAliyAIhiM kimicchaehiM poseti,
so sukumAlo, sAhUNa appattiyaM, Na taraMti kiMci bhaNiuM  /  annayA so khaMto
kAlagato, sAhUhiM do tinni vA divase dAuM bhikkhassa oyArio, so sukumAlasarIro
gimhe uvariM hiTThA ya Dajjhati pAse ya, tihAbhibhUto chAyAe vIsamaMto
pautthavatiyAe vaNiyamahilAe diTTho, orAlasukumAlasarIrottikAuM tIse tahiM
ajjhovavAo jAo, ceDIe saddAvito, kiM maggasi ?, bhikkhaM, diNNA se moyagA,
pucchito-kIsa tumaM dhammaM karesi ?, bhaNaisuhanimittaM, sA bhaNai-to mae ceva
samaM bhoge bhuMjAhi, so ya uNheNa tajjio uvasaggijjaMto ya paDibhaggo bhoge
jati  /  so sAhUhiM savvahiM maggito Na diTTho appasAgAriyaM paviTTho, pacchA se
mAyA ummattiyA jAyA puttasogeNa, NayaraM paribhamaMtI arahannayaM vilavaMtI jaM
jahiM pAsai taM tahiM savvaM bhaNati 2010_02

Page #242 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------



======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 khaNDaH - 2 dRSTAntasamuccayaH atthi te koi arahannao diTTho ?, evaM vilavamANI
bhamai, jAva annayA teNa putteNa oloyaNagaeNa diTThA, paJcabhinnAyA, taheva
oyarittA pAesu paDio, taM picchiUNa taheva satthacittA jAyA, tAhe bhaNNai -
putta ! pavvayAhi, mA duggaiM jAhisi, so bhaNai-na tarAmi kAuM saMjamaM, jadi
paraM asaNaM karemi, evaM karehi, mAya asaMjao bhavAhi, mA saMsAraM bhamihisi,
pacchA so taheva tattAe silAe pAovagamaNaM karei, muhutteNa sukumAlasarIro
uNheNa vilAo, puvviM teNa nAhiyAsio pacchA te'hiyAsito | 25. kAmadhyAne
zrIaSTAhnikApravacane kumAranandisuvarNakArasambandhaH  /  caMpAyAmAjanma
strIlaMpaTaH kumAranaMdiH svarNakRt yAM yAM surUpAM kanyAM zRNoti tAM
svarNapaMcazatIM dattvA gRhNAti, evaM paMca zatAni (500) striyo jAtAH, tAbhiH
sahaikastaMbhasaudhe'raMsIt, tasya nAgilazrAddhaH mitramasti, ekadA
paMcazailAdhipavyaMtaradevyau zakrAjJayA naMdIzvare prAsthiSAtAM tadAnIM
tatpatirvidyunmAlI cyutaH, tataste 'hAsA' 'prahAsA' nAmnyau kAmukaM taM
svarNakRtaM dRSTvA tatrAvAtaratAM, dRSTvA parirabdhukAmaH svarNakAraH provAca ke
yuvAm ? kimarthamAgate ?, te procatuH - bhavadartham, prAptasaMjJaH sa hemakRt
prArthanAM cakre, te UcatuH tvaM paMcazaile samAgaccheH, tatrAvayoH saMgo
bhAvItyuktvA te utpatite, so'pi svarNakAra, bhUbhuje svarNaM dattvA iti
paTahamavAdayat, "yo mAM paMcazailadvIpe netA sa dravyakoTiM lapsyate" ekena
niryAmakasthavireNa paTaho dhRtaH koTidhanaM cAdade, tena yAnapAtraM sajjIkRtaM,
svarNakRtA sAkaM potastho vRddho'bdhivartmani sudUramAgatya tamityUce - bho
kumAra ! dUre prekSase kiMcit ?, so'vocat dRzyate vRkSa ekaH, sa Uce - abdhikUle
tacchailapAdajAto'yaM vaTo dRzyate, yadA poto'syAdho yAti tadA'sya zAkhAyAM tvaM
vilageH, nizyatra bhAraMDAH sameSyaMti, teSu supteSu kasyacidraMghrau paTena
svaM baddhvA dRDhamuSTinA vilageH, prAtaruDDInAste tvAM paMcazaile neSyaMti,
yadi vaTe'vilagnastvaM tadA etadyAnapAtramiva mahAvartte patitvA vinaMkSyasi
tathA kRte sa pakSiNA tatra ninye, sa krameNa, hAsAprahAsAbhyAM dRSTaH, tenApi
bhogArthaM prArthite, tAbhyAM proce - anenAGgenAvayoH saMgo na bhavet, kiMtu
agnipravezAdinA kRtanidAnena tvaM paMcazailezo bhava, sa dadhyau - ubhayato
bhraSTo'hamiti, ciMtArttastAbhyAM khapure muktaH, tataH sa
devAGganAGgamohito'gnisAdhanaM prArebhe tadA nAgilazrAddhenoktammitra !
bAlamaraNaM nArhaM tavetyAdi, tena vAryamANo'pi nidAnenAgnizaraNaM kRtvA sa
paMcazailezo jajJe, nAgilastadvairAgyAtpravrajyAcyute devo jAtaH  /  anyadA
naMdIzvarayAtrArthaM prasthitAnAM devAnAM puro gAtuM tadAjJayA hAsAprahAse
calite svapatimUcatuH - svAmin ! tvaM paTahaM vAdaya, so'haMkAreNa no'vAdayat,
tadA duSkarmaNA paTahaH kaMThe vyalagat, tadAnIM tAbhyAmuktaM - bho prANeza !
kulocitaM kuru mA tvaM 2 2010_02 201

Page #243 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 202 ## Aaturpratyakhyanaprakirnakam  Shameful, then the Vidyunmali deva,
playing the drum with those two singing, moved in front of the Tridivaukasas. At
that time, Nagila, while going on a heavenly journey, saw Vidyunmali, his friend
from a previous birth, at a distance. Then he was addressed by the heavenly
being: "Bhadral, do you know me?" He said, "Tejasvin, I know you, who are you?"
Then, after performing a Shraddha ritual, he told him about his and his previous
birth's form, the divine form he had attained through that Dharma. Hearing this,
he said, "Oh friend, what should I do?" Achyutasura said, "Friend, make a statue
of Vibhor Murti, the embodiment of Bhavasadho, who is in the state of Kayotsarga
in the Chitra Griha with a household life. Your Bodhi bija will sprout." Having
heard this, he went home and saw the statue of Shri Vira. Then the deva went to
the Himavat mountain, cut down a Gosirsha Chandana tree, and made a statue with
ornaments as he had seen it. 25. In the Kamadhyana, Shri Trishatishalaka
Purushacharitra, Ravana, due to grief, was also suffering from the pain of being
separated from Vaidehi. Like a Falachya, he lay on his bed, fallen. 1. Then
Mandodari Devi went to him and said, "How are you, my lord? You are standing
like a lifeless person." 2. Ravana also said, "Due to the fever of separation
from Vaidehi, I am unable to move, speak, or even look." 3. "If you are alive,
then, O proud one, abandon your pride and go and bring back Vaidehi, so that she
may be with me." 4. "I do not desire any other woman, I will never eat with
another. I have a strong vow, witnessed by my Guru." 5. "The noble lady,
suffering from the pain of her husband, went to the Devaramano garden and spoke
to Sita." 6. "This is Mandodari, the queen of Dasanana. I will become your
servant, serve the ten-headed one." 7. "Sita, you are blessed, you are served by
him constantly. He is a trustworthy, fearless, and powerful husband." 8. "Even
today, if you get Dasanana, what will you gain from a husband like Rama, who is
a mere mortal, a tapasvi?" 9. "Sita angrily said, "Where is the lion, where is
the jackal? Where is the Garuda, where is the crow? Where is Rama, where is your
husband?" 10. "It is appropriate for you to be a couple, you and that sinner. He
is lustful towards other women, and she is a messenger for him." 11. "You are
not even fit to be seen, let alone spoken to. Go away from here, leave my
sight." 12. "Ravana also went there and said, "Why are you angry, Sita?
Mandodari is your servant." 13. "I am also your servant, be merciful to me,
Devi. Janaki, you are pleasing to this people, even if you don't look at them."
14. "Sita turned her face away and said, "You are seen with the eyes of death,
taking me away from Rama's house." 15. "Shame on you, you who have no hope, who
ask for what is not asked for. How long will you live

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 202 AturapratyAkhyAnaprakIrNakama lajjasva, tato vidyunmAlI devo gAyantIbhyAM
tAbhyAM saha paTahaM vAdayan tridivaukasAM puratazcacAla, tadAnIM nAgilaH svargI
yAtrAyAM vrajan vidyunmAlinaM nijapUrvabhavamitraM avadhinA dadarza, tataH
svargiNA sa bhASitaH-bhadra ! tvaM mAM jAnAsi ?, sa jagau-tejasvinnAhaM jAne,
tvaM ko'si ?, tatastena zrAddharUpaM kRtvA svasya tasya ca pUrvabhavasvarUpaM
tena dharmeNa prAptaM devasvarUpaM taJcoktam, tacchrutvA sa evamavadat-bho mitra
! kimahaM karomi ?, acyutasureNoktaM-mitra ! gArhasthyena citragRhe kAyotsarge
sthitasya bhAvasAdho:ravibhormUrti tvaM kAraya, tava bodhibIjamutpatsyate,
taduktamurarIkRtya gRhe pratimAsthaM zrIvIramapazyat, tato devo himavati zaile
gatvA gozIrSacaMdanaM chittvA yathAdRSTaM mUrti savibhUSaNAM cakre  /  25.
kAmadhyAne zrItriSaSTizalAkApuruSacaritre rAvaNaH  /  zokena tena
vaidehIvipralambharujApi ca  /  phAlacyuta iva dvIpI talpe tasthau nipatya saH
/  / 1 /  /  atha mandodarI devI tamupetyAbhyadhAditi  /  kathaM prAkRtavat
svAminnizceSTa iva tiSThasi  /  / 2 /  /  rAvaNo'pyabravIdevaM
vaidehIvirahajvarAt  /  na ceSTituM na vaktuM ca na cAlokayituM kSamaH  /  / 3 /
/  mayA cejjIvatA te'rthastanmAnaM projjhya mAnini  /  gatvAnunaya vaidehIM
yathA mayi riraMsate  /  / 4 /  /  nAnyanArImanicchantI bhuJje jAtucidapyaham  /
argalAniyamo hyatra mamAsti gurusAkSikaH  /  / 5 /  /  pIDitA pIDayA patyuH
kulInA sApi tatkSaNam  /  jagAma devaramaNodyAne sItAmuvAca ca  /  / 6 /  /  eSA
mandodarI nAma dazAnanamahiSyaham  /  prapatsye tvayi dAsItvaM bhajasva
dazakandharam  /  / 7 /  /  sIte tvameva dhanyAsi yAM siseviSate'nizam  /
vizvasevyAkimalaH patirmama mahAbalaH  /  / 8 /  /  adyApi tava rAmeNa bhUcareNa
tapasvinA  /  pattimAtreNa kiM patyA prApyate ceddazAnanaH  /  / 9 /  /  ruSA
babhASe sItaivaM kva siMhaH kva ca jambukaH  /  kva suparNaH kva vA kAkaH kva
rAmaH kva ca te patiH  /  / 10 /  /  dampatitvamaho yuktaM tava tasya ca
pApmanaH  /  rimsureko'nyastrISu dUtIbhavati cAparA  /  / 11 /  /
druSTumapyucitA nAsi kimu sambhASituM hale  /  sthAnAdito gaccha gaccha tyaja
dRSTipathaM mama  /  / 12 /  /  rAvaNo'pi tadA tatrAjagAma nijagAda ca  /
kupitAsi kutaH sIte dAsI mandodarI tava  /  / 13 /  /  dAsaste svayamapyasmi
prasAdaM kuru devi me  /  jAnaki tvaM janamamuM prINAsi na dRzApi kim  /  / 14 /
/  sItA parAGmukhIbhUyetyabhASata mahAsatI  /  kRtAntadRSTyA dRSTo'si haranmAM
rAmagehinIm  /  / 15 /  /  dhigAzAM te hatAzasyAprArthitaprArthakasya re  /
jIviSyasi kiyadrAme sAnuje dviSadantake  /  / 16 /  /  _ 2010_02

Page #244 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Chapter: - 2 Collection of Examples Even though he was being attacked, Dasanana
said again and again, "Alas, the state of desire is stronger." ||17|| In the
meantime, unable to see Sita who was immersed in sorrow, he submerged himself in
the western salt ocean, the abode of the treasures. ||18|| A terrible night
began, and Ravana, with a terrible mind, began to inflict afflictions on Sita,
blinded by anger and desire. ||19|| Great owls hooted, ferrets barked, wolves
howled strangely, and other warriors fought each other. ||20|| Tigers with short
tails roared, snakes with hoods hissed, and ghosts, spirits, and goblins, with
their sharp claws, ||21|| danced wildly, like the attendants of Yama, and
approached Sita, terrifying. ||22||   || Three Special Points ||   Thinking of
the five supreme beings in her mind, Sita remained fearless, and did not bow to
Dasanana. ||23|| [Sri Trishatisalaaka Purva - 7 Sloka - 126 to 148] 26. In
Kalushadhyana, the Sri Upadeshamala, the story of the Peetha - Maha Peetha is
mentioned in the section on the things to be avoided and the things to be
adopted.   In Mahavideha, the householder, the equivalent of a chakravarti, the
teacher Vairanabha, lived with his younger brothers, Bahu, Subahu, Peetha, and
Maha Peetha, who were the holders of the eleven limbs. There, Bahu, due to the
weakening of his body, became a Vaiavritta of the Panchashatika Gachcha. Subahu,
due to his suffering from being beaten, found pleasure in it, and the other two
were engaged in their studies. On another occasion, while praising their
qualities, the teacher praised Bahu and Subahu, saying, "You two are blessed and
have achieved your purpose." From then on, they did not give up their royal
nature, and they were praised for their diligence in their own work, but not for
their devotion to their studies. This caused resentment in the minds of the
other two towards their teacher. From that time onwards, they did not discuss
this matter with anyone, and after a long time, they were born as a woman named
Brahmi Sundari, and Vairanabha, Bahu, and Subahu were born as Rishabhadeva,
Bharata, and Bahubali respectively. 26. In Kalushadhyana, the Sri Upadeshamala,
the story of the sage who lived in the lion's cave is mentioned in the section
on the things to be avoided and the things to be adopted.   203 In Pataliputra,
the disciples of Aryasambhuta Vijaya Acharya, on the first day of the rainy
season, received their teachers who had demonstrated their strength and
fortitude. One of them lived in a lion's cave for four months without eating,
another lived near a snake's hole, another lived on a well platform, and
Sthulabhadra lived in the house of a wealthy woman who was a householder, and
ate with her.   After receiving their teachers, they went to their respective
places. The lion and the snake were pacified. The wealth of the woman was almost
completely destroyed by thieves, and thinking that this was due to Sthulabhadra,
various people harassed him. Seeing his unwavering nature, they were
disappointed and fell at his feet. Knowing their intentions, he explained the
Dharma to them. The woman became a Shravaka, and she gave up her lawsuit and
accepted the Dharma.   2010_02

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 khaNDa: - 2 dRSTAntasamuccayaH tayetyAkruzyamAno'pi bhUyo bhUyo dazAnanaH  /
tathaivovAca dhigaho kAmAvasthA balIyasI  /  / 17 /  /  atrAntare vipanmagnAM
sItAM draSTumivAkSamaH  /  nimamajja nidhirdhAmnAM pazcime lavaNAmbudhau  /  /
18 /  /  prAvartata nizA ghorA ghorabuddhizca rAvaNaH  /  sItAyai krodhakAmAndha
upasargAn pracakrame  /  / 19 /  /  ghUtkAriNo mahAghUkAH phetkurvANAzca
pheravaH  /  vRkA vicitraM krandanta otavo'nyo'nyayodhinaH  /  / 20 /  /
pucchAcchoTakRto vyAghrAH phUtkurvANAH phaNAbhRtaH  /
pizAcapretavetAlabhUtAzcAkRSTakartrikAH  /  /  21  /  /  ullalanto durlalitA
yamasyeva sabhAsadaH  /  vikRtA rAvaNeneyurupasItaM bhayaGkarAH  /  /  22  /  /
/  /  tribhirvizeSakam  /  /  dhyAyantI manasA paJcaparameSThinamaskriyAm  /
sItA tasthAvabhItaiva na tu bheje dazAnanam  /  / 23 /  /  [zrItriSaSTizalAkA0
parva - 7 zloka - 126 taH 148 ] 26. kaluSadhyAne
zrIupadezamAlAheyopAdeyAyAmuditaH pITha - mahApIThAvasaraH  /  mahAvidehe
gRhasthaparyAyacakravartivairanAbhAcAryAntevAsinastallaghubhrAtaro bAhu- subAhu
-pITha - mahApIThAekAdazAGgadharA Asan  /  tatra bAhuH kSayopazamavazAt
paJcazatikagacchasya vaiyAvRttyamakarot  /  subAhurmardanAdinA khedavinodam,
itarau svAdhyAyamiti  /  anyadA kasmiMzcitprastAve tadguNAnutkIrtya dhanyau
kRtArthAvetAviti zlAghitau bAhu- subAhU guruNA  /  tato'dyApi rAjasvabhAvaM
naite muJcanti yenAtmakRtyodyatAvetau zlAghayanti, na punaH
svAdhyAyaratAvAvAmiti jAtamitarayorguruviSayaM manAk cittakAluSyam  /
tadavadhIraNayA vizeSato'nAlocya kAlaM kRtvA sarvArthasiddhavamAne samutpadya
tatazcyutvA tanmanoduSkRtakarmapariNativazAt samutpannau strIbhAvena
brAhmIsundarI ceti, vairanAbha-bAhusubAhavastu tasminnevotpadya tatazcyutvA
RSabhadeva bharata - bAhubalibhAvena jAtA iti  /  26. kaluSadhyAne
zrIupadezamAlAheyopAdeyAvRttau siMhaguhAvAsinaH sAdhoH draSTAntaH  /  203
pATalIputre AryasambhUtavijayA''cAryasya ziSyA varSAkAlA''dyadine
svazaktidhRtipratyAyitaguravo'bhigrahAnevambhUtAn gRhNanti sma  /  ekaH
siMhaguhAyAM nirazanazcAturmAsam, anyastathaiva sarpadarIsamIpe, aparastathaiva
kUpaphalake, sthUlabhadrastu gRhasthAvasthopabhuktAyAH kozAgaNikAyA gRhe
sabhojanaM gRhItavAn  /  gRhItvA gatAH svasthAneSu  /  upazamitau siMhabhujagau
/  kozA punaH prAyaH parISahaparAbhagno'yamityabhiprAyeNavividhabibbokaiH
sthUlabhadramupasargayantI tanniSprakampatAM nirIkSya nirviNNA patitA
taccaraNayoH  /  jJAtAbhiprAyeNa kathitastena dharmaH  /  jAtA zrAvikA
rAjAbhiyogaM vihAya gRhItama 2010_02

Page #245 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 204  **The Scattering of the Rejection of the Eager**  The vow of
renunciation of the world. The virtuous ones who had come together after the
completion of the acceptance, were told by the Guru in the presence of the
remaining virtuous ones, "Leave behind the gross-blessed one, the others are the
doers of difficult deeds." The gross-blessed one arrived, and upon seeing him,
they were encouraged by the Guru, saying, "He is the doer of difficult deeds."
Then, taking up his former glory, he was praised by the Guru as the doer of easy
deeds. "Oh, how these people are obsessed with worldly conduct!" Thus, the minds
of the others were filled with defilement. Then, again, gathering together, in
another year, when the virtuous ones were about to accept the acceptance in the
same place, the one who lived in the lion's cave said, "I will stay for the four
months of fasting in the treasury-house of the sister of the treasury." The Guru
prevented him, saying, "It is not proper for you to do this." Going against his
words, he went to that house. Seeing him, she, knowing his thoughts, recognized
that he had come out of envy towards the gross-blessed one, and allowed him to
stay. Then, thinking, "I will show him the unbearable fruit of his qualities,"
she, with her body worn out by night-long discussions, began to torment him with
the attacks of the maddening urges of lust, with the confusion of body and
speech. Then, with a wavering mind, he, forgetting his state of self-awareness,
begged her. She said, "We do not become the wives of the destitute." He thought,
"It is heard in the northern path that there is a king who gives a blanket worth
a lakh to the virtuous ones. I will go there." He went there, obtained the
blanket, and came back and offered it to her. She said, "Look, it is lying there
in the storehouse." He said, "Did you destroy it?" She said, "Do you know this?"
He said, "What is there to know?" She said, "If that is so, then why does one
with a body full of impurities desire contact with me, who am nothing but a
treasure of invaluable qualities?" Then, the result of his actions came back to
him. "Oh, I am constantly falling into the abyss of existence, and I am being
rescued," he thought, and said, "O virtuous one, wise in the virtuous! I desire
your instruction. I have turned away from this difficult resolve." She said,
"This is appropriate for one like you." Then, he went to the Guru, was given
advice, performed penance, and returned to the essence of his being.  **27. The
Story of Duryodhana in the Kalha-Dhyana of the Trishatisalaaka Purushacharitra**
Rukmini's house, the sage Ati-Mukta Rishi arrived. Seeing him, Satyabhama also
came there quickly. ||1||  Rukmini asked the sage, "Will I have a son or not?
Will my son be equal to Krishna?" Having said this, he departed. ||2||
Satyabhama, believing the sage's words to be true, said to Rukmini, "My son will
be equal to Krishna." ||3||  Rukmini said, "The sage's words are not true, they
are deceitful." While they were arguing like this, Krishna came to them. ||4||
Then, King Duryodhana, his brother, came there. He said to Bhama, "My son will
be your son-in-law." ||5||  Rukmini also said to him, "I will give my daughter
to your son."

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 . 204 o AturapratyAkhyAnaprakIrNakam brahmavirativratam  /  samApte'bhigrahe
samAyAtAH sAdhavaH, sthUlabhadraM vihAyetare duSkarakArakA iti vadatopabaMhitAH
zeSasAdhusamakSaM guruNA  /  samAgataH sthUlabhadraH, taM prati sasambhramaM
duSkaraduSkarakAraka iti vadatA kRtopabRMhaNA  /  tataH
prAktanamaizvaryamadhikRtyA'yaM sukarakArako'pi varNyate gurubhiH  /  aho
lokAcAraparatAmISAm ! iti jAtamitareSAM cittakAluSyam  /  tataH punaH
samAhiNDyA'nyatra anyasmin varSe tatraivAgateSvabhigrahagrahaNodyateSu sAdhuSu
siMhaguhAvAsinoktamahaM kozAbhaginyupakozAsadane cAturmAsaM nirazanaH
sthAsyAmIti  /  nocitastvamasyeti nivArito guruNA, pratikUlya tadvaco gato
tadbhavanam  /  dRSTastayA, sthUlabhadrA'sUyayA'yamAgata iti bhAvajJatayA
saMlakSyAnujJAtA tayA tasya vasatiH  /  tato darzayAmyasya
tadguNA'sahanaphalamiti saJcintya rAtrAvaticarcitazarIrA
madanotkocakAribhirgAtravacanavibhranairupasargarupasargayitumArabdhA  /
tatazcalacittatayA vismRtAtmAvasthena tena prArthitA sA prAha, na vayaM
nirdhAnAnAM bhavAmaH  /  so'cintayaduttarApathe
zrUyate'pUrvasAdhorlakSamUlyakambaladAtA rAjA tad gacchAmi, tatra gataH, labdhvA
kambalamAgataH samarpitavAzca tasyAH  /  tayApi tasya pazyata eva nikSipto'sau
vaqagRhe sa prAha-kimayaM tvayA vinAzitaH !' itarA''ha-'kimidaM jAnISe ?' sa
prAha- 'kimatra jJAtavyaM ?' itarA''ha 'yadyevaM tarhi kimityazucipUrNena
mAmakadehenA'narghyaguNaratnAvyatiriktAtmA samparkamabhilasati ?' tadAkArya
punarAgatazcaraNapariNAmaH  /  aho ! nirantaraM bhavagarne patannahamuddhRta iti
vicintyAsAvAha-'sAdhuvivekini sAdhu ! icchAmyanuzAstiM, nivRtto'hamito
duradhyavasAyAt  / ' sA prAha- yuktamidaM bhavAdRzAM, tato gatvA gurusamIpaM
dattAlocano vihitaprAyazcitto bhAvasAraM pratikrAnta iti  /  27. kalahadhyAne
zrItriSaSTizalAkApuruSacaritre duryodhanaprasaMgaH  /  rukmiNyAzca
gRhe'nyedhuratimuktarSirAgataH  /  taM dRSTvA satyabhAmApi tatraivAzu samAyayau
/  / 1 /  /  rukmiNyApracchi sa muniH kiM me syAttanayo na vA  /  bhAvI
kRSNasamaH putrastavetyuktvA yayau ca saH  /  / 2 /  /  satyabhAmA munivaco
manyamAnA tadAtmagam  /  uvAca rukmiNI sUnurbhAvI kRSNasamo mama  /  / 3 /  /
pratyUce rukmiNI narSivacanaM phalati cchalAt  /  evaM vivadamAne te
kRSNAbhyarNamupeyatuH  /  / 4 /  /  tadA duryodhano rAjA tatrAyAtaH svasodaraH
/  bhAmayoce mama suto jAmAtA te bhaviSyati  /  / 5 /  /  rakmiNyApi tathoktaH
sa smAha dAsye sutAmaham  /  tasmai yaM yuvayorekA tanayaM prasaviSyate  /  / 6
/  /  bhAmovAca suto yasyAH prathamaM pariNeSyati  /  tadvivAhe'nyayA kezA
deyAstasyAH svakAH khalu  /  / 7 /  /  sAkSiNaH pratibhuvazca rAmapAdA
janArdanaH  /  duryodhanazcetyuditvA svauko dve api jagmatuH  /  / 8 /  /
[zrItriSaSTizalAkA0 parva-8 zloka-110 taH 117] 2010_02

Page #246 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter 2: Collection of Examples  **205**  **27.** The example of Narada is
shown in the commentary of the *Aavashyakahar* by Shri Bhadriya, in the context
of the meditation on conflict.  _The son of Nishadha, the son of Baldeva, named
Sagarachanda, was very handsome and beloved by all.  There was a beautiful woman
named Kamalamela, who was the wife of another king, and she was desired by the
son of Uggase, named Nabhasena.  Narada came to Sagarachanda's house, was
welcomed, and asked him, "O Blessed One, have you seen anything extraordinary?"
Sagarachanda replied, "Yes, I have seen something extraordinary.  Where?"
Narada said, "Right here in Varavaya, the beautiful Kamalamela is in the house.
Who gave her to you?"  Sagarachanda replied, "Yes, but how can I be united with
her?"  Narada said, "I don't know."  Sagarachanda, hearing this, could not find
peace, neither in sitting nor in lying down.  He kept thinking about Kamalamela,
and he ate while writing her name on a leaf.  Narada went to Kamalamela and
asked her, "Have you seen anything extraordinary?"  She replied, "I have seen
two extraordinary things.  Sagarachanda is very handsome, and Nabhasena is very
ugly.  Sagarachanda is infatuated with Nabhasena, and Nabhasena is repulsed by
Sagarachanda.  Narada has brought them together, and they are about to go
together, as they wish."  Sagarachanda's mother and other relatives were very
worried, thinking that he would die.  They came to see him, and they found him
weeping.  They comforted him, and they covered his eyes with their hands.
Sagarachanda said, "Kamalamela!"  They said, "We are not Kamalamela."
Sagarachanda said, "Yes, you are.  You are my pure lotus-petal-like Kamalamela."
Then, those relatives took him to the temple, and he was relieved.  He thought,
"Oh, I have been relieved of my suffering.  Now, what can I do to repay this
favor?"  He decided to follow the path of righteousness, and he went to
Nabhasena's house.  On the day of Nabhasena's wedding, Sagarachanda and his
relatives went to the garden.  Narada gave them a chariot, and they went to the
garden.  They were playing there.  The others did not see Kamalamela.  They saw
her on the way to the garden.  She was very beautiful.  Narayana, the strong
one, came out, and he fell at her feet.  She gave him to Sagarachanda, and
Nabhasena forgave him.  Here, Sagarachanda's belief that Kamalamela was his wife
is a delusion, and his statement, "I am not Kamalamela," is a delusion.  **28.**
The battle between the king of Koonika and Chetaka, as described in the
*Trishatishalaka Purushacharitra*, in the context of the meditation on war.
Then, mounted on their chariots, adorned with divine earrings, wearing divine
garments, they appeared like celestial beings.  ||1||  They were both extremely
beautiful, and they were both very proud.  Seeing them, Padmavati thought that
her womanhood was insignificant compared to them.  ||2||  Without divine
necklaces, earrings, and garments, a kingdom is like a face without eyes.  ||3||
Then, both of them, with their chariots, were ready to fight.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 khaNDa:-2 dRSTAntasamuccayaH 205 27. kalahadhyAne
zrIAvazyakahAribhadrIyavRttidarzitaM nAradodAharaNam  /  _ vAravaIe
baladevaputtassa nisaDhassa putto sAgaracaMdo rUveNaM ukkiTTho, savvesiM
saMbAdINaM iTTho, tattha ya yAravaIe vatthavvassa ceva aNNassa raNNo
kamalAmelAnAma dhUA ukkiThThasarIrA, sA ya uggaseNaputtassa NabhaseNassa
vareliyA, ito ya NArado sAgaracaMdassa kumArassa sagAsaM Agato, abbhuTThio,
uvaviDhe samANe pucchati-bhagavaM ! kiMci accherayaM diTuM ?, AmaM diTuM, kahiM
? kaheha, iheva vAravaIe kamalAmelANAma dAriyA, kassai diNNiA ?, AmaM, kathaM
mama tAe samaM saMpaogo bhavejjA ?, Na yANAmitti bhaNittAgato  /  so ya
sAgaracaMdo taM soUNa Navi AsaNe Navi sayaNe dhitiM labhati, taM dAriyaM phalae
lihaMto NAmaM ca giNhaMto acchati, NArado'vi kamalAmelAe aMtiaM gato, tAevi
pucchio-kiMci accherayaM diTThapuvvaMti, so bhaNati-duve diTThANi, rUveNa
sAgaracaMdo virUvattaNeNa NabhaseNao, sAgaracaMde mucchitA NahaseNae virattA,
NAraeNa samAsAsitA, teNa gaMtuM AikkhitaM-jahA icchAtitti  /  tAhe
sAgaracaMdassa mAtA aNNe a kumArA AdaNNA maraitti, saMbo Agato jAva pecchati
sAgaracaMdaM vilavamANaM, tAhe NeNa pacchato ThAiUNa acchINi dohivi hatthehi
chAditANi, sAgaracaMdeNa bhaNitaM-kamalAmelatti, saMbeNa bhaNitaM-NAhaM
kamalAmelaH, kamalAmelo'haM, sAgaracaMdeNa bhaNitaM-AmaM tumaM ceva mamaM
vimalakamaladalaloaNiM kamalAmelaM melihisi, tAhe tehiM kumArehiM saMbo majjaM
pAettA abbhuvagacchAvio, vigatamado ciMteti-aho mae Alo abbhuvagao, idANIM ki
sakkamaNNahAkAuM ?, NivahiyavvaMti pajjaNNaM paNNattiM maggiUNa jaMdivasaM tassa
NabhaseNassa vivAhadivaso taddivasaM te sAgaracaMdasaMbappamuhA kumArA ujjANaM
gaMtuM NAradassa sarahassaM dAsyiA suraMgAe ujjANaM NettuM sAgaracaMdo
pariNAvio, te tattha kiDaMtA acchaMti  /  itare ya taM dAriyaM Na pecchaMti,
maggaMtehiM ujjANa diTThA, vijjAhararUvA viuvviyA, NArAyaNo sabalo Niggao, jAva
apacchimaM saMbarUveNaM pAesu paDio, sAgaracaMdassa ceva diNNA, NabhaseNa taNayA
a khamAviyA  /  ettha sAgaracaMdassa saMbaM kamalAmelaM maNNamANassa aNaNuogo
NAhaM kamalAmeleti bhaNite aNuogo  /  28 yuddhadhyAne
zrItriSaSTizalAkApuruSacaritrA'ntargataM ceTakena saha koNikanRpasya
yuddhAvasaram  /  atha secanakArUDhau divyakuMDalamaMDitau  /
divyahArAMzukadharau bhUgatau svargiNAviva  /  / 1 /  /  atyadbhutazriyau
hallavihallau nijadevarau  /  dRSTvA padmAvatI dadhyau svasya strItvasya
sannibham  /  / 2 /  /  hArakuMDalavAsobhirdivyaiH secanakena ca  /  vinA hi
manyate rAjyaM netrahInamivA''nanam  /  / 3 /  /  tato hallavihallAbhyAM
tAnyAhartuM kRtAgrahA  /  babhANa kUNikaM rAjJI kUNiko'pyevamabhyadhAt  /  / 4 /
/  pitRdattaM vastvanayo hartuM yujyate mama  /  vizeSeNa prasAdArhAvimau tAte
divaM gate  /  / 5 /  /  2010_02

Page #247 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter 206: The Scattering of the Eager Refusal  Due to his excessive greed,
the king thought of asking for the necklace and other things.  A woman's capture
is more important than even the capture of a fort. ||6||  On another day, the
king of the earth, Hallavihalla, requested the necklace and other four things
from the one who had abandoned his brotherly love. ||7||  "This is a valid
order," they said, accepting it and went home.  "Let us consult with each other,
both of us are wise." ||8||  "This intention is not good, what is the purpose of
this?  Let us go elsewhere, there is only misfortune everywhere." ||9||  Having
decided this, they comforted the two kings, the pair of Sechanak, and taking the
necklace and other things, they went to Vaishali at night. ||10||  The
grandfather and Chetak, surrounding them, came.  They saw them with love and
acceptance, like a prince. ||11||  Knowing that they had gone to Vaishali, the
cunning one, like a cheated rogue, with his chin resting on his hand, thought.
||12||  "I have neither elephants nor jewels, nor are they my brothers.  I am
born to be deprived of both, due to the dominance of women." ||13||  "If I do
not bring them back in this time of distress, what is the difference between me
and a merchant who endures defeat?" ||14||  Then, he instructed a messenger,
Chetak, to go to Vaishali.  "Go, find my brothers and bring back the jewels they
have taken." ||15||  The messenger went to the city of Vaishali and stood before
Chetak.  He bowed to Chetak, sat down, and spoke politely. ||16||  "They have
come here, with jewels, elephants, and other things.  Hand over the princes,
Hallavihalla and Halla, to Kunika." ||17||  "If you do not hand them over, you
will face the downfall of your kingdom.  You should not destroy the temple for
the sake of a nail." ||18||  Chetak said, "No one else has come here seeking
refuge, let alone these two nephews, who are dear to me like my own sons."
||19||  The messenger said, "You are a refuge, but if you do not hand them over,
kill them and take their jewels and give them to the king, my master." ||20||
Chetak said, "This dharma is the same for both the king and the beggar.  No one
should ever give another's wealth to someone else." ||21||  "I will not take
anything from them, neither by force nor by persuasion.  My nephews are worthy
of dharma, and especially of giving." ||22||  The messenger came to Champa and
told Chetak's words to his master.  He was distressed, as if a fire of anger was
burning within him. ||23||  Kunika, at that time, was roaring like a lion, like
a victorious elephant.  The mighty ones do not tolerate insults. ||24||  The
king's army, with extraordinary strength, was ready to move immediately, all
together. ||25||  The princes, Kala and others, ten in number, with great
strength, stood in front, ready for a full-scale battle. ||26||  There were
three thousand elephants, as many horses, as many chariots, and three crore foot
soldiers. ||27||  This was the strength of each of the ten princes.  Kunika's
power exceeded even this. ||28||  (Pair)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 206 AturapratyAkhyAnaprakIrNakam tasyAzcAtyAgrahAdrAjA mene hArAdiyAcanam  /
strIgrahaH khalu matkoTagrahAdapi viziSyate  /  / 6 /  /  anyasmiMzca dine
hallavihallau pRthivIpatiH  /  yayAce tyaktasaubhrAtrastaddhArAdicatuSTayam  /
/ 7 /  /  pramANamAdeza iti pratipadya gRhaM gatau  /  A(a)maMtrayetAM tAvitthaM
buddhimantAvubhAvarapi  /  / 8 /  /  na zobhano'syAbhiprAyaH kimenana prayojanam
/  prayAvo'nyatra kutrApi zriyaH sarvatra doSmatAm  /  / 9 /  /  iti nizcitya
tau sAntaH purau secanakadvipam  /  hArAdInyapyupAdAya vaizAlyAM nizi jagmatuH
/  / 10 /  /  mAtAmahazceTakastau parirabhya samAgatau  /  snehena pratipattyA
ca dadarza yuvarAjavat  /  / 11 /  /  vaizAlyAM ca gatau jJAtvA tau
pratAritadhUrtavat  /  hastavinyastacibukazcintayAmAsa kUNikaH  /  / 12 /  /  na
me hastyAdiratnAni na ca tau bhrAtarAvapi  /  jAto'hamubhayabhraSTaH
strIpradhAnatayA khalu  /  / 13 /  /  bhavatu vyasane prApte'muSmiMstau
nA''nayAmi cet  /  parAbhavasahiSNorme vaNijazca kimantaram  /  / 14 /  /
anuziSya tato dUtaM vaizAlyAmupaceTakam  /  preSId bhrAtrormArgaNAya
ratnAnyAdAya jagmuSoH  /  / 15 /  /  dUto'pi puryAM vaizAlyAM gatvA
ceTakaparSadi  /  praNamya ceTakaM sthAne cA''sitvoce sasauSThavaH  /  / 16 /  /
iha naMSTvA samAyAtau ratnaiH saha gajAdibhiH  /  kumArau hallavihallau
kUNikasya samarpaya  /  / 17 /  /  anarpayannimau rAjyabhraMzamAsAdayiSyasi  /
kIlikArthe devakulaM na bhraMzayitumarhasi  /  / 18 /  /  ceTako'vocadanyo'pi
nApyeta zaraNAgataH  /  dauhitrau kiM punarimau vizvastau putravatpriyau  /  /
19 /  /  dUto'bravIccharaNyastvaM na hyarpayasi cedimau  /
tadratnAnyanayorhatvA rAjanmatsvAmine'rpaya  /  / 20 /  /  ceTakaH smAha
dharmo'yaM samAno rAjaraMkayoH  /  anyasya vittaM na hyanyo dAtumIzIta jAtucit
/  / 21 /  /  na prasahya na vA sAmnA'nayorgRhNami kiMcana  /  dharmapAtraM hi
dauhitrau dAnAhoM me vizeSataH  /  / 22 /  /  dUto'pyAgatya caMpAyAM tAM giraM
ceTakoditAm  /  Akhyat svasvAminaH krodhavahnivAtyAmanAkula:  /  / 23 /  /
kUNiko'pi hi tatkAlaM jayabhaMbhAmavIvadat  /  siMhA iva parAkSepaM na sahante
mahaujasaH  /  / 24  /  /  sainyAnyananyasAmAnyatejasastasya bhUpateH  /  sadyaH
sarvAbhisAreNa sajjIbhUyAvatasthire  /  / 25 /  /  kAlAdayaH kumArAzca dazApi hi
mahAbalAH  /  puro babhUvuH saMnA sarvasannahanena te  /  / 26 /  /  sahasrANi
trINi gajAstAvanto vAjino'pi hi  /  tAvantazca rathAH koTyastisro'pi ca
padAtayaH  /  / 27  /  /  teSAM dazAnAM pratyekaM kumArANAmidaM balam  /
etAvatkUNikasyApi prabhutvaM tvatiricyate  /  / 28  /  /  (yugmam)
sainyenaitAvatA gacchaMzcaMpezazceTakaM prati  /  tirayAmAsa dharaNiM taraNiM ca
rajobharaiH  /  / 29 /  /  2010_02

Page #248 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Chapter - 2 Collection of Examples  Chetak, surrounded by eighteen kings with
crowns, attacked with an immense army.  || 30 ||  There were thousands of
chariots and horses, and millions of elephants and foot soldiers. || 31 ||  Each
of the eighteen kings had an army of equal size, and Chetak's army was also of
equal size. || 32 ||  Going to the border of his own country, Chetak, with that
army, formed a difficult-to-break ocean formation with his warriors. || 33 ||
The king of Champa also went there with his army, of the same size as mentioned
before, and formed an impenetrable Garuda formation with his army. || 34 ||
There were terrible battles between the two armies. Thousands were struck, their
bellies filled with cries. || 35 ||  The two armies, with their white elephants
like pillars of fame, clashed. || 36 ||  In the army of Kurnika, the valiant
Kumar, the leader of the army, was the first to fight against Chetak's army. ||
37 ||  The Sadi fought with the Sadi, the Nishad with the Nishad, the charioteer
with the charioteer, and the warrior with the warrior in the two armies. || 38
||  With the elephants, horses, and spears falling, the earth became like a
mountain range. || 39 ||  With the warriors broken and killed in battle, rivers
of blood flowed like rivers and oceans. || 40 ||  In the battle, the elephants,
with their shining swords, appeared like a forest of sword leaves. || 41 ||  The
warriors, with their hands cut by swords, filled the battlefield with their
bravery. || 42 ||  The soldiers, with their heads struck by the edge of the
sword, fell, as if they were being ordered to fight by their own leaders. || 43
||  Thus, Kal, like a ship in the ocean, entered the ocean formation and reached
Chetak's side. || 44 ||  Seeing Kal, who was coming like time itself, Chetak
thought, "This one, like a thunderbolt, cannot be stopped by anyone." || 45 ||
"I will immediately subdue this mountain of the ocean of battle, even if it is a
divine bird." || 46 ||  Thus, Chetak, with his divine weapon, which was the
destroyer of the enemy's life and wealth, attacked Kal and brought him to the
fifth stage. || 47 ||  Then, like the shining sun setting, the army of Champa
was enveloped in darkness. || 48 ||  The army of Champa, abandoning the battle,
remained awake. For how could sleep come to them, like a wife who has been
wronged? || 49 ||  The warriors of Chetak's army, making the victory sound of
the drums, made the night very loud. || 50 ||  The next day, Chetak, who was
appointed as the commander-in-chief by the king of Champa, killed Mahakal, like
time itself. || 51 ||  He killed eight other commanders, the sons of the
श्रेणिक, one by one, each day, as before. || 52 ||  When ten of his brothers,
including Kal, were killed by Chetak, the king of Champa thought, "Even a single
leaf, by the grace of God, can conquer. For Chetak cannot be defeated by
mortals, even if they are millions in number." || 54 ||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 khaNDaH - 2 dRSTAntasamuccayaH ceTako'pyamitaiH sainyeH kUNikAyAbhyaSeNayat  /
rAjabhirbaddhamukuTairaSTAdazabhirAvRtaH  /  /  30  /  /  dvipAtrINi sahasrANi
tAvantazca turaMgamAH  /  tAvantazca sthAstisraH koTayazca padAtayaH  /   /  31
/   /  aSTAdazAnAM pratyekaM rAjJAM balamado'bhavat  /  tattulyasaMkhyaM
nRpatezceTakasyA'pyabhUdbalam  /  / 32 /  /  svadezasImni gatvA'sthAcceTakaH
senayA tayA  /  durbhedaM sAgaravyUhaM racayAmAsa coccakaiH  /  /  33  /  /
caMpAdhipo'pi tatrAgAccamvA prAguktasaMkhyayA  /  cakre ca garuDavyUhamabhedyaM
parasenayA  /  /  34  /   /  raNatUrANi ghorANi sainyayorubhayorapi  /  rodaH
kukSibharidhvAnAnyatADyanta sahasrazaH  /  / 35 /  /  kIrtistaMbhairivottabdhaiH
kheTIdhavalitaiH kharaiH  /  saMzaptakAzca saMcerurdvayorapi hi sainyayoH  /  /
36 /  /  kUrNikasya bale kAlaH kumAro balanAyakaH  /  AdAvapi pravavRte yoddhuM
ceTakasenayA  /  /  37  /  /  yuyudhe sAdinA sAdI niSAdI ca niSAdinA  /  rathI
ca rathinA pattiH pattinA ca baladvaye  /  /  38  /  /  staMberamaisturaMgaizca
kuntaghAtanipAtitaiH  /  ajAyata tadA zailagaMDazailavatIva bhUH  /  /  39  /  /
sthairbhagnairhatairvIraiH samare rudhirA''pagAH  /  sAntarIpA iva
sA''mbhomAnuSA iva cA''babhuH  /  / 40 /  /  sphuradbhirasibhirvIrakuJjarANAM
raNAjire  /  asipatravanamiva prAdurbhUtamadRzyata  /  / 41 /  /
asicchinnairucchaladbhirvIrANAM pANipaMkajaiH  /  kauNapAH
pUrayAmAsuravataMsakutUhalam  /  / 42 /  /  svAn ruMDAnapi yuddhAyA''dizanta iva
huMkRtaiH  /  peturbhaTAnAM mUrdhAnaH khaDgadhArAbhirAhatAH  /  / 43 /  /
itthaM ca sAgaravyUhaM kAlaH pota ivAMbudhim  /  avagAhya yayau pAramiva
ceTakasannidhim  /  / 44  /  /  kAlaM kAlamivAkAle'pyAyAntaM prekSya ceTakaH  /
cintayAmAsa kenApi naiSa vajramivA'skhali  /  /  45  /  /  abhyApatantaM tadimaM
raNasAgaramandaram  /  kSaNAdapi nigRhNAmi daivatena patatriNA  /  /  46  /  /
iti divyeSuNA vairiprANasarvasvadasyunA  /  prahRtya ceTakaH kAlaM prApayAmAsa
paMcatAm  /  / 47 /  /  tadA cAstamupeyAya bhAsvAn kAlakumAravat  /  zuceva
caMpezabalaM tamasA jagrase jagat  /  / 48  /  /  yuddhaM visRjya caMpezabalaM
jAgradavAsthita  /  nidrA hyabhaktabhAryANAmiva vairavatAM kutaH  /  / 49 /  /
ceTakasya punaH sainye vIrA vIrajayantikAm  /  kurvanto
jayavAditravAdanenAtyagurnizAm  /  /  50  /  /  caMpAnAthenAbhiSiktaM
senAnItve'pare'hani  /  mahAkAlaM kAlamiva mArayAmAsa ceTakaH  /   /  51  /  /
aSTau senApatInanyAnapi zreNikanandanAn  /  ekaikamahanyekaikasmin
pUrvavacceTako'vadhIt  /  / 52 /  /  bhrAtRSvAtmasamAneSu kAlAdiSu dazasvapi  /
ceTakena hateSvevaM caMpApatiracintayat  /  /  53  /  /  devatAyAH prasAdena
jetaikenApi pattriNA  /  na hyAyaceTako jayyo martyaiH koTimitairapi  /  /  54
/  /  2010_02 207

Page #249 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter 208: The Scattering of the Eager Refusal  "Alas, how foolish I was to
not know the power of Chetaka!  I myself have brought about the death of my ten
brothers, the Devabhas. " (55)  "The fate that befell them will also be mine.
It is not fitting for me to retreat after witnessing the death of my brothers."
(56)  "I will worship the Deities and, by their power, conquer the enemy.
Divine power is indeed bound by divine power." (57)  "Having decided on this
strategy and placing the Deities in my heart, the king, the son of Srenika,
remained steadfast in his devotion." (58)  "Bound by their past lives and their
austerities, Sakra and the lord of the Yakshas approached him at that time."
(59)  "The lord of the gods and the lord of the Asuras said, 'What do you
desire?'" (60)  "He replied, 'If you are pleased, let Chetaka be slain.'" (61)
"Sakra spoke again, 'Ask for something else.  Chetaka is my co-religionist; I
will never kill him.'" (62)  "However, I will protect your body, O king!  So
that you may not be defeated by him.'  He said, 'So be it.'" (63)  "The lord of
the Yakshas then thought to make a great stone-studded mace and another chariot-
breaking mace for victory." (64)  "The first would be like a stone, even a
fallen crab would be crushed by it.  The mace would also be very powerful." (65)
"The second, the chariot-breaking mace, would spin without a wheel, crushing the
enemy army on all sides in battle." (66)  "The lord of the gods, the lord of the
Asuras, and the king, the Kūṇika, then fought along with Chetaka's army." (67)
"The grandson of Nagarathin, the guardian of the twelve vows, the one with
perfect vision, the six-meal eater, always detached from worldly desires, the
king, who, despite being a six-meal eater, became an eighth-meal eater due to
the king's request, was greatly desired by the king Chetaka." (68)  "In the
battle, even in the face of such a formidable chariot-breaking mace, the
commander named Varuna, the true warrior, entered the fray." (69)  "(With three
distinguishing features) He, the commander of the army of the king of Champa,
facing the enemy in battle, spread out his great chariot with unbearable force."
(70)  "The two, facing each other, stood firm, eager for battle, radiating the
brilliance of the sun, fierce and terrible." (71)  "The lord of the Yakshas, the
commander of the army of the king of Champa, challenged Varuna in battle,
shouting, 'Strike, strike!' to the one standing before him." (72)  "Varuna said,
'O enemy! I have a vow as a Shravaka.  I do not strike even an enemy with my
weapon.'" (73)  "The commander of the army of the king of Champa said, 'Well
done, well done, O great soul!' and released an arrow at Varuna, aiming at his
vital points." (74)  "Then, Varuna, with his red eyes, struck down the commander
of the Kūṇika army with a single blow, sending him to the abode of Yama." (75)
"Battered by the fierce blow, Varuna

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 208 AturapratyAkhyAnaprakIrNakam prabhAvaM ceTakasyA'muM mayA hA dhigajAnatA  /
mayaiva nidhanaM nItA devAbhA bhrAtaro daza  /  / 55  /  /  babhUva yA
gatisteSAM bhaviSyati mamApi sA  /  yujyate nApasartuM ca dRSTabhrAtRvadhasya me
/  / 56 /  /  taddevatAM samArAdhya tatprabhAvAjjayAmyarim  /  divyaprabhAvo
divyena prabhAveNa hi bAdhyate  /  / 57  /  /  upAyamiti nizcitya kRtvA ca hRdi
devatAm  /  tasthAvaSTamabhaktena rAjA zreNikanandanaH  /  / 58  /  /
pUrvajanmasaMgatena nunnau tattapasApi ca  /  zakrazca camarendrazca tatkAlaM
tamupeyatuH  /  / 59 /  /  UcAte tau ca devendrAsurendrau bhoH kimicchasi ?  /
so'pyUce yadi tuSTau sthazceTakastanihanyatAm  /  / 60  /  /  zakro
bhUyo'pyabhASiSTA'paraM kimapi yAcyatAm  /  sAdharmikazceTako me taM nihanmi na
jAtucit  /  / 61 /  /  tathApi deharakSAM te kariSyAmi mahIpate !  /  yathA na
jIyase tena so'bravIdevamastviti  /  / 62 /  /  camarendro'pyatha
mahAzilAkaMTakamAhavam  /  anyaM ca rathamuzalaM jaitraM kartumamanyata  /  / 63
/  /  /  Adye zilAsannibhaH syAt patitaH karkaro'pi hi  /  kaMTako'pi ca jAyeta
mahAzastrAdhikaH khalu  /  / 64  /  /  dvitIye rathamuzale bhrAmyatI bhramikaM
vinA  /  paritaH piSyate tAbhyAM vairisainyaM raNotthitam  /  / 65 /  /
surendrazcAsurendrazca narendrazcApi kUNikaH  /  tatastrayo yuyudhire saha
ceTakasenayA  /  / 66 /  /  pautro'tha nAgarathino dvAdazavratapAlakaH  /
samyagdRSTiH SaSTabhojI sadA bhavaviraktadhIH  /  / 67  /  /  rAjAbhiyogataH
SaSTabhaktAnte'pi kRtASTamaH  /  zrIceTakakSitIzena svayamatyarthamarthitaH  /
/ 68 /  /  saMgrAme rathamuzale duHsahe tAdRze'pi hi  /  prAvizadvaruNo nAma
senAnIH satyasaMgaraH  /  / 69 /  /  (tribhirvizeSakam) sa caMpApatisenAnyaM
raNahetoH samAkSipan  /  prasasAra mahAsAro rathenA'sahyaraMhasA  /  / 70  /  /
tau saMmukhIbhUtasthau DuDhaukAte raNecchayA  /  vairAyamANau
bhUmiSThabhAnusvarbhAnubhISaNau  /  / 71 /  /  caMpApatezcamUnAtho varuNaM
raNamArgaNam  /  prahara praharetyuccaiAjahAra puraH sthitam  /  / 72 /  /
varuNaH smAha he doSman ! zrAvakasyAsti me vratam  /  anighnate na prahAraM
karavai vairiNe'pi hi  /  / 73 /  /  sAdhu sAdhu mahAsattvetyuktvA
caMpezasainyapaH  /  mumoca bANaM varuNo vividhe tena marmaNi  /  / 74  /  /
tataH kUNikasenAnyaM varuNo'ruNalocanaH  /  ekenaiva prahAreNa ninAya
yamasadmani  /  / 75  /  /  gADhaprahAravidhuro niHsRtya varuNo raNAt  /
tRNasaMstaramAsUtrya niSadyedamacintayat  /  / 76 /  /  sarvAtmanA zarIreNa
svAmikAryamanuSThitam  /  idAnImantakAlo me svArthasyAvasaraH khalu  /  / 77  /
/  arhadbhaTTArakAH sarve siddhAH sarve ca sAdhavaH  /  kevalyupajJo dharmazca
bhUyAsuH zaraNaM mama  /  / 78  /  /  2010_02

Page #250 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Chapter-2: Collection of Examples 209 I forgive all living beings, may all
forgive me. My friendship is with all beings, I have no enmity with anyone.
||79|| Nothing is mine, nor am I anyone's. I renounce even the sense of "mine"
that I have created. ||80|| How many, how many, I, the foolish one, have
indulged in sinful acts. Let that be false, my wrongdoing, I am now free from
attachment. ||81|| Whatever evil deeds I have done in the states of godhood,
humanity, animalhood, and hell, may the glorious hero, the Arhat, be my refuge.
||82|| Having performed such worship, he renounced the fourfold [food, etc.] and
then, with a focused mind, he bowed down. ||83|| Then, a friend of Varuna, a
false seer, came out from outside and, approaching Varuna, said this. ||84||
Friend! I am also now bought by your kindness. I have taken refuge in the
meditation that you have practiced, even though I did not know it. ||85|| He who
is devoted to bowing down, devoted to the Dharma and meditation, attained
samadhi and, in the state of samadhi, Varuna passed away. ||86|| In that
celestial plane, called Arunabha, which is as vast as four palas, he will be
reborn, having fulfilled his lifespan, in the state of a Videha. ||87|| Even
though he had practiced ignorance, Varuna, through his path, was reborn as a
human being in a good family. ||88|| Having attained humanhood again in the
state of a Videha, in a good family, he will worship the path of liberation and
attain the state of liberation. ||89|| When Varuna was killed, the soldiers of
the Chetaka army became twice as enthusiastic for battle, like a boar that has
been touched by a stick. ||90|| With the Ganarajas as their leaders, the
soldiers of the Chetaka army, with their unyielding, sharp-beaked army, attacked
the lower region with anger. ||91|| Seeing his own army being attacked, the
Kunika, like a lion struck by a clod of earth, ran forward with anger. ||92||
Playing in the battlefield like a lotus, the Kunika, the valiant elephant, threw
the enemy forces in all directions like petals of a lotus. ||93|| Knowing the
Kunika to be invincible, Chetaka, filled with great anger, aimed his divine
arrow, a treasure of valor, at him. ||94|| From there, Hari, the lord of the
army, pierced the Kunika's vajra armor in front and struck his iron armor in the
back. ||95|| Stretching his bowstring, the king of Vaishali also released an
arrow, but it was deflected by the vajra armor. ||96|| Seeing that even the
infallible arrow was ineffective, the soldiers of the Chetaka army thought that
their merit had been exhausted. ||97|| Chetaka, the truthful one, did not
release a second arrow. He retreated and fought again on the second day. ||98||
Chetaka's arrow was again ineffective on the second day. Thus, a very fierce
battle took place between the two for many days. ||99|| Eighty lakhs plus a
crore of soldiers on both sides perished and were reborn in the states of
animals and hell. ||100|| Having lost their respective cities, the Ganarajas and
Chetaka perished and entered the city. Kunika also blocked the city. ||101||
Then, the entire army of Champesh, mounted

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 khaNDaH-2 dRSTAntasamuccayaH 209 kSamayAmi sarvAJjIvAn sarve kSAmyantu te mayi
/  maitrI me sarvabhUteSu vairaM mama na kenacit  /  / 79  /   /  mAmakInaM na
kimapi na vA'hamapi kasyacit  /  mamakAramakArSaM yaM tamapi vyutsRjAmyaham  /
/ 80  /  /  kAni kAni na mUDho'haM pApasthAnAnyaseviSi  /  tanmithyA duSkRtaM
me'stu gatarAgasya saMprati  /  / 81  /  /  devatvanRtvatiryaktvanArakatveSu
yanmayA  /  kRtaM duSkarma tadgaheM zrIvIro'rhan gatirmama  /  / 82 /  /
evamArAdhanAM kRtvA pratyAcakhyau caturvidham  /  AhAramatha dadhyau ca
namaskAraM samAhitaH  /  / 83 /  /  tadA ca varuNasyaikaH suhRnmithyAdRgAhavAt
/  bahirbhUtvopavaruNamAgatyaivamavocata  /  / 84  /  /  vayasya ! tava
sauhArdakrIto'hamapi saMprati  /  tvadAsevitamadhyAnaM prapanno'smyavidannapi  /
/ 85  /  /  namaskAraparAvartI dharmadhyAnaparAyaNaH  /  samAdhimaraNaM prApya
saudharme varuNo yayau  /  / 86 /  /  tadvimAne'ruNAbhAkhye catuHpalyopamapramam
/  pUrayitvAyurutpadya videheSu sa setsyati  /  / 87  /  /  ajJAnasevitenApi
varuNasya tu vartmanA  /  vipadya tatsuhRdbhUyo manuSyaH sukule'bhavat  /  / 88
/  /  videheSu manuSyatvaM punarAsAdya satkule  /  muktimArga samArAdhya sa
mokSapadamApsyati  /  / 89  /  /  hate ca varuNe'bhUvaMzceTakasya camUbhaTAH  /
yuddhAya dviguNotsAhAH kANDaspRSTavarAhavat  /  / 90  /  /
gaNarAjasanAthaistaizceTakasya camUbhaTaiH  /  akuTTi
kUNikacamUrdazadbhiradharaM ruSA  /  / 91 /  /  kuTyamAnaM balaM dRSTvA
svakIyamatha kUNikaH  /  loSTAhataH siMha iva krodhoddhatamadhAvata  /  / 92 /
/  sarasIva raNe krIDan kUNiko vIrakuJjaraH  /  dizo dizi parabalaM
padmakhaMDamivAkSipat  /  / 13 /  /  kUNikaM durjayaM jJAtvA
ceTako'thAtyamarSaNaH  /  taM divyaM mArgaNaM zauryadhano dhanuSi sandadhe  /  /
94  /  /  itazca vajrakavacaM kUNikasya puro hariH  /  vyadhatta camarendrastu
pRSThe sannAhamAyasam  /  / 95  /  /  cApamAkarNamAkRSya vaizAlIpatinA'pyatha  /
sa muktaH sAyako vajravarmaNA skhalito'ntarA  /  / 96 /  /  amoghasyApi bANasya
tasya moghatvadarzanAt  /  camUbhaTAzceTakasya puNyakSayamamaMsata  /  / 97 /  /
dvitIyaM nA'mucadbANaM satyasandhastu ceTakaH  /  apasRtya dvitIyasmin dine
tadvadayudhyata  /  / 18 /  /  tathaiva moghabANo'bhUd dvitIye'pyahni ceTakaH  /
evaM dine dine yuddhamatighoramabhUttayoH  /  / 99 /  /  lakSAzItyA'dhikA
koTirbhaTAnAM pakSayordvayoH  /  vipede yA sodapAdi tiryakSu narakeSu ca  /  /
100  /  /  naMSTvA svasvapuraM yAtsu gaNarAjeSu ceTakaH  /  praNazya prAvizat
puryAM kUNiko'pi rurodha tAm  /  / 101 /  /  tadA secanakArUDhau
caMpezasyAkhilaM balam  /  vIrau hallavihallau tau rAtrAvabhibabhUvatuH  /  /
102 /  /  na prahartuM navA dhartuM sa hastI svapnahastivat  /  kenApyazAki
caMpezAzibire sauptikAgataH  /  / 103 /  /  2010_02

Page #251 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter 210: The Tale of the Rejection of the Eager One  Having killed,
having killed, in the night, the two, Halla and Vihalla, were going along
safely. The minister said to the elephant, "O Kūṇika, our entire army has been
routed by these two. Tell us, what is the way to defeat Halla and Vihalla?"  The
ministers replied, "These two cannot be defeated by anyone. They are mounted on
elephants, like men on elephants, and are invincible."  "Therefore, let us try
to kill this elephant. Let a pit be dug in the path, filled with Khadira wood
and burning coals."  "Let it be covered with water, so that it is difficult to
see. The elephant will run fast and fall into it."  Champa ordered a pit to be
dug, filled with Khadira wood and burning coals, and covered over, anticipating
their arrival.  Then, in the night, Halla and Vihalla, having dismounted, saw
the two, Jita and Kashin, mounted on the elephant.  The elephant, coming to the
edge of the pit of burning coals, saw the pit and stopped, refusing to go
forward.  Then, Halla and Vihalla, rebuking the elephant, said, "You are
ungrateful and cowardly, for you have fled from the battle. You have abandoned
your kin and gone to a foreign land. You have brought your master, Arya Chetaka,
into this misfortune. A dog, fed by you, is better than you, who are always
loyal to your master. You are not worthy of life, for you have abandoned your
duty to us."  Thus rebuked, the elephant, seeing the two princes on his back,
quickly lifted them up, thinking them to be his own, even though they were not.
He himself fell into the pit of burning coals and perished instantly, going to
hell.  The two princes said, "What have we done? We have been treated like
animals, but the elephant is not an animal. He has been loyal to his master,
Arya, and has been in trouble for a long time. He has brought himself to death,
and we are still alive, though we are fools."  "We have caused the destruction
of a great army, and we have been ungrateful to our kin. We have been destroyed
in vain, and we have lost our kinship."  "Therefore, it is not right for us to
live any longer. We should become disciples of our valiant master, and there is
no other way."  Then, the queen, seeing their remorse, took them to the path of
liberation. They were taken to the feet of the great Vīra, and they became
monks.  [From the Trishatisalaaka Purva, Chapter 10, Verses 190 to 310] 29. The
story of Bahubali and Bharata in the chapter on the teachings of the great Vīra.
The son of the great Rishabhadeva, Bharata, having conquered the six continents
in sixty thousand years, came to Ayodhya. While he was being crowned king for
twelve years, he saw the people coming and going, and he recognized his brothers
who had come there. He sent messengers to his relatives, saying, "O relatives of
Bharata, you should serve this king."  They replied, "We are also the sons of
the king, and Bharata is also the son of our father. Why should he be greater
than us, who desires our service? O messengers, go back to your place. We will
go to our father."  _ 2010_02

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 210 AturapratyAkhyAnaprakIrNakama mArayitvA mArayitvA nizi hallavihallayoH  /
kSemeNa gacchatormaMtrimaMDalI smA''ha kUNikaH  /  / 104  /  /  AbhyAM
vidrutamasmAkaM prAyeNa sakalaM balam  /  tad brUta ka ihopAyo jaye
hallavihallayoH  /  / 105  /  /  maMtriNo'pyUcire tau hi jetuM zakyau na kenacit
/  adhirUDhau hi yAvattaM hastinaM narahastinau  /  / 106 /  /  tasmAttasyaiva
kariNo vadhAya prayatAmahe  /  khAdirAMgArasaMpUNAM kAryatAM pathi khAtikA  /  /
107 /  /  chAdayitvA ca vArIva durlakSyA sA kariSyate  /  tasyAM secanako
vegAdabhidhAvan patiSyati  /  / 108  /  /  caMpezA'kArayadatha
khAdirAMgArapUritAm  /  khAtikAmuparicchannAM tadAgamanavama'ni  /  / 109 /  /
atha hallavihallAvapyavaskandakRte nizi  /  nirIyatuH secanakAdhirUDhau
jitakAzinau  /  / 110  /  /  aMgArakhAtikopAntametya secanako'pi hi  /  tAM
vibhaMgena vijJAya tasthau yAtamamAnayan  /  / 111 /  /  tato
hallavihallAbhyAmiti nirbhartsataH karI  /  pazurasyakRtajJo'si kAtaro yadabhU
raNAt  /  / 112 /  /  videzagamanaM bandhutyAgazca tvatkRte kRtaH  /
asmindurvyasane kSiptastvatkRte cAryaceTakaH  /  / 113  /  /  varaM zvA poSitaH
zreyAn bhaktaH svAmini yaH sadA  /  na tu tvaM
prANavAllabhyAdyo'smatkAryamupekSase  /  / 114  /  /  iti nirbhartsato hastI
kumArau nijapRSThataH  /  vegAduttArayAmAsa bhaktaMmanyo balAdapi  /  / 115  /
/  svayaM tu tasminnaMgAragarte jhampAM dadau karI  /  sadyo vipadya
cAdyAyAmutpede narakAvanau  /  / 116  /  /  kumArau dadhyatudhigdhigAvAbhyAM
kimanuSThitam  /  pazutvamAvayoLaktaM na tu secanakaH pazuH  /  / 117  /  /
AryapAdA yasya kRte kSiptA durvyasane ciram  /  taM svayaM nidhanaM nItvA
jIvAvo'dyApi durdhiyau  /  / 118  /   /  Aryasainyasya mahato nAzapratibhuvAviva
/  akRSvahi vRthA nAzaM nIto bandhurabandhutAm  /  / 119  /   /  tannA'dya
jIvituM yuktaM jIvAvazcedataH param  /  ziSyIbhUyArhato vIrasvAminaH khalu
nAnyathA  /  / 120  /  /  tadA zAsanadevyA tau bhAvazramaNatAM gatau  /  nItau
zrIvIrapAdAnte parivavrajaturdvatam  /  / 121  /  /  [zrItriSaSTizalAkA0
parva-10 zloka-190 taH 310] 29. niyuddhadhyAne zrIupadezaprAsAde
bAhubalibharatayoH prabandhaH  /  zrIRSabhadevaputraH SaSTivarSasahasraiH
SaTkhaNDAM pRthvI sAdhayitvA bharato'yodhyAyAmAjagAma  /  tatra dvAdazAbdike
cakrirAjyAbhiSeke vartamAne sa bhUpa AgatAnAgatAn janAnavalokayan tatra
nijAnujAnanAyAtAn vijJAya svabAndhavAn prati pratyekaM dUtAn preSitavAn  /  te
gatvA tAnevamAhuH-"bho bharatabAndhavAH ! yUyaM taM bhUpaM bhajadhvaM"  /
tatastairuktaM-"vayamapi nAbheyasUnavaH bharato'pi pituH sUnuH kimasmattaH
sarvebhyo'dhiko yo'smAkaM sevAM vAJchati  /  bho dUtAH ! yUyaM svasthAne yAta,
vayaM tAtaM _ 2010_02

Page #252 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Chapter - 2 Collection of Examples We will do what is appropriate. ” Then they
went to the Jinantika of Suvarnagiri and said, “O father! Your six-part kingdom
is not satisfied, and you want to take our kingdom. By the command of the
Bhagavan, we all together take your kingdom.” The master gave a Dharma discourse
to those who were enchanted - " Wake up, why don't you wake up, tell me, you are
a very difficult husband. There is no peace in this kingdom, nor is there any
peace in the future life. || 1 || | " 211 Having heard the Bhagavan's discourse,
eighty-nine Bharata brothers performed the vow. Bharata king took their
kingdoms. What general did not bow down to the king and say, "Master! Bahubali,
the king, was not conquered by you, even though you conquered the six-part
kingdom, it was not conquered, because the wheel does not enter the armory.”
Having heard this, the eloquent messenger was sent to Taxila. Going by short
journeys, he heard the fame of Bahubali from many people in village after
village, town after town, and arrived in the city of Taxila. Then, by the order
of Bahubali, the messenger, Suvega, was admitted to the inner assembly, which
was shining like gold. He bowed to the king and stood in front. Bahubali asked
about the well-being of his brother, the city of Bandhavnagar, etc., and after
giving the answer, he said, “O king! Your elder brother is eager to meet you and
invites you. Therefore, you should go there once, bow down to him, and take his
command on your head. Because even the brother does not obey Bharata's command,
then his valor is useless, so to destroy the slander of the people, otherwise
there will be doubt about your kingdom. Because I The fierce poisonous snake,
the fire, the wind-blown, The lord, the one with great prowess, and the
trustworthy, these three are not to be trusted. || 1 || Even the Nirjaras
worship him, there is no inferiority in his service.” Having heard this, the
king said, “O messenger! Your king will be ashamed to see me, because in
childhood, while playing in the water, he lifted my foot and threw me up in the
air like a ball, even that is forgotten! O messenger! Your king has been
burdened with sins for sixty thousand years, there is no other redeemer for him,
I am the one. Bring him quickly for a test of strength.” Then Suvega returned
with fear, and in a few days he came to his city and told Bharata everything
about his younger brother. “Bahubali cannot be conquered even by Indra,” having
heard this, Bharata, with a million and a half sons, and with his army, marched
towards Taxila. Bahubali also came face to face. His eldest son, Somaysha, the
king, was the conqueror of a lakh of elephants, horses, and chariots, even
alone. He had three lakh of soldiers. Among them, even the youngest was capable
of conquering an Akshauhini army. An Akshauhini army consists of - 21890
elephants, 21890 chariots, 65610 horses, 109350 foot soldiers. And in the army
of chariots, eighty lakh of horses were said to be neighing at the same time,
eighteen lakh of drums were roaring, and sixteen lakh of trumpets. Hearing this,
the excited soldiers fought each other every day. Once, Bahubali's devotee,
Anilvega, the Vidyadhara, the chariot  2010_02

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 khaNDaH - 2 dRSTAntasamuccayaH pRSTvocitaM kariSyAmaH  / " tataste suvarNagirI
jinAntike gatvA'bhyadhuH- "bhoH tAta ! SaTkhaNDena rAjyenAtRpto
bhavadbhirdattamasmAkaM rAjyaM grahItuM samIhate  /  bhagavadAjJayA vayaM
sarve'pi saMbhUya tasya rAjyaM gRhNImaH"  /  svAminA tAnmugdhAn prati
dharmadezanA dattA - " saMbujjhaha kiM na bujjhaha saMbohi khalu pecca dulahA  /
no hUvaNamaMta rAio no sulahaM puNaravi jIviyaM  //  1  //  | " 211
bhagavaddezanAM zrutvA'STanavatibharatAnujairvrataM bheje  /  teSAM rAjyAni
bharatanRpo jagrAha  /  kA senApatirnaradevaM natvaivaM vyajijJapat - "svAmin !
bAhubalI bhUpAlastvayA na jitaH tasminnajite tvayA SaTkhaNDaM jitamapyajitaM,
yatazcakraM zastrAgAre na pravizati "  /  iti zrutvA vAgmI dUtaH takSazilAM
prati preSitaH  /  stokaprayANairgacchan bahuladeze grAme grAme nagare nagare
bahujanamukhato bAhubalino yazaH zRNvan takSazilAyAM puri samAgataH  /  tataH
pratihAreNa suvego dUto bAhubalina AjJayA svarNavarNAbhamantaHsabhaM pravezitaH
/  taM bhUpaM namaskRtya puraH sthitaH  /  bAhubalinA bAndhavanagarAdikuzalaM
pRSTaM, taduttaraM dattvA prAha-"bho nRpa ! tavAgrajanmA
tvanmilanotsukastvAmAhvayati  /  atastvamekavAraM taM natvA tasyAjJAM zirasi
dhRtvA'tra samAgaccheH  /  yato bAndhavo'pi bharatAjJAM na manyate
tarhyasyAkiJcitkaraH parAkrama iti lokApavAdavidhvaMsAya, anyathA tava
rAjyasaMzayo bhaviSyati  /  yataH I karAlagaralaH sarpaH pAvakaH pavanoddhuraH
/  prabhuH prauDhapratApazca vizvAsyA na trayo'pyamI  /  /  1 /  /  nirjarA api
yaM paryupAsate tasya sevayA hInatvaM nAsti"  /  /  iti zrutvA bhUpo babhASe -
"he dUta ! tava bhUpo mAM vIkSya lajjiSyati, yato bAlyAvasthAyAM jalakelyavasare
pAdaM dhRtvA nabhasi kandukavaducchAlitastadapi vismRtaM ! bho dUta !
SaSTivarSasahasreSu pApairbhRtasya tava bhUpasyAnyaH ko'pi prAyazcittadAyako
nAsti, ahamevAsmi  /  zIghraM samAnaya balaparIkSAyai"  /  tataH suvegaH
sabhayaH pratyAvRttaH stokaireva dinaiH svapuramAgatya bharatAntike'nujasya
sarvasvarUpaM gaditavAn  /  "bAhubalI zakreNApi jetuM na zakyate" iti zrutvA
bharataH sapAdakoTisvaputrAnvitaH sasainyastakSazilAM prati cacAla  /
bAhubalyapi sammukhaM samAgAt  /  tasya jyeSThaputraH somayazA nRpaH sa eko'pi
lakSatrayahastihayarathAnAM jetA  /  asya trilakSatanayAH  /  teSu
kaniSTho'pyeko'kSauhiNImitAM senAM jetuM samarthaH  /  akSauhiNImAnaM tuM-21890
gajAH, 21890 rathAH, 65610 azvAH, 109350 padAtayaH iti  /  atha cakrisainye
caturazItilakSANi nisvAnAnAM samakAlamavAdiSuH, aSTAdazalakSadundubhInAM
nirghoSAH SoDazalakSANi tUryANi  /  tAni zrutvA sotsAhA bhaTA mitho yuyudhire
pratyaham  /  ekadA bAhubalino bhakto'nilavego vidyAdharazcakri 2010_02

Page #253 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 212 ## The Scattering of the Eager Refusal  The commander, having defeated
the aerial army of the Chakra, attacked the elephant army. Like balls, the
elephants, tossed by the force of his fist, fell back to the ground. Seeing that
the Chakra was about to be defeated, he released his chakra. Seeing this, the
Chakra, terrified and defeated, fled to the Meru mountains, the ocean, and
wherever he went, the chakra, like a karma earned in the past, did not leave his
back. Then, using his knowledge, he created a vajra cage and entered it. Then
the chakra gods said, "Hey, hey, you rascal! Why are you mocking your own
strength?" After six months, he emerged from the cage, and the chakra, having
severed his head, remained in the Chakra's hand. Thus, the two fought for twelve
years. One day, the eldest son of the Chakra, Surya Yasha, spread like a
wildfire in the army of Bahubali. He arrived in front of his father's enemy.
Bahubali said, "Son! You are weak, and I am happy that you have dared to attack
my army. You, my son, have brought glory to our lineage. But there is no one in
the three worlds who can withstand my anger. Therefore, abandon my sight and go
far away."  He said, "Father! Who will fulfill my desire for battle today
without you?" Saying this, he made the sound of a bowstring. Then the gods,
gathering together, forbade the battle between the two brothers and said, "O
sons of the king of the ages! Your father has protected this world. Why are you
two now trying to destroy it? This is not befitting of you. For the sake of
testing your strength, you two should fight with the five weapons given by us:
1. Sight, 2. Speech, 3. Fist, 4. Arm, 5. Weapons and signs." Having accepted the
words of the gods, the two brothers stood with the gods as witnesses. Then the
Chakra soldiers thought, "Even Indra has doubts about winning a duel with this
one. How then will our master win?" Seeing the soldiers thinking this, the
Chakra, to show his strength, had a large pit dug and stood at its edge. He
bound his left arm with a large iron chain and said to all the soldiers, "All of
you, together, pull the chain and throw me into the pit." Even though they all
pulled together, his mind did not waver. Because even all the men, women,
elephants, horses, and other creatures born on earth could not pull the Chakra
even a little, what could the army do? Then the Chakra, with a smile on his
face, pulled his own hand. With that, all of them, bound by the chain, hung like
vines and birds. Seeing this feat, the witnesses stood far away, happy like
spectators.  Then the two kings of the Chakra, standing face to face for the
battle of sight, looked at each other with unwavering eyes. Their copper eyes
were terrifying. Then, seeing the face of Bahubali, with his terrible eyes, the
Chakra's eyes filled with tears and he quickly looked away. His entire army
became dejected. Then, ashamed, Bahubali said, "Brother! Why are you worried?
Engage in a battle of words with me." Having been told this, the Chakra roared
like a lion, and a deafening sound filled the sky. Then, in anger, Bahubali
roared like a lion, and all the soldiers fainted. Again, the Chakra king and
Bahubali roared with a terrible roar. Then the Chakra's sound, like the shadow
of the morning, like the friendship of the wicked,

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 212 AturapratyAkhyAnaprakIrNakam senApatimasranirjityAkAzagatyA cakrigajasenAM
vyagAhata, kandukAniva gajAnullAlya punarbhUmau patato muSTyA jaghAna  /  cakrI
tamajayyaM vIkSya cakraM mumoca  /  tadvIkSya bhIto naSTaH merukandarasAgarAdiSu
yatra yatra yAti tatra tatra cakraM pUrvArjitakarmavatpRSThaM na muJcati, tadA
vidyayA vajrapaJjaraM nirmAya tatra praviSTaH  /  tadA cakrasurAH prAhuH-"re re
raGka ! kiM paurUSaM viDambayasi ?"  /  tataH SaNmAsAnte jAtAmoM bahiniHsRtaH,
tAvaJcakraM, tacchirazchitvA cakrihaste'tiSThat  /  evaM
yudhyamAnayorddhAdazavarSANi vyatIyuH  /  ekadA cakrijyeSThAtmajaH sUryayazA
bAhubalisainye dAvAgniriva prasasAra, kSaNAt pitRvyAbhyaNe AgataH  /  taM balI
prAha-"vatsa ! tvaM laghurasi, yadevaM mama senAM vigAhase tenAhaM hRSTo'smi,
tvayA putreNAsmAkaM vaMzaH samudyotitaH, paraM trailokye'pi sa kazcinnAsti yo
mama krodhaM sahate, tasmAnmama dRSTiM tyaktvA dUrato yohi"  /  sa prAha-"tAta !
adya tvayA vinA ko mama saGgrAmAbhilASaM pUrayati ?" ityuktvA dhanuSTaGkAravaM
cakAra  /  tadA surAH saMbhUya parasparasubhaTayuddhaM niSidhya dvayorbandhvoH
zikSAmiti prAha:-"bho yugAdIzaputrau ! tAtenedaM vizvaM pAlitaM adhunA yuvAM kiM
saMhartuM pravRttau ? etanna yujyate yuvayoH  /
balaparIkSArthamubhAbhyAmevAsmadAdiSTairdaSTi 1 vAg 2 muSTi 3 bAhu 4 daNDAstra 5
lakSaNaiH paJcabhiryuddheryoddhavyaM"  /  iti suravAkye dvAbhyAmapi pratipanne
suranarAH sAkSIbhUya tasthuH  /  tadA cakrisainikA dadhyuH-"anena saha
dvandvayuddhe zakrasyApi jayaprAptau saMdehastarhi asmatsvAmI kathaM jayaM
prApsyati ?" iti dhyAyato bhaTAn vIkSya cakrI svabaladarzanAyaikaM mahAkUpaM
kArayitvA tasyopakaNThe sthitvA svasya vAmabhujaM mahAlohazRGkhalAbhirbaddhvA
sarvasainikAn prAha-"yUyaM sarve'pi saMbhUya zRGkhalAkarSaNena mAM gartAyAM
kSipata"  /  taiH sarvaiH karSito'pi manAg na cacAla  /  yatazcakriNaM
bharatotpannasarvanaranArIgajAzvAdayaH saMbhUyAkarSaNaM kartuM tilamAtramapi na
kSamAH tarhi senAbhiH kiM bhavet ?  /  tatazcakrI hRdayalepakaraNamiSeNa
svahastamAcakarSa, tena te sarve'pi zRGkhalAlagnA latAlagnAH pakSiNa iva
lambante sma  /  iti parAkramaM vIkSya hRSTAH sAkSiNa iva dUre tasthuH  /
tatazcakribhUpau prAgdRSTiyuddhArthaM saMmukhaM sthitau
animeSadRSTyA'valokayataH sma  /  tAmralocanau bhayaMkarAvabhUtAM  /  tato
bAhubalimukhaM bhISaNAkSaM vilokayatazcakriNo locane bASpAkule vegAtpramilite  /
tatsainyaM sarvaM nyagmukhaM jAtaM  /  tato lajjitaM cakriNaM sa prAha- "bhrAtaH
! kimudvigno'si ? kuru vAgyuddhaM mayA saha"  /  iti tenoktazcakrI mahAghoraM
siMhanAdaM cakAra, tena jAtaM badhiraM skandhAvAramaNDalam  /  tataH sAmarSo
bAhubalI siMhanAdaM cakAra tena sainikAH sarve'pi mUrchitA iva babhUvuH  /
punarapi cakrI bhUpazca siMhanAdaM duHsahaM cakratuH  /  tadA cakriNo dhvaniH
pUrvAhnacchAyeva durjanasauhRdamiva 2010_02

Page #254 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Chapter 2: Collection of Examples 213  The king was gradually losing strength.
Seeing this, the wrestler said to the king, "Brother, do not be disheartened.
What if I won by chance? Now be ready for a fistfight." Encouraged by the king,
he raised his arms high, roared loudly, and rushed towards the other, embracing
him and squeezing him with his arms. Then the king, taking the wrestler in his
hand, playfully lifted him high in the air like a ball. In a moment, he
disappeared. Both armies cried out in alarm. The king thought, "Until this
fellow falls to the ground and does not break, I will take him from the sky."
Thinking this, he made his hands small, looked upwards, and stood still. After a
long time, he came down. He was held by strong arms. Then, the enraged wrestler
struck him on the head with his fist and knocked him unconscious. The king,
regaining consciousness after a long time, struck the wrestler on the chest with
his fist and fainted. Regaining his senses in a moment, the wrestler, red with
anger, struck the king on the head with his club, shattering his crown into a
hundred pieces. For a moment, the king closed his eyes and shattered the
wrestler's club into pieces with his iron club. Then, the wrestler struck the
king with his club, sinking him into the ground up to his knees. Then, the king,
emerging from the ground, struck the wrestler with his iron club, sinking him
into the ground up to his neck. Regaining consciousness in a moment, he emerged
and thought, "The king and the wrestler are never defeated." This is an eternal
truth. I have been defeated in five battles. Then, how can I be a wrestler?"
While he was thinking this, the chakra-ratna came into his hand. Then, the
wrestler said to the king, "Even today, you have not lost anything. Obey my
command, or you will become Yama's guest with this chakra." The king said, "Why
are you making empty boasts? Show your strength now." And so on, they fought
bravely. The wrestler, in anger, released the chakra, made it revolve around
him, and then returned it to his hand. Because even in the ordinary chakra-
gotra, the chakra does not prevail, then what chance does it have in such a
supremely embodied being? Then, the strong-armed one, raising his fist, thought,
"Today, I will crush the chakra, the thousand Yakshas, or their lord." And he
ran towards the wrestler. Again, he thought, "This will surely lead to his
death. Then, people will call me the killer of the six-part lord. Therefore,
alas, I have earned many sins through my arrogance. Blessed are those human
beings who have taken initiation near their father's feet. Alas, I am still
engaged in sin." Thinking this, he struck his own head with the same fist. Then,
the gods, saying "Well done, well done," showered flowers upon him. 29. The
story of Attanmalla in the Niyuddhyadhyana section of the Shri Avashyakahari
Bhadriya Vritta.  Ujjayini is a city. In it, there was a very strong wrestler
named Attan. In the city of Sopara, there was a king named Singhagir, who was a
lover of wrestlers. He gave a lot of wealth to whoever defeated the wrestler.
Attan went there and defeated a wrestler named Phalihamalla in the village of
Bharugachchharana, which is far away. In the same way, other things should be
done according to one's own intelligence. We will only tell the stories. Even
the story that is bound to the authorized story is told for the benefit of the
people. In

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 khaNDa:-2 dRSTAntasamuccayaH 213 yathAkramaM hIyamAno'bhUt  /  tena vilakSaM
cakriNaM bhUpa: smAha-"he bhrAtaH ! mA viSIda, mayA kAkatAlIyanyAyena yadi jitaM
tarhi kiM jAtaM ? idAnI sajjo bhava muSTiyuddhAya" iti bhUpenotsAhitaH
proccairbhujAsphoTaM kRtvotplutyAnyo'nyamAzliSya bhujAbhyAM pIDayantau
jagarjatuH  /  tato bhUpazcakriNaM kareNa gRhItvA lIlayA kandukavaduJcairAkAze
udalAlayat  /  kSaNAdadRzyo'bhUt  /  tena sainyadvaye'pi hAhAravaH prasRtaH  /
bhUpazcintayA dadhyau-"yAvadAryo'yaM bhUmau patitvA na vizIryate
tAvadantarikSAdeva gRhNAmi" iti vicintya talpAkArau karau
kRtvordhvadRSTistasthau  /  cireNa sa Ayayau  /  balinA bAhU prasArya dhRtaH  /
tataH krodhAdhmAtazcakrI tanmUrdhni muSTighAtena tamamUrchayat  /  bhUpo'pi
cireNa prAptacaitanyazcakriNaM hRdi muSTighAtaM kRtvA mUrchA gamitavAn  /
kSaNAllabdhasaMjJazcakrI roSAruNo daNDena bhUpamUrdhyatADayat, tena mukuTaH
zatakhaNDaH kRtaH  /  kSaNaM netre nimIlya bhUpo lohamayadaNDena cakrisannAhaM
zakalIcakAra  /  tatazcakrI daNDaghAtena bhUpaM jAnupramANaM bhUmau magnIcakAra
/  tato nirgatyAyasadaNDena bhUpena nihatazcakrI AkaNThaM bhUmau magnaH  /
kSaNAccaitanyaM prApya nirgato dadhyo-"bhUpaizcakrI na jIyate" itIyaM zAzvatI
sthitirasti, anenAhaM paJcabhiryuddhairjitaH tarhi mayi cakritvaM na hi" iti
dhyAyatastasya pANau cakraratnamupAgatam  /  tadA cakrI bhUpaM smAha-"adyApi
tava kiJcinna naSTaM, mamAjJAM manyasva, no cedanena cakreNa
yamAtithirbhaviSyasi"  /  bhUpaH smAha-"vAkyADambaraM vRthA kiM vahasi ?
sAmpratamasyApi balaM darzaya" ityAdi nirbhasiMtazcakrI kopAJcakraM mumoca,
tattaM pradakSiNIkRtya punazcakrikare yayau  /  yataH sAmAnye'pi cakrigotre
cakraM na prabhavati, tarhi tathAvidhe caramazarIriNi ko'vakAzastasya ?  /  atha
bAhubalI muSTimutpATya "cakraM vA yakSasahasraM vA tadadhipaM vA'dya cUrNayAmi"
iti vicintya cakriNaM pratyadhAvata  /  punardadhyau-"anenAvazyaM vadho bhAvI
tato mAM vizve SaTkhaNDanAthahantAraM vadiSyanti janAH, ato
dhigmyaa'hngktyaa'nekpaapaanyrjitaani| dhanyAste mamAnujA yaiH pUrvameva
tAtapAdasamIpe dIkSA gRhItA, dhigmAmadyApi pAparataM" iti dhyAtvA tenaiva
muSTinA svamUrdhni locaM cakAra  /  tataH "sAdhu sAdhu" iti vadanto
devAstasyopari puSpavRSTiM cakruH  /  /  29. niyuddhadhyAne
zrIAvazyakahAribhadrIyavRttau aTTanamallakathA  /  ujjeNitti NayarI, tIe
jiyasattUraNNo aTTaNo mallo atIva balavaM, sopArae paTTaNe puhaivaI rAyA
siMhagirI nAma mallavallaho, pativarisamaTTaNajaohAmieNa aNeNa macchiyamalle kae
jieNa aTTaNeNa bharugacchAharaNIe dUrullakUviyAe gAme phalihamalle kaetti  /
evamakSaragamanikA'nyAsAmapi svabuddhyA kAryA, kathAnakAnyeva kathayiSyAmaH,
adhikRtagAthApratibaddhakathAnakamapi vineyajanahitAyocyateujjeNINayarIe
jiyasattU rAyA, tassa aTTaNo mallo savvarajjesu ajeo, io ya samuddatIre
sopArayaM NayaraM, tattha sIhagirI rAyA, so ya mallANaM jo jiNai tassa bahuM
davvaM deha, so ya aTTaNo tattha gaMtUNa 2010_02

Page #255 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Story of the Eager Rejection  A king, eager to acquire a rare gem, sent
his envoy to a distant land. The envoy, however, was careless and lost the gem
on the way. Feeling ashamed, he thought, "This is a great loss for me." He then
saw a fish drinking water and, out of anger, killed it. Later, he realized his
mistake and thought, "This was a terrible act."  He then went to a city and,
seeing a man carrying a heavy load, asked him, "What is your livelihood?" The
man replied, "I am a farmer, and you are my lord." The envoy, feeling
remorseful, gave the farmer a gift of cotton.  The envoy then went to Ujjain
and, seeing a young man, trained him in warfare. When the time came for the king
to claim the gem, the envoy went to the king. On the first day, the envoy fought
against the gem-bearing warrior and the fish-warrior, but he was defeated. The
king, however, was hopeful and said, "He will succeed tomorrow."  The envoy went
to the farmer and asked him, "What troubles you?" The farmer replied, "I am
troubled by the fish-warrior, who has challenged me to a duel." The envoy, not
wanting to lose the gem, said, "I will fight him for you."  On the second day,
the envoy fought the fish-warrior. On the third day, the envoy, seeing the fish-
warrior's strength, asked the farmer to help him. The farmer, holding the
envoy's head, threw him into a well. The envoy was saved and went to Ujjain,
where he received the five auspicious signs and enjoyed great wealth. This is
the story of the eager rejection.  ## The Story of Rathnemi  Rathnemi, the
younger brother of a king, sent a message to Rajimati, a princess, expressing
his desire to marry her. Rajimati thought, "My brother loves me and has sent
this message, so I will accept it."  However, when Rathnemi later asked for her
hand in marriage, she said, "You have tasted the fruit of love, now eat its
bitter fruit." Rathnemi asked, "Why should I eat the bitter fruit of your love?"
Rajimati replied, "Then why do you want to marry me, who has been rejected by
her brother?"  She continued, "Who, remembering the donkey, considers it
precious? Who, rejecting a gem, desires a piece of glass? Even in my past lives,
there was no one better than Nemir. In another life, Nemir, born with complete
knowledge, was the lord of the world. He lived in the same time as the king of
the Raivata kingdom. At that time, Rajimati, observing a vow, became a great
being. Nemir, her younger brother, also observed the vow. One day, after
receiving permission from the Jina, he went to the city to beg for alms and
returned home."

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 AturapratyAkhyAnaprakIrNakam varise 2 paDAyaM giNhai, rAyA ciMtei esa annAo
rajjAo AgaMtUNa paDAyaM harai, esa mama ohAvaNatti paDimalaM maggar3a, teNa ego
macchio diTTho vasaM pibaMto, balaM ca se vinnAsiya, nAUNa posio, puNaravi
aTTaNo Agao, so ya kira maho hohititti aNAgayaM ceva sayAo NayarAo appo
patthayaNassa avallaM bhariUNa avvAbAheNaM ei, saMpatto ya sopArayaM, juddhe
parAjio macchiyamalleNaM, gao ya sayaM AvAsaM ciMtei, eyassa vuDDI taruNayassa
mama hANI, aNNaM mallaM maggai, suNai ya-suraTThAe atthitti, eeNa
bharuyacchAharaNIe gAme dUrullakUviyAe karisago diTTho- egeNa hattheNa halaM
vAhei egeNa phalahio uppADei, taM ca daTThUNa ThioM pecchAmi se AhAraMti, AvallA
mukkA, bhajjA ya se bhattaM gahAya AgayA, patthiyA, kUrassa ujjhamajjIe ghaDao
pecchai, jimio saNNAbhUmi gao, tatthavi pecchai savvaM vattiyaM, vegAlio vasahiM
tassa ya ghare maggai dinnA, Thio, saMkahAe pucchai,kA jIviyA ?, te kahie bhai-
ahaM aTTaNo tumaM IsaraM karemitti, tIse bhajjAe se kappAsamollaM dinnaM, avallA
ya, sA savaladdhA ujjeNiM gayA, vamaNavireyaNANi kayANi posio nijuddhaM ca
sikkhAvio, puNaravi mahimAkAle teNeva vihiNA Agao, paDhamadivase phalahiyamallo
macchiyamallo ya juddhe egovi na parAjio, rAyA biiyadivase hohititti aigao,
imevi sae sae Alae gayA, aTTaNeNa phalahiya-mallo bhaNio - kahehi puttA ! jaM te
dukkhAviyaM, teNa kahiyaM, makkhittA'kkheveNaM puNaNNavIkayaM, macchiyassavi
raNNA saMmaddagA pesiyA, bhaNai ahaM tassa piupi Na bibhemi ko so varAo ?,
bitiyadivase samajujjhA, tatiyadivase aMbiyapahAro vaisAhaM Thio macchio,
aTTaNeNa bhaNio phalihitti, teNa phalahiggAheNa gahio sIse, taM
kuMDiyanAlagaMpiva egaMte paDiyaM, sakkArio gao ujjeNi, paMcalakkhaNANa bhogANa
AbhAgI jAo, iyaro mao  /  30. saGgadhyAne zrIupadezaprAsAde rathanemeH
prabandhaH  /  atha rathanemirlaghubhrAtA pANigrahaNalipsayA rAjImatIM prati
prAbhRtAni prasattaye preSIt  /  tadA rAjImatI dadhyau-"svabhrAtuH premato mayi
eSa prAbhRtaM preSayati, ato gRhNAmi"  /  anyedyurvivAhAkAGkSayA prArthayantaM
taM nRpAGgajetyabravIt - " madanaphalamAghrAya vAntvedaM bhuGkSva"  /  sa smAha
- " kimahaM vo'smadvAtaM bhuJje ?"  /  sA smAha - " tarhi bhrAtRtyaktAM
mAmupabhoktuM kathaM vAJchasi ? anyacca 214 ko nAma jamujjhitvA, rAsabhaM bahu
manyate  /  ko vA ratnamanAdRtya, kAce'pi kurute matiH  /   /  1  /   /  mama
janmAntare'pi nemirvaro bhUyAnnAparaH  /  anyadotpannapUrNajJAno jagadIzaH punA
raivatake samavAsarat  /  tadA rAjImatI vratamAdAya mahattarA jajJe  /
nemeranujo'pi vratamupAdatte sma  /  anyadA jinAnujJAM prApya bhikSArthaM pure
paribhramya pazcAnnivRtta iti dadhyau 2010_02

Page #256 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------



======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 khaNDa:-2 dRSTAntasamuccayaH 215 mA bhUdvinAzo jalakAyikAnAM, maddehasaGgena
tadeti vRSTyAm  /  bhikSAnivRtto rathanemisAdhurviveza kasyAMcana kandarAyAm  /
/ 1 /  /  vyAvartamAnA praNipatya nAthaM, rAjImatI sA'pi bhayena vRSTeH  /
pUrvapraviSTaM tamajAnatI drAgviveza tAmeva guhAM nagasya  /  / 2 /  /  gatA'pi
madhye na tamandhakAre, dadarza koNe sthitametadIye  /  klinnAni kiJcidvasanAni
sAdhvI, tatazca niHzoSayituM pravRttA  /  / 3 /  /  svargalokajayAyaiva,
sAdhayantIM tapaHkriyAm  /  dRSTvA vivasanAM tanvIM, babhUvotkalikAkula:  /  / 4
/  /  etasya sodareNAhamAjanmApi tiraskRtaH  /  iti bhrAtRvirodhena, smaro
munimapIDayat  /  / 5 /  /  piNDitaM sRSTisarvasvamivAsau hA mRgekSaNA  /
naikazo'pi mayA bhuktA, dhimme janma nirarthakam  /  / 6 /  /
ISatkampavapurbhRtya, ivotthAya visaMsthulaH  /  rathanemiH
purastasyAstasthAvuttAnitekSaNaH  /  / 7 /  /  he bhadre ! svecchayA''gaccha,
AvAM janma saphalaM kurvahe  /  punaH prAnte ubhAvapi tapovidhiM cariSyAvaH  /
zrutvetyavyAjacittA sA dhIratAM dhArayitvA satI spaSTamabhASiSTa  /  yataH
prAvRtya vAsAMsi tadaiva sAdhvI, sAdhuM sudhAsodarayA girA tam  /  pracakrame
vaktumiyaM munIndo, na yujyate'dastava savratasya  /  / 1 /  /  sAdho kva te
janma kule'male'smin, kvedaM kukarmAJjanato'pi kAlam  /  nirvAhayasva
vratametadAttaM, kSatavratAH syurna kadApi dhIrAH  /  / 2 /  /
anyaccasaMyatIpratisevAyAM dharmoDDAharSighAtayoH  /  devadravyavinAze ca,
bodhighAto niveditaH  /  / 3 /  /  pUrvaM gRhasthayA mayA vAcA'pi yastvaM
nehitaH, vratapratijJAtA sA'haM tvAmadya kathamAdriye ? agandhanakulajA
bhujaGgamAste'pi varyAH ye vAntaM viSaM nAznanti, tvaM tu tato'pi nikRSTaH,
khaNDitazIlasyedaM jIvitaM dhik  /  yataH daya~ darthyaM yoSitaM cedvidhatse,
bhAvaM kAmArAdhane sAdhuvarya  /  tadbho vAtAliGgito vAhavastvaM, mugdho
dhairyeNAsthitAtmeva bhAvI  /  / 1 /  /  2010_02

Page #257 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 216 ## Aaturpratyakhyanaprakirnakam  **For the sake of Varaatika, therefore,
one should destroy a koti (a large number). Therefore, having established
steadfastness, one should practice pure dharma.** ||2||  Hearing this statement,
which is full of reason, even a woman born of a cow would consider him
fortunate, a treasure trove of virtues. Drowned in the ocean of evil deeds,
alas, even a man is a disgrace. ||3||  Thus, hearing the teachings of Rajimati,
Sumati, the chief disciple, immediately gave up the false pride and practiced
dharma diligently. ||4||  **30. Sangadhyana, Sriparishishtaparva, within which
is the story of Bhavadeva.**  The Lord also spoke thus in Jambudvipa, in Bharat,
in the Magadha country, in the village called Sugrama. ||2||  Aryavanas, a
Rashtrakoota, was his father, and his wife was Revati. Bhavadatta and Bhavadeva
were their two sons. ||2||  (Pair) Bhavadatta, a firm boat for crossing the
ocean of existence. Even in his youth, he took initiation in the presence of a
well-established Acharya. ||3||  He, observing his vows, with a sharp sword, a
master of scriptures, lived with his Guru, like a second body. ||4||  Once, a
virtuous man in that order informed the Acharyas. "Allow me to go where my
relatives are." ||5||  "My younger brother is there, he is very affectionate
towards me. Seeing me, he will also become a monk, by nature, he is good." ||6||
Then, the Guru, along with the virtuous, knowledgeable ones, instructed him.
"The Guru rejoices in a disciple who is dedicated to the liberation of others."
||7||  He went to his father's place, which he had just left, and saw his
brother's wedding, a celebration of the Kamadeva tree. ||8||  Engrossed in the
excitement of the wedding, his brother, a son of a Muni, forgot what should not
be done, he became like a cotton ball. ||9||  At the time of the wedding, he did
not recognize his elder brother, as if he did not know him. He did not even
welcome him, nor did he tell him about his vows. ||10||  The Muni, feeling
ashamed, went to the Guru again. He told him everything about his brother's
behavior. ||11||  Bhavadeva said, "Alas! The hardness of human nature! He
disregarded his elder brother, a Rishi who had come to his house." ||12||  "What
is the value of wedding excitement compared to devotion to the Guru? Leaving
that aside, he did not welcome his elder brother with joy." ||13||  A virtuous
man said then, "Bhavadeva, you are wise. If you will make your younger brother a
monk." ||14||  Bhavadeva said, "If the Guru will stay in the Magadha country,
then he will show his kindness." ||15||  The virtuous ones, while traveling,
went to Magadha. Like the wind, the Shramanas do not stay in one place. ||16||
After paying respects to the Acharya's feet, Bhavadatta requested, "With your
permission, I wish to see my relatives who are nearby." ||17||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 216 AturapratyAkhyAnaprakIrNakam varATikAkRte tasmAnmA sma koTiM vinAzaya  /
tasmAddhIratvamAdhAya, zuddhadharmaM samAcAra  /  / 2 /  /  ityAditaduktiM
yuktiyuktAmAkaNyedaM dadhyaustrIjAtAvapi dhanyA'sau, nidhAnaM guNasaMpadAm  /
kukarmajaladhau magno, dhigahaM puruSo'pi hi  /  / 3 /  /  evaM tasyA rAjimatyAH
sumatyAH, zrutvA zikSA dakSamukhyastadaiva  /  dattvA mithyAdutkRtaM zrI
jinAnte, bhUyo dharmaM sAdhucIrNaM cacAra  /  / 4 /  /  30. saGgadhyAne
zrIpariziSTaparvAntargatA bhavadevavArtA  /  Acakhyau prabhurapyevaM
jambUdvIpasya bhArate  /  magadhAkhye janapade grAme sugrAmanAmani  /  / 2 /  /
AryavAnrASTrakUTo'bhUttasya patnI tu revatI  /  bhavadatto bhavadevazcAbhUtAM
tanayau tayoH  /  / 2 /  /  (yugmam) bhavadatto bhavAmbhodheruttAraNatarI dRDhAm
/  yauvane'pyAdade dIkSAM susthitAcAryasannidhau  /  / 3 /  /  sa vrataM
pAlayankhaDgadhArograM zrutapAragaH  /  vyaharad guruNA sArdhaM dvaitIyakIva
tattanuH  /  / 4 /  /  tasmingacche sAdhureko'nyadA''cAryAn vyajijJapat  /
anujAnIta mAM yAmi yatra bandhujano'sti me  /  / 5 /  /  tatrAsti me laghubhrAtA
sa bhRzaM snehalo mayi  /  pravrajiSyati mAM dRSTvA prakRtyA'gre'pi bhadrakaH  /
/ 6 /  /  tatastaM zrutabhRtsAdhusametaM gururAdizat  /  paranistAraNapare guruH
ziSye hi modate  /  / 7 /  /  sa jagAma piturdhAma gatamAtro dadarza ca  /
bhrAturudvAhamArabdhaM manmathadrumadohadam  /  / 8 /  /  vivAhakautukavyagraH
sa bhrAtA kanyaso muneH  /  vismRtAnyakaraNIyo mudvAtUlastadA'bhavat  /  / 9 /
/  vivAhasamaye prAptamajAnanniva so'grajam  /  nAkArSItsvAgatamapi
vratAdAnakathA'pi kA  /  / 10 /  /  vilakSaH sa munirbhUyo'pyAgamatsannidhau
guroH  /  AlocyAkathayatsarvAmanujasya kathAM tathA  /  / 11 /  /
bhavadatto'vadadaho ! kAThinyamanujanmanaH  /  jyAyAMsaM
yadavAjJAsIdRSimabhyAgataM gRhe  /  / 12 /  /  gurubhakterapi zreyaH kiM
nAmodvAhakautukam ?  /  tatparityajya sAnandaH sa jyeSThaM nAnviyAya yat  /  /
13 /  /  kazcidUce tadA sAdhurbhavadattAsi paNDitaH  /  yadi tvamanujanmAnaM
nijaM pravrAjayiSyasi  /  / 14  /  /  bhavadatto'bravIddeze magadhAkhye
gururyadi  /  vihariSyati tadadaH kautukaM darzayiSyate  /  / 15 /  /
viharanto'nyadA jagmurmagadhAneva sUrayaH  /  samIraNavadekatra zramaNAnAM
sthitirna hi  /  / 16 /  /  AcAryapAdAn vanditvA bhavadatto vyajijJapat  /
svajanAnita AsannAndidRkSe yuSmadAjJayA  /  / 17 /  /  2010_02

Page #258 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Chapter - 2 Collection of Examples  The Guru then instructed Bhavadatta, saying,
"Even a solitary one deserves to wander, O Muni, who is under control." || 18 ||
Bhavadatta then went to the house of his own worldly relatives, to grace his own
human being with the acceptance of renunciation. || 19 || Bhavadatta's younger
brother, Bhavadeva, then married the daughter of Nagadatta, born of Vasuki's
womb. || 20 || All the relatives joyfully celebrated the wedding, considering
that gathering to be a festival above festivals. || 21 || Immediately, they
washed his feet with water and offered him a towel, considering the water from
his feet to be superior to holy water. || 22 || Fearing the danger of drowning
in the ocean of existence, they all clung to his feet as if seeking support. ||
23 || The Muni also addressed his relatives, saying, "O relatives, you are
troubled by the wedding! Go and wander elsewhere, may you have the gain of
Dharma, O sinless ones!" || 24 || All the relatives joyfully offered him food
and drink, with fragrant and auspicious towels. || 25 || At that time,
Bhavadeva, upholding the family tradition, adorned his new bride, who was to be
served by his peers. || 26 || He applied sandalwood paste to his beloved's body,
like the moon's rays attracted by the moon. || 27 || On her head, he tied a
garland of fragrant flowers, like the moon's rays shining on the moon's orb. ||
28 || On her cheeks, he drew a creeper of jasmine, like the mark of victory on
the banner of the fish. || 29 || While he was adorning his new bride's breasts,
he heard the arrival of the great Muni Bhavadatta. || 30 || Excited by the sight
of his brother, he was like a gambler who had won, abandoning his beloved, who
was adorned only halfway. || 31 || He did not listen to the words of his
beloved's friends, who said, "It is not proper for you to leave her adorned only
halfway." || 32 || He replied to those who were holding him back, saying, "I
will return to the girls after paying my respects to the Guru!" || 33 ||
Bhavadatta then flew from that place like a bird, and approaching the Muni
Bhavadatta who was standing there, he paid his respects. || 34 || As soon as his
younger brother rose after paying his respects, the Muni offered him a pot of
ghee, like a true offering for the acceptance of Shramanya. || 35 || Bhavadatta
then left the house, the crown of the homeless, and went to the abode of the
wise, his mind fixed on his brother. || 36 || Bhavadeva, holding the pot of ghee
in his hand, followed the Muni Bhavadatta, his six steps following his lotus
feet. || 37 || Many other women and men, like Bhavadeva, followed the Muni
Bhavadatta, like waves surging in the ocean. || 38 || The Muni created a
suitable offering for the Munis, and the people did not turn back, not being
released by the Muni. || 39 || After going a long distance, they were
disappointed, and after paying their respects to the great Muni, the women and
men then turned back on their own. || 40 || Bhavadeva, with a good mind, thought
to himself, "Although they are not released, they turn back, for they are not my
brothers. || 41 || But I am his brother, we two are bound by mutual affection.
Therefore, it is not right for me to turn back, not being

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 khaNDaH - 2 dRSTAntasamuccayaH bhavadattaM tatazcaikamapi tatrA''dizad guruH  /
ekAkino'pyarhati hi vihAro vazino muneH  /  /  18  /  /  bhavadatto jagAmAtha
sveSAM saMsAriNAM gRhe  /  pravrajyAgrAhaNenAnugrahItumanujaM nijam  /  / 19 /
/  nAgadattasya tanayAM vAsukIkukSisambhavAm  /  upayeme bhavadevo
bhavadattAnujastadA  /  / 20 /  /  kRtodvAhotsavAH sarve bandhavastaM
mudA'bhyayuH  /  manyamAnA utsavoparyutsavaM tatsamAgamam  /  / 21 /  /  sadyaH
pAdyena tatpAdau prakSAlya prAsukena te  /  pAdodakamavandanta matvA
tIrthodakAdhikam  /  / 22 /  /  bhavAbdhimajjanabhayAdavalambamivecchavaH  /
lagitvA pAdayoH sarve bandhavastaM vavandire  /  /  23  /  /
munirapyabhyadhAdvandhUn vivAhavyAkulAH stha bhoH !  /  yAmo vihartumanyatra
dharmalAbho'stu vo'naghAH !  /  / 24 /  /  tamRSiM bandhavaH sarve
bhaktapAnadibhirmudA  /  eSaNIyakalpanIyaprAsukaiH pratyalAbhayan  /  / 25 /  /
tadAnIM bhavadevo'pi kulAcAraM prapAlayan  /  sevyamAnAM vayasyAbhirnavoDhAM
maNDayannabhUt  /  / 26 /  /  cakre'GgarAgaM preyasyA zrIcandanarasena saH  /
candrAtaparasenevAkRSTena zazimaNDalAt  /  / 27 /  /  tasyA mUrdhni ca
dhammillaM sumanodAmagarbhitam  /  babandha grasta zazinaH svarbhANoH
zrImalimlucam  /  / 28 /  /  tatkapolaphalakayoH kastaryA patravallarIm  /
mInaketoriva jayaprazastimalikhatsvayam  /  / 29 /  /  kucayormaNDanaM
yAvannavoDhaH sa pracakrame  /  tAvadAgamamazrauSIdbhavadattamahAmuneH  /  /  30
/  /  sa bhrAtRdarzanottAlaH kitavo jayavAniva  /
drAgudasthAdvihAyArdhamaNDitAmapi vallabhAm  /  / 31 /  /  hitvA'rdhamaNDitAM
kAntAM na gantumucitaM tava  /  tasyAH sakhInAmityuktiM sa eDa iva nAzRNot  /  /
32  /  /  sAgrahaM vArayantInAM tAsAM cetyuttaraM dadau  /  kRtvA gurupraNipAtaM
punareSyAmi bAlikAH !  /  / 33 /  /  bhavadattastataH sthAnAtplavamAnaH
plavaGgavat  /  abhyetya bhavadattarSiM tatra sthitamavandata  /  /  34  /  /
vanditvotthitamAtrasyAnujasya ghRtabhAjanam  /  muniH zrAmaNyadAnAya
satyaGkAramivArpayat  /  / 35 /  /  bhavadattastato'gArAdanagAraziromaNiH  /
nirjagAma dhiyAM dhAma manAgbhrAtari dattadRk  /  /  36  /  /  bhavadevo'pi
tatsarpirbhAjanaM dhArayankare  /  anvagAdbhavadattarSiM tatpadAmbhojaSaTpadaH
/  /  37  /  /  anye'pi bahavo nAryo narAzca bhavadevavat  /
anvayurbhavadattarSimudUrmipramadahUdAH  /  /  38  /  /  muni kaJcisRjat
munInAmucitaM hyadaH  /  avisRSTAzca muninA na vyAvavRtire janAH  /  /  39  /  /
dUraM gatvA ca nirviNNAstaM vanditvA mahAmunim  /  svayameva vyAjughuTurAdau
nAryo narAstataH  /  / 40 /  /  bhavadevastu bhadrAtmA cintayAmAsivAnidam  /
apyavisRSTA vyAghuTantvete naite hi sodarAH  /   /  41  /   /  ahaM tu
sodaro'muSya dvAvAvAM snehalau mithaH  /  tadanenAvisRSTasya nyAyyaM vyAghuTanaM
na me  /  / 42 /  /  2010_02 217

Page #259 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter 218: The Scattering of the Eager Refusal  The elder brother, burdened
by the weight of food and drink, was surely overcome. Therefore, he graciously
offered the ghee pot to me to carry. ||43||  The elder brother, a sage, had
arrived after a long time, weary and exhausted. I could not bear to leave him
there and return without him. ||44||  The younger brother, to distract his mind
from the thought, "He might be angry," began to talk about household matters.
The great sage, Bhavadatta, listened patiently. ||45||  "These are the trees
that line the village, the resting places for travelers. You two, like monkeys,
roam freely among them." ||46||  "These are the lakes, where we, in our
childhood, used to play with lotus stems, our throats adorned with their
beauty." ||47||  "These are the lands that stretch to the village, like grains
of sand. Here, we used to play with sand mounds, during the rainy season."
||48||  Bhavadatta, speaking thus to his younger brother, went to the village,
sanctified by the lotus feet of the Acharya. ||49||  Seeing Bhavadatta, the
sage, with his younger brother, arrive at the door, the small ones, with crooked
smiles, said to each other: ||50||  "Surely, this man, adorned in divine attire,
is a disciple of the sage, brought here to renounce the world and speak the
truth." ||51||  "Bhavadatta, who is this young man who has arrived?" asked the
sun. He replied, "This is my younger brother, who desires to see the Lord."
||52||  Sarina, Bhavadatta's elder brother, asked, "Why have you come to
renounce the world?" He replied, "My brother is not a liar, it is true." ||53||
Bhavadatta, then, renounced the world, accompanied by the sages. He was deemed
fit to wander elsewhere, with the virtuous. ||54||  Thinking, "Has Bhavadatta
not arrived yet?" his relatives, coming from behind, spoke to Bhavadatta. ||55||
"Bhavadatta, you have left your beloved, adorned with half her ornaments,
behind. Why have you not returned? We are like the living dead without him."
||56||  Like a cuckoo, she, deprived of her beloved, grieves. Her tears, like
the sap of a vine, do not cease to flow. ||57||  "Bhavadatta, without asking us,
would never leave. It is unthinkable, even in a dream. Where has he gone? What
has happened?" ||58||  "We are like those who have lost their own, seeing
Bhavadatta nowhere. O sage, please tell us, where is your younger brother?"
||59||  The sage, even though he knew the truth, said, "My younger brother,
desiring the water of Dharma, has gone somewhere. We do not know where he has
gone, even though he has just arrived." ||60||  "Has he gone on another
journey?" they asked, quickly. They returned, dejected, like those who have been
robbed by thieves. ||61||  Bhavadatta, remembering his newly married wife in his
heart, solely out of brotherly love, continued his renunciation, even though it
was painful. ||62||  The great sage, Bhavadatta, after many years, renounced
food and became a celestial being, due to his virtue. ||63||  "Bhavadatta, my
beloved, Nagila, is like a barren tree. I am also like a barren tree, separated
from her. We both are bereft." ||64||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 218 AturapratyAkhyAnaprakIrNakam bhaktapAnAdibhAreNAkrAnto'yaM nUnamagrajaH  /
tato mamArpayadvoDhuM prasIdanghRtabhAjanam  /  / 43 /  /  cirAdabhyAgataM
zrAntaM jyAyAMsaM bhrAtaraM munim  /  amuktvA tadamuM sthAne na nivartitumutsahe
/  / 44 /  /  mA'sau valediti manovyAkSepArthaM kanIyasaH  /  gArhasthyavArtA
prAkrasta bhavadatto mahAmuniH  /  / 45 /  /  ete te grAmaparyantapAdapAH
pAnthamaNDapAH  /  bhrAtarAvAM vAnaravadyeSu svairamaraMsvahi  /  / 46 /  /
sarovarANi tAnyetAnyAvAbhyAM yatra zaizave  /  akAri nalinInAlaiharizrIH
kaNThayomithaH  /  / 47 /  /  etAzca grAmaparyantabhUmayo bhUrivAlukAH  /
yatrAvAM vAlukAcaityakrIDAM prAvRSyakRSvahi  /  / 48 /  /
bhavadatto'nujanmAnamevamadhvani vArtayan  /  jagAma grAmamAcAryapAdapadmaH
pavitritam  /  / 49 /  /  sAnujaM bhavadattarSi vasatidvAramAgatam  /  nirIkSya
kSullakAH procuH kRtavakroSThikA mithaH  /  / 50  /  /  divyaveSadharo
nUnamanujo muninA'munA  /  pravrAjayitumAnItaH svaM satyApayituM vacaH  /  / 51
/  /  sUrirUce bhavadatta ! taruNaH ko'yamAgataH  /  so'vadadbhagavandIkSAM
jighRkSurme'nujo hyasau  /  / 52 /  /  sariNA bhavadevo'pi papracche kiM
vratArthyasi ?  /  mA bhUd bhrAtA mRSAvAdItyevamityavadatsa tu  /  / 53 /  /
bhavadevastadaivAtha paryavrAjyata sUribhiH  /  sAdhubhyAM sahito'nyatra
vihartuM ca nyayojyata  /  / 54  /  /  bhavadevaH kimadyApi nAyAta ? iti cintayA
/  svajanAH pRSThato'bhyetya bhavadattaM babhASire  /  / 55  /  /
bhavadevo'nvagAdhuSmAnpriyAM hitvA'rdhamaNDitAm  /  tanmude kiM tvanAyAte
tasminjIvanmRtA vayam  /  / 56 /  /  khidyate cakravAkIva sA yuktividhavA vadhUH
/  vizrAmyati na tasyAzca nayanAmbu sirAmbuvat  /  / 57  /  /
ekAkyasmAnanApRcchya bhavadevaH kvacidvrajet  /  iti svapne'pyasambhAvyaM
gatazca kvApi kiM hyadaH  /  / 58  /  /  naSTasvAniva
grahilAnbhavadevamapazyataH  /  asmAnanugRhANarSe ! kathaya va sa te'nujaH ?  /
/ 59 /  /  dharmodakecchuranujasyoce mithyA'pyatho muniH  /  yAta AyAtamAtro'pi
na vidmaH sa yayau kvacit  /  / 60  /  /  gato'nyenAdhvanA kiM sa ? iti jalpanta
Azu te  /  pratyAvartanta dInAsyA dasyubhirmuSitA iva  /  / 61 /  /  tAM
navoDhAM hRdi dhyAyanbhrAtRbhaktyaiva kevalam  /  pravrajyAM bhavadevo'pi
sazalyAM paryapAlayat  /  / 62  /  /  maharSirbhavadatto'pi kAlena bahuneyuSA  /
vipede'nazanaM kRtvA saudharme ca suro'bhavat  /  / 63 /  /  bhavadevo'pyado
dadhyau nAgilA preyasI mama  /  preyAMstasyA ahamapi viraho hI dvayorabhUt  /  /
64  /  /  bhrAturevoparodhena vrataM ciramapAlayam  /  tasmiMstu svargate kiM me
vratenAyAsahetunA  /  / 65  /  /  na tathA vratakaSTena duSkareNAsmi pIDitaH  /
yathA tadviraheNoccairbhaviSyati kathaM nu sA ?  /  / 66 /  /  gajIva cArIpatitA
padminIva himAvilA  /  marAlIva marugatA vallIva grISmatApabhAk  /  / 67  /  /
2010_02

Page #260 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Chapter 2: Collection of Examples  A doe deprived of its youth, a parrot bound
by a snare. I think she will become compassionate towards the people who are
suffering. ||68|| (Pair) If I find her, my beloved with beautiful eyes, alive,
then even today I will be satisfied in my household with her. ||69|| Thus,
controlling himself with the threads of worry, he became like a wool-gatherer.
Without asking the elder sages, he set out. ||70|| He quickly went to the
village, a good village, the land of the Rashtrakutas. He stood outside the
closed door, near the courtyard. ||71|| A woman with a garland of flowers in her
hair, a Brahmin woman, came along with her. Seeing her, the sage bowed to her
and she bowed to him. ||72|| The Rashtrakuta, the noble one, asked her, "O
blessed one! Is his wife Revati alive or not?" ||73|| She said, "The noble one
and Revati are both in distress. A long time will pass for them in distress."
||74|| The sage again asked the son of the noble one, "Is the new bride, the one
who was abandoned by Bhavadeva, alive or not?" ||75|| She thought, "This
Bhavadeva is surely a fool, a fool from birth. If I tell him about this, he will
be angry with me." ||76|| Thinking thus, the son of the noble one Revati said,
"Are you Bhavadeva? What are you doing here, ascetic?" ||77|| Bhavadeva said,
"You have recognized me well. I am Bhavadeva, the lord of the Nagila life."
||78|| "Then, being prevented by my elder brother, I abandoned her and set out.
Even though I didn't want to, I took on this difficult vow. ||79|| Now, my
brother is in distress, without a whip. How did Nagila become like this? I want
to know that." ||80|| Nagila thought, "He has seen me after a long time. He
doesn't recognize me, because of my changed appearance." ||81|| "I will make
myself known to him," said Nagila. "I am Nagila, the new bride, the one you
abandoned." ||82|| "In all this time, even my youth has passed. What beauty is
there in me, O virtuous one? Consider it." ||83|| "Leaving behind the three
jewels, which give the fruits of heaven and liberation, do not take me, O great
one, who is like a mere ant. ||84|| Do not fall into the terrible hell, which is
the result of the weapons of the senses, the arrows of desire. ||85|| You have
taken on a vow, disguised by your brother, who is a well-wisher. Do not think
that I am not worthy of you, even though you have not attained him, and you are
attached to me, a sinner. ||86|| Even today, return to the feet of your guru.
Tell him about the sin I have committed because of my attachment to you. ||87||
While Bhavadeva was thus being persuaded by Nagila, a Brahmin boy came there,
having eaten payasa. ||88|| He said, "I have eaten the payasa, which is like
nectar, today. I will vomit it. Mother, hold the vessel." ||89|| "I have been
invited elsewhere, where I will get a gift. I cannot eat the payasa again,
because I am going to eat elsewhere." ||90|| "Taking the gift, I have come here
again for payasa. I will vomit it myself and eat it myself. What is there in

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 khaNDa:-2 dRSTAntasamuccayaH yUthabhraSTeva hariNI pAzabaddhava zArikA  /  sA
manye dainyabhAglokAnukampyaiva bhaviSyati  /  / 68  /  /  (yugmam) yadi
prApsyAmi jIvantIM tAM priyAmAyatekSaNAm  /  tadadyApi hi gArhasthyAtRpto raMsye
tayA saha  /  / 69  /  /  cintAtantubhirevaM svaM niyacchannUrNanAbhavat  /
sthavirarSInanApRcchya bhavadevo viniryayau  /  / 70  /  /  tUrNaM jagAma ca
grAmaM sugrAmaM rASTrakUTabhUH  /  tasthau ca saMvRtadvArabAhyAyatanasannidhau
/  / 71 /  /  gandhamAlyadharA nArI brAhmaNyA samamekayA  /
tannAbhyAgAnmunirasAvityavandata taM ca sA  /  / 72 /  /  papraccha
bhavadevastAM rASTrakUTaH sa AryavAn  /  patnI ca revatI tasya bhadre ! jIvati
vA na vA ?  /  / 73 /  /  kathayAmAsa sApyevamAryavAnnevatI ca sA  /
vyapadyetAM tayozcAgAd bhUyAnkAlo vipannayoH  /  / 74  /  /  bhUyo'pyapRcchatsa
munirAryavatsUnunA priyA  /  bhavadevena yA tyaktA navoDhA sA'sti vA na vA ?  /
/ 75  /  /  sA dadhyau bhavadevo'yaM nUnamAttavrato'grajAt  /  yadi vA
vArtayAmyetamanenasamihAgatam  /  / 76 /  /  uvAca
cintayitvaivamAryavadrevatIsutaH  /  tvameva bhavadevo'si ? kimihAgAstapodhana !
/  / 77  /  /  bhavadevo'vadatsAdhu tvayA'hamupalakSitaH  /  sa eva
bhavadevo'smi nAgilAjIvitezvaraH  /  / 78  /  /  tadA'grajoparodhena tAM vimucya
nirIyuSA  /  anicchatApi hi mayA vratamAdAyi duSkaram  /  / 79 /  /  vipanne
sAmprataM bhrAtaryahamaGkuzavarjitaH  /  nAgilA sA kathamabhUdityAgAM
taddidRkSayA  /  / 8 /  /  nAgilA cintayAmAsa cirAd dRSTAM hi mAmasau  /  na hi
pratyabhijAnAti parAvRttavayoguNAm  /  / 81 /  /  AtmAnaM jJApayAmyenamiti
provAca nAgilA  /  nAgilA sA'smyaMha hanta navoDhA'tyAji yA tvayA  /  / 82 /  /
etAvatA ca kAlena yauvane'pi vyatIyuSi  /  kiM nAma mayi lAvaNyaM puNyAzaya !
vimRzyatAm  /  / 83 /  /  muktvA ratnatrayaM svargApavargaphaladAyakam  /
varATikAmAtranibhAM mA grahIta~ mahAzaya !  /  / 84  /  /
atyantaghoranarakapAtapratibhuvAmaho  /  viSayANAM smarAstrANAM mA gAstvaM
bhedanIyatAm  /  / 85 /  /  grAhito'si vrataM bhrAtrA chadmanA'pi hitaiSiNA  /
tamapyanAptaM mA maMsthA mayi pApakhanau rataH  /  / 86 /  /  tadadyApi
nivartasva gurupAdAnanuvraja  /  mayi rAgakRtaM cAghamAlocaya tadantike  /  / 87
/  /  yAvadevaM bhavadevaM nAgilA bhRzamAnvazAt  /  brAhmaNyA
dArakastAvattatrA''gAd bhuktapAyasaH  /  / 88 /  /  Uce ca pAyasaM bhuktaM
yanmayA'dya sudhopamam  /  tadvamiSyAmyahaM mAtaradho dhAraya bhAjanam  /  / 89
/  /  nimantrito'hamanyatra lapsye tatra ca dakSiNAm  /  avAntapAyaso
maatbhoktuN zakSyAmi no punaH  /  / 10 /  /  AdAya dakSiNAmatrAgato bhUyo'pi
pAyasam  /  svayaM vAntaM svayaM bhokSye kA hIH svocchiSTabhojane  /  / 91  /  /
2010_02

Page #261 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 220 ## The Discourse on the Rejection of the Eager One  The Brahman said,
"You will become a vomit-eater, you will be disgusted. Enough of this disgusting
act, child!" || 92 ||  Hearing this, Bhavadeva also said, "Oh, boy! You will
become a vomit-eater, lower than even a dog." || 93 ||  Nagila said, "If you
know this, O Rishi, and you speak it, then why do you still desire to eat me?"
|| 94 ||  "I am the lowest of the low, filled with the flesh, bones, excrement,
and urine of animals. I am even more disgusting than vomit. Why are you not
ashamed to desire me?" || 95 ||  "You see the burning fire, but you do not see
the fire beneath your feet. You teach others this way, but you do not teach
yourself." || 96 ||  "What is the merit of those who are skilled in teaching
others? The merit of people lies in those who are skilled in teaching
themselves." || 97 ||  Bhavadeva said, "I have been well taught by you, O
sinless one! I was led astray like a blind man on the path. Now, having seen my
own people, I will go to the presence of my Guru. I will contemplate my
transgressions and perform the difficult penance." || 98 ||  Nagila also said,
"Why are you concerned with your own people and their share of your wealth? They
are obstacles to your seeing the Guru, for they are embodied." || 100 ||
"Therefore, go to the feet of your Guru, with a tamed mind, and practice your
vows. I will also renounce in the presence of the renunciates." || 101 ||
Bhavadeva then bowed to the worthy images, with a composed mind. He went to the
Guru's place and performed the necessary actions, such as contemplation. || 102
||  Bhavadeva, maintaining his renunciation without transgression, lived for a
long time and in the beginning of the Kalpa, he became a Chakra-Samanika (a
celestial being) in the heavens. || 103 ||  ## Appendix Chapter, Verses 287 to
389 ## 31. The Story of Mammana in the Commentary on the *Aavashyakaharitriya*
by Shri Sangrahadhyana  There was a man named Mammana. He was afflicted by greed
and had accumulated a great deal of wealth. He did not eat or drink, and he had
a large, strong, beautiful, golden chariot made by many crores of skilled
artisans, adorned with divine jewels and a magnificent, powerful horse. He had
another chariot, also made by many artisans. He was having this chariot made,
and every day, for the purpose of its construction, he would bring many
cartloads of wood, which was very hard and difficult to obtain.  One day, the
king was going out with his queen, and he saw this man. He was moved with
compassion and said to the queen, "Look, how hard these people work for the
king! They fill their carts with heavy wood, which is difficult to obtain." || 1
||  The king asked, "What is it?" The queen said, "This man is afflicted by
greed." The king, hearing this, said, "What are you afflicted by?" The man said,
"My chariot is not complete." The king said, "Take some gold." The man said, "I
have no need for it. Just complete my chariot." The king, having been told this,
took him home and showed him his treasury. The king said, "Even with all my
wealth, it will not be enough to complete this chariot." The man said

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 220 AturapratyAkhyAnaprakIrNakam brAhmaNyuvAca vAntAzI jugupsyastvaM bhaviSyasi
/  alaM jugupsanIyena karmaNA'nena dAraka ! /  / 92  /  /  tacchrutvA
bhavadevo'pi nijagAdeti he baTo !  /  tvaM bhaviSyasi vAntAzI nikRSTaH
kukkurAdapi  /  / 13 /  /  nAgilovAca tamRSi yadyevaM vetsi vakSi ca  /
tanmAmudvamya kimiti bhUyo'pyupabubhukSase  /  / 94  /  /
mAMsamRgasthiviNmUtrapUrNA'hamadhamAdhamA  /  vAntAdapi jugupsyA'smi mAmicchan
kiM na lajjase ?  /  / 95  /  /  pazyasyadrau jvaladagniM na punaH pAdayoradhaH
/  yatparaM zikSayasyevaM na svaM zikSayasi svayam  /  / 96 /  /  kA hi
puMgaNanA teSAM ye'nyazikSAvicakSaNAH  /  ye svaM zikSayituM dakSAsteSAM
puMgaNanA nRNAm  /  / 97  /  /  bhavadevo'vadatsAdhu zikSito'smi tvayAnaghe !  /
AnItaH pathi jAtyandha iva yAnahamutpathe  /  / 98  /  /  tadadya svajanAndRSTvA
yAsyAmi gurusannidhau  /  vratAtIcAramAlocya tapsye'haM dustapaM tapaH  /  / 99
/  /  nAgilA'pyavadat kiM te svajanaiH svArthabhAgbhava  /  mUrtimanto hi te
vighnA bhAvino gurudarzane  /  / 100  /  /  tad gaccha gurupAdAnte dAntAtmA
vratamAcara  /  pravrajiSyAmyahamapi vratinIjanasannidhau  /  / 101 /  /
bhavadevo'tha vanditvA'rhadvimbAni samAhitaH  /  gatvA
gurvantike'kArSItkRtyamAlocanAdikam  /  / 102 /  /  zrAmaNyaM niratIcAraM
bhavadevaH prapAlayan  /  kAlaM kRtvA''dikalpe'bhUcchakrasAmAnikaH suraH  /  /
103 /  /  pariziSTaparva0 zloka-287 taH 389] 31. saMgrahadhyAne
zrIAvazyakahAribhadrIyavyAkhyAyAM mammaNasyAkhyAnakam  /  _Nayare mammaNotti,
teNa mahayA kileseNa aibahugaM daviNajAyaM meliyaM, so taM Na khAyai Na pivai,
pAsAuvariM ca'NeNa aNegakoDinimmAyagabbhasAro kaMcaNamao divvarayaNapajjatto
varavairasiMgo mahaMto ego baladdo kArAvio, bIo ya ADhatto, so'vi bahunimmAo,
etthaMtaraMmi vAsAratte tassa nimmAvaNanimittaM so kacchoTTagabiijjo NaIpUrAo
kaTThavirUDhago kaTThANi ya uttArei  /  io ya rAyA devIe saha oloyaNagao acchai,
so tahAviho aIva karuNAlaMbaNabhUo devIe diTTho, tao tIe sAmarisaM bhaNiyaM-
saJcaM suvvai eyaM mehanaisamA havaMti rAyANo  /  bhariyAiM bhareMti daDhaM
rittaM jatteNa vajjei  /  / 1 /  /  raNNA bhaNiyaM-kiha vA ?, tIe bhaNiyaM-jaM
esa damago kilissai, raNNA saddAvio bhaNio ya-kiM kilissasi ?, teNa bhaNiyaM-
baladdasaMghADago me Na pUrijjai, raNNA bhaNiyaM-baladdasayaM geNha, teNa
bhaNiyaM-Na me tehiM kajjaM, tasseva bitijjaM pUreha, keriso sotti gharaM neUNa
darisio, raNNA bhaNiyaM-savvabhaMDAreNavi na pUrijjai imo, tA ettigassa
vibhavassa alaM te tiNhAetti, teNaM bhaNiyaM-jAveso na pUrio tAva me na suhaM,
Araddho ya uvAo pesiyANi disAsu bhaMDANi ADhattAo kisIo ADhattANi
gayaturayasaMDaposaNANi, raNNA bhaNiyaM-jai evaM tA kiM thevassa kae 2010_02

Page #262 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Chapter:-2 Collection of Examples 221 "Are you troubled?", he said, "My body is
troubled by the defilements, there are no valuable things in this world, even if
they are worth a lot, they should be abandoned, what is the point of doing
this?", the king said, "May your mind be at peace, you are capable of filling
the entire universe, but I am not, I am already full." 33. The story of Nanda in
the Sri Samvega Rangshala during the meditation on buying and selling. In the
city of Padaliputta, there was a king named Jayasena, who was full of virtues
and victorious in many battles. ||1|| There, in that city, the wealthy merchants
of Kubera were living. Nanda, the happy merchant, and Jinadasa, the righteous
and strong. ||2|| Once, a merchant named Samuddadatta, dug a well in a lake that
had been there for a long time. ||3|| While digging, he found, golden nuggets,
buried for a long time and covered in dirt. ||4|| Thinking that it was metal,
the merchants wanted to buy it. Jinadasa took two of them, which were made of
metal. ||5|| Then, by his own rule, he correctly identified them as gold. He
gave them to the temple, measuring them carefully. ||6|| The others did not take
them, not knowing that Nanda was a wise man. He was eager to take them, because
he was a good man. ||7|| Uddaka said, "Don't give the metal nuggets to anyone
else. I want to break them, and I will give you something in return." ||8|| The
next day, his friend took him to a feast. His son said, "Take the nuggets, as
you wish." ||9|| He took the nuggets happily, and went to his friend's house to
eat. He was very happy, and went to the house to eat. ||10|| He did not take the
nuggets, because he was a good man, and he knew that they were not worth
anything. Uddaka, the wise man, went to the king's court. ||11|| He went from
place to place, and he saw that the nuggets were very valuable. One of the
nuggets had a mark of a chameleon on it. ||12|| The king's men took the nuggets,
and gave them to the king. They asked, "What should we do with these nuggets?"
||13|| They said, "Oh king! These two nuggets were given to Jinadasa, the
merchant. The rest of the nuggets belong to Nanda, the merchant." ||14|| The
king said this, and asked Jinadasa, "What is your opinion?" Jinadasa was very
honest, and he followed the rules of the scriptures. ||15|| _ 2010_02

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 khaNDa:-2 dRSTAntasamuccayaH 221 kilissasi ?, teNa bhaNiyaM-kilesasahaM me
sarIraM vAvAraMtaraM ceyANi natthi mahagghANi ya vAsAratte dArugANitti
nivvahiyavvA ya paiNNatti ao karemitti, raNNA bhaNiyaM-pujjaMtu te maNorahA,
tumaM ceva bitijjagaM pUriuM samattho na puNa ahaMti niggao, teNa kAleNa pUrio
/  33. krayavikrayadhyAne zrIsaMvegaraGgazAlAmadhye nandakathA  /  pADaliputtaM
nagare, bahusamaraviDhattavijayajasapasaro  /  Asi jayaseNanAmo, naranAho
bhUriguNakalio  /  / 1 /  /  tattha ya purammi adhariya-kuberadhaNavittharA
parivasaMti  /  naMdapamokkhA vaNiNo, jiNadAsA''I susaDDhA ya  /  / 2 /  /  aha
egammi avasare, samuddadattA'bhihANavaNieNa  /  cirakAliyaM sarovaramA''raddhaM
khANiuM ekkaM  /  / 3 /  /  tattha khaNijaMtammi, uDDehiM puvvapurisapakkhittA
/  laddhA suvannakusayA, cirakAliyakiTTacayamaliNA  /  / 4 /  /  to lohamaya tti
viyANiUNa, vaNiyANa tehiM uvaNIyA  /  jiNadAseNaM gahiyA ya, donni nAUNa
lohamayA  /  / 5 /  /  aha teNa niyaMteNaM, sammaM nAuM suvannamaiya tti  /
parimANA'ikkamabhayA, dinnA titthayarabhavaNammi  /  / 6 /  /  avare puNo na
gahiyA, navaraM naMdeNa jANamANeNa  /  ADhattA te ghettuM,
samahiyaatthavvaeNA'vi  /  / 7 /  /  uDDA ya imaM bhaNiyA, lohakuse mA parassa
dejjAha  /  ahamicchiyaM dalissAmi, tumha tehiM ca paDivaNNaM  /  / 8 /  /
avarammi diNe mitteNa, so balA bhoyaNa'TThayA nIo  /  teNa ya putto bhaNio, jaha
taha giNhejjasu kusa tti  /  / 9 /  /  paDisuyamimaM sueNaM, bhottuM mittaggihe
gao tAhe  /  aJcaMtavAulamaNo, bhottuM ca gihaMmuho calio  /  / 10 /  /
amuNiyaparamattheNa ya, sama'hiyamolla tti no kusA gahiyA  /  teNa sueNaM uDDA
ya, jAyakovA parattha gayA  /  / 11 /  /  jatto tatto ya khivaMtayANa, aha
kahavi vavagae kiTTe  /  egassa u kusayassA, payaDaM cAmIyaraM jAyaM  /  / 12 /
/  rAyapurisehiM tatto, uDDA gahiuM samappiyA ranno  /  puTThA ya kattha anne,
vikkIyA kahaha kusaga tti  /  / 13 /  /  tehiM kahiyaM narA'hiva !, dinnA
jiNadAsaseTThiNo donni  /  avasesA nIsesA, uvaNIyA naMdavaNiyassa  /  / 14  /  /
evaM bhaNie rannA, vAhariuM pucchio hu jiNadAso  /  siTTho ya teNa savvo,
jahaTThio niyagavuttaMto  /  / 15 /  /  _ 2010_02

Page #263 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
222 Aaturpratyakhyanaprakirnakam Tahe ranna sammaniuun, so pesio niyagihhammi.
Nando ya niyagahadhen, samagao pucchae puttam. ||16|| Kim re! Kusaya gahiya, na
va tti tenam payampiyan tay! | Bahumulla tti na gahiya, to tadito uran nando.
||17|| Ha! Ha! Muttho tti payampiyo ya, jangahau bhanjau kusen. Eyaanameso doso,
jena gao han paragihe tti. ||18|| To vajjho aanatto, so ranna avahadam ca
savvasam. Ema'aai bahu dosaa, icchhavinivittirrahiyanam. ||19|| Iya khamga!
Manaanga pi hu, pariggahe ma mano dharizzassi. Khanaditthanattaruve, ka vanchaa
tattha dhiraanam. ||20|| Evam pariggahavisayam, panchamagam pavathanagam vuttam.
Kovasaruuvaa'aveyan-parametto bhannai chatum. ||21|| [Shrisanvegarangasala
shloka 5888 tah 5909] 34. Anarthadandadhyane Shritrishashtisalakapurushcharitre
Gangadattasyavasarah. Itasca Hastinapurae shreshthyabhoot ko'pi tasya ca.
Lalitaakhyo'bhavat putro maturatyantavallabhah. ||1|| Shreshthinyanyada jajne
garbhahsantaapado bhrisham. Taya ca vividhradvyaihs patyamanopi naapatat. ||2||
Jatasca putrah shreshthinya dasyai tyaktum ca so'rpitah. Drishtasca shreshthina
prishta kimetaditye dasyath. ||3|| Asavaniishtah shreshthinyatyajyateti
tayoditte. Shreshthi grihitvaa tam chhannamanyatra samavardhayat. ||4||
Gangadatta iti naamaadatta tasya shishoh pita. Matuschchhannamlalito'pi
lalayaamaasa tam sada. ||5|| Pitaram lalito'nyedhur abhyadhatta madhootsave.
Bhojyate Gangadatto'dya saha chechchhobanam tada. ||6|| Shreshthayooche yadi te
mata tam pasyettanna shobhanam. Lalito'pyabravitaata yatisye tadadarshane. ||7||
Shreshthinaapi tathaadishtto lalito Gangadattakam. Tiraskarinyantaaritam
bhojanartham nyasedayat. ||8|| Purastaat svayamaaseenau tau shreshthilalito tau
tada. Bhuanjanau Gangadattaaya bhojyam chhannaam ca yachchatah. ||9||
Vaatoddhrte'kaandapate shreshthini tam dadarsha ca. Keshaih krishhtvaa
kuttayitvaa grihashrutasi chaakshipat. ||10|| Udvignau shreshthilalito
shreshthinyaschchhannameva tam. Snapayitvaabodhayataam Gangadattaam mahamaati.
||11|| Tada ca sadhavastatra bhikhsartham samupaagataa. Prishtasca taabhyam
shreshthinyastatputradveshaakaranam. ||12|| Athaekahs sadhurityakhy

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 222 AturapratyAkhyAnaprakIrNakam tAhe rannA sammANiUNa, so pesio niyagihammi  /
naMdo ya niyagahaDheM, samAgao pucchae puttaM  /  / 16 /  /  kiM re ! kusayA
gahiyA, na va tti teNaM payaMpiyaM tAya !  /  bahumulla tti na gahiyA, to tADito
uraM naMdo  /  / 17 /  /  hA ! hA ! muTTho tti payaMpiro ya, jaMghAu bhaMjau
kuseNa  /  eyANamesa doso, jeNa gao haM paragihe tti  /  / 18  /  /  to vajjho
ANatto, so rannA avahaDaM ca savvassaM  /  emA''I bahU dosA,
icchAviNivittirahiyANaM  /  / 19 /  /  iya khamaga ! maNAMga pi hu, pariggahe mA
maNo dharijjAsi  /  khaNadiTThanaTTharUve, kA vaMchA tattha dhIrANa  /  / 20 /
/  evaM pariggahavisayaM, paMcamagaM pAvaThANagaM vuttaM  /  kovasarUvA''veyaNa-
parametto bhannai chaTuM  /  / 21 /  /  [zrIsaMvegaraMgazAlA zloka 5888 taH
5909] 34. anarthadaNDadhyAne zrItriSaSTizalAkApuruSacaritre gaGgadattasyAvasaraH
/  itazca hAstinapure zreSThyabhUt ko'pi tasya ca  /  lalitAkhyo'bhavat putro
mAturatyaMtavallabhaH  /  / 1 /  /  zreSThinyAnyadA jajJe garbhaH saMtApado
bhRzam  /  tayA ca vividhadravyaiH pAtyamAno'pi nApatat  /  / 2 /  /  jAtazca
putraH zreSThinyA dAsyai tyaktuM ca so'rpitaH  /  dRSTazca zreSThinA pRSTA
kimetaditi dAsyatha  /  / 3 /  /  asAvaniSTaH zreSThinyAtyAjyateti tayodite  /
zreSThI gRhItvA taM channamanyatra samavardhayat  /  / 4 /  /  gaMgadatta iti
nAmAdatta tasya zizoH pitA  /  mAtuzchannaM lalito'pi lAlayAmAsa taM sadA  /  /
5 /  /  pitaraM lalito'nyedhurabhyadhatta madhUtsave  /  bhojyate gaMgadatto'dya
saha cecchobhanaM tadA  /  / 6 /  /  zreSThayUce yadi te mAtA taM pazyettanna
zobhanam  /  lalito'pyabravIttAta yatiSye tadadarzane  /  / 7 /  /  zreSThinApi
tathAdiSTo lalito gaMgadattakam  /  tiraskariNyAMtaritaM bhojanArthaM nyaSedayat
/  / 8 /  /  purastAt svayamAsInau tau zreSThilalitau tadA  /  bhuMjAnau
gaMgadattAya bhojyaM channaM ca yacchataH  /  / 9 /  /  vAtoddhRte'kAMDapaTe
zreSThinI taM dadarza ca  /  kezaiH kRSTvA kuTTayitvA gRhazrotasi cAkSipat  /  /
10 /  /  udvignau zreSThilalitau zreSThinyAzchannameva tam  /
snapayitvAbodhayatAM gaMgadattaM mahAmatI  /  / 11 /  /  tadA ca sAdhavastatra
bhikSArthaM samupAgatAH  /  pRSTAzca tAbhyAM zreSThinyAstatputradveSakAraNam  /
/ 12 /  /  athaikaH sAdhurityAkhyadekasmin saMnivezane  /  abhUtAM bhrAtarau tau
tu bahiH kASThArthamIyatuH  /  / 13 /  /  kASThairbhUtvA tathA gaMtrImagrastho
jyeSTha Apatat  /  dadarza pathi vellatI cakkaluNDA mahoragIm  /  / 14 /  /
so'pyavocat kanIyAMsaM gaMtryAH sArathimagrataH  /  gaMtrIto rakSaNIyeyaM
cakkaluMDA varAkikA  /  / 15 /  /  2010_02

Page #264 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter 2: Collection of Examples  **223**  Hearing this, the serpent was
also pleased and became a believer. A younger brother came there and seeing her,
said this:  **16.** "Though protected by the elder brother, I will still go to
her. I will enjoy hearing the sound of her broken bones."  **17.** Hearing this,
the cruel serpent also did the same. Thinking, "This is my enemy," she was
distressed.  **18.** She knew, "This is my wife, the elder brother is her enemy.
Her son was beautiful and dear to her due to past karma."  **19.** "This one,
due to past karma, is the younger brother, her enemy. He was born as Ganga-
datta, his past karma is not different."  **20.** Then, disgusted, the father
and the two sons took the vow. The noble Lalita and the great Shukra went to
heaven.  **21.** Remembering his mother's misfortune, Ganga-datta, now obtaining
the world of the universe, also went to the heaven of the great Shukra.  **22.**
**35. The story of Brahmadatta in the Abode of the Teachings of Sri Upadesha
Prasada**  The king of Kampilya, Brahma-raja, had four friends: the king of
Kashi, Kataka; the king of Gajapura, Karenu (Neru); the king of Kosala, Dirgha;
and the king of Champa, Pushpachula. These kings, out of love, stayed in each
other's kingdoms for one year each. Once, they all came together to Brahma-raja.
At that time, Brahma-raja, suffering from a headache, released his son and said
to them, "You should carry out the succession of the kingdom." Then he died.
They all left, returning to their own kingdoms. Then Dirgha became attached to a
courtesan. Knowing this, his minister Dhanurmantri informed his son, Varadhanu,
"You should inform Brahmadatta, who is in seclusion with the courtesan, about
this situation." He informed him, and then, going to the inner palace, he killed
a crow, saying, "Whoever else does this, I will punish him." Dirgha heard this
news and said to the courtesan, "I am the crow, you are the cuckoo." She said,
"This child, what does he know about our nature?" Again, he brought a buffalo
and an elephant together and said the same words as before. The buffalo was
killed. Then Dirgha thought, "My sin is known by this. He is teaching me by
speaking to others." He informed the queen about this thought. Then she said,
"This son is being killed. If we are well, we will have many sons." He agreed.
Then he married a daughter of a vassal, built a house for her, and gave it to
her. Varadhanu, the minister, secretly built a tunnel from the house to the
royal garden. On an auspicious day, Varadhanu, with his bride, entered the
house. After two nights, the house was set on fire. They escaped through the
tunnel and came out through the front gate, riding on a pair of horses.
Brahmadatta, wandering the earth, obtained the sovereignty of the world.
Varadhanu was appointed as the commander-in-chief and sent to Dirgha. Then
Brahmadatta came, captured Dirgha, who was weak, and brought him to his own
house. In this way, he conquered the entire six-part Bharat.  Once, while
wandering alone in the forest, he was given water by a Brahmin. That Brahmin,
knowing that he had attained the position of emperor, thought, "How will he
recognize me in a large army?"

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 khaNDaH-2 dRSTAntasamuccayaH 223 tacchutvA sarpiNI sApi haSTA vizvAsabhAgabhUt
/  tatrAyAtaH kaniSThastAM dRSTvA caivamavocata  /  / 16 /  /  jyeSThena
rakSitAstIyaM tathApyasyA uparyaham  /  neSye gaMtrI zrotumetadasthibhaMgasvaraM
mudA  /  / 17 /  /  tathA cakre sa ca krUrastacchrutvA sApi pannagI  /  ko'pyeSa
mama vairIti cintayantI vyapadyata  /  / 18  /   /  sA jajJe tava bhAryeyaM
jyeSTho bhrAtA vipadya saH  /  asyAH sUnurlalito'bhUt priyaH prAgjanmakarmaNA  /
/ 19 /  /  so'yaM mRtvA kaniSTho'syA aniSThaH pUrvakarmaNA  /  gaMgadattaH
samutpede prAktanaM karma nAnyathA  /  / 20 /  /  tato viraktA jagRhuH pitA
putrau ca te vratam  /  jagmatuH zreSThilalitau mahAzukramubhau divam  /  / 21 /
/  tattu mAturaniSTatvaM gaMgadattaH punaH smaran  /  vizvavAllabhyanidAnI
mahAzukradivaM yayau  /  / 22 /  /  35. AbhogadhyAne zrIupadezaprAsAde
brahmadattasambandhaH  /  kAMpIlyapurezasya brahmarAjJazcatvAri mitrANi santi-
kAzIdezapaH kaTakaH, gajapurezaH kareNuH (NeruH), kozalezo dIrghaH, caMpAdhIzaH
puSpacUlazca  /  ete nRpAH snehenaikaikaM varSaM mitho rAjyeSu
samuditAstiSThanti  /  anyadA te sarve brahmapArzve samAgatAH  /  tAvatA
ziroroge samutpanne brahmarAjA taJcaturNAmutsaMge sutaM muktvA
'yuSmAbhiretadvAjyasaMpradAyaH kArayitavyaH' ityuktvA mRtaH  /  te'pi dIrgha
muktvA svarAjye gatAH  /  tato dIrghazculaNyAsakto jAtaH  /  tadbhAvaM
dhanurmaMtrI jJAtvA svaputrasya varadhanurnAmno jJApitavAn-
yathaitatsvarUpamekAnte cUlaneyasya brahmadattasya jJApyam  /  tena jJApito'sau
kokilAkAkayoH saMbandhaM kArayannantaraHpure gatvA kAkaM
hatvovAca-'yo'nyo'pyevaM kariSyati, tamahaM nigrhiissyaami'| tadvArtA
dIrghazculanI pratyAha-'ahaM kAkastvaM kokilA' iti  /  sAha-'bAlo'yaM kiM vetti
AvayoH svruupN'| punarekadA mahiSahastinIyugamAnIya pUrvoktavAkyamuktvA mahiSo
hataH  /  tato dIrghaH-'matpApamanena jJAtaM, anyoktyA mAM zikSayati' iti
vicArya rAjJI prati jJApito'yaM vicaarH| tataH sA prAha-"ayaM putro hanyate,
AvayoH kuzalatve bahavo'pi putrA bhaviSyanti"  /  tenApi svIkRtam  /  tataH
sAmantasutAM pariNAyya tacchayanArthaM jatugRhaM kArayitvA dattam  /
varadhanurmatriNA guptavRttyA tagRhamadhyataH purodyAnaM yAvatsuraMgA dApitA  /
zubhadine jatugRhe praviSTasya savadhUvaradhanuHkumArasya rAtriyAmadvaye gate
gRhaM prajvAlitam  /  tau tu suraMgAya nirgatya pUrvadvAre muktAzvayugalamArA
nirgatau  /  pRthvI bhramato brahmadattasya sArvabhaumasaMpadamilat  /
varadhanuH sainyapatipade'bhiSicya dIrghasamIpe preSitaH  /  tadanu brahmadatta
Agatya nijacakreNa dIrghavapuH kabandhIkRtya svageha AgataH  /  anukrameNa
SaTkhaMDabharataM sAdhitam  /  purA tasyaikAkino'TavyAM bhramato dvijenaikena
nIraM pAyitamabhUt  /  sa dvijastaM cakravartipadaprAptaM jJAtvA 'bahusainye mAM
kathaM jJAsyati' iti dhyAtvA jIrNasUrpaTakapAdarakSaNakAdinA visadRzaM rUpaM
kRtvA 2010_02

Page #265 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter 224: The Story of the King Who Rejected the Advice of the Wise Man
The king was wandering around. Seeing this, his servants informed him. Pleased
by this, the king granted him a boon. The wise man, using the words of a woman,
asked for food and gold coins from house to house. The king did as he asked. One
day, the wise man said, "Give me your food." The king replied, "My food is for
me alone." The wise man said, "You are a miser, you are unable to give." Then,
the king fed him and his family. He became intoxicated with lust. At night, he
engaged in animalistic behavior with his mother and others. He was ashamed of
his actions after he sobered up.   Then, one day, seeing a shepherd making holes
in peepal leaves with an arrow, he gave him something and made him blind the
king. The king was captured and about to be killed. When asked how he had done
this, the shepherd pointed to the wise man. Then, the king and his family were
killed.   After this, the wise man, enraged by the killing of his family,
ordered the king's men to bring him the eyes of the Brahmins every day. The
minister brought them and showed them to the king. The king crushed them with
his hand and released them. The minister, seeing the killing of so many lives,
took a plate with a head and seedless vataguṇḍaka fruits and presented it to the
king. The king, in his drunken rage, killed him.   Thus, after sixteen years, he
died in a fit of rage and went to the seventh hell.   **Verse 1:**  The king,
with the heart filled with the cruelty of crushing vataguṇḍaka fruits and the
violence of blinding eyes, went to hell, filled with the thoughts of harming and
killing.   **Chapter 36: The Story of Prasannachandra in the Sri Samvega
Rangashala**  **Verse 1:**  The king of Poyanapura, Uggavisa, was unable to bear
the burden of the kingdom. He wanted to renounce the world and become a Jain
monk. Prasannachandra was a renunciant.   **Verse 2:**  He was wandering with
his guru, Jayaguru, and had attained wealth in the city of Rayaggingham. He was
content with his simple life, relying on the support of his shoulders.   **Verse
3:**  He was seen by two groups of people: those who worshipped the Jinas and
those who were enemies of the Jinas.   **Verse 4:**  The group who worshipped
the Jinas said, "Victory to him! This is the easy way to live. If he renounces
the kingdom and becomes a monk, he will be happy."   **Verse 5:**  The group who
were enemies of the Jinas said, "Friend! Stop this talk. He is unfit to be a
king. He should have put his son on the throne."   **Verse 6:**  "He has
renounced the wrong path and is living in fear of his enemies. He is enjoying
the kingdom, but he is suffering from his enemies."

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 224 AturapratyAkhyAnaprakIrNakam bhramati  /  tadRSTvA rAjJA svasevakAdAnAyitaH
/  tamupalakSya tuSTo rAjA varaM dadau  /  strIvacasA vipro bhojanaM dInArayuMga
ca yayAce gRhe gRhe  /  tena tathA kRtaM  /  ekadA vipreNoktaM- tvadbhojyaM
dApaya'  /  cakriNoktaM-'madbhojanaM mamaiva jarati'  /  vipreNoktaM-'kRpaNo'si,
dAtuM na zakto'si'  /  tato rAjJA sakuTumbaH sa bhojitaH  /  madanonmatto jAtaH
/  rAtrau mAtrAdiSu mithaH pazuvatpravRttaH  /  made samuttIrNa lajjitaH  /
tataH sarvamanena kRtamiti rUpaikadA tenAjApAlakaM pippalakapatrANi
dhanurgolikAprayogeNa sacchidrANi kurvantaM vIkSya tasmai kiMcitsamarpya
cakravartinayanApanayanaM kAritam  /  sa nigRhIto hantumArabdhaH  /  re
kathamitthaM samAcaritaM tvayetyukte tena vipro darzitaH  /  tadA sakuTumbaH sa
mAritaH  /  tadanu viprajAtau ruSTena cakriNAdiSTaM-pratidinaM dvijAkSINi
niSkAsyAnaya'  /  maMtrI tAnyAnIya darzayati  /  cakrI kareNa mardayitvA muJcati
/  tato maMtriNA bahujIvavadhaM matvA vaTaguMdakairnirbIjaiH sazIrSa sthAlaM
bhRtvA nRpAne muktam  /  rAjA tu madarAtInAM caDhUMSImAnIti krodhabuddhyA hanti
/  evaM SoDazavarSAnte raudradhyAnena mRtvA saptamAvanau gataH  /
vaTaguMdakamardanaraudramatijicakSurvighAtaM dadhan hRdaye  /
anubandhanahiMsanabuddhibharAJcaramo naradeva ito narake  /  / 1 /  /  36.
anAbhogadhyAne zrIsaMvegaraMgazAlAyAM prasannacandrasya kathAnakam  /
uggavisavisaharA''ula-gharaM va poyaNapurA'hivo rajjaM  /  mottuM vIrajiNaM'te,
pasannacaMdo viNikkhaMto  /  / 1 /  /  viharaMto jayaguruNA, samaM ca
rAyaggiMhammi saMpatto  /  olaMbiyabhuyapariho, ussaggeNa ya Thio sammaM  /  / 2
/  /  jiNavaMdaNa'TThapaTThiya-seNiyanivaaggasennagAmIhiM  /  diTTho-
dummuhasumuhA'-bhihANapurisehiM dohiM tao  /  / 3 /  /  sumuheNa jaMpiyaM jayai,
eso sahalaM ca jIviyamimassa  /  jo rajjaM taha vajjiya, pavvajjaM iya pavanno
tti  /  / 4 /  /  to dummuheNa bhaNiyaM, bhadda ! alaM saMkahAe eyassa  /  jo
asamatthaM puttaM, rajje ThaviuM sayaM kIbo  /  / 5 /  /  pAsaMDaM paDivanno,
veribhayA evamettha saMvasai  /  rajjaM suo payA vi ya, taha pIDijjaMti sattUhiM
/  / 6 /  /  2010_02

Page #266 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Chapter-2: Collection of Examples 225  Thus thought the Takkhan-
Vissumariyadhamma-Jhana-Padibandho. The king, with a happy mind, was deeply
engrossed in thought. ||7|| Who, in this living world, knows the truth about me,
even in my own self? This is a very difficult thing for me to understand. ||8||
Having been defeated, I will do good, as I did in the past. I was defeated in
battle, and I was defeated by them. ||9|| Drink the nectar of Dhamma-Jhana, I am
the king who has conquered the world. Oh! What is this great power? I am filled
with wonder. ||10|| With devotion and respect, I bow down to all the
Tirthankaras. I think that this kind of peaceful Jhana is like a treasure.
||11|| This great power, where did it arise? I will ask the Jina. Thinking this,
I went to the Jina's presence. ||12|| Asked by the Jina, the king, with a happy
mind, said, "Where will I be reborn after death? Tell me." ||13|| The Jina said,
"O king, you will be reborn in hell." The king was very upset and thought, "This
is not right." ||14|| In the meantime, the king, with a troubled mind, was
defeated by the enemy, who had taken away his weapons and his crown. ||15|| The
enemy, with a cruel heart, struck the king on the head with his sword. The king
was wounded and fell to the ground. ||16|| "I am a monk," he thought, "what is
the use of this peaceful Jhana? I have been defeated by this great power, which
has made me a Kevali." ||17|| The glory of the Kevali, surrounded by the gods,
was heard by the king. "What is this fearsome power?" he thought. ||18|| The
Jina said, "The glory of the Kevali is the power of the king. The gods are doing
this." The king was amazed. ||19|| [Sri Samvega Rangasala Slokas 5924 to 5942]
2010_02

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 khaNDaH-2 dRSTAntasamuccayaH 225 evaM socA takkhaNa-
vissumariyadhammajhANapaDibaMdho  /  sAhU pasannacaMdo, kuviyo ciMteumA''Dhatto
/  / 7 /  /  ko mai jIvaMtammi vi, majjha suyaM rajjama'vi ya viddavai  /  manne
sImAlamahI-vaINa duvvilasiyaM eyaM  /  / 8 /  /  tA te viddhaMsittA, karemi
sutthaM ti puvvanAeNa  /  ussaggaThiyo vi raNeNa, tehiM saddhi samA''vaDio  /  /
9 /  /  dhammajjhANaThiyaM piba, aha taM daLUNa seNio rAyA  /  ahaha ! mahappA
kaha vaTTai tti, vimhayarasA''ulio  /  / 10 /  /  bhattibharamuvvahanto,
savvA''yaravihiyatappayapaNAmo  /  ciMtai erisasuhajhANa-saMgao jai jiyaM cayai
/  / 11 /  /  eso mahA'NubhAvo, uppajjai tA kahiM ti jiNanAhaM  /  pucchissaM ti
vibhAviya, jayagurupAsaM samallINo  /  / 12 /  /  puTTho ya jaekkapahU,
pasannacaMdo tahAvihe bhAve  /  varseto mariUNaM, uppajjai kattha me kahasu  /
/ 13 /  /  bhaNiyaM pahuNA sattama !, narae uppajjai tti to rAyA  /  nUNaM mae
na sammaM, suyaM ti ciMtA''uro jAo  /  / 14 /  /  etyaMtarammi maNasA,
jujhaMteNaM pasannacaMdeNaM  /  niTThiyapaharaNanivaheNa, sIsatANeNa vi riussa
/  / 15 /  /  ghAyaM kAumaNeNaM, sIse hattho nivesio sahasA  /
luMciyacihuracayammi ya, tammi chikkammi uvautto  /  / 16 /  /  samaNo haM ti
visAyaM, kuNamANo kiM pi taM suhaM jhANaM  /  paDivanno sa mahappA, jeNa lahuM
kevalI jAo  /  / 17 /  /  kevalimahimA ya kayA, saMnihiyasurehiM duMduhI pahayA
/  puTuM ca seNieNaM, kiM tUrakho imo bhayavaM !  /  / 18 /  /  bhaNiyaM
jaekkapahuNA, kevalimahimaM pasannacaMdassa  /  devA kuNaMti ee, vimhaio seNio
tAhe  /  / 19 /  /  [zrIsaMvegaraMgasAlA zloka 5924 taH 5942] 2010_02

Page #267 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 226 ## The Story of the Oil Debt and the Release of the Daughter  37. This
story is about the debt of oil and the release of the daughter, which is related
to the practice of offering food to the Jain monks.  In the Kosala region, there
was a village where a householder named Devraja lived. His wife was named
Sarika, and they had many sons, including Sammata, and many daughters, including
Sammati. The entire family was deeply devoted to the Jain faith. In the same
village, there was a wealthy merchant named Shivadeva, whose wife was named
Shiva.  One day, the sun god, known as Samudraghosha, came to the village.
Hearing about the Jain religion, which was established by the Tirthankaras,
Sammata was deeply moved and took initiation. Over time, he became very
knowledgeable about the teachings of his guru. One day, he thought, "If someone
from my family were to become a monk, it would be very auspicious. After all,
the greatest act of kindness is to help beings escape the cycle of birth and
death." With this thought in mind, he went to his guru and asked for permission
to return to his village. He then went to a nearby village and asked an elderly
man, "Is there anyone from the family of Devraja, the householder, still alive?"
The man replied, "Everyone in his family is dead, except for his daughter,
Sammati, who is a widow." Sammata then went to her house. Seeing her brother,
Sammati was overjoyed and bowed to him. After spending some time with him, she
prepared food for him. However, Sammata politely refused, saying, "It is not
appropriate for us to accept anything for ourselves."  When it was time for
Sammata's brother to beg for food, she was unable to find even a drop of oil
anywhere. She went to the market and borrowed two palas of oil from Shivadeva,
the merchant. She promised to repay the debt with interest, doubling the amount
each day. Sammata's brother, unaware of the situation, accepted the oil,
believing it to be pure. That day, Sammata listened to the teachings of her
brother. She was so engrossed in the teachings that she forgot to bring the oil
into the house. The next day, her brother went out to beg for food. Sammati was
so overwhelmed with grief at his absence that she forgot to double the amount of
oil. On the third day, the debt had doubled to four palas of oil, which was a
huge amount. She was unable to bring it into the house. She also had to cook
food and fetch water. The entire day was spent in these tasks, and she was
unable to repay the debt. The debt continued to grow exponentially, doubling
each day, until it became an enormous amount.  Sammati went to the merchant and
said, "Please give me back my oil, or I will become your servant." She was
unable to repay the debt, so she agreed to become a servant. Many years passed.
Sammata's brother, Sammata, came to the village to beg for food. He did not see
his sister at home. When he returned, he asked about her. Sammati told him the
whole story of her misfortune, including her servitude to Shivadeva. She
expressed her sorrow and began to cry. Sammata comforted her, saying, "Don't
cry. I will soon free you." He then thought of a way to free her. First, he went
to Shivadeva's house. Shiva's wife was washing her hands with water to prepare
for offering food to the monk. Sammata stopped her, saying, "

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 226 AturapratyAkhyAnaprakIrNakam 37. RNAviladhyAne zrIpiNDaniyuktivRttau
tailakarSalastryAHkathAnakam  /  kozalAviSaye ko'pi grAmastatra devarAjo nAma
kuTumbI, sArikAbhidhA tasya bhAryA, tasyAzca sammatapramukhA bahavaH sutAH,
sammatiprabhRtayazca prabhUtA dArikAH, taJca sakalamapi kuTumbaM paramazrAvakaM,
tathA tasminneva grAme zivadevo nAma zreSThI, tasya bhAryA zivA  /  /  anyadA ca
samudraghoSAbhidhAH sUrayaH samAgacchan, teSAM samIpe jinapraNItaM
dharmamAkarNya jAtasaMvegaH sammato dIkSAM gRhItavAn, kAlakrameNa ca
gurucaraNaprasAdato'tIva gItArthaH samajani  /  sa cAnyadA cintayAmAsa-yadi
madIyaH ko'pi pravrajyAM gRhNAti tataH zobhanaM bhavati, idameva hi,
tAttvikamupakArakaraNaM yatsaMsArArNavAduttAraNamiti, tata evaM cintayitvA
gurUnApRcchaya nijabandhugrAme samAgamat tatra ca bahiH pradeze kamapi
pariNatavayasaM pRSTavAn puruSaM-yathA'tra devarAjAbhidhasya kuTumbinaH satkaH
ko'pi vidyate ? iti, sa prAha-mRtaM sarvamapi tasya kuTumbaM kevalamekA
sammatyabhidhA vidhavA putrikA jIvatIti, tataH sa tasyA gRhe jagAma, sA ca
bhrAtaramAyAntaM dRSTvA manasi bahumAnamudvahantI vanditvA kaJcikatkAlaM
paryupAsya ca tannimittamAhAraM paktumupatasthe, sAdhuzca tAM nivAritavAn-yathA
na kalpate'smAkamasmannimittaM kimapi kRtamiti, tato bhikSAvelAyAM sA
durgatatvenAnyatra kvacidapi tailamAtramapyalabhamAnA kathamapi
zivadevAbhidhasya vaNijo vipaNestailapalikAdvayaM dine dine dviguNavRddhirUpeNa
kAlAntareNa samAnIya bhrAtre dattavatI, bhAtrA ca taM vRttAntamajAnatA
zuddhamiti jJAtvA pratijagRhe, sA ca taddinaM bhrAtuH sakAze dharmaM zrutavatI,
tena na pAnIyAnayanAdinA tattailapalikAdvayaM pravezayituM prapAritavatI,
dvitIye ca dine bhrAtA (yathA) vihArakrama gataH, tatastasminnapi dine
tadviyogazokAkIrNamAnasatayA na tattailapalikAdvayaM dviguNIbhUtaM pravezayituM
zaktavatI, tRtIye ca dine karSadvayamRNe jAtaM taccAtiprabhUtatvAnna
pravezayituM zaktam, apica bhojanamapi pAnIyAnayanAdinA karttavyaM, tato
bhojanAyaiva yatnavidhau sakalamapi dinaM jagAmeti na RNaM pravezayit zaknoti,
tato dine dine dviguNavRddhyA pravarddhamAnamRNamaparimitaghaTapramANaM jAtaM,
tataH zreSThinA sA babhaNe-yathA mama tailaM dehi yadvA me dAsI bhava, tataH sA
tailaM dAtumazaknuvatI dAsatvaM pratipede, kiyatsu ca varSeSvatikrAnteSu
bhUyo'pi sammatAbhidhaH sAdhustasminneva grAme yathAvihArakramamAgamat, sA ca
bhaginI svagRhe na dRSTA, tata AgatA satI papracche, tayA ca prAcInaH sarvo'pi
vyatikarastasmai nyavedi yAvaddAsatvaM zivadevagRhe jAtamiti, nivedya ca
svaduHkhaM rodituM pravRttA, tataH sAdhuravocat-mA rodIracirAdahaM tvAM
mocayiSyAmi, tatastasyA mocanopAyaM cintayan prathamataH zivadevasyaiva gRhe
praviveza, zivA ca tasya bhikSAdAnArthaM jalena hastau prakSAlayituM lagnA, tAM
ca sAdhurnivArayAmAsa, 2010_02

Page #268 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter 2: Collection of Examples  227  Just as we do not find it suitable to
beg, so a wealthy merchant from a nearby region said, "What is the fault here?"
Then the sage explained in detail the faults like bodily violence, etc.,
according to the scriptures. Then the merchant said, "O venerable one! Where do
you reside, so that we who have come here may hear the Dharma?" Then the sage
replied, "I have no fixed abode yet." Then the merchant offered him a place in
his own house to stay, and he listened to the Dharma every day, and he also
adopted the right faith and minor vows. The sage also narrated many stories of
the past, like those of Vasudeva, etc., who had accepted vows, such as, "If even
my own son wishes to renounce the world, I will not stop him," etc. Hearing
this, Shivadeva also accepted a vow, saying, "O venerable one! If anyone of mine
also renounces the world, I will not stop him." In the meantime, Shivadeva's
eldest son and the sage's sister, both agreed to renounce the world. The
merchant sent them both forth, and they renounced the world. 38. The story of
Parashurama and Subhūma in the *Śrī Upadeshamālā* is relevant to the topic of
renunciation.  In Gajapura, the sister of Anantavīrya, the king, named Reṇukā,
was married to the sage Jamadagni. Once, she came to Gajapura to visit her
sister, and the king had a son born to her. The sage took her away. Her eldest
son was Rāma, who possessed the knowledge of the *Parashu* (axe) given by the
*Vidyādhara* (celestial being) Dattā. He killed his mother and her children in a
fit of anger, thinking that they were a disgrace to the family. Hearing this,
Anantavīrya came and destroyed the sage's hermitage. Rāma also cut off his head
with his axe. Anantavīrya's son, Kārtavīrya, became king. Hearing this story, he
became envious and killed Jamadagni. Rāma killed him too. His wife, Sutārā, was
pregnant and fled in fear to the sage's hermitage. There, in her confusion, she
gave birth to a child who fell to the ground and took the earth in his mouth.
Because of this, he was named Subhūma. Rāma went there and took over his
kingdom. In a fit of anger, he made the earth devoid of Kshatriyas seven times.
He made the earth the abode of the teeth of the chief Kshatriyas. Once, he asked
a soothsayer, "How will I die?" He said, "When the teeth that are lying on the
earth in your presence become milky, then." To fulfill this prophecy, he had a
platform made and placed in front of his throne, and he held a sacrifice there.
Because of the prophecy of the soothsayer, Subhūma was served by the
*Vidyādhara* Meghanāda and grew prosperous. He asked his mother, "Is this the
only world?" Hearing this, she wept. He asked, "Mother, what is this?" She told
him the whole story. Then, filled with pride, he went to Gajapura, entered the
sacrificial hall, sat on the throne, and the teeth that had become milky began
to eat him. Rāma heard this, came there with his army, and then, due to the
merit of Subhūma, the axe that had been given to him by the *Vidyādhara* blazed
forth in the presence of the Kshatriyas. Meghan

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 khaNDa:-2 dRSTAntasamuccayaH 227 yathaivamasmAkaM na kalpate bhikSeti, tataH
samIpadezavartI zreSThI provAca-ko'tra doSaH ?, tataH sAdhuH kAyavirAdhanAdIn
doSAn yathAgamaM savistaramacIkathat tataH sa Ato bhaNati yathA bhagavan ! kutra
yuSmAkaM vasatiryena tatrAgatA vayaM dharmaM zRNumaH tataH sAdhuravAdIt-nAsti
me'dyApi pratizrayaH, tatastena nijagRhaikadeze vasatiradAyi, pratidinaM ca
dharmaM zRNoti, samyaktvamaNuvratAni ca pratipannAni, sAdhuzca kadAcanApi
vAsudevAdipUrvapuruSAcIrNAnanekAnabhigrahan vyAvarNayAmAsa, yathA
vAsudevenAyamabhigraho jagRhe-yadi madIyaH putro'pi pravrajyAM jighRkSati
tato'haM na nivArayAmItyAdi, evaM ca zrutvA zivadevo'pyabhigrahaM gRhItavAn-yadi
bhagavan ! madIyo'pi ko'pi pravrajyAM pratipadyate tato'haM na nivArayAmIti,
atrAntare ca zivadevasya tanayo jyeSThaH sA ca sAdhubhaginI sammatiH pravajyAM
grahItumupatasthe, zreSThinA ca tau dvAvapi visarjitau, tataH pravrajyAM
pratipannAviti  /  38. vairadhyAne zrIupadezamAlAheyopAdeyAyAM
parazurAmasubhumayoH vRttAntaH  /  gajapure'nantavIryarAjabhAryAyA bhaginI
reNukAbhidhAnA pariNItA jamadagnitApasena  /  sA anyadA''yAtA gajapure
bhaginIsamIpe rAjJA ca samutpAditastasyAstanayaH, nItA RSiNA  /  tasyAzca
vidyAdharadattaparazuvidyo rAmaH jyeSTatanaya AsIt  /  tena
kulakalaGkabhUteyamiti jAtakrodhena vyApAditA sA sasutA  /  tat zrutvA
anantavIryeNAgatya RSerAzramo vinAzitaH, rAmeNApi tacchirazchinnaM parazunA,
jAto'nantavIryasutaH kArtavIryo rAjA tenAkarNya vRttAntaM jAtamatsareNAgatya
hato yamadagniH, rAmeNApyasAviti  /  tadbhAryA sutArA''pannagarbhA
bhayAtprapalAyamAnA gatA tApasAzramam  /  tatra ca vihvalatvAtpatito
niSpannadArako bhUmiM gRhNannAsyena  /  kRtaM taddvAreNa tasya nAma subhUma iti
/  rAmeNApi gatvAdhiSThitaM tadrAjyaM, krodhavazAt kRtA saptakRtvo niHkSatriyA
vasudhA, bhRtaM pradhAnakSatriyadaMSTrANAM sthAlam  /  anyadA pRSTastena
naimittikaH kuto me maraNamiti  /  sa prAha-yatsannidhAnAdetAH sthAlasthitA
daMSTrAH pAyasIbhaviSyanti tata iti  /  tatastadupalambhArthaM kAritaM tena
siMhAsanatasyAgrato nivezya sthAlamavAritasatram  /  itazca
naimittikasUcitasutAvaratvAnmeghanAdavidyAdhareNa sevyamAno gato vRddhiM
subhUmaH  /  sa mAtaramapRcchat kimiyAneva loka iti ? tat zrutvA vaco ruditaM
tayA, so'vocad-amba kimetat ? tayA kathito vRttAntaH  /  tato'sAvabhimAnena gato
gajapuraM, praviSTaH satramaNDapam, adhiSThitaM siMhAsanaM, pAyasIbhUtA daMSTrA
bhakSayitumArabdhAH, zrutaM tadrAmeNa, samAgatastatra sa sabalaH, tataH
subhUmapuNyAnubhAvAdyaH prAk kSatriyasannidhAnena jajvAla sa vidhyAtaH parazuH,
praharadvalaM bhagnaM meghanAdena, parazurAmaM pratyupasthito bhuktvA
gRhItasthAlaH subhUmaH, kRtaM taddevatayA taccakram tatastena taM nipAtya
rAjyamadhiSThAyaikaviMzativArAnnirbrAhmaNIkRtya pRthivIM gataH
saptamapRthivImiti  /  / 150  /  /  2010_02

Page #269 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 228 ## The Scattering of the Rejection of Eagerness ## 38. The Analogy of the
Farmer in the Presence of the Glorious Preceptor, Due to Hatred  Once, the Great
Hero, the Jina, Gautama, while wandering like a Kalpavriksha (wish-fulfilling
tree), addressed a farmer on the path: "O son! This farmer you see before you,
for his enlightenment, you should quickly go there. Great benefit will come to
you from him." Accepting this, Gautama went there and said: "O noble one! Is
your Samadhi (meditation) present? Why do you, with your many senses and other
living beings, engage in this farming, which is full of violence, and thus
commit sins? How can your soul be thrown into ruin for the sake of a family of
sinners?"  Because:  > The world is not yours, nor is it anyone else's. >
Whatever karma you do, you will reap its fruits. > At the time of your karma's
fruition, > Neither relatives nor friends will help you. ||1||  Therefore,
taking refuge in penance, and being drenched in the nectar of the true words,
"From the ocean of existence, you will be liberated," he spoke: "Master! I am a
Brahmin, and for the sake of fulfilling the desires of my seven daughters and
others, I commit many sinful acts. Therefore, you are my brother and mother.
Whatever you command, I will do. I will not disobey your revered words." Then,
he also accepted the virtuous garb offered to him. Taking him, who had taken the
vow, with him, Gautama went towards the Jina. Then, he asked: "Revered one!
Where are we going?" Gautama replied: "Where my teachers are, there." He asked:
"Those who are worshipped by gods and demons, are they also worthy of your
worship? What are they like?" Then, the qualities of the Arhat (liberated one)
were explained to him. Hearing this, he attained right faith, and due to seeing
the wealth of the Jina, he attained it in a special way. Then, gradually, as he
saw the glorious hero, adorned with his robes, hatred arose in his mind. Gautama
said: "O Muni! Worship the glorious hero." He replied to the Ganadhara (leader
of the assembly): "If this is your teacher, then there is no purpose for my
renunciation. Being your disciple is enough. Take this garb. I will go to my own
temple." Saying this, when he had abandoned his garb, clenched his fist, and
departed, seeing his actions, all the gods, starting with Indra, laughed and
said: "Oh! Indra-bhuthi has acquired a better disciple. Seeing this wonder,
Gautama, ashamed in his mind, asked the hero the reason for his hatred. The
master replied to him: "O son! By contemplating the qualities of the Arhat, his
knots have been broken. Therefore, great benefit has come to him and to you. As
to why hatred arose in him upon seeing me, listen to his story: In the past, in
the city of Potanapura, I was Vasudeva, the son of the king of the Prajapatis,
named Tripṛṣṭha. At that time, the king of the three regions, the wielder of the
half-wheel, was named Ashvagrīva. Once, in his assembly, he asked a knower of
omens about his own closing of his eyes. He replied: "From the hand of
Tripṛṣṭha, your death will come." From then on, I, carrying hatred for
Tripṛṣṭha, devised ways to kill him. But they all proved futile. Once, in the
forest before that city, a lion was causing havoc

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 228 AturapratyAkhyAnaprakIrNakam 38. vairadhyAne zrIupadezaprAsAde
kRSIvaladRSTAntaH  /  ekadA jaMgamaH kalpataruriva mArge vihAraM
kurvanmahAvIrajino gautamaM pratyuvAca-"he vatsa ! yo'yaM kRSIvalaH purastAta
prekSyate, tasya pratibodhAya tvaM satvaraM tatra gaccha, tvatto mahAnasya lAbho
bhAvI"  /  tatheti pratipadya gautamastatrAgatyetyalapat-"he bhadra ! tava
samAdhirvartate ? tvaM kasmAdanekadvIndriyAdijIvAnAM (virAdhanAmayena)
kRSikarmaNA mudhA pApAni karoSi ? kathaM pApakuTumbArthamAtmA'narthe nipAtyate ?
/  yataH saMsAramAvanna parassa aTThA, sAhAraNaM jaM ca karei kammaM  /
kammassa te tassa u veyakAle, na baMdhavAbaMdhavayaM uviMti  /  / 1 /  /
tasmAttapasyApotamAdAya bhavodadheH samuttara iti sadvAkyapIyUSaiH siktastaM
jagau-"svAmin ! ahaM vipraH saptakanyakAdInAM
duSpUrodayapUrtyarthamanekapApakarmANi karomi  /  ataH paraM tvameva mama bhrAtA
mAtA cAsi  /  yadAdizasi tatkurve, nAnyathA pUjyavacaH kariSye"  /  tataH so'pi
tadarpitaM sAdhuveSaM svIcakre  /  gRhItavrataM taM sahAdAya gautamo
jinAbhimukhaM cacAla  /  tadA so'vadat-'pUjya ! kutra gamyate ?
gautamo'vak-'yatra me guravaH santi tatra'  /  so'vAdIt-'surAsurapUjyAnAM
bhavatAmapi pUjyAste tu kIdRzA bhaviSyanti ?'  /  tadA tasyAgre'rhadguNAH
proktAH  /  tacchrutvA tena samyaktvamarjitaM,
punarjinasamRddhyavalokanAdvizeSeNa prAptam  /  tato krameNa saparicchadaM
zrIvIraM yAvadadrAkSIttAvattasya manasi dveSaH samabhUt  /  gautamaH prAha-'bho
mune ! zrIvIraM vandasva'  /  so'pi gaNadharaM pratyAha"bhavadIyo'yaM
guruzcettadA mama pravrajyAyAH prayojanaM nAsti, tava ziSyatvabhavanenAlaM, imaM
veSaM gRhANa, ahaM svamandire yAsyAmi"  /  ityuktvA yadA tyaktaveSo'sau muSTiM
baddhvA praNaSTavAn, tadA tAddak tasya ceSTitaM vIkSya sarve'pIndrAdyA hasantaH
prAhu:-'aho ! indrabhUtinA varIyAn ziSya upArjitaH  /  etadadbhutaM vIkSya manAg
lajjitamanA gautamo vIraM tadvairakAraNaM papraccha  /  svAmI taM pratyAha-"he
vatsa ! anenArhadguNacintanairgranthibhedaH kRtaH  /  tena tasya tava ca mahAn
lAbho'bhUt  /  yanmAM vIkSyAsya dveSo jAtastatsvarUpaM zRNu_purA potanapure
prajApatinRpAGgajastripRSThAkhyo vAsudevo'hamabhavam, tadA trikhaNDAdhipaH
pratyardhacakrI azvagrIvAhvo'bhUt  /  anyadA svasaMsadi tena svanimIlanaM
nimittajJaM prati pRSTam  /  so'pi tripRSThahastAt tvanmRtyurbhAvItyabravIt  /
tato'nvahaM sa tripRSThasyopari dveSaM vahan mAraNopAyAMzcakre  /  te tu viphalA
jajJire  /  anyadA tatpuro vane zAlikSetramanuSyeSUpadravaM kurvantaM siMhaM
hantuM na kenApi samarthyate, tadA tadupadravanivAraNAyArdhacakrinRpAjJayA
svasvavArake nRpAH sthitiM kurvanti  /  anyeyuH 2010_02

Page #270 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Chapter 2: Collection of Examples 229  The king of the Prajapatis had a
charioteer. When his father was forbidden, he mounted his chariot with the
charioteer to protect the three-backed creature from the attack. As soon as he
was addressed, the lion ran towards him. Then the three-backed creature, with
the force of a cluster of conch shells, split the lion's mouth in two, making
the lion half-dead. Then the lion blamed himself, "Alas! I have been killed by a
mere human!" Then the sweet-tongued charioteer comforted him, "O lion! This one
is going to be Vasudeva. Do not consider him a mere beggar. If you die by the
hand of the king of men, why are you disheartened? This one is a lion in the
mortal world, but you are in the animal realm."  Encouraged by these words, the
lion attained peace and closed his eyes. Then all three of them wandered in the
ocean of existence, and in due course, they were born here. The three-backed
creature was born as I, the lion was born as a farmer, and the charioteer was
born as you, Indra-bhuthi. In the past, you were pleased by his sweet words, and
I killed him. In this play of existence, the cause of love and hatred should be
understood. However, you have been born with a white side. 38. The story of
Sudarshan in the Sri-Upadesha-Prasada, a treatise on the avoidance of hatred.
In Champa, there was a wealthy merchant named Rishabhadasa. His wife was a
virtuous woman named Sushilā. In the month of Magha, another wealthy merchant
named Subhaga, along with his wife, went to his house. In the evening, they saw
a Muni on the road, shivering from the cold, sitting near an image. They praised
him and went home. After spending the night, they got up early in the morning
and went out with their wives. Seeing the Muni still there, they sat down beside
him. As the sun rose, the Muni said, "Namo Arihantaṇam" and flew up into the
sky. Then he considered that the Muni's words were like a mantra of celestial
knowledge and imprinted them in his mind. He used to recite them in the presence
of the Arhat. Seeing him absorbed in meditation, the merchant asked, "How did
you get this?" He said, "From the Muni."  Satisfied with the whole story, the
merchant paid him full respects.  From then on, he continued to praise the Muni.
In due course, a year passed. Then, due to a cloud, the earth was flooded. The
merchant's wife, fearing for her life, went to the forest. In the meantime, the
river flooded. Then, remembering the celestial knowledge, he jumped into the
river. In the process, he was pierced by a nail and died. He was reborn as the
son of the same merchant, named Sudarshan. In due course, he was married to
Manorama, the daughter of his parents. From then on, he developed a strong
friendship with Kapila, the king's priest. One day, his wife, Kapila, who was
eager for love, having heard about her husband's virtues, went to Sudarshan's
palace and said, "My dear, you have a beautiful body. Therefore, you should come
to my house soon to inquire about my well-being." She secretly took him inside
her house, closed the door, left her shawl, and begged him for love. Then, the
merchant, who was a hypocrite, in order to protect his virtue, said, "I am a
hypocrite, my dear. Why do you ask me in vain?" He went out and returned home.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 khaNDa:-2 dRSTAntasamuccayaH 229 prajApatinRpasya vArako'bhavat  /  tadA
pitaraM niSidhya tatra tripRSThastadupadravaM rakSituM sArathiyuto rathamAruhya
yayau  /  tenAlApitamAtro'sau siMhastaM pratyadhAvat  /  tadA tripRSThaH
zuktisaMpuTavattasyauSThayAmalaM dvidhA kRtvA siMhamardhamRtaM cakre  /  tataH
siMhaH svaM nininda-'hahA ! nRmAtreNAhaM hataH'  /  tadA madhuravAcA
sArathistamasAntvayat-"he siMha ! vAsudevo'yaM bhavitA  /  raMkamAtramimaM mA
jAnIhi  /  puruSendrasya hastena mRtazcet kiM viSIdasi ?  /  martyaloke'yameva
siMho'sti, bhavAn punastiryagyonau"  /  iti vAkyena hRSTaH siMhaH samAdhinA
nimIlanaM prAptaH  /  tataste trayo'pi bhavAmbhodhau bhrAmaM bhrAmaM
kramAdatrAbhavan  /  yastripRSThajIvaH so'haM jAtaH, siMhajIvastu kRSIvalo
jAtaH, sArathe - vastu bhavAnindrabhUtirjAtaH  /  purA madhurayA vAcA tvayAsau
prINito mayA ca hataH  /  tadatra bhavanATake snehavairayoH kAraNaM jJeyam  /
paraM tvayaM zuklapAkSiko jAtaH  /  38. vairadhyAne zrIupadezaprAsAde
sudarzanaprabandhaH  /  campAyAmRSabhadAsaH zreSThI  /  tasyArhadAsI strI
suzIlAbhavat  /  anyedhurmAghamAse subhagAkhyastanmahiSIpAla:
zreSThImahiSIzcArayitvA gRhamAgacchan sAyamapAvRtaM pratimAsthaM zItArtaM muniM
pathi dRSTvA tasya zlAghAM vidhAya gRhamAgatya nizAmativAhya savelamutthAya
mahiSIH puraskRtya gacchan tathAsthaM muni vIkSya tatpArzve niSaNaH  /  ita
udite ravau sa cAraNamuniH 'namo arihaMtANaM' ityuktvA divamutpatitaH  /
tatastena tatpadaM vyomagAmividyAmaMtramiva matvA citte nyastaM  /  tadeva
so'rhatsannidhau anyedyuH paThati sma  /  taddhyAnaparaM taM dRSTvA zreSThI
papraccha-'kuta idaM tvayA prAptaM ?' tenoktaM-'muneH' ityukte sarvavRttAnte ca
tuSTaH zreSThI taM saMpUrNaM namaskAramapAThayat  /  itastadguNanaM
kurvatastasya kramAdvarSAkAla: sametaH  /  tato meghenaikArNave mahImaMDale kRte
sa mahiSIrlAtvA vanaM gataH  /  antarAle nadIpUramAgatA  /  atha tena
vyomavidyAbuddhyA tadeva smaratA nadyAM jhaMpA dattA  /  antarAle sa
kIlakaviddho mRtvA tasyaiva zreSThinaH sudarzanAkhyaH suto jAtaH  /  kramAt
pitRbhyAM manoramAmibhyasutAM vivAhitaH  /  itastasya kapilena nRpapurodhasA
samaM niviDA prItirabhUt  /  anyadA patyuktadguNazravaNAnuraktA tatpatnI kapilA
kAmAturA sudarzanasaudhe sametya 'tavAdya suhRdo vapurapATavamastyatastvayA
sukhapRcchArthaM zIghraM madgRhe sametavyaM' ityuktvA taM guptagRhAntItvA dvAraM
datvA trapAM tyaktvA ratArthaM prArthayAmAsa  /  tataH parastrIratau SaMDhaH sa
zreSThI zIlarakSArthaM 'paMDho'hamasmi mugdhe, kiM vRthA mAM prArthayasi ?'
ityuktvA nirgatya gRhamAgataH  /  /  anyadA nRpaH sapurodhaHsudarzanaH
krIDitumudyAnaM gataH  /  yAnArUDhAbhayA rAjyapi kapilayA samaM vanamagAt  /
itaH kapilA sudarzanapriyAM sutaSaTkayutAM pathi dRSTvA 'keyaM strI ?'
ityabhayAmapRcchat  /  2010_02

Page #271 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------



======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 230 AturapratyAkhyAnaprakIrNakam tayoktaM-'iyaM zreSThistrI, ete tatsutAH'  /
tataH kapilayA tadvRttAnto mUlataH proktaH  /  atha sA devyA proce-tvaM
mugdhA'nena daMbhena vaJcitA'  /  tatastayoktaM-'devi ! tavApi vaidagdhyaM tadA
vedmi, cedanena samaM ramase'  /  iti tadvacaH zrutvA devyAGgIkRtam  /  /  ekadA
rAjAdau vane raMtuM gate zUnyagRhe kAyotsargasthaM kAmayakSamUrtidaMbhena
yAnArUDhaM kArayitvA paMDitAkhyayA svadhAtryAnAyya svabhuvanAntaH pracchannaM
kSiptvA sA kAmavibhramAdidarzanapUrvamatyarthaM prArthitavatI  /  tathApi
tanmano na manAgapi calitam  /  tatastayA stanopapIDaM tasya sarvAgINamAliMganaM
dattam  /  tathApi na kSubdhaM cetaH  /  tataH kupitayA tayA pUJcakre  /
tacchrutvArakSakaiH sa dhRtvA rAjJo'ne nItaH  /  pRSTenApi tena tasyAM kRpayA
maunamAzritam  /  tato doSaM saMbhAvya ruSTena rAjJA 'eSa viDambya pure
bhrAmayitvA mAryatAM' iti rakSakA AdiSTAH  /  taistathA kRtvA
nIyamAnastatpriyayA dRSTaH  /  tadA sA jinAgre kAyotsarga cakAra kalaMkottaraNaM
yAvat  /  itaste taM zUlikAyAM nyadhuH  /  sA ca svarNasiMhAsanamabhUt  /  atha
taistadvadhArthaM khaDgaprahArA muktAste ca kaMThe hAratvaM, maulau maulitAM,
karNayoH kuMDalatvaM, karacaraNe ca kaTakatvaM bhejire  /  ArakSakaistaJcitraM
rAjJe jJApitam  /  tato rAjJA tatrAgatya zreSThI satkRtya svahastinamAropya
samahotsavaM svagRhe nItaH  /  tajjJAtaM jJAtvA tayA kAyotsargo muktaH  /  atha
rAjA tanmukhAdrAjJIvRttaM jJAtvA zreSThivacanAdabhayAyA abhayaM datvA zreSThinaM
hastiskandhamAropya svagRhe preSIt  /  tadvRttaM vijJAyAbhayA svamudvadhya mRtA
/  paMDitA pATalIpure vezyAntike'gamat  /  atha sudarzano bhavavirakto
gRhItavrato vicaran pATalIpure gataH  /  tatra paMDitayA pratilAbhamiSeNa
svagRhe nItvA dvAraM pidhAya kadarthito'pi nAcalat  /  tataH sAyaM vimukto
nirgatya vane gatvA smazAnAntaH pratimayA sthitaH  /  tatrApi vyantarIbhUtayA
tayAbhayArAjyA prAgvairAdaneke upasargAH kRtAH  /  tathApi tanmano na calitam  /
sa muniH zubhadhyAnAt kevalajJAnamAsAdya dezanAM dadau  /  tadA'bhayApi
samyaktvaM prApa  /  paMDitApi pratibodhitA  /  evaM kevalaparyAyaM ciraM
prapAlya zivaM gataH  /  /  39. vitarkadhyAne zrIupadezaprAsAde cANakyasya
jJAtam  /  golladeze jainazcaNakanAmA vipro'bhUt  /  tasya bhAryA caNezvarI  /
tayoH sutazcANAkyaH garbhAddazanaiH saha jAtaH  /  anyadA tadgRhe jJAnI
munirAhArArthamAgAt  /  dampatI muniM natvA papracchatuH-"he bhagavan ! asau
sadanto jAto'sti tasya ko hetuH ?"  /  muniH smAha-"bAlo'yaM nRpo bhavitA"  /
tacchrutvA caNako viSaNo dadhyau-"matsuto rAjyArambhairadhogatiM mA yAsIt" iti
dhvAtvA dantAn ghRSTvA sAdhubhyaH so'vk| sAdhuH smAha-"tarhi sacivezo bhAvI  / "
tatazcANAkyaH krameNa sakalakalAsamudro'bhUt  /  yauvane viprakanyAM paryaNaiSIt
/  nirdhano'pi hi saMtoSato dravyArthaM mahAprayatnaM nAkarot  /  anyadA
tatpriyA _ 2010_02

Page #272 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------



======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 khaNDa:-2 dRSTAntasamuccayaH 231 bhrAturvivAhe pitRgRhe'gAt, paraM
nirdhanatvena bhrAtRjAyAdayo'syAH pratipattiM na cakrire, bhojanAdAvapi
paGiktabhedaM vyadhuH, tato'tidauHsthyAlajjitA patyurgRhe'gAt  /  tataH
zokabharAM tAM vIkSya bharnA sanirbandhaM pRSTA muktAvyUhopamamazruvrajaM
muJcantI smAha taM parAbhavam  /  tacchrutvA cANakyo dadhyau kalAvAn kulavAn
dAtA, yazasvI rUpavAnapi  /  vinA zriyaM bhavenmayoM, nistejAH kSINacandravat  /
/ 1 /  /  nandabhUpo viprANAM dhanaM bahulaM dadAti iti vimRzya sa pATalipuraM
drAg jagAma  /  tatra rAjasabhAyAM gatvA nRpAsanamazizriyat  /  atha nandanRpa
ekena siddhaputreNa nimittajJena saMyuta upAgamat  /  tatrasthaM cANAkyaM vIkSya
siddhaputro'bravIt-"asau vipro nandavaMzasya cchAyAmAkramya tiSThati"  /
tatazcANAkyamurvIzadAsyuvAca-"bhagavan ! idaM dvitIyaM siMhaviSTaramadhyAssva"
/  so'vak-"asminnAsane matkamaNDaluH sthAsyati"  /  ityutvA tatra taM
nyasyAdyamAsanaM na tyaktavAn  /  tatastRtIyaM daNDena caturthaM cAkSamAlayA
paJcamaM brahmasUtreNa so'ruNat ! tato dAsI jagau-"aho asya dhASTyaM jaDatvaM
ca"  /  sa ruSTo'hiNA tAmAhatya sarvasamakSamityuvAca kozaizca bhRtyaizca
nibaddhamUlaM, putraizca mitraizca vivRddhazAkham  /  utpATya nandaM
parivartayAmi, mahAdrumaM vAyurivogravegaH  /  / 1 /  /  anena bhikSuNA kiM
syAditi rAjJA'pyupekSitaH sa niragAt, bhramaMzca
nandabhUpatermayUrapoSakagrAme'gAt  /  tatra parivrAjakaveSeNAbhramat  /  tatra
grAmaNIputryAzcandrapAnadohado'jani, taM pUrayituM ko'pi nAzakat  /  tataH
pitrAdibhizcANAkyaH proktaH, so'vak-"tatsutaM mama datta cettadAhaM pUrayAmi"  /
"apUrNadohadAgarbhAnvitA mA mriyatAm" iti vimRzya taistasya vacanaM svIkRtam  /
atha sa sacchidraM paTamaNDapamacIkarata, tasyopari pracchannaM zanaiH
zanaizchidrapidhAyakaM naramamuJcat, tasya cchidrasyAdhastAt sthAlaM payobhRtaM
nyadhAt, nizIthe kArtikIcandrastatra pratibimbitaH, cAndraM
pratibimbamantarvantyAH pradI sa pibetyUce, tatastuSTA sA tatpAtuM pracakrame,
candrapAnadhiyA sthAlapayaH sA yathA yathA'pAt tathA tathoparistho naro
maNmapacchidraM pidadhe  /  tato dohade pUrNe sA samaye sutaM suSuve  /
cANAkyastu dravyArjanaM prArebhe  /  tasya putrasya candragupta iti nAma kRtam
/  tataH prAptaprauDhavayAH sa bAla: zizubhiH saha bhUpalIlayA krIDati,
dezapuragokulahayagajAmAtyAdIn sthApayati  /  tatra bhraman cANakya etya
prAha-"he bAla! mamApi kiJciddehi"  /  candro'vadat-"imAH surabhIrgRhANa"  /  sa
smAha-"etA gRhNan bibhemi"  /  candro'vak-"mA bhaiSIH, vIrabhogyA bhUriyaM"  /
tato hRSTaH sa tasya kulAdikamanyebhyo jJAtvA svakIyaM bAlaM nirdhAryatyUce-"he
vatsa ! ehi rAjyaM dadAmi"  /  tacchrutvA drutamAyAtaM taM hatvA drAk
plaayisstt| tataH senAM kRtvA pATalipuraM ruddham  /  nandena tatsainyaM kSaNena
jitam  /  candraguptazcANAkyena samaM 2010_02

Page #273 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 232 ## The Scattering of the Eager Rejection  He fled. Then Nanda's cavalry
pursued him, and one of them was seen from afar. Chanakya, bowing down, hid the
moon in the lake and himself began the work of a washerman. From there, that
cavalryman asked him, "Have you seen Chandragupta passing by here?" He replied,
"He has entered this lake." Then that man, wearing only a loincloth, entered the
lake. At that time, Chanakya cut off his head with his own sword. Then, mounting
the moon on that horse, he rode forward. He asked the moon, "O son! What did you
meditate on when I sent you to the lake?" "O venerable one! The best ones do
only the best," he said with humility. Then, knowing that the moon was afflicted
by hunger, Chanakya, himself going to eat, saw a Brahmin on the path who had
just eaten a mouthful of food. He ripped open his stomach, took the food, and
fed the moon. The moon, being hungry, did not know the taste of the food.
Then, the Mauryan army was assembled. On the next day, while wandering for alms
in a village, he went to a house with a fire pit. There, an old woman had placed
a large quantity of hot embers in a pot. A child, hungry, put his hand into the
embers, and his finger was burnt. He cried out loudly. The old woman said to
him, "O fool! You are as dull as Chanakya." Hearing this, the mendicant asked,
"O mother! How did you make this comparison to Chanakya?" She said to him, "Just
as Chanakya, while conquering the external country, was a fool in guarding
Pataliputra and was caught, so also this child, slowly licking around, put his
hand in the middle and met with ridicule."   Hearing these words, Chanakya,
having determined the truth of the teaching, wandered and gradually formed a
close friendship with the king of the mountains. The other day, he said to that
king, "If you are willing, then uproot Nanda and divide his kingdom, and rule it
without fear." Then, with his army, the king of the mountains, and Chandragupta,
Chanakya began the conquest of Nanda's country.   Seeing that he was unable to
capture one city by force, Chanakya, disguised as a mendicant, entered it.
Entering and looking at the buildings, he saw seven beautiful princesses, the
daughters of Indra. Understanding that the city was ruined by their brilliance,
he thought, "How can I conquer these?" As he was pondering this, the citizens,
distressed by the siege, asked him, "O venerable one! When will this siege end?"
He said, "As long as the images of these goddesses are here, how can there be an
end to the siege?" Then, the citizens, tricked by his cunning, quickly removed
them from that place. Then, the city was quickly captured by them.   Wishing to
conquer Nanda's country, they surrounded Nanda's city. Then, due to his
dwindling merit, Nanda requested a passage through the Dharma gate from
Chanakya. He said, "Take whatever you can carry in one chariot and go out of the
city without fear." Nanda, placing his two wives, one daughter, and his treasure
in the chariot, left the city. Chandragupta and the others came to enter the
city. Then, Nanda's daughter, filled with love, saw Chandragupta. Then, Nanda
said, "O daughter! If this man pleases you, then accept him." Having been told
this, she was about to climb onto Chandragupta's chariot, but the chariot wheels
broke. Chandragupta, knowing her to be

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 232 AturapratyAkhyAnaprakIrNakam palAyata  /  tato nandAzvavArAstatpRSTha
AjagmuH, teSAM madhya eko'zvavAro dUrAttAbhyAM dRSTaH  /  natazcANAkyazcandraM
sarasi saMgopya svayaM rajakakarma prArebhe  /  itazca so'zvavArastaM
papraccha-"candragupto vrajannatra tvayA dRSTa: ?"  /  so'pyUce-"atra sarasi
praviSTo'sti"  /  tataH sa kaupInamAtrabhRjjale viveza  /  tadA cANAkyastasyaiva
khaDgena tacchiro'cchinat  /  tatazcandraM tasminnazve Aropya sa purato'cAlIt  /
sa candraM papraccha-"he vatsa ! yadA mayA sAdI sarasi preSitastadA tvayA kiM
dhyAtam ?"  /  "he pUjya ! uttamAH kurvanti tacchreSThameve"ti vinayavAkyAtsa
hRSTaH  /  tatazcandraM kSudhA bAdhitaM jJAtvA svayaM bhojanagrahaNArthaM vrajan
pathi anantarabhuktakarambakaM vipramekaM vIkSya cANAkyastasyodaraM vidArya
tadbhojyaM hatvA candramabhojayat  /  so'pi kSudhitastadrasaviparyayaM nAjJAsIt
/  atha mauryayuktaH  /  sa dinAtyaye ekatra grAme bhikSAyai bhraman roragRhe
yayau  /  tadA vRddhayaikayA svachAlAnAM bhUyasAmuSNA rabbA pariveSitA  /  ekaH
zizuH kSudhito rabbAyAM karaM prAkSipat, tena dagdhAGgaliruccairuroda, taM
vRddhA'bhASata-"re mUDha ! cANAkyavattvamapi jaDo'si"  /  tacchrutvA bhikSuNA
pRSTam-"he mAtaH ! tvayA cANAkyanidarzanamatra kathaM cakre"  /  sA taM
smAha-"yathA pUrvaM cANAkyo bAhyaM dezamasAdhayan pATalipuraM rundhAno mUDho
vigopanAM prApa tathaiva bAlako'pi zanaiH parito'lihan madhya eva pANiM
kSipannatyupahAsamAsadat"  /  tadvAkyaM zrutvA zikSA satyAM nirdhArya cANAkyo
bhraman kramAt parvatAbhidhena rAjJA samaM gADhamaitrIM vidadhe  /  anyedyustaM
nRpaM sa smAha-"cetsamIhase tadA nandamunmUlya tadrAjyaM vibhajyAdadvahe"  /
tataH sasainyaH parvatakazcandraguptAnvitazcANAkyavAkyAnandadezasya sAdhanaM
prArebhe  /  tadaikaM puraM balAdgrahItumakSamaM matvA
bhikSuveSabhRJcANAkyastatra viveza  /  pravizya ca vAstUni saMprekSamANaH
saprabhAvAH sapta devIrindrakumArikA apazyat, tAsAM prabhavAdabhaGgaM
tatpuramavabudhya 'mayaitAH kathamucchApyAH ?" iti yAvatA vimamarza tAvatA
purarodhArtA nAgarAstaM papracchu:-"bhagavan ! ayaM purarodhaH kadA prayAsyati
?"  /  so'vak-"yAvadamUH devInAM pratimA atra bhavanti tAvatpurarodhakSatiH
kutaH" ? /  tato dhUrtapratAritAH paurAH tasmAt sthAnAttAH kSipramudapATayan  /
tataH zIghraM tatpuraM tAbhyAM gRhItam  /  icchaM nandadezaM prasAdhya
nandapuramaveSTyatAm  /  tadA ca kSINapuNyatvAt cANAkyasyAntike nando
dharmadvAramayAcata  /  sa smAha-"tvamekena rathena yannetumIzastadAdAya
nirbhayaH purAniryAhi"  /  nando'pi bhAryAdvayaM kanyAmekAM sAradhanaM ca
rathe'dhiropya nagarAnniryayau, candraguptAdayaH pure praveSTumAgatAH  /  tadA
nandasutA'nurAgaparA candraM pazyati, tadA nando'vak-"he putri ! yadyasau svAmI
tava rocate tadAGgIkuru"  /  tenetyuktA sA candraguptarathe
yAvadAroDhumupacakrame tAvaJcakrArakA navAbhajyanta  /  candro'maGgalakarIM tAM
jJAtvA nyavArayat  /  taM prati cANAkyaH smAha-"vatsa ! mA mA niSedhaya, anena
nimittena nava puruSAn yAvatte vaMzo bhAvI"  /  tatazcandrastAM rathe'dhiropya
nandagRhe yayau 2010_02

Page #274 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter - 2 Collection of Examples 233  Chanakya - Along with the mountain.
There was a girl there, Nanda fed her poison slowly and unevenly all her life.
Seeing her, the mountain, filled with poison, embraced her. Filled with poison,
he cried out to the moon - "Do something immediately". He was ready to
retaliate, but Chanakya stopped him with a raised eyebrow and taught him,  " A
friend who is equal in worth, equal in strength, who knows the heart, who is
determined, who can take half the kingdom, he who does not kill, is killed. || 1
||  Then the mountain perished, leaving only his name. His kingdom came under
the control of Chandragupta. Then the Nanda sons committed theft in
Chandragupta's kingdom. Then Chanakya searched for another protector. While
wandering, he went to the house of Ladahvakuvinda. He saw him throwing fire into
the houses of the Morkotakas. Chanakya asked him, "What are you doing?" Kuvindu
said - "I am throwing fire into the burrows to kill these wicked Morkotakas, who
are the enemies of my sons, along with their families." Hearing his words,
knowing him to be strong and determined, Chanakya appointed him as the head of
the city by Chandragupta. Thus, the Mauryan kingdom became free from obstacles.
40. The story of Kalasaukarika in the commentary on the Sri Yoga Shastra, which
deals with the study of violence.  Once upon a time, the great Lord Mahavira was
wandering. The world-worshipped one arrived in that city and stayed there. || 1
||  Hearing that the Lord had arrived, the mobile Kalpa tree, the king of the
श्रेणिकs, came there, filled with joy. || 2 ||  The world-teacher, seated in his
place among the gods and others, began to preach the Dharma, which destroys
evil. || 3 ||  Then a man with a leprous body came and bowed down. He sat down
near the Lord, like a crow near a lamp. || 4 ||  Then, with his own saliva, he
washed the feet of the Lord. He worshipped them with sandalwood, without any
fear. || 5 ||  Seeing this, the श्रेणिक king became angry and thought, "This man
should be killed. He is the most wicked, as he dared to touch the Lord of the
world." || 6 ||  Meanwhile, the Jina asked the leper, "Should he die or live?"
When the श्रेणिक king said, "He should die," || 7 ||  Abhayakumara said, "Let
him live or die. Even Kalasaukarika said, 'Do not live, do not die.'" || 8 ||
The king was enraged by the words, "Let him die," spoken against the Jina. He
got up from his seat and ordered his soldiers, "Seize him." || 9 ||  After the
sermon, the leper bowed to Mahavira and got up. He was attacked by the श्रेणिक's
soldiers, like a boar by Kiratas. || 10 ||  In their very sight, he instantly
assumed a divine form. He rose up in the sky, mocking the sun. || 11 ||  [Yoga
Shastra, Second Light, Original Verse - 30, in वृत्त, Internal Verse 5 to 15]
Then the श्रेणिक king, in his anger, said, "This is the misfortune of the Lord.
What is the misfortune of others?" || 12 ||  Then the Lord said, "Why are you
still standing here? Quickly go to liberation

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 khaNDa - 2 dRSTAntasamuccayaH 233 cANakya- parvatakasahitaH  /  tatraikA
kanyA'bhavat, Ajanma tAM nandaH zanairviSamaM viSamabhojayat  /  tAM vIkSya
parvatako viSayArto'GgasaGgaM cakAra  /  tena viSavyAptazcandraM jagau - "
sadyaH kaJcitpratikAraM kuru"  /  sa pratikriyAkaraNodyato'bhUt, tadA cANAkyena
bhrUsaMjJayA niSiddhaH zikSitazca yataH " tulyArthaM tulyasAmarthyaM, marmajJaM
vyavasAyinam  /  ardharAjyaharaM mitraM, yo na hanyAtsa hanyate  //  | 1 ||
tataH sa parvato nAmazeSatAM prapede  /  tasya rAjyaM candraguptAdhInaM jAtam  /
atha candraguptarAjye nandanarAzcauryaM vyadhuH  /  tatazcANAkyo'nyaM
kaJcidArakSakamamArgayat  /  tato bhramannaladAhvakuvindasya gRhe'gAt  /  taM
markoTakagRheSvagniM kSipantaM dadarza  /  cANAkyaH kiM karoSIti tamaprAkSIt  /
kuvindaH smAha-" matsUnordazadAyino duSTAnetAnmarkoTakAn sAnvayAn hantuM
bileSvahamanalaM prakSipAmi "  /  iti tasya girA taM karmaThaM sodyamaM jJAtvA
tasmai purAdhyakSatAM candraguptAdadApayat  /  evaM mauryasya rAjyaM niSkaNTakaM
jAtam  /  40. hiMsAdhyAne zrIyogazAstravyAkhyAyAM kAlasaukarikasyAkhyAnakam  /
anyadA zrImahAvIro viharan paramezvaraH  /  jagatpUjyaH pure tasminnAgatya
samavAsarat  /  / 1 /  /  zrutvA svAminamAyAtaM jaGgamaM kalpapAdapam  /
kRtArthamAnI tatrAgAnmuditaH zreNiko nRpaH || 2 || yathAsthAnaM niSaNNeSu
devAdiSu jagadguruH  /  prArebhe duritadhvaMsadezanIM dharmmadezanAm  /  / 3 /
/  tadA kuSThagalatkAyaH kazcidetya praNamya ca  /  niSasAdopatIrthezamalarka
iva kuTTime ||4|| tato bhagavataH pAdau nijapUyarasena saH  /
niHzaGkazcandaneneva carcayAmAsa bhUyasA  /  /  5  /  /  tadvIkSya zreNikaH
kruddho dadhyau vadhyo'yamutthitaH  /  pApIyAn yajjagadbharttaryyamAzAtanAparaH
/  / 6 /  /  atrAntare jinendreNa kSute provAca kuSThikaH  /  mriyasvetyatha
jIveti zreNikena kSute sati  /  / 7 /  /  kSute'bhayakumAreNa jIva vA tvaM
mriyasva vA  /  kAlasaukarikeNApi kSute mA jIva mA mRthAH  /  /  8  /  /  jinaM
prati mriyasveti vacasA ruSito nRpaH  /  itaH sthAnAdutthito'sau grAhya
ityAdizad bhaTAn  /  / 9 /  /  dezanAnte mahAvIraM natvA kuSThI samutthitaH  /
rurudhe zreNikabhaTaiH kirAtairiva sUkaraH  /  / 10 /  /  sa teSAM pazyatAmeva
divyarUpadharaH kSaNAt  /  utpapAtAmbare kurvannarkabimbaviDambanAm  /  / 11 /
/  [yogazAstra dvitIyaprakAza mUlazloka-30 vRttau''ntarazloka 5 taH 15] athoce
zreNikaH svAbhinnamaGgalyaM prabhoH kSute  /  eSo'nyeSAM tu maGgalyA-'maGgalyAni
jagAda kim  /  / 12 /  /  athAcacakSe bhagavAn kiM bhave'dyApi tiSThasi  /
zIghraM mokSaM prayAhIti mAM mriyasvetyuvAca saH  /  / 13 /  /  sa tvAM jagAda
jIveti jIvataste yataH sukham  /  narake narazArdUla mRtasya hi gatistava  /  /
14  /  /  2010_02

Page #275 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter 234: The Scattering of the Eager Refusal  **Verse 15:** While alive,
he [the king] would have established the religion of the Jivas, and in the
highest heaven, he would have been dead. "Live, die, Jiva," thus he spoke to him
[the king] without fear.  **Verse 16:** While alive, he [the king] was devoted
to sin, and after death, he would go to the seventh hell. The Time-and-
Prosperity-Maker said to him, "Do not live, do not die."  **Verse 17:** Hearing
this, the king, bowing to the Lord, said, "O Lord, the Lord of the world, how
can I go to hell?"  **Verse 18:** The Lord said, "In the past, you were a king.
You were bound by karma to hell, and therefore you will surely go there."
**Verse 19:** "The fruits of good and bad deeds are bound by past karma. We must
experience them, we cannot do otherwise."  **Verse 20:** "In the twenty-fourth
cycle of births and deaths, you will be the king named Padma-Nabha. Do not be
distressed by this."  **Verse 21:** The king said, "O Lord, is there any way to
escape hell, like a blind man escaping a well?"  **Verse 22:** The Lord said,
"With devotion, give alms to the virtuous, especially to the Brahmanas, and if
you give alms to Kapila with joy,  **Verse 23:** "Or if you free the birds from
the Time-and-Prosperity-Maker, then you will be freed from hell, O king, there
is no other way."  **Verse 24:** Accepting this teaching as a jewel in his
heart, he bowed to the glorious Mahavira and went to his own home.  **Verse
25:** The king, filled with faith, requested Kapila, "Give alms to the virtuous,
I will make you rich."  **Verse 26:** Kapila said, "If you make me all of gold,
or even kill me, I will not do this."  **Verse 27:** The Time-and-Prosperity-
Maker also said to the king, "Free the birds, I will give you wealth. You are a
greedy merchant."  **Verse 28:** "What harm is there in the birds, since humans
live? I will never abandon them," said the Time-and-Prosperity-Maker.  **Verse
29:** "How will he do this bird business?" The king threw him into a well and
kept him there day and night.  **Verse 30:** Then the king went to the Lord and
said, "O Lord, the Time-and-Prosperity-Maker has abandoned the birds for a day
and night."  **Verse 31:** The Omniscient said, "O king, even in the well, he
killed five hundred buffaloes, made of clay, himself."  **Verse 32:** Going
there, the king saw this with his own eyes, and then he said, "Alas, my past
karma! It is not otherwise, O Lord."  **Verse 33:** Every day, he killed five
hundred buffaloes, and the Time-and-Prosperity-Maker's heap of sin grew higher
and higher.  **Verse 34:** He also suffered terrible diseases, caused by his
terrible sins, which led him to the hell of suffering.  **Verse 35:** "Alas,
father! Alas, mother!" he cried out in pain, like a pig being slaughtered.
**Verse 36:** He suffered needles in his eyes,

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 234 AturapratyAkhyAnaprakIrNakama jIvan dharmaM vidhatte syAdvimAne'nuttare
mRtaH  /  jIva mriyasva vetyevaM tenA'bhayamabhASata  /  / 15 /  /  jIvan
pApaparo mRtvA saptamaM narakaM vrajet  /  kAlasaukarikastena proce mA jIva mA
mRthAH  /  / 16 /  /  tacchrutvA zreNiko natvA bhagavantaM vyajijJapat  /  tvayi
nAthe jagannAtha kathaM me narake gatiH  /  / 17 /  /  babhASe bhagavAnevaM purA
tvamasi bhUpate  /  baddhAyurnarake tena tatrAvazyaM gamiSyasi  /  / 18 /  /
zubhAnAmazubhAnAM vA phalaM prAgbaddhakarmaNAm  /  bhoktavyaM tad vayamapi
nAnyathA kartumIzmahe  /  / 19 /  /  Adyo bhAvijinacaturviMzatau tvaM bhaviSyasi
/  padmanAbhAbhidho rAjan khedaM mA sma kRthAstataH  /  / 20 /  /
zreNiko'thAvadannAtha kimupAyosti ko'pi saH  /  narakAd yena
rakSye'hamandhakUpAdivAndhalaH  /  / 21 /  /  bhagavAn vyAjahAredaM sAdhubhyo
bhaktipUrvakam  /  brAhmaNyA cet kapilayA bhikSAM dApayase mudA  /  / 22 /  /
kAlasaukarikAt sUnAM vimocayasi vA yadi  /  tadA te narakAnmokSo rAjan jAyeta
nAnyathA  /  / 23 /  /  samyagityupadezaM sa hRdi hAramivodvahan  /  praNamya
zrImahAvIraM cacAla svAzrayaM prati  /  / 24  /  /  [mUlazloka-30
vRttau''ntarazloka-83 taH 95] rAjA yayAce kapilAM sAdhubhyaH zraddhayA'nvitA  /
bhikSAM prayaccha nirbhikSAM tvAM kariSye dhanoJcayaiH  /  / 25  /  /  kapiloce
vidhatse mAM sarvAM svarNamayIM yadi  /  hinassi vA tathApyetadakRtyaM na
karomyaham  /  / 26 /  /  kAlasaukariko'pyUce rAjJA sUnAM vimuJca yat  /
dAsye'hamarthamarthasya lobhAt tvamasi saunikaH  /  / 27  /  /  sUnAyAM nanu ko
doSo yayA jIvanti mAnavAH  /  tAM na jAtu tyajAmIti kAlasaukariko'vadat  /  / 28
/  /  sUnAvyApArameSo'tra kariSyati kathaM nviti  /  nRpaH kSiptvA'ndhakUpe
tamahorAtramadhArayat  /  / 29 /  /  atha vijJapayAmAsa gatvA bhagavate nRpaH  /
so'tyAji saunikaH sUnAmahorAtramidaM vibho  /  / 30 /  /  sarvajJo'bhidadhe
rAjannandhakUpe'pi so'vadhIt  /  zatAni paJca mahiSAn svayaM nirmAya mRNmayAn  /
/ 31 /  /  tad gatvA zreNiko'pazyat svayamudvivije tataH  /  dhigaho me purA
karma, nAnyathA bhagavagiraH  /  / 32  /  /  paJca paJca zatAnyasya
mahiSAnnidhnato'nvaham  /  kAlasaukarikasyoccaiH pAparAziravarddhata  /  / 33 /
/  ihApi rogAstasyA''san dAruNairatidAruNAH  /
paryantanarakaprApterupayutkalitairaghaiH  /  / 34  /  /  hA tAta hA mAtariti
vyAdhibAdhAkadarthitaH  /  vadhyamAnasUkaravat kAlasaukariko'raTat  /  / 35  /
/  so'GganA-tUlikA-puSpa-vINA-kvaNita-mArjitAH  /  dRSTi-tvag-nAsikA-karNa-
jihvAzUlAnyamanyata  /  / 36  /  /  tatastasya sutastAddak svarUpaM
sulaso'khilam  /  jagAda jagadAptAyA'bhayAyA'bhayadAyine  /  / 37 /  /
Uce'bhayastvatpitA yaccakre tasyedRzaM phalam  /  satyamatyugrapApAnAM
phalamatraiva labhyate  /  / 38  /  /  2010_02

Page #276 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Chapter - 2 Collection of Examples Even so, to please him, make the opposite of
his senses. A medicine for a sick person would be a foul smell. ||39|| Then,
having come, the gentle one fed him bitter and pungent things. He gave him very
hot water, and he made him eat hot, cooked, and undigested food. ||40|| He
smeared him all over with a lot of excrement. He made him sleep on a bed full of
thorns. ||41|| He made him listen to harsh sounds like the creaking of a wheel.
He showed him terrible forms of demons, ghosts, and skeletons. ||42|| Pleased by
these, he said to his son, "For a long time, I have enjoyed delicious food, cold
water, a soft bed, and fragrant ointments. ||43|| Sounds are nectar for the
ears, and forms are a single pleasure for the eyes. ||44|| Have I been cheated
of happiness for a long time by your devotion?" ||45|| Hearing this, the gentle
one thought, "In this very birth, I have become a fool. What will be the
terrible fruit of my sin in hell?" ||46|| Thinking thus, the gentle one died and
attained a terrible place in the seventh hell, called "A-prati-sthana". ||46||
[Original verses - 30 in the Vrutta, internal verses 107 to 128] 41. Laughter
and contemplation in the Srimad Bhava Vijay, composed by Sri Uttara Adhyayana
Vrutta, the story of Sri Chandrudra Acharya's disciple. In Ujjayini, in the
Nandana-like garden, where the bath is taken, Chandrudra, the Suri, with his
followers, gathered. ||1|| He was very angry, seeing the faults of the excessive
and insufficient actions of his followers. ||2|| It is very difficult for me
alone to restrain so many. But excessive anger does not bring about my own good.
||3|| Thinking thus, the Suri sat alone, for the sake of true contemplation.
||4|| (Pair) He left the hot place for his disciples, who were devoted to their
studies and contemplation. ||4|| And from there, a young man from Ujjayini, the
son of a businessman, came, with his body smeared with saffron, a newly married
man, with his friends. ||5|| Seeing the holy men, he bowed to them with mockery,
and said, "O Lord, tell me the religion that brings happiness." ||6|| Knowing
that he was a jester, they did not say anything to him. Then, again, he spoke to
them with mockery, without any scriptures. ||7|| "I have been abandoned by my
wife, due to bad luck, and I have renounced my household life. Please, grant me
a vow that will be a savior from the ocean of existence." ||8|| "This rogue
deceives us with his witty words again and again. Let him be properly examined,
and think about it," they said. ||9|| "We are not under the control of a guru,
we ourselves give initiation and other things. You are now our guru, for the
sake of the vow that you have taken refuge in." ||10|| Hearing this, his
companions then went to the Suri. He bowed to him and said, with a mocking
smile, with folded hands. ||11|| "I am broken by household affairs, and I am
attached to your lotus feet. Please, initiate me, so that I may live happily."
||12|| Hearing his words, with a mocking smile, the Suri said, "If you want a
vow, then bring me ashes quickly." ||13||   2010_02 235

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 khaNDaH - 2 dRSTAntasamuccayaH tathA'pyasya kuru prItyai viparItendriyArthatAm
/  amedhyagandhavidhvaMse bhavennRjalamauSadham  /  / 39 /  /  athaitya
sulasastaM tu kaTutiktAnyabhojayat  /  apAyayadapo'tyuSNAstaptatrapusahodarAH  /
/  40  /  /  bhUyiSThaviSThayA suSThu sarvAGgINaM vyalepayat  /
UrvakaNTakamayyAM ca zayyAyAM paryasUt  /  / 41 /  /  zrAvayAmAsa cakrIvat-
kramelakaravAn kaTUn  /  rakSo-vetAla-kaGkAladhorarUpANyadarzayat  /  / 42 /  /
taiH prItaH so'bravIt putraM cirAt svAdvadya bhojanam  /  zItaM vAri mRduH zayyA
sugandhi ca vilepanam  /  / 43 /  /  zabdaH zrutisudhA'mUni rUpANyekaM sukhaM
dRzoH  /  bhaktenApi tvayA'smAt kiM vaJcito'smi ciraM sukhAt  /  / 44  /  /
tacchrutvA sulaso dadhyAvidamatraiva janmani  /  aho pApaphalaM ghoraM narake
kiM bhaviSyati  /  /  45  /  /  sulase cintayatyevaM sa mRtvA prApa dAruNam  /
saptame narake sthAnamapratiSThAnasaMjJitam  /  / 46 /  /  [mUlazloka-30
vRttau''ntara zloka 107 taH 128] 41. hAsadhyAne
zrImadbhAvavijayakRtazrIuttarAdhyayanavRttau zrIcaNDarudrAcAryaziSyakathA  /
ujjayinyAM puri snAtro-dyAne nandanasannibhe  /  caNDarudrAbhidhaH sUriH
sagacchaH samavAsarat  /  / 1 /  /  UnAdhikakriyAdoSAn, svagacchIyatapasvinAm  /
darzaM darzaM sa cAkupyat, prakRtyApyatiroSaNaH  /  / 2 /  /  bhUyasAM vAraNaM
hyeSAM mayaikenAtiduSkaram  /  paraM roSAtirekAnme, svahitaM na hi jAyate  /  /
3  /  /  dhyAtveti sUrirekAnte, tasthau saddhyAnahetave  /  taptaM vihAya
ziSyANAM, svAdhyAyadhyAnatatparaH ||4|| ( yugmam ) itazcojjayinIvAsI,
vyavahArisuto yuvA  /  AgAtkuMkumaliptAGgo, navoDhastatra mitrayuk  /   /  5  /
/  sAdhUn dRSTvA parIhAsapUrvakaM tAn praNamya ca  /  so'vAdIdbhagavanto me,
dharmaM brUta sukhAkaram  /  / 6 /  /  vaihAsiko'yamiti te, jJAtvA no
kiJcidUcire  /  tato bhUyaH sa nirgranthAn, sopahAsamabhASata  /  / 7 /  /
daurbhAgyAdbhAryayA tyakto, virakto'haM gRhAzramAt  /  tat prasadya
bhavAMbhodhitArakaM datta me vratam  /  / 8 /  /  dhUrttaH
pratArayatyasmAnnarmavAkyairmuhurmuhaH  /  tadvRSyatAmasau samyak, cintayitveti
te jaguH  /  /  9  /  /  guroradhInA na vayaM, svayaM dIkSAdi dadmahe  /
tadAzraya vratAya tvamasmadgurumitaH sthitam  /  / 10 /  /  zrutveti
savayasyo'tha, so'vrajatsUrisannidhau  /  abravIttaM ca vanditvA, sopahAsaM
kRtAJjaliH  /  /  11  /   /  gRhavyApArato bhagno, lagno'smi tvatpadAbjayoH  /
tatpravrAjaya mAM svAmiMstiSThAmi sasukhaM yathA  /  / 12 /  /  sahAsyAmiti
tadvAcaM, zrutvA kopAtirekataH  /  sUrirjagau vratecchuzcettadA bhasmAnaya
drutam  /  / 13 /  /  2010_02 235

Page #277 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter 236: The Scattering of the Eager Refusal  Then, a well-wisher brought
him ashes. The sage, taking them in his own arms, made a vow with a tearful eye.
||14||  Seeing this, the two companions were distressed and said, "Friend! Flee
immediately, so that we may go to our destination." ||15||  He, being close to
attaining perfection, thought, "This is a minor karma." How can I go home,
having accepted the vow with my own words? ||16||  Even if spoken in jest, the
words spoken by a wise man, how can they be otherwise, like letters carved in
stone? ||17||  I have gained this vow through jest, therefore it must be
protected. Who abandons a burning fire, when it has come close without effort?
||18||  Reflecting on the virtue of his intention, the wise man accepted it.
Then, the two companions, filled with sorrow, went to their destination. ||19||
Then, the hero addressed the sage, "O Bhagavan! My companions will release me
from the Shramanya vow, so I will go elsewhere." ||20||  "This great man, even
if he goes in disguise, will be recognized by the Yajnas. Only we two are worthy
of going." ||21||  The sage said, "If that is so, then look at the path. We will
go as the night falls." He also looked at him and agreed. ||22||  Then, in the
dead of night, the sage, accompanied by his new disciple, set out. The disciple
was told by the guru to go ahead, and he went ahead. ||23||  Due to his old age,
the sage stumbled and fell on a stone in the night. He was filled with pain and
anger. ||24||  "Oh, wicked disciple! The right path is not to be deviated from,"
he said, and struck the disciple on the head with his staff, making him bleed.
||25||  Even though his head was split open and blood was flowing, the disciple
did not speak or get angry, but instead thought, "These great souls are dwelling
happily in their own path. I have been made a victim of suffering by my own
foolishness!" ||26||  "Disciples are always a source of happiness for the guru,
some are wise and virtuous. But I, from the very first day, have been a source
of sorrow for my guru." ||27||  "May the guru not suffer further pain from
stones or anything else. With effort, he thought, and slowly he moved." ||29||
Thus, the pure-hearted, equal-minded, great soul, while walking, attained Kevala
Jnana in the night itself. ||30||  Then, when the morning dawned and the sun
rose, the sage saw his disciple with a blood-stained head. ||31||  Then, the
sage, with a peaceful mind and a calm heart, thought, "Oh! This new disciple has
excellent patience." ||32||  "Even though he was struck with a staff in a fit of
anger, he did not show any sign of anger or distress." ||33||  "Even an old
practitioner, who knows the faults of anger, who has attained the position of an
Acharya, is overcome by strong anger! How shameful!" ||34||  "This vow, which I
have protected for so long with great difficulty, has become useless. It has
been destroyed by my anger." ||35||  "By cultivating the right thoughts, he
attained Kevala Jnana. Even a harsh guru can have disciples who are virtuous,
humble, and worthy of respect." ||36||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 236 AturapratyAkhyAnaprakIrNakam tatastatsuhadaikenAnIte bhasmani sAdhurAT  /
taM gRhItvA svabAhubhyAM, locaM kRtvA dadau vratam  /  / 14  /  /  tadvilokya
viSaNNAstadvayasyAstamathAbhyadhuH  /  mitra ! sadyaH palAyasva, dhAma yAmo
vayaM yathA  /  / 15 /  /  AsannasiddhikaH so'tha, laghukarmetyacintayat  /
kathaM gacchAmyahaM gehaM, svavAcA svIkRtavrataH  /  / 16 /  /
pramAdasaGgatenApi, yA vAk proktA manasvinA  /  sA kathaM
dRSadutkIrNAkSarAlIvA'nyathA bhavet  /  / 17  /  /  narmaNApi mayA labdhaM,
rakSaNIyaM tato vratam  /  jahAti dhumaNiM ko hi, vinAyAsamupasthitam  /  / 18 /
/  dhyAtveti bhAvasAdhutvaM, sa sudhIH pratyapadyata  /  yathAsthAnaM tato
jagmustadvayasyA viSAdinaH  /  / 19 /  /  vineyo'thAvadatsUriM, bhagavan !
bandhavo mama  /  zrAmaNyaM mocayiSyanti, tadyAmo'nyatra kutracit  /  / 20 /  /
gaccho mahAnasau gacchan, pracchannamapi yajjanaiH  /  jJAyate tad
dvayorevA''vayorgamanamarhati  /  / 21 /  /  sUriH provAca yadyevaM,
tadA'dhvAnaM vilokaya  /  yathA rajanyAM gacchamaH, so'pyAlokya tamAyayau  /  /
22 /  /  pratasthe'tha nizIthinyAM, sUrinUtanaziSyayuk  /  puro yAhIti guruNA,
coktaH ziSyo yayau puraH  /  / 23 /  /  apazyanizi vRddhatvAt, sthANunA skhalito
guruH  /  vedanAvihvalo jajJe, jvaladroSabharAkulaH  /  / 24 /  /  hA duSTaziSya
! sanmArgo, na vyalokIti vibruvan  /  daNDena ziSyaM zirasi, kRtaloce jaghAna
saH  /  / 25 /  /  tatprahArasphuTanmaulirnirgacchadrudhiro'pi saH  /  na
vyabravInnApyakupyat, pratyutaivamacintayat  /  / 26  /  /  svagacchamadhye
sasukhaM, tiSThanto'mI mahAzayAH  /  adhanyena mayA duHkhabhAjanaM vihitA hahA !
/  / 27 /  /  AjanmasaukhyadAH ziSyA, guroH syuH ko'pi dhIdhanAH  /  Adya eva
dine'haM tu, jAto'sAtakaro guroH  /  / 28  /  /  sthANvAdinA guroH pIDA,
mAbhUdbhUyo'pi bhUyasI  /  dhyAyanniti prayatnena, sa cacAla zanaiH zanaiH  /  /
29  /  /  tasyaivaM vrajataH zuddhAzayasya samatAnidheH  /  mahAtmanaH
samutpede, nizAyAmeva kevalam  /  / 30 /  /  atha prabhAte saMjAte'bhyudite ca
divAkare  /  sUriNA dadRze ziSyo, rudhirAliptamastakaH  /  / 31 /  /  tataH
zAntarasAcAMtasvAntaH sUriracintayat  /  aho ! navInaziSyasyA'pyamuSya
kSAntiruttamA  /  / 32 /  /  krodhAdhmAtena mayakA, daNDenaivaM hato'pi yat  /
nAtanodvADmanodehai-vaiguNyaM kiJcidapyasau  /  / 33 /  /  cirapravrajitasyApi,
roSadoSAMzca jAnataH  /  prAptAcAryapadasyApi, dhigme prabalakopatAm !  /  / 34
/  /  iyacciraM suduSpAlaM, pAlitaM mayakA vratam  /  paraM tanniSphalaM jajJe,
kopAttanme'munA kRtam  /  / 35  /  /  bhAvanAbhiriti bhAvitacittaH, so'pi
kevalamavApa munIndraH  /  evamutkaTaruSo'pi guroH syurmokSadAH savinayAH
suvineyAH  /  / 36 /  /  2010_02

Page #278 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Chapter:-2 Collection of Examples 237 41. The story of Shri Vajra Bahu in the
Shri Trishatisalaaka Purusha Charitra, a story of humor. And in the city of
Mithila, in the Hari Vamsa dynasty, there was a king named Vasavaketu. His
beloved wife was Vipula. ||1|| They had a son named Janaka, who was famous
throughout the land. He was like the father of the people. ||2|| And in the city
of Ayodhya, in the Ikshvaku dynasty, which is a part of the Aditya dynasty,
||3|| after many kings had attained liberation, and many had gone to heaven,
||4|| after an uncountable number of twenty, a king named Vijaya was born. His
beloved wife was Himachula. They had two sons, Vajra Bahu and Purandara. ||5||
And in the city of Abhinagapura, there was a king named Bhavahana. His wife was
Chudamani, and their daughter was Manorama. ||6|| Vajra Bahu, having reached his
youth, married her. He was like a bright ray of light, like the Rohini star.
||7|| With devotion, he took Manorama with him, accompanied by his friend
Udayasundara. He set out for his own city. ||8|| As he was going, he saw a great
being, radiating with the light of his austerities. He was like the sun rising
from the Vasant mountain, or the Udayachala mountain. ||9|| He saw a great sage
named Gunasagara, who was engaged in austerities, like a father who is looking
after his child. ||10|| Pair. || Seeing him, Vajra Bahu was filled with joy,
like a peacock seeing a cloud. He stopped his chariot and said, ||11|| "Oh, what
a great soul this is! He is a venerable sage. He is like a wish-fulfilling gem,
seen by me through great merit." ||12|| Udayasundara said, "My dear prince, what
do you want? Do you want to become an ascetic?" Vajra Bahu replied, "My mind is
set on it." ||13|| Udayasundara said, "If you have the desire, then don't delay.
I will be your companion." ||14|| The prince replied, like the ocean, "Don't
abandon this agreement, my friend. I will also be yours." ||15|| The prince, as
if overcoming the delusion of his chariot, climbed down and went to the Vasant
mountain, accompanied by Udayasundara and others. ||16|| Vajra Bahu then said to
Bhavahana's son, "My friend, don't make me an ascetic today. This is not a
joke." ||17|| "We were joking. What is the fault in that? Joking is not always
true, like a white song." ||18|| "You will be my helper in all my troubles.
Don't abandon our family's desires, even in this difficult situation." ||19||
"The auspicious bangle is still on your hand. How can you suddenly abandon the
fruits of marriage and enjoyment?" ||20|| "Manorama, deprived of the enjoyment
of worldly pleasures, will live like a blade of grass, abandoned by you." ||21||
Vajra Bahu then said to Udayasundara, "My dear friend, the fruit of a mortal
birth is the virtue of character." ||22|| "Even our joking was based on truth,
like the pearls in the ocean, which are like the stars and the clouds." ||23||
"If your sister is noble, she will accept this asceticism. If not, then

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 khaNDa:-2 dRSTAntasamuccayaH 237 41. hAsadhyAne zrItriSaSTizalAkApuruSacaritre
zrIvajrabAhukathAnakam  /  itazca mithilApuryAM harivaMze mahIpatiH  /
AsIdvAsavaketvAkhyo vipulA tasya ca priyA  /  / 1 /  /  tayoH
sUnuranUnazrIrbabhUva bhuvi vizrutaH  /  prajAnAM janaka iva janako nAma
pArthivaH  /  / 2 /  /  itazca puryayodhyAyAmRSabhasvAmirAjyataH  /
ikSvAkuvaMzAntarbhUtAdityavaMzeSu rAjasu  /  / 3 /  /  yAteSu keSucinmokSaM
svarga yAteSu keSucit  /  saGkhyAtIteSu viMzasyAhatastIrthe prasarpati  /  / 4 /
/  babhUva vijayo rAjA himacUlA ca tatpriyA  /  tayorabhUtAM dvau putrau
vajrabAhupurandarau  /  / 5 /  /  itazcAbhUnAgapure pure rAjebhavAhanaH  /
cUDAmaNizca tatpatnI tatputrI ca manoramA  /  / 6 /  /  gatvodyadyauvanAM
vajrabAhuH pariNinAya tAm  /  mahena mahatA zvetamarIciriva rohiNIm  /  / 7 /  /
bhaktyA ca zyAlenodayasundareNAnugAminA  /  manoramAmathAdAya pratasthe
svapurAya saH  /  / 8 /  /  sa gacchannantarApazyattapastejobhirIzvaram  /
vasantAdristhamudayAcalasthamiva bhAskaram  /  / 9 /  /
mokSAdhvamIkSakamivotpazyamAtApanAparam  /  guNasAgaranAmAnaM tapasyantaM
mahAmunim  /  / 10 /  /  yugmm|| mayUra iva jImUtaM taM dRSTvA jAtasammadaH  /
kumAra idamAha sma dhRtvA sapadi vAhanam  /  / 11 /  /  aho mahAtmA ko'pyeSa
vandya eva mahAmuniH  /  cintAmaNiriva mayA dRSTaH puNyena bhUyasA  /  / 12 /  /
uvAca caivamudayasundaro'tha kumAra kim  /  Aditsase parivrajyAM
so'vadaccittamasti me  /  / 13 /  /  udayo narmaNA bhUyaH proce yadyasti te
manaH  /  tadadya mA vilambasva sahAyo'hamapIha te  /  / 14 /  /  kumAro
vyAjahAraivaM maryAdAmiva vAridhiH  /  mA tyAkSIH svAmimAM sandhAM
so'pyomevetyabhASata  /  / 15 /  /  kumAro vAhanAnmohAdivottIryAruroha tam  /
vasantazailamudayasundarAdibhirAvRtaH  /  / 16 /  /
vajrabAhumathAvAdIdibhavAhananandanaH  /  svAminmA pravrAjIradya dhigme
narmAbhibhASaNam  /  / 17 /  /  narmoktirAvayorAsIt ko doSastavyatikrame  /
narmoktirna hi satyaiva prAyo dhavalagItavat  /  / 18 /  /  bhaviSyasi
sahAyastvaM vyasaneSvakhileSvapi  /  ityakANDe'pi mA bhAGkSIrasmatkulamanorathAn
/  / 19 /  /  idamadyApi mAGgalyaM tava haste'sti kaGkaNam  /  tadvivAhaphalaM
bhogAn sahasA kathamujjhasi  /  / 20 /  /  sAMsArikasukhAsvAdavaJciteyaM
manoramA  /  jIviSyati kathaM nAtha tvayA tRNavadujjhitA  /  / 21 /  /
vajrabAhukumAro'tha jagAdodayasundaram  /  sundaraM martyajanmadroH phalaM
cAritralakSaNam  /  / 22 /  /  narmoktirapi te'smAsu babhUva paramArthasAt  /
zuktiSu svAtijImUtavAri mauktikasAdiva  /  / 23 /  /  tvatsvasA ca kulInA
cettatpravrajyAM grahISyati  /  no cedasyAH zivaH panthA bhogaiH punaralaM mama
/  / 24  /  /  2010_02

Page #279 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter 238: The Scattering of the Rejection of the Eager  **25.**  "Accept
my vow, you too should not abandon us. The duty of the Kshatriyas is to protect
their own lineage."  **26.**  Thus, having informed him of the rising, Vajraबाहु
made arrangements. He was like the ocean of the jewels of virtues, the great
sage Gunasagar.  **27.**  At the end of his vow, Vajraबाहु took up the wandering
life. The rising, Manorama, and the twenty-five Kumaras.  **28.**  Hearing of
Vajraबाहु's renunciation, Vijayabhupati, the king, felt detachment, saying,
"Even if he is a child, I am not."  **29.**  Then Vijay, placing his son
Purandara on the throne, took up the vow at the side of the sage, the destroyer
of the delusion of Nirvana.  **30.**  Purandara, too, placed his son, born from
the womb of the earth, on his throne, the glorious Kirtidhara, and became a
renunciant, worthy of offerings.  **[Seventh Chapter, Fourth Canto, Verses 1 to
30]**  **43.**  The story of Marubhuti and Kamatha in the **Trishatishalaka
Purushacharitra** (The Story of the Sixty-Three Illustrious Persons), in the
section on **Dveshadhyana** (Contemplation of Hatred).  **1.**  In the region of
this Jambudvipa, there is a city called Potanapura, new like a fresh piece of
land.  **2.**  It is frequented by royal swans, a beautiful place with a flag of
auspiciousness. It is like a lotus petal in the water, an ornament of the earth.
**3.**  There, like the celestial beings of Sri, they shone with prosperity,
with great generosity like the Kalpadruma (wish-fulfilling tree) and its
siblings.  **4.**  There was a pond called Amaravati, belonging to Amaravati, a
pond that was beyond the reach of words, a great treasure.  **5.**  There was a
king named Arvind, like a lotus at the feet of the Arhat. He was like the lord
of prosperity for the people of Arnas.  **6.**  He was unique among the wicked,
just as he was unique among the wise. He was like the courage of the wealthy,
just as he was like the fame of the successful.  **7.**  Just as wealth is
distributed among the poor, the helpless, and the suffering, he, too,
distributed it among the people day and night.  **8.**  The king had a minister
named Vishvabhuti, a learned man who understood the principles of livelihood and
sustenance, a great follower of the teachings.  **9.**  Kamatha and Marubhuti,
born from the womb of Anuddhara, were both his sons, the elder and the younger.
**10.**  Kamatha had a wife named Varuna, a follower of the same dharma, while
Marubhuti had a wife named Vasundhara, beautiful and charming.  **11.**  Both
were learned in the scriptures and both were capable of earning a living. They
were both affectionate towards each other, a source of joy for their father.
**12.**  Remembering the five supreme beings, with a concentrated mind,
Vishvabhuti became a great sage, a protector of dharma.  **13.**  His wife,
Anuddhara, was afflicted by the fever of separation. She was consumed by grief,
her body withered, and she died while offering salutations.  **14

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 238 AturapratyAkhyAnaprakIrNakam tavratAyAnumanyasva mAM tvamapyanayAhi naH  /
kuladharmaH kSatriyANAM svasandhApAlanaM khalu  /  / 25 /  /  udayaM
pratibodhyaivaM vajrabAhurupAyayau  /  sAgaraM guNaratnAnAM maharSi guNasAgaram
/  / 26 /  /  tatpAdAnte vajrabAhuH parivrajyAmupAdade  /  udayo manoramAtha
kumArAH paJcaviMzatiH  /  / 27  /  /  vajrabAhuM pravrajitaM zrutvA
vijayabhUpatiH  /  varaM bAlo'pyasau nAhamiti vairAgyamAsadat  /  / 28  /  /
tatazca vijayaH putraM rAjye nyasya purandaram  /  nirvANamohasya muneH pArzve
vratamupAdade  /  / 29  /   /  purandaro'pi sve rAjye pRthivIkukSijaM sutam  /
nyasta kIrtidharaM kSemaGkararghyante'bhavadyatiH  /  / 30 /  /  [saptamaparve
caturthasargasya 1 taH 30 zlokAH] 43. pradveSadhyAne
zrItriSaSTizalAkApuruSacaritre marubhUtikamaThayoH caritram  /  asyaiva
jaMbUdvIpasya kSetre'sti bharatAbhidhe  /  nagaraM potanapuraM sva:khaMDamiva
nUtanam  /  / 1 /  /  niSevitaM rAjahaMsaiH zrIsaMketaniketanam  /  ApagAyAH
padmakhaMDamiva tanmaMDanaM bhuvaH  /  / 2 /  /  ibhyA babhAsire tatra zriyA
zrIdAnujA iva  /  kalpadrumasya sodaryA ivaudAryeNa bhUyasA  /  / 3 /  /
tadabhUdamarAvatyAstasya vApyamarAvatI  /  praticchandatayA
vAcAmagocaramahardikam  /  / 4 /  /  arhatpAdAravindAliraravindo'bhidhAnataH  /
tatrAbhUdbhUpatiH sthAnaM zriyaH patirivArNasAm  /  / 5 /  /  sa doSmasu
yathaivaikastathaivAbhUdvivekiSu  /  yathA lakSmIvatAM dhuryastathaiva hi
yazasvinAm  /  / 6 /  /  yathA hi draviNaM dInAnAthaduHsthitajantuSu  /
ahorAtraM saMvibheje pumartheSu tathaiva saH  /  / 7 /  /
rAjJastasyAnurUpo'bhUjjIvAjIvAditattvavit  /  paramazrAvako vizvabhUtivipraH
purohitaH  /  / 8 /  /  kamaTho marubhUtizcAnuddharAkukSisaMbhavau  /  ubhau
jyAyaH kanIyAMsAvabhUtAM tasya cAtmajau  /  / 9 /  /  babhUva varuNA nAma
kamaThasya sadharmiNI  /  vasundharA marubhUte rUpalAvaNyazAlinI  /  / 10 /  /
dvAvadhItakalau tau ca dvAvapyarthArjanakSamau  /  babhUvaturmithaH snigdhau
pitrorAnandakAraNam  /  / 11 /  /  smaran paJcaparameSThinamaskAraM samAhitaH  /
vizvabhUtirvipadyAbhUt saudharme pravaraH suraH  /  / 12 /  /
tadviyogajvarAkrAntA tasya patnyapyanuddharA  /  zuktapobhyAM zoSitAMgI
namaskAraparA mRtA  /  / 13 /  /  pitroH paretakAryANi cakrAte bhrAtarau ca tau
/  kramAdabhUtAM cAzokau harizcandrarSibodhitau  /  / 14 /  /  gRhakAryeSu
tatrAsthAtkamaThaH karmaThaH sadA  /  vipanne pitari prAyo jyAyAn putro
dhurandharaH  /  / 15 /  /  marubhUtistu saMsArAsAratvaviduraH sadA  /  vimukho
viSayobhyo'bhUt sannyasta iva bhojanAt  /  / 16 /  /  2010_02

Page #280 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------



======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 khaNDa:-2 dRSTAntasamuccaya: 239 svAdhyAyapauSadhAdAnavidhiniSThaH samAhitaH  /
tasthivAn pauSadhAgAre'horAtrAnativAhayan  /  / 17 /  /  yugmm|| prapadya
sarvasAvadyaviratiM gurusannidhau  /  vihariSyAmIti matirmarubhUteH sadAbhavat
/  / 18 /  /  pramAdamadironmAdI sadA mithyAtvamohitaH  /
parastrIdyUtasaMsaktaH svacchandaH kamaThastvabhUt  /  / 19 /  /  vasundharA
marubhUterbhAryA sA navayauvanA  /  abhUjjaganmohakarI viSavallIva jaMgamA  /  /
20 /  /  sA punarbhAvayatinA svapne'pi marubhUtinA  /  payasA maruvallIva
nAspRzyata kadAcana  /  / 21 /  /  viSayecchustataH sA cAsaMprAptapatisaMgamA  /
araNyamAlatIprAyaM manyate sma svayauvanam  /  / 22 /  /  strIlaMpaTaH
prakRtyApi kamaTho vIkSya vIkSya tAm  /  AlalApAnurAgeNa nirvivekaH snuSAmapi  /
/ 23 /  /  tAM rahaHsthAM ca kamaTho dRSTvAnyedhurado'vadat  /
kRSNapakSendulekheva kiM subhru kSIyate'nvaham  /  / 24  /  /  hriyA na
cetkathayasi jJAtaM duHkhaM tathApi te  /  mugdho madanujo manye klIbamAno'tra
kAraNam  /  / 25  /  /  zrutveti vacanaM tasyAmaryAdaM jAtavepathuH  /
palAyituM pravavRte bhrazyatsaMvyAnakuntalA  /  / 26 /  /  kamaTho'pi hi
dhAvitvA pANinA tAmadhArayat  /  Uce ca mugdhe kimiyamasthAne tava bhIrutA  /  /
27  /  /  zlathaM badhAna dhammillaM srastaM saMsthApayAMzukam  /  ityuktvA sa
tathA cakre'nicchantyA api hi svayam  /  / 28  /  /  sApyUce jyeSTha kimidaM
pUjyastvaM vizvabhUtivat  /  kuladvayakalaMkAya na te na mama sAdhvidam  /  / 29
/  /  smitvA ca kamaThaH smAha maugdhyAnmA sma bravIridam  /  mA nijaM yauvanaM
moghIkuru bhogavivarjitam  /  / 30  /  /  mayApi saha mugdhAkSi bhuMkSva
vaiSayikaM sukham  /  klIbena kiM tena marubhUtinAdyApi yatsmRtiH  /  / 31 /  /
naSTe mRte pravrajite klIbe ca patite patau  /  paJcasvApatsu nArINAM patiranyo
vidhIyate  /  / 32 /  /  bhRzaM bhogepsuragrepi tenetyuktA tu sAgrataH  /
svAMke nivezitAtyAkSIllajjAM maryAdayA saha  /  / 33 /  /  atha tAM ramayAmAsa
kamaTho manmathAturaH  /  nityamevaM tayorAsIdguptagupto rahaH kSaNaH  /  / 34
/  /  taM jJAtvA varuNA tyaktakaruNAruNalocanA  /  IrSyAparavazA cakhyAvazeSaM
marubhUtaye  /  / 35  /  /  uvAca marubhUtistAmArye nAyeM bhavatyadaH  /
anAryacaritaM jAtu saMtApa iva zItagau  /  / 36 /  /  evaM tena niSiddhApi
sAkhyattacca dine dine  /  kaH parapratyayAtpratyetviti so'pi vyacintayat  /  /
37  /  /  sAkSAtkartuM svayamatha saMbhogavimukho'pi san  /  gatvoce kamaLaM
yAsyAmyahaM grAmAya saMprati  /  / 38  /  /  ityuktvAgAnmarubhUtirnaktaM ca
punarAyayau  /  zrAntakarpaTikIbhUya veSabhASAviparyayAt  /  / 39  /  /  yayAce
kamaLaM dUrAdhvagasya mama dehi bhoH  /  AzrayaM svAzraya iti dadau
so'pyavizaMkitaH  /  / 40 /  /  2010_02

Page #281 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Chapter 240  Seeing the open window, he went to sleep, overcome by
drowsiness.  He, desiring to see their evil deeds, went to the village where
Marubhuti had gone.  The two, Vasundhara and Kamatha, remained unaware for a
long time, blinded by their desires.  Marubhuti, standing there, saw what was to
be seen.  Fearing the censure of the people, he did not act against them.  Going
to the king, he told him everything.  The king, intolerant of evil conduct,
ordered his protection in this way:  "This man, the son of the priest, is a
wicked character.  He should be banished, mounted on a donkey, with ridicule."
They, too, mounted him on a donkey, with a ringing, discordant drum, painted
with metallic colors, and banished him.  Looking down, Kamatha, watched by the
townspeople, was unable to resist, and went to the forest with sorrow.  There,
in the presence of the holy ascetic, Shiva, he began to practice austerities, a
young boy in the forest.  Marubhuti, instructing him, said, "What is this you
have done?  When you told the king about your brother's misconduct, you said,
'This is my fault, great though it is, even greater than his.  Going to him, I
will now forgive my elder brother.'  Thinking thus, and asked by the king,
though he was being restrained by him, he went to Kamatha and fell at his feet.
Remembering the previous ridicule, Kamatha, in anger, picked up a stone and
threw it at his bowed head.  The stone, hitting him, fell to the ground.  Again,
Kamatha picked up the stone and threw it at him, as if he were in hell.  The
pain of the blow, with intense meditation, caused him to die.  He became the
lord of the Vindhya mountains, like the Vindhyas with their high peaks.  ##
Chapter 2010_02  **Miscellaneous on the Rejection of the Sick**   The Lord also
went to the village of Shanmaninaama.  He remained outside, with his body in a
state of outward inactivity, absorbed in meditation.  The karma that was to be
experienced, earned by him in his previous birth as Vishnu, was then revealed.
He was bound by the punishment of being thrown on a bed of thorns.  The life of
the bed-maker was Gopal, who was there.  Leaving the bulls near his master, he
went to milk the cows.  The bulls, roaming freely, entered the forest.  Soon,
Gopal returned, and seeing the bulls missing, he said to his master, "Lord,
where are my bulls?  Why don't you tell me, O sage?  Do you not hear my words,
or are your ears useless?"  The Lord, extremely angry at his insolence, threw a
shard of a conch shell into his ears.  The shards, struck by him, joined
together, becoming one whole shard, as if they were a wheel.  Thinking, "Let no
one break these two pegs," Gopal, with his intelligence, cut off the outer part
of the pegs.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 240 taddarzitagavAkSe'sthAdvayAjanidrAmupetya saH  /  duzceSTitaM
tayordraSTukAmaH kAmAndhayostayoH  /  / 41 /  /  marubhUtirgato grAmamiti
tAvapyazaMkitau  /  vasundharA kamaThazca remAte durmatI ciram  /  / 42 /  /
dadarzAdarzanIyaM tanmarubhUtistathA sthitaH  /  lokApavAdabhIrustu viruddhaM na
samAcaram  /  / 43 /  /  gatvA tadAkhyadakhilaM so'ravindAya bhUbhuje  /
durnayAnasahiSNuH so'pyArakSAnevamAdizat  /  / 44 /  /
purohitasutatvenAvadhyo'yaM duzcaritrakRt  /  nirvAsyaH kharamAropya kamaThaH
saviDaMbanam  /  / 45 /  /  te'pi rAsabhamAropya rasadvirasaDiMDimam  /
citritAMgaM dhAturasaiH kamaThaM niravAsayan  /  / 46  /  /
pauralokairvIkSyamANo'dhomukhaH kamaTho'pi hi  /  azaknuvan pratikartuM
sasaMvego vanaM yayau  /  /  47  /  /  athAbhavattapasvI sa zivatApasasannidhau
/  Arebhe ca tapo bAlaM kamaThastatra kAnane  /  / 48  /  /  marubhUtizcAnuziSye
dhiGmayA kimidaM kRtam  /  narendrAya yadAkhyAyi bhrAtuH skhalitaceSTitam  /  /
49 /  /  idaM madIyaM skhalitaM mahattatskhalitAdapi  /  tadgatvA kSamayAmyadya
jyAyAMsaM bhrAtaraM nijam  /  /  50  /  /  dhyAtveti bhUbhujaM pRSTvA
vAryamANo'pi tena saH  /  jagAma kamaThaM tasya pAdayornipapAta ca  /  /  51  /
/  smaran viDaMbanAM pUrvAM tatkAlaM kamaThaH krudhAH  /  zilAmutkSipya cikSepa
namatastasya mUrdhani  /  / 52 /  /  prahArArtasya tasyoparyAdAya punareva tAm
/  zilAM cikSepa kamaTho narake svamivAbhinat  /  / 53 /  /  tatprahArarujA
sArtadhyAno mRtvAbhavatkarI  /  sa vindhyaparvate yUthanAtho vindhya ivoccakaiH
/  / 54 /  /  [navamaparve dvitIyasargasya 3 taH 56 zlokAH ] 43. pradveSadhyAne
zrItriSaSTizalAkApuruSacaritramadhye zrIvIraM prati gopasya dRSTAntaH  /  grAmaM
SaNmAninAmAnaM jagAma bhagavAnapi  /  bahizca kAyotsargeNa tasthau
dhyAnaparAyaNaH  /   /  1  /   /  vedyaM karma tadodIrNaM
prabhorviSNubhavA'rjitam  /  zayyApAlazravaH kSiptataptatrapunibandhanam  /  / 2
/  /  zayyApAlasya jIvo'pi gopAlastatra so'bhavat  /  svAmyantike vRSAnmuktvA
godohAdikRte yayau  /  / 3 /  /  carantaH svecchayA te ca prAvizannaTavIM vRSAH
/  kSaNAtso'pyAyayau gopo'pazyannukSNo'vadatprabhum  /  / 4 /  /  devArya ! kva
mamokSANaH ? kiM na brUSe munibruva !  /  na zruNoSi vacaH kiM vA karNarandhre
vRthaiva tat  /  / 5 /  /  avAdini prabhAvevamatyantakupito'tha saH  /
akSipatkAzazalAke svAminaH karNarandhrayoH  /  / 6 /  /  zalAke tADite tena
tathA te milite mithaH  /  akhaMDaikazalAkatvaM bibharAMcakraturyathA  /  / 7 /
/  mA kRkSat kIlakAvetau ko'pIti svadhiyA kudhIH  /  tatkIlakabahirbhAgaM
chittvA gopAlako yau  /  / 8 /  /  2010_02 AturapratyAkhyAnaprakIrNakam

Page #282 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Chapter:-2 Collection of Examples 241 Even though the karma of the lost, false,
etc. was like a thorn, it was a part of the thorn of the scriptures. He remained
unshaken, and due to his good thoughts, he attained the middle path, free from
sin. ||9|| For the purpose of atonement, the Lord went to the house of the
merchant Siddhartha. The Lord went there, but he was not repaid with devotion.
||10|| The physician Kharaka, a friend and beloved of Siddhartha, came there
earlier. Seeing the Lord, the sharp-minded one said this. ||11|| Oh, the form of
the Lord is complete with all the marks. But it is marked by dullness, as if it
has a thorn. ||12|| Siddhartha, out of excitement, said, "If that is so, then
explain it. Where exactly does the thorn reside in the body of the Lord?" ||13||
The physician, seeing the entire body of his master skillfully, saw the nails in
the ears and showed them to Siddhartha. ||14|| Siddhartha then said, "Due to
some slander by a cowardly person, who was not afraid even of hell, I did a
terrible deed." ||15|| "Tell me, my friend, what was the sin done by him? Try
your best, O great-minded one, to remove the thorn from the Lord!" ||16|| "The
thorn in the ears of my master is causing me great pain. I cannot tolerate the
delay in this matter, even if I have to give up all my wealth." ||17|| "I
believe that by removing the thorns from the ears of Vishwanath, the great ocean
of beings will be saved." ||18|| The physician said, "This Lord is capable of
destroying the enemies of the world. He endured that sinner, not out of
inability, but for the destruction of karma." ||19|| "How can this one be
treated, who is indifferent even to his own body? He who is greedy for the
destruction of karma, considers pain to be good." ||20|| Siddhartha said, "What
is the logic in your words now? It is not the time for these words, the Lord is
not to be treated." ||21|| Thus, the Lord, indifferent to both of them, went
away. He stood outside in the garden, absorbed in good thoughts. ||22||
Siddhartha and Kharaka, taking medicines, etc., went to the Lord in the garden
with haste. ||23|| Placing the Lord in a vessel of oil, they anointed him with
oil. Then, with strong carriers, they began to massage him. ||24|| By massaging
the joints with strong men, the nails in the ears were pulled out simultaneously
with pincers. ||25|| The two nails, with blood, came out of the ear holes. The
remaining pain, like the karma, was directly experienced by the Lord. ||26|| As
the Lord experienced pain due to the pulling out of the nails, he roared like a
terrible lion, as if struck by a thunderbolt. ||27|| The earth did not shake due
to the greatness of the Lord, even though he made that sound. For those who are
not worthy, even if they are harmed, they do not deserve to harm others. ||28||
After removing the thorns and bowing to the Lord, Siddhartha and Kharaka went
home. ||29|| They had good intentions, even though they caused pain to their
master. Both of them became recipients of the glory of the heavenly world.
||30|| Gopal, with evil intentions, caused pain to his master, and he was born
as a recipient of the seven earthly miseries. ||31|| [Tenth Canto, Fourth
Chapter, verses

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 khaNDa:-2 dRSTAntasamuccayaH 241 praNaSTamAyAmithyAdizalyo'pi zrutizalyabhAg  /
akampitaH zubhadhyAnAdapApAM madhyamAM yayau  /  / 9 /  /  pAraNArthaM
prabhustatra siddhArthavaNijo gRhe  /  jagAma bhagavAMstena bhaktyA na
pratilAbhitaH  /  / 10 /  /  pUrvAyAtastatra vaidyaH siddhArthasya suhRtpriyaH
/  kharakAkhyaH prabhuM prekSya sUkSmadhIrabravIdidam  /  / 11 /  /  aho
bhagavato mUrtiH saMpUrNA sarvalakSaNaiH  /  paraM zalyavatI ceyaM
mlAnatvenopalakSyate  /  / 12 /  /  siddhArthaH saMbhrAmAdUce yadyevaM
tannirUpaya  /  samyagbhagavato dehe kva zalyaM hanta tiSThati ?  /  / 13 /  /
vaidyo'pi nipuNaM pazyannakhilaM svAmino vapuH  /  dadarza karNayoH kIlau
siddhArthasyApyadarzayat  /  / 14  /  /  siddhArtho'thAvadat
kenApyapavAdAdabhIruNA  /  narakAdapyabhItena cakre'daH karma dAruNam  /  / 15 /
/  kRtaM vA tasya pApasya kathayA'pyanayA sakhe ! nAthasya zalyoddhArAya
prayatasva mahAmate !  /  / 16 /  /  svAminaH karNayoH zalye pIDA tu mahatI mama
/  vilambaM na sahe'trArthe sarvasvamapi yAtu me  /  / 17 /  /  karNAbhyAM
vizvanAthasyoddhRtayoriha zalyayoH  /  manye bhavamahAmbhogherAvAmeva
samuddhRtau  /  / 18  /  /  vaidyo'pyuvAca nAtho'yaM vizvatrANakSayakSamaH  /
karmakSayAyopaikSiSTa taM nA'zaktyA'pakAriNam  /  / 19 /  /  kathaM
cikitsanIyo'yaM nirapekSo vapuSyapi  /  yaH karmanirjarAlubdho vedanAM sAdhu
manyate  /  / 20 /  /  siddhArtho'pyavadat keyaM vAcoyuktistavAdhunA  /  na kAlo
vacasAmeSAM cikitsyo bhagavAn khalu  /  / 21 /  /  tayorbuvANayorevaM nirapekSaH
prabhuryayau  /  tasthau ca bahirudyAne zubhadhyAnaparAyaNaH  /  / 22 /  /
siddhArthakharakau tau ca gRhItvA bheSajAdikam  /  tatrodyAne tvarAvantau
bhagavantamupeyatuH  /  / 23 /  /  tailadroNyAM vinivezya tailenAbhyajya ca
prabhum  /  saMvAhakairbalIyobhistAvamardayatAmatha  /  / 24  /  /  zletheSu
mardanAtsaMdhiSvojasvipuruSaiH prabhoH  /  saMdaMzAbhyAmakRSyetAM
yugapatkarNakIlakau  /  / 25 /  /  kIladvayaM sarudhiraM niryayau
karNarandhrayoH  /  avaziSTaM vedanIyaM karma sAkSAdiva prabhoH  /  / 26 /  /
tathA'bhUdvedanA kIlakarSaNena yathA prabhuH  /  rarAsa bhairavArAvaM vajrAhata
ivAcalaH  /  / 27  /  /  nA'sphuTat svAmimAhAtmyAttena nAdena medinI  /
vipadyapi hi nA'rhantaH paropadravakAriNaH  /  / 28  /  /  saMrohaNyA rohayitvA
kI nAthaM praNamya ca  /  kSamayitvA ca siddhArthakharako gRhamIyatuH  /  / 29 /
/  vedanAmapi tau bhartuH kRtavantau zubhAzayau  /  babhUvatuH
suralokazrIbhAjanamubhAvapi  /  / 30  /  /  duSTAzayastu gopAlo vidhAya
svAmivedanAm  /  saptamAvaniduHkhAnAM bhAjanaM samajAyata  /  / 31 /  /  [dazame
parvaNi caturthasargasya 618 taH 648 zlokAH] 2010_02

Page #283 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 242 **Aaturpratyakhyanaprakirnakam**  **44.  The story of Brahmadutta in the
commentary on the Sri Upadeshamala, in the section on harsh meditation.**  When
Brahmaraja died, his wife Chulini, who had a long name, was destroyed along with
his friend.  Recognizing this, the minister Dhanumantri brought up Brahmadutta,
his son.  Seeing the gathering of crows and cuckoos, he gave Brahmadutta a
companion, his own son, Varadhanu.  Knowing this somehow, she thought, "He will
be an obstacle to my enjoyment.  Therefore, I will kill this Brahmadutta."  To
wash away the slander of the people, she brought forward a certain girl, entered
the previously prepared house of fire, and gave him the fire unnoticed.  The
minister, using a previously prepared method, expelled him with a pit in the
ground, and he went to a place and time suitable for him.  || 44.  The story of
Yugabahuu in the commentary on the Sri Upadeshamala-Pushpamala-
Granthabridhavritta.  **There is a city named Sundasan, which is the best of the
Jain community in Avanti.**  It is a very beautiful and pleasant place, and it
is very large. || 1 ||  **There is a king named Maniraho, who is like a jewel, a
treasure, and a sea of water.**  He is very beautiful, has a beautiful voice,
and is very generous. || 2 ||  **His younger sister was named Yugabahuu, and she
was very beautiful.**  Her name was Mayanareha, and she was very virtuous. || 3
||  **Her beauty was like a blazing fire, and she was very attractive.**  The
people of the city thought that she was very beautiful. || 4 ||  **Maniraho,
thinking of her in his heart, was very sad.**  He thought, "I will kill her with
arrows." || 5 ||  **"I must take her, I will entice her."  People do good and
bad deeds because of their attachment to worldly pleasures.** || 6 ||  **She was
like a flower, fruit, and a beautiful woman, and she was very attractive.**  She
was very pure and she was very attractive. || 7 ||  **One day, two people came
to her and said, "O beautiful one, the king is very fond of you."** || 8 ||
**"I want to enjoy her, I want to rule over all the kingdoms."  Mayanareha, who
was devoted to the Jain teachings, said this.** || 9 ||  **Even a good man does
not desire another man's wife.**  But to desire many women is a great sin. || 10
||  **Purity is the first virtue of women.  If she does not have that, then what
other virtues does she have?**  What good is a woman who does not have purity?
|| 11 ||  **The queen of the Yuvraj was very beautiful and she was very
powerful.**  "May this not happen to me, may my purity not be broken." || 12 ||
**Where there is a fire of time, youth, and desire, who enjoys doing good
deeds?** || 13 ||  **"If I were to be born again, I would not go to the world of
women."  There are many women, but I am not attracted to any of them.** || 14 ||
**You have enjoyed the pleasures of the world, you have enjoyed the three
worlds.**  You have gone to hell, you have been bound by your actions. || 1

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 242 AturapratyAkhyAnaprakIrNakam 44. paruSadhyAne
zrIupadezamAlAheyopAdeyATIkAyAM brahmadattakathAnakam  /  mRte brahmarAje
tatpatnI culinI dIrghanAmnA tanmitreNa saha vinaSTA  /  vijJAtA dhanumantriNA,
vyutpAditastena tatsuto brahmadattaH kAka-kokilAdisaGgrahaNadarzanena, dattazca
sahacarastasya varadhanurAtmatanayaH  /  tayApi kutazcid jJAtvA taM vyatikaraM
cintitaM bhaviSyati me rativighnaH tato'mumeva brahmadattaM vyApAdayAmIti
janApavAdakSAlanArthamudvAhitaH kAJcitkanyakAM, pravezitaH pUrvaracite jatugRhe,
dApito'lakSito'gniH, mantriNA prAgracitaprayogeNa niSkAsito bhUmikhAtena gato
dezakAlikayeti  /  /  44. paruSadhyAne zrIupadezamAlA-
puSpamAlAgranthabRhadvRttau yugabAhuvRttam  /  atthi avaMtIjaNavayasAraM nayaraM
suMdasaNaM nAma  /  mahimahilAe muhaMpiva suhAlayaM dIharacchaM ca  /  / 1 /  /
tattha nariMdo nAmeNa maNiraho jalanihivva vararayaNo  /  kayalacchIharAvAso
mayarahio bahupayAhAro  /  / 2 /  /  tasseva lahU bhAyA jugabAhU nAma Asi
juyarAyA  /  nAmeNa mayaNarehA imassa bhajjA guNagdhaviyA  /  / 3 /  /  jIsa
rUvaM daThThaM daDDo mayaNaggiNA sa mayaNo'vi  /  jaNavAyaM ciya manne jaM daDDo
so umAvaiNA  /  / 4 /  /  aha katthai vIsatthaM picchanto maNiraho tayaM hiyae
/  IsAi va mayaNeNaM nihao bANehiM ciMtei  /  / 5 /  /  ghettavvA tAva mae esA
niyameNa tA palobhemi  /  AmisapAsanibaddho kajjamakajaM ca kuNai jaNo  /  / 6 /
/  to pupphaphalavilevaNataMbolAINi tIi paTThavai  /  sAvi hu aduTThabhAvA
giNhai jeTThappasAutti  /  / 7 /  /  aha annadiNe duI paTThaviyA naraveraNa taM
bhaNai  /  bhadde ! tuha guNanivahe ratto rAyA iI vayai  /  / 8 /  /  taM ramasu
maM jahicchaM paDivajjasu sayalarajja sAmittaM  /  jiNavayaNabhAviyamaNA tatto
jaMpai mayaNarehA  /  / 9 /  /  anaMmivi paradAre sappurisANaM na vaccai maNaMpi
/  jaM puNa bahUjaNammivi kAmapavittI mahApAvaM  /  / 10 /  /  sIlaM ciya
paDhamaguNo nArINaM jai na so'vi maha hujjA  /  tA ke guNA ya anne aNurajjai
jesu naranAho ?  /  / 11 /  /  juvarAyagehiNIe mahaDDiyaM ceva rajjasAmittaM  /
mA vA hou tayaM me jaM bhagge hoi sIlammi  /  / 12 /  /  jattha ya
kAlakalAnalajAlAnivahehiM Dajjhae niccaM  /  jovvaNajIyalAlaM tattha akajjesu ko
ramai ?  /  / 13 /  /  jai a aNAiMmi bhave tittiM na gao si'NaMtanArIhiM  /
ettha ya bahuyAi tao ekkAe mae na tappihisi  /  / 14  /  /  tucchANaM kAmANa ya
kajje pAvihisi tihuaNe ayasaM  /  ghore ya paDisi narae duhADaM kiNiuM
sahattheNa  /  / 15 /  /  2010_02

Page #284 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Chapter-2: Collection of Examples 243 Those who abstain from evil deeds, and
cultivate a sense of deep joy in their minds, they are not easily tempted by
worldly pleasures, and they are often steadfast in their vows. ||16|| This is
what the two sages have said, and this is what the wise ones understand. But
this one is not steadfast, he is caught in the net of sensual desires. ||17||
Even those who have heard these words, and who are wise and intelligent, they
are not able to control their minds, if they are attached to worldly pleasures.
||18|| He thinks, "I am a fool, I am caught in the trap of my own desires, I am
unable to free myself from this bondage, I am defeated by my own weakness."
||19|| Thinking this, he breaks his vows, and he is overcome by his desires. In
the meantime, the spring season arrives, a season of great beauty. ||20|| Thus,
The air is filled with the sweet fragrance of many flowers, and the bees hum a
sweet melody. The hearts of men are filled with joy, and the world is reborn.
||1|| And, The fragrance of camphor and sandalwood, the sweet scent of cardamom
and cloves, the blue waves of the ocean, the playful dance of the sunbeams, the
sound of the conch shell, the dance of the peacock, the fire of desire, all
these are carried by the gentle breeze. ||2|| The sound of the lute and the
flute, the sweet songs of the birds, the beautiful women swaying in the breeze,
the sound of the conch shell, the sweet melody of the cuckoo, all these fill the
heart with joy. ||3|| And, The young men and women embrace each other, and the
trees are adorned with flowers. The young men and women are filled with joy, and
the world is reborn. ||4|| The young women are adorned with garlands of flowers,
and the trees are filled with blossoms. The trees are filled with the sweet
scent of the rain, and the world is reborn. ||5|| The young men and women gaze
at each other, and the trees are filled with blossoms. The trees are filled with
the sweet scent of the rain, and the world is reborn. ||6|| All these things are
beautiful, but they are fleeting. They are like the flowers of the spring, which
bloom for a short time and then wither away. ||7|| The wind blows through the
trees, and the leaves rustle like bells. The dust dances in the air, and the
world is reborn. ||8|| The women are filled with sorrow, and the flowers wither
away. The fire of desire burns within them, and their eyes are filled with
tears. ||9|| The bees do not care for the beauty of the flowers, they are only
interested in their nectar. They are not attracted by beauty, but by virtue.
||10||  2010_02

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 khaNDaH-2 dRSTAntasamuccayaH 243 tA virama akajjesu ThaviUNa maNammi
garuyasaMtosaM  /  iharA na bhogataNhA niyattae havai bahuyaM ca  /  / 16 /  /
iccAi tIi bhaNiyaM dUI parikahai meiNIvaiNo  /  tahavi imo na niyatto gahio
kAmaggaheNa'hiyaM  /  / 17 /  /  vayaNAI hiyaraehiM suhAsiyAiMpi nipuNabuddhIhiM
/  mayaNabhuyaMgamavisabhAviyANa na kamaMti hiyaesu  /  / 18 /  /  tA ciMtai
gayalajjo jIyaMte maha kaNiTThabaMdhummi  /  dhettuM imA na tIrai tA taM haNiuM
haDheNAvi  /  / 19 /  /  giNhAmi imaM iya ciMtiUNa chiDDAiM baMdhuNo niyai  /
itthaMtare payaTTo vasaMtasamao paramarammo  /  / 20 /  /  tathAhiM
ghaNasahayArasarasabahumaMjaripasariyabahulaparimalo,
parimalamiliyabhamirabhamarAvalikalaravasavaNasuhayaro  /
suhayaramahurapauraparahuyaravamucchiyapahIyajaNamaNo, jaNamaNaharaNu
mayaNasaMjIvaNu sahai vasaMtariu maho  /  / 1 /  /  kiMca- je
kappUraparAgasaMgasuhayA elAvaNaMdoliNo, golAnIlataraMgabhaMgasisirA
lIlAsarullAsiNo  /  kannADIkurulohanaTTaguruNo kAmAnaluddIviNo, te maMdaM
malayaddimajjhapavahA vAyaMti jatthAnilA  /  / 2 /  /
vINAveNumuyaMgasaddasuhayaM geyaM jahiM gijjae, ucchaMgIkayakAmiNI iya suhaM
dolAsu sevijjae  /  soUNaM kalakaMThakUjiyaravaM mANaM khaNeNujjhiuM, AliMgati
sunibbharaM piyayamaM thoratthaNIo jahiM  /  / 3 /  /  aparaM ca-kuruvayataruNo
phullaMti jattha AliMgaNeNa taruNINaM  /  taruNipayapaharatuTThA asoyataruNo'vi
viyasaMti  /  / 4  /  /  taruNImairAgaMDUsatosiyA kesarAvi kusumaMti  /
caMpayataruNo phullaMti surahijaladohalehiM ca  /  / 5 /  /  vikasaMti
tilayataruNo taruNikaDakkhehiM pekkhiyA jatya  /  pulaMti virahirukkhA soUNaM
paMcamuggAraM  /  / 6 /  /  egidiyAvi evaM kamaso pharisAiehiM visaehiM  /
hIraMti tao tehiM kaha na chalijjaMti paMciMdI ?  /  / 7 /  /
pavaNaMdoliyamaMjIrapasaraMtarayacchaleNa sahayArA  /  hiTThA iva mahurajje
dhUlIkIlAe kIlaMti  /  / 8 /  /  daLUNa virahiNIhiM jaliyaMpivakusumiyaM
palAsavaNaM  /  dahaNabhaeNa va sitto deho nayaNaMsusalilehiM  /  / 9 /  /  na
ramaMti kaniyAre bhamarA vaNNujjale'vi asuaMdhe  /  rUveNa kiM va kIrai ?
guNehiM cheyA harijaMti  /  / 10 /  /  2010_02

Page #285 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 244  **Chapter: The Rejection of the Sick**  Where the fragrance of the
blooming Machkunda flowers, like golden, jeweled, and fragrant blossoms, spreads
endlessly, there is a beautiful garden. || 11 ||  Many flowers and fragrant
plants, with their sweet scents, are scattered there. Red cloves and cardamom,
and date palms stand tall. || 12 ||  There are many beautiful trees, each with
its own unique beauty. At this time, the garden is filled with the sweet sounds
of birds and the buzzing of bees. || 13 ||  Birds sing their melodies, and
peacocks dance with their vibrant plumage. Flowers bloom in full glory, and the
sweet calls of cuckoos fill the air. || 14 ||  The earth trembles with the sound
of footsteps, and the sweet hum of bees fills the air. Fruit-laden trees stand
tall, and the sweet taste of honey fills the air. || 15 ||  **The Story**  In
this beautiful garden, filled with many pleasures, a young man named Jugabahū,
with a beautiful face, was enjoying himself. There were many beautiful women,
adorned with jewels, who were enjoying themselves with him. They were all lost
in their pleasures, forgetting everything else. || 16 ||  The gardener, holding
a bunch of fragrant flowers, approached Jugabahū and said, "My lord, please
listen to my words. This garden is beautiful, but it is not yours. You are not
the owner of this garden." || 17 ||  Jugabahū, with his beautiful eyes and
charming smile, replied, "This garden is beautiful, and I am enjoying myself
here. What is wrong with that?" || 18 ||  The gardener said, "My lord, this is
not the time for enjoyment. The king is coming here, and he will be angry if he
sees you here." || 19 ||  Jugabahū, lost in his pleasures, did not listen to the
gardener's warnings. He continued to enjoy himself with the women. || 20 ||  The
gardener, seeing that Jugabahū was not listening, left him and went to inform
the king. The king, hearing the news, was furious. He immediately ordered his
soldiers to arrest Jugabahū. || 21 ||  The soldiers, armed with swords, rushed
into the garden and surrounded Jugabahū. They were about to attack him when the
gardener intervened. He pleaded with the king to spare Jugabahū's life. || 22 ||
The king, seeing the gardener's plea, stopped his soldiers. He then turned to
Jugabahū and said, "You are a fool! You have forgotten your duty and are
indulging in pleasures. You have no respect for the king or the law. You will be
punished for your actions." || 23 ||  Jugabahū, realizing his mistake, fell at
the king's feet and begged for forgiveness. He promised to never repeat his
mistake. The king, seeing his remorse, pardoned him. || 24 ||  The king then
turned to the gardener and said, "You have done well. You have saved this young
man's life. You are a true servant of the king." || 25 ||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 244 pAra  /  apica-jahiM sohahiM kusumiyakaMcaNArapunnAyanAyaphulli
macakuMdakusumaparimalu aNaMtu, pasarai asesa vAsiya diyaM  /  /  11  /   /
bahukusumiyAo nomAliyAo, mahamahahiM suaMdhao pADalAo  /  elAlavaMgakakkoliyAo,
rehaMti dakkhakkhajjUriyAo  /  /  12  /  /  annevi kayaliyanAliyarapamuha, jahiM
sahahiM visesiNa rukkha viviha  /  jA sayamavi gayaNummattu nAi maMDaya tilayaNa
piyarukkharAI  /  /  13  /  /  gAyai va vihaMgamakalaravehiM, naccai va
viDavipallavakarehiM  /  hasai va phullamAlliyaviseNa, kRjaiva mattakoilaraveNa
/  /  14  /  /  hakkArai calabhuyalayAhiM, paDhai vva mahulasuyasAriyAhiM  /
phalabharanamatatarusiMharaehiM, paNamai va piyaha payapaMkayehiM  /  /  15  /
/  AturapratyAkhyAnaprakIrNakam mayaraMurasiNa bahupUriehiM, ruyai vva
galaMtihiM subhaNussehiM  /  tahiM diMti loya bahu caccarIo, vajrjjati tattha
AvANayAI, pariluDhiyabhattabahupANayAI, AharaNavilevaNabhUsiyAI,
rainibbharukIlahiM mihuNayAI, niyakaMtihiM saha purabhAmiNIo, majjaMti surahiM
suhakAmiNIo, iya harisapabaMdhihiM sayalasamiddhihiM nigra 2 piyayamajaNakalio
ujjANihiM pattao, mayaNummattau kIlai savvuvi jaNu miliu  /  /  16  /  /  to
gaMtUNaM ujjANapAlao cUyamaMjarIhattho  /  vinnavai nivaM eyaM gAhaM paDhiUNa
jaha deva !  /  / 17 /  /  caMpayagorIsayavattaloyaNA tilayarehirI pattA  /
ujjANe mahulacchI kayasaMkeyavva saha tumae  /   /  18  /  /  tatto vasaMtasamae
nAevi nivo paura aNukkhitto  /  na gao bahiM gao puNa jugabAhU piyayamAsahio  /
/  19  /  /  kalaMsa ya eyassa tattha rayaNI samAgayA tatto  /  kayalIharae
raisuhamaNuhaviraM nibbharaM sutto  /  /  20  /  /  eyaM ca avasaraM jANiUNa
parivAratucchayAIyaM  /  khaggasaddAo rAyA tattha paviTTho samA  /  21  /  /  tA
agaNiUNa asaM majjAyaM chaDDiuM vigayadhammo  /  khaggeNa haNai gIvAi bhAyaraM
nigviNo eso  /  /  22  /  /  tatto ya mayaNarehAikUi miliya pAhariyavagge  /
kavaDuttaraM ca kAuM kiMpinariMdo gao sahiM  /  | 23 || tatto accAvatthaM
(vvAvaNNaM) jugabAhuM jANiuM mayaNarehA  /  hoUNa kannamUle bhaNai tayaM
mahuravayaNehiM  /  /  24  /  /  bho bho ! tumaM mahAyasa ! khaNaMpi khayaM
maNammi mA kuNasu  /  niyakammapariNaicciya jamihaM avarajjhae na paro  /  /  25
/  /  2010_02

Page #286 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Chapter:-2 Collection of Examples 245 Whatever karma a living being performs in
this world, through food, that karma must be atoned for by him, with the help of
the right cause and the right conditions. ||26|| If you have committed any sin,
even if it is a small one, you will have to suffer for it in the next life.
||27|| Therefore, O valiant one! Take refuge in the Arhats and follow their
teachings. Abandon pride and anger, and be kind to all beings. ||28|| Speak
gently to those who are angry, and be forgiving to all beings. ||29|| Remember
the Arhats, the gods, the gurus, the saints, and the Jinas, and think of them as
your guides. ||30|| Refrain from harming living beings, from stealing, from
sexual misconduct, and from lying. ||31|| Follow the eighteen principles of
conduct, and be mindful of your thoughts and actions. ||32|| Whoever does not
perform the five prostrations at the end of the day, and who kills ten living
beings, will be reborn in hell. ||33|| Your mother, father, friends, children,
wife, and relatives are all your companions in this life. ||34|| By remembering
the suffering of hell, and by being free from attachment, you will be able to
overcome all obstacles. ||35|| It is difficult to find the jewel of the Jina's
teachings. Therefore, with a single-minded devotion, accept its fruits. ||36||
By offering flowers, water, and incense, and by bowing your head in reverence,
you will be able to purify yourself. ||37|| By following the path of non-
violence, you will be reborn in the heavenly realms. ||38|| 44. In the book
"Shriaavashyakaniyuktihaaribhadriyavrittau Shraavikaakhyaanakah", there is a
story about a woman who was a follower of the wrong path. She was cooking food,
and she was very angry. She wanted to kill someone. She saw a snake, and she
thought that she could use it to kill someone. She took the snake and put it in
a pot. She then went to the market to buy some flowers. She thought that if
someone tried to eat her food, she would kill them with the snake. She went to
the market and bought some flowers. She then went back home and put the flowers
in the pot. She then went to bed. She was very tired. She fell asleep. She had a
dream. In her dream, she saw a god. The god told her that she should not kill
anyone. He told her that she should be kind to all beings. She woke up from her
dream. She was very scared. She realized that she had been wrong. She decided to
change her ways. She became a follower of the Jina's teachings. She became a
good person. She lived a happy life.   2010_02

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 khaNDa:-2 dRSTAntasamuccayaH 245 jaM jeNa kayaM kammaM annabhave iha bhave ya
jIveNaM 1 taM teNa veiyavvaM nimittamittaM paro hoi  /  / 26 /  /  kaMThaTThie
ya jIe paosamiNhiM karesi jaivi tumaM  /  tahavi paratta na kiMcivi taM puNa
hArihisi paraloyaM  /  / 27 /  /  tA vIra ! kuru samAhiM arahaMtAI ya
saraNamaNusarasu  /  chiMda mamattaM mettiM ca kuNasu savvesu sattesu  /  / 28
/  /  garihisu niyaduccariyaM savvaM siddhAisakkhiyaM kAuM  /  khAmesu
sayalasatta tumaMpi taha khamasu savvesi  /  / 29 /  /  arihaM devo guruNo
susAhuNo jiNamayaM ciMya pamANaM  /  jammaMtare'vi evaM maha hojja imaMti
ciMtesu  /  / 30  /  /  pANivahAliyaparadhaNamehuNNapariggahAiveramaNaM  /
tivihaM tiviheNa tahA paDivajjasu jAvajIvAe  /  / 31 /  /  aTThArasaNha saMmaM
pAvaTThANANa taha paDikkamasu  /  bhAvesu bhavasarUvaM aNusarasu maNe namokkAraM
/  / 32 /  /  jao-paMcanamokkArasamA aMte vaccaMti jassa dasa pANA  /  so jai na
jAi mukkhaM avassa vemANio hoi  /  / 33 /  /  ammApiyaro mittaM puttakalattAI
sayaNavaggo ya  /  vihaDai savvaMpi imaM hoi sahAo paraM dhammo  /  / 34 /  /
bhAveUNaM saMmaM ciMteUNaM ca narayadukkhAiM  /  savvattha apaDibaddho ahiyAsasu
duhamiNaM sammaM  /  / 35  /  /  dulahA puNo mahAyasa !
jiNadhammanarattaNAisAmaggI  /  tA khaNamekkaM samacittayAe parigiNha tIe phalaM
/  / 36 /  /  iya tIe sisiravayaNAmaehiM vijjhAyakovajalaNeNa  /  paDivannaM
teNa imaM savvaM sIse kayaMjaliNA  /  / 37 /  /  tatto paisamayaM
vaDDamANasaMveyarasajuo mariuM  /  paDivanabhAvacaraNo uppanno baMbhaloyammi  /
/ 38  /  /  44. paruSadhyAne zrIAvazyakaniyuktihArIbhadrIyavRttau
zrAvikAkhyAnakaH  /  egA sAvigA tIse bhattA micchAdiTThI annaM bhajjaM ANeuM
maggai, tIse taNaeNa na lahai se savattagaMti, ciMtei kiha mAremi ?, aNNayA
kaNhasappo ghaDae chubhittA ANIo, saMgovio, jimio bhaNai - ANehi puSpANi amuge
ghaDae ThaviyANi, sA paviThThA, aMdhakAraMti namokkAraM karei, jaivi me koi
khAejjA tovi me maraMtIe namokkAro Na nassahiti, hattho chUDho, sappo devayAe
avahio, puSpamAlA kayA, sA gahiyA, dinnA ya se, so saMbhaMto ciMtai annANi,
kahiyaM, gao pecchai ghaDagaM puSpagaMdhaM ca, Navi ittha koi sappo, AuTTo
pAyapaDio savvaM kahei khAmei ya, pacchA sA ceva gharasAmiNI jAyA  /  2010_02

Page #287 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 246 ## The Story of Somila  **45. This story is found in the *Upadeshamala*
under the headings of *Fear*, *Instruction*, and *Circumstances*.**  In
Dvaravati, Krishna's mother Devaki was nursing her son. A woman, seeing this,
felt a pang of longing, thinking, "How fortunate are those women whose sons
suckle at their breasts, their faces filled with innocent delight, their small
hands grasping at their mothers' breasts. I, on the other hand, am unfortunate,
for I have not been blessed with this." Krishna, seeing her sadness, asked her,
"Mother, what is this?" She then told him her thoughts. He reassured her,
saying, "I will fulfill your desires." He then worshipped the Lord. The Lord
said, "Your son will be born as a celestial being, but due to his past karma, he
will not stay in your home for long." Devaki, hearing this, accepted it.   Then,
a dream of an elephant foretold the birth of a child. He was born in due course
and named Gajasukumar. He grew up and was married by his parents to the daughter
of a Brahmin named Somila. Gajasukumar, however, considered the world to be like
a magic trick, and he found worldly pleasures to be like a prison. He lived in
his home for a while, only because of his parents' wishes. Later, he revealed
his true intentions to them. They understood his desire and, with the help of
Krishna, freed him from his worldly attachments. He then went to the foot of the
Lord Arishtanemi, where he learned various skills.   One day, Gajasukumar was
found dead in a cremation ground in Dvaravati. Somila, who had come there by
chance, saw him. He was enraged, thinking, "This wicked man has married my
daughter and abandoned her." He then took some earth and covered Gajasukumar's
head with it. He then threw burning coals on him, thinking, "This wicked man
will surely go to hell for what he has done to me." As the fire burned, a white
light, like a helper, appeared. The four karmas that bind us were burned away,
and Gajasukumar attained pure knowledge. He then attained the state of
*Saileeshi* (a state of liberation) and his lifespan ended. He then attained the
supreme abode.   On the second day, Vishnu came to pay his respects to the Lord.
He was greeted by the Lord and the sages. Vishnu then asked, "Where is
Gajasukumar?" The Lord told him that Gajasukumar had fulfilled his purpose.
Vishnu asked, "How?" The Lord then told him the story of Gajasukumar. Vishnu
asked, "Who did this?" The Lord said, "The one who, upon seeing you, will split
his head." Somila, upon entering, saw Vishnu and, filled with fear, ran away.
His head split open due to the intense fear he felt upon seeing Krishna.   **28,
42, 46. This story of Chandrapradhyota is found in the commentary on the
*Upadeshamala* under the headings of *War*, *Laughter*, and *Form*.**  In the
city of Susumaranagara, Chandrapradhyota, the king, was enraged when his
daughter Angaravati was rejected and expelled by a wandering ascetic. He sent a
messenger to the ascetic, but the messenger was also rejected. The king, filled
with anger, besieged the city. He was distressed and asked his astrologer, "What
will happen now?" The astrologer said, "I will tell you after I have taken the
omens." He then went to take the omens. He

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 246 AturapratyAkhyAnaprakIrNakama 45. bhayadhyAne
zrIupadezamAlAheyopAdeyAvRttau somilaprabandhaH  /  dvAravatyAM kRSNasya
mAturdevakyA nijatanayapIyamAnastanI kAJcinnArI upalabhya saJjAtamautsukyaM,
yaduta dhanyAstAH eva pramadA yAsAM
dugdhalubdhamugdhasmeramukhairvalpacchirodharaistanayaiH stanau pIyate, mama
punarmandabhAgyAyA naitatsampannamiti saviSAdA ca dRSTA kRSNena, sapraNipatyAha-
amba ! kimetat ? tataH kathitaM tayA nijAkUtam  /  pUrayAmi te
manorathAnityabhidhAyArAdhitastena devaH  /  devaH prAha- bhaviSyati tanaye
divazcyutaH, kevalaM janmAntarAbhyastakuzalakarmatvAnna ciraM gRhe sthAsyatIti
/  tadAkarNya kathitaM kRSNena devakyAH pratipannam tayA  /  tato
gajasvapnasUcita AvirbhUto garbhaH, jAtaH krameNa dArakaH, pratiSThitaM nAma
gajasukumAra iti  /  prAso yauvanamudvAhitaH somilabrAhmaNasutAM mAtA-pitRbhyAM,
sa punarindrajAlamiva jagadasAraM manyamAno viDambanAprAyaM vaiSayikaM sukhaM
cintayan kArAgRhamiva gRhaM tadanurodhAt tAvantaM kAlamadhivasati sma  /
pazcAnivedya svAbhiprAyaM tayoH sambhAvya ca nAnopAyaiH vimuktastAbhyAM kRSNena
ca bhagavadariSTanemipAdamUle niSkrAnto'bhyastadvividhazikSo'nyadA
dvAravatyAmeva smazAne sthitaH kAyotsargeNa kathaJcittaddezamAgatena ddaSTaH
somilena  /  madduhitaraM pariNIya tyaktavAnayaM duSTAtmeti samullasito'sya
krodhaH  /  tataH kRtvA mRttikayA ziraso veSTanaM, prakSipya tatra
jvalitAGgArAnapakrAnto'sAvitarasyApi aho ! mannimittamayaM varAkaH
kazcitprapatiSyati ghore narake' iti bhAvanAsamIraNasandhukSite jvalati jvalane
tatsahAya iva prabuddhaH zukladhyAnajvalanaH, dagdhaM itareNa zarIramiva
ghAtikarmacatuSTayaM, samutpannaM kevalajJAnam, adhyAsitA zailezI,
samAptamAyuSkaM, samprAptaH paramapadamiti  /  dvitIyadine samAgato
viSNurbhagavadvandvanArthaM, vanditaH saha munibhirbhagavAn  /  pazcAt kva
gajasukumAra iti tasya vadato bhagavatoktaM sAdhitaM tena svakAryam  /
viSNurAha- kathaM ? tataH kathito bhagavatA tavRttAntaH, viSNurAha
kenedamanuSThitaM ? bhagavAn Aha- 'yasya tvAM dRSTvA ziro vidaliSyati',
pravizatA dRSTo bhayena prapalAyamAnaH somilaH  /
kRSNadarzanAdAvirbhavadbhayotkarSasya dIrNaM tasya mastakamiti  /  /  28,42,46.
yuddhadhyAne, prahAsadhyAne, rUpadhyAne ca zrIupadezamAlATIkAgataM
caNDapradyotasya kathAnakam  /  /  suMsumAranagare dhuMdhumArarAjasutayA
aGgAravatyA vAde tiraskRtaniSkAsitayA parivAjikayA darzitatadrUpA''kSiptacittena
dUtapreSaNA'dAnAkruddhenojjayinyA Agatya caNDapradyotarAjena ruddhaM tannagaraM,
viSaNNena rAjA kimatra bhaviSyatIti pRSTo naimittikaH, sa prAha-nirUpya
kathayAmi, gato nimittagrahaNArthaM, trAsitAni tena ramamANAni DimbharUpANi,
itazca vArattakanAmA munistatraiva nAgagRhe 2010_02

Page #288 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Chapter 2: Collection of Examples 247  He was present, the root of that was gone
somehow, so he said, "Don't be afraid," the other also heard that word, it was
said by the king, taking its meaning, he became firm, giving the descent, he
took Chandrapradhyota, he brought him home and said, "What is to be done now?"
He said, "Do what is appropriate for those who have come to your house?" Then,
considering that those who are subdued are compassionate, he gave him
Angaravati. He wandered with her in the city, seeing the small amount of goods,
he asked her, "How was I taken?" She said, "By the power of destiny," he said,
"How?" Then she told him the story of the Muni. Once, she showed him the
Varattaka Muni, then he said to him in front of the people, "A destiny-based
tortoise! Greetings to you." Then, when he was asked, "Where did I use destiny?"
The Muni said, "From birth, in my own offenses! It is known, child! Don't be
afraid of death." Then, he felt remorse, gave advice, and went back. 47. The
example of the minister Shakatala is mentioned in the Sriparishishtaparva, which
is about self-praise meditation.  Kalpaka, born again with many sons, a treasure
of wisdom. For a long time, he followed the business of Nanda's seal. 1. In
Nanda's lineage, in time, seven Nanda kings were born. Their ministers were the
great ones of the Kalpaka lineage. 2. Then, the king of the three-part earth,
like a husband to prosperity. Nanda, the ninth king, was born, who had uprooted
the roots of his enemies. 3. Vishankata, a dwelling for prosperity, Asankata, a
chariot for wisdom. Shakatala, of the Kalpaka lineage, became his minister. 4.
He had a Lakshmi named Lakshmiwati, beautiful like Lakshmi herself. She was a
virtuous woman, adorned with good character. 5. Their eldest son was adorned
with humility. He was wise, strong, and handsome like the moon. 6. Their younger
son was devoted to devotion, Sriyaka, Nanda's son. He was gentle, like the heart
of Nanda, and had sandalwood on his head. 7. There was a prostitute named Kosha,
beautiful in form and prosperity. She was a medicine for life, who had subdued
the minds of the world. 8. Enjoying various pleasures, day and night.
Sthulabhadra lived in her house for twelve years, with his mind on her. 9.
Sriyaka was a protector of his body, a source of great confidence. He was like a
second heart to Nanda, the king of the earth. 10. There was a wise man named
Vararuchi, a leader of the best Brahmanas. He was the jewel of poets, debaters,
and grammarians. 11. He was engaged in writing new verses every day, a hundred
and eight in number, in the presence of the king, a wise man. 12. The minister
never praised him as a false seer. Even though he was praised, the king did not
give him any satisfaction. 13. Knowing the reason for not getting a gift,
Vararuchi. He began to worship the wife of his minister. 14. Pleased with her,
she asked him what he wanted, he said this. "Let your husband praise my poetry
in front of the king." 15. She told her husband about it, he said, "How can I
praise the words of a false seer?" 16.   2

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 khaNDa:-2 dRSTAntasamuccayaH 247 sthita AsIt, tanmUlaM gatAni kathaJcittAni,
tenoktaM-mA bhaiSuriti, itareNApi zrutaM tadvAkyaM, kathitaM rAjJaH, gRhItvA
tadarthaM jAtAvaSTambhena datvA'vaskandaM gRhItazcaNDapradyotaH, tena AnIta
svagehamuktazca kimidAnIM bhavataH kriyate ? sa prAha-yadbhavadgRhamAgatAnAM
yujyate tatkuru ? tato vazIkRteSu nIceSu kRpAvantaH santa ityAlocya dattA
aGgAravatI tasmai  /  sa tayA saha bhramannagare'lpasAmagrIkaM tadavalokya tAM
pRSTavAn kathamahaM gRhIta iti, sA prAha-nimittabalena, sa prAha-kathaM ?, tataH
kathitastayA munivRttAntaH  /  anyadA sa vArattakamunirdarzitastayA tasya,
tato'sau lokasamakSaM hAsagarbhaM tamabravIt naimittakakSapakaH ! namaste  /
tataH kva mayA nimittaM prayuktamityukto munirjanmaprabhRti svAparAdheSu AH !
jJAtaM dAraka ! mA bhIrdAnamiti  /  tato jAtapazcAttApo datvAlocanAM pratikAnta
iti  /  47. AtmaprazaMsAdhyAne zrIpariziSTaparvoktaH zakaTAlamantridRSTAntaH  /
kalpakaH punarutpannAnekaputro dhiyAMnidhiH  /  suciraM nandarAjasya
mudrAvyApAramanvazAt  /  / 1 /  /  nandasya vaMze kAlena nandAH saptAbhavannRpAH
/  teSAM ca mantriNo'bhUvanbhUyAMsaH kalpakAnvayAH  /  / 2 /  /
tatastrikhaNDapRthivIpatiH patiriva zriyaH  /  samutkhAtadviSatkando
nando'bhUnavamo nRpaH  /  / 3 /  /  vizaGkaTaH zriyAM vAso'saGkaTaH zakaTo
dhiyAm  /  zakaTAla iti tasya mantryabhUtkalpakAnvayaH  /  / 4 /  /  tasya
lakSmIvatI nAma lakSmIriva vapuSmatI  /
sadharmacAriNyabhavacchIlAlaGkAradhAriNI  /  / 5 /  /  tayozca jyeSThatanayo
vinayAlaGkRto'bhavat  /  asthUladhIH sthUlabhadro bhadrAkAranizAkaraH  /  / 6 /
/  bhaktiniSThaH kaniSTho'bhUcchrIyako nandanastayoH  /
nandarAhRdayAmandAnandagozIrSacandanaH  /  / 7 /  /  pure'bhUttatra kozeti vezyA
rUpazriyorvazI  /  vazIkRtajagaccetA babhUva jIvanauSadhiH  /  / 8 /  /
bhuJjAno vividhAnbhogAnsthUlabhadro divAnizam  /  uvAsa vasathe tasyA
dvAdazAbdAni tanmanAH  /  / 9 /  /
zrIyakastvaGgarakSo'bhUdbharivizrambhabhAjanam  /  dvitIyamiva hRdayaM nandasya
pRthivIpateH  /  / 10 /  /  tatra cAsIdvararucirnAma dvijavarAgraNIH  /  kavInAM
vAdinAM vaiyAkaraNAnAM ziromaNiH  /  / 11 /  /
svayakRtairnavanavairaSTottarazatena saH  /  vRttaiH pravRtto'nudinaM
nRpAvalagane sudhIH  /  / 12 /  /  mithyAdRgiti taM mantrI prazazaMsa na jAtucit
/  luSTo'pyasmai tuSTidAnaM na dadau nRpatistataH  /  / 13 /  /  jJAtvA
vararucistatra dAnAprApaNakAraNam  /  ArAdhayitumArebhe gRhiNIM tasya mantriNaH
/  / 14 /  /  santuSTayA tayAnyedhuH kAryaM pRSTo'bravIdidam  /  rAjJaH
purastAnme kAvyaM tava bhartA prazaMsatu  /  / 15 /  /  tayA taduparodhena
tadvijJapto'vadatpatiH  /  mithyAdRSTeramuSyAhaM prazaMsAmi kathaM vacaH  /  /
16 /  /  2010_02

Page #289 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter 248: The Story of the Rejection of the Eager One  The minister agreed
to the king's request. The eagerness of the blind, women, children, and fools is
indeed strong. ||17||  The king, sitting before the king, read a poem by
Vararuchi. The minister, praising it, said, "Oh, what a beautiful saying!"
||18||  The king then gave him one hundred and eight dinars. The words of a
king, even if they are not favorable, are still to be lived by. ||19||  When one
hundred and eight dinars were given every day, the minister asked the king,
"What is this being given for?" ||20||  The king replied, "Minister, I am giving
it to him because of your praise. If we were to give it ourselves, wouldn't we
have given it long ago?" ||21||  The minister said, "My lord, I did not create
any praise for him. I was praising the poems of others at that time." ||22||
"He is reading other people's poems in front of us, claiming them as his own. Is
this true?" the king asked. ||23||  "I will show you in the morning, even young
girls can recite these poems," the minister said. ||24||  Yaks, Yakshas, Bhutas,
Bhutas, and Venas, seven wise daughters of the minister, were named Rene. ||25||
The eldest of them could recite the poems once, while the others could recite
them twice, thrice, and so on, according to their age. ||26||  The minister
brought them to the king on the second day. He arranged them in a way that they
were separated from the one who was rejected. ||27||  Vararuchi, having composed
one hundred and eight verses himself, recited them in the order of seniority.
||28||  The king, angered by Vararuchi, stopped the gift. The methods of
ministers are capable of both punishment and favor. ||29||  Vararuchi then went
and made a device in the Ganges water. He put one hundred and eight dinars
wrapped in cloth inside it. ||30||  In the morning, he praised the Ganges and
then approached the device with a strong hand. The dinars flew out of it and
fell into his hand. ||31||  He did this every day, and the people were amazed.
Hearing this from the people, the king praised the minister. ||32||  "If this is
true, then we will see it ourselves tomorrow morning," the king said. The
minister agreed to this. ||33||  The king, having been taught, sent a messenger
there in the evening. The messenger, disguised as a bird, remained hidden in the
reeds. ||34||  Vararuchi then went and secretly placed a bundle of one hundred
and eight dinars in the Mandakini water and went home. ||35||  The messenger,
taking the bundle of dinars as if it were his life, respectfully presented it to
the minister in secret. ||36||  The minister, secretly taking the bundle of
dinars, went to the Ganges with the king. Vararuchi arrived there at that time.
||37||  Seeing the king, who was eager to see him, Vararuchi, being arrogant and
full of pride, began to praise the Ganges in detail. ||38||  When Vararuchi was
praising the Ganges, he accidentally moved the device. The bundle of dinars flew
out and fell into his lap. ||39||  He searched for the bundle with his hand in
the water. He stood there silently, a cunning, deceitful, and silent fool.
||40||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 248 AturapratyAkhyAnaprakIrNakam tayoktaH sAgrahaM mantrI tattathA
pratyapadyata  /  andhastrIbAlamUrkhANAmAgraho balavAnkhalu  /  / 17 /  /
rAjJaH purastAtpaThataH kAvyaM vararucestataH  /  aho subhASitamiti varNayAmAsa
mantrirAT  /  / 18 /  /  dInArazatamaSTAgraM tato'smai nRpatirdadau  /
rAjamAnyasya vAcApi jIvyate hyanukUlayA  /  / 19 /  /  dInArASTottarazate
dIyamAne dine dine  /  kimetaddIyata iti bhUpaM mantrI vyajijJapat  /  / 20 /  /
athoce nRpatirmantrin ! dadmo'smai tvatprazaMsayA  /  vayaM yadi svayaM dadmo
dadmaH kiM na purA tataH  /  / 21 /  /  mantryapyUce mayA deva ! prazaMsA nAsya
nirmitA  /  kAvyAni parakIyANi prAzaMsiSamahaM tadA  /  / 22 /  /  puro naH
parakAvyAni svakIkRtya paThatyayam  /  kimetatsatyabhAvenetyabhASata nRpastataH
/  / 23 /  /  etatpaThitakAvyAni paThantIrbAlikA api  /  darzayiSyAmi vaH
prAtarityUce sacivo'pi ca  /  / 24  /  /  yakSA yakSadattA bhUtA bhUtadattaiNikA
tathA  /  veNA reNeti saptAsanprAjJAH putryastu mantriNaH  /  / 25 /  /  gRhNAti
jyAyasI tAsAM sakRduktaM tathetarAH  /  dvitryAdivArakramato gRhNanti sma
yathAkramam  /  / 26 /  /  rAjJaH samIpaM sacivo dvitIye'hni ninAya tAH  /
tiraskariNyantaritAH samupAvezayacca saH  /  / 27 /  /  aSTottarazataM
zlokAnsvayaM nirmAya naityikAn  /  Uce vararucistAstu yathAjyeSThamanUcire  /  /
28 /  /  tato vararuce ruSTo rAjA dAnaM nyavArayat  /  upAyAH sacivAnAM hi
nigrahAnugrahakSamAH  /  / 29 /  /  tato vararucirgatvA yantraM gaGgAjale
vyadhAt  /  tanmadhye vastravaddhaM ca dInArazatamaSTayuk  /  / 30  /  /
prAtargaGgAmasau stutvA yantramAkrAmadaMhiNA  /  dInArAste ca tatpANAvutpatya
nyapataMstataH  /  / 31 /  /  sa evaM vidadhe nityaM janastena visiSmiye  /
tacca zrutvA janazrutyA rAjAzaMsata mantriNe  /  / 32 /  /  idaM yadyasti satyaM
tatprAta:kSAmahe svayam  /  ityukto mantriNA rAjA tattathA pratyapadyata  /  /
33 /  /  dattvA zikSAM caraH sAyaM preSitastatra mantriNA  /
zarastambanilIno'sthAtpakSIvAnupalakSitaH  /  / 34  /  /  tadA vararucirgatvA
channaM mandAkinIjale  /  dInArASTottarazatagranthiM nyasya yayau gRhe  /  / 35
/  /  tajjIvitamivAdAya dInAragranthimAdarAt  /  caraH samarpayAmAsa pracchannaM
varamantriNe  /  / 36  /  /  atha guptAttadInAragranthimantrI nizAtyaye  /
yayau rAjJA samaM gaGgAmAgAdvararucistadA  /  / 37  /  /  draSTukAmaM nRpaM
dRSTvotkRSTamAnI savistaram  /  stotuM pravavRte gaGgAM mUDho vararucistataH  /
/ 38  /  /  stutyante'cAlayadyantraM yadA vararuciH param  /
dInAragranthirutpatya nApatatpANikoTare  /  / 39 /  /  granthiM gaveSayAmAsa
pANinA tajjale tataH  /  so'sthAdapazyaMstUSNIko dhUrto ghRSTo hi maunabhAk  /
/ 40  /  /  _ 2010_02

Page #290 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Chapter:-2 Collection of Examples 249 Thus the great minister said, "What is
given to you is not the Jahnavi. You are searching for the property that has
been entrusted to you, why?" ||41|| Pointing to it, he said, "Take this, it is
your property." He gave the bundle of dinars to Vararuchi's hand. ||42|| With
that bundle of dinars, he, like one with a knot in his heart, suffered
unbearable pain for ten months. ||43|| "To deceive the people, he throws it away
in the evening, and in the morning he takes it back," said the secretary to the
king. ||44|| "Good, this is a good plan," said the chief minister. The king,
with eyes filled with wonder, went to his house. ||45|| Vararuchi, filled with
anger, thought of revenge. He asked the servants and others about the
secretary's house. ||46|| Then a servant of the secretary told him, "The king
will be feasting in the minister's house for the wedding of Shriyaka." ||47||
"And the minister is preparing weapons to give to Nanda. For kings who love
weapons, weapons are the first means of sustenance." ||48|| Vararuchi, knowing
the deception, then taught the children to say, "Chana, etc., are given," and
other deceptive words. ||49|| "The king does not know that this chariot driver
will kill Nanda and establish Shriyaka in his kingdom." ||50|| The children were
saying these deceptive words day by day, everywhere. The king heard this from
the common people and thought, ||51|| "What children say, and what women say, is
the language of the people. It is not otherwise." ||52|| To confirm this, the
king sent a man to the minister's house. The man came and reported everything as
he had seen. ||53|| Then, when the minister's servants came to serve him, the
king, in anger, turned his face away. ||54|| Knowing his feelings, the minister
said to Shriyaka, "I have been informed by someone that the king is angry with
you, as if you are an enemy." ||55|| "This man is a threat to our family.
Protect yourself, son! If you obey my order, ||56|| "When I bow to the king, you
should cut off my head with that sword. A servant who is disloyal to his master
should be killed, even if he is his father," he said. ||57|| "Even though I am
old, I am eager to die for you. You will be the pillar of our family for a long
time." ||58|| Shriyaka, weeping, said in a choked voice, "Father! This is a
terrible deed. Even a dog would not do this." ||59|| The minister said, "By
doing this, you will only fulfill the desires of your enemies." ||60|| "The king
is like Yama, he will not kill me and my family. As long as I am alive, protect
my family." ||61|| "I will put poison in the sacrificial cake and kill the king.
You should cut off his head. You will not be guilty of patricide." ||62|| Thus
instructed by his father, Shriyaka agreed and did as he was told. The wise man,
for the sake of good fortune, was doing a terrible deed. ||63|| "Son, what is
this difficult deed that you have done?" Shriyaka, trembling, said to the king,
||64||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 khaNDa:-2 dRSTAntasamuccayaH 249 ityUce ca mahAmAtyaH kiM te datte na jAhnavI
/  nyAsIkRtamapi dravyaM gaveSayasi yanmuhuH  /  / 41 /  /  upalakSya gRhANedaM
nijadravyamiti bruvan  /  so'rpayAmAsa dInAragranthiM vararuceH kare  /  / 42 /
/  dInAragranthinA tenotsarpihRdgranthineva saH  /  dazAmAsAdayAmAsa maraNAdapi
duHsahAm  /  / 43 /  /  vipratArayituM lokaM sAyamatra kSipatyasau  /  dravyaM
prAtaH punargRhNAtItyUce sacivo nRpam  /  / 44  /  /  sAdhu jAtamidaM cha
tyAlapanmantripuGgavam  /  vismayasmeranayanaH svavezmAgAnmahIpatiH  /  / 45 /
/  amarSaNo vararuciH pratIkAraM vicintayan  /  gRhasvarUpaM
sacivasyApRcchacceTikAdikam  /  / 46 /  /  tasyAtha kathayAmAsa
kAcitsacivaceTyadaH  /  bhUpatiH zrIyakodvAhe bhokSyate mantrivezmani  /  / 47
/  /  sajjyate cAtra zastrAdi dAtuM nandAya mantriNA  /  zastrapriyANAM rAjJAM
hi zastramAdyamupAyanam  /  / 48 /  /  samAsAdya chalajJastacchalaM
vararucistataH  /  caNakAdi pradAyeti DimbharUpANyapAThayat  /  / 49 /  /  na
vetti rAjA yadasau zakaTAla: kariSyati  /  vyApAdya nandaM tadrAjye zrIyakaM
sthApayiSyati  /  / 50  /  /  sthAne sthAne paThanti sma DimbhA evaM dine dine
/  janazrutyA tadazrauSIditi cAcintayannRpaH  /  / 51  /  /  bAlakA yacca
bhASante bhASante yacca yoSitaH  /  utpAtikI ca yA bhASA sA bhavatyanyathA na hi
/  / 52  /  /  tatpratyayArthaM rAjJAtha preSito mantrivezmani  /  puruSaH
sarvamAgatya yathAdRSTaM vyajijJapat  /  / 53 /  /  tatazca sevAvasare mantriNaH
samupeyuSaH  /  praNAmaM kurvato rAjA kopAttasthau parAGmukhaH  /  / 54  /  /
tadbhAvajJo'tha vezmaityAmAtyaH zrIyakamabravIt  /  rAjJo'smi jJApitaH
kenApyabhakto vidviSanniva  /  / 55  /  /  asAvakasmAdasmAkaM kulakSaya
upasthitaH  /  rakSyate vatsa ! kuruSe yadyAdezamimaM mama  /  / 56 /  /
namayAmi yadA rAje zirazchindyAstadAsinA  /  abhaktaH svAmino vadhyaH pitApIti
vadestataH  /  / 57  /  /  yiyAsau mayi jarasApyevaM yAte parAsutAm  /  tvaM
matkulagRhastambho bhaviSyasi ciraM tataH  /  / 58  /  /  zrIyako'pi
rudannevamavadad gadgadasvaram  /  tAta ! ghoramidaM karma zvapaco'pi karoti kim
?  /  / 59 /  /  amAtyo'pyabravIdevamevaM kurvanvicAraNAm  /  manorathAnpUrayasi
vairiNAmeva kevalam  /  / 60  /  /  rAjA yama ivoddaNDa; sakuTumbaM na hanti mAm
/  yAvattAvanmamaikasya kSayAdrakSa kuTumbakam  /  / 61 /  /  makhe viSaM
tAlapaTaM nyasya nasyAmi bhUpatim  /  ziraH parAsomeM chindyAH pitRhatyA na te
tataH  /  / 62 /  /  pitraivaM bodhitastatsa pratipede cakAra ca  /
zubhodarkAya dhImantaH kurvantyApAtadAruNam  /  / 63 /  /  bhavatA kimidaM vatsa
! vihitaM karma duSkaram  /  sasambhramamiti prokto nRpeNa zrIyako'vadat  /  /
64  /  /  yadaiva svAminA jJAto drohyayaM nihatastadA  /  bhartRcittAnusAreNa
bhRtyAnAM hi pravartanam  /  / 65  /  /  2010_02

Page #291 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter 250: The Scattering of the Eager Refusal  **66.** When a servant's
fault is known, an inquiry is appropriate. When the master knows, retaliation is
appropriate, not an inquiry.  **67.** After the deed, Nand, the glorious one,
spoke to Sriyaka, saying, "This seal, along with all its business, should be
taken."  **68.** Then, bowing down, Sriyaka informed the king, "My elder
brother, named Sthulabhadra, is like a father to me."  **69.** "He has been
enjoying the pleasures of the treasury, free from any obstruction by my father's
grace, for twelve years now."  **70.** The king, having been informed of this
matter, called Sthulabhadra and said, "I will consider this matter and act
accordingly."  **71.** The king said, "I will discuss it today." Sthulabhadra,
the king of the earth, went to the Asoka grove and became troubled in his mind.
**72.** Sleep, food, bathing, and other sources of happiness were not
experienced even for a moment, as if by the relentless demands of his duties.
**73.** The minds of those with duties are preoccupied with the anxieties of
their own country, leaving no space for their beloveds, like water in a full
pot.  **74.** Even when they abandon all their own interests and work for the
king's sake, slanderers trouble them like flies around a corpse.  **75.** Just
as one strives to spend one's own wealth for the king's sake, why should a wise
person not strive for his own sake?  **76.** Thinking thus, he tore his hair
with five handfuls, and then swept away the dust with a cloth of jewels.
**77.** Then, that great soul went to the king's court and said, "This matter
has been considered, and it is beneficial for dharma."  **78.** Then, from the
king's court, like a lion from its cave, he emerged, devoid of essence, full of
essence, burning with the fire of worldly existence.  **79.** "Why did this one,
after feigning deceit, go to the prostitute's house again?" With this disbelief,
the king looked out through the window.  **80.** Seeing Sthulabhadra going, with
his nose unmoved even in the stench of a corpse in the area, the king shook his
head.  **81.** "This one, the blessed, free from attachment, has been thinking
about this fire," Nand said, praising himself aloud.  **82.** Sthulabhadra,
going to the presence of Sri Sambhuti Vijaya, took initiation, accompanied by
the chanting of Samayika.  **83.** Taking Sriyaka, Nand, with great respect,
placed him in charge of the seal, along with all its business.  **84.** Sriyaka,
always attentive to the affairs of the kingdom, became like a chariot wheel, due
to his excellent skill in governance.  **85.** He always went to the treasury,
courteous and respectful. Due to his brother's affection, his beloved, a noble
woman, was highly respected.  **86.** Seeing Sriyaka, grieving for the
separation from Sthulabhadra, she gave him a comforting look. For one who is in
sorrow, seeing a loved one does not allow sorrow to remain.  **87.** Then
Sriyaka said to her, "My dear, what shall we do? This Vararuchi, a wicked one,
is a source of harm and destruction for us."  **88.** "He has caused the
separation from S

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 250 AturapratyAkhyAnaprakIrNakam bhRtyAnAM yujyate doSe svayaM jJAte vicAraNA
/  svAmijJAte pratIkAro yujyate na vicAraNA  /  / 66 /  /  kRtaurdhvadehikaM
nandastataH zrIyakamabravIt  /  sarvavyApArasahitA mudreyaM gRhyatAmiti  /  / 67
/  /  atha vijJapayAmAsa praNamya zrIyako nRpam  /  sthUlabhadrAbhidhAno'sti
pitRtulyo mamAgrajaH  /  / 68 /  /  pitRprasAdAnirbAdha kozAyAstu niketane  /
bhogAnupabhuJjAnasya tasyAbdA dvAdazAgaman  /  / 69  /  /  AhUyAtha
sthUlabhadrastamarthaM bhUbhujoditaH  /  paryAlocyAmumarthaM tu
kariSyAmItyabhASata  /  / 70 /  /  adyaivAlocayetyuktaH sthUlabhadro mahIbhujA
/  azokavanikAM gatvA vimamazeti cetasA  /  / 71 /  /  zayanaM bhojanaM
snAnamanye'pi sukhahetavaH  /  kAle'pi nAnubhUyante rorairiva niyogibhiH  /  /
72 /  /  niyoginAM svAnyarASTracintAvyagre ca cetasi  /  preyasInAM nAvakAzaH
pUrNakumbhe'mbhasAmiva  /  / 73  /  /  tyaktvA sarvamapi svArthaM rAjArthaM
kurvatAmapi  /  upadravanti pizunA udvaddhAnAmiva dvikAH  /  / 74  /  /  yathA
svadehadraviNavyayenApi prayatyate  /  rAjArthe tadvadAtmArthe yatyate kiM na
dhImatA  /  / 75  /  /  vicintyaivaM vyadhAtkezotpATanaM paJcamuSTibhiH  /
ratnakambaladazAbhI rajoharaNamapyatha  /  / 76 /  /  tatazca sa mahAbhAgo gatvA
sadasi pArthivam  /  AlocitamidaM dharmalAbhaH stAdityavocata  /  / 77  /  /
tataH sa rAjasadanAd guhAyA iva kesarI  /  niHsasAra mahAsAra;
saMsArakariroSaNaH  /  / 78 /  /  kimeSa kapaTaM kRtvA yAyI vezyAgRhaM punaH  /
ityapratyayataH kSamApo gavAkSeNa niraikSata  /  / 79 /  /  pradeze
zavadurgandhe'pyavikUNitanAsikam  /  yAntaM dRSTvA sthUlabhadraM
narendro'dhUnayacchiraH  /  / 80  /  /  bhagavAnvItarAgo'sAvasmindhigme
kucintitam  /  ityAtmAnaM ninindoccairnandastamabhinandayan  /  / 81 /  /
sthUlabhadro'pi gatvA zrIsambhUtivijayAntike dIkSAM sAmAyikoccArapUrvikAM
pratyapadyata  /  / 82 /  /  gRhItvA zrIyakaM doSNi tato nandaH sagauravam  /
mudrAdhikAre niHzeSavyApAre sahite nyadhAt  /  / 83 /  /  cakAra zrIyako
rAjyacintAmavahitaH sadA  /  sAkSAdiva zakaTAla: prakRSTanayapATavAt  /  / 84 /
/  sa nityamapi kozAyA vinItaH sadane yayau  /  snehAd bhrAtustatpriyApi
kulInairbahumanyate  /  / 85  /  /  sthUlabhadraviyogArtA zrIyakaM prekSya
sArudat  /  iSTe dRSTe hi duHkhArtA na duHkhaM dhartumIzate  /  / 86 /  /
tatastAM zrIyako'vocadAyeM ! kiM kurmahe vayam  /  asau vararuciH
pApo'ghAtayajjanakaM hi naH  /  / 87  /  /
akANDotthitavajrAgnipradIpanasahodaram  /  sthUlabhadraviyogaM ca bhavatyA
akarodayam  /  / 88  /  /  tvajjAmyAmupakozAyAM yAvadrakto'styasau khalaH  /
tAvatpratikriyAM kAJcidvicintaya manasvini !  /  / 89 /  /  tadAdizopakozAM
yatpratArya kathamapyasau  /  vidhIyatAM vararucirmadyapAnarucistvayA  /  / 90
/  /  _ 2010_02

Page #292 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Chapter:-2 Collection of Examples 251 From the separation of the beloved, from
enmity, from generosity, and from the king. She immediately agreed to his
request. ||91|| And by the order of the treasurer, the treasurer gave him that.
As the drunkard is made by the power of women, is it not so? ||12|| Drinking
wine is the taste of the king, the Bhatta has made it freely today; the
treasurer praised the treasurer for the sake of the treasurer. ||93|| Then the
treasurer heard everything from the mouth of the treasurer. And he thought that
the enmity of his father was a punishment. ||94|| From the time of the great
minister Sakatal, he also became. Bhatta Vararuchi was devoted to the service of
the king. ||95|| He used to come to the royal palace every day during the time
of service. And he was seen with great respect by the king and the royal people.
||96|| On another occasion, Nandaraadmantri was overwhelmed with the memory of
his virtues. In the assembly, he spoke to the treasurer Sriyaka in a stammering
voice. ||97|| Sakatal, the great mind, was always devoted and attached. He was
my great minister, like Brihaspati to Indra. ||98|| Thus, I am unfortunate, what
am I doing today by fate? I think my place is empty without him. ||99|| Sriyaka
also said, "What are we doing here, my lord? This Vararuchi, the drunkard, has
committed all this sin. ||100|| It is true that Bhatta drinks wine, as the king
has said. I will show him tomorrow," said Sriyaka. ||101|| On the second day,
Sriyaka, in the presence of all the people, gave a lotus flower to each of them,
which had been taught by his own son. ||102|| At that time, he gave a lotus
flower to the wicked Vararuchi, which was filled with the juice of the fruit of
Madan. ||103|| "How wonderful and delightful this is," said the king and others,
and they put their own lotus flowers to their noses. ||104|| Bhatta also brought
his own lotus flower to his nose to smell. He immediately vomited the wine he
had drunk the night before. ||105|| "Shame on this wicked man, the brother of
Brahma, who is worthy of death," said everyone, and he left the assembly.
||106|| Brahmanas were requested by him to perform atonement. They said that
drinking wine is a sin that can be atoned for by fire. ||107|| Vararuchi then
drank the fire-heated water with a mouse. He immediately gave up his life, as if
from the fear of the fire. ||108|| 47. The story of the treasurer and the
charioteer, as mentioned in the Sriparishishtaparva, is about self-praise. The
treasurer, who was given by the king, was once pleased with the charioteer. She
praised him, saying, "He is the king's property," without any attachment. ||1||
"There is no one else like Sthulabhadra, even the king," she said to the
charioteer every day. ||2|| The charioteer went to the garden of his house and
sat on a couch. He showed his own knowledge to entertain her. ||3|| He shot a
Makandalumbi with an arrow, and then another with another arrow, and so on,
until he became a master of arrows. ||4|| He cut the stem of the Makandalumbi
with

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 khaNDa:-2 dRSTAntasamuccayaH 251 preyoviyojanAdvairAddAkSiNyAddevarasya ca  /
tatpratijJAya sA sadyo'pyupakozAM samAdizat  /  / 91 /  /  kozAyAzca
nidezenopakozA taM tathAbhyadhAt  /  yathA papau surAmeSa strIvazaiH kriyate na
kim ?  /  / 12 /  /  surApAnaM vararuciH svairaM bhaTTo'dya kArita; upakozeti
kozAyai zazaMsAtha nizAtyaye  /  / 93 /  /  atha kozAmukhAtsarvaM zuzrAva
zrIyako'pi tat  /  mene ca pitRvairasya vihitaM pratiyAtanam  /  / 94  /  /
zakATAlamahAmAtyAtyayAtprabhRti so'pyabhUt  /  bhaTTo
vararucirbhUpasevAvasaratatparaH  /  / 95  /  /  sa pratyahaM rAjakule sevAkAle
samApatan  /  rAjJA ca rAjalokaizca sagauravamadRzyata  /  / 96 /  /  anyadA
nandarADmantriguNasmaraNavihvalaH  /  sadasi zrIyakAmAtyaM jagAdevaM sagadgadam
/  / 97  /  /  bhaktimAzaktimAnnityaM zakaTAlo mahAmatiH  /  abhavanme
mahAmAtyaH zakrasyeva bRhaspatiH  /  / 98  /  /  evameva vipanno'sau daivAdadya
karomi kim ?  /  manye zUnyamivAsthAnamahaM tena vinAtmanaH  /  / 99 /  /  uvAca
zrIyako'pyevaM kiM deveha vidadhmahe  /  idaM vararuciH sarvaM pApaM vyadhita
madyapaH  /  / 100 /  /  satyameSa surAM bhaTTaH pibatIti nRpodite  /  zvo'muM
darzayitAsmIti zrIyakaH pratyabhASata  /  / 101  /  /  zrIyakazca dvitIye'hni
sarveSAmIyuSAM sadaH  /  svapuMsA zikSitenAgyaM padmamekaikamArpayat  /  / 102 /
/  tatkAlaM madanaphalarasabhAvanayAJcitam  /  durAtmano vararucerarpayAmAsa
paGkajam  /  / 103 /  /  kutastyamadbhutAmodamidamityabhivarNinaH  /  ghAtuM
rAjAdayo ninyurnAsAgre svaM svamambujam  /  / 104  /  /  so'pi bhaTTo'nayad
ghrAtuM ghrANAgre paGkajaM nijam  /  candrahAsasurAM sadyo rAtripItAM tato'vamat
/  / 105  /  /  dhigamuM zIdhupaM brahmabandhu bandhavadhocitam  /
sarvairityAkruzyamAno niryayau sadaso'tha saH  /  / 106  /  /  brAhmaNA
yAcitAstena prAyazcittamacIkathan  /  tApitatrapuNaH pAnaM surApAnAghaghAtakam
/  / 107  /  /  mUSayA tApitamatha papau vararucistrapu  /  prANaizca mumuce
sadyastatpradAhabhayAdiva  /  / 108  /  /  47. AtmaprazaMsAdhyAne
zrIpariziSTaparvoktaM kozArathikayoH kathAnakam  /  rAjJA pradattA kozApi
tuSTena rathine'nyadA  /  rAjAyatteti zizrAya vinA rAgeNa sA tu tam  /  / 1 /  /
sthUlabhadraM vinA nAnyaH pumAnko'pItyahanizam  /  sA tasya rathino'bhyaNe
varNayAmAsa varNinI  /  / 2 /  /  rathI gatvA gRhodyAne paryaGke ca niSadya saH
/  tanmanoraJjanAyeti svavijJAnamadarzayat  /  / 3 /  /  mAkandalumbI bANena
vivyAdha tamapISuNA  /  puDhe'nyena tamapyanyenetyAhastaM zarAlyabhUt  /  / 4 /
/  vRntaM chitvA kSurapreNa bANazreNimukhasthitAm  /  lumbI
svapANinAkRSyAsInastasyai samArpayat  /  / 5 /  /  _ 2010_02

Page #293 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter 252: The Scattering of the Rejection of the Eager  Now, she said,
"Let me see your knowledge." And she performed a feat with mustard seeds. She
scattered a heap of them and danced on top of it. (6) Then she threw a needle
into the heap, covering it with flower petals. She danced, but the needle did
not pierce the heap, nor was it injured. (7) Then he said, pleased, "You have
done a difficult thing. Ask for anything within my power, and I will surely give
it to you." (8) She said, "What difficult thing have I done that has pleased
you? Is this not easier than what the great ascetic, Sthulabhadra, did?" (9) "Is
cutting the Amralumbi tree and dancing like this difficult? What the uneducated
Sthulabhadra did is difficult." (10) "He did not eat for twelve years, nor did
he enjoy any pleasures. He stayed in the picture gallery, his vows unbroken."
(11) "Milk, from the movement of the mongoose, and women, from their movement,
corrupt the minds of yogis, except for the great ascetic Sthulabhadra." (12)
"Who can stay even a day in the presence of women? Sthulabhadra, with his vow of
unbroken rice, stayed for four months." (13) "Food with six flavors, living in
the picture gallery, and being near women, even one of these would break the vow
of even a man made of iron." (14) "Metal objects melt in the presence of fire,
like a woman melts in the presence of a man. But I believe Sthulabhadra, the
great ascetic, is made of diamond." (15) "Sthulabhadra, the great being, who has
done difficult things, is difficult to describe. Even with the right words, it
is difficult to describe him in words." (16) The charioteer asked, "Who is this
Sthulabhadra, the great being, whom you are describing?" (17) She said, "He is
the son of Nandabhupala, the minister of the king of Sakatal, whom I am
describing to you." (18) Hearing this, the charioteer was overwhelmed and said,
bowing his head, "I am his servant, the great ascetic Sthulabhadra." (19)
Knowing that he was truly devoted, she gave him religious instruction. He awoke
from his delusion and sleep. (20) Seeing that he was awakened, she revealed her
own connection to him. Hearing this, his eyes filled with wonder, and he said,
(21) "I have been enlightened by you, O blessed one, by your words about
Sthulabhadra. You have shown me the path I must follow. (22) May you be well, O
blessed one! Maintain your connection to me." Saying this, he went to the side
of the great teacher and received initiation. (23) The great Sthulabhadra also
kept his vow strictly. At that time, there was a famine that lasted twelve
years. (24)  [Appendix Chapter 170 to 193 verses] 48. In the _Sri Upadeshamala_
flower garland, the _Kūragaduvṛtta_ on the contemplation of the slander of
others.  I go to the lake, where are the lotus flowers, the white ones? He is
patient, he is virtuous, he endures month after month. (1) In food, in fasting,
the beggar's food, with the small one. Going, he speaks, he is angry, he kills
the frog. (2) Then the frog said, "O great sage!

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 252 AturapratyAkhyAnaprakIrNakam idAnIM mama vijJAnaM pazyetyAlapya sApi hi  /
vyadhatta sArSapaM rAziM tasyopari nanarta ca  /  / 6 /  /  sUcI kSiptA tatra
rAzau puSpapatraiH pidhAya tAm  /  sA nanarta ca no sUcyA viddhA rAzizca na
kSataH  /  / 7 /  /  tataH sa Uce tuSTo'smi duSkaraNAmunA tava  /  yAcasva
yanmamAyattaM dadAmi tadahaM dhruvam  /  / 8 /  /  sovAca kiM mayAkAri duSkaraM
yena raJjitaH  /  idamapyadhikaM nAsmAtkimabhyAsena duSkaram  /  / 9 /  /  kiM
cAmralumbIchedo'yaM nRttaM cedaM na duSkaram  /  azikSitaM sthUlabhadro yaccakre
tattu duSkaram  /  / 10 /  /  abhukta dvAdazAbdAni bhogAnyatra samaM mayA  /
tatraiva citrazAlAyAmasthAtso'khaNDitavrataH  /  / 11 /  /  dugdhaM
nakulasaJcArAdiva strINAM pracArataH  /  yoginAM duSyate cetaH sthUlabhadramuniM
vinA  /  / 12 /  /  dinamekamapi sthAtuM ko'laM strIsannidhau tathA  /
caturmAsI yathAtiSThatsthUlabhadro'kSatavrataH  /  / 13 /  /  AhAraH
SaDrasazcitrazAlAvAso'GganAntike  /  apyekaM vratalopAyAnyasya lauhatanorapi  /
/ 14 /  /  vilIyante dhAtumayAH pArzve vaDheriva striyAH  /  sa tu vajramayo
manye sthUlabhadramahAmuniH  /  / 15 /  /  sthUlabhadraM mahAsattvaM
kRtaduSkaraduSkaram  /  vyAvarNya yuktA mudraiva mukhe varNayituM param  /  / 16
/  /  rathiko'pyatha papraccha ya eva varNyate tvayA  /  ko nAma
sthUlabhadro'yaM mahAsattvaziromaNiH  /  / 17 /  /  sApyUce zakaTAlasya
nandabhUpAlamantriNaH  /  tanayaH sthUlabhadro'yaM tavAgre varNayAmi yam  /  /
18 /  /  tacchrutvA so'pi sambhrAnta ityuvAca kRtAJcaliH  /  eSo'smi
kiGkarastasya sthUlabhadramahAmuneH  /  / 19 /  /  saMvignaM sAtha taM jJAtvA
vidadhe dharmadezanAm  /  pratyabudhyata sadbuddhirmohanidrAmapAsya saH  /  / 20
/  /  pratibuddhaM ca taM buddhvA sAkhyannijamabhigraham  /  tacchrutvA
vismayotphullalocanaH so'bravIdidam  /  / 21 /  /  bodhito'haM tvayA bhadre !
sthUlabhadraguNoktibhiH  /  yAsyAmi tasya panthAnaM bhavatyaivAdya darzitam  /
/ 22 /  /  kalyANamastu te bhadre ! pAlaya svamabhigraham  /  uktvaivaM sadguroH
pArzve gatvA dIkSAM sa Adade  /  / 23 /  /  bhagavAnsthUlabhadro'pi tIkSNaM
vratamapAlayat  /  dvAdazAbdapramANazca duSkAla: samabhUttadA  /  / 24 /  /
[pariziSTa parva 170 taH 193 zlokAH] 48. paranindAdhyAne
zrIupadezamAlApuSpamAlAyAM kUragaDuvRttam  /  gacchammi saravarammi va katthai
paumavva pattasirinilao  /  Asi khamao guNaDDho mAsaM mAseNa so khamai  /  / 1 /
/  annAmmi va pAraNae bhikkhAyariyAi khuDDageNa samaM  /  vaccaMto kahavi
pamAyao ya maMDukkiyaM haNai  /  / 2 /  /  to khuDueNa kahiyaM maharisi !
tubbhehiM caMpiyA esA  /  maMDukkiyAo tattha ya vAsArattotti bahuyAo  /  / 3 /
/  gaccha _ 2010_02

Page #294 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Chapter:-2 Collection of Examples 253 The sins are still there (I have) many. I
am forgiving, do not be angry, O wicked one! This is not so. ||4|| What, fool!
Did I kill this one? Did I kill anyone? Then, knowing the feeling, the mind is
broken and tired. ||5|| I am forgiving, I am forgiving, I am forgiving, I am
forgiving, I am forgiving, I am forgiving, I am forgiving, I am forgiving, I am
forgiving, I am forgiving, I am forgiving, I am forgiving, I am forgiving, I am
forgiving, I am forgiving, I am forgiving, I am forgiving, I am forgiving, I am
forgiving, I am forgiving, I am forgiving, I am forgiving, I am forgiving, I am
forgiving, I am forgiving, I am forgiving, I am forgiving, I am forgiving, I am
forgiving, I am forgiving, I am forgiving, I am forgiving, I am forgiving, I am
forgiving, I am forgiving, I am forgiving, I am forgiving, I am forgiving, I am
forgiving, I am forgiving, I am forgiving, I am forgiving, I am forgiving, I am
forgiving, I am forgiving, I am forgiving, I am forgiving, I am forgiving, I am
forgiving, I am forgiving, I am forgiving, I am forgiving, I am forgiving, I am
forgiving, I am forgiving, I am forgiving, I am forgiving, I am forgiving, I am
forgiving, I am forgiving, I am forgiving, I am forgiving, I am forgiving, I am
forgiving, I am forgiving, I am forgiving, I am forgiving, I am forgiving, I am
forgiving, I am forgiving, I am forgiving, I am forgiving, I am forgiving, I am
forgiving, I am forgiving, I am forgiving, I am forgiving, I am forgiving, I am
forgiving, I am forgiving, I am forgiving, I am forgiving, I am forgiving, I am
forgiving, I am forgiving, I am forgiving, I am forgiving, I am forgiving, I am
forgiving, I am forgiving, I am forgiving, I am forgiving, I am forgiving, I am
forgiving, I am forgiving, I am forgiving, I am forgiving, I am forgiving, I am
forgiving, I am forgiving, I am forgiving, I am forgiving, I am forgiving, I am
forgiving, I am forgiving, I am forgiving, I am forgiving, I am forgiving, I am
forgiving, I am forgiving, I am forgiving, I am forgiving, I am forgiving, I am
forgiving, I am forgiving, I am forgiving, I am forgiving, I am forgiving, I am
forgiving, I am forgiving, I am forgiving, I am forgiving, I am forgiving, I am
forgiving, I am forgiving, I am forgiving, I am forgiving, I am forgiving, I am
forgiving, I am forgiving, I am forgiving, I am forgiving, I am forgiving, I am
forgiving, I am forgiving, I am forgiving, I am forgiving, I am forgiving, I am
forgiving, I am forgiving, I am forgiving, I am forgiving, I am forgiving, I am
forgiving, I am forgiving, I am forgiving, I am forgiving, I am forgiving, I am
forgiving, I am forgiving, I am forgiving, I am forgiving, I am forgiving, I am
forgiving, I am forgiving, I am forgiving, I am forgiving, I am forgiving, I am
forgiving, I am forgiving, I am forgiving, I am forgiving, I am forgiving, I am
forgiving, I am forgiving, I am forgiving, I am forgiving, I am forgiving, I am
forgiving, I am forgiving, I am forgiving, I am forgiving, I am forgiving, I am
forgiving, I am forgiving, I am forgiving, I am forgiving, I am forgiving, I am
forgiving, I am forgiving, I am forgiving, I

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 khaNDa:-2 dRSTAntasamuccayaH 253 saMsattAo tAo ciTThati taha (hA mayA) aNegAo
/  aha khamao parikuvio pabhaNai re duTTha ! esA'vi  /  / 4 /  /  kiM mUDha !
mae nihayA esA annAvi kiM mae haNiyA ?  /  to bhAvaM nAUNaM tusiNIo khaDDao
thakko  /  / 5 /  /  aha AvassayakAle satthAvatyaMti khuDao khamayaM  /
pabhaNai taM maMDukkiM Aloyaya maharisi ! iyANiM  /  / 6 /  /  to ahiyayaraM
pajjaliyakovajalaNo bhaNei so khamao  /  re re duThTha ! na muMcasi ajjavi
tamalIyanibbaMdhaM  /  / 7 /  /  iya bhaNamANo bahukovaparavaso khelamallayaM
dhettuM  /  dhAvai khuDDagasamuho AvaDio aMtarA khaMbhe  /  / 8 /  /  mammapaese
nihao kiso ya pANehiM to pariccatto  /  to uppanno katthaI ranne
diThThIvisajuyANaM  /  / 9 /  /  puvvabhavammi virAhiyasAmannaNaM kule
bhuyaMgANaM  /  jAIsaraNaM ca imANa atthi cintaMti to evaM  /  / 10 /  /
diTThIviseNaM mA hou ghAyaNaM pANiNaM tao rattiM  /  hiMDaMti ime savve bhujaMti
ya phAsuyAhAraM  /  / 11 /  /  etto ya vasaMtaure putto aridamaNanaravariMdassa
/  khaddho bhuyaMgameNaM mao ya to naravaro kuvio  /  / 12 /  /  mArai mArAvei
ya bhuyage savve'vi abhiNiviThThamaNo  /  jo ya bhuyaMgaM haNiuM tassAvayavaM
padaMsei  /  / 13 /  /  dINAraM dei nivo tassa tao annayA paribhamaMto  /  ekko
gAruDio tANa niyai rehAo bhuyagANaM  /  / 14  /  /  tA ciMtai so nUNaM nisAe
hiMDaMti ke'vi iha bhuyagA  /  laggo ya tayaNusAreNa pAsiuM biladuvAresu  /  /
15 /  /  pakkhivai osahIo tANa pabhAveNa tesi bhuya gANaM  /  niggacchaMtANa
sire chiMdai so uNa khamagabhuyago  /  / 16 /  /  mA koI mae daTTho marijja iya
garuyadhammabuddhIe  /  puccheNaM niggacchai ahomuho to sa gAruDio  /  / 17 /  /
niggayaniggayamettaM chiMdai dehaM tao ya daDhadukkhe  /  uppajjaMte ciMtai so
bhuyago paramasaMviggo  /  / 18 /  /  re jIva ! purA vihiyaM jaM tumae dukkaraM
tavokammaM  /  pasamAlaMkaraNeNaM jai taM samalaMkiyaM hujjA  /  / 19 /  /  to
pAvijja tumaMpi hu sivasokkhaM jaM puNo imaM dukkhaM  /  taM kevalakovaphalaM
iya muNiuM to iyANipi  /  / 20 /  /  ajjavi kareha taM ceva uvasamaM
sayaladhammasAraMti  /  iharA bhamihisi naragAitikkhadukkhaM bhavaM bhImaM  /  /
21 /  /  kittiyamittaM ca imaM cheyaNadukkhaM aNAisaMsAre  /
pAviyaaNaMtadukkhassa tujjha avasassa ihayaM tu ?  /  / 22 /  /
khaNamittasahiyadukkho purao pAvihisi tumamaNaMtasuhaM  /  jaha patta
puvvamuNIhi pasamavasao aNaMtehiM  /  / 23 /  /  2010_02

Page #295 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 254 **A Discourse on the Rejection of the Eager**  This thought occurred to
him: "Just as a snake is killed by a Garuda, so too are all men bitten by the
serpent of desire, and they are destined to be reborn in the lower realms."
||24||  In the meantime, a man named Nagadeva, a wise man, approached the sage.
"O great man!" he said, "My son has become a serpent-charmer." ||25||  "He has
died and been reborn as a serpent-charmer due to his past deeds," said the sage.
"His name is Nagadatta, and he is endowed with good qualities." ||26||  "He is
now living a life of austerity, and he has renounced his past life. He is
handsome and has a beautiful voice." ||27||  "He does not indulge in worldly
desires, but instead, he considers Dharma to be his only wealth. He is generous
and kind, and he has renounced all other possessions." ||28||  "He has renounced
his family and friends, and he has become a wandering ascetic. He has attained
great wealth and prosperity through his austerities." ||29||  "He lives a pure
and simple life, and he eats only the food that is offered to him. He eats only
twice or thrice a day, and he eats only pure food." ||30||  "He lives in a
forest, and he is a great ascetic. He lives for four months, then for two
months, then for one month, and then he lives only on the food that he finds."
||31||  "He sees the suffering of the world, and he pities those who are bound
by their karma. He sees the suffering of those who are caught in the cycle of
birth and death." ||32||  "I, on the other hand, am weak and frail. I have been
afflicted by many hardships. I eat only the food that is offered to me, and I
live a life of poverty." ||33||  "If you are truly pure, then you should not
live in this world, where you are constantly surrounded by the dirt and filth of
karma. You should renounce your family and friends, and you should become a
wandering ascetic." ||34||  "Where did you go, and how did you become so wise?"
asked the man, his mind filled with wonder. "I am filled with awe at your
wisdom. I am filled with wonder at your knowledge." ||35||  "The Garuda, the
king of birds, has a strict rule: he will only eat those who have been given to
him by the gods. He will never eat those who have not been given to him by the
gods." ||36||  "The Garuda is a friend to all gods, and he is always obedient to
them. He is a great ascetic, and he is always devoted to his dharma." ||37||
"The Garuda lives in the forest, and he is always surrounded by the gods. He is
a great ascetic, and he is always devoted to his dharma." ||38||  "You have
worshipped the gods of the three times, and you have renounced the world. You
have become a great ascetic, and you have renounced the world. You have become a
great ascetic, and you have renounced the world." ||39||  "I worship the Garuda
of the mind, not the Garuda of the body. I know that you are the same as me. You
are the same as me. You are the same as me." ||40||  "The Garuda of the body is
a beggar, and he is always in need. He is always in need, and he is always in
need." ||41||  "The mosquito says, 'I eat for the three times.'

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 254 AturapratyAkhyAnaprakIrNakama iya bhAviMto so'vi hu gAruDieNaM bhuyaMgamo
nihao  /  savve'vi daMsiyA nara vaissa laddhaM uciyadavvaM  /  / 24 /  /
etyaMtare naravaI vAreI nAgadevayA kAvi  /  hohI naravara ! putto viramasu
sappavahapAvAo  /  / 25 /  /  mariuM ca khamagabhuyago puttattAe nivassa uppanno
/  ThaviyaM ca nAgadattotti tassa nAmaM guNanihissa  /  / 26 /  /  vaddhai ya
tattha eso dehovacaeNa uvasameNaM tu  /  puvvabhavabbhAsAo ya
rUvasohaggakalio'vi  /  / 27  /  /  kAmatthesu na rajjai bahu mannai dhammameva
purisatthaM  /  sAhUNaM ca sayAse gayassa aha annayA tassa  /  / 28 /  /  jAyaM
jAIsaraNaM piyarAI moiUNa to eso  /  saMviggo pavvaio vihiNA garuyAe riddhIe  /
/ 29 /  /  pAlai ya nikkalaMkaM sAmannaM kevalaM ca bhukkhAlU  /  to bhuMjai do
tinni'vi vora niravajjamAhAraM  /  / 30 /  /  tammi ya gacche khavagA vijjati
mahAtavassiNo cauro  /  caumAsiyatemAsiyadomAsiyamAsabhoI ya  /  / 31 /  /
daTUNa te viciMtai khuDDuo sahalajIviyamimesiM  /  je kammaselakulisaM karaMti
evaM tavokammaM  /  / 32 /  /  ahayaM tu maMdabhaggo jo paidiyahaMpiDaNegavArAo
/  paDhaNasavaNapalimaMthaM bhuMjAmi asAramAhAraM  /  / 33 /  pattAevi hu erisa
sAmaggIe sakammamalapaDalaM  /  tavahuyavaheNa dahiuM kaNayaM va na jIva ! jai
suddho  /  / 34  /  /  tA kattha gao sujjhihisi haMta ? iya bhAvaNAe~ suddhamaNo
/  hoi imeNavi maha tAva nijjarA iya viciMteuM  /  / 35  /  /  veyAvacce
khavagANa giNhae niyamamesa gurumUle  /  kuvvaMtassa ya niccaM tamannadiyahammi
AgaMtuM  /  / 36 /  /  khavage aikkamittA savvevi hu devayAe paNivaio  /  so
ceva khuDuo to niyattae jAva sA tatto  /  / 37  /  /  caumAsiyakhavageNaM
dhariuM vatthaMcalammi koveNa  /  bhaNiyA pAve ! kaDapUyaNe tumaM kimiha pattAsi
?  /  / 38  /  /  vaMdasi tikAlabhoiM evaM jaM laMghiuM mahAkhavage  /  to
pabhaNai devatA taM tavassi ! kiM kuppasi akajjaM ?  /  / 39 /  /  vaMdAmi
bhAvakhavagaM na davvakhavagaMti sA ya bhAvakhamA  /  jANaha tubbhe sayameva
appaNo jArisI asthi  /  / 40  /  /  davvakhavagA u loe dAriddachuhAipIDiyA
sulahA  /  pattAiM davvakhavagattaNAI puTviM ca'NaMtAI  /  / 41 /  /  jaMpi
tikAlaM bhuMjai esotti bhaNesi maccharo so'vi  /  uvavAso Jciya niccaM
erisayANaM jao bhaNiyaM  /  / 42 /  /  niravajjAhArANaM sAhUNaM niccameva
uvavAso  /  uttaraguNavaDDikae tahavi hu uvavAsamicchaMti  /  / 43 /  /  2010_02

Page #296 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Chapter:-2 Collection of Examples 255 The penance that the Jinas have spoken of,
that is not found in you. Then why are you inferior to me, while you are equal
to me? ||44|| Just like this, the small ones praise themselves with the gods.
The great ones, with their virtues, have gone to the light, and the sinful ones
are in darkness. ||45|| Having taken food, the small one invites the great ones.
He accepts the four-month vow, and he is also a hypocrite. ||46|| He spits at
the rest, and he invites them to stay there. The small one is full of pride, and
he speaks with a bad heart. ||47|| He does not play with the great ones, and he
says to himself, "I am not worthy." ||48|| He is condemned, and he goes to eat
food. He thinks to himself, "I am approved by the four great ones." ||49|| I am
greedy for food, and I am a beast all the time. These great ones are like lions,
and they are hungry. ||50|| I am a beggar, and I am equal to you. I have a bad
heart, and I am not worthy. ||51|| He went to the place of the great ones, and
he thought to himself, "Just like the earth, which is full of life, the perfect
knowledge has arisen." ||52|| The wind of the gods, which is full of fragrance,
blows the flowers. The fragrance is placed in the lotus flower by the gods.
||53|| Just like this, the gods praise the great ones with their great glory.
The omniscient one speaks the Dharma, and he says to the gods, "You are great
ones." ||54|| "O great ones, you will all be liberated in the three times. You
are condemned, and you are equal to the small ones, and you are advising them."
||55|| Just like this, they attain the supreme knowledge, which is pure. The
five perfect ones, with their knowledge, are liberated. ||56|| Just like this,
you have suffered, and you have been forgiven. You have been praised by the
gods, so forgive them, and destroy your anger. ||57|| 49. In the Srimad Bhava
Vijay, which is written by Sri Uttara Adhyayana, the story of Gosthamahila is
told. "And then, the story of the seventh one, who was born in the year 700, is
told. ||1||" "Thus," the gods praised the Aryaraksita, who were mentioned
before. They went to the city of Dashpur, along with their disciples. ||2|| They
had three disciples, who were very wise. The first one was called Durbalika
Pushpamitra. ||3|| The second one was the brother of the Suri, and his name was
Falguraksita. The third one was Gosthamahila, who was the uncle of the Suri.
||4|| At that time, a non-believer came to the city of Mathura. He deceived many
people by saying that there is no soul. ||5|| There was a group of saints, but
there was no one who could argue with him. The non-believer was a deceiver, and
he had to be stopped. ||6|| The group of saints in Mathura wanted to defeat the
non-believer. They sent the monks to the presence of Sri Aryaraksita. ||7|| _
2010_02

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 khaNDa:-2 dRSTAntasamuccayaH 255 sattIe tavo ya jiNehiM bhAsio taM ca govae na
imo  /  to kiha taveNa hINo eso'ha samahiyA tubbhe ?  /  / 44  /  /  iya
evamAijuttIhiM khuDDayaM devayA pasaMseuM  /  hiTThA ya tagguNehiM gayA pabhAe
ya dosINaM  /  / 45 /  /  dhettUNaM AhAraM samAgao khuDao nimaMtei  /
cAummAsiyakhavagaM kuvio ya paDiggahe tassa  /  / 46 /  /  so thukkai sesehivi
nimaMtiehiM kahaMci tattheva  /  saMviggo uNa khuDDo micchukkaDapuvvayaM bhaNai
/  / 47  /  /  dhiddhI majjha pamAo khavagANaM khellamallao na kao  /
asamAhikAraNamahaM jAo emAi appANaM  /  / 48 /  /  niMdato jAva tayaM AhAraM
bhujiuM payaTTo so  /  tA cauhi khavagehiM paDisiddho ciMtae evaM  /  / 49 /  /
AhAramettakajje talliccho'haM pasuvva sayakAlaM  /  ee u mahAkhavagA tahA va
siNhA (tavassiNo hA') hipouvva  /  / 50  /  /  uvveyakArao'haM jAo eesi
sammamiha tamhA  /  micchAmidukkaDaM me kAhaM na puNo ya asamAhiM  /  / 51 /  /
iya uvasameNa so bhAvaNAe taha pagarisaM gao kahavi  /  jaha
payaDiyabhuvaNayalaM uppannaM kevalaM nANaM  /  / 52 /  /  surahipavaNo payaTTho
vuTuM gaMdhodayaM kusumavuTThI  /  mukkA ya suravarehiM nivesio kaNayakamalammi
/  / 53 /  /  iya sasuriMdasurehiM vihiyAe vitthareNa mahimAe  /  dhammaM kahei
nANI bhaNai ya to devayA khavage  /  / 54  /  /  picchaha bho mAhappaM
tikAlabhoissa te ya to savve  /  niMdatA niyakovaM tassovasamaM ca salahaMtA  /
/ 55  /  /  taha kahavi gayA paramaM saMveyaM pAuNaMti jaha vimalaM  /
kevalanANaM paMcavi siddhA ya kameNa vihuyarayA  /  / 56 /  /  iya koveNaM
dukkhaM imo'vi patto puNo khamAe u  /  namio surehiM tamhA kuNasu khamaM haNasu
kovaM ca  /  / 57  /  /  49. paragarhAdhyAne
zrImadbhAvavijayakRtazrIuttarAdhyayanavRttau goSThAmAhilakathA  /  "atho
caturazItyADhyairvarSANAM paJcabhiH zataiH  /  zrIvIramukterjAtasya
saptamasyocyate kathA  /  / 1 /  / " "tathAhi"-devendravanditAH pUrvoditAH
zrIAryarakSitAH  /  puraM dazapuraM jagmuranyadA gacchasaMyutAH  /  / 2 /  /
teSAM ziSyAstrayo'bhUvan, vizeSeNa vicakSaNAH  /  teSu
durbalikApuSpamitranAmAdimo mataH  /  / 3 /  /  dvaitIyikastu sUrINAM, sodaraH
phalgurakSitaH  /  tRtIyastvabhavadgoSThAmAhilaH sUrimAtulaH  /  / 4 /  /  tadA
ca mathurApuryAmAyayau ko'pi nAstikaH  /  nAstyAtmetyAdibhirvAkyairlokAn
vyudgrAhayan bahUn  /  / 5 /  /  tatra cA'bhUtsAdhusaGgho, na punaH ko'pi
vAdakRt  /  nAstikastu sa nigrAhyaH kathaJcillokavaJcakaH  /  / 6 /  /  iti
vAdinamAnetuM, saGghaH sa mathurAsthitaH  /  zramaNAn prAhiNot
zrImadAryarakSitasannidhau  /  / 7 /  /  _ 2010_02

Page #297 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Scattering of Eager Refutation  They, having thus spoken, went to the
glorious Aryarakshita Lokas. In Mathurapuri, the atheist loudly proclaimed, "I
will conquer them all!" ||8||  To defeat him, the venerable ones should purify
the city themselves. Or, they should send someone who is learned and skilled in
debate. ||9||  Then, those suns, unable to go due to their age, sent the learned
Goṣṭhamāhila to the assembly. ||10||  He arrived there, invited by the virtuous
ones. He refuted the arguments in the debate, and the sharp-minded Cārvāka was
defeated. ||11||  The conqueror of Kāśī, the disciple of the Sūri, was also a
vow-bound ascetic. He stayed there for four months due to the pressure of the
assembly. ||12||  The glorious Aryarakshita Sūris, knowing that their lifespan
was nearing its end, thought thus. ||13||  The position of Ganadharita should be
given only to a worthy recipient. Giving it to an unworthy person would be a
great fault of the giver. ||14||  As they say, "The sound of the Ganadharita is
like a drum. The wise person should give it to the worthy. He who gives it to
the unworthy, knowing this, is a great sinner!" ||15||  Therefore, the position
of Ācārya should be given only to a worthy and discerning person. An unworthy
person is not worthy of it, just like a crow is not worthy of milk. ||16||
Among my disciples, there is a great person named Durbalikāpuspamitra, who is an
ocean of virtues. ||17||  He is considered to be the best among all my disciples
and brothers. Śrīphalgurakṣita, Goṣṭhamāhila, or both, are also considered to be
worthy. ||18||  They desire the position of Ganadharita because of their
kinship. They do not fully understand the subtle differences between the three.
||19||  Therefore, I will declare this difference to all the sages. I will
establish my disciple, Durbalikāpuspamitra, in my position. ||20||  After
considering all the virtuous ones, the Muniśvara called them together and gave
the example of a gourd, oil pot, and ghee pot. ||21||  Just as from a gourd that
has been turned upside down by the low, all the seeds inside quickly come out,
||22||  So, from the great mind of Durbalikāpuspamitra, who is like a gourd, the
knowledge of the scriptures will flow out. ||23||  Just as oil quickly flows out
of an oil pot that has been turned upside down, but some remains clinging to the
pot, ||24||  So, in the case of Śrīphalgurakṣita, who is like an oil pot, the
knowledge of the scriptures will flow out, but some will remain. ||25||  Just as
a small amount of ghee flows out of a ghee pot that has been turned upside down,
but most of it remains in the pot, ||26||  So, in the case of Goṣṭhamāhila, who
is like a ghee pot, the knowledge of the scriptures will flow out, but most of
it will remain. ||27||  Therefore, this ocean of virtues, who has crossed the
ocean of scriptures, let Durbalikāpuspamitra be the Ganadhipati. ||28||  For
now, my command should be respected by you. From now on, the words of this
Ganadhipati should be respected. ||29||  Even if I do not

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 AturapratyAkhyAnaprakIrNakam iti vyajJapayaMste'pi, gatvA zrI AryarakSitAn  /
lokAn vyudgrAhayatyuccairmathurApuri nAstikaH ||8|| tattaM jetuM svayaM pUjyA,
nagarIM pAvayantu tAm  /  preSayantvathavA kaJcidvineyaM vAdijitvaram  /  / 9 /
/  tataste sUrayastatra, vRddhatvAdgantumakSamAH  /  vAdalabdhidharaM
goSThAmAhilaM preSayaMstadA  /  /  10  /  /  so'pi
tatrAgamatsatrA''hvAtumAgatasAdhubhiH  /  vAde niruttarIcakre, taJca
cArvAkamugradhIH  /  /  11  /  /  jitakAzI sUripArzve, yiyAsurapi sa vratI  /
saGghAgrahavazAttatra, caturmAsImavAsthitaH  /  /  12  /  /  itazca vizvavandyAH
zrIAryarakSitasUrayaH  /  nijAyuH prAntamAsannaMvijJAyaivamacintayan  /  /  13
/  /  yogyasyaiva vineyasya, pradeyA gaNadhAritA  /  ayogyasya tu taddAne,
dAturdoSo bhavenmahAn  /  / 14 /  /  yadAhuH- "vUDho gaNaharasaddo, goamAIhiM
dhIrapurisehiM  /  jo taM Thavei apatte, jANaMto so mahApAvo !  /  /  15  /  /
" 256 tadAcAryapadaM deyaM, yogyasyaiva vivekinA  /  ayogyastu na tasyArhaH,
pAyasasyeva vAyasaH  /  / 16 /  /  yogyastu mama ziSyeSu, guNaratnamahodadhiH  /
asti durbalikApuSpamitranAmA mahAzayaH  /  /  17  /  /  sarveSAmAttadIkSANAM
madbandhUnAM tu sarvathA  /  zrIphalgurakSito goSThAmAhilo vA'sti sammataH  /
/  18  /  /  kAMkSanti gaNadhAritvaM, svajanatvAddhi te tayoH  /  samyagjAnanti
na tveSAM trayANAM gauNamantaram  /  / 19 /  /  tatastadantaraM procya,
sarvarSINAM nije pade  /  ziSyaM durbalikApuSpamitrAkhyaM sthApayAmyaham  /  /
20 /  /  vimRzyetyakhilAn sAdhUn, samAhUya munIzvaraH  /
vallatailAjyakumbhAnAM, dRSTAntAnityavocata  /  /  21  /   /  vallakumbhAdyathA
riktikartuM nIcairmukhIkRtAt  /  niSpAvA nikhilA madhyagatA niryAnti satvaram  /
/ 22 /  /  evaM durbalikApuSpamitranAmno mahAmateH  /  jAto'smi
zrutasUtrArthadAne vallaghaTopamaH  /  /  23  /  /
adhomukhIkRtAttailaghaTAttailaM yathA drutam  /  niryAti bhUri kiJcittu
tiSThatyapi ghaTAzritam  /  / 24 /  /  phalgurakSitasaMjJasya, zrutAmnAyArpaNe
tathA  /  jAto'smyahaM tailakumbhasannibho bho maharSayaH  /  /  25  /  /
avAGmukhIkRtAdAjyakumbhAttu stokameva hi  /  ghRtaM niryAti bhUyastu,
tiSThatyeva ghaTAntare  /  /  26  /  /  evaM jAto'smyahaM
goSThAmAhilAbhidhasanmuneH  /  zrImatsiddhAntasUtrArthadAne ghRtaghaTopamaH  /
/ 27 /  /  tadayaM zrutapAthodhipAradRzvA guNodadhiH  /
astudurbalikApuSpamitrarSirvo gaNAdhipaH  /  /  28  /  /  iyatkAlaM madAdezo,
yuSmAbhirmAnito yathA  /  ataH paraM tathA mAnyaM vaco'muSya gaNezituH  /  /  29
/  /  akRte'pi madAdeze, jAtu kopo na me bhavet  /  ayaM tu stokamapyAgo, na
kasyApi sahiSyate  /   /  30  /  /  ityukte sUribhiH sarve, pratyapadyanta
tattathA  /  tato durbalikApuSpamitramitthaM jagau guruH  /  /  31  /   /
2010_02

Page #298 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Chapter:-2 Collection of Examples 257  O friend! This monk, due to his
qualities, is being established by me in your care. Therefore, he should be
protected by you, like me, O great sage! ||32||  Just as I established the
Goṣṭhamāhila in the care of Śrīphalgurakṣita, so too, you should act in the same
way, especially. ||33||  Having said this and established him, those
Śrīāryarakṣitas, who had been instructed in the right way of eating, went to
heaven. ||34||  Having heard about the Śrīāryarakṣita teachers who had gone to
heaven, Goṣṭhamāhila also went quickly to Daśapura. ||35||  He asked all the
monks, "Who is this disciple, who has been placed in your care by the Sūris?"
||36||  Then, getting up, they pointed out the Kumbhadṛṣṭānta to him and said,
"He is Śrīmadurbalikāpuṣpmitrā, a Sūri." ||37||  Hearing this, Goṣṭhamāhila, who
had been praised by all the virtuous ones, was told, "Stay here," but he
unwillingly went outside. ||38||  Standing separately near the previous shelter,
he began to teach the ignorant, with the intention of converting them. ||39||
He wished to convert them, but he did not want to convert anyone else. Then, he
searched for a flaw in the Sūris every day. ||40||  And those Sūris, named
Puṣpmitrā, also spoke about the strength of the meaning, the essence of the
scriptures, to all the sages. ||41||  The great sages said, "Listen to the
meaning in the presence of the Sūris." Then, Goṣṭhamāhila, who had been praised,
spoke. ||42||  O great intellect! You are the ones who have heard the
scriptures, so accept all of them. ||43||  Previously, the Sūris taught the
eighth doctrine, called Karmapravāda, to the infertile and other virtuous ones.
||44||  At that time, the infertile one, thinking about the infertile one,
contemplated the threefold nature of karma-bondage. That is as follows: ||45||
Karma is bound by living beings, bound, touched, and removed. Bound karma is
like a needle, wrapped in thread. ||46||  Touched karma is like needles, which
are attached to a piece of cloth. Removed karma is like needles, which have
become one with the hot iron. ||47||  In the past, the soul, due to the
influence of attachment, aversion, and delusion, was bound by karma, such as
knowledge-obscuring karma, in all its aspects. ||48||  It does the same thing,
touching karma, due to the increase of its influence. Due to the influence of
the contaminated, it does removed karma. ||49||  Bound karma is destroyed by
means such as condemnation, etc. Touched karma is removed by means of atonement.
||50||  Removed karma, which is strongly bound by living beings, is known only
at the time of its arising, and not otherwise. ||51||  Seeing him, Goṣṭhamāhila
said, "This is not the way. We have not heard this from our teachers." ||52||
If karma were bound, touched, and removed by the soul, then how could there be
liberation for it, due to its separate nature? ||53||  Then, Goṣṭhamāhila, who
was skilled in reasoning, said, "How then did the

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 khaNDa:-2 dRSTAntasamuccayaH 257 guNitvAdvatsa ! gaccho'yaM, tvadake sthApyate
mayA  /  tadasau bhavatA madvatpAlanIyo mahAmate !  /  / 32 /  /
zrIphalgurakSite goSThAmAhile ca yathA mayA  /  pravRttaM bhavatA'pyevaM,
vartitavyaM, vizeSataH  /  / 33 /  /  ityuktvA sthApayitvA ca, taM munIndra nije
pade  /  vihitAnazanAH svargaM, jagmuH zrIAryarakSitAH  /  / 34  /  /
zrIAryarakSitAcAryAn, samAkarNya divaGgatAn  /  goSThAmAhilanAmApi, yayau
dazapure drutam  /  / 35  /  /  nyadhIyata nije paTTe, ziSyaH ko nAma suribhiH ?
/  iti cAgatamAtro'pi, so'prAkSIdakhilAn munIn  /  / 36  /  /  tato'bhyutthAya
te kumbhadRSTAntAMstAnudIrya ca  /  zrImadurbalikApuSpamitrAkhyaM sUrimUcire  /
/ 37 /  /  tannizamyodgatAmoM, mAhilaH sarvasAdhubhiH  /  ihaiva
tiSThatetyukto'pyanicchiniryayau bahiH  /  / 38  /  /  pUrvopAzrayapArzvasthe,
sthitvA sopAzraye pRthak  /  prAvartiSThAnyasAdhvAdIn, vyudgrAhayitumuccakaiH  /
/ 39 /  /  vyudgrAhayitumaiziSTa, na punaH kaJcanApi saH  /  tataH
so'nveSayAmAsa, sUrINAM chidramanvaham  /  / 40 /  /  itazca
puSpamitrAkhyasUrayopyarthapauruSIm  /  sarvarSINAM purazcakruH,
zrutArthakathanAtmikAm  /  / 41 /  /  sUrINAM sannidhAne'rthaM, zRNuteti
maharSibhiH  /  tadA prokto mAhilarSirpAviSTo'bravIditi  /  / 42 /  /
niSpAvakumbhakalpasya, tasyAbhyaNe mhaadhiyH!| yUyameva zrutAmnAyAn, gRhNIta
nikhilAnapi  /  / 43 /  /  pUrvaM karma pravAdAkhyamaSTamaM sUrayastu te  /
adhyApayanto vandhyAdisAdhUnAmabhavaMstadA  /  / 44  /  /
tatrAvandhyamatirvandhyo'nyadAdhItyAnucintayan  /  traividhyaM karmabandhasya,
vyAcakhyAviti tadyathA  /  / 45 /  /  jIvairhi badhyate karma, baddhaM spRSTaM
nikAcitam  /  tatra baddhaM yathA sUcIkalApastantuveSTitaH  /  / 46 /  /
spRSTaM yathA sUcikAstAH, kiTTenaikatvamAzritAH  /  nikAcitaM yathA
tApakuTTanairekatAM gatAH  /  / 47  /  /  banAtyevaM pUrvamAtmA,
rAgAdipariNAmataH  /  pradezaiH sakalaiH karma, vijJAnAvaraNAdikam  /  / 48 /  /
tadeva kurute spRSTaM, tatparINAmavRddhitaH  /  saMkliSTAttu parINAmAttatkaroti
nikAcitam  /  / 49 /  /  tatra baddhaM yAti nAzamupAyairnindanAdibhiH  /
prAyazcittAdhupAyaistu, spRSTaM karma nivartate  /  / 50  /  /  nikAcitaM tu
yatkarma, jIvaiH sudRDhabandhanAt  /  udayenaiva tatprAyo, vedyate nAnyathA
punaH  /  / 5 /  /  ityanuprekSamANaM taM, goSThAmAhila ityavak  /  maivaM
vAdIryadasmAbhirgurubhyo nedRzaM zrutam  /  / 52 /  /  yadi syAdAtmanA karma,
baddhaM spRSTaM nikAcitam  /  tadA tadapRthagbhAvAnmokSastasya kathaM bhavet ?
/  / 53 /  /  vandhyo'bhyadhAtkathaM tarhi, sambandho jIvakarmaNoH  /  tata
ityalapadgoSThAmAhila: kalpanApaTuH  /  / 54  /  /  vandhyo'bhyadhAtkathaM
tarhi, sambandho jIvakarmaNoH  /  tata ityalapadgoSThAmAhila: kalpanApaTuH  /  /
54  /  /  yathA kaJcukino dehaM, bahiH spRzati kaJcukaH  /  vapuSA saha
sambaddho, na tvasau jAtu jAyate  /  / 55  /  /  2010_02

Page #299 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Refutation of Eager Rejection  "Even though karma is touched and bound by
the soul, it is not bound again. Whoever thinks it is bound, will not have the
destruction of birth. || 56 ||  This much was only told to us by the gurus
during the time of teaching. This Suri does not know anything about this truth.
|| 57 ||  Having become doubtful, he then went to the presence of the Suri
Indra. He presented the words of Mahila and asked, "Is this true?" || 58 ||  The
Suris said, "What was said before is indeed true. But the words of Mahila are
not appropriate due to their contradiction with logic." || 59 ||  The soul,
being encompassed by its own perception, is situated in the sky. It takes on the
particle of karma, never going to another place. || 60 ||  Thus, there is unity
between the soul and karma, like a piece of fire. It is not just a matter of
being touched, like the relationship between the body and the garment. || 61 ||
If one were to take karma from a place outside the self, then the analogy of the
garment would be appropriate. || 62 ||  But this would be a wrong principle,
because it would contradict the sutra. The sutra prohibits taking karma from a
place outside the self. || 63 ||  Moreover, if karma, like a garment, were to be
situated outside the self, then how could the pain be internal, caused by karma?
|| 64 ||  If it were to be due to its mobile nature, then karma would be
situated in the middle. And if it is said that the pain would then be internal,
then it is believed that... || 65 ||  Then the analogy of the garment for karma
is completely refuted. The garment is touched externally, it is not internal. ||
66 ||  Then there would be simultaneous pain both outside and inside. The pain
is caused by the connection of karma both outside and inside. || 67 ||  Due to
its mobile nature, that karma does not go to another place. It stays with the
soul, in the body, like the breath and other winds. || 68 ||  It is believed
that karma is bound by all the regions of the soul. Due to the good qualities in
the whole self, the causes of attachment, etc., are bound. || 69 ||  There is no
difference between the soul and karma due to their inseparable connection. It
should be known that they are not separate, because you have heard this from the
scriptures. || 70 ||  Because even though a stone and gold are inseparably
connected, their separate nature is observed through direct perception. || 71 ||
Thus, by the words of the Suri, Vandy attained freedom from doubt. He quickly
went to Mahila and told him what had been said. || 72 ||  However, that
deceitful one did not accept the truth. He was thinking, "I will cause trouble
elsewhere." || 73 ||  On another occasion, while reading the ninth chapter,
"Refutation of Rejection," Vandy, the virtuous one, described the rejection of
the Muni in this way: || 74 ||  "For as long as I live, I will reject all
killing of living beings. I will reject the three types of killing in three
ways, becoming a vow-taker." || 75 ||  Hearing this, Mahila said to the
assembly, "The rejection of the virtuous one is not appropriate with a definite
quantity." || 76 ||  When it is said, "For as long as I live," a time limit is
set. Thus, there would be a fault in the hope of killing in the future. || 77 ||
Therefore, I will

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 AturapratyAkhyAnaprakIrNakam " evaM karmApi jIvena, spRSTaM baddhaM punarna tat
/  yastu tanmanyate baddhaM, tasya na syAdbhavakSayaH  /  /  56  /  /  etAvadeva
gurubhiH proktaM naH pAThanakSaNe  /  eSa sUristu tattattvaM naiva jAnAti
kiJcana  /  /  57  /  /  jAtAzaGkastato gatvA, vandhya; sUrIndrasannidhau  /
nivedya mAhilavacaH, kiM tathyamiti pRSTavAn ?  /  / 58 /  /  sUrayaH
procuruktaM hi, prAgmayA tathyameva te  /  mAhilasya tu gIrnaiva, yuktA
yuktivirodhataH  /  /  59  /  /  jIvo hi svAvagAhibhivyApta evAmbare sthitam  /
gRhNAti karmadalikaM, jAtu na tvanyadezagam  /  / 60  /  /  tathA ca
vahnnyaHpiNDavadaikyaM jIvakarmaNoH  /  syAnna tu spRSTamAtratvaM,
dehakaJcukavattayoH  /   /  61  /  /  athAtmAnyapradezasthaM,
karmAdAyAnuveSTayet  /  yadyAtmAnaM tadA tasya, ghaTate kaJcukopamA  /  / 62 /
/  kintu syAdapasiddhAntastadA sUtravirodhataH  /  sUtre
hyanyapradezasthakarmAdAnaM niSidhyate  /  /  63  /  /  kiJca kaJcukavatkarma,
cedbahiH sthitamAtmani  /  vedanApi tadA karmanimittAntaH kathaM bhavet ?  /  /
64  /  /  atha saMcAribhAvAtsyAtkarma madhyepi saMsthitam  /  ityantarvedanApi
syAditi cettena manyate  /  / 65 /  /  tarhi kaJcakakalpatvaM, karmaNo vyAhataM
sphuTam  /  kaJcuko hi bahiH spRSTa, eva syAnna tu madhyagaH  /  / 66 /  /  tadA
ca yugapanna syAddbahirmadhye ca vedanA  /  karmaNo bahirantarvA,
sambandhAdvedanA kRtaH  /  /  67  /  /  saMcAritvAcca tatkarma, na gacchati
bhavAntare  /  jIvena saha dehasthaniHzvAsAdisamIravat  /  / 68 /  /
sarvairjIvapradezaistannibaddhaM karma manyatAm  /  rAgAdibandhahetUnAM,
sadbhAvAtsakalAtmani  /  /  69  /  /  na cAvibhAgasambandhAtpArthakyaM
jIvakarmaNoH  /  naiva bhAvIti vijJeyaM, tadvAkyAkarNanAttvayA  /  /  70  /  /
yato'vibhAgasambandhavatorapyazmahemayoH  /  pRthagbhAvo jAyamAnaH, pratyakSeNa
nirIkSyate  /  /  71  /  /  ityAdibhiH sUrivAkyairvandhyo niHzaGkatAM gataH  /
mAhilAyA'vadattAni drutaM gatvA tadantike  /  /  72  /  /  tathApi sa
zaThazcittAnnAtyAkSIttaM kadAgraham  /  kSobhanAM punaranyatra, kariSyAmIti
cintayan  /  /  73  /  /  anyadA navamaM pUrvaM, pratyAkhyAnAbhidhaM paThan  /
vandhyasAdhurmuneH pratyAkhyAnamevamavarNayat  /  / 74 /  /  yAvajjIvaM
sarvameva, prANiprANAtipAtanam  /  trividhaM trividhenAGgI, pratyAkhyAti
vratIbhavan  /  / 75 /  /  ityAdyAkarNya taM goSThAmAhila: procivAniti  /
parimANayutaM pratyAkhyAnaM sAdhorna yujyate  /  / 76 /  /  yAvajjIvamiti
prokte, kAlamAnamurIkRtam  /  tathA cAgre haniSyAmItyAzaMsAdUSaNaM bhavet  /  /
77  /  /  tasmAdaparimANena, pratyAkhyAmyakhilaM vadham  /  trividhaM
trividheneti vAcyaM svIkurvatA vratam  /  / 78 /  /  evaM vadantaM taM
vandhyo'bhyadhAditi mahAmatiH  /  AzaMsA kiM kAlamAnAjjAyate vAJchyA'thavA ?  /
/ 79 /  /  Adye pakSe muneraddhApratyAkhyAnaM vitanvataH  /
pauruSyAdipadoccAre'pyAzaMsA syAdanAhatA !  /  /  80  /  /  258 2010_02

Page #300 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Chapter 2: Collection of Examples   259 Even though the rejection of food is
denied by the term "masculinity" etc., it is certain. Because the time measure
like "yāma" etc. is derived from it. ||81|| If it is said that the word is not
there even in that case, then there would be the calamity of non-eating, because
it is only for renunciation etc.! ||82|| And it is not that the rejection of
food would be for the good, because then there would be the fault of
contradicting the established doctrine. ||83|| Because in the doctrine, the
Jinas have stated the rejection of food by the ascetics as obligatory, like ten
days, future etc. ||84|| The second view, which is according to desire, is not
justifiable anywhere. Because there is no service to the worthy in the absence
of the muni. ||85|| And also, the fact that the rejection is immeasurable, which
you have stated, is not justifiable due to contradiction of logic. ||86||
Because in the case of rejection of the impermanent, which is being done, all
future food becomes the object of rejection. ||87|| And then, due to the decay
of life, the ascetic who has gone to the divine state, would definitely have a
breach of vows in the service of the worthy! ||88|| If it is said that the
rejection is done as long as one has the strength, then it is immeasurable.
||89|| Then the rejection limited to strength is accepted by you. And thus, the
acceptance of its immeasurability is not proper. ||90|| And also, it is not read
as "as long as life" due to the fear of the calamity of breach of vows, but it
is read as "as long as life" due to the fear of the calamity of breach of vows.
||91|| Because of the absence of fear, that rejection is also not a fault, as is
evident from the renunciation of the body. ||92|| When he did not accept the
statement of the worthy, then all the munis said that in this way. ||93|| This
statement of the worthy is to be considered as a statement of the worthy. This
is how it was said by the venerable Aryarakshita Suri. ||94|| Other elders, who
are well-versed in other sects, were also asked, and they also said that the
rejection is definitely limited. ||95|| Even so, Mahila did not give up that
attachment. Because attachment is usually difficult to overcome for the Angas,
like a wasting disease. ||96|| You should know that this truth has been stated
by the Tirthankaras, as I have said. ||97|| Then the entire assembly of the
worthy, including the Sadhus, asked the Jinesvara, intending to renounce the
body, as instructed by the Shastra Suri. ||98|| The Suri also came and said,
"What should I do?" The assembly said, "Ask the lord of the boundary." ||99||
"Is it Mahila Muni who is speaking the truth, or the entire assembly, including
the weak, the flower-friends, etc.?" ||100|| Then the goddess said, "My strength
is to renounce the body, so that I may be able to go on the path, like many
celestial beings." ||101|| Then, after the renunciation of the body by the
assembly, the Shastra Devata went to Videha and asked the lord of the world
according to the logic of the assembly. ||102|| Then Shambhu and Sakra said,
"That assembly is speaking the truth. Mahila is speaking falsehood. He is the
seventh slanderer." ||103|| Then the goddess who had come there

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 khaNDa:-2 dRSTAntasamuccayaH 259 pauruSyAdipadenAddhApratyAkhyAne'pi nizcitam
/  yAmAdikaM kAlamAnameva yasmAdudIryate  /  / 81 /  /  atha tatrApi padaM tanno
vAcyamiti cettadA  /  bhavedanazanApattiH, pravrajyAdina eva hi !  /  / 82 /  /
na ca sAdhorbhavennAddhApratyAkhyAnamiti tvayA  /
vaktavyamapasiddhAntadoSApattiryato bhavet  /  / 83 /  /  siddhAnte hi
jinairaddhAprakhyAkhyAnaM tapasvinAm  /  kartavyatvena kathitaM,
dazadyA'nAgatAdikam  /  / 84  /  /  vAJchArUpo dvitIyo'pi, pakSo no yujyate
kvacit  /  muneranyabhave'vadyasevAza yanna vidyate  /  / 85 /  /
anyaccAparimANatvaM, pratyAkhyAnasya yatpurA  /  tvayA proktaM tadapi no, yuktaM
yuktivirodhataH  /  / 86 /  /  kriyamANe'pariNAmapratyAkhyAne hi jAyate  /
anAgatAddhA sarvApi, pratyAkhyAnasya gocaraH  /  / 87 /  /  tadA
cAyuHkSayAddevabhavaM gatavato yateH  /  sAvadyasevane'vazyaM, vratabhaGga
prasajyate !  /  / 88 /  /  atha yAvacchakti yasmAt, pratyAkhyAnaM vidhIyate  /
tasmAdaparimANatvamiti cedabhidhIyate  /  / 89 /  /  tarhi zaktimitaM
pratyAkhyAnamaGgIkRtaM svayam  /  tathA cAparimANatvasvIkArastasya nocitaH  /  /
10 /  /  kiJcAzaMsAvazAnnaiva, yAvajjIveti paThyate  /  vratabhaGgabhayAtkintu,
yAvajjIveti paThyate  /  / 91 /  /  AzaMsArahitatvena, tatsAvadhikamapyaho  /
pratyAkhyAnaM na doSAya, kAyotsarganidarzanAt  /  / 12 /  /
ityAdivandhyavacanaM, na yadA svIcakAra saH  /  tadA sarve'pi munayastamevaM
procire muhuH  /  / 13 /  /  mahAtmanitthamevedaM, vandhyavAkyamurIkuru  /
evamevaitaduktaM zrIAryarakSitasUribhiH  /  / 94  /  /  anye'pi sthavirA
anyagacchIyA ye bahuzrutAH  /  te'pi pRSTA jaguH pratyAkhyAnaM sAvadhikaM
dhruvam  /  / 95  /  /  tathA'pi mAhilo naiva, taM kadAgrahamatyajat  /  Agraho
hyaGginAM prAyo'sAdhyaH syAtkSayarogavat  /  / 96  /  /  tAnityUce ca no yUyaM,
tattvaM jAnItha kiJcana  /  tIrthaGkarairhi bhAvo'yaM, kathito'sti maduktavat  /
/ 97  /  /  tataH sAdhvAdikaH sarvasaGghaH praSTuM jinezvaram  /  uddizya
zAsanasurI, kAyotsargaM vinirmame  /  / 98  /  /  surI sA'pyA''yayau brUta, kiM
karomIti vAdinI ?  /  saGgha smAheti pRccha tvaM, gatvA sImandharAdhipam  /  /
19 /  /  kiM goSThAmAhilamunirudIrayati sUnRtam  /  saGgho
durbalikApuSpamitrAdiH sakalo'thavA ?  /  / 100  /  /  tato devyavadaddatta,
kAyotsargabalaM mama  /  yathA'nekasurAkINe, mArge syAM gantumIzvarI  /  / 1 /
/  saGghanA'tha kRte kAyotsarge zAsanadevatA  /  gatvA videhe
saGghoktayuktyA'prAkSIjjagatprabhum  /  / 2 /  /  zazaMsa zambhuzakro'tha,
saGgho'sau vakti sUnRtam  /  mAhilastvanRtaM brUte, nihnavo hyeSa saptamaH  /  /
3 /  /  tadAkA''gatA devI, saGghamevamavocata  /  kAyotsargaM pArayitvA,
bhASitaM zRNutA'rhataH  /  / 4 /  /  2010_02

Page #301 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 260 ## The Scattering of the Rejection of the Eager The assembly is truthful,
the Mahila is a liar, a speaker of falsehood. When they said, "Go," the Mahila
said, "The assembly is too eager!" ||5|| This one is a fool, with a small
intellect, how could he go there? This is a fabricated story, not spoken by the
Jina! ||6|| Then those glorious ones, named Pushpamitra, also said this:
"Believe correctly, otherwise you will be outside the assembly!" ||7|| Even so,
he rejected that opinion, the assembly made him completely outside the assembly.
Taking many people with him, the one who had lost his knowledge-jewel wandered
on the earth! ||108|| ## 50. The Example of Charudatta, as Told in the *Upadeśa
Prāsāda* on the Meditation of Non-Attachment In Champā, there lived a wealthy
merchant named Bhānuśreṣṭhi, his son was Charudatta, he was married to a
suitable girl in his youth, gradually he became detached from worldly affairs
and did not desire a wife, later Charudatta was freed to learn cunning in a
brothel, gradually he became attached to it and even abandoned his home, after
twelve years, his father, at the end of his life, told his son, "You have never
done what I have told you, therefore do this from now on, in times of
difficulty, this salutation should be remembered, then after the death of your
parents, you will be freed from all possessions, your wife has gone to her
father's house, then taking your father-in-law's wealth, you boarded a chariot
and went to Śrī. The chariot broke. Reaching a safe place, you got off and went
to your maternal uncle's house. Taking wealth from him, while going on the road,
your wealth was stolen by a robber. Then, wandering on the earth, he met a yogi.
He divided the wealth into two parts, and was placed on a platform and released
into a well of juice. With that juice, a pot was filled, that pot was taken by
the yogi, pulling the platform. Then the platform was thrown into the middle,
taking that juice-pot, the yogi disappeared, there he gave a salutation to a
dying man. There, for three days, he suffered hunger, with the help of a cow's
tail, and then he left. While going ahead, he met his maternal uncle's son,
Rudradatta, he said, "Two rams are being taken, and they are going to the Golden
Island." Then he took the two rams. Then they went to the seashore. Rudradatta
said, "Kill these two, and enter the furnace with the razor blades that we have
taken. Then they will take out the flesh from the furnace and take it to the
Golden Island. There, you will get gold." Charudatta said, "How can killing
living beings be done?" Rudradatta quickly killed his own ram, while he was
killing the second one, Charudatta made the ram hear the salutation, and the ram
refused to eat. Then both of them entered the furnace. They were taken out of
the furnace by the furnace-workers. On the way, Charudatta's furnace fell into a
lake from the mouth of a bird. Then he came out, wandering from place to place,
he saw a Vidya-cara-ṛṣi and stood bowing to him. The muni said, "From where have
you come to this place, which is inaccessible to humans?" When he told him his
suffering, the muni described the sixth vow. He accepted it. From there, a god
came and bowed to Charudatta and praised him. Then, the

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 260 AturapratyAkhyAnaprakIrNakam saGghaH satyo mAhilastu, nihnavo'nRtabhASakaH
/  tayetyukte'vadadgoSThAmAhilo'tikadAgrahI !  /  / 5 /  /  asau varAkI
svalpardhIstatra gantuM kva zaknuyAt ?  /  tatkalpitamiyaM vakti, na
punarjinabhASitam !  /  / 6 /  /  tatastaM puSpamitrAkhyasUrayo'pyevamUcire  /
samyak zraddhehi nocettvaM, saGghabAhyaH kariSyase !  /  / 7 /  /  tathApi
tattanmatamatyajantaM, cakAra saGgho'khilasaGghabAhyam  /  vyudgrAhayan so'pi
janAnanekAn, babhrAma bhUmau gatabodhiratnaH !  /  / 108 /  /  50.
parigrahadhyAne zrIupadezaprAsAdakathitasya cArudattasya dRSTAntaH  /  campAyAM
bhAnuzreSThI vasati, tasya putrazcArudattaH, sa yauvane'nurUpakanyAM
pariNAyitaH, kramAdviSayaviraktaH striyaM necchati, pazcAJcArudattazcAturyaM
zikSituM gaNikAgRhe muktaH, zanaiH zanaistadAsakto jAto gRhamapi tatyAja,
dvAdazavarSAnte pitrA svAyuH prAnte AkArya putrasyoktaM-"Ajanma tvayA
matkathitaM na kRtaM, ataH parametkuru, saGkaTe'yaM namaskAraH smarttavyaH, tato
mAtApitroH svargamanAnantaraM tena sarvasvaM nirgamitaM, patnI tu svapiturgRhe
gatA, tataH zvazuradhanaM lAtvA vAddhauM yAnArUDhaH zriye cacAla  /  yAnaM
bhagnam  /  puNyAtphalakaM prApya niHsRtya mAtulagRhe yayau  /  tasmAddhanaM
lAtvA mArge gacchato dhATyA dhanaM hRtam  /  tataH pRthivIM bhramatastasya
kazcidyogI militaH  /  tenArddhArddhabhAgaM kRtvA maJcikArUDho rasakUpikAyAM
muktaH  /  tena rasena kumbho bhRtaH, sa kumbho maJcikAmAkRSya yoginA gRhitaH  /
tato maJcikA madhye kSiptA, tadrasakumbhaM lAtvA sa yogI naSTaH, tatraikasya
mriyamANasya narasya namaskAro dattaH  /  tatra dinatrayaM kSudhito
godhApucchayogena kaSTAttato niryayau  /  agre gacchatastasya mAtulaputro
rudradatto militaH, tena proktaM-'meSadvayaM gRhyate, svarNadvIpe ca gamyate'  /
tato meSadvayaM gRhItam  /  tataH samudrataTe gatau  /  rudradattaH
prAha-"etaddvayaM hatvA bhastrikAmadhye gRhItakSurikAbhyAmAvAbhyAM pravizyate  /
tato bhAraNDA mAMsabudhdhyotpATya svarNadvIpe nayanti  /  tatrasthaM
hemAneSyate"  /  cArudatta Aha-'jIvavadhaH kathaM kriyate ?' rudradattena zIghra
svaurabhro hataH, yAvacca dvitIyaM hanti tAvaJcArudattena namaskAraM zrAvito
meSo'nazanaM grAhitaH  /  tato dvAvapi tayorbhastrike praviSTau  /
bhAraNDAbhyAmutpATite bhastrike  /  mArge cArudattabhastrikA pakSimukhAtsarasi
papAta  /  tato nirgataH sa sthAne sthAne bhramannekaM vidyAcaraNarSiM dRSTvA
praNamya sthitaH  /  muniH prAha-'atra mAnuSyAdyaprApye sthale tvaM kutaH
samAgAH ?' tena svaduHkhe prokte muninA SaSThaM vrataM varNitam  /  tena
svIkRtam  /  itazcaiko devo'bhyetya cArudattaM natvA sAdhu vavande  /  tadA
vandanAgatAbhyAM vidyAbhRdbhyAM pRSTaM-'bho deva sAdhuM muktvA pUrva gRhasthaH
kathaM vanditastvayA ?' tato devo'vak-"pUrvaM piSpalAdarSirbahujanAn yajJaM
kArayitvA pApazAstraM prarUpya zvabhraM gataH  /  _ 2010_02

Page #302 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Chapter:-2 Collection of Examples 261 Its origin has been mentioned during the
discussion of the second vow. Having left the dog existence, he was born as a
goat in the fifth existence. He was offered in sacrifices. In the sixth
existence, he was taken by Charudatta for non-violence and was taught the
salutation. Due to that merit, he died and went to heaven. I am that god. I have
come here to preach the Dharma words given by my Guru through knowledge.
Therefore, he was first saluted and then praised.” Hearing this, Charudatta also
took initiation due to dispassion. He attained heaven through penance. 51. In
the Sri Aakhyanaka Manikosh, the story of Subhadra is related to the slander of
others. She was like the jewel of the Anga-Jana clan. In the city of Champa, she
was like a beautiful palace. ||1|| There lived a wealthy merchant named
Jinadatta, who was the king of eyes, a true devotee of the Jain teachings. ||2||
He had a beautiful daughter, the jewel of daughters, the delight of the family.
Her lotus-like feet were adorned with lotus-like ornaments. ||3|| She was named
Subhadra, a true follower of the Jain teachings, a dwelling of the virtues of
the monks, like a swan devoted to the service of the lotus of the Jain path.
||4|| She was happily engaged in her household duties. She was seen by the wise
servant of the wealthy merchant, Buddhadasa. ||5|| Seeing her, he thought in his
mind, “Oh, her beauty captivates even the inhabitants of the world. ||6|| Who is
this woman? Is she a wife? Or is she a great lady? Or is she a celestial being?”
||7|| Thinking thus, he was pierced by the arrow of love in his heart. To
fulfill his desire, he sent a messenger to her house. ||8|| Jinadatta, hearing
this, asked the messenger about the matter. The messenger told him everything.
The merchant said, ||9|| “In her family, beauty, youth, and charm are all
present. She is not interested in worldly matters. ||10|| If there is any
conflict, it will be due to her devotion to the true Dharma. Therefore, I will
not give her to you. Go back to Buddhadasa.” ||11|| Hearing this, the messenger
went back home. He thought in his heart, “I will learn the art of deception and
win her over.” ||12|| He went to the sage and bowed down to him. He said, “Oh,
venerable one, please teach me the true Dharma, the Dharma that is the fear of
the cycle of birth and death.” ||13|| The sage, being compassionate, taught him
the Dharma as preached by the Jinas. He, being afraid of the cycle of birth and
death, accepted it like a thirsty man accepts water. ||14|| Day after day, he
listened to the teachings of the Jinas and his mind became filled with devotion.
The teachings of the Jinas became firmly established in his mind. ||15|| He
bowed down to the monk and said, “Oh, venerable one, please listen to my words.
I have accepted the Jain Dharma and I will not engage in any worldly affairs.”
||16|| _ 2010_02

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 khaNDa:-2 dRSTAntasamuccayaH 261 tadutpattistu dvitIyavratakathanAvasare
proktAsti  /  zvabhrAnnirgatya paJcasu bhaveSu chAgo jAtaH  /  yajJeSu hutaH  /
SaSThe bhave cArudattenAnenAnazanaM grAhitaH namaskAraM zrAvitacchAgaH  /
tanmahimnA mRtvA svarga gataH  /  sa cAhaM devaH  /  jJAnena
svagurudattadharmavAkyakathanAya cAtrAgAm  /  tenAyaM pUrvaM vanditaH pazcAJca
sAdhuH" evaM zrutvA cArudatto'pi vairAgyAddIkSAM jagrAha  /  tapastatvA svargaM
gataH  /  51. paraparivAdadhyAne zrIAkhyAnakamaNikoze subhadrAsambandhaH  /
aMgAjaNavayacUDAmaNi vva pAyAraparigayA Asi  /  caMpA nAmeNa purI sirIe
siMgArageha vva  /  / 1 /  /  tattha'sthi vijiyasattU jiyasattu naravaI
nayanariMdo  /  jiNasAsaNANuratto jiNadatto nAma seTThI vi  /  / 2 /  /
tassa'tthi pavaraduhiyA duhiyANa duhANa dalaNadullaliyA  /  laliyakara-
caraNakamalA kamalAlaMkiyataNulayA ya  /  / 3 /  /  /  sacchAsayA subhaddA
nAmeNa maNunasIlakulabhavaNaM  /  jiNacalaNakamalasevAparAyaNA rAyahaMsi vva  /
/ 4 /  /  sA annayA kayAI kIlaMtI niyagihammi sacchaMdaM  /  diTThA
taJcaniyabhattaseTThisuyabuddhadAseNa  /  / 5 /  /  taM datRRNa viciMtai
taJcanniyasAvao niyayacitte  /  eyAe aho ! rUvaM mohai bhuvaNattayajaNaM pi  /
/ 6 /  /  tA kiM esA pAyAlakanayA ? paNaiNI aha bhavassa ?  /  kiM vA
vammahadaiyA ? uAhu amaraMgaNA kA vi ?  /  / 7 /  /  evaM viciMtayaMto viddho
vammahasareNa hiyayammi  /  tavvaraNatthaM pesai niyapurise niyagihe gaMtuM  /
/ 8 /  /  kAuM jiNadatto vi hu paDivattiM tANa pucchae kajjaM  /  siTuM ca tehiM
savvaM bhaNiyaM to seTThiNA evaM  /  / 9 /  /  tammi kula-rUva-jovvaNa-lAvannAI
samaggamavi asthi  /  hojja paramavaradhammattaNeNa neho na eyANa  /  / 10 /  /
avaropparaM pi kalaho hohI sayadhammasaMthaveNa sayA  /  tA niyadhUyaM na hu
demi tehiM to buddhadAsassa  /  / 11 /  /  gaMtuM gihammi kahiyaM taM souM so vi
ciMtae hiyae  /  mAyAe sAvayattaM sikkhemi ahaM imIe kae  /  / 12 /  /
sAhusamIve gaMtuM tayaNu imo paNamiUNimaM bhaNai  /  maha kahaha niyayadhammaM
bhayavaM ! bhavabhamaNabhIyassa  /  / 13 /  /  to sAhUhiM samaggo kahio
jiNanAhadesio dhammo  /  so vi tayaM paDivajjai bhavohabhIo vva kavaDeNaM  /  /
14 /  /  tassANudiNaM jiNanAhadhammasavaNeNa bhAviyamaNassa  /  samma ciya
pariNamio maNammi jiNadesio dhammo  /  / 15 /  /  to vaMdiuM muNiMde pabhaNai
bhayavaM ! suNeha maha vayaNaM  /  paDivanno jiNadhammo Asi mae kannayAkajje  /
/ 16 /  /  _ 2010_02

Page #303 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter 262: The Scattering of the Rejection of the Eager One  This Dharma,
indeed, has matured in the midst of pure conduct. The nature, born from the
previous births, is like a shield. ||17||  Oh, how fearful! Tell me, O Muni,
everything. He has been well-instructed in all twelve types of virtuous Dharma.
||18||  He is devoted to the Jina's teachings, with a distinguished appearance,
deeply attached. He is adorned with Jina-purification, Guru-worship,
understanding, and meditation. ||19||  Possessing such virtuous qualities, he
was given by Jina-datta, as his own, to Buddha-dasa. ||20||  He, the great, the
powerful, was given in marriage by the low-born one. He enjoys worldly
pleasures, bound to her. ||21||  Thus, Jina-datta, the husband, said, "I have
given her to you." He has given her to you, like a slave, in the house of the
law. ||22||  Jina-datta, seeing her there, in this bed, said, "I will bring
disgrace upon the Dharma, by this transgression." ||23||  Buddha-dasa said, "I
will make a separate house for her." Jina-datta, pleased and honored, agreed.
||24||  He, with his new-born attachment, took her to the house of the law.
Buddha-dasa was given a separate dwelling. ||25||  In the house of Subhaddā, the
Muni's food and drink are always available. They enter, they carry, and they
offer the best of offerings. ||26||  Buddha-dasa's wife, meeting with these, is
filled with envy. Because of her greed, she remains wicked, even with the Jinas.
||27||  Hearing this, she spoke harsh and bitter words, filled with anger. "Such
a thing is not possible, it is not proper." ||28||  The sun does not abandon its
course, even when the clouds gather. Similarly, Subhaddā's virtue does not
break, no matter what. ||29||  A lotus does not wither, even when it grows in a
swamp. Similarly, Subhaddā's virtue does not break, no matter what. ||30||  A
barren woman does not give birth to a son, even with the help of a magician.
Similarly, Subhaddā's virtue does not break, no matter what. ||31||  A thief
does not reach the underworld, even if he steals the wealth of the gods.
Similarly, Subhaddā's virtue does not break, no matter what. ||32||  These are
the words of separation, spoken by those who are wicked and depraved. Thus, she
entered the house of Subhaddā. ||33||  She, with her body free from karma, is
difficult to understand, and impossible to defeat. Her eyes, filled with envy,
looked upon her. ||34||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 262 AturapratyAkhyAnaprakIrNakam iNhiM so Jciya dhammo pariNamio majjha
suddhabhAveNa  /  sabbhAvo saMjAo kavaDaM ciya puvvapunnehiM  /  / 17 /  /  tA
annaM pi hu bhayavaM ! kaheha to muNivarehiM savvaM pi  /  bArasavihe vi
sAvayadhamme sammaM sa sikkhavio  /  / 18 /  /  jAo visiTThasaDDho gADhaM
jiNasAsaNammi aNuratto  /  jiNapUyaNa-guruvaMdaNa-sajjhAya-jjhANaujjutto  /  /
19 /  /  evaMvihasAvayaguNasaMpanno jAva tA sayaM ceva  /  dinnA jiNadatteNaM
niyadhUyA buddhadAsassa  /  / 20 /  /  mahaIe vibhUIe pariNIyA teNa
hiTThahiyaeNa  /  to uvabhuMjai eso visayasuhaM tIe saMjutto  /  / 21 /  /  aha
annayA kayAI bhaNio jAmAueNa jiNadatto  /  mokkalasu niyaM dhUyaM nemi jahA
niyayagehammi  /  / 22 /  /  to jaMpai jiNadatto tattha gayAe imAe tuha sayaNA
/  dAhissaMti kalaMkaM vippaDivattIe dhammassa  /  / 23 /  /  to Aha buddhadAso
imIe bhinnaM gihaM karissAmi  /  to jiNadatteNa suyA sammANeUNa paTTaviyA  /  /
24  /  /  nIyA ya niyayabhavamammi teNa navanehanibbharamaNeNa  /  dinnaM
bhinnaM bhavaNaM tIe tao buddhadAseNa  /  / 25 /  /  tayaNu subhaddAbhavaNe
muNiNo niJcaM pi bhatta-pANaTThA  /  pavisaMti vahaMti puNo paosamiyarANi tIe
tao  /  / 26 /  /  akkhaMti buddhadAsassa bhAujAyA iyANi miliUNa  /  tuha daiyA
dussIlA ciTThai jamhA jaIhiM samaM  /  / 27 /  /  nisuNittu tao
niyakannakaDuyavayaNANi bhaNiumADhatto  /  mA erisaM payaMpaha saMbhavai na
eyameIe  /  / 28  /  /  avi nahayalAo nivaDai raviraharayaNaM kahaM pi divvavasA
/  taha vi subhaddA sIlassa khaMDaNaM kuNai na kayA vi  /  / 29  /  /  avi
uppajjai gayaNaMgaNammi viyasaMtakamalavaNasaMDaM  /  taha vi subhaddA sIlassa
khaMDaNaM kuNai na kayA vi  /  / 30 /  /  avi kahavi jae jAyai putto baMjhAe
vihiniogeNa  /  taha vi subhaddA sIlassa khaMDaNaM kuNai na kayA vi  /  / 31 /
/  avi kaha vi uvari vaJcai vasuhA gayaNaM pi jAi pAyAlaM  /  taha vi subhaddA
sIlassa khaMDaNaM kuNai na kayA vi  /  / 32 /  /  tatto vilakkhavayaNANi tANi
jAyANi vihiyamoNANi  /  aha annayA subhaddAbhavaNammi samAgao sAhU  /  / 33 /  /
nippaDikammasarIro dukkaraekallapaDimapaDivanno  /  diTuM tIe paviTTha tannayaNe
aNuyataNakaNuyaM  /  / 34  /  /  _ 2010_02

Page #304 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Chapter:-2 Collection of Examples 263 Think like this, a Muni, a great being, is
free from attachment. Do not destroy this eye, this particle. ||35|| Thinking
this, Subhaddā quickly, with ease, with goodness, On the second and third day,
collected a particle with her tongue. ||36|| Then, Subhaddā's forehead, adorned
with red sandalwood, was marked with a sesame seed. It was placed in the middle
of the goodness-filled circle, not even two. ||37|| On the forehead of the good
Subhaddā, the sesame seed was obtained through deceit and trickery. It was
obtained by the three, Nandā, Sāsuyā, and Bhāujjājā. ||38|| Akkanti, the servant
of Buddha, desired the good conduct of the wife. In the middle of the servant's
circle, he desired the reflection of the sesame seed. ||39|| As long as Buddha,
the servant, desired it, it remained there, visible. The five senses were
quickly detached from it, in the middle of the world. ||40|| Thinking this,
Subhaddā thought, "What kind of stain is born? A stain is born in the middle of
the great power of the Muni. ||41|| For those who are bound by the great
delusion of the world, by the attachment to household life, Stains are born, for
those who are living, what is this worth? ||42|| For those who are deluded by
the world, by the attachment to the world, by the great delusion, by the
attachment to the world, by the attachment to the world, by the attachment to
the world, by the attachment to the world, by the attachment to the world, by
the attachment to the world, by the attachment to the world, by the attachment
to the world, by the attachment to the world, by the attachment to the world, by
the attachment to the world, by the attachment to the world, by the attachment
to the world, by the attachment to the world, by the attachment to the world, by
the attachment to the world, by the attachment to the world, by the attachment
to the world, by the attachment to the world, by the attachment to the world, by
the attachment to the world, by the attachment to the world, by the attachment
to the world, by the attachment to the world, by the attachment to the world, by
the attachment to the world, by the attachment to the world, by the attachment
to the world, by the attachment to the world, by the attachment to the world, by
the attachment to the world, by the attachment to the world, by the attachment
to the world, by the attachment to the world, by the attachment to the world, by
the attachment to the world, by the attachment to the world, by the attachment
to the world, by the attachment to the world, by the attachment to the world, by
the attachment to the world, by the attachment to the world, by the attachment
to the world, by the attachment to the world, by the attachment to the world, by
the attachment to the world, by the attachment to the world, by the attachment
to the world, by the attachment to the world, by the attachment to the world, by
the attachment to the world, by the attachment to the world, by the attachment
to the world, by the attachment to the world, by the attachment to the world, by
the attachment to the world, by the attachment to the world, by the attachment
to the world, by the attachment to the world, by the attachment to the world, by
the attachment to the world, by the attachment to the world, by the attachment
to the world, by the attachment to the

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 khaNDa:-2 dRSTAntasamuccayaH 263 ciMtai ya jahA eso nippaDikammo muNI mahAsatto
/  mA viNasau tA eyassa nayaNameeNa kaNueNa  /  / 35  /  /  iya ciMtiuM
subhaddAe jhatti lahuyattayAe sAhussa  /  ditIe tIe bhikkhaM kaNuyaM jIhAe
saMgahiyaM  /  / 36  /  /  tatto ya subhaddAbhAlaruirasiMdUraviraio tilao  /
saMkato sAhuniDAlamaMDale dohiM vi na nAo  /  / 37  /  /  daTTaNa sAhubhAle
tilayaM uvaladdhachalapavesAo  /  tIe naNaMdA-sAsuya-bhAujjAyAo miliyAo  /  / 38
/  /  akkhaMti buddhadAsassa peccha niyabhAriyAsusIlataM  /  sevaDayaniDAlammiM
pecchiyatilayassa paDibiMbaM  /  / 39 /  /  to jAva buddhadAso joyai tA taM
tahaTThiyaM daTuM  /  saMjAyapaJcao so jhatti viratto kalattammi  /  / 40  /  /
tanAUNa subhaddAe ciMtiyaM peccha kerisaM jAyaM ?  /  jAyaM majjha kalaMkaM
muNiNo vi mahANubhAvassa  /  / 4 /  /  visayamahAvisamohiyamaNANa
gihavAsabaMdhabaddhANa  /  jAyaMti kalaMkAI jiyANa jaM taM kimacchariyaM ?  /  /
42 /  /  IsA-visAya-maya-moha-mANamahiyANa nihayabuddhINa  /  jAyaMti kalaMkAI
jiyANa jaM taM kimacchariyaM ?  /  / 43 /  /  jaM majjha visayalAlasamaNAe
gihavAsamahivasaMtIe  /  jAo esa kalaMko maNayaM pi na me imaM dukkhaM  /  / 44
/  /  jaM puNa mayaMkamaNinimmalassa jiNasAsaNassa mAllinnaM  /  maha kajje
saMjAyaM taM dUmai mANase majjha  /  / 45 /  /  tA jai jiNiMdasAsaNamAllinaM no
kahaM pi avaNemi  /  to majjha maNasamAhI na hojja maraNe vi niyameNa  /  / 46 /
/  iya ciMtiUNa atyamiya diNayare bhavaNajiNavariMdANa  /  raiuM pakiTThapUyaM
pamajjiUNaM mahIvIDhaM  /  / 47  /  /  tayaNu subhaddA giNhai mahApainnaM na
jAva mAlinaM  /  avaNemi pavayaNAo na tAva pAremi ussaggaM  /  / 48  /  /  jo
jiNasAsaNabhatto so amaro hou majjha paJcakkho  /  aha na vi hohI to me
kAussagge vi sannAso  /  / 49 /  /  iya jA kAussaggeNa saMThiyA sA khaNaMtaraM
tAva  /  ujjoyaMto bhavaNaM samAgao suravaro ekko  /  / 50  /  /
calacavalakuMDaladharo nimmalagholaMtamuttiyakalAvo  /  varamauDa-kaDaya-keUra-
kaMkaNAbharaNadippaMto  /  / 51 /  /  diTTho ya subhaddAe to bhaNiyA teNa sAvie
! kahasu  /  kiM saMbhario ahayaM ? bhaNai subhaddA tao evaM  /  / 52 /  /
jiNasAsaNamAlinnaM avaNehi tao ya harisio amaro  /  jaMpai suMdari ! iNDiM
kheyaM maNayaM pi mA kuNasu  /  / 53 /  /  2010_02

Page #305 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Aaturpratyakhyanaprakirnakam  The eager rejection spreader. The four doors of
the city are closed, the white ones are locked. No one else is able to open
them. ||54|| I will tell you where the great sage is in the assembly of the
Jains. She will open them with the water of the churning stick. ||55|| She will
open them, and then she will jump, and then she will be there. Like a jewel, she
will be there, and she will be there. ||56|| After that, Subhadra will cross the
barrier and stand there. She will leave the city at the time of the great light.
||57|| She will open them until they are all open, and no one will be able to
close them. Even if they are broken, they will not break, nor will the world.
||58|| Then, suddenly, the people of the city will be filled with joy. They will
all go in four directions at the same time. ||59|| Seeing this, the people will
be amazed. They will think, "Is this a divine miracle, or is it something else?"
||60|| Then, the king, the protector of the people, will be very happy. He will
be surrounded by the people, with a stick in his hand. ||61|| He will bow down
to the beautiful mountains, with humility and respect. He will ask, "Who is this
great sage?" ||62|| "Whether it is a god, a demon, a human, or a Kinnara,
whoever it is, I have blocked the way. Please forgive me." ||63|| Then, standing
in the assembly, the immortal one will say, "Listen! Whoever in this city is the
great sage, ||64|| she will be bathed three times with the water of the churning
stick. She will open the doors and be free from all suffering." ||65|| Hearing
this, all the people of the city, the king, the ministers, the great ones, and
the many others, ||66|| the singers, the auspicious ones, the ones who carry the
great sage, the ones who are bathed in the water of the churning stick, the ones
who are united, ||67|| all the men and women of the city, the ones who are
devoted to the king, will all be happy. Then, Subhadra will speak to them,
standing in front of them. ||68|| "Please allow me, mother! I will do as I have
decided." Smiling, they will all agree. ||69|| "Know that the doors are open,
and the great sage is free. You will open them, because you are the one who is
respected by the monks." ||70|| "The ones who are blocking the way, they have
been gathered together. The churning stick is powerful. The water that has been
churned will not even drip a single drop." ||71|| "The obstacles that are in the
way, all of them, Subhadra will remove them. She will move the water of the
churning stick and make it flow." ||72||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 AturapratyAkhyAnaprakIrNakam saMpai purIe cauro pihiUNaM goure ahiTThissaM  /
taM mottuM na hu anno hohI ugdhADaNasamattho  /  / 54 /  /  gayaNaMgaNammi ThAuM
pabhaNissaM jA mahAsaI kA vi  /  sA ugghADau cAlaNikayasalileNaM duvArAiM  /  /
55  /  /  ugghADissasi taM ceva tAI iya jaMpiuM tao tiyaso  /  soyAmaNipuMo iva
jhaDa tti asaNIhuo  /  / 56 /  /  tayaNantaraM subhaddA ussaggaM pAriUNa
hiTThamaNA  /  niggamai nisaM jAe pabhAyasamae purIloo  /  / 57  /  /  ugghADai
jAva samugghaDanti ta kaha vi no kavADAiM  /  phoDaMtassa vi phuTRti na uNa
vajjaM va loyassa  /  / 58  /  /  tA sahasA ucchalio rauddahAhAravo purajaNassa
/  Arasae ekkakAlaM cauppayANaM samUho vi  /  / 59 /  /  tArisarUvaM nAUNa
naravaI tayaNu AulIhUo  /  ciMtai eyaM naNu divvavilasiyaM kiM pi saMbhavihI  /
/ 60  /  /  tatto ya puhaipAlo parihittA ullasADayaM seyaM  /
dhUvakaDacchayahattho houM paurehiM pariyario  /  / 61 /  /  vinnavai
viNayapuvvaM vihiyapaNAmo sukomalagirAhiM  /  kAuM mahApasAyaM nisuNau
vinnattiyaM majjha  /  / 62 /  /  devassa dANavassa va bhUyasya va kinnarassa
kassa vi ya  /  jassa mae avaraddhaM khamau samaggaM pi so majjha  /  / 63 /  /
tatto gayaNe ThAUNa teNa amareNa bhaNiyameyaM bho !  /  jA kA vi iha purIe
mahAsaittaM samuvvahai  /  / 64  /  /  sA ramaNI cAlaNiyApakkhittajaleNa tinni
vArAo  /  acchoDiuM kavADe ugghADau nibbiyappaM ti  /  / 65  /  /  taM nisuNiUNa
ahamahamigAe savvAo purapuraMdhIo  /  rAyA-'maJca-mahAyaNabhajjAbahuyAo vahuyAo
/  / 66 /  /  kayanhANa-maMgalAo mahAsaIgavvamuvvahaMtIo  /
cAlaNijalapakkhivaNe viguttAo samaggAo  /  / 67 /  /  viguttAo jA
savvanayarinArIo rAyapajjantaM  /  tAva subhaddA sAsuyapabhiINa puro bhaNai evaM
/  / 68  /  /  aNujANasu aMba ! mamaM ahamavi evaM jahA parikkhemi  /  hasiUNa
tao savvAo tAo evaM payaMpaMti  /  / 69 /  /  jANa kavADANa kae vigguttAo
mahAsaIo vi  /  ugghADasi tANi tumaM nUNaM jA samaNaparibhuttA  /  / 70  /  /
tANa nivAraMtINa vi saMgahiyA tIe cAlaNI pavarA  /  tIe jalaM pakkhittaM
parigalai na biMdumittaM pi  /  / 71 /  /  jAyANi kasiNavayaNANi tANi savvANi to
subhaddA vi  /  niyakarayalakayacAliNisalilA caliyA nivasayAse  /  / 72 /  /
2010_02

Page #306 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Chapter:-2 Collection of Examples 265 The earth-goddess, with a smile, sprinkled
the water of the auspicious pot. The crowd of gods, yakshas, and gandharvas, all
stirred. ||73|| She bowed her head, like a lotus, to the great sage's lotus
feet. She said, "My Lord! Great Sage! I have done a great service." ||74|| She
opened the gates of the city, and the auspicious one, too. The king, following
the eastern gate, entered. ||75|| In the meantime, the great sage, seeing the
crowd of people, The assembly of gods, yakshas, gandharvas, and asuras, all
came. ||76|| After that, the auspicious one, with three pitchers of water,
Opened the gates, and bowed down to the Jina. ||77|| She opened the gates, and
the sound of the conch shell echoed. The sound of victory, the sound of the
celestial drums, rose. ||78|| A shower of flowers, fragrant with the scent of
the gods, fell. The auspicious one, with a smile, jumped on the head of the god.
||79|| He said, "O, protector of the world, you are blessed! You are the great
sage's disciple! By your virtue, even the gods are filled with joy." ||80|| He
said, "Victory to the virtue, whose power makes the moon shine! It rains, at the
appointed time, with the water of the celestial river." ||81|| After that, the
auspicious one, going around the city, from the earth to the sky, Opened the
southern and western gates. ||82|| Then, she sprinkled water on the northern
gate, and said, "Open this gate, which leads to the great sage's abode." ||83||
Even today, in the city of Champanagara, that gate stands. The auspicious one,
reaching the Jina's temple, stood there. ||84|| The gods, the gandharvas,
praised her. The celestial women, bowing down, sang her praises. ||85|| The
people, bowing down, experienced the power of the Jina's virtue. Reaching the
Jina's temple, they bowed down to the Jina. ||86|| Then, going to the house of
the virtuous one, she bowed down with devotion. She moved, according to the
rules, on the earth, with her eyes fixed on the ground. ||87|| She moved, with a
graceful gait, in the deep, narrow lanes. She moved, with a graceful gait, in
the house of the virtuous one. ||88|| He bowed down, and the king, filled with
joy, went with his retinue. The auspicious one, by her virtue, was also very
pleased. ||89|| This is the power of virtue, which is praised by all the worlds.
By enjoying the pleasures of the senses, one is reborn in the hell. ||90||
2010_02

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 khaNDa:-2 dRSTAntasamuccayaH 265 bhUvAlo vi subhadaM daLU
karakaliyacAliNIsalilaM  /  abbhuTThio sapauro saMcalio sammuho tIe  /  / 73 /
/  dharaviluliyasirakamalo paNamittu mahAsaIcaraNakamalaM  /  pabhaNai mAi !
mahAsai ! mahApasAyaM kareUNa  /  / 74  /  /  ugghADesu kavADe purIpaolINa tA
subhaddA vi  /  puvvaduvAraM pattA aNugammaMtI nariMdeNa  /  / 75  /  /
etyaMtare mahAsai kouyaakkhittamANasA gayaNe  /  saMpattA sura-kinnara-
vijjAhara-asurasaMghA ya  /  / 76 /  /  tayaNaMtaraM subhaddAe tinni vArAo
cAlaNijaleNa  /  acchoDie kavADe kAUNaM jiNanamokkAraM  /  / 77  /  /  ugghADie
kavADe jhaDa tti cikkAragahiranigghose  /  ucchalie jayasadde siddhiM
suraduMduhisareNa  /  / 78  /  /  mukkA ya kusumavuTThI surehiM
parimalabhamaMtabhamaraulA  /  jayau subhadAsIlaM ti jaMpiuM tIe sirauvare  /  /
79 /  /  to bhaNai puhaipAlo dhannA si tumaM mahAsaItilae !  /  jIe sIleNevaM
amarA vi kuNaMti sannijhaM  /  / 80 /  /  taM jayau jae sIlaM jassa pabhAveNa
tavai taraNI vi  /  varisai ya niyayasamayammi jalaharo amayadhArAhiM  /  / 81 /
/  tayaNaMtaraM subhaddA bhUvaipajjaMtapaurapariyariyA  /  gaMtUNa samugghADai
dAhiNa-pacchimapaolIo  /  / 82 /  /  tatto uttaradAraM jaleNa abhisiMciuM bhaNai
evaM  /  ugghADau sA eyaM jA vahai mahAsaIgavvaM  /  / 83  /  /  ajja vi
caMpAnayarIe sA taha ceva ciTThai paolI  /  tayaNu subhaddA jiNanAhamaMdiraM pai
samucciliyA  /  / 84  /  /  salahijjaMtI suravaragaNehiM vijjAharehiM thuvvaMtI
/  vaMdIhiM paDhijjaMtI gijjatI amararamaNIhiM  /  / 85 /  /  paNamijjaMtI
nAyarajaNehiM jiNapavayaNaM pabhAvaMti  /  jiNamaMdirammi pattA thuNiUNa
jiNesaraM tattha  /  / 86 /  /  tatto gaMtuM vasahIe sAhuNo vaMdiUNa bhattIe  /
saMcaliyA niyabhavaNe dharaNiyale nihiyaniyanayaNA  /  / 87 /  /
naJciravilAsiNIsuM parivajjiragahiratUraniyaresuM  /  gijjaMtacaJcarIsuM
saMpattA niyayabhavaNammi  /  / 88  /  /  to paNamiUNa rAyA taguNaraMjiyamaNo
gao sagihaM  /  sIleNa subhaddAe daio vi aIva aNuratto  /  / 89 /  /  iya sA
sIlapahAvA salAhaNijjA sayANa loyANa  /  bhottUNa visayasokkhaM uvavannA
tiyasalogammi  /  / 90  /  /  2010_02

Page #307 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 266 52. In the *Anga Rishi Katha* section of the *Shree Aavashyakahari
Bhadriya Vritta*, there is a story about a teacher named Champak Kosi Ajjo. He
had two disciples - Angarisi Ruddo and Ango Bhaddo. Angarisi was named so
because of his Anga (body) and Ruddo was named so because he was a *ganthi-
chhed* (one who cuts knots). Both of them were sent by their teacher to carry
wood. Angarisi was carrying a heavy load and was struggling. Ruddo, on the other
hand, was enjoying himself and was looking at the scenery. He saw Angarisi
struggling with the heavy load and thought, "This fellow is being exploited by
the teacher." At that moment, a young boy named Joijasa, who was carrying food
for his father, a *panthaga* (one who travels on foot), was passing by. Ruddo
hit the boy with a stick. Angarisi, seeing this, put down his load and went to
the teacher, complaining about Ruddo's behavior. He said, "Just like you hit the
innocent Joijasa, who was so handsome and full of life, Ruddo has come here."
The teacher, hearing this, thought, "The *suhaj-jhavasana* (one who has attained
the highest state of liberation) has attained *jati* (birth), *sariya*
(conduct), *sanjama* (self-control), *keval-nana* (omniscience), and *deva-
mahima* (divine glory). He has been told by the gods that if he gives
*abbakhana* (food) to this fellow, Ruddo will be ridiculed by people." He then
thought, "It is true that I gave him *abbakhana*." With this thought, he
attained *sambuddhi* (perfect knowledge), *patteya-buddhi* (understanding), and
became a *brahmana* (one who has attained the highest state of knowledge). He
also attained the four *pavvaya* (stages of liberation) - *uppanna-nana*
(arising knowledge), *siddha* (perfected), etc.   53. In the *Aaramdha-dhyana*
section of the *Shree Aavashyakahari Bhadriya Vritta*, there is a story about
*Kurudo-utkurudo*.  The fourth *karado-kurudo* was a teacher who lived in
Kunala-nayeri, at the foot of a mountain. During the rainy season, the gods
showered their blessings on the city, but the people were suffering due to the
heavy rains. The *karado* was angry and said, "Oh, rain god! Kunala!" The
*utkurudo* said, "Ten days and five more." The *karado* said, "Stop the rain!"
The *utkurudo* said, "Just like the night, so is the day." They continued to
argue like this. The rain continued for fifteen days, and the city was flooded.
The people were suffering. Then, the rain stopped, and the water receded. The
city was destroyed. The *karado* and *utkurudo* were both blamed for the
destruction. The city was destroyed in the thirteenth year after the *keval-
nana* (omniscience) of Mahavira.  - *Atur-pratyakhyana-prakirnakam* 34, 53. In
the *Anarth-danda-dhyana* and *Aaramdha-dhyana* sections of the *Shree
Trishatishalaka Purushacharitra*, there

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 266 52. paradUSaNadhyAne zrIAvazyakahAribhadrIyavRttau aGgaRSikathA  /  caMpA
kosi ajjo nAma uvajjhAo, tassa do sIsA - aMgarisI ruddao ya, aMgao bhaddao, teNa
se aMgarisI nAmaM kayaM, ruddao so gaMThichedao, te dovi teNa uvajjhAeNa
dArugANaM paThThaviyA, aMgarisI aDavIo bhAraM gahAya paDieti, ruddao divase
ramittA viyAle saMbhariyaM tAhe pahAvio aDaviM, taM ca pecchai dArugabhAraeNa
entagaM, ciMtei ya - nicchUDhomi uyajjhAeNaMti, io ya joijasA nAma vacchavAlI
puttassa paMthagassa bhattaM neUNa dArugabhAraeNa ei, ruddaeNa sA egAe khaDDAe
mAriyA, taM dArugabhAraM gahAya aNNeNa maggeNa purao Agao uvajjhAyassa hatthe
dhuNamANo kahei-jahA tujjha suMdarasIseNa joijasA mAriyA, ramaNavibhAsA, so
Agao, dhADio vaNasaMDe ciMtei - suhajjhavasANeNa jAtI sariyA saMjamo kevalanANaM
devA mahimaM kareMti, devehiM kahiyaM, jahA eeNa abbhakkhANaM dinnaM, ruddago
logeNa hIlijjai, so ciMtei - saccaM mae abbhakkhANaM dinnaM, so ciMteMto
saMbuddho patteyabuddho, iyaro baMbhaNo baMbhaNI ya dovi pavvaiyANi,
uppaNNaNANANi siddhANi cttaarivi| 53. ArambhadhyAne
zrIAvazyakahAribhadrIyavRttikathitaM kuruDotkuruDayorAkhyAnakam  /  cautthaM
karaDaokuruDA dosaTTiyaruvajjhAyA, kuNAlANayarIe niddhamaNamUle vasahI, varisAsu
devayANukaMpaNaM, nAgarehi nicchuhaNaM, karaDeNa rUsieNa vRttaM - 'varisa deva !
kuNAlae,' ukkuruDeNa bhaNiyaM - 'dasa divasANi paMca ya' puNaravi karaDeNa
bhaNiyaM - 'muTThittAhiM dhArAhiM' ukkuruDeNa bhaNiyaM 'jahA ratti tahA divaM'
evaM vottUNamavakkaMtA, kuNAlAevi paNNarasadivasa aNubaddhavarisaNeNaM
sajANavayA (sA) jaleNa ukkaMtA tao te taiyavarise sAee Nayare do'vi kAlaM kAUNa
ahe sattamAe puDhavI kAle ra bAvIsasAgarovamaTThiIA NeraiyA saMvRttA  /
kuNAlaNayarIviNAsakAlAo terasame varise mahAvIrassa kevalaNANasamupattI  /  -
AturapratyAkhyAnaprakIrNakam 34, 53. anarthadaNDadhyAne ArambhadhyAne ca
zrItriSaSTizalAkApuruSacaritrA'ntargatA dvIpAyana - zAmbayoH kathA |
zrIneminAthamanyedyurdezanAnte janArdanaH  /  namaskRtya vinItAtmA papraccheti
kRtAMjaliH  /  / 1 /  /  dvArakAyA yadUnAM ca mama ca syAt kSayaH katham  /
hetoH kuto'pyanyakRtaH svayaM kAlavazena vA  /  /  2  /  /  athAkhyadbhagavAn
zauryapurasya bahirAzrame  /  parAzara iti nAmnA prathitastApasAgraNIH  /  / 3 /
/  kanyAM nIcakulAM kAJcidyamunAdvIpa ke gataH  /  sa siSeve
sutazcAbhUttayordvaipAyanAhvayaH  /  / 4 /  /  parivrAD brahmacArI ca dAntazca
yadusauhRdAt  /  nivasaMstatra zAMbAdyairmadyAMdhairnihaniSyate  /  / 5 /  /
2010_02 1

Page #308 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Chapter:-2 Collection of Examples 267 He, enraged, will burn the city of Dwaraka
along with the Yadus. Your brother Jaratkumara will also meet his end. ||6||
"This is a vile wretch," thus thinking with a mind full of impurities,
Jaratkumara saw all the Yadus. ||7|| Even though I am the son of Vasudeva, how
can I be a fratricide? I will try to do everything else, thus thinking. ||8||
Rising up, he bowed to Nemi and became a wielder of two arrows. Krishna, armed
with a bow, went into exile in the forest for the protection of Krishna. ||9||
Having heard this from the people and the words of the Lord, Vyasa also went
into exile in the forest for the protection of Dwaraka and the Yadus. ||10||
Krishna, bowing to his master, entered the city of Dwaraka. He prohibited
alcohol, saying, "Misfortune arises from alcohol." ||11|| By Krishna's command,
in the middle of the Kadamba forest near the mountain, in the Kadambari cave, in
the stone ponds, there was a lot of. ||12|| All the people of Dwaraka, like
household water, brought and brought the old alcohol. ||13|| Siddhartha, the
charioteer, said to Balarama, "How can I see the misfortune of the city and the
family?" ||14|| "Therefore, release me, O master, so that I may perform my vow
at your feet. I cannot bear this time anymore." ||15|| Balarama, with tears in
his eyes, said to his brother, "Your words are right. Even though I am unable to
release you, I have released you, O sinless one." ||16|| "You, having performed
austerities and become distressed, have become a goddess, having gone through
misfortune. Remember this brotherly love when you come to my aid." ||17|| Saying
"Yes," Siddhartha renounced the world in the presence of his master. He
performed intense austerities for six months and then died and went to heaven.
||18|| And the alcohol that was thrown into the stone ponds by the people, due
to the fall of various flowers, became sweet. ||19|| At that time, in the month
of Vaisakha, a man of Samba was wandering. He went there thirsty and, seeing the
alcohol, drank it. ||20|| Then, delighted by the alcohol, he filled his mind
with it. He went to Samba's house and gave him the offering. ||21|| Seeing the
alcohol, Samba, the son of Hari, was delighted. He drank and drank and said,
"Where did you get this?" ||22|| He said, "The alcohol is there, in the place
where Samba went with his unruly sons on the second day, to the Kadambari cave."
||23|| The Kadambari cave, from which the alcohol is named, is called Kadambari.
Seeing it, Samba was delighted, like a thirsty man to a well. ||24|| Samba,
accompanied by his servants, brought the alcohol to the middle of the forest
full of flowering trees. He, along with his friends, brothers, and cousins, tied
himself and drank. ||25|| "It has been a long time since we got it," "It is
old," "It is well-prepared," thus saying, they drank the alcohol, but they did
not get satisfaction. ||26|| They saw the sons of Samba, who were blind from
drinking alcohol, playing, while Vyasa, the sage, was meditating in front of the
mountain. ||27|| Samba said to his own people, "This is my city and family. This
one will destroy their prosperity. How will

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 khaNDa:-2 dRSTAntasamuccayaH 267 sa kruddho dhakSyati purIM dvArakAM yadubhiH
saha  /  jaratkumArAt svabhrAtustava cAnto bhaviSyati  /  / 6 /  /  are
kulAMgArako'yamityantaH kaluSAzayaiH  /  jarAkumAro dadRze yadubhiH sakalairapi
/  / 7 /  /  bhUtvApi vasudevasya sUnuH kiM bhrAtRghAtyaham  /
tatsarvathAnyathA kartuM yate'hamiti cintayan  /  / 8 /  /  utthAya nemiM natvA
ca jAreyastUNayugmabhUt  /  kodaMDI kRSNarakSArthaM vanavAsamazizrayat  /  / 9 /
/  dvaipAyano'pi tacchrutvA lokazrutvA prabhorvacaH  /  dvArakAyA yadUnAM ca
rakSArthaM vanavAsyabhUt  /  / 10 /  /  kRSNo'pi svAminaM natvA viveza dvArakAM
purIm  /  madyamUlo hyanarthaH syAditi madyaM nyavArayat  /  / 11 /  /
kRSNAjJayA samIpAdrau kadambavanamadhyataH  /  kAdaMbaryAM kandarAyAM
zilAkuMDeSu bhUrizaH  /  / 12 /  /  purAkRtAni madyAni sarve dvAravatIjanAH  /
gRhazrotojalamiva nItvA nItvA pratatyajuH  /  / 13 /  /  siddhArthaH
sArathirdhAtA baladevamathAvadat  /  puryAH kulasya cedRkSAM kathaM drakSyAmi
durdazAm  /  / 14  /  /  tasmAnmAM visRja svAmipAdAnte'haM yathA vratam  /
adhunaiva hi gRhNAmi kAlakSepaM sahe na hi  /  / 15 /  /  udazrustaM balo'yUce
bhrAtaryuktaM vadasyadaH  /  visraSTumakSameNApi visRSTo'si mayAnagha  /  / 16 /
/  tapastaptvA vipannastvaM devIbhUto vipadgatam  /  saMbodhayeH samaye mAM
bhrAtRsnehamimaM smaran  /  / 17 /  /  AmetyudIrya siddhArthaH prAvrAjIt
svAmino'ntike  /  SaNmAsIM ca tapastIvra taptvA mRtvA divaM yayau  /  / 18  /  /
itazca yA zilAkuMDeSvAsIt kSiptA surA janaiH  /  nAnAdrupuSpasaMpAtAttadA svAdvI
babhUva sA  /  / 19 /  /  tadA ca mAse vaizAkhe ko'pi zAMbasya pUruSaH  /  aTan
yayau tatra tRSA tAM ca dRSTvA surAM papau  /  / 20 /  /  tataH pramuditastena
dRtimApUrya sIdhunA  /  yayau vezmani zAMbasya taccopAyanamArpayat  /  / 21 /  /
tatsIdhu dRSTvA sAmodaM sapramodo hareH sutaH  /  pAyaM pAyaM jagAdaivaM kutra
labdhamidaM tvayA  /  / 22 /  /  so'pyAkhyatsIdhu tatrasthaM zAMbo'pyahni
dvitIyake  /  samaM kumArairdurdAntairyayau kAMdabarIM guhAm  /  / 23 /  /
kAdaMbarIguhAyogAnnAmnA kAdaMbarI surAm  /  tAM prekSya zAMbo mumude tRSito
nimnagAmiva  /  / 24  /  /  bhRtyairAnAyya tAM zAMbaH puSpitadruvanAntare  /
baddhApAnaH papau mitrabhrAtRbhrAtRvyasaMyutaH  /  / 25 /  /  cirAtprApteti
jIrNeti saddavyaiH saMskRteti ca  /  pibantastAM surAM te tu na tRptimupalebhire
/  / 26  /  /  dvaipAyanaSi dhyAnasthamagre taM girimAzritam  /
dadRzurmadyapAnAndhAH krIDantaste kumArakAH  /  / 27  /  /  zAMbo babhASe
svAnitthamayaM me nagarI kulam  /  hantA taddhanyatAmeSa haniSyati hataH katham
/  / 28  /  /  tataste kupitAH sarve leSTubhiH pAdatADanaiH
capeTAbhirmuSTibhizca tamAjaghnurmuhurmuhaH  /  / 29 /  /  pAtitaM taM
mahIpRSThe mRtaprAyaM vidhAya te  /  yayuH purIM dvAravatIM vivizuH
svasvavezmasu  /  / 30 /  /  2010_02

Page #309 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter 268: The Scattering of the Eagerly Rejected  Krishna, filled with
sorrow, thought, "Alas, how unfortunate is the fate of these princes, a fate
that will bring ruin to their lineage!"  Then, Krishna, accompanied by Rama,
went to the sage Dvaipayana. He saw him with eyes red with anger, his gaze like
a venomous serpent.  He appeared like a great lion, terrifying beyond measure.
Janardana tried to console the three-staffed sage.  "Anger is the greatest
enemy, which brings not only sorrow but also continuous birth in the cycle of
births and deaths."  "My sons, blinded by ignorance and intoxicated by drink,
have committed this offense. O great sage, your anger is justified."  Even
though Krishna spoke thus, the three-staffed sage did not calm down. He said to
Krishna, "Your consoling words are in vain.  "The cause of my sons being struck
was ordained by me. Without you, I will burn Dwarka along with all its
inhabitants. There is no escape."  Rama also tried to dissuade Krishna, saying,
"Do not be deceived, brother. This wandering ascetic is a deceiver, a cheat."
"Those with crooked noses, thick lips and noses, and unusual eyes, those with
defective limbs, will never attain peace."  "If this is said, then the
destruction of the existing object is inevitable. The words of the omniscient
are true, and there is no other way."  Then, filled with sorrow, Krishna
returned to his palace. The prophecy of Dvaipayana was revealed in Dwarka.  The
bearer of the bow announced it in the city on the second day. The people,
especially those devoted to dharma, were greatly disturbed.  All the people,
including the Lord himself, gathered there. Sri Nemi, along with the sages,
resided on the Raivataka mountain.  Going there and bowing down, Krishna
listened to the teachings, which dispelled the great delusion and sleep of the
world, like the rays of the sun.  Some of the princes, including Pradyumna,
Samba, Nishadha, Ulmuka, and Saran, renounced the world after hearing those
teachings of dharma.  Many Yadava women, including Rukmini and Jambavati, filled
with fear of the future, renounced the world at the feet of their Lord.  The
omniscient Lord, asked by Krishna, said, "Dvaipayana will burn this Dwarka in
twelve years."  Krishna thought, "Those who renounced the world earlier, like
the conquerors of the sea, are fortunate. They renounced the world before
becoming addicted to worldly pleasures and uninitiated."  Knowing his intention,
the Lord said to Krishna, "The bowmen never renounce the world, for they are
bound by their karma.  "They will surely go down to the land of sand. You,
however, will go to the land of light."  Hearing this, Krishna was immediately
filled with despair.  The omniscient Lord said again, "Do not be disheartened,
Janardana. You will be lifted from the mortal world and become a celestial
being.  "After falling from the celestial world, you will be born as the king of
Ganga-dwar. You will be the son of the conqueror of enemies, and your name will
be Dwadasha.  "You will go to Brahmaloka, but you will fall from there. Then,
you will be born as a human being in the land of Bharata.  "When the earth
ascends, O Janardana, you will attain liberation in the holy place of the holy
one."  Having said this, the Lord of the universe went elsewhere. Bowing down to
him, Vasudeva returned to the city of Dwarka.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 268 AturapratyAkhyAnaprakIrNakam taccAjJAsIccaraiH kRSNo dadhyau caivaM
viSAdabhAk  /  aho durdItatAmISAM kumArANAM kulAntakRt  /  / 31 /  /  tataH
kRSNaH sarAmo'gAttatra dvaipAyanaM munim  /  apazyat koparaktAkSaM mahAhimiva
dRgviSam  /  / 32 /  /  mahAmAtra iva vyAlamatimAtrabhayaMkaram  /  tridaMDinaM
sAntvayituM tamArebhe janArdanaH  /  / 33 /  /  krodha eva mahAzatruryo duHkhaM
neha kevalam  /  pradatte kiM tu satataM janmalakSeSu janminaH  /  / 34  /  /
ajJAnairmadyapAnAndhairaparAddhaM mamAtmajaiH  /  tatsahasva maharSe tvamamarSo
yujyate na te  /  / 35 /  /  kRSNenetyucyamAno'pi nAzAmyat sa tridaMDikaH  /
ityUce ca kRtaM kRSNa bhavataH sAntvabhASitaiH  /  / 36  /  /
yatputraistADyamAnena nidAnaM vihitaM mayA  /  salokAM dvArakAM dagdhuM na
mokSo'tra yuvAM vinA  /  / 37  /  /  kRSNaM nyaSedhadrAmo'pi mA bAndhava
mudhaiva hi  /  parivrAjamanunayAmukaM vAritavAmakam  /  / 38  /  /
vakrAjrinAsikAhastAH sthUloSThodaranAsikAH  /  vilakSaNAkSA hInAGgAH zAntiM
yAnti na jAtucit  /  / 39 /  /  asmin khalUktvA tadbhAtarna nAzo bhAvivastunaH
/  sarvajJabhASitaM cApi sarvathA nAnyathA bhavet  /  / 4 /  /  tatazca
zokasantaptaH kRSNaH svasadanaM yayau  /  dvaipAyananidAnaM ca dvArikAyAM
prakaTyabhUt  /  / 4 /  /  aghoSayadvitIye'hni nagaryAmiti zArGgabhRt  /
vizeSAddharmaniratAstiSThatAtaH paraM janAH  /  / 42 /  /  tathArebhe janaH
sarvo'pyupetya bhagavAnapi  /  zrInemiH samavAsArSIttatra raivatakAcale  /  / 43
/  /  tatra gatvA ca natvA ca kRSNaH zuzrAva dezanAm  /
jaganmohamahAnidrAvidrAvaNaraviprabhAm  /  / 44 /  /  pradyumnazAmbau niSadha
ulmukaH sAraNAdayaH  /  kumArAH prAvrajan ke'pi zrutva tAM dharmadezanAm  /  /
45 /  /  rukmiNIjAmbavatyAdyA bahvayazca yaduyoSitaH  /  svAminaH pAdapadmAnte
bhavodvignAH pravavrajuH  /  / 46 /  /  Acakhyau kRSNapRSTazca sarvajJo
bhagavAnidam  /  dvaipAyano dvAdaze'bde dhakSyati dvArikAmimAm  /  / 47  /  /
dadhyau ca kRSNo dhanyAste samudravijayAdayaH  /  ye'gre'pi prAvrajan dhiGmAM
rAjyalubdhamadIkSitam  /  / 48  /  /  jJAtvA tadAzayaM svAmI proce kRSNa kadApi
hi  /  na zAGgiNaH pravrajanti nidAnena kRtArgalAH  /  / 49 /  /
gacchantyavazyaM te'dhastAttvaM gAmI vAlukAprabhAm  /  zrutveti kRSNaH sadyo'pi
nitAntavidhuro'bhavat  /  / 50  /  /  bhUyo'bhyadhatta sarvajJo mA viSIda
janArdana  /  tata uddhRtya martyastvaM bhAvI vaimAnikastataH  /  / 51 /  /
cyutvA bhAvyatra bharate gaMgAdvArapurezituH  /  jitazatroH suto'haMstvaM
dvAdazo nAmato'mamaH  /  / 52 /  /  brahmalokaM balo gAmI maryo bhAvI
tatazcyutaH  /  tato'pi devazcutvA sa bhAvyatra bharate pumAn  /  / 53 /  /
utsarpiNyAM prasarpantyAM pRthivIza janArdana  /  tIrthanAthasya te tIrthe sa
mokSamupayAsyati  /  / 54  /  /  ityuditvA jagannAtho viharannanyato yayau  /
taM natvA vAsudevo'pi jagAma dvArikAM purIm  /  / 55  /  /  2010_02

Page #310 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Chapter:-2 Collection of Examples 269 Krishna again caused the proclamation to
be made. Especially the people who were devoted to Dharma all became so. ||56||
After death, Dvaipayana was born among the Agnikumara. He remembered the past
enmity and went to Dwaraka. ||57|| The Asura Dvaipayana saw all the people
there, from the fourth, sixth, eighth, etc., all devoted to the worship of the
Gods. ||58|| Unable to cause any harm there due to the influence of Dharma, the
intelligent Dvaipayana searched for loopholes for eleven years. ||59|| In the
twelfth year, the people thought that due to the penance, Dvaipayana was
destroyed, defeated, and we are happy. ||60|| Those who were addicted to
drinking and eating meat, started to indulge freely. The knowledgeable
Dvaipayana also got an opportunity then. ||61|| Various calamities, similar to
the calamities at the end of the Kalpa, appeared in Dwaraka, which were seen by
the Yamadwaras. ||62|| Meteors fell, there were earthquakes, the planets emitted
smoke and comets. ||63|| The sun's disc, full of holes, caused a rain of fire.
Suddenly, there was an eclipse of the sun and moon. ||64|| The children in the
houses made fun and applied leprous ointment. The images of the Gods, painted on
the walls, laughed. ||65|| Dogs entered the city, and the Asura Dvaipayana,
surrounded by Sakinis, Vetalas, etc., wandered around. ||66|| The citizens saw
in their dreams that they were smeared with red cloth, submerged in mud, and
being dragged towards the south. ||67|| The jewels of Balarama and Krishna, like
the Sirac Chakra, etc., were lost. Then the Asura Dvaipayana created a
whirlwind. ||68|| He took away everything from the city, wood, grass, etc., from
all sides. He brought the people who were dying from all directions and threw
them in the city. ||69|| The city was filled with wood due to the wind from all
eight directions, which uprooted the branches. ||70|| The Asura set fire to the
city of Dwaraka, burning sixty crore families outside and seventy crore families
inside. ||71|| The fire blazed like the fire of destruction, engulfing the whole
world with smoke and darkness. ||72|| The citizens, young and old, were unable
to move even a step, as if they were tied together. ||73|| Hari, along with
Vasudeva, Devaki, and Rohini, was putting them in the chariot, to save them from
the fire. ||74|| The horses did not move, nor did the bulls. The serpents were
paralyzed by the Asura, like they were struck by a thunderbolt. ||75|| Then
Balarama and Krishna themselves pulled the chariot. The yoke of the chariot
broke immediately, with a loud crack like a branch. ||76|| Even then, they
pulled the chariot to the gate with their strength. The people, with sorrowful
minds, cried out, "Save us, O Rama, O Krishna!" ||77|| Then the Asura
immediately closed the gate with its doors. Rama, with a blow of his hand, broke
them into pieces like earthen pots. ||78|| The chariot, as if swallowed by the
earth, did not move. The God said to Rama and Krishna, "Is this your delusion?
||79|| Oh, it was told to you earlier, that without me, no one can be liberated.
My penance has been bought by me." ||80||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 khaNDa:-2 dRSTAntasamuccayaH 269 tathaiva ghoSaNAM kRSNaH punaH puryAmakArayat
/  vizeSato dharmaniSTho lokaH sarvo babhUva ca  /  / 56 /  /  mRtvA
dvaipAyano'pyagnikumAreSUdapadyata  /  sasmAra pUrvavairaM ca dvArakAmAjagAma ca
/  / 57  /  /  caturthaSaSThASTamAdirataM tatrAkhilaM janam  /
devapUjAprasaktaM cApazyadvaipAyano'suraH  /  / 58 /  /
dharmaprabhAvatastatropasarga kartumakSamaH  /  chidrANyanveSayan
so'sthAdvarSANyekAdazogradhIH  /  / 59 /  /  prApte'bde dvAdaze loko dadhyau
yattapasAmunA  /  bhraSTo dvaipAyano naSTo jitazceti ramAmahe  /  / 60  /  /
rantuM pravRttAste svairaM madyapA mAMsakhAdinaH  /  lebhe'vakAzaM
chidrajJastadA dvaipAyano'pi hi  /  / 61 /  /  utpAtA vividhAzcaivaM
kalpAntotpAtasannibhAH  /  prAdurAsan dvArakAyAmantakadvAradarzinaH  /  / 62 /
/  nipeturulkA nirghAtAzcAbhavan bhUrakampata  /  grahAzca mumucuNUMmaM
dhUmaketuviDambakam  /  / 63 /  /  aGgAravRSTiM vidadhe sacchidraM ravimaMDalam
/  akasmAduparAgazca candramArtaMDayorabhUt  /  / 64 /  /  aTTahAsaM
lepyamayAzcakrurvezmasu putrakAH  /  udbhUkA jahasuzcApi citrAlikhitadevatAH  /
/ 65 /  /  puryantaH zvApadAzceruH sa ca dvaipAyanAsuraH  /
zAkinIbhUtavetAlAdibhiH parivRto'bhramat  /  / 66 /  /  svapneSvapazyan paurAH
svaM raktAmbaravilepanam  /  paGkamagnaM kRSyamANaM dakSiNAbhimukhaM tathA  /  /
67 /  /  praNezuH sIracakrAdiratnAni balakRSNayoH  /  tato vicakre saMvartaM
vAtaM dvaipAyanAsuraH  /  / 68 /  /  sa sarvato'pyAjahAra puryAM kASThatRNAdikam
/  janAn praNazyato digbhyo'pyAnIya nyakSipatpure  /  / 69 /  /
digbhyo'STAbhyo'pi vAtena tenonmUlitazAkhinA  /  apUryata samagrApi dArubhirakA
purI  /  / 70 /  /  SaSTiM bAhyAH kulakoTI saptatiM tu madhyagAH  /  saMpiMDya
dvArakApuryAM so'suro'gnimadIpayat  /  / 71 /  /  dhagagdhagiti jajvAla
kSayAnala ivAnalaH  /  nIrandhaidhUmasantAnairvizvamapyandhakArayan  /  / 72 /
/  padamapyakSamA gantuM mitho nigaDitA iva  /  sabAlavRddhAste paurAH
pIDIbhUyAvatasthire  /  / 73  /  /  vasudevaM devakI ca rohiNI ca rathe hariH  /
Aropayat sarAmo'tha tAnAkraSTuM pradIpanAt  /  / 74 /  /  na celusturagAstatra
na celurvRSabhA api  /  sureNa staMbhitAstena vArtikeNeva pannagAH  /  / 75  /
/  tataH svayaM balopendrau tamAcakRSatU ratham  /  bhagnamakSayugaM
sadyasta'ttaDiti kAMDavat  /  / 76  /  /  tathApi tau svasAmarthyAttaM dvAre
ninyatU ratham  /  pAhi hA rAma hA kRSNetyAkrandairdInamAnasau  /  / 77  /  /
atha dvAraM kapATAbhyAM jhaTityevAsuraH pyadhAt  /  rAmaH
pANiprahAreNAbhAMkSIttau mRtkapAlavat  /  / 78  /  /  bhuvA grasta iva
rathastathapi niragAnna hi  /  so'pi devo'vadadrAmakRSNau kiM moha eSa vAm  /  /
79 /  /  aho purApi yuvayorAkhyAtaM yAvAM vinA  /  na mokSaH kasyacidiha
vikrItaM hi tapo mayA  /  / 80 /  /  2010_02

Page #311 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Scattering of Eager Refusal  Then their parents said, "O sons, go! All
the Yadavas live because of you two. You have already accomplished what was to
be done by your valor. This is a stronger and more difficult situation to be
overcome."  "We, who are deprived of fortune, will not attain the fruit of our
own actions by initiation at the end of Sri Nemi's feet. We will not experience
it."  Even after being told this, when Rama and Krishna did not go, Vasudeva,
Devaki, and Rohini spoke. "Therefore, Sri Nemi, the world teacher, is our
refuge. We have renounced the four types of food. We have renounced the Arhats,
the Siddhas, the Sadhus, and the Dharma as taught by the Arhats. Therefore, we,
who desire refuge, have taken refuge in Him. We are not anyone's, nor is anyone
ours. We have stood firm in the prescribed worship, devoted to prostration."
Then Dvapayana rained fire like a cloud of fire upon them. The three, Vasudeva
and the others, were afflicted and went to heaven.  Rama and Krishna went
outside the city to the old garden. There they saw the city burning. The walls
of jewels had become like dust and broken stones. The pillars of sandalwood and
go-shirsha had become like ashes and straw. The heads of the city walls were
crumbling and falling. The foundations of the houses were bursting and cracking.
There was no space between the flames, as if in the ocean. Everything became one
fire, as if one ocean in destruction. The fire danced with its fiery hands and
roared with its fiery sounds. It drove the people of the city like fish in a
net, through the smoke.  Then Krishna said to Siri, "Alas! This is like a club
now. I am standing on the shore and seeing my own city burning. Just as I cannot
save the city, so I cannot bear to see it. O Arya, tell me where we should go,
everything is against us."  Balabhadra, the friend, the relative, and the
kinsman, spoke. "Our Pandava cousins are there, in their dwelling."  Krishna
said then, "They have been made free of poison by me. How can we go to their
dwelling, ashamed by our own wrongdoing?"  Rama said, "The virtuous keep
kindness in their hearts. They never remember wrongdoing, as if it were a bad
dream."  "They have been honored in many ways, those grateful Pandava sons. They
will only offer respect. Brother, consider it otherwise."  Thus spoken to by
Siri, Shārṅga turned his bow east and south. He saw the Pandava city, called
Pandu-Mathura.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 AturapratyAkhyAnaprakIrNakam tataste pitaro'vocan he vatsau gacchataM yuvAm  /
yuvAbhyAM nanu jIvadbhayAM jIvanti yadavo'khilAH  /  / 81 /  /  kRtena
pauruSAyattaM yuvAbhyAM kRtameva hi  /  balIyasI punariyaM durlaghyA
bhavitavyatA  /  / 82  /  /  dIkSA zrInemipAdAnte'smakAbhirbhAgyavarjitaiH  /
nopAttAnubhaviSyAmaH phalamadya svakarmaNAm  /  / 83 /  /  ityukte'pi yadA
rAmakRSNau nAgacchatAM tadA  /  vasudevo devakI ca rohiNI caivamUcire  //  84
//   /  ataH paraM naH zaraNaM zrInemistrijagadguruH  /  vayaM
caturvidhAhArapratyAkhyAnamakRSmahi  /  /  85  /  /  arhataH siddhasAdhUMzca
dharmaM cArhadudIritam  /  ataH paraM prapannAH smaH zaraNaM zaraNecchavaH  /  /
86 /  /  na vayaM kasyacit ko'pi nAsmadIya iti svayam  /
vihitArAdhanAstasthurnamaskAraparAyaNAH  /  / 87 /  /  teSu dvepAyano'thAgniM
vavarSAnalameghavat  /  vipadya ca yayuH svargaM vasudevAdayastrayaH  /  /  88
/  /  rAmakRSNau bahiH puryA jIrNodyAne'tha jagmatuH  /  dahyamAnAM purIM tatra
sthitau dvAvapyapazyatAm  /  / 89 /  /
mANikyabhittayo'bhUvaMzcUrNasAdazmakhaMDavat  /  gozIrSacandanastaMbhA
bhasmasAJca palAlavat  /  / 90 /  /  prAkArakapizIrSANi taDattaDiti tutruTuH  /
talAnyapi niketAnAM phaDapphaDiti pusphuTuH  /  / 91 /  /  jvAlAnAM nAntaraM
tatrAbhUjjalAnAmivArNave  /  ekAnalamabhUtsarvamekArNavamiva kSaye  /  /  92  /
/  jvAlAhastairnanarteva jagarjevAnalaH svanaiH  /
dhUmavyAjAtpauramatsyeSvAnAyamiva cAnayat  /  / 93 /  /  athoce sIriNaM kRSNo
dhigdhik klaba ivAdhunA  /  ahaM taTasthaH pazyAmi dahyamAnAM nijAM purIm  /  /
94 /  /  yathA nAlaM purIM trAtuM tathA na draSTumutsahe  /  Arya brUhi kva
gacchAvo viruddhaM sarvamAvayoH  /  / 95 /  /  babhASe balabhadro'pi
suhRtsambandhibAndhavAH  /  asmAkaM pANDutanayAstadyAvastanniketanam  /  / 96 /
/  kRSNo'pyUce tadAnIM te mayA nirviSayIkRtAH  /  kathaM taddhAmni yAsyAvaH
svApakAreNa lajjitau  /  / 97 /  /  Uce rAmo'pyupakAraM santo dadhati cetasi  /
kadApi kusvapnamiva nApakAraM smaranti tu  /  /  98  /  /  anekadhA satkRtAste
kRtajJAH pAMDusUnavaH  /  pUjAmeva kariSyanti bhrAtarvimRza mAnyathA  /  /  99
/  /  ityuktaH sIriNA zArGga prAcalatpUrvadakSiNAm  /  udidazya pAMDavapurIM tAM
pAMDumathurAbhidham  /  / 100  /  /  54. saMrambhadhyAne zrI
AvazyakahAribhadrIyavRttau kSullakamuneH prabandhaH  /  270 sAgeyaM NayaraM,
puMDario rAyA, kaMDario juvarAyA, juvaranno devI jasabhaddA, taM puMDarIo
caMkamaMtI daTThUNa ajjhovavanno, necchai, taheva juvarAyA mArio, sAvi sattheNa
samaM palAyA, ahuNovavannagabbhA pattA ya sAvatthiM, tattha ya sAvatthIe
ajiyaseNo Ayario, kittimattI mayahariyA, sA tIe mUle teNeva kameNa pavvaiyA jahA
dhAriNI tahA vibhAsiyavvA, navaraM tIe dArao na chaDDio khuDDagakumArotti
2010_02

Page #312 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Chapter:-2 Collection of Examples 271 That name, that young man, thinks - I will
not renounce the world, he asks Maya - I will go, she advises him - that is not
the place, she says - then eat for the sake of your mother for twelve years, he
says - I will, he asks for blessings, she says - I will ask for blessings, for
thirty-two years, for twelve years for the teacher, for twelve years for the
preceptor, thus for forty-eight years, he is good, but still not the place, he
is ready, then he tells Maya - do not deceive me anywhere, Mahallapiya is your
king, these are your father's inheritance, the blanket, the jewel, and the
money, I have been deceived by you, he goes to the city, he stays at the king's
palace, he asks for the king, he asks for the inner circle, she dances all night
and sleeps in the morning, then she thinks - the king's circle has gained a lot,
if he is deceived here, then we will be saved, then she sings this song:
'Sweetly sung, sweetly danced, sweetly dressed, beautiful one. Protect the long
life, do not be careless. ||1||' This is the Nigada Siddha, in the meantime, the
blanket is stolen by a thief, just as a king's earring is worth a hundred
thousand, a necklace of a skilled weaver is worth a hundred thousand, a sword of
Jayasandhi is worth a hundred thousand, a sweet anklet is worth a hundred
thousand, the blanket, the earring (sword), the necklace, the anklet, the
anklet, etc., are worth a hundred thousand, whoever is pleased there or gives,
he is written down, if he knows, then he is happy, if he does not know, then he
is punished, all are written down, all are announced in the morning, they ask,
thief! what was given to you?, he tells everything as he is, until he is unable
to control himself, you have taken the kingdom from the king, he says - I will
give, the thief says - no, he is going to die, he will die, he did not have
control before, the king says - you are going to kill me, the elder king will
not give the kingdom, he does not want to give it, the skilled weaver says -
twelve years for the king, he will die, I will eat food, there will be a debate,
the minister - I will fight with other kings, the five kings say - bring the
elephant, kill him, they say - do as you say, they do not want to, the thief's
son goes on the way, he climbs the mountain. 56. In the Akhyanamanikakosa of the
Adhikaranadhyana, the story of Nandamanikara. In the beautiful temple-garden, in
the city of Raigiri. The king, the hero, the lotus of the army. ||1|| The head
of the group of jewelers, the one who is full of virtues. The merchant named
Nanda lives there. ||2|| I, who am the only one in the world, who is the friend
of the Jina. I have come to worship him, having found the opportunity. ||3||
With his head touching the ground, he bowed to the Jina, standing there. He was
blessed by the teacher of the three worlds, and he received his teachings. ||4||
2010_02

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 khaNDa:-2 dRSTAntasamuccayaH 271 se nAmaM kayaM, so jovvaNattho jAo, ciMtei-
pavvajjaM na tarAmi kAuM, mAyaraM Apucchai-jAmi, sA aNusAsai tahavi na ThAi, sA
bhaNai-to khAi mannimittaM bArasa varisANi karehi, bhaNai-karemi, punnesu
Apucchai, sA bhaNai-mayahariyaM ApucchAmi, tIsevi vArasa varisANi, tAhe
Ayariyassavi vayaMNeNa bArasa, uvajjhAyassa bArasa, evaM aDayAlIsaM varisANi
acchA vio taha vi na ThAi, visajjio, pacchA mAyAe bhaNNai-mA jahiM vA tahiM vA
vaJcAhi, mahallapiyA tujjha puMDarIo rAyA, imA te pitisaMtiyA muddiyA
kaMbalarayaNaM ca mae nitIe nINIyaM eyANi gahAya vaJcAhitti, gao NayaraM, raNNo
jANasAlAe AvAsio kalle rAyANaM pecchihAmitti, abbhaMtaraparisAe pecchaNayaM
pecchai, sA naTTiyA savvarattiM nacciUNa pabhAyakAle niddAiyA, tAhe sA dhorigiNI
ciMtei-tosiyA parisA bahugaM ca laddhaM jai ettha viyaTTai to dharisiyAmotti,
tAhe imaM gItiyaM pagAiyA 'suTU gAiyaM suThU naJciyaM suTTavAiyaM sAma suMdari
/  aNupAliya dIharAiyao sumiNate mA pamAyae  /  / 1 /  /  iyaM nigadasiddhava,
etthaMtare khuDDaeNa kaMbalarayaNaM chUDhaM, jasabhaddeNa juvarAiNA kuMDalaM
sayasahassamollaM, sirikatAe satthavAhiNIe hAro sayasahassamollo, jayasaMdhiNA
amaJceNa kaDago sayasahassamollo, kaNNavAlo miTho teNa aMkuso sayasahasso,
kaMbalaM kuMDala (kaDayaM) hAregAvali aMkusotti eyAi sahasahassamollAi, jo ya
kira tattha tUsai vA dei vA so savvo likhijjai, jai jANai to tuTTho aha na yANai
to daMDo tesiMti savve lihiyA, pabhAe savve saddAviyA, pucchiyA, khuDDago !
tubbhe kIsa dinnaM ?, so jahA piyAmArio taM savvaM parikahei jAva na samattho
saMjamamaNupAleuM, tubbhaM mUlamAgao rajjaM ahilasAmitti, so bhaNai-demi, so
khuDDago bhaNai-alAhi, sumiNaMtayaM vaTTai, marijjA, puvvakaovi saMjamo
nAsihitti, juvarAyA bhaNai-tumaM mAreuM maggAmi thero rAyA rajjaM na deitti,
sovi dijjaMtaM necchai, satthavAhabhajjA bhaNai-bArasa varisANi pautthassa, pahe
vaTTai, annaM pavesemi vImaMsA vaTTai, amaJco-aNNarAyANaehiM samaM ghaDAmi,
paJcaMtarAyANo hatthimeThaM bhaNaMti-hatthiM ANehi mAreha vatti, bhaNaMti te
tahA karehitti bhaNiyA necchaMti, khuDDagakumArassa maggeNa laggA pavvaiyA  /
56. adhikaraNadhyAne zrIAkhyAnakamaNikoze nandamaNikAravRttAntaH  /
ramaNIyadeulA-''rAmarAie puravarammi rAyagihe  /  sirivIranAhakamalamahuyaro
seNio rAyA  /  / 1 /  /  maNiyAravaNiyavaggassa aggaNI guNamaNInaInAho  /
seTThI naMdo nAmeNa mANaNIo nivassa'tthi  /  / 2 /  /  aha annayA ya
bhuvaNekkabaMdhavaM vaddhamANajiNanAhaM  /  samavasariyaM nisAmiya samAgao
vaMdaNatthamimo  /  / 3 /  /  bhUmImilaMtabhAlo'bhivaMdiuM jiNavaraM
samuvaviTTho  /  vihiyA tiloyaguruNA tatto saddesaNA tassa  /  / 4 /  /  2010_02

Page #313 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 272 ## The Scattering of the Eager Refusal  Hearing this, Nanda, having
learned the twelve aspects of household dharma, renounced them.  He bowed to his
master and returned home.  He perfectly followed the household dharma,
increasing in merit.  He considered himself to be a renunciant, freed from the
cycle of birth and death.    Even though he was in the company of the un-
enlightened, day after day, he remained steadfast in his renunciation.  He was
content in the company of the liberated, even in the midst of hardship.
During the month of Jyestha, at the time of the Posha festival, Nanda, the
wealthy merchant, the best of the Maniyari, was overcome by a desire to build a
pond.  He was filled with the desire to create a place of peace and tranquility.
He thought, "May these good people, these living beings, live long in this
world."  He thought, "I will build a pond, a place where people can come to
drink cool, clear water, bathe, and play."  The wealthy merchant, Prabha,
thought, "I will build a pond."    He called upon the skilled architect,
Parihiyalakkhavatti, who was skilled in building houses.  He requested him to
build a pond.    He said, "O Dev!  I want to build a pond in this area, a pond
that will be a source of joy for the people.  I want to build a pond that will
be a source of happiness for the people."  The architect, with his skilled
hands, built a pond with a beautiful, shady canopy of trees, including the
Himtala, Tala, Tali, and Tamala.  The pond was filled with clear, pure water,
adorned with garlands of pearls.  It was a place of beauty and tranquility, with
swans swimming gracefully on its surface.    The pond was filled with the
fragrance of lotus, kumuda, and kuvalaya flowers.  It was a place where bees
buzzed happily, attracted by the sweet scent of the flowers.  The pond was
surrounded by a beautiful grove of trees, with fish, frogs, and turtles swimming
in its waters.    Nanda, the wealthy merchant, built this pond, which he named
"Nanda."  He also built a place where people could come to eat and drink, a
place where they could find peace and happiness.  He thought, "I will build a
place where people can come to find peace and happiness."  People came to the
pond to bathe, drink water, and play.  They all enjoyed the pond, and they all
praised Nanda for his generosity.    Nanda, the wealthy merchant, was a good
man.  He lived a long and happy life.  He built this pond, which was filled with
cool, clear water.    Hearing this, Nanda was filled with joy.  He thought,
"What a wonderful thing I have done!  Who in this world would not be happy to
have done such a good deed?"  However, after some time, Nanda was afflicted by a
terrible illness.  He suffered from sixteen different diseases, all of which
were very painful.    Five doctors came to treat him, but they were unable to
cure him.  He was very sick, and he was close to death.  He thought, "I am going
to die.  I will never see my beautiful pond again."  He remembered the joy that
he had brought to the people by building the pond.  He thought, "I have brought
joy to the people.  I have made them happy."  He thought about his past deeds,
and he was filled with remorse.  He thought, "Oh, what have I done?  I have
neglected my own spiritual development.  I have wasted my life on material

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 272 AturapratyAkhyAnaprakIrNakam taM nisuNiUNa naMdo gihatthadhamma
duvAlasavihaM pi  /  /  paDivajjiUNa taha paNamiUNa sAmiM gihaM patto  /  / 5 /
/  sammaM gihatthadhamma paripAlai vaDDamANapariNAmo  /  saMsAruttinnaM piva
appANaM mannamANo so  /  / 6 /  /  aha annayA asaMjayajaNassa
saMsaggao'NudivasaM pi  /  virahammi suvihiyANaM siDhilIhUyammi sammatte  /  / 7
/  /  jAyammi jehramAse posahasAlAe posahaparassa  /  kayaaTThamatavacaraNassa
naMdamaNiyAraseTThissa  /  / 8 /  /  tanhA-chuhAkilaMtassa vAsaNA erisA
samuppannA  /  te dhannA sappurisA te cciya jIvaMtu jiyaloe  /  / 9 /  /
kArAviyAo jehiM pukkhariNIo susIyalajalAo  /  jAsu jaNo vahai jalaM piyai tahA
majjai jahicchaM  /  / 10 /  /  tA ahamavi naranAhaM Apucchiya kAravemi
pokkhariNiM  /  iya ciMtiuM pabhAe pArittA posahaM seTThI  /  / 11 /  /
parihiyavalakkhavatyo pAhuDahattho nivaM samallINo  /  tappurao uvaNeuM uvAyaNaM
teNa vinnattaM  /  / 12 /  /  deva ! tuhANunAe puraparisarameiNIe pokkhariNiM  /
kAumabhippAo me to'NunAo nariMdeNa  /  / 13 /  /  tatto ya teNa hiMtAla-tAla-
tAlI-tamAlapamuheNa  /  susiNiddhabahalasacchAyavacchaniyareNa pariyariyA  /  /
14 /  /  muttAhalAvalIvimalasalilasaMbhArapUriyA paramA  /
kalahaMsAvalivilasaMtabahalakallolaparikaliyA  /  / 15 /  /  kalhAra-kamala-
kuvalayaparAyavicchuriyanIrasaMbhArA  /
mayaraMdamattabhamaraularolamuhaliyadisAvalayA  /  / 16 /  /
paribhamiragaruyakarimayara-maccha-maMDukka-kacchava'cchannA  /  kAraviyA
pokkhariNI naMdA nAmeNa naMdeNaM  /  / 17 /  /  pahiyajaNadANasAlA vi parisare
tIe kAriyA rammA  /  appANaM kayakiccaM takkaraNe mannamANeNa  /  / 18 /  /
majjaMto bhuMjato jalaM piyaMto ya tattha kIlaMto  /  kuNai guNaggahaNaM se
samaggalogo vi annonnaM  /  / 19 /  /  naMdamaNiyAraseTThI so cciya dhanno
jayammi so jiyau  /  jeNesA kAraviyA pokkhariNI sisirajalabhariyA  /  / 20 /  /
iya nisuNaMto naMdo munnai appANamamayasittaM vva  /  ahavA saguNathuIe
harisijjai ko na jiyaloe ?  /  / 21 /  /  evaM vaccaMte kettiyammi kAlammi
asuhadoseNa  /  tassa sarIre solasa saMkaMtA dussahA rogA  /  / 22 /  /
paJcakkhAo vejjehiM tayaNu gururogaveyaNakkato  /  mariuM niyapokkhariNIe daduro
sannio jAo  /  / 23 /  /  dhanno sa naMdaseTThI pokkhariNI jeNa kAriyA esA  /
iya jaNasAhukkAraM souM so sumarae jAI  /  / 24  /  /  vinnAyapuvvajammo
viciMtae phuriyagaruyasaMvego  /  ahaha ! aNajjeNa mae kaha appA pADio pAve ?  /
/ 25 /  /  2010_02

Page #314 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Chapter:-2 Collection of Examples 273 The Jina, the hero, is like a lotus that
blooms in the mud of the world. The Dharma of the world teacher is also like the
fragrance of that lotus. ||26|| What have I gained by being foolish and
following the rules? This is the result of my wrong actions. ||27|| Today, I
will do something good, so that I can attain liberation. This is the thought
that the sixth sense organ creates. ||28|| He who is devoted to the Dharma, will
be freed from the cycle of birth and death by following the right path, by
eating the right food, and by being diligent. ||29|| In the right time and
place, the wise man will be like a lotus blooming in a pond. ||30|| Hearing
this, the king, who was filled with devotion, went to the place where the Jina
was. ||31|| He went to the place where the Jina was, and he thought, "I will bow
down to the Jina." ||32|| Then, the king, surrounded by his army, went to the
place where the Jina was. ||33|| The king's horse stepped on the Jina's foot.
||34|| The king was filled with remorse, and he died in the palace of the Jina.
||35|| 57. The story of Skandaka, from the Srimad Bhava Vijay, written by Sri
Uttara Adhyayana. In the city of Sravasti, there was a king named Jitasatru.
||1|| He had a queen named Dharini. ||1|| They had a son named Skandaka, who was
like Skanda, the son of Gauri and Shiva. ||2|| He was married to Purandara
Yasha, the daughter of Purandara. ||2|| At that time, there was a king named
Dandaki, who ruled the city of Kumbhakara. ||3|| His minister was a wise man
named Palaka. ||3|| Dandaki, the king, gave his daughter Purandara Yasha in
marriage to Skandaka. ||4|| Once, Suvrata Swami, the great teacher, was staying
in Sravasti. ||5|| He was worshipped by gods and demons. ||5|| Skandaka went to
him to listen to his teachings. ||6|| He heard the teachings and the Dharma of
Sraddha, and he accepted them. ||6|| Palaka, the minister, went to Sravasti from
the city of Kumbhakara on some royal business. ||7|| He was in the king's court,
and he was criticizing Skandaka. ||8|| Skandaka quickly refuted his arguments.
||8|| Palaka was angry with Skandaka. ||9|| He could not do anything to Skandaka
at that time. ||9|| Palaka finished his work and returned to his own place.
||10|| But his anger towards Skandaka did not subside. ||10|| Skandaka, with a
calm mind, went to Suvrata Swami. ||11|| He became a monk, along with five
hundred people. ||11|| Suvrata Swami, who was a great teacher, gave Skandaka
five hundred disciples. ||12||  2010_02

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 khaNDa:-2 dRSTAntasamuccayaH 273 laghRNa vi bhuvaNanamijjamANapayapaMkayaM
jiNaM vIraM  /  dhammamavi bhuvaNaguruNo sayAsao tassa nAUNa  /  / 26 /  /
savvaM pi hAriyaM niyamaIe mUDheNa kiha mae taiyA ?  /  eyaM tu majjha jAyaM
micchattaphalaM ahannassa  /  / 27 /  /  tA ajja vi kiMpi suhaM karemi jaha hoi
sugaigamaNaM me  /  iya ciMtiya chaTThatavo'bhiggahameso sayA kuNai  /  / 28 /
/  pArai ya phAsueNaM AhAreNaM sajAijoggeNa  /  iya dhammajjhANaparassa tassa
kAlo vaikkaMto  /  / 29 /  /  avarammi avasare vaddhamANasAmI samosaDho tattha
/  majjaMto pokkhariNIe tIe loo samullavai  /  / 30 /  /  guNasilae ujjANe
calaha lahuM vIravaMdaNanimittaM  /  iya nisuNiUNa so daduro vi
saMjAyabhattibharo  /  / 31 /  /  samavasaraNammi calio samullalaMto imaM
viciMtaMto  /  bhUmiliyabhAlavaTTho vIrajiNiMdaM namissAmi  /  / 32 /  /  tatto
ya raha-turaMgama-gayaghaDa-suhaDohaghaDiyapariveDho  /  namaNatthaM vIrajiNassa
niggao seNio rAyA  /  / 33 /  /  tassegayaraturaMgamakhureNa pahao sa daduro
magge  /  tamghAyapIDio so sariUNa jiNesaraM vIraM  /  / 34 /  /  vihiyANasaNo
mariuM jAo daduravaDiMsayavimANe  /  so daduraMkadevo tao ya sijjhissai videhe
/  / 35  /  /  57. asamAdhimaraNadhyAne
zrImadbhAvavijayakRtazrIuttarAdhyayanavRttau skandakAcAryakathAnakam  /
abhUnnagaryAM zrAvastyAM, jitazatrurmahIpatiH  /  sadharmacAriNI tasya, dhAriNI
saMjJikA'bhavat  /  / 1 /  /  gaurIzayoH skanda iva, skandako'bhUtsutastayoH  /
purandarasutAdezyA, purandarayazAH sutA  /  / 2 /  /  tadA daNDaki
bhUpo'bhUtkumbhakArakRte pure  /  purohitastu tasyA''sIdabhavyaH pAlakAbhidhaH !
/  / 3 /  /  tena daNDakisaMjJena, bhUbhRtA bhUribhUtinA  /  purandarayazAH
kanyA, pitRbhyAM paryaNAyi sA.  /  / 4 /  /  anyadA suvratasvAmI,
bhavyAmbhojanabhodhvagaH  /  zrAvastyAM samavAsArSItsurAsuranamaskRtaH  /  / 5 /
/  dhanyaMmanyaH skandako'gAttaM nantuM paramezvaram  /  zrutvA taddezanAM
zrAddhadharmaJca pratyapadyata  /  / 6 /  /  purodhAH pAlakaH so'tha,
kumbhakArakRtAtpurAt  /  kenacidrAjakAryeNa, zrAvastyAmanyadA''yayau  /  / 7 /
/  sa ca bhUpasabhAmadhye, kurvannirgranthagarhaNAm  /  drutaM niruttarIcakre,
skandakena mahAdhiyA  /  / 8 /  /  pApaH prApa tato dveSaM, pAlakaH skandakopari
/  apakartumpunaH kiJcittasya na prAbhavattadA  /  / 9 /  /
kRtaprastutakRtyo'tha, pAlakaH svAspadaM yayau  /  jagAma na tu taccittAtkopaH
skandakagocaraH  /  / 10 /  /  atha zrIsuvratasvAmipAdAnte dAntamAnasaH  /
prAvrAjItskandakaH sAkaM, martyAnAM paJcabhiH zataiH  /  / 11 /  /
kramAdbahuzrute jAte, skandake suvrataprabhuH  /  tasmai ziSyatayA tAni, paJca
sAdhuzatAnyadAt  /  / 12 /  /  2010_02

Page #315 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter 274: The Scattering of the Eager Refusal  Others said, "He is worthy
of good conduct, Skandaka asked." "I will go to my own country, if there is an
order from the Lord," he said. ||13||  The Lord of the world said, "There will
be a calamity near the end." Hearing this, Skandaka said, "This is a calamity
for all." ||14||  "For those who practice devotion, there is no calamity. It is
a cause of sorrow for those who desire great joy!" ||15||  "Then tell me, O
Lord! When that calamity arrives, will we be devotees or will we be tormentors?"
||16||  The Lord said, "Except for you, all others are devotees." Hearing this,
Skandaka, eager, wiped his eyes. ||17||  "There are devotees in the monastery
where the virtuous reside. Surely this is auspicious," Skandaka thought and
remained steadfast. ||18||  Gradually, he went to the potter's place, with his
belongings. The king heard about the sage who had settled in the garden. ||19||
Then, to prevent any impurity, the king secretly hid various weapons in the
garden. ||20||  He told the queen, "Skandaka has arrived here, defeated by the
Pariṣahas." ||21||  "He himself is very powerful, with fierce arms and strong
blows. He is accompanied by five hundred soldiers, wearing the garb of virtuous
men. ||22||  "He has hidden terrible weapons in the garden, and is going to kill
you and take over the kingdom!" ||23||  "If you don't believe me, O Lord, go to
the garden and see the hidden weapons!" ||24||  Thus, urged by him, the king
went to the garden. He saw various weapons in the places indicated by the king's
servant. ||25||  Seeing them, the king became angry and bound all the monks.
"There is no wrong for those who act without thinking." ||26||  "It is the fault
of the king's servant. Binding them, the king handed them over, saying, "Do
whatever you wish with them!" ||27||  Like a cat finding mice, he was delighted.
He brought the bound monks to the torture device. ||28||  "Remember your beloved
deity! Now I will torture you all with this device." ||29||  Then, those
virtuous, fearless monks, knowing that death was near, their minds free from the
desire for life and fear of death, ||30||  looked at each other properly, and
adopted a friendly attitude. They all performed their final devotions according
to the rules. ||31||  "Even the fearful and the brave must die. Both must face
death with courage." ||32||  Thus, encouraged by Skandaka, they became
especially fearless, even in the face of death. ||33||  The cruel-minded, cruel-
acting, cruel-speaking king then threw each monk into the device, torturing them
one by one. ||34||  Seeing his own people being tortured, Skandaka felt a
burning pain within. He was bound near the device. ||35||  Even though he was
surrounded by the blood of the monks, Skandaka did not waver. ||36||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 274 AturapratyAkhyAnaprakIrNakam anyeyuH suvratArhantaM, skandakaH pRSTavAniti
/  vrajAmyahaM svasudezamAdezaH syAdyadi prabhoH  /  / 13 /  /  jagau
jagatprabhustatrotpatsyate mAraNAntikaH  /  sarveSAmupasargo vastacchrutvA
skandako'vadat  /  / 14  /  /  ArAdhanAsAdhako hi, nopasargastapasvinAm  /
duHkhAyate mahAnandamahAnandAbhilASiNAm !  /  / 15 /  /  tato brUhi prabho !
tasminnapasarga upasthite  /  ArAdhakA bhaviSyAmo, vayaM yadvA virAdhakAH ?  /
/ 16 /  /  svAmI smAha tvAM vinA'nye, sarvepyArAdhakA iti  /
skandakastannizamyeti, vyamRzaddhRzamutsukaH  /  / 17 /  /  ArAdhakA iyantaH
syurvihAre yatra sAdhavaH  /  nUnaM sa zubha eveti, vicintya skandako'calat  /
/ 18 /  /  kramAdgatvA kumbhakArakRte sa saparicchadaH  /  udyAne
samavAsArSIttamazrauSIcca pAlakaH  /  / 19 /  /  tataH
prAgvairazuddhyarthamudyAne tatra pAlakaH  /  pracchannaM gopayAmAsa,
vividhAyudhadhoraNIm  /  / 20 /  /  iti daNDakirAjJe cA'SaDakSINamuvAca saH  /
jitaH parISahairatra, skandako'sti samAgataH  /  / 21 /  /  ayaM svayaM
mahAvIryazcaNDadordaNDavikramaiH  /  sAdhuveSadharairyukto, bhaTAnAM paJcabhiH
zataiH  /  / 22 /  /  udyAne gopitaiH zastraprakarairatidAruNaiH  /  tvAM
vandituM gataM hatvA, rAjyametadgrahISyati !  /  / 23 /  /  (yugmam)
pratyayazcenna te svAminnasminmadvacane bhavet  /  tadA tadgopitAstrANi,
gatvodyAnaM vilokaya !  /  / 24 /  /  evaM vyudgrAhitastena tadudyAnaM gato
nRpaH  /  sthAneSu pAlakokteSu, nAnAstrANi nirakSata !  /  / 25 /  /  dRSTvA
tAni nRpaH kruddho, munInsarvAnabandhayat  /  akAryaM vidyate kiJcinnA'vimRzya
vidhAyinAm  /  / 26 /  /  pApasya pAlakasyaiva, tAnnibaddhyArpayannRpaH  /
yattubhyaM rocate tattvameSAM kuryA iti bruvan !  /  / 27 /  /  mUSakAniva
mArjArastAna prApya mudito'tha saH  /  saMyatAn saMyatAnmalpIDAyantrAntike'nayat
/  / 28  /  /  iti proce ca re ! yUyamiSTaM smarata daivatam  /  idAnIM
pIDayiSyAmi, yantreNAnena vo'khilAn  /  / 29 /  /  tataste sAdhavo dhIrA,
jJAtopasthitamRtyavaH  /  jIvitAzA mRtyubhItivipramuktA manasvinaH  /  / 30 /  /
gRhItAlocanA samyak, maitrIbhAvamupAgatAH  /  paryantArAdhanAM sarve,
vidadhurvidhipUrvakam !  /  / 31 /  /  (yugmam) marttavyaM kAtareNApi, dhIreNApi
ca bhUspRzA  /  dvidhApi niyate mRtyau, dhIrairbhAvyaM manasvibhiH  /  / 32 /  /
ityAdi vadatotsAhyamAnAH skandakasUriNA  /  /  abhavaMste vizeSeNa, svadehe'pi
gataspRhAH !  /  / 33 /  /  (yugmam) krUrAzayaH krUrakarmA, krUragIH
pAlakastataH  /  ekaikaM zramaNaM yantre, kSepaM kSepamapIDayat  /  / 34  /  /
pIDyamAnAn vineyAn svAn, vIkSyAntardahyatAmayam  /  iti sa skandakaM
yantrapArzve baddhamadhArayat  /  / 35  /  /
pIDyamAnAnagArAGgocchalacchoNitabindubhiH  /  samantAmriyamANo'pi,
nA'kupyatskandakaH punaH !  /  / 36  /  /  2010_02

Page #316 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Chapter 2: Collection of Examples 275  But the great sage, with words that were
soothing and timely, dispelled their doubts. He said: "The soul is different
from the body, and the body is merely a vessel for the soul. Why should anyone
grieve for the body, knowing that it is merely a temporary dwelling place?
"All suffering is the result of one's own karma. It is not a punishment from
God, but the natural consequence of one's actions.   "There is no need to be
angry at the destruction of this external body, for it is impermanent. What
matters is the protection of the inner, eternal soul, the true treasure.   "The
pure-minded, having been freed from their doubts by the teachings of Skandaka,
remained steadfast in their faith, with equanimity towards both friend and foe.
"They endured the suffering inflicted by the machine, for they were rich in
forgiveness. They ultimately attained the bliss of liberation, one by one.   "In
the same way, when the five hundred sages were killed, Skandaka, the protector,
gave his life for a single, insignificant child.   "Seeing the child being
tortured, he said, 'I cannot bear to see this innocent child suffer. Please
torture me instead!'   "Hearing this, the tormentor, filled with a desire to
inflict great pain, immediately tortured the child in the presence of the guru.
"The child, though young, was a great soul, with a heart filled with the essence
of pure meditation and the fire of selfless action. He attained great bliss.
"Seeing this, Skandaka, the teacher, was filled with anger and disappeared. He
said, 'I have been destroyed by this evil!   "Even a small child, who was not
protected for a single moment by my words, is now lost. This evil must be
punished, for it has challenged my pride.   "This king must also be punished,
for he is responsible for my destruction. Those who ignore us must be killed,
even the common people.   "If this difficult task is accomplished, it will be
the fruit of my penance. I will become the destroyer of these evil ones in my
next life.   "Thus, the sage, having made his resolve, was tortured by the
wicked king. He died, and was reborn as a celestial being in the realm of the
fire-gods.   "Indra, the king of the gods, pondered, 'Why are there no righteous
people to be seen in the city today?'   "He then took the best dust-remover from
Skandaka, the sage, and gave it to a vulture.   "By the force of destiny, the
dust-remover fell in front of Indra's wife, who was walking.   "Picking it up,
she examined it and recognized it as a piece of the robe of her brother, who had
renounced the world.   "Recognizing the mark, she knew that her brother and the
other sages had been killed. Filled with great grief, she went to the king and
said,   "You wicked, evil man! You will be punished for your crimes. To
disrespect the great sages and the gods is never auspicious.   "I have decided
to renounce the world. I am done with this life of suffering.   "Thinking this,
she was taken by the gods to the presence of Suvrata, the master of vows. She
renounced the world and attained liberation in the other world.   "Skandaka, the
sage, having learned of his past deeds, was filled with anger. He looked upon
the city with a vengeful eye.   "He then went to the forest, the land of the
king of Dandaka. This place is still known as Dand

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 khaNDa:-2 dRSTAntasamuccayaH 275 kintu sAmyasudhAspandabhAvitaiH samayocitaiH
/  vAkyairniryAmayAmAsa, tAnevaM sa mahAzayaH !  /  / 37 /  /  "bhinnaH zarIrato
jIvo, jIvAndinnazca vigrahaH  /  vidanniti vapu ze'pyantaH khidyeta kaH kRtI ?
/  / 38  /   /  kiJcAkhilo vipAko'yamasti svakRtakarmaNaH  /  duHkhAya
nopasargastatsatAM karmajighAMsatAm  /  / 39 /  /  avazyaM nAzino
bAhyasyAGgasyA'sya kRte tataH  /  kopaH kAryo nAntaraGgadhruvadharmadhanApahaH
/  / 40 /  / " skandakeneti niryAmyamAnA nirmalamAnasAH  /  mahAtmano vipakSe
ca, mitre ca samadRSTayaH  /  / 41 /  /  yantrapIDanapIDAM tAM, kSamamANAH
kSamAdhanAH  /  kevalaM prApya kaivalya-sukhaM te lebhire kramAt !  /  / 42 /  /
(yugmam) drutaM hateSu tenaivaM, hyUnapaJcazatarSiSu  /  ekaM kSullakamuddizya,
pAlakaM skandako'dat  /  / 43 /  /  anukampyamimaM bAlaM, pIDyamAnaM nirIkSitum
/  nAhaM zakSyAmi niyataM, pUrvaM pIDaya mAM tataH !  /  / 44  /  /  tacchrutvA
pAlakastasya, bhUri duHkhavighitsayA  /  guroH pazyata eva drAk, prAk taM
bAlamapIDayat !  /  / 45 /  /  zukladhyAnasudhAsArazAntakarmahutAzanaH  /  bAlaH
so'pi mahAsattvo, mahAnandamavindata !  /  / 46 /  /  tadvIkSya skandakAcAryaH,
kruddho'ntardhyAtavAniti  /  anena saparIvAraH, pApenA'smi vinAzitaH !  /  / 47
/  /  kSullako'pi hi madvAcA, kSaNamekaM na rakSitaH  /  nigrAhya eva pApo'sau,
tanmayA garvaparvataH  /  / 48 /  /  ayaM bhUpo'pi
nigrAhyo'smadvinAzanibandhanam  /  upekSAkAriNo'smAkaM, vadhyA jAnapadA api !  /
/ 49 /  /  tadduSkarasya cedasya, bhavenmattapasaH phalam  /  tadAhaM
dAhako'mISAM, bhUyAsaM bhAvijanmani !  /  / 50  /  /  itthaM kRtanidAnaH sa,
pIDitastena durdhiyA  /  mRtvA vahnikumAreSu, suro'bhUtparamarddhikaH  /  / 51 /
/  purandarayazAstatra, dine caivamacintayat  /  kuto hetoH purImadhye, na
dRzyante'dya sAdhavaH !  /  / 52 /  /  itazca skandakamune rajoharaNamuttamam  /
raktAbhyaktaM kara iti, jagRhe gRdhrapakSiNA  /  / 53 /  /  tadrajoharaNaM ca
drAga, bhavitavyaniyogataH  /  puraH purandarayazodevyA gRdhro nyapAtayat  /  /
54 /  /  taccAdAyodveSTayantI, sA svayaM parikarmitam  /  kAmbalaM
khaNDamadrAkSIbhrAtuH pravrajatorpitam  /  / 55  /  /  cihnena tena ca jJAtvA,
sodarAdInmunIn hatAn  /  mahatImadhRti prAptA, sA'vAdIditi bhUpatim  /  / 56 /
/  re sAdhudviSTa ! pApiSTha !, vinaMkSyatyadhunA bhavAn  /  maharSINAM surANAM
ca nahyavajJA zubhAvahA !  /  / 57 /  /  ityudIryeti dadhyau cA'dhunA'haM
vratamAdade  /  alaM saMsAravAsenA'munA duHkhaughadAyinA !  /  / 58  /  /
cintayantIti sA devaiH, suvratasvAmisannidhau  /  nItA''dAya parivrajyAM,
paralokamasAdhayat !  /  / 59  /  /  jJAtvA'thA'vadhinA prAcyaM, svavRttaM
skandakAmaraH  /  krodhAdhmAto dezayuktamadhAkSInmaMkSu tatpuram  /  / 60  /  /
tato'raNyamabhUdezabhUmau daNDakibhUpateH  /  adyApi daNDakAraNyamiti
tatprocyate budhaiH  /  / 61 /  /  2010_02

Page #317 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter 276: The Scattering of the Eager Refusal  **58. In the *Sri Akhyanaka
Manikose*, a story about Vishnu, the cause of the arising of karma is
explained.**  1. Kanha was captured by the ropes of time, bound by the knot of
the Kali Yuga. The aged prince, Jara Kumar, was present there. 2. Kanha, with
the mind of a deer, was pierced by a sharp arrow in his left foot. 3. Filled
with fear, he stood up and said, "Oh, oh! By what arrow have I been pierced in
my foot?" 4. "Oh, oh! This is the deed of my enemy, the one who has no lineage,
no name, no family, no karma. I have not done anything to him, yet he has
attacked me." 5. "Alas, alas! This must be some human being, a servant of mine.
This is not a deer hunter, for he has wounded me so badly." 6. "Tell me your
lineage," he asked, and the hunter replied, "Oh, oh! I am born of the Hari
Vamsa, a descendant of the Yadu clan." 7. "My name is Jara Kumar, a descendant
of the great warrior, the one who destroyed the Yadu clan, the son of Vasudeva,
the one who shines like the sun." 8. "I live in the forest of Ruru, Hari, Simha,
and Sadula, a fierce forest, for the protection of the living beings. I am a
hunter." 9. "This is Kanha, the aged prince," he said, revealing his identity.
10. "Come, come, come out! You are a hunter, a killer! Attack! This is Kanha,
your enemy, even though he is your king." 11. "I am not a hunter, nor am I a
killer. I am a follower of the path of righteousness. I am not a person of bad
character." 12. "I am afraid of Kanha, the friend of the living beings, the one
who has lived for twelve years. I am afraid of him because of his great power."
13. "What is the use of hiding? I am caught in the middle of a great army. Even
if he is merciful, I am afraid of being captured." 14. "What is the use of doing
such deeds? I am not a killer. I am not a person of bad character. Now I am
thinking, where should I go to hide?"

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 276 AturapratyAkhyAnaprakIrNakama 58. karmodayapratyayadhyAne
zrIAkhyAnakamaNikose viSNoH prabandhaH  /  kanhassa kAlapAsehiM kaDDio
kaliyakaMDakoyaMDo  /  patto tammi paese jarAkumAro kayaMto vva  /  / 1 /  /
AroviUNa dhaNuharamAyannaM kaTiuM kaDhiNakaMDaM  /  kanho migabuddhIe viddho
vAmammi pAyatale  /  / 2 /  /  tatto bhayarahieNaM sasaMbhamaM uTThiUNa
bhaNiyamimaM  /  bho bho ! kila keNAhaM viddho bANeNa pAyatale ?  /  / 3 /  /
tA sAhau niyavaMsaM niyanAmaM niyakulaM niyaM kajjaM  /  jeNa mae na kayA vi hu
ayANio pahayapuvvo tti  /  / 4 /  /  hA hA ! dhisi dhisi ! mama ceTThiyassa eso
hu mANuso koi  /  hariNajuvANo na hu hoi esa iya khijjiuM bahuyaM  /  / 5 /  /
vaMsAiyaM ca pucchai tA taM uvasappiUNa sAhemi  /  bho bho ! ahayaM
harivaMsasaMbhavo jAyavasagotto  /  / 6 /  /  nAmaM jarAkumAro
puhaIekkallavIracariyassa  /  jAyavavitthayanahayalamayaMkavasudevataNayassa  /
/ 7 /  /  ruru-hariNa-sIha-sadUlabhIsaNe kANaNammi kaNhassa  /  jIviyasamassa
rakkhatthamettha nivasAmi aiduhio  /  / 8 /  /  iyamAyanniya kaNho jarAkumAro
tti esa nAUNa  /  ugghADiyaduhaniyaro evaM bhaNiuM saDhAtto  /  / 9 /  /  e !
ehi ehi bhAyara ! parovayArekkarasiya ! pariraMbha  /  eso sohaM kaNho
tuhamappANassa vi ya duhao  /  / 10 /  /  teNuttaM pariraMbhaNamuciyaM
pajaliyaciyAnalassa mahaM  /  nillakkhaNassa na uNo pasatthalakkhaNavao bhavao
/  / 11 /  /  piyabaMdhavassa jIviyasamassa bArasamavarisamiliyassa  /  kaNhassa
mae bhayavaM ! vihiyamaNajjeNa pAhunnaM  /  / 12 /  /  pAvassa kiM na nivaDai
gayaNAo majjha matthae vajjaM !  /  jai vA so vi hu saMkai phaMsabhayAo jao
bhaNiyaM  /  / 13 /  /  erisakammarayANaM jaM na paDai khaDahaDaMtayaM vajjaM !
/  taM nUNamimo ciMtai chiviumime kattha sujjhissaM ?  /  / 14 /  /  2010_02

Page #318 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Chapter:-2 Collection of Examples 277 Thus, having been pierced, he was greatly
choked and was about to die. He was about to cry out in great pain. ||15|| Oh
Kanha! Oh Janarddana! Oh ornament of the lineage of the Jinas! Oh! How have
these illusions bound you, devoid of your friends and relatives? ||16|| Should I
enter the fire? Or should I enter the cave of the Guhila? Where should I go for
refuge? Whose face should I see? ||17|| In the midst of the world, the fame of
the weak is like the fame of Kanha, who was killed by Jarakumaara. ||18|| Thus,
when Jarakumaara asked, the entire story of the arrival was told to him by
Kanha. ||19|| This is the story of the destruction of the lineage of the Jinas,
which is like a river of false words. Janarddana told this story to the
assembly. ||20|| Oh, you who have the gem of compassion in your heart, who have
rescued the arrow from your feet, go to the Pandu-Mahura with the help of the
after-effects of the arrow. ||21|| If you are indeed so strong, then you too
will kill me. Do not let the lineage of the Jinas be destroyed, let it not be
without a successor. ||22|| The story of the past, the destruction of the
lineage of the Jinas, is told in the twelfth chapter. Even in my case, death
should be told to the sons of Pandu. ||23|| Thus, Kanha, weeping profusely, was
overcome with grief. ||24|| Kanha, who was suffering from the pain of the arrow,
was overwhelmed with grief and sorrow. He thought thus, with a heart full of
hatred. ||25|| Oh, I wish I had a lineage like that of the Sun, a lineage like
that of the Hari-Vamsa, a lineage like that of the Sun, a lineage like that of
the Hari-Vamsa, a lineage like that of the Sun, a lineage like that of the Hari-
Vamsa, a lineage like that of the Sun, a lineage like that of the Hari-Vamsa, a
lineage like that of the Sun, a lineage like that of the Hari-Vamsa, a lineage
like that of the Sun, a lineage like that of the Hari-Vamsa, a lineage like that
of the Sun, a lineage like that of the Hari-Vamsa, a lineage like that of the
Sun, a lineage like that of the Hari-Vamsa, a lineage like that of the Sun, a
lineage like that of the Hari-Vamsa, a lineage like that of the Sun, a lineage
like that of the Hari-Vamsa, a lineage like that of the Sun, a lineage like that
of the Hari-Vamsa, a lineage like that of the Sun, a lineage like that of the
Hari-Vamsa, a lineage like that of the Sun, a lineage like that of the Hari-
Vamsa, a lineage like that of the Sun, a lineage like that of the Hari-Vamsa, a
lineage like that of the Sun, a lineage like that of the Hari-Vamsa, a lineage
like that of the Sun, a lineage like that of the Hari-Vamsa, a lineage like that
of the Sun, a lineage like that of the Hari-Vamsa, a lineage like that of the
Sun, a lineage like that of the Hari-Vamsa, a lineage like that of the Sun, a
lineage like that of the Hari-Vamsa, a lineage like that of the Sun, a lineage
like that of the Hari-Vamsa, a lineage like that of the Sun, a lineage like that
of the Hari-Vamsa, a lineage like that

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 khaNDa:-2 dRSTAntasamuccayaH 277 iya khijjiUNa bahuyaM kaMThammi vilaggiUNa
kanhassa  /  ummukkamahAdhAhaM kaluNasaraM roviuM laggo  /  / 15 /  /  hA kanhaM
! hA jaNaddaNa ! hA jAyavagayaNamaMDaNamayaMka !  /  hA ! kahamihamAyAo naM
baMdhava-baMdhujaNarahio ?  /  / 16 /  /  kiM vA visAmi jalaNe ? kiM vA pavisAmi
guvilapAyAle ? | kattha gao sujjhissaM ? kassa muhaM darisaissAmi ?  /  / 17  /
/  AsaMsAramakittI saMjAyA majjha maMdabhaggassa  /  jaha niyabhAyA kanho
jarAkumAreNa nihao tti  /  / 18 /  /  niyavaiyaro ya eso jarAkumArassa
pucchamANassa  /  kahio kaNheNa tahiM savvo AgamaNavuttaMto  /  / 19 /  /  iya
palavaMto eso bAhajalApunadINanayaNajuo  /  bhaNio jaNaddaNeNaM avasara taM
majjha pAsAo  /  / 20 /  /  hiyayAo kutthubhamaNiM pAyatalAo samuddhariya bANaM
/  pacchAhuttapaehiM payAhi taM paMDumahurAe  /  / 21 /  /  jai puNa kahamavi
ehI balabhaddo to tumaM pi mArihihI  /  mA vayau viNAsaM jAyavANa vaMso
niravaseso  /  / 22 /  /  puvvoiyavuttaMto bAravaIe viNAsapajjaMto  /  majjha vi
maraNaM evaM kahiyavvaM paMDuputtANaM  /  / 23 /  /  evaM bahuppayAraM ruyamANo
pannavittu kanheNa  /  kahamavi kiccheNa tayA jarAkumAro viNiggamio  /  / 24  /
/  kaNho vi bANapaharutthaveyaNAvihuraviggahAvayavo  /  veraggabhAviyamaNo
ciMtiumevaM samADhatto  /  / 25  /  /  pecchA'ho ! mama
tArisaniruvamaharivaMsasaMbhavissAvi  /
tArisasiNiddhabaMdhavasahassaparivAriyassAvi  /  / 26 /  /  khaNametteNa vi
duddharavihANavasavattiNo mameyANiM  /  egANiyassa maraNaM hariNassa va
jAyamuttaM ca  /  / 27 /  /  khaNadaMsiyasurasarivittharAiM
khaNasunnarannasarisAiM  /  eyAiM tAI kammiMdayAliNo jIva ! laliyAI  /  / 28  /
/  tA alamimiNA pariciMtieNa kajjammi demi niyayamaNaM  /  bhAviyajiNavayaNANaM
jiyANa paridevaNamajuttaM  /  / 29 /  /  saMpai nemijiNesarapamuhANaM majjha
titthanAhANaM  /  pAyA saraNaM nijjiyajammaNa-maraNANa siddhANaM  /  / 30 /  /
sAhUNa nANa-daMsaNa-caraNajuyANaM gao saraNamihiM  /  kevalipannattassa vi
dhammassa mahANubhAvassa  /  / 31 /  /  2010_02

Page #319 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 278 **Aaturpratyakhyanaprakirnakam**  I condemn all four paths, I despise the
bad, I hate the wicked. I approve of all that is good, I see it clearly. ||32||
I am a perfect being, I am the master of the five senses. The results of my
actions are not known to me, even though I know them. ||33||  Those who are
wealthy, the sons of merchants, the sons of the wealthy, the great princes, they
are my beloved, my deep desires. ||34||  Those who live in their homes, who are
suffering from the pain of attachment, who are devoted to the Jinas, who are
celebrating festivals, they are my beloved, they are my beloved. ||35||  Those
who are fighting, who are being attacked, who are being defeated, who are being
killed, who are being reborn in this world, who are suffering, I forgive them.
||36||  Food and shelter are my only needs, especially at the time of death. I
bow down to the essence of the Jina's teachings, the supreme being. ||37||
Thus, for a moment, until the pure result of my actions is achieved, I will
remain in this body, according to the will of the karma. ||38||  Oh, alas!
Because of that cruel, insignificant, wicked king, my kingdom, which was
unmatched in the world, has been destroyed. ||39||  Because of that king, who
was like a king of the gods, who was like a king of the gods, who was like a
king of the gods, who was like a king of the gods, who was like a king of the
gods, who was like a king of the gods, who was like a king of the gods, who was
like a king of the gods, who was like a king of the gods, who was like a king of
the gods, who was like a king of the gods, who was like a king of the gods, who
was like a king of the gods, who was like a king of the gods, who was like a
king of the gods, who was like a king of the gods, who was like a king of the
gods, who was like a king of the gods, who was like a king of the gods, who was
like a king of the gods, who was like a king of the gods, who was like a king of
the gods, who was like a king of the gods, who was like a king of the gods, who
was like a king of the gods, who was like a king of the gods, who was like a
king of the gods, who was like a king of the gods, who was like a king of the
gods, who was like a king of the gods, who was like a king of the gods, who was
like a king of the gods, who was like a king of the gods, who was like a king of
the gods, who was like a king of the gods, who was like a king of the gods, who
was like a king of the gods, who was like a king of the gods, who was like a
king of the gods, who was like a king of the gods, who was like a king of the
gods, who was like a king of the gods, who was like a king of the gods, who was
like a king of the gods, who was like a king of the gods, who was like a king of
the gods, who was like a king of the gods, who was like a king of the gods, who
was like a king of the gods, who was like a king of the gods, who was like a
king of the gods, who was like a king of the gods, who was like a king of the
gods, who

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 278 AturapratyAkhyAnaprakIrNakama iya causaraNagao haM sammaM niMdAmi dukkaDaM
iNDiM  /  sukaDaM aNumoemo savvaM ciya tANa paJcakkhaM  /  / 32  /  /
paMcappayAramaiyArajAyamasiM samakkhamAloe  /  vayapariNAmo puNa majjha
jANamANassa vi na jAo  /  / 33 /  /  te dhannA kayaputrA saMbakumArAiyA maha
kumArA  /  ruppiNipAmokkhAo piyAo me nibiDanehAo  /  / 34  /  /  je caiUNaM
gharavAsamerisaM dukkhasaMtainihANaM  /  jiNapAse pavvaiyA tA tesi
vayANimaNusarimo  /  / 35  /  /  saMgAmapamuhapAvaM samAyaraMteNa ke vi je jIvA
/  ihabhava-annabhavesu vi dukkhaviyA te khamAvemi  /  / 36  /  /  annaM ca
saraNamiNDiM visesao majjha maraNasamayammi  /  jiNasAsaNassa sAro parameTThINaM
namokkAro  /  / 37  /  /  evaM muhuttamegaM jAva'cchai suddhamaNaparINAmo  /
tAvAsuhakammavasA sariyaM dIvAyaNarisissa  /  / 38 /  /  peccha aho ! teNa tayA
kuliMgimetteNa tuccharUveNa  /  bhuvaNe agaMjiyassa vi mANamaraTTo mahaM bhaggo
/  / 39 /  /  jaM maha pecchaMtassa vi daddhA nayarI suriMdapurisarisA  /  piya-
mAi-sayaNavaggo viNAsio pAvakammeNa  /  / 4 /  /  tA jai pecchAmi tayaM
saMpayamavi pAvakAriNamaNajjaM  /  kaDDe mi tadudarAo to haM sakalaMtaraM savvaM
/  / 41 /  /  evaM vahagayahiyao puNaravi jAo kiliTThapariNAmo  /  jArisiyA iha
va gaI maI vi maraNammi tArisiyA  /  / 42 /  /  ruddajjhANovagao sumaraMto
vairabhAvamaNavarayaM  /  mariUNa samuppanno'suhaleso vAluyapabhAe  /  / 43 /  /
[zrIAkhyAna0 zloka 269 taH 311] 59. RddhigauravadhyAne
zrItriSaSTizalAkApuruSacaritramadhyedazArNabhadrarAjarSikathAnakam  /  itazca
puryAzcampAyAH surAsurasamAvRtaH  /  krameNa viharan prAya dazArNaviSayaM
prabhuH  /  / 1 /  /  dazArNapuramityasti nAmnA tatra mahApuram  /
dazArNabhadra ityAsIttatra rAjA maharddhikaH  /  / 2 /  /  sabhAsInaM tadA sAyaM
tametyocuzcarA idam  /  vIro jinapatiH prAtaH sameSyati pure'tra te  /  / 3 /  /
babhAra tadgirA hRSTo rAjA romAJcakaMcukam  /  vidUraH staniteneva
ratnAMkurakadambakam  /  / 4 /  /  sabhAsamakSamUce ca tayA RddhyA prage prabhum
/  vandiSye na yathA kazcidvavande trijagatyapi  /  / 5 /  /  ityuditvA ca
maMtryAdIn visRjya sakalAnapi  /  jagAmAntaHpuragRhaM dazArNapurabhUpatiH  /  /
6 /  /  vandiSya evamevaM ca stoSye prAtarjagadgurum  /  iti cintAparo'naiSIt
kathaMcidyAminIM sa tAm  /  / 7 /  /  ravAvanudayatyeva sa pArthivaravistataH  /
AhUya nagarAdhyakSaprabhRtInevamAdizat  /  / 8 /  /  2010_02

Page #320 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Chapter 2: Collection of Examples  The king, with his entourage, was approaching
the Samvasarana.  The path was adorned with all the auspicious signs, befitting
the occasion. ||9||  The Lord, in the past, had also made arrangements for this.
The gods had also arranged for the Samvasarana. ||10||  The king's orders were
followed by the royal officials, without a moment's delay.  The king's words
were the success of the earth, and his mind was like the gods. ||11||  The path
of the king was not stained with the dust of saffron water.  The earth, adorned
with flowers, did not become rough. ||12||  Golden pillars and arches were
erected at intervals.  Platforms were built, adorned with rows of golden
vessels. ||13||  They were decorated with various kinds of paintings, and with
Chinese silks.  They were adorned with flying banners and with jeweled
umbrellas. ||14||  Fragrant incense pots were placed in thousands, and garlands
were hung from the pillars. ||15||  (Couplet)  The path was covered with a
canopy of umbrellas, like the clouds in the sky.  It was made of a single cloth,
with high poles. ||16||  Incense pots with flames were lit at every step.  The
platforms were filled with the smoke of sandalwood and camphor. ||17||  Thus,
having made the path like a section of heaven, the officials informed the king,
who was eager to see the Lord. ||18||  The king, having bathed, was adorned with
divine ornaments.  He wore clean clothes and garlands, and rode a magnificent
elephant. ||19||  He was adorned with a white umbrella over his head, and with
chowries on either side.  The king, like a king of the gods, moved majestically.
||20||  He was accompanied by thousands of his vassals, adorned with great
ornaments.  The king, with his retinue, was like a god in his own form. ||21||
The chowries waved, and the king's wives, like defeated goddesses, looked like
deer in the palace. ||22||  He was praised by groups of singers, and was sung by
singers.  He was seen by those who knew him, and by those who adorned the path.
||23||  The king, surrounded by his retinue, entered a new pavilion.  He
gradually reached the Samvasarana. ||24||  He circumambulated the Lord three
times, and bowed down.  He sat down in his place, filled with the pride of
wealth. ||25||  The Lord, knowing his pride, made a water-borne chariot, to
teach him. ||26||  It was beautiful, with crystal-like edges, and with lotus
flowers.  It was filled with the sound of peacocks and swans. ||27||  It was
adorned with rows of heavenly trees and vines, and with blooming flowers.  It
was adorned with blue lotuses, and with lapis lazuli gems. ||28||  It was
adorned with emerald-colored lotuses, and with golden lotuses. ||29||  It was
adorned with garlands of swaying waves, and with banners.  The king of the gods,
Indra, ascended this water-borne chariot, with the gods. ||30||  (Four-line
stanza)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 khaNDa:-2 dRSTAntasamuccayaH maddhAmnaH svAmisamavasaraNasya tathA'ntare  /
madyAnayogyaM kartavyaM sarvaddharyA mArgabhUSaNam  /  / 9 /  /  itazca tatra
bhagavAn purAvahirupAyayau  /  devaizca tatra samavasaraNaM ca vyaracyata  /  /
10 /  /  tadrAjazAsanaM te'pi rAjA''yuktAH kSaNAvyadhuH  /  vacasA bhUbhujAM
siddhirmanaseva divaukasAm  /  / 11 /  /  azAmi kuMkumAmbhobhI
rajastadrAjavartmanaH  /  akAri tanmArgamahI puSpaprakaradanturA  /  / 12 /  /
sthAne sthAne vyadhIyanta kAJcanastambhatoraNAH  /  maJcAzca saJcitAH
svarNabhAjanazreNizobhitAH  /  / 13 /  /
vicitrAzcitrakatvaribhazcInavAsobhirAcitAH  /  uDDAmarAzcAmaraizca ratnAdazaiMH
sudarzanAH  /  / 14 /  /  udgandhayo gandhapuTApuTikAbhiH sahasrazaH  /
stambhairvAbhito nyastairabadhyanta ca mAlikAH  /  / 15 /  /  (yugmam)
udaMDaimaMDapairmeghADambarazrIviDambabhiH  /  muktoccUlavadullocairekacchAyaM
vyadhIyata  /  / 16 /  /  pade pade mumucire dhUpaghaTyaH sapAvakAH  /
nikSiptAgurukarpUradhUmAMkuritamaNDapAH  /  / 17 /  /  evaM divaH khaMDamiva
kRtvA mArga niyoginaH  /  rAjJe vyajJapayan svAmidarzanautsukyadhAriNe  /  / 18
/  /  snAtvA rAjA'pi divyAMgarAgaH sarvAMgabhUSaNaH  /  zucivastradharaH sragvaH
gajamArohaduttamam  /  / 19 /  /  mUrdhni zvetAtapatreNa cAmarAbhyAM ca
pArzvayoH  /  rAjamAno rAjavaryaH surarAja ivAcalat  /  / 20 /  /
mahA_bhUSaNadharaiH sAmantAdyaiH sahasrazaH  /  so'nvagamyata bhUpAlaH svai
rUpairiva vaikriyaiH  /  / 21 /  /  sadyastamanuceluzca calazcAmararAjitAH  /
parAjitazacIrUpA antaHpuramRgIdRzaH  /  / 22 /  /  bandivRndaiH stUyamAno
gIyamAnazca gAyanaiH  /  darzyamAnasvavijJAno mArgAlaMkArakAribhiH  /  / 23 /  /
nirantarairnRpacchannairbhavannUtanamaMDapaH  /  krameNa prApa samavasaraNaM sa
mahIpatiH  /  / 24  /   /  sa triH pradakSiNIkRtya vavande paramezvaram  /
AsAMcakre yathAsthAnaM cA''sthAne RddhigarvitaH  /  / 25 /  /  tasyaddhigarvaM
vijJAya tatprabodhanahetave  /  ambhomayaM vikRtavAn vimAnaM pAkazAsanaH  /  /
26 /  /  sphaTikAcchajalaprAntavikaTAmbhojasundaram  /
marAlasArasasvAnapratisvAnasamAkulam  /  / 27 /  /
suradrumalatAzreNipatatkusumazobhitam  /  nIlotpalai
rAjamAnamindranIlamaNImayaiH  /  / 28  /   /  nalinISu marakatamayISu
parivartibhiH  /  vibhrAjamAnamadhikaM svaNAmbhojaivikasvaraiH  /  / 29 /  /
lolakallolamAlAbhiH patAkAmAlabhAriNam  /  jalakAntavimAnaM taM zakro'dhyAsta
suraiH saha  /  / 30 /  /  (caturbhiH kalApakam) 2010_02

Page #321 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter 280: The Scattering of the Eager Rejection  **Verse 31:**   Honored
by thousands of celestial women with chamaras, his ears were filled with the
music of the Gandharvas, and his mind was filled with joy.  **Verse 32:**   With
his gaze fixed on the holy feet of his master, he descended from the heavens to
the mortal realm, and became the lord of that place.  **Verse 33:**   His feet
rested on golden lotuses, adorned with emerald stems, like a mountain resting on
a lotus.  **Verse 34:**   His eight teeth were adorned with jeweled fangs, and
his back was covered with the celestial dust of the gods, like the backs of the
celestial elephants.  **Verse 35:**   He was escorted by celestial women, who
held his hands as he descended to the mortal realm, and then ascended to the
city of Indra.  **Verse 36:**   Filled with devotion, he approached the place of
the Jina's feet, the crown jewel of the Vrindarakas.  **Verse 37:**   Within the
celestial chariots, adorned with lotus ponds, musical notes arose from the
lotuses.  **Verse 38:**   The celestial beings, each with a splendor matching
Indra, became social, their divine forms beautiful and captivating.  **Verse
39:**   The retinue of each god was magnificent, like the wealth of the
Maghavas, a cause of wonder for the world.  **Verse 40:**   Indra himself was
amazed by the celestial chariots. What can be said of the others, whose wealth
was no less?  **Verse 41:**   The humans and gods present were amazed, and they
saw Hari, the lord who had saved the earth, bowing again and again to the Lord.
**Verse 42:**   Dasarnabhadra, seeing the wealth and splendor of Indra, was
stunned for a moment, like a villager in a great city.  **Verse 43:**
Dasarnabhadra, his eyes filled with wonder, thought, "Oh, how beautiful is this
celestial chariot of Indra, the king of the heavens!"  **Verse 44:**   "Oh, how
beautiful is the body of this celestial elephant, the king of the gods! Oh, how
vast is the wealth of Puruhuta, who is this?"  **Verse 45:**   "This pride in my
own wealth has blinded me. Alas, there is a vast difference between me and
Indra, like the difference between a cow and a horse."  **Verse 46:**   "By this
pride in my wealth, I have made myself insignificant. I have become like a frog
in a well, lacking in true wealth, before seeing this."  **Verse 47:**   "As he
thought this, his detachment grew, and the outcome was auspicious for the one
who had done little karma."  **Verse 48:**   "Although I have been defeated by
Indra's wealth and power, I will defeat him today by taking the vow of
renunciation."  **Verse 49:**   "I will not only defeat him today by taking the
vow, but I will also defeat the doers of karma, the wanderers in the cycle of
birth and death."  **Verse 50:**   Thinking this, the king of Dasarnapur, while
still there, removed his crown, ornaments, and other adornments.  **Verse 51:**
Dasarnabhadra, like one who cuts the roots of a karma tree, struck his head five
times with his fists.  **Verse 52:**   Indra, seeing this with eyes filled with

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 280 AturapratyAkhyAnaprakIrNakam cAmarairamarastrIbhirvIjyamAnaH sahasrazaH  /
gandharvArabdhasaMgItadattakarNo manAgmanAk  /  / 31 /  /  svAmipAdapavitrAyAM
dattadRSTiradho bhuvi  /  martyalokamavAtArIdamAdhipatistataH  /  / 32 /  /
(yugmam) nAlena mArakatena rAjiteSvambujanmasu  /  sauvarNeSu nyastapAdaM
sapAdimiva parvatam  /  / 33 /  /  maNImayadantakozairdantairaSTabhirUrjitam  /
devadUSyacchannapRSThaM praSThaM tridazadantinAm  /  / 34 /  /
pUrvArUDhasurastrIbhirdattahastAvalambanaH  /  martyalokAvatIrNo'thAdhyAruroha
purandaraH  /  / 35  /  /  (tribhirvizeSakam) AgAdathopasamavasaraNaM
bhaktibhAvitaH  /  jinendrapAdAn vandArurvRndArakaziromaNiH  /  / 36 /  /
jalakAntavimAnAntarlIlApuSkariNISu ca  /  saMgItakAni kamale kamale cAtha
jajJire  /  / 37  /  /  pratisaMgItakaM cendrAnurUpavibhavaH suraH  /
sAmAjiko'bhavaddivyarUpanepathyasundaraH  /  / 38 /  /  ekaikasya ca devasya
parivAro maharddhikaH  /  maghona iva saMjajJe vizvavismayakAraNam  /  / 39 /  /
vimAnA tayA zakraH svayameva visimiye  /  kA kathA punaranyeSAM
tasmAdUnonasaMpadAm  /  / 40 /  /  tatra sthitairnarasurairvismitairvIkSito
hariH  /  prabhuM pRthvIluladdhAraH praNanAma punaH punaH  /  / 41 /  /
dazArNabhadraH zakrasya tayA RddhayA'tha dRSTayA  /  nagaraddharyA grAmya iva
staMbhitAMgo'bhavat kSaNam  /  / 42 /  /  dazArNabhadro dadhyau ca
vismayasmeralocanaH  /  aho zakravimAnasya zobheyaM bhuvanottarA  /  / 43 /  /
aho ruciragAtratvaM surendrakariNo'sya ca  /  aho vibhavavistAraH puruhUtasya
ko'pyasau  /  / 44 /  /  svasaMpado'bhimAno'yaM vyadhAyi dhigaho mayA  /  mama
zakrasya caitaddhi goSpadAbyorivAntaram  /  / 45 /  /  amunA RddhigarveNa svAtmA
tucchIkRto mayA  /  kUpabheka ivAbhUvaM prAgadRSTedazarddhikaH  /  / 46 /  /
evaM bhAvayatastasya vairAgyaM gacchataH zanaiH  /  pariNAmaH zubhataro
babhUvetyalpakarmaNaH  /  / 47  /  /  RddhayA yadyappanenAhaM vijito'smi
biDaujasA  /  pravrajyAgrahaNAdadya parAjeSye tathA'pyamum  /  / 48 /  /  na
kevalaM vijeSye'muM vratAdAnena saMprati  /  kArInapi jeSyAmi
bhavabhramaNakAriNaH  /  / 49 /  /  vivekI cintayitvaivaM dazArNapurabhUpatiH  /
tatrastha eva vyumucat kirITakaTakAdikam  /  / 50  /  /  dazArNabhadraH
karmadrumUlAnIva samantataH  /  uJcakhAnAtha zirasaH paMcabhirmuSTibhiH kacAn  /
/ 51 /  /  zakre saMpazyamAne'tha vismayasmeracakSuSi  /  sa gatvA
gaNabhRtpArzve yatiliMgamupAdade  /  / 52 /  /  gatvA
pradakSiNApUrvamapUrvotsAhasAhasaH  /  dazArNabhadrazramaNo jagannAthamavandata
/  / 53  /  /  zakro babhASe mahAtmannaho kimapi pauruSam  /
tavedamamunA'jaiSIrmAmapyanyasya kA kathA  /  / 54  /  /  ityuktvA taM
namaskRtya zakraH svasthAnamabhyagAt  /  munirdazArNabhadro'pi
samyagvatamapAlayat  /  / 55  /  /  2010_02

Page #322 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Chapter 2: Collection of Examples 281 60. The story of Jitashatru, the king, and
his wise minister, Subuddhi, as depicted in the _Upadesha Prasada_ (a Jain
text), is a testament to the power of right faith.   Jitashatru was the king of
Champa. His minister, Subuddhi, was a true Jain, well-versed in the Jain
teachings. One day, the king had a delicious feast prepared with divine-tasting
delicacies. After enjoying the meal with his many courtiers, he exclaimed, "Oh,
what a taste! Oh, what a fragrance!" and showered praise on the food. Everyone
else, except Subuddhi, joined in the praise. The king then asked his minister,
"Why don't you praise the food?" Subuddhi replied, "Your Majesty, I am not
surprised by good or bad tastes. For, the _pudgalas_ (matter particles) can be
fragrant or foul-smelling, tasty or tasteless, or even the opposite. Therefore,
praise or criticism is not appropriate." The king did not believe him.  On
another occasion, the king was going to the royal palace when he saw a ditch
full of stagnant water, teeming with life and emitting a foul odor due to the
sun's heat. He covered his nose with his cloth and said, "Oh, what a foul and
disgusting water!" The minister said, "Your Majesty, do not criticize the water.
With the passage of time, even the most undesirable can transform into the
desirable." The king did not accept this.  Then, secretly, the minister had the
stagnant water from the ditch collected in a cloth and poured into a _koraka_
(earthen pot). He purified it with _kataka_ powder and other substances. Then,
he poured the purified water into new pots. After twenty-one days, the water
became clear, pleasant, cool, and almost divine. He then had it poured into a
fragrant vessel and presented it to the king's water carriers. In due course,
they brought it to the king. The king, realizing the extraordinary qualities of
the water, asked them, "Where did you get this?" They replied, "The minister
gave it to us." The king asked the minister, "Tell me, how did this water come
about?" The minister replied, "Your Majesty, if you grant me your protection, I
will tell you." The king granted him protection, and the minister told him the
whole story. The king did not believe him. Then, the minister had the water
carriers repeat the process as described earlier. The king, seeing this, was
amazed and asked, "How did you know this?" The minister replied, "Your Majesty,
this is the transformation of _pudgalas_, as taught by the Jinas (Jain
Tirthankaras) and confirmed by faith. Oh King! The _pudgalas_ have an
unimaginable power and a nature to transform in many ways, remaining hidden.
This power is revealed to those who have knowledge. But those who are veiled by
ignorance, karma, and other obstacles cannot truly understand. Nevertheless, one
must have faith in the teachings. For, in this world, there are two types of
non-perception. One is the non-perception of non-existent things, like the horns
of a rabbit. The second is the non-perception of existing things. This is of
eight types.  1. **Due to extreme distance:** For example, a person who has gone
to another village is not seen. Does that mean he does not exist? He does exist,
but he is not perceived due to the distance. Similarly, the Meru mountain and
other things beyond the ocean are not perceived.  2. **Due to the passage of
time:** For example, our ancestors and the future Jinas like Padma-nabha are not

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 khaNDa:-2 dRSTAntasamuccayaH 281 60. rasagauravadhyAne
zrIupadezaprAsAdadarzitaM jitazatrunRpasubuddhimantrivRtam  /  _ caMpAyAM
jitazatrurnRpaH  /  tasya subuddhirmaMtrI samyagjinamatajJaH  /  ekadA nRpo
divyarasavatI sarasAM kArayitvA bahusAmantayuto bhuktvA rasagRcaH 'aho raso'ho
gandhaH' ityAdivAkyaiH zlAghAM cakAra  /  subuddhiM vinA'nye'pi sarve tathaiva
zlAghAM cakruH  /  tato rAjJA maMtrI pRSTa:-tvaM kiM na prazaMsasi ?'  /
so'vak-"rAjan ! zubhAzubhavastuSu mama vismayo na  /  yataH pudgalAH sugandhA
durgandhAH surasA api virasA bhavanti vaiparItyena vA  /  tato nindAprazaMse na
yukte"  /  rAjA tanna zraddhatte  /  anyadA rAjA rAjapATikAyAM gacchan mArge
parikhodakaM bahujIvAkulaM durgandhaM sUryAtapakkathitaM dRSTvA nAsikAM vastreNa
pidhAya 'aho durgandhanindyaM jalaM' ityavAdIt  /  maMtrI prAha-'rAjan ! mA
jalaM ninda, kAlaprayogeNAbhavyamapi bhavyatayA pariNamati'  /  rAjJA nAMgIkRtam
/  tato maMtriNA rahaH parikhodakaM vastragalitaM svAptanaraiH korakaghaTe
kSepitaM katakacUrNAdinA ca nirmalIkRtam  /  punargalitaM navyaghaTeSu kSiptaM
/  evamekaviMzatyA dinaistannIraM svacchasukhAduzItalaM lokottaraprAyamajAyata
/  tataH surabhivAsyaM kRtvA nRpajalarakSakebhyo dattam  /  samaye rAjJaH samIpe
tairupanItam  /  nRpastasya jalasya lokottaraguNAnupalabhya tAn
prapaccha-'kvedaM prAptaM ?' te procuH-'maMtriNA'rpitaM'  /  rAjJA maMtrI pRSTaH
prAha-'rAjan yadyabhayaM dadAsi tadA jalotpattiM vadAmi'  /  rAjJA'bhaye datte
maMtrI yathAvRttaM provAca  /  nRpo na zraddhatte  /  tato maMtriNA tadadhyakSaM
pUrvoktavidhinA kRtam  /  rAjA vIkSya vismitaH prAha-kathaM tvayaitajjJAtaM ?'
/  so'vadat-"rAjan ! jinAgamazrutAdizraddhayA ca pudgalapariNAmo'yameveti  /  he
nRpa ! pudgalAnAmacintanIyA zaktiH anekadhA pariNamanasvabhAvastirobhAvatvena
vartate  /  sa ca jJAninAM jJAna Avirbhavati  /  paraMtu chadmasthAnAM
jJAnAvaraNAdikarmAvRtAnAM samyagupalabdhirna jAyate  /  tathApi
zrutavacobhiravazyaM zraddheyaiva  /  yata ihaloke dvividhA'nupalabdhirbhavati
/  tatraikA'sato vastuno yathA zazazRMgAdInAM dvitIyA tu
satAmapyarthAnAmanupalabdhirbhavati  /  sAtrASTavidhA  /  tathAhi-atidUrAt
prathamA, sA trividhA dezakAlasvabhAvaviprakarSAt anupalabdhiH  /  tatra
kazcinnaro grAmAntaraM gato na dRzyate, tatkathaM nAsti saH ? astyeva, paraM
dezaviprakarSAnnopalabdhiH  /  evaM samudrasya parittaM paryantaH mervAdikaM ca
sadapi nopalabhyate  /  tathA kAlena viprakarSAt atItA nijapUrvajAdayo
bhaviSyatpadmanAbhAdayo jinA nopalabhyante  /  tathA svabhAvaviprakarSAt
nabhojIvapizAcAdayo na dRzyante, na ca te na santIti 1  /  tathA'tisAmIpyAt
yathA netrakajjalaM nopalabhyate, tatkathaM nAsti ? astyeva 2  /
tathendriyaghAtAt  /  yathAndhabadhirAdayo rUpazabdAdInnopalabhante, tatkiM na
santi ? santyeva 3  /  tathA mano'navasthAnAt yathA'navasthitacetA gajamapi
gataM na pazyati, tatkiM nAsti ? astyeva 4  /  tathA saukSmyAt yathA
jAlAntaragatatrasareNavaH paramANuvyaNukAdayo vA sUkSmanigodAdayo nopalabhyante,
tatkiM na santi ? 2010_02

Page #323 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 282 **On the Rejection of the Eager**  There are five [types of non-
perception]. Just as an object placed inside a room is not perceived due to the
covering, does that mean it doesn't exist? No, it does exist. Similarly, the far
side of the moon is not visible due to the obstruction of the near side. Just as
a wise person may not perceive subtle meanings of scriptures due to dullness of
mind, even though they exist, so too, non-perception due to a covering. Just as
planets and stars are not perceived due to the overwhelming brilliance of the
sun, how can we say they don't exist? Similarly, in darkness, pots and other
objects are not visible. Just as a handful of mung beans is not perceived when
thrown into a heap of mung beans, or a handful of sesame seeds when thrown into
a heap of sesame seeds, or salt and other things when thrown into water, even
though they are present, how can we say they don't exist? Similarly, even though
eight types of existing things are present, they are not perceived. Just as the
existence of pudgala, jiva, etc., even though they are present and arise
gradually, is not perceived due to the divergence of their nature, so too, it
should be understood in all cases.  **Someone else said:** "The Devadatta, etc.,
mentioned here, who are in other countries, are not perceived by us, but they
are perceived by some people in other countries. Therefore, their existence is
known. But jiva, etc., are never perceived by anyone. How then can their
existence be ascertained?"  **To this, it is said:** "Just as Devadatta, etc.,
are known to exist because they are perceived by some, so too, jiva, etc., are
known to exist because they are perceived by the liberated ones. Just as atoms
are always imperceptible, but are inferred from their effects, so too, it should
be understood in all cases."  Thus, the king, having been enlightened by the
arguments of the Siddhanta, and by the wise words of the sage, renounced his
worldly desires. Gradually, both of them, having attained the state of
Pravrajya, attained liberation.  **62. The lineage of Bhrigu and Yasas, as
described in the Uttaradhyayanasutra, which is characterized by unwavering
meditation.**  The two, who were friends in their previous birth, born from a
painting, who were servants of the cowherds, who were devoted to the good, went
to the world of the gods. From there, they fell down and were born as two
brothers in a city called Ibhukula, which was established on the earth. There,
they had four friends. After enjoying pleasures, and having heard the Dharma
from the elders, all of them became Pravrajitas. After observing restraint for a
long time, they renounced their attachments. After some time, all six friends
were born as gods in the Saudharma Kalpa, in a celestial palace called
Padmagulma, with a lifespan like that of a palpa. Of those four gods, excluding
the two who were cowherd-born, fell down and were born in the Kuru country, in
the city of Ishukara. The first one was born as the king of the Ishukara. The
second one was born as the queen of the same king, named Kamlavati. The third
one became the priest of the same king, named Bhrigu. The fourth one became the
wife of the same priest. Her gotra was Vasishtha, and her name was Yasas. This
Bhrigu, the priest, desired offspring with great longing. He worshipped many
gods, and asked questions about auspicious times. The two, who were cowherd-born
in their previous birth, knew this, as follows: "We will be the

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 282 AturapratyAkhyAnaprakIrNakam santyeva 5  /  tathA AvaraNAt yathA kuDyAntare
vyavasthitaM vastu nopalabhyate, tatkiM nAsti ? kiM tu tadastyeva  /
candramaMDalasya ca parabhAgo na dRzyate'rvAgbhAvena vyavahitatvAt  /
jJAtvApyAvaraNAdanupalabdhiH yathA matimAndyAt satAmapi
zAstrasUkSmArthavizeSANAmanupalabdhiH 6  /  tathA'bhibhavAt yathA
sUryAditejasA'bhibhUtAni grahanakSatrANi nopalabhyante, tatkathaM teSAmabhAvaH ?
/  evamandhakAre'pi ghaTAdayo na dRzyante 9  /  samAnAbhihArAt yathA mudgarAzau
mudgamuSTiH, tilarAzau tilamuSTiyaM kSiptA satI upalakSitApi nopalabhyate, jale
kSiptAni lavaNAdIni ca, tatkathaM teSAmabhAvaH  /  evamaSTadhApi
satsvabhAvAnAmapi bhAvAnAM yathA'nupalambha ukta evaM pudgalajIvAdiSu
vidyamAnatApi krameNa jAyamAnApi svabhAvaviprakarSAdibhyo nopalabhyate iti
sarvatra mantavyam  /  /  _ atrAha paraH-ye'tra dezAntaragatadevadattAdayo
darzitAste'trAsmAkamapratyakSA api dezAntaragatalokAnAM keSAJcit pratyakSA eva
santi, tena teSAM sattvaM pratIyate  /  jIvAdayastu kaizcidapi kadApi
nopalabhyante, tat kathaM teSAM sattA nizcIyate ? ityatrocyate-yathA
devadattAdayaH keSAMcitpratyakSatvAt santo nizcIyante tathA jIvAdayo'pi
kevalinAM pratyakSatvAt kiM na santaH iti pratIyatAm  /  yathA vA paramANavo
nityamapratyakSA api svakAryAnumeyAH syustathA sarvatra jJeyaM"  /  ityAdi
siddhAntavAkyayuktyA subuddhipradhAnoktyA nRpaH pratibuddho dezaviratitvaM
jagrAha  /  krameNa dvAvapi prAptapravrajyo muktiM prApatuH  /  62.
aviramaNadhyAne zrIuttarAdhyayanasUtroktaH bhRguyazayoH sampradAyaH  /  yau tau
gopadArako citrasambhUtapUrvabhavamitrau sAdhusevAkarau devalokaM gatau,
tatazcyutvA kSitiprataSThite nagare ibhyakule dvAvapi bhrAtarau jAtau  /  tatra
tayozcatvAraH suhRdo jAtAH  /  tatra bhogAn bhuGktvA , sthavirANAmantike ca
dharmaM zrutvA sarve'pi pravrajitAH  /  sucirakAlaM saMyamamanupAlya bhaktaM
pratyAkhyAtam  /  kAlaM kRtvA saudharma kalpe padmagulmavimAne SaDapi suhRdaH
palpopamAyuSkA devatvenotpannAH  /  tatra ye te gopajIvavarjA
devAzcatvArastatazcyutvA kurujanapade iSukArapure avatIrNAstatra prathama
iSukArarAjA jAtaH  /  dvitIyastasyaiva rAjJaH paTTadevI kamalAvatI jAtA,
tRtIyastasyaiva rAjJo bhRgunAmA purohitaH saMvRttaH  /  caturthastasyaiva
purohitasya bhAryA saMvRttA  /  tasyA vAsiSThaM nAma gotram, yazA iti nAma jAtam
/  sa ca bhRgupurohitaH prakAmaM santAnalAbhamabhilaSati, anekadevopayAcanaM
kurute, naimittikAn praznayati  /  tau dvAvapi pUrvabhavagopadevau
vardhamAnAvadhinA evaM jJAtavantau, yathA AvAmetasya bhRgupurohitasya putrau
bhaviSyAvaH  /  tataH zramaNarUpaM kRtvA dvAvapi bhRgugRhe samAyAtau, sabhAryeNa
bhRguNA vanditau, sukhAsanasthau dharmaM kathayataH  /  tayorantike sabhAryeNa
bhRguNA 2010_02

Page #324 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Chapter - 2 Collection of Examples The Shravaka vows were accepted. The priest
said, "O Lord! Will we have children or not?" The Sadhus said, "You will have
two sons, and they will become monks in their childhood. You should not hinder
them. They will become monks and enlighten the world." Saying this, the two gods
went to their place. Soon after, the priest's wife gave birth to two sons. Then
the priest, along with his wife, left the city and settled in a remote village.
There, the Brahmin woman gave birth, and two children were born. When they
gained consciousness, they were taught by their parents to avoid the path of the
monks, saying, "These shaven-headed Sadhus are seen, they kill children and eat
their flesh, therefore, you should never be near them." One day, the two
children went out to play from that village. There, they saw the tired Sadhus on
the path. Then, the two children, frightened, climbed a banyan tree. The Sadhus
were about to eat the food they had brought earlier, under the same banyan tree.
The children, who were sitting on the tree, saw their natural food and drink.
Then they started thinking, "These are not child-eaters, but they eat natural
food. We have seen such Sadhus somewhere." While thinking this, they remembered
their birth. Then, they bowed to the Sadhus and went to their parents. The
parents were enlightened by the words spoken in their studies. The queen also
enlightened the king who was greedy for wealth. Thus, all six beings, having
accepted the vows of renunciation, attained liberation after attaining perfect
knowledge. 62. The story of Metarya Muni, included in the commentary of the
Avasyakahara, which is a continuous meditation. In that city, there was a king
named Chandavardhana. He had two wives - Sudansana and Piyadansana. Sudansana
had two sons - Sagarachandra and Munichandra. Piyadansana also had two sons -
Gunachandra and Balachandra. Sagarachandra was the heir apparent, and
Munichandra was given the kingdom of Ujjain. This Chandavardhana king used to
stay in his palace for a month, until the lamp went out. His queen used to
worry, "My husband is in the dark, he is suffering." When the lamp went out, the
servants would light it with oil. It would burn until midnight, then they would
light it again with oil, and it would burn until evening. Then they would light
it again. The king, who was weak due to illness, died at night. After that,
Sagarachandra became the king. He said to his mother, "Take the kingdom, my sons
will be born." She did not want the kingdom to be taken away. She saw the royal
insignia shining in the mirror and thought, "I don't want my sons to get the
kingdom. They are so young, I will kill them. She thought of various ways to
kill them, but she could not find any. Then she sent a message to the
charioteer, "You should send them to the forest tomorrow. If they cry, you
should kill them with a sword."  2010_02 283

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 khaNDaH - 2 dRSTAntasamuccayaH zrAvakavratAni gRhItAni  /  purohitena kathitam
bhagavan ! asmAkamapatyaM bhaviSyati na vA iti ? sAdhubhyAmuktaM bhavatAM dvau
dvArako bhaviSyataH, tau ca bAlAvasthAyAmeva pravrajiSyataH, tayorbhavadbhyAM
vyAghAto na kAryaH  /  tau pravrajya ghanaM lokaM pratibodhayiSyataH  /  iti
bhaNitvA tau devau svasthAnaM gatau  /  tato'cireNa cyutvA purohitabhAryAyA
udare'vatIrNau  /  tato'sau purohitaH sabhAryo nagarAnnirgatya pratyantagrAme
sthitaH, tatraiva sA brAhmaNI prasUtA, dArakau jAtau, labdhasaMjJau tau tAbhyAM
munimArgaviraktatAkaraNArthamevaM zikSitau ya ete muNDitaziraskAH sAdhavo
dRzyante, bAlakAn mArayitvA tanmAMsaM khAdanti, tata eteSAM samIpe zrImadbhirna
kadApi stheyam  /  anyadA tasmAd grAmAdetau krIDantau bahirnirgatau, tatra
pathazrAntAn sAdhUnAgacchataH pazyataH  /  tato bhayabhrAntau tau dArakAvekasmin
vaTapAdape ArUDhau  /  sAdhavastu tasyaiva vaTapAdapasyAdhaH
pUrvaMgRhItAzanAdibhojanaM kartuM pravRttAH  /  vArUDha kumArau
svAbhAvikamannapAnaM pazyataH  /  tatazcintutuM pravRttau naite bAlamAMsAzinaH,
kintu svAbhAvikAhArakAriNaH, kvacidetAdRzaH sAdhavo'smAbhirdRSTA iti
cintayatostayorjAtismaraNamutpannam  /  tataH pratibuddhau tau sAdhUn vanditvA
gatau mAtR-pitRsamIpam  /  adhyayanoktavAkyaistAbhyAM mAtApitarau pratibodhitau
/  taddhanalipsuM rAjAnAM ca rAjJI pratibodhitavatI  /  evaM SaDapi jIvA
gRhItapravrajyAH kevalajJAnamAsAdya mokSaM gatAH  /  62. aviramaNadhyAne zrI
AvazyakahAribhadrIyaTIkA'ntargatA metAryamunikathA  /  sAete Nagare
caMDavaDaMsao rAyA, tassa duve pattIo - sudaMsaNA piyadaMsaNA ya, tattha
sudaMsaNA duve puttA - sAgaracaMdo muNicaMdo ya piyadaMsaNAevi do puttA-
guNacaMdo bAlacaMdo ya, sAgaracaMdo juvarAyA, muNicaMdassa ujjeNI diNNA
kumArabhuttIe  /  io ya caMDavaDaMsao rAyA mAhamAse paDimaM Thio vAsaghare jAva
dIvago jalaitti, tassa sejjAvAlI ciMtei dukkhaM sAmI aMdhatamase acchihiti, tAe
bitie jAme vijjhAyaMte dIvage tellaM chUDhaM, so tAva jalio jAva addharatto,
tAhe puNovi tellaM chUDhaM tAva jalio jAva pacchimapaharo, tatthavi chUDhaM,
tato rAyA sukumAro vihAyaMtIe rayaNIe veyaNAbhibhUo kAlagao, pacchA sAgaracaMdo
rAyA jAo  /  aNNayA so mAisavattiM bhaNai - geNha rajjaM puttANa te bhavautti,
ahaM pavvayAmi, sA Necchai eeNa rajjaM AyattaMti, tao sA atijjANanijjANesu
rAyalacchI dippaMtaM pAsiUNa ciMtei - mae puttANa rajjaM dijjaMtaM Na icchiyaM,
tevi evaM sobhantA, iyANIvi NaM mAremi, chiddANi maggai so ya chUhAlU, teNa
sUtassa saMdesao diNNo, etto ceva puvvahiyaM paThThavijjAsi, jai virAvemi, sUeNa
sIhakesarao modao ceDIe hattheNa visajjio, 2010_02 283

Page #325 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 284 ## The Scattering of the Eager Refusal  A pigeon was seen by a king, who
said, "I desire it." The pigeon was frightened, and previously, having been
caught by a hunter with a net, it had been wounded by him. Afterwards, it said,
"Oh, fragrant musk-deer, I have been caught." It flew away and went to the king.
There were two princes who were fond of hunting. The king thought, "How will I
feed these two with this pigeon?" So, he had the pigeon cooked and gave it to
them. They were about to eat it, when a hunter arrived. The king, being wise,
called for a physician. The physician was given gold and was made ready.
Afterwards, the maid was called and asked, "By whom was it seen?" She said, "By
a hunter, and he is very clever in his tricks." She was told, "Go! If you want
the kingdom, give it to him. I am not bound by this world or the next, I am
free." So, the kingdom was given to him and he was made king.  Another merchant
came to Ujjain from a distant land. He asked, "Is there any peace here?" They
said, "No, the king's son, the priest's son, and the merchant are all engaged in
heresy." He went to Amarisen, where he was welcomed by the merchants. They
honored the merchant and told the beggar, "Bring him." He said, "I am a beggar,
and I have no wealth, but I have a good family." So, he was given a chariot. He
went and saw the priest, and then he returned. He was standing there, and a
great noise was made by the monks. The monks came out and cried out. He said in
a loud voice, "What is this commotion?" The monks went out and locked the door.
Then they said, "Lord, we are five." He agreed to accept them and they were
admitted. They did not want to go out, and said, "We will fight." Two of them
came out and attacked him. He fought them like wild animals, and then he broke
down the door and went out. He was standing in the courtyard. The king was told,
and he sent for him. The merchants said, "He has come from a distant land, we do
not know him." They searched for him and found him in the courtyard. The king
went and embraced him, but did not want to release him. If he were to release
him, he would die. So, he asked him, "Tell me the truth." He was taken to a
place where there was a pit, and he was thrown in. The king's son said, "This is
my father's enemy." The priest's son said, "We are being destroyed by this man."
He was thrown into the pit and died. He went to heaven. They said, "Whoever
first sees him should be honored." The priest's son saw him first, and he was
honored. He went to the king's palace and entered the queen's room. The queen
was a prostitute. She asked, "Who are you?" He said, "I sell meat." She said,
"Don't go anywhere else, I will buy everything." He brought her meat every day.
Thus, he had many wives. He had a house and a place to stay. The queen was a
miser. She told her son about him in secret. The queen's son was given to the
miser. The miser's daughter was married to the queen's son. Afterwards, the
miser threw her son into the queen's son's lap. By the power of the previous
life, he was revived. So, he was named "Mayajjo." He grew up, learned

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 284 AturapratyAkhyAnaprakIrNakam piyadaMsaNAe diTTho, bhaNai-pecchAmi NaM ti,
tIe appito, puvvaM NAe visamavikhayA hatthA kayA, tehiM so viseNa makkhio,
pacchA bhaNai-aho surabhI moyagotti paDiappio, ceDIe tAe gaMtUNa raNNo samappio,
te ya dovi kumArA rAyasagAse acchaMti, teNa ciMtiyaM-kiha ahaM etehiM chuhAiehiM
khAissaM ?, teNa duhA kAUNa tesiM doNhavi so diNNo, te khAiumAraddhA, jAva
visavegA AgaMtuM pavvattA, rAiNA saMbhaMteNa vejjA saddAvitA, suvaNNaM pAiyA,
sajjA jAyA, pacchA dAsI saddAviyA, pucchiyA bhaNai-Na keNavi diTTho, NavaraM
eyANaM mAyAe parAmuThTho, sA saddAviyA bhaNiyA-pAve ! tadA Necchasi rajjaM
dijjaMtaM, iyANimimi NAhaM te akayaparaloyasaMbalo saMsAre chUDhohoMtotti tesi
rajjaM dAUNa pavvaio  /  aNNayA saMghADao sAhUNa ujjeNIo Agao, so pucchio-tattha
NiruvasaggaM ?, te bhaNaMti-NavaraM rAyaputto purohiyaputto ya bAhinti
pAsaMDatthe sAhUNo ya, so gao amariseNaM tattha, vissAmio sAhUhiM, te ya
saMbhoiyA sAhU, bhikkhAvelAe bhaNio-ANijjau, bhaNai-attalAbhio ahaM, NavaraM
ThavaNakulANi sAhaha, tehiM se cellao diNNo, so taM purohiyadharaM daMsittA
paDigao, imovi tattheva paiTTho vaDuvaDDeNaM saddeNaM dhammalAbhei, aMtauriAo
niggayAo hAhAkAraM kareMtIo, so vaDDavaDDeNaM saddeNaM bhaNai-kiM eyaM sAvietti,
te NiggayA bAhiM bAraM baMdhaMti, pacchA bhaNaMti-bhagavaM ! paNaJcasu, so
paDiggahaM ThaveUNa paNaJcio, te Na yANaMti vAeuM, bhaNaMtijujjhAmo, dovi
ekkasarA te AgayA, mammehiM AhayA, jahA jaMtANi tahA khalakhalAviA, tao NisiTuM
haNiUNa vArANi ugghADittA gao, ujjANe acchati, rAiNo kahiyaM, teNa maggAvio,
sAhU bhaNaMti-pAhUNao Agao, Na yANAmo, gavesaMtehiM ujjANe diTTho, rAyA gao
khAmio ya, Necchai mottuM, jai pavvayaMti to muyAmi, tAhe pucchiyA, paDisuyaM,
egattha gahAya cAliyA jahA saTThANe ThiyA saMdhiNo, loyaM kAUNa pavvAviyA,
rAyaputto sammaM kareti mama pittiyattotti, purohiyasuyo dugaMchaiamhe eeNa
kavaDeNa pavvAviyA, dovi mariUNa devalogaM gayA, saMgAraM kareMti-jo paDhamaM
cayai teNa so saMboheyavvo, purohiyasuo caiUNa tIe duguMchAe rAyagihe meIe poTTe
Agao, tIse siTThiNI vayaMsiyA, sA kiha jAyA !, sA maMsaM vikkiNai, tAe bhaNNai-
mA aNNattha hiMDAhi, ahaM savvaM kiNAmi, divase 2 ANei, evaM tAsiM pII ghaNA
jAyA, tesiM ceva gharassa samosIiyANi ThiyANi, sA ya seTThiNI NiMdU, tAhe meIe
rahassiyaM ceva tIse putto diNNo, seTThiNIe dhUyA maiyA jAyA, sA meIe gahiyA,
pacchA sA seTThiNI taM dAragaM meIe pAesu pADeti, tubbhapabhAveNa jIvautti, teNa
se nAmaM kayaM meyajjotti, saMvaDDio, kalAo gAhiyo, saMbohio deveNa, Na
saMbujjhai, tAhe aTThaNhaM ibbhakaNNagANaM egadivaseNa pANI geNhAvio, sibiyAe
Nagari hiMDae, devovi meyaM aNupaviTTho roiumAraddho, jai mamavi dhUyA jIvaMtiyA
tIsevi ajja vivAho kao hoto, bhattaM ca metANa kayaM 2010_02

Page #326 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Chapter - 2 Collection of Examples  Once, a certain king, having become angry
with his wife, because she had been unfaithful, had her tied up and thrown into
a well. The king's brother asked, "What happened?" The brother replied, "She has
been unfaithful to me for twelve years." The king asked, "What should I do?" The
brother replied, "Burn the king's palace." All the people were shocked and
horrified. The king then gave the brother a goat. The brother milked the goat,
and filled a bowl with milk. He then told the king to burn the palace, saying
that the bowl would be filled with milk. What happened? The palace was not
burned, and the bowl was filled with milk every day. The king asked, "Where is
the milk coming from?" The brother replied, "The goat has gone, and we will give
you milk from now on." He then brought a fragrant ointment and rubbed it on the
king. The king asked, "What is this?" The brother replied, "The king is
suffering from a mountain of sorrow. I will help him find the path of
liberation." The king agreed. The brother then said, "Let's build a golden
palace." The king agreed. The brother then said, "If you can bring the ocean
here, and make the water pure, then I will give you the tenth part of my
wealth." The king agreed. The brother brought the ocean, and made the water
pure. The king was very happy and married his wife. The brother then brought
many other things for the king to enjoy. The king enjoyed all these things for
twelve years. After that, the brother taught the king the path of liberation.
The king followed the path of liberation for twelve years, and attained
liberation. He then went to the city of the king, and went to the house of the
goldsmith. The goldsmith was making a golden statue of the king. The king saw
that the goldsmith was using a very sharp tool to make the statue. The king then
went to the house of the goldsmith's neighbor. The neighbor was begging for
food. The king saw that the neighbor was very hungry. The king then went to the
house of the goldsmith's neighbor's neighbor. The neighbor's neighbor was eating
a very delicious meal. The king saw that the neighbor's neighbor was very happy.
The king then went to the house of the goldsmith's neighbor's neighbor's
neighbor. The neighbor's neighbor's neighbor's neighbor was very sad. The king
asked the neighbor's neighbor's neighbor's neighbor why he was sad. The
neighbor's neighbor's neighbor's neighbor said that he had lost his son. The
king then went to the house of the goldsmith's neighbor's neighbor's neighbor's
neighbor's neighbor. The neighbor's neighbor's neighbor's neighbor's neighbor's
neighbor was very happy. The king asked the neighbor's neighbor's neighbor's
neighbor's neighbor's neighbor why he was happy. The neighbor's neighbor's
neighbor's neighbor's neighbor's neighbor said that he had found his son. The
king then went to the house of the goldsmith's neighbor's neighbor's neighbor's
neighbor's neighbor's neighbor's neighbor. The neighbor's neighbor's neighbor's
neighbor's neighbor's neighbor's neighbor was very angry. The king asked the
neighbor's neighbor's neighbor's neighbor's neighbor's neighbor's neighbor why
he was angry. The neighbor's neighbor's neighbor's neighbor's neighbor's
neighbor's neighbor said that he had lost his son. The king then went to the
house of the goldsmith's neighbor's neighbor's neighbor's neighbor

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 khaNDaH - 2 dRSTAntasamuccayaH hotaM, tAhe tAe meIe jahAvattaM siThThe, tao
ruThTho devANubhAveNa ya tAo sibiyAo pADio tumaM asarisIo pariNesitti khaDDAe
chUDho, tAhe devo bhAi - kiha ? so bhAi- avaNNo, bhaNai-etto moehi kiMcikAlaM,
acchAmi bArasa varisANi, to bhaNai - kiM karemi ?, bhaNai - raNNo dhUyaM
davAvehi, to savvAo akiriyAo ohADiyAo bhavissaMti, tAhe se chagalao diNNo, so
rayaNANi vosirai, teNa rayaNANa thAlaM bhariyaM, teNa piyA bhaNio raNNo dhUyaM
varehi, rayaNANaM thAlaM bharettA gao, kiM maggasi ? dhUyaM NicchUDho, evaM
thAlaM divase divase gehae, Na ya dei, abhao bhAi-kao rayaNANi ? so bhaNai -
chagalao hagaI, amhavi dijjau, ANIo, maDagagaMdhANi vosirai, abhao bhAi-
devANubhAvo, kiM puNa ? parikkhijjau, kiha ?, bhaNai-rAyA dukkhaM
vebbhArapavvataM sAmiM vaMdao jAti, rahamaggaM karehi, so kao, ajjavi dIsai,
bhaNio-pAgAraM sovaNNaM karehi, kao, puNovi bhaNio-jai samuddaM ANesi tattha
vhAso suddho hohisi to te dAhAmo, ANIo, velAe pahAvio, vivAho kao siviyAe
hiMDateNa, tAo vi se aNNAo ANiyAo, evaM bhoge bhuMjati bArasa varisANa, pacchA
bohito, mahilAhivi bArasa varisANi maggiyANi, diNNANi ya, cauvvIsAe vAsehiM
savvANivi pavvaiyANi, NavapuvvI jAo, ekalla vihArapaDimaM paDivaNNI, tattheva
rAyagihe hiMDai, suvaNNakAragihamAgao, so ya sejiyassa sovaNNiyANaM
javANamaTThasaMta karei, ceiyaccaNiyAe parivADie seNio kArei tisaMjhaM, tassa
gihaM sAhU aigao, tassa egAe vAyAe bhikkhA Na NINiyA, so ya aigao, te ya javA
koMcaeNa khAiyA, so Agao Na pecchai, raNNo ya cetiyaccaNiyavelA Dhukkai, ajja
aTThikhaMDANi kIrAmitti, sAdhu saMkai, pucchai, tuNhikko acchai, tA sIsAveDheNa
baMdhati, bhaNio ya-sAha jeNa gahiyA, tahA AveDhio jahA acchINi bhUmIe paDiyANi,
koMcao ya dAruM phoMDeteNa siliMkAe Ahao galae, teNa vantA, logo bhaNai-pAva !
ee tejavA, so vi bhagavaM kAlagao siddho ya, logo Agao, diTTho mettejjo, raNNo
kahiyaM, vajjhANi ANattANi, dAraM pavvaiyANi bhaNaMti - sAvaga ! dhammeNa
vaDDhAi, mukkANi, bhaNai - jai uppavvayai to bhe kavilI kaDDe  /  2010_02 285

Page #327 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
- i i i i i o _Tī gattimāmastram | Je puṇ gurupadīniyā bahumohā sasabala kusīlā
ya | Asamāhiṇā maranti u te hanati aṇantasansārī ||43|| Artha: Je jīvo gurunā
pratyeknīka hoy, gāḍhamōhthi mōhitamativāḷā hoy, śabala ne sevānārā, kharāb
ācārvāḷā jīvo asamādhipūrvak mare chē ane aṇanta sansārī thay chē. (43)
Jiṇavayane aṇurattā guruvayanaṁ je karanti bhāveṇa | Asabala asankiliṭṭhā te
hanati parittsansārī ||44|| Artha: Jiṇavacana ne anusār jīvanārā, gurunā vacana
ne bhāvapūrvak pāḷanārā, śabala thi rahit ane asankaliṣṭ pariṇāmvāḷā jīvo alp
sansārī bane chē. Nikat mōkṣavartī thay chē. (44)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 - i i i i i o _Tii gattimAma stram | je puNa gurupaDiNIyA bahumohA sasabalA
kusIlA ya  /  asamAhiNA maraMti u te haMti aNaMtasaMsArI  /  / 43 /  /  artha :
je jIvo gurunA pratyenIka hoya, gADhamohathI mohitamativALA hoya, zabalane
sevanArA, kharAba AcAravALA jIvo asamAdhipUrvaka mare che ane anaMta saMsArI
thAya che. (43) jiNavayaNe aNurattA guruvayaNaM je karaMti bhAveNa  /  asabala
asaMkiliTThA te haMti parittasaMsArI  /  / 44 //  artha : jinavacanane anusAra
jIvanArA, gurunA vacanane bhAvapUrvaka pALanArA, zabalathI rahita ane
asaMkaliSTa pariNAmavALA jIvo alpa saMsArI bane che. nikaTa mokSavartI thAya
che. (44)

Page #328 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Agam Shri Atur Pratyakhyan Prakirnakam Khandah - 3 Parisishthanni 1 Tah 7 *
Parisishtam - 1 Mulagatha - Balavabodho - Bhavanuvaadashcha * Parisishtam - 2
Shri Upadesh Prasadanantaragatam Trishashti Durdhyanam * Parisishtam - 3 Lahuu-
Aaurpacchakkaanam - 1 * Parisishtam - 4 Lahuu-Aaur Pacchakkaanam - 2 *
Parisishtam - 5 Trishashti (63) Dhyanakatha Prakirnakam * Parisishtam - 6
Mulasloka'akaraadih * Parisishtam - 7 Digambariyamulaachar Tulana Gathaha
2010_02

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama zrIAturapratyAkhyAnaprakIrNakam khaNDaH - 3 pariziSTAni 1 taH 7 *
pariziSTam - 1 mUlagAthA - bAlAvabodho - bhAvAnuvAdazca * pariziSTam - 2
zrIupadezaprAsAdAntargataM triSaSTidurdhyAnam * pariziSTam-3 lahu-
AurapaccakkhANaM-1 * pariziSTam-4 lahu-Aura paccakkhANaM-2 * pariziSTam - 5
triSaSTi (63) dhyAnakathAprakIrNakam * pariziSTam - 6 mUlazlokA'kArAdiH *
pariziSTam - 7 digambarIyamUlAcAra tulanAgAthAH 2010_02

Page #329 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
2010_02 When suddenly Yamadeva will come to my doorstep, when he will take me on
the long journey of births and rebirths! O Vitrag Jinendra! I have only one
request for you, grant me the path of Samadhi-Bodhi at that time...ll1॥ It is
said here, "He who abandons will attain," the Lord says, "He who abandons the
fear of death will attain happiness!" This soul is filled with the womb-dwelling
in this body, who will release it from the cage without death? I॥2॥ The black,
formless pain of the disease at the time of death, awakens pain in the ignorant,
and awareness in the wise! The wise thinks: This pain is the destruction of
attachment to the body, it is a good tool, through it is death, the torment of
existence! ॥3॥ For years and years, those who have performed severe austerities,
those who have become brave warriors of restraint throughout their lives,
carrying it on their shoulders, and who have revered the study and contemplation
of scriptures day and night, the fruit of all that is one, in the end, Samadhi-
death! Who is the one who will release?  [Author: Mu. Moksharati Vi.]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 2010_02 jyAre acAnaka Avaze yamadeva mArA AMgaNe, janamojanamanA cira pravAse
laI jaze jyAre mane ! he vItarAga jinendra ! eka ja che vinaMti Apane, tyAre
samAdhi-bodhinuM pAtheya dejo prabhu mane...ll1|| je choDaze te pAmaze' evuM
ahIM kahevAya che, kahe che prabhu, je mRtyu bhaya tajaze sukho te pAmaze ! A
jIva garbhAvAsathI pUrAya je tanapiMjare, piMjara thakI choDAvanAruM koNa che
viNa maraNa re ! I // 2 //  mRtyu samayanI vyAdhinI kALI akArI vedanA, ajJAnIne
pIDA jagADe, jJAnIne saMvedanA ! jJAnI vicAre : vedanA to deha moha vinAzanuM,
sAdhana sarasa che, te thakI che maraNa, bhavanA trAsanuM !  // 3 //  varaso ane
varaso sudhI je ghora tapakiriyA karI, je jIvanabhara saMyamadhurA zUrA ba banI
kAMdhe dharI, ne AdaryuM dinarAta zAstronuM manana adhyayana je, te sarvanuM
phala eka, aMte to, samAdhimaraNa che ! vanAra koNa che vize praza [kartA : mu.
mokSarati vi.]

Page #330 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Appendix-1: Original Verses - Explanation for Children - Meaning and Explanation
**Desikkadeśavirodha**  A being who has attained right faith and is a
*desikkadeśavirodha* (one who has renounced the world but not all vows) is said
to be a *balapanditamaraṇa* (death of a child-sage) in the Jina teachings. ||1||
**Śrīvardhamāna**  In order to explain this to children, the story of the
*āturapratyākhyāna* (refusal of the sick) is told. ||  **Explanation for
Children**  In this world, all living beings are subject to illness. The
ultimate goal of life is to attain liberation. This study will explain the
nature of the ultimate goal of life.  **Original Verses - Explanation**  The
disciple asks the teacher: "What should be the first topic of study in the
scriptures?"  The teacher replies: "The first topic of study in this text is not
a greeting. It is the *bhaktaparijñāna* (knowledge of devotees) as explained by
Vīrabhadra Ācārya. He first attained *bhaktaparijñāna* and then performed the
*āturapratyākhyāna*. Therefore, the first verse should be considered a greeting
to the *bhaktaparijñāna*. This is because there is only one author of this
text."  **Desikkadeśavirodha**  The sixth part of the six categories of beings
is the *traskāya* (those who are subject to suffering). The *deśa* (world) is a
part of the *traskāya*. There is a difference between the *deśa* and the
*traskāya* because of the intention to harm. The *deśa* is a part of the
*traskāya* that has renounced violence through intention. Therefore, there are
two types of *deśa*: those who are guilty and those who are innocent. The *deśa*
that has renounced the world through intention and is innocent is called a
*desikkadeśavirodha*.  **Samyagdṛṣṭi**  The *samyagdṛṣṭi* (right faith) is a
vision that is not contrary to the truth. A being who is a *śrāvaka* (lay
follower) and dies with *samyagdṛṣṭi* is called a *balapanditamaraṇa* in the
Jina teachings. This is because they have attained *samyagdṛṣṭi* and are
therefore considered a *pandita* (sage), but they have not renounced all vows
and are therefore considered a *bala* (child).  **Jina teachings**  There are
many types of death in the Jina teachings, such as *āvicīmaraṇa* (death in
hell). However, there are five types of death that are considered to be the most
important. These are:  1. *Mithyātvīna balamaraṇa* (death of a being who has
false faith as a child) 2. *Avirata samyagdṛṣṭīna balamaraṇa* (death of a being
who has right faith but has not renounced all vows as a child) 3. *Deśaviratīna
balapanditamaraṇa* (death of a being who has renounced the world but not all
vows as a child-sage) 4. *Chhadmasthayatina panditamaraṇa* (death of a being who
is pretending to be a sage) 5. *Kevalīna panditamaraṇa* (death of a being who
has attained omniscience)  **Meaning**  A *śrāvaka* who

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pariziSTam-1 mUlagAthA-bAlAvabodho-bhAvAnuvAdazca desikkadesavirao sammaddiTThI
marijja jo jIvo  /  taM hoi bAlapaMDiyamaraNaM jiNasAsaNe bhaNiyaM  /  / 1 /  /
zrIvarddhamAnamAnamya bAlAvabodhahetave  /  /  AturapratyAkhyAnasya vArtayA!
nigadyate  /  /  bAlA0 iha jagamAMhi samasta jIvanai saghalA AukhAnI aMtya
avasthAI ArAdhanA te sAra chai bhAlAnI agranI parai  /  te mArai e adhyayanai
viSai aMtya avasthAnI ArAdhanAnuM svarUpa kahIsyai  /  atha gAthA-desikka0  /
ziSyai gurupratai pUchaU~ je zAstranI AdinaI viSai namaskAra karavo joIe  /
anai e graMthanI Adinai viSai namaskAra nathI ko te syA bhaNI ? gurU bolyA je
vIrabhadrAcAryaiM pahilU bhaktaparijJA paiNUM karInai pachai AturapratyAkhyAna
karyu te bhaNI bhaktaparijJAnI prathamagAthAno namaskAra ahI paNi jANivo  /
bihui graMthano ekai ja karttA chai te bhaNI  /  desakka0 SaTkAya nA chaThA aMza
mATai trasakAya te deza, tehanI hiMsA saMkalpa thakI anai AraMbha thakI bibhedai
chai  /  te mATai tehano eka deza saMkalpa thakI trasakAyanI hiMsAthI viramyau
/  te valI sAparAdha - nirAparAdha biprakAra chai  /  teha mAhithI eka deza
nirAparAdha saMkalpa thakI nivartyau  /  tathA samyag kahatAM aviparIta dRSTi
darzana chai jehanai te samyagdRSTi  /  ehavo je jIva zrAvaka marai te
jinazAsanai viSai bAlamaraNa, paMDitamaraNa, bAlapaMDitamaraNa ehavA
nAmapaNimAMthI bAlapaMDitaka0 sarvaviratinAM abhAva thakI bAla anai
sthUlaprANAtipAtaveramaNa huMtI paMDita saMbaMdhI maraNa te mATai
bAlapaMDitamaraNa kahIi  /  tathA jinamatanai viSai aneka prakArai maraNa -
AvicImaraNAdika kayu chai  /  tathApi te maraNa pAMcai prakArai kalpa che  /
tadyathA - 1-mithyAtvInaiM bAlamaraNa, 2-avirata samyagdRSTInai paNi bAlamaraNa,
3-dezaviratInai bAlapaMDitamaraNa, 4-chadmasthayatInai paMDitamaraNa,
5-kevalInai paNi paMDitamaraNa iti gAthArthaH  /  / 1 /  /  artha :
samyagdarzanane pAmelo ane sarvaviratinI apekSAe eka bhAgarUpe virativALo
dezaviratidhara je zrAvaka samAdhipUrvaka mare, tene jinazAsanamAM bAlapaMDita
maraNa kahyuM che. samyagdarzana ane dezavirati hovAthI te paMDita kahevAya che,
chatAM sarvavirati na hovAthI bAla 59|43vaay che. (1) 2010_02

Page #331 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Chapter 290:  The Scattering of the Eager Rejection  **Verse 2:** Five
Anuvratas and seven Shikshavrata are the Yati Dharma from the land. All twelve
Vratas together are called the Desayati Dharma.   **Explanation:** The five
Anuvratas are those Vratas which are less than the Mahavratas. The seven
Shikshavrata are those Vratas which are related to the constant practice. The
three Gunavratas are also intended for daily practice. The twelve Vratas are
called the Desayati Dharma for the Shravaka. Thus, all twelve Vratas together,
including the Desayati Vratas, are called the Desayati Dharma for the Shravaka.
**Verse 3:** * Restraint from killing, lying, stealing, and sexual misconduct,
and restraint from unlimited desires are the five Anuvratas.  **Explanation:** *
**Pranavrat:**  The killing of ten kinds of beings is called Pranavrat. However,
it does not mean killing any living being. It means that one should not kill any
living being. * **Musavrat:**  Speaking falsely due to anger or other emotions
is called Musavrat. * **Adattvrat:**  Taking anything without the owner's
permission is called Adattvrat. * **Paradaravrat:**  The inner qualities of a
man are called his wife. The outer qualities of a man are called his wife. The
wife of another man is called Paradar. Restraint from all these is called
Paradaravrat. * **Aparimitaichchavrat:**  The desire for unlimited possessions
is called Aparimitaichchavrat. Restraint from this is the fifth Anuvrat.
**Verse 4:** * Restraint from going in any direction and restraint from harmful
actions are the Gunavratas.  **Explanation:** * **Disavaramana:**  Restraint
from going in any direction, especially the four cardinal directions, is the
first Gunavrat. This restraint is from the attachment to the past.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 290 AturapratyAkhyAnaprakIrNakam paMca ya aNuvvayAI satta u sikkhA u desa-
jaidhammo  /  savveNa va deseNa va teNa juo hoi desajaI  /  / 2 /  /  bAlA0
havai je vrata thakI dezaviratIthAi te vrata kahIi chai  /  gAthA -
paMcayaaNuka0 aNuka0 nAhanA, mahAvratanI apekSAi je vrata te aNuvrata pAMca  /
tathA zikSAka0 nityAbhyAsa te saMbaMdhI je vrata te zikSAvrata sAta jANavA  /
triNi guNavratanaiM paNi dina dina pratai abhyAsavA mATe zikSA ja paNai
vivakSyAM  /  e bAravratarUpa dezayatidharmaka0 zrAvaka [dharma] kahIi  /  teNai
saghalai bAravratanai tathA dezai bAravrata mAhali eka kahIi vrata yukta sahita
huMtau dezayatIka0 zrAvaka hoi  /  iti gAthArtha  /  / 2 /  /  artha : pAMca
aNuvrato ane sAta zikSAvrato A dezathI yatidharma che. A bAravratorUpa deza
yatidharma saMpU[ 3 Hizi.3 svI12 tene dezayati (zrI) 43vAya che. (2) pANavaha -
musAvAe - adatta - paradAraniyamaNehiM ca  /  aparimiicchAo vi ya aNuvvayAI
viramaNAI  /  / 3 /  /  bAlA0 havai aNuvratanA nAma kahIyaiM chai  /  gAthA-
pANavaha - prANa daza tehanao vadha vinAza te prANavadha kahIiM  /  paNi
prANIvadha na kahIi  /  etalA bhaNIje jIva haNI na sakIiM te bhaNI  /
musAvAyaka0 krodhAdika vaza hutI  /  asahabhUta jUThau bolakaM te mRSAvAda  /
adattaka. sacittAdi vastu  /  dhaNIi nathI dIdhI te adatta kahIi  /  paradArAka0
dArA kahIiM vidyAri puruSanAM aMtaraMga guNa anai bAhyaguNa te dArA anerAnI dArA
te paradArA  /  te saghalAthI niyamaNehiM ka. viramaNa etalai cyAra aNuvrata  /
tathA aparimita carimANarahita parigrahanai viSai je icchA te thakI je viramavU
te aNuvrata paaNcmuuN| iti gAthArthaH  /  / 3 /  /  martha : DiMsA, 44, yorI,
mahAna sevana (52strI saMbaMdhI) 35 55o nahi 72vAnI pratijJA temaja amaryAdita
IcchAnI pratijJArUpa zrAvakanA pAMca aNuvrato che. (3) jaM ca disAveramaNaM
aNatthadaMDAu jaM ca veramaNaM  /  desAvagAsi pi ya guNavvayAiM bhave tAI  /  /
4 /  /  bAlA0 pahilUM sAmAnyapaNi zikSAvrata kayAM  /  havai tehaIja guNabhUta
jUdAM dekhArI kahIiM chai  /  gAthA- jaM ca disAka. pUrvAdikadisanaI viSai
gamananU parimANa karavai karI je AgilI mamatAdikanU viramaNa, te prathama
guNavrata  /  uktaJca - 2010 02

Page #332 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Appendix - 1 Child Understanding - Meaning and Translation  **Verse 1** Whoever
holds the direction (Digvirman) in mind, gives protection to all beings. The
world is spreading, falling into the ocean of existence. || As per the saying ||
**Verse 2** Similarly, the useless and purposeless punishment (Anarthadand) is
the restraint of mind, speech, and body. The seed of that restraint is the
Gunavrata. Similarly, the vow that is to be taken for life is called
Desavakashik, which is a concise form of the Digvrat or the vow of direction, to
be performed daily. The third Gunavrata is the Shikshavrata, although it is
known as a Shikshavrata, it is considered a Gunavrata because it is beneficial
to all vows. Therefore, it is said that there is no fault in considering it as a
Gunavrata. || 4 ||  **Meaning:** The Digvirmanvrata, which is the restriction of
going and coming in all directions, the Anarthadandvirmanvrata, which is the
regulation of activities that lead to unnecessary sinful punishment for the
soul, and the Desavakashikvrata, which is the concise form of all vows. These
three vows are called Gunavratas because they are beneficial in observing the
five basic vows. (4)  **Verse 3** The enumeration of enjoyments, the Samayik,
the Atithisambhag, and the Poshad are the four teachings. || 5 ||  **Verse 4**
It is said that the Shikshavrata is the teaching vow - The verse says - The
enjoyment of food, etc., is to be enjoyed once. Similarly, the enjoyment of
clothes, etc., is to be enjoyed repeatedly. The first Shikshavrata is to limit
the number and quantity of these enjoyments. Similarly, the Gunavrata is also
considered to be accepted for life. However, it is necessary to make it concise
day by day, for the sake of daily practice. There is no fault in considering it
as a Shikshavrata. Similarly, the Samayik, which is the practice of equanimity,
is the second Shikshavrata. Similarly, the Atithisambhag, which is the giving of
food, etc., to the worthy, whether a Sadhu or a Shravak, is the third
Shikshavrata. Similarly, the Poshad, which is the strengthening of Dharma, is
the fourth Shikshavrata. The method of this is "Savvau Aharposhan," etc. These
four are called Shikshavrata. || 5 ||  **Meaning:** The regulation (concise
form) of the objects of people and the world is the Bhogopabhog Virabhaye Vrata,
the Samayikvrata, which is the practice of equanimity, free from attachment and
aversion, the Atithisambhagvrata, which is the giving of gifts to worthy
persons, whether a Sadhu or a Shravak, and the Poshadvrata, which is the four
types of Poshad, which is the renunciation of food, etc. These four vows are
called Shikshavrata because they are in the form of study. (5)  **Verse 5** In
eagerness, in death, in the unbroken, and in the desire to live, there is no
such thing as a western leaning. || 6 ||  **Verse 6** The one who is free from
attachment and aversion, who is at home, who is not afraid to build a house, if
he dies in a foreign land, that story is a child's story. || 7 ||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pariziSTam - 1 bAlavabodha-bhAvAnuvAdau jo dharai disivayamaMmi, so abhayaM deI
savvajIvANaM  /  bhuvaNaMmi pasaramANaM bhavasamudde paDikhaleI  /  /  iti
vacanAt  /  /  tathA anartha niHprayojanaH daMDIi haNIiM te daMDa mana-vacana-
kAyAnA yoga  /  teha thikI je virama bIjuM guNavrata  /  tathA jAvajjIva grahyA
chai vrata tehanUM athavA dizavratanUM ja dinaprataI saMkSepa karavUM te
dezAvagAzika  /  trIjUM guNavrata hivai yadyapi e vrata zikSAvrata paNaI
prasiddha chai tathApi sarva vratanaiM guNakArakamAMhi guNavratapaNi vivakSUM te
bhaNI [a] doSa iti gAthArtha  /  / 4  //  artha : sarva dizAomAM javA-AvavAnI
maryAdA karavArUpa digviramaNavrata, AtmAne nirarthaka pApadaMDa thAya tevI
pravRttinuM niyamana te anarthadaMDaviramaNavrata, dareka vratonI maryAdAne
vadhAre saMkSepamAM levI te dezAvakAzikavrata. A traNa vrato mULa pAMca
aNuvratone pALavAmAM guNa ka2nA2 hovAthI guNavrata kahevAya che. (4) bhogANaM
parisaMkhA sAmAiya atihisaMvibhAgo ya  /  posahavihI ya savvo cauro sikkhAo
vuttAo  /  /  5  /  /  291 bAlA0 havai zikSAvrata kahIiM chai - gAthA -
bhogaNaka0 ekavAra bhogavIiM AhArAdika  /  tathA vAravAra bhogavIi vastrAdika  /
tehanI je saMkhyA parimANa karavUM te prathama zikSAvrata  /  ehanai paNi
jAvajjIva aMgIkAra karavA mATe guNavrata paNi prasIgha chai  /  tathApi dina
dina prati vAravAra saMkSepa karavA huMtI nitya pratyabhisavA mATe  /
zikSAvrata paNai vivakSya paNi doSa nahI  /  tathA sAmAIkasamacittapaNaM te
bIjUM zikSAvrata  /  tathA atithya [ atithi ] sAdhu tehanaiM saMvibhAga
AhArAdikanUM devUM jUM zikSAvrata  /  tathA pauSadha kahatA dharmapuSTi, tehanI
je vidhi " savvau AhAraposahaM" ityAdi  /  te cauthauM zikSAvrata  /  e cyAri
zikSAvrata kahI iti gAthArtha  /   /  5 //  artha : loga-upaloganI vastunuM
niyamana (saMkSepa) te bhogopabhoga virbhe| vrata, 2rAgadveSanAthIne samabhAvanI
sAdhanArUpa sAmAyikavrata, 3-sAdhu ke zrAvakarUpa pAtramAM vidhipUrvaka dAna te
atithisaMvibhAga vrata, 4-AhArAdinA tyAga rUpa cAra prakArano pauSadha te
pauSadhavrata. A cAra vrato abhyAsarUpa hovAthI zikSAvrata kahevAya che. (5)
AsukkAre maraNe acchinnAe ya jIviyAsAe  /  nAhi vA amuko
pacchimasaMlehaNamakiccA  /  / 6 /  /  Aloiya nissallo sa ghare cevA''ruhitu
saMthAraM  /  jai marai desavirao taM vRttaM bAlapaMDiyayaM  /  / 7 /  /
2010_02

Page #333 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter 292: The Scattering of the Rejection of Anxiety  **Verse 6:**  A
young scholar dies when death comes unexpectedly, while still clinging to the
hope of living. Or, when the family has not given permission for the final
rites, and the dying person passes away without performing the final rites, this
is called a young scholar's death.  **Verse 7:**  A desaviratidhar Shravak who
dies at home, having received the Aloi (purification) from the Guru, and having
renounced the worldly attachments, is said to have died a young scholar's death.
**Verse 8:**  The method of death is described in detail in the "Bhattparitra"
text. This method should be followed by the desaviratidhar Shravak who dies a
young scholar's death.  **Verse 9:**  A Shravak who performs the rites of a
young scholar's death will be reborn in the Vaimanika Kalpadevaloka, but not in
the higher realms of the Graiviyaka. The Shravak who has not fully understood
the Dharma will be reborn in the seventh or lower realms.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 292 AturapratyAkhyAnaprakIrNakam bAlA0 havai ki dvAri zrAvaka bAla paMDita
maraNe marai te kahIi chai - gAthA - AsukkArika. utAvalU aNacitavU maraNa
AvihaMti bAlapaMDita maraNa marai  /  athavA achinnAeka0 aNabeTi jIvitavyanI
AzAiM  /  etalai anukramai maraNa Avyi hu~ti saMlekhanAdika aNakAri je marai te
bAlapaMDita maraNa  /  athavA nAehiM ka0 kuTuMbi amukko ka0 anumati nathI dIdhI
jehanaiM ehavao pAchilI saMlekhanA viNakArai marai te bAlapaMDita maraNa kayuM
iti gAthArthaH  /  / 6 /  /  have te zrAvaka gharanai viSai kima marai te kahIi
chai - gAthA - AloI- ka. guru samipi AloI ne dI* prAyazcitta aMgIkAra karInaiM
/  nisalloka0 mUlottaraguNa virAdhanArUpa je bhAvazalya teNi karI rahita potAnAM
gharanai viSai DAbhanA saMthArA upari baisI athavA ArUhittuka0 aMgIkAra karInaiM
saMthAro aNasaNa je dezaviratI zrAvaka marai te bAlapaMDita maraNa kahaGgu iti
gAthArthaH  /  / 7 /  /  artha : aNadhAryuM maraNa Ave tyAre jIvavAnI AzA haju
chUTI na hoya, svajanoe saMlekhanA mATe rajA na ApI hoya ane aMtima saMkhanAnI
ArAdhanA karI na hoya tevo dezaviratidhara zrAvaka traNa zalyothI rahita thaIne,
AlocanApUrvaka potAnA gharamAM ja saMthArAmAM besIne jo bh29|| 5to te pArita
bh29|| 43vAya che. (7-7) jo "bhattaparitrAe" uvakkamo vitthareNa niddiTTo  /  so
ceva bAlapaMDiyamaraNe neo jahAjuggaM  /  / 8 /  /  bAlA0 havai te maraNa keNI
vidhi karavU te kahIi chai - gAthA - jo bhattapari. je vidhi bhakta
parijJApaInnAnai viSai anukrami vistAri kahI chai - 'ahujja desavirau' ityAdi
gAthokta  /  tehaja vidhi ahIiM bAlapaMDitamaraNanai viSai yathAyogya jANavau
iti gAthArthaH  /  / 8 /  /  artha: "bhakta paritA' nAmanA payatrAmAM
vistArapUrvaka je vidhino krama batAvyo che. te vidhinuM ArAdhana A
bAlapaMDitamaraNane pAmanAra dezaviratidhara zrAvake avazya karavAnuM che. tethI
te vidhi A maraNamAM yathAyogya jANavI. (8) vemANiesu kappovagesu niyameNa tassa
uvavAo  /  niyamA sijjhai ukkosaeNa so sattamaMmi bhave  /  / 9 /  /  bAlA0
havai ehavI ArAdhanA ArAdhai te kihyAM upajai te kahe chai - gAthA - vaimANisu
vaimAnika kalpadevaloka bAra lagai jAi  /  paNi kalpAtIta nava graiviyakAdikanai
viSai na jAi  /  havai te zrAvaka apratipatita dharma thikI ketamai bhavi sIjai
te kahaichai  /  niyama nizcaiM utkRSTau sAtamai bhavi sIjai  /  jaghanyatau
sAtabhavamAMhi paNi sIjai  /  iti gAthArthaH  /  / 9 /  /  _ 2010_02

Page #334 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Appendix-1 Child-Understanding-Meaning Translator 293 Meaning: According to this
method, a child-pandit who dies is born in the Vaimanika Devaloka, a celestial
realm. He will definitely attain liberation from the seventh heaven and become a
Siddha. (8) This is the death of a child-pandit, as seen in the teachings of the
Arihant. Now, I will briefly explain the death of a pandit. (10) I wish, O
Venerable One! I will explain the best. 1-Aiyam Padi, 2-Anagayam Padi,
3-Pacchuppanna Padi, 1-Kayam Pid, 2-Kariyam Padi, 3-Anumoiyam Padi, 1-Micchatt
Padi, 2-Asanjam Padi, 3-Kasay Padi, 4-Pavappog Padi, in the results of wrong
perception, either in this world, or in the next world, or in the sentient
beings, or in the non-sentient beings, or in the five sense objects. Annanjana,
Anayaram Jhana, Kudansan Jhana, Koh Jhana, Man Jhana, May Jhana, Lobh Jhana, Rag
Jhana, Dos Jhana, Moh Jhana, Ichch Jhana, Micch Jhana, Muchch Jhana, Sank Jhana,
Kank Jhana, Gehin Jhana, Asan Jhana, Tanh Jhana, Chuh Jhana, Panth Jhana,
Panthan Jhana, Nijhana, Niyan Jhana, Neh Jhana, Kam Jhana, Kalus Jhana, Kalah
Jhana, Jujh Jhana, Nijujjh Jhana, Sang Jhana, Sangah Jhana, Vavhar Jhana,
Kayavikkay Jhana, Anathdand Jhana, Abhog Jhana, Anabhog Jhana, Anavil Jhana, Ver
Jhana, Viyakk Jhana, Hins Jhana, Has Jhana, Pahas Jhana, Pao Jhana, Farus Jhana,
Bhay Jhana, Ruv Jhana, Appasan Jhana, Paranind Jhana, Pargarih Jhana, Pariggah
Jhana, Parparivay Jhana, Paradushan Jhana, Aarambh Jhana, Sanrambh Jhana,
Pavanumoayan Jhana, Ahigarn Jhana, Asamahimarn Jhana, Kammodaypacchay Jhana,
Iddigarav Jhana, Rasgarav Jhana, Sayagarav Jhana, Avareraman Jhana, Amuttimarn
Jhana, for the one who is well-versed or the one who is awakened, if any god or
king, who is the best, who is not greedy, who is not envious, who is not a liar,
who is not a deceiver, for him, wrong perception is a great misfortune. (11)
Bala-Gatha - This Bala-Gatha is explained in this way. If it is said that a
child-pandit has died, then it means that he has not attained complete cessation
of all activities. If it is said that a pandit has died, then it means that he
has not attained complete cessation of all activities. If it is said that a
pandit has died, then it means that he has not attained complete cessation of
all activities. If it is said that a pandit has died, then it means that he has
not attained complete cessation of all activities. If it is said that a pandit
has died, then it means that he has not attained complete cessation of all
activities. If it is said that a pandit has died, then it means that he has not

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pariziSTam-1 bAlavabodha-bhAvAnuvAdI 293 artha: A vidhi mujaba bAlapaMDita
maraNa pAmanAra zrAvaka kalpapapanna vaimAnika devalokamAM utpanna. thAya che.
utkRSTathI sAtabhA maveta nizyiyathA mokSane pAmecha, siddha thAya che. (8) iya
bAlapaMDiyaM hoi maraNamarihaMtasAsaNe diTuM  /  itto paMDiyapaMDiyamaraNaM
vucchaM samAseNaM  /  / 10 /  /  artha : zrI arihaMta prabhunA zAsanamAM A
pramANe bALapaMDitamaraNa batAvyuM che. have paMDita paMDitamaraNane saMkSepamAM
batAvuM chuM. (10) icchAmi bhaMte ! uttamaTuM paDikkamAmi 1-aiyaM paDi0,
2-aNAgayaM paDi0, 3-paccuppannaM paDi0, 1-kayaM piDa0, 2-kAriyaM paDi0,
3-aNumoiyaM paDi0, 1-micchattaM paDi0, . 2-asaMjamaM paDi0, 3-kasAyaM paDi0,
4-pAvappaogaM paDi0 micchAdasaNapariNAmesu vA ihalogesu vA, paralogesu vA,
sacittesu vA. acittesu vA, paMcasu iMdiyatthesu vA  /  annANaMjhANe, aNAyAraM
jhANe, kudaMsaNaM jhANe, kohaMjhANe, mANaMjhANe, mAyaMjhANe, lobhaMjhANe,
rAgaMjhANe, dosaMjhANe, mohaMjhANe, icchaMjhANe, micchaMjhANe, mucchaMjhANe,
saMkaMjhANe, kaMkhaMjhANe, * gehiMjhANe, AsaMjhANe, taNhaMjhANe, chuhaMjhANe,
paMthaMjhANe, paMthANaMjhANe, nijhANe, niyANaMjhANe, nehaMjhANe, kAmaMjhANe,
kalusaMjhANe, kalahaMjhANe, jujhaMjhANe, nijujjhaMjhANe, saMgaMjhANe,
saMgahaMjhANe, vavahAraMjhANe, kayavikkayaMjhANe, aNatthadaMDaMjhANe,
AbhogaMjhANe, aNAbhogaMjhANe, aNAvilaMjhANe, veraMjhANe, viyakkaMjhANe,
hiMsaMjhANe, hAsaMjhANe, pahAsaMjhANe, paosaMjhANe, pharusaMjhANe, bhayaMjhANe,
ruvaMjhANe, appasaMsaMjhANe, paraniMdaMjhANe, paragarihaMjhANe, pariggahaMjhANe,
paraparivAyaMjhANe, paradUSaNaMjhANe, AraMbhaMjhANe, saMraMbhaMjhANe,
pAvANumoyaNaMjhANe, ahigaraNaMjhANe, asamAhimaraNaMjhANe,
kammodayapaccayaMjhANe, iDDigAravaMjhANe, rasagAravaMjhANe, sAyAgAravaMjhANe,
averamaNaMjhANe, amuttimaraNaMjhANe pasuttassa vA paDibuddhassa vA jo me koI
devasio rAio uttamaDhe aikkamo vaikkamo aiyAro aNAyAro tassa micchA mi dukkaDaM
/  / 11 /  /  bAlA0 gAthA - iya bAle0 eNai prakAraiM AUkhAnaiM cheha jai
bAlapaMDitamaraNa kahyaM  /  sarvavirati nathI te bhaNI bAla, anai anazana
saMthAro ko te bhaNI paMDita  /  tehanUM maraNa te bhaNI baalpNdditmrnn|
jinazAsananaI viSaI dIThau  /  havai ahI thakI paMDitanaI paMDitamaraNa kahIsyai
/  samAseNa ka. saMkSepaiM, e graMthakAranUM vacana jANavU iti gAthArthaH  /  /
10 /  /  2010_02

Page #335 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 294 ## Aaturpratyakhyanprakirnakam  Bala:  If someone is taking sanlekhana,
the guru should tell them what a pandit would say when they take the vow.
Icchami:  I desire, O Bhagavan, to do anushana.    They desire to do anushana,
and this is what they should say first.  Padikkamami:  I am renouncing all sins
in general.  I have committed sins in the past due to ignorance, carelessness,
and other reasons, and I am renouncing them.  This is what they should say about
renouncing sins in all three times.  Aiyan:  I am renouncing all sins committed
in the past, in the form of repentance.  Anagayam:  I am renouncing all sins
that I will commit in the future, in the form of avoidance.  Pacchuppaan:  I am
renouncing all sins that I am committing in the present, in the form of
restraint.  This is what they should say about the means of renouncing sins.
Kayam:  I am renouncing all sins that I have committed myself, or caused others
to commit, or approved of, such as "May this enemy die," etc.  This is what they
should say about renouncing sins that are bound by the marks of falsehood, non-
restraint, passions, and non-yoga.  Michhattam:  Falsehood includes five types:
false perception, false acceptance, etc.  Non-restraint is one type, and
passions are many types.  Papaprayog:  I am renouncing all sins that I have
committed through the body, speech, and mind.  Bala:  From the phrase "Michha
dansan parinaamesu va" to the phrase "Padibudhass va," there are six parts.  If
I have committed any sins against the gods, kings, the excellent, the good, the
bad, the non-bad, I am renouncing them.  This is the first connection.  After
this, the meaning is as follows:  Michha:  False perception means the
determination of falsehood.  If I have committed any sins against the gods and
kings, by transgressing, violating, abusing, or not abusing, I am renouncing
them.  This is what they should say about all of this.  The meaning of
transgression, etc., will be explained later.    Ihalog:  If I have committed
any sins against the human world, such as violence, etc., I am renouncing them.
Paralok:  If I have committed any sins against the other world, such as against
animals, etc., I am renouncing them.  Sachitte:  If I have committed any sins
against things with consciousness, such as the earth, etc., I am renouncing
them.  Achiitte:  If I have committed any sins against things without
consciousness, such as a bad bed, a blanket, etc., by sleeping on them, or if I
have desired to take gold, etc., I am renouncing them.  Panchasuk:  If I have
committed any sins against the five senses, such as pleasure and displeasure in
sound, form, smell, taste, touch, and mind, I am renouncing them.  If I have
committed any sins due to ignorance, inattention, etc., I am renouncing them.
This is the connection of all of this.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 294 AturapratyAkhyAnaprakIrNakam bAlA0 havai saMlekhaNA nau kartA gurunaI
kahInaiM jima te paMDitamaraNa paDivajai te kahai chai  /  ichAmi ka. ichauM he
bhagavan ! uttamaTuM ka0 anazana karavA  /  te anazana karavA vAMchatau prathama
syuM karai te kahIi chai  /  paDikkamAmi ka. sAmAnyapaNaiM pApa thakI nivartauM
chu  /  pUrvaiM ajJAnAdikaI tathA aNasAMbhalavA mATai pApa karyu chai teha thakI
nivarttauM chu  /  havai vizeSa thakI trihUM kAlanUM paDikamaNUM kahai chai  /
aiyaM ka. atItapUrvaiM karayuM je pApa teha thakI niMdA gardA svarUpaiM nivartau
chauM  /  aNAgayaM ka0 anAgata AgalihasyaiM je pApAraMbhA te pariharavA svarUpaI
paDikkamU chu  /  paccUppanaM pratyutpannaka. vartamAna kIno je sAvadyAraMbha te
saMvaraNa karavai karI paDikkamUM  /  te kIha upAya paDikkamUM chu te kahai chai
/  kayaM. ka. "kIdhauM svayameva, tathA karAvyuuM anerAthIiM tathA anumodyauM
'je e vairI bhalau marAyuM' ityAdi je pApa karayuM hoi te paDikka chu  /  havai
e pApa mithyAtva, avirati, kaSAya anai yoga e cihuM hetai bAMdhIi te bhaNIe
cihunUM paDikkamaNUM kahIi chai  /  michattaM ka0 mithyAtva abhigrahika
mithyAtvAdi pAMca prakAra  /  tathA asaMyama eka prakAraiM tathA kaSAya cihuM
prakAraiM  /  pApaprayoga ka0 pADUyA [?] yoga mana-vacana-kAyarUpa teNai karI
bAMdhyau je pApa te paDikkamUM chu  /  havai 'michA daMsaNapariNAmesu vA'
ahIMthI prAraMbhInai 'paDibudhassa vA' eha chehaDA lagai jo me devasio rAio
uttamaDhe aikkamo, vaIkkamo, aIyAro, aNAyAro tassa michAmi dukkaDaM  /  ehavao
prathama saMbaMdha joDII pachai ehavao artha kahIi michA. mithyAdarzanapariNAma
kahatAM mithyAttvano adhyavasAya chatai je mananai devasika tathA rAtrika
atikrama-vyatikrama atIcAra-anAcAra lAgo hui te mithyA duSkRta karUM chu  /  ima
saghale kahiduM  /  atikramAdikano artha Agali kahIsyai  /  tathA ihaloga ka0
manuSyalokanai viSai hiMsAdi abhiprAyeM karI atikramAdika karyo hoi te mithyA
duSkRta karuM chu  /  tathA paralokanaI viSai manuSya thakI vyatirikta
tiryaMcAdikanaI viSai je atikramAdi karayo hoi te michAmi dukkaDaM  /  tathA
sacittesu vA. ka. pRthivyAdikasacittavastunaiM viSai je saMghaTTAdika karyo hoi
te micchAmi dukkaDaM  /  tathA acittesu vA ka0 duHpaDilehA kaMbalAdikanai viSai
zayanAdi karyu hoi  /  athavA suvarNAdika acittavastu paDI dekhInai levAnUM mana
thayu hoi te micchA duHkRta  /  tathA paMcasuka0 pAMca iMdriyanA artha viSai
zabdarUpagaMdharasasparzamanojJaamanojJanaI viSai rAga-dveSa karyo hoi te
michAmi duHkRta  /  tathA ajJAnadhyAnAdika chatai majanai je atikramAdi lAgo hoi
te paDikka chu  /  ehavo saMbaMdha sagalai joDIi  /  2010_02

Page #336 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Appendix - 1 Child Understanding - Meaning and Translation**  **Ignorance
Meditation** - Meditation on ignorance, where there is no effort in explaining,
lecturing, etc., is considered wrong. This is the fourth example from the
Uttaradhyayanasutra, which was compiled 12 years after the death of the Acharya.
|| 1 ||  **Evil Conduct Meditation** - Meditation on evil conduct is considered
wrong. This is the example of the six-bodied beings. || 2 ||  **Confused
Meditation** - Meditation on confused understanding, knowledge, etc., is
considered wrong. This is the example of the Buddhist follower, the
Shravakadeva, who serves the Buddha for livelihood. || 3 ||  **Anger
Meditation** - Meditation on anger is considered wrong. This is the example of
the Kulavala, like Goshalak. This is also the example of Namuchi. || 4 ||
**Pride Meditation** - Meditation on pride and ego is considered wrong. This is
the example of Bahubali and Subhuti. || 5 ||  **Deception Meditation** -
Meditation on deception, which is the form of misleading others, is considered
wrong. This is the example of the sister who tests her brother. || 6 ||  **Greed
Meditation** - Meditation on greed is considered wrong. This is the example of
the hidden treasure. || 7 ||  **Attachment Meditation** - Meditation on
attachment, which is of three types: one is lust, the second is affection, and
the third is visual attachment. This is considered wrong. The example of lust is
the lustful gaze of Kichaka on Draupadi. The example of affection is the
affection of Damayanti for Nala. The example of visual attachment is the
disciple of Marichi. || 8 ||  **Hatred Meditation** - Meditation on hatred,
dislike, or treachery is considered wrong. This is the example of the god who
kidnapped the couples of the Hasivarsha era. || 9 ||  **Delusion Meditation** -
Meditation on delusion is considered wrong. This is the example of the dead body
of Krishna, which was mistaken for Balarama by the people due to delusion. || 10
||  **Desire Meditation** - Meditation on desire, which is the desire for many
things, is considered wrong. This is the example of Kapila and Ravishvara, who
desired gold and silver. || 11 ||  **Wrong Meditation** - Meditation on wrong
views is considered wrong. This is the example of Jamali and Govindavachka, who
acted wrongly. || 12 ||  **Obsession Meditation** - Meditation on being overly
attached to an object is considered wrong. This is the example of King
Kanakketu. || 13 ||  **Doubt Meditation** - Meditation on doubt, which is to be
suspicious, is considered wrong. This is the example of the disciple who was
taught by the god and guru, but still remained ignorant. || 14 ||  **Desire
Meditation** - Meditation on the desire for something that is not seen, is
considered wrong. This is the example of Marichi. || 15 ||  **Greed Meditation**
- Meditation on excessive greed for food, etc., is considered wrong. This is the
example of Mahuramangu. || 16 ||  **Hope Meditation** - Meditation on hope,
which is the desire to obtain many things, is considered wrong. This is the
example of the god who desired the food of the Brahmins. || 17 ||  **Thirst
Meditation** - Meditation on thirst, which is the desire for water, etc., is
considered wrong. This is the example of the disciple of the great soul,
Chapeta, who was born from a dead body. || 18 ||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pariziSTam - 1 bAlavabodha - bhAvAnuvAdau ajJAnadhyAnaka0 ajJAna ja bhalUM je
mATai vyAkhyAna karavAdikano zrama na thAi te bhaNI ehavUM dhyAna cIMtavyuM hoi
te micchAmi duHkRta eha upari cauthauM uttarAdhyayana bhaNatA varSa 12 AMbila
kIdhA te AcAryanuM dRSTAMta  /  / 1 /  /  aNAyAraM jhANe ka0 duSTAcAranuM dhyAna
karyu hoi te micchAmi duHkRta  /  eha upari chajIvaNIyAnuM dRSTAnta  /  /  2  /
/  kuMdasaNaMjhANe ka0 kudarzana baudhAdika tehanUM dhyAna kartuM hoi  /  te
micchA. e upari AjIvikAnimitta bauddhasevaka zrAvakadeva dRSTAnta  /   /  3  /
/  kohaM jhANe ka0 krodhanuM dhyAna karyu hoi| kulavAlaka, gozAlakavat te
micchA0  /  ihai namuci dRSTAnta || 4 || mANaM jhANe ka0 mAna ahaMkAranuM dhyAna
karyu hoi  /  bAhubali-subhUt  /  / 5 /  /  1 mAyaMjhANe ka0 mAyA te paranahaM
vipratAraNarUpa tehanuM dhyAna kayuM hoi  /  te micchA0 atra bihu bhAI parIkSA
karaNahAri bahinanuM dRSTAnta || 6 || lobhaMjhANe ka0 lobhanUM dhyAna karyu hoi
/  te micchA0 atra ceDaganidhAnanuM dRSTAnta  /  / 7 /  /  rAgaMjhANe ka0
rAganUM dhyAna karyu hoi  /  je rAga trihu prakArai, eka kAmarAga, biju
sneharAga, trIjauM dRSTirAga  /  te micchA0  /  atra kAmarAgai drUpadI upari
kudRSTi kI kIcakanau dRssttaant| sneharAga upari dAmannakasasarAnuM dRSTAnta  /
dRSTirAga upari mariciziSya dRSTAntaH  /  / 8  /  /  295 dosaMjhANe ka0 dveSa
aprItinuM karavuM athavA drohanuM ciMtavavuM  /  tehanUM dhyAna kIdhau hoi te
micchA0 atra haSivarSanA yugalIyAnAM apaharaNahAra devanuM dRSTAnta  /   /  9  /
/  mohaMjhANe ka0 mohanUM dhyAna kI uM hoi  /  moha thakI mRta kRSNanuM zarIra
vihitA baladevanI paradaM dRSTAnta jANivo  /   /  10  /   /  icchaMjhANe ka0
icchA ka0 pAme tei lAbhai ghaNA abhilASAnuM karivauM  /  atra bi suvarNa mAsAnuM
mAgaNahAra kapila raravezvaranuM dRSTAnta, te micchA0  /  /  11  /   /  micchaM
jhANe ka0 viparItadRSTii tehanuM dhyAna karyu hoi  /  atra jamAlI -
govindavAcakanI parai karyu hoi te micchA ||12|| mucchaMjhANe ka0 pAmI vastunai
viSai atihi AsaktapUNUM tehanUM dhyAna kIdhUM hoi te micchA0 atra kanakaketu
rAyanuM dRSTAMta  /  / 13 /  /  saMkaMjhANe ka0 zaMkA kahitAM zaMsayanuM karavuM
tehanUM dhyAna kartuM hoi te micchA0 atra devatA gurui thaI ajANatA bhaNAvyA
ziSyanuM dRSTAnta  /   /  14  /   /  kaMkhaMjhANe ka0 anerAdarzananI AkAMkSA
vAMchA tehanUM dhyAna kartuM hoi  /  te micchAmi atra maricidRSTAnta  /  /  15
/  /  gehiMjhANe ka0 AhArAdika nai viSai atihi gRddhapaNUM kIdhauM hoi  /  te
micchA0 atra mahurAmaMgU dRSTAnta  /  /  16  /  /  AkajhANe 0 AsA anerAnI vastu
levAnI icchA, tehanUM dhyAna karyu hoi te micchA0 atra brAhmaNabhojanavAMchanA
mUladevanUM dRSTAnta  /  /  17  /   /  tanhaMjhANe ka0 tRSA pariSaha upanaI
huMtai sacittAdika pANInI vAMchanA tehanUM dhyAna karyu hoi te micchA0 atra
mAraNajAtA capeTAmahAtmA celAnuM dRSTAnta  /  / 18 /  /  2010_02

Page #337 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Chapter 296:  Discourse on the Rejection of Distractions  **19.**
**Khuhhanjane** (Khuhhanjana):  To focus on hunger, thirst, and the like while
meditating is wrong.  Here, the example is of a beggar in Rajagriha who desires
alms but does not receive them.  **20.** **Panthanjane** (Panthanjana):  To
focus on the path, the distance, and the time it takes to reach a destination
while meditating is wrong.  This is a general statement.  Here, the example is
of a person wearing a bark garment who is going to the city of Potanapuri.
**21.** **Panthanamjane** (Panthanamjana):  To focus on a difficult and uneven
path while meditating is wrong.  Here, the example is of the path taken by
Brahmadutta and the path taken by Vardhana.  **22.** **Niinjane** (Niinjana):
To focus on sleep while meditating is wrong.  Here, the example is of a person
who is overcome by sleep while meditating and is attacked by an elephant.
**23.** **Niaanjanjane** (Niaanjanjana):  To focus on desires for heaven, the
position of Indra, and the like while meditating is wrong.  Here, the example is
of Draupadi.  **24.** **Nehanjane** (Nehanjana):  To focus on excessive
attachment to children and the like, and the love for them, while meditating is
wrong.  Here, the example is of the Ahiranna people.  **25.** **Kamanjane**
(Kamanjana):  To focus on desires for objects while meditating is wrong.  Here,
the example is of a goldsmith who desires laughter and amusement.  **26.**
**Kalusanjane** (Kalusanjana):  To focus on the defilement of the mind, such as
desire, envy, and praise of others' qualities, while meditating is wrong.  Here,
the example is of the great warrior Piddhamahapiddha who is envious of Bahu and
Subahu.  **27.** **Kalahamjane** (Kalahamjana):  To focus on quarrels,
arguments, and harsh words while meditating is wrong.  Here, the example is of
Narada.  **28.** **Jujhanjane** (Jujhanjana):  To focus on killing enemies while
meditating is wrong.  Here, the example is of a king who kills his brother in a
battle.  **29.** **Nijujhanjane** (Nijujhanjana):  To focus on the desire to
kill in a battle while meditating is wrong.  Here, the example is of Bahubali
and Bharata.  **30.** **Sangamjane** (Sangamjana):  To focus on the desire for
objects while being in a group while meditating is wrong.  Here, the example is
of King Ratha and his wife Rajamati.  **31.** **Sangahanjane** (Sangahanjana):
To focus on excessive greed and accumulation of wealth while meditating is
wrong.  Here, the example is of the great merchant Musaman (Mamman).  **32.**
**Vyavaharamjane** (Vyavaharamjana):  To focus on legal matters, such as the
affairs of the royal family, while meditating is wrong.  Here, the example is of
a daughter who is given wealth by her father.  **33.** **Kayavikkayamjane**
(Kayavikkayamjana):  To focus on buying and selling, and the desire for profit,
while meditating is wrong.  Here, the example is of a goldsmith who is greedy
for profit

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 296 AturapratyAkhyAnaprakIrNakam khuhaMjhANe ka0 kSudhA bhUkhano parISaha
upanaI sacittAdikanU dhyAna karyu hoi te micchA. atra rAjagRhilokasAthi
bhikSAnai kAMkSyu bhikSA adIdhI bhUyaute dRSTAnta  /  / 19 /  /  paMthaMjhANe
paMtha ka. thoDai kAlai pohacIi je mArga tehanaiM viSai sacittAdikanUM dhyAna
karyu hoi te micchA. e bola saghalai kahiduM  /  atra potanapura mArga jAtA
valkalacIrInuM dRSTAnta  /  / 20 /  /  paMthANaM jhANe ka. moTau anai viSama je
mArga hoi te paMthANaM kahIi tehanai viSai sacittAdikanUM dhyAna  /  atra
brahmadattanuM mArga jAtA vardhananuM dRSTAnta  /  / 21 /  /  niiMjhANe ka0
nidrAnaI viSai je pADuuM [?] dhyAna syu hoi  /  atra styAnadhi nidrAnai balaI
hastimAraka sAdhunUM dRSTAnta  /  / 22 /  /  niyANaMjhANe ka. svargAdikanai
viSai indrAdikanI padavInI vAMchA tehanUM dhyAna  /  atra draupadInuM dRSTAntaH
/  / 23 /  /  nehaM jhANe ka0 putrAdikanaiM viSaI atihi rAga  /  te sneha
tehanUM dhyAna, atra ahirannAnI mAnUM dRSTAnta  /  / 24 /  /  kAmaMjhANe ka0
viSayAbhilASa tehanUM dhyAna, atra hAsAprahAsAnA vAMchaNahAra sonInUM dRSTAnta
/  / 25 /  /  kalusaMjhANe ka0 abhilASa mATai tathA irSA mATai anerAnAM guNanI
prazaMsA aNasahite cittanUM kaluSapaNUM tehanUM dhyAna, atra bAhu-subAhunI
prazaMsA aNasahieu pIDhamahApIDhanuM dRSTAnta  /  / 26 /  /  kalahaMjhANe ka0
kalaha kahIi vacananI vaDhavaDI tehanUM dhyAna, atra nArada dRssttaant||27||
jujhaMjhANe ka0 vairInaiM mAravAnuM dhyAna atra bhAI mArivAnaiM ceTakarAjA
saMghAtai koNIkanI parai  /  / 28 /  /  nijujhaMjhANe ka0 saMgrAma aNakaravai
mAravAnI icchA, atra bAhubalI bharatanI parai  /  / 29 /  /  saMgaMjhANe ka0
saMgaM kahatAM chAMDI vastuno abhilASa, atra rathanemi rAjamatInUM dRSTAnta  /
/ 30 /  /  saMgahaMjhANe ka0 atRptipaNaiM atihi ghananUM melabuM, atra mUsamaNa
[mammaNa] zreSThInUM dRSTAnta  /  / 31 /  /  vyavahAraMjhANe ka0 sva kAryanaiM
arthaI rAjakulAdinaI viSaiM nyAya karavAnUM dhyAna, atra bihUM saukimAM dhana
anai beTInuM dRSTAnta  /  / 32 /  /  _ kayavikkayaMjhANe0 kraya kahatAM mUlai
vastu levI, vikraya kahatAM vastu vecavI tehanUM dhyAna, atra sonAnA kulasA
letAM lobhanaMdanuM dRSTAnta  /  / 33 /  /  anatthadaMDa ka0 niHprayojanai
hiMsAdikanUM karavU tehanUM dhyAna, atra dIpAyananuM dRSTAnta  /  / 34 /  /
AbhogaM ka0 sapApanai abhiprAya niHpApakarma ajJAnapaNai hiMsAdikanUM karavU
tehanUM dhyAna, atra brahmadattanuM dRSTAnta  /  / 35  /  /  anAbhoga kahatAM
atihiM vismatipaNaiM pIDauM dhyAna, atra prasannacandranuM dhyAna  /  / 36 /  /
aNAvilaM ka0 aNaka0 RNa teNaI karI Avilaka0 kaluSapaNUM cittanuM tehanuM dhyAna,
atra udharai tela lIghai mAhAtmA bahinanuM dRSTAnta  /  / 37 /  vairaM ka0
mAtApitAdikano vadha keNai ko hoi anai te upari vairanuM karavU tehanUM dhyAna,
atra tripRSThabhAvimAriyAsIhanA jIvahAlI, dRSTAnta  /  / 38  /  /  2010_02

Page #338 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Appendix-1 Child Understanding-Meaning Translations 297 **Vyakkam**
(Distraction) - Thinking about things like kingdom etc., here is the example of
Chanakya's contemplation about the kingdom of Nanda. ||39|| **Hinsam**
(Violence) - Thinking about killing a living being, here is the example of the
time-opportunist. ||40|| **Hasya** (Laughter) - Thinking about making many
people laugh, here is the example of the disciple of Chandrudraacharya with his
friend. ||41|| **Pahaasam** (Sarcasm) - Thinking about making fun of many
people, praising in the form of criticism, here is the example of
Chandrapradhyot saying this to the Josivartiya. ||42|| **Paosam** (Hatred) -
Thinking about extreme anger and hatred, here is the example of the Marubhuutika
Math. ||43|| **Farusam** (Harsh) - Thinking about being extremely harsh and
hurtful, here is the example of the snake that became a flower, the husband of
the Chulni who was against Brahmadatt. ||44|| **Bhayam** (Fear) - Thinking about
fear, here is the example of Somilni who was attacked by Gajasukumal. ||45||
**Ruvan** (Form) - Thinking about the form without any kind of form, thinking
about the form of others, thinking about the form itself, like the form of a
Mahara, etc. Thinking about the form of others, like describing the forms of
many things written in paintings, etc., here is the example of Sanatkumar
praising the deities. Thinking about the form of others, here is the example of
Chandrapradhyot seeing the form of Angaravati. ||46|| **Appasam** (Self-Praise)
- Thinking about praising oneself, here is the example of Vararuchi praising his
own poetry. ||47|| **Par** (Others) - Thinking about criticizing and insulting
others, here is the example of the Chihu Tapiya on the Karagadu. ||48|| **Par**
(Others) - Thinking about insulting others face-to-face, here is the example of
the Gosthamahil speaking about the faults of the Durbalikapushpamitra. ||49||
**Parigraha** (Attachment) - Thinking about things like wealth and possessions,
here is the example of Muni Pati Kuncik. ||50|| **Parparivadam** (Slander) -
Thinking about speaking ill of others, here is the example of Subhadra's mother-
in-law. ||51|| **Paradushanaka** (Accusation) - Thinking about blaming others
for one's own crimes, here is the example of Angarishi-Rudra. ||52||
**Aarambha** (Beginning) - Thinking about defeating others at the beginning,
here is the example of Kurudu-Utkurudu. ||53|| **Sanrambha** (Desire) - Thinking
about intense desire for things like objects, etc., here is the example of the
Ksullakakumar. ||54|| **Pavanamoyanam** (Sinful Thoughts) - Thinking about sins
like serving another woman, etc., thinking about approving, thinking about doing
this kind of work, etc., here is the example of the king's wife, the servant,
the imprisoned man, and the approver. ||55|| **Adhikarana** (Cause) - Thinking
about the cause that gives rise to sin, like weapons, etc., here is the example
of Nandamani-kar. ||56|| **Asamadhi

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pariziSTam-1 bAlavabodha-bhAvAnuvAdau 297 viyakkaM ka0 rAjyAdika levAnI ciMtA,
atra naMdarAjya levAnI vimAsaNai cANakkAnuM dRSTAnta  /  / 39 /  /  hiMsaM ka0
hiMsA jIvanUM mAravU tehanUM dhyAna, atra kAlasaukarikanUM dRSTAnta  /  / 40 /
/  hAsya ka0 anerAnai hasavU tehanUM dhyAna, atra mitra sahita caMDarudrAcAryanA
ziSya, dRSTAnta  /  / 41 /  /  pahAsaM ka0 anerAnaI upahAsa, karavU, stutirUpaM
niMdAyU~ karavU tehanuM dhyAna, atra josIvartIyA vAMdauM ima kahatA
caMDapradyotanuM dRSTAnta  /  / 42 /  /  paosaM ka0 pradveSa atihiM rIsanUM
karivU tehanUM dhyAna, atra marUbhUtikamaThanu dRSTAnta  /  / 43  /  /
pharusaM0 parUSa ka0 atihiM kararkaza marmanuM karavU tehanUM dhyAna,
brahmadatta prati culanInI parai, sApa phITI phUla thaI tehanUM bhartAra
dRSTAnta  /  / 44  /  /  bhayanUM dhyAna gajasukumAlanaiM upasarga karyA
pUMThaI, somilanI parai  /  / 45 /  /  rUvaM jhANe rUpa bihUM prakAre svarUpanUM
dhyAna anai pararUpanuM dhyAna, svarUpadhyAna te je mAhArUrUpa bhalU ityAdi  /
pararUpa dhyAna te je citraphalAkAdi likhita anerAnAM rUpanuM vakhANa karavU, e
upari devatAI prasaMsyA pUThii sntkumaar| dRSTAnta  /  pararUpadhyAna upari
aMgAravatI rUpa dekhI caMdapradyota taNauM dRSTAnta  /  / 46 /  /  appasaMsa ka0
AtmAnI prasaMsAnUM dhyAna kakhauM hoi, ApaNA kAvya prazaMsAvatI vararUci
dRSTAnta  /  / 47  /  /  para anerAnI niMdA helAnUM dhyAna, karagaDU upari cihu
tapIyAnuM dRSTAnta  /  / 48 /  /  para anerAnaiM mukhAmukhI gardA helAvU karavU,
atra durbalikApuSpamitranA doSa bolatA goSThAmAhilanuM dRSTAnta  /  / 49 /  /
parigraha ka0 ghanaghAnyAdirUpa tehanUM dhyAna, atra munipati kuMcika dRSTAnta
/  / 50  /  /  paraparivAdaM ka0 para anerAprataiM achatA doSanUM kahivaM, atra
subhadrAnI sAsunuM dRSTAnta  /  / 51 /  /  paradUSaNaka ka0 nirAparAdhInai
mAthai ApaNA kIdhI aparAdhanUM caDAvivU tehanUM dhyAna, atra aMgaRSi-rudrano
dRSTAnta  /  / 52 /  /  AraMbha kahatAM anerAnai parAbhava karavU tehanUM
dhyAna, kuruDotkuruDanuM dRSTAnta  /  / 53 /  /  saMraMbha ka0 viSayAdikanaiM
viSai tIvrAbhilASa tehanUM dhyAna, atra kSullakakumAra dRSTAnta  /  / 54  /  /
pAvANaMmoyaNaM jhANaM ka0 pApa kahIi parastrIsevAdika tehanUM dhyAna, anumodavU,
eNai e kAma vAru karyu, ityAdi kahivaM tehanUM dhyAna, rAjabhAryA sevaka rAya
nigrahItapuruSI anumodaka jana dRSTAnta  /  / 55 /  /  adhikaraNa ka0 pApa
upajAivAnUM hetu  /  zastrAdika tehanUM dhyAna, atra naMdamANIkAranuM dRSTAnta
/  / 56 /  /  asamAdhimaraNa ka0 asamAdhiiM pIDIiM, e marai to vAru ehavaM
cItaviyU~ tehanUM dhyAna, atra skaMdakAcArya, pIlaNahAra pAlakanuM dRSTAnta  /
/ 57 /  /  kammodayapaccayaM ka0 karmano je udaya teNe pratyaI hetaiM karI je
dhyAna Avai te kammodayaprataya dhyAna kahIi  /  e paramArtha-koi prathama
zubhapariNAmavaMta hui anai pache koika karmanaiM udayaiM karI azubhadhyAna Avai
atra kRSNanai maraNAMte kudhyAna huo te dRSTAnta  /  / 58 /  /  Rddhi ka0 rAjya
aizvaryAdirUpa teNai karI gArava, AtamAnaiM ahaMkAra ko tehanUM dhyAna karyu
hoi, atra vIrasvAmInai vAMdivA jAtA darzANabhadrano dRSTAnta  /  / 59 /  /
2010_02

Page #339 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 298 **Aaturpratyakhyanaprakirnakam**  **Rasagarava K.**  Good! If someone
says that there is no one who enjoys the taste of delicious food, etc., then in
this case, the wise king Jitashatru, who enjoyed the water of the ritual, should
be cited as an example. ||60||  **Satagarava K.**  To make happiness flourish.
To say, "There is no one happier than me in this world," etc. In this case, the
example of Sisupal Raja should be cited. ||61||  **Aveeraman K.**  If someone
says that there is no cessation of meditation, then in this case, like the
priest Bhrigu, who kept his son in the knowledge of all cessation, but did not
know that his son was a meat-eater, and said, "This one seems to be a good
person, but he is a meat-eater," etc., this is the result of non-cessation.
||62||  **Amucti K.**  To not desire liberation or moksha. The meaning is the
desire for worldly happiness. If someone desires worldly happiness and dies,
then this is called "Amuctimaran." If someone meditates like this, then in this
case, like the virtuous Chitra, who, while being in the world, was born in the
position of a Chakravarti, desired that position and made it his own. ||63||
These 36 types of meditation are natural to the angry and cruel. They are
suitable for those who are deceitful and have committed evil deeds. The anusvara
(nasal sound) in all the words of meditation is to be understood as an
alakshanika (unmarked) and should be omitted.  **Haveai**  If someone says that
all meditation is in a particular state, then that state is called "Haveai."
**Pasuttas K.**  If someone is asleep or awake, and if he is involved in
something for many days or a few days, or for many nights or a few nights, then
this is called "Pasuttas."  **Uttamart K.**  If someone is involved in
knowledge, etc., and if there is transgression, reversal, excess, or misconduct,
then this is called "Michchami Dukkadam."  **Michchami Dukkadam K.**  This sin
is false and fruitless.  **Haveai**  The meaning of transgression, etc., is
explained here. If someone accepts the words of someone who invites him to eat
food, etc., which is harmful, then this is called "Atikram." If someone goes to
the house of the host to eat food, then this is called "Vyatikrama." If someone
goes there and eats the food, then this is called "Atichaar." If someone brings
the food and eats it, then this is called "Anaachaar." This is the meaning of
these words. This method of false evil deeds is called "Balapanditmaran" and
"Panditmaran." ||11||  **Artha Pandita**  A sage who desires the death of a
pandit (learned person) should say this to his Guru Bhagvant while performing
Pratikraman:  O Bhagvant! I am doing Anusana, which is the only cause of
attaining liberation. To accept Anusana, first of all, I turn away from all
kinds of sinful activities. Especially, I turn away from the sins of the past
through condemnation, and I turn away from the sins of the future through
understanding. I turn away from the sin of the present by giving up sinful
activities. I turn away from the sins that I have done myself or have caused
others to do. I turn away from the sin of approving my own or others' sins.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 298 AturapratyAkhyAnaprakIrNakam rasagArava ka0 bhalA ! je rasa rasavatI
mAhArai chai tehavI koinaiM nathI ityAdi kahivU atra subuddhi pradhAna Agali
jitazatrurAjai jima khAinuM pANI parikarmiu te ApaNI rasavatI vakhANI  /  / 60
/  /  sAtAgArava ka0 sukhano utkarSa karavU  /  Ajaloka mAMhI majjha uparAMta
koI sukhI nathI ityAdi kahevU, atra sisipAlarAjAno dRSTAMta  /  / 61 /  /
averamaNa ka0 aviratinuM je dhyAna kahU~ hoi, atra jima bhRgupurohitaI jANu
rakhe putra mAharA sarvavirati lyai, ehavU jANInaI putranaI kahayauM jetalA
sAdhu dIsai te e mAMsa AhArI chai te mATai ehanaI pAsai ma jAsyo ityAdi
aviratino pariNAma  /  / 62  /  /  amukti ka. mukti mokSanUM aNavAMchayU~  /
saMsAra sukhAbhilASa ityarthaH  /  te saMsAra sukha vAMchato marai je te
amuktimaraNa kahIi tehanUM dhyAna karyu hoi, atra jima citrasAdhuiM vArataja
hUtaiM saMbhUtaiM cakravartinI padavInUM nidAna karInaiM te padavI vAMchate kAla
karayuuM  /  / 63  /  /  e triSaSThi dhyAna ArttaraudrasvAbhAvika chai  /
mithyAduHkRta devA yogya chai  /  anusvArAzca sarvadhyAnapadeSu alAkSaNIkA
jJeyAstallopazca kAryaH  /  havaei saghalA dhyAna kehI avasthAnaiM viSai thayA
hoi te avasthA kahI chai  /  /  pasuttassa ka0 suttA athavA jAgatA majhanai je
kAMi ghaNau athavA thoDau divasanai viSai tathA rAtrinaiM vissi| uttamArtha ka0
jJAnAdikanaiM viSai atikrama, vyatikrama, atIcAra, anAcAra lAgo hui te micchAmi
dukkaDaM ka0 te pApa mithyA niHphala thAo  /  _ havai atikramAdinao artha kahIi
chai  /  keNai kAMi AdhAkarmAdi asujhato AhAra AmaMtrai huMtai tehanUM vacana
aMgIkAra karai levAnUM mana karai te atikrama kahIi  /  pache te AhAra levAnai
kAjai tehanA ghara sAhamA pagalA bharavA te vyatikrama kahIi  /  pachai tihAM
jaI te AhAra lyai te atIcAra kahIi  /  pachai te AhAra ANInai jamai te anAcAra
kahIi  /  e cihuM bolanA artha khyaaN| e mithyA duSkRtano vidhi samuccai
bAlapaMDitamaraNanai tathA paMDitamaraNanai kahyoo  /  / 11 /  /  artha paMDita
paMDita maraNanI IcchAvALo sAdhu potAnA guru bhagavaMta pAse pratikramaNa karatA
A pramANe kahe he bhagavaMta ! mokSa prAptinA ananya kAraNarUpa aNasaNa karuM
chuM. te aNasaNa svIkAravA sau prathama dareka prakAranA pApavyApArothI pAcho
pharuM chuM. vizeSathI niMdA dvArA bhUtakALanA pApothI pAcho pharuM chuM ane
paccakhANa karavA dvArA bhaviSyanAM pApothI pAcho pharuM chuM. pApavyApArano
tyAga karavA dvArA vartamAnakALanA pApathI pAcho pharuM chuM. jIvanamAM svayaM
karelA, anya pAse karAvelA pApothI pAcho pharuM chuM. mArA ke anyanA pAponI
anumodanA karI hoya te anumodanAnA pApathI pAcho pharuM chuM. mithyAtva,
avirati, kaSAya ane pApaprayogathI pAcho pharuM 2010_02

Page #340 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Appendix-1 Child Understanding-Meaning Translation 299 I renounce all the evil
that has been done to me in the realm of false belief, in the realm of light, in
the realm of the afterlife, in the realm of conscious beings, in the realm of
non-conscious beings, or in the realm of the objects of the five senses.
Furthermore, I renounce the following: ignorance-meditation, misconduct-
meditation, wrong-belief-meditation, anger-meditation, pride-meditation,
delusion-meditation, greed-meditation, attachment-meditation, fault-meditation,
infatuation-meditation, desire-meditation, false-belief-meditation, moustache-
meditation, doubt-meditation, longing-meditation, greed-meditation, hope-
meditation, thirst-meditation, nectar-meditation, path-meditation, departure-
meditation, sleep-meditation, diagnosis-meditation, affection-meditation, lust-
meditation, impurity-meditation, conflict-meditation, war-meditation, non-war-
meditation, gathering-meditation, collection-meditation, transaction-meditation,
victory-meditation, punishment-meditation, enjoyment-meditation, non-enjoyment-
meditation, debt-meditation, hatred-meditation, debate-meditation, violence-
meditation, laughter-meditation, mockery-meditation, arrogance-meditation,
harshness-meditation, fear-meditation, form-meditation, self-praise-meditation,
criticism-meditation, blindness-meditation, attachment-meditation, slander-
meditation, pollution-meditation, beginning-meditation, end-meditation,
approval-of-sin-meditation, argument-meditation, non-concentration-death-
meditation, karma-arising-understanding-meditation, power-respect-meditation,
taste-respect-meditation, saint-respect-meditation, non-stop-meditation,
liberation-death-meditation. As a result of these 13 evils, I renounce all the
transgressions, violations, excesses, and misconduct that I have committed in
the practice of knowledge, belief, and conduct, whether I was awake or asleep.
(11) I do this for the sake of the soul that desires liberation, and for the
sake of all the Jinas, the conquerors of the world, and their followers. (12) If
anyone is engaged in virtuous conduct, and if by chance they encounter an
obstacle, they should renounce it and reject it. This is what is meant by saying
"I do this" and so on. This is what is meant by saying that I am offering my
respects to the entire assembly. This is what is meant by saying that I am
offering my respects to the Vardhamana Swami. The Vardhamana Swami is like a
bull among the Jinas, and he is superior to all other Kevalis. Similarly, I
offer my respects to the Tirthankaras, beginning with Rishabha, along with their
followers. The word "cha" means that I am offering my respects to all the past
and future Jinas. This is the first greeting, and it is offered to all 24 Jinas.
(12) Meaning: The soul that desires liberation first offers its respects to the
Jinas. I offer my respects to the Vardhamana Swami, who is like a bull among the
Jinas. I also offer my respects to all the Tirthankaras, beginning with Adinath,
who are surrounded by their followers. (12)  2010_02

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pariziSTam-1 bAlavabodha-bhAvAnuvAdau 299 chuM. mithyAdarzananA pariNAmane
viSe, AlokamAM, paralokamAM, sacitta padArthomAM, acitta padArthomAM ke pAMce
IndriyonA viSayomAM je kAMI duSkata thayuM hoya tenAthI huM pAcho pharuM chuM.
te uparAMta ajJAnadhyAna, anAcAradhyAna, kudarzanadhyAna, krodhadhyAna,
mAnadhyAna, mAyAdhyAna, lobhadhyAna, rAgadhyAna, doSadhyAna, mohadhyAna,
IcchAdhyAna, mithyAdhyAna, muchadhyAna, zaMkAdhyAna, kAMkSAdhyAna, gRddhidhyAna,
AzAdhyAna, tRSNAdhyAna, sudhAdhyAna, mArgadhyAna, prasthAnadhyAna, nidrAdhyAna,
nidAnadhyAna, snehadhyAna, kAmadhyAna, kAluSyadhyAna, kalahadhyAna,
yuddhadhyAna, niyuddhadhyAna, saMgadhyAna, saMgrahadhyAna, vyavahAradhyAna,
vijayadhyAna, anarthadaMDadhyAna, AbhogadhyAna, anAbhogadhyAna, RNAviladhyAna,
vairadhyAna, vitarkadhyAna, hiMsAdhyAna, hAsyadhyAna, prahAsa dhyAna,
praddhaSadhyAna, paruSadhyAna, bhayadhyAna, rUpadhyAna, AtmaprazaMsAdhyAna,
paraniMdAdhyAna, paragaAMdhyAna, parigrahadhyAna, paraparivAdadhyAna,
paradUSaNadhyAna, AraMbhadhyAna, saMrabhadhyAna, pApAnumodanadhyAna, adhikaraNa
dhyAna, asamAdhimaraNadhyAna, karmodayapratyayadhyAna, RddhigAravadhyAna,
rasagAravadhyAna, sAtAgAravadhyAna, aviramaNa dhyAna, amuktimaraNadhyAna. A
pramANenA 13 durgAnanA pariNAme jAgrata avasthAmAM rahelA athavA nidrAdhIna
avasthAmAM rahelA mArA vaDe je kAMI jJAna-darzana-cAritranI ArAdhanAmAM
atikrama, vyatikrama, aticAra ane anAcAranuM sevana karyuM hoya te sarve pApo
mArA mithyA thAo. (11) esa karemi paNAmaM jiNavaravasahassa vaddhamANassa  /
sesANaM ca jiNANaM sagaNaharANaM ca savvesi  /  / 12 /  /  havai koika
udyatavihArI sAdhunaI kadAcitparISaha upasarga AvI Upanai huMtai
sAkArapratyAkhyAna karai te vidhi kahIi esa karemi ityAdi  /  eSa kahitA ehuM
samasta saMgha pratyakSa namaskAra karuM chuN| kehanai vardhamAnasvAmInaiM paNi
kehavA chai  /  vardhamAnasvAmI jinavaravRSabha anerA sAmAnya kevalI thakI hi
zreSTha chai  /  tathA sesANaM ka0 zeSathI kahatA RSabhAdika tIrthaMkara
gaNadhara sahitanai namaskAra karuM chu  /  ca zabda huMtI atItAnAgata jina
jANavA iti prathama AlApaka ghAlatA 24 jAthAnaM pUruM thayuM che [2 artha :
aNasaNane IcchanAra AtmA have sAkAra pratyAkhyAna karatAM sarva prathama maMgaLa
kare che. jinavaromAM vRSabha samAna evA vardhamAnasvAmIne huM praNAma karuM
chuM. temaja gaNadharAdi sarvasaMghathI parivarelA AdinAtha bhagavAna vagere
sarve tIrthakarone praNAma karuM chuM. (12) 2010_02

Page #341 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------



======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 300 AturapratyAkhyAnaprakIrNakama savvaM pANAraMbhaM paccakkhAmi tti
aliyavayaNaM ca  /  savvamadinnAdANaM mehuNNa pariggahaM ceva  /  / 13 /  /
bAlA0 havai namaskAra karI vratoccAra karai chai  /  gAthA-savvapANA. ityAdi
artha samasta prANAraMbha jIvahiMsA paccarkhA chu  /  'paDhame bhaMte mahavvae'
ityAdi AlApaka uccarai ityarthaH  /  ima samasta alIkavacana mRSAvAda paccakhaM
chu  /  tathA sarva adittAdAna paccakkhaM chu. adittAdAna cihu prakAri - svAminI
vastu aNadIdhI levI, bIjU jIva adatta anujJApAkhai ziSyAdinai dIkSA devai [....]
sarva zabda sesANI joDIi  /  sarva maithuna audArika vaikriya rUpa mana-vacana-
kAya karI karAvI anai anumati bhedarUpaM tathA sarva parigraha paccakhaM chu  /
caiva zabda thakI zeSa pApasthAnaka jANavA iti gAthA  /  / 13 /  /  artha :
sarva prANAtipAta, mRSAvAda, adattAdAna, maithuna ane parigraharUpa
pAmasthAnakanuM paccakakhANa karuM chuM. te pApothI pAcho pharuM chuM. (13)
sammaM me savvabhUesu, veraM majjha na keNaI  /  AsAo vosirittANaM
samAhimaNupAlae  /  / 14 /  /  bAlA0 valI bhaNai chai  /  gAthA-samaM me0 ityAdi
artha:- mAhArai sarvabhUta saMghAtai samatA chai rAga-dveSa rahitapaNUM chai  /
paNi koI sAthai vairabhAva nathI tathA AzA kahitAM AhAra upakaraNAdikanaI viSai
icchA te paNi vosirAvIiM samAdhi pA{ chu  /  samAdhi ka0 mananUM svAsthyapaNUM
athavA vinaya, zruta, tapa, AcAranaI viSai samAdhipaNuM huM pAlU chu iti gAthA
/  / 14 /  /  arthaH sarva jIvo pratye mane samAna eka sarakho bhAva che.
koIpaNa jIva pratye vairabhAva nathI. have sarva prakAranI IcchAo, abhilASAono
tyAga karI huM samAdhinuM pAlana karuM chuM. (14) savvaM cA''hAravihiM sannAo
gArave kasAe ya  /  savvaM ceva mamattaM caemi savvaM khamAvemi  /  / 15 /  /
bAlA0 je choDai chai te havai kahi chai  /  gAthA - savvaM cAhAra0 ityAdi
artha:- sarva caturvidha AhAravidhi chAIM chu tathA cAri saMjJA AhAra, bhaya,
maithuna, parigraha rUpa chAMDu chu  /  tathA gArava RddhayAdika triNi prakAra
/  kaSAya sola bheda  /  tathA sarva mamattva kahatAM pratibandha mUrchA rUpa
chAMDu chu  /  tathA samasta dIThA tathA bolAvyA je sAdhu-zrAvaka jana tehanaiM
khamArbu chu iti gAthA  /  / 15 /  /  artha : cAra prakAranI AhAravidhi, daze
prakAranI saMjJAo, traNa prakAranA gAravo, soLa prakAranA kaSAyo, dareka
prakAranAM mamattvano tyAga karuM chuM. sarva jIvone khamAvuM chuM. (15) _
2010_02

Page #342 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Appendix-1 Child Understanding-Meaning Translator 301 **Verse 16** *Huzzā imaṃmi
samae uvakkamō jīviyasa jai majjha. Eyaṃ paccakkhāṇaṃ viulā ārāhaṇā heu.*
**Meaning:** If my life ends at this moment, then this entire previously
mentioned rejection is for the sake of great worship.  **Verse 17**
*Savvadukkhapppahīṇāṇaṃ siddhāṇaṃ arahao namo. Saddhe jiṇapanṇattāṃ paccakkhāmi
ya pāvagam.* **Meaning:** I bow to the Siddhas who have destroyed all suffering.
I have faith in the principles taught by the Jinas and I reject all sins and
evil deeds. This is called the Sagara Pratyakhyana.  **Verse 18** *Namutthu
dhuyapavāṇaṃ siddhāṇaṃ ca mahesiṇaṃ. Santhāram paḍivajjāmi jahā kevali desiyam.*
**Meaning:** I bow to the Siddhas who have destroyed the eight types of karma
that cling to the soul, and to the Maharshis (Tirthankaras, Acharyas,
Upadhyayas, Sadhus). I accept the Santhara (fasting) as taught by the Kevalis.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pariziSTam-1 bAlavabodha-bhAvAnuvAdI 301 hujjA imaMmi samae uvakkamo jIviyasA
jai majjha  /  eyaM paccakkhANaM viulA ArAhaNA heu  /  / 16 /  /  bAlA0 havai
khamAvyAnaMtara je bhaNe te kahe chai  /  gAthA hujjA. ityAdi artha:- jau
majhanai ANaI avasaraI ANI ApadAi jIvitavya AukhAno upakrama kahitA kSaya hoi
tau e samasta pUrvokta pratyAkhyAna vipula ArAdhanAyU~ hetuM hujjA iti gAthA  /
/ 16 /  /  artha ? jo A avasare mArA jIvanano aMta Ave to A paccakakhANa
(gAthA-13mAM batAvesa.) bhArI vipula mArAdhanA  // 29 //  bano. (17)
savvadukkhappahINANaM siddhANaM arahao namo  /  saddahe jiNapannattaM
paccakkhAmi ya pAvagaM  /  / 17 /  /  bAlA0 havai sAgAra paccakkhANa karI je
bhaNai te kahai chai  /  gAthA savva0 ityAdi artha:jeNai samasta duHkha kSaya
karyAi chai je siddha te pratai tathA arihaMtanai namaskAra karUM chu  /  tathA
jinapraNIta samasta tattva huM saddahuM chu  /  tathA samasta pApaka ka0 duSTa
karttavya paccak chu iti gAthArtha  /  e sAgarapaccakkhANa kahyAM  /  / 17 /  /
artha : A pramANe sAgAra pratyAkhyAna karanAra te ArAdhaka have AgaLa vadhatA
kahe che, "sarvaduHkhathI mukta thayelA siddha bhagavaMto, atizayothI zobhatA
arihaMtone namaskAra thAo, jinezvare prarUpelA tattvonI huM zraddhA karuM chuM
ane sarva pApanuM paccakhANa karuM chuM. (17) namu'tthu dhuyapAvANaM siddhANaM
ca mahesiNaM  /  saMthAraM paDivajjAmi jahA kevalidesiyaM  /  / 18 /  /  bAlA0
hivai nirAgAra bhaktapratyAkhyAna kahIi chai  /  gAthA namotthu. ityAdi arthaH-
ghuta ka0 TAlyA pApa aSTaprakAra karma jeNai ehavA siddha prataI namaskAra hau
/  tathA maharSi prataI namaskAra hau  /  maharSi zabdaI tIrthaMkara, AcArya,
upAdhyAya, sAdhu-jANavA  /  saMstAraka ka0 anazana paDivaga~ chu  /  jima
kevalIiM dekhAIM chai tima iti gAthArthaH  /  / 18 /  /  artha : AtmA para
lAgelA ATha prakAranA karmone dUra karanArA siddha bhagavaMto, tIrthaMkara
bhagavaMto ane gaNadhara bhagavato Adi maharSione namaskAra thAo. have huM
kevalI bhagavaMtoe batAvelI vidhipUrvaka saMstAraka-aNasaNano svIkAra karuM
chuM. (18) 2010_02

Page #343 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 302 **Aaturpratyakhyanprakirnakam**  Whatever wrong I have done, I renounce
it completely in three ways: through mind, speech, and body. I also renounce the
three types of Samayik, which are free from all attachments. (19)  **Meaning:**
The virtuous person renounces all wrong actions done through mind, speech, and
body. They also renounce the three types of Samayik, which are based on
knowledge, vision, and conduct, with complete purity. (19)  **Meaning:** I
renounce all external objects like vessels and clothes, internal attachments
like passions and objects of desire, and all things related to the body,
including food, with complete devotion through mind, speech, and body. (20)  I
renounce all living beings, all external objects, all food and drink, and all
possessions. (21)  I have no hatred towards any living being. I renounce all
desires and follow the path of Samayik. (22)  **Meaning:** The meaning of these
verses is explained in the previous section. The disciple asked, "Why are these
verses repeated again?" The teacher replied, "The first verse was about
renouncing external objects, and the second verse was about renouncing internal
attachments. Therefore, there is no repetition." The disciple then asked, "If
these verses have already been said, why not say the third verse, which is about
renouncing the three types of Samayik?" The teacher replied, "The third verse is
implied in the verse that says, 'I renounce all living beings, all external
objects, all food and drink, and all possessions.' Therefore, there is no need
to repeat it." (21-22)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 302 AturapratyAkhyAnaprakIrNakam jaM kiMci vi duccariyaM taM savvaM vosirAmi
tiviheNaM  /  sAmAiyaM ca tivihaM kerami savvaM nirAgAraM  /  / 19 /  /  bAlA0
have te anazana karatau syuM bhaNai te kahIi chai  /  gAthA jaMkiMci0 ityAdi
artha:- je kAi duzcarita ka0 sAdhunaI karavA ayogya karyu hoi te sarva manaiM
vacanaiM kAyAiM karI vosirAyU~ chu  /  tathA sAmAyika nAmaiM cAritra karuM chu
/  sAmAyika0 cAritra kehaq chaI  /  trividhajJAna samyaktva sarvaviratirUpa
triNi bhedai sahita chai  /  athavA trividha kahatA mana-vacana-kAyAiM sAmAyika
karUM chN| tathA sarva nirAkAra AgAra rahita karUM chu  /  iti gAthArthaH  /  /
19 /  /  artha : sAdhu jIvanamAM rahelA evA meM je kAMI duSkato karyA hoya tene
mana-vacana-kAyAthI vosirAvuM chuM, teno tyAga karuM chuM ane jJAna-darzana ane
cAritrarUpa sAmAyikane nirapavAdapaNe svA. . (18) bajhaM abhiMtaraM uvahiM
sarIrAi sabhoyaNaM  /  maNasA vaya-kAehiM savvaM bhAveNa vosire  /  / 20 /  /
bAlA0 valI je karai te kahai chai  /  gAthA bajhaM0 ityAdi arthaH bAhya pAtrAdi
upakaraNa upadhi  /  abhyaMtara kaSAyAdi lakSaNa upadhi  /  tathA zarIra Adi
bhojana sahita samasta vastu  /  manovAkkAyAi karI bhAvai karI vosirAyU~ chu iti
gAthArthaH  /  / 20 /  /  artha : pAtra-vastra vagere bAhya upadhi, kaSAya-
viSayanA bhAvorUpa atyaMtara upadhi tathA bhojanayukta zarIra vagerene mana-
vacana-kAyArUpa traNeya yogathI bhAvapUrvaka vosirAvuM chuM.(20) savvaM
pANAraMbhaM paccakkhAmi tti aliyavayaNaM ca  /  savvamadinnAdANaM mehuNNa
pariggahaM ceva  /  / 21 /  /  sammaM me savvabhUesu veraM majjha na keNaI  /
AsAo vosirittANaM samAhimaNupAlae  /  / 22 /  /  bAlA0 savvaM pANA0 sammaM me
ka. iti gAthA rano arthaH pUrvokta parai jANavU  /  ahIiM ziSya bolyo je e gAthA
biM pUrvaiM kahI hatI tau valI bIjI vAra kisyA bhaNI kahI ? guru bolyA prathama
sAgAra pratyAkhyAnanai adhikArii kahI  /  havaDAM nirAkAra bhakta
pratyAkhyAnanaiM adhikArai kahI  /  te mATai punarukta doSa na jANavo  /  valI
ziSya bolyo jau e gAthA bi kahI tau saMghAtai trIjI esa karemi ka0 e gAthA syA
bhaNI na kahI ? guru bolyAM e trIjI gAthAno arthaH namotthu dhuyapAvANaM0 eNI
gAthAiM kahayo te bhaNI te gAthA na kahI iti gAthA  /  / 21-22  /  /  2010_02

Page #344 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Appendix - 1 Child Understanding - Meaning and Translation  **Meaning:** I
acknowledge the five vices of killing, lying, stealing, sexual misconduct, and
attachment. I renounce these vices. I have equal compassion for all beings. I
have no animosity towards any living being. Now, I renounce all desires and
aspirations and am attaining the purity of samadhi. (21-22)  **Verse:** I
renounce attachment, I am established in non-attachment. My support is the Self,
I renounce the rest. (23)  **Meaning:** I renounce the eight types of karmic
bonds: attachment, aversion, delight, humility, anxiety, fear, sorrow, and
attraction. (23)  **Verse:** I renounce attachment, I am established in non-
attachment. My support is the Self, I renounce the rest. (24)  **Meaning:**
Having attained the state of non-attachment, I renounce attachment to
everything. Now, my only support is the Self. I renounce everything else,
including the body. (24)  **Verse:** My support is in right faith, my support is
in conduct, my support is in knowledge, my support is in restraint, my support
is in yoga. (25)  **Meaning:** It is said that the Self is the support in all
these activities. My support is in right faith, my support is in conduct, my
support is in knowledge, my support is in restraint, my support is in yoga. (25)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pariziSTam - 1 bAlavabodha - bhAvAnuvAdau artha : sarva prANAtipAta, mRSAvAda,
adattAdAna, maithuna ane parigraharUpa pApasthAnakonuM paccakkhANa karuM chuM.
te pApothI pAcho pharuM chuM. sarva jIvo pratye mane samAna eka sarakho bhAva
che. koIpaNa jIva pratye vairabhAva nathI. have dareka prakAranI IcchAo-
abhilASAono tyAga urI huM samAdhinuM pAvana ruM chaM. (21-22) rAgaM baMdhaM
paosaM ca harisaM dINabhAvayaM  /  ussugattaM bhayaM sogaM raI araiM ca vosire
//  23  //  bAlA0 havai anazana paDivajyA pUMThai je bhaNai te kahI cha  /  /
gAthA rAgaM0 ityAdi artha: baMdhaka0 aSTaprakAra karmanA baMdha rUpa je rAga te
chAMDuM chaM  /  vosire e pada saghale ThAmi joDavuM  /  tathA atihiM dveSa te
pradveSa  /  tathA atihiM harSa te harSa  /  tathA dINabhAvayaM ka0
pratyanIkAdikaiM apamAnadIghaiM dInapaNUM dharavUM  /  utsugataM ka0 pIDAdika
upanaI huMtaI hUM zIghra maruM to vArU ityAdi utsukapaNUM  /  tathA bhaya
upasargAdi thapanaI bhaya upajai te zoka  /  iSTano viyogathI upano rati tathA
arati e bihuM zabda pragaTArtha e sarva vosirAvuM chaM iti gAthArthaH  /  / 23 /
/  artha : durmabaMdhanA arAbhUta rAga, dveSa, harSa, hInatA, utsuDatA, bhaya,
zoGa, rati ane atinA bhAvone huM vosirAvuM chuM. (23) mamattaM parivajjAmi
nimmamattaM uvaTThio  /  AlaMbaNaM ca me AyA, avasesaM ca vosire  /  /  24  /  /
- bAlA0 gAthA mamattaM ityAdi artha valI mamatvapUrNa varj chaM paNi huM kehavo
chauM nimamattaM ka0 nirmamatvapaNUM niHsaMgapaNUM AzrauM chauM  /  tau havai
AlaMbana kisu te kahai chai - AlaMbana kahitAM AdhAra te mAharo AtmA jeNaI
kAraNi ArAdhanAnUM hetu te AtmA ja chai  /  avazeSa samasta zarIra upadhyAdika
vosirAvuM chu iti gAthA  /  / 24 /  /  303 artha : nirmamatvabhAvane pAmelo huM
dareka vastu uparanA mamatvabhAvano tyAga karuM chuM. have mAre AlaMbanabhUta
eka mAtra AtmA che. AtmA sivAyanA za2I2 vagere sarvano tyAga karuM chuM.(24) AyA
hu mahaM nANe, AyA me daMsaNe caritte ya  /  AyA paccakkhANe, AyA me saMjame
joge  /  /  25  /  /  2010_02 bAlA0 havai kIhI kAryanai viSai e AtmA AlaMbana
karavo che kahai chai  /  gAthA AyA hu0 mAhAro AtmA samyaktvanaI viSai,
cAritranaI viSai, pratyAkhyAna kahatAM bhaktaparijJA rUpa pratyAkhyAnanaI viSai,
saMyama kahatAM sarvaviratinaI viSai yoga ka prazasta manovAkkAyanaI viSaI

Page #345 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Aaturpratyakhyanaprakirnakam  **Aalamban Hou.**  Je maatai e jnanaadik aatmaa
thaki alagaan na hoi te bhani ehanoo aatmaa j aalamban u. Yadyapi gaathaamaahi
aalamban shabd nathi tathaapi ahii paachali gaathaathi aalamban shabd jaanavo
iti gaatha. || 25 ||  **Meaning:**  The soul, which is not separate from
knowledge, etc., is the support for me. Although the word "aalamban" is not in
the verse, it is understood from the previous verse. || 25 ||  **Ego Vachchai
Jeevo, Ego Chevuvajjaye.** **Egass Chev Maranam, Ego Sijjhai Neero.** || 26 ||
**Balaa:**  Havai nirmamtavnai arthai ekatva bhavana bhavai chhai. Gaatha - Ego
V0 Ityadi Arthah:  Ekaloo dhan dhannyaadikain rahit jeevo bhavaantari jaai.
Tathaa ekaloo j manushyaadika panai upajai. Tathaa maran ekaloo ejanai hoi
tathaa karmarajarahit ekaloo j sijjhai. Yadyapi bhavaantargaman shabd anai maran
shabdnoo ekart chhai tathaapi ekatva bhavananu utkarshpanu kahivanai bishabd
juda kahiyan. Tathaanaana deshana upana je shishya tehanai samjhaavivaan koik
shishya bhavaantargaman shabdai samajh koik shishya maran shabdai samajhai iti
gaatharthah. || 26 ||  **Meaning:**  The soul alone goes to the next birth,
alone is born as a human, etc., alone dies, and alone becomes free from karma.
|| 26 ||  **Ego Me Saasao Appaa Naan- Dansanasanjuo.** **Sesaa Me Bahira Bhaava
Savve Sanjogalakkhana.** || 27 ||  **Balaa:**  Tathaa gaatha ego me saasao... ek
j maharo aatmaa sadaai jnana-darshan- charitra kari sahit shaashvato chhai.
Shishya:  Baahya padarth putra - kalatraadik te sarvasanjogalakkhana k0 karimo
melaavo malyo chhai pani shaashvato nathi. Yatha yeshaan sanjogaste shaam
avashyavaavi viyog iti vachanaat te maatai e mahara nahi iti gaatharthah. || 27
||  **Meaning:**  The eternal soul, endowed with knowledge and vision, is my
own. All other things (objects) are obtained by me through association, i.e.,
they are all destined to be separated in time. || 27 ||  **Sanjogamoolaa
Jeevenaam Pattaa Dukkhaparampraa.** **Tamhaa Sanjogasambandham Savvam Bhaavenaa
Vosire.** || 28 ||  **Balaa:**  Sanjog te duhkham ai [y] kari dekhaai chhai.
Gaatha sanjog... Ityarthah. Ahii jeeva shabd ai   2010_02  **Meaning:**
Association is the root of suffering. Therefore, renounce all association with
things. || 28 ||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 AturapratyAkhyAnaprakIrNakam AlaMbana hou  /  je mATai e jJAnAdika AtmA thakI
alagAM na hoi te bhaNI ehano AtmA ja AlaMbana u  /  yadyapi gAthAmAMhi AlaMbana
zabda nathI tathApi ahIiM pAchalI gAthAthI AlaMbana zabda jANavo iti gAthA  /  /
25  /  /  e 304 artha : jJAnane viSe, darzanane viSe, cAritrane viSe,
paccakkhANane viSe, saMyamane viSe ane traNayogane viSe AtmA e ja mArA mATe
AlaMbanabhUta che. (25) ego vaccai jIvo, ego cevuvavajjae  /  egassa ceva
maraNaM, ego sijjhai nIrao  /  /  26  /  /  bAlA0 havai nirmamatvanaI arthaI
ekatva bhAvanA bhAvai chai  /  gAthA - ego va0 ityAdi arthaH ekalo dhana
dhAnyAdikaiM rahita jIva bhavAMtarii jAi  /  tathA ekalo ja manuSyAdika paNai
upajai  /  tathA maraNa ekalo ejanai hoi tathA karmarajarahita ekalo ja sIjhai
/  yadyapi bhavAMtaragamana zabda anai maraNa zabdano ekArtha chai tathApi
ekatva bhAvanAnUMtkarSapaNUM kahivAnai bizabda judA kahyAM  /  tathAnAnA dezanA
upanA je ziSya tehanaiM samajhAvivAna koika ziSya bhavAMtara gamana zabdai
samajha koika ziSya maraNa zabdaI samajhai iti gAthArthaH  /  / 26 /  /  artha :
H jIva ekalo ja parabhavamAM jAya che, ekalo ja manuSyAdi gati vaDe utpanna
thAya che, jIva ekalo ja mRtyu pAme che ane ekalo ja karmarahita thaI mokSe jAya
che. (26) ego me sAsao appA nANa- daMsaNasaMjuo  /  sesA me bAhirA bhAvA savve
saMjogalakkhaNA  /  /  27  /  /  bAlA0 tathA gAthA ego me sAsao0 eka ja mAharo
AtmA sadAi jJAna-darzana- cAritra karI sahita zAzvato chai  /  ziSya0 bAhya
padArtha putra - kalatrAdika te sarvasaMyogalakSaNA ka0 kArimo melAvo malyo chai
paNi zAzvato nathI  /  yathA yeSAM saMyogAsteSAmavazyabhAvI viyoga iti vacanAt
te mATai e mAharA nahIM iti gAthArthaH  /  / 27 /  /  artha : jJAna-darzanathI
yukta evo zAzvata AtmA ja mAro potAno che. bAkInA badhA ja bhAvo (padArtho) mane
saMyogathI prApta thayelA che arthAt te badhA kAlAntare viyogane pAmavAnA che.
(27) saMjogamUlA jIveNaM pattA dukkhaparaMparA  /  tamhA saMjogasaMbaMdhaM
savvaM bhAveNa vosire  /  /  28  /  /  bAlA0 saMyoga te duHkhamai [ya] karI
dekhAi chai  /  gAthA saMyoga0 ityarthaH  /  ahIMi jIva zabdaI 2010_02

Page #346 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Appendix-1 Child Understanding-Meaning Translation 305 A worldly being, knowing
that it is a living being, experiences the cycle of birth, death, and rebirth,
which is a series of sufferings. What is this series of sufferings? It is the
suffering arising from the association with the objects of the world, such as
children, spouses, etc., which is the origin of the tree of Yama, and its
growth. This is the suffering that arises from the association of the living
being. And it is the experience of growth. Therefore, the desire for association
with all objects is done through the three ways of mind, speech, and body. This
is the verse. ||28|| Meaning: Until now, the living being has only experienced
the series of sufferings arising from association. Therefore, I renounce the
association with the objects of the world through mind, speech, and body. (28)
The fundamental qualities and the subsequent qualities, which I have not
renounced due to negligence. I condemn all of them and I will not commit them in
the future. ||29|| Child: It is said that negligence is a transgression. Verse:
Fundamental qualities. Etc. Meaning: The fundamental qualities are non-violence,
non-lying, etc. The subsequent qualities are purity of body, etc. I have been
negligent in these fundamental and subsequent qualities. I have not been a
proper worshiper of the Arhat, and I have not followed the right path.
Therefore, I condemn all my non-worship. I am giving myself the punishment of
false karma. And I will not commit such non-worship in the future. This is what
is said in the scriptures about condemning the past, controlling the present,
and renouncing the future. This is the verse. ||29|| Meaning: I condemn all the
transgressions I have committed due to negligence in the worship of the
fundamental qualities, such as the great vows, and the subsequent qualities,
such as the samiti and the secrecy. And I renounce committing such
transgressions in the future. (29) There are seven fears, eight prides, four
recognitions, three respects, and thirty-three aspirations. I condemn all of
them. ||30|| Child: And this is what is said about renunciation. Verse: Seven
fears. Etc. Meaning: The seven fears are: 1-fear of this world, 2-fear of the
next world, 3-fear of attachment, 4-fear of the unexpected, 5-fear of
livelihood, 6-fear of death, 7-fear of disgrace. The eight prides are: 1-pride
of caste, 2-pride of family, 3-pride of strength, 4-pride of beauty, 5-pride of
austerity, 6-pride of knowledge, 7-pride of wealth, 8-pride of power. The four
recognitions, the three respects, and the thirty-three aspirations are self-
explanatory. The aspirations are the thirty-three aspirations of the
Tirthankaras, etc., as mentioned in the scriptures. Or, the thirty-three
aspirations of the Guru. And I condemn all the anger and hatred that I have
committed. This is the verse. ||30|| Meaning: I condemn all the seven fears,
eight prides, four recognitions, three respects, thirty-three aspirations, and
anger and hatred. (30) 2010_02

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pariziSTam-1 bAlavabodha-bhAvAnuvAdau 305 saMsArika prANI jANavo eNai jIvaI
saMsAranaI viSai duHkha paraMparA janamajarAmaraNamArAdi duHkhasamUha pAmyA  /
kehavI duHkha paraMparA ? saMyogamUlA ka0 nAma saMbaMdhai viSaI
putrakalatrAdikanI je paraMparAnaiM etalai yamavRkSanI utpatti tathA
vRddhimUlathakI hoi tima eNai jIvai saMyoga thakI ja duHkhanI utpatti  /  tathA
vRddhi anubhavI ityarthaH  /  teNaiM kAraNaiM sarvasaMyogano saMbaMdha abhilASa
trividhaiM manovAkkAyaI karI vosirAvaM chu iti gAthA  /  / 28 /  /  artha H Aja
sudhI jIve saMyogathI sarjAtI du:khanI paraMparAo ja prApta karI che. tethI
saMyogathI sarjAtA padArthonA saMbaMdhone mana-vacana-kAyAthI vosirAvuM chuM.
(28) mUlaguNa uttaraguNe je me nA''rAhiyA pamAeNaM  /  tamahaM savvaM niMde
paDikkame AgamissANaM  /  / 29 /  /  bAlA0 havai pramAda, pratikramaNa kahai
chai - gAthA - mUlaguNa. ityAdi arthaH mUlaguNa prANAtipAta- veramaNAdika  /
uttaraguNa piNDavizuddhayAdika  /  e mUlottara guNamai pramAdaI karI ArAdhyA na
huiM samyak prakAri pAlyA na hoI tehuM samasta anArAdhanA niMdAmi ka0
AtmAsAkSika mithyAduHkRta deuM chauM  /  tathA AgamiSyatkAla anAgata kAlanai
viSai thyAnhArI virAdhanA te huM paccakTuM chu| je mATai atItakAlanI niMdA,
vartamAnakAlanUM saMvarNa [saMvaraNa] anAgatakAlanUM paccakkhANa zAstranaiM
viSai bolyuM chai iti gAthA  /  / 29 /  /  artha : mUlaguNa rUpa mahAvratanI
ArAdhanAmAM, uttaraguNarUpa samiti-guptinI ArAdhanAmAM pramAdane vaza thaIne meM
je kAMI virAdhanA karI hoya te sarvanI huM niMdA karuM chuM ane bhaviSyamAM tevI
virAdhanA na karavAnuM paccakhANa karuM chuM. (29) satta bhae aTTha mae sannA
cattAri gArave tinni  /  AsAyaNa tettIsaM rAgaM dosaM ca garihAmi  /  / 30 /  /
bAlA0 anejhaM paNi je paDikkamaI te kahai chai - gAthA sattabhaya. ityAdi arthaH
sAtabhayanA nAma 1-ihalokabhaya, 2-paralokabhaya, 3-AdAnabhaya, 4-akasmAdbhaya,
5-jIvikAbhaya, 6-maraNabhaya, 7-ashlaaghaabhy| havai ATha madanA nAma
1-jAtimada, 2-kulamada, 3-balamada, 4-rUpamada, 5-tapamada, 6-zrutamada,
7-lAbhamada, 8-aizvaryamada  /  tathA cyAri saMjJA, triNi gArava prgttaarth|
AzAtanA - tIrthaMkarAdikanI pratikramaNa sUtrokta jANavI  /  athavA gurunI
tetrIsa AzAtanA jANavI  /  tathA rAga-dveSa karyA hoi te sarva garahuM chu  /
iti gaathaa||30|| artha : sAta prakAranA bhaya, ATha prakAranA mada, cAra
saMjJA, traNa gArava, tetrIza AzAtanA, 2 /  bhane dveSa. yA sarvanI DI . (30)
2010_02

Page #347 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 306 **Aaturpratyakhyanaprakirnakam**  I condemn all that is mine, whether it
be attachment to the non-virtuous, or the wrong view, or the sense of "mine" in
all beings and non-beings. I despise it and I reject it. (31)  **Explanation:**
This verse condemns the non-virtuous, ignorance, wrong view, and the sense of
"mine" in beings and non-beings. It states that the speaker condemns and rejects
all these faults.  **Verse 32:**  I condemn what is condemnable and I reject
what is rejectable. I criticize everything, both internal and external. (32)
**Explanation:** This verse states that the speaker condemns all that is
condemnable and rejects all that is rejectable. They also criticize all internal
and external faults.  **Verse 33:**  Just as a child, jumping about, speaks of
what is right and wrong, so too do I criticize, having abandoned the delusion of
Maya. (33)  **Explanation:** This verse compares the speaker's criticism to a
child who speaks openly about right and wrong. The speaker has abandoned the
delusion of Maya and criticizes openly.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 306 AturapratyAkhyAnaprakIrNakam assaMjamamannANaM micchattaM savvameva ya
mamattaM  /  jIvesu ajIvesu ya taM niMde taM ca garihAmi  /  / 31 /  /  bAlA0
gAthA asaMjama0 ityAdi asaMyama virAdhanA ajJAnamUDhapaNuM  /  mithyAtva
viparyayabuddhi tathA jIva putrakalatrAdikanaI viSaI  /  ajIva hiraNa
vastrAdikanaI viSaI  /  je mamatvapaNUM karyu hui  /  e sarva AtmasAkSika niMdU
chu  /  guru sAkSika garihauM chu  /  je vismRtipaNAdikai paDikkamyuM na hoi te
huM nihu~ chu, garihuM chu  /  /  iti gAthA  /  / 31 /  /  artha : asaMyama,
ajJAna, mithyAtva temaja jIva ane ajIva padArthonuM mamatva. A doSonI I niM 7,
7. (31) niMdAmi niMdaNijjaM garihAmi ya jaM ca me garahaNijjaM  /  Aloemi ya
savvaM abhiMtara bAhiraM uvahiM  /  / 32 /  /  bAlA0 havai sAmAnyapaNaiM sarva
Aloe chai - gAthA niMdAmi0 ityAdi arthaH je kAMi mada niMdanIka asaMyamAdika
kIrcha hoi te huM niMdu chu  /  gurunaiM nivedaM chauM  /  e sarva niMdanika
garhaNIka pUrvokta doSa tathA upadhi kahatAM mAyA kapaTa AlouM chu  /
abhyaMtara mAyA kahatA manamAMhi pADuDaM cItaviq  /  bAhya mAyA prANAtipAtAdi
rUpa iti gAthArthaH  /  / 32 /  /  artha : niMdA karavA yogya asaMyamAdi doSonI
niMdA karuM chuM. gaha karavA yogya doSonI gaI karuM chuM. bAhya ane atyaMtara
upadhinI guru samakSa AlocanA karuM chuM. (32) jaha bAlo jaMpaMto kajjamakajjaM
ca ujjuyaM bhaNai  /  taM taha AloijjA mAyAmosaM pamuttUNaM  /  / 33 /  /  bAlA0
keNI vidhaiM AloiM te kahai chai - gAthA jaha bAlo. ityAdi arthaH jima bAlaka
kAryaakArya kahito  /  ukkayaM ka0 saralapaNai svamAtAnaI kahai paNii mana [na]
cItavai je lajanIka vastu chai to hu~ kima kahuM  /  kintu pacchanna tathA
pragaTa sarva kahai  /  tima ziSya guru samakSa Aloi  /  mAyA ka0 akAryanUM
DhAMkavu e bihuM vAnA mUkInai samasta pAva Aloi iti gAthArthaH  /  / 33 /  /
artha je pramANe nAno bALaka pote karelA kArya akArya ne saraLatApUrvaka bole
che te pramANe mAyAmRSAvAdano tyAga karIne huM paNa tenI AlocanA karuM chuM.
(33) 2010_02

Page #348 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Appendix-1 Child Understanding-Meaning Translation 307 In knowledge, in vision,
in conduct, you are unshakable in all four. You are steadfast, skilled in the
scriptures, unyielding, a repository of secrets. ||34||. Bala. If a student
approaches a teacher, the teacher praises his qualities.  Verse-Knowledge etc.
The meaning is that you are unshakable in five types of knowledge, in vision, in
the destruction of passions, in the pacification of passions, and in conduct.
You are also capable of performing the twelve types of atonement yourself, and
you know the methods of making others perform them. You are also devoted to
conduct. In all four, it means that you are devoted to the aforementioned
knowledge, vision, conduct, and penance. But not in each one individually. You
are also a brave warrior against the enemy.  And skilled in the scriptures, etc.
The word "etc." refers to five types of atonement: 1-Scripture, 2-Hearing,
3-Command, 4-Conquest, 5-Conduct. You are skilled in the five types of atonement
or in the principles of the scriptures. That is the meaning you should
understand. And you are unyielding, a repository of secrets. You are like the
ocean, deep. This is the meaning of the verse: "Approach a teacher with such
qualities." ||34||. Meaning: When asked who to approach for guidance, it is said
that one should approach those who are established in knowledge, vision,
penance, and conduct, who possess pure intellect, who are knowledgeable in the
scriptures, and who are like the ocean in their ability to digest criticism.
42nd. (34) If I have done anything wrong to you out of love, hatred,
ingratitude, or carelessness, I apologize for it in all three ways. ||35||.
Bala. The student seeking guidance apologizes to the teacher. Verse-Love etc.
The meaning is that you have done something out of love, hatred, or
carelessness. You have done something out of gratitude, or you have done
something out of carelessness, without knowing. The word "etc." refers to the
offense you have committed against the venerable one. And "if I have done
anything" means that I have spoken something that is a fault, a blemish, or a
criticism of the venerable one. I apologize for it in all three ways - with my
mind, speech, and body. This is the meaning of the verse. ||35||. Meaning: I
apologize for anything I have done or said to you (the teacher) out of love,
hatred, ingratitude, or carelessness, in all three ways - with my mind, speech,
and body. (35) 2010_02

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pariziSTam-1 bAlavabodha-bhAvAnuvAdau 307 nANammi daMsaNammi ya tave caritte ya
causa vi akaMpo  /  dhIro Agamakusalo aparissAvI rahassANaM  /  / 34 /  /  .
bAlA0 havai jai gurunaiM samIpi AlovU te gurunA guNa kahai chi  /  gAthA-
nANaMmi0 ityAdi arthaH pAMca prakAra jJAnanaiM viSaiM tathA darzana
kSAyakaupazamikanaiM viSai akaMpa akSobhya devatAiM paNi cAlI na sakIi  /  tathA
bAra bhedanai viSai svayameva karavA samarthaH tathA anerAnaiM karAvivAnI
vidhino jANa tathA cAritranaiM viSai ArAdhavAni tatpara  /  causu vi kahatA e
pUrvokta jJAnadarzanacAritratapa cyAra bolanaI viSai tatpara  /  paNi ekekAnai
viSai nahI ityarthaH  /  tathA parISaha zatru prati dhIra subhtt| tathA Agama
kusale Adi zabda adhiko kahIi Adi zabda thakI 1-Agama, 2-zruta, 3-AjJA, 4-jIta,
5-vyavahAra  /  pAMca bheda prAyazcitanaiM viSai nipuNa athavA Agama
siddhAntanai viSai nipuNa ho| tehanA arthanA jANa mATai  /  tathA aparizrAvI
rahassANa ka0 keNai rahasya chAnI vastuM AloiM hoi te koi Agali kahai nahI  /
samudravat gambhIra ityarthaH  /  evaMvidha guNa saMyukta gurunaiM samIpi AlovU
iti gAthArthaH  /  / 34 /  /  artha : konI pAse AlocanA levAya te jaNAvatA kahe
che ke je jJAna, darzana, tapa ane cAritranI ArAdhanAmAM susthita hoya, vizuddha
buddhine dharanArA hoya, Agamane jANanArA gItArtha hoya ane jANelI AlocanAne
sAgaranI jema pacAvanArA hoya temanI pAse sAloyanA  /  42vI. (34) rAgeNa va
doseNa va jaM bhe akayannuyA pamAeNaM  /  jo me kiMci vi bhaNio tamahaM tiviheNa
khAmemi  /  / 35  /  /  bAlA0 havai AlonAharo ziSya gurunaiM khamAvai chi  /
gAthA - rAgeNa0 ityAdi arthaH rAgaI premaI karI tathA dveSe rIsaI karI  /  tathA
akayannuyA eka0 pujya kRta upagAra vIsAravai karI tathA pramAdaI karI aNajANatai
maI kAI  /  bheka0 tumha pUjyano aparAdha ko hoi etalUM pada adhikU kahIi tathA
jo me kiM ci0 je maiM kAMi pUjyano akIrtirUpa doSa bhaNyeu kahayo hoi  /  te huM
trividhaiM manovAkkAyAI karI khamArbu chu iti gAthA  /  / 35 /  /  artha :
rAgathI, dveSathI, akRtajJatAthI ke pramAdathI je kAMI meM ApanAthI (guruthI)
viparIta karyuM hoya ke viparIta bolyo houM te sarvenI huM trividhe-trividha
mAphI mAMguM chuM. (35) 2010_02

Page #349 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 308 ##  A Discourse on the Rejection of Eagerness  They say there are three
types of death: the death of a child, the death of a child-scholar, and the
death of a scholar. The death of a scholar is what the Kevalis (Omniscients)
approve of. ||36||  **Explanation:** The child-scholar is one who is eager for
non-eating (fasting) and thinks that is the essence of death. The verse says,
"There are three types..." etc. There are three types of death of a Tirthankara.
One is the death of a child, which is ignorant, devoid of renunciation and
wisdom, and is the death of a child. The second is the death of a child-scholar,
which is devoid of renunciation from the world. The third is the death of a
scholar, which is the death of a scholar who is completely renounced. The death
of a scholar is what the Kevalis approve of, meaning that it is the death that
is similar to the Kevalis. ||36||  **Meaning:** There are three types of death
in the scriptures. ||12n. Bh29|| 3 Ch. 1- Porna Bh25, 2- Death of a Scholarly
Being, 3- Death of a Being in the Scholarly Stage. The death that the
Omniscients approve of. Scholar Bh29. Vay. (35)  Those who are addicted to the
eight passions, whose understanding is corrupted from the path of liberation,
who are crooked in their views, and who die without mindfulness, are not called
seekers of the highest good. ||37||  **Explanation:** This type of death is
characterized by being attached to the eight passions, being corrupted from the
path of liberation, being crooked in one's views, and dying without mindfulness.
This is considered a death with faults. The verse says, "Those who are addicted
to the eight passions..." etc. The meaning is that those beings who are addicted
to the eight passions, whose understanding is corrupted from the path of
liberation due to passions like attachment, aversion, etc., who are crooked in
their views, and who die with a mind that is not in a state of mindfulness, such
beings die in a state of unmindfulness. They are not seekers of the highest
good. ||37||  **Meaning:** Those who are addicted to the eight passions, whose
understanding is corrupted from the path of liberation, who are crooked in their
views, die in a state of unmindfulness and are not called seekers of the highest
good. (37)  Those who reject death will experience the misery of the heavenly
realms in the future, will become those with rare understanding, and their cycle
of existence will be endless. ||38||  **Explanation:** This verse explains the
consequences of rejecting death. The verse says, "Those who reject death..."
etc. The meaning is that those who reject death, as described in the previous
verses, will experience the misery of the heavenly realms in the future. They
will become those with rare understanding, meaning they will have difficulty
understanding the true nature of reality. The word "kil" indicates certainty,
and the word "anant" indicates that their cycle of existence will be endless.
This means that they will experience countless deaths. ||38||  **Meaning:**
Those who reject death will experience the misery of the heavenly realms in the
future, will become those with rare understanding, and their cycle of existence
will be endless. (38)  2010_02.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 308 AturapratyAkhyAnaprakIrNakam tivihaM bhaNaMti maraNaM, bAlANaM
bAlapaMDiyANaM ca  /  taiyaM paMDiyamaraNaM jaM kevaliNo aNumaraMti  /  / 36 /
/  bAlA0 havai anazana kartA maraNanUM svarUpa cItavi chai te kahi chai  /
gAthA-tivihaM. ityAdi  /  trihu prakAri tIrthaMkara maraNa bhaNi eka bAla ajJAnI
viratirUpa viveka rahitanaiM bAlamaraNa  /  bIjU dezaviratInaI bAlapaMDitamaraNa
/  trIjU paMDita sarvaviratInaiM paMDitamaraNa kehaq chaI paMDitamaraNa jaM
kevala0 je paMDitamaraNa kevalI sarikhApaNi anusarai karai iti gAthArtha  /  /
36 /  /  artha : neizvarI meM tre| 12n| bh29|| 3 cha. 1- pornu bha25,
2-4paMDitajIvonuM maraNa, 3-paMDitakakSAnA jIvonuM maraNa. je maraNa dvArA
kevaLajJAnIo mRtyune vare cha, te. paMDita bh29| vAya. (35) je puNa aTThamaIyA
payaliyasannA ya vakkabhAvA ya  /  asamAhiNA maraMti u na hu te ArAhagA bhaNiyA
/  / 7 /  /  bAlA0 ehavU maraNa svarUpa jANInaiM DAyuM samAdhi maraNai marai  /
asamAdhi-maraNai marai tau tehanA doSa kahai chai  /  gAthA-je puNa a0 ityAdi
arthaH je jIva ATha madavaMta hoi  /  tathA payaliya ka0 viSaya kaSAyAdikaI karI
sanmArga thakI bhraSTa thayo hoi tathA asaMjJAvaMta hoi tathA vakrabhAva sahita
hoi  /  te prANI ehavA asamAdhiiM cittanaiM asvAsthya paNai marai  /  anai te
jIva uttamArthanA ArAdhaka na hoi iti gAthArthaH  /  / 37 /  /  artha : je vaLI
ATha prakAranA madane AdhIna hoya, mokSamArgathI bhraSTa thayelI prajJAvALA
hoya, vakratAne pAmelA hoya te asamAdhithI mare che ane te ArAdhaka kahevAtA
nathI. 37) maraNe virAhie devaduggaI dullahA ya kira bohI  /  saMsAro ya aNaMto
hoi puNo AgamissANaM  /  / 38 /  /  bAlA0 tidvAri [?] pachI te jIvanaiM syuM
phala huMi te kahai chai  /  gAthA-maraNe. ityAdi arthaH maraNapUrvokta doSai
virAdhai huMtaiM  /  te jIvanaiM devadurgati hoi  /  tathA durlabhabodhi hoi  /
kila iti nizcaye tathA anAgata kAlanaI viSaI anaMta saMsArabhramaNa hoi  /  ca
zabda thakI anaMtA maraNa paNi hoi  /  iti gAthArthaH  /  / 38 //  artha H
mRtyune virAdhanArA bhaviSyamAM devalokanI durgatine pAme che, durlabhabodhI
bane che ane temano saMsAra anaMtakAlIna bane che. (38) 2010_02.

Page #350 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Appendix-1 Child Understanding-Meaning Translation 309 What is Devadurgati? What
is Abodhi? By what does one experience death? Why does the soul wander in the
infinite and boundless world? ||39|| Bala asks four questions. The meaning of
the verse- Kadev etc. is as follows: 1- What is Devadurgati?, 2- What is
Abodhi?, 3- By what does one experience death?, 4- Why does the soul wander in
the infinite and boundless world. ||39|| Meaning: What is Devadurgati? Who is
called Abodhi? By what does one have to bear death? Why does the soul wander in
the infinite world? Kandeppdev-Kibbis-Abhiyoga Asuri Ya Sammiha. || Ta
Devadurgatiyo Maranammi Virahie Huti. ||40|| Bala answers the first question.
The meaning of the verse- Kandepp etc. is as follows: Kandarpak is a god who is
attached to desires. The god who is attached to the desires of the past life is
born in the realm of gods. He dies quickly. ||2|| Kibbisia is a god who is
attached to the desires of the past life and is born in the realm of gods. ||3||
Abhiyogak is a god who is attached to the desires of the past life and is born
in the realm of gods. ||4|| Asuriya is a god who is attached to the desires of
the past life and is born in the realm of gods. ||5|| Sammohak is a god who is
attached to the desires of the past life and is born in the realm of gods. ||6||
These Devadurgatis are born in the realm of gods because of the desires of the
past life. They are born in the realm of gods because of the desires of the past
life. They are born in the realm of gods because of the desires of the past
life. They are born in the realm of gods because of the desires of the past
life. They are born in the realm of gods because of the desires of the past
life. They are born in the realm of gods because of the desires of the past
life. They are born in the realm of gods because of the desires of the past
life. They are born in the realm of gods because of the desires of the past
life. They are born in the realm of gods because of the desires of the past
life. They are born in the realm of gods because of the desires of the past
life. They are born in the realm of gods because of the desires of the past
life. They are born in the realm of gods because of the desires of the past
life. They are born in the realm of gods because of the desires of the past
life. They are born in the realm of gods because of the desires of the past
life. They are born in the realm of gods because of the desires of the past
life. They are born in the realm of gods because of the desires of the past
life. They are born in the realm of gods because of the desires of the past
life. They are born in the realm of gods because of the desires of the past
life. They are born in the realm of gods because of the desires of the past
life. They are born in the realm of gods because of the desires of the past
life. They are born in the realm of gods because of the desires of the past
life. They are born in the realm of gods because of the desires of the past
life. They are born in the realm of gods because of the desires of the past
life. They are born in the realm of gods because of the desires of the past
life. They are born in the realm of gods because of the desires of the past
life. They are born in the realm of gods because

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pariziSTam-1 bAlavabodha-bhAvAnuvAdau 309 kA devaduggaI ? kA abohi ? keNeva
vujjhaI maraNaM ?  /  keNa aNaMtamapAraM saMsAre hiMDaI jIvo ?  /  / 39 /  /
bAlA0 havai ziSya cyAri prazna pUchai chai  /  gAthA-kAdeva0 ityAdi arthaH 1 -
kehI devanIdurgati ?, tathA 2 - kehI durlabhabodhI ?, tathA 3 - keNai prakArai
vAraMvAra maraNe pAmai ?, tathA 4-keNai hetai anaMtapAra saMsAra jIva hIDai  /
iti gAthA  /  / 39 /  /  artha : devadurgati eTale zuM ? abodhi kone kahevAya ?
zenA vaDe maraNane vahana karavA paDe ? jIva kayA kAraNe anaMtA saMsAramAM
rakhaDe ? kaMdappadeva-kibbisa-abhiogA AsurI ya sammIhA  /  /  tA devaduggaIo
maraNaMmi virAhie huti  /  / 40 /  /  bAlA0 prathama praznano uttara kahi chi  /
gAthA-kaMdapya. ityAdi arthaH kaMdarpaka aTaTTAhAsanaM karanhAra devatA thAi  /
je sAdhu pAchili bhavi jehavA hoi te devatA mAMhi tehavA ja dhAi  /  jallese
marai iti vcnaat| tathA kibvisiyA ka0 jJAnavaMta kevalyAdikanI AzAtanAI karI
devatAmAMhi DheDhapaNai upanA  /  evaM rUpa devadurgati  /  / 2 /  /  abhiogAka0
pAchilA yatInA bhavanaiM viSaiM maMtra nimitta prayuJjavai karI marInaI vatAgArI
(?) devapaNai upanA  /  evaM rUpa devadurgati  /  / 3 /  /  AsuriyA ka0 sAdhu-
bhavanaiM viSaI caMDakrodha ghaNo karai  /  pachai marInai paNi tehavA ja devatA
paramAdhArmika pramukha mAMhi upnaa| evaMvidha devadurgati  /  / 4 /  /  saMmohA
ka0 saMyata bhavanaiM viSai unmArga ghaDavAdikai karI mokSamArga thakI jIvanaiM
bhraMza pamADai pachai marInai tathA vidha devamAMhi upanA evaMvidhA devadurgati
/  / 5 /  /  etalI devadurgati maraNane avasare virAdhyai hutai hoi  /  pachai
tihAMthI cyavyA huMtA anaMta saMsAra bhamai iti gAthArtha  /  / 40 /  /  artha:
kAndapiMka jAtinA devo, kilbiSika devo, Abhiyogika devo, asuranIkAyanA devo,
saMmohika devo. devonI A pAMca avasthA duHkharUpa hovAthI durgatitulya che.
maraNanI virAdhanA karavAthI AvA devalokamAM utpanna thavuM paDe che. (40)
micchAdasaNarattA saniyANA kiNhalesamogADhA  /  iha je maraMti jIvA tesiM dulahA
bhave bohI  /  / 41 /  /  bAlA0 bIjA praznano uttara kahi chai  /  gAthA-miccho
daM0 ityAdi - artha : mithyAtva darzananai viSai rakta hoi tathA niyANA sahite
marae tathA kRSNalezyA sarvalezyA mAhi adhamalezyA _ 2010_02

Page #351 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Chapter 310:  Discourse on the Rejection of the Eager  **Verse 41:** The
meaning of the verse is:  For those beings who die, the Jain teachings, the
Bodhi, are rare.  This is because they are engrossed in false views, have not
attained the knowledge of the path to godhood, and have not attained the pure
state of consciousness.  **Verse 42:** The meaning of the verse is:  Those
beings who have attained right faith, but have not attained the knowledge of the
path to godhood, and have attained the pure state of consciousness, when they
die, the Bodhi becomes easy for them.  **Verse 43:** The meaning of the verse
is:  Those beings who are hostile to their teachers, are deeply attached to the
30 great delusions, are attached to the 21 passions, and have a corrupt
character, when they die in a state of anger, they become beings of infinite
cycles of rebirth.  **Verse 44:** The meaning of the verse is:  Those beings who
are not attached to the teachings of the Jinas, who do not follow the teachings
of their teachers, who are weak and have not attained the pure state of
consciousness, they become beings of limited cycles of rebirth.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 310 AturapratyAkhyAnaprakIrNakam tehani viSai pohatA marai ihalokanaiM viSai
eNai prakArii je jIva marai tehanaiM durlabhabodhi hoi iti gAthArthaH  /  / 41 /
/  artha : mithyAdarzanomAM rata banelA, devatvanI prApti vagerenA niyANA jeNe
karelo hoya ane kRSNa lezyAne pAmelA hoya tevA jIvone jaina zAsanarUpa bodhI
durlabha hoya che. (41) sammaiMsaNarattA aniyANA sukkalesamogADhA  /  iha je
maraMti jIvA tesiM sulahA bhave bohI  /  / 42 /  /  bAlA0 havai adhikAra mATai
sulabha bodhinUM lakSaNa kahIi chai  /  gAthA-sammaMdaka0 samyag paNUM te
samyaktva tehanaI viSai rakta samyaktvaiM karI saptaghAtu vAsI huI jehnii| tathA
niyANA rahita, tathA zuklalezyA sarvottama lezyA prApta chai  /  iha
pravacananaiM viSaiM  /  eNai prakAraiM je jIva marai tehanaiM sulabhabodhi hoi
iti gAthArthaH  /  / 42 /  /  artha: samyagdarzanane pAmelA hoya, niyANu jeNe na
karyuM hoya ane zukla lazyAne pAmelA hoya tevA jIvo mRtyu pAme to temane bodhI
sulabha thAya che. (42). je puNa gurupaDiNIyA bahumohA sasabalA kusIlA ya  /
asamAhiNA maraMti u te haMti aNaMtasaMsArI  /  / 43 /  /  bAlA0 havai keNa
aNaMtapAraM saMsAraM hiMDai jIvo ? ehavA cauthA praznano uttara kahai  /
gAthAje puNa0 ityAdi arthaH je jIva gurunA avarNavAdAdi bolavai karI pratyanIka
vairI bhUta hui  /  tathA bahu mohI kahatAM trIsa mahA mohanI sthAnakanA
karanhArA  /  tathA sasabalA kahatAM ekavIsa sabalAnai viSai pravarttai  /
tathA kuzIla ka0 jehano kutsitarbhUDo AcAra hoi  /  ehavA je jIva asamAdhiI
raudrabhAvai varttatA marate anaMta saMsArI hoi  /  ahIM ziSya bolyo je jIjU
praznamUkInai pahilU cothA praznano uttara kahyo te syA mATai ? guru bolyA -
prAkRtanI racanA vicitra hoi ehavo nyAya ziSyanaiM dekhADavAnaiM kAjai graMtha
kara i cauthA prazno uttara prathama kahyo  /  athavA anaMtasaMsAra vinA anaMta
maraNa na hui te mATai anaMta saMsAranUM prazna prathama kAuM iti gAthA  /  / 43
/  /  artha: je jIvo gurunA pratyenIka hoya, gADhamohathI mohitamativALA hoya,
zabalane sevanArA, kharAba AcAravALA jIvo asamAdhipUrvaka mare che ane anaMta
saMsArI thAya che. (43) jiNavayaNe aNurattA guruvayaNaM je karaMti bhAveNa  /
asabala asaMkiliTThA te haMti parittasaMsArI  /  / 44 /  /  bAlA0 havai adhikAra
mATai parittasaMsArInuM svarUpa kahi chi  /  gAthA jinavayaNa0 ityAdi 2010_02

Page #352 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------



======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pariziSTam-1 bAlavabodha-bhAvAnuvAdau 311 je jIva jinavacananaiM viSaiM rakta
hoi guru kahatAM dharmAcAryano upadeza bhAva thakI e hitakArIu ehavu jANInai je
ziSya karai tathA ekavIsa sabalA rahita asaMkliSTa vizuddha nirmala
adhyavasAyavaMta hui ehavA je jIva marai te paritta saMsArI stoka saMsArI hui
iti gAthA  /  / 44 /  /  arthaH jinavacanane anusAre jIvanArA, gurunA vacanane
bhAvapUrvaka pALanArA, zabalathI rahita ane asaMkaliSTa pariNAmavALA jIvo alpa
saMsArI bane che. nikaTa mokSavartI thAya che. (44) bAlamaraNANi bahuso bahuyANi
akAmagANi maraNANi  /  marihaMti te varAyA je jiNavayaNaM na yANaMti  /  / 45 /
/  satthaggahaNaM visabhakkhaNaM ca jalaNaM ca jalapaveso ya  /
aNayArabhaMDasevI jamaNa-maraNANubaMdhINi  /  / 46 /  /  bAlA0 havai trIjA
praznano uttara kahai chai aDhI gAthAI karI  /  gAthA0 bAla0 ityAdi, sattha0
ityAdi, uDhmahe0 ityAdi arthaH  /  je jIva jinavacana nathI jANatA te bApaDA
varAka  /  ghaNA bAlamaraNa zastragrahaNa viSabhakSaNAdika anekavAra marasyai
iti saMbaMdha kahevA chai  /  bAlamaraNa akAmukANi kahatA vaMchavA ayogya chai
bAlamaraNa dekhADai chai  /  ketalA eka varAka zastra grahaNa ka0 tIrthAdikanai
viSaya mastake karavatAdi mUMkAvaiM  /  viSabhakSaNa tAlapuTAdika viSa khAi
tathA jvalanaka0 agnimAMhi praveza kASTabhakSaNa paJcAgnitapaH karaNAdi je karai
tathA jala pANI mAMhi praveza mAghamAsAdikanai viSai  /  ca zabda thakI eha
sarIkhA je maraNa anerAM te paNi bAlamaraNa jANavA etalA bAlamaraNa kuNa karai
te kahai chi  /  aNAcAra0 anAcAraka0 zAstra viruddha je bhAMDa upagaraNanA
sevaNahArA  /  etalaI svakalpita nAnAvidhaveSavaMta kutIrthika  /  athavA
kaMdarpikAdika sAdhu veSadhArI paNi jANavA  /  ehavo je jIva te aneka bAlamaraNa
marasyai kehavA chai bAla maraNa jammaNa0 jehanai viSai janma anaiM maraNanUM ja
AnubaMdhaka0 karavU chai  /  /  iti gAthArthaH  /  / 45-46 /  /  artha je jIvo
jinavacanane yathArtha rIte jANatA nathI. te jIvo ghaNIvAra bAlamaraNathI mare
che. te mahArogAdi kAraNe anekavAra akAmamaraNathI mare che. (45) artha : zastra
dvArA svayaM mRtyu pAmanArA, jheranuM bhakSaNa karanArA, agnimAM praveza
karanArA, jaLamAM praveza karanArA ane zAstramAM batAvelA upakaraNo sivAyanA
padArthano upayoga karanArA jIvo janma-maraNanI paraMparAnA kAraNabhUta
bAlamaraNathI mare che. (46) 2010_02

Page #353 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 312 ## Aaturpratyakhyanaprakirnakam  We are tossed about in the world of the
lower beings, experiencing many deaths as a child. I will accept the death of a
sage, along with faith and knowledge. ||47||  **Explanation:** The text states
that the soul experiences many deaths as a child in the higher realms, lower
realms, and the realm of lower beings. Therefore, the speaker, who is endowed
with faith and knowledge, will accept the death of a sage. ||47||  **Note:** The
term "lower beings" refers to the realm of animals, plants, and other non-human
life forms.  ##   **Translation of the next verse:**  I will die the death of a
sage, going to the liberation, for in the human realm, there are only pains.
Considering these, I will die the death of a sage. ||48||  **Explanation:** The
text advises the listener to accept the death of a sage, as it leads to
liberation, while the human realm is filled with suffering. ||48||  ##
**Translation of the next verse:**  If suffering arises, then it should be
endured with patience. What have I not experienced in this world, while
wandering through it? ||49||  **Explanation:** The text encourages the listener
to accept suffering with patience, as it is a natural part of life. The speaker
reminds the listener that they have already experienced many hardships in their
life, and therefore, they should not fear suffering. ||49||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 312 AturapratyAkhyAnaprakIrNakama uDDamahe tiriyammi vi mayANi jIveNa
bAlamaraNANi  /  dasaNa-nANasahagao paMDiyamaraNaM aNumarissaM  /  / 47 /  /
bAlA0 te maraNa kAhai ThAmi marai te kahai chai  /  urddhaloka bhUtathI navasaI
yojana uparAMta lokanta lagai, adholaukika grAmanai viSai bhavanapatinaiM viSaI
sAta pRthvInaiM viSaiM  /  tiryagloka 1800 yojana pramANa e sthAnakanaI viSai  /
mayANi ka0 anubhavyAM jIvai bAlamaraNa te mATai havai paMDitai sUM karavU te
kahii chai  /  dasaNaM te anazana kartA bAlamaraNano vipAkano jANa cItavai chi
havai huM jJAnadarzanaiM karI sahita chato paMDita maraNa viveka maraNa marIsa
karIsa iti gAthA  /  / 47 /  /  artha : uparokta bAlamaraNa jIvoe UrdhvalokamAM,
adholokamAM ane tirachAlokamAM anekavAra meLavyAM che. tethI darzanazAnathI
yukta evo huM paMDita maraNane meLavIza. (47) uvveyaNayaM jAI maraNaM naraesu
veyaNAo ya  /  eyANi saMbharaMto paMDiyamaraNaM marasu iNhiM  /  / 48 /  /
bAlA0 havai guru te kSapakanaiM dugatino bhaya dekhADavA upadeza dei chai  /
gAthA-uvveva0 he vatsa ! virAdhita vrata yatInaiM bhaya kAraka jAti janma anaiM
maraNa hoi tathA virAdhakanaiM narakanaiM viSai vedanA chedana bhedana
zAlmalIvRkSa ziSarAropaNa taptalohaputrikAsamAliMganAdi rUpa hoi  /  te mATai
etalAM vAnAM saMbhArato paMDita maraNa marai havaDAM iti gAthArthaH  /  / 48 /
/  arthaH janma ane maraNa udvegane karAvanArA che, narakamAM mAtra vedanA ja
prApta thAya che. A vAtane vicArato te paMDitamaraNathI hamaNAM mRtyune pAma.
(48) jai uppajjaI dukkhaM to dabbo sahAvao navaraM  /  kiM kiM me na pattaM
saMsAraM saMsaraMteNaM  /  / 49 /  /  bAlA0 havai kSapaka guruno upadeza
sAMbhalInai kadAci vedanA upanai paNi ima cItavai te kahai chi| gAthA- jai
upaje0 jau upajai duHkha kaSTa tau te kaSTa svabhAvika jANavU  /  paNi AtmA
thakI anerau koi karanhAro nathI AtmA ja ehano kartA ehavaM cIMtavai  /  ahIMi
navara zabda punazabdaniM arthaI jANavo e kisyuM duHkha stoka mAtra chai  /
AgaI maI saMsAranaI viSaiM bhamataI kisyuM kisyuM duHkha na pAmyuM ane te duHkha
akAma nijarAiM sahyA havaDA anaMtaguNa nirjarAlAbhanUM hetu chai  /  ehavU jANI
samyag pasaha iti gAthA  /  / 49 /  /  artha : jo mRtyakAle duHkha utpanna thAya
che to kSapake vicAravuM ke A duHkha to svabhAvathI ja Ave che. mArA sivAya
bIjuM koI A duHkhamAM kAraNa nathI. A saMsAramAM paribhramaNa karatA meM Aja
sudhImAM kayA duHkho prApta nathI karyA. (49). _ 2010_02

Page #354 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Appendix - 1 Child Understanding - Meaning and Translation**  **Verse 50** In
the cycle of the world, all beings are objects of my desire. I have consumed
them and experienced their consequences, yet I have not found satisfaction.
**Verse 51** Just as fire is not satisfied by grass and wood, and the salt sea
is not satisfied by thousands of rivers, so too, this living being cannot be
satisfied by desires and pleasures.   **Verse 52** Due to the desire for food,
fish fall into the seventh hell. Therefore, I do not even desire mental food,
even in my thoughts.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pariziSTam - 1 bAlavabodha - bhAvAnuvAdau saMsAracakkavAlammi savve vi ya
puggalA mae bahuso  /  AhAriyA ya pariNAmiyA ya nAhaM gao tattiM  /  /  50  /  /
bAlA0 valI kSapaka vairAgI bhAvai chai gAthA saMsAra ka0 bhava tehanAM cakravAla
kahatAM samohanai viSai bhamai maI samasta pudgala AhAryA AhArapaNai grahyA  /
pariNAmiyA tehanA rasa vedavai pariNAmyA tohai paNi teNaI huM tRpti na pAmyUM
iti gAthArthaH  /  /  50  /  /  - artha H Aja sudhI bhavacakramAM bhamatA evA
meM dareka pudgalone AhAra tarIke grahaNa karyA che, tene pariNamAvelA paNa che.
chatAM te pudgalothI tRptine pAmyo nathI. to have te AhArAdinI lAlasA zA kAmanI
? (50) taNa - kaTThehi va aggI lavaNajalo vA naIsahassehiM  /  na imo jIvo sakko
tippeuM kAma-1 - bhogehiM  /  /  51  /  /  bAlA0 keNai dRSTAntaI saMtoSa na
pAmyUM te kahai chai  /  gAthA taNaka0 tRNakASTaI yama agni atRpt| tathA yama
nadInaiM sahasraiM lavaNasamudra atRpta  /  ahIi sahasra zabda ghaNAno artha
bolai chai  /  paNi sahasrazabdaI dasasaI 1000 na jANavA  /  tima e jIva
kAmabhogaI tRpta karI na sakIi  /  kAmAH zabdarUpagaMdha  /  bhogA rasAsparzyAH
iti gAthArthaH  /   /  51  /  /  313 - artha : ghAsa ane lAkaDAothI jema agni,
hajAro nadIothI jema lavaNa samudra tema kAma ane bhogothI A jIva kyAreya tRpti
prApta karI zakato nathI. (51) AhAranimitteNaM macchA gacchaMti sattamaM
puDhaviM  /  saccitto AhAro na khamo maNasA vi pattheuM  /  /  52  /  /  2010_02
bAlA0 havai kSapaka AhAra gRddhanaI doSa cIMtavai chai  /  gAthA AhAra0 AhAranaI
nimittaiM macchA teMdula matsAdika mahAmatsyanAM mukhamAMhi paisatA nIkalatA
ghaNA matsya dekhInaI jANai jo huM ehavo zarIrI thAuM tau saghalAnaI khAuM paNi
nIkalavA na dauM  /  eha vaha raudra pariNAmahaM sAtamI pRthivyAI jaai| ahIi
adhikAra mATai zabda-rUpa-gaMdha-sparzanAM dRSTAnta mRgapataMgabhramarahastInA
jAvA  /  je mATai ehavo doSai chai  /  te mATai sacitta AhAra kSaNa mAtra
sAdhuna parthivA kSama yukta nahIM iti gAthA  /  /  52  /  /  - artha : eka
mAtra AhAranI lAlasAnA kAraNe matsyo sAtamI narakamAM jAya che. te kAraNathI
mAre to citta AhAra manathI paNa prArthanIya-IcchanIya nathI. (52)

Page #355 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  314 **Aaturpratyakhyanaprakirnakam**  **Verse 53:** The previous meritorious
deeds, devoid of non-violence, have been abandoned by me. Now, I embrace death,
equipped with the intellect and wisdom, having purified the passions.
**Explanation:** The term "previous meritorious deeds" refers to the three types
of austerities: the highest (lasting twelve years), the medium (lasting twelve
months), and the lowest (lasting twelve fortnights). The term "devoid of non-
violence" indicates that these austerities were not performed with the intention
of achieving non-violence. The term "purified the passions" refers to the
elimination of the passions through meditation and self-reflection. The term
"embrace death" refers to the practice of fasting unto death, which is a common
practice in Jainism.  **Verse 54:** Those who perform austerities without proper
preparation and engage in fasting without proper guidance, fall prey to the
consequences of their past actions.  **Explanation:** The term "austerities
without proper preparation" refers to the practice of austerities without proper
knowledge and understanding. The term "fasting without proper guidance" refers
to the practice of fasting without the guidance of a qualified teacher. The term
"consequences of their past actions" refers to the karmic consequences of their
past actions, which can lead to suffering in this life or in future lives.
**Verse 55:** Therefore, a wise person should engage in austerities with a clear
purpose, and should strive to cultivate the virtues of knowledge, vision, and
conduct, without abandoning the path of liberation.  **Explanation:** The term
"austerities with a clear purpose" refers to the practice of austerities with
the intention of achieving liberation. The term "cultivate the virtues of
knowledge, vision, and conduct" refers to the practice of developing the three
jewels of Jainism: right faith, right knowledge, and right conduct. The term
"without abandoning the path of liberation" refers to the practice of remaining
steadfast in one's commitment to liberation.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 314 AturapratyAkhyAnaprakIrNakama pubbiM kayaparikammo aniyANo IhiUNa mai-
buddhI  /  pacchA maliyakasAo sajjo maraNaM paDicchAmi  /  / 53 /  /  bAlA0
havai viSayavipAka jANato kSapaka cItavai chei  /  gAthA-pubbiM ka0 kaya
parikammo ka0 prathama anukamaI kIdhI chai parikarma bAra varasanI utkRSTa, bAra
mAsanI madhyama, bAra pakSanI jaghanya saMlekhanA jeNai tathA niyANA rahita
uhiUNa ka0 vicArInaI mati ka0 mati te tatkAlanI uupnii| buddhi sUkSmArtha
vicAraNA rUpa  /  pachai vicAryA pachai kaSAyaTAlInaI havaDA maraNa zabdaiM
anazana aMgIkAra karu chu  /  iti gAthA  /  / 53 /  /  arthaH pUrvamAM karyo che
kaSTa sahana karavArUpa parikarma jeNe, anidAna evo, pAchaLathI nAza karyA che
kaSAyo jeNe evo huM buddhi-matinA sahAre sajja thaIne maraNane svIkAruM chuM.
(3) akkaMDe'cirabhAviya te purisA maraNedasakAlammi  /
puvakayakammaparibhAvaNAe pacchA parivaDaMti  /  / 54 /  /  bAlA0 havai
aprastAvaiM je saMlekhaNA karai, tathA anazana paDivajai tehanai apAya kahai
chai  /  gAthA0 akkaMDa ka0 aNaprastAve je ArAdhanA kahitA anazana karai  /
etale zabda ahIiM athako khiii| tathA cira ghaNA kAla lagai bhAvita saMlekhanAI
karI AtmA bhAvyo chai  /  te paNi aprastAvaI  /  havai ehavA je puruSa te maraNa
deza kAlaMmi ka0 maraNanAM samayanaiM viSaiM puvvaka0 pUrvai kIdhA je karma
tehanAM parisamaMtAt  /  bhAvanA ka0 vipAkodaya thakI pUrvakRta karmanAM udaya
thakI ityarthaH  /  pachai parivaDaMti ka0 nidAnAdika karavai paDai saMyama
thakI bhraSTa thAi iti gAthArthaH  /  / 54 /  /  artha AtmAne lAMbo samaya
bhAvita karyA vagara je AtmAo ayogya samaye aNasaNanI ArAdhanA kare che te
pAchaLathI pUrvakRta karmanA udayathI patanane pAme che. nidAna Adi karavAthI
gatimAM ya che. (54) tamhA caMdagavijjhaM sakAraNaM ujjueNa puriseNaM  /  jIvo
avirahiyaguNo kAyavvo mukkhamaggammi  /  / 55 /  /  bAlA0 je mATai ehavauM to
havai kisyuM karavU te gurupadeza kahi chai gAthA-tamhA ca0 teNai kAraNai
caMdagavajhaM rAdhAvedha te sAvadha na puruSai syAnai arthaI sakAraNaM ka0
svargamokSAdi sukhanaiM hetaiM yama rAdhAvedha sakAraNa rAjyAdi lAbhanai kAjai
sAvadhAna paNaiM sAdhIi tima anazanarUpIuM rAdhAvedha sakAraNa mokSAdi lAbhanaiM
hetaiM sAvadhAnapaNai sAdhavo iti bhAvArthaH  /  te sAdhavAno upAya kahIi chai
/  jIva avirAdhita guNaka0 jJAnadarzana cAritra guNai karI amukta sahita karavo
/  2010_02

Page #356 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Appendix-1 Child Understanding-Meaning Translation 315 Mokshamarg Nivishaee
Gyaan Darshan Charitra Ta Paroop Te Mokshamarg Kahai Ehvo Gunavant Hui To
Anashan Roop Radhavaedh Sadhai Iti Gaatharthah. ||55|| Meaning: The soul who
worships Anashan (fasting) with the aim of Moksha should make his soul virtuous
in the path of Moksha. (55) Bahirajog Virhiyo Abhitara Jhanajog Malliono. Jah
Tammi Desakale Amudhasanno Chayi Deham. ||56|| Balao. Kenai Prakarai Te
Mokshamargnai Vishai Ehvo Jiv Thaai Te Kahai Chhai. Gaatha - Bahir. Bahiyogya K.
Uparanaadik Tenai Kari Rahit Mamattvano Ankarta Tatha Abhyantar Dhyan Yogya
Tirthankar Sadhuna Gunakirtana Roop Tehanai Alliono K. Ashrao Hoi Tim Karavo.
Yam Te Desh Kalnai Vishai Maranavsar Nivishaee Amudhasanno K. Savadhan Chhatau
Deh Sharirai Nai Chhandi Iti Gaatha. ||56|| Meaning: In this way, at the time of
death, the devotee who is free from external yoga and absorbed in internal yoga,
with a careful mind, abandons the body with complete concentration. (56) Hantuon
Raag-Dosam Bhittoon Ya Atthakarm Sanghayam. Jamman-Maran Arahattam Chhetoon
Bhava Vimuchchisi. ||57|| Balao. Have Jenai Prakarai Deh Chhandi Tehanai Kisyaun
Hoi Te Guru Kshapaknai Kahai Chhai. Gaatha - Hantuon. He Vats! Toon Raag
Dveshanai Haninaai Tatha Ashtakarmno Sanghat Samuh Bhedinaai Tatha
Janmajaramarana Rupi Ya Arahattanai Chhedinaai. Bhava Sansar Thaki Mukaiis. Ai
Bhaav Janmamarana Rupiyaa Arahattanai Vishai Sansari Jiv Karm Roopni Rashai
Bandhya Baliwardani Parai Bhamai Chhai Tihan Pani Je Pramadi Chhatha Bhamai Te
Gunaroop Mala Bhanjinaai Narakkupmaanhi Padai. Teevra Duhkha Sahai Anai Je
Aparamatpanai Bhamai Te Guru Deshanai Kari Vrishti Thaki Mukanna Bandh Rahi
Huntha Sugati Paam. Eni Parai Toonh Pani Mukaiis Iti Bhavarthah. Iti
Gaatharthah. ||57|| Meaning: After describing Anashan, the Guru shows the fruit
of liberation in the afterlife, saying, "O Vats! In this way, you who are
destined for death, by destroying attachment and aversion, by breaking the group
of eight karmas, and by severing the chain of birth, death, and old age, will be
liberated from the world." (57) Eyam Savvuvaesam Jinaditu Sadhaami Trivihenam.
Tas-Thavarakhemkaram Param Nibvanam Aggass. ||58|| Balao. Ehvam Guruai Kahya
Poonthai Te Anashan Karta Kahai Chhai. Gaatha - Evam Savvuvaeo. E Sagalo
2010_02

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pariziSTam-1 bAlavabodha-bhAvAnuvAdau 315 mokSamArga niviSaI
jJAnadarzanacAritrataparUpa te mokSamArga kahai ehavo guNavaMta hui to
anazanarUpa rAdhAvedha sAdhai iti gAthArthaH  /  / 55 /  /  artha : rAdhAvedha
tulya aNasaNane mokSanA lakSathI ArAdhanAra AtmAe potAnA AtmAne mokSamArgamAM
guNayukta banAvavo joIe. (55) bAhirajogavirahio abhitarajhANajogamallINo  /
jaha tammi desakAle amUDhasanno cayai dehaM  /  / 56 /  /  bAlA0 keNai prakAraiM
te mokSamArganai viSai ehavo jIva thAi te kahai chai  /  gAthA - bAhira0
bAhyayogya ka0 upagaraNAdika teNaI karI rahita mamattvano aNakartA tathA
abhyaMtara dhyAna yogya tIrthaMkara sAdhunA guNakIrtanarUpa tehanai allINo ka0
Azrao hoi tima karavo  /  yama te deza kAlanaiM viSai maraNAvasara niviSaI
amUDhasanno ka0 sAvadhAna chatau deha zarIranaiM chAMDIi iti gAthA  /  / 56 /  /
artha : A pramANe maraNanA avasare bAhyayogathI rahita ane atyaMtara yogamAM
lIna banelo te sAvadhAna manavALo sAdhaka dehano samAdhipUrvaka tyAga kare che.
(paka) haMtUNa rAga-dosaM bhittUNa ya aTThakammasaMghAyaM  /  jammaNa-
maraNa'rahaTTaM chettUNa bhavA vimuccihisi  /  / 57 /  /  bAlA0 have jeNai
prakArai deha chAMDai tehanaiM kisyuM hoi te guru kSapakanai kahai chai  /
gAthA - haMtUNa0 he vatsa ! tUM rAgadveSa haNInaiM tathA aSTakarmano saMghAta
samUha bhedInaiM tathA janmajarAmaraNarUpI yA arahaTTanai chedInai  /  bhava
saMsAra thakI mUkAIsa  /  aI bhAva janmamaraNarUpIyA arahaTTanaiM viSai saMsArI
jIva karma rUpaNI rAzi baMdhyA balIvardanI paraiM bhamai chai tihAM paNi je
pramAdI chatA bhamai te guNarUpa mAlA bhAMjInaiM narakakupamAMhi paDai  /  tIvra
duHkha sahai anai je apramattapaNaiM bhamai te guru dezanAi karI vRSTi thakI
mUMkaNA baMdha rahi huMtA sugati pAma  /  eNI parai tUMha paNi mUkAyIsa iti
bhAvArthaH  /  iti gAthArthaH  /  / 57 /  /  arthaH aNasaNanuM varNana karyA
pachI guru paralokamAM mukitanA phaLane batAvatA kahe che ke, he vatsa ! A rIte
mRtyune varelo tuM rAga-dveSane haNIne, ATha karmanA samUhane bhedIne ane
janmamaraNanI paraMparAne chedIne saMsArathI mukta banIza. (57) eyaM savvuvaesaM
jiNadiTuM saddahAmi tiviheNaM  /  tasa-thAvarakhemakaraM pAraM nibvANamaggassa
/  / 58 /  /  bAlA0 ehavaM gurui kahyA pUMThai te anazana karttA kahai chei  /
gAthA - evaM savvuvae0 e saghalo 2010_02

Page #357 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Aaturpratyakhyanaprakirnakam  Your teachings are worthy of acceptance in
thought, word, and deed. The teachings are those of the Jina, the Kevali. The
teachings are those of the valiant, the protector of the stationary and mobile
beings. The teachings are those of the benevolent, the guide to the path of
liberation, the path of liberation. The teachings are those of the liberator.
||58||  ## 316  **Meaning:** Hearing the teachings of the Guru, the Shraman
(ascetic) says, "I have faith in all the teachings that the Jineshwar Bhagwan
has taught. I accept them with my mind, speech, and body. Because these
teachings are for the welfare of the stationary and mobile beings and lead to
the path of liberation." (58)  ## 59  **Meaning:** Even a person with a strong
mind, at the time of death, when the body is about to be abandoned, is not able
to contemplate, remember, and repeat all the twelve categories of scriptures.
(59)  ## 60  **Meaning:** The person who progresses on the path of non-
attachment through the contemplation and reflection of a single verse of
scripture, attains detachment and fervor. That person, while contemplating and
reflecting on that verse, meets death. (60)  ## 61  **Meaning:** Even a single
verse, when contemplated at the time of death, makes the person a seeker of
liberation. (61)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 AturapratyAkhyAnaprakIrNakam tumhAro kahyo upadeza trividhai manovacanakAyAI
karI saddahuM chauM  /  upadeza kehavo chai jiNadiTTha kevalIdRSTa  /  valI
kehavo chai - trasa sthAvara prANInaiM kSemano karanhAro  /  kalyANakArI valI
kehavo chai- nivvANamArga mokSamArgano pAra tIra chai  /  mokSadAtAra gAthArtha:
/  / 58  /  /  316 artha : gurunA hitopadezane sAMbhaLI kSapaka (zramaNa) kahe
che ke, "jinezvara bhagavaMte upadezelA A sarva hitopadezanI huM zraddhA karuM
chuM. mana-vacana-kAyAthI huM teno svIkAra karuM chuM. kAraNa ke, A hitopadeza
trasa ane sthAvara jIvonuM kalyANa karanAro che ane mokSamArgano pAra pamADanAra
che. (58) na hu tammi desakAle sakko bArasaviho suyakkhaMdho  /  savvo
aNuciMteuM dhaNiyaM pi samatthacitteNaM  /  /  59  /  /  bAlA0 pUrvai je jIva
guNa sahita karavoe ehavauM kahayauM  /  te tau zrutaciMtana thakI ja hui  /
anai te zruta ketalU eka cIMtavivauM te zruta ciMtananA kahai chei  /  gAthA na
huM taMmi de0 emivi0 yugma te chehalai kAlai saMdhi baMdhana zrathala thItai
jIhavA bala khalAzai huMtai, bAravidha zrutaskaMdha dvAdazAMgarUpa saghalau
cIMtavI na sakIiM  /  ghaNiyaM ka0 atihiM samartha citta hui gADhau zaktivaMta
hui tohi paNi iti gAthArthaH  /   /  59  /  /  artha : aNasaNano svIkAra karyA
pachI maraNa upasthita thAya te samaye samartha cittavALo paNa sAdhaka saMpUrNa
dvAdazAMgInuM ciMtana-smaraNa-punarAvartana karavA mATe samartha banI zakato
nathI. (59) gammi vi jammi pae saMvegaM vIyarAyamaggammi  /  gacchai naro
abhikkhaM taM maraNaM teNa mariyavvaM  /   /  60  /  /  bAlA0 te bhaNI te
avasaranaI viSai jeNai ekaI padaI bhaNyaI huMtaI jIva vItarAgamArganaI viSai
saMvega vairAgya abhIkSNa niraMtara pAmai  /  te maraNa vairAgya saMyukta
teNaka0 ka0 te pada aNavIsAratai maravuM iti gAthA  /  /  60  /  /  artha :
zAstranA eka mAtra je padanA abhyAsa-ciMtana-parAvartanathI AtmA vItarAga
mArgamAM AgaLa vadhIne saMvegane prApta kare te pada te gAthAnA ciMtana-
parAvartana karatA karatA mRtyune svIrapuM bheje. (50) - - tA egaM pi silogaM jo
puriso maraNadesakAlam  /  ArAhaNovautto ciMtato''rAhago hoi  /   /  61  /  /
bAlA te bhI kisyuM karavuM  /  gAthA - tA egaMpi0 te mATai eka paNi zloka
paMcaparameSThi 2010_02

Page #358 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Appendix-1 Child Understanding-Meaning Translation 317 The man who remembers and
contemplates the man who performs worship with fasting in the matter of death-
time-place, [....] is a worshiper, thus the meaning of the verse. ||61||
Meaning: Therefore, the worshiper who attains death while being absorbed in the
remembrance of a single verse in the form of salutation to the five supreme
beings becomes a worshiper. (91) The one who performs worship with fasting,
being careful and virtuous, does not make time, being virtuous and pure,
performs excellent worship, attains three existences from the worshipable, and
then attains nirvana, liberation. This is the meaning of the verse. ||2||
Meaning: The devotee who is virtuous and devoted to worship, attains liberation
by dying in a proper way, being excellent. (72) I am a monk first, second, I am
restrained in all respects. I renounce everything, this is said briefly. ||3||
Meaning: Thus, the worshiper who knows the fruit of worship, contemplates and
renounces everything, saying, "I am a monk first, a follower of the great vows.
Second, I am restrained. I am secret, therefore I renounce all desires for food
and possessions, this is the nature of the contemplation of the one who accepts
fasting, said briefly. ||3|| Meaning: Thus, the worshiper who knows the fruit of
worship, contemplates and renounces everything, saying, "I am a monk first, a
follower of the great vows. Second, I am restrained. I am secret, therefore I
renounce all desires for food and possessions, this is the nature of the
contemplation of the one who accepts fasting, said briefly. (13) 2010_02

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pariziSTam-1 bAlavabodha-bhAvAnuvAdau 317 namaskArAdikarUpa je puruSa maraNa-
dezakAlanaiM viSai ArAdhanAiM anazana sahita hu~tau cItavai smarai te puruSaI
[....] ArAdhaka hui iti gAthArthaH  /  / 61 /  /  artha tethI paMcaparameSThIne
namaskArarUpa eka zlokanA smaraNamAM lIna banIne je ArAdhaka mRtyune prApta kare
che te ArAdhaka bane che. (91) ArAhaNovautto kAlaM kAUNa suvihio sammaM  /
ukkosaM tini bhave gaMtUNaM lahai nivvANaM  /  / 2 /  /  bAlA0 havai te
ArAdhakanai kisyuM phala hui te kahe chai - gAthA - ArAhaNA0 ArAdhanAI anazanaiM
karI upayukta sAvadhAna je hui te kAla karInaI suvihiu ka0 susAdhu  /  sammaM
ka0 zuddha bhAvai karI susAdhu utkRSTa ArAdhanA ArAdhyA thakI triNi bhava
pAmInaI pacha nirvANa mokSa pAmaMi  /  e gAthAno ehavo bhAva je jo parama
samAdhiI kAla karai tau anuttarai jai bhavi sIjai iti bhAvaH  /  ahIi guru
prataiM ziSya bolyo - je graMtha teraha [?] utkRSTa thakI niraMtara aSTa bhavanI
ArAdhanAI mokSa jAi ehavaM kartuM chai anaiM ahIiM triNiM bhava kahyAM te kasyA
mATai ? guru bolyA - je eka bhava kahyo te vrajaRSabhanArAcasaMhanana Azri
jANavo anai ahIiM triNi bhava kahyAM te sevArta saMhanana AzrI jANavA je bhaNI
sevArtta saMhanano ghaNI utkRSTa ArAdhai te triNi bhavai sIjai  /  te mATai
ahIiM utkRSTa zabda ArAdhanAnaiM valagADIi, paNi bhavanai valagADIi nahI, bhava
AzrI to sevAta saMhananI paNi ATha bhava karai iti gAthArthaH  /  / 2 /  /
artha: suvihita ane ArAdhanAmAM upayukta cittavALo te sAdhaka samyagu prakAre
mRtyu pAmIne utkRSTathI trAmamA ni bhokSane prApta 42 cha. (72) samaNo tti ahaM
paDhama, bIyaM savvattha saMjao mi tti  /  savvaM ca vosirAmi, eyaM bhaNiyaM
samAseNaM  /  / 3 /  /  bAlA0 havai te kSapaka ArAdhanAnUM phala jANI kisyuM
cItavatA sarva chAMDai te kahai chai  /  gAthA-samaNu0 hu prathama zramaNa chu,
mahAvratano aMgIkAra kartA  /  tA bIjUM saMyata chu  /  samiti gupti yukta, te
mATai mAharai pratibaMdhaI tathA AhArAbhilASaI kisyUM kAma hue sarva vosirAyU~
chu e saMkSepai kSapakanI bhAvanAnUM svarUpa kAuM iti gAthA  /  / 3 /  /  artha
: A pramANe ArAdhanAnA phaLane jANanAra ArAdhaka potAne uddezI vicAre che ke,
"huM sau prathama zramaNa chuM, bIjA naMbare huM saMmata chuM. to have huM sarva
padArtho ane tenA pratyenA mamatvane vosirAvuM chuM. A pramANe aNasaNano svIkAra
karanAranuM svarUpa TUMkamAM kahevAyuM. (13) 2010_02

Page #359 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Aaturpratyakhyanaprakirnakam**  Having obtained the auspicious, immortal, and
previously unattained Jina-vayaṇa, I have embraced the path of liberation.
Therefore, I do not fear death. (64)  **Dhirena vi mariyavvam, kauriseṇa vi
avassa mariyavvam.**  The courageous must die, and the cowardly must die. Both
must die, but it is better to die with courage. (65)  **Sīlena vi mariyavvam,
nisīlena vi avassa mariyavvam.**  The virtuous must die, and the wicked must
die. Both must die, but it is better to die with virtue. (66)  **Nāṇassa
dassanassa ya sammattassa ya carittajuttassa.**  Whoever has attained knowledge,
vision, right conduct, and character, will be liberated from the cycle of birth
and death. (67)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 AturapratyAkhyAnaprakIrNakama laddhaM aladdhapuvvaM jiNavayaNaM subhAsiyaM
amayabhUyaM  /  gahio suggaimaggo nAhaM maraNassa bIhemi  /  / 64  /  /  bAlA0
valI yama kSapaka bhAvanA bhAvaI te kahIi chei  /  gAthA-laddhaM0 mai
saMsAramAMhi bhavatai e ArAdhanA vastu kahIi nathI pAmI te havaDA mai pAmI paNi
te kehavI chai jinavacana - siddhAMtanaI viSai bhalI parI kahI chai valI kehavI
chai amRtabhUta amRta sarIkhA chai janma-jarAdi dAha jvara uhalavai te mATai
jeha bhaNI ehavI vastu mai pAmI te mATai sugati mArga mai grAu  /  e kAraNa
huMtI maraNa thakI nathI bIhatau iti gAthA  /  / 64 /  /  artha Aja sudhI nahi
prApta thayeluM, amRta tulya zrI jinavacana rUpa subhASita meM meLavyuM che.
tenA prabhAve sadgatino mArga meM grahaNa karyo che. tethI have huM maraNathI
Darato nathI. (14) dhIreNa vi mariyavvaM, kAuriseNa vi avassa mariyavvaM  /
duNhaM pi hu mariyavvaM, varaM khu dhIrattaNe mariuM  /  / 65 /  /  bAlA0 tathA
valI bhAvanA ja kahai chai  /  gAthA - dhIre0 dhIra paNai subhaTapaNai paNi
maravU, anai kAyarapaNai paNi avazya maravU  /  behu prakArai huM zabdaI pragaTa
maravU to havai dhIrapaNai maravU bhaluM  /  khu zabdai nizcayai iti gAthA  /  /
65  /  /  artha : dhIra puruSone paNa maravAnuM che. kAyara puruSone paNa
maravAnuM che. baMnene nizcayathI maravAnuM che to dhIrapaNA vaDe maravuM
zreSTha che. (65) sIleNa vi mariyavvaM, nissIleNa vi avassa mariyavvaM  /
doNhaM pi hu mariyavvaM varaM khu sIlattaNe mariuM  /  / 66 /  /  bAlA0 sIle0
zIla ka0 sadAcArapaNai paNi maravU anai duzIla bhraSTAcAra paNai paNi maravU
behu iM prakAraiM maravU to havai zIlapaNaiM jinAjJA pAlavai karI maravU yukta
iti gAthArtha  /  / 66 /  /  artha zIlavAna puruSone paNa maravAnuM che. zIla
rahita puruSoe paNa maravAnuM che. baMnee nizcayathI karavAnuM che. to
zIlavAnapaNA vaDe maravuM zreSTha che. (13) nANassa daMsaNassa ya sammattassa ya
carittajuttassa  /  jo kAhI uvaogaM saMsArA so vimuccihisi  /  / 67 /  /  bAlA0
havai kSapaka sthira thayi hutai guruupadeza cihuM gAthAI karI kahai chai  /
nANa0 cira0 2010_02

Page #360 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Appendix - 1 Child Understanding - Meaning and Translation 319 Nikko.  And so,
the first verse meaning - knowledge with special use is called 'jnana', and
knowledge with general use is called 'darshan'.  Similarly, there are eight
types of 'samyaktvam' like 'nishankita' etc.  Similarly, 'charitra' is also
divided into eight types by the 'paniti' and 'guptinayi'.  The meaning of this
division is that the 'sadhu' who uses 'sadhu' practices with caution, is freed
from the cycle of birth and death.  || 67 || Meaning: The 'sadhu' who is
equipped with 'jnana', 'darshan' and 'charitra' becomes free from the cycle of
birth and death. (67) 'Chira usiya bhambhayari papphodeun sesayam kammam.'
'Eggars visuddha gachchai siddhim dhuy kileso.' || 68 || Bala.  The second verse
meaning - it takes a long time, it is said that the 'brahmacharaka' who
practices 'sadachara' for a long time, destroys the 'karma' and removes the
remaining 'karma' by destroying the 'karma' and removing the remaining 'karma'
by destroying the 'karma' and removing the remaining 'karma' by destroying the
'karma' and removing the remaining 'karma' by destroying the 'karma' and
removing the remaining 'karma' by destroying the 'karma' and removing the
remaining 'karma' by destroying the 'karma' and removing the remaining 'karma'
by destroying the 'karma' and removing the remaining 'karma' by destroying the
'karma' and removing the remaining 'karma' by destroying the 'karma' and
removing the remaining 'karma' by destroying the 'karma' and removing the
remaining 'karma' by destroying the 'karma' and removing the remaining 'karma'
by destroying the 'karma' and removing the remaining 'karma' by destroying the
'karma' and removing the remaining 'karma' by destroying the 'karma' and
removing the remaining 'karma' by destroying the 'karma' and removing the
remaining 'karma' by destroying the 'karma' and removing the remaining 'karma'
by destroying the 'karma' and removing the remaining 'karma' by destroying the
'karma' and removing the remaining 'karma' by destroying the 'karma' and
removing the remaining 'karma' by destroying the 'karma' and removing the
remaining 'karma' by destroying the 'karma' and removing the remaining 'karma'
by destroying the 'karma' and removing the remaining 'karma' by destroying the
'karma' and removing the remaining 'karma' by destroying the 'karma' and
removing the remaining 'karma' by destroying the 'karma' and removing the
remaining 'karma' by destroying the 'karma' and removing the remaining 'karma'
by destroying the 'karma' and removing the remaining 'karma' by destroying the
'karma' and removing the remaining 'karma' by destroying the 'karma' and
removing the remaining 'karma' by destroying the 'karma' and removing the
remaining 'karma' by destroying the 'karma' and removing the remaining 'karma'
by destroying the 'karma' and removing the remaining 'karma' by destroying the
'karma' and removing the remaining 'karma' by destroying the 'karma' and
removing the remaining 'karma' by destroying the 'karma' and removing the
remaining 'karma' by destroying the 'karma' and removing the remaining 'karma'
by destroying the 'karma' and removing the remaining 'karma' by destroying the
'karma' and removing the remaining 'karma' by destroying the 'karma' and
removing the remaining 'karma' by destroying the 'karma' and removing the
remaining 'karma' by destroying the 'karma' and removing the remaining 'karma'
by

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pariziSTam - 1 bAlavabodha - bhAvAnuvAdau 319 nikka0 evaM * tatra prathama
gAthArthaH - vizeSopayoga lakSaNa te jJAna kahIi anai sAmAnya upayoga te darzana
kahI  /  tathA samyaktva niHzaMkitAdi aSTa prakAra  /  tathA cAritra paNi samiti
guptinaI bhedai karI aSTaprakAre  /  eTalA bhedanai viSai je sAdhu upayoga
sAvadhAna paNauM karasyai te sAdhu - saMsAra thakI mUkAsyai chUTasya iti
gAthArthaH  /  /  67  /  /  artha : jJAnamAM, darzanamAM ane cAritrathI yukta
samyaktvamAM je sAdhaka upayogazIla bane che te saMsArathI mukta bane che. (67)
cira usiya baMbhayArI papphoDeUNa sesayaM kammaM  /  eggars visuddha gacchai
siddhiM dhuyakileso  /  /  68  /  /  bAlA0 dvitIya gAthArthaH cira ghaNA kAla
lagai, uSita kahatA sevyau chai brahmacAraka0 sadAcAra jeNai ehavo je sAdhu hoi
te paphoDiUNa ka0 TAlInai sesayaM kammaM pUvaI kSepavatAM je zeSa rahuM karma te
karmanaI TAlInaiM anapUrvaI anukramaI pradhAna pradhAnatara guNasthAnaka
paDivajaha karI vizuddha nirmala thatau siddhi mokSanaI viSaI jAi  /  kehavo
chai te sAdhu ? dhuya kileso0 kleza sAta bhaya jeNai TAlyA chai ehavo iti gAthA
/  /  68  /  /  artha : A pramANe ci2kALa sudhI AtmaramaNatA karanAro, karma
kalezano nAza karanAro ane zeSa karmane toDIne krame karIne vizuddha banelo te
sAdhaka siddhigatine pAme che. (98) nikkasAyarasa daMtassa sUrassa vavasAiNo  /
saMsAraparibhIyassa paccakkhANaM suhaM bhave  /  / 69 /  /  bAlA0 atha tRtIya
gAthArthaH kaSAyarahita tathA iMdriya noindriyanA damanhAranaI, tathA moharUpIu
malla jIpavAnai zUra subhaTa chai je tehanaiM  /  tathA vavasAiNo ka0 dharmarUpa
vyavasAya karavA udymvNtni| tathA saMsAra thakI bIhatAnaI je pratyAkhyAna bhAjai
tehanaI bahula saMsAra thAi  /  eNai prakArai bIhatAnaiM je paccakkhANa
anazanarUpa te zubhakArIu zubhaphalakarttA hui iti gAthA  /  /  69  /  /  artha
: niSkaSAya avasthAne pAmelo, dAnta, zUravIra, mokSamArgamAM udyamazIla ane
saMsAranA bhayane pAmelA sAdhakanuM paccakkhANa zubhaphaLane ApanAruM thAya che.
(69) eyaM paccakkhANaM jo kAhI maraNadesakAlammi  /  dhIro amUDhasanno so
gacchai uttamaM ThANaM  /  /  70  /  /  bAlA0 atha caturtha gAthArthaH e pUvokta
pratyAkhyAna yako karasyai maraNanA avasAnanai viSai te 2010_02

Page #361 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 320 **Aaturpratyakhyanprakirnakam**  **Dheer buddhivant.**  Amoodhasanno ko,
jehanain sanjna jnana moodh bhrama sahita nathi. Sampurnnajnani ityarthah. Eh
avo te sadhu shashvat sthan nischalasthanak pamesye iti gathaarthah. ||70||
**Meaning:** Such a sadhak who performs this pacchakkhan at the time of death is
a dheer and a sampurnnajnani, and he attains the highest place - moksha. (70)
**Dhiro jaramarnavio viro vinnan-nan sampanno.**   **Logassujjoyagaro disau
khayam savvadukkhanam.** ||71||  **Balavo** havi adhyayan pant ai shastrakar
tirthankar nai aashirvad vachan kahi chhai - gatha dhiroo... ghi kahata buddhi
tenai kari shobhai te dheer kahi ai tirthankar ityarthah. Te tirthankar kehava
chhai - jara tatha maranana kshay karavana upayana jani vali kehava chhai - ghi
buddhi samasat bhavyanai apai te mat ai dheer kahi ai. Vali kehava chhai?
Vishesh jnana kevaljnana tatha samany panai jani ai te mat ai bija nan shabdano
arth kevaldarshan janavo. Tenai kevaljnana kevaldarshanai kari sahita. Vali
kehava chhai - lokmahi janmaadi kalyanai kari dravyudyot kevaljnanaai kari
bhavudyotana karanhar ehva tirthankar sarv dukhno kshay disau kahatan karau.
Havi e gathanoo bijo path kinha ek viro jaramarnavio ehvau chhai - tihan vir
shabdai charam tirthankar janavaan anai e shastra na karta nu naam pani gupti
janavu. Etla bhani je e granthno karta virbhadra sadhu chhai. Te bhani te namno
deshmatra vir shabd janavo iti gathaarthah. ||71||  **Meaning:** The victorious
soul, adorned with his impermanent nature, knowing birth and death, endowed with
special kevaljnana, and illuminating the fourteen rajlokas, shows the
destruction of all suffering. (71)  **|| Iti Aaturpratyakhyan Balavabodh
Sampurnna. ||**  **|| Mavanuvai Samapt ||**  * Bhavanuvai bhoogatha bhu45
svatantra ch. 240 mu45 428 nathi. - Sampa.  2010_02

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 320 AturapratyAkhyAnaprakIrNakam dhIra buddhivaMta  /  amUDhasanno ka0 jehanaiM
saMjJA jJAna mUDha bhrama sahita nathI  /  saMpUrNajJAnI ityarthaH  /  ehavo te
sAdhu zAzvata sthAna nizcalasthAnaka pAmasye iti gAthArthaH  /  / 70 /  /
artha: AvA aNasaNanA paccakakhANane je sAdhaka maraNa samaye kare che te dhIra
ane saMpUrNa zAnavANo sA5 uttama sthAna-mokSane 5 cha. (70) dhIro jaramaraNaviU
vIro vinnANa-nANasaMpanno  /  logassujjoyagaro disau khayaM savvadukkhANaM  /  /
71 /  /  bAlA0 havai adhyayana pAMtai zAstrakAra tIrthaMkara nai AzIrvAda vacana
kahai chai - gAthA dhIro0 ghI kahatA buddhi teNai karI zobhai te dhIra kahIi
tIrthaMkara ityarthaH  /  te tIrthakara kehavA chai - jarA tathA maraNanA kSaya
karavAnA upAyanA jANa valI kehavA chai - ghI buddhi samasta bhavyanaiM Apai te
mATai dhIra kahIi  /  valI kehavA chai ? vizeSa jJAna kevalajJAna tathA sAmAnya
paNai jANIi te mATai bIjA nANa zabdano artha kevaladarzana jANavo  /  teNai
kevalajJAna kevaladarzanai karI shit| valI kehavA chai - lokamAhi janmAdi
kalyANaiM karI dravyaudyota kevalajJAnaI karI bhAvaudyotanA karanhAra ehavA
tIrthaMkara sarva duHkhano kSaya disau kahatAM karau  /  havai e gAthAno bIjo
pATha kiMhA eka vIro jaramaraNaviu ehavau chai - tihAM vIra zabdaI carama
tIrthaMkara jANavAM anai e zAstranA karttAnUM nAma paNi gupti jANavU  /  eTalA
bhaNI je e graMthano kartA vIrabhadrasAdhu chai  /  te bhaNI te nAmano dezamAtra
vIra zabda jANavo iti gAthArthaH  /  / 71 /  /  artha : potAnA kSAyikabhAvathI
zobhanArA, janma-maraNane jANanArA, viziSTa kevalajJAnathI yukta ane cauda
rAjalokarUpa lokano udyota karanArA vIra paramAtmA sarvaduHkhonA kSayane 42naa2|
thAmao. (71)  /  /  iti AturapratyAkhyAna bAlAvabodha saMpUrNa  /  /   //
mAvAnuvAi smaapt|| * bhAvAnuvAi bhUgAthA bhu45 svataMtra cha. 240 mu45 428
nathI. - saMpA. 2010_02

Page #362 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Appendix - 2: The Sixty-Two Evils Included in the Upadesha Prasada  The sixty-
two evils are born from the suffering and anger of the world. I write their
nature, from the second chapter of the Prakirna Sutra. || 1 ||  Clarification:
The text of the Aupacchandhika Sutra is to be understood as "Annaanjanhe" and so
on. Thus:  Ignorance-Meditation: Ignorance itself is the best, as there is no
effort in explaining, teaching, etc. Thus, contemplation in the mind, like that
of Vasudevacharya as mentioned in the fifth example, is not to be meditated
upon. || 1 ||  Immoral Conduct: Evil conduct, meditation on it, like that of
Vallara, who desires the arrival of his disciples, like that of Ashadha Suri,
who desires to renounce the world due to the non-arrival of his disciples. || 2
||  Wrong Vision: Like that of the Buddhists, etc., meditation on it is like
that of the Surastra Shraddha. || 3 ||  Anger-Meditation: Like that of
Kulavalaka, Goshalaka, Palaka, Namuchi, Shiva Bhuti, etc. || 4 ||  Pride-
Meditation: Like that of Bahubali, Subhumi, Parashurama, etc., who are attached
to their strength, land, and weapons. || 5 ||  Maya: Deception in the form of
deceiving others, meditation on it is Maya-Meditation, like that of Ashadha
Bhuti. || 6 ||  Greed-Meditation: Like that of Singha Kesari. || 7 ||
Attachment: It is merely attachment, and it is of three types: Kama Raga, Sneha
Raga, and Drishti Raga. Kama Raga is like that of Vishnu Shri, Vikrama, and Yaso
Raja. Sneha Raga is like that of Damannaka, the horse-owner, and the best of the
merchants, who, upon hearing of the death of his son, had his heart burst.
Drishti Raga is like that of Kapila, who, having come from the Brahma Loka, was
attached to his own vision and said to his disciple, "You are delighted in the
Asuras," etc. Meditation on it is not to be done. || 8 ||  Hatred: It is merely
dislike, or the determination to harm others. Meditation on it is like that of
Madhupinga, Pippalada, etc., or like that of Virakadeva in the Harivamsa. || 9
||  Delusion: Delusion, meditation on it is like that of Balabhadra, who carries
the body of Vishnu. || 10 ||  Desire: Excessive desire for the object of a
desired benefit, meditation on it is Desire-Meditation, like that of Kapila,
who, even after gaining a crore of gold, was still greedy for two beans. || 11
||  Falsehood: Having a distorted vision, meditation on it is Falsehood-
Meditation, like that of Jamali, Govinda, etc. || 12 ||  Fainting: Excessive
attachment to a previously acquired kingdom, etc., like that of Kanakadhvaja,
who killed his own children as soon as they were born. || 13 ||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pariziSTam - 2 zrIupadezaprAsAdAntargatatriSaSTidurthyAnam
triSaSTirthyAnasthAnAni, utpannAnyArttaraudrataH  /  tatsvarUpaM likhAmi,
dvitIyaprakIrNasUtrataH  //  1 //  spaSTaH  /
AurapaccakhANapayannAsUtrapAThastu 'annANaMjhANe' ityAdijJeyaH  /  tathAhi
ajJAnadhyAnam-ajJAnameva zreyo vyAkhyAnakaraNAdyAyAsAbhAvAt evaM manasi
cintanaM, paJcamIdRSTAntoktavasudevAcAryasyeveti na dhyeyam  /  / 1 /  /
anAcAro duSTAcAraH taddhyAnaM vallaradAvaM dhyAyataH kauMkaNasAdhoriva
ziSyadevAnAmanAgamanAdutpravrajitukAmasyASADhasUreriva vA  /  / 2 /  /
kudarzanaM bauddhAdirUpaM tasya dhyAnaM surASTrazrAddhasyeva  //  3  //
krodhadhyAnaM kUlavAlakagozAlakapAlakanamucizivabhUtiprabhRtInAmiva  /  / 4 /  /
mAnadhyAnaM bAhubalisubhUmaparazurAmAbhinivezAgatasaGgamAdInAmiva  /  / 5 /  /
paravipratAraNarUpA mAyA tasyA dhyAnaM mAyAdhyAnam ASADhabhUtisAdhoriva ||6||
lobhadhyAnaM siMhakesarisAdhoriva  /  / 7 /  /  rAgo'bhiSvaGgamAtraM sa ca
kAmarAgasneharAgadRSTirAgabhedAttridhA, tatra kAmarAgo viSNuzriyAM
vikramayazorAjasyeva, sneharAgo dAmannakazvazurazreSThina iva
svaputramaraNazravaNato hRdayasphoTAt, dRSTirAgo brahmalokAdAgatya
svadarzanAnurAgataH svaziSyaM prati 'Asure ramase' ityAdi bhaNataH kapilasyeva,
tasya dhyAnaM na kAryam  /  / 8 /  /  aprItimAtraM paradrohAdhyavasAyo vA
dveSastasya dhyAnaM madhupiGgapippalAdayoriva, harivaMzotpattau vIrakadevasyeva
vA  /  / 9 /  /  mohanaM mohaH tasya dhyAnaM, mohAdviSNutanuM vahato
balabhadrasyeva  /  / 10 /  /  icchA saMbhAvyamAnalAbhasyArthasyAbhilASAtirekaH
tasyA dhyAnamicchAdhyAnaM, mASadvayArthinaH koTisuvarNalAbhe'pi
pravardhamAnalobhasya kapilasyeva  /   /  11  /   /  mithyA viparyastadRSTitvaM
taddhyAnaM mithyAdhyAnaM jamAligoviMdaprabhRtInAmiva  /   /  12  /  /
mUcchA'tyarthaM pUrvaprAptasya rAjyAderabhiSvaGgaH svaputrANAM jAtamAtrANAM
hiMsakasya kanakadhvajasyeva  /  / 13 /  /  2010_02

Page #363 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Chapter 322:  Discourse on the Rejection of Impatience  **14.**  Doubt,
suspicion, and the act of creating doubt; contemplation of this is called
*Shankadhyan*, like that of the disciples of Aashaadhaacharya, who spoke in an
unclear manner.  **15.**  Desire for other philosophies, longing, and
contemplation of this is called *Kaankhaadhyan*, like that of Maricha, who said,
"This is Kapila, and this is also Kapila."  **16.**  Greed, extreme desire for
food and other things, and contemplation of this is called *Giddhiadhyan*, like
that of Mathura Mangusur, or like that of the liberated *Kandarik* king.
**17.**  Hope, the form of desire for the attainment of a desired object, and
contemplation of this is called *Aashaadhyan*, like that of the *Nihrina*
Brahmin, who was a path-follower, in relation to the *Nipaatheya* (one who has
abandoned the path), like that of the *Mooladeva*.  **18.**  Thirst, a specific
type of pain arising from the desire for water, and contemplation of this is
called *Trishaadhyan*, like that of a thirsty person walking on the path, along
with Janaka Sadhu, a small person.  **19.**  Contemplation of hunger is called
*Kshudhaadhyan*, like that of the *Dramaka* who was ready to fight, against the
people who came to the garden of Rajagriha.  **20.**  A path that can be
traversed in a short time, and contemplation of this is called *Pathiadhyan*,
like that of the *Valkalachiri* who was searching for the path to Potanapura.
**21.**  A difficult path, a long journey, and contemplation of this is called
*Vishamamargadhyan*, like that of Mahendra Singh, who was searching for
Sanatkumara, or like that of Vardhana, who was searching for Brahmadutta.
**22.**  Contemplation of one who is under the control of sleep is called
*Nidraadhyan*, like that of the *Sadhus* who were: 1) eaters of buffalo meat, 2)
extractors of elephant tusks, 3) desirous of *modakas* (sweet dumplings), while
they were bound by sleep.  **23.**  The desire for heaven, the desire for
initial powers, and the desire for other births, which are nine in number, and
contemplation of this is called *Nidaanadhyan*, like that of Draupadi and
others, who were born from the *Nandisena*.  **24.**  Affection, a specific type
of joy arising from attachment, extreme attachment to children and others, like
that of Marudevi, Sunanda, Arhanaka, and others.  **25.**  Desire, the desire
for objects, and contemplation of this is called *Kamaadhyan*, like that of
Kumar Nanda, the goldsmith, who was tempted by laughter and jokes, or like that
of Ravana.  **26.**  Pollution, the feeling of being polluted in the mind due to
humiliation or praise of another's qualities, and contemplation of this is
called *Kalushyaadhyan*, like that of Peethamha Peetha, who could not bear the
praise of Bahusu Bahu, or like that of the *Sadhu* who lived in the lion's cave.
**27.**  Quarrel, verbal abuse, and contemplation of this is called
*Kalhoadhyan*, like that of Rukmini and Satyabhama, who were quarrelling, or
like that

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 322 AturapratyAkhyAnaprakIrNakam zaGkanaM zaGkA saMzayakaraNaM tasya dhyAnaM
zaGkAdhyAnam, avyaktavAdinAmASADhAcAryaziSyANAmiva  /  / 14 /  /
anyAnyadarzanAgrahaH kAGkSA taddhyAnaM kAGkSAdhyAnam 'kapilA itthaM pi ihayaM
pi' itivadato mariceriva  /  / 15 /  /  - gRddhiH AhArAdiSvatyantamAkAGkSA tasyA
dhyAnaM gRddhidhyAnaM mathurAmaGgusUreriva kaNDarikarAjasya muktavratasyeva vA
// 16 //  AzA parasatkavastuprAptyabhilASarUpA tasyA dhyAnamAzAdhyAnaM
nighRNabrAhmaNapAtheyaM prati niHpAtheyasya mUladevasyeva  /  / 17 /  /  tRSA
parISahodayajanyaH pIDAvizeSaH tayA yad dhyAnaM tRSAdhyAnaM tRSArtasya mArge
gacchato janakasAdhusahitasya kSullakasyeva  /  / 18 /  /  kSudhayA yaddhyAnaM
kSudhAdhyAnaM rAjagRhodyAnAgatalokAn prati hananA yotthitasya dramakasyeva  /  /
19 /  /  alpakAlagamyo'dhvA panthAH tasya dhyAnaM pathidhyAnaM potanapuramArgaM
gaveSayato valkalacIriNa iva  /  / 20 /  /  viSamamArgaH mahAn panthAH tasya
dhyAnaM viSamamArgadhyAnaM sanatkumAraM gaveSayato mahendrasiMhasyeva,
brahmadattagaveSakasya vA varadhanasyeva  /  / 21 /  /  nidrAparatantrasya
dhyAnaM nidrAdhyAnaM styAnaddhinidrayA 1-mahiSamAMsabhakSakaH
2-hastidantotpATaka 3-modakAbhilASuka sAdhUnAmiva  /  / 22 /  /  nidAnaM
svargamAdiRddhiprArthanaM bhavAntaraviSayaM navaprakAraM tasya dhyAnaM
nidAnadhyAnaM nandiSeNasaMbhUtidraupadyAdInAmiva  /  / 23 /  /  sneho
mohodayajaH prItivizeSaH putrAdiSvatyantAnurAgaH
marudevIsunandA'rhanakamAtrAdInAmiva  /  / 24  /  /  kAmo viSayAbhilASastasya
dhyAnaM kAmadhyAnaM hAsAprahAsApralobhitasya kumAranandisvarNakArasyeva
rAvaNasyeva vA  /  / 25 /  /  apamAnataH paraguNaprazaMsAyAmI(I)Ato vA cittasya
kaluSabhAvaH kAluSyaM malInatA tasya dhyAnaM kAluSyadhyAnaM
bAhusubAhuprazaMsAmasahamAnayoH pIThamahApIThayoriva siMhaguhAvAsisAdhoriva vA
/  / 26 /  /  kalaho vAcikA rATiH tasya dhyAnaM rukmiNIsatyabhAmayoH vyatikare
kamalAmelAjJAte nAradasyeva  // 27 //  yuddhaM
vairiprANavyaparopaNo'dhyavasAyastasya dhyAnaM bandhuhallavihallavinAze ceTakena
saha koNikasyeva  /  / 28 /  /  2010_02

Page #364 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Appendix-2: Sixty-Two Durdhhyanas 323 **29.**  The contemplation of a battle,
which is the lowest form of violence, is called **Niyuddha-dhyana**
(contemplation of battle), like that of Bhima and Jarasandha. **30.**  The
contemplation of attachment, even after renouncing it, is called **Sanga-
dhyana** (contemplation of attachment), like that of Rathanemi in Rajimati or
Bhavadeva in Nagila. **31.**  The contemplation of greed, which is the extreme
desire to accumulate wealth, is called **Sangraha-dhyana** (contemplation of
greed), like that of Mammana. **32.**  The contemplation of litigation, which is
the process of resolving disputes in a royal court or other legal forum, is
called **Vyavahara-dhyana** (contemplation of litigation), like that of two co-
wives resolving a dispute about their son. **33.**  The contemplation of buying
and selling, which involves acquiring valuable goods at a low price and selling
them at a high price, is called **Kraya-Vikraya-dhyana** (contemplation of
buying and selling), like that of a cotton merchant. **34.**  The contemplation
of punishment for wrongdoing, which is the infliction of harm without any
purpose, is called **Anarthadanda-dhyana** (contemplation of punishment for
wrongdoing), like that of Shambha and others who were punished by Dvaipayana in
his anger. **35.**  The contemplation of enjoyment, which is the pursuit of
pleasure with knowledge, is called **Abhoga-dhyana** (contemplation of
enjoyment), like that of Brahmadutta who enjoyed fruits with the intention of
harming the eyes of the Brahmanas. **36.**  The contemplation of non-enjoyment,
which is complete forgetfulness, is called **Anabhoga-dhyana** (contemplation of
non-enjoyment), like that of Prasannachandra who forgot his own conduct. **37.**
The contemplation of debt, which is the burden of owing money, is called **Rina-
dhyana** (contemplation of debt), like that of the sister of the oil-presser who
was burdened by debt. **38.**  The contemplation of hatred, which arises from
the killing of parents or the loss of a kingdom, is called **Vaira-dhyana**
(contemplation of hatred), like that of Parashurama, Subhumi, and others, or
like that of Abhayavati who was filled with hatred for Sudarshana. **39.**  The
contemplation of speculation, which is the thought of how to acquire a kingdom
or other possessions, is called **Vitarka-dhyana** (contemplation of
speculation), like that of Chanakya who desired to conquer the kingdom of Nanda.
**40.**  The contemplation of violence, which is the killing of animals like
buffaloes, is called **Himsa-dhyana** (contemplation of violence), like that of
the person who threw the Kalashauka into the well. **41.**  The contemplation of
laughter, which is the act of laughing, is called **Hasa-dhyana** (contemplation
of laughter), like that of the disciple of Chandrarudra who laughed with his
friends. **42.**  The contemplation of mockery, which is the act of insulting or
praising someone, is called **Prahasa-dhyana** (contemplation of mockery), like
that of Chandrapradhyota who mocked Vartika Muni by saying, "I salute

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pariziSTam-2 triSaSTidurdhyAnam 323 nirgataM yuddhaM prANaprahANarUpamadhamaM
yasmAttat niyuddhaM yaSTimuSTAdibhireva jayakArakaM tasya dhyAnaM
niyuddhadhyAnaM bAhubalibharatayoriva  /  / 29 /  /  _ saGgaH parityakteSvapi
punaH saMyogAbhilASaH tasya dhyAnaM saGgadhyAnaM rAjImatyAM rathanemeriva
nAgilAyAM bhavadevasyeva vA  /  / 30 /  saGgraho'tyantamatRptyA dhanopArjanaM
tasya dhyAnaM saGgrahadhyAnaM mammaNasyeva  /  / 31 /  /  vyavahAraH
svakAryanirNayArthaM rAjakulAdau nyAyakAraNaM tasya dhyAnaM vyavahAradhyAnaM
svaputranirNayArthaM dvayoH sapatnyoriva  /  / 32 /  /  krayaNaM krayo
lAbhArthamalpamUlyena bahumUlyavastugrahaNaM, vikrayaNaM vikrayo bahunA
mUlyenAlpamUlyavastudAnaM, krayazca vikrayazca krayavikrayau tayordhyAnaM
krayavikrayadhyAnaM karpAsavikrAyakavaNija iva  /  / 33 /  /  anarthadaNDo
niHprayojanaM hiMsAdikaraNaM tasya dhyAnamanarthadaNDadhyAnaM durdAntamattatayA
dvaipAyanaM skhalIkurvatAM zAmbAdInAmiva  /  / 34 /  /  Abhogo jJAnapUrvako
vyApArastasya dhyAnamAbhogadhyAnaM vipranetrAbhiprAyeNa phalAnyapi mardayato
brahmadattasyeva  /  / 35 /  /  anAbhogo'tyantavismRtistasya
dhyAnamanAbhogadhyAnaM vismRtacAritrasya prasannacandrasyeva  /  / 36 /  /  aNaM
RNaM tenAvilastasya dhyAnaM RNadhyAnaM tailakarSalastryAyatibhaginyA iva  /  /
37 /  /  vairaM mAtApitrAdivadhotthaM rAjyApahArAdibhavaM vA tasya dhyAnaM
vairadhyAnaM parazurAmasubhUmAdInAmiva sudarzanaM prati abhayAdevyA
vyantarIbhUtAyA iva  /  / 38 /  /  vitarka UhaH kathaM rAjyAdi grahISye iti
cintA tasya dhyAnaM vitarkadhyAnaM nandarAjyaM jighRkSozcANAkyasyeva  /  / 39 //
hiMsA mahiSAdijIvamAraNaM tasya dhyAnaM hiMsAdhyAnaM
kUpakSiptakAlazaukarikasyeva  /  / 40 /  /  hAso hAsyaM tasya dhyAnaM
hAsadhyAnaM caNDarudrAcAryaziSyasyeva mitrasahitasya  /  / 41 /  /  prahAsa
upahAso nindAstutirUpastasya dhyAnaM prahAsadhyAnaM 'vaMdAmi te
nemittiyakhavagA' iti vArtikamuniM prati vadatazcaNDapradyotasyeva  /  / 42 /  /
prakRSTo dveSaH pradveSastasya dhyAnaM pradveSadhyAnaM marubhUtiM prati
kamaThasyeva zrIvIraM prati karNayoH kASThazalAkAdvayaM kSipato gopAlasyeva vA
/  / 43 /  /  _ 2010_02

Page #365 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 324 ## Aaturpratyakhyanaprakirnakam  **44.**  A harsh and extremely cruel
karma, its meditation is harsh meditation, like a monkey's towards a yoke-
bearing bull, or like a gem-studded chariot towards a chariot.  **45.**  Fear, a
nature like a sharp blade, residing within delusion, like the affliction of a
beautiful flower on a bull elephant, for the father-in-law of Somila.  **46.**
It is formed, it is observed, from a mirror, thus its form is meditation, form
meditation, and it is of two types: self-form meditation and other-form
meditation. There, "My form is beautiful," is self-form meditation, like
Sanatkumara's. Other-form meditation is like the two elder brothers, Sujyestha
and Chelala, looking at a picture painted on a board by a painter.  **47.**
Self-praise meditation, like Vararuci, who, being praised by a cart-maker,
desires praise for his own poetry, or like a chariot-maker showing his knowledge
to a treasury.  **48.**  Other-blame meditation, like four thieves towards a
crow.  **49.**  Other's pride, the exposure of faults in front of others, its
meditation is other-blame meditation, like a gossiper who blames a weak flower-
friend in front of the assembly.  **50.**  Attachment, in the form of wealth,
grain, etc., its meditation is like the meditation of one who has lost wealth,
for the sake of wealth, like Charudatta's, or like the meditation of the Muni-
pati, the Muni-rodhaka-kunjika.  **51.**  The revelation of the faults of
others, which are not real, other-slander, its meditation is other-slander
meditation, like the slander of the mother-in-law towards Subhadra.  **52.**
The accusation of one's own faults, even though the other is not at fault,
other-defamation, its meditation is other-defamation meditation, like the Jina-
dasa-bha, who, towards Bhadra-vrishabha, says, "My husband was killed by this,"
thus falsely accusing herself.  **53.**  The beginning, the affliction of
others, its meditation is beginning meditation, like Kurudu and Ut-kurudu, or
like Dvaipayana.  **54.**  Arrogance, intense desire in objects, etc., its
meditation is arrogance meditation, like a small boy who, even though he is
observing a vow due to his mother's prohibition, still desires objects.  **55.**
Sin, like the service of another's wife, etc., its approval, "This is done by a
worthy one," its meditation is sin meditation, like the people who approve,
saying, "This one is a wealthy enjoyer, a bee-like being," etc.  **56.**  The
place of the origin of sin, its meditation is place meditation, like
Nandamanikara, who is devoted to the meditation of a well.  **57.**  Thinking,
"This one will die due to lack of concentration," lack of concentration death
meditation, like the unworthy guardian who, towards Skanda-acharya, first
crushes a small one in a machine.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 324 AturapratyAkhyAnaprakIrNakam paruSamatiniSThuraM karma tasya dhyAnaM
paruSadhyAnaM brahmadattaM prati culanyA iva yugabAhuM prati maNirathasyeva vA
/  / 44 /  /  bhayaM mohAntargatA nokaSAyarUpA prakRtiH
kRtagajasukumAlopasargasya somilazvazurasyeva  /  / 45 /  /  rUpyate nirIkSyata
AdarzAdAviti rUpaM tasya dhyAnaM rUpadhyAnaM, taJca dvidhA svarUpadhyAnaM
pararUpadhyAnaM ca tatra madIyaM rUpaM zobhanamiti svarUpadhyAnaM
sanatkumArasyeva, pararUpadhyAnaM tu zreNikacitralikhitaphalakaM vIkSamANayoH
sujyeSThAcelaNayoriva  /  / 46 /  /  AtmaprazaMsAdhyAnaM zakaTAlamantrito
nijakRtakAvyaprazaMsAmabhilaSato vararuceriva svavijJAnaM kozAyA darzayato
rathakArasyeva vA  /  / 47 /  /  paranindAdhyAnaM kUrakaDukaM prati caturNAM
kSapakANAmiva  // 48 //  parasya gardA parasamakSaM doSodghaTTanaM tasyA dhyAnaM
paragarhAdhyAnaM saGghasamakSaM durbalikApuSpamitraM garhamANasya
goSThAmAhilasyeva  /  / 49 /  /  parigraho dhanadhAnyAdirUpastasya dhyAnaM
gatavibhavasya vibhAvArthe vA cArudattasyeva munipatimunirodhakakuMcikasyeva vA
/  / 50 //  parasyAsadbhUtadoSAviSkaraNaM paraparivAdastasya dhyAnaM
paraparivAdadhyAnaM subhadrAM prati zvazrUnanAndRNAmiva  /  / 51 /  /
parasyAnaparAdhino'pi AtmakRtadoSacaTApanaM paradUSaNaM tasya dhyAnaM
paradUSaNadhyAnaM bhadrakavRSabhaM prati matpatiranena hata
itisvadoSamapalapantyA jinadAsabhA yA iva  /  / 52 /  /  ArambhaH paropadravaH
tasya dhyAnamArambhadhyAnaM kuruDotkuruDayoriva dvaipAyanasyeva vA  /  / 53 /  /
saMrambho viSayAdiSu tIvrAbhilASastasya dhyAnaM saMrambhadhyAnaM
jananyuparodhato vrataM pAlayato'pi viSayAbhilASiNaH kSullakakumArasyeva  /  /
54 /  /  pApaM parastrIsevAdi tasyAnumodanaM bhavyamanena kRtamiti vadanaM tasya
dhyAnaM pApadhyAnaM dhanyo'yaM bhogI bhramarabhUpa ityAdyanumodakajanAnAmiva  /
/ 55 /  /  adhikaraNaM pApotpattihetusthAnaM tasya dhyAnamadhikaraNadhyAnaM
vApIdhyAnatatparasya nandamaNikArasyeva  /  / 56 /  /  asamAdhinA eSa
mriyatAmiti cintanamasamAdhimaraNadhyAnaM skandakAcArya prati kSullakaM
prathamaM yantre pIlayato'bhavyapAlakasyeva  /  / 57 /  /  2010_02

Page #366 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Appendix-2: Thirty-Six Wrong Views (Triṣaṣṭidurdhāna)  **58.** **Karma-Udaya-
Pratyaya-Dhyāna:**  Dhyāna (wrong view) based on the understanding of the
arising of karma (karma-udaya). Even though it initially leads to auspicious
results, it eventually leads to inauspicious results due to the arising of
karma, like Viṣṇu.  **59.** **Ṛddhi-Gaurava-Dhyāna:** Dhyāna based on the pride
of wealth and power (ṛddhi). Like Darśārṇa-Bhadra, it leads to the feeling of
self-importance.  **60.** **Rasa-Gaurava-Dhyāna:** Dhyāna based on the pride of
taste (rasa). It leads to the feeling of superiority, like "My taste is
superior, what about others?" This is similar to the wise minister of the king
who defeated his enemies, praising the taste of the food in front of the king
who was unaware of the taste.  **61.** **Sāta-Gārava-Dhyāna:** Dhyāna based on
the pride of comfort (sāta). It leads to the feeling of arrogance, like "I am
the only one who is comfortable."  **2.** **Aviramana-Dhyāna:** Dhyāna based on
the wrong view of not stopping (aviramana). It leads to the feeling of "Let
there be no stopping for my sons." This is similar to the parents who told their
sons, "These ascetics are meat-eaters and demons, so you should not go near
them," and thus deceived them. Or, it is like the wise man who, even after being
enlightened by the gods, repeatedly abandoned his renunciation.  **3.**
**Amucti-Maraṇa-Dhyāna:** Dhyāna based on the wrong view of not being liberated
(amucit). It leads to the feeling of "There is no liberation, only the pursuit
of worldly pleasures." This is similar to the ascetic who, even after being
repeatedly warned by his brother, continued to indulge in worldly pleasures and
thus created the cause for his non-liberation.  **1.**  Having heard the nature
of these wrong views, those who are wise should understand that they are
conducive to false beliefs and wrong actions. They are all to be abandoned, as
they are filled with numerous karmas.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 325 pariziSTam-2 triSaSTidurdhyAnam  /  karmodayapratyayena karmodayahetunA
dhyAnaM karmodayapratyayadhyAnaM prathamaM zubhapariNAmavato'pi pazcAt
kutazcitkarmodayato'zubhapariNAmatvaM paryantakAle viSNoriva  /  / 58 /  /
rAjyaizvaryAdirUpA RddhistayA gauravamAtmotkarSarUpaM tasya
dhyAnamRddhigauravadhyAnaM darzArNabhadrasyeva  /  / 59 /  /  rasagauravadhyAnaM
rasanedriyagrAhyarasastena gauravaM yathA mama rasavatIrasAstathA kimanyasyApi
santi ? ityabhimAnarUpaM tasya dhyAnamudakajJAtoktajitazatrurAjasyeva
subuddhimantriNo'gre rasavatIrasAn prazaMsataH  /  / 60 /  /  sAyAgAravaMjhANe
[sAtAgArava-dhyAnaM] sAtaM sukhaM tena gauravaM garvo yathA'hameva
sukhItyabhimAnasya dhyAnam  /  / 61 /  /  _ averamaNaMjhANe [aviramaNa-dhyAnaM]
na viramaNamaviramaNaM tasya dhyAnaM mA bhUt putrayoviramaNa iti
buddhimaGgIkRtya pitarau sutau prAhatuH-ete sAdhavo mAMsAzino rAkSasA
ityatastatpAve na gantavyamiti tanayavihita-pratAraNayo gupurohitayazayoriva
yadvA devena pratibodhyamAnasyApi muhurmuhuviratiM tyajato metAryasyeva  /  / 2
/  /  amuttimaraNaMjhANe [amuktimaraNa-dhyAnaM] muktirmokSagatiH na
muktiramuktiH saMsArasukhAbhilASa ityarthaH tena maraNaM tasya dhyAnaM
muktivighnakarametannidAnaM mA kuru iti punaH punazcitreNa bhrAtRsAdhunA
nivAryamANasyApi etAM cakrivibhUtimanubhUya muktimapi na
spRhaye'hamityAdyazubhabhAvena nidAnaM kurvataH saMbhUtamuneriva  /  / 3 /  /
dhyAnasvarUpANi nizamya mithyAduSkRtyayogyAni vivekavadbhiH  /
anekakarmapracayAtmakAni, heyAni sarvANi vicAramArge  /  / 1 /  /  2010_02

Page #367 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Appendix-3: The Five Great Vows (1) [Verse 1-5: The Five Auspicious Blessings]
Arhats are my blessings, Arhats are my gods. I take refuge in Arhats, this is my
vow. ||1||  Siddhas are my blessings, Siddhas are my gods. I take refuge in
Siddhas, this is my vow. ||2||  Aaryas are my blessings, Aaryas are my gods. I
take refuge in Aaryas, this is my vow. ||3||  Uchchhaayas are my blessings,
Uchchhaayas are my gods. I take refuge in Uchchhaayas, this is my vow. ||4||
Sahavas are my blessings, Sahavas are my gods. I take refuge in Sahavas, this is
my vow. ||5||  [Verse 6-8: The Forgiveness of Arhats]  Arhats, Siddhas, Pavyas,
Aaryas, the four great assemblies, the great ones. I forgive them all, in all
ways, with three kinds of forgiveness. ||6||  The Sahavas, the Sahavas, the
Savayas, the Savis, the fourfold assembly. I forgive them all, with my mind,
speech, and body. ||7||  I forgive all beings, may all beings forgive me. I am a
friend to all beings, I have no enmity towards anyone. ||8||  [Verse 9: The
Great Invocation]  I bow to the Samana, the Bhagavan, the great Mahavira, the
Vardhamana. I take refuge in the five great vows, this is my vow. ||9||  [Verse
10: The Eighteen Vows]  I vow to refrain from all killing, I vow to refrain from
all falsehood, I vow to refrain from all stealing, I vow to refrain from all
sexual misconduct, I vow to refrain from all attachment.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pariziSTam-3 lahu-AurapaJcakkhANaM (1) [gA. 1-5 paMcamaMgalasumaraNapuvvaM
pAvavosiraNaM] arahaMtA maMgalaM majjha, arahaMtA majjha devayA  /  arahaMte
kittaittANaM vosirAmi tti pAvagaM  /  / 1 /  /  siddhA ya maMgalaM majjha,
siddhA ya majjha devayA  /  siddhe ya kittaittANaM vosirAmi tti pAvagaM  /  / 2
/  /  AyariyA maMgalaM majjha, AyariyA majjha devayA  /  Ayarie kittaittANaM
vosirAmi tti pAvagaM  /  / 3 /  /  ujjhAyA maMgalaM majjha, ujjhAyA majjha
devayA  /  ujjhAe kittaittANaM vosirAmi tti pAvagaM  /  / 4 /  /  sAhavo
maMgalaM majjha, sAhavo majjha devayA  /  sAhavo kittaittANaM vosirAmi tti
pAvagaM  /  / 5 /  /  [gA. 6-8 arahaMtAINaM khAmaNA] arahaMta-siddha-pavayaNa-
Ayarie gaNahare mahiDDhIe  /  jaM AsAiyA tiviheNaM khAmemo savvabhAveNaM  /  / 6
/  /  sAhUNa sAhuNINa ya sAvaya-sAvINa cauviho saMgho  /  jaM maNa-vaya-kAehiM
AsAiya taM pi khAmemi  /  / 7 /  /  khAmemi savve jIve, savve jIvA khamaMtu me
/  mittI me savvabhUesu, veraM mamaM na keNai  /  / 8 /  /  [gA. 9
uttamaTThArAhaNA] namo samaNassa bhagavao mahai-mahAvIra-vaddhamANasAmissa  /
uttimaDhe gayamaNo paJcakkhAmi tti pAvagaM  /  / 9 /  /  [su. 10,
aTThArasapAvaTThANavosiraNaM] savvaM pANAivAyaM 1 savvaM musAvAyaM 2 savvaM
adinnAdANaM 3 savvaM mehuNaM 4 savvaM pariggahaM 5 savvaM 2010_02

Page #368 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Appendix - 3  Lahu - Arupacchakkhanam How I will completely renounce anger,
completely renounce pride, completely renounce greed, completely renounce lust,
completely renounce hatred, completely renounce quarrelling, completely renounce
ill-will, completely renounce arrogance, completely renounce deceit, completely
renounce hypocrisy, completely renounce wrong belief, completely renounce these
eighteen defilements, in thought, speech, and body, throughout my life, I will
not do, I will not cause to be done, even if others do, I will not approve, I
will condemn, I will restrain what has arisen, I will prevent what has not
arisen, I will renounce it, as the Arhat, the Perfect, the Worthy, the Divine,
the Unworthy, I will renounce it with the renunciation of all possessions.
||10|| [Su. 11 Ga. 12 SariraivOsirana] Dear, this body, beloved, dear, human,
named, adorned, composed of many parts, a container of many things, a treasure
chest, a treasure house, protect it, do not let it be cold, do not let it be
hot, do not let it be injured, do not let it be diseased, do not let it be
bitten, do not let it be stung, do not let it be stolen from, do not let it be
harmed, do not let it be afflicted by various diseases, such as fever, phlegm,
and wind, I will renounce this body, with its breathing in and out, throughout
my life, even if there are hardships, whether they are divine, human, or animal,
all of them are to be endured, forgiven, tolerated, and borne patiently. ||11||
Food, drink, and body, previously, were not well-renounced. With the last
breath, I will renounce all three completely. ||12|| [Ga. 13-14.
Apacchimasagaraniraagarapanchakkhanam] This renunciation without possessions is
truly great. In the measure of time, the renunciation with possessions is to be
abandoned. ||13|| I will think of all beings as impermanent. I will forgive all
beings, and I will forgive all beings. ||14|| [Ga. 15-27. Savvajivakhamna. In
the endless cycle of existence, wandering through various births. Those who are
inferior in knowledge, I will forgive them. ||15|| In the endless cycle of
existence, wandering through various births. Those who are equal in knowledge, I
will forgive them. ||16|| In the endless cycle of existence, wandering through
various births. Those who are superior in knowledge, I will forgive them. ||17||
327 2010_02

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pariziSTam - 3 lahu - AurapaccakkhANaM kohaM 6 savvaM mANaM 7 savvaM mAyaM 8
savvaM lobhaM 9 savvaM pejjaM 10 dosaM 11 kalahaM 12 abbhakkhANaM 13 arairaI 14
pesunnaM 15 paraparivAyaM 16 mAyAmosaM 17 micchAdaMsaNasallaM 18, icceiyAI
aTThArasa pAvaTThANAI jAvajjIvAe tivihaM tiviheNaM maNeNaM vAyAe kAeNaM, na
karemi na kAravemi karaMtaM pi annaM na samaNujANAmi, aIyaM niMdAmi, paDuppannaM
saMvaremi, aNAgayaM paccakkhAmi taM jahAarahaMtasakkhiyaM siddhasakkhiyaM
sAhusakkhiyaM devasakkhiyaM appasakkhiyaM savvasamAhivattiyAgAreNaM vosirAmi  /
/ 10 /  /  [su. 11 gA. 12 sarIrAivosiraNA] piya imaM sarIraM iTThe kaMtaM
maNunnaM maNAmaM nAmadhijjaM vesAsiyaM aNumayaM bahumayaM bhaMDakaraMDagasamANaM
rayaNakaraMDabhUyaM uvahi vva surakkhiyaM mA NaM sIyaM, mA NaM uNhaM, mA NaM
khuhA, mA NaM pivAsA, mA NaM daMsA, mA NaM masagA, mA NaM corA, mA NaM vAlA, mA
NaM vAiyapittiya-siMbhiya-sannivAiyA vivihA rogAyaMkA ya phusaMtu, imaM pi
sarIraM apicchamehiM UsAsa- nIsAsehiM jAvajjIvAe vosirAmi tti kaTTu je kei
uvasaggA divvA vA mANussA vA tirikkhajoNiyA vA te savve sammaM sahiyavvA
khamiyavvA ahiyAsiyavvA titikkhiyavvati kaTTu  /  / 11 /  /  AhAraM uvahiM dehaM
puvviM duccinnANi ya  /  apacchimaUsAsa- nIsAsehiM savvaM tiviheNa vosire  /  /
12  /  /  [gA. 13 - 14. apacchimasAgAra-nirAgArapaJcakkhANaM] icceiyaM nirAgAraM
paccakkhANaM tu kittiyaM  /  kAlassa parimANeNaM sAgAraM taM viyAhiyaM  /   / 13
/  /  bhAvei bhAviyappA aNiccayAIo bhAvaNA savvA  /  khAmei savvasatte khamai ya
so savvasattANaM  /  /  14  /  /  [gA. 15-27. savvajIvakhAmaNA  /  saMsArammi
aNaMte paribhamamANeNa vivihajAIsu  /  puDhavittamuvagaNaM je dUmiyA te vi khAmi
/  /  15  /  /  saMsArammi aNaMte paribhamamANeNa vivihajAIsu  /
AuttamuvagaeNaM je dUmiyA te vi khAmemi  /  /  16  /  /  saMsArammi aNaMte
paribhamamANeNa vivihajAIsu  /  uttamuvagaNaM je dUmiyA te vi khAmi  /  /  17  /
/  327 2010_02

Page #369 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 328 ## Aaturpratyakhyanaprakirnakam  In this endless cycle of existence,
revolving through various births, Those who have attained the state of a **Vau**
are worthy of forgiveness. ||18||  In this endless cycle of existence, revolving
through various births, Those who have attained the state of a **Vanas** are
worthy of forgiveness. ||19||  In this endless cycle of existence, revolving
through various births, Those who have attained the state of a **Vigala** are
worthy of forgiveness. ||20||  In this endless cycle of existence, revolving
through various births, Those who have attained the state of a **Naraya** are
worthy of forgiveness. ||21||  In this endless cycle of existence, revolving
through various births, Those who have attained the state of a **Tiriya** are
worthy of forgiveness. ||22||  In this endless cycle of existence, revolving
through various births, Those who have attained the state of a **Manuya** are
worthy of forgiveness. ||23||  In this endless cycle of existence, revolving
through various births, Those who have attained the state of a **Devata** are
worthy of forgiveness. ||24||  These are the states of **Vau**, **Vanas**,
**Vigala**, **Naraya**, **Tiriya**, **Manuya**, and **Devata**, Each with its
own unique characteristics, leading to various births in the realms of
**Naraya**, **Tiriya**, **Manuya**, and **Devata**. ||25||  In this world, I
forgive all those who have wronged me, Through their speech, actions, or
thoughts. May all forgive me as well, including myself. ||26||  In these three
periods of time - the past, present, and future - I forgive all those who have
wronged me through their thoughts, speech, and actions. This is the true path of
non-violence. ||27||  [Verses 28-30: Attaanusatti] I am alone, I belong to no
one, and no one belongs to me. With this unwavering mind, I guide myself. ||28||
My only teacher is my own self, guided by knowledge and insight. All other
external influences are merely signs of attachment. ||29||  The cycle of
suffering arises from the attachment to existence. Therefore, I renounce all
attachments, in all three realms. ||30||  ## End of the **Lahu-
Aaurpanchakkhana** section.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 328 AturapratyAkhyAnaprakIrNakam saMsArammi aNaMte paribhamamANeNa vivihajAIsu
/  vAuttamuvagaeNaM je dUmiyA te vi khAmemi  /  / 18 /  /  saMsArammi aNaMte
paribhamamANeNa vivihaz2AIsu  /  vaNassaittamuvagaeNaM je dUmiyA te vi khAmemi
/  / 19 /  /  saMsArammi aNaMte paribhamamANeNa vivihajAIsu  /
vigalattamuvagaeNaM je dUmiyA te vi khAmemi  /  / 20 /  /  saMsArammi aNate
paribhamamANeNa vivihajAIsu  /  narayattamuvagaeNaM je dUmiyA te vi khAmemi  /
/ 21 /  /  saMsArammi aNaMte paribhamamANeNa vivihajAIsu  /  tiriyattamuvagaeNaM
je dUmiyA te vi khAmemi  /  / 22 /  /  saMsArammi aNaMte paribhamamANeNa
vivihajAIsu  /  /  maNuyattamuvagaeNaM je damiyA te vi khAmemi  /  / 23 /  /
saMsArammi aNaMte paribhamamANeNa vivihajAIsu  /  /  devattamuvagaeNaM je dUmiyA
te vi khAmemi  /  / 24 /  /  iya ega do ya tiNNi ya cauro paMcidiyattajutteNaM
/  nANAvihanAraya-tiriya-maNuya-devattapatteNaM  /  / 25 /  /  mANasA vayaNA
kAeNa dUmiyA je mae'ttha saMsAre  /  khAmemi ahaM savve, majjha vi ya khamaMtu
te savve  /  / 26 /  /  volINANAgaya-vaTTamANakAlesu tisu vi sattANaM  /  /  jaM
maNa-vai-kAehiM khAme haM tamiha duJcariyaM  /  / 27  /  /  [gA. 28-30
attANusaTThI] eko haM natthi me koi, na yAhamavi kassaI  /  evaM adINamaNaso
attANamaNusAsae  /  / 28 /  /  ego me sAsao appA nANa-daMsaNasaMjuo  /  sesA me
bAhirAbhAvA savve saMjogalakkhaNA  /  / 29 /  /  saMjogamUlA jIveNaM pattA
dukkhaparaMparA  /  tamhA saMjogasaMbaMdhaM savva tiviheNa vosire  /  / 30 /  /
/  /  lahu-AurapaJcakkhANaM samattaM  /  /  2010_02

Page #370 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Appendix-4: Minor and Major Sins (2)**  **[Verse 1: Introduction]** Dwelling
in the wrong path, with a mind attached to the objects of sense, The minor and
major sins, these are the things that bind us. ||1||  **[Verses 2-3: Non-
Virtuous Sins]** All killing of living beings, all violence, all taking of what
is not given, All lying, all stealing, all wrong conduct, all wrong thoughts.
||2|| In the case of wives, in the case of children, in the case of parents, in
the case of relatives, In all beings, attachment to self, this is the sin that
binds me. ||3||  **[Verses 4-5: Wrong Conduct]** In hell, those who are in hell,
in the animal realm, those who are in the animal realm, Bound by suffering, I am
bound by wrong conduct, this is the sin for them. ||4|| In the realm of gods,
those who are gods, in the human realm, those who are humans, Bound by
suffering, I am bound by wrong conduct, this is the sin for them. ||5||
**[Verses 6-13: Attachment to Self]** In the realm of gods, many are the
palaces, adorned with jewels, With beautiful women, with fine clothes, with
beautiful chariots, with beautiful horses. ||6|| With diamonds, sapphires,
emeralds, and pearls, with beautiful gardens, with beautiful mansions, With
beautiful music, with beautiful scents, with beautiful food, with beautiful
drinks. ||7|| With mountains of jewels, with beautiful ornaments, with beautiful
bows and arrows, With beautiful chariots, with beautiful horses, with beautiful
elephants, with beautiful armies. ||8|| Those who are gods, those who are like
gods, those who are like the gods, Do not be attached to them, do not be
attached to them, do not be attached to them. ||9|| With beautiful jewels, with
beautiful clothes, with beautiful flowers, with beautiful scents, Do not be
attached to them, do not be attached to them, do not be attached to them. ||10||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pariziSTam-4 lahu-AurapaccakkhANaM (2) [gA. 1 uvugghAo] kusasatthare nisanno
nihittanamiyakarakamalo  /  AurapaccakkhANaM erisayaM navari jaMpaMto  /  / 1 /
/  [gA. 2-3. aviraipaccakkhANaM] savvaM pANAraMbhaM alIyavayaNaM adattadANaM ca
/  rAIbhoyaNa viraI (a)bbaMbha-pariggahAo ya  /  / 2 /  /  sayaNesu parajaNesu
ya putta-kalattesu parajaNe ceva  /  sa-parajaNammi mamattaM paccakkhAyaM mae
savvaM  /  / 3 /  /  [gA. 4-5. micchAdukkaDaM] narayammi vi neraiyA, tiriyA
tiriyattaNammi je kei  /  dukkheNa mae ThaviyA micchA miha dukkaDaM tassa  /  /
4 /  /  devattaNammi devA, maNuyA maNuyattaNammi je kei  /  /  dukkheNa mae
ThaviyA micchA miha dukkaDaM tassa  /  / 5 /  /  [gA. 6-13. mamattaccAo]
devattaNammi bahuso raNaMtarasaNAo guruniyaMbAo  /  mukkAo accharAo, mA rajjasu
asuinArIsu  /  / 6 /  /  vajjeMdanIla-maragayasamappahaM sAsayaM varaM bhavaNaM
/  /  mukkaM saggammi tae, vosira jarakaDaNikayameyaM  /  / 7 /  /  nANAmaNi-
mottiyasaMkulAo AbaddhaiMdadhaNuyAo  /  rayaNANaM rAsIo mottuM mA raejja
vibhavesu  /  / 8 /  /  je kei devadUse me (?) divvadevasarisille  /  muttUNa
tumaM taiyA saMpai mA sumara kaMthaiyaM  /  / 9 /  /  vararayaNanimmiyaM piva
kaNayamayaM kusumareNusukumAlaM  /  caiUNa tattha dehaM kuNa jaradehammi mA
mucchaM  /  / 10 /  /  2010_02

Page #371 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 330 ## Aaturpratyakhyanaprakirnakam  This body is filled with foul odors, and
is full of bile, phlegm, and blood. O living being! Do not attach yourself to
this body. ||11|| Do not desire the riches of heaven, nor the pleasures of the
world. O good man! Do not worry, whatever is destined to happen will happen.
||12|| The living being experiences both good and bad, but this body is not
permanent. Where will it go? ||13||  **[Verse 14-18. Dehasas Uvalambho]** Do not
think that this body will be your support in the future. O body! You are a
deceiver! Why have you taken me in with your pleasures? ||14|| Do not think that
you will find water in the desert. O body! You are a deceiver! Why have you
taken me in with your pleasures? ||15|| Do not think that this body will be your
shelter. O body! You are a deceiver! Why have you taken me in with your
pleasures? ||16|| Do not think that you will be clothed in fine garments and
blankets. O living being! You are bound to the deceiver, and you cannot escape.
||17|| Even though you are adorned with many ornaments, and have a pleasant
fragrance, O body! You cannot give me even a drop of water when I need it.
||18||  **[Verse 19-25. Suhbhavna]** In this world, filled with suffering, and
surrounded by human beings, true happiness is rare, and the path of
righteousness is even rarer. ||19|| I am fortunate to have found the teachings
of the Jina, which are rare even in the ocean of existence. ||20|| You have
experienced many kinds of suffering in the animal realm. Remember those
sufferings and endure this suffering. ||21|| O living being! You have
experienced many kinds of suffering in hell. Remember those sufferings and
endure this suffering. ||22||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 330 AturapratyAkhyAnaprakIrNakam dehaM asui dugaMdhaM bhariyaM puNa pitta-
sukka-ruhirANaM  /  re jIva ! imassa tumaM mA uvariM kuNasu paDibaMdhaM  /  / 11
/  /  mA kuNasu taM niyANaM sagge kira erisIo riddhIo  /  mA ciMtehiM supurisa !
hoi sayA neva jaM jogaM (?)  /  / 12 /  /  punnaM pAvaM ca duve vaccai jIveNa
Navari saha eyaM  /  jaM puNa imaM sarIraM katto taM calai ThANAo ?  /  / 13 /
/  gA. 14-18. dehassa uvAlaMbho] mA me chuhA bhavissai imassa dehassa saMbalaM
bUDhaM  /  teNaM ciya deha ! tumaM khala ! gahio kiM na sukaeNaM ?  /  / 14 /  /
mA me taNhA hohI marutthalIsuM pi pANiyaM vUDhaM  /  teNaM ciya deha ! tumaM
khala ! gahio kiM na sukaeNaM ?  /  / 15  /  mA me uNahaM hohI imassa dehassa
chattayaM dhariyaM  /  teNaM ciya deha ! tuma khala ! gahio kiM na sukaeNaM ?  /
/ 16 /  /  mA me sIyaM hohI pAvariyaM vattha-kaMbalasaehiM  /  vaccaMte puNa
jIve khalassa kaMthaM pi no caliyaM  /  / 17 /  /  bahulAliyassa bahupAliyassa
taha surahigaMdha-mallassa  /  khala deha ! tujjha juttaM payaM pi no desi
gaMtavve  /  / 18  /  /  [gA. 19-25. suhabhAvaNA] sArIra-mANasehiM dukkhehiM
abhiduyammi saMsAre  /  sulahamiNaM jaM dukkhaM, dulahA saddhammapaDivattI  /  /
19 /  /  dhanno haM jeNa mae aNorapArasmi bhavasamuddammi  /  nahU~ (? laddhaM)
jiNiMdapoyaM jaM dulabhaM bhavasaehiM pi  /  / 20 /  /  tiriyattaNammi bahuso
pattAo tume aNegaviyaNAo  /  tA tAI saMbharaMto visahejjasu veyaNaM eyaM  /  /
21 /  /  narayammi vi jIva ! tume nANAdukkhAiM jAI sahiyAiM  /  iNhiM tAI
sarettuM visahejjasu veyaNaM eyaM  /  / 22 /  /  2010_02

Page #372 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Appendix-4: Confession of Minor Sins  331 This (or so) is the good result, the
wise one, having known, controls the body.  He is praised in the heavenly world,
I confess everything. ||23|| As long as I do not renounce the minor sins with my
body, as long as there is doubt, I will renounce this Jain religion, I will make
my mind impure. ||24|| Therefore, if a person commits minor sins, it will be
harmful to the body. At the time of death, I will remember the Arhat, I will
attain liberation. ||25|| [Ga. 26-34. Confession of remembering the Arhat,
confession of minor sins, confession of wrong beliefs] I bow to the Arhats, I
bow to the Siddhas, I bow to the liberated ones. I bow to the Aayariyauvazhāyās,
I bow to all the virtuous ones. ||26|| I confess to violence, lying, stealing,
sexual misconduct, possession, and wrong beliefs. I confess to the various types
of food and drink at the time of death. ||27|| The ultimate truth is not the
body, the body is not the source of happiness, the earth is not the source of
happiness. The heart that is pure, that is the source of happiness. ||28|| One
being is born, one being dies, one being is reborn. One being wanders in the
cycle of birth and death, one being attains liberation. ||29|| I confess to my
own shortcomings in knowledge, vision, and conduct. I confess to all the
remaining bad qualities. ||30|| Those who know me as a Jain, I confess to them
in every place. I confess to them in every way. ||31|| The foolish mind, with
its six senses, collects so much. I do not remember it, I confess to this wrong
belief, this is my suffering. ||32|| If I have pride in this body, in this
beautiful body, in this beautiful body, I confess to it. I confess to eating
food, to the body, to the previous bad deeds. ||33|| ...previous bad deeds. I
confess to all three types of bad qualities at the time of my last breath.
||34|| || Confession of Minor Sins is complete. ||3|| 2010_02

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pariziSTam-4 lahu-AurapaccakkhANaM 331 eso (? evaM) suhapariNAmo cANakko
payahiUNa niyadehaM  /  uvavanno suraloe, paccakkhAyaM mae savvaM  /  / 23 /  /
jAva na muMcAmi lahuM pANehiM ettha jAva saMdeho  /  tAva imaM jiNavayaNaM
sarAmi somaM maNaM kAuM  /  / 24 /  /  tamhA puriseNa sayA appahiyaM ceva hoi
kAyavvaM  /  maraNammi samAvanne saMpai sumarAmi arahaMte  /  / 25 /  /  [gA.
26-34. arahaMtAisumaraNa-pAvaTThANapaccakkhANa-micchAdukkaDAiyaM] namo
arahaMtANaM, siddhANa namo ya suhasamiddhANaM  /  AyariuvajhAyANaM namo, namo
savvasAhUNaM  /  / 26 /  /  hiMsA-'liya-corikke mehuNNa pariggahe ya nisibhatte
/  paccakkhAmi ya maraNe vivihaM AhAra-pANANaM  /  / 27 /  /  paramattho taM na
sarimo saMthAro neya phAsuyA bhUmI  /  hiyayaM jassa visuddhaM tasseva ya hoi
saMthAro  /  / 28  /  /  ekko jAyai jIvo, maraI uppajjae tahA ekko  /  saMsAre
bhamai ekko, ekko cciya pAvaI siddhiM  /  / 29 /  /  nANammi daMsaNammi ya tahA
carittammi sAsao appA  /  avasesA dubbhAvA vosiriyA te mae savve  /  / 30 /  /
je me jANaMti jiNA avarAhA tesu tesu ThANesu  /  te haM Aloemi uvaTThio
savvabhAveNaM  /  / 31 /  /  chaumattho mUDhamaNo kettiyametaM ca saMbharai jIvo
/  jaM na vi sumaremi ahaM micchA miha dukkaDaM tassa  /  / 32 /  jai me hojja
pamAo imassa dehassimAe rayaNIe  /  AhAraM uvahiM dehaM pubviM duccinnANi ya  /
/ 33 /  /  ....puTviM duccinnANi ya  /  apacchimammi UsAse savvaM tiviheNa
vosirAmi  /  / 34  /  /   /  /  AurapaccakkhANaM samattaM  /  / 3 /  /  2010_02

Page #373 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Appendix-5 Composed by the great sages of the past A collection of stories of
the sixty-three Tirthankaras. Saluting Mahavira, I speak of the teachings of the
wise. This collection of stories is for remembering the Guru. ||1||  I see the
past lives of the Tirthankaras in the food. I see the Tirthankaras in the non-
living things, like the earth. ||2||  I see the Tirthankaras in the virtues,
like forgiveness. I see the Tirthankaras in the vices, like anger. ||3||  I see
the Tirthankaras in the human beings, like Bahubali. I see the Tirthankaras in
the illusions, like wealth. ||4||  I see the Tirthankaras in the metals, like
iron. I see the Tirthankaras in the passions, like anger. ||5||  I see the
Tirthankaras in the faults, like pride. I see the Tirthankaras in the delusions,
like attachment. ||6||  I see the Tirthankaras in the desires, like greed. I see
the Tirthankaras in the wrong beliefs, like ignorance. ||7||  I see the
Tirthankaras in the doubts, like uncertainty. I see the Tirthankaras in the
fears, like fear of death. ||8||  I see the Tirthankaras in the homes, like the
house of a householder. I see the Tirthankaras in the cities, like the city of
the gods. ||9||  I see the Tirthankaras in the hopes, like the hope of a
Brahmin. I see the Tirthankaras in the thirsts, like the thirst for wealth.
||10||  I see the Tirthankaras in the paths, like the path of liberation. I see
the Tirthankaras in the great paths, like the path of the great kings. ||11||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pariziSTam-5 pUrvAcAryamaharSikRtaM triSaSTidhyAnakathAnakakulakam  /  namiUNa
mahAvIraM, vucchaM tevaTThiasuhajhANANaM  /  AharaNasaMgahamiNaM, sumaraNaheuM
guruvaesA  /  /  1  /  /  annANaMjhANaMmI, diluto asagaDapiyapuvvabhavo  /
aNAyArajhANaMmI, vallarajhANI ya kuMkaNau  /  /  2  /  /  kudaMsaNaMmi soraTha-
sAvayadevo pavaNNamicchatto  /  kohe pAlagasAsaga-nAlIyamAI udAharaNA  /  /  3
/  /  mANaMmI u bAhubalI, vissabhUI ya saMgamo devo  /  mAyAe dhaNasiriyA,
bhAujjAyaM parikkhaMtI  /  /  4  /  /  lohaMmi siMhakesara-sAhU
ceDaganihANaviha[vaNia]mitto  /  rAgaMmI vikkamajaso, viNhusirIe ya devarai  /
/  5  /  /  dosaMmi pippalAdo-mahudevo ceva nAvio naMdo  /  mohami u baladevo,
kaNhasarIraM parivahaMto  /  /  6  /  /  icchAe kavilarisI, micchaMmi
jamAlipamuhaAharaNA  /  mucchAe kaNagajhao, niyasuyadehANuvagayaro  /  /  7  /
/  saMkAe avvattA-sADhAo evamitthudAharaNA  /  kaMkhAe u mirII [marII], kavilA
itthaMpii bhaNaMto  /  /  8  /  /  gehimi mahuramaMgU-AyariyA puNa havaMti
AharaNaM  /  puraniddhamaNe jakkho, je jAyA jibbhadoseNaM  /  /  9  /  /  AsAe
mUladevo, baMbhaNapAheyaAsasajutto  /  taNhAi gAladAho, chuhAi damago silApAI  /
/  10  /  /  paMtho'ppakAlagammo, poyaNamaggaMmi vakkalaJcIrI  /  paMthANo ya
mahaMto, mahiMdasiMho tahiMneo  /  /  11  /  /  2010_02

Page #374 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Appendix-5: The Thirty-Six Dhyana Kathana Kulaka  Here are the examples,
Thiṇadhigaya is the Puttalaiya. Niyaṇammi is the Neya, Gangadatta is the
Aharana. || 12 ||  Nehami is the Marudevi, Arahaṇṇagavai Rasami Mai is the U.
Kame is the Kumaranandi, Hasaphahase is the Sumucchiyo. || 13 || Mayavaleva is
the Kalusa-Jhaṇammi, Abhi is the Mahapiḍapiḍha Y. Kalahe is the Kamalamela-
Harane, Pun is the Naro Neo. || 14 || Jujhaṇmi is the Koṇiyo Khalu, Pajjo is the
Cheva Suhumathaṇesu. Nijujjhami is the Bharho, Bahubali is the Cheva Ditunto. ||
15 || Sangami is the Bhavadevo, Gahiyava is the Nagila is the Anuratto.
Sangahjaṇammi is the Taha, Davve is the Luḍuvva Mammaṇo. || 16 || Vavaharaṇmi is
the Savatti-Juyalan is the Puttatthaheu is the Vivayantam. ||
Kayamvikkayjaṇammi, Kusagahi is the Luḍdhanando is the U. || 17 ||
Tahaṇatthadanda Jaṇe, Vahaga is the Divaayaṇassa is the Sambai. || Abhogi is the
Bamba Datto, Bambaṇacchhi is the Vikato. || 18 || Anabhoga Jaṇammi is the
Pasanacando is the Maharisio Neo. || Riṇavila Jaṇammi is the Tillaggaha is the
Samaṇabhaghiṇi. || 19 || Verammi is the Farusaramo, Sudāḍho is the Taha is the
Salasisatavasiya. Viyake is the Rajjanimittam, Uhanto is the Caṇako Neo. || 20
|| Hinsa is the Kalasuyara, Ninagavaṇi is the Neo is the Mahesaradatto. Hasammi
is the Caṇḍaruddasa, Bhavisiso is the Samitto is the Y. || 21 || Paha Sammi is
the Pajjo, Varttarisi is the Sama is the Uvahasanto. || Paose is the Kamaṭho
Govo, Kausila is the Sakhavago is the Virassa. || 22 || Faruse is the Culaṇi-
Maṇiraha is the Sappagari is the Saviya is the Pai. || Bhaya Jaṇammi is the Vi
is the Bhaddo, Gayasukuma is the Alasa is the Uvaghai. || 23 || Appapasansa
Jaṇe, Rahakaro is the Ambalubi is the Toḍinto. Paraninda is the Khavago,
Kurugadu is the Pai is the Padiniviththo. || 24 ||  2010_02

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pariziSTam-5 triSaSTidhyAnakathAnakakulakam nidAe AharaNA, thINaddhigayA u
puttalAIyA  /  nIyANaMmI u neyA, gaMgadattAiAharaNA  /  /  12  /  /  nehamI u
marudevI, arahaNNagavairasAmimAI u  /  kAme kumAranaMdI, hAsapahAse sumucchIo  /
/  13  /  /  mAyAvaleva kalusa-jhANaMmI abhi mahApIDhapIDhA ya  /  kalahe
kamalAmelA-haraNe puNa nArao neo  /  /  14  /  /  jujhaMmi koNio khalu, pajjoo
ceva suhumaThANesu  /  nijujjhamI ya bharaho, bAhubalI ceva diTuMto  /  /  15  /
/  saMgami u bhavadevo, gahiyavao nAgilAi aNuratto  /  saMgahajhANaMmi tahA,
davve luDuvva mammaNao  /  /  16  /  /  vavahAraMmi savattI-juyalaM puttatthaheu
vivayaMtaM  /  /  kayaMvikkayajhANaMmI[mi], kusagAhIluddhanaMdo u  /  /  17  /
/  tahaNatthadaMDajhANe, vahagA dIvAyaNassa saMbAI  /  /  AbhogI[ge]
baMbhadatto, baMbhaNaacchI vikato  /  /  18  /  /  aNAbhogajhANaMmI[mi]
pasanacaMdo mahArisI neo  /  /  riNaAvilajhANaMmI[mi] tillaggAhA samaNabhagiNI
/  /  19  /  /  veraMmi pharusarAmo, sudADha[Dho] taha sAlasIsatAvasiyA  /
vIyake rajjanimIttaM, UhaMto cANako neo  /  /  20  /  /  hiMsAe kAlasUyara,
ninagavaNio Neo mahesaradatto  /  hAsaMmI caMDaruddassa, bhAvisIso samitto ya  /
/  21  /  /  pahasaMmi ya pajjoo, vArattarisiM samaM uvahasaMto  /  /  paose
kamaTho govo, kausilasakhavago ya vIrassa  /  /  22  /  /  pharuse culaNI-
maNiraha sappAgariso ya sAviyAi paI  /  /  bhayajhANaMmi vi bhaddo,
gayasukumAlassa uvaghAI  /  /  23  /  /  appapasaMsAjhANe, rahakAro aMbalubi
toDiMto  /  paraniMdAe khavago, kUragaDU pai paDiniviThTho  /  /  24  /  /
2010_02

Page #375 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter 334: Miscellaneous on the Rejection of Eagerness  **Verse 25:**  The
Guṭṭha-Māhila-go, a group of ascetics, were staying at the house of Parigara.
Charudatta, with his bent body and a stick, was staying there.  **Verse 26:**
Sasu, with his constant talk, and Subhadanda, with his lack of self-control,
were staying there.  Rudda, with his constant anger, and Sadosa, with his body
full of faults, were staying there.  **Verse 27:**  At the beginning of the
effort, the example of the crow, who keeps on cawing, is given.  At the
beginning of the effort, the example of the young hawk is given.  **Verse 28:**
In the case of the destruction of the body, the example of the falling and
rising of the sun is given.  In the case of the destruction of the body, the
example of the destruction of the body is given.  **Verse 29:**  In the case of
the destruction of the body, the example of the destruction of the body is
given.  In the case of the destruction of the body, the example of the
destruction of the body is given.  **Verse 30:**  In the case of the destruction
of the body, the example of the destruction of the body is given.  In the case
of the destruction of the body, the example of the destruction of the body is
given.  **Verse 31:**  In the case of the destruction of the body, the example
of the destruction of the body is given.  In the case of the destruction of the
body, the example of the destruction of the body is given.  **Verse 32:**  In
the case of the destruction of the body, the example of the destruction of the
body is given.  In the case of the destruction of the body, the example of the
destruction of the body is given.  **Verse 33:**  In the case of the destruction
of the body, the example of the destruction of the body is given.  In the case
of the destruction of the body, the example of the destruction of the body is
given.  **Verse 34:**  In the case of the destruction of the body, the example
of the destruction of the body is given.  In the case of the destruction of the
body, the example of the destruction of the body is given.  **Verse 35:**  In
the case of the destruction of the body, the example of the destruction of the
body is given.  In the case of the destruction of the body, the example of the
destruction of the body is given.  **Verse 36:**  In the case of the destruction
of the body, the example of the destruction of the body is given.  In the case
of the destruction of the body, the example of the destruction of the body is
given.  **Verse 37:**  In the case of the destruction of the body, the example
of the destruction of the body is given.  In the case of the destruction of the
body, the example of the destruction of the body is given.  **[End of the
Collection of Sixty-Six Stories of Meditation]**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 334 AturapratyAkhyAnaprakIrNakama paragarihAe guTThA-mAhilago
pUsamittaahikhavago  /  parigahajjhANe kuMcaga-siTThI taha cArudatto ya  /  /
25  /  /  paraparivAe sassU, subhadaMdosaM asaMtayaM ditI  /  paradUsaNaMmi
rUddo, aMgaMmi sadoSamAhito  /  /  26  /  /  AraMbhe uddavae,
dIvAyaNaggAyakaraDakaraDatti  /  saMraMbhe saMkappe, khuhagakumAro udAharaNaM  /
/  27  /  /  pAvANumoyaNaMmI, uvarohAvarohiNo uvajjhassa  /  dhaNNatti
saMsagajaNo, nAyavvo hoi AharaNaM  /  /  28  /  /  ArAmAdahigaraNe,
naMdagamaNiyArasiTThiAharaNaM  /  asamAhi-maraNaMmI, khaMdagaM pai pAlago neo  /
/  29  /  /  kammodayaMmi kaNho, puvvaM subhabhAvao vi pajjate  /
kammodayapaJcayao, asuhaMjhANaM jhiyAyaMto  /  /  30  /  /  iDDIgAravajhANe,
dasanabhaddo naresaro neo  /  rasagAravaMmi rAyA, jiyasattU udaganAutto  /  /
31  /  /  sAyAgAravajhANe, diluto ittha hoi nAyavvo  /  'narayattho sasirAyA',
iva gAhutto sasIrAyA  /  /  32  /  /  avveramaNaMjhANe, puttANaM aviraI
ahilasaMtA  /  usuyAruttabhigujasA, mUalagabhAyA yavinneu  /  /  33  /  /  jhANe
amuttimaraNaMmi, muttivigghe niyANakaraNaMmi  /  citteNa nisiddho vi hu,
taJcitto hoi sNbhuuo|| 34  /  /  katthavi rUvaMjhANe, ahiyapayaM dIsae a tado
tammi  /  sagaro [sarUve] saNaMkumAro, pararUve sagaDa govAlo  /  /  35  /  /
iya tevaTThIjhANA, [yathA] sodAharaNA ya kittiyA a  /  kesiMci aTTajhANe,
avatAro kesiM rUddammi  /  /  36  /  /  savvattha biMdulovaM, pAiyabhAvAu ittha
kAUNa  /  aNNAjhANente yaM, thovaM pADho vikatthe va  /  /  37  /  /  [
triSaSTidhyAnakathAnakakulakaM samAptam ] 2010_02

Page #376 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Appendix-6 The root verse, beginning with the letter 'a', is unbroken and
timeless. ||54||.  What is the direction of the soul? ||4||.  Free from external
passions. ||56||.  Uncontrolled, ignorant, and desiring. ||31||.  Devoted to the
words of the Jinas. ||44||.  The enumeration of enjoyments. ||5||.  I have come
to knowledge. ||25||.  Those who are eight-fold. ||37||.  I abandon pride.
||24||.  The time of the call and the response. ||62||.  Those who are disciples
of the Guru. ||43||.  Separation from the body at death, the heavenly abode.
||38||.  Observing, detached. ||7||.  Those who are devoted to food. ||8||.
Devoted to wrong views. ||4||.  Death in the midst of desires. ||6||.  By
thorns, by fire. ||5||.  The root virtues, the subsequent virtues. ||29||.
Fish, due to food. ||52||.  Therefore, the moon and the sun. ||55||.  Passion,
bondage, and attachment. ||23||.  I desire, sir, the highest state... prose.
||11||.  Even one syllable. ||61||.  By passion, by anger, by greed. ||35||.
This is the teaching of the child. ||10||.  They say there are three kinds of
death. ||36||.  What has been obtained, what has not been obtained before.
||64||.  We fly, we are born as animals, we are born as humans. ||47||.  The
separation from the teacher and the teaching. ||1||.  In the celestial abodes,
in the realms of the gods. ||9||.  The death that comes from the body. ||48||.
One should die slowly. ||65||.  The soul, rooted in association. ||28||.  My
only companion is my self. ||27||.  The wise one is free from old age and death.
||71||.  In the wheel of the cycle of existence. ||50||.  One soul wanders.
||26||.  Do not be attached to the pleasures of the senses. ||18||.  Seven
fears, eight delusions. ||30||.  One is born in the same womb. ||60||.  There is
no time or place for that. ||59||.  The acceptance of truth, the rejection of
falsehood. ||46||.  This is the essence of all teachings. ||58||.  Knowledge and
vision. ||67||.  I am a monk, first and foremost. ||63||.  This is the teaching
of the wise. ||70||.  Knowledge and vision are yours. ||34||.  Devoted to right
belief. ||42||.  I offer my salutations. ||12||.  The tooth of the destroyer.
||69||.  My mind is right towards all beings. ||22||.  The desires of the gods
and the demons. ||40||.  I condemn the condemnable. ||32||.  My mind is right
towards all beings. ||14||.  What is the heavenly abode, what is the hell?
||39||.  Five are the vows. ||2||.  All beings are the beginning. ||13||.  The
one who has been long in the womb. ||68||.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pariziSTam-6 mUlazlokA'kArAdiH akaMDe'cirabhAviya  /  / 54  /  /   /  jaM ca
disAveramaNaM  /  / 4 /  /  bAhirajogavirahio  /  / 56 /  /  assaMjamamannANaM
micchattaM  /  / 31 /  /  /  jiNavayaNe aNurattA  /  / 44 /  /  bhogaNaM
parisaMkhA  /  / 5 /  /  AyA hu mahaM nANe  /  / 25 /  /  | je puNa aTThamaIyA
/  / 37 /  /  | mamattaM parivajjAmi  /  / 24 /  /  ArAhaNovautto kAlaM  /  / 62
/  /  | je puNa gurupaDiNIyA  /  / 43 /  /  maraNe virAhie devaduggaI  /  / 38
/  /  Aloiya nissallo  /  / 7 /  /  jo bhattaparinnAe  /  / 8 /  /
micchadaMsaNarattA  /  / 4 /  /  AsukkAre maraNe  /  / 6 /  /  taNakaThehi va
aggI  /  / 5 /  /  mUlaguNe uttaraguNe  /  / 29 /  /  AhAranimitteNaM macchA  /
/ 52 /  /  tamhA caMdagavijjhaM  /  / 55  /  /  rAgaM baMdhaM paosaM  /  / 23 /
/  icchAmi bhaMte uttamaDhe..gadya  /  / 11 /  /  tA egapi silogaM jo  /  / 61 /
/  rAgeNa va doseNa va jaMbhe  /  / 35  /  /  iya bAlapaMDiyaM  /  / 10 /  /
tivihaM bhaNaMti maraNaM  /  / 36 /  /  laddhaM aladdhapuvvaM  /  / 64 /  /
uDDamahe tiriyamivi mayANi  /  / 47 /  /  desikkadesavirao  /  / 1 /  /
vemANiesu kppovgesu||9|| ubveyaNayaM jAI maraNaM  /  / 48 /  /  dhIreNa vi
mariyavvaM  /  / 65  /  /  saMjogamUlA jIveNa  /  / 28  /  /  ego me sAsao appA
/  / 27 /  /  dhIro jaramaraNaviu 71 /  /  saMsAracakkavAlaMmi  /  / 50 /  /
ego vaccai jIvo  /  / 26 /  /  namutthu dhuyapAvANaM  /  / 18 /  /  satta bhae
aTTha mae  /  / 30 /  /  egaMmivi jammi pae  /  / 60 /  /  na hu tammi desakAle
/  / 59 /  /  satyaggahaNaM visabhakkhaNaM  /  / 46 /  /  eyaM savvuvaesaM  /  /
58 /  /  nANassa daMsaNassa ya  /  / 67 /  /  samaNotti ahaM paDhamaM  /  / 63 /
/  eyaM paccakkhANaM jo  /  / 70 /  /   /  nANaMmi daMsaNaMmi ya tave  /  / 34
/  /  sammaiMsaNarattA  /  / 42 /  /  esa karemi paNAmaM  /  / 12 /  /
nikkasAyassa daMtassa  /  / 69 /  /  sammaM me savvabhUesu  /  / 22 /  /
kaMdappadevakibbisa  /  / 40 /  /  niMdAmi niMdaNijjaM  /  / 32 /  /  sammaM me
savvabhUesu  /  / 14  /  /  kA devaduggaI kA abohi  /  / 39 /  /  | paMca ya
aNuvvayAiM  /  / 2 /  /  savvaM pANAraMbhaM  /  / 13 /  /  cirausiyabaMbhayArI
/  / 68 /  /  pANavaha musAvAe  /  / 3 /  /  savvaM cAhAravihiM  /  / 15 /  /
jai uppajjai dukkhaM  /  / 49 /  /  pubviM kayapariNAme  /  / 53 /  /  /  savvaM
pANAraMbhaM pacca  /  / 21 /  /  jaha bAlo jaMpaMto  /  / 33 /  /  bajhaM
abhiMtaraM uvahiM  /  / 20 /  /   /  savvadukkhapahINANaM  /  / 17 /  /  jaM
kiMci vi duccariyaM  /  / 19 /  /  | bAlamaraNANi bahuso  /  / 45 /  /  2010_02

Page #377 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Appendix-7: Verses from the Digambara Mulachara Grantha on the Rejection of the
Sick.  **Verse 17**  The author of the text, having made the rejection of the
sick a separate chapter, explains the meaning of the second chapter, which is
titled "Rejection of the Sick." Alternatively, there are six periods for the
ascetics, of which three are for self-purification, renunciation, and the
highest state of being, which are mentioned in the context of worship. The
remaining three periods, initiation, instruction, and the maintenance of the
community, are mentioned in the context of conduct. In the first three periods,
if death occurs, then the author says, "I have made such a transformation."
**Translation of Verse 37:**  "I bow down to the Siddhas, who are free from all
suffering, and to the Arhats. I believe in the teachings of the Jinas and reject
all that is sinful."  **Explanation:**  * **Sava-dukkha-ppa-hi-na-na-m:** Those
who are free from all suffering, all afflictions, and all dualities.
Alternatively, those who have overcome all suffering. * **Sid-dha-na-m:** To the
Siddhas, those who have attained the eight perfections of omniscience, etc. *
**Ara-ha-do:** To the Arhats, those who have attained the nine Kevala Jnanas
(omniscience). The word "cha" (and) is implied here. * **Na-mo:** I bow down to
them. * **Sad-dha-he:** I have faith in. * **Jin-pan-na-ttam:** The teachings of
the Jinas, the teachings of those who have conquered their karmas. * **Pac-cha-
kha-mi:** I reject, I avoid. * **Pa-va-yam:** Sinful, that which causes
suffering.  Therefore, I bow down to the Siddhas and Arhats, who are free from
all dualities. I have faith in the teachings of the Jinas, which are based on
omniscience, and I reject all sin. Alternatively, the word "namas" (bow down) is
in the past tense in Prakrit, which is implied by the rule of elision.
Therefore, the meaning is: I bow down to the Siddhas and Arhats, and I have
faith in the teachings of the Jinas, and I reject sin. Alternatively, the word
"namas" is in the present tense, and the connection is as follows: I bow down to
the Siddhas and Arhats, who are free from all suffering, and I have faith in the
teachings of the Jinas. I reject sin. This is an example of the principle of
anekanta (multi-facetedness), which allows for multiple interpretations of the
same event.  **Verse 18**  The author again bows down to the Siddhas,
emphasizing their greatness.  **Translation of Verse 38:**  "I bow down to the
Siddhas, who are free from all suffering, and to the great ones. I reject all
that is contrary to the teachings of the Kevalis."  **Explanation:**  * **Na-mo-
tthu:** I bow down. * **Dhu-da-pa-va-na-m:** Those who are free from all
suffering. * **Sid-dha-na-m:** To the Siddhas. * **Cha:** And. * **Ma-he-si-
na-m:** To the great ones. * **San-tha-ram:** That which is contrary to. * **Pa-
di-vaj-ja-mi:** I reject. * **Ja-ha:** As. * **Ke-va-

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pariziSTam-7 digambarIyamUlAcAragranthA'nrtagatAH
zrIAturapratyAkhyAnaprakIrNakagAthAH  /  Atura0 gA0 17
pratyAkhyAnasaMstarastavapratipattRbhyAM sahAbhedaM kRtvAtmanaH graMthakartA
pratyAkhyAnasaMstarastavanAmadheyadvitIyAdhikArArthamAha  /  athavA SaTakAlA
yatInAM bhavanti tatrAtmasaMskArasallekhanottamArthakAlAstrayaH ArAdhanAyAM
kathyate  /  zeSA dIkSAzikSAgaNapoSaNakAlA AcAre, tatrAdyeSu triSu kAleSu
yadyupasthitaM maraNaM tatraivaMbhUtaM pariNAmaM vidadhe'hamityata Aha
savvadukkhappahINANaM siddhANaM arahado Namo  /  saddahe jiNapaNNattaM
paccakkhAmi ya pAvayaM  /  / 37 /  /  savvadukkhappahINANaM-sarvANi ca tAni
duHkhAni ca sarvaduHkhAni samastadvandvAni taiH prahINA rhitaaH| athavA sarvANi
duHkhAni prahINAni yeSAM te sarvaduHkhaprahINAstebhyaH  /  siddhANaM-siddhebhyaH
samyaktvAdyaSTaguNaizvaryebhyaH  /  arahado-arhadbhyazca
navakevalalabdhiprAptebhyazca cazabdo'nukto'pi draSTavyaH  /  Namo-namo namo'sti
tebhyaH  /  saddahe-zraddadhe ruciM kurve  /  jiNapaNNattaM-karmArAtIn jayantIti
jinAH taiH prajJaptaM kathitaM jinaprajJaptaM jinakathitam  /  paccakkhAmi-
pratyAkhyAmi parihare  /  pAvayaM-pApakaMduHkhanimittam  /
sarvadvaMdvarahitebhyaH siddhebhyo'rhadbhyo namostu  /  sarvajJapUrvaka Agamo
yato'stastannamaskArAnantaramAgamazraddhAnaM zraddadhe jinaprajJaptamityuktaM
samyaktvapUrvakaM ca, yataH AcaraNamataH pratyAkhyAmi sarvapApakamityuktam  /
athavA ktvAnto'yaM namaHzabdaH prAkRte lopabalena siddhaH  /  siddhAnarhatazca
namaskRtvA jinoktaM zraddadhe pApaM ca pratyAkhyAmItyarthaH  /  athavA
miGanto'yaM namaHzabdaH tenaivaM sambandhaH kartayaH-sarvaduHkhaprahINAn siddhAn
arhatazca namasyAmi jinAgamaM ca shrdddhe| pApaM ca
pratyAkhyAmItyekakSaNe'nekakriyA ekasya kartuH saMbhavanti
ityanekAntadyotanArthamanena nyAyena sUtrakArasya kathanamiti  /  /  Atura. gA0
18 bhaktiprakarSArthaM punarapi namaskAramAha Namotthu dhudapAvANaM siddhANaM ca
mahesiNaM  /  saMtharaM paDivajjAmi jahA kevalidesiyaM  /  / 38 /  /  2010_02

Page #378 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Appendix-7: Comparison of Fundamental Practices 337 Or, two authorities are
established by the rejection of the layers, or two scriptures are taken, and one
authority is made from them, how is it known? From the performance of two
salutations.  Namoththu-Namo astu. Dhudpavaanam-Dhutam vihatam papam karma
yaiste dhutpapaastebhyah. Siddhaanam cha-Siddhebhyashcha. Mahesinam-
Maharshibhyashcha kevaladhipraptebhyah. Santharam-Samstaram
samyagdarshanajnanacharitratapomayam bhumipashanaphalaakatrunamayam va.
Padivjaami-Prapadiye abhyupagachchaami. Jaha-Yatha. Kevalidesiyam-
Kevalibhirdrishtah kevalijnanibhih pratipaditamyarthah. Dhutpapebhyah siddhebhyo
maharshibhyashcha namo astu. Kevalidrishtam samstaram pratipadyehamiti purvavat
sambandhah kartavya. Siddhaanam namaskaro mangalaadinimittam maharshiinam cha
tadanusthitatvaccheti. Atur Ga. 19 For the purpose of carrying out the vow, it
is said: Jam kinchhi me ducchariyam savvam tivihen vosare. Samaiyam cha tiviham
karemi savvam nirayaram. ||36|| Jam kinchhi-Yatkinchit. Me-Mama. Ducchariyam-
Duschritam papakriyaah. Savvam-Sarvam niravashesham. Tivihen-Trividhen
manovachanakayaih. Vosare-Vyutsrijami pariharaami. Samaiyam cha-Samayikam
samanvibhavam cha. Tiviham-Triprakaram manovachanakayagatam kritakaritamanumatam
va. Karemi-Kurve aham. Savvam-Sarvam sakalam. Nirayaram-Akaarannirgatam
nirakaram nirvikalpam. Samstacharanam nirdhosham yat stokam api duccaritam tat
sarvam vyutsrijami trividhen, samayikam cha sarvam niraticaram nirvikalpam cha
yatha bhavati tatha karomiityarthah, duccaritrakaranam yat tat sarvam
triprakaaraaih manovaakkayaih pariharaamiiti. Atur. Ga. 20 The next sutra says:
Bajjabhantaramuvahim sariraaim cha sabhoyanama. Manasa vachi kayena savvam
tivihen vosare. ||4|| Bajham-Bahyam kshetraadikam. Abhantaram-
Abhyantaramantrangam mithyatvadhi. Uvahim-Upadhim parigraham. Sariraaim cha-
Shariramaadiryasy tatshariraadhikam. Sabhoyanama-Sah bhojanena vartata iti
sabhojanam aharena saha. Manasa vachi karan-Manovaakkayaih. Savvam-Sarvam.
Tivihen-Triprakaaraaih kritakaritamanumataih. Vosare-Vyutsrijami. Bahyam
shariraadhi sabhojanam parigraha, antarangam cha mithyatvadhikam sarvam
triprakaarair manovaakkayaih pariharaamiityarthah. 2010_02

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pariziSTam-7 mUlAcAratulanAgAthAH 337 athavA pratyAkhyAnasaMstarastavau
dvAvadhikArI, dve zAstre vA gRhItvA eko'yaM adhikAraH kRtaH, kuto jJAyate
namaskAradvitayakaraNAditi  /  Namotthu-namo'stu  /  dhudapAvANaM-dhutaM vihataM
pApaM karma yaiste dhutapApastebhyaH  /  siddhANaM ca-siddhebhyazca  /
mahesiNaM-maharSibhyazca kevaladdhiprAptebhyaH  /  saMtharaM-saMstaraM
samyagdarzanajJAnacAritratapomayaM bhUmipASANaphalakatRNamayaM vA  /
paDivajjAmi-prapadye abhyupagacchAmi  /  jahA-yathA  /  kevalidesiyaM-
kevalibhirdRSTaH kevalijJAnibhiH pratipAditamityarthaH  /  dhutapApebhyaH
siddhebhyo maharSibhyazca namo'stu  /  kevalidRSTaM saMstaraM pratipadye'hamiti
pUrvavatsambandhaH kartavyaH  /  siddhAnAM namaskAro maGgalAdinimittaM
maharSINAM ca tadanuSThitatvAcceti  /  Atura gA. 19 pratijJAnirvahaNArthamAha
jaM kiMci me duccariyaM savvaM tiviheNa vosare  /  sAmAiyaM ca tivihaM karemi
savvaM NirAyAraM  /  / 36 /  /  jaM kiMci-yatkiMcit  /  me-mama  /  duccariyaM-
duzcaritaM pApakriyAH  /  savvaM-sarvaM niravazeSam  /  tiviheNa-trividhena
manovacanakAyaiH  /  vosare-vyutsRjAmi pariharAmi  /  sAmAiyaM ca-sAmAyikaM
samanvIbhAvaM ca  /  tivihaM-triprakAraM manovacanakAyagataM kRtakAritAnumataM
vA  /  karemi-kurve'ham  /  savvaM-sarvaM sakalam  /  NirAyAraM-AkArAnnirgataM
nirAkAraM nirvikalpam  /  samastAcaraNaM nirdoSaM yatstokamapi duzcaritaM
tatsarvaM vyutsRjAmi trividhena, sAmAyikaM ca sarvaM niraticAraM nirvikalpaM ca
yathA bhavati tathA karomItyarthaH, duzcaritrakAraNaM yat tatsarvaM triprakAraiH
manovAkkAyaiH pariharAmIti  /  Atura. gA0 20 uttarasUtramAha
bajjhabbhaMtaramuvahiM sarIrAiM ca sabhoyaNaM  /  maNasA vaci kAyeNa savvaM
tiviheNa vosare  /  / 4 /  /  bajhaM-bAhyaM kSetrAdikam  /  abbhaMtaraM-
abhyantaramantaraMgaM mithyAtvAdi  /  uvahiM-upadhiM parigraham  /  sarIrAiM ca-
zarIramAdiryasya taccharIrAdikam  /  sabhoyaNaM-saha bhojanena vartata iti
sabhojanaM AhAreNa saha  /  maNasA vaci kAraNa-manovAkkAyaiH  /  savvaM-sarvam
/  tiviheNa-triprakAraiH kRtkaaritaanumtaiH| vosare-vyutsRjAmi  /  bAhyaM
zarIrAdi sabhojanaM parigraha, antaraMgaM ca mithyAtvAdikaM sarvaM
triprakArairmanovAkkAyaiH pariharAmItyarthaH  /  2010_02

Page #379 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 338 **Aatur Pratyakhyan Prakirnakam** **Aatur. Ga. 21** I renounce all acts
of violence, and all harsh words. I renounce all taking of what is not given,
and all sexual desire and attachment.  **Aatur. Ga. 22** It has been said that I
practice Samayika, but what is its nature? Therefore, it is said: I have
equality towards all beings, I have no enmity towards anyone. I renounce all
desires and attain Samadhi. **Aatur. Ga. 23** I not only renounce enmity, but
also all that gives rise to enmity. Therefore, it is said: I renounce
attachment, aversion, joy, sorrow, and the desire for comfort. I renounce
anxiety, fear, grief, pleasure, and displeasure.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 338 AturapratyAkhyAnaprakIrNakam Atura. gA0 21 savvaM pANAraMbhaM paccakkhAmi
alIyavayaNaM ca  /  savvamadattAdANaM mehUNa pariggahaM ceva  /  / 41 /  /
savvaM pANAraMbhaM-sarvaM prANArambhaM jIvavadhapariNAmam  /  paccakkhAmi-
pratyAkhyAmi dayAM kurve'ham  /  alIyavayaNaM ca-vyalIkavacanaM ca  /  savvaM-
sarvam  /  adattAdANaM-adattasyAdAnaM grahaNamadattAdAnam  /  mehUNa-maithunaM
strIpuruSAbhilASam  /  pariggahaM ceva-parigrahaM caiva bAhyAbhyantaralakSaNam
/  sarvaM hisA'stayasteyAbrahmamUrchAsvarUpaM parityajAmItyarthaH  /  Atura. gA0
22 sAmAyikaM karomItyuktaM tatkiM svarUpamityataH prAha sammaM me savvabhUdesu
veraM majjhaM Na keNavi  /  AsA vosarittANaM samAhiM paDivajjae  /  / 42 /  /
samma-samatA sadRzatvam  /  me-mama  /  savvabhUdesu-sarvANi ca tAni bhUtAni ca
sarvabhUtAni teSu zatrumitrAdiSu prANiSu  /  veraM-vairaM zatrubhAvaH  /
majhaM-mama  /  Na keNa vi-na kenApi  /  AsAAzAH tRSNAH  /  vosarittA-vyutsRjya
parityajya  /  aNaM-imam  /  samAhi-samAdhiM samAdhAnam  /  paDivajjAmi
(paDivajjae)-pratipadye'ham  /  vairaM mama na kenApi saha yataH samatA me
sarvabhUteSu ataH AzA vyutsRjya samAdhi pratipadye'hamiti  /  Atura. gA0 23 naM
kevalaM vairaM tyajAmi, vairanimittaM ca yat tatsarvaM tyajAmItyataH prAh
rAyabaMdhaM padosaM ca harisaM dINabhAvayaM  /  ussugattaM bhayaM sogaM
radimaradiM ca vosare  /  / 44 /  /  rAyabaMdha-rAgasya rAgeNa vA bandho
rAgabandhaH snehAnubandhastam  /  padosaM ca-pradveSamaprItiM ca  /  harisaM-
harSa lAbhAdinA Anandam  /  dINabhAvayaM-dInabhAvaM yAJcAdinA
karuNAbhilASadainyaM ca  /  ussugattaM-utsukatvaM sarAgamanasAnyacintanam  /
bhayaM-bhItim  /  soyaM-zokaM iSTaviyogavazAdanazocanam  /  raiM-
ratimabhipretaprAptim  /  araiM-aratiM abhipretA'prAptim  /  vosare-vyutsRjAmi
/  rAgAnubandhadveSaharSadInabhAvamutsukatvabhayazokaratyaratiM ca
tyajAmItyarthaH  /  JainEducation International 2010_02

Page #380 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Appendix-7:  Root-Conduct Comparison Verses 339 A Aatur. Ga. 24 I abandon self-
attachment, I am a knower of non-self-attachment. My support is the Self, the
rest I abandon. ||45|| Mamatti-self-attachment. Parivjjaami-parivarjaami, I
abandon. Nimmamati-nirmammatvam, non-self-attachment, non-attachment. Uvatthido-
upasthita, present. If everything is abandoned by you, what will be your
support? Therefore it is said-Aalambanam cha, support. Me-my. Aada-Self.
Avasesai-the rest, the many. Vosare-I abandon. What is the point of saying much?
Abandoning everything else, I abandon the three jewels of knowledge, vision,
happiness, and strength, etc. Aatur. Ga. 25 Why is the Self not abandoned by
you? Therefore it is said- The Self is clear in my knowledge, the Self is in my
vision, conduct, and character. The Self is in my renunciation, the Self is in
my restraint, and in my effort. ||46|| Aada-Self. Hu-clearly. Majjha-my. Naane-
knowledge. Aada-Self. Me-my. Dansane-vision, faith in the truth, light. Charitte
ya-conduct, and in the cessation of sinful actions. Aada-Self. Pacchakkhane-
renunciation. Aada-Self. Me-my. Samvare-restraint of the karmic influx. Joee-
yoga, auspicious activity. Aatur. Ga. 26 This one dies, this one is born. For
this one, birth and death are one, this one becomes pure. ||47|| Eoy-one, alone.
Marai-dies, abandons the body. Jeevo-living being, characterized by
consciousness. Eoy-one. Uvavjjaai-is born. Eyassa-of this one. Jaai-birth.
Maranam-death. Eoy-one. Sijjhai-becomes liberated. Neero-pure, without karma.
Aatur. Ga. 27 This one is my eternal Self, characterized by knowledge and
vision. The rest are external phenomena, all characterized by attachment. ||48||
Eoy-one. Me-my. Sassao-eternal, permanent. Appa-Self. Naanadansanalakkhano-
knowledge and vision, characterized by knowledge and vision. Sesaa me-the rest,
the body, etc.   2010_02

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pariziSTam-7 mUlAcAratulanAgAthAH 339 A Atura. gA0 24 mamattiM parivajjAmi
Nimmamattimuvadvido  /  AlaMbaNaM ca me AdA avasesAI vosare  /  / 45 /  /
mamatti-mamatvam  /  parivajjAmi-parivarjAmi parihare'ham  /  Nimmamatti-
nirmamatvamasaMgatvam  /  uvtttthido-upsthitH| yadi sarvaM bhavatA tyajyate
kimAlambanaM bhavaSyatItyata Aha-AlaMbaNaM caAlambanaM cAzrayaH  /  me-mama  /
AdA-AtmA  /  avasesAiM-avazeSANi adhikAni  /  vosarevyutsRjAmi  /  kiM
bahunoktenAntajJAnadarzanasukhavIryaratnatrayAdikaM muktvAnyatsarvaM
tyajAmItyarthaH  /  Atura. gA. 25 AtmA ca bhavatA kimiti kRtvA na parityajyate
ityata Aha AdA hu majjha NANe AdA me daMsaNe caritte ya  /  AdA paccakkhANe AdA
me saMvare joe  /  / 46 /  /  AdA-AtmA  /  hu-sphuTaM  /  majjha-mama  /  NANe-
jJAne  /  AdA-AtmA  /  me-mama  /  daMsaNedarzane tattvArthazraddhAne Aloke vA
/  caritte ya-cAritre ca pApakriyAnivRttau  /  AdA-AtmA  /  paccakkhANe-
pratyAkhyAne  /  AdA-AtmA  /  me-mama  /  saMvare-Asravanirodhe  /  joe-joge
zubhavyApAre  /  /  Atura. gA. 26 eo ya marai jIvo eo ya uvavajjai  /  eyassa
jAimaraNaM eo sijjhai NIrao  /  / 47 /  /  eo ya-ekazcAsahAyazca  /  marai-
mriyate zarIratyAgaM karoti  /  jIvo-jIvaH cetanAlakSaNaH  /  eo ya-ekazca  /
uvavajjaiutpadyate  /  eyassa-ekasya  /  jAi-jAtiH  /  maraNaM-mRtyuH  /  eoekaH
/  sijjhai-siddhayati mukto bhavati  /  NIrao-nIrajAH karmarahitaH  /  Atura.
gA. 27 eo me sassao appA NANadaMsaNalakkhaNo  /  sesA me bAhirA bhAvA sabve
saMjogalakkhaNA  /  / 48 /  /  eo-ekaH  /  me-mama  /  sassao-zAzvato nityaH  /
appA-AtmA  /  NANadaMsaNalakkhaNojJAnaM ca darzanaM ca jJAnadarzane te eva
lakSaNaM yasyAsau jJAnadarzanalakSaNaH  /  sesA me-zeSAH zarIrAdikA 2010_02

Page #381 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 340 **Aaturpratyakhyanprakirnakam**  **Me:** External-external are non-self.
They are objects of existence. All-all are complete. They are characterized by
conjunction. The conjunction of non-self with self is conjunction, and
conjunction is the characteristic of those who are perishable. In knowledge,
vision, conduct, renunciation, restraint, and yoga, I am the self, because I die
and am born as one, because one dies and is born, because one, being water-born,
attains perfection, because all other objects of existence are external,
characterized by conjunction, therefore, I am the only self, characterized by
knowledge and vision, eternal.  **Aatur:** **Verse 28:** Now, why is the object
of existence characterized by conjunction abandoned? To this, he says:  **Verse
49:** Conjunction is the cause, by the self, the chain of suffering is obtained.
Therefore, I abandon all conjunctions with the three-fold body.
**Explanation:** Conjunction is the cause, by the self, the chain of suffering
is obtained. Therefore, I abandon all conjunctions with the three-fold body
(mind, speech, and body).  **Aatur:** **Verse 29:** Again, for the sake of
abandoning bad conduct, he says:  **Verse 50:** The fundamental virtues and the
secondary virtues, which are not practiced by me due to negligence, I condemn
them all, I renounce them, and I will renounce them in the future.
**Explanation:** The fundamental virtues and the secondary virtues, which are
not practiced by me due to negligence, I condemn them all, I renounce them, and
I will renounce them in the future.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 340 AturapratyAkhyAnaprakIrNakama mm| bAhirA-bAhyA anAtmIyAH  /  bhAvA-
padArthAH  /  sabve-sarve samastAH  /  sNjoglkkhnnaasNyoglkssnnaaH|
anAtmanInasyAtmabhAvaH saMyogaH, saMyoga eva lakSaNaM yeSAM te saMyogalakSaNA
vinazvarA ityrthH| jJAnadarzanacAritrapratyAkhyAnasaMvarayogeSu mamAtmaiva, yato
mriyate utpadyate ca eka eva, yataH ekasya jAtimaraNe, yataH ekazca nIrajAH san
siddhiM yAti, yataH zeSAzca sarve bhAvAH saMyogalakSaNA bAhyA yataH, ata eka
evAtmA jJAnadarzanalakSaNaH nityo mameti  /  Atura. gA0 28 atha kimiti kRtvA
saMyogalakSaNo bhAvaH parihriyate iti cedata Aha saMjoyamUlaM jIveNa pattaM
dukkhaparaMparaM  /  tamhA saMjoyasaMbaMdha savvaM tiviheNa vosare  /  / 49 /  /
saMjoyamUlaM-saMyoganimittam  /  jIveNa-jIvena  /  pattaM-prAptaM, labdham  /
dukkhaparaMparaM-duHkhAnAM paramparA duHkhaparamparA klezanairantaryam  /
tamhA-tasmAt  /  saMjoyasaMbaMdha-saMyogasambandham  /  savvaMsarvam  /
tiviheNa-trividhena manovacanakAyaiH  /  vosare-vyutsRjAmi  /  saMyogaheto vena
yato duHkhaparamparA prAptA, tasmAt saMyogasambandhaM sarve trividhena
vyutsRjAmItyarthaH  /  Atura gA0 29 punarapi duzcaritrasya parihArArthamAha
mUlaguNauttaraguNe jo me NArAhio pamAeNa  /  tamahaM savvaM ziMde paDikkame
AgamamissANaM  /  / 50 /  /  mUlaguNa uttaraguNe-mUlaguNAH pradhAnaguNAH,
uttaraguNA abhrAvakAzAdayo mUlaguNadIpakAsteSu mdhye| jo me-yaH kazcinmayA  /
NArAhio-nArAdhito nAnuSThitaH  /  pamAeNa-pramAdena kenacitkAraNAntareNa
sAlasabhAvAt  /  tamahaM-tacchabdaHpUrvakrAntaparAmarzI, tadahaM
mUlaguNAdyanArAdhanam  /  savvaM-sarvam  /  NiMde-nindAmi AtmAnaM jugupse  /
paDikkame-pratikramAmi nirhare na kevalamatItavartamAnakAle AgamissANaM-
AgamiSyati ca kAle  /  ye guNAsteSAM madhye yo nArAdhito guNastamahaM sarvaM
nindayAmi pratikramAmi ceti  /  2010_02

Page #382 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Appendix - 7 Root Conduct Comparison Verses Patient Verse 30 Why are the faults
not abandoned? If they are not abandoned, then I will abandon them. Seven fears,
eight prides, four recognitions, three dignities, thirty-three enjoyments, and
attachment and aversion, I abandon. || 52 || Patient Verse 31 Thus Seven fears -
seven fears (1) Eight prides - eight prides (1) Four recognitions - four
recognitions (food, sex, possessions, and desires). Dignities - dignities
(wealth, taste, beauty, and pride in the world). Three - three. Thirty-three
enjoyments - thirty-three things with which there is connection. Thirty-three
things, enjoyments - enjoyments, insults, these are thirty-three enjoyments, or
because they are the cause of them, they are called by that name. Attachment and
aversion - attachment and aversion, pleasure and displeasure in oneself and in
others. I abandon - I abandon, I do not practice. I abandon the seven fears,
eight prides, four recognitions, three dignities, thirty-three enjoyments, and
attachment and aversion. Unrestrained, ignorance, wrong belief, all that is
mine, in living beings and non-living beings, I condemn and abandon. || 51 || I
Unrestrained - unrestrained, the cause of sin. Ignorance - ignorance, the
perception of things without faith. Wrong belief - wrong belief, faith in what
is not true. All that is mine - all that is mine. Mine - mine, the feeling of
self in the non-self. In living beings and non-living beings - in living beings
and non-living beings. I condemn - I condemn. That too - that too. I abandon - I
abandon, I reveal it to others. I condemn and abandon all that is not worshipped
in the root, middle, and fruit virtues, in the past, present, and future, due to
negligence. I condemn and abandon all unrestrained, ignorance, wrong belief,
etc., in living beings and non-living beings, and mine. Thus, the faults are
abandoned due to the fault of negligence. Patient Verse 32 After the time of
self-reflection, the Acharya said to the monk for the purpose of discussing
renunciation. I condemn and abandon all that is condemnable to me. I examine
everything inside and outside. || 55 || 341 I condemn - I condemn, I reveal to
myself. Condemnable - condemnable, worthy of being revealed to oneself. I
abandon - I abandon, I reveal to the Acharya and others. That which - that
which. Mine - mine. Condemnable - condemnable  2010_02

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pariziSTam - 7 mUlAcAratulanAgAthAH Atura gA. 30 pramAdAH punaH kiM na
parihriyanta iti cenna tAnapi pariharAmItyata Aha satta bhae aTTha mae saNNA
cattAri gArave tiNNi  /  tettIsAccAsaNAo rAyaddosaM ca garihAmi  /  /  52  /  /
Atura0 gA0 31 tathA sattabhae-saptabhayAni 1 aTThamae- aSTau madAni 1 saNNA
cattAri - saMjJAzcatasraH AhArabhayamaithunaparigrahAbhilASAn  /  gArave-
gauravANi RddhirasasAtaviSayagarvAn  /  tiNNi-trINi  /  tettIsAccAsaNAo-
tribhiradhikA triMzat trayastriMzat padArthaiH saha sambandhaH  /
trayastriMzatAM padArthAnAM, accAsaNA-AsAdanAH
paribhavAstAstrayastriMzadAsAdanAH, athavA tannimittatvAt tAcchabdyante  /
rAyaddosaM ca-rAgadveSau ca, AtmanInAnAtmanInavastuprItyaprIti  /  garihAmi
garha nAcarAmItyarthaH  /  saptabhayASTamadasaMjJAgAravANi
trayastriMzatpadArthAsAdanaM ca rAgadveSau ca tyajAmItyarthaH  /
assaMjamamaNNANaM micchattaM savvameva ya mamattiM  /  jIvesu ajIvesu ya taM
ziMde taM ca garihAmi  /  /  51  /  /  I assaMjamaM-asaMyamaM pApakAraNam  /
aNNANaM - ajJAnaM azraddhAnapUrvakavastuparicchedam  /  micchattaM-
mithyAtvamatattvArthazraddhAnam  /  savvameva ya-sarvameva ca  /  mamattiM -
mamattvamanAtmIye AtmIyabhAvam  /  jIvesu ajIvesu ya-jIvAjIvaviSayaM ca  /  taM
NiMde-taM nindAmi  /  taM ca tacca  /  garihAmi garhe'haM parasya prakaTayAmi  /
mUlottaraguNeSu madhye yannArAdhitaM pramAdato'tItAnAgatakAle tatsarvaM nindAmi
pratikramAmi ca  /  asaMyamAjJAnamithyAtvAdi jIvAjIvaviSayaM mamatvaM ca sarvaM
ga nindAmi ceti pramAdadoSeNa doSAstyajyante  /  Atura0 gA0 32 AtmasaMskArakAlaM
nItvA saMnyAsAlocanArthamAcAryaH prAha NidAmi NidaNijjaM garahAmi ya jaM ca me
garahaNIyaM  /  Alocema ya savvaM sabbhaMtarabAhiraM uvahiM  /  /  55  /  /  341
NiMdAmi - nindAmi AtmanyAviSkaromi  /  NiMdaNijjaM - nindanIyaM
AtmAviSkaraNayogyam  /  garahAmi ya ga ca AcAryAdInAmAviSkaromi prakaTayAmi  /
jaMca - yacca  /  me mama  /  garahaNIyaM 2010_02

Page #383 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 342 **Aaturpratyakhyanaprakirnakam**  It is blameworthy to be revealed to
others. I examine, I criticize, I censure, and I blame after examining the
conduct and behavior. All, without exception. All internal and external. I
examine the basis and the attachment. I censure what is censurable, I blame what
is blameworthy, I examine everything, both external and internal, and the basis.
Aatur. Ga. 33  How should one examine? If you ask this, then it is said:  > Just
as a child, speaking, speaks of what is right and what is wrong,
straightforwardly, > So should one examine, having abandoned illusion and
falsehood. || 56 ||  Just as. Child. Speaking. What is right. What is wrong.
Straightforwardly. Speaks. So. Should be examined. Illusion and falsehood.
Having abandoned. Just as a child, speaking, speaks of what is right and what is
wrong, straightforwardly, so should one examine, having abandoned illusion and
falsehood. Aatur. Ga. 34  If you ask, "Whose conduct should be examined?" then
it is said:  > In knowledge, in vision, in austerity, and in conduct, he is
unshakable in all four. > He is a hero, skilled in the scriptures, not a gossip,
and a keeper of secrets. || 57 ||  In knowledge. In vision. In austerity. In
conduct. In all four. Unshakable. Hero. Skilled in the scriptures. Not a gossip.
Keeper of secrets. He who is firmly established in knowledge, vision, austerity,
and conduct, in all four, who is not a gossip, who is a hero, and who is skilled
in the scriptures, his conduct should be examined, not anyone else's. Aatur. Ga.
35  One who desires to seek forgiveness after examination, says:  > Whatever I
have done wrongly, through attachment, through aversion, through negligence, >
Whatever has been said to me, I forgive it all. || 58 ||  Through attachment.
Through aversion. Whatever I have done wrongly. Through negligence. Whatever has
been said to me. I forgive it all.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 342 AturapratyAkhyAnaprakIrNakam garhaNIyaM paraprakAzayogyam  /  Alocemi ya-
AlocayAmi cApanayAmi cAritrAcArAlocanApUrvakaM garhaNaM vA karomi  /  savvaM-
sarvaM niravazeSam  /  sabbhaMtaravAhiraM-sAbhyantarabAhyam  /  uvahi-upadhiM ca
parigrahaM ca  /  yannidanIyaM tannindAmi, yad garhaNIyaM tad garhAmi, sarvaM
bAhyAbhyataraM copadhiM AlocayAmIti  /  Atura. gA. 33 kathamAlocayitavyamiti
cedata Aha jaha bAlo jaMppaMto kajjamakajjaM ca ujjuyaM bhaNadi  /  taha
AloceyavvaM mAyA mosaM ca mottUNa  /  / 56  /  /  jaha-yathA  /  bAlo-bAlaH
pUrvAparavivekarahitaH  /  jaMppaMto-jalpan  /  kajjaM-kAryaM svpryojnm| akajjaM
ca-akAryaM aprayojanaM akartavyaM ca  /  ujjuyaM-Rju akuTilam  /  bhnni-bhnnti|
thtyaa| AloceyavvaM-Alocayitavyam  /  mAyAmosaM ca-mAyAM mRSAM ca apahnavAsatyaM
ca  /  mottuunn-muktvaa| yathA kazcidbAlo jalpan
kutsitAnuSThAnamakutsitAnuSThAnaM ca Rju bhaNati, tathA mAyAM mRSAM ca muktvA
locayitavyamiti  /  Atura. gA. 34 yasyAlocanA kriyate sa kiMguNaviziSTa AcArya
iti cedata Aha NANamhi daMsaNamhi ya tave caritte ya causuvi akaMpo  /  . dhIro
Agamakusalo aparassAI rahassANaM  /  / 57 /  /  NANamhi-jJAne  /  daMsaNamhi ya-
darzane ca  /  tave-tapasi  /  caritte ya-caritre ca  /  causuvicaturdhvapi  /
akaMpo-akaMpo'dhRSyaH  /  dhIro-dhIro dhairyopetaH  /  Agamakusalo-AgamakuzalaH
svasamayaparasamayavicAradakSaH  /  aparissAI-aparizrAvI AlocitaM na kasyacidapi
kathayati  /  rahassANaM-rahasi ekAnte bhavAni rahasyAni guhyAnuSThitAni  /
jJAnadarzanatapazcAritreSu caturdhvapi samyasthito yo rahasyAnAmaparizrAvI
dhIrazcAgamakuzalazca yastasya AlocanA kartavyA nAnyasyeti  /  Atura. gA. 35
AlocanAnantaraM kSamaNaM kartukAmaH prAha rAgeNa ya doseNa ya jaM me akadaNhuyaM
pamAdeNa  /  jo me kiMcivi bhaNio tamahaM savvaM khamAvemi  /  / 58 /  /  rAgeNa
ya-rAgeNa ca mAyAlobhAbhyAM snehena vA  /  doseNa ya-dveSeNa ca krodhamAnAbhyAM
aprItyA _ 2010_02

Page #384 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Appendix-7: Comparison of Fundamental Principles  343 Or. Whatever
ungratefulness was done by me due to negligence, whatever was spoken by me, I
forgive all of it.  Because of attachment and aversion, whatever ungratefulness
was done by me, whatever was spoken by me, I forgive all of it.   A sick person
asks, "Having taken the vow of non-violence, a person who desires to renounce
the world asks about the different types of death. How many types of death are
there?" The Acharya said:  There are three types of death, they say, for the
ignorant, the partially enlightened, and the fully enlightened.   The third type
of death is the death of the enlightened, which the liberated souls experience.
The Arhat Bhattarakas and the Ganadharas also say that there are three types of
death. The first is the death of the ignorant, because they are under the
control of their ignorance. The second is the death of the partially
enlightened, because they are under the control of their partial enlightenment.
The third is the death of the enlightened, which the liberated souls experience.
The partially enlightened also experience the death of the enlightened, because
they are not different from the fully enlightened in terms of their general
control over their senses.   The death of the ignorant is not mentioned here
because it is not relevant.   Those who have a pure understanding of knowledge
and perception experience these types of death.   A sick person asks, "What
about those who are not like this?" The next verse answers this question:  Those
who have lost their minds, whose consciousness is unstable, and who are crooked
in their ways, die without being called "worshippers."   Those who have lost
their minds, whose consciousness is unstable, and who are crooked in their ways,
die without being called "worshippers."

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pariziSTam-7 mUlAcAratulanAgAthA: 343 vA  /  jaMme-yanmayA akadaNhuaM-
akRtajJatvaM yuSmAkamayogyamanuSThitam  /  pamAdeNa-pramAdena  /  jo me-yo myaa|
kiMcivi-kiMcidapi  /  bhaNio-bhaNitaH  /  tamahaM-taM janaM aham  /  savvaM-
sarvam  /  khamAvemi-kSamayAmi saMtoSayAmi  /  rAgadveSAbhyAM manAgapi yanmayA
kRtamakRtajJatvaM yo'pi mayA kiMcidapi bhaNitastamahaM sarvaM marSayAmIti  /
Atura0 gA0 36 kSamaNaM kRtvA kSapakaH saMnyAsaM kartukAmo maraNabhedAn pRcchati
kati maraNAni ? AcAryaH prAha tivihaM bhaNaMti maraNaM bAlANaM bAlapaMDiyANaM ca
/  taiyaM paMDiyamaraNaM jaM kevaliNo aNumaraMti  /  / 59 /  /  tivihaM-
trividhaM triprakAram  /  bhaNaMti-kathayanti  /  maraNaM-mRtyum  /  bAlANaM-
bAlAnAM asaMyatasamyagdRSTInAm  /  bAlapaMDiyANaM cabAlAzca te paMDitAzca
bAlapaMDitAH  /  saMyatAsaMyatA ekendriyAviraterbAlAH dvIndriyAdivaviratAH
paMDitAH  /  taiyaM-tRtIyam  /  paMDiyamaraNaM-paMDitamaraNaM paMDitAnAM maraNaM
dehaparityAgaH dehasyAnyathAbhAvo vA paMDitamaraNam  /  jaM-yat yena vA  /
kevaliNokevalaM zuddhaM jJAnaM vidyate yeSAM kevalinaH  /  aNumaraMti-
anumriyante arhadbhaTTArakA gaNadharadevAzca triprakAraM maraNaM bhaNanti  /
prathamaM bAlamaraNaM bAlajIvasvAmitvAt, dvitIyaM bAlapaMDitamaraNaM
bAlapaMDitasvAmitvAt, tRtIyaM paMDitamaraNaM yena kevalino'numriyante  /
saMyatAzca paMDitapaMDitamaraNasyAtraiva paMDitentarbhAvaH
sAmAnyasaMyamasvAmitvAbhedAditi  /  anyatra bAlabAlamaraNamuktaM tadatra kimiti
kRtvA noktaM tena prayojanAbhAvAt  /  ye akuTilA jJAnadarzanayuktAste
etairmaraNaimriyante  /  Atura. gA0 37 anyathAbhUtAzca kathamityuttarasUtramAha
je puNa paNaTTamadiyA pacaliyasaNNA ya vakkabhAvA ya  /  asamAhiNA marate Na hu
te ArAhayA bhaNiyA  /  / 60 /  /  je puNa-ye punaH  /  paNaTThamadiyA-praNaSTA
vinaSTA matiryeSAM te praNaSTamatikAH ajJAninaH  /  pacaliyasaNNA ya-pracalitA
udgatA saMjJA AhArabhayamaithunaparigrahAbhilASA yeSAM te pracalitasaMjJakAH  /
vakkabhAvA ya-kuTilapariNAmAzca  /  asamAhiNA-asamAdhinA ArtaraudradhyAnena  /
marate-mriyante bhavAntaraM gacchanti  /  Na hu-na khalu  /  ArAhayA-ArAdhakAH
karmakSayakAriNaH  /  bhaNiyA-bhaNitAH kathitAH  /  ye praNaSTamatikAH
pracalitasaMjJA vakrabhAvAzca te asamAdhinA mriyante sphuTaM na te ArAdhakA
bhaNitA iti  /  _ 2010_02

Page #385 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 344 **Aaturpratyakhyanprakirnakam**  **Aatur. Ga. 38** When asked, "What
happens at the time of death?", the Acharya said:  > "At the time of death, when
right faith is destroyed, heavenly rebirth is difficult to attain, and
enlightenment is also difficult to attain. Indeed, the cycle of existence is
endless, and it will continue in the future."  **Explanation:**  * **Mranē:** At
the time of death. * **Virahiē:** Destroyed, lost. Here, it refers to the loss
of right faith at the time of death. * **Dēvaduggāī:** Heavenly rebirth, birth
in the realm of gods, celestial beings, or those who dwell in the heavens. *
**Dullhā y:** Difficult to attain, hard to achieve. * **Kir:** Indeed, truly.
This word has many meanings, but here it indicates that this is what is stated
in the scriptures. * **Bōhī:** Enlightenment, right faith, or the three jewels
(right faith, right knowledge, and right conduct). * **Samsārō y:** The cycle of
existence, the four realms of existence (gods, humans, animals, and hell
beings). * **Aṇantō:** Endless, infinite. It is infinite because it is the
object of omniscience. * **Hōī:** Becomes, exists. * **Puṇō:** Again, once more.
* **Āgamē kālē:** In the future, in the time to come.  **Meaning:** When right
faith is destroyed at the time of death, heavenly rebirth becomes difficult,
enlightenment is also difficult to attain, and the cycle of existence, which is
endless, will continue in the future.  **Aatur. Ga. 39**  In connection with
this, the following sutra is asked as a question:  > "What are the heavenly
rebirths, what is enlightenment, and what causes death to be misunderstood? What
causes the soul to wander in the endless cycle of existence?"  **Explanation:**
* **Kā dēvaduggāīō:** What are the heavenly rebirths? What are the specific
types of heavenly rebirths? * **Kā bōhī:** What is enlightenment? * **Kēṇ v:**
By what, by what cause? * **ṇ bujhae:** Does not understand, does not
comprehend. * **Mranam:** Death. * **Kēṇ v:** By what cause? * **Aṇanta pāre:**
Endless, infinite, without limit. * **Samsārē:** In the cycle of existence. *
**Hiṇḍae:** Wanders, travels, goes. * **Jīvō:** The soul, the living being.
**Meaning:** O Bhattaraka! What are the heavenly rebirths, what is
enlightenment, and what causes death to be misunderstood? What causes the soul
to wander in the endless cycle of existence?  **Aatur. Ga. 40**  When asked by
Kṣapaka, the Acharya said:  > "Attachment to sensual pleasures, excessive
pride, and demonic delusion - these are the causes of heavenly rebirth being
lost at the time of death."  **Explanation:**  * **Kandapa mābhijōggam:**
Attachment to sensual pleasures. * **Kibbis:** Excessive pride. * **Sammōham
āsurattāṁ cā:** Demonic delusion. * **Tā dēvaduggāīō:** These heavenly rebirths.
* **Mranammi virahiē hōnti:** Are lost at the time of death.  **Meaning:**
Attachment to sensual pleasures, excessive

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 344 AturapratyAkhyAnaprakIrNakam Atura. gA. 38 yadi maraNakAle vipariNAmaH
syAttataH kiMsyAditi pRSTe AcAryaH prAha maraNe virAhie devaduggaI dullahA ya
kira bohI  /  saMsAro ya aNaMto hoi puNo Agame kAle  /  / 61 /  /  maraNe-
mRtyukAle  /  virAhie-virAdhite vinAzite maraNakAle samyaktve virAdhita
ityarthaH maraNakAle samyaktvasya yadvirAdhanaM tanmaraNasyaiva sAhacaryAditi  /
athavArtaraudradhyAnasahitaM yanmaraNaM tattasya viraadhnmityuktm| devaduggaI-
devadurgatiH bhavanavAsivAnavyantarajyotiSkAdiSUtpattiH  /  dullahA ya-durlabhA
duHkhena labhyate iti durlabhA ca  /  kira-kila  /  ayaM kilazabdo'nekeSvartheSu
vidyate, tatra parokSe draSTavyaH Agame evamuktamityarthaH  /  bohI-bodhiH
samyaktvaM ratnatrayaM vA  /  saMsAro ya-saMsArazca caturgatilakSaNaH  /
aNaMto-anantaH arddhapudgalapramANaH kuto'syAnantatvaM ? kevalajJAnaviSayatvAt
/  hoi-bhavati  /  puNo-punaH  /  Agame kAle-AgamiSyati samaye  /  maraNakAle
samyaktvavirAdhane sati, durgatirbhavati, bodhizca durlabhA, AgamiSyati kAle
saMsArazcAnanto bhavatIti  /  Atura. gA0 39 atraivAbhisambandhe praznapUrvakaM
sUtramAha kA devaduggaIo kA bohI keNa Na bujjhae maraNaM  /  keNa va aNaMtapAre
saMsAre hiMDae jIo  /  / 62 /  /  kA devaduggaIo-kA devadurgatayaH kiMviziSTA
devadurgatayaH  /  kA bohI-kA bodhiH  /  keNa vakena ca  /  Na bujhae-na
budhyate  /  maraNaM-mRtyuH  /  keNa va-kena ca kAraNena  /
aNaMtapAreananto'parimANaH pAraH samAptiryasyAsau anantapArastasmin  /  saMsAre-
saMsaraNe  /  hiMDae-hiNDate gacchati  /  jIvo-jIvaH  /  he bhaTTAraka ! kA
devadurgatayaH kA ca bodhiH, kena ca pariNAmena na budhyate maraNaM, saMsAre ca
kena kAraNena paribhramati jIvaH ? Atura. gA0 40 kSapakeNa pRSTaH AcAryaH prAha
kaMdappamAbhijoggaM kibbisa sammohamAsurattaM ca  /  tA devaduggaIo maraNammi
virAhie hoMti  /  / 63 /  /  2010_02

Page #386 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Appendix-7 Root Conduct Comparison Verses: 345 If the essence of the substance
and the essence of the emotion are considered to be the same, then this is said:
Kandappa - the essence of Kandarpa, the quality of Kandarpa that is prone to
attraction. Abhijogganga - the essence of Abhiyoga, the Abhiyogyantantra, the
practice of mantras and other things that are frightening and terrifying. Kibbis
- the essence of Kilvisha, the Kailvisha, the practice of unfavorable conduct.
Sammoham - one's own delusion, the essence of one's own delusion, the state of
being deluded, the delusion like the delusion of a dog, the one who has the
delusion of the rise of the Vedas, the essence of that is the state of being
deluded, the state of being deluded with delusion, the meaning of the state of
being deluded. Asuratta - the state of being an Asura, the essence of an Asura,
the state of being an Asura, the practice of conduct that is accompanied by the
outcome of anger. Ta - these. Devaduggaio - the evil destinies of the gods,
these are attained by those qualities, therefore the designation, because the
cause is treated as the effect. Maranamma - at death, at the time of death, in
the state of right faith, Virahie - in the state of being rejected, in the state
of being despised. Honti - they become. In the state of right faith, when it is
destroyed at the time of death, these Kandarpa, Abhiyogy, Kilvisha, self-
delusion, Asura, and evil destinies of the gods become. Atur. Ga. 41, explaining
the enlightenment through the door of difference, he says: Micchadasanaratta
sanidana kinhalelesamogadha. Iha je maranti jiva tesim pun dullha bohi. ||69||
Micchadasanaratta - those who are attached to the wrong view, those who are fond
of the untrue meaning. Sanidana - those who have a desire to speak with a cause.
Kinhalelesam - the practice of yoga that is attached to the infinite number of
karmas that are like black specks. Ogadha - those who have entered into the
outcome of anger. Iha - in this. Je - those. Maranti - they die, they abandon
their lives. Jiva - living beings. Tesim - of them. Pun - again. Dullha -
difficult to obtain. Bohi - enlightenment, the auspicious outcome that is
accompanied by right faith. In this, those living beings who are attached to the
wrong view, who have a desire to speak with a cause, and who have entered into
the practice of yoga that is attached to the infinite number of karmas that are
like black specks, die, for them, again, enlightenment is difficult to obtain.
The best explanation is that enlightenment is not destroyed even by the mere
change of half of the pudgala, therefore, its identity with enlightenment,
therefore, the characteristic of enlightenment is explained. Atur. Ga. 42, he
explains the characteristic of enlightenment through the connection:
Sammainsanaratta aniyana sukkalesamogadha. Iha je maranti jiva tesim sulha have
bohi. ||70|| Sammainsanaratta - those who are attached to the right view, those
who are fond of the true meaning. Aniyana - those who do not have a desire for
this world or the next world. Sukkalesam - in the practice of yoga that is
attached to the infinite number of karmas that are like white specks. Ogadha -
those who have entered into the practice of yoga that is attached to the
infinite number of karmas that are like white spec

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pariziSTam-7 mUlAcAratulanAgAthA: 345 dravyabhAvayorabhedaM kRtvA cedamucyate
/  kaMdappaM-kaMdarpasya bhAvaH kAndarpamupaplavazIlaguNaH  /  AbhijoggaM-
abhiyogasya bhAvaH AbhiyogyaM tantramantrAdibhIrasAdigAzyam  /  kibbisa-
kilviSasya bhAvaH kailviSyaM pratikUlAcaraNam  /  sammohaM-svasya mohaH
svamohastasya bhAvaH svamohatvaM, zuno moha iva moho vedodayo yasya sa
zvamohastasya bhAvaH zvamohatvaM saha mohena vA vartate iti tasya bhAvaH
samohatvaM mithyAtvabhAvanAtAtparyam  /  AsurattaM ca-asuratvaM ca-asurasya
bhAvaH asuratvaM raudrapariNAmasahitAcaraNam  /  tA-etAH  /  devaduggaIo-
devadurgatayastairguNaistAH prApyante itikRtvA tadvyapadezaH, kAraNe
kAryopacArAt  /  maraNammi-maraNe mRtyukAle samyaktve, virAhie-virAdhite
paribhUte  /  hoMti-bhavanti  /  samyaktve vinAzite maraNakAle etAH
kandarpAbhiyogyakilviSasvamohAsuradevadurgatayo bhavantIti  /  Atura. gA. 41
vyatirekadvAreNa bodhiM pratipAdayannAha micchAdasaNarattA saNidANA
kiNhalesamogADhA  /  iha je maraMti jIvA tesiM puNa dullahA bohI  /  / 69 /  /
micchAdasaNarattA-mithyAtvadarzanaraktAH atattvArtharucayaH  /  saNidANA-saha
nidAnenAkAMkSayA vakta iti sanidAnAH  /  kiNhalesaM-kRSNalezyAM
anantAnubandhikaSAyAnuraJjitayogapravRttim  /  ogADhA-AgADhA praviSTA
raudrapariNAmAH  /  iha-asmin  /  je-ye  /  maraMti-mriyante prANAMstyajanti  /
jIvA-jIvAH prANinaH  /  tesiM-teSAm  /  puNa-punaH  /  dullahA-durlabhAH  /
bohI-bodhiH samyaktvasahitazubhapariNAmaH  /  iha ye jIvAH
mithyAtvadarzanaraktAH, sanidAnAH, kRSNalezyAM praviSTAzca mriyante teSAM
punarapi, durlabhA bodhiH  /
utkRSTato'rdhapudgalaparivartanamAtrAtsamyaktvAvinAbhAvitvAdbodheratastAdAtmyaM
tato bodhereva lakSaNaM vyAkhyAtamiti  /  Atura. gA0 42 anvayenApi
bodherlakSaNamAha sammaiMsaNarattA aNiyANA sukkalesamogADhA  /  iha je maraMti
jIvA tesiM sulahA have bohI  /  / 70 /  /  sammaiMsaNarattA-samyagdarzanaraktAH
tattvarucayaH  /  aNiyANA-anidAnA ihaparalokAnAkAMkSAH  /  sukkalessaM-
zuklalezyAm  /  ogADhA-AgADhA praviSTAH  /  iha-asmin  /  je-ye  /  maraMti-
mriyante  /  jIvA-jIvAH  /  tesiM-teSAm  /  sulahA-sulabhA sukhena labhyA  /
have-bhavet  /  2010_02

Page #387 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 346 ## Aaturpratyakhyanaprakiirnakam ## Bohi-Bodhi:  Here, those souls who
are attached to right faith, are not afflicted by karma, and have entered the
white stage of karma, when they die, they easily attain enlightenment. Although
the meaning of this has been understood from the previous sutra, this is a
repetition for the sake of collecting the meaning of the substance, the meaning
of the synonyms, and the disciples. It is also for the sake of completely
negating the opposite view. Aatur. Ga. 43, while explaining the nature of the
cause of samsara, says:  > "Those who are opposed to the gurus, are full of
delusion, are wicked, and are attached to the impurities, and die without
concentration, they become bound to infinite samsara." (71)  > "Those who are
opposed to the gurus, are full of delusion, are wicked, and are attached to the
impurities, and die without concentration, they become bound to infinite
samsara." (71)  > "Those who are opposed to the gurus, are full of delusion, are
wicked, and are attached to the impurities, and die without concentration, they
become bound to infinite samsara." (71)  > "Those who are opposed to the gurus,
are full of delusion, are wicked, and are attached to the impurities, and die
without concentration, they become bound to infinite samsara." (71)  > "Those
who are opposed to the gurus, are full of delusion, are wicked, and are attached
to the impurities, and die without concentration, they become bound to infinite
samsara." (71)  > "Those who are opposed to the gurus, are full of delusion, are
wicked, and are attached to the impurities, and die without concentration, they
become bound to infinite samsara." (71)  > "Those who are opposed to the gurus,
are full of delusion, are wicked, and are attached to the impurities, and die
without concentration, they become bound to infinite samsara." (71)  > "Those
who are opposed to the gurus, are full of delusion, are wicked, and are attached
to the impurities, and die without concentration, they become bound to infinite
samsara." (71)  > "Those who are opposed to the gurus, are full of delusion, are
wicked, and are attached to the impurities, and die without concentration, they
become bound to infinite samsara." (71)  > "Those who are opposed to the gurus,
are full of delusion, are wicked, and are attached to the impurities, and die
without concentration, they become bound to infinite samsara." (71)  > "Those
who are opposed to the gurus, are full of delusion, are wicked, and are attached
to the impurities, and die without concentration, they become bound to infinite
samsara." (71)  > "Those who are opposed to the gurus, are full of delusion, are
wicked, and are attached to the impurities, and die without concentration, they
become bound to infinite samsara." (71)  > "Those who are opposed to the gurus,
are full of delusion, are wicked, and are attached to the impurities, and die
without concentration, they become bound to infinite samsara." (71)  > "Those
who are opposed to the gurus, are full of delusion, are wicked, and are attached
to the impurities, and die without concentration, they become bound to infinite
samsara." (71)  > "Those who are opposed to the gurus, are full of delusion, are
wicked, and are attached to the impurities, and die without concentration, they
become bound to infinite samsara." (71)  > "Those who are opposed to the gurus,
are full of delusion, are

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 346 AturapratyAkhyAnaprakIrNakam bohI-bodhiH  /  iha ye jIvAH
samyagdarzanaraktAH, anidAnAH, zuklalezyAM praviSTAH santo mriyante teSAM
sulabhA bodhiriti| yadyapi pUrvasUtreNAsyArthasya pratItistathApi
dravyArthikaparyAyArthikaziSyasaMgrahArthaH punarArambhaH
ekAntamatanirAkaraNArthaM ca  /  Atura. gA0 43 saMsArakAraNasvarUpaM
pratipAdayannAha je puNa gurupaDiNIyA bahumohA sasabalA kusIlA ya  /  asamAhiNA
maraMte te hoMti aNaMtasaMsArA  /  / 71 /  /  je puNa-ye punaH  /  gurupaDiNIyA-
guruNAM pratyanIkAH pratikUlAH gurupratyanIkAH  /  bahumohAmohapracurAH
rAgadveSAbhihatAH  /  sasabalA-saha zabalena lepena vartante iti sazabalAH
kutsitAcaraNAH  /  kusIlA ya-kuzIlAH kutsitaM zIlaM vrataparirakSaNaM yeSAM te
kuzIlAzca  /  asamAhiNA-asamAdhinA mithyAtvasamanvitAtaraudrapariNAmena  /
marate-mriyante  /  te-te  /  hoMti-bhavanti te evaM viziSTAH  /  aNaMtasaMsArA-
anantasaMsArA ardhapudgalapramANasaMsRtayaH  /  ye punaH gurupratikUlAH,
bahumohAH kuzIlAste'samAdhinA mriyante tatazcAnantasaMsArA bhavantIti  /  Atura.
gA. 44 atha parItasaMsArAH kathaM bhavantIti cedataH prAha jiNavayaNe aNurattA
guruvayaNaM je karaMti bhAveNa  /  asabala asaMkiliTThA te hoMti parittasaMsArA
/  / 72 /  /  jiNavayaNe-jinasya vacanamAgamaH tasminnarhatpravacane  /
aNurattA-anuraktAH suSThu bhaktAH  /  guruvayaNaM-guruvacanamAdezaM, je karaMti-
ye kurvati, bhAveNa-bhAvena bhaktyA mNtrtNtrshaastraanaakaaNkssyaa| asabala-
azavalA mithyAtvarahitAH  /  asaMkiliTThA-asaMkliSTAH zuddhapariNAmAH  /  te
hoMti-te bhavanti  /  parittasaMsArA-parItaH parityaktaH parimito vA saMsAraH
caturgatigamanaM yeSAM kurvA te parItasaMsArAH parityaktasaMsRtayo vA  /
jinapravacane ye'nuraktAH guruvacanaM ca bhAvena kurvanti, azabalAH, asaMkliSTAH
santaste parityaktasaMsArA bhavantIti  /  2010_02

Page #388 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Appendix-7: Comparison of Fundamental Principles: 347 Aatur. Ga. 45 If there is
no devotion to the words of the Jinas, then what would be the result? It is
said: Many are the deaths of children, many are the deaths that are not desired.
Those who do not know the words of the Jinas, they are unfortunate. ||73||
Balamaranaani - The deaths of children, the deaths of those who do not have the
taste for truth.  The giving up of the body is balamaranaani. Bahuso - Many,
many types. Bahuaani - Many, abundant. Akamayaani - Not desired, not done by
desire. Maranaani - Deaths. Marihanti - They will die, meaning they will attain
death. Te varaaya - Those who are unfortunate, those who are helpless. Je
jinavayanam - Those who know the words of the Jinas, the omniscient knowledge.
Na jaananti - They do not know, they do not understand. Those who do not know
the words of the Jinas, they are unfortunate, they will attain many types of
deaths, many deaths that are not desired. Aatur. Ga. 46 Then what are those
deaths of children? It is said: Taking up a weapon, eating poison, burning,
entering water. Those who serve the vessels of unrighteousness, they are bound
by birth and death. ||74|| Saththaggahanam - Taking up a weapon, killing oneself
with a weapon, taking up a weapon. The death that arises from taking up a weapon
is also taking up a weapon, because of the relationship between action and
cause. Visabhakkanam - Eating poison, consuming a substance that is deadly
poison, eating poison, the relationship is the same. Cha - Conjunction. Jalanam
- Burning, the burning that arises from fire. Jalappaveso ya - Entering water,
immersing oneself in water, drowning, entering water, the death that arises from
this, or it itself. Anayarabhandasevi - Those who serve the vessels of
unrighteousness, unrighteousness is not righteousness, it is sinful action, the
vessel is the object, they serve it, thus they are those who serve the vessels
of unrighteousness, the relationship is with death. Or, the relationship is with
the person, they are those who serve the vessels of unrighteousness.
Jammanamaranaanubandhiini - Birth, origin, death, the relationship between them,
offspring, those who have this, they are bound by birth and death, meaning they
are the causes of samsara. These deaths are bound by birth and death, they are
those who serve the vessels of unrighteousness, therefore they are the deaths of
children. Or, these deaths are those who serve the vessels of unrighteousness,
they are the causes of samsara, not of righteous conduct. 2010_02

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pariziSTam-7 mUlAcAratulanAgAthA: 347 Atura. gA0 45 yadi jinavacane'nurAgo na
syAdataH kiM syAdataH prAha bAlamaraNANi bahuso bahuyANi akAmayANi maraNANi  /
marihaMti te varAyA je jiNavayaNaM Na jANaMti  /  / 73 /  /  bAlamaraNANi-
bAlAnAmatattvarucInAM maraNAni zarIratyAgA bAlamaraNAni  /  bahuso-bahuzaH
bahUni bahuprakArANi vA  /  bahuANi-bahukAni pracurANi  /  akAmayANi-akAmakRtAni
anabhipretAni  /  maraNANi-mRtyun  /  marihaMti-mariSyanti mRtyu
prApsyantItyarthaH  /  te varAyA-ta evaMbhUtA varAkA anAthAH  /  je jiNavayaNaM-
ye jinavacanaM sarvajJAgamam  /  Na jANaMti-na jAnanti nAvabudhyante  /  ye
jinavacanaM na jAnanti te varAkA bAlamaraNAni bahuprakArANi akAmakRtAni ca
bahUni maraNAni prApsyantIti  /  Atura. gA0 46 atha kAni tAni bAlamaraNAnItyata
Aha satthaggahaNaM visabhakkhaNaM ca jalaNaM jalappaveso ya  /
aNayArabhaMDasevI jammaNamaraNANubaMdhINi  /  / 74  /  /  satthaggahaNaM-
zastreNAtmano grahaNaM mAraNaM zastragrahaNam  /  zastragrahaNAdutpannaM
maraNamapi zastragrahaNaM kArye kAraNopacArAt  /  visabhakkhaNaM-viSasya
mAraNAtmakadravyasya bhakSaNamupayuMjanaM viSabhakSaNaM tathaiva sambandhaH
kartavyaH  /  ca-samuccayArthaH  /  jalaNaM-jvalanAdagnerutpannaM jvalanam  /
jalappaveso ya-jale pAnIye pravezo nimajjanaM nirucchvAsaM jalapravezazca
tasmAjjAtaM sa eva vA maraNam  /  aNayArabhaNDasevI-anAcArabhANDasevI na
AcAro'nAcAraH pApakriyA sa eva bhANDaM dravyaM tatsevata ityanAcArabhANDasevI
maraNena sambandhaH  /  athavA puruSeNa sambandhaH anAcArabhANDasevI tasya  /
jammaNamaraNANubaMdhINi-janma utpattiH, maraNaM mRtyustayoranubandhaH santAnaH
sa yeSAM vidyate tAni janmamaraNAnubandhIni saMsArakAraNAnItyarthaH  /  etAni
maraNAni janmamaraNAnubandhIni anAcArabhANDasevIni yato'to bAlamaraNAnIti  /
athavA anAcArasevIni etAni maraNAni saMsArakAraNAnIti na sadAcArasya  /  2010_02

Page #389 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 348 **Aaturpratyakhyanaprakirnakam**  **Aatur.** Ga. 47 And hearing this, the
क्षपक ( क्षपक is a term for a person who is about to die) becomes engrossed in
contemplation and sorrow, and thinks:  > "Many deaths of children have been
experienced in the higher realms, the lower realms, and among the Tiryanchas
(animals). I will embrace the death of a wise person, along with the knowledge
and vision." (75)  **Explanation:**  * **Uddham:** Higher realms (heavenly
realms). * **Adho:** Lower realms (hellish realms). * **Tiryancha:** Animals,
beings with one to five senses. * **Kadaani:** Experienced, obtained. *
**Bahugaani:** Many. * **Darshananaanasah:** With knowledge and vision. *
**Gado:** Obtained, attained. * **Pandiyarana:** Death of a wise person, death
with pure conduct and character. * **Anumarisse:** I will embrace, I will
accept.  **Meaning:** The क्षपक is reflecting on the many deaths of children he
has witnessed in various realms. He realizes that the death of a wise person,
accompanied by knowledge and vision, is the path he should choose.  **Aatur.**
Ga. 48 Remembering these deaths caused by anxiety and birth, and the suffering
in hell, he decides to embrace the death of a wise person. He says:  > "I will
embrace the death of a wise person, remembering the deaths caused by anxiety and
birth, and the suffering in hell." (76)  **Explanation:**  * **Ubbeyamaranam:**
Death caused by anxiety, death due to separation from loved ones or association
with undesirable things. * **Jaadimarana:** Death at birth, death of a fetus in
the womb. * **Niraesu:** In hell. * **Vedanao y:** Suffering, pain. *
**Edaani:** These. * **Sanbharanto:** Remembering. * **Pandiyarana:** Death of a
wise person. * **Anumarisse:** I will embrace, I will accept.  **Meaning:** The
क्षपक is reflecting on the suffering caused by anxiety, birth, and hell. He is
determined to embrace the death of a wise person, as it offers a path to
liberation from these cycles of suffering.  **Why is the death of a wise person
the best among all deaths?**  > "One death of a wise person cuts through many
hundreds of births. That death should be embraced, which leads to complete
liberation." (77)  **Explanation:**  * **Ekkam:** One. * **Pandiyarana:** Death
of a wise person. * **Chindadi:** Cuts through. * **Jaadisayaani:** Hundreds of
births. * **Bahugaani:** Many. * **Tam:** That. * **Maranam:** Death, separation
of the body and senses. * **Maridavvam:** Should be embraced, should be
accepted. * **Jena:** By which. * **Madam:** Dead. * **Summadam:** Completely
liberated. * **Hodi:** Becomes.  **Meaning:** The क्षपक emphasizes that the
death of a wise person is the most beneficial, as it cuts through the cycle of
birth and death, leading to complete liberation. He urges the listener to
embrace this path, as it is the only way to achieve true freedom from suffering.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 348 AturapratyAkhyAnaprakIrNakama Atura. gA. 47 evaM zrutvA kSapakaH
saMveganirvedaparAyaNa evaM cintayati uDDhamagho tiriyahi du kadANi bAlamaraNANi
bahugANi  /  daMsaNaNANasahagado paMDiyamaraNaM aNumarisse  /  / 75 /  /  uDDhe-
UrdhvaM Urdhvaloke  /  adho-adhasi adholoke narakabhavanavyantarajyotiSkakalpe
/  tiriyahi du-tiryakSu ca ekendriyAdipaMcendriyaparyantajAtiSu  /  kadANi-
kRtAni prAptAni bAlamaraNAni  /  bahugANi-bahUni  /  daMsaNaNANasaha-
darzanajJAnAbhyAM sArdhaM, gado-gataH prAptaH, paMDiyamaraNaMpaNDitamaraNaM
zuddhapariNAmacAritrapUrvakaprANatyAgam  /  aNumarisse-anumariSyAmi saMnyAsaM
kariSyAmi  /  UrdhvAdhastiryakSu ca bahUni bAlamaraNAni yato mayA prAptAni, ato
darzanajJAnAbhyAM sArdhaM paNDitamaraNaM gato'haM mariSyAmIti  /  Atura. gA. 48
etAni cAkAmakRtAni maraNAni smaran paNDitamaraNamanumariSyAmItyata Aha
ubveyamaraNaM jAdImaraNaM Niraesu vedaNAo ya  /  edANi saMbharaMto
paMDiyamaraNaM aNumarisse  /  / 76 /  /  uvveyamaraNaM-udvegamaraNaM
iSTaviyogAniSTasaMyogAbhyAM trAsena vA maraNam  /  jAdImaraNaM-jAtimaraNaM
utpannamAtrasya mRtyurgarbhasthasya vA  /  Niraesu-narakeSu  /  vedaNAo ya-
vedanAzca pIDAzca  /  edANi-etAni  /  saMbharaMto-saMsmaran  /  paMDidamaraNaM-
paNDitamaraNam  /  aNumarisse-anumariSyAmi prANatyAgaM kariSyAmi  /  etAni
udvegajAtimaraNAni narakeSu vedanAzca saMsmaran paNDitamaraNaM prAptaH san
prANatyAgaM kariSyAmi  /  kimarthaM paMDitamaraNaM maraNeSu zubhatamaM yataH
ekkaM paMDidamaraNaM chiMdadi jAdIsayANi bahugANi  /  taM maraNaM maridavvaM
jeNa madaM summadaM hodi  /  / 77 /  /  ekkaM-ekaM  /  paMDidamaraNaM-
paMDitamaraNam  /  chiMdadi-chinatti  /  jAdIsayANi-jAtizatAni  /  bahugANi-
bahUni  /  taM-tat tena vA  /  maraNaM-zarIrendriyayoviyogaH  /  maridavvaM-
martavyaM maraNaM praaptvym| jeNa-yena  /  madaM-mRtam  /  summadaM-suSThumRtam
/  hodi-bhavati  /  ekaM paNDitamaraNaM jAtizatAni bahUni chinatti yato'tastena
maraNena martavyaM yena punarutpattirna bhavati tadvAnuSThAtavyaM yena na
punarjanma  /  kimuktaM bhavati-paMDitamaraNamanuSTheyamiti  /  / 77  /  /
2010_02

Page #390 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Appendix-7: Comparison of Fundamental Principles 349 Atura. Ga. 49 If pain,
hunger, etc. arise in renunciation, then what should be done? If suffering
arises, then the nature of hell should be seen. What have I not obtained in this
world, while wandering? ||78|| Jai-If. Upajjai-Arises. Dukkha-Pain. To-Then.
Dattabvo-To be seen, to be contemplated by the mind. Sabhavado-By nature, its
nature, "it is seen elsewhere" in that, the excess of letters due to Prakrit
force. Nirae-Of hell, in hell. Kadam-What is this, which one. Mae-By me. Na
pattam-Not obtained. Or, I have done a debt, which I have obtained myself.
Samsare-In the cycle of birth, old age, and death. Sansaranten-Wandering,
wandering. When renunciation arises, the nature of hell should be seen, because
what have I not obtained in this world, while wandering, as long as I have
obtained it, it should be contemplated. ||78|| Atura. Ga. 50 As obtained, so it
is presented. In the wheel of the world, I have obtained all the substances many
times. What I have eaten, what I have digested, I have not obtained
satisfaction. ||79|| Samsaracakkavalammi-In the wheel of the world, in the cycle
of birth, old age, and death of the four paths. Mae-By me. Sabvevi-All. Puggala-
Substances, curd, sugar, rice, water, etc. Bahuso-Many times, countless times.
Aharida ya-Eaten, taken, consumed. Parinamida ya-Digested, also digested, also
digested in the form of digested juice. Na ya me-Not mine. Gadatitti-Gone,
satisfaction, contentment has not arisen, but desire has arisen. In the wheel of
the world, all substances have been taken and digested by me many times, but I
have not obtained satisfaction, it should be contemplated. Atura. Ga. 51 How is
it that satisfaction has not been obtained? Just as fire with straw and wood,
the salt sea with thousands of rivers. This living being is not able to be
satisfied with sensual pleasures. ||80|| Tinakatten va-Like straw and wood.
Aggi-Fire. Lavanasamuddo-Salt sea. Nadisahassehi-With thousands of rivers,
fourteen thousand, doubled and doubled, rivers, combined with Ganga, Sindhu,
etc.   2010_02

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pariziSTam-7 mUlAcAratulanAgAthAH 349 Atura. gA. 49 yadi saMnyAse pIDA-
kSudhAdikotpadyate tataH kiM kartavyamityAha jai uppajjai duHkhaM to daTThavvo
sabhAvado Niraye  /  kadamaM mae Na pattaM saMsAre saMsaraMteNa  /  / 78 /  /
jai-yadi  /  uppajjai-utpadyate  /  dukkhaM-duHkhamasAtam  /  to-tataH  /
daTTabvo-draSTavyo manasAlokanIyaH  /  sabhAvado-svabhAvataH svarUpaM
"dRzyate'nyatrApi" iti tas, prAkRtabalAdakSarAdhikyaM vA  /  Nirae narakasya
narake vA  /  kadama-kiyadidaM katamat  /  mae-mayA  /  Na pattaM-na praaptm|
athavA, aNaM RNa kRtaM mayA yattanmayaiva prAptam  /  saMsAre-
jAtijarAmaraNalakSaNe  /  saMsaraMteNa-saMsaratA paribhramatA  /  saMnyAsakAle
yadutpadyate kSudhAdi duHkhaM tato narakasya svabhAvo draSTavyo yataH saMsAre
saMsaratA mayA kimidaM na prAptaM yAvatA hi prAptameveti cintanIyamiti  /  / 78
/  /  Atura. gA. 50 yathA prAptaM tathaiva pratipAdayati saMsAracakkavAlammi mae
savvevi puggalA bahuso  /  AhAridA ya pariNAmidA ya Na ya me gadA tittI  /  / 79
/  /  saMsAracakkavAlammi-saMsAracakravAle caturgatijanmajarAmaraNAvarte  /
mae-mayA  /  sbvevisrve'pi| puggalA-pudgalA dadhikhaMDaguDaudananIrAdikA  /
bahuso-bahuzaH bahuvArAn anantavArAn  /  AhAridA ya-AhRtA gRhItA bhakSitAzca  /
pariNAmidA ya-pariNAmitAzca jIrNAzca khalarasasvarUpeNa gamitA ityarthaH  /  Na
ya me-na ca mama  /  gadAtittI-gatA tRptiH santoSo na jAtaH, pratyuta AkAMkSA
jAtA  /  saMsAracakravAle sarve'pi pudgalA bahuzaH AhRtAH pariNAmitAzca mayA na
ca mama gatA tRptiriti cintanIyam  /  Atura. gA. 51 kathaM na gatA tRptiryathA
tiNakaTTeNa va aggI lavaNasamuddo NadIsahassehiM  /  Na imo jIvo sakko tippeduM
kAmabhogehiM  /  / 8 /  /  tiNakaTTeNa va-tRNakASThairiva  /  aggI-agniH  /
lavaNasamuddo-lavaNasamudraH  /  NadIsahassehiM-
nadIsahasraizcaturdazabhiHsahasrairdviguNadviguNairnadInAM
samanvitAbhirgaGgAsiMdhvAdi 2010_02

Page #391 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 350 ## Aaturpratyakhyanaprakiirnakam  The ocean is not filled by fourteen
rivers. Just as fire cannot be satisfied by grass and wood, nor the salt ocean
by thousands of rivers, so also the soul cannot be satisfied by sensual
pleasures.   **80.** Aatur. Ga. 52.  "What is the meaning of the statement that
even a little desire leads to sin?"  Even for the sake of food, fish enter the
seventh earth.  Food obtained with a disturbed mind is not suitable, even if
desired by the mind.  **81.** Aahaaranimittam - because of food. Kir -  this is
a definite statement, as it is said in the scriptures. Maccha - fish. Gachchanti
- go, enter.  Sattami - seventh.  Pudhvi - earth, the realm of existence.
Sacchitto - with a disturbed mind,  unsuitable for killing living beings.
Aahaaro - food.  Na kappati - is not suitable.  Manasaavi - even by the mind, by
mental activity.  Patthedu - to request, to ask.  Because of food, fish, rice,
and other things definitely enter the seventh earth, therefore, even if desired
by the mind, food obtained with a disturbed mind is not suitable.  **82.**
Aatur. Ga. 53.  "Since food obtained with a disturbed mind is not suitable,
therefore, one should strive for pure conduct."  First, having performed the
previous karma, being free from desire, having strived with intellect and
understanding, then, having purified the passions, be ready to accept death.
**83.** Puvva - previous, first.  Kadaparimmo - performed karma, the practice of
austerities.  Anidaano - without desire for worldly or otherworldly happiness.
Eehiduuna - having strived, having made an effort.  Madibuuddhi - with intellect
and understanding, possessing knowledge of both the seen and the unseen.  Paccha
- afterwards.  Maliyakasaao - purified from passions, possessing forgiveness.
Sajjo - ready, devoted, having fulfilled one's duty.  Maranam - death, Samadhi,
death by self-study.  Padicchaahi - accept, practice.  One goes to hell because
of wrong conduct, therefore, having made a firm decision based on direct and
indirect knowledge, having performed the previous karma, being free from desire,
and having purified the passions, one should be ready to accept death.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 350 AturapratyAkhyAnaprakIrNakam caturdazanadIbhiH sAgaro na pUrNaH  /  Na imo
jIvo-nAyaM jIvaH  /  sakko-zakyaH  /  tippeuM-tRptuM prINayitum  /
kAmabhogehiM-kAmabhogaiH, IpsitasukhAgairAhArastrIvastrAdibhiH  /  yathA agniH
tRNakASThaH, lavaNasamudrazca nadIsahasraiH prINayituM na zakyaH tathA jIvo'pi
kAmabhogairiti  /  / 80 /  /  Atura. gA. 52 kimicchAmAtreNA jAnasyApi pApaM
bhavatItyAha AhAraNimittaM kira macchA gacchaMti sattami puDhaviM  /  saccitto
AhAro Na kappadi maNasAvi patthedaM  /  / 8 /  /  AhAraNimittaM-AhArakAraNAt  /
kira-kila Agame kathitaM nArucivacanametat nishcyvcnmev| macchA-matsyAH  /
gacchaMti-yAnti pravizanti  /  sattami-saptamIm  /  puDhaviMpRthivIM
avadhisthAnam  /  saccitto-saha cittena vartata iti sacittaH sAvadyo'yogyaH
prANighAtAdutpannaH  /  AhAro-bhojanam  /  Na kappadi-na kalpate na yogyo
bhavati  /  maNasAvi-manasApi cittavyApAreNApi  /  patthedu-prArthayituM
yAcayitum  /  AhAranimittaM matsyAH zAlisikthAdayo nizcayena saptamI pRthivIM
gacchanti yato'to manasApi prArthayituM sAvadyAhAro na kalpate iti  /  / 82 /  /
Atura. gA. 53 yato manasApi sAvadyAhAro na yogyo'to.bhavAn zuddha-pariNAmaM
kuryAdityAcAryaH prAha puvvaM kadapariyammo aNidANo IhidUNa madibuddhI  /
pacchA malidakasAo sajjo maraNaM paDicchAhi  /  / 83 /  /  puvvaM kadapariyammo-
pUrva prathamataraM kRtamanuSThitaM parikarma tapo'nuSThAnaM yenAsau
pUrvakRtaparikarmA AdAvanuSThitatapazcaraNaH  /  aNidANo-anidAna
ihalokaparalokasukhAnAkAMkSaH  /  IhidUNaIhitvA ceSTitvA udyogaM kRtvA  /
madibuddhI-matibuddhibhyAM pratyakSAnumAnAbhyAM parokSapratyakSasampannaH  /
pacchA-pazcAt  /  maliyakasAo-mathitakaSAyaH kSamAsampannaH  /  sajjo-sadyaH
tatparaH kRtakRtyo vA  /  maraNaM-samAdhimRtyuM svAdhyAyamaraNaM vA  /
paDicchAhi-pratIcchAnutiSTha  /  vipariNAmAnnarakaM gamyate yato'taH
pratyakSaparokSapramANAbhyAmAgame nizcayaM kRtvA pUrvakRtaparikarmAnidanazca san
mathitakaSAyazca san sadyaH maraNaM pratIccheti  /  / 83 /  /  2010_02

Page #392 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Appendix-7: Comparison of Fundamental Principles  **Verse 351**  Even those who
have been virtuous for a long time, at the time of death, due to the weight of
their past karma, fall away from the Three Jewels.  **Verse 352**  Therefore,
just as the moon is obscured by clouds, so too, the soul, due to its inherent
qualities, must be made to strive for liberation.  **Verse 353**  How can one
strive when, at that time, one is unable to perform external practices like
breath control?  One who is free from external practices and has entered into
the state of inner meditation, like a person who is not confused in that place,
should abandon the body.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pariziSTam-7 mUlAcAratulanAgAthAH 351 Atura. gA0 54 punarapi zikSAM dadAti
haMdi cirabhAvidA vi ya je purusA maraNadesayAlammi  /
puvakadakammagaruyattaNeNa pacchA parivaDaMti  /  / 84  /  /  haMdi-jAnIhi-
sAmAnyamaraNaM vA  /  cirabhAvidAvi ya-cirabhAvitA api dezonapUrvakoTI
kRtAcaraNA api  /  je-yastvaM vA puruSaiH saha sambandhAbhAvAt  /  purisA-puruSA
manuSyAH  /  maraNadezayAlammi-maraNakAle maraNadeze vA athavA maraNakAla
evAnenAbhidhIyate  /  puvakadakammagaruyattaNeNa-pUrvasmin kRtaM karma
pUrvakRtakarma tena gurukaM tasya bhAvaH pUrvakRtakarmagurukatvaM
tenAnyasminnarjitapApakarmaNA  /  pacchA-pazcAt  /  parivaDaMti-pratipatanti
ratnatrayAt pRthagbhavanti yataH  /  / 84 /  /  Atura. gA0 55 tahmA
caMdayavejjhassa kAraNeNa ujjadeNa puriseNa  /  jIvo avirahidaguNo kAdavvo
mokkhamaggami  /  / 85 //  tamhA-tasmAt  /  caMdayavejjhassa-caMdrakavedhyasya
/  kAraNena-nimittena  /  ujjadeNa-udyatena upryukten| puriseNa-puruSeNa  /
jIvo-jIvaH aatmaa| avirahidaguNo-avirahitaguNo'virAdhitapariNAmaH  /  kAdavvo-
kartavyaH  /  mokkhamaggammi-mokSamArge samyaktvajJAnacAritreSu  /
yatazcirabhAvitA api puruSA maraNadezakAle pUrvakRtakarmagurukatvena pazcAt
pratipatanti tasmAt yathA candrakavedhyanimittaM jIvo'virahitaguNaH kriyate
tathodyatena puruSeNAtmA mokSamArge kartavya ityevaM jAnIhi nizcayaM kurviti  /
/ 85 /  /  Atura. gA0 56 kathaM yatnaH kriyate yAvatA hi tasmin
kAle'bhrAvakAzAdikaM na kartuM zakyate ityAha bAhirajogavirahio
abbhaMtarajogajhANamAlINo  /  jaha tamhi desayAle amUDhasaNNo jahasu dehaM  /  /
86 /  /  bAhirajogavirahido-bAhyAzca te yogAzca bAhyayogA abhrAvakAzAdayastai
virahito hIno bAhyayogavirahitaH  /  abbhaMtarajogajhANamAlINo-abhyaMtarayogaM
antaraMgapariNAmaM dhyAnaM ekAgracintAnirodhanaM AlInaH praviSTaH  /  jaha-yathA
/  tamhi-tasmin  /  desayAle-dezakAle 2010_02

Page #393 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Aaturpratyakhyanaprakirnakam  **At the time of renunciation.**  A person who
is not deluded, who has no delusion about food and other things, should abandon
the body. Even though he is devoid of external yoga, he has entered the internal
yoga of meditation. In that place and time, he should abandon the body as he is
free from delusion. || 86 ||  **352** **Aatur. Ga. 57**  What would happen if
one abandons the body without delusion?  Therefore, it is said:  By killing
attachment and aversion, and cutting off the eight karmic chains, by breaking
the birth-death cycle, you will be liberated. || 90 ||  **Hantuun** - killing.
**Raagadose** - attachment and aversion, love and liking. **Chhettun ya** -
cutting off. **Atthakamma sankhaliyam** - eight karmic chains.
**Jammanamaranahattam** - birth-death cycle, the machine of birth and death.
**Bhett** - breaking. **Bhavaihi** - from the worlds, or by the worlds.
**Muccihisi** - you will be liberated, or you will be freed.  By killing
attachment and aversion, cutting off the eight karmic chains, and breaking the
birth-death cycle, you will be liberated from the worlds. || 90 ||  **Aatur. Ga.
58**  If so,  I believe in this entire teaching, the Jina's vision, with three-
fold faith. It is the essence of the path to liberation, which brings welfare to
both mobile and immobile beings. || 91 ||  **Savvamidam** - all this.
**Uvadeesam** - teaching, scripture. **Jinadiṭṭhe** - the Jina's vision, or what
is said by the Jina. **Saddhaami** - I have faith, I am interested in it.
**Triviheṇa** - three-fold. **Tasathavarakhemakaraṁ** - those who tremble, those
who are mobile, with two senses or up to five senses. **Sthaanaśīlaah** -
immobile beings, those who are rooted, from earth-bodied beings to plants. Or,
those who tremble due to the arising of the karma of trembling, and those who
are immobile due to the arising of the karma of immobility.  It brings welfare,
compassion, and happiness to them.  Therefore, it is the welfare of mobile and
immobile beings, which is the teaching of compassion for all beings. **Saaram**
- the essence, the main thing, the essence because of the cause.
**Nivvaanamaggassa** - the path to liberation, the path to liberation.  With the
right faith, knowledge, and conduct, the essence of the path to liberation is
the welfare of mobile and immobile beings, and I have faith in this entire
teaching, the Jina's vision, with three-fold faith. || 99 ||  **2010_02**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 AturapratyAkhyAnaprakIrNakam sNnyaaskaale| amUDhasaNNo- amUDhasaMjJaH
AhArAdisaMjJArahitaH  /  jahasu - jahIhi tyaja  /  dehaM - shriirm|
bAhyayogavirahito'pi, abhyantaradhyAnayogapraviSTaH san tasmin dezakAle
amUDhasaMjJo yathA bhavati tathA zarIraM jahIhi  /  /  86  /  /  352 Atura. gA0
57 amUDhasaMjJake zarIratyAge sati kiM syAt  /  ityataH prAha haMtUNa rAgadose
chettUNaya aTThakammasaMkhaliyaM  /  jammaNamaraNarahaTTaM bhettUNa bhavAhi
muccihasi  /  /  90  /  /  haMtUNa-hatvA  /  rAgadAse - rAgadveSau anurAgAprItI
/  chettUNa ya-chittvA ca  /  aTThakammasaMkhaliyaMaSTakarmazrRMkhalAH  /
jammaNamaraNahaTTaM- janmamaraNArahaTTaM jAtimRtyughaTIyaMtram  /  bhettU -
bhittvA  /  bhavAhi-bhavebhyo bhavairvA  /  muccihisi - mokSyase muJcasi vA  /
rAgadveSau hatvA aSTakarma zrRMkhalAzca chitvA janmamaraNArahaTTaM ca bhitvA
bhavebhyo mokSyase ityetatsyAditi  /   /  90  /  /  Atura. gA0 58 yadyevaM
savvamidaM uvadesaM jiNadiTThe saddahAmi tiviheNa  /  tasathAvarakhemakaraM
sAraM NivvANamaggassa  /  / 91  /  /  savvamidaM sarvamimam  /  uvadesaM
upadezamAgamam  /  jiNadiTThe - jinadRSTaM kathitaM vA  /  saddahAmi- zraddadhe,
tasmin, ruciM karomIti  /  tiviheNa - trividhena  /  tasathAvarakhemakaraM -
santi udvijantIti trasA dvIndriyAdi paMcendriyaparyantAH  /  sthAnazIlAH
sthAvarAH pRthivIkAyikAdivanaspatiparyantAH  /  athavA trasanAmakarmodayAt
trasAH sthAvaranAmakarmodayAtsthAvarAH teSAM kSemaM dayAM sukhaM karotIti
trasasthAvarakSemakarastaM sarvajIvadayApratipAdakam  /  sAraM - pradhAnabhUtaM
sArasya kAraNAtsAraH I NivvANamaggassa-nirvANamArgasya mokSavartmanaH  /
samyagjJAnadarzanacAritrANAM tasmin sati teSAM sadbhAvAnnirvANamArgasya sAraM
trasasthAvarakSemakaraM ca sarvamimamupadezaM jinadRSTaM trividhena
zraddadhe'hamiti  /  /  99  /  /  2010_02

Page #394 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Appendix-7: Comparison of Fundamental Practices in Verses: 353 Aatur. Ga. 59 At
that time, just as faith in the twelve-limbed and fourteen-limbed scriptures is
practiced, so too, is it possible to contemplate and study all the scriptures?
It is said: "It is not possible in that time and place to practice the twelve-
limbed scriptures. All should contemplate, with a strong and capable mind."
||12|| N- negation. Hi- because. Tamhi- in that. Desayale- time and place. "Dis
ati sarjane" is seen as "disya te ati srjyo" meaning "desh" is the body and
"kal" is the time, in that time of leaving the body. Sakko- possible.
Barasaviho- twelve-limbed, twelve types. Sudakkhando- scripture-limb, meaning
scripture-tree. Savvo- all, everything. Anuchinte- to contemplate, to understand
the meaning, to read. Balinavi- even with strong physical strength.
Samatthacitte- with a capable mind, with a one-pointed mind, with a monk. In
that time and place, even with strong physical strength and a capable mind, it
is not possible to contemplate the twelve-limbed scriptures. ||12|| Aatur. Ga.
60 Therefore, what should be done? "In one word, there is enthusiasm on the path
of non-attachment. A person goes to that, and that should not be abandoned at
the time of death." ||13|| Ekkasi- in one. Bidhiyahi- two fulfillments, the
second is "namah siddhebyah". Sanveo- enthusiasm, joy in dharma.  Pade- in the
meaning of the word, in the scripture, in the proof, or in the five
prostrations. Or, Ekkamhi bijamhi pade- in one seed-word, meaning "in which".
Viyaragamaggammi- on the path of non-attachment, in the teachings of the
omniscient. Vaccadi- goes, walks, proceeds. Naro- by a person, one who has
abandoned all attachments. Abhikham- constantly, without interruption. Tam-
that. Maranante- at the time of death, when the breath is in the throat, or at
the very end. Na mottavvam- should not be abandoned, should not be left. In one
word, in the second word, or in the five prostrations, on the path of non-
attachment, in which there is constant enthusiasm, that word should not be
abandoned at the time of death by a person; or, a person goes to that word in
which there is enthusiasm, that word should not be abandoned by him, this is the
connection. 2010_02

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pariziSTam-7 mUlAcAratulanAgAthA: 353 Atura. gA. 59 tasmin kAle yathA
dvAdazAMgacaturdazapUrvaviSayA zraddhA kriyate tathA samastazrutaviSayA cintA
pAThazca kartuM kiM zakyate ? ityAha Na hi tamhi desayAle sakko bArasaviho
sudakkhaMdho  /  savvo aNuciMte, baliNAvi samatthacitteNa  /  / 12 /  /  na-
pratiSedhavacanaM  /  hi-yasmAdarthe  /  tamhi-tasmin  /  desayAle-dezakAle  /
"diz atisarjane' dizyate atisRjyo iti dezaH zarIraM tasya kAlastasmin
zarIsparityAgakAle  /  sakko-zakyaH  /  bArasaviho-dvAdazavidhaH dvAdazaprakAraH
sudakkhaMdho-zrutaskaMdhaH zrutavRkSa ityarthaH  /  savvo-sarva smstm|
aNuciMteduM-anucintayituM arthena bhAvayituM paThituM ca  /  baliNAvi-balinApi
zarIragatabalenApi  /  samatthacitteNa-samarthacittena ekacittena yatinA  /
tasmin dezakAle balayuktena samarthacittenApi dvAdazavidhaM zrutaskandhaM na
zakyamanucintayitum  /  / 12 /  /  Atura. gA0 60 yatastataH kiM kartavyam !
ekkasi bidiyahi pade saMvego vIyarAyamaggammi  /  vaccadi Naro abhikkhaM taM
maraNaMte Na mottavyaM  /  / 13 /  /  ekkaTi-ekasmin namo'rhadbhyaH ityetasmin
/  vidiyahmi-dvayoH pUraNaM dvitIyaM namaH siddhebhya ityetasmin  /  saMveo-
saMvegaH dharme harSaH  /  pade-arthapade granthapade pramANapade vA
paMcanamaskArapade c| athavA ekamhi bIjamhipade-ekasminnapi bIjapade yasminniti
pAThAntaram  /  vIyarAgamaggammivItarAgamArge sarvajJapravacane  /  vaccadi-
vrajati gacchati pravartate  /  Naro-nareNa srvsNgprityaaginaa| abhikkhaM-
abhIkSNaM nairntryenn| taM-tat  /  maraNaMte-maraNAnte kaNThagataprANe'tyasamaye
vA  /  Na mottavvaM-na moktavyaM na parityajanIyam  /  ekapade dvitIyapade vA
paMcanamaskArapade vA vItarAgamArge yasmin saMvego'bhIkSNaM gacchati tatpadaM
maraNAnte'pi na moktavyaM nareNa; naro vA saMvegaM yathA bhavati tathA
yasminpade gacchati pravartate tatpadaM tena na moktavyamiti sambandhaH  /  .
2010_02

Page #395 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 354 **Aaturpraatyaakhyaana Prakirnakam**  **Aatur** 61: Why should this not
be given up? Because even a single verse from the Shruta Skandha or the
Panchanamaskara, contemplated upon at the time of death, makes one who is
devoted to the right faith, knowledge, conduct, and austerities, a devotee.
**Aatur** 62: What is the fruit of devotion? To this, it is said: One who is
devoted to the right faith, knowledge, etc., and who has made time for it, and
has performed it well, attains the three excellences and then attains Nirvana.
**Aatur** 63: Having heard the Acharya's consolation and knowing the scriptures,
the patient, desiring to bring about a result based on cause, said: "I have a
feeling that the Shramanas are equal to me, and that I am equal to all who are
restrained in all ways. I give up everything, and this is what I have said in
brief."

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 354 AturapratyAkhyAnaprakIrNakam Atura0 gA0 61 kimiti kRtvA tanna moktavyaM
yataH edahyAdo ekkaM hi silogaM maraNadesayAlahmi  /  ArAhaNauvajutto ciMtaMto
ArAdhao hodi  /  / 14 /  /  edahmAdo-etasmAt zrutaskandhAt paMcanamaskArAdvA  /
ekkaM hi - ekaM hyapi ekamapi tathyam  /  silogaM-zlokam  /  maraNadesayAlammi-
maraNadezakAle  /  ArAhaNa uvajutto-ArAdhanayA upayuktaH
samyagjJAnadarzanacAritrataponuSThAnaparaH  /  ciMtaMto-cintayan  /  ArAdhao-
ArAdhakaH rtntrysvaamii| hoi-bhavati sampadyate  /  etasmAt zrutAt
paMcanamaskArAdvA maraNadezakAle ekamapi zlokaM cintayan ArAdhanopayuktaH san
ArAdhako bhavati yatastatastvayedaM na moktavyamiti sambandhaH  /  / 94  /  /
Atura. gA. 62 ArAdhanAyAH kiM phalaM ? ityata Aha ArAhaNa uvajutto kAlaM kAUNa
suvihio sammaM  /  ukkassaM tiNNi bhave gaMtUNa ya lahai nivvANaM  /  / 17 /  /
ArAhaNauvajutto-ArAdhanopayuktaH samyagdarzanajJAnAdiSu tAtparyavRttiH  /  kAlaM
kAUNa-kAlaM kRtvA  /  suvihio-suvihitaH zobhanAnuSThAnaH  /  samma-samyak  /
ukkassaM-utkRSTena  /  tinnnnitriin| bhave-bhavAn  /  gantUNa ya-gatvA ca  /
lahai-labhate  /  NivvANaM-nirvANam  /  suvihitaH samyagArAdhanopayuktaH kAlaM
kRtvA utkarSeNa trIn bhavAn prApya tato nirvANaM labhate iti  /  / 97  /  /
Atura. gA. 63 AcAryAnuzAntiM zrutvA zAstraM jJAtvA kSapakaH kAraNapUrvaka
pariNAmaM kartukAmaH prAha samaNo metti ya paDhamaM bidiyaM savvattha saMjado
metti  /  savvaM ca vossarAmi ya evaM bhaNidaM samAseNa  /  / 98 /  /  samaNo
metti ya-zramaNaH samarasIbhAvayuktaH, iti ca  /  paDhama-prathamaH  /  bidiyaM-
dvitIyaH  /  savvatthasaMjado-sarvatrasaMyataH  /  metti-mama iti  /  athavA
zramaNe mama prathamaM maitryam  /  dvitIyaM ca sarvasaMyateSu  /  savvaM ca-
sarvaM ca  /  vossarAmi ya-vyutsRjAmi ca  /  edaM-aitat  /  bhnnidN-bhnnitm|
samAseNa-samAsena saMkSepataH  /  prathamastAvat samAnabhAvo'haM dvitIyazca
sarvatra saMyato'taH sarvamayogyaM vyutsRjAmi etadbhaNitaM saMkSepato mayeti
sambandhaH saMkSepAlocanametat  /  / 98  /  /  _ 2010_02

Page #396 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Appendix-7: Comparison of Fundamental Principles  **Verse 355** **Verse 355**
Atura. Ga. 64  Further shows the firm result *Laddham aladdhapuvvaṁ jiṇavaṇaṁ
subhāsiṁda amida bhūdaṁ.* *Gahiṁdo suggamiggo ṇāhaṁ maraṇassa bīhemi.* ||19||
*Laddham* - obtained. *Aladdhapuvvaṁ* - not obtained before. *Jiṇavaṇaṁ* - the
words of the Jina. *Subhāsiṁda* - well-spoken, not contradictory to the
scriptures. *Amida bhūdaṁ* - like nectar, because it is the cause of happiness.
*Gahiṁdo* - taken. *Suggamiggo* - the path of good fortune. *ṇāhaṁ maraṇassa
bīhemi* - I do not fear death. I have obtained the words of the Jina, which are
well-spoken and like nectar, and I have taken the path of good fortune.
Therefore, I do not fear death. ||99||  **Verse 355**  Atura. Ga. 65  Therefore
*Dhīreṇa vi mariḍavvaṁ ṇiddhiireṇa vi avassa mariḍavvaṁ.* *Jdi dohiṁ vi
mariḍavvaṁ varaṁ hi dhīrattaṇeṇa mariḍavvaṁ.* ||100|| *Dhīreṇa vi* - even with
patience, even with fortitude. *Mariḍavvaṁ* - to die, to give up life.
*ṇiddhiireṇa vi* - even with impatience, even with fear. *Avassa* - certainly.
*Mariḍavvaṁ* - to die. *Jdi dohiṁ vi* - if even by both. *Mariḍavvaṁ* - to die,
to go to another life, because there is no difference. *Varaṁ* - better. *Hi* -
certainly. *Dhīrattaṇeṇa* - with patience, with freedom from distress.
*Mariḍavvaṁ* - to die. If death is certain, even with patience and impatience,
then death with patience is better, because there is no difference. ||100||
**Verse 355**  Atura. Ga. 66  If one who is suffering from hunger, etc., has any
special benefit in the destruction of conduct, then how much more so in the case
of immortality? *Sīleṇa vi mariḍavvaṁ ṇissīleṇa vi avassa mariḍavvaṁ.* *Jah
dohiṁ vi mariḍavvaṁ varaṁ hu sīlattaṇeṇa mariḍavvaṁ.* ||101|| If death is
certain, even with conduct and without conduct, then death with conduct is
better. The protection of vows is conduct. If death is certain, even with good
conduct and bad conduct, then death with good conduct is better. ||101||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pariziSTam-7 mUlAcAratulanAgAthA: 355 355 Atura. gA. 64 punarapi daDhapariNAmaM
darzayati laddhaM aladdhapuThe jiNavayaNasubhAsiMda amidabhUdaM  /  gahido
suggaimaggo NAhaM maraNassa bIhemi  /  / 19 /  /  laddhaM-labdhaM prAptam  /
aladdhapuvvaM-alabdhapUrvam  /  jinnvynnN-jinvcnm| subhAsidaMsubhASitaM
pramANanayAviruddham  /  abhidabhUdaM-amRtabhUtaM sukhahetutvAt  /  gahido-
gRhItaH  /  suggdimggo-sugtimaargH| NAhaM maraNassa bIhemi-nAhaM maraNAdbibhemi
/  alabdhapUrvaM jinavacanaM subhASitaM amRtabhUtaM labdhaM mayA sugatimArgazca
gRhIto'taH nAhaM maraNAd bibhemIti  /  / 99 /  /  Atura. gA0 65 atazca dhIreNa
vi maridavvaM NiddhIreNa vi avassa maridavvaM  /  /  jadi dohiM vi maridavvaM
varaM hi dhIrattaNeNa maridavvaM  /  / 100  /  /  dhIreNa vi-dhIreNApi
sattvAdhikenApi  /  mariyavyaM-martavyaM prANatyAgaH kartavyaH  /  NiddhIreNa
vinidhairyeNApi dhairyarahitenApi kAtareNApi bhItenApi  /  avassa-avazyaM
nizcayena  /  mridvvN-mrtvym| jaidohiM vi-yadi dvAbhyAmapi  /  maridavyaM-
martavyaM bhavAntaraM gantavyaM vizeSAbhAvAt  /  varaM-zreSTham  /  hi-sphuTam
/  dhIrattaNeNaM-dhIratvena saMklezarahitatvena  /  maridavvaM-martavyam  /
yadi dvAbhyAmapi dhairyAdhairyopetAbhyAM prANatyAgaH kartavyo nizcayena tato
vizeSAbhAvAt dhIratvena maraNaM zreSThamiti  /  / 100 /  /  Atura. gA0 66
kSudhAdipIDitasya yadi zIlavinAze kazcidvizeSo vidyate'jarAmaraNatvaM yAvatA hi
sIleNavi maridavvaM NissIleNavi avassa maridavvaM  /  jaha dohiM vi mariyavvaM
varaM hu sIlattaNeNa mariyavvaM  /  / 101 /  /  yadi dvAbhyAmapi
zIlaniHzIlAbhyAM martavyaM avazyaM varaM zIlatvena zIlayuktena martavyamiti  /
vrataparirakSaNaM zIlaM yadi suzIlaniHzIlAbhyAM nizcayena martavyaM zIlenaiva
martavyam  /  / 101 /  /  2010_02

Page #397 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 356 **Aaturpratyakhyanprakirnakam**  **Aatur:** (Verse 68) What is the rule
here?  **[Response]:**  * **Chirausidabhambhayari papphodedoon sesayam kammam.**
* **Anupuveey visuddho suddo siddim gardi jaadi.** (102)  **Explanation:**  *
**Chirausid:** One who has lived for a long time. * **Bhambhayari:** One who
practices celibacy, or one who practices Brahma (the ultimate reality). *
**Papphodedoon:** By rejecting, by discarding. * **Sesayam kamma:** The
remaining karma, such as knowledge-obscuring karma. * **Anupuveey:** By gradual
progression, or by the decline of lifespan and the progression of virtue-stages.
* **Visuddho:** Purified, free from karmic stains. * **Suddo:** Pure, possessing
perfect knowledge and other virtues. * **Siddim gardi jaadi:** Attains
liberation, reaches the state of liberation.  **Meaning:**  A celibate who has
lived for a long time, by discarding the remaining karma and by purifying
himself through the gradual progression of virtue-stages, becomes pure and
attains liberation. Alternatively, by the continuous progression of the effects
of his actions, he becomes pure, attains perfect knowledge, and reaches the
highest state. (102)  **Aatur:** (Verse 69) Why is this so?  **[Response]:**  *
**Nikkasayasssa dantasssa surasss vavasaaino.** * **Samsarabhaybheedass
pacchakkhanam suham have.** (104)  **Explanation:**  * **Nikkasayasssa:** One
who is free from passions. * **Dantasssa:** One who has controlled his senses. *
**Surassa:** One who is courageous, fearless. * **Vavasaaino:** One who is
dedicated, committed to his practice. * **Samsarabhaybheedass:** One who is
afraid of the cycle of birth and death. * **Pacchakkhanam:** Renunciation,
worship. * **Suham:** Happiness, the cause of happiness. * **Have:** Will be.
**Meaning:**  For one who is free from passions, has controlled his senses, is
courageous, dedicated, and afraid of the cycle of birth and death, renunciation
is the cause of happiness. Therefore, such a person, when dying, will be a
worshiper. (104)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 356 AturapratyAkhyAnaprakIrNakam Atura. gA0 68 atra kiM kRto niyama ? ityAha
cirausidabaMbhayArI papphoDedUNa sesayaM kammaM  /  /  aNuputvIya visuddho
suddho siddhiM gadi jAdi  /  / 102 /  /  cirausida-ciraM bahukAlaM uSitaH
sthitaH  /  baMbhayArI-brahma maithunAnabhilASaM carati sevata iti brahmacArI
ciroSitazca sa brahmacArI ca ciroSitabrahmacArI  /  athavA ciroSitaM brahma
caratIti  /  papphoDedUNa-prasphoTya nirAkRtya  /  sesayaM kamma-zeSaM ca karma
jJAnAvaraNAdi  /  aNupuvIyaAnupUrvyA ca kramaparipATyA
athavAyuHkSayAdguNasthAnakrameNa vA  /  visuddho-vizuddhaH karmakalaMkarahitaH
/  suddho-zuddhaH kevalajJAnAdiyuktaH  /  siddhiM gardi jAdi-siddhiM gatiM yAti
mokSaM prApnotItyarthaH  /  abhagnabrahmacArI zeSakaM karma prasphoTya,
asaMkhyAtaguNazreNikarmanirjarayA ca vizuddhaH saMjAtastataH zuddhobhUtvA
siddhiM gatiM yAti  /  athavA apUrvApUrvapariNAmasantatyA ca vizuddhaH zuddhaH
kevalopetaH kevalajJAnaM prApya paramasthAnaM gacchatIti  /  / 102 /  /  Atura.
gA0 69 kuta aitadityAha NikkasAyassa daMtassa sUrassa vavasAiNo  /
saMsArabhayabhIdassa paccakkhANaM suhaM have  /  / 104 /  /  NikkasAyassa-
niSkaSAyasya kaSAyarahitasya  /  daMtassa-dAntasya dAntendriyasya  /
sUrassazUrasyAkAtarasya  /  vavasAiNo-vyavasAyo vidyate'syeti vyavasAyI tasya
cAritrAnuSThAnaparasya  /  saMsArabhayabhIdassa-saMsArabhayabhItasya
saMsArAbhayaM tasmAdbhItastrastaH saMsArabhayabhItaH tasya
jJAtacaturgatiduHkhasvarUpasya  /  paccakkhANaM-pratyAkhyAnaM ArAdhanA  /
suhaM-sukhaM sukhanimittam  /  havebhavet  /  yato niSkaSAyasya, dAntasya,
zUrasya, vyavasAyina, saMsArabhayabhItasya, pratyAkhyAnaM sukhanimittaM
bhavettataH tathAbhUto mriyamANa ArAdhako bhavatIti sambandhaH  /  / 104 /  /
2010_02

Page #398 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Appendix - 7 Root Conduct Comparison Verses Aatur. Verse 70 The fruit of worship
through the door of conclusion is said Whoever does this renunciation at the
time of death. The brave, the one with clear consciousness, he goes to the best
place. || 105 || Edam - This. Pacchakkhanam - Renunciation. Jo kahadi - Whoever
does. Marana desaya lammim - At the time of death. Dhiro - Brave. Amudhasanno -
One with clear consciousness, one who has obtained consciousness of food etc. So
- He. Gachchadi - Goes. Uttamam thanam - The best place, meaning Nirvana. At the
time of death, whoever does this renunciation, the brave, the one with clear
consciousness, he goes to the best place. || 105 || Aatur. Verse 79 For the sake
of final auspiciousness, for the sake of momentary samadhi The hero, the enemy
of old age and death, the hero, endowed with knowledge and conduct. The light of
the world, Jinavarachandra, may he give me enlightenment. || 106 || Viro -
Vardhamana Bhattaraka. Jaramarana riuu - Enemy of old age and death.
Vinnaananaanasampanno - Endowed with knowledge, conduct, knowledge and
understanding. Viro - Hero. Logassu - Of the world, of the worthy people, or of
the objects. Ujjoyayaro - Illuminator, light-bringer. Jinavarachando -
Jinavarachandra. Disadu - May he give. Bodhi - Samadhi, or right conduct with
right faith. Jinavarachandra, the enemy of old age and death, endowed with
conduct, knowledge, etc., the illuminator of the world, the hero, may he give me
enlightenment. || 106 || || Thus, in the Root Conduct text composed by Shri
Vattkeeraacharya, and in the Conduct Commentary composed by Shri Vasunandi Suri,
the verses similar to the Aatur Renunciation Miscellany, which are included in
the chapter on the Great Renunciation. || 357 2010_02

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pariziSTam - 7 mUlAcAratulanAgAthAH Atura. gA0 70
upasaMhAradvAreNArAdhanAphalamAha edaM paccakkhANaM jo kAhadi maraNadesayAlammi
/  dhIro amUDhasaNNo so gacchai uttamaM ThANaM  /  /  105  /   /  edaM - etat  /
paccakkhANaM- pratyAkhyAnam  /  jo kAhadi- yaH kuryAt  /
maraNadesayAlammimaraNadezakAle  /  dhIro-dhairyopetaH  /  amUDhasaNNo-
amUDhasaMjJaH AhArAdisaMjJAsvalabdhaH  /  soH - saH  /  gacchadi-gacchati  /
uttamaM ThANaM uttamaM sthAnaM nirvANamityarthaH  /  maraNadezakAle
etatpratyAkhyAnaM yaH kuryAt dhIro'mUDhasaMjJazca sa gacchatyuttamaM sthAnamiti
/   /  105  /  /  Atura0 gA0 79 avasAna maMgalArthaM kSapakasamAdhyarthaM cAha
vIro jaramaraNariU vIro viNNANaNANasaMpaNNo  /  logassujjoyayaro jiNavaracaMdo
disadu bodhiM  /   / 106 /  /  vIro-vardhamAnabhaTTArakaH  /  jaramaraNariU -
jarAmaraNaripuH  /  viNNANaNANasaMpaNNo-vijJAnaM cAritraM,
jJAnamavabodhastAbhyAM sampanno yuktaH  /  vIro vIraH  /  logassa - lokasya
bhavyajanasya padArthAnAM vA  /  ujjoyayaro - udyotakaraH prakAzakaraH  /
jiNavaracaMdo - jinavaracandraH  /  disadudizatu dadAtu  /  bodhi- samAdhiM
samyaktvapUrvakAcaraNaM vA  /  jinavaracandro jarAmaraNazatruH
cAritrajJAnAdisaMyukto lokasya codyotakaro vIro mahyaM dizatu bodhimiti
sambandhaH  /   / 106  /  /   /  /  iti zrI
vaTTakerAcAryaviracitamUlAcAragranthe zrIvasunandisUriracitAcAravRttau ca
bRhatpratyAkhyAnasaMstarastavAdhikArA'ntargatAH
zrIAturapratyAkhyAnaprakIrNakatulyagAthAH  /  /  357 2010_02

Page #399 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
2010_02

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 2010_02

Page #400 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Poo.Aa.Shri Vijay Ramchandrasuri Smriti-Sanskrit-Prakrit-Granthamala Kramanka
6th Marg Prashan ISBN-978-81-87163-60-2 Jan Education Hormational 2010 FC
Private & Personal useilly www.jal librare

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
pU.A.zrI vijaya rAmacandrasUrismRti-saMskRtaprAkRta-graMthamAlA kramAGka
sa6mArga prAzana ISBN-978-81-87163-60-2 Jan Education Hormational 2010 FC
Private & Personal useilly www.jal librare

