Catalog link: https://jainqq.org/explore/003464/1

Page #1 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
In memory of the revered Gurudev, Shri Joravarmalji Maharaj Coordinator and
Chief Editor Yuvacharya Shri Madhukar Muni Essential Sutras. * (Original-
Translation-Interpretation-Notes-Appendix-Included)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 sva. pUjya gurudeva zrI jorAvaramala jI mahArAja kI smRti meM Ayojita saMyojaka
evaM pradhAna sampAdaka yuvAcArya zrI madhukara muni Avazyaka sUtra. * ( mUla-
anuvAda-vivecana-TippaNa - pariziSTa-yukta )

Page #2 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Jinagam-Granthamala: Granthank 24 Om Arha [ In the auspicious memory of the
revered Gurudev Pujya Shri Joravarmalji Maharaj ] Aavashyak Sutra [ Original
Text, Hindi Translation, Discussion, Notes ] Inspiration Up-Pravartak Shasansevi
Sw. Swami Shri Brajlalji Maharaj Aady-Samyojak Tatha Pradhan Sampadak Sw.
Yuvacharya Shri Mishrimalji Maharaj 'Madhukar' Translator Discussant Editor
Siddhantacharya Mahasati Dr. Suprabha 'Sudha' M.A.; Ph.D. - - Publisher Shri
Aagam Prakashan Samiti, Byawar ( Rajasthan )

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 jinAgama-granthamAlA : granthAMka 24 OM arha [ paramazraddheya gurudeva pUjya
zrI jorAvaramalajI mahArAja kI puNya smRti meM Ayojita ] Avazyaka sUtra [
mUlapATha, hindI anuvAda, vivecana, TippaNa yukta ] preraNA upapravarttaka
zAsanasevI sva0 svAmI zrI brajalAlajI mahArAja AdyasaMyojaka tathA pradhAna
sampAdaka sva0 yuvAcArya zrI mizrImalajI mahArAja 'madhukara' anuvAdaka vivecaka
sampAdaka siddhAntAcAryA mahAsatI DaoN. suprabhA 'sudhA' ema. e.; pIeca. DI. - -
prakAzaka zrI Agama prakAzana samiti, byAvara ( rAjasthAna )

Page #3 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Jinagam-Granthamala: Granthank 24 D O O • Nirdéshan Adhyatmayogini Vidushi
Sadhvi Shri Umravakumarji M. Sa. 'Archana' Sampadak Mandal Acharya Shri
Devendramuni Ji M. Sa. Shastri Anuyogapravartka Muni Shri Kanhaiyalalji 'Kamal'
Shri Ratnamuni Samp्रेरक Muni Shri Vinaykumar 'Bhim' Sanshodhan Devkumar Jain
Tritiya Sanskaran Viranirvan Samvat 2527 Vikram Samvat 2057 E. San 2001
Prakashka Shri Agam Prakashan Samiti, Shri Braj- Madhukar Smriti Bhavan Pipaliya
Bazaar, Byawar (Rajasthan) - Mudrak Shrimati Vimlesh Jain, Ajantā Paper
Converters Lakshmi Chauk, Ajmer 305 001, Phone: 420120 Shabd-Sanyogan Rohit
Computers, Ajmer Muly: 55/- Rupaye 305101, - Phone: 50087 305 008, Phone: 660916

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 jinAgama-granthamAlA : granthAMka 24 D O O * nirdezana adhyAtmayoginI viduSI
sAdhvI zrI umarAvakuMvarajI ma. sA. 'arcanA' sampAdaka maNDala AcArya zrI
devendramuni jI ma. sA. zAstrI anuyogapravartaka muni zrI kanhaiyAlAlajI
'kamala' zrI ratanamuni sampreraka muni zrI vinayakumAra 'bhIma' saMzodhana
devakumAra jaina tRtIya saMskaraNa vIranirvANa saMvat 2527 vikrama saMvat 2057
I. san 2001 prakAzaka zrI Agama prakAzana samiti, zrI braja- madhukara smRti
bhavana pIpaliyA bAjAra, byAvara ( rAjasthAna ) - mudraka zrImatI vimaleza
jaina, ajantA pepara kanvarTarsa lakSmI cauka, ajamera 305 001, phona : 420120
zabda-saMyojana rohita kampyUTarsa, ajamera mUlya : 55 /- rUpaye 305101, - phona
: 50087 305 008, phona : 660916

Page #4 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Youthful Acharya Shri Madhukar Muni Ji Ma.Ma. 卐Mahamantra Namō Arihantāṇam, Namō
Siddhaṇam, Namō Āiriyāṇam, Namō Uvvajhaȳāṇam, Namō Loesavva Sāhūṇam, Eso Panch
Namōkkārō' Savvapāvapanaasano || Mangalaṇam Cha Savvesim, Padham Havai Mangalam
||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 yuvAcAryA zrI mAdhukAra munIjI mA.mA. Wan mahAmaMtrama Namo arihaMtANaM, Namo
sidhdANaM, Namo AyariyANaM, Namo uvajjhAyANaM, Namo loesavva sAhUNaM, eso paMca
NamokkAro' savvapAvapaNAsaNo || maMgalANaM ca savvesiM, paDhama havai maMgalaM
||

Page #5 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The five great vows (Mahavratas) are: 1. Ahimsa (non-violence) 2. Satya
(truthfulness) 3. Asteya (non-stealing) 4. Brahmacharya (continence) 5.
Aparigraha (non-attachment)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================


Page #6 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Published on the Holy Remembrance occasion of Rev. Guru Shri Joravarmalji
Maharaj AVASHYAK SUTRA (Original Text, Hindi Version, Notes, Annotations and
Appendices etc.) Inspiring Soul Up-pravartaka Shasansevi (Late) Swami Shri
Brijlalji Maharaj Convener & Founder Editor (Late) Yuvacharya Shri Mishrimalji
Maharaj Madhukar Translator & Annotator Siddhantachrya Sadhwi Dr. Suprabha
'Sudha', M. A.; Ph. D. Publishers Shri Agam Prakashan Samiti Beawar (Raj.)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Published on the Holy Remebrance occasion of Rev. Guru Shri Joravarmalji
Maharaj AVASHYAK SUTRA (Original Text, Hindi Version, Notes, Annotations and
Appendices etc.) Inspiring Soul Up-pravartaka Shasansevi (Late) Swami Shri
Brijlalji Maharaj Convener & Founder Editor (Late) Yuvacharya Shri Mishrimalji
Maharaj Madhukar Translator & Annotator Siddhantachrya Sadhwi Dr. Suprabha
'Sudha', M. A.; Ph. D. Publishers Shri Agam Prakashan Samiti Beawar (Raj.)

Page #7 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Jinagam Granthmala Publication No. 24 Direction Sadhvi Shri Umravkunwarji
'Archana' Board of Editors Acharya Shri Devendra Muni ji Shartri
Anuyogapravartaka Muni Shri Kanhaiyalalji 'Kamal' Shri Ratan Muni Promotor
Munishiti Vinayakumar 'Bhima' Correction & Supervision Dev Kumar Jain Third
Edition Vir-Nirvana Samvat 2527 Vikram Samvat 2057, Nov., 2001 Publishers Shri
Agam Prakashan Samiti, Shri Brij Madhukar Smriti Bhawan Pipaliya Bazar, Beawar
(Raj.) [India] Pin - 305901 Phone : 50087 O Printer Smt. Vimelesh Jain, Ajanta
Paper Convertors Laxmi Chowk, AJMER 0 : 420120 a Graphics ROHIT Computers, Ajmer
- 305901 Phone : 660916 Price : Rs. 551

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Jinagam Granthmala Publication No. 24 Direction Sadhvi' Shri Umravkunwarji
'Archana' Board of Editors Acharya Shri Devendra Muni ji Shartri
Anuyogapravartaka Muni Shri Kanhaiyalalji 'Kamal' Shri Ratan Muni Promotor
Munishiti Vinayakumar 'Bhima' Correction & Supervision Dev Kumar Jain Third
Edition Vir-Nirvana Samvat 2527 Vikram Samvat 2057, Nov., 2001 Publishers Shri
Agam Prakashan Samiti, Shri Brij Madhukar Smriti Bhawan Pipaliya Bazar, Beawar
(Raj.) [India] Pin - 305901 Phone : 50087 O Printer Smt. Vimelesh Jain, Ajanta
Paper Convertors Laxmi Chowk, AJMER 0 : 420120 a Graphics ROHIT Computers, Ajmer
- 305901 Phone : 660916 Price : Rs. 551

Page #8 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Dedication**  To the noble soul of the late - Shri Mishrilalji Maharaj
'Madhukar' - Young Acharya of the Shraman Sangh, Whose indomitable courage and
devotion to the Shruta gave birth to the Jinagam-Granthamala, who during their
lifetime composed numerous texts, rendering immeasurable service to humanity,
whose high conduct and pure thoughts became their natural state, whose
scholarship was renowned among the learned, who were established by countless
saints and sages as the future leaders of the Shraman Sangh, Who were the
embodiment of Samyak Sankalp, Sambhashan, and Samadhi in thought, word, and
deed. [From the First Edition]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 samarpaNa jinake adamya sAhasa evaM zrutabhakti ne jinAgama-granthamAlA ko
janma diyA, jinhoMne apane jIvana kAla meM anekAneka granthoM kA praNayana kara
mAnava-loka kA asIma upakAra kiyA, ucca AcAra aura zuci vicAra jinakA sahaja
yoga bana gayA thA, jinakA vaiduSya vidvadvarga meM thA, jo zata-zata santoM
satiyoM dvArA zramaNasaMgha ke bhAvI karNadhAra ke rUpa meM pratiSThita kie gae
the, jo manasA vAcA - karmaNA samyak saMkalpa, sambhASaNa aura samAdhi ke sAkAra
pratIka the, una sarvatobhadra mahAmanISI zramaNa saMghIya yuvAcArya - zrI
mizrIlAlajI mahArAja 'madhukara' kI divaMgata punItAtmA ko  /  [ prathama
saMskaraNa se ]

Page #9 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The five great vows (Mahavratas) are: 1. **Ahimsa** (non-violence) 2. **Satya**
(truthfulness) 3. **Asteya** (non-stealing) 4. **Brahmacharya** (continence) 5.
**Aparigraha** (non-attachment)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================


Page #10 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
This is the third edition of the **Āvaśyaka Sūtra**, the 24th text in the **Śrī
Jināgama-Granthamālā**, being presented to the readers. The **Āvaśyaka Sūtra**
is related to religious practices and is always useful and necessary for every
aspiring seeker. This sūtra has been diligently edited and translated by Dr. Śrī
Suprabhāji M. 'Sudhā' Siddhāntācārya, Sāhityaratna, M.A., Ph.D., a disciple of
the highly learned **Mahāsatiji Śrī Umrāvakuṁvarji M. 'Arcā'**, an
**Adhyātmayogīni**. Therefore, we are grateful for this significant contribution
by **Mahāsatiji**.  **Mahāsatiji** has made every effort to make this text
useful for everyone. The translation has been embellished by providing the
meaning and significance of specific words.  **Sāhityavācaspati** and learned
scholar **Muni Śrī Devendramuniji M. Śāstrī** has made this sūtra more useful by
writing a detailed introduction. In the introduction, he has shed light on the
nature of **Āvaśyakas** and has also presented a comparison of essential
practices in different religions.  The publication of **Āgama** texts was
initiated through the **Śrī Āgama Prakāśana Samiti**. The second editions of all
the texts have been published. However, as the publication of the texts
progressed, the number of readers increased beyond expectations. Therefore, even
when the second edition texts became unavailable, the demand for all the texts
of **Āgama Battisi** continued to grow. To fulfill this demand, it was decided
to publish the third edition under the guidance of **Adhyātmayogīni Mālavjyoti
Sādhvī Śrī Umrāvakuṁvarji M. 'Arcā'**.  According to the decision, the work of
publishing the texts that were becoming unavailable is ongoing. In this
sequence, this third edition of the **Āvaśyaka Sūtra** is being published. We
request **Āgama** lovers to cooperate in the propagation of these **Āgamas**.
With this request, we express our heartfelt gratitude to all our collaborators
on behalf of the committee.  Sāgaramal Baitālā Knowledge Chand Vinayakiya Ratan
Chand Modi Acting President Sardarmal Chordia Minister President Minister

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prakAzakIya zrI jinAgama-granthamAlA ke 24 veM grantha AvazyakasUtra kA yaha
tRtIya saMskaraNa pAThakoM ke samakSa prastuta kiyA jA rahA hai| AvazyakasUtra
dharma-kriyA se sambaddha hai aura pratyeka mumukSu sAdhaka ke lie sadaiva
upayogI evaM Avazyaka hai| isa sUtra kA sampAdana evaM anuvAda adhyAtmayoginI
paramaviduSI mahAsatIjI zrI umarAvakuMvarajI ma0 'arcanA' kI paNDitA ziSyA DaoN.
zrI suprabhAjI ma0 'sudhA' siddhAntAcArya, sAhityaratna, ema0 e0, pIeca0DI0 ne
parizramapUrvaka kiyA hai| ataeva hama mahAsatIjI ke isa mahattvapUrNa yogadAna
ke lie AbhArI haiN| _mahAsatIjI ne isa grantha ko sarvasAdhAraNa ke lie upayogI
banAne kA pUrNa rUpa se prayAsa kiyA hai| viziSTa zabdoM kA artha aura bhAvArtha
dekara anuvAda ko alaMkRta kiyA hai| sAhityavAcaspati vidvadvara muni zrI
devendramunijI ma. zAstrI ne prastuta sUtra kI vizada prastAvanA likha kara ise
adhika upayogI banA diyA hai| prastAvanA meM Apane vistAra ke sAtha AvazyakoM ke
svarUpa para prakAza DAlA hai aura vibhinna dharmoM sambandhI Avazyaka kriyA kI
tulanA bhI prastuta kI hai| zrI Agama prakAzana samiti ke mAdhyama se Agama
granthoM kA prakAzana prArambha kiyA gayA thaa| sabhI granthoM ke dvitIya
saMskaraNa prakAzita ho cuke haiN| kintu jaise-jaise granthoM kA prakAzana hotA
gayA, vaise-vaise pAThakoM kI saMkhyA meM anumAna se bhI adhika vRddhi huI hai
ataH dvitIya saMskaraNa ke granthoM ke anupalabdha hote jAne para bhI Agama
battIsI ke samasta granthoM kI mAMga bar3hatI gii| isakI pUrti ke lie
adhyAtmayoginI mAlavajyoti sAdhvI zrI umarAvakuMvarajI ma0 'arcanA' ke nirdezana
meM tRtIya saMskaraNa prakAzita karane kA nirNaya kiyA gyaa| nirNaya ke anusAra
aprApya hote jA rahe granthoM ko prakAzita karane kA kArya cAlU hai| isI krama
meM 'AvazyakasUtra' kA yaha tRtIya saMskaraNa prakAzita kiyA jA rahA hai|
_AgamapremI sajjana ina AgamoM ke pracAra-prasAra meM sahayoga deM, isI nivedana
ke sAtha samiti kI ora se hama apane sabhI sahayogiyoM kA hArdika AbhAra mAnate
haiN| sAgaramala baitAlA jJAnacanda vinAyakiyA ratanacanda modI kAryavAhaka
adhyakSa saradAramala coraDiyA mahAmaMtrI adhyakSa maMtrI

Page #11 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Generous and Supportive -  Shri Jethamalji Sa. Chordia  A famous saying is -
"ज्ञानस्य फलं विरतिः" - The fruit of knowledge is detachment. Similarly, there
is another saying - "वित्तस्य फलं वितरणं" - The fruit of wealth is charity.
Chandavat's Nokha, a small but picturesque village, is located in Nagaur
district and Medta tehsil. There are many houses of the Chordia family in this
village. There are also families like Bothra, Lalvani, etc. Almost all the
families are skilled in business.  Shri Udaychandji was the ancestor of the
Chordia family. He had three sons - Shri Harkachandji, Shri Rajmalji and Shri
Chandmalji. Shri Harkachandji's son was Shri Ganeshmalji and his mother's name
was Shrimati Rupibai. Shri Ganeshmalji's wife's name was Sundarbai. They had ten
sons and one daughter, whose names are as follows - Shri Jogilalji, Shri
Parsamalji, Shri Amarchandji, Shri Madanlalji, Shri Sayaramalji, Shri
Pukharajji, Shri Jethamalji, Shri Sampatrajji, Shri Mangalchandji and Shri
Bhurmalji. The daughter's name is Ladkankwarbai.  Shri Jethamalji Sa. is the
seventh son. His wife's name is Shrimati Reshamkwar. He is always interested in
religious and social work. He is always at the forefront of social service,
religious festivals, charity, etc.  His business area is Bangalore. He has a
very large shop of English medicines named "Mahaveer Drug House". This shop is
number one in the distribution of medicines in South India. He is the General
Secretary of the Pharmaceutical Business Association. He is the co-secretary of
the All India Pharmaceutical Business Association. He is a trustee of the
Bangalore Shri Sangh and the president of the Bangalore Yuva Jain Parishad. He
is the vice-president of the Bangalore City Station. He has three sons - Shri
Mahaveerchandji, Shri Premchandji, Shri Ashokji and one daughter - Snehlata. All
the sons are graduates and capable. They are going to take over his
responsibilities.  His entire family is a follower of the tradition of Acharya
Pravar Shri Jayamalji M. Sa. and is a devoted devotee of the late revered
Gurudev Shri Hazarimlalji M. Sa., Shri Up-Pravartak Swami Shri Brijlalji M. Sa.,
revered Yuvacharya Shri Madhukar Muniji M. Sa. and currently Up-Pravartak Shri
Vinaymuniji M. Sa. etc. Munirajas.  He has unwavering faith in _Adhyatmayogini,
Malavjyoti, Kashmirpracharika Mahasatiji Shrimati Umravkwarji M. Sa. "Archana".
For the past 5-7 years, he has spent most of his time in the service of
Mahasatiji M. Sa. Overall, if we say, he is an institution in himself.  He has
been contributing since the establishment of the Shri Aagam Prakashan Samiti. He
has been eager to develop the activities of the committee with his guidance from
time to time and is still doing so. For this, we express our heartfelt gratitude
to you.  Gyanchand Vinayakiya Minister

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 udAramanA arthasahayogI - zrI jeThamalajI sA. corar3iyA eka ukti prasiddha hai
- "jJAnasya phalaM viratiH" jJAna kA suphala hai vairaagy| vaise hI eka sUkti
hai - "vittasya phalaM vitaraNaM" dhana kA suphala hai daan| nAgaura jilA tathA
mer3atA tahasIla ke antargata cAMdAvatoM kA nokhA eka choTA sA kintu suramya
grAma hai, isa grAma meM coraDiyA parivAra ke ghara adhika haiN| botharA,
lalavANI Adi parivAra bhI haiN| prAyaH sabhI parivAra vyApArakuzala haiN|
coraDiyA parivAra ke pUrvajoM meM zrI udayacandajI pUrva puruSa the| unake tIna
putra the - zrI harakacanda jI, zrI rAjamalI jI va zrI caaNdmljii| zrI
harakacandajI ke putra the zrI gaNezamalajI evaM inakI mAtezvarI kA nAma zrImatI
rUpIbAI thaa| zrI gaNezamalajI kI dharmapatnI kA nAma sundarabAI thaa| Apake
dasa putra evaM eka putrI hue, jinake nAma isa prakAra haiM - zrI jogIlAlajI,
zrI pArasamalajI, zrI amaracandajI, zrI madanalAlajI, zrI sAyaramalajI, zrI
pukharAjajI, zrI jeThamalajI, zrI sampattarAjajI, zrI maMgalacandajI evaM zrI
bhuurmljii| putrI kA nAma lADakaMvara bAI hai| zrImAn jeThamala jI sA0 sAtaveM
nambara ke putra haiN| ApakI dharmapatnI kA nAma zrImatI rezamakaMvara hai| Apa
dhArmika evaM sAmAjika kAryoM meM sadA satata abhiruci rakhane vAle haiN| Apa
samAjasevA, dhArmika-utsava, dAna Adi kAryoM meM sadA agrasara rahate haiN|
ApakA vyAvasAyika kSetra baiMgalora hai| "mahAvIra Draga hAusa" ke nAma se
aMgrejI davAiyoM kI bahuta bar3I dukAna hai| dakSiNa bhArata meM davAIyoM ke
vitaraNa meM isa dukAna kA prathama nambara hai| Apa auSadhi vyAvasAyika
esosiyezana ke janarala saikreTrI haiN| akhila bhArata auSadhi vyavasAya
esosiyezana ke Apa sahamantrI haiN| Apa baiMgalora zrI saMgha ke TrasTI haiM
evaM baiMgalora yuvaka jaina pariSad ke adhyakSa haiN| baiMgalora siTI sthAnaka
ke upAdhyakSa haiN| Apake tIna putra - zrI mahAvIracandajI, zrI premacandajI,
zrI azokajI haiM tathA eka putrI - snehalatA hai| sabhI putra grejueTa evaM
suyogya haiN| Apake kAryabhAra ko sambhAlane vAle haiN| ApakA samasta parivAra
AcArya pravara zrI jayamallajI ma. sA. kI sampradAya kA anuyAyI hai tathA
svargIya pUjya gurudeva zrI hajArImala jI ma0 sA0, zrI upa-pravartaka svAmIjI
zrI brajalAlajI ma0 sA0, pUjya yuvAcArya zrI madhukara munijI ma. sA. evaM
vartamAna meM upa-pravartaka zrI vinayamunijI ma. sA. Adi munirAjoM ke prati
pUrNa niSThAvAna bhakta _ adhyAtmayoginI, mAlavajyoti, kAzmIrapracArikA
mahAsatIjI zrI umarAvakaMvarajI ma. sA. "arcanA" ke prati ApakI ananya zraddhA
hai| pichale 5-7 varSoM se Apa adhikAMza samaya mahAsatIjI ma. sA0 kI sevA meM
hI vyatIta karate haiN| kula milAkara yadi kahA jAe to Apa apane Apa meM eka
saMsthA haiN| zrI Agama prakAzana samiti kI sthApanA se lekara adyAvadhiparyanta
ApakA yogadAna rahA hai| samaya-samaya para apane mArgadarzana se samiti kI
pravRttiyoM kA vikAsa karane meM tatpara rahe haiM aura vartamAna meM bhI haiN|
etadartha hama ApakA sadhanyavAda AbhAra mAnate haiN| jJAnacaMda vinAyakiyA
maMtrI

Page #12 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
From their side............. [From the first edition] All beings in the vast
universe desire happiness. In the Acharanga Sutra, Shraman Bhagwan Mahavira said
- "Savve pana ...... Suhasaya dukkhapaddicula" All beings, whether they are an
insect or an elephant, a poor human or the king of heaven Indra, all desire
happiness. No one desires suffering. 'Sukkhakamani bhutani' - The desire of all
beings is to attain happiness. But the question is, how to attain happiness? It
is not a fruit that hangs on a tree, which can be plucked or bought from
somewhere! If it were so, all the rich people would have bought it long ago.
Then the poor would not have been able to get happiness! But it is not so.
Happiness manifests from within oneself. The seeds of happiness and suffering
are hidden within the soul. The action that is essential to attain that
happiness - one should contemplate, ponder and implement that action. The action
of life, without which we cannot move forward on the path of spiritual
happiness, is called essential. Just as breathing is necessary to stay alive, in
the same way, in the spiritual realm, the action or practice that is necessary,
essential for the purity of life, is called 'essential' in the Agam. Essential
Pratikraman etc. are obligatory duties. The literal meaning of Pratikraman is -
to abstain from sins. Pratikraman is to bring the soul's attitude, which has
become unrighteous, to a righteous state. Or the meaning of Pratikraman is - a
genuine and meticulous examination of past life. Pratikraman is a medicine in
the Jain tradition for the atonement of all the small and big distortions of the
mind, which fall under the category of sin in some form or the other. Just as
bodily distortions are diseases, so are anger, pride, deceit, greed etc.
distortions of the mind are diseases of the mind. Its treatment is also
necessary. Bodily disease can cause pain for at most one birth, but once the
disease of the mind starts, if the person remains careless, it troubles him not
only for thousands, but for lakhs of births. Thousands of Jain, Buddhist and
Vedic stories from Indian mythological literature are witness to this.
Therefore, it is paramount to immediately rectify mental distortions through
Pratikraman. In Anuyogadwar, eight synonyms of essential are given - essential,
obligatory, Dhruvanigraha, Vishodhi, Adhyayan Shatkvarg, Nyaya, Aradhana and
Marg. 1. Acharanga Sutra, 1/2/3 2. Udana 2/3 3. Avassayam Avassakaranij,
Dhvaniggaho Visohi ya. Ajzhayana-Chakkavaggo, Nao Arahana Maggo || [9]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 apanI ora se............. [prathama saMskaraNa se ] virAT vizva ke samasta
prANI sukha cAhate haiN| AcArAMga sUtra meM zramaNa bhagavAn mahAvIra ne kahA
hai - "savve pANA ...... suhasAyA dukkhapaDikUlA" samasta prANI cAhe vaha kIr3I
hai yA kuMjara, daridratama mAnava hai athavA svargAdhipati indra, sabhI sukha
cAhate haiN| duHkha koI nahIM caahtaa| 'sukkhakAmAni bhUtAni" - prANimAtra kI
kAmanA hai ki sukha mile| lekina prazna yaha hai ki sukha mile kaise? vaha koI
aisA phala to hai nahIM jo kisI vRkSa para laTaka rahA ho, jise tor3a liyA jAya
athavA kahIM se kharIda liyA jAye! yadi aisA hotA to jitane bhI dhanika haiM, ve
kaba ke use kharIda lete| phira becAre garIboM ko to sukha nasIba hI nahIM hotA!
para aisA nahIM hai| sukha apane hI bhItara se prakaTa hotA hai| AtmA meM hI
sukha-duHkha ke bIja chipe hue haiN| usa sukha ko prApta karane ke lie jo kriyA
anivArya hai - usa kriyA kA cintana, manana karake usakA amala karanA caahie|
jIvana kI vaha kriyA, jisake abhAva meM hama Atmika sukhalAbha ke patha para Age
nahIM bar3ha sakate, vahI Avazyaka kahalAtI hai| jIvita rahane ke lie jisa
prakAra zvAsa lenA jarUrI hai, usI prakAra AdhyAtmika kSetra meM jIvana kI
pavitratA ke lie, jo kriyA athavA sAdhanA jarUrI hai, anivArya hai use hI Agama
meM 'Avazyaka' kI saMjJA se abhihita kiyA jAtA hai| Avazyaka pratikramaNa Adi
avazya karaNIya krttvy| pratikramaNa kA zAbdika artha hai - pApoM se nivRtta
honaa| AtmA kI jo vRtti azubha ho cukI hai, usa vRtti ko zubha sthiti meM lAnA
pratikramaNa hai| athavA pratikramaNa kA artha hai - atIta ke jIvana kA
prAmANikatA-pUrvaka sUkSma niriikssnn| mana kI choTI-bar3I sabhI vikRtiyA~, jo
kisI na kisI rUpa meM pApa kI zreNI meM AtI haiM, unake pratikAra ke lie jaina
paramparA meM pratikramaNa eka mahauSadha hai| tana kI vikRti jaise roga hai,
vaise hI krodha, mAna, mAyA, lobha Adi mana kI vikRtiyA~ mana ke roga haiN|
isakI cikitsA bhI Avazyaka hai| tana kA roga adhika se adhika eka janma taka hI
pIr3A de sakatA hai, kintu mana kA roga eka bAra prArambha hone ke bAda, yadi
vyakti asAvadhAna rahA to hajAroM hI nahIM, lAkhoM janmoM taka parezAna karatA
hai| bhAratIya paurANika sAhitya kI hajAroM jaina, bauddha evaM vaidika kathAe~
isakI sAkSI haiN| ataH pratikramaNa ke dvArA mAnasika vikRtiyoM kA tatkAla
parimArjana kara lenA paramAvazyaka hai| anuyogadvAra meM Avazyaka ke ATha
paryAyavAcI nAma diye haiM - Avazyaka, avazyakaraNIya, dhruvanigraha, vizodhi,
adhyayanaSaTkavarga, nyAya, ArAdhanA aura maarg| 1. AcArAMgasUtra, 1/2/3 2.
udAna 2/3 3. AvassayaM avassakaraNija, dhuvaniggaho visohI y| ajjhayaNa-
chakkavaggo, nAo ArAhaNA mggo|| [9]

Page #13 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
For Sadhus, Sadhvis, Shravaks, and Shravikas, Pratikraman is absolutely
essential for the atonement of actions performed during the evening and morning.
There are six essential sutras for study: (1) Samayik (2) Chaturvinshati Stav
(3) Vandana (4) Pratikraman (5) Kayotsarga (6) Pratyakhyan.  1. Samayik
Regarding the practice of Samayik, the great Gautama Swami asked the Lord
Mahavira: Q: "Bante! What does Samayik create in a being?" A: "Samayik creates
detachment from the path of worldly attachments."  What a poignant question and
answer that touches the soul! What joy does the soul experience that has drunk
the nectar of equality? The question seems serious, but the answer is even more
profound.  O Gautama! Through Samayik, the soul becomes detached from the
tendency of worldly attachments. The soul's inclination has been running towards
the inauspicious for a long time. The practice of Samayik removes the soul from
the inauspicious inclination, connects it to the auspicious, and leads it
towards purity.  Just as a person, when he ties animals with a nail, has no fear
of them running away, similarly, those who practice equanimity tie the
inauspicious inclination with Samayik, and then there is no fear of going
towards vices. The meaning of Samayik is not just to stop physical actions, but
also to stop inauspicious mental actions. The main foundation of Samayik is the
mind. Until Samayik comes into the mind, the Samayik of the body has no special
significance. King Prasannacandra's body was in Samayik, but his mind was
entangled in other adverse emotions. The body was in equanimity, but the mind
was inclined towards destruction. The instability of the mind bound him in a
bond worthy of the seventh hell, but as soon as the mind also became inclined
towards equanimity along with the body, he attained liberation by destroying all
karmas.  2. Chaturvinshati-Stav The second study of the essential sutras is
Chaturvinshati Stav. Before reaching the field of criticism, it is necessary to
purify the field. The seeker should first become stable in equanimity, then
praise the great men of virtue. The praise of the virtues of great men is a
source of inspiration for every seeker. Until the human mind takes refuge in the
present twenty-four, who have become the twenty-four best artists of spiritual
life, it will not be able to learn spiritual art. In this regard, Ganadhar
Gautama asks the Lord Mahavira: Q: "Bante! What does Chaturvinshati create in a
being?" A: "Chaturvinshati creates the knowledge of the twenty-four."  1.
Uttaraadhyayana, A. 29 Sutra 9 2. Uttaraadhyayana A. 29 Sutra 10 [10]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 sAdhu-sAdhvI, zrAvaka-zrAvikA ke lie sAyaMkAla aura prAta:kAla karmoM kI
nirjarA karane ke lie pratikramaNa parama anivArya hai| Avazyaka sUtra ke chaha
adhyayana haiM - (1) sAmAyika (2) caturviMzatistava (3) vaMdanA (4) pratikramaNa
(5)kAyotsarga (6) prtyaakhyaan| 1. sAmAyika sAmAyika kI sAdhanA ke viSaya meM
mahAmahima gautama svAmI ne zramaNa bhagavAn mahAvIra se prazna kiyA - pra0 -
sAmAieNaM bhaMte! jIve kiM jaNayai ? u0 - sAmAieNaM sAvajajogaviraI jaNayai  //
jIvana ko sparza karane vAlA kitanA mArmika prazrottara hai| jisa AtmA ne samatA
ke amRtabindu kA pAna kiyA hai, vaha kauna-sA Ananda prApta karatA hai? prazra
jarA gaMbhIra lagatA hai, kintu uttara meM usase bhI adhika gaMbhIratA he
gautama! sAmAyika dvArA AtmA sAvadhayoga kI pravRtti se virakta hotI hai| AtmA
kI vRtti cirakAla se azubha kI tarapha daur3a rahI hai| sAmAyika kI sAdhanA AtmA
ko azubha vRtti se haTAkara zubha meM jor3atI hai aura zubha se zuddhi kI ora le
jAtI hai| jisa prakAra vyakti pazuoM ko jaba kIle se bAMdha detA hai, taba usake
bhAga jAne kA bhaya nahIM rahatA, usI prakAra samabhAva ke sAdhaka azubha vRtti
ko sAmAyika se bAMdha dete haiM, phira vikAra kI tarapha jAne kA bhaya nahIM
rahatA hai| sAmAyika kA artha sirpha zArIrika kriyA ko rokanA hI nahIM, apitu
azubha mAnasika kriyA ko bhI rokanA hai| sAmAyika kI mukhya AdhArabhUmi mana hI
hai| jaba taka mana meM sAmAyika nahIM AtI, taba taka tana kI sAmAyika kA vizeSa
mahattva nahIM hai| rAjarSi prasannacandra kA zarIra to sAmAyika meM thA lekina
mana kinhIM aura hI viSama bhAvoM se guMthA huA thaa| tana samabhAva meM thA
kintu mana saMhAra meM pravRtta thaa| mana kI asthiratA ke yoga ne unako sAtaveM
naraka taka ke yogya bandhana meM bAMdha liyA, parantu jaise hI tana ke sAtha
mana bhI samabhAva meM pravRtta banA ki sampUrNa karmoM kA kSaya karake kaivalya
ko bhI prApta kara liyaa| 2. caturviMzati-stava AvazyakasUtra kA dUsarA
adhyayana hai cturvishtistv| AlocanA ke kSetra meM paMhucane se pUrva
kSetrazuddhi honA Avazyaka hai| sAdhaka prathama samabhAva meM sthira bane,
phira guNAdhika mahApuruSoM kI stuti kre| mahApuruSoM kA guNakIrtana pratyeka
sAdhaka ke lie preraNA kA srota hai| mAnava-mana jaba taka vartamAna caubIsI
meM, jo AdhyAtmika jIvana ke caubIsa sarvottama kalAkAra ho gaye haiM, unakA
zaraNa nahIM legA taba taka AdhyAtmika kalA sIkha nahIM skegaa| isa viSaya meM
gaNadhara gautama zramaNa bhagavAn mahAvIra se prazna karate haiM - pra0 -
cauvvIsathaeNaM bhaMte! jIve kiM z2aNayai ? u0 - cauvvIsatthaeNaM dasaNavisohiM
jnnyi||' 1. uttarAdhyayana, a. 29 sUtra 9 2. uttarAdhyayana a. 29 sUtra 10 [10]

Page #14 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Lord, what is the place of the twenty-four **stava** in life, and what spiritual
quality does the soul attain when it receives the light of **stavan-stuti** in
life? O Gautama! The light of prayer, **stuti**, purifies the soul's vision-
knowledge. The darkness of **mithyatva** destroys the brilliance of the
**darshanaguna**, but the **stuti** of **beetarag** removes the **mithyatva**
and leads the seeker towards **samyaktva**.  3. **Vandana** The third study of
the **avashyak sutra** is **vandana**. It is essential to have devotion to the
guru and humility when entering the field of criticism. In the **jnatasutra**,
there is an important question and answer. The connoisseur of life, Seth
Sudarshan Muni, asks Thavachaputra, what is the root of Jainism, Jain
philosophy? - 'What is the root of Dharma?' That great **anagar** did not say
that **kshama** etc. qualities are the root of Dharma, but said that
'**vinaya**' is the root of Dharma - 'Sudansana! **Vinaya** is the root of
Dharma.' **Vinaya** is like the foundation brick of the building of life.
**Vinaya** is a hypnotic mantra. Through **vinaya**, through humility, even gods
are subdued and enemies become friends. Therefore, the seeker, after praising
the **tirthankara**, bows to the guru. On this subject, the disciple asks - Q -
**Vandana** by whom, sir? What does it generate in the soul? A - **Vandana**
destroys the **niyagoy** karma, binds the **uchagoy** karma, and removes the
**sohagga** and **appadhihaya** **anaphala**, and generates **dahiṇabhava**. O
Bhagavan! What is the fruit obtained by the soul from **vandana**? Gautama!
Through **vandana**, the soul destroys the **niyagoy** karma, binds the
**uchagoy** karma, and attains such good fortune that its command does not fail,
i.e., its speech becomes so refined that everyone obeys its command. Also,
**vandana** gives the soul **dahiṇabhava**.  4. **Pratikraman** **Pratikraman**
is the fourth study of the **avashyak sutra**. **Pratikraman** is necessary for
the purification of transgressions committed in vows. Every day, one should
contemplate how much the soul has gone from vow to non-vow today? How many times
did the flame of **kṣaya** ignite? And if it did, what was the cause? Was that
**kṣaya** **anantaanubandhi**, **apratyakhyani**, **pratyakhyani**, or
**sanjwalan**? Were the words spoken in the heat of anger appropriate or
inappropriate? Thus, by contemplating and reflecting in a subtle way, purifying
it is **pratikraman**. In **pratikraman**, the seeker remembers his mistakes and
sheds tears of repentance. The blackness of sin cannot be washed away by
hundreds of maunds of water from the river, but two drops of tears of repentance
wash it away in a minute. A thinker has said - He who makes a mistake is human,
but to be proud of that mistake is the work of a demon. It is natural to make
mistakes, but to feel proud of mistakes, i.e., to consider mistakes as flowers
and sit on them, is the work of a demon. 1. **Uttaraadhyayanasutra** A. 29 Sutra
11 [11]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prbho| caturviMzati-stava kA jIvana meM kyA sthAna hai tathA jIvana meM
stavana-stuti kA prakAza prApta hotA hai, taba AtmA kauna se AdhyAtmika guNa ko
prApta karatI hai ? he gautama! prArthanA kA, stuti kA prakAza AtmA ke darzana-
jJAna ko vizuddha banAtA hai| mithyAtva kA aMdhakAra darzanaguNa kI pratibhA ko
naSTa kara detA hai, kintu bItarAga kI stuti mithyAtva se haTAkara sAdhaka ko
samyaktva kI ora le jAtI hai| 3. vandanA Avazyaka sUtra kA tIsarA adhyayana
vandanA hai| AlocanA kSetra meM praveza karate samaya gurubhakti evaM namratA kA
honA Avazyaka hai| jJAtAsUtra meM eka mahattvapUrNa prazrottara AyA hai| jIvana
kA pArakhI seTha sudarzana muni thAvaccAputra se prazna karatA hai ki
jainadharma kA, jainadarzana kA mUla kyA hai ? - 'kiM mUlae dhamme ?' usa
mahAmahima anagAra ne kSamA Adi guNoM ko dharma kA mUla na batAkara 'vinaya' ko
hI dharma kA mUla kahA hai - 'sudaMsaNA! viNayamale dhmme|' vinaya jIvanaprAsAda
kI nIMva kI IMTa rUpa hai| vinaya eka vazIkaraNa maMtra hai| vinaya se, namratA
se devatA bhI vaza meM ho jAte haiM tathA zatru, mitra bana jAte haiN| isalie
sAdhaka tIrthaMkara kI stuti ke bAda gurudeva ko vandana karate haiN| isa viSaya
meM ziSya prazra karatA hai - pra0 - vandaNaeNaM bhNte| jIve kiM jaNayaDa ? u0 -
vandaNaeNaM nIyAgoyaM kamma khvei| uccAgoyaM kammaM nibndhi| sohaggaM ca NaM
appaDihayaM ANAphalaM nivvattei, dAhiNabhAvaM ca NaM jnnyi| bhagavan ! vandana
karane se jIva ko kisa phala kI prApti hotI hai ? gautama! vandanA dvArA AtmA
nIcagotrarUpa baMdhe hue karma kA kSaya karatA hai aura uccagotra karma ko
bAMdhatA hai tathA aisA saubhAgya prApta karatA hai ki usakI AjJA niSphala nahIM
jAtI hai arthAt usakI vANI meM itanA nikhAra A jAtA hai ki sabhI usakI AjJA kA
pAlana karate haiN| sAtha hI vandanA se AtmA ko dAkSiNyabhAva prApta hotA hai|
4. pratikramaNa pratikramaNa AvazyakasUtra kA caturtha adhyayana hai| vratoM meM
lage aticAroM kI zuddhi ke lie pratikramaNa kI AvazyakatA hai| pratidina
yathAyamaya yaha cintana karanA ki Aja AtmA vrata se avrata meM kitanA gayA ?
kaSAya kI jvAlA kitanI bAra prajvalita huI? aura huI to nimitta kyA banA? vaha
kaSAya anantAnubandhI thA athavA apratyAkhyAnI, pratyAkhyAnI yA saMjvalana ?
krodha ke Aveza meM jo zabda kahe, ve ucita the yA anucita ? isa prakAra sUkSma
rUpa se cintana-manana karake isakI zuddhi karanA hI pratikramaNa hai|
pratikramaNa meM sAdhaka apanI bhUloM kA smaraNa karatA hai aura usake lie
pazcAtApa ke A~su bahAtA hai| pApa kI kAlimA ko nadI kA saikar3oM mana pAnI
nahIM dho sakatA, kintu pazcAtApa ke A~su kI do bUMdeM use eka minaTa meM dho
detI haiN| eka vicAraka ne kahA hai - jo bhUla karatA hai vaha mAnava hai,
lekina usa bhUla para ahaMkAra karanA rAkSasa kA kAma hai| bhUla honA svAbhAvika
hai, para bhUla para gaurava anubhava karanA arthAt bhUla ko phUla mAnakara
baiTha 1. uttarAdhyayanasUtra a. 29 sUtra 11 [11]

Page #15 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
To err is the greatest mistake, and this mistake later becomes a thorn in life.
What is Pratikraman? What is its relationship with the soul? The disciple asks -
Q - Paddikkamaṇeṇam bhanta! Jīve kiṁ jaṇayai? A - Paddikkamaṇeṇam vayachiddāṇi
pihei pihiyavayachiddē puṇ jīve niruddhasavē, asabalacaritē aṭṭhasu
payavaṇamāyāsu uvauṭṭē apuhatṭē suppanihiē biharai॥ O Lord! What specific
quality does the soul attain by performing Pratikraman? Resolving the disciple's
curiosity, the Lord says - Through Pratikraman, the practitioner covers the
holes in his vows. He removes the lapses that occur in his vows due to
negligence. The pure-vowed soul, by stopping the influx of karmas, becomes free
from the defects of the body, etc., and with pure restraint, becomes vigilant in
the eight Pravachanamatras and, engrossed in restraint, directs his senses
towards the right path and wanders in the path of restraint. From the
perspective of time, there are five types of Pratikraman - (1) Daivasik, (2)
Ratrik, (3) Paakshik, (4) Chaturmasik and (5) Saavatsarik. 1. Daivasik -
Pratikraman performed at the end of the day is Daivasik. 2. Ratrik - Pratikraman
performed at the end of the night, i.e., criticizing the faults committed during
the night. 3. Paakshik - Criticizing the sins at the end of fifteen days. 4.
Chaturmasik - Performing Pratikraman for the faults committed in four months on
the full moon days of Kartik, Falgun and Ashadh after four months. 5.
Saavatsarik - Criticizing the faults committed throughout the year on the
fiftieth or fiftieth day from Ashadh Purnima. In the field of sadhana,
Mithyatva, Avrat, Pramad, Kashay and Ashubh Yoga are considered to be five
defects. Every day during Pratikraman, the practitioner introspects his life and
sees whether he is not leaving the path of Samyaktva and moving towards the
thorny path of Mithyatva? Is he not forgetting the true nature of the vow and
going towards Avrat? Is his mind not getting trapped in the stressful
environment of Pramad, leaving the peaceful environment of Apramattatva? Is he
not going towards the foul-smelling enclosure of Kashay, leaving the fragrant
garden of Akashay? Is the tendency of the yogas not engaged in Ashubhyoga,
leaving Shubhyoga? If I have gone into Mithyatva, Avrat, Pramad, Kashay and
Ashubh Yoga, then I should again engage in Samyaktva, Vrat, Akashayata, Apramad
and Shubh Yoga. Pratikraman is an unparalleled art of the life of a practitioner
and the essence of Jain sadhana. There is no action in which faults cannot be
committed due to negligence. One should perform Pratikraman to get rid of those
faults. In Pratikraman, the practitioner 1. Uttaraadhyayanasutra A. 29 Sutra 12
[12]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 jAnA sabase bar3I bhUla hai aura yahI bhUla Age jAkara jIvana meM zUla bana
jAtI hai| pratikramaNa kyA hai ? AtmA ke sAtha isakA kyA sambandha hai ? isa
viSaya meM ziSya prazra karatA hai - pra0 - paDikkamaNeNaM bhaMte! jIve kiM
jaNayai ? u0 - paDikkamaNeNaM vayachiddANi pihei pihiyavayachidde puNa jIve
niruddhAsave, asabalacarite aTaThsu payavaNamAyAsu uvautte apuhatte suppaNihie
bihri|| bhagavan ! pratikramaNa karake AtmA kauna se viziSTa guNa ko prApta
karatA hai ? ziSya ke mana kI jijJAsA kA samAdhAna karate hue bhagavAn pharamAte
haiM - pratikramaNa dvArA sAdhaka vrata ke chidroM ko AcchAdita (banda) karatA
hai| pramAdavaza vrata meM jo skhalana ho jAtA hai, use pratikramaNa ke dvArA
dUra karatA hai| zuddhavratadhArI jIva AzravoM ko rokakara zavalAdi doSa rahita
zuddha saMyama vAlA hokara ATha pravacanamAtAoM meM sAvadhAna hotA hai aura
saMyama meM tallIna rahatA huA samAdhi-pUrvaka apanI indriyoM ko sanmArgagAmI
banAkara saMyama-mArga meM vicaraNa karatA hai| kAla kI dRSTi se pratikramaNa ke
pAMca prakAra hote haiM - (1) daivasika, (2) rAtrika, (3) pAkSika, (4)
cAturmAsika aura (5) saaNvtsrik| 1. daivasika - dina ke anta meM kiyA jAne vAlA
pratikramaNa daivasika hai| 2. rAtrika - rAtri ke anta meM kiyA jAne vAlA
pratikramaNa arthAt rAtri meM lage hue doSoM kI AlocanA krnaa| 3. pAkSika -
pandraha dina ke anta meM pApoM kI AlocanA krnaa| 4. cAturmAsika - cAra mahIne
ke bAda kArtikI pUrNimA, phAlgunI pUrNimA evaM ASAr3hI pUrNimA ke dina cAra
mahIne ke antargata lage doSoM kA pratikramaNa krnaa| 5. sAMvatsarika - ASAr3hI
pUrNimA se unapacAsaveM yA pacAsaveM dina varSa bhara meM lage hue doSoM kI
AlocanA krnaa| sAdhanA ke kSetra meM mithyAtva, avrata, pramAda, kaSAya aura
azubha yoga, ye pAMca doSa mAne gae haiN| sAdhaka pratidina pratikramaNa ke
samaya apane jIvana kA antarnirIkSaNa karatA huA yaha dekhatA hai ki vaha kahIM
samyaktva ke prazasta patha ko chor3akara mithyAtva ke kaMTIle patha kI tarapha
to nahIM bar3ha rahA hai ? vrata ke vAstavika svarUpa ko bhUlakara avrata kI ora
to nahIM jA rahA hai ? apramattatA ke zAnta vAtAvaraNa ko chor3akara mana kahIM
pramAda ke tanAvapUrNa vAtAvaraNa meM to nahIM phaMsa rahA hai ? akaSAya ke
surabhita bAga ko chor3akara kaSAya ke durgandha se yukta bAr3e kI ora to nahIM
gayA hai ? yogoM kI pravRtti zubha yoga ko chor3akara azubhayogya meM to nahIM
lagI ? yadi maiM mithyAtva, avrata, pramAda, kaSAya aura azubha yoga meM gayA
hU~, to mujhe punaH samyaktva, vrata, akaSAyatA, apramAda aura zubha yoga meM
pravRtta honA caahie| pratikramaNa sAdhakajIvana kI eka apUrva kalA hai tathA
jaina sAdhanA kA prANatva hai| aisI koI bhI kriyA nahIM jisameM pramAdavaza doSa
na laga ske| una doSoM se nivRtti hetu pratikramaNa karanA caahie| pratikramaNa
meM sAdhaka apane 1. uttarAdhyayanasUtra a. 29 sUtra 12 [12]

Page #16 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Every tendency of life, when observed and contemplated, becomes light by
renouncing these faults. 5. Kayotsarga Kayotsarga is the fifth study of the
Aavashyak Sutra and the eleventh tapa. It means renouncing attachment to the
body. As long as there is attachment to the body, the seeker cannot move forward
firmly in the field of life. Therefore, Kayotsarga has an amazing, fundamental
and unique importance in the Jain practice. In the Anuyogadwar, Kayotsarga is
called 'Vranachikitsa'. Even with caution, faults creep into practice due to
negligence etc. Kayotsarga is a balm to heal these wounds, which heals the
wounds of excess. Kayotsarga is performed to refine the life of restraint, to
atone, to purify oneself, to free the soul from Maya, Mithyatva and Nidana
surgery, and to destroy sinful karmas. Regarding Kayotsarga, the disciple asks -
Q - Kausaggenam Bhanta. What does it create in the soul? A - Kausaggenam Tiya -
Paduppanna Payachitta Bisohei, Visuddhapayachitte Ya Jive Nivvuhahiyae Ohariya
Bharuvva Bharavahe Pasatthajjhanovagae Suham Suhenam Viharai. Q - Bhagavan! What
fruit does the soul obtain from Kayotsarga? A - Through Kayotsarga, the soul
becomes pure from the excesses of the past and present. After being purified
from excesses, the seeker experiences such joy in his mind, as a laborer
experiences when the weight is removed from his head. 6. Pratyakhyan Pratyakhyan
is the sixth study of the Aavashyak Sutra. After criticizing the excesses of the
past, the seeker performs Kayotsarga as atonement and becomes free from the
faults of the past. But it is necessary to reject future faults. Pratyakhyan
also has an important place in the seeker's life. Because in this vast universe
there are so many substances that it is impossible to count them. No matter how
long a person's life may be, he cannot consume all the things in the world. But
human desires are infinite like the sky. There is a desire to enjoy one after
another, due to which there is always dissatisfaction and unrest in the human
mind. The only way to quench the fire of that dissatisfaction is Pratyakhyan.
Pratyakhyan stops the related sins that will be committed in the future and the
seeker's life begins to shine in the golden light of restraint. Pratyakhyan
stops all the actions of Aviriti that will come in the future and the seeker
follows the rules of restraint properly. Regarding Pratyakhyan, it is said - 1.
Uttaraadhyayanasutra A. 29, Sutra 13 [13]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 jIvana kI pratyeka pravRtti kA avalokana, nirIkSaNa karate hue ina doSoM se
nivRtta hokara halkA banatA hai| 5. kAyotsarga kAyotsarga AvazyakasUtra kA
pAMcavA~ adhyayana hai tathA gyArahavAM tapa hai| isakA artha hai deha ke prati
mamatva tyaagnaa| jaba taka deha ke prati mamatvabhAva hai taba taka sAdhaka
jIvana ke maidAna meM dRDhatApUrvaka Age nahIM bar3ha sktaa| ata: jaina sAdhanA-
paddhati meM kAyotsarga kA adbhuta, maulika evaM vilakSaNa mahattvapUrNa sthAna
hai| anuyogadvAra meM kAyotsarga ko 'vraNacikitsA' kahA hai| sAvadhAna rahane
para bhI pramAda Adi ke kAraNa sAdhanA meM doSa laga jAte haiN| una doSa rUpI
jakhmoM ko ThIka karane ke liye kAyotsarga eka marahama hai, jo aticAra rUpI
ghAvoM ko ThIka kara detA hai| saMyamI jIvana ko adhikAdhika pariSkRta karane ke
lie, prAyazcita karane ke liye, apane Apako vizuddha banAne ke lie, AtmA ko
mAyA, mithyAtva aura nidAna zalya se mukta karane ke lie, pApa karmoM ke
nirghAta ke lie kAyotsarga kiyA jAtA hai| kAyotsarga ke viSaya meM ziSya prazra
karatA hai - pra0 - kAusaggeNaM bhNte| jIve kiM jaNayai? u0 - kAusaggeNaM tIya -
paDuppannaM pAyacchittaM bisohei, visuddhapAyacchitte ya jIve nivvuyahiyae
ohariya bhAruvva bhAravahe pasatthajjhANovagae suhaM suheNaM vihri|' pra0 -
bhagavan ! kAyotsarga se AtmA kyA phala prApta karatA hai ? u. - kAyotsarga ke
dvArA AtmA bhUtakAla aura vartamAna kAla ke aticAroM se vizuddha banatA hai|
aticAroM se zuddha hone ke bAda sAdhaka ke mana meM itanA Ananda kA anubhava
hotA hai, jitanA ki eka majadUra ke mastaka para se vajana haTa jAne para use
hotA hai| 6. pratyAkhyAna pratyAkhyAna AvazyakasUtra kA chaThA adhyayana hai|
bhUtakAla ke aticAroM kI AlocanA ke bAda sAdhaka prAyazcita rUpa meM kAyotsarga
karatA hai aura atIta ke doSoM se mukta ho jAtA hai| parantu bhaviSya ke doSoM
ko rokane ke lie pratyAkhyAna karanA Avazyaka hai| sAdhaka ke jIvana meM
pratyAkhyAna kA bhI mahattvapUrNa sthAna hai| kyoMki isa virATa vizva meM itane
adhika padArtha haiM, jinakI parigaNanA karanA bhI asaMbhava hai| cAhe kitanI
bhI lambI umra kyoM na ho, phira bhI eka manuSya vizva kI sabhI vastuoM kA
upabhoga nahIM kara sktaa| lekina mAnava kI icchAeM to AkAza kI bhAMti ananta
haiN| eka ke bAda dUsare ko bhogane kI icchA hotI hai, jisake kAraNa manuSya ke
antarmAnasa meM sadA atRpti evaM azAnti banI rahatI hai| usa atRpti kI Aga ko
bujhAne kA ekamAtra upAya pratyAkhyAna hai| pratyAkhyAna se bhaviSya meM lagane
vAle tatsaMbaMdhI pApa ruka jAte haiM aura sAdhaka kA jIvana saMyama ke sunahare
prakAza meM jagamagAne lagatA hai| pratyAkhyAna se bhaviSya meM Ane vAlI avirati
kI sabhI kriyAeM ruka jAtI haiM aura sAdhaka niyamopaniyama kA samyak pAlana
karatA hai| pratyAkhyAna ke viSaya meM kahA gayA hai - 1. uttarAdhyayanasUtra a.
29, sUtra 13 [13]

Page #17 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Q. Venerable one, what does the soul manifest through renunciation? A. Through
renunciation, the soul stops the doors of influx. As long as the doors of influx
are not stopped, the flow of karma continues to enter the soul. As long as
something is not renounced, the attachment to it does not go away and the karma-
dust continues to come. Renunciation leads to the cessation of desires, because
renunciation is not possible without limiting desires. Another great benefit of
renunciation is that the thirst of the mind, the birth state and the fickleness
are eliminated and the seeker experiences supreme peace. - In conclusion, the
six essentials are necessary actions for the seeker. Whether the seeker is a
monk or a lay person, they perform these actions, but the intensity of their
experience may vary. A monk can perform these actions with more intensity than a
lay person, because monks are completely detached from the beginning. This
necessary action is performed daily by the monk seeker. The order of the six
essentials is scientifically presented. The first, 'Samayik', teaches the
practice of equanimity in life. Through the 'Twenty-Four Stavas', he develops
the feeling of being free from attachment like the Tirthankaras. Through
'Vandanā', he adorns himself with the virtue of humility. Through
'Pratikramaṇa', he becomes introspective by detaching himself from all external
and internal changes. Through 'Kayotsarga', he reduces the attachment to the
body and dwells in the self. And in 'Pratikyāṇa', he accepts various types of
renunciations for the future. In this way, the seeker awakens his spiritual life
through the six essentials and takes steps on the path of liberation. It is
mandatory for the monks of the first and last Tirthankaras to perform the
essentials regularly. If they do not perform the essentials, they are deviated
from the monk dharma. Even if there is a fault, and even if there is no fault,
one should perform Pratikramaṇa. - Thoughts on the Shraman Sutra The only
religion that fulfills the desires of the aspiring souls is the one that can
reside in the pure soul. Just as a farmer plows his land, adds manure, removes
stones and weeds before sowing seeds, only then does he sow seeds in the field.
Seeds cannot be sown in barren land or in stony, rocky land. Similarly, the
heart is also a field. In it, 1. Uttaraadhyayanasutra A. 29 Sutra 14 2.
Sapaddiccammano Dhammō, Purimassā Ya Pacchhimassā Ya Jiṇassā. Majjhimayāṇa
Jiṇāṇaṁ, Kāranajāe Paḍikkamanāṁ || Āvashyakniryaakti, Ga. 1244 [14] -

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pra0 paccakkhANeNaM bhaMte jIve kiM jaNaya ? u0- paccakkhANeNaM AsavadArAI
NiruMbhai, paccakkhANeNaM icchAnirohaM jaNayai  /  icchAniroha gae ya NaM jIve
sabvadavvesu viNIyataNhe sIIbhUe viharar3a  / ' - pra0 bhagavan ! pratyAkhyAna
dvArA AtmA kisa Atma-guNa ko prakaTa karatA hai ? u0- pratyAkhyAna dvArA AtmA
Azraya ke dvAroM ko roka detA hai| jaba taka Ate hue AzrayoM ke dvAroM ko nahIM
rokatA hai, taba taka karmoM kA pravAha AtmA meM AtA hI rahatA hai| jaba taka
kisI vastu kA pratyAkhyAna nahIM kiyA jAtA, taba taka tatsaMbaMdhI Asakti dUra
nahIM hotI aura karma-raja AtA hI rahatA hai| pratyAkhyAna se icchAoM kA nirodha
ho jAtA hai kyoMki icchAoM ko maryAdita kiye binA pratyAkhyAna saMbhavita nahIM
pratyAkhyAna kA eka bar3A lAbha yaha bhI hai ki mana kI tRSNA janma sthiti evaM
caMcalatA samApta ho jAtI hai aura sAdhaka ko parama zAnti kA anubhava hotA hai|
- kula milAkara niSkarSa yaha hai ki SaTAvazyaka sAdhaka ke liye avazyakaraNIya
kriyA hai| sAdhaka cAhe zramaNa ho athavA zrAvaka ina kriyAoM ko karatA hI hai,
lekina donoM kI anubhUti meM tIvratA mandatA ho sakatI hai| zrAvaka kI apekSA
zramaNa ina kriyAoM ko adhika tallInatA se kara sakatA hai, kyoMki zramaNa
AraMbha samAraMbha se sarvathA virata hote haiN| yaha avazya karaNIya kriyA
zramaNa sAdhaka pratidina anivArya rUpa se karatA hai| chaha AvazyakoM kA krama
bar3e vaijJAnika DhaMga se nirUpita kiyA gayA hai| pahalA 'sAmAyika' Avazyaka
jIvana meM samabhAva kI sAdhanA sikhAtA hai 'caturviMzatistava' dvArA vaha
tIrthaMkara bhagavantroM jaisI vItarAgatA apane andara vikasita karane kI
bhAvanA karatA hai| 'vandanA' ke dvArA vaha svayaM vinaya guNa se vibhUSita hotA
hai, 'pratikramaNa' dvArA samasta bAhya evaM vaibhAvika pariNatiyoM se virata
hokara antarmukha banatA hai, 'kAyotsarga' ke dvArA zarIra kI mamatA kama kI
jAtI hai tathA AtmabhAva meM ramaNa kiyA jAtA hai aura 'pratyAkhyAna' meM
bhaviSya ke lie vibhinna prakAra ke tyAga grahaNa kie jAte haiN| isa prakAra
sAdhaka SaDAvazyaka se apane adhyAtma jIvana ko jagAtA huA mukti kI rAha para
kadama bar3hAtA hai| prathama aura antima tIrthaMkara ke zramaNoM ke liye yaha
anivArya hai ki ve niyamataH Avazyaka kreN| yadi ve Avazyaka kriyA nahIM karate
haiM to zramaNadharma se cyuta ho jAte haiN| yadi doSa lagA hai to bhI aura doSa
nahIM lagA ho to bhI pratikramaNa avazya karanA hI caahie|' zramaNasUtra
sambandhI vicAraNA mumukSu prANiyoM kI icchA pUrNa karane vAlA eka mAtra dharma
hI hai aura vaha vizuddha AtmA meM raha sakatA hai| jisa prakAra kisAna bIja
bone se pahale apanI jamIna meM hala calAtA hai, khAda DAlatA hai, kaMkara
pattharoM ko tathA phAlatU ghAsa-phUsa Adi ko haTAtA hai, usake bAda hI vaha
kheta meM bIja botA hai Usara bhUmi meM bIja bone se yA kaMkarIlI, patharIlI
bhUmi meM bIja bone se phasala paidA nahIM ho sktii| isI prakAra hRdaya bhI eka
kSetra hai| isameM 1. uttarAdhyayanasUtra a. 29 sUtra 14 2. sapaDikkamaNo
dhammo, purimassa ya pacchimassa ya jiNssa  /  majjhimayANa jiNANaM, kAraNajAe
paDikkamaNaM  //  Avazyakaniryukti, gA. 1244 [14] -

Page #18 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Before sowing the seed of Dharma, it needs to be purified. As it is said,
"Dhammo Suddhassa Chitthai." Dharma resides only in a pure heart. To purify the
soul and establish it in Dharma, certain rules are prescribed in the Agamas. One
of the main rules is "Aavashyak." "Aavashyak" is the lifeblood of Jain practice
and a great means of examining and testing one's soul. As the name suggests, it
contains essential topics. The nature of the daily duties to be performed by the
fourfold sangha - Sadhu, Sadhvi, Shravak, and Shravika - is expounded in the
Aavashyak Sutra. This Sutra concisely describes the potential for faults to
arise in daily life, in a way that everyone can easily understand. However,
there are some points to consider regarding the Shraman Sutra.  **Doubt (1):**
Since the name Shraman belongs to the Sadhu, is it appropriate for only the
Sadhu to read the Shraman Sutra, or should the Shravak also read it?  **Solution
(1):** The narrow interpretation that Shraman is only the name of the Sadhu is
not scripturally sound. The Vyākhyāprajñapti (Bhagavati) Sutra, in the eighth
Uddeshak of the twentieth Shatak, states: "Titt'ham Puṇ Chauvvaṇṇaiṇṇe
Samaṇasaṁghe, Taṁ Jaha - Samaṇā, Samaṇīo, Sāvagā, Sāviyāo." This means that the
Sadhu, Sadhvi, Shravak, and Shravika, all four, are called the Shraman Sangha.
Although in practice, Shraman is the name of the Sadhu, the Bhagavan has
referred to all four Tirthas as the Shraman Sangha. Every seeker should accept
this word of the Aapta.  **Doubt (2):** The Shraman Sutra only speaks of the
conduct of the Sadhu, so it is appropriate for only the Sadhu to read it. What
use is it for the Shravak?  **Solution (2):** The text of the Shraman Sutra is
extremely useful in many Dharma practices performed by the Shravak. For example:
(1) When a Shravak is asleep during a Poushadh Vrat or Sanvar, to be free from
the faults that arise during sleep, one should first recite the Margshudhi
(Iriyavahyam), then recite the Kayotsarg (Tass Uttari), then recite the
Kayotsarg of the two Logas, and then recite the first text of the Shraman Sutra,
"Ichchhami Padikkaamiuṁ Pagamasijjaye." There is no other text to be free from
the faults of sleep.  (2) The eleventh (eleventh) Padima Dharis Shravak are only
Bhikshopajivis, and in many places, Shravaks who observe the Dayavat (holders of
the tenth Vrat) also perform Gochari. To be free from the faults that arise in
it, one must recite the second text, "Padikkaamami Goyaraggachariya."  (3) The
twenty-first Adhyayan of the Shri Uttaradhyayanasutra states: "Niggan'the
Paavayane Saave Se Vi Kovie." This means that the Shravak who observes the Vrats
was a Kovid (scholar) in the Nirgranth Pravachan (scripture). This text proves
that the Shravak is a scholar of the scriptures. And in the twenty-second
Adhyayan, "Silavanta Bahussuya," it is said that Shri Rajamatiji had read many
Sutras at the time of her initiation. This proves that the Shravika is a scholar
of the scriptures. If they have not performed Samayik, Poushadh Vrat, or written
down clothes, money, etc., then to be free from that fault, one should recite
the third text, "Padikkaamami Chaukalam Sajjhayass Akaranyaye."  (4) From the
first to the thirty-third verses in the fourth text, all are to be known (Jney).
Some are to be abandoned (Hey) and some are to be accepted (Upadeya). Each
action is very useful. Therefore, knowledge of them is also essential for the
Shravaks.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dharmarUpI bIja bone se pahale isakI zuddhi karanI hotI hai| kahA bhI hai -
'dhammo suddhassa citttthii|' dharma zuddha hRdaya meM hI ThaharatA hai| AtmA ko
vizuddha banAkara dharma meM sthita karane ke lie kucha niyama AgamoM meM
nirdiSTa haiN| Avazyaka inhIM niyamoM meM se eka mukhya niyama hai| 'Avazyaka'
jaina sAdhanA kA mUla prANa hai tathA apanI AtmA ko nirakhane parakhane kA eka
mahAn upAya hai| nAma se spaSTa vidita hotA hai ki isameM AvazyakIya viSayoM kA
saMgraha hai| sAdhu, sAdhvI, zrAvaka aura zrAvikA isa caturvidha saMgha dvArA
samAcaraNIya nitya karttavya karma kA svarUpa AvazyakasUtra meM pratipAdita hai|
isa sUtra meM jIvanavyavahAra meM jina doSoM kI utpatti hone kI saMbhAvanA hai,
unakA saMkSipta kathana, sabhI AsAnI se samajha sakeM aisI khUbI se kiyA hai
lekina zramaNasUtra ke viSaya meM kucha vicAraNIya hai| yathA - zaMkA (1) -
zramaNa nAma sAdhu kA hai, isalie zramaNasUtra sAdhu ko hI par3hanA ucita hai yA
zrAvaka ko bhI? samAdhAna (1) - zramaNa sAdhu kA hI nAma hai, aisA saMkucita
artha zAstrasammata nahIM hai| vyAkhyAprajJapti (bhagavatI) sUtra 20veM zataka
ke AThaveM uddezaka meM kahA hai - 'titthaM puNa cAuvvaNNAiNNe samaNasaMghe, taM
jahA - samaNA, samaNIo, sAvagA, saaviyaao|' arthAt sAdhu, sAdhvI, zrAvaka aura
zrAvikA, ina cAroM ko zramaNasaMgha kahate haiN| yadyapi vyavahAra meM zramaNa
sAdhu kA hI nAma hai, tathApi bhagavAn ne to cAroM tIrthoM ko hI zramaNasaMgha
ke rUpa meM kahA hai| isa AptavAkya ko pratyeka mumukSu ko mAnanA caahie| zaMkA
(2) -'zramaNasUtra meM sAdhu ke AcAra kA hI kathana hai, isalie sAdhu ko hI
par3hanA ucita hai, zrAvaka ke lie usakA kyA upayoga hai ? samAdhAna (2) -
zrAvaka kRta aneka dharmakriyAoM meM zramaNasUtra ke pATha parama upayogI hote
haiN| udAharaNa ke lie (1) jaba zrAvaka pauSadhavrata meM yA saMvara meM
nidrAgrasta hote haiM, taba nidrA meM lage hue doSoM se nivRtta hone ke lie
prathama mArgazuddhi (iriyAvahiyaM kA pATha), kAyotsarga (tassa uttarI) kA pATha
bolane ke bAda do logassa ke pATha kAyotsarga karake prakaTa meM eka logassa
kahe, isake bAda zramaNasUtra kA prathama pATha "icchAmi paDikkAmiuM
pagAmasijjAe" kA pATha kahanA caahie| nidrA ke doSoM se nivRtta hone kA anya koI
pATha nahIM hai| . (2) ekAdazama (gyArahavIM) paDimAdhArI zrAvaka bhikSopajIvI
hI hote haiM tathA kaI sthAnoM para dayAvata ke pAlana karane vAle (dazaveM
vrata ke dhAraka) zrAvaka bhI gocarI karate haiN| usameM lage hue doSoM kI
nivRtti karane ke lie dUsarA pATha "paDikkamAmi goyaraggacariyA" kA pATha kahanA
par3atA hai| (3) zrI uttarAdhyayanasUtra ke 21veM adhyayana meM kahA hai, -
"niggaMthe pAvayaNe sAvae se vi kovie" arthAt pAlita zrAvaka nirgranthapravacana
(zAstra) meM kovida (paNDita) thA, isa pATha se zrAvaka aura 22veM adhyayana meM
"sIlavaMtA bahussuyA" arthAt dIkSA lene ke samaya zrI rAjamatIjI bahuta sUtra
par3hI huI thIM, isase zrAvikA zAstra kI pAThikA siddha hotI hai| isa prakAra
unhoMne sAmAyika, pauSadhavrata meM muhapatti tathA vastra, pUMjanI Adi kA
pratilekhana nahIM kiyA ho to usa doSa kI nivRtti karane ke lie tIsarA pATha
"paDikamAmi caukAlaM sajjhAyassa akaraNayAe" ko kahanA caahie| (4) cauthe pATha
meM eka bola se lagAkara tetIsa bola taka kahe haiN| ve saba hI jJeya (jAnane
yogya) haiN| kucha heya (chor3ane yogya) aura kucha upAdeya (svIkArane yogya)
padArthoM ke darzaka haiN| pratyeka kArya bar3e upayogI haiN| ataH unakA jJAna
bhI zrAvakoM ke lie Avazyaka hai| [15]

Page #19 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(5) The fifth lesson is "Nirgranth Pravachan" (Namo Chauvvisaaye), which
contains the glory of the Jina Pravachan (scripture) and Jainism, and the
statement of the despicable and desirable in eight speeches. It is also very
useful for the Shravakas. Thus, there is not a single subject or lesson in the
Shraman Sutra that is useless for the Shravaka. Doubt (3) - The Sadhu should
also be told the Shravaka Sutra in the Pratikraman, like the Shravaka, because
it also contains the statement of all three types of substances, namely,
knowable, despicable, and desirable. Solution (3) - It is essential to tell the
vows and transgressions of the Shravaka together. But this subject is very
debatable. (1) The Shravaka's Anuvratas are included in the Mahavrata of the
Sadhu, so there is no need to tell the Sadhu the Shravaka's vows. (2) The
Shravaka should definitely aspire to become a Sadhu, so there is a need to tell
the Shraman Sutra, but if it is said that the Sadhu should also feel like a
Shravaka and tell the Shravaka Sutra in the Pratikraman, then this statement
will be completely inappropriate. Doubt (4) - Is there any evidence that the
Shravaka used to or does perform Pratikraman including the Shraman Sutra?
Solution (4) - Shravakavaristha Shri Lokashah, the restorer of the Jain religion
who had fallen from Dharma due to the twelve-year Mahaduhkala, happened in the
city of Ahmedabad in the country of Gujarat. In that country, i.e., Gujarat,
Jhalawar, Kathiawar, Kutch, etc. - all the Shravakas of six and eight kotis used
to and do perform Pratikraman including the Shraman Sutra. The Shravakas of the
sect of Param Pujya Shri Kahanaji Rishiji Maharaj, who is seated on the third
part of Param Pujya Shri Lavji Rishiji Maharaj, the restorer of the Sanatan Jain
Sadhumarg Samaj, speak the Shraman Sutra. The Shravakas of the sect of Param
Pujya Shri Dharmadasaji Maharaj, the Mulacharya of the twenty-two sects, and the
Shravakas of the sect of Pujya Shri Ekalingadasaji Maharaj, the Dharmapravartak
of the Mewar country, perform Pratikraman including the Shraman Sutra. It is
proved from the above doubt-solution that the Shravaka should perform
Pratikraman including the Shraman Sutra. The Shravaka's actions cannot be
completely pure without the lessons of the Shraman Sutra. Because the Shravaka
Sutra contains the subjects that the Shravakas must know and the subjects that
they must act upon. The Shravakas of ancient times used to perform Pratikraman
including the Shraman Sutra, even today some Shravakas perform Pratikraman
including the Shraman Sutra, and those who do not perform Pratikraman including
the Shraman Sutra should now do so. The present edition The present edition of
the Avashyak Sutra is being published by the Agam Prakashan Samiti. This
committee was organized by our late Gurudev Pujya Yuvacharya Shri 'Madhukar'
Muniji Maharaj. It was Gurudev's idea that the original Agamas should be
published in such a way that even ordinary Agam-loving people could easily study
them. This was not an ordinary resolution. It was a Bhagirath Anushthan, but
Gurudev, who was rich in great resolve, turned it into a work, and under your
guidance, many Agamas were also published. But the sad thing is that Gurudev
passed away in the middle. Even after that, the publication work designated by
Gurudev is progressing with the significant cooperation of many Munivar and
generous Sadgrihasthas. Now this publication work should be considered as a
tribute to Gurudev Yuvacharya Shri in a way. [16]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (5) pAMcavAM pATha "nirgrantha pravacana" (namo cauvvIsAe) kA hai, jisameM jina
pravacana (zAstra) kI evaM jainamata kI mahimA hai tathA ATha boloM meM heya -
upAdeya kA kathana hai| vaha bhI zrAvakoM ke lie paramopayogI hai| isa prakAra
zramaNasUtra meM eka bhI viSaya yA pATha aisA nahIM hai jo ki zrAvaka ke lie
anupayogI ho| zaMkA (3) - zrAvaka kI taraha sAdhu ko bhI zrAvakasUtra
pratikramaNa meM kahanA cAhie, kyoMki usameM bhI jJeya, heya, upAdeya Adi tInoM
prakAra ke padArthoM kA kathana hai| samAdhAna (3)- zrAvaka ke vratoM aura
aticAroM ko eka sAtha kahanA AvazyakasUtra hai| lekina yaha viSaya bar3A
vicAraNIya hai| (1) sAdhu ke mahAvratoM meM zrAvaka ke aNuvratoM kA samAveza ho
jAtA hai, isalie sAdhu ko zrAvakoM ke vrata kahane kI AvazyakatA nahIM hai| (2)
zrAvaka ko to sAdhu hone kA manoratha avazya karanA cAhi ataH zramaNasUtra
kahane kI AvazyakatA hai, parantu yadi kahe ki sAdhu bhI zrAvaka hone kI bhAvanA
kare aura zrAvaka sUtra ko pratikramaNa meM kahe to yaha kathana sarvathA ayogya
hI hogaa| zaMkA (4) - zrAvaka zramaNasUtra sahita pratikramaNa karate the yA
karate haiM, isakA koI pramANa hai kyA ? samAdhAnA (4) - dvAdaza vArSika
mahAduSkAla se dharmaskhalita jainoM ke punaruddhAraka zrAvakavariSTha zrI
lokAzAha gujarAta deza ke ahamadAbAda zahara meM hue| usa deza meM arthAt
gujarAta, jhAlAvAr3a, kAThiyAvAr3a, kaccha Adi dezoM meM - chaha koTi evaM ATha
koTi vAle sabhI zrAvaka zramaNasUtra sahita pratikramaNa karate the evaM karate
haiN| sanAtana jaina sAdhumArgI samAja ke punaruddhAraka paramapUjya zrI
lavajIRSijI mahArAja ke tRtIya pAra para virAjita hue parama pUjya zrI
kahAnajIRSijI mahArAja kI sampradAya ke zrAvaka zramaNasUtra bolate haiN| bAIsa
sampradAya ke mUlAcArya parama pUjya zrI dharmadAsajI mahArAja kI sampradAya ke
zrAvaka evaM mevAr3a deza dharmapravartaka pUjya zrI ekaliMgadAsajI mahArAja kI
sampradAya ke zrAvaka zramaNasUtra sahita pratikramaNa karate haiN| uparyukta
zaMkA-samAdhAna se siddha hotA hai ki zrAvaka ko zramaNasUtra sahita
pratikramaNa karanA caahie| zramaNasUtra ke pAThoM ke binA zrAvaka kI kriyA pUrI
taraha zuddha nahIM ho sakatI hai| kyoMki zrAvakoM ko avazya jAnane yogya viSaya
aura AcaraNa karane yogya viSaya zrAvakasUtra meM haiN| prAcInakAla ke zrAvaka
zramaNasUtra sahita pratikramaNa karate the, vartamAna meM bhI kucha zrAvaka
zramaNasUtra sahita pratikramaNa karate haiM aura jo zramaNasUtra sahita
pratikramaNa nahIM karate haiM, unheM aba karanA caahie| prastuta saMskaraNa
AvazyakasUtra kA prastuta saMskaraNa Agama prakAzana samiti dvArA prakAzita kiyA
jA rahA hai| isa samiti kI AyojanA hamAre svargIya gurudeva pUjya yuvAcArya zrI
'madhukara' munijI mahArAja dvArA kI gaI thii| gurudeva kA yaha vicAra thA ki
mUla AgamoM kA prakAzana aisI paddhati se kiyA jAe jisase sarvasAdhAraNa
AgamapremI janoM ko bhI unakA svAdhyAya kara sakanA sarala ho| yaha koI sAmAnya
saMkalpa nahIM thaa| eka bhAgIratha anuSThAna thA, magara mahAn saMkalpa ke
dhanI gurudeva ne ise kArya rUpa meM pariNata kiyA aura Apake nirdezana meM
aneka AgAmoM kA prakAzana ho bhI gyaa| kintu duHkha kA viSaya yaha hai ki
gurudeva bIca meM hI svarga sidhAra ge| tatpazcAt bhI aneka munivaroM aura udAra
sadgRhasthoM ke mahattvapUrNa sahayoga se gurudeva dvArA nirdiSTa prakAzana -
kArya agrasara ho rahA hai| aba yaha prakAzana kArya gurudeva yuvAcAryazrI ke
prati eka prakAra se zraddhAMjali-svarUpa hI samajhanA caahie| [16]

Page #20 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
In the editing of the *Aavashyak Sutra*, our Guruji, M. Adhyatmayogini,
embodiment of boundless affection, sweet-tongued, supremely learned, revered
Shri Umravkunvarji M. Sa. has guided me. I received the support of the ascetic
embodiment Shri Ummedkunvar M. and other Sadhvi Mandal. The editions edited by
Upadhyaya Kavivarya Shri Amarmuniji M. etc. have also been used in this as they
are. I am deeply grateful for the cooperation of all of them. Sahithya
Vachaspati Shri Devendramuniji M. has adorned this edition by writing an
extensive preface. It is natural to be grateful to him. Despite taking utmost
care, if any error has remained anywhere, then the generous reader should inform
us, so that it can be rectified in the next edition. Sadhvi Suprabha 'Sudha'
[17]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 AvazyakasUtra ke sampAdana meM hamArI guruNIjI ma. adhyAtmayoginI,
prazastavAtsalyamUrti, sumadhura bhASiNI, paramaviduSI pUjya zrI
umarAvakuMvarajI ma. sA. merA patha-pradarzana kiyA hai| tapomUrti zrI
ummedakuMvara ma. tathA anya sAdhvI - maNDala kA sahayoga prApta huA  /
upAdhyAya kavivarya zrI amaramunijI ma. Adi dvArA sampAdita saMskaraNoM kA bhI
isameM yathAsthAna upayoga kiyA gayA hai| ina sabhI ke sahayoga ke lie maiM
atIva AbhArI hUM  /  sAhityavAcaspati zrI devendramunijI ma. ne vistRta
prastAvanA likha kara isa saMskaraNa ko vibhUSita kiyA hai  /  unake prati
AbhArI honA svAbhAvika hai  /  pUrI sAvadhAnI baratane ke bAvajUda agara kahIM
koI truTi raha gaI ho to udAra pAThaka hameM avazya sUcanA deM, jisase agale
saMskaraNa meM usakA parimArjana kiyA jA ske| sAdhvI suprabhA 'sudhA' [17]

Page #21 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. 10. 11. 12. 13. 14. 15. 16. 17. 18. 19. 20. 21. 22.
23. 24. 25. 26. Aagam Prakashan Samiti, Byaver (Executive Committee) Shriman
Sagarmalji Baitala Shriman Ratanchandji Modi Shriman Dhanrajji Vinayakia Shriman
Bhanwarlalji Gothi Shriman Hukmichandji Parkh Shriman Dulichandji Chordia
Shriman Jasrajji Parkh Shriman Sardar Malji Chordia Shriman Gyanrajji Mootha
Shriman Gyanchandji Vinayakia Shriman Prakashchandji Chopra Shriman Janvarilalji
Shishodia Shriman R. Prasannchandji Chordia Shriman Manakchandji Sancheti
Shriman Rikhbachandji Lodha Shriman S. Sayermalji Chordia Shriman Mulchandji
Surana Shriman Motichandji Chordia Shriman Amarchandji Modi Shriman Kishnalalji
Baitala Shriman Jatanrajji Mehta Shriman Devrajji Chordia Shriman Gautamchandji
Chordia Shriman Sumermalji Medtiya Shriman Prakashchandji Chordia Shriman
Pradeepchandji Chordia President Acting President Vice President Vice President
Vice President Vice President Vice President General Secretary Secretary
Secretary Joint Secretary Treasurer Treasurer Advisor Advisor Member Member
Member Member Member Member Member Member Member Member Member Indore Byaver
Byaver Chennai Jodhpur Chennai Durg Chennai Pali Byaver Byaver Byaver Chennai
Jodhpur Chennai Chennai Nagaur Chennai Byaver Chennai Medtacity Chennai Chennai
Jodhpur Chennai Chennai

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. 10. 11. 12. 13. 14. 15. 16. 17. 18. 19. 20. 21. 22.
23. 24. 25. 26. Agama prakAzana samiti, byAvara ( kAryakAriNI samiti ) zrImAn
sAgaramalajI baitAlA zrImAn ratanacandajI modI zrImAn dhanarAjajI vinAyakiyA
zrImAn bhaMvaralAlajI goThI zrImAn hukmIcandajI pArakha zrImAn dulIcandajI
corar3iyA zrImAn jasarAjajI pArakha zrImAn saradAra malajI corar3iyA zrImAn
jJAnarAjajI mUthA zrImAn jJAnacandajI vinAyakiyA zrImAn prakAzacaMdajI caupar3A
zrImAn jaMvarIlAlajI zizodiyA zrImAn Ara. prasannacandrajI corar3iyA zrImAn
mANakacandajI saMcetI zrImAn rikhabacaMdajI lor3hA zrImAn esa. sAyaramalajI
corar3iyA zrImAn mUlacandajI surANA zrImAn motIcandajI corar3iyA zrImAn
amaracaMdajI modI zrImAn kizanalAlajI baitAlA zrImAn jatanarAjajI mehatA zrImAn
devarAjajI corar3iyA zrImAn gautamacaMdajI corar3iyA zrImAn sumeramalajI
mer3atiyA zrImAn prakAzacandajI corar3iyA zrImAn pradIpacaMdajI corar3iyA
adhyakSa kAryavAhaka adhyakSa upAdhyakSa upAdhyakSa upAdhyakSa upAdhyakSa
upAdhyakSa mahAmantrI mantrI mantrI sahamantrI koSAdhyakSa koSAdhyakSa
parAmarzadAtA parAmarzadAtA sadasya sadasya sadasya sadasya sadasya sadasya
sadasya sadasya sadasya sadasya sadasya indaura byAvara byAvara cainnaI
jodhapura cainnaI durga cainnaI pAlI byAvara byAvara byAvara cainnaI jodhapura
cainnaI cainnaI nAgaura cainnaI byAvara cainnaI mer3atAsiTI cainnaI cainnaI
jodhapura cainnaI cainnaI

Page #22 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Introduction **Essential Sutras: A Critical Study** [From the First Edition]
In Indian literature, the word "Agam" is synonymous with scripture. The
**Aavashyakachurnikar** defines the word "Agam" as: "That by which the
understanding of substances is achieved, is Agam." The **Anuyogadwarachurni**
states: "That which is the word of the **Aapta** (omniscient being) is Agam." In
the **Anuyogadwar Maladhariya Tika**, the Acharya, while contemplating the word
"Agam", clarifies that "That which comes from the Guru Parampara (lineage of
teachers) is Agam." Acharya **Vachaspati Mishra** writes: "That scripture by the
practice of which the means of **Abhyudaya** (worldly prosperity) and
**Nishreyas** (spiritual liberation) are known, is Agam." According to
**Abhinavagupta Acharya**, "That which, upon reading, provides comprehensive
understanding, is Agam." Similarly, Acharya **Jinabhadragani Kshamasraman**, in
the **Visheshaavashyak Bhashya**, defines scripture as: "That by which the true,
real form of the knowable, the soul, is understood and disciplined, is
scripture."  The word "Sutra" is also used in the same sense as "Agam" and
"Shastra". **Sanghadasagani**, in the **Brihatkalpa Bhashya**, explains the word
"Sutra" as: "That by following which the shedding of karmas occurs, is Sutra."
In the **Visheshaavashyak Bhashya**, using the **Nirukta** method of
interpretation, it is written: "That which irrigates the meaning, is Sutra."
Acharya **Abhaydeva**, in the **Sthananga Vritti**, writes: "That by which
meaning is strung together, is Sutra." The **Brihatkalpa Tika** states: "By
following the Sutra, the shedding of eight types of karma-dust occurs, hence it
is called Sutra."  **Essential: The Life Force of Jain Practice**  The
**Aavashyak Sutra** holds a unique place in Jain Agam literature. The
**Anuyogadwarachurni**, while defining **Aavashyak**, states: "That which makes
the **Gunashunya Atma** (soul devoid of qualities) reside in auspicious
emotions, is **Aavasak**."  1. **Njjati Attha Jene So Agamo.** - Aavashyakchurni
1/36 2. **Attass Va Vayanam Agamo.** - Anuyogadwarachurni, page 16 3.
**Guruparamparayenagachchatiityagamaha.** - Anuyogadwar Maladhariya Tika, page
202 4. **Aasamantat Arth Gamayati iti Agamha.** 5. **Sasajjiti Tene Tahim Va
Neyamayato Satyam.** 6. **Anusarai Tti Suttam.** - Brihatkalpa Bhashya, 311 7.
**Sinchati Kharai Jamattham Tamha Suttam Niruttavihina.** - Vi.Bha. 1368 8.
**Suryante Anenetti Sutram.** - Sthananga Vritti, page 49 9. **Sutramanusaran
Raj:-Ashta Prakaram Karma Apanayati Tatah Saranat Sutram.** - Brihatkalpa Tika,
page 95 [19]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prastAvanA Avazyaka sUtra : eka samIkSAtmaka adhyayana [prathama saMskaraNa se]
bhAratIya sAhitya meM 'Agama' zabda zAstra kA paryAyavAcI hai| AvazyakacUrNikAra
ne Agama zabda kI paribhASA karate hue likhA hai - jisake dvArA padArthoM kA
avabodha hotA hai, vaha Agama hai|' anuyogadvAracUrNi meM likhA hai - jo
Aptavacana hai, vaha Agama hai| anuyogadvAra maladhArIya TIkA meM AcArya ne
Agama zabda para cintana karate hue yaha spaSTa kiyA hai ki jo guruparamparA se
AtA hai, vaha Agama hai| AcArya vAcaspati mizra ne likhA hai - jisa zAstra ke
anuzIlana se abhyudaya evaM niHzreyas kA upAya avagata ho, vaha Agama hai|
abhinavaguptAcArya ke abhimatAnusAra jisake paThana se sarvAMgINa bodha prApta
ho, vaha Agama hai| isI prakAra AcArya jinabhadragaNI kSamAzramaNa ne
vizeSAvazyakabhASya meM zAstra kI paribhASA dete hue likhA hai - jisake dvArA
yathArtha satya rUpa jJeya kA, AtmA kA paribodha ho aura anuzAsana kiyA jA sake,
vaha zAstra hai| Agama aura zAstra ke hI artha meM sUtra zabda kA bhI prayoga
hotA hai| saMghadAsagaNI ne bRhatkalpabhASya meM sUtra zabda kI vyAkhyA karate
hue likhA hai - jisake anusaraNa se karmoM kA saraNaapanayana hotA hai, vaha
sUtra hai| vizeSAvazyakabhASya meM niruktavidhi se artha karate hue likhA hai -
jo artha kA siMcana 'kSaraNa karatA hai, vaha sUtra hai| AcArya abhayadeva ne
sthAnAMgavRtti meM likhA hai - jisase artha sUtrita / gumphita kiyA jAtA hai,
vaha sUtra hai| bRhatkalpaTIkA meM likhA hai - sUtra kA anusaraNa karane se aSTa
prakAra kI karma-raja kA apanayana hotA hai, ata: vaha sUtra kahA jAtA hai|
jaina sAdhanA kA prANa : Avazyaka jaina AgamasAhitya meM AvazyakasUtra kA apanA
viziSTa sthAna hai| anuyogadvAracUrNi meM Avazyaka kI paribhASA karate hue likhA
hai - jo guNazUnya AtmA ko prazasta bhAvoM se AvAsita karatA hai, vaha AvAsaka /
/  1. Najjati atthA jeNa so aagmo| -AvazyakacUrNi 1/36 2. attassa vA vayaNaM
aagmo| - anuyogadvAracUrNi, pRSTha 16 3. gurupaarmpryennaagcchtiityaagmH| -
anuyogadvAra maladhArIya TIkA, pR. 202 4. AsamantAt artha gamayati iti aagmH| 5.
sAsajjiti teNa tahiM vA neyamAyato satyaM  /  6. anusarai tti suttN| -
bRhatkalpa bhASya, 311 7. siMcati kharai jamatthaM tamhA suttaM niruttvihinnaa|
vi.bhA. 1368 8. sUtryante aneneti suutrm| - sthAnAMgavRtti, pR. 49 9.
sUtramanusaran raja:-aSTa prakAraM karma apanayati tataH saraNAt suutrm| -
bRhatkalpaTIkA, pRSTa, 95 [19]

Page #23 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
It is essential. The Anuogadwar Maldhariy Tika states that the one who is the
abode of all virtues is Avasak. It is an essential sutra. In other words, it can
also be said that the one who makes the soul prosperous with excellent virtues
is Avasak. It is the lifeblood of essential Jain practice. It is a living
commentary on life purification and fault correction. Whether the practitioner
is literate or illiterate, whether a common inquirer or a great sage with
extraordinary brilliance, knowledge of the essential is not only necessary but
mandatory for all practitioners. Through the knowledge of the essential sutra,
the practitioner examines and tests his soul. Just as there is Sandhyakarma in
the Vedic tradition, worship in the Buddhist tradition, Khor Deh Avesta in the
Parsis, prayer in the Jews and Christians, and Namaz in Islam, so too in
Jainism, there is the essential for the purification of faults and the increase
of virtues.  The essential is the main part of Jain practice. It is the basis of
spiritual equality, humility, and other virtues. The goal of an insightful
practitioner is not external matter, but self-purification. The practice and
worship through which the soul experiences eternal happiness, destroys karma-
mala, and attains the light of spirituality through right faith, right
knowledge, and right conduct, is the essential. It is necessary to do something
to refine those mistakes after seeing one's own mistakes. The provision of the
essential is for everyone, whether a monk or a nun, a layman or a laywoman. The
Anuogadwar Sutra gives eight synonyms for the essential - essential, necessary,
Dhruvanigraha, Vishudhi, Adhyayan Shatkvarg, Nyaya, Aradhana, and Marg. Although
there is a slight difference in meaning in these names, all the names express
the same meaning.  It is a rule for the monks of the first and last Tirthankaras
that they must perform the essential. If monks and nuns do not perform the
essential, they are deviated from the monastic dharma. Even if there is a stain
of fault in life, or even if there is no stain, the essential should be
performed. The Essential Appointment clearly states that in the reign of the
first and last Tirthankaras, dharma was formulated including Pratikraman.
Knowledge of the essential is also considered essential for lay people. This is
why in the Svetambar tradition, the religious studies of children begin with the
Essential Sutra. The Essential Sutra has six parts - 1. Samayik - practice of
equality, 2. Chaturvinshati Stav - praise of the twenty-four Tirthankara Devas -
Anuogadwar Churni, p. 14   Anuogadwar Maldhariy Tika, p. 28 1. Sunnamappaṇam tam
pasatthabhaavehiṁ āvāsetiiti āvāsam. 2. Samagrasyaapi
gunagraamasyaavasakamityavasakam. • 3. Samaṇeṇa sāvaena ya, avassa kāyavvayam
havaī jamhā. Ante aho-nisassa ya, tamhā āvassaṁ nāma|| 4. Sapaḍikkamaṇo dhammo,
purimasssa ya pacchimasssa ya jiṇassa. Majjhimayaṇ jiṇāṇam, kāraṇajāe
paḍikkamaṇam || - Avasyavritti, Gatha 2, page 53 - Avasyanyukti, Gatha 1244 [20]
.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Avazyaka hai| anuyogadvAra maladhArIya TIkA meM likhA hai, jo samasta guNoM kA
nivAsasthAna hai, vaha AvAsaka  /  Avazyaka sUtra hai| dUsare zabdoM meM yoM bhI
kahA jA sakatA hai ki jo prazasta guNoM se AtmA ko sampanna karatA hai, vaha
AvAsaka  /  Avazyaka jaina sAdhanA kA prANa hai| vaha jIvanazuddhi aura
doSaparimArjana kA jIvanta bhASya hai| sAdhaka cAhe sAkSara ho, cAhe nirakSara
ho, cAhe sAmAnya jijJAsu ho yA pratApapUrNa pratibhA kA dhanI koI mUrdhanya
manISI, sabhI sAdhakoM ke lie Avazyaka kA jJAna Avazyaka hI nahIM, anivArya hai|
AvazyakasUtra ke parijJAna se sAdhaka apanI AtmA ko nirakhatA hai, parakhatA
hai| jaise vaidika paramparA meM sandhyAkarma hai, bauddha paramparA meM upAsanA
hai, pArasiyoM meM khora deha avestA hai, yahUdI aura IsAIyoM meM prArthanA hai,
islAma dharma meM namAja hai, vaise hI jainadharma meM doSoM kI vizuddhi ke lie
aura guNoM kI abhivRddhi ke lie Avazyaka hai| Avazyaka jaina sAdhanA kA mukhya
aMga hai| vaha AdhyAtmika samatA, namratA, prabhRti sadguNoM kA AdhAra hai|
antardRSTisampanna sAdhaka kA lakSya bAhya padArtha nahIM, Atmazodhana hai| jisa
sAdhanA aura ArAdhanA se AtmA zAzvata sukha kA anubhava kare, karma-mala ko
naSTa kara samyagdarzana, samyagjJAna aura samyakcAritra se adhyAtma ke Aloka ko
prApta kare, vaha Avazyaka hai| apanI bhUloM ko nihAra kara una bhUloM ke
pariSkAra ke lie kucha na kucha kriyA karanA Avazyaka hai| Avazyaka kA vidhAna
zramaNa ho yA zramaNI ho, zrAvaka ho yA zrAvikA ho, sabhI ke lie hai|
anuyogadvArasUtra meM Avazyaka ke ATha paryAyavAcI nAma die haiM - Avazyaka,
avazyakaraNIya, dhruvanigraha, vizodhi, adhyayanaSaTkavarga, nyAya, ArAdhanA
aura maarg| ina nAmoM meM kiMcit arthabheda hone para bhI sabhI nAma samAna
artha ko hI vyakta karate haiN| prathama aura antima tIrthaMkara ke zramaNoM ke
lie yaha niyama hai ki ve anivArya rUpa se Avazyaka kreN| yadi zramaNa aura
zramaNiyAM Avazyaka nahIM karate haiM to zramaNadharma se cyuta ho jAte haiN|
yadi jIvana meM doSa kI kAlimA lagI hai to bhI aura nahIM lagI hai to bhI
Avazyaka avazya karanA caahie| Avazyakaniyukti meM spaSTa rUpa se likhA hai ki
prathama aura carama tIrthaMkaroM ke zAsana meM pratikramaNa sahita dharma
prarUpita kiyA gayA hai| zrAvakoM ke lie bhI Avazyaka kI jAnakArI Avazyaka mAnI
gaI hai| yahI kAraNa hai ki zvetAmbara paramparA meM bAlakoM ke dhArmika
adhyayana kA prArambha AvazyakasUtra se hI karAyA jAtA hai| AvazyakasUtra ke
chaha aMga hai - 1. sAmAyika - samabhAva kI sAdhanA, 2. caturviMzatistava -
cauvIsa tIrthaMkara devoM kI stuti - anuyogadvAracUrNi, pR. 14 anuyogadvAra
maladhArIya TIkA, pR. 28 1. suNNamappANaM taM pasatthabhAvehiM AvAsetIti
aavaasN| 2. samagrasyApi guNagrAmasyAvAsakamityAvAsakam  /  * 3. samaNeNa
sAvaeNa ya, avassa kAyavvayaM havai jmhaa| ante aho-nisassa ya, tamhA AvassayaM
naam|| 4. sapaDikkamaNo dhammo, purimassa ya pacchimassa ya jinnss| majjhimayANa
jiNANaM, kAraNajAe paDikkamaNaM  //  - AvazyakavRtti, gAthA 2, pRSTha 53 -
Avazyakaniyukti, gAthA 1244 [20] .

Page #24 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
3. Vandana - Salutations to the Sadgurus, their praise, 4. Pratikramana -
Criticism of faults, 5. Kayotsarga - Renunciation of attachment to the body, 6.
Pratiakhyana - Renunciation of food etc. In Anuyogadwar, their names are given
as follows - 1. Savadha Yogavirat (Samayik), 2. Utkiirtan (Chaturvinshati Stav),
3. Gunavatpratipatti (Guru - Upasana or Vandana), 4. Skhalitnindana
(Pratikramana - Criticism of past sins), 5. Vranachikitsa (Kayotsarga -
Meditation, renunciation of attachment to the body) and 6. Gunadharana
(Pratiakhyana - Renunciation for the future, acceptance of rules etc.). In
Jnanasar, Acharya, while expounding the importance of Aavashyak Kriya, wrote -
Aavashyak Kriya does not allow the soul to fall from the purity of emotions
already attained. For the growth of virtues and for the non-slippage of attained
virtues, the practice of Aavashyak Kriya is very useful. The practice of
Aavashyak Kriya leads to the progressive development of life. In his life, the
ocean of virtues starts to roar. The order of sadhana that is kept in Aavashyak
is based on the chain of cause and effect and is completely scientific. For the
seeker, it is necessary to attain equality first. Without equality, the
beautiful flowers do not bloom and the thorns of vices do not fall. When the
flames of inequality are burning in the inner heart, how can the virtues of the
great men be praised? Only the person who holds equality in life praises the
virtues of the great men and brings their noble qualities into life. Therefore,
Chaturvinshati Stav Aavashyak is kept after Samayik Aavashyak. When a person
holds virtues in his heart, then his head bows at the feet of the great men.
Overwhelmed with devotion, he salutes them, hence the third Aavashyak is
Vandana. The heart of the seeker who performs Vandana is simple, like an open
book, everyone can read the pages of his life. Only a simple person criticizes
his own faults, hence the description of Pratikramana Aavashyak after Vandana.
To remember the mistakes and to get rid of those mistakes, stability in body and
mind is necessary. In Kayotsarga, the body and mind are concentrated and the
practice of stable attitude is done. When the body and mind are stable, then
Pratiakhyana can be done. When the mind is in a wavering state, then
Pratiakhyana is not possible. Therefore, Pratiakhyana Aavashyak is placed sixth.
Thus, this Shad Aavashyak is the best way of self-reflection, self-examination
and self-elevation. In Anuyogadwar Sutra, there are two divisions of Aavashyak -
Dravya Aavashyak and Bhava Aavashyak. In Dravya Aavashyak, only the recitation
of the texts is done without thinking, with a distracted mind. The mind wanders
here and there without being engaged in the text that is being recited. In
Dravya Aavashyak, only external action takes place, due to lack of use, internal
brilliance does not manifest from that action. It is lifeless sadhana. In Bhava
Aavashyak, the seeker performs the action with use. With that action, his mind,
his speech, his body are completely concentrated. 1. Jan nan ime samano va
samani va savao va savia va tacchitte, tammane, talleese, tadajjavasie,
tattivyajjavasanae, tadattovaute, tadappiyayakaranee, tabbavanaabavie, annattha
katthai manam akaremane ubhaokalam avassayam karenti se tam logujariyam
bhavaavassayam. [21]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 3. vandana - sadguruoM ko namaskAra, unakA guNagAna, 4. pratikramaNa - doSoM kI
AlocanA, 5. kAyotsarga - zarIra ke prati mamatva kA tyAga, 6. pratyAkhyAna -
AhAra Adi kA tyaag| anuyogadvAra meM inake nAma isa prakAra die gaye haiM - 1.
sAvadha yogavirati (sAmAyika), 2. utkIrtana (caturviMzatistava), 3.
guNavatpratipatti (guru -upAsanA athavA vandanA), 4. skhalitanindanA
(pratikramaNa - pichale pApoM kI AlocanA), 5. vraNacikitsA (kAyotsarga-dhyAna
zarIra se mamatva - tyAga) aura 6. guNadhAraNa (pratyAkhyAna - Age ke lie tyAga,
niyamagrahaNa aadi)| jJAnasAra meM AcArya ne AvazyakakriyA kA mahattva
pratipAdita karate hue likhA hai - AvazyakakriyA pahale se prApta bhAvavizuddhi
se AtmA ko girane nahIM detii| guNoM kI vRddhi ke lie aura prApta guNoM ko
skhalita na hone ke lie Avazyaka kriyA kA AcaraNa bahuta upayogI hai|
AvazyakakriyA ke AcaraNa se jIvana kA uttarottara vikAsa hotA hai| usake jIvana
meM sadguNoM kA sAgara ThAThe mArane lagatA hai| Avazyaka meM jo sAdhanA kA
krama rakhA gayA hai, vaha kArya-kAraNa bhAva kI zrRMkhalA para avasthita hai
tathA pUrNa vaijJAnika hai| sAdhaka ke lie sarvaprathama samatA ko prApta karanA
Avazyaka hai| binA samatA ko a sarasa sumana khilate nahIM aura avaguNoM ke
kAMTe jhar3ate nhiiN| jaba antarhadaya meM viSamabhAva kI jvAlAeM dhadhaka rahI
hoM taba vItarAgI mahApuruSoM ke guNoM kA utkIrtana kisa prakAra kiyA jA sakatA
hai ? samatva ko jIvana meM dhAraNa karane vAlA vyakti hI mahApuruSoM ke guNoM
kA saMkIrtana karatA hai aura unake udAtta guNoM ko jIvana meM utAratA hai|
isIlie sAmAyika Avazyaka ke pazcAt caturviMzatistava Avazyaka rakhA gayA hai|
jaba guNoM ko vyakti hRdaya meM dhAraNa karatA hai, tabhI usakA sira mahApuruSoM
ke caraNoM meM jhukatA hai| bhaktibhAvanA se vibhora hokara vaha unheM vandana
karatA hai, isIlie tRtIya Avazyaka vandana hai| vandana karane vAle sAdhaka kA
hRdaya sarala hotA hai, khulI pustaka kI taraha usake jIvana - pRSThoM ko
pratyeka vyakti par3ha sakatA hai| sarala vyakti hI kRta doSoM kI AlocanA karatA
hai, ata: vandana ke pazcAt pratikramaNa Avazyaka kA nirUpaNa hai| bhUloM ko
smaraNa kara una bhUloM se mukti pAne ke lie tana evaM mana meM sthairya
Avazyaka hai| kAyotsarga meM tana aura mana kI ekAgratA kI jAtI hai aura sthira
vRtti kA abhyAsa kiyA jAtA hai| jaba tana aura mana sthira hotA hai, tabhI
pratyAkhyAna kiyA jA sakatA hai| mana DaoNvADola sthiti meM ho, taba
pratyAkhyAna sambhava nahIM hai| isIlie pratyAkhyAna Avazyaka kA sthAna chaThA
rakhA gayA hai| isa prakAra yaha SaDAvazyaka AtmanirIkSaNa, AtmaparIkSaNa aura
AtmotkarSa kA zreSThatama upAya hai| anuyogadvAra sUtra meM Avazyaka ke do
vibhAga prApta haiM - dravya-Avazyaka aura bhaav-aavshyk| dravya Avazyaka meM
binA cintana, anyamanaska bhAva se pAThoM kA kevala uccAraNa kiyA jAtA hai| jo
pATha bolA jA rahA hai usa pATha meM mana na lagakara idhara - udhara bhaTakatA
rahatA hai| dravya-Avazyaka meM kevala bAhya kriyA calatI hai, upayoga ke abhAva
se usa kriyA se Antarika teja prakaTa nahIM hotaa| vaha prANarahita sAdhanA hai|
bhAva-Avazyaka meM sAdhaka upayoga ke sAtha kriyA karatA hai| usa kriyA ke sAtha
usakA mana, usakA vacana, usakA tana pUrNa rUpa se ekAgra hotA 1. jaM NaM ime
samaNo vA samaNI vA sAvao vA sAviyA vA taccitte, tammaNe, tallese,
tadajjhavasie, tattivyajjhavasANe, tadaTThovautte, tadappiyayakaraNe,
tabbhAvaNAbhavie, annattha katthaI maNaM akaremANe ubhaokAlaM avassayaM kareMti
se taM logujariyaM bhaavaavssyN| [21]

Page #25 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
He practices with single-mindedness and equanimity. When the material essentials
are matched with the emotional essentials, the material essentials become a
radiant essential. This is why the scholars have given great importance to the
emotional essentials. Emotional essentials are transcendental practice and the
fruit of that practice is liberation.  **Samayik Essentials**  Samayik holds the
first place in the six essentials. It is the essence of Jain conduct. Samayik is
essential for both monks and lay people. All lay people, when they accept the
path of practice, first adopt the Samayik conduct. There are five types of
conduct. Samayik conduct is the first among them. Samayik conduct has been
present throughout the reign of all twenty-four Tirthankaras, but the other four
conducts are not present. For monks, Samayik is the first conduct, while for lay
practitioners, Samayik is the first of the four vows. The grand edifice of Jain
ethical philosophy is based on the solid foundation of Samayik. The practice of
equanimity is not the heritage of any particular individual or group. It is for
all practitioners, and whoever practices equanimity is a Jain. Acharya
Haribhadra has clearly stated that whether the practitioner is a Svetambara, a
Digambara, a Buddhist, or of any other faith, whoever is in equanimity will
undoubtedly attain liberation. One person gives away one hundred thousand gold
coins every day, another person practices equanimity yoga. Who is greater among
these two? In resolving this curiosity, the wise men of truth have said -
whoever practices equanimity yoga - Samayik, is great. The karma that a person
who practices penance continuously for millions of years cannot destroy, the
practitioner of equanimity destroys in a few moments. No practitioner has been
liberated without equanimity, nor will he be. Those who have been liberated in
the past, those who are being liberated in the present, and those who are to be
liberated in the future, the basis of their liberation was Samayik. It is. It
will remain.  Samayik is a pure practice. In Samayik, the practitioner's mind
remains completely calm like the ocean of milk, therefore he does not bind new
karma. Due to being situated in his own nature, he destroys the remaining karma.
Therefore, Acharya Haribhadra has written that through the pure practice of
Samayik, the being destroys the destructive karma and attains omniscience.  -
Haribhadra  1. Whether a Svetambara or a Digambara, a Buddha or another. Whoever
is in equanimity will attain liberation, no doubt. 2. One gives away a piece of
gold every day. Another, however, practices Samayik, he does not fall short. 3.
What does not get destroyed even by millions of years of penance. The mind of
equanimity destroys that karma in a moment. 4. Samayik - pure soul, completely
destroys destructive karma. From its destruction, one attains omniscience, the
illuminator of the world and the beyond. - Haribhadra Ashtak-Prakarana, 30-1
[22]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 hai| vaha ekalaya aura ekatAnatA ke sAtha sAdhanA karatA hai| jaba dravya
Avazyaka ke sAtha bhAva Avazyaka kA sumela hotA hai to dravya Avazyaka eka
tejasvI Avazyaka bana jAtA hai| yahI kAraNa hai ki zAstrakAroM ne bhAva Avazyaka
ko atyadhika mahattva diyA hai| bhAva Avazyaka lokottara sAdhanA hai aura usa
sAdhanA kA phala mokSa hai| sAmAyika Avazyaka SaDAvazyaka meM sAmAyika kA
prathama sthAna hai| vaha jaina AcAra kA sAra hai| sAmAyika zramaNa aura zrAvaka
donoM ke liya Avazyaka hai| jitane bhI zrAvaka haiM ve jaba sAdhanA kA mArga
svIkAra karate haiM to sarvaprathama sAmAyikacAritra ko grahaNa karate haiN|
cAritra ke pAMca prakAra haiN| unameM sAmAyikacAritra prathama hai|
sAmAyikacAritra cauvIsa hI tIrthaMkAroM ke zAsana kAla meM rahA hai, para anya
cAra cAritra avasthita nahIM haiN| zramaNoM ke liye sAmAyika prathama cAritra
hai, to gRhastha sAdhakoM ke liye sAmAyika cAra zikSAvratoM meM prathama
zikSAvrata hai| jaina AcAradarzana kA bhavya prAsAda sAmAyika kI sudRr3ha nIMva
para AdhRta hai| samatvavRtti kI sAdhanA kisI vyakti vizeSa yA varga vizeSa kI
dharohara nahIM hai| vaha sabhI sAdhakoM ke liye hai aura jo samatvavRtti kI
sAdhanA karatA hai vaha jaina hai| AcArya haribhadra ne to spaSTa rUpa se kahA
hai ki sAdhaka cAhe zvetAmbara ho, cAhe digambara ho, bauddha ho yA anya kisI
mata kA ho, jo bhI samabhAva meM sthita hogA vaha niHsandeha mokSa ko prApta
kregaa| eka vyakti pratidina eka lAkha svarNa mudrAoM kA u karatA hai, dUsarA
vyakti samatvayoga kI sAdhanA karatA hai| ina donoM meM mahAn kauna hai? isa
jijJAsA kA samAdhAna karate hue tattvadarzI manISiyoM ne kahA - jo samatvayoga -
sAmAyika kI sAdhanA karatA hai, vaha mahAn hai| karor3oM varSoM taka tapazcaraNa
kI nirantara sAdhanA karane vAlA jina karmoM ko naSTa nahIM kara pAtA, unako
samabhAvI sAdhaka kucha hI kSaNoM meM naSTa kara letA hai| koI bhI sAdhaka binA
samabhAva ke mukta nahIM huA hai aura na hogA hii| atIta kAla meM jo sAdhaka
mukta hue haiM, vartamAna meM jo mukta ho rahe haiM tathA bhaviSya meM jinheM
mukta honA hai, unake mukta hone kA AdhAra sAmAyika thA  /  hai  /  rhegaa|
_sAmAyika eka vizuddha sAdhanA hai| sAmAyika meM sAdhaka kI cittavRtti
kSIrasamudra kI taraha ekadama zAnta rahatI hai, isaliye vaha navIna karmoM kA
bandha nahIM krtaa| AtmasvarUpa meM sthita rahane ke kAraNa jo karma zeSa rahe
hue haiM, unakI vaha nirjarA kara letA hai| isIlie AcArya haribhadra ne likhA
hai ki sAmAyika kI vizuddha sAdhanA se jIva ghAtikarmoM ko naSTa kara
kevalajJAna ko prApta kara letA hai|" - haribhadra 1. seyambaro vA Asambaro vA
buddho vA taheva anno vaa| samabhAvabhAviyappA lahei mukkhaM na saMdehA  //  2.
divase divase lakkhaM dei suvaNNassa khaMDiyaM ego| ego puNa sAmAiyaM, karei na
pahuppae tss|| 3. tivvatavaM tavamANe jaM na vi nivaTTai jmmkoddiihiN| taM
samabhAviacitto, khavei kammaM khaNaddheNa  /  /  4. sAmAyika - vizuddhAtmA
sarvathA ghaatikrmnnH| kSayAtkevalamAproti lokaalokprkaashkm|| - haribhadra
aSTaka-prakaraNa, 30-1 [22]

Page #26 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Acharya Pujyapada, in his work Sarvarthasiddhi, defines Samayika as follows: The
word "Samaya" is derived from the root "In" which means "motion" with the prefix
"Sam". "Sam" signifies unity, "Ay" means movement, therefore, "Samaya" is the
movement of the soul back towards itself, after being diverted by external
influences. The feeling of "Samaya" is Samayika. Acharya Malayagiri writes:
"Sam" is to be in the middle of the causes of attachment and aversion. The
presentation of the seeker, who is in a state of "Sam", towards liberation is
Samayika. Jinabhadragani Kshamasraman has also accepted this definition in his
Visheshavashakabhashya. The various interpretations of Samayika are given in the
Niyukti, Churni, Bhashya and Haribhadriya Vritti of the Avashakasutra, as well
as in the Malayagiri Vritti. To have a feeling of friendship towards all beings
is "Sam", and the benefit that comes from "Sam" is Samayika. To abandon the
tendencies of sin is called the abandonment of "Savadhayoga". The practice of
virtues like non-violence, equality, etc. is called "Niravadhayoga". To abandon
"Savadhayoga" and to dwell in pure nature is called "Sam". The practice by which
one attains this "Sam" is Samayika. The word "Sam" means "best" and "Ayan" means
"conduct". Therefore, the name of the best conduct is Samayika. The practice of
non-violence, etc., which is the best practice, done at the right time, is
Samayika.  By contemplating the various etymologies of Samayika, it becomes
clear that they all emphasize equality. To remain in one's own nature, when
various situations of attachment and aversion arise, is truly Samayika. Equality
means: stability of mind, suppression of attachment and aversion, and remaining
unmoved in happiness and sorrow, being present in equanimity. Due to the causes
of karma, unequal feelings of attachment and aversion arise. To remove oneself
from these unequal feelings and to dwell in one's own nature is equality.
Equality is called Yoga in the Gita.  To stop the evil tendencies of mind,
speech, and body, and to focus the mind on one's definite goal is Samayika. The
seeker who performs Samayika controls his mind, speech, and body. He remains in
a state of equanimity, detached from objects, passions, and attachment and
aversion. He does not feel anger in his inner mind when he sees an opponent, nor
does he feel joy from attachment when he sees a friend. He dives into the deep
ocean of equality, so that the flames of inequality cannot destroy his practice.
He is not bitten by the mosquitoes of slander, nor does he get stung by the
scorpions of envy. Whether the situation is favorable or unfavorable, whether
the flowers of happiness are blooming or the sharp thorns of sorrow are
piercing, he always remains in equanimity. His contemplation is always awake.
1. 'Sam' means unity. For example, "Sangata Ghrita", "Sangata Taila" means that
they are united. Unity is the meaning of "Ayan", "Ayan" means movement. "Samaya"
is the movement of the soul back towards itself, after being diverted by
external influences. "Samayika" is the feeling of "Samaya". "Samayika" is the
purpose of this. - Sarvarthasiddhi, 7,21 2. "Sam" is the one who is in the
middle of attachment and aversion. "In" means motion, "Ayan" means movement.
"Sam" means unity, "Ay" means movement. "Samaya" is the presentation of the
seeker, who is in a state of "Sam", towards liberation. - Avashakasutra
Malayagiri Vritti, 854 3. "Sam" means free from attachment and aversion. "Ayan"
means movement. "Samaya" is the movement of the soul back towards itself, after
being diverted by external influences. "Samayika" is the feeling of "Samaya". -
Visheshavashakabhashya, 3477 4. - Visheshavashakabhashya, verse 3481 5.
"Samayika" is the benefit that comes from "Sam". - Visheshavashakabhashya, verse
3480 6. Equality is called Yoga. - Bhagavad Gita, 2-48 [23]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 AcArya pUjyapAda ne sarvArthasiddhi meM sAmAyika kI paribhASA karate hue likhA
hai - sama upasargapUrvaka gati artha vAlI "iNa" dhAtu se 'samaya' zabda
niSpanna hotA hai| sam - ekIbhAva, aya - gamana arthAt ekIbhAva ke dvArA bAhya
pariNati se punaH mur3akara AtmA kI ora gamana karanA samaya hai| samaya kA
bhAva sAmAyika hai| AcArya malayagiri ne likhA hai - rAga - dveSa ke kAraNoM meM
madhyastha rahanA sama hai| madhyasthabhAvayukta sAdhaka kI mokSa ke abhimukha
jo prastuti hai, vaha sAmAyika hai| jinabhadragaNI kSamAzramaNa ne bhI
vizeSAvazyakabhASya meM yahI paribhASA svIkAra kI hai| AvazyakasUtra kI niyukti,
cUrNi, bhASya aura hAribhadrIyA vRtti malayagirivRtti Adi meM sAmAyika ke
vividha dRSTiyoM se vibhinna artha kiye haiN| sabhI jIvoM para maitrI bhAva
rakhanA sAma hai aura sAma kA lAbha jisase ho, vaha sAmAyika hai| pApakArI
pravRttiyoM kA tyAga karanA hI sAvadhayoga parityAga kahalAtA hai| ahiMsA,
samatA prabhRti sadguNoM kA AcaraNa niravadyayoga hai| sAvadhayoga kA parityAga
kara zuddha svabhAva meM ramaNa karanA 'sama' kahalAtA hai| jisa sAdhanA ke
dvArA usa 'sama' kI prApti ho, vaha sAmAyika hai| 'sama' zabda kA artha zreSTha
hai aura 'ayana' kA artha AcaraNa hai| arthAt zreSTha AcaraNa kA nAma sAmAyika
hai| ahiMsA Adi zreSTha sAdhanA samaya para kI jAtI hai, vaha sAmAyika hai|
sAmAyika kI vibhinna vyutpattiyoM para cintana karane se yaha spaSTa jJAta hotA
hai ki una sabhI meM samatA para bala diyA gayA hai| rAga - dveSa ke vividha
prasaMga, samupasthita hone para Atma - svabhAva meM sama rahanA, vastutaH
sAmAyika hai| samatA se tAtparya hai - mana kI sthiratA, rAga dveSa kA upazamana
aura sukha duHkha meM nizcala rahanA, samabhAva meM upasthita honaa| karmoM ke
nimitta se rAga-dveSa ke viSamabhAva samutpanna hote haiN| una viSama bhAvoM se
apane Apako haTAkara sva-svarUpa meM ramaNa karanA, samatA hai| samatA ko hI
gItA meM yoga kahA hai| mana, vacana aura kAya kI duSTa vRttiyoM ko rokakara
apane nizcita lakSya kI ora dhyAna ko kendrita kara denA sAmAyika hai| sAmAyika
karane vAlA sAdhaka mana, vacana aura kAya ko vaza meM kara letA hai| viSaya,
kaSAya aura rAga dveSa se alaga thalaga rahakara vaha sadA hI samabhAva meM
sthita rahatA hai| virodhI ko dekhakara usake antarmAnasa meM krodha kI jvAlA
nahIM bhaDakatI aura na hI hitaiSI ko dekhakara vaha rAga se AhvAdita hotA hai|
vaha samatA ke gahana sAgara meM DubakI lagAtA hai, jisase viSamatA kI. jvAlAe~
usakI sAdhanA ko naSTa nahIM kara paatiiN| use na nindA ke macchara DaMsate haiM
aura na IrSyA ke bicchU hI DaMka mArate haiN| cAhe anukUla paristhiti ho cAhe
pratikUla, cAhe sukha ke sumana khila rahe hoM, cAhe duHkha ke nukIle kAMTe
bIMdha rahe hoM, para vaha sadA samabhAva se rahatA hai| usakA cintana sadA
jAgrata 1. 'sam' ekIbhAve vartate  /  tadyathA, saMgataM ghRtaM saMgataM
tailamityucyate ekIbhUtamiti gamyate  /  ekatvena ayanaM gamanaM samayaH, samaya
eva saamaayikm| samayaH prayojanamasyeti vA vigrahya saamaayikm| -
sarvArthasiddhi, 7,21 2. samo-rAgadveSayorapAntarAlavartI madhyasthaH, iNa gatau
ayanaM ayo gamanamityarthaH, samasya ayaH samAyaH - samIbhUtasya sato
mokSAdhvani pravRttiH samAya eva saamaayikm| - Avazyaka malayagirivRtti, 854 3.
rAgaddosavirahio samo tti ayaNaM ayo tti gamaNaM ti| samagamaNaM ti samAo sa eva
sAmAiyaM naam|| - - vizeSAvazyaka bhASya, 3477 4. vizeSAvazyaka bhASya, gAthA
3481 5. ahavA samassa Ao guNANa lAbho tti samAo so| - vi. bhASya, gA. 3480 6.
samatvaM yogmucyte| - bhagavadgItA, 2-48 [23]

Page #27 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
He remains in equanimity. He thinks that conjunction and disjunction - both are
not the nature of the soul. These are the fruits of the rise of auspicious and
inauspicious karmas. The soul cannot be benefited or harmed by the conjunction
and disjunction of external objects. Therefore, he remains in constant
equanimity. Acharya Bhadrabahu said - The sadhak who has equanimity towards all
living beings, both mobile and immobile, his Samayik is pure. The Samayik of the
one whose soul is engaged in restraint, austerity, and rules is pure. Acharya
Haribhadra has written - Just as sandalwood makes even the axe that cuts it
fragrant, so too is the Samayik of the one who spreads the fragrance of
equanimity towards the opponent. Through equanimity, the sadhak concentrates his
soul powers and manifests his great energy. Man is entangled in the whirlpool of
many desires, which destroys his personality. An atmosphere of duality and
tension persists. The vices of barbarity, animality, narrow-mindedness, and
attachment-aversion flourish. When man deviated from equanimity, then there was
distortion in nature, tension in the individual, inequality in society, and
elements of violence in the age. To stop all of them, to maintain balance and
order, Samayik is necessary. Samayik is the pure ocean of equanimity that waves.
The sadhak who takes a dip in it is freed from the steps of attachment and
aversion. The practice of Samayik is a very excellent practice. All other
practices are included in it. Acharya Jinabhadragani Kshamasraman called Samayik
the fourteen-fold meaning-mass. Upadhyaya Yashovijayaji described Samayik as the
essence of the complete twelve-fold Jinvani. The essence of colorful blooming
flowers is fragrance. If the flower does not have fragrance, only form, then it
can only satisfy the eyes of the viewers, but it cannot provide freshness to the
heart and mind. The essence of milk is ghee. Milk that does not have ghee is
only milk in name. It is ghee that gives milk its nourishment. It gives strength
to the body. Similarly, the essence of sesame is oil. If the oil is extracted
from the sesame seeds, the juice from the sugarcane, the rice from the paddy,
then it becomes useless. Similarly, if equanimity, that is, Samayik, is removed
from the practice, then that practice is also useless. It is only a practice in
name. Without equanimity, worship is mockery. The sadhak is caught in the web of
Maya - Necessary Appointment, 799 1. (a) Who is the same in all beings, both
mobile and immobile. His Samayik is pure, says the Kevali-Bhasiya. (b)
Anuyogadwar 128 (c) Niyamasar 126 2. (a) Whose soul is engaged in restraint,
austerity, and rules. His Samayik is pure, says the Kevali-Bhasiya. (b)
Anuyogadwar 127 (c) Niyamasar 127 3. Haribhadra Ashtak-Prakarana 29-1 4. Samayik
is the essence of fourteen-fold meaning-mass. 5. Tattvarthavritti 1-1 -
Necessary Appointment, 788 - Special. Commentary, Ga. 2796 [24]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 rahatA hai| vaha socatA hai ki saMyoga aura viyoga - ye donoM hI AtmA ke
svabhAva nahIM haiN| ye to zubhAzubha karmoM ke udaya kA phala hai| parakIya
padArthoM ke saMyoga aura viyoga se AtmA kA na hita ho sakatA hai aura na hI
ahita hii| isalie vaha satata samabhAva meM rahatA hai| AcArya bhradabAhu ne
kahA - jo sAdhaka trasa aura sthAvara rUpa sabhI jIvoM para samabhAva rakhatA
hai, usakI sAmAyika zuddha hotI hai| jisakI AtmA saMyama meM, tapa meM, niyama
meM saMlagna rahatI hai, usI kI sAmAyika zuddha hotI hai| AcArya haribhadra ne
likhA hai - jaise candana, kATane vAlI kulhAr3I ko bhI sugandhita banA detA hai,
vaise hI virodhI ke prati bhI jo samabhAva kI sugandha phailAtA hai, usI kI
sAmAyika zuddha hai| samatA ke dvArA sAdhaka AtmazaktiyoM ko kendrita karake
apanI mahAna UrjA ko prakaTa karatA hai| mAnava aneka kAmanAoM ke bhaMvarajAla
meM ulajhA rahatA hai, jisase usakA vyaktitva kSata vikSata ho jAtA hai| dvandva
aura tanAva kA vAtAvaraNa banA rahatA hai| barbaratA, pazutA, saMkIrNatA va rAga
- dveSa ke vikAra jantu panapate rahate haiN| jaba mAnava samatA se vicalita huA
taba prakRti meM vikRti, vyakti meM tanAva, samAja meM viSamatA, yuga meM hiMsA
ke tattva ubhare haiN| una sabhI ko rokane ke lie, santulana aura vyavasthA
banAye rakhane ke lie sAmAyika kI AvazyakatA hai| sAmAyika samatA kA laharAtA
huA nirmala sAgara hai| jo sAdhaka usameM avagAhana kara letA hai, vaha rAga
dveSa ke kadama se mukta ho jAtA hai| sAmAyika kI sAdhanA bahuta hI utkRSTa
sAdhanA hai| anya jitanI bhI sAdhanAeM haiM, ve sabhI sAdhanAeM isameM
antarnihita ho jAtI haiN| AcArya jinabhadragaNI kSamAzramaNa ne sAmAyika ko
caudaha pUrva kA arthapiNDa kahA hai| upAdhyAya yazovijayajI ne sAmAyika ko
sampUrNa dvAdazAMgI rUpa jinavANI kA sArarUpa batAyA hai| raMga biraMge khile
hue puSpoM kA sAra gaMdha hai, yadi puSpa meM gaMdha nahIM hai, kevala rUpa hI
hai to vaha kevala darzakoM ke netroM ko tRpta kara sakatA hai, kintu dila aura
dimAga ko tAjagI pradAna nahIM kara sktaa| dUdha kA sAra ghRta hai| jisa dUdha
meM ghRta nahIM hai, vaha kevala nAmamAtra kA hI dUdha hai| ghRta se hI dUdha
meM pauSTikatA rahatI hai| vaha zarIra ko zakti pradAna karatA hai| isI prakAra
tila kA sAra tela hai| yadi tiloM meM se tela nikala jAe, ikSu khaNDa meM se
rasa nikala jAe, dhAna meM se cAvala nikala jAe to vaha nissAra bana jAtA hai|
vaise hI sAdhanA meM se samabhAva yAnI sAmAyika nikala jAye to vaha sAdhanA bhI
nissAra hai| kevala nAmamAtra kI sAdhanA hai| samatA ke abhAva meM upAsanA
upahAsa hai| sAdhaka mAyAjAla ke caMgala - Avazyakaniyukti, 799 1. (ka) jo samI
savvabhUesu tasesu thAvaresu y| tassa sAmAiyaM hoi, ii kevli-bhaasiyN|| (kha)
anuyogadvAra 128 (ga) niyamAsAra 126 2. (ka) jassa sAmANio appA saMjame niyame
tave  /  tassa sAmAiyaM hoi, ii kevali-bhAsiyaM  //  (kha) anuyogadvAra 127 (ga)
niyamasAra 127 3. haribhadra aSTaka-prakaraNa 29-1 4. sAmAiyaM saMkhevo coddasa
puSyathapiMDotti  //  5. tattvArthavRtti 1-1 - Avazyakaniyukti, 788 - vizeSA.
bhASya, gA. 2796 [24]

Page #28 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
He gets trapped. Seeing the progress of others, the fire of envy starts burning
in his inner mind, the poisonous germs of hatred and opposition start churning.
That is why emphasis has been placed on the need for Samayik. The Bhagavati
Sutra describes that in front of the Anugar of Parsva Pathy Kalasya Vesi, the
Shraman Upasakas of Tungiya Nagari had presented the curiosity that what is
Samayik? And what is the meaning of Samayik? Kalasya Vesi Anugar clearly said,
"The soul is Samayik and the soul is the meaning of Samayik." The implication is
that when the soul abandons sinful activities and resides in equanimity, then
Samayik happens. The soul's separation from the Kashayik disorders and dwelling
in its own nature is Samayik and that is the culmination of the soul. In
Samayik, the seeker abandons external vision and adopts internal vision,
abandons disparity and resides in equanimity, removes attachment from material
objects and resides in his own nature, just as the infinite sky is the basis for
the animate and inanimate beings of the world, in the same way, Samayik Sadhana
is the basis for spiritual Sadhana. 1 Analyzing the nature of Samayik, Samayik
has been propounded from various perspectives. Its nature is propounded from
name, establishment, substance, time, area and feeling etc. The seeker who
performs Samayik is so stable in Sadhana that whether it is a good name or a bad
name, that name has no effect on the inner mind of that seeker. He thinks that
the soul is nameless, the soul has no name, the name is of the presented body,
this body is the creation of name karma. Therefore, why should I make vain
resolutions and alternatives? The seeker of Samayik does not rejoice by looking
at an attractive object, nor does he feel disgust by looking at a disgusting
form. He thinks that the soul is beyond form. Beauty and ugliness are the
transformation of Pudgal atoms, which are sometimes good and sometimes bad. I am
separate from the Pudgal element. Thus, he contemplates and remains in
equanimity. This establishment is Samayik. The seeker who observes the Samayik
vow does not get mesmerized by the beauty of objects and does not get distressed
by ugliness. Similarly, he does not get happy by seeing a valuable object and
does not get distressed by seeing a low-value object. He contemplates that the
beauty and ugliness of objects is just a human imagination. The same object
appears beautiful to one person and not beautiful to another. Humans have
imagined value in diamonds, emeralds, rubies, pearls etc., otherwise they are
just stones like other stones. Thinking this way, the seeker maintains
equanimity in all material objects. This is the substance Samayik. Whether it is
the scorching heat of summer, the terrible chilling cold of the month of Paush,
the rain in the form of thousands of streams in Shravan, Bhadrapad or the
drizzle of drops, whether it is a favorable time or an unfavorable time, the
seeker who observes the Samayik vow wanders in equanimity. Cold, heat etc. are
the touches of Pudgal and all these Pudgal affect only Pudgal. I am the soul, no
touch can have any effect on me. I have to stay away from these Vaibhav
situations and reside in the soul nature. This is the time Samayik. For the
seeker who is devoted to Samayik, whether it is a pleasant place or an
unpleasant place, whether it is a beautiful fragrant garden or a barren land,
whether it is a high attic of a huge city or a thorny land of a deserted forest,
it makes no difference. [25]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 meM phaMsa jAtA hai| dUsaroM kI unnati ko nihAra kara usake antarmAnasa meM
IrSyA agni sulagane lagatI hai, vaira virodha ke jaharIle kITANu kulabulAne
lagate haiM  /  isIlie sAmAyika kI AvazyakatA para bala diyA gayA hai|
bhagavatIsUtra meM varNana hai ki pArzvapatya kAlasyavesI anagAra ke samakSa
tuMgiyA nagarI ke zramaNopAsakoM ne jijJAsA prastuta kI thI ki sAmAyika kyA hai
? aura sAmAyika kA artha kyA hai ? kAlAsyavesI anagAra ne spaSTa rUpa se kahA, "
AtmA hI sAmAyika hai aura AtmA hI sAmAyika kA artha hai| " tAtparya yaha hai ki
jaba AtmA pApamaya vyApAroM kA parityAga kara samabhAva meM avasthita hotA hai,
taba sAmAyika hotI hai| AtmA kA kASAyika vikAroM se alaga hokara svasvarUpa meM
ramaNa karanA hI sAmAyika hai aura vahI Atma pariNati hai| sAmAyika meM sAdhaka
bAhya dRSTi kA parityAga kara antardRSTi ko apanAtA hai, viSamabhAva kA
parityAga kara samabhAva meM avasthita rahatA hai, para padArthoM se mamatva
haTAkara nijabhAva meM sthita hotA hai jaise ananta AkAza vizva ke carAcara
prANiyoM ke lie AdhArabhUta hai, vaise hI sAmAyika sAdhanA AdhyAtmika sAdhanA ke
lie AdhArabhUta hai| 1 sAmAyika ke svarUpa kA vizleSaNa karate hue vividha
dRSTiyoM se sAmAyika ko pratipAdita kiyA gayA hai| nAma, sthApanA, dravya, kAla,
kSetra aura bhAva Adi se usakA svarUpa pratipAdita hai  /  sAmAyika karane vAlA
sAdhaka sAdhanA meM itanA sthira hotA hai ki cAhe zubha nAma ho cAhe azubha nAma
ho usa nAma kA usa sAdhaka ke antarmAnasa para koI asara nahIM hotaa| vaha
socatA hai ki AtmA anAmI hai, AtmA kA koI nAma nahIM hai, nAma prastuta zarIra
kA hai, yaha zarIra nAmakarma kI racanA hai| isalie maiM vyartha hI kyoM
saMkalpa vikalpa karU~ sAmAyika kA sAdhaka cittAkarSaka vastu ko nihArakara
AhlAdita nahIM hotA to ghinaune rUpa ko dekhakara ghRNA bhI nahIM krtaa| vaha to
socatA hai ki AtmA rUpAtIta hai| surUpatA aura kurUpatA to pudgala paramANuoM kA
pariNamana hai, jo kabhI zubha hotA hai to kabhI azubha hotA hai| maiM pudgala
tattva se pRthak hU~  /  isa prakAra vaha cintana kara samabhAva meM rahatA hai|
yaha sthApanA sAmAyika hai| sAmAyika vratadhArI sAdhaka padArthoM kI sundaratA
ko dekhakara mugdha nahIM hotA aura asundaratA ko dekhakara khinna nahIM hotaa|
isI taraha bahumUlya vastu ko dekhakara prasanna nahIM hotA aura alpamUlya vAlI
vastu ko dekhakara khinna nahIM hotaa| vaha cintana karatA hai ki padArthoM kI
sundaratA aura asundaratA kI kalpanA mAnava kI kalpanAmAtra hai| eka hI vastu
eka vyakti ko sundara pratIta hotI hai to dUsare ko vaha sundara pratIta nahIM
hotii| hIre panne, mANaka motI Adi javAharAta meM bhI mAnava ne mUlya kI kalpanA
kI hai, anyathA to ve anya pattharoM kI bhAMti patthara hI haiN| aisA vicAra
kara sAdhaka sabhI bhautika padArthoM meM samabhAva rakhatA hai| yaha dravya
sAmAyika hai| grISma kI cilacilAtI dhUpa ho, pauSa mAha kI bhayaMkara sanasanAtI
sardI ho, zrAvaNa, bhAdrapada kI hajAra hajAra dhArA ke rUpa meM varSA ho athavA
rimajhima rimajhima bUMdeM gira rahI hoM, cAhe anukUla samaya ho, cAhe pratikUla
samaya ho, sAmAyika vratadhArI sAdhaka samabhAva meM vicaraNa karatA hai| zIta
uSNa Adi sparza pudgala ke haiM aura ye sAre pudgala, pudgala ko hI prabhAvita
karate haiN| maiM to AtmasvarUpa hU~, kisI bhI para sparza kA koI prabhAva nahIM
ho sktaa| mujhe ina vaibhAvika sthitiyoM se dUra rahakara AtmabhAva meM sthita
rahanA hai| yaha kAla sAmAyika hai| sAmAyikaniSTha sAdhaka ke lie cAhe ramaNIya
sthAna ho, cAhe aramaNIya, cAhe sundara sugandhita upavana ho, cAhe baMjara
bhUmi ho, cAhe virATa nagara kI ucca aTTAlikA ho, yA nirjana vana kI kaMTIlI
bhUmi ho, koI pharka nahIM [25]

Page #29 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
He remains in equanimity everywhere. His contemplation goes on that my dwelling
place is neither the forest nor the city, my dwelling place is the soul itself,
then why should I bind myself to karma by falling into the delusion of the field
in vain? Every substance remains in its own nature, so I have to remain stable
in the nature of the soul, this field is temporary. The contemplation of the भाव
सामायिकधारी is upward-looking. He always wanders in the nature of the soul. His
contemplation goes on - "I" am imperishable and immortal, I am the essence of
consciousness, life and death, honor and dishonor, union and separation, profit
and loss, all these are the disorders caused by the ripening of karma. I have no
real connection with them. To attain the pure, wise, liberated soul essence by
thinking in this way is भाव सामायिक. Acharya Nemichandra has said in Gommatasar
- When the seeker's knowledge consciousness is directed towards the nature of
the soul, leaving behind the possessions of others, then भाव सामायिक takes
place. The soul that is free from attachment and aversion, that is filled with
the middle path, is called सम. To go into that सम is भाव सामायिक. Acharya
Jindasgani Mahत्तर has contemplated भाव सामायिक in detail. He has compared the
गुणनिष्पन्न भाव सामायिक to a vast city. Just as a vast city is rich in people,
wealth, grain, etc., adorned with various forests and groves, so the life of a
seeker who performs भाव सामायिक is adorned with virtues. There is a brilliance
of various virtues in his life, there is a kingdom of peace. Acharya Jindasgani
Mahत्तर has considered सामायिक necessary as आधमंगल'. All the material blessings
in the world can be transformed into material misfortunes, but सामायिक is such a
भावमंगल that can never become a misfortune. The practice of equanimity is the
central point of all blessings. The soul, which has been wandering in this vast
universe for an infinite time, if it once performs भाव सामायिक, then it does not
wander in the world for more than seven or eight births. सामायिक is such a
touchstone, by the touch of which the soul is freed from the darkness of
falsehood, etc., of infinite time. There are two main divisions of सामायिक:
द्रव्य सामायिक and भाव सामायिक. The rituals that are performed before performing
सामायिक, such as spreading a seat for सामायिक, cleaning the place, collecting
religious equipment like मुखवस्त्रिका, etc., and being present at one place,
this is द्रव्य सामायिक. In द्रव्य सामायिक, the seat, clothes, cleaning,
मुखवस्त्रिका, mala, etc. should be clean and simple, they should be white, not
colorful. White color is a symbol of purity and auspiciousness. Modern science
has also considered white color as a symbol of peace. In सामायिक, neither dirty
and disgusting religious equipment should be kept nor glittering luxurious
items. भाव सामायिक is that in which the seeker remains stable in the nature of
the soul. Both द्रव्य and भाव are necessary in सामायिक. भावशून्य द्रव्य is only
a stamped clay, it cannot get value in the market like a gold coin, it can only
entertain children. द्रव्यशून्य भाव is only gold, on which no stamp is
imprinted. It can get value as gold but not as a coin. द्रव्ययुक्त भाव is a gold
coin. It holds its value and moves freely everywhere. Therefore, भावयुक्त द्रव्य
सामायिक is also important. 1. आदिमंगलं सामाइयज्झयणं ।...... सव्वमंगलनिहाणं
निव्वाणं पाविहित्ति काऊण सामाइयज्झयणं मंगलं भवति । - आवश्यकचूर्णि [26]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pdd'taa| vaha sarvatra samabhAva meM rahatA hai| usakA cintana calatA hai ki
merA nivAsasthAna na jaMgala hai, na nagara, merA to nivAsasthAna AtmA hI hai,
phira vyartha hI kSetra ke vyAmoha meM par3akara kyoM karmabandhana karUM ?
pratyeka padArtha apane svabhAva meM sthita rahatA hai to mujhe hI AtmabhAva meM
sthira rahanA hai, yaha kSetra sAmAyika hai| bhAva sAmAyikadhArI kA cintana
UrdhvamukhI hotA hai| vaha sadA sarvadA AtmabhAva meM vicaraNa karatA hai| usakA
cintana calatA hai - "maiM" ajara aura amara hU~, caitanyasvarUpa hU~, jIvana
maraNa, mAna apamAna, saMyoga viyoga, lAbha alAbha ye sabhI karmodayajanya
vikAra haiN| merA inake sAtha vastutaH koI sambandha nahIM hai| isa prakAra
vicAra karake zuddha buddha mukta Atmatattva ko prApta karanA hI bhAva sAmAyika
hai| AcArya nemicandra ne gombhaTasAra meM kahA hai - paradravyoM se nivRtta
hokara jaba sAdhaka kI jJAnacetanA AtmasvarUpa meM pravRtta hotI hai, tabhI
bhAva sAmAyika hotI hai| rAga dveSa se rahita madhyastha bhAvApanna AtmA sama
kahalAtA hai| usa sama meM gamana karanA bhAva sAmAyika hai| AcArya jinadAsagaNI
mahattara ne bhAva sAmAyika para vistAra se cintana kiyA hai| unhoMne
guNaniSpanna bhAva sAmAyika ko eka virATa nagara kI upamA dI hai| jaise eka
virATa nagara jana, dhana, dhAnya Adi se samRddha hotA hai, vividha vanoM aura
upavanoM se alaMkRta hotA hai, vaise hI bhAva sAmAyika karane vAle sAdhaka kA
jIvana sadguNoM se samalaMkRta hotA hai| usake jIvana meM vividha sadguNoM kI
jagamagAhaTa hotI hai, zAnti kA sAmrAjya hotA hai| AcArya jinadAsagaNI mahattara
ne sAmAyika Avazyaka ko AdhamaMgala' mAnA hai| jitane bhI vizva meM
dravyamaMgala haiM, ve sabhI dravyamaMgala amaMgala ke rUpa meM parivartita ho
sakate haiM, para sAmAyika aisA bhAvamaMgala hai jo kabhI bhI amaMgala nahIM ho
sktaa| samabhAva kI sAdhanA sabhI maMgaloM kA mUla kendra hai| ananta kAla se
isa virATa vizva meM paribhramaNa karane vAlA AtmA yadi eka bAra bhI bhAva
sAmAyika grahaNa kara le to vaha sAta ATha bhava se adhika saMsAra meM
paribhramaNa nahIM krtaa| sAmAyika aisA pArasamaNi hai, jisake saMsparza se
anantakAla kI mithyAtva Adi kI kAlimA se AtmA mukta ho jAtA hai| sAmAyika ke
dravya sAmAyika aura bhAva sAmAyika ye do mukhya bheda haiN| sAmAyika grahaNa
karane ke pUrva jo vidhi vidhAna kiye jAte haiM, jaise sAmAyika ke lie Asana
bichAnA, rajoharaNa, mukhavastrikA Adi dhArmika upakaraNa ekatrita kara, eka
sthAna para avasthita honA, yaha dravya sAmAyika hai| dravya sAmAyika meM Asana
vastra rajoharaNa, mukhavastrikA, mAlA Adi vastueM svaccha aura sAdagIpUrNa honI
cAhiye, ve raMga biraMge na hokara zveta hone caahie| zveta raMga zukla aura
zubha dhyAna kA pratIka hai| Adhunika vijJAna ne bhI zveta raMga ko zAnti kA
pratIka mAnA hai| sAmAyika meM na gande aura vIbhatsa dharmopakaraNa rakhane
cAhie aura na camacamAtI huI vilAsitApUrNa vastue~ hii| bhAva sAmAyika vaha hai
jisameM sAdhaka AtmabhAva meM sthira rahatA hai| sAmAyika meM dravya aura bhAva
donoM kI AvazyakatA hai| bhAvazUnya dravya kevala mudrA lagI huI miTTI hai, vaha
svarNamudrA kI taraha bAjAra meM mUlya prApta nahIM kara sakatI, kevala bAlakoM
kA manoraMjana hI kara sakatI hai| dravyazUnya bhAva kevala svarNa hai, jisa
para mudrA aMkita nahIM hai| vaha svarNa ke rUpa meM to mUlya prApta kara sakatA
hai kintu mudrA ke rUpa meM nhiiN| dravyayukta bhAva svarNamudrA hai| vaha apanA
mUlya rakhatI hai aura abAdha gati se sarvatra calatI hai| isIlie bhAvayukta
dravya sAmAyika kA bhI mahattva hai| 1. AdimaMgalaM sAmAiyajjhayaNaM  / ......
savvamaMgalanihANaM nivvANaM pAvihitti kAUNa sAmAiyajjhayaNaM maMgalaM bhavati
/  - AvazyakacUrNi [26]

Page #30 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
There are two types of Samayik based on the eligibility of the practitioner: 1.
Samayik for householders and 2. Samayik for ascetics. According to tradition,
Samayik for householders should be for one Muhurta (48 minutes), but they can
also observe Samayik for longer durations based on their situation. Samayik for
ascetics is for their entire lifetime.  Acharya Bhadrabahu has described three
types of Samayik: 1. Samyaktv Samayik, 2. Shruta Samayik, and 3. Charitra
Samayik. Both Samyaktv and Shruta are essential for the practice of equanimity.
Without Samyaktv, Shruta cannot be pure, and neither can Charitra. First, firm
faith leads to the purification of belief. Samyaktv does not involve blind
faith. It involves the knowledge of discrimination. Shruta purifies thoughts.
When belief and thoughts are pure, then Charitra becomes pure.  Samayik is a
spiritual practice, therefore the question of caste does not arise in it.
Harikeshi Muni was an Antyaj by caste, but through the practice of Samayik, he
became worthy of being worshipped by the gods. Arjun Malakar, who was a cruel
murderer one day, embraced liberation through the influence of Samayik practice.
Jain literature provides an incident of a Punia Shravak to illustrate the
importance of Samayik. When Emperor Shrenik inquired, Lord Mahavira told him
that he would be born in the first hell after death because he had accumulated
such karmas. Emperor Shrenik asked for a way to escape hell. The Lord gave him
four solutions. One of those solutions was to buy the Samayik of the Punia
Shravak. When Shrenik went to buy the Samayik, the Punia Shravak said to him,
"What is the price of one Samayik? You can ask Lord Mahavira." In response to
King Shrenik's question, Lord Mahavira said, "O King! You have such vast wealth,
but all this wealth is not enough to buy even a fraction of Samayik. The value
of Samayik is far greater than that." The essence is that Samayik is a priceless
practice. Spiritual practice cannot be compared to material wealth. In the face
of spiritual wealth, material possessions are not only insignificant but
negligible.  **Comparison: Buddhist and Vedic Tradition**  Samayik is the pure
practice of Jain sadhana. This practice can be partially compared to the
practices of other religions. Buddhism is a stream of Shraman culture. In that
stream, the Eightfold Path is described for practice. The word Samyak is used
before each element of the Eightfold Path, such as Samyakdrishti, Samyak-
sankalp, Samyak-vachan, Samyak-karmanta, Samyak-ajiva, Samyak-vyayama, Samyak-
smriti, and Samyak-samadhi.  1. Aavashyak Niyukti, Gatha 796 2. Samaiyam cha
tiviham, sammattam suyam taha charittam cha. Duviham cheva charittam, agaram
anagariyam cheva. - Aavashyak Niyukti, 796 3. Uttaradhyayanasutra, Harikeshi
Adhyayan, 12 4. Antakrit Dashaang, 6 Varga, Tritiya Adhyayan 5. (a) Digha Nikaya
- Mahasatipatthana - Sutta (b) Samyutta Nikaya 5, p. 8-10 [27]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 sAmAyika ke pAtra bheda se do bheda hote haiM - 1. gRhastha kI sAmAyika aura 2.
zramaNa kI saamaayik|' gRhastha kI sAmAyika paramparAnusAra eka muhUrta yAnI 48
minaTa kI honI hai, adhika samaya ke lie bhI vaha apanI sthiti ke anusAra
sAmAyika vrata kara sakatA hai| zramaNa kI sAmAyika yAvajjIvana ke lie hotI hai|
AcArya bhadrabAhu ne sAmAyika ke tIna bheda batAe haiM - 1. samyaktvasAmAyika 2.
zrutasAmAyika aura 3. caaritrsaamaayik| samabhAva kI sAdhanA ke liye samyaktva
aura zruta ye donoM Avazyaka haiN| binA samyaktva ke zruta nirmala nahIM hotA
aura na cAritra hI nirmala hotA hai| sarvaprathama dRr3ha niSThA hone se vizvAsa
kI zuddhi hotI hai| samyaktva meM aMdhavizvAsa nahIM hotaa| vahAM bhedavijJAna
hotA hai| zruta se vicAroM kI zuddhi hotI hai| jaba vizvAsa aura vicAra zuddha
hotA hai, taba cAritra zuddha hotA hai| sAmAyika eka AdhyAtmika sAdhanA hai,
isIlie isameM jAti pAMti kA prazna nahIM utthtaa| harikezI muni jAti se antyaja
the, para sAmAyika kI sAdhanA se ve devoM dvArA bhI arcanIya bana gye| arjuna
mAlAkAra, jo eka dina krUra hatyArA thA, sAmAyika sAdhanA ke prabhAva se usane
mukti ko varaNa kara liyaa| jaina sAhitya meM sAmAyika kA mahattva pratipAdana
karane hetu pUniyA zrAvaka kI eka ghaTanA prApta hotI hai - samrATa zreNika kI
jijJAsA para bhagavAn mahAvIra ne batAyA ki tuma marakara prathama naraka meM
utpanna hooge, kyoMki tumane isI prakAra ke karmoM kA anubandhana kiyA hai|
samrATa zreNika ne naraka se bacane kA upAya puuchaa| bhagavAn ne cAra upAya
btaaye| una upAyoM meM eka upAya pUniyA zrAvaka kI sAmAyika ko kharIdanA thaa|
jaba zreNika sAmAyika kharIdane ke lie pahuMcA to pUniyA zrAvaka ne zreNika se
kahA - 'eka sAmAyika kA mUlya kitanA hai? yaha Apa bhagavAn mahAvIra se pUcha
liijie|' rAjA zreNika ke prazna ke uttara meM bhagavAn mahAvIra ne kahA - 'rAjan
!' tumhAre pAsa itanA virAT vaibhava hai para yaha sArA dhana sAmAyika kI dalAlI
ke lie bhI paryApta nahIM hai| sAmAyika kA mUlya to usase bhI kahIM adhika hai|
sAra yaha hai ki sAmAyika eka amUlya sAdhanA hai| AdhyAtmika sAdhanA kI tulanA
bhautika vaibhava se nahIM kI jA sktii| AdhyAtmika nidhi ke sAmane bhautika
sampadAe~ tuccha hI nahIM, nagaNya haiN| tulanA : bauddha aura vaidika paramparA
se sAmAyika jaina sAdhanA kI vizuddha sAdhanApaddhati hai| isa sAdhanApaddhati
kI tulanA AMzika rUpa se anya dharmoM kI sAdhanApaddhati se kI jA sakatI hai|
bauddhadharma zramaNasaMskRti kI hI eka dhArA hai| usa dhArA meM sAdhanA ke lie
aSTAMgika mArga kA nirUpaNa hai| aSTAMgika mArga meM sabhI ke Age samyak zabda
kA prayoga huA hai jaise - samyagdRSTi, samyak-saMkalpa, samyak-vacana, samyak-
karmAnta, samyak-AjIva, samyak-vyAyAma, samyak-smRti aura smyk-smaadhi| 1.
Avazyakaniyukti, gAthA 796 2. sAmAiyaM ca tivihaM, sammattaM suyaM tahA carittaM
c| duvihaM ceva carittaM, agAramaNAgAriyaM cev|| - Avazyakaniyukti, 796 3.
uttarAdhyayana, harikezI adhyayana, 12 4. antakRtadazAMga, 6 varga, tRtIya
adhyayana 5. (ka) dIghanikAya-mahAsatipaTThAna-sUtta (kha ) saMyuttanikAya 5,
pR. 8-10 [27]

Page #31 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Buddhist scholars believe that the word "samyak" used here means "sam" because
the Pali word "samma" has both "sam" and "samyak" forms. The word "samyak" used
here refers to reducing the tendencies of attachment and aversion. Only when the
amount of attachment and aversion is reduced can the seeker take steps towards
equanimity yoga. The last path in the Eightfold Path is called "samyak samadhi".
In samadhi, the mind becomes free from attachment and aversion. Until the mind
becomes free from attachment and aversion, samadhi is not realized. In the
Samyutta Nikaya, the Tathagata Buddha said - Those who have truly understood the
Dharma, who are not entangled in any opinion or later, are enlightened, have
equal vision, and their conduct remains equal even in unequal situations. In
another place in the Samyutta Nikaya, Buddha clearly stated - The path of the
Aryans is equal. Aryans conduct themselves equally even in unequal situations.
In the Majjhima Nikaya, the pacification of attachment, aversion, and delusion
is considered the ultimate. In the Suttanipata, it is said that just as I am, so
are all beings in the world. Therefore, one should conduct oneself by
considering all beings as equal to oneself. The emphasis on the middle path in
Buddhist philosophy is also based on equanimity. Thus, references to equanimity
are found here and there in Buddhism. This makes it clear that Buddhism also
considers equanimity to be an essential part of practice. It is true that they
did not describe Samayik, but they did mention the fundamental equanimity of
Samayik.  The Vedic tradition's texts also mention equanimity yoga here and
there. The Bhagavad Gita is a representative text of the Vedic tradition. In it,
while discussing yoga, equanimity is called yoga. The goal of knowledge, action,
devotion, and meditation is equanimity. Without equanimity, knowledge is
ignorance. The one who has equanimity is truly the knower of reality. Without
equanimity, action does not become inaction, and in the absence of equanimity,
action will remain bound. Without equanimity, a devotee is not a true devotee.
Equanimity has that extraordinary power by which ignorance transforms into
knowledge, and that knowledge is known as yoga. From the Gita's perspective, the
Supreme Self, Brahman, is equal. The person who remains in equanimity is in the
state of being the Supreme Self. In the ninth chapter, Shri Krishna told the
valiant Arjuna - O Arjuna! I am present in all beings in the form of equality.
What is the meaning of equanimity from the Gita's perspective? Pondering on this
question...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 bauddha sAhitya ke manISiyoM kA yaha abhimata hai ki yahAM jo samyak zabda kA
prayoga huA hai vaha sama ke artha meM hai, kyoMki pAlI bhASA meM jo sammA zabda
hai, usake sama aura samyak donoM rUpa banate haiN| yahAM para jo samyak zabda
kA prayoga huA hai, vaha rAga dveSa kI vRttiyoM ko nyUna karane ke artha meM
vyavahata huA hai| jaba rAga-dveSa kI mAtrA kama hotI hai, tabhI sAdhaka
samatvayoga kI ora apane kadama bar3hA sakatA hai| aSTAMgika mArga meM antima
mArga kA nAma samyak samAdhi hai| samAdhi meM cittavRtti rAga dveSa se rahita ho
jAtI hai| jaba taka cittavRttiyA~ rAga-dveSa se mukta nahIM banatIM, taba taka
samAdhi ke saMdarzana nahIM hote| saMyuttanikAya' meM tathAgata buddha ne kahA -
jina vyaktiyoM ne dharmoM ko sahI rUpa se jAna liyA hai, jo kisI mata pakSa yA
bAda meM ulajhe hue nahIM haiM ve sambuddha haiM samadRSTA haiM aura viSama
sthitiyoM meM bhI unakA AcaraNa sama rahatA hai| saMyuttanikAya meM anya sthAna
para buddha ne spaSTa kahA-AryoM kA mArga sama hai| Arya viSama sthiti meM bhI
sama kA AcaraNa karate haiN| majjhimanikAya meM rAga-dveSa, moha ke upazama ko
hI parama mana mAnA hai| suttanipAta meM kahA gayA hai jisa prakAra maiM hUM,
vaise hI saMsAra ke sabhI prANI haiN| ataH sabhI prANiyoM ko apane sadRza
samajhakara AcaraNa karanA caahiye| bauddhadarzana meM mAdhyastha vRtti para jo
bala diyA hai, usakA mUla AdhAra bhI samabhAva hI hai| isa prakAra bauddhadharma
meM yatra tatra samatva ke ullekha prApta haiN| isase yaha spaSTa hai ki
bauddhadharma meM bhI samabhAva ko sAdhanA kA eka Avazyaka aMga mAnA hai| yaha
satya hai ki unhoMne sAmAyika kA nirUpaNa nahIM kiyA, para sAmAyika kA jo mUla
samabhAva hai, usakA ullekha jarUra kiyA hai| vaidika paramparA ke granthoM meM
bhI samatvayoga kI carcA yatra tatra huI hai| zrImadbhagavadgItA vaidika
paramparA kA eka pratinidhi grantha hai| usameM yoga kI carcA karate hue samatva
ko hI yoga kahA hai| jJAna, karma, bhakti, dhyAna Adi kA uddezya samatva hai|
binA samatva ke jJAna, ajJAna hai| jisameM samatva bhAva hai vahI vastutaH
yathArtha jJAnI hai| binA samatA ke karma akarma nahIM banatA, samatva ke abhAva
meM karma kA bandhakatva banA rhegaa| samatva ke abhAva meM bhakta bhI saccA
bhakta nahIM hai| samatva meM vaha apUrva zakti hai, jisase ajJAna jJAna ke rUpa
meM parivartita ho jAtA hai aura vaha jJAna yoga ke rUpa meM jAnA jAtA hai|
gItAkAra kI dRSTi se svayaM paramAtmA  /  brahma sama hai| jo vyakti samatva meM
avasthita rahatA hai, vaha paramAtmatvabhAva meM hI avasthita hai| navama
adhyAya meM zrIkRSNa ne vIra arjuna ko kahA - he arjuna! maiM sabhI prANiyoM meM
sama ke rUpa meM sthita huuN| gItAkAra kI dRSTi se samatva kA kyA artha hai? isa
prazna para cintana karate 1. saMyuktanikAya 1/1/8 2. saMyuktanikAya 1/2/6 3.
majjhimanikAya 3/40/2 4. suttanipAta 3/36/7 5. zrImadbhagavadgItA 2/48 6.
zrImadbhagavadgItA 5/18 7. zrImadbhagavadgItA 4/22 8. (ka) zrImadbhagavadgItA
5/19 9. zrImadbhagavadgItA 5/19 10.zrImadbhagavadgItA 9/19 (kha) gItA (zAMkara
bhASya)5/18 [28]

Page #32 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Acharya Shankar has written that the meaning of equality is equivalence, it is
the view of self. Just as happiness is dear to me, so too does he see happiness
and sorrow as favorable and unfavorable to all beings, he does not act. He is
the one who is equal-sighted. To have the view of self towards all beings is
equality. The yogi practitioner of equality, whether in a favorable situation or
an unfavorable situation, whether he receives respect or scorn, whether he
receives unfavorable things, whether he sees the attainment of perfection or
receives imperfection, even then his inner mind remains equal in all those
situations. Krishna said to Arjuna that he who remains equal in happiness and
sorrow, he who is not agitated or disturbed by the objects of the senses, he is
the one who is entitled to liberation/immortality. In the eighteenth chapter of
the Gita, Shri Krishna said in very clear words that he who is situated in the
state of equality, he alone can attain my supreme devotion. Thus, the tone of
equality yoga is expressed here and there in the Gita.  Today, in the absence of
equality yoga in the world, the dark clouds of inequality are hovering. Due to
which the individual, society and nation are troubled. Equality yoga establishes
harmony in various aspects of life in such a way that not only the struggle of
individual life ends, but also the struggles of social life are destroyed, if
all the members of society and nation strive for it. Equality yoga eliminates
intellectual prejudice and the sweet stream of affection begins to flow. All the
struggles of life end, the root cause of the struggle of the intellectual world
is insistence and prejudice. Freed from the poison of prejudice, man readily
accepts truth. The yogi practitioner of equality is neither narrow-minded in his
intellectual view nor does he have any attachment to enjoyment. Therefore, his
conduct is pure and his thoughts are noble. He believes in the principle of
"live and let live". Thus, we see that through equality yoga, the Gita author
has emphasized the practice of equanimity.  In Samayik, neither attachment plays
its own tune nor does hatred play its magical tune. This is an undertaking to
become free from attachment and aversion. This is the alchemy that, holding the
finger of discrimination, places the practitioner on the golden earth of
equality. This is the practice of decorating and adorning life.  Chaturvinshati
stava The second essential in the six essentials is Chaturvinshati stava. We
have seen in the previous lines that Samayik prescribes the practice of
abstaining from faulty conduct. By abstaining from faulty conduct, the
practitioner necessarily takes refuge in some support, so that he can remain
steady in equanimity. For this purpose, the practitioner praises the
Tirthankaras in Samayik.  Chaturvinshati stava is a unique creation of
devotional literature. In it, the Ganges of devotion is flowing. If the
practitioner takes a dip in that Ganges, he cannot remain without being
intoxicated with joy. The Tirthankaras are great in terms of renunciation and
detachment, in terms of the practice of restraint. By extolling their virtues,
spiritual strength is infused into the practitioner's inner heart. If for some
reason faith becomes weak, then it infuses new inspiration. - 1. Shrimad
Bhagavad Gita, Shankar Bhashya 6/32 2. Gita 2/15 3. Gita 18/54 [29]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 hue AcArya zaMkara ne likhA hai samatva kA artha tulyatA hai, Atmavat dRSTi
hai| jisa prakAra sukha mujhe priya hai, duHkha sabhI prANiyoM ko sukha aura
duHkha ko anukUla aura pratikUla rUpa meM dekhatA hai, vaha AcaraNa nahIM krtaa|
vahI samadarzI hai| sabhI prANiyoM ke prati Atmavat dRSTi rakhanA samatva hai|
samatva yogI sAdhaka cAhe anukUla sthiti ho, cAhe pratikUla sthiti ho, cAhe
sammAna milatA ho, cAhe tiraskAra apriya hai, vaise hI vizva ke kisI ke prati
bhI pratikUla prApta hotA ho, cAhe siddhi ke saMdarzana hote hoM, cAhe asiddhi
prApta ho, to bhI usakA antarmAnasa una sabhI sthitiyoM , meM sama rahatA hai|
kRSNa ne arjuna se kahA jo sukha duHkha meM samabhAva rakhatA hai, jo indriyoM
ke viSaya sukha meM hI Akula vyAkula nahIM hotA, vahI mokSa / amRtatva kA
adhikArI hai| gItA ke aThArahaveM adhyAya meM zrIkRSNa ne bahuta spaSTa zabdoM
meM kahA jo samatva bhAva meM sthita hotA hai| vahI merI parama bhakti ko prApta
kara sakatA hai| isa prakAra gItA meM samatvayoga kA svara yatra-tatra mukharita
huA hai| - -- - Aja vizva ke samatvayoga ke abhAva meM viSamatA kI kAlI ghaTAeM
maMDarA rahI haiN| jisase vyakti, samAja aura rASTra parezAna haiM  /
samatvayoga jIvana ke vividha pakSoM meM isa prakAra samanvaya sthApita karatA
hai jisase na kevala vyaktigata jIvana kA saMgharSa samApta hotA hai, apitu
sAmAjika jIvana ke saMgharSa bhI naSTa ho jAte haiM, yadi samAja aura rASTra ke
sabhI sadasyagaNa usake liye prayatnazIla hoN| samatvayoga se vaicArika
durAgraha samApta ho jAtA hai aura sneha kI sura saritAM pravAhita hone lagatI
hai| jIvana ke sabhI saMgharSa samApta ho jAte haiM vaicArika jagat ke saMgharSa
kA mUla kAraNa Agraha durAgraha hai  /  durAgraha ke viSa se mukta hone para
manuSya satya ko sahaja rUpa se svIkAra kara letA hai| samatvayogI sAdhaka na
vaicArika dRSTi se saMkucita hotA hai aura na usameM bhogAsakti hI hotI hai|
isalie usakA AcAra nirmala hotA hai aura vicAra udAtta hote haiM vaha 'jIo aura
jIne do ke siddhAnta meM vizvAsa rakhatA hai| isa prakAra hama dekhate haiM ki
samatvayoga ke dvArA gItAkAra ne samabhAva kI sAdhanA para bala diyA hai| -
sAmAyika Avazyaka meM na rAga apanA rAga AlApatA hai aura na dveSa apanI jAduI
bIna bajAtA hai| vItarAga aura vitRSNa banane ke liye yaha upakrama hai| yaha
vaha kImiyA hai jo bhedavijJAna kI aMgulI pakar3akara samatA kI sunaharI dharatI
para sAdhakA ko sthita karatA hai| yaha sAdhanA jIvana ko sajAne aura saMvArane
kI sAdhanA hai| caturviMzatistava SaDAvazyaka meM dUsarA Avazyaka
caturviMzatistava hai| hamane pUrva paMktiyoM meM dekhA ki sAmAyika meM sAvadha
yoga se nivRtta rahane kA vidhAna kiyA gayA hai| sAvadya yoga se nivRtta
rahakara sAdhaka kisI na kisI Alambana kA Azraya avazya grahaNa karatA hai,
jisase vaha samabhAva meM sthira raha ske| etadartha hI sAmAyika meM sAdhaka
tIrthaMkara devoM kI stuti karatA hai  /  caturviMzatistava bhakti sAhitya kI
eka viziSTa racanA hai| usameM bhakti kI bhAgIrathI pravAhita ho rahI hai| yadi
sAdhaka usa bhAgIrathI meM avagAhana kare to Ananda-vibhora hue binA nahIM raha
sktaa| tIrthaMkara tyAga aura vairAgya kI dRSTi se, saMyamasAdhanA kI dRSTi se
mahAn hai| unake guNoM kA utkIrtana karane se sAdhaka ke antarhRdaya meM
AdhyAtmika bala kA saMcAra hotA hai| yadi kisI kAraNavaza zraddhA zithila ho
jAye to usameM abhinava sphUrti kA saMcAra - 1. zrImadbhagavadgItA, zAMkara
bhASya 6 / 32 2. gItA 2 / 15 3. gItA 18/54 [29]

Page #33 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
It happens. Before his eyes, a blazing reflection of renunciation and detachment
appears, melting his ego like ice. Remember, the body of a Tirthankara is made
up of the most auspicious atoms in the world, therefore, from the point of view
of form, the Tirthankara is great. Among all the beings in the world, the
Tirthankara is the most powerful. Even the greatest heroes cannot stand before
his strength. Tirthankaras are born with Avadhijnana. As soon as they accept the
Shraman-Diksha, they attain Manahparyavgyan and after that, the divine light of
Kevalgyan starts shining in them, therefore, from the point of view of
knowledge, the Tirthankara is great. From the point of view of Darshan,
Tirthankaras are the holders of Kshayik Samyaktva. Their character develops
progressively. Their results are always increasing. No one can match them in
terms of knowledge, Darshan, and character, as well as in charity. Before
entering the Shraman Dharma, they donate one crore eight lakh gold coins every
day for one year. They are secret Brahmachari. Even during the time of Sadhana,
the Devanganas cannot attract them with their wonderful forms. Tirthankaras set
a record in the field of Tapasya. They do not even drink water during the time
of Tapasya. In the field of Bhavana, the Bhavana of Tirthankaras becomes
progressively pure and purest. Thus, the life of Tirthankaras is a holy
institution of various characteristics. There can be many Arihants at one place
at one time, but there is only one Tirthankara. Every Sadhak can become an
Arihant by trying, but to become a Tirthankara, the Sadhana of not one but many
Bhavas is required. Tirthankaratva is an excellent Puny nature. By engraving the
qualities of Tirthankaras, the heart becomes pure, desires are calmed. Just as a
cold compress calms fever during a high fever, in the same way, when the fever
of desire creates restlessness in life, the remembrance of Tirthankaras provides
peace like a cold compress. By praising Tirthankaras, accumulated Karma is
destroyed. Just as a tiny spark can burn a pile of cotton, in the same way, the
praise of Tirthankaras destroys Karma. When we praise Tirthankaras, a bright
ideal of each Tirthankara remains before us. As soon as the remembrance of
Bhagwan Rishabhdev comes, the picture of the Adimyug starts shining on the
mental canvas. He starts thinking that Bhagwan created this human culture. He
ran the administration of the state. He taught man the lessons of art,
civilization, and religion. He left royal splendor and became a Shraman. Even
after not getting alms for a year, joy played on his face. The life of Bhagwan
Shantinath is a great symbol of peace. The life of Bhagwati Malli is a shining
example of women's life. Bhagwan Arishtanemi is the very incarnation of
compassion. For the protection of the lives of animals and birds, he even
abandons the beautiful Rajimati. As soon as the remembrance of Bhagwan Parsva
comes, a form of the Tapasya tradition of that era comes before us, in which
there is no light of knowledge, the flames of Kshayas are burning in the inner
mind, and the flames of Panchagni are also burning outside. He saves the snake
burning in those flames. Even when tortured by Kamath, no anger arose in his
mind, and even when praised by Dharanendra Padmavati, no happiness arose in his
mind. This is his Vitaragi form. The life of Bhagwan Mahavira is a great
revolutionary life. Even from many hair-raising Upsargas, he does not deviate
even a little. In the Upsargas given by Aryas and Anaryas, by Devas and Danavas,
by animals and birds, he remains unshakable like Mount Meru. He refutes caste
and creed and emphasizes the importance of qualities. He gives respect to women.
[30]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 hotA hai| usake netroM ke sAmane tyAga-vairAgya kI jvalanta pratikRti AtI hai,
jisase usakA ahaMkAra barpha kI taraha pighala jAtA hai| smaraNa rakhiye,
saMsAra meM jo zubhatara paramANu haiM unase tIrthaMkara kA zarIra nirmita hotA
hai, isalie rUpa kI dRSTi se tIrthaMkara mahAn hai| saMsAra meM jitane bhI prANI
haiM, una prANiyoM meM tIrthaMkara sabase adhika balI haiN| unake bala ke sAmane
bar3e-bar3e vIra bhI Tika nahIM paate| tIrthakara avadhijJAna ke sAtha janma
lete haiN| zramaNa-dIkSA aMgIkAra karate hI unheM manaHparyavajJAna prApta ho
jAtA hai aura usake pazcAt unameM kevalajJAna kA divya Aloka jagamagAne lagatA
hai, ataH jJAna kI dRSTi se tIrthaMkara mahAn hai| darzana kI dRSTi se
tIrthaMkara kSAyika samyaktva ke dhAraka hote haiN| unakA cAritra uttarottara
vikasita hotA hai| unake pariNAma sadA varddhamAna rahate haiN| jJAna, darzana
aura cAritra ke sAtha hI dAna meM unakI barAbarI koI bhI nahIM kara sktaa| ve
zramaNadharma meM praviSTa hone ke pUrva eka varSa taka pratidina eka karor3a
ATha lAkha svarNa mudrAoM kA dAna dete haiN| ve gupta brahmacArI hote haiN|
sAdhanA kAla meM devAMganAe~ bhI apane adbhuta rUpa meM unako AkarSita nahIM
kara paatiiN| tapa ke kSetra meM tIrthaMkara kIrtimAna saMsthApita karate haiN|
ve tapa-kAla meM jala bhI grahaNa nahIM krte| bhAvanA ke kSetra meM tIrthaMkaroM
kI bhAvanA uttarottara nirmala aura nirmalatama hotI jAtI hai| isa prakAra
tIrthaMkaroM kA jIvana vividha vizeSatAoM kA pAvana pratiSThAna hai| eka kAla
meM eka sthAna para aneka arihanta ho sakate haiM, para tIrthakara eka hI hotA
hai| pratyeka sAdhaka prayatna karane para arihanta bana sakatA hai, kintu
tIrthaMkara banane ke liye eka nahIM aneka bhavoM kI sAdhanA apekSita hai|
tIrthaMkaratva utkRSTa puNya prakRti hai| tIrthaMkaroM ke guNoM kA utkIrtana
karane se hRdaya pavitra hotA hai, vAsanAe~ zAnta hotI haiN| jaise tIvra jvara
ke samaya barpha kI ThaMDI paTTI lagAne se jvara zAnta ho jAtA hai, usI prakAra
jaba jIvana meM vAsanA kA jvara becainI paidA karatA ho, usa samaya tIrthaMkaroM
kA smaraNa barpha kI paTTI kI taraha zAnti pradAna karatA hai| tIrthaMkaroM kI
stuti se saMcita karma naSTa ho jAte haiN| jaise eka nanhIM sI cinagArI ruI ke
Dhera ko bhasma kara detI hai, vaise hI tIrthaMkaroM kI stuti se karma naSTa ho
jAte haiN| jaba hama tIrthaMkaroM kI stuti karate haiM to pratyeka tIrthaMkara
kA eka ujjvala Adarza hamAre sAmane rahatA hai| bhagavAn RSabhadeva kA smaraNa
Ate hI Adimayuga kA citra mAnasa-paTala para camakane lagatA hai| vaha socane
lagatA hai ki bhagavAn ne isa mAnava-saMskRti kA nirmANa kiyaa| rAjyavyavasthA
kA saMcAlana kiyaa| manuSya ko kalA, sabhyatA aura dharma kA pATha pddh'aayaa|
rAjasI vaibhava ko chor3akara ve zramaNa bne| eka varSa taka bhikSA na milane
para bhI cehare para AhlAda aThakheliyA~ karatA rhaa| bhagavAn zAntinAtha kA
jIvana zAnti kA mahAn pratIka hai| bhagavatI mallI kA jIvana nArI jIvana kA eka
jvalanta Adarza hai| bhagavAn ariSTanemi karuNA ke sAkSAt avatAra haiN| pazu
pakSiyoM kI prANa rakSA ke liye ve sarvAMgasundarI rAjImatI kA bhI parityAga
kara dete haiN| bhagavAn pArzva kA smaraNa Ate hI usa yuga kI tapa paramparA kA
eka rUpa sAmane AtA hai, jisameM jJAna kI jyoti nahIM hai, antarmAnasa meM
kaSAyoM kI jvAlAe~ dhadhaka rahI haiM to bAhara bhI paMcAgni kI jvAlAe~ sulaga
rahI haiN| ve una jvAlAoM meM se jalate hue nAga ko bacAte haiN| kamaTha ke
dvArA bhayaMkara yAtanA dene para bhI unake mana meM roSa paidA nahIM huA aura
dharaNendra padmAvatI ke dvArA stuti karane para bhI mana meM prasannatA nahIM
huii| yaha hai unakA vItarAgI ruup| bhagavAn mahAvIra kA jIvana mahAn krAntikArI
jIvana hai| aneka lomaharSaka upasargoM se bhI ve tanika mAtra bhI vicalita
nahIM hote| AryoM aura anAryoM ke dvArA, devoM aura dAnavoM ke dvArA, pazu-
pakSiyoM ke dvArA diye gaye upasargoM meM ve meru kI taraha avicala rahate haiN|
jAti-pAMti kA khaNDana kara ve guNoM kI mahattA para bala dete haiN| nArI jAti
ko pratiSThA pradAna karate haiN| [30]

Page #34 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Thus, the praise of the Tirthankaras inspires humans to awaken their own valor.
The soul is the Supreme Soul. The karma-bound being is the karma-free Shiva. One
day, the soul of the Tirthankar was also trapped in the mire of worldly desires,
just like ours. But as soon as he understood his true nature, he abandoned it
and became Narayana from a human. He became the Supreme Soul from the soul. If I
also strive like the Tirthankar, I can become like him. Shri Krishna had clearly
told Arjuna, "Do my devotion, I will free you from all sins." Shraman Bhagwan
Mahavira also said, "I am the protector from fear." The Tathagata Buddha said,
"He who sees me, sees the Dharma." However, it is clear that according to both
Jain and Buddhist ideologies, a person ascends to the highest peak of his own
effort and falls into the abyss of his own misdeeds. Jainism does not give place
to the idea of being freed by the grace of the Lord without trying to free
oneself from sin. It has not considered such mindless prayer to be appropriate.
Its clear intention has been that such prayers make humans humble and dependent.
The devotee who does not make his own effort, the praise of the Tirthankaras
alone cannot grant him liberation. The effort of the individual can only lead
him towards the palace of liberation. The Tirthankaras are the pillars of light
on the path of sadhana. The lighthouse guides the ship, but it is the ship that
does the work of sailing. Similarly, it is the duty of the seeker to progress
towards sadhana. From the Jain perspective, the goal of devotion is self-
realization. It is to express the power that lies within oneself. The kind of
faith/feeling that is strong in the seeker's inner mind, his life will be like
that. That is why the Gita-kar said, "This man is made of faith, whatever he is
devoted to, he becomes that." In the house where the Garuda bird resides, there
cannot be a snake. Snakes flee from the shadow of Garuda. Where the praise of
the Tirthankaras, like Garuda, is seated in the hearts, there the snakes of sin
cannot stay. The holy remembrance of the Tirthankaras destroys sin. A disciple
asked with curiosity - Bhagwan! What virtue is attained by doing the twenty-four
stava? Bhagwan Mahavira, while solving, said - By doing the twenty-four stava,
the purity of vision is attained. There are many benefits of the twenty-four
stava. It purifies faith, makes rightness pure. It develops the power to bear
hardships and trials with equanimity, and the holy inspiration to become a
Tirthankar is awakened in the mind. That is why the twenty-four stava or the
praise of the Tirthankar has been given a place in the six essentials. Vandan In
the field of sadhana, after the Tirthankar, the second place is that of the
Guru. The Tirthankar is a god. After the god, the Guru is bowed to. He is
praised and greeted. In the necessary appointment, the words like chitikarma,
poojakarma etc. have been used in the sense of Vandan. The seeker is dedicated
to virtue with all his mind, speech and body. 1. Gita 18/66 2. Sutra Kritanga
1/16 3. (a) Majjhimanikaya (b) Itivrittak 3/43 4. Shrimad Bhagavad Gita 17/3
[31]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 isa prakAra tIrthakaroM kI stuti mAnava meM apane pauruSa ko jAgRta karane kI
preraNA detI hai| AtmA hI paramAtmA hai| karmabaddha jIva hai to karmamukta ziva
hai| eka dina tIrthaMkara kI AtmA bhI hamArI taraha hI bhogavAsanA ke daladala
meM phaMsI thii| para jyoM hI usane apane svarUpa ko samajhA tyoM hI vaha use
tyAga kara nara se nArAyaNa bana gii| AtmA se paramAtmA bana gii| yadi maiM bhI
tIrthakara kI taraha prayatna karUM to maiM unake samAna bana sakatA huuN|
zrIkRSNa ne arjuna ko spaSTa zabdoM meM kahA thA ki tuma merI bhakti karo, maiM
tumheM sabhI pApoM se mukta kara duuNgaa|' zramaNa bhagavAn mahAvIra ne bhI kahA
- maiM bhaya se rakSA karane vAlA huuN| tathAgata buddha ne kahA - jo mujhe
dekhatA hai, vaha dharma ko dekhatA hai| tathApi yaha spaSTa hai ki jaina aura
bauddha ina donoM vicAradhArAoM ke anusAra vyakti apane hI puruSArtha se utthAna
ke sarvocca zikhara para ArUDha hotA hai aura apane hI kuprayatna se patana ke
mahAgarta meM giratA hai| svayaM pApa se mukta hone kA prayatna na kara prabhu
ke sahAre mukta hone kI kalpanA ko jainadharma meM sthAna nahIM diyA hai| usane
isa prakAra kI vivekazUnya prArthanA ko ucita nahIM mAnA hai| usakA yaha spaSTa
abhimata rahA hai ki isa prakAra kI prArthanAe~ mAnava ko dInahIna aura
parApekSI banAtI haiN| jo sAdhaka svayaM puruSArtha nahIM karatA, usa sAdhaka ko
kevala tIrthaMkaroM kI stuti mukti pradAna nahIM kara sktii| vyakti kA
puruSArtha hI use mukti mahala kI ora bar3hA sakatA hai| tIrthakara to
sAdhanAmArga ke Aloka stambha haiN| Aloka stambha jahAja kA patha pradarzana
karatA hai, para calane kA kArya to jahAja kA hI hai| vaise hI sAdhanA kI ora
pragati karanA sAdhaka kA kArya hai| jaina dRSTi se bhakti kA lakSya svayaM kA
sAkSAtkAra hai| apane meM rahI huI zakti kI abhivyakti karanA hai| sAdhaka ke
antarmAnasa meM jisa prakAra kI zraddhA / bhAvanA balavatI hogI, usI prakAra kA
usakA jIvana bnegaa| isIliye gItAkAra ne kahA - 'zraddhAmayo'yaM puruSaH yo
yacchUddha sa eva sH|" jisa ghara meM garur3a pakSI kA nivAsa ho, usa ghara meM
sA~pa nahIM raha sktaa| sA~pa garur3a kI praticchAyA se bhAga jAte haiN| jinake
hRdaya meM tIrthakaroM kI stutirUpI garur3a AsIna hai, vahAM para pAparUpI sA~pa
nahIM raha paate| tIrthakaroM kA pAvana smaraNa hI pApa ko naSTa kara detA hai|
eka ziSya ne jijJAsA prastuta kI - bhagavan ! caturviMzatistava karane se kisa
sadguNa kI upalabdhi hotI hai? bhagavAn mahAvIra ne samAdhAna karate hue kahA -
caturviMzatistava karane se darzana kI vizuddhi hotI hai| caturviMzatistava se
aneka lAbha haiN| usase zraddhA parimArjita hotI hai, samyaktva vizuddha hotA
hai| upasarga aura parISahoM ko samabhAva se sahana karane kI zakti vikasita
hotI hai aura tIrthakara banane kI pavitra preraNA mana meM ubuddha hotI hai|
isIliye SaDAvazyakoM meM tIrthaMkarastuti yA caturviMzatistava ko sthAna diyA
gayA hai| vandana sAdhanA kSetra meM tIrthakara ke pazcAt dUsarA sthAna guru kA
hai| tIrthaMkara deva haiN| deva ke pazcAt guru ko namana kiyA jAtA hai| unakA
stavana aura abhivAdana kiyA jAtA hai| Avazyakaniyukti meM vandana ke artha meM
citikarma, pUjAkarma Adi paryAyavAcI zabda vyavahata hue haiN| sAdhaka mana,
vacana aura zarIra se sadguNa ke prati sarvAtmanA samarpita 1. gItA 18/66 2.
sUtrakRtAMga 1/16 3. (ka) majjhimanikAya (kha) itivRttaka3/43 4.
zrImadbhagavadgItA 17/3 [31]

Page #35 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
It is said that the virtuous are worthy of respect. Humility is essential in
life. Jain Agamas consider humility as the foundation of religion. The Agam
literature elaborates on humility, but it is true that Jainism is not about
blind subservience. In the time of Lord Mahavira, there was a sect whose
followers would bow to any animal or bird they encountered on their path. Lord
Mahavira clearly stated, "Human! Your mind is not meant to bow to the feet of
the unworthy." Being humble is one thing, but bowing to every individual as if
they are divine is another. Jainism emphasizes the worship of virtues. It bows
to the feet of the virtuous. To bow to virtues means to embrace them. If a
seeker bows to an unrestrained, degenerate person whose life is filled with
misconduct, desires, and flames of attachment and aversion, it means encouraging
those vices. Acharya Bhadrabahu, in his work "Aavashyak Niyukti," clearly states
that such unworthy individuals should not be bowed to, as they are unworthy of
respect. Bowing to unworthy individuals does not lead to the shedding of karmas
nor does it enhance one's reputation. Approving of unrestraint and misconduct
leads to the binding of new karmas. Therefore, bowing to them is futile. An
unworthy individual who knows that their life is a storehouse of vices, if they
receive a bow from virtuous individuals, they pollute their own life. They
increase their unrestraint and bring about their own downfall.  From the Jain
perspective, both material and emotional character are essential in a seeker. If
there is no material character, only emotional character, it is not commendable.
Because for ordinary seekers, their pure character is their guide. If there is
only material character and no emotional character, it is also not praiseworthy.
It is merely a facade. A seeker needs a guru whose material and emotional
character are both pure, whose life is complete in both behavior and conviction.
Only such a virtuous guru is worthy of respect and praise. From such a virtuous
guru, a seeker can receive pure inspiration. The practice of bowing in
"Aavashyak Niyukti" is to bow to such a virtuous guru.  Bowing eliminates ego,
leads to humility, and expresses unwavering devotion to virtuous teachers.
Following the commands of the Tirthankaras leads to the worship of pure
religion. Therefore, a seeker should constantly be aware and bow. There should
be no negligence in bowing. When the source of devotion flows in the seeker's
inner mind, they spontaneously bow to the feet of the virtuous teachers. Bowing
that is not primarily driven by devotion, but by fear, temptation, reputation,
or other such emotions, is merely material bowing, not emotional bowing.
Material bowing often leads to the binding of karmas. Bowing done with pure and
unblemished emotions is the true bowing. Acharya Malayagiri wrote, "Material
bowing is a sign of false vision, but emotional bowing is a sign of right
vision."  - Aavashyak Niyukti 1108 1. Pasatthai vandamanassa neva kitti na
nijjarahoai. Kayakilesam emeva kunai tah kammabandham cha. 2. Je
bhamchearabhatta pae uddanti bhambayarinam. Te honti kunt muntaa bohi ya
sudulhaa tesim.  - Aavashyak Niyukti 1109 [32]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 hotA hai| jo sadguNI haiM, unhIM ke caraNoM meM vaha nata hotA hai| jIvana meM
vinaya Avazyaka hai| jaina AgamoM meM vinaya ko dharma kA mUla kahA hai|
AgamasAhitya meM vinaya ke sambandha meM vistAra se vivecanA hai, tathApi yaha
satya hai ki jainadharma vainayika nahIM hai| bhagavAn mahAvIra ke yuga meM eka
aisA pantha thA jisake anuyAyI pazu pakSI Adi jo bhI mArga meM mila jAtA, use ve
namaskAra karate the| bhagavAn mahAvIra ne spaSTa zabdoM meM kahA - mAnava! terA
mastiSka aire-gaire ke caraNoM meM jhukane ke liye nahIM hai| namra honA alaga
bAta hai, para hara eka vyakti ko paramAdaraNIya samajhakara namaskAra karanA
alaga bAta hai| jainadharma meM sadguNoM kI upAsanA kI gaI hai| usakA sira
sadguNiyoM ke caraNoM meM nata hotA hai| sadguNoM ko namana karane kA artha hai
sadguNoM ko apnaanaa| yadi sAdhaka asaMyamI patita vyakti ko namaskAra karatA
hai, jisake jIvana meM durAcAra panapa rahA ho, vAsanAe~ ubhara rahI hoM, rAga-
dveSa kI jvAlAeM dhadhaka rahI hoM, usa vyakti ko namana karane kA artha hai -
una durguNoM ko protsAhana denaa| AcArya bhadrabAhu' ne Avazyakaniyukti meM
bahuta hI spaSTa zabdoM meM likhA hai ki aise guNahIna vyaktiyoM ko namaskAra
nahIM karanA cAhie, kyoMki guNoM se rahita vyakti avandanIya hote haiN|
avandanIya vyaktiyoM ko namaskAra karane se karmoM kI nirjarA nahIM hotI aura na
kIrti hI bar3hatI hai| asaMyama aura durAcAra kA anumodana karane se naye karma
baMdhate haiN| ataH unako vandana vyartha hai| eka avandanIya vyakti jo jAnatA
hai ki merA jIvana durguNoM kA AgAra hai, yadi vaha sadguNI vyaktiyoM se
namaskAra grahaNa karatA hai to vaha apane jIvana ko dUSita karatA hai| asaMyama
kI vRddhi kara apanA hI patana karatA hai| jainadharma kI dRSTi se sAdhaka meM
dravya cAritra aura bhAva cAritra ye donoM Avazyaka haiN| yadi dravya cAritra
nahIM hai, kevala bhAva cAritra hI hai, to vaha prazaMsanIya nahIM hai| kyoMki
sAmAnya sAdhakoM ke liye usakA pavitra cAritra hI pathapradarzaka hotA hai|
kevala dravya cAritra hI hai, aura bhAva cAritra kA abhAva hai to bhI vaha
zlAghanIya nahIM hai| vaha to kevala dikhAvA hai| sAdhaka ko aise hI guru kI
AvazyakatA hai jisake dravya aura bhAva donoM hI cAritra nirmala hoM, vyavahAra
aura nizcaya donoM hI dRSTiyoM se jisake jIvana meM pUrNatA ho, vahI sadguru
vandanIya aura abhinandanIya hotaH hai| aise sadguru se sAdhaka pavitra preraNA
grahaNa kara sakatA hai| vandanA Avazyaka meM aise hI sadguru ko namana karane
kA vidhAna hai| vandana karane se ahaMkAra naSTa hotA hai, vinaya kI upalabdhi
hotI hai| sadguruoM ke prati ananya zraddhA vyakta hotI hai| tIrthakaroM kI AjJA
kA pAlana karane se zuddha dharma kI ArAdhanA hotI hai| ataH sAdhaka ko satata
jAgarUka rahakara vandana karanA caahiye| vandana karane meM kiMcinmAtra bhI
upekSA nahIM rakhanI caahie| jaba sAdhaka ke antarmAnasa meM bhakti kA srota
pravAhita hotA hai, taba sahasA vaha sadguruoM ke caraNoM meM jhuka jAtA hai|
jisa vandana meM bhakti kI pradhAnatA nahIM, kevala bhaya, pralobhana, pratiSThA
Adi bhAvanAe~ panapa rahI hoM, vaha vandana kevala dravya vandana hai, bhAva
vandana nhiiN| dravya vandana se kitanI hI bAra karma bandhana bhI ho jAtA hai|
pavitra aura nirmala bhAvanA se kiyA gayA vandana hI sahI vandana hai| AcArya
malayagiri ne likhA hai dravya vandana mithyAdRSTi bhI karatA hai kintu bhAva
vandana samyagdRSTi hI - Avazyakaniyukti 1108 1. pAsatthAI vaMdamANassa neva
kittI na nijjraahoi| kAyakilesaM emeva kuNaI taha kammabaMdhaM c|| 2. je
baMbhacerabhaTTA pAe uDDaMti baMbhayArINaM  /  te hoMti kuMTa muMTA bohI ya
sudullahA tesiN|| - Avazyakaniyukti 1109 [32]

Page #36 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
It does. The act of worshipping matter by a person with a wrong view is merely a
mechanical process, it does not bring any spiritual benefit. Both matter and
feeling are necessary for worship. In the 'Dhammapada', the Tathagata Buddha
said, "The fruit of the sacrifice and offering that a person performs throughout
the year with the desire for merit is not even a fourth part of the fruit of
saluting the virtuous souls. Therefore, one should bow down to the great souls
with simple minds. The man who always serves the elders and is respectful, his
four things increase: longevity, beauty, happiness and strength." Thus, worship
is given importance in Buddhism. There also, - There has been a tradition of
worship based on seniority and juniority in the life of a Shraman. In the Vedic
tradition also, worship is considered necessary for the growth of virtues. In
the Shrimad Bhagavata, there is a mention of Navdha Bhakti. In that Navdha
Bhakti, worship is also described as a type of devotion. In the eighteenth
chapter of the Shrimad Bhagavad Gita, Shri Krishna has encouraged the devotees
for worship by saying "Maam Namaskuru". - Jain sages have thought very
extensively and deeply about worship. Acharya Bhadrabahu has described 32
defects of worship. Only a seeker who avoids those defects can perform true
worship. In short, those defects are as follows: - 1. Anadrita 2. Stabdha 2.
Prasiddha 4 Paripindita 5. Tolgati 6. Ankusha 7. Kachchparigat 8. Matsyodavritta
9. Manasa Pradwishta 10. Vedikabaddha 11. Bhaya 12. Bhajaman 13. Maitri 14.
Gaurav 15. Karan 16. Stainya 17. Pratyanik 18. Rusht 19. Tarjit 20. Shatha 21.
Hilita 22. Viparikunchita 23. Drishttadrisht 24. Shringa 25. Kar 26. Mochan 27.
Ashlist Anashlist 28. Un 29. Uttar Chuda 30. Muk 31. Dhadar 32. Chudali. The
essence is that while worshipping, there should not be any kind of selfish
feeling/aspiration/fear or disrespect towards anyone in the inner mind. We
should give due respect to those whom we worship. Mind, speech, and body, all
three should be bowed down at the feet of the worshipable. Pratikraman All the
spiritual traditions of India provide strong inspiration for self-realization.
Due to negligence and carelessness in the soul since time immemorial, vices and
desires have established their dominance. They have to be removed and Godhood
has to be awakened. The animalistic tendency in man is not his own, but has come
from outside. The seeker's 1. Dhammapada, 108 2. Dhammapada 109 3. Manusmriti,
2/121 4. Shrimad Bhagavata Purana 7/5/23 5. Shrimad Bhagavad Gita 18/65 6. (a)
Aavashyakaniyukti 1207-1211 (b) Pravachansaro uddhar Vandanaadwar [33]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karatA hai| midhyAdRSTi kI dravya vandana kI kriyA kevala yAMtrika prakriyA
hai, use kisI bhI prakAra kA AdhyAtmika lAbha nahIM hotA  /  vandana ke liye
dravya aura bhAva donoM hI Avazyaka haiN| dhammapada' meM tathAgata buddha ne
kahA puNya kI icchA se jo vyakti varSa bhara meM yajJa auraM havana karatA hai,
usa yajJa aura havana kA phala puNyAtmAoM ke abhivAdana ke phala kA caturtha
bhAga bhI nahIM hai| ataH sarala mAnasa vAle mahAtmAoM ko namana karanA caahiye|
sadA vRddhoM kI sevA karane vAle aura abhivAdanazIla puruSa kI cAra vastueM
vRddhi ko prApta hotI haiN| Ayu, saundarya, sukha aura bl|' isa prakAra
bauddhadharma meM vandana ko mahattva diyA hai| vahA~ para bhI - zramaNajIvana
kI variSThatA aura kaniSThatA ke AdhAra para vandana kI paramparA rahI hai|
vaidika paramparA meM bhI vandana sadguNoM kI vRddhi ke liye Avazyaka mAnA hai|
zrImadbhAgavata meM navadhA bhakti kA ullekha hai  /  usa navadhA bhakti meM
vandana bhI bhakti kA eka prakAra batAyA gayA hai| zrImadbhagavadgItA' ke
aThArahaveM adhyAya meM "mAM namaskuru" kahakara zrIkRSNa ne vandana ke liye
bhaktoM ko utprerita kiyA hai| - jaina manISiyoM ne vandana ke sambandha meM
bahuta hI vistAra se aura gaharAI se cintana kiyA hai| AcArya bhadrabAhu ne
vandana ke 32 doSa batAye haiN| una doSoM se bacane vAlA sAdhaka hI sahI vandana
kara sakatA hai| saMkSepa meM ve doSa isa prakAra haiM - 1. anAdRta 2. stabdha
2. prasiddha 4 paripiNDita 5. Tolagati 6. aMkuza 7. kacchaparigata 8.
matsyodavRtta 9 manasApradviSTa 10. vedikAbaddha 11. bhaya 12. bhajamAna 13.
maitrI 14. gaurava 15. kAraNa 16. stainya 17. pratyanIka 18. ruSTa 19. tarjita
20. zaTha 21. hIlita 22. viparikuMcita 23 dRSTAdRSTa 24. zrRMga 25 kara 26.
mocana 27. AzliSTa anAzliSTa 28. Una 29. uttaracUr3A 30. mUka 31. DhaDDara 32
cuDalI  /  sAra yaha hai ki vandana karate samaya antarmAnasa meM kisI prakAra
kI svArthabhAvanA / AkAMkSA / bhaya yA kisI ke prati anAdara kI bhAvanA nahIM
honI caahie| jinako hama vandana kareM unako hama yogya sammAna pradAna kareM  /
mana, vacana, aura kAyA tInoM hI vandanIya ke caraNoM meM nata hoN| pratikramaNa
bhAratavarSa kI sabhI adhyAtmavAdI dharma-paramparAeM AtmasAdhanA kI prabala
preraNA pradAna karatI haiN| AtmA meM ananta kAla se pramAda aura asAvadhAnI ke
kAraNa vikAra aura vAsanAeM apanA prabhutva jamAe hue haiN| unheM haTAkara
Izvaratva ko jagAnA hai| mAnava meM jo pazutva vRtti hai, vaha svayaM usakI
nahIM apitu bAhara se AI huI hai| sAdhaka kI 1. dhammapada, 108 2. dhammapada
109 3. manusmRti, 2 / 121 4. zrImadbhAgavata purANa 7 / 5 / 23 5. zrImadbhagavad
gItA 18 / 65 6. (ka) Avazyakaniyukti 1207-1211 (kha) pravacanasAroddhAra
vandanAdvAra [33]

Page #37 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The soul is like the sun, surrounded by dark clouds. Due to the black clouds of
karma, the soul's supreme brilliance is not visible. It considers itself lowly
and insignificant. The mistakes made in the past due to ignorance and
carelessness can only be rectified through **pratikraman**. **Pratikraman** is
like a panacea for destroying the disease of sin.  **Pratikraman** is a unique
term in the Jain tradition. The literal meaning of **pratikraman** is to return.
We have transgressed our limits, moved away from our natural state and entered a
state of deviation. Therefore, returning to the limits of our natural form is
**pratikraman**. **Pratikraman** is the criticism and condemnation of sins
committed by oneself, by others, or by approving of sins committed by others,
for the purpose of eliminating all sins committed through mind, speech, and
body. Acharya Hemchandra wrote, "**Pratikraman** is to return oneself to the
auspicious from the inauspicious among the auspicious yogas." Acharya Haribhadra
also said the same in his **Aavashyakavritti**.  Returning from the
transgression of the accepted rules and limits is **pratikraman**. In the field
of sadhana, there are five terrible defects: **mithyatva**, **avrata**,
**pramada**, **kṣaya**, and **ashubha yoga**. The sadhaka introspects his life
during the pleasant times of morning and evening. At that time, he deeply
contemplates whether he has strayed from the path of **samyaktv** and become
entangled in the thorny bushes of **mithyatva**? Has he forgotten the nature of
**vrata** and embraced **avrata**? Instead of wandering in the blissful garden
of **aprammatta**, has he wandered in the scorching desert of **pramada**? Has
he left the fragrant, verdant garden of **akṣaya** and walked on the blazing
path of **kṣaya**? Has the tendency of mind, speech, and body, which should be
engaged in **shubha yoga**, become engaged in **ashubha yoga**? If I have gone
into **mithyatva**, **avrata**, **pramada**, **kṣaya**, and **ashubha yoga**,
then I should return to **samyaktv**, **vrata**, **akṣaya**, **aprammatta**, and
**shubha yoga**. **Pratikraman** is performed with this very vision.  -
**Aavashyak Nirukti**, **Aavashyak Churni**, **Aavashyak Haribhadravriti**,
**Aavashyak Malaya Giri Vriti**, etc. have discussed **pratikraman** in great
detail. They have also given eight synonyms for **pratikraman**, which express
the different meanings of **pratikraman**. Although the meaning of all eight is
the same, they are:  1. **Pratipam kramanam pratikramanam**, **ayam artha
shubhayoghebhyo'shubhayogantaraṁ krāntasya shubheshu evaṁ kramanātpratipam
kramanam**. - **Yoga Shastra**, Third Light, **Svopjnavritti** 2. **Svasthanad
yat parasthanam pramadasya vashad gatah**. **Tatraiva kramanam bhuyah
pratikramanamuchyate**. 3. (a) **Prati prativartanaṁ vā, shubheshu yogeshu
mokshaphaladeshu**. **Nishalyasya yateryat tadva jneyam pratikramanam**. (b)
**Aavashyak Nirukti**, Verse 1250 4. **Padikamanam padiyarana, pariharaṇa varana
niyatti ya ninda gariha sohi, padikamanam atthaha hoi**. [34] **Aavashyak
Nirukti** 1233

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 AtmA ghanaghora ghaTAoM se ghire hue sUrya ke sadRza hai| karmoM kI kAlI
ghaTAoM ke kAraNa AtmA kA parama teja dikhAI nahIM de rahA hai| vaha apane Apa
ko dIna hIna samajha rahA hai| bhUtakAla meM jo ajJAna aura pramAda ke kAraNa
bhUleM huI haiM, una bhUloM kA pariSkAra pratikramaNa ke dvArA hI sambhava hai|
pAparUpI roga ko naSTa karane meM pratikramaNa rAmabANa auSadha ke sadRza hai|
pratikramaNa jaina paramparA kA eka viziSTa zabda hai  /  pratikramaNa kA
zAbdika artha hai punaH lauTAnA  /  hama apanI maryAdAoM kA atikramaNa kara
apanI svabhAva-dazA se nikalakara vibhAvadazA meM cale gaye, ataH punaH svabhAva
rUpa sImA meM pratyAgamana karanA pratikramaNa hai| jo pApa mana, vacana aura
kAyA se svayaM kiye jAte haiM dUsaroM ke karavAye jAte haiM aura dUsaroM ke
dvArA kiye hue pApoM kA anumodana kiyA jAtA hai, una sabhI pApoM kI nivRtti
hetu, kiye gaye pApoM kI AlocanA karanA, nindA karanA pratikramaNa hai| AcArya
hemacandra ne likhA hai zubha yogoM meM se azubha yogoM meM gaye hue apane Apa
ko punaH zubha meM lauTA lAnA pratikramaNa hai|' AcArya haribhadra ne bhI
AvazyakavRtti meM yahI kahA gRhIta niyamoM aura maryAdA ke atikramaNa se puna:
lauTanA hI pratikramaNa hai| sAdhanA ke kSetra meM midhyAtva, avrata, pramAda,
kaSAya aura azubha yoga ye pAMcoM bhayaMkara doSa haiN| sAdhaka prAtaH aura
saMdhyA ke suhAvane samaya meM apane jIvana kA antarnirIkSaNa karatA hai, usa
samaya vaha gaharAI se cintana karatA hai ki vaha kahIM samyaktva ke prazasta
patha ko chor3akara mithyAtva kI kaMTIlI jhAr3iyoM meM to nahIM ulajhA hai ?
vrata ke svarUpa ko vismRta kara avrata ko to grahaNa nahIM kiyA hai ?
apramattatA ke nandanavana meM viharaNa ke sthAna para pramAda kI jhulasatI
marubhUmi meM to vicaraNa nahIM kiyA hai ? akaSAya ke sugandhita sarasabja bAga
ko chor3akara, kaSAya ke dhadhakate hue patha para to nahIM calA hai? mana,
vacana, kAyA kI pravRtti jo zubha yoga meM laganI cAhiye thI vaha azubha yoga
meM to nahIM lagI ? yadi maiM mithyAtva, avrata, pramAda, kaSAya aura azubha
yoga meM gayA hU~, to mujhe punaH samyaktva, vrata, akaSAya, apramAda aura zubha
yoga meM AnA caahie| isI dRSTi se pratikramaNa kiyA jAtA hai| - Avazyaka
niryukti, AvazyakacUrNi Avazyaka hAribhadrIyAvRtti, Avazyaka malayagirivRtti
prabhRti granthoM meM pratikramaNa ke sambandha meM bahuta vistAra ke sAtha
vicAra carcAeM kI gaI haiN| unhoMne pratikramaNa ke ATha paryAyavAcI zabda bhI
diye haiM, jo pratikramaNa ke vibhinna arthoM ko vyakta karate haiN| yadyapi
AThoM kA bhAva eka hI hai kintu ye 1. pratIpaM kramaNaM pratikraNam, ayamarthaH
zubhayogebhyo'zubhayogAntaraM krAntasya zubheSu evaM kramaNAtpratIpaM kramaNam
/  - yogazAstra, tRtIya prakAza, svopajJavRtti 2. svasthAnAd yatparasthAnaM
pramAdasya vazAd gataH  /  tatraiva kramaNaM bhUyaH pratikramaNamucyate  //  3.
(ka) prati prativartanaM vA, zubheSu yogeSu mokSaphaladeSu  /  niHzalyasya
yateryat tadvA jJeyaM pratikramaNam  //  (kha) Avazyakaniryukti, gAthA 1250 4.
paDikamaNaM paDiyaraNA, pariharaNA vAraNA niyattI ya nindA garihA sohI,
paDikamaNaM aTTahA hoi  //  [34] Avazyakaniryukti 1233

Page #38 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The words are helpful in understanding the complete meaning of Pratikraman. They
are as follows:  1. **Pratikraman** - This word has the prefix "Prati" and the
root "Kramu". "Prati" means - adverse and "Kramu" means - stepping. The return
of the seeker from the state of Mithyatva, Agnana, Asanyam, which is the
opposite of Samyagdarshan, Samyagjnana, Samyakcharitra, to his own state is
Pratikraman or repetition. 2. **Praticharana** - To practice restraint with
utmost care, staying away from the field of Asanyam, with purity is
Praticharana, i.e., to progress in the practice of restraint is Praticharana. 3.
**Pratiharana** - While the seeker is diligently advancing on the path of
practice, he encounters many obstacles in his path. Sometimes the attraction of
Asanyam wants to distract him from practice, sometimes favorable and unfavorable
circumstances arise. If the seeker does not maintain Pariharana (Pratiharana),
he may go astray. Therefore, he constantly abandons inauspicious yoga,
inattention and misconduct. This is Pariharana. 4. **Varana** - Varana means
prohibition (stopping). The seeker can attain liberation only by practicing
restraint, restraining himself from objects and passions. Therefore, the word
Varana has been used in the sense of Pratikraman to renounce objects and
passions. 5. **Nivritti** - Nivritti has been of paramount importance in Jain
practice. Even if there is a tendency towards inauspicious yoga due to
negligence, even while being constantly vigilant, one should quickly come to the
auspicious. The word Nivritti has come here as a synonym for Pratikraman to
renounce the inauspicious. 6. **Ninda** - The seeker keeps introspection.
Whatever sinful tendencies have occurred in his life, he should condemn those
sins with a pure heart. Self-condemnation is for polishing life. It creates
remorse in the mind towards sins and the seeker resolves that I will not commit
the sins that I committed carelessly in the future. Thus, the word Ninda has
been used in the sense of Pratikraman to condemn sins. 7. **Garda** - Ninda is
done by oneself, it does not require a witness and Garda is done in front of the
gurus. It is very difficult to reveal one's sins to the gurus without any
reservation. A seeker who does not have self-strength cannot do Garda. There is
intense remorse for sins in Garda. Garda is a Garudi mantra that removes the
poison of sin, by using which the seeker becomes free from sin. Therefore, Garda
is called a synonym for Pratikraman. 8. **Shuddhi** - Shuddhi means purity. Just
as the stain on the utensil is cleaned with sourness, the dirt on the gold is
purified by heating, the dirt of the woolen garment is cleaned with petrol, in
the same way the dirt of the heart is cleaned.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zabda pratikramaNa ke sampUrNa artha ko samajhane meM sahAyaka haiN| ve isa
prakAra haiM - 1. pratikramaNa' - isa zabda meM "prati" upasarga hai aura
"kramu" dhAtu hai| prati kA tAtparya hai - pratikUla aura kramu kA tAtparya hai
- pdnikssep| jina pravRttiyoM se sAdhaka samyagdarzana, samyagjJAna,
samyakcAritra rUpa svasthAna se haTakara mithyAtva, ajJAna, asaMyama rUpa
parasthAna meM calA gayA hai, usakA punaH apane Apa meM lauTa AnA pratikramaNa
yA punarAvRtti hai| 2. praticaraNA' - asaMyama kSetra se alaga-thalaga rahakara
atyanta sAvadhAna hokara vizuddhatA ke sAtha saMyama kA pAlana karanA
praticaraNA hai, arthAt saMyama sAdhanA meM agrasara honA praticaraNA hai| 3.
pratiharaNA - sAdhaka ko sAdhanA ke patha para mustaidI se apane kadama bar3hAte
samaya usake patha meM aneka prakAra kI bAdhAeM AtI haiN| kabhI asaMyama kA
AkarSaNa use sAdhanA se vicalita karanA cAhatA hai to kabhI anukUla aura
pratikUla paristhitiyA~ utpanna hotI haiN| yadi sAdhaka pariharaNA (pratiharaNA)
na rakhe to vaha pathabhraSTa ho sakatA hai| isIlie vaha pratipala pratikSaNa
azubha yoga, durdhyAna aura durAcaraNoM kA tyAga karatA hai| yahI pariharaNA
hai| 4. vAraNA - vAraNA kA artha niSedha (rokanA) hai| sAdhaka viSaya, kaSAyoM
se apane Apako roka kara saMyama-sAdhanA karate hue hI mokSa prApta kara sakatA
hai| isaliye viSaya, kaSAyoM se nivRtta hone ke liye pratikramaNa artha meM
vAraNA zabda kA prayoga huA hai| 5. nivRtti - jaina sAdhanA meM nivRtti kA
atyanta mahattva rahA hai| satata sAvadhAna rahane para bhI kabhI pramAda ke
vaza azubha yogoM meM usakI pravRtti ho jAye to use zIghra hI zubha meM AnA
caahiye| azubha se nivRtta hone ke liye hI yahA~ pratikramaNa kA paryAyavAcI
zabda nivRtti AyA hai| 6. nindA - sAdhaka antarnirIkSaNa karatA rahatA hai|
usake jIvana meM jo bhI pApayukta pravRtti huI ho, zuddha hRdaya se use una
pApoM kI nindA karanI caahiye| svanindA jIvana ko mA~jane ke liye hai| usase
pApoM ke prati mana meM glAni paidA hotI hai aura sAdhaka yaha dRr3ha nizvaya
karatA hai ki jo pApa maiMne asAvadhAnI se kiye the ve aba bhaviSya meM nahIM
kruuNgaa| isa prakAra pApoM kI nindA karane ke liye pratikramaNa ke artha meM
nindA zabda kA vyavahAra huA hai| 7. gardA - nindA apane-ApakI kI jAtI hai,
usake liye sAkSI kI AvazyakatA nahIM hotI aura gardA gurujanoM ke samakSa kI
jAtI hai| guruoM ke samakSa niHzalya hokara apane pApoM ko prakaTa kara denA
bahuta hI kaThina kArya hai| jisa sAdhaka meM Atmabala nahIM hotA, vaha gardA
nahIM kara sktaa| gardA meM pApoM ke prati tIvra pazcAttApa hotA hai| gardA
pAparUpI viSa ko utArane vAlA gAruDI maMtra hai, jisake prayoga se sAdhaka pApa
se mukta ho jAtA hai| isaliye garhA ko pratikramaNa kA paryAyavAcI kahA hai| 8.
zuddhi - zuddhi kA artha nirmalatA hai| jaise bartana para lage huye dAga ko
khaTAI se sApha kiyA jAtA hai, sone para lage huye maila ko tapA kara zuddha
kiyA jAtA hai, UnI vastra ke maila ko peTrola se sApha kiyA jAtA hai, vaise hI
hRdaya ke maila 1. paDikkamaNaM punraavRttiH| 2. atyAdarAt caraNA paDicaraNA
akAryaparihAraH kAryapravRttizca  /  3. asubhabhAva-niyattaNaM niyttii| -
AvazyakacUrNi - AvazyakacUrNi - AvazyakacUrNi [35]

Page #39 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
It is purified by **pratikraman**. Therefore it is called **shuddhi**. Acharya
Bhadrabahu has encouraged the seeker to deeply contemplate on four main topics
in **pratikraman**. From this perspective, there are four types of
**pratikraman**: 1. For **Shraman** and **Shravak**, there are provisions for
**mahavrata** and **anuvrata** respectively. To avoid any faults, constant
vigilance is necessary. Although **Shraman** and **Shravak** remain constantly
vigilant, sometimes due to carelessness, there may be lapses in non-violence,
truthfulness, non-stealing, celibacy, and non-possession. In such cases,
**Shraman** and **Shravak** should perform **pratikraman** for their
purification. 2. A code of conduct for **Shraman** and **Shravak** is laid down
in the **Agam** literature. For **Shraman**, there are many provisions like
**swadhyay**, **dhyan**, **pratilikhan**, etc., while for **Shravak**, there is
also a provision for daily practice. If there is a lapse in following these
provisions, then **pratikraman** should be performed in that regard. Even a
slight carelessness towards one's duties is not right. 3. It is very difficult
to prove abstract substances like the soul through direct evidence. They can
only be proved through evidence like **Agam**. If doubt arises in the mind
regarding these abstract elements, whether they exist or not, then the seeker
should perform **pratikraman** for its purification. 4. The sages have forbidden
harmful actions like violence, etc. The seeker should not perform these harmful
actions. If, due to carelessness, they are performed, then purification should
be done. In the **Anuyogadwar Sutra**, two types of **pratikraman** are
mentioned: **dravya pratikraman** and **bhav pratikraman**. In **dravya
pratikraman**, the seeker performs **pratikraman** while sitting in one place,
without any use, with the desire for fame. This **pratikraman** works like a
machine, lacking contemplation. There is no remorse in the mind for sins. He
continues to commit those lapses again and again. From a real perspective, the
purification that should happen does not happen through that **pratikraman**.
**Bhav pratikraman** is that in which the seeker experiences intense remorse in
his inner mind for his sins. He thinks, why did I commit these lapses? With firm
determination, he criticizes those sins usefully. He makes a firm resolve that
these faults will not occur again in the future. Thus, **bhav pratikraman** is
the real **pratikraman**. In **bhav pratikraman**, the seeker neither indulges
in false beliefs and other evil thoughts himself, nor encourages others to do
so, nor approves of indulging in evil thoughts. Generally, it is understood that
**pratikraman** is for the purification of faults committed in the past. But
Acharya Bhadrabahu has explained that **pratikraman** does not only purify
faults committed in the past, but also purifies those committed in the present
and future. 1. **Padisiddhanam karane, kicchanam akaranepaddikamanam.
Asaddahaneyatha, viviriyaparuvanaye a.** - **Aavashyakaniyukti Gatha 1268** 2.
**Micchattai na gacchai na ya gacchavei na anujane. Jam man-vay-kaehin tam
bhaniyam bhavpaddikamanam.** - **Aavashyakaniyukti (Ha.Bha.Vr.)** 3. **(a)
Aavashyakaniyukti (b) Pratikraman shabdo hi atra ashubhayoganivrittimatrartha
samanyatah parihrigrite, tatha cha satyateetavishayam pratikramanam nindadwarena
ashubhayoganivrittireveti, pratyupannavishayapi sanvardwarena
ashubhayoganivrittireva anagatavishayam api pratyakhyanadwarena
ashubhayoganivrittireveti na dosha iti.** - **Acharya Haribhadra** [36]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 ko pratikramaNa dvArA zuddha kiyA jAtA hai| isaliye use zuddhi kahA hai| AcArya
bhadrabAhu ne sAdhaka ko utprerita kiyA hai ki vaha pratikramaNa meM pramukha
rUpa se cAra viSayoM para gaharAI se anucintana kre| isa dRSTi se pratikramaNa
ke cAra bheda banate haiM - 1. zramaNa aura zrAvaka ke liye kramazaH mahAvratoM
aura aNuvratoM kA vidhAna hai| usameM doSa na lage, isake liye satata sAvadhAnI
Avazyaka hai| yadyapi zramaNa aura zrAvaka satata sAvadhAna rahatA hai, tathApi
kabhI-kabhI asAvadhAnIvaza ahiMsA, satya, acaurya, brahmacarya, aparigraha meM
skhalanA ho gaI ho to zramaNa aura zrAvaka ko usakI zuddhi hetu pratikramaNa
karanA caahiye| 2. zramaNa aura zrAvakoM ke liye eka AcArasaMhitA AgamasAhitya
meM nirUpita hai| zramaNa ke liye svAdhyAya, dhyAna, pratilekhana Adi aneka
vidhAna haiM to zrAvaka ke liye bhI dainaMdina sAdhanA kA vidhAna hai| yadi una
vidhAnoM kI pAlanA meM skhalanA ho jAye to usa sambandha meM pratikramaNa karanA
caahiye| kartavyoM ke prati jarA sI asAvadhAnI bhI ThIka nahIM hai| 3. AtmA Adi
amUrta padArthoM ko pratyakSa pramANa ke dvArA siddha karanA bahuta kaThina hai|
ve to Agama Adi pramANoM ke dvArA siddha kiye jA sakate haiN| una amUrta tattvoM
ke sambandha meM mana meM yaha socanA ki ve haiM yA nahIM, yadi isa prakAra mana
meM azraddhA utpanna huI ho to usakI zuddhi ke liye sAdhaka ko pratikramaNa
karanA caahiye| 4. hiMsA Adi duSkRtya, jinakA maharSiyoM ne niSedha kiyA hai,
sAdhaka una duSkRtyoM kA pratipAdana na kre| yadi asAvadhAnIvaza kabhI
pratipAdana kara diyA ho to zuddhi kre| anuyogadvAra sUtra meM pratikramaNa ke
do prakAra batAye gaye haiM -dravyapratikramaNa aura bhAvapratikramaNa  /
dravyapratikramaNa meM sAdhaka eka sthAna para avasthita hokara binA upayoga ke
yazaprApti kI abhilASA se pratikramaNa karatA hai| yaha pratikramaNa yaMtra kI
taraha calatA hai, usameM cintana kA abhAva hotA hai| pApoM ke prati mana meM
glAni nahIM hotii| vaha punaH-punaH una skhalanAoM ko karatA rahatA hai|
vAstavika dRSTi se jaisI zuddhi honI cAhiye, vaha usa pratikramaNa se nahIM ho
paatii| bhAvapratikramaNa vaha hai, jisameM sAdhaka ke antarmAnasa meM pApoM ke
prati tIvra glAni hotI hai| vaha socatA hai, maiMne isa prakAra skhalanAeM kyoM
kI? vaha dRr3ha nizcaya ke sAtha upayogapUrvaka una pApoM kI AlocanA karatA
haiN| bhaviSya meM ve doSa punaH na lageM, isake liye dRr3ha saMkalpa karatA
hai| isa prakAra bhAvapratikramaNa vAstavika pratikramaNa hai| bhAvapratikramaNa
meM sAdhaka na svayaM mithyAtva Adi durbhAvoM meM gamana karatA hai aura na
dUsaroM ko gamana karane ke liye utprerita karatA hai aura na durbhAvoM meM
gamana karane kA anumodana karatA hai| sAdharaNatayA yaha samajhA jAtA hai ki
pratikramaNa atItakAla meM lage huye doSoM kI parizuddhi ke liye hai| para
AcArya bhadrabAhu ne batAyA ki pratikramaNa kevala atItakAla meM lage doSoM kI
hI parizuddhi nahIM karatA apitu vaha vartamAna aura bhaviSya 1. paDisiddhANaM
karaNe, kiccANamakaraNe paDikkamaNaM  /  asaddahaNe ya tahA, vivarIyaparUvaNAe
a|| - Avazyakaniyukti gAthA 1268 2. micchAttAI Na gacchai Na ya gacchAvei
nnaannujaannei| jaM maNa-vaya-kAehiM taM bhaNiyaM bhAvapaDikammaNaM  //  -
Avazyakaniyukti (hA.bha.vR.) 3. (ka) Avazyakaniyukti (kha) pratikramaNazabdo hi
atrAzubhayoganivRttimAtrArthaH sAmAnyataH parihyagRte, tathA ca satyatItaviSayaM
pratikramaNaM nindAdvAreNa azubhayoganivRttireveti, pratyupannaviSayapi
saMvaradvAreNa azubhayoga-nivRttireva anAgataviSayamapi pratyAkhyAnadvAreNa
azubhayoganivRttirevati na doSa iti  /  - AcArya haribhadra [36]

Page #40 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
It also purifies the faults. The purification of the faults incurred in the past
is done in the **Aalocna Pratikraman**, and even in the present, the seeker, by
remaining engaged in **Sanwar Sadhana**, becomes free from sins. Along with
this, in **Pratikraman**, he accepts **Pratyakhyan**, which saves him from
future faults as well. He resolves, "I will be free from the inauspicious yoga
of the past, I will be inclined towards the auspicious yoga in the present, and
I will also be inclined towards the auspicious yoga in the future."  From the
perspective of time, there are five types of **Pratikraman** - 1. **Daivaasik**,
2. **Raatrik**, 3. **Paakshik**, 4. **Chaaturmaasik**, and 5. **Saanvatsarik**.
1. **Daivaasik** - **Pratikraman** done at the end of the day is **Daivaasik**.
2. **Raatrik** - At the end of the night, to purify the faults incurred during
the night.  3. **Paakshik** - At the end of fifteen days, on the days of
**Amavasya** and **Poornima**, to contemplate the sins committed throughout the
fortnight and perform **Pratikraman** is **Paakshik Pratikraman**.  4.
**Chaaturmaasik** - After four months, on the days of **Kartik Poornima** and
**Phalguni Poornima**, to criticize the faults incurred in the four months and
perform **Pratikraman** is **Chaaturmaasik**.  5. **Saanvatsarik** - On the
fiftieth or fifty-first day of **Aashaadhi Poornima**, to perform
**Pratikraman** for the faults incurred throughout the year.  Here, there may be
a natural curiosity - when the seeker performs **Pratikraman** regularly every
morning and evening, then what is the need for **Paakshik**, **Chaaturmaasik**,
and **Saanvatsarik Pratikraman**? The solution is - just as a house is cleaned
daily, but on festival days, special cleaning is done, similarly, in daily
**Pratikraman**, the transgressions are criticized, but on festival days, with
special awareness, life is observed, examined, and the sins are washed away.  In
**Sthanaanga**, six types of **Pratikraman** are described from other
perspectives. They are as follows -  1. **Uchchar Pratikraman** -
**Pratikraman** for the faults incurred while walking on the way while
defecating and cleaning the stool with awareness.  2. **Prasravan Pratikraman**
- **Pratikraman** for the act of urinating after cleaning the urine with
awareness.  3. **Itvar Pratikraman** - Performing **Pratikraman** for short
periods like daily, nightly, etc.  4. **Yaavatkath Pratikraman** - The
resolution to be free from sin for the entire life, which is taken for the
duration of **Mahavrat** etc., is **Yaavatkath Pratikraman**.  5. **Yatkinchit-
Mithya Pratikraman** - Even while living life with caution, if any kind of
uncontrolled behavior occurs due to carelessness or inattentiveness, to accept
that mistake at that moment and to repent for it.  6. **Swapnaantik
Pratikraman** - To repent for a bad dream seen in a dream, which is in the form
of a vice or desire.  1. **Sthanaanga 6/5/37** [37]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 ke doSoM kI bhI zuddhi karatA hai| atItakAla meM lage huye doSoM kI zuddhi to
AlocanA pratikramaNa meM kI jAtI hai, vartamAna meM bhI sAdhaka saMvara sAdhanA
meM lagA rahane se pApoM se nivRtta ho jAtA hai| sAtha hI pratikramaNa meM
pratyAkhyAna grahaNa karatA hai, jisase bhAvI doSoM se bhI baca jAtA hai|
bhUtakAla ke azubha yoga se nivRtti, vartamAna meM zubha yoga se pravRtti aura
bhaviSya meM bhI zubha yoga meM pravRtti karU~gA, isa prakAra vaha saMkalpa
karatA hai| kAla kI dRSTi se pratikramaNa ke pA~ca prakAra hI batAye haiM - 1.
daivasika, 2. rAtrika, 3. pAkSika, 4. cAturmAsika aura 5. saaNvtsrik| 1.
daivasika - dina ke aMta meM kiyA jAne vAlA pratikramaNa daivasika hai| 2.
rAtrika - rAtri meM jo doSa lage hoM - unakI rAtri ke aMta meM nivRtti krnaa| 3.
pAkSika - paMdraha dina ke aMta meM amAvasyA aura pUrNimA ke dina sampUrNa pakSa
meM Acarita pApoM kA vicAra kara pratikramaNa karanA pAkSika pratikramaNa hai|
4. cAturmAsika - cAra mAha ke pazcAt kArtikI pUrNimA, phAlgunI pUrNimA ke dina
cAra mahinoM meM lage hue doSoM kI AlocanA kara pratikramaNa karanA cAturmAsika
hai| 5. sAMvatsarika - ASAr3hI pUrNimA ke unapacAsa yA pacAsaveM dina varSa
bhara meM lage hue doSoM kA pratikramaNa krnaa| yahA~ para yaha sahaja jijJAsA
ho sakatI hai ki jaba sAdhaka pratidina prAta:-sAyaM niyamita pratikramaNa
karatA hai, phira pAkSika, cAturmAsika aura sAMvatsarika pratikramaNa kI kyA
AvazyakatA hai ? samAdhAna hai - pratidina makAna kI saphAI kI jAtI hai tathApi
parva dinoM meM vizeSa saphAI kI jAtI hai, vaise hI pratidina pratikramaNa meM
aticAroM kI AlocanA kI jAtI hai, para parva dinoM meM vizeSa rUpa se jAgarUka
raha kara jIvana kA nirIkSaNa, parIkSaNa aura pApa kA prakSAlana kiyA jAtA hai|
sthAnAMga' meM pratikramaNa ke cha: prakAra anya dRSTiyoM se pratipAdita hai| ve
isa prakAra haiM - 1. uccArapratikramaNa - vivekapUrvaka purISatyAga, mala
paraTha kara Ane ke samaya mArga meM gamanAgamana sambandhI jo doSa lagate haiM,
unakA prtikrmnn| 2. prasravaNapratikramaNa - vivekapUrvaka mUtra ko paraThane ke
pazcAt IryA kA prtikrmnn| 3. itvarapratikramaNa - daivasika, rAtrika Adi
svalpakAlIna pratikramaNa krnaa| 4. yAvatkathikapratikramaNa - mahAvrata Adi jo
yAvatkAla ke liye grahaNa kiye jAte haiM arthAt sampUrNa jIvana ke liye pApa se
nivRtta hone kA jo saMkalpa kiyA jAtA hai, vaha yAvatkathikapratikramaNa hai| 5.
yatkiMcit-mithyA pratikramaNa - sAvadhAnIpUrvaka jIvanayApana karate hue bhI
pramAda athavA asAvadhAnI se kisI bhI prakAra asaMyamarUpa AcaraNa ho jAne para
usI kSaNa usa bhUla ko svIkAra kara lenA aura usake prati pazcAttApa krnaa| 6.
svapnAntikapratikramaNa - svapna meM koI vikAra-vAsanA-rUpa kusvapna dekhane
para usake sambandha meM.pazcAttApa krnaa| 1. sthAnAMga 6/5/37 [37]

Page #41 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The six types of *pratikramna* that have been expounded are primarily related to
the life-conduct of a *shraman*. In brief, the *pratikramna* that is necessary
for all seekers can be classified as follows: *pratikramna* of 25 *mithyatva*,
14 *jnana-atichar*, and 18 *papasthanas*. Secondly, *pratikramna* of the five
great vows, *asanyam* of mind, speech, and body, faults related to walking,
speaking, begging, receiving and depositing, and excretion of stool and urine,
etc., is also necessary for *shraman* seekers. *Pratikramna* of transgressions
in the five *anu-vratas*, three *guna-vratas*, and four *shiksha-vratas* is
necessary for *vrati* *shravakas*. For those seekers who have taken the
*sanlekhana* vow, *pratikramna* of the five transgressions of *sanlekhana* is
necessary. *Pratikramna* is the lifeblood of Jain practice. There is no action
in which a slip-up due to carelessness cannot occur. Whether while relieving
oneself of minor excretions, while performing ablutions, while copying, or while
going here and there for alms, the seeker should be constantly aware of these
slip-ups. Without neglecting these slip-ups even in the slightest, one should
perform *pratikramna* to be free from these faults. Because *pratikramna* is an
unparalleled action for polishing life. In *pratikramna*, the seeker deeply
examines his life, there is unity in his mind, speech, and body. While
practicing, the seeker sometimes becomes deviated from his practice due to
anger, pride, delusion, or greed, he makes a mistake, then at the time of
*pratikramna*, he deeply observes his life and refines each and every fault. If
he could not reveal the hidden faults in his mind due to shame, he reveals those
faults too in the presence of the *sadguru* or in the presence of the Lord. Just
as a skilled physician examines and reveals the remaining disease in the body
through X-rays, etc., similarly, in *pratikramna*, the seeker observes each
tendency, expresses those faults, and becomes light. *Pratikramna* is an
unparalleled action in the life of a seeker. It is that diary in which the
seeker writes down the list of his faults and undertakes to be free from each
and every fault. He is called a skilled businessman who looks every evening to
see how much profit he has made today. A businessman who does not know his
income cannot be a successful businessman. The seeker should see what duty I
should have done today, but due to carelessness I could not do it? I should not
have been alienated from my duty. In this way, he remembers his mistakes.
Remembering his mistakes makes him aware of his true situation. Until the
mistakes are remembered, the mistakes are not understood, then they cannot be
refined. The seeker often does not consider his mistakes as mistakes, but
considers them right, but in reality, they are his mistakes. Many people, even
though they understand the mistake, do not accept it. But when the seeker
introspects, he becomes aware of his mistake. It is said that the famous thinker
Franklin improved his life through a diary. He had many vices in his life. He
used to write his vices in his diary and then deeply contemplate them, thinking
how many mistakes I have made this week. I will not repeat these mistakes next
week. In this way, through the diary, he gradually removed the vices of life and
became a great virtuous thinker. *Pratikramna* is the best undertaking to
improve life, the axis of spiritual life. After criticizing one's own faults, a
feeling of repentance arises, and all faults are burnt and destroyed by the fire
of that repentance. [38]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 ye jo bhI pratikramaNa ke cha: prakAra pratipAdita kiye gaye haiM, inakA mukhya
sambandha zramaNa kI jIvanacaryA se hai| saMkSepa meM jinakA pratikramaNa karanA
Avazyaka hai, unakA saMkSepa meM vargIkaraNa isa prakAra ho sakatA hai - 25
mithyAtva, 14 jJAnAticAra aura aThAraha pApasthAnoM kA pratikramaNa sabhI
sAdhakoM ke liye Avazyaka hai| dUsarI bAta paMca mahAvrata; mana, vANI, zarIra
kA asaMyama; gamana, bhASaNa, yAcanA, grahaNa-nikSepa evaM mala-mUtra-visarjana
Adi se sambandhita doSoM kA pratikramaNa bhI zramaNa sAdhakoM ke liye Avazyaka
hai| paMca aNuvratoM, tIna guNavratoM aura cAra zikSAvratoM meM lagane vAle
aticAroM kA pratikramaNa vratI zrAvakoM ke liye Avazyaka hai| jina sAdhakoM ne
saMlekhanA vrata grahaNa kara rakhA ho, unake liye saMlekhanA ke pA~ca aticAroM
kA pratikramaNa Avazyaka hai| pratikramaNa jaina sAdhanA kA prANatattva hai|
aisI koI bhI kriyA nahIM jisameM pramAdavaza skhalanA na ho ske| cAhe laghuzaMkA
se nivRtta hote samaya, cAhe zaucanivRtti karate samaya, cAhe pratilekhanA
karate samaya, cAhe bhikSA ke liye idhara-udhara jAte samaya sAdhaka ko una
skhalanAoM ke prati satata jAgarUka rahanA caahiye| una skhalanAoM ke sambandha
meM kiMcit mAtra bhI upekSA na rakha kara una doSoM se nivRtti hetu pratikramaNa
karanA caahiye| kyoMki pratikramaNa jIvana ko mAMjane kI eka apUrva kriyA hai|
sAdhaka pratikramaNa meM apane jIvana kA gaharAI se nirIkSaNa karatA hai, usake
mana meM, vacana meM, kAyA meM ekarUpatA hotI hai| sAdhaka sAdhanA karate samaya
kabhI krodha, mAna, mAyA, lobha se sAdhanAcyuta ho jAtA hai, usase bhUla ho jAtI
hai to vaha pratikramaNa ke samaya apane jIvana kA gaharAI se avalokana kara
eka-eka doSa kA pariSkAra karatA hai| yadi mana meM chipe hue doSa ko lajjA ke
kAraNa prakaTa nahIM kara sakA, una doSoM ko bhI sadguru ke samakSa yA bhagavAn
kI sAkSI se prakaTa kara detA hai| jaise kuzala cikitsaka parIkSaNa karatA hai,
aura zarIra meM rahI huI vyAdhi ko eksa-re Adi ke dvArA batA detA hai, vaise hI
pratikramaNa meM sAdhaka pratyeka pravRtti kA avalokana karate hue, una doSoM ko
vyakta kara halkA banatA hai| pratikramaNa sAdhaka-jIvana kI eka apUrva kriyA
hai| yaha vaha DAyarI hai jisameM sAdhaka apane doSoM kI sUcI likha kara eka-eka
doSa se mukta hone kA upakrama karatA hai  /  vahI kuzala vyApArI kahalAtA hai,
jo pratidina sAyaMkAla dekhatA hai ki Aja ke dina maiMne kitanA lAbha prApta
kiyA hai| jisa vyApArI ko apanI AmadanI kA jJAna nahIM hai, vaha saphala vyApArI
nahIM ho sktaa| sAdhaka ko dekhanA cAhiye ki Aja ke dina aisA kaunasA kartavya
thA jo mujhe karanA cAhiye thA, kiMtu pramAda ke kAraNa maiM use nahIM kara sakA
? mujhe apane kartavya se vimukha nahIM honA cAhiye thaa| isa prakAra vaha apanI
bhUloM kA smaraNa karatA hai  /  bhUloM kA smaraNa karane se use apanI sahI
sthiti kA parijJAna ho jAtA hai| jaba taka bhUloM kA smaraNa nahIM hogA, bhUloM
ko bhUla nahIM samajhA jAyegA, taba taka unakA pariSkAra ho nahIM sktaa| sAdhaka
aneka bAra apanI bhUloM ko bhUla na mAna kara unheM sahI mAnatA hai para
vastuta: vaha usakI bhUleM hI hotI haiN| kitane hI vyakti bhUla ko bhUla
samajhate hue bhI use svIkAra nahIM krte| para jaba sAdhaka antarnirIkSaNa
karatA hai to use apanI bhUla kA parijJAna hotA hai| kahA jAtA hai ki
suprasiddha vicAraka phreMkalina ne apane jIvana ko DAyarI ke mAdhyama se
sudhArA thaa| usake jIvana meM aneka durguNa the| vaha apane durguNoM ko DAyarI
meM likhA karatA thA aura phira gaharAI se unakA cintana karatA thA ki isa
saptAha meM maiMne kitanI bhUleM kI haiN| agale saptAha meM ina bhUloM kI
punarAvRtti nahIM kruuNgaa| isa prakAra DAyarI ke dvArA usane jIvana ke durguNoM
ko dhIre-dhIre nikAla diyA thA aura eka mahAna sadguNI cintaka bana gayA thaa|
pratikramaNa jIvana ko sudhArane kA zreSTha upakrama hai, AdhyAtmika jIvana kI
dhurI hai| AtmadoSoM kI AlocanA karane se pazcAttApa kI bhAvanA jAgRta hone
lagatI hai aura usa pazcAttApa kI agni se sabhI doSa jalakara naSTa ho jAte
haiN| [38]

Page #42 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Pāpāchāran is like a surgical wound. If it is not removed, but kept hidden in
the mind, its poison will continue to grow inside and that poison will ruin the
life of the seeker. A major weakness of humans is that they always remember
their virtues but forget their vices. They also forget the virtues of others and
remember their vices. This is why they rarely present a list of their virtues
and never tire of singing the tales of others' vices. While the seeker should
see the virtues of others and their own vices. The eight synonyms of Pratikraman
include the words "ninda" and "garha". Condemnation of others leads to karma
bondage and self-condemnation leads to the destruction of karma. When the seeker
examines their life, they see thousands of vices in their life. They try to
remove those vices gradually. This is the characteristic of a seeker's life that
they are a seeker of virtues. Their vision is like that of a swan. Like a swan,
they accept the path of virtues, they pick up the pearls. They do not put their
mouth on excrement like a crow. Pravarana in Buddhism Just as there is a
provision for seekers to perform Pratikraman at the end of the night and the end
of the day in Jainism, there are also provisions for liberation from sin in
other traditions. The word Pratikraman is not used in Buddhism, but instead the
words Pratikarma, Pravarana and Papadeshana etc. are used. In Udāna, the
Tathagata Buddha said Papadeshana is necessary for the purity and divinity of
life. By criticizing the conduct of sin, a person deeply examines the faults of
sin in relation to our life Pravarana has been of great importance in Buddhism.
The burden becomes lighter. After the rainy season, the monastic community
gathers and presents what faults they have committed in the rainy season? This
is Pravarana. In this, the seen, heard and suspected offenses are rectified.
This leads to mutual humility. The method of Pravarana was as follows - the
chief monk informs the monastic community that today is Pravarana. First, the
senior monk sits on the Kukkuta seat with the Uttarasangha on his shoulder. With
folded hands, he requests the community that I am performing Pravarana before
you of the seen, heard, suspected offenses. The community should tell me my
offenses, I will explain them. He repeats this three times. After that, the
younger monk and then all the monks in turn repeat their sins. In this way,
fortnightly purification is done through Pravarana. Pravarana is done on the
fourteenth and full moon. Earlier, at least five monks were considered necessary
for Pravarana. Later, four, three, two and finally one monk was also allowed to
perform Pravarana. In special circumstances, Pravarana could be done very
briefly and at other times as well. - - - In the text 'Bodhicharyavatara',
Acharya Shantideva has written - One should repeat Triskandha, Papadeshana-
Punyanumodana and Bodhiparinamana three times at night and three times during
the day, so that unintentional mistakes are mitigated. 1. Udāna 5/5, Translator
Jagdish Kashyap, Maha Bodhi Society, Sarnath 2. Anujānami bhikkhave, vassam,
buṭṭhānaṁ, bhikkhūṁ tīhi ṭhānehi pakāretu diṭṭhena vā sutena vā parisankāya vā.
Sā vo bhavissati ajñāmajñānulomata āpattivuṭṭhānata vinayapurekkhā ratā.
Mahāvagga, p. 167 3. Bodhicharyavatara 5/98 - [39]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pApAcaraNa zalya ke sadRza hai| yadi use bAhara nahIM nikAlA gayA, mana meM hI
chipA kara rakhA gayA to usakA viSa andara hI andara bar3hatA calA jAyegA aura
vaha viSa sAdhaka ke jIvana ko barabAda kara degaa| mAnava kI eka bar3I kamajorI
yaha hai ki vaha apane sadguNoM ko to sadA smaraNa rakhatA hai kintu durguNoM ko
bhUla jAtA hai| sAtha hI vaha anya vyaktiyoM ke sadguNoM ko bhUla kara unake
durguNoM ko smaraNa rakhatA hai| yahI kAraNa hai ki vaha yadAkadA apane sadguNoM
kI sUcI prastuta karatA hai aura dUsaroM ke durguNoM kI gAthAeM gAtA huA nahIM
aghaataa| jabaki sAdhaka ko dUsaroM ke sadguNa aura apane durguNa dekhane cAhiye
/  pratikramaNa ke ATha paryAyavAcI zabdoM meM nindA aura garhA zabda prayukta
huye haiN| dUsaroM kI nindA se karma bandhana hotA hai aura svanindA se karmoM
kI nirjarA hotI hai| jaba sAdhaka apane jIvana kA nirIkSaNa karatA hai to use
apane jIvana meM hajAroM durguNa dikhAI dete haiN| una durguNoM ko vaha dhIre-
dhIre nikAlane kA prayAsa karatA hai  /  sAdhaka ke jIvana kI yaha vizeSatA hai
ki vaha guNagrAhI hotA hai usakI dRSTi haMsa dRSTi hotI hai| vaha haMsa kI
taraha sadguNoM ke patha ko grahaNa karatA hai, muktAoM ko cugatA hai| vaha kAka
kI taraha viSThA para mu~ha nahIM rkhtaa| bauddhadharma meM pravAraNA
jainadharma meM vyavasthita rUpa se nizAnta aura divasAnta meM jisa prakAra
sAdhakoM ke liye pratikramaNa karane kA vidhAna hai, usI prakAra pApa se mukta
hone ke vidhAna anya paramparAoM meM bhI pAye jAte haiN| bauddhadharma meM
pratikramaNa zabda kA prayoga nahIM huA hai para usake sthAna para pratikarma,
pravAraNA aura pApadezanA prabhRti zabdoM kA prayoga huaa| udAna meM tathAgata
buddha ne kahA jIvana kI nirmalatA evaM divyatA ke liye pApadezanA Avazyaka hai|
pApa ke AcaraNa kI AlocanA karane se vyakti pApa ke bauddhadharma meM pravAraNA
kA atyadhika mahatva rahA hai| varSAvAsa ke. doSoM ke sambandha meM gaharAI se
nirIkSaNa karatA ki hamAre jIvana bhAra se halkA ho jAtA hai| khulA huA pApa
cipakatA nahIM pazcAt bhikSusaMgha ekatrita hotA hai aura apane kRta aparAdhoM
meM prastuta varSAvAsa meM kyA-kyA doSa lage haiM ? yaha pravAraNA hai| isameM
dRSTa, zruta parizaMkita aparAdhoM kA parimArjana kiyA jaataa| jisase paraspara
vinaya kA anumodana hotA  /  pravAraNA kI vidhi isa prakAra thI - pramukha
bhikSu saMgha ko yaha sUcita karatA ki Aja pravAraNA hai| sarvaprathama sthavira
bhikSu uttarAsaMgha ko apane kaMdhe para rakhakara kukkuTa Asana para baitthtaa|
hAtha jor3akara saMgha se yaha nivedana karatA hai ki meM dRSTa, zruta,
parizaMkita aparAdhoM kI Apake sAmane pravAraNA kara rahA huuN| saMgha mere
aparAdhoM ko batAye, maiM unakA spaSTIkaraNa kruuNgaa| vaha isa bAta ko tIna
bAra doharAtA hai| usake bAda usase choTA bhikSu aura phira kramazaH sabhI
bhikSu doharAte haiM apane pApoM ko| isa prakAra pravAraNA se pAkSika zuddhi kI
jAtI hai| pravAraNA caturdazI aura pUrNimA ko kI jaatii| pahale kama se kama
pA~ca bhikSu pravAraNA meM Avazyaka mAne jAte the| usake bAda cAra, tIna, do
aura anta meM eka bhikSu bhI pravAraNA kara sakatA hai yaha anumati dI gaI hai|
vizeSa sthiti meM pravAraNA bahuta hI saMkSepa meM aura anya samaya meM bhI kI
jA sakatI thii| - - - bodhicaryAvatAra' nAmaka grantha meM AcArya zAntideva ne
likhA hai- rAtri meM tIna bAra aura dina meM tIna bAra triskandha, pApadezanA-
puNyAnumodanA aura bodhipariNAmanA kI AvRtti karanI cAhiye, jisase anajAne meM
huI skhalanAoM kA zamana ho 1. udAna 5/5, anuvAdaka jagadIza kAzyapa, mahAbodhi
sabhA, sAranAtha 2. anujAnAmi bhikkhave, vassaM, buTThAnaM, bhikkhUna tIhi
ThAnehi pakAretu diTThena vA sutena vA parisaMkAya vA  /  sA vo bhavissati
ajJAmajJAnulomatA ApattivuTThAnatA vinayapurekkhA ratA  /  mahAvagga, pR0 167 3.
bodhicaryAvatAra 5/98 - [39]

Page #43 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
It goes. Acharya Shantideva has explained two types of Papadeshna -
Prakritisavadya and Prajnaptisavadya. Prakritisavadya is that which is
inherently blameworthy, such as violence, falsehood, theft, etc., and
Prajnaptisavadya is the violation of a vow after taking it, such as Vikal food,
possessions, etc. In Bodhicharyavatara, Acharya Shantideva writes - "Whatever
Prakritisavadya and Prajnaptisavadya sins I, the ignorant fool, have committed,
I bow down to the Lord with folded hands, trembling with sorrow, for the
atonement of all of them. O heroes! Accept the offense as an offense. I will not
commit this sin again." Buddhist Pravarana, as the senior monk recites the
Acharya Samhita, and after reading each rule, he expects the monks present to
reveal it to the Sangha if anyone has violated the rule. In the Jain tradition,
there is a provision for criticizing sins before the Guru or the Geetarth. But
there is no tradition of revealing sin before the Sangha. Revealing sin before
the Sangha can also be misused by the Agiitarth person. It can also lead to a
situation of condemnation. Therefore, Jainism has made a provision for criticism
before the Geetarth. The Pravarana before the Sangha can be compared to the
collective Pratikraman prevalent today. Pratikraman and Sandhya Like Pratikraman
in the Vedic tradition, there is a provision for Sandhya. It is a religious
ritual performed both in the morning and evening. Sandhya means - Sam - to
meditate in the best way possible. To meditate with devotion, with faith, being
engrossed in the devotion of one's Ishtadev. The second meaning of Sandhya is
union/conjunction/relationship. The union or relationship of the devotee with
the Supreme Being during worship. The third meaning is the religious rituals
performed at the junction of night and day, that is Sandhya. In this Sandhya, an
attempt is made to purify the body by sprinkling water on the body with the
Vishnu mantra. The seat is purified by sprinkling water on it, chanting the
praise of Mother Earth. Then there is contemplation on the order of creation,
then the cycle of Pranayama begins. The glory and dignity of Agni, Vayu, Aditya,
Brihaspati, Varuna, Indra and Vishwa Devas have been sung. Saptavyahriti is for
these Devas only. The Vedic sages have praised water with great emotion. They
said - "O water! You wander in the midst of all living beings, your movement is
everywhere in the cave of the universe. You are the Yajna, the Vashatkar, the
Ap, the Jyoti, the Rasa and the Amrit too." In Sandhya, the Sun is offered water
three times. In the first offering, the riding of three demons is imagined, in
the second, the weapons of the demon, and in the third, the destruction of the
demons. After that, the Gayatri Mantra is recited. In it, the Sun is prayed for
intelligence and inspiration. There is also a practice of sprinkling water in
these praises, which is based on external rituals. There is no attempt to touch
the emotions of the inner world and liberate the soul from the dirt of sin. In
one mantra, such sentiments have definitely been expressed - "Sun Narayana,
Yakshapati and Devas, I pray to you - protect me from sins committed due to
Yaksha, subject and anger. I offer the sins committed by mind, speech, hands,
feet, stomach and penis in day and night to the Sun, the immortal womb.
Therefore, may he destroy those sins. 21. Om Antascharasi Bhuteshu, Guhayaam
Vishvato Mukhah. Twam Yajnastam Vashatkar, Apo Jyotir Aso Amritam. 2. Om Surya
Cha Ma Manyu Cha Manyupataya Cha Manyukritebhyah Papebhyo Rakshantaam. Yad Ahra
Yad Ratrya Paapam Akaan Manasa Vaacha Hastabhyam Padbhyam Udarena Shishna Ratris
Tadavalumpatu, Yat Kinchid Duritam Mayi Idam Ahamapo Amritayoni Suryey Jyotishy
Juhoomi Swaha." [40]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 jAtA hai| AcArya zAntideva ne hI pApadezanA ke prakRtisAvadya aura
prajJaptisAvadya-ye do prakAra batAye haiN| prakRtisAvadha vaha hai, jo svabhAva
se hI nindanIya hai, jaise hiMsA, asatya, corI Adi aura prajJaptisAvadha hai
vrata grahaNa karane ke pazcAt usakA bhaMga karanA, jaise vikAla bhojana,
parigraha aadi| bodhicaryAvatAra meM AcArya zAntideva likhate haiM - jo bhI
prakRtisAvadha aura prajJaptisAvadha pApa mujha abodha mUDha ne kamAye haiM, una
saba kI dezanA duHkha se ghabarAkara maiM prabhu ke sAmane hAtha jor3akara
bArambAra praNAma karatA huuN| he nAyako! aparAdha ko aparAdha ke rUpa meM
grahaNa kro| maiM yaha pApa phira nahIM kruuNgaa| bauddha pravAraNA, jaisA ki
jyeSTha bhikSu AcArasaMhitA kA pATha karatA hai aura pratyeka niyama ke par3hane
ke pazcAt upasthita bhikSuoM se vaha isa bAta kI apekSA karatA hai ki yadi kisI
ne niyama kA bhaMga kiyA hai to vaha saMgha ke samakSa use prakaTa kara de|
jaina paramparA meM guru ke samakSa yA gItArtha ke samakSa pApoM kI AlocanA
karane kA vidhAna hai| para saMgha ke samakSa pApa ko prakaTa karane kI
paramparA nahIM hai| saMgha ke samakSa pApa ko prakaTa karane se agItArtha
vyakti usakA durupayoga bhI kara sakate haiN| usase nindA kI sthiti bhI bana
sakatI hai| isaliye jainadharma ne gItArtha ke sAmane AlocanA kA vidhAna kiyaa|
saMgha ke samakSa jo pravAraNA hai, usakI tulanA vartamAna meM pracalita
sAmUhika pratikramaNa ke sAtha kI jA sakatI hai| pratikramaNa aura saMdhyA
vaidika paramparA meM pratikramaNa kI taraha saMdhyA kA prAvadhAna hai| yaha eka
dhArmika anuSThAna hai, jo prAta: aura sAyaMkAla donoM samaya kiyA jAtA hai|
saMdhyA kA artha hai-sam-uttama prakAra se dhyai-dhyAna krnaa| apane iSTadeva kA
bhakti-bhAvanA se vibhora hokara zraddhA ke sAtha dhyAna karanA, cintana krnaa|
saMdhyA kA dUsarA artha hai miln/sNyog/smbndh| upAsanA ke samaya upAsaka kA
paramezvara ke sAtha saMyoga yA sambandha honaa| tIsarA artha hai rAtri aura
dina kI saMndhi-velA meM jo dhArmika anuSThAna kiye jAte haiM, vaha saMdhyA hai|
isa saMdhyA meM viSNumaMtra ke dvArA zarIra para jala chiTakakara zarIra ko
pavitra banAne kA upakrama kiyA jAtA hai| pRthvI mAtA kI stuti se abhimaMtrita
kara Asana para jala chiTakakara use pavitra kiyA jAtA hai| usake bAda sRSTi ke
utpattikrama para vicAra hotA hai, phira prANAyAma kA cakra calatA hai| agni,
vAyu, Aditya, vRhaspati, varuNa, indra aura vizva devatAoM kI mahimA aura garimA
gAI gaI hai| saptavyAhRti inhIM devoM ke liye hotI hai| vaidika maharSiyoM ne
jala kI saMstuti bahuta hI bhAvanA ke sAtha kI hai| unhoMne kahA - he jala! Apa
jIva mAtra ke madhya meM vicarate ho, brahmANDa rUpI guhA meM saba ora ApakI
gati hai| tumhIM yajJa ho, vaSaTkAra ho, ap ho jyoti ho, rasa ho aura amRta bhI
tumhI ho|' saMdhyA meM tIna bAra sUrya ko jala ke dvArA arghya diyA jAtA hai|
prathama arghya meM tIna rAkSasoM kI savArI kA, dUsare meM rAkSasa ke zastroM kA
aura tIsare meM rAkSasoM ke nAza kI kalpanA kI jAtI hai| usake pazcAt gAyatrI
maMtra par3hA jAtA hai| usameM sUrya se buddhi evaM sphUrti kI prArthanA kI jAtI
hai| ina stutiyoM meM jala chiTakane kI bhI prathA hai, jo bAhyacAra para AdhRta
hai| antarjagata kI bhAvanAoM ko sparza kara pApa-mala se AtmA ko mukta karane
kA upakrama nahIM hai| eka maMtra meM isa prakAra ke bhAva avazya hI vyakta huye
haiM - "sUrya nArAyaNa, yakSapati aura devatAoM se merI prArthanA hai-yakSa
viSayaka tathA krodha se kiye huye pApoM se merI rakSA kreN| dina aura rAtri meM
mana, vANI, hAtha, paira, udara aura zizna se jo pApa huye hoM una pApoM ko maiM
amRtayoni sUrya meM homa karatA huuN| isaliye vaha una pApoM ko naSTa kreN| 2 1.
OMantazcarasi bhUteSu, guhAyAM vishvtomukhH| tvaM yajJastvaM vaSaTkAra, Apo
jyotirso'mRtm| 2. om sUryazca mA manyuzca manyupatayazca manyukRtebhyaH pApebhyo
rkssntaam| yad ahrA yad rAtryA pApamakAeM manasA vAcA hastAbhyAM padbhyAmudareNa
ziznA rAtristadavalumpatu, yat kiJcid dUritaM mayi idamahamApo'mRtayonI sUrye
jyotiSi juhomi svaahaa|" [40]

Page #44 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
There is a mantra in the Krishna Yajurveda that says, "I surrender whatever
misconduct has occurred from my mind, speech, and body." In this way, the Vedic
tradition seeks forgiveness from the Lord for sins committed through the evening
ritual. This is similar to the concept of Pratikraman.  In the Parsi religion,
there is also a provision for confessing sins. The Khordah Avesta is the main
scripture of the Parsi religion. It states, "I repent for the evil thoughts that
have arisen in my mind, the use of vulgar language from my speech, and the
wrongdoings of my body. I repent for all the wrong deeds I have done. I repent
for arrogance, slander of the dead, greed, anger, envy, looking with evil
intent, self-indulgence, laziness, whispering, violation of purity, false
testimony, theft, adultery, and all sins that I have committed knowingly or
unknowingly. I confess these wrongdoings with a pure heart and separate myself
from them."  The founder of Christianity, Jesus, considered it necessary to
confess sins. Hiding sins makes them grow, while confessing them reduces or
destroys them. This method of confessing sins to be free from faults is similar
to Pratikraman. Pratikraman is the best way to purify life. Some religions
discuss it in detail, while others mention it briefly. But it is true that all
religions have considered it necessary.  Kayotsarga also holds a significant
place in the Jain practice. Kayotsarga is called Vranachikitsa in the
Anuyogadwar Sutra. Constant vigilance is necessary because negligence can lead
to faults in practice. Kayotsarga is a kind of balm for healing the wounds
caused by these faults. It heals the wounds caused by excesses. If a garment
becomes very dirty, it needs to be cleaned. It won't be clean in one wash; it
needs to be cleaned repeatedly with soap. Similarly, the garment of restraint
also gets stained with the dirt of excesses and the stains of mistakes. These
stains are cleansed through Pratikraman. The stains that don't disappear through
Pratikraman are removed through Kayotsarga. In Kayotsarga, deep contemplation is
undertaken to destroy the fault.  Why is Kayotsarga performed? The Necessary
Sutra, while contemplating this question, states that Kayotsarga is performed to
refine the life of restraint, to free the soul from Maya, Mithyatva, and Nidana
Shalya, and to destroy the effects of sinful karmas.  Kayotsarga consists of two
words: Kaya and Utsarga. It means the abandonment of the body. However, it is
not possible to abandon the body while alive. Here, the abandonment of the body
means the abandonment of physical restlessness and attachment to the body. The
practitioner remains isolated from the material objects of the world for some
time and immerses themselves in their true self. Kayotsarga is a way of turning
inward.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 kRSNayajurveda meM eka maMtra hai ki mere mana, vANI aura zarIra se jo bhI
durAcaraNa huA ho, maiM usakA visarjana karatA isa prakAra vaidika paramparA meM
saMdhyA ke dvArA Acarita pApoM ke kSaya ke liye prabhu se abhyarthanA kI jAtI
hai| yaha eka dRSTi se pratikramaNa se hI milatA-julatA rUpa hai| pArasI dharma
meM bhI pApa ko prakaTa karane kA vidhAna hai| khoradeha avastA pArasI dharma kA
mukhya grantha hai| usa grantha meM kahA gayA hai - mere mana meM jo bure vicAra
samutpanna huye hoM, vANI se tuccha bhASA kA prayoga huA ho aura zarIra se jo
akRtya kiye hoM, jo bhI maiMne duSkRtya kiye haiM, maiM usake liye pazcAttApa
karatA huuN| ahaMkAra, mRta vyaktiyoM kI nindA, lobha, krodha, IrSyA, burI dRSTi
se nihAranA, svacchandatA, Alasya, kAnAphUsI, pavitratA kA bhaMga, mithyA
sAkSya, taskaravRtti, vyabhicAra, jo bhI pApa mujhase jJAta athavA ajJAta rUpa
se huye haiM, una duSkRtyoM ko maiM sarala hRdaya se prakaTa karatA huuN| una
saba se alaga hokara pavitra hotA huuN| IsAI dharma ke praNetA mahAtmA yIzu ne
pApa ko prakaTa karanA Avazyaka maanaa| pApa ko chipAne se vaha bar3hatA hai
aura prakaTa karane se ghaTa jAtA hai yA naSTa ho jAtA hai| isa taraha pApa ko
prakaTa kara doSoM se mukta hone kA upAya jo batAyA gayA hai vaha pratikramaNa
se milatA-julatA hai| pratikramaNa jIvana zuddhi kA zreSThatama prakAra hai|
kisI dharma meM usakI vistAra se carcA hai to kisI meM samAsa se| para yaha
satya hai ki sabhI ne usako Avazyaka mAnA hai| kAyotsarga jaina sAdhanA paddhati
meM kAyotsarga kA bhI apanA mahattvapUrNa sthAna hai| kAyotsarga ko
anuyogadvArasUtra meM vraNacikitsA kahA hai| satata sAvadhAna rahane para hI
pramAda Adi ke kAraNa sAdhanA meM doSa laga jAte haiM. bhaleM ho jAtI haiN|
bhaloM rUpI ghAvoM ko ThIka karane ke liye kAyotsarga eka prakAra kA marahama
hai  /  vaha aticAra rUpI ghAvoM ko ThIka kara detA hai  /  eka vastra bahuta hI
malIna ho gayA hai, use sApha karanA hai, vaha eka bAra meM sApha nahIM hogA,
use bAra-bAra sAbuna lagA kara sApha kiyA jAtA hai, usI prakAra saMyama rUpI
vastra para bhI aticAroM kA maila laga jAtA hai, bhUloM ke dAga laga jAte haiN|
una dAgoM ko pratikramaNa ke dvArA svaccha kiyA jAtA hai| pratikramaNa meM bhI
jo dAga nahIM miTate unheM kAyotsarga ke dvArA haTAyA jAtA hai| kAyotsarga meM
gaharAI se cintana kara usa doSa ko naSTa karane kA upakrama kiyA jAtA hai|
kAyotyarga kyoM kiyA jAtA hai ? usa prazra para Avazyaka sUtra meM cintana
karate huye likhA hai - saMyamI jIvana ko adhikAdhika pariSkRta karane ke liye,
AtmA ko mAyA, mithyAtva aura nidAna zalya se mukta karane ke liye, pApa karmoM
ke nirghAta ke liye kAyotsarga kiyA jAtA hai| kAyotsarga meM kAyA aura utsarga -
ye do zabda Ate haiN| jisakA tAtparya hai-kAya kA tyaag| para jIvita rahate huye
zarIra kA tyAga sambhava nahIM hai| yahA~ para zarIratyAga kA artha hai-zArIrika
caMcalatA aura dehAsakti kA tyaag| sAdhaka kucha samaya taka saMsAra ke bhautika
padArthoM se alaga-thalaga rahakara AtmasvarUpa meM lIna hotA hai| kAyotsarga
antarmukhI hone kI eka 1. kRSNayajurveda - darzana aura cintana : bhAga 2, pR0
192 se uddhRt| 2. khoradeha avastA, pR05/23-24 3. tassa uttarIkaraNeNaM
pAyacchittakaraNeNaM, visohIkaraNeNaM, visallIkaraNeNaM, pAvANaM kammANaM
nigghAyaNaTThAe ThAmi kaaussggN| - AvazyakasUra [41]

Page #45 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
This is a sacred practice. Through it, the practitioner moves from an outward-
oriented state to an inward-oriented one, becoming detached and rising above
attachment and aversion. Kayotsarga reduces physical attachment. Attachment to
the body is the biggest obstacle to spiritual practice. By reducing attachment
to the body through Kayotsarga, the practitioner is freed from the desire to
adorn and beautify the body and becomes absorbed in the Self. This is why
Kayotsarga is said to be the end of suffering for the practitioner. Whatever the
practitioner does, they are advised to perform Kayotsarga after the action, so
that they can be free from attachment to the body.  Kayotsarga is given a
separate place in the six essentials, which expresses the sentiment that every
practitioner should contemplate morning and evening that this body is separate
and I am separate. I am eternal, immortal, imperishable. This body is transient.
Like a dewdrop on a lotus leaf, it is impossible to say when this body will be
destroyed. For the sake of the body, a human being also performs actions that
are not conducive to their spiritual progress. They are unable to discern
between edible and inedible food for the nourishment of the body. Kayotsarga
reduces attachment to the body. When the practitioner is in Kayotsarga, they
endure any kind of affliction, such as bites from insects, mosquitoes, or cold
and heat, with a peaceful mind. They remain in the body but are beyond the body.
Acharya Dharmadas has written in the Upadeshamala that one should not wear any
covering during Kayotsarga.  In Kayotsarga, the practitioner is completely still
and motionless like a rock. They remain in the posture in which they abandon
attachment to the body and become absorbed in the Self. Acharya Bhadrabahu has
written that in the state of Kayotsarga, if someone applies sandalwood to the
practitioner out of devotion, or if someone pierces their body with a needle out
of hatred, whether they live or die, the practitioner remains the same in all
situations. Only then is Kayotsarga pure. During Kayotsarga, if any kind of
affliction arises from gods, humans, or animals, the practitioner who endures
them with equanimity, their Kayotsarga is truly correct.  The facts that Acharya
Bhadrabahu has presented for the practitioners of Kayotsarga infuse strength
into the practitioner's inner mind, and they become immersed in Kayotsarga with
determination. However, this does not mean that they should fall into the trap
of false beliefs and sacrifice their lives. Because the situation of all
practitioners is not the same. Some practitioners may be exceptional, they are
not afraid of hardships, they move forward courageously like lions. But there
are also some weak practitioners, for them the Necessary Sutras instruct on the
use of shelters. In Kayotsarga, there may be various bodily ailments such as
coughing, sneezing, belching, fainting, etc. Sometimes there may also be tremors
in the body. Even then, Kayotsarga is not broken. At some point, the
practitioner may be standing in Kayotsarga, and at that time, the wall or roof
of the house may also collapse. There may also be a fire in the house or where
they are standing. There may also be afflictions from thieves and kings. At that
time, the practitioner can leave Kayotsarga and go to a safe place. Their
Kayotsarga will not be broken, because the main purpose of Kayotsarga is
Samadhi. If Samadhi is broken, it turns into Artha and Raudra meditation. This
transformation breaks Kayotsarga. The Kayotsarga in which Samadhi increases is
beneficial. But the action that increases Asamadhi 1. Aavashyakaniyukti, Gatha
1548 2. Tivihanuvasagganam Manusaanam Tiriyaanam. Sammamahiyasanaae Kaussaggo
Havai Sumro || - Aavashyakaniyukti, Gatha 1549 [42]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pavitra sAdhanA hai| bahirmukhI se sAdhaka antarmukhI sthiti meM pahu~catA hai
aura anAsakta banakara rAga-dveSa se Upara uTha jAtA hai| kAyotsarga se zArIrika
mamatA kama ho jAtI hai| zarIra kI mamatA sAdhanA ke liye sabase bar3I bAdhA
hai| kAyotsarga meM zarIra kI mamatA kama hone se sAdhaka zarIra ko sajAne-
saMvArane se haTakara AtmabhAva meM lIna rahatA hai| yahI kAraNa hai ki sAdhaka
ke liye kAyotsarga duHkhoM kA anta karane vAlA batAyA gayA hai| sAdhaka jo bhI
kArya kare, usa kArya ke pazcAt kAyotsarga karane kA vidhAna hai, jisase vaha
zarIra kI mamatA se mukta ho ske| SaDAvazyaka meM kAyotsarga ko svataMtra sthAna
diyA gayA hai, jo isa bhAvanA ko abhivyakta karatA hai ki pratyeka sAdhaka ko
prAta: aura saMdhyA ke samaya yaha cintana karanA cAhiye ki yaha zarIra pRthak
hai aura maiM pRthak huuN| maiM ajara, amara, avinAzI huuN| yaha zarIra
kSaNabhaMgura hai| kamala-patra para par3e huye osabindu kI taraha yaha zarIra
kaba naSTa ho jAye, kahA nahIM jA sktaa| zarIra ke liye mAnava akArya bhI karatA
hai| zarIra ke poSaNa hetu bhakSya abhakSya kA bhI viveka nahIM rakha paataa|
kAyotsarga ke dvArA zarIra kI mamatA kama kI jAtI hai| kAyotsarga meM jaba
sAdhaka avasthita hotA hai taba DA~sa, maccharoM ke va sardI-garmI ke kaise bhI
upasarga kyoM na hoM, vaha zAnta bhAva se sahana karatA hai  /  vaha deha meM
rahakara bhI dehAtIta sthiti meM rahatA hai| AcArya dharmadAsa ne upadezamAlA
grantha meM likhA hai ki kAyotsarga ke samaya prAvaraNa nahIM rakhanA caahiye|
kAyotsarga meM sAdhaka caTTAna kI taraha pUrNa rUpa se nizcala, nispanda hotA
hai| jina mudrA meM vaha zarIra kA mamatva tyAga kara AtmabhAva meM ramaNa
karatA hai| AcArya bhadrabAhu ne likhA hai - kAyotsarga kI sthiti meM sAdhaka ko
yadi koI bhaktibhAva se candana lagAye yA koI dveSapUrvaka basUle se zarIra kA
chedana kare, cAhe usakA jIvana rahe yA mRtyu kA varaNa karanA par3e, vaha saba
sthitiyoM meM sama rahatA hai| tabhI kAyotsarga vizuddha hotA hai| kAyotsarga ke
samaya deva, mAnava aura tiryaJca sambandhI sabhI prakAra ke upasarga upasthita
hone para jo sAdhaka unheM samabhAvapUrvaka sahana karatA hai, usI kA kAyotsarga
vastutaH sahI kAyotsarga hai| AcArya bhadrabAhu ne kAyotsarga ke sAdhakoM ke
liye jina tathyoM kA pratipAdana kiyA hai, ve sAdhaka ke antarmAnasa meM bala kA
saMcAra karate haiM aura ve dRr3hatA ke sAtha kAyotsarga meM tallIna ho jAte
haiM kintu isakA yaha tAtparya nahIM hai ki vaha mithyAgraha ke cakkara meM
par3akara apane jIvana ko homa de| kyoMki sabhI sAdhakoM kI sthiti samAna nahIM
hotii| kucha sAdhaka viziSTa ho sakate haiM, ye kaSToM se ghabarAte nahIM, zera
kI taraha sAhasapUrvaka Age bar3hate haiN| para kucha durbala sAdhaka bhI hote
haiM, unake liye AvazyakasUtra meM AgAroM kA nirdeza hai| kAyotsarga meM khA~sI,
chIMka, DakAra, mUrchA prabhRti vividha zArIrika vyAdhiyA~ ho sakatI haiN| kabhI
zarIra meM prakampana Adi bhI ho sakatA hai| to bhI kAyotsarga bhaMga nahIM
hotaa| kisI samaya sAdhaka kAyotsarga meM khar3A hai, usa samaya makAna kI
dIvAra yA chata girane kI bhI sthiti paidA ho sakatI hai| makAna meM yA jahA~
vaha khar3A hai vahA~ para agnikAMDa bhI ho sakatA hai| taskara aura rAjA Adi ke
bhI upasarga ho sakate haiN| usa samaya kAyotsarga se nivRtta hokara sAdhaka
surakSita sthAna para bhI jA sakatA hai| usakA kAyotsarga bhaMga nahIM hogA,
kyoMki kAyotsarga kA mUla uddezya samAdhi hai| yadi samAdhi bhaMga hotI hai to
Arta aura raudra dhyAna meM pariNata hotI hai| yaha pariNati kAyotsarga ko
bhaMga kara detI hai| jisa kAyotsarga meM samadhi kI abhivRddhi hotI ho, vaha
kAyotsarga hI hitAvaha hai| kintu jisa kArya ko karane se asamAdhi kI vRddhi 1.
Avazyakaniyukti, gAthA 1548 2. tivihANuvasaggaNaM mANusANa tiriyaannN|
sammamahiyAsaNAe kAussaggo havai sumro|| - Avazyakaniyukti, gAthA 1549 [42]

Page #46 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
If there is intense and fierce meditation, it is called *kayotsarga* done in the
name of *kayaklesha*. Acharya Bhadrabahu has even said that if a practitioner is
absorbed in *kayotsarga-mudra* and another practitioner is bitten by a snake,
then in such a situation, that practitioner should immediately leave
*kayotsarga* and help the bitten practitioner. At that time, it is more
meritorious to help than to do *kayotsarga*.  The meaning of *kayotsarga* is not
just that the practitioner should abandon physical restlessness and stand still
like a tree, like a mountain, or like dry wood. The stillness related to the
body can also be found in one-sense beings. No matter how many blows you strike
on a mountain, when does it become restless? It does not even get angry at
anyone. The stability that is in it is the stability of an undeveloped being,
but the stability that occurs in *kayotsarga* is of a different kind. Acharya
Jinadasagani Mahttar has described two types of *kayotsarga* - 1. *dravya-
kayotsarga* and *bhava-kayotsarga*. In *dravya-kayotsarga*, the body is first
restrained. Abandoning physical restlessness and attachment, becoming stable in
the *jin-mudra*, restraining bodily movements, this is *kaya-kayotsarga*. It is
also called *dravya-kayotsarga*. After this, the practitioner becomes absorbed
in *dharma-dhyana* and *shukla-dhyana*. He binds the mind with pure thoughts and
resolutions, so that he does not experience any kind of physical pain. He lives
in the body but remains separate from the body in the state of the self. This is
the feeling of *bhava-kayotsarga*. This type of *kayotsarga* is the one that
destroys all kinds of suffering.  To understand the difference between *dravya*
and *bhava*, the Acharyas have described four types of *kayotsarga* - 1.
*utthit-utthit* 2. *utthit-nivist* 3. *upavist-utthit* 4. *upavist-nivist*.  1.
*Utthit-utthit* - In this *kayotsarga-mudra*, when the practitioner stands, his
consciousness also stands with him. He abandons inauspicious meditation and
becomes absorbed in auspicious meditation. He is a first-class practitioner. His
body is also raised and his mind is also raised. He is raised from both the
*dravya* and *bhava* perspectives.  2. *Utthit-nivist* - Some practitioners
close their eyes and stand up for the sake of practice. They appear to be
standing physically, but there is no awakening in them mentally. Their minds are
entangled in various worldly things. They keep diving into the stream of intense
and fierce meditation. Even though their body is standing, their mind is seated.
Therefore, even though he is standing, that practitioner is seated.  3.
*Upavist-utthit* - Sometimes, due to physical illness or old age, the
practitioner cannot stand for *kayotsarga*. He does *kayotsarga* sitting in a
comfortable posture like *padmasana* or *sukha-asana* for the sake of physical
comfort. From the perspective of the body, he is sitting, but a strong stream of
auspicious and pure feelings is flowing in his mind, due to which he is mentally
raised even though he is sitting. The body may be sitting, but the
practitioner's mind is raised.  4. *Upavist-nivist* - Some practitioners, even
though they are physically capable, do not stand up due to laziness.  1. *So pun
kaussaggo davvato bhavato ya bhavati.* *Davvato kayachetttha niroho, bhavato
kaussaggo jhanam.* 2. *Kaussagan tao kujja savvadukkhavimokkhano.* -
*Aavashyakachurni* - *Uttaraadhyayana* 26-42 [43]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 hotI ho, Arta aura raudra dhyAna bar3hate hoM, vaha kAyotsarga ke nAma para
kiyA gayA kAyakleza hai| AcArya bhadrabAhu ne to yahA~ taka kahA hai ki eka
sAdhaka kAyotsarga-mudrA meM lIna hai aura yadi kisI dUsare sAdhaka ko sA~pa Adi
ne Dasa liyA to aisI sthiti meM vaha sAdhaka usI samaya kAyotsarga chor3akara
daMzita sAdhaka kI sahAyatA kre| usa samaya kAyotsarga kI apekSA sahayoga denA
hI zreyaskara hai| kAyotsarga kA artha kevala itanA hI nahIM hai ki zArIrika
caMcalatA kA tyAga kara vRkSa kI bhAMti yA parvata kI taraha yA sUkhe kASTha kI
taraha sAdhaka nispaMda khar3A ho jaaye| zarIra se sambandhita nispaMdatA to
ekendriya Adi prANiyoM meM bhI ho sakatI hai| parvata para cAhe jitane bhI
prahAra karo, vaha kaba caMcala hotA hai ? vaha kisI para roSa bhI nahIM krtaa|
usameM jo sthairya hai, vaha avikasita prANI kA sthairya hai kintu kAyotsarga
meM hone vAlA sthairya bhinna prakAra kA hai| AcArya jinadAsagaNI mahattara ne
kAyotsarga ke do prakAra batAye haiM-1. dravyakAyotsarga aura bhaavkaayotsrg|
dravyakAyotsarga meM pahale zarIra kA nirodha kiyA jAtA hai| zarIrika caMcalatA
aura mamatA kA parityAga kara jina-mudrA meM sthira honA, kAyaceSTA kA
nirundhana karanA, yaha kAyakAyotsarga hai  /  ise dravyakAyotsarga bhI kahate
haiM  /  isake pazcAt sAdhaka dharmadhyAna aura zukladhyAna meM ramaNa karatA
hai| mana ko pavitra vicAra aura saMkalpa se bAMdhatA hai, jisase usako kisI bhI
prakAra kI zArIrika vedanA kA anubhava nahIM hotaa| vaha tana meM rahakara bhI
tana se alaga-thalaga AtmabhAva meM rahatA hai| yahI bhAvakAyotsarga kA bhAva
hai| isa prakAra kA kAyotsarga hI sabhI prakAra ke duHkhoM ko naSTa karane vAlA
hai| dravya aura bhAva ke bheda ko samajhane ke liye AcAryoM ne kAyotsarga ke
cAra prakAra batalAye haiM - 1. utthitautthita 2. utthita-niviSTa 3. upaviSTa-
utthita 4. upaviSTa-niviSTa  /  1. utthita-utthita - isa kAyotsarga-mudrA meM
jaba sAdhaka khar3A hotA hai to usake sAtha hI usake antarmAnasa meM cetanA bhI
khar3I ho jAtI hai| vaha azubha dhyAna kA parityAga kara prazasta dhyAna meM
lIna ho jAtA hai| vaha prathama zreNI kA sAdhaka hai| usakA tana bhI utthita hai
aura mana bhii| vaha dravya aura bhAva donoM hI dRSTiyoM se utthita hai| 2.
utthita-niviSTa - kucha sAdhaka sAdhanA kI dRSTi se A~kha mUMdakara khar3e ho
jAte haiN| ve zArIrika dRSTi se to khar3e dikhAI dete haiM kintu mAnasika dRSTi
se unameM kucha bhI jAgRti nahIM hotii| unakA mana saMsAra ke vividha padArthoM
meM ulajhA rahatA hai| Arta aura raudra dhyAna kI dhArA meM vaha avagAhana
karatA rahatA hai| tana se khar3e hone para bhI usakA mana baiThA hai| ataH
utthita hokara bhI vaha sAdhaka niviSTa hai| 3. upaviSTa-utthita - kabhI-kabhI
zArIrika asvasthatA athavA vRddhAvasthA ke kAraNa kAyotsarga ke liye sAdhaka
khar3A nahIM ho sktaa| vaha zArIrika suvidhA kI dRSTi se padmAsana Adi sukhAsana
se baiThakara kAyotsarga karatA hai| tana kI dRSTi se vaha baiThA huA hai kintu
mana meM tIvra zubha-zuddha bhAvadhArA pravAhita ho rahI hotI hai, jisake kAraNa
baiThane para bhI vaha mana se utthita hai| zarIra bhale hI baiThA hai kintu
sAdhaka kA mana utthita hai| 4. upaviSTa-niviSTa - koI sAdhaka zArIrika dRSTi se
samartha hone para bhI Alasya ke kAraNa khar3A nahIM hotaa| 1. so puNa kAussaggo
davvato bhAvato ya bhvti| daSvato kAyaceTThA niroho, bhAvato kAussaggo jhaannN||
2. kAussagaM tao kujjA svvdukkhvimokkhnno| - AvazyakacUrNi - uttarAdhyayana
26-42 [43]

Page #47 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Standing Sitting He performs Kayotsarga while sitting. From the perspective of
the body, he is sitting, and from the perspective of the mind, he is not awake.
His mind is entangled in worldly desires or attachment and aversion. Both his
body and mind are still. Of these four types of Kayotsarga, the first and third
types are the true Kayotsarga. Through these Kayotsargas, the practitioner can
attain the great goal of practice. From the perspective of physical posture and
mental thought process, Acharya Bhadrabahu has described nine types of
Kayotsarga in the Aavashyakaniyukti - Physical Posture Mental Thought Process
Standing Dharma-Shukla Dhyana 2. Utsrita Standing Neither Dharma-Shukla nor
Aarta-Roudra, but a state of thoughtlessness 3. Utsrita-Nishanna Sitting Aarta-
Roudra Dhyana 4. Nishanna-Utsrita Sitting Dharma-Shukla Dhyana Neither Dharma-
Shukla Dhyana nor Aarta-Roudra, but a state of thoughtlessness 6. Nishanna-
Nishanna Lying Down Aarta-Roudra Dhyana 7. Nishanna-Utsrita Lying Down Dharma-
Shukla Dhyana Neither Dharma-Shukla nor Aarta-Roudra, but a state of
thoughtlessness 9. Nishanna-Nishanna Kayotsarga can be performed in all three
postures: standing, sitting, and lying down. The method of performing Kayotsarga
in the standing posture is as follows: Let both hands hang towards the knees,
keep the feet in a straight line, the heels should touch, and there should be a
gap of four fingers between the toes of both feet. The one performing Kayotsarga
in the sitting posture should sit in Padmasana or Sukhasana. Keep the hands
either on the knees or place the right hand on the left palm and keep them on
the lap. The one performing Kayotsarga in the lying down posture should first
stretch and then stabilize the limbs from head to toe. Do not keep the hands and
feet close together. In all of these, it is essential that the limbs are stable
and relaxed. There has been a special tradition of performing Kayotsarga while
standing. Because the Tirthankaras often perform Kayotsarga in this posture.
Acharya Aparajit has written that the practitioner performing Kayotsarga should
become inactive from the body and stand like a pillar. Extend both arms towards
the knees. Become absorbed in profound meditation. Do not stand with the body
completely stiff, nor should it be bent. He should stand in Samamudra. In
Kayotsarga, bear the hardships and trials with equanimity. Kayotsarga Lying Down
1. Aavashyakaniyukti, Gatha 1459-60 2. Yogashastra 3, Patra 250 [44]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 khar3A baiThA baiThe-baiThe hI vaha kAyotsarga karatA hai| tana kI dRSTi se
vaha baiThA huA hai aura bhAva kI dRSTi se bhI usameM jAgRti nahIM hai| usakA
mana sAMsArika viSaya-vAsanA meM yA rAgadveSa meM phaMsA huA hai| usakA tana
aura mana donoM hI baiThe huye haiM  /  kAyotsarga ke ina cAra prakAroM meM
prathama aura tRtIya prakAra kA kAyotsarga hI sahI kAyotsarga hai| ina
kAyotsarga ke dvArA hI sAdhaka sAdhanA ke mahAn lakSya ko prApta kara sakatA
hai| zArIrika avasthiti aura mAnasika cintanadhArA kI dRSTi se AcArya bhadrabAhu
ne Avazyakaniyukti meM kAyotsarga ke nau prakAra batAye hai - zArIrika sthiti
mAnasika vicAradhArA utsRta-utsRta khar3A dharma-zukladhyAna 2. utsRta khar3A na
dharma-zukla, na AI-raudra kintu cintanazUnya dazA 3. utsRta-niSaNNa Arta-
raudradhyAna 4. niSaNNa-utsRta baiThA dharma-zukladhyAna niSaNNa na dharma-
zukladhyAna, na Ata-raudra kintu cintanazUnya dazA niSaNNa-niSNNa baiThA Arta-
raudradhyAna niSaNNa-utsRta leTA dharma-zukladhyAna niSaNNa na dharma-zukla, na
Ata-raudra kintu cintanazUnya dazA 9. niSaNNa-niSaNNa leTA Artta-raudradhyAna
kAyotsarga khar3e hokara, baiThakara aura leTakara tInoM avasthAoM meM kiyA jA
sakatA hai| khar3I mudrA meM kAyotsarga karane kI rIti isa prakAra hai-donoM
hAthoM ko ghuTanoM kI ora laTakA leM, pairoM ko sama rekhA meM rakheM, eDiyAM
milI hoM aura donoM pairoM ke paMjoM meM cAra aMgula kA antara ho| baiThI mudrA
meM kAyotsarga karane vAlA padmAsana yA sukhAsana se baitthe| hAthoM ko yA to
ghuTanoM para rakhe yA bAyIM hathelI para dAyIM hathelI rakhakara unheM aMka meM
rkhe| leTI huI mudrA meM kAyotsarga karane vAlA sira se lekara paira taka ke
avayavoM ko pahale tAne phira sthira ko| hAtha-paira ko saTAye huye na rkhe| ina
sabhI meM aMgoM kA sthira aura zithila honA Avazyaka hai| khar3e hokara
kAyotsarga karane kI eka vizeSa paramparA rahI hai| kyoMki tIrthakara prAyaH isI
mudrA meM kAyotsarga karate haiM  /  AcArya aparAjita ne likhA hai ki kAyotsarga
karane vAlA sAdhaka zarIra se niSkriya ho kara khambhe kI taraha khar3A ho
jaaye| donoM bAhuoM ko ghuTanoM kI ora phailA de| prazasta dhyAna meM lIna ho
jaaye| zarIra ko ekadama akar3A kara na khar3A rakhe aura na ekadama jhukA kara
hii| vaha samamudrA meM khar3A rhe| kAyotsarga meM kaSToM aura parISahoM ko
samabhAva se sahana kre| kAyotsarga leTA 1. Avazyakaniyukti, gAthA 1459-60 2.
yogazAstra 3, patra 250 [44]

Page #48 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The place where it is performed should be secluded, peaceful and devoid of
living beings. _ It is an attempt to move towards *dravya-kayotsarga* and
*bhava-kayotsarga*. *Dravya* is gross, it moves from grossness to subtlety. In
*dravya-kayotsarga*, external objects are abandoned, such as - abandoning
*upadhi*, abandoning *bhakta-pan* etc., but in *bhava-kayotsarga*, three things
are necessary - *kashaya-vyutsarga*, *sansara-vyutsarga* and *karma-vyutsarga*.
In *kashaya-vyutsarga*, all four types of *kashayas* are avoided. *Krodha* is
conquered by *kshama*, *mana* by *vinaya*, *maya* by *saralata* and *lobha* by
*santosha*. In *sansara-vyutsarga*, the world is abandoned. The world is of four
types - *dravya-sansara*, *kshetra-sansara*, *kala-sansara* and *bhava-sansara*.
*Dravya-sansara* is of four *gati* forms. *Kshetra-sansara* is in the form of
*adhah*, *urdhava* and *madhya* lokas. *Kala-sansara* is from one time to the
time of *pudgala-paravartan*. *Bhava-sansara* is the form of the soul's
attachment to objects, which is the root cause of worldly wandering. *Dravya*,
*kshetra*, *kala* sansara cannot be abandoned. In *Acharanga*, it is said -
those who are the objects of the senses, they are truly the world and the soul
attached to them wanders in the world. In *Agam* literature, the word 'sansara-
kantare' is used here and there. Which means - the four *gati* forms of the
world are the shores. To abandon the root causes of worldly wandering. To
abandon *mithyatva*, *avrata*, *pramada*, *kashaya* and *ashubha* yoga is
*sansara-vyutsarga*. The *kayotsarga* performed to destroy the eight types of
*karmas* is called *karma-vyutsarga*. The various types of *kayotsarga* that
have been described have been classified from the physical point of view and
from the point of view of thought. From the point of view of purpose,
*kayotsarga* has been divided into two types - *cheshta-kayotsarga* and
*abhibhava-kayotsarga*. _ *Cheshta-kayotsarga* is performed for the purification
of defects. When the *shraman* goes out for *shaucha*, *bhiksha* etc. and there
is a tendency towards *nidra* etc., this *kayotsarga* is performed for the
purification of the defects that arise in it. *Abhibhava-kayotsarga* is
performed in two situations - firstly, to concentrate the mind for *atma-
chintan* for a long time or for *atma-shuddhi*, and secondly, in the event of a
crisis. Such as revolution, fire, famine etc. The time of *cheshta-kayotsarga*
is based on *uchchvasa*. This *kayotsarga* is performed in various situations
for 8, 25, 27, 300, 500, and 1008 *uchchvasas*. The time of *abhibhava-
kayotsarga* is the least *antar-muhurta* and the best is one year. *Bahubali*
performed *kayotsarga* for one year. 1. There, the body is free from desire,
standing like a pillar, with arms hanging down, well-versed in meditation, with
a raised and bent body, enduring all kinds of hardships, standing in a place
devoid of living beings, desiring the destruction of *karma*, in a secluded
place. - *Mularadhana* 2-113, *Vijayoday* p. 278-279 2. In this world, there are
four types of *sansara*, abandon them - *Dravya-sansara*, *kshetra-sansara*,
*bhava-sansara*, *kala-sansara*. - *Sthananga* 4,12,61 3. Which qualities are
attached to it. - *Acharanga* 1/1/5 4. That *utsarga* is of two types,
*abhibhava* and *nayavya*. The first is for the purification of *utsarga* in
*bhiksha-riya*, the second is for the purification of *utsarga*. - *Aavashyak-
niyukti*, verse 1452 5. (a) There, *cheshta-kayotsarga* is from eight to twenty-
five to twenty-seven to three hundred to five hundred to one thousand and eight
*uchchvasas*. *Abhibhava-kayotsarga* is from *muhurta* to one year, like
*Bahubali*. - *Yoga-shastra* 3, page 250 (b) *Antar-muhurta* is the least time
for *kayotsarga*, one year is the best. - *Mularadhana* 2, 116,
*Vijayodayavritti* [45]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 jisa sthAna para kiyA jAye, vaha sthAna ekAnta, zAnta aura jIva-jantuoM se
rahita ho|' _ dravyakAyotsarga, bhAvakAyotsarga kI ora bar3hane kA eka upakrama
hai| dravya sthUla hai, sthUlatA se sUkSmatA kI ora bar3hA jAtA hai|
dravyakAyotsarga meM bAhya vastuoM kA parityAga kiyA jAtA hai, jaise - upadhi kA
tyAga karanA, bhakta-pAna Adi kA tyAga karanA, para bhAvakAyotsarga meM tIna
bAteM Avazyaka haiM - kaSAyavyutsarga, saMsAravyutsarga aura krmvyutsrg|
kaSAyavyutsarga meM cAroM prakAra ke kaSAyoM kA parihAra kiyA jAtA hai| kSamA ke
dvArA krodha, vinaya ke dvArA mAna ko, saralatA se mAyA ko tathA santoSa se
lobha jItA jAtA hai| saMsAravyutsarga meM saMsAra kA parityAga kiyA jAtA hai|
saMsAra cAra prakAra kA hai - dravyasaMsAra, kSetrasaMsAra, kAlasaMsAra aura
bhaavsNsaar| dravyasaMsAra cAra gati rUpa hai| kSetrasaMsAra adhaH, Urdhva aura
madhya loka rUpa hai| kAlasaMsAra eka samaya se lekara pudgalaparAvartanakAla
taka hai| bhAvasaMsAra jIva kA viSayAsakti rUpa bhAva hai, jo saMsAra-bhramaNa
kA mUla kAraNa hai| dravya, kSetra, kAla saMsAra kA tyAga nahIM kiyA jA sakatA
hai  /  AcArAMga' meM kahA hai - jo indriyoM ke viSaya haiM, ve hI vastutaH
saMsAra haiM aura unameM Asakta huA AtmA saMsAra meM paribhramaNa karatA hai|
Agama sAhitya meM yatra-tatra 'saMsArakaMtAre' zabda kA vyavahAra huA hai|
jisakA artha hai - saMsAra ke cAra gatirUpa kinAre haiN| saMsAra paribhramaNa ke
jo mUla kAraNa haiM, una mUla kAraNoM kA tyAga krnaa| mithyAtva, avrata,
pramAda, kaSAya aura azubha yoga kA parityAga karanA hI saMsAravyutsarga hai|
aSTa prakAra ke karmoM ko naSTa karane ke liye jo kAyotsarga kiyA jAtA hai, use
karmavyutsarga kahate haiN| kAyotsarga ke jo vividha prakAra batAye gaye haiM,
unameM zArIrika dRSTi se aura vicAra kI dRSTi se bheda kiye gaye haiN| prayojana
kI dRSTi se kAyotsarga ke do bheda kiye gaye haiM - ceSTAkAyotsarga aura
abhibhvkaayotsrg| _ ceSTAkAyotsarga doSavizuddhi ke liye kiyA jAtA hai| jaba
zramaNa zauca, bhikSA Adi kAryoM ke liye bAhara jAtA hai tathA nidrA Adi meM
pravRtti hotI hai, usameM doSa lagane para usakI zuddhi ke liye prastuta
kAyotsarga kiyA jAtA hai| abhibhavakAyotsarga do sthitiyoM meM kiyA jAtA hai -
prathama dIrghakAla taka Atmacintana ke liye yA Atmazuddhi ke liye mana ko
ekAgra kara kAyotsarga karanA aura dUsarA saMkaTa Ane pr| jaise viplava,
agnikAMDa, durbhikSa aadi| ceSTAkAyotsarga kA kAla ucchvAsa para AdhArita hai|
yaha kAyotsarga vibhinna sthitiyoM meM 8, 25, 27, 300, 500, aura 1008 ucchavAsa
taka kiyA jAtA hai| abhibhavakAyotsarga kA kAla jaghanya antarmuhUrta aura
utkRSTa eka varSa kA hai| bAhubali ne eka varSa taka kAyotsarga kiyA thaa| 1.
tatra zarIranispRhaH, sthANurivordhvakAyaH pralaMbitabhujaH
prazastadhyAnapariNato'nunnamitA natakAyaH parISahAnupasargAzca sahamAnaH
tiSThanirjantuke karmApAyAbhilASI vivikte deshe| - mUlArAdhanA 2-113, vijayodayA
pR. 278-279 2. caThavihe saMsAre paNNatte, taM jahA - davvasaMsAre,
khettasaMsAre, bhAvasaMsAre, kaalsNsaare| - sthAnAMga 4,12,61 3. je guNe se
aavtte| - AcArAMga 1/1/5 4. so ussaggo duviho ciTThae abhibhave ya naayvyo|
bhikkhAyariyAi paDhamo uvasaggabhijuMjaNe biio|| - Avazyakaniyukti, gAthA 1452
5. (ka) tatraceSTAkAyotsargo'STa-paMcaviMzati-saptaviMzati-trizata-paJcazata-
aSTottarasahastrocchvAsAna yAvad bhvti| abhibhava-kAyotsargastu muhUrtAdArabhya
saMvatsaraM yAvad bAhubaliriva bhvti| - yogazAstra 3, patra 250 (kha)
antarmuhUrta: kAyotsargasya jaghanyaH kAlaH vrssmutkRssttH| - mUlArAdhanA 2,
116, vijayodayAvRtti [45]

Page #49 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
There are five types of *Kayotsarga* performed for purification of *doshas*:
daily, nightly, fortnightly, four-monthly, and yearly.  The *Kayotsarga* in the
six essentials involves meditation on the *Chaturvinshati stava*. The
*Chaturvinshati stava* has seven verses and twenty-eight lines. One line is
meditated upon in one breath. Meditation on one *Chaturvinshati stava* is
completed in twenty-five breaths. While inhaling, one should mentally recite
'Logass Ujjoyagare' and while exhaling, 'Dhammatithayare Jine'. While inhaling
the second time, one should recite 'Arihante Kittaissan' and while exhaling,
'Chauveesam Pi Kevali'. In this way, the *Kayotsarga* of the *Chaturvinshati
stava* is performed.  The objective, quantity, and time duration of *Kayotsarga*
are given in *Pravachana Saroddhara* and *Vijayodayavritti* as follows:
**Pravachana Saroddhara**  *Chaturvinshati stava*  | Verse | Line | Breath |
|---|---|---| | 1. Daily | 1. Yoga Shastra, 3 | 2. Four, two, twelve, twenty,
four, these are the breaths. | | 2. Nightly | 3. Twenty-five, thirteen, with
'Loga' twenty-three are to be meditated upon. | 4. One hundred and twenty-five,
two hundred and fifty-two in a year. | | 3. Fortnightly | 5. Evening and
morning, three hundred each are to be done in a fortnight. | 6. Five in four
months, eight thousand and eighty in a year. | | 4. Four-monthly | 7. One
hundred breaths in the evening, five hundred in the morning, three hundred in a
fortnight. | 8. Four hundred in four months, five hundred in a year. | | 5.
Yearly | 9. Eight in *Pratikrama*, two in *Yogabhakti*, these two are mentioned.
|  |  - *Mularadhana-Vijayodayavritti*, 1,116

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 doSavizuddhi ke liye jo kAyotsarga kiyA jAtA hai vaha kAyotsarga daivasika,
rAtrika, pAkSika, cAturmAsika aura sAMvatsarika rUpa se pA~ca prakAra kA hai| _
Sar3Avazyaka meM jo kAyotsarga hai, usameM caturviMzatistava kA dhyAna kiyA jAtA
hai| caturviMzatistava meM sAta zloka aura aTThAIsa caraNa haiN| eka ucchavAsa
meM eka caraNa kA dhyAna kiyA jAtA hai| eka caturviMzatistava kA dhyAna paccIsa
ucchvAsoM meM sampanna hotA hai| prathama zvAsa lete samaya mana meM 'logassa
ujjoyagare' kahA jAyegA aura sAMsa ko chor3ate samaya 'dhammatitthayare jiNe'
kahA jaayegaa| dvitIya sAMsa lete samaya 'arihaMte kittaissaM' aura chor3ate
samaya 'cauvIsaM pi kevalI' kahA jaayegaa| isa prakAra caturvizatistava kA
kAyotsarga hotA hai| pravacanasAroddhAra meM aura vijayodayAvRtti meM kAyotsarga
kA dhyeya, parimANa aura kAlamAna isa prakAra diyA gayA pravacanasAroddhAra
caturviMzatistava zloka caraNa ucchvAsa 1. daivasika 2. rAtrika 3. pAkSika 4.
cAturmAsika 5. sAMvatsarika 1. yogazAstra, 3 2. cattAri do duvAlasa, vIsa cattA
ya huMti ujjoyaa| devasiya rAya pakkhiya, cAummAse ya varise y|| paNavIsa
addhaterasa, saloga pannatarI ya boddhvyaa| sayamegaM paNavIsaM, be bAvaNNA ya
brisNmi|| sAyaM sayaM gosaddha tinneva sayA haveMti pkkhmi| paMca ya cAummAse,
varise aTThottara shssaa| 3. sAyAhne ucchvAsazatakaM pratyuSasi paMcAzata, pakSe
trishtaani| caturSamAsesu catu:zatAni, paMcazatAni, saMvatsare ucchvaasaanaam||
aSTau pratikrame yogabhaktau tau dvaavudaahtau| - mUlArAdhanA-vijayodayAvRtti,
1,116

Page #50 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Translation:  1. Daily 2. Nightly 3. Fortnightly 4. Chaturmasik (Four-month
period) 5. Annual  24 2 12 16 20 Vijayodaya Verse 25 12%, 75 100 125 500 500
There is no uniformity in the number of breaths given for Kayotsarga in
Pravachansaroththar and Vijayodaya Vritti. This can be easily understood from
the chart given in the above lines.  1. Ashtotarashatoচ্ছ্বাসঃ Kayotsargaḥ
pratikrame | Sandhye prabhaatike vaardhamananyastat saptavimshatiḥ ||
Saptavimshatiruchchvasaḥ samsaroonmoolanakshame | Santi panchanamaskaare navadha
chinitte sati || 2. Ashtavimshati sankhyanaḥ Kayotsargaḥ mata jinaiḥ. Ahoratra
gataḥ sarva shadavashyakakaarinaam || Swaadhyaaye dvaadasha praajnaiḥ
vandanaayaam shadiritaḥ. Ashtau pratikrame yoghabhaktau tau dvaavudaahritau ||
3. Moolaraadhana 2, 116 Vijayodaya Vritti 4. Uttaraadhyaayana 26, 39-51  Acharya
Amitagati, belonging to the Digambar tradition, has laid down the rule that one
should focus on 108 breaths for daily Kayotsarga and 54 breaths for night
Kayotsarga. And for other Kayotsargas, one should focus on 27 breaths. In 27
breaths, there are nine repetitions of Namaskara, because one Namaskara Maha
Mantra is focused on in 3 breaths. 'Namo Arihantaanam, Namo Siddhaanam' in one
breath, 'Namo Aayariyaanam Namo Uvvajjaayaanam' in the second breath, and 'Namo
Loe " Savvasahuunam' in the third breath - in this way, one Namaskara Maha
Mantra is completed in 3 breaths. Acharya Amitagati believes that one should
perform Kayotsarga a total of 28 times a day and night. 12 times during
Swaadhyaaya, 6 times during Vandana, 8 times during Pratikramana, and 2 times
during Yoghabhakti, making a total of 28 times.  Acharya Aparajit believes that
one should perform Kayotsarga with 108 breaths if there is a transgression
related to the five great vows. If there is doubt due to the mind's fickleness
or in counting the number of breaths while performing Kayotsarga, then one
should perform Kayotsarga for eight more breaths.  - Foot Note - [ 47 ] 100 50
300 400 — Upon examining the literature of both the Shwetambar and Digambar
traditions, it is clear that Kayotsarga has been a special rule for Shraman
Sadhakas in the past. In the study of Bhramana Samachari in Uttaraadhyaayana and
Breath 100 50 300 400 Amitagati Shravakaachar 8, 68-69 Amitagati Shravakaachar
8, 66-67

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 1. daivasika 2. rAtrika 3. pAkSika 4. cAturmAsika 5. sAMvatsarika
caturviMzatistava 2 12 16. 20 vijayodayA zloka 25 12%, 75 100 125 500 500
pravacanasAroddhAra aura vijayodayAvRtti meM jo ucchvAsa saMkhyA kAyotsarga kI
dI gaI hai, usameM ekarUpatA nahIM hai| yaha Upara kI paMktiyoM meM jo cArTa
diyA gayA hai, usase sahaja jAnA jA sakatA hai| 1. aSTottarazatocchvAsaH
kAyotsargaH pratikrame  /  sAndhye prAbhAtike vArdhamanyastat saptaviMzatiH  //
saptaviMzatirucchvAsAH saMsAronmUlanakSame  /  santi paMcanamaskAre navadhA
cintite sati  //  2. aSTaviMzati saMkhyAnAH kAyotsargA matA jinaiH|
ahorAtragatAH sarva SaDAvazyakakAriNAm  //  svAdhyAye dvAdaza prAjJaiH
vandanAyAM SaDIritAH  /  aSTau pratikrame yogabhaktau tau dvAvudAhRtau  //  3.
mUlArAdhanA 2, 116 vijayodayA vRtti 4. uttarAdhyayana 26, 39-51 digambara
paramparA ke AcArya amitagati" ne yaha vidhAna kiyA hai daivasika kAyotsarga meM
108 aura rAtri ke kAyotsarga meM 54 uccazvAsoM kA dhyAna karanA cAhiye aura anya
kAyotsarga meM 27 ucchvAsoM kA dhyAna karanA caahiye| 27 ucchvAsoM meM namaskAra
kI nau AvRttiyAM ho jAtI haiM, kyoMki 3 ucchvAsoM meM eka namaskAra mahAmaMtra
para dhyAna diyA jAtA hai| 'namo arihaMtANaM, namo siddhANaM' eka ucchvAsa meM
'namo AyariyANaM namo uvajjhAyANaM' dUsare ucchvAsa meM tathA 'namo loe "
savvasAhUNaM' tIsare ucchvAsa meM meM - isa prakAra 3 ucchvAsoM meM eka
namaskAra mahAmaMtra kA dhyAna pUrNa hotA hai| AcArya amitagati kA abhimata hai
ki bhramaNa ko dina aura rAta meM kula 28 bAra kAyotsarga karanA caahiye|'
svAdhyAyakAla meM 12 bAra, vandanakAla meM 6 bAra, pratikramaNakAla meM 8 bAra,
yogabhaktikAla meM 2 bAra isa prakAra kula 28 bAra kAyotsarga karanA caahiye|
AcArya aparAjita kA mantavya hai ki paMca mahAvrata sambandhI atikramaNa hone
para 108 ucchvAsoM kA kAyotsarga karanA caahiye| kAyotsarga karate samaya mana
kI caMcalatA se yA ucchavAsoM kI saMkhyA kI parigaNanA meM saMdeha samutpanna ho
jAye to ATha ucchvAsa kA aura adhika kAyotsarga karanA cAhiye  /  - caraNa - [
47 ] 100 50 300 400 -- zvetAmbara aura digambara donoM hI paramparAoM ke sAhitya
kA paryavekSaNa karane para yaha spaSTa hai ki atItakAla meM zramaNa sAdhakoM ke
liye kAyotsarga kA vidhAna vizeSa rUpa se rahA hai| uttarAdhyayana' ke bhramaNa
samAcArI adhyayana meM aura ucchvAsa 100 50 300 400 amitagati zrAvakAcAra 8,
68-69 amitagati zrAvakAcAra 8, 66-67

Page #51 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The "Dashavaikalik Chulika" mentions that the Shraman should perform Kayotsarga
repeatedly. Mental concentration is essential for Kayotsarga. Kayotsarga is
performed for many purposes. The main purpose of Kayotsarga is to alleviate
anger, pride, delusion, and greed. Kayotsarga is also prescribed for the removal
of inauspiciousness, obstacles, and hindrances. If any kind of inauspiciousness,
obstacle, or ill omen occurs at the beginning of a good work or journey, one
should perform Kayotsarga for eight breaths. In that Kayotsarga, one should
contemplate the Namaskar Mahamantra. If the obstacle arises again for the second
time, one should perform Kayotsarga for sixteen breaths and contemplate the
Namaskar Mahamantra twice. If the obstacle arises again for the third time, one
should perform Kayotsarga for thirty-two breaths and contemplate the Namaskar
Mahamantra four times. If the obstacle arises again for the fourth time, one
should understand that the obstacle is sure to come and should not start the
good work or journey. The process of Kayotsarga is not painful. Kayotsarga
provides complete rest to the body and an unprecedented feeling of peace in the
mind. Therefore, Kayotsarga can be performed for a long time. In Kayotsarga, the
mind is focused on the breath, hence its duration is also measured by counting
the breaths. The main purpose of Kayotsarga is to attain the proximity of the
soul and its natural quality is to maintain mental balance. Maintaining mental
balance purifies the intellect and makes the body completely healthy. Acharya
Bhadrabahu has described many benefits of Kayotsarga: 1. Dehajadya Buddhi - Due
to phlegm etc., there is inertia in the body. Kayotsarga destroys the doshas of
phlegm etc. Therefore, the inertia arising from them is also eliminated. 2.
Matijadya Buddhi - In Kayotsarga, the mind's tendency becomes focused, which
makes the mind concentrated. Intellectual inertia is eliminated and sharpness
comes in it. 3. Sukha-Dukha Titiksha - Kayotsarga gives an unprecedented ability
to bear happiness and sorrow. 4. Anupreksha - The person in Kayotsarga practices
Anupreksha or contemplation steadily. 5. Dhyana - Kayotsarga naturally leads to
the practice of good meditation. - Dashavaikalik Chulika 2-7 1. Abhikhanam
Kaussagkari 2. Kayotsarga Shataka, Gatha 8 3. Savvesu Khaliyadisu Jhaejjha Panch
Mangalam. Do Siloge Va Chintejja Egggo Vavi Takkhanam || Biijyam Pun
Khaliyadisu, Ussasa Hati Tah Ya Solas Ya. Taiyammi U Battisa, Chauthammi Na
Gachchae Annam || 4. (a) Dehamaijadassuddhi, Suhadukkhatitikkhaya Anuppeha.
Jhaiya Ya Suham Jhanam, Egggo Kaussaggammi. (b) Manaso Eggaggattam Janayi,
Dehass Hanai Jaddattam. Kaussaggaguna Khalu, Suhaduhamajjatthaya Cheva || (c)
Prayatnavisheshatah Paramalaghavasambhavaat. - Vyavahar Bhashya Peethika, Gatha
118, 119 - Kayotsarga Shataka, Gatha 13 - Vyavahar Bhashya Peethika, Ga. 125 -
Vahi, Vritti [48]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dazavaikAlika cUlikA' meM zramaNa ko punaH-punaH kAyotsarga karane vAlA batAyA
hai| kAyotsarga meM mAnasika ekAgratA sarvaprathama Avazyaka hai  /  kAyotsarga
aneka prayojanoM se kiyA jAtA hai  /  krodha, mAna, mAyA, lobha kA upazamana
kAyotsarga kA mukhya prayojana hai| amaMgala, vighna aura bAdhA ke parihAra ke
liye bhI kAyotsarga kA vidhAna prApta hotA hai| kisI zubha kArya ke prArambha
meM yAtrA meM, yadi kisI prakAra kA upasarga, bAdhA yA apazakuna ho jAye to ATha
zvAsa-prazvAsa kA kAyotsarga karanA caahiye| usa , kAyotsarga meM namaskAra
mahAmantra kA cintana karanA caahiye| dvitIya bAra punaH bAdhA upasthita ho jAye
to solaha zvAsa-prazvAsa kA kAyotsarga kara do bAra namaskAra mahAmantra kA
cintana karanA caahiye| yadi tRtIya bAra bhI bAdhA upasthita ho jAye to 32
zvAsa-prazvAsa kA kAyotsarga kara cAra bAra namaskAra mahAmantra kA cintana
karanA caahiye| caturtha bAra bhI yadi bAdhA upasthita ho to vighna avazya hI
Ane vAlA hai, aisA samajha kara zubha kArya yA vihAra yAtrA ko prArambha nahIM
karanA caahiye| kAyotsarga kI prakriyA kaSTaprada nahIM hai| kAyotsarga se
zarIra ko pUrNa vizrAnti prApta hotI hai aura mana meM apUrva zAnti kA anubhava
hotA hai| isIliye kAyotsarga lambe samaya taka kiyA jA sakatA hai| kAyotsarga
meM mana ko zvAsa meM kendrita kiyA jAtA hai, etadartha usakA kAlamAna zvAsa
ginatI se bhI kiyA jAtA hai| kAyotsarga kA pradhAna uddezya hai AtmA kA
sAnnidhya prApta karanA aura sahaja guNa hai mAnasika santulana banAye rkhnaa|
mAnasika santulana banAye rakhane se buddhi nirmala hotI hai aura zarIra pUrNa
svastha hotA hai| AcArya bhadrabAhu ne kAyotsarga ke aneka phala batAye haiM -
1. dehajADyabuddhi - zleSma Adi ke dvArA deha meM jar3atA AtI hai  /  kAyotsarga
se zleSma Adi ke doSa naSTa ho jAte haiM  /  isaliye unase utpanna hone vAlI
jar3atA bhI samApta ho jAtI hai| 2. matijADyabuddhi - kAyotsarga meM mana kI
pravRtti kendrita ho jAtI hai, usase citta ekAgra hotA hai| bauddhika jar3atA
samApta ho kara usameM tIkSNatA AtI hai| 3. sukha-duHkhatitikSA - kAyotsarga se
sukha-duHkha ko sahana karane kI apUrva kSamatA prApta hotI hai| 4. anuprekSA -
kAyotsarga meM avasthita vyakti anuprekSA yA bhAvanA kA sthiratApUrvaka abhyAsa
karatA hai| 5. dhyAna - kAyotsarga se zubhadhyAna kA sahaja abhyAsa ho jAtA hai|
- dazavakAlika cUlikA 2-7 1. abhikkhaNaM kAussagakArI 2. kAyotsargazataka, gAthA
8 3. savvesu khaliyAdisu jhAejjhA paMca mNglN| do siloge va ciMtejjA egaggo vAvi
tkkhnnN|| biiyaM puNa khaliyAdisu, ussAsA hati taha ya solasa y| taiyammi u
battIsA, cautthammi na gacchae annnnN|| 4. (ka) dehamaijaDasuddhI,
suhadukkhatitikkhayA annuppehaa| jhAiya ya suhaM jhANaM, egaggo kAusaggammi  /
(kha) maNaso egaggattaM jaNayai, dehassa haNai jaDDattaM  /  kAussaggaguNA
khalu, suhaduhamajjhatthayA ceva  //  (ga) prayatnavizeSataH prmlaaghvsNbhvaat|
- vyavahArabhASya pIThikA, gAthA 118, 119 - kAyotsargazataka, gAthA 13 -
vyavahArabhASya pIThikA, gA. 125 - vahI, vRtti [48]

Page #52 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
In Kayotsarga, along with the immersion of physical restlessness, there is also
an immersion of physical attachment, which prevents the generation of tension in
the body and mind. Physiologists believe that stress gives rise to many physical
and mental ailments. For example, due to physical activity: 1. Sugar levels in
the muscles decrease. 2. Lactic acid accumulates in the muscles. 3. An increase
in lactic acid leads to an increase in body temperature. 4. Fatigue is
experienced in the nervous system. 5. The amount of oxygen in the blood
decreases. But with Kayotsarga: 1. Acid is converted back into sugar. 2. The
accumulation of lactic acid in the muscles decreases. 3. The decrease in lactic
acid leads to a decrease in body temperature. 4. The nervous system experiences
renewed freshness. 5. The amount of oxygen in the blood increases. Thus,
Kayotsarga is of great importance from a health perspective. The mind, brain,
and body are deeply interconnected. When there is no harmony between these
three, nervous tension arises. When we perform any action, there should be
balance. When there is no balance, nervous tension increases. If the body is
working separately and the mind is wandering elsewhere, then nervous tension
arises. Kayotsarga is a beautiful way to relieve this nervous tension. In
Kayotsarga, relaxation is required first. If the practitioner wants to perform
Kayotsarga while sitting, then they should sit in Sukhasana or Padmasana. Then
straighten the spine and neck, ensuring there is no bending or tension. The
limbs should be relaxed and straight. After that, take a deep breath. Try to
take as long a breath as possible without discomfort. This will greatly help in
the relaxation of both the body and mind. After taking eight to ten deep
breaths, the process will become natural. By sitting still, some relaxation can
happen on its own, and then focus the mind on the part of the body that needs to
be relaxed. For example, first relax the muscles of the neck, shoulders, chest,
abdomen, right and left back, arms, hands, palms, fingers, waist, legs, etc. In
this way, by relaxing the physical parts and muscles, the connection with the
gross body is severed and a connection is established with the subtle body - the
Taijas and Karman. The Taijas body provides radiance. By establishing a
connection with the Karman body, the practice of discrimination is done. In this
way, the delusion of body-self unity is dispelled by discrimination. The body is
like a vessel. It contains many powers like breath, senses, mind, and brain.
Kayotsarga is a simple way to become familiar with those powers. Through
Kayotsarga, the breath becomes subtle. The breath is between the body and mind.
Breath [49]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 kAyotsarga meM zArIrika caMcalatA ke visarjana ke sAtha hI zArIrika mamatva kA
bhI visarjana hotA hai, jisase zarIra aura mana meM tanAva utpanna nahIM hotaa|
zarIrazAstriyoM kA mAnanA hai ki tanAva se aneka zArIrika aura mAnasika
vyAdhiyAM samutpanna hotI haiN| udAharaNArtha zArIrika pravRtti se - 1. snAyu
meM zarkarA kama ho jAtI hai| 2. laikTika esiDa snAyu meM ekatrita hotI hai| 3.
laikTika esiDa kI abhivRddhi hone para zarIra meM uSNatA bar3ha jAtI hai| 4.
snAyutaMtra meM thakAna kA anubhava hotA hai| 5. rakta meM prANavAyu kI mAtrA
nyUna ho jAtI hai| kintu kAyotsarga se - 1. esiDa punaH zarkarA meM parivartita
ho jAtA hai| 2. laikTika esiDa kA snAyuoM meM jamAva nyUna ho jAtA hai| 3.
laikTika esiDa kI nyUnatA se zArIrika uSNatA nyUna hotI hai| 4. snAyutaMtra meM
abhinava tAjagI AtI hai| 5. rakta meM prANavAyu kI mAtrA bar3ha jAtI hai| isa
prakAra svAsthyadRSTi se kAyotsarga kA atyadhika mahattva hai| mana, mastiSka
aura zarIra kA paraspara gaharA sambandha hai| jaba ina tInoM meM sAmaMjasya
nahIM hotA taba snAyavika tanAva samatpanna hote haiN| jaba hama koI kArya
karate haiM taba meM santalana rahanA caahiye| jaba santalana nahIM rahatA taba
snAyavika tanAva bar3ha jAtA hai| tana alaga kArya kara rahA hai aura mana alaga
sthAna para bhaTaka rahA hai to snAyavika tanAva ho jAtA hai| kAyotsarga isa
snAyavika tanAva ko dUra karane kA eka sundara upAya hai| kAyotsarga meM
sarvaprathama zithilIkaraNa kI AvazyakatA hai| yadi baiThe-baiThe hI sAdhaka
kAyotsarga karanA cAhatA hai to vaha sukhAsana yA padmAsana se baitthe| phira
rIr3ha kI haDDI aura gardana ko sIdhA kare, usameM jhukAva aura tanAva na ho|
aMgopAMga zithila aura sIdhe sarala rheN| usake pazcAt dIrgha zvAsa le| binA
kaSTa ke jitanA lambA zvAsa le sake utana prayAsa kre| isase zarIra aura mana
donoM ke zithilIkaraNa meM bahuta sahayoga milegaa| ATha-dasa bAra dIrgha zvAsa
lene ke pazcAta vaha krama sahaja ho jaayegaa| sthira baiThane se apane Apa hI
kucha-kucha zithilIkaraNa ho sakatA hai aura usake pazcAta jisa aMga ko zithila
karanA ho usameM mana ko kendrita kreN| jaise sarvaprathama gardana, kandhA,
sInA, peTa dAyeM bAyeM pRSTha bhAga, bhujAeM, hAtha, hathelI, aMgulI, kaTi,
paira Adi sabhI kI mAMsapeziyoM ko zithila kiyA jAtA hai| isa prakAra zArIrika
avayava va mAMsapeziyoM ke zithila ho jAne se sthUla zarIra se sambandha
viccheda ho kara sUkSma zarIra se - taijasa aura kArmaNa se sambandha sthApita
kiyA jAtA hai  /  taijasa zarIra se dIpti prApta hotI hai| kArmaNa zarIra ke
sAtha sambandha sthApita kara bhedavijJAna kA abhyAsa kiyA jAtA hai| isa taraha
zarIra-Atmaikya kI jo bhrAnti hai, vaha bhedavijJAna se miTa jAtI hai| zarIra
eka bartana ke sadRza hai| usameM zvAsa, indriya, mana aura mastiSka jaisI aneka
zaktiyAM rahI huI haiN| una zaktiyoM se paricita hone kA sarala mArga kAyotsarga
hai| kAyotsarga se zvAsa sUkSma hotA hai| zarIra aura mana ke bIca zvAsa hai  /
zvAsa [49]

Page #53 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Five types of breath have been described - 1. Sahaja Shwas 2. Shanta Shwas 3.
Ukhadi Shwas 4. Vikshipt Shwas and 5. Tez Shwas. In the first practice, the
practitioner takes a deep and long breath. In the second practice, rhythmic
breathing is practiced. In the third stage, subtle, calm and frozen breathing is
practiced. In the fourth practice, there is a state of natural Kumbhaka. This
state is created by Pranayama, Pralamb Jap and meditation. Pranayama has a
direct effect on the body, but to strike the mental knot, it is necessary for
the mind to be determined. Many Jain Acharyas have considered long breath to be
useful, but not fast breath. Their opinion is that due to the injury of fast
breath, the body and mind become weak due to excessive fatigue, there is no
state of alertness towards consciousness. In that state, it becomes difficult to
save oneself from the emptiness of drowsiness that comes due to fainting and
fatigue. Therefore, the breath should not be pulled out. It should be made long
and deep. The slower the breath, the less activity in the body. The subtlety of
breath is peace. In the beginning, there is no expansion of energy and new
production. Only energy is conserved and after a few days, that accumulated
energy makes the mind unidirectional and engages it in a goal. Due to the
slowness of breath, the body also becomes inactive, the breath becomes calm. The
mind becomes thoughtless and intense dispassion arises in the inner mind. As the
breath becomes fickle, so does the mind. When the breath becomes stable, the
fickleness of the mind is also destroyed. Breath is a machine that remains in
the body, when it becomes more active, there is turmoil in the body centers and
when it becomes normal, a kind of peace prevails in it. The inactivity of breath
is the peace and samadhi of the mind. When we get angry, our breathing rate
increases, but in meditation, the breathing rate becomes calm, which makes the
mind stable. The ability of Kayotsarga comes after Pratikraman. In Pratikraman,
the mind becomes completely pure due to the criticism of sins, due to which the
practitioner can achieve concentration in Dharma Dhyan and Shukla Dhyan. If the
practitioner performs Kayotsarga without purifying the mind, then he does not
get that much success. For this reason, Kayotsarga has been ordained after
Pratikraman in the Shadavasya. To perform Kayotsarga correctly, it is necessary
to avoid the defects of Kayotsarga. In the texts like Pravachansarothhar, 19
defects of Kayotsarga are described - 1. Ghotak Dosha 2. Lata Dosha 3. Stambh
Kudya Dosha 4. Mal Dosha 5. Shabri Dosha 6. Vadhu Dosha 7. Nigad Dosha 8.
Lambothar Dosha 9. Stan Dosha 10. Urdhika Dosha 11. Sanayati Dosha 12. Khalin
Dosha 13. Vayas Dosha 14. Kapitya Dosha 15. Shirshothkampit Dosha 16. Muk Dosha
17. Angulika Bhru Dosha 18. Varuni Dosha and 19. Prajna Dosha. These defects are
mainly related to the body and the posture of sitting and standing etc.
Therefore, the practitioner should practice Kayotsarga free from these defects.
Just as Kayotsarga is ordained in Jainism, it has been given great emphasis, in
the same way, it has been accepted in other religious traditions to a greater or
lesser extent. Acharya Shantirakshit has written in the 'Bodhicharyavatara' text
- All beings who have a body, 1. If the breath moves, the mind moves, if the
breath is still, the mind is still. One should know that the breath that has
gone into rhythm is useless. || 2. Bodhicharyavatara 3. 12-13 [50]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 ke pA~ca prakAra batAye gaye haiM - 1. sahaja zvAsa 2. zAnta zvAsa 3. ukhar3I
zvAsa 4. vikSipta zvAsa aura 5. teja shvaas| sAdhaka pahale abhyAsa meM gaharA
aura lambA zvAsa letA hai| dUsare abhyAsakrama meM layabaddha zvAsa kA abhyAsa
kiyA jAtA hai| tRtIya krama meM sUkSma, zAnta aura jame hue zvAsa kA abhyAsa
kiyA jAtA hai| caturtha abhyAsakrama meM sahaja kumbhaka kI sthiti hotI hai| isa
sthiti kA nirmANa prANAyAma, pralamba jApa aura dhyAna se kiyA jAtA hai|
prANAyAma kA sIdhA prabhAva zarIra para giratA hai kintu manogranthi para coTa
karane ke liye mana kA saMkalpabaddha honA Avazyaka hai| kitane hI jainAcAryoM
ne dIrgha zvAsa ko upayogI mAnA hai kintu teja zvAsa ko nhiiN| unakA mantavya
hai ki tIvra zvAsa kI coTa se zarIra aura mana atyadhika thakAna ke kAraNa
zithila ho jAte haiM, cetanA ke prati sAvadhAnatA kI sthiti nahIM hotii| usa
avasthA meM mUrchA aura thakAna ke kAraNa Ane vAlI tandrArUpa zUnyatA se apane
Apa ko bacAnA bhI kaThina ho jAtA hai| isaliye zvAsa ko ukhAr3anA nahIM caahiye|
use lambA aura gaharA karanA caahiye| jitanA zvAsa dhImA hotA hai, zarIra meM
utanI hI kriyAzIlatA nyUna ho jAtI hai| zvAsa kI sUkSmatA hI zAnti hai|
prArambha meM urjA kA vistAra aura nayA utpAdana nahIM hotaa| kevala urjA kA
saMrakSaNa hotA hai aura kucha dinoM ke pazcAt vaha saMcita urjA mana ko eka
dizAgAmI banA kara use eka dhyeya meM lagAtI hai| zvAsa kI maMdatA se zarIra bhI
niSkriya ho jAtA hai, prANa zAMta ho jAte haiN| mana nirvicAra ho aura
antarmAnasa meM tIvratama vairAgya udbuddha ho jAtA hai| jyoM-jyoM zvAsa caMcala
hotA hai, tyoM-tyoM mana bhI caMcala hotA hai| zvAsa ke sthira hone para mana kI
caMcalatA bhI naSTa ho jAtI hai| zvAsa zarIra meM rahA huA yaMtra hai jisake
adhika sakriya hone para zarIrakendroM meM uthala-puthala maca jAtI hai aura
sAmAnya hote hI usameM eka prakAra kI zAnti vyApta ho jAtI hai| zvAsa kI
niSkriyatA hI mana kI zAnti aura samAdhi hai| jaba hameM krodha AtA hai usa
samaya hamArI sAMsa kI gati tIvra ho jAtI hai para dhyAna meM zvAsagati zAnta
hone se usameM mana kI sthiratA hotI hai| kAyotsarga kI yogyatA pratikramaNa ke
pazcAt AtI hai| pratikramaNa meM pApoM kI AlocanA ho jAne se citta pUrNa rUpa se
nirmala bana jAtA hai, jisase dharmadhyAna aura zukladhyAna meM sAdhaka ekAgratA
prApta kara sakatA hai| yadi sAdhaka binA cittazuddhi kiye hI kAyotsarga karatA
hai to use utanI saphalatA prApta nahIM hotii| etadartha hI SaDAvazyaka meM
pratikramaNa ke pazcAt kAyotsarga kA vidhAna kiyA hai| kAyotsarga ko sahI rUpa
se sampanna karane ke liye yaha Avazyaka hai ki kAyotsarga ke doSoM se bacA
jaaye| pravacanasAroddhAra prabhRti granthoM meM kAyotsarga ke 19 doSa varNita
haiM - 1. ghoTaka doSa 2. latA doSa 3. staMbhakuDya doSa 4. mAla doSa 5. zabarI
doSa 6. vadhu doSa 7. nigar3a doSa 8. lambottara doSa 9. stana doSa 10. urddhikA
doSa 11. saMyatI doSa 12. khalIna doSa 13. vAyasa doSa 14. kapitya doSa 15.
zIrSotkampita doSa 16. mUka doSa 17. aMgulikA bhrU doSa 18. vAruNI doSa aura 19.
prajJA doss| ina doSoM kA mukhya sambandha zarIra se tathA baiThane aura khar3e
rahane ke Asana Adi se hai  /  ataH sAdhaka ko ina doSoM se mukta ho kara
kAyotsarga kI sAdhanA karanI caahiye| jaise jainadharma meM kAyotsarga kA
vidhAna hai, usa para atyadhika bala diyA hai, vaise hI nyUnAdhika rUpa meM vaha
anya dhArmika paramparAoM meM bhI mAnya rahA hai| bodhicaryAvatAra' grantha meM
AcArya zAntirakSita ne likhA hai - sabhI dehadhAriyoM ko jisa 1. cale vAte calaM
cittaM nizcale nizcalaM bhvet| niSphalaM taM vijAnIyAt zvAso ya layaM gtH|| 2.
bodhicaryAvaH ra 3 /  12-13 [50]

Page #54 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The body has been offered as a sacrifice, just like the type of happiness it is.
Let them kill it, slander it, or throw dust on it, let them play, laugh, or
indulge. What do I care? Because I have given the body to them. Thus they speak
of body renunciation. Kayotsarga is a type of meditation practice. The Tathagata
Buddha emphasized meditation practice. Meditation practice has been prevalent in
the Buddhist tradition since ancient times. Even in Vipassana, etc., there is an
attempt to remove attachment to the body.  **Rejection**  The name of the sixth
essential is **pratyakhyana**. **Pratyakhyana** means renunciation. The word
**pratyakhyana** is formed by the combination of the three words **prati-a-
akhyana**. Accepting vows with restraint, contrary to **avirat** and
**asanyama**, is **pratyakhyana**. In other words, **pratyakhyana** is the
statement, in an all-encompassing way, towards one's own nature, which gives
rise to the quality of **anasamsa**. In even clearer words, **pratyakhyana** is
the statement of renunciation from inauspicious yoga and inclination towards
auspicious yoga, with restraint towards the future.  In this vast universe,
there are so many substances that it is impossible to count, and it is also
impossible for one person to enjoy all those things. No matter how long a
lifespan may be, a human being cannot enjoy all the things in the world. Human
desires are limitless. He wants to have all things. Even if a Chakravarti
Emperor gets all things, his desires cannot end. Desires keep increasing day by
day and night by night. Due to desires, there is always unrest in the human
mind. The only way to destroy that unrest is **pratyakhyana**. In
**pratyakhyana**, the practitioner destroys the root cause of unrest, attachment
and craving. As long as attachment remains, peace cannot be attained.
**Samayik**, **Chaturvinshati stava**, **vandana**, **pratikramana**, and
**kayotsarga** purify the self, but **pratyakhyana** is absolutely necessary to
prevent the thief king of attachment from entering the mind again. Once a
garment is cleaned, it is kept in a cupboard to prevent it from becoming soiled
again. Similarly, **pratyakhyana** is done to prevent the mind from becoming
soiled. In **Anuyogadvara**, **pratyakhyana** is called **gunadharana**.
**Gunadharana** means to hold the qualities of vows. By restraining the actions
of the mind, speech, and body, the inclination towards auspicious actions is
focused. Focusing on auspicious actions restrains desires. Cravings are
pacified. Many virtues are attained. For this reason, Acharya Bhadrabahu said,
"**Pratyakhyana** leads to restraint. Restraint leads to the cessation of
**asrava**, and the cessation of **asrava** leads to the end of craving. The end
of craving gives rise to the incomparable state of **upshamabhava**, and from
that, **pratyakhyana** becomes pure. From the purity of **upshamabhava**, the
virtue of **charitra** is revealed. From **charitra**, karma...  1.
**Pratyakhyanam** - **Pratyakhyana** is the statement of renunciation with
restraint towards the future, contrary to the inclination. -
**Yogashastravritti** 2. **Pratyakhyana** is the statement, in an all-
encompassing way, towards one's own nature, contrary to **avirat** and
**asanyama**, etc., which gives rise to the quality of **anasamsa**. -
**Pravachansaro uddharavritti** 3. **Pratyakhyana** is the renunciation of
craving, which leads to the cessation of **asrava**. - **Aavashyakaniyukti**
1594 **Pratyakhyana** becomes pure from the cessation of craving, and humans
become free from suffering. - **Aavashyakaniyukti** 1595 [51]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prakAra sukha ho, vaise hI yaha zarIra maine nyauchAvara kara diyA hai| ve cAhe
isakI hatyA kareM, nindA kareM yA isa para dhUla phaikeM, cAhe kheleM, cAhe
ha~seM, cAhe vilAsa kreN| mujhe isakI kyA cintA? kyoMki maine zarIra unheM hI de
DAlA hai| isa prakAra ve dehavyutsarjana kI bAta karate haiN| kAyotsarga
dhyAnasAdhanA kA hI eka prakAra hai| tathAgata buddha ne dhyAnasAdhanA para bala
diyaa| dhyAnasAdhanA bauddha paramparA meM atIta kAla se calI A rahI hai|
vipazyanA Adi meM bhI deha ke prati mamatva haTAne kA upakrama hai| pratyAkhyAna
chaThe Avazyaka kA nAma pratyAkhyAna hai| pratyAkhyAna kA artha hai - tyAga
krnaa| pratyAkhyAna zabda kI racanA prati-A-AkhyAna, ina tInoM zabdoM ke saMyoga
se hotI hai| avirati aura asaMyama ke pratikUla rUpa meM maryAdA ke sAtha
pratijJA grahaNa karanA pratyAkhyAna hai| dUsare zabdoM meM kaheM to AtmasvarUpa
ke prati abhivyApta rUpa se, jisase anAzaMsA guNa samutpanna ho, isa prakAra kA
AkhyAna arthAt kathana karanA pratyAkhyAna hai| aura bhI adhika spaSTa zabdoM
meM kaheM to bhaviSya kAla ke prati A-maryAdA ke sAtha azubha yoga se nivRtti
aura zubha yoga meM pravRtti kA AkhyAna karanA pratyAkhyAna hai| isa virAT vizva
meM itane adhika padArtha haiM, jinakI parigaNanA karanA sambhava nahIM aura una
saba vastuoM ko eka hI vyakti bhoge, yaha bhI kabhI sambhava nhiiN| cAhe kitanI
bhI lambI umra kyoM na ho, tathApi eka mAnava saMsAra kI sabhI vastuoM kA
upabhoga nahIM kara sktaa| mAnava kI icchAyeM asIma haiN| vaha sabhI vastuoM ko
pAnA cAhatA hai| cakravartI samrAT ko sabhI vastueM prApta ho jAyeM to bhI usakI
icchAoM kA anta nahIM A sktaa| icchAeM dina dUnI aura rAta caugunI bar3hatI
rahatI haiN| icchAoM ke kAraNa mAnava ke antarmAnasa meM sadA azAnti banI rahatI
hai| usa azAnti ko naSTa karane kA ekamAtra upAya pratyAkhyAna hai| pratyAkhyAna
meM sAdhaka azAnti kA mUla kAraNa Asakti aura tRSNA ko naSTa karatA hai| jaba
taka Asakti banI rahatI hai taba taka zAnti upalabdha nahIM ho sktii| sAmAyika,
caturviMzatistava, vandana, pratikramaNa aura kAyotsarga ke dvArA Atmazuddhi kI
jAtI hai kintu punaH Asakti rUpI taskararAja antarmAnasa meM praviSTa na ho,
usake liye pratyAkhyAna atyanta Avazyaka hai| eka bAra vastra ko svaccha banA
diyA gayA, vaha punaH malina na ho, isake liye usa vastra ko kapATa meM rakhate
haiM, isI taraha mana meM malinatA na Aye, isaliye pratyAkhyAna kiyA jAtA hai|
anuyogadvAra meM pratyAkhyAna kA eka nAma 'guNadhAraNa' diyA gayA hai|
guNadhAraNa se tAtparya hai-vratarUpI guNoM ko dhAraNa krnaa| mana, vacana aura
kAyA ke yogoM ko rokakara zubha yogoM meM pravRtti ko kendrita kiyA jAtA hai|
zubha yogoM meM kendrita karane se icchAoM kA nirundhana hotA hai| tRSNAeM zAnta
ho jAtI haiN| aneka sadguNoM kI upalabdhi hotI hai| etadartha hI AcArya
bhadrabAhu ne kahA - pratyAkhyAna se saMyama hotA hai| saMyama se Azrava kA
nirundhana hotA hai aura Azrava ke nirundhana se tRSNA kA anta ho jAtA hai|
tRSNA ke anta se anupama upazamabhAva samutpanna hotA hai aura usase
pratyAkhyAna vizuddha banatA hai| upazamabhAva kI vizuddhi se cAritradharma
prakaTa hotA hai  /  cAritra se karma 1. pravRttipratikUlatayA A-maryAdayA
khyAnaM - prtyaakhyaanm| - yogazAstravRtti 2. aviratisvarUpaprabhRti
pratikUlatayA A- maryAdayA AkArakaraNasvarUpayA AkhyAnaM-kathanaM
prtyaakhyaanm|- pravacanasAroddhAravRtti 3. paccakkhANaMmi kae, AsavadArAI huMti
pihiyaaii| AsavavuccheeNaM taNhA - vuccheyaNaM hoii|| - Avazyakaniyukti 1594
taNhA-vocchedeNa u, aulovasamo bhave maNussANaM  /  aulovasameNa puNo,
paccakkhANaM havai suddhaM  //  - Avazyakaniyukti 1595 [51]

Page #55 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
They are **nirjīna** (non-living). From them, only the divine light of
**kevalgyan** (omniscience) and **kevaldarshan** (omniscient vision) shines
brightly, and the eternal bliss of **mukti** (liberation) is attained.  There
are two main types of **pratyakhyan** (renunciation): 1. **Mūlaguṇa-
pratyakhyan** and 2. **Uttaraguna-pratyakhyan**. **Mūlaguṇa-pratyakhyan** is
adopted for life. There are also two types of **Mūlaguṇa-pratyakhyan**: 1.
**Sarvamūlaguṇa-pratyakhyan** and 2. **Deshamūlaguṇa-pratyakhyan**.
**Sarvamūlaguṇa-pratyakhyan** includes the five **mahavrata** (great vows) of a
**shraman** (ascetic), and **Deshamūlaguṇa-pratyakhyan** includes the five
**anuvrata** (minor vows) of a **shramanopasaka** (lay follower). **Uttaraguna-
pratyakhyan** is adopted daily or for a few days. There are also two types of
**Uttaraguna-pratyakhyan**: **Desh Uttaraguna-pratyakhyan** and **Sarv
Uttaraguna-pratyakhyan**. For **grihastha** (householders), there are three
**gunavrata** (virtue vows) and four **shikshavrata** (instruction vows), these
seven are **Uttaraguna-pratyakhyan**. For both **shraman** and
**shramanopasaka**, there are ten types of **pratyakhyan**. The
**Bhagawatisutra**, **Sthananga-vritti**, **Aavashyak-niyukti**, and
**Mulachar** describe these ten **pratyakhyan**. Their brief summary is as
follows:  1. **Anagat**: The **tapa** (austerity) that should be done during
festivals like **Paryushana**, should be done beforehand so that the service of
the elderly, sick, and ascetics can be easily done in the future. **Vasunandi**,
the commentator of **Mulachar**, has written: "The fast that is to be done on
the fourteenth day should be done on the first day." 2. **Atikrant**: The
**tapa** that should be done during the festival days, if it cannot be done due
to the occasion of service, etc., should be done later on the non-festival days.
**Vasunandi** has written: "The fast that is to be done on the fourteenth day
should be done on the first day." 3. **Kotisahita**: Starting the next **tapa**
without completing the previous **tapa** that is ongoing. **Acharya Abhaydev**
has also given the same meaning in **Sthananga-vritti**. **Acharya Vattakera**
has written the meaning of **Kotisahita pratyakhyan** in **Mulachar** as: "To
resolve to do fasting, etc., according to one's strength." According to
**Vasunandi**, this resolution is **Samanvita pratyakhyan**. For example, if
there is strength after the **svadhyayavela** (time for self-study) the next
day, then I will fast, otherwise not. 4. **Niyantrit**: Even if there are
special obstacles like illness, etc., on the day when one intends to do
**pratyakhyan**, one should do the **pratyakhyan** that one has resolved to do
in the mind, without caring about those obstacles. In **Mulachar**, it is called
**Vikhandit**, but there is no difference in meaning between the two. This
**pratyakhyan** is for **Chaturdasha Purvadhari Jinakalp Shraman** and **Dasha
Purvadhari Shraman**, because their resolve is so strong that no obstacle of any
kind can deter them from their determination. After the **nirvana** (liberation)
of **Jambuswami**, the **Jinakalp** was broken, so this **pratyakhyan** is also
not present today.  - **Aavashyak-niyukti 1596** . 1. **Tatto Charitta-dhammo,
Kamma-vivega Tao Apuvva Tu.** **Tatto Keval-naanam, Tao Ya Mukkho Saya-sukkho.**
|| 2. **Bhagawatisutra 7.2** 3. **Sthananga-vritti Patra 472-473** 4.
**Aavashyak-niyukti, Adhyayan 6** 5. **Mulachar, Shat-aavashyak Adhikar, Gatha
140-141** [52]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 nirjINa hote haiN| usase kevalajJAna, kevaladarzana kA divya Aloka jagamagAne
lagatA hai aura zAzvata mukti rUpI sukha prApta hotA pratyAkhyAna ke mukhya do
bheda haiM - 1. mUlaguNa-pratyAkhyAna aura 2. uttrgunn-prtyaakhyaan| mUlaguNa-
pratyAkhyAna yAvajjIvana ke liye grahaNa kiyA jAtA hai| mUlaguNapratyAkhyAna ke
bhI do bheda haiM - 1. sarvamUlaguNa-pratyAkhyAna aura 2. dezamUlaguNa-
pratyAkhyAna  /  sarvamUlaguNapratyAkhyAna meM zramaNa ke pA~ca mahAvrata Ate
haiM aura dezamUlaguNapratyAkhyAna meM zramaNopAsaka ke pA~ca aNuvrata Ate haiN|
uttaraguNapratyAkhyAna pratidina grahaNa kiyA jAtA hai yA kucha dinoM ke liye|
uttaraguNapratyAkhyAna ke bhI deza uttaraguNapratyAkhyAna aura sarva
uttaraguNapratyAkhyAna ye do bheda haiM  /  gRhasthoM ke liye tIna guNavrata
aura cAra zikSAvrata, ye sAta uttaraguNapratyAkhyAna haiN| zramaNoM aura
zramaNopAsaka donoM ke liye dasa prakAra ke pratyAkhyAna haiN| bhagavatIsUtra,
sthAnAMgavRtti, Avazyakaniyukti aura mUlAcAra meM dasa pratyAkhyAna kA varNana
hai| jisakA saMkSipta sAra isa prakAra hai - 1.anAgata - paryuSaNa Adi parva meM
jo tapa karanA cAhiye, vaha tapa pahale kara lenA jisase ki pUrva ke samaya
vRddha, rugNa, tapasvI Adi kI sevA sahaja rUpa se kI jA ske| mUlAcAra ke
TIkAkAra vasunandI ne likhA hai - caturdazI ko kiyA jAne vAlA upavAsa pratipadA
ko krnaa| 2. atikrAnta - jo tapa parva ke dinoM meM karanA cAhiye, vaha tapa
parva ke dinoM meM sevA Adi kA prasaMga upasthita hone se na kara sake to use
bAda meM aparva ke dinoM meM karanA caahiye| vasunandI ne likhA hai - caturdazI
ko kiyA jAne vAlA upavAsa pratipadA ko krnaa| 3. koTisahita - jo pUrva tapa cala
rahA ho, usa tapa ko binA pUrNa kiye hI agalA tapa prArambha krnaa| AcArya
abhayadeva ne bhI sthAnAMgavRtti meM yahI artha kiyA hai AcArya vaTTakera ne
mUlAcAra meM koTi sahita pratyAkhyAna kA artha likhA hai ki zakti kI apekSA
upavAsa Adi karane kA saMkalpa krnaa| vasunandI ke anusAra yaha saMkalpa
samanvita pratyAkhyAna hai| jaise agale dina svAdhyAyavelA pUrNa hone para yadi
zakti rahI to maiM upavAsa karUMgA, anyathA nahIM kruuNgaa| 4. niyaMtrita - jisa
dina pratyAkhyAna karane kA vicAra ho usa dina roga Adi vizeSa bAdhAeM upasthita
ho jAyeM to bhI una bAdhAoM kI paravAha kiye binA jo mana meM pratyAkhyAna
dhAraNa kiyA, vaha pratyAkhyAna kara lenaa| mUlAcAra meM isakA nAma vikhaMDita
hai, para donoM meM arthabheda nahIM hai| prastuta pratyAkhyAna caturdaza
pUrvadhArI jinakalpI zramaNa, dazapUrvadhArI zramaNa ke liye hai, kyoMki unakA
saMkalpa bala itanA sudRr3ha hotA hai ki kisI bhI prakAra kI koI bhI bAdhA unako
nizcaya se vicalita nahIM kara sktii| jambUsvAmI ke nirvANa ke pazcAt jinakalpa
kA viccheda ho gayA hai, isaliye yaha pratyAkhyAna bhI vartamAna meM nahIM hai|
- Avazyakaniyukti 1596 . 1. tatto carittadhammo, kammavivega tao apuvvaM tu  /
tatto kevalanANaM, tao ya mukkho syaasukkho|| 2. bhagavatIsUtra 7 / 2 3.
sthAnAMgavRtti patra 472-473 4. Avazyakaniyukti, adhyayana 6 5. mUlAcAra,
SaTAvazyaka adhikAra, gAthA 140-141 [52]

Page #56 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Translation:  **5. Sakara:** When making a pratyakhyana, the sadhaka imagines
a specific form in their mind - "If this type of situation arises, I will
renounce it." In other words, the pratyakhyana made by imagining an exception in
the mind is called Sakara-pratyakhyana.  **6. Nirakara:** This pratyakhyana is
made without any exceptions. This pratyakhyana requires strong willpower.
Acharya Abhaydev wrote about the fifth and sixth pratyakhyanas, stating that in
Sakara pratyakhyana, all types of exceptions can be applied, but in Nirakara
pratyakhyana, even exceptions like the command of a superior cannot be applied.
However, the exceptions of Anabhoga and Sahasakara remain in both. Vasunandī,
explaining the meaning of Aakara, wrote that one should perform penance in a
particular constellation. The pratyakhyana made by performing penance for a long
time based on the difference in constellations, etc., is Aakara. Performing
fasting, etc., voluntarily without considering constellations, etc., is Nirakara
pratyakhyana.  **7. Parimanavat:** When going for alms or taking food, the
Shraman makes a vow, "I will only consume this much today." Or, when going to a
householder's house to eat, they think, "If I get this type of food, I will eat
it, otherwise not." For example, Shraman Datti, who holds the image of a monk,
takes food only after determining the quantity. In Mulachar, the word
Parimanagat is used instead of Parimanakrit.  **8. Niraveshesh:** Complete
renunciation of all four types of food: Asan, Pan, Khadim, and Swadim. Vasunandī
Shraman believes that this pratyakhyana is for life. However, there is no such
description in the Svetambar Agam literature.  **9. Sanketik:** The pratyakhyana
made with a signal is called Sanketik pratyakhyana. For example, by making a
fist or tying a knot in a cloth - "Until I open my fist or the knot, I will not
put anything in my mouth." The pratyakhyana in which the sadhaka renounces
according to their convenience is called Sanketik pratyakhyana. In Mulachar, it
is called Adhanagat. Vasunandī Shraman has interpreted Adhanagat pratyakhyana as
a pratyakhyana related to the path. It indicates the practice of fasting while
crossing a forest, river, etc. The meaning of Sahetuk pratyakhyana is fasting
done when an upsurge, etc., occurs.  **10. Adha:** Making a pratyakhyana by
setting a specific time limit. This pratyakhyana includes ten pratyakhyanas:
(including Namokkar) Navkarsi, Porsi, Purvardha, Ekashan, Ekasthan, Achaml,
Upvas, Divascharim, Abhigha, Nirvikrutik. The meaning of Adha is time. Acharya
Abhaydev has interpreted Adha as the pratyakhyana made based on the time limit
of Porsi, etc.  In pratyakhyana, the sadhaka restrains the evil tendencies of
the soul, mind, speech, and body and engages in good tendencies. Due to the
restraint of Asrava, the sadhaka becomes completely detached, which brings them
peace. While taking the things that the sadhaka is allowed to take in
pratyakhyana, they do not become attached to them. Pratyakhyana awakens a
special awareness of non-attachment in the sadhaka's life.  Pratyakhyana has a
special significance in the field of sadhana. The sadhaka should remain
constantly vigilant so that no fault occurs in pratyakhyana. Therefore, there is
a mention of six types of purity in the necessary.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 5. sAkAra - pratyAkhyAna karate samaya sAdhaka mana meM vizeSa AkAra kI kalpanA
karatA hai - yadi isa prakAra kI paristhiti utpanna hogI to maiM isakA tyAga
karatA huuN| dUsare zabdoM meM yUM kahA jA sakatA hai ki mana meM apavAda kI
kalpanA karake jo tyAga kiyA jAtA hai, vaha sAkAra - pratyAkhyAna hai| 6.
nirAkAra - yaha pratyAkhyAna kisI prakAra kA apavAda rakhe binA kiyA jAtA hai|
isa pratyAkhyAna meM dRr3ha manobala kI apekSA hotI hai  /  AcArya abhayadeva ne
pA~caveM, chaThe pratyAkhyAna ke sambandha meM likhA ki sAkAra pratyAkhyAna meM
sabhI prakAra ke apavAda vyavahAra meM lAye jA sakate haiM, para anAkAra
pratyAkhyAna meM mahattara kI AjJA Adi apavAda bhI vyavahAra meM nahIM lAye jA
sakate, tathApi anAbhoga aura sahasAkAra kI chUTa inameM bhI rahatI hai|
vasunandI ne AkAra kA artha spaSTa karate huye likhA hai ki amuka nakSatra meM
amuka tapasyA karanI hai| nakSatra Adi ke bheda ke AdhAra para lambe samaya kA
tapasyA kara pratyAkhyAna hai| nakSatra Adi kA vicAra kiye binA svecchA se
upavAsa Adi karanA anAkAra pratyAkhyAna hai| 7. parimANavata - zramaNa bhikSA ke
liye jAte samaya yA AhAra grahaNa karate samaya yaha pratijJA grahaNa karatA hai
ki maiM Aja itanA hI grAsa grahaNa kruuNgaa| athavA bhojana lene ke liye
gRhastha ke yahA~ jAte samaya mana meM yaha vicAra karanA ki amuka prakAra kA
AhAra prApta hogA to maiM grahaNa karUMgA, anyathA nhiiN| jaise
bhikSupratimAdhArI zramaNadatti Adi kA parimANa karake hI AhAra lete haiM  /
mUlAcAra meM parimANakRta ke sthAna para parimANagata zabda AyA hai| 8.
niravazeSa - azana, pAna, khAdima aura svAdima ina cAroM prakAra ke AhAra kA
pUrNa rUpa se parityAga krnaa| vasunandI zramaNa kA yaha abhimata hai ki yaha
pratyAkhyAna yAvajjIvana ke liye hotA hai| para zvetAmbara Agama sAhitya meM isa
prakAra kA koI varNana nahIM hai| 9. sAMketika - jo pratyAkhyAna saMketapUrvaka
kiyA jAye, vaha sAMketika pratyAkhyAna hai| jaise muTThI bA~dhakara yA kisI
vastra meM gA~Tha lagAkara - jaba taka maiM muTThI yA gA~Tha nahIM kholUMgA,
taba taka koI bhI vastu mukha meM nahIM ddaaluuNgaa| jisa pratyAkhyAna meM
sAdhaka apanI suvidhA ke anusAra pratyAkhyAna karatA hai, vaha sAMketika
pratyAkhyAna kahalAtA hai| mUlAcAra meM isakA nAma addhAnagata hai| vasunandI
zramaNa meM addhAnagata pratyAkhyAna kA artha mArgaviSayaka pratyAkhyAna kiyA
hai| yaha aTavI, nadI Adi ko pAra karate samaya upavAsa karane kI paddhati kA
sUcaka hai| sahetuka pratyAkhyAna kA artha hai - upasarga Adi Ane para kiyA jAne
vAlA upvaas| 10. addhA - samaya vizeSa kI maryAdA nizcita karake pratyAkhyAna
krnaa| isa pratyAkhyAna ke antargata (namokkAra sahita) navakArasI, porasI,
pUrvArddha, ekAzana, ekasthAna, AcAmla, upavAsa, divasacarima, abhigraha,
nirvikRtika, ye dasa pratyAkhyAna Ate haiN| addhA kA artha kAla hai| AcArya
abhayadeva ne addhA kA artha porasI adi kAlamAna ke AdhAra para kiyA jAne vAlA
pratyAkhyAna kiyA hai| pratyAkhyAna meM AtmA, mana, vacana aura kAyA kI duSTa
pravRttiyoM ko rokakara zubha pravRttiyoM meM pravRtta hotA hai| Azrava kA
nirundhana hone se sAdhaka pUrNa nispRha ho jAtA hai, jisase use zAMti upalabdha
hotI hai| pratyAkhyAna meM sAdhaka jina padArthoM ko grahaNa karane kI chUTa
rakhatA hai, una padArthoM ko grahaNa karate samaya Asakta nahIM hotaa|
pratyAkhyAna se sAdhaka ke jIvana meM anAsakti kI vizeSa jAgRti hotI hai|
sAdhanA ke kSetra meM pratyAkhyAna kA viziSTa mahattva rahA hai| pratyAkhyAna
meM kisI bhI prakAra kA doSa na lage, jisake liye sAdhaka ko satata jAgarUka
rahanA caahiye| isIliye Avazyaka meM chaha prakAra kI vizuddhi kA ullekha hai|
[53]

Page #57 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
These purifications are as follows: 1. **Shraddhanavishuddhi** - To follow with
faith the form of the five great vows, twelve vows, etc., which is renunciation.
2. **Jnānavishuddhi** - To know the nature of the renunciation as it is, like
the Jina Kalpa, the Sthavira Kalpa, the Mulaguna, the Uttaraguna, etc. 3.
**Vinayavishuddhi** - Renunciation happens with the mind, speech, and body. In
renunciation, as many salutations are prescribed, so many salutations should be
done. 4. **Anubhashanashuddhi** - While accepting renunciation, stand in the
posture of humility in front of the Sadguru and pronounce the pure text. 5.
**Anupalanashuddhi** - In a terrible forest or in a famine, etc., or in a sick
state, follow the vow with enthusiasm and in the right way. 6.
**Bhavavishuddhi** - To recite the text of renunciation with a pure feeling free
from attachment and aversion.  In the Necessary Appointment, Acharya Bhadrabahu
has written that there is a possibility of three types of defects in
renunciation. Therefore, the seeker should avoid those defects. Those defects
are as follows:  1. A certain person has accepted renunciation, due to which he
is being respected in society. I should also do renunciation in the same way, so
that I will be respected. To do renunciation with such a feeling of attachment.
2. I should do such renunciation that the fame and glory of those who have
accepted renunciation will be dimmed. To do renunciation motivated by ill will
towards others in this way. In this type of renunciation, intense hatred is
manifested. 3. To do renunciation motivated by the feeling that I will get fame
in this world and in the next world also, the flute of happiness and peace will
play in my life. In this, there is a desire for fame, a desire to gain wealth,
etc.  The disciple presented the inquiry - Gurudev! Whose renunciation is good
renunciation and whose renunciation is bad renunciation?  The Lord gave the
solution - The renunciation of that seeker who has knowledge of the living and
the non-living, who has complete knowledge of the purpose for which renunciation
is being done, is good renunciation. The renunciation of that seeker who does
not have knowledge of the living and the non-living, who, due to the
predominance of ignorance, even while doing renunciation, does not know the
essence of renunciation, is bad renunciation. Therefore, such a renunciant is
unrestrained, restless, and a solitary child.  1. Thus, indeed, with the wrong
perception, with the right hand, even with all beings, He speaks of perception,
but he does not speak the truth, he speaks deception ....... - Bhagavati || 2
[54]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 ye vizuddhiyAM nimrAnusAra haiM 1. zraddhAnavizuddhi-paMcamahAvrata,
bArahavrata Adi rUpa jo pratyAkhyAna hai, usakA zraddhA ke sAtha pAlana krnaa|
2. jJAnavizuddhi - jinakalpa, sthavirakalpa, mUlaguNa, uttaraguNa Adi jisa
pratyAkhyAna kA jaisA svarUpa hai, usa svarUpa ko samIcIna rUpa se jaannaa|
3.vinayavizuddhi- mana, vacana aura kAyA sahita pratyAkhyAna hotA hai|
pratyAkhyAna meM jitanI vandanAoM kA vidhAna hai, utanI vandanA avazya karanI
caahiye| 4. anubhASaNAzuddhi - pratyAkhyAna grahaNa karate samaya sadguru ke
sammukha vinayamudrA meM khar3e rahakara zuddha pATha kA uccAraNa kre| 5.
anupAlanAzuddhi - bhayaMkara vana meM yA durbhikSa Adi meM yA rugNa avasthA meM
vrata kA utsAha ke sAtha samyak prakAra se pAlana kre| 6. bhAvavizuddhi- rAga-
dveSa rahita pavitra bhAvanA se pratyAkhyAna kA pATha krnaa| Avazyakaniyukti meM
AcArya bhadrabAhu ne likhA hai ki pratyAkhyAna meM tIna prakAra ke doSa lagane
kI sambhAvanA rahatI hai| ataH sAdhaka ko una doSoM se bacanA caahiye| ve doSa
isa prakAra haiM - 1. amuka vyakti ne pratyAkhyAna grahaNa kiyA hai, jisake
kAraNa usakA samAja meM Adara ho rahA hai| maiM bhI isI prakAra pratyAkhyAna
karUM, jisase merA Adara ho| aisI rAga bhAvanA ko lekara pratyAkhyAna krnaa| 2.
maiM aisA pratyAkhyAna karUM jisake kAraNa jinhoMne pratyAkhyAna grahaNa kiyA
hai, unakI kIrti-kaumudI dhuMdhalI ho jaay| isa prakAra dUsaroM ke prati
durbhAvanA se utprerita hokara pratyAkhyAna krnaa| isa prakAra ke pratyAkhyAna
meM tIvra dveSa prakaTa hotA hai| 3. isa loka meM mujhe yaza prApta hogA aura
paraloka meM bhI mere jIvana meM sukha aura zAMti kI baMzI bajegI, isa bhAvanA
se utprerita hokara pratyAkhyAna krnaa| isameM yaza kI abhilASA, vaibhava prApti
kI kAmanA Adi rahI huI hai| ziSya ne jijJAsA prastuta kI - gurudeva! kisa
sAdhaka kA pratyAkhyAna supratyAkhyAna hai aura kisa sAdhaka kA pratyAkhyAna
duSpratyAkhyAna hai ? bhagavan ne samAdhAna diyA - jisa sAdhaka ko jIva-ajIva kA
parijJAna hai, pratyAkhyAna kisa uddezya se kiyA jA rahA hai, isakI pUrNa
jAnakArI hai, usa sAdhaka kA pratyAkhyAna supratyAkhyAna hai| jisa sAdhaka ko
jIva-ajIva kA parijJAna nahIM hai, jo ajJAna kI pradhAnatA ke kAraNa
pratyAkhyAna karatA huA bhI pratyAkhyAna ke marma ko nahIM jAnatA, usakA
pratyAkhyAna duSpratyAkhyAna hai| ata: aisA pratyAkhyAna karane vAlA asaMyata
hai, avirata hai, aura ekAntabAla hai|' 1. evaM khalu se duppaccakkhAI
savyapANehiM jAva savvasattehiM paccakkhAyamiti vadamANo no saccaM bhAsaM
bhAsai, mosaM bhAsaM bhAsai ....... /  - bhagavatI  /  / 2 [54]

Page #58 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Translation:  **The texts like Pravachana Saroddhara and Yogashastra have
expounded the fourfold truth (Chaturbhangi) by considering the qualifications
and disqualifications of the seeker who accepts the renunciation and the seeker
who grants it.**  1. **When the seeker who accepts the renunciation is wise and
the guru who grants it is knowledgeable, then it is a completely pure
renunciation.** 2. **If the seeker who accepts the renunciation does not know
the secret of renunciation, but the guru who grants it knows the essence of
renunciation and explains it to the disciple in a proper way, then the
disciple's renunciation becomes a correct renunciation. If he does not
understand its essence, then his renunciation is impure.** 3. **If the guru who
grants the renunciation does not know the essence of renunciation, but the one
who is accepting it knows the secret of renunciation, then that renunciation is
pure renunciation. Even if knowledgeable gurus are present, it is inappropriate
to accept renunciation from an ignorant person due to tradition or other
reasons.** 4. **If the seeker who accepts the renunciation does not know the
essence of renunciation and the one from whom he is accepting it is also
ignorant of the secret of renunciation, then his renunciation is an impure
renunciation.**  **Renunciation is in place of Mount Meru in the six essentials
(Shadavashyak). Renunciation stops all future actions of non-observance (Avrata)
and the seeker follows the rules and sub-rules properly.**
**Uttaradhyayanasutra, while contemplating on renunciation, has explained it in
the following ways:**  1. **Samyoga-Pratyakhyana:** Abandoning the practice of
eating together in a group, the food brought by the ascetics. This makes the
being self-reliant and satisfied with the benefits he receives. 2. **Upadhi-
Pratyakhyana:** Abandoning clothes and other equipment. This prevents obstacles
in self-study (Swadhyay) etc. Being free from desires, he does not have the
desire to ask for clothes etc. or to protect them, and there is no mental
distress. 3. **Ahar-Pratyakhyana:** Abandoning food eliminates attachment to
life. Being free from attachment, he does not experience any suffering even in
the absence of food. 4. **Yoga-Pratyakhyana:** Restraining the tendencies of
mind, speech, and body is Yoga-Pratyakhyana. This is attained in the fourteenth
quality stage. Such a seeker does not create new karmas but destroys the
accumulated karmas.  **References:**  1. Pravachana Saroddhara Vritti 2.
Yogashastra, Swopagna Vritti 3. Uttaradhyayanasutra 29/33 4. Uttaradhyayanasutra
29/34 5. Uttaradhyayanasutra 29/35 6. Uttaradhyayanasutra 29/37

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pravacanasAroddhAra, yogazAstra Adi granthoM meM pratyAkhyAna grahaNa karane
vAle sAdhaka aura grahaNa karAne vAle sAdhaka kI yogyatA aura ayogyatA ko lakSya
meM rakhakara catubhaMgI kA pratipAdana kiyA hai - 1.pratyAkhyAna grahaNa karane
vAlA sAdhaka bhI vivekI ho aura pratyAkhyAnapradAtA guru bhI gItArtha ho to vaha
pUrNa zuddha pratyAkhyAna hai| 2. pratyAkhyAna grahaNa karane vAlA pratyAkhyAna
ke rahasya ko nahIM jAnatA para pratyAkhyAna pradAna karane vAlA guru
pratyAkhyAna ke marma ko jAnatA hai aura vaha pratyAkhyAna karane vAle ziSya ko
pratyAkhyAna kA marma samyak prakAra se samajhA detA hai to ziSya kA
pratyAkhyAna sahI pratyAkhyAna ho jAtA hai| yadi vaha usake marma ko nahIM
samajhatA hai to usakA pratyAkhyAna azuddha pratyAkhyAna hai| 3. pratyAkhyAna
pradAna karane vAlA guru pratyAkhyAna ke marma ko nahIM jAnatA kintu jo
pratyAkhyAna grahaNa kara rahA hai, vaha pratyAkhyAna ke rahasya ko jAnatA hai,
to vaha pratyAkhyAna zuddha pratyAkhyAna hai| yadi pratyAkhyAna jJAtA guru
vidyamAna hoM, unakI upasthiti meM bhI paramparA Adi kI dRSTi se agItArtha se
pratyAkhyAna grahaNa karanA anucita hai| 4. pratyAkhyAna grahaNa karane vAlA
pratyAkhyAna ke marma ko nahIM jAnatA aura jisase pratyAkhyAna grahaNa karanA
hai, vaha bhI pratyAkhyAna ke rahasya se anabhijJa hai to usakA pratyAkhyAna
azaddha pratyAkhyAna hai|| SaDAvazyaka meM pratyAkhyAna sumeru ke sthAna para
hai| pratyAkhyAna se bhaviSya meM Ane vAlI avrata kI sabhI kriyAe~ ruka jAtI
haiM aura sAdhaka niyamoM-upaniyamoM kA samyak pAlana karatA hai| uttarAdhyayana
meM pratyAkhyAna ke sambandha meM cintana karate huye nimra prakAra batAye haiM
- 1. saMbhoga-pratyAkhyAna - zramaNoM dvArA lAye huye AhAra ko eka sthAna para
maNDalIbaddha baiTha kara khAne kA parityAga krnaa| isase jIva svAvalambI hotA
hai aura apane dvArA prApta lAbha se hI saMtuSTa rahatA hai| 2. upadhi-
pratyAkhyAna - vastra Adi upakaraNoM kA tyAga krnaa| isase svAdhyAya Adi karane
meM vighra upasthita nahIM hotaa| AkAMkSA rahita hone se vastra Adi mAMgane kI
aura unakI rakSA karane kI use icchA nahIM hotI tathA mana meM saMkleza bhI
nahIM hotaa| 3. AhAra-pratyAkhyAna - AhAra kA parityAga karane se jIvana ke
prati mamatva nahIM rhtaa| nirmamatva hone se AhAra ke abhAva meM bhI use kisI
prakAra ke kaSTa kI anubhUti nahIM hotii| 4. yoga-pratyAkhyAna - mana, vacana
aura kAya sambandhI pravRtti ko rokanA yoga-pratyAkhyAna hai| yaha caudahaveM
guNa sthAna meM prApta hotA hai| aisA sAdhaka nUtana karmoM kA bandha nahIM
karatA varan pUrvasaMcita karmoM ko kSaya karatA hai| 1. jANago jANagasagAse,
ajANago jANagasagAse, jANago ajANagasagAse, ajANago ajaanngsgaase| -
pravacanasAroddhAravRtti 2. yogazAstra, svopajJavRtti 3. uttarAdhyayana 29/33 4.
uttarAdhyayana 29/34 5. uttarAdhyayana 29/35 6. uttarAdhyayana 29/37

Page #59 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
5. **Sadbhaav-pratyakhyaan** - To attain the state of **vitraag** by abandoning
all kinds of tendencies. In this, the soul becomes free from all kinds of
karmas. 6. **Shariir-pratyakhyaan** - In this, the state of **ashariiri siddha**
is attained. 7. **Sahay-pratyakhyaan** - Not taking the help of anyone in one's
work. This makes the soul attain **ekatva bhaav**. By attaining **ekatva
bhaav**, it becomes wordless, free from strife, full of restraint and full of
samadhi. 8. **Kashaay-pratyakhyaan** - Generally, the **saamyami sadhak**
conquers **kashaay**, due to which the sadhak does not bind karmas. By
conquering **kashaay**, he does not have attachment or hatred towards pleasant
and unpleasant objects. Thus, the types of **pratyakhyaan** and their fruits are
described in **Uttaraadhyaayan**. **Pratyakhyaan** stops the sinful acts that
will happen in the future and the sadhak's life starts to shine with the
pleasant light of restraint.  Thus, **Shadaavashyak** are essential for the
sadhak. Whether the sadhak is a **shraavak** or a **shraman**, he does these
actions. Yes, the depth and intensity of their experience can be and is
different. A **shraman** can do these actions with more dedication than a
**shraavak** because he is a renunciate of the world, completely detached from
the beginning. This is why his sadhana has more brilliance than that of a
**shraavak**. **Shadaavashyak** have a very important place in the life of a
sadhak. Where **aavashyak** brings spiritual purity, there is also an increase
in virtues like equality, humility, forgiveness, etc. in worldly life, due to
which the springs of joy start flowing.  **Vyakhyasaahitya**  **Aavashyak
Sutra** is such an important sutra that the most commentaries have been written
on it. Its main commentary texts are - **Niyukti**, **Bhaashya**, **Churni**,
**Vritti**, **Stabak** (Tabba) and **Hindi Vivechan**.  Ten **niyukti** are
available on the **aagam**. The name of the first **niyukti** among those ten
**niyukti** is **Aavashyak Niyukti**. **Aavashyak Niyukti** discusses many
important topics in detail. In the subsequent **niyukti**, it is indicated to
look at **Aavashyak Niyukti** without discussing those topics. To understand
other **niyukti**, it is necessary to understand **Aavashyak Niyukti**. It first
has an **upoudghaat**, which is in the form of an introduction. It has 880
**gaathaa**. It is a detailed description of the first five **gyaan**.  After
the description of **gyaan**, **niyukti** describes **Shadaavashyak**. It first
has **samaayik**. **Chaaritra** begins with **samaayik**. Both **gyaan** and
**chaaritra** are necessary for liberation. The one who is eligible for
**samaayik** is **shrutagyani**. He attains **kshay**, **upsham**,
**kshayopsham**, **kevalgyaan** and **moksh**. The one who is eligible for
**samaayik shruta** attains a glorious position like **tirthankar**. The
**shruta** that the **tirthankar** preaches after attaining **kevalgyaan** is
**Jinpravachan**. That 1. **Uttaraadhyaayan** 29/41 2. **Uttaraadhyaayan** 29/38
o० 3. **Uttaraadhyaayan** 29/39 4. **Uttaraadhyaayan** 29/36 [56]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 5. sadbhAva-pratyAkhyAna - sabhI prakAra kI pravRttiyoM kA parityAga kara
vItarAga avasthA ko prApta krnaa| isameM jIva sabhI prakAra ke karmoM se mukta
ho jAtA hai| 6. zarIra-pratyAkhyAna - isameM azarIrI siddhAvasthA prApta hotI
hai| 7. sahAya-pratyAkhyAna - apane kArya meM kisI kA bhI sahayoga na lenaa|
isase jIva ekatvabhAva ko prApta karatA hai| ekatvabhAva prApta hone se vaha
zabdavihIna, kalahavihIna, saMyamabahula tathA samAdhibahula ho jAtA hai| 8.
kaSAya-pratyAkhyAna - sAmAnyarUpa se kaSAya ko saMyamI sAdhaka jItatA hI hai,
jisase sAdhaka karmoM kA bandha nahIM krtaa| kaSAyoM para vijaya prApta karane
se use manojJa aura amanojJa viSayoM ke prati mamatva yA dveSa nahIM hotaa| isa
prakAra uttarAdhyayana meM pratyAkhyAnoM ke prakAra va usake phala nirUpita kiye
haiN| pratyAkhyAna se bhaviSya meM hone vAle pApakRtya ruka jAte haiM aura
sAdhaka kA jIvana saMyama ke suhAvane Aloka se jagamagAne lagatA hai| isa
prakAra SaDAvazyaka sAdhaka ke liye avazya karaNIya haiN| sAdhaka cAhe zrAvaka
ho athavA zramaNa, vaha ina kriyAoM ko karatA hI hai| hA~, ina donoM kI gaharAI
aura anubhUti meM tIvratA, maMdatA ho sakatI hai aura hotI hai| zrAvaka kI
apekSA zramaNa ina kriyAoM ko adhika tallInatA ke sAtha kara sakatA hai kyoMki
vaha saMsAratyAgI hai, Arambha-samArambha se sarvathA virata hai| isI kAraNa
usakI sAdhanA meM zrAvaka kI apekSA adhika tejasvitA hotI hai| SaDAvazyakoM kA
sAdhaka ke jIvana meM bahuta hI mahattvapUrNa sthAna hai| Avazyaka se jahA~
AdhyAtmika zuddhi hotI hai, vahAM laukika jIvana meM bhI samatA, namratA,
kSamAbhAva Adi sadguNoM kI vRddhi hone se Ananda ke nila nirjhara bahane lagate
haiN| vyAkhyAsAhitya AvazyakasUtra eka aisA mahattvapUrNa sUtra hai ki usa para
sabase adhika vyAkhyAyeM likhI gayI haiN| isake mukhya vyAkhyAgrantha ye haiM -
niyukti, bhASya, cUrNi, vRtti, stabaka (TabbA) aura hindI vivecn| AgamoM para
dasa niyuktiyAM prApta haiN| una dasa niyuktiyoM meM prathama niyukti kA nAma
Avazyakaniyukti hai| Avazyakaniyukti meM aneka mahattvapUrNa viSayoM para
vistAra se carcA kI gaI hai| usake pazcAt kI niyuktiyoM meM una viSayoM kI
carcAeM na kara Avazyakaniyukti ko dekhane kA saMketa kiyA gayA hai| anya
niyuktiyoM ko samajhane ke liye Acazyakaniyukti ko samajhanA Avazyaka hai|
isameM sarvaprathama upodghAta hai, jo bhUmikA ke rUpa meM hai| usameM 880
gAthAeM haiN| prathama pA~ca jJAnoM kA vistAra se nirUpaNa hai| jJAna ke varNana
ke pazcAt niyukti meM SaDAvazyaka kA nirUpaNa hai| usameM sarvaprathama sAmAyika
hai| cAritra kA prArambha hI sAmAyika se hotA hai  /  mukti ke liye jJAna aura
cAritra ye donoM Avazyaka haiN| sAmAyika kA adhikArI zrutajJAnI hotA hai| vaha
kSaya, upazama, kSayopazama kara kevalajJAna aura mokSa ko prApta karatA hai|
sAmAyikazruta kA adhikArI hI tIrthakara jaise gauravazAlI pada ko prApta karatA
hai| tIrthakara kevalajJAna hone ke pazcAt jisa zruta kA upadeza karate haiM
vahI jinapravacana hai| usa 1. uttarAdhyayana 29/41 2. uttarAdhyayana 29/38 o0
3. uttarAdhyayana 29/39 4. uttarAdhyayana 29/36 [56]

Page #60 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
After detailed contemplation, the purpose, instructions, and outcomes of Samayik
have been discussed through 26 points. While contemplating how to eliminate
Mithyatva, the author has described Mahavira's previous births, the conduct of
the Kulkaras in those births, the life story of Bhagwan Rishabhdev, etc., in
detail. The Nihavas have also been explained.  After contemplating Samayik from
the perspective of Nay, Samyaktva, Shruta, and Charitra have been identified as
the three aspects of Samayik. The one whose soul delights in restraint, rules,
and austerity, whose inner mind is filled with an ocean of equanimity towards
all beings - they are the true recipient of Samayik. The Samayik Sutra begins
with the Namaskar Maha Mantra. Therefore, the origin, deposition, words,
meaning, form, object, objection, fame, order, purpose, and fruit of the
Namaskar Mantra have been contemplated from these eleven perspectives, which is
very beneficial for the seeker. (Sarvavirat) In Samayik, the three Karans and
three Yogas lead to the abandonment of the conscious tendency.  The second study
is of the Chaturvinshati Stav. It sheds light on the six depositions of name,
establishment, substance, field, time, and feeling.  The third study is of
Vandana. Chitikarma, Kritikarma, Pujakarma, and Vinayakarma are synonyms for
Vandana. Who should be worshipped? By whom should it be done? When should it be
done? How many times should it be done? How many times should one bow their
head? How many essentials are required for purification? How many faults should
one be freed from? Why should Vandana be done? These nine points have been
considered. The Shraman who has excellent conduct and pure thoughts is worthy of
Vandana. Vandana should be performed when the Shraman is calm, assured, and
tranquil.  The fourth study is called Pratikraman. Pratikraman is the return of
the soul to its own place, which has gone astray into Mithyatva, etc., due to
carelessness. Praticharana, Pariharana, Varana, Nivritti, Ninda, Garha, Shuddhi
- these are synonyms for Pratikraman. Many examples have been given in the text
to understand their meaning. The stories of Nagadatta, etc., have been given.
After this, a collection of 32 Yogas like Alochana, Nirapalap, Aapatti,
Dridhadharmata, etc., has been compiled and examples of Mahagir, Sthulbhadra,
Dharmaghoosh, Surendradatt, Varattak, Vaidhanvantari, Karkandu, Arya
Pushpabhooti, etc., have also been given to explain them. Along with this, light
has been shed on Swadhyaya-Aswadhyaya.  The fifth study is the explanation of
Kayotsarga. Kayotsarga and Vyutsarga are synonymous. Some faults are corrected
by Alochana, some by Pratikraman, and some by Kayotsarga. Kayotsarga eliminates
the inertia of the body and mind. It develops the ability to endure pleasure and
pain. It involves contemplation of the twelve Anuprekshas like Anitya, Asharan,
etc. The fickleness of the mind is destroyed and the practice of Shubhadhyan
continuously increases. While contemplating Shubhadhyan, the author has said
that the concentration of the mind for a moment is called Dhyan. He has
described four types of that Dhyan: Art, Raudra, Dharma, and Shukla. The first
two Dhyans are called Apadhyan because they are for the purpose of worldly
advancement, and the last two Dhyans are praiseworthy because they are the cause
of liberation. A lot of information has been given about the relationship
between Dhyan and Kayotsarga, which is knowledge-enhancing. The Shraman should
perform Kayotsarga according to his ability. Performing Kayotsarga for longer
than one's capacity can lead to many kinds of faults. It is not appropriate to
sleep deceitfully during Kayotsarga, to ask questions about the Sutra and its
meaning, to remove thorns, to go to the toilet, etc. This shows neglect towards
the task. Kayotsarga [57]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 para vistAra se cintana karane ke pazcAt sAmAyika para uddezya, nirdeza,
nirgama Adi 26 bAtoM ke dvArA vivecana kiyA gayA hai| mithyAtva kA nirgamana
kisa prakAra kiyA jAtA hai, isa prazna kA cintana karate hue niyuktikAra ne
mahAvIra ke pUrva bhavoM kA varNana, usameM kulakaroM kI caryA, bhagavAna
RSabhadeva kA jIvana-paricaya Adi vistRta rUpa se diyA hai| nihavoM kA bhI
nirUpaNa naya dRSTi se sAmAyika para cintana karane ke pazcAt samyaktva, zruta
aura cAritra; ye tIna sAmAyika ke bheda kiye gaye haiN| jisakI AtmA saMyama,
niyama aura tapa meM ramaNa karatI hai, jisake antarmAnasa meM prANimAtra ke
prati samabhAva kA samudra ThAThe mAratA hai - vahI sAmAyika kA saccA adhikArI
hai| sAmAyika sUtra ke prArambha meM namaskAra mahAmaMtra AtA hai| isaliye
namaskAra maMtra kI utpatti, nikSepa, pada, padArtha, prarUpaNA, vastu, AkSepa,
prasiddhi, krama, prayojana aura phala - ina gyAraha dRSTiyoM se namaskAra
mahAmaMtra para cintana kiyA gayA hai jo sAdhaka ke liye bahuta hI upayogI hai|
(sarvavirati) sAmAyika meM tIna karaNa aura tIna yoga se sAvadha pravRtti kA
tyAga hotA hai| dUsarA adhyayana caturviMzatistava kA hai| isameM nAma,
sthApanA, dravya, kSetra, kAla aura bhAva ina chaha nikSepoM kI dRSTi se prakAza
DAlA gayA hai| tRtIya adhyayana vandanA kA hai  /  citikarma, kRtikarma,
pUjAkarma aura vinayakarma, ye vandanA ke paryAyavAcI haiM  /  vandanA kise
karanI cAhiye ? kisake dvArA honI cAhiye ? kaba honI cAhiye ? kitanI bAra honI
cAhiye ? kitanI bAra sira jhukanA cAhiye? kitane AvazyakoM se zuddhi honI cAhiye
? kitane doSoM se mukti honI cAhiye ? vandanA kisaliye karanI cAhiye? prabhRti
nau bAtoM para vicAra kiyA gayA hai| vahI zramaNa vandanIya hai jisakA AcAra
utkRSTa hai aura vicAra nirmala hai| jisa samaya vaha prazAnta, Azvasta aura
upazAnta ho, usI samaya vandanA karanI caahiye| caturtha adhyayana kA nAma
pratikramaNa hai| pramAda ke kAraNa AtmabhAva se jo AtmA mithyAtva Adi
parasthAna meM jAtA hai, usakA punaH apane sthAna meM AnA pratikramaNa hai|
praticaraNA, pariharaNA, vAraNA, nivRtti, nindA, garhA, zuddhi - ye pratikramaNa
ke paryAyavAcI haiN| inake artha ko samajhane ke liye niyukti meM aneka dRSTAnta
diye gaye haiN| nAgadatta Adi kI kathAeM dI gaI haiN| isake pazcAt AlocanA,
nirapalApa, Apatti, dRr3hadharmatA Adi 32 yogoM kA saMgraha kiyA gayA hai aura
unheM samajhAne ke liye mahAgiri, sthUlabhadra, dharmaghoSa, surendradatta,
vArattaka, vaidya dhanavantari, karakaNDu, Arya puSpabhUti Adi ke udAharaNa bhI
diye gaye haiN| sAtha hI svAdhyAya-asvAdhyAya ke sambandha meM prakAza DAlA gayA
hai| pA~caveM adhyayana meM kAyotsarga kA nirUpaNa hai| kAyotsarga aura
vyutsarga ye ekArthavAcI haiN| kucha doSa AlocanA se ThIka hote haiM to kucha
doSa pratikramaNa se aura kucha doSa kAyotsarga se ThIka hote haiN| kAyotsarga
se deha aura buddhi kI jar3atA miTatI hai| sukha-duHkha ko sahana karane kI
kSamatA samutpanna hotI hai| usameM anitya, azaraNa Adi dvAdaza anuprekSAoM kA
cintana hotA hai| mana kI caMcalatA naSTa ho kara zubhadhyAna kA abhyAsa
nirantara bar3hatA hai| niyuktikAra ne zubhadhyAna para cintana karate hue kahA
hai ki antarmuhUrta taka citta kI jo ekAgratA hai, vahI dhyAna hai| usa dhyAna
ke Arta, raudra, dharma aura zukla - ye cAra prakAra batAye haiN| prathama do
dhyAna saMsAra-abhivRddhi ke hetu hone se unheM apadhyAna kahA hai aura antima
do dhyAna mokSa kA kAraNa hone se prazasta haiN| dhyAna aura kAyotsarga ke
sambandha meM aneka prakAra kI jAnakArI dI gaI hai jo jJAnavardhaka hai| zramaNa
ko apane sAmarthya ke anusAra kAyotsarga karanA caahiye| zakti se adhika samaya
taka kAyotsarga karane se aneka prakAra ke doSa samutpanna ho sakate haiN|
kAyotsarga ke samaya kapaTapUrvaka nidrA lenA, sUtra aura artha kI pratipRcchA
karanA, kAMTA nikAlanA, laghuzaMkA Adi karane ke liye cale jAnA ucita nahIM hai|
isase usa kArya ke prati upekSA prakaTa hotI hai| kAyotsarga [57]

Page #61 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
They have also mentioned 19 defects like *ghotk* etc. The person who is beyond
the body and mind is the true owner of *kayotsarga*. The sixth study,
*pratyakhyana*, has been discussed from six perspectives: *pratyakhyana*,
*pratyakhyata*, *pratyakhyeya*, *pardshad*, *kathana-vidhi*, and *phal*. There
are six types of *pratyakhyana*: name, establishment, substance, *aditsa*,
prohibition, and feeling. The purity of *pratyakhyana* comes from six types:
faith, knowledge, humility, *anubhashana*, observance, and feeling.
*Pratyakhyana* stops the flow of *ashrava*. It leads to immersion in the river
of equality. By worshipping character, the *karma* is destroyed. By performing
*apuurvakarana*, one ascends to the *kshapka* category and attains *kevalgyan*.
Finally, one gets the uninterrupted happiness of liberation. The person who is
not distracted and uncorrupted is the owner of *pratyakhyana*. In
*avashyakaniyukti*, all the rules and regulations that make the life of a
*shraman* brilliant and dominant have been discussed in detail. This *niyukti*
also presents ancient historical facts. The author of this *niyukti* is Acharya
Bhadrabahu. Historians believe that there were many Acharyas named Bhadrabahu in
Jain history. One of them, the fourteenth *purvadhari* Acharya Bhadrabahu, went
to Nepal to practice *mahapranayama* yoga. From the perspective of the
Svetambara tradition, he was the author of *chedasutra*. According to the
Digambara tradition, he went to the south instead of Nepal. From our
perspective, these two Bhadrabahus must have been separate individuals. Because
the one who went to Nepal did not go to the south, and the one who went to the
south did not go to Nepal. The author of *niyukti*, Bhadrabahu, was the brother
of the famous astrologer Varahamihira. His time is the sixth century of the
Vikram era. Punyavijayaji, the author of *Agam Prabhakar*, believes that
Shrutakevali Bhadrabahu started the *niyuktis*, and they continued to develop
until the second Bhadrabahu. Thus, some of the *niyuktis* are very ancient,
while others are more recent. The current *niyuktis* are not entirely composed
by the fourteenth *purvadhara* Bhadrabahu. Because the author of *niyukti*,
Bhadrabahu, has saluted the author of *chedasutra*, Bhadrabahu. According to our
opinion, in *Samavayanga*, *Sthananga*, and *Nandi*, where the introduction of
*dwadasanga* is given, the text "sankejjau nijjuttio" is found. This makes it
clear that the tradition of *niyuktis* existed even during the *agam* period.
Each Acharya or *upaadhyaya* would have created *niyuktis* from their own
perspective to make their disciples understand the secrets of the *agam* by
heart. Just like professors today make their students write notes, *niyuktis*
would have been like that. The second Bhadrabahu would have given the final form
to the *niyuktis* based on them. After the *niyuktis*, commentary literature was
written. The style of commentary of *niyuktis* was very cryptic and concise.
They lacked the expansion of the subject. Their main goal was to explain the
technical terms. The commentaries, written in Prakrit language in detail to
reveal the deep secrets of *niyuktis*, are known by that name. The credit for
expressing the abundance of meaning hidden in the words of *niyuktis* goes to
the commentators. In the commentary, the use of Magadhi and Shaurseni is visible
in many places. The main meter is *arya*. The commentary literature presents
many ancient traditions, worldly stories, and the methods of conduct and thought
of traditional *shramans*. **Commentary** The name of the commentator
Jinabhadragani Kshamasraman is engraved in Jain history with honor. He wrote
*Vishesh Avashyak Bhashya* on *Avashyak Sutra*. Three commentaries were written
on *Avashyak Sutra*: 1. *Mula Bhashya*, 2. *Bhashya*, and 3. *Vishesh Avashyak
Bhashya*. The first two commentaries are very concise. Many of their verses are
found in *Vishesh Avashyak Bhashya*. Therefore, *Vishesh Avashyak Bhashya* also
represents both commentaries. This commentary is only on the first study,
*Samayik*. It has 3603 verses. .. [58]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 ke ghoTaka Adi 19 doSa bhI batAye haiN| jo deha buddhi se pare hai, vahI vyakti
kAyotsarga kA saccA adhikArI hai| chaThe adhyayana pratyAkhyAna kA pratyAkhyAna,
pratyAkhyAtA, pratyAkhyeya, parSada, kathanavidhi aura phala ina chaha dRSTiyoM
se vivecana kiyA gayA hai| pratyAkhyAna ke nAma, sthApanA, dravya, aditsA,
pratiSedha aura bhAva, ye chaha prakAra haiN| pratyAkhyAna kI vizuddhi zraddhA,
jJAna, vinaya, anubhASaNA, anupAlana aura bhAva - ina chaha prakAra se hotI hai|
pratyAkhyAna se Azrava kA nirundhana hotA hai| samatA kI saritA meM avagAhana
kiyA jAtA hai| cAritra kI ArAdhanA karane se karmoM kI nirjarA hotI hai|
apUrvakaraNa kara kSapaka zreNI para ArUr3ha ho kara kevalajJAna prApta hotA hai
aura anta meM mokSa kA avyAbAdha sukha milatA hai| pratyAkhyAna kA adhikArI vahI
sAdhaka hai jo vikSipta aura avinIta na ho| _ Avazyakaniyukti meM zramaNa jIvana
ko tejasvI-varcasvI banAne vAle jitane bhI niyamopaniyama haiM, una saba kI
carcA vistAra se kI gaI hai| prAcIna aitihAsika tathyoM kA pratipAdana bhI isa
niyukti meM huA hai| prastuta niyukti ke racayitA AcArya bhadrabAhu haiN|
itihAsavijJoM kA abhimata hai ki jaina itihAsa meM bhadrabAhu nAmaka aneka
AcArya huye haiM, unameM eka caturdaza pUrvadhArI AcArya bhadrabAhu nepAla meM
mahAprANAyAma nAmaka yoga kI sAdhanA karane gaye the, ve zvetAmbara paramparA kI
dRSTi se cheda sUtrakAra the| digambara paramparA ke anusAra ve bhadrabAhu
nepAla na jAkara dakSiNa meM gaye the| para hamArI dRSTi se ye donoM bhadrabAhu
eka na hokara pRthaka-pRthaka rahe hoNge| kyoMki jo nepAla gaye the ve dakSiNa
meM nahIM gaye haiM aura jo dakSiNa meM gaye the ve nepAla nahIM gaye the|
niyuktikAra bhadrabAhu prasiddha jyotirvid varAhamihira ke sahodara bhrAtA the|
unakA samaya vikrama kI chaThI zatAbdI hai| AgamaprabhAkara puNyavijayajI kA
mantavya hai ki zrutakevalI bhadrabAhu ne niyuktiyAM prArambha kI aura dvitIya
bhadrabAhu taka una niyuktiyoM meM vikAsa hotA rhaa| isa prakAra niyuktiyoM meM
kucha gAthAeM bahuta hI prAcIna haiM to kucha arvAcIna haiN| vartamAna meM jo
niyuktiyAM haiM, ve caturdaza pUrvadhara bhadrabAhu ke dvArA pUrNa rUpa se
racita nahIM haiN| kyoMki niyuktikAra bhadrabAhu ne chedasUtrakAra bhadrabAhu ko
namaskAra kiyA hai| hamAre abhimatAnusAra samavAyAMga, sthAnAMga evaM nandI meM
jahAM para dvAdazAMgI kA paricaya pradAna kiyA gayA hai, vahAM para 'saMkhejjAo
nijjuttIo' yaha pATha prApta hotA hai| isase yaha spaSTa hai ki niyuktiyoM kI
paramparA AgamakAla meM bhI thii| pratyeka AcArya yA upAdhyAya apane ziSyoM ko
Agama kA rahasya hRdayaMgama karAne ke liye apanI-apanI dRSTi se niyuktiyoM kI
racanA karate rahe hoNge| jaise vartamAna prophesara vidyAthiyoM ko noTsa
likhavAte haiM, vaise hI niyuktiyAM rahI hoNgii| unhIM ko mUla AdhAra banAkara
dvitIya bhadrabAhu ne niyuktiyoM ko antima rUpa diyA hogaa| niyuktiyoM ke pazcAt
bhASya sAhitya likha gyaa| niyuktiyoM kI vyAkhyAzailI bahuta hI gUr3ha aura
saMkSipta thii| unameM viSaya vistAra kA abhAva thaa| usakA mukhya lakSya
pAribhASika zabdoM kI vyAkhyA karanA thaa| niyuktiyoM ke gambhIra rahasyoM ko
prakaTa karane ke liye vistAra se prAkRta bhASA meM jo padyAtmaka vyAkhyAeM
likhI gaIM, ve bhASya ke nAma se prasiddha haiN| niyuktiyoM ke zabdoM meM chipe
huye arthabAhulya ko abhivyakta karane kA zreya bhASyakAroM ko hai| bhASya meM
aneka sthaloM para mAgadhI aura zaurasenI ke prayoga dRSTigocara hote haiN|
mukhya chanda AryA hai| bhASya sAhitya meM aneka prAcIna anuzrutiyoM, laukika
kathAoM aura paramparAgata zramaNoM ke AcAra-vicAra kI vidhiyoM kA pratipAdana
hai| bhASya bhASyakAra jinabhadragaNI kSamAzramaNa kA nAma jaina itihAsa meM
gaurava ke sAtha uTuMkita hai| AvayakasUtra para unhoMne vizeSAvazyakabhASya kI
racanA kii| AvazyakasUtra para tIna bhASya likhe gaye-1. mUlabhASya 2. bhASya
aura 3. vishessaavshykbhaassy| pahale ke do bhASya bahuta hI saMkSepa meM likhe
gaye haiN| unakI bahuta sI gAthAeM vizeSAvazyakabhASya meM mila gaI haiN|
isaliye vizeSAvazyakabhASya donoM bhASyoM kA bhI pratinidhitva karatA hai| yaha
bhASya kevala prathama adhyayana sAmAyika para hai| isameM 3603 gAthAeM haiN| ..
[58]

Page #62 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
This commentary reflects upon almost all the important topics described in Jain
Agam literature. It is a compilation and assessment of detailed material on
knowledge, proof, ethics, Syadvada, Nayavada, and Karmavada. Its greatest
feature is that Jain philosophical principles are compared with other
philosophical principles. It analyzes the beliefs of Jain Agam literature from a
logical perspective. This commentary is very useful for understanding the deep
secrets of Agam and has been followed by later scholars. First, the sermons are
greeted, and then it is written that liberation is attained through both
knowledge and action. The necessary is itself knowledge-action-filled. From it,
perfection is attained. Just as a skilled physician allows a suitable diet for a
child, so too has the Lord granted permission for the necessary for seekers.
Various obstacles arise in the best work. There is a provision for
auspiciousness for their peace. Auspiciousness occurs in three places in the
text. The word auspiciousness has been contemplated from the perspective of
deposition. Knowledge feeling is auspicious. Therefore, there is a very detailed
description of the five types of knowledge.  The necessary has been contemplated
from names, etc., deposits. There are two types of necessary: substance-
necessary and Agam and non-Agam forms. The example of Prince Kunal is given for
the high-letter text. The example of the Vidyadhar is given for the low-letter
text. The example of a child is given for both, and for the eager, examples of
excessive food and medicine are given. To clarify the nature of the non-Agam
form of the substance-necessary, the example of the Sadhvabhas is given. The
feeling-necessary is also of two types: Agam form and non-Agam form. The use of
the meaning of the necessary, which is the result of form, is the Agam form of
feeling-necessary. The knowledge-action, which is the result of both forms, is
the non-Agam form of feeling-necessary. The synonyms of the six necessities and
their meaning-authority have been considered.  While contemplating Samayik, it
has been said - equanimity is the characteristic of Samayik. Just as space is
the basis of all substances, so too is Samayik the basis of all virtues. There
are three types of Samayik: vision, knowledge, and character. There are many
gates to enter a great city, so too are there four gates to the study of
Samayik: undertaking, deposition, following, and Nay. All four gates have been
described in detail. The essence of Samayik scripture is Samayik. Character is
the direct cause of liberation. The purity of character comes from the true
knowledge of the object through knowledge. Even with perfect knowledge, the
being does not become liberated until it receives the benefit of complete
purification. When does the being receive the benefit of Samayik? While
contemplating this, it has been written that the being cannot receive the
benefit of Samayik while the eight karma natures are in their excellent states.
The excellent state of name, lineage is twenty koți-koți sagaropama. The
excellent state of the deluding is seventy koți-koți sagaropama. The excellent
state of knowledge-obscuring, vision-obscuring, painful, and hindrance is thirty
koți-koți sagaropama. The excellent state of life-karma is thirty-three
sagaropama. When the excellent state of the deluding karma is bound, the
excellent state of knowledge-obscuring, vision-obscuring, painful, name,
lineage, and hindrance karma is bound, but there is no fixed rule for the state
of life-karma. It can be bound in all three states: excellent, medium, and
inferior. When the excellent state of any karma other than the deluding is
bound, the excellent state of the deluding or other karma is bound, but the
state of life-karma can also be bound in the inferior state. Of these Samayik:
rightness, scripture, country-vow, and all-vow, whoever has bound the excellent
karma state, cannot attain even one Samayik. But it also happens and does not
happen from the previously accepted alternative. For example, in the Uttara-
Vimana-dwelling gods, there is previously accepted rightness, scripture, but not
in the rest. Those who have the inferior state of knowledge-obscuring, etc., do
not even receive the benefit of one of these four Samayik, because they have
already received it. Therefore, the question of receiving it again does not
arise. The inferior state of life-karma [59]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prastuta bhASya meM jainAgamasAhitya meM varNita jitane bhI mahattvapUrNa
viSaya haiM, prAyaH una sabhI para cintana kiyA hai| jJAnavAda, pramANavAda,
AcAra nIti, syAdvAda, nayavAda, karmavAda para vizada sAmagrI kA Akalana-
saMkalana hai| isakI sabase bar3I vizeSatA yaha hai ki jaina dArzanika siddhAnto
kI tulanA anya dArzanika siddhAnto ke sAtha kI gaI hai| isameM jaina
AgamasAhitya kI mAnyatAoM kA tArkika dRSTi se vizleSaNa kiyA gayA hai| Agama ke
gahana rahasyoM ko samajhane ke liye yaha bhASya bahuta hI upayogI hai aura isI
bhASya kA anusaraNa paravartI vijJoM ne kiyA hai| sarvaprathama pravacanoM ko
namaskAra kiyA hai, usake pazcAt likhA hai ki jJAna aura kriyA donoM se mokSa
prApta hotA hai| Avazyaka svayaM jJAna-kriyAmaya hai| usI se siddhi samprApta
hotI hai| jaise kuzala vaidya bAlaka ke liye yogya AhAra kI anumati detA hai,
vaise hI bhagavAn ne sAdhakoM ke liye Avazyaka kI anumati pradAna kI hai|
zreSTha kArya meM vividha prakAra ke vighna upasthita hote haiN| unakI zAnti ke
liye maMgala kA vidhAna hai| grantha meM maMgala tIna sthAnoM para hotA hai|
maMgala zabda para nikSepa dRSTi se cintana kiyA hai| jJAna bhAva maMgala hai|
ataH jJAna ke pA~coM bhedoM kA bahuta vistAra ke sAtha nirUpaNa hai| Avazyaka
para nAma Adi nikSapoM se cintana kiyA gayA hai| dravya-Avazyaka, Agama aura no-
Agama rUpa do prakAra kA hai| adhikAkSara pATha ke liye rAjaputra kuNAla kA
udAharaNa diyA hai| hInAkSara pATha ke liye vidyAdhara kA udAharaNa diyA hai|
ubhaya ke liye bAla kA udAharaNa diyA hai aura Atura ke liye atimAtrA meM
bhojana aura bheSaja viparyaya ke udAharaNa diye haiN| lokottara noAgama rUpa
dravyAvazyaka ke svarUpa ko spaSTa karane ke liye sAdhvAbhAsa kA dRSTAnta dekara
samajhAyA gayA hai| bhAvaAvazyaka bhI Agama rUpa aura noAgama rUpa do prakAra kA
hai| Avazyaka ke artha kA jo upayoga rUpa pariNAma hai vaha AgamaM rUpa bhAva-
Avazyaka hai| jJAna-kriyA ubhaya rUpa jo pariNAma hai, vaha noAgama rUpa bhAva-
Avazyaka hai| SaDAvazyaka ke paryAya aura usake arthAdhikAra para vicAra kiyA
gayA hai| sAmAyika para cintana karate huye kahA hai - samabhAva hI sAmAyika kA
lakSaNa hai| sabhI dravyoM kA AdhAra AkAza hai, vaise hI sabhI sadguNoM kA
AdhAra sAmAyika hai| sAmAyika ke darzana, jJAna aura cAritra ye tIna bheda haiN|
kisI mahAnagara meM praveza karane ke liye aneka dvAra hote haiM, vaise hI
sAmAyika adhyayana ke upakrama, nikSepa, anugama aura naya - ye cAra dvAra haiN|
ina cAroM dvAroM kA vistAra se nirUpaNa kiyA gayA hai| sAmAyikazruta kA sAra
sAmAyika hai| cAritra hI mukti kA sAkSAt kAraNa hai| jJAna se vastu kA yathArtha
parijJAna hone se cAritra kI vizuddhi hotI hai| kevalajJAna hone para bhI jIva
mukta nahIM hotA, jaba taka use sarva saMvara kA lAbha na ho jaaye| sAmAyika kA
lAbha jIva ko kaba upalabdha hotA hai ? isa para cintana karate huye likhA hai
ki AThoM karma prakRtiyoM kI utkRSTa sthitiyoM ke rahate huye jIva ko sAmAyika
kA lAbha nahIM ho sktaa| nAma, gotra kI utkRSTa sthiti bIsa koTA-koTi sAgaropama
hai| mohanIya kI sattara koTA-koTi sAgaropama hai| jJAnAvaraNa, darzanAvaraNa,
vedanIya aura antarAya kI tIsa koTA-koTi sAgaropama hai| Ayukarma kI tetIsa
sAgaropama hai  /  mohanIya karma kI utkRSTa sthiti kA bandha hone para
jJAnAvaraNa, darzanAvaraNa, vedanIya, nAma, gotra aura antarAya karma kI utkRSTa
sthiti baMdhatI hai, kintu Ayu karma kI sthiti ke liye nizcita niyama nahIM hai
/  vaha utkRSTa aura madhyama aura jaghanya tInoM prakAra kI sthiti baMdha
sakatI hai| mohanIya ke atirikta jJAnAvaraNa Adi kisI bhI karma kI utkRSTa
sthiti kA bandha hone para mohanIya yA anya karma kI utkR sthiti kA bandha hotA
hai kintu Ayukarma kI sthiti jaghanya bhI bandha sakatI hai| samyaktva, zruta,
dezavrata aura sarvavrata, ina sAmAyikoM meM se jisane utkRSTa karma sthiti kA
bandha kiyA hai, vaha eka bhI sAmAyika ko prApta nahIM kara sktaa| kinta use
pUrva pratipanna vikalpa se hotI bhI hai aura nahIM bhI hotii| jaise
anuttaravimAnavAsI deva meM pUrvapratipanna samyaktva, zruta hote haiM, zeSa meM
nhiiN| jina kI jJAnAvaraNa Adi kI jaghanya sthiti hai, unako bhI ina cAra
sAmAyikoM meM se eka kA bhI lAbha nahIM hotA, kyoMki use pahale bhI prApta ho
gaI hai| ataH punaH prApta karane kA prazna hI samupasthita nahIM hotaa|
Ayukarma kI jaghanya sthiti [59]

Page #63 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
This is not attainable by the one who is going to attain it, nor can he attain
it. After this, the nature of granthi-bhed has been explained by contemplating
the causes of samyaktvaprapti. Except for ayukarma, the remaining seven karmas
remain in the state of desh nyun kota-koti sagaropama, then the soul becomes
inclined towards samyaktv. He attains samyaktv. When the palyopama separation is
destroyed from it, deshvirati-shravaktv is attained. When the sankhyat
sagaropama is destroyed from it, sarvavirati charitra is achieved. When the
sankhyat sagaropama is destroyed from it, upshamshreni is attained. When the
sankhyat sagaropama is destroyed from it, kshapak shreni is attained. Due to the
rise of kshaya, darshan etc. samayik cannot be attained. If it is attained by
chance, it is destroyed again. Kshaya is that which benefits karmas. The
destruction, upsham or kshayopahsam of these twelve types of kshayas,
anantanubandhi-chatushk, apratyakhyani-chatushk, pratyakhyani-chatushk, leads to
the attainment of charitra. In samayik, there is abandonment of savadha yoga. It
is of two types, itvar and pavatkathic. Itvar samayik is short-lived and
yavatkathic is for life. The bhashyakar has elaborated on samayik, chedopa
sthapana, parihara vishuddhi, sukshmasampray and yathakyat charitra in detail.
Samayik charitra has been described through these twenty-six doors: udदेश,
nirdesh, nirgam, kshetra, kal, purush, karan, pratyay, lakshan, nay, samavatar,
anumata, kim, katividh, kasy, kutr, keshu, katham, kiyachir, kati, santar,
avirahit, bhav, aakarsh, sparshan and nirukti. All the important things related
to samayik are included in these doors. While considering the origin of samayik
in the third nirgam door, the acharya has discussed the eleven ganadharas of
Bhagwan Mahavira. While discussing the eleventh door of samayik, samavatar, the
acharya has discussed the separation of charan karananuyog, dharmakathananuyog,
ganitanuyog and dravyanuyog, and there is also a description of nihnvas. There
is an elaborate discussion on nihnvavada. In the end, the original words of the
samayik sutra, 'karemi bhanta' etc., have been considered. Who will not be
fascinated by the strong logical power, skill in expression, fluency in
presentation and uniqueness of discussion of Jinbhadragani Kshamasraman?
Visheshavashakbhashya has a unique place in language literature.
Visheshavashakbhashya is the last work of Acharya Jinbhadra. He had also started
writing his own commentary on it, but his lifespan was completed before it could
be completed, due to which that commentary remained incomplete. The opinion of
the knowledgeable is that the later period of Jinbhadragani should be around 650
to 660 Vikram Samvat. Churnisahitya After the creation of niyukti and bhashya, a
desire arose in the minds of Jain sages to write a commentary literature on the
agamas. They composed commentaries in pure Prakrit and in Sanskrit-mixed
Prakrit, which are now known as Churnisahitya. Jinadasagani Mahttar has a
prominent place among the creators of Churnisahitya. He wrote seven churnis.
Among them, Avashak Churni is an important work. This churni is written
according to niyukti, bhashya gathas have also been used here and there. The
language is mainly Prakrit, but Sanskrit shlokas, prose and prose lines have
also been quoted. The language is fluent. The style has elegance and vigour.
[60]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 vAle ko na yaha pahale prApta hotI hai aura na vaha prApta hI kara sakatA hai|
isake pazcAt samyaktva prApti ke kAraNoM para cintana karate huye granthi-bheda
kA svarUpa spaSTa kiyA hai| Ayukarma ko chor3akara zeSa sAta karmoM kI sthiti,
deza nyUna koTA-koTi sAgaropama kI avazeSa rahatI hai taba AtmA samyaktva ke
abhimukha hotA hai| use samyaktva kI prApti hotI hai| usameM se palyopama
pRthaktva kA kSaya hone para dezavirati-zrAvakatva kI prApti hotI hai usameM se
bhI saMkhyAta sAgaropama kA kSaya hone para sarvavirati cAritra kI upalabdhi
hotI hai| usameM se saMkhyAta sAgaropama kA kSaya hone para upazamazreNI prApta
hotI hai| usameM se bhI saMkhyAta sAgaropama kA kSaya hone para kSapaka zreNI
prApta hotI kaSAya ke udaya ke kAraNa darzana Adi sAmAyika prApta nahIM ho
sktii| yadi kadAcit prApta bhI ho gaI to vaha punaH naSTa ho jAtI hai| jisase
karmoM kA lAbha ho vaha kaSAya hai| anantAnubandhI-catuSka, apratyAkhyAnI-
catuSka, pratyAkhyAnI-catuSka ina bAraha prakAra ke kaSAyoM kA kSaya, upazama yA
kSayopazama hone se cAritra kI prApti hotI hai| sAmAyika meM sAvadha yoga kA
tyAga hotA hai| vaha itvara aura pAvatkathika ke rUpa meM do prakAra kI hai|
itvara sAmAyika alpakAlIna hotI hai aura yAvatkathika jIvanaparyanta ke liye|
bhASyakAra ne sAmAyika, chedopasthApanA, parihAravizuddhi, sUkSmasamparAya aura
yathAkhyAta cAritra kA vistAra se vivecana kiyA hai| sAmAyika cAritra kA uddeza,
nirdeza, nirgama, kSetra, kAla, puruSa, kAraNa, pratyaya, lakSaNa, naya,
samavatAra, anumata, kim, katividha, kasya, kutra, keSu, katham, kiyaccira,
kati, sAntara, avirahita, bhava, AkarSa, sparzan aura niru kti, ina chabbIsa
dvAroM se varNana kiyA hai| sAmAyika sambandhI jitanI bhI mahattvapUrNa bAteM
haiM, ve sabhI ina dvAroM meM samAviSTa ho gaI haiN| tRtIya nirgama dvAra meM
sAmAyika kI utpatti ke sambandha meM vicAra karate hue AcArya ne bhagavAna
mahAvIra ke gyAraha gaNadharoM kI carcA kI hai| sAmAyika ke gyArahaveM dvAra
samavatAra para vivecana karate hue AcArya ne caraNakaraNAnuyoga,
dharmakathanAnuyoga, gaNitAnuyoga aura dravyAnuyoga ke pRthakkaraNa kI carcA kI
hai tathA nihnavoM kA bhI varNana hai| nihnavavAda para vistAra se carcA hai|
anta meM 'karemi bhante' Adi sAmAyika sUtra ke mUla padoM para vicAra kiyA gayA
hai| jinabhadragaNI kSamAzramaNa kI prabala tArkika zakti, abhivyakti kuzalatA,
pratipAdana kI paTutA tathA vivecana kI viziSTatA ko nihAra kara kauna medhAvI
mugdha nahIM hogA ? bhASA sAhitya meM vizeSAvazyakabhASya kA anUThA sthAna hai|
vizeSAvazyakabhASya AcArya jinabhadra kI antima racanA hai| unhoMne isa para
svopajJavRtti bhI likhanI prArambha kI thI, kintu pUrNa hone se pahale hI unakA
AyuSya pUrNa hogayA thA, jisase vaha vRtti apUrNa hI raha gii| vijJoM kA
abhimata hai ki jinabhadra gaNI kA uttarakAla vikrama saMvat 650 se 660 ke
AsapAsa honA caahiye| cUrNisAhitya niyukti aura bhASya kI racanA ke pazcAt jaina
manISiyoM ke antarmAnasa meM AgamoM para gadhAtmaka vyAkhyA sAhitya likhane kI
bhAvanA utpanna huii| unhoMne zuddha prAkRta meM aura saMskRta mizrita prAkRta
meM vyAkhyAoM kI racanA kI, jo Aja cUrNisAhitya ke rUpa meM vizruta hai|
cUrNisAhitya ke nirmAtAoM meM jinadAsagaNi mahattara kA mUrdhanya sthAna hai|
unhoMne sAta cUrNiyAM likhiiN| usameM Avazyaka cUrNi eka mahattvapUrNa racanA
hai| yaha cUrNi niyukti ke anusAra likhI gaI hai, bhASya gAthAoM kA upayoga bhI
yatra-tatra huA hai  /  mukhya rUpa se bhASA prAkRta hai kintu saMskRta ke
zloka, gadya va gadya paMktiyAM bhI uddhRta kI gaI haiN| bhASA pravAhayukta hai|
zailI meM lAlitya va oja [60]

Page #64 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
This is a detailed commentary. It is extensive compared to other commentaries.
It mentions many texts like Oghanuyukti Churni, Govindanuyukti, Vasudeva Hindi,
etc. It first discusses auspiciousness. Bhavamangal describes knowledge. It
considers the essential aspects from the perspective of scriptural knowledge and
from the perspective of deposition. It sheds light on the essential aspects of
substance and essence. The Tirthankaras are the embodiments of the scriptures.
It answers the question of who the Tirthankaras are and discusses the previous
births of Lord Mahavira to explain how his soul was liberated from falsehood. In
the birth of Marichi, Mahavira's soul was the grandson of Rishabhdev. Therefore,
it sheds light on the previous birth of Lord Rishabhdev and his life. The entire
life of Emperor Bharat is also included in it. After many births, Mahavira's
soul became Mahavira. The commentary details all the hardships that Mahavira
faced in his life. Like the appointment, it also describes nihilism. After that,
it describes the distinctions of Samayik from the perspective of substance,
synonyms, and Nayadristi, its owner, its area of attainment, time, direction,
the one who performs Samayik, the reasons for its attainment, joy, the example
of Kamadeva, compassion, Indra Nag, Punyashal, Shivraj Rishi Gangadatt,
Dasharnabhad, Ilaputra, etc. It gives examples of the state of Samayik, the
number of Samayik practitioners, the difference in Samayik, the attraction of
Samayik, and the importance of equanimity by giving the example of Damdatt and
Metary. It clarifies the subject by giving the example of Tetaliputra for
summary, brevity, and flawlessness, and for religious interest and rejection.
After this, there is the commentary of Sutrasparshik appointment. In it, the
example of Arhantr, Dharmaruchi, and Jamgni is given for the great mantra of
salutation, affection from the perspective of deposition, attachment, and hatred
respectively. It sheds light on the salutation to Arhants and Siddhas, the four
types of intellect, karma, liberation, yoga restraint, the unparalleled joy of
Siddhas, salutation to Acharyas, Upadhyayas, and Sadhus, and its purpose. After
that, it explains the six types of karma in detail by explaining the text
'Karemi Bhanta' of Samayik. In Chaturvinshati Stav, it considers the words like
Stav, Lok, Udyot, Dharma-Tirthankar, etc. from the perspective of deposition. In
the third Vandana study, it describes the nature of the Shraman worthy of
salutation and explains Chitikarma, Kritikarma, Poojakarma, and Vinayakarma by
giving examples. It prohibits saluting the blind. In the fourth study, the
definition of Pratikraman is given from the perspective of Pratikramak,
Pratikraman, and Pratikrantyavya. It presents examples while discussing
Praticharana, Pariharana, Varana, Nivatti, Ninda, Garha, Shdhi, and Alochana. It
describes the excesses that occur in Kayik, Vaachik, Mansik, Atichara,
Iryapathiki Viradhana, Prakam Shayya, Bhikshacharya, Swadhyay, etc., the four
Vikathas, the four Dhyanas, the five Kriyas, the five Kamagunas, the five
Mahavratas, and the five Samitis. It has made two distinctions of education:
reception and service. It gives a detailed biography of Abhay Kumar. It also
gives the characters of historical figures like Emperor Shrenik, Chellana,
Sursa, Konik, Chetak, Udayi, Mahapadmanand, Shakdala, Vararuchi, Sthulbhadra,
etc. While describing the importance of vows, it says - it is better to enter a
blazing fire than to live by deviating from virtue. The fifth study describes
Kayotsarg. Kayotsarg is a kind of spiritual wound healing. Kayotsarg has two
words: Kay and Utsarg. Kay is described from twelve types of depositions like
name, establishment, etc., and Utsarg from six depositions. There are two types
of Kayotsarg: Cheshta Kayotsarg and Abhibhav Kayotsarg. Cheshta Kayotsarg is
performed to get rid of the sin of the fault that has been committed in walking,
etc. Abhibhav Kayotsarg is performed when one is defeated by the Huns, etc.
There are two types of Kayotsarg: praiseworthy and unpraiseworthy, and then
there are nine types like Ucchrit, etc. Shruti, Siddha [61]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 hai| aitihAsika kathAoM kI pracuratA hai| yaha cUrNi anya cUrNiyoM se vistRta
hai| oghaniyukti cUrNi, govindaniyukti, vasudevahiNDI prabhRti aneka granthoM kA
ullekha isameM huA hai| sarvaprathama maMgala kI carcA kI gaI hai| bhAvamaMgala
meM jJAna kA nirUpaNa hai  /  zrutajJAna kI dRSTi se Avazyaka para nikSepa dRSTi
se cintana kiyA hai| dravyAvazyaka aura bhAvAvazyaka para prakAza DAlA hai|
zruta kA prarUpaNa tIrthaMkara karate haiN| tIrthaMkara kauna hote haiM - isa
prazna kA samAdhAna karate hue bhagavAna mahAvIra kA jIva mithyAtva se kisa
prakAra mukta huA, yaha pratipAdana karane ke liye mahAvIra ke pUrva bhavoM kI
carcA kI gaI hai| mahAvIra kA jIva marIci ke bhava meM RSabhadeva kA pautra
thaa| ataH bhagavAna RSabhadeva ke pUrva bhava aura RSabhadeva ke jIvana para
prakAza DAlA hai| samrATa bharata kA bhI sampUrNa jIvana isameM AyA hai|
bhagavAna mahAvIra kA jIva aneka bhavoM ke pazcAt mahAvIra bnaa| mahAvIra ke
jIvana meM jo bhI upasarga Aye, usakA savistRta nirUpaNa cUrNi meM huA hai|
niyukti kI taraha nihnavavAda kA bhI nirUpaNa hai| usake pazcAt dravya, paryAya,
nayadRSTi se sAmAyika ke bheda, usakA svAmI, usakI prApti kA kSetra, kAla, dizA,
sAmAyika karane vAlA, usakI prApti ke hetu, Ananda, kAmadeva kA dRSTAnta,
anukampA, indranAga, puNyazAla, zivarAjarSi gaMgadatta, dazArNabhadra, ilAputra
Adi ke dRSTAnta diye haiN| sAmAyika kI sthiti, sAmAyikavAloM kI saMkhyA,
sAmAyika kA antara, sAmAyika kA AkarSa, samabhAva kI mahattA kA pratipAdana
karane ke liye damadatta evaM metArya kA dRSTAnta diyA hai| samAsa, saMkSepa
aura anavadya ke liye dharmaruci va pratyAkhyAna ke liye tetalIputra kA dRSTAnta
dekara viSaya ko spaSTa kiyA gayA hai| isake pazcAt sUtrasparzika niyukti kI
cUrNi hai| usameM namaskAra mahAmaMtra, nikSepa dRSTi se sneha, rAga va dveSa ke
liye kramazaH arhantraka, dharmaru ci tathA jamagni kA udAharaNa diyA gayA hai|
arihantoM va siddhoM ko namaskAra, autpattikI Adi cAroM prakAra kI buddhi,
karma, samudghAta, yoganirodha, siddhoM kA apUrva Ananda, AcArya upAdhyAyoM aura
sAdhuoM ko namaskAra evaM usake prayojana para prakAza DAlA hai| usake bAda
sAmAyika ke pATha 'karemi bhante' kI vyAkhyA karake chaha prakAra ke karma kA
vistRta nirUpaNa kiyA gayA hai| caturviMzatistava meM stava, loka, udyota,
dharma-tIrthaMkara Adi padoM para nikSepa dRSTi se cintana kiyA hai| tRtIya
vandanA adhyayana meM vandana ke yogya zramaNa ke svarUpa kA pratipAdana kiyA
hai aura citikarma, kRtikarma, pUjAkarma, vinayakarma ko dRSTAnta dekara
samajhAyA gayA hai| anandha ko vandana karane kA niSedha kiyA gayA hai| caturtha
adhyayana meM pratikramaNa kI paribhASA pratikrAmaka, pratikramaNa,
pratikrAntavya ina tIna dRSTiyoM se kI gaI hai| praticaraNA, pariharaNA, vAraNA,
nivatti, nindA, garhA, zaddhi aura AlocanA para vivecanA karate haye udAharaNa
bhI prastuta kiye haiN| kAyika, vAcika, mAnasika, aticAra, IryApathikI
virAdhanA, prakAma zayyA, bhikSAcaryA, svAdhyAya Adi meM lagane vAle aticAra,
cAra vikathA, cAra dhyAna, pA~ca kriyA, pA~ca kAmaguNa, pA~ca mahAvrata, pA~ca
samiti Adi kA pratipAdana kiyA hai| zikSA ke grahaNa aura Asevana ye do bheda
kiye haiN| abhaya kumAra kA vistAra se jIvana-paricaya diyA hai| sAtha hI
samrATa zreNika, cellaNA, surasA, koNika, ceTaka, udAyI, mahApadmananda,
zakaDAla, vararuci, sthUlabhadra Adi aitihAsika vyaktiyoM ke caritra bhI diye
gaye haiN| vrata kI mahattA kA pratipAdana karate huye kahA hai - prajjvalita
agni meM praveza karanA zreyaskara hai, kintu zIla se skhalita hokara jIvita
rahanA anucita hai| paJcama adhyayana meM kAyotsarga kA varNana hai| kAyotsarga
eka prakAra se AdhyAtmika vraNacikitsA hai| kAyotsarga meM kAya aura utsarga ye
do pada haiN| kAya kA nAma, sthApanA Adi bAraha prakAra ke nikSepoM se varNana
kiyA hai aura utsarga kA chaha nikSepoM se| kAyotsarga ke ceSTAkAyotsarga aura
abhibhavakAyotsarga ye do bheda haiN| gamana Adi meM jo doSa lagA ho usake pApa
se nivRtta hone ke liye ceSTAkAyotsarga kiyA jAtA hai| hUNa Adi se parAjita
hokara jo kAyotsarga kiyA jAtA hai vaha abhibhavakAyotsarga hai| kAyotsarga ke
prazasta evaM aprazasta ye do bheda haiM aura phira ucchrita Adi nau bheda haiN|
zruta, siddha kI [61]

Page #65 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The text sheds light on the method of *kshamana* by explaining *stuti*. Finally,
it also sheds light on the faults, fruits, etc. of *kayotsarga*. The sixth study
deals with *pratyakhyana*. It discusses the excesses of *samyaktva*, the
excesses of the twelve vows of a *shravaka*, *pratyakhyana*, six types of
purity, the qualities of *pratyakhyana*, *agaras*, etc. with many illustrations.
Ten Thus, *Aavashyakachurni* by Jinadasagani Mahattara is a great work. The
*churni* explains in detail all the topics covered in *Aavashyakaniyukti*. It
highlights the lives of many legendary and historical great men, which are of
great importance from historical and cultural perspectives. Commentary
Literature The original *agama*, *niyukti* and *bhashya* literature is written
in Prakrit language. The *churni* literature mainly uses Prakrit language and
secondarily Sanskrit language. After that came the era of Sanskrit commentary.
The era of commentary is the golden age in Jain literature. *Niyukti* explains
the etymology and interpretation of the words of the *agamas*. *Bhashya*
literature elaborates on the profound meanings of the *agamas*. *Churni*
literature attempts to explain the esoteric meanings based on folk tales, while
commentary literature analyzes the *agamas* from a philosophical perspective.
The commentators not only used the ancient *niyukti*, *bhashya* and *churni*
literature in their commentaries, but also strengthened the subject with new
arguments. The study and research of commentaries also gives a proper
understanding of the social, cultural, political and geographical conditions of
that era. The first commentator among the commentators is Jinabhadragani
Kshamasraman. He wrote his own commentary on his *Visheshaavashyakbhashya*, but
he could not complete it in his lifetime. He could only write commentary up to
the sixth *ganadhara*. His style was simple, elegant and full of *prasadguna*.
His presented commentary was completed by Kotyacharya after him. This is
indicated by Kotyacharya at the end of the sixth *ganadharavad*. Among the
Sanskrit commentators, Acharya Haribhadra's name can be taken with pride. He was
a great scholar of Sanskrit language. His time was from Vikram Samvat 757 to
827. He also wrote a commentary on *Aavashyakaniyukti*, but instead of following
the verses of *Aavashyakachurni*, he presented the subject independently. Seeing
this commentary, the learned have concluded that Acharya Haribhadra wrote two
commentaries on *Aavashyakasutra*. The commentary which is not available at
present was bigger than the available commentary because Acharya himself has
written 'Vyasarthastu Visheshvivaranadavagantavya iti'. Even after searching,
this commentary has not been found yet. While presenting the nature of knowledge
in the commentary, he has discussed *abhinibodhak* knowledge from six
perspectives. He has also discussed the difference between *shruta*, *avadhi*,
*manahparyaya* and *kevalgyan* from the perspective of etc. 1 - The twenty-three
gates of *samayik* etc. have been discussed according to *niyukti*. In the exit
gate of *samayik*, information has been given about the *kulkaras* and their
relationship with their previous births. The topics which are briefly mentioned
in *niyukti* and *churni* have been elaborated here. In the context of
meditation, all the verses of *Dhyanashataka* have also been discussed. While
shedding light on the method of *paristhapana*, the entire text of
*paristhapana* related *niyukti* has been quoted. In this commentary,
illustrations in Prakrit language have also been given to clarify the subject.
This commentary is named *Shishyahita*. Its volume is 22,000 verses. The author
has also given a brief introduction of himself at the end. [62]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 stuti para prakAza DAlakara kSAmaNA kI vidhi para vicAra kiyA hai| anta meM
kAyotsarga ke doSa, phala Adi para bhI prakAza DAlA gayA hai| SaSTha adhyayana
meM pratyAkhyAna kA vivecana hai| isameM samyaktva ke aticAra, zrAvaka ke bAraha
vratoM ke aticAra, pratyAkhyAna, chaha prakAra kI vizuddhi, pratyAkhyAna ke
guNa, AgAra Adi para aneka dRSTAntoM ke sAtha vivecana kiyA hai| dasa isa
prakAra AvazyakacUrNi jinadAsagaNI mahattara kI eka mahanIya kRti hai|
Avazyakaniryukti meM Aye huye sabhI viSayoM para cUrNi meM vistAra ke sAtha
spaSTatA kI gaI hai| isameM aneka paurANika, aitihAsika mahApuruSoM ke jIvana
uTTaGkita kiye gaye haiM, jinakA aitihAsika aura sAMskRtika dRSTi se atyadhika
mahattva hai| TIkAsAhitya mUla Agama, niryukti aura bhASyasAhitya prAkRta bhASA
meM nirmita hai| cUrNisAhitya meM pradhAna rUpa se prAkRta bhASA kA aura gauNa
rUpa se saMskRta bhASA kA prayoga huA hai| usake pazcAt saMskRtaTIkA kA yuga
aayaa| jaina sAhitya meM TIkA kA yuga svarNima yuga hai| niyukti meM AgamoM ke
zabda kI vyutpatti aura vyAkhyA hai| bhASya sAhitya meM vistAra se AgamoM ke
gambhIra bhAvoM kA vivecana hai| cUrNi sAhitya meM nigUr3ha bhAvoM ko loka-
kathAoM ke AdhAra se samajhAne kA prayAsa hai to TIkAsAhitya meM AgamoM kA
dArzanika dRSTi se vizleSaNa hai| TIkAkAroM ne prAcIna niryukti, bhASya aura
cUrNi sAhityoM kA to apanI TIkAoM me prayoga kiyA hI hai sAtha hI naye-naye
hetuoM dvArA viSaya ko aura adhika puSTa banAyA hai| TIkAoM ke adhyayana aura
parizIlana se usa yuga kI sAmAjika, sAMskRtika, rAjanaitika aura bhaugolika
paristhitiyoM kA bhI samyak jJAna ho jAtA hai| TIkAkAroM meM sarvaprathama
TIkAkAra jinabhadragaNI kSamAzramaNa haiN| unhoMne apane vizeSAvazyakabhASya
para svopajJa vRtti likhI para yaha vRtti ve apane jIvanakAla meM pUrNa nahIM
kara ske| ve chaThe gaNadhara vyakta taka hI TIkA likha ske| unakI zailI sarala,
sarasa aura prasAdaguNa yukta thI unakI prastuta TIkA unake pazcAt koTyAcArya ne
pUrNa kii| isakA saMketa koTyAcArya ne chaThe gaNadharavAda ke anta meM diyA
hai| saMskRta TIkAkAroM meM AcArya haribhadra kA nAma gaurava ke sAtha liyA jA
sakatA hai| ve saMskRta bhASA ke prakANDa paNDita the| unakA sattA samaya
vikrama saMvat 757 se 827 kA hai| unhoMne Avazyakaniyukti para bhI vRtti likhI
kintu AvazyakacUrNi ke padoM kA usameM anusaraNa na karake svataMtra rUpa se
viSaya kA pratipAdana kiyA hai| prastuta vRtti ko dekhakara vijJoM ne yaha
anumAna kiyA hai ki AcArya haribhadra ne AvazyakasUtra para do vRttiyAM likhI
thiiN| vartamAna meM jo TIkA upalabdha nahIM hai, vaha TIkA upalabdha TIkA se
bar3I thI kyoMki AcArya ne svayaM likhA hai 'vyAsArthastu
vizeSavivaraNAdavagantavya iti  / ' anveSaNA karane para bhI yaha TIkA abhI taka
upalabdha nahIM ho sakI hai| vRtti meM jJAna kA svarUpa pratipAdita karate huye
Abhinibodhaka jJAna kA chaha dRSTiyoM se vivecana kiyA hai| zruta, avadhi, manaH
paryava aura kevalajJAna kA bhI bheda Adi kI dRSTi se vivecana kiyA hai| 1 -
sAmAyika Adi ke tevIsa dvAroM kA vivecana niyukti ke anusAra kiyA gayA hai|
sAmAyika ke nirgama dvAra meM kulakaroM ke prati aura unake pUrva bhavoM ke
sambandha meM sUcana kiyA hai| niryukti aura cUrdhi meM jina viSayoM kA saMkSepa
meM saMketa kiyA gayA hai unhIM kA isameM vistAra kiyA gayA hai| dhyAna ke
prasaMga meM dhyAnazataka kI samasta gAthAoM para bhI vivecana kiyA hai  /
paristhApanAvidhi para prakAza DAlate huye sampUrNa paristhApanA sambandhI
niyukti ke pATha ko uddhRta kiyA gayA hai| prastuta vRtti meM prAkRta bhASA meM
dRSTAnta bhI viSaya ko spaSTa karane ke liye diye gaye haiN| isa vRtti kA nAma
ziSyahitA hai| isakA granthamAna 22000 zlokapramANa hai| lekhaka ne anta meM
apanA saMkSepa meM paricaya bhI diyA hai| [62]

Page #66 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Kotyacharya completed the incomplete commentary of Acharya Jinabhadragani
Kshamasraman on the *Svopagyabhashya* and also wrote a new commentary on the
*Visheshavasyakabhashya*. However, the author has not mentioned Acharya
Haribhadra anywhere in that commentary. This suggests that he would have been a
contemporary or predecessor of Haribhadra. Kotyacharya has remembered
Jinabhadragani Kshamasraman with reverence and affection. Maladhari Acharya
Hemchandra has mentioned Kotyacharya as an ancient commentator in his commentary
on the *Visheshavasyakabhashya*. The *Prabhavakacharitra* has considered Acharya
Shilank and Kotyacharya as one. However, the times of Shilank and Kotyacharya
are not the same. The time of Kotyacharya is the 8th century Vikram era, while
the time of Shilank is the 9th-10th century Vikram era. Therefore, they are
distinct from each other. The commentary of Kotyacharya on the
*Visheshavasyakabhashya* is neither too brief nor too extensive. The stories
included in the commentary are in Prakrit language. The size of the commentary
is 13,700 verses.  Acharya Malayagiri was a brilliant and eminent thinker. He
wrote very important commentaries on the *Agam* texts. His vast scholarship is
clearly reflected in those commentaries. The depth of the subject, the
simplicity of the language, the elegance of the style and the clarity of the
analysis are his characteristics. He was a profound scholar of *Agam*
literature, and was also proficient in mathematics, philosophy and
*Karmasiddhanta*. He wrote commentaries on many *Agams*. He also wrote a
commentary called *Avasyakavivarana* on the *Avasyakasutra*. This commentary is
not on the original sutra, but on the *Avasyakaniyukti*. This commentary is
available only in an incomplete form. It discusses in detail the auspicious
beginning, etc., and reflects on its utility. It discusses the verses of the
*niyukti* in a simple and understandable style. The uniqueness of the commentary
is that the Acharya has not independently discussed the verses of the
*Visheshavasyakabhashya*, but has summarized them in his commentary. All the
verses that appear in the commentary support the statement of the commentary.
The commentary also mentions the *Svopagyavritti* of the
*Visheshavasyakabhashya*, as well as Prajnakaragupta, *Avasyakachurnikar*,
*Avasyakamula-tikakar*, *Avasyakamula-bhashyakar*, *Laghiyastrayalankar*,
Akalanka-Nyayavatar-vrittikar, etc. Stories have also been quoted here and there
to clarify the subject. The language of the stories is Prakrit. The commentary
available today ends with the discussion of 'Thubham Rayanavichittam Kunthu
Suminamammi Ten Kunthujino' in the second study called *Chaturvinshatistava*.
After that, the commentary on the mention of Bhagwan Aranath is not found. This
commentary is only up to the second study called *Chaturvinshatistava*, and that
too is incomplete. The size of the available commentary is 18,000 verses.
Maladhari Acharya Hemchandra was a great genius and a scholar of the *Agams*. He
was a skilled orator and eloquent. He created many texts. The *Avasyakavritti-
Pradeshavyaakhya* was written on the commentary of Acharya Haribhadra, hence its
other name is *Haribhadriya-Avasyakavritti-tippanak*. The disciple of Maladhari
Acharya Hemchandra has also written a commentary on the *Pradeshavyaakhya*.  The
second commentary on the *Visheshavasyakabhashya* by Acharya Maladhari
Hemchandra is *Shiष्यहिता*. This is a very large work. The Acharya has tried to
explain all the topics that have come in the commentary in a very simple and
easy way. Despite the predominance of philosophical discussions, the style is
not difficult. This is its great feature. The Sanskrit narratives have brought
sweetness and simplicity to the subject. It would not be an exaggeration to say
that the present commentary has made it easy to read and study the
*Visheshavasyakabhashya*.  Many other thinkers have also written commentaries on
the *Avasyakasutra*. Their details are as follows: [63]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 koTayAcArya ne AcArya jinabhadragaNI kSamAzramaNa ke apUrNa svopajJa bhASya ko
pUrNa kiyA aura vizeSAvazyakabhASya para bhI eka navIna vRtti likhii| para
lekhaka ne usa vRtti meM AcArya haribhadra kA kahIM para bhI ullekha nahIM kiyA
hai| isase yaha jJAta hotA hai ki ve haribhadra ke samakAlIna yA pUrvavartI
hoNge| koTyAcArya ne jinabhadragaNI kSamAzramaNa kA zraddhAsnigdha smaraNa kiyA
hai| maladhArI AcArya hemacandra ne apanI vizeSavazyakabhASyavRtti meM
koTyAcArya kA prAcIna TIkAkAra ke rUpa meM ullekha kiyA hai| prabhAvaka
caritrakAra ne AcArya zIlAta ko aura koTayAcArya ko eka mAnA hai| parantu
zIlAGka aura koTayAcArya donoM ke samaya eka nahIM haiN| koTayAcArya kA samaya
vikrama kI AThavIM sadI hai to zIlAGka kA samaya vikrama kI navIM dazamI sadI
hai| ata: ve donoM pRthak-pRthak haiM  /  koTyAcArya kA prastuta
vizeSAvazyakabhASya para jo vivaraNa hai vaha na to atisaMkSipta hai aura na hI
ativistRta hI hai| vivaraNa meM jo kathAeM uTUMkita kI gaI haiM, ve prAkRta
bhASA meM haiN| vivaraNa kA granthamAna 13700 zloka pramANa hai| _AcArya
malayagiri utkRSTa pratibhA ke dhanI mUrdhanya manISI the| unhoMne Agama
granthoM para bahuta hI mahattvapUrNa TIkAeM likhI haiN| una TIkAoM meM unakA
prakANDa pANDitya spaSTa rUpa se jhalakatA hai| viSaya kI gahanatA, bhASA kI
prAMjalatA, zailI kA lAlitya evaM vizleSaNa kI spaSTatA unakI vizeSatAe~ haiM  /
ve AgamasAhitya ke gambhIra jJAtA the to gaNitazAstra, darzanazAstra aura
karmasiddhAnta meM bhI niSNAta the| unhoMne aneka AgamoM para TIkAeM likhiiN|
AvazyakasUtra para bhI unhoMne AvazyakavivaraNa nAmaka vRtti likhI hai| yaha
vivaraNa mUla sUtra para na hokara Avazyakaniyukti para hai| yaha vivaraNa
apUrNa hI prApta huA hai| isameM maMgala Adi para vistAra se vivecana aura usakI
upayogitA para cintana kiyA gayA hai| niyukti kI gAthAoM para sarala aura
subodha zailI meM vivecana kiyA hai| vivecana kI viziSTatA yaha hai - AcArya ne
vizeSAvazyakabhASya kI gAthAoM para svataMtra vivecana na kara unakA sAra apanI
vRtti meM uTuMkita kara diyA hai| vRtti meM jitanI bhI gAthAeM AI haiM, ve vRtti
ke vaktavya ko puSTa karatI haiM  /  vRtti meM vizeSAvazyakabhASya kI
svopajJavRtti kA bhI ullekha huA hai sAtha hI prajJAkaragupta, Avazyaka
cUrNikAra, Avazyaka mUla TIkAkAra, Avazyaka mUla bhASyakAra,
laghIyastrayAlaMkAra,akalaGka-nyAyAvatAra vRttikAra prabhRti kA bhI ullekha huA
hai| yatra-tatra viSaya ko spaSTa karane ke liye kathAeM bhI uddhRta kI gaI
haiN| kathAoM kI bhASA prAkRta hai| vartamAna meM jo vivaraNa upalabdha hai
usameM caturviMzatistava nAmaka dvitIya adhyayana ke 'thUbhaM rayaNavicittaM
kuMthu sumiNammi teNa kuMthujiNo' ke vivecana taka prApta hotA hai| usake pazcAt
bhagavAn aranAtha ke ullekha kA vivaraNa nahIM milatA hai| yaha jo vivaraNa hai
vaha caturviMzatistava nAmaka dvitIya adhyayana taka hai aura vaha bhI apUrNa
hai| jo vivaraNa upalabdha hai usakA granthamAna 18000 zloka pramANa hai|
maladhArI AcArya hemacandra mahAn pratibhAsampanna aura AgamoM ke jJAtA the| ve
pravacanapaTu aura vAgmI the| unhoMne neka granthoM kA nirmANa kiyaa|
AvazyakavRtti pradezavyAkhyA AcArya haribhadra kI vRtti para likhI gaI hai,
isaliye usakA aparanAma hAribhadrIyAvazyaka vRttiTippaNaka hai| maladhArI AcArya
hemacandra ke ziSya ne pradezavyAkhyATippaNa bhI likhA hai| AcArya maladhArI
hemacandra kI vizeSAvazyakabhASya para dUsarI vRtti ziSyahitA hai| yaha
vRhattama kRti hai| AcArya ne bhASya meM jitane bhI viSaya Aye haiM, una sabhI
viSayoM kA bahuta hI sarala aura sugama dRSTi se samajhAne kA prayAsa kiyA hai|
dArzanika carcAoM kA prAdhAnya hone para bhI zailI meM kAThinya nahIM hai| yaha
isakI mahAna vizeSatA hai| saMskRta kathAnakoM se viSaya meM sarasatA va
saralatA A gaI hai| yadi yaha kaha diyA jAye ki prastuta TIkA ke kAraNa
vizeSAvazyakabhASya ke paThana-pAThana meM saralatA ho gaI to koI atizayokti
nahIM hogii| anya aneka manISiyoM ne bhI AvazyakasUtra para vRttiyAM likhI haiN|
saMkSepa meM unakA vivaraNa isa prakAra hai - [63]

Page #67 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Nibhatta, Maṇikyasekhara, Kulaprabha, Rājavallabha, etc. have composed
commentaries on the Āvaśyaka Sūtra. In addition to these, in Vikram Samvat 1122,
Nami Sadhu, in Samvat 1222, Śrī Candrasūri, in Samvat 1440, Śrī Jñānasāgara, in
Samvat 1500, Dhīrasundara, in Samvat 1540, Śubhavardhanagiri, in Samvat 1697,
Hitaruci, and in 1958, Pūjya Ghāsilālji Mahārāj also composed commentaries on
the Āvaśyaka Sūtra, showcasing their brilliance. After the end of the commentary
era, concise commentaries were created for the common people to understand the
meaning of the Āgamas, which are known as Stavak or Tabva, and they were written
in simple and understandable styles in vernacular languages. Dharmasimha Muni
wrote Balavabodha Tabve on 27 Āgamas in the 18th century, his Tabve explain the
original meaning. He also wrote a Tabva on the Āvaśyaka. After the Tabve, the
translation era began. Āgama literature is mainly available in three languages:
English, Gujarati, and Hindi. The Āvaśyaka Sūtra has not been translated into
English, it has only been translated into Gujarati and Hindi. In the research-
oriented era, scholars like Pandit Sukhlālji Singhavi and Upādhyāya Amaramuni
ji, etc. have also published research papers in Hindi to analyze the subject.
The modern era is the era of printing. In this era, vast literature has been
printed and reached the hands of the common people. The work of publishing the
Āgamas has been done by various institutions from time to time. The Āvaśyaka
Sūtra and its commentary literature have been published as follows:  In 1928,
the Āgamoday Samiti, Bombay, published the first part of the Āvaśyaka Sūtra with
the Bhadrabahu commentary and the Malayagiri commentary. Its second part was
published in 1932 and the third part in 1936 by Devchand Lalbhai Jain
Pustakoddhār, Surat.  In 1916-17, the Āvaśyaka with the Bhadrabahu commentary
and the Haribhadrīya commentary was published by the Āgamoday Samiti, Bombay.
In 1920, the Āvaśyaka Sūtra with the Maladhārī Hemacandra commentary,
Pradeshāvyākhyā, was published by Devchand Lalbhai Jain Pustakoddhār, Bombay.
In 1939 and 1941, the Bhadrabahu commentary on the Āvaśyaka, the Dīpikā by
Maṇikyasekhara, was published by the Vijayadānasūriśvara Jain Granthamālā,
Surat.  In 1928 and 1929, the Āvaśyaka Cūrṇi by Jīnādās, the eastern part and
the western part respectively, were published. From Vīra Samvat 2427 to 2441,
the Viśeṣāvaśyaka Bhāṣya, Śiṣyahitākhya Bṛhadvṛtti, with the commentary of
Maladhārī Ācārya Hemacandra, was published by the Yaśovijaya Jain Granthamālā,
Banaras. In 1923, 'Viśeṣāvaśyaka Gāthānām Akāradīkramḥ Tathā Viśeṣāvaśyaka
Viṣayānām Anukramaḥ' was published by the Āgamoday Samiti, Bombay.  In 1966, the
Viśeṣāvaśyaka Bhāṣya with the Svopājñavṛtti was published in three parts by the
Lalbhai Dalpatbhai Bharatiya Saṃskṛti Vidyāmandir.  In 1936 and 1937, the
Viśeṣāvaśyaka Bhāṣya Vivaraṇa by Koṭyācārya was published by the Ṛṣabhadevaji
Kesarimaji Pracārak Saṃsthā, Ratlām. In 1936, the Āvaśyaka Namisāra Vṛtti was
published by the Vijayadānasūriśvara Granthamālā, Bombay.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 , 2 nibhaTTa, mANikyazekhara, kulaprabha, rAjavallabha Adi ne AvazyakasUtra
para vRttiyoM kA nirmANa kiyA hai| inake atirikta vikrama saMvat 1122 meM nami
sAdhu ne saMvat 1222 meM zrI candrasUri ne, saMvat 1440 meM zrI jJAnasAgara ne,
saMvat 1500 meM dhIrasundara ne, saMvat 1540 meM zubhavarddhanagiri ne saMvat
1697 meM hitaruci ne tathA san 1958 meM pUjya ghAsIlAla jI mahArAja ne bhI
AvazyakasUtra para vRtti kA nirmANa kara apanI pratibhA kA paricaya diyA hai|
TIkAyuga samApta hone ke pazcAt janasAdhAraNa ke liye AgamoM ke zabdArtha karane
vAlI saMkSipta TIkAeM banAI gaI jo stavaka yA TabvA ke nAma se vizruta haiM aura
ve lokabhASAoM meM sarala aura subodha zailI meM likhI giiN| dharmasiMha muni ne
18vIM zatAbdI meM 27 AgamoM para bAlAvabodha Tabve likhe the, unake bve
mUlasparzI artha ko spaSTa karane vAle haiN| unhoMne Avazyaka para bhI TabvA
likhA thaa| TabvoM ke pazcAt anuvAda yuga kA prArambha huaa| mukhya rUpa se
Agama sAhitya kA anuvAda tIna bhASAoM meM upalabdha hai- aMgrejI, gujarAtI aura
hindI  /  AvazyakasUtra kA aMgrejI anuvAda nahIM huA hai, gujarAtI aura hindI
meM hI anuvAda huA hai| zodha pradhAna yugaM meM AvazyakasUtra para paMDita
sukhalAlajI siMghavI tathA upAdhyAya amaramunijI prabhRti vijJoM ne viSaya kA
vizleSaNa karane ke liye hindI meM zodha nibandha bhI prakAzita kiye haiM  /
Adhunika yuga mudraNa kA yuga hai| isa yuga meM virAT sAhitya mudrita ho kara
janatA janArdana ke kara-kamaloM meM pahu~cA hai| AgamoM ke prakAzana kA kArya
vibhinna saMsthAoM dvArA samaya-samaya para huA hai| AvazyakasUtra aura usakA
vyAkhyA sAhitya isa prakAra prakAzita huA hai san 1928 meM Agamodaya samiti
bambaI ne AvazyakasUtra bhadrabAhu niyukti aura malayagiri vRtti ke sAtha
prathama bhAga prakAzita kiyaa| usakA dvitIya bhAga san 1932 meM tathA tRtIya
bhAga san 1936 meM devacanda lAlabhAI jaina pustakoddhAra sUrata se prakAzita
hue| san 1916-17 meM Avazyaka bhadrabAhuniryukti hAribhadrIyA vRtti ke sAtha
Agamodaya samiti bambaI se prakAzita huI  /  san 1920 meM AvazyakasUtra
maladhArI hemacandra vihita pradezAvyAkhyA ke sAtha devacanda lAlabhAI jaina
pustakoddhAra bambaI ne prakAzita kiyaa| san 1939 aura 1941 meM bhadrabAhu
kRtaAvazyakaniryukti kI mANikyazekhara viracita dIpikA vijayadAnasUrIzvara jaina
granthamAlA, sUrata se prakAzita huI  /  san 1928 aura san 1929 meM
AvazyakacUrNi jinadAsa racita kramazaH pUrva bhAga aura uttara bhAga prakAzita
huA hai vIra saMvat 2427 se 2441 meM vizeSAvazyakabhASya ziSyahitAkhya
bRhadvRtti, maladhArI AcArya hemacandra kI TIkA sahita, yazovijaya jaina
granthamAlA banArasa se prakAzita huaa| san 1923 meM
'vizeSAvazyakagAthAnAmakAradikramaH tathA vizeSAvazyaka viSayANAmanukramaH'
Agamodaya samiti bambaI se prakAzita hue| san 1966 meM vizeSAvazyakabhASya
svopajJavRtti sahita lAlabhAI dalapatabhAI bhAratIya saMskRti vidyAmaMdira se
tIna bhAgoM meM prakAzita huA hai| san 1936 aura 1937 meM koTyAcArya kRta
vizeSAvazyakabhASya vivaraNa kA prakAzana RSabhadeva jI kesarImala jI pracAraka
saMsthA ratalAma se huaa| san 1936 meM hI Avazyaka namisAra vRtti
vijayadAnasUrIzvara granthamAlA bambaI se prakAzita huI  /  [ 64 ]

Page #68 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
In 1958, the Jain Shastroddhar Samiti, Rajkot, published the *Aavashyak Sutra*
with Sanskrit commentary, Hindi and Gujarati translations, authored by Pujya
Ghasilalji Maharaj. In 1986, *Aavashyak Sutra* with Gujarati translation was
published by Bhimshi Manek, Bombay, and from 1924 to 1927, the Agamoday Samiti,
Bombay, published the Gujarati translation, showcasing their literary interest.
In Veer Samvat 2446, Acharya Amolkarishiji published the Hindi translation of 32
Agams, and *Aavashyak Sutra* was also published in this series. The original
text of *Aavashyak Sutra* has also been published from various places. In 1954,
Muni Phoolchandji 'Pupphabhikkhu' published *Suttagame* from Gurgaon Cantonment,
which included the original text, and the original text was also published in
*Angpavitthasuuttaani*, published in 1984 from Sailana. Under the Jain
Agamgranthamala, Muni Punyavijayji Maharaj published *Dasaveyalisuuttam
Uttarjjhayanai Aavassayasuttam* from Shri Mahavira Jain Vidyalaya, Bombay, in
1977. This is published with many appendices like commentaries on various texts,
sutra index, word index, special name index, etc. It is very useful for
researchers. In Samvat 2007, *Samayik Sutra* and *Shraman Sutra* were published
from Sanmati Gyanpeeth, Agra, with Hindi commentary. This edition and editing A
lot has been written about *Aavashyak Sutra* from time to time, and it has also
been published from various places. This publication is also in the same
tradition of publication. It was the heartfelt desire of the young Acharya, the
late Panditpravar Madhukar Mishrimalji Maharaj, that the 32 Agams be published.
The work of publishing the Agams began under his leadership and chief
editorship. In a short time, many Agams were published in a grand manner. But it
is a matter of regret that the young Acharya's beautiful vision could not be
fulfilled during his lifetime. He passed away in 1983. His passing away was a
loss of a great sage. It was the responsibility of the editorial board and the
publication committee to give concrete form to his heartfelt desire. It is a
matter of joy that the editorial board and the publication committee have
fulfilled their responsibility with dedication and have resolved to complete
this work with the cooperation of many eminent scholars. The credit for editing
*Aavashyak Sutra* goes to the learned Mahasati Shri Suprabhaji M.A.,
Sahityaratna, Siddhantacharya, a disciple of the highly learned Sadhviratna
Umravkunwarji 'Archana'. It contains the pure original text, the meaning of
specific words, the meaning, and also the necessary commentary, therefore, this
edition will prove useful for the general public. She has edited this treasure
of a text with great dedication. Sadhvi Suprabhaji is an emerging writer and a
scholar of various subjects. The great sage, the lifeblood of the Agam Prakashan
Mala, Pandit Shobhachandji Bharill, has polished the editing with the touch of
his pen. Bharillji's sharp vision has added luster to the editing. It is hoped
that this Agam will also be revered by the masses like other Agams. I had
planned to write a very detailed introduction to *Aavashyak Sutra*, but due to
being busy writing other texts, I have written only briefly, all the credit for
which goes to the great grace and vision of the great saint, Adhyatmayogi Pujya
Gurudev Upadhyay Shri Pushkarmuniji Maharaj. It is only by his great grace that
I have been able to do some work in the field of writing. This introduction will
be useful in understanding the mystery of *Aavashyak Sutra*, then I will
consider my labor worthwhile. Today [65]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 san 1958 meM pUjya ghAsIlAla jI mahArAjakRta AvazyakasUtra saMskRta vyAkhyA
hindI va gujarAtI anuvAda ke sAtha jainazAstroddhAra samiti rAjakoTa ne
prakAzita kiyaa| san 1986 meM AvazyakasUtra gujarAtI anuvAda ke sAtha bhImasI
mANeka bambaI ne aura san 1924 se 1927 taka Agamodaya samiti bambaI ne gujarAtI
anuvAda prakAzita kara apanI sAhityika ruci kA paricaya diyaa| vIra saMvat 2446
meM AcArya amolakaRSi jI ne 32 AgamoM kA jo hindI anuvAda prakAzita kiyA, usa
lar3I kI kar3I meM AvazyakasUtra bhI prakAzita huaa| AvazyakasUtra kA mUla pATha
bhI aneka sthaloM se prakAzita huA hai| gur3agA~va chAvanI se san 1954 meM muni
phUlacandajI 'pupphabhikkhu' ne suttAgame kA prakAzana karavAyA, usameM tathA
sailAnA se san 1984 meM prakAzita 'aMgapaviTThasuttANi' meM mUla pATha prakAzita
huA hai| AgamaprabhAvaka muni puNyavijayajI mahArAja ne jaina AgamagranthamAlA
ke antargata IsvI san 1977 meM zrI mahAvIra jaina vidyAlaya bambaI se
'dasaveyAliyasuttaM uttarajjhayaNAI AvassayasuttaM' zIrSaka se prakAzita huA
hai| yaha aneka granthoM ke TippaNa, sUtrAnukrama, zabdAnukrama,
vizeSanAmAnukrama Adi aneka pariziSToM ke sAtha prakAzita hai| zodhArthiyoM ke
liye bahuta hI upayogI hai| saMvat 2007 meM sanmati jJAnapITha AgarA se
sAmAyikasUtra aura zramaNasUtra hindI vivecana sahita prakAzita huA hai|
prastuta saMskaraNa aura sampAdana samaya-samaya para AvazyakasUtra para bahuta
likhA gayA hai aura vibhinna sthAnoM se usakA prakAzana bhI huA hai| usI
prakAzana kI dhavala paramparA meM prastuta prakAzana bhI hai| zramaNa saMgha ke
yuvAcArya svargIya paNDitapravara madhukara mizrImalajI mahArAja kI yaha hArdika
icchA thI ki Agama battIsI kA prakAzana ho| unake saMyojakatva aura pradhAna
saMpAdakatva meM Agama prakAzana kA kArya prArambha huaa| svalpa samaya meM hI
aneka AgamoM ke zAnadAra prakAzana huye| para paritApa hai ki yuvAcAryazrI kI
kamanIya kalpanA unake jIvana kAla meM pUrNa nahIM ho skii| san 1983 meM unakA
svargavAsa ho gyaa| unake svargavAsa se eka mahAmanISI santaratna kI kSati huii|
unakI hArdika icchA ko mUrta rUpa dene kA uttaradAyitva saMpAdaka maMDala aura
prakAzana samiti kA thaa| prasannatA hai saMpAdaka maMDala aura prakAzana samiti
ne apanA uttaradAyitva niSThA ke sAtha nibhAyA hai aura aneka mUrdhanya
manISiyoM ke sahayoga se isa kArya ko sampanna karane kA saMkalpa kiyA hai  /
AvazyakasUtra ke saMpAdana kA zreya parama viduSI sAdhvIratna umarAvaku~varajI
'arcanA' kI suziSyA viduSI mahAsatI zrI suprabhAjI ema. e., sAhityaratna,
siddhAntAcArya ko hai| isameM zuddha mUla pATha, viziSTa zabdoM kA artha,
bhAvArtha aura sAtha hI Avazyaka vivecana diyA gayA hai, ataeva yaha saMskaraNa
sarvasAdhAraNa ke liye upayogI siddha hogaa| unhoMne bahuta hI lagana ke sAtha
isa grantharatna kA saMpAdana kiyA hai| sAdhvI suprabhAjI udIyamAna lekhikA
tathA vividha viSayoM kI jJAtA haiM  /  mahAmanISI, AgamaprakAzana mAlA ke prANa
paNDita zobhAcandrajI bhArilla ne apanI kalama ke sparza se saMpAdana ko nikhArA
hai| bhArillajI kI painI dRSTi se saMpAdana meM cAra cA~da laga gaye haiN| AzA
hai anya AgamoM kI bhAMti yaha Agama bhI janamAnasa meM samAdRta hogaa|
AvazyakasUtra para bahuta hI vistAra se prastAvanA likhane kA merA vicAra thA
para anyAnya granthoM ke lekhana meM vyasta hone se saMkSepa meM hI kucha likha
gayA hU~, usakA sArA zreya mahAmahima vizvasanta adhyAtmayogI pUjya gurudeva
upAdhyAya zrI puSkaramunijI mahArAja kI mahatI kRpA-dRSTi ko hai| unakI mahAna
kRpA se hI maiM lekhana ke kSetra meM kucha kArya kara sakA huuN| AvazyakasUtra
ke rahasya ko samajhane ke liye yaha prastAvanA kucha upayogI hogI to maiM apanA
zrama sArthaka smjhNgaa| Aja [65]

Page #69 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
In the storm of materialism, humanity is becoming increasingly extroverted.
Forgetting oneself, it is yearning for material possessions. And for this, it is
embracing injustice, oppression, and corruption, which is making it restless
itself, and the flames of unrest are blazing everywhere in the family, society,
and nation. Humanity is distressed, society is troubled, and the nation is
worried. This is not progress, but an illusion flourishing in its name. Today
there is a need to return to our nature from the encroachment that has taken
place. The *Aavashyakasutra* provides the message of removing the seeker from
external influences and bringing him to his own nature. Let us implement this
message in our lives and purify ourselves, this is the inner desire! -
Devendramuni Shastri Jain Sthanak Veer Nagar, Delhi-7 18-7-85 [66]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 bhautikavAda kI AMdhI meM mAnava bahirmukhI hotA calA jA rahA hai| vaha apane
Apako bhUlakara para padArthoM ko prApta karane ke liye lalaka rahA hai| aura
usake liye anyAya, atyAcAra aura bhraSTAcAra ko apanA rahA hai, jisase vaha
svayaM azAnta hai, parivAra, samAja aura rASTra meM sarvatra azAnti kI jvAlA
dhadhaka rahI hai| usase mAnava vyathita hai, samAja parezAna hai aura rASTra
cintita hai| yaha pragati nahIM, usake nAma para panapane vAlA bhrama hai| Aja
AvazyakatA hai, jo atikramaNa huA hai usase punaH svabhAva kI ora lauTane kii|
AvazyakasUtra sAdhaka ko parabhAva se haTAkara nijabhAva meM lAne kA saMdeza
pradAna karatA hai| usa sandeza ko hama jIvana meM utArakara apane ko pAvana
banAyeM, yahI Antarika kAmanA ! - devendramuni zAstrI jaina sthAnaka vIranagara,
dillI-7 18-7-85 [66]

Page #70 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Essential Sutras: Table of Contents**  **Guru Vandana** **Namaskara Sutra**
**First Study:** * Samayika Pratigya Sutra * Mangala Sutra * Uttama Chatushtaya
* Sharan Sutra (Abridged) * Pratikramana Sutra * Eryapathika Sutra * Explanation
of Specific Words * Agam Sutra * Reading on Excesses of Knowledge **Second
Study:** * Chaturvinshati Stava * Reading of Chaturvinshati Stava **Third
Study:** * Vandana Ichchhami Khamasamano * Vandana Vidhi * Thirty-Three Types of
Ashatanas **Fourth Study:** * Pratikramana * Reading on Excesses * Shayya Sutra
* Bhikshadoshanivritti Sutra * Swadhyaya and Pratilekhana Doshanivritti Sutra *
Reading of Thirty-Eight Sentences **One Asanyama** **Two Bandhana** **Three
Danda** **Three Gupti** **Three Shalya** **Three Gaurav** **Three Viradhana**
**Four Kashaya** **Four Sanjna** **Four Vikatha** **Four Dhyana** **Five Kriya**
**Five Kamguna** **Five Mahavrat** **Five Samiti** **Six Jeevanikaya** **Six
Leshya** **Seven Bhayasthan** **Eight Madasthan** **Nine Brahmacharya Gupti**
**Ten Shraman Dharma** **Eleven Upasaka Pratima** **Twelve Bhikshu Pratima**
**Thirteen Kriyasthan** **Fourteen Bhootgram** **Fifteen Parmadharmic**
**Sixteen Gatha Shodashak** **Seventeen Asanyama** **Eighteen Abrahmacharya**
**Nineteen Jnata Sutra Study** **Twenty Asamadhiasthan** [67]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 AvazyakasUtram : viSayAnukramaNikA guruvandana namaskArasUtra prathama
adhyayana : sAmAyika pratijJAsUtra maMgalasUtra uttama catuSTaya zaraNa-sUtra
(saMkSipta) pratikramaNa-sUtra eryApathikasUtra viziSTa zabdoM kA spaSTIkaraNa
Agama-sUtra jJAna ke aticAroM kA pATha dvitIya adhyayana : caturviMzatistava
caturviMzatistava kA pATha tRtIya adhyayana : vandana icchAmi khamAsamaNo
vandanAvidhi AzAtanAoM ke tetIsa prakAra caturtha adhyayana : pratikramaNa
aticAroM kA pATha zayyAsUtra bhikSAdoSanivRttisUtra svAdhyAya tathA
pratilekhanA-doSanivRttisUtra 38 teMtIsa bola kA pATha eka asaMyama do bandhana
tIna daMDa tIna gupti tIna zalya tIna gaurava tIna virAdhanA cAra kaSAya cAra
saMjJA cAra vikathA cAra dhyAna pA~ca kriyA pA~ca kAmaguNa pA~ca mahAvrata pA~ca
samiti chaha jIvanikAya chaha lezyA sAta bhayasthAna ATha madasthAna nau
brahmacaryagupti dasa zramaNadharma gyAraha upAsakapratimA bAraha bhikSupratimA
teraha kriyAsthAna caudaha bhUtagrAma pandraha paramAdhArmika solaha
gAthASoDazaka satraha asaMyama aThAraha abrahmacarya unnIsa jJAtAsUtra adhyayana
bIsa asamAdhisthAna [67]

Page #71 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##    **121** **Twenty-one Shabaldoshas** **4.  Excesses of Brahmacharya
Anuvrata**  **113 Twenty-two Parishha** **5.  Excesses of Parigrahaparimaana
Vrata**  **114 Twenty-three Sutra Kritaanga Study** **6.  Excesses of Digvrata**
**114 Twenty-four Dev** **7.  Excesses of Upbhog-Paribhogparimaana Vrata**
**115 Twenty-five Bhavana** **8.  Excesses of Anarthadandaviramana Vrata**
**117 Brihatkalpa, Vyavhaar Sutra** **9.  Excesses of Samayik Vrata**  **118
Trayi's Twenty-six Studies** **10. Excesses of Deshavakashik Vrata**  **118
Twenty-seven Anagaar Guna** **11. Excesses of Paushdha Vrata**  **119** **12.
Excesses of Atithi Sambhibhag Vrata**  **120 Twenty-eight Aachaar Prakalpa
Twenty-nine Paap Shruta Prasanga**  **Fifth Study: Kayotsarga**  **Thirty
Mahamohaniya Sthan** **Explanation of Kayotsarga**  **Thirty-one Siddha Guna**
**Sixth Study: Pratyakhyan**  **Thirty-two Yoga Sangraha** **Types of
Pratyakhyan**  **123 Thirty-three Ashaatana**  **Namaskara Sahit Sutra**
**Pratigya Sutra (Nirgranth Pravachan's Text)** **Paurushi Sutra**  **125 Big
Sanlekhana's Text** **Poorvaardha Sutra**  **126 Five Vandan of the Five Pads**
**Ekaashan Sutra**  **127 Darshan Samyaktva's Text** **100 Eggaathaan
Pacchakhaan**  **129 Guru-Guna Smaran Sutra** **Aachaaml - Ayambil Pratyakhyan
Sutra**  **130 Kshamana Sutra** **102** **Abhaktarth - Upvaas Sutra**  **Eighty-
four Lakh Jeevoyoni's Text**  **105** **Divas Charim Sutra**  **Kulkodi
Khamane's Text** **Abhigraha Sutra**  **133 Pranipat Sutra** **Nirvikruti
Sutra**  **134 Utility of Vratas** **111 Pratyakhyan Parana Sutra**  **135
Twelve Vratas' Excesses' Pratikraman**  **Appendix 1. Excesses of Ahimsa
Anuvrata**  **112 2. Excesses of Mrushavad Viraman Vrata**  **112** **Method of
Necessary**  **3. Excesses of Adattadaan Viramana Anuvrata**  **113**  **[68]**
**124** **101** **W** **106 106** **137**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 121 ikkIsa zabaladoSa 4. brahmacaryANuvrata ke aticAra 113 bAIsa parISaha 5.
parigrahaparimANavrata ke aticAra 114 teIsa sUtrakRtAMga adhyayana 6. digvrata
ke aticAra 114 caubIsa deva 7. upabhoga-paribhogaparimANavata paccIsa bhAvanA ke
aticAra 115 chabbIsa dazAzrutaskandha 8. anarthadaNDaviramaNavrata ke aticAra
117 bRhatkalpa, vyavahArasUtra 9. sAmAyikavrata ke aticAra 118 trayI ke chabbIsa
adhyayana 10. dezAvakAzikavrata ke aticAra 118 sattAIsa anagAraguNa 11.
pauSadhavrata ke aticAra 119 12. atithisaMvibhAgavata ke aticAra 120 aTThAIsa
AcAraprakalpa unatIsa pApazrutaprasaMga paMcama adhyayana : kAyotsarga tIsa
mahAmohanIyasthAna kAyotsarga kA spaSTIkaraNa ikatIsa siddhaguNa SaSThAdhyayana
: pratyAkhyAna battIsa yogasaMgraha pratyAkhyAna ke prakAra 123 tetIsa AzAtanA
namaskArasahitasUtra pratijJAsUtra (nirgrantha pravacana kA pATha) pauruSIsUtra
125 bar3I saMlekhanA kA pATha pUrvArdhasUtra 126 pAMcoM padoM kI vandanA
ekAzanasUtra 127 darzanasamyaktva kA pATha 100 egaTThANa paccakkhANa 129 guru-
guNasmaraNasUtra AcAmla - AyaMbila pratyAkhyAnasUtra 130 kSAmaNAsUtra 102
abhaktArtha - upavAsasUtra caurAsI lAkha jIvayoni kA pATha 105 divasacarimasUtra
kulakoDI khamAne kA pATha abhigrahasUtra 133 praNipAtasUtra nirvikRtikasUtra 134
vratoM kI upayogitA 111 pratyAkhyAna pAraNAsUtra 135 bAraha vratoM ke aticAroM
kA pratikramaNa pariziSTa 1. ahiMsANuvrata ke aticAra 112 2. mRSAvAdaviramaNa
vrata ke aticAra 112 Avazyaka kI vidhi 3. adattAdAnaviramaNANuvrata ke aticAra
113 [68] 124 101 W 106 106 137

Page #72 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Āvaśyaka Sutta Āvaśyaka Sūtram

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 AvassayasuttaM AvazyakasUtram

Page #73 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The five great vows (Mahavratas) are: 1. **Ahimsa** (non-violence) 2. **Satya**
(truthfulness) 3. **Asteya** (non-stealing) 4. **Brahmacharya** (continence) 5.
**Aparigraha** (non-attachment)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================


Page #74 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Essential Sutra: Guru Vandan Sutra**  I offer obeisance to the Guru, I bow
down, I prostrate, I pay homage, I respect, I offer auspiciousness and
blessings, I consider you as a deity, I offer my salutations to the Chaitya
(knowledge). I offer my obeisance with my forehead.  **Meaning:** O Great Guru!
I offer my salutations by placing my joined palms three times, starting from the
right side and rotating them to the right, and then placing them on my forehead.
I bow down with five limbs, I offer my salutations, I pay homage, I respect
(with clothes, food, etc.), you are the embodiment of auspiciousness, you are
the embodiment of blessings, you are the embodiment of divinity, you are the
Chaitya (knowledge).  Therefore, O Gurudev! I offer my worship, service, and
devotion to you with my mind, speech, and body. I humbly bow down and offer my
salutations at your lotus feet.  **Discussion:** In Indian culture, the Guru
holds a significant position. If one does not have the guidance of a true Guru
in life, even attaining the vision of the Lord becomes difficult. At the
beginning of every auspicious work, the Guru is worshipped with devotion and
faith.  In a way, the Guru is even more important than God. A Vedic sage has
even said: If God is angry, the Guru can save you, but if the Guru is angry,
even God's power cannot save you.  **Harau ruste guru straata, gurau ruste na
vai shivah.** **Tasmat sarvaprayatnena, gurumeva prasadayet.**  Indeed, the
importance of a true Guru is immeasurable. Just as oil is needed to light a
lamp, a key is needed to run a clock, and food is needed to nourish the body, so
too is a true Guru needed to make life progressive. True Gurus are the true
artists of life. Therefore, Gurudev is like a boat in the ocean of existence,
who brings the noble beings to the shore. For a being lost in the darkness of
ignorance, the Guru is like a lamp, a source of light. There is no one more
benevolent in the world than the Guru. Many devotees have even said: "I will
abandon God, but I will not abandon the Guru." Because it is the Guru who
teaches us about right and wrong. A disciple should offer salutations, service,
and worship to such a benevolent Gurudev with devotion, only then can he
understand the mystery of life and the world.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 AvazyakasUtram guruvandanasUtra tikkhutto AyAhiNaM payAhiNaM karemi, vaMdAmi,
namasAmi, sakAremi, sammANemi, kallANaM maMgalaM devayaM ceiyaM pajuvAsAmi
matthaeNa vNdaami| bhAvArtha - he guru mahArAja ! maiM aJjalipuTa ko tIna bAra
dAhine hAtha kI ora se prArambha karake phira dAhine hAtha kI ora taka ghumAkara
apane lalATapradeza para rakhatA huA pradakSiNApUrvaka stuti karatA hU~, pA~ca
aMga jhukAkara vandanA karatA hU~, namaskAra karatA hU~, satkAra karatA hU~,
(vastra, anna Adi se) sammAna karatA hU~, Apa kalyANa-rUpa haiM , maMgalasvarUpa
haiM, Apa devatAsvarUpa haiM , caitya arthAt jJAnasvarUpa haiN| ataH he
gurudeva! maiM mana, vacana aura zarIra se ApakI paryupAsanA-sevAbhakti karatA
hU~ tathA vinayapUrvaka mastaka jhukAkara Apake caraNa-kamaloM meM vandanA
karatA huuN| vivecana - bhAratIya saMskRti meM guru kA mahattvapUrNa sthAna hai
/  yadi jIvana meM sadguru kA sAnnidhya prApta na ho to prabhu-darzana bhI
kaThina ho jAtA hai| pratyeka maMgala kArya ke prAraMbha meM bhakti evaM zraddhA
ke sAtha guru ko vandana kiyA jAtA hai| eka dRSTi se bhagavAn se bhI sadguru kA
mahattva adhika hai  /  eka vaidika RSi ne to yahA~ taka kahA hai - bhagavAn
yadi ruSTa ho jAye to sadguru bacA sakatA hai para sadguru ruSTa ho jAye to
bhagavAn kI zakti nahIM, jo use ubAra ske| harau ruSTe guru strAtA, gurau ruSTe
na vai shivH| tasmAtsarvaprayatnena, gurumeva prsaadyet|| vastutaH sadguru kA
mahattva aparampAra hai| dIpaka ko prakAzita karane ke liye jaise tela kI
AvazyakatA hai, ghar3I ko calAne ke liye cAbI kI jarUrata hai, zarIra ko hRSTa-
puSTa banAne ke liye bhojana Avazyaka hai, vaise hI jIvana ko pragatizIla banAne
ke liye sadguru kI AvazyakatA hai  /  sadguru hI jIvana ke sacce kalAkAra haiM
/  ataH gurudeva hI bhava-sindhu meM naukA svarUpa haiM, jo bhavya prANiyoM ko
kinAre lagAte haiM  /  ajJAnarUpa andhakAra meM bhaTakate huye prANI ke liye
guru pradIpa ke samAna prakAzadAtA haiM  /  vizva meM guru se bar3hakara anya
koI bhI upakArI nahIM hai| aneka bhaktoM ne to yahA~ taka kaha DAlA hai ki
-"guru na tajUM hari ko taja ddaaluuN|" kyoMki hitAhita kA bodha karAne vAle
guru hI hote haiM  /  aise parama upakArI guru deva kI caraNa-vandanA, sevA,
arcanA Adi ziSya samarpaNa bhAva se kare taba hI vaha jIvana aura jagat kA
rahasya samajha sakatA hai|

Page #75 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  [4] **Essential Sutras** **Meaning of Specific Words** * **Tikkhutto** -
**Trikrutva:** Three times. * **Ayahiṇam** - From the right side. Its Sanskrit
form is 'Aadakshinam'. **Payahiṇam** - The Sanskrit form of this is
'Pradakshinam'. Meaning, clockwise from the right side. * **Vandami** - I bow.
The meaning of bowing is to praise. * **Namansami** - I salute. Its Sanskrit
form is 'Namasyami'. There is a difference between bowing and saluting. Bowing
means praising with the mouth, and saluting means bowing with the body,
prostrating. * **Kallaṇam** - **Kalyanam** - Kaly means one who grants
liberation or peace. * **Mangalam** - Auspicious, prosperity, auspicious and
auspicious.  Based on the necessary instructions, Acharya Haribhadra wrote in
the commentary of the first verse of the first study of the Dasha Vaikalika
Sutra - "Mangyate - Adhigamyate Hitam Anena Iti Mangalam" Meaning, that which
brings benefit to the seeker is auspicious. "Maam Gaalayati Bhavad iti Mangalam
- Sansaraad Apanayati" That which separates me (the soul) from the bondage of
the world, liberates me, is auspicious. The famous commentator of the
Visheshaavashyak Bhashya, Shri Hemchandracharya says - "Makyate Alankriyate Atma
Yenetti Mangalam" That which makes the soul radiant is auspicious. Or, that
which brings heaven and liberation or destroys sin is called auspicious.
**Salutation Sutra** Namo Arihantaanam, Namo Siddhaanam, Namo Aariyaanam. Namo
Uvvajjaayaanam, Namo Loe Savvasahuuṇam. ||  **Meaning** - Salutations to the
Arihants, salutations to the Siddhas, salutations to the Acharyas, salutations
to the Upadhyayas, salutations to all the virtuous beings in the human world.
Eso Panch Namokkaroo, Savva-Paav-Ppanasanoo. Mangalaanam Cha Savvesim, Padham
Havai Mangalam ||  **Meaning** - This salutation to the five supreme beings, the
great souls, is the destroyer of all sins. It is the most auspicious of all
auspicious things.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 4] [ AvazyakasUtra viziSTa zabdoM kA artha tikkhutto - trikRtva:- tIna bAra  /
AyAhiNaM - dAhinI ora se| isakA 'AdakSiNaM' saMskRta rUpa banatA hai| payAhiNaM
- kA saMskRta rUpa 'pradakSiNaM' banatA hai| arthAt dAhinI ora se
prdkssinnaapuurvk| vaMdAmi - vandana karatA huuN| vandana kA artha hai stuti
krnaa| namaMsAmi - namaskAra karatA huuN| isakA saMskRta rUpa 'namasyAmi' hai  /
vandanA aura namaskAra meM aMtara hai  /  vandanA arthAt mukha se guNagAna
karanA, stuti karanA aura namaskAra arthAt kAyA se namrIbhUta honA, praNamana
krnaa| kallANaM - kalyANaM-kalya arthAt mokSa pradAna karane vAle yA zanti
pradAna karane vaale| maMgalaM - zubha, kSema, prazasta evaM shiv|
Avazyakaniyukti ke AdhAra para AcArya haribhadra ne dazavaikAlikasUtra ke
prathama adhyayana kI prathama gAthA kI TIkA meM likhA hai - "maMgyate -
adhigamyate hitamanena iti maMgalam" arthAt jisake dvArA sAdhaka ko hita kI
prApti ho vaha maMgala hai| "mAM gAlayati bhavAditi maMgalam-saMsArAdapanayati"
jo mujhe (AtmA ko) saMsAra ke bandhana se alaga karatA hai, chur3atA hai, vaha
maMgala hai| vizeSAvazyakabhASya ke prasiddha TIkAkara zrI hemacandrAcArya
kahate haiM - "makyate alaMkriyate AtmA yeneti maMgalam' jisake dvArA AtmA
zobhAyamAna ho vaha maMgala hai| athavAjisake dvArA svarga evaM mokSa prApta
kiyA jAtA hai yA pApa kA vinAza kiyA jAtA hai, use maMgala kahate haiN|
namaskArasUtra namo arihaMtANaM, namo siddhANaM, namo aayriyaannN| namo
uvajjhAyANaM, namo loe svvsaahuunnN|| bhAvArtha - arihaMtoM ko namaskAra ho,
siddhoM ko namaskAra ho, AcAryoM ko namaskAra ho, upAdhyAyoM ko namaskAra ho,
mAnava-loka meM vidyamAna samasta sAdhuoM ko namaskAra ho| eso paMca namokkAro,
svv-paav-ppnnaasnno| maMgalANaM ca savvesiM, paDhamaM havai maMgalaM  //
bhAvArtha uparyukta pA~ca parameSThI-mahAn AtmAoM ko kiyA huA yaha namaskAra
saba prakAra ke

Page #76 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Namaskarasutra] [5 It is the one that completely destroys sins and is the first
auspiciousness in all the auspiciousnesses of the world. Discussion - Jain
culture has an important place in Indian culture, and Jainism has an important
place in Jain culture. There is no mantra greater than the Namaskaramantra or
Navkaramantra in the Jain tradition. Jainism is a spiritual religion. Therefore,
its mantra is also imbued with spiritual feeling. The Jain tradition believes
that the Navkaramantra is the essence, the essence of the entire Jain literature
or the fourteen Purvas. The Navkaramantra is the best mantra of Jain literature.
It is the main symbol of divine equality. It explains the importance of only
virtue-worship, without any sectarian discrimination, without any particular
country, caste or religion. In ancient religious texts, the Navkaramantra is
also called the Paramesthimantra. Those great souls who are in the supreme
position, that is, in the highest form, are called Paramesthis. The
Navkaramantra has many names like Namaskaramantra, Paramesthimantra etc. But the
most famous name is Navkaramantra. There are nine verses in the Navkaramantra,
hence it is called Navkaramantra. Five verses are of the original verses and the
remaining four verses are of the Chulika. The five verses of Arihant etc. are of
the role of the seeker and the Siddha, and the last four verses are indicative
of the glory of the Maha Mantra. _Mumuksha humans have considered Namaskar very
important. Namaskar is a pure symbol of humility and virtue-receptivity. The
tradition of greeting the superior and elder souls has been uninterrupted since
time immemorial. Arihants have twelve, Siddhas have eight, Acharyas have thirty-
six, Upadhyayas have twenty-five and Sadhus have twenty-seven virtues. The
speech of these five verses, endowed with these virtues, is the greeting given
to the great souls, which liberates from this mortal world forever and bestows
eternal Shiva-Sukha. The first verse is of Arihant. There are two words in
Arihant - 'Ari' and 'Hant'. Ari means - internal enemies like attachment and
aversion, and Hant means - destroyer. The second meaning of the word Arihant is
- the one who has destroyed the four destructive karmas of knowledge-veil,
vision-veil, mohaniya and antaray, and has attained perfect knowledge and
perfect vision, that liberated soul is Arihant. The Acharyas of the Arihant
verse have mentioned many readings, such as - Arhant, Arhant, Aru Hant, Arohant
etc. Those for whom there is no secret in the world, those whose perfect
knowledge and vision hide nothing, they are Arhants. Those who are worshipped by
miracles like the Ashoka tree etc. are Arhants. Those who are never to be born
again, that is, those who have been liberated from birth and death forever, are
called 'Aruhant' or 'Arohant'.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 namaskArasUtra ] [5 pApoM ko pUrNatayA nAza karane vAlA hai aura vizva ke saba
maMgaloM meM prathama maMgala hai| . vivecana - bhAratIya-saMskRti meM
jainasaMskRti kA aura jainasaMskRti meM bhI jainadharma kA mahattvapUrNa sthAna
hai  /  jaina paramparA meM namaskAramaMtra yA navakAramaMtra se bar3hakara
dUsarA koI maMtra nahIM hai  /  jainadharma adhyAtmapradhAna dharma hai  /  ataH
usakA maMtra bhI adhyAtma bhAvanA se otaprota hai  /  navakAramaMtra ke
sambandha meM jainaparamparA kI mAnyatA hai ki yaha sampUrNa jaina vAGmaya
athavA caudaha pUrvo kA sAra hai, nicor3a hai  /  jaina sAhitya kA sarvazreSTha
maMtra navakAramaMtra hai  /  vaha divya samabhAva kA pramukha pratIka hai  /
isameM binA kisI sAmpradAyika bhedabhAva ke, binA kisI deza, jAti athavA dharma
kI vizeSatA ke kevala guNa-pUjA kA mahattva batAyA gayA hai  /  prAcIna dharma-
granthoM meM navakAramaMtra kA dUsarA nAma parameSThImaMtra bhI hai| jo mahAn
AtmAe~ parama pada meM arthAt ucca svarUpa meM sthita haiM, ve parameSThI
kahalAtI haiN| navakAramaMtra ke namaskAramaMtra, parameSThImaMtra Adi aneka
nAma haiM  /  parantu sabase prasiddha nAma navakAramaMtra hI hai  /
navakAramaMtra meM nau pada haiM, ataH ise navakAramaMtra kahate haiM  /  pAMca
pada mUla padoM ke haiM aura zeSa cAra pada cUlikA ke haiN| arihaMta Adi pAMca
pada sAdhaka tathA siddha kI bhUmikA ke haiM aura antima cAra pada mahAmaMtra kI
mahimA ke nidarzaka haiN| _mumukSa mAnavoM ne namaskAra ko bahuta mahattvapUrNa
mAnA hai| namaskAra, namratA evaM guNagrAhakatA kA vizuddha pratIka hai| apane
se zreSTha evaM jeSTha AtmAoM ko namaskAra karane kI paramparA anAdikAla se
avicchinna rUpa se calI A rahI hai| arihantoM ke bAraha, siddhoM ke ATha,
AcAryoM ke chattIsa, upAdhyAyoM ke paccIsa evaM sAdhuoM ke sattAIsa guNa haiN|
ina guNoM se yukta ina pA~coM padoM ke vAcya mahAn AtmAoM ko kiyA gayA namaskAra
isa nazvara saMsAra se sadA ke liye chuTakArA dilAkara zAzvata ziva-sukha kA
pradAtA hai| prathama pada arihanta kA hai  /  arihanta meM do zabda haiM -
'ari' aura 'hnt'| ari kA artha hai - rAgadveSa Adi andara ke zatru aura hanta kA
artha hai - nAza karane vaalaa| arihanta pada kA dUsarA artha isa prakAra hai -
jisane jJAnAvaraNa, darzanAvaraNa, mohanIya aura antarAya, ina cAra ghanaghAtika
karmoM kA nAza karake kevalajJAna, kevaladarzana ko prApta kara liyA hai, vaha
jIvanmukta paramAtmA arihanta hai| arihanta pada ke AcAryoM ne aneka pAThAntaroM
kA ullekha kiyA hai, yathA - arahanta, arhanta, aru hanta, arohanta aadi| jinake
liye jagat meM koI rahasya nahIM raha gayA hai, jinake kevalajJAna-darzana se
kucha chipA nahIM hai, ve arahanta haiM  /  jo azokavRkSa Adi prAtihAryoM se
pUjita haiM, ve arhanta haiN| jinheM phira kabhI janma nahIM lenA hai arthAt jo
janma-maraNa se sadA ke liye chuTakArA pA cuke haiM, unheM 'aruhanta' yA
'arohanta' kahate haiN|

Page #77 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Necessary Sutra  The second phrase is "Namo Siddhanam". Siddha means
"perfect", that is, those whose practice is complete. Those great souls who are
completely free from karmic defilement, who have forever escaped the cycle of
birth and death, who have become immortal, imperishable, Siddha-Buddha-Mukta,
and attained liberation, are addressed by the term Siddha. According to Buddhist
belief, the Siddhahood of the Siddhas is not like the extinguishing of a lamp, a
state of non-existence, nor is it merging into a cosmic entity, but rather a
state of pure being. The happiness of the Siddhas is boundless. While emperors
and other humans, as well as all gods, experience happiness, which is dependent,
the Siddhas always experience a unique, infinite, uninterrupted, and
indescribable spiritual happiness. To learn more about this happiness in detail,
one should refer to the Aupapatik Sutra (Aagam Prakashan Samiti, Byawar, pp.
180-181).  ## Third Phrase  The third phrase is "Namo Ayariyanam". The Acharya
is the true protector, guide, and beacon of Indian culture. The Acharya is not
an ordinary practitioner, but a special one. The Acharya is called the father of
the Dharma-based Shraman-Sangha, "Acharya: Parama: Pita". He is not a
Tirthankara, but he is like a Tirthankara. He himself firmly adheres to the five
principles of conduct: Jnanaachar, Darshanachar, etc., and guides other
practitioners. Like a lamp, he burns himself to illuminate other self-lamps. The
Sadhu, Sadhvi, Shravak, and Shravika, these four types of Sangha, are led in
their spiritual practice by the Acharya. Through this phrase "Namo Ayariyanam",
we pay homage to countless past, present, and future Acharyas.  ## Fourth Phrase
The fourth phrase pays homage to the Upadhyayas. This phrase is also very
important. In the life of a practitioner, there is an essential need for wisdom
and knowledge. Through the knowledge of discrimination, one can understand the
distinction between the inert and the conscious, between virtue and vice,
between the world and liberation, and only then can a practitioner build a noble
and ideal life and reach the highest peak of practice. Therefore, the
responsibility of teaching spiritual knowledge lies with the Upadhyaya.  "Up-
samepe'dhyayate yasmat iti Upadhyaya". Upadhyayas unravel the inner complexities
of human life with a subtle method and teach detachment from evil conduct and
attachment to good conduct. Through this phrase "Namo Uvjjhayaanam", we pay
homage to countless past, present, and future Upadhyayas. The Upadhyayas are
worthy of our respect because they are endowed with knowledge, vision, and
character, and because they are benefactors by teaching the Sutras.  ## Fifth
Phrase  The fifth phrase pays homage to the Sadhus. The seeker of Nirvana, that
is, the one who possesses the jewels of right knowledge, right vision, and right
conduct, and who uses them to attain liberation, or the one who holds all beings
with equanimity, and who aspires for liberation...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 [ AvazyakasUtra dUsarA pada 'namo siddhANaM' hai| siddha kA artha hai - pUrNa
arthAt jinakI sAdhanA pUrI ho cukI hai| jo mahAn AtmAyeM karma-mala se sarvathA
mukta hokara janma-maraNa ke cakra se sadA ke liye chuTakArA pAkara ajara,
amara, siddha-buddha-mukta hokara mokSa prApta kara cuke haiM, ve siddha pada se
sambodhita hote haiN| siddhoM kA siddhatva bauddha mAnyatA ke anusAra dIpaka
bujha jAne kI taraha abhAvasvarUpa nahIM hai aura na kisI virAT sattA meM vilIna
ho jAnA hai, apitu sadbhAva svarUpa hai| siddhoM kA sukha apAra hai| cakravartI
Adi manuSyoM ko tathA samasta devoM kabhI sukha prApta hai jo parAzrita hai,
kintu usase bhI anupama, ananta avyAbAdha evaM anirvacanIya AdhyAtmika sukha
siddhoM ko sadaiva prApta rahatA hai  /  vistAra se usa sukha kA varNana jAnane
ke liye aupapAtika sUtra ( Agama prakAzana samiti byAvara, pR. 180 - 181)
dekhanA cAhiye  /  6] tIsarA pada 'namo AyariyANaM' hai| AcArya bhAratIya
saMskRti kA saccA saMrakSaka hai, pathapradarzaka hai tathA Aloka-staMbha hai|
AcArya koI sAdhAraNa sAdhaka na hokara eka viziSTa sAdhaka hai| AcArya ko
dharmapradhAna zramaNa-saMgha kA pitA kahA hai " AcAryaH paramaH pitA"  /
tIrthaMkara to nahIM para tIrthaMkara sadRza hai  /  vaha jJAnAcAra, darzanAcAra
Adi pA~ca AcAroM kA svayaM dRr3hatA pAlana karatA hai tathA anya sAdhakoM ko
dizAdarzana detA hai| dIpaka kI taraha svayaM jalakara dUsare Atma- dIpoM ko
pradIpta karatA hai| sAdhu, sAdhvI, zrAvaka aura zrAvikA, yaha cartuvidha saMgha
hai, isakI AdhyAtmika sAdhanA ke netRtva kA bhAra AcArya para hI hotA hai  /
"namo AyariyANaM" isa pada ke dvArA ananta - ananta bhUta, vartamAna evaM
anAgata AcAryoM ko namaskAra kiyA jAtA hai| caturtha pada meM upAdhyAyoM ko
namaskAra kiyA gayA hai| yaha pada bhI bahuta hI mahattvapUrNa hai|
sAdhakajIvana meM viveka - vijJAna kI anivArya AvazyakatA hai| bheda-vijJAna ke
dvArA jar3a aura cetana ke, dharma aura adharma ke utthAna evaM patana ke,
saMsAra aura mokSa ke pRthakkaraNa kA bhAna hone para hI sAdhaka apanA ucca evaM
, Adarza jIvana banA sakatA hai aura sAdhanA ke sarvottuMga zikhara para pahuMca
sakatA hai| ataH AdhyAtmika vidyA ke zikSaNa kA kartRtva upAdhyAya para hai|
"upa-samIpe'dhIyate yasmAt iti upAdhyAyaH  /  'upAdhyAya mAnava-jIvana kI
antargranthiyoM ko sUkSma paddhati se sulajhAte haiM aura pApAcAra ke prati
virakti kI tathA sadAcAra ke prati anurakti kI zikSA dene vAle haiN| " namo
uvajjhAyANaM" isa pada dvArA anantAnanta bhUta, vartamAna evaM AgAmIkAla ke
upAdhyAyoM ko vandanA kI jAtI hai| jJAna, darzana, cAritra se yukta tathA sUtra
par3hAne ke kAraNa upakArI hone se upAdhyAya namaskAra ke yogya haiM  /  yyn
pAMcaveM pada meM sAdhuoM ko namaskAra kiyA gayA hai| nirvANa sAdhaka ko arthAt
samyagjJAnadarzanacAritra rUpa ratnoM aura inake dvArA mokSa ko sAdhane vAle
athavA saba prANiyoM para samabhAva rakhane vAle, mokSAbhilASI

Page #78 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Namsakarsutra] [7 Salutations to all the omniscient, Jnana-Anuvratin Sadhus who
are the helpers of the Bhavyas and reside in the Lok of the two and a half
islands. "Sadhayati Mokshamargamiti Sadhu" - meaning those who practice the
three jewels of Right Faith, Right Knowledge, and Right Conduct, the path to
liberation, are Sadhus.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 namaskArasUtra ] [7 bhavyoM ke sahAyaka tathA ar3hAI dvIpa rUpa loka meM rahe
huye sabhI sarvajJa - AjJAnuvartI sAdhuoM ko namaskAra ho| "sAdhayati
mokSamArgamiti sAdhuH" arthAt jo samyagjJAna-darzana evaM cAritra rUpa
ratnatraya kI, mokSamArga kI sAdhanA karate haiM, ve sAdhu haiN| an

Page #79 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[1] First Study: Samayik Vrata Sutra I accept, O Venerable One, the Samayik
Vrata. I renounce all sinful actions, for the duration of my life, with my mind,
speech, and body. I will not commit them, nor cause others to commit them, nor
will I approve of those who commit them. O Venerable One, I repent for my past
sins, I condemn them in my mind, I denounce them in your presence, and I
completely abandon them. Meaning: O Lord! I accept the Samayik Vrata. Therefore,
I renounce all sinful actions. For the duration of my life, I will not commit
any sinful actions with my mind, speech, and body, nor will I cause others to
commit them, nor will I approve of those who commit them. O Venerable One! I
repent for my past sins, I condemn them in my mind, I denounce them in your
presence, and I completely abandon them. Discussion: When a seeker aspiring for
liberation moves from household life towards the path of complete renunciation
and virtue, this Samayik Sutra is recited. According to Jain tradition, it is
mandatory to take refuge in this Samayik Sutra to attain the position of a
world-benefactor saint. The purpose of Samayik is the practice of equanimity. To
hold equanimity towards all living beings is a great and noble ideal. The
scriptures say: "He who is equal to all beings, both mobile and immobile, he
alone attains Samayik." - The Kevali Bhagavan, in the Anuyogadwar, has said - He
(the seeker) who holds equanimity towards all mobile and immobile beings, he
alone attains Samayik. Jainism is a religion based on equality. Samayik is the
practice of equality. The etymology of the word Samayik is as follows: 'Samasyah
ayah samaayah, sah prayojanam yasya tat samaayikam' - that is, the practice
whose purpose is to bring equality in life. When a householder Shravak accepts
Samayik, he generally renounces the sinful actions for one Muhurta, that is, 48
minutes, with two Karana and three Yoga. In Jainism, it is essential to have
Karana and Yoga in any renunciation or rule. Karana means -

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 [1] prathama adhyayana : sAmAyika pratijJAsUtra karemi bhaMte ! sAmAiyaM savvaM
sAvajaM jogaM paccakkhAmi jAvajjIvAe, tivihaM tiviheNaM - maNeNaM, vAyAe, kAeNaM
na karemi, na kAravemi, karaMtaMpi annaM na smnnujaannaami| tassa bhaMte!
paDikkamAmi, niMdAmi garihAmi appANaM vosiraami| bhAvArtha - bhagavan ! maiM
sAmAyika vrata grahaNa karatA hU~  /  ataH sAvadya-pApa karma vAle vyApAroM kA
tyAga karatA huuN| jIvana paryanta mana, vacana aura zarIra - ina tInoM yogoM se
pApa karma na maiM svayaM karUMgA, na dUsaroM se karAUMgA aura na karane vAloM
kA anumodana hI kruuNgaa| bhaMte ! pUrvakRta pApoM se nivRtta hotA hU~, apane
mana se pApoM ko burA mAnatA hU~, ApakI sAkSI se unakI garhA - nindA karatA hU~,
atIta meM kRta pApoM kA pUrNarUpa se parityAga karatA huuN| vivecana - jaba
mokSAbhilASI sAdhaka, gRhastha jIvana se sarvavirati-sAdhutA kI ora agrasara
hotA hai, taba yaha sAmAyikasUtra bolA jAtA hai  /  vizva-hitaMkara saMta ke
pada para pahuMcane ke liye isa sAmAyikasUtra kA Alambana lenA jainaparamparA ke
anusAra anivArya hai| sAmAyika kA uddezya samabhAva kI sAdhanA hai| prANimAtra
para samabhAva rakhanA mahAn ucca Adarza hai| zAstrakAra kahate haiM - jo samo
savvabhUesa, tasesu thAvaresu y| tassa sAmAiyaM hoi, ii kevlibhaasiyN|| -
anuyogadvAra kevalI bhagavAn ne kahA hai - jo (sAdhaka) samasta trasa aura
sthAvara jIvoM ke prati samabhAva dhAraNa karatA hai, usI ko sAmAyika kI prApti
hotI hai| jainadharma samatApradhAna dharma hai, samatA kI sAdhanA ko hI
sAmAyika kahate haiM  /  sAmAyika zabda kI vyutpatti isa prakAra hai - 'samasya
AyaH samAyaH, saH prayojanaM yasya tat sAmAyikam' arthAt vaha anuSThAna jisakA
prayojana jIvana meM samatA lAnA hai  /  gRhastha zrAvaka sAmAyika svIkAra
karate samaya do karaNa aura tIna yoga se sAdhAraNatayA eka muhUrta arthAt 48
miniTa ke liye sAvadyayoga kA tyAga karatA hai  /  jainadharma meM jo bhI
pratyAkhyAna evaM niyama kiyA jAtA hai usameM karaNa aura yoga kA honA Avazyaka
hai| karaNa kA artha hai -

Page #80 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## First Study: Samayik  **Introduction:** Samayik has three forms: (1) doing it
oneself, (2) causing others to do it, and (3) approving it. Yoga refers to mind,
speech, and body.  **The Highest Renunciation:** The highest renunciation is
achieved through the abandonment of all three karmas and three yogas. A muni's
Samayik involves all three karmas and three yogas, hence it is considered the
most excellent renunciation. A householder's Samayik involves two karmas and
three yogas. When reciting the Samayik text, if a householder is observing the
Samayik vow themselves or a sadhu is causing them to observe it, the phrase
"duviham tivihenam" should be used, and "javjivaae" should be replaced with
"javniyam".  **Causes of Decline:** Jainism identifies two causes of decline:
yoga and kshaya. Yoga refers to the activity of mind, speech, and body. Kshaya
refers to anger, pride, deceit, and greed. These four are the uneven states of
the soul. Anger is the state where we view others with hatred or aversion and
desire to harm them. In pride, even though the feeling of hatred is less, there
is still a sense of discrimination, we consider ourselves superior and others
inferior, ourselves big and others small, ourselves righteous and others sinful
and wicked. Deceit refers to the desire to fulfill one's self-interest through
hidden means or deception. Greed is the desire for excessive gain. In greed,
one's own self-interest is given more importance than the interests of others.
Samayik is a practice to rise above these unfavorable yogas and kshayas.
**Potential Errors:** While performing Samayik, householders contemplate
potential errors, which are called "atichaar" in Jain terminology. These
atichaars are of five types: 1. Manodushpranidhan, 2. Vachodushpranidhan, 3.
Kayadushpranidhan, 4. Smrityantardhan, 5. Anvasthita. Pranidhan means
investment. Dushpranidhan means wrong investment. Mind, speech, and body are the
most valuable possessions of every practitioner. Smrityantardhan means
forgetting that one is in Samayik and engaging in useless talk. The practitioner
should always be vigilant. Anvasthita means fickleness or distraction. One
should complete the vow with steadiness for the duration it was taken.  **Mangal
Sutra:** Four Auspicious Things: Arihant is auspicious, Siddha is auspicious,
Saahu is auspicious,

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prathama adhyayana : sAmAyika ] prvRtti| usake tIna rUpa haiM - (1) svayaM
karanA , (2) dUsare se karAnA aura (3) anumodana krnaa| yoga kA artha hai mana,
vacana aura shriir| sarvazreSTha tyAga tInoM karaNoM aura tInoM yogoM se hotA
hai  /  muni kI sAmAyika tIna karaNa tIna yoga se hotI hai ata: sarvotkRSTa
tyAga muni kA mAnA gayA hai  /  gRhastha kI sAmAyika do karaNa tIna yoga se hotI
hai  /  sAmAyika pATha kA uccAraNa karate samaya yadi koI gRhastha zrAvaka
svayaM sAmAyika vrata grahaNa kara rahA hai athavA sAdhu use vrata grahaNa
karavA rahA hai to 'duvihaM tiviheNaM' pATha bolA jAyegA aura 'jAvajIvAe' ke
sthAna para 'jAvaniyama' kahA jaaegaa| jainadharma meM patana ke do kAraNa mAne
gaye haiM - yoga aura kaSAya  /  yoga kA artha hai - mana, vacana aura kAyA kI
halacala  /  kaSAya arthAt krodha, mAna, mAyA aura lobha  /  ye cAroM AtmA kI
vaiSamyapUrNa avasthAe~ haiN| krodha usa avasthA kA nAma hai , jaba hama dUsare
ko ghRNA yA dveSa kI dRSTi se dekhate haiM aura hAni pahu~cAnA cAhate haiM  /
mAna kI avasthA meM dveSa bhAvanA nyUna hone para bhI usa rUpa meM bhedabuddhi
rahatI hai, hama svayaM ko U~cA mAnate haiM aura dUsare ko nIcA, svayaM ko bar3A
aura dUsare ko choTA, apane ko dharmAtmA evaM dUsare ko pApI, adhama mAnate haiM
/  mAyA kA artha hai svArtha ko pracchanna-rUpa se yA kapaTa ke dvArA pUrNa
karane kI bhAvanA  /  lobha arthAt adhika lAbha kI icchaa| lobhAvasthA meM
svayaM ke svArtha ko jitanA mahattva diyA jAtA hai , utanA dUsare ke svArtha ko
nhiiN| sAmAyika inhIM azubha yogoM aura kaSAyoM se Upara uThane kI sAdhanA hai|
_ sAmAyika pUrNa karate samaya gRhastha saMbhAvita bhUloM kA cintana karatA hai,
jinheM jaina paribhASA meM 'aticAra' kahate haiM  /  ve aticAra pA~ca prakAra ke
haiM - 1. manoduSpraNidhAna, 2. vacoduSpraNidhAna, 3. kAyaduSpraNidhAna,
4.smRtyantardhAna, 5. anvsthitaa| praNidhAna kA artha hai - viniyoga, jise
aMgrejI meM Investment kahA jAtA hai| duSpraNidhAna kA artha hai - galata
viniyoga (wrong Investment)  /  mana, vacana aura kAyA pratyeka sAdhaka kI
bahumUlya sampatti hai  /  smRtyantardhAna kA artha hai isa bAta ko bhUla jAnA
ki maiM sAmAyika meM hU~ aura vyartha kI bAtoM meM laganA  /  sAdhaka ko sadA
jAgarUka rahanA cAhiye  /  anavasthitatA kA artha hai - caMcalatA athavA
anymnsktaa| jitane samaya ke liye vrata liyA hai, use sthiratA ke sAtha pUrA
karanA caahiye| maMgalasUtra cattAri maMgalaM - arihaMtA maMgalaM, siddhA
maMgalaM, sAhU maMgalaM,

Page #81 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 10] **Kevali-pannatto dhammo mangalam.** **Meaning:** There are four
auspicious things in the world. (1) Arihant Bhagwan is auspicious. (2) Siddha
Bhagwan is auspicious. (3) Sadhu-Maharaj is auspicious. (4) Dharma, in the form
of the omniscient, is auspicious.  **Worldly and transcendental
auspiciousness.** Curd, rice, and garlands of flowers.  **Discussion:**
Auspiciousness is of two types. The first is worldly auspiciousness. The
Arihant, etc., mentioned in the sutras, are transcendental auspiciousness.
Worldly auspiciousness is not absolute or ultimate auspiciousness. Therefore,
the great souls who are devoted to spirituality and self-realization have sought
out transcendental auspiciousness, separate from worldly auspiciousness.
Transcendental auspiciousness is never inauspicious. Worldly auspiciousness,
filled with worldly entanglements, has never brought lasting peace to anyone,
nor will it ever. What kind of auspiciousness is it if it does not bring lasting
joy? Therefore, transcendental auspiciousness is the true auspiciousness.
**[Essential Sutra]** In the four auspicious things presented here, the first
two are ideal forms. The ultimate goal of our life is to attain the Arihant and
finally the Siddha state. Arihant and Siddha are the ideal forms of perfect
self-purification, i.e., enlightenment, and are auspicious, while Sadhu is the
ideal form of spiritual practice. The Sadhu state includes Acharya and
Upadhyaya.  Finally, Dharma-mangal comes. The establishment of the previous
states is due to its influence or the fruit of Dharma. The power of Dharma is
supreme.  **Uttama Chatushtaya** **Cattari logutama** **Arihanta logutama,**
**Siddha logutama,** **Sahuu logutama,** **Kevali-pannatto dhammo logutama.**
**Meaning:** There are four supreme, i.e., the best, in the world. (1) Arihant
Bhagwan is the best in the world. -

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 10] kevali - paNNatto dhammo maMgalaM  /  bhAvArtha - saMsAra meM cAra maMgala
haiN| (1) arihaMta bhagavAn maMgala haiN| (2) siddha bhagavAn maMgala haiM  /
(3) sAdhu - mahArAja maMgala haiN| (4) sarvajJaprarUpita dharma maMgala hai|
laukika maMgala aura lokottara mNgl| dadhi, akSata, puSpamAlA vivecana maMgala
do prakAra ke haiN| Adi laukika maMgala mAne gaye haiN| sUtrokta arihaMta Adi
lokottara maMgala haiN| laukika maMgala ekAnta aura Atyantika maMgala nahIM
hote| ataH adhyAtmaniSTha AtmArthI mahApuruSoM ne laukika maMgala se pRthak
alaukika maMgala kI zodha kI hai| alaukika maMgala kabhI amaMgala nahIM hotA hai
/  sAMsArika ulajhanoM se bhare laukika maMgala se Aja dina taka na to kisI ne
sthAyI zAMti prApta kI hai aura na bhaviSya meM hI koI kara paayegaa| sthAyI
Ananda jaba taka na mile, taba taka vaha maMgala kaisA ? ataH alaukika maMgala
hI vAstavika maMgala hai| 1 [ AvazyakasUtra prastuta cAra maMgaloM meM prathama
do maMgala Adarza rUpa haiN| hamAre jIvana kA aMtima lakSya kramazaH arihaMta
aura aMta meM siddha pada kI prApti karanA hI hai| arihaMta aura siddha pUrNa
Atmavizuddhi arthAt siddhatA ke Adarza Adarza maMgala haiM, jabaki sAdhu
sAdhakatA ke Adarza maMgala haiN| sAdhu pada meM AcArya aura upAdhyAya bhI
samAhita ho jAte haiM  /  sabase aMta meM dharma- maMgala AtA hai| isI ke
prabhAva se yA dharma ke phalasvarUpa hI pUrvavartI anya padoM kI pratiSThA hai|
dharma kI zakti sarvopari hai  /  uttamacatuSTaya cattAri loguttamA arihaMtA
loguttamA, siddhA loguttamA, sAhU loguttamA, kevali - paNNatto dhammo loguttamA
/  bhAvArtha - saMsAra meM cAra uttama arthAt sarvazreSTha haiM (1) arihaMta
bhagavAn loka meM uttama haiN| -

Page #82 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## First Study: Samayik  **(11 (2))** The Siddha Bhagwan is the best in the
world. **(3)** The Sadhu-Maharaj is the best in the world. **(4)** The Dharma,
embodied in the omniscient, is the best in the world.  **Discussion:** The
Agamkaras have said that there are four best things. The Arihant, Siddha, Sadhu,
and Dharma are the four best things that lead the wandering souls, who have been
wandering for an infinite time, on the path of upliftment. And whatever is best
is also auspicious. It is world-renowned that every enlightened being in the
world today is engaged in the search for the best, whether it be in the social
sphere, the political sphere, or the spiritual sphere. Among the four best
things, the Arihant and the Siddha are the best in the form of the Supreme Soul.
The pure light form of the soul after the removal of karmic impurities is the
Supreme Soul. The Sadhu is the best in the form of the Acharya, Upadhyaya, and
Muni, the Mahatmas. Dharma is the only best and excellent means to become a
Mahatma from the soul and a Supreme Soul from the Mahatma. It is also said -
'Dharanaad Dharma' - that is, the Dharma that sustains and saves the souls
falling into misery is the best Dharma.  The Agamkar has shed light on this
principle that Dharma is the root of all auspiciousness. If there is no
fragrance in the flower, no heat in the fire, no coolness in the water, no
sweetness in the sugar, then what will be their form? Nothing. The same is the
condition of a man without Dharma. It is also said - "Dharmena Heenaah Pashubhih
Samanaah" - that is, there is no difference between a man without Dharma and an
animal - both are equal. The practice of Dharma is the practice of good. There
are two types of practice - 1. Practice of morality and 2. Practice of Dharma.
The practice of morality is the practice of virtue. This practice can only lead
to morality and lays the foundation for Dharma-prasad. The practice of Dharma
leads to liberation.  **Sharan Sutra:** Chattari Saranam Pavajami - Arihante
Saranam Pavajami, Siddhe Saranam Pavajami, Saahu Saranam Pavajjami, Kevali-
Pannattam Dhammam Saranam Pavajami.  **Meaning:** I take refuge in the four -
(1) I take refuge in the Arihants,

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prathama adhyayana : sAmAyika ] [11 (2) siddha bhagavAn loka meM uttama haiN|
(3) sAdhu-mahArAja loka meM uttama haiN| (4) sarvajJaprarUpita dharma loka meM
uttama hai| vivecana - AgamakAroM ne kahA hai ki uttama cAra haiM  /  ananta
kAla se bhaTakatI huI bhavya AtmAoM ko utthAna ke patha para le jAne vAle
arihanta, siddha, sAdhu aura dharma ye cAra hI uttama haiM tathA jo uttama hotA
hai, vahI maMgala hotA hai  /  yaha bAta vizva-vikhyAta hai ki Aja saMsAra kA
pratyeka prabuddha prANI uttama kI zodha meM lagA huA hai, cAhe vaha sAmAjika
kSetra ho, rAjanaitika kSetra ho athavA AdhyAtmika kSetra ho  /  cAra uttamoM
meM arihanta aura siddha paramAtmA ke rUpa meM uttama haiM  /  karma-mala ke
dUra ho jAne ke bAda AtmA kA zuddha jyoti rUpa ho jAnA hI paramAtmatva hai  /
sAdhu pada meM AcArya, upAdhyAya aura muni, mahAtmA ke rUpa meM uttama haiM  /
AtmA se mahAtmA aura mahAtmA se paramAtmA banane ke liye dharma hI ekamAtra
uttama evaM utkRSTa sAdhana hai  /  kahA bhI hai - 'dhAraNAd dharmaH' arthAt
durgati meM giratI huI AtmAoM ko jo dhAraNa karatA hai , bacAtA hai, vahI uttama
dharma hai| _ AgamakAra ne isI siddhAnta para prakAza DAlA hai ki dharma saba
maMgaloM kA mUla hai  /  yadi puSpa meM sugandha na ho, agni meM uSNatA na ho,
jala meM zItalatA na ho, mizrI meM miThAsa na ho to unakA kyA svarUpa rahegA ?
kucha bhI nhiiN| ThIka yahI dazA dharmahIna mAnava kI hai| kahA bhI hai -
"dharmeNa hInAH pazubhiH samAnAH " arthAt dharmahIna mAnava aura pazu meM koI
aMtara nahIM - donoM samAna haiM  /  dharma kI sAdhanA zubha kI sAdhanA hai  /
sAdhanA do prakAra kI hai - 1. nIti kI sAdhanA aura 2. dharma kI saadhnaa| nIti
kI sAdhanA, puNya kI sAdhanA hai| yaha sAdhanA kevala naitikatA taka le jA
sakatI hai aura dharma-prasAda kI nIMva kA kAma karatI hai| dharma kI sAdhanA
mukti taka le jAtI hai| zaraNasUtra cattAri saraNaM pavajAmi - arihaMte saraNaM
pavajAmi, siddhe saraNaM pavajAmi, sAhU saraNaM pavajjAmi, kevali-paNNattaM
dhamma saraNaM pvjaami| bhAvArtha - maiM cAra kI zaraNa svIkAra karatA hU~ - (1)
arihaMtoM kI zaraNa svIkAra karatA hU~,

Page #83 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  [12] **[Essential Sutra]** (2) I take refuge in the Siddhas, (3) I take
refuge in the Sadhus, (4) I take refuge in the Dharma embodied in the
omniscient.  **Discussion:** No material object in the world can truly provide
refuge to a human being. Be it a mother, father, son, wife, wealth, or any other
relative. But, not knowing this fact, ignorant humans consider these perishable
objects of the world as refuge.  The reality is that in the world, there is no
other refuge giver besides the Arihants, Siddhas, Sadhus, and the Dharma
embodied in the omniscient. All the wicked people who have become virtuous in
the past and present have become so only by taking refuge in these four. A human
being wants to take refuge in Dharma. Dharma has the capacity to provide refuge.
"Dhammo. Diivo Paitttha Nan" - meaning Dharma is a lamp, a light, a foundation,
a base, a movement. There may be many other refuge givers, but the best refuge
is the one that saves us, rescues us from difficulties, frees us from fear, and
makes us fearless. What object in the world can save us from the fear of death
forever? Can it protect us from the undesirable consequences of sinful actions?
This power lies only in taking refuge in the four mentioned in the sutra.
Therefore, these four are the true refuge from a transcendental perspective.
**[Pratikraman Sutra]** I wish to renounce, with a steady mind, staying in one
place, all other activities except meditation and silence. [But before that, the
disciple criticizes his own faults -] In knowledge, in perception, in conduct,
and especially in the knowledge of the scriptures, in the form of right conduct
and the form of conduct in Samayik, 'Jo Me Devasio' - meaning, whatever
transgression I have committed due to negligence, regarding the rules of conduct
for the day (and night), whether it be physical, mental, verbal, or mental
transgression, may the sin of that transgression be nullified for me.  That
transgression is against the sutra, against the path, against the tradition,
against the unthought-of conduct,

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 12] [ AvazyakasUtra (2) siddhoM kI zaraNa svIkAra karatA hU~, (3) sAdhuoM kI
zaraNa svIkAra karatA hU~, (4) sarvajJaprarUpita dharma kI zaraNa svIkAra karatA
huuN| vivecana - vizva kA koI bhI bhautika padArtha mAnava ko vAstavika rUpa meM
zaraNa nahIM de sakatA hai| cAhe mAtA ho, pitA ho, putra ho, patnI ho, dhana-
vaibhava ho athavA anya koI svajana parijana ho  /  kintu isa tathya ko na
jAnakara ajJAnI mAnava duniyA ke nazvara padArthoM ko hI zaraNa samajhatA hai|
vAstavikatA yaha hai ki vizva meM sivAya arihaMta, siddha, sAdhu aura
sarvajJaprarUpita dharma ke atirikta anya koI zaraNadAtA nahIM hai| jitane bhI
atIta evaM vartamAna meM duSTajana ziSTa bane haiM, ve cAra zaraNa svIkAra
karane para hI bane haiN| manuSya dharma kI zaraNa meM AnA cAhatA hai| dharma
meM zaraNa dene kI kSamatA hai "dhammo. dIvo paiTThA NaM" arthAta dharma eka
dIpa hai - prakAzapuMja hai, eka pratiSThA hai - eka AdhAra hai, eka gati hai  /
zaraNa dene vAle aura bhI aneka ho sakate haiM kintu vahI uttama zaraNa hai jo
hameM trANa detA hai| saMkaToM se ubAratA hai, bhaya se vimukta nirbhaya banAtA
hai| saMsAra kA kauna-sA padArtha hai jo hameM sadA ke liye mRtyu ke bhaya se
bacA sake ? pApa-karmoM ke aniSTa vipAka se hamArI rakSA kara sake ? yaha zakti
sUtrokta cAra kI zaraNa grahaNa meM hI hai| ataeva yahI cAra pAramArthika dRSTi
se zaraNa-bhUta haiN| pratikramaNa-sUtra icchAmi ThAmi kAussagaM jo me devasio
aiyAro kao kAio, vAio, mANasio, ussutto, ummaggo, akappo, akaraNijjo, duljhAo,
duviciMtio aNAyAro, aNicchiyavvo, asamaNapAuggo, nANe taha dasaNe caritte sue
sAmAie, tihaM guttINaM, cauNhaM kasAyANaM, paMcaNhaM mahavvayANaM, chaNhaM
jIvanikAyANaM, sattahaM piMDesaNANaM, aTThaNhaM pavayaNamAUNaM, navaNhaM
baMbhaceraguttINaM, dasavihe samaNadhamme, samaNANaM jogANaM jaM khaMDiyaM jaM
virAhiyaM tassa micchA mi dukkddN|| bhAvArtha - he bhadanta ! maiM citta ko
sthiratA ke sAtha, eka sthAna para sthira rahakara, dhyAna-mauna ke sivAya anya
sabhI vyApAroM kA parityAga rUpa kAyotsarga karatA huuN| [ parantu isake pahale
ziSya apane doSoM kI AlocanA karatA hai - ] jJAna meM, darzana meM, cAritra meM
tathA vizeSa rUpa se zrutadharma meM, samyaktva rUpa tathA cAritra rUpa sAmAyika
meM 'jo me devasio' arthAt mere dvArA pramAdavaza divasa sambandhI (tathA rAtri
sambandhI) saMyama maryAdA kA ullaMghana rUpa jo aticAra kiyA gayA ho, cAhe vaha
kAyika, mAnasika, vAcika athavA mAnasika aticAra ho, usa aticAra kA pApa mere
liye niSphala ho| vaha aticAra sUtra ke viruddha hai, mArga arthAt paramparA se
viruddha hai, akalpya-AcAra se viruddha hai,

Page #84 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## First Study: Samayik [13]  What is not to be done, is the form of
inattentive-distracted mind, is the form of ill-conceived-angry mind, is not to
be acted upon, is not to be desired, in short, is completely opposite to
virtuous conduct - is not to be done by the virtuous.  The three Gutis (internal
organs) that are conducive to restraint, the cessation of the four passions, the
five great vows, the protection of the six earth bodies, water bodies, etc., the
seven types of bodily pain (1. Unsoiled, 2. Soiled, 3. Extracted, 4. Lightly
covered, 5. Not taken, 6. Taken, 7. Abandoned Dharma), the eight teachings of
the mother (five committees, three Gutis), the nine vows of celibacy, the ten
duties of a Shraman (duties related to a Shraman) - if these are broken or
violated, then all that sin shall be nullified for me.  **Discussion:**  Man is
the link between gods and demons. He can attain godhood through his virtuous
conduct and can also fall to the lower level of demons through his unvirtuous
conduct. Man has three great powers - mind, speech, and body. By the strength of
these powers, he can create any kind of life, whether prosperous or
unprosperous. Saints and sages should be mindful of the good and bad actions of
their mind, speech, and body at every step. Even a little carelessness in this
matter can lead to a terrible downfall. The text of this Pratikraman Sutra
cleanses the mistakes made day and night through these three powers-yogas and
creates a strong determination to be careful in the future. This is the initial
sutra of Pratikraman. It briefly performs Pratikraman for mistakes related to
conduct and thoughts.  **Explanation of some technical terms:**  *
**'Ussutto'**: The Sanskrit form of 'Ussutto' is 'Utsutra'. The meaning of
Utsutra is - Sutra, i.e., conduct contrary to the Agamas. * **'Ummago'**: The
form of 'Ummago' is 'Unmarg', i.e., transgression of the state of pacification
of passions and entering into the state of arising passions is 'Unmarg'. When
the Karmic covering of conduct is pacified, then conduct arises, and when the
Karmic covering of conduct arises, then conduct is destroyed. Therefore, the
seeker should constantly move in the state of arising: pacification of passions.
The meaning of 'Marg' is also tradition. * **'Akkapo'**: The Dharma-business in
the form of conduct and action, i.e., conduct, is called 'Kalpa'. To act against
conduct and action is 'Akkapo'. * **'Sue'**: The meaning of 'Shruta' is Shruta-
knowledge. The Agama literature is called 'Shruta' because it is heard from the
mouth of the liberated Tirthankara Bhagwan. Before being written down, the
Agamas were received only through the Shruti tradition, i.e., the Guru would
give the Agamas to his disciple, and the disciple would give them to his
disciple orally. Therefore,

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prathama adhyayana : sAmAyika ] [ 13 nahIM karane yogya hai, durdhyAna-
ArtadhyAna rUpa hai, durvicintita-raudradhyAna rUpa hai, nahIM Acarane yogya
hai, nahIM cAhane yogya hai, saMkSepa meM sAdhuvRtti ke sarvathA viparIta hai-
sAdhu ko nahIM karane yogya hai| yoga-nirodhAtmaka tIna gupti, cAra kaSAyoM kI
nivRtti, pA~ca mahAvrata, chaha pRthivIkAya, jalakAya Adi jIvanikAyoM kI rakSA,
sAta piNDaiSaNA-(1. asaMsRSTA, 2. saMsRSTA, 3. uddhRtA, 4. alpalepA, 5.
avagRhItA, 6. pragRhItA, 7. ujjhitadharmikA), ATha pravacana mAtA (pA~ca samiti,
tIna gupti), nau brahmacaryagupti, dazavidha zramaNadharma (zramaNa-sambandhI
kartavya) yadi khaNDita huye hoM, athavA virAdhita huye hoM, to vaha saba pApa
mere liye niSphala ho| vivecana - mAnava, deva evaM dAnava ke bIca kI kar3I hai
/  vaha apanI sadvRttiyoM ke dvArA devatva ko prApta kara sakatA hai aura
asadvRttiyoM ke dvArA dAnava jaisI nimna koTi meM bhI pahuMca sakatA hai|
manuSya ke pAsa tIna mahAn zaktiyA~ haiM - mana, vacana evaM kAya  /  ina
zaktiyoM ke bala para vaha prazasta-aprazasta cAhe jaisA jIvana banA sakatA hai|
santoM-munijanoM ko to kadama-kadama para mana, vacana aura zarIra kI zubhAzubha
ceSTAoM kA dhyAna rakhanA caahiye| isa viSaya me jarA bhI asAvadhAnI bhayaMkara
patana kA kAraNa bana sakatI hai| prastuta pratikramaNa-sUtra ke pATha dvArA
inhIM tIna zaktiyoM-yogoM se rAta-dina meM hone vAlI bhUloM kA parimArjana kiyA
jAtA hai aura bhaviSya meM sAvadhAna rahane kI sudRr3ha dhAraNA banAI jAtI hai
/  yaha pratikramaNa kA prArambhika sUtra hai| isameM AcAra-vicAra sambandhI
bhUloM kA saMkSepa meM pratikramaNa kiyA jAtA hai| kucha pAribhASika zabdoM kA
vizeSa spaSTIkaraNa isa prakAra hai - 'ussutto' - ussutto kA saMskRta rUpa
'utsUtra' hotA hai  /  utsUtra kA artha-sUtra arthAt Agama se viruddha aacrnn|
'ummago' - unmArga rUpa arthAt kSAyopazamika bhAva kA ullaGghana karake audayika
bhAva meM saMkramaNa karanA unmArga hai  /  cAritrAvaraNa karma kA jaba
kSayopazama hotA hai, taba cAritra kA AvirbhAva hotA hai aura jaba cAritrAvaraNa
karma kA udaya hotA hai taba cAritra kA ghAta hotA hai| ataH sAdhaka ko
pratipala udaya : kSAyopazamika bhAva meM saMcaraNa karate rahanA caahiye| mArga
kA artha paramparA bhI hai| 'akappo' - caraNa evaM karaNa rUpa dharmavyApAra
kalpa arthAt AcAra kahalAtA hai| caraNa-karaNa ke viruddha AcaraNa karanA akalpa
hai| 'sue' - arthAt zruta kA artha hai zrutajJAna  /  vItarAga tIrthaMkara
bhagavAn ke zrImukha se sunA huA hone se Agama-sAhitya ko zruta kahA jAtA hai  /
lipibaddha hone se pUrva Agama zrutiparamparA se hI grahaNa kiye jAte the arthAt
guru apane ziSya ko aura ziSya apane ziSya ko maukhika rUpa meM Agama pradAna
karatA thaa| isa kAraNa

Page #85 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 14]  **Essential Sutras**  This is also called **Agam Shruta**. The meaning
of **Atichara** related to **Shruta** is - faith and representation contrary to
**Shruta**.  **'Sattanha Pindesaanham'** - Taking pure and faultless **Prasauk**
food and water is **Eshana**. There are seven types of **Pindeshana**:  1.
**Asansrushta** - Taking food with hands and utensils that are not stained by
the offered food. 2. **Sansrushta** - Taking food with hands and utensils that
are stained by the offered food. 3. **Udhrita** - Taking food that the
householder has taken out for themselves from the vessel into a plate, etc. 4.
**Alplepa** - Taking roasted chickpeas, etc., which are not oily and therefore
cannot be smeared. 5. **Avagrihita** - Taking food that the eater has served on
a plate, etc., for eating, but has not yet started eating. 6. **Pragrihita** -
Taking food that has been touched by the eater's hand, etc., for the first time,
but has not become stale because the eater has not taken another bite. 7.
**Ujjhitdharma** - Taking food that is being thrown away because it is too much
or for some other reason.  **'Atthanham Pavayanmaunam'** - Five **Samiti** and
three **Gupti** together make eight **Pravachan-Matas**. The foundation of the
entire **Shramanachar** is the five **Samiti** and three **Gupti**. Proper
effortful **Pravritti Samiti** and proper restraint of **Yogas** is called
**Gupti**.  Five **Samiti**: 1. **Iryasamiti**, 2. **Bhasasamiti**, 3.
**Eshanasamiti**, 4. **Ayanbhandamattnikkhevanasamiti**, 5. **Uccar-Pasavan-
Khell-Jall-Sanghan-Paritthavan-Iyasamiti**.  Three **Gupti**: 1. **Manogupti**,
2. **Vachanagupti**, and 3. **Kayagupti**.  **'Jam Khandiyam Jam Virahiyam'** -
That which is broken and that which is violated. A minor violation of a vow is
called **Khandan**, and a complete violation is called **Viradhana**. In some
places, violation of the majority, but not the entirety, is called
**Viradhana**.  **'Miccha Mi Dukkadam'** - My evil deeds are false and futile.
The word **'Miccha Mi'** is divided into **'Mi' 'Chha' 'Mi'** and interpreted as
follows: **'Mi'** - abandoning physical and mental pride, **'Chha'** - covering
up the fault of **Asanyam**, **'Mi'** - I who remain within the limits of
**Charitra**.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 14] [ AvazyakasUtra bhI Agama zruta' kahalAtA hai| zruta-sambandhI aticAra kA
Azaya hai - zruta kI viparIta zraddhA evaM prruupnnaa| _ 'sattaNhaM
piMDesaNANaM' - doSa rahita zuddha prAsuka AhAra-pAnI grahaNa karanA eSaNA hai
/  piNDaiSaNA ke sAta prakAra haiM - 1. asaMsRSTA - deya bhojana se binA sane
huye hAtha tathA pAtra se AhAra lenaa| 2. saMsRSTA - deya bhojana se sane huye
hAtha tathA pAtra se AhAra lenaa| 3. uddhRtA - bartana se thAlI Adi meM gRhastha
ne apane liye jo bhojana nikAla rakhA ho, vaha lenaa| 4. alpalepA - jisameM
cikanAhaTa na ho, ataeva lepa na laga sake, isa prakAra ke bhune huye cane Adi
grahaNa krnaa| 5. avagRhItA - bhojanakAla ke samaya bhojanakartA ne bhojanArtha
thAlI Adi meM jo bhojana parosa rakhA ho, kintu abhI bhojana zurU na kiyA ho,
vaha AhAra lenaa| 6. pragRhItA - thAlI meM bhojanakartA dvArA hAtha Adi se
prathama bAra to pragRhIta ho cukA ho, para dUsarI bAra grAsa na lene ke kAraNa
jhUThA na huA ho, vaha AhAra lenaa| 7. ujjhitadharmA - jo AhAra adhika hone
athavA anya kisI kAraNa se pheMkane yogya samajhakara DAlA jA rahA ho, vaha
grahaNa krnaa| _ 'aTThaNhaM pavayaNamAUNaM' - pA~ca samiti aura tIna gupti
milakara ATha pravacana-mAtAe~ haiM  /  sampUrNa zramaNAcAra kI AdhArabhUmi
pA~ca samiti aura tIna gupti hI haiM  /  samIcIna yatanApUrvaka pravRtti samiti
aura yogoM kA samyak nigraha gupti kahalAtA hai| pA~ca samiti - 1. IryAsamiti,
2. bhASAsamiti, 3. eSaNAsamiti, 4. AyANabhaMDamattanikkhevaNAsamiti, 5. uccAra-
pAsavaNakhella-jalla-saMghANa-pariTThAvaNiyAsamiti  /  tIna gupti - 1.
manogupti, 2. vacanagupti evaM 3. kAyagupti  /  'jaM khaMDiyaM jaM virAhiyaM' -
jo khaMDita huA ho aura virAdhita huA ho| kisI vrata kA alpAMzena ullaMghana
khaNDana kahalAtA hai aura sarvAMzena atikramaNa ko virAdhanA kahate haiN|
kahIM-kahIM sarvAMza nahIM kintu adhikAMza ke ullaMghana ko virAdhanA kahA gayA
hai| _ 'micchA mi dukkaDaM' - merA duSkRta mithyA-niSphala ho| 'micchA mi' isa
pada kA 'mi' 'cchA' 'mi' aisA padaccheda karake isa prakAra artha karate haiM -
yathA 'mi'-kAyika aura mAnasika abhimAna ko chor3akara, 'cchA'-asaMyamarUpa doSa
ko DhaMka kara, 'mi'-cAritra kI maryAdA meM rahA huA maiN|

Page #86 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
English translation with Jain terms preserved:  First study: Samayika [15] 'Du'-
I denounce the blamable soul, 'Ka'- the performed cautious karmas, 'Dang'- I
renounce through equanimity. That is, being humble in substance and sentiment,
and established in the limits of conduct, I denounce the blamable soul-activity
and relinquish the committed misdeeds (sins) through the sentiment of
equanimity. However, this is a distressed imagination. Acarya-pathika-sutra I
wish to perform pratikramana for the transgressions in the movement, coming and
going, stepping on living beings, stepping on seeds, stepping on green
vegetation, crushing the anthills, spider-webs, and other living beings'
habitats, which my jivas (souls) have violated - the one-sensed, two-sensed,
three-sensed, four-sensed, five-sensed, abhihata (struck), vattiya (covered),
lesiya (stained), sanghata (aggregated), sanghattiya (collided), pariyapanna
(surrounded), kilama (fatigued), uddaviya (disturbed), shifted from one place to
another, deprived of life, for that mistaken deed of mine. Meaning - I perform
pratikramana (confession and repentance). If due to carelessness or
inattentiveness while walking on the path or observing the vow of restraint, any
harm or violation has been caused to any living being, then I wish to abstain
from that sin. - While going out from the upashraya (abode) for svadhyaya (self-
study) etc. and then returning to the upashraya, or while moving on the path, if
I have crushed the living beings under my feet or in any other way, or have
trampled upon the grains of corn, wheat or any other seeds, or have crushed the
green vegetation like grass, sprouts etc., then may that entire sin born out of
transgression be false-void and ineffective. And if I have violated or harmed
any living being from the one-sensed to the five-sensed, obstructed the ones
coming in front, covered with dust etc., crushed on the ground or among
themselves, heaped them up, touched them carelessly in a distressing manner,
fatigued, disturbed, shifted from one place to another, deprived of life, then
may all that sin be false-void and ineffective. Explanation - A human being is a
wanderer. He keeps moving all the time. Sometimes he moves with the body,
sometimes he explores the world with his speech, and sometimes he measures the
sky-underworld with his mind. His one yoga (union) remains perpetually dynamic.
His journey begins from the first breath of life and continues till the last
breath. The ascetic is especially a wanderer. The meaning is that movement in
life is an inevitable activity.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prathama adhyayana : sAmAyika ] [15 'du'- sAvadyakArI AtmA kI nindA karatA hU~,
'ka'- kiye huye sAvadha karma ko, 'DaM'- upazama dvArA tyAga karatA huuN| arthAt
dravya evaM bhAva se namra tathA cAritramaryAdA meM sthita hokara maiM sAvadya
kriyAkArI AtmA kI nindA karatA hU~ aura kiye huye duSkRta (pApa) ko upazama
bhAva se haTAtA huuN| kintu yaha eka kliSTa kalpanA hai| airyApathikasUtra
icchAmi paDikkamiuM iriyAvahiyAe virAhaNAe gamaNAgamaNe pANakkamaNe bIya-
kkamaNe, hariya-kkamaNe, osA-uttiMga-paNaga-daga-maTTI-makkaDA-saMtANA-
saMkamaNe, je me jIvA virAhiyA-egiMdiyA, beiMdiyA, teiMdiyA, cauridiyA,
paMciMdiyA, abhihayA, vattiyA, lesiyA, saMghAiyA, saMghaTTiyA, pariyAviyA,
kilAmiyA, uddaviyA, ThANAo ThANaM saMkAmiyA, jIviyAo vavaroviyA, tassa micchA mi
dukkddN| bhAvArtha - maiM pratikramaNa karatA huuN| mArga meM calate huye athavA
saMyamadharma pAlana karate huye lAparavAhI athavA asAvadhAnI ke kAraNa kisI bhI
jIva kI kisI prakAra kI virAdhanA arthAt hiMsA huI ho to maiM usa pApa se
nivRtta honA cAhatA huuN| - svAdhyAya Adi ke liye upAzraya se bAhara jAne meM
aura phira lauTakara upAzraya Ane meM athavA mArga meM kahIM gamanAgamana karate
huye prANiyoM ko pairoM ke nIce yA kisI anya prakAra se kucalA ho, sacitta jau,
gehU~ yA kisI bhI taraha ke bIjoM ko kucalA ho, ghAsa, aMkura Adi harita
vanaspati ko masalA ho, dabAyA ho to merA vaha saba aticArajanya pApa mithyA ho-
niSphala ho tathA ekendriya, dvIndriya, trIndriya, caturindriya tathA
paMcendriya taka kisI bhI jIva kI virAdhanA-hiMsA kI ho, sAmane Ate huye ko rokA
ho, dhUla Adi se DhaMkA ho, jamIna para yA Apasa meM masalA ho, ekatrita karake
Upara nIce Dhera kiyA ho, asAvadhAnI se klezajanaka rIti se chuA ho, paritApita
arthAt duHkhita kiyA ho, thakAyA ho, trasta-hairAna kiyA ho, eka jagaha se
dUsarI jagaha badalA ho, jIvana se rahita kiyA ho, to merA vaha saba pApa mithyA
ho-niSphala ho| vivecana - manuSya bhramaNazIla hai  /  vaha sadA-sarvadA
ghUmatA rahatA hai  /  kabhI zarIra se ghUmatA hai, kabhI vANI se duniyA kI
saira karatA hai, to kabhI mana se AkAza-pAtAla ko nApatA hai| usakA eka yoga
niraMtara gatizIla rahatA hai| usakI yAtrA jindagI kI pahalI sAMsa se prArambha
hotI hai aura antima sAMsa taka calatI rahatI hai| sAdhu to vizeSa rUpa se
ghummakar3a hai  /  tAtparya yaha hai ki jIvana meM gamanAgamana karanA anivArya
kriyA

Page #87 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 16] [Essential Sutra] And it is natural for other beings to suffer from it.
This Aryapathic Sutra describes in great detail how and to which beings
suffering is caused during activities like walking, moving, etc. It provides a
powerful method for purifying oneself by sincerely repenting for the suffering
caused to all subtle and gross beings, from one-sensed to five-sensed. Jainism
is a religion based on wisdom. All the interpreters of religion in the world
have tested every practice, whether small or great, ordinary or special, on the
touchstone of wisdom. The practice that has wisdom is the right practice, the
practice with good karma, and the one that lacks wisdom is the wrong practice,
the practice with bad karma. The Acharanga Sutra clearly states - 'Vivege
Dhammamahie' meaning that Dharma lies in wisdom, wisdom is the divine eye that
tests truth and falsehood. What is to be rejected, what is to be known, what is
to be adopted, what is duty, what is non-duty? A wise man decides all these
things only through wisdom. Yatanā, meaning to walk, stand, sit, sleep, etc.
with wisdom, does not lead to the bondage of sinful karma, because the root
cause of the bondage of sinful karma is Ayatanā. The Dasha Vaikalika Sutra says
- Jayam Chare Jayam Chithe, Jayamase Jayam Saye. Jayam Bhumjato Bhasanto, Pav-
Kamman Na Bandhai || This passage is a shining example of the tenderness of the
heart. It is a living picture of the resolutions of wisdom and Yatanā. If one
has to move around for essential needs and unintentionally causes suffering to
any being, even while being careful, this Sutra expresses repentance for it.
'Ichchhami Padikkaumiu Iriya Vahiyaa Virahanaae' This is the initial Sutra, the
Ajnā Sutra. Through this, permission is sought from the Gurudev for Aryapathic
Pratikraman. The word 'Ichchhami' signifies that there is no external pressure
on the seeker. He wants to perform Pratikraman for self-purification out of his
own free will and inner inspiration. He is seeking permission from the Gurudev
for this. This is the difference between atonement and punishment. In atonement,
the offender himself accepts his crime and is eager to atone for it to purify
himself again. In punishment, there is no room for free will. The passage from
'Gamanagamanē' to 'Jiviyaaō Vavaroviyaa' is the Alochanā Sutra. Alochanā means
to reveal one's offenses one by one in front of the Guru Maharaj. One's
mistakes...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 16] [ AvazyakasUtra hai aura usase anya prANiyoM ko pIr3A honA svAbhAvika hai|
prastuta airyApathika sUtra meM gamanAgamana Adi pravRttiyoM meM kisa prakAra
aura kina-kina jIvoM ko pIr3A pahu~ca jAtI hai? isakA atyanta sUkSmatA evaM
vizadatA se varNana kiyA gayA hai| ekendriya se lekara paMcendriya taka sabhI
sUkSma evaM sthUla jIvoM ko huI pIr3A ke liye hRdaya se pazcAttApa karake
zuddha-vizuddha banAne kA prabhAvazAlI vidhAna isa pATha meM kiyA gayA hai|
jainadharma vivekapradhAna dharma hai| vizva meM jitane bhI dharma ke
vyAkhyAkAra huye haiM, unhoMne pratyeka sAdhanA ko, cAhe vaha laghu ho, cAhe
mahAn, cAhe sAmAnya ho, cAhe viziSTa, viveka kI kasauTI para kasakara dekhA hai|
jisa sAdhanA meM viveka hai, vaha samyak sAdhanA hai, zubha yoga vAlI sAdhanA
hai aura jisameM aviveka hai, vaha asamyak aura azubhayoga vAlI sAdhanA hai|
AcArAGgasUtra meM spaSTa kahA hai- 'vivege dhammamAhie' arthAt viveka meM hI
dharma hai, viveka satyAsatya kA parIkSaNa karane vAlA divya netra hai| heya kyA
hai, jJeya kyA hai, upAdeya kyA hai , kartavya kyA hai, akartavya kyA hai ?
vivekI puruSa ina saba bAtoM kA viveka se hI nirNaya karatA hai  /  yatanA
arthAt vivekapUrvaka calane phirane, khar3e hone, baiThane, sone, Adi se pApa
karma kA bandha nahIM hotA, kyoMki pApa-karma ke bandhana kA mUla kAraNa ayatanA
hai  /  dazavaikAlika sUtra meM kahA hai - jayaM care jayaM ciThe, jayamAse
jayaM sye| jayaM bhuMjato bhAsaMto, pAva-kammaM na bNdhii|| prastuta pATha
hRdaya kI komalatA kA jvalanta udAharaNa hai| viveka aura yatanA ke saMkalpoM kA
jItA jAgatA citra hai| Avazyaka pravRtti ke liye idhara-udhara AnA-jAnA huA ho
aura upayoga rakhate huye bhI yadi kahIM asAvadhAnIvaza kisI jIva ko pIr3A
pahuMcI ho to usake liye prastuta sUtra meM pazcAttApa prakaTa kiyA gayA hai
'icchAmi paDikkamiuM iriyAvahiyAe virAhaNAe' yaha prArambha kA sUtra AjJAsUtra
hai  /  isake dvArA gurudeva se airyApathika pratikramaNa kI AjJA lI jAtI hai
'icchAmi' zabda se dhvanita hotA hai ki sAdhaka para bAhara kA koI dabAva nahIM
hai| vaha svecchApUrvaka antara kI preraNA se hI Atmazuddhi ke liye pratikramaNa
karanA cAhatA hai  /  isake liye gurudeva se AjJA mAMga rahA hai  /  prAyazcitta
aura daNDa meM yahI antara hai| prAyazcitta meM aparAdhI svayaM apane aparAdha
ko svIkAra karake punaH Atmazuddhi ke liye prAyazcitta karane ko tatpara rahatA
hai  /  daNDa meM svecchA ke liye koI sthAna nahIM hai| 'gamaNAgamaNe' se lekara
'jIviyAo vavaroviyA' taka kA pAThAMza AlocanAsUtra hai| AlocanA kA artha hai
guru mahAraja ke samakSa apane aparAdha ko eka ke bAda eka kramazaH prakaTa
krnaa| apanI bhUla

Page #88 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## First Study: Samayik [17]  To acknowledge is a great thing, and then to
humbly present it to the Guru in its true form is even greater. Only courageous
and valiant men who have an inner desire for self-purification can do this.
**Explanation of Specific Words**  * **Abhihaya** - Its Sanskrit form is
'Abhihataḥ', which means to have stopped something coming towards you. That is,
to have stopped creatures coming towards you and obstructed their free movement.
* **Vattia** - (Vartitaḥ) meaning covered with dust etc. * **Lesia** - means to
crush living beings on the ground, and **Sanghattia** means to touch living
beings and cause them pain. * **Utting** - means the nest of ants or a burrow
made by ants. Acharya Haribhadra has also defined its meaning as a particular
type of creature with the shape of a donkey - Uttinga Gardhabhaakrutiyojivaḥ,
Kiitikanagaraani va. From the mention of Acharya Jinas Das Mahत्तर, it is known
that this is a creature that digs holes in the ground. 'Uttinga naam
Gaddhabhaakiti Jiva Bhoomie Khaddayam Karenti' - Aavashyakachurni. * **Dag** -
water with consciousness. * **Matti** - earth with consciousness. * **Thaanao
Thaanam Sankamia** - pushed from one place to another. * **Vavarovia** - an
ambush has been laid. Aagarsutra  **Therefore, by:**  * **Uttarikarana**
(rectification) * **Payachchittkarana** (atonement) * **Visohikarana**
(separation) * **Visallikarana** (dispersion) * **Pavaanam Kammaanam
Nigghayanaṭṭhae** (for the destruction of the karmas of the past) * **Thaami
Kaussaggam** (I will remain steadfast)  **And by:**  * **Annattha Usasieṇam**
(not by eating) * **Nisasieṇam** (not by sitting) * **Khaasieṇam** (not by
coughing) * **Chhieṇam** (not by sneezing) * **Jambhaaiieṇam** (not by yawning)
* **Uḍḍueṇam** (not by flying) * **Vayanisaggeṇam** (not by speaking) *
**Bhamalie** (not by wandering) * **Pittmuchchaae** (not by vomiting)  **And
by:**  * **Suhumehi Ang-Sanchalehi** (not by moving the body) * **Suhumehi Khel-
Sanchalehi** (not by moving in play) * **Suhumehi Ditthi-Sanchalehi** (not by
moving the eyes)  **And by such Aagaras (refuges), I am:**  * **Abhaggho**
(unbroken) * **Aviraaheo** (unwavering)  **My Kaussagga (steadfastness) is:**  *
**Jaaav Arihantaanam Bhagavantaanam** (until I attain the state of an Arihant) *
**Namukkareṇam Na Paaremi** (I will not transgress by disrespect)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prathama adhyayana : sAmAyika ] [17 svIkAra karanA bahuta bar3I bAta hai, aura
phira use guru ke samakSa niSkapaTa bhAva se yathAvat rUpa meM nivedana karanA
to aura bhI bar3I bAta hai  /  Atmazodhana kI Antarika kAmanA rakhane vAle
sAhasI vIra puruSa hI aisA kara sakate haiN| viziSTa zabdoM kA spaSTIkaraNa
'abhihayA' - isakA saMskRta rUpa 'abhihatAH' banatA hai, jisakA artha sammukha
Ate huye ko rokA ho| arthAt sAmane Ate prANiyoM ko roka kara unakI svataMtra
gati meM bAdhA DAlI ho| 'vattiyA' - (vartitAH) arthAt dhUla Adi se DhaMke hoN|
'lesiyA' - kA artha hai jIvoM ko bhUmi para masalanA aura saMghaTTiyA kA artha
hai jIvoM ko sparza kara pIr3ita krnaa| 'uttiMga' kA artha hai cIMTiyoM kA nAla
athavA cIMTiyoM kA bila kiyA gayA hai  /  AcArya haribhadra ne inakA artha
'gardabha' kI AkRti kA jIva vizeSa bhI kiyA hai, - uttiMgA gardabhAkRtayojIvAH,
kITikAnagarANi vaa| AcArya jinadAsa mahattara ke ullekha se mAlUma hotA hai yaha
bhUmi meM gaDr3hA karane vAlA jIva hai  /  'uttiMgA nAma gaddabhAkitI jIvA
bhUmie khaDDayaM kareMti'- aavshykcuurnni| 'daga' - sacitta jala  /  'maTTI' -
sacitta pRthvii| 'ThANAo ThANaM saMkAmiyA' - eka sthAna se dUsare sthAna para
dhakelA ho| 'vavaroviyA' - ghAta kiyA ho| AgArasUtra tassa uttarIkaraNeNaM
pAyacchittakaraNeNaM visohIkaraNeNaM visallIkaraNeNaM pAvANaM kammANaM
nigghAyaNaTThAe ThAmi kAussaggaM, annattha UsasieNaM, nIsasieNaM, khAsieNaM,
chIeNaM, jaMbhAieNaM, uDDueNaM, vAyanisaggeNaM, bhamalIe, pittamucchAe,
suhumehiM aMga-saMcAlehi, suhumehiM khela-saMcAlehiM, suhumehiM diTThi-
saMcAlehiM, evamAiehiM AgArehi, abhaggo avirAhio, huja me kAussaggo, jAva
arihaMtANaM bhagavaMtANaM, namukkAreNaM na pAremi,

Page #89 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[18] Thus, by means of restraint, silence, and meditation, I purify myself.
[Essential Sutra] The meaning is that I perform Kayotsarga for the sake of the
soul's special excellence, purity, and superiority, for atonement, for being
free from blemishes, and for the complete destruction of sinful karmas. In
Kayotsarga, I abandon all bodily activities and become still. However, I exclude
those bodily functions that are unavoidable due to their natural occurrence.
(These functions are as follows:) High breath, low breath, cough, sneeze, yawn,
belch, expulsion of apan vayu, dizziness, fainting due to bile disorder, subtle
movement of limbs, subtle expulsion of phlegm, subtle movement of eyes, i.e.,
circulation, etc. My Kayotsarga is not broken or devoid of restraint from these
sources. Until I have bowed to the Arihant Bhagwans, I remain motionless in one
place, silent, with my mind fixed in Dharma-dhyana, and I separate my body from
sinful activities. This sutra explains the nature of Kayotsarga as a method for
the special purification of transgressions. Here, the word "tass" refers to the
soul that is tainted with transgressions. Some people interpret "tass" as
referring to transgressions, but that is not appropriate. In reality, it is
connected to the phrase "tass miccha mi dukkadam." It is not connected to
"uttarikaraneṇam" and "visallikaraneṇam." The reason is that Kayotsarga is not
performed to purify transgressions, nor do they contain Maya-adi blemishes.
Maya-adi blemishes are the vibhava parinamas of the soul, so it is clear that
"tass" can only mean the soul. The purpose of this sutra is to abandon all
bodily activities for the attainment of soul development. This is an Uttari-
karana Sutra. Through it, in the Aryapathic Pratikramana, a special refinement
in the form of Kayotsarga is resolved to remove the remaining subtle impurities
in the pure soul. In brief, we can say that atonement is necessary for the
purification of vows and the soul. Atonement cannot occur without the
purification of emotions. For the purification of emotions, it is necessary to
abandon blemishes (Maya, Nidana, Mithyadarshan). The abandonment of blemishes
and the destruction of sinful karmas can only be achieved through Kayotsarga.
Therefore, performing Kayotsarga is paramount.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 18] tAva kArya ThANeNaM moNeNaM jhANeNaM, appANaM vosirAmi  /  [ AvazyakasUtra
bhAvArtha AtmA kI vizeSa utkRSTatA, nirmalatA yA zreSThatA ke liye, prAyazcitta
ke liye, zalyarahita hone ke liye, pApa karmoM kA pUrNatayA vinAza karane ke
liye maiM kAyotsarga karatA hU~  /  kAyotsarga meM kAya vyApAroM kA parityAga
karatA hU~, nizcala hotA hU~  /  parantu jo zArIrika kriyAyeM azakya parihAra
hone ke kAraNa svabhAvataH harakata meM A jAtI haiM unako chodd'kr| (ve kriyAyeM
isa prakAra haiM - ) U~cA zvAsa, nIcA zvAsa, khAMsI, chIMka, ubAsI, DakAra,
apAna vAyu kA nikalanA, cakkara AnA, pittavikAra-janya mUrcchA, sUkSma rUpa se
aMgoM kA hilanA, sUkSma rUpa se kapha kA nikalanA, sUkSma rUpa se netroM kI
harakata se arthAt saMcAra se, ityAdi AgAroM se merA kAyotsarga bhagna na evaM
virAdhanA rahita ho  /  jaba taka arihaMta bhagavAnoM ko namaskAra na kara lU~,
taba taka eka sthAna para sthira raha, mauna raha kara, dharmadhyAna meM citta
ko sthira karake apane zarIra ko pApa vyApAroM se alaga karatA hU~  /  prastuta
sUtra meM aticAroM kI vizeSa zuddhi ke liye vidhipUrvaka kAyotsarga kA svarUpa
vivecana batAyA gayA hai| yahAM para 'tassa' pada se aticArayukta AtmA ko
grahaNa kiyA gayA hai| koI koI 'tassa' isa pada se aticAra kA grahaNa karate
haiM, lekina vaha ucita nahIM hai| vAstava meM usakA saMbaMdha 'tassa micchA mi
dukkaDaM ' isa pada ke sAtha hai| 'uttarIkaraNeNaM' aura 'visallIkaraNeNaM' ke
sAtha usakA sambandha nahIM baitthtaa| kAraNa yaha hai ki na to aticAroM ko
utkRSTa banAne ke liye kAyotsarga kiyA jAtA hai aura na usameM mAyA bAdi zalya
hote haiM  /  mAyAdi zalya to AtmA ke vibhAva pariNAma haiM, ataH spaSTa hai ki
'tassa' kA artha AtmA hI ho sakatA hai  /  AtmavikAsa kI prApti ke liye zarIra
sambandhI samasta vyApAroM kA tyAga karanA hI isa sUtra kA prayojana 1 yaha
uttarI - karaNa sUtra hai| isake dvArA airyApathika pratikramaNa meM zuddha AtmA
meM bAkI rahI huI sUkSma malinatA ko bhI dUra karane ke liye vizeSa
pariSkArasvarUpa kAyotsarga kA saMkalpa kiyA jAtA hai  /  prastuta uttarIkaraNa
pATha ke sambandha meM saMkSipta meM hama kaha sakate haiM ki vrata evaM AtmA kI
zuddhi ke liye prAyazcita Avazyaka hai| prAyazcita binA bhAva kI zuddhi ke nahIM
ho sakatA  /  bhAvazuddhi ke liye zalya ( mAyA, nidAna, mithyAdarzana) kA tyAga
jarUrI hai| zalya kA tyAga aura pApakarmoM kA nAza kAyotsarga se hI ho sakatA
hai. ataH kAyotsarga karanA paramAvazyaka hai I

Page #90 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## First Study: Samayik  **Meaning of Specific Words**  * **'Tass'**:  A soul
contaminated by transgressions. * **'Uttarikaraneṇam'**:  Due to belching. *
**'Visallikaraneṇam'**:  For excellence or purity, to remove impurities. *
**'Thāmi'**:  I do. * **'Uḍḍuēṇam'**:  Due to dizziness. * **'Bhamaliē'**:  Due
to dizziness. * **'Khelasanchālehiṁ'**:  Due to the movement of phlegm (khel -
śleṣ - kph).  **Lesson on Transgressions of Knowledge**  **1. Sutra**  There are
three types of Agamas: 1. Suttagam, 2. Atthagam, 3. Tadubhayagam.  The one with
few words but comprehensive meaning, concise, free from doubt, flawless and
detailed is called 'Sutra' by the learned.  The Agama in the form of Sutra is
called 'Sutragam' and the one requested by the seekers of liberation is called
'Arthagam'. Only Sutragam cannot fulfill the purpose, therefore, the one with
both Sutra and meaning is called 'Tadubhayagam'.  The fruit of reading this
Agama with transgressions is false. These transgressions are as follows:  1. The
words are read in reverse order. 2. The words are read with missing letters. 3.
The words are read with extra letters. 4. The same meaning from different parts
of the same scripture is read together, or a pause is taken at an inappropriate
place, or a Sutra is created from one's own intellect and added to the Sutra. 5.
The words are read without understanding.  **2. Conclusion**  If any
transgression is committed in the knowledge of these three types of Agamas, then
I condemn it.  **3. 'Tass micchā mi dukkadaṁ'**:  If there is a desire for
knowledge and the knowledgeable, while considering their qualities, then 'Tass
micchā mi dukkadaṁ'.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prathama adhyayana : sAmAyika ] viziSTa zabdoM kA artha 'tassa' aticAroM se
dUSita AtmA kI  /  'uttarIkaraNeNaM' DakAra Ane se  /  utkRSTatA yA nirmalatA ke
liye, 'visallIkaraNeNaM' - zalyarahita karane ke liye  /  'ThAmi' - karatA hU~
/  'uDDueNaM' 'bhamalIe' - cakkara A jAne se  /  'khelasaMcAlehiM ' khela -
zleSa - kapha ke saMcAra se  /  jJAna ke aticAra kA pATha - 1. sUtra Agame
tivihe paNNatte, taM jahA - suttAgame, atthAgame tadubhayAgame  /  jaM vAiddhaM,
vaccAmeliyaM, hINakkharaM, accakkharaM payahINaM, viNayahINaM, jogahINaM,
ghosahINaM, suTThadiNNaM, duTTu paDicchiyaM, akAle kao sajjhAo, kAle na kao
sajjhAo, asajjhAe sajjhAiyaM, sajjhAe na sajjhAiyaM, tassa micchA mi dukkaDaM
//  bhAvArtha Agama tIna prakAra kA hai - -- - 1. suttAgama, 2. atthAgama, 3.
tadubhayAgama  /  jisameM akSara thor3e para artha sarvavyApaka, sAragarbhita,
saMdeharahita, nirdoSa tathA vistRta ho use vidvAn loga 'sUtra' kahate haiM  /
sUtra rUpa Agama 'sUtrAgama' kahalAtA hai tathA jo mumukSuoM se prArthita ho use
'arthAgama' kahate haiM  /  kevala sUtrAgama se prayojana siddha nahIM ho
sakatA, isaliye sUtra aura artharUpa 'tadubhayAgama' kahA hai| isa Agama kA
pATha karane meM jo aticAra - doSa lagA ho, usakA phala mithyA ho| ve aticAra
isa prakAra haiM ke ' akSara ulaTa-palaTa par3he hoM  /  1 [19 3. hIna akSara
yukta arthAt koI akSara kama karake par3hA ho  /  4. adhika akSara yukta par3hA
ho| 2. eka hI zAstra meM alaga-alaga sthAnoM para Aye hue samAna artha vAle
pAThoM ko eka sthAna para lAkara par3hA ho athavA asthAna meM virAma liyA ho yA
apanI buddhi se sUtra banAkara sUtra meM DAlakara par3he hoN| 5. padahI par3hA
ho 1 1. isa taraha tIna prakAra ke Agama rUpa jJAna ke viSaya meM koI aticAra
lagA ho to AloUM  /  2. bhaNatAM guNatAM vicAratAM jJAna aura jJAnavanta kI
AzAtanA kI ho to 'tassa micchA mi dukkaDaM  /  '

Page #91 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Translation:  **20]**  6.  Studied without discipline. 7.  Studied without
yoga (lacking concentration of mind). Or, studied without performing the
austerities prescribed for the study of that scripture. Or, taught without
discerning the worthy and unworthy. 8.  Studied without the proper pronunciation
of vowels like *udatta* etc. 9.  Studied beyond the capacity of the student to
grasp the scripture. 10.  Studied the scriptures with a corrupt mind. 11.
Studied the scriptures at a time different from the time prescribed in the
scriptures for their study. - - 12.  Did not study the scriptures at the time
prescribed in the scriptures for study. 13.  Studied the scriptures at a time
when it was not prescribed to do so. [Essential Sutra] 14.  All my sins arising
from not studying the scriptures at the prescribed time are nullified.
**Discussion:**  The knowledge that is free from doubt and supernatural, being
taught by the Tirthankara Bhagwan, and which astounds the *bhavya* beings, or
the knowledge that emanated from the mouth of the Arhant Bhagwan and was
received by the *Ganadhar* Dev, and which the *bhavya* beings accepted with a
right mind, is called *Aagam*.  I criticize any transgression regarding the
three types of *Aagam* knowledge: *Mulapath* form, *Arth* form, and *Mulapath*
and *Arth* combined form. If the sutras are not studied in order, for example,
instead of "Namo Arihantaanam", "Arihantaanam Namo" is read. If it is studied
without proper pronunciation, for example, if the "a" sound in the word "Anala"
is reduced, it becomes "Nala", and if the "k" sound in the word "Kamala" is
reduced, it becomes "Mala", etc. The example of the *Vidhyadhar* and
*Abhaykumar* is famous in this regard.  -  Seeing a *Vidhyadhar* flying and
falling, King Shrenik asked the Bhagwan along with his son *Abhaykumar*,
"Bhanta! Why is this *Vidhyadhar* flying and falling like this?" Then the
Bhagwan said, "This *Vidhyadhar* has forgotten one letter of his knowledge, due
to which his aircraft falls repeatedly like a bird without wings."  Hearing
this, *Abhaykumar*, the son of King Shrenik, by his *Padanusaarini* attainment,
saw the *charan* of his aircraft...  1.  There are three types of vowels:
*Udatta*, *Anudatta*, and *Svarit*. "Uccairupalabhyaman Udatta, Nichair
Anudatta, Samavrytya Svarit" - meaning, speaking with a loud voice is *Udatta*,
speaking softly is *Anudatta*, and speaking in a medium voice is *Svarit*.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 20] 6. vinayarahita par3hA ho  /  7. yogahIna (mana kI ekAgratA se rahita)
par3hA ho| athavA jisa zAstra ke adhyayana ke liye jo tapazcaraNa vihita hai,
use na karake par3hA 1 athavA pAtra-apAtra kA viveka kiye binA par3hAyA ho  /
AyaMbila Adi karane rUpa yogodvahana 8. udAtta Adi svaroM se rahita par3hA ho|
9. 'suTThadiNNaM' - ziSya meM zAstra grahaNa karane kI jitanI zakti ho usase
adhika par3hAyA ho  /  10. Agama ko duSTa bhAva se grahaNa kiyA ho  /  11. jina
sUtroM ke paThana kA jo kAla zAstra meM kahA hai, usase bhinna dUsare kAla meM
una sUtroM kA svAdhyAya kiyA ho  /  - - 12. svAdhyAya ke zAstrokta kAla meM
svAdhyAya na kiyA ho  /  13. asvAdhyAya kAla meM svAdhyAya kiyA ho  /  [
AvazyakasUtra 14. svAdhyAya kAla meM svAdhyAya na kiyA ho, usase utpanna huA
merA sarva pApa niSphala ho  /  vivecana - jo jJAna tIrthaMkara bhagavAn ke
dvArA upadiSTa hone ke kAraNa zaMkA rahita evaM alaukika hai tathA bhavya jIvoM
ko cakita kara dene vAlA hai athavA jo jJAna arhanta bhagavAn ke mukha se nikala
kara gaNadhara deva ko prApta huA tathA bhavya jIvoM ne samyak bhAva se jisako
mAnA use 'Agama' kahate haiM  /  mUla pATha rUpa, artha rUpa evaM mUla pATha
aura artha - ubhaya rUpa, isa taraha tIna prakAra ke Agama jJAna ke viSaya meM
jo koI aticAra lagA ho usakI maiM AlocanA karatA hU~  /  yadi sUtra kramapUrvaka
na par3hA gayA ho, yathA 'namo arihaMtANaM' kI jagaha 'arihaMtANaM namo' aisA
par3hA ho| akSarahIna par3hA ho, jaise 'anala' zabda kA akAra kama kara diyA
jAye to 'nala' bana jAtA hai tathA 'kamala' zabda ke 'ka' ko kama kara dene se
'mala' bana jAtA hai ityAdi, isa viSaya meM vidyAdhara aura abhayakumAra kA
dRSTAnta prasiddha hai - ur3ate-girate kisI vidyAdhara ke vimAna ko dekha kara
apane putra abhayakumAra ke sAtha rAjA zreNika ne bhagavAn se pUchA bhante !
yaha vimAna isa prakAra ur3a ur3a kara kyoM gira rahA hai? taba bhagavAn ne
pharamAyAyaha vidyAdhara apanI vidyA kA eka akSara bhUla gayA hai, jisase yaha
vimAna binA pA~kha ke pakSI kI taraha bArabAra giratA hai  /  aisA suna kara
rAjA zreNika ke putra abhayakumAra ne apanI padAnusAriNI- labdhi dvArA usake
vimAna cAraNa 1. svara ke tIna bheda haiM- udAtta, anudAtta, svrit|
'uccairupalabhyamAna udAttaH, nIcairanudAttaH, samavRtyA svaritaH' arthAt -
tIvra uccAraNapUrvaka bolanA udAtta, dhIme bolanA anudAtta tathA madhyama rUpa
se bolanA svarita kahalAtA hai|

Page #92 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[First Study: Samayika] [21 By completing the mantra, he perfected his manortha
and learned the means of attaining the Siddhi of Akashagamini Vidya from that
Vidhyadhara. If more letters are added and read, then - as for example, if 'a'
is added before the word 'nal' and read, it becomes 'anal', which means fire. If
the word is spoken with fewer or more letters, if it is read without respect, if
it is read without yoga, if it is read without udattādi svaras, if it is read
with more power than necessary, if it is read, if the Agam is received with bad
intentions. If one studies at an inappropriate time, or if one does not study at
the appointed time for study, if one studies at the time of non-study, if one
does not study at the time of study, and if one does not show respect and
reverence to knowledge and knowledgeable people while studying or wandering,
then may all that sin of mine be nullified. || First Samayikaavashyak Sampanna.
1. For Asvadhyaya, see Appendix.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prathama adhyayana : sAmAyika ] [21 maMtra ko pUrA karake usake manoratha ko
siddha kiyA aura usa vidyAdhara se AkAzagAmini vidyA kI siddhi kA upAya sIkha
liyaa| adhika akSara jor3a kara par3hA jAye to - yathA 'nala' zabda ke pahale
'a' jor3a kara par3hA jAye to 'anala' bana jAtA hai, jisakA artha agni hai  /
pada ko nyUna yA adhika karake bolA gayA ho, vinayarahita par3hA gayA ho,
yogahIna par3hA ho, udAttAdi svara rahita par3hA ho, zakti se adhika par3hAyA
ho, par3hA ho, Agama ko bure bhAva se grahaNa kiyA ho| akAla meM svAdhyAya kiyA
ho aura svAdhyAya ke liye niyata kAla meM svAdhyAya na kiyA ho, asvAdhyAya ke
samaya svAdhyAya kiyA ho, svAdhyAya ke samaya svAdhyAya na kiyA ho tathA
par3hate samaya, vicarate samaya jJAna tathA jJAnavaMta puruSoM kI avinaya-
azAtanA kI ho to merA vaha saba pApa niSphala ho|  //  prathama sAmAyikAvazyaka
smpnn| 1. asvAdhyAya ke liye dekhiye pariziSTa

Page #93 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[2] I will praise the twenty-four Tirthankaras, the Jinas, who are the
conquerors of the fourfold afflictions. || 1 || I bow to the first Tirthankara,
Rishabhadeva, and to Ajitanatha. I bow to Sambhava, Abhinandan, Sumati, Padma
Prabha, Suparshva, and Chandraprabha, the conqueror of passions. || 2 || I bow
to Pushpadanta (Suvidhinatha), Sheetal, Shreyans, Vasupujya, Vimalanatha,
Ananta, the conqueror of passions, Dharmanatha, and Shantinatha. || 3 || I bow
to Kunthunatha, Aranatha, Mallinatha, Munisuvrata, and Naminatha. In the same
way, I bow to Arishta Nem, Parshvanatha, and Vardhamana. || 4 || I have praised
these twenty-four Tirthankaras, who are free from the dust of karma, who are
free from old age and death, and who are the conquerors of internal enemies. May
they be pleased with me. || 5 || May the Siddhas, who are the best in the world,
who are worthy of praise and respect, grant me the highest benefit, the benefit
of liberation. || 6 || May the Siddhas, who are pure and radiant, who are the
masters of their senses, who are deep like the ocean, grant me liberation. || 7
||  - **Meaning** I will praise the twenty-four Tirthankaras, who are the
conquerors of the fourfold afflictions, who are the establishers of the path of
righteousness, and who are the conquerors of passions. || 1 || I bow to
Rishabhadeva and Ajitanatha. I bow to Sambhava, Abhinandan, Sumati, Padma
Prabha, Suparshva, and Chandraprabha, the conqueror of passions. || 2 || I bow
to Pushpadanta (Suvidhinatha), Sheetal, Shreyans, Vasupujya, Vimalanatha,
Ananta, the conqueror of passions, Dharmanatha, and Shantinatha. || 3 || I bow
to Kunthunatha, Aranatha, Mallinatha, Munisuvrata, and Naminatha. In the same
way, I bow to Arishta Nem, Parshvanatha, and Vardhamana. || 4 || I have praised
these twenty-four Tirthankaras, who are free from the dust of karma, who are
free from old age and death, and who are the conquerors of internal enemies. May
they be pleased with me. || 5 || May the Siddhas, who are the best in the world,
who are worthy of praise and respect, grant me the highest benefit, the benefit
of liberation. || 6 || May the Siddhas, who are pure and radiant, who are the
masters of their senses, who are deep like the ocean, grant me liberation. || 7
||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 [2] caturviMzatistava dhammatitthayare jiNe  /  cauvIsaM pi kevalI  //  1  //
dvitIya adhyayana logassa ujjoyagare, arihaMte kittaissaM, usabhamajiyaM ca
vaMde, sambhavamabhiNaMdaNaM ca sumaI ca  /  paumappahaM supAsaM, jiNaM ca
caMdappahaM vaMde  //  2  //  suvihaM ca pupphadaMtaM, sIyala- sijjaMsa-
vAsupujjaM ca  /  vimalamaNataM ca jiNaM, dhammaM saMtiM ca vaMdAmi  //  3  //
kuMthuM araM ca malli, vaMde muNisuvvayaM namijiNaM ca  /  vaMdAmi riTThanemiM
pAsaM taha vaddhamANaM ca  // 4 //  evaM mae abhithuA, vihUyarayamalA
pahINajaramaraNA  /  cauvIsaM pi jiNavarA, titthayarA me pasIyaMtu  //  5  //
kittiya - vaMdiya-mahiyA, je e logassa uttamA siddhA  /  Arugga - bohi lAbhaM
samAhi varamuttamaM diMtu  //  6  //  caMdesu nimmalayarA, Aicyesu ahiyaM
prayAsayarA  /  sAgaravaragaMbhIrA, siddhA siddhiM mama disaMtu  // 7  //  -
bhAvArtha akhila vizva meM dharma yA samyagjJAna kA udyota karane vAle, dharma-
tIrtha kI sthApanA karane vAle, rAga-dveSa ko jItane vAle, aMtaraMga zatruoM ko
naSTa karane vAle kevalajJAnI 24 tIrthaMkaroM kA maiM kIrtana karUMgA arthAt
stuti karUMgA yA karatA hU~  //  1  //  zrI RSabhadeva ko aura ajitanAtha ko
vandana karatA hU~  /  sambhava, abhinandana, sumati, padmaprabha, supArzva aura
rAgadveSa ke vijetA candraprabha jina ko namaskAra karatA hU~  //  2  //  zrI
puSpadanta (suvidhinAtha), zItala, zreyAMsa, vAsupUjya, vimalanAtha, rAga-dveSa
ke vijetA anaMta, dharmanAtha tathA zrI zAntinAtha bhagavAn ko namaskAra karatA
hU~  //  3  //  zrI kunthunAtha, aranAtha, mallinAtha, munisuvrata evaM
naminAthajina ko vandana karatA hU~  /  isI prakAra bhagavAn ariSTanemi,
pArzvanAtha aura vardhamAna svAmI ko bhI namaskAra karatA hU~  //  4  //  jinakI
maiMne nAma nirdezapUrvaka stuti kI hai, jo karma rUpa raja evaM mala se rahita
haiM, jo jarAmaraNadonoM se sarvathA mukta haiM, ve Antarika zatruoM para vijaya
pAne vAle dharmapravartaka 24 tIrthaMkara mujha para prasanna

Page #94 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Second Study: The Twenty-Four Stotras [23  **5.** Those who have been
praised, worshipped, and reverently adored by Indra and other gods, as well as
by humans, and who are the most excellent in the entire universe, may those
Tirthankara Bhagavans grant me health, that is, self-health or Siddhatva, that
is, self-peace, the full benefit of the Triratna, that is, Right Faith, Right
Knowledge, and Right Conduct, and the highest Samadhi. **6.** Those who are more
pure than the moons, more radiant than the suns, and as profound as the great
ocean like the Self-born, may those Siddha Bhagavans grant me Siddhi, that is,
may I attain liberation through their support. **7.**  **Discussion:** In the
first study, Samayika, which is the cessation of all harmful actions, was
explained. Now, in this second study, the Twenty-Four Stotras, the cessation of
all harmful actions is taught. Therefore, the purity of Right Conduct and the
destruction of all karmas, which leads to enlightenment and liberation in this
and future lives, is praised through the glorification of the Tirthankara
Bhagavans.  The word "Lok" (universe) is used here, which, according to Jain
terminology, refers to the five aggregates (Pancha-Astikaya). The scriptures
also mention four types of Lok: substance, space, time, and state. Here, all of
these should be understood. I praise the twenty-four Tirthankaras who illuminate
this entire universe with the lamp of their teachings, who liberate beings from
suffering and lead them to a good destiny, who establish the path of Dharma, and
who conquer the enemies of karma, such as attachment, aversion, and delusion.
After making a general vow to praise the twenty-four Tirthankaras, they are
praised specifically by name. I bow to Shri Rishabhadeva Swami, who knows the
nature of the universe and the beyond, who has attained the highest state, who
is the foundation of the noble ones, who waters the garden of Dharma with the
water of his teachings, and who is adorned with the symbol of the bull.  I bow
to Shri Ajitanatha, who conquered attachment and aversion, and whose name "Ajit"
(unconquered) was given because his mother did not lose when playing dice while
he was in her womb.  I bow to Shri Sambhavanatha, who is the embodiment of
infinite bliss, and whose birth brought an end to famine and ushered in an era
of abundance.  I bow to Shri Abhinandan Swami, who brings joy to the noble
beings, and whose birth was celebrated by Indra with repeated praise and
greetings.  Thus, there are twenty-four Tirthankaras, the best among the knowers
of the ultimate truth, who are adorned with various qualities. May they be
pleased with me.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dvitIya adhyayana : caturviMzatistava ] [23 hoM  // 5 //  jinakI indrAdi devoM
tathA manuSyoM ne stuti kI hai, vandanA kI hai, bhAva se pUjA kI hai aura jo
sampUrNa loka meM saba se uttama haiM, ve tIrthaMkara bhagavAn mujhe Arogya
arthAt Atma-svAsthya yA siddhatva arthAt Atma-zAMti, bodhi-samyak darzanAdi
ratnatraya kA pUrNa lAbha tathA zreSTha samAdhi pradAna kareM  //  6  //  jo
candramAoM se bhI vizeSa nirmala haiM, jo sUryoM se bhI adhika prakAzamAna haiM,
jo svayaMbhUramaNa jaise mahAsamudra ke samAna gaMbhIra haiM, ve siddha bhagavAn
mujhe siddhi pradAna kareM, arthAt unake Alambana se mujhe siddhi arthAt mokSa
prApta ho  // 7 //  vivecana - pahale adhyayana meM sAvadha yoga kI nivRtti rUpa
sAmAyika kA nirUpaNa karake aba caturviMzatistava rUpa isa dUsare adhyayana meM
samasta sAvadya yogoM kI nivRtti kA upadeza hone se samyaktva kI vizuddhi tathA
janmAntara meM bhI bodhi aura sampUrNa karmoM ke nAza ke kAraNa hone se parama
upakArI tIrthaMkara bhagavantoM kA guNa-kIrtana arthAt stavana kiyA gayA hai| jo
kevalajJAna rUpI sUrya athavA jJAna ke dvArA dekhA jAya use vyutpatti kI upekSA
se 'loka' kahate haiM  /  yahA~ jaina paribhASA ke anusAra 'loka' zabda se
paJcAstikAya kA grahaNa hai| zAstra meM dravya, kSetra, kAla aura bhAva rUpa
caturvidha loka kA bhI kathana hai  /  yahA~ ina sabhI kA grahaNa samajha lenA
cAhiye  /  isa samasta loka ko pravacana rUpI dIpaka dvArA prakAzita karane
vAle, prANiyoM ko duHkhoM se chur3Akara sugati meM dhAraNa karane vAle, dharma
rUpa tIrtha kI sthApanA karane vAle, rAgAdi karmazatruoM ko jItane vAle caubIsa
tIrthaMkaroM kI maiM stuti karatA huuN| isa prakAra caubIsa tIrthaMkaroM kI
stuti karane kI sAmAnya rUpa se pratijJA karane ke pazcAt nAmagrahaNapUrvaka
vizeSa rUpa se stuti kI gaI hai  /  jo lokAloka ke svarUpa ko jAnane vAle,
parama pada ko prApta hone vAle, bhavya janoM ke AdhArabhUta, dharma rUpI bagIce
ko pravacana rUpa jala se sIMcane vAle tathA vRSabha ke cihna se yukta haiM ,
aise zrI RSabhadeva svAmI ko maiM vandana karatA huuN|| jo rAgadveSa ko jItane
vAle haiM tathA jaba ve garbha meM Aye taba caupar3a khelate mAtA kI hAra na
hone se jinakA nAma 'ajita' par3A, una zrI ajitanAtha ko maiM vandana karatA
huuN| jo ananta sukha svarUpa haiM aura jinake garbha meM Ate hI dhAnyAdi ke
adhika saMbhava hone se durbhikSa miTakara subhikSa ho gayA aise zrI
sambhavanAtha ko vandana karatA huuN| jo bhavya jIvoM ko harSita karane vAle
haiM aura garbha meM Ane para jinakA indra ne bAra-bAra stavanaabhinandana kiyA
una zrI abhinandana svAmI ko maiM vandana karatA huuN| isa prakAra vibhinna
vizeSatAoM se yukta kevalajJAniyoM meM zreSTha caubIsa tIrthaMkara haiM, ve
mujha para prasanna

Page #95 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 24] [Essential Sutra Yes. In 'Chauvaisaampi', the word 'api' refers to the
Tirthankaras who reside in the Mahavideha realm. I bow to all of them.
Explanation of some words - Kittiy - individually named or praised, Vandiy -
praised in mind, speech, and body, Mahiya - honored, respected by all beings due
to qualities like superior knowledge, etc. The meaning of puja is to honor and
respect. The Acharyas have categorized puja into two types - Dravya puja and
Bhava puja. For Prabhu puja, flowers are needed, but they should be flawless,
non-sentient Bhava-flowers. Regarding this, the renowned Jain Acharya Haribhadra
has described the Bhava-flowers suitable for Prabhu puja in the Ashtak Prakaran
as follows: Ahimsa satyamasteyam, brahmacharyamasangata. Guru bhaktistapyo
jnanam, satpushpani prachakshate || - Ashtak Prakaran 3.6 Meaning - Non-
violence, truth, non-stealing, celibacy, non-attachment, devotion, austerity,
and knowledge are the flowers that make life fragrant. These are the Bhava-
flowers of the heart. Arug - meaning health, self-wellbeing, or self-peace.
Health is of two types - Dravyaarogya and Bhavaarogya. Dravya-arogya means being
free from diseases and ailments like fever, etc. Bhava-arogya means being free
from karmic afflictions. It means attaining self-peace, being in one's true
self, or becoming a Siddha. In this sutra, the primary meaning of 'arogya' is
Bhava-arogya. Dravya-arogya is also required for the practice of Bhava-arogya,
because until the body and mind are healthy, self-realization will be difficult,
but it is not intended here. Alternatively, the meaning of the phrase
'Aruggabohilaabham' is - health, meaning the benefit of Bodhi, Samyagdarshan,
etc. for liberation. The true Tirtha is the Dharma that takes us across the
ocean of Samsara and protects us from misfortune. Those who establish the
Dharma-Tirtha of non-violence, truth, etc. are called Tirthankaras. All twenty-
four Tirthankaras have established Dharma in their respective times, and have
stabilized the people who had deviated from Dharma back into Dharma. The last
words in this text are - Siddha Siddhi Mam Disantu - meaning - May the Siddha
Bhagwan grant me Siddhi. There may be a doubt here - Siddha Bhagwan is free from
attachment, has accomplished everything, does not give or take anything from
anyone, then why is such a request made to them? The solution is that, in
reality, this means that devotees can attain Siddhi only by taking refuge in
Bhagwan. || Second Essential Sutra Ends || 00

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 24] [ AvazyakasUtra hoN| 'cauvIsaMpi' meM 'api' zabda se mahAvideha kSetra meM
viharamAna tIrthaMkara grahaNa kiye gaye haiN| una sabako bhI vandana karatA
huuN| katipaya zabdoM kA spaSTIkaraNa - kittiya - pRthak-pRthak nAma se kIrtita
athavA stuta, vaMdiya- vandita-mana, vacana tathA kAya se stuta, mahiyA -
pUjita, jJAnAtizaya Adi guNoM ke kAraNa saba prANiyoM dvArA sammAnita  /  pUjA
kA artha satkAra evaM sammAna karanA hai  /  AcAryoM ne pUjA ke do bheda kiye
haiM - dravyapUjA evaM bhaavpuujaa| prabhupUjA ke liye puSpoM kI AvazyakatA hotI
hai, kintu ve niravadya acitta bhAva-puSpa hI hone cAhiye  /  isake viSaya meM
jaina-jagat prasiddha AcArya haribhadra ne aSTaka prakaraNa meM prabhupUjA ke
yogya bhAva-puSpoM kA varNana isa prakAra kiyA hai - ahiMsA satyamasteyaM,
brhmcrymsNgtaa| guru bhaktistapo jJAnaM, satpuSpANi pracakSate  //  - aSTaka
prakaraNa 3 / 6 arthAt - ahiMsA, satya, asteya, brahmacarya, anAsakti, bhakti,
tapa, evaM jJAna rUpI pratyeka puSpa jIvana ko mahakA dene vAlA hai| ye hRdaya
ke bhAvapuSpa haiN| Aruga - arthAt Arogya-Atma-svAsthya yA aatm-shaaNti| Arogya
do prakAra kA hotA haidravyArogya aura bhAvArogya  /  dravya-Arogya yAni jvara
Adi rogoM-vikAroM se rahita honaa| bhAva-Arogya yAni karma-vikAroM se rahita
honA  /  arthAt Atma-zAMti milanA, Atma-svarUpastha honA yA siddha honA  /
prastuta sUtra meM 'Arogya' kA mUla abhiprAya bhAva-Arogya se hai| bhAva-Arogya
kI sAdhanA ke liye dravya-Arogya bhI apekSita hai, kyoMki jaba taka zarIra evaM
mana svastha nahIM hogA, taba taka AtmasAdhanA kA honA kaThina hogA, kintu vaha
yahA~ vivakSita nahIM hai  /  athavA 'AruggabohilAbhaM' pada kA artha hai -
Arogya arthAt mokSa ke liye bodhi samyagdarzanAdi kA laabh| saMsAra-sAgara se
pAra karAne vAlA evaM durgati se bacAne vAlA dharma hI saccA tIrtha hai-jo
ahiMsA, satya Adi dharma-tIrtha kI sthApanA karate haiM, ve tIrthaMkara kahalAte
haiM  /  caubIsoM hI tIthakaroM ne apane-apane samaya meM dharma kI sthApanA kI
hai, dharma se DigatI huI janatA ko punaH dharma meM sthira kiyA hai| prastuta
pATha meM antima zabda Ate haiM -siddhA siddhI mama disaMtu-isakA artha hai-
siddha bhagavAn mujhe siddhi pradAna kreN| yahA~ zaMkA ho sakatI hai ki-siddha
bhagavAn to vItarAga haiM, kRtakRtya haiM, kisI ko kucha dete-lete nahIM, phira
unase isa prakAra kI yAcanA kyoM kI gaI hai? samAdhAna yaha hai ki vastutaH
isakA Azaya yaha hai ki bhakta bhagavAn kA Alambana lekara hI siddhi prApta kara
sakate haiN|  //  dvitIya Avazyaka samApta  //  00

Page #96 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
I seek forgiveness, O Ascetic! I wish to pay homage to you, the one who has
conquered the senses. Please grant me permission to enter this limited space. I
touch your feet with my head, having restrained myself from sinful actions.
Forgive me if my touch has caused you any discomfort.  **Body Journey Inquiry**
**Discipline Journey Inquiry** Are you free from suffering? - - Have you spent
the day in a state of non-attachment, engaging in virtuous actions? Is your
journey of discipline unimpeded? And is your body, mind, and senses...
**Apology for Offenses** O Ascetic! I seek forgiveness for any offenses
committed during the day. I renounce any actions that went against the proper
conduct. For any of the thirty-three types of transgressions committed during
the day, through any of the ten types of wrong conduct, whether done through
false speech, evil thoughts, harmful actions, anger, pride, deceit, greed, or
any other transgression committed in the past, present, or future, through any
violation of the Dharma, I seek forgiveness, O Ascetic! I renounce it, I condemn
it, and I especially condemn it, I condemn it in the presence of the Guru.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 icchAmi khamAsamaNo icchAmi khamAsamaNo ! vaMdiuM jAvaNijjAe nisIhiyAe,
aNujANaha me miuggahaM, nisIhi ahokAyaM kAyasaMphAsaM, khamaNijjo bhe kilAmo,
appakilaMtANaM, bahusubheNaM bhe divaso vaikkaMto ? jattA bhe ? javaNijjaM ca
bhe ? khAmemi khamAsamaNo ! devasiaM vaikkamaM, AvassiyAe paDikkamAmi  /
khamAsamaNANaM devasiyAe AsAyaNAe tittIsannayarAe jaM kiMci micchAe maNudukkaDAe
vayadukkaDAe kAyadukkaDAe kohAe, mANAe, mAyAe, lobhAe, savvakAliyAe savvamiccho
vayArAe savvadhammAikkamaNAe AsAyaNAe, jo me devasio aiyAro kao tassa
khamAsamaNo ! paDikkama mi niMdAmi garihAmi appANaM vosirAmi  /  he kSamAvAn
zramaNa ! maiM apane zarIra ko pApa-kriyA se haTAkara bhAvArtha icchA nivedana
yathAzakti vandanA karanA cAhatA hU~  /  [ 3 ] tRtIya adhyayana : vandana
anujJApanA isaliye mujhako parimita bhUmi (avagraha ) meM praveza karane kI AjJA
dIjiye  /  pApa kriyA ko roka kara maiM Apake caraNoM kA mastaka se sparza
karatA hU~  /  mere dvArA chUne se Apako bAdhA huI ho to use kSamA kIjiye  /
zarIrayAtrA-pRcchA saMyamayAtrA-pRcchA pIr3A se to rahita hai ? - - Apane aglAna
avasthA meM rahakara bahuta zubha kriyAoM se divasa bitAyA hai ? ApakI
saMyamayAtrA to nirbAdha hai ? aura ApakA zarIra, mana tathA indriyoM kI
aparAdha kSamApanA he kSamAvAn zramaNa ! maiM Apako divasa sambandhI aparAdha ke
liye khamAtA hU~ aura Avazyaka kriyA karane meM jo viparIta anuSThAna huA hai
usase nivRtta hotA hU~  /  Apa kSamAzramaNa kI divasa meM kI huI tetIsa meM se
kisI bhI AzAtanA dvArA maiMne jo divasa sambandhI aticAra sevana kiyA ho' usakA
maiM pratikramaNa karatA hU~ tathA kisI bhI mithyA bhAva se kI huI, duSTa mana
se, vacana se aura kAyA se kI huI, krodha, mAna, mAyA aura lobha se kI huI,
bhUtakAlAdi sarvakAla sambandhI sarva mithyopacAra se kI gaI, dharma kA
ullaMghana karane vAlI AzAtanA ke dvArA jo maiMne divasa sambandhI aticAra
sevana kiyA ho, to he kSamAzramaNa ! usase maiM nivRtta hotA hU~, usakI maiM
nindA karatA hU~ aura vizeSa nindA karatA hU~, guru ke samakSa nindA karatA 1.
rAtri pratikramaNa karate samaya

Page #97 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[26] I renounce (myself) from the business of sins. - Discussion - In the second
study, the Tirthankaras, who are the preachers of the Samayik vow, which is the
renunciation of the Savadya Yoga, such as Pranatipat, etc., have been praised.
The Samayik vow, as instructed by the Tirthankaras, can only be obtained by the
grace of the Guru Maharaj. For this reason, and because it is the etiquette to
perform Pratikraman after paying respects to the Guru, it is necessary to pay
respects to the Guru. Therefore, we begin the third study called 'Guru Vandana'.
'Icchami' - Jainism is a religion based on desire. Every sadhak performs every
sadhana of his own free will, there is no pressure on him. Sadhana performed
without the joy of the mind, or out of reluctance or pressure, is not actually
sadhana, but a kind of punishment. Lifeless religious practices, laden with
pressure or fear, crush the life of the sadhak instead of elevating it. This is
why the word 'Icchami' is used first in every sadhana of Jainism, in the form of
'Icchami Khamasamano', 'Icchami Padikkamami', etc. The meaning of Icchami is - I
want, that is, I am desirous of performing this action from the inspiration of
my inner mind. 'Khamasamano' The four words Shramanah, Shamanah, Samanaah,
Samanah become 'Samano' in Prakrit. Although there is a slight difference in the
meaning of these four words, there is no difference in the meaning. 2. 'Shaman'
is called 'Shaman'. 1. 'Shraman' - One who labors, that is, who works hard in
twelve types of austerities, or who suppresses the senses and mind, is called
'Shraman'. - [Essential Sutra - • One who pacifies the fire of Kshaya and
Nokashaya, which are anger, pride, deceit and greed - 3. 'Saman' One who has
equal regard for enemy and friend is called 'Saman'. 4. 'Saman' One who teaches
the Jina's teachings well, or who lives by conquering the Kshaya by the power of
restraint, is called 'Saman'. — The root 'Shramu' is used in the sense of
penance and sorrow. Therefore, one who performs penance and remains completely
detached from the world is called a Shraman. A Shraman who is full of
forgiveness is called a Kshamasraman. In the Anuyogadwar Sutra, six types of
essentials are mentioned - 'Samaiyam Chauveesatthao, Vandayanam, Padikkamaman,
Kaussaggo Pacchakkhanam.' Of these, Vandana is the third essential. In this, the
disciple addresses the Gurudev and says O Kshamasraman Gurudev! I, with my
strength, offer my respects with a body free from the Savadya business, such as
Pranatipat, etc. -

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 26 ] hU~ aura AtmA ko (apane Apako ) pApa sambandhI vyApAroM se nivRtta karatA
hU~  /  - vivecana - dUsare adhyayana meM prANAtipAta Adi sAvadya yoga kI
nivRttirUpa sAmAyika vrata ke upadezaka tIrthaMkaroM kI stuti kI gaI hai|
tIrthaMkaroM se upadiSTa va sAmAyika vrata guru mahArAja' kI kRpA se hI prApta
ho sakatA hai| isa kAraNa tathA guruvandanapUrvaka hI pratikramaNa karane kA
ziSTAcAra hone se guruvandanA karanA Avazyaka hai  /  ataeva 'guruvandana'
nAmaka tRtIya adhyayana prArambha karate haiM 'icchAmi' - jainadharma
icchApradhAna dharma hai| sAdhaka pratyeka sAdhanA apanI svayaM kI icchA se
karatA hai, usa para kisI kA dabAva nahIM rahatA hai  /  citta kI prasannatA ke
abhAva meM arucipUrvaka yA dabAva se kI jAne vAlI sAdhanA, vastuta: sAdhanA na
hokara eka taraha se daNDa rUpa ho jAtI hai| dabAva se yA bhaya ke bhAva se lAdI
huI niSprANa dharmakriyAeM sAdhaka ke jIvana ko unnata banAne ke badale kucala
detI haiN| yahI kAraNa hai ki jainadharma kI sAdhanA meM sarvatra 'icchAmi
khamAsamaNo', 'icchAmi paDikkamAmi' Adi rUpa meM sarvaprathama 'icchAmi' kA
prayoga hotA hai  /  icchAmi kA artha hai - maiM cAhatA hU~ arthAt maiM
anta:karaNa kI preraNA se yaha kriyA karane abhilASI hU~  /  'khamAsamaNo'
zramaNaH, zamanaH, samanAH, samaNaH ina cAroM zabdoM kA prAkRta meM 'samaNo'
rUpa banatA hai| ina cAroM ke zabdArtha meM kiMcit bhinnatA hone para bhI
bhAvArtha meM bheda nahIM hai| 2. 'zamana ' ko 'zamana' kahate haiM  /  1.
'zramaNa' - bAraha prakAra kI tapasyA meM zrama arthAt parizrama karane vAle,
athavA indriya evaM mana kA damana karane vAle ko 'zramaNa' kahate haiM  /  - [
AvazyakasUtra - * krodha, mAna, mAyA aura lobha kaSAya evaM nokaSAya rUpI agni
ko zAnta karane vAle - 3. 'samana' zatru tathA mitra para samabhAva rakhane vAle
ko 'samana' kahate haiM  /  4. 'samaNa' acchI taraha se jinavANI kA upadeza dene
vAle, athavA saMyama ke bala se kaSAya ko jItakara rahane vAle ko 'samaNa'
kahate haiN| -- 'zramu' dhAtu tapa aura kheda artha meM vyavahRta hotI hai| ataH
jo tapazcaraNa karatA hai evaM saMsAra se sarvathA nirlipta rahatA hai, vaha
zramaNa kahalAtA hai  /  kSamApradhAna zramaNa kSamAzramaNa hotA hai  /
anuyogadvAra sUtra meM Avazyaka ke chaha prakAra batAye gaye haiM - 'sAmAiyaM
cauvIsatthao, vaMdayaNaM, paDikkamaNaM, kAussaggo paccakkhANaM  / ' inameM
vandanA tIsarA Avazyaka hai| isameM ziSya gurudeva ko vandana kara sambodhana
karake kahatA hai he kSamAzramaNa gurudeva ! maiM apanI zakti ke anusAra
prANAtipAta Adi sAvadha vyApAroM se rahita kAya se vandanA -

Page #98 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  [27 Third Study: Vandan]  I wish to enter the Mitavgrah (the area of three
and a half cubits around where the Guru Maharaj is seated), therefore please
grant me permission to enter.  The Guru grants permission to the disciple by
saying "Anujanami" (I permit). Upon receiving permission, the disciple says: "O
Guru Maharaj! I stop all my worldly activities and touch your feet with my head
and hands. If I have caused you any discomfort by this act of Vandan, please
forgive me. Khamemi Khamasamano! Devasiyam Vaikkaman Avassiae Padikkamami" (O
Forgiving Ascetic! I seek forgiveness for any offenses committed related to the
day and I will remain free from offenses in the future by performing the
necessary actions of worshiping your commands, i.e., I will try not to commit
any offenses).  ## Vandan Method  - While saying "Ichchami Khamasamano Vandioum
Javanijjaae Nisihiyaa" during Vandan, stand outside the Avgrah with both hands
placed on the forehead and bow your head in front of the Guru, seeking
permission to enter the Avgrah. This signifies that the disciple is committed to
always carrying the Guru's commands on their head.  ## First Three Cycles  "Aho"
- "Kaayam" - "Kaaryam" - These are completed with two letters each. Touch the
Guru's feet with both hands joined in Kamalmudra and say the letter "A" in a
soft voice. Then, place the joined hands on your forehead and say the letter
"Ho" in a loud voice. This is the first cycle. Similarly, the remaining two
cycles of "Ka....yam" and "Ka....yam" are also performed.  ## Next Three Cycles
1. "Jatta Bhe," 2. "Javanni," 3. "Jjam Cha Bhe" - These are completed with three
letters each. Touch the Guru's feet with both hands joined in Kamalmudra and say
the letter "J" in a soft, low voice. Then, bring the joined hands to your heart
and say the letter "Tta" in a medium, accented voice. Finally, touch your
forehead and say the letter "Bhe" in a high voice. This is the first cycle.
Similarly, the remaining two cycles of "Jav Ni..." and "Jjac..." should also be
performed. There are six cycles for the first "Khamasamano" and similarly six
for the second "Khamasamano," totaling twelve cycles.  In this way, the disciple
stands outside the Avgrah in the first place of request, with both hands holding
a Rajoharan in the Yathajat Mudra, bowing half their body and performing Vandan
by reciting from "Ichchami Khamasamano" to "Nisihiyaa." The disciple expresses
their desire to perform Vandan. After the disciple's request, they should
perform Vandan from outside the Avgrah by reciting "Tikkhutto." Alternatively,
the Guru...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 [ 27 tRtIya adhyayana : vandana ] karanA cAhatA hU~, ata: Apa mujhe mitAvagraha
(jahA~ guru mahArAja virAjita hoM, unake cAroM ora kI sAr3he tIna hAtha bhUmi)
meM praveza karane kI AjJA dIjiye  /  guru ziSya ko 'anujAnAmi' arthAt AjJA detA
hU~, kahakara praveza kI AjJA dete haiM  /  AjJA pAkara ziSya kahatA hai- he
guru mahArAja ! maiM sAvadya vyApAroM ko rokakara mastaka aura hAtha se Apake
caraNoM ko sparza karatA hU~  /  isa taraha vandanA karane se mere dvArA Apako
kisI prakAra kA kaSTa pahu~cA ho to Apa use kSamA kareM  /  khAmemi khamAsamaNo!
devasiyaM vaikkamaM AvassiyAe paDikkamAmi arthAt he kSamAzramaNa ! divasa
sambandhI jo kucha aparAdha ho cukA hai usake liye kSamA cAhatA hU~ aura
bhaviSya meM ApakI AjJA kI ArAdhanA rUpa Avazyaka kriyA ke dvArA aparAdha se
alaga rahU~gA, arthAt aparAdha nahIM karane kA prayatna kruuNgaa| vandanA vidhi
- 'icchAmi khamAsamaNo vaMdiuM jAvaNijjAe nisIhiyAe' vandanA ke samaya uparyukta
sUtrAMza bolakara avagraha meM praveza karane kI AjJA ke liye avagraha se bAhara
hI khar3A rahakara donoM hAtha lalATa pradeza para rakhakara guru ke sAmane zira
jhukaae| isakA Azaya yaha hai ki vaha gurudeva kI AjJAoM ko sadaiva mastaka para
vahana karane ke liye kRtapratijJa hai  /  prathama ke tIna Avarta 'aho'-' kAyaM
' 'kArya' isa prakAra do-do akSaroM se pUre hote haiM  /  kamalamudrA se
aMjalibaddha donoM hAthoM se guru caraNoM ko sparza karate huye manda svara se
'a' akSara kahanA, tatpazcAt aMjalibaddha hAthoM ko mastaka para lagAte huye
ucca svara se 'ho' akSara kahanA, yaha pahalA Avarta hai  /  isI prakAra
'kA....yaM' aura 'kA....yaM' ke zeSa do Avarta bhI kie jAte haiM  /  - - --
agale tIna Avarta - 1. ' jattA bhe, ' 2. 'javaNi, ' 3. 'jjaM ca bhe' - isa
prakAra tIna-tIna akSaroM ke hote haiN| kamalamudrA se aMjalibaddha donoM hAthoM
se gurucaraNoM ko sparza karate huye anudAtta manda svara se 'ja' akSara kahanA
cAhiye  /  punaH hRdaya ke pAsa aJjali lAte huye svarita-madhyama svara se 'ttA'
akSara kahanA cAhiye phira apane mastaka ko chUte huye udAtta svara se ' bhe'
akSara kahanA caahiye| yaha prathama Avarta hai| isI paddhati se 'java Ni...'
aura 'jjaca... 'ye zeSa do Avarta bhI karane cAhiye  /  prathama 'khamAsamaNo'
ke chaha aura isI prakAra dUsare 'khamAsamaNo' ke chaha, kula bAraha Avarta hote
haiM  /  isa prakAra ziSya, avagraha ke bAhara prathama icchA - nivedana-sthAna
meM yathAjAta mudrA se donoM hAthoM meM rajoharaNa liye huye AdhA zarIra
jhukAkara namana karatA hai aura 'icchAmi khamAsamaNo' se lekara 'nisIhiyAe'
taka kA pATha par3hakara vandana karatA ziSya vandana karane kI icchA nivedana
karatA hai| ziSya ke isa prakAra nivedana karane ke pazcAt avagraha se bAhara
rahakara hI 'tikkhutto' ke pATha se vandana kara lenA cAhiye  /  athavA guru

Page #99 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  28] **Essential Sutra**  The word 'Chhandena' means to give consent to
perform obeisance as desired.  After receiving permission from the Gurudev to
perform obeisance through the aforementioned method, the disciple should move
forward, outside the Avgraha area but nearby, to another place called 'Avgraha-
Pravesha-Ajna-Yachana'. There, they should again bow slightly and ask for
permission to enter the Avgraha by saying 'Anujanaha Me Miuggaham'. Upon
receiving the request, Gurudev should grant permission by saying 'Anujanama'.
After receiving permission, the disciple should enter the Avgraha with the
'Yathajat Mudra', which is the same posture as when they accepted initiation,
with both hands joined in Anjali mudra placed on the head, while saying 'Nisihi-
Nisihi'.   Later, after cleansing the ground with Rajoharan, the disciple should
sit in front of Gurudev in the 'Ukdu' or 'Goduhasan' posture. They should then
perform the first three 'Avarta' by saying 'Aho Kayam Karyam' according to the
aforementioned method, and perform 'Samphasan' by touching their forehead to
Gurudev's feet.  After that, they should ask for forgiveness for any
inconvenience caused to Gurudev while touching their feet by saying 'Khamanijjo
Bhe Kilamo'. Then, they should inquire about Gurudev's well-being for the day by
saying 'Appakilantanam Bahusubhena Bhe Divaso Vaikkato?'. Gurudev should then
respond with 'Tatha' and inquire about the disciple's well-being. Subsequently,
the disciple should perform the three 'Avarta' - 'Jatta Bhe', 'J Va Ni', and
'Jjam Cha Bhe' - and inquire about the disciple's peace of mind regarding their
journey, practice, and body. In response, Gurudev should inquire about the
disciple's peace and well-being regarding their journey and livelihood. Finally,
the disciple should say 'Avassiae' and exit the Avgraha.  In the present text,
the phrase 'Divaso Vaikkato' in 'Bahusubhena Bhe Divaso Vaikkato' should be
replaced with 'Rai Vaikkata' during the night Pratikraman, 'Pakkhovaikkato'
during the Pakshik Pratikraman, 'Chaummaasi Vaikkata' during the Chaturmasik
Pratikraman, and 'Sanvatcharo Vaikkato' during the Sanvatsarik Pratikraman.  In
the Samvayanga Sutra, the 12th Samvay, while describing the form of obeisance,
Bhagwan Mahavir has mentioned 25 types of obeisance:  **Oon Jahajayam Kitikamm
Barasavayam.** **Chausiram Tiguttam Cha, Dupavesam Ega Nikkhamanam.**  Meaning:
Two Avenant, one Yathajat, twelve Avarta, four Shiras, three Gupti, two
Pravesha, and one Nikkhaman, totaling 25 essentials.  The third obeisance in the
essential actions holds a significant place. It is the disciple's paramount duty
to perform obeisance to Gurudev with a humble heart and inquire about their
well-being for the day and night, because...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 28 ] [ AvazyakasUtra 'chandeNaM' aisA zabda kahate haiM, jisakA artha hai -
icchAnusAra vandana karane kI sammati denA  /  gurudeva kI tarapha se uparyukta
paddhati ke dvArA vandana karane kI AjJA mila jAne para ziSya Age bar3hakara,
avagraha kSetra ke bAhara, kintu pAsa hI 'avagraha - pravezAjJA - yAcanA' nAmaka
dUsare sthAna meM punaH arddhavinata hokara namana karatA hai aura gurudeva se
'aNujANaha me miuggahaM' isa pATha ke dvArA avagraha meM praveza kI AjJA mAMgatA
hai| AjJA mAMgane para gurudeva apanI ora se 'aNujANAmi' kahakara AjJA pradAna
karate haiM  /  AjJA milane ke bAda 'yathAjAta mudrA' arthAt dIkSA aMgIkAra
karate samaya ziSya kI jaisI mudrA hotI hai, vaisI, donoM hAtha aMjalibaddha
kapAla (mastaka) para rakhane kI mudrA se 'nisIhi - nisIhi ' pada kahate huye
avagraha meM praveza karanA caahiye| bAda meM rajoharaNa se bhUmi pramArjana
kara gurudeva ke pAsa ukaDU arthAt goduhAsana se baiThakara prathama ke tIna
Avarta 'aho kAyaM kAryaM' pUrvokta vidhi ke anusAra kahake saMphAsaM kahate huye
gurucaraNoM meM mastaka lagAnA cAhiye  /  tatpazcAt 'khamaNijjo bhe kilAmo '
pATha ke dvArA caraNa-sparza karate samaya gurudeva ko jo bAdhA hotI hai, usakI
kSamA mAMgI jAtI hai| tadanantara 'appakilaMtANaM bahusubheNa bhe divaso
vaikkato ?' kahakara divasa sambandhI kuzala-kSema pUchI jAtI hai| phira guru
bhI ' tathA ' kahakara apane ziSya kA kuzala kSema pUchate haiM  /  anantara
ziSya ' jattA bhe'' ja va Ni'' jjaM ca bhe' - ina tInoM AvartoM kI kriyA kare
evaM saMyama - yAtrA tathA zarIra sambandhI zAnti puuche| uttara meM gurudeva
bhI ziSya se usakI yAtrA aura yApanIya sambandhI sukha zAMti puuche| isake bAda
'AvassiyAe' kahate huye avagraha se bAhara AnA cAhiye  /  prastuta pATha meM jo
'bahusubheNaM bhe divaso vaikkaMto' meM 'divaso vaikkaMto' pATha hai, usake
sthAna meM rAtri - pratikramaNa ke samaya 'rAI vaikkaMtA', pAkSika pratikramaNa
meM 'pakkhovaikkaMto', cAturmAsika pratikramaNa meM 'cAummAsI vaikkaMtA' tathA
sAMvatsarika pratikramaNa meM 'saMvaccharo vaikkaMto' aisA pATha bolanA cAhiye
/  samavAyAMga sUtra 12veM samavAya meM vandana ke svarUpa kA prarUpaNa karate
huye bhagavAn mahAvIra ne vandana kI 25 vidhiyA~ batalAI haiN| oNa jahAjAyaM
kitikammaM bArasAvayaM  /  causiraM tiguttaM ca, dupavesaM ega nikkhamaNaM  //
arthAt - do avanata, eka yathAjAta, bAraha Avarta, cAra zira, tIna gupti, do
praveza aura eka niSkramaNa, isa prakAra kula 25 Avazyaka haiN| Avazyaka - kriyA
meM tIsare vandana Avazyaka kA mahattvapUrNa sthAna hai| gurudeva ko vinamra
hRdaya se vandana karanA tathA unakI dina tathA rAtri sambandhI sukha-zAMti
pUchanA ziSya kA parama kartavya hai, kyoMki

Page #100 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Third Study: Salutations  [29] After the Arhats, the Gurudev is the ruler of
the spiritual kingdom. Saluting them is equivalent to saluting the Lord.
Salutations bring humility. The principle of humility was highly emphasized in
ancient India. It is said, "Vinayo Jinasaasanamoolam," meaning humility is the
root of the Jain teachings. The Jain Siddhanta Deepika states, "Anashaatana
bahumaan karanam cha vinayaha." Not doing Ashatana and showing respect is
humility.  **Meaning of Specific Words:**  * Jaavanijaae - According to
strength, in accordance with power. * Nisihiyaa - From the cessation of careful
business. * Anujaanah - Please permit. * Miuuggham - Mitaavagraha, meaning the
area around where the Guru Maharaj is seated, a space of three and a half hands
wide. * Aho Kaayam - Adha:kaay - Part of the body, feet. * Kaayasamphasaam -
Kaay, meaning by hand, proper touch (of the feet). * Khamanijjo - Worthy of
forgiveness. * Bhe - By you. * Appakilantaanam - Free from bodily labor or
hindrance. * Vaikkham - Excess. * Avassya - Necessary, action in the form of
foot-touching. * Aasaayana - Disrespect, disregard. * Teteesaanayaraae - Any of
the thirty-three types (of Ashatana). * Savvakaliyaae - All beings, present,
future, and past. * Savvamichchovayaraae - Filled with all kinds of false
treatments.  There are thirty-three Ashatanas, they are as follows:  1. If a
Saikhya (newly initiated or one with a lesser degree of initiation) Sadhu walks
very close to a Raatnika (one with a higher degree of initiation) Sadhu, this is
the first Ashatana of the Saikhya. 2. If a Saikhya Sadhu walks ahead of a
Raatnika Sadhu, this is the second Ashatana of the Saikhya. 3. If a Saikhya
Sadhu walks alongside a Raatnika Sadhu, this is the third Ashatana of the
Saikhya. 4. If a Saikhya Sadhu stands in front of a Raatnika Sadhu, this is the
fourth Ashatana of the Saikhya. 5. If a Saikhya Sadhu stands alongside a
Raatnika Sadhu, this is the fifth Ashatana of the Saikhya. 6. If a Saikhya Sadhu
stands very close to a Raatnika Sadhu, this is the sixth Ashatana of the
Saikhya. 7. If a Saikhya Sadhu sits in front of a Raatnika Sadhu, this is the
seventh Ashatana of the Saikhya. 8. If a Saikhya Sadhu sits alongside a Raatnika
Sadhu, this is the eighth Ashatana of the Saikhya. 9. If a Saikhya Sadhu sits
very close to a Raatnika Sadhu, this is the ninth Ashatana of the Saikhya. 10.
If a Saikhya Sadhu and a Raatnika Sadhu are leaving the meditation ground
together, and the Saikhya Sadhu performs Achaman (purification) before the
Raatnika Sadhu, this is the tenth Ashatana of the Saikhya.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 tRtIya adhyayana : vandana ] [29 arihantoM ke pazcAt gurudeva hI AdhyAtmika
sAmrAjya ke adhipati haiM, unako vandana karanA bhagavAn ko vandana karane ke
samAna hai  /  vandana karane se vinamratA AtI hai| prAcIna bhArata meM prastuta
vinaya ke siddhAnta para atyadhika bala diyA gayA hai| kahA bhI hai - 'viNayo
jiNasAsaNamUlam' arthAt vinaya jinazAsana kA mUla hai| jainasiddhAntadIpikA meM
kahA hai - 'anAzAtanA bahumAnakaraNaM ca vinyH|' azAtanA nahIM karanA tathA
bahumAna karanA vinaya hai| viziSTa zabdoM kA artha - jAvaNijAe - zakti kI
anukUlatA se, zakti ke anusAra  /  nisIhiyAe - sAvadha vyApAra kI nivRtti se|
aNujANaha - anumati diijiye| miuggahaM - mitaavagraha arthAt gurumahArAja jahA~
virAjamAna hoM, usake cAroM ora kI sAr3he tIna hAtha caur3I bhuumi| aho kAyaM -
adha:kAya - zarIra kA bhAga, caraNa  /  kAyasaMphAsaM - kAya arthAt hAtha se,
(caraNoM kA) samyak sparza  /  khamaNijjo - kSamA ke yogy| bhe - Apake dvArA  /
appakilaMtANaM - zarIrika zrama yA bAdhA se rhit| vaikkama - aticaar| avassiyA -
avazya karane yogya caraNa-karaNa rUpa kriyaa| AsAyaNA - avajJA, anaadr|
tettIsannayarAe - tetIsa prakAra(kI AzAtanA) meM se koI bhii| savvakAliyAe -
sarva-bhUta, vartamAna, bhaviSyatkAla smbndhii| savvamicchovayArAe - sarvAMzataH
mithyA upacAroM se yukt| AzAtanAe~ tetIsa haiM, ve isa prakAra haiM - 1.zaikSa
(navadIkSita yA alpa dIkSA-paryAya vAlA) sAdhu rAnika (adhika dIkSA paryAya
vAle) sAdhu ke ati nikaTa hokara gamana kare  /  yaha zaikSa kI (zaikSa dvArA kI
gaI) pahalI AzAtanA hai| 2. zaikSa sAdhu rAtnika sAdhu ke Age gamana kare  /
yaha zaikSa kI dUsarI AzAtanA hai| 3. zaikSa sAdhu rAnika sAdhu ke sAtha
barAbarI se cale  /  yaha zaikSa kI tIsarI AzAtanA hai  /  4. zaikSa sAdhu
rAtnika sAdhu ke Age khar3A ho  /  yaha zaikSa kI cauthI AzAtanA hai| 5. zaikSa
sAdhu rAtlika sAdhu ke barAbarI se khar3A ho  /  yaha zaikSa kI pAMcavIM AzAtanA
hai| 6. zaikSa sAdhu rAnika sAdhu ke ati nikaTa khar3A ho  /  yaha zaikSa kI
chaThI AzAtanA hai| 7. zaikSa sAdhu rAtnika sAdhu ke Age baiThe  /  yaha zaikSa
kI sAtavIM AzAtanA hai| 8. zaikSa sAdhu rAtnika sAdhu ke sAtha barAbarI se
baiThe  /  yaha zaikSa kI AThavIM AzAtanA hai| 9. zaikSa sAdhu rAtnika sAdhu ke
ati samIpa baiThe  /  yaha zaikSa kI navIM AzAtanA hai| 10. zaikSa sAdhu rAtlika
sAdhu ke sAtha bAhara vicAra bhUmi ko nikalatA huA yadi zaikSa rAtnika sAdhu se
pahale Acamana (zauca-zuddhi) kare to yaha zaikSa kI dasavIM AzAtanA hai|

Page #101 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  [Essential Sutras]  **11.**  A *Shaiksha* monk, while going out with a
*Ratnik* monk to the *Vichara Bhoomi* or *Vihar Bhoomi*, if the *Shaiksha* monk
criticizes first and the *Ratnik* monk later, this is the eleventh *Ashatana* of
a *Shaiksha*.  **12.** If a monk is already talking with a *Ratnik* monk, and
the *Shaiksha* monk speaks before the *Ratnik* monk, and the *Ratnik* monk
speaks later, this is the twelfth *Ashatana* of a *Shaiksha*.  **13.** If a
*Ratnik* monk asks a *Shaiksha* at night or during the *Vikal* (twilight),
"Arya! Who is sleeping and who is awake?", and the *Shaiksha* ignores it and
does not answer, this is the thirteenth *Ashatana* of a *Shaiksha*.  **14.** If
a *Shaiksha* monk brings food, drink, *Khadim* (food offered to a monk), or
*Swadim* (delicious food) and first criticizes in front of another *Shaiksha*
and then in front of the *Ratnik* monk, this is the fourteenth *Ashatana* of a
*Shaiksha*.  **15.** If a *Shaiksha* monk brings food, drink, *Khadim*, or
*Swadim* and first shows it to another *Shaiksha* and then shows it to the
*Ratnik* monk, this is the fifteenth *Ashatana* of a *Shaiksha*.  **16.** If a
*Shaiksha* monk brings food, drink, *Khadim*, or *Swadim* and first invites
another *Shaiksha* to eat and then invites the *Ratnik* monk, this is the
sixteenth *Ashatana* of a *Shaiksha*.  **17.** If a *Shaiksha* monk brings food,
drink, *Khadim*, or *Swadim* with a *Ratnik* monk and gives it to someone
without asking the *Ratnik* monk, this is the seventeenth *Ashatana* of a
*Shaiksha*.  **18.** If a *Shaiksha* monk brings food, drink, *Khadim*, or
*Swadim* and eats with a *Ratnik* monk, and eats the best food quickly in large
bites, this is the eighteenth *Ashatana* of a *Shaiksha*.  **19.** If a
*Shaiksha* monk ignores something said by a *Ratnik* monk, this is the
nineteenth *Ashatana* of a *Shaiksha*.  **20.** If a *Shaiksha* monk listens
while sitting in his place when something is said by a *Ratnik* monk, this is
the twentieth *Ashatana* of a *Shaiksha*.  **21.** If a *Shaiksha* monk says,
"What was said?" when something is said by a *Ratnik* monk, this is the twenty-
first *Ashatana* of a *Shaiksha*.  **22.** If a *Shaiksha* monk speaks to a
*Ratnik* monk using the word "you" (a disrespectful term), this is the twenty-
second *Ashatana* of a *Shaiksha*.  **23.** If a *Shaiksha* monk speaks rudely
to a *Ratnik* monk with a clicking sound, this is the twenty-third *Ashatana* of
a *Shaiksha*.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 30] [ AvazyakasUtra 11. zaikSa sAdhu rAtnika sAdhu ke sAtha bAhara vicAra bhUmi
ko yA vihAra bhUmi ko nikalatA huA : yadi zaikSa rAnika sAdhu se pahale AlocanA
kare to aura rAtnika sAdhu pIche kare yaha zaikSa kI gyArahavIM AzAtanA hai| 12.
koI sAdhu rAnika sAdhu ke sAtha pahale se bAta kara rahA ho, taba zaikSa sAdhu
rAtnika sAdhu se pahale hI bole aura rAtnika sAdhu pIche bola pAve to yaha
zaikSa kI bArahavIM AzAtanA hai| 13. rAtnika sAdhu rAtri meM yA vikAla meM
zaikSa se pUche ki Arya! kauna so rahe haiM aura kauna jAga rahe haiM? yaha
sunakara bhI zaikSa anasunI karake koI uttara na de to yaha zaikSa kI terahavIM
AzAtanA hai| 14. zaikSa sAdhu azana, pAna, khAdima yA svAdima lAkara pahale kisI
anya zaikSa ke sAmane AlocanA kare pIche rAtnika sAdhu ke sAmane, to yaha zaikSa
kI caudahavIM AzAtanA hai| 15. zaikSa sAdhu azana, pAna, khAdima yA svAdima
lAkara pahale kisI anya zaikSa ko dikhalAve pIche rAlika sAdhu ko dikhAve, to
yaha zaikSa kI pandrahavIM AzAtanA hai| 16. zaikSa sAdhu azana, pAna, khAdima yA
svAdima AhAra lAkara pahale kisI anya zaikSa ko bhojana ke liye nimaMtraNa de
aura pIche rAtnika sAdhu ko nimaMtraNa de, to yaha zaikSa kI solahavIM AzAtanA
hai| 17. zaikSa sAdha rAtnika sAdha ke sAtha azana. pAna, khAdima svAdima AhAra
ko lAkara rAtnika sAdhu se binA pUche jisa kisI ko de, to yaha zaikSa kI
sattarahavIM AzAtanA hai| 18. zaikSa sAdhu azana, pAna, khAdima svAdima AhAra
lAkara rAnika sAdhu ke sAtha bhojana karatA huA yadi uttama bhojya padArthoM ko
jaldI-jaldI bar3e-bar3e kavaloM se khAtA hai, to vaha zaikSa kI aThArahavIM
AzAtanA hai| 19. rAtnika sAdhu dvArA kucha kahe jAne para yadi zaikSa use
anasunI karatA hai, to yaha zaikSa kI unnIsavIM AzAtanA hai| 20. rAtnika sAdhu
dvArA kucha kahe jAne para yadi zaikSa apane sthAna para baiThe hue sunatA hai,
to yaha zaikSa kI bIsavIM AzAtanA hai| 21. rAtnika sAdhu dvArA kucha kahe jAne
para kyA kahA' isa prakAra se yadi zaikSa kahe, to yaha zaikSa kI ikkIsavIM
AzAtanA hai| 22. zaikSa rAnika sAdhu ko 'tuma' kaha kara (tuccha zabda se) bole
to yaha zaikSa kI bAIsavIM AzAtanA hai| 23. zaikSa rAtnika sAdhu se capa-capa
karatA huA udaMDatA se bole to yaha zaikSa kI teIsavIM

Page #102 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Third Study: Respect   [31]  **Aspirations:**  24. If a student, while
listening to a Ratnik Sadhu, expresses approval with words like "Yes, yes," it
is the twenty-fourth aspiration of a student.  25. If a student, while listening
to a Ratnik Sadhu's Dharmakatha, says "You don't remember," it is the twenty-
fifth aspiration of a student.  26. If a student, while listening to a Ratnik
Sadhu's Dharmakatha, says "Stop it," it is the twenty-sixth aspiration of a
student.  27. If a student, while listening to a Ratnik Sadhu's Dharmakatha,
creates division in the assembly, it is the twenty-seventh aspiration of a
student.  28. If a student, while listening to a Ratnik Sadhu's Dharmakatha,
does not stand up when the assembly does, and the Ratnik Sadhu repeats the same
story a second or third time, it is the twenty-eighth aspiration of a student.
29. If a student kicks the bed or bedding of a Ratnik Sadhu, it is the twenty-
ninth aspiration of a student.  30. If a student stands, sits, or sleeps on the
bed or seat of a Ratnik Sadhu, it is the thirtieth aspiration of a student.  31,
32. If a student sits on a seat higher than or equal to that of a Ratnik Sadhu,
it is the thirty-first and thirty-second aspiration of a student.  33. If a
student, while sitting on their seat, answers a Ratnik Sadhu's question, it is
the thirty-third aspiration of a student.  **Discussion:**  It is the duty of a
newly initiated Sadhu to always be mindful of the respect and humility due to
their Acharya, Upadhyaya, and senior Sadhus in their Dikshaparaya, whether they
are walking, standing, sitting, being asked a question, or during Gochari. If
they fail in this duty, they commit aspirations and break their means of
liberation. These thirty-three aspirations are mentioned to keep this in mind.
The original text mentions four aspirations and indicates the rest with the word
"etc." Their nature is explained according to the Dasha-Shrutaskandha.  ## Third
Essential Completed.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 tRtIya adhyayana : vandana ] [31 AzAtanA hai| 24. zaikSa rAnika sAdhu se kathA
karate huye 'jI, hA~' Adi zabdoM se anumodanA na kare to yaha zaikSa kI
caubIsavIM AzAtanA hai| 25. zaikSa rAlika dvArA dharmakathA karate samaya
'tumheM smaraNa nahIM' isa prakAra se bole to yaha zaikSa kI paccIsavIM AzAtanA
hai| 26. zaikSa rAtnika dvArA dharmakathA karate samaya 'basa karo' ityAdi kahe
to yaha zaikSa kI chabbIsavIM AzAtanA hai| 27. zaikSa rAlika dvArA dharmakathA
karate samaya yadi pariSad ko bhedana kare, to yaha zaikSa kI sattAIsavIM
AzAtanA hai| 28. zaikSa rAtnika sAdhu dvArA dharmakathA kahate huye usa sabhA ke
nahIM uThane para dUsarI yA tIsarI bAra bhI usI kathA ko kahe to yaha zaikSa kI
aTThAIsavIM AzAtanA hai| 29. zaikSa yadi rAnika sAdhu ke zayyA, saMstAraka ko
paira se ThukarAve to yaha zaikSa kI unatIsavIM AzAtanA hai| 30. zaikSa yadi
rAtnika sAdhu ke zayyA yA Asana para khar3A hotA, baiThatA, sotA hai, to yaha
zaikSa kI tIsavIM AzAtanA hai| _ 31, 32. zaikSa yadi rAnika sAdhu se U~ce yA
samAna Asana para baiThatA hai, to yaha zaikSa kI ikatIsavIM, battIsavIM AzAtanA
hai| 33. rAtnika ke kucha kahane para zaikSa apane Asana para baiThA-baiThA
uttara de, yaha zaikSa kI tetIsavIM AzAtanA hai| vivecana - navIna dIkSita sAdhu
kA kartavya hai ki vaha apane AcArya, upAdhyAya aura dIkSAparyAya meM jyeSTha
sAdhu kA calate, uThate, baiThate samaya unake dvArA kucha pUchane para, gocarI
karate samaya, sadA hI unake vinaya-sammAna kA dhyAna rkhe| yadi vaha apane isa
kartavya meM cUkatA hai, to unakI AzAtanA karatA hai aura apane mokSa ke
sAdhanoM ko khaMDita karatA hai  /  isI bAta ko dhyAna meM rakhakara ye tetIsa
AzAtanAe~ kahI gaI haiN| prakRta sUtra meM cAra AzAtanAoM kA nirdeza kara zeSa
kI yAvat pada se sUcanA kI gaI hai| unakA dazAzrutaskaMdha ke anusAra svarUpa-
nirUpaNa kiyA gayA hai|  //  tRtIya Avazyaka smpnn| 00

Page #103 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[4] Fourth Study: Text of Pratikramana Transgressions Regarding the first
Iryasamiti, if any transgression has occurred, then consider: - From the
perspective of Dravya (substance), whether the body or the living being has not
been observed properly. - From the perspective of Kshetra (space), whether it
has not been observed properly within a radius of three and a half cubits. -
From the perspective of Kala (time), whether it has not been observed properly
without seeing the day and without spending the night. - From the perspective of
Bhava (emotion), whether it has not been observed properly with the use of the
senses. - From the perspective of Guna (quality), whether the Samvaraguna
(virtuous quality) has not been observed properly. If any sin or fault has
occurred regarding the first Iryasamiti, then it is a transgression against the
Devas (gods). Regarding the second Bhasasamiti, if any transgression has
occurred, then consider: - From the perspective of Dravya (substance), whether
harsh, cruel, decisive, violent, piercing, divisive, tormenting of parasites,
and all-sinful language mixed with filth has been spoken. - From the perspective
of Kshetra (space), whether it has been spoken while walking on the road. - From
the perspective of Kala (time), whether it has been spoken in the evening or at
night with loud and harsh words. - From the perspective of Bhava (emotion),
whether it has been spoken with anger or hatred. - From the perspective of Guna
(quality), whether the Samvaraguna (virtuous quality) has not been observed
properly. If any sin or fault has occurred regarding the second Bhasasamiti,
then it is a transgression against the Devas (gods). Regarding the third
Eshanasamiti, if any transgression has occurred, then consider: - From the
perspective of Dravya (substance), whether the sixteen transgressions of Udgaman
(departure), the sixteen transgressions of Utpat (origin), and the ten
transgressions of Eshana (perception), along with the forty-two transgressions
related to food and water, have been committed. - From the perspective of
Kshetra (space), whether it has been consumed after being taken beyond two kosas
(a unit of distance). - From the perspective of Bhava (emotion), whether the
five transgressions of the five mandalas (circles) have not been avoided. - From
the perspective of Guna (quality), whether the Samvaraguna (virtuous quality)
has not been observed properly. If any sin or fault has occurred regarding the
third Eshanasamiti, then it is a transgression against the Devas (gods).
Regarding the fourth Ayanabhandamattanikkhvevana Samiti, if any transgression
has occurred, then consider: - From the perspective of Dravya (substance),
whether it has been taken or kept with negligence. - From the perspective of
Kshetra (space), whether it has been kept in the house or courtyard of a
householder. - From the perspective of Kala (time), whether the proper time for
discarding it has not been observed. - From the perspective of Bhava (emotion),
whether it has been enjoyed with attachment and delusion. - From the perspective
of Guna (quality), whether the Samvaraguna (virtuous quality) has not been
observed properly. If any sin or fault has occurred regarding the fourth Samiti,
then it is a transgression against the Devas (gods). Regarding the fifth Uccara-
Pasavana-Khel-Jall-Singhan-Paritthavana Samiti, if any transgression has
occurred, then consider: - From the perspective of Dravya (substance), whether
it has been discarded in a high or low place. - From the perspective of Kshetra
(space), whether it has been discarded in the house or courtyard of a
householder. - From the perspective of Bhava (emotion), whether it has not been
done with proper care and attention. - From the perspective of Kala (time),
whether the permission of Sakrendra Maharaj has not been taken before discarding
it. - From the perspective of Dravya (substance), whether it has been discarded
with a small amount of capital. - From the perspective of Kala (time), whether
it has not been washed three times after discarding it. - From the perspective
of Bhava (emotion), whether it has not been done with proper care and attention.
- From the perspective of Kshetra (space), whether it has not been done with
proper care and attention. - From the perspective of Guna (quality), whether the
Samvaraguna (virtuous quality) has not been observed properly. If any sin or
fault has occurred regarding the fifth Samiti, then it is a transgression
against the Devas (gods).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 [4] caturtha adhyayana : pratikramaNa aticAroM kA pATha pahilI iriyAsamiti ke
viSaya jo koI aticAra lAgyo hoya to AloUM, dravya thakI cha kAyA kA jIva joine
na cAlyo hoUM, kSetra thakI sAr3hA tIna hAtha pramANe joine na cAlyo hoUM, kAla
thakI dina ko dekhe binA rAta ko pUMje binA cAlyo hoUM, bhAva thakI upayoga
sahita joine na cAlyo hoU, guNa thakI saMvaraguNa pahilI iriyAsamiti ke viSaya
jo koI pApa doSa lAgyo hoya to devasiya sambandhI tassa micchA mi dukkddN|
dUsarI bhASAsamiti ke viSaya jo koI aticAra lAgyo hoya to AloUM, dravya thakI
bhASA karkazakArI, kaThorakArI, nizcayakArI, hiMsAkArI, chedakArI, bhedakArI,
parajIva kA pIDAkArI, sAvaja savvapApakArI kUr3I mizra bhASA bolyo hoU, kSetra
thakI raste cAlatAM bolyo hoU, kAla thakI pahara rAtri gayA pIche gAr3he gAr3he
zabda bolyo hoU, bhAva thakI rAgadveSa se bolyo hoU, guNa thakI saMvaraguNa
dUsarI bhASAsamiti ke viSaya jo koI pApa doSa lAgyo hoya to devasiya sambandhI
tassa micchA mi dukkddN| tIsarI eSaNAsamiti ke viSaya jo koI aticAra lAgyo hoya
to AloUM, dravya thakI sole udgamaNa kA doSa, sole utpAta kA doSa, daza eSaNA kA
doSa ina bayAlIsa doSa sahita AhAra kA pANI lAyo hoya, kSetra thakI do koza
uparAMta le jAIne bhogavyo hoya, bhAva thakI pA~ca mAMDalA kA doSa na TAlA hoya,
guNa thakI saMvaraguNa, tIsarI eSaNA samiti ke viSaya jo koI pApa doSa lAgyo
hoya, to devasiya sambandhI tassa micchA mi dukkddN| cauthI
AyANabhaMDamattanikkhevaNA samiti ke viSaya jo koI aticAra lAgyA hoya to AloUM,
dravya thakI bhAMDopakaraNa ajayaNA se lIdhA hoya, ajayaNA se rakhyA hoya,
kSetra thakI gRhastha ke ghara AMgaNe rakhyA hoya, kAla thakI kAlokAla
paDilehaNA na kI hoya, bhAva thakI mamatA mUrchA sahita bhogavyA hoya, guNa
thakI saMvaraguNa, cauthI samiti ke viSaya jo koI pApa doSa lAgyo hoya to
devasiya sambandhI tassa micchA mi dukkaDaM  //  4  //  pAMcavIM uccAra-
pAsavaNa-khela-jalla-siMghANa-pariTThAvaNiyAsamiti ke viSaya jo koI aticAra
lAgyo hoya to AloUM, dravya thakI uMcI nIcI jagaha paraThavyo hoya, kSetra thakI
gRhastha ke ghara AMgaNe paraThavyo hoya, bhAva thakI jAtA AvasahI AvasahI na
karI hoya, pariThavate pahale zakrendra mahArAja kI AjJA nahIM lI hoya, thor3I
pU~jIne ghaNo pariThavyo hoya, paraThane ke bAda tIna bAra vosire vosire na
kInho hoya, AvatA ni:sahI na karI hoya, ThikANe AIne kAUsagga na karyo hoya,
guNa thakI saMvara guNa pA~cavIM samiti ke viSaya jo koI pApa, doSa lAgyo hoya
to devasiya sambandhI tassa micchA mi dukkaDaM  //  5  //

Page #104 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Fourth Study: Pratikraman  **[33]**  **1.** For the subject of *Managupti*,
if any transgression occurs, then the *Aaloo*, *Aarambh-Samarambh*, *Vishay-
Kashaya* are the subjects. If the mind is inclined towards wrong thoughts, then
for the *Devasya* related to this, *Tass Miccha Mi Dukkadam*.  **2.** For the
subject of *Vachanagupti*, if any transgression occurs, then the *Aaloo*,
*Vachan Aarambh*, *Sarambh*, *Samarambh*, *Rajkatha*, *Deshkatha*, *Streekatha*,
*Bhattkatha* are the subjects. If any of these four stories are involved, then
for the *Devasya* related to this, *Tass Miccha Mi Dukkadam*.  **3.** For the
subject of *Kayagupti*, if any transgression occurs, then the *Aaloo*, *Kaya
Aarambh*, *Sarambh*, *Samarambh*, *without Puja*, *Ajyanapan*, *Asavadhanapan*,
*spreading hands and feet*, *contracting*, *without Puja*, *fear etc. taking
support* are the subjects. Then for the *Devasya* related to this, *Tass Miccha
Mi Dukkadam*.  **1.** For *Prithvikaaya*, if there is harm to the living beings
of *Prithvikaaya* like *Mitti*, *Mardi*, *Khadi*, *Geru*, *Hingalu*, *Hadtaal*,
*Hadmachi*, *Loon*, *Bhodal*, *Paththar* etc., then for the *Devasya* related to
this, *Tass Miccha Mi Dukkadam*.  **2.** For *Apkaaya*, if there is harm to the
living beings of *Apkaaya* like *Thaar ko Pani*, *Os ko Pani*, *Him ko Pani*,
*Ghada ko Pani*, *Talaab ko Pani*, *Nivaan ko Pani*, *Sankal ko Pani*, *Mishra
Pani*, *Varshad ko Pani* etc., then for the *Devasya* related to this, *Tass
Miccha Mi Dukkadam*.  **3.** For *Teukaaya*, if there is harm to the living
beings of *Teukaaya* like *Khira*, *Angira*, *Bhobal*, *Bhadrsaal*, *Jhaal*,
*Tootti Jhaal*, *Bijli*, *Ulkaapat* etc., then for the *Devasya* related to
this, *Tass Miccha Mi Dukkadam*.  **4.** For *Vaukaaya*, if there is harm to the
living beings of *Vaukaaya* like *Ukkaliyaavaay*, *Mandaliyaavaay*, *Ghanavaay*,
*Ghanagunjavaay*, *Tanavaay*, *Shuddhavaay*, *Saptavaay*, *Vejane Kari*,
*Taalikari*, *Chamrikari* etc., then for the *Devasya* related to this, *Tass
Miccha Mi Dukkadam*.  **5.** For *Vanaspatikaaya*, if there is harm to the
living beings of *Vanaspatikaaya* like *Hari Tarkari*, *Beej*, *Ankur*, *Kan*,
*Kapas*, *Gumma*, *Guccha*, *Lata*, *Leelan*, *Phoolan* etc., then for the
*Devasya* related to this, *Tass Miccha Mi Dukkadam*.  **6.** For *Beindriya*,
if there is harm to the living beings of *Beindriya* like *Lat*, *Gindola*,
*Alasiya Shankh*, *Sancholia*, *Kori*, *Jaloak* etc., then for the *Devasya*
related to this, *Tass Miccha Mi Dukkadam*.  **7.** For *Teindriya*, if there is
harm to the living beings of *Teindriya* like *Kidi Makori*, *Joun*, *Leenkh*,
*Chanchan*, *Maankan*, *Gajai*, *Khajuriya*, *Udhai*, *Dhaneriya* etc., then for
the *Devasya* related to this, *Tass Miccha Mi Dukkadam*.  **8.** For
*Chaturindriya*, if there is harm to the living beings of *Chaturindriya* like
*Teed*, *Patangia*, *Makkhi*, *Machchar*, *Bhanvra*, *Tigori*, *Kasari*,
*Bichchu* etc., then for the *Devasya* related to this, *Tass Miccha Mi
Dukkadam*.  **9.** For *Panchendriya*, if there is harm to the living beings of
*Panchendriya* like *Jalchar*, *Thalchar*, *Khechar*, *Urpar*, *Bhujpar*, *Sanni
Asanni*, *Garbhj*, *Samucchim*, *Paryapta Aparyapta* etc., then for the
*Devasya* related to this, *Tass Miccha Mi Dukkadam*.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 caturtha adhyayana : pratikramaNa ] [33 _ managupti ke viSaya jo koI aticAra
lAgyo hoya to AloU, AraMbha-samAraMbha, viSaya-kaSAya ke viSaya khoTo mana
pravartAvyo hoya to devasiya sambandhI tassa micchA mi dukkaDaM  //  1  //
vacanagupti ke viSaya jo koI aticAra lAgyo hoya to AloU, vacana AraMbha,
sAraMbha, samAraMbha, rAjakathA, dezakathA, strIkathA, bhattakathA ina cAra
kathA meM se koI kathA kI hoya to devasiya sambandhI tassa micchA mi dukkaDaM
//  2  //  kAyagupti ke viSaya jo koI aticAra lAgyo hoya to AloUM, kAyA AraMbha,
sAraMbha, samAraMbha, binA pUMjyAM ajayaNApaNe asAvadhAnapaNe, hAtha-paga
pasArayA hoya, saMkocyA hoya, bina pUjyAM bhItAdika ko oTIgaMNo (sahArA) lIdho
hoya to devasiya sambandhI tassa micchA mi dukkaDaM  //  3  //  pRthvIkAya meM
miTTI, marar3I, khar3I, gerU, hiMgalU, har3atAla, har3amacI, lUNa, bhoDala,
patthara ityAdi pRthvIkAya ke jIvoM kI virAdhanA kI hoya to devasiya sambandhI
tassa micchA mi dukkaDaM  //  1  //  apkAya meM ThAra ko pANI, osa ko pANI, hima
ko pANI, ghar3A ko pANI, talAba ko pANI, nivANa ko pANI, saMkAla ko pANI, mizra
pANI, varSAda ko pANI ityAdi apkAya ke jIvoM kI virAdhanA kI hoya to devasiya
sambandhI tassa micchA mi dukkddN|  /  teukAya meM khIrA, aMgIrA, bhobhala,
bhar3asAla, jhAla, TUTatI jhAla, bijalI, ulkApAta ityAdi teukAya ke jIvoM kI
virAdhanA kI hoya to devasiya sambandhI tassa micchA mi dukkddN| vAukAya meM
ukkaliyAvAya, maMDaliyAvAya, ghaNavAya, ghaNagUMjavAya, taNavAya, zuddhavAya,
sapaTavAya, vIjaNe karI, tAlikarI, camarIkarI ityAdi vAukAya ke jIvoM kI
virAdhanA kI hoya to devasiya sambandhI tassa micchA mi dukkddN| vanaspatikAya
meM harI tarakArI, bIja, aMkura, kaNa, kapAsa, gummA, gucchA, latA, lIlaNa,
phUlaNa ityAdi vanaspatikAya ke jIvoM kI virAdhanA kI hoya to devasiya sambandhI
tassa micchA mi dukkddN| beindriya meM laTa, giMDolA, alasiyA zaMkha,
saMkholiyA, kor3I, jaloka, ityAdi bendriya jIvoM kI virAdhanA kI hoya to
devasiya sambandhI tassa micchA mi dukkddN| teindriya meM kIr3I makor3I, jUM,
lIMkha, cAMcaNa, mAMkaNa, gajAI, khajUriyA, udhaI, dhaneriyA ityAdi teindriya
jIvoM kI virAdhanA kI hoya to devasiya sambandhI tassa micchA mi dukkddN|
caturindriya meM tIr3a, pataMgiyA, makkhI, macchara, bhaMvarA, tigorI, kasArI,
bicchU ityAdi caturindriya jIvoM kI virAdhanA kI hoya to devasiya sambandhI
tassa micchA mi dukkddN| paMcendriya meM jalacara, thalacara, khecara, urapara,
bhujapara, sannI asannI, garbhaja, samucchima, paryAptA aparyAptA ityAdi

Page #105 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  [34] [Essential Sutras] If there is a violation of the five-sense beings,
then it is a great misfortune for the Devasiya. **First:** If any transgression
occurs regarding the first great vow, then consider it a violation: (1)
Indrathavarakaya (2) Bambhathavarakaya (3) Sippathavarakaya (4)
Sammathithavarakaya (5) Payavachathavarakaya (6) Jangamakaya. Violence against
these substances, in the field of all beings, from the time of the beginning of
life to the end of life, with the three karmas and three yogas, if any sin or
fault occurs regarding the first great vow, then it is a great misfortune for
the Devasiya. **Second:** If any transgression occurs regarding the second great
vow, then consider it a violation:  Kohā vā, Lohā vā, Hāsā vā, Kridā
Kutuhalakārī.  Speaking lies through these substances, in the field of all
beings, from the time of the beginning of life to the end of life, with the
three karmas and three yogas, if any sin or fault occurs regarding the second
great vow, then it is a great misfortune for the Devasiya. **Third:** If any
transgression occurs regarding the third great vow, then consider it a
violation:  Kāmarāga, Dṛṣṭirāga, Devata Sambandhi, Manusya - Tiryanch Sambandhi.
Enjoying sensual pleasures through these substances, in the field of all beings,
from the time of the beginning of life to the end of life, with the three karmas
and three yogas, if any sin or fault occurs regarding the third great vow, then
it is a great misfortune for the Devasiya. **Fourth:** If any transgression
occurs regarding the fourth great vow, then consider it a violation:  Sachitta
Parigraha, Achitta Parigraha, Misra Parigraha.  Having attachment to things,
desiring things, keeping needles, thread, and metal as possessions, in the field
of all beings, from the time of the beginning of life to the end of life, with
the three karmas and three yogas, if any sin or fault occurs regarding the
fourth great vow, then it is a great misfortune for the Devasiya. **Fifth:** If
any transgression occurs regarding the fifth great vow, then consider it a
violation:  Char Ahar Asan, Pan, Khayan, Saim, Sitamatra, Lepamatra.  Eating at
night, keeping food, knowing that keeping it is good, in the field of all
beings, from the time of the beginning of life to the end of life, with the
three karmas and three yogas, if any sin or fault occurs regarding the fifth
great vow, then it is a great misfortune for the Devasiya. **Sixth:** If any
transgression occurs regarding the vow of abstaining from food at night, then
consider it a violation:  Char Ahar Asan, Pan, Khayan, Saim, Sitamatra,
Lepamatra.  Eating at night, keeping food, knowing that keeping it is good, in
the field of all beings, from the time of the beginning of life to the end of
life, with the three karmas and three yogas, if any sin or fault occurs
regarding the vow of abstaining from food at night, then it is a great
misfortune for the Devasiya. **Eighteen Sins:** (1) Prāṇātipāta (2) Mṛṣāvāda (3)
Adattādāna (4) Maithuna (5) Parigraha (6) Krodha (7) Māna (8) Māyā (9) Lobha
(10) Rāga (11) Dveṣa (12) Kalaha (13) Abhyākhyāna (14) Paiśunya (15)
Paraparivāda (16) Rati-arati (17) Māyāmoso (18) Mithyādarśana.  If any sin or
fault occurs regarding these eighteen sins, then it is a great misfortune for
the Devasiya. If any sin or fault occurs regarding the five main vows, then it
is a great misfortune for the Devasiya. If any sin or fault occurs regarding the
five virtues, then it is a great misfortune for the Devasiya. If any sin or
fault occurs regarding the thirty-three Ashātanās, including those of the Guru
and elders, then it is a great misfortune for the Devasiya.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 34] [ AvazyakasUtra paMcendriya jIvoM kI virAdhanA kI hoya to devasiya
sambandhI tassa micchA mi dukkddN| pahilA mahAvrata ke viSaya jo koI aticAra
lAgyo hoya to AloU, (1) indathAvara kAya (2) bambhathAvarakAya (3)
sippathAvarakAya (4) sammatIthAvarakAya (5) pAyAvacathAvarakAya (6) jaMgamakAya
dravya se inakI hiMsA kI hoya, kSetra se samasta loka meM, kAla se jAvajIva
taka, bhAva se tIna karaNa tIna yoga se mahAvrata ke viSaya jo koI pApa doSa
lAgyo hoya to devasiya sambandhI tassa micchA mi dukkddN| dUsarA mahAvrata ke
viSaya jo koI aticAra lAgyo hoya to AloUM, kohA vA, lohA vA, hAsA vA, krIr3A
kutuhalakArI dravya se jhUTha bolyo hoUM, kSetra se samasta loka meM, kAla se
jAvajIva taka, bhAva se tIna karaNa tIna yoga se dUsarA mahAvrata ke viSaya jo
koI pApa doSa lAgyo hoya to devasiya sambandhI tassa micchA mi dukkddN| tIsarA
mahAvrata ke viSaya jo koI aticAra lAgyo hoya to AloUM, kAmarAga, dRSTirAga,
devatA sambandhI, manuSya - tiryaMca sambandhI dravya se kAma-bhoga sevyA hoya,
kSetra se samasta loka meM, kAla se jAvajIva taka, bhAva se tIna karaNa tIna
yoga se cauthA mahAvrata ke viSaya jo koI pApa doSa lAgyo hoya to devasiya
sambandhI tassa micchA mi dukkddN| _ pA~cavAM mahAvrata ke viSaya jo koI aticAra
lAgyo hoya to AloU, sacitta parigraha, acitta parigraha, mizra parigraha, dravya
se chati vastu para mUrchA kI hoya, para vastu kI icchA kI hoya, suI kusaga
dhAtu mAtra parigraha rAkhyo hoya, kSetra se samasta loka meM, kAla se jAvajIva
taka, bhAva se tIna karaNa tIna yoga se pA~cavA mahAvrata ke viSaya jo koI pApa
doSa lAgyo hoya to devasiya sambandhI tassa micchA mi dukkddN| chaTThA
rAtribhojanatyAga ke viSaya jo koI aticAra hoya to AloUM, cAra AhAra asaNaM,
pANaM, khAiyaM, sAimaM, sItamAtra, lepamAtra, rAtavAsI rAkhyo hoya, rakhAyo
hoya, rAkhatA pratye bhalo jANyo hoya to devasiya sambandhI tassa micchA mi
dukkddN| aThAraha pApa (1) prANAtipAta (2) mRSAvAda (3) adattAdAna (4) maithuna
(5) parigraha (6) krodha (7) mAna (8) mAyA (9) lobha (10) rAga (11.) dveSa (12)
kalaha (13) abhyAkhyAna (14) paizunya (15) paraparivAda (16) rati-arati (17)
mAyAmoso (18) mithyAdarzana zalya ye aTThAraha pApa sevyA hoya, sevAyA hoya,
sevatA pratye bhalo jANyo hoya to devasiya sambandhI tassa micchA mi dukkddN|
pA~ca mUlaguNa mahAvrata ke viSaya jo koI pApa, doSa lAgyo hoya to devasiya
sambandhI tassa micchA mi dukkaDaM  /  isa uttaraguNa pacakkhANa ke viSaya jo
koI pApa, doSa lAgyo hoya to devasiya sambandhI tassa micchA mi dukkddN| tetIsa
AzAtanA meM guru kI, bar3oM kI, koI bhI AzAtanA huI ho to devasiya sambandhI
tassa micchA mi dukkddN|

Page #106 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Fourth Study: Pratikramana  [35] **Shayyasutra**  I wish to perform
Pratikramana for sleeping. If I have slept for a long time, or slept repeatedly
for a long time, turned over in bed with effort, or turned over repeatedly,
contracted or stretched my limbs with effort, caused pain to six-legged
creatures like lice by harsh touch, coughed without effort or forcefully, said
that the bed is too hard, or made other complaints about the bed, sneezed or
yawned with effort, scratched my body without a purpose, or touched any object,
touched a wet object with awareness, (all these are transgressions while awake
during sleep).  Now, transgressions related to the dream state during sleep are
mentioned: If I have been agitated or disturbed by seeing a dream of war,
marriage, etc., if my mind has been deluded in a dream, if I have engaged in
sexual activity with a woman in a dream, if I have looked at a woman or other
beings with lustful intent, if I have experienced mental defilement, if I have
consumed food or water in a dream, or desired to consume them, then all these
transgressions related to sleep that I have committed, "Tass miccha mi dukkadam"
- may they be nullified.  **Explanation:**  Every part of our soul is bound to
matter. On each part of the soul, there are infinite layers of karma-worms, and
the soul is polluted by this karma-stain. As long as the karma-stain remains,
birth and death, disease and sorrow, and the pain of union and separation will
continue. This has been happening since time immemorial. Only by removing the
karma-worms bound to the soul and making the soul pure and spotless can the
cycle of suffering be destroyed. As the saying goes, "Jalabindunipaten kramaśaḥ
pūryate ghaṭaḥ," a pot is filled drop by drop, and a treasury is filled by
saving penny by penny. The same is true for spiritual practice.  Although all
religious founders and preachers have discussed the importance of wisdom for
spiritual practice from their own perspectives, the depth and sensitivity of the
analysis and discussion found in Jain scriptures is unmatched. Every action in
Jain culture is guided by wisdom. The Dasha Vaikalika Sutra states:  1. Female
practitioners should read "Purisa vippariyasiaye" instead of "Itthi
vippariyasiaye."

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 caturtha adhyayana : pratikramaNa ] [35 zayyAsUtra icchAmi paDikkamiDaM,
pagAmasijAe, nigAmasijjAe, saMthArAuvvaTTaNAe, pariyaTTaNAe, AuMTaNAe,
pasAraNAe, chappaIsaMghaTTaNAe, kUie, kakkarAie, chIe, jaMbhAie, Amose
sasarakkhAmose AulamAulAe, sovaNavattiyAe, itthIvippariyAsiyAe'
diTThivippariyAsiyAe, maNavippariyAsiyAe, pANa-bhoyaNavippariyAsiyAe, jo me
devasio aiyAro kao, tassa micchA mi dukkddN|| bhAvArtha - maiM zayana sambandhI
pratikramaNa karanA cAhatA huuN| zayanakAla meM yadi dera taka sotA hoU~ yA
bAra-bAra bahuta kAla taka sotA rahA hoU~, ayatanA ke sAtha eka bAra karavaTa lI
ho, yA bAra-bAra karavaTa badalI ho, hAtha aura paira Adi aMga ayatanA se sameTe
hoM tathA pasAre hoM, SaTpadI - jUM Adi kSudra jIvoM ko kaThora sparza ke dvArA
pIr3A pahuMcAI ho, binA yatanA ke athavA jora se khAMsA ho, yaha zayyA bar3I
kaThora hai, Adi zayyA ke doSa kahe hoM, ayatanA se chIMka evaM jaMbhAI lI ho,
binA pUMje zarIra ko khujalAyA ho athavA kisI bhI vastu kA sparza kiyA ho,
sacitta rajayukta vastu kA sparza kiyA ho-(ye saba zayanakAlIna jAgate samaya ke
aticAra haiN|) _aba sote samaya svapna-avasthA sambandhI aticAra kahe jAte haiM
- svapna meM yuddha, vivAhAdi ke avalokana se AkulatA-vyAkulatA rahI ho, svapna
meM mana bhrAnta huA ho, svapna meM strI ke sAtha kuzIla sevana kiyA ho, strI
Adi ko anurAga kI dRSTi se dekhA ho, mana meM vikAra AyA ho, svapna dazA meM
rAtri meM AharapAnI kA sevana kiyA ho yA sevana karane kI icchA kI ho, isa
prakAra mere dvArA zayana sambandhI jo bhI aticAra kiyA ho 'tassa micchA mi
dukkar3a' arthAt vaha saba merA pApa niSphala ho| vivecana - hamArI AtmA kA
pratyeka pradeza jar3a se Abaddha-pratibaddha hai| pratyeka Atma-pradeza para
karmakITa ke ananta paTala lage haiM aura usa karma-kAlimA se AtmA kaluSita banI
huI hai| jaba taka karmakAlimA banI rahegI, taba taka janma-maraNa - roga-zoka
aura saMyoga-viyogAdi duHkha bhI bane rheNge| anAdi kAla se aisA hI calA A rahA
hai| Atma-baddha karma-kITa ko haTAkara AtmA ko nirmala zuddha banAne se hI
duHkha paramparA naSTa ho sakatI hai  /  ' jalabindunipAtena kramazaH pUryate
ghaTa:' kI ukti ke anusAra bUMda-bUMda se ghaTa bhara jAtA hai aura pAI-pAI
jor3ate huye tijorI bhara jAtI hai  /  dharma-sAdhanA ke liye bhI ThIka yahI
bAta hai| _ yadyapi sabhI dharma pravartakoM evaM pracArakoM ne apanI apanI
dRSTi se dharmasAdhanA ke liye anivArya viveka kA vivecana kiyA hai, phira bhI
jitanA sUkSma evaM bhAvapUrNa vivecana evaM vizleSaNa jainAgamoM meM kiyA gayA
hai vaisA anyatra nhiiN| jaina saMskRti kI pratyeka kriyA vivekamaya hai  /
dazavaikAlika sUtra meM kahA hai - 1. strI sAdhaka 'itthIvippariyAsiAe' ke
sthAna para 'purisavippariyAsiAe' pddh'eN|

Page #107 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[36] [Essential Sutra] Jayam care, jayam chitte, jayam mase, jayam saye. Jayam
bhujanta bhasanta, pavakammam na bandhai. || One who walks with effort, stands
with effort, sits with effort, sleeps with effort, eats with effort and speaks
with effort, does not bind the karma of sin.  Even the most ordinary seeker, if
he keeps his focus on small practices, does not forget the effort of
discernment, one day he can become a very high seeker. And conversely,
neglecting even ordinary mistakes and not being discerning can lead to the
downfall of even a higher seeker. This is why Jain ethics emphasizes paying
attention to even subtle mistakes.  This sutra is for the atonement of excesses
related to sleep. Whatever physical, verbal and mental mistakes have been made
while sleeping, whatever transgression of restraint has been made, whatever kind
of emotional imbalance has occurred, this sutra provides a provision for
repentance - for giving 'miccha mi dukkad' for all of it.  Meaning of specific
words - Pagamasijae - the Sanskrit form is 'prakamashayya'. Prakamashayya means
- sleeping more than the limit. Nigamasijae - sleeping repeatedly for a long
time, is nikamashaya. Kuiye - coughing. Kakkaraiye - the word 'karkarayit' means
to grumble. If the bed is uneven or hard, the sadhu should use it with
equanimity and peace. The seeker should not grumble or mutter about the defects
of the bed. Amose - touching the body or other objects without wiping them.
Sasarakkhamose - touching an object that is contaminated with conscious dust.
Aulmaulaae - with anxiety and agitation. Sovanvattiae - due to the perception of
a dream.  This bed-sutra should be read by the seeker whenever he wakes up from
sleep. It is also called the text for the removal of sleep defects. After
reading this text, one should also read the text of one person or four people.
Bhikshadoṣanivṛttisūtra Padikkhamāmi goyaraggachari yae, bhikkaayariyae ugghāḍa
k vāḍ-ugghāḍanāe, sāṇāvacchādārāsaṁghaṭṭanāe, maṇḍī-pāhuḍiāe, balipahuḍiāe,
uvaṇāpāhuḍiāe, saṁkie, sahasāgāre, aṇeṣaṇāe, pāṇeṣaṇāe pāṇabhoyanaae,
biyabhōyanaae, hariyabhōyanaae, pacchākammiāe, purekammiāe, adiṭṭhaḍāe,
dagasaṁsaṭṭhaḍāe, rayasaṁsaṭṭhaḍāe, pārisāḍaniāe, pāriṭṭhāvaniāe, ohāsaṇa-
bhikkhāe, jaṁ uggemeṇaṁ, uppayaneṣaṇāe aparisuḍḍhaṁ pariggahiyam, paribhuṭṭa vā
jaṁ na pariṭṭhaviyam, tassa miccha mi dukkad.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 36] [ AvazyakasUtra jayaM care, jayaM ciTTe, jayamAse, jayaM sye| jayaM
bhujaMto bhAsaMto, pAvakammaM na bNdhi|| jo sAdhaka yatanA se calatA hai, yatanA
se khar3A hotA hai, yatanA se baiThatA hai, yatanA se sotA hai, yatanA se
bhojana karatA aura bolatA hai, vaha pApakarma kA bandha nahIM krtaa| sAdhAraNa
se sAdhAraNa sAdhaka bhI choTI-choTI sAdhanAoM para lakSya detA rahe, viveka-
yatanA ko vismRta na kare to eka dina vaha bahuta U~cA sAdhaka bana sakatA hai
aura isake viparIta sAdhAraNa-sI bhUloM kI upekSA karate rahane se tathA viveka
nahIM rakhane se uccatara zreNI ke sAdhaka kA bhI adhaHpatana ho sakatA hai  /
yahI kAraNa hai ki jaina AcArazAstra sUkSma bhUloM para bhI dhyAna rakhane kA
saMketa karatA hai| prastuta sUtra zayana sambandhI aticAroM kA pratikramaNa
karane ke liye hai  /  sote samaya jo bhI zArIrika, vAcika evaM mAnasika kisI
bhI prakAra kI bhUla huI ho, saMyama kA atikramaNa kiyA ho kisI bhI prakAra kA
bhAva-viparyAsa huA ho, usa sabake liye pazcAttApa karane kA - 'micchA mi
dukkar3a' dene kA vidhAna prastuta zayyA-sUtra meM kiyA gayA hai| viziSTa zabdoM
kA artha - pagAmasijAe - kA saMskRta rUpa 'prakAmazayyA' hotA hai  /
prakAmazayyA kA artha hai - maryAdA se adhika sonaa| nigAmasijAe - bAra-bAra
adhika kAla taka sote rahanA, nikAmazayyA hai  /  kUie - khAMsate huye|
kakkarAie - 'karkarAyita' zabda kA artha hai kudd'kudd'aanaa| zayyA viSama ho yA
kaThora ho to sAdhu ko samatA evaM zAMti ke sAtha usakA sevana karanA caahiye|
sAdhaka ko zayyA ke doSa kahate huye kur3akur3AnA-bar3abar3AnA nahIM cAhiye  /
Amose - pramArjana kiye binA zarIra yA anya vastu kA sparza krnaa|
sasarakkhAmose - sacitta raja se yukta vastu ko chuunaa| AulamAulAe -
AkulatAvyAkulatA se  /  sovaNavattiyAe - svapna ke pratyaya - nimitta se|
prastuta-zayyA-sUtra ko, jaba bhI sAdhaka sokara uThe, avazya par3hanA cAhiye  /
ise nidrAdoSanivRtti kA pATha bhI kahA jAtA hai  /  yaha pATha par3hakara bAda
meM eka logassa athavA cAra logassa kA pATha bhI par3hanA caahiye|
bhikSAdoSanivRttisUtra paDikkamAmi goyaraggacari yAe, bhikkhAyariyAe ugghADa ka
vADa-ugghADaNAe, sANAvacchAdArAsaMghaTTaNAe, maMDI-pAhuDiyAe, balipAhuDiyAe,
uvaNApAhuDiyAe, saMkie, sahasAgAre, aNesaNAe, pANesaNAe pANabhoyaNAe,
bIyabhoyaNAe, hariyabhoyaNAe, pacchAkammiyAe, purekammiyAe, adiTThahaDAe,
dagasaMsaTThahaDAe, rayasaMsaTThahaDAe, pArisADaNiyAe, pAriTThAvaNiyAe, ohAsaNa-
bhikkhAe, jaM uggameNaM, uppAyaNesaNAe aparisuddhaM pariggahiyaM, paribhutta vA
jaM na pariTThaviyaM, tassa micchA mi dukkddN|

Page #108 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Fourth Study: Pratikraman  [37 Meaning - In the form of Gocharcharya
Bhikchacharya, I repent for any transgression-fault that has been committed,
whether known or unknown.  Playing with half-open doors, touching a dog, calf,
or child, taking Mandipraabhratik Agrapind, taking food prepared for Bali,
taking food kept aside for Bhikshus, taking food with doubts like Adhakarma,
taking food hastily without thinking, taking food without Aeshna
(investigation), making any mistake in Aeshna of drinking water, food, etc.,
taking food containing any living being, taking Beejbhushan (food containing
seeds), taking Haritbhushan (food containing sentient plants), taking food after
giving food to Sadhu, taking food before giving food to Sadhu, taking food
without seeing, taking food touched by sentient water, taking food touched by
sentient dust, taking food given in the way of Parishaatanika, taking food given
in the vessel of Parishthapanika, or taking food without reason, taking food
that is not fit for consumption, taking food without reason, taking food with 16
Udgam Doshas, taking food with 16 Utpada Doshas, taking food with 10 Doshas
related to Aeshna and Grahaneshna.  If I have taken food or water contrary to
the Sadhumaryada, knowing it to be impure, but not repenting, then all my sins
are false.  Discussion - Jainism is a religion based on non-violence. It is an
ocean of compassion, a storehouse of mercy, a lake of goodwill, a source of
sweetness, and a source of compassion. It takes care in every practice and gives
great importance to the purity of food, conduct, and behavior for the progress
of practice.  Human life is essential for the practice of restraint, and food
and water are essential for sustaining life. Food and water cannot be prepared
without the beginning and end, and the Sadhu is a renunciant of the beginning
and end. What should be done in such a situation? Jain Agamas have provided a
very beautiful solution to this problem. The present text is indicative of that
solution. Firstly, the Sadhu should earn a living through Bhikhavritti and
should take only pure food in Bhikhavritti. The faults from which he has to
abstain are mentioned in this text.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 caturtha adhyayana : pratikramaNa ] [37 bhAvArtha - gocaracaryA rUpa
bhikSAcaryA meM, yadi jJAta athavA ajJAta kisI bhI rUpa meM jo bhI aticAra-doSa
lagA ho, usakA pratikramaNa karatA huuN| ardha khule kivAr3oM ko khelanA, kutte,
bachar3e aura baccoM kA saMghaThThA-sparza karanA, maNDIprAbhRtika agrapiNDa
lenA, baliprAbhRtika-bali ke liye taiyAra kiyA huA bhojana lenA,
sthApanAprAbhRtika-bhikSuoM ko dene ke uddezya se alaga rakhA huA bhojana lenA,
AdhAkarma Adi kI zaMkA vAlA AhAra lenA, sahasAkArabinA soce-vicAre zIghratA se
AhAra lenA, binA eSaNA - chAna-bIna kie lenA, pAna-bhojana-pAnI Adi pIne yogya
vastu kI eSaNA meM kisI prakAra kI truTi karanA , jisameM koI prANI ho, aisA
bhojana lenA, bIjabhojana-bIjoM vAlA bhojana lenA, harita-bhojana-sacitta
vanaspatti vAlA bhojana, pazcAt-karma-sAdhu ko AhAra dene ke bAda tadartha
sacitta jala se hAtha yA pAtroM ko dhone Adi ke kAraNa lagane vAlA doSa,
pura:karmasAdhu ko AhAra dene ke pahale sacitta jala se hAtha yA pAtroM ko dhone
Adi ke kAraNa lagane vAlA doSa, adRSTAhata-binA dekhA lAyA bhojana lenA,
udakasaMsRSTAhRta-sacitta jala ke sAtha sparza vAlI vastu lenA, sacitta raja se
spRSTa vastu lenA, pArizATanikA-dete samaya mArga meM giratA-bikharatA huA diyA
jAne vAlA AhAra lenA, pAriSThApanikAAhAra dene ke pAtra meM pahale se rahe huye
kisI bhojana ko DAlakara diyA jAne vAlA anya bhojana lenA, athavA binA kAraNa
'paraThane-yogya' kAlAtIta ayogya vastu grahaNa krnaa| binA kAraNa mA~gakara
viziSTa vastu lenA, udgama-AdhAkarma Adi 16 udgama doSoM se yukta bhojana lenA,
utpAdana-dhAtrI Adi 16 sAdhu kI tarapha se lagane vAle utpAdanA doSoM sahita
AhAra lenaa| eSaNA- grahaNaiSaNA saMbaMdhI zaMkita Adi 10 doSoM se sahita AhAra
lenaa| uparyukta doSoM vAlA azuddha-sAdhumaryAdA ke viparIta AhAra-pAnI grahaNa
kiyA ho, grahaNa kiyA huA bhoga liyA ho, kintu dUSita jAnakara bhI paraThA na
ho, to merA samasta pApa mithyA ho| vivecana - jainadharma ahiMsApradhAna dharma
hai  /  ahiMsaka karuNA kA sAgara, dayA kA AgAra, sadbhAvanA kA sarovara,
sarasatA kA srota tathA anukampA kA utsa hotA hai| vaha pratyeka sAdhanA meM
upayoga-sAvadhAnI rakhatA hai tathA sAdhanA kI pragati ke liye khAna-pAna,
AcAra-vicAra, AhAra-vihAra kI vizuddhi ko bar3A mahattva detA hai|
saMyamasAdhanA ke liye mAnava jIvana Avazyaka hai aura jIvana ko TikAye rahane
ke liye AhArapAnI kA sevana anivArya hai| AhAra-pAnI Arambha-samAraMbha ke binA
taiyAra nahIM hotA aura sAdhu AraMbha samAraMbha kA tyAgI hotA hai| aisI sthiti
meM kyA kiyA jAye ? jainAgamoM meM isa samasyA kA bahuta hI sundara samAdhAna
kiyA hai  /  prastuta pATha usI samAdhAna kA bodhaka hai| prathama to yaha ki
sAdhu bhikSAvRtti se jIvananirvAha kare aura bhikSAvRtti meM bhI nirdoSa AhAra
grahaNa kre| use jina doSoM se bacanA hai, ve doSa isa pATha meM pratipAdita
kiye gaye haiN|

Page #109 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 38] [Essential Sutra]  For a Jain monk, the provision of consuming food with
nine types of purity (Navakoti) is made. The nine types are as follows:  * Not
cooking food oneself. * Not asking others to cook for oneself. * Not approving
of the cooking process. * Not buying ready-made food. * Not asking others to buy
food for oneself. * Not approving of the purchase of food. * Not causing harm
oneself. * Not causing harm through others. * Not approving of the act of
causing harm.  In this way, Jainism emphasizes the observance of very subtle
non-violence.  **Meaning of Specific Terms:**  * **Gocharacharya:** Just as a
cow in the forest does not uproot grass from the ground but eats it from above
while moving forward and satisfies its hunger, similarly, a monk also satisfies
his hunger by consuming a little food without causing any harm to a householder.
The Dasha Vaikalik Sutra uses the analogy of a bee (Madhukar) for this. A bee
also satisfies its own needs by consuming a little nectar from flowers without
causing any harm to them.  * **Kapatodghatan:** Opening the closed doors of a
householder's house to take food and water is considered faulty, because there
is a possibility of harming living beings due to the opening of the doors
without cleaning them. Entering the house and taking food also indicates the
rudeness of the seeker, because the householder may be engaged in some special
work inside his house and if the seeker suddenly opens the door and enters, it
is not appropriate. This is the path of discharge. If it is necessary to take
something for a specific reason and the doors have to be opened carefully, then
they can be opened by oneself or by someone else. This is the path of exception.
* **Mandipraabhratika:** This means taking the first portion (Agripinda). The
first portion of the prepared food that is kept aside for the sake of merit is
called Agripinda.  * **Bali praabhratika:** Food prepared for the worship of
deities, etc., is called Bali. It is not appropriate for a monk to consume such
food.  * **Sankie:** While taking food, one should never consume food that is
suspected of having any kind of fault related to food, such as half-cooked food,
etc.  * **Sahsaakar:** Acting hastily, whether in worldly or spiritual matters,
is harmful in both respects.  * **Adrishtahat:** When a monk arrives at a
householder's house, he should take whatever he needs by seeing it with his own
eyes. Taking something without seeing it leads to the fault of Adrishtahat. The
meaning is that the object to be given may be placed on some sentient being, and
therefore, taking it may lead to the fault of harming living beings. Therefore,
taking anything without seeing it is not acceptable.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 38] [ AvazyakasUtra jaina bhikSu ke liye navakoTi-parizuddha AhAra grahaNa
karane kA prAvadhAna kiyA gayA hai  /  navakoTi isa prakAra haiM - na svayaM
bhojana pakAnA, na apane liye dUsaroM se kahakara pakavAnA, na pakAte huye kA
anumodana krnaa| na khuda banA-banAyA kharIdanA, na apane liye dUsaroM se
kharIdavAnA aura na kharIdane vAle kA anumodana krnaa| na svayaM kisI ko pIr3A
denA, na dUsare se pIr3A dilavAnA aura na pIr3A dene vAle kA anumodana krnaa|
isa prakAra jainadharma meM bahuta sUkSma ahiMsA kI maryAdA kA dhyAna rakhA gayA
hai| viziSTa zabdoM kA artha - gocaracaryA - arthAt jisa prakAra eka gAya vana
meM ghAsa kA tinakA jar3a se na ukhAr3a kara, Upara se khAtI huI ghUmatI-Age
bar3ha jAtI hai aura apanI kSudhAnivRtti kara letI hai , isI prakAra muni bhI
kisI gRhastha ko pIr3A na detA huA thor3A-thor3A bhojana grahaNa karake apanI
kSudhAnivRtti karatA hai  /  dazavaikAlika sUtra meM isake liye madhukara arthAt
bhramara kI upamA dI hai| bhramara bhI phUloM ko binA kucha hAni pahu~cAye
thor3A-thor3A rasa grahaNa karatA huA, Atma-tRpti kara letA hai| kapATodghATana
- gRhastha ke ghara ke dvAra ke baMda kivAr3a khola kara AhAra-pAnI lenA sadoSa
hai , kyoMki binA pramArjana kie kapATa-udghATana se jIva-virAdhanA kI
sambhAvanA rahatI hai| isa prakAra ghara meM praveza karake AhAra lene se
sAdhaka kI asabhyatA bhI pratIta hotI hai, kyoMki gRhastha apane ghara ke andara
kisI vizeSa kArya meM saMlagna ho aura sAdhu acAnaka kivAr3a kholakara andara
jAe to yaha ucita nahIM hai  /  yaha utsarga mArga hai| yadi kisI vizeSa kAraNa
se Avazyaka vastu lenI ho tathA yatanApUrvaka kivAr3a kholane hoM to svayaM
khole athavA kisI anya se khulavAye jA sakate haiM  /  yaha apavAda mArga hai|
maMDIprAbhRtikA - arthAt agrapiNDa lenaa| taiyAra kiye huye bhojana ke kucha
agra-aMza ko puNyArtha nikAla kara jo rakha diyA jAtA hai, vaha agrapiMDa
kahalAtA hai| baliprAbhRtikA - devI-devatA Adi kI pUjA ke liye taiyAra kiyA huA
bhojana bali kahalAtA hai| aisA AhAra lenA sAdhu ko nahIM kalpatA hai| saMkie -
AhAra lete samaya bhojana ke sambandha meM kisI prakAra kI bhI AdhAkarmAdi doSa
kI AzaMkA se yukta, aisA AhAra kadApi nahIM lenA caahiye| sahasAkAra - 'utAvalA
so bAvalA' zIghratA meM kArya karanA, kyA laukika aura kyA lokottara donoM hI
dRSTiyoM se ahitakara hai| _ adRSTAhata - gRhastha ke ghara para pahu~cakara
sAdhu ko jo bhI vastu lenI ho, vaha jahAM rakhI ho, svayaM apanI A~khoM se
dekhakara lenI caahiye| binA dekhe hI kisI vastu ko grahaNa karane se adRSTAhata
doSa lagatA hai| bhAva yaha hai ki deya vastu na mAlUma kisI sacitta vastu para
rakhI huI ho, ata: usake grahaNa karane se jIvavirAdhanA doSa laga sakatA hai  /
ataeva binA dekhe kisI bhI vastu ko lenA grAhya nahIM hai|

Page #110 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Fourth Study: Pratikramana  [39 _ Avabhasana Bhiksha - Begging for a specific
item in food.  Svadhyaya and Pratilekhana Dosha Nivritti Sutra]  "I do
Pratikramana for Svadhyaya and Pratilekhana. If, due to carelessness, I have not
done Svadhyaya in the four periods of the day and night, the first and last
periods, or if I have not done Pratilekhana of clothes, utensils, etc. in the
morning and evening, or if I have not done it properly, or if I have not done
the cleaning, or if I have not done it properly, then all these transgressions,
violations, excesses, or misconducts are false and void for me."  **Meaning:** I
do Pratikramana for Svadhyaya and Pratilekhana. If, due to carelessness, I have
not done Svadhyaya in the four periods of the day and night, the first and last
periods, or if I have not done Pratilekhana of clothes, utensils, etc. in the
morning and evening, or if I have not done it properly, or if I have not done
the cleaning, or if I have not done it properly, then all these transgressions,
violations, excesses, or misconducts are false and void for me.  **Discussion:**
(Q) "Venerable Sir, what does Pratilekhana of time generate in a being?" (A)
"Pratilekhana of time destroys the karma that obscures knowledge. It leads to
the attainment of knowledge."  - Uttaraadhyayanasutra, Chapter 29. The above
sutra is about Pratilekhana of time. The Agamas state that one should do regular
Svadhyaya in the early and late parts of the day, and similarly in the early and
late parts of the night, i.e., in all four periods of day and night. It is also
necessary to do Pratilekhana of clothes, utensils, cleaning, etc. If, due to
carelessness, one makes a mistake in these two essential duties, there is a
provision for doing Pratikramana to purify oneself.  Time plays a crucial role
in the creation, sustenance, destruction, separation of the united, and union of
the separated. Therefore, it is essential to keep track of time to illuminate
every aspect of life's progress. One should perform the actions that are
appropriate for the time. Therefore, in the Uttaraadhyayanasutra, the scholar
has set a timetable for the Sadhus. It has also been specified that "each action
should be done at the appointed time." The first and last periods of the day and
night are designated for Svadhyaya. Thus, there are four periods of Svadhyaya in
a day and night.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 caturtha adhyayana : pratikramaNa ] [39 _ avabhASaNa bhikSA - bhojana meM kisI
viziSTa vastu kI yAcanA krnaa| svAdhyAya tathA pratilekhanAdoSanivRtti sUtra
paDikka mAmi, cAukkAlaM sajjhAyassa akaraNayAe, ubhao kAlaM bhaMDovagaraNassa
appaDilehaNAe, duppaDilehaNAe, appamajaNAe, duppamajaNAe, aikkame, vaikkame,
aiyAre, aNAyAre jo me devasio aiyAro kao tassa micchA mi dukkddN| bhAvArtha -
svAdhyAya tathA pratilekhanA sambandhI pratikramaNa karatA huuN| yadi
pramAdavaza dina aura rAtri ke prathama tathA antima prahara rUpa cAroM kAloM
meM svAdhyAya na kiyA ho, prAtaH tathA saMdhyA donoM kAla meM vastrapAtra Adi
bhANDopakaraNa kI pratilekhanA na kI ho athavA samyak-prakAra se pratilekhanA na
kI ho, pramArjanA na kI ho, athavA vidhipUrvaka pramArjanA na kI ho, ina kAraNoM
se atikrama, vyatikrama, aticAra athavA anAcAra lagA ho to ve saba mere pApa
mithyA-niSphala hoN| vivecana - (pra.) kAlapaDilehaNayAe NaM bhaMte! jIve kiM
jaNayai ? (u.) kAlapaDilehaNayAe NaM nANAvaraNijjaM kammaM khvei| he bhagavan !
kAla kI pratilekhanA karane se kyA phala hotA hai ? kAla kI pratilekhanA se
jJAnAvaraNakarma kA kSaya hotA hai aura jJAna guNa kI prApti hotI hai| -
uttarAdhyayana sUtra a.29 uparyukta sUtra kAla-pratilekhanA kA hai  /  Agama meM
kathana hai ki dina ke pUrva bhAga tathA uttara bhAga meM, isI prakAra rAtri ke
pUrva bhAga tathA uttara bhAga meM, arthAt divasa evaM rAtri ke cAroM kAloM meM
niyamita svAdhyAya karanA caahiye| sAtha hI vastra-pAtra rajoharaNa Adi kI
pratilekhanA bhI Avazyaka hai| yadi pramAdavaza ukta donoM Avazyaka kartavyoM
meM bhUla ho jAya to usakI zuddhi ke liye pratikramaNa karane kA vidhAna hai|
pratyeka vastu ko utpanna karane, TikAye rakhane, naSTa karane aura saMyukta ko
viyukta tathA viyukta ko saMyukta karane meM kAla kA mahattvapUrNa yogadAna hai
/  ata: jIvana kI pragati ke pratyeka aMga ko Alokita rakhane ke liye kAla kI
pratilekhanA karanA arthAt kAla kA dhyAna rakhanA atIva Avazyaka hai| jisa kAla
meM jo kriyA karanA cAhiye usa kAla meM vahI kriyA kI jAnI cAhiye  /  isaliye
uttarAdhyayana sUtra meM zAstrakAra ne sAdhuoM ke liye kAlakrama (Time Table)
nirdhArita kara diyA hai| sAtha hI yaha bhI nirdiSTa kara diyA hai - 'kAle kAlaM
samAyare' arthAt pratyeka kArya niyata samaya para hI karanA caahiye| divasa
aura rAtri kA prathama aura antima prahara svAdhyAya ke liye nizcita kiyA gayA
hai| isa prakAra ahorAtra meM svAdhyAya ke cAra kAla haiN|

Page #111 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  [40]  **Self-study (Swadhyay) is the supreme austerity.** It is a powerful
tool for acquiring new knowledge, preserving acquired knowledge, and for the
eradication of the karma that obscures knowledge. A major characteristic of
self-study is the concentration of the mind. Self-study stops the restless mind
from wandering and makes it focused. This is why four periods of the day are
designated for it.  Abhaydeva Suri, the commentator of the **Sthananga Sutra**,
defines self-study as "studying with proper decorum" - '**Suṣṭhu āmaryādayā
adhiyate iti svādhyāyaḥ**'.  The **Sthananga Sutra** (2.130) compares self-study
to a **Nandanavana** (heavenly garden). Just as in the Nandanavana, every
direction offers magnificent views that delight the mind, and a person forgets
all their troubles upon entering it, similarly, in the Nandanavana of self-
study, one finds beautiful and instructive sights, and the mind, freed from
worldly worries, begins to wander in a transcendental realm. Self-study is like
a lamp for our dark life path.  **Transcription (Pratilekhana):** A monk must
transcribe all their possessions, such as clothes, utensils, etc., in the
morning and evening. Using these possessions without looking at them leads to
the sin of violence. Not performing self-study or transcription at the
prescribed time, performing it at a forbidden time, not having faith in self-
study and transcription, falsely representing them, or not performing them in
the proper way, are all transgressions (**Aticara-dosha**) related to self-study
and transcription.  This **Kal-Pratilekhana Sutra** should be read after
performing self-study and transcription. The meaning of the terms **Atikrama**,
etc., that appear in this text is as follows:  1. **Atikrama:** To think of
breaking a vow or promise. 2. **Vyatikrama:** To be inclined to break a vow. 3.
**Aticara:** To partially break a vow. 4. **Anacara:** To completely break a
vow.  **Thirty-three Verses:**  I renounce the one-fold un-restrained. I
renounce the two-fold bonds - the bond of attachment (raga) and the bond of
aversion (dvesha). I renounce the three-fold punishments - the punishment of the
mind (manadanda), the punishment of the body (kayadanda), and the punishment of
the lifespan (vayadanda).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 40] [ AvazyakasUtra svAdhyAya parama tapa hai| navIna jJAnArjana ke liye,
arjita jJAna ko surakSita rakhane ke liye tathA jJAnAvaraNakarma kI nirjarA ke
liye svAdhyAya hI eka sabala sAdhana hai  /  svAdhyAya kI eka bar3I vizeSatA
haicitta kI ekAgratA  /  svAdhyAya se caMcala citta kI daur3adhUpa ruka jAtI hai
aura vaha kendrita ho jAtA hai  /  yahI kAraNa hai ki usake liye cAra prahara
niyata kiye gaye haiN| sthAnAMgasUtra ke TIkAkAra abhayadevasUri ne svAdhyAya kA
artha karate huye likhA hai - bhalibhAMti maryAdA ke sAtha adhyayana karanA
svAdhyAya hai - 'suSThu AmaryAdayA adhIyate iti svaadhyaayH'| - sthAnAMga 2
sthA. 130 zAstrakAroM ne svAdhyAya ko nandanavana kI upamA dI hai| jisa prakAra
nandanavana meM pratyeka dizA ke bhavya se bhavya dRzya mana ko Anandita karane
ke liye hote haiM, vahA~ jAkara mAnava saba prakAra ke kaSToM ko bhUla jAtA hai,
usI prakAra svAdhyAya rUpa nandanavana meM bhI eka se eka sundara evaM
zikSAprada dRzya dekhane ko milate haiM tathA mana duniyAvI jhaMjhaToM se mukta
hokara eka alaukika loka meM vicaraNa karane lagatA hai| svAdhyAya hamAre
andhakArapUrNa jIvanapatha ke liye dIpaka ke samAna hai| pratilekhanA - sAdhu ke
pAsa jo bhI vastra-pAtra Adi upAdhi ho, usakI prAta:kAla evaM sAyaMkAla
pratilekhanA karanI hotI hai| upadhi ko binA dekhe pUMje upayoga meM lAne se
hiMsA kA doSa lagatA hai| zAstrokta samaya para svAdhyAya yA pratilekhanA na
karanA, zAstraniSiddha samaya para karanA, svAdhyAya evaM pratilekhanA para
zraddhA na rakhanA tathA isa sambandha meM mithyA prarUpaNA karanA, yA ucita
vidhi se na karanA Adi svAdhyAya evaM pratilekhana rUpa aticAra-doSa haiN| yaha
kAla-pratilekhanA sUtra svAdhyAya tathA pratilekhana karane ke bAda par3hanA
caahiye| prastuta pATha meM Aye huye atikrama Adi kA artha isa prakAra hai - 1.
atikrama - gRhIta vrata yA pratijJA ko bhaMga karane kA vicAra krnaa| 2.
vyatikrama - vratabhaMga ke liye udyata honaa| 3. aticAra - AMzika rUpa se vrata
ko khaMDita krnaa| 4. anAcAra - vrata ko pUrNa rUpa se bhaMga krnaa| tetIsa bola
kA pATha paDikkamAmi egavihe asNjme| paDikkamAmi dohiM baMdhaNehi-
rAgabaMdhaNeNaM, dosbNdhnnennN| paDikkamAmi tihiM daMDehi-maNadaMDeNaM,
vayadaMDeNaM, kaaydNddennN|

Page #112 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Fourth Study: Pratikramana  I repent for the three types of Gupptis -
Manoguppti, Vachanaguppti, and Kayaguppti.  I repent for the three types of
Sallis - Mayashally, Niyanashally, and Micchadansanasally.  I repent for the
three types of Garavas - Iddhigaurav, Rasagaurav, and Sayagaurav. I repent for
the three types of Viradhanas - Nanaviradhana, Dansanaviradhana, and
Charittaviradhana.  **Meaning:**  I repent for all the transgressions and faults
that I have committed due to the non-observance of the principle of Avirati,
which is one form of Asanaya.  I repent for the faults that have arisen due to
the two types of bonds - Raga Bandhan and Dvesha Bandhan.  I repent for the
faults that have arisen due to the three types of punishments - Manodanda,
Vachandanda, and Kayadanda.  I repent for the faults that have arisen due to the
three types of Gupptis - Manoguppti, Vachanaguppti, and Kayaguppti.  I repent
for the faults that have arisen due to the three types of Sallis - Mayashally,
Niyanashally, and Micchadansanasally.  I repent for the faults that have arisen
due to the three types of Garavas - Iddhigaurav, Rasagaurav, and Sayagaurav.  I
repent for the faults that have arisen due to the three types of Viradhanas -
Nanaviradhana, Dansanaviradhana, and Charittaviradhana.  I repent for the four
types of Kasayas - Kohakasaya, Manakasaya, Mayakasaya, and Lobhakasaya.  I
repent for the four types of Sannahas - Aharasannaha, Bhayasannaha,
Mehunasannaha, and Pariggahasannaha.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 caturtha adhyayana : pratikramaNa ] paDikkamAmi tihiM guttIhiM - maNaguttIe,
vayaguttIe, kAyaguttIe  /  paDikkamAmi tihiM sallehiM - mAyAsalleNaM,
niyANasalleNaM, micchAdaMsaNasalleNaM  /  - 7 paDikkamAmi tihiM gAravehiM -
iDDhIgAraveNaM, rasagAraveNaM, sAyAgAraveNaM  /  paDikkamAmi tihiM virAhaNAhiM -
nANavirAhaNAe, daMsaNavirAhaNAe, carittavirAhaNAe  /  - bhAvArtha avirati rUpa
ekavidha asaMyama kA AcaraNa karane se jo bhI aticAra-doSa lagA ho, usakA
pratikramaNa karatA hU~  /  do prakAra ke bandhanoM se lage doSoM kA
pratikramaNa karatA hU~ arthAt unase pIche haTatA huuN| do prakAra 1.
rAgabandhana evaM 2. dveSabandhana  /  tIna prakAra ke daNDoM se lage doSoM kA
pratikramaNa karatA hU~  /  tIna daNDa 1. manodaNDa, 2. vacanadaNDa evaM 3.
kAyadaNDa  /  tIna prakAra kI guptiyoM se arthAt unakA AcaraNa karate huye
pramAdavaza jo bhI guptiyoM sambandhI viparItAcaraNarUpa doSa lage hoM, unakA
pratikramaNa karatA hU~  /  tIna gupti - manogupti, vacanagupti evaM kAyagupti
/  mAyAzalya, ke bandhana haiM -- tIna prakAra ke zalyoM se hone vAle doSoM kA
pratikramaNa karatA huuN| tIna zalya nidAnazalya aura mithyAdarzanazalya | [ 41
- -- tIna prakAra ke gaurava - abhimAna se lagane vAle doSoM kA pratikramaNa
karatA hU~  /  tIna gaurava 1. AcArya Adi pada kI prApti rUpa Rddhi kA ahaMkAra
- Rddhigaurava  /  2. madhura Adi rasa kI prApti kA abhimAnarasagaurava tathA 3
sAtAgaurava sAtA kA artha hai Arogya evaM zArIrika sukha  /  Arogya, zArIrika
sukha tathA vastra pAtra zayanAsana Adi sukha-sAdhanoM ke milane para abhimAna
karanA evaM na milane para unakI AkAMkSA karanA sAtAgaurava 1 - tIna prakAra kI
virAdhanAoM se hone vAle doSoM kA pratikramaNa karatA huuN| ve isa prakAra haiM
1. jJAna kI tathA jJAnI kI niMdA karanA, jJAnArjana meM Alasya karanA, akAla-
svAdhyAya karanA Adi jJAnavirAdhanA hai  /  2. samyaktva evaM samyaktvadhArI
sAdhaka kI virAdhanA karanA darzanavirAdhanA hai  /  3. ahiMsA, satya Adi
cAritra kA samyak pAlana na karanA, usameM doSa lagAnA cAritravirAdhanA hai  /
paDikkamAmi cauhiM kasAehiM - kohakasAeNaM, mANakasAeNaM, mAyAkasAeNaM,
lobhakasAeNaM  /  paDikkamAmi cauhiM sannAhiM - AhArasannAe, bhayasannAe,
mehuNasannAe, prigghsnnaae|

Page #113 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[42] I repent for the four types of Vikatha - Itthikaha, Bhattakha, Desakha, and
Rayakha. I repent for the four types of Dhyana - Attena Dhyana, Ruddena Dhyana,
Dhammena Dhyana, and Sukkena Dhyana. **Meaning:** Kashaya Sutra - I repent for
the transgressions caused by the four Kashayas - Krodha Kashaya, Mana Kashaya,
Maya Kashaya, and Lobha Kashaya. Sanjna Sutra - I repent for the transgressions
caused by the four types of Sanjna - Ahar Sanjna, Bhaya Sanjna, Maithuna Sanjna,
and Parigraha Sanjna. Vikatha Sutra - I repent for the transgressions caused by
the four types of Vikatha - Itthikaha, Bhattakha, Desakha, and Rayakha. Dhyana
Sutra - I repent for the transgressions caused by the practice of Arta Dhyana
and Raudra Dhyana, and the non-practice of Dharma Dhyana and Shukla Dhyana. I
repent for the five types of Kriya - Kayika, Ahigarika, Pausya, Paritavana, and
Panaiva Kriya. I repent for the five types of Kamaguna - Sadde, Rive, Gandhe,
Rase, and Phase. I repent for the five types of Mahavrata - Sarva Panaivaaya
Veraman, Sarva Musavaaya Veraman, Sarva Adinna Daana Veraman, Sarva Mehunaa
Veraman, and Sarva Parigraha Veraman. I repent for the five types of Samiti -
Iriya Samiti, Bhasa Samiti, Esana Samiti, Aayana Bhandamatta Nikkhevana Samiti,
and Uccara Pasavana Khel Jall Singhana Paritthavana Samiti. **Meaning:** Kriya
Sutra - I repent for the transgressions caused by the five types of Kriya -
Kayika, Ahigarika, Pausya, Paritavana, and Panaiva Kriya. Kamaguna Sutra - I
repent for the transgressions caused by the five types of Kamaguna - Sadde,
Rive, Gandhe, Rase, and Phase. Mahavrata Sutra - I repent for the transgressions
caused by the five Mahavrata - Sarva Panaivaaya Veraman (non-violence), Sarva
Musavaaya Veraman (truthfulness), Sarva Adinna Daana Veraman (non-stealing),
Sarva Mehunaa Veraman (celibacy), and Sarva Parigraha Veraman (non-attachment).
Samiti Sutra - I repent for the transgressions caused by the non-observance of
the five types of Samiti - Iriya Samiti, Bhasa Samiti, Esana Samiti, Aayana
Bhandamatta Nikkhevana Samiti, and Uccara Pasavana Khel Jall Singhana
Paritthavana Samiti.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 42] [ AvazyakasUtra paDikkamAmi cauhiM vikahAhiM - itthIkahAe, bhattakahAe,
desakahAe, raaykhaae| _ paDikkamAmi cauhi jhANehiM - aTTeNaM jhANeNaM, ruddeNaM
jhANeNaM, dhammeNaM jhANeNaM, sukkeNaM jhaannennN| bhAvArtha - kaSAyasUtra -
cAra kaSAyoM ke dvArA hone vAle aticAroM kA pratikramaNa karatA hU~  /  cAra
kaSAya - krodhakaSAya, mAnakaSAya, mAyAkaSAya aura lobhkssaay| saMjJAsUtra -
cAra prakAra kI saMjJAoM ke dvArA jo aticAra-doSa lagA ho, usakA pratikramaNa
karatA huuN| cAra saMjJAe~ - AhAra saMjJA, bhaya saMjJA, maithuna saMjJA aura
parigraha saMjJA  /  vikathAsUtra - strI kathA, bhakta kathA, deza kathA aura
rAja kathA, ina cAra vikathAoM ke dvArA jo bhI aticAra lagA ho, usakA
pratikramaNa karatA huuN| _ dhyAnasUtra - ArtadhyAna aura raudradhyAna ke karane
se tathA dharmadhyAna evaM zukladhyAna ke na karane se jo bhI aticAra lagA ho,
usakA pratikramaNa karatA huuN| paDikkamAmi paMcahi kiriyAhiM - kAiyAe,
ahigaraNiyAe, pAusiyAe, pAritAvaNiyAe, paannaaivaaykiriyaae| _ paDikkamAmi
paMcahi kAmaguNehiM - saddeNaM, rUveNaM, gaMdheNaM, raseNaM, phaasennN|
paDikkamAmi paMcahiM mahavvaehiM - savvAo pANAivAyAo veramaNaM, savvAo musAvAyAo
veramaNaM, savvAo adinnAdANAo veramaNaM, savvAo mehuNAo veramaNaM, savvAo
pariggahAo vermnnN| paDikkamAmi paMcahiM samiIhiM - iriyAsamiIe, bhAsAsamiIe,
esaNAsamiIe, AyANabhaMDamattanikkhevaNAsamiIe, uccaar-paasvnn-khel-jll-
siNghaann-pritttthaavnniyaasmiiie| bhAvArtha - kriyAsUtra - kAyikI,
AdhikaraNikI, prAdveSikI, pAritApanikI aura prANAtipAtikI, ina pA~ca kriyAoM ke
karane se jo bhI aticAra lagA ho unakA pratikramaNa karatA huuN| kAmaguNasUtra -
zabda, rUpa, gaMdha, rasa aura sparza ina pA~coM kAmaguNoM ke dvArA jo bhI
aticAra lagA ho usakA pratikramaNa karatA huuN| _ mahAvratasUtra -
sarvaprANAtipAtaviramaNa - ahiMsA, sarvamRSAvAdaviramaNa - satya,
sarvaadattAdAnaviramaNa asteya, sarvamaithunaviramaNa - brahmacarya,
sarvaparigrahaviramaNa - aparigraha, ina pA~coM mahAvratoM meM koI bhI aticAra
doSa lagA ho, usakA pratikramaNa karatA huuN| samitisUtra - IryAsamiti,
bhASAsamiti, eSaNAsamiti, AdAna-bhANDamAna-nikSepaNA-samiti, uccAraprazravaNa-
zleSma-jalla-siMghANa-pariSThApanikAsamiti, ina pAMcoM samitiyoM kA samyak
pAlana na karane se jo

Page #114 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[43 Fourth Study: Pratikraman] I do pratikraman for the transgressions committed
by me. _I do pratikraman for the six Jivnikayas - Prithvikaaya, Apkaaya, Agni
kaaya, Vayu kaaya, Vanaspatikaaya, and Traskaaya. I do pratikraman for the six
Leshas - Krishna lesha, Neel lesha, Kapoot lesha, Tejo lesha, Padam lesha, and
Shukl lesha. Jivnikayasutra - I do pratikraman for the transgressions committed
by me due to violence against the six Jivnikayas - Prithvikaaya, Apkaaya, Agni
kaaya, Vayu kaaya, Vanaspatikaaya, and Traskaaya. Leshyasutra - I do pratikraman
for the transgressions committed by me due to the practice of the first three
Adharma Leshas - Krishna lesha, Neel lesha, Kapoot lesha, and not practicing the
last three Dharma Leshas - Tejo lesha, Padam lesha, and Shukl lesha. I do
pratikraman for the seven Bhayathanas, eight Mayathanas, nine Bambhchegutis, ten
Samanadhammaekkaras, eleven Uvasagpadimas, twelve Bhikkhupadimas, thirteen
Kiriyathanas, fourteen Bhuyyagamas, fifteen Parmahammas, sixteen Gaahasolas,
seventeen Asanjamas, eighteen Abambhas, nineteen Nayajjhanas, twenty
Asamahithanas, twenty-one Sabalas, twenty-two Parisahas, twenty-three
Suygajjhanas, twenty-four Devas, twenty-five Bhavanas, twenty-six
Dasakappavavaharanam Uddesanakaalas, twenty-seven Anagaragunas, twenty-eight
Ayarappakappas.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 [43 caturtha adhyayana : pratikramaNa ] bhI aticAra lagA ho usakA pratikramaNa
karatA huuN| _paDikkamAmi chahiM jIvanikAehiM - puDhavikAeNaM, AukAeNaM,
teukAeNaM, vAukAeNaM, vaNassaikAeNaM, tskaaennN| paDikkamAmi chahiM lesAhiM -
kiNhalesAe, nIlalesAe, kAulesAe, teulesAe, paumalesAe, sukklesaae|
jIvanikAyasUtra - pRthvIkAya, apkAya, agnikAya, vAyukAya, vanaspatikAya aura
trasakAya, ina chahoM jIvanikAyoM kI hiMsA karane se jo aticAra lagA ho, usakA
pratikramaNa karatA huuN| lezyAsUtra - kRSNalezyA, nIlalezyA, kApotalezyA,
tejolezyA, padmalezyA, zuklalezyA ina chahoM lezyAoM ke dvArA arthAt prathama
tIna adharmalezyAoM kA AcaraNa karane se aura anta kI tIna dharmalezyAoM kA
AcaraNa na karane se jo bhI aticAra lagA ho, usakA pratikramaNa karatA huuN|
pauikkamAmi sattahiM bhayaThANehiM, aTThahiM mayaTThANehiM, navahiM
baMbhaceraguttIhiM, dasavihe samaNadhammeekkArasahiM uvAsagapaDimAhi, bArasahiM
bhikkhupaDimAhiM, terasahiM kiriyAThANehiM, cauddasahiM bhUyagAmehiM,
pannarasahiM paramAhimmiehiM, solasahiM gAhAsolasaehiM, sattarasavihe asaMjame,
aTThArasavihe abaMbhe, egUNavIsAe nAyajjhayaNehiM, vIsAe asamAhiThANehiM,
ikkavIsAe sabalehiM, bAvIsAe parIsahehiM, tevIsAe sUyagajjhayaNehiM, cauvIsAe
devehiM, paNavIsAe bhAvaNAhiM, chavvIsAe dasAkappavavahArANaM uddesaNakAlehiM,
sattAvIsAe aNagAraguNehiM aTThAvIsAe aayaarppkppehiN|

Page #115 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[44] [ Necessary Sutra ] From the 7 places of fear, the 8 places of pride, the 9
secrets of celibacy, the 10 violations of Shraman Dharma like forgiveness, the
11 vows of the Upasaka-Shravaka, the 12 vows of the Bhikshu, the 13 places of
action, the 14 groups of beings, the 15 holy ones, the 16 studies including the
study of the first Shruta Skandha of the Sutra Kritanga Sutra, the 17 types of
non-restraint, the 18 types of non-celibacy, the 19 studies of the Jnata Sutra,
the 20 places of non-concentration, the 21 weaknesses, the 22 tolerances, the 23
studies of the Sutra Kritanga Sutra, the 24 Devas, the 25 thoughts of the 5
great vows, the 26 occasions of the Dasha Shruta Skandha, Brihat Kalpa and
Vyavahar, the 27 qualities of the Sadhu, the 28 studies of the Achar Prakalpa,
Acharanga and Nishita Sutra, the 29 instances of sinful Shruta, the 30 places of
the Maha Mohaniya Karma,

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 44] [ AvazyakasUtra egaNatIsAe pAvasuyappasaMgehiM, tIsAe
mahAmohaNIyaTThANehiM, egatIsAe siddhAiguNehiM, battIsAe joga-saMgahehiM,
tettIsAe AsAyaNAhiM - 1. arihaMtANaM AsAyaNAe, 2. siddhANaM AsAyaNAe, 3.
AyariyANaM AsAyaNAe, 4. uvajhAyANaM AsAyaNAe, 5. sAhUNaM AsAyaNAe, 6. sAhUNINaM
AsAyaNAe,7. sAvayANaM AsAyaNAe, 8. sAviyANaM AsAyaNAe, 9. devANaM AsAyaNAe, 10.
devINaM AsAyaNAe, 11. ihalogassa AsAyaNAe, 12. paralogassa AsAyaNAe, 13. kevali-
pannattassa dhammassa AsAyaNAe, 14. sadeva-maNuyAsurassa logassa AsAyaNAe, 15.
savvApANa-bhUya-jIva-sattANaM AsAyaNAe, 16.kAlassa AsAyaNAe, 17.. suassa
AsAyaNAe, 18. suyadevayAe AsAyaNAe, 19. vAyaNAyariyassa AsAyaNAe, jaM 20.
vAiddhaM, 21.vaccAmeliyaM, 22. hINakkharaM, 23. accakkharaM, 24. payahINaM, 25.
viNayahINaM, 26. jogahINaM, 27. ghosahINaM, 28. suThudinaM, 29.
dudrupaDicchiyaM, 30. akAle kao sajjhAo, 31. kAle na kao sajjhAo, 32. asajjhAie
sajjhAiyaM, 33. sajjhAe na sajjhAiyaM, tassa micchA mi dukkaDaM  /  bhAvArtha -
pratikramaNa karatA hU~ - sAta bhaya ke sthAnoM arthAt kAraNoM se, ATha mada ke
sthAnoM se, nau brahmacarya kI guptiyoM se arthAt unakA samyak pAlana na karane
se, dasavidha kSamA Adi zramaNa dharma kI virAdhanA se, gyAraha upAsaka pratimA
- zrAvaka kI pratijJAoM se arthAt unakI azraddhA tathA viparIta prarUpaNA se,
bAraha bhikSu kI pratimAoM se - unakI azraddhA athavA viparIta prarUpaNA se,
teraha kriyA ke sthAnoM se, caudaha jIvoM ke samUha se arthAt unakI hiMsA se,
pandraha paramAdhArmikoM se arthAt una jaisA bhAva rakhane yA AcaraNa karane se,
sUtrakRtAMgasUtra ke prathama zrutaskaMdha ke gAthA adhyayana sahita solaha
adhyayanoM se, sataraha prakAra ke asaMyama meM rahane se, aThAraha prakAra ke
abrahmacarya meM vartane se, jJAtAsUtra ke unnIsa adhyayanoM se arthAt unakI
viparIta zraddhA prarUpaNA karane se, bIsa asamAdhi ke sthAnoM se, ikkIsa
zabaloM se, bAIsa pariSahoM se arthAt unako sahana na karane se,
sUtrakRtAMgasUtra ke teIsa adhyayanoM se arthAt tadanusAra AcaraNa na karane se
yA viparIta zraddhA-prarUpaNA karane se, caubIsa devoM se arthAt unakI avahelanA
karane se, pA~ca mahAvratoM kI paccIsa bhAvanAoM (kA yathAvat pAlana na karane)
se, dazAzrutaskandha, bRhatkalpa aura vyavahAra - ukta sUtratrayI ke chabbIsa
uddezana kAloM se, sattAIsa sAdhu ke guNoM se, AcAraprakalpa- AcArAMga tathA
nizIthasUtra ke aTThAIsa adhyayanoM se, unatIsa pApazruta ke prasaMgoM se,
mahAmohanIya karma ke tIsa sthAnoM se,

Page #116 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Fourth Study: Pratikraman  [From the thirty-one primary or most excellent
qualities of the forty-five Siddhas, the thirty-two Yogasangrahas, the thirty-
three Ashatanas, such as Arihant, Siddha, Acharya, Upadhyaya, Sadhu, Sadhvi,
Shravak, Shravika, Dev, Devi, Ihalok, Parlok, Kevaliprरूपित Dharma, the entire
world including Devas, Manushayas, Asuras, all Pran-Vikal-tray, Bhut-Vanaspati,
Jiva-Panchendriya, Sattwa-Prithvikaaya and other four Sthavar, as well as time,
Shruta-Shastra, Shruta-Devata, and Vachanacharya - from all these Ashatanas,
And from the diverse - the texts of the Sutra or the letters of the Sutra being
reversed, reading them repeatedly with a mind devoid of Vyatyaneḍita, mixing the
text of one Sutra with another, reading by omitting letters, adding extra
letters, reading without proper words, not showing proper respect to the Shastra
and the Shastradhyapaka, reading without proper pronunciation - devoid of
Udattādi Swaras, reading without Yoga - without the special Tapas of Upadhanadi
or without its use, giving too much text to a student who is not capable of
receiving it - Sushṭhudatt, receiving the Agam-path given by the Vachanacharya
with a bad attitude - Dusṭhupratichchhit, reading the Kalik, Utkalik Sutras
during their prohibited time - Akalsvadhyaya, studying during the time of
Asvadhyaya, not studying during the time of Svādhyāya.  From these fourteen
Ashatanas of Shruta-Jnana, and from all the thirty-three Ashatanas, whatever
transgressions have been committed, may my related Duskrut-Pap be Mithya.
**Discussion - Asanayam Sutra - Asanayam is the opposite of Sanayam. Asanayam is
the root of all worldly suffering. The name Asanayam is given to the emotions
like Raga-Dvesha, Kshaya, etc., which arise from the rise of Charitramohaniya
Karma. These are the evil tendencies of the mind due to greed and desire. He who
does not practice restraint over these tendencies, or does not control them, is
their slave, their servant. He can never become a conqueror of himself.
Therefore, self-restraint is absolutely essential to become a conqueror of
oneself. He who cannot practice self-restraint, who does not establish control
over his mind and senses, becomes enslaved by his desires and can never attain
peace and Samadhi. And desires are infinite like the sky. They can never be
fulfilled. The Shastrakar says - 'Iccha hu agas sama anantiya.'  -
Uttaraadhyayanasutra, Adhyaya 9 - Although there are 17 types of Sanayam, there
are also 17 types of Asanayam, its opposite, and due to the desire for
expansion, there may be other types as well, which are mentioned later. But
here, only one type has been mentioned for the sake of general understanding and
collection. ]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 caturtha adhyayana : pratikramaNa ] [45 siddhoM ke ikatIsa Adi yA sarvotkRSTa
guNoM se, battIsa yogasaMgrahoM se, tetIsa AzAtanAoM se, yathA arihaMta, siddha,
AcArya, upAdhyAya, sAdhu, sAdhvI, zrAvaka, zrAvikA, deva, devI, ihaloka,
paraloka, kevaliprarUpita dharma, deva-manuSyoM-asuroM sahita samagra loka,
samasta prANa-vikalatraya, bhUta-vanaspati, jIva-paMcendriya, sattva-pRthvIkAya
Adi cAra sthAvara, tathaiva kAla, zruta-zAstra, zruta-devatA vAcanAcArya - ina
sabakI AzAtanA se, tathA vyAviddha - sUtra ke pAThoM ko yA sUtra ke akSaroM ko
Age-pIche kiyA ho, vyatyAneDitazUnya-citta se kaI bAra par3hatA hI rahA ho, anya
sUtra kA pATha anya sUtra meM milAyA ho, akSara chor3a kara par3hA ho,
atyakSara-akSara bar3hA diye hoM, padahIna par3hA ho, zAstra evaM zAstrAdhyApaka
kA samucita vinaya na kiyA ho, ghoSahIna - udAttAdi svaroM se rahita par3hA ho,
yogahIna-upadhAnAdi tapovizeSa ke binA athavA upayoga ke binA par3hA ho,
suSThudatta - adhika grahaNa karane kI yogyatA na rakhane vAle ziSya ko bhI
adhika pATha diyA ho, duSThupratIcchita - vAcanAcArya ke dvArA diye hue
AgamapATha ko duSTa bhAva se grahaNa kiyA ho, akAlasvAdhyAya - kAlika, utkAlika
sUtroM ko unake niSaddha kAla meM par3hA ho, asvAdhyAya ke samaya svAdhyAya kiyA
ho, svAdhyAya kI sthiti meM svAdhyAya na kiyA ho| isa prakAra zrutajJAna kI
caudaha AzAtanAoM se, aura saba milA kara tetIsa AzAtanAoM se jo bhI aticAra ho,
tatsambandhI merA duSkRta-pApa mithyA ho| vivecana - asaMyamasUtra - asaMyama,
saMyama kA virodhI hai| asaMyama hI samasta sAMsArika duHkhoM kA mUla hai|
cAritramohanIya karma ke udaya se hone vAle rAga-dveSa rUpa kaSAya Adi bhAvoM kA
nAma asaMyama hai| lobha evaM tRSNA se ye mana kI duSTa vRttiyAM haiM  /  ina
vRttiyoM para jo saMyama nahIM rakhatA hai, athavA niyaMtraNa nahIM rakhatA hai
vaha inakA dAsa hai, gulAma hai| vaha kabhI AtmavijetA nahIM bana sktaa| ataH
AtmavijetA banane ke liye AtmasaMyama parama Avazyaka hai| jo AtmasaMyama nahIM
rakha sakatA, apane mana evaM indriyoM para niyaMtraNa sthApita nahIM karatA,
vaha icchAoM ke vazIbhUta hokara kabhI zAMti-samAdhi nahIM pA sakatA aura
icchAeM to AkAza ke samAna ananta haiM  /  unakI kabhI pUrti nahIM ho sktii|
zAstrakAra kahate haiM - 'icchA hu AgAsasamA annNtiyaa|' - uttarAdhyayana sU. a.
9 _ yadyapi saMyama ke 17 bheda hone se usake virodhI asaMyama ke bhI 17 bheda
haiM aura vistAra kI vivakSA se anya bheda bhI ho sakate haiM, jo Age ginAye bhI
gaye haiN| kintu sAmAnyagrAhI saMgrahanaya kI apekSA se yahA~ eka hI prakAra
kahA gayA hai|

Page #117 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 46] **Essential Sutra** **Bondage Sutra**  This sutra states that attachment
and aversion are bondage. Attachment and aversion lead to the binding of the
eight types of karma. The tendency towards attachment and aversion arises from
the emergence of *charitramoha*, which is a contaminant and destroyer of the
life of restraint. As long as the impurity of attachment and aversion exists,
the purity of *charitra* cannot be achieved in any way.  Attachment and aversion
are two seeds, the disease of karmic bondage. Through the knowledge-born
dispassion, one attains liberation and samadhi.  - Brihadaloyana (by Ranjit
Singh)  Attachment is the culmination of delusion, by which the soul is stained
by karma. Aversion is the ill-will, hatred, anger, etc., towards someone. Out of
the four *kṣayās*, anger and pride are categorized under aversion, and delusion
and greed are categorized under attachment.  **Danda Sutra**  - The punishment
that the soul receives due to its evil tendencies, i.e., becoming a recipient of
suffering, is called *danda*. There are three types of *danda*: 1. *Manodanda*,
2. *Vachanadanda*, and 3. *Kayadanda*.  1. **Manodanda** - 1. Feeling
despondent, 2. Thinking cruel thoughts, 3. Having useless fantasies, 4.
Wandering aimlessly without purpose, 5. Holding impure thoughts, 6. Feeling
hatred, aversion, etc., towards someone. These evil tendencies cause the soul to
be punished in the twenty-four *dandakas*.  2. **Vachanadanda** - 1. Speaking
untruthfully, 2. Slandering others, gossiping, 3. Speaking harshly, 4. Praising
oneself, 5. Speaking uselessly or without purpose, 6. Presenting a false image
against the principles, etc.  3. **Kayadanda** - 1. Causing pain to someone, 2.
Indulging in immoral behavior, 3. Stealing someone's belongings, 4. Being
arrogant and haughty, 5. Wandering aimlessly, 6. Walking carelessly, etc.
Through these three, the soul performs evil actions and is punished. It wanders
in the twenty-four *dandakas*, becoming a recipient of afflictions. Therefore,
these are called *danda*.  **Gupti Sutra**  *Gupti* - To refrain from evil
actions and engage in virtuous actions is *gupti*. Alternatively, to protect the
soul properly from the causes of the world, to stop the evil tendencies of the
three *yogas*, and to prevent the incoming *karma* like garbage is *gupti*.
There are three types of *gupti*: 1. *Manogupti*, 2. *Vachanagupti*, 3.
*Kayagupti*.  **Manogupti** - The resolve related to the beginning,
commencement, and initiation of *artha*, *raudriya*, and *dhyana* related to the
mind.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 46] [ AvazyakasUtra bandhanasUtra prastuta sUtra meM rAga-dveSa ko bandhana
kahA hai| rAga-dveSa ke dvArA aSTavidha karmoM kA bandha hotA hai| rAga-dveSa kI
pravRtti cAritramoha ke udaya se hotI hai tathA cAritramoha saMyama-jIvana kA
dUSaka evaM ghAtaka hai| jaba taka rAga-dveSa kI malinatA hai taba-taka cAritra
kI zuddhatA kisI bhI taraha nahIM ho sktii| rAga-dveSa do bIja haiM, karmabandha
kI vyaadh| jJAnAtama vairAgya se, pAvai mukti smaadh|| - bRhadAloyaNA(raNajIta
siMha kRta) jisake dvArA AtmA karma se raMgA jAtA hai, vaha moha kI pariNati
rAga hai tathA kisI ke prati zatrutA, ghRNA, krodha Adi durbhAvanA dveSa hai  /
cAra kaSAyoM meM se krodha aura mAna ko dveSa meM tathA mAyA aura lobha ko rAga
meM parigaNita kiyA gayA hai| daNDasUtra - _ AtmA kI jisa azubha pravRtti se
AtmA daNDita hotA hai arthAt duHkha kA pAtra banatA hai, vaha daNDa kahalAtA hai
/  daNDa tIna prakAra ke hote haiM - 1. manodaNDa, 2. vacanadaNDa aura 3.
kaaydnndd| 1. manodaNDa - 1. viSAda karanA, 2. krUratApUrNa vicAra karanA, 3.
vyartha kalpanAyeM karanA, 4. mana kA idhara-udhara binA prayojana bhaTakanA, 5.
apavitra vicAra rakhanA, 6. kisI ke prati ghRNA, dveSa Adi karanA manodaNDa hai|
inakI azubha pravRttiyoM se AtmA caubIsa daNDakoM meM daNDita hotA hai| 2.
vacanadaNDa - 1. asatya bolanA, 2. anya kI nindA, cugalI karanA, 3. kar3avA
bolanA, 4. apanI prazaMsA karanA, 5. nirarthaka yA niSprayojana bolanA, 6.
siddhAMta ke viruddha prarUpaNA karanA aadi| 3. kAyadaNDa - 1. kisI ko pIr3A
pahu~cAnA, 2. anAcAra kA sevana karanA, 3. kisI kI vastu curAnA, 4. abhimAna se
akar3anA, 5. vyartha idhara-udhara DolanA, 6. asAvadhAnI se calanA aadi| inhIM
tInoM ke mAdhyama se AtmA azubha pravRttiyA~ karake daNDita hotA hai - caubIsa
daNDakoM meM bhaTakatA huA klezoM kA bhAjana banatA hai, ataeva ye daNDa
kahalAte haiN| guptisUtra - gupti - azubha yoga se nivRtta ho kara zubha yoga
meM pravRtti karanA gupti hai  /  athavA saMsAra ke kAraNoM se AtmA kI samyak
prakAra se rakSA karanA, tInoM yogoM kI azubha pravRtti ko rokanA tathA Agantuka
karmarUpI kacare ko rokanA gupti hai| gupti tIna prakAra kI hai - 1. manogupti,
2. vacanagupti, 3. kAyagupti  /  manogupti - Arta tathA raudra dhyAna viSayaka
mana se saMraMbha, samAraMbha tathA AraMbha saMbaMdhI saMkalpa

Page #118 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Fourth Study: Pratikraman  [47]  Not engaging in alternatives, contemplating
Dharma-Dhyana, maintaining a neutral attitude is Manogupti.  There are four
types of Manogupti:  * **Dravya:** The mind should not be involved in the
beginning and end of the activity. * **Kshetra:** Throughout the entire world. *
**Kala:** Throughout life. * **Bhaava:** The mind should not be involved in the
subject, Kshaya, Artha-Roudra Dhyana, Raga-Dvesha.  There are four types of
Vachanagupti:  * **Dravya:** Not engaging in four types of Vikatha. *
**Kshetra:** Throughout the entire world. * **Kala:** Throughout life. *
**Bhaava:** Not speaking carelessly.  There are four types of Kayagupti:  *
**Dravya:** Not taking care of the body. * **Kshetra:** Throughout the entire
world. * **Kala:** Throughout life. * **Bhaava:** Not engaging in careless Yoga.
**Shalya Sutra:**  Maya, Nidana, and Mithyadarshan, these three faults are
called Shalya in the language of Agam. Anything that causes internal pain and
suffering, like a thorn, arrow, etc., is a Dravya Shalya. Maya, etc., are Bhaava
Shalya. According to Acharya Haribhadra, the etymology is: "Shalyate'neneti
Shalya." Maya, Nidana, and Mithyadarshan are called Shalya in the spiritual
realm because just as a thorn, nail, or arrow, etc., piercing a part of the
body, disturbs a person, similarly, the three Shalya mentioned in the Sutra,
residing within, also torment the inner soul of the seeker. All three Shalya are
the cause of intense Karma-bandha.  1. **Maya Shalya:** Maya means deception.
Maya is a sharp-edged sword that cuts off the bond of affection in an instant.
The Dasha Vaikalika Sutra says: "Maya Mitrani Nasei," meaning that engaging in
Maya destroys friendships and feelings of friendship. 2. **Nidana Shalya:**
Desiring worldly fruits of Dharmacharan, craving for pleasures is Nidana Shalya.
3. **Mithyadarshan Shalya:** Not having faith in truth and clinging to falsehood
is Mithyadarshan Shalya.  I repent for the faults arising from these three
Shalya.  **Gaurav Sutra and Viradhana Sutra:**  Pride in the form of attaining
the position of an Acharya, etc., and pride in the form of attaining sweet,
etc., pleasant tastes, etc.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 caturtha adhyayana : pratikramaNa ] [47 vikalpa na karanA, dharma-dhyAna
saMbaMdhI cintana karanA, madhyastha bhAva rakhanA manogupti hai| manogupti ke
cAra bheda - dravya se AraMbha-samAraMbha meM mana na pravartAve, kSetra se
samasta loka meM, kAla se jIvanaparyaMta aura bhAva se viSaya-kaSAya Artta-
raudra dhyAna, rAga-dveSa meM mana na prvrtaave| vacanagupti ke cAra bheda -
dravya se cAra prakAra kI vikathA na karanA, kSetra se samasta loka meM, kAla se
jIvanaparyaMta, bhAva se sAvadha vacana na bolnaa| kAyagupti ke cAra bheda -
dravya se zarIra kI zuzrUSA na kare, kSetra se samasta loka meM, kAla se
jIvanaparyaMta, bhAva se sAvadha yoga na prvrtaanaa| zalyasUtra - _mAyA, nidAna
aura mithyAdarzana, ye tInoM doSa Agama kI bhASA meM zalya kahalAte haiM  /
jisake dvArA antara pIr3A sAlatI rahatI ho, kasakatI rahatI ho vaha tIra, kAMTA
Adi dravya zalya haiM  /  mAyA Adi bhAva zalya haiM  /  AcArya haribhadra ke
anusAra vyutpatti isa prakAra hai - "zalyate'neneti shlym|" AdhyAtmika kSetra
meM mAyA, nidAna aura mithyAdarzana ko zalya isaliye kahA hai ki jisa prakAra
zarIra ke kisI bhAga meM kAMTA, kIla tathA tIra Adi tIkSNa vastu ghusa jAye to
vaha manuSya ko kSubdha banA detI hai, usI prakAra aMtara meM rahA huA sUtrokta
zalyatraya bhI sAdhaka kI antara AtmA ko sAlatA rahatA hai| tInoM hI zalya tIvra
karmabandha ke hetu 1. mAyAzalya - mAyA kA artha hai kapaTa  /  mAyA eka tIkSNa
dhAra vAlI asi hai jo ApasI snehasaMbaMdha ko kSaNabhara meM kATa detI hai|
dazavaikAlikasUtra meM kahA hai - 'mAyA mittANi nAsei' arthAt mAyAcAra karane se
mitroM - maitrIbhAva kA vinAza hotA hai| 2. nidAnazalya - dharmAcaraNa ke
sAMsArika phala kI kAmanA karanA, bhogoM kI lAlasA rakhanA nidAnazalya hai| 3.
mithyAdarzanazalya - satya para zraddhA na lAnA evaM asatya kA kadAgraha rakhanA
mithyAdarzanazalya hai| isa prakAra tInoM zalyoM se hone vAle doSoM kA
pratikramaNa karatA huuN| gauravasUtra evaM virAdhanAsUtra - AcArya Adi kI
padaprApti rUpa Rddhigaurava, madhura Adi priya rasa kI prApti kA abhimAna rUpa

Page #119 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[48] [Essential Sutra] I renounce any transgression that may have been committed
due to the pride arising from the enjoyment of taste and the attainment of
physical pleasure, which is called "Saata-Gaurav," and due to the contradiction
of knowledge, that is, the knowledge by which the soul and other substances are
known, the contradiction of perception, and the contradiction of conduct. These
three contradictions are the cause of any transgression. The meaning of "Gaurav"
is "heaviness." Gaurav is of two types: 1. Dravya-Gaurav, 2. Bhaava-Gaurav. The
heaviness of stone, etc., is Dravya-Gaurav, and the inauspicious feeling of the
soul due to pride and greed is Bhaava-Gaurav. To follow conduct in its pure form
without any fault is called "Aaraadhana," and the opposite of this, not
following knowledge, etc., in their proper form, and finding fault with them, is
called "Viraadhana." Kashaya Sutra - "Kohang Maanang Cha Maayang Cha, Lobhang
Cha Paav-Vaddhanang. Vame Chattari Dosse U, Ichchhanto Hiyampano." -
Dashavaikalika Sutra, A.8 That is, a seeker who desires the welfare of his soul
should abandon the four Kashayas: anger, pride, deceit, and greed, which
increase sin. The soul is harmed more by Kashayas than by any other enemy.
Kashayas are the strong causes of karma-bandha. They are the ones that make the
soul wander in the cycle of birth and death. The soul that is polluted by
Kashayas cannot contain knowledge, perception, conduct, etc., just as no other
color can be applied to a black cloth. Kashayas are the root cause of the soul's
rise and fall. With the intense arousal of Kashayas, the soul falls into the
deep pit of degradation, because when Kashayas gain control over the mind, all
the virtues that are opposed to them are gradually lost. "Kohu Peeing Panasei,
Maano Vinayanasaano. Maaya Mittaani Nasei, Lobho Savvavinaasano." -
Dashavaikalika, A.8, 38, 39 Anger destroys love, pride destroys humility, deceit
destroys friendship, and greed destroys all virtues. Forgiveness destroys anger,
humility, i.e., gentleness, destroys pride, simplicity destroys deceit, and
contentment destroys greed.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 48] [ AvazyakasUtra rasagaurava tathA zArIrika sukhaprApti se hone vAle
abhimAna rUpa sAtAgaurava ke kAraNa, evaM jJAna kI arthAt jisake dvArA jIvAdi
padArtha jAne jAe~ usa jJAna kI virAdhanA, darzana kI virAdhanA, cAritra kI
virAdhanA, ina tIna virAdhanAoM ke kAraNa jo koI aticAra kiyA gayA ho to usase
maiM nivRtta hotA huuN| gaurava kA artha hai gurutva - bhArIpana  /  gaurava do
prakAra kA hotA hai 1. dravyagaurava, 2. bhaavgaurv| patthara Adi kI gurutA
dravyagaurava hai aura abhimAna evaM lobha ke kAraNa hone vAlA AtmA kA azubha
bhAva bhAvagaurava hai| kisI bhI prakAra kA doSa na lagAte hue cAritra kA
vizuddharUpa se pAlana karanA ArAdhanA hai aura isake viparIta jJAnAdi AcAra kA
samyak rUpa se ArAdhanA na karanA, unameM doSa lagAnA virAdhanA hai| kaSAyasUtra
- kohaM mANaM ca mAyaM ca, lobhaM ca paav-vddddhnnN| vame cattAri dose u,
icchaMto hiymppnno|| - dazavai. sU. a.8 arthAt apanI AtmA kA hita cAhane vAle
sAdhaka ko pApa bar3hAne vAle krodha, mAna, mAyA tathA lobha ina cAroM kaSAyoM
kA tyAga kara denA caahiye| _AtmA kA kaSAyoM dvArA jitanA ahita hotA hai, utanA
kisI bhI anya zatru dvArA nahIM hotaa| kaSAya karmabandha ke prabala kAraNa
haiN| yahI AtmA ko saMsAra-bhramaNa karAte haiM  /  kaSAya ke dvArA jisakI AtmA
kaluSita hai, usameM jJAna, darzana, cAritra Adi kA samAveza nahIM ho sakatA,
ThIka usI prakAra jaise kAle kambala para dUsarA koI raMga nahIM car3hatA  /
AtmA ke utthAna tathA patana ke mUla kAraNa kaSAya haiM  /  kaSAyoM ke tIvra
udreka se AtmA adhaHpatana ke gahare garta meM giratI jAtI hai, kyoMki kaSAyoM
kA mana para adhikAra ho jAne para unake virodhI sabhI sadguNa eka-eka karake
lupta ho jAte haiM - koho pIiM paNAsei, mANo vinnynaasnno| mAyA mittANi nAseI,
lobho svvvinnaasnno|| uvasameNa haNe kohaM, mANaM maddavayA jinne| mAyamajava -
bhAveNaM, lobhaM saMtosao jinne|| - dazavaikAlika, a.8||38,39 krodha prIti kA
nAza karatA hai, mAna vinaya kA nAza karatA hai, mAyA mitratA kA nAza karatI hai
tathA lobha samasta sadguNoM kA nAza karatA hai| kSamA se krodha ko, vinaya se
arthAt mRdutA se mAna ko, saralatA se mAyA ko aura saMtoSa se lobha

Page #120 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Fourth Study: Pratikraman  [49]  **What should be conquered?**
**Samjnasutra:**  Desire in beings is called Samjna. Samjna also means
'consciousness'. In the present context, when the power of consciousness becomes
tainted by the arising of Mohaniya and Asata Vedaniya karma, it is called
'Samjna'.  Shri Pannavan's eighth verse describes ten types of Samjna. Sixteen
distinctions are also outlined in many sutras. The original distinctions are
four: 1. Ahar, 2. Bhay, 3. Maithun, 4. Parigraha.  1. **Ahar Samjna:** Ahar
Samjna arises due to four reasons: 1. Empty stomach, 2. Arising of Kshudha
Vedaniya, 3. Seeing food, and 4. Thinking about food.  2. **Bhay Samjna:** Bhay
Samjna arises due to four reasons: 1. Impatience, 2. Arising of Bhay-Moh, 3.
Seeing an object that causes fear, 4. Thinking about fear. The feeling of fear
that arises in the soul due to the arising of Bhay Mohaniya is Bhay Mohaniya.
3. **Maithun Samjna:** The sensation of Ved Moh Uday is called Maithun Samjna.
It also arises due to four reasons: 1. Strengthening the body, 2. Arising of Ved
Mohaniya karma, 3. Seeing a woman, etc., and 4. Thinking about sexual pleasure.
4. **Parigraha Samjna:** The desire to accumulate or the awakening of greed due
to the arising of Lobh Mohaniya is Parigraha Samjna. It also has four causes: 1.
Increasing possessiveness, 2. Arising of Lobh Mohaniya, 3. Seeing wealth, and 4.
Thinking about acquiring wealth.  **Vikathasutra:**  Conduct that contaminates
restraint and meaningless conversation is called Vikatha. I refrain from any
excess caused by the four types of Vikatha: Streekatha, Bhaktakatha, Deshkath,
and Rajakath. (For a female seeker, it is appropriate to speak about male
stories).  1. **Streekatha:** A certain woman from a certain country, caste, and
family is beautiful or ugly. She wears very beautiful clothes and jewelry. She
also sings very beautifully. Such thoughts are considered to be a cause of
excess because they can lead to defects in vows like Brahmacharya.  2.
**Bhaktakatha:** Bhaktakatha is of four types based on Aavap, Nirvap, Aarambh,
and Nishtan: 1. Ahar Samjna, 2. Bhay Samjna, 3. Maithun Samjna, 4. Parigraha
Samjna, 5. Krodh Samjna, 6. Man Samjna, 7. Maya Samjna, 8. Lobh Samjna, 9. Lok
Samjna, 10. Ogh Samjna.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 caturtha adhyayana : pratikramaNa ] [49 ko jItanA caahiye| saMjJAsUtra - jIvoM
kI icchA ko saMjJA kahate haiN| saMjJA kA artha 'cetanA' bhI hotA hai| prastuta
meM mohanIya evaM asAtA vedanIya karma ke udaya se jaba cetanAzakti vikArayukta
ho jAtI hai taba vaha 'saMjJA' padavAcya hotI hai| zrI pannavaNA ke AThaveM pada
meM saMjJA ke dasa prakAra batAye haiM  /  aneka sUtroM meM solaha bheda bhI
prarUpita kiye gaye haiN| mUla bheda cAra haiM - 1. AhAra, 2. bhaya, 3.
maithuna, 4. prigrh| 1. AhArasaMjJA - AhArasaMjJA cAra kAraNoM se utpanna hotI
hai  /  yathA - 1. peTa khAlI hone se, 2. kSudhA vedanIya ke udaya se, 3. AhAra
ko dekhane se aura 4. AhAra saMbaMdhI cintana karane se| 2. bhayasaMjJA -
bhayasaMjJA cAra kAraNoM se utpanna hotI hai - 1. adhairya rakhane se, 2. bhaya-
moha ke udaya se, 3. bhaya utpanna karane vAle padArtha ko dekhane se, 4. bhaya
kA cintana karane se| bhaya mohanIya ke udaya se AtmA meM jo trAsa kA bhAva
utpanna hotA hai, vaha bhayamohanIya hai| 3. maithunasaMjJA - vedamohodaya kA
saMvedana maithunasaMjJA kahalAtI hai| vaha bhI cAra kAraNoM se utpanna hotI hai
- 1. zarIra puSTa banAne se, 2. vedamohanIya karmodaya se, 3. strI Adi ko
dekhane se aura 4. kAma-bhoga kA cintana karane se| 4. parigrahasaMjJA -
lobhamohanIya ke udaya se manuSya kI saMgrahavRtti yA mUrchA jAgrata hotI hai
vaha parigrahasaMjJA hai| usake bhI cAra kAraNa haiM - 1. mamatva bar3hAne se,
2. lobhamohanIya ke udaya se, 3. dhanasampatti ko dekhane se aura 4. dhana-
parigraha kA cintana karane se| vikathAsUtra - saMyama ko dUSita karane vAle
evaM nirarthaka vArtAlApa ko vikathA kahate haiM  /  strIkathA, bhaktakathA,
dezakathA tathA rAjakathA rUpa cAra vikathAoM ke kAraNa jo kucha aticAra lagA ho
to usase maiM nivRtta hotA huuN| (nArI sAdhikA ke liye puruSa kathA bolanA
caahiye)| 1. strIkathA - amuka deza, jAti, kula kI amuka strI sundara athavA
kurUpa hotI hai| vaha bahuta sundara vastrAbhUSaNa pahanatI hai| gAnA bhI bahuta
sundara gAtI hai  /  ityAdi vicAra se brahmacarya Adi vratoM meM doSa lagane kI
sambhAvanA hone se isako aticAra kA hetu mAnA gayA hai| 2. bhaktakathA -
bhaktakathA AvApa, nirvApa, Arambha evaM niSThAna ke bheda se cAra prakAra kI
hai| 1. 1. AhArasaMjJA, 2. bhayasaMjJA, 3.maithunasaMjJA, 4. parigrahasaMjJA, 5.
krodhasaMjJA, 6. mAnasaMjJA, 7. mAyAsaMjJA, 8. lobhasaMjJA 9. lokasaMjJA, 10.
oghsNjnyaa|

Page #121 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 50] **To do.** **Aavaap** In such and such a kitchen, this much ghee, this
much greens, this much spice will be fine. **Nirvaap** - There were so many
dishes, so many greens, it was sweet, thus the story of the seen food. —
**Aaraambh** In such and such a kitchen, this much greens and fruits etc. will
be needed, etc. **Nishtaan** Such and such food items will cost this much
rupees, etc. 3. **Deshaktha** - Praising or criticizing the diverse dress,
adornment-creation, food practices, house construction art, customs and
traditions of countries is Deshaktha. - 4. **Rajaktha** Describing the army,
queens, art of war, enjoyment and luxury of kings is called Rajaktha. Rajaktha
is of four types - 1. Atiyaan, 2. Niryaan, 3. Balvaahan, 4. Kosh. **Dhyansutra**
**Aavashyakasutra** Still like a steady lamp-flame in a windless, i.e. vacuum
place, contemplation of only one subject, devoid of the resolve of other
subjects, is called meditation. That is, steady determination and concentration
of mind till the end of a moment is meditation. Due to the absence of the mind
of the Vीतराग, Yoga-Nirodh is their meditation. Meditation is of two types,
praiseworthy and not praiseworthy. Artt and Raudra are not praiseworthy
meditations, therefore they are to be rejected. Dharma and Shukla are
praiseworthy meditations, they are to be followed. - Acharya Jinas Das Mahत्तर
has quoted a verse on this very subject in the Pratikram Manaadhyaayan of
Aavashyakachurni **Hinsaanooranjitam Raudram, Attam Kaamanuranjitam.
Dhammaranjijam Dhamam, Shuklajjaananam Niranjanam.** That is - :- Meditation
influenced by desire is called Artt. Meditation colored by violence is Raudra,
meditation influenced by Dharma is Dharma Dhyaan and Shukla Dhyaan is completely
Niranjan. 1. **Artdhyaan** - Artt means sorrow, distress, pain or suffering.
Meditation that happens due to the cause of Artt is called Artdhyaan. Due to the
association of undesirable things, due to the separation from desirable things,
due to illness etc. and also due to the desire for enjoyments, a kind of
distortion, i.e. pain, occurs in the mind and when it 1 **"Antomuhutimittam,
Chittaavaththaanamegavaththumi. Chhaumatthaanam Na Joganiroho Jinaananti."**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 50] karanA  /  AvApa amuka rasoI meM itanA ghI, itanA zAka, itanA masAlA ThIka
rahegA  /  nirvApa - itane pakavAna the, itanA zAka thA, madhura thA, isa
prakAra dekhe huye bhojya padArtha kI kathA -- Arambha amuka rasoI meM itane
zAka aura phala Adi kI jarUrata rahegI, ityAdi  /  niSThAna amuka bhojya
padArthoM meM itane rupaye lageMge Adi  /  3. dezakathA - dezoM kI vividha
vezabhUSA, zRMgAra-racanA, bhojana paddhati, gRha nirmANakalA, rIti rivAja Adi
kI prazaMsA yA nindA karanA dezakathA hai  /  - 4. rAjakathA rAjAoM kI senA,
rAniyoM, yuddha kalA, bhogavilAsa Adi kA varNana karanA rAjakathA kahalAtI hai
/  rAjakathA cAra prakAra kI hai - 1. atiyAna, 2. niryANa, 3. balavAhana, 4.
koSa  /  dhyAnasUtra AvazyakasUtra pavanarahita arthAta nirvAta sthAna meM
sthira dIpa - zikhA ke samAna nizcala, anya viSayoM ke saMkalpa se rahita kevala
eka hI viSaya kA cintana dhyAna kahalAtA hai| arthAt antarmuhUrta kAla taka
sthira adhyavasAna evaM mana kI ekAgratA dhyAna hai| vItarAga ke mana kA abhAva
hone ke kAraNa yoga-nirodha hI unakA dhyAna hotA hai  / ' dhyAna prazasta aura
aprazasta rUpa se do prakAra kA hotA hai| Artta aura raudra aprazasta dhyAna
haiM, ataH heya - tyAjya haiM  /  dharma tathA zukla prazasta dhyAna haiM
AcaraNIya haiM  /  - AcArya jinadAsa mahattara ne AvazyakacUrNi ke pratikra
maNAdhyayana meM isI prasaMga para eka gAthA uddhRta kI hai hiMsANuraMjitaM
raudraM, aTTaM kAmANuraMjitaM  /  dhammaraMjiyaM dhammaM, suklajjhANaM
niraMjaNaM  //  arthAt- :- kAma se anuraMjita dhyAna Arta kahalAtA hai| hiMsA se
raMgA huA dhyAna raudra hai, dharma se anuraMjita dhyAna dharmadhyAna hai aura
zukladhyAna pUrNa niraMjana hotA hai| 1. ArtadhyAna - Arti kA artha duHkha,
vyathA, kaSTa yA pIr3A hotA hai| Arti ke nimitta se jo dhyAna hotA hai, vaha
ArtadhyAna kahalAtA hai  /  aniSTa vastu ke saMyoga se, iSTa vastu ke viyoga se,
roga Adi ke kAraNa tathaiva bhogoM kI lAlasA se mana meM jo eka prakAra kI
vikalatA-sI arthAt pIr3A-sI hotI hai aura jaba vaha 1 "antomuhutamittaM,
cittAvatthANamegavatthummi  /  chaumatthANaM Na jogaNiroho jiNANaMti  //

Page #122 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Fourth Study: Pratikramana  **1. Arta-Dhyana:** When concentration takes the
form of sorrow, it is called Arta-Dhyana.  **2. Raudra-Dhyana:** A person who
harbors extremely cruel thoughts like violence is called Rudra. The mental state
of a Rudra person is called Raudra-Dhyana. Alternatively, when there is an
arising of attachment and aversion due to cutting, piercing, burning, binding,
killing, striking, suppressing, and cutting, and there is no compassion, then
such a self-result is called Raudra-Dhyana.  **3. Dharma-Dhyana:** Meditation
imbued with the Dharma, which is the form of the command of the Vitaraga, is
called Dharma-Dhyana. Alternatively, contemplation of the study of Agamas,
observance of vows, bondage-liberation, restraint of senses, and compassion for
beings is called Dharma-Dhyana.  **4. Shukla-Dhyana:** Meditation that purifies
karmic impurities and removes sorrow is called Shukla-Dhyana. Dharma-Dhyana is
the means of Shukla-Dhyana. It is also said: "The meditation of a great person
whose senses are devoid of worldly desires, who is free from the three yogas
(which are full of defects like resolve, imagination, and fluctuation), is
called 'Shukla-Dhyana'."  **-**  **Kriya Sutra:**  According to Jain definition,
in this context, the evil business, especially the one that is primarily based
on violence, is called 'Kriya'. There are 25 types of Kriya according to the
detailed method, but all other Kriyas are included in the five Kriyas mentioned
in the sutras, therefore, the original Kriyas are considered to be only five.
**1. Kayiki Kriya:** The action that takes place through the body is called
Kayiki. There are three types of this. The action of Mithyadristi and Avirat
Samyak-Dristi is called Avirat-Kayiki. The action of a Pramattasanyami Muni is:
1. **Sanchhedan-airedhana-bhanjan-maran-aishcha, bandha-prahar-daman-
airvinikrintan-aishcha.** Rago-dayo bhavati yena na chanukampa, dhyanam tu
raudramiti tatpravadanti tajjnaah.  2. **Sutrarth-sadhan-mahavrata-dharaneshu,
bandha-pramoksha-gamana-agama-hetu-chinta.** Panchendriya-vyuparamashcha daya
cha bhute, dhyanam tu dharmyamiti sampravadanti tajjnaah.  3. **Shodhayatyashta-
prakaram karma-malam shucham va klamayatiti shuklam.**  4. **Yasyendriyani
vishayeshu paraangmukhani, sankalpa-kalpana-vikalapa-vikar-doshaih.** Yogais
tatha tribhiraho! Nibhritantaraatma, dhyanam tu shuklamidamasya samaadishanti.
**-**  **Acharya Nami.**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 caturtha adhyayana : pratikramaNa ] ekAgratA kA rUpa dhAraNa karatI hai taba
vaha ArtadhyAna kahalAtI hai  /  2. raudradhyAna hiMsA Adi atyanta krUra vicAra
rakhane vAlA vyakti rudra kahalAtA hai  /  rudra vyakti ke manobhAvoM ko
raudradhyAna kahA jAtA hai  /  athavA chedana, bhedana, dahana, bandhana,
mAraNa, praharaNa, damana, kartana Adi ke kAraNa rAga-dveSa kA udaya ho aura
dayA na ho to aise Atma-pariNAma ko raudradhyAna kahate haiM  / ' 3.
dharmadhyAna vItarAga kI AjJA rUpa dharma se yukta dhyAna ko dharmadhyAna kahate
haiM  /  athavA Agama ke paThana vratadhAraNa, bandha-mokSAdi, indriyadamana
tathA prANiyoM para dayA karane ke cintana ko dharmadhyAna kahate haiM  /  -- --
4. zukladhyAna karmamala ko zodhana karane vAlA tathA zoka ko dUra karane vAlA
dhyAna zukladhyAna hai  /  dharma dhyAna, zukladhyAna kA sAdhana hai  /  kahA
bhI hai I - 'jisakI indriyA~ viSaya-vAsanA rahita hoM, saMkalpavikalpAdi
doSayukta jo tIna yoga, unase rahita mahApuruSa ke dhyAna ko 'zukladhyAna'
kahate haiM  /  - kriyAsUtra - - jaina paribhASA ke anusAra prastuta prakaraNa
meM hiMsApradhAna duSTa vyApAra - vizeSa ko 'kriyA' kahate haiM  /  vistAra-
paddhati se kriyA ke 25 bheda mAne gaye haiM parantu anya samasta kriyAoM kA
sUtrokta pAMca kriyAoM meM hI antarbhAva ho jAtA hai, ataH mUla kriyAeM pAMca hI
mAnI jAtI haiM  /  1. kAyikIkriyA * kAya ke dvArA hone vAlI kriyA kAyikI
kahalAtI haiM isake tIna bheda mAne gaye haiM  /  mithyAdRSTi aura avirata
samyak - dRSTi kI kriyA avirata - kAyikI kahalAtI hai, pramattasaMyamI muni kI
1. saMchedanairdahana - bhaJjana-mAraNaizca, bandha-prahAra-
damanairvinikRntanaizca  //  rAgodayo bhavati yena na cAnukampA, dhyAnaM tu
raudramiti tatpravadanti tajjJAH  //  2. sUtrArthasAdhanamahAvratadhAraNeSu,
bandhapramokSagamanAgamahetucintA  /  paJcendriyavyuparamazca dayA ca bhUte, [
51 dhyAnaM tu dharmyamiti saMpravadanti tajjJAH  //  3. zodhayatyaSTaprakAraM
karmamalaM zucaM vA klamayatIti zuklam  /  4. yasyendriyANi viSayeSu
parAGmukhAni, saMkalpakalpana vikalpavikAradoSaiH  /  yogaistathA tribhiraho !
nibhRtAntarAtmA, dhyAnaM tu zuklamidamasya samAdizanti  //  - AcArya nami  /

Page #123 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Translation:  **[52]**  1. **Uparatkayiki** is a type of action that is
abandoned due to **Savadyoga**. 2. **Aadhikarini Kriya** is the action that
makes the soul eligible for hell or other lower realms. It is the specific act
of performing rituals with instruments like swords or incantations, which are
considered means of sin. 3. **Praadveshiki Kriya** - **Praadvesha** means envy,
jealousy, and malice. This is considered a strong cause of binding karma with
unfavorable results. Therefore, harboring animosity towards any living or non-
living being is **Praadveshiki Kriya**. 4. **Paritapaniki Kriya** -
**Paritapan** refers to suffering inflicted through means like beating. The
action arising from **Paritapan** is called **Paritapaniki Kriya**. There are
two types of **Paritapaniki Kriya** based on the distinction between self and
others. Inflicting suffering upon oneself is **Swaparitapaniki** and inflicting
suffering upon others is **Par-Paritapaniki Kriya**. [**Aavashyak Sutra**] 5.
**Praanaatipataki Kriya** - The killing or destruction of living beings is
called **Praanaatipat**. The action arising from **Praanaatipat** is called
**Praanaatipataki Kriya**. There are two types of this: killing oneself due to
passions like anger is **Swahastpraanaatipataki Kriya**, and killing others in
the same way is **Parpraanaatipataki Kriya**.  **[Kaamgun Sutra]** **Subject**
This Sutra states that if during the journey of self-control, the mind gets
distracted by **Kaamgun** (the five senses: sound, form, smell, taste, and
touch), abandoning neutrality and becoming attached to likes and dislikes,
getting caught in the web of delusion, i.e., developing attachment to pleasant
sounds, etc., and aversion to unpleasant ones, then it should be removed from
there and directed back to the path of self-control. This is the **pratikraman**
of the soul from **Kaamgun**.  **[Mahavrat Sutra]** A **Sadhu** completely
abandons violence, falsehood, stealing, etc., i.e., they constantly and fully
practice the nine aspects of the **Mahavrat** (great vows) like non-violence,
etc. Therefore, the vows of non-violence, etc., of a **Sadhu** are called
**Mahavrat**. **Mahavrat** are considered the five fundamental virtues of a
**Sadhu**. The remaining conduct is called **Uttargun**. The utility of
**Uttargun** lies in protecting the fundamental virtues; they have no
independent purpose. **Mahavrat** are taken through three **Karan** (means) and
three **Yoga** (union). To not inflict violence on oneself, not cause others to
inflict violence, and not approve of those who inflict violence, through mind,
speech, and body, these are the **Mahavrat** of non-violence. Similarly, one
should understand the meaning of the nine-fold pledge regarding the abandonment
of falsehood, stealing, sexual misconduct, and possessions.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 52] kriyA sAvadyayoga se uparata hone ke kAraNa uparatakAyikI kahalAtI hai| 2.
AdhikariNIkriyA jisake dvArA AtmA naraka Adi durgati kA adhikArI hotA hai, vaha
pApa kA sAdhana khaDgAdi yA durmaMtrAdi kA anuSThAna-vizeSa adhikaraNa kahalAtA
hai, usase hone vAlI kriyA  /  3. prAdveSikIkriyA - pradveSa kA artha matsara,
DAha, IrSyA hotA hai| yaha akuzala pariNAma karmabandha kA prabala kAraNa mAnA
jAtA hai| ataH jIva yA ajIva kisI bhI padArtha para dveSyabhAva rakhanA,
prAdveSikIkriyA I 4. pAritApanikIkriyA tAr3ana Adi ke dvArA diyA jAne vAlA
duHkha paritApana kahalAtA hai| paritApana se niSpanna hone vAlI kriyA,
pAritApanikI kriyA kahalAtI hai  /  sva tathA para ke bheda se pAritApanikI
kriyA do prakAra kI hotI hai| apane Apako paritApa pahuMcAnA svapAritApanikI
aura anya prANI ko paritApa pahuMcAnA para - pAritApanikIkriyA hai  /  [
AvazyakasUtra - - 5. prANAtipAtikIkriyA - prANoM kA atipAta yA vinAza
prANAtipAta kahalAtA hai  /  prANAtipAta se hone vAlI kriyA prANAtipAtikI
kahalAtI hai| isake do bheda haiM- krodhAdi kaSAyavaza hokara apanI hiMsA
karanA, svahastaprANAtipAtikI kriyA hai aura isI prakAra dUsare kI hiMsA karanA,
paraprANAtipAtikI kriyA hai| kAmaguNasUtra viSaya prastuta sUtra meM ullekha hai
ki yadi saMyama yAtrA karate huye kahIM kAmaguNa arthAt pA~ca indriyoM ke zabda,
rUpa, gandha, rasa aura sparza, ina viSayoM meM mana bhaTaka gayA ho, taTasthatA
ko chor3a rAga-dveSa yukta ho gayA ho, mohajAla meM phaMsa gayA arthAt iSTa
zabdAdi meM rAga aura aniSTa meM dveSa utpanna huA ho to use vahA~ se haTAkara
puna: saMyama patha para agrasara karanA caahiye| yahI kAmaguNoM se AtmA kA
pratikramaNa hai  /  mahAvratasUtra sAdhu hiMsA, asatya, adattAdAna, Adi kA
sarvathA tyAga karatA hai arthAt ahiMsA Adi mahAvratoM kI navakoTi se sadA
sarvathA pUrNa ArAdhanA karatA hai, phalataH sAdhu ke ahiMsA Adi vrata mahAvrata
kahalAte haiM  /  mahAvrata sAdhu ke pAMca mUlaguNa kahe jAte haiN| isake
atirikta zeSa AcAra uttaraguNa kahalAte haiM  /  uttaraguNoM kI upayogitA
mUlaguNoM kI rakSA meM hai, svayaM svataMtra unakA koI prayojana nhiiN|
mahAvrata tIna karaNa aura tIna yoga se grahaNa kiye jAte haiN| jIvana paryanta
kisI bhI prakAra kI hiMsA na svayaM karanA, na dUsare karAnA, na karane vAloM kA
anumodana karanA, mana se, vacana se aura kAya se yaha ahiMsA mahAvrata haiN|
isI prakAra asatya, steya, maithuna evaM parigraha Adi ke tyAga ke sambandha meM
bhI navakoTi kI pratijJA kA bhAva samajha lenA cAhiye  /

Page #124 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Fourth Study: Pratikramana  **[53]**  **Important to Know:**  After the
present Mahavrat Sutra, the mention of Samiti Sutra is found in almost all the
available copies and the commentary books of the Aavashyak Sutra. But Acharya
Jinasena Mahत्तर has written - "Ettha kevi anna pi pathanti" meaning here some
Acharyas read other texts also. Such as - five Asrava, five Samvara doors, five
Nirjara doors etc.  **Samiti Sutra:**  The necessary blameless conduct of a Muni
completely free from violence to living beings is called Samiti. The effort for
the best results is also called Samiti. Samiti is a symbolic word of the Agamas.
The meaning of Samiti is - to act with discretion. Samiti is of five types:  1.
**Iryasamiti:** To walk with discretion when work arises and to walk in a useful
way so that no harm is done to other living beings. 2. **Bhasasamiti:** To speak
blameless words when necessary, meaning to speak words that are beneficial,
moderate, truthful and clear. 3. **Eshan asamiti:** To avoid the forty-two
faults related to food etc. and to accept alms blamelessly, to enjoy by avoiding
the faults related to the five mandalas is Eshan asamiti. 4. **Adan-
Bhandamaatraniksepanasamiti:** To accept clothes, utensils, books etc. equipment
usefully and to deposit them on a living-being-free, cleansed ground is Adan-
Bhandamaatraniksepanasamiti. 5. **Parishthapanikasamiti:** To dispose of
excrement, urine, phlegm, saliva, nasal mucus etc. or leftover food and broken
utensils etc. in a living-being-free secluded ground, to dispose of them with
proper effort so that no living beings are born, is Parishthapanikasamiti.
**Jivanikayasutra:**  The word 'Jivanikaya' is made up of two words: 'Jiva' and
'Nikaya'. The meaning of 'Jiva' is - sentient being and the meaning of 'Nikaya'
is - a group, a collection. The collection of living beings is called
Jivanikaya. Earth, water, fire, air, plants and Tris, these are the six Nikayas.
In these six Nikayas, i.e. groups, all the worldly living beings are:  1.
"Padikkhamami panchahi asavadaarehi - micchat-avirati-pamad-kasayajogehi,
panchahi anasavadaarehi - sammatt-virati appamad akasayitt-ajogittehi, panchahi
nijar-thanhehi, nan-dasan-charitt-tav-sanjamehi." 2. "Bhasasamiti ma
hitamitasandighdharthabhasanam."  - Acharya Haribhadra.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 caturtha adhyayana : pratikramaNa ] [53 vizeSa jJAtavya - . prastuta
mahAvratasUtra ke pazcAt prAyaH sabhI prApta pratiyoM aura AvazyakasUtra ke
TIkAgranthoM meM samitisUtra kA ullekha milatA hai  /  parantu AcArya jinadAsa
mahattara ne likhA hai - "ettha kevi aNNaM pi paThanti" arthAt yahAM kucha
AcArya dUsare pATha bhI par3hate haiM  /  yathA - pAMca Azrava, pAMca
saMvaradvAra, pAMca nirjarAdvAra aadi| samitisUtra sarvathA jIva hiMsA se nivRta
muni kI Avazyaka nirdoSa pravRtti ko samiti kahate haiM  /  uttama pariNAmoM kI
ceSTA ko bhI samiti kahate haiN| samiti AgamoM kA eka sAMketika zabda hai|
samiti kA artha hai - vivekayukta hokara pravRtti krnaa| samiti pAMca prakAra kI
hai - 1. IryAsamiti - kArya utpanna hone para vivekapUrvaka gamana karanA tathA
dUsare jIvoM ko kisI prakAra kI hAni na ho, isa prakAra upayogapUrvaka calanA
IryAsamiti hai| 2. bhASAsamiti - AvazyakatA hone para nirdoSa vacana kI pravRtti
karanA, arthAt hita, mita, satya evaM spaSTa vacana kahanA bhASAsamiti hai| 3.
eSaNAsamiti - AhArAdi sambandhI bayAlIsa doSoM ko TAlakara nirdoSa bhikSA
grahaNa karanA, 5 maNDala sambandhI doSa TAlakara bhoganA eSaNAsamiti hai| 4.
AdAna-bhANDamAtranikSepaNAsamiti - vastra, pAtra, pustaka Adi upakaraNoM ko
upayogapUrvaka grahaNa karanA evaM jIva rahita pramArjita bhUmi para nikSepaNa
karanA-rakhanA AdAna-bhANDamAtranikSepaNAsamiti hai| 5. pAriSThApanikAsamiti -
mala, mUtra, kapha, thUka, nAsikAmala Adi yA bhuktazeSa bhojana tathA bhagna
pAtra Adi paraThane yogya vastu jIva rahita ekAnta sthaNDila-bhUmi meM
paraThanA, jIvAdi utpanna na hoM, etadartha ucita yatanApUrvaka paraThanA
pAriSThApanikAsamiti hai| jIvanikAyasUtra - 'jIvanikAya' zabda jIva aura nikAya
ina do zabdoM se banA hai| jIva kA artha hai - cetana prANI tathA nikAya kA
artha hai - rAzi arthAt samUha  /  jIvoM kI rAzi ko jIvanikAya kahate haiM  /
pRthvI, apa, teja, vAyu, vanaspati aura trasa, ye chaha nikAya haiM  /  ina
chaha nikAyoM meM arthAt samUhoM meM samasta saMsArI jIvoM kA 1. "paDikkamAmi
paMcahiM AsavadArehiM - micchata-avirati-pamAda-kasAyajogehiM, paMcahi
aNAsavadArehiM - sammatta-virati appamAda akasAyitta-ajogittehiM, paMcahiM
nijara-ThANehiM, naann-dsNnn-critt-tv-sNjmehiN|" 2. "bhASAsamiti ma
hitmitaasNdigdhaarthbhaassnnm|" - AcArya hribhdr|

Page #125 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 54]  **Essential Sutra** This Sutra encompasses the situation where one has
caused harm, of any kind, to any of the six groups of living beings through
negligence. This act is considered a transgression.  **Leshya Sutra** The
concise meaning of Leshya is mental attitude or thought-wave. The
Uttaradhyayanasutra, Bhagavati Sutra, Prajnapana Sutra, etc., describe Leshya in
detail and in a subtle manner.  Explaining Leshya, Acharya Jinasena Mahत्तर
states that the results of the soul, through which good and bad karma are
synthesized with the soul, are called Leshya. The results of the combination of
mind, speech, and body are referred to as Leshya. Since the liberated soul
without any combination is considered devoid of Leshya. There are six main types
of Leshya:  1. **Krishna Leshya:** This mental attitude is the most heinous.
Those with Krishna Leshya have extremely petty, cruel, harsh, and merciless
thoughts. They despise non-violence, truth, etc. They are not afraid of this
world or the next, nor of the adverse consequences of the afterlife. They are
only concerned with their own happiness and do not care about the lives of
others. They are extremely cruel and sinful.  2. **Neela Leshya:** This mental
attitude is slightly better than the first, but still not desirable. Those with
this Leshya are envious, intolerant, deceitful, shameless, and greedy for
pleasure. They are engrossed in their own happiness. However, they do take some
care of the beings who provide them with happiness, according to the principle
of 'Ajaposhana'.  3. **Kapot Leshya:** This mental attitude is also undesirable.
Those with this Leshya are crooked in their thoughts, speech, and actions. They
are harsh-tongued and try to cover up their faults.  4. **Tejo Leshya:** This
mental attitude is pure. Those with this Leshya are humble, thoughtful,
compassionate, and interested in religion. They prioritize the well-being of
others over their own comfort and have a generous spirit.  5. **Padma Leshya:**
Those with Padma Leshya have a life that is like a lotus, spreading fragrance to
others. Their mind is calm, steady, and prevents evil tendencies. They fear sin,
conquer attachment and sorrow. They are moderate in speech, gentle, and self-
controlled.  1. 'Lish sansleshene, sanshlishyaate aatmaa tais-tais:
parinaamantairai: yathaa shleeshena varna-sambandhee bhavati evaa
leshyaabhiraatmani karmaanisanshlishyantae. Yoga-parinaamo leshya, jamhaa
ayogikevali alessso.' - Aavashyak - Churni

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 54] [ AvazyakasUtra samAveza ho jAtA hai| prastuta sUtra meM chahoM jIvasamUhoM
meM se kisI ko kisI bhI prakAra kI pramAda - vaza pIr3A pahuMcAyI ho to usakA
pratikramaNa kiyA gayA hai| lezyAsUtra lezyA kA saMkSipta artha hai - manovRtti
yA vicAra-taraMga  /  uttarAdhyayanasUtra, bhagavatIsUtra, prajJApanAsUtra Adi
meM lezyA kA vistAra se tathA sUkSma rUpa se varNana kiyA gayA hai| lezyA kI
vyAkhyA karate huye AcArya jinadAsa mahattara kahate haiM ki AtmA ke jina
zubhAzubha pariNAmoM ke dvArA zubhAzubha karma kA AtmA ke sAtha saMzleSaNa hotA
hai, ve pariNAma lezyA kahalAte haiM  /  mana, vacana aura kAya rUpa yoga ke
pariNAma lezyA padavAcya haiN| kyoki yoga ke abhAva meM ayogI kevalI lezyA
rahita mAne gaye haiM  /  lezyA ke mukhya bheda chaha haiM  /  1. kRSNalezyA -
yaha manovRtti sabase jaghanya hai  /  kRSNalezyA vAle ke vicAra atIva kSudra,
krUra, kaThora evaM nirdaya hote haiN| ahiMsA, satya Adi se unheM ghRNA hotI hai
/  ihaloka paraloka se evaM paraloka sambandhI aniSTa pariNAmoM se ve nahIM
ddrte| unheM apane sukha se matalaba hotA hai - dUsaroM ke jIvana kA kucha bhI
ho, isakI cintA nahIM rahatI hai| ve atizaya krUra evaM pApI hote haiM  /  2.
nIlalezyA yaha manovRtti pahalI kI apekSA kucha ThIka hai parantu upAdeya yaha
bhI nahIM  /  isa lezyA vAlA ISyAlu, asahiSNu, mAyAvI, nirlajja, evaM rasalolupa
hotA hai| apane sukha meM masta rahatA hai  /  parantu jina prANiyoM ke dvArA
sukha milatA hai, unakI bhI 'ajapoSaNa' nyAya ke anusAra kucha sAra-saMbhAla
kara letA hai  /  3. kApotalezyA yaha manovRtti bhI aprazasta hai| isa lezyA
vAlA vyakti vicArane, bolane aura kArya karane meM vakra hotA hai| kaThorabhASI
evaM apane doSoM ko Dha~kane vAlA hotA hai| - 4. tejolezyA yaha manovRtti
pavitra hai  /  isake hone para manuSya namra, vicArazIla, dayAlu evaM dharma
meM abhiruci rakhane vAlA hotA hai| apanI sukhasuvidhA ko gauNa karake dUsaroM
ke prati adhika udAra bhAvanA rakhatA hai| - 5. padmalezyA - padmalezyA vAle
manuSya kA jIvana kamala ke samAna dUsaroM ko sugandha dene vAlA hotA hai| isa
lezyA vAle kA mana zAnta, nizcala evaM azubha pravRttiyoM ko rokane vAlA hotA
hai| pApa se bhaya khAtA hai| moha aura zoka para vijaya prApta karatA hai| vaha
mitabhASI, saumya evaM jitendriya hotA hai  /  1. 'liza saMzleSaNe, saMzliSyate
AtmA taistai: pariNAmAntaraiH  /  yathA zleSeNa varNa-saMbaMdhI bhavati evaM
lezyAbhirAtmani karmANisaMzlizyante  /  yoga- pariNAmo lezyA, jamhA ayogikevalI
alesso  / ' - Avazyaka - cUrNi

Page #126 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Fourth Study: Pratikraman  [556. Shukla Leshya - This attitude is called
Shukla because it is the most pure. The body with this Leshya takes food for its
sustenance. It does not cause any harm to any living being. It removes the
culmination of attachment and aversion and adopts the state of being free from
attachment. The one with the ultimate Shukla Leshya remains free from attachment
and maintains constant equanimity.  The first three Leshyas - Krishna, Neel and
Kapoth are to be abandoned, and the last three Leshyas - Tejo, Padma and Shukla
are to be adopted. Without the final Shukla Leshya, the completion of self-
development is impossible. If the conduct of the Adharma Leshyas and the conduct
of the Dharma Leshyas have not been performed on the path of life purification,
then Pratikraman is performed through the present sutra.  Bhayaadisutra -  Some
of the words from fear to desire are adoptable, some are knowable, and some are
to be abandoned. There are seven types of fear:  1. Ihalokabhaya - Fear of a
creature of one's own species is Ihalokabhaya, such as - fear of a human from
another human, fear of a Tiryanch from another Tiryanch. 2. Parlokabhaya - Fear
of a creature of another species is Parlokabhaya, such as - fear of a human from
a god or a Tiryanch etc. 3. Adanabhaya - Fear of being robbed of wealth etc. by
a thief etc. 4. Akasmatbhaya - Sudden fear without any reason. 5. Aajivkabhaya -
Fear of the misfortune of not getting food etc. for the journey of life in times
of famine etc. 6. Maranabhaya - Fear of death. 7. Apayash-Ashlokabhaya - Fear of
the fear of disgrace.  Fear is a specific result of the agitation of the soul
caused by the rise of the Bhayamohaniyakarma. A Sadhu should not bow down to any
fear. To be fearless means neither to be afraid oneself nor to make others
afraid. Fear corrupts the life of restraint, therefore Pratikraman is performed
for fear.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 caturtha adhyayana : pratikramaNa ] [55 6. zuklalezyA - yaha manovRtti sabase
adhika vizuddha hone ke kAraNa zukla kahalAtI hai| isa lezyA vAlA zarIra ke
nirvAha ke liye AhAra grahaNa karatA hai| kisI bhI prANI ko kaSTa nahIM detaa|
rAga-dveSa kI pariNati haTAkara vItarAga bhAva dhAraNa karatA hai  /
paramazuklalezyA vAlA Asaktirahita hokara satata samabhAva rakhatA hai| prathama
kI tIna lezyAeM - kRSNa, nIla evaM kApota tyAjya haiM aura anta kI tIna lezyAeM
- tejo, padma evaM zukla upAdeya haiM  /  antima zuklalezyA ke binA Atma-vikAsa
kI pUrNatA kA honA asaMbhava hai| jIvanazuddhi ke patha meM adharma lezyAoM kA
AcaraNa aura dharma lezyAoM kA AcaraNa na kiyA ho to prastuta sUtra ke dvArA
usakA pratikramaNa kiyA jAtA hai| bhayAdisUtra - bhaya se lekara AzAtanA taka ke
bola kucha upAdeya haiM, kucha jJeya haiM, kucha heya haiM  /  bhayasthAna ke
sAta prakAra haiM - 1. ihalokabhaya - apanI jAti ke prANI se DaranA ihalokabhaya
hai, jaise - manuSya kA manuSya se, tiryaJca kA tiryaJca se ddrnaa| 2.
paralokabhaya - dUsarI jAti vAle prANI se DaranA paralokabhaya hai, jaise
manuSya kA deva se yA tiryaJca Adi se ddrnaa| 3. AdAnabhaya - cora Adi dvArA
dhana Adi chIne jAne kA bhaya  /  4. akasmAtbhaya - binA kAraNa hI acAnaka Dara
jaanaa| 5. AjIvikAbhaya - durbhikSa Adi meM jIvana-yAtrA ke liye bhojana Adi kI
aprApti ke durvikalpa se ddrnaa| 6. maraNabhaya - mRtyu se ddrnaa| 7. apayaza-
azlokabhaya - apayaza kI AzaMkA se ddrnaa| bhayamohanIyakarma ke udaya se hone
vAle AtmA ke udvega rUpa pariNAma-vizeSa ko bhaya kahate haiN| sAdhu ko kisI
bhaya ke Age apane Apako nahIM jhukAnA caahiye| nirbhaya rahanA arthAt na svayaM
bhayabhIta honA aura na dUsaroM ko bhayabhIta karanA cAhiye  /  bhaya ke dvArA
saMyama-jIvana dUSita hotA hai , tadartha bhaya kA pratikramaNa kiyA jAtA hai|

Page #127 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 56] [Essential Sutras] Eight types of pride: 1. **Jatimad:** Pride in one's
high and noble caste (maternal side). 2. **Kulmad:** Pride in one's high lineage
(paternal side). 3. **Balmad:** Pride in one's strength. 4. **Rupmad:** Pride in
one's appearance and beauty. 5. **Tapomad:** Pride in being a rigorous ascetic.
6. **Shrutad:** Pride in one's knowledge of scriptures, being a scholar. 7.
**Labhpradad:** Pride in gaining desired objects, profit. 8. **Aishwaryamad:**
Pride in one's dominion.  **Discussion:** These eight types of pride are
mentioned in the Samavayanga Sutra. Ganadhar Gautam asked Sri Mahavira Swami: "O
Bhagavan! What benefit does a being gain by conquering pride?" The Lord
answered: "Conquering pride brings gentleness, no new karma is bound, and the
previously bound karma is destroyed." - Uttara.Su.A.29.  Meaning: Conquering
pride brings gentleness, no new karma is bound, and the previously bound karma
is destroyed.  Pride makes a person's mind soar high, and when they fall, there
is a risk of their head being crushed.  In the world, pride, arrogance, and
vanity are considered like dogs. Just as a dog licks and makes impure when
loved, and bites when beaten, similarly, nurturing pride leads to disgrace, and
when pride is shattered, it can lead to the end of one's life. Therefore, it is
said: "The pain of death is momentary, but the pain of pride being shattered is
a constant torment."

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 56] [ AvazyakasUtra ATha madasthAna - 1. jAtimada - UMcI evaM zreSTha jAti
(mAtRpakSa) kA abhimAna  /  2. kulamada - UMce kula (pitRpakSa) kA abhimAna  /
3. balamada - apane bala kA ghamaNDa krnaa| 4. rUpamada - apane rUpa kA,
saundarya kA abhimAna krnaa| 5. tapomada - ugra tapasvI hone kA garva krnaa| 6.
zrutamada - zAstrAbhyAsa kA arthAt paMDita hone kA ghamaNDa krnaa| 7. lAbhaprada
- abhISTa vastu ke mila jAne para lAbha kA garva krnaa| 8. aizvaryamada - apane
prabhutva kA ahNkaar| vivecana - ye ATha mada samavAyAMga sUtra ke ullekhAnusAra
haiM  /  gaNadhara gautama ne zrI mahAvIra svAmI se prazna kiyA thA - mANa-
vijaeNaM bhaMte! jIve kiM jaNayai ? he bhagavan ! mAna para vijaya pAne se jIva
ko kisa lAbha kI prApti hotI hai? bhagavAna ne samAdhAna diyA - "mANavijaeNaM
mahavaM jaNayai, mANaveyaNijjaM navaM kammaM na baMdhaI, puvva-baddhaM ca
nijrei|" - uttarA.sU.a.29  /  arthAt - mAna para vijaya pAne se mRdutA prApta
hotI hai| navIna karmoM kA bandha nahIM hotA tathA pUrvArjita karmoM kI nirjarA
hotI hai| ahaMkAra se manuSya kA dimAga AsamAna para car3ha jAtA hai aura aisI
sthiti meM nIce Thokara lagane para sira phaTane kI AzaMkA rahatI hai| jagat meM
mAna, garva, abhimAna ko kutte ke samAna mAnA gayA hai| jaise kuttA prema karane
para muMha cATa kara azuddha kara detA hai aura mArane para kATa khAtA hai, usI
taraha ahaMkAra kA poSaNa karane se apayaza kA bhAgI bananA par3atA hai aura
jaba ahaMkAra khaMDita ho jAtA hai to jIvana-lIlA samApta hone kI bhI naubata A
jAtI hai| isaliye kahA hai - "mRtyostu kSaNikA pIDA mAna-khaMDo pde-pde|" arthAt
- mRtyu kI pIr3A to kSaNika hotI hai, kiMtu mAna-bhaMga hone kI pIr3A pada-pada
para kaSTa pahu~cAtI hai|

Page #128 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Fourth Study: Pratikraman  [57 Nine Brahmacharya Secrets -  - Brahmacharya is
the strength of the body. It is the supreme wealth of life. It is the subduing
of the mind. It is the upliftment of the soul. It is the best among vows. It is
the foundation of sadhana and the basis of Dharma worship. It is the means of
success and the source of peace. It is the ocean of forgiveness and the
storehouse of humility. The sixth study of the Sutra Kritanga Sutra states -
'Tavesu Va Uttama Bhamchearam' meaning Brahmacharya is the best among
austerities. The meaning of Brahmacharya -  Jivo Bhamho Jivammi Chev Chariya,
Havij Ja Jadino? Tam Janam Bhamchearam, Vimuk Pardehatittiss. - Bhagavati
Aradhana 81 meaning - Brahma means the soul, to dwell in the soul is
Brahmacharya.  Brahmacharya is the foundation of Dharma sadhana. Through its
practice, the path to self-salvation is paved. The Prashnavyakaran Sutra states
- Brahmacharya is the embankment of the lotus pond of Dharma. It is the
storehouse of qualities like compassion, forgiveness, etc. and the basis of the
branches of Dharma. Devotees and kings worship the Brahmachari. It is the
auspicious path of the world.  Dev-Danav-Gandhavva Jakkha-Rakkhas-Kinnara.
Bhamhyarim Namsanti Dukkaram Je Karanti Te. - Uttaraadhyayanasutra meaning -
Even gods like Dev, Danav, Gandharva, Yaksha, Rakshasa, and Kinnara bow down to
the Brahmachari who practices the difficult Brahmacharya.  The American sage
'Thoro' said - "Brahmacharya is the flower of the tree of life and its beautiful
fruits are many, including brilliance, purity, courage, etc." In the words of
Vyasa - "Brahmacharya is nectar." The person who enjoys the nectar of
Brahmacharya becomes immortal forever. Brahmacharya is the great sadhana of
life.  If, while practicing sadhana, one inadvertently transgresses the nine
Brahmacharya secrets, then pratikraman is performed through this sutra.  Nine
secrets have been established in the scriptures to keep Brahmacharya well
protected. In short, their meaning is as follows -

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 caturtha adhyayana : pratikramaNa ] [57 nau brahmacaryaguptiyA~ - - brahmacarya
zarIra kI zakti hai  /  jIvana kA paramottama dhana hai  /  mana kA mardana hai
/  AtmA kA utthAna hai| vratoM meM uttama hai  /  sAdhanA kI buniyAda aura
dharmArAdhanA kA AdhAra hai  /  saphalatA kA sAdhana aura zAMti kA srota hai  /
kSamA kA sAgara aura vinaya kA AgAra hai| sUtrakRtAMga sUtra ke chaThe adhyayana
meM likhA hai - 'tavesu vA uttama baMbhaceraM' arthAt brahmacarya tapoM meM
zreSTha hai| brahmacarya kA artha - jIvo baMbho jIvammi ceva cariyA, havija jA
jadiNo ? taM jANaM baMbhaceraM, vimukka prdehtittiss|| - bhagavatI ArAdhanA 81
arthAt - brahma arthAt AtmA, AtmA meM caryA arthAt ramaNa karanA brahmacarya
hai| brahmacarya dharmasAdhanA kA AdhAra hai| isakI sAdhanA se AtmakalyANa kA
mArga prazasta hotA hai| praznavyAkaraNasUtra meM kahA hai - brahmacarya
dharmarUpI padmasarovara kI pAla hai| vaha dayA kSamAdi guNoM kA AgAra hai evaM
dharmazAkhAoM kA AdhAra hai  /  brahmacArI kI deva-narendra pUjA karate haiM  /
yaha saMsAra kA maMgalamaya mArga hai| deva-dANava-gaMdhavvA jkkh-rkkhs-kinnraa|
baMbhayAriM namasaMti dukkaraM je karaMti te|| - uttarAdhyayanasUtra arthAt -
deva, dAnava, gaMdharva, yakSa, rAkSasa tathA kinnara Adi devagaNa bhI duSkara
brahmacarya kA pAlana karane vAle brahmacArI ko namaskAra karate haiN| amerikana
RSi 'thoro' ne kahA hai - "brahmacarya jIvana-vRkSa kA puSpa hai aura pratibhA,
pavitratA, vIratA Adi aneka usake manohara phala haiN|" vyAsa ke zabdoM meM -
"brahmacarya amRta hai|" jo manuSya brahmacarya rUpI amRta kA AsvAdana kara letA
hai, vaha sadA ke liye amara bana jAtA hai  /  brahmacarya jIvana kI virATa
sAdhanA hai| yadi sAdhanA karate hue kahIM bhI pramAdavaza nau
brahmacaryaguptiyoM kA atikramaNa kiyA ho to usakA prastuta sUtra ke dvArA
pratikramaNa kiyA jAtA hai| brahmacarya ko bhalIbhAMti surakSita rakhane ke liye
nava guptiyAM zAstroM meM pratipAdita kI gaI haiM  /  saMkSepa meM unakA Azaya
isa prakAra hai -

Page #129 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  58] **Essential Sutras**  1. **Avoiding secluded dwelling:** Do not stay in
a place inhabited by women, animals, or eunuchs. 2. **Avoiding conversations
about women:** Do not engage in discussions about women, their stories, beauty,
etc. 3. **Avoiding sitting together:** Do not sit on the same seat with a woman,
and even after she leaves, do not sit in that place for a muhurta (48 minutes).
4. **Avoiding gazing at women's bodies:** Do not look at the attractive limbs
and features of women. If by chance your gaze falls upon them, immediately avert
it as you would from the sun. 5. **Avoiding hearing sounds from behind walls:**
Do not listen to or see a woman's words, songs, laughter, appearance, etc., from
behind a wall or any other cover. 6. **Avoiding recalling past pleasures:** Do
not remember past sensual experiences. 7. **Avoiding prescribed food:** Do not
consume heavy food that stimulates desires. 8. **Avoiding excessive food:** Do
not eat even dry and bland food in excess. According to texts on diet, fill half
your stomach with food, leave two parts for water, and one part for air.
According to scriptures, the ideal diet for a male practitioner is 32 kavala,
and for a female practitioner, 28 kavala. The measure of a kavala is the size of
a peacock's egg. 9. **Avoiding adornment:** Do not adorn your body.  In these
nine secrets of celibacy, and in the ten virtues of patience, liberation, non-
attachment, honesty, humility, lightness (freedom from attachment to material
possessions), truth, self-control, austerity, celibacy, and renunciation, I
renounce any transgression.  **Eleven Images of the Devotee**  The special type
of attachment of a desavirata (one who has renounced worldly attachments) is
called pratima (image). A shraman who worships gods and gurus is called a
shramanopasaka (devotee of shramans). When a devotee worships images, he is
called a pratimadhari shravaka (devotee who holds images). These images are
eleven:  1. **Darshan Pratima:** In this image, the shravaka, without holding
any kind of royal office or other position, follows pure, untainted, and proper
right faith. The main aspect is the renunciation of falsehood and transgression.
This image lasts for one month. 2. **Vrata Pratima:** After attaining right
faith, the devotee practices vows. He fulfills the vows of the five anuvrata
(minor vows) and other vows properly. However, he does not observe samayika (a
daily meditation) properly at the right time...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 58] [AvazyakasUtra 1. viviktavasatisevana - strI, pazu aura napuMsakoM se yukta
sthAna meM na tthhrnaa| 2. strIkathAparihAra - striyoM kI kathAvArtA, saundarya
Adi kI carcA na krnaa| 3. niSadyAnupavezana - strI ke sAtha eka Asana para na
baiThe, usake uTha jAne para bhI eka muhUrta taka usa sthAna para na baitthe| 4.
strI-aMgopAMgAdarzana - striyoM ke manohara aMga, upAMga na dekhe  /  yadi kabhI
akasmAt dRSTi par3a jAye to usI prakAra sahasA haTA le jaise sUrya kI ora se
dRSTi haTA lI jAtI hai| 5.kuDyAntara-zabdazravaNAdivarjana - dIvAra Adi kI Ar3a
se strI ke zabda, gIta, hAsya, rUpa Adi na sune aura na dekhe| 6.
pUrvabhogAsmaraNa - pahale bhoge hue bhogoM kA smaraNa na kre| 7. praNIta-
bhojana-tyAga - vikArotpAdaka gariSTha bhojana na kre| 8. atimAtra-bhojanatyAga
- rUkhA-sUkhA bhojana bhI adhika mAtrA meM na kre| AhAra saMbaMdhI granthoM ke
anusAra AdhA peTa anna se bhare, Adhe meM se do bhAga pAnI ke liye aura eka
bhAga havA ke liye chor3a de| zAstrAnusAra puruSa sAdhaka kA utkRSTa AhAra
battIsa aura nArI sAdhikA kA aTThAIsa kavala hai| kavala kA pramANa bhI batA
diyA gayA hai mayUrI ke aMDe jitnaa| 9. vibhUSAparivarjana - zarIra kI vibhUSA-
sajAvaTa na kare  /  ina nau brahmacarya-guptiyoM meM aura kSAnti, mukti,
nirlobhatA, Arjava (saralatA rakhanA), mArdava (mAna parityAga), lAghava (dravya
bhAva se laghutA), satya saMyama tapa brahmacarya evaM tyAga, isa prakAra dasa
prakAra ke yatidharma meM jo koI aticAra lagA ho to usase maiM nivRtta hotA
huuN| gyAraha upAsakapratimA - dezavirata zrAvaka ke abhigrahavizeSa ko pratimA
kahate haiM  /  deva aura guru kI upAsanA karane vAlA zramaNopAsaka hotA hai  /
jaba upAsaka pratimAoM kA ArAdhana karatA hai taba pratimAdhArI zrAvaka kahalAtA
hai  /  ye pratimAeM gyAraha haiN| 1. darzanapratimA - isa pratimA meM zrAvaka
kisI bhI prakAra kA rAjAbhiyoga Adi AgAra na rakhakara zuddha niraticAra,
vidhipUrvaka samyagdarzana kA pAlana karatA hai  /  isameM mithyAtva-aticAra kA
tyAga mukhya hai  /  yaha pratimA eka mAsa kI hotI hai| 2. vratapratimA - vratI
zrAvaka samyaktva lAbha ke pazcAt vratoM kI sAdhanA karatA hai| pAMca aNuvrata
Adi vratoM kI pratijJAoM ko samyak prakAra se nibhAtA hai| kintu sAmAyika kA
yathAsamaya samyak pAlana nahIM

Page #130 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Fourth Study: Pratikramana  **[59]**  **1. Pratikramana Pratima:** This
pratima involves the practice of pratikramana, but the individual is unable to
fully observe the vows of non-violence, truthfulness, non-stealing, celibacy,
and non-attachment. This pratima lasts for one month.  **2. Samyak Pratima:**
This pratima involves the practice of pratikramana and the observance of the
vows of non-violence, truthfulness, non-stealing, celibacy, and non-attachment,
but the individual is unable to fully observe the vow of non-possession. This
pratima lasts for two months.  **3. Samayik Pratima:** This pratima involves the
practice of Samayik and the observance of the vows of non-violence,
truthfulness, non-stealing, celibacy, and non-attachment, but the individual is
unable to fully observe the vow of non-possession during festival days. This
pratima lasts for three months.  **4. Paushdhopavas Pratima:** This pratima
involves the practice of all the aforementioned rules, including the complete
observance of the Paushdha fast on the eighth, fourteenth, full moon, and new
moon days. This pratima lasts for four months.  **5. Kayotsarga Pratima:** This
pratima involves the practice of all the aforementioned vows and the following
specific rules:  1. No bathing. 2. Abstinence from all four types of food at
night. 3. Keeping the dhoti loose. 4. Observing celibacy during the day. 5.
Limiting sexual activity at night.  This pratima can be practiced for a minimum
of one, two, or three days, and a maximum of five months. It is also known as
the "Nitya Pratima."  **6. Brahmacharya Pratima:** This pratima involves the
complete observance of celibacy. This pratima lasts for a minimum of one night
and a maximum of six months.  **7. Sachittatyaga Pratima:** This pratima
involves the complete abandonment of food with conscious awareness. This pratima
lasts for a minimum of one night and a maximum of seven months.  **8.
Aarambhatyaga Pratima:** This pratima involves refraining from initiating any
action and practicing compassion towards all six types of living beings. This
pratima lasts for a minimum of one, two, or three days, and a maximum of eight
months.  **9. Preshyatyaga Pratima:** This pratima involves refraining from
initiating any action, even when prompted by others. The individual does not
initiate any action themselves, nor does they allow others to initiate actions
for them, but they do not abandon the practice of approval. This pratima lasts
for a minimum of one, two, or three days, and a maximum of nine months.  **10.
Uddishtabhaktatyaga Pratima:** This pratima involves refraining from consuming
food prepared for oneself and abandoning the practice of Uddishta Bhakt. The
individual must completely shave their head with a razor. When asked about
matters related to the household, they should only say "I know" if they know,
and "I don't know" if they don't know. This...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 caturtha adhyayana : pratikramaNa ] [59 kara paataa| yaha pratimA do mAsa kI
hotI hai| 3. sAmAyikapratimA - isa pratimA meM sAmAyika tathA dezAvakAzika vrata
kA pAlana karatA hai, kintu parva dinoM meM pauSadhavrata kA samyak pAlana nahIM
kara paataa| yaha tIna mAsa kI hotI hai| 4. pauSadhopavAsapratimA - pUrvokta
sabhI niyamoM ke sAtha aSTamI, caturdazI, pUrNimA aura amAvasyA ko pratipUrNa
pauSadha upavAsa sahita karatA hai  /  yaha pratimA cAra mAsa kI hai| 5.
kAyotsargapratimA - uparyukta sabhI vratoM kA bhalI-bhAMti pAlana karate huye
prastuta pratimA ke nimnokta niyamoM ko vizeSa rUpa se dhAraNa karanA hotA hai -
1. snAna nahIM krnaa| 2. rAtri meM cAroM prakAra ke AhAra kA tyAga krnaa| 3.
dhotI kI lAMgha khulI rkhnaa| 4. dina meM brahmacarya kA pAlana krnaa| 5. rAtri
meM maithuna kA parimANa rkhnaa| isa pratimA kA pAlana jaghanya eka yA do athavA
tIna dina, utkRSTa pAMca mahIne taka kiyA jAtA hai| ise niyama pratimA bhI kahA
jAtA hai| 6. brahmacaryapratimA - brahmacarya kA pUrNa pAlana krnaa| isa pratimA
kI kAla maryAdA jaghanya eka rAtri aura utkRSTa chaha mAsa kI hotI hai| 7.
sacittatyAgapratimA - sacitta AhAra kA sarvathA tyAga krnaa| yaha pratimA
jaghanya eka rAtri aura utkRSTa sAta mAsa kI hotI hai| 8. AraMbhatyAgapratimA -
isa pratimA meM svayaM AraMbha nahIM karatA, chaha kAya ke jIvoM kI dayA pAlatA
hai| isakI kAla maryAdA jaghanya eka, do, tIna dina aura utkRSTa ATha mAsa kI
hai| 9. preSyatyAgapratimA - isa pratimA meM dUsaroM ke dvArA Arambha karAne kA
bhI tyAga hotA hai  /  vaha svayaM Arambha nahIM karatA, na dUsaroM se karAtA
hai kintu anumodana kA use tyAga nahIM hotA hai| kAla jaghanya eka, do, tIna
dina hai aura utkRSTa kAla nau mAsa hai| 10. uddiSTabhaktatyAgapratimA - isa
pratimA meM apane nimitta banAyA huA bhojana grahaNa nahIM kiyA jAtA hai ,
uddiSTa bhakta kA bhI tyAga hotA hai  /  ustare se sarvathA ziromuNDana karanA
hotA hai  /  gRha saMbaMdhI viSayoM ke pUche jAne para yadi jAnatA hai to
'jAnatA hU~' aura nahIM jAnatA hai to nahIM jAnatA hU~' itanA mAtra kahe  /
yaha

Page #131 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  [60] [Essential Sutras]  The duration of a pratima (vow) is one night for
the least severe and ten months for the most severe.  11. Shramanabhootpratima -
The holder of this pratima is not a Shraman (ascetic) but is like a Shraman. He
wanders around wearing the attire of a Sadhu (holy man) and carrying the
utensils suitable for a Sadhu. If he has the strength, he performs Keshalunchana
(shaving of the head and beard), otherwise he gets his head shaved with a razor.
The duration of this pratima is one day and night for the least severe and
eleven months for the most severe.  The common meaning of Upasak is Shravak (lay
follower) and the meaning of Pratima is Pratijna-Abhiggraha (vow-acceptance).
The pratima of an Upasak is called Upasakpratima.  It should be noted here that
there is some difference of opinion regarding the duration of Shravak's pratima.
Some Acharyas (teachers) consider their duration to be one, two, three, up to
eleven months. They do not consider one, two, three days, etc. as the least
severe duration.  Twelve Bhikshu Pratima -  It is an offense to not practice the
twelve Bhikshu Pratima as much as possible, to not have faith in them, and to
misrepresent them.  1. The first pratima-holder Bhikshu is allowed to take one
datti (portion) of food and one datti of water. The flow of food and water given
by the donor in the Sadhu's bowl is considered one datti as long as it remains
unbroken. When the flow is broken, the datti ends. One should take food from
where it is prepared for one person, but not from where it is prepared for two,
three, or more people. This first pratima is for one month.  2. to 7. The second
to seventh pratima are each for one month. In these, one datti increases
progressively. Two datti of food and two datti of water are taken in the second
pratima. Similarly, in the third, fourth, up to the seventh pratima, three,
four, five, six, and seven datti of food and the same amount of water are taken
respectively.  8. The eighth pratima is for seven days and nights. In this, one
should practice Chavivihar (four types of conduct) with alternate fasting. One
should meditate outside the village in Uttanasana (lying on the back), Pasin
(lying on one side), and Nisadyasana (sitting with legs straight). If any
upsarga (obstacle) arises, one should bear it with a calm mind.  9. This pratima
is also for seven days and nights. In this, one should practice Chavivihar with
Shashthabhakta Tap (fasting with six portions). One should meditate in a
secluded place outside the village in Dandasana, Lagandasana, or Utkatukasana.
10. This is also for seven days and nights. In this, one should practice
Chavivihar with Tele-Tele Parana (fasting with oil). Outside the village...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 60] [ AvazyakasUtra pratimA jaghanya eka rAtri kI aura utkRSTa dasa mAsa kI
hotI hai| 11. zramaNabhUtapratimA - isa pratimA kA dhAraka zrAvaka zramaNa to
nahIM kintu zramaNa sadRza hotA hai| sAdhu ke samAna veza dhAraNa karake aura
sAdhu ke yogya hI bhANDopakaraNa rakha kara vicaratA hai  /  zakti ho to
kezaluJcana karatA hai, anyathA ustare se ziromuNDana karAtA hai  /  isa kA kAla
jaghanya eka ahorAtra arthAt eka dina-rAta aura utkRSTa gyAraha mAsa hotA hai|
upAsaka kA pracalita artha zrAvaka hai aura pratimA kA artha - pratijJA-
abhigraha hai| upAsaka kI pratimA upAsakapratimA kahalAtI hai| yahA~ yaha
jJAtavya hai ki zrAvaka kI pratimAoM ke kAla-mAna meM kucha matabheda hai| kucha
AcArya inakA kAla eka, do, tIna yAvat gyAraha mAsa kA mAnate haiM  /  jaghanya
eka, do, tIna divasa Adi nahIM maante| bAraha bhikSupratimA - bAraha
bhikSupratimAoM kA yathAzakti AcaraNa na karanA, una para zraddhA na karanA
tathA unakI anyathA prarUpaNA karanA aticAra hai| 1. prathama pratimAdhArI
bhikSu ko eka datti anna kI aura eka datti pAnI kI lenA kalpatA hai  /  sAdhu ke
pAtra meM dAtA dvArA diye jAne vAle anna aura jala kI dhArA jaba taka akhaNDa
banI rahe taba taka vaha eka datti hai| dhArA khaNDita hone para datti kI
samApti ho jAtI hai  /  jahA~ eka vyakti ke liye bhojana banA ho vahIM se lenA
cAhiye, kintu jahAM do, tIna Adi se adhika vyaktiyoM ke liye bhojana banA ho
vahAM se nahIM lenA caahiye| yaha pahalI pratimA eka mAsa kI haiN| 2. se 7.
dUsarI se sAtavIM pratimA taka kA samaya eka-eka mAsa kA hai| inameM kramazaH
eka-eka datti bar3hatI jAtI hai| do datti dUsarI pratimA meM AhAra kI, do datti
pAnI kI lenaa| isI prakAra tIsarI, cauthI yAvat sAtavIM pratimA meM kramazaH
tIna, cAra, pAMca, chaha aura sAta datti anna kI aura utanI hI pAnI kI grahaNa
kI jAtI haiN| 8. AThavIM pratimA sapta ahorAtra kI hotI hai  /  isameM cauvihAra
ekAntara upavAsa karanA hotA hai  /  gA~va ke bAhara uttAnAsana (citta sonA),
pAsina (eka karavaTa lenA) tathA niSadyAsana (pairoM ko barAbara karake
baiThanA) se dhyAna lagAnA caahiye| upasarga Aye to zAntacitta se sahana karanA
caahiye| 9. yaha pratimA bhI sAta ahorAtra kI hai| isameM cauvihAra SaSThabhakta
tapa (bele-bele pAraNA) kiyA jAtA hai| gAMva ke bAhara ekAnta sthAna meM
daNDAsana, lagaMDAsana athavA utkaTukAsana se dhyAna kiyA jAtA hai| 10. yaha bhI
sapta ahorAtra kI hotI hai  /  isameM cauvihAra tele-tele pAraNA kiyA jAtA hai|
gAMva ke

Page #132 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Fourth Study: Pratikraman  **[61]** Meditation is performed in the Godohasan,
Virasan or Amrakubjasan postures outside.  **[11]** This pratima is for one day
and one night. Its practice is done for one day and one night. Its worship is
done by the Bele with the offering of Chaubihara. Kayotsarga is performed
outside the village.  **[12]** This pratima is for only one night. Its worship
is done by offering Bele and performing Chaubihara with oil. Standing outside
the village, with the head slightly bowed, keeping the gaze fixed on a single
particle, Kayotsarga is performed with unwavering eyes.  Devas, humans, and
animals related upsargas are tolerated with equanimity. One should not be swayed
by upsargas. If one is swayed by upsargas, one becomes mad or develops a chronic
disease. If one remains steadfast, one attains Avadhijnana, Manahparyavgyana and
Kevalgyana.  **Thirteen Kriyasthanas:**  Kriya here means action. Its thirteen
types are as follows:  **1. Arthakriya:**  To inflict violence on, cause
violence to, or approve of violence against a being for one's own purpose is
Arthakriya.  **2. Anyakriya:**  Sinful karma performed without any purpose is
called Anyakriya.  **3. Hinsakriya:**  To inflict violence on a being because
someone is harming, will harm, or has harmed me or my loved ones, or to inflict
violence on a being out of anger is Hinsakriya.  **4. Aksamkriya:**  Sin
committed hastily without knowing is Aksamkriya.  **5. Drishtiviparyayakriya:**
Sin committed due to delusion, such as punishing an innocent man under the
delusion that he is a thief.  **6. Mrishkriya:**  To lie.  **7.
Adattadanakrima:**  To steal.  **8. Adhyatmakriya:**  Grief, etc., that arises
in the mind without any external cause.  **9. Mankriya:**  To praise oneself, to
be arrogant.  **10. Mitrakriya:**  To punish loved ones harshly.  **11.
Mayakriya:**  To be hypocritical.  **12. Lobhkriya:**  To be greedy.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 caturtha adhyayana : pratikramaNa ] [61 bAhara godohAsana, vIrAsana athavA
AmrakubjAsana se dhyAna kiyA jAtA hai| 11. yaha pratimA eka ahorAtra kI hotI
hai| eka dina aura eka rAta taka isakI sAdhanA kI jAtI hai| cauvihAra bele ke
dvArA isakI ArAdhanA hotI hai  /  gA~va ke bAhara kAyotsarga kiyA jAtA hai| 12.
yaha pratimA kevala eka rAtri kI hai| isakA ArAdhana bele ko car3hAkara
cauvihAra telA karake kiyA jAtA hai  /  gA~va ke bAhara khar3e hokara, mastaka
ko thor3A sA jhukAkara kisI eka pudgala para dRSTi rakhakara nirnimeSa netroM se
nizcalatApUrvaka kAyotsarga kiyA jAtA hai  /  deva, manuSya evaM tiryaMca
sambandhI upasarga Ane para unheM samabhAva se sahana kiyA jAtA hai| upasarga se
calAyamAna nahIM honA caahiye| yadi upasarga se calAyamAna ho jAye to pAgala
arthAt bAvalA bane yA dIrghakAlika roga utpanna ho jaaye| yadi sthira rahe to
avadhijJAna, manaHparyavajJAna tathA kevalajJAna taka prApta karatA hai| teraha
kriyAsthAna - kriyA kA artha yahAM kArya hai| isake teraha prakAra nimnalikhita
haiM - 1. arthakriyA - apane kisI prayojana ke liye jAvoM kI hiMsA karanA,
karAnA yA anumodanA karanA arthakriyA hai| 2. anyakriyA - binA kisI prayojana ke
kiyA jAne vAlA pApa karma anarthakriyA kahalAtA hai| 3. hiMsAkriyA - amuka
vyakti mujhe athavA mere snehiyoM ko kaSTa detA hai, degA athavA usane diyA hai,
yA locakara kisI prANI kI hiMsA krnaa| 4. akasmAkriyA - zIghratAvaza binA jAne
ho jAne vAlA pApa akasmAkriyA hai| 5. dRSTiviparyayakriyA - matibhrama se hone
vAlA pApa, yathA-corAdi ke bhrama meM sAdhAraNa anaparAdhI puruSa ko daNDa de
denaa| 6. mRSAkriyA - jhUTha bolnaa| 7. adattAdAnakrimA - corI krnaa| 8.
adhyAtmakriyA - bAhya nimitta ke binA mana meM hone vAlA zoka aadi| 9. mAnakriyA
- apanI prazaMsA karanA, ghamaMDa krnaa| 10. mitrakriyA - priyajanoM ko kaThora
daNDa denaa| 11. mAyAkriyA - dambha krnaa| 12. lobhakriyA - lobha krnaa|

Page #133 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  62] [ Necessary Sutra 13. *Iryapathiki kriya* is the action that a non-
negligent, wise, and restrained person performs for the purpose of movement.
Fourteen *Bhootgram* *Sukshma kendriya*, *badar ekendriya*, *dwiindriya*,
*triindriya*, *chaturindriya*, *asangni panchendriya*, and *sangni panchendriya*
- these seven have sufficient and insufficient, making a total of fourteen
categories. To harm them, to inflict any kind of pain on them, is an act of
violence. - Discussion - Jain scriptures mention the different categories of
living beings in detail to ensure the meticulous observance of non-violence and
to avoid violence. This is because one cannot avoid harming a living being
without properly identifying it. Here, fourteen groups of living beings,
*Bhootgram*, are mentioned, which encompass all living beings in the world.
*Sukshma* beings are those that are present throughout the universe but are not
visible to the naked eye. They are so subtle that they do not die when killed
and do not get cut when cut. They are beings with the *sukshma* karma arising,
and they are all *ekendriya* stationary beings. Keep in mind that beings with
small bodies like *kunthuva* are not counted among these *sukshma* beings.
*Kunthuva* and other such beings have *badar* karma arising, therefore they are
counted among *badar* - *tras* beings. *Paryapti* means the fullness of a
being's power. When a being takes a new birth, it needs *pudgalas* that are
useful for the formation of its new body, senses, etc. The fullness of the power
to absorb those *pudgalas* and transform them into the form of body, senses,
language, etc. is called *paryapti*. Beings that have achieved this fullness are
called *paryapt*. Until that power is complete, they are called *aparyapt*.
There are four *paryaptis* in *ekendriya* beings, five in beings from
*dwiindriya* to *asangni panchendriya*, and six in *sangni* - *samansk* beings.
The fulfillment of all the *paryaptis* possible for a being happens in a single
*antarmuhurt* (a very short period of time). Fifteen *Parmadharmic* 1. *Amb*, 2.
*Ambarish*, 3. *Shyam*, 4. *Shabal*, 5. *Roudra*, 6. *Uparoudra*, 7. *Kal*, 8.
*Mahakal*, 9. *Asipatra*, 10. *Dhanuh*, 11. *Kumbh*, 12. *Baluk*, 13.
*Vaitarani*, 14. *Kharswar*, 15. *Mahaghoosh*. These are the supreme *adharmic*,
sinful, cruel, and merciless *asura* deities. They torture the beings in hell
for no reason, just for their own amusement. Their specific characteristics are
as follows: 1. *Amb* takes the beings of hell to the sky and throws them down,
grabs them by the neck and throws them into pits. -

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 62] [ Avazyaka sUtra 13. IryApathikIkriyA apramatta vivekI saMyamI ko
gamanAgamana ke nimitta se lagane vAlI kriyA  /  caudaha bhUtagrAma sUkSma
kendriya, bAdara ekendriya, dvIndriya, trIndriya, caturindriya, asaMjJI
paMcendriya aura saMjJI paMcendriya, ina sAtoM ke paryApta aura aparyApta yoM
kula caudaha bheda hote haiM  /  inakI virAdhanA karanA, inheM kisI bhI prakAra
kI pIr3A denA aticAra hai  /  - vivecana - jainAgamoM meM sUkSma rUpa se ahiMsA
kA pAlana karane ke liye evaM hiMsA se bacane ke liye aneka AdhAroM se jIvoM ke
bheda-prabhedoM kA ullekha kiyA gayA hai, kyoMki jIva kI bhalI-bhAMti pahacAna
hue binA usakI hiMsA se bacA nahIM jA sakatA  /  prastuta meM jIvoM ke caudaha
grAmoM samUhoM kA ullekha kiyA gayA hai, jinameM samasta jAgatika jIvoM kA
samAveza ho jAtA I sUkSma jIva ve kahalAte haiM jo samasta lokAkAza meM vyApta
haiM kintu carma cakSuoM se dRSTigocara nahIM hote  /  ve itane sUkSma hote haiM
ki mArane se marate nahIM aura kATane se kaTate nahIM haiN| ve sUkSmanAmakarma
ke udaya vAle prANI haiM aura ve saba ekendriya sthAvara hI hote haiN| dhyAna
rahe ki kuMthuvA jaise choTe zarIra vAle jIvoM kI ina sUkSma jIvoM meM ginatI
nahIM hai| kuMthuvA Adi jIva bAdaranAma karma ke udaya vAle haiM, ataeva unakI
gaNanA bAdara - trasa jIvoM meM hotI hai| paryApti kA abhiprAya hai jIva kI
zakti kI pUrNatA  /  jIva jaba navIna janma grahaNa karatA hai taba usa nUtana
zarIra, indriya Adi ke nirmANa ke liye upayogI pudgaloM kI AvazyakatA hotI hai|
una pudgaloM ko grahaNa karake zarIra, indriya, bhASA Adi ke rUpa meM pariNata
karane kI zakti kI paripUrNatA hI paryApti kahalAtI hai  /  yaha paripUrNatA
prApta kara lene vAle jIva paryApta kahalAte haiN| jaba taka vaha zakti pUrI
nahIM hotI taba taka ve aparyApta kahalAte haiN| ekendriya jIvoM meM cAra,
dvIndriya se lekara asaMjJI paMcendriyoM taka meM pAMca aura saMjJI - samanaska
prANiyoM meM chaha paryAptiyAM hotI haiN| jisa jIva meM jitanI paryAptiyAM
saMbhava haiM, unakI pUrti eka antarmuhUrtakAla meM hI hojAtI hai| paMdraha
paramAdhArmika 1. amba, 2. ambarISa, 3. zyAma, 4. zabala, 5. raudra, 6.
uparaudra 7. kAla, 8. mahAkAla, 9. asipatra, 10. dhanuH, 11. kumbha, 12. bAluka,
13. vaitaraNI, 14. kharasvara, 15. mahAghoSa  /  ye parama adhArmika, pApAcArI,
krUra evaM nirdaya asura jAti ke deva haiN| nArakIya jIvoM ko vyartha hI kevala
manovinoda ke liye yAtanA dete haiN| inakA vizeSa paricaya isa prakAra hai 1.
amba nAraka jIvoM ko AkAza meM le jAkara nIce paTakane vAle, gardana pakar3akara
gaDDhe meM -

Page #134 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Fourth Study: Pratikramana  **1. Giraane Vaale** Those who throw down, those
who throw up into the sky with their mouths upside down and fall down, those who
bark like spears, etc.  **2. Ambareesh** Those who make half-dead.  **3. Shyam**
Those who beat with whips, etc., those who cut off limbs, etc., those who pierce
with spikes, needles, etc.  **4. Shabal** Those who tear apart.  **5. Raudra**
Those who are fierce.  **6. Uparaudra** Those who are extremely fierce.  **7.
Kaal** Those who feed.  **8. Mahakaal** Those who roast.  **9. Asipatra** Those
who, by twisting the forest of sharp leaves like swords, drop those leaves like
the edge of a sword on the Naraki beings who have come to the forest seeking
shade, and tear them apart with the Vikriya Vayu.  **10. Dhanush** Those who
pierce with bows.  **11. Kumbh** Those who break the joints of the Naraki beings
limb by limb with maces, etc.  **12. Baluk** Those who cook in pots, etc.  **13.
Vaitarani** Those who twist the Vaitarani river, which is filled with foul-
smelling blood and iron, boiling zinc and kathera, and extremely alkaline hot
water, and throw the Naraki beings into it, causing them to suffer in many ways.
**14. Kharaswar** Those who climb high, thorny, vajra-like Salmali trees, and
drag the Naraki beings who are screaming, and those who place a karot on their
heads and tear them apart.  **15. Mahaghosh** Those who, with a loud roar, stop
the Naraki beings who are running around like deer in fear of extreme pain, like
animals in a pen.  I renounce any transgression that may have been committed by
the approval of the sin committed by them, etc.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 caturtha adhyayana : pratikramaNa ] girAne vAle, ulTe muMha AkAza meM
uchAlakara girate samaya barchA Adi bhauMkane vAle  /  2. ambarISa adhamare kara
dene vAle  /  vAle  /  3. zyAma kor3A Adi se pITane vAle, hAtha-paira Adi
avayavoM ko burI taraha kATane vAle, zUla - suI Adi se bIMdhane vAle Adi  /  4.
zabala 5. raudra 6. uparaudra 7. kAla khilAne vAle  /  1 - 8. mahAkAla bhUnane
vAle  /  - 10. dhanuSa 11. kumbha 12. bAluka mudgara Adi dvArA nArakiyoM ke
aMga-aMga ke jor3oM ko cUra-cUra karane vAle  /  narakastha jIvoM ko khUba U~ce
uchAla kara girate samaya talavAra, bhAle Adi meM pirone = [ 63 nairayikoM ko
mudgara Adi se kUTa kara, karoMta, kaiMcI Adi se Tukar3e-Tukar3e kara 9.
asipatra talavAra jaise tIkhe pattoM ke vana kI vikurvaNA karake usa vana meM
chAyA kI icchA se Aye hue nArakI jIvoM ko vaikriya vAyu dvArA talavAra kI dhAra
jaise tIkhe patte girAkara chinna-bhinna karane vaale| nArakIya jIvoM ke hAtha-
paira tor3ane vAle  /  kuMbhI Adi meM pakAne vAle  /  pUrvajanma ke mAMsAhArI
jIvoM ko unhIM kI pITha Adi kA mAMsa kATa-kATa kara - - dhanuSa se chedane vAle
/  UMTanI Adi ke AkAra vAlI kumbhiyoM meM pakAne vAle  /  vajramaya tapta bAlukA
meM canoM ke samAna tar3atar3AhaTa karate hue nArakI jIvoM ko 13. vaitaraNI
atyanta durgandha vAlI rAdha-lohU se bharI huI evaM tape huye jastA aura kathIra
kI ukalatI huI, atyanta kSAra se yukta uSNa pAnI se bharI huI vaitaraNI nadI kI
vikurvaNA karake usameM naraka ke jIvoM ko DAlakara aneka prakAra pIr3ita karane
vAle  /  14. kharasvara tIkhe vajramaya kAMTe vAle UMce-UMce zAlmalI vRkSoM para
car3hAkara cillAte huye nArakI jIvoM ko khIMcane vAle, mastaka para karota
rakhakara cIrane vAle  /  15. mahAghoSa atyanta vedanA ke Dara se mRgoM kI
taraha idhara-udhara bhAgate huye nAraka jIvoM ko bAr3e meM pazuoM kI taraha
ghora garjanA karake rokane vaale| inake dvArA hone vAle pApa kI anumodanA Adi
se jo aticAra lagA ho, to maiM usase nivRtta hotA hU~  /

Page #135 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[64] [Essential Sutras] [Sixteen Verses] The sixteen studies of the first Shruta
Skandha of the Sutra Kritanga are as follows: 1. Self-Time-Other Time, 2.
Vaitaliya, 3. Prefix-Recognition, 4. Woman-Recognition, 5. Hell-Division, 6.
Hero-Praise, 7. Kushila-Definition, 8. Vigor, 9. Dharma, 10. Samadhi, 11.
Liberation Path, 12. Samavasarana, 13. As It Is, 14. Text, 15. Acceptable, 16.
Verse. I repent for any transgressions in their faith or presentation. Seventeen
Asanyamas - 1-9. Violence, causing violence, and approving violence towards
Earth-bodied, Water-bodied, Fire-bodied, Air-bodied, and Plant-bodied beings, as
well as two-sensed, three-sensed, four-sensed, and five-sensed beings. 10.
Ajiva-Asanyama - Accepting valuable clothes, vessels, etc., which are not Ajiva,
even though they are not Ajiva, is Ajiva-Asanyama. 11. Preksha-Asanyama -
Getting up, sitting down, etc., in a place with living beings. 12. Utpreeksha-
Asanyama - Approving the sinful deeds of householders. 13. Pramardana-Asanyama -
Not cleaning clothes, vessels, etc. 14. Paristhapanika-Asanyama - Eating
improperly. 15. Mind-Asanyama - Holding evil thoughts in the mind. 16. Speech-
Asanyama - Speaking false, harsh, cruel, and painful words. 17. Body-Asanyama -
Being careless in bodily actions such as walking, etc. These seventeen Asanyamas
are mentioned in the Samavayanga Sutra. Acharya Haribhadra has mentioned
'Sanjame' in place of 'Asanjame' in the Essentials. The meaning of Sanjame is
restraint. There are also seventeen types of restraint, namely Earth-bodied
restraint, etc. If one has committed any Asanyama, has not practiced restraint,
or has had a contrary faith or presentation, then Tass Miccha Mi Dukkadam.
Eighteen Abrahmacharya - Self-indulgence in the pleasures of the gods through
mind, speech, and body, causing others to indulge, and approving indulgence,
thus nine types are related to the Vikriya body, and human and animal beings.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 64] [ AvazyakasUtra gAthA SoDazaka - sUtrakRtAGga ke prathama zrutaskandha ke
solaha adhyayana isa prakAra haiM - 1. svasamaya-parasamaya, 2. vaitAlIya, 3.
upasarga-parijJA, 4. strI-parijJA, 5. narakavibhakti, 6. vIrastuti, 7.
kuzIlaparibhASA, 8. vIrya, 9. dharma, 10. samAdhi, 11. mokSamArga, 12.
samavasaraNa, 13. yathAtathya, 14. grantha, 15. AdAnIya, 16. gaathaa| inakI
zraddhA yA prarUpaNA meM lage aticAroM kA pratikramaNa karatA huuN| sattaraha
asaMyama - 1-9. pRthivIkAya, apkAya, tejaskAya, vAyukAya aura vanaspatikAya
tathA dvIndriya, trIndriya, caturindriya aura paMcendriya jIvoM kI hiMsA karanA,
karAnA, anumodana krnaa| 10. ajIva-asaMyama - ajIva hone para bhI jina vastuoM
ke dvArA asaMyama hotA hai, una bahumUlya vastra, pAtra Adi kA grahaNa karanA
ajIva-asaMyama hai| 11. prekSA-asaMyama - jIva-sahita sthAna meM uThanA-baiThanA
aadi| 12. utprekSA-asaMyama - gRhasthoM ke pApakarmoM kA anumodana krnaa| 13.
pramArjana-asaMyama - vastra, pAtra Adi kA pramArjana na krnaa| 14.
pariSThApanikA-asaMyama - avidhi se prtthnaa| 15. mana-asaMyama - mana meM
durbhAva rkhnaa| 16. vacana-asaMyama - mithyA, kaTu, kaThora, pIr3AkArI vacana
bolnaa| 17. kAya-asaMyama - gamanAgamanAdi kAyika kriyAoM meM asAvadhAna rhnaa|
ye sattaraha asaMyama samavAyAMgasUtra meM kahe gaye haiN| AcArya haribhadra ne
Avazyaka meM 'asaMjame' ke sthAna meM 'saMjame' kA ullekha kiyA hai| saMjame kA
artha saMyama hai  /  saMyama ke bhI uparyukta hI pRthvIkAyasaMyama Adi
sattaraha bheda haiN| kisI bhI asaMyama kA AcaraNa kiyA ho, saMyama kA AcaraNa
na kiyA ho athavA inakI viparIta zraddhA prarUpaNA kI ho to tassa micchA mi
dukkddN| aThAraha abrahmacarya - deva sambandhI bhogoM kA mana, vacana aura kAya
se svayaM sevana karanA, anya se sevana karAnA tathA sevana karate huye kA
anumodana karanA, isa prakAra nau bheda vaikriyazarIra sambandhI tathA manuSya
evaM tiryaJca sambandhI

Page #136 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Fourth Study: Pratikramana  [65]  Nine types of Audarik Bhogas should be
understood in the same way. In total, there are eighteen types. The 19 studies
of Jnata Dharma Katha are:  1. Meghkumar (Utksipt), 2. Dhannah Sarthavaha
(Sanghat), 3. Mayuraand, 4. Karma, 5. Shailak, 6. Tumbalep, 7. Rohini, 8. Malli,
9. Makandee, 10. Chandra, 11. Davadavvriksh, 12. Udak, 13. Manduk, 14. Tetali
Pradhan, 15. Nandiphal, 16. Avarakanka, 17. Akirnak, 18. Susuma, 19. Pundarik.
_Not practicing Sadhu Dharma according to the meaning of these nineteen examples
is Atichar. Twenty Asamadhi Sthanas:_  Being situated in the path of Moksha with
focused mind is called Samadhi. The opposite of this is Asamadhi. The twenty
Sthanas of Asamadhi are:  1. Davadav - Walking hurriedly. 2. Walking without a
staff. 3. Cleaning without purpose. 4. Having an unorganized bed and seat. 5.
Disrespecting Gurus. 6. Ignoring elders. 7. Bhootopghat - Thinking about killing
beings. 8. Getting angry every moment. 9. Speaking ill of others indirectly. 10.
Speaking decisively about doubtful matters repeatedly. 11. Creating new
conflicts daily. 12. Rekindling settled conflicts. 13. Studying at an
inappropriate time. 14. Accepting alms with hands etc. with a conscious mind and
with impurities. 15. Speaking loudly after midnight. 16. Creating divisions and
differences in the Gachch etc.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 caturtha adhyayana : pratikramaNa ] [65 audArika bhogoM ke bhI isI taraha nau
bheda samajha lene cAhiye  /  kula bheda milAkara aThAraha hote haiN|
jJAtAdharmakathA ke 19 adhyayana - 1. meghakumAra (utkSipta), 2. dhannA
sArthavAha (saMghATa), 3. mayUrANDa, 4. karma, 5. zailaka, 6. tumbalepa, 7.
rohiNI, 8. mallI, 9. mAkandI, 10. candra, 11. dAvadavavRkSa, 12. udaka, 13.
maNDUka, 14. tetalipradhAna, 15. nandIphala, 16. avarakaMkA, 17. AkIrNaka, 18.
suMsumA, 19. punnddriik| _ ukta unnIsa udAharaNoM ke bhAvAnusAra sAdhudharma kI
sAdhanA na karanA aticAra hai| bIsa asamAdhisthAna - citta kI ekAgratApUrvaka
mokSamArga meM sthita hone ko samAdhi kahate haiM  /  isake viparIta asamAdhi
hai| asamAdhi ke bIsa sthAna nimnalikhita haiM - 1. davadava-jaldI-jaldI clnaa|
2. binA pUMje clnaa| 3. binA upayoga ke pramArjana krnaa| 4. amaryAdita zayyA
aura Asana rkhnaa| 5. gurujanoM kA apamAna krnaa| 6. sthaviroM kI avahelanA
krnaa| 7. bhUtopaghAta-jIvoM ke ghAta kA cintana krnaa| 8. kSaNa-kSaNa meM
krodha krnaa| 9. parokSa meM avarNavAda krnaa| 10. zaMkita viSaya meM bAra-bAra
nizcayapUrvaka bolnaa| 11. nitya nayA kalaha krnaa| 12. zAnta huye kalaha ko
punaH uttejita krnaa| 13. akAla meM svAdhyAya krnaa| 14. sacitta raja-sahita
hAtha Adi se bhikSA lenaa| 15. prahara rAta bItane ke bAda jora se bolnaa| 16.
gaccha Adi meM cheda-bheda, phUTa-anekatA krnaa|

Page #137 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Aavashyaka Sutra] 17. To speak in a way that causes distress to the gana
(monastic community). 18. To dispute with everyone. 19. To keep eating and
drinking something or the other throughout the day. 20. To consume inauspicious
food and the like. Twenty-one Shvabala Dosha - The Shvabala Dosha are entirely
to be abandoned by the sadhus (ascetics). The actions that cause the character
(charitra) to become impure (shvabala) and get destroyed are called Shvabala
Dosha. They are as follows: 1. Performing manual work. 2. Engaging in sexual
misconduct, transgression, and excessive sexual indulgence. 3. Eating at night.
4. Accepting Aadhakarm - food prepared for the sake of the sadhus. 5. Accepting
Rajapinda (food from the king). 6. Accepting Auddeshika - food brought,
purchased, or borrowed for the sake of the sadhus, etc. 7. Repeatedly breaking
the vow of abstinence. 8. Leaving one's gana (monastic community) and joining
another within six months. 9. Taking a bath (entering a river, etc.) three times
in a month. 10. Consuming Matristhana (related to illusion) three times in a
month. 11. Consuming Shayya-tarpinda. 12. Intentionally committing violence. 13.
Intentionally speaking falsehood. 14. Intentionally committing theft. 15.
Intentionally sitting on or sleeping on earth or stones with life forms. 16.
Consuming food, bedding, or seat with life forms. 17. Intentionally consuming
tubers, bark, coral, flowers, seeds, etc.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 66] [ AvazyakasUtra 17. gaNa ko duHkha utpanna ho, aisI bhASA bolnaa| 18.
haraeka ke sAtha virodha krnaa| 19. dinabhara kucha na kucha khAte-pIte rhnaa|
20. aneSanIya AhAra Adi kA sevana krnaa| ikkIsa zabaladoSa - zabala doSa sAdhu
ke liye sarvathA tyAjya haiM  /  jina kAryoM ke karane se cAritra karbura
(zabala) arthAt malIna hokara naSTa ho jAtA hai, unheM zabaladoSa kahate haiM  /
ve isa prakAra haiM - . 1. hastakarma krnaa| 2. maithuna-atikrama, vyatikrama
evaM aticAra rUpa se maithuna sevana krnaa| 3. rAtribhojana krnaa| 4. AdhAkarma-
sAdhu ke nimitta banAyA huA bhojana lenaa| 5. rAjapiNDa lenaa| 6. auddezika -
sAdhu ke nimitta athavA kharIdA huA, sthAna para sAmane lAkara diyA huA, udhAra
lAyA huA Adi bhojana vagairaha lenaa| 7. bAra-bAra pratyAkhyAna bhaMga krnaa| 8.
chaha mAsa ke andara gaNa se gaNAntara meM jaanaa| 9. eka mahIne meM tIna bAra
udaka kA lepa lagAnA (nadI Adi meM utrnaa)| 10. eka mAsa meM tIna bAra
mAtRsthAna (mAyA kA) sevana krnaa| 11. zayyAtarapiNDa kA sevana krnaa| 12. jAna-
bUjhakara hiMsA krnaa| 13. jAna-bUjhakara jhUTha bolnaa| 14. jAna-bUjhakara corI
krnaa|| 15. jAna-bUjhakara sacitta pRthvI para baiThanA, sacittazilA para sonA
aadi| 16. jIva sahita pITha, phalaka Adi kA sevana krnaa| 17. jAna-bUjhakara
kanda-mUla, chAla, pravAla, puSpa, phUla, bIja Adi kA bhojana krnaa|

Page #138 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Fourth Study: Pratikramana  [67]  18. Applying ten udak-lep (water paste with
awareness) in a year. 19. Consuming food from Maya-sthana (places of illusion)
ten times in a year. 20. Knowingly consuming food with a hand that has touched
water with awareness, or with a brush etc. that has touched water with
awareness. 21. Knowingly sitting, sleeping, or performing Kayotsarga (body
relaxation) in places inhabited by living beings, in places with seeds,
greenery, insect nests, flowers, mud, and spider webs.  Twenty-two Pariṣaha:
The hardships that a Sadhu (Jain monk) must endure for the sake of remaining
steadfast in their vows and for the exhaustion of karmas, due to hunger, thirst,
or any other reason, are called Pariṣaha. Because the life of a Sadhu is not a
life of ease. It is a life of struggle for the complete purity of the soul,
turning away from comfort. The Samvayanga and Uttaradhyayanasutra describe 22
Pariṣaha. One should strive to conquer them. The details are as follows:  1.
Kṣudhā - Enduring the hardship of hunger. 2. Pipāsā - Enduring the hardship of
thirst when pure water is not available. 3. Śīta - Enduring the hardship of
extreme cold due to wearing minimal clothing. 4. Uṣṇa - Enduring the hardship of
heat. 5. Daṃśamaśaka - Enduring the hardship of insects like flies, mosquitoes,
and bedbugs. 6. Acela - Enduring the hardship of not having clothes. 7. Arati -
Overcoming the aversion to vows due to fear of difficulties. 8. Strīpariṣaha -
Conquering the temptation of women. This is a favorable Pariṣaha. 9. Carya
Pariṣaha - Enduring the hardship of travel and movement during journeys. 10.
Niṣadyā - Enduring the disturbance in places of study and meditation. 11. Śayyā
- Enduring the hardship of not having a comfortable place to sleep. 12. Ākrośa -
Maintaining equanimity when someone insults, threatens, or humiliates you. 13.
Vadh - Enduring the beating of wood etc. with equanimity.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 caturtha adhyayana : pratikramaNa ] [67 18. eka varSa meM daza udaka-lepa
(sacitta jala kA lepa) lgaanaa| 19. varSa meM dasa bAra mAyA-sthAnoM kA sevana
krnaa| 20. jAna-bUjhakara sacitta jala vAle hAtha se tathA sacitta jala-sahita
kur3achI Adi se diyA jAne vAlA AhAra grahaNa krnaa| 21. jAna-bUjhakara jIvoM
vAle sthAna para, bIja, harita, kIr3InagarA, lIlana-phUlana, kIcar3a aura
makar3I ke jAloM vAle sthAna para baiThanA, sonA, kAyotsarga krnaa| bAIsa
pariSaha - kSudhA Adi kisI bhI kAraNa se kaSTa upasthita hone para saMyama meM
sthira rahane ke liye tathA karmoM kI nirjarA ke liye jo zArIrika tathA mAnasika
kaSTa sAdhu ko sahana karane cAhiye, ve pariSaha haiM, kyoMki sAdhujIvana
sukhazIlatA kA jIvana nahIM hai| vaha ArAmatalabI se vimukha hokara AtmA kI
pUrNa nirmalatA ke liye jUjhane kA jIvana hai| zrI samavAyAMga evaM
uttarAdhyayana meM 22 pariSahoM kA varNana hai| ina para vijaya pAnAsamabhAva se
sahanA caahiye| vivaraNa isa prakAra hai - 1. kSudhA - bhUkha kA kaSTa sahana
krnaa| 2. pipAsA - nirdoSa pAnI nahIM milane para pyAsa kA kaSTa sahana krnaa|
3. zIta - alpa vastroM ke kAraNa bhayaMkara ThaMDa kA kaSTa shnaa| 4. uSNa -
garmI kA kaSTa shnaa| 5. daMzamazaka - DAMsa-macchara-khaTamala Adi jantuoM kA
kaSTa shnaa| 6. acela - vastroM ke nahIM milane para hone vAlA kaSTa shnaa| 7.
arati - kaThinAiyoM se ghabarAkara saMyama ke prati hone vAlI aruci kA nivAraNa
krnaa| 8. strIpariSaha - nArIjanya pralobhana para vijaya paanaa| yaha anukUla
pariSaha hai| 9. caryApariSaha - vihAra-yAtrA meM hone vAlA gamanAdi kA kaSTa
shnaa| 10. niSadyA - svAdhyAya-bhUmi Adi meM hone vAle upadrava ko sahana krnaa|
11. zayyA - anukUla makAna nahIM milane para hone vAle kaSTa ko shnaa| 12.
Akroza - koI gAlI de, dhamakAye yA apamAnita kare to samabhAva rkhnaa| 13. vadha
- samabhAva se lakar3I Adi kI mAra shnaa|

Page #139 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  68] [Essential Sutras 14. **Yachana** - Even if someone disregards your
request, do not be upset. 15. **Alaabha** - Even if you do not receive something
after requesting it, do not be distressed. 16. **Roga** - When illness arises,
bear it patiently. 17. **Trinasparsha** - Endure the pain caused by thorns or
sleeping on grass. 18. **Jalla** - Bear the discomfort of bodily waste. 19.
**Satkara** - Do not become arrogant when receiving honor and respect, and do
not be distressed when not receiving it. 20. **Prajna** - Do not be proud of
your intellect. 21. **Agnana** - Bear the sorrow of ignorance with equanimity.
22. **Darshan** - Do not be influenced by the alluring environment of false
beliefs that corrupt **Samyaktva** (right faith). 23 Studies of **Sutrakritanga
Sutra** - The aforementioned sixteen studies of the first **Shruta Skandha** and
the seven studies of the second **Shruta Skandha** - (17) **Pundarika**, (18)
**Kriyasthan**, (19) **Aharparijna**, (20) **Pratyakhyan Kriya**, (21) **Achar
Shruta**, (22) **Ard Kumar**, (23) **Nalandeeya**, together make twenty-three
studies. According to the statements of these twenty-three studies, not living a
life of restraint is an **Atichara** (transgression). Twenty-four Devas - The
ten **Bhavana Patis** like **Asura Kumar**, the eight **Vyantara** like
**Bhoot** and **Yaksha**, the five **Jyotishka** like **Surya** and **Chandra**,
and the **Vaimanika Devas**, making a total of twenty-four types of Devas. They
are the greatest representatives of the life of enjoyment in the world. Praising
them is praising the life of enjoyment, and criticizing them is a sign of
hatred. Therefore, a **Mumukha** (aspirant for liberation) should remain
neutral. If neutrality is ever broken, it is an **Atichara**. The renowned
commentator of **Uttaraadhyayanasutra**, Acharya Shantisuri, includes the
twenty-four **Tirthankara Devas** in the term "Deva". Accepting this meaning
would make it an **Atichara** - not showing respect or reverence towards them,
not following their instructions, etc. Twenty-five thoughts of the five
**Mahavratas** - The scriptures have outlined five thoughts for each
**Mahavrat** for the pure observance of the **Mahavratas**. The nature of these
thoughts is very heart-touching and life-inspiring. For the pure observance of
**Shraman Dharma** (Jain way of life),

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 68] [ AvazyakasUtra 14. yAcanA - mAMgane para koI tiraskAra kara de to bhI
kSubdha na honaa| 15. alAbha - yAcanA karane para bhI vastu na mile to kheda na
krnaa| 16. roga - roga utpanna hone para dhairyapUrvaka sahana krnaa| 17.
tRNasparza - kAMTA Adi cubhane para yA tRNa para sone se hone vAle kaSTa ko
shnaa| 18. jalla - zArIrika mala kA pariSaha sahana krnaa| 19. satkAra - pUjA-
pratiSThA prApta hone para ahaMkAra na karanA, na prApta hone para kheda na
krnaa| 20. prajJA - buddhi kA garva nahIM krnaa| 21. ajJAna - buddhihInatA kA
duHkha samabhAva se sahana krnaa| 22. darzana - darzana arthAt samyaktva ko
bhraSTa karane vAle mithyA matoM ke mohaka vAtAvaraNa se prabhAvita na honaa|
sUtrakRtAMgasUtra ke 23 adhyayana - prathama zrutaskandha ke pUrvokta solaha
adhyayana evaM dvitIya zrutaskandha ke sAta adhyayana - (17) puNDarIka,
(18)kriyAsthAna, (19) AhAraparijJA, (20) pratyAkhyAnakriyA, (21) AcAra zruta,
(22) ArdrakumAra, (23) nAlandIya, milakara teIsa adhyayana hote haiN| ukta teIsa
adhyayanoM ke kathanAnusAra saMyamI jIvana na honA, aticAra hai| cauvIsa deva -
asurakumAra Adi daza bhavanapati; bhUta, yakSa Adi ATha vyantara; sUrya, candra
Adi pAMca jyotiSka aura vaimAnika deva, isa prakAra kula cauvIsa jAti ke deva
haiM  /  saMsAra meM bhoga-jIvana ke ye sabase bar3e pratinidhi haiN| inakI
prazaMsA karanA bhogamaya jIvana kI prazaMsA karanA hai aura nindA karanA
dveSabhAva hai  /  ata: mumukSa ko taTastha bhAva hI rakhanA caahiye| yadi kabhI
taTasthatA kA bhaMga kiyA ho to aticAra hai| uttarAdhyayanasUtra ke suprasiddha
TIkAkAra AcArya zAntisUri yahA~ deva zabda se cauvIsa tIrthaMkara devoM kA bhI
grahaNa karate haiM  /  isa artha ke mAnane para aticAra hogA- unake prati Adara
yA zraddhA bhAva na rakhanA, unakI AjJAnusAra na calanA aadi| pAMca mahAvratoM
kI paccIsa bhAvanAe~ - mahAvratoM kA zuddha pAlana karane ke liye zAstroM meM
pratyeka mahAvrata kI pAMca-pAMca bhAvanAe~ batalAI gaI haiM  /  bhAvanAoM kA
svarUpa bahuta hI hRdayagrAhI evaM jIvanasparzI hai  /  zramaNadharma kA zuddha
pAlana karane ke liye

Page #140 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Fourth Study: Pratikramana  **[69]** One must definitely focus on the
emotions. The five emotions of the Ahimsa Mahavrat are:  1. **Iryasamiti:**
Moving and going in a useful manner. 2. **Alokita Panabhojan:** Eating in a
well-lit place with care. 3. **Adananiksepsamiti:** Picking up and placing
objects with discernment. 4. **Manogupti:** Restraint of the mind. 5.
**Vachanagupti:** Restraint of speech.  The five emotions of the Satya Mahavrat
are:  1. Speaking after consideration. 2. Abandoning anger. 3. Abandoning greed.
4. Abandoning fear. 5. Abandoning laughter and jokes.  The five emotions of the
Asteya Mahavrat are:  1. Consuming after requesting from eighteen types of pure
places. 2. Taking daily avagraha of grass, wood, etc. 3. Not cutting trees for
backrests, planks, etc. 4. Not consuming excessive amounts of ordinary food. 5.
Performing the duties of a Sadhu.  The five emotions of the Brahmacharya
Mahavrat are:  1. Living in a place devoid of the presence of women, animals,
and eunuchs. 2. Avoiding stories about women. 3. Not observing the limbs of
women. 4. Not remembering past sexual experiences. 5. Not eating delicious food
daily.  The five emotions of the Aparigraha Mahavrat are:  1-5. When the five
senses come into contact with their objects - sound, form, smell, taste, and
touch - maintaining indifference, without generating attachment towards the
pleasant and aversion towards the unpleasant.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 caturtha adhyayana : pratikramaNa ] [69 bhAvanAoM para avazya hI lakSya denA
caahiye| ahiMsA-mahAvrata kI pAMca bhAvanAe~ - 1. IryAsamiti -
upayogapUrvakagamanAgamana krnaa| 2. AlokitapAnabhojana - dekha-bhAlakara
prakAzayukta sthAna meM AhAra krnaa| 3. AdAnanikSepasamiti - vivekapUrvaka
pAtrAdi uThAnA tathA rkhnaa| 4. manogupti - mana kA sNym| 5. vacanagupti - vANI
kA sNym| satya-mahAvrata kI pAMca bhAvanAe~ - 1. vicAra kara bolanA, 2, krodha
kA tyAga, 3. lobha kA tyAga, 4. bhaya kA tyAga, 5. ha~sI-majAka kA tyaag| asteya
mahAvrata kI pAMca bhAvanAe~ - 1. aThAraha prakAra ke zuddha sthAna kI yAcanA
karake sevana krnaa| 2. pratidina tRNa-kASThAdi kA avagraha lenaa| 3. pITha-
phalaka Adi ke liye bhI vRkSAdi ko nahIM kATanA  /  4. sAdhAraNa piNDa kA adhika
sevana nahIM krnaa| 5. sAdhu kI vaiyAvRtya krnaa| brahmacarya-mahAvrata kI pAMca
bhAvanAe~ - 1. strI-pazu-napuMsaka ke sAnnidhya se rahita sthAna meM rhnaa| 2.
strI-kathA kA varjana krnaa| 3. striyoM ke aMgopAMgoM kA avalokana nahIM krnaa|
4. pUrvakRta kAmabhoga kA smaraNa nahIM krmaa| 5. pratidina sarasa bhojana na
krnaa| aparigraha-mahAvata kI pAMca bhAvanAe~ - 1.-5. pAMca indriyoM ke viSaya -
zabda, rUpa, gandha, rasa aura sparza ke indriya-gocara hone para manojJa para
rAgabhAva tathA amanojJa para dveSabhAva na lAkara udAsInabhAva rkhnaa|

Page #141 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 70] **Essential Sutras**  The 26 study periods of the Dasha Shruta, Brihat
Kalpa and Vyavahar Sutra -  Ten from the Dasha Shruta Skandha, six from the
Brihat Kalpa and ten from the Vyavahar Sutra, transgression occurs from
deviating from the study periods of these twenty-six studies and not acting
according to them.   **Twenty-seven Qualities of an Ascetic**  Not properly
following the twenty-seven qualities of an ascetic according to the scriptures
is transgression. To purify oneself, there is the Pratikramana of the qualities
of a Muni.  1. - 5.  Properly observing the five great vows of Ahimsa, Satya,
Asteya, Brahmacharya and Aparigraha, 6.  Renunciation of night meals, 7. - 11.
Controlling the five senses, 12.  Purity of the inner self (Bhavasatya), 13.
Karanasatya - properly recording clothes, vessels, etc., 14.  Forgiveness, 15.
Vitaragata - detachment, 16.  Good inclination of the mind, 17.  Good
inclination of speech, 18.  Good inclination of the body, 19. - 24.  Protection
of the six types of living beings, 25.  Being virtuous, 26.  Enduring pain like
cold, etc., and 27.  Enduring even a fatal attack with equanimity.  Acharya
Haribhadra has described these twenty-seven qualities in his commentary on the
Aavashyak Sutra, according to an ancient verse of the Sangrahani-kar. However,
in the Samavayanga Sutra, the twenty-seven qualities of a Muni are mentioned
slightly differently - five great vows, control of the five senses, renunciation
of the four kshayas, Bhavasatya, Karanasatya, Yogasatya, forgiveness,
detachment, mind-concentration, speech-concentration, body-concentration,
knowledge-fullness, vision-fullness, virtue-fullness, endurance of pain,
endurance of a fatal attack.  **Twenty-eight Achar Prakalpas**  There are
different beliefs regarding the explanation of Achar Prakalpa. According to
Acharya Haribhadra, Achar itself is called Achar Prakalpa - 'Achar ev Achar
Prakalpa'.  The meaning of Achar is the first Anga Sutra. Its Prakalpa, i.e.,
special study, is called Nishita Sutra. Or, the Prakalpa, i.e., arrangement of
knowledge, etc., of virtuous conduct is called Achar Prakalpa.  'Acharah
Prathamaangam Tasy Prakalpah Adhyayanavishesho Nishitamittyaparabhidhanam.
Acharasy Va Sadhvacharasya Jnanadivishaysya Prakalpo Vyavasthapanamiti Achar
Prakalpah'  - Abhaydeva Samavayanga Sutra Commentary  There are twenty-five
studies of the Acharanga Sutra, including Shastraparijna, and the Nishita Sutra
is also a chapter of the Acharanga Sutra.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 70] [ AvazyakasUtra dazAzruta Adi sUtratrayoM ke 26 uddezana kAla -
dazAzrutaskandha ke dasa, bRhatkalpa ke chaha aura vyavahArasUtra ke dasa, ina
chabbIsa adhyayanoM ke pAThanakAla meM vyatikrama karane se evaM unake anusAra
AcaraNa na karane se aticAra hotA hai| sattAIsa anagAra ke guNa - sattAIsa
anagAra ke guNoM kA zAstrAnusAra bhalIbhAMti pAlana na karanA aticAra hai| usakI
zuddhi ke liye muni-guNoM kA pratikramaNa hai| 1. - 5. ahiMsA, satya asteya,
brahmacarya evaM aparigraha rUpa pAMca mahAvratoM kA samyak pAlana karanA,, 6.
rAtribhojana kA tyAga karanA, 7. - 11. pAMcoM indriyoM ko vaza meM rakhanA, 12.
bhAvasatyaanta:karaNa kI zuddhi, 13. karaNasatya-vastra, pAtra Adi kI bhalI-
bhAMti pratilekhanA karanA, 14. kSamA, 15. vItarAgatA-vairAgya, 16. mana kI
zubha pravRtti, 17. vacana kI zubha pravRtti, 18. kAya kI zubha pravRtti, 19.24.
chaha kAya ke jIvoM kI rakSA, 25. cAritra se yuktatA, 26. zIta Adi vedanA kA
sahanA aura, 27. mAraNAntika upasarga ko bhI samabhAva se shnaa| uparyukta
sattAIsa guNa, AcArya haribhadra ne apanI AvazyakasUtra kI ziSyahitA TIkA meM
saMgrahaNIkAra kI eka prAcIna gAthA ke anusAra varNana kiye haiM  /  parantu
samavAyAMgasUtra meM muni ke sattAIsa guNa kucha bhinna rUpa se aMkita haiM -
pA~ca mahAvrata, pA~ca indriyoM kA nirodha, cAra kaSAyoM kA tyAga, bhAvasatya,
karaNasatya, yogasatya, kSamA, virAgatA, mana:samAharaNatA, vacanasamAharaNatA,
kAyasamAharaNatA, jJAnasampannatA, darzanasampannatA, cAritrasampannatA,
vedanAtisahanatA, maarnnaantikaatishntaa| aTThAIsa AcAraprakalpa - AcAprakalpa
kI vyAkhyA ke sambandha meM vibhinna mAnyatAe~ haiM  /  AcAra haribhadra ke
anusAra AcAra ko hI AcAra-prakalpa kahate haiM - 'AcAra eva aacaarprklpH|' AcAra
kA artha prathama aMgasUtra hai  /  usakA prakalpa arthAt adhyyn-vishess|
nizIthasUtra AcAraprakalpa kahalAtA hai  /  athavA jJAnAdi sAdhu-AcAra kA
prakalpa arthAt vyavasthApana AcAra-prakalpa kahA jAtA 'AcAraH prathamAGgaM
tasya prakalpaH adhyayanavizeSo nishiithmitypraabhidhaanm| AcArasya vA
sAdhvAcArasya jJAnadiviSayasya prakalpo vyavasthApanamiti AcAraprakalpaH' -
abhayadeva-samavAyAMgasUtra TIkA AcArAMgasUtra ke zastraparijJA Adi 25 adhyayana
haiM aura nizIthasUtra bhI AcArAMgasUtra kI cUlikA

Page #142 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Fourth Study: Pratikramana  [71]  The three studies are considered to be the
essence, therefore, together they make up the twenty-eight studies of the
Acharanga Sutra.  1. Shastraparijna, 2. Lokavijaya, 3. Shitooshniya, 4.
Samyaktva, 5. Lokasar, 6. Dhutaadhyayan, 7. Mahaparijna, 8. Vimokhsa, 9.
Upadhanashruta, 10. Pindaishaana, 11. Shayya, 12. Iryaadhyayan, 13. Bhasha, 14.
Vastraishaana, 15. Patraishaana, 16. Avgrahapratima, 17. Sapta Sthanaadi-
Saptaikikaadhyayan, 18. Naishadikisaptaikikaadhyayan, 19.
Ucchaaraprasravanasataikikaadhyayan, 20. Shabdasataikikaadhyayan, 21.
Roopasataikikaadhyayan, 22. Parkriyaasaptaikikaadhyayan, 23.
Anyonyakriyaasataikikaadhyayan, 24. Bhavana, 25. Vimukti, 26. Udghta, 27.
Anudghta, 28. Aaropaana.  According to the Samavayanga Sutra, the twenty-eight
divisions of Acharaprakalpa are as follows:  1. One month of Pratikramana, 2.
One month and five days of Pratikramana, 3. One month and ten days of
Pratikramana. In this way, one should increase by five days until five months.
(This makes 25) 26. Upadghta-Anupaddhata, 27. Aaropaana, 28. Kritsnaakritsna. If
there is any transgression in the faith, form, etc. of these twenty-eight
studies, then "Tass Miccha Mi Dukkadam".  ## Twenty-Nine Divisions of Papashruta
-  That which causes the soul to fall into a state of misery is called "Pap"
(sin), and that which is heard from the Guru's mouth is called "Shruta"
(scripture). Similarly, the scripture that describes sin is called "Papashruta".
It is mainly of twenty-nine types.  1. Utpat - The science of omens that tells
the auspicious and inauspicious nature of the rain of blood, etc., which happens
spontaneously. 2. Bhoum - The science that tells the results of earthquakes,
etc. 3. Swapnashashtra - The science that tells the auspicious and inauspicious
results of dreams. 4. Antariksha Shastra - The science that describes the
celestial battles, etc., that occur in the sky. 5. Angashashtra - The science
that tells the results of the twitching of different parts of the body. 6.
Swarashashtra - The science that explains the results of the lunar, solar, etc.,
sounds of living beings. 7. Vyanjanashashtra - The science that describes the
results of moles, freckles, etc. 8. Lakshanashastra - The science that tells the
auspicious and inauspicious results of the characteristics (beauty, ugliness,
size, etc.) of women and men.  -  -  -  These eight become twenty-four due to
the divisions of Sutra, Vritti, and Vartika.  25. Vikthanuyoga - The science
that tells the means of achieving meaning and desire. For example, the
Vatsyayana-written...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 caturtha adhyayana : pratikramaNa ] [ 71 svarUpa mAnA jAtA hai, ataH usake tIna
adhyayana milakara AcArAMgasUtra ke aTThAIsa adhyayana hote haiM 1.
zastraparijJA, 2. lokavijaya, 3. zItoSNIya, 4. samyaktva, 5. lokasAra, 6.
dhUtAdhyayana, 7. mahAparijJA, 8. vimokSa, 9. upadhAnazruta, 10. piNDaiSaNA, 11.
zayyA, 12. IryAdhyayana, 13. bhASA, 14. vastraiSaNA, 15. pAtraiSaNA, 16.
avagrahapratimA, 17. sapta sthAnAdi-saptaikikAdhyayana, 18.
naiSadhikIsaptaikikAdhyayana, 19. uccAraprasravaNasataikikAdhyayana, 20
zabdasatai kikAdhyayana, 21. rUpasatai kikAdhyayana, 22.
parakriyAsaptaikikAdhyayana, 23. anyonyakriyAsataikikAdhyayana, 24. bhAvanA, 25.
vimukti, 26. udghAta, 27. anudghAta, 28. AropaNa  /  samavAyAMgasUtra ke anusAra
AcAraprakalpa ke aTThAIsa bheda isa prakAra haiM 1. eka mAsa kA prAyacitta, 2.
eka mAsa pAMca dina kA prAyazcitta, 3. eka mAsa dasa dina kA prAyazcitta  /  isI
prakAra pAMca dina bar3hAte huye pAMca mAsa taka kahanA cAhiye  /  ( isa prakAra
25 hue) 26. upadghAta-anupaddhAta, 27. AropaNa, 28. kRtsnAkRtsna  /  ina
aTThAIsa adhyayanoM kI zraddhA, prarUpaNA Adi meM koI aticAra lagA ho to tassa
micchA mi dukkaDaM  /  pApazruta ke 29 bheda - jo AtmA ko durgati meM DAlane kA
kAraNa ho, use 'pApa' kahate haiM, aura jo guru mukha se sunA jAye use 'zruta'
kahate haiM  /  isI prakAra pAparUpa zruta ko 'pApazruta' kahate haiN| vaha
mukhyataH unatIsa prakAra kA hai. 1. utpAta apane Apa hone vAlI rudhira Adi kI
vRSTi kA zubhAzubha batAne vAlA nimittazAstra  /  2. bhauma - bhUmikampa Adi kA
phala batAne vAlA zAstra  /  3. svapnazAstra * svapna kA zubhAzubha phala batAne
vAlA zAstra  /  4. antarikSazAstra AkAza meM hone vAle grahayuddha Adi kA
varNana karane vAlA zAstra  /  5. . aMgazAstra 6. svarazAstra 7. vyaJjanazAstra
8. lakSaNazAstra kahane vAlA zAstra  /  - - - - zarIra ke vibhinna aMgoM ke
phar3akane kA phala kahane vAlA zAstra  /  jIvoM ke candrasvara, sUryasvara Adi
svara kA phala pratipAdana karane vAlA zAstra  /  tila, maSA Adi ke phala kA
varNana karane vAlA zAstra  /  strI aura puruSoM ke lakSaNoM (mAna, unmAna,
pramANa Adi) kA zubhAzubha phala - - - ye AThoM hI sUtra, vRtti aura vArtika ke
bheda se caubIsa ho jAte haiM  /  25. vikathAnuyoga artha aura kAma ke upAyoM ko
batAne vAlA zAstra  /  jaise vAtsyAyanakRta

Page #143 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[72] Aavashyaka Sutra 26. Vidyanuyoga - A scripture that explains the means to
attain proficiency in various sciences like Rohini, etc. 27. Mantrānuyoga - A
scripture that explains the accomplishment of tasks through the use of mantras,
etc. 28. Yogānuyoga - A scripture that explains various yogic practices like
vashikarana, etc. 29. Anyatīrthikānuyoga - Scriptures of other faiths that
advocate and approve of violence-oriented conduct.  - Samavayangasutra. By
having faith in, and expounding upon, these 29 types of sinful scriptures, one
becomes free from the transgressions committed. The 30 stages of the most
deluding karmic bondage are: 1. Drowning and killing mobile beings in water. 2.
Killing mobile beings by obstructing their breathing, etc. 3. Killing mobile
beings by confining them in buildings and suffocating them with smoke. 4.
Killing mobile beings by inflicting deadly blows on their heads. 5. Killing
mobile beings by wrapping their heads in wet leather, etc. 6. Deceiving and
robbing travelers. 7. Secretly indulging in unethical conduct. 8. Falsely
defaming others. 9. Deliberately speaking a mixed language in the assembly. 10.
Destroying the kingdom of the king. 11. Claiming to be a celibate student of
scriptures, though not being one. 12. Pretending to be a celibate, though not
being one. 13. Stealing the wealth of the one who provides shelter. 14. Being
ungrateful for the help received. 15. Killing the householder or the leader of
the community.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 72] [ AvazyakasUtra kAmasUtra aadi| 26. vidyAnuyoga - rohiNI Adi vidyAoM kI
siddhi kA upAya batAne vAlA shaastr| 27. mantrAnuyoga - mantra Adi ke dvArA
kAryasiddhi batAne vAlA shaastr| 28. yogAnuyoga - vazIkaraNa Adi yoga batAne
vAlA shaastr| 29. anyatIrthikAnuyoga - anyatIrthikoM dvArA pravartita evaM
abhimata hiMsA pradhAna AcArazAstra aadi| - samavAyAMgasUtra isa prakAra ina 29
prakAra ke pApazrutoM kI zraddhA, prarUpaNA Adi karane se jo aticAra kiyA ho to
usase nivRtta hotA huuN| mahAmohanIya karmabandha ke 30 sthAna - 1. trasa jIvoM
ko pAnI meM DUbAkara maarnaa| 2. trasa jIvoM ko zvAsa Adi rokakara maarnaa| 3.
trasa jIvoM ko makAna Adi meM banda karake dhuMe meM ghoTakara maarnaa| 4. trasa
jIvoM ko mastaka para daNDa Adi kA ghAtaka prahAra karake maarnaa| 5. trasa
jIvoM ko mastaka para gIlA camar3A Adi lapeTa kara maarnaa| 6. pathikoM ko
dhokhA dekara mAranA athavA luuttnaa| 7. gupta rIti se anAcAra kA sevana krnaa|
8. dUsare para mithyA kalaMka lgaanaa| 9, sabhA meM jAna-bUjhakara mizra bhASA
bolnaa| 10. rAjA ke rAjya kA dhvaMsa krnaa| 11. bAlabrahmacArI na hote huye bhI
apane ko bAlabrahmacArI khlaanaa| 12. brahmacArI na hote huye bhI brahmacArI
hone kA DhoMga rcnaa| 13. AzrayadAtA kA dhana curaanaa| 14. kRta-upakAra ko na
mAna kara kRtaghnatA krnaa| 15. gRhapati athavA saMghapati Adi kI hatyA krnaa|

Page #144 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Fourth Study: Pratikraman  16. Killing a king, a wealthy merchant, or a
national leader. 17. Killing a man who is a special benefactor to society. 18.
Corrupting a Diksha Sadhu from their vows. 19. Slandering a Kevaljnani. 20.
Insulting or denigrating the path to liberation (Moksha). 21. Slandering an
Acharya or Upadhyaya. 22. Not serving an Acharya or Upadhyaya. 23. Claiming to
be a Bahushruta (one who has vast knowledge) when one is not. 24. Claiming to be
a Tapaswi (one who practices austerities) when one is not. 25. Having the
ability to serve but not serving one's dependent elders, sick, etc. 26.
Repeatedly engaging in violence and lustful speech. 27. Engaging in magic,
sorcery, etc. 28. Being excessively attached to and immersed in sensual
pleasures. 29. Slandering the Devas (divine beings). 30. Claiming to have had a
darshan (vision) of the Devas when one has not, out of a desire for prestige.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 caturtha adhyayana : pratikramaNa ] 16. rAjA, nagaraseTha tathA rASTranetA Adi
kI hatyA karanA 17. samAja ke AdhArabhUta viziSTa paropakArI puruSa kI hatyA
karanA  /  18. dIkSita sAdhu ko saMyama se bhraSTa karanA  /  19. kevalajJAnI kI
nindA karanA  /  20. mokSamArga kA apakAra athavA avarNavAda karanA  /  21.
AcArya athavA upAdhyAya kI nindA karanA  /  22. AcArya athavA upAdhyAya kI sevA
na karanA  /  23. bahuzruta na hote huye bhI apane Apako bahuzruta kahanA,
kahalAnA  /  24. tapasvI na hote huye bhI apane ko tapasvI kahanA  /  25. zakti
hote huye bhI apane Azrita vRddha, rogI Adi kI sevA na karanA  /  26. hiMsA
tathA kAmotpAdaka vikathAoM kA bAra-bAra prayoga karanA  /  [ 73 27. jAdU-TonA
Adi karanA  /  28. kAmabhoga meM atyadhika lipta rahanA, Asakta rahanA  /  29.
devatAoM kI niMdA karanA  /  30. devadarzana na hote huye bhI pratiSThA ke moha
se devadarzana kI bAta kahanA  /  1 dazAzrutaskandha vivecana - saMsAra ke
prANimAtra ko moha ne ghera rakhA hai| cAroM ora moha kA jAla bichA huA hai kyA
parivAra, kyA sampradAya, kyA jAti evaM kyA anya ikAI, sarvatra moha kA aMdherA
vyApta hai  /  kahIM dhana kA moha hai to kahIM putra kA, kahIM strI kA moha to
kahIM vastrAbhUSaNoM kaa| mohamamatva bAhara meM dikhAI dene vAlI cIja nahIM hai
ki jise hAtha meM lekara batAyA jA ske| ye to eka prakAra bhAva haiN| jaba
karmabandha hotA hai cAhe vaha mohanIya kA ho, cAhe anya karmoM kA, taba AtmA ke
sAtha ananta - ananta karmavargaNAoM kA hotA hai| unakI aneka paryAyeM haiM,
nyUnAdhika avasthAe~ haiM  /  mohabahurupiyA hai  /  vaha aneka rUpoM meM AtA
hai  /  indrajAla bhI usake sAmane tuccha  /  usake sAmane rAvaNa kI bahurUpiNI
yA bahusAriNI vidyA bhI nagaNya hai| moha ko pahacAnanA bar3A kaThina hai  /
mahAmohanIya karma kI sthiti bhI jaghanya antarmuhUrta kI aura utkRSTa 70
karor3Akaror3a sAgaropama kI hai, jo saba karmoM kI sthiti se adhika hai| yahA~
mahAmohanIya karma ke bandha ke mukhya tIsa sthAna arthAt kAraNa prarUpita kiye
gaye haiM  /  ina tIsa mahAmohanIya ke kAraNoM meM se kisI bhI kAraNa se jo koI
aticAra kiyA gayA ho to maiM

Page #145 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[74] [Necessary Sutra] I renounce that. The 31 qualities of Siddhas - _ The
qualities that reside in Siddhas from the very beginning of the Siddha state,
i.e., from the time of attaining the Siddha state, are called Siddhaadigunas.
These qualities manifest due to the destruction of the 31 natures of the eight
karmas. These 31 qualities are as follows: 1. Due to the destruction of the five
natures of the Jnanavaraniya karma - 1. Ksheenamatigyanavarana, 2.
Ksheenshrutgyanavarana, 3. Ksheenavadhigyanavarana, 4.
Ksheenmanahparyavgyanavarana, 5. Ksheenkevalgyanavarana. 2. Due to the
destruction of the nine natures of the Darshanavaraniya karma - 1.
Ksheenchchhuxudarshanavarana, 2. Ksheenachchhuxudarshanavarana, 3.
Ksheenavadhidarshanavarana, 4. Ksheenkevaldarshanavarana, 5. Ksheennidra, 6.
Ksheennidranidra, 7. Ksheenprachala, 8. Ksheenprachalaprachala, 9.
Ksheenstyanagrudhi. 3. Due to the destruction of the two natures of the Vedaniya
karma - 1. Ksheensataavedaniya, 2. Ksheenasataavedaniya.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 74] [ AvazyakasUtra usase nivRtta hotA huuN| siddhoM ke 31 guNa - _ AdikAla
arthAt siddha avasthA kI prApti ke prathama samaya se hI siddhoM meM rahane vAle
guNoM ko siddhAdiguNa kahate haiN| ATha karmoM kI ikatIsa prakRtiyA~ naSTa hone
se ye guNa prakaTa hote haiM  /  ve ikatIsa guNa nimnalikhita haiM - 1.
jJAnAvaraNIya-karma kI pAMca prakRti naSTa hone ke kAraNa - 1.
kSINamatijJAnAvaraNa, 2. kSINazrutajJAnAvaraNa, 3. kSINaavadhijJAnAvaraNa, 4.
kSINamanaH paryavajJAnAvaraNa, 5. kssiinnkevljnyaanaavrnn| 2. darzanAvaraNIya-
karma kI nau prakRtiyoM ke kSaya se - 1. kSINacakSudarzanAvaraNa, 2.
kSINaacakSudarzanAvaraNa, 3. kSINaavadhidarzanAvaraNa, 4.
kSINakevaladarzanAvaraNa, 5. kSINanidrA, 6.kSINanidrAnidrA, 7. kSINapracalA, 8.
kSINapracalApracalA, 9. kssiinnstyaangRddhi| 3. vedanIya-karma kI do prakRtiyoM
ke kSaya se - 1. kSINasATAvedanIya, 2. kssiinnasaataavedniiy|

Page #146 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Fourth Study: Pratikramana] 4. From the destruction of the two natures of
Mohaniya Karma: 1. Kshina Darshan Mohaniya, 2. Kshina Charitra Mohaniya. 5. From
the complete destruction of the four natures of Ayu Karma: 1. Kshina Nairyaika
Ayu, 2. Tiryancha Ayu, 3. Manushya Ayu, 4. Deva Ayu. From the destruction of the
two natures of Gotra Karma: 1. Kshina Uchcha Gotra, 2. Kshina Nicha Gotra. From
the destruction of the two natures of Nama Karma: 1. Kshina Shubha Nama, 2.
Kshina Ashubha Nama. 8. From the destruction of the five natures of Antaraya
Karma: 1. Kshina Dana Antaraya, 2. Kshina Labha Antaraya, 3. Kshina Bhoga
Antaraya, 4. Kshina Upbhoga Antaraya, 32 Yoga Sangraha - 5. 5. Kshina Virya
Antaraya. I renounce any transgression that may have been committed in relation
to these. - - ― - Samavayanga Sutra [ 75 1. Criticizing faults in the presence
of Gurus. 2. Not telling anyone else about someone's faults after hearing them.
3. Remaining steadfast in Dharma even in the face of adversity. 4. Performing
austerities without attachment. The practice of Achar Shiksha, which includes
the assimilation of the meaning of the sutras, the assimilation of the form,
education, and transcription, etc.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 caturtha adhyayana : pratikramaNa ] 4. mohanIya karma kI do prakRtiyoM ke kSaya
se 1. kSINadarzanamohanIya, 2. kSINacAritramohanIya | 5. Ayu- karma kI cAra
prakRtiyoM ke samUla kSaya se 6. nAma-karma kI do prakRtiyoM ke kSaya se 1.
kSINa nairayikAyu, 2 tiryaJcAyu, 3. manuSyAyu, 4. devAyu  /  gotra-karma kI do
prakRtiyoM ke kSaya se 1. kSINauccagotra, 2. kSINanIcagotra  /  karanA  /  1.
kSINazubhanAma, 2. kSINaazubhanAma  /  8. antarAya - karma kI pAMca prakRtiyoM
ke kSaya se 1. kSINadAnAntarAya, 2. kSINalAbhAntarAya, 3. kSINabhogAntarAya, 4.
kSINaupabhogAntarAya, battIsa yoga saMgraha - 5. 5. kSINavIryAntarAya  /  inake
viSaya meM jo aticAra kiyA gayA ho to maiM usase nivRtta hotA hU~  /  - - -- -
samavAyAMgasUtra [ 75 1. gurujanoM ke samakSa doSoM kI AlocanA karanA  /  2.
kisI ke doSoM kI AlocanA sunakara kisI anya se na kahanA  /  3. Apatti Ane para
bhI dharma meM dRr3ha rahanA  /  4. Asaktirahita tapa karanA  /  sUtrArtha
grahaNa rUpa grahaNa zikSA evaM pratilekhanA Adi rUpa AsevanA - AcAra zikSA kA
abhyAsa

Page #147 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[76] [Necessary Sutras] 6. Not engaging in beautification or adornment. 7.
Abandoning attachment to worship and installation, and practicing secret
austerities. 8. Renouncing greed. 9. Enduring hardships, persecutions, and
afflictions with patience. 10. Maintaining purity, self-control, and
truthfulness. 11. Straightforwardness and simplicity. 12. Purity of right faith.
13. Samadhi and serenity of mind. 14. Not being deceitful in the observance of
conduct. 15. Practicing the ten types of humility related to Arhats, etc. 16.
Patience - maintaining composure in the face of favorable and unfavorable
circumstances. 17. Awe - fear of worldly pleasures or a longing for liberation.
18. Not engaging in deceitful conduct. 19. Remaining engaged in virtuous
practices. 20. Restraint - stopping the inflow of karmic impurities. 21.
Purification of faults. 22. Detachment from worldly pleasures. 23. Pure
observance of the fundamental virtues. 24. Pure observance of the secondary
virtues. 25. Renunciation - not being attached to the body. 26. Not being
careless. 27. Being vigilant in the journey of self-control every moment. 28.
Being devoted to auspicious contemplation, Dharma, and pure contemplation. 29.
Not becoming impatient even in the face of death-like pain.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 76] [ AvazyakasUtra 6. zobhA zRMgAra nahIM krnaa| 7. pUjA evaM pratiSThA kA
moha chor3akara gupta tapa krnaa| 8. lobha kA tyAga krnaa| 9. titikSA-pariSaha-
upasarga Adi ko sahana krnaa| 10. zuci-saMyama evaM satya kI pavitratA rkhnaa|
11. aarjv-srltaa| 12. smyktvshuddhi| 13. smaadhi-prsnncitttaa| 14. AcAra-pAlana
meM mAyA nahIM krnaa| 15. vinaya-arihantAdi sambandhI daza prakAra kA vinaya
krnaa| 16. dhairya-anukUla-pratikUla pariSaha Ane para dhairya rkhnaa|| 17.
saMvega-sAMsArika bhogoM se bhaya athavA mokSAbhilASA honaa| 18. mAyAcAra na
krnaa| 19. sadanuSThAna meM nirata rhnaa| 20. saMvara-pApAzrava ko roknaa| 21.
doSoM kI zuddhi krnaa| 22. kAma- bhogoM se virkti| 23. mUlaguNoM kA zuddha
pAlana  /  24. uttaraguNoM kA zuddha pAlana  /  25. vyutsarga-zArIrika mamatA na
krnaa| 26. pramAda na krnaa| 27. pratikSaNa saMyama-yAtrA meM sAvadhAna rhnaa|
28. zubhadhyAna-dharma-zukladhyAna-parAyaNa honaa| 29. mAraNAntika vedanA hone
para bhI adhIra na honaa|

Page #148 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Fourth Study: Pratikraman  [77]  30. Abandoning the company of the wicked.
31. Performing atonement for committed faults. 32. Cultivating knowledge and
other virtues until death.  **Discussion:** I renounce any transgression that
may have been committed due to the lack of proper observance of these thirty-two
Yogasangrahas.  The activities of the mind, speech, and body are called Yoga.
There are two types of Yoga: auspicious Yoga and inauspicious Yoga. Restraint
consists of engaging in auspicious Yoga and abstaining from inauspicious Yoga.
In this sutra, the auspicious Yoga, which is the form of virtuous conduct, is
the subject of discussion. Only this can preserve the purity of a restrained
life. "Yoga is the activity of mind, speech, and body, and here only the
auspicious ones are intended."  - Acharya Abhaydeva, Samvayanga Tika, Thirty-
three Ashatanas  Jain Acharyas have beautifully explained the etymology of the
word Ashatana. The attainment of spiritual qualities like right faith, etc., is
called 'Aaya', and the meaning of Shatana is 'destruction'. Insulting Gods,
Gurus, scriptures, etc., leads to the destruction of good qualities like right
faith, etc. "Aaya - is the characteristic of attaining right faith, etc., and
its Shatana - destruction is explained as Ashatana."  - Acharya Abhaydeva,
Samvayanga Tika, "Ashatana is the destruction of Aaya, which is right faith,
etc. By dropping the 'Ya' sound, it becomes Ashatana."  - Acharya Jinadas,
Aavashyakachurni, The thirty-three Ashatanas related to the Guru have been
mentioned earlier. Here, the thirty-three Ashatanas of Arhanta, etc., are
described in the original text. Their meaning is as follows:  **Ashatana of
Arhanta:** The first Ashatana mentioned in the sutra is that of Arhanta. It is
the Arhanta Bhagwan who, for countless eons, has shown the light of truth to
beings wandering in darkness. They are the ones who preach Dharma and explain
the path of righteousness. Therefore, one should not commit Ashatana towards the
supremely benevolent Arhanta.  _If someone says that there are no Arhanta in
Bharatavarsha, then how can there be Ashatana towards them? The answer is that
'Arhanta do not have any existence. They have preached a strict Dharma. They are
free from attachments..._

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 caturtha adhyayana : pratikramaNa ] [77 30. saMga kA parityAga krnaa| 31. kRta
doSoM kA prAyazcita krnaa| 32. maraNaparyanta jJAnAdi kI ArAdhanA krnaa|
vivecana - ina battIsa yogasaMgrahoM kA samyak ArAdhana nahIM hone se jo koI
aticAra kiyA gayA ho to maiM usase nivRtta hotA huuN| mana, vacana evaM kAya ke
vyApAra ko yoga kahate haiM  /  yoga ke do bheda haiM - zubha yoga evaM azubha
yog| zubha yoga meM pravRtti aura azubha yoga se nivRtti hI saMyama hai|
prastuta sUtra meM zubha pravRtti rUpa yoga hI grAhya hai  /  usI kA saMgraha
saMyamI jIvana kI pavitratA ko akSuNNa banAe rakha sakatA hai| "yujyante iti
yogAH manovAkkAyavyApArAH, te ceha prazastA eva vivkssitaa|" - AcArya abhayadeva
samavAyAMga TIkA tetIsa AzAtanA - jainAcAryoM ne AzAtanA zabda kI nirukti bar3I
sundara kI hai  /  samyagdarzana Adi AdhyAtmika guNoM kI prApti ko 'Aya' kahate
haiM aura zAtanA kA artha hai khaNDana  /  deva, guru zAstra Adi kA apamAna
karane se samyagdarzana Adi sadguNoM kI zAtanA-khaNDanA hotI hai| 'AyaH -
samyagdarzanAvadyavAptilakSaNastasya zAtanA-khaNDanaM niruktaadaashaatnaa|' -
AcArya abhayadeva samavAyAMga TIkA 'AsAtaNANAmaM nANAdiAyassa saatnnaa|
yakAralopaM kRtvA AzAtanA bhvti|' - AcArya jinadAsa, AvazyakacUrNi gurudeva
sambandhI 33 AzAtanAoM kA ullekha pUrva meM kiyA jA cukA hai| yahA~ arihantAdi
kI tetIsa AzAtanAoM kA nirUpaNa mUla pATha meM hI kiyA gayA hai| unakA artha isa
prakAra hai - arihaMtANaM AsAyaNAe - sUtrokta tetIsa AzAtanAoM meM pahalI
AzAtanA arihantoM kI hai| anantakAla se andhakAra meM bhaTakate huye jIvoM ko
satya kA prakAza mUlata: arihanta bhagavAn hI dikhalAte haiN| ve hI dharma kA
upadeza karate haiM tathA sanmArga kA nirUpaNa karate haiM  /  ataH paramopakArI
arihantoM kI AzAtanA nahIM karanI caahiye| _ yadi koI kahe ki bhAratavarSa meM
to arihanta haiM hI nahIM, phira unakI AzAtanA kaise ho sakatI hai? samAdhAna
hai ki 'arihanta kI koI sattA nahIM hai| unhoMne to kaThora dharma kA upadeza
diyA hai  /  ve vItarAga hote

Page #149 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 78] **Essential Sutra**  **Arhats' Asatana:** To have doubts like, "Why do
they use golden thrones, etc.?"  **Siddhas' Asatana:** To disregard them,
saying, "There are no Siddhas. If there is no body, how can there be infinite
happiness?"  **Acharya-Upadhyaya's Asatana:** To think, "These are children, of
low lineage, with little intelligence. They preach to others but don't practice
themselves." Similarly, one should understand the Upadhyaya's Asatana.
**Sadhus' Asatana:** To criticize them, saying, "Cowardly people, unable to
support their families, renounce their homes and beg. They live off the earnings
of householders."  **Sadhvis' Asatana:** To belittle them because they are
women. To call them the root of conflict and strife, and to disregard them in
such ways.  **Shravak-Shravika's Asatana:** Jainism is a very generous and vast
religion. Here, not only are Arhats and other great souls revered, but also
ordinary householders who practice the Deshaviriti Dharma. To disregard these
Shravaks and Shravikas is also a sin. Every Acharya, Upadhyaya, and Sadhu must
repent for any known or unknown disregard towards Shravaks and Shravikas during
daily morning and evening Pratikraman. They must say, "Micchami Dukkadam." Jain
Agamas compare Shravaks and Shravikas to "Ammapiyaro." Jainism emphasizes
virtues. There, virtues are worshipped, not anyone considered superior or
inferior based on attire, gender, etc.  **Devas-Devis' Asatana:** To think,
"Devas are attached to worldly desires, unable to resist them, constantly
engaged in them, and despite being powerful, they don't improve governance."
Similarly, one should understand the Devis' Asatana.  **Asatana of This World
and the Next:** This world and the next refer to: for humans, humans are this
world, and hell, Tiryanch, and Devas are the next world. To misrepresent this
world and the next, to not believe in rebirth, to not believe in the principle
of the four paths of hell, etc., is the Asatana of this world and the next.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 78] [AvazyakasUtra huye bhI svarNa-siMhAsana Adi kA upayoga kyoM karate haiM?'
ityAdi duzcintana karanA arihantoM kI AzAtanA siddhoM kI AzAtanA - 'siddha koI
hotA hI nahIM hai| jaba zarIra hI nahIM rahA to phira ananta sukha kaise mila
sakatA hai ' Adi avajJA karanA siddhoM kI AzAtanA hai| AcArya-upAdhyAya kI
AzAtanA - vaha isa prakAra hai - 'ye bAlaka haiM, akulIna haiM, alpabuddhi haiM
, auroM ko to upadeza dete para svayaM kucha nahIM karate' ityaadi| isI prakAra
upAdhyAya kI AzAtanA samajhanI caahiye| sAdhuoM kI AzAtanA - 'kAyara jana
parivAra kA pAlana-poSaNa na kara sakane ke kAraNa gRhatyAga kara bhIkha mAMgane
kA dhandhA akhtiyAra kara lete haiM  /  gRhasthoM kI kamAI para gulacharre
ur3Ate haiM ' ityAdi kaha kara sAdhuoM kI nindA karanA unakI AzAtanA hai|
sAdhviyoM kI AzAtanA - strI hone ke kAraNa sAdhviyoM ko nIcA batalAnA  /  unako
kalaha aura saMgharSa kI jar3a kahanA, ityAdi rUpa se avahelanA karanA sAdhviyoM
kI AzAtanA hai| zrAvaka-zrAvikAoM kI AzAtanA - jainadharma atIva udAra aura
virAT dharma hai| yahA~ kevala arihanta Adi mahAn AtmAoM kA hI gaurava nahIM
hai, apitu sAdhAraNa gRhastha hote huye bhI jo strI-puruSa dezavirati dharma kA
pAlana karate haiM, una zrAvakoM evaM zrAvikAoM kI avajJA karanA bhI pApa hai|
pratyeka AcArya, upAdhyAya aura sAdhu ko bhI pratidina prAtaH aura sAyaMkAla
pratikramaNa ke samaya zrAvakoM evaM zrAvikAoM ke prati jJAta yA ajJAta rUpa se
kI jAne vAlI avajJA ke liye pazcAttApa karanA hotA hai  /  'micchA mi dukkaDaM'
denA hotA hai| jainAgamoM meM zrAvakoM-zrAvikAoM ko 'ammApiyaro' se upamita kiyA
gayA hai  /  jainadharma meM guNoM ko mahattva diyA hai  /  vahA~ guNoM kI pUjA
hotI hai, na ki veSabheda yA liMga Adi ke bheda se kisI ko U~cA yA nIcA samajhA
jAtA hai| devoM-deviyoM kI AzAtanA - vaha isa prakAra hai - devatA to viSaya-
vAsanA meM Asakta, apratyAkhyAnI, avirata haiM aura zaktimAn hote huye bhI
zAsana kI unnati nahIM karate, ityaadi| isI prakAra deviyoM kI AzAtanA samajhanA
caahiye| ihaloka aura paraloka kI AzAtanA - ihaloka aura paraloka kA abhiprAya
isa prakAra hai - manuSya ke liye manuSya ihaloka hai aura naraka, tiryaJca evaM
deva paraloka hai  /  ihaloka aura paraloka kI asatya prarUpaNA karanA,
punarjanma Adi na mAnanA, narakAdi cAra gatiyoM ke siddhAnta para vizvAsa na
rakhanA ityAdi ihaloka aura paraloka kI AzAtanA hai|

Page #150 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Fourth Study: Pratikramana  [79] **Aspiring to the Well-being of All Living
Beings (Pran-Bhoot etc.)** - The terms Pran-Bhoot etc. are considered
synonymous. They all refer to a living being (Jiva). Acharya Jinadas says -
"Egatthita va ete." However, Acharya Jinadas Mahत्तर and Acharya Haribhadra etc.
have also accepted some specific meanings for these words.    Dwi-Indriya etc.
beings are called Pran, and Prithvi-Kaya etc. Eka-Indriya beings are called
Bhoot. The term Jiva is used for all worldly beings, and the term Sattwa is used
for all infinite beings, both worldly and liberated.  "Praninah Dwi-
Indriyaadayah. Bhootani Prithvyaadayah ... Ji-vanti Jivaa-Ayuh-Karma-Anubhava-
Yuktaah Sarva Eva."  Sattvaa - Saansarik - Saansara-Atit-Bhedah."  - This sutra,
which emphasizes aspiring to the well-being of all infinite beings in the
universe, is very important. The infinite compassion of Jainism is not limited
to only familiar and beloved beings. Rather, it is a great ideal to seek
forgiveness from all living beings. Whether a being is near or far, gross or
subtle, known or unknown, enemy or friend, in any form, it is completely
forbidden for a seeker to aspire to its ill-being or disregard it.  **Aspiring
to the Well-being of the Dharma as Exemplified by the Kevali** - Before becoming
a Kevali, a seeker becomes completely free from attachment (Veetrag). Therefore,
because of being Veetrag and omniscient, the Dharma exemplified by them is
beneficial to all and true. Even then, to speak ill of the Dharma exemplified by
them is to speak ill of the Dharma exemplified by the Kevali. Similarly, I
refrain from aspiring to the ill-being of the world, including gods, humans, and
Asuras, in the form of false representation.  **Aspiring to the Well-being of
Time (Kal)** - I refrain from aspiring to the ill-being of time in the form of
believing that "Time is not the characteristic of change" or "Time does
everything, it digests beings, destroys them, and even when the world is asleep,
it is awake, therefore time is unstoppable."  **Aspiring to the Well-being of
the Shruta** - I refrain from aspiring to the ill-being of the Shruta, which is
the nectar of words, in the form of false representation, which emanated from
the mouth of Lord Mahavira, reached the ears of the Ganadharas, is the explainer
of general and specific matters, and makes the noble beings immortal.
**Aspiring to the Well-being of the Shruta-Devata** - Shruta-Devata means the
Tirthankaras and Ganadharas who created the Shruta. They are the original
custodians and creators of the Shruta, hence they are Shruta-Devata. I refrain
from aspiring to their ill-being, as well as the ill-being of the
Vaachanaacharya (who, according to the instructions of the Upadhyaya,  Kal:
Pachati Bhootani, Kal: Sanharate Prajah. Kal: Supteshu Jagarti, Kalo Hi
Duratikram: ||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 caturtha adhyayana : pratikramaNa ] [79 prANa-bhUta Adi kI AzAtanA - prANa-
bhUta Adi zabdoM ko ekArthaka mAnA gayA hai| sabakA artha jIva hai| AcArya
jinadAsa kahate haiM - 'egaTThitA va ete|' parantu AcArya jinadAsa mahattara
aura AcArya haribhadra Adi ne ukta zabdoM ke kucha vizeSa artha bhI svIkAra kiye
haiM  /  dvIndriya Adi jIvoM ko prANa aura pRthvIkAya Adi ekendriya jIvoM ko
bhUta kahA jAtA hai| samasta saMsArI prANiyoM ke liye jIva aura saMsArI tathA
mukta saba anantAnanta jIvoM ke liye sattva zabda kA vyavahAra hotA hai -
"prANinaH dviindriyaadyH| bhUtAni pRthvyAdayaH ... /  jIvanti jIvA-
AyuHkarmAnubhavayuktAH sarva eva "" /  sattvAH - sAMsArika - sNsaaraatiitbhedH|"
- Avazyaka-ziSyahitA TIkA vizva ke samasta anantAnanta jIvoM kI AzAtanA kA yaha
sUtra bar3A hI mahattvapUrNa hai| jainadharma kI karuNA kA ananta pravAha kevala
paricita aura snehI jIvoM taka hI sImita nahIM hai  /  apitu samasta jIva-rAzi
se kSamA mAMgane kA mahAn Adarza hai  /  prANI nikaTa ho yA dUra, sthUla ho yA
sUkSma, jJAta ho yA ajJAta, zatru ho yA mitra, kisI bhI rUpa meM ho, usakI
AzAtanA evaM avahelanA karanA sAdhaka ke liye sarvathA niSiddha hai|
kevaliprarUpita dharma kI AzAtanA - sAdhaka kevalI hone se pUrva hI pUrNa
vItarAga ho jAte haiN| ataeva vItarAga evaM sarvajJa hone ke kAraNa unake dvArA
prarUpita dharma sarvahitakArI evaM satya hI hotA hai| phira bhI unake dvArA
prarUpita dharma kA avarNavAda karanA kevaliprarUpita dharma kA avarNavAda hai|
isI prakAra devoM, manuSyoM aura asuroM sahita loka kI asatya prarUpaNA rUpa
AzAtanA se nivRtta hotA huuN| kAla kI AzAtanA - vartanAlakSaNa kAla nahIM hai'
isa prakAra kI athavA 'kAla hI sabakucha karatA hai, jIvoM ko pacAtA hai, unakA
saMhAra karatA hai aura saMsAra ke soye rahane para bhI jAgatA hai, ataH
kAladurnivAra hai,'' isa prakAra kAla ko ekAnta kartA mAnane rUpa AzAtanA se
nivRtta hotA huuN| bhagavAn mahAvIra ke mukha-candra se nissRta, gaNadhara ke
karNoM meM pahuMce huye, sAmAnya-vizeSAtmaka padArtha ke bodhaka aura bhavya
jIvoM ko ajara-amara karane vAle vacanAmRta svarUpa zruta kI asatya prarUpaNA
Adi AzAtanA se nivRtta hotA huuN| zrutadevatA kI AzAtanA - zrutadevatA kA artha
hai - zruta-nirmAtA tIrthaMkara tathA gaNadhara  /  ve zruta ke mUla adhiSThAtA
haiM, racayitA haiM, ataH zrutadevatA haiN| unakI tathA vAcanAcArya (upAdhyAya
ke AdezAnusAra kAla: pacati bhUtAni, kAlaH saMharate prjaaH| kAlaH supteSu
jAgarti, kAlo hi durtikrmH||

Page #151 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[80] [Necessary Sutra] I am freed from the desire to teach the Shruta to the
disciples in the form of a text. Vyatyaneḍita - The Sanskrit form of
Vaccameliyam is 'Vyatyaneḍita'. It means - to speak twice or thrice with a blank
mind. Some Acharyas have interpreted the meaning of Vyatyaneḍita differently.
For example, Vyatyaneḍita is to combine together similar synonymous words that
have come in different Sutras and places. The meaning of these words has already
been given in the previous knowledge-related excesses. From 'Paḍikkammami
Egavihe Asanjame' to 'Tetisae Asayanahin', the vast form of one-type of non-
restraint is described. All this group of excesses is basically a description of
non-restraint. 'Paḍikkammami Egavihe Asanjame' is a brief-pratikramana of non-
restraint. And this pratikramana gradually becomes vast from 'Dohi Bandhanehin'
onwards to 'Tetisae Asayanahin'. _ This Lokaloka Pramana is an infinite vast
universe. In it, there are infinite forms of non-restraint like violence,
falsehood, etc., which are despicable, infinite forms of restraint like non-
violence, etc., which are desirable, and infinite forms of pudgala, etc., which
are knowable. The seeker has to perform pratikramana of all these. Thus, if one
has not practiced infinite restraint-places and has practiced non-restraint-
places, then it is pratikramana. In this way, just like the words from one to
thirty-three, other infinite words should also be kept in mind, whether they are
known or unknown. The seeker should not only perform pratikramana of the known,
but also of the unknown. Only then is it said in the final text ahead - "Jan
Sambharami, Jan Cha Na Sambharami". That is, I perform pratikramana of the
faults that are coming to mind and also of the faults that are not coming to
mind, but have happened. Pratijna-Sutra Nirgrantha-Pravachana text - Namo
Chauvīsae Tittthayaraṇam Usabhaimahavīrapjjavasaṇāṇam. Iṇameva Niggantham
Pāvaṇam Saccham, Aṇuttaram, Kevaliyam, Paḍipuṇṇam, Neyāuyam, Sansuddham,
Sallagattan, Siddhimaggan, Muttimaggam, Nijaṇamaggam, Nivvāṇamaggam,
Avithamavisandhi, Savvadukkhapphīṇamaggam. Ittham Ṭhiā Jīvā Siṇhanti, Buṇhanti,
Muccanti, Parinivvāyanti Savvadukkhāṇamantā Karenti. Tam Dhammam Saddahāmi
Pattiyāmi, Roemi, Phāsemi, Pālemi, Aṇupālemi. Tam Dhammam Saddahato, Pattianto,
Roanto, Phāsanto, Palanto, Aṇupalanto. Tassa Dhammassa Kevalipannattassa
Abbuṭṭhiomi Ārāhaṇāe Viroemi Virāhaṇāe, Asanjam Parīyāṇāmi, Sanjam
Uvasampjjammi.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 80] [ AvazyakasUtra ziSyoM ko pATha rUpa meM zruta kA uddezAdi karate haiM,
una) kI AzAtanA se nivRtta hotA huuN| vyatyAneDita - vaccAmeliyaM kA saMskRta
rUpa 'vyatyAneDita' hotA hai| isakA artha hai-zUnya citta se do tIna bAra
bolnaa| kucha AcAryoM ne vyatyAne Dita kA artha bhinna rUpa se bhI kiyA hai|
yathA bhinna-bhinna sUtroM meM tathA sthAnoM para Aye huye eka jaise
samAnArthaka padoM ko eka sAtha milAkara bolanA vyatyAneDita hai| ina zabdoM kA
artha pUrva meM jJAna saMbaMdhI aticAroM meM diyA jA cukA hai| 'paDikkamAmi
egavihe asaMjame' se lekara 'tetIsAe AsAyaNAhiM ' taka ke sUtra meM ekavidha
asaMyama kA hI virATa rUpa batalAyA gayA hai  /  yaha saba aticAra-samUha
mUlata: asaMyama kA hI vivaraNa hai  /  paDikkamAmi egavihe asaMjame' yaha
asaMyama kA saMkSipta-pratikramaNa hai| aura yahI pratikramaNa Age 'dohi
baMdhaNehiM ' Adi se lekara 'tetIsAe AsAyaNAhiM ' taka kramazaH virATa hotA gayA
hai| _ yaha lokAloka pramANa ananta virAT saMsAra hai  /  isameM ananta hI
asaMyama rUpa hiMsA, asatya Adi heyasthAna haiM , ananta saMyama rUpa ahiMsA Adi
upAdeyasthAna haiM tathA ananta pudgala Adi jJeyasthAna haiM  /  sAdhaka ko ina
sabakA pratikramaNa karanA hotA hai| isa prakAra ananta saMyama-sthAnoM kA
AcaraNa na kiyA ho aura asaMyama-sthAnoM kA AcaraNa kiyA ho to usakA
pratikramaNa hai  /  isa prakAra eka se lekara tetIsa taka ke bola ke samAna hI
anya ananta bola bhI arthata: saMkalpa meM rakhane cAhiye, bhale hI ve jJAta hoM
yA ajJAta hoM  /  sAdhaka ko kevala jJAta kA hI pratikramaNa nahIM karanA, apitu
ajJAta kA bhI pratikramaNa karanA hai| tabhI to Age ke antima pATha meM kahA hai
-"jaM saMbharAmi, jaM ca na sNbhraami"| arthAt jo doSa smRti meM A rahe haiM
unakA pratikramaNa karatA hU~ aura jo doSa smRti meM nahIM A rahe haiM, parantu
hue haiM, una sabakA bhI pratikramaNa karatA huuN| pratijJA-sUtra nirgrantha-
pravacana kA pATha - namo cauvIsAe titthayarANaM usbhaaimhaaviirpjjvsaannaannN|
iNameva niggaMthaM pAvayaNaM saccaM, aNuttaraM, kevaliyaM, paDipuNNaM, neyAuyaM,
saMsuddhaM, sallagattaNaM, siddhimaggaM, muttimaggaM, nijANamaggaM,
nivvANamaggaM, avitahamavisaMdhi, svvdukkhpphiinnmggN| itthaM ThiA jIvA
sijhaMti, bujhaMti, muccaMti, parinivvAyaMti savvadukkhANamaMtaM kreNti| taM
dhammaM saddahAmi pattiyAmi, roemi, phAsemi, pAlemi, annupaalemi| taM dhammaM
saddahato, pattiaMto, roaMto, phAsaMto, pAlaMto, annupaalNto| tassa dhammassa
kevalipannattassa abbhuTThiomi ArAhaNAe viraomi virAhaNAe, asaMjamaM pariyANAmi,
saMjamaM uvsNpjjaami|

Page #152 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[81 Fourth Study: Pratikramana]  I renounce the impure, I adopt the pure. I
renounce the non-spiritual, I adopt the spiritual. I renounce ignorance, I adopt
knowledge. I renounce non-activity, I adopt activity. I renounce wrong belief, I
adopt right belief. I renounce non-enlightenment, I adopt enlightenment. I
renounce the wrong path, I adopt the right path. What I have accumulated, and
what I have not accumulated. What I have renounced, and what I have not
renounced.  I repent for all these to the omniscient Arihant. I, the ascetic,
have renounced sinful activities, I am free from delusion, right-visioned,
devoid of deceit and falsehood.  I bow down with my head, mind and speech to all
the Tirthankaras, from Bhagavan Rishabhadeva to Bhagavan Mahavira, who are
present in the fifteen continents and oceans, some of whom are adorned with the
garland of jewels, some who observe the five great vows, and some who observe
the eighteen virtuous practices, and who have attained the state of
Akshayakaracharitra (the conduct that is imperishable).  Meaning - I pay
obeisance to the twenty-four Tirthankaras, from Bhagavan Rishabhadeva to
Bhagavan Mahavira.  This Jain doctrine preached by the Tirthankaras is the
ultimate truth, unparalleled, expounded by the Kevali-Kevalins (omniscient
beings), complete with the qualities leading to liberation, unobstructed by
logic, reasoning and arguments, completely pure i.e. absolutely flawless,
destroys the afflictions like delusion, is the means to attain the path of
liberation and freedom from karmic bondage, is the path to liberation from the
cycle of birth and death, is the path to attain complete peace i.e. Nirvana, is
devoid of false beliefs, is eternal and without beginning or end, and is the
path to completely eliminate all sufferings.  The aspirants who abide by and
practice this Jain doctrine become enlightened, attain omniscience, become
liberated, attain complete peace of the soul, and eternally end all their
sufferings.  I have faith, belief, interest, experience, and observe this Jain
doctrine with utmost dedication.  I, while having faith, belief, interest and
experience in this Jain doctrine, engage in its practice.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 [81 caturtha adhyayana : pratikramaNa ] abhaM pariyANAmi, baMbha uvsNpjjaami|
akappaM pariyANAmi, kappaM uvsNpnjaami| annANaM pariyANAmi, nANaM uvsNpjaami|
akiriyaM pariyANAmi, kiriyaM uvsNpjjaami| micchattaM pariyANAmi, sammataM
uvsNpjaami| abohiM pariyANAmi, bohiM uvsNpjaami| amaggaM pariyANAmi, maggaM
uvsNpjjaami| jaM saMbharAmi, jaM ca na sNbhraami| jaM paDikkamAmi, jaM ca na
pddikkmaami| tassa savvassa devasiyassa aiyArassa pddikkmaami| samaNo'haM
saMjaya-viraya-paDihayapaccakkhAyapAvakamme , aniyANo ditttthisNpnno-maayaa-mos-
vivjio| aDDhAijesu dIva-samuddesu pannarasasu kammabhUmIsu, jAvaMti, kei sAhU
rayaharaNa-gucchapaDiggahadhArA, paMcamahavvaya-dhArA aTThArassa-sahassa-
sIlaMgadhArA, akkhayAkAracarittA, te savve sirasA maNasA matthaeNaM vNdaami||
bhAvArtha - bhagavAn RSabhadeva se le kara bhagavAna mahAvIra paryanta caubIsa
tIrthaMkara devoM ko maiM namaskAra karatA huuN| _ yaha tIrthaMkaropadiSTa
nirgrantha-pravacana hI satya hai, anuttara-sarvottama hai , kevalika-
kevalajJAniyoM dvArA prarUpita hai, (mokSaprApaka guNoM se) paripUrNa hai,
nyAya, yukti, tarka se abAdhita hai, pUrNarUpa se zuddha arthAt sarvathA
niSkalaMka hai, mAyA Adi zalyoM ko naSTa karane vAlA hai, siddhimArga-siddhi kI
prApti kA upAya hai, karma-bandhana se mukti kA sAdhana hai, saMsAra se chur3A
kara mokSa kA mArga hai , pUrNa zAnti rUpa nirvANa kA mArga hai, mithyAtvarahita
hai, vicchedarahita arthAt sanAtana nitya hai tathA pUrvAparavirodha se rahita
hai, saba duHkhoM kA pUrNatayA kSaya karane kA mArga hai| isa nirgrantha
pravacana meM sthita rahane vAle arthAt tadanusAra AcaraNa karane vAle bhavya
jIva siddha hote haiM , buddha-sarvajJa hote haiM , mukta hote haiM , pUrNa
AtmazAnti ko prApta karate haiM , samasta duHkhoM kA sadAkAla ke liye anta
karate haiN| maiM isa nirgrantha pravacana rUpa dharma para zraddhA karatA hU~,
pratIti karatA hU~, ruci karatA hU~, sparzanA karatA hU~, pAlanA arthAt rakSA
karatA huuN| vizeSa rUpa se niraMtara pAlana karatA huuN| maiM prastuta jina-
dharma kI zraddhA karatA huA, pratIti karatA huA, ruci karatA huA, sparzanA
AcaraNa

Page #153 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 82] [Essential Sutra]  I strive for the worship of that only-perfect
religion, and I am detached and withdrawn from opposition. I know non-restraint
through *jñāparijñā* and abandon it through *pratyākhyānaparijñā*, and I accept
restraint. I know non-chastity and abandon it, and I accept chastity. I know the
*akalpya* (unrighteous) and abandon it, and I accept the *kritya* (righteous). I
know ignorance and abandon it, and I accept knowledge. I know inaction-nihilism
and abandon it, and I accept action-right-view. I know falsehood and abandon it,
and I accept right-view-non-violence.  I know the unrighteous path of violence,
etc., through *jñāparijñā* and abandon it through *pratyākhyānaparijñā*. I
accept the righteous path of non-violence, etc.  I perform *pratikramaṇa* for
the transgressions of the day, those I remember, those I recall, and those I do
not recall, those I have already performed *pratikramaṇa* for and those I have
not been able to perform *pratikramaṇa* for.  I am an ascetic, I am restrained,
I am withdrawn from worldly affairs and the world, I am one who represses sinful
actions, I am free from the root-cause of attachment, I am endowed with right-
vision, I am one who avoids falsehood and untruth along with delusion.  I bow
down to all the *sadhu* *muniraj* who are in the limited human realm of two and
a half islands and two oceans, that is, in the fifteen *karmabhūmis*, who are
adorned with *rajohaṛaṇa*, *guccak*, and *pātra*, and who uphold the five great
vows, the eighteen thousand *śīlāṅga* - the limbs of good conduct, and who are
renunciants who follow the path of non-transgression. I bow down to them with my
mind and my head.  **Discussion:** Jainism primarily presents the ideal of
avoiding sins. Therefore, it does not consider it sufficient to simply repent
for past actions, but also instructs on taking precautions to ensure that sins
are not committed again in the future.  Before making the vow, the great
travelers of the path of restraint, from Ādinātha Śrī Ṛṣabha to Mahāvīra, the
twenty-four *tīrthaṅkara* deities, have been saluted. Warriors remember
warriors, and heroes remember heroes. This is a righteous war, therefore, only
righteous heroes are remembered here. It has been an unwavering rule that the
devotees of the practice and those who have attained perfection in that practice
are remembered according to the practice one wishes to perform. Therefore, the
remembrance of the twenty-four *tīrthaṅkara* of Jainism is what stabilizes our
self-purification. The *tīrthaṅkara* are for us like...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 82] [ AvazyakasUtra karatA huA, pAlana karatA huA, vizeSa rUpa se niraMtara
pAlana karatA huA - usa kevaliprarUpita dharma kI ArAdhanA ke liye udyata hotA
hU~ aura virAdhanA se virata-nivRtta hotA huuN| asaMyama ko jJaparijJA se jAnatA
aura pratyAkhyAnaparijJA se tyAgatA hU~ tathA saMyama ko svIkAra karatA huuN|
abrahmacarya ko jAnatA aura tyAgatA hU~ aura brahmacarya ko svIkAra karatA huuN|
akalpya (akRtya) ko jAnatA aura tyAgatA hU~, kRtya ko svIkAra karatA huuN|
ajJAna ko jAnatA aura tyAgatA hU~, jJAna ko svIkAra karatA huuN| akriyA-
nAstikavAda ko jAnatA tathA tyAgatA hU~, kriyA-samyagvAda ko svIkAra karatA
huuN| mithyAtva ko jAnatA aura tyAgatA hU~, samyaktva-sadAgraha ko svIkAra
karatA huuN| hiMsA Adi amArga ko (jJaparijJA se) jAnatA aura
(pratyAkhyAnaparijJA se) tyAgatA huuN| ahiMsA Adi mArga ko svIkAra karatA huuN|
jina doSoM ko smaraNa kara rahA hU~, jo yAda haiM aura jo smRtigata nahIM haiM,
jinakA pratikramaNa kara cukA hU~ aura jinakA pratikramaNa nahIM kara pAyA hU~,
una divasa saMbaMdhI aticAroM kA pratikramaNa karatA huuN| maiM zramaNa hU~,
saMyamI hU~, virata-sAvadha vyApAroM se evaM saMsAra se nivRtta hU~, pApakarmoM
ko pratihata karane vAlA hU~, nidAna zalya se rahita arthAt Asakti se rahita
hU~, dRSTisampanna-samyagdarzana se yukta hU~, mAyA sahita mRSAvAda-asatya kA
parihAra karane vAlA huuN| DhAI dvIpa aura do samudra parimita mAnava kSetra meM
arthAt paMdraha karmabhUmiyoM meM jo bhI rajoharaNa, gucchaka evaM pAtra ko
dhAraNa karane vAle tathA pA~ca mahAvratoM, aThAraha hajAra zIlAMgoM-sadAcAra ke
aMgoM ko dhAraNa karane vAle evaM niraticAra AcAra ke pAlana tyAgI sAdhu
munirAja haiM, una sabako zira namA kara, mana se, mastaka se vandanA karatA
huuN| vivecana - jainadharma mUlataH pApoM se bacane kA Adarza prastuta karatA
hai| ataH vaha kRta karmoM ke liye pazcAtApa kara lenA hI paryApta nahIM
samajhatA, pratyuta bhaviSya meM punaH pApa na hone pAyeM, isa bAta kI bhI
sAvadhAnI rakhane kA nirdeza karatA hai| pratijJA karane se pahale saMyama-patha
ke mahAna yAtrI AdinAtha zrI RSabha se le kara mahAvIra paryanta caubIsa
tIrthaMkara devoM ko namaskAra kiyA hai  /  yuddhavIra yuddhavIroM kA to
arthavIra arthavIroM kA smaraNa karate haiN| yaha dharmayuddha hai, ata: yahAM
dharmavIroM kA hI smaraNa kiyA gayA hai| yaha aTala niyama rahA hai ki jaisI
sAdhanA karanI ho usI sAdhanA ke upAsakoM evaM usameM siddhi prApta karane vAloM
kA smaraNa kiyA jAtA hai| ataH jainadharma ke caubIsa tIrthaMkaroM kI smRti
hamArI Atma-zuddhi ko sthira karane vAlI hai  /  tIrthaMkara hamAre liye
aMdhakAra meM

Page #154 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Fourth Study: Pratikraman  **Lighthouses are:**  **Lord Rishabhdev**  Among
the twenty-four Tirthankaras in the present Kalchakra, Lord Rishabhdev is the
first. Human civilization originated with him. Before him, humans lived in
forests, ate fruits, and wandered without any social life. They had no knowledge
of Dharma or Karma. Lord Rishabhdev was the first to reveal the true nature of
the soul.  Lord Rishabhdev is the founder of Jainism in this Avasarpini Kal.
Those who consider Jainism to be entirely modern should pay attention to this.
The praises of Lord Rishabhdev are sung in the Vedas and Puranas. He was the
original redeemer of human culture, therefore he has been revered by all humans.
Ancient Vedic Rishis did not forget his great favors, they have sung his praises
with open hearts.  - [ 83 - Anarvaanam Vrishabham Mandrajivham, Brihaspatim
Vardhaya Navyam Arke. - - Rig Veda 1.190.1 -  Meaning: Worship Rishabh, who is
sweet-tongued, knowledgeable, and worthy of praise, with mantras that enhance
him.  Lord Mahavira, at the beginning of this age, enhanced the dignity of
Jainism established by Lord Rishabhdev, with the help of the twenty-two
intermediate Tirthankaras and the final Tirthankara, Lord Mahavira. But at that
time, they had to grapple with many difficult problems in both social and
religious spheres. More than twenty-six hundred years ago, although the island
of Dharma was lit, the state of the country was very deplorable. Violence was
rampant, and humanity was groaning under the weight of exploitation and
immorality. Rivers of animal blood flowed in the name of religion, and terrible
atrocities were committed against Shudras and women. In that difficult time, the
savior of the world, the valiant Lord, was born and with his inner strength, he
sounded the drum of non-violence.  India owes an infinite debt to Lord Mahavira,
a debt that we can never repay in any way. He was completely selfless, he did
not want anything in return. But as his followers or servants, it is our duty to
walk on the path he showed us and bow our heads in reverence and devotion at his
lotus feet.  -  Niggantham Pavayanam - 'Pavayanam' is the noun and 'Niggantham'
is the adjective. The word 'Nigganth' is famous in Jain literature. The Sanskrit
form of Nigganth is 'Nirgranth'. Nirgranth means - free from external
attachments like wealth and possessions, and internal attachments like false
beliefs, non-restraint, anger, pride, and delusion, i.e., completely renounced
and...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 caturtha adhyayana : pratikramaNa ] prakAzastaMbha haiM  /  bhagavAn RSabhadeva
vartamAna kAlacakra meM jo caubIsa tIrthaMkara hue haiM, unameM bhagavAn
RSabhadeva sarvaprathama haiN| Apake dvArA hI mAnava sabhyatA kA AvirbhAva huA
hai  /  Apase pahale mAnava jaMgaloM meM rahatA, vana - phala khAtA evaM
sAmAjika jIvana se zUnya ghUmA karatA thA  /  na use dharma kA patA thA aura na
karma kA hI  /  AtmA kA svarUpadarzana sarvaprathama bhagavAn RSabhadeva ne hI
kraayaa| bhagavAn RSabhadeva isa avasarpiNI kAla meM jainadharma ke Adi
pravartaka haiM  /  jo loga jainadharma ko sarvathA Adhunika mAne baiTheM haiM,
unheM isa ora lakSya denA cAhiye  /  bhagavAn RSabhadeva ke guNagAna vedoM aura
purANoM taka meM gAye gaye haiN| ve mAnava saMskRti ke Adi uddhAraka the, ataH
ve mAnava mAtra ke pUjya rahe haiM  /  prAcIna vaidika RSi unake mahAn upakAroM
ko nahIM bhUle the, unhoMne khule hRdaya se bhagavAn RSabhadeva kA stuti gAna
kiyA hai - [ 83 - anarvANaM vRSabhaM mandrajihvaM, bRhaspatiM vardhayA
navyamarke  /  - - Rg maM. 1 sU. 190 maM. 1 arthAt miSTabhASI, jJAnI, stutiyogya
RSabha ko pUjA-sAdhaka maMtroM dvArA vardhita karo  /  bhagavAn mahAvIra isa
yuga ke prAraMbha meM bhagavAn RSabhadeva ke dvArA saMsthApita jaina dharma kI
garimA ko madhyavartI bAisa tIrthaMkaroM ne tathA carama tIrthaMkara bhagavAn
mahAvIra ne saMvarddhanA pradAna kii| kintu usa samaya unheM sAmAjika evaM
dhArmika donoM hI kSetroM meM anekAneka vikaTa samasyAoM se jUjhanA par3A thaa|
Aja se chabbIsa sau varSa se kucha adhika varSa pUrva yadyapi dharma kA dvIpa
prajvalita thA, para deza kI dazA atyaMta zocanIya thii| cAroM ora hiMsA kA
tANDavanRtya ho rahA thA tathA zoSaNa evaM anAcAra kI ati se mAnavatA karAha
rahI thii| dharma ke nAma para pazuoM ke rakta kI nadiyAM bahatI thIM, zUdroM
para tathA nArI jAti para bhI bhayAnaka atyAcAra hote the| usa vikaTa belA meM
jagaduddhAraka vIra prabhu ne janma liyA aura Atmazakti se ahiMsA dharma kI
dundubhi yI thii| bhagavAn mahAvIra kA RNa bhAratavarSa para anaMta hai, asIma
hai, hama kisI bhI prakAra se unakA RNa adA nahIM kara skte| ve pUrNa niSkAma
the, badale meM cAhate bhI kucha nahIM the| lekina unake anuyAyI athavA sevaka
hone ke nAte hamArA kartavya hai ki hama unake batAye hue sanmArga para caleM
aura zraddhA aura bhakti ke sAtha mastaka jhukA kara unake zrIcaraNoM meM
vandana kareM  /  - niggaMthaM pAvayaNaM 'pAvayaNaM' vizeSya hai aura
'niggaMthaM' vizeSaNa hai| jaina sAhitya se 'niggaMtha' zabda prasiddha hai  /
niggaMtha kA saMskRta rUpa 'nirgrantha' hotA  /  nirgrantha kA artha hai -
dhana-dhanya Adi bAhya grantha aura mithyAtva, avirati tathA krodha, mAna, mAyA
Adi Abhyantara grantha arthAt parigraha se rahita, pUrNa tyAgI evaM

Page #155 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[84] [Essential Sutra The restrained sage. The discourse of the Nirgranthas, the
Arihantas, is the Nairgranthya Pravachana. The word Niggantha in the original is
not a synonym for Nirgrantha, but rather for 'Nairgranthya'. The word
'Pavayanam' has two Sanskrit transformations - Pravachana and Pravachana.
Acharya Jinadas calls it Pravachana and Haribhadra calls it Pravachana. Although
there is a difference in words, both Acharyas mean the same thing. In which the
true nature of the Jivadi substances and the practice of the Ratna-tray of
knowledge, etc. is described, that from Samayika to the beginning of Bindusar,
the Agam-literature is contained in the Nirgrantha Pravachana or Nairgranthya
Pravachana. 'Prakarshena Abhividhina Uchyante Jivaadayo Yasmin Tatpravachanam.'
- Acharya Haribhadra. From Shri Rishabhdev Swami to Shri Mahavira Swami, my
salutations to all the twenty-four Tirthankara Bhagavants. Thus, saluting, they
praise the discourse of the Tirthankaras - this is Nirgrantha, i.e., free from
the silver, etc., material form and the false, etc., mental form - the Muni-
related Samayika, etc., to the end of the Pratyakhyana, the twelve-fold
Ganipitaka form, the discourse taught by the Tirthankaras is true. Saccam -
Truth is the nature of the soul, the subject of experience and the ideal of
conduct. Just as the sweetness of sugar can only be experienced by tasting it,
similarly, the importance of truth is known only by putting it into practice.
The devotee of truth keeps truth with him at all times in every field of life.
Truth is a universal principle. Truth cannot be separated from religion. Truth
adorns morality. When truth is reflected in life and conduct, man's life
automatically becomes religious. In religious and moral scriptures, the glory of
truth has been extolled without hesitation. Truth is the best, the most
excellent. Religion cannot be imagined without truth. _ 'Na'sau Dharmo Yatra Na
Satyamasthi' i.e., that religion is not religion which is far from truth. Truth
is the essence of practice, the thread of man's philosophical thinking and the
door to the goal of liberation. The entire essence of the world is contained in
it. In the Prashnavyakarana Sutra, truth is called the form of God. The basis of
life is truth, the mine of happiness. See Prashravyakarana, truth itself is God.
1. 'Nirgranthanaamidam Nairgranthyam Pravachanamiti.' - Acharya Haribhadra 2.
'Pavayanam Samaiyaadi Bindusarapjjavasanam Jaththa Nan-Dasan-
Charittsaahanavaavara Anegadha Vanijjati.' - Acharya Jinabhadra,
Aavashyakachurni

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 84] [AvazyakasUtra saMyamI saadhu| nirgranthoM arihantoM kA pravacana,
nairgranthyaprAvacana hai|' mUla meM jo niggaMtha zabda hai, vaha nirgrantha kA
vAcaka na ho kara 'nairgranthya' kA vAcaka hai  /  'pAvayaNaM' zabda ke do
saMskRta rUpAntara haiM - pravacana aura prAvacana  /  AcArya jinadAsa pravacana
kahate haiM aura haribhadra prAvacana  /  zabda bheda hote hue bhI artha donoM
AcArya eka hI kahate haiM  /  jisameM jIvAdi padArthoM kA tathA jJAnAdi
ratnatraya kI sAdhanA kA yathArtha rUpa se nirUpaNa kiyA gayA hai, vaha sAmAyika
se le kara bindusAra ke pUrva taka kA Agama-sAhitya nirgrantha pravacana yA
nairgranthya prAvacana meM garbhita ho jAtA hai| 'prakarSeNa abhividhinA ucyante
jIvAdayo yasmina ttpraavcnm|' - AcArya haribhadra  /  zrI RSabhadeva svAmI se le
kara zrI mahAvIra svAmI paryanta caubIsoM tIrthaMkara bhagavantoM ko merA
namaskAra ho| isa prakAra namaskAra karake tIrthaMkara praNIta pravacana kI
stuti karate haiM - yahI nirgrantha arthAt rajata Adi dravyarUpa aura mithyAtva
Adi bhAvarUpa grantha se rahita - muni saMbaMdhI sAmAyika Adi pratyAkhyAna
paryanta dvAdazAMga gaNipiTaka svarUpa tIrthaMkaroM dvArA upadiSTa pravacana
satya hai| saccaM - satya AtmA kA svabhAva, anubhUti kA viSaya aura AcaraNa kA
Adarza hai  /  jaise mizrI kI madhuratA kA anubhava, AsvAdana use muMha meM
rakhane se hI ho sakatA hai, usI prakAra satya kA mahattva use AcaraNa meM
utArane se hI mAlUma hotA hai| satya kA upAsaka jIvana ke hara kSetra meM hara
samaya satya ko sAtha rakhatA hai  /  satya eka sArvabhauma siddhAnta hai  /
satya ko dharma se alaga nahIM kiyA jA sakatA hai| satya se nIti suzobhita hotI
hai  /  jIvana aura vyavahAra meM satya kI jhalaka Ane para manuSya kA jIvana
apane Apa dharmamaya ho jAtA hai| dharma aura nItigranthoM meM sarvatra satya kI
mahimA kA muktakaMTha se bakhAna kiyA gayA hai| satya sarvottama hai,
sarvotkRSTa hai  /  satya ke binA dharma kI kalpanA nahIM kI jA sakatI hai| _
'nA'sau dharmo yatra na satyamasti' arthAt vaha dharma, dharma nahIM hai jo
satya se dUra hai| satya sAdhanA kA sAra, manuSya kI tattva-cintanA kA tAra aura
mokSa maMjila kA dvAra hai  /  saMsAra kA sampUrNa sAra tattva isameM nihita
hai| praznavyAkaraNasUtra meM satya ko bhagavAn kA rUpa kahA gayA hai| jIvana kA
AdhAra hai, satya sukhoM kI khaan| prazravyAkaraNa dekhiye, satya svayaM
bhagavAn  //  1. 'nirgranthAnAmidaM nairgranthyaM praavcnmiti|' - AcArya
haribhadra 2. 'pAvayaNaM sAmAiyAdi bindusArapajjavasANaM jattha nANa-dasaNa-
carittasAhaNavAvArA aNegadhA vnnijjti|' - AcArya jinabhadra, AvazyakacUrNi

Page #156 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Fourth Study: Pratikramana  **[85 Kevaliya** - The word 'Kevaliya' in the
original text can be translated into two Sanskrit forms - 'Kevala' and
'Kaivalika'. 'Kevala' means unique. The principles of Samyagdarshana, etc., are
unique and supreme. 'Kaivalika' means - formulated or propounded by the Kevalis.
**Padipunnam** - Samyagdarshana, Samyagjnana and Samyakcharitra are the essence
of Jainism. It is complete in itself.  **Neyauyam** - The Sanskrit form of
'Neyauyam' is 'Naiyayika'. Acharya Haribhadra defines 'Naiyayika' as - one who
is 'nayansheel', a carrier, is 'Naiyayika'. Samyagdarshana, etc., lead to
liberation, therefore they are called 'Naiyayika'. 'Nayansheelan Naiyayikam
Mokshagamakametyartha'. Shri Bhava Vijayji defines 'Nyaya' as 'Moksha'. Because
definite income-profit is 'Nyaya' and such 'Nyaya' is only 'Moksha' and for the
seeker there is no other benefit greater than 'Moksha' - "Nishchit Ayo Laabho
Nyayo Muktiryartha, Sa Prayojanamasyeti Naiyayika". - Uttaraadhyayana Vritti,
Adhy. 4, Ga. 5. One meaning of this can also be - 'युक्त-तर्क से युक्त-अबाधित'
(equipped with logic and reasoning, unobstructed).  **Sallkattan** - In the
language of the Agamas, 'Shalya' means - 'Maya, Nidana and Mithyatva'. External
'Shalya' cause pain only for a short time, but these internal 'Shalya' are very
terrible. Since time immemorial, countless souls have been suffering due to
these 'Shalya'. Even reaching heaven does not provide liberation from them.
Acharya Umaswati has written in the Tattvarth Sutra - 'Nishalya Vrati'. For a
'Vrati', it is paramount to be 'Nishalya', i.e., free from 'Shalya'.
**Nijanamgam** - Acharya Haribhadra has defined 'Niryana' as the state of
'Moksha'. The place where one goes is called 'Yana'. Unique knowledge is called
'Niryana'. 'Moksha' is the only state that is the best 'Yana-Sthan'. Therefore,
it is also called 'Niryana' in Jain Agamic literature.  **Avisandhi** -
'Avisandhi' means without 'Sandhi'. 'Sandhi' refers to the gap in between. The
meaning is that Jainism has been continuously uninterrupted since time
immemorial. It may not be present in a particular time in the Bharatadi Kshetra,
but it always remains uninterrupted in the Mahavideha Kshetra. The boundaries of
time cannot hinder the progress of Jainism. Jainism is 'Nijadharma', i.e., the
religion of the soul. Therefore, it will always be found somewhere in the three
times and three realms.  **Savva-Du:khpaheenamgam** - The final attribute of
Dharma is 'Sarvadukhapraheenamarg'. Every being in the world is tormented by
suffering, afflicted by pain. He desires happiness for himself, desires joy, but
the world...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 caturtha adhyayana : pratikramaNa ] [85 kevaliyaM - mUla meM 'kevaliyaM' zabda
hai, isake saMskRta rUpAntara do kiye jA sakate haiM - kevala aura kaivlik|
kevala kA artha advitIya hai  /  samyagdarzAnAdi tattva advitIya haiM,
sarvazreSTha haiN| kaivalika kA artha hai - kevalajJAniyoM dvArA prarUpita
arthAt prtipaadit| paDipuNNaM - samyagdarzana, samyagjJAna aura samyakcAritra hI
jainadharma hai| vaha apane Apa meM saba ora se pratipUrNa hai| neyAuyaM -
'neyAuyaM' kA saMskRta rUpa naiyAyika hotA hai  /  AcArya haribhadra naiyAyika
kA artha karate haiM - jo nayanazIla hai, le jAne vAlA hai, vaha naiyAyika hai
/  samyagdarzana Adi mokSa meM le jAne vAle haiM, ataH ve naiyAyika kahalAte
haiM  /  'nayanazIlaM naiyAyikaM mokssgmkmityrthH|' zrI bhAvavijaya jI nyAya kA
artha 'mokSa' karate haiN| kyoMki nizcita Aya - lAbha hI nyAya hai aura aisA
nyAya ekamAtra mokSa hI hai tathA sAdhaka ke liye mokSa se bar3ha kara anya koI
lAbha nahIM hai - "nizcita Ayo lAbho nyAyo muktirityarthaH, sa prayojanamasyeti
naiyaayikH|" - uttarAdhyayanavRtti, adhya. 4, gA. 5 isakA eka artha yukti-tarka
se yukta-abAdhita bhI ho sakatA hai| sallakattaNaM - Agama kI bhASA meM zalya kA
artha hai - 'mAyA, nidAna aura mithyaatv|' bAhara ke zalya kucha kAla ke liye hI
pIr3A dete haiM, paraMtu ye andara ke zalya to bar3e hI bhayaMkara hote haiM  /
anAdikAla se anaMta AtmAe~ ina zalyoM ke kAraNa pIr3ita ho rahI haiM  /  svarga
meM pahu~ca kara bhI ina se mukti nahIM miltii| AcArya umAsvAti ne
tattvArthasUtra meM likhA hai - 'niHzalyo vrtii'| vratI ke liye sarvaprathama
niHzalya arthAt zalya-rahita honA parama Avazyaka hai| nijANamaggaM - AcArya
haribhadra ne niryANa kA artha mokSa pada kiyA hai| jahAM jAyA jAtA hai vaha
yAna hotA hai  /  nirupama jJAna niryANa kahalAtA hai  /  mokSa hI aisA pada hai
jo sarvazreSTha yAna-sthAna hai  /  ata: vaha jaina Agama sAhitya meM niryANa
padavAcya bhI hai| avisandhi - avisandhi arthAt sandhi se rahita  /  sandhi bIca
ke antara ko kahate haiM  /  bhAva yaha hai ki jinazAsana anAdikAla se niraMtara
avyavacchinna calA A rahA hai  /  bharatAdi kSetra meM kisI kAla vizeSa meM
nahIM bhI hotA hai, parantu mahAvideha kSetra meM to sadA kAla avyavacchinna
banA rahatA hai  /  kAla kI sImAe~ jainadharma kI pragati meM bAdhaka nahIM bana
sktiiN| jinadharma nijadharma arthAt AtmA kA dharma hai  /  ata: vaha tIna kAla
aura tIna loka meM kahIM na kahIM sadA sarvadA milegA hii| savva-
duHkhapahINamaggaM - dharma kA aMtima vizeSaNa sarvaduHkhaprahINamArga hai|
saMsAra kA pratyeka prANI duHkha se vyAkula hai, kleza se saMtapta hai  /  vaha
apane liye sukha cAhatA hai, Ananda cAhatA hai, parantu saMsAra

Page #157 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 86] [Essential Sutras 1 There is no happiness that is not intertwined with
sorrow. Because an individual, under the influence of ignorance and delusion,
seeks happiness in external objects. But those objects that appear pleasant and
enjoyable today, in due course, become painful, distressing, and the cause of
increased sorrow and grief. The wealth that an individual acquires through
deceit, fraud, and illusion, for which he works day and night, becomes the cause
of the destruction of life. He also becomes a guest of the prison due to theft
of taxes, etc. The son who is the apple of his parents' eye, the piece of their
heart, the darling of their heart in childhood, becomes a thorn in their heart,
a thorn in their eyes, a stain on their family when he grows up and becomes
immoral. Even hearing his name causes pain. The head hangs in shame. If there
were happiness in objects, how could one object be the cause of happiness at one
time and sorrow at another? In the true sense, it is not true happiness, but an
illusion of happiness. 'The cycle of suffering experienced by the soul is rooted
in association.' The truth is that the soul has been suffering from time
immemorial due to association with external objects that are different from the
self. True happiness can only be attained through the practice of Dharma, which
is in the form of the three jewels, namely right faith, right knowledge, and
right conduct. Therefore, Acharya Haribhadra writes: "The path that is free from
all suffering, the liberation that is the cause of it." Sijjhanti - In Jainism,
the complete development of the infinite qualities of the soul is considered to
be Siddhatva. Until knowledge is infinite, vision is infinite, character is
infinite, energy is infinite, i.e., until every quality is infinite, Jainism
does not accept liberation. 'Sijjhanti' means that the living beings who are
situated in the path mentioned become Siddhas. Bhagavan's - Bujjhati - They
become Buddhas. Buddha means the one who has complete knowledge. There may be a
doubt here that Buddhahood is attained even before becoming a Siddha. In the
course of spiritual development, in the fourteen Gunasthanas, infinite
knowledge, infinite vision, etc. qualities are attained in the thirteenth
Gunasthana itself, and liberation takes place after the fourteenth Gunasthana.
So what is the meaning of saying Bujjhati after Sijjhanti? The solution is that
complete knowledge is attained in the thirteenth Gunasthana, so according to the
order of development, the place of Buddhahood is first and the place of
Siddhatva is second, but the Buddhahood mentioned here after Siddhatva means
that even after becoming a Siddha, Buddhahood remains, it is not destroyed. Some
philosophers say that there is a lack of knowledge in liberated souls, this
particular description negates their belief. Muccianti - The word 'Muccianti'
means - to be liberated from karmas. Until even a single karma-particle remains
associated with the soul, liberation cannot take place. Acharya Umaswati has
written in the first sutra of the tenth study of Tattvarth Sutra -
"Kritsnakarmakshaya Moksha" i.e., liberation takes place when all karmas are
destroyed.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 86 ] [ AvazyakasUtra 1 kA koI bhI sukha aisA nahIM hai, jo duHkha se asaMbhinna
ho  /  kyoMki vyakti ajJAna aura moha ke vazIbhUta ho kara bAhya padArthoM meM
sukha DhUMDhatA hai| lekina jo padArtha Aja sukhada aura prItikara pratIta hote
haiM, kAlAntara meM ve hI kaSTaprada, klezajanaka evaM zoka saMtApa vRddhi ke
kAraNa bana jAte haiN| jisa dhana kI prApti ke liye vyakti chala, kapaTa aura
mAyA kA sevana karatA hai, jise prApta karane ke liye dina-rAta eka karatA hai,
vahI dhana prANoM ke nAza kA kAraNa bana jAtA hai| kara, Teksa Adi kI corI ke
kAraNa kArAgRha kA mehamAna bhI banAtA hai| jo putra bacapana meM mAtA-pitA kI
A~khoM kA tArA, dila kA Tukar3A, hRdaya kA dulArA hotA hai, vahI bar3A hone para
durAcArI bana jAne ke kAraNa hRdaya kA zUla, A~khoM kA kAMTA, kula kA kalaMka
bana jAtA hai| usakA nAma sunane meM bhI kaSTa hotA hai| lajjA se mastaka jhuka
jAtA hai| agara padArtha meM sukha hotA to eka padArtha eka samaya sukha kA aura
dUsare samaya duHkha kA kAraNa kaise bana jAtA ? sacce artha meM vaha saccA
sukha nahIM, sukhAbhAsa hai  /  'saMyogamUlA jIvena prAptA duHkhaparamparA' saca
to yaha hai ki Atmabhinna bAhya padArthoM ke saMyoga ke kAraNa jIva anAdi kAla
se duHkhoM ko bhugata rahA hai| saccA sukha to samyagdarzanAdi ratnatraya rUpa
dharma kI sAdhanA se hI prApta ho sakatA hai  /  isaliye AcArya haribhadra
likhate haiM sarvaduHkha - prahINamArga - sarvaduHkha - prahINo
mokSastatkAraNamityarthaH  /  sijjhati - jainadharma meM AtmA ke anaMta guNoM kA
pUrNa vikAsa ho jAnA hI siddhatva mAnA gayA I jaba taka jJAna anaMta na ho,
darzana anaMta na ho, cAritra anaMta na ho, vIrya anaMta na ho, arthAt pratyeka
guNa anaMta na hoM, taba taka jainadharma mokSa honA svIkAra nahIM karatA  /
'sijjhaMti' kA artha hai batAye hue mArga meM sthita jIva siddha hote haiM  /
bhagavan ke - bujjhati - buddha hote haiN| buddha arthAta pUrNa jnyaanii| yahAM
zaMkA ho sakatI hai ki buddhatva to siddha hone ke pahale hI prApta ho jAtA hai|
AdhyAtmika vikAsa ke kramasvarUpa caudaha guNasthAnoM meM, anaMta jJAna, anaMta
darzana Adi guNa terahaveM guNasthAna meM hI prApta ho jAte haiM aura mokSa,
caudahaveM guNasthAna ke bAda hotA hai| ataH sijhaMti ke bAda bujjhati kahane kA
kyA abhiprAya hai ? samAdhAna kevalajJAna terahaveM guNasthAna meM prApta ho
jAtA hai ataH vikAsakrama ke anusAra buddhatva kA sthAna pahalA hai aura
siddhatva kA dUsarA, paraMtu yahAM siddhatva ke bAda jo buddhatva kahA hai usakA
abhiprAya yaha hai ki siddha ho jAne ke bAda bhI buddhatva banA rahatA hai,
naSTa nahIM hotA hai| kucha dArzanika muktAtmAoM meM jJAna kA abhAva ho jAnA
kahate haiM, unakI mAnyatA kA niSedha isa vizeSaNa se ho jAtA hai  /  muccaMti -
'muccaMti' pada kA artha hai - karmoM se mukta honaa| jaba taka eka bhI karma -
paramANu AtmA sambandhita rahatA hai taba taka mokSa nahIM ho sktaa| AcArya
umAsvAti ne tattvArthasUtra ke dasaveM adhyayana ke prathama sUtra meM likhA hai
- " kRtsnakarmakSayo mokSaH" arthAt samasta karmoM ke naSTa hone para mokSa hotA
hai  /

Page #158 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Fourth Study: Pratikraman  [87] For those seeking liberation, it is essential
to first destroy the harmful karmas of Gnanavaraniya, Darshanavaraniya,
Mohaniya, and Antaray. This should be done with knowledge and through the
practice of Shabhakriya, as the soul purifies itself through Shabha and
progresses towards purity. Eventually, through arduous practice, the light of
knowledge blossoms within the soul. The remaining non-harmful karmas, namely
Vedaniya, Nama, Gotra, and Ayukarma, are like a burnt rope, and they are
destroyed in the short time it takes to utter five short syllables. Only then
can the soul attain Siddhi.  The essence is that the soul can only become stable
in its true state by breaking free from the karmic bonds that have been
associated with it since time immemorial.  The principles of Karmavad and
Atmavad, as propounded by Mahavira, are profound. Every seeker should gain
complete knowledge about all the principles before embarking on the path of
practice. This will enable the seeker to become fearless and naturally engage in
practice, ultimately becoming a Siddha and a Buddha. In other words, they will
attain eternal and imperishable liberation by becoming free from karma.
Liberation is one. It is the separation of the soul from the karmic bonds.
Although liberation is of eight types, corresponding to the eight karmas
(Gnanavaraniya, etc.), it is still one in terms of the general liberation. There
is no difference. The liberation of a soul happens only once. A soul that
attains liberation once will not be reborn, as the causes for rebirth are
absent. Therefore, the state attained is permanent and irreversible. There is no
need to regain it. Hence, liberation is one.  Parinivvayan: The soul is
inherently upward-moving. Through right knowledge, right faith, and right
conduct, the soul becomes pure, enlightened, perfectly pure, spotless, clear,
radiant, and elevated. The soul, in its form of knowledge and faith, is the
eternal principle. All other emotions, such as attachment and aversion, and the
karmic body, are external and caused by association. "Anno jivo annam sariram" -
the soul is different, and the body is different.  - Sutra Kritanga Sutra
(2-1-9) The soul, devoid of material elements like words, forms, and sensual
pleasures, is the one that can attain liberation. Jainism firmly believes that
every soul possesses a great light that shines brightly. An ocean of bliss and
eternal peace surges within it. When the consciousness of every dormant soul
awakens, it becomes the Supreme Soul, free from attachment, and transforms from
the small to the vast, from the insignificant to the great. Ultimately, it
attains Parinirvana.  Nirvana cannot be praised. It is a place of indescribable,
unparalleled, extraordinary supreme bliss that cannot even be imagined.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 caturtha adhyayana : pratikramaNa ] [87 mokSaprApti ke liye jijJAsu sAdhakoM ko
jJAnAvaraNIya, darzanAvaraNIya, mohanIya evaM aMtarAya ina ghAtika karmoM ko
sarvaprathama naSTa karane ke liye jJAnapUrvaka zabhakriyA karanI cAhiye, kyoMki
AtmA zabha se hI zuddha kI ora agrasara hotI hai aura eka samaya aisA bhI AtA
hai ki kaSTasAdhya sAdhanA ke dvArA AtmA meM bodha kI kiraNa prasphuTita ho jAtI
hai| jo aghAtika karma vedanIya, nAma, gotra evaM Ayukarma jalI huI rassI ke
samAna zeSa rahate haiM, unako pA~ca laghu akSara uccAraNa karane meM jitanA
samaya lagatA hai, utane svalpa samaya meM naSTa karake hI AtmA siddhi ko prApta
ho jAtI hai| _ Azaya yaha hai ki AtmA ke sAtha anAdi kAla se jo karmoM kA
sambandha hai, unakA bhedana karake hI AtmA svadazA meM sthira ho sakatI hai|
mahAzramaNa mahAvIra kA karmavAda evaM AtmavAda siddhAnta atyanta gahana hai|
pratyeka sAdhaka ko sAdhanA-patha para gatizIla hone se pUrva sabhI tattvoM ke
sambandha meM samyak prakAreNa jAnakArI kara lenI cAhiye, jisase sAdhaka
nirdhAnta ho kara sahaja hI sAdhanArata ho sake tathA siddha, buddha ho sake  /
arthAt karmamukta hokara zAzvata evaM akSaya mokSa-sukha ko prApta kara ske|
mokSa eka hai - AtmA kA karma rUpa pAza se alaga honA mokSa hai  /  yaha mokSa
yadyapi jJAnAvaraNIya Adi ATha karmoM se tat-tat karmoM ke chUTane se ATha
prakAra kA hai, phira bhI mocanasAmAnya kI apekSA yaha eka hai| isameM bheda
nahIM hai  /  jIva kI mukti eka hI bAra hotI hai  /  jo jIva eka bAra mokSa
prApta kara letA hai vaha phira se saMsAra meM janma ke kAraNoM kA abhAva hone
se janma dhAraNa nahIM karatA, ataH jo sthiti prApta ho gaI hai vaha sAdi hokara
bhI aparyavasita hai| usakI punaH prApti kA abhAva hai, ataH mokSa eka hI hai|
parinivvAyaMti - AtmA svabhAva se UrdhvagAmI hai| samyagjJAna, darzana evaM
cAritra ke dvArA AtmA zuddha, buddha, vizuddha, amala, vimala, ujjvala evaM
unnata banatI hai  /  jJAna-darzana svarUpa AtmA hI zAzvata tattva hai| isase
bhinna jitane bhI rAga-dveSa, karma-zarIra Adi bhAva haiM , ve saba saMyogajanya
bAhya bhAva haiN| 'anno jIvo annaM sarIraM' arthAt AtmA bhinna hai aura zarIra
bhinna hai| - sUtrakRtAMga sUtra (2-1-9) zabda, rUpa, kAmabhogAdi jar3a
padArthoM se rahita AtmA hI mokSagAmI ho sakatI hai  /  jainadharma kI yaha
dRr3ha mAnyatA hai ki hara eka AtmA meM mahAn jyoti jAjvalyamAna hai  /  Ananda
aura amara zAMti kA mahAsAgara usameM hiloreM mAra rahA hai| pratyeka prasupta
AtmA kA jaba caitanya jAga uThatA hai to vaha AtmA paramAtmA vItarAga evaM
kSudra se virATa aura laghu se mahAn bana jAtI hai| anta meM parinirvANa ko
prApta ho jAtI hai| nirvANa kI prazasti nahIM ho sktii| vaha aise anirvacanIya,
anupama, asAdhAraNa paramAnanda kA sthAna hai ki jisakI kalpanA bhI nahIM kI jA
sktii|

Page #159 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Necessary Sutras  The **Acharanga Sutra** states: "O Gautama! There are no
words to describe the bliss of liberation. Just as a mute person knows the taste
of jaggery but cannot describe it, similarly, the liberated souls who have
attained the **Niranjan** state experience the bliss of liberation but have no
words to express it. After attaining the **Niranjan** state, all suffering
ends."  ## The Bliss of Liberation  Thirty-two thousand crowned kings stand in
service, hands folded, awaiting orders. Is the happiness of the **Chakravarti**,
the ruler of six continents, greater than the bliss of liberation? If the
**Chakravarti's** happiness were greater, why would he himself abandon his vast
empire and embrace the life of a mendicant? The **Chakravarti** himself
considers his happiness insignificant, even trivial, compared to the bliss of
liberation. The devotee, through righteous practice, attains liberation and ends
all physical and mental suffering. Acharya Jinadas says, "They become the end of
all bodily and mental suffering, they become free from all afflictions."  ## The
Importance of Faith  **Sad Dhaami** - I have faith. Faith is the foundation of
life. Without faith, no human being can cross the ocean of this world. No matter
how learned, knowledgeable, wise, or philosophical a person may be, if they lack
**Samyaktva** (right faith) and faith in their soul, knowledge of various
languages and mastery of various arts cannot liberate them from the ocean of
this world. Therefore, faith is the nectar of life. Achieving any goal is not
difficult, but faith or belief is rare.  "**Sad Dhaami** is extremely rare." -
Uttara Sutra, Chapter 3  Without faith, a person cannot even recognize
themselves. Without faith, knowledge becomes like a cripple. The truly
intelligent and great are those whose every fiber is imbued with faith.
Dedicated practice with unwavering focus on the goal leads to success. Single-
mindedness in achieving the goal is the foundation upon which success sprouts,
grows, flourishes, and bears fruit, leading to fulfillment. A person lacking
single-mindedness, firm belief, and unwavering faith in their goal, no matter
how hard they strive, will never succeed. Whether it be education, artistic
pursuit, business, industry, or religious practice, success can only be achieved
through dedicated effort with faith and belief.  There are two forms of faith:
**Samyak Shraddha** (right faith) and **Andh Shraddha** (blind faith). **Samyak
Shraddha** is based on reason, while **Andh Shraddha** is based on unreason.
Both originate in the human heart. Just as a cow's udder...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 [ AvazyakasUtra savvadukkhANamaMtaM kareMti zrImad AcArAGgasUtra meM batalAyA
hai - he gautama! mokSa ke sukha kA svarUpa batalAne ke liye koI zabda nahIM
hai| jaise gUMgA AdamI gur3a ke svAda ko jAnatA hai, lekina usakA varNana nahIM
kara sakatA; isI prakAra jo muktAtmA jIva, jinheM niraMjana pada prApta huA hai,
ve mokSa sukha kA anubhava to karate haiM, magara use prakaTa karane ke liye
unake pAsa bhI koI zabda nahIM hai| niraMjana pada kI prApti ke bAda sabhI
duHkhoM kA anta ho jAtA hai  /  8] -- battIsa hajAra mukuTabaddha rAjA jisakI
sevA meM khar3e rahate haiM aura hAtha jor3e AjJA kI pratIkSA karate rahate
haiM, usa chaha khaNDa ke adhipati cakravartI kA sukha uttama hai yA mokSa kA
sukha uttama hai ? agara cakravartI kA sukha uttama hotA to svayaM cakravartI
bhI akhaNDa SaTkhaNDa ke mahAn sAmrAjya ko Thokara mArakara kyoM bhikSu jIvana
svIkAra karate ? cakravartI svayaM apane sukha ko mokSa sukha kI tulanA meM
tuccha, ati tuccha samajhatA hai arthAt dharmArAdhaka sAdhaka mokSa prApta kara
zArIrika evaM mAnasika saba prakAra ke duHkhoM kA anta kara detA hai| AcArya
jinadAsa kahate haiM- "savvesiM sArIra - mANasANaM dukkhANaM antakarA bhavanti,
vocchiNNasavvadukkhA bhvnti|" arthAt siddha bhagavAn samasta zArIrika aura
mAnasika duHkhoM kA anta karane vAle haiM, samasta klezoM se mukta ho jAte haiM
/  saddahAmi - maiM zraddhA karatA huuN| zraddhA jIvana nirmANa kA mUla hai|
zraddhA ke binA koI bhI manuSya isa saMsAra sAgara se pAra ho jAye, yaha
sambhava nahIM  /  vyakti kitanA bhI vidvAn ho, jJAnavAn ho, paMDita ho,
dArzanika ho kintu agara usameM samyaktva nahIM hai, usakI AtmA ke prati zraddhA
nahIM hai to vividha bhASAoM kA jJAna aura aneka prakAra kI kalAoM kA abhyAsa
bhI use saMsAra sAgara se pAra nahIM kara sakatA  /  ataH zraddhA hI jIvana ke
liye amRta hai| kisI bhI sAdhya kI prApti durlabha nahIM hai, kintu zraddhA
athavA vizvAsa durlabha hai "saddA parama dullahA  / " uttarA. sU. a. 3 zraddhA
ke binA manuSya apane Apako bhI nahIM pahacAna sktaa| zraddhA ke binA jJAna bhI
paMgu ke sadRza ho jAtA hai| medhAvI tathA mahAn vahI hotA hai jisakI raga-raga
meM zraddhA basI huI ho| dhyeya ke prati ekaniSTha rahakara sAdhanA karane se
saphalatA milatI hai| dhyeyasiddhi meM ekaniSThatA hI vaha bhUmikA hai ki jisa
para saphalatA kA aMkura utpanna hotA hai, panapatA hai, bar3hatA hai aura
phalaprada hokara kRtakRtya banA detA hai| jisa vyakti ko apane dhyeya meM
ekaniSThA nahIM, dRr3ha AsthA nahIM, aTUTa vizvAsa nahIM, usa dulamula sAdhaka
kA koI bhI kArya saphala nahIM ho sktaa| cAhe vidyAbhyAsa ho, kalA sAdhanA ho,
vyApAra ho, udyoga ho athavA dhArmika kriyA ho, sabhI meM ekaniSTha banakara
zraddhA evaM vizvAsapUrvaka puruSArtha karane se hI saphalatA prApta ho sakatI
hai| zraddhA ke do rUpa hote haiM - prathama samyak zraddhA evaM dUsarI aMdha
zraddhA  /  samyak zraddhA vivekapUrNa hotI hai tathA aMdha zraddhA avivekamaya
hotI hai| donoM kA udagama sthAna mAnava kA hRdaya hai  /  jaise gau ke stanoM
se vivekI mAnava -

Page #160 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Fourth Study: Pratikramana  [89]  Milk is obtained from a cow, and a leech
obtains blood. The location is the same. Diamond and coal are obtained from the
same mine, and flowers and thorns from the same plant. What one receives depends
on their vision.  There are two types of Samyak Shraddha:  * **Vyavahar-Samkit
(Shraddha)** is faith in a good Guru, good Devata, and good Dharma. * **Nischya
Samyaktv** is the faith of a Sadhak who is steadfast in Samyak Darshan, Samyak
Gyan, and Samyak Charitra. This Sadhak has realized the true nature of the soul
and has faith in its infinite power.  Shraddha is the first step in entering the
palace of liberation.  The foundation of Sadhana is truly Samyak Darshan.
Without it, the word "Dharma" cannot be associated with any action. In this
text, the Sadhak vows that they have faith, understanding, and belief in the
Dharma taught by the Vitarag. They also vow to have affection and interest in
it.  **Fasem-Palem-Anupalem:** Jain Darshan does not consider only faith and
understanding as the cause of achieving the goal. Climbing the first step and
staying there will not allow entry into the palace of liberation. The Agamkaras
have instructed the Sadhak to move forward with Samyak Shraddha, to climb
higher, and to vow to touch the Dharma, to follow it in every situation
throughout life, and to protect the accepted Dharma even in favorable and
unfavorable circumstances. They vow to firmly follow the Dharma practiced by the
previous Aaptapurushas.  The Mumukhu Sadhak repeats this vow again and again.
Only then can they succeed in their goal. Just as a tailor uses thread along
with a needle to make a piece of cloth whole, similarly, conduct is essential
along with Samyaktv (Shraddha).  **Abbhuttiomi:** In this text, the Sadhak vows
to be fully prepared for the worship of Dharma, standing firm in the field of
Dharma worship, with faith, affection, understanding, touch, following, and
adherence to Dharma.  **Jn-Parijna and Pratyakhyan-Parijna:** The Acharaanga and
other Agam literature mention two types of Parijna:  * **Jn-Parijna:** Knowing
the nature of the Heya, Upadeshya, and Jneya substances. * **Pratyakhyan-
Parijna:** Rejecting and abandoning the Heya.  There are two types of
Pratyakhyan:  1. **Supratyakhyan** 2. **Dushtpratyakhyan**  Knowing the nature
of Pratyakhyan and the nature of the substances that are rejected...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 caturtha adhyayana : pratikramaNa ] [89 dUdha prApta kara letA hai aura joMka
nAmaka jIva rakta prApta karatA hai  /  sthAna to eka hI hai  /  eka hI khAna se
hIrA aura koyalA, eka hI paudhe se phUla aura zUla prApta hote haiM  /  kise kyA
grahaNa karanA hai, yaha saba apanI dRSTi para nirbhara karatA hai| samyak
zraddhA do prakAra kI hai - suguru, sudeva evaM sudharma para zraddhA honA
vyavahAra-samakita (zraddhA) hai tathA jo sAdhaka samyagdarzana, samyagjJAna
evaM samyakcAritra - ina Atmika guNoM meM niSThAvAna hotA hai, jise AtmA kA
asalI svarUpa avagata ho gayA hai aura AtmA ke ananta sAmarthya para vizvAsa
hai, vaha sAdhaka nizcaya samyaktva kA adhikArI kahalAtA hai| zraddhA mukti-
mahala meM praveza karane kA prathama sopAna hai| vAstava meM sAdhanA kA
dharAtala samyagdarzana hI hai| isa ke abhAva meM kisI bhI kriyA ke sAtha dharma
zabda nahIM jur3a sktaa| sAdhaka prastuta pATha meM pratijJA karatA hai ki
vItarAga ke batAye dharma para maiM zraddhA karatA hU~, pratIti karatA hU~
arthAt dharma meM vizvAsa karatA hU~, prIti karatA hU~ evaM ruci karatA hU~
aadi| phAsemi-pAlemi-aNupAlemi - jainadarzana kevala zraddhA evaM pratIti ko hI
sAdhya kI siddhi meM hetubhUta nahIM mAnatA hai| prathama sopAna para car3ha
kara vahIM jame rahane se mukti-mahala meM praveza nahIM kiyA jA sktaa|
AgamakAroM ne sAdhaka ko saMketa diyA hai ki Atma-siddhi ke liye samyak zraddhA
ke sAtha Age bar3hanA hogA, Upara car3hanA hogA aura yaha pratijJA bhI karanI
hogI ki maiM dharma kA sparza karatA hU~, jIvanaparyaMta pratyeka sthiti meM
usakA pAlana karatA hU~ arthAt anukUla evaM pratikUla paristhitiyoM meM bhI
svIkRta dharmAcAra kI rakSA karatA huuN| pUrva AptapuruSoM dvArA Acarita dharma
kA dRr3hatApUrvaka pAlana karatA huuN| isa pratijJA kI mumukSu sAdhaka bAra-bAra
punarAvRtti karatA rahatA hai| tabhI vaha apane dhyeya meM saphala ho sakatA
hai| jaise darjI khaNDa paTa ko akhaNDa rUpa dene ke liye suI ke sAtha dhAgA bhI
letA hai, usI prakAra samyaktva (zraddhA) ke sAtha AcaraNa kI bhI anivAryatA
hai| abbhuTThiomi - prastuta pATha meM sAdhaka yaha pratijJA karatA hai ki maiM
dharma kI zraddhA, prIti, pratIti, sparzanA, pAlanA tathA anupAlanA karatA huA
dharma kI ArAdhanA meM samyak prakAreNa abhyutthita hotA hU~ arthAt taiyAra hotA
hU~, dharmArAdhanA ke kSetra meM dRr3hatA ke sAtha khar3A hotA hai| jJa-parijJA
evaM pratyAkhyAna-parijJA - AcArAGga Adi Agama sAhitya meM do prakAra kI
parijJAoM kA ullekha AtA hai - eka jJa-parijJA, dUsarI prtyaakhyaan-prijnyaa|
jJa-parijJA kA artha hai heya-upAdeya-jJeya padArtha ko svarUpataH jAnanA  /
pratyAkhyAna-parijJA kA artha hai heya kA pratyAkhyAna karanA, chodd'naa|
pratyAkhyAna ke bhI do prakAra haiM - 1. supratyAkhyAna evaM 2.
dussprtyaakhyaan| pratyAkhyAna kA svarUpa tathA jisakA pratyAkhyAna kiyA jAtA
hai una padArthoM kA svarUpa jAna kara

Page #161 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 90] **Essential Sutra**  Rejection that is done with proper understanding is
called **Supratyakhyan**. Rejection done without understanding the nature of the
object is called **Duspratyakhyan**.  It is essential to first understand the
nature of **Asanyam** (non-restraint), **Pranatipat** (violence),
**Abrahmacharya** (non-celibacy), **Maithunavritti** (sexual activity), **Akalp-
Akrit** (non-virtuous actions), **Agnan-Mithyagnan** (ignorance-false
knowledge), **Akriya-Asatkriya** (non-action-false action), **Mithyatva**
(falsehood), etc., which are all self-defeating and unfavorable behaviors. Only
then can we abandon them and embrace **Sanyam** (restraint), **Brahmacharya**
(celibacy), **Krit** (virtuous actions), **Samyaggnan** (right knowledge), etc.
How can we abandon something without knowing what it is, its nature, the harm it
causes, and the benefits of abandoning it? Therefore, **Gyan-Parigya**
(knowledge-understanding) is absolutely essential before **Pratyakhyan-Parigya**
(rejection-understanding). Even the most rigorous actions and intense external
practices of an ignorant seeker only lead to further worldly wandering.  In the
text "**Asanjam parianami, sanjam uvasampjjam**", the action "**parianami**"
signifies not just knowing or abandoning, but a combined meaning of "**knowing
and abandoning**".  Acharya Jinasena also says, "**Parianamitti gyan-parinaya
janami, pacchakkhan-parinaya pacchakkhami**".  **Akapp-Kapp** - **Kapp** means
conduct. Therefore, conduct in the form of **charan-karan** (actions and speech)
is called **Kapp** in the language of the scriptures. **Akkapp** is the
opposite. The seeker vows that they know and abandon **Akkapp-Akrit** (non-
virtuous actions) and embrace **Kapp-Krit** (virtuous actions).  Acharya
Jinasena has divided the single **Asanyam** (non-restraint) into two categories
based on specific intentions: **Mulagun-Asanyam** (non-restraint of the root
qualities) and **Uttaragun-Asanyam** (non-restraint of the secondary qualities).
He then uses the word **Abrahm** to refer to **Mulagun-Asanyam** and **Akkapp**
to refer to **Uttaragun-Asanyam**. According to Acharya Shri, the form of the
vow is: "I abandon **Mulagun-Asanyam** with discernment and embrace **Mulagun-
Sanyam** (restraint of the root qualities)."  **Annan-Nan** - **Agnan**
(ignorance) here does not refer to the absence of knowledge due to the arising
of **Gnanavaranakarma** (karma that obscures knowledge), but rather to
**Mithyagnan** (false knowledge). If we interpret it as the absence of
knowledge, then the question of abandoning it does not arise. How can we abandon
something that does not exist?  Knowledge is obtained through the destruction or
suppression of **Gnanavaranakarma**, and **Mithyatva** (falsehood) arises,
making it false.  1. "**Akalp-akritma-akhyayate kalpastukritamiti**" - Acharya
Haribhadra 2. "**So ya asanjam visesato duviho-mula-gun-asanjamo uttaragun-
asanjamo ya. Ato samannena bhanuun sanvegadya-arth visesato cheva bhanati abham
abham-ggahnena mula-gun bhananti tti evam .... akapp-ggahnena uttaragunati**" -
Avasyakachurni

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 90] [ AvazyakasUtra pratyAkhyAna karanA supratyAkhyAna hai| isake viparIta
pratyAkhyAna arthAt svarUpa jAne samajhe binA kiyA jAne vAlA pratyAkhyAna
duSpratyAkhyAna hai| asaMyama, prANAtipAta Adi abrahmacarya - maithunavRtti,
akalpa-akRtya, ajJAna-mithyAjJAna, akriyAasatkriyA, mithyAtva Adi AtmavirodhI
pratikUla AcaraNa ko tyAga kara saMyama, brahmacarya, kRtya, samyagjJAna Adi ko
svIkAra karate hue yaha Avazyaka hai ki pahale asaMyama Adi kA svarUpa jJAta
kara liyA jaaye| jaba taka yaha patA nahIM calegA ki asaMyama Adi kyA haiM,
unakA svarUpa kyA hai, unake hone se kyA hAni hai tathA unheM tyAgane se sAdhaka
ko kyA lAbha hai, taba taka unheM tyAgA kaise jAyegA? ataH pratyAkhyAna-parijJA
se pahale jJa-parijJA atyaMta Avazyaka hai| ajJAnI sAdhaka kI kaThora se kaThora
kriyAyeM evaM ugra se ugra bAhyasAdhanA bhI saMsAra-paribhramaNa kA hI kAraNa
hotI hai| prastuta pATha meM 'asaMjamaM pariyANAmi, saMjama uvasaMpajjAmi'
ityAdi pATha meM jo 'pariyANAmi' kriyA hai usakA artha na kevala jAnanA hai aura
na kevala chor3anA, apitu sammilita artha hai 'jAna kara chodd'naa'| AcArya
jinadAsa bhI kahate haiM - "pariyANAmitti jJa-pariNayA jANAmi, paccakkhANa-
pariNayA pcckkhaami|" akappa-kappa - kalpa kA artha hai AcAra  /  ataH caraNa-
karaNa rUpa AcAra-vyavahAra ko Agama kI bhASA meM kalpa kahA jAtA hai| isake
viparIta akalpa hotA hai  /  sAdhaka pratijJA karatA hai ki maiM akalpa-akRtya
ko jAnatA tathA tyAgatA hU~ aura kalpa-kRtya ko svIkAra karatA huuN| AcArya
jinadAsa ne sAmAnyataH kahe hue ekavidha asaMyama ke hI vizeSa vivakSA bheda se
do bheda kiye haiM - 'mUlaguNa-asaMyama aura uttrgunn-asNym|' aura phira abrahma
zabda se mUlaguNa-asaMyama kA tathA akalpa zabda se uttaraguNa-asaMyama kA
grahaNa kiyA hai| AcAryazrI ke kathanAnusAra pratijJA kA rUpa isa prakAra hotA
hai - "maiM mUlaguNa-asaMyama kA vivekapUrvaka parityAga karatA hU~ aura
mUlaguNa-saMyama ko svIkAra karatA huuN|" annANa-nANa - ajJAna kA artha yahAM
jJAnAvaraNakarma ke udaya se hone vAlA jJAna kA abhAva nahIM apitu mithyA jJAna
samajhanA caahiye| jJAna kA abhAva artha liyA jAye to usake tyAgane kA prazna hI
upasthita nahIM hotaa| jo hai hI nahIM, usakA tyAga kaisA? jJAnAvaraNakarma ke
kSayopazama se jJAna prApta hotA hai aura mithyAtva kA udaya use mithyA banA
detA hai| 1. "akalpo'kRtyamAkhyAyate kalpastu kRtymiti|" - AcArya haribhadra 2.
"so ya asaMjamo visesato duviho-mUlaguNa-asaMjamo uttaraguNa-asaMjamo y| ato
sAmaNNeNa bhaNiUNa saMvegAdyartha visesato ceva bhaNati abaMbha abaMbhaggahaNeNa
mUlaguNa bhaNNaMti tti evaM .... akappagahaNeNa uttrgunnti|" - AvazyakacUrNi

Page #162 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Fourth Study: Pratikramana  [91]  This false knowledge is called ignorance
here. The knowledge that accompanies right faith is called right knowledge. It
is called knowledge here.  Akriya-Kriya - I know and abandon non-action, which
is nihilism. Acharya Haribhadra considers non-action as a special kind of
ignorance and action as a kind of knowledge - "Akriya Nastikavada: Kriya
Samyagvada." Not believing in the world, the afterlife, dharma, and adharma is
nihilism. Conversely, believing in the world, the afterlife, dharma, and adharma
is theism.  According to Acharya Jinadas - "Appasatta Kiriya Akriya, Itara
Kiriya Iti." That is, inappropriate action is called non-action and appropriate
action is called action.  Michchatt-Sammatt - There are eighteen types of sins.
The last, eighteenth sin is false belief. False belief is the only sin that
nourishes, protects, and increases all other sins. It is the result of this that
the soul has had to endure all the suffering of birth, death, etc. from time
immemorial. As long as there is false belief, all sins are safe.  False belief
keeps one trapped in the cycle of existence, while right belief grants the
ultimate happiness of liberation and makes the soul a supreme soul. False belief
is destructive, while right belief is liberating and protective. Thus, the
seeker understands the nature of false belief and right belief, abandons false
belief, and accepts right belief.  Abodhi-Bodhi - "Abodhih - Mithyatvakarya,
Bodhistu Samyaktvasyeti." - Acharya Haribhadra  Abodhi is the work of false
belief, and Bodhi is the work of right belief.  Holding onto false beliefs,
being attached to worldly pleasures, criticizing dharma, speaking ill of the
liberated Arihant Bhagwan, etc. are the works of false belief. Holding onto
truth, being indifferent to worldly pleasures, having firm faith in dharma,
having love and compassion for all beings, etc. are the works of right belief.
To know and understand Abodhi and abandon it, and to accept Bodhi.  Amagga-Magga
- I know and abandon the wrong path, such as violence, and accept the right
path, such as non-violence, the path of liberation. Or, I abandon the wrong
path, which is opposed to Jainism, such as the path of the Parsva sect and the
path followed by the heretics, and accept the path of the three jewels,
knowledge, faith, and conduct.  What I hold, and what I do not hold.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 caturtha adhyayana : pratikramaNa ] [91 yahI mithyAjJAna yahA~ ajJAna kahA gayA
hai  /  samyagdarzana-sahacara jJAna samyagjJAna kahalAtA hai| use yahA~ jJAna
zabda se kahA gayA hai| akiriyA-kiriyA - akriyA arthAt nAstivAda ko jAnatA tathA
tyAgatA huuN| AcArya haribhadra akriyA ko ajJAna kA hI vizeSa bheda mAnate haiM
aura kriyA ko jJAna kA bheda kahate haiM - "akriyA nAstikavAdaH kriyA
smygvaadH|" loka-paraloka, dharma-adharma Adi para vizvAsa na rakhanA
nAstikavAda hai| isake viparIta loka-paraloka, dharma-adharma Adi para vizvAsa
rakhanA AstikavAda hai| AcArya jinadAsa ke anusAra - "appasatthA kiriyA akiriyA,
itarA kiriyA iti|" arthAt ayogya kriyA ko akriyA evaM prazasta-yogya kriyA ko
kriyA kahate haiN| micchatta-sammatta - pApa ke aThAraha prakAra haiN| unameM
antima aThArahavAM pApa mithyAtva hai  /  mithyAtva hI eka aisA pApa hai jo
samasta pApoM kA poSaka, rakSaka evaM vardhaka hai| isI kA phala hai ki jIva ko
anAdikAla se janma-maraNAdi samasta duHkhoM ko sahana karanA par3A hai| jaba
taka mithyAtva hai, taba taka sabhI pApa surakSita haiN| mithyAtva, saMsAra-
cakra meM phaMsAye rakhane vAlA hai aura samyaktva, mokSa kA parama sukha
pradAna kara AtmA ko paramAtmA banAne vAlA hai  /  mithyAtva mAraka hai aura
samyaktva tAraka hai, rakSaka hai  /  isa prakAra sAdhaka mithyAtva evaM
samyaktva kA svarUpa samajhakara mithyAtva kA tyAga karatA hai aura samyaktva ko
svIkAra karatA hai| abohi-bohi - "abodhiH -mithyAtvakArya, bodhistu
smyktvsyeti|" - AcArya haribhadra abodhi mithyAtva kA kArya hai aura bodhi
samyaktva kA kaary| asatya kA durAgraha rakhanA, saMsAra ke kAmabhogoM meM
Asakti rakhanA, dharma kI nindA karanA, vItarAga arihanta bhagavAn kA avarNavAda
bolanA ityAdi mithyAtva ke kArya haiN| satya kA Agraha rakhanA, saMsAra ke
kAmabhogoM se udAsIna rahanA, dharma ke prati dRr3ha AsthA rakhanA, prANimAtra
para prema evaM karuNA kA bhAva rakhanA ityAdi samyaktva ke kArya haiN| abodhi
ko jAnakara arthAt samajhakara tyAganA evaM bodhi ko svIkAra krnaa| amagga-magga
- amArga-hiMsA Adi amArga-kumArga ko jAnatA tathA tyAgatA hU~ aura ahiMsA Adi
mArga-sanmArga-mokSamArga ko svIkAra karatA huuN| athavA jinamata se viruddha
pArzvastha nihnava tathA kutIrthikasevita amArga ko chor3akara jJAnAdi
ratnatraya rUpa mArga ko svIkAra karatA huuN| jaM saMbharAmi, jaM ca na
saMbharAmi

Page #163 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 92] [Essential Sutra] What I remember, and what I do not remember - the
desire of the human mind from time immemorial has been to move its steps towards
progress. Whether a student or a businessman, whether an artist or any other
seeker, he wants his continuous development and his steps to move forward. But
one thing to keep in mind is that the real progress of man is not in increasing
wealth, gaining fame, becoming a scholar by acquiring material knowledge, or
becoming a leader, but in increasing spiritual qualities. To increase spiritual
qualities, it is necessary to keep observing one's mistakes or faults. As long
as the seeker is in a state of delusion, filled with karmic actions, it is
natural for faults to exist in life. That mistake or fault may be in knowledge
or unknowingly, i.e. there is a memory of restraint or fault and sometimes there
is no memory. The seeker repents for all of them. Thus, by repenting knowingly,
the seeker progresses. The portion of the sutra from 'Jan Sambharami' to 'Jan
Cha Na Padikkamami' is related to 'Tass Savvas Devasiyass Aiyarass Padikkamami'.
The meaning of the present sutra is that I repent for all those daily
transgressions that I remember or do not remember, that I repent for or do not
repent for. Doubt - What does it mean to repent for those I repent for?
Repenting for repentance itself does not seem logical? Acharya Jinasena has
given a beautiful solution to the above doubt. He interprets 'Padikkamami' as
'Pariharami' - 'Sanghayanaadi-Daurballyaadin Jan Padikkamami-Pariharami
Karanijan, Jan Cha Na Padikkamami Akaranijan.' - Aavashyakachurni - i.e. if due
to some special circumstances like physical weakness etc., I have left a good
deed that I should have done - i.e. not done, and done a deed that I should not
have done, then I repent for all that transgression. Samanoham Sanjay-Viray
Padihay... The meaning of this portion of the sutra is - "I am a Shraman, I am a
restrained, abstinent, restrained, rejected sinner, I am without attachment, I
am endowed with vision, and I am free from illusion and falsehood." The word
'Shraman' is derived from the root 'Shram'. It means to work hard. Acharya
Haribhadra, while revealing the essence of the third verse of the first study of
the Dashaevaalik Sutra, interprets Shraman as an ascetic. One who...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 92] [ AvazyakasUtra jaM paDikkamAmi, jaM ca na paDikkamAmi - mAnava ke mana kI
anAdikAlIna kAmanA yahI rahI hai ki vaha apane kadama pragati kI ora bddh'aaye|
cAhe vidyArthI ho athavA vyavasAyI, cAhe kalAkAra ho athavA koI anya sAdhaka,
vaha cAhatA yahI hai ki usakA nirantara vikAsa hotA rahe aura kadama Age se Age
bar3hate rheN| kintu eka bAta vizeSa rUpa se dhyAna rakhane ki hai ki manuSya kI
vAstavika pragati dhana bar3hA lene meM, prasiddhi prApta karane meM, bhautika
jJAna prApta karake vidvAn kahalAne meM athavA netA bana jAne meM nahIM hai,
apitu Atmika guNoM kI vRddhi karane meM hai| Atmika guNoM kI vRddhi ke liye
apanI bhUloM kA athavA doSoM kA avalokana karate rahanA Avazyaka hai  /  sAdhaka
jaba taka chadmastha hai, ghAtikarmodaya se yukta hai, taba taka jIvana meM
doSoM kA honA svAbhAvika hai| vaha bhUla yA doSa jAnakArI meM ho sakatA hai
athavA anajAna meM bhI, arthAt asaMyama athavA doSa kI smRti rahatI hai aura
kabhI nahIM bhI rahatI hai  /  sAdhaka una saba kA pratikramaNa karatA hai  /
isa prakAra jJAnapUrvaka pratikramaNa karane se sAdhaka kI pragati hotI hai|
'jaM saMbharAmi' Adi se lekara 'jaM ca na paDikkamAmi' taka ke sUtrAMza taka kA
sambandha 'tassa savvassa devasiyassa aiyArassa paDikkamAmi' se hai| prastuta
sUtra kA bhAva yaha hai ki jinakA smaraNa karatA hU~, athavA jinakA smaraNa
nahIM karatA hU~, jinakA pratikramaNa karatA hU~, jinakA pratikramaNa nahIM
karatA hU~, una saba daivasika aticAroM kA pratikramaNa karatA huuN| zaMkA -
jinakA pratikramaNa karatA hU~ phira bhI unakA pratikramaNa karatA hU~ - isakA
artha kyA hai? pratikramaNa kA bhI pratikramaNa karanA kucha saMgata pratIta
nahIM hotA? AcArya jinadAsa ne uparyukta zaMkA kA sundara samAdhAna kiyA hai|
ve- 'paDikkamAmi' kA artha 'pariharAmi' karate haiM - 'saMghayaNAdi-
daurbalyAdinA jaM paDikkamAmi-pariharAmi karaNijaM, jaM ca na paDikkamAmi
akrnnijN|' - AvazyakacUrNi arthAt zArIrika durbalatA Adi kisI vizeSa
paristhitivaza yadi maiMne karane yogya satkArya chor3a diyA ho - arthAt na kiyA
ho, aura na karane yogya kArya kiyA ho to usa saba aticAra kA pratikramaNa
karatA samaNo'haM saMjaya-viraya paDihaya0 ... isa sUtrAMza kA artha hai - "maiM
zramaNa hU~, saMyata-viratapratihata-pratyAkhyAta pApakarmA hU~, anidAna hU~,
dRSTisampanna hU~ aura mAyAmRSAvivarjita huuN|" 'zramaNa' zabda ' zram' dhAtu se
banA hai  /  isakA artha hai zrama krnaa| AcArya haribhadra dazaivakAlika sUtra
ke prathama adhyayana kI tIsarI gAthA kA marmodghATana karate huye zramaNa kA
artha tapasvI karate haiM  /  jo apane hI

Page #164 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Fourth Study: Pratikraman  Those who attain liberation through effort and
penance are called Shramanas.  The meaning of "Sanjata" is "one who makes proper
effort in restraint." The seeker should always make proper effort in duties like
non-violence, truthfulness, etc. "Sanjato-samman jato, karaniyeshu yogeshhu
samyak prayatnapara ity arthah."  One who is "Virat" is free from all kinds of
harmful yogas, meaning they denounce past sins and remain free from all sins by
being vigilant for the future.  The meaning of "Virat" is:  - **Pratihat-
pratyakhyat-papakarma:** One who destroys past sins through denouncement and
condemnation, and abandons future sins through the vow of renunciation. This
symbolizes the seeker's purification of life in all three times.  The meaning of
"Sadhana" is:  - **Trikal vijayi:** To be victorious over sinful karma in all
three times. As it is said: "Padihatan atita nidanam - garhanadinihim,
pacchakkhatam sesam akaranataya pavakarma pavacharam yena sa tatha." - Acharya
Jinadas  **Anidana:** The meaning of "Nidana" is the desire for complete
attainment with certainty. The meaning of "Anidana" is penance and other
practices performed without attachment. For example, if a merchant wants to buy
goods worth a lakh rupees, he can buy the desired goods if he has more than a
lakh rupees or exactly a lakh rupees. But if he has less than a lakh rupees, he
will not be able to buy goods worth a lakh rupees. Similarly, if the seeker has
an abundance of virtuous karma, he can attain complete Siddhi by performing
"Nidana." Otherwise, he cannot. But that Siddhi is exhausted in the same birth.
As a result of "Nidana," the soul has to be born in a lower realm. According to
the Agamkaras, Vasudevas and Prativa-sudevas attain Siddhi like the kingdom of
Trikhand through "Nidana." After that, they descend. Therefore, the instruction
of the Lokottara Aapta Purushas for the seekers is that they should perform
penance without "Nidana" and vow that they have no attachment to the alluring
enjoyments of the world, their practice is only for self-purification, their
goal is not bondage but liberation. With such a firm resolve, the seeker can
achieve the goal through his practice.  **Drishtisampanna:** The meaning of
"Drishtisampanna" is one who is endowed with pure vision in the form of
Samyagdarshan. It is essential for the seeker aspiring for liberation to have
pure vision. Because without Samyagdarshan, the seeker cannot have true
discernment of what is beneficial and what is harmful. Only a seeker with
Samyagdarshan can avoid the ten types of false beliefs. Only a seeker with pure
vision can investigate truth and reality. Samyagdarshan is indeed the root of
all virtues. "Ditthisampanno" - meaning "Savvaguna-mulbhaataguṇayuktatvam." -
Acharya Jinadas  A soul with Samyagdarshan can see everything as it is, even
while living in the world, not with a false vision. For example...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 caturtha adhyayana : pratikramaNa ] zrama se tapa:sAdhanA se mukti lAbha karate
haiM, ve zramaNa kahalAte haiM  /  saMyata kA artha hai 'saMyama meM samyak
yatana karane vAlA  / ' ahiMsA, satya Adi kartavyoM meM sAdhaka ko sadaiva
samyak prayatna karate rahanA caahiye| 'saMjato-sammaM jato, karaNIyeSu jogeSu
samyak prayatnapara ityarthaH '  /  saba prakAra ke sAvadya yogoM se virati
nivRtti karane vAlA, arthAt pahale kiye pApoM kI nindA aura bhaviSyakAla ke liye
saMvara karake sakala pApoM se rahita honA  /  virata kA artha hai -- [ 93 -
pratihatapratyAkhyAtapApakarmA arthAt bhUtakAla meM kiye gaye pApa karmoM ko
nindA evaM garhA ke dvArA pratihata (vinaSTa) karane vAlA aura vartamAna tathA
bhaviSya meM hone vAle pApa karmoM ko nahIM karane kA pratijJA rUpa pratyAkhyAna
ke dvArA parityAga karane vAlA  /  yaha vizeSa sAdhaka kI traikAlika jIvana-
zuddhi kA pratIka hai| sAdhanA kA artha hai- pApa karmoM para trikAla vijayI
honaa| kahA bhI hai- 'paDihataM atItaNidaNaM- garahaNAdIhiM, paccakkhAtaM sesaM
akaraNatayA pAvakammaM pAvAcAraM yeNa sa tathA  /  ' - AcArya jinadAsa anidAna -
nidAna kA artha hai - nizcaya rUpa se yatheSTa prApti kI AkAMkSA  /  anidAna kA
artha hai anAsakta bhAva se kiyA jAne vAlA tapa Adi anuSThAna  /  jaise kisI
vyApArI ne lAkha rupaye kA sAmAna kharIdanA cAhA, yadi usake pAsa meM lAkha
rupaye se adhika yA lAkha rupaye haiM taba to vaha manacAhA lAkha rupaye kA mAla
kharIda skegaa| kintu usake pAsa lAkha se kama haiM to vaha lAkha rupaye kA mAla
nahIM kharIda skegaa| isI prakAra yadi sAdhaka ke pAsa puNya karma kA Adhikya
hai to nidAna karane para use yatheSTa Rddhi prApta ho sakatI hai anyathA nhiiN|
lekina vaha Rddhi nidAna karane se usI janma meM parisamApta ho jAtI hai| nidAna
ke pariNAmasvarUpa Age adhogati meM usa AtmA ko utpanna honA par3atA hai|
AgamakAroM ke kathanAnusAra vAsudevoM aura prativAsudevoM ko nidAna se hI
trikhaNDa ke sAmrAjya Adi kI RRddhi upalabdha hotI hai  /  tatpazcAt unakA
adhogamana hI hotA hai  /  isaliye lokottara Apta puruSoM kA sAdhakoM ke liye
nirdeza hai ki vaha nidAna rahita tapa kare aura yaha pratijJA kare ki mujhe
saMsAra ke lubhAvane bhogoM meM koI Asakti nahIM hai, merI sAdhanA kevala
Atmazuddhi ke liye hai, merA dhyeya bandhana nahIM mukti hai| aise dRr3ha
saMkalpa ko lekara sAdhaka apanI sAdhanA ke dvArA sAdhya kI upalabdhi kara
sakatA hai  /  dRSTisampanna - dRSTisampanna kA artha hai - samyagdarzana rUpa
vizuddha dRSTi se sampanna  /  mokSAbhilASI sAdhaka ke liye zuddha dRSTi kA honA
anivArya hai  /  kyoMki samyagdarzana ke abhAva meM sAdhaka ko hitAhita kA saccA
viveka nahIM ho sakatA  /  samyagdRSTi sAdhaka hI dasa prakAra ke mithyAvAdoM se
baca sakatA hai  /  satya aura tathya kA anveSaNa zuddha dRSTisampanna sAdhaka
hI kara sakatA hai| samyagdarzana vastutaH saba guNoM kA mUla hai|
'diTThisampanno'- arthAt 'savvaguNa- muulbhuutgunnyukttvm|' AcArya jinadAsa
samyagdRSTi AtmA saMsAra meM rahakara bhI saba kucha yathAvata dekha sakatA hai,
mithyAdRSTi nahIM  /  jaise

Page #165 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 94] [Essential Sutra]  Even when enclosed in a box of pure glass, a person
can see the objects outside, but a person enclosed in an iron box cannot see. A
swimmer, who remembers the art of swimming, can reach the bottom of deep water
and even with tons of water on his head, he will not drown, but one who is
ignorant of the art of swimming can drown in a little water. In Jainism, sadhana
(spiritual practice) begins only from the fourth gunasthana (stage of spiritual
progress) called Aviratsamyaagdristi.  Maya-Mrishvivarjit - Maya devoid of
falsehood. Maya-Mrish is the seventeenth Mahapapa (great sin) among the eighteen
Mahapapas. It is the first of the three Shalya (spiritual thorns). Just as a
thorn pierces deep into the foot and is not visible, but the traveler cannot
move forward on the path due to the prick of the thorn, similarly, a Mayaavi
(deceitful) sadhak, who hides his faults, cannot take even a single step on the
path of sadhana for the attainment of his goal. Just as a snake and a rope
cannot be recognized in the dark, similarly, a person deluded by Maya cannot
recognize Adharma (unrighteousness) and Dharma (righteousness). Therefore, a
sadhak should purify himself by criticizing and atoning for his past sins in the
present. If there is a boil in a healthy body, a doctor can remove the pus by
surgery with a scalpel. If only ointment is applied without surgery, the pus can
spread throughout the body.  Adhhaijjesu Deevasamuddesu  At the end of this
text, all the sadhus (ascetics) residing in the two and a half islands and
fifteen karmabhoomis (fields of action) are saluted with a bow of the head. The
meaning is:  1. Jambudweep, Dhaatki Khandadweep and Ardha Pushkardweep, and in
comparison to them, the Lavana and Kalodadhi oceans and the fifteen regions -
karmabhoomis are the fields of sadhana of Shraman Dharma. There are no humans in
the further regions, nor is there any sadhana of Shraman Dharma. Therefore, I
bow to all the sadhus, sadhvis, rajoharan, punjani and pratigrah (those who
accept offerings), the followers of the five great vows and the holders of
eighteen thousand sheelangarath, and those who are Akshat Aacharavan - Adhakarma
etc. who avoid 42 doshas (faults) while taking food, those who avoid 47 doshas
while taking food, those who follow the Akhand Aachar (unbroken conduct), such
sthavirakalpi, jinkalpi muniraj with my head, mind and forehead.  -  In the
present sutra, the text 'Shirasa, Manasa, Matthaena Vandami' comes. It means - I
bow with my head, mind and forehead. The question may arise that head and
forehead are the same, then why are they mentioned separately? The answer to
this question is: The head is the main part of the whole body. Therefore, bowing
with the head means bowing with the body. Mind is the inner consciousness,
therefore it is indicative of mental bowing.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 94] [ AvazyakasUtra nirmala kA~ca kI peTI meM banda hote huye bhI vyakti bAhara
ke dRzyamAna padArthoM ko dekha sakatA hai, kintu lohe kI peTI meM banda vyakti
nahIM dekha sktaa| koI tairAka, tairane kI kalA jisako yAda ho, gahare pAnI meM
tala taka pahuMca kara TanoM pAnI usake sira para hone para bhI DUba nahIM
sakatA, kintu jo tairane kI kalA se anabhijJa hai, thor3e se pAnI meM DUba
sakatA hai| jainadarzana meM sAdhanA aviratasamyagdRSTi nAmaka cauthe guNasthAna
se hI prArambha hotI hai  /  mAyA - mRSAvivarjita - mAyA mRSA se rahita  /  mAyA
mRSA aThAraha mahApApoM meM sattarahavAM mahApApa hai  /  tIna zalya meM
prathama zalya hai| jaise paira meM zUla gaharA utara jAtA hai aura dikhAI to
nahIM detA, kintu pathika kadama zUla kI cubhana ke kAraNa patha para bar3ha
nahIM sakate, isI prakAra mAyAvI arthAt apane doSoM ko chipAne vAle sAdhaka kA
eka kadama bhI apanI sAdhya kI siddhi ke liye sAdhanA patha para nahIM bar3ha
sakatA hai  /  aMdhere meM jaise sAMpa aura rassI ko nahIM pahacAnA jA sakatA
hai, isI prakAra mAyA se mUr3ha banA vyakti adharma aura dharma kI pahacAna bhI
nahIM kara sakatA  /  ataH sAdhaka ko cAhiye ki vaha apane pUrvakRta pApoM kI
vartamAna meM AlocanA aura prAyazcitta ke dvArA zuddhi kara le| svastha zarIra
meM yadi phor3A ho jAya to naztara ke dvArA DAkTara Aparezana karake usakA
mavAda nikAla sakatA hai| binA Aparezana ke yadi malhama paTTI kara dI jAyegI to
mavAda pUre zarIra meM bhI phaila sakatA I aDDhAijjesu dIvasamuddesu prastuta
pATha ke anta meM ar3hAI dvIpa, pandraha karmabhUmiyoM meM vidyamAna samasta
sAdhuoM ko mastaka namAkara namaskAra kiyA gayA hai| abhiprAya yaha hai 1
jambUdvIpa, dhAtakIkhaNDadvIpa aura ardha puSkaradvIpa tathA apaharaNa kI apekSA
se lavaNa evaM kAlodadhi samudra aura unameM bhI pandraha kSetra - karmabhUmiyAM
hI zramaNa dharma kI sAdhanA kA kSetra haiN| Age ke kSetroM meM na mAnava hai
aura na zramaNadharma kI sAdhanA hai| ataH ar3hAI dvIpa ke mAnava kSetra meM jo
bhI sAdhu, sAdhvI, rajoharaNa, pUMjanI aura pratigraha arthAt pAtra ko dhAraNa
karane vAle, pAMca mahAvratoM ke pAlaka aura aThAraha hajAra zIlAGgaratha ke
dhAraka tathA akSata AcAravAn -AdhAkarma Adi 42 doSoM ko TAlakara AhAra lene
vAle, 47 doSa TAlakara AhAra bhogane vAle, akhaNDa AcAra ko pAlane vAle aise
sthavirakalpI, jinakalpI munirAjoM ko zira se, mana se aura mastaka se vandanA
karatA hU~  /  - zirasA, manasA, mastakena prastuta sUtra meM 'sirasA, maNasA
matthaeNa vaMdAmi' pATha AtA hai| isakA artha hai - zira se, mana se aura
mastaka se vandanA karatA huuN| prazna ho sakatA hai ki zira aura mastaka to eka
hI haiM, phira inakA pRthak ullekha kyoM kiyA gayA ? isa prazna kA uttara isa
prakAra hai zira samasta zarIra meM mukhya hai| ataH zira se vandanA karanA
arthAt zarIra se vandana karanA  /  mana antaHkaraNa hai, ataH yaha mAnasika
vandanA kA dyotaka hai|

Page #166 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  95 **Fourth Study: Pratikraman**  "Matthaena Vandami" means "I bow my head
in reverence." This is a form of verbal veneration, therefore, there is no
repetition error as it indicates the nature of mental, verbal, and physical
veneration.  According to Jainism, ego is the cause of bondage of the lower-
caste karma, and humility leads to the bondage of the higher-caste karma.
Therefore, those who are humble, respect elders, and hold a reverent attitude
towards the virtuous are the highest and the best. Jainism is a worshipper of
virtues. In Jainism, humility and modesty are called penance. It is said,
"Vinayo Jinasaasanamulam," "Vinayamolo Dhammo."  Humility is the root of the
Jain teachings, humility is the root of Dharma.  The Dashavaikalik Sutra also
praises the virtue of humility. In the study of humility, it is said using the
metaphor of a tree:  "Khandhao Paccha Samuventi Saaha. Tao Se Pushpancha Phalam
Raso Ya. Mulam Paramo Se Mokkho. Kitti Suyam Sigdham, Nisssansam
Chaabhigacchai."  "Just as from the root of a tree, the trunk, from the trunk
the branches, from the branches the sub-branches, and then in order, leaves,
flowers, fruits, and juice are produced, in the same way, the root of the Dharma
tree is humility, and its final fruit and juice is liberation."  "Vinayo Saasane
Mulam, Vinio Sanjao Bhawe. Vinayaou Vippamukkasssa, Kao Dhammo Kao Tavo."  The
root of the Jain teachings is humility. Only a humble seeker can be a true
ascetic. What is the Dharma and what is the penance of one who is devoid of
humility?  The ego, arrogance, and lack of discipline of a disciple make the
Guru's mind unhappy. The Uttaradhyayanasutra states:  "Ramae Pandie Saasan,
Hayam Bhaddam Va Vahaae. Balam Sammai Saasantho, Galiyassan Va Vahaae."  "Just
as the teacher of a good horse is happy, so too, the Guru is happy in teaching
humble disciples. But the teacher of a bad horse and the Guru of an
undisciplined disciple are unhappy."  Humility is a beautiful ornament of human
life. It makes a person's virtues fragrant. Humility...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 [ 95 caturtha adhyayana : pratikramaNa ] 'matthaeNa vandAmi' kA artha hai -
mastaka jhukAkara vandanA karatA huuN| yaha vAcika vandanA kA rUpa hai, ataeva
mAnasika, vAcika aura kAyika trividha vandanA kA svarUpa-nirdeza hone se
punarukti doSa nahIM hai  /  jainadharma ke anusAra ahaMkAra nIcagotra-karma ke
bandha kA kAraNa hai tathA namratA se uccagotra kA bandha hotA hai  /  ataH jo
sAdhaka namra haiM, vRddhoM kA Adara karate haiM, sadguNI ke prati pUjya bhAva
rakhate haiM, ve hI ucca haiM, sarvazreSTha haiN| jainadharma guNoM kA pujArI
hai| jainadharma meM vinaya evaM namratA ko tapa kahA gayA hai| kahA hai 'viNao
jiNasAsaNamUlaM, ' 'viNayamUlo dhammo  / ' vinaya jinazAsana kA mUla hai, vinaya
dharma kA mUla 1 -- dazavaikAlika sUtra meM bhI vinaya kA guNagAna kiyA hai|
vinayAdhyayana meM vRkSa kA rUpaka dete hue kahA hai. khaMdhAo pacchA samuveMti
sAhA  /  tao se puSpaMca phalaM raso ya  //  mUlaM paramo se mokkho  /  kittI
suyaM sigdhaM, nissesaM cAbhigacchai  //  mUlAo khaMdhappabhavo dumassa, sAha-
ppasAhA viruhaMti pattA, evaM dhammassa viNao, jeNa daza. 9/2/1-2 arthAt - jisa
prakAra vRkSa ke mUla se skandha, skandha se zAkhAe~, zAkhAoM se prazAkhAe~ aura
phi ra krama se patra, puSpa, phala evaM rasa utpanna hote haiM, isI prakAra
dharmavRkSa kA mUla vinaya hai aura usakA antima phala evaM rasa mokSa hai  /
viNao sAsaNe mUlaM, viNIo saMjao bhave  /  viNayAu vippamukkassa, kao dhammo kao
tavo  //  - -- AvazyakacUrNa jinazAsana kA mUla vinaya hai| vinIta sAdhaka hI
saccA saMyamI ho sakatA hai| jo vinaya se hIna hai, usakA kaisA dharma aura
kaisA tapa ? ziSya kA ahaMkAra va uddaNDatA evaM anuzAsanahInatA guru ke mana ko
khinna kara detI hai| uttarAdhyayana sUtra meM batAyA gayA hai ramae paMDie
sAsaM, hayaM bhaddaM va vaahe| bAlaM sammai sAsaMto, galiyassaM va vAhae  //
arthAt - jaise uttama ghor3e kA zikSaka prasanna hotA hai, vaise hI vinIta
ziSyoM ko jJAna dene meM guru - prasanna hote haiM  /  kintu duSTa ghor3e kA
zikSaka aura avinIta ziSya ke guru khedakhinna hote haiM  /  | namratA mAnava-
jIvana kA sundara AbhUSaNa hai| isase manuSya ke guNa saurabhapUrNa ho jAte
haiN| vinamratA

Page #167 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 96] [Essential Sutra]  This sutra pays homage to the Muni Rajas, who uphold
the unbroken conduct and character, with the head, mind, and heart, or vows to
do so. Eighteen thousand Shilaangas - the scholars have explained the eighteen
thousand Shilaangas in this way:  "Joga karane sanna, indiya bhommai samandhamme
ya. Annonnehi abbatha, attarasa sila sahasai."  Meaning, three Yogas, three
Karanas, four Sanjnas, five Indriyas, ten types of Prithvikaaya and other
beings, and ten Shraman Dharma - multiplying all these together results in
eighteen thousand types of Shila.  The meaning of "Shila" is "Achar" (conduct).
From the perspective of difference and non-difference, there are eighteen
thousand types of Achar. The ten types of Shraman Dharma are: Kshama
(forgiveness), Nirlobhata (non-greed), Saralata (simplicity), Mrudutva
(gentleness), Laghva (lightness), Satya (truthfulness), Samyama (self-control),
Tap (austerity), Tyaga (renunciation), and Brahmacharya (celibacy).  The Muni,
who upholds the ten Shraman Dharmas, does not begin with the five stationary
beings like Prithvikaaya, the four Trasas like Dwiindriya, and the one Ajeeva -
thus, there are ten beginnings.  The eighteen thousand Shilaanga chariot is as
follows: 1. Prithvikaaya beginning, 2. Apkaaya beginning, 3. Tejaskaaya
beginning, 4. Vayukaaya beginning, 5. Vanaspatikaaya beginning, 6. Dwiindriya
beginning, 7. Triindriya beginning, 8. Chaturindriya beginning, 9. Panchendriya
beginning, 10. Ajeeva beginning. These ten types are for Shanti (peace).
Similarly, for Mukti (liberation), Arjava (straightforwardness), and
Brahmacharya, there are 100 types each with Shrotrendriya. Similarly, there are
100 types each with Chakshusindriya, Ghranendriya, Rasnendriya, and
Sparshendriya. All these are 500 types for Aharasanjna. Similarly, there are 500
types each for Bhayasanjna, Maithunasanjna, and Parigrahasanjna. All these are
2000 types. By not doing, not causing to do, and not approving, these are
tripled to 6000 types. Then, by tripling these with mind, speech, and body,
there are 18000 types of Shilaanga chariot.  The text of the Great Sanlekhana:
"Ah Bhanta! Apchhimmaraananthiya Sanlehana Jhushana Arahana Paushadhashala
Punje, Punje ke Ucchaarpasaavanbhumika Padhilehe, Padhileh ke, Gamanagaman,
Padikkama, Padikkama ke, Darbhadik Santhara Santhare, Santhara ke Darbhadik
Santhara Duruhe, Duruhe ke Purva tatha Uttar Disha Sanmukh Palyankadik Asan se
Baithe, Baithe ke 'Karayalsanpariggihiyam Siraasavattm Matthaaye Anjali Kattu
Evam Vayasi 'Namotthunan Arihantaan Bhagavantan Jaav Sampattan' Aise Anant Sidd
Bhagavan Ko Namaskar Karke, 'Namotthunan Arihantaan Bhagavantan Jaav
Sampaviukamaan' Jayavante Vartaman Kale Mahavideh Kshetra mein Vicharate Huye
Tirthankar Bhagavan Ko Namaskar Karke Apne Dharmaacharyaji Maharaj Ko Namaskar
Karta Hoon. Sadhu Sadhvi Pramukh Charon Tirth Ko Khamakar, Sarva Jeeva Rashee Ko
Khamakar, Pehle Jo Vrat Adare Hain Unmein Jo Atichara Dosha Lage Hon, Ve
Sarva..."

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 96] [ AvazyakasUtra jIvana kA mahAn guNa hai  /  prastuta sUtra meM akhaNDa
AcAra-cAritra ko pAlane vAle munirAjoM ko sAdhaka zira se, mana se aura mastaka
se vandana karatA hai, athavA 'vandana karatA hU~' aisI pratijJA karatA hai|
aThAraha hajAra zIlAMga - zAstrakAroM ne aThAraha hajAra zIla-aMgoM kI vyAkhyA
isa prakAra kI hai joge karaNe saNNA, iMdiya bhommAi samaNadhamme y| aNNoNNehi
abbhatthA, aTThAraha siilshssaaii|| arthAt tIna yoga, tIna karaNa, cAra
saMjJAe~, pAMca indriyAM, dasa prakAra ke pRthvIkAya Adi jIva aura dasa
zramaNadharma-ina sabakA paraspara guNAkAra karane se zIla ke aThAraha hajAra
bheda hote haiN| 'zIla' kA artha hai 'aacaar'| bhedAnubheda kI dRSTi se AcAra ke
aThAraha hajAra prakAra hote haiN| dasavidha zramaNadharma-kSamA, nirlobhatA,
saralatA, mRdutA, lAghava, satya, saMyama, tapa, tyAga evaM brahmacarya  /
dazavidha zramaNa dharma ke dhArakamuni, pRthvIkAya Adi pAMca sthAvaroM evaM
dvIndriya Adi cAra trasoM aura eka ajIva-isa prakAra daza kA AraMbha nahIM
karate haiN| aThAraha hajAra zIlAGga ratha isa prakAra hai - 1. pRthvIkAya
AraMbha, 2. apkAya AraMbha, 3. tejaskAya AraMbha, 4. vAyukAya AraMbha, 5.
vanaspatikAya AraMbha, 6. dvIndriya AraMbha, 7. trIndriya AraMbha, 8.
caturindriya AraMbha, 9. paMcendriya AraMbha, 10. ajIva aarNbh| ye dasa bheda
zAnti ke hue, isI prakAra mukti, Arjava, yAvat brahmacarya ke ye saba
zrotrendriya ke sAtha 100 bheda hue, isI prakAra cakSurindriya ke 100,
ghrANendriya ke 100, rasanendriya ke 100, sparzendriya ke 100, ye saba
AhArasaMjJA ke 500 bheda hue, isI prakAra bhayasaMjJA ke 500, maithunasaMjJA ke
500, parigrahasaMjJA ke 500, ye saba 2000 bheda hue, inheM na karane , na karAne
aura na anumodana karane ke dvArA tiguNA karane para 6000 bheda hue, phira inheM
mana, vacana aura kAyA se tiguNA karane para 18000 bheda zIlAGgaratha ke hote
haiN| bar3I saMlekhanA kA pATha aha bhaMte! apacchimamAraNaMtiya saMlehaNA
jhUsaNA ArAhaNA pauSadhazAlA pUMje, pUMja ke uccArapAsavaNabhUmikA paDilehe,
paDileha ke, gamaNAgamaNe, paDikkame, paDikkama ke , darbhAdika saMthArA
saMthAre, saMthAra ke darbhAdika saMthArA durUhe, durUha ke pUrva tathA uttara
dizA sanmukha palyAMkAdika Asana se baiThe, baiTha ke 'karayalasaMpariggahiyaM
sirasAvattaM matthae aMjaliM kaTu evaM vayAsI 'namotthuNaM arihaMtANaM
bhagavaMtANaM jAva saMpattANaM aise ananta siddha bhagavAn ko namaskAra karake,
'namotthuNaM arihaMtANaM bhagavaMtANaM jAva saMpAviukAmANaM' jayavante vartamAna
kAle mahAvideha kSetra meM vicarate huye tIrthaMkara bhagavAn ko namaskAra
karake apane dharmAcAryajI mahArAja ko namaskAra karatA huuN| sAdhu sAdhvI
pramukha cAroM tIrtha ko khamAkara, sarva jIva rAzi ko khamAkara, pahale jo
vrata Adare haiM unameM jo aticAra doSa lage hoM, ve sarva

Page #168 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Fourth Study: Pratikramana  [97]  Alochana, Parikarma, Nindana - becoming free
from blemish, I renounce all injury to living beings, all falsehood, all taking
of what is not given, all sexual pleasure, all attachment, all anger, pride, and
so on up to the delusion of false belief, all inauspicious activities. For as
long as I live, I will not do, cause to be done, or consent to these eighteen
iniquities in any of the three ways (by mind, speech, or body).  I renounce all
food, drink, edibles, and beverages. For as long as I live, I renounce these
four kinds of sustenance.  This body of mine, which is dear, pleasant,
agreeable, and charming, may it not be affected by cold, heat, hunger, thirst,
insects, thieves, weapons, wind, bile, phlegm, or any kind of ailment or
calamity.  With my last breaths, I relinquish this body. Thus is my faith, thus
is my exposition. When I touch (the earth), may I be purified. Such is my final
Sallekhana, Jhusana, and Aradhana. The five Aticaras (transgressions) are to be
known and not to be committed, namely, those related to this world, the next
world, life, death, and sensual pleasures. That is a grave offense.  The meaning
is: When death is imminent, one should lovingly practice the austerity of
Sallekhana. First, one should clean the place of penance. One should renounce
the act of evacuation. After performing Pratikramana, facing the east or north,
one should sit on a seat of Darbha grass, etc., and joining the palms, bowing
the head, recite "Namo-tthuna Arihantanam Bhagavantanam..." and pay obeisance to
the Siddha Bhagavans. Then, reciting "Namo-tthuna Arihantanam Bhagavantanam..."
one should pay obeisance to the Tirthankaras currently residing in the
Mahavideha region. Next, one should pay obeisance to one's spiritual preceptor.
One should seek forgiveness from the fourfold Sangha (of monks, nuns, laymen,
and laywomen) and then seek forgiveness from all living beings. One should
confess and denounce the transgressions committed in the vows previously
observed. One should renounce the five sins (of violence, falsehood, theft,
sexual pleasure, and attachment) and the eighteen iniquities (of anger, pride,
deceit, greed, and so on up to the delusion of false belief) in the three ways
(of mind, speech, and body). For the rest of one's life, one should renounce the
four kinds of sustenance. After that, one should detach oneself from the
affection for this body, which is dear, pleasant, agreeable, and charming, and,
purifying oneself through Sallekhana, Jhusana, and Aradhana, one should
undertake pure fasting.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 caturtha adhyayana : pratikramaNa ] [97 Aloca ke , paDikkama ke , ninda ke
niHzalya hokara ke savvaM pANAivAyaM paccakkhAmi, savvaM musAvAyaM paccakkhAmi,
savvaM adiNNAdANaM paccakkhAmi, savvaM mehuNaM paccakkhAmi, savvaM pariggahaM
paccakkhAmi, savvaM kohaM mANaM jAva micchAdasaNasallaM paccakkhAmi, savvaM
akaraNija jogaM paccakkhAmi jAvajIvAe tivihaM tiviheNaM na karemi, na kAravemi,
karataMpi annaM na samaNujANAmi maNasA, vayasA, kAyasA aise aThAraha
pApasthAnaka paccakkha kara, savvaM asaNaM pANaM, khAima, sAima, cauvvihaMpi
AhAraM paccakkhAmi jAvajjIvAe aise cAroM AhAra paccakkha kara jaM pi ya imaM
zarIraM iTheM, kaMtaM, piyaM, maNuNNaM, maNAma, dhijaM, visAsiyaM sammayaM,
aNumayaM, bahumayaM bhaNDakaraNDasamANaM rayaNakaraNDabhUyaM, mA NaM sIyaM, mA
NaM uNhaM, mA NaM khuhA, mA NaM pivAsA, mA NaM bAlA, mA NaM corA, mA NaM
daMsamasagA, mA NaM vAiyaM, pittiyaM, kapphiyaM, saMbhIyaM,sA .saNNivAiyaM
vivihA rogAyaMkA parisahA uvasaggA phAsA phasanta.evaM piyaNaM caramehiM
ussAsaNissAsehiM vosirAmi tti kaTu aise zarIra ko vosirA kara kAlaM
aNavakaMkhamANe viharAmi, aisI merI saddahaNA, prarUpaNA to hai, pharasanA karUM
taba zuddha hoUM , aise apacchima mAraNaMtiya saMlehaNA, jhUsaNA, ArAhaNAe paMca
aiyArA jANiyavvA na samAyariyavvA, taM jahA te AloU ihalogAsaMsappaoge,
paralogAsaMsappaoge, jIviyAsaMsappaoge, maraNAsaMsappaoge, kAmabhogAsaMsappaoge,
tassa micchA mi dukkddN| bhAvArtha - mRtyu kA samaya nikaTa Ane para saMlekhanA
tapa kA prIti pUrvaka sevana karane ke liye sarvaprathama pauSadhazAlA kA
pramArjana kre| mala-mUtra tyAgane kI bhUmi kA pratilekhana kre| calane-phirane
kI kriyA kA pratikramaNa kara pUrva yA uttara dizA kI ora muMha karake palyaMka
(pAlathI) Adi Asana lagAkara darbhAdika ke Asana para baiThe aura hAtha
jor3akara zira se Avartana karatA huA mastaka para hAtha jor3akara 'namotthuNaM
arihaMtANaM bhagavaMtANaM jAva saMpattANaM' isa prakAra bola kara siddha
bhagavAn ko namaskAra kre| tatpazcAt 'namotthuNaM arihaMtANaM bhagavaMtANaM jAva
saMpAviukAmANaM' aisA bolakara vartamAna kAla meM mahAvideha kSetra meM jo
tIrthaMkara vicara rahe haiM, unako namaskAra kre| phira apane dharmAcArya jI
mahArAja ko namaskAra kre| sAdhu sAdhvI, zrAvaka zrAvikA, isa prakAra caturvidha
saMgha se kSamAyAcanA kare, punaH samasta jIvoM se kSamA maaNge| pahale dhAraNa
kiye huye vratoM meM jo aticAra lage hoM unakI AlocanA aura nindA kre| sampUrNa
hiMsA, jhUTha, corI, abrahmacarya (maithuna) aura aparigraha-ina pAMca pApoM kA
tathA krodha, mAna, mAyA, lobha yAvat mithyAdarzana zalya Adi aThAraha
pApasthAnoM kA tathA sampUrNa pApajanya yoga kA tIna karaNa aura tIna yoga se
tyAga kare  /  jIvanaparyanta cAroM prakAra ke AhAra kA tyAga kare  /  isake
pazcAt jo apanA zarIra manojJa hai, usa para se mamatva haTAve aura saMlekhanA
saMbaMdhI pApoM aticAroM ko dUra karake zuddha anazana kare  /  isa prakAra
zraddhA aura prarUpaNA kI zuddhi ke liye nitya pATha kare aura antima samaya meM
sparzanA dvArA zuddha ho| viziSTa zabdoM kA artha isa prakAra hai - iTuM - iSTa,
icchAnukUla  /  kaMtaM - kamanIya  /  piyaM -

Page #169 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[98] [Essential Sutras] Beloved, dear. Manuṇṇam - pleasing, beautiful. Maṇām -
extremely beautiful. Dhijam - worthy of bearing, courageous. Visāsiyam -
trustworthy. Sammayam - honored. Aṇumayam - highly honored. Bahumayam - greatly
honored. Bhaṇḍakaraṇḍagasamaṇam - like a casket of ornaments.
Rayaṇakaraṇḍagabhūyam - like a casket of jewels. Mā ṇam sīyam - may there be no
cold. Mā ṇ uṇham - may there be no heat. Mā ṇam khuhā - may there be no hunger.
Mā ṇam pivāsā - may there be no thirst. Mā ṇam vālasarpa na kāṭe - may there be
no snake bite. Mā ṇam corā - may there be no fear of thieves. Mā ṇam dansamasagā
- may there be no torment from mosquitoes and flies. Māṇ vāhiyam - may there be
no diseases. Pittiyam - bile. Kapiyam - phlegm. Sambhiyam - fearful. Sannivāiyam
- epidemic. Viviha - various kinds of. Rogāyankā - disease and terror. Parisahā
- suffering from hunger etc. Uvassaṇgā - upsarga (suffering inflicted by gods,
animals etc.). Phāsā phusantu - may they be connected. Caramehiṁ - in the end.
Ussāsanissāsehiṁ - with breaths (inhalation and exhalation). Vosirāmi - I
renounce. Tti kaṭu - by doing so. Kālam aṇavakankhamane - not desiring time.
Viharami - I wander, I roam. Ihalokāsansappaoge - desiring the pleasures of this
world, such as emperors. Paralokāsansappaoge - desiring the pleasures of the
other world, such as Indra. Jīviyāsansappaoge - desiring to live.
Maraṇāsansappaoge - desiring to die without seeing glory, worship, or due to
extreme suffering. Kāmabhogāsansappaoge - desiring sensual pleasures. Mā - do
not. Majjha - my. Huja - be. Maraṇante vi - even after death. Saḍḍhāparūvaṇammi
- in the establishment of faith. Annabhāvo - opposite feeling. Salutations to
the five categories:  First category: Sri Arihant Bhagwan, the least twenty
Tirthankaras, the most excellent one hundred sixty and one hundred seventy
Devadhidevajis, among them, in the present time, twenty Viharmanjis wander in
the Mahavideha Kshetra. The bearer of one thousand eight Lakshanas, thirty-four
Atishayas, thirty-five Vani Gunas, seated in majesty, worthy of worship by
sixty-four Indras, free from eighteen faults, possessing twelve qualities,
infinite knowledge, infinite character, infinite strength and power, infinite
happiness, divine sound, Bhamandala, crystal throne, Ashoka tree, flower rain,
divine drums, umbrella held, chowri waved, the bearer of the power of human
form, wandering in two and a half islands and fifteen Kshetras, the least two
crore Kevalis and the most excellent nine crore Kevalis, the bearer of
Kevalgyan, Kevaldarshan, the knower of all substances, fields, time, and
emotions -  Such Sri Arihant Bhagwan Maharaj, if you have any disrespect or
desire for my day and night, then O Arihant Bhagwan! Forgive my offense
repeatedly. With folded hands, bowed head, and bowed head, I offer salutations
one thousand eight times with the Tikkhutto text. (Here, recite the Tikkhutto
text)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 98] [ AvazyakasUtra priya, pyaaraa| maNuNNaM - manojJa, manohara  /  maNAma -
atyanta mnohr| dhijaM - dhAraNa karane yogya dhairyshaalii| visAsiyaM - vizvAsa
karane yogya  /  saMmayaM - sanmAna ko prApta  /  aNumayaM - vizeSa sammAna ke
prApta  /  bahumayaM - bahuta sanmAna ko prApta  /  bhaNDakaraNDagasamANaM -
AbhUSaNoM ke karaNDaka (Dibbe) ke samAna  /  rayaNakaraNDagabhUyaM - ratnoM ke
karaNDaka ke samAna  /  mA NaM sIyaM - zIta (sardI) na ho| mA Na uNhaM- uSNatA
(garmI) na ho|maa NaM khuhA - bhUkha na lge| mA NaM pivAsA - pyAsa na lge|maa
NaM vAlAsarpa na kATe  /  mA NaM corA - coroM kA bhaya na ho| mA NaM daMsamasagA
- DAMsa aura macchara na satAveM  /  mANa vAhiyaM - vyAdhiyAM na hoN| pittiyaM -
pitt| kaphiyaM - kapha  /  saMbhIyaM - bhyNkr| sannivAiyaM - sannipAta  /
vivihA - aneka prakAra ke  /  rogAyaMkA - roga aura aatNk| parisahA - kSudhA Adi
kA kaSTa uvassaggA - upasarga (deva, tiryaMca Adi dvArA diyA gayA kaSTa  / )
phAsA phusantu - saMbaMdha kareM  /  caramehiM - anta ke  /  ussAsanissAsehiM -
ucchvAsaniHzvAsoM (zvAsocchavAsoM) se| vosirAmi - tyAga karatA huuN| tti kaTu -
aisA karake  /  kAlaM aNavakaMkhamANe - kAla kI AkAMkSA (vAMchA) nahIM karatA
huaa| viharAmivihAra karatA hU~, vicaraNa karatA hU~  /  ihalogAsaMsappaoge -
isa loka ke cakravartI Adi ke sukhoM kI iccha krnaa| paralogAsaMsappaoge -
paraloka sambandhI indra ke sukhoM kI icchA krnaa| jIviyAsaMsappaoge - jIvita
rahane kI icchA karanA  /  maraNAsaMsappaoge - mahimA, pUjA na dekhakara athavA
vizeSa duHkha hone se marane kI icchA krnaa| kAmabhogAsaMsappaoge - kAmabhogoM
kI icchA krnaa|maa - mata  /  majjha - mere| huja - ho| maraNaMte vi - mRtyu ho
jAne para bhii| saDDhAparUvaNammi - zraddhA prarUpaNA meM  /  annahAbhAvo -
viparIta bhaav| pAMcoM padoM kI vandanA pahale pada zrI arihanta bhagavAn
jaghanya bIsa tIrthaMkarajI, utkRSTa eka sau sATha tathA eka sau sattara
devAdhidevajI, unameM vartamAna kAla meM bIsa viharamAna jI mahAvideha kSetra
meM vicarate haiM  /  eka hajAra ATha lakSaNa ke dharaNahAra, cauMtIsa atizaya,
paiMtIsa vANI guNoM karake virAjamAna, causaTha indroM ke vandanIya, aThAraha
doSa rahita, bAraha guNa sahita, ananta jJAna, ananta cAritra, ananta balavIrya,
ananta sukha, divyadhvani, bhAmaNDala, sphaTika siMhAsana, azoka vRkSa,
kusumavRSTi, devadundubhi, chatra dharAve, caMvara viMjAve, puruSAkAra parAkrama
ke dharaNahAra, ar3hAI dvIpa pandraha kSetra meM vicare, jaghanya do karor3a
kevalI aura utkRSTa nava karor3a kevalI, kevalajJAna, kevaladarzana ke
dharaNahAra, sarva dravya, kSetra, kAla, bhAva ke jAnanahAra - aise zrI arihaMta
bhagavanta mahArAja ApakI divasa evaM rAtri sambandhI avinaya AzAtanA kI ho to
he arihaMta bhagavan ! merA aparAdha bArambAra kSamA kriye| hAtha jor3a, mAna
mor3a, zIza namA kara tikkhutto ke pATha se eka hajAra ATha bAra namaskAra
karatA huuN| (yahAM tikkhutto kA pATha bolanA)

Page #170 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Fourth Study: Pratikraman  **[99]**  You are auspicious, supreme, O Lord! O
Master! You are always a refuge in this life, the next life, and all lives.
**Second Verse:**  The glorious Siddha Bhagavan are infinite in number,
classified into fifteen categories: Tirtha Siddha, Atirtha Siddha, Tirthankara
Siddha, Atirthankara Siddha, Swayambuddha Siddha, Pratyekabuddha Siddha,
Buddhabodhita Siddha, Strilinga Siddha, Purushaling Siddha, Napumsakaling
Siddha, Swaling Siddha, Anyaling Siddha, Grihasthalingsiddha, Ekasiddha,
Anekasiddha. They are born without birth, without aging, without death, without
fear, without disease, without sorrow, without suffering, without poverty,
without karma, without body, without delusion, without Maya, without servant,
without master, without hunger, without thirst, they are the light within the
light, they have accomplished all tasks, and have become infinite Siddha
Bhagavan in fourteen ways, classified into fifteen categories. They possess
eight qualities: infinite knowledge, infinite vision, क्षायिक सम्यक्त्व,
infinite bliss, unshakeable अवगाहना, formless, without weight, infinite energy.
O glorious Siddha Bhagavan, if I have committed any unintentional offense
against you during the day, please forgive me. I fold my hands, bow my head, and
offer salutations with the Tikkhutto mantra one thousand and eight times. May
you be my refuge in all lives, forever.  **Third Verse:**  The glorious Acharya
Maharaj are adorned with thirty-six qualities, they observe the five great vows,
the five conducts, they have conquered the five senses, they have abandoned the
four passions, they observe pure celibacy with the nine restraints, they are
pure in the five समिति, the three गुप्ति, and in their worship. They possess
these thirty-six qualities and eight possessions: (1) आचारसम्पदा, (2)
श्रुतसम्पदा, (3) शरीरसम्पदा, (4) वचनसम्पदा, (5) वाचनासम्पदा, (6) मतिसम्पदा, (7)
प्रयोगमतिसम्पदा, (8) परिज्ञासम्पदा.  The glorious Acharya Maharaj are just,
benevolent, renunciant, detached, great in qualities, and devoted to qualities.
O glorious Acharya Maharaj, if I have committed any unintentional offense
against you during the day and night, please forgive me. I fold my hands, bow my
head, and offer salutations with the Tikkhutto mantra one thousand and eight
times. May you be my refuge in all lives, forever.  **Fourth Verse:**  The
glorious Upadhyaya Maharaj possess twenty-five qualities (including the eleven
Angas, twelve Upangas, Charanasattari, Karanasattari) and know the Angas and
Upangas Sutras with their original meaning.  The eleven Angas are: Acharanga,
Suyagadaanga, Thanaanga, Samavayaanga, Vivahapannaati (Bhagavati),
Nayaadhammakah (Jnatadharmakatha), Upasakadasa, Antagadadasa, Anuttarovavai,
Panhavaagaran (Prashnavyakaran), Vivaagsu (Vipak Shruta).  The twelve Upangas
are: Uvavai, Rayappaseni, Jivajivabhigam, Pannavanaa, Jambudvippapannaati,
Chandapannaati, Surapannaati, Nirayavaliya, Kappavadansya, Pufphya, Pufph
Chuliya, Vahnidasha.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 caturtha adhyayana : pratikramaNa ] [ 99 Apa maMgalika ho, uttama ho, he
svAmin! he nAtha! Apa isa bhava, parabhava evaM bhava-bhava meM sadAkAla zaraNa
1 dUsare pada zrI siddha bhagavAn pandraha bhede anaMta siddha hue haiM -
tIrthasiddhA, atIrthasiddhA, tIrthaMkarasiddhA, atIrthaMkarasiddhA, svayaM
buddhasiddhA, pratyekabuddhasiddhA, buddhabodhitasiddhA, strIliMgasiddhA,
puruSaliMgasiddhA, napuMsakaliMgasiddhA, svaliMgasiddhA, anyaliMgasiddhA,
gRhasthaliMgasiddhA, ekasiddhA, anekasiddhA  /  jahAM janma nahIM, jarA nahIM,
maraNa nahIM, bhaya nahIM, roga nahIM, zoka nahIM, duHkha nahIM, dAridrya nahIM,
karma nahIM, kAyA nahIM, moha nahIM, mAyA nahIM, cAkara nahIM, ThAkara nahIM,
bhUkha nahIM, tRSA nahIM, jyota meM jyota virAjamAna, sakala kArya siddha karake
cavade prakAre pandraha bhede anaMta siddha bhagavAn hue haiN| ananta jJAna,
ananta darzana, kSAyika samyaktva, ananta sukha, aTala avagAhanA, amUrtika,
agurulaghu, ananta vIryya, ye ATha guNa karake sahita haiM  /  aise zrI siddha
bhagavanta jI mahArAja ApakI divasa sambandhI avinaya azAtanA kI ho to bArambAra
siddha bhagavAn! merA aparAdha kSamA kriye| hAtha jor3a, mAna mor3a, zIza namA
kara tikkhutto ke pATha se eka hajAra ATha bAra namaskAra karatA hU~  /  yAvat
bhava-bhava sadA kAla zaraNa ho  /  tIsare pada zrI AcArya mahArAja chattIsa
guNa karake virAjamAna haiM, pAMca mahAvrata pAle, pAMca AcAra pAle, pAMca
indriya jIte, cAra kaSAya TAle, navavAr3a sahita zuddha brahmacarya pAle, pAMca
samiti, tIna gupti zuddha ArAdhe, ye chattIsa guNa aura ATha sampadA ( 1 :
AcArasampadA, 2. zrutasampadA, 3. zarIrasampadA, 4. vacanasampadA, 5.
vAcanAsampadA, 6. matisampadA, 7. prayogamatisampadA, 8. parijJAsampadA) sahita
haiM  /  aise AcArya mahArAja nyAyapakSI, bhadrika pariNAmI, tyAgI, vairAgI,
mahAguNI, guNAnurAgI haiN| aise zrI AcArya mahArAja ApakI divasa evaM rAtri
sambandhI avinaya AzAtanA kI ho to bArambAra merA aparAdha kSamA kriye| hAtha
jor3a, mAna mor3a, zIza namA kara tikkhutto ke pATha se eka hajAra ATha bAra
namaskAra karatA hU~  /  yAvat bhava-bhava sadA kAla zaraNa ho  /  cauthe pada
zrI upAdhyAya jI mahArAja paccIsa guNa karake sahita (gyAraha aMga, bAraha
upAMga caraNasattarI, karaNasattarI ina se yukta) haiM tathA aMga- upAMga sUtroM
ko mUla artha sahita jAneM  /  gyAraha aMga AcArAMga, sUyagaDAMga, ThANAMga,
samavAyAMga, vivAhapannati (bhagavatI), NAyAdhammakahA (jJAtAdharmakathA),
upAsakadasA, aMtagaDadasA, aNuttarovavAI, paNhAvAgaraNa (praznavyAkaraNa),
vivAgasu (vipAka zruta)  /  - bAraha upAMga uvavAI, rAyappaseNI,
jIvAjIvAbhigama, pannavaNA, jambUdIvapannatti, candapannatti, sUrapannatti,
nirayAvaliyA, kappavaDaMsiyA, pupphiyA, puppha cUliyA, vahnidazA  /

Page #171 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Essential Sutras Four main sutras: Uttarajjhayana (Uttaraadhyayana),
Dasaveyalisuutta (Dashavaikalika Sutra), Nandisuuta (Nandi Sutra), Anuoagaddaar
(Anuyogadwar). [100] Four Chhed Sutras: Dasasuyaakkhando (Dasha Shruta Skandha),
Vihadakkappo (Vridhatkalpa), Vavhaarasuutta (Vyavahar Sutra), Nisiihasuutta
(Nishith Sutra) and Battisavaan Aavssagan (Aavashyak) and seven Nayas, four
Nipekshas, knowing one's own opinion and others' opinions, not a Jina but like a
Jina, not a Kevali but like a Kevali.  Such Shri Upadhyaya Ji Maharaj, who
removes the darkness of Mithyatva, who illuminates the light of Samkiti, who
stabilizes the beings who are falling from Dharma, who possesses many qualities
like Saare, Waare, Dhaare, etc. If you have any desire for my service day and
night, then repeatedly, O Upadhyaya Ji Maharaj! Forgive my offenses. With folded
hands, bowing my head, I offer salutations one thousand and eight times with the
recitation of Tikkhutto. May I be your refuge forever in all births.  In the
fifth verse, "Namo Loe Savvasahunam", in the world of two and a half islands and
fifteen regions, all the Sadhu Ji Maharaj, the lowest two thousand crore, the
highest nine thousand crore, dwell in victory. They have five great vows,
conquer five senses, avoid four passions, are true in thought, true in action,
true in yoga, forgiving, detached, have control over mind, control over speech,
control over body, are endowed with knowledge, endowed with vision, endowed with
conduct, are free from the fear of birth, free from the fear of death, possess
these twenty-seven qualities. They follow five principles of conduct, protect
six bodies, abandon eight types of pride, practice ten types of Yati Dharma,
perform twelve types of austerities, follow seventeen types of restraints,
conquer twenty-two types of temptations, avoid forty-two faults while taking
food and water, avoid forty-nine faults while enjoying, avoid fifty-two types of
misconduct, are not affected by the three types of desires, are not bound by the
three types of attachments, are renunciants in thought, enjoyers in action,
etc., free from attachment and ego.  Such Muni Raj Maharaj, if you have any
desire for my service day and night, then repeatedly, O Muni Raj! Forgive my
offenses. With folded hands, bowing my head, I offer salutations one thousand
and eight times with the recitation of Tikkhutto. May I be your refuge forever
in all births.  The recitation of Darshan Samyaktva: Arihanto Mah Devo,
Javjjiivam Susahuno Guruno. Jinpannatta Tatta, Iya Sammatta Mae Vahiyam.
Paramatthasanthavo Va Sudiṭṭhaparamatthasevana Vaavi. Vaavanna- Kudansana-
Vajjana Gna Sammattasaddahana.  Iya Sammattasssa Panch Aiyaara Peyala Janiyavva
Na Samayriyavva, Tan Jaha Te Aaloum Sanka, Kankha, Vitigicchha, Par-
Pasandapasanssa, Parapasandasanthavo.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 [ Avazyaka sUtra cAra mUlasUtra uttarajjhayaNaM (uttarAdhyayana),
dasaveyAliyasuttaM ( dazavaikAlikasUtra), NaMdIsutaM (nandIsUtra), aNuogaddAra
(anuyogadvAra )  /  100 ] cAra chedasUtra - dasAsuyakkhaMdho ( dazA zrutaskaMdha
), vihadakkappo ( vRhatkalpa), vavahArasuttaM ( vyavahArasUtra ), NisIhasuttaM
(nizIthasUtra) aura battIsavAM AvassagaM (Avazyaka) tathA sAta naya, cAra
nipekSa, svamata aura paramata ke jAnakAra, jina nahIM para jina sarIkhe, kevalI
nahIM para kevalI sarIkhe  /  aise zrI upAdhyAya jI mahArAja mithyAtva rUpa
aMdhakAra ke meTanahAra, samakita rUpa udyota ke karanahAra, dharma se Digate
hue prANI ko sthira kareM, sArae, vArae, dhArae, ityAdi aneka guNa karake sahita
haiM aise zrI upAdhyAya jI mahArAja ApakI divasa evaM rAtri sambandhI avinaya
AzAtanA kI ho to bArambAra he upAdhyAya jI mahArAja ! merA aparAdha kSamA
kariye, hAtha jor3a, mAna mor3a, zIza namA kara tikkhutto ke pATha se eka hajAra
ATha bAra namaskAra karatA hU~  /  yAvat bhava-bhava sadA kAla zaraNa ho  /
pAMcaveM pada 'Namo loe savvasAhUNaM' ar3hAI dvIpa pandraha kSetra rUpa loka meM
sarva sAdhu jI mahArAja jaghanya do hajAra karor3a, utkRSTa nava hajAra karor3a
jayavanta vicareM, pAMca mahAvrata, pAMca indriya jIteM, cara kaSAya TAleM,
bhAvasacce, karaNasacce, jogasacce, kSamAvantA vairAgyavantA, manasamAdhAraNiyA,
vayasamAdhAraNiyA, kAyasamA dhAraNiyA, nANasampannA, daMsaNasampannA,
cAritrasampannA, vedanIyasamA ahi yAsanIyA, maraNAntiyasamAahiyAsanIyA, aise
sattAIsa guNa karake sahita haiN| pAMca AcAra vAle, cha: kAya kI rakSA kareM,
ATha mada chor3eM, daza prakAra yatidharma dhAreM, bAraha bhede tapa kareM,
satraha bhede saMyama pAleM, bAvIsa pariSaha jIteM, bayAlIsa doSa TAla kara
AhAra pAnI leveM, saiMtAlIsa doSa TAla kara bhogaveM, bAvana anAcAra TAleM,
ter3iyA Ave nahIM, netiyA jIme nahIM, sacitta ke tyAgI, acitta ke bhogI ityAdi
moha mamatA rahita haiM  /  aise munirAja mahArAja ApakI divasa evaM rAtri
sambandhI avinaya AzAtanA kI ho to bArambAra he munirAja ! merA aparAdha kSamA
kriye| hAtha jor3a, mAna mor3a, zIza namA kara tikkhutto ke pATha se eka hajAra
ATha bAra namaskAra karatA hU~  /  yAvat bhava-bhava sadA kAla zaraNa ho  /
darzanasamyaktva kA pATha arihaMto maha devo, jAvajjIvaM susAhuNo guruNo  /
jiNapaNNattaM tattaM, iya sammattaM mae vahiyaM  //  paramatthasaMthavo vA
sudiTThaparamatthasevaNA vAvi  /  vAvaNNa- kudaMsaNa- vajjaNA jJa
sammattasaddahaNA  //  ia sammattassa paMca aiyArA peyAlA jANiyavvA na
samAyariyavvA, taM jahA te AlouM saMkA, kaMkhA, vitigicchA, para-
pAsaMDapasaMsA, parapAsaMDasaMthavo  /

Page #172 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Fourth Study: Pratikraman  [101] If any transgression has been committed
regarding the subject of the Samyak Ratna substance, then I criticize: 1. Doubt
in the words of the Jina, 2. Desire for display, 3. Praise of the heretic, 4.
Introduction to the heretic, 5. Doubt in the fruits of Dharma. If such a stain
of falsehood has been attached to my Samyakta-Ratna, then may it be destroyed.
**Meaning:** The Tirthankara, the victorious one, who has conquered the internal
enemies like attachment and aversion, is my deity. The Nirgrantha Guru, who
practices restraint throughout life, is my teacher. And the Dharma, as taught by
the Jineshwara Deva, the liberated one, that is, non-violence, truth, etc., is
my religion. I have accepted this vow of Samyakta, which is the essence of faith
in the deity, guru, and Dharma, for my entire life. May I have the knowledge of
the soul and other substances, may I receive the service of the sadhus who are
well-versed in the soul and other principles and the secrets of the doctrine,
may I never associate with those who are corrupted from Samyakta and are false,
may my faith in Samyakta remain steadfast.  I criticize myself if I have doubted
the words of the liberated one, if I have desired something that is not taught
by the liberated one, if I have doubted the fruits of Dharma, or if I have felt
disgust upon seeing the clothes, utensils, or body of the sadhus and sadhvis,
the great souls, if I have praised the heretic upon seeing his miracles, and if
I have introduced myself to the heretic. May all my sins be nullified.  **Guru-
Guna-Smaraṇa-Sutra**  Panchidhiya-Samvarano, Tah Navavih-Bhambache-Guttidharo.
Chauvvih-Kasaya-Mukko, Ia Attarasa-Gunahin Sanjutto. Panch Mahavvaya-Jutto,
Panch Vihayar-Palana-Samatyyo. Panch-Samio-Tigutto, Chhattisguno Guru Majjha.
**Meaning:** My Guru is the supreme sadhu who controls the outward movement of
the five senses, who holds the nine secrets of celibacy, the nine enclosures,
who is free from the four types of passions, who is endowed with eighteen
qualities, who is united with the five great vows, who is capable of upholding
the five conducts, who holds the five samitis and three secrets, and who
possesses these thirty-six qualities.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 caturtha adhyayana : pratikramaNa ] [101 isa prakAra zrI samakita ratna
padArtha ke viSaya meM jo koI aticAra lagA ho to AloUM - 1. zrI jinavacana meM
zaMkA kI ho, 2. paradarzana kI AkAMkSA kI ho, 3. parapAkhaMDI kI prazaMsA kI ho,
4. parapAkhaMDI kA paricaya kiyA ho, 5. dharmaphala ke prati saMdeha kiyA ho|
aise mere samyaktva-ratna para mithyAtva rUpI raja-maila lagA ho to tassa micchA
mi dukkddN| bhAvArtha - rAga-dveSa Adi Abhyantara zatruoM ko jItane vAle
vItarAga arihaMta bhagavAn mere deva haiM, jIvanaparyaMta saMyama kI sAdhanA
karane vAle nirgrantha guru haiM tathA vItarAgakathita arthAt zrI jinezvara deva
dvArA upadiSTa ahiMsA, satya Adi hI merA dharma hai  /  yaha deva, guru, dharma
para zraddhAsvarUpa samyaktva vrata maiMne yAvajjIvana ke liye grahaNa kiyA hai
evaM mujhako jIvAdi padArtha kA paricaya ho, bhalI prakAra jIvAdi tattvoM ko
tathA siddhAMta ke rahasya ko jAnane vAle sAdhuoM kI sevA prApta ho, samyaktva
se bhraSTa tathA mithyAtvI jIvoM kI saMgati kadApi na ho, aisI samyaktva ke
viSaya meM merI zraddhA banI rhe| maiMne vItarAga ke vacana meM zaMkA kI ho, jo
dharma vItarAga dvArA kathita nahIM hai, usakI AkAMkSA kI ho, dharma ke phala
meM saMdeha kiyA ho, yA sAdhu sAdhvI Adi mahAtmAoM ke vastra, pAtra, zarIra Adi
ko malina dekha kara ghRNA kI ho, parapAkhaNDI kA camatkAra dekha kara usakI
prazaMsA kI ho tathA parapAkhaNDI se paricaya kiyA ho to maiM usakI AlocanA
karatA huuN| merA vaha saba pApa niSphala ho| guru-guNa-smaraNasUtra paMcidiya-
saMvaraNo, taha navaviha - baMbhacera - guttidhro| cauviha-kasAya-mukko, ia
aTThArasa-guNehiM sNjutto|| paMca mahAvvaya - jutto, paMcavihAyAra - paalnn-
smtyo| paMca - samio - tigutto, chattIsaguNo guru mjjh|| bhAvArtha - pAMca
indriyoM ke vaiSayika cAMcalya ko rokane vAle, brahmacarya kI navavidha guptiyoM
ko - nau vAr3oM ko dhAraNa karane vAle, krodha Adi cAra prakAra ke kaSAyoM se
mukta isa prakAra aThAraha .guNoM se saMyukta, ahiMsA Adi pAMca mahAvratoM se
yukta, pAMca AcAroM ko pAlane meM samartha, pAMca samiti aura tIna gupti ko
dhAraNa karane vAle, isa prakAra ukta chattIsa guNoM vAle zreSTha sAdhu mere
guru haiN|

Page #173 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  English Translation:  **[Necessary Sutra]**  **Doha**  Infinite are the
twenty-four Tirthankaras, infinite are the Siddhas. The Kevala Jnani, the
Ganadharas, I bow to them with folded hands. ||1||  Two types of Kevala Jnani,
twenty Tirthankaras wandering. Thousands of pairs of Tirthankaras, the Sadhus,
the Nishidis. ||2||  Wealth is the Sadhu, wealth is the Sadhvi, wealth is the
Jain Dharma. These destroy all sins, break all eight karmas. ||3||  Always
remember the Arihants, the Siddhas, the Acharyas, the Upadhyayas. I bow to the
feet of all the Sadhus, with my head bowed. ||4||  Remember the Shasana Nayaka,
the Bhagvant Veer Jinendra. He removes all obstacles, grants supreme bliss.
||5||  Amrit resides in the thumb, the treasure of attainment. Remember Shri
Guru Gautam, the giver of desired fruits. ||6||  Guru and Govind both stand, to
whom should I bow? I am indebted to Gurudev, who showed me Govind. ||7||  A
greedy Guru cannot save you, he is not your savior. If you desire liberation,
then embrace a selfless Guru. ||8||  The Sadhu, the Sati, the warrior, the
Jnani, the elephant tusk. They do not leave you, even if you fall into the abyss
of time. ||9||  The Guru is the lamp, the Guru is the moonlight, without the
Guru, there is utter darkness. Do not forget this, the Guru is the foundation of
my life. ||10||  **[Forgiveness Sutra]**  **Aayari-Uvajjae**  With folded hands,
I bow to the entire Kula-Gana. If I have committed any offense, I forgive all
with my whole heart. ||1||  To the entire Saman Sangha, I offer my salutations
with folded hands. I forgive all, even the unforgivable. ||2||  To all living
beings, with a mind filled with Dharma, I forgive all, even the unforgivable.
||3||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 102] [ AvazyakasUtra dohA ananta caubIsI jina namU, siddha anante kodd'|
kevalajJAnI gaNadharA, bandU be kara jodd'|| 1 //  doya koDi kevaladharA,
viharamAna jina biis| sahasra yugala koDi namU, sAdhu namUM nizadIza  //  2 //
dhana sAdhu, dhana sAdhvI, dhana-dhana hai jina dharma  /  ye samar2yA pAtaka
jhare, TUTe AThoM karma  //  3  //  arihaMta siddha samarUM sadA, AcAraja
upaadhyaay| sAdhu sakala ke caraNa ko, vandUM zIza navAya  //  4 //
zAsananAyaka sumariye, bhagavanta vIra jinnNd| aliya vighana dUre hare, Ape
paramAnanda  //  5 //  aMguSThe amRta base, labdhi taNA bhaNDAra  /  zrI guru
gautama sumariye, vAMchita phala dAtAra  //  6  //  guru govinda donoM khar3e,
kisake lAgUM paay| balihArI gurudeva kI, govinda diyo batAya  // 7 //  lobhI
guru tAre nahIM, tire so taarnnhaar| jo tUM tiriyo cAha to, nirlobhI guru dhAra
//  8  //  sAdhu satI ne zUramA, jJAnI ne gjdnt| itanA pIchA nA haTe, jo juga
jAya par3anta  //  9  //  guru dIpaka guru cAMdaNI, guru bina ghora aNdhaar|
palaka na visarUM tuma bhaNI, guru mujha prANa AdhAra  // 10 //  kSAmaNAsUtra -
Ayariya-uvajjhAe, sIse sAhammie kula-gaNe y| je me keI kasAyA, savve tiviheNa
khaamemi||1|| savvassa samaNasaMghassa, bhagavao aMjali karia siise| savvaM
khamAvaittA, khamAmi savvassa ahyNpi||2|| savvassa jIvarAsissa, bhAvao
dhmmnihiyniycitto| sarva khamAvaittA, khamAmi savvassa ahyNpi||3||

Page #174 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Fourth Study: Pratikraman  **(Mranasamadhi - Prakirnak and Sanstarak -
Prakirnak)**  I seek forgiveness with my mind, speech, and body for whatever I
have done wrong due to anger, hatred, or ungratefulness, or due to attachment.
|| 4 ||  **Meaning:** I seek forgiveness from the Acharya, Upadhyaya, Shishya,
Sadharmik, Kula, and Gan for any wrong I have done to them with my mind, speech,
and body. || 1 ||  With folded hands, I seek forgiveness from all the revered
Muni-gan for my offenses, and I also forgive them. || 2 ||  [103]  With my mind
fixed on Dharma, I seek forgiveness from all beings for my offenses, and I also
forgive them. || 3 ||  I seek forgiveness from all with my mind, speech, and
body for whatever I have said due to attachment, hatred, ungratefulness, or
insistence. || 4 ||  May all beings forgive me. I have no enmity towards anyone.
I bow to the twenty-four Tirthankaras, acknowledging my blame, criticism,
reproach, and disgust.  I seek forgiveness from all beings, I am a friend to all
beings. Thus, I am aware, I have performed Pratikraman with my mind, speech, and
body.  **Meaning:** If I have wronged any being, I seek forgiveness from them.
May all beings forgive me. I am a friend to all beings in the world, I have no
enmity or opposition towards anyone.  I perform Pratikraman with my mind,
speech, and body, acknowledging my sins through criticism, blame, reproach, and
disgust. I am free from sins and bow to the twenty-four Tirthankaras.
**Discussion:** The mind is a storehouse of emotions. It contains countless
auspicious and inauspicious emotions. As a result of these auspicious and
inauspicious emotions, countless karma particles bind with the soul every
moment. Auspicious emotions lead to auspicious karma, and inauspicious emotions
lead to inauspicious karma. Due to these bonds, the soul has been wandering in
the fourteen realms of the universe, in the eighty-four lakh species of beings,
experiencing temporary pleasures and pains since time immemorial. The soul has
endured much pain and suffering compared to pleasure. After countless births,
the soul has attained the ten boons of the Aryakshetra, the noble lineage, the
human birth, etc. It has also received the opportunity to hear the words of the
liberated ones and to associate with the saints.  1. **Savva jive su, iti
jinadas mahattarah.**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 caturtha adhyayana : pratikramaNa ] ( maraNasamAdhi- prakIrNaka aura saMstAraka
- prakIrNaka) rAgeNa va doseNa va, ahavA akayaNNuNA paDiniveseNaM  /  jaM me kiM
ci vibhaNiaM tamahaM tiviheNaM khAmemi  //  4  //  bhAvArtha - AcArya,
upAdhyAya, ziSya, sAdharmika, kula, aura gaNa, inake Upara maiMne jo kucha
kaSAya kiye hoM, una saba se maiM mana, vacana aura kAyA se kSamA cAhatA hU~  //
1  //  aJjalibaddha donoM hAtha jor3akara samasta pUjya munigaNa se maiM
aparAdha kI kSamA cAhatA hU~ aura maiM bhI unheM kSamA karatA hU~  //  2  //
[103 dharma meM citta ko sthira karake sampUrNa jIvoM se maiM apane aparAdha kI
kSamA cAhatA hU~ aura svayaM bhI unake aparAdha ko kSamA karatA hU~  //  3  //
rAga-dveSa, akRtajJatA athavA Agraha vaza maiMne jo kucha bhI kahA ho, usake
liye maiM mana, vacana kAyA se sabhI se kSamA cAhatA hU~  //  4  //  savve jIvA
khamaMtu me  /  veraM majjhaM na keNai  //  niMdiya garihiya dugaMchiyaM sammaM
/  vaMdAmi jiNe cauvvIsaM  //  khAmemi savve jIvA, mittI me savvabhUesu',
evamahaM Aloiya, tiviheNa paDikkaMto, - bhAvArtha - maiMne kisI jIva kA aparAdha
kiyA ho to maiM usase kSamA cAhatA huuN| sabhI prANI mujhe kSamA kreN| saMsAra
ke prANimAtra se merI mitratA hai, merA kisI se vaira-virodha nahIM hai| maiM
apane pApoM kI AlocanA, niMdA, garhA, aura jugupsA ke dvArA tIna prakAra se
arthAt mana, vacana aura kAya se pratikramaNa kara, pApoM se nivRtta hokara
caubIsa tIrthaMkara devoM kI vandanA karatA hU~  /  vivecana mana bhAvanAoM kA
bhaNDAra  /  isameM asaMkhya zubhAzubha bhAvanAe~ vidyamAna rahatI haiM aura ina
zubhAzubha bhAvanAoM ke phalasvarUpa hara kSaNa anantAnanta karma - paramANuoM
kA AtmA ke sAtha bandha hotA rahatA hai| zubha bhAvanAoM se zubha karmoM kA aura
azubha bhAvanAoM se azubha karmoM kaa| ina bandhanoM ke kAraNa hI AtmA anAdi
kAla se caudaha rAjU parimita loka meM, caurAsI lAkha jIva yoniyoM meM
paribhramaNa karatA huA paudgalika asthAyI sukha-duHkhoM kA bhoga bhI karatA A
rahA hai| sukha kI apekSA AtmA ne duHkha evaM pIr3Ae~ bahuta sahana kI haiN|
koTAnukoTi janmoM ke bAda Arya kSetra, uttama kula, mAnava janma, Adi dasa boloM
kI jIva ko prApti huI hai aura sAtha hI vItarAga vANI zravaNa karane kA tathA
santa samAgama kA suavasara bhI prApta huA 1. savva jIvesu, iti jinadAsa
mahattarAH  /

Page #175 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 104]  [This is an essential sutra. Now there is a need to understand the
nature of karma and the soul, i.e., the inert and the conscious, with unwavering
faith, and to implement the motives for self-elevation in life. The first motive
in the causes of self-welfare is the virtue of forgiveness. The scripture says -
There are ten types of ascetic virtues, as follows: 1. Patience, 2. Liberation,
3. Non-attachment, 4. Humility, 5. Lightness, 6. Truthfulness, 7. Self-control,
8. Austerity, 9. Compassion, 10. Brahma-charia. - Samvayanga Sutra Lord
Mahavira, the क्षमाश्रमण, has mentioned forgiveness as the first among the ten
types of ascetic virtues. Forgiveness is an essential need in the life of a
seeker. Without forgiveness, a person cannot live a happy and peaceful life in
any field. In fact, 'forgiveness' is a natural quality of man, which should not
be abandoned by man in any situation. The influence of forgiveness and love can
change even cruel hearts - "Forgiveness is the power of control in the world,
what is not achievable by forgiveness?" - Subhashit Sanchay i.e. Forgiveness is
the mantra of control in the world, what is not achieved by forgiveness? The
greatest penance is forgiveness itself. 'Kshantitulyaṁ tapo nāsti' - There is no
penance equal to forgiveness. Seekers who have a firm resolve for the upliftment
of their soul are certainly able to control their mind, i.e., to forgive. The
temptations of pleasures cannot attract them, desires cannot affect them, and
even severe calamities and crises cannot disturb them. The attacks of greed on
the heart of a controlled person become ineffective, and the fire of anger is
extinguished in his ocean of forgiveness. Such a man, by coordinating physical,
mental, moral and spiritual principles, remains engaged in sadhana according to
the formulated rules. If a seeker engaged in sadhana unknowingly makes a mistake
due to a state of delusion, he immediately apologizes for his offenses with a
simple heart. At the end of the Pratikraman, it is essential to have a
coordination of mind, speech and body while reciting the presented forgiveness
sutra. It is necessary to repent for past mistakes to make life pure and
spotless, but if repentance remains mere repentance, it is of no use. When there
is repentance, there should also be a firm resolve in the mind to correct the
mistake, and efforts should be made not to repeat the mistakes that have already
been made. Only then can the seeker's true forgiveness sutra be useful in life
upliftment. This apology eliminates the criminal tendencies of life and
establishes the kingdom of peace in life, and new rays of light sprout in the
heart. Like the Chakravarti's gem (while conquering the six continents) in the
dark cave that has been shrouded in darkness for millions of years, ]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 104] [ AvazyakasUtra hai| aba AvazyakatA hai aTala AsthA ke sAtha karma aura
AtmA arthAt jar3a-cetana ke svarUpa ko samajhakara Atma-utthAna ke hetuoM ko
jIvana meM utArane kii| Atma kalyANa ke kAraNoM meM prathama hetu kSamA-dharma
hI hai| zAstra kA vacana hai - dasavihe samaNadhamme paNNatte, taM jahA - 1.
khaMtI, 2. muttI, 3. ajave, 4. maddave, 5. lAghave, 6. sacce, 7. saMjame , 8.
tave, 9. ciyAe, 10. bNbhcervaase| - samavAyAMgasUtra kSamAzramaNa bhagavAn
mahAvIra ne dasa prakAra ke yatidharmoM meM sarva prathama kSamA ko hI batAyA
hai| sAdhaka jIvana meM kSamA dharma kI anivArya AvazyakatA hai  /  kSamA ke
abhAva meM vyakti kisI bhI kSetra meM sukha-zAntimaya jIvana nahIM jI sakatA
hai| vAstava meM 'kSamA' manuSya kA naisargika guNa hai, ise kisI bhI paristhiti
meM manuSya ko chor3anA nahIM caahiye| kSamA tathA prema ke prabhAva se krUra
hRdaya bhI badale jA sakate haiM - "kSamA vazIkRtirloke kSamayA kiM na sAdhyate
?" - subhASita saMcaya arthAt kSamA saMsAra meM vazIkaraNa maMtra hai, kSamA se
kyA siddha nahIM hotA ? sabase bar3A tapa kSamA hI hai| 'kSAntitulyaM tapo
nAsti' - kSamA ke barAbara dUsarA tapa nahIM hai| apanI AtmA ke abhyudaya kA
dRr3ha saMkalpa rakhane vAle sAdhaka nizcaya hI mana ko saMyata banAne meM
arthAt kSamA karane meM samartha hote haiM  /  bhogoM ke pralobhana unheM
AkarSita nahIM kara sakate, lAlasAe~ unheM bhAvita nahIM kara pAtI tathA bhISaNa
vipattiyAM aura saMkaTa unheM vyAkula nahIM kara sakate  /  saMyata vyakti ke
hRdaya para lobha ke AkramaNa-prahAra beasara ho jAte haiM tathA krodha kI agni
usake kSamA sAgara meM Akara samApta ho jAtI hai| aisA puruSa zArIrika,
mAnasika, naitika tathA AdhyAtmika siddhAntoM kA samanvaya karake jina prarUpita
niyamoM ke anusAra sAdhanA-rata rahatA hai| sAdhanA-nirata vyakti se kabhI
chadmastha avasthA ke kAraNa jAneanajAne yadi bhUla ho jAe to vaha tatkAla apane
aparAdhoM kI sarala hRdaya se kSamAyAcanA kara letA hai| pratikramaNa kI
parisamApti para prastuta kSamA yAcanA sUtra kA uccAraNa karate samaya manoyoga,
vacanayoga aura kAyayoga-ina tInoM kA samanvaya honA Avazyaka hai  /  jIvana ko
niSkaluSa aura nirmala banAne ke liye vigata bhUloM para pazcAttApa karanA
Avazyaka hai kintu pazcAttApa yadi korA pazcAttApa hI rahe to usase kucha bhI
lAbha nahIM hotaa| pazcAttApa hone para bhUla ko sudhArane kA mana meM dhruva
saMkalpa bhI honA cAhiye aura jo bhUleM pahale ho cukI haiM, unheM phira na
doharAne kA prayatna karanA cAhiye, tabhI sAdhaka kA saccA kSamApanAsUtra
jIvanautthAna meM upayogI bana sakatA hai  /  isa kSamAyAcanA se jIvana ke
aparAdhI saMskAra samApta ho jAte haiM aura jIvana meM zAnti kA sAmrAjya
sthApita ho jAtA hai tathA hRdaya meM navIna prakAza kI kiraNeM sphuTita ho jAtI
haiM  /  jaise karor3oM varSoM se andhakArAcchAdita tAmasa guphA meM cakravartI
kA maNiratna (chaha khaNDa kI vijaya karate samaya)

Page #176 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Fourth Study: Pratikraman  [105]  Just as light spreads in an instant, so too
does the light of self-knowledge shine brightly in the life of a being united
with the virtue of forgiveness. The text of eighty-four lakh (8.4 million)
living beings:  - Seven lakh (700,000) Earth-bodied, seven lakh (700,000) Water-
bodied, seven lakh (700,000) Fire-bodied, seven lakh (700,000) Air-bodied, ten
lakh (1 million) each of plant-bodied, fourteen lakh (1.4 million) ordinary
plant-bodied, two lakh (200,000) two-sensed, two lakh (200,000) three-sensed,
two lakh (200,000) four-sensed, four lakh (400,000) hellish, four lakh (400,000)
celestial, four lakh (400,000) five-sensed non-human, fourteen lakh (1.4
million) human.  In these four realms, I have unknowingly, knowingly,
intentionally, or unintentionally, through my actions or inaction, caused harm
to any living being, whether subtle or gross, in their state of being, walking,
standing, sitting, or lying down. I have also approved of such harm, pierced,
broken, or caused pain. Through my mind, speech, and body, I have committed
eighteen lakh twenty-four thousand one hundred twenty (1,824,120) types of *Tass
Miccha Mi Dukkadam*.  **Explanation:**  There are eighty-four lakh (8.4 million)
types of births (yoni) for all beings in the four realms. Yoni means the place
of birth for living beings. There are 8.4 million types of birthplaces for all
living beings. Although there are even more places, all those places that are
similar in terms of color, smell, taste, touch, and form are considered as one.
There are 350 basic types of Earth-bodied beings. Multiplying these types by
five colors gives 1750 types. Multiplying again by two smells gives 3500 types.
Multiplying again by five tastes gives 17500 types. Multiplying again by eight
touches gives 140,000 types. Multiplying again by five forms gives a total of
seven lakh (700,000) types.  Similar to Earth-bodied beings, there are 350 basic
types each for Water-bodied, Fire-bodied, and Air-bodied beings. Multiplying
these by five colors, etc., gives a total of ten lakh (1 million) types for
each. There are 700 basic types of root and stem plants. Multiplying these by
five colors, etc., gives a total of 14 lakh (1.4 million) types.  Similarly,
there are 100 basic types each for two-sensed, three-sensed, and four-sensed
beings. Multiplying these by five colors, etc., gives a total of four lakh
(400,000) types for each. There are 700 basic types of human beings. Multiplying
these by five colors, etc., gives a total of 14 lakh (1.4 million) types for
humans.  1. Multiplying the 563 types of the living being principle by the
countries of Abhihayadi, etc., gives 5630 types. Then, multiplying these by
attachment and aversion gives 11260 types. Then, multiplying these by mind,
speech, and body gives 33780 types. Then, multiplying these by the three karmas
gives 101340 types. Then, multiplying these by the three times gives 304020
types. Then, multiplying these by six: Arhant, Siddha, Acharya, Upadhyaya, Guru,
and Atma, gives 1824120 types.  In this way, I confess to *Tass Miccha Mi
Dukkadam* and vow to refrain from committing sinful actions.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 caturtha adhyayana : pratikramaNa ] [105 kSaNa bhara meM Aloka phailA detA hai,
isI prakAra kSamAguNa se saMyukta saMyata ke jIvana meM AtmajJAna kA prakAza
sphuTita ho jAtA hai| caurAsI lAkha jIvayoni kA pATha - sAta lAkha pRthvIkAya,
sAta lAkha apkAya, sAta lAkha tejaskAya, sAta lAkha vAyukAya, daza lAkha
pratyeka vanaspatikAya, caudaha lAkha sAdhAraNa vanaspatikAya, do lAkha
dvIndriya, do lAkha trIndriya, do lAkha caturindriya, cAra lAkha nArakI, cAra
lAkha devatA, cAra lAkha tiryaJca paMcendriya, caudaha lAkha manuSya, aise cAra
gati meM caurAsI lAkha jIvayoni ke sUkSma-bAdara, paryApta-aparyApta kisI jIva
kA hAlate-cAlate, uThate-baiThate jAnate-ajAnate hanana kiyA ho, karAyA ho,
hanatA prati anumodana kiyA ho, chedA-bhedA ho, kilAmaNA upajAI ho, mana,
vacana, kAyA karake aThAraha lAkha cauvIsa hajAra eka sau vIsa (18,24,120)
prakAre tassa micchA mi dukkddN| vivecana - cAra gati meM jitane bhI saMsArI
jIva haiM, unakI caurAsI lAkha yoniyAM haiM  /  yoni kA artha hai - jIvoM ke
utpanna hone kA sthAna  /  samasta jIvoM ke 84 lAkha prakAra ke utpatti-sthAna
haiM  /  yadyapi sthAna to isase bhI adhika haiM, parantu varNa, gandha, rasa,
sparza aura saMsthAna ke rUpa meM jitane bhI sthAna paraspara samAna hote haiM,
una sabakA milakara eka hI sthAna mAnA jAtA hai| pRthvIkAyika jIvoM ke mUla
bheda 350 haiM  /  pAMca varNa se ukta bhedoM ko guNA karane se 1750 bheda hote
haiM  /  punaH do gandha se guNA karane para 3500, punaH pAMca rasa se guNa
karane para 17500, punaH ATha sparza se guNa karane para 1,40,000, punaH pAMca
saMsthAna se guNA karane para kula sAta lAkha bheda hote haiN| pRthvIkAya ke
samAna hI jalakAya, tejaskAya, vAyukAya ke bhI pratyeka ke mUla bheda 350 haiM
/  unako pAMca varNa Adi se guNA karane se kula dasa lAkha yoniyAM ho jAtI haiM
/  kandamUla kI jAti ke kula bheda 700 haiM , ataH unako pAMca varNa Adi se guNA
karane para kula 14,00,000 yoniyAM hotI haiN| isI prakAra dvIndriya, trIndriya,
caturindriya rUpa vikalatraya ke pratyeka ke mUla bheda 100-100 haiM  /  unako
pAMca varNa Adi se guNA karane para pratyeka kI kula cAra-cAra lAkha yoniyAM
hotI haiM  /  manuSya jAti ke mUla bheda 700 haiM, ataH pAMca varNa Adi se guNA
karane se manuSya kI kula 14,00,000 yoniyAM ho jAtI haiN| 1. jIva tattva ke 563
bhedoM ko abhihayAdi dezoM ke sAtha guNAkAra karane se 5630 bheda hote haiN|
phira inako rAga aura dveSa ke sAtha dviguNa karane se 11260 bheda banate haiN|
phira inhIM ko mana, vacana, kAyA ke sAtha triguNA karane se 33780 bheda ho jAte
haiN| phira tIna karaNoM ke sAtha guNAkAra karane se 101340 bheda bana jAte
haiN| inako tIna kAloM ke sAtha guNAkAra karane se 304020bheda hote haiN| phira
arihaMta, siddha, AcArya, upAdhyAya, guru aura AtmA,isa prakAra chaha se guNA
karane para 1824120 bheda banate haiN| isa prakAra se maiM micchA mi dukkaDaM
detA hU~ aura phira pApakarma na karane kI pratijJA karatA huuN|

Page #177 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[106] [Essential Sutra - Total Number of Souls -  There are twelve lakh souls in
the Earth realm, seven lakh souls in the Hell realm, three lakh souls in the
Fire realm, seven lakh souls in the Air realm, twenty-eight lakh souls in the
Plant realm, seven lakh souls in the two-sense beings, eight lakh souls in the
three-sense beings, nine lakh souls in the four-sense beings, twelve and a half
lakh souls in the aquatic beings, ten lakh souls in the terrestrial beings,
twelve lakh souls in the aerial beings, ten lakh souls in the creeping beings,
nine lakh souls in the crawling beings, twenty-five lakh souls in the hell
realm, twenty-six lakh souls in the god realm, twelve lakh souls in the human
realm. Thus, there are one crore seventy-nine and a half lakh souls in total. If
one denies this, then it is a great sin. Pranipat Sutra -  Salutations to the
Arhats, the Bhagavants. [1] Salutations to the Atigaras, the Tirthankaras, the
Self-Enlightened Ones. [2] Salutations to the Purushottama, the Purush-Soha, the
Purush-Var-Padma, the Purush-Var-Gandha-Hatthi. [3] Salutations to the
Loguttama, the Log-Naha, the Log-Hiya, the Log-Paiva, the Log-Pajjoyaga. [4]
Salutations to the Abhaya-daya, the Chakkhu-daya, the Magga-daya, the Saran-
daya, the Jiva-daya, the Bohi-daya. [5] Salutations to the Dharma-daya, the
Dharma-Desaya, the Dharma-Nayaga, the Dharma-Sara-hi, the Dharma-Var-Chaur-Ant-
Chakkavatti. [6] Salutations to the Di-vo-Tana-Saran-Gai-Paitthana, the Appadhi-
Var-Nana-Dasan-Dhara, the Viyatta-Chhau-Mana. [7] Salutations to the Jinas, the
Javayas, the Tinnas, the Tarayas, the Buddhas, the Bohayas, the Muttas, the
Moyagas. [8] Salutations to all the omniscient ones, all the Arihant, the Siva-
Mayala-Maruya-Mananta-Makkhaya-Mavva-Baha-Mapunara-Vitti-Sidhi-Gai-Namadheyam-
Thana-Sampatta. Salutations to the Jinas, the Jiva-bhaya. Meaning - Salutations
to the Arhat Bhagavants. (How are the Arhat Bhagavants?) The beginning of
Dharma...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 106] [ AvazyakasUtra kula koDI khamAne kA pATha - pRthvIkAya ke bAraha lAkha
kulakoDI, apkAya ke sAta lAkha kulakoDI, tejaskAya ke tIna lAkha kulakoDI,
vAyukAya ke sAta lAkha kulakoDI, vanaspatikAya ke aTThAIsa lAkha kulakoDI,
dvIndriya ke sAta lAkha kulakoDI, trIndriya ke ATha lAkha kulakoDI, caturindriya
ke nava lAkha kulakoDI, jalacara ke sAr3he bAraha lAkha kulakoDI, sthalacara ke
dasa lAkha kulakoDI, khecara ke bAraha lAkha kulakoDI, uraparisarpa ke dasa
lAkha kulakoDI, bhujaparisarpa ke nava lAkha kulakoDI, naraka ke paccIsa lAkha
kulakoDI, devatA ke chabbIsa lAkha kulakoDI, manuSya ke bAraha lAkha kulakoDI,
yoM eka karor3a sAr3he sattAnavai lAkha kulakoDI kI virAdhanA kI ho to devasI
saMbaMdhI tassa micchA mi dukkddN| praNipAta-sUtra - namotthuNaM arihaMtANaM,
bhgvNtaannN||1|| AigarANaM, titthayarANaM, sayaMsaMbuddhANaM  // 2 //
purisuttamANaM, purisa-sohANaM, purisavarapuMDarIyANaM,
purisavaragaMdhahatthINaM  // 3 //  loguttamANaM, loganAhANaM, logahiyANaM,
logapaIvANaM, logpjjoygraannN||4|| abhayadayANaM, cakkhudayANaM, maggadayANaM,
saraNadayANaM, jIvadayANaM, bohidyaannN||5|| dhammadayANaM, dhammadesayANaM,
dhammanAyagANaM, dhammasArahINaM, dhmmvr-caaurNt-ckkvttttiinnN||6|| dIvo tANaM-
saraNa-gaI-paiTThANaM, appaDihaya-varanANa-dasaNadharANaM, viyttttchumaannN||7||
jiNANaM, jAvayANaM, tiNNANaM, tArayANaM, buddhANaM bohayANaM, muttANaM,
moygaannN||8|| savvannUNaM, savvadarisINaM, siva-mayalamaruya-maNaMta-makkhaya-
mavvAbAha-mapuNarAvitti-siddhigainAmadheyaM ThANaM saMpattANaM, namo jiNANaM,
jiybhyaannN|| bhAvArtha - zrI arihanta bhagavantoM ko namaskAra ho| (arihaMta
bhagavAn kaise haiM?) dharma kI Adi

Page #178 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Fourth Study: Pratikramana  [107]  They are the ones who do (good deeds).
They are the ones who establish religious pilgrimages. They are self-enlightened
(without preaching). They are the best among men, they are lions (in their
strength) among men, they are like the pure white lotus among men, they are like
fragrant elephants among men. They are the best in the world, they are the lords
of the world, they are the benefactors of the world, they are the lamps in the
world, they are the ones who illuminate the world.  They are the ones who give
fearlessness, they are the ones who give the eyes of knowledge, they are the
ones who give the path of righteousness, they are the ones who give refuge, they
are the givers of life in the form of restraint, they are the preachers of
righteousness, they are the leaders of righteousness, they are the charioteers-
drivers of righteousness.  They are the best, the wheel-turners of
righteousness, who end the four states of existence. They are the ones who
possess unhindered and supreme knowledge-vision. They are free from karmas like
knowledge-obscuration and other destructive karmas, or from negligence.  They
are the ones who have conquered their own attachment and aversion, they are the
ones who conquer others. They are the ones who have crossed the ocean of the
world themselves, they are the ones who save others. They are the ones who have
attained enlightenment themselves, they are the ones who give enlightenment to
others. They are the ones who are free from karma themselves, they are the ones
who liberate others.  They are omniscient, they are all-seeing, and they are of
the form of auspiciousness and welfare, unshakeable and stable, free from decay
and disease, infinite and endless, inexhaustible and imperishable, free from
obstacles and pain, free from rebirth and return, that is, free from birth and
death. They have attained the place called Siddha-Gati. They are the ones who
have conquered fear, they are the ones who have conquered attachment and
aversion. To such Jina Bhagavants, my salutations.  **Discussion:**  This
passage pays homage to Arihant and Siddha Bhagavants. From time immemorial,
countless Arihants and Siddhas have existed. Therefore, to express their
importance and excellence, the original text uses the plural form. Arihants are
those who destroy the internal enemies like attachment, etc. Siddhas are those
who completely burn away the eight karmas bound to the soul. To attain the same
position as them, and to travel on the same path that they traveled to attain
the supreme position, we pay homage to them to awaken the resolve and ability
within our hearts.  The original text also contains some special adjectives
whose meaning we should pay special attention to. Bhagavants are called
"Abhaydayanam", etc., meaning that Bhagavants are givers of fearlessness, givers
of eyes, givers of the path, givers of enlightenment, etc. However, according to
Jainism, according to Bhagavants themselves, no one can give anyone auspicious
or inauspicious results. The Agamas say, "Atta Katta Vikatta Ya." This means
that a person is the doer, the enjoyer, and the creator of his own karma and
happiness and sorrow. Acharya Amitagati has expressed this same fact in clear
words -

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 caturtha adhyayana : pratikramaNa ] [107 karane vAle haiM  /  dharma tIrtha kI
sthApanA karane vAle haiM, (paropadeza binA) svayaM hI prabuddha hue haiN|
puruSoM meM zreSTha haiM, puruSoM meM siMha (ke samAna parAkramI) haiM, puruSoM
meM zreSTha puNDarIka-zveta kamala ke samAna hai, puruSoM meM zreSTha gandha-
hastI haiM  /  loka meM uttama haiM loka ke nAtha haiM , loka ke hitakartA haiM,
loka meM dIpaka haiM, loka meM udyota karane vAle haiN| abhaya dene vAle haiM ,
jJAna rUpI netra dene vAle haiM, dharmamArga ko dene vAle haiM, zaraNa dene vAle
haiM, saMyama rUpa jIvana ke dAtA haiM, dharma ke upadezaka haiM , dharma ke
netA haiM, dharma ke sArathI-saMcAlaka haiM  /  cAra gati kA anta karane vAle
zreSTha dharma ke cakravartI haiM , apratihata evaM zreSTha jJAna-darzana ko
dhAraNa karane vAle haiM , jJAnAvaraNa Adi ghAtikarmoM se athavA pramAda se
rahita haiN| svayaM rAga-dveSa ko jItane vAle haiM, dUsaroM ko jItAne vAle haiM
, svayaM saMsAra sAgara se tara gaye haiM, dUsaroM ko tArane vAle haiM, svayaM
bodha pA cuke haiM, dUsaroM ko bodha dene vAle haiM, svayaM karma se mukta haiM,
dUsaroM ko mukta karAne vAle haiN| sarvajJa haiM, sarvadarzI haiM, tathA ziva-
kalyANarUpa, acala-sthira, aruja-roga rahita, ananta-aMta rahita, akSaya-kSaya
rahita, avyAbAdha-bAdhA-pIr3A rahita, apunarAvRtti-punarAgamana se rahita arthAt
janma-maraNa se rahita, siddhagati nAmaka sthAna ko prApta kara cuke haiM, bhaya
ko jItane vAle haiM, rAga-dveSa ko jItane vAle haiM - aise jina bhagavantoM ko
merA namaskAra ho| vivecana - prastuta pATha meM arihanta aura siddha bhagavAn
ko namaskAra kiyA gayA hai| anAdi kAla se aba taka ananta arihanta aura siddha
ho cuke haiM , isa kAraNa tathA unakI mahattA - utkRSTatA prakaTa karane ke liye
mUla pATha meM bahuvacana kA prayoga kiyA gayA hai  /  rAgAdi Antarika ripuoM ko
vinaSTa karane vAle arihanta kahalAte haiM aura AtmA ke sAtha baMdhe ATha karmoM
ko samUla bhasma kara dene vAle lokottara mahApuruSa siddha kahe jAte haiN| una
jaisA pada prApta karane evaM jisa prazasta pada para prayANa karake unhoMne
paramottama pada prApta kiyA hai, usI patha para calakara usa pada ko prApta
karane ke liye apane antaHkaraNa meM saMkalpa evaM sAmarthya jAgRta karane ke
liye unheM namaskAra kiyA jAtA hai| mUla pATha meM katipaya vizeSaNa aise bhI
haiM jinakA rahasya hameM vizeSa rUpa se dhyAna meM rakhanA caahiye| bhagavAn ko
'abhayadayANaM' Adi kahA gayA hai, arthAt bhagavAna abhayadAtA haiM , cakSudAtA
haiM, mArga ke dAtA haiM, bodhi ke dAtA haiM , ityaadi| kintu jainadharma ke
anusAra, bhagavAn ke svayaM ke kathanAnusAra koI kisI ko zubha yA azubha phala
pradAna nahIM kara sktaa| Agama meM kahA hai - 'attA kattA vikattA y|' arthAt
puruSa svayaM apane karmoM kA kartA-hartA aura sukha-duHkha kA janaka hai  /
AcArya amitagati ne isI tathya ko spaSTa zabdoM meM vyakta kiyA hai -

Page #179 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 108] [Essential Sutra] The good or bad fruits of actions performed by the
soul in the past are experienced by it. If one receives the fruits of actions
performed by another, then the actions performed by oneself become meaningless.
In other words, the soul receives the good or bad fruits of the actions it
performed in the past. If one receives the fruits of actions performed by
another, then it is clear that the actions performed by oneself become useless.
Further, the same text says: No one gives anything to anyone except the karma
earned by the embodied soul.  Thinking thus, become single-minded, focus on
yourself. Abandon the notion that someone else gives something.  This is the
true soul-doctrine of Jainism, and it awakens the infinite, boundless potential
of the soul. This is the great mantra of not becoming a beggar by showing
weakness before anyone. This is the ultimate perspective. Then why are the
Tirthankaras called the giver of fearlessness, etc.?  The solution to this
question is that there are two types of causes for every action - material and
instrumental. The accomplishment of an action is due to both types of causes,
not just one. Just as clay is essential for making a pot, similarly, the potter,
the wheel, etc., are also essential instrumental causes. According to this rule,
the material cause of one's own liberation - moksha - is the soul itself, and
the instrumental causes are the Tirthankaras, the Dharma Sangha, etc., who
embody the Dharma. From a practical perspective, the instrumental cause is also
called the doer. Therefore, in the present text, the Tirthankaras are called
"givers" from the perspective of practical reality, because they are the
teachers of the path, by following which the soul becomes fearless for all time.
The word "fearlessness" also means "self-control." Since the Tirthankaras are
the teachers of self-control, they are also the givers of fearlessness.
Similarly, one should understand the meaning of the epithets "giver of sight,"
etc.  Meaning of specific words - Bhagavantam - to the Tirthankaras. The word
"Bhag" has six meanings - 1. Aishwarya - wealth, 2. Form, 3. Fame, 4. Beauty, 5.
Dharma, and 6. Effort. Those who possess these six qualities in their entirety
and in the most excellent form are called Tirthankaras.  Aigara Adikara - the
one who does the first action. Dharma, although being the nature of a thing, is
timeless. 1. Aishwaryasya samgrasya rupasya yashasas shriyah. Dharmasya ath
prayatnasya, shannām bhag iti ingana. - Dashavaikalikachurni-Jinadas

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 108] [ AvazyakasUtra svayaM kRtaM karma yadAtmanA purA, phalaM tadIyaM labhate
shubhaashubhm| pareNa dattaM yadi labhate sphuTaM, svayaM kRtaM karma
nirarthakaM tdaa|| arthAt atIta kAla meM AtmA ne svayaM zubha yA azubha karma
kiye haiM, unhIM kA zubha yA azubha phala vaha prApta karatA hai| yadi dUsare ke
dvArA diyA phala milatA ho to spaSTa hai ki apane kiye karma niSphala hoM jAyeM
! Age vahIM kahate haiM - nijArjitaM karma vihAya dehino, na ko'pi kasyApi
dadAti kinycn| vicArayannevamananyamAnaso paro dadAtIti vimuJca shemussiim||
arthAt apane upArjita karmoM ke sivAya koI kisI ko kucha bhI nahIM detaa| aisA
vicAra karake ananyamanaska bano-apanI ora dRSTi lgaao| dUsarA koI kucha detA
hai, isa buddhi kA parityAga kara do| jainadharma kA yaha saccA AtmavAda hai
aura yaha AtmA ke ananta, asIma puruSArtha ko jagAne vAlA hai| yaha kisI ke
samakSa dainya dikhalAkara bhikhArI na banane kA mahAmUlya maMtra hai  /  yahI
pAramArthika dRSTi hai , to phira bhagavAn ko abhaya Adi kA dAtA kyoM kahA gayA
hai ? isa prazna kA samAdhAna yaha hai ki pratyeka kArya ke kAraNa do prakAra ke
hote haiM - upAdAna aura nimitta  /  kArya kI niSpatti donoM prakAra ke kAraNoM
se hotI hai, eka se nhiiN| ghaTa banAne ke liye jaise upAdAna mRttikA Avazyaka
hai, usI prakAra kumbhakAra, cAka Adi nimitta kAraNa bhI anivArya rUpa se
apekSita haiM  /  isa niyama ke anusAra apane utkarSa kA - mokSa kA upAdAna
kAraNa svayaM AtmA hai aura nimitta kAraNa arihanta bhagavAn evaM tatprarUpita
dharma saMgha Adi haiM  /  vyavahAranaya se nimitta kAraNa ko bhI kartA kahA
jAtA hai  /  ata: prastuta pATha meM bhI vyavahAranaya kI dRSTi kI pradhAnatA se
arihanta bhagavAn ko 'dAtA' kahA hai, kyoMki arihanta bhagavAn usa patha ke
upadeSTA haiM, jisakA anusaraNa karane se jIva sadA kAla ke liya abhaya-
bhayayukta banatA hai| 'abhaya' zabda kA artha 'saMyama' bhI hai| bhagavAn
saMyamopadeSTA hone se bhI abhayadAtA haiN| isI prakAra cakSudAtA Adi vizeSaNoM
ke viSaya meM bhI samajha lenA caahiye| viziSTa zabdoM kA artha - bhagavaMtANaM
- bhagavaMtoM ko| bhaga' zabda ke chaha artha haiM - 1. aizvarya - vaibhava, 2.
rUpa, 3. yaza:kIrti, 4. zrI-zobhA, 5. dharma aura 6. prayatna-puruSArtha  / ' ye
chaha vizeSatAe~ jinameM samagra sarvotkRSTa rUpa meM vidyamAna hoM, ve bhagavAn
kahalAte haiN| AigarA Adikara - Adi karane vaale| dharma yadyapi vastu kA
svabhAva hone ke kAraNa anAdi 1. aizvaryasya samagrasya rUpasya yazasaH shriyH|
dharmasyAtha prayatnasya, SaNNAM bhaga itiinggnaa| - dazavaikAlikacUrNi-jinadAsa

Page #180 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Fourth Study: Pratikramana  [109]  Though infinite, the true nature of
Dharma, its boundaries, are distorted in various ages due to the corruption of
conduct like non-violence, penance, and restraint.  Therefore, those who remove
these distortions and establish the true form of Dharma, its boundaries, in
accordance with time, are called Bhagwan Adikar.  **Purisa-Singh:**  Among wild
animals, the lion is considered the most powerful and roams fearlessly.
Similarly, Bhagwan is infinitely powerful and fearless, hence like a lion among
men (Purusha-Singh).  **Purisa-Varga-Gandha-Hasti:**  A Gandha-Hasti is an
elephant whose trunk exudes a fragrant musk. The intense fragrance of this musk
frightens other elephants, causing them to flee. The Gandha-Hasti is also
considered auspicious.  In the presence of Bhagwan, other opponents become meek,
unable to stand their ground, and Bhagwan is also supremely auspicious.
Therefore, Bhagwan is like the best Gandha-Hasti among men.  **Loka-Nath:**  A
Nath is one who grants what is not attained (yoga) and protects what is attained
(kshema).  Bhagwan grants the attainment of auspicious Dharma, which is not yet
attained, and protects it through the teachings of various methods. Bhagwan
teaches Dharma to all beings of the world with equanimity, hence they are the
Nath of the entire world.  **Loka-Pradeep:**  A Loka-Pradeep is an excellent
lamp for the world. A worldly lamp illuminates a limited area, destroying
external darkness. However, Bhagwan is a Pra-deep, a superior lamp, who
eternally removes the darkness of ignorance caused by falsehood, which has been
present in the soul since time immemorial.  A worldly lamp illuminates only
those objects that are visible to the eye, which are small and gross. However,
Bhagwan's Loka-uttar (transcendental) lamp of Kevala-Jnana (perfect knowledge)
illuminates all objects, both subtle and gross, perceivable and imperceptible,
related to all three times (past, present, future).  A worldly lamp cannot show
the complete form of even gross objects, only their shape and form are visible.
However, in Bhagwan's Jnana-Pradeep, every object is reflected with its infinite
qualities and modifications.  A worldly lamp is extinguished due to factors like
depletion of oil, wind speed, etc. However, Bhagwan's Jnana-Pradeep, once
ignited, remains eternally lit. Therefore, Bhagwan is not a lamp, but a Loka-
uttar Deenaka (transcendental illuminator). Bhagwan's knowledge is inseparable
from Bhagwan, and it is the source of light for all worlds. Therefore, Bhagwan
is Loka-Pradeep.  **A-Punara-Avitti:**  Many epithets are used here for the
Siddhi-Gati-Sthan (state of liberation). These epithets are easy to understand.
Moksha is Shiva (free from all kinds of troubles), Achal (stable), Aruj (free
from all kinds of internal and external diseases), Anant (infinite), Akshat
(never diminished), Avya-badh (free from all obstacles), and A-Punara-Avitti
(non-repetitive).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 caturtha adhyayana : pratikramaNa ] [109 ananta hai, tathApi ahiMsA, tapa,
saMyama AdirUpa vyavahAra dharma kI maryAdAoM meM vibhinna yugoM meM jo vikRti A
jAtI hai, use dUra karake dharma ke vAstavika svarUpa ko, usakI maryAdAoM ko
kAla ke anurUpa prasthApita karane ke kAraNa bhagavAn Adikara kahalAte haiN|
purisasIha - puruSasiMha-vanya pazuoM meM siMha sabase adhika parAkramI ginA
jAtA hai aura nirbhaya hokara vicaratA hai  /  isI prakAra bhagavAn ananta
parAkramI aura nirbhaya hone ke kAraNa puruSasiMha-puruSoM meM siMha ke samAna
hai| purisavaragaMdhahatthI - puruSavaragaMdhahastI-gandhahastI vaha kahalAtA
hai jisake gaNDasthala se sugandhita mada jharatA rahatA hai  /  usa mada kI
sugandha kI atizaya ugratA ke kAraNa anya hastI ghabarA jAte haiM-dUra bhAga
jAte haiN| gaMdhahastI mAMgalika bhI mAnA jAtA hai| bhagavAn ke sanmukha jAte hI
anya vAdI nirmada ho jAte haiM , Tika nahIM sakate haiM aura bhagavAn parama
mAMgalika bhI haiM, ataeva puruSoM meM zreSTha gaMdhahastI ke samAna haiN| .
loganAha - lokanAtha-yoga arthAt aprApta padArtha ko prApta karAne vAlA, kSema
arthAt prApta padArtha kI rakSA karane vAlA 'nAtha' kahalAtA hai -
'yogakSemakaro naathH|' bhagavAn aprApta maMgalamaya dharma kI prApti karAne
vAle aura prApta dharma kI vividha vidhiyoM ke upadeza dvArA rakSA karane vAle
haiN| bhagavAn vizva ke samasta prANiyoM ko samabhAva se dharma kA upadeza
karate haiM, ataeva samagra loka ke nAtha haiN| logapaIva - lokapradIpa-loka meM
athavA loka ke liye utkRSTa dIpaka  /  laukika dIpaka parimita kSetra meM bAhya
andhakAra ko vinaSTa karake prakAza karatA hai, parantu bhagavAn pra-dIpa-
prakRSTa dIpa haiM, jo anAdi kAla se AtmA meM rahe hue mithyAtvajanya
ajJAnAndhakAra ko sadA ke liye dUra karate haiN| dIpa-prakAza meM atyalpa aura
sthUla dRSTigocara ho sakane vAle padArtha hI bhAsita hote haiM, kintu bhagavAn
ke kevalajJAna rUpI lokottara pradIpa meM trikAla sambandhI, sUkSma-sthUla,
indriya-gamya, atIndriya, sabhI padArtha pratibhAsita hote haiM  /  dravya-dIpa
meM sthUla padArtha bhI apane sampUrNa rUpa meM dikhAI nahIM dete, kevala unakA
rUpa aura AkAra hI dRSTigocara hotA hai, bhagavAn ke jJAnapradIpa meM pratyeka
padArtha apane ananta-ananta guNa-paryAyoM sameta pratibimbita hotA hai  /
dravya-dIpa tailakSaya, pavana ke vega Adi kAraNoM se bujha jAtA hai, parantu
bhagavAn kA jJAnapradIpa ekabAra prajvalita hokara sadaiva prajjvalita hI rahatA
hai  /  ataeva vaha dIpa nahIM pradIpa-lokottara dInaka haiM  /  bhagavAn kA
jJAna bhagavAn se abhinna hai aura vaha samasta lokoM ke liye prakAza-pradAtA
hai, ataeva bhagavAn lokapradIpa haiM  /  _ apuNarAvitti - apunarAvRtti -
siddhigati-sthAna ke liye aneka vizeSaNoM kA yahAM prayoga kiyA gayA hai| ve
vizeSaNa sugama haiM  /  mokSa ziva arthAt saba prakAra ke upadravoM se rahita
hai, acala - sthira hai, aruja - sabhI prakAra ke bAhyAbhyantara rogoM se rahita
hai, ananta hai - usakA kadApi aMta nahIM hotA, akSata hai, arthAt usameM kabhI
kSati-nyUnatA nahIM AtI, avyAbAdha hai - samasta bAdhaoM se vivarjita hai aura
apunarAvRtti

Page #181 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[110] It means that once one attains liberation, one never has to return from
there. Here it is worth considering why the adjective 'apunaavrtti' (non-return)
was used after using the adjectives 'ananta' (infinite) and 'akshta'
(imperishable)? The solution is that some philosophers believe that when a
liberated soul sees its Tirtha (sacred place) being neglected, it leaves
liberation and returns to the world to protect it. This adjective was used to
show that this belief is wrong. Just as a seed cannot sprout after being burnt,
similarly, a bhavanakur (seed of rebirth) cannot sprout after the karma-bija
(seed of karma) is burnt. The implication is that past karma gives rise to new
karma, once karma is completely destroyed, new karma cannot arise, and in the
absence of karma, rebirth is not possible. In fact, the state of liberation is
eternal and infinite. The word 'apunaavrtti' was used to express this meaning. 1
[ Necessary Sutras The text 'Namotthunan' is read twice - once with the aim of
Arhant Bhagavants and once with the aim of Siddha Bhagavants. When it is read
with the aim of Arhants, it is said 'Thaanampaaviukamaanam'. And when the praise
of Siddha Bhagavants is done, the text 'Thaanamsampattaanam' is said. The
difference in meaning between the two texts is as follows -
'Thaanampaaviukamaanam' means those who aim to attain liberation, those who have
a goal. 'Thaanamsampattaanam' means those who have attained liberation. 00

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 110] hai, arthAt ekabAra siddhi prApta ho jAne para phira kabhI vahAM se vApisa
nahIM lauTanA par3atA  /  yahAM vicAraNIya hai ki ananta aura akSata (akSaya)
vizeSaNoM kA prayoga karane ke pazcAta 'apunarAvRtti' vizeSaNa ke prayoga kI
kyoM AvazyakatA huI ? samAdhAna yaha hai ki katipaya dArzanikoM ki aisI mAnyatA
hai| ki muktAtmA jaba apane tIrtha kI avahelanA hote hue dekhate haiM to usake
rakSaNa ke liye mokSa ko chor3a kara puna: saMsAra meM A jAte haiN| isa mAnyatA
ko bhrAnta batalAne ke liye isa vizeSaNa kA prayoga kiyA gayA hai| jaise bIja ke
dagdha ho jAne para usase aMkura utpanna nahIM hotA, usI prakAra karmabIja ke
bhasma ho jAne para bhavaaMkura utpanna nahIM ho sktaa| tAtparya yaha hai ki
pUrvavartI karma hI navIna karma ko utpanna karatA hai, eka bAra karma kA samUla
nAza ho jAne para navIna karmoM kA udbhava sambhava nahIM hai aura karma ke
abhAva meM punaH saMsAra meM janma honA sambhava nahIM  /  vastutaH mokSa-pada
sAdi aura ananta hai  /  isa Azaya ko vyakta karane ke liye 'apunarAvRtti' pada
kA prayoga kiyA gayA hai| 1 [ AvazyakasUtra 'namotthuNaM' pATha do bAra par3hA
jAtA hai- arihanta bhagavantoM ko lakSya karake aura siddha bhagavantoM ko
lakSya karake  /  jaba arihantoM ko lakSya karake par3hA jAtA hai to 'ThANaM
saMpAviukAmANaM' aisA bolA jAtA hai| aura jaba siddha bhagavantoM kI stuti kI
jAtI hai to 'ThANaM saMpattANaM' aisA pATha bolA jAtA hai| donoM pAThoM ke artha
meM antara isa prakAra hai - 'ThANaM saMpAviukAmANaM' arthAt mukti pada ko
prApta karane kA lakSya rakhane vAle, dhyeya vaale|'tthaannN saMpattANaM' kA
artha hai mukti pada ko jo prApta kara cuke haiN| 00

Page #182 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
1. The rules that make life smooth and lead towards enlightenment are called
**meryaadaayen** (rules) or those **meryaadaayen** that are universal,
beneficial to all beings, and lead to the welfare of oneself and others, can be
called rules or **vrata** (vows). 2. The firm resolve to abandon the faults that
arise in one's life experience is the origin of **vrata**. **The usefulness of
vrata** 3. Two banks are necessary to control the continuous flow of a river,
similarly, **vrata** are necessary to control, limit, and keep life dynamic.
Just as the flow becomes fragmented in the absence of banks, similarly, the life
force of a person without **vrata** becomes fragmented. Therefore, **vrata** are
extremely necessary to focus life force and use it in the right direction. 4. A
kite flying high in the sky thinks, "What need do I have for the string's
restraint? If this string were not there, I could fly freely in the sky." But we
know what happens to the kite when the string breaks. As soon as the string
breaks, the kite's dream of free flight in the sky is shattered and it has to
fall into the dust. Similarly, to keep the kite of life elevated, it is
necessary to remain bound by the string of **vrata**. **Four ways in which
faults occur in vrata** 1. **Atikram** - Desire to break the accepted **vrata**.
2. **Vyatikram** - Being ready to break the accepted **vrata**. 3. **Atichaar**
- Breaking the accepted **vrata** partially. 4. **Anaachaar** - Breaking the
accepted **vrata** completely. It is necessary to protect **vrata** from these
faults, and if a fault occurs by mistake, it should be rectified by
**pratikraman** (atonement). It is from this perspective that the **atichaar**
(partial transgressions) are mentioned here. Remember that this **pratikraman**
text is related to the **vrata** of **shravak** (male lay follower) and
**shravika** (female lay follower).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 1. jIvana ko sughar3a banAne vAlI aura Aloka kI ora le jAne vAlI maryAdAyeM
niyama kahalAtI haiM athavA jo maryAdAeM sArvabhauma haiM, prANimAtra ke liye
hitAvaha haiM aura jina se sva-para kA hitasAdhana hotA hai, unheM niyama yA
vrata kahA jA sakatA hai| 2. apane jIvana ke anubhava meM Ane vAle doSoM ko
tyAgane kA dRr3ha saMkalpa utpanna hotA hai, tabhI vrata kI utpatti hotI hai  /
vratoM kI upayogitA 3. saritA ke satata gatizIla pravAha ko niyaMtrita rakhane
ke liye do kinAre Avazyaka hote haiM, isI prakAra jIvana ko niyaMtrita,
maryAdita aura gatizIla banAye rakhane ke liye vratoM kI AvazyakatA hai| jaise
kinAroM ke abhAva pravAha chinna-bhinna ho jAtA hai, isI prakAra vrata vihIna
manuSya kI jIvana-zakti bhI chinna-bhinna ho jAtI hai| ataeva jIvana zakti ko
kendrita aura yogya dizA meM usakA upayoga karane ke liye vratoM kI atyanta
AvazyakatA hai| 4. AkAza meM U~cA ur3ane vAlA pataMga socatA hai mujhe Dora ke
bandhana kI kyA AvazyakatA hai  /  yaha Dora na ho to maiM svachanda bhAva se
gagana-vihAra kara sakatA huuN| kintu hama jAnate haiM ki Dora TUTa jAne para
pataMga kI kyA dazA hotI hai| Dora TUTate hI pataMga ke unmukta vyomavihAra kA
svapna bhaMga ho jAtA hai aura use dhUla meM milanA par3atA hai| isI prakAra
jIvanarUpI pataMga ko unnata rakhane ke liye vratoM kI Dora ke sAtha baMdhe
rahane kI AvazyakatA hai| cAra prakAra se vratoM meM doSa lagatA 1. atikrama
svIkRta vrata ko bhaMga karane kI icchA honaa| 2. vyatikrama svIkRta vrata ko
bhaMga karane hetu tatpara honA  /  3. aticAra - svIkRta vrata ko ekadeza bhaMga
karanA  /  4. anAcAra svIkRta vrata ko sarvathA bhaMga karanA  /  ina doSoM se
vratoM kI rakSA karanA Avazyaka hai aura pramAdavaza kadAcit doSa laga jAye to
usakA pratikramaNa karake zuddhi kara lenA caahiye| isI dRSTi se yahAM aticAroM
kA pATha diyA gayA hai| smaraNa rahe ki yaha pratikramaNa - pATha zrAvaka-
zrAvikAoM ke vratoM se sambandhita hai  /  - - - - 00

Page #183 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Repentance for the transgressions of the twelve vows: 1. Transgression of
the vow of non-violence  The first Anuvrata - **Thulao Panaivaayaao Veramanam**,
to refrain from harming any living being, whether two-sensed, three-sensed,
four-sensed, or five-sensed, with the intention of harming them, knowing that
they are living beings, except for those who are harmful and criminal, and to
refrain from harming them with the intention of harming them, with the mind,
speech, and body. This is the first **sthula pranatipat veraman** vow, which has
five transgressions that should be known and avoided. These are: **aloou-
bandhe** (binding), **vahe** (hitting with a whip or stick), **chhavi-chheee**
(piercing the skin), **aibhare** (overloading), and **bhat-paan-vichcheh**
(depriving of food and water). These are all **michcha mi dukkad** (bad karma).
**Meaning:** A Shravak has twelve vows, of which five are called Anuvratas and
seven are called Uttargunas. The transgression of these vows in the world is
called **atichaar**. Each vow has five transgressions. Here, the method of
purification for the five transgressions of the vow of non-violence is
described. I will not harm, nor will I cause harm, with my mind, speech, and
body, to any two-sensed, three-sensed, four-sensed, or five-sensed living
beings, except for those who are harmful and criminal, knowing that they are
living beings. If I have bound any living being, beaten them with a whip or
stick, pierced their skin, overloaded them, or deprived them of food and water,
then all these sins will be nullified.  **Implication:** A householder Shravak
renounces the intentional harming of innocent living beings in the vow of non-
violence. He does not renounce the harming of stationary living beings, but he
does renounce the unnecessary harming of them. He also renounces the harming of
criminal living beings, but only the harming of innocent living beings. He
renounces the intentional harming of innocent living beings, even with the
intention of harming them, such as "I will kill this." In agriculture,
construction, and business, innocent living beings are also harmed, but this is
initial violence, not intentional. Therefore, a householder Shravak does not
renounce it. This is why his first vow is called **sthula pranatipat veraman**.
This is accepted with two actions and three yogas.  ## 2. Transgressions of the
vow of refraining from false speech  The second Anuvrata - **Thulao Musavaayaao
Veramanam**, to refrain from speaking big lies, such as **kanaliye**
(deceitful), **govaliye** (deceitful), **bhomaliye** (deceitful), **nasavaharo**
(false promises), **koodsakkhije** (false witness), etc., with the mind, speech,
and body. This is the second **sthula mrishavaad veraman** vow, which has five
transgressions that should be known and avoided. These are: **aloou** (false
accusation), **sahasabbakkhaane** (speaking in front of many),
**rahasabbakkhaane** (speaking in secret), **sadaramantbhee** (speaking with a
deceitful intention), **mosovaese** (deceitful behavior), and **koodlehakarane**
(deceitful action). These are all **michcha mi dukkad** (bad karma).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 bAraha vratoM ke aticAroM kA pratikramaNa 1. ahiMsANuvrata ke aticAra pahalA
aNuvrata - thUlAo pANAivAyAo veramaNaM, trasa jIva beiMdiya, teiMdiya,
cauridiya, paMciMdiya, jAna ke pahacAna ke saMkalpa karake usameM sva sambandhI
zarIra ke bhItara meM pIr3AkArI, sAparAdhI ko chor3akara niraparAdhI ko AkuTTI
(hanane ) kI buddhi se hanane kA paccakkhANa jAvajjIvAe duvihaM tiviheNaM - na
karemi, na kAravemi maNasA, vayasA, kaaysaa| aise pahale sthUla
prANAtipAtaveramaNa vrata ke paMca aiyArA peyAlA jANiyavvA na samAyariyavvA, taM
jahA-te AloU-baMdhe, vahe , chavicchee, aibhAre, bhattapANaviccheha, tassa
micchA mi dukkddN| bhAvArtha - zrAvaka ke vrata bAraha haiM, unameM pAMca
aNuvrata mUla aura sAta uttaraguNa kahalAte haiN| gRhIta vratoM kA dezataH
ullaMghana aticAra kahalAtA hai| pratyeka vrata ke pAMca-pAMca aticAra haiN|
unameM yahAM ahiMsANuvrata ke pAMca aticAroM kI zuddhi kA vidhAna kiyA gayA hai|
maiM sva - sambandhI (apane aura apane sambandhI janoM) ke zarIra meM pIr3AkArI
aparAdhI jIvoM ko chor3a kara dvIndriya, trIndriya, caturindriya aura
paMcendriya trasa jIvoM kI hiMsA saMkalpa karake mana, vacana aura kAyA se na
karUMgA aura na kraauNgaa| maiMne kisI jIva ko yadi bandhana se bAMdhA ho,
cAbuka, lAThI Adi se mArA ho, pITA ho, kisI jIva ke carma kA chedana kiyA ho,
adhika bhAra lAdA ho tathA anna-pAnI kA viccheda kiyA ho to ve saba pApa
niSphala hoN| tAtparya yaha hai ki gRhastha zrAvaka ahiMsANuvrata meM
niraparAdha trasa jIvoM kI saMkalpI hiMsA kA hI tyAga karatA hai  /  vaha
sthAvara jIvoM kI hiMsA kA tyAgI nahIM hotaa| kintu unakI bhI nirarthaka hiMsA
kA tyAga karatA hai  /  trasa jIvoM meM bhI aparAdhI kI hiMsA kA nahIM, kevala
niraparAdha jIvoM kI hiMsA tyAgatA hai aura niraparAdhoM kI bhI saMkalpI hiMsA
kA - 'maiM ise mAra DAlUM' isa prakAra kI buddhi se ghAta karane kA tyAga karatA
hai| kRSi, gRhanirmANa, vyavasAya Adi meM niraparAdha trasa jIvoM kA bhI hanana
hotA hai, tathApi vaha AraMbhI hiMsA hai, saMkalpI nhiiN| ataeva gRhastha
zrAvaka usakA tyAgI nhiiN| isa kAraNa usakA pahalA vrata sthUla
prANAtipAtaviramaNa kahalAtA hai| yaha do karaNa aura tIna yoga se svIkAra kiyA
jAtA hai| 2. mRSAvAdaviramaNavrata ke aticAra dUjA aNuvrata - thUlAo musAvAyAo
veramaNaM, kanAlIe, govAlIe, bhomAlIe, NAsAvahAro ( thApaNamoso), kUDasakkhije (
kUr3I sAkha) ityAdika moTA jhUTha bolane kA paccakkhANa, jAvajIvAe duvihaM
tiviheNaM - na karemi, na kAravemi maNasA, vayasA, kAyasA evaM dUjA sthUla
mRSAvAdaveramaNa vrata ke paMca aiyArA jANiyavvA na samAyariyavvA, taM jahA te
AlouM - sahasabbhakkhANe, rahassabbhakkhANe sadAramantabhee, mosovaese,
kUDalehakaraNe, tassa micchA mi dukkddN|

Page #184 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  [Twelve Vows and Their Transgressions] [113]  **Meaning** I will not speak
or cause others to speak gross lies with my mind, speech, and body throughout my
life. I will not speak falsely regarding the relationship of a bride and groom,
or about cows, buffaloes, and other animals. I will not speak falsely about
someone's entrusted property (such as deposited money), nor will I undervalue it
or give false testimony. If I have falsely defamed someone, falsely accused
individuals during private discussions, revealed the secret thoughts of my wife,
given false advice, or written false documents (such as stamp papers, accounts,
etc.), may all those sins be nullified.  **3. Transgressions of the
*Adattadanaviramananu* Vow**  - **Third Anuvrata - *Thulao Adinnadanao
Veramanam*:** I will not engage in gross *Adattadan* (taking what is not given)
throughout my life, in two or three ways, with my mind, speech, and body. I will
not engage in gross *Adattadan* such as digging a pit, opening a knot, unlocking
a lock, looting while walking on the road, taking a large object found lying
around, etc. I will not engage in *Adattadan* related to relatives, business, or
objects found lying around without any doubt. I condemn these actions. May all
those sins be nullified.  **Meaning** I will not steal anyone's belongings by
digging a pit in their house, breaking a wall, opening a knot, unlocking or
breaking a lock, or looting while walking on the road. I will not take a large
object found lying on the road. I will not engage in gross theft related to
relatives, business, or objects found lying around without any doubt, with my
mind, speech, and body. If I have taken stolen goods, helped a thief, or
suggested ways to steal, gone to an enemy kingdom during war, used false weights
and measures, or shown a good product but given a bad one (adulterated goods), I
condemn these evil deeds. May all those sins be nullified.  **4. Transgressions
of the *Brahmacharyanu* Vow**  - **Fourth Anuvrata - *Thulao Mehunao
Veramanam*:** I will not engage in gross sexual misconduct throughout my life,
in two or three ways, with my mind, speech, and body, related to gods and
goddesses. I will not engage in sexual misconduct with humans and animals in one
way, with my body. This fourth vow is about being content with one's own spouse
and avoiding others' spouses.  1. A man should say "content with my own spouse,"
and a woman should say "content with my own husband."

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 bAraha vratoM ke aticAroM kA pratikramaNa ] [113 bhAvArtha maiM jIvanaparyanta
mana, vacana, kAyA se sthUla jhUTha nahIM bolUMgA aura na bolAUMgA  /  kanyA-
vara ke sambandha meM, gAya, bhaiMsa Adi pazuoM ke viSaya meM kabhI asatya nahIM
boluuNgaa| kisI kI rakhI huI dharohara (sauMpI huI rakama Adi) ke viSaya meM
asatya bhASaNa nahIM karUMgA aura na dharohara ko hInAdhika batAuMgA tathA
jhUThI sAkSI nahIM duuNgaa| yadi maiMne kisI para jhUThA kalaMka lagAyA ho,
ekAMta meM maMtraNA karate hue vyaktiyoM para jhUThA Aropa lagAyA ho, apanI strI
ke gupta vicAra prakAzita kiye hoM, mithyA upadeza diyA ho, jhUThA lekha (sTAmpa
bahI-khAtA Adi) likhA ho to mere ve saba pApa niSphala hoM  /  3.
adattAdAnaviramaNANuvrata ke aticAra - tIjA aNuvrata - thUlAo adiNNAdANAo
veramaNaM khAta khanakara, gAMTha kholakara, tAle para kUMcI lagAkara, mArga meM
calate hue lUTa kara, par3I huI dhaNiyAtI moTI vastu jAnakara lenA, ityAdi moTA
adattAdAna kA paccakkhANa, sage sambandhI vyApAra sambandhI tathA par3I nirbhamI
vastu ke uparAnta adattAdAna kA paccakkhANa jAvajjIvAe duvihaM tiviheNaM na
karemi, na kAravemi maNasA, vayasA, kAyasA evaM tIjA sthUla adattAdAnaveramaNa
vrata ke paMca aiyArA jANiyavvA na samAyariyavvA, taM jahA te AlouM tenAhar3e,
takkarappaoge, viruddharajjAikkame, kUDatullakUDamANe, tappaDirUvagavavahAre
tassa micchA mi dukkaDaM  /  bhAvArtha - maiM kisI ke makAna meM khAta lagAkara
arthAt bhIMta ( khoda kara ) phor3a kara, gAMTha kholakara, tAle para kUMcI lagA
kara athavA tAlA tor3a kara kisI kI vastu ko nahIM lUMgA, mArga meM calate hue
ko nahIM lUTUMgA, kisI kI mArga meM par3I huI moTI vastu ko nahIM lUMgA, ityAdi
rUpa se sage sambandhI, vyApAra sambandhI tathA par3I huI zaMkA rahita vastu ke
uparAnta sthUla corI ko mana-vacana-kAya se na karUMgA aura na karAUMgA  /  yadi
maiMne corI kI vastu lI ho, cora ko sahAyatA dI ho, yA corI karane kA upAya
batalAyA ho, lar3AI ke samaya viruddha rAjya meM AyA gayA hoUM, jhUThA tola va
mApa rakhA ho, athavA uttama vastu dikhAkara kharAba vastu dI ho (vastu meM
milAvaTa kI ho), maiM ina kukRtyoM (bure kAmoM) kI AlocanA karatA hU~  /  ve
mere saba pApa niSphala hoM  /  4. brahmacaryaNuvrata ke aticAra cauthA aNuvrata
- thUlAo mehuNAo veramaNaM sadArasaMtosie' avasesa mehuNavihiM paccakkhAmi
jAvajjIvAe deva devI sambandhI duvihaM tiviheNaM na karemi, na kAravemi maNasA,
vayasA, kAyasA tathA manuSya tiryaJca sambandhI egavihaM egaviheNaM na karemi
kAyasA evaM cauthA sthUla svadArasaMtoSa, paradAravivarjana 1. 'svadArasaMtoSa'
aisA puruSa ko bolanA cAhiye aura strI ko 'svapatisaMtoSa' aisA bolanA caahiye|

Page #185 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 114] [Essential Sutras] The five transgressions of the *Maithuna* (sexual
intercourse) vow within the *Achar* (conduct) are to be known and not to be
committed. These are as follows: -  * Engaging in conversation with a woman who
is already married to another man, or with an unmarried woman, * Engaging in
sexual play with another person, * Attempting to marry another person's wife, *
Having a strong desire for sexual pleasure, * Engaging in sexual intercourse
with a woman who is not one's wife. I condemn these transgressions. May all my
sins be nullified.  **Meaning:** The fourth *Anuvrata* (minor vow) involves
abstaining from gross sexual intercourse. I will be content with my own wife for
life and renounce all other forms of sexual activity. I will not engage in
sexual activity with deities, nor will I encourage others to do so. I will not
engage in sexual activity with humans or animals. If I have engaged in
conversation with a woman who is already married to another man, or with an
unmarried woman, if I have attempted to engage in sexual play with another
person, if I have attempted to marry another person's wife, or if I have had a
strong desire for sexual pleasure, then I condemn these transgressions. May all
my sins be nullified.  ## 5. Transgressions of the *Parigraha* (Possession) vow
The fifth *Anuvrata* - Abstaining from excessive possessions. I will limit my
possessions to the following: * Land and buildings, * Gold and silver, * Wealth
and grain, * Two-legged and four-legged animals, * Metals and their products. I
will not increase my possessions beyond the limits I have set for myself. I will
not increase my possessions in any way, through my mind, speech, or body. The
five transgressions of the *Parigraha* (possession) vow within the *Achar*
(conduct) are to be known and not to be committed. These are as follows: -  *
Exceeding the limit of land and buildings, * Exceeding the limit of gold and
silver, * Exceeding the limit of wealth and grain, * Exceeding the limit of two-
legged and four-legged animals, * Exceeding the limit of metals and their
products. I condemn these transgressions. May all my sins be nullified.  ## 6.
Transgressions of the *Digvrata* (Direction) vow The sixth *Digvrata* - I will
limit my movement to the following directions: * East, * South, * West.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 114] [ AvazyakasUtra rUpa maithunaveramaNavrata ke paMca aiyArA jANiyavvA na
samAyariyavvA, taM jahA te AlouM - ittariya pariggahiyAgamaNe,
apariggahiyAgamaNe, anaMgakrIr3A, paravivAhakaraNe kAmabhogativvAbhilAse, tassa
micchA mi dukkddN| bhAvArtha - cauthe aNuvrata meM sthUla maithuna se viramaNa
kiyA jAtA hai| maiM jIvanaparyanta apanI vivAhitA strI meM hI saMtoSa rakha kara
zeSa saba prakAra ke maithuna-sevana kA tyAga karatA hU~ arthAt deva-devI
sambandhI maithuna kA sevana mana, vacana, kAyA se na karUMgA aura na
kraauuNgaa| manuSya aura tiryaJca sambandhI maithunasevana kAyA se na kruuNgaa|
yadi maiMne itvarikA parigRhItA athavA aparigRhItA se gamana karane ke liye
AlApa-saMlApAdi kiyA ho, prakRti ke viruddha aMgoM se kAmakrIr3A karane kI ceSTA
kI ho, dUsare ke vivAha karane kA udyama kiyA ho, kAmabhoga kI tIvra abhilASA kI
ho to maiM ina duSkRtyoM kI AlocanA karatA huuN| ve mere saba pApa niSphala hoN|
5. parigrahaparimANavrata ke aticAra pAMcavAM aNuvrata - thUlAo pariggahAo
veramaNaM, khettavatthu kA yathAparimANa, hiraNNa-suvaNNa kA yathAparimANa,
dhana-dhAnya kA yathAparimANa, dupaya-cauppaya kA yathAparimANa, kuviya dhAtu kA
yathAparimANa, jo parimANa kiyA hai usake uparAnta apanA karake parigraha
rakhane kA paccakkhANa, jAvajIvAe egavihaM tiviheNaM na karemi maNasA, vayasA,
kAyasA evaM pAMcavAM sthUla parigrahaparimANa vrata ke paMca aiyArA jANiyavvA na
samAyariyavvA, taM jahA te AlouM-khettavatthuppamANAikkame,
hiraNNasuvaNNappamANAikkame, dhaNadhaNNappamANAikkame ,
dupayacauppayappamANAikkame, kuviyappamANAikkame tassa micchA mi dukkddN| .
bhAvArtha - kheta-khulI jagaha, vAstu-mahala-makAna Adi, sonA-cAMdI, dAsa-dAsI,
gAya, hAthI, ghor3A, caupAye Adi, dhana-dhAnya tathA sonA-cAMdI ke sivAya kAMsA,
pItala, tAMbA, lohA Adi dhAtu tathA inase bane huye bartana Adi aura zaiyyA,
Asana, vastra Adi ghara saMbaMdhI vastuoM kA maiMne jo parimANa kiyA hai, isake
uparAnta sampUrNa parigraha kA mana, vacana, kAyA se jIvanaparyanta tyAga karatA
huuN| yadi maiMne kheta, vAstu-mahalamakAna ke parimANa kA ullaMghana kiyA ho,
sonA, cAMdI ke parimANa kA ullaMghana kiyA ho, dhana, dhAnya ke parimANa kA
ullaMghana kiyA ho, dAsa, dAsI Adi dvipada aura hAthI, ghor3A Adi catuSpada kI
saMkhyA ke parimANa kA ullaMghana kiyA ho, (inake atirikta) dUsare dravyoM kI
maryAdA kA ullaMghana kiyA ho to maiM usakI AlocanA karatA hU~ aura cAhatA hU~
ki mere ve saba pApa niSphala hoN| 6. digvrata ke aticAra chaThA dizivrata-
uDaDhadisi kA yathAparimANa, ahodisi kA yathAparimANa,tiriyAdisi kA

Page #186 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
English Translation (preserving Jain terms):  [Pratikramana of the
transgressions of the twelve vows] [Having done the yathaparimaana (as per the
prescribed measure), thereafter, going beyond the body, I renounce the five
asrava (influx of karmic matter) for as long as I live. The sixth [vow], ekaviha
(single-garment vow), triviha (threefold vow) - I shall not do by mind, speech,
and body. And the five aticaras (transgressions) of the sixth dishivrata
(direction vow) are to be known, not to be practiced, that is -
uddhadishippamaanaikkarame (transgression of the upward direction),
ahodishippamaanaikkarame (transgression of the downward direction),
tiryagdishippamaanaikkarame (transgression of the transverse direction),
khittavuddhī (extending the area), saiiantaraddhā (doubt about the limits of the
area), tassa micchā mi dukkadam (may those [transgressions] be false and sinful
for me).  Bhavaartha (meaning) - What I have measured in the upward, downward,
and transverse directions, I will not perform activities like going and coming,
etc. by mind, speech, and body beyond that. If I have transgressed the measure I
have taken of the upward, downward, and transverse directions, have extended the
area, or have doubts about the limits of the area and have proceeded further,
then I confess that. May those [transgressions] be false and sinful for me.  The
transgression of the high, low, and transverse directions is called aticaras
here. The implication is that he is desiring to go beyond the prescribed limits
of the land, but has not gone out yet, then it is an atichara, and when he has
gone out, it is an anachara.  7. Transgressions of the vow of limiting
consumption and use  The seventh vow - In renouncing the use and consumption [of
things], [the transgressions are] - 1. Ullaniavihim (using excessively), 2.
Dantanavihi (using toothbrush), 3. Phalavihi (using fruits), 4. Abbhanganavihi
(using oil for massage), 5. Uvattanavihi (using unguents), 6. Majjanavihi (using
bathing water), 7. Vatthavihim (using clothes), 8. Vilevanavihi (using
perfumes), 9. Pupphavihi (using flowers), 10. Aabaranavihi (using ornaments),
11. Dhuvavihim (using incense), 12. Pejavihi (using beverages), 13. Bhakkhanavi
(using food), 14. Odanavihi (using cooked rice), 15. Supavihi (using curries),
16. Vigayavihi (using sweets), 17. Sagavihi (using salt), 18. Mahuravihim (using
honey), 19. Jiimanavihi (using food), 20. Panoavihi (using drinks), 21.
Mukhavaasamvihi (using mouth fresheners), 22. Vaahanavi (using vehicles), 23.
Uvaahanavihi (using footwear), 24. Sayanavihim (using beds), 25. Sacittavihim
(using living things), 26. Dravyavihim (using substances), etc. - I have done
the yathaparimaana (as per the prescribed measure). Thereafter, I renounce the
use and consumption of things for the purpose of enjoyment, for as long as I
live, in the ekaviha (single-garment vow), triviha (threefold vow) - I shall not
do by mind, speech, and body.  And the two types of upahhoga-paribhoga (use and
consumption) are prescribed - bhojanaao (food) and kammao (activities). The five
aticaras (transgressions) to be known, not to be practiced by the samanopasaka
(Jain ascetic) regarding bhojanaao (food) are - sacittaahare (consuming food
with life), sacittapatibbaddhahare (consuming food connected with life),
appauliosahihhakkhanaiya (consuming food not properly sifted),
duppauliosahihhakkhanaiya (consuming food not properly cleaned),
tucchhisohihhakkhanaiya (consuming food without proper consideration). And the
fifteen kammadaana (occupations) to be known, not to be practiced by the
samanopasaka (Jain ascetic) regarding kammao (activities) are - ingaalakamme
(making charcoal), vanakamme (working in the forest), saadikamme (weaving
cloth), bhaadikamme (making baskets), phodikamme (making pots), dantavaanijje
(trading in ivory), lakkhaavaanijje (trading in lac), rasavaanijje (trading in
juices), kesavaanijje (trading in hair), visavaanijje (trading in poison),
jantapiilanakamme (torturing living beings), nillamcchanakamme (branding),
davaggiidaavanaya (kindling fire), saradahatalaayasosanaya (drying up lakes and
ponds), asaijjanaposanaya (not supporting the needy), tassa micchaa mi dukkadam
(may those [transgressions] be false and sinful for me).  Bhavaartha (meaning) -
I have done the yathaparimaana (as per the prescribed measure) for using towels
and other clothes for wiping the body, using toothbrush, washing hair with amla
and other fruits, massaging with oil, applying unguents, using bathing water,
wearing clothes, using perfumes, using flowers, using ornaments, using incense,
using beverages, using food, using cooked rice, using curries, using sweets,
using salt, using honey, using food, using drinks, using mouth fresheners, using
vehicles, using footwear, using beds, using living things, using substances,
etc. Thereafter, I renounce the use and consumption of things for the purpose of
enjoyment.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 bAraha vratoM ke aticAroM kA pratikramaNa ] [115 yathAparimANa kiyA ho, usake
uparAnta svecchA se kAyA se Age jAkara pAMca Azrava sevana kA paccakkhANa
jAvajjIvAe chaThe egavihaM tiviheNaM - na karemi maNasA, vayasA, kAyasA evaM
chaThe dizivrata ke paMca aiyArA jANiyavvA na samAyariyavvA, taM jahA te AlouM -
uD DhadisippamANAikkame , ahodisippamANAikkame , tiriyAdisippamANAikkame,
khittavuDDhI, saiantaraddhA, tassa micchA mi dukkddN| bhAvArtha - jo maiMne
UrdhvadizA, adhodizA aura tiryadizA kA parimANa kiyA hai, usake Age gamanAgamana
Adi kriyAoM ko mana, vacana, kAyA se na kruuNgaa| yadi maiMne UrdhvadizA,
adhodizA aura tiryadizA kA jo parimANa kiyA hai usakA ullaMghana kiyA ho, kSetra
ko bar3hAyA ho, kSetraparimANa kI sImA meM saMdeha hone para Age calA hoUM to
maiM usakI AlocanA karatA huuN| mere ve saba pApa mithyA hoN| UMcI, nIcI,
tirachI dizAoM ke ullaMghana ko yahAM aticAra kahA hai| isakA tAtparya yaha hai
ki maryAdA kI huI bhUmi se bAhara jAne kI icchA kara rahA hai lekina bAhara gayA
nahIM hai taba taka aticAra hai, bAhara cale jAne para anAcAra hai| 7. upabhoga-
paribhogaparimANavata ke aticAra sAtavAM vrata - uvabhoga - paribhogavihiM
paccakkhAyamANe - 1. ullaNiyAvihi, 2. dantaNavihi, 3. phalavihi, 4.
abbhaMgaNavihi, 5. uvaTTaNavihi, 6. majaNavihi, 7. vatthavihi, 8. vilevaNavihi,
9. pupphavihi, 10. AbharaNavihi, 11. dhUvavihi, 12. pejavihi, 13. bhakkhaNavihi,
14. odaNavihi, 15. sUpavihi, 16. vigayavihi, 17. sAgavihi, 18. mahuravihi, 19.
jImaNavihi, 20. pANoavihi, 21. mukhavAsavihi, 22. vAhaNavihi, 23. uvAhaNavihi,
24. sayaNavihi, 25. sacittavihi, 26. davvavihi, ityAdi kA yathAparimANa kiyA
hai, isake uparAnta uvabhoga-paribhoga vastu ko bhoga nimitta se bhogane kA
paccakkhANa, jAvajjIvAe, egavihaM tiviheNaM na karemi manasA, vayasA, kAyasA
evaM sAtavAM uvabhogaparibhoga duvihe pannatte, taM jahA - bhoyaNAo ya, kammao
y| bhoyaNAo samaNovAsaeNaM paMca aiyArA jANiyavvA na samAyariyavvA, taM jahA te
AlouM - sacittAhAre, sacittapaDibaddhAhAre, appauliosahibhakkhaNayA,
duppauliosahibhakkhaNayA, tucchIso hibhkkhnnyaa| kammao ya NaM samaNovAsaeNa
paNNarasa kammAdANAiM jANiyavvAiM na samAyariyavvAiM,taM jahA te AlouM -
iMgAlakamme, vaNakamme, sADIkamme , bhADIkamme, phoDIkamme, daMtavANije,
lakkhavANije, rasavANije, kesavANije, visavANije, jaMtapIlaNakamme ,
nillaMchaNakamme , davaggidAvaNayA, saradahatalAyasosaNayA, asaIjaNaposaNayA,
tassa micchA mi dukkddN| bhAvArtha - maiMne zarIra poMchane ke aMgoche Adi
vastra kA, dAtauna karane kA, A~valA Adi phala se bAla dhone kA, tela Adi kI
mAliza karane kA, ubaTana karane kA, snAna karane ke jala kA, vastra pahanane
kA,

Page #187 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 116] [Essential Sutra] I renounce the use and consumption of all objects,
except those that have been measured, such as: applying sandalwood paste,
smelling flowers, wearing ornaments, burning incense, drinking milk and other
beverages, eating rice, wheat, etc., lentils, milk products (milk, yogurt, ghee,
jaggery, etc.), vegetables, sweet juices, chewing, drinking water, cardamom,
cloves, etc. (items that make the mouth fragrant), riding horses, elephants,
chariots, etc., wearing shoes, etc., beds, etc., consuming objects with
sentience, and all other remaining objects.  There are two types of use and
consumption: food-related and karma-related (the trades that lead to the
acquisition of food). There are five types of food-related use and consumption
and fifteen types of karma-related use and consumption, making a total of twenty
transgressions of this vow. I criticize them as follows:  If I have consumed: 1.
more than the prescribed amount of objects with sentience, 2. gum, etc.,
attached to sentient trees, etc., 3. uncooked food, 4. half-cooked food, 5.
trivial medicine, and if I have engaged in fifteen karma-related activities,
then I criticize them and wish that all my sins be nullified.  _ Objects used
once, such as food, are counted as consumption, and objects used repeatedly,
such as clothes, are counted as use. The occupations or businesses that lead to
the binding of intense karma are karma-related activities. There are fifteen of
them, and their meaning is as follows:  1. **Angarakarma:** Making charcoal from
wood, working as a blacksmith, potter, goldsmith, cobbler, and brick-maker is
called 'Angarakarma'. 2. **Vanakarma:** Selling unchopped or chopped leaves,
flowers, or fruits of plants, or working as a miller or grinder is called
'Vanajivica'. 3. **Shaktakarma:** Making, getting made, driving, and selling
carts, wagons, or their parts is called 'Shakatjivica'. _ 4. **Bhatakkarma:**
Loading goods on carts, oxen, buffaloes, donkeys, camels, mules, etc., and
earning a living by charging rent for them is called 'Bhatakjivica'. 5.
**Sphotkarma:** Earning a living by digging ponds, wells, stepwells, etc., and
breaking and shaping stones, etc., which are acts of great violence towards the
earth, is called 'Sphotjivica'. 1. Cutting and selling grass and wood from the
forest. 2. Digging up and selling minerals from the earth.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 116] [ AvazyakasUtra candanAdi kA lepana karane kA, puSpa sUMghane kA, AbhUSaNa
pahanane kA, dhUpa jalAne kA, dUdha Adi pIne kA, cAvala gehU~ Adi kA, mUMga Adi
kI dAla kA, vigaya (dUdha, dahI, ghI, gur3a Adi) kA, zAka-bhAjI kA, madhura rasa
kA, jImane kA, pIne ke pAnI kA, ilAyacI-lauMga ityAdi mukha ko sugaMdhita karane
vAlI vastuoM kA, ghor3A, hAthI, ratha Adi savArI kA, jUte Adi pahanane kA,
zayyA-palaMga Adi kA, sacita vastu ke sevana kA tathA inase bace hue bAkI ke
sabhI padArthoM kA jo parimANa kiyA hai, usake sivAya upabhoga tathA paribhoga
meM Ane vAlI vastuoM kA tyAga karatA huuN| upabhoga-paribhoga do prakAra kA hai
- bhojana (bhogya padArtha) sambandhI aura karma (jina vyApAroM se bhogya
padArthoM kI prApti hotI hai una vANijya) smbndhii| bhojana sambandhI upabhoga-
paribhoga ke pAMca aura karma saMbaMdhI upabhoga paribhoga ke pandraha, isa
taraha isa vrata ke kula bIsa aticAra hote haiM  /  ve nimna prakAra haiM, unakI
AlocanA karatA hU~  /  yadi maiMne 1. maryAdA se adhika sacitta vastu kA AhAra
kiyA ho, 2. sacitta vRkSAdi ke sAtha lage hue goMda Adi padArthoM kA AhAra kiyA
ho, 3. agni se binA pakI huI vastu kA bhojana kiyA ho, 4. adhapakI vastu kA
bhojana kiyA ho, 5. tuccha auSadhi kA bhakSaNa kiyA ho tathA pandraha karmAdAna
kA sevana kiyA ho to maiM unakI AlocanA karatA hU~ aura cAhatA hU~ ki merA saba
pApa niSphala ho| _ eka bAra upayoga meM Ane vAlI vastu AhAra Adi kI gaNanA
upabhoga meM aura bAra-bAra kAma meM Ane vAlI vastra Adi vastu paribhoga meM
ginI jAtI hai  /  jinase tIvratara karmoM kA AdAna-grahaNa bandhana hotA hai, ve
vyavasAya yA dhandhe karmAdAna haiN| unakI saMkhyA pandraha hai aura artha isa
prakAra hai - 1. iMgAlakarma - lakar3iyoM ke koyale banAne kA, bhar3abhUje kA,
kuMbhAra kA, lohAra kA, sunAra kA, ThaThere-kasere kA, aura IMTa pakAne kA,
dhandhA karanA 'aMgAra karma' kahalAtA hai| 2. vanakarma - vanaspatiyoM ke
chinna yA achinna pattoM, phUloM yA phaloM ko becanA yA anAja ko dalane yA
pIsane kA dhaMdhA karanA' 'vanajIvikA' hai| 3. zakaTakarma - chakar3A, gAr3I Adi
yA unake pahiyA Adi aMgoM ko banAne, banavAne, calAne tathA becane kA dhaMdhA
karanA 'zakaTajIvikA' hai| _ 4. bhATakakarma - gAr3I, baila, bhaiMsA, gadhA,
UMTa, khaccara Adi para bhAra lAdane kI arthAt inase bhAr3A kirAyA kamAkara
AjIvikA calAnA 'bhATakajIvikA' hai| 5. sphoTakarma - tAlAba, kUpa, bAvar3I Adi
khudavAne aura patthara phor3ane-gar3hane Adi pRthvIkAya kI pracura hiMsA rUpa
karmoM se AjIvikA calAnA 'sphoTajIvikA' hai| 1. vana se ghAsa, lakar3I kATa kara
lAnA aura becnaa| 2. jamIna phor3a kara khanija padArtha nikAlanA, becnaa|

Page #188 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  [Transgressions of the Twelve Vows] [117 6. **Dantvaanijya** - To obtain or
purchase in advance, by going to the place of origin, the teeth of an elephant,
the hair of a cow, the nails of an owl, the bones of a conch, the skin of a lion
or cheetah, the feathers of a swan, and other parts of tormented beings, is
called 'Dantvaanijya'. 7. **Laakshavaanijya** - Lac, menasil, indigo, flowers of
dhataki, bark, etc., and tankan khar, etc., are causes of sin, therefore, their
trade is also a cause of sin. This is called 'Laakshavaanijya' karmadaan. 8-9.
**Ras-Kesh Vaanijya** - Selling butter, fat, honey, and alcohol, etc., is called
'Rasvaanijya', and doing the business of selling bipeds and quadrupeds, i.e.,
animals and birds, etc., is called 'Keshvaanijya'. 10. **Vishvaanijya** -
Trading in poisonous substances, weapons, ploughs, instruments, iron, and
orpiment, etc., which are deadly, is called 'Vishvaanijya'. 11.
**Yantrapeedanakarma** - Grinding sesame, sugarcane, mustard, and castor, etc.,
and operating a well-wheel, etc., doing the business of taking oil in exchange
for sesame, etc., and making a living by making such instruments is called
'Yantrapeedanakarma'. 12. **Nirlanchanakarma** - Piercing the nose of animals,
putting a ring in it, branding, applying a mark, castrating, rubbing the back of
a camel, and piercing the ear and the neck-blanket is called 'Nirlanchanakarma'.
- 13. **Asatiposhanakarma** - Keeping a myna, parrot, cat, dog, rooster, and
peacock, nourishing a maid servant - keeping someone as a slave or maid servant
and keeping immoral women for earning money is called 'Asatiposhanakarma'. -
14-15. **Davdav and Sarshoshanakarma** - Setting fire to the forest out of habit
or considering it virtuous is called 'Davdav', and drying up ponds, rivers, and
lakes, etc., is called 'Sarshoshanakarma'. Note - The above fifteen karmadaans
are for guidance. There are other similar violent businesses that are also to be
avoided by a Shravak. The same should be understood in relation to the
transgressions of other vows. Similar to the five transgressions of each vow,
other transgressions are also to be avoided for the protection of the vow. -
Yogashastra, Third Chapter, 101-113 8. **Anarthadandaviramanavrat's
Transgressions** The eighth Anattaadandaviramanavrat - Chauvvihe Anattaadande
Panatte Tam Jaha Avajjhaanaayarie Pamayaayarie Hinsappaayaane Paavakkammovaese
(in which eight agars come, or, or, or, family

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 bAraha vratoM ke aticAroM kA pratikramaNa ] [117 6. dantavANijya - hAthI ke
dAMta, camarI gAya Adi ke bAla, ulUka Adi ke nAkhUna, zaMkha Adi kI asthi, zera
cItA Adi ke carma aura haMsa Adi ke roma aura anya trasa jIvoM ke aMgoM ko unake
utpatti sthAna meM jA kara lenA yA pezagI dravya de kara kharIdanA
'dantavANijya' kahalAtA hai  /  7. lAkSAvANijya - lAkha, menasila, nIla, dhAtakI
ke phUla, chAla Adi, TaMkaNa khAra Adi pApa ke kAraNa haiM, ata: unakA vyApAra
bhI pApa kA kAraNa hai  /  yaha 'lAkSAvANijya' karmAdAna kahalAtA hai  /  8- 9.
rasa-keza vANijya- makkhana, carbI, madhu aura madya Adi becanA 'rasavANijya'
kahalAtA hai aura dvipada evaM catuSpada arthAt pazu-pakSI Adi kA vikraya karane
kA dhaMdhA karanA 'kezavANijya' kahalAtA hai| 10. viSavANijya viSa, zastra,
hala, yaMtra, lohA aura haratAla Adi prANaghAtaka vastuoM kA vyApAra karanA
'viSavANijya' kahalAtA hai  /  11. yaMtrapIr3anakarma - tila, Ikha, sarasoM,
aura eraMDa Adi ko pIlane kA tathA rahaTa Adi calAne kA dhaMdhA karanA, tilAdi
dekara tela lene kA dhaMdhA karanA aura isa prakAra ke yaMtroM ko banAkara
AjIvikA calAnA 'yaMtrapIr3anakarma' kahalAtA hai  /  12. nirlaMchanakarma -
jAnavaroM kI nAka bIMdhanA natthI karanA, AMkanA - DAma lagAnA, badhiyAkhassI
karanA, UMTa Adi kI pITha gAlanA aura kAna kA tathA gala-kaMbala kA chedana
karanA 'nilachanakarma' kahA gayA hai| - 13. asatIpoSaNakarma mainA, totA,
billI, kuttA, murgA evaM mayUra pAlanA, dAsI kA poSaNa karanA - kisI ko dAsa-
dAsI banAkara rakhanA aura paisA kamAne ke liye duzzIla striyoM ko rakhanA 'asa
poSaNakarma kahalAtA hai  /  - 14-15. davadAva tathA sarazoSaNakarma - Adata ke
vaza hokara yA puNya samajha kara dava- jaMgala meM Aga lagAnA 'duva-dAva'
kahalAtA hai aura tAlAba, nadI, draha Adi ko sukhA denA 'sarazoSaNakarma ' hai
/  TippaNa - ukta paMdraha karmAdAna digdarzana ke liye haiN| inake samAna
vizeSa hiMsAkArI anya vyApAradhaMdhe bhI haiM, jo zrAvaka ke liye tyAjya haiM  /
yahI bAta anyAnya vratoM ke aticAroM ke saMbaMdha meM bhI samajhanI caahiye| eka
- eka vrata ke pAMca-pAMca aticAroM ke samAna anya aticAra bhI vrata rakSA ke
liye tyAjya haiM  /  - yogazAstra, tRtIya pra. 101-113 8.
anarthadaNDaviramaNavrata ke aticAra AThavAM aNaTThAdaNDaviramaNavrata -
cauvvihe aNaTThAdaMDe paNNatte taM jahA avajjhANAyarie pamAyAyariye hiMsappayANe
pAvakammovaese (jisameM ATha AgAra Ae vA, rAe vA, nAe vA, parivAre

Page #189 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Translation:  [118] (I do not commit, nor cause to be committed, any act of
*Anarthadanda* through the mind, speech, or body, in two ways, in three ways,
whether it be through the agency of the necessary, or through the agency of
gods, or through the agency of serpents, or through the agency of Yakshas, or
through the agency of Bhutas, or through the agency of these very things.)  I
hold these as exceptions:  (If I have to resort to *Anarthadanda* for self-
defense, or by the order of the king, or for the sake of my caste, or for the
sake of my family, or for the sake of my relatives, or if I am compelled by
gods, Yakshas, or Bhutas, then I hold these as exceptions.)  Except for these
exceptions, I will not commit, nor cause to be committed, any act of
*Anarthadanda* through the mind, speech, or body, for the rest of my life.  If I
have told stories that arouse lust, or have made others laugh like a clown, or
have imitated others, or have engaged in meaningless chatter, or have collected
weapons of violence like swords, pestles, and mortars without purpose, or have
preached the initiation of violence like building houses, or have accumulated
food, clothing, and other things beyond my own needs and those of my family,
then I criticize myself for these actions and I wish that all my sins may be
nullified. 9.  Transgressions of the *Samayika* Vow  The ninth *Samayika* vow:
I will observe the *Samayika* vow according to the rules I have established, for
as long as I have vowed.  I will not commit, nor cause to be committed, any act
of *Anarthadanda* through the mind, speech, or body.  This is the form of the
vow.  When the occasion for *Samayika* arises, I will perform it, and then I
will purify myself by repentance.  These are the five things that should be
known and avoided in the ninth *Samayika* vow:  (1)  Injury to the mind, (2)
Injury to speech, (3)  Injury to the body, (4)  Not performing the *Samayika*
vow, (5)  Performing the *Samayika* vow without proper understanding.  These are
the things that are wrong and harmful.  Meaning:  I will observe the *Samayika*
vow according to the rules I have established, for as long as I have vowed, by
abandoning the evil tendencies of the mind, speech, and body.  By not allowing
evil thoughts to arise in the mind, by not speaking harsh or sinful words, and
by restraining the actions of the body, peace and tranquility will arise in the
soul.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 118] [ AvazyakasUtra vA, deve vA, nAge vA, jakkhe vA, bhUe vA, ettiehiM AgArehi
aNNattha ) jAvajIvAe duvihaM tiviheNaM na karemi, na kAravemi, maNasA, vayasA,
kAyasA evaM AThavAM aNaTThAdaNDaviramaNavrata ke paMca aiyArA jANiyavvA na
samAyariyavvA taM jahA te AlouM - kaMdappe kukkuie moharie saMjuttAhigaraNe
uvabhogaparibhogAiritte tassa micchA mi dukkddN| bhAvArtha - binA prayojana
doSajanaka hiMsAkArI kArya karanA anarthadaMDa hai  /  isake cAra bheda haiM -
apadhyAna, pramAdacaryA, hiMsAdAna aura pApopadeza  /  iSTa saMyoga va aniSTa
viyoga kI ciMtA karanA, dUsaroM ko hAni pahuMcAne kA vicAra karanA arthAt mana
meM kisI bhI prakAra kA durdhyAna karanA apadhyAna hai  /  asAvadhAnI se kAma
karanA, dhArmika kAryoM ko tyAga kara dUsare kAryoM meM lage rahanA pramAdacaryA
hai  /  dUsaroM ko hala, UkhalamUsala, talavAra-bandUka Adi binA prayojana hiMsA
ke upakaraNa denA hiMsAdAna hai| pApa kAryoM kA dUsaroM ko upadeza denA
pApopadeza hai| maiM ina cAroM prakAra ke anarthadaMDa kA tyAga karatA huuN|
(yadi AtmarakSA ke liye, rAjA kI AjJA se, jAti ke tathA parivAra ke, kuTumba ke
manuSyoM ke liye, yakSa, bhUta Adi devoM ke vazIbhUta ho kara anarthadaMDa kA
sevana karanA par3e to inakA AgAra, apavAda-chUTa, rakhatA huuN| ina AgAroM ke
sivAya) maiM janmaparyaMta anarthadaMDa kA mana, vacana, kAyA se svayaM sevana
nahIM karUMgA aura na kraauNgaa| yadi maiMne kAma jAgrata karane vAlI kathAeM kI
hoM, bhAMDoM kI taraha dUsaroM ko haMsAne ke liye haMsI-dillagI kI ho yA dUsaroM
kI nakala kI ho, nirarthaka bakavAda kiyA ho, talavAra, Ukhala, mUsala Adi
hiMsAkArI hathiyAroM yA aujAroM kA niSprayojana saMgraha kiyA ho, makAna banAne
Adi AraMbha-hiMsA kA upadeza diyA ho, apanI tathA kuTumbiyoM kI AvazyakatAoM ke
sivAya anna, vastra Adi kA saMgraha kiyA ho to maiM usakI AlocanA karatA hU~
aura maiM cAhatA hU~ ki mere saba pApa niSphala hoN| 9. sAmAyikavrata ke aticAra
navavAM sAmAyikavrata - sAvaja jogaM paccakkhAmi jAvaniyamaM pajjuvAsAmi,
duvihaM tiviheNaM na karemi, na kAravemi maNasA, vayasA, kAyasA, aisI uddahaNA
prarUpaNA to hai, sAmAyika kA avasara Ae sAmAyika karUM taba pharasanA karake
zuddha hoU evaM navame sAmAyikavrata ke paMca aiyArA jANiyavvA na samAyariyavvA,
taM jahA te AlouM -maNaduppaNihANe, vayaduppaNihArNa, kAyaduppaNihANe,
sAmAiyassa sai akaraNayA, sAmAiyassa aNavaTThiyassa karaNayA tassa micchA mi
dukkddN| bhAvArtha - maiM mana, vacana, kAyA kI duSTa pravRtti ko tyAga kara
jitane kAla kA niyama kiyA hai, usake anusAra sAmAyikavrata kA pAlana karUMgA
mana meM bure vicAra utpanna nahIM hone se, kaThora yA pApajanaka vacana nahIM
bolane se, kAyA kI halana-calana Adi kriyA ko rokane se AtmA meM jo zAMtisamAdhi
Datpanna

Page #190 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  [The Transgressions of the Twelve Vows] [119] Samayika is the practice of
abstaining from all sinful actions of mind, speech, and body, and not causing
others to do so. If I have had evil thoughts, spoken harsh or sinful words,
moved my body, stretched or contracted my limbs, or performed any other action
in a way that is not in accordance with the principles of Samayika, or if I have
forgotten the time of Samayika, or if I have performed Samayika for a short time
or in an unstable manner, then I confess my transgression. May all my sins be
nullified.   10. Transgressions of the Desavakasika Vrat The tenth Desavakasika
Vrat - From dawn onwards, I will not go beyond the limits of the area that has
been set for the six directions, nor will I send others beyond those limits. I
will not do this with my mind, speech, or body. I will not consume or use
anything beyond the limits of the area that has been set for the use of material
things. I will not do this with my mind, speech, or body.   There are five
transgressions of the Desavakasika Vrat that should be known and avoided. These
are:  - Seeking something from outside the limits. - Sending someone outside the
limits. - Making someone aware of your presence by speaking to them. - Making
someone aware of your presence by showing yourself or your belongings. - Making
someone aware of your presence by throwing stones or other objects.   If I have
committed any of these transgressions, then I confess my transgression. May all
my sins be nullified.   11. Transgressions of the Paushdha Vrat The eleventh
Paushdha Vrat - I will not eat any food that is not permitted, drink any drink
that is not permitted, wear any jewelry or gold that is not permitted, wear any
garlands, perfumes, or cosmetics that are not permitted, or use any tools,
weapons, or other objects that are not permitted. I will not do this with my
mind, speech, or body. I will not do this for the entire day and night. This is
my vow. I will observe the Paushdha Vrat on the occasion of the Paushdha Vrat.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 bAraha vratoM ke aticAroM kA pratikramaNa ] [119 hotI hai, usako sAmAyika
kahate haiM  /  isaliye maiM niyamaparyanta mana, vacana, kAyA se pApajanaka
kriyA na karUMgA aura na dUsaroM se krvaauuNgaa| yadi maiMne sAmAyika ke samaya
meM bure vicAra kie hoM, kaThora vacana yA pApajanaka vacana bole hoM,
ayatanApUrvaka zarIra se calanA-phiranA, hAtha pAMva ko phailAnA-saMkocanA Adi
kriyAe~ kI hoM, sAmAyika karane kA kAla yAda na rakhA ho tathA alpakAla taka yA
anavasthita rUpa se jaise-taise hI sAmAyika kI ho to (tassa micchA mi dukkaDaM)
maiM AlocanA karatA huuN| merA vaha pApa saba niSphala ho| 10. dezAvakAzikavrata
ke aticAra dasavAM dezAvakAzikavrata - dina prati prabhAta se prArambha karake
pUrvAdika chahoM dizA meM jitanI bhUmikA kI maryAdA rakkhI ho, usake uparAnta
Age jAne kA tathA dUsaroM ko bhejane kA paccakkhANa jAva ahorattaM duvihaM
tiviheNaM na karemi, na kAravemi maNasA, vayasA, kaaysaa| jitanI bhUmikA kI
maryAdA rakkhI hai, usameM jo dravyAdika kI maryAdA kI hai, usake uparAnta
upabhoga-paribhoga nimitta se bhogane kA paccakkhANa jAva ahorattaM egavihaM,
tiviheNaM na karemi, maNasA, vayasA, kAyasA evaM dasaveM desAvagAsika vrata ke
paMca aiyArA jANiyavvA na samAyariyavvA, taM jahA te AlouM - ANavaNappaoge,
pesavaNappaoge, saddANuvAe, rUvANuvAe, bahiyA puggalapakkheve, tassa micchA mi
dukkddN| bhAvArtha - chaThe digvrata meM sadA ke liye jo dizAoM kA parimANa kiyA
hai, dezAvakAzika vrata meM usakA pratidina saMkoca kiyA jAtA hai| maiM usa
saMkoca kiye gaye dizAoM ke parimANa se bAhara ke kSetra meM jAne kA tathA
dUsaroM ko bhejane kA tyAga karatA huuN| eka dina aura eka rAta taka parimANa kI
gaI dizAoM se Age mana, vacana, kAyA se na svayaM jAUMgA aura na dUsaroM ko
bhejuuNgaa| maryAdita kSetra meM dravyAdi kA jitanA parimANa kiyA hai, usa
parimANa ke sivAya upabhoga-paribhoga nimitta se bhogane kA tyAga karatA huuN|
mana, vacana, kAyA se maiM unakA sevana nahIM kruuNgaa| dezAvakAzika vrata kI
ArAdhanA meM yadi maiMne maryAdA se bAhara kI koI vastu maMgAI ho, maryAdA se
bAhara ke kSetra meM kisI vastu ko maMgAne ke liye yA lena-dena karane ke liye
kisI ko bhejA ho, maryAdA se bAhara ke kSetra meM rahane vAle manuSya ko zabda
karake apanA jJAna karAyA ho, maryAdA se bAhara ke manuSyoM ko bulAne ke liye
apanA yA padArtha kA rUpa dikhAyA ho yA kaMkara Adi pheMkakara apanA jJAna
karAyA ho to maiM AlocanA karatA huuN| merA vaha saba pApa niSphala ho| 11.
pauSadhavrata ke aticAra _ gyArahavAM paDipuNNapauSadhavata - asaNaM pANaM
khAimaM sAimaM kA paccakkhANa, ababhasevana kA paccakkhANa, amuka maNi-suvarNa
kA paccakkhANa, mAlA-vanaga-vilevaNa kA paccakkhANa, sattha musalAdika sAvaja
joga sevana kA paccakkhANa jAva ahorattaM pajjuvAsAmi duvihaM tiviheNaM na
karemi, na kAravemi maNasA, vayasA, kAyasA, aisI merI saddahaNA prarUpaNA to
hai, pauSadha kA avasare pauSadha karUM

Page #191 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 120] [Essential Sutra] If I become pure by performing the Rasa (fasting) and
know the five Ayara of the eleventh Pratipurna-Paushdhavrat, but do not follow
them, then I criticize myself. These Ayara are: - Appadhilehi-Duppadhilehi
Sejjasantharae (not cleaning the bed) - Appamjjiya-Duppamjjiya Sejjasantharae
(not cleaning the bed) - Appadhilehi-Duppadhilehi Uccarapasaavanabhoomi (not
cleaning the place for urination and defecation) - Appamjjiya-Duppamjjiya
Uccarapasaavanabhoomi (not cleaning the place for urination and defecation) -
Posahassa Samma Ananupalanaya (not following the rules of the fast)
**Meaning:** I vow to abstain from all four types of food - Asan (food), Pan
(drink), Khaim (edible), and Saim (tasty) - for one day and night, for the
Pratipurna-Paushdhavrat. I also vow to abstain from sexual misconduct, wearing
ornaments like gems and gold, wearing garlands, applying powders and sandalwood
paste, using weapons like swords and tools like ploughs and pestles. I will not
engage in these sinful activities with my mind, speech, or body, nor will I make
others do so. This is my vow, but I will become pure only when I follow the fast
properly. If I have not cleaned the bed, the place for urination and defecation,
or if I have not followed the rules of the fast according to the scriptures,
then I criticize myself and wish for my sins to be nullified.  ## 12.
Atithisanvibhagawat's Transgressions The twelfth Atithisanvibhagawat: I vow to
give pure donations of food, drink, edibles, tasty food, clothes, utensils,
blankets, foot-cloths, stools, mats, bedding, medicines, and other things to the
Niggantha ascetics when they come together, and I will become pure by doing so.
If I know the five Ayara of the twelfth Atithisanvibhagawat but do not follow
them, then I criticize myself. These Ayara are: - Sachittnikkhevanaya (placing
an impure object on a pure object) - Sachittpihanaya (covering an impure object
with a pure object) - Kalaikkame (asking for alms before or after the proper
time) - Paravavaese (giving alms to someone else instead of the ascetic) -
Macchariaye (giving alms with envy or jealousy)  **Meaning:** I vow to give pure
donations of food, drink, edibles, tasty food, clothes, utensils, blankets,
foot-cloths, stools, mats, bedding, medicines, and other things to the Niggantha
ascetics when they come together, and I will become pure by doing so. If I have
placed an impure object on a pure object, covered an impure object with a pure
object, asked for alms before or after the proper time, given alms to someone
else instead of the ascetic, or given alms with envy or jealousy, then I
criticize myself and wish for my sins to be nullified.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 120] [ AvazyakasUtra taba pha rasanA karake zuddha hoU evaM gyArahavAM
pratipUrNapauSadhavata kA paMca aiyArA jANiyavvA na samAyariyavvA, taM jahA te
AlouM - appaDilehiya-duppaDilehiya sejjAsaMthArae, appamajjiya-duppamajiya
sejjAsaMthArae, appaDile hiya-duppaDile hiya uccArapAsavaNabhUmi, appamajiya-
duppamajjiya uccArapAsavaNabhUmi, posahassa samma aNaNupAlaNayA, tassa micchA mi
dukkddN| bhAvArtha - maiM pratipUrNa pauSadhavrata ke viSaya meM eka dina evaM
rAta ke liye azana, pAna, khAdya aura svAdya ina cAroM prakAra ke AhAra kA tyAga
karatA huuN| abrahmacarya sevana kA, amuka maNi-suvarNa Adi ke AbhUSaNa pahanane
kA, phUlamAlA pahanane kA cUrNa aura candanAdi ke lepa karane kA, talavAra Adi
zastra aura hala, mUsala Adi aujAroM ke prayoga saMbaMdhI jitane sAvadha vyApAra
haiM , una sabakA tyAga karatA hU~  /  yAvat eka dina-rAta pauSadhavrata kA
pAlana karatA huA maiM ukta pApa kriyAoM ko mana, vacana, kAyA se nahIM karUMgA
aura na anya se karavAUMgA, aisI merI zraddhA-prarUpaNA to hai kintu pauSadha kA
samaya Ane para jaba usakA pAlana karUMgA taba zuddha houuNgaa| pauSadhavrata ke
samaya zayyA ke liye jo kuza, kambala Adi Asana haiM unakA maiMne pratilekhana
aura pramArjana na kiyA ho, mala-mUtra tyAga karane kI bhUmi kA pratilekhana
aura pramArjana na kiyA ho athavA acchI taraha se na kiyA ho tathA samyak
prakAra Agamokta maryAdA ke anusAra pauSadha kA pAlana na kiyA ho to maiM usakI
AlocanA karatA hU~ aura cAhatA hU~ ki merA saba pApa niSphala ho| 12.
atithisaMvibhAgavata ke aticAra bArahavAM atithisaMvibhAgavata - samaNe
niggaMthe phAsuyaesaNijeNaM asaNa-pANa-khAima-sAimavattha-paDiggaha-kaMbala-
pAyapuMchaNeNaM paDihAriya-pIDha-phalaka-sejjA-saMthAraeNaM osaha-bhesajjeNaM
paDilAbhemANe viharAmi, aisI merI sahahaNA prarUpaNA hai, sAdhu-sAdhvI kA yoga
milane para nirdoSa dAna dUM taba zuddha hoUM evaM bArahaveM
atithisaMvibhAgavata ke paMca aiyArA jANiyavvA na samAyariyavvA, taM jahA te
AloU - sacittanikkhevaNayA, sacittapihaNayA, kAlAikkame, paravavaese, mcchriaae|
jo me devasio aiyAro kao tassa micchA mi dukkddN| bhAvArtha - maiM
atithisaMvibhAgavrata kA pAlana karane ke liye nirgrantha sAdhuoM ko acitta,
doSa rahita azana, pAna, khAdya, svAdya AhAra kA , vastra pAtra kambala
pAdapoMchana, caukI, paTTA, saMstAraka auSadhi Adi kA sAdhu-sAdhvI kA yoga
milane para dAna dUM taba zuddha hoUM, aisI merI zraddhA prarUpaNA hai  /  yadi
maiMne sAdhu ke yogya acitta vastu ko sacitta vastu para rakhA ho, acitta vastu
ko sacitta vastu se DhakA ho, bhojana ke samaya se pahale yA pIche sAdhu ko
bhikSA ke liye prArthanA kI ho, dAna dene yogya vastu ko dUsare kI batAkara
sAdhu ko dAna nahIM diyA ho dUsare ko dAna dete IrSyA kI ho, matsarabhAva se
dAna diyA ho, to maiM usakI AlocanA karatA hU~ aura cAhatA hU~ ki merA vaha saba
pApa niSphala ho| 00

Page #192 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[5] **Kayotsarga:** The fifth essential Kayotsarga. This is a technical term
from the Nirgrantha tradition. While the word is formed by combining "kay"
(body) and "utsarga" (release), its meaning is not the release of the body, but
the release of attachment to the body. The root of attachment to all worldly
things is the body. A seeker whose mind is free from attachment to the body
cannot be attached to other seemingly different objects. The seeker on the path
of liberation prays to the Lord:  "May I have the power to separate myself, my
soul, from the body, like a sword from its sheath, by your grace, O Jinendra!" -
Acharya Amitagati  Through such prayers, the seeker one day reaches the state
described in the Agamas:  "A seeker does not consider their body as 'mine'." -
Dasha Vaikalika  Thus, to attain a state beyond the body while still residing in
it is a significant practice. Kayotsarga is performed with this desirable goal
in mind and is considered essential. It is also a form of atonement that
destroys past sins and purifies the practice:  "I perform Kayotsarga to elevate
my restraint, to atone, to purify, to free myself from impurities, and to
completely destroy sinful actions."

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 [5] paJcamAdhyayana : kAyotsarga pAMcavAM Avazyaka kAyotsarga hai  /
nirgrantha-paramparA kA yaha eka pAribhASika zabda hai  /  yoM to 'kAya' aura
'utsarga' zabdoM ke milane se yaha zabda niSpanna huA hai, kintu isakA artha
kAya - zarIra kA utsarga-tyAga karanA nahIM, varan zarIra ke mamatva kA tyAga
karanA hai| samasta jAgatika vastuoM para jo mamatva bhAva utpanna hotA hai,
usakA mUla zarIra hI hai| jisa sAdhaka ke mana meM zarIra ke prati mamatA na
raha jAye, anya pratyakSataH bhinna dikhane vAle padArthoM para usameM mamatA
raha hI nahIM sktii| mukti patha kA pathika sAdhaka prabhu ke samakSa isaliye
yaha prArthanA - kAmanA karatA hai - zarIrataH kartumanantazaktiM,
vibhinnamAtmAnamapAstadoSam  /  jinendra ! koSAdiva khaDgayaSTiM , tava
prasAdena mamAstu shktiH|| - AcArya amitagati arthAt he jinendra! Apake prasAda
se mujhameM aisI zakti AvirbhUta ho jAye ki maiM apane Apako - apane AtmA ko usI
prakAra zarIra se pRthak kara sakU jisa prakAra myAna se talavAra ko pRthak kara
liyA jAtA hai| isa prakAra kI kAmanA karate-karate sAdhaka eka dina usa ucca
sthiti para pahuMca jAtA hai, jisake liye Agama nirdeza karatA hai - _ 'avi
appaNo vi dehami nAyaraMti mmaaiyN|' - dazavaikAlika arthAt apane deha para bhI
sAdhaka kA mamabhAva nahIM rhtaa| isa prakAra deha meM rahate huye bhI dehAtIta
dazA prApta ho jAnA mahattvapUrNa sAdhanA hai| isI ko prApta karane ke liye
spRhaNIya uddezya se kAyotsarga kiyA jAtA hai aura ise AvazyakoM meM parigaNita
kiyA hai  /  yaha eka prakAra kA prAyazcitta bhI hai, jisake dvArA pUrvakRta
pApoM kA vinAza hotA hai aura sAdhanA meM nirmalatA AtI hai - tassa
uttarIkaraNeNaM, pAyacchittakaraNeNaM, visohIkaraNeNaM, visallIkaraNeNaM pAvANaM
kammANaM NigghAyaNaTTAe ThAmi kaaussggN| arthAt saMyama ko adhika ucca banAne ke
liye, prAyazcita karane ke liye, vizuddha karane ke liye, AtmA ko zalyarahita
karane ke liye aura pApa-karmoM kA samUla nAza karane ke liye maiM kAyotsarga
karatA huuN|

Page #193 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 122] [Essential Sutra Meditation.]  Kayotsarga is of two types -
Dravyakayotsarga and Bhavakayotsarga.  Standing still in one place with the Jin-
mudra, abandoning all bodily movements and activities, is Dravyakayotsarga.
Abandoning Artha and Raudra dhyanas and engaging in Dharma and Shukla dhyanas,
letting the flow of auspicious thoughts in the mind, establishing the soul in
its pure original form - this is Bhavakayotsarga.  _ 'So Pun Kaussaggo Davvato
Bhavato Ya Bhavati, Davvato Kayachettan Niroho, Bhavato Kaussaggo - Acharya
Jinadas in Uttaradhyayanasutra has said that Kayotsarga is completely free from
all suffering.  Whether it is Kayotsarga or any other action, it is only
fruitful when done with feeling.  The importance of Kayotsarga that has been
shown above is actually the importance of Kayotsarga done with feeling.
Bhavavihin, mere Dravyakayotsarga is not the cause of self-purification.  To
clarify this fact, an Acharya has mentioned four forms of Kayotsarga, which are
as follows:  1. **Uthit-Uthit:** When the practitioner doing Kayotsarga stands
with both body and feeling, i.e., when he abandons Durdhyana and engages in
Dharma-Shukla dhyana, then he performs Uthit-Uthit Kayotsarga.  This form is
completely desirable. 2. **Uthit-Niviṣṭ:** Standing with the body but not with
feeling, i.e., doing Durdhyana.  This form is undesirable. 3. **Upaviṣṭ-Uthit:**
A weak or very old practitioner may not be able to stand, but he stands with
feeling - he is absorbed in auspicious dhyana, then his Kayotsarga is called
Upaviṣṭ-Uthit.  This form is also desirable. 4. **Upaviṣṭ-Niviṣṭ:** When a
careless practitioner does not stand with either body or feeling, then this is
the form of Kayotsarga.  This is not actually Kayotsarga, but only a pretense of
Kayotsarga.  While performing the fifth essential form of Kayotsarga, although
other texts are also recited, the focus on 'Logass' is the main part.  This will
be clear from the method mentioned elsewhere.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 122] [AvazyakasUtra jhaannN|' kAyotsarga do prakAra kA hai - dravyakAyotsarga
aura bhAvakAyotsarga  /  zArIrika ceSTAoM - vyApAroM kA tyAga karake, jina-mudrA
se eka sthAna para nizcala khar3e rahanA dravyakAyotsarga hai  /  Arta aura
raudra dhyAnoM kA tyAga kara dharmadhyAna evaM zukladhyAna meM nirata honA, mana
meM zubha bhAvanAoM kA pravAha bahAnA, AtmA ko apane zuddha mUla svarUpa meM
pratiSThita karanA - _ 'so puNa kAussaggo davvato bhAvato ya bhavati, davvato
kAyaceTThAniroho, bhAvato kAussago - AcArya jinadAsa uttarAdhyayana meM
kAyotsarga ko samasta duHkhoM se sarvathA mukta karane vAlA kahA gayA hai|
kAyotsarga ho athavA anya koI kriyA, bhAvapUrvaka karane para hI vAstavika
phalaprada hotI hai  /  Upara kAyotsarga kA jo mahattva pradarzita kiyA gayA
hai, vaha vastutaH bhAvapUrvaka kiye jAne vAle kAyotsarga kA hI mahattva hai|
bhAvavihIna mAtra dravyakAyotsarga Atmavizuddhi kA kAraNa nahIM hotaa| isa
tathya ko spaSTa karane ke liye eka AcArya ne kAyotsarga ke cAra rUpoM kA
ullekha kiyA hai, jo isa prakAra haiM - 1. utthita-utthita - kAyotsarga karane
vAlA sAdhaka jaba dravya ke sAtha bhAva se bhI khar3A hotA hai arthAt durdhyAna
se haTa kara jaba dharma-zukladhyAna meM ramaNa karatA hai, taba vaha utthita-
utthita kAyotsarga karatA hai| yaha rUpa sarvathA upAdeya hai| 2. utthita-
niviSTa - dravya se khar3A honA, bhAva se khar3A na honA arthAt durdhyAna krnaa|
yaha rUpa heya hai| 3. upaviSTa-utthita - koI azakta yA ativRddha sAdhaka khar3A
nahIM ho sakatA, kintu bhAva se khar3A hotA hai - zubhadhyAna meM lIna hotA hai,
taba vaha kAyotsarga upaviSTa-utthita kahalAtA hai  /  yaha rUpa bhI upAdeya 4.
upaviSTa-niviSTa - koI pramAdazIla sAdhaka jaba zarIra se bhI khar3A nahIM hotA
aura bhAva se bhI khar3A nahIM hotA taba kAyotsarga kA yaha rUpa hotA hai| yaha
vAstava meM kAyotsarga nahIM, kintu kAyotsarga kA dambha mAtra hai| paMcama
AvazyakarUpa kAyotsarga karate samaya yadyapi anyAnya pAThoM kA bhI uccAraNa
kiyA jAtA hai parantu logassa' kA dhyAna hI isakA pramukha aMga hai  /  anyatra
ullikhita vidhi se yaha saba spaSTa ho jaayegaa| 00

Page #194 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
To take. To do. The ten types of Pratyakhyana are explained, as follows: In the
previous chapters, the destruction of past karma through Pratikramana and
Kayotsarga was explained. In this sixth chapter, the prevention of new binding
karma is explained. Or, in the fifth chapter, the treatment of the Atichar form
of Vrat through Kayotsarga was explained. After the treatment, the attainment of
Gun occurs, therefore, in this Pratyakhyana study called 'Gunadharak', the
concept of the fundamental Gun is explained. To renounce a harmful object with
the witness of a Guru or the self, in order to be free from future sins, is
called Pratyakhyana. Pratyakhyana is a preventive of future sins. It is of ten
types: (1) Anagat - due to any unavoidable reason, to perform penance before the
fixed time. (2) Atikrant - due to unavoidable reasons, to perform penance after
the fixed time. (3) Kotisahita - to perform penance starting and ending with the
same Koti (order of Chaturthabhakta etc.). (4) Niyantri - even if strong reasons
like Vyavritti etc. arise, not to abandon the planned penance. (This
Pratyakhyana can only be performed by Vajrarishbhanaraachasanahananadhari
Anagar). (5) Sakar - in which Utsarga (necessary Annatthanabhog and
Sahasagararup) and Aagars in the form of exceptions are kept, is called Sakar or
Sagar. (6) Anakar - in which Aagars in the form of exceptions are not kept, is
called Anakar. (7) Parimanakrit - in which the quantity of Datti etc. is
specified. (8) Niraveshesh - in which there is complete renunciation of Anadi.
(9) Sanket - in which there is a signal like opening the fist etc., for example,
"As long as I do not open my fist, my Pratyakhyana is valid".

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 lenA  /  karanA  /  dasavihe paccakkhANe paNNatte, taM jahA pichale adhyAyoM
meM pratikramaNa evaM kAyotsarga dvArA pUrvasaJcita karmoM kA kSaya kahA gayA
hai  /  isa chaThe adhyayana meM navIna baMdhane vAle karmoM kA nirodha kahA
jAtA  /  athavA pAMcaveM adhyayana meM kAyotsarga dvArA aticAra rUpa vrata kI
cikitsA kA nirUpaNa kiyA gayA hai| cikitsA ke anantara guNa kI prApti hotI hai,
ata: 'guNadhAraka' nAmaka isa pratyAkhyAna adhyayana meM mUlottara guNa kI
dhAraNA kahate haiM  /  bhaviSya meM lagane vAle pApoM se nivRtta hone ke liye
gurusAkSI yA AtmasAkSI se heya vastu ke tyAga karane ko pratyAkhyAna kahate haiM
/  pratyAkhyAna bhaviSyatkAlika pApoM kA nirodhaka hai| vaha dasa prakAra kA hai
vaiyAvRtya Adi kisI anivArya kAraNa se, niyata samaya se pahale hI tapa kara ( 1
) anAgata aNAgayamaikkaMtaM, koDIsahiyaM niyaMTiyaM ceva  /  sAgAramaNAgAraM,
parimANakaDaM niravasesaM  /  saMkeyaM ceva addhAe, paccakkhANaM bhave dasahA
//  [ 6 ] SaSThAdhyayana : pratyAkhyAna - (2) atikrAnta kAraNavaza niyata samaya
ke bAda tapa karanA  /  (3) koTisahita - jisa koTi (caturthabhakta Adi ke krama)
se tapa prArambha kiyA, usI se samApta - ( 4 ) niyantrita - vaiyAvRtya Adi
prabala kAraNoM ke ho jAne para bhI saMkalpita tapa kA parityAga na krnaa| (yaha
pratyAkhyAna vajraRSabhanArAcasaMhananadhArI anagAra hI kara sakate haiM  / )
(5) sAkAra - jisameM utsarga (avazya rakhane yogya aNNatthaNAbhoga aura
sahasAgArarUpa) tathA apavAda rUpa AgAra rakhe jAte haiM, use sAkAra yA sAgAra
kahate haiM  /  (6) anAkAra jisa tapa meM apavAdarUpa AgAra na rakhe jAyeM, use
anAkAra kahate haiM  /  (7) parimANakRta - jisameM datti Adi kA parimANa kiyA
jAya  /  (8) niravazeSa jisameM anAdi kA sarvathA tyAga ho  /  ( 9 ) saMketa -
jisameM muTThI kholane Adi kA saMketa ho, jaise- "maiM jaba taka muTThI nahIM
kholU~gA taba taka mere pratyAkhyAna hai " ityAdi  /

Page #195 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 124] [Essential Sutra (10) Adhhapratyakhyana - The rejection made with the
duration of time like Muhurta, Paurushi etc. 1. Namaskarasahitasutra Uggaye sure
namokkarasahiyam pacchakkhami cauvviham pi aharam - asanam, panam, khaim, saim.
Annath'anaabhogena, sahasagarenam, vosirami. _Meaning - Upon sunrise, I accept
the rejection with Namaskar - for two ghadi (hours) after sunrise (nokarasi) and
I renounce all four types of food - asanam, panam, khaim, and saim. In this
pratyakhyana, there are two exceptions - anaabhoga - extreme forgetfulness and
sahasagarenam - sudden urgency. Except for these two exceptions, I renounce all
four types of food. Discussion - Namaskarasahita means not consuming food
without reciting Namaskar from sunrise to two ghadi after sunrise, i.e., for the
duration of Muhurta. In common language, it is called 'Navakarasi' (Nokarasi).
Four types of food (1) Asanam - This includes all types of food like roti, rice
etc. (2) Panam - Milk, water, etc., all drinkable things are included in panam.
But according to tradition, only water is consumed here. (3) Khadim - Nuts,
fruits etc. Some Acharyas include sweets in asanam and some in khadim. (4)
Swadim - Cloves, cardamom, betel nut etc. are considered as Swadim for mouth
freshener. In this food, the main focus is on the taste of the mouth, not on the
filling of the stomach. The Sanskrit word 'Aakar' is called 'Aagar' in Prakrit
language. The meaning of Aakar - exception is considered. The meaning of
exception is - if in a particular situation, the renounced item is consumed or
has to be consumed, then the pratyakhyana is not broken. Therefore, it is
necessary to keep the necessary Aagar while accepting the vow. If this is not
done, there is a possibility of breaking the vow - _ 'Akiyate vidhiyate
pratyakhyanabhangaparihararthamitayaakarah' - 'Pratyakhyanam cha
apavadarupaakarasahitam karttavyaam, anyatha tu bhangah syat.' - Acharya
Hemachandra (Yogashastra)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 124] [ AvazyakasUtra (10) addhApratyAkhyAna - muhUrta, pauruSI Adi kAla kI
avadhi ke sAtha kiyA jAne vAlA prtyaakhyaan| 1. namaskArasahitasUtra uggae sUre
namokkArasahiyaM paccakkhAmi cauvvihaM pi AhAraM - asaNaM, pANaM, khAima, sAimaM
/  annattha'NAbhogeNaM, sahasAgAreNaM, vosiraami| _bhAvArtha - sUrya udaya hone
para namaskArasahita - do ghar3I dina caDhe taka kA (nokArasI kA) pratyAkhyAna
grahaNa karatA hU~ aura azana, pAna, khAdima tathA svAdima - ina cAroM hI
prakAra ke AhAra kA tyAga karatA huuN| prastuta pratyAkhyAna meM do AgAra arthAt
apavAda haiM - anAbhoga - atyanta vismRti aura sahasAkArazIghratA (acaank)| ina
do AgAroM ke sivA cAroM AhAra vosirAtA hU~ - tyAga karatA huuN| vivecana -
namaskArasahita arthAt sUryodaya se lekara do ghar3I dina caDhe taka yAni
muhUrta bhara ke liye namaskAra par3he binA AhAra grahaNa nahIM krnaa| sAdhAraNa
bolacAla kI bhASA meM ise 'navakArasI' (nokArasI)kahate haiN| cAra prakAra kA
AhAra (1) azana - isameM roTI, cAvala Adi sabhI prakAra kA bhojana A jAtA hai|
(2) pAna - dUdha, pAnI Adi sabhI pIne yogya cIjeM pAna meM samAviSTa haiN| kintu
paramparA ke anusAra yahAM pAna se kevala jala hI grahaNa kiyA jAtA hai| (3)
khAdima - mevA, phala aadi| kucha AcArya miSThAnna ko azana meM grahaNa karate
haiM aura kucha khAdima meN| (4) svAdima - lauMga, ilAyacI, supArI Adi mukhavAsa
ko svAdima mAnA hai| isa AhAra meM udarapUrti kI dRSTi na hokara mukhyatayA
mukha ke svAda kI dRSTi hotI hai| saMskRta bhASA kA 'AkAra' hI prAkRta bhASA meM
'AgAra' kahalAtA hai| AkAra kA artha - apavAda 'mAnA jAtA hai  /  apavAda kA
artha hai - yadi kisI vizeSa sthiti meM tyAga kI huI vastu sevana kara lI jAye
yA karanA par3a jAya to pratyAkhyAna bhaMga nahIM hotA hai  /  ataeva vrata
aMgIkAra karate samaya Avazyaka AgAra rakhanA caahiye| aisA na karane para vrata
bhaMga kI saMbhAvanA rahatI hai - _ 'Akiyate vidhIyate
pratyAkhyAnabhaMgaparihArArthamityAkAraH' - 'pratyAkhyAnaM ca
apavAdarUpAkArasahitaM karttavyam, anyathA tu bhaMgaH syaat|' - AcArya
hemacandra (yogazAstra)

Page #196 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Sixth Study: Renunciation  **[125]**  This is the case with both the
*Anabhoga* and *Sahasakara* receptacles: as long as one is unaware, the fast is
not broken. However, if one becomes aware but has already taken food into the
mouth and does not spit it out and stop eating, then the fast is broken.
Therefore, it is the duty of the practitioner to stop eating as soon as they
become aware and to spit out everything that is in their mouth with effort. If
they do not do this, the fast is broken.  **2. The Pauraushi Sutra**  I renounce
the *Pauraushi*. From sunrise until one *prahar* after sunrise, I renounce all
four types of food: *ashan*, *pan*, *khadim*, and *swadim*. I renounce it
through *Anabhoga*, *Sahasakara*, *Prachchhannakaal*, *Dishamoh*, *Sadhuvachan*,
and *Sarvasamadhipratyayakara*. Except for these six receptacles, I renounce all
four types of food completely.  **Meaning:** Renouncing the *Pauraushi* means
abstaining from all four types of food from sunrise until one *prahar* after
sunrise.  **Explanation:** The literal meaning of *Pauraushi* is "the shadow of
a man." When one *prahar* has passed after sunrise, the shadow of a man becomes
as long as his body. This meaning is used figuratively to refer to a specific
period of time, one *prahar* after sunrise.  The six receptacles of *Pauraushi*
are:  1. **Anabhoga:** Eating due to forgetfulness or lack of awareness of the
renunciation. 2. **Sahasakara:** Accidentally taking water or something else
into the mouth. 3. **Prachchhannakaal:** Mistakenly believing that the
*Pauraushi* is complete due to the sun being obscured by clouds or a storm. 4.
**Dishamoh:** Mistaking east for west and believing that the *Pauraushi* has not
yet arrived, but then eating due to the sun being high in the sky. 5.
**Sadhuvachan:** Eating based on the word of a trustworthy person who says, "The
*Pauraushi* has arrived," even though it has not. 6.
**Sarvasamadhipratyayakara:** Eating due to being completely absorbed in
meditation and not being aware of the time.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 SaSThAdhyayana : pratyAkhyAna ] [125 anAbhoga aura sahasAkAra donoM hI AgAroM
ke saMbaMdha meM yaha bAta hai ki jaba taka patA na cale, taba taka to vrata
bhaMga nahIM hotaa| parantu patA cala jAne ke bAda bhI mukha meM grAsa le liyA
ho aura use thUke nahIM evaM Age khAnA banda nahIM kare to vrata bhaMga ho jAtA
hai| ataH sAdhaka kA karttavya hai ki jaise hI patA cale, bhojana banda kara de
aura jo kucha mukha meM ho, vaha saba yatanA ke sAtha thUka de| aisA na kare to
vrata bhaMga ho jAtA 2.pauruSIsUtra uggae sUre porisiM paccakkhAmi; cauvvihaM pi
AhAraM - asaNaM, pANaM, khAimaM, sAimaM  /  annattha'NAbhogeNaM, sahasAgAreNaM,
pacchannakAleNaM, disAmoheNaM, sAhuvayaNeNaM, savvasamAhivattiyAgAreNaM,
vosiraami| _ bhAvArtha - pauruSI kA pratyAkhyAna karatA hU~  /  sUryodaya se
lekara azana, pAna, khadima aura svAdima cAroM hI prakAra ke AhAra kA eka
prahara dina car3he taka tyAga karatA huuN| isa vrata ke AgAra chaha haiM -(1)
anAbhoga, (2) sahasAkAra, (3) pracchannakAla, (4) dizAmoha, (5) sAdhuvacana, (6)
sarvasamAdhipratyayAkAra  /  ina chaha AkAroM ke sivAya pUrNatayA cAroM prakAra
ke AhAra kA tyAga karatA huuN| vivecana - sUryodaya se lekara eka prahara dina
car3he taka cAroM prakAra ke AhAra kA tyAga karanA, pauruSI pratyAkhyAna hai|
pauruSI kA zAbdika artha hai - 'puruSa-pramANa chaayaa|' eka prahara dina
car3hane para manuSya kI chAyA ghaTate-ghaTate apane zarIra pramANa lambI raha
jAtI hai  /  isI bhAva ko lekara 'pauruSI' zabda praharaparimita kAla vizeSa ke
artha meM lakSaNA vRtti ke dvArA rur3ha ho gayA hai| pauruSI ke chaha AgAra isa
prakAra haiM - (1) anAbhoga - pratyAkhyAna kI vismRti-upayogazUnyatA ho jAne se
bhojana kara lenaa| (2) sahasAkAra - akasmAt jala Adi kA mukha meM cale jaanaa|
(3) pracchannakAla - bAdala athavA A~dhI Adi ke kAraNa sUrya ke Dhaka jAne se
pauruSI pUrNa ho jAne kI bhrAnti se AhAra kara lenaa| (4) dizAmoha - pUrva ko
pazcima samajhakara pauruSI na Ane para bhI sUrya ke UMcA car3ha Ane kI bhrAnti
se azanAdi sevana kara lenaa| (5) sAdhuvacana - 'pauruSI A gaI' isa prakAra kisI
Apta puruSa ke kahane para binA pauruSI Ae

Page #197 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 126] [ Necessary Sutra This is the observance of Pauraushi. (6)
Sarvasamadhipratyayakara - Taking medicine etc. for the relief of an accidental
pain or other severe illness. Pratchchhannakaal, Dishamoh and Sadhuvachan, the
meaning of these three Aagaras is that if due to delusion, Pauraushi is not
complete, but one eats thinking it is complete, then the fast is not broken. If
one comes to know while eating that Pauraushi is not yet complete, then one
should stop eating at that time. Just like Pauraushi, there is also
Sārdhapauraushi-pratyākhyāna. In this, one has to abstain from food till one and
a half Prahar of the day has passed. Therefore, when one wants to reject the
said Sārdhapauraushi, one should say 'Saddhaporisin' instead of 'Porisin'. 3.
Purvardhasutra Uggaye Sure, Purimadde Pacchakkhami; Chauvviham Pi Aharam-Asanam,
Panam, Khaim, Saim. Annatth'anaabhogena, Sahaasagaarena; Pacchhannakaalena,
Dishaamoha, Saahuvaayane, Mahattaragaare, Savvasamahivattiyaagaare Vosirami.
Meaning - From sunrise till the first half of the day, i.e. till two Prahar, I
abstain from all four types of food - Asana, Pan, Khadim, Swadim. I abstain from
food completely except for these seven Aagaras - Anaabhog, Sahaasakaar,
Pratchchhannakaal, Dishamoh, Sadhuvachan, Mahattarakaar and
Sarvasamadhipratyakaar. Discussion - This is the Sutra of Purvardha-
pratyākhyāna. In this, from sunrise till the first half of the day, i.e. till
two Prahar of the day, one abstains from all four types of food. Seven Aagaras
are considered in this pratyākhyāna. Six are the same Aagaras as mentioned
earlier for Pauraushi, the seventh Aagara is Mahattarakaar. The word 'Mahattar'
in 'Mahattarakaar' has two meanings - Mahattar means a great person, Acharya,
Upadhyaya etc. the head of the Gachchha or Sangh, and also a great purpose or
work with a lot of Nirjara. Accordingly, the meaning is that for the sake of a
great purpose - a purpose with a lot of Nirjara, one should complete the
pratyākhyāna before the stipulated time for the service of a patient etc. or for
any other important work of the Shraman Sangh. Here, the meaning of Mahattar is
- a great purpose that is conducive to Nirjara. As Acharya Siddhasen has written
- 'Mahattaram - Brihattar Nirjaralaabhetu bhootam, purushantara by
pratyākhyānapalanavashal labhya nirjara apekshya,

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 126] [ AvazyakasUtra hI pauruSI kA pAlana kara lenaa| (6)
sarvasamAdhipratyayAkAra - kisI Akasmika zUla Adi tIvra roga kI upazAMti ke liye
auSadhi Adi grahaNa krnaa| pracchannakAla, dizAmoha aura sAdhuvacana, ukta tInoM
AgAroM kA abhiprAya yaha hai ki bhrAMti ke kAraNa pauruSI pUrNa na hone para bhI
pUrNa samajha kara bhojana karale to vrata bhaMga nahIM hotA hai| yadi bhojana
karate samaya yaha mAlUma ho jAe ki abhI pauruSI pUrNa nahIM huI hai to usI
samaya bhojana karanA chor3a denA caahiye| pauruSI ke samAna hI sArdhapauruSI-
pratyAkhyAna bhI hotA hai  /  isameM Der3ha prahara dina car3he taka AhAra kA
tyAga karanA hotA hai| ataH jaba ukta sArdhapauruSI kA pratyAkhyAna karanA ho
taba 'porisiM' ke sthAna para 'saDDhaporisiM' pATha bolanA caahiye| 3.
pUrvArdhasUtra uggae sUre, purimaDDe paccakkhAmi; cauvvihaM pi AhAraM-asaNaM,
pANaM, khAima, saaimN| annattha'NAbhogeNaM, sahasAgAreNaM; pacchannakAleNaM,
disAmohaNaM, sAhuvayaNeNaM, mahattarAgAreNaM, savvasamAhivattiyAgAreNaM
vosiraami| bhAvArtha - sUryodaya se le kara dina ke pUrvArdha taka arthAt do
prahara taka cAroM prakAra ke AhAraazana, pAna, khAdima, svAdima kA pratyAkhyAna
karatA huuN| anAbhoga, sahasAkAra, pracchannakAla, dizAmoha, sAdhuvacana,
mahattarAkAra aura sarvasamAdhipratyAkAra, ina sAta AgAroM ke sivAya pUrNatayA
AhAra kA tyAga karatA huuN| vivecana - yaha pUrvArdha-pratyAkhyAna kA sUtra hai|
isameM sUryodaya se lekara dina ke pUrva bhAga taka arthAt do prahara dina
car3he taka cAroM taraha ke AhAroM kA tyAga kiyA jAtA hai| prastuta pratyAkhyAna
meM sAta AgAra mAne gaye haiM  /  chaha to pUrvokta pauruSI ke hI AgAra haiM ,
sAtavAM AgAra mahattarAkAra hai  /  'mahattarAkAra' meM 'mahattara' zabda kA
artha do prakAra se kiyA gayA hai - mahattara arthAt apekSAkRta mahAna puruSa
AcArya, upAdhyAya Adi gaccha yA saMgha ke pramukha tathA apekSAkRta mahAna
nirjarA vAlA koI prayojana yA kArya, tadanusAra artha hai ki mahAna - apekSAkRta
adhika nirjarA ko dhyAna meM rakha kara rogI Adi kI sevA ke liye yA
zramaNasaMgha ke kisI anya mahattvapUrNa kArya ke liye nizcita samaya se pahale
pratyAkhyAna pAra lenaa| yahAM mahattara kA artha hai - mahAn nirjarA-sAdhaka
prayojana  /  yathA AcArya siddhasena ne likhA hai - 'mahattaraM -
pratyAkhyAnapAlanavazAllabhyanirjarApekSayA bRhattaranirjarAlAbhahetubhUtaM,
puruSAntareNa

Page #198 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Sixth Study: Renunciation  [127]  It is impossible to fulfill the purpose of
a sick monk's service or a purpose related to the Sangha, which is a greater
cause than the renunciation itself. This is the greater cause - the exception to
renunciation.  **Meaning:** The renunciation itself leads to a certain level of
depletion. However, a greater depletion arises from a purpose that cannot be
fulfilled by anyone else, such as the service of a sick monk or a purpose
related to the Sangha. In such a situation, if food is consumed before the
prescribed time, the vow is not broken. According to this meaning, the vow-taker
can consume this food based on their own discretion, even without the order of
the Acharya or others.  However, Acharya Nami writes in the Pratikramana Sutra
Vritti:  "The greater cause is what is done with the permission of the Acharya
or other great ones, who are very great. For example, if a virtuous person has
renounced food, and then a purpose arises related to the family, the gana, or
the Sangha, which cannot be fulfilled by anyone else, and if the person is
appointed by the Acharya or other great ones for this purpose, then if they are
able to fulfill the purpose while adhering to the renunciation, they should do
so. If they cannot fulfill the purpose while adhering to the renunciation, then
they should eat according to the order of the greater cause. In this situation,
the renunciation is not broken."  **Meaning:** Those who are very great are
called Acharya or other great ones. What is done with their permission and
within the limits is called the greater cause. For example, if a sadhu has
renounced food, and then a purpose arises related to the family, the gana, or
the Sangha, which cannot be fulfilled by anyone else, then if they are able to
fulfill the purpose while adhering to the renunciation, they should do so. If
they cannot fulfill the purpose while adhering to the renunciation, then they
should eat. In this situation, the renunciation is not broken. According to this
meaning, the Acharya or other great ones are the "greater" ones. This food can
be consumed only with their permission.  Just like the renunciation of the first
half of the day, there is also the renunciation of the second half of the day.
The renunciation of the second half of the day means not consuming food until
three praharas have passed. When observing the renunciation of the second half
of the day, the word "avaddham" should be recited instead of "purimaddham". The
rest of the recitation is the same for both renunciations.  4. The One-Seat
Sutra  I accept the one-seat penance. Therefore, I renounce all three types of
food: asana, khadim, and svadim.  The eight causes of this vow are:  * Food *
Desire for food * Desire for delicious food * Eating and distributing food *
Serving a guru * Food for the sake of hospitality * The greater cause * Food for
the sake of all beings

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 SaSThAdhyayana : pratyAkhyAna ] [127 sAdhayitumazakyaM glAnacaityasaMghAdi-
prayojanaM, tadeva AkAraH - pratyAkhyAnApavAdo mhttraakaarH|' _ arthAt -
pratyAkhyAna ke pAlana se jitanI nirjarA hotI hai, usase bhI mahAn nirjarA kA
kAraNa evaM kisI anya puruSa se jo na ho sakatA ho, aisA koI rugNamuni kI sevA
yA saMgha saMbaMdhI koI prayojana upasthita ho jAnA mahattarAkAra hai| aisI
sthiti meM yadi samaya se pUrva AhAra grahaNa kara liyA jAye to vrata bhaMga
nahIM hotaa| isa artha ke anusAra AcAryAdi ke Adeza ke binA bhI vratadhArI apane
viveka se hI isa AgAra kA sevana kara sakatA hai| kintu AcArya nami
pratikramaNa-sUtra vRtti meM likhate haiM - "atizayena mahAn mahattara
AcAryAdistasya vacanena maryAdayA karaNaM mahattarAkAro, yathA kenAdi sAdhunA
bhaktaM pratyAkhyAtaM , tatazca kula-gaNa-saMghAdi-
prayojanamananyasAdhyamutpannaM, tatra cAsau mahattarerAcAryAdyairniyuktaH,
tatazca yadi zaknoti tathaiva kartuM tadA karoti; atha na, tadA
mahattarakAdezena bhuJAnasya na bhaMga iti|" _ tAtparya yaha hai - jo bahuta
mahAn hoM, ve AcAryAdi mahattara kahalAte haiN| unake Adeza se maryAdApUrvaka jo
kiyA jAe vaha mahattarAgAra kahalAtA hai| yathA - kisI sAdhu ne AhAra kA tyAga
kiyaa| usake pazcAt kula, gaNa yA saMgha Adi kA koI kArya A par3A aura vaha
kArya bhI aisA ki dUsare ke dvArA ho nahIM sktaa| aisI sthiti meM yadi
pratyAkhyAna kA pAlana karatA huA usa kArya ko kara sake to kare  /  yadi
pratyAkhyAna ke sAtha vaha kArya sampanna na kara sake to AhAra kara le| isa
avasthA meM pratyAkhyAna bhaMga nahIM hotA  /  isa artha ke anusAra AcAryAdi
mahAn puruSa 'mahattara' haiM  /  unake Adeza se hI yaha AgAra sevana kiyA jA
sakatA hai| pUrvArdha-pratyAkhyAna ke samAna hI apArdha-pratyAkhyAna bhI hotA
hai  /  apArdha-pratyAkhyAna kA artha hai - tIna prahara dina car3he taka AhAra
grahaNa na krnaa| apArdha-pratyAkhyAna grahaNa karate samaya 'purimaDDhaM' ke
sthAna meM 'avaDDhaM' pATha bolanA caahiye| zeSa pATha donoM pratyAkhyAnoM kA
samAna hai| 4. ekAsanasUtra egAsaNaM paccakkhami tivihaM pi AhAraM asaNaM,
khAimaM, sAimaM  /  annattha'NAbhogeNaM, sahasAgAreNaM, sAgAriyAgAreNaM,
AuMTaNa-pasAraNeNaM, guru-abbhuTThANeNaM, pAriTThAvaNiyAgAreNaM,
mahattarAgAreNaM, savvasamAhivattiyAgAreNaM vosiraami| bhAvArtha - maiM ekAzana
tapa svIkAra karatA huuN| phalataH azana, khAdima aura svAdima - ina tInoM
prakAra ke AhAroM kA pratyAkhyAna karatA huuN| isa vrata ke AgAra ATha haiM ,
yathA -

Page #199 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[128] [Essential Sutra] (1) Anabhoga, (2) Sahasagar, (3) Sagarikaakar, (4)
Akunchana-Prasaran, (5) Gurvabhyuththan, (6) Parishthapanikaakar, (7)
Mahattarakaar, (8) Sarvasamadhipratyayakaar. I renounce food except for these
eight Agars. Discussion - Eating once a day is called Ekashan tapa. Ekashan
means - ek + ashan, i.e. eating once. Rejection is the same for both
householders and monks. However, householders should keep in mind that they
should only consume uncooked food and water in Ekashan. Monks, on the other
hand, renounce uncooked food for life. A Shravak should not recite the
Pariṭṭhāvaṇiāgareṇaṁ' text while reciting the original text. While eating in
Ekashan and Dwikashan, all four types of food can be taken at will, but after
eating, food is renounced for the rest of the time. If one wants to do Trivihar
Ekashan, then water can be drunk for the rest of the time. If one wants to do
Chaurivihar, then even water cannot be drunk. If one wants to do Duvihar, then
water and mouth freshener can be taken after eating. Nowadays, Trivihar Ekashan
is the prevalent practice, hence the text 'Triviham' is given in the original
text. If one wants to do Chaurivihar, then one should recite the text
'Chauriviham pi aharam asanam, panam, khaim, saim'. The tradition of Duvihar-
Ekashan was prevalent in ancient times. In today's age, its practice is very
rare, although it is not completely absent. There are eight Agars in Ekashan.
Four have already been mentioned, the remaining four are as follows: 1.
Sagarikaakar - In the language of the Agamas, a Sagarik is a householder. It is
forbidden to eat in front of a householder. Therefore, if a monk has to stop
eating and go to a secluded place to eat again after a Sagarik arrives, the fast
is not broken. 1. 'Egashan' is a Prakrit word, which has two Sanskrit
translations - 'Ekashan' and 'Ekasana'. (1) 'Ekashan' means - eating once. (2)
'Ekasana' means - eating from one seat. Both meanings are acceptable in
'Egashan'. Ekansakṛt ashanam-bhojanam ekam vā āsanam-putācalanato yatra
pratyākhyāne tadekāśanam ekāsanam vā, prākṛte dvayor api egāśanam iti rūpam. -
Acharya Haribhadra explains in the Pravachanasaroḍdhāravṛtti that eating once
and not getting up again. 'Ekāśanam nāma sadu-paviṣṭa patācalanena bhojanam.' -
Aavashyakavṛtti

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 128] [ AvazyakasUtra (1) anAbhoga, (2) sahasAgAra, (3) sAgArikAkAra, (4)
AkuJcana-prasAraNa, (5) gurvabhyutthAna, (6) pAriSThApanikAkAra, (7)
mahattarAkAra, (8) srvsmaadhiprtyyaakaar| ukta ATha AgAroM ke sivA AhAra kA
tyAga karatA huuN| vivecana - dina meM eka bAra bhojana karanA, ekAzana tapa
kahalAtA hai| ekAzana kA artha hai - eka+ azana,' arthAt eka bAra bhojana krnaa|
pratyAkhyAna, gRhastha tathA sAdhu donoM ke liye samAna hI hai| phira bhI
gRhastha ko dhyAna rahe ki vaha ekAzana meM acitta arthAt prAsuka AhAra-pAnI hI
grahaNa kre| sAdhu ko to yAvajjIvana ke liye aprAsuka AhAra kA tyAga hI hai  /
zrAvaka ko mUla pATha bolate samaya pAriTThAvaNiyAgareNaM' pATha nahIM bolanA
caahiye| ekAzana aura dvikAzana meM bhojana karate samaya to yatheccha cAroM
AhAra liye jA sakate haiM, parantu bhojana ke bAda zeSakAla meM bhojana kA tyAga
hotA hai| yadi ekAzana tivihAra karanA ho to zeSakAla meM pAnI piyA jA sakatA
hai| yadi cauvihAra karanA ho to pAnI bhI nahIM piyA jA sktaa| yadi duvihAra
karanA ho to bhojana ke bAda pAnI tathA svAdima - mukhavAsa liyA jA sakatA hai
/  Aja kala tivihAra ekAzana kI prathA hI pracalita hai, ataeva mUla pATha meM
'tivihaM' pATha diyA hai  /  yadi cauvihAra karanA ho to 'cauvihaM pi AhAraM
asaNaM, pANaM, khAimaM, sAimaM' aisA pATha bolanA caahiye| duvihAra-ekAzana kI
paramparA prAcIna kAla meM thii| Aja ke yuga meM isakA pracalana bahuta kama
hai, yadyapi sarvathA kA abhAva nahIM hai| ekAzana meM ATha AgAra hote haiM  /
cAra pahale A cuke haiM, zeSa cAra isa prakAra haiM - 1. sAgArikAkAra - Agama kI
bhASA meM sAgArika gRhastha ko kahate haiM  /  gRhastha ke A jAne para usake
sammukha bhojana karanA niSiddha hai| ataH sAgArika ke Ane para sAdhu ko bhojana
karanA chor3a kara yadi bIca meM hI uTha kara, ekAnta meM jA kara punaH dUsarI
bAra bhojana karanA par3e to vrata bhaMga nahIM hotA hai| 1. 'egAsaNa' prAkRta-
zabda hai, jisake saMskRta rUpAntara do hote haiM - 'ekAzana' aura 'ekaasn'| (1)
'ekAzana' kA artha hai - eka bAra bhojana krnaa| (2) 'ekAsana' kA artha hai -
eka Asana se bhojana krnaa| 'egAsaNa' meM donoM hI artha grAhya haiN| ekaMsakRt
azanaM-bhojana ekaMvA AsanaM-putAcalanato yatra pratyAkhyAne tadekAzanamekAsanaM
vA, prAkRte dvayorapi egAsaNamiti ruupm|' - pravacanasAroddhAravRtti AcArya
haribhadra ekAsana kI vyAkhyA karate haiM ki eka bAra baiTha kara phira na
uThate hue bhojana krnaa| 'ekAzanaM nAma sadupaviSTa patAcAlanena bhojnm|' -
AvazyakavRtti

Page #200 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Sixth Study: Refutation  [129]  2. **Akunchanaprasaran:**  Contracting or
expanding limbs like hands and feet when feeling numb while eating.  3.
**Gurvabhyuththan:**  Rising and standing up to show respect to a teacher or a
special guest upon their arrival.  The meaning of this section is very
important. When a teacher or guest arrives, one should definitely stand up. At
that time, one should not have the delusion that "There is no rule to stand up
from one's seat. Therefore, I will be guilty of breaking my vow if I stand up."
There is no fault in standing up for teachers, it does not break the vow, but
rather it is the worship of the virtue of humility. Acharya Siddhasen writes:
"Because it is necessary to rise for teachers, one should definitely stand up
even while eating. There is no breaking of the vow in this." -
Pravachansaroaddharavritti 4.  **Paristthapanikakar:**  It is a rule for Jain
monks to take only a limited amount of food to satisfy their essential hunger,
not more. However, if by mistake a monk has more food than necessary and needs
to discard some, then the monk should accept the food with the permission of the
Gurudev.  Acharya Siddhasen has said: "There is a possibility of many faults in
discarding food, and there is merit and benefit in accepting and consuming it
according to the scriptural law. Therefore, accepting it again with the
permission of the Guru does not break the vow."  5. **Egaththanapacchakkhan:**
"I accept the vow of Ekashan, Egaththan, Pacchakkham. I refuse all three types
of food: Asan, Khadim, and Saim."  (1) Anabhog, (2) Sahasakar, (3) Sagarikakar,
(4) Gurvabhyuththan, (5) Paristthapanikakar, 1. Pravachansaroaddharavritti. 2.
If one wants to renounce all four types of food, then one should say "Chauvviham
pi".

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 SaSThAdhyayana : pratyAkhyAna ] [129 2. AkuJcanaprasAraNa - bhojana karate
samaya sunna par3a jAne para hAtha, paira Adi aMgoM kA sikor3anA yA phailaanaa|
3. gurvabhyutthAna - gurujana evaM kisI atithi vizeSa ke Ane para unakA vinaya-
satkAra karane ke liye uThanA, khar3e honaa| prastuta AgAra kA Azaya bar3A hI
mahattvapUrNa hai  /  gurujana evaM atithijana ke Ane para avazya hI uTha kara
khar3A ho jAnA caahiye| usa samaya yaha bhrAnti nahIM rakhanI cAhiye ki 'ekAsana
meM uTha kara khar3e hone kA vidhAna nahI hai  /  ataH uThane yA khar3e hone se
vrata bhaMga ke kAraNa mujhe doSa lgegaa|' gurujanoM ke liye uThane meM koI doSa
nahIM hai, isase vrata bhaMga nahIM hotA, pratyuta vinaya tapa kI ArAdhanA hotI
hai| AcArya siddhasena likhate 'guruNAmabhyutthAnArhatvAdavazyaM
bhuJjAnenA'pyutthAnaM karttavyamiti, na tatra prtyaakhyaanbhnggH|' _ -
pravacanasAroddhAravRtti 4. pAriSThApanikAkAra - jaina muni ke liye vidhAna hai
ki yaha apanI Avazyaka kSudhApUrti ke liye parimita mAtrA meM hI AhAra lAye,
adhika nhiiN| tathApi kabhI bhrAMtivaza yadi kisI muni ke pAsa AhAra adhika A
jAye aura vaha paraThanA - DAlanA par3e to AhAra ko gurudeva kI AjJA se tapasvI
muni ko grahaNa kara lenA caahiye| AcArya siddhasena ne kahA hai - AhAra ko
paraTha dene meM bahuta doSoM kI sambhAvanA rahatI hai aura use grahaNa-bhakSaNa
kara lene meM Agamika nyAya ke anusAra guNa-lAbha hai, ataeva guru kI AjJA se
punaH usakA upabhoga kara lene se vrata-bhaMga nahIM hotaa| 5.
egaTThANapaccakkhANa ekkAsaNaM egaTThANaM paccakkhAmi, tivihaM' pi AhAraM -
asaNaM, khAimaM, sAimaM  /  annattha'NAbhogeNaM, sahasAgAreNaM, sAgAriyAgAreNaM,
guruabbhuTThANeNaM, pAriTThAvaNiyAgAreNaM, mahattarAgAreNaM,
savvasamAhivattiyAgAreNaM vosiraami| bhAvArtha - ekAzana rUpa ekasthAna vrata ko
grahaNa karatA huuN| azana, khAdima aura svAdima tInoM prakAra ke AhAra kA
pratyAkhyAna karatA huuN| (1) anAbhoga, (2) sahasAkAra, (3) sAgArikAkAra, (4)
gurvabhyutthAna, (5) pAriSThApanikAkAra, 1. prvcnsaaroddhaarvRtti| 2. cAroM
prakAra ke AhAra kA tyAga karanA ho to 'cauvvihaM pi' aisA pATha bolanA caahiye|

Page #201 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 130] [Necessary Sutra (6) Mahattarakar, (7) Sarvasamadhipratyayakara. Except
for the aforementioned seven Aagaras, I completely renounce food.]
**Discussion:** This is a Sutra of Ekasthan. The word 'Sthan' within Ekasthan
refers to 'position'. Therefore, the implied meaning of Ekasthan is - 'Without
moving any other limbs except the right hand and mouth, eating only once a day
in the same posture. That is, the posture, the arrangement of limbs, and the
posture that is present at the beginning of the meal should be maintained until
the end of the meal.'  Acharya Jinadas has defined Ekasthan in the same way in
the Aavashyakachurni - 'Jatha anguvangam thaviyam taheva samuddisitavvam, aagare
se aountanasaranam natthi, sesa satta taheva.'  All other methods of Ekasthan
are similar to Ekashan. Only the Aagara of contraction and expansion of hands,
feet, etc. is not present. Therefore, 'aountanasaranenam' is not mentioned in
the present Sutra.  6. Aachaml-Ayambilpratyakhyanasutra _ I accept the Ayambil
tapa. I renounce food except for the eight Aakaras, namely Anaabhog, Sahasakar,
Lepalepa, Utkshiptvivek, Grihasthasanssrusht, Parishthapanikakar, Mahattarakar,
and Sarvasamadhipratyayakara._  **Meaning:** Ayambil means Aachaml tapa. I
accept the Aachaml tapa. I renounce food except for the eight Aakaras, namely
Anaabhog, Sahasakar, Lepalepa, Utkshiptvivek, Grihasthasanssrusht,
Parishthapanikakar, Mahattarakar, and Sarvasamadhipratyayakara.  **Discussion:**
In the Aachaml Vrat, only one dry, bland, and unadulterated meal is taken in a
day. Milk, curd, ghee, oil, jaggery, sugar, cooked food, etc., any kind of sweet
food cannot be taken in the Aachaml Vrat. In ancient Aacharyagranths, there is a
provision for performing Aachaml only by one of rice, black gram, or sattu.
Ayambil is more important than Ekashan and Ekasthan. In Ekashan and Ekasthan,
one can eat delicious food in one meal, but in Ayambil, only bland food like
boiled black gram, etc., without salt, is taken in one meal. The meaning is that
Aachaml tapa is a great ideal for conquering the desire for taste. Restraint of
the tongue is a great restraint.  Ayambil is performed as Chaturvidhahar and
Trividhahar according to the wish of the Sadhak. If one wants to perform
Chaturvidhahar, one should say, 'Chauvviham pi aharam asanam, panam, khaim,
saim' and in Trividhahar, one should not say 'panam'.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 130] [ AvazyakasUtra (6) mahattarAkAra, (7) sarvasamAdhipratyayAkAra  /  ukta
sAta AgAroM ke sivA pUrNatayA AhAra kA tyAga karatA vivecana - yaha ekasthAna kA
sUtra hai  /  ekasthAnAntargata 'sthAna' zabda 'sthiti' kA vAcaka hai  /  ataH
eka sthAna kA phalitArtha hai - 'dAhine hAtha evaM mukha ke atirikta zeSa saba
aMgoM ko hilAye binA, dina meM eka hI Asana aura eka hI bAra bhojana krnaa|
arthAt bhojana prArambha karate samaya jo sthiti, jo aMgavinyAsa ho, jo Asana
ho, usI sthiti, aMgavinyAsa evaM Asana se bhojana kI samApti taka baiThe rahanA
caahiye|' AcArya jinadAsa ne AvazyakacUrNi meM eka sthAna kI yahI paribhASA kI
hai - 'ekaTThANe jaM jathA aMguvaMgaM ThaviyaM taheva samuddisitavvaM, AgAre se
AuMTaNapasAraNaM natthi, sesA satta thev|' ekasthAna kI anya vidhi saba
'ekAzana' ke samAna hai| kevala hAtha, paira Adi ke AkuJcanaprasAraNa kA AgAra
nahIM rhtaa| isaliye prastuta sUtra meM 'AuMTaNapasAraNeNaM' kA uccAraNa nahIM
kiyA jAtA hai| 6. AcAmla-AyaMbilapratyAkhyAnasUtra _ AyaMbilaM paccakkhAmi,
annattha'NAbhogeNaM, sahasAgAreNaM, levAleveNaM, ukkhittavivegeNaM,
gihisaMsaTTeNaM, pAriTThAvaNiyAgAreNaM, mahattarAgAreNaM,
savvasamAhivattiyAgAreNaM vosiraami| bhAvArtha - AyaMbila arthAt AcAmla tapa
grahaNa karatA huuN| anAbhoga, sahasAkAra, lepAlepa, utkSiptaviveka,
gRhasthasaMsRSTa, pAriSThApanikAkAra, mahattarAkAra, sarvasamAdhipratyayAkAra -
ukta ATha AkAra arthAt apavAdoM ke atirikta anAcAmla AhAra kA tyAga karatA huuN|
vivecana - AcAmla vrata meM dina meM eka bAra rUkSa, nIrasa evaM vikRti-rahita
AhAra hI grahaNa kiyA jAtA hai , dUdha, dahI, ghI, tela, gur3a, zakkara,
pakvAnna Adi kisI bhI prakAra kA svAdu bhojana, AcAmlavrata meM grahaNa nahIM
kiyA jA sktaa| prAcIna AcAragranthoM meM cAvala, ur3ada athavA sattU Adi meM se
kisI eka ke dvArA hI AcAmla karane kA vidhAna hai| ekAzana aura ekasthAna kI
apekSA AyaMbila kA mahattva adhika hai| ekAzana aura ekasthAna meM to eka bAra
ke bhojana meM yatheccha sarasa AhAra bhI grahaNa kiyA jA sakatA hai parantu
AyaMbila ke eka bAra ke bhojana meM to kevala ubale hue ur3ada ke bAkale Adi
lavaNa rahita, nIrasa AhAra hI grahaNa kiyA jAtA hai| bhAvArtha yaha hai ki
AcAmla tapa meM rasalolupatA para vijaya prApta karane kA mahAn Adarza hai|
jihvendriya kA saMyama, eka bahuta bar3A saMyama hai| AyaMbila hI sAdhaka kI
icchAnusAra caturvidhAhAra evaM trividhAhAra kiyA jAtA hai| caturvidhAhAra
karanA ho to, 'cauvvihaM pi AhAraM asaNaM, pANaM, khAima, sAimaM' bolanA cAhiye
aura trividha meM pANaM nahIM bolanA caahiye|

Page #202 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Sixth Study: Rejection  [131]  Eight Agars (exceptions) are mentioned in the
Ayambil. Five of these Agars are the same as the previous rejections, while the
three new Agars are as follows:  1. **Lepalepa:** If a vessel or hand is
contaminated with ghee or other impurities, and the householder wipes it clean
and offers food that is fit for Achaml, then there is no breach of the vow if it
is accepted. _The word 'Lepalepa' is formed from 'Lep' and 'Alep'. 'Lep' means
to be contaminated with ghee, etc. 'Alep' means to wipe it clean and remove the
contamination. Even after wiping, some residue of the impurity remains.
Therefore, the Agar of Lepalepa is included in Achaml. 'Lepasch Alepasch
Lepalepaṁ Tasmadanyatra, Bhajane Vikṛtyādyavayavasadbhave'pi Na-bhanga
Ityarthaḥ.'_ - Pravachanasaroḍdhāravṛtti 2.  2. **Utkṣipta-Viveka:** If dry rice
or bread, etc., has been previously contaminated with jaggery or sugar, etc.,
and a Muni observing the Achaml vow is offered that food, it can be accepted.
'Utkṣipta' means to lift, and 'Viveka' means to remove - not to leave it behind
after lifting.  3. **Gṛhasthasamsṛṣṭa:** Taking Kulmāṣa, etc., that has been
touched by ghee or oil, etc., is the Agar of Gṛhasthasamsṛṣṭa. In this Agar, it
is important to note that if the amount of impurity is small, then there is no
breach of the vow, but if the impurity is in large quantities, then accepting it
becomes a cause for breach of the vow.  Some Acharyas believe that the four
Agars of Lepalepa, Utkṣipta-Viveka, Gṛhasthasamsṛṣṭa, and Pariṣṭhāpanikāgāra are
only for Sadhus, not for householders.  7. **Abhaktārtha-Upvāsa Sutra:**  Uggaye
Sūre, Abhatṭhaṁ Paccakkhāmi, Cauvvihaṁ Pi Āhāra-Asanaṁ, Pāṇaṁ, Khāimaṁ, Sāimaṁ.
Annattha'ṇābhōgeṇaṁ, Sahasāgāreṇaṁ, Pāriṭṭhāvaṇiāgāreṇaṁ, Mahattarāgāreṇaṁ,
Savvasamāhivattiāgāreṇaṁ Vōsirāmi.  Meaning: From sunrise, I observe the
Abhaktārtha-Upvāsa, therefore I renounce all four types of food: Asana, Pāna,
Khādima, and Svadima. _I renounce all types of food except for the five Agars of
Anābhōga, Sahasākāra, Pāriṣṭhāpanikākāra, Mahattarākāra, and
Sarvasamādhipratyayākāra._

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 SaSThAdhyayana : pratyAkhyAna ] [131 AyaMbila meM ATha AgAra mAne gaye haiM  /
ATha meM se pAMca AgAra to pUrva pratyAkhyAnoM ke samAna hI haiM, navIna tIna
AgAra isa prakAra haiM - 1. lepAlepa - AcAmla meM grahaNa na karane yogya zAka
tathA ghRta Adi vikRti se yadi pAtra athavA hAtha Adi lipta hoM aura dAtA
gRhastha yadi use poMchakara unake dvArA AcAmla-yogya bhojana baharAye to
grahaNa kara lene para vrata bhaMga nahIM hotA hai| _'lepAlepa' zabda'lepa' aura
'alepa' milakara banA hai| lepa kA artha ghRtAdi se pahale lipta honA hai| alepa
kA artha hai bAda meM usako poMchakara alipta kara denaa| poMcha dene para bhI
vikati kA kacha aMza lipta rahatA hI hai  /  ataH AcAmla meM lepAlepa kA AgAra
rakhA jAtA hai| 'lepazca alepazca lepAlepaM tasmAdanyatra, bhAjane
vikRtyAdyavayavasadbhAve'pi na-bhaMGga ityrthH|' _ - pravacanasAroddhAravRtti 2.
utkSipta-viveka - zuSka odana evaM roTI Adi para gur3a tathA zakkara Adi adrava-
sUkhI vikRti pahale se rakhI ho, AcAmlavratadhArI muni ko koI vaha vikRti
uThAkara roTI Adi denA cAhe to grahaNa kI jA sakatI hai  /  utkSipta kA artha
uThAnA hai aura viveka kA artha hai - haTAnA - uThAne ke bAda usakA na lagA
rhnaa| 3. gRhasthasaMsRSTa - ghRta athavA tela Adi vikRti se choMke huye kulmASa
Adi lenA gRhasthasaMsRSTa AgAra hai| ukta AgAra meM yaha dhyAna rakhane kI bAta
hai ki yadi vikRti kA aMza svalpa ho, taba to vrata bhaMga nahIM hotA parantu
vikRti yadi adhika mAtrA meM ho to vaha grahaNa kara lene se vrata bhaMga kA
nimitta banatI hai| kucha AcAryoM kI mAnyatA hai ki lepAlepa, utkSipta-viveka,
gRhasthasaMsRSTa aura pAriSThApanikAgAra - ye cAra AgAra sAdhu ke liye hI haiM ,
gRhastha ke liye nhiiN| 7. abhaktArtha-upavAsasUtra uggae sUre, abhattaTheM
paccakkhAmi, cauvvihaM pi AhAra-asaNaM, pANaM, khAima, saaimN|
annattha'NAbhogeNaM, sahasAgAreNaM, pAriTThAvaNiyAgAreNaM, mahattarAgAreNaM,
savvasamAhivattiyAgAreNaM vosiraami| bhAvArtha - sUryodaya se lekara
abhaktArtha-upavAsa grahaNa karatA hU~, phalataH azana, pAna, khAdima, svAdima
cAroM hI prakAra ke AhAra kA tyAga karatA huuN| _ anAbhoga, sahasAkAra,
pAriSThApanikAkAra, mahattarAkAra, srvsmaadhiprtyyaakaar| ukta pAMca AgAroM ke
sivAya saba prakAra ke AhAra kA tyAga karatA huuN|

Page #203 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 132] **Essential Sutra**  **Explanation - Meaning of Abhakta -** The meaning
of "bhakta" is food. The meaning of "artha" is "purpose". The meaning of "a" is
"not". Combining all three, the meaning is - the purpose of "bhakta" is not
present in the vow, that is, fasting. "There is no rejection of food in which
vow, that is fasting." - Shraddhapratikramanavritti, by Devendra  Fasting is of
two types: Chauvvihahar and Trivihahar.    **Chauvvihahar Abhattatha** is when
one abstains from all four types of food from sunrise to sunrise the next day.
**Trivihahar** (Trividhahar) fasting allows for the consumption of water.
Therefore, the six water-related categories in the original text should be
expanded after "Savvasamahivattiyaagarenam" as follows:  "Paanass Levaadeṇ Va,
Alevaadeṇ Va, Acchheṇ Va, Bahaleṇ Va, Sasittheṇ Va, Asittheṇ Va Vosirami."
These six categories have been mentioned by almost all ancient Acharyas,
including Jinadasamhattar, Haribhadra, and Siddhasena. This rule applies not
only to fasting but also to other renunciations where Trividhahar is to be
observed. Although Acharya Jinadasa, etc., have mentioned this only in the
context of Abhakta.  The meaning of these water-related categories is as
follows:  1. **Lepkrit:** Water from lentils, dates, tamarind, etc., and any
water that is thick enough to coat a vessel. This type of water can be consumed
during Trividhahar.  2. **Alekpkrit:** Water from buttermilk, etc., that is
clear and water from kanji, etc. One should use Alepkrit water for washing that
does not leave a coating on the vessel.  3. **Acch:** Acch means clean. Only
heated water is considered Acch. However, Acharya Siddhasena, the author of the
Pravachansaroaddhar Vritti, mentions hot water, etc. "Apichchalaat
Ushnodakaadeh." But Acharya Shri has not clarified what other water is
acceptable besides hot water. It is possible that clean water used for washing
fruits, etc., is acceptable. A Gujarati commentator has also written this.  4.
**Bahal:** Smooth paste from sesame seeds, rice, and barley, etc., is called
Bahal. Some Acharyas also use the word Bahulep in place of Bahal.  5.
**Sasikth:** Water used for washing hands and vessels that are coated with
flour, etc., and contains particles of flour, etc. This type of water does not
break the fast during Trividhahar.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 132] [ AvazyakasUtra vivecana - abhaktArtha - bhakta kA artha bhojana hai|
'artha' kA artha 'prayojana' hai| 'a' kA artha 'nahIM' hai| tInoM milAkara artha
hotA hai - bhakta kA prayojana nahIM hai jisa vrata meM vaha, arthAt upvaas| 'na
vidyate bhaktAoM yasmin pratyAkhyAne so'bhaktArthaH sa upvaasH|' -
zrAddhapratikramaNavRtti, devendrakRta cauvihAhAra aura tivihAhAra ke rUpa meM
upavAsa do prakAra kA hotA hai  /  sUryodaya se lekara dUsare dina sUryodaya
taka cAroM prakAra ke AhAroM kA tyAga karanA 'cauvvihAhAra abhattaTTha' kahalAtA
hai| tivihAhAra arthAt trividhAhAra upavAsa meM pAnI liyA jAtA hai  /  ata: jala
saMbaMdhI chaha AgAra mUla pATha meM 'savvasamAhivattiyAgAreNaM' ke Age isa
prakAra bar3hA kara bolanA cAhiye - 'pANassa levADeNa vA, alevADeNa vA, accheNa
vA, bahaleNa vA , sasittheNa vA, asittheNa vA vosiraami|' ukta chaha AgAroM kA
ullekha jinadAsamahattara, haribhadra aura siddhasena Adi prAyaH sabhI prAcIna
AcAryoM ne kiyA hai| kevala upavAsa meM hI nahIM anya pratyAkhyAnoM meM hI jahA~
trividhAhAra karanA ho, sarvatra uparyukta pATha bolane kA vidhAna hai  /
yadyapi AcArya jinadAsa Adi ne isakA ullekha abhaktArtha ke prasaMga para hI
kiyA hai| ukta jala saMbaMdhI AgAroM kA bhAvArtha isa prakAra hai - 1. lepakRta
- dAla Adi kA mAMDa tathA imalI, khajUra, drAkSA Adi kA paanii| vaha saba pAnI
jo pAtra meM upalepakAraka ho, lepakRta kahalAtA hai  /  trividhAhAra meM isa
prakAra kA pAnI grahaNa kiyA jA sakatA hai| 2. alepakRta - chAcha Adi kA nitharA
huA aura kAMjI Adi kA pAnI alepakRta kahalAtA hai| alepakRta pAnI se vaha
dhovana lenA cAhiye, jisakA pAtra meM lepa na lagatA ho| 3. accha - accha kA
artha svaccha hai  /  garama kiyA huA pAnI hI accha zabda se grAhya hai  /  hA~,
pravacanasAroddhAra kI vRtti ke racayitA AcArya siddhasena uSNodakAdi kA kathana
karate haiN| 'apicchalAt ussnnodkaadeH|' parantu AcArya zrI ne spaSTIkaraNa
nahIM kiyA ki 'Adi' zabda se uSNa jala ke atirikta aura kaunasA jala grAhya hai?
sambhava hai phala Adi kA svaccha dhovana grAhya ho  /  eka gujarAtI arthakAra
ne aisA likhA bhI hai| 4. bahala - tila, cAMvala aura jau Adi kA cikanA mAMDa
bahala kahalAtA hai  /  bahala ke sthAna para kucha AcArya bahulepa zabda kA bhI
prayoga karate haiN| 5. sasiktha - 'ATA Adi se lipta hAtha tathA pAtra Adi kA
vaha dhovana jisameM siktha arthAt ATe Adi ke kaNa bhI hoN| isa prakAra kA jala
trividhAhAra upavAsa meM lene se vrata bhaMga nahIM hotaa|

Page #204 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Sixth Study: Renunciation  [133]  6. **Asiktha** - The washing of hands and
vessels, etc., soiled with flour, etc., which is strained, so that it does not
contain particles of flour, etc.  Pandit Sukhlalji says - If one wishes to
observe a **Chauvvihahar** fast from the beginning, then one should say
"**Paritthavanniagarenam**". If one has taken **Trividhahar** at the beginning,
but wishes to observe a **Chauvvihahar** fast in the evening due to not taking
water, then one should not say "**Paritthavanniagarenam**".  8.
**Divascharimsutra**  I renounce **Divascharim** (or **Bhavacarim**) and all
four types of food - **Asan**, **Pan**, **Khaim**, and **Saim**. I renounce food
except for **Anabhoga**, **Sahasagar**, **Mahattaragar**, and
**Savvasamahivattiagar**.  **Meaning** - I am taking the vow of **Divascharim**
(or **Bhavacarim**), therefore I renounce all four types of food - **Asan**,
**Pan**, **Khaim**, and **Saim**. I renounce food except for the four **Agars**
- **Anabhoga**, **Sahasagar**, **Mahattaragar**, and **Savvasamahivattiagar**.
**Discussion** - This is the **Charampratyakhyanasutra**. "**Charam**" means
"final". It is of two types - the final part of the day and the final part of
life (**Bhavam**). Renouncing all four or three types of food from before sunset
until sunrise the next day is **Divascharampratyakhyan**.
**Bhavacarimpratyakhyan** means - when a seeker is certain that their life is
short, they renounce all four or three types of food for the rest of their life
and take **Santhara** to practice **Sanjam**. **Bhavacarimpratyakhyan** is a
bright symbol of success in the practice of **Sanjam** throughout life.  If one
wishes to renounce **Bhavacarim**, then one should say "**Bhavacarim**" instead
of "**Divascharim**". The rest of the text is the same as **Divascharim**.  For
a **Muni**, there is a renunciation of **Trividham** with **Trividham** for the
night meal. Therefore, they renounce the rest of the day's food through
**Divascharim** and remember the renunciation of the night meal as a reminder.
The same applies to householders who renounce the night meal. Those who do not
renounce the night meal renounce food for the rest of the day and night through
**Divascharim**.  9. **Abhigrahasutra**  I renounce **Abhigraha** and all four
types of food - **Asan**, **Pan**, **Khaim**, and **Saim**. I renounce food
except for **Anabhoga**, **Sahasagar**, **Mahattaragar**, and
**Savvasamahivattiagar**.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 SaSThAdhyayana: pratyAkhyAna ] [133 6. asiktha - ATA Adi se lipta hAtha tathA
pAtra Adi kA vaha dhovana, jo chanA huA ho, phalataH jisameM ATe Adi ke kaNa na
hoN| paMDita sukhalAlajI kA kahanA hai - prArambha se hI cauvvihAhAra upavAsa
karanA ho to 'pAriTThAvaNiyAgAreNaM' bolanA caahiye| yadi prArambha meM
trividhAhAra kiyA ho, parantu pAnI na lene ke kAraNa sAyaMkAla ke samaya
tivihAhAra se cauvvihAhAra upavAsa karanA ho to 'pAriTThAvaNiyAgAreNaM' nahIM
bolana caahiye| 8. divasacarimasUtra divasacarimaM ( bhavacarimaM vA)
paccakkhAmi cauvvihaM pi AhAraM-asaNaM, pANaM,khAimaM, saaimN|
annattha'NAbhogeNaM, sahasAgAreNaM, mahattarAgAreNaM, savvasamAhivattiyAgAreNaM
vosiraami| bhAvArtha - divasacarama kA (athavA bhavacarama kA) vrata grahaNa
karatA hU~, phalata: azana, pAna, khAdima aura svAdima cAroM prakAra ke AhAra kA
tyAga karatA huuN| anAbhoga, sahasAkAra, mahattarAkAra aura
sarvasamAdhipratyayAkAra, ukta cAra AgAroM ke sivAya AhAra kA tyAga karatA huuN|
vivecana - yaha caramapratyAkhyAnasUtra hai| 'carama' kA artha hai 'antim|' vaha
do prakAra kA hai - divasa kA antima bhAga aura bhava arthAt Ayu kA antima
bhaag| sUrya asta hone se pahale hI dUsare dina sUryodaya taka ke liye cAroM
athavA tInoM AhAroM kA tyAga karanA, divasacaramapratyAkhyAna hai|
bhavacaramapratyAkhyAna kA artha hai - jaba sAdhaka ko yaha nizcaya ho jAye ki
Ayu thor3I hI zeSa hai to yAvajIvana ke liye cAroM yA tInoM prakAra ke AhAra kA
tyAga kara de aura saMthArA grahaNa karake saMyama kI ArAdhanA kre| bhavacarama
kA pratyAkhyAna jIvana bhara kI saMyama sAdhanA saMbaMdhI saphalatA kA ujjvala
pratIka hai| 'bhavacarama' kA pratyAkhyAna karanA ho to 'divasacarimaM' ke
sthAna para 'bhavacarimaM' bolanA caahiye| zeSa pATha divasacarima ke samAna hI
hai| muni ke liye jIvanaparyanta trividhaM trividhena rAtribhojana kA tyAga hotA
hai  /  ata: unako divasacarima ke dvArA zeSa dina ke bhojana kA tyAga hotA hai
aura rAtribhojana tyAga kA anuvAdakatvena smaraNa ho jAtA hai| rAtribhojana
tyAgI gRhasthoM ke liye bhI yahI bAta hai| jinako rAtribhojana kA tyAga nahIM
hai unako divasacarima ke dvArA zeSa dina aura rAtri ke liye bhojana kA tyAga ho
jAtA hai| 9. abhigrahasUtra abhiggahaM paccakkhAmi cauvvihaM pi AhAraM-asaNaM,
pANaM, khAima, sAimaM  /  annattha'NAbhogeNaM, sahasAgAreNaM, mahattarAgAreNaM,
savvasamAhivattiyAgAreNaM vosiraami|

Page #205 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 134] **Essential Sutra** **Meaning:** I take the vow of non-attachment,
therefore I renounce all four types of food: ashan, pan, khadim, and svadim (for
the stipulated time). I renounce all four types of food, except for the four
stores: anabhog, sahasakar, mahattarakar, and sarvasamadhipratyayakara, until
the fulfillment of non-attachment. **Discussion:** After fasting, etc., or even
without fasting, etc., one should make a firm resolve in one's mind that one
will only partake in food when certain things are available, otherwise one will
not eat for the duration of the vowed days, such as a vow or a fast. This type
of vow is called 'abhigraha'. After firmly deciding in one's mind what things
one must adhere to in abhigraha, one should renounce them through the above
text. The vow of abhigraha is difficult. Only patient and courageous
practitioners can follow it. Students of Jain history know that one ascetic took
the abhigraha of lion-saffron sweets, and when that abhigraha was not fulfilled,
he went mad and wandered around with a bowl, day and night, without regard for
time. This example is found in the commentaries of the Kalpasutra, therefore,
one should definitely consider one's strength when taking abhigraha.  ## 10.
Sutra of Non-Corruption **Meaning:** I renounce corruptions. I renounce
corruption except for the nine stores: anabhog, sahasakar, lepalepa,
grihasthasansrisht, utkshiptvivek, pratiityamrakshit, parishthapanik,
mahattarakar, and sarvasamadhipratyayakara. **Discussion:** Food items that
cause mental defilement are called vikriti. 'Because they are the cause of
mental defilement, they are called vikriti' - Acharya Hemachandra's
Yogashastravritti (Third Light). Vikriti includes food items like milk, yogurt,
butter, ghee, oil, jaggery, and honey. The real purpose of food is to strengthen
the body and mind. The strength of the mind means keeping it pure, i.e., free
from defects. A healthy mind resides in a healthy body. However, we cannot deny
that even when the mind is not healthy, to a great extent, what we call physical
health remains. But it does not benefit the soul, but rather harms it.
Therefore, it is necessary to give the body pure nourishment so that the body
and mind remain healthy, and the purity of both...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 134] [ AvazyakasUtra bhAvArtha - maiM abhigraha kA vrata grahaNa karatA hU~,
ataeva azana, pAna, khAdima aura svAdima cAroM hI prakAra ke AhAra kA
(saMkalpita samaya taka) tyAga karatA huuN| anAbhoga, sahasAkAra, mahattarAkAra
aura sarvasamAdhipratyayAkAra, ukta cAra AgAroM ke sivAya abhigrahapUrti taka
cAroM prakAra ke AhAra kA tyAga karatA huuN| vivecana - upavAsa Adi ke bAda
athavA binA upavAsa Adi ke bhI apane mana meM nizcita pratijJA kara lenA ki
amuka bAtoM ke milane para hI pAraNA arthAt AhAra grahaNa karUMgA, anyathA
vrata, belA Adi saMkalpita dinoM kI avadhi taka AhAra grahaNa nahIM kruuNgaa|
isa prakAra kI pratijJA ko ' abhigraha' kahate haiM  /  abhigraha meM jo bAteM
dhAraNa karanA hoM, unheM mana meM nizcaya kara lene ke bAda hI uparyukta pATha
ke dvArA pratyAkhyAna karanA caahiye| abhigraha kI pratijJA kaThina hotI hai|
dhIra evaM vIra sAdhaka hI abhigraha kA pAlana kara sakate haiM  /  jaina
itihAsa ke vidyArthI jAnate haiM ki eka sAdhu ne siMha-kesariyA modakoM kA
abhigraha kara liyA thA aura vaha abhigraha jaba pUrA na huA to pAgala hokara
rAta dina kA vicAra na rakhakara pAtra liye ghUmane lgaa| kalpasUtra kI TIkAoM
meM ukta udAharaNa AtA hai, ataH abhigraha karate samaya apanI zakti kA vicAra
avazya kara lenA caahiye| 10. nirvikRtikasUtra nivigaiyaM paccakkhAmi
annattha'NAbhogeNaM, sahasAgAreNaM, levAleveNaM, gihatthasaMsiDheNaM,
ukkhittavivegeNaM, paDuccamakkhieNaM, mahattarAgAreNaM,
savvasamAhivattiyAgAreNaM vosiraami| bhAvArtha - maiM vikRtiyoM kA pratyAkhyAna
karatA huuN| anAbhoga, sahasAkAra, lepAlepa, gRhasthasaMsRSTa, utkSiptaviveka,
pratItyamrakSita, pAriSThApanika, mahattarAkAra, sarvasamAdhipratyayAkAra - ukta
nau AgAroM ke sivAya vikRti kA parityAga karatA huuN| vivecana - mana meM vikAra
utpanna karane vAle bhojya padArthoM ko vikRti kahate haiM - 'manaso
vikRtihetutvAd vikRtayaH' AcArya hemacandra-kRta yogazAstravRtti (tRtIya
prakAza)  /  vikRti meM dUdha, dahI, makkhana, ghI, tela, gur3a, madhu Adi
bhojya padArtha sammilita haiN| bhojana kA vAstavika uddezya hai zarIra aura
sAtha hI mana ko sabala bnaanaa| mana kI sabalatA se tAtparya hai use zuddha
arthAt doSarahita rkhnaa| svastha zarIra meM hI svastha mana rahatA hai| kintu
isa bAta se inkAra nahIM kara sakate ki mana ke svastha na rahane para bhI kAphI
sImA taka, jise hama kevala zArIrika svasthatA kahate haiM, vaha banI rahatI
hai| para usase AtmA ko koI lAbha nahIM hotA balki hAni hI hotI hai| ataH
Avazyaka hai ki zarIra ko aisI zuddha khurAka dI jAye jisase zarIra bhI svastha
rahe aura mana bhI tathA ina donoM kI zuddhatA

Page #206 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Sixth Study: Renunciation  [135]  The soul can become elevated. Therefore,
the scriptures have stated that one should maintain sattvic qualities in food.
Food that causes defilement cannot remain in the body without polluting it.
There are nine repositories of non-defilement. The description of eight
repositories has already been covered in previous chapters. The repository
called "Pratiityamrakshit" is new. Consuming items like bread, etc., on which
ghee, etc., has been applied only with the finger, is called the
Pratiityamrakshit repository. The meaning of this repository is that a seeker
who renounces defilement like ghee, etc., cannot consume ghee, etc., in the form
of a stream. They can consume bread that has been lightly smeared with ghee.
"Pratiityamrakshit is when, for the purpose of slight delicacy, one takes a
little ghee with the finger and applies it to dry bread, etc. It is not to be
consumed in a stream." - Devendra Pratikramanavritti, Tilakacharya  11. Sutra on
Renunciation Completion  "Upon sunrise, I have completed the renunciation, along
with the salutation. That renunciation has been properly touched, nurtured,
purified, crossed, declared, and worshipped. Whatever has not been properly
worshipped, may its misdeeds be false for me."  Meaning: This is a sutra for the
completion of renunciation. Whatever renunciation has been undertaken, its
completion should be done through this sutra. In the original text above,
"Namukkarsahyam" is a general word indicating a salutation. In its place, the
name of the renunciation that has been undertaken should be used. For example,
if one has undertaken the renunciation of "Paurushi," then one should say
"Paurusipaccakhaanam kayam."  There are six limbs of observing renunciation:  1.
**Fasayam (Touched or Splashed)** - Receiving renunciation from the Guru or
oneself, according to the proper procedure. 2. **Paliyam (Nurtured)** -
Continuously protecting it. 3. **Sohiyam (Purified)** - If any defilement
occurs, immediately purifying it. Alternatively, the Sanskrit word for "Sohiyam"
is "Shobhit," which means "adorned." In this case, the meaning would be to eat
after offering food to the Gurus, companions, or guests.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 SaSThAdhyayana : pratyAkhyAna ] [135 se AtmA unnata ho ske| isaliye zAstrakAroM
ne batalAyA hai ki bhojana meM sAtvikatA rakhanI cAhiye  /  vikArajanaka bhojana
zarIra ko dUSita kie binA nahIM raha sakatA  /  nirvikRti ke nau AgAra haiN|
ATha AgAroM kA varNana to pahale ke pAThoM meM yathAsthAna A cukA hai|
'pratItyamrakSita' nAmaka AgAra nayA hai| bhojana banAte samaya jina roTI Adi
para sirpha uMgalI se ghI Adi cupar3A gayA ho aisI vastuoM ko grahaNa karanA,
pratItyamrakSita AgAra kahalAtA hai| isa AgAra kA yaha bhAva hai ki ghRta Adi
vikRti kA tyAga karane vAlA sAdhaka dhArA ke rUpa meM ghRta Adi nahIM khA sakatA
hai| ghI se atyalpa rUpa meM cupar3I huI roTiyA~ khA sakatA hai| 'pratItya
sarvathA rUkSamaNDakAdi, ISatsaukumArya pratipAdanAya yadaMgulyA ISad ghRtaM
gRhItvA prakSitaM tadA kalpate, na tu dhArayA  /  ' devendra pratikramaNavRtti,
tilakAcArya 11. pratyAkhyAnapAraNAsUtra uggae sUre namukkArasahiyaM paccakkhANaM
kayaM  /  taM paccakkhANaM sammaM kAraNaM phAsiyaM, pAliyaM, tIriyaM, kiTTiyaM,
sohiyaM, ArAhiyaM  /  jaM ca na ArAhiyaM, tassa micchAmi dukkaDaM  /  bhAvArtha
- sUryodaya hone para jo namaskAra sahita yA "pratyAkhyAna kiyA thA, vaha
pratyAkhyAna (mana,vacana) zarIra ke dvArA samyak rUpa se spRSTa, pAlita,
zodhita, tIrNa, kIrtita evaM ArAdhita kiyA aura jo samyak rUpa se ArAdhita na
kiyA ho, usakA duSkRta mere liye mithyA ho  /  ..... vivecana yaha
pratyAkhyAnapUrti kA sUtra hai  /  koI bhI pratyAkhyAna kiyA ho, usakI samApti
prastuta sUtra ke dvArA karanI caahiye| Upara mUla pATha meM 'namukkArasahiyaM'
namaskArikA kA sUcaka sAmAnya zabda hai| isake sthAna meM jo pratyAkhyAna
grahaNa kara rakhA ho, usakA nAma lenA caahiye| jaise ki pauruSI lI ho to
'paurusIpaccakkhANaM kayaM' aisA kahanA cAhiye  /  pratyAkhyAna pAlane ke chaha
aMga haiM satata rakSA karanA  /  (1) phAsiyaM (spRSTa athavA sparzita )
gurudeva se yA svayaM vidhipUrvaka pratyAkhyAna lenA  /  pratyAkhyAna ko bAra-
bAra upayoga meM lAkara sAvadhAnI (2) pAliyaM (pAlita) sAtha usakI - -- (3)
sohiyaM (zodhita) - koI dUSaNa laga jAya to sahasA usakI zuddhi krnaa| athavA
'sohiya' kA saMskRta rUpa zobhita bhI hotA hai  /  isa dazA meM artha hogA
gurujanoM ko, sAthiyoM ko athavA atithijanoM ko bhojana dekara svayaM bhojana
karanA  /  -

Page #207 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[136] (4) **Tiriyam** (Tirita) Eating food. - [Aavashyakasutra] Even after the
time for the renunciation taken has elapsed, after staying for some time, (5)
**Kittiyam** (Kirtita) before starting to eat food, to say with deliberation,
considering the renunciation taken, that I had taken such and such renunciation
in such and such way, it has been fulfilled well. (6) **Arahiyam** (Aradhita) 1
To worship the renunciation according to the [teachings]. - Staying completely
away from all faults, according to the method mentioned above, 00 1. Acharya
Jinadas has said 'Anupalita' in place of 'Aradhita'. The meaning of Anupalita is
- to follow the renunciation while repeatedly remembering the words of the
Tirthankara - 'Anupaliyam naam anusmṛtya anusmṛtya tīrthankaravacanam
pratyākhyānam pāliyatvam.' Aavashyakachurni

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 136] (4) tIriyaM ( tIrita) bhojana karanA  /  - [ AvazyakasUtra liye huye
pratyAkhyAna kA samaya pUrA ho jAne para bhI kucha samaya Thaharakara (5)
kiTTiyaM (kIrtita) bhojana prArambha karane se pahale lie huye pratyAkhyAna ko
vicAra kara utkIrtana-pUrvaka kahanA ki maiMne amuka pratyAkhyAna amuka rUpa se
grahaNa kiyA thA, vaha bhalI-bhAMti pUrNa ho gayA hai  /  (6) ArAhiyaM
(ArAdhita) 1 anusAra pratyAkhyAna kI ArAdhanA karanA  /  - saba doSoM se
sarvathA dUra rahate huye Upara kahI huI vidhi ke 00 1. AcArya jinadAsa ne
'ArAdhita' ke sthAna para 'anupAlita' kahA hai| anupAlita kA artha kiyA hai -
tIrthaMkaradeva ke vacanoM kA bAra-bAra smaraNa karate hue pratyAkhyAna kA
pAlana karanA - 'anupAliyaM nAma anusmRtya anusmRtya tIrthaMkaravacanaM
pratyAkhyAnaM pAliyatvaM  / ' AvazyakacUrNi

Page #208 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Appendix**  The method of the necessary is to spread an asana by cleaning and
sweeping a spotless place free of living beings. Then, standing on it, offer
three salutations to the Lord Shasana Pati Bhagwan Mahavir Swami and to one's
present Guru Maharaj with the recitation of 'Tikkhutto'. Then, taking the
permission of the Chaubis Stav, perform the Chaubis Stav. In the Chaubis Stav,
perform Kaussagg by reciting 'Ichchakarenam' and 'Tass Uttari'. In the Kaussagg,
meditate on the two 'Logass'. Recite 'Namo Arihantaanam' and perform the
Kaussagg. If the mind, speech, and body are moving during the Kaussagg, or if
there is Aarthadhyan or Raudra dhyan, then say 'Tass Miccha Mi Dukkadam' and
speak it aloud to one 'Logass'. Then, take permission to perform Pratikraman.
Recite one Navkar and say 'Ichchami Nam Bhanta' and first take permission for
the necessary.  In the first necessary, perform Kaussagg by reciting 'Karemi
Bhanta', 'Ichchami Thami', and 'Tass Uttari'. In the Kaussagg, meditate on the
following: Agame Tivihe, San-Samakit, Atichara (five Samiti, three Gupti, six
Kay, five Mahavrata, sixth Ratribhojanatyag Vrata), Chhoti Sanlekhana, Eighteen
Papasthan, Ichchami Thami, and one Navkar mantra. In all the sections, instead
of 'Micchami Dukkadam', say 'Tass Aloou'. Recite 'Namo Arihantaanam' and perform
the Kaussagg. Recite the four dhyan and complete the first necessary. Then, take
permission for the second necessary.  In the second necessary, speak aloud to
one 'Logass'. Then, take permission for the third necessary.  In the third
necessary, recite 'Ichchami Khamasamano' twice. When the word 'Nisihiyaa' comes,
sit with both knees bent and both hands joined. When the word 'Titissannayaraye'
comes, stand up and complete the recitation. Similarly, recite 'Ichchami
Khamasamano' twice. Then, take permission for the fourth necessary.  In the
fourth necessary, stand up and speak aloud the following which were meditated
upon in the Kaussagg: Agame Tivihe, Dansan Samakit, Atichara, Chhoti Sanlekhana,
Eighteen Papasthan, Ichchami Thami. In all the sections, say 'Micchami
Dukkadam'. Then, recite 'Tass Savvas'. Then, take permission for the 'Shraman
Sutra' and sit with the right knee bent. Then, recite one Navkar, Karemi Bhanta,
Chattari Mangalam, Ichchami Thami, Ichchakarenam, Agame Tivihe, Dansan Samakit.
After that, recite the following: Nidra Dosh Nivritti (Pagamasijaaye), Bhiksha
Dosh Nivritti (Goieraggchariyaaye), Swadhyay and Pratilekhan (Chaukalasijjaaye),
and Tetis Bol. Afterwards, bend both knees, join both hands, bow the head, and
recite the Nigranth Pravachan (Namo Chauvisaaye). When the word 'Abbhuttiomi'
comes, stand up and recite the entire text. Then, sit in Padmasana and recite
the following: Badi Sanlekhana, Eighteen Papasthan. Then, stand up and recite
'Tass Dhamas' and repeat the previous steps twice.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pariziSTa Avazyaka kI vidhi jIva-janturahita niravadya sthAna kA pratilekhana-
pramArjana karake Asana bichaave| phira usa para khar3e hokara zAsanapati
bhagavAn mahAvIra svAmI ko evaM apane vartamAna guru mahArAja ko 'tikkhutto' ke
pATha se tIna bAra vandanA karake cauvIsastava kI AjJA lekara cauvIsastava kre|
cauvIsastava meM 'icchAkAreNaM' aura 'tassa uttarI' ke pATha kahakara kAussagga
kare  /  kAussagga meM do logassa' kA dhyAna kre| 'namo arihaMtANaM' kahakara
'kAussagga' pAre  /  'kAussagga' meM mana, vacana, kAyA calita hue hoM to,
ArtadhyAna, raudradhyAna dhyAyA ho to 'tassa micchA mi dukkaDaM' bolakara eka
'logassa' prakaTa rUpa meM bole  /  phira pratikramaNa karane kI AjJA le|
'icchAmi NaM bhaMte' eka navakAra kahakara pahale Avazyaka kI AjJA le| pahale
Avazyaka meM karemi bhaMte, icchAmi ThAmi tathA tassa uttarI kI pATI bolakara
kAussagga kre| kAussagga meM Agame tivihe, saNa-samakita, aticAra kI pATiyAM
(pAMca samiti, tIna gupti, cha: kAya, pAMca. mahAvrata, chaThA rAtribhojanatyAga
vrata) choTI saMlekhaNA, aThAraha pApasthAna, icchAmi ThAmi aura eka navakAra
maMtra kA mana meM ciMtana kre| saba pATiyoM meM 'micchAmi dukkaDaM' ke badale
'tassa AloU' kahe, 'namo arihaMtANaM' kaha kara kAussagga pAre  /  cAra dhyAna
kA pATha bolakara pahalA Avazyaka samApta kre| phira dUsare Avazyaka kI AjJA le|
dUsare Avazyaka meM eka logassa prakaTa kahe  /  phira tIsare Avazyaka kI AjJA
le| tIsare Avazyaka meM 'icchAmi khamAsamaNo' kA pATha do bAra bole  /  jahA~
'nisIhiyAe' zabda Ave vahA~ dono ghuTanoM ko khar3e kara ke donoM hAtha jor3a
kara baiThe aura jaba 'tittIsannayarAe' zabda Ave taba khar3e hokara pATha
samApta kare  /  isI taraha dUsarI bAra 'icchAmi khamAsamaNo' kA pATha bole|
phira cauthe Avazyaka kI AjJA leve| _ cauthe Avazyaka meM khar3e hokara Agame
tivihe, daMsaNa samakita, aticAra kI pATiyAM, choTI saMlekhanA, aThAraha
pApasthAna, icchAmi ThAmi - jinakA kAussagga meM ciMtana kiyA thA, unheM yahA~
prakaTa kahe  /  sabhI pATiyoM meM 'micchA mi dukkaDaM' kahe  /  phira 'tassa
savvassa' kA pATha kahe  /  phira 'zramaNasUtra' kI AjJA lekara dAhinA ghuTanA
khar3A karake baiThe, tadanantara eka navakAra, karemi bhaMte, cattAri maMgalaM,
icchAmi ThAmi, icchAkAreNaM, Agame tivihe, daMsaNa samakita, khe| bAda meM
nidrAdoSanivRtti (pagAmasijAe)kA, bhikSAdoSanivRtti (goyaraggacariyAe) kA,
svAdhyAya tathA pratilekhana (caukAlasijjAe) kA aura tetIsa bola kA pATha khe|
pazcAt donoM ghuTane khar3e kara, donoM hAtha jor3akara, sira jhukAkara
nigraMthapravacana (namo cauvIsAe) kA pATha kahe  /  jahA~ 'abbhuTTiomi' zabda
ho vahA~ khar3A hokara sarva pATha kahanA caahiye| phira pAlathI lagAkara baiThe
aura bar3I saMlekhanA, aThAraha pApasthAna kahe, phira khar3e hokara 'tassa
dhamassa' kA pATha kahakara pUrvavat do bAra

Page #209 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[138] [Essential Sutras] Recite the phrase "Icchami Khamasamano". Then, bow down
with both knees, join both hands above the knees, bow your head low, recite one
Navkar Mantra, and then recite the five-fold salutation. Then, sit down and
recite the Anant Chaubis, Ayariyauvjjhae Dhaai Dweep, Chauraasi Lakh Jeevoyoni,
Kul Kodi, Khamemi Savve Jeeva, and the eighteen Papasthanak. Then, take the
command of the fifth essential.  In the fifth essential, recite the Pratikraman,
one Navkar, Karemi Bhanta, Icchami Thami, Tass Uttari, and then focus on the
Logass in Kaussagg (in Devasiy-Rayasiy Pratikraman, four Logass should be done
in Kaussagg, in Pakkhi Pratikraman, eight, in Chaumasi Pratikraman, twelve, and
in Sanvatsarik Pratikraman, twenty). Recite "Namo Arihantaanam" and complete the
Kaussagg. Then, recite one Logass Prakat and say "Icchami Khamasamano" twice.
Then, take the command of the sixth essential.  In the sixth essential, stand up
and receive the Pacchakkhan from the Sadhuji Maharaj according to your ability.
If the Sadhuji Maharaj is not present, then receive the Pacchakkhan from the
Jyeshtha Shravak. If they are also not present, then accept the ten Pratyakhyan
according to your ability. Then, recite two Namotthunan, face the east and north
directions, and salute Simandhar Swami, Mahavira Swami, and the Muni Rajas.
Afterwards, apologize to everyone from the heart and recite the Chaubisi and
other hymns.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 138] [ AvazyakasUtra 'icchAmi khamAsamaNo' kA pATha kahe  /  phira donoM
ghuTane namA kara, ghuTanoM ke Upara donoM hAtha jor3akara, mastaka ko nIcA
namAkara, eka navakAra maMtra kaha kara, pAMca padoM kI vandanA kahe  /  phira
nIce baiThakara ananta cauvIsa, AyariyauvajjhAe DhAI dvIpa, caurAsI lAkha
jIvayoni, kula koDI kA pATha, khAmemi savve jIvA, aThAraha pApasthAnaka kahe  /
phira pAMcaveM Avazyaka kI AjJA le| pAMcaveM Avazyaka meM prAyazcitta kA pATha,
eka navakAra, karemi bhaMte, icchAmi ThAmi, tassa uttarI kI pATI bolakara
kAussagga meM logassa kA dhyAna kare (devasiya-rAyasiya pratikramaNa meM cAra,
pakkhI pratikramaNa meM ATha, caumAsI pratikramaNa meM bAraha aura sAMvatsarika
pratikramaNa meM bIsa logassa kA kAussagga karanA caahiye)| 'namo arihaMtANaM'
kaha kara kAussagga paare| phira eka logassa prakaTa kaha kara do bAra icchAmi
khamAsamaNo' bole| phira chaThe Avazyaka kI AjJA le| _ chaThe Avazyaka meM
khar3e hokara sAdhujI mahArAja se apanI zakti anusAra paccakkhANa grahaNa kre|
yadi sAdhujI mahArAja na hoM, to jyeSTha zrAvaka se paccakkhANa grahaNa kare  /
yadi ve bhI nahIM hoM, to svayameva daza pratyAkhyAnoM meM se yathAzakti svIkAra
kre| phira do namotthuNaM kA pATha par3hakara uttara tathA pUrva dizA meM mukha
kara sImandhara svAmI, mahAvIra svAmI tathA munirAjoM ko vandanA kre| bAda meM
sabhI ko antaHkaraNa se khamAve tathA cauvIsI Adi stavana bole|

Page #210 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Anadhyaya Kaal  [Quoted from Nandi Sutra, edited by Acharya Pravara Shri
Atmaramji Maharaj]  One should study scriptures only during the time prescribed
in the Agamas for self-study. Studying during the Anadhyaya Kaal is prohibited.
The Manusmriti and other Smritis also describe Anadhyaya Kaal in detail. Vedic
people also mention the Anadhyayas of the Vedas. Similarly, other Arsha Granthas
are also considered Anadhyaya. Jain Agamas, being Sarvajnokt, Devadhisthit and
Swaravidya combined, also have their Anadhyaya Kaal mentioned in the Agamas,
such as:  **Ten Anadhyayas related to the sky:**  1. **Ulkapaat:** If there is a
great fall of stars, one should not study scriptures for one Prahar. 2.
**Digdaah:** As long as the direction is red, meaning it appears as if there is
fire in the direction, one should not study. 3. **Garjit:** Thunder 4.
**Vidyut:** Lightning However, Garjan and Vidyut are not considered Anadhyaya
during Chaturmas, as they are often a natural occurrence during this season.
Therefore, from Ardra to Swati Nakshatra, it is not considered Anadhyaya. 5.
**Nirghaat:** When there is a loud roar in the sky without clouds, or when there
is thunder with clouds, there is an Anadhyaya period of two Prahar. 6.
**Yupaka:** In the Shukla Paksha, the Sandhya of Pratipada, Dwitiya, and
Tritiya, when the moonlight is visible, is called Yupaka. One should not study
during these days, until the night. 7. **Yakshadeepta:** When there is a light
in a direction, like lightning, but with a slight delay, it is called
Yakshadeepta. One should not study as long as the Yaksha-like light is visible
in the sky.  **Ten Anadhyayas related to the body:**  1. **Atthi:** Bone 2.
**Mansam:** Flesh 3. **Sonite:** Blood 4. **Asuchi Samante:** In the presence of
impurity 5. **Susanasamante:** In the presence of a cremation ground 6.
**Chandovarate:** During the lunar eclipse 7. **Surovarate:** During the solar
eclipse 8. **Padane:** During a fall 9. **Rayavuggahe:** During a robbery 10.
**Uvassayassa Anto Oralie Sarirage:** During the final moments of life  **Four
Mahapratipada:**  1. **Ashadhapadivaa** 2. **Indamahapadivaa** 3.
**Kattiapadivaa** 4. **Sugimhapadivaa**  **Four Mahapratipada Purnima:**  1.
**Ashadhapadivaa Purnima** 2. **Indamahapadivaa Purnima** 3. **Kattiapadivaa
Purnima** 4. **Sugimhapadivaa Purnima**  **Four Sandhya:**  1. **Pradhumate:**
Dawn 2. **Pachchimate:** Evening 3. **Majjhane:** Noon 4. **Addarate:** Midnight
**Four Kaal:**  1. **Puvvane:** Morning 2. **Avarane:** Afternoon 3. **Paose:**
East 4. **Pacchuse:** West  According to the above Sutrapath, there are 32
Anadhyayas, which are divided into ten related to the sky, ten related to the
body, four Mahapratipada, four Mahapratipada Purnima, and four Sandhya. These
are briefly described below:  **Sky-related Anadhyayas:**  1. **Ulkapaat:** If
there is a great fall of stars, one should not study scriptures for one Prahar.
2. **Digdaah:** As long as the direction is red, meaning it appears as if there
is fire in the direction, one should not study. 3. **Garjit:** Thunder 4.
**Vidyut:** Lightning However, Garjan and Vidyut are not considered Anadhyaya
during Chaturmas, as they are often a natural occurrence during this season.
Therefore, from Ardra to Swati Nakshatra, it is not considered Anadhyaya. 5.
**Nirghaat:** When there is a loud roar in the sky without clouds, or when there
is thunder with clouds, there is an Anadhyaya period of two Prahar. 6.
**Yupaka:** In the Shukla Paksha, the Sandhya of Pratipada, Dwitiya, and
Tritiya, when the moonlight is visible, is called Yupaka. One should not study
during these days, until the night. 7. **Yakshadeepta:** When there is a light
in a direction, like lightning, but with a slight delay, it is called
Yakshadeepta. One should not study as long as the Yaksha-like light is visible
in the sky.  **Body-related Anadhyayas:**  1. **Atthi:** Bone 2. **Mansam:**
Flesh 3. **Sonite:** Blood 4. **Asuchi Samante:** In the presence of impurity 5.
**Susanasamante:** In the presence of a cremation ground 6. **Chandovarate:**
During the lunar eclipse 7. **Surovarate:** During the solar eclipse 8.
**Padane:** During a fall 9. **Rayavuggahe:** During a robbery 10. **Uvassayassa
Anto Oralie Sarirage:** During the final moments of life  **Mahapratipada:**  1.
**Ashadhapadivaa:** One should not study during the Ashadhapadivaa. 2.
**Indamahapadivaa:** One should not study during the Indamahapadivaa. 3.
**Kattiapadivaa:** One should not study during the Kattiapadivaa. 4.
**Sugimhapadivaa:** One should not study during the Sugimhapadivaa.
**Mahapratipada Purnima:**  1. **Ashadhapadivaa Purnima:** One should not study
during the Ashadhapadivaa Purnima. 2. **Indamahapadivaa Purnima:** One should
not study during the Indamahapadivaa Purnima. 3. **Kattiapadivaa Purnima:** One
should not study during the Kattiapadivaa Purnima. 4. **Sugimhapadivaa
Purnima:** One should not study during the Sugimhapadivaa Purnima.  **Sandhya:**
1. **Pradhumate:** One should not study during the Pradhumate. 2.
**Pachchimate:** One should not study during the Pachchimate. 3. **Majjhane:**
One should not study during the Majjhane. 4. **Addarate:** One should not study
during the Addarate.  **Kaal:**  1. **Puvvane:** One should not study during the
Puvvane. 2. **Avarane:** One should not study during the Avarane. 3. **Paose:**
One should not study during the Paose. 4. **Pacchuse:** One should not study
during the Pacchuse.  **Note:** The translation attempts to preserve the Jain
terms while providing a clear and understandable explanation of the Anadhyaya
Kaal.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 anadhyAyakAla sva. AcAryapravara zrI AtmArAmajI ma. dvArA sampAdita nandIsUtra
se uddhRta ] svAdhyAya ke lie AgamoM meM jo samaya batAyA gayA hai, usI samaya
zAstroM kA svAdhyAya karanA caahie| anadhyAyakAla meM svAdhyAya varjita hai|
manusmRti Adi smRtiyoM meM bhI anadhyAyakAla kA vistArapUrvaka varNana kiyA gayA
hai| vaidika loga bhI veda ke anadhyAyoM kA ullekha karate haiN| isI prakAra
anya ArSa granthoM kA bhI anadhyAya mAnA jAtA hai| jainAgama bhI . sarvajJokta,
devAdhiSThita tathA svaravidyA saMyukta hone ke kAraNa, inakA bhI AgamoM meM
anadhyAyakAla varNita kiyA gayA hai, jaise ki dasavidhe aMtalikkhite asajjhAe
paNNatte, taM jahA - ukkAvAte, disidAghe, gajjite, vijjute, nigghAte, juvate,
jakkhAlitte, dhUmitA, mahitA, rayaugghAte  /  dasavihe orAlite asajjhAtite, taM
jahA - - aTThI, maMsaM, soNite, asucisAmaMte, susANasAmaMte, caMdovarAte,
sUrovarAte, paDane, rAyavuggahe, uvassayassa aMto orAlie sarIrage  /
-sthAnAGgasUtra, sthAna 10 no pati niggaMthANa vA niggaMthINa vA cauhiM
mahApADivaehiM sajjhAyaM karittae, taM jahA - AsADhapADivae, iMdamahapADivae
kattiapADivae sugimhpaaddive| no kappai niggaMthANa vA niggaMdhINa vA, cauhiM
saMjhAhiM sajjhAyaM karettae, taM jahA paDhimAte, pacchimAte, majjhaNhe
addddrte| kappaI niggaMthANa vA, niggaMthINa vA, cAukkAlaM sajjhAyaM karettae,
taM jahA - puvvaNhe avaraNhe, paose, paccUse  /  - sthAnAGgasUtra, sthAna 4,
uddeza 2 uparokta sUtrapATha ke anusAra dasa AkAza se sambandhita, dasa audArika
zarIra se sambandhita, cAra mahApratipadA, cAra mahApratipadA kI pUrNimA aura
cAra sandhyA, isa prakAra battIsa anadhyAya mAne gae haiM, jinakA saMkSepa meM
nimna prakAra se varNana hai, jaise - AkAza sambandhI dasa anadhyAya 1.
ulkApAta- tArApatana - yadi mahat tArApatana huA hai to eka prahara paryanta
zAstra svAdhyAya nahIM karanA cAhie  /  2. digdAha- - jaba taka dizA raktavarNa
kI ho arthAta aisA mAlUma par3e ki dizA meM Aga sI lagI hai, taba bhI svAdhyAya
nahIM karanA caahie| 3. garjita4. vidyuta kintu garjana aura vidyuta kA
asvAdhyAya cAturmAsa meM nahIM mAnanA caahie| kyoMki vaha garjana aura vidyuta
prAyaH Rtu svabhAva se hI hotA hai  /  ataH ArdrA se svAti nakSatra paryanta
anadhyAya nahIM mAnA jaataa| 5. nirghAta -- binA bAdala ke AkAza meM
vyantarAdikRta ghora garjana hone para, yA bAdaloM sahita AkAza meM kar3akane
para do prahara taka asvAdhyAya kAla hai| 6. yUpaka - zukla pakSa meM pratipadA,
dvitIyA, tRtIyA kI sandhyA, candraprabhA ke milane ko yUpaka kahA jAtA hai| ina
dinoM prahara rAtri paryanta svAdhyAya nahIM karanA caahie| - - bAdaloM ke
garjana para eka prahara paryanta svAdhyAya na kare  /  - bijalI camakane para
eka prahara paryanta svAdhyAya na kre| 7. yakSAdIpta- - kabhI kisI dizA meM
bijalI camakane jaisA, thor3e-thor3e samaya pIche jo prakAza hotA hai vaha
yakSAdIta kahalAtA hai| ataH AkAza meM jaba taka yakSAkAra dIkhatA rahe taba
taka svAdhyAya nahIM karanA caahie|

Page #211 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Translation:  **8. Dhūmikā-Kṛṣṇa-Kārttika:** The period from Kṛṣṇa-Kārttika
to Māgha is the gestation period of the clouds. During this time, a fine, water-
like mist of smoky color falls, which is called Dhūmikā-Kṛṣṇa. As long as this
mist falls, one should not engage in svādhyāya.  **9. Mihikāśveta:** In winter,
a fine, water-like mist of white color falls, which is called Mihikā. As long as
this falls, it is a time of asvādhyāya.  **10. Raja-Udghāta:** Due to the wind,
dust spreads all over the sky. As long as this dust remains spread, one should
not engage in svādhyāya.  The above ten reasons are related to the sky and are
considered asvādhyāya. The following ten reasons are related to the generous
(audārika) and are also considered asvādhyāya.  **11-12-13. Bones, Flesh, and
Blood:** If the bones, flesh, and blood of a five-sensed animal are visible,
then as long as those things are not removed from there, it is asvādhyāya. The
commentator considers asvādhyāya for a distance of 60 cubits around these
things.  Similarly, asvādhyāya is considered for the bones, flesh, and blood of
a human being. The difference is that asvādhyāya for these lasts for 100 cubits
and one day and night. Asvādhyāya for a woman's menstrual period lasts for three
days. Asvādhyāya for the birth of a boy and a girl is considered to last for
seven and eight days respectively.  **14. Aśaci-Mala-Mūtra:** As long as
excrement and urine are visible, it is asvādhyāya.  **15. Śmaśāna:** Asvādhyāya
is considered for a distance of 100 cubits around a cremation ground.  **16.
Candragrahaṇa:** During a lunar eclipse, one should not engage in svādhyāya for
eight, twelve, or sixteen praharas, depending on the severity of the eclipse
(jghanya, madhyama, utkrṣṭa).  **17. Sūryagrahaṇa:** During a solar eclipse,
asvādhyāya is also considered for eight, twelve, or sixteen praharas, depending
on the severity of the eclipse.  **18. Patana:** When a great king or national
leader dies, one should not engage in svādhyāya until his cremation is
completed. Alternatively, one should gradually resume svādhyāya until a new
leader takes over.  **19. Rājavyuḍgraha:** When there is a war between nearby
kings, one should not engage in svādhyāya until peace is restored. Even after
peace is restored, one should not engage in svādhyāya for one day and night.
**20. Audārika Śarīra:** If a five-sensed being is killed within a shelter, one
should not engage in svādhyāya as long as the body remains there. If the
lifeless body remains within a distance of 100 cubits, one should not engage in
svādhyāya.  The above ten reasons are related to the generous (audārika) body
and are considered asvādhyāya.  **21-28. Four Mahotsava and Four
Mahāpratipadā:** The four Mahotsava are Āṣāḍha Pūrṇimā, Āśvina Pūrṇimā, Kārttika
Pūrṇimā, and Caitra Pūrṇimā. The pratipadā that comes after these Pūrṇimā is
called Mahāpratipadā. It is forbidden to engage in svādhyāya during these days.
**29-32. Prātaḥ, Sāyam, Madhyāhna, and Ardharātri:** One should not engage in
svādhyāya one ghaḍī before and one ghaḍī after sunrise, one ghaḍī before and one
ghaḍī after sunset, one ghaḍī before and one ghaḍī after midday, and one ghaḍī
before and one ghaḍī after midnight.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 8.dhUmikA-kRSNa-kArtika se lekara mAgha taka kA samaya meghoM kA garbhamAsa
hotA hai| isameM dhUmra varNa kI sUkSma jalarUpa dhuMdha par3atI hai| vaha
dhUmikA-kRSNa kahalAtI hai| jaba taka yaha dhuMdha par3atI rahe, taba taka
svAdhyAya nahIM karanA caahie| 9. mihikAzveta-zItakAla meM zveta varNa kA sUkSma
jalarUpa dhundha mihikA kahalAtI hai| jaba taka yaha giratI rahe, taba taka
asvAdhyAya kAla hai| 10. raja-udghAta- vAyu ke kAraNa AkAza meM cAroM ora dhUli
chA jAtI hai| jaba taka yaha dhUli phailI rahatI hai, svAdhyAya nahIM karanA
caahie| uparokta dasa kAraNa AkAza sambandhI asvAdhyAya ke haiN| audArika
sambandhI dasa anadhyAya 11-12-13. haDDI, mAMsa aura rudhira-paMcendriya
tiryaMca kI haDDI, mAMsa aura rudhira yadi sAmane dikhAI deM, to jaba taka vahA~
se vaha vastue~ uThAI na jAeM, taba taka asvAdhyAya hai| vRttikAra Asa-pAsa ke
60 hAtha taka ina vastuoM ke hone para asvAdhyAya mAnate haiN| isI prakAra
manuSya sambandhI asthi, mAMsa aura rudhira kA bhI anadhyAya mAnA jAtA hai|
vizeSatA itanI hai ki inakA asvAdhyAya sau hAtha taka tathA eka dina-rAta kA
hotA hai| strI ke mAsika dharma kA asvAdhyAya tIna dina tk| bAlaka evaM bAlikA
ke janma kA asvAdhyAya kramazaH sAta evaM ATha dina paryanta kA mAnA jAtA hai|
14. azaci-mala-mUtra sAmane dikhAI dene taka asvAdhyAya hai| 15.zmazAna-
zmazAnabhUmi ke cAroM ora sau-sau hAtha paryanta asvAdhyAya mAnA jAtA hai| 16.
candragrahaNa-candragrahaNa hone para jaghanya ATha, madhyama bAraha aura
utkRSTa solaha prahara paryanta svAdhyAya nahIM karanA caahie| 17. sUryagrahaNa-
sUryagrahaNa hone para bhI kramazaH ATha, bAraha aura solaha prahara paryanta
asvAdhyAyakAla mAnA gayA hai| 18. patana-kisI bar3e mAnya rAjA athavA
rASTrapuruSa kA nidhana hone para jaba taka usakA dAhasaMskAra na ho taba taka
svAdhyAya nahIM karanA caahie| athavA jaba taka dUsarA adhikArI sattArUDha na ho
taba taka zanaiH zanaiH svAdhyAya karanA caahie| 19. rAjavyudgraha-samIpastha
rAjAoM meM paraspara yuddha hone para jaba taka zAnti na ho jAe, taba taka usake
pazcAt bhI eka dina-rAtri svAdhyAya nahIM kreN| 20.audArika zarIra-upAzraya ke
bhItara paMcendriya jIva kA vadha ho jAne para jaba taka kalevara par3A rahe,
taba taka tathA 100 hAtha taka yadi nirjIva kalevara par3A ho to svAdhyAya nahIM
karanA caahie| asvAdhyAya ke uparokta 10 kAraNa audArika zarIra sambandhI kahe
gaye haiN| 21-28. cAra mahotsava aura cAra mahApratipadA-ASADhapUrNimA,
AzvinapUrNimA, kArtikapUrNimA aura caitrapUrNimA ye cAra mahotsava haiN| ina
pUrNimAoM ke pazcAt Ane vAlI pratipadA ko mahApratipadA kahate haiN| inameM
svAdhyAya karane kA niSedha hai| 29-32. prAtaH sAyaM madhyAhna aura ardharAtri-
prAtaH sUrya ugane se eka ghar3I pahile tathA eka ghar3I piiche| sUryAsta hone
se eka ghar3I pahile tathA eka ghar3I piiche| madhyAhna arthAt dopahara meM eka
ghar3I Age aura eka ghar3I pIche evaM ardharAtri meM bhI eka ghar3I Age tathA
eka ghar3I pIche svAdhyAya nahIM karanA caahie| % D

Page #212 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
• Member List / Shri Agam Prakashan Samiti, Byawer List of Benefactor Members
Mahastamh Patron 1. Shri Birdicandji Prakashchandji Telesara, Pali 1. Seth
Mohanmalji Chordia, Madras 2. Shri Gulabchandji Mangilalji Surana, Secunderabad
2. Shri Gyanrajji Kevalchandji Mootha, Pali 3. Shri Pukharajji Shishodia, Byawer
3. Shri Premrajji Jatanrajji Mehta, Medta City 4. Shri S. Jadawmalji
Manakchandji Betala, Bagalkot 4. Shri Sayermalji Jethamalji Chordia, Bangalore
5. Shri Premrajji Bhanwarlalji Shrisrimal, Durg 6. Shri S. Kishanchandji
Chordia, Madras 7. Shri Kanwarlalji Betala, Guwahati 8. Seth Khivrajji Chordia
Madras 9. Shri Gumanmalji Chordia, Madras 10. Shri S. Badalchandji Chordia,
Madras 11. Shri J. Doolichandji Chordia, Madras 12. Shri S. Ratanchandji
Chordia, Madras 13. Shri J. Annarajji Chordia, Madras 14. Shri S. Sayerchandji
Chordia, Madras 15. Shri R. Shantillalji Uttamchandji Chordia, Madras 16. Shri
Siremalji Hirachandji Chordia, Madras 17. Shri J. Hukumchandji Chordia, Madras
Stambh Member 1. Shri Agarchandji Fatechandji Parkh, Jodhpur 2. Shri Jasrajji
Ganeshmalji Sancheti, Jodhpur 3. Shri Tilakchandji Sagarmalji Sancheti, Madras
4. Shri Poosalalji Kisturchandji Surana, Katangi 5. Shri R. Prasannachandji
Chordia, Madras 6. Shri Deepchandji Chordia, Madras 7. Shri Moolchandji Chordia,
Katangi 8. Shri Vardhman Industries, Kanpur 9. Shri Mangilalji Mishrilalji
Sancheti, Durg 5. Shri Hiralalji Pannalalji Chopra, Byawer 6. Shri Mohanlalji
Nemichandji Lalwani, Changatola . 7. Shri Deepchandji Chandanmalji Chordia,
Madras 8. Shri Pannalalji Bhagchandji Bothra, Changatola 9. Smt. Sirekunwar Bai
Dharm Patni Sw. Shri Suganchandji Jhamar, Madurantakam 10. Shri Bastimalji
Mohanlalji Bohra (KGF) Jadan 11. Shri Thanchandji Mehta, Jodhpur 12. Shri
Bhairudanji Labhchandji Surana, Nagaur 13. Shri Khubchandji Gadiya, Byawer 14.
Shri Mishrilalji Dhanrajji Vinaykia, Byawer 15. Shri Indrachandji Baid,
Rajnandgaon 16. Shri Ravtamlaji Bhikamchandji Pagaria, Balaghat 17. Shri
Ganeshmalji Dharmicandji Kankaria, Tangla 18. Shri Suganchandji Bokdia, Indore
19. Shri Harkachandji Sagarmalji Betala, Indore 20. Shri Raghunathmalji
Likhmichandji Lodha, Changatola 21. Shri Sidhkarnajji Shikharchandji Baid,
Changatola

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 * sadasya- sUcI / zrI AgamaprakAzana samiti, byAvara arthasahayogI sadasyoM kI
zubha nAmAvalI mahAstambha saMrakSaka 1. zrI biradIcaMdajI prakAzacaMdajI
talesarA, pAlI 1. zrI seTha mohanamalajI corar3iyA, madrAsa 2. zrI gulAbacandajI
mAMgIlAlajI surANA, sikandarAbAda 2. zrI jJAnarAjajI kevalacandajI mUthA, pAlI
3. zrI pukharAjajI zizodiyA, byAvara 3. zrI premarAjajI jatanarAjajI mehatA,
mer3atA siTI 4. zrI za. jar3AvamalajI mANakacandajI betAlA, bAgalakoTa 4. zrI
sAyaramalajI jeThamalajI corar3iyA, baiMgalora 5. zrI premarAjajI bhaMvaralAlajI
zrIzrImAla, durga 6. zrI esa. kizanacandajI corar3iyA, madrAsa 7. zrI
kaMvaralAlajI baitAlA, gohATI 8. zrI seTha khIMvarAjajI corar3iyA madrAsa 9. zrI
gumAnamalajI corar3iyA, madrAsa 10. zrI esa. bAdalacandajI corar3iyA, madrAsa
11. zrI je. dulIcandajI corar3iyA, madrAsa 12. zrI esa. ratanacandajI corar3iyA,
madrAsa 13. zrI je. annarAjajI corar3iyA, madrAsa 14. zrI esa. sAyaracandajI
corar3iyA, madrAsa 15. zrI Ara. zAntilAlajI uttamacandajI corar3iyA, madrAsa zrI
siremalajI hIrAcandajI corar3iyA, madrAsa zrI je. hukmIcandajI corar3iyA,
madrAsa stambha sadasya 1. zrI agaracandajI phatecandajI pArakha, jodhapura 2.
zrI jasarAjajI gaNezamalajI saMcetI, jodhapura 3. zrI tilokacaMdajI sAgaramalajI
saMcetI, madrAsa 4. zrI pUsAlAlajI kistUracaMdajI surANA, kaTaMgI 5. zrI Ara.
prasannacandajI corar3iyA, madrAsa 6. zrI dIpacandajI corar3iyA, madrAsa 7. zrI
mUlacandajI corar3iyA, kaTaMgI 8. zrI varddhamAna iNDasTrIja, kAnapura 9. zrI
mAMgIlAlajI mizrIlAlajI saMcetI, durga 16. 17. - 5. zrI hIrAlAlajI pannAlAlajI
caupar3A, byAvara 6. zrI mohanalAlajI nemIcandajI lalavANI, cAMgATolA . 7. zrI
dIpacaMdajI candanamalajI corar3iyA, madrAsa 8. zrI pannAlAlajI bhAgacandajI
botharA, cAMgATolA 9. zrImatI sireku~vara bAI dharmapatnI sva. zrI suganacandajI
jhAmar3a, madurAntakam 10. zrI bastImalajI mohanalAlajI boharA (KGF) jAr3ana 11.
zrI thAnacandajI mehatA, jodhapura 12. zrI bhairUdAnajI lAbhacandajI surANA,
nAgaura 13. zrI khUbacandajI gAdiyA, byAvara 14. zrI mizrIlAlajI dhanarAjajI
vinAyakiyA, byAvara 15. zrI indracandajI baida, rAjanAMdagAMva 16. zrI
rAvatamalajI bhIkamacandajI pagAriyA, bAlAghATa 17. zrI gaNezamalajI
dharmIcandajI kAMkariyA, TaMgalA 18. zrI suganacandajI bokar3iyA, indaura 19.
zrI harakacandajI sAgaramalajI betAlA, indaura 20. zrI raghunAthamalajI
likhamIcandajI lor3hA, cAMgATolA 21. zrI siddhakaraNajI zikharacandajI baida,
cAMgATolA

Page #213 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
• Member List / 22. Shri Sagarmalji Nortamlaji Pincha, Madras 23. Shri
Mohanrajji Mukanchandji Baliya, Ahmedabad 24. Shri Kesharimalji Janvarilalji
Talesara, Pali 25. Shri Ratanchandji Uttamchandji Modi, Baywar 26. Shri
Dharmichadji Bhagchandji Bohra, Jhutha 27. Shri Chhogmalji Hemrajji Lodha Dondi
Lohara 28. Shri Gunachandji Dalichandji Kataria, Bellary 29. Shri Mulchandji
Sujanmalji Sancheti, Jodhpur 30. Shri C. Amarchandji Bothra, Madras 31. Shri
Bhanvarlalji Mulchandji Surana, Madras 32. Shri Badalchandji Jugrajji Mehta,
Indore 33. Shri Lalchandji Mohanlalji Kothari, Gothan 34. Shri Hiralalji
Pannalalji Chopra, Ajmer 35. Shri Mohanlalji Parsamalji Pagaria, Bangalore 36.
Shri Bhanvarimalji Chordia, Madras 37. Shri Bhanvarlalji Gothi, Madras 38. Shri
Jalmachandji Rikhbachandji Bafna, Agra 39. Shri Ghevarchandji Pukharajji Bhurt,
Guwahati 40. Shri Jabarchandji Gelda, Madras 41. Shri Jadavmalji Suganchandji,
Madras 42. Shri Pukharajji Vijayrajji, Madras 43. Shri Chenmalji Surana Trust,
Madras 44. Shri Lunakaranji Rikhbachandji Lodha, Madras 45. Shri Surajmalji
Sajjanrajji Mehta, Koppal Associate Members 1. Shri Devkaranji Shrichandji Dosi,
Medtacity 2. Smt. Chaganibai Vinaykia, Baywar 3. Shri Poonamchandji Nahata,
Jodhpur 4. Shri Bhanvarlalji Vijayrajji Kankaria, Chillipuram 5. Shri
Bhanvarlalji Chopra, Baywar 6. Shri Vijayrajji Ratnalalji Chatar, Baywar 7. Shri
B. Gajrajji Bokdia, Salem 8. Shri Phoolchandji Gautamchandji Kanted, Pali 9.
Shri K. Pukharajji Bafna, Madras 10. Shri Rupraji Jodharajji Mootha, Delhi 11.
Shri Mohanlalji Mangalchandji Pagaria, Raipur 12. Shri Nathmalji Mohanlalji
Lunia, Chandawal 13. Shri Bhanvarlalji Gautamchandji Pagaria, Kushalpura 14.
Shri Uttamchandji Mangilalji, Jodhpur 15. Shri Mulchandji Parkh, Jodhpur 16.
Shri Sumermalji Medtia, Jodhpur 17. Shri Ganeshmalji Nemichandji Tantia, Jodhpur
18. Shri Udayrajji Pukharajji Sancheti, Jodhpur 19. Shri Badarmalji Pukharajji
Bant, Kanpur 20. Smt. Sundarbai Gothi Dharmpatni Shri Tarachandji Gothi, Jodhpur
21. Shri Raychandji Mohanlalji, Jodhpur 22. Shri Ghevarchandji Rupraji, Jodhpur
23. Shri Bhanvarlalji Manakchandji Surana, Madras 24. Shri Janvarilalji
Amarchandji Kothari, Baywar 25. Shri Manakchandji Kishnalalji, Medtacity 26.
Shri Mohanlalji Gulabchandji Chatar, Baywar 27. Shri Jasrajji Janvarilalji
Dhariawal, 28. Shri Mohanlalji Champalalji Gothi, Jodhpur 29. Shri Nemichandji
Dakalia Mehta, Jodhpur 30. Shri Tarachandji Kevalchandji Karnavat, Jodhpur 31.
Shri Asumal & Co., Jodhpur 32. Shri Pukharajji Lodha, Jodhpur 33. Smt. Suganibai
Dharmpatni Shri Mishrilalji Sand, Jodhpur

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 * sadasya- sUcI / 22. zrI sAgaramalajI noratamalajI pIMcA, madrAsa 23. zrI
mohanarAjajI mukanacandajI bAliyA, ahamadAbAda 24. zrI kezarImalajI
jaMvarIlAlajI talesarA, pAlI 25. zrI ratanacandajI uttamacandajI modI, byAvara
26. zrI dharmIcandajI bhAgacandajI boharA, jhUThA 27. zrI chogAmalajI hemarAjajI
lor3hA DoMDIlohArA 28. zrI guNacaMdajI dalIcaMdajI kaTAriyA, bellArI 29. zrI
mUlacandajI sujAnamalajI saMcetI, jodhapura 30. zrI sI. amaracandajI botharA,
madrAsa 31. zrI bhaMvaralAlajI mUlacandajI surANA, madrAsa 32. zrI bAdalacaMdajI
jugarAjajI mehatA, indaura 33. zrI lAlacaMdajI mohanalAlajI koThArI, goThana 34.
zrI hIrAlAlajI pannAlAlajI caupar3A, ajamera 35. zrI mohanalAlajI pArasamalajI
pagAriyA, baiMgalora 36. zrI bhaMvarImalajI corar3iyA, madrAsa 37. zrI
bhaMvaralAlajI goThI, madrAsa 38. zrI jAlamacaMdajI rikhabacaMdajI bAphanA,
AgarA 39. zrI ghevaracaMdajI pukharAjajI bhuraTa, gohATI 40. zrI jabaracandajI
gelar3A, madrAsa 41. zrI jar3AvamalajI suganacandajI, madrAsa 42. zrI
pukharAjajI vijayarAjajI, madrAsa 43. zrI cenamalajI surANA TrasTa, madrAsa 44.
zrI lUNakaraNajI rikhabacaMdajI lor3hA, madrAsa 45. zrI sUrajamalajI
sajjanarAjajI mahetA, koppala sahayogI sadasya 1. zrI devakaraNajI zrIcandajI
DosI, mer3atAsiTI 2. zrImatI chaganIbAI vinAyakiyA, byAvara 3. zrI pUnamacandajI
nAhaTA, jodhapura 4. zrI bhaMvaralAlajI vijayarAjajI kAMkariyA, cillIpuram 5.
zrI bhaMvaralAlajI caupar3A, byAvara 6. zrI vijayarAjajI ratanalAlajI catara,
byAvara 7. zrI bI. gajarAjajI bokaDiyA, selama 8. zrI phUlacandajI
gautamacandajI kAMTheDa, pAlI 9. zrI ke. pukharAjajI bAphaNA, madrAsa 10. zrI
rUparAjajI jodharAjajI mUthA, dillI 11. zrI mohanalAlajI maMgalacaMdajI
pagAriyA, rAyapura 12. zrI nathamalajI mohanalAlajI lUNiyA, caNDAvala 13. zrI
bhaMvaralAlajI gautamacandajI pagAriyA, kuzAlapurA 14. zrI uttamacaMdajI
mAMgIlAlajI, jodhapura 15. zrI mUlacandajI pArakha, jodhapura 16. zrI
sumeramalajI mer3atiyA, jodhapura 17. zrI gaNezamalajI nemIcandajI TAMTiyA,
jodhapura 18. zrI udayarAjajI pukharAjajI saMcetI, jodhapura 19. zrI
bAdaramalajI pukharAjajI baMTa, kAnapura 20. zrImatI sundarabAI goThI
dharmapatnI zrI tArAcaMdajI goThI, jodhapura 21. zrI rAyacandajI mohanalAlajI,
jodhapura 22. zrI ghevaracandajI rUparAjajI, jodhapura 23. zrI bhaMvaralAlajI
mANakacaMdajI surANA, madrAsa 24. zrI jaMvarIlAlajI amaracandajI koThArI,
byAvara 25. zrI mANakacaMdajI kizanalAlajI, mer3atAsiTI 26. zrI mohanalAlajI
gulAbacandajI catara, byAvara 27. zrI jasarAjajI jaMvarIlAlajI dhArIvAla, 28.
zrI mohanalAlajI campAlAlajI goThI, jodhapura 29. zrI nemIcaMdajI DAkaliyA
mehatA, jodhapura 30. zrI tArAcaMdajI kevalacaMdajI karNAvaTa, jodhapura 31. zrI
AsUmala eNDa kaM., jodhapura 32. zrI pukharAjajI loDhA, jodhapura 33. zrImatI
suganIbAI dharmapatnI zrI mizrIlAlajI sAMDa, jodhapura

Page #214 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Member List / Suraana, Jodhpur 34. Shri Bachhrajji 35. Shri Harkachandji Mehta,
Jodhpur 36. Shri Devrajji Labhchandji Medtiya, Jodhpur 37. Shri Kanakrajji
Madanrajji Golia, Jodhpur 38. Shri Ghevarchandji Parsamalji Tantia, Jodhpur 39.
Shri Mangilalji Chordia, Kuchera 40. Shri Sardarmalji Suraana, Bhilai 41. Shri
Okchandji Hemrajji Soni, Durg 42. Shri Surajkaranji Suraana, Madras 43. Shri
Ghisulalji Lalchandji Parkh, Durg 44. Shri Pukharajji Bohra, (Jain Transport
Co.) Jodhpur 45. Shri Champalalji Saklecha, Jalna 46. Shri Premrajji Mithalalji
Kamdar, Bangalore 47. Shri Bhanwarlalji Motha & Sons, Jaipur 48. Shri Lalchandji
Motilalji Gadia, Bangalore 49. Shri Bhanwarlalji Navratnamalji Sankhla,
Mettupalayam 50. Shri Pukharajji Chhallani, Karanguli 51. Shri Asakaranji
Jasrajji Parkh, Durg 52. Shri Ganeshmalji Hemrajji Soni, Bhilai 53. Shri
Amritrajji Jaswantrajji Mehta, 54. Shri Ghevarchandji Kishoramalji Parkh,
Jodhpur 55 Shri Mangilalji Rekchandji Parkh, Jodhpur 56. Shri Munnilalji
Mulchandji Gulechha, Jodhpur 57. Shri Ratnalalji Lakhpatrajji, Jodhpur 58. Shri
Jivrajji Parsamalji Kothari, Medta City 59. Shri Bhanwarlalji Rikhabchandji
Nahata, Nagaur 60. Shri Mangilalji Prakashchandji Runwal, Mysore 61. Shri
Pukharajji Bohra, Pipaliya Kalan 62. Shri Harkachandji Jugrajji Bafna, Bangalore
63. Shri Chandanmalji Premchandji Modi, Bhilai 64. Shri Bhivrajji Baghmar,
Kuchera 65. Shri Tilokchandji Premprakashji, Ajmer 66. Shri Vijaylalji
Premchandji Gulechha Rajnandgaon 67. Shri Ravatmalji Chajed, Bhilai 68. Shri
Bhanwarlalji Dungarmalji Kankaria, Bhilai 69. Shri Hiralalji Hastimalji
Deshlhara, Bhilai 60. Shri Vardhaman Sthanakwasi Jain Shravak Sangh,
Dallirajhara 71. Shri Champalalji Buddharajji Bafna, Byaver 72. Shri Gangaramji
Indrachandji Bohra, Kuchera 73. Shri Fatehrajji Nemichandji Karnavat, Calcutta
74. Shri Balchandji Thanchandji Bhurt, Calcutta 75. Shri Sampatrajji Kataria,
Jodhpur 76. Shri Javrilalji Shanti Lalji Suraana, Bolaram 77. Shri Kanmalji
Kothari, Dadia 75. Shri Pannalalji Motilalji Suraana, Pali 79. Shri Manakchandji
Ratnalalji Munot, Tangla 80. Shri Chimman Singhji Mohansinghji Lodha, Byaver 81.
Shri Riddhakaranji Ravatmalji Bhurt, Guwahati 82. Shri Parsamalji Mahavirchandji
Bafna, Gothan 83. Shri Fakirchandji Kamalchandji Shrisrimal, Kuchera 84. Shri
Mangilalji Madanlalji Chordia, Bhairunda 85. Shri Sohनलालji Lunakaranji Suraana,
Kuchera 86. Shri Ghisulalji, Parsamalji, Javrilalji Kothari, Gothan 87. Shri
Sardarmalji & Company, Jodhpur 88. Shri Champalalji Hiralalji Bagrecha, Jodhpur

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 sadasya - sUcI / surANA, jodhapura 34. zrI baccharAjajI 35. zrI harakacandajI
mehatA, jodhapura 36. zrI devarAjajI lAbhacaMdajI mer3atiyA, jodhapura 37. zrI
kanakarAjajI madanarAjajI goliyA, jodhapura 38. zrI ghevaracandajI pArasamalajI
TAMTiyA, jodhapura 39. zrI mAMgIlAlajI corar3iyA, kucerA 40. zrI saradAramalajI
surANA, bhilAI 41. zrI okacaMdajI hemarAjajI sonI, durga 42. zrI sUrajakaraNajI
surANA, madrAsa 43. zrI ghIsUlAlajI lAlacaMdajI pArakha, durga 44. zrI
pukharAjajI boharA, (jaina TrAnsaporTa kaM.)jodhapura 45. zrI campAlAlajI
sakalecA, jAlanA 46. zrI premarAjajI mIThAlAlajI kAmadAra, baiMgalora 47. zrI
bhaMvaralAlajI mUthA eNDa sansa, jayapura 48. zrI lAlacaMdajI motIlAlajI gAdiyA,
baiMgalora 49. zrI bhaMvaralAlajI navaratnamalajI sAMkhalA, meTTUpaliyama 50.
zrI pukharAjajI challANI, karaNagullI 51. zrI AsakaraNajI jasarAjajI pArakha,
durga 52. zrI gaNezamalajI hemarAjajI sonI, bhilAI 53. zrI amRtarAjajI
jasavantarAjajI mehatA, 54. zrI ghevaracaMdajI kizoramalajI pArakha, jodhapura
55 zrI mAMgIlAlajI rekhacaMdajI pArakha, jodhapura 56. zrI munnIlAlajI
mUlacaMdajI gulecchA, jodhapura 57. zrI ratanalAlajI lakhapatarAjajI, jodhapura
58. zrI jIvarAjajI pArasamalajI koThArI, mer3atA siTI 59. zrI bhaMvaralAlajI
rikhabacaMdajI nAhaTA, nAgaura 60. zrI mAMgIlAlajI prakAzacandajI rUNavAla,
maisUra 61. zrI pukharAjajI boharA, pIpaliyA kalAM 62. zrI harakacaMdajI
jugarAjajI bAphanA, baiMgalora 63. zrI candanamalajI premacaMdajI modI, bhilAI
64. zrI bhIMvarAjajI bAghamAra, kucerA 65. zrI tilokacaMdajI premaprakAzajI,
ajamera 66. zrI vijayalAlajI premacaMdajI gulecchA rAjanAMdagA~va 67. zrI
rAvatamalajI chAjer3a, bhilAI 68. zrI bhaMvaralAlajI DUMgaramalajI kAMkariyA,
bhilAI 69. zrI hIrAlAlajI hastImalajI dezalaharA, bhilAI 60. zrI varddhamAna
sthAnakavAsI jaina zrAvakasaMgha, dallIrAjaharA 71. zrI campAlAlajI buddharAjajI
bAphaNA, byAvara 72. zrI gaMgArAmajI indracaMdajI boharA, kucerA 73. zrI
phateharAjajI nemIcaMdajI karNAvaTa, kalakattA 74. zrI bAlacaMdajI thAnacandajI
bhuraTa, kalakattA 75. zrI sampatarAjajI kaTAriyA, jodhapura 76. zrI
javarIlAlajI zAMtilAlajI surANA, bolArama 77. zrI kAnamalajI koThArI, dAdiyA 75.
zrI pannAlAlajI motIlAlajI surANA, pAlI 79. zrI mANakacaMdajI ratanalAlajI
muNota, TaMgalA 80. zrI cimmanasiMhajI mohanasiMhajI loDhA, byAvara 81. zrI
riddhakaraNajI rAvatamalajI bhuraTa, gauhATI 82. zrI pArasamalajI
mahAvIracaMdajI bAphanA, goThana 83. zrI phakIracaMdajI kamalacaMdajI
zrIzrImAla, kucerA 84. zrI mA~gIlAlajI madanalAlajI corar3iyA, bhairUMdA 85. zrI
sohanalAlajI lUNakaraNajI surANA, kucerA 86. zrI ghIsUlAlajI, pArasamalajI,
jaMvarIlAlajI koThArI, goThana 87. zrI saradAramalajI eNDa kampanI, jodhapura
88. zrI campAlAlajI hIrAlAlajI bAgarecA, jodhapura

Page #215 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
89. Shri Pukharajji Kataria, Jodhpur 90. Shri Indrachandji Mukanchandji, Indore
91. Shri Bhanwarlalji Bafna, Indore 92. Shri Jethmalji Modi, Indore 93. Shri
Balchandji Amarchandji Modi, Byawar 94. Shri Kundanmalji Parsamalji Bhandari,
Bangalore 95. Smt. Kamalakunwar Lalwani, wife of late 115. Shri Mohanlalji
Dhariawal, Pali 116. Smt. Ramkunwarbai, wife of Shri Chandmalji Lodha, Bombay
117. Shri Mangilalji Uttamchandji Bafna, Bangalore 118. Shri Sanchalalji Bafna,
Aurangabad 119. Shri Bhikhamchandji Manakchandji Khabia, (Kudalore) Madras 97.
Shri Suganchandji Sancheti, Rajnandgaon 98. Shri Prakashchandji Jain, Nagaur
120. Smt. Anopkunwar, wife of Shri Champalalji Sanghvi, Kuchera 99. Shri
Kushalchandji Rikhabchandji Surana, Bolaram 121. Shri Sohनलालji Sojatiya,
Thanwala 100. Shri Lakshmichandji Ashok Kumarji Shrisrimal, 122. Shri
Champalalji Bhandari, Calcutta Kuchera 123. Shri Bhikhamchandji Ganeshmalji
Chaudhary, Dhulea 124. Shri Pukharajji Kishनलालji Tateड़, Secunderabad 101. Shri
Gudarmalji Champalalji, Gothan 102. Shri Tejarajji Kothari, Mangaliyaवास 103.
Shri Sampatrajji Chordia, Madras 104. Shri Amarchandji Chajed, Padu Bari 105.
Shri Jugrajji Dhanrajji Barmecha, Madras 106. Shri Pukharajji Naharmalji
Lalwani, Madras 107. Smt. Kanchandevi and Nirmala Devi, Madras 108. Shri
Dulerajji Bhanwarlalji Kothari, Kushalपुरा 125. Shri Mishrilalji Sajjanlalji
Kataria, Secunderabad 126. Shri Vardhaman Sthanakwasi Jain Shravak Sangh, Bagar
Nagar 109. Shri Bhanwarlalji Mangilalji Betala, Deh 110. Shri Jivrajji
Bhanwarlalji Chordia, Bhairunda 111. Shri Mangilalji Shanti Lalji Runwal,
Harsolаv 112. Shri Chandmalji Dhanrajji Modi, Ajmer 113. Shri Ramprasanna
Gyanprasar Kendra, Chandrapur 114. Shri Bhurmalji Dulichandji Bokardia, Medta
City Shri Parsamalji Lalwani, Gothan 96. Shri Akhechandji Lunकरणji Bhandari,
Calcutta 127. Shri Pukharajji Parsamalji Lalwani, Bilara 128. Shri T. Parsamalji
Chordia, Madras 129. Shri Motilalji Asulalji Bohra & Co., Bangalore 130. Shri
Sampatrajji Surana, Manmad

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 89. zrI pukharAjajI kaTAriyA, jodhapura 90. zrI indracandajI mukanacandajI,
indaura 91. zrI bhaMvaralAlajI bAphaNA, indaura 92. zrI jeThamalajI modI,
indaura 93. zrI bAlacandajI amaracandajI modI, byAvara 94. zrI kundanamalajI
pArasamalajI bhaMDArI, baiMgalora 95. zrImatI kamalAkaMvara lalavANI dharmapatnI
sva. 115. zrI mohanalAlajI dhArIvAla, pAlI 116. zrImatI rAmakuMvarabAI
dharmapatnI zrI cAMdamalajI loDhA, bambaI 117. zrI mA~gIlAlajI uttamacaMdajI
bAphaNA, baiMgalora 118. zrI sAMcAlAlajI bAphaNA, auraMgAbAda 119. zrI
bhIkhamacandajI mANakacandajI khAbiyA, (kuDAlora) madrAsa 97. zrI suganacandajI
saMcetI, rAjanAMdagA~va 98. zrI prakAzacaMdajI jaina, nAgaura 120. zrImatI
anopakuMvara dharmapatnI zrI campAlAlajI saMghavI, kucerA 99. zrI kuzAlacaMdajI
rikhabacandajI surANA, bolArama 121. zrI sohanalAlajI sojatiyA, thAMvalA 100.
zrI lakSmIcaMdajI azokakumArajI zrIzrImAla, 122. zrI campAlAlajI bhaNDArI,
kalakattA kucerA 123. zrI bhIkhamacandajI gaNezamalajI caudharI, dhUliyA 124.
zrI pukharAjajI kizanalAlajI tAter3a, sikandarAbAda 101. zrI gUdar3amalajI
campAlAlajI, goThana 102. zrI tejarAjajI koThArI, mAMgaliyAvAsa 103. zrI
sampatarAjajI corar3iyA, madrAsa 104. zrI amaracaMdajI chAjer3a, pAdu bar3I 105.
zrI jugarAjajI dhanarAjajI baramecA, madrAsa 106. zrI pukharAjajI nAharamalajI
lalavANI, madrAsa 107. zrImatI kaMcanadevI va nirmalA devI, madrAsa 108. zrI
dulerAjajI bhaMvaralAlajI koThArI, kuzAlapurA 125. zrI mizrIlAlajI sajjanalAlajI
kaTAriyA, sikandarAbAda 126. zrI varddhamAna sthAnakavAsI jaina zrAvaka saMgha,
bagar3Inagara 109. zrI bhaMvaralAlajI mAMgIlAlajI betAlA, Deha 110. zrI
jIvarAjajI bhaMvaralAlajI corar3iyA, bhairUMdA 111. zrI mA~gIlAlajI zAMtilAlajI
rUNavAla, harasolAva 112. zrI cAMdamalajI dhanarAjajI modI, ajamera 113. zrI
rAmaprasanna jJAnaprasAra kendra, candrapura 114. zrI bhUramalajI dulIcaMdajI
bokar3iyA, mer3atAsiTI zrI pArasamalajI lalavANI, goThana 96. zrI akhecandajI
lUNakaraNajI bhaNDArI, kalakattA 127. zrI pukharAjajI pArasamalajI lalavANI,
bilAr3A 128. zrI TI. pArasamalajI corar3iyA, madrAsa 129. zrI motIlAlajI
AsUlAlajI boharA eNDa kaM., baiMgalora 130. zrI sampatarAjajI surANA, manamAr3a

Page #216 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Life Sketch of Yuvacharya Shri Mishrimalji M.Sa. 'Madhukar' Muni  **Birth:**
* Date: 14th Margashirsha Shukla, Vikram Samvat 1970 * Place: Tinwari Nagar,
Jodhpur District, Rajasthan * Mother: Smt. Tulsibai * Father: Shri Jamnalalji
Dhaadiwal  **Initiation:** * Date: 10th Vaishakh Shukla, Vikram Samvat 1980 *
Place: Bhinay Gram, Ajmer District * Diksha Guru: Shri Joravarmalji M.Sa. *
Shiksha Guru (Guru Brother): Shri Hazarimlalji M.Sa.  **Acharya Parampara:** *
Pujya Acharya Shri Jaymallji M.Sa.  **Acharya Pad:** * Jay Gachch - Vikram
Samvat 2004 * Renunciation of Acharya Pad for the unity of the Shraman Sangh -
Vikram Samvat 2009  **Upadhyaya Pad:** * Vikram Samvat 2033  **Yuvacharya Pad:**
* Announcement: 1st Shravan Shukla, Vikram Samvat 2036 (25th July 1979,
Hyderabad) * Chadar Mahotsav: 10th Chaitra Shukla, Vikram Samvat 2037 (23rd
March 1980, Jodhpur)  **Nirvana:** * Date: 7th Migsar Vad, Vikram Samvat 2040
(26th November 1983, Nashik, Maharashtra)  **Personality and Knowledge:** * A
glorious, majestic, and radiant forehead, bright large eyes, a smile that
illuminated his face, a gentle and affectionate voice, a radiance of spiritual
brilliance, profound devotion to his Gurus, humility along with knowledge,
wisdom along with authority, and a disciplined Shraman. * He possessed profound
knowledge of Prakrit, Sanskrit, Grammar, Prakrit Grammar, Jain Agamas, Nyaya
Darshan, etc. * He was a highly skilled orator, novelist, storyteller, and
commentator.  **Published Works:** * **Pravachan Sangrah:**     1. Antar Ki Aur,
Part 1 & 2     2. Sadhana Ke Sutra     3. Paryushana Parva Pravachan     4.
Anekanta Darshan     5. Jain-Karmasiddhanta     6. Jain Tattva-Darshan     7.
Jain Sanskrit - Ek Vishleshan     8. Grihasth Dharma     9. Aparigraha Darshan
10. Ahimsa Darshan     11. Tap Ek Vishleshan     12. Adhyatma-Vikas Ki Bhoomika
* **Katha Sahitya:**     * Jain Katha Mala, Part 1 to 51 * **Upanyas:**     1.
Pinjare Ka Panchhi     2. Ahimsa Ki Vijay     3. Talash     4. Chhaya     5. Aan
* **Other Books:**     1. Agam Parichay     2. Jain Dharma Ki Hazar Shikshaen
3. Jiyo To Aise Jiyo * **Special:**     * Compiler and Chief Editor of Agam
Battisi  **Shishya:** * Muni Shri Vinaykumarji 'Bheem'  **Website:** *
gyanmandirdkobatiron.org

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
yuvAcArya zrI mizrImalajI ma.sA. 'madhukara' muni kA (jIvana paricaya janma
tithi vi.saM. 1970 mArgazIrSa zuklA caturdazI janma-sthAna tiMvarI nagara, jilA-
jodhapura (rAja.) mAtA zrImatI tulasIbAI pitA zrI jamanAlAlajI dhAr3IvAla dIkSA
tithi vaizAkha zuklA 10 vi.saM. 1980 dIkSA-sthAna bhiNAya grAma, jilA-ajamera
dIkSAguru zrI jorAvaramalajI ma.sA. zikSAguru (gurubhrAtA) zrI hajArImalajI
ma.sA. AcArya paramparA pUjya AcArya zrI jayamallajI ma.sA. AcArya pada jaya
gaccha-vi.saM.2004 zramaNa saMgha kI ekatA hetu AcArya pada kA tyAga vi.saM.2009
upAdhyAya pada vi.saM.2033 nAgaura (varSAvAsa) yuvAcArya pada kI ghoSaNA zrAvaNa
zuklA 1 vi.sa. 2036 dinAMka 25 julAI 1979 (haidarAbAda) yuvAcArya pada-cAdara
mahotsava vi.saM. 2037 caitra zuklA 10 dinAMka 23-3-80, jodhapura svargavAsa
vi.saM.2040 migasara vada 7 dinAMka 26-11-1983, nAsika (mahArASTra) ApakA
vyaktitva evaM jJAna : 1. gauravapUrNa bhavya tejasvI lalATa, camakadAra bar3I
A~kheM, mukha para smita kI khilatI AbhA aura sneha tathA saujanya varSAti
komala vANI, AdhyAtmika teja kA nikhAra, gurujanoM ke prati agAdha zraddhA,
vidyA ke sAtha vinaya, adhikAra ke sAtha viveka aura anuzAsita zramaNa the|
prAkRta, saMskRta, vyAkaraNa, prAkRta vyAkaraNa, jaina Agama, nyAya darzana Adi
kA praur3ha jJAna munizrI ko prApta thaa| Apa uccakoTi ke pravacanakAra,
upanyAsakAra, kathAkAra evaM vyAkhyAkAra the| Apake prakAzita sAhitya kI
nAmAvalI pravacana saMgraha : 1. antara kI ora, bhAga 1 va 2, 2. sAdhanA ke
sUtra, 3. paryuSaNa parva pravacana, 4. anekAnta darzana, 5. jaina-
karmasiddhAnta, 6. jainatattva-darzana, 7. jaina saMskRta-eka vizleSaNa,
8.gRhasthadharma, 9. aparigraha darzana, 10. ahiMsA darzana, 11. tapa eka
vizleSaNa, 12. AdhyAtma-vikAsa kI bhuumikaa| kathA sAhitya : jaina kathA mAlA,
bhAga 1 se 51 taka upanyAsa : 1. piMjare kA paMchI, 2. ahiMsA kI vijaya, 3.
talAza, 4. chAyA, 5. Ana pafering Jinshan anya pustakeM : 1. Agama paricaya, 2.
jainadharma kI hajAra zikSAe~,3.jiyo to aise jiya vizeSa : Agama battIsI ke
saMyojaka va pradhAna smpaadk| ziSya : Apake eka ziSya haiM- 1. mani zrI
vinayakumArajI 'bhIma' 135612 gyanmandirdkobatiron.org

