Catalog link: https://jainqq.org/explore/034694/1

Page #1 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Namo Namo Nimmaladansanas, Bal Brahmachari Shri Neminaathay Namah. Pujya Anand-
Kshama-Lalit-Sushil-Sudharmasagar-Guru-bhyo Namah. Aagam-27 Bhaktaparijna Aagam
Sutra Hindi Anuvaad Anuvaadak Evam Sampadak Aagam Deepaakar Muni Deepa Ratna
Sagarji [ M.Com. M.Ed. Ph.D. Shruta Maharshi ] Aagam Hindi-Anuvaad-Shreni
Pushp-27

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 namo namo nimmaladaMsaNassa bAla brahmacArI zrI neminAthAya nama: pUjya Ananda-
kSamA-lalita-suzIla-sudharmasAgara-gurUbhyo namaH Agama-27 bhaktaparijJA
AgamasUtra hindI anuvAda anuvAdaka evaM sampAdaka Agama dIvAkara muni
dIparatnasAgarajI [ M.Com. M.Ed. Ph.D. zruta maharSi ] Agama hindI-anuvAda-zreNI
puSpa-27

Page #2 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Agam Sutra 27, Payanna Sutra-4, 'Bhaktaparijna' Sutra Agam Sutra-27-
'Bhaktaparijna' Payanna Sutra-4- Hindi Translation Where to see what? Order
Subject Order Subject Page 06 Importance of auspiciousness and knowledge,
eternal-non-eternal happiness, difference between death | 4 | Criticism-Penance
| Vrat-Samayik Aropan etc. 6 | Conduct-Khamana-Upadesh etc. 07 07 Muni
Diparatnasagar Krit "(Bhaktaparijna)" Agam Sutra-Hindi Translation" Page 2

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama sUtra 27,payannAsUtra-4,'bhaktaparijJA' sUtra AgamasUtra-27-
'bhaktaparijJA' payannAsUtra-4- hindI anuvAda kahAM kyA dekhe? krama viSaya
krama viSaya pRSTha 06 maMgala evaM jJAna kI mahattA zAzvata-azAzvata sukha
maraNa ke bheda | 4 | AlocanA-prAyazcitta | vrata-sAmAyika AropaNa Adi 6 |
AcaraNA-khAmaNA-upadeza Adi 07 07 muni dIparatnasAgara kRt "(bhaktaparijJA)"
Agama sUtra-hindI anuvAda" Page 2

Page #3 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Agama Sutra 27, Paryannasūtra-4, 'Bhaktaparijñā'  01. Krama (Order) 02. Sthāna
(Place) 03. Āgama Nāma (Name of Agama) 04. Ācāra (Conduct) 05. Sūtrakṛt
(Composer of Sūtras) 06. Samavāya (Compilation) 07. Upāsakadaśā (Layman's Stage)
08. Antakṛtdaśā (Final Stage) 09. Anuttaropapātikadaśā (Highest Celestial Stage)
10. Praśnavyākaraṇadaśā (Answering Questions Stage) 11. Vipākashruta (Karmic
Fruition) 12. Aupapātika (Supernatural) 13. Rājaprashṇīya (Royal Inquiries) 14.
Jīvājīvābhigama (Understanding Life and Non-life) 15. Prajñāpanā (Exposition)
16. Sūryaprajñapti (Description of the Sun) 17. Candraprajñapti (Description of
the Moon) 18. Jambūdvīpaprajñapti (Description of Jambūdvīpa) 19. Nirayāvalikā
(Hells) 20. Kalpavataṃsikā (Celestial Garlands) 21. Puṣpaka (Flowers) 22.
Puṣpacūlikā (Flower Garlands) 23. Vṛṣṇidaśā (Vṛṣṇi Stage) 24. Catuḥśaraṇa (Four
Refuges) 45. Āgama Vargīkaraṇa (Classification of Āgamas)  Sūtra 25. Aṅgasūtra-1
26. Aṅgasūtra-2 27. Bhaktaparijñā (Aṅgasūtra-3) 28. Tāṇḍulavaicarika
(Aṅgasūtra-4) 29. Saṃstāraka (Aṅgasūtra-5) 30.1 Gaccācāra (Aṅgasūtra-6) 30.2
Candraveddhaka (Aṅgasūtra-7) 31. Gaṇividyā (Aṅgasūtra-8) 32. Devendrastava
(Aṅgasūtra-9) 33. Vīrastava (Upāṅgasūtra-10) 34. Niśītha (Upāṅgasūtra-11) 35.
Bṛhatkalpā (Upāṅgasūtra-12) 36. Vyavahāra (Paryannasūtra-1) 37. Daśāśrutaskandha
(Paryannasūtra-2) 38. Jītakalpa (Paryannasūtra-3) 39. Upāṅgasūtra-5 40. Āvaśyaka
(Upāṅgasūtra-6) 41.1 Oghanirjukti (Upāṅgasūtra-7) 41.2 Piṇḍanirjukti
(Upāṅgasūtra-8) 42. Daśavaikālika (Upāṅgasūtra-9) 43. Uttarādhyayana
(Upāṅgasūtra-10) 44. Nandī (Chedas ūtra-1 to 6) 45. Anuyogadvāra (Mūlasūtra-1 to
4, Cūlikāsūtra-1 and 2)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama sUtra 27, payannAsUtra -4, 'bhaktaparijJA' krama 01 02 03 sthAna 04 05 06
Agama kA nAma AcAra sUtrakRt samavAya bhagavatI jJAtAdharmakathA 07 upAsakadazA
08 aMtakRt dazA 09 anuttaropapAtikadazA 10 praznavyAkaraNadazA 11 vipAkazruta 12
aupapAtika 13 rAjaprazniya 14 jIvAjIvAbhigama 15 prajJApanA 16 sUryaprajJapti 17
candraprajJapti 18 jaMbUdvIpaprajJapti 19 nirayAvalikA kalpavataMsikA 20 21
puSpaka 22 puSpacUlikA 23 vRSNidazA 24 catuHzaraNa 45 Agama vargIkaraNa sUtra
krama aMgasUtra- 1 25 aMgasUtra - 2 26 aMgasUtra- 3 27 aMgasUtra-4 aMgasUtra- 5
aMgasUtra- 6 aMgasUtra-7 aMgasUtra- 8 aMgasUtra- 9 upAMgasUtra-10 upAMgasUtra-11
upAMgasUtra-12 payannAsUtra - 1 Agama kA nAma AturapratyAkhyAna mahApratyAkhyAna
bhaktaparijJA 28 taMdulavaicArika 29 saMstAraka 30.1 gacchAcAra 30.2
candravedhyaka 31 gaNividyA 32 devendrastava 33 vIrastava 34 nizItha 35
bRhatkalpa 36 vyavahAra aMgasUtra- 10 aMgasUtra- 11 upAMgasUtra- 1 upAMgasUtra-2
upAMgasUtra-3 upAMgasUtra-4 38 jItakalpa mahAnizItha upAMgasUtra-5 39
upAMgasUtra-6 40 Avazyaka upAMgasUtra-7 41.1 oghaniryukti upAMgasUtra-8 41.2
piMDaniryukti upAMgasUtra- 9 42 dazavaikAlika 43 44 nandI 45 anuyogadvAra 37
dazAzrutaskandha uttarAdhyayana muni dIparatnasAgara kRt "(bhaktaparijJA)" Agama
sUtra - hindI anuvAda " sUtra sUtra payannAsUtra - 2 payannAsUtra - 3
payannAsUtra-4 payannAsUtra-5 payannAsUtra - 6 payannAsUtra- 7 payannAsUtra - 7
payannAsUtra - 8 payannAsUtra- 9 payannAsUtra - 10 chedasUtra - 1 chedasUtra-2
chedasUtra - 3 chedasUtra - 4 chedasUtra -5 chedasUtra - 6 mUlasUtra - 1
mUlasUtra - 2 mUlasUtra - 2 mUlasUtra - 3 mUlasUtra - 4 cUlikAsUtra - 1
cUlikAsUtra - 2 Page 3

Page #4 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Box 10 06 02 01 13 05 04 09 Aagam Sutra 27, Payanna Sutra-4, Bhaktaparijna' Muni
Diparatnasagarji Published Literature Aagam Literature Aagam Literature
Literature Name Box Order Literature Name Original Aagam Literature: 147 6 |
Aagam Other Literature:1-1- Aagam Suttanni-Mulam print [49] -1- Maram Thanuyog
-2- Aagam Suttanni-Mulam Net [45] -2- Aagam Sambandhi Sahitya -3- Aagam Manjusha
(Mula Prat) [53] -3- Rishibhashit Suttranni | Aagam Anuvaad Sahitya: 165 -4-
Aagamiy Suktaavali 01 -1- Aagam Sutra Gujarati Anuvaad [47] | Aagam Sahitya- Kul
Pustak 516 -2- Aagam Sutra Hindi Anuvaad Net [47] | -3- Aagamsootra English
Trans. | [11] | -4- Saamsutra Sati 42rati Manuvaah [48] -5- Aagam Sutra Hindi
Anuvaad print [12] Other Literature:3 Aagam Vivechan Sahitya: 171 Tattvabhyas
Sahitya-1- Aagam Sutra Satikam [46] 2 Sutraabhyas Sahitya 06 1-2- Aagam
Suttranni Satikam Pratakar-1 / Vyakaran Sahitya| -3- Aagam Suttranni Satikam
Pratakar-2 Vyakhyan Sahitya. -4- Aagam Churni Sahitya [09] 5 Unalat Sahitya|-5-
Savrittik Aagam Suttranni-1 [40] 6 V Sahitya 04 -6- Savrittik Aagam Suttranni-2
[08] 7 Maradhana Sahitya 03 |-7- Sachurnik Aagam Suttanni. [08] 8 Pariyay
Sahitya 04 Aagam Kosh Sahitya: 1479 | 154n Sahitya-1- Aagam Saddakoso [04] 10 |
Tirthankar Sanksipt Darshan -2- Aagam Kahakoso [01] | 11hi Sahitya-3- Aagam-
Sagar-Kosh: [05] 12 Diparatnasagarna Laghushodhanibandh 05 -4- Aagam-Shabdadhi-
Sangrah (Pra-San-Gu) [04] Aagam Siwayanu Sahitya Kool Pustak 5 Aagam Anukram
Sahitya: 09 -1- Sagamvishayanoomub- (Bhoog) | 1-Aagam Sahitya (Kul Pustak) | 516
-2- Aagam Vishayanoomukram (Satikam) 04 2-Aagametar Sahitya (Kul 085 -3- Aagam
Sutra-Gatha Anukram Diparatnasagarji Ke Kul Prakashan | 601 A
AAEmunihiparatnasagarunu Sahitya | Bhumhihiparatnasagarunu Aagam Sahitya [ Pust8
516] Tenaiis Pana [98,300] 2 Bhunitiparatnasagarunu Manay Sahitya [Hut Pust8 85]
Tana Hus Pana [09,270] Munihiparatnasagar Sanhalit Tattvarth Sutra'ni Vishisht
DVD Nas Pana [27,930] Abha2. Prashanoahul 501 + Vishisht DVD Pana 1,35,500 Muni
Diparatna Sagar Krit “(Bhaktaparijna)” Aagam Sutra-Hindi Anuvaad” Page 4 02 25
05 02 | 03

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 baksa 10 06 02 01 13 05 04 09 Agama sUtra 27, payannAsUtra-4, bhaktaparijJA'
muni dIparatnasAgarajI prakAzita sAhitya Agama sAhitya Agama sAhitya sAhitya
nAma baksa krama sAhitya nAma mUla Agama sAhitya: 147 6 | Agama anya
sAhitya:1-1- AgamasuttANi-mUlaM print [49] -1- mArAma thAnuyoga -2-
AgamasuttANi-mUlaM Net [45] -2- Agama saMbaMdhI sAhitya -3- AgamamaJjUSA (mUla
prata) [53] -3- RSibhASita sUtrANi | Agama anuvAda sAhitya: 165 -4- Agamiya
sUktAvalI 01 -1- AgamasUtra gujarAtI anuvAda [47] | Agama sAhitya- kula pustaka
516 -2- AgamasUtra hindI anuvAda Net [47] | -3- Aagamsootra English Trans. |
[11] | -4- sAmasUtra saTI 42rAtI manuvAH [48] -5- AgamasUtra hindI anuvAda print
[12] anya sAhitya:3 Agama vivecana sAhitya: 171 tattvAbhyAsa sAhitya-1-
AgamasUtra saTIkaM [46] 2 sUtrAbhyAsa sAhitya 06 1-2- AgamasUtrANi saTIkaM
pratAkAra-1 / vyAkaraNa sAhitya| -3- AgamasUtrANi saTIkaM pratAkAra-2 vyAkhyAna
sAhitya. -4- Agama cUrNi sAhitya [09] 5 unalata sAhitya|-5- savRttika
AgamasUtrANi-1 [40] 6 va sAhitya 04 -6- savRttika AgamasUtrANi-2 [08] 7
mArAdhanA sAhitya 03 |-7- sacUrNika AgamasuttANi  /  [08] 8 pariyaya sAhitya 04
Agama koSa sAhitya: 1479 | 154na sAhitya-1- Agama saddakoso [04] 10 | tIrthakara
saMkSipta darzana -2- Agama kahAkoso [01] | 11hI sAhitya-3- Agama-sAgara-koSa:
[05] 12 dIparatnasAgaranA laghuzodhanibaMdha 05 -4- Agama-zabdAdi-saMgraha (prA-
saM-gu) [04] Agama sivAyanuM sAhitya kUla pustaka 5 Agama anukrama sAhitya: 09
-1- sAgamaviSayAnubha- (bhUga) | 1-Agama sAhitya (kula pustaka) | 516 -2- Agama
viSayAnukrama (saTIka) 04 2-Agametara sAhitya (kula 085 -3- Agama sUtra-gAthA
anukrama dIparatnasAgarajI ke kula prakAzana | 601 A AAEmunihIparatnasAgaranuM
sAhitya | bhumihIparatnasAgaranu Agama sAhitya [ pusta8 516] tenAisa pAnA
[98,300] 2 bhuniTIparatnasAgaranuM manya sAhitya [huta pusta8 85] tanA husa pAnA
[09,270] munihIparatnasAgara saMhalita tatvArthasUtra'nI viziSTa DVD nAsa pAnA
[27,930] abhaa2| prAzanohula 501 + viziSTa DVD pAnA 1,35,500 muni
dIparatnasAgara kRt "(bhaktaparijJA)" Agama sUtra-hindI anuvAda" Page 4 02 25 05
02 | 03

Page #5 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Āgama Sūtra 27, Payannāsūtra-4, ‘Bhaktaparijñā’  **Sūtra - 1** I speak of the
Bhaktaparijñā, in order to remember myself and others, after paying homage to
the Muni Mahāvīrasvāmī, who is endowed with great wonders and great influence.
**Sūtra - 2** The Jain religion, victorious and existing, is the giver of the
garden of the Kalpavṛkṣa, by whose support the suffering beings, wandering in
the forest of the world, attain the bliss of liberation.  **Sūtra - 3** Having
obtained the rare human birth and the word of the Jineśvara Bhagavān, the
virtuous person should become subservient to the knowledge and the taste of
eternal bliss.  **Sūtra - 4** The wise person desires the bliss of liberation,
free from afflictions, for that which is to be experienced today will be
remembered tomorrow.  **Sūtra - 5** The wise person calls the happiness of
humans and gods as misery from the point of view of the ultimate goal, because
it is terrible and impermanent in its consequences. Therefore, what is the
benefit of that happiness? (i.e., that happiness is of no use).  **Sūtra - 6**
The human with a pure intellect should strive to follow the commands of the
Jineśvara, which are the means of eternal bliss, as stated in the Jina’s word.
**Sūtra - 7** The worship of knowledge, vision, conduct, and austerity, as
spoken by the Jineśvara, is called the worship of his commands.  **Sūtra - 8**
Even the soul who is diligent in following the vows, at the time of death,
attains complete devotion by worshipping according to the sūtra.  **Sūtra - 9**
The death of the diligent person is described as three types: Bhaktaparijñā
death, Igni death, and Pādapōpagam death, for the courageous (the liberated) do
not have the same dharma as death.  **Sūtra - 10** Bhaktaparijñā death is of two
types: with thought and without thought. The death of the diligent ascetic with
a weak body, through Sanlekhanā, is with thought.  **Sūtra - 11** The death of
the ascetic without thought, without Sanlekhanā, is Bhaktaparijñā death without
effort.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama sUtra 27, payannAsUtra-4, 'bhaktaparijJA' sUtra - 1 mahAatizayavaMta aura
mahAprabhAvavAle muni mahAvIrasvAmI kI vaMdanA kara ke svayaM ko aura para ko
smaraNa karane ke hetu se maiM bhakta parijJA kahatA hU~  /  sUtra - 2 saMsAra
rUpI gahana vana meM ghUmate hue pIr3ita jIva jisa ke sahAre mokSa sukha pAte
haiM usa kalpavRkSa ke udyAna ko denevAlA jainazAsana jayavaMta vidyamAna hai  /
samAna sukha sUtra - 3 sUtra durlabha manuSyatva aura jinezvara bhagavAna kA
vacana pA kara satpuruSa ne zAzvata sukha ke eka rasIka aura jJAna ko vazavartI
honA cAhie  /  sUtra - 4 jo sukha Aja honA hai vo kala yAda karane yogya
honevAlA hai, usa ke lie paMr3ita puruSa upasarga rahita mokSa sukha kI vAMchA
karatA hai  /  ke [27] bhaktaparijJA payannAsUtra-4- hindI anuvAda sUtra - 5
paMr3ita puruSa mAnava aura devatAoM kA jo sukha hai use paramArtha se duHkha hI
kahate haiM, kyoMki vo pariNAma se dAruNa aura azAzvata hai  /  isalie usa sukha
se kyA lAbha ? (yAni vo sukha kA koI kAma nahIM hai)  /  sUtra sUtra sUtra - 6
jinavacana meM nirmala buddhivAle mAnava ne zAzvata sukha ke sAdhana aise jo
jinendra kI AjJA kA ArAdhana hai, una AjJA pAlane ke lie udyama karanA cAhie  /
- 7 - 8 jinezvara ne kahA huA jJAna, darzana, cAritra aura tapa una kA jo
ArAdhana hai vahI AjJA kA ArAdhana kahA hai dikSA pAlana meM tatpara (apramatta)
AtmA bhI maraNa ke avasara para sUtra meM kahe anusAra ArAdhanA karate hue pUrI
taraha ArAdhakapana pAtA hai  /  sUtra - 9 maraNa samAna dharma nahIM aise
dhairyavaMtane ( vItarAgane) usa udyamavaMta kA maraNa bhaktaparijJA maraNa,
iginI maraNa aura pAdapopagama maraNa aise tIna prakAra se kahA hai  /  sUtra -
10 bhakta parijJA maraNa do prakAra kA hai - savicAra aura avicAra | saMlekhanA
dvArA durbala zarIravAle udyamavaMta sAdhu kA savicAra maraNa hotA hai  /  sUtra
- 11 bhakta parijJA maraNa aura parAkrama rahita sAdhu ko saMlekhanA kie binA jo
maraNa hotA hai vo avicAra bhakta muni dIparatnasAgara kRt " (bhaktaparijJA)"
Agama sUtra - hindI anuvAda " Page 5

Page #6 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Agam Sutra 27, Payannasutra-4, 'Bhaktaparijna'  I will explain the knowledge
of Bhaktaparijna death as per my understanding.  **Sutra 12** A Yati of the
present time, who is devoid of patience and strength, who commits untimely death
and who commits Akrit (transgression), is worthy of death without any obstacles.
**Sutra 13** One who desires the happiness of Upasham, who is devoid of sorrow
and laughter, who is hopeless for his own life, who is devoid of the desire for
worldly pleasures and who is striving for Dharma, such a person is worthy of
Bhaktaparijna death.  **Sutra 14** One who has determined the state of death,
who has recognized the world as diseased and devoid of qualities, such a Bhavy
Yati or householder should be considered worthy of Bhaktaparijna death.  **Sutra
15** The ocean of the world, which is like a crocodile with disease, old age,
and death, which is always like a pool of water with birth, which gives terrible
pain in the end, is very difficult to cross. This is a matter of sorrow.
**Sutra 16** Those who are afflicted with remorse, who are dear to Dharma, who
have a desire to condemn faults, and who are free from faults and bad character,
such Pasththadics are also worthy of fasting.  **Sutra 17** After fasting, he
comes to the feet of the Guru with joy and humility, and placing his hands on
his forehead like a crown, he worships the Guru and says this.  **Sutra 18** O
virtuous one! I wish to board the excellent ship of Bhaktaparijna and sail
through the ocean of the world with the help of the liberating Guru.  **Sutra
19** That Guru, beautiful with the nectar of compassion, also says to him: (O
son!) Accept the criticism, accept the vows, forgive everyone, and then accept
the Bhaktaparijna fast.  **Sutra 20, 21** Saying "I wish!", with devotion and
respect, with a pure resolve, having destroyed the evil, worshipping the Guru's
feet properly, desiring to liberate his own self, with intense faith due to the
desire for liberation (Sanveg) and the desire to leave the world (Udveg),
whatever he does for purification, he becomes a worshipper of the soul.  **Sutra
22** Now he criticizes properly, free from the fault of Aloayan, behaving like a
child in his childhood.  **Sutra 23** When the Acharya gives the atonement with
all his qualities, he starts the atonement penance properly.  **(Muni
Diparatnasagar Krit "Bhaktaparijna" Agam Sutra - Hindi Translation) Page 61

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama sUtra 27, payannAsUtra-4, 'bhaktaparijJA' parijJA maraNa ko yathAmati meM
kahU~gA  /  sUtra 12 dhIraja bala rahita, akAla maraNa karanevAle aura akRta
(aticAra) ke karanevAle aise niravadya vartamAna kAla ke yati ko upasarga rahita
maraNa yogya hai| sUtra sUtra - 13 upazama sukha ke abhilASavAlA, zoka aura
hAsya rahita apane jIvita ke lie AzArahita, viSayasukha kI tRSNA rahita aura
dharma ke lie udyama karate hue jinheM saMvega huA hai aisA vaha (bhaktaparijJA
maraNa ke lie yogya hai|) sUtra - 14 jisane maraNa kI avasthA nizce kI hai,
jisane saMsAra kA vyAdhigrasta aura nirguNapana pahacAnA hai, aise bhavya yati
yA gRhastha ko bhaktaparijJA maraNa ke yogya mAnanA cAhie  /  sUtra - 15 vyAdhi,
jarA aura maraNa samAna magaramacchavAlA, haMmezA janma samAna pAnI ke
samUhavAlA, pariNAma meM dAruNa duHkha denevAlA saMsArarUpI samudra kAphI
duranta hai, yaha kheda kI bAta hai  /  sUtra - 16 pazcAttApa se pIr3ita, jinheM
dharma priya hai, doSa ko nindane kI tRSNAvAlA aura doSa evam duHzIlapana se
aise pAsatthAdika bhI anazana ke yogya haiN| sUtra - 17 yaha anazana kara ke
harSa sahita vinaya dvArA guru ke caraNakamala ke pAsa Akara hastakamala mukuTa
rUpa se lalATa se lagAkara guru kI vaMdanA kara ke isa prakAra kahatA hai  /
sUtra 18 satpuruSa ! bhakta parijJA rUpa uttama jahAja para car3a kara niryAmaka
guru dvArA saMsAra samAna samudrameM tairane kI maiM IcchA rakhatA hU~  /  sUtra
19 dayA samAna amRta rasa se sundara vaha guru bhI use kahate haiM ki- ( he
vatsa !) AlocanA le kara, vrata svIkAra kara ke, sarva ko khamAne ke bAda,
bhakta parijJA anazana ko aMgIkAra kara le  /  sUtra 20, 21 IcchaM ! kahakara
bhakti- bahumAna dvArA zuddha saMkalpavAlA, naSTa hue anarthavAlA guru ke
caraNakamala kI vidhivat vaMdanA kara ke apane zalya kA uddhAra karane kI IcchA
rakhanevAlA, saMvega (mokSa kA abhilASa) aura udvega (saMsAra chor3a dene kI
IcchA) dvArA tIvra zraddhAvAlA zuddhi ke lie jo kucha bhI kare usake dvArA vaha
AtmA ArAdhaka banatA hai - - sUtra 22 aba vo AloyaNa ke doSa se rahita, bacce kI
taraha bacapana ke samaya jaisA AcaraNa kiyA ho vaisA samyak prakAra se Alocana
karatA hai  /  sUtra - 23 AcArya ke samagra guNa sahita AcArya prAyazcita de
taba samyak prakAra se vaha prAyazcitta tapa zurU karake muni dIparatnasAgara
kRt " (bhaktaparijJA)" Agama sUtra - hindI anuvAda" Page 61

Page #7 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Sutra **Aagam Sutra 27, Payannasutra-4, 'Bhaktaparijna'**  The pure-hearted
disciple says again. Sutra-24  To save us from the terrifying ocean of the
world, which is like a group of aquatic beings suffering terrible pain, may the
great Guru Maharaj, who is like a smooth-sailing ship, establish us in the great
vows (i.e., bestow the vows upon us). Sutra-25  The Yati who has renounced anger
is the one who has taken the unbroken great vow, even then, he is eligible for
the initiation of the Pravrajya vow. Sutra-26  Just as a servant returns after
diligently completing the order of his master, so too, he who observes the
conduct throughout his life, returns to the Guru in the same way. Sutra-27  Even
he who has observed the vow with transgression and broken the vow with the
punishment of Akuti (deceit), is considered eligible for initiation by the one
who is present with right understanding. Sutra-28  After that, the Guru
initiates the disciple, whose head is bowed down by the weight of the great vow,
which is like a mountain, with the proper procedure. Sutra-29  Now, for the
Deshaviriti Shravak who is devoted to blood and Jinavachan, the pure Anuvrat is
bestowed upon him at the time of death. Sutra-30  He who is free from attachment
and has a generous heart, whose hair stands on end with joy at the mention of
the Jinas, worships the Guru, the Sangha, and the fellow-religionists with
sincere devotion. Sutra-31  The Shravak should use his wealth for the sake of
the primary Jinenndra Prasad, the Jinabimb, and the highest prestige, as well as
for writing excellent scriptures, for the Sutirth, and for the worship of the
Tirthankaras. Sutra-32  If that Shravak is fond of all renunciation and
restraint, with a mind, speech, and body that are opposed to (worldly desires),
without attachment to his family, with sorrow for the suffering of others, and
with dispassion... Sutra-33  ...that Shravak should accept the initiation like
Santhara, and by following the rules, should accept the five great vows, which
are the form of all renunciation, and the primary Samayik conduct. Sutra-34, 35
When that Shravak, who is determined to observe the Samayik conduct and to
accept the great vow, and who has performed the final Pacchakkhan, says to the
great Guru, with specific qualities, bowing his head at his lotus feet: "O
Bhagavan!"  **Muni Diperatnasagar Krit "(Bhaktaparijna)" Aagam Sutra - Hindi
Translation** Page 7

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 sUtra Agama sUtra 27, payannAsUtra-4, 'bhaktaparijJA' nirmala bhAvavAlA vaha
ziSya phira se kahatA hai| sUtra-24 dArUNa duHkha samAna jalacara jIva ke samUha
se bhayAnaka saMsAra samAna samudra meM se tArane ke lie samartha guru mahArAja
nirvighna jahAja samAna mahAvrata meM Apa hamArI sthApanA kare  /  (arthAt vrata
AropaNa kare) sUtra-25 jisane kopa khaMDana kiyA hai vaisA akhaMDa mahAvratavAlA
vaha yati hai, to bhI pravrajyA vrata kI upasthApanA ke lie vaha yogya hai|
sUtra - 26 svAmI kI acche tarIke se pAlana kI gaI AjJA ko jaise cAkara vidhivat
pUrA kara ke lauTAte haiM, vaise jIvana bhara cAritra pAlana kara ke vo bhI guru
ko usI prakAra se yaha kahate haiN| sUtra-27 jisane aticAra sahita vrata kA
pAlana kiyA hai aura AkuTTI (chala) daMDa se vrata khaMDita kiyA hai vaise bhI
samyaka upasthita honevAle ko use (ziSya ko) upasthApanA yogya kahA hai| sUtra -
28 usa ke bAda mahAvrata samAna parvata ke boja se namita hue mastakavAle usa
ziSya ko saguru vidhi dvArA mahAvrata kI AropaNA karate haiN| sUtra-29 aba
dezavirati zrAvaka samakita ke lie rakta aura jinavacana ke lie tatpara ho use
bhI zuddha aNuvrata maraNa ke samaya AropaNa kiye jAte haiN| sUtra-30 niyANA
rahita aura udAra cittavAlA, harSa se jina kI romarAjI vikasvara haI ho aisA vo
guru kI, saMgha kI aura sAdharmika kI niSkapaTa bhakti dvArA pUjA kare  /
sUtra-31 pradhAna jinendra prasAda, jinabimba aura uttama pratiSThA ke lie tathA
prazasta grantha likhavAne meM, sutIrtha meM aura tIrthaMkara kI pUjA ke lie
zrAvaka apane dravya kA upayoga kare  /  sUtra - 32 yadi vo zrAvaka sarva virati
saMyama ke lie prItivAlA, viruddha mana, (vacana) aura kAyAvAlA, svajana
parivAra ke anurAga rahita, viSama para khedavAlA aura vairAgyavAlA hosUtra - 33
_vo zrAvaka saMthArA samAna dIkSA ko aMgIkAra kare aura niyama dvArA doSa rahita
sarva virati rUpa pA~ca mahAvrata se pradhAna sAmAyika cAritra aMgIkAra kare  /
sUtra-34,35 jaba vo sAmAyika cAritra dhAraNa karanevAlA aura mahAvrata ko
aMgIkAra karanevAlA sAdhu aura aMtima paccakkhANa karU~ vaise nizcayavAlA
dezavirati zrAvaka viziSTa guNa dvArA mahAna guru ke caraNakamala meM mastaka
dvArA namaskAra kara ke kahatA hai ki he bhagavan ! muni dIparatnasAgara kRt
"(bhaktaparijJA)" Agama sUtra-hindI anuvAda" Page 7

Page #8 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Agam Sutra 27, Payannasutra-4, 'Bhaktaparijna'  Sutra, with your permission,
I accept the Bhaktaparijna Anashan. Sutra-36  Knowing the divine purpose of
achieving well-being for both the one taking the Anashan and oneself through
worship, the Acharya should administer the Anashan; otherwise (if Anashan is
taken without considering the purpose), it is considered a fault. Sutra-37
After that, the Guru should show the excellent substances to the disciple and
explain the three types of food, up to the Javvajiv, through Pacchakkhan.
Sutra-38  Seeing (the excellent substances), a being who has reached the shore
of the Bhavasagar should contemplate what use it is to him; a being who desires
substances should contemplate accordingly, even after experiencing the emotions
of enjoyment. Have I not enjoyed and renounced? Sutra-39  Being aware that even
pure substances are ultimately impure, one should engage in auspicious
contemplation; one who experiences sorrow should be given such Choyana
(inspiration). Sutra-40  For the purification of the Udarmala, if Samadhipan
(water with sugar, etc.) is good for him, then he should be given that sweet
water to drink, and he should be given a little laxative. Sutra-41, 42
Cardamom, cinnamon, Nagakesar, and Tamalpatra, boiled with sugar and milk,
cooled and given to drink, is called Samadhipan. (Drinking it relieves heat.)
After that, he should be given a laxative with a sweet medicine made from iron-
like substances. Because by extinguishing the fire in the stomach, this (the one
performing the Anashan) attains Samadhi with ease. Sutra-43  The ascetic
performing Anashan, here he desires the three types of food (Ashan, Khadim, and
Svadim) up to Javvajiv, in this way, the Acharya who is administering the
Niryamaana should request the Sangh. Sutra-44  For him (the ascetic), the Sangh
should perform Kayotsarga for two hundred and fifty-six breaths, explaining all
matters related to worship in a non-obstructive manner. Sutra-45  After that, in
the assembly of the Acharya Sangh, the ascetic should be explained the four
types of food through Pacchakkhan, according to the Chaityavandan ritual.
Sutra-46  Or, for Samadhi, the three types of food should be explained,
including the Agara, through Pacchakkhan. After that, water should also be
renounced, observing the opportunity.  Muni Diparatnasagar Krit
"(Bhaktaparijna)" Agam Sutra-Hindi Translation" 1 Page 8 Page 8

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama sUtra 27, payannAsUtra-4, 'bhaktaparijJA' sUtratumhArI anumati se bhakta
parijJA anazana maiM aMgIkAra karatA hU~  /  sUtra-36 ArAdhanA dvArA usa kA
(anazana lenevAle kA) aura khuda kA kalyANa ho aise divya nimitta jAna kara,
AcArya anazana dilAe; nahIM to (nimitta dekhe binA anazana liyA jAe to) doSa
lagatA hai| sUtra-37 usa ke bAda vo guru utkRSTa sarva dravya apane ziSya ko
dikhAkara tIna prakAra ke AhAra ke jAvajjIva taka paccakkhANa krvaae| sUtra-38
(utkRSTa dravya ko) dekhakara bhavasAgara ke taTa para pahu~ce hue mujhe isa ke
dvArA kyA kAma hai aise koI jIva cintavana kare; koI jIva dravya kI IcchA ho vo
bhugata kara saMvega pAne ke bAvajUda bhI usa mutAbika cintavana kare  /  kyA
maiMne bhugata kara tyAga nahIM kiyA; sUtra - 39 jo pavitra padArtha ho vo anta
meM to azuci hai aise jJAna meM tatpara hokara zubha dhyAna kare; jo viSAda pAe
use aisI coyaNA (preraNA) denI caahie| sUtra - 40 _ udaramala kI zuddhi ke lie
samAdhipAna (zarkarA Adi kA pAnI) use acchA ho to vo madhura pAnI bhI use pIlAnA
cAhie aura thor3A-thor3A virecana karavAnA caahie| sUtra - 41, 42 ilAyacI,
dAlacInI, nAgakesara aura tamAlapAtra, zakkaravAlA dUdha ubAla kara, ThaMr3A
kara ke pilAe use samAdhi pAnI kahate haiM  /  (use pIne se tApa upazamana hotA
hai  / ) usake bAda phophalAdika dravya se madhura auSadha se virecana karavAnA
cAhie  /  kyoMki usase udara kA agni bUjhane se yaha (anazana ko karanevAlA)
sukha se samAdhi prApta karatA hai| sUtra-43 anazana karanevAlA tapasvI,
jAvajjIva taka tIna prakAra ke AhAra (azana, khAdima aura svAdima) ko yahA~
vosirAtA hai, isa taraha se niryAmaNA karavAnevAle AcArya saMgha ko nivedana
kare  /  sUtra-44 (tapasvI) usako ArAdhanA sambandhI sarva bAta nirupasarga rUpa
se pravarte usa ke lie sarva saMgha ko do sau chappana zvAsozvAsa kA kAyotsarga
karanA caahie| sUtra-45 usa ke bAda usa AcArya saMgha ke samudAya meM
caityavandana vidhi dvArA usa kSapaka (tapasvI) ko caturvidha AhAra kA
paccakkhANa krvaae| sUtra - 46 yA phira samAdhi ke lie tIna prakAra ke AhAra ko
AgAra sahita paccakkhANa karAe  /  usa ke bAda pAnI bhI avasara dekhakara tyAga
karAveM  /  muni dIparatnasAgara kRt "(bhaktaparijJA)" Agama sUtra-hindI
anuvAda" 1 Page 8 Page 8

Page #9 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Sutra Aagam Sutra 27, Payannasutra-4, 'Bhaktaparijna' Sutra-47  After that,
bowing his head and placing his two hands on his head like a crown, he (the one
who is fasting) makes the feeling of remorse known to the entire assembly.
Sutra-48  I apologize for all the kashayas I have committed with the Acharya,
Upadhyaya, Shishya, Kula, and Gana, with my body, speech, and mind. Sutra-49  O
Bhagavan! I apologize for all my transgressions, please forgive me. I also
apologize to the assembly of the virtuous, with a pure heart. Sutra-50  In this
way, through veneration, apology, and self-criticism, the karma accumulated in
this life is destroyed in an instant, like the queen of the deer. Sutra-51  Now,
with a firm resolve for the Mahavrata, with a mind filled with the words of the
Jinas, one who is mindful of food and who is pleasing to the mind through
intense remorse, to him (the one who is fasting); Sutra-52  The Acharya Maharaj
gives a lesson like wood to him who considers himself fulfilled by the benefits
of the fast, to overcome the sin-like Kadava. Sutra-53  The root of the
Kudaagrah (greed) has grown large, like a tree. Uproot this falsehood from its
roots, O dear one! And nourish the right conduct, like the supreme truth, with
the principles of the Sutras. Sutra-54  And then, through love for virtue,
practice intense devotion to the Vitaraga Bhagavan. And develop a love for the
five salutations, like the essence of the teachings. Sutra-55  Always strive for
self-study, which benefits the well-being of the virtuous. And protect the five
great vows daily, with your own conscience as your witness. Sutra-56  Abandon
the Niyan Shalya, like a thorn, which is a hindrance to great and virtuous deeds
due to delusion. And subdue the Magendras, like the senses, which are condemned
by the group of Munis. Sutra-57  Destroy the Kashaya-like Pisach, which is like
an obstacle to the bliss of Nirvana, a terrible destroyer leading to hell, and a
constant aid in the desire for worldly pleasures. Sutra-58  When time has not
arrived and a little bit of conduct remains, wield the sword to destroy the
great enemy, like delusion.  Muni Diperatnasagar Krit "(Bhaktaparijna)" Aagam
Sutra-Hindi Translation" Page 9

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 sUtra Agama sUtra 27, payannAsUtra-4, 'bhaktaparijJA' sUtra-47 usake bAda zIza
jhukAkara apane do hAtha ko mastaka pe mukuTa samAna karake vo (anazana
karanevAlA) vidhivat saMvega kA ahasAsa karavAte hue sarva saMgha ko khamAtA
hai| sUtra -48 AcArya, upAdhyAya, ziSya, kula aura gaNa ke sAtha maiMne jo kucha
bhI kaSAya kie hoM, ve sarva maiM trividha se (mana, vacana, kAyA se) khamAtA
huuN| sUtra-49 he bhagavan ! mere sabhI aparAdha ke pada (galatI), maiM khamAtA
hU~, isalie mujhe khamAo maiM bhI guNa ke samUhavAle saMgha ko zuddha hokara
khamAtA huuN| sUtra-50 isa taraha vaMdana, khAmaNA aura svanindA dvArA so bhava
kA upArjita karma eka pala meM mRgAvatI rAnI kI taraha kSaya karate haiN| sUtra
- 51 aba mahAvrata ke bAre meM nizcala rahe hae, jinavacana dvArA bhAvita
manavAle, AhAra kA paccakkhANa karanevAlA aura tIvra saMvega dvArA manohAra usa
(anazana karanevAle) ko; sUtra-52 anazana kI ArAdhanA ke lAbha se khuda ko
kRtArtha mAnanevAle usa ko AcArya mahArAja pAparUpI kAdava kA ullaMghana karane
ke lie lakaDI samAna zikSA dete haiN| sUtra-53 bar3hA hai kugraha (kadAgraha)
samAna mUla jisa kA aise mithyAtva ko jar3a se ukher3akara he vatsa !
paramatattva jaise samyaktva ko sUtranIti se siiNc| sUtra-54 aura phira guNa ke
anurAga dvArA vItarAga bhagavAna kI tIvra bhakti kara  /  aura pravacana ke sAra
jaise pA~ca namaskAra ke lie anurAga kara  /  sUtra-55 suvihita sAdhu ke hita ko
karanevAle svAdhyAya ke lie hamezA udyamavaMta ho  /  aura nitya pA~ca mahAvrata
kI rakSA Atma sAkSI se kara  /  sUtra -56 moha dvArA kara ke bar3e aura
zubhakarma ke lie zalya samAna niyANa zalya kA tU tyAga kara, aura munIndra ke
samUha meM ninde gae indriya samAna magendro ko ta dama  /  sUtra- 57 nirvANa
sukha meM aMtarAya samAna, naraka Adi ke lie bhayAnaka pAtakAraka aura viSaya
tRSNA meM sadA sahAya karanevAle kaSAya samAna pizAca kA vadha kara  /  sUtra-58
kAla nahIM pahu~cate aura aba thor3A sA cAritra bAkI rahate, moha samAna mahA
vairI ko vidArane ke lie khaDga muni dIparatnasAgara kRt "(bhaktaparijJA)" Agama
sUtra-hindI anuvAda" Page 9

Page #10 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Agam Sutra 27, Payannasutra-4, 'Bhaktaparijna'  **Sutra 59:** Like a thread
and wood are beneficial for teaching, so listen to the teachings.  **Sutra 60:**
Abandoning all forms of falsehood, which is like the root-seed of the world,
become skilled in the meditation of Namaskara with a firm mind for Samyaktv.
**Sutra 61:** Just as people, due to their thirst, consider mirage as water,
similarly, a deluded mind, due to falsehood, desires happiness from evil deeds.
**Sutra 62:** The great sins that intense falsehood gives to a living being,
even fire, poison, or a black snake cannot inflict.  **Sutra 63:** A deluded
mind, due to falsehood, experiences intense suffering in this very life, like
the Datta Raja of Turuman city, due to the sin of hating the virtuous.  **Sutra
64:** Do not be negligent for Samyaktv, which destroys all suffering, because
knowledge, penance, vigor, and conduct reside in Samyaktv.  **Sutra 65:** Just
as you are attached to material things, attached to love, and have blood for the
attachment of virtue, similarly, become attached to Jinshasan through the
attachment of Dharma.  **Sutra 66:** One who is corrupted by Samyaktv should be
known as corrupted by everything, but one who is corrupted by conduct is not the
most corrupted, because a living being who has attained Samyaktv does not wander
much in the world.  **Sutra 67, 68:** One who is corrupted by Darshan should be
considered corrupted, because one who has fallen from Samyaktv does not attain
liberation. A living being without conduct attains liberation, but a living
being without Samyaktv does not attain liberation.  **Sutra 69:** Even a living
being with pure Samyaktv and without restraint earns the Tirthankara karma. Just
as those who are destined for welfare in the future, like the Lord Krishna of
the Harivansh and King Shrenik, etc., have earned the Tirthankara karma,
similarly, living beings with pure Samyaktv attain the tradition of welfare.
(Because) a gem like Samyakdarshan is invaluable for the Sura and Asura realms.
**Sutra 70:** A living being dies due to time after attaining dominion over the
three realms. But after attaining Samyaktv, a living being attains liberation
with eternal happiness.  **Muni Diparatnasagar Krit “(Bhaktaparijna)” Agam
Sutra-Hindi Translation”** Page 10

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama sUtra 27, payannAsUtra-4, 'bhaktaparijJA' sUtraaura lakar3I samAna hita
zikSA ko tU sUna  /  sUtra- 59 saMsAra kI jaDa-bIja samAna mithyAtva kA sarva
prakAra se tyAga kara, samyaktva ke lie dRr3ha cittavAlA ho kara namaskAra ke
dhyAna ke lie kuzala bana jA  /  sUtra-60 jisa taraha loga apanI tRSNA dvArA
mRgatRSNA ko (mRgajala meM) pAnI mAnate haiM, vaise mithyAtva se mUr3ha manavAlA
kudharma se sukha kI IcchA rakhatA hai| sUtra - 61 tIvra mithyAtva jIva ko jo
mahAdoSa dete haiM, ve doSa agni viSa yA kRSNa sarpa bhI nahIM pahu~cAte  /
sUtra-62 mithyAtva se mUr3ha cittavAle sAdhu prati dveSa rakhane samAna pApa se
turumaNi nagarI ke dattarAjA kI taraha tIvra duHkha isa loka meM hI pAte haiN|
sUtra - 63 sarva duHkha ko naSTa karanevAle samyaktva ke lie tuma pramAda mata
karanA, kyoMki samyaktva ke sahAre jJAna, tapa, vIrya aura cAritra rahe haiN|
sUtra - 64 jaise tU padArtha para anurAga karatA hai, prema kA anurAga karatA
hai aura sadguNa ke anurAga ke lie rakta hotA hai vaise hI jinazAsana ke lie
hamezA dharma ke anurAga dvArA anurAgI bana  /  sUtra-65 samyaktva se bhraSTa vo
sarva se bhraSTa jAnanA cAhie, lekina cAritra se bhraSTa honevAlA sabase bhraSTa
nahIM hotA kyoMki samyaktva pAe hue jIva ko saMsAra ke lie jyAdA paribhramaNa
nahIM hotaa| sUtra - 66 darzana dvArA bhraSTa honevAle ko bhraSTa mAnanA cAhie,
kyoMki samyaktva se gire hae ko mokSa nahIM milatA  /  cAritra rahita jIva mukti
pAtA hai, lekina samakita rahita jIva mokSa nahIM paataa| sUtra - 67, 68 zuddha
samakita hote hue avirati jIva bhI tIrthaMkara nAmakarma upArjana karatA hai  /
jaise AgAmI kAla meM kalyANa honevAlA hai jinakA vaise harivaMza ke prabhu yAni
kRSNa aura zreNika Adi rAjA ne tIrthaMkara nAmakarma upArjana kiyA hai vaise
nirmala samyaktvavAle jIva kalyANa kI paramparA pAte haiM  /  (kyoMki)
samyagdarzana samAna ratna sura aura asura loka ke lie anamola hai| sUtra - 69
tIna loka kI prabhutA pAkara kAla se jIva maratA hai  /  lekina samyaktva pAne
ke bAda jIva akSaya sukhavAlA mokSa pAtA hai| sUtra-70 arihaMta siddha, caitya
(jina pratimA) pravacana-siddhAMta, AcArya aura sarva sAdhu ke lie mana, vacana
aura kAyA muni dIparatnasAgara kRt "(bhaktaparijJA)" Agama sUtra-hindI anuvAda"
Page 10

Page #11 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Agam Sutra 27, Payannasutra-4, 'Bhaktaparijna'**  **Sutra 71** Perform intense
devotion with pure emotion due to these three reasons.  **Sutra 72** Even
solitary devotion to the Jinas is capable of preventing downfall and leads to a
continuous stream of rare happiness until attaining liberation.  **Sutra 73** If
knowledge grants liberation and fruit to the devotee, then will the knowledge of
liberation grant liberation to the non-devotee?  **Sutra 74** The person who
does not devote themselves to the Lord, the Victorious One, who is the leader of
all worship, is like someone who sows sugarcane in barren land with great
effort.  **Sutra 75** The person who desires worship without actually performing
it is like someone who desires grain without seed or rain without clouds.
**Sutra 76** Just like the life of the gem merchant in Rajgriha who became a
frog, devotion to Shri Jinendra Maharaj leads to birth in a good time and the
attainment of happiness.  **Sutra 77** Do not abandon the Navkar mantra, which
destroys the world with pure intention, without focusing your mind on anything
else, even for a moment.  **Sutra 78** Jinendra Bhagwan has said that even a
single salutation to the Arhant at the time of death is capable of destroying
the world.  **Sutra 79** The wicked Mahavat, who was called a thief and impaled
on a stake, became a Yaksha with eyes like lotus petals, dwelling in auspicious
meditation, by chanting "Namo Jinanam."  **Sutra 80** Countless times, living
beings have taken and abandoned meaningless material forms, along with
devotional salutations.  **Sutra 81** Salutation is like a flag to be taken for
worship, and then it is like an unimpeded chariot for the living being to travel
on the path of liberation.  **Sutra 82** Just as knowledge, properly cultivated
through worship, controls the demon, so too does knowledge, properly cultivated,
controls the demon-like mind.  **Muni Diparatnasagar Krit "(Bhaktaparijna)" Agam
Sutra-Hindi Anuvaad"** **Page 11**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama sUtra 27, payannAsUtra-4, 'bhaktaparijJA' sUtrauna tInoM kAraNa se zuddha
bhAva se tIvra bhakti kara  /  sUtra - 71 akelI jinabhakti bhI durgati kA
nivAraNa karane ko samartha hotI hai aura siddhi pAne taka durlabha aise sukha
kI paramparA hotI hai| sUtra-72 vidyA bhI bhaktivAn ko siddha aura phala
denevAlI hotI hai to kyA mokSavidyA abhaktivaMta ko siddha hogI? sUtra - 73 una
ArAdhanA ke nAyaka vItarAga bhagavAna kI jo manuSya bhakti nahIM karatA vo
manuSya kAphI udyama kara ke DA~gara ko Ukhara bhUmi meM botA hai  /  sUtra-74
ArAdhaka kI bhakti na karane ke bAvajUda bhI ArAdhanA kI IcchA rakhanevAlA
mAnava bIja ke binA dhAnya kI aura bAdala binA bArIsa kI IcchA rakhatA hai|
sUtra-75 rAjagRha nagara meM maNiAra zeTha kA jIva jo meMr3haka huA thA usa kI
taraha zrI jinezvara mahArAja kI bhakti uttama kala meM utpatti aura sakha kI
niSpatti karAtI hai| sUtra-76 ArAdhanApUrvaka, dUsarI kisI ora citta lagAe binA,
vizuddha lezyA se saMsAra ke kSaya ko karanevAle navakAra ko mata chodd'naa|
sUtra-77 yadi mauta ke samaya arihaMta ko eka bhI namaskAra ho to vo saMsAra ko
naSTa karane ke lie samartha haiM aisA jinezvara bhagavAna ne kahA hai| sUtra -
78 bUre karma karanevAlA mahAvata, jise cora kahakara zUlI para car3AyA thA vo
bhI 'namo jiNANam' kahakara zubha dhyAna meM kamalapatra jaise A~khavAlA yakSa
huA thaa| sUtra - 79 bhAva namaskAra sahita, nirarthaka dravyaliMga ko jIvane
anantI bAra grahaNa kie aura choDa die haiN| sUtra-80 ArAdhanA samAna patAkA
lene ke lie namaskAra hAtharUpa hotA hai, aura phira sadgati ke mArga meM jAne
ke lie vo jIva ko apratihata ratha samAna hai| sUtra-81 ajJAnI govAla bhI
navakAra kI ArAdhanA kara ke mara gayA aura vaha caMpAnagarI ke lie zreSThI
putra sudarzana ke nAma se prasiddha huaa| sUtra-82 jisa taraha acche tarIke se
ArAdhana kI huI vidyA dvArA puruSa, pizAca ko vaza meM karatA hai, vaise acchI
taraha se ArAdhana kiyA huA jJAna mana samAna pizAca ko vaza meM karatA hai|
muni dIparatnasAgara kRt "(bhaktaparijJA)" Agama sUtra-hindI anuvAda" Page 11

Page #12 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Sutra A Agam Sutra 27, Payannasutra-4, 'Bhaktaparijna' Sutra-83 Just as the
Krishna Sarpa (black snake) is subdued by a mantra chanted in the proper way,
similarly, the mind, like a Krishna Sarpa, is subdued by knowledge chanted in
the proper way. Sutra-84 Just as a monkey cannot stay still for even a moment,
similarly, the mind cannot stay still (unchanging) for even a moment without the
pleasure of worldly objects. Sutra-85 For that, one should bind the monkey-like
mind, which is always restless, with the rope of Jineshwara's teachings and make
it dwell in auspicious meditation. Sutra-86 Just as a needle attached to a
thread does not get lost even if it falls into garbage, similarly, a being
(Jiva) attached to the thread (of auspicious meditation) does not get lost even
if it falls into the world. Sutra-87 If Yav Rajarshi saved a person from death
through worldly verses and (the king) attained virtue, then what to say about a
being who gets rid of the suffering of death through the Sutras taught by
Jineshwara Bhagwan? Sutra - 88 By merely listening to (remembering) these words
of Upashama, Vivek, and Sanvar, Chilatiputra, who had only Shrutagyan (knowledge
gained through listening), attained knowledge and divinity. Sutra-89,90 Knowing
the difference between beings, by the effort of Jiva, you should abandon the
killing of the six types of beings through the right conduct of mind, speech,
and body. Just as you do not like suffering, similarly, all beings do not like
suffering. Knowing this, with utmost respect, be careful, consider every being
as your own self, and practice compassion. Sutra-91 Just as there is nothing
higher than Mount Meru for the world and nothing bigger than the sky, similarly,
there is no dharma (righteousness) equal to ahimsa (non-violence). You should
believe this. Sutra - 92 This Jiva has a relationship with all beings in every
way. Therefore, by killing a being, you are killing all those who are related to
you. Sutra - 93 One should consider the killing of a being as one's own killing
and compassion for a being as one's own compassion. Therefore, a being who
desires the happiness of the soul has abandoned the killing of all beings. Sutra
- 94 One should understand with subtle intelligence that all the suffering that
a being experiences while wandering in the four states of existence is the
result of killing. Muni Diparatnasagar Krit “(Bhaktaparijna)” Agam Sutra-Hindi
Anuvaad” Page 12

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 sUtra A Agama sUtra 27, payannAsUtra-4, 'bhaktaparijJA' sUtra-83 jisa taraha
vidhivat ArAdhana kie hue maMtra dvArA kRSNa sarpa kA upazamana hotA hai, usI
taraha acche tarIke se ArAdhana kie hue jJAna dvArA mana samAna kRSNa sarpa vaza
hotA hai| sUtra-84 jisa taraha bandara eka pala bhI nizcala nahIM raha sakatA,
usI taraha viSaya ke Ananda binA mana eka pala bhI madhyastha (nizcala) nahIM
raha sktaa| sUtra-85 usa ke lie vo uThanevAle mana samAna bandara ko jinezvara
ke upadeza dvArA dora se bA~dhakara zubha dhyAna ke lie ramaNa karanA caahie|
sUtra-86 jisa taraha dora ke sAtha sUI bhI kUr3e meM gira gaI ho to bhI vo guma
nahIM hotI, usI taraha (zubha dhyAna rUpI) dora sahita jIva bhI saMsAra meM gira
gayA ho to bhI naSTa nahIM hotaa| sUtra-87 yadi laukika zloka dvArA yava rAjarSi
ne maraNa se bacAyA aura (rAjA) usane sAdhupana pAyA, to jinezvara bhagavAna ke
batAe hue sUtra dvArA jIva maraNa ke duHkha se chUTakArA pAe usameM kyA kahanA?
sUtra - 88 yA upazama, viveka, saMvara una pada ko kevala sUnane ko (smaraNa
mAtra se) (utane hI) zrutajJAnavAle cilAtIputra ne jJAna aura devatva paayaa|
sUtra-89,90 jIva ke bheda ko jAnakara, jAvajjIva prayatna dvArA samyak mana,
vacana, kAyA ke yoga se cha: kAya ke jIva ke vadha kA tU tyAga kara  /  jisa
taraha tumheM daHkha acchA nahIM lagatA, usI taraha sarva jIva ko bhI duHkha
acchA nahIM lagatA aisA jAnakara, sarva Adara se upayukta (sAvadha) hokara
Atmavat hara eka jIva ko mAnakara dayA kA pAlana kara  /  sUtra-91 jisa taraha
jagata ke lie meru parvata se jyAdA koI UMcA nahIM hai aura AkAza se koI bar3A
nahIM hai, usI taraha ahiMsA samAna dharma nahIM hai aisA tU mAna le| sUtra - 92
yaha jIvane sabhI jIva ke sAtha samI tarIke se sambandha pAyA hai  /  isalie
jIva ko mAratA huA tU sarva sambandhI ko mAratA hai| sUtra - 93 jIva kA vadha
apanA hI vadha mAnanA cAhie aura jIva kI dayA apanI hI dayA hai, isalie AtmA ke
sukha kI IcchA rakhanevAle jIva ne sarva jIva hatyA kA tyAga kiyA haA hai| sUtra
- 94 cAra gati meM bhaTakate hue jIva ko jitane duHkha par3ate haiM vo saba
hatyA kA phala hai aisA sUkSma buddhi se mAnanA caahie| muni dIparatnasAgara kRt
"(bhaktaparijJA)" Agama sUtra-hindI anuvAda" Page 12

Page #13 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Sutra Aagam Sutra 27, Payannasutra-4, 'Bhaktaparijna' Sutra-95  One should
understand that great happiness, dominion, whatever is naturally beautiful,
health, good fortune, all of these are the fruits of non-violence. Sutra-96  A
Chandala, even though he was thrown away for the sake of a Susumar Drah,
attained the proximity of the Gods due to the virtue of the vow of non-violence
arising from saving a single living being in a day. Sutra-97, 98  One should
abandon all four types of false speech by effort, for which even restrained men
are entangled by the fault of language (through karma by false speech). Those
four types of falsehood are: revealing an untrue thing, like saying the soul is
omnipresent; speaking a different meaning, like using the word "cow" to refer to
a dog; saying truth is falsehood, like saying the soul does not exist; and
slander, like calling someone a thief when they are not. And then, one should
not speak falsely through laughter, anger, greed, or fear. But one should speak
truthful words that are beautiful and beneficial to the living being. Sutra-99
A truthful man is worthy of trust like a mother, worthy of worship by people
like a guru, and beloved by all like a relative. Sutra-100  Whether one has
matted hair or a topknot, is shaven-headed, wears bark cloth, or is naked, a
liar is called a hypocrite and a Chandala. Sutra-101  Even a single lie destroys
many truthful words, because a single false word sent Vasu Raja to hell.
Sutra-102  O patient one! Do not even think of taking, even a small amount of
another's wealth, like a probe for a toothache, without giving it back.
Sutra-103  And then, the man who takes another's wealth also takes his life.
Because that man sacrifices the life of a being for money, but does not give up
the money. Sutra-104  Therefore, accepting the supreme Dharma of compassion for
living beings, do not take what is not given, because the Jineswar Bhagwan and
the Ganadharas have forbidden it, and it is against the people and also
unrighteous. Sutra-105, 106  A thief suffers greatly in hell and in the animal
realm even in the afterlife; in human life, he is also afflicted by poverty and
destitution. The son of a Shravak who renounced stealing, obtained happiness in
the same way that an old woman named Kidhi, whose house was robbed by thieves,
made the big toe of one of the thieves from the back of a peacock. The king
recognized this mark and spared the Shravak's son, but killed all the other
thieves.  Muni Diparatnasagar Krit "(Bhaktaparijna)" Aagam Sutra-Hindi
Translation Page 13

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 sUtra Agama sUtra 27, payannAsUtra-4, 'bhaktaparijJA' sUtra-95 jo koI bar3A
sukha, prabhutA, jo kucha bhI svAbhAvika tarIke se sundara hai, vo, nirogIpana,
saubhAgyapana, vo saba ahiMsA kA phala samajhanA caahie| sUtra- 96 suMsumAra
draha ke lie pheMkA gayA lekIna caMDAlane bhI eka dinameM eka jIva bacAne se
utpanna honevAlI ahiMsA vrata ke guNa se devatA kA sAnidhya pAyA  /  sUtra -
97,98 sabhI cAra prakAra ke asatya vacana ko koziza dvArA tyAga kara, jisa ke
lie saMyamavaMta puruSa bhI bhASA doSa dvArA (asatyabhASaNa dvArA karma se)
lipta hote haiM  /  ve cAra prakAra ke asatya-asat vastu ko prakaTa karanA, jisa
taraha AtmA sarvagata hai, dUsarA artha kahanA, jaise go zabda se zvAna  /  sat
ko asat kahanA-jaise AtmA nahIM hai | niMdA karanA  /  jaise cora na ho use cora
kahanA  /  aura phira hAsya dvArA, krodha dvArA, lobha dvArA aura bhaya dvArA
vaha asatya na bolanA  /  lekina jIva ke hita meM aura sundara satya vacana
bolanA caahie| sUtra - 99 satyavAdI puruSa mAtA kI taraha bharosA rakhane ke
lAyaka, guru kI taraha logoM ko pUjane lAyaka aura riztedAra kI taraha sabako
pyArA lagatA hai| sUtra - 100 jaTAvaMta ho yA zikhAvaMta ho, muMDa ho, valkala
(per3a kI chAla ke kapar3e pahananevAlA ho yA nagna ho to bhI asatyavAdI logoM
ke lie pAkhaMr3I aura caMDAla kahalAtA hai| sUtra-101 eka bAra bhI bolA huA
jhUTha kaIM satya vacana ko naSTa karatA hai, kyoMki eka asatya vacana dvArA
vasu rAjA naraka meM gayA  /  sUtra - 102 he dhIra ! alpa yA jyAdA parAyA dhana
(jaise ki) dA~ta khutarane ke lie eka zalAkA bhI, adanta (die binA) lene ke lie
mata socnaa| sUtra-103 aura phira jo puruSa (parAyA) dravya haraNa karatA hai vo
usa kA jIvita bhI hara letA hai| kyoMki vo puruSa paise ke lie jIva kA tyAga
karatA hai lekina paise ko nahIM chodd'taa| sUtra-104 isalie jIvadayA samAna
parama dharma ko grahaNa kara ke adatta na le, kyoMki jinezvara bhagavAna aura
gaNadharoM ne usakA niSedha kiyA hai, aura loka ke viruddha bhI hai aura adharma
bhI hai| sUtra - 105, 106 cora paraloka meM bhI naraka evaM tiryaMca gati meM
bahuta duHkha pAtA hai; manuSyabhavameM bhI dIna aura daridratA se pIr3atA hai
/  corI se nivartanevAle zrAvaka ke lar3ake ne jisa taraha se sukha pAyA, kIr3hI
nAma kI bur3hiyA ke ghara meM cora Ae  /  una cora ke pA~va kA aMgUThA bur3hiyA
ne mora ke pIche se banAyA to usa nizAnI rAjA ne pahacAnakara zrAvaka ke putra
ko chor3akara bAkI saba cora ko mArA  /  muni dIparatnasAgara kRt
"(bhaktaparijJA)" Agama sUtra-hindI anuvAda" Page 13

Page #14 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Agama Sutra 27, Paryannasūtra 4, 'Bhaktaparijñā'  Sutra 107 Through the
protection of the new brahmacarya, protect the pure brahmacarya and always
conquer lust, considering it to be full of great faults.  Sutra 108 Indeed, all
the faults that cause suffering in this world and the next world are brought
about by the human's concept of sexual intercourse.  Sutra 109, 110 Rati and
arati, the two fickle-tongued ones, the fierce-hooded ones in the form of
volition, the ones dwelling in the cave of sense objects, the ones with the face
of intoxication, and the ones with the form of arrogant anger - these appear to
be under the control of the human, who is bitten by the snake of kāma, the one
with the garment of modesty, the one with the beard of ego, and the one causing
unbearable suffering.  Sutra 111 The living being endures the pain of the
terrifying hell and the dreadful ocean of the worldly existence, but does not
see the insignificance of the desired happiness.  Sutra 112 Just as the grocer,
pierced by hundreds of arrows of lust and distressed, was thrown by the king's
wife into the latrine, and he remained there, enduring the foul smell.  Sutra
113 The person attached to lust does not know the accessible and inaccessible,
like the ascetic Vaiśyāyana. Just as the wealthy merchant Kubera remained aloof
from the sexual pleasure of his own mother who gave birth to him immediately.
Sutra 114 Considering the nature of this prohibition, leave aside the one who
has incited the quarrel of lust, who is pervaded by Kāmadeva and is like the
creeper of the poison of faults, for women.  Sutra 115 The woman blinded by the
objects of senses, without respecting her family, lineage, husband, son, mother,
and father, falls into the ocean of suffering equal to that.  Sutra 116
Comparing women to rivers, women are downward-flowing, having beautiful breasts
(like the rivers holding beautiful water), attractive to see, beautiful, and
slow-moving, and they also pierce the mountain-like (men) like the rivers.
Sutra 117 Who will really trust the form of the serpent-like woman who is
extremely recognizable, extremely dear, and then extremely loving?  Sutra 118
The woman with destroyed hopes, extremely trustworthy, ready for favors, and
deeply loving, but once displeasing, soon leads the husband towards death.
"Bhaktaparijñā" Agama Sutra - Hindi Translation by Muni Deepratan Sagar

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama sUtra 27, payannAsUtra 4, 'bhaktaparijJA' sUtra - 107 nava brahmacarya kI
gupti dvArA zuddha brahmacarya kI tuma rakSA karo aura kAma ko bahuta doSa se
yukta mAnakara hamezA jIta lo| sUtra sUtra 108 vAkaI meM jitane bhI doSa isa
loka aura paraloka ke lie duHkhI karavAnevAle haiM, una sabhI doSa ko mAnava kI
maithunasaMjJA lAtI hai| sUtra - 109, 110 rati aura arati samAna caMcala do
jIhvAvAle, saMkalpa rUpa pracaMDa phaNAvAle, viSaya rUpa bila meM basanevAle,
madarUpa mukhavAle aura garva se anAdara rUpa roSavAle lajjA samAna kAMcalIvAle,
ahaMkAra rUpa dAr3ha vAla aura duHsaha duHkha denevAle viSavAle, kAmarUpI sarpa
dvArA Da~se gae mAnava paravaza dikhAI dete haiM  /  sUtra 111 raudra naraka ke
darda aura ghora saMsAra sAgara kA vahana karanA, usa ko jIva pAtA hai, lekina
kAmita sukha kA tucchapana nahIM dekhatA  /  sUtra - 112 jaise kAma ke seMkar3oM
tIra dvArA viMdhe gae aura gRddha hue banIyeM ko rAjA kI strI ne pAyakhAne kI
khAla meM DAla diyA aura vo kaIM durgaMdha ko sahana karate hue vahA~ rahA  /
sUtra - 113 kAmAsakta mAnava vaizyAyana tApasa kI taraha gamya aura agamya nahIM
jAnatA  /  jisa taraha kuberadatta zeTha turanta hI bacce ko janma denevAlI
apanI mAtA ke surata sukha se rakta rahA  /  sUtra- 114 kaMdarpa se vyApta aura
doSa rUpa viSa kI velar3I samAna striyoM ke lie jisane kAma kalaha prerita kiyA
hai| aise pratibaMdha ke svabhAva se dekhate hue tuma use chor3a do  /  sUtra-
115 viSayAMdha honevAlI strI kula, vaMza, pati, putra, mAtA, pitA ko kadra na
karate hue duHkha sama sAgarameM giratI hai sUtra 116 striyoM kI nadiyoM ke
sAtha tulanA karane se strI nIcagAmInI (nadI pakSa meM jhukAva rakhanevAlI
bhUmimeM jAnevAlI), acche stanavAlI ( nadI ke lie sundara pAnI dhAraNa
karanevAlI), dekhane lAyaka, khUbasUrata aura maMda gativAlI nadiyoM kI taraha
meru parvata jaise bojha (puruSa) ko bhI bhedatI hai| sUtra- 117 ati
pahacAnavAlI, ati priya aura phira ati premavaMta aisI bhI strI ke rUpa nAgina
para vAkaI meM kauna bharosA rakhegA ? sUtra- 118 naSTa huI AzAvAlI (strI) ati
bharosemaMda, ahesAna ke lie tatpara aura gahare premavAle lekina eka bAra
apriya karanevAle pati ko jalda hI maraNa kI ora le jAtI hai  /  muni
dIparatnasAgara kRt " (bhaktaparijJA)" Agama sUtra - hindI anuvAda" Page 14

Page #15 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Sutra **Agam Sutra 27, Payannasutra-4, 'Bhaktaparijna' Sutra - 119**  A
woman, like a new garland of jasmine, beautiful to look at, with delicate limbs
and bound by virtue (thread), steals the heart of a man. Sutra - 120  But the
beauty of her appearance, like the embrace of a woman, is intoxicating, like the
garland of Kaner worn by a condemned man, it destroys the man. Sutra - 121  The
sight of women is indeed beautiful, so what is the benefit of the pleasure of
union? The fragrance of a garland is also fragrant, but its touch is like
destruction. Sutra - 122  The king of Saketa, named Devarati, became corrupt by
the pleasures of kingship because his queen, due to the rage of jealousy, threw
him into the river and he drowned. Sutra - 123  A woman is a river of sorrow, a
cave of sin, a house of deceit, a tormentor, like the wood of the fire-stick
that kindles the fire, a mine of sorrow and the opposite of happiness. Sutra -
124  Who is the man who, not knowing the control of the mind, will be able to
escape properly from the gaze of a woman with eyes like a deer, whose arrow of
desire is widespread? Sutra - 125  Just as the poison of a snake increases with
its high and dense cloud-like garland, so too does a woman with high breasts
increase the poison of attachment in a man. Sutra - 126  Therefore, you should
abandon the sight of such women, whose sight is like that of a poisonous
serpent; for the arrows of women's eyes destroy life like virtue. Sutra - 127
Even the mind of a muni with little virtue melts like wax in fire from the
company of a woman. Sutra - 128  Even if one renounces all company and becomes
lean-bodied through austerity, like a muni dwelling in a cave (lion-cave), even
a muni is moved by the company of a woman. Sutra - 129, 130  In the river of
womanhood, which is like a wave of beauty, a flood of pleasure, and water of
youth, what man in the world does not drown?  The wise man has crossed the ocean
of youth, which is like water of desire, a crocodile of attachment, full of
aquatic creatures of pleasure and pride, and a crocodile of lust.  **Muni
Diparatnasagar Krit “(Bhaktaparijna)” Agam Sutra-Hindi Translation”** Page 15
Page 15

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 sUtra Agama sUtra 27, payannAsUtra-4, 'bhaktaparijJA' sUtra - 119 khUbasUrata
dikhanevAlI, sukumAra aMgavAlI aura guNa se (dora se) baMdhI huI naI jAI kI mAlA
jaisI strI puruSa ke dila ko curAtI hai| sUtra - 120 lekina darzana kI sundaratA
se moha utpanna karanevAlI usa striyoM ke AliMgana samAna madirA, kaNera kI
vadhya (vadhya puruSa ke gale meM pahanI gaI) mAlA kI taraha puruSa kA vinAza
karatI hai| sUtra-121 strioM kA darzana vAkaI meM khUbasUrata hotA hai, isalie
saMgama ke sukha se kyA lAbha ? mAlA kI suvAsa bhI khuzabUdAra hotI hai, lekina
mardana vinAza samAna hotA hai| sUtra - 122 sAketa nagara kA devarati nAma kA
rAjA rAja ke sukha se bhraSTa haA kyoMki rAnI ne pAMgale ke rAga kI vajaha se
use nadI meM pheMka diyA aura vo nadI meM DUba gayA  /  sUtra-123 strI zoka kI
nadI, durita kI (pApa kI) guphA, chala kA ghara, kleza karanevAlI, samAna agni
ko jalAnevAle araNI ke lakar3e jaisI, duHkha kI khAna aura sukha kI pratipakSI
hai| sUtra - 124 kAma rUpI tIra ke vistAravAle mRgAkSI (strI) ke dRSTi ke
kaTAkSa ke lie mana ke nigraha ko na jAnanevAlA kauna-sA puruSa samyak tarIke se
bhAga jAne meM samartha hogA? sUtra-125 ati UMce aura ghane bAdalavAlI meghamAlA
jaise har3akavA ke viSa ko jitanA bar3hAtI hai usI taraha ati UMce payodhara
(stana) vAlI strI puruSa ke moha viSa ko bar3hAtI hai| sUtra - 126 isalie
dRSTiviSa sarpa kI dRSTi jaisI usa striyoM kI dRSTi kA tuma tyAga karanA; kyoMki
striyoM ke nayanatIra cAritra samAna prANa ko naSTa karate haiN| sUtra - 127 _
strI ke saMga se alpa sattvavAle muni kA mana bhI agni se pIgalanevAle moma kI
taraha pIgala jAtA hai| sUtra - 128 yadi sarva saMga kA bhI tyAga karanevAlA
aura tapa dvArA kuza aMgavAlA ho to bhI kozA ke ghara meM ba~sanevAle (siMha
guphAvAsI) muni kI taraha strI ke saMga se muni bhI calAyamAna hote haiN| sUtra
- 129, 130 zRMgAra samAna kallolavAlI, vilAsarUpI bAr3havAlI aura yauvana samAna
pAnIvAlI aurata rUpI nadI meM jagata ke kauna-se puruSa nahIM DUbate ? dhIra
puruSa viSayarUpa jalavAle, moharUpa kAdavavAle, vilAsa aura abhimAna samAna
jalacara se bhare aura mada samAna magaramacchavAle, yauvana samAna sAgara ko
pAra kara gae haiN| muni dIparatnasAgara kRt "(bhaktaparijJA)" Agama sUtra-hindI
anuvAda" Page 15 Page 15

Page #16 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Sutra Aagam Sutra 27, Payannasutra-4, 'Bhaktaparijna' Sutra-131  Renounce all
internal and external attachments through the three causes of giving, causing to
give, and receiving, and through the combination of mind, speech, and body.
Sutra-132  With the intention of attachment (parigraha), a being kills, lies,
steals, engages in sexual intercourse, and commits acts of unconsciousness
without measure. (Attachment does not have a measure). Sutra-133  Attachment is
the cause of great fear, because even though the son stole the wealth, the
Shravak Kunchik Seth was afflicted with doubt about the Muni. Sutra-134  The man
who is free from all (external and internal) attachments, has a cool result, and
a calm mind, experiences a happiness that even a Chakravarti cannot attain.
Sutra-135  The great vows of a Muni free from blemishes, unbroken and without
transgression, are destroyed by the blemishes of Niyan. Sutra-136  That (Niyan
blemish) is of three types: filled with attachment, filled with aversion, and
filled with delusion. Consider the prayer for inferior lineage, etc., for the
sake of Dharma as a delusion-filled Niyan. Consider the Niyan done for the sake
of attachment as attachment-filled, and the Niyan done for the sake of aversion
as aversion-filled. Sutra-137  The example of Gangadatta is famous for
attachment-filled Niyan, the example of Vishvabhuthi, etc., is famous for
aversion-filled Niyan (in the life of Mahavira Swami), and the example of
Chandapingal, etc., is famous for delusion-filled Niyan. Sutra-138  The man who,
neglecting the happiness of liberation, performs Niyan for the sake of temporary
happiness, is like someone who destroys a vaidurya gem for a glass gem.
Sutra-139  It is appropriate to pray for the benefit of suffering-destruction,
karma-destruction, samadhi-death, and the seed of enlightenment. It is not
appropriate to ask for anything else. Sutra-140  By abandoning the Niyan
blemish, by abstaining from nighttime meals, by protecting the five great vows
through the five committees and three guptis, one practices the happiness of
liberation. Sutra-141  A being attached to the objects of the senses falls into
the ocean of samsara like a bird with clipped wings, without any good qualities
and without any chance of escape.  Muni Diparatnasagar Krit "(Bhaktaparijna)"
Aagam Sutra-Hindi Translation" Page 16

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 sUtra Agama sUtra 27, payannAsUtra-4, 'bhaktaparijJA' sUtra-131 karane,
karavAne dana rUpa tIna kAraNa dvArA aura mana, vacana aura kAyA ke yoga se
abhyaMtara aura bAharI aise sarva saMga kA tuma tyAga kro| sUtra - 132 saMga ke
(parigraha ke) Azaya se jIva hatyA karatA hai, jhUTha bolatA hai, corI karatA
hai, maithuna kA sevana karatA hai, aura parimANa rahita mUrchA karatA hai  /
(parigraha kA parimANa nahIM krtaa)| sUtra-133 parigraha bar3e bhaya kA kAraNa
hai, kyoMki putra ne dravya corane ke bAvajUda bhI zrAvaka kuMcika zeTha ne
munipati muni ko zaMkA se pIDita kiyaa| sUtra - 134 sarva (bAhya aura
abhyaMtara) parigraha se mukta, zItala pariNAmavAlA aura upazAMta cittavAlA
puruSa nirlobhatA kA (saMtoSa kA) jo sukha pAtA hai vo sukha cakravartI bhI
nahIM pAte  /  sUtra-135 zalya rahita muni ke mahAvrata, akhaMDa aura aticAra
rahita ho usa muni ke bhI mahAvrata, niyANa zalya dvArA naSTa hote haiN| sUtra -
136 vo (niyANa zalya) rAgagarbhita, dveSagarbhita aura mohagarbhita, tIna
prakAra se hotA hai; dharma ke lie hIna kulAdika kI prArthanA kare use
mohagarbhita nidAna samajhanA, rAga ke lie jo nidAna kiyA jAe vo rAga garbhita
aura dveSa ke lie jo nidAna kiyA jAe use dveSagarbhita samajhanA cAhie  /
sUtra-137 rAga garbhita nidAna ke lie gaMgadatta kA, dveSagarbhita nidAna ke lie
vizvabhUti Adi kA (mahAvIra svAmI ke jIva) aura moha garbhita nidAna ke lie
caMDapiMgala Adi ke dRSTAMta prasiddha haiN| sUtra - 138 jo mokSa ke sukha kI
avagaNanA karake asAra sukha ke kAraNa rUpa nidAna karatA hai vo puruSa kAcamaNi
ke lie vaiDUrya ratna ko naSTa karatA hai| sUtra - 139 duHkhakSaya, karmakSaya,
samAdhi maraNa aura bodhi bIja kA lAbha, itanI cIja kI prArthanA karanI, usake
alAvA dUsarA kucha bhI mA~gane ke lie ucita nahIM hai| sUtra-140 niyANa zalya kA
tyAga karake, rAtri bhojana kI nivRtti karake, pA~ca samiti tIna gupti dvArA
pA~ca mahAvrata kI rakSA karate hue mokSa sukha kI sAdhanA karatA hai| sUtra -
141 indriya ke viSaya meM Asakta jIva suzIla guNarUpa pIche binA aura chedana
hue paMkhavAle paMchI kI taraha saMsAra sAgara meM giratA hai| muni
dIparatnasAgara kRt "(bhaktaparijJA)" Agama sUtra-hindI anuvAda" Page 16

Page #17 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Agam Sutra 27, Payannasutra-4, 'Bhaktaparijna'** **Sutrasutra-142,143** Just
as a dog, even after chewing on dry bones, does not get its juice and absorbs
the juice from its soles, yet feels pleasure while licking it, so too, a man who
enjoys the company of women does not get pleasure, yet considers the exertion of
his body as pleasure. Sutra-144 Just as there is no essence in the womb of a
kel, even after searching thoroughly, similarly, there is no pleasure to be
found in the objects of the senses, even after searching extensively. Sutra-145
The wife of a merchant who went abroad by the auditory sense, the merchant of
Mathura by the passion of the eye, the prince by the smell, and the king of
Sodas by the taste of the tongue were destroyed. Sutra-146 The king of the
wicked Somalika was destroyed by the sense of touch; if he was destroyed by a
single object, what will happen to him who is attached to the five senses?
Sutra-147 A being who desires objects falls into the insurmountable ocean of
existence, and he who is free from objects crosses the ocean of existence. The
example of the two brothers (Jinpalit and Jinrakshit) who met the goddess of
Ratnadweep is famous. Sutra-148 Beings who desire passion are cheated, and
beings who are free from desire are free from any obstacles (desired), a being
who has attained the essence of the discourse should be free from desire.
Sutra-149 Beings who are attached to objects fall into the terrible ocean of the
world, and beings who are not attached to objects cross the forest of the world.
Sutra-150 Therefore, O valiant man! By the strength of patience, subdue the
indomitable (suppressing suffering) lion-like senses; by doing so, you will
conquer the internal enemy-like and hateful, and accept the flag of worship.
Sutra-151 Knowing the consequences of anger, etc., and knowing the virtues that
result from their suppression, O good man! By effort, suppress the afflictions
like kshaya. Sutra-152 Know the cause of the increase and decrease of kshaya,
which are the most intense sufferings of the three worlds and the supreme
happiness, all in order. Sutra-153 Nanda, etc., by anger, Parashurama, etc., by
pride, Pandurajja (Pandava Arya) by illusion, and Lohananda, etc., by greed have
suffered. Muni Diparatnasagar Krit "(Bhaktaparijna)" Agam Sutra-Hindi
Translation" Page 17

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama sUtra 27, payannAsUtra-4, 'bhaktaparijJA' sUtrasUtra-142,143 jisa taraha
zvAna (kuttA) sUkha gaI haDDIoM ko cabAne ke bAvajUda bhI usakA rasa nahIM pAtA
aura (apane) talave se rasa ko zoSatA hai, phira bhI use cATate hue sukha kA
anubhava hotA haA mAnatA hai| vaise hI striyoM ke saMga kA sevana karanevAlA
puruSa sukha nahIM pAtA, phira bhI apane zarIra ke parizrama ko sukha mAnatA hai
/  sUtra - 144 acchI taraha se khojane ke bAvajUda bhI jaise kela ke garbha meM
kisI jagaha meM sAra nahIM hai, usI taraha indriya ke viSaya meM kAphI khojane
ke bAvajUda bhI sukha nahIM miltaa| sUtra-145 zrotra indriya dvArA paradeza gae
hae sArthavAha kI strI, cakSu ke rAga dvArA mathurA kA vaNika, ghrANa dvArA
rAjaputra aura jIhA ke rasa se sodAsa rAjA kA vadha huaa| sUtra-146 sparza
indriya dvArA duSTa somAlikA ke rAjA kA nAza huA; ekaika viSaya se yadi vo naSTa
hae to pA~ca indriya meM Asakta ho usakA kyA hogA? sUtra-147 viSaya kI apekSA
karanevAlA jIva dustara bhava samudra meM giratA hai, aura viSaya se nirapekSa
ho vo bhavasAgara ko pAra kara jAtA hai  /  ratnadvIpa kI devI ko mile hue
(jinapAlita aura jinarakSita nAma ke) do bhAIoM kA dRSTAnta prasiddha hai|
sUtra-148 rAga kI apekSA rakhanevAle jIva Thaga cUke haiM, aura rAga kI apekSA
rahita jIva binA kisI vighna ke (Icchita) pA cUke haiM, pravacana kA sAra prApta
kiye hue jIva ko rAga kI apekSA rahita honA caahie| sUtra-149 viSaya meM Asakti
rakhanevAle jIva ghora saMsAra sAgara meM girate haiM, aura viSaya meM Asakti na
rakhanevAle jIva saMsAra rUpI aTavI ko pAra kara jAte haiN| sUtra-150 _ isalie
he dhIra puruSa ! dhIraja samAna bala dvArA durdAnta (duHkha se damana vaise)
indriya rUpa siMha ko dama; aisA kara ke aMtaraMga vairI samAna aura dveSa kA
jaya karanevAlA tU ArAdhanA patAkA kA svIkAra kara  /  sUtra - 151 krodhAdika ke
vipAka ko jAnakara aura usa ke nigraha se honevAle guNa ko jAnakara he supuruSa
! tU prayatna dvArA kaSAya samAna kleza kA nigraha kara  /  sUtra-152 jo tIna
jagata ke ati tIvra duHkha haiM aura jo uttama sukha haiM ve sarva kramAnusAra
kaSAya kI vRddhi aura kSaya kI vajaha jaannaa| sUtra-153 krodha dvArA naMda Adi
aura mAna dvArA parazurAma Adi mAyA dvArA paMDarajjA (pAMDu AryA) aura lobha
dvArA lohanandAdi ne duHkha pAe haiN| muni dIparatnasAgara kRt "(bhaktaparijJA)"
Agama sUtra-hindI anuvAda" Page 17

Page #18 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Agam Sutra 27, Payannasutra-4, 'Bhaktaparijna' Sutra-Sutra-154 Such
teachings, like the nectar of immortality, soak the mind, and just as a thirsty
man is calmed by drinking water, so too does the disciple, becoming extremely
healthy, say: Sutra-155 O Lord! I desire your beneficial teachings, like a
strong piece of wood, to cross the mire of the cycle of births and deaths. I
will do as you have said. With such humility, he bows down and says: Sutra-156
If, one day (on this occasion), due to the rise of inauspicious karma, pain or
thirst, etc., arises in the body. Sutra-157 Then, the Niryamak, Kshapak (one who
fasts), teaches with soothing, sweet, joyful, heart-pleasing, and truthful
words. Sutra-158 O virtuous man! You made a great vow amidst the fourfold
assembly, that I will worship well. Now remember that. Sutra-159 Who will break
the Pacchakkhana, witnessed in the presence of the Arihant, Siddha, Kevali, and
the entire assembly? Sutra-160 _Even those who were severely tormented by
Shialanis, attained worship through Avatisukumal meditation. Sutra-161 Even
Bhagwan Sukosal, who cherished Siddhatha (liberation), attained liberation even
after being eaten by a tiger on the Chitrakoot mountain. Sutra-162 Chanakya, the
minister who fasted on the Padupopagam in Gokul, attained the highest good even
after being burned by cow dung set ablaze by the minister Subandhu. Sutra-163
Remembering the pain of being burned by the power of King Kuncha in Rohtak, he
also attained the highest good (worship). Sutra-164, 165 Therefore, O patient
man! You too, relying on sattva, cultivate patience and contemplate the nirguna
nature of the vast ocean of the world. Birth, old age, and death, like water,
are endless, like suffering, filled with aquatic creatures, and the cause of
suffering for the soul. Such a sea of existence is very painful and fierce.
Sutra-166 I am blessed because I have found this rare boat of the true Dharma,
which is difficult to obtain in millions of births, for the vast ocean of
existence. Muni Diperatnasagar Krit “(Bhaktaparijna)” Agam Sutra-Hindi
Translation” Page 18

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama sUtra 27, payannAsUtra-4, 'bhaktaparijJA' sUtrasUtra-154 isa taraha ke
upadeza samAna amRta pAna dvArA bhIge hue citta ke lie, jisa taraha pyAsA puruSa
pAnI pIkara zAnta hotA hai vaise vo ziSya atizaya svastha hokara kahatA
haisUtra-155 he bhagavAna ! maiM bhavarUpI kIcar3a ko pAra karane ko dRr3ha
lakar3I samAna Apa kI hitazikSA kI IcchA rakhatA hU~, Apane jo jaise kahA hai
maiM vaise karatA huuN| aise vinaya se avanata huA vo kahatA hai  /  sUtra-156
yadi kisI dina (isa avasara meM) azubha karma ke udaya se zarIra meM vedanA yA
tRSA Adi pariSaha use utpanna ho  /  sUtra-157 to niryAmaka, kSapaka (anazana
karanevAle) ko snigdha, madhura, harSadAyI, hRdaya ko bhAnevAlA, aura saccA
vacana kahate hue zIkha dete haiN| sUtra-158 he sat puruSa ! tumane caturvidha
saMgha ke bIca bar3I pratijJA kI thI, ki maiM acchI taraha se ArAdhanA karU~gA
aba usa kA smaraNa kara | sUtra-159 arihaMta, siddha, kevalI aura sarva saMgha
kI sAkSImeM pratyakSa kie gae paccakkhANa kA bhaMga kauna karegA? sUtra-160
_ziyAlaNI se ati khavAye gae, ghora vedanA pAnevAle bhI avantisukumAla dhyAna
dvArA ArAdhanA prApta hue  /  sUtra - 161 jinheM siddhArtha (mokSa) pyArA hai
aise bhagavAna sukosala bhI citrakUTa parvata ke lie vAghaNa dvArA khAe jAne
para bhI mokSa ko prApta hue| sUtra-162 gokula meM pAdapopagama anazana
karanevAle cANakya maMtrI ne subandhu maMtrI dvArA jalAe hae gobara se jalAne ke
bAda bhI uttamArtha ko prApta kiyaa| sUtra - 163 rohItaka meM kuMca rAjA dvArA
zakti ko jalAyA gayA usa vedanA ko yAda kara ke bhI uttamArtha (ArAdhakapana ko)
prApta hue| sUtra-164,165 usa kAraNa se he dhIra puruSa ! tuma bhI sattva kA
avalambana karake dhIratA dhAraNa kara aura saMsAra samAna mahAna sAgara kA
nirguNapana soca  /  janma, jarA aura maraNa samAna pAnIvAlA, anAdi, duHkha
samAna zvApada (jalacara jIva) dvArA vyApta aura jIva ko duHkha kA heturUpa aisA
bhava samudra kAphI kaSTadAyI aura raudra hai  /  sUtra - 166 maiM dhanya hU~
kyoMki maiMne apAra bhava sAgara ke lie lAkhoM bhava meM pAne ke durlabha yaha
saddharma rUpI nAva pAI hai muni dIparatnasAgara kRt "(bhaktaparijJA)" Agama
sUtra-hindI anuvAda" Page 18

Page #19 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Sutra Aagam Sutra 27, Payanna Sutra - 4, 'Bhaktaparijna' Sutra - 167 By the
effect of this being practiced once with effort, the being does not experience
sorrow and poverty even for lifetimes. Sutra - 168 _ This Dharma is an
unparalleled Chintamani gem, and an unparalleled Kalpavriksha, it is the supreme
mantra, and then it is like the supreme nectar. Sutra - 169 Now (by the Guru's
teachings) for the Manimaya Mandir, beautifully radiant, with the qualities of
Jin, free from the blemish of Anjan, with the remembrance of the five
prostrations, the devotee should give up their life. Sutra - 170 That (Shravak)
devotee, by worshipping Bhaktaparijna from the lowest level, through the purity
of the result, becomes a Mahardhik Devata in the Saudharma Devaloka. Sutra - 171
By worshipping Bhaktaparijna in an excellent way, a householder becomes a Devata
in the twelfth Devaloka named Achyuta, and if they are a Sadhu, they attain the
bliss of Moksha in an excellent way, or they are born in the Sarvarthasiddha
Vimana. Sutra - 172 In this way, the Yogeshwar Jin Mahaviraswami, according to
the auspicious words spoken by him, this Bhaktaparijna Payanna is read, recited,
and practiced by the blessed ones. (What they attain is explained in the next
verse) Sutra - 173 The soul that properly worships the one hundred and seventy
verses, like the one hundred and seventy Tirthankaras spoken for the sake of the
principle, for the excellent wandering of the human realm, attains eternal
blissful Moksha. (27)-Bhaktaparijna-Prakirnak Sutra - 4, Hindi translation by
Muni Diparatnasagar Muni Diparatnasagar's “(Bhaktaparijna)” Aagam Sutra - Hindi
Translation” Page 19

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 sUtra Agama sUtra 27, payannAsUtra-4, 'bhaktaparijJA' sUtra - 167 eka bAra
prayatna kara ke pAlana kiye jAnevAle isa ke prabhAva dvArA, jIva janmAMtara ke
lie bhI duHkha aura dAridraya nahIM paate| sUtra - 168 _ yaha dharma apUrva
cintAmaNi ratna hai, aura apUrva kalpavRkSa hai, yaha parama maMtra hai, aura
phira yaha parama amRta samAna hai| sUtra - 169 aba (guru ke upadeza se)
maNimaya maMdira ke lie sundara tarIke se sphurAyamAna jina guNa rUpa aMjana
rahita udyotavAle vinayavaMta (ArAdhaka) paMca namaskAra ke smaraNa sahita prANa
kA tyAga kara de| sUtra - 170 vo (zrAvaka) bhakta parijJA ko jaghanya se
ArAdhanA kara ke pariNAma kI vizuddhi dvArA saudharma devalokameM maharddhika
devatA hote haiN| sUtra-171 utkRSTarUpa se bhaktaparijJA kA ArAdhana kara ke
gRhastha acyuta nAma ke bArahave devaloka meM devatA hote haiM, aura yadi sAdhu
ho to utkRSTarUpa se mokSa ke sukha pAte haiM yA to sarvArthasiddha vimAna meM
utpanna hote haiN| sUtra-172 isa taraha se yogezvara jina mahAvIrasvAmI ne kahe
hue kalyANakArI vacana anusAra prarUpita yaha bhakta parijJA payannA ko
dhanyapuruSa par3hate haiM, Avartana karate haiM, sevana karate haiM  /  (ve kyA
pAte haiM yaha Age kI gAthA meM batAte haiM) sUtra-173 mAnava kSetra ke lie
utkRSTarUpa se vicarane aura siddhAMta ke lie kahe gae eka sau sattara
tIrthaMkara kI taraha eka sau sattara gAthA kI vidhivat ArAdhanA karanevAlI AtmA
zAzvata sukhavAlA mokSa pAtI hai| (27)-bhaktaparijJA-prakIrNakasUtra-4 kA muni
dIparatnasAgarakRt hindI anuvAda pUrNa muni dIparatnasAgara kRt
"(bhaktaparijJA)" Agama sUtra-hindI anuvAda" Page 19

Page #20 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Aagam Sutra 27, Payannasutra-4, 'Bhaktaparijna' Sutra Namo Namo Nimmaladansanas
Poojyapad Shri Anand-Kshama-Lalit-Sushil-Sudharmasagar Guru Bhyo Nam: 27
Bhaktaparijna Aagam Sutra Hindi Anuvaad SEEDSC025 [Anuvaadak Evam Sampadak]
Aagam Diwaakar Muni Diparatnasagarji ' [ M.Com. M.Ed. Ph.D. Shruta Maharshi ]
Jasat:- (1)  (2) deepratnasagar.in Bhes Dress:- jainmunideepratnasagar@gmail.com
Moja 09825967397 Muni Diparatnasagar Krit “(Bhaktaparijna)” Aagam Sutra-Hindi
Anuvaad" Page 20

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
Agama sUtra 27,payannAsUtra-4,'bhaktaparijJA' sUtra namo namo nimmaladaMsaNassa
pUjyapAd zrI AnaMda-kSamA-lalita-suzIla-sudharmasAgara gurUbhyo nama: 27
bhaktaparijJA AgamasUtra hindI anuvAda SEEDSC025 [anuvAdaka evaM saMpAdaka]
Agama dIvAkara muni dIparatnasAgarajI ' [ M.Com. M.Ed. Ph.D. zruta maharSi ]
jasATa:- (1) (2) deepratnasagar.in bhesa Dresa:-
jainmunideepratnasagar@gmail.com mojA 09825967397 muni dIparatnasAgara kRt
"(bhaktaparijJA)" Agama sUtra-hindI anuvAda" Page 20

