Catalog link: https://jainqq.org/explore/003493/1

Page #1 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
In memory of the revered Gurudev Shri Joravarmalji Maharaj, this is organized by
the Coordinator and Chief Editor, Yuvacharya Shri Ma Ekara Mana Trini
Chedasatraani. [Dasha-shruta-skandha, Brihat-kalpa-sutra, Vyavahar-sutra]
(Original translation, commentary, notes, and Pati-tata included)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
sva0 pUjya gurudeva zrI jorAvaramala jI mahArAja kI smRti meM Ayojita saMyojaka
evaM pradhAna sampAdaka yuvAcArya zrI mA ekara mAna trINi cedasatrANi. [
dazAzrutaskandha, bRhatkalpasUtra, vyavahArasUtra] (mUla anuvAda-vivecana-
TippaNa-pATITATa yukta) neration international Pe Personal use only

Page #2 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
‡•ê Aham Jinagam-Granthamala: Granthank 32-A {In the auspicious memory of the most
revered Gurudev Pujya Shri Joravarmalji Maharaj, sponsored Triini Chhedsutrani
Dasashrutaskandha - Brihatkalpa Vyavaharsutra [Original Text, Hindi Translation,
Commentary, Notes] Inspiration (Self) Up-Promoter Shasanasevi Swami Shri
Bajlalji Maharaj Coordinator and First Editor (Self) Yuvacharya Shri Mishrimalji
Maharaj 'Madhukar' Translator - Commentator - Editor Anuyogapravartka Muni Shri
Kanhaiyalalji M. 'Kamal' Gitarya Shri Tilockmuniji M. Publisher Shri Agam
Prakashan Samiti, Byawar (Rajasthan)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
OM ahaM jinAgama-granthamAlA : granthAGka 32-A {paramazraddheya gurudeva pUjya
zrI jorAvaramalajI mahArAja ko puNyasmRti meM prAyojita trINi chedasUtrANi
dazAzrutaskandha - bRhatkalpa vyavahArasUtra [mUlapATha, hindI anuvAda,
vivecana, TippaNa yukta] preraNA (sva.) upapravartaka zAsanasevI svAmI zrI
bajalAlajI mahArAja saMyojaka tathA prAdya sampAdaka (sva0) yuvAcArya zrI
mizrImalajI mahArAja 'madhukara' anuvAdaka - vivecaka-sampAdaka
anuyogapravartaka muni zrI kanhaiyAlAlajI ma. 'kamala' gItArya zrI tilokamunijI
ma0 prakAzaka zrI AgamaprakAzana samiti, byAvara (rAjasthAna)

Page #3 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Jinagam-Granthamala: Granthaang 32-A / Nirdeshan _ Sadhvi Shri Umravakuvar
'Archana' / Sampadakamandal Anuyogapravarttak Muni Shri Kanhaiyalalji 'Kamal'
Upadhyay Shri Devendramuni Shastri Shri Ratnamuni 0 Samprerak Muni Shri
Vinaykumar 'Bheem' Shri Mahendramuni 'Dinakar' [Pratham Sanskaran Veer Nirvan
San. 2517 Vikram San. 2048 January 1992 E. / Prakashk Shri Agam Prakashan Samiti
Shri Braj-Madhukar Smriti Bhavan, Pipaliya Bazaar, Byawar (Rajasthan)
Pin-305901] Mudrak Satishchandra Shukla Vaidik Yantraalay, Kesargunj,
Ajmer-305001 D Mulya 160) Rupane: .

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
jinAgama-granthamAlA : granthAGa 32-A / nirdezana _ sAdhvI zrI umarAvakuvara
'arcanA' / sampAdakamaNDala anuyogapravartaka muni zrI kanhaiyAlAlajI 'kamala'
upAcArya zrI devendramuni zAstrI zrI ratanamuni 0 sampreraka muni zrI
vinayakumAra 'bhIma' zrI mahendramuni 'dinakara' [prathama saMskaraNa vIra
nirvANa saM02517 vikrama saM0 2048 janavarI 1992 I. / prakAzaka zrI
AgamaprakAzana samiti zrI braja-madhukara smRti bhavana, pIpaliyA bAjAra,
byAvara (rAjasthAna) pina-305901 ] mudraka satIzacandra zukla vaidika
yaMtrAlaya, kesaragaMja, ajamera-305001 D mUlya 160) rupAne : .

Page #4 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Published at the Holy Remembrance occasion of Rev. Guru Shri Joravarmalji
Maharaj **TREENI CHHEDSUTRANI** Dashashrutskandha Brihatkalpa Vyavhar Sutras
(Original Text with Variant Readings, Hindi Version, Notes and Annotations etc.)
Inspiring Soul (Late) Up-pravartaka Shasansevi Rev. Swami Shri Brijlalji Maharaj
Convener & Founder Editor (Late) Yuvacharya Shri Mishrimalji Maharaj 'Madhukar'
Translator-Annotator-Editor Anuyoga Pravartaka Muni Shri Kanbaiyalalji 'Kamal'
Geetarth Shri Tilokmuniji Publishers Shri Agam Prakashan Samiti Beawar (Raj.)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
Publisbed at the Holy Remembrance occasion of Rev. Guru Shri Joravarmalji
Maharaj TREENI CHHEDSUTRANI Dashashrutskandha Brihatkalpa Vyavhar Sutras (
Original Text with Variant Readings, Hindi Version, Notes and Annotations etc. ]
Inspiring Soul (Late) Up-pravartaka Shasansevi Rev. Swami Shri Brijlalji Maharaj
Convener & Founder Editor (Late) Yuvacharya Shri Mishrimalji Maharaj 'Madhukar'
Trabslator-Annotator-Editor Anuyoga Pravartaka Muni Shri Kanbaiyalalji 'Kamal'
Geetarth Shri Tilokmuniji Publishers Shri Agam Prakashan Samiti Beawar (Raj.)

Page #5 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Jinagam Granthmala Publications No. 32-B O Direction Sadhwi Shri Umravkunwar
'Archana' Board of Editors Anuyogapravartaka Muni Shri Kanbaiyalalji 'Kamal'
Upacharya Shri Devendra Muni Shastri Shri Ratan Muni O Promotor Muni Shri
Vinayakumar 'Bhima' Sri Mahendra Muni 'Dinakar' First Edition Vir-Nirvana Samvat
2517 Vikram Samvat 2048, January 1992. O Publisher Shri Agam Prakashan Samiti,
Shri Brij-Madhukar Smriti Bhawan, Pipaliya Bazar, Beawar (Raj.) Pin 305 901 O
Printer Satish Chandra Shukla Vedic Yantralaya Kesarganj, Ajmer Price Rs Gtd
+75|

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
Jinagam Granthmala Publicatios No. 32-B O Direction Sadhwi Shri Umravkunwar
'Archana' Board of Editors Anuyogapravartaka Muni Shri Kanbaiyalalji 'Kamal'
Upacharya Shri Devendra Muni Shastri Shri Ratan Muni O Promotor Muni Shri
Vinayakumar 'Bhima' Sri Mahendra Muni 'Dinakar' First Edition Vir-Nirvana Samvat
2517 Vikram Samvat 2048, January 1992. O Publisher Shri Agam Prakashan Samiti,
Shri Brij-Madhukar Smriti Bhawan, Pipaliya Bazar, Beawar (Raj.) Pin 305 901 O
Printer Satish Chandra Shukla Vedic Yantralaya Kesarganj, Ajmer Price Rs Gtd
+75|

Page #6 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
At the lotus feet of all the Shrutadhara Sthaviras of the past, present and
future, who are constantly engaged in the practice of Samarpana Niratichaar and
Samyama Sadhana.  Samarpana Anuyogpravartan Muni Kanhaiyalal 'Kamal' Geetaarth
Tilokmuni.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
samarpaNa niraticAra saMyamasAdhanA meM satata saMlagna rahane vAle atIta,
anAgata aura vartamAna ke sabhI zrutadhara sthaviroM ke karakamaloM meN|
samarpaka anuyogapravartaka muni kanhaiyAlAla 'kamala' gItArtha tilokamuni

Page #7 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Please provide the text you would like translated. I need the text to translate
it into English.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================


Page #8 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Under the heading "Three Chhedasutras", the Dasha-Shruta-Skandha, Brihat-Kalpa
and Vyavahar, these three Chhedasutras are published. Due to the large number of
pages, the Nisha-Mutra has been published as a separate volume. The translation,
commentary, editing, etc. of these four Chhedasutras has been done with great
effort, dedication and concentration by Muni Shri Tilokmuniji in the presence of
Anuyoagpravartak Muni Shri Kanhaiyalalji M. 'Kamal'. Therefore, readers should
contact Muni Shri Tilokmuniji for the solution of their queries related to
Chhedasutras. The Chhedasutras are included in the last section of the
Agambattisi. With their publication, the publication work of all the Agamas has
been completed. Therefore, as a token of gratitude, the committee presents its
request. When Yuvacharya Shri Sw. Shraddhey Madhukaramuniji M. Sa. was studying
the Agamas with his Maha-Mahim Gurudev Shri Zoravarmalji M. Sa., Gurudev Shri
had expressed his feelings many times that if the Agamas were made available in
a simple and understandable language and style along with their commentaries, it
would be very useful for reading and studying. Yuvacharya Shri was inspired by
these feelings of Gurudev Shri. He discussed with his elder Guru-Mata Swami Shri
Hazarimlalji M., Swami Shri Brijlalji M., made plans and when he completed the
plan on his own, he also informed the learned Muni-Rajas, learned Sadhvis about
his ideas. He consulted with the Sad-Grihasthas. In this way, the plan was
approved by everyone and the committee. Then, on Vaishakh Shukla 10, Vikram
Samvat 2036, the day of the Nirvana of Bhagwan Mahavir, the announcement was
made to start the editing and publication of Bhagwan's Deshana-rupa Agambattisi
and the work started according to the prescribed rules and regulations. On the
Yuvacharya Chadar-Pradan Mahatmav Day, the Gracharangamutra was presented to the
readers as Jinagam Granthamala Granth-Ank 1. This publication tradition was
going on at a rapid pace when a terrible incident occurred. Deep waves of
sadness engulfed the committee. The planner Yuvacharya Shri passed away. This
was a great loss. But, with the strength of the courage and the blessings of Sw.
Yuvacharya Shri, the committee remained committed to its work. It is the result
of this that the great work of publishing the Agambattisi, which was started,
has been completed as per the rules. The committee is grateful to Adhyatmayogini
Vidushi Maha-Mati Shri Umravakoovarji M. Sa. "Archana" for her guidance and for
inspiring the committee to complete the work by filling the void left by
Yuvacharya Shri. Padmashri Mohanmalji...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
prakAzakIya "trINi chedamutrANi' zIrSaka ke antargata dazAzrutaskandha,
bRhatkalpa aura vyavahAra ye tIna chedamUtra prakAzita hai| pRSTha maryAdA
adhika hone se nizIthamutra ko pRthaka granthAMka ke rUpa meM prakAzita kiyA hai
/ ina cAroM chedasUtroM kA anuvAda. vivecana, saMpAdana aAdi kA kArya mukhya
rUpa se anuyogapravartaka muni zrI kanhaiyAlAlajI ma. 'kamala' ke sAnnidhya meM
gItArtha muni zrI tilokamunijI ne vahuta parizrama. lagana aura manoyogapUrvaka
kiyA hai| atAva pAThakagaNa chedamtroM sambandhI apanI jijJAsAnoM ke samAdhAna
ke lie muni zrI tilokamunijI se saMparka bnaayeN| AgamabattImI ke aMtima varga
meM chadasUtroM kA samAveza hai| inake prakAzana ke sAtha sabhI AgamoM kA
prakAzana kArya saMpanna ho gayA hai / atAva upamahAra ke rUpa meM mamiti apanA
nivedana prastuta karatI hai zramaNamaMdha ke yuvAcAryazrI sva. zraddhaya
madhukaramunijI ma. sA. jaba apane mahAmahima gurudevazrI jorAvaramalajI ma. sA.
meM prAgamoM kA adhyayana karate the taba gurudevazrI ne aneka bAra apane udgAra
vyakta kiye the ki prAgamoM ko unakI TIkAnoM kA mArAMza lekara sarala subodha
bhASA, zailI meM upalabdha karAyA jAye to paThana-pAThana ke liye vizeSa upayogI
hogaa| gurudevazrI ke ina udagAroM meM bavAcAryazrI jI ko preraNA milii| apane
jyeSTha gahamrAtA svAmIjI zrI hajArImalajI ma., svAmIjI zrI brajalAlajI ma. se
carcA karate, yojanA banAte aura jaba apanI ora me yojanA ko pUrNa pada diyA
taba vidvadvarya munirAjoM, viduSI sAdhviyoM ko bhI apane vicAroM meM avagata
kraayaa| sadgRhasthoM se parAmarza kiyA / ima prakAra mabhI aura meM yojanA kA
anumodana ho gayA taba vi. saM. 2036 vaizAkha zuklA 10 zramaNabhagavAna mahAvIra
ke kaivalyadivasa para bhagavAna kI dezanA rUpa pAgamabattIsI ke saMpAdana,
prakAzana ko prArambha karane kI ghoSaNA kara dI gaI aura nirdhArita rIti-nIti
ke anusAra kArya prArambha ho gyaa| yuvAcArya cAdara-pradAna mahAtmava divasa
para grAcArAMgamtra ko jinAgama granthamAlA granyAMka 1 ke rUpa meM pAThakoM ke
adhyayanArtha prastuta kiyaa| yaha prakAzana-parampaga pravAdha gati meM cala
rahI thI ki dAruNaprasaMga upasthita ho gayA. avasAda kI gaharI ghaTAyeM ghira
graaii| yojanAkAra yuvAcAryazrI divaMgata ho gye| yaha mAmika grAghAta thaa|
kintu sAhama aura sva. yuvAcAryazrI ke varada pAzIrvAdoM kA saMbala lekara
samiti apane kArya meM tatpara rhii| isI kA suphala hai ki grAgamavatIsI ke
prakAzana ke jisa mahAna kArya ko prArambha kiyA thA, vaha yathAvidhi sampanna
kara sakI hai| mamiti adhyAtmayoginI viduSI mahAmatI zrI umarAvakUvarajI ma. sA.
"arcanA" kI kRtajJa hai| apane mArga-darzana aura yuvAcAryazrI ke rikta sthAna
kI puti kara kArya ko pUrNa karane kI preraNA dii| padmazrI mohanamalajI

Page #9 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Sa. Chordia, Shri Chimmatsinghji Lodha, Shri Pukharajji Shishodia, Shri
Chandmalji Binaykia, Pandit Shri Shobhachandraji Bharill, etc. and other Ajat
Karma·π≠ MahƒÅyogƒ´s who are no longer with us, are remembered and paid homage to.
Finally, the committee thanks each member of its supporting family. With their
cooperation, the four-fold growth of Jain literature has been achieved. We are
merely playing the role of ordinary executors under their guidance. Ratanchand
Modi, Acting President, Amarchand Modi, Sayaramal Chordia, General Secretary,
Shri ƒÄgam PrakƒÅ≈õan Samiti, Pipaliya BƒÅzƒÅr, BƒÅwar-305901, Amarchand Modi,
Minister.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
sA. coraDiyA, zrI cimmatasiMhajI lor3hA, zrI pukharAjajI zizodiyA, zrI
cAMdamalajI binAyakiyA, paNDita zrI zobhAcandrajI bhArilla aAdi va anyAnya ajAta
karmaTha mahayogIyoM kA jo aba hamAre bIca nahIM haiM, smaraNa kara zraddhAMjali
samarpita karatI hai| aMta meM samiti apane sahayogI parivAra ke pratyeka
sadasya ko dhanyavAda detI hai| inake sahakAra meM jaina vAGamaya kI caturdika-
caturgaNita zrIvRddhi kara makI hai| hama to inake mArgadarzana meM mAmAnya
kAryavAhaka kI bhUmikA kA nirvAha kara rahe haiN| ratanacanda modI kAryavAhaka
adhyakSa amaracanda modI sAyaramala coraDiyA mahAmaMtrI zrI Agama prakAzana
samiti, pIpaliyA bAjAra, byAvara-305901 amaracanda modI maMtrI

Page #10 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Editorial Note: A Critical Review of the Cheda-Sutras  The Jain tradition, as
understood by the SthƒÅnakavƒÅsƒ´, recognizes 32 ƒÄgamas as the word of the
liberated ones (Vƒ´tarƒÅga-vƒÅ·πáƒ´). These are: eleven Angas, twelve Upangas, four
M≈´las, four Chedas, and one PrƒÅva≈õyaka.   The ≈övetƒÅmbara M≈´rti-p≈´jaka tradition,
however, recognizes forty-five ƒÄgamas. The number of Angas, Upangas, etc.
remains the same. However, they include MahƒÅni≈õƒ´tha and Pa√±cakalpa along with
Ni≈õƒ´tha, Da≈õƒÅ≈õrutaskandha, B·πõhatkalpa, and VyavahƒÅras≈´tra in the Prakƒ´r·πáakas and
Cheda-s≈´tras.  The ƒÄgamas, including Angas, Upangas, etc., encompass all aspects
of literature: religion, philosophy, ethics, culture, civilization, history,
art, etc. However, they primarily focus on elaborating Jain philosophy,
religious principles, and ethical practices. The Angas, Upangas, and M≈´la-varga
primarily deal with theoretical concepts. ƒÄcƒÅrƒÅ·πÖga, UpƒÅsaka Da≈õƒÅ·πÖga, and
PrƒÅva≈õyaka S≈´tras extensively discuss ethical practices. The Cheda-s≈´tras are
the embodiments of rules and regulations for ethical purity. This note provides
some insights into the Cheda-s≈´tras.  Why the name Cheda-s≈´tra? The term "Cheda"
is not new to the Jain tradition. The second of the five types of conduct is
called Chedopa sthƒÅpanƒÅcƒÅritra. While the general meaning of "Cheda" is the
piercing of body parts like ears, nose, etc., the meaning of "Cheda" in the
context of religion is as follows:  "VajjhƒÅ·πáu·π≠ƒÅ·πáe·πáam je·πáa ·πáa bƒÅhijjjae taje
·πáiyaya. Sambhavaƒ´ ya parisuddha' so pu·πáa dhammammƒ´ cheutti."  This means that
"Cheda" is that which does not hinder religion through external actions and
leads to increased purity. Therefore, the characteristic of Chedopa sthƒÅpanƒÅ is
to establish the soul in the five types of Yama-like Dharma, namely non-
violence, etc., by abandoning the old, cautious practices. Or, Chedopa sthƒÅpanƒÅ-
samyama is the abandonment of actions like violence, theft, etc., with their
respective distinctions, and the purification through atonement, etc., when a
vow is broken. This is of two types: Nirati-cƒÅra and SƒÅti-cƒÅra.  In Nirati-cƒÅra
Chedopa sthƒÅpanƒÅ, the practitioner is established in the five great vows, namely
non-violence, etc., by separating them from the previous Samayika conduct, which
involved the complete abandonment of all actions. In SƒÅti-cƒÅra Chedopa
sthƒÅpanƒÅcƒÅritra, atonement is necessary along with criticism for re-
establishment (puna·∏• sthƒÅpita). This atonement is based on the severity of the
transgression. There are ten types of atonement, of which Cheda-prƒÅya≈õcitta is
the seventh. There are seven atonements, from critical atonement to Cheda-
prƒÅya≈õcitta, which are given to the clothed ascetics. The last three are given
to the unclothed ascetics.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
sampAdakIya cheda-sUtra : samIkSAtmaka vivecana pAgamoM kI saMkhyA sthAnakavAsI
jaina paraMparA jina AgamoM ko vItarAga-vANI ke rUpa meM mAnatI hai, unakI
saMkhyA 32 hai| vaha isa prakAra hai-gyAraha aMga, bAraha upAMga, cAra mUla,
cAra cheda aura eka Avazyaka / zvetAmbara mUrti-pUjaka paraMparA ke anusAra
paiMtAlIsa Agama haiN| aMga, upAMga Adi kI saMkhyA to samAna hai| kintu
prakIrNakoM aura chedasUtroM meM nizItha, dazAzrutaskandha, bRhatkalpa va
vyavahArasUtra ke sAtha mahAnizItha aura paMcakalpa ko adhika mAnA hai| aMga,
upAMga Adi AgamoM meM dharma, darzana, AcAra, saMskRti, sabhyatA, itihAsa, kalA
Adi sAhitya ke sabhI aMgoM kA samAveza hai / parantu mukhya rUpa se jaina
darzana aura dharma ke siddhAntoM aura AcAroM kA vistAra se varNana kiyA gayA
hai| aMga, upAMga, mUlavarga meM prAyaH saiddhAntika vicAroM kI mukhyatA hai|
AcArAMga, upAsaka dazAMga aura prAvazyaka sUtroM meM prAcAra kA vistAra se
varNana kiyA hai| chedasUtra AcArazuddhi ke niyamopaniyamoM ke prarUpaka haiN|
prastuta meM chedasUtroM sambaMdhI kucha saMketa karate haiN| chedasUtra nAma
kyoM? cheda zabda jaina paramparA ke liye navIna nahIM hai| cAritra ke pAMca
bhedoM meM dUsare kA nAma chedopasthApanAcAritra hai / kAna, nAka prAdi avayavoM
kA bhedana to cheda zabda kA sAmAnya artha hai, kintu dharma-sambandhI cheda kA
lakSaNa isa prakAra hai vajjhANuTANeNaM jeNa Na bAhijjae taye nniyyaa| saMbhavai
ya parisuddha' so puNa dhammammi cheutti / jina bAhyakriyAoM se dharma meM bAdhA
na AtI ho aura jisase nirmalatA kI vaddhi ho, use cheda kahate haiN| ataeva
chedopasthApanA kA lakSaNa yaha huA-purAnI sAvadha paryAya ko chor3akara ahiMsA
prAdi pAMca prakAra ke yamarUpa dharma meM AtmA ko sthApita karanA
chedopasthApanAsaMyama hai| athavA jahA~ hiMsA, corI ityAdi ke bheda pUrvaka
sAvadha kriyAoM kA tyAga kiyA jAtA hai aura vratabhaMga ho jAne para isakI
prAyazcitta Adi se zuddhi kI jAtI hai, usako chedopasthApanA saMyama kahate
haiN| yaha niraticAra aura sAticAra ke bheda se do prakAra kA hai| niraticAra
chedopasthApanA meM pUrva ke sarvasAvadyatyAga rUpa sAmAyika cAritra ke pRthaka-
pRthaka ahiMsA Adi paMca mahAvrata rUpa bheda karake sAdhaka ko sthApita kiyA
jAtA hai| sAticAra chedopasthApanAcAritra meM upasthApita (pUna: sthApita)
karane ke liye AlocanA ke sAtha prAyazcitta bhI Avazyaka hai| yaha
prAyazcittavidhAna skhalanAoM kI gaMbhIratA ko dekhakara kiyA jAtA hai|
prAyazcitta dasa prakAra ke haiN| inameM chedaprAyazcitta sAtavAM hai| AlocanAI
prAyazcitta se chedAha prAyazcitta paryanta sAta prAyazcitta hote haiN| ye
veSayukta zramaNa ko diye jAte haiN| aMtima tIna veSamukta zramaNa ko diye jAte
haiN|

Page #11 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The **Chhedaprayaschitta** is the final **prayaschitta** (atonement) given to
**veshamukta shramanas** (Jain monks who have renounced all worldly
possessions). It encompasses the six previous **prayaschittas**. **Moolah**,
**Anvasthapyai**, and **Parinchikai** **prayaschittas** are considered minor,
while **Aalochaanah** to **Chhedaah** **prayaschittas** are considered major.
Due to their extensive nature, the **Dasha Shruta Skandha** (Acharadasa),
**Brihatkalpa**, **Vyavahar**, and **Nishith** Agamas are referred to as
**Chhedasutras**.  The general subject matter of the **Chhedasutras** can be
understood from the above statement. They address how to avoid and rectify any
faults committed by a **sadhaka** (spiritual aspirant) during their
**sadhanamay** (spiritual) life. From this perspective, the topics of the
**Chhedasutras** can be divided into four parts:  1. **Utsargamarga** (Path of
Renunciation) 2. **Apavadamarga** (Path of Exception) 3. **Doshasevan**
(Committing Faults) 4. **Prayaschittavidhan** (Atonement Regulations)  1.
**Utsargamarga** refers to the rules that are mandatory for **sadhu-sadhvi**
(Jain monks and nuns). It involves adhering to the **samachari** (conduct)
without any deviation or alteration. This path emphasizes the practice of
**nirdosha charitra** (faultless conduct). Following this path ensures
**aprammatta** (mindfulness) in the **sadhaka** and makes them worthy of praise
and respect.  2. **Apavadamarga** refers to special rules. It is of two types:
(1) **Nirdosha Visheshvidhi** (Faultless Special Rule) and (2) **Sadosha
Visheshvidhi** (Faulty Special Rule). Special rules are stronger than general
rules. **Apavadic** rules are based on reasons. The **praagaras** (barriers)
placed in **uttaragunapratyakhyan** (rejection of higher qualities) are all
**nirdosha apavadas** (faultless exceptions). An action or tendency that does
not violate **prajna** (wisdom) is considered **nirdosha**. However, due to
strong reasons, even if the mind is unwilling, one may be compelled to commit a
fault. This is considered **sadosha apavada** (faulty exception).
**Prayaschitta** (atonement) purifies such faults. This path protects the
**sadhaka** from **praart-raudr dhyan** (meditation with anger and violence).
While not praiseworthy, it is not so reprehensible as to cause public criticism.
**Anachar** (immorality) cannot be considered a part of **apavadavidhi**
(exceptional rule) in any form.  3. **Doshasevan** refers to violating the
**Utsargamarga** and **Apavadamarga** paths. The process of purification for
such violations is called **prayaschitta**.  4. **Prayaschittavidhan** is the
regulation of **prayaschitta** for the purification of faults. This regulation
is essential for **doshashuddhi** (purification of faults).  The above statement
reveals the importance of **prayaschitta** for purification. In this context,
some specific points are highlighted.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
veSamukta zramaNa ko diye jAne vAle prAyazcittoM meM chedaprAyazcitta aMtima
prAyazcitta hai| isake sAtha pUrva ke chaha prAyazcitta grahaNa kara liye jAte
haiN| mUlAha, anavasthApyAI aura pAriJcikAI prAyazcitta vAle alpa hote haiN|
AlocanAha se chedAha paryanta prAyazcitta vAle adhika hote haiN| isaliye unakI
adhikatA se sahasrAmravana nAma ke samAna dazAzrutaskandha (AcAradasA)
bRhatkalpa, vyavahAra, nizItha AgamoM ko chedasUtra kahA jAtA hai| chedasUtroM
kA sAmAnya varNya-viSaya uparyukta kathana se yaha jJAta ho jAtA hai ki
sAdhanAmaya jIvana meM yadi sAdhaka ke dvArA koI doSa ho jAye kaise bacA jAye,
usakA parimArjana kaise kiyA jAye, yaha chedasUtroM kA sAmAnya varNya-viSaya
hai| isa dRSTi se chedasUtroM ke viSayoM ko cAra bhAgoM meM vibhAjita kiyA jA
sakatA hai - 1. utsargamArga, 2. apavAdamArga, 3. doSasevana, 4
prAyazcittavidhAna / 1. jina niyamoM kA pAlana karanA sAdhu-sAdhvIvarga ke liye
anivArya hai| binA kisI honAdhikatA, parivartana ke samAna rUpa se jisa samAcArI
kA pAlana karanA avazyaMbhAvI hai aura isakA prAmANikatA se pAlana karanA
utsargamArga hai| nirdoSa cAritra kI prArAdhanA karanA isa mArga kI vizeSatA
hai| isake pAlana karane se sAdhaka meM apramattatA banI rahatI hai tathA isa
mArga kA anusaraNa karane vAlA sAdhaka prazaMsanIya evaM zraddheya banatA hai|
2. apavAda kA artha hai vizeSavidhi / vaha do prakAra kI hai(1) nirdoSa
vizeSavidhi aura (2) sadoSa vizeSavidhi / sAmAnyavidhi se vizeSavidhi balavAna
hotI hai| ApavAdika vidhi sakAraNa hotI hai| uttaraguNapratyAkhyAna meM jo
prAgAra rakhe jAte haiM, ve saba nirdoSa apavAda haiN| jisa kriyA, pravatti se
prAjJA kA atikramaNa na hotA ho, vaha nirdoSa hai, parantu prabalatA ke kAraNa
mana na hote hue bhI vivaza hokara jisa doSa kA sevana karanA par3atA hai yA
kiyA jAye, vaha sadoSa apavAda hai / prAyazcitta se usakI zuddhi ho jAtI hai|
yaha mArga sAdhaka ko prArta-raudra dhyAna se bacAtA hai| yaha mArga
prazaMsanIya to nahIM hai kintu itanA nindanIya bhI nahIM ki lokApavAda kA
kAraNa bana jaaye| anAcAra to kisI bhI rUpa meM apavAdavidhi kA aMga nahIM
banAyA yA mAnA jA sakatA hai| svecchA aura svacchandatA se svairAcAra meM
pravRta honA, maryAdA kA atikramaNa karate hue apane svArtha, mAna-abhimAna ko
sarvopari sthApita karanA, saMgha kI avahelanA karanA, uddaNDatA kA pradarzana
karanA, anuzAsana bhaMga karanA anAcAra hai| yaha akalpanIya hai, kintu anAcArI
kalpanIya banAne kI yukti-prayuktiyoM kA sahArA letA hai| aisA vyakti, sAdhaka
kisI bhI prakAra kI vidhi se zuddha nahIM ho sakatA hai aura na zuddhi ke yogya
pAtra hai| 3, 4-doSa kA artha hai utsarga aura apavAda mArga kA bhaMga karanA
aura usa bhaMga ke zuddhikaraNa ke liye kI jAne vAlI vidhi, prAyazcita kahalAtI
hai| prabalakAraNa ke hone para anicchA se, vismRti aura pramAdavaza jo doSa
sevana ho jAtA hai, usakI zuddhi ke liye prAyazcitta se zuddha honA, yahI
chedasUtroM ke varNana kI sAmAnya rUparekhA hai| prAyazcita ko anivAryatA
doSazuddhi ke liye prAyazcitta kA vidhAna hai, uparyukta kathana se yaha jJAta
ho jAtA hai| isI saMdarbha meM yahA~ kucha vizeSa saMketa karate haiN| [10]

Page #12 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The reason for placing Charitraachar amidst the five principles of Anugardharma
is that it is the only means by which the combined practice of Jnanaachar,
Darshanachar, and Tapaachar-Veeryachar can be accomplished without hindrance.
Charitraachar has eight divisions: five Samitis and three Guptis. The five
Samitis are like a retreat-oriented tendency in a disciplined life, while the
three Guptis are purely retreat-oriented. Their role in Anugardharma practice is
evident in an unprecedented joy and enthusiasm. However, due to the influence of
worldly passions, like attachment and aversion, if the boundaries of Samitis,
Guptis, and Mahavrats are occasionally transgressed, violated, or exceeded, then
Prayashchitta acts as a protective wall. The implication is that if there is a
persistent attachment to the original qualities (Moolgunas) and the subsequent
qualities (Uttargunas), then Prayashchitta is mandatory for their removal. The
reason for the prominence of Chhedprayashchitta is that there are ten types of
Prayashchitta. The first six Prayashchittas are for the purification of general
faults, while the last four are for the purification of strong faults. Chhedarha
Prayashchitta is the first of the last four Prayashchittas. The commentators,
while explaining it, have presented an allegory from Ayurveda. Its essence is
that if a person's limbs or organs become so contaminated by disease or poison
that there is no possibility of recovery through treatment, then it is
appropriate to amputate that limb or organ through surgery. However, the disease
or poison should not be allowed to spread throughout the body. Because if this
is not done, untimely death is inevitable. But before amputation, it is the duty
of the physician to explain to the patient and his close relatives that the limb
or organ has become so contaminated by disease that there is no possibility of
recovery through nourishing treatment. If they want to protect their life and be
free from pain, then they should have the limb or organ amputated through
surgery. Although there will be intense pain during the surgery, it will be for
a short time, but the rest of their life will be free from the current pain. If,
after this explanation, the patient and his guardians agree to the amputation,
then it is the duty of the physician to amputate the limb or organ to protect
the body and life from the disease. In the same way, the Acharya and other
Anugars should be explained that due to the persistent attachment to faults,
your subsequent qualities have become so contaminated that their purification is
no longer possible through ordinary Prayashchittas like criticism, etc. Now, if
you wish, the days of persistent attachment can be amputated to secure the rest
of your disciplined life. Otherwise, neither Samadhi-death nor liberation from
the cycle of birth and death will be possible. If, after this explanation, the
Anugar abandons persistent attachment and accepts Chhedprayashchitta, then the
Acharya should purify him by giving him Chhedprayashchitta. It should be noted
here that Chhedprayashchitta only purifies the faults attached to the subsequent
qualities. The faults attached to the original qualities are purified by Mool-ah
and other three Prayashchittas. The style of description in Chhedsutras: Three
types of Charitraachar are presented in Chhedsutras: (1) Heyaachar, (2)
Jneyaachar, (3) Upadeyaachar. Upon detailed consideration of these, the
following forms emerge: (1) Vidhik‡§≤‡•ç‡§™, (2) Nishedhak‡§≤‡•ç‡§™, (3) Vidhinisedhak‡§≤‡•ç‡§™,
(4) Prayashchittakalp, (5) Prakirnak. Of these, there will be four divisions of
other Vidhi-kalpadic, besides Prayashchittakalp. [11]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
anagAradharma ke pAMca prAcAroM ke bIcoMbIca cAritrAcAra ko sthAna dene kA yaha
hetu hai ki jJAnAcAradarzanAcAra tathA tapAcAra-vIryAcAra kI samanvita sAdhanA
nirvighna sampanna ho, isakA eka mAtra sAdhana cAritrAcAra hai / cAritrAcAra ke
ATha vibhAga haiMpAMca samiti, tIna gupti / pA~ca samitiyAM saMyamI jIvana meM
nivRttimUlaka pravRttirUpA haiM aura tIna guptiyAM to nivRttirUpA hI haiN| inakI
bhUmikA para anagAra kI sAdhanA meM eka apUrva ullAsa, utsAha ke darzana hote
haiN| kintu viSaya-kaSAyavaza, rAga-dveSAdi ke kAraNa yadi samiti, gupti aura
mahAvratoM kI maryAdAoM kA atikrama, vyatikrama yA aticAra yadA-kadA ho jAye to
surakSA ke liye prAyazcitta prAkAra (parakoTA) rUpa hai| phalitArtha yaha hai ki
mUlaguNoM, uttaraguNoM meM pratisevanA kA dhuna laga jAye to usake parihAra ke
liye prAyazcitta anivArya hai| chedaprAyazcitta kI mukhyatA kA kAraNa
prAyazcitta ke dasa prakAra haiN| inameM prAraMbha ke chaha prAyazcitta sAmAnya
doSoM kI zuddhi ke liye haiM aura aMtima cAra prAyazcitta prabala doSoM ko
zuddhi ke liye haiN| chedArha prAyazcitta meM aMtima cAra prAyazcittoM meM
prathama prAyazcitta hai| vyAkhyAkAroM ne isakI vyAkhyA karate hae Ayurveda kA
eka rUpaka prastuta kiyA hai| usakA bhAva yaha haikisI vyakti kA aMga-upAMga
roga yA viSa se itanA adhika dUSita ho jAye ki upacAra se usake svastha hone kI
saMbhAvanA hI na rahe to zalyakriyA se usa aMga-upAMga kA chedana karanA ucita
hai, para roga yA viSa ko zarIra meM vyApta nahIM hone denA caahiye| kyoMki aisA
na karane para akAlamRtyu avazyaMbhAvI hai| kintu aMgachedana ke pUrva vaidya kA
kartavya hai ki rugNa vyakti aura usake nikaTa saMbaMdhiyoM ko samajhAye ki
aMga-upAMga roga se itanA dUSita ho gayA hai ki aba poSadhopacAra se svastha
hone kI saMbhAvanA nahIM hai| jIvana kI surakSA aura vedanA kI mukti cAheM to
zalyakriyA se aMga-upAMga kA chedana karavA leN| yadyapi zalyakriyA se aMga-
upAMga kA chedana karate samaya tIvra vedanA hogI para hogI thor3I dera, kintu
zeSa jIbana vartamAna jaisI vedanA se mukta rhegaa| isa prakAra samajhAne para
vaha rugNa vyakti aura usake abhibhAvaka aMga-chedana ke liye sahamata ho jAye
to cikitsaka kA kartavya hai ki aMga-upAMga kA chedana kara zarIra aura jIvana
ko vyAdhi se bacAve / isa rUpaka kI taraha prAcArya Adi anagAra ko samajhAyeM ki
doSa pratisevanA se Apake uttaraguNa itane adhika dUSita ho gaye haiM ki aba
unakI zuddhi AlocanAdi sAmAnya prAyazcittoM se saMbhava nahIM hai| aba Apa cAheM
to pratisevanAkAla ke dinoM kA chedana kara zeSa saMyamI jIvana ko surakSita
kiyA jaaye| anyathA na samAdhimaraNa hogA aura na bhavabhramaNa se mukti hogii|
isa prakAra samajhAne para vaha anagAra yadi pratisevanA kA parityAga kara
chedaprAyazcitta svIkAra kare to prAcArya use chedaprAyazcitta dekara zuddha
kreN| yahA~ yaha vizeSa jAnanA cAhiye ki chedaprAyazcitta se kevala uttaraguNoM
meM lage doSoM kI zuddhi hotI hai| mUlaguNoM meM lage doSoM kI zuddhi mUlAha Adi
tIna prAyazcittoM se hotI hai| chedasUtroM kI varNanazailI chedasUtroM meM tIna
prakAra ke cAritrAcAra pratipAdita haiM(1) heyAcAra, (2) jJeyAcAra, (3)
upAdeyAcAra / inakA vistRta vicAra karane para yaha rUpa phalita hotA hai (1)
vidhikalpa, (2) niSedhakalpa, (3) vidhiniSedhakalpa, (4) prAyazcittakalpa, (5)
prakIrNakaH / inameM se prAyazcittakalpa ke atirikta anya vidhi-kalpAdika ke
cAra vibhAga hoMge [11]

Page #13 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(1) Legal precepts for the Nirgranthas, (2) Legal precepts for the Nigranthis,
(3) Legal precepts for the Nirgrantha-Nigranthis, (4) General legal precepts /
Similarly, one should also understand the prohibitive precepts, etc. / The
sutras in which the word 'Kappar' is used are the legal precepts. Those in which
the word 'No Kappar' is used are the prohibitive precepts. Those in which both
'Kappar' and 'No Kappar' are used are the legal-prohibitive precepts and those
in which neither 'Kappar' nor 'No Kappar' is used are the legal precepts. For
the atonement, there is a clear mention in the sutras at the appropriate place.
In the Cheda Sutras, after mentioning the general legal-prohibitive precepts, a
clear indication of the legal and prohibitive precepts for the Nirgranthas has
been given. Similarly, the statement of the legal-prohibitive precepts for the
Nirgranthi is there. It is not possible to give a detailed list here of what and
which legal-prohibitive form is for both and how much atonement is there for
each in case of transgression. Readers can find out themselves by looking at the
scriptures. The atonement is for the purification of the fault of the giver and
the receiver. The Cheda Sutras have a detailed description regarding the
eligibility of the giver and the receiver. Here we are giving a brief summary of
it. Transgression, violation, abuse, and misconduct are the causes of
transgression / But those who do not criticize the faults due to crookedness and
inertia can never become eligible for purification / Even if someone criticizes
deceitfully, his criticism is not fruitful. If his mind is not ready to
criticize, then doing atonement is like a flower in the sky. The essence of the
above statement is that the critic should be upright and free from deceit. He
should have a feeling of repentance in his heart, only then he will be able to
be ready for the purification of the fault. Similarly, the one who listens to
the criticism of the critic and is entitled to help in his purification is the
one who understands the essence of the atonement, is neutral, knows the feelings
of others, is able to understand the situation, is himself innocent, is
impartial, and is a worthy speaker. Such a senior practitioner can make the
guilty innocent. He can discipline the Sangha and remove public slander and
misconceptions. Based on this brief introduction, we now present a brief
introduction to the three Cheda Sutras compiled in this book - 1. Dasha Shruta
Skandha, 2. Brihat Kalpa and 3. Vyavahar. (1) Dasha Shruta Skandha or Prachar
Dasha Samavayanga, Uttara Adhyayana and Aavashyak Sutra have been called Ayar
Dasha (Achar Dasha) or name before Kalpa and Vyavahar Sutra. Therefore, this is
the first Cheda Sutra in the Cheda Sutras. It has become more popular as 'Dasha
Shruta Skandha' because its ten chapters are mentioned in the tenth place of the
Sthananga Sutra. The names of the ten chapters are as follows - 1. Asamadhi
Sthan, 2. Sabal Dosha, 3. Ashatana, 4. Ganisampada, 5. Chitta Samadhi Sthan, 6.
Upasak Pratima, 7. Bhiksha Pratima, 8. Paryushana Kalpa 9. Mohaniya Sthan and
10. Ayati Sthan / In these ten chapters, Asamadhi Sthan, [12]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
(1) nirgranthoM ke vidhikalpa, (2) nigraMthiyoM ke vidhikalpa, (3) nigrantha-
nirgranthiyoM ke vidhikalpa, (4) sAmAnya vidhikalpa / isI prakAra niSedhakalpa
Adi bhI samajhanA cAhiye / jina sUtroM meM 'kappaI' zabda kA prayoga hai, ve
vidhikalpa ke sUtra haiN| jinameM 'no kappaI' zabda prayoga hai, ve niSedhakalpa
ke sUtra haiN| jinameM 'kappaI' aura 'no kappaI' donoM kA prayoga hai ve vidhi-
niSedhakalpa ke sutra haiM aura jinameM 'kappaI' aura 'nokappaI' donoM kA
prayoga nahIM hai ve vidhAnasutra haiN| prAyazcittavidhAna ke liye sUtroM meM
yathAsthAna spaSTa ullekha hai| chedasUtroM meM sAmAnya se vidhi-niSedhakalpoM
kA ullekha karane ke bAda nirgranthoM ke liye vidhikalpa aura niSedhakalpa kA
spaSTa saMketa kiyA gayA hai| isI prakAra nirgranthI ke vidhi-niSedhakalpa kA
kathana hai| donoM ke liye kyA aura kauna vidhi-niSedhakalpa rUpa hai aura
pratisevanA hone para kisakA kitanA prAyazcitta vidhAna hai, usakI yahAM vistRta
sUcI denA saMbhava nahIM hai| granthAvalokana se pAThakagaNa svayaM jJAta kara
leN| prAyazcittavidhAna ke dAtA-AdAtA kI yogyatA doSa ke parimArjana ke liye
prAyazcitta vidhAna hai| isake lene aura dene vAle kI pAtratA ke sambandha meM
chedasUtroM meM vistRta varNana hai| jisake saMkSipta sAra kA yahAM kucha
saMketa karate haiN| atikrama, vyatikrama, aticAra, anAcAra doSa sevana ke
kAraNa haiM / kintu jo vakratA aura jar3atA ke kAraNa doSoM kI AlocanA
sahajabhAva se nahIM karate haiM, ve to kabhI bhI zuddhi ke pAtra nahIM bana
sakate haiM / yadi koI mAyApUrvaka AlocanA karatA hai taba bhI usakI AlocanA
phalaprada nahIM hotI hai| usakI manobhUmikA aAlocanA karane ke liye tatpara
nahIM hotI to prAyazcitta karanA AkAzakusumabat hai| ukta kathana kA sArAMza
yaha huA ki Alocaka Rju, chalakapaTa se rahita manasthitivAlA honA caahiye|
usake aMtar meM pazcAttApa kI bhAvanA ho, tabhI doSaparimArjana ke liye tatpara
ho skegaa| isI prakAra prAlocanA karane vAle kI AlocanA sunane vAlA aura usakI
zuddhi meM sahAyaka hone kA adhikArI vahI ho sakegA jo prAyazcittavidhAna kA
marmajJa ho, taTastha ho, dUsare ke bhAvoM kA vettA ho, paristhiti kA parijJAna
karane meM sakSama ho, svayaM nirdoSa ho, pakSapAta rahita ho, prAdeya vacana
vAlA ho| aisA variSTha sAdhaka doSI ko nirdoSa banA sakatA hai| saMgha ko
anuzAsita evaM lokApavAda, bhrAMta dhAraNAoM kA zamana kara sakatA hai| isa
saMkSipta bhUmikA ke AdhAra para aba isa grantha meM saMkalita-1.
dazAzrutaskandha, 2. bRhatkalpa aura 3. vyavahAra, ina tIna chedasUtroM kA
saMkSipta paricaya prastuta karate haiN| (1) dazAzrutaskandha athavA prAcAradazA
samavAyAMga, uttarAdhyayana aura AvazyakasUtra meM kalpa aura vyavahArasUtra ke
pUrva AyAradasA (AcAradazA) yA nAma kahA gayA hai| ataH chedasUtroM meM yaha
prathama chedasUtra hai| sthAnAMgasUtra ke dasaveM sthAna meM isake dasa
adhyayanoM kA ullekha hone se 'dazAzrutaskandha' yaha nAma adhika pracalita ho
gayA hai| dasa adhyayanoM ke nAma isa prakAra haiM1. asamAdhisthAna, 2,
sabaladoSa, 3. aAzAtanA, 4. gaNisampadA, 5. cittasamAdhisthAna, 6.
upAsakapratimA, 7. bhikSapratimA, 8. paryuSaNAkalpa 9. mohanIyasthAna aura 10.
AyatisthAna / ina dasa adhyayanoM meM asamAdhisthAna, [12]

Page #14 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The elements compiled in the Chittasamadhi Sthana, Mohaniya Sthana and Ayati
Sthana are actually related to Yoga Vidya. If compared with Yoga Shastra, it
will be known that these four studies are very important in the ten studies of
the Pracharadasha for concentrating and unifying the mind. The Upasaka Pratima
and Bhikku Pratima impart knowledge of the highest rules of the most rigorous
practice of the Shravaka and Shraman. In the Paryushana Kalpa, it has been
discussed in detail how to perform Paryushana, how to celebrate it, and when to
celebrate it. In these two Dasha, Sabaldosha and Ashatana, the daily rules of
Sadhu life have been discussed and it has been said that these rules should be
followed. What is to be abandoned should be abandoned firmly and what is to be
adopted should be followed. In the fourth Dasha, Dashaganisampada, a very useful
description of the personality, influence and physical influence of the person
sitting on the Acharya Pad has been given. It is necessary for those who are
engaged in the desire for the Acharya Pad to study these before taking the
Acharya Pad. Thus, this Dasha Shruta Skandha (Acharadasha) holds a very
important place in the Shraman life. In other words, the subject matter of the
Dasha of Dasha Shruta Skandha can also be mentioned as follows: The first three
Dasha and the last two Dasha present the Heyachar of the Sadhaka. The fourth
Dasha states the Gneyachar of the Agitart Anugar and the Upadeyachar for the
Gitart Anugar. The fifth Dasha describes the Upadeyachar. The sixth Dasha states
the Jayachar for the Anugar and the Upadeyachar for the Sagar (Shramanopasaka).
The seventh Dasha states the Upadeyachar for the Anugar and the Gneyachar for
the Sagar. The eighth Dasha has some Gneyachar, some Heyachar and some
Upadeyachar for the Anugar. Thus, this Acharadasha-Dasha Shruta Skandha is
useful for both Anugar and Sagar. In the Chhedasutra like Kalpa, Vyavahar etc.,
also the Hey, Gney and Upadeya Prachar has been stated. (2) The word Kalpa in
Brihatkalpasutra is indicative of many meanings. This word is found in Vedic
literature. There are six limbs of the Veda, one of them is the limb in which
the rules of rituals like Yajna are given, that limb is called Kalpa. The word
Kalpa is also used for time. The time of fourteen Manvantaras is known by the
word Kalpa. Four billion, thirty-two crore years pass in it. This long period of
time is called Kalpa. The word Kalpa is also used in a similar sense, such as
Shraman Kalpa, Rishi Kalpa etc. The word Kalpa is also used for the tree which
gives the desired fruit, it is called Kalpavriksha. The word Kalpa is also used
for the state boundary. There is a political boundary up to the twelfth
Devaloka. For this reason, those Devalokas are called 'Kalpa Devalokas'. Whoever
lives life according to the legal rules, he definitely becomes rich in happiness
and wealth. The word Kalpa, which is used to describe the present scripture, is
completely different from the above meanings. [13]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
cittasamAdhisthAna, mohanIyasthAna aura AyatisthAna meM jina tattvoM kA
saMkalana kiyA gayA hai, ve vastutaH yogavidyA se saMbaddha haiN| yogazAstra se
unakI tulanA kI jAye to jJAta hogA ki citta ko ekAgra tathA samAhita karane ke
lie prAcAradazA ke dasa adhyayanoM meM ye cAra adhyayana atyanta mahattvapUrNa
hai / upAsakapratimA aura bhikSupratimA zrAbaka va zramaNa kI kaThoratama
sAdhanA ke uccatama niyamoM kA parijJAna karAte haiM / paryuSaNAkalpa meM
paryuSaNa raba karanA cAhiye, kaise manAnA cAhiye...? kaba manAnA cAhiye, isa
viSaya para vistAra se vicAra kiyA gayA hai| sabaladoSa aura AzAtanA ina do
dazAnoM meM sAdhujIvana ke dainika niyamoM kA vivecana kiyA gayA hai aura kahA
gayA hai ki ina niyamoM kA paripAlana honA hI caahiye| inameM jo tyAjya haiM,
unakA dRr3hatA se tyAga karanA cAhiye aura jo upAdeya haiM, unakA pAlana karanA
caahiye| caturtha dazAgaNisaMpadA meM AcAryapada para virAjita vyakti ke
vyaktitva, prabhAva tathA usake zArIrika prabhAva kA atyanta upayogI varNana
kiyA gayA hai| prAcAryapada kI lipsA meM saMlagna vyaktiyoM ko prAcAryapada
grahaNa karane ke pUrva inakA adhyayana karanA Avazyaka hai| isa prakAra yaha
dazAzrutaskandha (AcAradazA) satra zramaNajIvana meM atyanta mahattvapUrNa
sthAna rakhatA hai| prakArAntara se dazAzrataskandha kI dazAoM ke pratipAdya kA
ullekha isa rUpa meM bhI ho sakatA haiprathama tIna dazAnoM aura aMtima do
dazAoM meM sAdhaka ke heyAcAra kA pratipAdana hai| cauthI dazA meM agItArtha
anagAra ke jJeyAcAra kA aura gItArtha anagAra ke liye upAdeyAcAra kA kathana
hai| pAMcavI dazA meM upAdeyAcAra kA nirUpaNa hai| chaThI dazA meM anagAra ke
liye jayAcAra aura sAgAra (zramaNopAsaka) ke liye upAdeyAcAra kA kathana hai|
sAtavI dazA meM anagAra ke liye upAdeyAcAra aura sAgAra ke liye jJeyAcAra kA
kathana kiyA hai| AThavIM dazA meM anagAra ke liye kucha jJeyAcAra, kucha
heyAcAra aura kucha upAdeyAcAra hai| isa prakAra yaha AcAradazA-dazAzrutaskaMdha
anagAra aura sAgAra donoM ke liye upayogI hai| kalpa, vyavahAra Adi chedasUtroM
meM bhI heya, jJeya aura upAdeya prAcAra kA kathana kiyA gayA hai| (2)
bRhatkalpasUtra kalpa zabda aneka arthoM kA bodhaka hai, isa zabda kA prayoga
vaidika sAhitya meM upalabdha hotA hai| veda ke chahaH aMga haiM unameM eka vaha
aMga hai jisameM yajJa prAdi karmakANDoM kA vidhAna hai, vaha aMga kalpa
kahalAtA hai| kAlamAna ke liye bhI kalpa zabda kA prayoga milatA hai| caudaha
manvantaroM kA kAlamAna kalpa zabda se jAnA jAtA hai| usameM cAra araba, battIsa
karor3a varSa bIta jAte haiN| itane lambe kAla kI saMjJA ko kalpa kahA hai|
sadRza artha meM bhI kalpa zabda kA prayoga kiyA jAtA hai, jaise ki
zramaNakalpa, RSikalpa ityAdi / kalpa zabda usa vRkSa ke lie bhI prayukta hotA
hai jo vRkSa manovAMchita phala dene vAlA hai, vaha kalpavRkSa kahalAtA hai|
rAjyamaryAdA ke lie bhI kalpa zabda kA prayoga kiyA jAtA hai| bArahaveM devaloka
taka rAjanIti kI maryAdA hai| isI kAraNa una devalokoM ko 'kalpa devaloka' kahA
jAtA hai| maryAdA vaidhAnikarIti se jo bhI koI jIvana calAtA hai, vaha avazya hI
sukha aura sampatti se samRddha bana jAtA hai| prastuta zAstra kA nAma jisa
kalpa zabda se caritArtha kiyA hai, vaha uparyukta arthoM se bilkula bhinna hai|
[13]

Page #15 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
In this context, the word "Kalpa" refers to Dharma-Maryada (religious norms and
boundaries).  Sadhu Achar (conduct of a monk) is Dharma-Maryada.  Any scripture
that describes Dharma-Maryada is called Kalpa, as the name reflects the subject
matter.  A name that accurately reflects the subject matter of a scripture is
called a "Yatharth Naam" (true name).  A scripture that provides guidance and
boundaries for the internal and external conduct of a Sadhu is called Kalpa.
The scripture that contains the life stories of Bhagwan Mahavir, Parshvanath,
Arishtanemi, and Rishabhdev, has a final chapter that describes the conduct of a
Sadhu.  This scripture is called "Paryushana Kalpa" and is considered a "Lahu
Kalpa" (smaller Kalpa).  In comparison, a scripture that provides a more
detailed description of Sadhu-Maryada is called "Bhatva Kalpa".  It generally
describes the rules and regulations of the three types of conduct: Samayik,
Chhedopasthapaneya, and Parihar Vishuddhi.  It is mandatory for those who follow
these types of conduct to adhere to all the descriptions in the Brihat Kalpa
scripture.  The scripture that describes the various norms of Sadhu and Sadhvi
is called "Bhat Kalpa Sutra".  In Prakrit language, it is called "Bihakkappa
Suttam".  The question of whether "Kappsuttam" (Kalpa Sutra) and "Kappsury"
(Kalpa Shruta) are the same or different is irrelevant, as "Kappsuttam" is a
Kalik Agam (scripture of the time).  The eighth study of Acharadasha (conduct)
or Dasha Shruta Skandha is "Paryushana Kalpa", which only describes the conduct
during the rainy season.  A few centuries ago, this "Paryushana Kalpa" was
combined with the life stories of Tirthankaras and the list of elders
(Sthaviravali).  Gradually, it became known as "Kalpa Sutra" among the general
public.  To differentiate this Kalpa Sutra from the present one, the present
Kalpa Sutra is called "Bhat Kalpa Sutra".  In reality, there is no mention of a
scripture named "Bhat Kalpa Sutra" in any other scripture.  In the Nandisutra,
it is called "Kapo".  There are two divisions of "Kappsury": "Chullakappsury"
and "Mahakappsury".  Similarly, "Kappiyakappiyan" is also an Utkalik Agam
(scripture of the time).  All these are scriptures that prescribe atonement, but
they are fragmented, according to historians of Jain literature.  The original
text of the present "Kappsuttam" is in prose and contains 473 Anushtup Shlokas.
It contains 81 rules and prohibitions (Vidhi-Nishedhakalpa).  All these Kalpas
are related to the five Samitis (vows) and five Mahavratas (great vows).
Therefore, they are classified here.  The scriptures that are related to more
than one Samiti or more than one Mahavrat are placed under the heading "Samiti
and Mahavrat's combined rules and prohibitions" and "Mahavrat Kalpa".  According
to Uttaradhyayanasutra Chapter 24, the subject of Iryasamiti is very broad, so
the scriptures that appear to be generally related to knowledge, perception, or
conduct, etc., are placed under the heading "Iryasamiti's rules and
prohibitions".  The classification chart is as follows: (1) Iryasamiti's rules
and prohibitions: 1. Charsutra, 2. Adhwagaman Sutra, 3. Aryakshetra Sutra, 4.
Mahandi Sutra, 5. Bairajya-Viruddha Rajya Sutra, 6. Antagruhastha, 7. Vachana
Sutra, 8. Sanjnapya Sutra, 9. Ganantaropa Sampat Sutra, 10. Kalpasthiti Sutra.
1. Abhidhan Rajendra: Volume 3, page 239 discusses the word "Kappsury".  [14]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
prastuta prasaMga meM kalpa zabda kA artha dharma-maryAdA hai| sAdhu AcAra hI
dharma-maryAdA hai| jisa zAstra meM dharmamaryAdA kA varNana ho baha kalpa hai,
nAma viSayAnurUpa hI hai| jisa zAstra kA jaisA viSaya ho vaisA nAma rakhanA
yathArtha nAma kahalAtA hai| sAdhudharma ke Antarika aura bAhya-AcAra kA nirdeza
evaM maryAdA batAne vAlA zAstra kalpa kahalAtA hai| jisa sUtra meM bhagavAna
mahAvIra, pArzvanAtha, ariSTanemi aura RSabhadeva kA jIvanavRtta hai, usa zAstra
ke aMtima prakaraNa meM sAdhu samAcArI kA varNana hai| vaha paryuSaNAkalpa hone
se laghukalpa hai| usakI apekSA se jisameM sAdhu-maryAdA kA varNana vistRta ho,
vaha vahatvalpa kahalAtA hai| isameM sAmAyika, chedopasthApanIya aura
parihAravizuddhi ina tInoM cAritroM ke vidhi vidhAnoM kA sAmAnya rUpa se varNana
hai / bRhatkalpa zAstra meM jo bhI varNana hai una sabakA pAlana karanA ukta
cAritrazIloM ke liye avazyaMbhAvI hai / vividha sUtroM dvArA sAdhu sAdhvI kI
vividha maryAdAoM kA jisameM varNana kiyA gayA hai, use bahatkalpasUtra kahate
hai / prAkRta bhASA meM bihakkappasuttaM rUpa banatA hai| prastuta "kappasuttaM"
(kalpasUtra) aura "kappasuya" (kalpazruta) eka haiM yA bhinna haiM ? yaha AzaMkA
aprAsaMgika hai, kyoMki "kappasuttaM" kAlika Agama hai| aAcAradazA arthAt
dazAzrutaskandha kA AThavAM adhyayana "paryuSaNAkalpa" hai, isameM kevala
varSAvAsa kI samAcArI hai| kucha zatAbdiyoM pahale isa "paryuSaNAkalpa" ko
tIrthaMkaroM ke jIvanacaritra tathA sthavirAvalI se saMyukta kara diyA gayA
thaa| yaha zanaiH-zanai: kalpasUtra ke nAma se janasAdharaNa meM prasiddha ho
gyaa| isa kalpasUtra se prastuta kalpasUtra kA nAma bhinna dikhAne ke lie
prastuta kalpasUtra kA nAma bahatkalpasUtra diyA gayA hai| vAstava meM
bRhatkalpasUtra nAma ke Agama kA kisI Agama meM ullekha nahIM hai| nandIsatra
meM isakA nAma "kappo" hai / kappasuyaM ke do vibhAga haiM "cullakappasuyaM"
aura "mahAkappasurya" / isI prakAra "kappiyAkappiyaM" bhI utkAlika Agama hai| ye
saba prAyazcitta-vidhAyaka Agama haiM, para ye vicchinna ho gaye haiM aisA
jainasAhitya ke itihAsajJoM kA abhimata hai| kalpa vargIkaraNa prastuta
"kalpasuttaM" kA mUla pATha gadya meM hai aura 473 anuSTupa zloka pramANa hai /
isameM 81 vidhi-niSedhakalpa haiM / ye sabhI kalpa pAMca samiti aura pAMca
mahAvratoM se sambandhita haiM / ataH inakA vargIkaraNa yahA~ kiyA gayA hai|
jina sUtroM kA eka se adhika samitiyoM yA eka se adhika mahAvratoM se sambandha
hai, unakA sthAna samiti aura mahAvrata ke saMyukta vidhi-niSedha aura
mahAvratakalpa zIrSaka ke antargata hai| uttarAdhyayana a0 24 ke anusAra
IryAsamiti kA viSaya bahuta vyApaka hai, isalie jo sUtra sAmAnyatayA jJAna,
darzana yA cAritra Adi se sambandhita pratIta hue haiM unako "IryAsamiti ke
vidhi-niSedhakalpa" zIrSaka ke nIce sthAna diyA hai| vargIkaraNadarzaka prArUpa
isa prakAra hai (1) IryAsamiti ke vidhi-niSedha kalpa--1. cArasUtra, 2.
adhvagamanasUtra, 3. AryakSetrasUtra, 4. mahAnadIsUtra, 5. bairAjya-
viruddharAjyasUtra, 6. antagRhasthA, 7. vAcanAsUtra, 8. saMjJApyasUtra, 9.
gaNAntaropasampatsUtra, 10. kalpasthitisUtra / 1. abhidhAna rAjendra : bhAga
tRtIya pRSTha 239 para "kappasuyaM" zabda kA vivecana / [14]

Page #16 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(2) Joint Law-Prohibition-Formulas of the *Iryasamiti* and
*Paristhapanikasamiti* - 11. *Vicharbhumiviharbhumisutra* / (3) Law-Prohibition-
Formulas of the *Bhasha-samiti* - 12. *Vachanasutra*, 13. *Prastarasutra*, 14.
*Antarigrihasthanadisutra*, (4) Law-Prohibition-Formulas of the *Eshanasamiti* [
*Aharashana* ] 15. *Prlambasutra*, 16. *Ratribhaktasutra*, 17. *Sankhatisutra*,
18. *Sagarik-Pariharikasutra*, 19. *Ahutika-Nihati Kasutra*, 20. *Anshikasutra*,
21. *Kalakshetrattikrantasutra*, 22. *Kalpasthitakalpasthitasutra*, 23.
*Sanstrita-Nivichikitsasutra*, 24. *Udgarsutra*, 25. *Graharavidhisutra*, 26.
*Parivasitasutra*, 27. *Pulakabhaktasutra*, 28. *Kshetravagrahpramanasutra*, 29.
*Rodhaka* (Army) *Sutra* (*Panashana*) 30. *Panakavidhisutra*, 31.
*Aneshniyasutra*, 32. *Moksutra*, (*Vastrashana*) 33. *Chilimilika Sutra* 34.
*Ratrivastradigrahanasatra*, 35. *Hatahatasutra*, 36. *Upadhisutra*, 37.
*Vastrasutra*, 38. *Nishrasasutra*, 39. *Trikritsnachaturkritsnasutra*, 40.
*Samavasaranasutra*, 41. *Yatharatnaadhikasutra*, (*Vastra-Pashana*) 42.
*Pravagrah Sutra*, (*Pashana*) 43. *Ghatimaatraka Sutra*, (*Rajoharanaishana*)
44. *Rajoharanasutra*, (*Chamaishana*) 45. *Charmasutra*, (*Shayyaa-
Sanstaarakaishana*) 46. *Shayyaa-Sanstaarakasutra*, 47.
*Yatharatnaadhikashayyaa-Sanstaarak-Paribhajanasutra*, (*Sthaneshana*) 48.
*Avagrahasutra*, (*Upashrayeishana*) 49. *Apanagrih-Rathyaamukhasutra*, 50.
*Chitrakarm Sutra*, 51. *Sagarik Nidhasutra*, 52. *Sagarik Upashrayasutra*, 53.
*Pratibaddha Shayyaasutra*, 54. *Gathapatikulmadhyavasasutra*, 55.
*Upashrayasutra*, 56. *Upashrayavidhisutra*, (*Vasatinivas*) 57.
*Masakalpasutra*, 58. *Vagadasutra*, *Mahavato* who are not eligible 59.
*Pravrajanasutra* (*Mahavrat Prarupan*) 60. *Mahavatsutra*, Law-Prohibition-
Formulas of the First *Mahavrat* 61. *Adhikaranasutra*, 62. *Vyavshamanasutra*,
Law-Prohibition-Formulas of the First and Third *Mahavrat* 63.
*Avasthappasutra*, Law-Prohibition-Formulas of the First-Fourth *Mahavrat* 64.
*Dakatirasutra*, 65. *Anudghatikasutra*, Law-Prohibition-Formulas of the Fourth
*Mahavrat* 66. *Upashray-Praveshasutra*, 67. *Apavritadwar Upashrayasutra*, 68.
*Avagrahanantak-Pravagrahpattakasutra*, 69. *Brahmapaayasutra*, 70.
*Brahmarakshasutra*, 71. *Paranchikasutra*, 72. *Kantakad-Uddharanasutra*, 73.
*Durgsutra*, 74. *Kshiptchittaadisutra*, *Tapakalpa* 75. *Kritikarm Sutra* 76.
*Glanasutra*, 77. *Pariharikasutra* 78. *Vyavaharasutra*, Post-Death Rituals 79.
*Vishvambhanasutra*, Joint Formulas of *Mahavrat* and *Samiti* 80.
*Parimanthasatra* Through this classification, every knowledgeable reader can
understand the usefulness of this *Agam*. How important these Law-Prohibition-
Formulas are for the life of a *Shraman*. Only through their study and
contemplation can the true practice of the five vows be possible. This is the
opinion of the *Agam* experts, and it is self-evident that only those who know
these Law-Prohibition-Formulas will be able to prevent the violation of the
*Kalpa*. (3) *Vyavaharasutra* The presented *Vyavaharasutra* is the third
*Chhedasutra* / It has ten *Uddeshaka*. The last (fifth) *sutra* of the tenth
*Uddeshaka* has the names of five *Vyavahara*. This *sutra* is also named after
the five *Vyavahara* as the main ones. 1. As many *sutras* as there are in the
*Upashray* Law-Prohibition-Formulas, they are mostly also the Law-Prohibition-
Formulas of the fourth *Mahavrat*. 2. These *sutras* are the ones that prescribe
the *Vinaya* *Yavaty* and *Prayaschitta* etc. internal austerities. 3. The first
*Chhedasutra* is *Dasha* (*Ayaradasha Dasha-Shruta-Skandha*), the second
*Chhedasutra* is *Kalpa* (*Brihatkalpa*) and the third *Chhedasutra* is
*Vyavahara* / See *Sama* 26 *Sutra* 2 / Or *Utta* *A* 31, *Ga* 17 / The
commentator's opinion is that the fifth *sutra* of the tenth *Uddeshaka* of the
*Vyavaharasutra* is the last *sutra*. All the *sutras* from the *Purushaprakar*
to the *Dasavidhavaiyaavaty* are either *Parivadhit* or *Chulikarup*. [ 15 ]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
(2) IryAsamiti aura pariSThApanikAsamiti ke saMyukta vidhi-niSedhakalpa-11.
vicArabhUmivihArabhUmisUtra / (3) bhASA-samiti ke vidhi-niSedhakalpa-12.
vacanasUtra, 13. prastArasUtra, 14. antaragRhasthAnAdisUtra, (4) eSaNAsamiti ke
vidhi-niSedhakalpa [AhAraSaNA] 15. pralambasUtra, 16. rAtri bhaktasUtra, 17.
saMkhatisUtra, 18. sAgArika-pArihArikasUtra, 19. AhutikA-nihati kAsUtra, 20.
aMzikAsUtra, 21.kAlakSetrAtikrAntasUtra, 22. kalpasthitAkalpasthitasUtra, 23.
saMstRta-nivicikitsasUtra, 24. udgArasUtra, 25. grAhAravidhisUtra, 26.
parivAsitasUtra, 27. pulAkabhaktasUtra, 28. kSetrAvagrahapramANasUtra, 29.
rodhaka (senA) sUtra (pANaSaNA) 30. pAnakavidhisUtra, 31. aneSaNIyasUtra, 32.
mokasUtra, (vastraMSaNA) 33. cilimilikA sUtra 34. rAtrivastrAdigrahaNasatra, 35.
hatAhatAsUtra, 36, upadhisUtra, 37. vastrasutra, 38. nizrAsUtra, 39.
trikRtsnacatuHkRtsnasUtra, 40. samavasaraNasUtra, 41. yathAratnAdhika
vastraparibhAjakasUtra, (vastra-pASaNA) 42. pravagrahasUtra, (pASaNA) 43.
ghaTImAtraka sUtra , (rajoharaNaiSaNA) 44. rajoharaNasUtra, (camaiSaNA) 45.
carmasUtra, (zayyA-saMstArakeSaNA) 46. zayyA-saMstArakasUtra, 47.
yathAratnAdhika zayyA-saMstAraka-paribhAjanasUtra, (sthAneSaNA) 48.
avagrahasUtra, (upAzrayaiSaNA) 49. ApaNagRha-rathyAmukhasUtra, 50.
citrakarmasUtra, 51. sAgArika nidhAsUtra, 52. sAgArika upAzrayasUtra, 53.
pratibaddha zayyAsUtra, 54. gAthApatikulamadhyavAsasUtra, 55. upAzrayasUtra, 56.
upAzrayavidhisUtra, (vasatinivAsa) 57. mAsakalpasUtra, 58. vagaDAsUtra,
mahAvatoM ke anadhikArI 59. pravrAjanAsUtra (mahAvrata prarUpaNa) 60.
mahAvatasUtra, prathama mahAvata ke vidhiniSedhakalpa 61. adhikaraNasUtra, 62.
vyavazamanasUtra, prathama aura tRtIya mahAvata ke vidhiniSedhakalpa 63.
AvasthAppasUtra, prathama-caturtha mahAvata ke vidhiniSedhakalpa 64.
dakatIrasUtra, 65. anudghAtikasUtra, caturthamahAvata ke vidhiniSedhakalpa 66.
upAzraya-pravezasUtra, 67. apAvRtadvAra upAzrayasUtra, 68. avagrahAnantaka-
pravagrahapaTTakasUtra, 69. brahmApAyasUtra, 70. brahmarakSAsUtra, 71.
pArAJcikasutra, 72. kaNTakAdi-uddharaNasUtra, 73. durgasUtra, 74.
kSiptacittAdisUtra, tapakalpa' 75. kRtikarmasUtra 76. glAnasUtra, 77.
pArihArikasUtra 78. vyavahArasUtra, maraNottaravidhi 79. vizvambhavanasUtra,
mahAvata aura samiti ke saMyuktakalpa 80. parimanthasatra isa vargIkaraNa se
pratyeka vijJapAThaka isa Agama kI upAdeyatA samajha sakate haiN| zrAmaNya
jIvana ke lie ye vidhi-niSedhakalpa kitane mahattvapUrNa haiN| inake svAdhyAya
evaM cintana-manana se hI paMcAcAra kA yathArtha pAlana sambhava hai| yaha
pAgamajJoM kA abhimata hai tathA ina vidhi-niSedhakalpoM ke jJAtA hI kalpa
viparIta pAcaraNa ke nivAraNa karane meM samartha ho sakeMge, yaha svataH siddha
hai| (3) vyavahArasUtra prastuta vyavahArasUtra tRtIya chedasUtra hai / isake
dasa uddezaka haiN| dasaveM uddezaka ke aMtima (pAMcaveM) sUtra meM pAMca
vyavahAroM ke nAma hai / isa sUtra kA nAmakaraNa bhI pA~ca vyavahAroM ko
pramukha mAnakara hI kiyA gayA hai| 1. upAzraya vidhi-niSedha-kalpa ke jitane
sUtra haiM ve prAyaH caturtha mahAvata ke vidhi-niSedha-kalpa bhI haiN| 2.
vinaya yAvatya aura prAyazcitta prAdi grAbhyantara tapoM kA vidhAna karane vAle
ye satra haiN| 3. prathama chedasUtra dazA, (AyAradazA dazAzrutaskandha),
dvitIya chedasUtra kalpa (bRhatkalpa) aura tRtIya chedasUtra vyavahAra / dekhie
sama0 26 sUtra2 / athavA utta0 a0 31, gA0 17 / bhASyakAra kA mantavya hai-
vyavahArasUtra ke dasaveM uddezaka kA pAMcavAM sUtra hI antima sUtra hai|
puruSaprakAra se dasavidhavaiyAvatya paryanta jitane sUtra haiM, ve saba
parivadhita haiM yA cUlikArUpa hai| [ 15 ]

Page #17 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The word "vyavahar" is formed from the combination of the prefixes "vi" and "av"
and the root "har". "Vi" indicates diversity or method, "av" indicates doubt,
and "har" indicates the action of removing. Therefore, "vyavahar" refers to the
removal of various doubts related to a matter of dispute. This is the specific
meaning of the word "vyavahar".  The main topics of the "vyavahar sutra" are: 1.
"vyavahar" (conduct), 2. "vyavahari" (one who conducts), and 3. "vyavahartavya"
(that which is to be conducted).  The last sutra of the tenth udde≈õaka states
that there are five "vyavahar karan" (means of conduct). The "vyavahari" (those
who conduct the action of conduct) are the "geetarth" (teachers, etc.) who
purify the "gan" (community). The "shraman" and "shramanis" (monks and nuns) are
the "vyavahartavya" (those who are to be conducted). This means that the
"vyavaharajna" (one who knows conduct) conducts the action of purifying the
"gan" from transgressions. Just as a potter (doer) uses a wheel, a stick, clay,
and a thread, etc. (means) to make a pot (action), similarly, the "vyavaharajna"
uses "vyavahar" (conduct) to purify the "vyavahartavya" (community) from
transgressions.  There are two main interpretations of "vyavahar": 1. "laukika"
(worldly) and 2. "loko‡§§‡•ç‡§§‡§∞" (transcendental). The "laukika" interpretation is of
two types: 1. "samanya" (general) and 2. "vishesh" (specific). The general
interpretation is conduct with others or the exchange of money. The specific
interpretation is the entire process of litigation, i.e., justice.  There are
some words related to this specific interpretation that have been in use since
ancient times in the Vedic tradition of "shruti" (revealed knowledge) and
"smriti" (remembered knowledge). These include:  1. "vyavaharshastra" (law
code): This deals with the rules and regulations made collectively by the state
government on a particular subject, as well as the punishment for violating
those rules.  1. "Vi" for "nanartha" (various meanings), "av" for "sandeha"
(doubt), "haran" is called "har" (removal). "Nana sandehaharanad, vyavahar iti
sthitih" (From the removal of various doubts, the state of "vyavahar" arises). -
Katyayana  2. "Nana vivad vishaya san≈õayo hiyate'nena iti vyavaharah" (This
removes doubts related to various matters of dispute, hence "vyavahar").  3.
"Chattari purisajaya pannatta, tam jahaganasohi kare nama ege no manakare..."
(There are four types of people, and among them, the "ganasohi kare" is not a
"manakare" (a person who is not a monk)). - Vyavahar Purushaprakar Sutra  4.
"Gaha-vahari khalu katta, vavaharo hoi karanbhuto u. Vahiravvam kajja, kubhadi
tiyassa jah siddi" (The "gaha-vahari" (householder) is the doer, and "vyavahar"
is the means. The "vahiravvam kajja" (work to be done) is like the making of a
pot, etc., which is achieved through the means). - Vyavahar Bhadyapithika Gatha
2  5. "Na kashchit kasyachit mitram, na kashchit kasyachid ripuh / Vyavaharena
jayante, mitrani ripavastatha" (No one is a friend of anyone, and no one is an
enemy of anyone. Friends and enemies are created through "vyavahar"). -
Hitopade≈õa, Mitralabdha, 72  6. "Parasparam manushyanam, svarthavipratipattishu
/ Vakyanayaad vyavasthan, vyavahar udahritah" (Among humans, in matters of
conflicting interests, "vyavahar" is described as the establishment of a
settlement through words). - Mitakshara [16]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
vyavahAra-zabdaracanA vi+va+ha-+dhA / 'vi' aura 'ava' ye do upasarga haiN| haja-
haraNe dhAtu hai / 'ha' dhAtu se 'pA' pratyaya karane para hAra banatA hai|
vi+va+hAra-ina tInoM se vyavahAra zabda kI racanA huI hai| 'vi'vividhatA yA
vidhi kA sUcaka hai| 'prava'saMdeha kA sUcaka hai| 'hAra'-haraNa kriyA kA sUcaka
hai| phalitArtha yaha hai ki vivAda viSayaka nAnA prakAra ke saMzayoM kA jisase
haraNa hotA hai vaha 'vyavahAra' hai| yaha vyavahAra zabda kA vizeSArtha hai|
vyavahArasUtra ke pramukha viSaya 1. vyavahAra, 2. vyavahArI aura 3.
vyavahartavya-ye tIna isa sUtra ke pramukha viSaya haiN| _ dasaveM uddezaka ke
antima sUtra meM pratipAdita pAMca vyavahAra karaNa (sAdhana) haiM, gaNa kI
zuddhi karane vAle gItArtha (prAcAryAdi) vyavahArI (vyavahAra kriyA pravartaya)
kartA haiM, aura zramaNa zramaNiyAM vyavahartavya (vyavahAra karane yogya) haiM
/ arthAt inakI aticAra zuddhirUpa kriyA kA sampAdana vyavahArajJa vyavahAra
dvArA karatA hai| jisa prakAra kumbhakAra (kartA), cakra, daNDa mRttikA sUtra
Adi karaNoM dvArA kumbha (karma) kA sampAdana karatA hai-isI prakAra
vyavahArajJa vyavahAroM dvArA vyavahartavyoM (gaNa) kI aticAra zuddhi kA
sampAdana karatA hai| vyavahAra-vyAkhyA vyavahAra kI pramukha vyAkhyAyeM do haiM
/ eka laukika vyAkhyA aura dUsarI lokottara vyAkhyA / laukikA vyAkhyA do prakAra
kI hai1. sAmAnya aura 2. vizeSa / sAmAnya vyAkhyA hai-dUsare ke sAtha kiyA jAne
vAlA AcaraNa athavA rupaye-paisoM kA lena-dena / vizeSa vyAkhyA hai-abhiyoga kI
samasta prakriyA arthAta nyAya / isa viziSTa vyAkhyA se sambandhita kucha zabda
pracalita haiN| jinakA prayoga vaidika paramparA kI zrutiyoM evaM smRtiyoM meM
cirantana kAla se calA mA rahA hai| yathA 1. vyavahArazAstra-(daNDasaMhitA)
jisameM rAjya-zAsana dvArA kisI vizeSa viSaya meM sAmUhika rUpa se banAye gaye
niyamoM ke nirNaya aura niyamoM kA bhaMga karane para diye jAne vAle daNDoM kA
vidhAna va vivecana hotA hai| 1. 'vi' nAnArthe ''va' saMdehe, 'haraNaM' hAra
ucyate / nAnA saMdehaharaNAda, vyavahAra iti sthitiH 1-kAtyAyana / nAnA vivAda
viSayaH saMzayo hiyate'nena iti vyavahAraH / 2. cattAri purisajAyA paNNattA, taM
jahAgaNasohikare nAma ege no maannkre|.... vyava0 puruSaprakAra sUtra 3. gAhA-
vahArI khalu kattA, vavahAro hoI karaNabhUto u| vahariyavvaM kajja, kubhAdi
tiyassa jaha siddhI / / vya0 bhAdhyapIThikA gAthA 2 4. na kazcit kasyacinmitraM,
na kazcit kasyacid ripuH / vyavahAreNa jAyante, mitrANi ripavastathA / / -hito0
mi0 72 5. parasparaM manuSyANAM, svArthavipratipattiSu / vAkyAnayAyAd
vyavasthAna, vyavahAra udAhRtaH / / mitaakssraa| [16]

Page #18 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
2. A **VyavahƒÅrj√±a** (judge) who is knowledgeable in **VyavahƒÅr≈õƒÅstra** (law) is
the one who considers and decides on accusations, etc., with discernment.  There
are two types of **loko‡§§‡•ç‡§§‡§∞** interpretations: 1. General and 2. Specific. / The
general interpretation is the conduct of one **ga·πáa** (group) with another
**ga·πáa**, or the conduct of one **≈õrama·πáa** (ascetic) with another **≈õrama·πáa**,
or the conduct of one **ƒÅcƒÅrya**, **upƒÅdhyƒÅya**, etc., with another **ƒÅcƒÅrya**,
**upƒÅdhyƒÅya**, etc. / The specific interpretation is the "**vapan**" (sowing) of
**tapa** (austerities) and other practices through the **sarvaj√±okta vidhi**
(method of the omniscient) and the removal of **atiƒçƒÅrajanaya pƒÅpa** (sin
arising from transgression) is **vyavahƒÅra**. The **bhƒÅ·π£yakƒÅra** (commentator)
instructs that the word **vyavahƒÅra** is created by combining the word **hƒÅra**
with the word **vyav** in place of the word **vivƒÅpa**. There are two types of
**vyavahƒÅra**: 1. **vidhi vyavahƒÅra** and 2. **avidhi vyavahƒÅra**. / **Avidhi
vyavahƒÅra** is against **mok·π£a** (liberation), therefore it is not the subject
of this s≈´tra, but **vidhi vyavahƒÅra** is its subject. There are four types of
**vyavahƒÅra**: 1. **nƒÅma vyavahƒÅra**, 2. **sthƒÅpanƒÅ vyavahƒÅra**, 3. **dravya
vyavahƒÅra**, and 4. **bhƒÅva vyavahƒÅra**. 1. **NƒÅma vyavahƒÅra** - a particular
person being named "**vyavahƒÅra**". / 2. **SthƒÅpanƒÅ vyavahƒÅra** - the true or
false representation of the person named "**vyavahƒÅra**". / 3. **Dravya
vyavahƒÅra** has two divisions: from **ƒÅgama** (scripture) and from **noƒÅgama**
(non-scripture). From **ƒÅgama** - the knower of the inappropriate (useless)
**vyavahƒÅra** word. / From **noƒÅgama** - **dravya vyavahƒÅra** is of three types:
1. **j√±a≈õarƒ´ra**, 2. **bhavyasarƒ´ra**, and 3. **tadvyatirikta**. / **J√±a≈õarƒ´ra**
- the dead body of the knower of the **vyavahƒÅra** word. / **Bhavyasarƒ´ra** -
the future body of the knower of the **vyavahƒÅra** word. / **Tadvyaitirikta**
**dravya vyavahƒÅra** - **vyavahƒÅra** scripture or book. / This is of three
types: 1. **laukika**, 2. **loko‡§§‡•ç‡§§‡§∞**, and 3. **kuprƒÅvanika**. The development
of **laukika** **dravya vyavahƒÅra** began with the development of humans from
the **bhogabh≈´mi** (land of enjoyment). Even in that ancient time, men lived as
husbands and women as wives, but their sexual desire was very limited. They had
only two children (at once) in their entire life. Of these, one was a boy and
one was a girl. "We two, our two" was the motto of their worldly life. They
would become husband and wife in their youth as brother and sister. 1. **Vyav.
BhƒÅ·π£ya. Pƒ´·π≠hikƒÅ GƒÅ. 4** / 2. **Vyav. BhƒÅ·π£ya. Pƒ´·π≠hikƒÅ GƒÅ. 4** / 3. **Vyav.
BhƒÅ·π£ya. Pƒ´·π≠hikƒÅ GƒÅthƒÅ-6** / [17]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
2. vyavahArajJa(nyAyAdhIza) jo vyavahArazAstra kA jJAtA hotA hai vahI kisI
abhiyoga Adi para vivekapUrvaka vicAra karane vAlA evaM daNDanirNAyaka hotA hai|
lokottara vyAkhyA bhI do prakAra kI hai.-1 sAmAnya aura 2 vizeSa / sAmAnya
vyAkhyA hai--eka gaNa kA dUsare gaNa ke sAtha kiyA jAne vAlA AcaraNa / athavA
eka zramaNa kA dUsare zramaNa ke sAtha, eka AcArya, upAdhyAya Adi kA dUsare
AcArya , upAdhyAya Adi ke sAtha kiyA jAne vAlA AcaraNa / vizeSa vyAkhyA hai
-sarvajJokta vidhi se tapa prabhRti anuSThAnoM kA "vapana" yAne bonA aura usase
aticArajanya pApa kA haraNa karanA vyavahAra hai'| 'vivApa' zabda ke sthAna meM
'vyava' Adeza karake 'hAra' zabda ke sAtha saMyukta karane para vyavahAra zabda
kI sRSTi hotI hai yaha bhASyakAra kA nirdeza hai| vyavahAra ke bheda-prabheda
vyavahAra do prakAra kA hai--1 bidhi vyavahAra aura 2 avidhi vyavahAra / avidhi
vyavahAra mokSa-virodhI hai, isalie isa sUtra kA viSaya nahIM hai, apitu vidhi
vyavahAra hI isakA viSaya hai| vyavahAra cAra prakAra ke haiM-1 nAmavyavahAra 2
sthApanAvyavahAra 3 dravyavyavahAra aura 4 bhaavvyvhaar| 1. nAmavyavahAra--kisI
vyakti vizeSa kA 'vyavahAra' nAma honA / 2. sthApanAvyavahAra-vyavahAra nAma
vAle vyakti kI sat yA asat pratikRti / 3. dravyavyavahAra ke do bheda haiM--
Agama se aura noAgama se| Agama se anupayukta (upayogarahita) vyavahAra pada kA
jJAtA / noAgama se--dravyavyavahAra tIna prakAra kA hai-1 jJazarIra 2
bhavyazarIra aura 3 tadvyatirikta / jJazarIra-vyavahAra pada ke jJAtA kA
mRtazarIra / bhavyazarIra-vyavahAra pada ke jJAtA kA bhAvIzarIra / tavyatirikta
dravyavyavahAra-vyavahAra zruta yA pustaka / yaha tIna prakAra kA hai-1 laukika,
2 lokottara aura kupraavnik| laukika dravyavyavahAra kA vikAsakrama mAnava kA
vikAsa bhogabhUmi se prArambha huA thaa| usa AdikAla meM bhI puruSa pati rUpa
meM aura strI patnI rUpa meM hI rahate the, kintu donoM meM kAma-vAsanA atyanta
sImita thii| sAre jIvana meM unake kevala do santAne (eka sAtha) hotI thiiN|
unameM bhI eka bAlaka aura eka bAlikA hii| "hama do hamAre do" unake sAMsArika
jIvana kA yahI sUtra thaa| ve bhAI-bahina hI yuvAvasthA meM pati-patnI rUpa meM
rahane lagate the| 1. vyava0 bhASya0 pIThikA gA0 4 / 2. vyava0 bhASya0 pIThikA
gA0 4 / 3. vyaya0 bhASya0 pIThikA gAthA-6 / [ 17 ]

Page #19 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Their means of livelihood were Kalpavriksha / Sitting on gold in their shade,
eating fruits, drinking the nectar of trees / They wore bark and listened to the
music of trees every moment / They did not work, nor did they have any kind of
worry, therefore they were long-lived and very happy. They did not do Dharma,
nor did they do sinful deeds, there was no speaker, no listener, they were not
arrogant, no one punished them, there was no ruler, nor were they ruled. Such
was the life of the couple / The cycle of time was moving. The land of enjoyment
was beginning to turn into the land of karma. The means of livelihood,
Kalpavriksha, were disappearing. The problems of eating, drinking, and sleeping
were beginning to torment them. What to eat and drink? Where to live, where to
sleep? Above was the sky, below was the earth. How to protect oneself from cold,
heat, and rain?  Many such worries had surrounded man. There was a scramble for
food and drink. Premature deaths began to occur and the life of the couple
(husband and wife) became unmatched. The first Sushma-Sushma period and the
second Sushma period had ended. The two divisions of the third Sushma-Dushma
period had also ended. The third division's vicious cycle was going on / It was
a time of transition / For the sake of happiness, peace, and order, the first
five Kulkaras first tortured the criminals with the 'Hat' verbal punishment, but
after some time this punishment became ineffective. This was the first principle
of the suppression policy of punishment. The era of implanting violence in the
human heart began here. The second five Kulkaras influenced the attackers by
torturing them with the "Mat" verbal punishment, but this punishment also became
ineffective as time passed / The third five Kulkaras ruled and suppressed those
who spread unrest with the "Dhik" verbal punishment. Although these three
punishments of the punishable were only verbal punishments, but the punishment,
synonymous with violence, did not make man gentle but cruel, not merciful but
wicked. The name of the first Kulkar was "Sumati". He was to use "Shaman" for
the happiness and prosperity of mankind, but influenced by the crooked cycles of
time, he also started the vicious cycle of "Daman". The last Kulkar was Shri
Rishabhdev. When the punishment policy of condemnation also failed, the Karma
Tripdi "1 Asi, 2 Masi, 3 Krishi" emerged from the mouth of Lord Rishabhdev
(Adinath). The sunrise of human social life took place / Human society was
divided into two classes / One class of rulers and one class of ruled. The
minority ruling class began to discipline the majority ruled class. Lord
Adinath's son Bharat became the emperor / He also began to use the suppression
policy inherited from his ancestors on his brothers. When the original source of
Upshamars, Lord Adinath (Rishabhdev), encouraged Bahubali and others for the
eternal (spiritual) kingdom, they agreed. Because the humans of that era were of
'righteous nature'. The burning desire for the kingdom in the hearts of the
brothers was completely extinguished by the invincible stream of non-violence.
[18]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
unake jIvana-nirvAha ke sAdhana the kalpavRkSa / sonA-baiThanA unakI chAyA meM,
khAnA phala, pInA vRkSoM kA madajala / pahanate the valkala aura sunate the
vRkSavAdya pratipala / na ve kAma-dhandhA karate the, na unheM kisI prakAra kI
koI cintA thI, ataH ve dIrghajIvI evaM atyanta sukhI the| na ve karate the
dharma, na ve karate the pApakarma, na thA koI vaktA, na thA koI zrotA, na the
ve uddaNDa, na unheM koI detA thA daNDa, na thA koI zAsaka, na the ve shaasit|
aisA thA yugalajana-jIvana / kAlacakra cala rahA thaa| bhogabhUmi karmabhUmi meM
pariNata hone lagI thii| jIvana-yApana ke sAdhana kalpavRkSa vilIna hone lage
the| khAne-pIne aura sone-baiThane kI samasyAyeM satAne lagI thiiN| kyA khAyeM-
pIyeM ? kahA~ raheM, kahA~ soyeM ? Upara AkAza thA, nIce dharatI thii| sardI,
garmI aura varSA se baceM to kaise baceM? ityAdi aneka cintAoM ne mAnava ko
ghera liyA thaa| khAne-pIne ke lie chInA-jhapaTI calane lgii| akAla mRtyue~ hone
lagI aura jor3e (pati-patnI) kA jIvana bejor3a hone lgaa| prathama suSama-
suSamAkAla aura dvitIya suSamAkAla samApta ho gayA thaa| tRtIya suSamA-
duSamAkAla ke do vibhAga bhI samApta ho gaye the| tRtIya vibhAga kA duzcakra
cala rahA thA / vaha thA saMkramaNa-kAla / sukha, zAnti evaM vyavasthA ke lie
sarvaprathama prathama pAMca kulakaroM ne aparAdhiyoM ko 'hat'isa vAgdaNDa se
pratAr3ita kiyA, para kucha samaya bAda yaha daNDa prabhAvahIna ho gyaa| daNDa
kI damana nIti kA yaha prathama sUtra thaa| mAnava hRdaya meM hiMsA ke
pratyAropaNa kA yuga yahIM se prArambha huaa| dvitIya pAMca kulakaroM ne
AtatAyiyoM ko "mata" isa vAgdaNDa se pratAr3ita kara prabhAvita kiyA, kintu yaha
daNDa bhI samaya ke sopAna pAra karatA huA prabhAvahIna ho gayA / tRtIya pAMca
kulakaroM ne azAnti phailAne vAloM ko "dhika" isa vAgdaNDa se zAsita kara
nigraha kiyaa| yadyapi daNDanIya ke ye tInoM daNDa vAgdaNDa mAtra the, para
hiMsA ke paryAyavAcI daNDa ne mAnava ko komala na banAkara krUra banAyA, dayAlu
na banAkara duSTa bnaayaa| prathama kulakara kA nAma yadyapi "sumati" thaa|
mAnava kI sukha-samRddhi ke lie use "zamana" kA upayoga karanA thA para kAla ke
kuTila kucakroM se prabhAvita hokara usane bhI "damana" kA duzcakra claayaa|
antima kulakara zrI RSabhadeva the| dhikkAra kI daNDanIti bhI asaphala hone lagI
to bhagavAna RSabhadeva (AdinAtha) ke zrImukha se karma tripadI "1 asi, 2 masi,
3 kRSi' prasphurita huii| mAnava ke sAmAjika jIvana kA sUryodaya huA / mAnava
samAja do vargoM meM vibhakta ho gayA / eka varga zAsakoM kA aura eka varga
zAsitoM kaa| alpasaMkhyaka zAsaka varga bahusaMkhyaka zAsita varga para
anuzAsana karane lgaa| bhagavAna AdinAtha ke suputra bharata cakravartI bane /
pUrvajoM se virAsata meM milI damananIti kA prayoga ve apane bhAiyoM para bhI
karane lge| upazamarasa ke Adizrota bha0 AdinAtha (RSabhadeva) ne bAhabalI Adi
ko zAzvata (AdhyAtmika) sAmrAjya ke lie protsAhita kiyA to ve mAna gye| kyoMki
usa yuga ke mAnava 'Rjujar3a prakRti ke the| ahiMsA kI amogha amIdhArA se
bhAiyoM ke hRdaya meM prajvalita rAjyalipsA kI lobhAgni sarvathA zAnta ho gii|
[18]

Page #20 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
From the time of Bhagwan Ajitanath to Bhagwan Parshvanath, it was the era of
'Rijprajna' humans. During the reign of eleven Chakravartis, nine Baldevs, nine
Vasudevas and nine Prativa-sudevas, the cycle of punishment was so oppressive
that people almost forgot the gentle path of Shraman-niti. The policies of
inducement, punishment and division were widely propagated. Now, the era of
'Vakrajada' humans has arrived. The human heart is dominated by crookedness and
inertia. Punishment (suppression) has been considered essential for social
order. Mutilation and capital punishment have become commonplace. Penal codes
and instruments of punishment have been created. Criminal courts and criminology
have also developed. In the past, weapons like Agniyastra and in the present,
weapons like nuclear bombs have been used to suppress people through cruel
punishment. In ancient literature, there is a description of a Dandapani (Yama
Raja), but today, many Dandapanis can be seen walking around everywhere. This is
worldly material interaction. Lokottara Dravyavyavahar - the interaction of free
Shramans who disregard the teachings of Acharyas, etc., with other free
Shramans, such as the exchange of food, etc. Lokottara Bhavyavyavahar - this is
of two types: 1. From Pagam and 2. From Nomagam. From Agam - the one who knows
the meaning of the word 'Upayukta Vyavahar'. From Nomagam, there are five types
of behavior: 1. Agam, 2. Shruta, 3. Agyna, 4. Dharana, 5. Jeet. 1. Where there
is Pagam, establish behavior from Pagam. 2. Where there is no Agam, but Shruta,
establish behavior from Shruta. 3. Where there is no Shruta, but Prajna,
establish behavior from Prajna. 4. Where there is no Prajna, but Dharana,
establish behavior from Dharana. 5. Where there is no Dharana, but Jeet,
establish behavior from Jeet. Establish behavior from these five: 1. Pagam, 2.
Shruta, 3. Prajna, 4. Dharana and 5. Jeet. Wherever any of these exist,
establish behavior from that. Question: Bhanta! What have the Pagambalik Shraman
Nirgranthas said (regarding these five behaviors)? Answer: (Ayushman Shramans)
In these five behaviors, whenever there is a particular behavior in a particular
matter, the Shraman Nirgrantha, remaining impartial (mediator), behaves
correctly and becomes a follower of the Agyna! 1. Pragamato Vyavahar
Padarthajnata Tatra Chopayukta 'Upayogo Bhava Nikshepa' iti Vachanat. - Vyav.
Bha. Peethika Gatha 6 1. Tanam-5. U. 2 0 421/Tatha Bhag. Sha. 8. U. 8. Su. 8, 9.
[19]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
bha0 ajitanAtha se lekara bha. pArzvanAtha paryanta 'RjaprAjJa' mAnavoM kA yuga
rahA / gyAraha cakravartI, no baladeva, no vAsudeva aura nau prativAsudevoM ke
zAsana meM daNDanIti kA itanA damanacakra calA ki saumya zamananIti ko loga
prAyaH bhUla gye| dAma- pralobhana, daNDa aura bheda - ina tIna nItiyoM kA hI
sarva sAdhAraNa meM adhikAdhika pracAra-pramAra hotA rahA / aba AyA "vakrajar3a"
mAnavoM kA yuga / mAnava ke hRdayapaTala para vakratA aura jar3atA kA sAmrAjya
chA gyaa| sAmAjika vyavasthA ke lie daNDa (damana) anivArya mAna liyA gyaa|
aMga-bhaMga aura prANadaNDa sAmAnya ho gye| daNDasaMhitAyeM banI, daNDa-yantra
bane / daNDanyAyAlaya aura daNDavijJAna bhI vikasita haa| AgneyAstra Adi aneka
prakAra ke astra-zastroM ne atIta meM aura vartamAna meM aNubama Adi aneka
astroM dvArA nRzaMsa daNDa se damana kA prayoga hotA rahA hai| paurANika sAhitya
meM eka daNDapANi (yamarAja) kA varNana hai para Aja to yatra-tatra-sarvatra
anekAneka daNDapANi hI calate phirate dikhAI dete haiM / yaha laukika
dravyavyavahAra hai| lokottara dravyavyavahAra-prAcAryAdi kI upekSA karanevAle
svacchanda zramaNoM kA anya svacchanda zramaNoM ke sAtha azanAdi AdAna-pradAna
kA pArasparika vyavahAra / lokottara bhAvavyavahAra-1 yaha do prakAra kA hai ?
pAgama se aura 2 nomAgama se / Agama se- upayogayukta vyavahAra pada ke artha kA
jJAtA' / nogrAgama se pAMca prakAra ke vyavahAra haiM 1. Agama, 2. zruta, 3.
AjJA, 4. dhAraNA, 5. jIta / 1. jahA~ pAgama ho vahA~ pAgama se vyavahAra kI
prasthApanA kreN| 2. jahA~ Agama na ho, zruta ho, vahA~ zruta se vyavahAra kI
prasthApanA kreN| 3. jahA~ zruta na ho, prAjJA ho, vahA~ prAjJA se vyavahAra kI
prasthApanA kreN| 4. jahA~ prAjJA na ho, dhAraNA ho, vahA~ dhAraNA se vyavahAra
kI prasthApanA kareM / 5. jahA~ dhAraNA na ho, jIta ho, vahA~ jIta se vyavahAra
kI prasthApanA kreN| ina pAMcoM se vyavahAra kI prasthApanA kareM:-1. pAgama, 2.
zruta, 3. prAjJA, 4. dhAraNA aura 5. jIta se| inameM se jahA~-jahA~ jo ho
vahA~-vahA~ usI se vyavahAra kI prasthApanA kreN| pra0 bhaMte ! pAgamabalika
zramaNa nirgranthoM ne (ina pAMca vyavahAroM ke sambandha meM) kyA kahA hai?
u0--(AyuSmana zramaNo) ina pAMcoM vyavahAroM meM se jaba-jaba jisa-jisa viSaya
meM jo vyavahAra ho taba-taba usa usa viSaya meM anizritopAzrita ...
(madhyastha) rahakara samyak vyavahAra karatA huA zramaNa-nirgrantha AjJA kA
pArAdhaka hotA hai ! 1. prAgamato vyavahArapadArthajJAtA tatra copayukta
'upayogo bhAva nikSepa' iti vacanAt / -vyava0 bhA0 pIThikA gAthA 6 1. TANaM-5.
u0 2 0 421/tathA bhaga0 za0 8. u0 8. sU0 8, 9 / [19]

Page #21 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Agamvyavahar** is the method of conduct and prohibitions practiced or
formulated by Kevalgyanis, Manahparyavgyanis, and Avadhigyanis. The method of
conduct and prohibitions practiced or formulated by the fourteen, ten, and nine
purvadharis is also Agamvyavahar.  **Shrutavyavahar** is the method of conduct
and prohibitions practiced or formulated by the eight purna and ninth apurna
dharis. The method of conduct and prohibitions specified by the ten (Ayara Dasha
- Dasha Shruta Skandha), Kalpa (Brihat Kalpa), Vyavahar, Achar Prakalpa
(Nishith), etc. Cheda Shruta (Shastra) is also Shrutavyavahar.
**Agyavvyavahar** is when two Geetarth Shramans are traveling in different
countries far apart from each other and there is no possibility of meeting in
the near future. If one of them has to take the atonement for Kalpika
Pratisevna, then he should send his transgression to the Geetarth Shishya. If
there is no Geetarth Shishya, then he should send his transgression to the
Dharana Kushal Ageetarth Shishya in a symbolic language and send it to the
distant Geetarth Muni. After listening to the criticism, the Geetarth Muni
should consider the Dravya, Kshetra, Kala, Bhav, Sanhanan, Dhairya, Bal, etc.
and go there himself and give atonement. Or he should send the Geetarth Shishya
to explain. If there is no Geetarth Shishya, then he should send the message of
atonement for transgression-purification in symbolic languages along with the
one who brought the message of criticism. This is Agyavvyavahar.
**Dharnavvyavahar** is when a Geetarth Shraman has given atonement for a
transgression based on Dravya, Kshetra, Kala, and Bhav, and another Shraman who
has committed the same transgression takes atonement according to the Dharna.
**Agamvyavahar** can be divided into three categories based on the concept of
Kalpana: Utkrishta, Madhyama, and Jaghanya.  1. **Utkrishta Agamvyavahar** is
the method of conduct and prohibitions practiced or formulated by Kevalgyanis,
because Kevalgyan is complete direct knowledge.  2. **Madhyama Agamvyavahar** is
the method of conduct and prohibitions practiced or formulated by
Manahparyavgyanis or Avadhigyanis, because although Manahparyavgyan and
Avadhigyan are partial (Desha) direct knowledge, they are both self-relative.
3. **Jaghanya Agamvyavahar** is the method of conduct and prohibitions practiced
or formulated by the fourteen, ten, and nine purvadharis, because although they
are specific Shruta, they are indirect.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
AgamavyavahAra kevalajJAniyoM, manaHparyavajJAniyoM aura avadhijJAniyoM dvArA
Acarita yA prarUpita vidhi-niSedha AgamavyavahAra hai| nava pUrva, daza pUrva
aura caudaha pUrvadhAriyoM dvArA Acarita yA prarUpita vidhi-niSedha bhI
AgamavyavahAra hI hai| zrutavyavahAra ATha pUrva pUrNa aura navama pUrva
apUrNadhArI dvArA Acarita yA pratipAdita vidhi-niSedha bhI zrutavyavahAra hai|
dazA (AyAradazA-dazAzrutaskandha), kalpa (bRhatkalpa), vyavahAra, AcAraprakalpa
(nizItha) Adi chedazrata (zAstra) dvArA nirdiSTa vidhi-niSedha bhI
zrutavyavahAra hai / AjJAvyavahAra do gItArtha zramaNa eka dUsare se alama dUra
dezoM meM vihAra kara rahe hoM aura nikaTa bhaviSya meM milane kI sambhAvanA na
ho| unameM se kisI eka ko kalpikA pratisevanA kA prAyazcitta lenA ho to apane
aticAra doSa kahakara gItArtha ziSya ko bheje / yadi gItArtha ziSya na ho to
dhAraNAkuzala agItArtha ziSya ko sAMketika bhASA meM apane aticAra kahakara
dUrastha gItArtha mUni ke pAsa bheje aura usa ziSya ke dvArA kahI gaI AlocanA
sanakara vaha gItArtha muni dravya, kSetra, kAla, bhAva, saMhanana, dhairya,
bala Adi kA vicAra kara svayaM vahA~ Ave aura prAyazcitta de| athavA gItArtha
ziSya ko samajhAkara bheje| yadi gItArtha ziSya na ho to AlocanA kA sandeza lAne
vAle ke sAtha hI sAMketika bhASAoM meM aticAra-zuddhi ke lie prAyazcitta kA
saMdeza bheje-yaha prAjJAvyavahAra hai / 2 dhAraNAvyavahAra kisI gItArtha
zramaNa ne dravya, kSetra, kAla aura bhAva kI apekSA se jisa aticAra kA jo
prAyazcitta diyA hai, usakI dhAraNA karake jo zramaNa usI prakAra ke aticAra
sevana karane vAle ko dhAraNAnusAra prAyazcitta AgamavyavahAra kI kalpanA se
tIna bheda kiye jA sakate hai utkRSTa, madhyama aura jaghanya / 1.
kevalajJAniyoM dvArA Acarita yA prarUpita vidhi-niSedhapUrNa utkRSTa
AgamavyavahAra hai, kyoMki kevalajJAna sakala pratyakSa hai| 2.
manaHparyavajJAna aura avadhijJAna yadyapi vikala (deza) pratyakSa haiM phira
bhI ye donoM jJAna Atma-sApekSa haiM, isaliye mana:paryavajJAniyoM yA
avadhijJAniyoM dvArA Acarita yA prarUpita vidhi-niSedha (madhyama)
AgamavyavahAra hai| 3. caudaha pUrva, daza pUrva aura nava pUrva (sampUrNa)
yadyapi viziSTa zruta haiM, phira bhI parokSa haiM, ataH inake dhAraka dvArA
prarUpita yA Acarita vidhi-niSedha bhI AgamavyavahAra hai, kintu yaha jaghanya
AyamavyavahAra hai| 2. so vavahAra vihaNNU, aNumajjittA suttovaeseNa / sIsassa
dei appaM, tassa imaM dehi pacchittaM / / --vyava0 bhA0 u0 10 gA0661 / [20]

Page #22 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
"Dhar·πáƒÅvyavahƒÅra" is the practice of accepting and adhering to a particular
conduct. Alternatively, "VaiyƒÅvatya" refers to the act of a ≈örama·πáa who has
benefited the Ga·πáa through service, but who has not been able to learn the
"Chhedashruta." In such a case, the Guru MahƒÅrƒÅja would make him accept certain
"PrƒÅya≈õcitta" (penance) practices. This too is considered "Dhar·πáƒÅvyavahƒÅra."
"Jƒ´tavyavahƒÅra" encompasses the concepts of "Sthiti" (state), "Kalpa" (time),
"MaryƒÅdƒÅ" (limit), and "VyavasthƒÅ" (system). These are synonyms for "Jƒ´ta." The
pure conduct that is established through "Gƒ´ta" (scripture) is "Jƒ´tavyavahƒÅra."
"Jƒ´tavyavahƒÅra" also includes the practice of performing "PrƒÅya≈õcitta" that is
either less or more than what is prescribed in the "≈öruta" (scripture), but is
traditionally practiced. If, in addition to the reasons mentioned in the "S≈´tra"
(aphorism), other reasons arise, and the "AticƒÅra" (excess) is rectified through
"PrƒÅya≈õcitta" practiced by many "Gƒ´ta" (scripture) scholars, then that too is
"Jƒ´tavyavahƒÅra." The rules and prohibitions established by many "Gƒ´ta"
(scripture) scholars and unanimously agreed upon are also considered
"Jƒ´tavyavahƒÅra."  If, while the "PrƒÅya≈õcitta" for violating the
"VyavahƒÅrapa√±caka" (five types of conduct) is prescribed by the "ƒÄgama"
(scripture), someone practices "≈örutavyavahƒÅra" (scriptural conduct), then they
are liable for the "PrƒÅya≈õcitta" of four "Guru" (teachers). Similarly, if
someone practices "PrƒÅj√±ƒÅvyavahƒÅra" (conduct based on wisdom) while
"≈örutavyavahƒÅra" is applicable, or "YƒÅj√±ƒÅvyavahƒÅra" (conduct based on rituals)
while "Dhar·πáƒÅvyavahƒÅra" is applicable, or "Dhar·πáƒÅvyavahƒÅra" while
"Jƒ´tavyavahƒÅra" is applicable, they are all liable for the "PrƒÅya≈õcitta" of four
"Guru" (teachers).  The "VyavahƒÅrapa√±caka" (five types of conduct) can only be
practiced in a sequential order, starting from the beginning and moving forward.
Practicing them in reverse order is strictly prohibited. An "ƒÄgamavyavahƒÅrƒ´"
(one who follows the "ƒÄgama") should only practice "ƒÄgamavyavahƒÅra" and not any
other conduct based on "≈öruta" (scripture) or other sources. This is because
when the sun shines, there is no need for the light of a lamp.  "Just as good
qualities are desirable, so is the conduct that is beneficial. This is what is
said about the twelve types of conduct." - "VyavahƒÅra" (conduct) "Uttara"
(chapter) 10, "BhƒÅ·π£ya" (commentary) "GƒÅthƒÅ" (verse) 724.  "What is beneficial is
not to be practiced by those who are not worthy. What is beneficial for the
worthy is to be practiced by them." - "VyavahƒÅra" (conduct) "Uttara" (chapter)
10, "BhƒÅ·π£ya" (commentary) "GƒÅthƒÅ" (verse) 715.  "Whatever "PrƒÅya≈õcitta"
(penance) is not contrary to the established tradition, and whatever is
beneficial for many, that is indeed "Jƒ´takalpa" (conduct based on "Jƒ´ta")." -
"VyavahƒÅra" (conduct) "BhƒÅ·π£ya" (commentary) "Pƒ´bikƒÅ" (commentary) "GƒÅthƒÅ"
(verse) 12.  "What is beneficial for the worthy, but is practiced by those who
are careless and distracted, even if it is practiced by many, is not to be
practiced by the worthy. What is beneficial for the worthy, given with
enthusiasm and devotion, even if practiced by one person, is to be practiced by
the worthy." - "VyavahƒÅra" (conduct) "Uttara" (chapter) 10, "BhƒÅ·π£ya"
(commentary) "GƒÅthƒÅ" (verse) 720, 721.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
detA hai, vaha dhAraNAvyavahAra hai| athavA -vaiyAvatya arthAta sevAkAryoM se
jisa zramaNa ne gaNa kA upakAra kiyA hai vaha yadi chedazruta na sIkha sake to
guru mahArAja use katipaya prAyazcitta padoM kI dhAraNA karAte haiM yaha bhI
dhAraNAvyavahAra hai| jItavyavahAra sthiti, kalpa, maryAdA aura vyavasthAye
'jIta' ke paryAyavAcI haiM / gItArtha dvArA pravartita zuddha vyavahAra
jItavyavahAra hai| zrutokta prAyazcitta se hIna yA adhika kintu paramparA se
Acarita prAyazcitta denA jItavyavahAra hai| sUtrokta kAraNoM ke atirikta kAraNa
upasthita hone para jo aticAra lage haiM unakA pravartita prAyazcitta aneka
gItArthoM dvArA Acarita ho to vaha bhI jItavyavahAra hai| aneka gItArthoM dvArA
nirdhArita evaM sarvasammata vidhi-niSedha bhI jItavyavahAra hai|'
vyavahArapaMcaka ke kramabhaMga kA prAyazcitta AgamavyavahAra ke hote huye yadi
koI zrutavyavahAra kA prayoga karatA hai to cAra guru ke prAyazcitta kA pAtra
hotA hai| isI prakAra zratavyavahAra ke hote huye prAjJAvyavahAra kA
prayogakartA, yAjJAvyavahAra ke hote haye dhAraNAvyavahAra kA prayogakartA tathA
dhAraNAvyavahAra ke hote huye jItavyavahAra kA prayogakartA cAra guru ke
prAyazcitta kA pAtra hotA hai| vyavahArapaMcaka kA prayoga pUrvAnupUrvIkrama se
arthAt anukrama se hI ho sakatA hai kintu pazcAnupUrvIkrama se arthAt
viparItakrama se prayoga karanA sarvathA niSiddha hai| AgamavyavahArI
AgamavyavahAra se hI vyavahAra karate hai; anya zrutAdi vyavahAroM se nahIM
kyoMki jisa samaya sUrya kA prakAza ho usa samaya dIpaka ke prakAza kI
AvazyakatA nahIM rhtii| ki puNa guNovaeso, vavahArassa u ciu pasatthasma / eso
bhe parikahiyo, duvAlasaMgassa gavaNIyaM / -vyava0 u0 10 bhASya gAthA 724 / jaM
jItaM sAvajja, na teNa jIeNa hoi bvhaaro| jaM jIyamasAvajjaM, teNa u jIeNa
vvhaaro|| -vyava0 u0 10 bhASya gAthA 715 / ja jassa pacchittaM,
pAyariyaparaMparAe aviruddha / jogA ya bahu vigappA, emo khalu jItakappo / /
-vyava0 bhASya pIbikA gAthA 12 / jaM jIyamasohikaraM, pAsattha-pamatta-
saMjayAINNaM / jai vi mahAjaNAinna, na teNa jIeNa bvhaaro|| jaM jIyaM sohikara,
saMvegaparAyaNena datteNa / egeNa vi pAiNNaM, teNa u jIeNa bvhaaro|| .-vyava0 u0
10 bhASya gAthA 720, 721 / [21]

Page #23 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
"The conduct of a Jina (as long as the fourfold assembly exists) remains / Other
conduct ceases. If the conduct of a non-Jain causes violence to living beings in
grain, juice, fruit, and flowers, then purification is achieved by licking ghee.
If one steals cotton, silk, wool, one-hoofed and two-hoofed animals, birds,
fragrant substances, medicines, and ropes, etc., then purification is achieved
by drinking milk for three days. A Brahmin who has memorized the Rig Veda, even
if he kills all three worlds or eats anywhere, does not incur any sin. In the
summer, one should perform the five-fire penance, in the rainy season, one
should sit in the shade of a tree during the rain, and in the autumn, one should
wear wet clothes - in this way, one should gradually increase the penance. /
"The terms 'vyavahari', 'vyavaharajna', and 'vyavaharta' are synonymous. One who
is dear to Dharma, firm in Dharma, detached, fearful of sin, knowledgeable of
the meaning of the sutras, and free from attachment and aversion (impartial) is
a 'vyavahari'. If one gives the atonement prescribed by the Agamas according to
the transgression, considering the substance, place, time, feeling, the person
who is a devotee of transgression, and the contemplation of counter-service,
then the 'vyavaharajna' (giver of atonement) is a devotee. 1. Gatha -
Suttamangayavisayam, Khettam Kalam cha Papp Vavharo. Hohiti na Ailla, Ja Tittham
Tav Jito U / / - Vyav. 10 Bhashya Gatha 55 / Annadyajanam Sattvanam, Rasajanam
cha Sarvasha / Falapushpodhbhavanam cha, Ghritprashso Vishodhanam // - Manu. A.
11/143 / Kasakijtjirnanam, Dwishaphaikashaphasy cha / Pakshigandhaushdhinam cha,
Rajjvaschaiva Tyahm Payah / / - Manu. A. 11/16 / 4. Hatva Lokanapiimanstiri,
Nashyannapi Yatastatah / Rigvedam Dharayanvipro, Nainah Prapnoti Kinchan // .-
Manu. A. 11/261 / Grishme Panchatapasthusyadvarsha Svabhraavakashikah /
Ardravassastu Hemante, Kramasho Vardhayastapah || - Manu. A. 6/23 / 6.
K-Piyadhhamma Dadhadhamma, Sanvigga Cheva Dajjabhiru A. Suttattha Tadubhayaviuu,
Anissiya Vavharakari Ya / / Vy. Bhashya Peethika Gatha 14 / Kh‚Äì1 Pracharavan, 2
Aadharavan, 3 Vyavaharavan, 4 Apnidak, 5 Prakari, 6 Aparishravi, 7 Niryaphak, 8
Apaydarshi, 9 Priyadharmmi, 10 Dridhadharmmi. Thanam. 10, Su. 733 / G-Vyav. U.
10 Bhashya Gatha 243 / 245 / 246 / 247 / 298 / 300 / [ 22 ]"

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
jItavyavahAra tIrtha (jahA~ taka caturvidha saMgha rahatA hai vahA~ taka)
paryanta rahatA hai / anya vyavahAra vicchinna ho jAte haiN|'
kuprAvanikavyavahAra anAja meM, rasa meM, phala meM aura phala meM hone vAle
jIvoM kI hiMsA ho jAve to ghI cATane se zuddhi ho jAtI hai| kapAsa, rezama, Una,
ekakhura aura dokhura vAle pazu, pakSI, sugandhita padArtha, auSadhiyoM aura
rajju Adi kI corI kare to tIna dina dUdha pIne se zuddhi ho jAtI hai| Rgveda
dhAraNa karane vAlA vipra tInoM loka ko mAre yA kahIM bhI bhojana kare to use
kisI prakAra kA pApa nahIM lagatA hai| grISmaRtu meM paMcAgni tapa karanA,
varSARtu meM varSA barasate samaya bitA chAyA ke baiThanA aura zaradaRtu meM
mIle vastra pahane rahanA-isa prakAra kramazaH tapa bar3hAnA cAhiye / "
vyavahArI vyavahArajJa, vyavahArI, vyavahartA-ye samAnArthaka haiN| jo
priyadharmI ho, dRr3hadharmI ho, vairAgyavAna ho, pApabhIru ho, sUtrArtha kA
jJAtA ho aura rAga-dveSarahita (pakSapAtarahita) ho vaha vyavahArI hotA hai|
dravya, kSetra, kAla, bhAva, aticArasevI puruSa aura pratisevanA kA cintana
karake yadi kisI ko aticAra ke anurUpa prAgamavihita prAyazcitta detA hai to
vyavahArajJa (prAyazcittadAtA) aArAdhaka hotA hai| 1. gAhA-suttamaNAgayavisayaM,
khettaM kAlaM ca pappa vvhaaro| hohiti na AillA, jA titthaM tAva jIto u / /
-vyava0 10 bhASya gAthA 55 / annAdyajAnAM sattvAnAM, rasajAnAM ca sarvazaH /
phalapuSpodbhavAnAM ca, ghRtaprAzo vizodhanam // -manu0 a0 11/143 /
kAsakITajIrNAnAM, dvizaphaikazaphasya ca / pakSigandhauSadhInAM ca, rajjvAzcaiva
tyahaM payaH / / -manu0 a0 11/16 / 4. hatvA lokAnapImAMstrI, nazyannapi
yatastataH / RgvedaM dhArayanvipro, nainaH prApnoti kiJcana // .-manu0 a0 11/261
/ grISme paJcatapAstusyAdvarSA svabhrAvakAzikaH / ArdravAsAstu hemante, kramazo
vrdhystpH|| -manu0 a0 6/23 / 6. ka-piyadhammA daDhadhammA, saMviggA ceva
dajjabhIrU a| suttattha tadubhayaviU, aNissiya vavahArakArI ya / / vya0 bhASya
pIThikA gAthA 14 / kha-1 prAcAravAn, 2 aAdhAravAn, 3 vyavahAravAn, 4 apanIDaka,
5 prakArI, 6 aparizrAvI, 7 niryApaka, 8 apAyadarzI, 9 priyadharmI, 10
dRddh'dhrmii| ThANaM0 10, sU0 733 / ga-vyava0 u010 bhASya gAthA 243 / 245 / 246
/ 247 / 298 / 300 / [ 22 ]

Page #24 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
"A practitioner (penitent) who performs minor and major penances with attachment
and aversion, without contemplating the substance, field, etc., is
contradictory." The practices to be performed are non-scriptural. These are of
many types. There are four types of non-scriptural: 1. It is one-time but heavy-
karma, therefore it is a non-worshipper of Dharma. 2. It is one-time and light-
karma, therefore it is a worshipper of Dharma. 3. It is one-time and heavy-
karma, therefore it is a non-worshipper of Dharma. 4. It is one-time and light-
karma, therefore it is a worshipper of Dharma. Similarly, there are four types
of non-scriptural women. There are five types of non-scriptural: 1. Pulaka -
whose disciplined life is like straw, without essence. Although he has faith in
the truth, he also performs rituals, but he also uses the benefits obtained from
penance and maintains a conduct that seems like knowledge transgression. 2.
Bakusha - these are of two types: instrument-bakusha and body-bakusha. One who
is engaged in decorating instruments and body and desires prosperity and fame.
He consumes transgressions worthy of hole penance. 3. Kushil - this is of two
types: 1. Pratisevna Kushil and 2. Kashaya Kushil. Pratisevna Kushil who
transgresses in the post-qualities like Pindashuddhi etc. Kashaya Kushil - who
is not able to remain stable in his natural state due to the occasional rise of
passionate passions. 4. Nimranth - pacified-delusion non-scriptural. 5.
Graduate, Yogikevali and Ayogikevali. There are many varieties of these five
non-scriptural. All these are practicable. As long as the knowledge of the first
restraint and fourteen previous births remained, the aforementioned ten penances
were given. Their 1. Gaha who is self-controlled, he knows the truth and the
subtle. In the cycle of conduct, he is the measure of the good. The cycle of
conduct is the ultimate subtle of conduct. He who understands the meaning, he is
the true practitioner. 2. Who is big in the initiation cycle. 3. Who is small in
the initiation cycle. Thanam 04, U. 3, Sutra 320. - Vyav. U. 10 Commentary Verse
605, 607 >> [ 23 ]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
dravya, kSetra prAdi kA cintana kiye binA rAga-dveSapUrvaka hInAdhika
prAyazcitta detA hai vaha vyavahArajJa (prAyazcittadAtA) virAdhaka hotA hai|'
vyavahartavya vyavahartavya vyavahAra karane yogya nirgrantha haiN| ye aneka
prakAra ke haiN| nirgrantha cAra prakAra ke haiM1. ekarAnika hotA hai kintu
bhArIkarmA hotA hai, ata: vaha dharma kA anArAdhaka hotA hai| 2. ekarAnika hotA
hai aura halukarmA hotA hai, ataH vaha dharma kA pArAdhaka hotA hai|| 3. eka
avamarAtnika hotA hai aura bhArIkarmA hotA hai, ataH vaha dharma kA anArAdhaka
hotA hai / 4. eka avamarAnika hotA hai kintu halukarmA hotA hai, ata: vaha
dharma kA ArAdhaka hotA haiN| isI prakAra nirgranthiyA~ bhI cAra prakAra kI hotI
haiN| 4 nirgrantha pAMca prakAra ke haiM. 1. pulAka--jisakA saMyamI jIvana bhUse
ke samAna sArarahita hotA hai| yadyapi tattva meM zraddhA rakhatA hai,
kriyAnuSThAna bhI karatA hai, kintu tapAnuSThAna se prApta labdhi kA upayoga bhI
karatA hai aura jJAnAticAra lageaisA bartana-vyavahAra rakhatA hai| 2. bakuza-ye
do prakAra ke hote haiMupakaraNabakuza aura zarIrabakuza / jo upakaraNoM ko evaM
zarIra ko sajAne meM lagA rahatA hai aura Rddhi tathA yaza kA icchuka rahatA hai
/ chedaprAyazcitta yogya aticAroM kA sevana karatA hai| 3. kuzIla- yaha do
prakAra kA hai-1 pratisevanAkuzIla aura 2 kaSAyakuzIla / pratisevanAkuzIla jo
piNDazuddhi Adi uttaraguNoM meM aticAra lagAte haiM / kaSAyakuzIla-jo yadA kadA
saMjvalana kaSAya ke udaya se svabhAvadazA meM sthira nahIM raha pAtA / 4.
nimrantha-upazAntamoha nirgrantha / 5. snAtakasayogIkevalI aura ayogiikevlii|
ina pAMca nirgranthoM ke aneka bheda-prabheda haiN| ye saba vyavahArya haiN|
jaba taka prathama saMhanana aura caudaha pUrva kA jJAna rahA taba taka pUrvokta
dasa prAyazcitta diye jAte the| inake 1. gAhAjo suyamahijjai, bahaM suttatthaM
ca niuNaM vijANAi / kappe vavahAraMmi ya, so u pamANaM suyaharANaM / / kappassa
ya nijjutti vavahArassa va paramaniuNassa / jo atthato viyANai, bavahArI so
annunnnnaato|| 2. jo dIkSAparyAya meM bar3A ho / 3. jo dIkSAparyAya meM choTA ho
/ ThANaM04, u0 3, sUtra 320 / -vyava0 u010 bhASya gAthA 605, 607 >> [ 23 ]

Page #25 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
When a person becomes *vichchhanna* (disqualified), the *anavastapya* and
*paranchik* pratyaschitta are also *vichchhanna* - meaning these two
pratyaschitta are not given. The remaining eight pratyaschitta are given until
*tirtha* (the fourfold sangha). *Pulaka* was given six pratyaschitta until
*vyutsarma*. *Pratisevaka-bakusha* and *pratisevaka-kushila* are given all ten
pratyaschitta. *Sthaviras* are not given *anavastapya* and *paranchik*
pratyaschitta; the remaining eight pratyaschitta are given. *Nirgrantha* can
only be given two pratyaschitta - 1 *alocana*, 2 *viveka*. A *snataka* only
takes one pratyaschitta - *viveka*. They are not given any pratyaschitta.   1.
Those with *samayikacharitra* are given eight pratyaschitta without *ched* and
*mula*. 2. Those with *chedopasthapaniyacharitra* are given all ten
pratyaschitta. 3. Those with *parihara-vishuddhi-charitra* are given *path*
pratyaschitta until *mula*. 4. Those with *sukshma-samparaya-charitra* and 5.
those with *yathakyata-charitra* are given only two pratyaschitta - 1 *alocana*
and 2 *viveka*. All these are practical.   When a *vyavaharajna* (knowledgeable
in *vyavahar*) uses a *vyavahar* (conduct) from the five *vyavahar* with a
*vyavahartabya* (a monk or nun who is eligible for *vyavahar*), then the
*vyavahar* word becomes synonymous with the *tapas* (austerity) in the form of
*pratyaschitta*. Therefore, a brief introduction to *tapas* in the form of
*pratyaschitta* is given here.   1. *Guruk*, 2. *Laguk*, 3. *Lagusvak*. There
are three types of *guruk* - 1. *Guruk*, 2. *Gurutarak*, and 3. *Yathaguruk*.
*Gatha* - *Paloyana-padikka-manne, mise-vivege taheva viussagge*. *Aaechchh
pachchitta, pulag-niyanthaya bodhavva*. *Bauss-padisevaganan, payachchhinna
havan ti savve vi*. *Bhave kappe, jinakappe aha hoti*. *Paloyana vivego ya,
niyanthass duve bhave*. *Vivego ya sinayass, ameya padivattito*. - *Vyavahara*
10 *Bhashya Gatha* 357, 58, 59.   *Samaiyasanjayanan, payachchitta, ched-mula-
rahiyattha*. *Theranan jinanan pun, mulata avha hoi*. *Pariharavishuddhiye, mula
ta atta ti pachchitta*. *Theranan jinanan pun, javiham cheyadivajja va*.
*Paloyana-vivego ya taiyam tu na vijjati*. *Suhumey samparaye, ahakkaaye taheva
ya*. - *Vyavahara* 10 *Bhashya Gatha* 361-62-63-64.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
vicchanna hone para anavasthApya aura pArAMcika prAyazcitta bhI vicchanna ho
gaye -arthAt ye donoM prAyazcitta ava nahIM diye jAte haiN| zeSa ATha
prAyazcitta tIrtha (caturvidhasaMgha) paryanta diye jaayeNge| pulAka ko
vyutsarmaparyanta chaha prAyazcitta die jAte the| pratisevakabakuza aura
pratisevanAkuzIla ko dasoM prAyazcitta diye jAte haiN| sthaviroM ko anabasthApya
aura pArAMcika prAyazcitta nahIM diye jAte; zeSa ATha prAyazcitta diye jAte
haiN| nirgrantha ko kevala do prAyazcitta diye jA sakate haiM-1 AlocanA, 2
viveka / snAtaka kevala eka prAyazcitta letA hai-viveka / unheM koI prAyazcitta
detA nahIM hai|' 1 sAmAyikacAritra vAle ko cheda aura mUla rahita ATha
prAyazcitta diye jAte haiN| 2 chedopasthApanIyacAritra vAle ko dasoM prAyazcitta
diye jAte haiN| 3 parihAravizuddhicAritra vAle ko mUlaparyanta pATha prAyazcitta
diye jAte haiN| 4 sUkSmasaMparAyacAritra vAle ko tathA 5 yathAkhyAtacAritra vAle
ko kevala do prAyazcita diye jAte haiM1 aAlocanA aura 2 viveka / ye saba
vyavahArya haiM / 2 vyavahAra ke prayoga vyavahArajJa jaba ukta vyavahArapaMcaka
meM se kisI eka vyavahAra kA kisI eka vyavahartavya (vyavahAra karane yogya
zramaNa yA zramaNI) ke sAtha prayoga karatA hai to vidhi ke niSedhaka ko yA
niSedha ke vidhAyaka ko prAyazcitta detA hai taba vyavahAra zabda prAyazcitta
rUpa tapa kA paryAyavAcI ho jAtA hai| ataH yahA~ prAyazcitta rUpa tapa kA
saMkSipta paricaya diyA gayA hai| 1 gurukaH, 2 laghuka, 3 laghusvaka / guruka ke
tIna bheda 1 guruka, 2 gurutaraka aura 3 yathAguruka / gAhA-pAloyaNapaDikkamaNe,
mIsa-vivege taheva viussagge / eecha pacchittA, pUlAganiyaMThAya bodhavvA / /
bausapaDisevagANaM, pAyacchinnA havaM ti savve vi / bhave kappe, jiNakappe ahA
hoti / / pAloyaNA vivego ya, niyaMThassa duve bhave / vivego ya siNAyassa, emeyA
pddivttito|| -vyava0 10 bhASya gAthA 357, 58, 59 sAmAiyasaMjayANaM, pAyacchittA,
cheda-mUlarahiyaTThA / therANaM jiNANaM puNa, mUlata avhA hoii||
parihAravisuddhIe, mUlaM tA aTTAti pcchittaa| therANaM jiNANaM puNa, javihaM
cheyAdivajja vA / / pAloyaNA-vivego ya taiyaM tu na vijjtii| suhumeya saMparAe,
ahakkhAe taheva ya // -vyava0 u010 bhASya gAthA 361-62-63-64 / [ 24 ]

Page #26 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Types of *Laghu* and *Laghusvak*  **Laghu** has three types:  1. *Laghuk* 2.
*Laghutarak* 3. *Yathalaghuk*  **Laghusvak** has three types: 1. *Laghusvak* 2.
*Laghusvatarak* 3. *Yathalaghusvak*  **Guru Prayaschitta** is a type of *Maha
Prayaschitta* and is considered *Anudhatik*. The duration of this *Prayaschitta*
is fixed, and the *Tap* (austerity) is completed within that time. This *Tap* is
only given to those who practice *Pika Pratisevna*.  **Guru Prayaschitta
Practices:**  1. **Guru Prayaschitta:** One month, *Attham Tela* (three days of
fasting) 2. **Gurutar Prayaschitta:** Four months, *Dasham Chola* (four days of
fasting) 3. **Gurutar Prayaschitta:** Six months, *Dwadashm Pachola* (five days
of fasting)  **Laghuk Practices/Prayaschitta Tap:**  1. **Laghu Prayaschitta:**
Thirty days, *Chhadar Bela* (two days of fasting) 2. **Laghutar Prayaschitta:**
Twenty-five days, *Chautha* (one day of fasting) 3. **Yathalaghu Prayaschitta:**
Twenty days, *Achaml*  **Laghusvak Prayaschitta:**  1. **Laghusvak
Prayaschitta:** Fifteen days, *Ek Sthanak* (one *Egalthano*) 2. **Laghusvatarak
Prayaschitta:** Ten days, *Purvardh* (two *Porsi*) 3. **Yathalaghusvak
Prayaschitta:** Five days, *Nivritik* (food without *Vikriti*)  **Duration of
*Prayaschitta*:**  1. One month has twenty-four days of *Tapascharya* and eight
days of *Parana*. If the last *Parana* day is excluded, then one month (thirty-
one days) is considered *Guru Prayaschitta*. 2. One month has twenty-four days
of *Tapascharya* and six days of *Parana*. This makes one month (thirty days) of
*Guru Prayaschitta*. 3. One month has twenty-five days of *Tapascharya* and five
days of *Parana*. This makes one month (thirty days) of *Guru Prayaschitta*. 4.
Thirty days have ten *Chhut* (breaks) with twenty days of *Tapascharya* and ten
days of *Parana*. 5. Thirteen days of *Tapascharya* and twelve days of *Parana*.
The last *Parana* day is not included here. 6. Twenty days have ten *Achaml*
with ten days of *Tapascharya* and ten days of *Parana*. 7. Fifteen days of *Ek
Sthanak* are performed continuously. 8. Ten days of *Purvardh* are performed
continuously. 9. Five days of *Nivritik* are performed continuously.
**Reference:** *Vah* *Udde* 5 *Bhashya* *Gatha* 6039-6044

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
laghu ke tIna bheda 1. laghuka, 2. laghutaraka aura 3. yathAlaghuka / laghusvaka
ke tIna bheda 1. laghusvaka, 2. laghusvataraka aura 3. yathAlaghusvaka / guru
prAyazcitta mahA prAyazcitta hotA hai usakI anadadhAtika saMjJA hai| isa
prAyazcitta ke jitane dina nizcita haiM aura jitanA tapa nirdhArita hai vaha
tapa utane hI dinoM meM pUrA hotA hai| yaha tapa pikApratisevanA vAloM ko hI
diyA jAtA hai| guruka vyavahAra : prAyazcita tapa 1. guru prAyazcitta-eka mAsa
paryanta aTThama telA (tIna dina upavAsa) 2. gurutara prAyazcitta- cAra mAsa
paryanta dazama '.-colA (cAra dina kA upavAsa) 3. gurutara prAyazcitachaha mAsa
paryanta dvAdazama3-pacolA (pAMca dina kA upvaas)| laghuka vyavahAra/prAyazcita
tapa 1. laghu prAyazcittatIsa dina paryanta chadrabelA (do upavAsa) 2. laghutara
prAyazcitta-pacIsa dina paryanta cauttha' - upavAsa / 3. yathAlaghu prAyazcita--
bIsa dina paryanta AcAmla / ' 1. laghusvaka prAyazcitta-pandraha dina paryanta
eka sthAnaka (egalaThANo) 2. laghusvataraka prAyazcitta-dasa dina paryanta-
pUrvArdha (do porasI) 3. yathAlaghusvaka prAyazcitta-pAMca dina
paryantanivikRtika (vikRtirahita AhAra) / 1. eka mAsa meM pATha adrama hote
haiM- inameM cauvIsa dina tapazcaryA ke aura ATha dina pAraNA ke| antima pAraNe
kA dina yadi chor3a deM to eka mAma (ikatIsa dina) guru prAyazcitta kA hotA hai|
meM chaha dasama hote haiM inameM caubIsa dina tapazcaryA ke aura chaha dina
pAraNe ke isa prakAra eka mAsa (tIsa dina) guru prAyazcitta kA hotA hai / 3. eka
mAsa meM pA~ca dvAdazama hote haiM-inameM pacIsa dina tapazcaryA ke aura pA~ca
dina pAraNe ke isa prakAra eka mAsa (tIsa dina) guru prAyazcitta kA hotA hai| 4.
tIsa dina meM dasa chuTTa hote haiM- inameM bIsa dina tapazcaryA ke aura dasa
dina pAraNe ke hote haiN| meM teraha upavAsa hote haiM. inameM teraha dina
tapazcaryA ke aura bAraha dina pAraNe ke / antima pAraNe kA dina yahA~ nahIM
ginA hai| 6. bIsa dina meM dasa AcAmla hote haiM-inameM dasa dina tapazcaryA ke
aura dasa dina pAraNe ke hote haiM / 7. pandraha dina eka sthAnaka nirantara
kiye jAte haiN| 8. dasa dina pUrvArdha nirantara kiye jAte haiN| 9. pAMca dina
nirvikRtika AhAra nirantara kiyA jAtA hai| 10. vaha0 udde0 5 bhASya gAthA
6039-6044 / [25]

Page #27 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Guru Prayaschitta Tap has three divisions: 1. Jaghanya, 2. Madhyama, and 3.
Utkrishta.   1. Jaghanya Guru Prayaschitta - One month and two months.  2.
Madhyama Guru Prayaschitta - Three months and four months.  3. Utkrishta Guru
Prayaschitta - Five months and six months.   Jaghanya Guru Prayaschitta Tap is
to continuously perform Attam Tap for one or two months. Madhyama Guru
Prayaschitta Tap is to continuously perform Dasham Tap for three or four months.
Utkrishta Guru Prayaschitta Tap is to continuously perform Dwadashma Tap for
five or six months.   Similarly, there are three divisions each for Lagh
Prayaschitta Tap and Laghuswak Tap. The worship of Tap is also done in the
aforementioned month order.   There are three divisions of Utkrishta Guru
Prayaschitta: 1. Utkrishta-Utkrishta, 2. Utkrishta-Madhyama, 3. Utkrishta-
Jaghanya.   1. Utkrishta-Utkrishta Guru Prayaschitta - To continuously perform
Dwadashma Tap for five or six months.  2. Utkrishta-Madhyama Guru Prayaschitta -
To continuously perform Dwadashma Tap for three or four months.  3. Utkrishta-
Jaghanya Guru Prayaschitta - To continuously perform Dwadashma Tap for one or
two months.   Similarly, there are three divisions each for Madhyama Guru
Prayaschitta and Jaghanya Guru Prayaschitta. The worship of Tap is also done in
the aforementioned order.   There are three divisions each for Utkrishta Lagh
Prayaschitta, Madhyama Lagh Prayaschitta, Jaghanya Lagh Prayaschitta, and
Utkrishta Laghuswak Prayaschitta, Madhyama Laghuswak Prayaschitta, and Jaghanya
Laghuswak Prayaschitta. The worship of Tap is also done in the aforementioned
month order.   For further details, one should study Vyavahar Bhashya.
**Vyavahar (Prayaschitta) Ko Upadeyata**  **Question:** Bhagwan! What is the
benefit of Prayaschitta to a Jiva?   **Answer:** Prayaschitta purifies the
sinful karma and makes the character pure. By performing Prayaschitta in the
right way, the path (Samyagdarshan) and the fruit of the path (knowledge) are
purified. The conduct and the fruit of conduct (Mokshamarg) are purified.   1.
(a) Uttara Adhyayan 29  (b) Pavam Chhidai Jamha, Payachchittan Tu Bhannae Tenam
/ Paaen Va Vichittan, Visohae Ten Pachchittan // - Vyav. Bhashya Peethika, Gatha
35  (c) Prayah Papam Samuddishtan, Chittan Tasy Vishodhanam / Yada Prayasy
Tapas: Chittan Nishchay Iti Smriti.  (d) Prayasy Papasy Chittan Vishodhanam
Prayaschittan / [26]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
guru prAyazcita tapa ke tIna vibhAga1. jaghanya, 2. madhyama aura 3. utkRSTa /
1. jaghanya guru prAyazcitta-eka mAsika aura dvaimAsika / 2. madhyama guru
prAyazcittatraimAsika aura cAturmAsika / 3. utkRSTa guru prAyazcitta-pAMcamAsika
aura pANmAsika / jaghanya guru prAyazcitta tapa haieka mAsa yA do mAsa paryanta
nirantara aTTama tapa krnaa| madhyama guru prAyazcitta tapa hai--tIna mAsa yA
cAra mAsa paryanta nirantara dazama tapa krnaa| utkRSTa guru prAyazcitta tapa
hai-pA~ca mAsa yA chaha mAsa paryanta nirantara dvAdazama tapa krnaa| isI
prakAra lagha prAyazcitta tapa ke aura laghasvaka tapa ke bhI tIna-tIna vibhAga
haiN| tathA tapa kI ArAdhanA bhI pUrvokta mAsa krama se hI kI jAtI hai| utkRSTa
guru prAyazcitta ke tIna vibhAga 1. utkRSTa-utkRSTa, 2. utkRSTa-madhyama, 3.
utkRSTa-jaghanya / 1. utkRSTa-utkRSTa guru prAyazcita-pA~ca mAsa yA chaha mAsa
paryanta nirantara dvAdazama tapa karanA / 2. utkRSTa-madhyama guru prAyazcitta-
tIna mAsa yA cAra mAsa paryanta nirantara dvAdazama tapa karanA / 3. utkRSTa-
jaghanya guru prAyazcitta-eka mAsa yA do mAsa paryanta nirantara dvAdazama tapa
karanA / isI prakAra madhyama guru prAyazcitta ke tIna vibhAga aura jaghanya
guru prAyazcitta ke bhI tIna vibhAga haiN| tapArAdhanA bhI pUrvokta krama se hI
kI jAtI hai| utkRSTa lagha prAyazcitta, madhyama lagha prAyazcitta, jaghanya
lagha prAyazcitta ke tIna, tIna vibhAga tathA utkRSTa laghusvaka prAyazcitta,
madhyama ladhusvaka prAyazcitta aura jaghanya laghusvaka prAyazcitta ke bhI
tIna, tIna vibhAga haiN| tapArAdhanA bhI pUrvokta mAsakrama se hai| vizeSa
jAnane ke liye vyavahAra bhASya kA adhyayana karanA caahiye| vyavahAra
(prAyazcitta) ko upAdeyatA pra0-bhagavana ! prAyazcitta se jIva ko kyA lAbha
hotA hai ? u0--prAyazcitta se pApakarma kI vizuddhi hotI hai aura cAritra
niraticAra hotA hai| samyak prakAra se prAyazcitta karane para mArga
(samyagdarzana) aura mArgaphala (jJAna) kI vizuddhi hotI hai| prAcAra aura
prAcAraphala (muktimArga) kI zuddhi hotI hai|' 1. (ka) utta0 a0 29 (kha) pAvaM
chidai jamhA, pAyacchittaM tu bhannae teNaM / pAeNa vA vicittaM, visohae teNa
pacchittaM // -vyava. bhASya pIThikA, gAthA 35 (ga) prAyaH pApaM samuddiSTaM,
cittaM tasya vizodhanam / yadA prAyasya tapasa: cittam nizcaya iti smRtii| (gha)
prAyasya pApasya cittaM vizodhanam prAyazcittam / [ 26 ]

Page #28 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Types of Atonement (Prayschitta)  1. **Jnana Prayschitta:** Atonement for
transgressions of knowledge, achieved through self-criticism and other means. 2.
**Darshan Prayschitta:** Atonement for transgressions of perception, achieved
through self-criticism and other means. 3. **Charitra Prayschitta:** Atonement
for transgressions of conduct, achieved through self-criticism and other means.
4. **Viyatt Kicchapaayachchitte:** This fourth type of atonement has two
interpretations:     * **Viyattkicchapaayachchitte:** Atonement for explicit
actions.         * This has two meanings:             * **Explicit:** The
atonement act prescribed by the Acharya is the remedy for the sin. This means
that when an Acharya prescribes atonement, they consider the transgressor's
possessions, location, time, and emotions. The atonement prescribed by the
Acharya may or may not be mentioned in the Dashakalapa-Vyavahar, but it will
still purify the soul.             * **Explicit:** Atonement acts clearly
specified in the sutras.     * **Chiyattkicchapaayachchitte:** Atonement for
abandoned actions.         * **Chiyatt:** This word also means "pleasing." Acts
pleasing to the Acharya, such as repentance, are also forms of atonement.  **Ten
Types of Atonement:**  1. **Palochana Yogya:** Atonement for transgressions that
can be purified through self-criticism. 2. **Atikrama:** Transgression of
fundamental principles. 3. **Vyatikrama:** Transgression of secondary
principles. 4. **Atichara:** Transgression of rules. 5. **Anaacharasevi:**
Transgression of ethical conduct.  **Punishment vs. Atonement:**  * Punishment
is harsh, while atonement is relatively gentle. * Punishment is accepted
unwillingly, while atonement is accepted willingly. * Punishment suppresses
desires, while atonement mitigates them.  **Number of Transgressions:**  *
**Jnana:** 14 transgressions * **Darshan:** 5 transgressions * **Charitra:** 106
transgressions     * 25 transgressions from the five great vows     * 2
transgressions from abstaining from nighttime meals     * 4 transgressions from
Iryasamiti     * 2 transgressions from Bhashasamiti     * 47 transgressions from
Eshan asamiti     * 2 transgressions from Adan Nikshepanasamiti     * 10
transgressions from Paristhapanasamiti     * 9 transgressions from the three
Guptis     * 5 transgressions from Sanlekhana  **Note:** The Sanskrit equivalent
of "Chiyatt" meaning "pleasing" is not found. (Source: Ardhamagadhi Kosh, Part
2, Chiyatt word, page 628 [27])

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
prAyazcitta ke bheda-prabheda 1. jJAna-prAyazcitta-jJAna ke aticAroM kI zuddhi
ke liye AlocanA Adi prAyazcitta krnaa|' 2. darzana-prAyazcitta-darzana ke
aticAroM kI zuddhi ke liye AlocanA Adi prAyazcitta krnaa| 3. cAritra
prAyazcitta-cAritra ke aticAroM kI zuddhi ke liye AlocanA Adi prAyazcitta karanA
/ 3 4. viyatta kiccapAyacchitte-isa caturtha prAyazcita ke do pAThAntara haiM 1.
viyattakiccapAyacchitte-vyaktakRtya prAyazcita / 2. ciyattakiccapAyacchitte-
tyaktakRtya prAyazcita / ka-vyaktakRtya prAyazcitta ke do artha haiM(1) vyakta-
arthAta AcArya unake dvArA nirdiSTa prAyazcitta kRtya pApa kA parihAraka hotA
hai| tAtparya yaha hai ki AcArya yadA-kadA kisI ko prAyazcitta dete haiM to ve
aticArasevI ke dravya, kSetra, kAla, bhAva Adi dekhakara dete haiN| prAcArya
dvArA diye gaye prAyazcitta kA ullekha dazAkalpa-vyavahAra Adi meM ho yA na ho
phira bhI usa prAyazcitta se Atmazuddhi avazya hotI hai| _khavyakta arthAt
spaSTa cheda sUtra nirdiSTa prAyazcitta kRtya / bhinna bhinna aticAroM ke
bhinna-bhinna (mAlocanAdi kRtya) prAyazcitta / ka-tyakta kRtyaprAyazcitta -jo
kRtya tyakta haiM unakA prAyazcitta / kha--ciyatta--kA eka artha 'prItikara' bhI
hotA hai| prAcArya ke prItikara kRtya vaiyAvRtya Adi bhI prAyazcitta rUpa haiN|
dasa prakAra ke prAyazcitta(1) pAlocanA yogya-jina aticAroM kI zUddhi prAlocanA
se ho sakatI hai aise aticAroM kI AlocanA (Ga) jisa prakAra laukika vyavahAra
meM sAmAjika yA rAjanaitika aparAdhiyoM ko daNDa dene kA vidhAna hai--isau
prakAra mUlaguNa yA uttaraguNa sambandhI (1) atikrama, (2) vyatikrama, (3)
aticAra aura (4) anAcAraseviyoM ko prAyazcitta dene kA vidhAna hai| sAmAnyatayA
daNDa aura prAyazcitta samAna pratIta hote haiM, kintu daNDa krUra hotA hai aura
prAyazcitta apekSAkRta komala hotA hai| daNDa anicchApUrvaka svIkAra kiyA jAtA
hai aura prAyazcitta svecchApUrvaka svIkAra kiyA jAtA hai / daNDa se bAsanAoM kA
damana hotA hai aura prAyazcitta se zamana hotA hai| 1. jJAna ke caudaha aticAra
/ 2. darzana ke pA~ca aticAra / 3. cAritra ke ekasau chaha (106) aticAra pAMca
mahAvrata se paccIsa aticAra / rAtribhojana tyAga ke do aticaar| iryAsamiti ke
cAra aticAra / bhASAsamiti ke do aticaar| eSaNA samiti ke seMtAlIsa aticaar|
AdAna nikSepaNA samiti ke do ati cAra / pariSThApanA samiti ke dasa praticAra /
tIna gupti ke 9 aticaar| saMlekhanA ke 5 aticAra 4. 'ciyatta' kA 'prItikara'
arthasUcaka saMskRta rUpAntara milatA nahIM hai| -ardhamAgadhIkoza bhAga 2
ciyattazabda pR0 628 [ 27 ]

Page #29 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Translation:  **(1)** **Aalochana Yogya:**  A transgression that is worthy of
**Aalochana** (criticism) is a type of **Prayaschitta** (atonement).
Transgressions of the **Eshana Samiti** (committee for guidance) and
**Paristhapana Samiti** (committee for establishment) are often worthy of
**Aalochana**.  **(2)** **Pratikramna Yogya:** Transgressions that can be
purified through **Pratikramna** (confession and repentance) are **Pratikramna
Yogya**. Transgressions of the **Samitis** and **Guptis** (secret keepers) are
often **Pratikramna Yogya**.  **(3)** **Ubhay Yogya:** Transgressions that can
be purified through both **Aalochana** and **Pratikramna** are **Ubhay Yogya**.
Transgressions committed by misidentifying **Ekendirya** (one-sensed) and other
beings, or by causing them to migrate, are **Ubhay Yogya**.  **(4)** **Viveka
Yogya:** Transgressions that can be purified through **Viveka** (discernment) or
**Parityaag** (renunciation) are **Viveka Yogya**. Renouncing **Adhakarma
Aahar** (food taken without proper consideration) is **Viveka Yogya**.  **(5)**
**Vyutsarga Yogya:** Transgressions that can be purified by restraining bodily
actions and stabilizing the mind on the **Dhyeya** (goal) are **Vyutsarga
Yogya**. **Kayotsarga** (restraint of bodily actions) performed after crossing a
river is **Vyutsarga Yogya**.  **(6)** **Tapa Yogya:** Transgressions that can
be purified only through **Tapa** (austerity) are **Tapa Yogya**. Transgressions
mentioned in the **Nishith Sutra** are often **Tapa Yogya** (**Murumas** or
**Laghumas**).  **(7)** **Chheda Yogya:** Transgressions that can be purified
through **Diksha Chheda** (breaking of initiation) are **Chheda Yogya**. Some
transgressions of the **Five Great Vows** are **Chheda Yogya**.  **(8)** **Mool
Yogya:** Transgressions that can be purified only by re-accepting the
**Mahavratas** (Great Vows) are **Mool Yogya**. Transgressions involving one or
more **Mahavratas** are **Mool Yogya**.  **(9)** **Anvasthapya Yogya:**
Transgressions that can be purified only by renouncing the **Vratas** (vows) and
**Vesh** (attire) are **Anvasthapya Yogya**. Transgressions like indulging in
**Aakarna Apavad** (unjustified criticism), repeatedly committing a
transgression, or committing multiple transgressions simultaneously are **Chheda
Yogya**. Just as an infected limb is amputated to protect the rest of the body,
similarly, a corrupted vow is renounced to protect the remaining vows.  **(2)**
Those who kill one or more **Panchendriya Pranis** (five-sensed beings), violate
**Sheel** (conduct), speak **Mrishvad** (falsehood) with a deliberate and impure
mind, engage in **Adattadan** (taking without giving), possess **Parigraha**
(attachment), wear **Par-Ling** (attire of a renunciant) or **Grihasthalin**
(attire of a householder) are **Mool Yogya**.  **(3)** There are three types of
**Anvasthapya Yogya** transgressions:     1. Stealing from a **Sadhmik** (fellow
Jain)     2. Stealing from **Anyarmis** (non-Jains)     3. Striking with a
stick, fist, or other weapon.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
karanA AlocanA yogya prAyazcitta hai| eSaNA samiti aura pariSThApanA samiti ke
aticAra prAyaH AlocanA yogya haiN| (2) pratikramaNayoMgya-jina aticAroM kI
zuddhi pratikramaNa se ho sakatI hai, aise aticAroM kA pratikramaNa karanA--
pratikramaNa yogya hai| samitiyoM evaM guptiyoM ke aticAra prAyaH pratikramaNa
yogya haiN| (3) ubhayayogyajina aticAroM kI zuddhi AlocanA aura pratikramaNa-
donoM se hI ho sakatI hai aise aticAroM kI AlocanA tathA unakA pratikramaNa
karanA-ubhaya yogya prAyazcitta hai| ekendriyAdi jIvoM kA abhidhAna karane se
yAvata sthAnAntaraNa karane se jo aticAra hote haiM ve ubhaya prAyazci yogyatta
haiN| (4) vivekayogya-jina aticAroM ko zuddhi viveka arthAt parityAga se hotI
hai aise aticAroM kA parityAga karanA viveka (tyAga) yogya prAyazcitta hai|
AdhAkarma AhAra yadi A jAya to usakA parityAga karanA hI vivekayogya prAyazcitta
hai|| (5) vyutsarga yogya-jina aticAroM kI zuddhi kAyika kriyAoM kA avarodha
karake dhyeya meM upayoga sthira karane se hotI hai aise aticAra vyutsarga
prAyazcitta yogya haiN| nadI pAra karane ke bAda kiyA jAne vAlA kAyotsarga
vyutsarga yogya prAyazcitta hai| (6) tapayogya-jina aticAroM kI zUddhi tapa se
hI ho sakatI haiaise aticAra tapa prAyazcitta yogya haiN| nizIthasUtra nirdiSTa
aticAra prAyaH tapa (murumAsa, laghumAsa) prAyazcitta yogya haiN| (7)
chedayogya-jina aticAroM kI zuddhi dIkSA cheda se ho sakatI hai ve aticAra cheda
prAyazcitta yogya haiN| pA~ca mahAvratoM ke katipaya aticAra cheda prAyazcitta
yogya haiN| (8) mUlayogya-jina aticAroM kI zuddhi mahAvratoM ke puna: AropaNa
karane se hI ho sakatI hai, aise anAcAra mUla prAyazcitta ke yogya hote haiM /
eka yA eka se adhika mahAvratoM kA hone vAlA mUla prAyazcitta yogya hai / (9)
anavasthApyayogya-jina anAcAroM kI zuddhi vrata evaM veSa rahita karane para hI
ho sakatI hai-aise anAcAra anavasthApya prAyazcitta yogya hote haiM / akAraNa
apavAda mArga sevana meM Asakta, eka aticAra kA aneka bAra AcaraNakartA, tathA
eka sAtha aneka aticAra sevanakartA cheda prAyazcitta yogya hotA hai| jisa
prakAra zeSa aMga kI rakSA ke liye vyAdhivikRta aMga kA chedana atyAvazyaka hai-
isI prakAra zeSa vrata paryAya kI rakSA ke liye dUSita vrata paryAya kA chedana
bhI atyAvazyaka hai| 2. eka bAra yA aneka bAra paMcendriya prANiyoM kA vadha
karane vAlA, zIla bhaMga karane vAlA, saMkliSTa saMkalpapUrvaka mRSAvAda bolane
vAlA, adattAdAna karane vAlA, parigraha rakhane vAlA, para-liMga (parivrAjakAdi
kA veSa) dhAraNa karane vAlA tathA gRhasthaliMga dhAraNa karane vAlA mUla
prAyazcitta yogya hotA hai| 3. anavasthApya prAyazcitta yogya tIna haiM 1.
sAdhamika kI corI karane vAlA, 2. anyarmiyoM kI corI karane vAlA, 3. daNDa,
lAThI yA mukke Adi se prahAra karane vaalaa| -ThANaM0 3, u04 sU0 201 [28]

Page #30 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(10) **ParƒÅ·πÉcƒ´ka**-worthy transgressions, which can only be purified by adopting
the garb of a householder and performing the prescribed austerities for a very
long time, are **ParƒÅ·πÉcƒ´ka**-penance worthy. A person undergoing this penance is
expelled from the shelter, village, and country. The main reasons for penance
are: 1. **Atikrama** - the intention to commit a transgression / 2.
**Vyatikrama** - collecting the means to commit a transgression / 3.
**AtichƒÅra** - beginning to commit a transgression. 4. **AnƒÅchƒÅra** - committing
a transgression. There are three types of **Atikrama**: 1. **Atikrama** of
knowledge, 2. **Atikrama** of perception, 3. **Atikrama** of conduct. Similarly,
there are **Vyatikrama**, **AtichƒÅra**, and **AnƒÅchƒÅra** of knowledge. There are
also three types each of perception and conduct. **Atikrama** of knowledge is of
three types: 1. **Jaghanya**, 2. **Madhyama**, 3. **Utk·πõ·π£·π≠a**. Similarly, there
are **Vyatikrama**, **AtichƒÅra**, and **AnƒÅchƒÅra** of knowledge. There are also
three types each of perception and conduct. If **Atikrama** of knowledge, etc.
has occurred, then one should criticize oneself before the guru, perform
**pratikramƒÅ·πáa**, and purify oneself by means of censure, deep reflection, etc.,
make a firm resolve not to commit the transgression again, and perform penance
in the form of austerity. Similarly, one should purify **Vyatikrama**, etc. of
knowledge, and **Atikrama**, etc. of perception and conduct. 1. **·π¨hƒÅ·πáa·πÉ** 6,
**S≈´** 489 / **·π¨hƒÅ·πáa·πÉ** 8, **S≈´** 605 / **·π¨hƒÅ·πáa·πÉ** 9, **S≈´** 688 / **·π¨hƒÅ·πáa·πÉ**
10, **S≈´** 733 / There are five **ParƒÅ·πÉcƒ´ka**-penance worthy transgressions: 1.
One who creates discord among those in the same lineage (**gaccha**). 2. One who
creates discord among those in the same group (**ga·πáa**). 3. One who is inclined
towards violence. 4. One who is a fault-finder. 5. One who repeatedly uses the
**pra≈õna≈õƒÅstra**. - **·π¨hƒÅga·πÉ** 5, **U** 1 **S≈´** 398 / There are three
**ParƒÅ·πÉcƒ´ka**-penance worthy transgressions: 1. **Du·π£·π≠a** **ParƒÅ·πÉcƒ´ka** 2.
**Pramatta** **ParƒÅ·πÉcƒ´ka** 3. **Anyo'nya** **Maithanasevƒ´** **ParƒÅ·πÉcƒ´ka** / For
specific knowledge regarding **AnvavasthƒÅpya** and **ParƒÅ·πÉcƒ´ka** penance, one
should refer to the **VyavahƒÅra BhƒÅ·π£ya**. 2. (a) **·π¨hƒÅ·πáa·πÉ** 3 **U** 4 **S≈´** 195
/ (b) To resolve to study during the time of non-study is **Atikrama** of
knowledge / To go to get a book is **Vyatikrama** of knowledge / To begin
studying is **AtichƒÅra** of knowledge. To complete the study is **AnƒÅchƒÅra** of
knowledge. Similarly, one should understand **Atikrama**, etc. of perception and
conduct. [29]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
(10) pArAMcika yogya-jina anAcAroM kI zuddhi gRhastha kA veSa dhAraNa karAne
para aura bahuta lambe samaya taka nirdhArita tapa kA anuSThAna karAne para hI
ho sakatI hai aise anAcAra pArAMcikaprAyazcitta yogya hote haiN| isa prAyazcitta
vAlA vyakti upAzraya, grAma aura deza se bahiSkRta kiyA jAtA hai| prAyazcitta ke
pramukha kAraNa 1. atikrama-doSasevana kA saMkalpa / 2. vyatikrama-doSasevana ke
sAdhanoM kA saMgraha karanA / 3. aticAra-doSasevana prArambha krnaa| 4.
anAcAra-~-doSasevana kara lenaa| atikrama ke tIna bheda1. jJAna kA atikrama, 2.
darzana kA atikrama, 3. cAritra kA atikrm| isI prakAra jJAna kA vyatikrama,
aticAra aura anAcAra haiM / darzana aura cAritra ke bhI tIna-tIna bheda haiN|
jJAna kA atikrama tIna prakAra kA hai 1. jaghanya, 2. madhyama, 3. utkRSTa / isI
prakAra jJAna kA vyatikrama, aticAra aura anAcAra haiN| darzana aura cAritra ke
bhI tIna-tIna bheda haiN| jJAnAdi kA atikrama ho gayA ho to guru ke samakSa
AlocanA karanA, pratikramaNa karanA tathA nindA, gahare Adi karake zuddhi
karanA, punaH doSasevana na karane kA dRr3ha saMkalpa karanA tathA prAyazcitta
rUpa tapa karanA / isI prakAra ke jJAna ke vyatikramAdi tathA darzana-cAritra ke
atikramAdi kI zuddhi karanI caahie|' 1. ThANaM0 6, sU0 489 / ThANaM0 8, sU0 605
/ ThANaM0 9, sU0 688 / ThANaM0 10, sU0 733 / pArAMcika prAyazcitta yogya pA~ca
haiM1. jo kula (gaccha) meM rahakara paraspara kalaha karAtA ho| 2. jo gaNa meM
rahakara paraspara kalaha karAtA ho| 3. jo hiMsAprekSI ho, 4. jo chidrapremI ho,
5. praznazAstra kA bArambAra prayoga karatA ho| -ThAgaM 5, u01 sU0 398 /
pArAMcika prAyazcitta yogya tIna haiM1. duSTa pArAMcika 2. pramatta pArAMcika 3.
anyo'nya maithanasevI pArAMcika / anavasthApya aura pArAMcika prAyazcitta ke
sambandha meM vizeSa jAnane ke liye vyavahArabhAzya dekhanA caahiye| 2. (ka)
ThANaM 3 u04 sU0 195 / (kha) asvAdhyAyakAla meM svAdhyAya karane kA saMkalpa
karanA jJAna kA atikrama hai / pustaka lene jAnA- jJAna kA vyatikrama hai /
svAdhyAya prArambha karanA jJAna kA aticAra hai| pUrNa svAdhyAya karanA jJAna kA
anAcAra hai| isI prakAra darzana tathA cAritra ke atikramAdi samajhane caahie|
[29]

Page #31 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Ten Types of Consumption (Pratisevna)  1. **Darp Pratisevna:** Consumption of
non-virtuous food with ego. 2. **Pramad Pratisevna:** Consumption of non-
virtuous food due to five types of negligence (like sleepiness). 3. **Anabhog
Pratisevna:** Consumption of virtuous food unwillingly due to forgetfulness. 4.
**Pratur Pratisevna:** Consumption of non-virtuous food during illness. 5.
**Apatti Pratisevna:** Consumption of non-virtuous food due to reasons like
famine. 6. **Sankit Pratisevna:** Consumption of virtuous food with doubt. 7.
**Sahsaakar Pratisevna:** Consumption of virtuous food suddenly or forcefully.
8. **Bhay Pratisevna:** Consumption of non-virtuous food due to fear. 9.
**Pravas Pratisevna:** Consumption of non-virtuous food due to hatred. 10.
**Vimarsh Pratisevna:** Consumption of virtuous food for testing a disciple.
These types of consumption are broadly classified into two: **Dapika** and
**Kalpika**.  **Dapika Pratisevna:** Consumption of non-virtuous food with
attachment and aversion. The consumer becomes **viraadhak** (one who hinders
spiritual progress).  **Kalpika Pratisevna:** Consumption of virtuous food
without attachment and aversion, or consumption that happens due to
circumstances. The consumer becomes **araadhak** (one who helps spiritual
progress).  ## Six Types of Knowledge Transgression (Jnana Atichaar)  1. **Kala
Atichaar:** Studying scriptures at an inappropriate time. 2. **Vinaya
Atichaar:** Not respecting the teacher's instructions due to pride in one's
caste or lineage while studying scriptures. 3. **Bahuman Atichaar:** Not
respecting the scriptures and the teacher. 4. **Upadhana Atichaar:** Engaging in
activities like scratching or applying ointment while reciting scriptures. 5.
**Nihnava Abhidhana Atichaar:** Hiding the teacher's name. 6. **Vyanjana
Atichaar:** Pronouncing more or fewer syllables than required. 7. **Artha
Atichaar:** Not understanding the meaning of the scriptures in context, or
understanding it in a contrary way. 8. **Ubhaya Atichaar:** Pronouncing a short
vowel as long, or a long vowel as short. Pronouncing an accented syllable as
unaccented, or an unaccented syllable as accented.  **Atikram, Vyatikrama, and
Atichaar** are three types of transgressions that arise from the influence of
the three passions (sanjvalana kshaya). They are purified through various types
of atonement, starting from **Aalocana** (self-reflection) and ending with
**Tapoham** (intense penance).  **Chhed, Mula, Anvasthapy, and Paranchik** are
four types of transgressions that are eligible for atonement. They arise from
the influence of the remaining twelve passions (Anantanubandhi 4, Apratyakhyani
4, Pratyakhyani 4).  **Quotes:**  1. "**Gaaha raagaddosaanugaya, tu dappiya
kappiya tu tadbhaava. Praaraadhana u kappe, viraadhana hoti dappe·πá**" -
Brihadkatha Upadesha 4, Bhashya Matha 4943. 2. "**Savve vi aiyaara sanjalanaa·πáam
udayo honti**" - Abhidhana Kosha, 'Aiyaar' word.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
pratisevanA ke dasa prakAra 1. darpapratisevanA-ahaMkArapUrvaka akRtya sevana /
2. pramAdapratisevanA-nidrAdi pAMca prakAra ke pramAdavaza akRtya sevana / 3.
anAbhoga pratisevanAvismRtipUrvaka anicchA se prakRtya sevana / 4.
prAturapratisevanA-rugNAvasthA meM akRtya sevana / 5. ApattipratisevanA-
dubhikSAdi kAraNoM se akRtya sevana / 6. zaMkita pratisevanA-AzaMkA se prakRtya
sevana / 7. sahasAkAra pratisevanA-akasmAt yA balAtkAra se prakRtya sevana / 8.
bhayapratimevanA-bhaya se akRtya sevana / 9. pravaSapratisevanA-dveSabhAva se
akRtya sevana / 10. vimarzapratisevanA-ziSya kI parIkSA ke nimitta prakRtya
sevana / ye pratisevanAyeM saMkSepa meM do prakAra kI haiM-dapikA aura kalpikA /
rAga-dveSa pUrvaka jo akRtya sevana kiyA jAtA hai vaha dapikA pratisevanA hai|
isa pratisevanA se pratisevaka virAdhaka hotA hai| rAga-dveSa rahita pariNAmoM
se jo pratisevanA ho jAtI hai yA kI jAtI hai vaha kalpikA pratisevanA hai| isakA
pratisevaka ArAdhaka hotA hai| pATha prakAra ke jJAnAticAra1. kAlAticAra-akAla
meM svAdhyAya karanA / 2. vinayAticAra-zruta kA adhyayana karate samaya jAti
aura kula mada se guru kA vinaya na krnaa| 3. bahumAnAticAra-zruta aura guru kA
sanmAna na krnaa| 4. upadhAnAticAra-zruta kI vAcanA lete samaya prAcAmlAdi
tapana krnaa| 5. nihnavanAbhidhAnAticAra-guru kA nAma chipaanaa| 6.
vyaMjanAticAra-hInAdhika akSaroM kA uccAraNa krnaa| 7. arthAticAra-prasaMga
saMgata artha na karanA / arthAta viparIta artha krnaa| 8. ubhayAticAra-hasva kI
jagaha dIrgha uccAraNa karanA, dIrgha kI jagaha hrasva uccAraNa karanA / udAtta
ke sthAna meM anudAtta kA aura anudAtta ke sthAna meM udAtta kA uccAraNa karanA
/ atikrama, vyatikrama aura aticAra ye tIna saMjvalana kaSAya ke udaya se hote
haiM-inakI zuddhi AlocanAha se lekara tapo'haMparyanta prAyazcittoM se hotI hai
/ cheda, mUlA, anavasthApya aura pArAMcika prAyazcitta yogya aticAra aura
anAcAra zeSa bAraha kaSAyoM (anantAnubandhI 4, apratyAkhyAnI 4, pratyAkhyAnI 4)
ke udaya se hote haiN| 1. gAhArAgaddosANugayA, tu dappiyA kappiyA tu tdbhaavaa|
prArAdhaNA u kappe, virAdhaNA hoti dappeNa // -bRha0 u04 bhASya mAthA 4943 / 2.
savve vi aiyArA saMjalaNANaM udayao hoMti // -abhi0 koSa-'aiyAra' zabda / [30]

Page #32 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
There are four types of Shramanas who consume the four types of faults:
Atikrama, Vyatikrama, Atichar and Anachar, which are both manifest and
concealed.   1. Some Shramanas consume these faults openly, i.e., they do not
conceal them. 2. Some Shramanas consume these faults in a concealed manner,
i.e., they do not reveal them. 3. Some Shramanas consume these faults both
openly and in a concealed manner. 4. Some Shramanas do not consume these faults
either openly or in a concealed manner.  Those who fall into the first category
are not disciplined, are undisciplined, free-willed, deceitful and shameless,
and they are not afraid of sin, therefore they consume faults openly.  Those who
fall into the second category are of two types:  * Those with a clear
understanding, if they consume these faults occasionally, they conceal them
because they themselves consume faults due to weakness of the soul, therefore
they think that other Shramanas should not consume faults by seeing them consume
faults, therefore they conceal the consumption of faults. * Those with an
unclear understanding, who are deceitful Shramanas, do not consume these faults
openly out of fear of public shame or with the intention that the faith of the
devotees should remain on them, but they do so in secret.  Those who fall into
the third category are of a deceitful nature, they consume ordinary faults
openly but conceal powerful faults. If someone sees them consuming ordinary
faults, they say, "Ordinary faults are common to all in this five-fold time.
Therefore, it is impossible to avoid these faults."  Those who fall into the
fourth category are truly detached, are seekers of liberation and are devoted to
self-study, therefore they do not consume these faults either openly or in a
concealed manner.  The practice of atonement as prescribed in the Vyavahar Sutra
is for the purification of the faults consumed by the first three categories of
Shramanas. The last, fourth category of Shramanas are the keepers of the
Niratichar character, therefore there is no provision for any kind of atonement
for them.  The purification of conduct is both difficult and easy. In the
Dharma-shastra of the first Tirthankara, Bhagwan Rishabhdev Adinath, the
Shramanas were mostly righteous and simple, but they were dull (those with low
intellectual development). Therefore, they were not able to fully understand and
follow the principles of the Sutra. This was the only reason why their conduct
was difficult to purify.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
prakaTa aura pracchanna doSa sevana atikrama, vyatikrama, aticAra aura anAcAra-
ina cAra prakAra ke doSoM kA sevana karane vAle zramaNazramaNiyAM cAra prakAra
ke haiM 1. kucha zramaNa-dhamaNiyA~ ina ukta doSoM kA sevana prakaTa karate haiM
arthAt pracchanna nahIM karate haiN| 2. kucha zramaNa-zramaNiyA~ ina ukta doSoM
kA sevana pracchanna karate haiM arthAt prakaTa nahIM karate haiN| 3. kucha
zramaNa-zramaNiyA~ ina ukta doSoM kA sevana prakaTa bhI karate haiM aura
pracchanna bhI karate haiN| 4. kucha zramaNa-zramaNiyA~ ina ukta doSoM kA sevana
na prakaTa karate haiM aura na pracchanna karate haiN|' prathama bhaMga vAle--
zramaNa-zramaNiyA~ anuzAsana meM nahIM rahane vAle avinIta, svacchanda, prapaMcI
evaM nirlajja hote haiM aura ve pApabhIrU nahIM hote haiM ataH doSoM kA sevana
prakaTa karate haiN| dvitIya bhaMga vAle-zramaNa-zramaNiyA~ do prakAra ke hote
haiM-ata: doSa kA sevana prakaTa karate haiM / yathA prazasta bhAvanA vAle-
zramaNa-zramaNiyA~ yadi yadA-kadA ukta doSoM kA sevana karate haiM to pracchanna
karate haiM, kyoMki ve svayaM paristhitivaza Atmika' durbalatA ke kAraNa doSoM
kA sevana karate haiM isalie aisA socate haiM ki mujhe doSa-sevana karate haye
dekhakara anya zramaNa-zramaNiyA~ doSa-sevana na kareM ataH ve doSoM kA sevana
pracchanna karate haiN| aprazasta bhAvanA vAle...mAyAvI zramaNa-zramaNiyA~ loka-
lajjA ke bhaya se yA zraddhAlujanoM kI zraddhA mere para banI rahe isa saMkalpa
se ukta doSoM kA sevana prakaTa nahIM karate haiM apitu chipakara karate haiN|
tRtIya bhaMga vAle-zramaNa-zramaNiyA~ vaMcaka prakRti ke hote haiM ve sAmAnya
doSoM kA sevana to prakaTa karate haiM kintu sazakta (prabala) doSoM kA sevana
pracchanna karate haiM / _yadi unheM koI sAmAnya doSa sevana karate huye dekhatA
hai to ve kahate haiM-'sAmAnya doSa to isa paMcamakAla meM sabhI ko lagate haiN|
ata: ina doSoM se bacanA asambhava hai|' caturtha bhaMga bAle-zramaNa-zramaNiyAM
sacce vairAgya vAle hote haiM, mumukSu aura svAdhyAyazIla bhI hote haiM prataH
ve ukta doSoM kA sevana na prakaTa karate haiM, na pracchanna karate haiM /
prathama tIna bhaMga vAle zramaNa-zramaNiyoM dvArA sevita doSoM kI zUddhi ke lie
hI vyavahArasutra nirdiSTa prAyazcitta-vidhAna hai| aMtima caturtha bhaMga vAle
zramaNa-zramaNiyA~ niraticAra cAritra ke pAlaka hote haiM ataH unake lie kisI
bhI prakAra ke prAyazcitta kA vidhAna nahIM hai| vyavahArazuddhi kaThina bhI,
sarala bhI prathama tIrthaMkara bhagavAna RSabhadeva AdinAtha ke dharmazAsana
meM zramaNa-zramaNiyA~ prAyaH Rju-sarala hote the para jaDa (alpabauddhika
vikAsa vAle) hote the| ataH ve sUtra siddhAnta nirdiSTa samAcArI kA paripUrNa
jJAna tathA paripUrNa pAlana nahIM kara pAte the| unakI vyavahAra zuddhi
duHsAdhya hone kA ekamAtra yahI kAraNa thaa| 1. ThANaM-4, u. 1, sU. 272 [31]

Page #33 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The 22 Tirthankaras (from Bhagwan Ajitanatha to Bhagwan Parshvanatha) and their
Shraman-Shramani were mostly righteous and wise (simple and enlightened). They
were always striving to have complete knowledge and complete adherence to the
principles laid down in the Sutras. Therefore, their conduct was very simple.
The Shraman-Shramani of the last Tirthankara, Bhagwan Mahavira, are mostly
crooked and dull. Even though they have detailed knowledge of the Shruta,
including Dasha, Kalpa, and Vyavahar, each Gachch presents a different
interpretation of the principles. The observance of great religious festivals
like Paryushana Parva and Samvatsari Parva, Pakkhi, and Chaumasi Alochana are
also performed on different days. Due to their crookedness and dullness, they do
not readily criticize the transgressions that occur in the Mulaguna and
Uttargana. Therefore, their conduct is very difficult to purify.   Palochana and
Alochak: Alochana is the act of revealing transgressions (which occur due to
ignorance, ego, carelessness, or circumstances) to the Guru. An Alochak is one
who reveals the transgressions that have occurred due to the aforementioned
reasons to the Guru. If the Alochak is deceitful and performs Palochana
deceitfully, then he will not receive good results from the Alochana. If the
Alochak is not deceitful and performs Alochana without deceit, then he will
receive good results from the Alochana.   It is essential to criticize
transgressions for the purification of conduct and the purification of the self
(Atma). However, there are different categories of seekers. One category does
not criticize transgressions at all. They say, "We have committed transgressions
(Akruti), we are committing them, and we will continue to commit them. Because
the country, time, and physical-mental conditions are such that our disciplined
life cannot be free from transgressions. It is not possible for us, so what is
the benefit of Alochana? It is like the process of bathing an elephant.
Transgressions occur, we criticize them, and then transgressions occur again.
This cycle continues." Their thinking is unwise because if we wear clothes, we
wear them, and we will continue to wear them, then the clothes we wear are
soiled, they are soiled, and they will continue to be soiled. Then what is the
benefit of purifying the clothes? How can this be considered appropriate? As
long as we wear clothes, it is our duty to keep them clean. Because there are
many benefits to purifying clothes - clothes that are purified daily do not
become soiled, and clean clothes also contribute to good health.   Similarly, as
long as the activities of the Yogas are present and the Kshayas are intense or
mild, the accumulation of Karmic dirt due to transgressions is certain.   1.
Gatha - Purimanam Dubbisoho U, Charimanam Durano Palo. Kappo Majjhimagnam Tu,
Suvishoho Supalo / Utt. A. 23, Gatha 27 / [32]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
bAvIsa tIrthaMkaroM (bhagavAn ajitanAtha se bha0 pArzvanAtha paryanta) ke
zramaNa-zramaNI prAyaH Rju-prAjJa (sarala aura prabuddha) hote the| ve sUtra
siddhAnta pratipAdita samAcArI kA paripUrNa jJAna tathA paripUrNa pAlana karane
meM sadA prayatnazIla rahate the ataH unakI vyavahAra zUddhi ati sarala thii|
antima tIrthaMkara bhagavAna mahAvIra kI paramparA ke zramaNa-zramaNI prAyaH
vakrajaDa haiN| dazA, kalpa, vyavahAra prAdi meM vizada zruta samAcArI ke hote
huye bhI pratyeka gaccha bhinna-bhinna samAcArI kI prarUpaNA karatA hai|
paryuSaNaparva tathA saMvatsarI parva jaise mahAna dhArmika parvo kI ArAdhanA,
pakkhI, caumAsI AlocanA bhI vibhinna dinoM meM kI jAtI hai| vakratA aura jar3atA
ke kAraNa mUlaguNa tathA uttaragaNoM meM lagane vAle aticAroM kI AlocanA bhI ve
sarala hRdaya se nahIM karate ataH unakI vyavahAra zuddhi ati kaThina hai|'
pAlocanA aura Alocaka AlocanA-ajJAna, ahaMkAra, pramAda yA paristhitivaza jo
utsarga mArga se skhalana arthAta aticAra hotA hai--use guru ke samakSa prakaTa
karanA AlocanA hai aura Alocaka vaha hai jo pUrvokta kAraNoM se lage huye
aticAroM ko guru ke samakSa prakaTa karatA hai / _ yadi Alocaka mAyAvI ho aura
mAyApUrvaka pAlocanA karatA ho to usako AlocanA kA use acchA phala nahIM milatA
hai| yadi pAlocaka mAyAvI nahIM hai aura mAyArahita AlocanA karatA hai to usakI
AlocanA kA use acchA phala milatA hai| vyavahArazuddhi ke liye tathA nizcaya
(Atma) zuddhi ke liye lage haye aticAroM kI AlocanA karanA anivArya hai kintu
sAdhakoM ke vibhinna varga haiN| unameM eka varga aisA hai jo aticAroM kI
pAlocanA karatA hI nahIM hai| unakA kahanA hai-hamane aticAra (akRtya) sevana
kiye haiM, karate haiM aura karate rheNge| kyoMki deza, kAla aura zArIrika-
mAnasika sthitiyAM aisI haiM ki hamArA saMyamI jIvana niraticAra rahe.-aisA
hameM saMbhava nahIM lagatA hai ata: AlocanA se kyA lAbha hai yaha to hastisnAna
jaisI prakriyA hai| aticAra lage AlocanA kI aura phira aticAra lageyaha cakra
calatA hI rahatA hai| unakA yaha cintana avivekapUrNa hai kyoMki vastra pahane
haiM, pahanate haiM aura pahanate raheMge to pahane gaye vastra malina huye
haiM, hote haiM aura hote raheMge'phira vastra zuddhi se kyA lAbha hai !'-yaha
kahanA kahA~ taka ucita hai ? ba taka vastra pahananA hai taba taka unheM zuddha
rakhanA bhI eka kartavya hai. kyoMki vastrazuddhi ke bhI kaI lAbha haiM-
pratidina zuddha kiye jAne vAle vastra prati malina nahIM hote haiM aura svaccha
vastroM se svAsthya bhI samRddha rahatA hai / isI prakAra jaba taka yogoM ke
vyApAra haiM aura kaSAya tIvra yA manda hai taba taka aticAra janya karmamala
laganA nizcita hai| 1. gAhA-purimANaM dubbisojho u, carimANaM durnnupaalo| kappo
majjhimagANaM tu, suvisojho supAlo / utta. a. 23, gAthA 27 / [ 32]

Page #34 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Constantly criticizing transgressions does not purify the soul from karmic
impurities and keeps it in a state of emotional distress. As the practice of
yoga is obstructed and the passions become weaker, the occurrence of
transgressions becomes less frequent. The second category is those who do not
criticize transgressions out of fear of disgrace, reproach, censure, or
condemnation, or out of fear of losing fame, reputation, or worship and respect.
The third category is those who criticize but do so hypocritically. They think,
"If I don't criticize, my present life will be ruined and my future life will
also be miserable. If I criticize, my present and future life will be
prosperous, or if I criticize, I will attain knowledge, vision, and good
conduct." The scriptures prescribe double penance for hypocritical critics. The
fourth category is those who criticize without hypocrisy. They are: 1. well-
born, 2. of noble lineage, 3. humble, 4. knowledgeable, 5. insightful, 6.
virtuous, 7. forgiving, 8. self-controlled, 9. free from attachment, 10. free
from regret. This is the category of such seekers. Their conduct and conviction
are both pure. Whether the critic is a seeker of liberation or not, they should
always criticize in front of a seeker of liberation. In the absence of a seeker
of liberation, in front of whom should they criticize? There is a sequence for
this, which can be known by studying the Chhedasutras. Why is the editing of the
Vyavaharsutra the ultimate goal of the life of restrained souls? - "Purity of
conviction," that is, complete liberation of the soul (from karmic impurities),
and for this, the purity of conduct prescribed by the Vyavaharsutra is
essential. Just as physical health requires purification of the stomach, and
purification of the stomach requires purification of food, similarly, spiritual
well-being requires purity of conviction, and purity of conviction requires
purity of conduct. Because without purity of conduct, purity of conviction is
absolutely impossible. In worldly life, transactions are conducted only with
those who are honest (in giving and taking money). Similarly, in spiritual life,
actions like worship and veneration are performed only with a seeker of pure
conduct. 1. Gatha - Payiriyapayamulam, Ganturna Sai Parakkama / Tahe Savvena
Attasohi, Kayavva Es Uvaeso. / Jah Sakusalo Vi Vejjo, Annassa Kahei Attano Vahi
/ Vejjassa Ya So Souto, Padikamma Samarabhate // Jayante Na Vi Evam,
Payachchittavihimapano Niunam / Tah Vi Ya Pagadatarayam, Paloedevvayam Hoi / Jah
Balo Jappanto, Kajjamakajjam Cha Ujjuyam Bhanai / Tam Tah Paloija Mayaamaya
Vippamukko U / -Vyav. U. 10 Bhashya Gatha 460-471 / [ 33 ]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
pratidina aticAroM kI aAlocanA karate rahane se AsmA karmamala se pratimalina
nahIM hotA hai aura bhAvaprArogya rahatA hai| jyoM jyoM yogoM kA vyApAra
avaruddha hotA hai aura kaSAya mandatama hote jAte haiM, tyoM tyoM aticAroM kA
laganA pralpa hotA jAtA hai| dvitIya varga aisA hai jo ayaza-akIti, avarNa
(nindA) yA avajJA ke bhaya se ayavA yaza-kIrti yA pUjA-satkAra kama ho jAne ke
bhaya se aticAroM kI AlocanA hI nahIM krte| tRtIya varga aisA hai jo AlocanA to
karatA hai para mAyApUrvaka karatA hai / vaha socatA hai maiM yadi pAlocanA
nahIM karUgA to merA vartamAna jIvana gahita ho jAyagA aura bhAvI jIvana bhI
vikrata ho jAya karUMgA to merA vartamAna evaM bhAvI jIvana prazasta ho jAyagA
athavA pAlocanA kara lUgA to jJAna darzana evaM cAritra kI prApti ho jaaygii|
mAyAvI Alocaka ko dugunA prAyazcitta dene kA vidhAna prArambha ke sUtroM meM
hai| cauthA varga aisA hai jo mAyArahita AlocanA karatA hai, vaha 1.
jAtisampanna, 2. kulasampanna, 3. vinayasampanna, 4. jJAnasampanna, 5.
darzanasampanna, 6. cAritrasampanna, 7. kSamAzIla, 8. nigrahazIla, 9, amAyI, 10.
apazcAttApI / aise sAdhakoM kA yaha varga hai / inakA vyavahAra aura nizcaya
donoM zuddha hote haiM / pAlocaka gItArtha ho yA agItArtha, unheM AlocanA sadA
gItArtha ke sAmane hI karanI cAhiye / gItArtha ke abhAva meM kina ke sAmane
karanA caahiye|' unakA eka krama haijo chedasUtroM ke svAdhyAya se jAnA jA
sakatA hai| vyavahArasUtra kA sampAdana kyoM saMyamI AtmAoM ke jIvana kA carama
lakSya hai -"nizcayazuddhi' arthAt AtmA kI (karma-mala se) sarvathA mukti aura
isake liye vyavahArasUtra pratipAdita vyavahArazuddhi anivArya hai| jisaprakAra
zArIrika svAsthyalAbha ke liye udarazuddhi Avazyaka hai aura udarazuddhi ke liye
AhArazuddhi atyAvazyaka hai-isI prakAra prAdhyAtmika ArogyalAbha ke lie
nizcayazuddhi Avazyaka hai aura nizcayazuddhi ke liye vyavahArazuddhi Avazyaka
hai| kyoMki vyavahArazuddhi ke binA nizcayazuddhi sarvathA asaMbhava hai|
sAMsArika jIvana meM vyavahArazuddhi vAle (rupaye-paisoM ke dene lene meM
prAmANika) ke sAtha hI lena-dena kA vyavahAra kiyA jAtA hai| AdhyAtmika jIvana
meM bhI vyavahArazuddha sAdhaka ke sAtha hI kRtikarmAdi (vandana-pUjanAdi)
vyavahAra kiye jAte haiN| 1. gAhA-pAyariyapAyamUlaM, gaMtUrNa sai parakkame /
tAhe savveNa attasohI, kAyavvA esa uveso|| jaha sakusalo vi vejjo, annassa kahei
attaNo vAhi / vejjassa ya so souto, paDikamma samArabhate // jAyAMteNa vi evaM,
pAyacchittavihimappaNo niuNaM / taha vi ya pAgaDatarayaM, pAloedavvayaM hoi /
jaha bAlo jappaMto, kajjamakajjaM ca ujjuyaM bhaNai / taM taha pAloijjA mAyAmaya
vippamukko u / .-vyava0 u0 10 bhASya gAthA 460-471 / [ 33 ]

Page #35 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The conduct of restrained souls is purified (free from the stain of sin arising
from transgression) by the five conducts expounded in the Vyavahar Sutra. Some
thoughts have been expressed for the Chhed Sutras published in the Granth. In
this writing, I have included essential excerpts from the Ayara Dasha,
Kappasuttam Chhed Sutras edited by me earlier, Pandit Ratna Muni Shri
Vijaymuniji Shastri's "Prachar Dasha: An Exercise" and Upadhyay Muni Shri
Phoolchandji 'Shraman's "Brihat Kalpasutra Ki Uththanika". For this, I express
my heartfelt gratitude to both the Munis. The work of writing detailed
discussions etc. has been done by Shri Tilockmuniji M. Therefore, readers are
requested to kindly contact Munishri for the solution of their inquiries. Muni
Kanhaiyalal "Kamal" [34]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
vyavahArasUtra pratipAdita pAMca vyavahAroM se saMyamI prAtmAoM kA
vyavahArapakSa zuddha (aticArajanya pApamala-rahita) hotA hai| grantha meM
prakAzita chedasUtroM ke liye katipaya vicAra vyakta kiye haiN| isa lekhana meM
mere dvArA pUrva meM sampAdita aAyAradasA, kappasuttaM chedasUtroM meM
paNDitaratna muni zrI vijayamunijI zAstrI ke "prAcAradazA: eka anuzIlana" aura
upAdhyAya muni zrI phUlacandajI 'zramaNa ke "bRhatkalpasUtra kI utthAnikA" ke
prAvazyaka lekhAMzoM kA samAveza kiyA hai| etadartha munidvaya kA sadhanyavAda
AbhAra mAnatA huuN| vistRta vivecana Adi likhane kA kArya zrI tilokamunijI ma.
ne kiyA hai| ataeva pAThakagaNa apanI jijJAsAnoM ke samAdhAna ke liye munizrI se
saMparka karane kI kRpA kreN| muni kanhaiyAlAla "kamala" [ 34 ]

Page #36 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Introduction: Three Chhed Sutras: A Critical Study  The place of the Vedas in
the Vedic tradition, the Tripitaka in the Buddhist tradition, the Bible in
Christianity, and the Quran in Islam is the same as that of the Agam literature
in the Jain tradition. The significant difference between the Vedas and the
Buddhist and Jain Agam literature is that the sages of the Vedic tradition
emphasized the protection of words, while the Jain and Buddhist traditions
emphasized the meaning. This is why the words of the Vedas have been largely
preserved, but they have not been able to establish a consensus on meaning. The
Jain and Buddhist traditions have been completely opposite in this regard.
There, the protection of meaning has been emphasized, and meaning has been
considered more important than words. This is why there are variations in the
texts of the Agams, but there is rarely a difference in meaning. The words of
the Vedas have been imbued with mantras, which has preserved the words but
destroyed their meaning. The Jain Agam literature, not being imbued with mantra
power, has preserved the meaning completely. The Vedas do not represent the
views of any particular sage, while the Jain Ganipitaka and the Buddhist
Tripitaka represent the words of Lord Mahavira and the Tathagata Buddha
respectively. The Tirthankaras have been the formulators of the meaning of the
Jain Agams, and the Ganadharas have been the authors of the Sutras. The culture
of the Jain and Vedic traditions has been distinct. The folk culture is
primarily spiritual. The Jain Agams have primarily resonated with a spiritual
tone, while the Vedas have expressed a worldly tone. It should not be forgotten
that the things mentioned in the Jain Agams about atomic science, biology,
botany, etc., two thousand five hundred years ago, are still astonishing to
scientists today. The Jain Agam... literature has been important from many
perspectives. Some time ago, there was a belief among Western and Eastern
scholars that the Vedas were the original source of the Agams and the Tripitaka,
but the ruins found in the excavations of Mohenjo-daro and Harappa have
radically changed the scholars' belief that the culture that existed in India
before the arrival of the Aryans was fully developed and it was a Shraman
culture. Impartial thinkers have unanimously accepted the fact that the Vedic
tradition has accepted the five great vows of non-violence, truth, non-stealing,
celibacy, and non-possession due to the influence of the Shraman culture. Today,
the Vedic... [35]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
prastAvanA trINi chedasUtrANi : eka samIkSAtmaka adhyayana vaidika paramparA meM
jo sthAna veda kA hai, bauddha paramparA meM jo sthAna tripiTaka kA hai, IsAI
dharma meM jo sthAna bAIbila kA hai, islAma dharma meM jo sthAna kurAna kA hai,
vahI sthAna jainaparamparA meM Agama-sAhitya kA hai| veda tathA bauddha aura
jaina Agama-sAhitya meM mahattvapUrNa bheda yaha rahA hai ki vaidika paramparA
ke RSiyoM ne zabdoM kI surakSA para adhika bala diyA jabaki jaina aura bauddha
paramparA meM artha para adhika bala diyA gayA hai| yahI kAraNa hai ki vedoM ke
zabda prAya: surakSita rahe haiM aura artha kI dRSTi se ve eka mata sthira nahIM
kara sake haiN| jaina aura bauddha paramparA meM isase bilkula hI viparIta rahA
hai| vahA~ artha kI surakSA para adhika bala diyA gayA hai, zabdoM kI apekSA
artha adhika mahattvapUrNa mAnA gayA hai| yahI kAraNa hai ki AgamoM ke
pAThabheda milate haiM, para unameM prAyaH arthabheda nahIM hai| veda ke zabdoM
meM maMtroM kA prAropaNa kiyA gayA hai jisase zabda to surakSita rahe, para
usake artha naSTa ho gae / jaina Agama-sAhitya meM maMtra-zakti kA Aropa na hone
se artha pUrNa rUpa se surakSita rahA hai| veda kisI eka RSi vizeSa ke vicAroM
kA pratinidhitva nahIM karate, jaba ki jaina gaNipiTaka evaM bauddha tripiTaka
kramaza: bhagavAna mahAvIra aura tathAgata buddha kI vANI kA pratinidhitva
karate haiN| jaina AgamoM ke artha ke prarUpaka tIrthakara rahe haiM aura sUtra
ke racayitA gaNadhara haiN| jaina aura vaidika paramparA kI saMskRti pRthaka-
pRthaka rahI hai| janasaMskRti adhyAtma pradhAna hai| jaina AgamoM meM adhyAtma
kA svara pradhAna rUpa se jhaMkRta rahA hai, vedoM meM laukikatA kA svara
mukharita rahA hai| yahA~ para yaha bAta bhI vismaraNa nahIM honI cAhie ki Aja
se paccIsa sau varSa pUrva aNa-vijJAna, jIva-vijJAna, banaspati-vijJAna Adi ke
sambandha meM jo bAteM jaina AgamoM meM batAI gaI haiM, unheM par3hakara Aja kA
vaijJAnika bhI vismita hai| jaina Agama... sAhitya kA ina aneka dRSTiyoM se bhI
mahattva rahA hai| kucha samaya pUrva pAzcAtya aura paurvAtya vijJoM kI yaha
dhAraNA thI ki veda hI Agama aura tripiTaka ke mUla srota haiM, para
mohanajodar3o aura har3appA kI khudAI se prApta dhvaMsAvazeSoM ne vijJoM kI
dhAraNA meM AmUlacUla parivartana kara diyA hai ki AryoM ke Agamana se pUrva
bhArata meM jo saMskRti thI vaha pUrNa rUpa se vikasita thI aura vaha
zramaNasaMskRti thii| niSpakSa vicArakoM ne yaha satya-tathya eka mata se
svIkAra kiyA hai ki zramaNasaMskRti ke prabhAva se hI vaidika paramparA ne
ahiMsA, satya, asteya, brahmacarya aura aparigraha mahAvratoM ko svIkAra kiyA
hai| Aja jo vaidika { 35 ]

Page #37 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The description of ahimsa and other principles in tradition is a contribution of
Jain culture. The word 'Agam' has many meanings. I have discussed it in detail.
In Acharang, the word 'Pagam' is used in the sense of knowing. "Agametta-
Anavizza"2 means to know and be wise. One who knows the brevity of Agam is
called 'Laghavanga Agammane'. In Vyavahar Bhashya, Sanghadasagani, while
describing Pragam-Vyavahar, has divided it into two categories: direct and
indirect. Direct includes Avadhi, Manaparyav and Keval knowledge, and indirect
includes fourteen previous and lesser Shruta knowledge. This also makes it clear
that knowledge is Pragam. The teachings given by the omniscient and all-seeing
Tirthankaras are also Pragam because they are knowledge. In Bhagavati,
Anuyogadwar and Sthanang, the word Pragam is used in the sense of scripture.
There, four types of evidence are mentioned: Pratyaksha, Anuman, Upaman and
Pragam. Pragam is also divided into two categories: Laukik and Lokottar. Laukik
Pagam includes Bharat, Ramayana etc., and Lokottar Pagam includes Achar,
Sutrakrut etc. Lokottar Agam is also divided into three categories: Suttagam,
Aththagam and Tadubhayagam. From another perspective, there are three types of
Agam: Pratmagam, Anantaragam and Paramparagam. There are two types of Agam:
Arthrup and Sutrap. Tirthankar Prabhu teaches Arthrup Pragam, hence Arthrup Gram
is called Pratmagam of Tirthankaras, because it is their own Arthagam, they have
not taken it from anyone else, but the same Arthagam has been received by the
Ganadharas from the Tirthankaras. There is no interference of any third person
between Ganadhar and Tirthankar, hence for Ganadharas, that Arthagam is called
Anantaragam, but based on that Arthagam, Ganadharas themselves create Sutra-rup.
Therefore, Sutragam is called Pratmagam for Ganadharas. The direct disciples of
Ganadharas receive Sutragam directly from Ganadharas, there is no interference
between them. Therefore, for those disciples, Sutragam is Anantaragam, but
Arthagam is Paramparagam. Because they received it from their Dharma Guru
Ganadharas. But this was not Pratmagam for Ganadharas. They received it from
Tirthankaras. The disciples of Ganadharas and 1. Four Chapters of Culture: p.
125 - Ramdhari Singh "Dinakar" 2. Pracharang 124 Jnatva Prajnapayet 3. Acharang
116 / 3 Laghavanga Agamyan Avabudhyamanah 4. Vyavahar Bhashya Ga. 201 5.
Bhagavati 5 / 3 / 192 6. Anuyogadwar 7. Sthanang 338, 228, 8. Anuyogadwar 49-50
p. 68, Punyavijayaji edited, published by Mahavira Vidyalaya, Mumbai 9. Ahva
Agame Tibihe Panatte, Tam Jaha-Suttagame Ya Aththagame Ya Tadubhayagame Ya /
~Anuyogadwarsutra 470, p. 179 10. Ahva Pragame Tivihe Panatte, Tam Jaha
Attagame, Anantaragame Paramparagame Ya / Anuyogadwarsutra 470, p. 179 11. (a)
Shrichandriya Sangrahni Ga. 112 (b) Aavashyakaniyukti Ga. 92 [ 36 ]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
paramparA meM ahiMsAdi kA varNana hai vaha jainasaMskRti kI dena hai / ' Agama
zabda ke aneka artha haiN| usa para maiMne vistAra se carcA kI hai| AcArAGga meM
jAnane ke artha meM pAgama zabda kA prayoga hamA hai| "AgamettA-ANavejjA"2
jAnakara prAjJA kre| lAghavaM AgamamANe laghutA ko jAnane vAlA / vyavahArabhASya
meM saMghadAsagaNI ne prAgama-vyavahAra kA varNana karate hue usake pratyakSa
aura parokSa ye do bheda kiye haiN| pratyakSa meM avadhi, manAparyava aura
kevala jJAna hai aura parokSa meM caturdaza pUrva aura unase nyUna zrutajJAna kA
samAveza hai| isase bhI spaSTa hai ki jo jJAna hai vaha prAgama hai| sarvajJa
sarvadarzI tIrthaMkaroM ke dvArA diyA gayA upadeza bhI jJAna hone ke kAraNa
prAgama hai| bhagavatI, anuyogadvAra aura sthAnAGga meM prAgama zabda zAstra ke
artha meM prayukta huA hai| vahA~ para pramANa ke cAra bheda kiye gaye haiM-
pratyakSa, anumAna, upamAna aura prAgama / prAgama ke bhI laukika aura lokottara
ye do bheda kie gae haiN| laukika pAgama bhArata, rAmAyaNa prAdi haiM aura
lokottara pAgama AcAra, sUtrakRta prAdi haiN| lokottara Agama ke suttAgama,
atthAgama aura tadubhayAgama ye tIna bheda bhI kie gae haiN| eka anya daSTi se
Agama ke tIna prakAra aura milate haiM-prAtmAgama, anantarAgama aura
paramparAgama / aAgama ke artharUpa aura satrarUpa ye do prakAra haiN|
tIrthaMkara prabhu artharUpa prAgama: kA upadeza karate haiM ata: artharUpa
grAmama tIrthaMkaroM kA prAtmAgama kahalAtA hai, kyoMki vaha arthAgama unakA
svayaM kA hai, dUsaroM se unhoMne nahIM liyA hai, kintu vahI arthAgama
gaNadharoM ne tIrthaMkaroM se prApta kiyA hai / gaNadhara aura tIrthaMkara ke
bIca kisI tIsare vyakti kA vyavadhAna nahIM hai etadartha gaNadharoM ke lie vaha
arthAgama anantarAgama kahalAtA hai, kintu usa arthAgama ke AdhAra se svayaM
gaNadhara sUtrarUpa racanA karate haiN| isalie sUtrAgama gaNadharoM ke lie
prAtmAgama kahalAtA hai| gaNadharoM ke sAkSAt ziSyoM ko gaNadharoM se sUtrAgama
sIdhA hI prApta hotA hai, unake madhya meM koI bhI vyavadhAna nahIM hotaa|
isalie una ziSyoM ke lie sUtrAgama anantarAgama hai, kintu arthAgama to
paramparAgama hI hai| kyoMki vaha unhoMne apane dharmaguru gaNadharoM se prApta
kiyA hai| kintu yaha gaNadharoM ko bhI prAtmAgama nahIM thaa| unhoMne
tIrthaMkaroM se prApta kiyA thaa| gajadharoM ke praziSya aura 1. saMskRti ke
cAra adhyAya : pR. 125 -rAmadhArIsiMha "dinakara" 2. prAcArAMga 124 jJAtvA
prAjJApayet 3. AcArAMga 116 / 3 lAghavaM Agamayan avabudhyamAnaH 4.
vyavahArabhASya gA. 201 5. bhagavatI 5 / 3 / 192 6. anuyogadvAra 7. sthAnAGga
338, 228, 8. anuyogadvAra 49-50 pR. 68, puNyavijayajI sampAdita, mahAvIra
vidyAlaya, bambaI dvArA prakAzita 9. ahavA Agame tibihe paNNatte, taM jahA-
suttAgame ya atthAgame ya tadubhayAgame ya / -~anuyogadvArasUtra 470, pR. 179
10. ahavA prAgame tivihe paNNatte, taM jahAattAgame, aNaMtarAgame paraMparAgame
ya / anuyogadvArasUtra 470, pR. 179 11. (ka) zrIcandrIyA saMgrahaNI gA. 112
(kha) Avazyakaniyukti gA. 92 [ 36 ]

Page #38 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
In their tradition, the sutras and their meanings are passed down through a
lineage of disciples and students. The Ganadharas compiled the sacred discourses
of the Lord Mahavira in the form of sutras, which became known as the Anga
literature. It has twelve divisions: Achar, Sutra-krit, Sthan, Samavay,
Bhagavati, Jnata, Upasaka-dasha, Antakrid-dasha, Anuttaroppapatik,
Prasnavyakaran, Vipak, and Drishtibad. Drishtibad is a division of the earlier
literature. Based on the Arhad-bhasit matrikapadas, the Ganadharas created
fourteen scriptures, which contain the essence of the entire Shruta. These
fourteen scriptures are known as the fourteen Purvas. The analytical method of
these Purvas is extremely complex, so only those great sadhakas who were endowed
with exceptional intelligence could understand them. For ordinary sadhakas and
for the benefit of women, the Dvadasangi was created. Acharya Jinabhadragani
Kshamasraman wrote that the study of Drishtibad was not suitable for women.
Because women are of a frivolous nature, they are easily proud. Their senses are
fickle. Their intellect is weaker than that of men. Therefore, the study of
Drishtibad, with its excessive miracles and wonders, is not for them. The
Maladhari Acharya Hemchandra, in explaining this topic, wrote that if women were
to study Drishtibad, their frivolous nature would lead them to develop egotism,
thinking, "I am a student of Drishtibad," which would lead them to despise and
scorn men, causing their downfall. Therefore, the great compassionate
Tirthankaras, who are the embodiments of mercy, prohibited women from studying
Drishtibad and other studies that involve excessive miracles and wonders. The
Brihatkalpaniyukti also mentions this. What Jinabhadragani Kshamasraman and
Maladhari Hemchandra wrote about the distorted nature and weak intellect of
women does not seem entirely accurate. These things are also possible in men.
Many women are more intelligent and serious than men. This is clear from the
descriptions found in the scriptures.   **Note:** The Jain terms have been
preserved in the translation.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
unakI paramparA meM hone vAle anya ziSya aura praziSyoM ke lie sUtra aura artha
paramparAgama haiM / 2 zramaNa bhagavAna mahAvIra ke pAvana pravacanoM kA sUtra
rUpa meM saMkalana-prAkalana gaNadharoM ne kiyA, vaha aMgasAhitya ke nAma se
vizruta huprA / usake AcAra, sUtrakRta, sthAna, samavAya, bhagavatI, jJAtA,
upAsakadazA, antakRddazA, anuttaropapAtika, praznavyAkaraNa, vipAka aura
dRSTibAda ye bAraha vibhAga haiN| dRSTibAda kA eka vibhAga pUrva sAhitya hai|
Avazyakaniyukti ke anusAra gaNadharoM ne arhadbhASita mAtRkApadoM ke AdhAra se
caturdaza zAstroM kA nirmANa kiyA, jisameM sampUrNa zruta kI avatAraNA kI gii|
ye caturdaza zAstra caturdaza pUrva ke nAma se vizruta hue / ina pUrvo kI
vizleSaNa-paddhati atyadhika kliSTa yI ataH jo mahAn pratibhAsampanna sAdhaka
the unhIM ke lie vaha pUrva sAhitya grAhaya thA / jo sAdhAraNa pratibhAsampanna
sAdhaka the unake lie evaM striyoM ke upakArArtha dvAdazAMgI kI racanA kI gii|
AcArya jinabhadragaNI kSamAzramaNa ne likhA hai ki daSTibAda kA adhyayana-
paThana striyoM ke lie bajya thaa| kyoMki striyAM tuccha svabhAva kI hotI haiM,
unheM zIghra ho garva prAtA hai| unakI indriyAM caMcala hotI haiN| unakI medhA-
zakti puruSoM kI apekSA durbala hotI hai etadartha utthAna-samutthAna prabhRti
atizaya yA camatkAra yukta adhyayana aura dRSTivAda kA jJAna unake lie nahIM
hai|14 maladhArI prAcArya hemacandra ne prastuta viSaya kA spaSTIkaraNa karate
hae likhA hai ki striyoM ko yadi kisI taraha dRSTivAda kA adhyayana karA diyA
jAe to tuccha prakRti ke kAraNa "maiM dRSTivAda kI adhyetA hUM" isa prakAra mana
meM ahaMkAra Akara puruSa ke paribhava-tiraskAra prabhRti meM pravRtta ho jAye
jisase usakI durgati ho sakatI hai etadartha dayA ke avatAra mahAn paropakArI
tIrthaMkaroM ne utthAna, samutthAna Adi atizaya camatkAra yukta adhyayana evaM
dRSTivAda ke adhyayana kA striyoM ke lie niSedha kiyaa| 5 bRhatkalpaniyukti meM
bhI yahI bAta AI hai / jinabhadragaNI kSamAzramaNa ne aura maladhArI hemacandra
ne striyoM kI pravRtti kI vikRti va medhA kI durbalatA ke sambandha meM jo likhA
hai vaha pUrNa saMgata nahIM lagatA hai / ve bAteM puruSa meM bhI sambhava haiN|
aneka striyAM puruSoM se bhI adhika pratibhAsampanna va gambhIra hotI haiN| yaha
zAstra meM pAye hae varNanoM se bhI spaSTa hai / / 12. titthagarANaM atthassa
attAgame, gaNaharANaM suttassa attAgame, atthassa aNaMtarAgame, gaNaharasIsANaM
suttassa aNaMtarAgame atthassa paraMparAgame teNaM paraM suttassa vi atthassa vi
No attAgame No aNaMtarAgame, paramparAgame -anuyogadvAra 470, pR0 179 13.
dhammovAo pavayaNamahabA pubvAI desayA tassa / sabbaMjiNA | gaNaharA,
codasapuvvA u te tassa / / sAmAiyAiyAvA vayajIvanikAya bhAvaNA paDhamaM / eso
dhammovAdo jiNehi savvehi ubailo / / -~-Avazyakaniyukti gA0 292-293 14. tucchA
gArababahulA calidiyA dubbalA dhiIe ya / iti pAisesajjhayaNA bhUyAvAyo ya no
sthINaM // ..."iha bicitrA jagati prANinaH tatra ye durmedhasaH te pUrvANi
nAdhyetumIzate, pUrvANAmatigambhIrArthatvAta teSAM ca durmedhatvAt strINAM
pUrvAdhyayanAnAdhikAra eva tAsAM tucchatvAdi doSabahulatvAt /
-vizeSAvazyakabhASya gAthA 55 kI vyAkhyA pR0 48 prakAzaka-prAgamodaya samiti
bambaI [ 37 ]

Page #39 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
When a woman can attain the highest spiritual position of a Tirthankara, and can
acquire Kevala Jnana, then wise people should contemplate with an impartial
perspective on the weaknesses pointed out for the study of Drashtivad, and the
weaknesses due to which women were not considered eligible for Drashtivad. In my
view, the knowledge of the previous literature was attainable. To acquire that
knowledge, only study and reading were not enough, some specific practices were
also mandatory for the seeker. For those practices, the seeker had to stay alone
in a secluded and peaceful place for some time. The physical body of women is
not such that they can stay alone in seclusion and perform long practices. From
this perspective, the study of Drashtivad was prohibited for women. This is more
rational and logical. In my view, this is also the reason for the non-
availability of the Aharaksharir of women. Based on the Anga texts compiled by
the Ganadharas, other sthaviras later created texts, which are called Angabahya.
Anga and Angabahya, these Agam texts are the fundamental pillars of the reign of
Bhagwan Mahavira. They are the key to Jain conduct, the unique treasure of Jain
thought, the dignity of people's culture, and the glory of Jain literature. It
should be remembered that the process of including Angabahya texts in the Agam
has not been the same in both the Svetambar and Digambar traditions. In the
Digambar tradition, the number of Angabahya Agams is very small, but in the
Svetambars, this tradition continued for a long time, which resulted in a larger
number of Angabahya texts. It is very important that the various studies of
Praavashyak, Dashavakalik, Uttaradhyayanasutra, and Nishita, etc., are equally
accepted in both traditions. The Svetambar scholars believe that the original
form of Agam literature has been lost to a great extent, but not completely, it
still remains. In the three compilations of Angas and Angabahya Bhagams, there
has definitely been some change in its original form. Later events and
deliberations have also been included. For example, the description of seven
Nihnvas and Navaganas in the Stananga. The subject hinted at in the
Prashnavyakaran is not available at present, however, most of the Agams are
original, completely original. From the perspective of language and style of
writing, it is very ancient. Present-day linguists consider the first
Shrutaskandha of Acharanga and the first Shrutaskandha of Sutrakrutanga to be
two thousand five hundred years old. They also consider Stananga, Bhagavati,
Uttaradhyayanasutra, Dashavakalik, Nishita, and Kalpa to be ancient. There is no
doubt that the original of the Pragam is still preserved. From the perspective
of the Digambar tradition, the Anga literature has been lost. Therefore, they
created new texts and considered them as evidence like the Agams. The Digambar
tradition does not consider the Pragam literature of the Svetambars as evidence,
and the Svetambar tradition does not consider the texts of the Digambar
tradition as valid, but when I contemplate with an impartial perspective, it is
clear that there is no significant difference in the original perspective of the
Pragam texts of both traditions. The philosophical views, Jiva views, Karma
views, Lok views, and Jnana views are the same in both Pragam texts. There is no
difference from a philosophical perspective. Even if we contemplate from the
perspective of the conduct tradition, there is no significant difference even
though there are some differences regarding the use of clothes. The texts of the
Digambar tradition emphasize nudity, but in practice, the number of naked monks
has been very small, and the number of Digambar Bhattarakas, etc.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
jaba strI adhyAtma-sAdhanA kA sarvoccapada tIrthaMkara nAmakarma kA anubandha
kara sakatI hai, kevalajJAna prApta kara sakatI hai taba dRSTivAda ke
adhyayanArtha jina durbalatAoM kI ora saMketa kiyA gayA hai aura jina
durbalatAoM ke kAraNa striyoM ko daSTivAda kI adhikAriNI nahIM mAnA gayA hai una
para vijJoM ko taTastha daSTi se gambhIra cintana karanA caahie| merI dRSTi se
pUrva-sAhitya kA jJAna labdhyAtmaka thA / usa jJAna ko prApta karane ke lie
kevala adhyayana aura par3hanA hI paryApta nahIM thA, kucha viziSTa sAdhanAeM
bhI sAdhaka ko anivArya rUpa se karanI par3atI thiiN| una sAdhanAoM ke lie usa
sAdhaka ko kucha samaya taka ekAnta-zAnta sthAna meM ekAkI bhI rahanA Avazyaka
hotA thaa| striyoM kA zArIrika saMsthAna isa prakAra kA nahIM hai ki ve ekAnta
meM ekAkI raha kara dIrgha sAdhanA kara skeN| isa dRSTi se striyoM ke lie
dRSTivAda kA adhyayana niSedha kiyA gayA ho| yaha adhika tarkasaMgata va yukti-
yukta hai / merI dRSTi se yahI kAraNa striyoM ke AhArakazarIra kI anupalabdhi
prAdi kA bhI hai| gaNadharoM dvArA saMkalita aMga granthoM ke AdhAra se anya
sthaviroM ne bAda meM granthoM kI racanA kI, ve aMgabAhya khlaaye| aMga aura
aMgabAhya ye Agama grantha hI bhagavAn mahAvIra ke zAsana ke AdhArabhUta stambha
haiN| jaina prAcAra kI kuJjI haiM, jaina vicAra kI advitIya nidhi haiM,
janasaMskRti kI garimA haiM aura jaina sAhitya kI mahimA haiN| yaha smaraNa
rakhanA cAhie ki aMgabAhya granthoM ko Agama meM sammilita karane kI prakriyA
zvetAmbara aura digambara donoM hI paramparAoM meM eka samAna nahIM rahI hai|
digambara paraMparA meM aMgabAhya AgamoM kI saMkhyA bahuta hI svalpa hai kintu
zvetAmbaroM meM yaha paramparA lambe samaya taka calatI rahI jisase aMgabAhya
granthoM kI saMkhyA adhika hai| yaha bahuta hI mahattvapUrNa bAta hai ki
prAvazyaka ke vividha adhyayana, dazavakAlika, uttarAdhyayana aura nizItha prAdi
donoM hI paramparAoM meM samAna rUpa se mAnya rahe haiN| _ zvetAmbara vidvAnoM
kI yaha mAnyatA hai ki Agama-sAhitya kA maulika svarUpa bahuta bar3e parimANa
meM lupta ho gayA hai para pUrNa nahIM, aba bhI vaha zeSa hai| aMgoM aura
aMgabAhya bhAgamoM kI jo tIna bAra saMkalanA huI usameM usake maulika rUpa meM
kucha avazya hI parivartana huA hai| uttaravartI ghaTanAoM aura vicAraNAmoM kA
samAveza bhI kiyA gayA hai| jaise sthAnAMga meM sAta nihnava aura navagaNoM kA
varNana / praznavyAkaraNa meM jisa viSaya kA saMketa kiyA gayA hai vaha
bartamAna meM upalabdha nahIM hai, tathApi AgamoM kA adhikAMza bhAga maulika
hai, sarvathA maulika hai| bhASA va racanA zailI kI dRSTi se bahuta hI prAcIna
hai| vartamAna bhASAzAstrI AcArAMga ke prathama zrutaskandha ko aura
sutrakRtAMga ke prathama zrutaskandha ko DhAI hajAra varSa prAcIna batalAte haiM
/ sthAnAMga, bhagavatI, uttarAdhyayana, dazavakAlika, nizItha aura kalpa ko bhI
ve prAcIna mAnate haiN| isameM kisI bhI prakAra kA sandeha nahIM hai ki prAgama
kA mUla prAja bhI surakSita hai| digambara paramparA kI dRSTi se aMga sAhitya
lupta ho cukA hai| ata: unhoMne navIna granthoM kA sRjana kiyA aura unheM AgamoM
kI taraha pramANabhUta mAnA / zvetAmbaroM ke prAgama-sAhitya ko digambara
paramparA pramANabhUta nahIM mAnatI hai to digambara paramparA ke granthoM ko
zvetAmbara paramparA mAnya nahIM karatI hai, para jaba maiM taTastha dRSTi se
cintana karatA to spaSTa jJAta hotA hai ki donoM hI paramparAoM ke prAgama
granthoM meM maulika dRSTi se koI vizeSa antara nahIM hai| donoM ke pAgama
granthoM meM tattvavicAra, jIvavicAra, karmavicAra, lokavicAra, jJAnavicAra
samAna hai| dArzanika dRSTi se koI antara nahIM hai| prAcAra paramparA kI dRSTi
se bhI cintana kareM to vastra ke upayoga ke sambandha meM kucha matabheda hone
para bhI vizeSa antara nahIM rhaa| digambara paramparA ke granthoM meM nagnatva
para atyadhika bala diyA gayA, kintu vyavahAra meM nagna muniyoM kI saMkhyA
bahuta hI kama rahI aura digambara bhaTTAraka Adi kI saMkhyA

Page #40 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Jain Kalpa was given more importance than the Sthavirakalpa in the
Svetambara Pragama literature, but from a practical perspective, it was
prohibited after the Aryajambhu. The Digambara tradition prohibits women from
attaining liberation, but the Digambara tradition-accepted Shatkhandagama states
that human women are adequately present in the Samyagmithyadristi,
Asanyatasamyagdristi, Sanyatasanyata, and Sanyata Gunasthanas.  In this, the
word "Sanjad" is given in a note by the editors, the gist of which is that a
human woman cannot be in the "Sanyata" Gunasthana, and upon being in the Sanyata
Gunasthana, a woman can attain liberation.  A strong atmosphere of opposition
arose in the Digambara community regarding this question, then the editors of
the text, Pandit Heerlalji Jain, etc., again explained it in the "Preface to the
Third Part of the Pakhandagama," but when scholars saw the original copy of the
Pakhandagama in Moodbidri (Karnataka), the word "Sanjad" was found in it as
well.  Vadakaraswami, in his Mulachar, analyzes the conduct of the Prayikas,
saying that the sadhus or Dharayikas who conduct themselves in this way attain
worship, fame, and happiness in the world, and attain liberation.  This also
mentions the Prayikas attaining liberation.  However, later commentators
prohibited women's liberation in their commentaries.  Of all the rules of
conduct, the most important rule is that of intended renunciation, which has
been equally important in both traditions.  In the Svetambara Pragama literature
and its explanatory literature, there is a special description of the
exceptional path regarding conduct, but there is no description of exceptions in
the Digambara tradition, but upon deep reflection, it appears that there must
have been exceptions in the Digambara tradition as well.  If there were no
exceptions from the beginning, how would the name of Nishita appear in the list
of Angavahy?  In the Svetambara tradition, the study of exceptions has been
prohibited for everyone by codifying them.  Only a Shraman with special
qualifications is considered eligible to read them.  The number of Svetambara
Shramans has been very high from the beginning, which led to the creation of
Chhedasutras for the proper functioning of society.  The Chhedasutras explain
the hidden secrets and subtle activities of Shramanachar.  Many favorable and
unfavorable situations arise in the life of a Shraman, the Chhedasutras tell how
to make decisions in such difficult situations.  The description of rules and
sub-rules regarding conduct, as is available in the Chhedasutras in the Jain
tradition, is also found in the Vinayapitaka in the Buddhist tradition, and in
the Kalpasutra, Shrotasutra, and Grihasutras in the Vedic tradition.
Chhedasutras were also created in the Digambara tradition, but they are not
available today.  The Chhedasutra is not mentioned in the Mandisutra.  The first
use of "Chhedasutra" is in Praavshakanyukti 16. Sammamicchhaittthi
Asanjadassammaittthi Sanjadasanjad (Atra Sanjad iti Pathasheshah Prabhati)
Tthaaane Niyama Pajjattiaao. -Shatkhandagama, Part 1 Sutra 93 p. 332,
Praka..-Seth Lakshmichand Shitabaray Jain Sahityoddhark Fund Office Amravati
(Berar) 1939 17. Evam Vidhaanchariyam Charitam Je Sadhavo Ya Ajjaayo / Te
Jagpujj Kitti Suham Cha Lan Sizhati / / -Mulachar 4/196, p. 168 [39]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
unase bahata adhika rhii| zvetAmbara pAgama sAhitya meM jinakalpa ko
sthavirakalpa se adhika mahattva diyA gayA kinta vyavahArika dRSTi se Arya jambU
ke pazcAt jinakalpa kA niSedha kara diyA gyaa| digambara paramparA meM strI ke
nirvANa kA niSedha kiyA hai kintu digambara paramparA mAnya SakhaNDAgama meM
manuSya-striyAM samyagamithyAdRSTi, asaMyatasamyagadaSTi, saMyatAsaMyata aura
saMyata guNasthAnoM meM niyama se paryAptaka hotI haiM / 16 isameM "saMjada"
zabda ko sampAdakoM ne TippaNa meM diyA hai, jisakA sArAMza yaha hai ki manuSya-
strI ko "saMyata" guNasthAna na ho sakatA hai aura saMyata guNasthAna hone para
strI mokSa meM jA sakatI hai| prastuta prazna ko lekara digambara samAja meM
prabala virodha kA bAtAvaraNa samutpanna huA taba grantha ke sampAdaka
paM.hIralAlajI jaina Adi ne pUnaH usakA spaSTIkaraNa "pakhaNDAgama ke tRtIya
bhAga kI prastAvanA" meM kiyA kintu jaba vijJoM ne mUDabidrI (karNATaka) meM
paTakhaNDAgama kI mUla prati dekhI to usameM bhI "saMjada" zabda milA hai|
vadakarasvAmI viracita mUlAcAra meM prAyikAmoM ke prAcAra kA vizleSaNa karate
hue kahA hai jo sAdhu athavA dhAryikA isa prakAra AcaraNa karate haiM ve jagat
meM pUjA, yaza va sukha ko pAkara mokSa ko pAte haiN| isameM bhI prAyikAoM ke
mokSa meM jAne kA ullekha hai / kintu bAda meM TIkAkAroM ne apanI TIkAoM meM
strI nirvANa kA niSedha kiyA hai| prAcAra ke jitane bhI niyama haiM unameM
mahattvapUrNa niyama uddiSTa tyAga kA hai, jisakA donoM hI paramparAmoM meM
samAna rUpa se mahattva rahA hai| zvetAmbara prAgama-sAhitya meM aura usake
vyAkhyA sAhitya meM prAcAra sambandhI apavAda mArga kA vizeSa varNana milatA hai
kintu digambara paramparA ke anyoM meM apavAda kA varNana nahIM hai, para
gaharAI se cintana karane para aisA pratIta hotA hai ki digambara paramparA meM
bhI apavAda rahe hoMge, yadi prArambha se hI apavAda nahIM hote to aMgavAhya
sUcI meM nizItha kA nAma kaise AtA ? zvetAmbara paramparA meM 'apavAdoM ko
sUtrabaddha karake bhI usakA adhyayana pratyeka vyakti ke lie niSiddha kara diyA
gyaa| vizeSa yogyatA vAlA zramaNa hI usake par3hane kA adhikArI mAnA gayA /
zvetAmbara zramaNoM kI saMkhyA prArambha se hI atyadhika rahI jisase samAja kI
suvyavasthA hetu chedasUtroM kA nirmANa haa| chedasUtroM meM zramaNAcAra ke
nigUr3ha rahasya aura sUkSma kriyA-kalApa ko samajhAyA gayA hai| zramaNa ke
jIvana meM anekAneka anukUla aura pratikUla prasaMga samupasthita hote haiM,
aisI viSama paristhiti meM kisa prakAra nirNaya lenA cAhie yaha bAta chedasUtroM
meM batAI gaI hai| prAcAra sambandhI jaisA niyama aura upaniyamoM kA varNana
jaina paramparA meM chedasUtroM meM upalabdha hotA hai vaisA hI varNana bauddha
paramparA meM vinayapiTaka meM milatA hai aura vaidika paramparA meM ke
kalpasUtra, zrotasUtra aura gRhasUtroM meM milatA hai| digambara paramparA meM
bhI chetrasUtra bane the para Aja ve upalabdha nahIM haiN| chedasUtra kA
nAmollekha mandIsUtra meM nahIM huA hai| "cheda sUtra" kA sabase prathama
prayoga prAvazyakaniyukti 16. sammAmicchAiTThi asaMjadasammAiTThi saMjadAsaMjada
(atra saMjada iti pAThazeSaH pratibhAti) TThANe NiyamA pjjttiyaao|
-SaTkhaNDAgama, bhAga 1 sUtra 93 pR. 332, prakA..-seTha lakSmIcaMda zitAbarAya
jaina sAhityoddhAraka phaNDa kAryAlaya amarAvatI (barAra) san 1939 17. evaM
vidhANacariyaM caritaM je sAdhavo ya ajjAyo / te jagapujja kitti suhaM ca laNa
sijhati / / -mUlAcAra 4/196, pR. 168 [ 39]

Page #41 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
It is green. 18 After that, this word has also been used in
*VisheshAvashyakBhashya* and *NishithBhashya*. The implication is that if we
consider *AvashyakNiyukti* to be the work of the brother of the astrologer
Varahamihira, the second Bhadrabaahu, then he lived in the sixth century Vikram.
He has used it. It is clear that the word "Chhedasutta" was used before
"Mulasutta". Why were certain *Pragamas* given the name "Chhedasutra"? The
answer to this question is not directly and clearly available in ancient texts.
However, it is clear that the sutras that have been called "Chhedasutta" are
*Prayashchitta* sutras. In *Sthananga*, five *charitras* are mentioned for the
*Shramanas* (1) *Samayik*, (2) *Chhedopasthapaniya*, (3) *PariharVishuddhi*, (4)
*SookshmaSamparaya*, (5) *Yayakhyata* / 22 Of these, the last three *charitras*
have become extinct in the present time. The *Samayik* *charitra* is short-
lived, the *Chhedopasthapanik* *charitra* lasts for life. *Prayashchitta* is
also related to this *charitra*. It is possible that the *Prayashchitta* sutras
were given the name *Chhedasutra* keeping this *charitra* in mind. In
*Malayagiri*‚Äôs *AvashyakVritti* 23, the term *pad-vibhaga*, *samachari* has been
used for *Chhedasutras*. Both the words *pad-vibhaga* and *Chhed* have been
kept. Because in *Chhedasutras*, one sutra is not connected to another sutra.
All the sutras are independent. Their interpretation is also done from the
*Chhed*-perspective or from the *vibhaga*-perspective. *DashaShrutaSkandha*,
*Nishith*, *Vyavahar* and *BrihatKalpa* these sutras have been quoted from the
ninth *Pratyakhyana* before, 24 from that, being cut off, i.e., separated, they
may have been given the name *Chhedasutra*, this is also possible / 25
*Chhedasutras* have been considered as the best *Shruta*. The *Bhashyakaras*
also support this statement. 26 *Chanikara* Jinadas Mah‡§§‡•ç‡§§‡§∞ himself raises this
question that why are *Chhedasutras* the best? Then he himself solves it by
saying that the *Prayashchitta* method is described in the *sutra*, it purifies
the *charitra*, for this reason this *Shruta* is considered the best. 18. *Jan
cha Mahakappasuyam, jani asesani Chheasuttani / Charanakarananuprago ti
kaliyatthe uvamyani / / -AvashyakNiyukti 777 -VisheshAvashyakBhashya 2265 20.
(a) *ChhedasuttaniSihaadi, atyo ya gato ya Chhedasuttaadi /
MantanimittoSahipahude, ya gati annath / / NishithBhashya 5947 (b) See also
Canonical Literature p. 36. 21. *JainAgamDhar* and *Prakrit Vangmay* -Author
Punyavijayaji, ‚Äî-Muni Hazarimala SmritiGranth, p. 718 22. (a) *SthanangaSutra*
5, *Uddeshak* 2, *Sutra* 428 (b) *VisheshAvashyakBhashya* Ga. 1260-1270 23.
*Padvibhaga, Samachari Chhedasutrani / -AvashyakNiyukti 665, MalayagiriVritti
24. *Kataram Suttam? Dasaukappo Vabaharo ya / Kataraato uddhrtam? Uchyate
pacchakkhana-puthavaao. -DashaShrutaSkandhaChuni, Patra 2 25. *Nishith* 19 / 17
26. *ChheyasuyamuttamSuyam / -NishithBhashya, 6148 [40]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
meM harA hai|18 usake pazcAt vizeSAvazyakabhASya aura nizIthabhASya' mAdi meM
bhI yaha zabda vyavahRta huA hai| tAtparya yaha hai ki hama aAvazyakaniyukti ko
yadi jyotirvida varAhamihira ke bhrAtA dvitIya bhadrabAha kI kRti mAnate haiM to
ve vikrama kI chaThI zatAbdI meM hue haiN| unhoMne isakA prayoga kiyA hai|
spaSTa hai ki "chedasutta" zabda kA prayoga "mUlasutta" se pahale huA hai| amuka
prAgamoM ko "chedasUtra" yaha abhidhA kyoM dI gaI ? isa prazna kA uttara prAcIna
granthoM meM sIdhA aura spaSTa prApta nahIM hai| hA~ yaha spaSTa hai ki jina
sUtroM ko "chedasutta" kahA gayA hai ve prAyazcittasUtra haiN| sthAnAGga meM
zramaNoM ke lie pAMca cAritroM kA ullekha hai (1) sAmAyika, (2)
chedopasthApanIya, (3) parihAravizuddhi, (4) sUkSmasaMparAya, (5) yayAkhyAta /
22 inameM se vartamAna meM tIna antima cAritra vicchinna ho gaye haiN| sAmAyika
cAritra svalpakAlIna hotA hai, chedopasthApanika cAritra hI jIvana paryanta
rahatA hai| prAyazcitta kA sambandha bhI isI cAritra se hai| saMbhavata: isI
cAritra ko lakSya meM rakhakara prAyazcittasUtroM ko chedasUtra kI saMjJA dI gaI
ho| malayagiri kI AvazyakavRtti 23 meM chedasUtroM ke lie pada-vibhAga, samAcArI
zabda kA prayoga hamA hai| pada-vibhAga aura cheda ye donoM zabda rakhe gaye
hoN| kyoMki chedasUtroM meM eka sUtra kA dUsare sUtra se sambandha nahIM hai|
sabhI sUtra svataMtra haiN| unakI vyAkhyA bhI cheda-daSTi se yA vibhAga-daSTi se
kI jAtI hai| dazAzrutaskandha, nizItha, vyavahAra aura bRhatkalpa ye sUtra
nauveM pratyAkhyAna pUrva se uddhRta kiye gaye haiM,24 usase chinna arthAt
pRthak karane se unheM chedasUtra kI saMjJA dI gaI ho, yaha bhI sambhava hai /
25 chedasUtroM ko uttama zruta mAnA gayA hai| bhASyakAra bhI isa kathana kA
samarthana karate haiN|26 caNikAra jinadAsa mahattara svayaM yaha prazna
upasthita karate haiM ki chedasUtra uttama kyoM haiM ? phira svayaM hI usakA
samAdhAna dete kidasatra meM prAyazcittavidhi kA nirUpaNa hai, usase cAritra kI
vizuddhi hotI hai, etadartha yaha zrata uttama mAnA 18. jaM ca mahAkappasuyaM,
jANi asesANi cheasuttANi / caraNakaraNANuprogo ti kAliyatthe uvamayANi / /
-Avazyakaniyukti 777 -vizeSAvazyakabhASya 2265 20. (ka) chedasuttaNisIhAdI, atyo
ya gato ya chedasuttAdI / maMtanimittosahipAhUDe, ya gAti aNNAttha / /
nizIthabhApya 5947 (kha) kenonikala liTarecara pR. 36 bhI dekhie| 21.
jainAgamadhara aura prAkRta vAGmaya -lekhaka puNyavijayajI, ---muni hajArImala
smRtigrantha, pR. 718 22. (ka) sthAnAMgasUtra 5, uddezaka 2, sUtra 428 (kha)
vizeSAvazyakabhASya gA. 1260-1270 23. padavibhAga, samAcArI chedasUtrANi /
-Avazyakaniyukti 665, malayagirivRtti 24. kataraM suttaM ? dasAukappo vabahAro
ya / katarAto uddhRtaM ? ucyate pcckkhaann-putthvaao| -dazAzrutaskaMghacUNi,
patra 2 25. nizIdha 19 / 17 26. cheyasuyamuttamasuyaM / -nizIthabhASya, 6148
[40]

Page #42 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
It has gone. A comprehensive discussion of the practice of the Shraman life is
available only in the Cheda Sutras. What are the limitations of the seeker, what
is his duty? Such questions have been pondered upon in them. To cut out the
element of unrestraint from life, to cleanse the practice of its impurities, to
be fully vigilant to avoid mistakes, to take atonement and rectify them if
mistakes are made, all this is the work of the Cheda Sutras. / In Samachari
Shatak, Time Sundargani has stated the number of Cheda Sutras to be six: (1)
Mahanishith, (2) Dasha Shruta Skandha, (3) Vyavahar, (4) Brihat Kalp, (5)
Nishith, (6) Jit Kalp / Except for Jit Kalp, the names of the remaining five
Sutras are also found in Nandi Sutra. Jit Kalp is the work of Jinbhadragani
Kshamasraman, therefore it cannot be placed in the category of Agam. / The
present version of Mahanishith is a restoration by Acharya Haribhadra (8th
century AD). It had been consumed by termites before that. Therefore, the
Mahanishith available today also does not find a place in the category of Agam.
Thus, there are only four original Cheda Sutras - (1) Dasha Shruta Skandha, (2)
Vyavahar, (3) Brihat Kalp and (4) Nishith / The Jain Agams have been created in
two ways (1) Krit, (2) Ni! Hit / The Agams that have been created independently
are called Krit Agams. For example, the Dvadasangi was created by the Ganadharas
and the Upanga literature was created by different sthaviras, they are all Krit
Pagams. Ni! Hit Agams are considered to be - (1) Acharachula (2) Dashakalik (3)
Nishith (4) Dasha Shruta Skandha (5) Brihat Kalp (6) Vyavahar (7)
Uttaradhyayanas's Parisha Adhyayan. Acharachula has been elaborated by
Chaturdashapurvi Bhadrabahu, this fact has become clear through investigation
today. The style of composition of Acharachula is completely different from
Acharang. It was composed after Acharang. The Acharang-Niyuktikar has considered
it to be sthavir. The meaning of sthavir has been given as Ganadhar by
Charnikar. 1. Cheyasuyam kamha uttamasuttam? Bhannami jamha ettham sapayachitto
vidhi bhannati, jamha etegaracharanvishuddham kareti, tamha tam uttamasuttam /
Nishith Bhashya 6184's Chuni 2. Samachari Shatak, Agam Sthapanadhikari. 3.
Kaliyam anegavihann pannattam, tam jaha dasao, kappo, vavharo, niseeh,
mahaniseeh / -Nandi Sutra 77 4. Agamyug ka Jain Darshan, p. 21-22, Pan. Dalsukh
Bhai Malvaniya - Prakashan Sanmati Gyanpeeth, Agra 5. Therehi'anuggahatta,
sisehi hou pagauttham cha / Ayarao aththo, payarangesu pavibhatto //
-Acharangniyukti Ga. 287 6. There Ganadhara. Acharangchuni, p. 326 [ 41 ]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
gayA hai| zramaNa-jIvana kI sAdhanA kA sarvAGgINa vivecana chedasUtroM meM hI
upalabdha hotA hai| sAdhaka kI kyA maryAdA hai, usakA kyA karttavya hai ? ityAdi
praznoM para unameM cintana kiyA gayA hai| jIvana meM se asaMyama ke aMza ko
kATakara pRthaka karanA, sAdhanA meM se doSajanya malinatA ko nikAlakara sApha
karanA, bhUloM se bacane ke lie pUrNa sAvadhAna rahanA, bhUla ho jAne para
prAyazcitta grahaNa kara usakA parimArjana karanA, yaha saba chedasUtroM kA
kArya hai / samAcArIzataka meM samayasundaragaNI ne chedasUtroM kI saMkhyA chaha
batalAI hai:(1) mahAnizItha, (2) dazAzrutaskaMdha, (3) vyavahAra, (4)
bRhatkalpa, (5) nizItha, (6) jItakalpa / jItakalpa ko chor3akara zeSa pAca
sUtroM ke nAma nandIsUtra meM bhI pAye haiN| jItakalpa jinabhadragaNI
kSamAzramaNa kI kRti hai, etadartha use Agama kI koTi meM sthAna nahIM diyA jA
sakatA / mahAnizItha kA jo vartamAna saMskaraNa hai, vaha AcArya haribhadra (vi.
8 vIM zatAbdI) ke dvArA punaruddhAra kiyA huA hai| usakA usake pUrva hI dImakoM
ne udarastha kara liyA gayA thaa| ataH vartamAna meM upalabdha mahAnizItha bhI
Agama kI koTi meM nahIM paataa| isa prakAra maulika chedasUtra cAra hI haiM-(1)
dazAzrutaskandha, (2) vyavahAra, (3) bRhatkalpa aura (4) nizItha / nie hita
Agama jaina AgamoM kI racanAeM do prakAra se huI hai(1) kRta, (2) ni! hita /
jina AgamoM kA nirmANa svataMtra rUpa se huA hai ve Agama kRta kahalAte haiN|
jaise gaNadharoM ke dvArA dvAdazAMgI kI racanA kI gaI hai aura bhinna-bhinna
sthaviroM ke dvArA upAMga sAhitya kA nirmANa kiyA gayA hai, ve saba kRta pAgama
haiN| ni! hita Agama ye mAne gaye haiM - (1) AcAracUlA (2) dazavakAlika (3)
nizItha (4) dazAzrutaskandha (5) bRhatkalpa (6) vyavahAra (7) uttarAdhyayana kA
parISaha adhyyn| prAcAraculA yaha caturdazapUrvI bhadrabAhu ke dvArA nirvRhaNa
kI gaI hai, yaha bAta aAja anveSaNA ke dvArA spaSTa ho cukI hai| prAcArAMga se
prAcAracUlA kI racanA-zailI sarvathA pRthak hai| usakI racanA AcArAMga ke bAda
huI hai| AcArAMga-niyuktikAra ne usako sthavirakRta mAnA hai|' sthavira kA artha
carNikAra ne gaNadhara kiyA hai| 1. cheyasuyaM kamhA uttamasuttaM ? bhaNNAmi
jamhA etthaM sapAyacchitto vidhI bhaNNati, jamhA etegaccaraNavizuddhaM kareti,
tamhA taM uttamasuttaM / nizIthabhASya 6184 kI cUNi 2. samAcArIzataka, Agama
sthaapnaadhikaar| 3. kAliyaM aNegavihaM paNNattaM, taM jahAdasAo, kappo,
vavahAro, nisIha, mahAnisIha / -nandIsUtra 77 4. Agamayuga kA jainadarzana, pR0
21-22, paM0 dalasukhabhAI mAlavaNiyA -prakAzaka sanmati jJAnapITha, AgarA 5.
tharehi'NuggahaTThA, sIsahi hou pAgautthaM ca / AyArAo attho, pAyAraMgesu
pavibhatto // -AcArAMganiyukti gA0 287 6. there gnndhraa| AcArAMgacUNi, pR0 326
[ 41 ]

Page #43 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
And the commentator has done the fourteen ‡§™‡•Ç‡§∞‡•ç‡§µ‡•Ä, but the name of the ‡§∏‡•ç‡§•‡§µ‡§ø‡§∞ has
not come in them. The opinion of the learned is that the word ‡§∏‡•ç‡§•‡§µ‡§ø‡§∞ here is
used for the fourteen ‡§™‡•Ç‡§∞‡•ç‡§µ‡•Ä ‡§≠‡§¶‡•ç‡§∞‡§¨‡§æ‡§π‡•Å. To express the profound meaning of the
‡§Ü‡§ö‡§æ‡§∞‡§æ‡§Ç‡§ó, the "‡§Ü‡§ö‡§æ‡§∞‡§ö‡•Ç‡§≤‡§æ" has been created. The commentator has indicated the
‡§®‡§ø‡§∞‡•ç‡§Ø‡§π‡•Ç‡§£‡§∏‡•ç‡§•‡§≤ of the five ‡§ö‡•Ç‡§≤‡§æ. The ‡§¶‡§∂‡§µ‡§ï‡§æ‡§≤‡§ø‡§ï fourteen ‡§™‡•Ç‡§∞‡•ç‡§µ‡•Ä ‡§∂‡§Ø‡•ç‡§Ø‡§Ç‡§≠‡§µ has been
‡§®‡§ø!‡§π‡§£ by the various ‡§™‡•Ç‡§∞‡•ç‡§µ‡•ã. For example, the fourth study is taken from the
‡§Ü‡§§‡•ç‡§Æ‡§™‡•ç‡§∞‡§µ‡§æ‡§¶ ‡§™‡•Ç‡§∞‡•ç‡§µ, the fifth study from the ‡§ï‡§∞‡•ç‡§Æ‡§™‡•ç‡§∞‡§µ‡§æ‡§¶ ‡§™‡•Ç‡§∞‡•ç‡§µ, the seventh study
from the ‡§∏‡§§‡•ç‡§Ø‡§™‡•ç‡§∞‡§µ‡§æ‡§¶ ‡§™‡•Ç‡§∞‡•ç‡§µ, and the remaining studies are taken from the third
‡§µ‡§∏‡•ç‡§§‡•Å of the ‡§™‡•ç‡§∞‡§§‡•ç‡§Ø‡§æ‡§ñ‡•ç‡§Ø‡§æ‡§® ‡§™‡•Ç‡§∞‡•ç‡§µ. According to the second opinion, the ‡§¶‡§∂‡§µ‡§ï‡§æ‡§≤‡§ø‡§ï
‡§ó‡§£‡§ø‡§™‡§ø‡§ü‡§ï is quoted from the ‡§¶‡•ç‡§µ‡§æ‡§¶‡§∂‡§æ‡§Ç‡§ó‡•Ä. The ‡§®‡§ø‡§∂‡•Ä‡§• has been ‡§®‡§ø!‡§π‡§£ from the ninth
‡§™‡•Ç‡§∞‡•ç‡§µ called ‡§™‡•ç‡§∞‡§§‡•ç‡§Ø‡§æ‡§ñ‡•ç‡§Ø‡§æ‡§®. The ‡§™‡•ç‡§∞‡§§‡•ç‡§Ø‡§æ‡§ñ‡•ç‡§Ø‡§æ‡§® ‡§™‡•Ç‡§∞‡•ç‡§µ has twenty ‡§µ‡§∏‡•ç‡§§‡•Å, i.e.,
‡§Ö‡§∞‡•ç‡§•‡§æ‡§ß‡§ø‡§ï‡§æ‡§∞. The name of the third ‡§µ‡§∏‡•ç‡§§‡•Å is ‡§Ü‡§ö‡§æ‡§∞. It also has twenty
‡§™‡•ç‡§∞‡§æ‡§≠‡•É‡§§‡§ö‡•ç‡§õ‡•á‡§¶, i.e., subdivisions. The ‡§®‡§ø‡§∂‡•Ä‡§• has been ‡§®‡§ø'‡§π‡§£ from the twentieth
‡§™‡•ç‡§∞‡§æ‡§≠‡•Ç‡§§‡§ö‡•ç‡§õ‡•á‡§¶. According to the ‡§™‡§Ç‡§ö‡§ï‡§≤‡•ç‡§™‡§ö‡•Ç‡§£‡§ø, the ‡§®‡§ø‡§∞‡•ç‡§Ø‡•Å ‡§π‡§ï of ‡§®‡§ø‡§∂‡•Ä‡§• is
‡§≠‡§¶‡•ç‡§∞‡§¨‡§æ‡§π‡•Å‡§∏‡•ç‡§µ‡§æ‡§Æ‡•Ä. This opinion has also been supported by the ‡§™‡•ç‡§∞‡§æ‡§ó‡§Æ‡§™‡•ç‡§∞‡§≠‡§æ‡§µ‡§ï
‡§Æ‡•Å‡§®‡§ø‡§∂‡•ç‡§∞‡•Ä ‡§™‡•Å‡§£‡•ç‡§Ø‡§µ‡§ø‡§ú‡§Ø‡§ú‡•Ä. 1. "‡§∏‡•ç‡§•‡§µ‡§ø‡§∞‡•à‡§É" ‡§∂‡•ç‡§∞‡•Å‡§§‡§µ‡•É‡§¶‡•ç‡§ß‡§∂‡•ç‡§ö‡§§‡•Å‡§∞‡•ç‡§¶‡§∂‡§™‡•Ç‡§∞‡•ç‡§µ‡§µ‡§ø‡§¶‡•ç‡§≠‡§ø‡§É  /  2.
‡§¨‡§ø‡§Æ‡§∏‡•ç‡§∏ ‡§Ø ‡§™‡§Ç‡§ö‡§Æ‡§è, ‡§Ö‡§ü‡•ç‡§†‡§Æ‡§ó‡§∏‡•ç‡§∏ ‡§¨‡§ø‡§á‡§Ø‡§Ç‡§Æ‡§ø ‡§â‡§¶‡•ç‡§¶‡•á‡§∏‡•á  /  ‡§≠‡§£‡§ø‡§ì ‡§™‡§ø‡§°‡•ã ‡§∏‡§ø‡§ú‡•ç‡§ú‡§æ, ‡§µ‡§§‡•ç‡§•‡§Ç ‡§™‡§æ‡§â‡§ó‡•ç‡§ó‡§π‡•ã
‡§ö‡•á‡§µ  /  /  ‡§™‡§Ç‡§ö‡§Æ‡§ó‡§∏‡•ç‡§∏ ‡§ö‡§â‡§§‡•ç‡§•‡•á ‡§á‡§∞‡§ø‡§Ø‡§æ, ‡§µ‡§£‡§ø‡§ú‡•ç‡§ú‡§à ‡§∏‡§Æ‡§æ‡§∏‡•á‡§£‡§Ç  /  ‡§õ‡•Å‡§ü‡•ç‡§†‡§∏‡•ç‡§∏ ‡§Ø ‡§™‡§Ç‡§ö‡§Æ‡§è,
‡§≠‡§æ‡§∏‡§ú‡•ç‡§ú‡§æ‡§Ø‡§Ç ‡§µ‡§ø‡§Ø‡§æ‡§£‡§æ‡§π‡§ø  /  ‡§∏‡§§‡•ç‡§§‡§ø‡§ï‡•ç‡§ï‡§ó‡§æ‡§£‡§ø ‡§∏‡§§‡•ç‡§§‡§µ‡§ø, ‡§®‡§ø‡§ú‡•ç‡§ú‡§¢‡§æ‡§à ‡§Æ‡§π‡§æ‡§™‡§∞‡§ø‡§®‡•ç‡§®‡§æ‡§ì‡•§ ‡§∏‡§§‡•ç‡§•‡§™‡§∞‡§ø‡§®‡•ç‡§®‡§æ
‡§≠‡§æ‡§µ‡§£, ‡§®‡§ø‡§ú‡•ç‡§ú‡•Ç‡§¢‡§æ‡§®‡•ã ‡§ß‡•Å‡§Ø‡§µ‡§ø‡§Æ‡•Å‡§§‡•ç‡§§‡•Ä  /  /  ‡§Ü‡§Ø‡§æ‡§∞‡§™‡§ï‡§™‡•ç‡§™‡•ã ‡§™‡•Å‡§£, ‡§™‡§ö‡•ç‡§ö‡§ï‡•ç‡§ñ‡§æ‡§£‡§∏‡•ç‡§∏ ‡§§‡§á‡§Ø‡§µ‡§§‡•ç‡§•‡•Ç‡§™‡•ç‡§∞‡•ã‡•§
‡§Ü‡§Ø‡§æ‡§∞‡§®‡§æ‡§Æ‡§ß‡§ø‡§ú‡•ç‡§ú‡§æ, ‡§µ‡•Ä‡§∏‡§á‡§Æ‡§æ ‡§™‡§æ‡§π‡•Å‡§°‡§ö‡•ç‡§õ‡•á‡§Ø‡§æ  //  -‡§™‡•ç‡§∞‡§æ‡§ö‡§æ‡§∞‡§æ‡§Ç‡§ó‡§®‡§ø‡§Ø‡•Å‡§ï‡•ç‡§§‡§ø ‡§ó‡§æ‡•¶ 288-291 3.
‡§™‡§æ‡§Ø‡§™‡•ç‡§™‡§µ‡§æ‡§Ø ‡§™‡•Å‡§¨‡•ç‡§µ‡§æ ‡§®‡§ø‡§ú‡•ç‡§ú‡•Ç‡§¢‡§æ ‡§π‡•ã‡§á ‡§ß‡§Æ‡•ç‡§Æ‡§™‡§®‡•ç‡§®‡§§‡•Ä‡•§ ‡§ï‡§Æ‡•ç‡§™‡§™‡•ç‡§™‡§µ‡§æ‡§Ø ‡§™‡•Å‡§¨‡•ç‡§¨‡§æ ‡§™‡§ø‡§Ç‡§°‡§∏‡•ç‡§∏ ‡§â ‡§è‡§∏‡§£‡§æ
‡§§‡§ø‡§µ‡§ø‡§ß‡§æ  /  /  ‡§∏‡§ö‡•ç‡§ö‡§Ø‡•ç‡§™‡§µ‡§æ‡§Ø ‡§™‡•Å‡§µ‡•ç‡§µ‡§æ ‡§®‡§ø‡§ú‡•ç‡§ú‡•Ç‡§¢‡§æ ‡§π‡•ã‡§á ‡§¨‡§ï‡•ç‡§ï‡§∏‡•Å‡§¶‡•ç‡§ß‡•Ä ‡§â  /  ‡§Ö‡§µ‡§∏‡•á‡§∏‡§æ ‡§®‡§ø‡§ú‡•ç‡§ú‡§¢‡§æ
‡§®‡§µ‡§Æ‡§∏‡•ç‡§∏ ‡§â ‡§§‡§á‡§Ø‡§µ‡§§‡•ç‡§•‡•Ç‡§Ø‡•ã‡•§ -‡§¶‡§∂‡§µ‡§ï‡§æ‡§≤‡§ø‡§ï‡§®‡§ø‡§Ø‡•Å‡§ï‡•ç‡§§‡§ø ‡§ó‡§æ‡•¶ 16-17 ‡§¨‡•Ä‡§Æ‡•ã‡§Ω‡§µ‡§ø ‡§Ö ‡§Ü‡§è‡§∏‡•ã, ‡§ó‡§£‡§ø‡§™‡§ø‡§°‡§ó‡§æ‡§ì
‡§¶‡•Å‡§µ‡§æ‡§≤‡§∏‡§Ç‡§ó‡§æ‡§Ø‡•ã‡•§ ‡§è‡§Ö‡§Ç ‡§ï‡§ø‡§∞ ‡§£‡§ø‡§ú‡•ç‡§ú‡•Ç‡§¢‡§Ç ‡§Æ‡§£‡§ó‡§∏‡•ç‡§∏ ‡§Ö‡§£‡•Å‡§ó‡§æ‡§π‡§ü‡§æ‡§è  /  - ‡§¶‡§∂‡§µ‡§ï‡§æ‡§≤‡§ø‡§ï‡§®‡§ø‡§Ø‡•Å‡§ï‡•ç‡§§‡§ø ‡§ó‡§æ. 18
‡§£‡§ø‡§∏‡•Ä‡§π‡§Ç ‡§£‡§µ‡§Æ‡§æ ‡§™‡•Å‡§¨‡•ç‡§µ‡§æ ‡§™‡§ö‡•ç‡§ö‡§ï‡•ç‡§ñ‡§æ‡§£‡§∏‡•ç‡§∏ ‡§§‡§§‡§ø‡§Ø‡§µ‡§§‡•ç‡§•‡•Ç‡§ì‡•§ ‡§Ü‡§Ø‡§æ‡§∞ ‡§®‡§æ‡§Æ‡§ß‡•á‡§ú‡•ç‡§ú‡§æ, ‡§µ‡•Ä‡§∏‡§§‡§ø‡§Æ‡§æ ‡§™‡§æ‡§π‡•Å‡§°‡§ö‡•ç‡§õ‡•á‡§¶‡§æ
/  ‚Äî‡§®‡§ø‡§∂‡•Ä‡§•‡§≠‡§æ‡§∑‡•ç‡§Ø 6500 6. ‡§≤‡•á‡§£ ‡§≠‡§ó‡§µ‡§§‡§æ ‡§Ü‡§Ø‡§æ‡§∞‡§™‡§ï‡§™‡•ç‡§™-‡§¶‡§∏‡§æ-‡§ï‡§™‡•ç‡§™-‡§µ‡§µ‡§π‡§æ‡§∞‡§æ ‡§Ø ‡§®‡§µ‡§Æ‡§™‡•Å‡§¨‡§®‡•Ä‡§∏‡§Ç‡§¶‡§≠‡•Ç‡§§‡§æ
‡§®‡§ø‡§ú‡•ç‡§ú‡•Ç‡§¢‡§æ  /   ‡§™‡§Ç‡§ö‡§ï‡§≤‡•ç‡§™‡§ö‡•Ç‡§£‡§ø, ‡§™‡§§‡•ç‡§∞ 1 (‡§≤‡§ø‡§ñ‡§ø‡§§) 7. ‡§¨‡•É‡§π‡§§‡•ç‡§ï‡§≤‡•ç‡§™‡§∏‡•Ç‡§§‡•ç‡§∞, ‡§≠‡§æ‡§ó 6, ‡§™‡•ç‡§∞‡§∏‡•ç‡§§‡§æ‡§µ‡§®‡§æ
‡§™‡•É. 3 [42]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
aura vRttikAra ne caturdazapUrvI kiyA hai kintu unameM sthavira kA nAma nahIM
AyA hai| vijJoM kA abhimata hai ki yahA~ para sthavira zabda kA prayoga
caturdazapUrvI bhadrabAhu ke lie hI huA hai| AcArAMga ke gambhIra artha ko
abhivyakta karane ke lie "AcAracUlA" kA nirmANa huA hai / niyuktikAra ne pAMcoM
cUlAoM ke niryahUNasthaloM kA saMketa kiyA hai| dazavakAlika caturdazapUrvI
zayyaMbhava ke dvArA vibhinna pUrvo se ni!haNa kiyA gayA hai / jaise-caturtha
adhyayana AtmapravAda pUrva se, paMcama adhyayana karmapravAda pUrva se, saptama
adhyayana satyapravAda pUrva se aura zeSa adhyayana pratyAkhyAna pUrva kI tRtIya
vastu se uddhata kiye gaye haiN|' dvitIya abhimatAnusAra dazavakAlika gaNipiTaka
dvAdazAMgI se uddhRta hai| nizItha kA ni! haNa pratyAkhyAna nAmaka nauveM pUrva
se huA hai| pratyAkhyAna pUrva ke bIsa vastu arthAt arthAdhikAra haiN| tRtIya
vastu kA nAma AcAra hai| usake bhI bIsa prAbhRtaccheda arthAt upavibhAga haiN|
bIsaveM prAbhUtaccheda se nizItha kA ni' haNa kiyA gayA hai| paMcakalpacUNi ke
anusAra nizItha ke niryu haka bhadrabAhusvAmI hai| isa mata kA samarthana
prAgamaprabhAvaka munizrI puNyavijayajI ne bhI kiyA hai| 1. "sthaviraiH"
zrutavRddhazcaturdazapUrvavidbhiH / 2. bimassa ya paMcamae, aTThamagassa
biiyaMmi uddese / bhaNio piDo sijjA, vatthaM pAuggaho ceva / / paMcamagassa
cautthe iriyA, vaNijjaI samAseNaM / chuTThassa ya paMcamae, bhAsajjAyaM viyANAhi
/ sattikkagANi sattavi, nijjaDhAI mhaaprinnaao| satthaparinnA bhAvaNa,
nijjUDhAno dhuyavimuttI / / AyArapakappo puNa, paccakkhANassa tiyvtthuupro|
AyAranAmadhijjA, vIsaimA pAhuDaccheyA // -prAcArAMganiyukti gA0 288-291 3.
pAyappavAya pubvA nijjUDhA hoi dhmmpnntii| kampappavAya pubbA piMDassa u esaNA
tividhA / / saccaypavAya puvvA nijjUDhA hoi bakkasuddhI u / avasesA nijjaDhA
navamassa u tiyvtthuuyo| -dazavakAlikaniyukti gA0 16-17 bImo'vi a Aeso,
gaNipiDagAo duvaalsNgaayo| eaM kira NijjUDhaM maNagassa aNugAhaTAe / -
dazavakAlikaniyukti gA. 18 NisIhaM NavamA pubvA paccakkhANassa ttiyvtthuuo|
AyAra nAmadhejjA, vIsatimA pAhuDacchedA / --nizIthabhASya 6500 6. leNa bhagavatA
AyArapakappa-dasA-kappa-vavahArA ya navamapubanIsaMdabhUtA nijjUDhA /
paMcakalpacUNi, patra 1 (likhita) 7. bRhatkalpasUtra, bhAga 6, prastAvanA pR. 3
[42]

Page #44 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
"The Dasha-Shruta-Skandha, Brihat-Kalpa and Vyavahar, all three are considered
to be abridged versions of the original fourteen Purvas by Bhadra-Bahu Swami.
According to the Dasha-Shruta-Skandha's own statement, the currently available
Dasha-Shruta-Skandha is shorter than the original Dasha-Shruta-Skandha found in
the Angas. This abridgment was done by the Sthaviras for the benefit of their
disciples. According to the Churni, the name of the Sthavira is Bhadra-Bahu.
The second study of the Uttaradhyayanas is also considered to be an Anga-
Prabhava. According to Bhadra-Bahu, the author of the abridgment, it is an
excerpt from the seventeenth Prabhrit of the Karma-Pravada-Purva. In addition to
these, a large part of the extra-Anga literature, especially the Karma
literature, is considered to be abridged from the original.  It is important to
clarify the meaning of the term "niyuhita" (abridged) in relation to these
works. The Tirthankaras are the ones who provide the essence of the meaning, the
Sutrakara (author of the Sutras) is Ganadhara, and the ones who are credited
with the current abridged form are the ones whose names are inscribed or known.
For example, the author of the Dasha-Kalika is Shayambhava, and the author of
the Kalpa, Vyavahar, Nishita and Dasha-Shruta-Skandha is Bhadra-Bahu.  Both the
Svetambara and Digambara sects agree on the number of Jain Anga literature. They
both accept twelve Angas. However, this is not the case with the number of
extra-Anga Agamas, as they have different opinions. Some consider the number of
Agamas to be 84, some 45, and some 32. The list of Agamas given in the Nandi-
Sutras does not include all the Agamas that are currently available. The
Svetambara Murtipujak community considers 45 Agamas, including some abridgments
along with the original Agamas, while some consider 84. The Stanakvasi and
Terapanthi traditions consider only 32 to be authoritative. The Digambara
community believes that all the original Agamas have been lost.  1. Vandami
Bhaddabahum, Pai·πáam Chariya SayalasuyƒÅ·πái / So Suttasssa Karagamisan (·πáam) Dasasu
Kappe Ya VavahƒÅre / Dasha-Shruta-Skandha Niyukti Ga.1, Patra 1 2. Dahariyo U
ImƒÅno, Ajja·πáesu Mahaiyo Angesu / Chhasu NƒÅyƒÅdiyesu, Vatthavibh≈´sƒÅvasƒÅ·πáamiv //
Dahariyo U ImƒÅo, Nijj≈´·∏çhƒÅyo A·πáuggaha·π≠·π≠ƒÅe. Tharehi·πÅ Tu DasƒÅno, Jo DasƒÅ JƒÅ·πáao Jƒ´vo
/ ‚ÄîDasha-Shruta-Skandha Niyukti 5-6 Dasha-Shruta-Skandha Churni / 3.
Kamppappayapubve Sattarase PƒÅhu·∏çammi Jam Suttam / Sa·πáayam SodahƒÅra·πáam Tam Cheva
Ihampi GƒÅyabvam / / -Uttaradhyayanas Niyukti Ga.69 4. (a) Tattvartha-Sutras
1-20, Shruta-Sagariyavritti. (b) Shatkhandaga (Dhavla Tika) Khand 1, p. 6 5.
Barah Angavijjha /"

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
dazAzrutaskandha, bRhatkalpa aura vyavahAra, ye tInoM pAgama caturdazapUrvI
bhadrabAhusvAmI ke dvArA pratyAkhyAnapUrva se niyUMDha haiN|' dazAzrutaskandha
kI niyukti ke mantavyAnusAra vartamAna meM upalabdha dazAzrutaskaMdha
aMgapraviSTa AgamoM meM jo dazAeM prApta haiM, unase laghu haiN| inakA niyUhaNa
ziSyoM ke anugrahArtha sthaviroM ne kiyA thaa| cUrNi ke anusAra sthavira kA nAma
bhadrabAhu hai| _ uttarAdhyayana kA dUsarA adhyayana bhI aMga-prabhava mAnA jAtA
hai / niyuktikAra bhadrabAhu ke matAnusAra vaha karmapravAdapUrva ke satrahaveM
prAbhRta se uddhRta hai| inake atirikta Agametara sAhitya meM vizeSataH
karmasAhitya kA bahuta-sA bhAga pUrvoddhRta mAnA jAtA hai| niyU hita kRtiyoM ke
sambandha meM yaha spaSTIkaraNa karanA Avazyaka hai ki usake artha ke prarUpaka
tIrthaMkara haiM, sUtra ke racayitA gaNadhara haiM aura jo saMkSepa meM usakA
vartamAna rUpa upalabdha hai usake kartA vahI haiM jina para jinakA nAma aMkita
yA prasiddha hai| jaise dazavakAlika ke zayyaMbhava; kalpa, vyavahAra, nizItha
aura dazAzrutaskaMdha ke racayitA bhadrabAhu haiN| jaina aMga-sAhitya kI saMkhyA
ke sambandha meM zvetAmbara aura digambara sabhI ekamata haiN| sabhI aMgoM ko
bAraha svIkAra karate haiN| parantu aMgabAhya AgamoM kI saMkhyA ke sambandha meM
yaha bAta nahIM hai, unake vibhinna mata hai / yahI kAraNa hai ki AgamoM kI
saMkhyA kitane hI 84 mAnate haiM, koI-koI 45 mAnate haiM aura kitane hI 32
mAnate haiM / nandIsUtra meM AgamoM kI jo sUcI dI gaI hai, ve sabhI Agama
vartamAna meM upalabdha nahIM haiN| zvetAmbara mUrtipUjaka samAja mUla prAgamoM
ke sAtha kucha niyuktiyoM ko milAkara 45 Agama mAnatA hai aura koI 84 mAnate
haiN| sthAnakavAsI aura terApaMthI paramparA battIsa ko hI pramANabhUta mAnatI
hai| digambara samAja kI mAnyatA hai ki sabhI prAgama vicchinna ho gaye haiN| 1.
vaMdAmi bhaddabAhuM, pAINaM cariya sayalasuyaNANi / so suttassa kAragamisaM
(NaM) dasAsu kappe ya vavahAre / dazAzrutaskaMdha niyukti gA.1, patra 1 2.
DaharIo u imAno, ajjhayaNesu mahaIo aMgesu / chasu nAyAdIesu,
vatthavibhUsAvasANamiva // DaharIyo u imAo, nijjUDhAyo annugghttttaae| tharehiM
tu dasAno, jo dasA jANao jIvo / --dazAzrutaskaMdhaniyukti 5-6
dazAzrutaskaMdhacUNi / kampappavAyapubve sattarase pAhuDaMmi jaM suttaM /
saNayaM sodAharaNaM taM ceva ihaMpi gAyabvaM / / -uttarAdhyayananiyUkti gA.69 5.
(ka) tattvArthasUtra 1-20, zrutasAgarIya vRtti| (kha) SaTkhaNDAgama (dhavalA
TIkA) khaNDa 1, pR. 6 bAraha aMgavijjhA /

Page #45 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Dasha Shruta Skandha is a Cheda Sutra. The Cheda Sutra has two functions: to
protect from faults and to provide atonement for faults committed inadvertently.
It contains provisions for avoiding faults. In the Thananga, it is known as
Prachar Dasha. The Dasha Shruta Skandha has ten studies, hence its name. The
Dasha Shruta Skandha has 1830 Anushtup Shlokas in the available text. There are
216 Gadyasutras and 52 Padya Sutras. The first Uddeshak describes 20 Asamadhi
Sthanas. Samadhi is the state of mind that is peaceful and remains on the path
of liberation through knowledge, vision, and conduct. Asamadhi is the state of
mind that is disturbed and restless, and leads the soul away from the path of
liberation through knowledge, vision, and conduct. There are twenty types of
Asamadhi. These include: walking quickly, walking at night without worship,
performing bodily functions without purpose, disrespecting elders, and slander.
These actions lead to Asamadhi in oneself and other beings. The seeker's soul is
polluted and their pure conduct is stained. Therefore, it is called Asamadhi
Sthan. The second Uddeshak describes 21 Shabal Doshas, which destroy the purity
of conduct. When conduct is stained, it becomes impure. Therefore, they are
called Shabal Doshas. The word "Shabal" means "colored". Shabal Doshas include:
masturbation, touching women, eating and performing actions at night, being a
Pradhakarmi, consuming food for a specific purpose, breaking a vow, and
consuming Maya Sthan. Conduct becomes Shabal by committing four faults in the
Uttargunas, and three faults in the Mulagunas, in addition to Anachar. The third
Uddeshak describes 33 types of Ashatanas. The Jain Acharyas have given a
beautiful explanation of the word Ashatana. The attainment of spiritual
qualities like Samyag Darshan is called "Aaya" and "Shatana" means
"destruction". Disrespecting great men like Sadgurudev leads to the destruction
of good qualities like Samyag Darshan. The thirty-three types of Ashatanas
include: walking, standing, or sitting in front of the Guru, in the same row, or
very close to the Guru; speaking to someone else before the Guru; disregarding
the Guru's words; not criticizing after returning from begging; and so on. The
fourth Uddeshak describes the eight types of Ganisampadas. A community of
Shramans is called a Gan. The head of the Gan is called the Gani. The eight
types of Ganisampadas are: Prachar Sampada, Shruta Sampada, Sharira Sampada,
Vachan Sampada, Vachana Sampada, Mati Sampada, Prayog Mati Sampada, and Sangrah
Parijnana Sampada. The four types of Prachar Sampada are: being virtuous and
disciplined, being free from ego, being of unsteady nature, and being of old
nature (unchanging nature).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
dazAzrutaskandha dazAzrutaskaMdha chedasUtra hai / chedasUtra ke do kArya haiM-
doSoM se bacAnA aura pramAdavaza lage hae doSoM kI zuddhi ke lie prAyazcitta kA
vidhAna krnaa| isameM doSoM se bacane kA vidhAna hai / ThANAMga meM isakA
aparanAma prAcAradazA prApta hotA hai| dazAzrutaskaMdha meM daza adhyayana haiM,
isalie isakA nAma dazAzrutaskaMdha hai| dazAzrutaskaMgha kA 1830 anuSTupa zloka
pramANa upalabdha pATha hai / 216 gadyasUtra haiM / 52 padyasUtra haiN| prathama
uddezaka meM 20 asamAdhisthAnoM kA varNana hai| jisa satkArya ke karane se citta
meM zAMti ho, prAtmA jJAna-darzana-cAritra rUpa mokSamArga meM rahe, vaha
samAdhi hai aura jisa kArya se citta meM aprazasta evaM azAMta bhAva hoM, jJAna-
darzana-cAritra Adi mokSamArga se AtmA bhraSTa ho, vaha asamAdhi hai| asamAdhi
ke bIsa prakAra haiN| jaisejaldI-jaldI calanA, binA pUje rAtri meM calanA, binA
upayoga saba daihika kArya karanA, gurujanoM kA apamAna, nindA Adi krnaa| ina
kAryoM ke AcaraNa se svayaM va anya jIvoM ko asamAdhibhAva utpanna hotA hai|
sAdhaka kI AtmA dUSita hotI hai / usakA pavitra cAritra malina hotA hai| ataH
use asamAdhisthAna kahA hai| dvitIya uddezaka meM 21 zabala doSoM kA varNana
kiyA gayA hai, jina kAryoM ke karane se cAritra kI nirmalatA naSTa ho jAtI hai|
cAritra malaklinna hone se vaha karbura ho jAtA hai| isalie unheM zabaladoSa
kahate haiM / 2 "zabalaM karburaM citram" zabala kA artha citravarNA hai|
hastamaithuna, strI-sparza Adi, rAtri meM bhojana lenA aura karanA, prAdhAkarmI,
auddezika pAhAra kA lenA, pratyAkhyAnabhaMga, mAyAsthAna kA sevana karanA Adi-
Adi ye zabala doSa haiN| uttaraguNoM meM atikramAdi cAra doSoM kA evaM mUlaguNoM
meM anAcAra ke atirikta tIna doSoM kA sevana karane se cAritra zabala hotA hai|
tIsare uddezaka meM 33 prakAra kI AzAtanAoM kA varNana hai| jainAcAryoM ne
AzAtanA zabda kI nirukti atyanta sundara kI hai| samyagdarzanAdi AdhyAtmika
guNoM kI prApti ko Aya kahate haiM aura zAtanA kA artha khaNDana hai|
sadagurudeva Adi mahAn puruSoM kA apamAna karane se samyagdarzanAdi sadguNoM kI
AzAtanA-khaNDanA hotI hai|3| ziSya kA muru ke Age, samazreNI meM, atyanta samIpa
meM gamana karanA, khar3A honA, baiThanA Adi, guru, se pUrva kisI se sambhASaNa
karanA, guru ke vacanoM ko jAnakara avahelanA karanA, bhikSA se lauTane para
AlocanA na karanA, prAdi-Adi pAzAtanA ke tetIsa prakAra haiN| caturtha uddezaka
meM prakAra kI gaNisampadAoM kA varNana hai| zramaNoM ke samudAya ko gaNa kahate
haiN| gaNa kA adhipati gaNI hotA hai| gaNisampadA ke ATha prakAra
haiMprAcArasampadA, zrutasampadA, zarIrasampadA, vacanasampadA, vAcanAsampadA,
matisampadA, prayogamatisampadA aura saMgrahaparijJAnasampadA / prAcArasampadA
ke saMyama meM dhra vayogayukta honA, ahaMkArarahita honA, aniyatavRtti honA,
vRddhasvabhAvI (acaMcalasvabhAvI)-ye cAra prakAra haiN| samAdhAnaM
samAdhi:-cetasaH svAsthya, mokSamArge'vasthitirityartha: na
samAdhirasamAdhistasya sthAnAni AzrayA bhedAH paryAyA asamAdhi-sthAnAni /
-AcArya haribhadra zabalaM-kaburaM cAritraM yaH kriyAvizeSairbhavati te
zabalAstadyogAtsAdhavo pi| -abhayadevakRta samavAyAMgaTIkA 3. Aya:-
samyagdarzanAdyavAptilakSaNastasya zAtanA-khaNDanA niruktAdAzAtanA / .--prAcArya
abhayadevakRta samavAyAMgaTIkA

Page #46 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The **Shruta Sampada** has four types: **Bahushruta**, **Parichita Shruta**,
**Vichitra Shruta**, and **Ghosh Vishuddhikarakta**. The **Sharira Sampada** has
four types: **Samyak Anupat** (proper proportion of height and width of the
body), **Alajjaspad Sharira** (a body that is not a cause of shame), **Sthir
Sangathan** (stable organization), and **Pratipoorna Indriyata** (complete
senses). The **Vachan Sampada** has four types: **Pradeyavachan** (speech that
is worthy of being received), **Madhur Vachan** (sweet speech), **Anishrit**
(unrestricted, without any conditions), and **Asandigdha Vachan** (unambiguous
speech). The **Vachana Sampada** has four types: **Vicharpoork Vachya Vishay Ka
Uddeshya Nirdeshan** (pointing out the purpose of the subject matter with
deliberation), **Vicharpoork Vachan** (reading with deliberation), **Upayukt
Vishay Ka Hi Vivechan** (discussing only the appropriate subject), and **Arth Ka
Sunishchit Roop Se Nirupan** (representing the meaning in a definite way). The
**Mati Sampada** has four types: **Avgrah**, **Iha**, **Avay**, and **Dharana**.
**Avgrah** has six types: **Kshipragrahan** (quick grasping), **Bahuggrahan**
(grasping many things), **Bahuvudhgrahan** (grasping many different things),
**Dhravgrahan** (firm grasping), **Anishritgrahan** (unrestricted grasping), and
**Asandigdhagrahan** (unambiguous grasping). Similarly, **Iha** and **Avay**
also have six types each. **Dharana** has six types: **Bahudharana** (holding
many things), **Bahubidhdharana** (holding many different things), **Puratan
Dharana** (holding old things), **Durddhar Dharana** (holding things firmly),
**Anidhit Dharana** (holding things without any effort), and **Asandigdha
Dharana** (holding things unambiguously).   The **Prayog Mati Sampada** has four
types: **Swayan Ki Shakti Ke Anusar Vad-Vivad** (debating according to one's own
strength), **Parishad Ko Dekhkar Vad-Vivad** (debating by looking at the
assembly), **Kshetra Ko Dekhkar Vad-Vivad** (debating by looking at the field),
and **Kal Ko Dekhkar Vad-Vivad** (debating by looking at the time). The
**Sangrah Parijna Sampada** has five types: **Varshakal Mein Sabhi Muniyon Ke
Niwas Ke Liye Yogyasthan Ki Pareeksha** (examining a suitable place for the
residence of all the monks during the rainy season), **Sabhi Shramanon Ke Liye
Pratiharik Peet, Falak, Shayya, Sanstark Ki Vyavastha** (arranging seats,
platforms, beds, and bedding for all the monks), **Niyamit Samay Par Pratiyek
Kary Karna** (doing every task at the appointed time), **Apne Se Jyest Shramanon
Ka Satkar-Samman** (honoring and respecting the senior monks).   After
describing the **Gani Sampada**, the text discusses the four types of **Vinay-
Pratipatti** related to them: **Achar Vinay**, **Shruta Vinay**, **Vikshepan Av
Vinay**, and **Dosha Nirghat Vinay**. This fourfold **Vinay-Pratipatti** is
called **Guru Sambandhi Vinay-Pratipatti**. Similarly, the **Shishya Sambandhi
Vinay-Pratipatti** has four types: **Upakaranotpadanta** (producing tools),
**Sahayata** (assistance), **Varna Sanjwalanta** (praising the qualities), and
**Bhar Pratyavarohaanta** (reducing the burden). Each of these has four types
again. Thus, the presented **Uddeshak** analyzes a total of 32 types of **Vinay-
Pratipatti**.   The fifth **Uddeshak** describes ten types of **Chitta
Samadhi**: **Dharma Bhavana**, **Swapna Darshan**, **Jati Smaran Gyan**, **Dev
Darshan**, **Avadhi Gyan**, **Avadhi Darshan**, **Manah Paryav Gyan**, **Keval
Gyan**, **Keval Darshan**, and **Keval Maran** (Nirvana). Along with the
description of these ten stages, it sheds light on the specific nature of
**Mohaniya Karma**.   The sixth **Uddeshak** describes eleven types of **Upasak
Pratiman**. Before describing the **Pratiman**, it depicts the nature of
**Mithyadrishti** and explains that it gives punishment without any
consideration for justice or injustice. For example, it gives punishments like
**Sampattiharan** (taking away property), **Mudan** (shaving), **Tarjan**
(threatening), **Tadan** (beating), **Anduk Bandhan** (tying with a rope),
**Nigad Bandhan** (tying with chains), **Kasth Bandhan** (tying with wood),
**Charak Bandhan** (imprisonment), **Nigad Yugal Sankutan** (tying the limbs
together), **Hast, Pad, Karn, Nasika, Ashth, Shirsha, Mukh, Ved Adi Ka Chhedan**
(cutting the hands, feet, ears, nose, teeth, head, mouth, and Vedas), **Hriday
Utpatana** (removing the heart), **Nayanadi Utpatana** (removing the eyes),
**Ullamban** (hanging from a tree), **Gharshan** (rubbing), **Gholan** (mixing),
**Shulaayan** (hanging on a spike), **Shulabhedan** (piercing with a spike),
**Kshar Vartan** (sprinkling salt on wounds), **Darbha Vartan** (causing pain
with grass), **Singh Puchhan** (lion's tail), **Vrushabha Puchhan** (bull's
tail), **Dava Agni Dagdhan** (burning with fire), **Bhakta Panan Nirodh**
(stopping food and water), etc., and experiences joy in doing so. But
**Samyagdrishti** is **Praastik** and becomes an **Upasak** and practices the
eleven **Pratiman**. These eleven **Upasak Pratiman** have already been
described in **Upasak Dasang**.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
zrutasampadA ke bahuzrutatA, paricitazrutatA, vicitrazrutatA,
ghoSavizuddhikArakatA-ye cAra prakAra haiN| zarIrasampadA ke zarIra kI lambAI va
caur3AI kA samyaka anupAta, alajjAspada zarIra, sthira saMgaThana, pratipUrNa
indriyatA-ye cAra bheda haiN| vacanasampadA ke prAdeyavacana- grahaNa karane
yogya vANI, madhura vacana, anizrita- pratibandharahita, asaMdigdha vacana-ye
cAra prakAra haiN| vAcanAsampadA ke vicArapUrvaka vAcyaviSaya kA uddezya nirdeza
karanA, vicArapUrvaka vAcana karanA, upayukta viSaya kA hI vivecana karanA,
artha kA sunizcita rUpa se nirUpaNa karatA-ye cAra bheda haiN| matisampadA ke
avagraha, IhA, avAya aura dhAraNA-ye cAra prakAra haiM / avagraha matisampadA ke
kSipragrahaNa, bahugrahaNa, bahuvidhagrahaNa, dhra vagrahaNa, anizritagrahaNa
aura asaMdigdhagrahaNaye chaha bheda haiN| isI prakAra IhA aura avAya ke bhI
chaha-chaha prakAra haiM / dhAraNA matisampadA ke bahudhAraNa, bahubidhadhAraNa,
purAtanadhAraNa, durddharadhAraNa, anidhitadhAraNa aura asaMdigdhadhAraNa-....ye
chaha prakAra haiN| prayogamatisampadA ke svayaM kI zakti ke anusAra vAda-vivAda
karanA, pariSada ko dekhakara vAda-vivAda karanA, kSetra ko dekhakara vAda-
vivAda karanA, kAla ko dekhakara vAda-vivAda karanA--ye cAra prakAra haiN|
saMgrahaparijJAsampadA ke varSAkAla meM sabhI muniyoM ke nivAsa ke lie
yogyasthAna kI parIkSA karanA, sabhI zramaNoM ke lie prAtihArika pITha, phalaka,
zayyA, saMstAraka kI vyavasthA karanA, niyamita samaya para pratyeka kArya
karanA, apane se jyeSTha zramaNoM kA satkAra-sammAna karanA-ye bheda haiN|
gaNisampadAoM ke varNana ke pazcAt tatsambandhI caturvidha vinaya-pratipatti
para ciMtana karate hue AcAravinaya, zrutavinaya, vikSepaNAvinaya aura
doSanirghAtavinaya batAye haiN| yaha catuvidha vinayapratipatti hai jo
gurusambandhI vinayapratipatti kahalAtI hai| isI prakAra ziSya sambandhI vinaya
pratipatti bhI upakaraNotpAdanatA, sahAyatA, varNasaMjvalanatA (guNAnuvAditA),
bhArapratyavarohaNatA hai / ina pratyeka ke punaH cAra-cAra prakAra haiN| isa
prakAra prastuta uddezaka meM kula 32 prakAra kI vinaya-pratipatti kA vizleSaNa
hai| pAMcaveM uddezaka meM daza prakAra kI cittasamAdhi kA varNana hai|
dharmabhAvanA, svapnadarzana, jAtismaraNajJAna, devadarzana, avadhijJAna,
avadhidarzana, manaHparyavajJAna, kevalajJAna, kevaladarzana, kevalamaraNa
(nirvANa) ina daza sthAnoM ke varNana ke sAtha mohanIyakarma kI viziSTatA para
prakAza DAlA hai| chaThe uddezaka meM gyAraha prakAra kI upAsaka pratimAnoM kA
varNana hai| pratimAoM ke varNana ke pUrva mithyAdRSTi ke svabhAva kA citraNa
karate hue batAyA hai ki vaha nyAya kA yA anyAya kA kicinamAtra bhI binA khyAla
kiye daMDa pradAna karatA hai| jaise sampattiharaNa, muDana, tarjana, tAr3ana,
aMdukabandhana (sAMkala se bAMdhanA), nigaDabandhana, kASThabandhana,
cArakabandhana (kArAgRha meM DAlanA), nigaDayugala saMkuTana (aMgoM ko mor3akara
bAMdhanA), hasta, pAda, karNa, nAsikA, aSTha, zIrSa, mukha, veda Adi kA chedana
karanA, hRdaya-utpATana, nayanAdi utpATana, ullaMbana (vRkSAdi para laTakAnA),
gharSaNa, gholana, zUlAyana (zUlI para laTakAnA), zUlAbhedana, kSAravartana
(jakhmoM Adi para namakAdi chir3akanA), darbhavartana (ghAsAdi se pIr3A
pahuMcAnA), siMhapuchana, vRSabhapuchana, dAvAgnidagdhana, bhaktapAnanirodha
prabhRti daMDa dekara Ananda kA anubhava karatA hai| kintu samyagdRSTi prAstika
hotA hai va upAsaka bana ekAdaza pratimAoM kI sAdhanA karatA hai| ina gyAraha
upAsaka pratimAoM kA varNana upAsakadazAMga meM bhI A cukA hai| [ 45 ]

Page #47 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Some preceptors believe that a lay follower who has completed the *pratima*
(ritual) takes vows of *sannyasa* (renunciation). It is mentioned that Kartik
Seth had performed the *pratima* 100 times. The seventh *uddeshika* (chapter)
describes the *shraman* (ascetic) *pratimaa* (rituals). These *bhikshu* (monk)
*pratimaa* are 12 in number. The first *pratima* requires the *bhikshu* to
accept one *datti* (gift) of food and one *datti* of water. The *datti* is the
continuous flow of food and water given by the donor to the *shraman*‚Äôs vessel.
It is permissible to accept food from a place where it is prepared for one
person, but not from a place where it is prepared for two, three, or more
people. The duration of this *pratima* is one month. The second *pratima* is
also for one month. In this, two *datti* of food and two *datti* of water are
accepted. Similarly, in the third, fourth, fifth, sixth, and seventh *pratimaa*,
three, four, five, six, and seven *datti* of food and the same number of *datti*
of water are accepted respectively. Each *pratima* lasts for one month. They are
called tri-monthly, four-monthly, etc., only because of the increase in the
number of *datti*. The eighth *pratima* lasts for seven days and nights. It
involves observing *chaubihar* (four-fold) fasting. One must stand facing the
sky outside the village, lie on one side, and sit in *vishadhyasana* (with legs
straight) and endure any *upsarga* (adverse conditions) with a calm mind. The
ninth *pratima* also lasts for seven nights. In this, *chaubihar* is observed
with *bela-bela* (at specific times) *parana* (breaking of fast). One must
meditate in a secluded place outside the village in *dandasana*, *lagudasana*,
or *utkatasana*. The tenth *pratima* also lasts for seven nights. In this,
*chaubihar* is observed with *tele-tele* (at specific times) *parana*. One must
meditate outside the village in *godohasana*, *virasana*, and *amrakubjasana*.
The eleventh *pratima* lasts for one day and night. Its practice is done until
the *path* (fourth) *prahar* (watch). *Chaubihar* is observed in this *pratima*.
One must stand outside the city with both hands extended towards the knees like
a staff and perform *kayotsarga* (relaxation of the body). The twelfth *pratima*
lasts for only one night. Its practice is done with *tele* (at specific times).
One must stand outside the village in the cremation ground, slightly bending the
head, focusing on a single particle with steady eyes, and perform *kayotsarga*
with unwavering determination. Any *upsarga* must be endured with equanimity.
There are many rules for *shraman* who are in these *pratimaa*. For example, if
a *pratima* observer is *nirgrantha* (without possessions), they should divide
the begging time into three parts: beginning, middle, and end. They should not
go begging in the middle and end parts after going in the beginning part. A
*shraman* who is in a monthly *pratima* can stay for one night where they are
known. If they are unknown, they can stay for two nights. Staying for longer
than that incurs a penalty of *ched* (punishment) or *tap* (penance) for the
same number of days. Similarly, other strict rules can be imposed. For example,
if a fire breaks out in the *upaashraya* (shelter), they should not go inside.
If someone tries to pull them out, they should not resist but carefully exit.
Similarly, if a mad elephant, horse, bull, dog, tiger, etc., comes in front of
them, they should not retreat even a step out of fear. They should patiently
endure cold and heat. The eighth *uddeshika* (chapter) describes the
*paryushana* (penance) *kalpa* (ritual). The word *paryushana* is derived from
the prefix *pari* and the root *vas* [46]...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
pratimAdhAraka zrAvaka pratimA kI pUrti ke pazcAt saMyama grahaNa kara letA hai
aisA kucha prAcAryoM kA abhimata hai| kArtika seTha ne 100 bAra pratimA grahaNa
kI thI aisA ullekha prApta hotA hai| sAtaveM uddezaka meM zramaNa kI pratimAoM
kA varNana hai| ye bhikSupratimAeM 12 haiN| prathama pratimAdhArI bhikSa ko eka
datti anna kI aura eka datti pAnI kI lenA kalpatA hai| zramaNa ke pAtra meM dAtA
dvArA diye jAne vAle anna aura jala kI dhArA jaba taka akhaNDa banI rahatI hai,
use datti kahate haiN| jahA~ eka vyakti ke lie bhojana banA ho vahA~ se lenA
kalpatA hai| jahAM do, tIna yA adhika vyaktiyoM ke lie banA ho vahA~ se nahIM le
sktaa| isakA samaya eka mAsa kA hai| dUsarI pratimA bhI eka mAsa kI hai| usameM
do datti prAhAra kI aura do datti pAnI kI lI jAtI haiM / isI prakAra tIsarI,
cauthI, pAMcavIM, chaThI aura sAtavI pratimAnoM meM kramazaH tIna, cAra, pAMca,
chaha aura sAta datti anna kI aura utanI hI datti pAnI kI grahaNa kI jAtI haiN|
pratyeka pratimA kA samaya eka-eka mAsa hai| kevala dattiyoM kI vRddhi ke kAraNa
hI trimAsika se sAtamAsika kramaza: kahalAtI haiN| AThavI pratimA sAta dina-rAta
kI hotI hai| isameM ekAntara cauvihAra upavAsa karanA hotA hai| gAMva ke bAhara
AkAza kI ora muha karake sIdhA dekhanA, eka karavaTa se leTanA aura viSadyAsana
(pairoM ko barAbara karake) baiThanA, upasarga Ane para zAntacitta se sahana
karanA hotA hai| nauvI pratimA bhI sAta rAtri kI hotI hai| isameM cauvihAra
bele-bele pAraNA kiyA jAtA hai| gAMva ke bAhara ekAnta sthAna meM daNDAsana,
laguDAsana yA utkaTakAsana karake dhyAna kiyA jAtA hai| . dasabI pratimA bhI
sAta rAtri kI hotI hai| isameM cauvihAra tele-tele pAraNA kiyA jAtA hai| gAMva
ke bAhara godohAsana, vIrAsana aura AmrakubjAsana se dhyAna kiyA jAtA hai|
gyArahavIM pratimA eka ahorAtri kI hotI hai| pATha prahara taka isakI sAdhanA kI
jAtI hai| caubihAra belA isameM kiyA jAtA hai / nagara ke bAhara donoM hAthoM ko
ghuTanoM kI ora lambA karake daNDa kI taraha khar3e rahakara kAyotsarga kiyA
jAtA hai| bArahavIM pratimA kevala eka rAtri kI hai| isakA aArAdhana tele se
kiyA jAtA hai| gAMva ke bAhara zmazAna meM khar3e hokara mastaka ko thor3A
jhukAkara kisI eka pudagala para dRSTi rakhakara ninimeSa netroM se nizcitatA
pUrvaka kAyotsarga kiyA jAtA hai| upasarga Ane para samabhAva se sahana kiyA
jAtA hai| ina pratimAoM meM sthita zramaNa ke lie aneka vidhAna bhI kiye haiN|
jaise-koI vyakti pratimAdhArI nirgrantha hai to use bhikSAkAla ko tIna vibhAga
meM vibhAjita karake bhikSA lenI cAhiye--Adi, madhya aura carama / Adi bhAga meM
bhikSA ke lie jAne para madhya aura carama bhAga meM nahIM jAnA cAhiye / mAsikI
pratimA meM sthita zramaNa jahA~ koI jAnatA ho vahA~ eka rAta raha sakatA hai|
jahAM use koI bhI nahIM jAnatA vahA~ vaha do rAta raha sakatA hai| isase adhika
rahane para utane hI dina kA cheda athavA tapa prAyazcitta lagatA hai| isI
prakAra aura bhI kaThora anuzAsana kA vidhAna lagAyA jA sakatA hai| jaise koI
upAzraya meM Aga lagA de to bhI use nahIM jAnA caahie| yadi koI pakar3akara use
bAhara khIMcane kA prayatna kare to use haTha na karate hue sAvadhAnIpUrvaka
bAhara nikala jAnA cAhie / isI taraha sAmane yadi madonmatta hAthI, ghor3A,
baila, kuttA, vyAghra prAdi A jAeM to bhI use unase Darakara eka kadama bhI
pIche nahIM haTanA caahiye| zItalatA tathA uSNatA ke parISaha ko dhairyapUrvaka
sahana karanA caahiye| AThaveM uddezaka (dazA) meM paryuSaNA kalpa kA varNana
hai / paryuSaNa zabda "pari" upasarga pUrvaka vas dhAtu se [46 ]

Page #48 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
"Ana·∏•" is a suffix used to form this word. It means self-immersion, self-
delight, or being in one's own self.  /  The second meaning of Paryushana Kalpa
is to reside in one place. It is of two types: Salamban and NirƒÅvalamban.
Salamban means with a cause, and NirƒÅvalamban means without a cause.  /
NirƒÅvalamban has two divisions: Jghanya (inferior) and Utkrushta (superior). The
synonyms of Paryushana are as follows: (1) PariyƒÅya Vatthava·πáƒÅ, (2) Pajjosama·πáƒÅ,
(3) PƒÅgaiyƒÅ, (4) Parivasa·πáƒÅ, (5) Pajjusa·πáƒÅ, (6) VƒÅsƒÅvƒÅsa, (7) Padhamasamosara·πáa,
(8) Thava·πáƒÅ, and (9) Jetthoggha. All these names have the same meaning, but
there is a slight difference in meaning based on the difference in etymology.
This difference in meaning demonstrates the importance of various traditions
related to Paryushana and the actions performed during that specific time.  /
These meanings also reveal some historical facts.  /  The seniority and
juniority of Dikshaparaya are calculated based on the Paryushana period.
Paryushana period is considered a type of year count. Therefore, Paryushana is
considered the cause of the state of Dikshaparaya.  /  During Varshavas, certain
specific actions related to substances, fields, time, and emotions are
performed. Therefore, Paryushana is also called Pajjosama·πáƒÅ. Third, it is called
"PƒÅgaiyƒÅ" (natural) because it is to be worshipped equally by householders and
others. During this fixed period, the seeker tries to stay closer to the soul,
hence it is also called Parivasa·πáƒÅ. Paryushana also means service. During this
period, the seeker serves and worships the qualities of the soul like knowledge
and vision, hence it is called Pajjusa·πáƒÅ. In this Kalpa, the Shraman resides in
one place for four months, hence it is called VƒÅsƒÅvƒÅsa Varshavas. If there is no
specific reason, entry into the area suitable for Chaturmas is done only during
the rainy season, hence it is called Prathamasamavasara·πáa.  /  Its boundaries
vary depending on the seasonal period. Therefore, it is called Thava·πáƒÅ
(establishment).  /  There is a field acquisition for each month during the
seasonal period, but for four months during the rainy season, hence it is called
Jetthoggha (Jyeshthaavagraha). If the Sadhu has reached the designated place by
Ashadhi Purnima and declared Varshavas, then Varshavas begins from Shravan
Krishna Panchami. If the suitable area is not found, then Varshavas should be
started on Shravan Krishna Dashami. If the suitable area is still not found,
then Varshavas should be started on Shravan Krishna Panchadashi-Amavasya.  /
Even if the suitable area is not found, it is considered mandatory to start
Varshavas by Bhadrapad Shukla Panchami, increasing the days by five each time.
If the suitable area is not found even by this time, then Paryushana Kalpa
should be performed under a tree.  /  But this date should not be violated under
any circumstances. The current Paryushana Kalpasutra is the eighth study of the
Dasha Shruta Skandha. The oldest copies of Dasha Shruta Skandha, which are from
before the fourteenth century, have the complete Kalpasutra in the eighth study.
This clearly proves that Kalpasutra is not an independent work but the eighth
study of Dasha Shruta Skandha.  /  [47]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
"anaH" pratyaya lagakara banA hai| isakA artha hai, prAtmamajjana, AtmaramaNa yA
Atmastha honA / paryuSaNakalpa kA dUsarA artha hai eka sthAna para nivAsa krnaa|
vaha sAlaMbana yA nirAvalaMbana rUpa do prakAra kA hai| sAlaMbana kA artha hai
sakAraNa aura nirAvalaMbana kA artha hai kAraNarahita / nirAvalaMbana ke
jaghanya aura utkRSTa do bheda haiN| paryuSaNA ke paryAyavAcI zabda isa prakAra
haiM-(1) pariyAya vatthavaNA, (2) pajjosamaNA, (3) pAgaiyA, (4) parivasanA, (5)
pajjusaNA, (6) vAsAvAsa, (7) paDhamasamosaraNa, (8) ThavaNA aura (9) jettttoggh|
ye sabhI nAma ekArthaka haiM, tathApi vyutpatti-bheda ke AdhAra para kiMcit
arthabheda bhI hai aura yaha arthabheda paryuSaNA se sambandhita vividha
paramparAoM evaM usa niyata kAla meM kI jAne vAlI kriyAoM kA mahattvapUrNa
nidarzana karAtA hai / ina arthoM se kucha aitihAsika tathya bhI vyakta hote
haiM / paryuSaNA kAla ke AdhAra se kAlagaNanA karake dIkSAparyAya kI jyeSThatA
va kaniSThatA ginI jAtI hai| paryuSaNAkAla eka prakAra kA varSamAna ginA jAtA
hai| ata: paryuSaNA ko dIkSAparyAya kI avasthA kA kAraNa mAnA hai / varSAvAsa
meM bhinna-bhinna prakAra ke dravya-kSetra-kAla-bhAva sambandhI kucha vizeSa
kriyAoM kA AcaraNa kiyA jAtA hai ata: paryuSaNA kA dUsarA nAma pajjosamaNA hai|
tIsarA, gRhastha Adi ke lie samAnabhAvena ArAdhanIya hone se yaha "pAgaiyA" yAni
prAkRtika kahalAtA hai| isa niyata avadhi meM sAdhaka AtmA ke adhika nikaTa
rahane kA prayatna karatA hai ataH vaha parivasanA bhI kahA jAtA hai| paryuSaNA
kA artha sevA bhI hai| isa kAla meM sAdhaka AtmA ke jJAnadarzanAdi guNoM kI sevA
upAsanA karatA hai ataH use pajjusaNA kahate haiN| isa kalpa meM zramaNa eka
sthAna para cAra mAsa taka nivAsa karatA hai ataeva ise vAsAvAsavarSAvAsa kahA
gayA hai| koI vizeSa kAraNa na ho to prAvRT (varSA) kAla meM hI cAturmAsa karane
yogya kSetra meM praveza kiyA jAtA hai ataH ise prathamasamavasaraNa kahate haiM
/ RtubaddhakAla kI apekSA se isakI maryAdAeM bhinna-bhinna hotI haiN| ataeva
yaha ThavaNA (sthApanA) hai / RtubaddhakAla meM eka-eka mAsa kA kSetrAvagraha
hotA hai kintu varSAkAla meM cAra mAsa kA hotA hai ataeva ise jeTThoggaha
(jyeSThAvagraha) kahA hai| agara sAdhu ASAr3hI pUrNimA taka niyata sthAna para A
pahuMcA ho aura varSAvAsa kI ghoSaNA kara dI ho to zrAvaNa kRSNA paMcamI se hI
varSAvAsa prArambha ho jAtA hai| uparyukta kSetra na milane para zrAvaNa kRSNA
dazamI ko, phira bhI yogya kSetra kI prApti na ho to zrAvaNa kRSNA paMcadazamI-
amAvasyA ko varSAvAsa prArambha karanA cAhie / itane para bhI yogya kSetra na
mile to pAMca-pAMca dina bar3hAte hue antataH bhAdrapada zuklA paMcamI taka to
varSAvAsa prArambha kara denA anivArya mAnA gayA hai| isa samaya taka bhI
upayukta kSetra prApta na ho to vRkSa ke nIce hI payUSaNAkalpa karanA cAhie /
para isa tithi kA kisI bhI paristhiti meM ullaMghana nahIM karanA caahie|
vartamAna meM jo paryuSaNA kalpasUtra hai, vaha dazAzrutaskandha kA hI AThavAM
adhyayana hai| dazAzrutaskandha kI prAcInatama pratiyAM, jo caudahavIM zatAbdI
se pUrva kI haiM, unameM AThaveM adhyayana meM pUrNa kalpasUtra AyA hai| jo yaha
spaSTa pramANita karatA hai ki kalpasUtra svatantra racanA nahIM kintu
dazAzrutaskandha kA hI AThavAM adhyayana hai / [47 ]

Page #49 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Secondly, the appointment of the second Bhadrabahu, which is mentioned in the
Dasha-Shruta-Skandha and dates back to the sixth century BCE, provides an
explanation for the terms used in the text. Muni Shri Punyavijayaji believes
that the commentary on the Dasha-Shruta-Skandha is approximately sixteen hundred
years old. The first sutra of the Kalpa Sutra states, "Te·πáam kƒÅle·πáam te·πáam
samae·πáam sama·πáo bhagavƒÅ mahƒÅvƒ´re.............." and the last sutra states,
"..............bhujjo bhujjo uvadamsei." The same text is found in the eighth
udde≈õaka [chapter] of the Dasha-Shruta-Skandha. Here, the remaining text is
abbreviated under the word "jav." The text currently available only describes
the Panch Kalyanak, which has no connection to the Paryushana Kalpa. Therefore,
it is clear that the Paryushana Kalpa was the complete Kalpa Sutra in this
study. The authors of both the Kalpa Sutra and the Dasha-Shruta-Skandha are
Bhadrabahu. Therefore, since both are works of the same author, it can be said
that the Kalpa Sutra is a textual study of the Dasha-Shruta-Skandha. This is
clearly evidenced by the commentary, churni, Prithvichandatippan, and other
commentaries on the Kalpa Sutra. The ninth udde≈õaka describes 30 maha-mohaniya
(greatly deluding) places. The pudgala karmas (karmic particles) that bind the
soul are called karmas. Mohaniya karma (deluding karma) is the most prominent
among them. There is no limit to the causes of mohaniya karma bandha (binding of
deluding karma), but the scriptural authors have mentioned thirty types of
causes that lead to mohaniya karma bandha. Among them, the intensity and cruelty
of durdhyavasa (stubbornness) are so great that sometimes maha-mohaniya karma is
bound, causing the soul to wander in the world for 70 ko·π≠i-ko·π≠i sƒÅgaropam
(billions of billions of oceans). Acharya Haribhadra and Jinadasagani use only
the word mohaniya. The Uttaradhyayanasutra, Samavayangasutra, and Dasha-Shruta-
Skandha also refer to mohaniya sthana (deluding places). However, the word
"mahamoham pakuvvai" (greatly deluding) is used in the description of the types.
These places include drowning living beings in water, killing them by
suffocating them, killing them by tying wet leather on their heads, engaging in
illicit sex in secret, falsely accusing someone, claiming to be a celibate even
though one is not, criticizing a Kevalajnani (omniscient), claiming to be a
scholar even though one is not, practicing magic, repeatedly using sexually
suggestive language, etc. The tenth udde≈õaka is called "Ayati Sthana" (Place of
Effort). It describes various nidanas (causes). Nidana means the resolution that
arises from the desire for fulfillment due to the influence of delusion, which
leads to the desire for objects like lust, etc. When desires arise in the human
mind due to the strong influence of delusion, he makes a firm resolution to
fulfill them. This particular resolution is nidana. Due to nidana, human desires
continue to exist even in the future, preventing him from being liberated from
the cycle of birth and death. From the perspective of future birth and death,
this udde≈õaka is called Prayati Sthana (Place of Effort). Prayati means birth or
caste. It is considered Ayati Sthana because it is the cause of nidana. In other
words, if "ti" is separated from Ayati, "pay" remains. Pray means benefit. The
nidana that benefits birth and death is called Ayati. This chapter describes how
Bhagavan Mahavira arrived in Rajagaha. King Shrenik and Queen Chelna arrived to
pay their respects to the Bhagavan. Seeing the divine and magnificent form and
great prosperity of King Shrenik, the Shramanas began to think, "Shrenik appears
to be like a god himself. If we also have the fruits of our austerities, rules,
and restraint, then we too can 1. Tisan moha-thanai-abhikkhanam-abhikkhanam
ayaremane va samaayaremane va mohanijjatae kammam pakarei. Dasha-Shruta-Skandha,
p. 321-Upa. Atmaramji Maharaj [48]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
dUsarI bAta dazAzrutaskandha para jo dvitIya bhadrabAha kI niyukti hai, jinakA
samaya vikrama kI chaThI zatAbdI hai, usameM aura usa niyukti ke AdhAra se
nirmita pracalita hai, usake padoM kI vyAkhyA milatI hai| muni zrI puNyavijayajI
kA abhimata hai ki dazAzrutaskandha kI cUNi lagabhaga solaha sau varSa purAnI
hai| kalpasUtra ke pahale sUtra meM "teNaM kAleNaM teNaM samaeNaM samaNo
bhagavaM mahAvIre.............."aura aMtima sUtra meM .............."bhujjo
bhujjo uvadaMsei" pATha hai| vahI pATha dazAzrutaskandha ke AThaveM uddezaka
[dazA] meM hai| yahAM para zeSa pATha ko "jAva" zabda ke antargata saMkSepa kara
diyA hai| vartamAna meM jo pATha upalabdha hai usameM kevala paMcakalyANaka kA
hI nirUpaNa hai, jisakA paryuSaNAkalpa ke sAtha koI sambandha nahIM hai| ataH
spaSTa hai ki paryuSaNAkalpa isa adhyayana meM pUrNa kalpasUtra thaa| kalpasUtra
aura dazAzrutaskandha ina donoM ke racayitA bhadrabAha haiN| isalie donoM eka hI
racanAkAra kI racanA hone se yaha kahA jA sakatA hai ki kalpasUtra
dazAzrutaskandha kA pAThavA adhyayana hI hai / vRtti, cUNi, pRthvIcaMdaTippaNa
aura anya kalpasUtra ko TIkAoM se yaha spaSTa pramANita hai| nauveM uddezaka meM
30 mahAmohanIya sthAnoM kA varNana hai| AtmA ko prAvata karane vAle pudagala
karma kahalAte haiN| mohanIyakarma una saba meM pramukha hai|
mohanIyakarmabaMdha ke kAraNoM kI koI maryAdA nahIM hai, tathApi zAstrakAra ne
mohanIya karmabaMdha ke hetubhUta kAraNoM ke tIsa bhedoM kA ullekha kiyA hai|
unameM duradhyavasAya kI tIvratA aura krUratA itanI mAtrA meM hotI hai ki kabhI
kabhI mahAmohanIyakarma kA bandha ho jAtA hai jisase AtmA 70 koTA-koTi
sAgaropama taka saMsAra meM paribhramaNa karatA hai| AcArya haribhadra tathA
jinadAsagaNI mahattara kevala mohanIya zabda kA prayoga karate hai|
uttarAdhyayana, samavAyAMga aura dazAzrutaskandha meM bhI mohanIthasthAna kahA
hai|' kintu bhedoM ke ullekha meM "mahAmohaM pakuvvai" zabda kA prayoga huA hai|
ve sthAna jaise ki trasa jIvoM ko pAnI meM DabAkara mAranA, unako zvAsa Adi roka
kara mAranA, mastaka para gIlA camar3A Adi vA~dhakara mAranA, guptarIti se
anAcAra kA sevana karanA, mithyA kalaMka lagAnA, bAlabrahmacArI na hote hue bhI
bAlabrahmacArI kahalAnA, kevalajJAnI kI nindA karanA, bahuzruta na hote hue bhI
bahuzruta kahalAnA, jAdU-TonA Adi karanA, kAmotpAdaka vikathAoM kA bAra-bAra
prayoga karanA Adi haiN| dazaveM uddezaka dizA kA nAma "AyatisthAna" hai| isameM
vibhinna nidAnoM kA varNana hai| nidAna kA artha hai-moha ke prabhAva se kAmAdi
icchAoM kI utpatti ke kAraNa hone vAlA icchApUrtimUlaka saMkalpa / jaba mAnava
ke antarmAnasa meM moha ke prabala prabhAva se vAsanAeM udabhUta hotI haiM taba
vaha unakI pUrti ke lie dRr3ha saMkalpa karatA hai| yaha saMkalpavizeSa hI
nidAna hai| nidAna ke kAraNa mAnava kI icchAeM bhaviSya meM bhI nirantara banI
rahatI haiM jisase vaha janma-maraNa kI paramparA se mukta nahIM ho paataa|
bhaviSyakAlIna janma-maraNa kI dRSTi se prastuta uddezaka kA nAma prAyatisthAna
rakhA gayA hai| prAyati kA artha janma yA jAti hai| nidAna kA kAraNa hone se
AyatisthAna mAnA gayA hai| dUsare zabdoM meM kaheM to Ayati meM se "ti" pRthaka
kara lene para 'pAya" avaziSTa rahatA hai| prAya kA artha lAbha hai| jisa nidAna
se janma-maraNa kA lAbha hotA hai usakA nAma Ayati hai| isa dazA meM varNana hai
ki bhagavAn mahAvIra rAjagaha pdhaare| rAjA zreNika va mahArAnI celanA bhagavAna
ke vandana hetu phuNce| rAjA zreNika ke divya va bhavya rUpa aura mahAn samRddhi
ko nihAra kara zramaNa socane lagezreNika to sAkSAt devatulya pratIta ho rahA
hai| yadi hamAre tapa, niyama aura saMyama Adi kA phala ho to hama bhI 1. tIsaM
moha-ThaNAI-abhikkhaNaM-abhikkhaNaM AyAremANe vA samAyAremANe vA mohaNijjatAe
kammaM pakareI / dazAzrutaskandha, pR. 321-upA. AtmArAmajI mahArAja [48 ]

Page #50 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
They wished to become like Chelna. Seeing the beautiful, radiant form and
splendor of Queen Chelna, a resolve arose in the minds of the Shramanis that if
their practice bore fruit, they would become like Chelna in their next birth.
The Antaryami Mahavira knew their resolve and asked the Shramanas and Shramanis
if such a resolve had arisen in their minds. They replied in the affirmative,
"Yes, Bhagavan! This is true." The Lord said, "The Nirgrantha-Pravachana is the
best, it is complete, it destroys all karmas. Those Shramanas or Shramanis who,
turning away from Dharma, are attracted by wealth and splendor, and make a
Nidana, if they complete their lifespan without atonement, are born in the
Devaloka, and from there they are reborn in the Manavloka. Due to the Nidana,
they do not attain Kevali Dharma. They remain forever captivated by worldly
objects." The Shastrakar has described 9 types of Nidan and explained that the
Nirgrantha Pravachana is the only means of liberation from all karmas.
Therefore, one should not make a Nidana, and if one has made it, one should
become free by performing Alochana-Prayaschitta. In conclusion, the biography of
Bhagavan Mahavira is found in detail in the Pathvi Dasha of this Pragama. There
is a beautiful description of Chittasamadhi and Dharmacinta. There is also a
description of the different types of Upasaka-Pratima and Bhikshu-Pratima. The
Brihatkalpa has a glorious place in the Cheda Sutras. Like other Cheda Sutras,
this Sutra also contemplates on the rules of conduct for Shramanas, including
Vidhi-Nishedha, Utsarga-Apabad, Tapas, Prayaschitta, etc. It has six Uddesakas,
81 Adhikars, and 473 Shlokas in the available original text. There are 206 Sutra
numbers. The first Uddesaka has 50 Sutras. The first five Sutras are about Tal-
Prlamb. It is forbidden for Nirgranthas and Nirgranthis to take Tal and Prlamb.
It is stated that one should not take unripe Tal fruit or Tal root, but one
should take ripe Tal Prlamb. The rules regarding Masakalpa state that Shramanas
should stay in one place for a maximum period of 8 months during the Hemant and
Grishma seasons. It is not permissible for Shramanas to stay in the following 16
types of places for more than one month at a time, except during the rainy
season, with or without a Prachira or Prachira. 1. Gram [where 18 types of taxes
are levied by the state] 2. Magar [where 18 types of taxes are not levied] 3.
Khet [which has an earthen wall around it] 4. Karbat [where few people live] 5.
Madamb [where there is no village for two and a half kos] [49]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
isa jaise bneN| mahArAnI celanA ke sundara salaune rUpa va aizvarya ko dekhakara
zramaNiyoM ke antarmAnasa meM yaha saMkalpa huA ki hamArI sAdhanA kA phala ho to
hama AgAmI janma meM calanA jaisI baneM / antaryAmI mahAvIra ne unake saMkalpa
ko jAna liyA aura zramaNa-zramaNiyoM se pUchA ki kyA tumhAre mana meM isa
prakAra kA saMkalpa huA hai? unhoMne svIkRti sUcaka uttara diyA"hAM, bhagavan !
yaha bAta satya hai|" bhagavAn ne kahA-"nirgrantha-pravacana sarvottama hai,
paripUrNa hai, sampUrNa karmoM ko kSINa karane vAlA hai| jo zramaNa yA
zramaNiyAM isa prakAra dharma se vimukha hokara aizvarya Adi ko dekhakara lubhA
jAte haiM aura nidAna karate haiM ve yadi binA prAyazcitta kie Ayu pUrNa karate
haiM to devaloka meM utpanna hote haiM aura vahAM se ve mAnavaloka meM punaH
janma lete haiN| nidAna ke kAraNa unheM kevalI dharma kI prApti nahIM hotii| ve
sadA sAMsArika viSayoM meM hI mugdha bane rahate haiN|" zAstrakAra ne 9 prakAra
ke nidAnoM kA varNana kara yaha batAyA ki nirgrantha pravacana hI saba karmoM se
mukti dilAne vAlA ekamAtra sAdhana hai / ataH nidAna nahIM karanA cAhie aura
kiyA ho to AlocanA-prAyazcitta karake mukta ho jAnA caahie| upasaMhAra isa
prakAra prastuta prAgama meM bhagavAna mahAvIra kI jIvanI vistAra se pAThavI
dazA meM milatI hai| cittasamAdhi evaM dharmacintA kA sundara varNana hai /
upAsakapratimAoM va bhikSupratimAoM ke bheda-prabhedoM kA bhI varNana hai|
bRhatkalpa bRhatkalpa kA chedasUtroM meM gauravapUrNa sthAna hai / anya
chedasUtroM kI taraha isa sUtra meM bhI zramaNoM ke AcAraviSayaka vidhi-niSedha,
utsarga-apabAda, tapa, prAyazcitta Adi para cintana kiyA gayA hai| isameM chaha
uddezaka haiM, 81 adhikAra haiM, 473 zlokapramANa upalabdha mUlapATha hai / 206
sUtrasaMkhyA hai| prathama uddezaka meM 50 sUtra haiM / pahale ke pAMca sUtra
tAlapralaMba viSayaka hai| nirgrantha aura nirgranthiyoM ke lie tAla evaM
pralaMba grahaNa karane kA niSedha hai| isameM akhaNDa evaM apakva tAlaphala va
tAlamUla grahaNa nahIM karanA cAhie kintu vidArita, pakva tAla pralaMba lenA
kalpya hai, aisA pratipAdita kiyA gayA hai, Adi-Adi / mAsakalpa viSayaka niyama
meM zramaNoM ke RtubaddhakAla-hemanta aura grISma Rtu ke 8 mahinoM meM eka
sthAna para rahane ke adhikatama samaya kA vidhAna kiyA hai| zramaNoM ko
saparikSepa arthAt saprAcIra evaM prAcIra se bAhara nimnokta 16 prakAra ke
sthAnoM meM varSARtu ke atirikta anya samaya meM eka sAtha eka mAsa se adhika
ThaharanA nahIM klptaa| 1. grAma [jahAM rAjya kI aora se 18 prakAra ke kara liye
jAte hoM] 2. magara [jahAM 18 prakAra ke kara na lie jAte hoM 3. kheTa [jisake
cAroM ora miTTI kI dIvAra ho] 4. karbaTa [jahAM kama loga rahate hoM] 5. maDamba
[jisake bAda DhAI kosa taka koI gA~va na ho] [ 49 ]

Page #51 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
6. Pattana [where all things are available] 7. Aakar [where all things are
available] 8. Dronamukha [where there is a path connecting water and land, where
sea goods are unloaded] 9. Nigam [where merchants reside] 10. Rajdhani [where
the king's palace etc. are] 11. Prashram [where ascetics etc. live] 12. Nivesh
Sannivesh [where merchants unload their goods] 13. Sambadh-Sambah [where farmers
live or where people from other villages come to stay in mountains, caves etc.
for the protection of their wealth etc. from their village] 14. Ghosh [where
Gujar people-Gwalas who graze cows etc. live] 15. Anshika [half, third or fourth
part of a village] 16. Putbhadan [where merchants of the village come to sell
their goods]. They can stay inside and outside the city walls for one month
each. While staying inside, they should take alms from inside and while staying
outside, they should take alms from outside. Shramanis can stay inside for two
months and outside for two months. Where there is only one gate of the city
wall, Nirgranth and Nirgranthis are prohibited from staying together, but if
there are many gates, they can stay. Where there are many shops around the
Upashraya, many gates, Sadhvis should not stay there, but Sadhu can stay with
effort. / Where the place is completely open, there are no gates, Sadhvis should
not stay there. If there is no Upashraya-place by way of exception, they can
stay by putting up a curtain. Nirgranths are also allowed to stay in an open
place. Nirgranth and Nirgranthis have been allowed to keep and use a cloth
mosquito net [Chilimilika]. Nirgranth and Nirgranthis are not allowed to stand,
sit, lie down, sleep, eat, drink, study etc. near a water body. / Where there
are pictures that cause lust, Shraman-Shramanis should not stay there. They
should not stay without the permission of the house owner. Shraman-Shramanis
should not stay in a house where there is a path in the middle - where
householders live. / If there is a quarrel between an Acharya, Upadhyaya,
Shraman or Shramani of a Shraman, they should apologize to each other. He who is
calm is a worshiper. The essence of Shram Dharma is Upsham - "Uvasamsaram
Samannam". Vihar is prohibited during Varshavas, but it is prescribed during
Hemant and Grishma seasons. Nirgranth-Nirgranthis are prohibited from wandering
repeatedly in unfavorable areas. Because there is a possibility of violation of
restraint. Therefore, there is a provision for atonement. [ 50 ]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
6. pattana [jahAM saba vastueM upalabdha hoM] 7. Akara [jahAM saba vastueM
upalabdha hoM] 8. droNamukha [jahA~ jala aura sthala ko milAne vAlA mArga ho,
jahAM samudrI mAla prAkara utaratA ho] 9. nigama [jahAM vyApAriyoM kI vasati ho]
10. rAjadhAnI [jahAM rAjA ke rahane ke mahala Adi hoM] 11. prAzrama [jahAM
tapasvI Adi rahate hoM] 12. niveza sanniveza [jahAM sArthavAha pAkara utarate
hoM] 13. sambAdha-saMbAha [jahAM kRSaka rahate hoM athavA anya gAMva ke loga
apane gAMva se dhana Adi kI rakSA ke nimitta parvata, guphA Adi meM Akara
Thahare hue hoM] 14. ghoSa [jahAM gAya Adi carAne vAle gUjara loga-gvAle rahate
hoM] 15. aMzikA [gAMva kA ardha, tRtIya athavA caturtha bhAga] 16. puTabhedana
[jahAM para gAMva ke vyApArI apanI cIjeM becane Ate hoM] nagara kI prAcIra ke
andara aura bAhara eka-eka mAsa taka raha sakate haiN| andara rahate samaya
bhikSA andara se lenI cAhie aura bAhara rahate samaya bAhara se| zramaNiyAM do
mAsa andara aura do mAsa bAhara raha sakatI haiN| jisa prAcIra kA eka hI dvAra
ho vahAM nirgrantha aura nirgranthiyoM ko eka sAtha rahane kA niSedha kiyA hai,
para aneka dvAra hoM to raha sakate haiN| jisa upAzraya ke cAroM ora aneka
dukAneM hoM, aneka dvAra hoM vahAM sAdhviyoM ko nahIM rahanA cAhie kintu sAdhu
yatanApUrvaka raha sakatA hai / jo sthAna pUrNa rUpa se khulA ho, dvAra na hoM
vahAM para sAdhviyoM ko rahanA nahIM klptaa| yadi apavAdarUpa meM upAzraya-
sthAna na mile to paradA lagAkara raha sakatI haiN| nirgranthoM ke lie khule
sthAna para bhI rahanA kalpatA hai| nirgrantha aura nirgranthiyoM ko kapar3e kI
maccharadAnI [cilimilikA rakhane va upayoga karane kI anumati pradAna kI gaI
hai| nirgrantha va nirgranthiyoM ko jalAzaya ke sannikaTa khar3e rahanA,
baiThanA, leTanA, sonA, khAnA-pInA, svAdhyAya Adi karanA nahIM kalpatA / jahAM
para vikArotpAdaka citra hoM vahAM para zramaNa-zramaNiyoM ko rahanA nahIM
klptaa| makAna mAlika kI binA anumati ke rahanA nahIM klptaa| jisa makAna ke
madhya meM hokara rAstA ho- jahAM gRhastha rahate hoM, vahAM zramaNa-zramaNiyoM
ko nahIM rahanA cAhie / kisI zramaNa kA AcArya, upAdhyAya, zramaNa yA zramaNI se
paraspara kalaha ho gayA ho, paraspara kSamAyAcanA karanI caahie| jo zAMta hotA
hai vaha ArAdhaka hai| zramaNadharma kA sAra upazama hai-"uvasamasAraM
saamnnnnN"| varSAvAsa meM vihAra kA niSedha hai kintu hemanta va grISma Rtu meM
vihAra kA vidhAna hai| jo pratikUla kSetra hoM vahA~ nirgrantha-nirgranthiyoM ko
bAra-bAra vicaranA niSiddha hai| kyoMki saMyama kI virAdhanA hone kI sambhAvanA
hai| isalie prAyazcitta kA vidhAna hai| [ 50 ]

Page #52 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
If a householder wishes to give clothes, vessels, blankets, etc. to a monk who
has gone out for alms or for bodily needs, then the monk should take and keep
them only after obtaining permission from the Acharya. Similarly, the permission
of the Pravartini is necessary for the Dharmni. Monks and nuns are prohibited
from taking food, etc. at night or at an inappropriate time. Similarly, it is
prohibited to take clothes, vessels, blankets, and cleaning materials. As an
exception, if a thief has stolen the clothes of monks and nuns and they have
been recovered, they can be taken at night. If the clothes have been worn by
thieves, cleaned, dyed, or perfumed with fragrant substances, they can also be
taken. Nirgranth and Nirgranthis are prohibited from traveling at night or at an
inappropriate time. If it is necessary to go for Uccarabhumi, etc., as an
exception, they should not go alone but should take Sadhus with them. The
boundaries of the traveling area for Nirgranth and Nirgranthis have been
considered. In the past, the Aryakshetra extended from Angadesh and Magadhadesh
in the east to Kausambi in the south, to Sthuna in the west, and to Kunala in
the north. Traveling in the Aryakshetra increases knowledge and vision. If there
is no possibility of loss of the Ratna-tray by going to the Anaryakshetra, then
one can go. In the second Uddeshak, 12 sutras on Upashraya state that monks and
nuns should not stay even for a short time in an Upashraya where rice, barley,
mung, urad, etc. are scattered. However, if they are piled up in one place, it
is permissible to stay there during the winter and summer seasons. If they are
stored safely in a storehouse, etc., it is permissible to stay there even during
the rainy season. Sadhus and Sadhvis should not stay even for a short time in a
place where Suravikat, Sauviravikat, etc. are kept. If, due to circumstances, no
other place is available even after searching, the monk can stay for two nights,
but not more. Staying for longer than that incurs the atonement of Chhed or
Parihar. Similarly, one should not stay in an Upashraya that has a cold water
well, a hot water well, a lamp, a lamp, etc. Similarly, one should not take
food, etc. from the owner of one or more houses. If there is one main owner, one
can take from the rest. Here, the Shayatar is the main one whose permission has
been taken. The various aspects of Shayatar have been considered. Nirgranth-
Nirgranthis can take clothes in five ways: Jangik, Bhangik, Sanak, Potak, and
Tiritpattak.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
gahastha ke yahAM bhikSA ke lie yA zaucAdi ke lie zramaNa bAhara jAya usa samaya
yadi koI gRhastha vastra, pAtra, kambala Adi denA cAhe to AcArya kI anumati
prApta hone para use lenA rakhanA caahie| vaise hI dhamaNI ke lie pravartinI kI
AjJA Avazyaka hai| zramaNa-zramaNiyoM ke lie rAtri ke samaya yA asamaya meM
AhArAdi grahaNa karane kA niSedha kiyA gayA hai| isI taraha vastra, pAtra,
kambala, rajoharaNa grahaNa kA niSedha hai| apavAdarUpa meM yadi taskara
zramaNa-zramaNiyoM ke vastra curAkara le gayA ho aura ve punaH prApta ho gaye
hoM to rAtri meM le sakate haiN| yadi ve vastra taskaroM ne pahane hoM, svaccha
kiye hoM, raMge hoM yA dhUpAdi sugandhita padArthoM se vAsita kiye hoM to bhI
grahaNa kara sakate haiN| nirgrantha va nirgranthiyoM ko rAtri ke samaya yA
vikAla meM vihAra kA niSedha kiyA gayA hai| yadi uccArabhUmi Adi ke lie apavAda
rUpa meM jAnA hI par3e to akelA na jAya kintu sAdhuoM ko sAtha lekara jAya /
nirgrantha va nirgranthiyoM ke vihAra kSetra kI maryAdA para cintana kiyA gayA
hai / pUrva meM aMgadeza evaM magadhadeza taka, dakSiNa meM kausAmbI taka,
pazcima meM sthUNA taka va uttara meM kuNAlA taka-ye AryakSetra haiN|
prAryakSetra meM vicarane se jJAna-darzana kI vRddhi hotI hai| yadi anAryakSetra
meM jAne para ratnatraya kI hAni kI sambhAvanA na ho to jA sakate haiN| dvitIya
uddezaka meM upAzraya viSayaka 12 sUtroM meM batAyA hai ki jisa upAzraya meM
zAlI, vIhi, mUga, ur3ada Adi bikhare par3e hoM vahAM para zramaNa-zramaNiyoM ko
kiMcit samaya bhI na rahanA cAhie kintu eka sthAna para Dhera rUpa meM par3e hue
hoM to vahAM hemanta va grISma Rtu meM rahanA kalpatA hai| yadi koSThAgAra Adi
meM surakSita rakhe hue hoM to varSAvAsa meM bhI rahanA kalpatA hai| jisa sthAna
para surAvikaTa, sauvIravikaTa Adi rakhe hoM vahA~ kiMcit samaya bhI sAdhu-
sAdhviyoM ko nahIM rahanA caahie|' yadi kAraNavazAt anveSaNA karane para bhI
anya sthAna upalabdha na ho to zramaNa do rAtri raha sakatA hai, adhika nhiiN|
adhika rahane para cheda yA parihAra kA prAyazcitta AtA hai / 2 / isI taraha
zItodakavikaTakubha, uSNodakavikaTakubha, jyoti, dIpaka aAdi se yukta upAzraya
meM nahIM rahanA caahie| isI taraha eka yA aneka makAna ke adhipati se AhArAdi
nahIM lenA caahie| yadi eka mukhya ho to usake atirikta zeSa ke yahAM se le
sakate haiN| yahAM para zayyAtara mukhya hai jisakI prAjJA grahaNa kI hai|
zayyAtara ke vividha pahaluoM para cintana kiyA gayA hai| nimrantha-nirganthiyoM
ko jAMgika, bhA~gika, sAnaka, potaka aura tiriTapaTTaka ye pA~ca prakAra se
vastra lenA kSemakIrtikRta vRti, pRSTha 10952 2. "chedo vA" paMcarAtrindivAdiH
"parihAro vA" mAsalaghukAdistapovizeSo bhavatIti sUtrArthaH / / -vahI 3.
jaMgamAH trasAH tadavayavaniSpannaM jAMgamikam, bhagA atasI tanmayaM bhAMgikam,
sanasUtramayaM sAnakam, potaka kAryAsikam tirITa: vRkSavizeSastasya yaH paTTo
valkala kSaNastaniSpanna tirITapaTTakaM nA paMcamam / ~-u02, sU024 [ 51 ]

Page #53 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
It is permissible to have five types of "rajoharan": au·πáik, prau·π£·π≠rik, sƒÅnak,
vaccakcipphak, and m≈´jccipphak. In the third udde≈õaka, it is not permissible for
nirgranthas to sit, sleep, eat, drink, study, meditate, or perform kayotsarga in
the shelter of nirgranthis. Similarly, it is not permissible for nirgranthis to
sit, eat, drink, etc. in the shelter of nirgranthas. The next four s≈´tras
discuss the rules regarding clothing, consumption, etc. Regarding clothing, it
is stated that they should not be colored, but should be white. The rules
regarding what items to wear or not wear are laid out. The rules regarding
clothing at the time of initiation are also described. It is forbidden to take
clothes during the rainy season, but there is no obstacle to taking clothes
during the winter and summer seasons if necessary. The division of clothing is
also considered in this regard. It is not permissible for nirgranthas and
nirgranthis to take pratihƒÅrik items and travel elsewhere without giving them to
their owner. If someone steals an item, it should be investigated and returned
to the owner if found. If necessary, it can be used with the owner's permission.
In the fourth udde≈õaka, the rules for atonement are laid out for offenses
related to abrahmasevan, night-time meals, etc. A pandaka, napu·π£aka, and vƒÅtika
are ineligible for pravrajyƒÅ. Even having sexual intercourse with them, eating
together, etc. is forbidden. It is inappropriate to teach scriptures to an
avinƒ´ta, rasalolopi, or krodhi. The three types of people who are ineligible for
pravrajyƒÅ and teaching are du·π£·π≠a, m≈´·∏çha, and duvidagdha. If a nirgranthi is ill
or for any other reason needs the support of their father, brother, son, etc. to
get up or sit down, and desires the support of a sƒÅdhaka, they receive a
cƒÅturmƒÅsika prƒÅya≈õcitta. Similarly, if a nirgranthi mother, wife, etc. needs
support and desires the support of a sƒÅdhvi, they also receive a cƒÅturmƒÅsika
prƒÅya≈õcitta. This is because there is a possibility of violating the fourth
vrata, so atonement is prescribed. It is not permissible for nirgranthas and
nirgranthis to accept kalƒÅtikrƒÅnta, k·π£etrƒÅtikrƒÅnta, pra≈õnƒÅdi, etc. It is not
permissible to keep food brought by the first pauru·π£ƒ´ until the fourth pauru·π£ƒ´.
If it is forgotten, it should be given to a partha. There is a rule for
atonement if it is used. If, by mistake, an ane·π£a·πáƒ´ya, snigdha pra≈õnƒÅdi, etc.
has come in the alms, it should be given to a ≈õrama·πáa who has not established
the mahƒÅvrata. If there is no such ≈õrama·πáa, it should be given to a partha in a
blameless place. Food, etc. prepared for ≈õrama·πáas who are in the state of
ƒÅchelakya, etc. is permissible for ≈õrama·πáas who are not in that state. Food,
etc. prepared for ≈õrama·πáas who are not in that state is not permissible for
≈õrama·πáas who are in that state. Here, "kalpasthita" means
"pancayƒÅmadharmapratipanna" and "akalpasthita" means
"cƒÅturyƒÅmadharmapratipanna". 1. "au·πáik" means "≈´ranikƒÅnƒÅm≈´r·πáƒÅbhiniv·πõttam",
"prau·π£·π≠rik" means "u·π£·π≠romƒÅbhiniv·πõttam", "sƒÅnak" means "sanav·πõk·π£avalkƒÅdjƒÅtam",
"vƒÅcakah" means "t·πõ·πáavi≈õe·π£astasyacippakah", "ku·π≠·π≠ita·∏• tvag≈´pa·∏• ten ni·π£panna
vaccakcipphakam", "mujah" means "≈õarastambastasyacippakƒÅdjƒÅtam m≈´jccipphakam
nƒÅma pa√±camam iti". - U. 2, S≈´. 25 [52]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
kalpatA hai aura auNika, prauSTrika, sAnaka, vaccakacippaka, mUjacippaka ye
pAMca prakAra ke' rajoharaNa rakhanA kalpatA hai| tRtIya uddezaka meM
nirgranthoM ko nirgranthiyoM ke upAzraya meM baiThanA, sonA, khAnA, pInA,
svAdhyAya, dhyAna, kAyotsarga karanA nahIM kalpatA / isI prakAra nirgranthiyoM
ko nirgranthoM ke upAzraya prAdi meM baiThanA, khAnA, pInA Adi nahIM kalpatA /
prAge ke cAra sUtroM meM carma viSayaka, upabhoga Adi ke sambandha meM
kalpAkalpa kI carcA hai| vastra ke sambandha meM kahA hai ki ve raMgIna na hoM,
kintu zveta hone caahie| kaunasI-kaunasI vastueM dhAraNa karanA yA na karanA-
isakA vidhAna kiyA gayA hai| dIkSA lete samaya vastroM kI maryAdA kA bhI varNana
kiyA gayA hai| varSAvAsa meM vastra lene kA niSedha hai kintu hemanta va grISma
RtU meM AvazyakatA hone para vastra lene meM bAdhA nahIM hai aura vastra ke
vibhAjana kA isa sambandha meM bhI cintana kiyA hai| nirgrantha-nirgranthiyoM ko
prAtihArika vastueM usake mAlika ko binA diye anyatra vihAra karanA nahIM
klptaa| yadi kisI vastu ko koI curA le to usakI anveSaNA karanI cAhiye aura
milane para zayyAtara ko de denI cAhie / yadi AvazyakatA ho to usakI AjJA hone
para upayoga kara sakatA hai / caturtha uddezaka meM abrahmasevana tathA rAtri-
bhojana Adi vratoM ke sambandha meM doSa lagane para prAyazcitta kA vidhAna kiyA
gayA hai| paMDaka, napusaka evaM vAtika pravrajyA ke lie ayogya hai| yahAM taka
ki unake sAtha saMbhoga eka sAtha bhojana-pAnAdi karanA bhI niSiddha hai|
avinIta, rasalolupI va krodhI ko zAstra par3hAnA anucita hai| duSTa, mUDha aura
duvidagdha ye tIna pravrajyA aura upadeza ke anadhikArI haiN| nigraMnthI rugNa
avasthA meM yA anya kisI kAraNa se apane pitA, bhAI, putra Adi kA sahArA lekara
uThatI yA baiThatI ho aura sAdhu ke sahAre kI icchA kare to cAturmAsika
prAyazcita pAtA hai| isI taraha nirgrantha mAtA, zrI Adi kA sahArA lete hue
tathA sAdhvI ke sahAre kI icchA kare to use bhI cAturmAsika prAyazcitta AtA hai|
isameM caturtha vrata ke khaMDana kI sambhAvanA hone se prAyazcitta kA vidhAna
kiyA hai| nirgrantha va nirganthiyoM ko kAlAtikrAnta, kSetrAtikrAnta prazanAdi
grahaNa karanA nahIM klptaa| prathama pauruSI kA lAyA huA AhAra caturtha pauruSI
taka rakhanA nahIM klptaa| yadi bhUla se raha jAya to paraTha denA caahie|
upayoga karane para prAyazcitta kA vidhAna hai| yadi bhUla se aneSaNIya, snigdha
prazanAdi bhikSA meM A gayA ho to anapasthApita zramaNa- jinameM mahAvratoM kI
sthApanA nahIM kI hai unheM de denA caahie| yadi vaha na ho to nirdoSa sthAna
para paraTha denA caahie| Acelakya prAdi kalpa meM sthita zramaNoM ke lie
nirmita AhArAdi akalpasthita zramaNoM ke lie kalpanIya hai| jo AhArAdi
akalpasthita zramaNoM ke lie nirmita ho vaha karUpasthita zramaNoM ke lie
akalpya hotA hai| yahAM para kalpasthita kA tAtparya hai
"paMcayAmadharmapratipanna" aura akalpasthita dharma kA artha hai
"caaturyaamdhrmprtipnn"| 1. "auNika" UraNikAnAmUrNAbhinivRttam, "pauSTrika"
uSTromabhinivRttam, "sAnaka" sanavRkSavalkAd jAtam "vAcakaH" tRNavizeSastasya
"cippakaH'' kuTTitaH tvagUpaH tena niSpanna vaccakacippakam "mujaH"
zarastambastasya cippakAd jAtaM mujacippaka nAma paMcamamiti / -u0 2, sU0 25 [
52

Page #54 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
If a Nigrantha wishes to be ordained in another gana due to knowledge or other
reasons, the permission of the Acharya is required. Similarly, if a Pracharaya,
Upadhyaya, Ganavachchedak, etc., wishes to be ordained in another gana, they
should join the other gana only after making suitable arrangements in their own
community. If a Shraman or Shramani attains Kaladharma during the evening or
night, other Shraman-Shramanis should keep the dead body carefully throughout
the night. In the morning, they should bring bamboo, etc., from a householder's
house, tie the deceased with it, and place it on a harmless land in the forest.
They should then return the bamboo, etc., to the householder. If a Shraman has
quarreled with a householder, he should not engage in begging until the
householder is pacified. To explain the method of accepting
Pariharavishuddhacharitra, on the day of Parana, the Acharya and Upadhyaya
themselves go to the Shraman, provide him with food, and after returning to
their own place, explain the method of observing Pariharavishuddhacharitra.
Shraman-Shramanis should not cross more than one of the five great rivers,
Ganga, Yamuna, Sarayu, Koshika, and Mahi, in a month. Shallow rivers like
Airavati, etc., can be crossed two or three times a month. Shraman-Shramanis
should stay in harmless huts made of grass, where they cannot stand properly,
during the Hemant and Grishma seasons. If the hut is made of harmless grass,
etc., and is less than two hands high, they cannot stay there during the rainy
season. If it is more than two hands high, they can stay there during the rainy
season. The Pancham Uddeshak states that if a deva takes the form of a woman and
holds the hand of a Sadhu, and the Sadhu considers her soft touch pleasurable,
he incurs the sin of Mithuna Pratisevan and has to perform Chaturmasik Guru-
Prayaschitta. Similarly, if a Sadhvi experiences the touch of a man and
considers it pleasurable, she also incurs Chaturmasik Guru-Prayaschitta. If a
Shraman joins another gana without resolving a conflict and the Acharya of that
gana learns that he has come there after quarreling, he should be given a five-
night punishment and then pacified and sent back to his own gana. If a strong or
weak Shraman takes food, etc., thinking that the sun has risen or has not yet
set, and then learns that the sun has not yet risen or has already set, he
should immediately abandon the food, etc. He does not incur the sin of night
food. One who takes food, etc., with doubt about sunrise and sunset incurs the
sin of night food. Shraman-Shramanis should spit out any food, etc., that comes
into their mouth through belching, etc., at night. If a Dwindriya, etc.,
creature falls into food, etc., it should be carefully removed and the food,
etc., should be consumed. If it cannot be removed, it should be placed in a
secluded, harmless place. If drops of water fall into food, etc., while eating,
and the food is hot, there is no fault in eating it. [53]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
kisI nigrantha ko jJAna Adi ke kAraNa anya gaNa meM upasampadA lenI ho to AcArya
kI anumati prAvazyaka hai| isI prakAra prAcArya, upAdhyAya, gaNAvacchedaka Adi
ko bhI yadi anya gaNa meM upasampadA lenI ho to apane samudAya kI yogya
vyavasthA karake hI anya gaNa meM sammilita honA caahie| saMdhyA ke samaya yA
rAtri meM koI zramaNa yA zramaNI kAladharma ko prApta ho jAya to dUsare zramaNa-
zramaNiyoM ko usa mRta zarIra ko rAtri bhara sAvadhAnI se rakhanA caahie| prAtaH
gRhastha ke ghara se bAMsa Adi lAkara mRtaka ko usase bAMdhakara dUra jaMgala
meM nirdoSa bhUmi para prasthApita kara denA cAhie aura puna: bAMsa Adi gahastha
ko de denA caahie| zramaNa ne kisI gahastha ke sAtha yadi kalaha kiyA ho to use
zAMta kiye binA bhikSAcaryA karamA nahIM klptaa| parihAravizuddhacAritra grahaNa
karane kI icchA vAle zramaNa ko vidhi samajhAne hetu pAraNe ke dina svayaM
cArya, upAdhyAya usake pAsa jAkara AhAra dilAte haiM aura svasthAna para Akara
parihAravizuddhacAritra kA pAlana karane kI vidhi batalAte haiN| zramaNa-
zramaNiyoM ko gaMgA, yamunA, sarayU, kozikA, mahI ina pAMca mahAnadiyoM meM se
mahIne meM eka se adhika bAra eka nadI pAra nahIM karanI caahie| airAvatI Adi
chichalI nadiyAM mahIne meM do-tIna bAra pAra kI jA sakatI haiN| zramaNa-
zramaNiyoM ko ghAsa kI aisI nirdoSa jhopar3I meM, jahAM para acchI taraha se
khar3A nahIM rahA jA sake, hemanta va grISma Rtu meM rahanA baya' hai| yadi
nirdoSa tRNAdi se banI huI do hAtha se kama UMcI jhopar3I hai to varSARtu meM
vahAM nahIM raha sakate / yadi do hAtha se adhika UMcI hai to vahAM varSARtu meM
raha sakate haiN| paMcama uddezaka meM batAyA hai ki yadi koI deva strI kA rUpa
banAkara sAdhu kA hAtha pakar3e aura vaha sAdhu usake komala sparza ko sukharUpa
mAne to use maithuna pratisevana doSa lagatA hai aura use cAturmAsika guru-
prAyazcitta AtA hai| isI prakAra sAdhvI ko bhI usake viparIta puruSa sparza kA
anubhava hotA hai aura use sukharUpa mAne to cAturmAsika guru-prAyazcitta AtA
hai| koI zramaNa binA kleza ko zAMta kie anya gaNa meM jAkara mila jAya aura usa
gaNa ke prAcArya ko jJAta ho jAya ki yaha zramaNa bahAM se kalaha karake AyA hai
to use pAMca rAtadina kA cheda denA cAhie aura use zAnta kara apane gaNa meM
punaH bheja denA caahie| sazakta yA azakta zramaNa sUryodaya ho cukA hai yA abhI
asta nahIM huyA hai aisA samajhakara yadi AhArAdi karatA hai aura phira yadi use
yaha jJAta ho jAya ki abhI to sUryodaya huA hI nahIM hai yA asta ho gayA hai to
use AhArAdi tatkSaNa tyAga denA caahie| use rAtribhojana kA doSa nahIM lgtaa|
sUryodaya aura sUryAsta ke prati zaMkAzIla hokara AhArAdi karane vAle ko
rAtribhojana kA doSa lagatA hai| zramaNa-zramaNiyoM ko rAtri meM DakArAdi ke
dvArA muha meM anna Adi A jAya to use bAhara thUka denA cAhie / yadi pAhArAdi
meM dvIndriyAdi jIva gira jAya to yatanApUrvaka nikAla kara AhArAdi karanA
caahie| yadi nikalane kI sthiti meM na ho to ekAnta nirdoSa sthAna meM
paristhApana kara de| aAhArAdi lete samaya sacitta pAnI kI bUdeM AhArAdi meM
gira jAeM aura vaha AhAra garama ho to use khAne meM kicita mAtra bhI doSa nahIM
hai| [53 ]

Page #55 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Because the drops that fall in it become unmindful / If the food is cold, one
should neither eat it oneself nor feed it to others, but should place it in a
secluded place. For a Nirgranthi, to live alone, to remain naked, to be without
possessions, to take sunbath outside the village, to sit in Utkatukasana,
Virasana, Dandasana, Lagudshayi and other asanas and perform Kayotsarga is the
way. - It is inconceivable for Nirgranthis to take the Mok (urine or spit) of
each other, but it can be taken due to reasons like illness / If a Bhikshu in
the form of a Parihar has to go elsewhere on the orders of a Sthavir, etc., he
should go quickly and return after completing the work. If there is any kind of
fault in the character, then one should purify oneself by performing atonement.
In the sixth Uddeshak, it is stated that Nirgranthis should not speak six types
of words: Alik (false) words, Heelitavachan, Khisitavachan, Parushavachan,
Garhasthikavachan, Vyavashmitodiranavachan (words that stir up a settled
dispute). One who accuses someone of Pranatipat, Mrishvad, Adattadan, Avirati-
Abrahma, Napusak, Das, etc., receives atonement. If a thorn has pierced the foot
of a Nirgranthi and he is unable to remove it, then a Nirgranthi can remove it
as an exception. Similarly, if there is a situation of drowning, falling,
slipping, etc. in a river, etc., then a Sadhu or Sadhvi can save him by holding
his hand / Similarly, a Nirgranthi with a disturbed mind can be taken to his
place by holding his hand, in the same way, a Sadhvi can also take him by
holding his hand. It should be remembered that these are exceptional sutras.
There is no feeling of depravity in this, but a feeling of protecting each
other's restraint. The name of the Sadhu's code of conduct is Kalpasthiti / It
is of six types - Samayik-Sanyatakalpasthiti, Chhedopasthapaniya
Sanyatakalpasthiti, Nirvishamanakalpasthiti, Nivishtakayikakalpasthiti,
Jinkalpasthiti and Sthavirakalpasthiti. _In this way, Brihatkalpa sheds light on
many important facts related to the life and conduct of Shraman-Shramani. This
is the special feature of this scripture. Vyavaharsutra Brihatkalpa and Vyavahar
are both complementary to each other / Vyavahar is also a Chhedasutra which is
Charananuyogamaya. It has ten Uddeshak / 373 Anushtup shlokas are the available
original text / 267 are the number of sutras. In the first Uddeshak, a Shraman
who consumes a fault worthy of monthly atonement and criticizes that fault to
the Acharya, etc. without deceit, receives a monthly atonement, while if he does
it with deceit, he becomes a participant in a bi-monthly atonement. A Sadhak who
criticizes a fault worthy of bi-monthly atonement without deceit receives a bi-
monthly atonement, and if he does it with deceit, he receives a three-month
atonement / In this way, three, four, five and six months [ 54 ]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
kyoMki usameM par3I huI bUMdeM acitta ho jAtI haiM / yadi AhAra zItala hai to na
svayaM khAnA cAhie aura na dUsaroM ko khilAnA cAhie apitu ekAnta sthAna para
paristhApana kara denA caahie| nirgranthI ko ekAkI rahanA, nagna rahanA,
pAvarahita rahanA, grAmAdi ke bAhara AtApanA lenA, utkaTukAsana, vIrAsana,
daNDAsana, laguDazAyI Adi Asana para baiThakara kAyotsarga karanA vayaM hai| -
nirgrantha-nirgranthiyoM ko paraspara moka (pezAba yA thUka) kA Acamana karanA
akalpya hai kintu rogAdi kAraNoM se grahaNa kiyA jA sakatA hai / parihArakarUpa
meM sthiti bhikSa ko sthavira Adi ke Adeza se anyatra jAnA par3e to zIghra jAnA
cAhie aura kArya karake punaH lauTa AnA caahie| yadi cAritra meM kisI prakAra kA
doSa lage to prAyazcitta lekara zuddha kara lenA caahie| chaThe uddezaka meM
yaha batAyA hai ki nirgrantha-nirgranthiyoM ko alIka (jhUTha) vacana,
hIlitavacana, khisitavacana, paruSavacana, gArhasthikavacana,
vyavazamitodIraNavacana (zAMta hue kalaha ko ubhAranevAlA vacana), ye chaha
prakAra ke vacana nahIM bolanA caahie| prANAtipAta, mRSAvAda, adattAdAna,
avirati-abrahma, napusaka, dAsa Adi kA Aropa lagAne vAle ko prAyazcitta pAtA
hai| nirgantha ke paira meM kAMTA laga gayA ho aura vaha nikAlane meM asamartha
ho to use apavAdarUpa meM nirgranthI nikAla sakatI hai| isI prakAra nadI Adi meM
DUbane, girane, phisalane Adi kA prasaMga Aye to sAdhu sAdhvI kA hAtha
pakar3akara bacAye / isI prakAra vikSiptacitta nirgranthI ko apane hAtha se
pakar3akara usake sthAna para pahuMcA de, vaise hI bhI sAdhvI hAtha pakar3akara
pahuMcA sakatI hai| yaha smaraNa rakhanA cAhie ki ye ApavAdika sUtra haiN|
isameM vikArabhAvanA nahIM kintu paraspara ke saMyama kI surakSA kI bhAvanA hai|
sAdhu kI maryAdA kA nAma kalpasthiti hai / yaha chaha prakAra kI hai--sAmAyika-
saMyatakalpasthiti, chedopasthApanIya saMyatakalpasthiti,
nirvizamAnakalpasthiti, niviSTakAyikakalpasthiti, jinakalpasthiti aura
sthvirklpsthiti| _isa prakAra bRhatkalpa meM zramaNa-zramaNiyoM ke jIvana aura
vyavahAra se sambandhita aneka mahattvapUrNa tathyoM para prakAza DAlA hai| yahI
isa zAstra kI vizeSatA hai| vyavahArasUtra bRhatkalpa aura vyavahAra ye donoM
eka dUsare ke pUraka haiM / vyavahAra bhI chedasUtra hai jo caraNAnuyogamaya
hai| isameM daza uddezaka haiM / 373 anuSTupa zloka pramANa upalabdha mUla pATha
hai / 267 sUtra saMkhyA hai| prathama uddezaka meM mAsika prAyazcitta ke yogya
doSa kA sevana kara usa doSa kI prAcArya Adi ke pAsa kapaTarahita AlocanA karane
vAle zramaNa ko ekamAsika prAyazcitta pAtA hai jabaki kapaTasahita karane para
dvimAsika prAyazcitta kA bhAgI hotA hai| dvimAsika prAyazcitta ke yogya doSa kI
sAdhaka niSkapaTa AlocanA karatA hai to use dvimAsika prAyazcitta pAtA hai aura
kapaTasahita karane se tIna mAsa kA / isa prakAra tIna, cAra, pAMca aura chaha
mAsa ke [ 54 ]

Page #56 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
There is a provision for atonement. The provision for atonement is for a maximum
of six months. One who has committed many offenses should be criticized in order
and then atonement should be taken for all together. Even while doing atonement,
if the offense is committed again, then atonement should be done again. The
Shraman who is taking atonement should get up and sit with other Sadhus only
after taking permission from the Sthavir etc. If he sits with someone in
violation of the permission, then his Dikshaparaya for that many days is
reduced, which is called a hole in the Agamic language. He can go to another
place for the service of Sthavir etc. by abandoning the Pariharakalp / A Shraman
wanders alone by abandoning the Gan, and if he feels unable to follow the pure
conduct, then he should be criticized and a hole or new Diksha should be taken /
The same rule applies to the single-minded Ganavchhedak, Acharya and
Shithilachari Shraman as is generally for the single-minded Shraman. Criticism
should be done in front of the Pracharya, Upadhyay and atonement should be taken
to become pure. If they are absent, then criticism should be done in front of
their Sambhogi, Sarmic, Bahushrut etc. If they are not nearby, then criticism
should be done by going to the Sambhogi, Bahushrut etc. Shraman of another
community wherever they are and atonement should be taken. If they are also not
there, then if there is a Sarupik (Sadoshi) but Bahushrut Sadhu, then atonement
should be taken by going there. If he is also not there, then atonement should
be taken by going to the Bahushrut Shramanopasak, and if he is also absent, then
atonement should be taken by going to the Samyagdristi Gahesth / In the absence
of all these, go outside the village or city and stand facing the east or north
direction, fold both hands and criticize your offense / It is said in the second
Uddeshak that if two Sarmic are together with the same Samachari and one of them
has committed an offense, then atonement should be taken in front of the other.
The burden of service etc. of the one doing atonement remains on the other
Shraman. If both have committed the offense, then they should criticize each
other, take atonement and serve. If one Shraman has committed an offense out of
many Shramans, then atonement should be given to only one / If all have
committed an offense, then all except one should take atonement and purify
themselves, and after their atonement is complete, he should also be given
atonement and purified. It is not considered appropriate to remove the
Pariharakalp-situated Shraman from the Gachch if he becomes ill / It is the duty
of the Ganavchhedak to make him recite the Bayavritti until he becomes healthy,
and after becoming healthy, he should take atonement because he served in the
Sadoshav‡§∏‡•ç‡§•‡§æ. Similarly, the one who is doing Anvasthapy and Paranchik atonement
should not be removed from the Gachch in the state of illness. The Viksiptchitt
should also not be removed from the Gachch, and until his mind becomes stable,
his full service should be done, and after becoming healthy, nominal atonement
should be given. Similarly, the Deeptchitt (whose mind has become inflamed with
pride), Unmadprapt, Upsargprapt, Sadhikarana, Saprayaschitt etc. should not be
removed from the Gachch. The ninth Anvasthapy atonement-taking Sadhu should be
reinstated in restraint without making him wear a Mrihsthalang [ 55 ]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
prAyazcitta kA vidhAna hai| adhika se adhika chaha mAsa ke prAyazcitta kA
vidhAna hai| jisane aneka doSoM kA sevana kiyA ho use kramazaH pAlocanA karanI
cAhie aura phira sabhI kA sAtha meM prAyazcitta lenA caahie| prAyazcitta karate
hue bhI yadi punaH doSa laga jAya to usakA punaHprAyazcitta karanA caahie|
prAyazcitta kA sevana karane vAle zramaNa ko sthavira Adi kI anujJA lekara hI
anya sAdhuoM ke sAtha uThanAbaiThanA caahie| AjJA kI avahelanA kara kisI ke
sAtha yadi vaha baiThatA hai to utane dina kI usakI dIkSAparyAya kama hotI hai
jise Agamika bhASA meM cheda kahA gayA hai| parihArakalpa kA parityAga kara
sthavira Adi kI sevA ke lie dUsare sthAna para jA sakatA hai / koI zramaNa gaNa
kA parityAga kara ekAkI vicaraNa karatA hai aura yadi vaha apane ko zuddha
prAcAra ke pAlana karane meM asamartha anubhava karatA hai to use AlocanA kara
cheda yA navIna dIkSA grahaNa karavAnI cAhie / jo niyama sAmAnya rUpa se
ekalavihArI zramaNa ke lie hai vahI niyama ekalavihArI gaNAvacchedaka, AcArya va
zithilAcArI zramaNa ke lie hai| AlocanA prAcArya, upAdhyAya ke samakSa kara
prAyazcitta lekara zuddha honA caahie| yadi ve anupasthita hoM to apane
saMbhogI, sArmika, bahuzruta Adi ke samakSa AlocanA karanI caahie| yadi ve pAsa
meM na hoM to anya samudAya ke saMbhogI, bahuzruta Adi zramaNa jahA~ hoM vahA~
jAkara AlocanA kara prAyazcitta grahaNa karanA caahie| yadi vaha bhI na hoM to
sArUpika (sadoSI) kintu bahuzruta sAdhu hoM to vahA~ jAkara prAyazcitta lenA
caahie| yadi vaha bhI na hoM to bahuzruta zramaNopAsaka ke pAsa aura usakA bhI
abhAva ho to samyagdaSTi gahastha ke pAsa jAkara prAyazcitta karanA cAhie / ina
sabake abhAva meM gA~va yA nagara ke bAhara jAkara pUrva yA uttara dizA ke
sammukha khar3e hokara donoM hAtha jor3akara apane aparAdha kI pAlocanA kare /
dvitIya uddezaka meM kahA hai ki eka samAna samAcArI vAle do sArmika sAtha meM
hoM aura unameM se kisI eka ne doSa kA sevana kiyA ho to dUsare ke sanmukha
prAyazcitta lenA caahie| prAyazcitta karane vAle kI sevA Adi kA bhAra dUsare
zramaNa para rahatA hai| yadi donoM ne doSasthAna kA sevana kiyA ho to paraspara
AlocanA kara prAyazcitta lekara sevA karanI caahie| aneka zramaNoM meM se kisI
eka zramaNa ne aparAdha kiyA ho to eka ko hI prAyazcitta de / yadi sabhI ne
aparAdha kiyA hai to eka ke atirikta zeSa sabhI prAyazcitta lekara zuddhikaraNa
kareM aura unakA prAyazcitta pUrNa hone para use bhI prAyazcitta dekara zuddha
kreN| parihArakalpasthita zramaNa kadAcit rugNa ho jAya to use gaccha se bAhara
nikAlanA nahIM kalpatA / jaba taka vaha svastha na ho jAya taba taka bayAvRtya
karavAnA gaNAvacchedaka kA kartavya hai aura svastha hone para usane
sadoSAvasthA meM sevA karavAI ataH use prAyazcitta lenA caahie| isI taraha
anavasthApya evaM pArAMcika prAyazcitta karane vAle ko bhI rugNAvasthA meM
gaccha se bAhara nahIM karanA caahie| vikSiptacitta ko bhI gaccha se bAhara
nikAlanA nahIM kalpatA aura jaba taka usakA citta sthira na ho jAya taba taka
usakI pUrNa sevA karanI cAhie tathA svastha hone para nAmamAtra kA prAyazcitta
denA caahie| isI prakAra dIptacitta (jisakA citta abhimAna se udadIpta ho gayA
hai), unmAdaprApta, upasargaprApta, sAdhikaraNa, saprAyazcitta grAdi ko gaccha
se bAhara nikAlanA nahIM klptaa| nauvAM anavasthApya prAyazcitta karane vAle
sAdhu ko mRhasthaliMga dhAraNa karAye binA saMyama meM punaH sthApita [ 55 ]

Page #57 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
It should not be done, because its offense is so great that without doing so,
its full atonement cannot be done, and nor is fear generated in the minds of
other Shramans towards that type of offense. Similarly, after dressing the
Shraman with the tenth Paranchik atonement in the garb of a householder, he
should be re-established in restraint / This right is in the hands of the
atonement giver that he can also dress him in another type of garb without
dressing him in the garb of a householder. It is not appropriate for Pariharic
and Apariharic Shramans to eat together / Apariharic Shramans should not eat
with Pariharic Shramans without completing their tapas, because those who are
ascetics, after completing their tapas, cannot eat with them before one month of
tapas has passed for five days and six months of tapas for one month, because
during those days they need a special type of food which is not necessary for
others / The third Uddeshak states that if a Shraman has a desire in his mind to
wander independently, but he is not knowledgeable about Acharang etc., then even
if he has disciples etc. with his family, it is not appropriate to be
independent by forming a separate gana. If he is knowledgeable about Acharang
etc., then he should wander after taking permission from the sthavir, the one
who wanders without the permission of the sthavir has to be a part of the chhed
or Pariharic atonement for as many days as he has wandered in this way. Only one
who has been initiated for at least three years, is proficient in the practice
of Nirgranth, is proficient in restraint, is proficient in Acharang Pradi
Pravachanshastras, is fully capable of giving atonement, is skilled in deciding
the field etc. for the Sangha, is virtuous, is learned etc. can become an
Upadhyay. One who is skilled in the practice of Shraman, is adept in preaching,
is knowledgeable about Dashashrutaskandha-Kalpa-Brihatkalpavyavahar and has been
initiated for at least five years can become an Acharya / Acharya, Upadhyay,
Pravartini, Sthavir, Gani, Ganavchhedak can be given to one who is skilled in
the practice of Shraman, is proficient in preaching, is unattached in mind and
is knowledgeable about Stananga-Samavayanga. In an exception, a sadhu who has
been initiated for one day can also be established in the position of Acharya,
Upadhyay. Such a sadhu must be a believer, patient, trustworthy, impartial,
joyful, permitted, majority and of high birth and endowed with qualities. One
should follow restraint only with the permission of the Acharya or Upadhyay /
One who consumes non-Brahma is ineligible for the position of Acharya etc. / If
he has done such a deed after abandoning the Gachchha, then after taking re-
initiation and three years have passed, if his mind is stable, his vices are
calm, there is no lack of kshaya etc., then he can be established in the
position of Acharya. The fourth Uddeshak states that there should be at least
one other sadhu with the Acharya or Upadhyay in the Hemant and Grishma seasons
and two with the Ganavchhedak / In the rainy season, it is necessary to have two
sadhus with the Acharya and Upadhyay and three with the Ganavchhedak. [ 56 ]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
nahIM karanA cAhie, kyoMki usakA aparAdha itanA mahAna hotA hai ki binA vaisA
kiye usakA pUrA prAyazcitta nahIM ho pAtA aura na anya zramaNoM ke antarmAnasa
meM usa prakAra ke aparAdha ke prati bhaya hI utpanna hotA hai| isI prakAra
dasaveM pAraMcika prAyazcitta vAle zramaNa ko bhI gahastha kA veSa pahanAne ke
pazcAta puna: saMyama meM sthApita karanA cAhie / yaha adhikAra prAyazcittadAtA
ke hAtha meM hai ki use gahastha kA veSa na pahanAkara anya prakAra kA veSa bhI
pahanA sakatA hai| pArihArika aura apArihArika zramaNa eka sAtha AhAra kareM,
yaha ucita nahIM hai / pArihArika zramaNoM ke sAtha binA tapa pUrNa hue
apArihArika zramaNoM ko AhArAdi nahIM karanA cAhie, kyoMki jo tapasvI haiM unakA
tapa pUrNa hone ke pazcAt eka mAsa ke tapa para pAMca dina aura chaha mahIne ke
tapa para eka mahInA vyatIta ho jAne ke pUrva unake sAtha koI AhAra nahIM kara
sakatA, kyoMki una dinoM meM unake lie vizeSa prakAra ke pAhAra kI AvazyakatA
hotI hai jo dUsaroM ke lie Avazyaka nahIM / tRtIya uddezaka meM batAyA hai ki
kisI zramaNa ke mAnasa meM apanA svataMtra gaccha banAkara paribhramaNa karane
kI icchA ho para vaha AcArAMga Adi kA parijJAtA nahIM ho to ziSya Adi
parivArasahita hone para bhI pRthak gaNa banAkara svacchandI honA yogya nhiiN|
yadi vaha AcArAMga Adi kA jJAtA hai to sthavira se anumati lekara vicara thavira
kI binA anumati ke vicarane bAle ko jitane dina isa prakAra vicarA ho utane hI
dina kA cheda yA pArihArika prAyazcitta kA bhAgI honA par3atA hai| upAdhyAya
vahI bana sakatA hai jo kama se kama tIna varSa kI dIkSAparyAya vAlA hai,
nirgrantha ke prAcAra meM niSNAta haiM, saMyama meM pravINa hai, AcArAMga prAdi
pravacanazAstroM meM pAraMgata hai, prAyazcitta dene meM pUrNa samartha hai,
saMgha ke lie kSetra Adi kA nirNaya karane meM dakSa hai, cAritravAna hai,
bahuzruta hai Adi / prAcArya vaha bana sakatA hai jo zramaNa ke prAcAra meM
kuzala, pravacana meM paTu, dazAzrutaskandha-kalpa-bRhatkalpavyavahAra kA jJAtA
hai aura kama se kama pAMca varSa kA dIkSita hai / AcArya, upAdhyAya,
pravartinI, sthavira, gaNI, gaNAvacchedaka pada use diyA jA sakatA hai jo
zramaNa ke prAcAra meM kuzala, pravacanadakSa, asaMkliSTamanA va sthAnAMga-
samavAyAMga kA jJAtA hai| apavAda meM eka dina kI dIkSAparyAya vAle sAdhu ko bhI
prAcArya, upAdhyAya ke pada para pratiSThita kiyA jA sakatA hai| usa prakAra kA
sAdhu pratItikArI, dhairyazIla, vizvasanIya, samabhAvI, pramoda kArI, anumata,
bahumata va ucca kulotpanna evaM guNasaMpanna honA Avazyaka hai| AcArya athavA
upAdhyAya kI AjJA se hI saMyama kA pAlana karanA cAhie / abrahma kA sevana
karane vAlA prAcArya Adi padavI ke ayogya hai / yadi gaccha kA parityAga kara
usane vaisA kArya kiyA hai to punaH dIkSA dhAraNa kara tIna varSa bItane para
yadi usakA mana sthira ho, vikAra zAMta ho, kaSAya Adi kA abhAva ho to prAcArya
pada para pratiSThita kiyA jA sakatA hai| caturtha uddezaka meM kahA hai ki
prAcArya athavA upAdhyAya ke sAtha hemanta aura grISma Rtu meM kama se kama eka
anya sAdhu honA cAhie aura gaNAvacchedaka ke sAtha do / barSARtu meM prAcArya
aura upAdhyAya ke sAtha do va gaNAvacchedaka ke sAtha tIna sAdhuoM kA honA
Avazyaka hai| [ 56 ]

Page #58 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
This text sheds light on the importance of the Acharya and explains how to
conduct oneself in their absence. If the Acharya or Upadhyaya is seriously ill
and their life expectancy is low, all other Shramans should be called together
and the Acharya should declare that upon their passing, a particular Sadhu
should be given a particular position. If, after their death, that Sadhu does
not seem suitable, another can be appointed. If the Sadhu is deemed suitable,
they should be appointed. If another suitable Shraman is not yet proficient in
the Acharanga and other texts, they can be temporarily appointed to any position
with the consent of the Acharya and others. Once a suitable candidate is found,
the previous individual should relinquish their position. Failure to do so will
result in a penance. If two Shramans are traveling together, they should conduct
themselves as senior and junior according to their qualifications and respect
each other. The same applies to the Acharya and Upadhyaya. In the fifth
Uddeshak, the Pravartini should travel from village to village in the cold and
hot seasons with at least two other Sadhvis, and the Ganavachhedaka should be
accompanied by three other Sadhvis. During the rainy season, the Pravartini
should be accompanied by three and the Ganavachhedaka by four Sadhvis. The same
rules regarding the death of the Pravartini and the appointment of a successor
apply to the Shramanis as they do to the Shramans. The general rule for
Vaiavrittya is that a Shraman should not perform Vaiavrittya for a Shramani, and
vice versa. However, they can serve each other in exceptional circumstances. In
cases of snakebite or other emergencies, service can be provided by a
householder, but this is not permitted for Sthavirakalpis. Vaiavrittya is not
permitted for Jinakalpis. If they seek service, they must perform a Pariharic
penance. The sixth Uddeshak states that one should not visit their relatives
without the permission of the Sthaviras. Shramans and Shramanis who are
Alpashrut and Alp-Pragami should not visit their relatives alone. If they must
visit, they should do so with a Bahushrut and Bahupragamdhari Shraman or
Shramani. Food that is cooked and ready before the arrival of a Shraman is
acceptable, but food that is not ready is not acceptable. When the Acharya or
Upadhyaya arrives at the Upashraya from outside, their feet should be wiped
clean. Their belongings, such as their Lghunit, should be carefully placed on
the ground. They should be served with Vaiavrittya as much as possible. They
should be accompanied within the Upashraya. When they leave the Upashraya, they
should be accompanied. The Ganavachhedak should be accompanied within the
Upashraya and when leaving. Shramans and Shramanis are expected to live with
Shramans and Shramanis who are knowledgeable in the Pracharanga and other
Agamas. Living with those who are not knowledgeable will result in penance. If
Shramans and Shramanis from other Gachchas come for a specific reason, and they
are innocent, virtuous, free from major faults, untouched by anger and other
negative emotions, and self-critical, they should be treated with equality.
Otherwise, they should not be. [ 57 ]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
AcArya kI mahattA para prakAza DAlakara yaha batAyA gayA hai ki unake abhAva meM
kisa prakAra rahanA cAhie ? AcArya, upAdhyAya yadi adhika rugNa hoM aura jIvana
kI AzA kama ho to anya sabhI zramaNoM ko bulAkara prAcArya kahe ki merI Ayu
pUrNa hone para amuka sAdhu ko amuka padavI pradAna karanA / unakI mRtyu ke
pazcAt yadi vaha sAdhu yogya pratIta na ho to anya ko bhI pratiSThita kiyA jA
sakatA hai aura yogya ho to use hI pratiSThita karanA caahie| anya yogya zramaNa
AcArAMga Adi par3hakara dakSa na ho jAya taba taka AcArya Adi kI sammati se
asthAyI rUpa se sAdhu ko kisI bhI pada para pratiSThita kiyA jA sakatA hai aura
yogya padAdhikArI prApta hone para pUrvavyakti ko apane pada se pRthaka ho jAnA
caahie| yadi vaha vaisA nahIM karatA hai to prAyazcitta kA bhAgI hotA hai| do
zramaNa sAtha meM vicaraNa karate hoM to unheM yogyatAnusAra choTA aura bar3A
hokara rahanA cAhie aura eka-dUsare kA sammAna karanA cAhie / isI prakAra
AcArya, upAdhyAya ko bhii| pAMcaveM uddezaka meM pravartinI ko kama se kama do
anya sAdhviyoM ke sAtha zItoSNakAla meM grAmAnugrAma vicaraNa karanA cAhie aura
gaNAvacchedikA ke sAtha tIna anya sAdhviyAM honI cAhie / varSA Rtu meM
pravartinI ke sAtha tIna aura gaNAvacchedikA ke sAtha cAra sAdhviyAM honI
caahie| pravartinI prAdi kI mRtyU aura padAdhikArI kI niyukti ke sambandha meM
jaisA zramaNoM ke lie kahA gayA hai vaisA hI zramaNiyoM ke lie bhI samajhanA
caahie| vaiyAvRtya ke lie sAmAnya vidhAna yaha hai ki zramaNa, zramaNI se aura
zramaNI, zramaNa se bayAvRtya na karAve kintu apavAdarUpa meM paraspara sevA-
zuzrUSA kara sakate haiN| sarpadaMza Adi koI viziSTa paristhiti paidA ho jAya to
apavAdarUpa meM gahastha se bhI sevA karavAI jA na sthavirakalpiyoM ke lie hai|
jinakalpiyoM ke lie sevA kA vidhAna nahIM hai| yadi ve sevA karavAte haiM to
pArihArika taparUpa prAyazcitta karanA par3atA hai| chaThe uddezaka meM batAyA
hai ki apane svajanoM ke yahAM binA sthaviroM kI anumati prApta kie nahIM jAnA
caahie| jo zramaNa-zramaNI alpazruta va alpa-prAgamI haiM unheM ekAkI apane
sambandhiyoM ke yahAM nahIM jAnA cAhie / yadi jAnA hai to bahuzruta va
bahuprAgamadhArI zramaNa-zramaNI ke sAtha jAnA caahie| zramaNa ke pahuMcane ke
pUrva jo vastu paka kara taiyAra ho cukI hai vaha grAhya hai aura jo taiyAra
nahIM huI hai vaha agrAhya hai| prAcArya, upAdhyAya yadi bAhara se upAzraya meM
AveM to unake pAMva poMchakara sApha karanA caahie| unake laghunIta Adi ko
yatanApUrvaka bhUmi para paraThanA caahie| yathAzakti unakI vaiyAvRtya karanI
cAhie / upAzraya meM unake sAtha rahanA caahie| upAzraya ke bAhara jAveM taba
unake sAtha jAnA cAhie / gaNAvacchedaka upAzraya meM raheM taba sAtha rahanA
cAhie aura upAzraya se bAhara jAeM to sAtha jAnA caahie| zramaNa-zramaNiyoM ko
prAcArAMga Adi AgamoM ke jJAtA zramaNa-zramaNiyoM ke sAtha rahana kalpatA hai
aura binA jJAtA ke sAtha rahane para prAyazcitta kA bhAgI bananA par3atA hai|
kisI vizeSa kAraNa se anya gaccha se nikalakara Ane vAle zramaNa-zramaNI yadi
nirdoSa haiM, AcAraniSTha haiM, sabaladoSa se rahita haiM, krodhAdi se
asaMspRSTa haiM, apane doSoM kI AlocanA kara zUddhi karate haiM, to unake sAtha
samAnatA kA vyavahAra karanA kalpatA hai, nahIM to nhiiN| [ 57 ]

Page #59 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The seventh Uddeshak states that a Sadhu should not initiate a woman and a
Sadhvi should not initiate a man. If a woman in a place where there is no Sadhvi
nearby feels a desire for renunciation, then she can be initiated on the
condition that she will be entrusted to a Sadhvi as soon as possible. Similarly,
a Sadhvi can also initiate a man. It is not considered appropriate for Shramanis
to wander in places where thieves, rogues, or wicked people are prevalent, as
there is a fear of theft of clothes and other belongings, and violation of vows.
There is no such restriction for Shramans. If a Shraman has a feud with another
Shraman who resides in a dangerous place (a place inhabited by thieves, etc.),
then he should go there and apologize to him, but not while staying in his own
place. However, a Shramani can apologize from her own place. It is not
considered appropriate for Sadhus and Sadhvis to wander freely without the
control of the Acharya and Upadhyaya. The eighth Uddeshak highlights that a
Sadhu should bring bedding materials that can be lifted with one hand, and
should be brought from a distance that can be covered in three days. For a bound
Nirgranth, it is considered appropriate to bring such materials from a distance
that can be covered in five days, if necessary. The following equipment is
considered appropriate for a Sthavir: Danda, Bhand, Chatra, Matrika, Lasthik
(pillow or cushion to be kept behind the back), a cushion for meditation, Chel
(cloth), Chel-Chilimilika (cloth curtain), Charm, Charmkosh (leather bag),
Charm-Palich (piece of leather for wrapping). Those equipment that cannot be
carried along can be kept at the residence of a householder near the Upashraya
and used from time to time. If there are many Shramans in a place, and one of
them has forgotten some equipment at a householder's place, and another Shraman
goes there, then the householder should tell the Shraman that this equipment
belongs to a saint of your community. Then the saint should take the equipment
and come to his own place and give it to the one who owns it. If the equipment
does not belong to any saint, then he should neither use it himself nor give it
to others for use, but should abandon it in a harmless place. If the Shraman has
left from there, then he should search for him and deliver it to him personally.
If his exact address is not known, then he should deposit it in a secluded
place. While discussing Pahar, it has been stated that one who eats eight
morsels is called Alp-Yahari, one who eats twelve morsels is called
Aparthavmaudrik, one who eats sixteen morsels is called Dvibhagaprapt, one who
eats twenty-four morsels is called PraptAvmaudrik, one who eats thirty-two
morsels is called PramanopetAhari, and one who eats one morsel less than thirty-
two is called Avmaudrik. The ninth Uddeshak states that if a Shramatar has
ownership or some right over food, etc., then that food is not acceptable for
Shramans and Shramanis. It also mentions the Bhikshu-Pratimans, which we have
already discussed in the description of DashaShrutaSkandha. The tenth Uddeshak,
while describing the form of Yavamdhyachandra-Pratima or Vanamdhyachandra-
Pratima, states that one which is thick in the middle and thin on both sides,
like a grain of barley, is called Yavamdhyachandra-Pratima. One which is thin in
the middle and thick on both sides, like a forest, is called Vajramdhyachandra-
Pratima. The holder of Yavamdhyachandra-Pratima is called Vamdhyachandra-
Pratima. One who is like a forest [ 58 ]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
sAtaveM uddezaka meM yaha vidhAna hai ki sAdhU strI ko aora sAdhvI puruSa ko
dIkSA na de| yadi kisI aise sthAna meM kisI strI ko vairAgya bhAvanA jAgrata haI
ho jahAM sannikaTa meM sAdhvI na ho to vaha isa zarta para dIkSA detA hai ki
vaha yathAzIghra kisI sAdhvI ko supurda kara degaa| isI taraha sAdhvI bhI puruSa
ko dIkSA de sakatI hai| jahAM para taskara, badamAza yA duSTa vyaktiyoM kA
prAdhAnya ho vahAM zramaNiyoM ko vicaranA nahIM kalpatA, kyoMki vahAM para
vastrAdi ke apaharaNa va vratabhaMga zrAdi kA bhaya rahatA hai| zramaNoM ke lie
koI bAdhA nahIM hai| kisI zramaNa kA kisI aise zramaNa se vaira-virodha ho gayA
hai jo vikaTa dizA (corAdi kA nivAsa ho aisA sthAna) meM hai to vahA~ jAkara
usase kSamAyAcanA karanI cAhie, kintu svasthAna para rahakara nhiiN| kintu
zramaNI apane sthAna se bhI kSamAyAcanA kara sakatI hai| sAdhu-sAdhviyoM ko
AcArya, upAdhyAya ke niyantraNa ke binA svacchanda rUpa se paribhramaNa karanA
nahIM klptaa| AThaveM uddezaka meM isa bAta para prakAza DAlA gayA hai ki sAdhU
eka hAtha se uThAne yogya choTe-moTe zayyA saMstAraka, tIna dina meM jitanA
mArga taya kara sake utanI dUra se lAnA kalpatA hai| kisI baddha nirgrantha ke
lie mAvazyakatA par3ane para pAMca dina meM jitanA cala sake utanI dUrI se lAnA
kalpatA hai / sthavira ke lie nimna upakaraNa kalpanIya haiM--daNDa, bhANDa,
chatra, mAtrikA, lASThika (pITha ke pIche rakhane ke lie takiyA yA pATA),
dhyAyAdi ke lie baiThane kA pATA), cela (vastra), cela-cilimilikA (vastra kA
pardA), carma, carmakoza (camar3e kI thailI), carma-palicha (lapeTane ke lie
camar3e kA ttukdd'aa)| ina upakaraNoM meM se jo sAtha meM rakhane ke yogya na
hoM unheM upAzraya ke samIpa kisI gRhastha ke yahAM rakhakara samaya-samaya para
unakA upayoga kiyA jA sakatA hai| kisI sthAna para aneka zramaNa rahate hoM,
unameM se koI zramaNa kisI gRhastha ke yahAM para koI upakaraNa bhUla gayA ho
aura anya zramaNa vahAM para gayA ho to gRhastha zramaNa se kahe ki yaha
upakaraNa Apake samudAya ke saMta kA hai to saMta usa upakaraNa ko lekara
svasthAna para Aye aura jisakA upakaraNa ho use de de| yadi vaha upakaraNa kisI
saMta kA na ho to na svayaM usakA upayoga kare aura na dUsaroM ko upayoga ke lie
de kintu nirdoSa sthAna para usakA parityAga kara de| yadi zramaNa vahAM se
vihAra kara gayA ho to usakI anveSaNA kara svayaM use usake pAsa pahuMcAve /
yadi usakA sahI patA na lage to ekAnta sthAna para prasthApita kara de| pAhAra
kI carcA karate hue batAyA hai ki ATha grAsa kA AhAra karane vAlA alpa-yAhArI,
bAraha grAsa kA AhAra karane vAlA apArdhAvamaudarika, solaha grAsa kA AhAra
karane vAlA dvibhAgaprApta, caubIsa grAsa kA AhAra karane vAlA
prAptAvamaudarika, battIsa grAsa kA AhAra karane vAlA pramANopetAhArI evaM
battIsa grAsa se eka hI grAsa kama khAne vAlA avamaudarika kahalAtA hai| nauveM
uddezaka meM batAyA hai ki zayyAtara kA AhArAdi para svAmitva ho yA usakA kucha
adhikAra ho to vaha prAhAra zramaNa-zramaNiyoM ke lie grAhya nahIM hai| isameM
bhikSupratimAnoM kA bhI ullekha hai jisakI carcA hama dazAzrutaskandha ke
varNana meM kara cuke haiN| dasaveM uhe zaka meM yavamadhyacandra pratimA yA
vanamadhyacandrapratimA kA svarUpa pratipAdita karate hue kahA gayA hai ki jo
yava (jau) ke kaNa samAna madhya meM moTI ora donoM ora patalI ho vaha
yavamadhyacandrapratimA hai| jo vana ke samAna madhya meM patalI aura donoM aura
moTI ho vaha vajramadhyacandrapratimA hai| yavamadhyacandrapratimA kA dhAraka
vamadhyacandrapratimA hai| jo vana [ 58 ]

Page #60 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
A Shraman, for a period of one month, renounces attachment to his body and bears
all favorable and unfavorable circumstances related to Devas, humans, and
animals with equanimity. On the first day of the bright fortnight, he takes one
datti of food and one datti of water. On the second day, he takes two datti of
food and two datti of water. In this way, he increases by one datti each day,
taking 15 datti of food and 15 datti of water on the full moon day. In the dark
fortnight, he decreases by one datti each day and observes a fast on the new
moon day. This is called Yavam‡§ß‡•ç‡§Ø‡§ö‡§®‡•ç‡§¶‡•ç‡§∞‡§™‡•ç‡§∞‡§§‡§ø‡§Æ‡§æ. In Vajram‡§ß‡•ç‡§Ø‡§ö‡§®‡•ç‡§¶‡•ç‡§∞‡§™‡•ç‡§∞‡§§‡§ø‡§Æ‡§æ, 15
datti of food and 15 datti of water are taken on the first day of the dark
fortnight. This is decreased daily until one datti of food and one datti of
water are taken on the new moon day. In the bright fortnight, one datti is
increased each day until a fast is observed on the full moon day. Thus, in each
30-day pratima, food is taken according to datti for 29 days and a fast is
observed on the last day. There are five types of ‡§µ‡•ç‡§Ø‡§µ‡§π‡§æ‡§∞: ‡§Ü‡§ó‡§Æ, ‡§∂‡•ç‡§∞‡•Å‡§§, ‡§Ü‡§ú‡•ç‡§û‡§æ,
‡§ß‡§æ‡§∞‡§£‡§æ, and ‡§ú‡•Ä‡§§‡§µ‡•ç‡§Ø‡§µ‡§π‡§æ‡§∞. ‡§Ü‡§ó‡§Æ is the first and the others are discussed in detail
in the commentary. There are three types of ‡§∏‡•ç‡§•‡§µ‡§ø‡§∞: ‡§ú‡§æ‡§§‡§ø‡§∏‡•ç‡§•‡§µ‡§ø‡§∞, ‡§∏‡•Ç‡§§‡•ç‡§∞‡§∏‡•ç‡§•‡§µ‡§ø‡§∞, and
‡§™‡•ç‡§∞‡§µ‡•ç‡§∞‡§ú‡•ç‡§Ø‡§æ‡§∏‡•ç‡§•‡§µ‡§ø‡§∞. A Shraman who is 60 years old is called ‡§ú‡§æ‡§§‡§ø‡§∏‡•ç‡§•‡§µ‡§ø‡§∞ or
‡§µ‡§Ø‡§É‡§∏‡•ç‡§•‡§µ‡§ø‡§∞. One who knows ‡§†‡§æ‡§£‡§æ‡§Ç‡§ó and ‡§∏‡§Æ‡§µ‡§æ‡§Ø‡§æ‡§Ç‡§ó is called ‡§∏‡•Ç‡§§‡•ç‡§∞‡§∏‡•ç‡§•‡§µ‡§ø‡§∞, and one who
has been initiated for 20 years and is ‡§®‡§ø‡§∞‡•ç‡§ó‡•ç‡§∞‡§®‡•ç‡§• is called ‡§™‡•ç‡§∞‡§µ‡•ç‡§∞‡§ú‡•ç‡§Ø‡§æ‡§∏‡•ç‡§•‡§µ‡§ø‡§∞.
There are three types of ‡§∂‡•à‡§ï‡•ç‡§∑ ‡§≠‡•Ç‡§Æ‡§ø‡§Ø‡§æ‡§Ç: ‡§∏‡§™‡•ç‡§§-‡§∞‡§æ‡§§‡•ç‡§∞‡§ø‡§¶‡§ø‡§®‡•Ä, ‡§ö‡§æ‡§§‡•Å‡§∞‡•ç‡§Æ‡§æ‡§∏‡§ø‡§ï‡•Ä, and
‡§∑‡§£‡•ç‡§Æ‡§æ‡§∏‡§ø‡§ï‡•Ä. It is not permissible to initiate children below the age of eight
years. Those who are young are not eligible to study ‡§™‡•ç‡§∞‡§æ‡§ö‡§æ‡§∞‡§æ‡§Ç‡§ó‡§∏‡•Ç‡§§‡•ç‡§∞. It is
permissible to teach ‡§Ü‡§ö‡§æ‡§∞‡§æ‡§Ç‡§ó to a sadhu who has been initiated for at least
three years. It is permissible to teach ‡§∏‡•Ç‡§§‡•ç‡§∞‡§ï‡•É‡§§‡§æ‡§Ç‡§ó to one who has been
initiated for four years, ‡§¶‡§∂‡§æ‡§∂‡•ç‡§∞‡•Å‡§§‡§∏‡•ç‡§ï‡§®‡•ç‡§ß, ‡§ï‡§≤‡•ç‡§™ (‡§¨‡•É‡§π‡§§‡•ç‡§ï‡§≤‡•ç‡§™), and ‡§µ‡•ç‡§Ø‡§µ‡§π‡§æ‡§∞ to one
who has been initiated for five years, ‡§∏‡•ç‡§•‡§æ‡§®‡§æ‡§Ç‡§ó and ‡§∏‡§Æ‡§µ‡§æ‡§Ø‡§æ‡§Ç‡§ó to one who has been
initiated for eight years, ‡§µ‡•ç‡§Ø‡§æ‡§ñ‡•ç‡§Ø‡§æ‡§™‡•ç‡§∞‡§ú‡•ç‡§û‡§™‡•ç‡§§‡§ø (‡§≠‡§ó‡§µ‡§§‡•Ä) to one who has been
initiated for ten years, ‡§≤‡§ò‡•Å‡§µ‡§ø‡§Æ‡§æ‡§®-‡§™‡•ç‡§∞‡§µ‡§ø‡§≠‡§ï‡•ç‡§§‡§ø, ‡§Æ‡§π‡§æ‡§µ‡§ø‡§Æ‡§æ‡§®‡§™‡•ç‡§∞‡§µ‡§ø‡§≠‡§ï‡•ç‡§§‡§ø, ‡§Ö‡§Ç‡§ó‡§ö‡•Ç‡§≤‡§ø‡§ï‡§æ,
‡§¨‡§Ç‡§ó‡§≤‡§ø‡§ï‡§æ, and ‡§µ‡§ø‡§µ‡§æ‡§π-‡§ö‡•Ç‡§≤‡§ø‡§ï‡§æ to one who has been initiated for eleven years,
‡§Ö‡§£‡•ã‡§∞‡•Å‡§™‡§™‡§æ‡§§‡§ø‡§ï, ‡§ó‡§∞‡•Å‡§≤‡•ã‡§™‡§™‡§æ‡§§‡§ø‡§ï, ‡§ß‡§∞‡§£‡•ã‡§™‡§™‡§æ‡§§‡§ø‡§ï, ‡§µ‡•à‡§∂‡•ç‡§∞‡§Æ‡§£‡•ã‡§™‡§™‡§æ‡§§‡§ø‡§ï, and ‡§µ‡•à‡§≤‡§Ç‡§ß‡§∞‡•ã‡§™‡§™‡§æ‡§§‡§ø‡§ï to one
who has been initiated for twelve years, ‡§â‡§™‡§∏‡•ç‡§•‡§æ‡§®‡§∂‡•ç‡§∞‡•Å‡§§, ‡§¶‡•á‡§µ‡•á‡§®‡•ç‡§¶‡•ç‡§∞‡•ã‡§™‡§™‡§æ‡§§, and
‡§®‡§æ‡§ó‡§™‡§∞‡§ø‡§Ø‡§æ‡§™‡§®‡§ø‡§ï‡§æ (‡§®‡§æ‡§ó‡§™‡§∞‡§ø‡§Ø‡§æ‡§µ‡§£‡§ø‡§ó‡•ç‡§∞‡§æ) to one who has been initiated for thirteen
years, ‡§∏‡•ç‡§µ‡§™‡•ç‡§®‡§≠‡§æ‡§µ‡§®‡§æ to one who has been initiated for fourteen years, ‡§ö‡§æ‡§∞‡§£‡§≠‡§æ‡§µ‡§®‡§æ
to one who has been initiated for fifteen years, ‡§µ‡•á‡§¶‡§®‡•Ä‡§∂‡§§‡§ï to one who has been
initiated for sixteen years, ‡§™‡§æ‡§∂‡•Ä‡§µ‡§ø‡§∑‡§≠‡§æ‡§µ‡§®‡§æ to one who has been initiated for
seventeen years, ‡§¶‡•É‡§∑‡•ç‡§ü‡§ø‡§µ‡§ø‡§ß‡§≠‡§æ‡§µ‡§®‡§æ to one who has been initiated for eighteen
years, ‡§¶‡•É‡§∑‡•ç‡§ü‡§ø‡§µ‡§æ‡§¶ to one who has been initiated for nineteen years, and all types
of scriptures to one who has been initiated for twenty years. There are ten
types of ‡§µ‡•à‡§Ø‡§æ‡§µ‡•É‡§§‡•ç‡§Ø (service): 1. ‡§Ü‡§ö‡§æ‡§∞‡•ç‡§Ø ‡§ï‡•Ä ‡§µ‡•à‡§Ø‡§æ‡§µ‡•É‡§§‡•ç‡§Ø, 2. ‡§â‡§™‡§æ‡§ß‡•ç‡§Ø‡§æ‡§Ø ‡§ï‡•Ä ‡§µ‡•à‡§Ø‡§æ‡§µ‡•É‡§§‡•ç‡§Ø,
3. ‡§∏‡•ç‡§•‡§µ‡§ø‡§∞ ‡§ï‡•Ä, 4. ‡§§‡§™‡§∏‡•ç‡§µ‡•Ä ‡§ï‡•Ä, 5. ‡§∂‡•à‡§ï‡•ç‡§∑-‡§õ‡§æ‡§§‡•ç‡§∞ ‡§ï‡•Ä, 6. ‡§ó‡•ç‡§≤‡§æ‡§®-‡§∞‡•Å‡§ó‡•ç‡§£ ‡§ï‡•Ä, 7. ‡§∏‡§æ‡§Æ‡§ø‡§ï ‡§ï‡•Ä,
8. ‡§ï‡§≤ ‡§ï‡•Ä, 9. ‡§ó‡§£ ‡§ï‡•Ä, and 10. ‡§∏‡§Ç‡§ò ‡§ï‡•Ä ‡§µ‡•à‡§Ø‡§æ‡§µ‡•É‡§§‡•ç‡§Ø. These ten types of ‡§µ‡•à‡§Ø‡§æ‡§µ‡•É‡§§‡•ç‡§Ø lead
to ‡§Æ‡§π‡§æ‡§®‡§ø‡§∞‡•ç‡§ú‡§∞‡§æ. In conclusion, this sutra has many special features. It
emphasizes ‡§∏‡•ç‡§µ‡§æ‡§ß‡•ç‡§Ø‡§æ‡§Ø. [59]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
zramaNa eka mAsa paryanta apane zarIra ke mamatva ko tyAga kara deva, manuSya
aura tiryaJca sambandhI anukUla yA pratikUla upasargoM ko samabhAvapUrvaka
sahana karatA hai aura zuklapakSa kI pratipadA ko eka datti AhAra kI aura eka
datti pAnI kI, dvitIyA ko do datti AhAra kI aura do datti pAnI kI grahaNa karatA
hai| isa prakAra kramazaH eka-eka datti bar3hAtA huA pUrNimA ko 15 datti AhAra
kI aura 15 datti pAnI kI grahaNa karatA hai| kRSNapakSa meM kramaza: eka datti
kama karatA jAtA hai aura amAvasyA ke dina upavAsa karatA hai| ise
yavamadhyacandrapratimA kahate haiN| vajramadhyacandrapratimA meM kRSNapakSa kI
pratipadA ko 15 datti pAhAra kI aura 15 dati pAnI kI grahaNa kI jAtI hai| use
pratidina kama karate hue yAvat amAvasyA ko eka datti prAhAra kI aura eka datti
pAnI kI grahaNa kI jAtI hai / zuklapakSa meM kramaza: eka-eka datti bar3hAte hue
pUrNimA ko upavAsa kiyA jAtA hai / isa prakAra 30 dina kI pratyeka pratimA ke
prArambha ke 29 dina datti ke anusAra pAhAra aura antima dina upavAsa kiyA jAtA
hai| vyavahAra ke Agama, zruta, AjJA, dhAraNA aura jItavyavahAra, ye pAMca
prakAra haiN| inameM pAgama kA sthAna prathama hai aura phira kramazaH inakI
carcA vistAra se bhASya meM hai| sthavira ke jAtisthavira, sUtrasthavira aura
pravrajyAsthavira, ye tIna bheda haiN| 60 varSa kI Ayu vAlA zramaNa jAtisthavira
yA vayaHsthavira kahalAtA hai| ThANAMga, samavAyAMga kA jJAtA sUtrasthavira aura
dIkSA dhAraNa karane ke 20 varSa pazcAta kI dIkSA vAle nirgrantha
pravrajyAsthavira kahalAte haiN| zaikSa bhUmiyAM tIna prakAra kI haiM-sapta-
rAtridinI cAturmAsikI aura ssnnmaasikii| ATha varSa se kama umra vAle bAlaka-
bAlikAoM ko dIkSA denA nahIM klptaa| jinakI umra laghu hai ve prAcArAMgasUtra ke
par3hane ke adhikArI nahIM haiN| kama se kama tIna varSa kI dIkSAparyAya vAle
sAdhu ko AcArAMga par3hAnA kalpya hai / cAra varSa kI dIkSAparyAya vAle ko
sUtrakRtAMga, pA~ca varSa kI dIkSAparyAya vAle ko dazAzrutaskandha, kalpa
(bRhatkalpa) aura vyavahAra, ATha varSa kI dIkSA vAle ko sthAnAMga aura
samavAyAMga, dasa varSa kI dIkSA vAle ko vyAkhyAprajJapti (bhagavatI), gyAraha
varSa kI dIkSA vAle ko laghuvimAna-pravibhakti, mahAvimAnapravibhakti,
aMgacUlikA, baMgalikA aura vivAha-cUlikA, bAraha varSa kI dIkSA vAle ko
aNorupapAtika, garulopapAtika, dharaNopapAtika, vaizramaNopapAtika aura
vailaMdharopapAtika, teraha varSa kI dIkSA vAle ko upasthAnazruta,
devendropapAta aura nAgapariyApanikA (nAgapariyAvaNigrA), caudaha varSa kI dIkSA
vAle ko svapnabhAvanA, pandraha varSa kI dIkSA vAle ko cAraNabhAvanA, solaha
yarSa kI dIkSA vAle ko vedanIzataka, satraha varSa kI dIkSA vAle ko
pAzIviSabhAvanA, aThAraha varSa kI dIkSA vAle ko dRSTividhabhAvanA, unnIsa varSa
kI dIkSA vAle vAle ko dRSTivAda aura bIsa varSa kI dIkSA vAle ko saba prakAra ke
zAstra par3hAnA kalpya hai| vaiyAvRtya (sevA) dasa prakAra kI kahI gaI hai1.
AcArya kI vaiyAvRtya, 2. upAdhyAya kI vaiyAvRtya, usI prakAra, 3. sthavira kI,
4. tapasvI kI, 5. zaikSa-chAtra kI, 6. glAna-rugNa kI, 7. sAmika kI, 8. kala kI.
9. gaNa kI aura 10. saMgha kI vaiyAvRtya / uparyukta dasa prakAra kI vayAvRtya
se mahAnirjarA hotI hai| upasaMhAra isa prakAra prastuta sUtra kI aneka
vizeSatAeM haiN| isameM svAdhyAya para vizeSa rUpa se bala diyA gayA hai| [ 59 ]

Page #61 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Furthermore, studying during an inappropriate time is prohibited. The concept of
an inappropriate time for study has been discussed. The limits of study among
monks and nuns have been defined. There is a description of the types of food
intake: Kavalahari, Alpahari, and Unodari. Rules for the conduct of the Acharya
and Upadhyaya in the Bihar have been laid down. There is a detailed discussion
of the methods of criticism and atonement. The rules and regulations regarding
the residence, study, conduct, and organization of the nuns have been discussed.
The author of this text is believed to be Shrutakevali Bhadrabahu.   To
understand the profound secrets of the Agam literature, various commentaries
have been created. This vast body of Agam commentary can be divided into five
parts: (1) Niyuktis (Nijjutti), (2) Bhashyas (Bhas), (3) Chuniyas (Chunni), (4)
Sanskrit commentaries, and (5) commentaries written in vernacular languages.
The first commentaries written in Prakrit language, known as Niyuktis, are
renowned. In Niyuktis, instead of commenting on every verse of the original
text, the focus is primarily on explaining technical terms. Its style is that of
the Niksepa method, which has been highly favored in jurisprudence. In the
Niksepa method, after presenting multiple possible meanings of a single verse,
the inappropriate meanings are rejected, and the appropriate meaning is
accepted. The renowned German scholar, Sharpeentier, defined Niyukti as follows:
"Niyuktis serve only as an index to their main part. They briefly mention all
the detailed events." Bhadrabahu is considered the author of Niyuktis. We have
written extensively about who he was in other introductions. Ten Niyuktis of
Bhadrabahu are available. Among them is the Dasashrutaskandhaniyukti.   The
Dasashrutaskandhaniyukti begins with salutations to the first Shrutakevali
Bhadrabahu, followed by a description of the rights of the ten studies. The
first study, Asamadhisthan, discusses the relationship between dravya and bhava
samadhi, and describes fifteen Niksepas: the name of the place, establishment,
dravya, area, faith, upward, conduct, residence, restraint, acceptance, warrior,
immovable, counting, institution (sanghan), and bhava. The second study
considers four Niksepas, starting with the name Shabala. The third study
analyzes Ashatana. The fourth study, while considering the Niksepa perspective
on "Gani" and "Sampada," states that Gani and Guni are synonymous. Prachar is
the first Ganisthan. Sampada has two divisions: dravya and bhava. The body is
dravya sampada, and conduct is bhava sampada. The fifth study considers the
Niksepa perspective on chitta samadhi. There are four types of samadhi. When the
mind is free from attachment and aversion, and is absorbed in focused attention,
then it is bhava samadhi. The sixth study considers the Niksepa perspective on
the Upasaka and the image. There are four types of Upasaka: dravyopasaka,
tadarthopaasaka, mohopaasaka, and bhavopaasaka. Only one whose life is
illuminated by the light of Samyagdarshan can be a Bhavopaasaka. Here, the
eleventh [60] ...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
sAtha hI ayogyakAla meM svAdhyAya karane kA niSedha kiyA gayA hai| anadhyAyakAla
kI vivecanA kI gaI hai| zramaNazramaNiyoM ke bIca adhyayana kI sImAeM nirdhArita
kI gaI haiN| AhAra kA kavalAhArI, alpAhArI aura UnodarI kA varNana hai /
prAcArya, upAdhyAya ke lie bihAra ke niyama pratipAdita kiye gaye haiN| AlocanA
aura prAyazcitta kI vidhiyoM kA isameM vistRta vivecana hai / sAdhviyoM ke
nivAsa, adhyayana, vaiyAvatya tathA saMgha-vyavasthA ke niyamopaniyama kA
vivecana hai| isake racayitA zrutakevalI bhadrabAha mAne jAte haiN|
vyAkhyAsAhitya Agama sAhitya ke guru gambhIra rahasyoM ke udghATana ke liye
vividhavyAkhyAsAhitya kA nirmANa hayA hai ! usa virATa Agama vyAkhyAsAhitya ko
hama pAMca bhAgoM meM vibhakta kara sakate haiM (1) niyuktiyAM (nijjutti)| (2)
bhASya (bhAsa) / (3) cUNiyAM (cunnnni)| (4) saMskRta ttiikaaeN| (5) lokabhASA
meM likhita vyAkhyAsAhitya / sarvaprathama prAkRta bhASA meM jo padyabaddha
TIkAeM likhI gaI ve niyuktiyoM ke nAma se vizruta haiN| niyuktiyoM meM mUla
grantha ke pratyeka pada para vyAkhyA na kara mukhya rUpa se pAribhASika zabdoM
kI vyAkhyA kI gaI hai / usakI zailI nikSepapaddhati kI hai| jo nyAyazAstra meM
atyadhita priya rhii| nikSepapaddhati meM kisI eka pada ke sambhAvita aneka
artha karane ke pazcAt unameM se aprastuta arthoM kA niSedha kara prastuta artha
grahaNa kiyA jAtA hai| suprasiddha jarmana vidvAn zArapeNTiyara ne niyukti kI
paribhASA isa prakAra kI hai"niyuktiyA~ apane pradhAna bhAga ke kevala iNDeksa
kA kAma karatI haiM / ve sabhI vistAra yukta ghaTanAvaliyoM kA saMkSepa meM
ullekha karatI haiN|" niyuktikAra bhadrabAha mAne jAte haiN| ve kauna the isa
sambandha meM hamane anya prastAvanAoM meM vistAra se likhA hai / bhadrabAhu kI
dasa niyuktiyAM prApta haiM / usameM dazAzrutaskandhaniyukti bhI eka hai|
dazAzrutaskandhaniyukti prathama zratakevalI bhadrabAha ko namaskAra kiyA gayA
hai phira daza adhyayanoM ke adhikAroM kA varNana hai| prathama asamAdhisthAna
meM dravya aura bhAva samAdhi ke sambandha meM cintana kara sthAna ke nAma,
sthApanA, dravya, kSetra, zraddhA, Urdhva, caryA, vasati, saMyama, pragraha,
yodha, acala, gaNana, saMsthAna (saMghANa) aura bhAva ina pandraha nikSepoM kA
varNana hai| dvitIya adhyayana meM zabala kA nAma Adi cAra nikSepa se vicAra
kiyA hai| tRtIya adhyayana meM AzAtanA kA vizleSaNa hai| caturtha adhyayana meM
"gaNi" aura "sampadA" para nikSepa dRSTi se cintana karate hue kahA gayA hai ki
gaNi aura guNI ye donoM ekArthaka haiN| prAcAra hI prathama gaNisthAna hai|
sampadA ke dravya aura bhAva ye do bheda haiM / zarIra dravyasampadA hai aura
AcAra bhAvasampadA hai| paMcama adhyayana meM cittasamAdhi kA nikSepa kI daSTi
se vicAra kiyA gayA hai| samAdhi ke cAra prakAra haiN| jaba citta rAga-dveSa se
mukta hotA hai, prazastadhyAna meM tallIna hotA hai taba bhAvasamAdhi hotI hai|
SaSTha adhyayana meM upAsaka aura pratimA para nikSepa daSTi se cintana kiyA
gayA hai| upAsaka ke dravyopAsaka, tadarthopAsaka, mohopAsaka aura bhAvopAsaka
ye cAra prakAra hai| bhAvopAsaka vahI ho sakatA hai jisakA jIvana samyagdarzana
ke Aloka se jagamagA rahA ho| yahAM para zramaNopAsaka kI ekAdaza [60 ]

Page #62 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
This is a representation of the paradigms. In the seventh study, while
contemplating the Shraman pratima, five types have been mentioned: Samadhi
pratima, Upadhan pratima, Viveka pratima, Prati-sanlin pratima, and Viveka
pratima. In the eighth study, while contemplating the Paryushana kalpa,
Parivasana, Paryushana, Payu Pashmana, Varshavas, Pratham-Samavasaran, Sthapana,
and Jyestha Graha have been described as synonyms. The Shraman resides in one
place during Varshavas and wanders for the remaining months. In the ninth study,
while considering the Mohaniya-sthan, its synonyms for Moha have been mentioned:
Pap, Bary, Vaer, Pank, Panak, Kshobh, Asat, Sang, Shalya, Atr, Nirati, and
Dharty. In the tenth study, while contemplating the root causes of birth and
death, the means to be liberated from them have been explained. After the
Niyukti literature, the Bhashya literature was created, but no Bhashya was
written on the Dasha-shruta-skandha. After the Bhashya literature, the Churni
literature was created. This is a prose-based explanatory literature. It
contains explanations written in pure Prakrit and a mixture of Prakrit and
Sanskrit. The name of Churnikar Jinadasagani Mahttar is particularly noteworthy
in the Churni literature. The Dasha-shruta-skandha-churni is based on the Dasha-
shruta-skandha Niyukti. In this Churni, Mangalacharan has been done first. After
that, the chapters of the ten studies have been discussed. It is simple and easy
to understand. There are some differences between the original text and the
Churni-approved text. This Churni is mainly in Prakrit language. The use of
Sanskrit words and sentences is also seen here and there. After the Churni, the
era of Sanskrit commentaries came. In that era, commentaries were written in
Sanskrit on many Agamas. Brahmamuni (Brahmarshi) wrote a commentary on the
Dasha-shruta-skandha, and Acharya Ghasilalji M. wrote an explanation in Sanskrit
on the Dasha-shruta-skandha. Acharya Samrat Atmaramji M. wrote a commentary in
Hindi on the Dasha-shruta-skandha. And Acharya Amolkarishiji M. wrote the first
Hindi translation. The Dasha-shruta-skandha, including the original Niyukti and
Churni, was published in Vikrama Samvat 2011 by Mani-vijayji Gani Granthamala,
Bhavnagar. The Hindi translation of the Dasha-shruta-skandha by Amolkarishiji
was published in Vir Samvat 2445 by Sukhdevsahay Jwalaprasad, Hyderabad. The
Hindi commentary by Acharya Atmaramji M. was published in 1936 by the Jain
Shastramala office, Saidmittha Bazaar, Lahore. The Dasha-shruta-skandha by
Ghasilalji M. was published in 1960 by the Jain Shastroddhar Samiti, Rajkot,
along with the Sanskrit explanation and Hindi translation. The original-based
translation, under the name of Prayar-Dasha, was published in 1981 by Agam
Anuyog Prakashan, Sanderao. Special meanings have also been given in it here and
there. This edition has been done by the expert in Pragam literature, the great
sage Muni Shri Kanhaiyalalji M. "Kamal". This edition is not only beautiful, but
extremely beautiful. He has presented a neutral, thought-provoking solution to
the mysteries of the Agam and the various tangled questions of Shramanachar,
based on ancient explanatory literature. In a few words [ 61 ]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
pratimAnoM kA nirUpaNa hai| saptama adhyayana meM zramaNapratimAoM para cintana
karate hue bhAvabhramaNapratimA ke samAdhipratimA, upadhAnapratimA,
vivekapratimA, pratisaMlInapratimA aura vivekapratimA ye pA~ca prakAra batAye
haiN| aSTama adhyayana meM paryuSaNAkalpa para cintana kara parivasanA,
paryuSaNA, payu pazamanA, varSAvAsa, prathama-samavasaraNa, sthApanA aura
jyeSTha graha ko paryAyavAcI batAyA hai| zramaNa varSAvAsa meM eka sthAna para
sthita rahatA hai aura pATha mAha taka vaha paribhramaNa karatA hai| navama
adhyayana meM mohanIyasthAna para vicAra kara usake pApa, barya, vaira, paMka,
panaka, kSobha, asAta, saMga, zalya, atara, nirati, dhartya ye moha ke
paryAyavAcI batAe gaye haiN| dazama adhyayana meM janmamaraNa ke mUla kAraNoM
para cintana kara usase mukta hone kA upAya batAyA gayA hai| niyuktisAhitya ke
pazcAt bhASyasAhitya kA nirmANa huA, kintu dazAzrutaskandha para koI bhI bhASya
nahIM likhA gyaa| bhASyasAhitya ke pazcAt cUrNisAhitya kA nirmANa huaa| yaha
gadyAtmaka vyAkhyAsAhitya hai / isameM zuddha prAkRta aura saMskRta mizrita
prAkRta meM vyAkhyA likhI gaI hai| cUrNikAra jinadAsagaNi mahattara kA nAma
cuNisAhitya meM vizeSa rUpa se ullekhanIya hai| dazAzrutaskandhacUrNi kA mUla
AdhAra dazAzrutaskandha niyukti hai| isa cUNi meM prathama maMgalAcaraNa kiyA
gayA hai| usake pazcAt dasa adhyayanoM ke adhikAroM kA vivecana kiyA gayA hai|
jo sarala aura sugama hai| mUlapATha meM aura cUrNisammata pATha meM kucha
antara hai| yaha caNi mukhya rUpa se prAkRta bhASA meM hai| yatra-tatra saMskRta
zabdoM va vAkyoM ke prayoga bhI dikhAI dete haiM / cUNi ke pazcAt saMskRta
TIkAoM kA yuga aayaa| usa yuga meM aneka AgamoM para saMskRta bhASA meM TIkAeM
likhI gaI / brahmamuni (brahmarSi) ne dazAzrutaskandha para eka TIkA likhI hai
tathA prAcArya ghAsIlAlajI ma. ne dazAzrutaskandha para saMskRta meM vyAkhyA
likhI aura AcArya samrATa AtmArAmajI ma. ne dazAzrataskandha para hindI meM TIkA
likhii| aura AcArya amolakaRSijI ma. ne sarvaprathama hindI anuvAda likhaa|
maNivijayajI gaNi granthamAlA bhAvanagara se dazAzrutaskandha mUla niyukti cUNi
sahita vi. saM. 2011 meM prakAzita huaa| sukhadevasahAya jvAlAprasAda
haidarAbAda se vIra saM. 2445 ko amolakaRSijI kRta hindI anuvAda
dazAzrutaskandha kA prakAzita huprA / jaina zAstramAlA kAryAlaya saidamiTThA
bAjAra lAhaura se prAcArya prAtmArAmajI ma. kRta san 1936 meM hindI TIkA
prakAzita huii| saMskRta vyAkhyA va hindI anuvAda ke sAtha jaina zAstroddhAra
samiti rAjakoTa se san 1960 meM ghAsIlAlajI ma. kA dazAzrutaskandha prakAzita
huaa| Agama anuyoga prakAzana sANDerAva se prAyAra-dazA ke nAma se mUlasparzI
anuvAda sana 1981 meM prakAzita hamA / yatra-tatra usameM vizeSArtha bhI diyA
gayA hai| prastuta sampAdana-prAgama sAhitya ke marmajJa mahAmanISI muni zrI
kanhaiyAlAlajI ma. "kamala" ne kiyA hai| yaha sampAdana sundara hI nahIM, ati
sundara hai| Agama ke rahasya kA tathA zramaNAcAra ke vividha ulajhe hue praznoM
kA unhoMne prAcIna vyAkhyA sAhitya ke prAdhAra se taTastha cintanaparaka
samAdhAna prastuta kiyA hai| svalpa zabdoM meM [ 61 ]

Page #63 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Clarifying the subject is a characteristic of the editor Muni. His profound
scholarship is evident throughout this edition. The commentary on the
Brihatkalpa is written in the style of the Brihatkalpaniyukti-Dasashrutaskandha,
similar to the Brihatkalpaniyukti. It begins by paying homage to the
Tirthankaras, reflecting on the various types of knowledge, and highlighting the
inherent unity of knowledge and auspiciousness. It examines the Anuyoga through
the seven deposits of name, establishment, substance, field, time, speech, and
emotion. The Anuyoga is the post-existent yoga, or the subtle form of yoga. The
four gateways to Anuyoga are the inception, deposit, following, and perspective
of the Kalpa. The wise, learned, long-ordained, contemplative, unwavering,
established, non-hearsay, knowledgeable, authorized, and emotionally
transformative saint is the one who studies and contemplates the Kalpa and its
practical application. It includes a detailed description of the Tal-Prlamb, and
prescribes atonement for its acceptance. It also examines the deposits of terms
like village, city, Kheda, Karbatak, Madamb, port, Akar, Dronamukha, Nigam,
capital, Pashram, investment, restraint, announcement, and Anshika. It sheds
light on the Jainic and the non-Jainic perspectives. While considering the term
"Aarya," it examines the twelve deposits of name, establishment, substance,
field, caste, lineage, karma, language, craft, knowledge, vision, and character.
Wandering in the Aarya field leads to the growth of knowledge, vision, and
character. Wandering in non-Aarya fields increases the possibility of acquiring
various faults. This fact is clarified by giving the example of Skandacharya. It
also instructs on wandering in non-Aarya fields for the growth of knowledge,
vision, and character, and provides the example of King Samprati. The conduct,
thoughts, food, and movement of the Shramans and Shramanis are beautifully
described in a concise manner. The entire commentary is based on the deposit
method. This Niyukti is not independent but is integrated into the Brihatkalpa
Bhashya. The Brihatkalpa-Ladhubhashya-Brihatkalpa Ladhubhashya is a very
important work of Sanghadasagani. It elaborates on the verses of the
Brihatkalpasutra. Despite being a Ladhubhashya, it has 6490 verses. It is
divided into six objectives. The Bhashya begins with a detailed preface, which
has 805 verses. This Bhashya contains a collection and assessment of important
cultural material from India. Dr. Motichand, in his book "Sarthavah," has
beautifully assessed "Travelers and Sarthavahs" based on some aspects of this
cultural material. Its content is particularly useful for studying ancient
Indian culture and civilization. The heart-touching, subtle, and logical
analysis of the conduct of Jain Shramans is a significant feature of this
Bhashya. The preface discusses the auspiciousness, the concept of Shrutagyan in
the Panchakgyan, the process of attaining Samyaktva, and the nature of
Praupashmik, Sasvadan, Kshayopashmik, Vedak, and Kshayik Samyaktva. It explains
the nature of Anuyoga and examines it through twelve types of gateways,
including deposits. It contemplates the Kalpavyavahar from various perspectives,
using examples to clarify the subject matter. The commentary on the first
objective explains various types of faults and atonement related to the Tal-
Vriksh, exceptions related to the acceptance of Tal-Prlamb, reasons for Shramans
and Shramanis to travel to other countries and its method, the rules and
regulations for the illness of Shramans, and the types of texts for Vaishyas. It
explains the conduct of Shramans and Shramanis in special circumstances like
famine, etc. [ 62 ]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
viSaya ko spaSTa karanA sampAdaka munijI kI vizeSatA hai| isa sampAdana meM
unakA gambhIra pANDitya yatra-tatra mukharita huA hai| bRhatkalpa kA
vyAkhyAsAhitya bRhatkalpaniyukti-dazAzrutaskandha kI taraha bRhatkalpaniyukti
likhI gaI hai| usameM sarvaprathama tIrthaMkaroM ko namaskAra kara jJAna ke
vividha bhedoM para cintana kara isa bAta para prakAza DAlA hai ki jJAna aura
maMgala meM kathaMcit abheda hai / anuyoga para nAma, sthApanA, dravya, kSetra,
kAla, vacana aura bhAva ina sAta nikSepoM se cintana kiyA hai / jo pazcAdbhUta
yoga hai vaha anuyoga hai athavA jo stoka rUpa yoga hai vaha anUyoga hai| kalpa
ke upakrama, nikSepa, anugama aura naya ye cAra anuyogadvAra haiM / kalpa aura
vyavahAra kA adhyayana cintana karane vAlA medhAvI santa bahuzruta,
cirapravajita, kalpika, acaMcala, avasthita, aparizrAvI, vijJa prAptAnujJAta
aura bhAvapariNAmaka hotA hai| isameM tAla-pralamba kA vistAra se varNana hai,
aura usake grahaNa karane para prAyazcitta kA bhI vidhAna hai| grAma, nagara,
kher3a, karbaTaka, maDamba, pattana, Akara, droNamukha, nigama, rAjadhAnI,
pAzrama, niveza, saMbAdha, ghoSa, aMzikA, Adi padoM para bhI nikSepadRSTi se
cintana kiyA hai| jinakalpika aura sthavirakalpika para bhI prakAza DAlA hai|
Arya pada para vicAra karate hue nAma, sthApanA, dravya, kSetra, jAti, kula,
karma, bhASA, zilpa, jJAna, darzana, cAritra ina bAraha nikSepoM se cintana kiyA
hai| pAryakSetra meM vicaraNa karane se jJAna, darzana aura cAritra kI
abhivaddhi hotI hai| anArya kSetroM meM vicaraNa karane se aneka doSoM ke lagane
kI sambhAvanA rahatI hai| skandakAcArya ke dRSTAnta ko dekara isa tathya ko
spaSTa kiyA gayA hai| sAtha hI jJAna-darzana-cAritra kI vRddhi hetu anArya
kSetra meM vicaraNa karane kA Adeza diyA hai aura usake lie rAjA samprati kA
dRSTAnta bhI diyA gayA hai / zramaNa aura zramaNiyoM ke prAcAra, vicAra, AhAra,
vihAra kA saMkSepa meM bahuta hI sundara varNana kiyA gayA hai| sarvatra
nikSepapaddhati se vyAkhyAna kiyA gayA hai| yaha niyukti svatantra na rahakara
bRhatkalpabhASya meM mizrita ho gaI hai| bRhatkalpa-ladhubhASya-bRhatkalpa
ladhubhASya saMghadAsagaNI kI eka bahuta hI mahattvapUrNa kRti hai| isameM
bRhatkalpasUtra ke padoM kA vistAra ke sAtha vivecana kiyA gayA hai| laghabhASya
hone para bhI isakI gAthA saMkhyA 6490 hai| yaha chaha uddezyoM meM vibhakta
hai| bhASya ke prArambha meM eka savistRta pIThikA dI gaI hai| jisakI gAthA
saMkhyA 805 hai| isa bhASya meM bhArata kI mahattvapUrNa sAMskRtika sAmagrI kA
saMkalana-Akalana huA hai| isa sAMskRtika sAmagrI ke kucha aMza ko lekara DaoN.
motIcanda ne apanI pustaka "sArthavAha" meM "yAtrI aura sArthavAha" kA sundara
prAkalana kiyA hai| prAcIna bhAratIya saMskRtika aura sabhyatA kA adhyayana
karane ke lie isakI sAmagrI vizeSa upayogI hai| jaina zramaNoM ke AcAra kA
hRdayagrAhI, sUkSma, tArkika vivecana isa bhASya kI mahattvapUrNa vizeSatA hai|
pIThikA meM maMgalavAda, jJAnapaMcaka meM zrutajJAna ke prasaMga para vicAra
karate hue samyaktvaprApti kA krama aura praupazamika, sAsvAdana, kSAyopazamika,
vedaka aura kSAyika samyaktva ke svarUpa kA pratipAdana kiyA gayA hai / anuyoga
kA svarUpa batAkara nikSepa Adi bAraha prakAra ke dvAroM se usa para cintana
kiyA hai| kalpavyavahAra para vividha daSTiyoM se cintana karate hue yatra-tatra
viSaya ko spaSTa karane ke lie dRSTAntoM kA bhI upayoga huA hai| pahale uddezaka
kI vyAkhyA meM tAla-vRkSa se sambandhita vividha prakAra ke doSa aura
prAyazcitta, tAla-pralamba ke grahaNa sambandhI apavAda, zramaNa-zramaNiyoM ko
dezAntara jAne ke kAraNa aura usakI vidhi, zramaNoM kI asvasthatA ke vidhi-
vidhAna, vaiSoM ke pATha prakAra batAye haiN| duSkAla prabhRti vizeSa paristhiti
meM zramaNa-zramaNiyoM ke eka dUsare [ 62 ]

Page #64 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
This text describes the method of living in the field of non-attachment, its 144
transgressions and related atonement, etc. It discusses terms like village,
city, hamlet, Karbatak, Madamb, port, rampart, Dronamukha, Nigama, capital,
ashram, investment, Sambadha, Anshika, Putbhadan, Shankar, etc. It describes the
Nakshatra month, Chandra month, Ritu month, Aditya month and Abhidhit month. It
discusses the actions of Jinakalpika and Sthavirakalpika, Samvasarana,
Tirthankara, Ganadhara, Aharakshariri, Anuttardeva, Chakravarti, Baldeva,
Vasudeva, etc., their auspicious and inauspicious karma natures, the
transformation of the Tirthankara's language into different languages,
Afnagrigha, Rathiyamukha, Shringatak, Chatushk, Chatvar, Antaraphna, etc. It
sheds light on the potential faults that may befall the Shramanis residing in
the Upashrayas built in those places. The commentator has described twelve types
of Dravya Gram (1) Uttanakamallaka, (2) Avaang Mukhamallaka, (3) Samputamallaka,
(4) Uttanakhandamallaka, (5) Avaang Mukhkhandamallaka, (6) Samputakhandamallaka,
(7) Bhiti, (8) Padali, (9) Valabhi, (10) Akshatak, (11) Ruchka, (12) Kashyapak.
Jinakalpika Munis exist only during the time of Tirthankara, Ganadhara and
Kevali. The Samachari of Jinakalpika Muni is described through twenty-seven
doors: (1) Shruta, (2) Sanhanan, (3) Upsarga, (4) Atanka, (5) Vedana, (6)
Katijan, (7) Sthandila, (8) Vasati, (9) Kiyaachir, (10) Ucchaar, (11) Prasravan,
(12) Avakash, (13) Trunphalaka, (14) Sanrakshanata, (15) Sansthapanata, (16)
Prabhriti, (17) Praagni, (18) Deep, (19) Avadhan, (20) Vatsyaksha, (21)
Bhikshacharya, (22) Panak, (23) Lepalepa, (24) Lepa, (25) Prachaaml (26)
Pratima, (27) Masakalp / While contemplating the state of Jinakalpika, light has
been shed through these doors: field, time, character, pilgrimage, cycle,
scripture, Veda, Kalpa, Linga, Leshya, meditation, calculation, acceptance,
renunciation, shaving, atonement, cause, Nishpratikarma and devotion. After
this, the nature of Pariharavishuddhik and Yathalandhik Kalpa is explained. The
pravrajya, education, earning, irregular residence and outcome of
Sthavirakalpika are all the same as Jinakalpika. While shedding light on the
conduct of Shramanas, it describes the time of conduct, the area suitable or
unsuitable for residence and sustenance of the Gachchha before conducting, the
selection of supervisors, how to travel for the transcription of the area, the
conduct route and Sthandila land, water, resting place, alms, residence,
disturbance, etc., the method of entering the transcribable area, examining the
inner mind of the humans there through alms, the knowledge of ease and
difficulty in obtaining alms, medicine, etc., the permission of the head of the
residence before conducting, seeing auspicious omens before conducting, etc. The
Samachari of Sthavirakalpika sheds light on these points: 1. Transcription - the
time of transcription of clothes, etc., the faults of transcription and their
atonement / 2. Exit - the time of exiting the Upashraya / 3. Prabhriti - whether
or not to stay in the house prepared for the householder. The related method and
atonement / [63]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
ke avagahIta kSetra meM rahane kI vidhi, usake 144 bhaMga aura tatsambandhI
prAyazcitta Adi kA varNana hai| grAma, nagara, kheDa, karbaTaka, maDamba,
pattana, prAkara, droNamukha, nigama, rAjadhAnI, Azrama, niveza, saMbAdha,
aMzikA, puTabhedana, zaMkara prabhRti padoM para viyecana kiyA hai|
nakSatramAsa, candramAsa, RtumAsa, AdityamAsa aura abhivadhitamAsa kA varNana
hai| jinakalpika aura sthavirakalpika kI kriyAeM, samavasaraNa, tIrthakara,
gaNadhara, AhArakazarIrI, anuttaradeva, cakravartI, baladeva, vAsudeva Adi kI
zubha aura azubha karmaprakRtiyAM, tIrthakara kI bhASA kA vibhinna bhASAoM meM
pariNamana, AphNagRha, rathyAmukha, zRGgATaka, catuSka, catvara, antarAphNa Adi
padoM para prakAza DAlA gayA hai aura una sthAnoM para bane hue upAzrayoM meM
rahane vAlI zramaNiyoM ko jina doSoM ke lagane kI sambhAvanA hai unakI carcA kI
gaI hai| bhASyakAra ne dravya grAma ke bAraha prakAra batAye hai (1)
uttAnakamallaka, (2) avAGa mukhamallaka, (3) sampuTamallaka, (4)
uttAnakakhaNDamallaka, (5) avAGa mukhakhaNDamallaka, (6) sampuTakhaNDamallaka,
(7) bhiti, (8) paDAli, (9) valAbhi, (10) akSATaka, (11) rucaka, (12) kaashypk|
tIrthakara, gaNadhara aura kevalI ke samaya hI jinakalpika muni hote haiN|
jinakalpika muni kI samAcArI kA varNana sattAIsa dvAroM se kiyA hai- (1) zruta,
(2) saMhanana, (3) upasarga, (4) AtaMka, (5) vedanA, (6) katijana, (7)
sthaMDila, (8) vasati, (9) kiyAccira, (10) uccAra, (11) prasravaNa, (12)
avakAza, (13) tRNaphalaka, (14) saMrakSaNatA, (15) saMsthApanatA, (16)
prAbhRtikA, (17) prAgni, (18) dIpa, (19) avadhAna, (20) vatsyakSa, (21)
bhikSAcaryA, (22) pAnaka, (23) lepAlepa, (24) lepa, (25) prAcAmla (26) pratimA,
(27) mAsakalpa / jinakalpika kI sthiti para cintana karate hae kSetra, kAla,
cAritra, tIrtha, paryAya, Agama, veda, kalpa, liMga, lezyA, dhyAna, gaNanA,
abhigraha, pravrAjanA, muNDApanA, prAyazcitta, kAraNa, niSpratikarma aura bhakta
ina dvAroM se prakAza DAlA hai| isake pazcAt parihAravizuddhika aura
yathAlandika kalpa kA svarUpa batAyA hai| sthavirakalpika kI pravrajyA, zikSA,
arthagrahaNa, aniyatavAsa aura niSpatti ye sabhI jinakalpika ke samAna haiN|
zramaNoM ke vihAra para prakAza DAlate hae vihAra kA samaya, vihAra karane se
pahale gaccha ke nivAsa evaM nirvAha yogya yA ayogya kSetra, pratyupekSakoM kA
nirvAcana, kSetra kI pratilekhanA ke lie kisa prakAra gamanAgamana karanA cAhie,
vihAra mArga evaM sthaMDila bhUmi, jala, vizrAmasthAna, bhikSA, vasati, upadrava
Adi kI parIkSA, pratilekhanIya kSetra meM praveza karane kI vidhi, bhikSA se
vahA~ ke mAnavoM ke antarmAnasa kI parIkSA, bhikSA, auSadha Adi kI prApti meM
saralatA va kaThinatA kA parijJAna, vihAra karane se pUrva vasati ke adhipati kI
anumati, vihAra karane se pUrva zubha zakUna dekhanA Adi kA varNana hai|
sthavirakalpikoM kI samAcArI meM ina bAtoM para prakAza DAlA hai1. pratilekhanA-
vastra Adi kI pratilekhanA kA samaya, pratilekhanA ke doSa aura unakA prAyazcita
/ 2. niSkramaNa- upAzraya se bAhara nikalane kA samaya / 3. prAbhRtikA- gRhastha
ke lie jo makAna taiyAra kiyA hai, usameM rahanA cAhie yA nahIM rahanA caahie|
tatsambandhI vidhi va prAyazcitta / [63 ]

Page #65 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Translation:  **4. Time for Accepting Alms and Essential Items Related to
Alms**  **5. Method of Cleaning the Kalpaka-patra (Alms Bowl), Lepita
(Lacquered) and Alapita (Unlacquered) Patra, Benefits of Patra-Lep (Lacquer)**
**6. Gachchashatikadi - Religious, Swagrihayatimishra (Mixed with Household),
Swagrihapashaandamishra (Mixed with Household Heresy), Yavadathikamishra (Mixed
with Yavadathika), Kritakrit (Purchased), Putikarmika (Made with Foul Material),
and Pratmarthakrit (Made for Self-Interest) and their Sub-Categories**  **7.
Description of the Anuyan Rath Yatra (Procession of the Anuyan) and its
Associated Faults**  **8. Purakarma - Faults Incurred by Cleaning Hands, etc.,
with Water Containing Mind-Stuff Before Accepting Alms**  **9. Glan-Glan-Rugna
(Sick) Shraman's Service, Nirjara (Loss of Energy) Due to it, Investigation of
Pathya (Dietary Regimen), Method of Taking the Sick Shraman to a Vaidya
(Physician), Manner of Talking to the Vaidya, Providing Shelter to the Sick
Shraman, Faults Incurred by the Acharya (Teacher) Leaving the Sick Shraman in a
Lane, etc., and the Provisions for their PrƒÅya≈õcitta (Atonement)**  **10.
Gachchpratibandha Yathalandaika - Conduct, Including Vandana (Salutation), with
Yathalandaika Kalpadharis (Followers of the Yathalandaika Kalpa) Who Maintain a
Connection with the Gachch Due to Reasons like Vachana (Scriptural Texts), etc.,
and the Limits of Masakalpa (Monthly Observances)**  **11. Uparidosha - Faults
Incurred by Staying in One Area for More Than One Month During Times Other Than
the Rainy Season**  **12. Apvada - Exceptional Reasons for Staying in One Area
for More Than One Month, Light Shed on the Method of Bhikshacharya (Practice of
Accepting Alms) for Shraman and Shramani (Male and Female Ascetics). It is also
Explained that if a Village, City, etc., is Divided into Two Parts, Inside and
Outside a Fort, then Light is Shed on the Rules and Regulations Regarding the
Acharya's Conduct for Shramanis Inside and Outside. The Limits of Masakalpa for
Nirgranthi (One Who Has Abandoned All Attachments), Vihar-Vidhi (Rules of
Conduct), the Head of the Community and his Qualities, Recording of the Area by
Him, Abduction of Shramanis by Buddhist Shravakas (Followers) in Bharouch,
Suitable Areas for Shramanis, Residence, Protection from Harassment by Non-
believers, Number of Shramanis Going for Bhiksha (Alms), Maximum Time a Shramani
Can Stay in One Place Outside the Rainy Season, and its Provisions. Considering
Both the Sthavirakalpa (Elder's Code) and Jinakalpa (Jina's Code), the
Commentary Accepts the Prominence of Both from the Perspectives of Nispaddaka
(Executor) and Nispann (Accomplished). From the Perspective of Sutra-Artha
(Meaning of the Sutra), etc., Sthavirakalpa is the Nispaddaka of Jinakalpa.
Jinakalpa is Nispann from the Perspective of Jnana (Knowledge), Darshan
(Vision), Charitra (Conduct), etc. To Clarify the Subject, Examples of
Guhasingh, Two Women, and Two Groups are Presented. It is Elaborated that
Nirgandha-Nirgranthis (Those Who Have Abandoned All Attachments) Should Not Stay
in a Village, City, etc., with One Entrance and One Courtyard. Various
Perspectives are Considered Regarding Where Shraman and Shramani Should Stay. In
the Vyavshaman Prakrut Sutra, it is Considered that if There is Discord Among
Shramans, Then One Should Adopt Upshaman (Pacification) and Calm the Distress.
One Who Adopts Upshaman is Paradharka (One Who Acts for the Benefit of Others),
and One Who Does Not is Viradhak (One Who Acts for Self-Interest). The Acharya
is Subject to PrƒÅya≈õcitta for Neglecting to Pacify Distress Among Shraman and
Shramani. The Method of Pacifying Disputes Among Them is Presented.**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
4. bhikSA-bhikSA ke lene kA samaya aura bhikSA sambandhI prAvazyaka vastueM / 5.
kalpakaraNa-pAtra ko svaccha karane kI vidhi, lepakRta aura alepakRta pAtra,
pAtra-lepa se lAbha / 6. gacchazatikAdi-AdhArmika, svagRhayatimizra,
svagRhapASaNDamizra, yAvadAthikamizra, krItakRta, pUtikArmika aura
prAtmArthakRta tathA unake avAntara bheda / 7. anuyAna rathayAtrA kA varNana
aura usa sambandhI doSa / 8. pura:karma-bhikSA lene se pUrva sacitta jala se
hAtha Adi sApha karane se lagane vAle doSa / 9. glAna-glAna-rugNa zramaNa kI
sevA se hone vAlI nirjarA, usake lie pathya kI gaveSaNA, cikitsA ke lie baidya
ke pAsa le jAne kI vidhi, vaidya se vArtAlApa karane kA tarIkA, rugNa zramaNa ko
upAzraya, galI Adi meM chor3akara cale jAne vAle prAcArya ko lagane vAle doSa
aura unake prAyazcitta kA vidhAna / 10. gacchapratibaddha yathAlaMdika-vAcanA
Adi kAraNoM se gaccha se sambandha rakhane vAle yathAladika kalpadhAriyoM ke
sAtha vandana Adi vyavahAra tathA mAsakalpa kI maryAdA / 11. uparidoSa-varSARtu
ke atirikta samaya meM eka kSetra meM eka mAsa se adhika rahane se lagane vAle
doSa / 12. apavAda-eka kSetra meM eka mAsa se adhika rahane ke prApavAdika
kAraNa, zramaNa-zramaNiyoM kI bhikSAcaryA kI vidhi para bhI prakAza DAlA hai|
sAtha hI yaha bhI batAyA hai ki yadi grAma, nagara Adi durga ke andara aura
bAhara do bhAgoM meM vibhakta ho to andara aura bAhara zramaNiyoM ke
prAcArasambandhI vidhi-vidhAnoM para prakAza DAlate hae batAyA hai ki nirgranthI
ke mAsakalpa kI maryAdA, vihAra-vidhi, samudAya kA pramukha aura usake guNa,
usake dvArA kSetra kI pratilekhanA, bauddha zrAvakoM dvArA bhar3auca meM
zramaNiyoM kA apaharaNa, zramaNiyoM ke yogya kSetra, vasati, vidharmI se
upadrava kI rakSA, bhikSAhetu jAne vAlI zramaNiyoM kI saMkhyA, varSAvAsa ke
atirikta zramaNI ko eka sthAna para adhika se adhika kitanA rahanA, usakA
vidhAna haiN| sthavirakalpa aura jinakalpa ina donoM avasthAoM meM kaunasI
avasthA pramukha hai, isa para cintana karate hue bhASyakAra ne niSpAdaka aura
niSpanna ina donoM dRSTiyoM se donoM kI pramukhatA svIkAra kI hai| sUtra artha
Adi dRSTiyoM se sthavirakalpa jinakalpa kA niSpAdaka hai| jinakalpa jJAna-
darzana-cAritra prabhRti dRSTiyoM se niSpanna hai| viSaya ko spaSTa karane kI
dRSTi se guhAsiMha, do mahilAeM aura do vargoM ke udAharaNa prastuta kiye haiN|
_eka prAcaura aura eka dvAra vAle grAma-nagara Adi meM nirgandha-nirgranthiyoM
ko nahIM rahanA cAhie, isa sambandha meM vistAra se vivecana kiyA hai| zramaNa-
zramaNiyoM ko kisa sthAna meM rahanA cAhie, isa para vividha dRSTiyoM se cintana
kiyA gayA hai| vyavazamana prakRta sUtra meM isa bAta para cintana kiyA hai ki
zramaNoM meM paraspara vaimanasya ho jAye to upazamana dhAraNa karake kleza ko
zAnta karanA caahie| jo upazamana dhAraNa karatA hai vaha pArAdhaka hai, jo
nahIM karatA hai vaha virAdhaka hai| prAcArya ko zramaNa-zramaNiyoM meM kleza
hone para usakI upazAnti hetu upekSA karane para prAyazcitta kA vidhAna hai|
paraspara ke jhagar3e ko zAnta karane kI vidhi pratipAdita kI gaI hai|

Page #66 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Four Nature Sutras state that monks and nuns should not travel from one
village to another during the rainy season. If they do, they incur a penance. If
there is an exceptional reason to travel, they should do so with great care. The
Avagraha Sutra states that when a monk is going for alms or to the ground for
sanitation, etc., and a householder requests him to take clothes, bowls,
blankets, etc., he should take them and give them to the Acharya, etc., and use
them only after obtaining their permission. The Ratribhakt Prakrut Sutra states
that one should not consume food or drink at night or during the twilight hours,
nor should one accept clothes, etc. Traveling at night and during the twilight
hours is also prohibited. There are two types of paths: Panth and Marg. Panth is
a path where there is nothing between, such as a village, town, etc., and Marg
is a path where there are villages and towns in between. There are five types of
merchants: Bhandi, Bahilka, Bharavah, Praudarik, and Karpatak. There are eight
types of merchants and eight types of merchants' managers. For travel, the Aryan
region is particularly suitable. The term "Aryan" has been considered in terms
of twelve deposits, including name, etc. There are six Aryan castes: Ambastha,
Kalinda, Vaideha, Vidak, Harit, and Tantun. There are also six types of Aryan
families: Ugra, Bhog, Rajanya, Kshatriya, Jnat-Kaurava, and Ikshvaku. Further,
in the discussion related to the Upashraya, the obstacles to the Upashraya have
been elaborated upon. A monk should not stay in a place where grains like rice
and barley, etc., are scattered, nor should he stay in a place where there are
jars of liquor, jars of cold water, light, lamps, food, milk, yogurt, butter,
etc. The method of abandoning the food offered by the Sagarik, the method of
donating food brought from another place, the method of accepting food from the
Samarik, the method of accepting food, utensils, etc., made for specific
individuals, and the method of accepting the Rajoharan have been explained.
There are five types of clothes: (1) Jangik, (2) Bhangik, (3) Sanak, (4) Potak,
(5) Tiritpattak, and five types of Rajoharan: (1) Aunik, (2) Praustrik, (3)
Sanak, (4) Vakchakchippak, (5) Mujchippak. Their nature and method of acceptance
have been explained. The Third Uddeshak explains the method of entering the
Upashraya for the Nirgranth and the Nirgranthis. The acceptance of clothes,
etc., which are whole and not whole, different and not different, and the
contemplation on the title of newly initiated monks and nuns have been
discussed. The method of accepting the title, the method of bowing, etc., have
been established. While contemplating on the violence and non-violence involved
in tearing clothes, the violence of substance and the violence of feeling have
been considered. The more intense the passion, etc., in violence, the more
intense the karmic bondage will be. The karmic bondage due to knowledge and
ignorance in the violent, the diversity of the karmic bondage due to the
diversity of the authority, etc., have been contemplated. The Fourth Uddeshak
lays down the penance for manual labor, etc. The feeling of sexual desire can
never be free from passion, etc. Therefore, it is not an exception. The
initiation of Pandak, etc., into the order is prohibited. The Fifth Uddeshak
sheds light on the Gachcha, the obstacles related to the scriptures and the
subject matter, the faults incurred by staying in the Gachcha with a troubled
mind or by leaving one's own Gachcha and going to another Gachcha, and their
penance, the faultless and doubtful night meals, the faults related to belching,
vomiting, etc., and their penance, the effort for food, etc. Special rules and
regulations have been laid down for nuns. The Sixth Uddeshak describes the use
of faultless words and the non-use of false words, the penance for killing,
etc., the removal of thorns, the faults caused by misinterpretation, the
exception to penance. Monks and nuns should use [65]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
cAra prakRta sUtra meM batAyA hai ki zramaNa-zramaNiyoM ko varSARtu meM eka
gAMva se dUsare gAMva nahIM jAnA caahie| yadi mamana karatA hai to use
prAyazcitta pAtA hai| yadi ApavAdika kAraNoM se vihAra karane kA prasaMga
upasthita ho to use yatanA se gamana karanA caahie| avagrahasUtra meM batAyA hai
ki bhikSA yA zaucAdi bhUmi ke lie jAte hue zramaNa ko gRhapati vastra, pAtra,
kambala Adi grahaNa karane kI prArthanA kare to use lekara prAcArya Adi ko
pradAna kare aura unakI AjJA prApta hone para usakA upayoga kre| rAtribhakta
prakRta sUtra meM batAyA hai ki rAtri yA vikAla meM prazana pAna Adi grahaNa
karanA nahIM cAhie aura na vastra Adi ko grahaNa karanA caahie| rAtri aura
vikAla meM adhvagamana kA bhI niSedha kiyA gayA hai / adhva ke do bheda haiM--
pantha aura mArga / jisake bIca meM grAma, nagara Adi kucha bhI na pAe vaha
pantha hai aura jisake bIca grAma nagara Aye vaha mArga hai| sArtha ke bhaMDI,
bahilaka, bhAravaha, praudarika, kArpaTika ye pAMca prakAra haiN| ATha prakAra
ke sArthavAha aura pATha prakAra ke sArtha-vyavasthApakoM kA ullekha hai| vihAra
ke lie AryakSetra hI vizeSa rUpa se upayukta hai| Arya pada para nAma Adi bAraha
nikSepoM se vicAra kiyA hai / Arya jAtiyAM ambaSTha, kalinda, vaideha, vidaka,
harita, tantuNa ye chaha haiM aura Arya kula bhI ugra, bhoga, rAjanya, kSatriya,
jJAta-kaurava aura ikSvAku yaha chaha prakAra ke haiN| Age upAzraya sambandhI
vivecana meM upAzraya ke vyAghAtoM para vistAra se prakAza DAlA hai| jisameM
zAli brIhi Adi sacitta dhAnya kaNa bikhare hue hoM usa bIjAkIrNa sthAna para
zramaNa ko nahIM rahanA cAhie aura na surAvikaTa kumbha, zItodakavikaTakumbha,
jyoti, dIpaka, piNDa, dugdha, dahI, navanIta Adi padArthoM se yukta sthAna para
hI rahanA caahie| sAgArika ke pAhAradi ke tyAga kI vidhi, anya sthAna se AI huI
bhojanasAmagrI ke dAna kI vidhi, sAmArika kA piNDagrahaNa, viziSTa vyaktiyoM ke
nimitta banAye hue bhakta, upakaraNa Adi kA grahaNa, rajoharaNa grahaNa karane
kI vidhi batAI hai| pAMca prakAra ke vastra-(1) jAMgika, (2) bhAMgika, (3)
sAnaka, (4) potaka, (5) tirITapaTTaka, pAMca prakAra ke rajoharaNa-(1) auNika,
(2) prauSTrika, (3) sAnaka, (4) vakcakacippaka, (5) mujacippaka-inake svarUpa
aura grahaNa karane kI vidhi batAI gaI hai| tRtIya uddezaka meM nirgrantha aura
nirgranthiyoM ke paraspara upAzraya meM praveza karane kI vidhi batAI hai|
kRtsna aura akRtsna, bhinna aura abhinna vastrAdi grahaNa, navadIkSita zramaNa-
zramaNiyoM kI upadhi para cintana kiyA hai| upadhigrahaNa kI vidhi, vandana Adi
kA vidhAna kiyA hai| vastra phAr3ane meM hone vAlI hiMsA-ahiMsA para cintana
karate hue dravyAhiMsA aura bhAvahiMsA para vicAra kiyA hai| hiMsA meM jitanI
adhika rAga Adi kI tIvratA hogI utanA hI tIvra karmabandhana hogaa| hiMsaka meM
jJAna aura ajJAna ke kAraNa karmabaMdha, adhikaraNa kI vividhatA se karmabaMdha
meM vaividhya Adi para cintana kiyA gayA hai| caturtha uddezaka meM hastakarma
Adi ke prAyazcitta kA vidhAna hai| mathunabhAva rAgAdi se kabhI bhI rahita nahIM
ho sktaa| ata: usakA apavAda nahIM hai / paNDaka Adi ko pravrajyA dene kA
niSedha kiyA hai| paMcama uddezaka meM gaccha sambandhI, zAstra smaraNa aura
taviSayaka vyAghAta, klezayukta mana se gaccha meM rahane se athavA svagaccha kA
parityAga kara anya gaccha meM cale jAne se lagane vAle doSa aura unakA
prAyazcitta, niHzaMka aura sazaMka rAtribhojana, udgAra-vamana grAdi viSayaka
doSa aura usakA prAyazcitta, pAhAra Adi ke lie prayatna Adi para prakAza DAlA
gayA hai| zramaNiyoM ke lie vizeSa rUpa se vidhi-vidhAna batAye gaye haiN|
SaSTha uddezaka meM nirdoSa vacanoM kA prayoga aura mithyA vacanoM kA aprayoga,
prANAtipAta Adi ke prAyazcitta, kaNTaka ke uddharaNa, viparyAsajanya doSa,
prAyazcitta apavAda kA varNana hai| zramaNa-zramaNiyoM ko viSama [65 ]

Page #67 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
One should not deviate from the path. Understanding the reasons behind the
deranged state of a nirgranthi, the text discusses the arrangements for their
care and the rules and prohibitions regarding their treatment, etc. / For
Shramanas, six types of Parimanu Vyadhat are considered - (1) Kautkucit (2)
Moukharik (3) Chakshulol (4) Titinik (5) Ichchalom (6) Bhijjanidanakaran - their
nature, faults, and exceptions, etc. are contemplated. _ In Kalpasthiti Prakrut,
six types of Kalpasthitis are discussed - (1) Samayikkalpasthiti, (2)
Chhedopasthanayakalpasthiti, (3) Nivishmanakalpasthiti, (4)
Nivishtakayikakalpasthiti, (5) Jinkalpasthiti, (6) Stavirakalpasthiti.
Chhedopasthanayakalpasthiti has ten Kalpas, including Achelky, Prauddeshik, etc.
Its possessors and non-possessors are also contemplated. In this commentary,
there are scattered Subhashitas, such as "O humans! Be vigilant always, the
intellect of a vigilant human develops, he who is awake is always blessed."
"Jagarah Nara Nicham, Jagaramanasas Badhate Buddhi / So Suvati // So Dhanam, Jo
Jagati So Saya Dhanno //"  "Character and modesty are the ornaments of a woman.
A woman's body cannot be adorned with ornaments like necklaces, etc. Her
ornament is only character and modesty." "In a gathering, speech devoid of good
conduct and improper is not considered praiseworthy." Thus, this commentary
presents a very subtle analysis of the principles and thoughts of Shramanas from
a logical perspective. It also sheds considerable light on the social, cultural,
religious, and political conditions of that era. There is beautiful analysis
from a psychological perspective in many places. This 'Grantharatna' holds an
unparalleled and unique place not only in the history of Jain literature but
also in Indian literature. Brihatkalpachurni is the primary source and
Laghubhashya for this Churni. / The initial part of Dasashrutaskandhachurni and
Brihatkalpachurni is almost similar. Linguists believe that Dasashrutaskandhani
is older than Brihatkalpachurni. It is possible that both these Churnis belong
to the same Acharya. This Churni has a preface and six Uddeshak. / In the
beginning, the nature of knowledge is contemplated. / While stating that
Abhidhan and Abhidhey are sometimes different and sometimes the same, six
synonyms for the word 'Vriksh' are given in different languages. What is called
'Vriksh' in Sanskrit is called 'Rukkh' in Prakrit, 'Prodan' in Magadhi, 'Kar' in
Lat, 'Chor' in Tamil, and 'Idaku' in Andhra. The Churni mentions texts like
Tattvarthadhigama, Visheshavashyakbhashya, Karmaprakriti, Mahakala,
Govindaniyanti, etc. The language is Sanskrit-mixed Prakrit. The author's name
is not mentioned anywhere in the Churni.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
mArga se nahIM jAnA caahie| jo nirgranthI vikSiptacitta ho gaI hai usake kAraNoM
ko samajhakara usake dekha-rekha kI vyavasthA aura cikitsA grAdi ke vidhi-
niSedhoM kA vivecana kiyA gayA hai / zramaNoM ke lie chaha prakAra ke parimanyu
vyAdhAta mAne gaye haiM--(1) kautkucita (2) maukharika (3) cakSulola (4)
titiNika (5) icchAloma (6) bhijjAnidAnakaraNa-inakA svarUpa, doSa aura apavAda
Adi para cintana kiyA hai| _ kalpasthiti prakRta meM chaha prakAra kI
kalpasthitiyoM para vicAra kiyA hai-(1) sAmAyikakalpasthiti, (2)
chedopasthAnIyakalpasthiti, (3) nivizamAnakalpasthiti, (4)
niviSTakAyikakalpasthiti, (5) jinakalpasthiti, (6) sthavirakalpasthiti |
chedopasthApanIyakalpasthiti ke Acelakya, prauddezika prAdi dasa kalpa haiN|
usake adhikArI aura anadhikArI para bhI cintana kiyA gayA hai| prastuta bhASya
meM yatra-tatra subhASita bikhare par3e haiM, yathAhe mAnavo ! sadA-sarvadA
jAgrata raho, jAgrata mAnava kI buddhi kA vikAsa hotA hai, jo jAgatA hai vaha
sadA dhanya hai| "jAgaraha narA NicaM, jAgaramANassa bar3hate buddhi / so suvati
// so dhaNaM, jo jaggati so sayA dhaNNo // zIla aura lajjA hI nArI kA bhUSaNa
hai| hAra Adi prAbhUSaNoM se nArI kA zarIra vibhUSita nahIM ho sktaa| usakA
bhUSaNa to zIla aura lajjA hI hai| sabhA meM saMskAra rahita asAdhUvAdinI vANI
prazasta nahIM kahI jA sktii| isa prakAra prastuta bhASya meM zramaNoM ke
prAcAra-vicAra kA tArkika dRSTi se bahuta hI sUkSma vivecana kiyA gayA hai| usa
yuga kI sAmAjika sAMskRtika dhArmika rAjanItika sthitiyoM para bhI khAsA acchA
prakAza par3atA hai| aneka sthaloM para manovaijJAnika dRSTi se sundara
vizleSaNa huA hai| jaina sAhitya ke itihAsa meM hI nahIM, apitu bhAratIya
sAhitya meM isa' grantharatna kA apUrva aura anUThA sthAna hai| bRhatkalpacUNi
isa cUNi kA prAdhAra mUlasUtra va laghubhASya hai / dazAzrutaskandhacUNi kA aura
bRhatkalpacUrNi kA prArambhika aMza prAyaH milatA-julatA hai| bhASAvijJoM kA
mantavya hai ki bRhatkalpacaNi se dazAzru taskandhaNi prAcIna hai| yaha sambhava
hai ki ye donoM hI caNiyAM eka hI AcArya kI hoN| prastutaH cUNi meM pIThikA aura
chaha uddezaka hai / prArambha meM jJAna ke svarUpa para cintana kiyA gayA hai /
abhidhAna aura abhidheya ko kathaMcita bhinna aura kathaMcit abhinna batAte hue
vakSa zabda ke chaha bhASAoM meM paryAya diye haiN| jise saMskRta meM vRkSa
kahate haiM vahI prAkRta meM rukkSa, magadha meM prodaNa, lATa meM kara, damila-
tamila meM cora aura Andhra meM iDAku kahA jAtA hai| caNi meM tattvArthAdhigama,
vizeSAvazyakabhASya, karmaprakRti, mahAkalpa, govindaniyaMkti Adi granthoM kA
ullekha kiyA hai| bhASA saMskRtamizrita prAkRta hai| caNi meM prArambha se anta
taka lekhaka ke nAma kA nirdeza nahIM huA hai|

Page #68 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
This commentary is on the *Brihatkalpa* and its *Niyukti* written by Bhadrabaahu
Swami and the *Laghubhashya* written by Sanghdasagani. Acharya Malayagiri could
only write his commentary up to verse 606 of the *Peethika*. He did not write
any further commentary. The remaining commentary was completed by Acharya
Kshemakirti, as acknowledged by Kshemakirti himself. At the beginning of the
commentary, the commentator has paid homage to Jinesvara Deva and remembered his
Sadgurudev, and expressed gratitude to the commentator and the *Churnikara*. The
commentator has written about the creators of the *Brihatkalpa* and *Vyavahara
Sutra* that the fourteen *Purvadhara* Bhadrabaahu Swami created the *Kalpa* and
*Vyavahara* for the benefit of the *Shramanas* so that there would be no
interruption in the *Prayaschitta*. He created the *Niyukti* to clarify the
profound secrets of the *Sutra*, and the commentator created the *Bhashya* for
those of limited intellect who lack brilliance. The *Niyukti* and *Bhashya* both
reveal the meaning of the *Sutra* and thus became one text. The commentary uses
Prakrit verses as quotations and cites Prakrit stories to make the subject
matter easier to understand. The present *Malayagiri Vritti* has 4600 verses.
Thus, we see that Acharya Malayagiri was a profound scholar of the scriptures.
The deep discussion and analysis of various philosophies found in his
commentaries is not available anywhere else. He was a great philosopher,
renowned commentator, and a great lecturer of his time. His ability to present
the profound secrets of the *Agamas* in a logical style was amazing and unique.
Saubhagyasagar wrote a commentary on the *Brihatkalpa* in Sanskrit. The
*Brihatkalpa Niyukti*, *Laghubhashya*, and the commentaries of Malayagiri and
Kshemakirti were published from 1933 to 1941 by the Jain Pratmananda Sabha,
Bhavnagar, Saurashtra. The present text was edited by Chaturvijayji and
Punyavijayji. This edition can be considered excellent from the perspective of
editing skills. The *Brihatkalpa* was published with a commentary by an unknown
commentator by the Samyakgyan Pracharak Mandal, Jodhpur. In 1923, it was
published with German commentary, etc., by W. Schubring, Leipzig, 1905: original
only in Nagari script - Pune, 1923. In 1915, Dr. Jivraj Ghelabhai Doshi
published it with a Gujarati translation from Ahmedabad, and Acharya
Amolakrishiji M. published it with a Hindi translation by Sukhdevsahay
Jwalaprasad Jauhari, Hyderabad. In 1977, it was published by Agam Anuyog
Prakashan, Sanderao, under the name "Kappsuttam" with a literal translation and
special meaning. The present editor of this text is the Agam Anuyog Pravartak
Muni Shri Kanhaiyalalji M. 'Kamal'. His word-by-word translation and editing are
captivating. Based on ancient commentary literature, the editor Muni has
attempted to clarify many hidden secrets. The *Vyavahara Sutra* commentary
literature is a vibrant commentary on the practice of *Shraman* life. In the
*Vyavahara Niyukti*, the *Utsarga* and *Apavada* are as follows: 1. Shri
Malayagiri Prabhavo, Yam Kattu Mupakramant Matimantaha / Sa Kalpashastra Teeka
Maya Anusandhoyate Alpadhiyaa / - Brihatkalpa Peethikavritti, p. 177 [67]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
vRhatkalpapIThikAvRtti prastuta vRtti bhadrabAhu svAmI viracita
bRhatkalpaniyukti evaM saMghadAsagaNI biracita laghubhASya para hai| AcArya
malayagiri pIThikA kI bhASya gAthA 606 paryanta hI apanI vRtti likha ske| Age
unhoMne vRtti nahIM likhI hai| Age kI vRtti prAcArya kSemakIrti ne pUrNa kI hai|
jaisA ki svayaM kSemakIrti ne bhI svIkAra kiyA hai|' vRtti ke prArambha meM
vRttikAra ne jinezvara deva ko praNAma kara sadgurudeva kA smaraNa kiyA hai
tathA bhASyakAra aura cUrNikAra ke prati bhI kRtajJatA vyakta kI hai| vRttikAra
ne bRhatkalpa evaM vyavahArasUtra ke nirmAtAoM ke sambandha meM likhA hai ki
caturdaza pUrvadhara bhadrabAha svAmI ne zramaNoM ke anugrahArtha kalpa aura
vyavahAra kI racanA kI jisase ki prAyazcitta kA vyavaccheda na ho / unhoMne
sUtra ke gambhIra rahasyoM ko spaSTa karane ke liye niyukti kI hI racanA kI hai
aura jinameM pratibhA kI tejasvitA kA abhAva hai una alpabuddhi vAle vyaktiyoM
ke lie bhASyakAra ne bhASya kA nirmANa kiyA hai| vaha niyukti aura bhASya sUtra
ke artha ko prakaTa karane vAle hone se donoM eka grantha rUpa ho gye| vatti meM
prAkRta gAthAoM kA uddharaNa ke rUpa meM prayoga haA hai aura viSaya ko subodha
banAne kI dRSTi se prAkRta kathAe~ uddhRta kI gaI haiN| prastuta malayamiri
vRtti kA granthamAna 4600 zloka pramANa hai| isa prakAra hama dekhate haiM ki
prAcArya malayagiri zAstroM ke gambhIra jJAtA the| vibhinna darzanazAstroM kA
jaisA aura jitanA gambhIra vivecana evaM vizleSaNa unakI TIkAoM meM upalabdha
hai, vaisA anyatra kahIM para bhI upalabdha nahIM hai / ve apane yuga ke mahAn
tattvacintaka, prasiddha TIkAkAra aura mahAn vyAkhyAtA the| AgamoM ke
gurugambhIra rahasyoM ko tarkapUrNa zailI meM prastuta karane kI unakI kSamatA
adbhuta thI, anUThI thii| saubhAgyasAgara ne bRhatkalpa para saMskRta bhASA meM
eka TIkA likhii| bRhatkalpaniyukti, laghubhASya tathA malayagiri, kSemakIrti
kRta TIkA sahita san 1933 se 1941 taka zrI jaina prAtmAnanda sabhA bhAvanagara
saurASTra se prakAzita huii| prastuta grantha kA sampAdana caturavijayajI aura
puNyavijayajI ne kiyaa| sampAdana kalA kI dRSTi se yaha sampAdana utkRSTa kahA
jA sakatA hai| vRhatkalpa eka ajJAta TIkAkAra kI TIkA sahita samyakajJAna
pracAraka maNDala jodhapura se prakAzita haa| sana 1923 meM jarmana TippaNI Adi
ke sAtha W. Schubring Lepizig 1905 : mUla mAtra nAgarIlipi meM-pUnA, 1923 / san
1915 meM DaoN. jIvarAja ghelAbhAI dozI ne gujarAtI anuvAda sahita ahamadAbAda se
prakAzita kiyA, aura AcArya amolakaRSijI ma. ne hindI anuvAda sahita
sukhadevasahAya jvAlAprasAda jauharI haidarAbAda se prakAzita kiyaa| I. san 1977
meM Agama anuyoga prakAzana sANDerAva se "kappasuttaM" ke nAma se mUlAnusparzI
anuvAda aura vizeSa artha ke sAtha prakAzita huaa| prastuta sampAdana prastuta
prAgama ke sampAdaka Agama anuyoga pravartaka muni zrI kanhaiyAlAlajI ma.
'kamala' haiN| jinakA zabdAnulakI anuvAda aura sampAdana mana ko lubhAne vAlA
hai| prAcIna vyAkhyA sAhitya ke AdhAra para aneka nigUr3ha rahasyoM ko sampAdaka
munivara ne spaSTa karane kA prayAsa kiyA hai| vyavahArasUtra vyAkhyAsAhitya
vyavahAra zramaNa jIvana kI sAdhanA kA eka jIvanta bhASya hai| vyavahAraniyukti
meM utsarga aura apavAda 1. zrI malayagirI prabhavo, yAM kattu mupAkramanta
matimantaH / sA kalpazAstra TIkA mayA'nusandhoyate'lpadhiyA /
-bRhatkalpapIThikAvRtti, pR. 177 [67 ]

Page #69 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
This is a discussion. There is also a commentary on this appointment. Which is
more detailed. The appointments of the Brihatkalpa and Vyavahar are very similar
in terms of style, sentiment and language. The facts and principles of sadhana
are almost the same in both. This appointment has been merged into the
commentary. We have already mentioned in the past that the name of the author of
the Vyavahar Bhashya has not yet been known. Like the Brihatkalpa Bhashya, this
Bhashya also sheds light on the conduct and thoughts of the Nirgrantha and
Nirgranthis. First of all, the nature of Vyavahar, Vyavhari and Vyavhartavya has
been discussed in the preface. From the point of view of faults in conduct, the
meaning, difference, cause, special study, Tadah Parshad etc. of atonement have
been discussed and many examples have also been given to clarify the subject.
After this, contemplation has been done from the point of view of deposit on the
words like Bhikshu, Masparihar, Sthanapratisevana, Alochana etc. There is a
separate provision of atonement for Atikram, Vyatikrama, Atichar, Anachar
related to Adhakarma. The purity of both Mulaguna and Uttaraguna is done by
atonement. For Atikram, there is a provision of Masaguru and Kalalghu atonement,
for Atichar, Tapoguru and Kalaguru and for Anachar, Chaturguru atonement.
Pindavishuddhi Samiti Bhavana Tap Pratima and Abhiggraha are all in Uttaraguna.
They have forty-two, eighty, twenty-five, twelve, twelve and four differences
respectively. There are two types of the man who does atonement: Nirgat and
Vartaman. Those who have crossed the Atikrant by Tapohr atonement are Nirgat and
those who are present are Vartaman. Their differences have also been made. There
are four types of men who are eligible for atonement: 1. Ubhaytara who can serve
others while practicing the sadhana of restraint and penance. 2. Atmatara - who
can only do penance. 3. Paratara - who can only serve. 4. Anyatara - who can
only practice one of penance and service at a time. Malochana Palochanaha and
Alochak do not happen without. Alochanaha is itself Acharavan, Pradharavan,
Vyavharavan, Apvridak, Prakurbhi, Niryapak, Apayadarshi and Aparishrabi, endowed
with these qualities. The Alochak is also endowed with these ten qualities:
Jatisampanna, Kulsampanna, Vinayasampanna, Gyanasampanna, Darshanasampanna,
Charanasampanna, Kshata, Danta, Amayi and Apachchattpi. Along with this, the
Bhashyakar has also contemplated on the faults of Alochana, the substance that
is the subject of it, etc., the method of giving atonement, etc. In the
description of Pariharatapas, the analysis of service has been done and examples
of Subhadra and Mugawati have also been given. The five types of Aroopana:
Prasthapanika, Sthapita, Kritsna, Akritsna and Hadhada have been told and
discussed in detail. There is a description of various types of atonements for
leaving the Gachch due to laxity and rejoining the Gachch. The nature of
Parsvastha, Yathachchanda, Kushil, Pravasanna and Sansakta has been highlighted.
[68]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
kA vivecana hai| isa niyukti para bhASya bhI hai| jo adhika vistRta hai|
bRhatkalpa aura vyavahAra kI niyukti paraspara zailI bhAva-bhASA kI dRSTi se
bahuta kucha milatI-julatI hai| donoM meM sAdhanA ke tathya va siddhAnta prAyaH
samAna haiM / yaha niyukti bhASya meM vilIna ho gaI hai| vyavahArabhASya hama
pUrva meM hI batA cuke haiM ki vyavahArabhASya ke racayitA kA nAma abhI taka
jJAta nahIM ho sakA hai| bRhatkalpabhASya ke samAna hI isa bhASya meM bhI
nirgrantha aura nirgranthiyoM ke AcAra-vicAra para prakAza DAlA hai|
sarvaprathama pIThikA meM vyavahAra, vyavahArI evaM vyavahartavya ke svarUpa kI
carcA kI gaI hai| vyavahAra meM doSa lagane kI dRSTi se prAyazcitta kA artha,
bheda, nimitta, adhyayana vizeSa, tadaha parSada Adi kA vivecana kiyA gayA hai
aura viSaya ko spaSTa karane ke liye aneka dRSTAnta bhI diye gaye haiN| isake
pazcAt bhikSu, mAsaparihAra, sthAnapratisevanA, AlocanA Adi padoM para nikSepa
dRSTi se cintana kiyA hai| AdhAkarma se sambandhita atikrama, vyatikrama,
aticAra, anAcAra ke lie pRthaka-pRthaka prAyazcitta kA vidhAna hai| mUlaguNa
aura uttaraguNa ina donoM kI vizuddhi prAyazcitta se hotI hai| atikrama ke lie
mAsaguru aura kAlalaghu, aticAra ke lie tapoguru aura kAlaguru aura anAcAra ke
liye caturguru prAyazcitta kA vidhAna hai| piNDavizuddhi samiti bhAvanA tapa
pratimA aura abhigraha ye sabhI uttaraguNa meM haiN| inake kramaza: bayAlIsa,
bhATha, paccIsa, bAraha, bAraha aura cAra bheda hote haiN| prAyazcitta karane
vAle puruSa ke nirgata aura vartamAna ye do prakAra haiN| jo taporha prAyazcitta
se atikrAnta ho gaye haiM ve nirgata haiM aura jo vidyamAna haiM ve vartamAna
haiN| unake bhI bheda-prabheda kiye gaye haiN| prAyazcitta ke yogya puruSa cAra
prakAra ke hote haiM1. ubhayatarajo saMyama tapa kI sAdhanA karatA huA bhI
dUsaroM kI sevA kara sakatA hai / 2. Atmatara-jo kevala tapa hI kara sakatA hai|
3. paratara-jo kevala sevA hI kara sakatA hai| 4. anyatara-jo tapa aura sevA
donoM meM se kisI eka samaya meM eka kA hI sevana kara sakatA hai| mAlocanA
pAlocanAha aura Alocaka ke binA nahIM hotii| aAlocanAha svayaM AcAravAna,
prAdhAravAna, vyavahAravAna, apavrIDaka, prakurvI, niryApaka, apAyadarzI aura
aparizrAbI, ina guNoM se yukta hotA hai / Alocaka bhI jAtisampanna,
kulasampanna, vinayasampanna, jJAnasampanna, darzanasampanna, caraNasampanna,
kSAnta, dAnta, amAyI aura apazcAttApI ina dasa guNoM se yukta hotA hai| sAtha hI
AlocanA ke doSa, tadaviSayabhUta dravya Adi, prAyazcitta dene kI vidhi Adi para
bhI bhASyakAra ne cintana kiyA hai| parihAratapa ke varNana meM sevA kA
vizleSaNa kiyA gayA hai aura subhadrA aura mugAvatI ke udAharaNa bhI diye gaye
haiN| AropaNA ke prasthApanikA, sthApitA, kRtsnA, akRtsnA aura hADahaDA ye pAMca
prakAra batAye haiM tathA ina para vistAra se carcA kI hai| zithilatA ke kAraNa
gaccha kA parityAga kara punaH gaccha meM sammilita hone ke lie vividha prakAra
ke prAyazcittoM kA varNana hai| pArzvastha, yathAcchanda, kuzIla, pravasanna
aura saMsakta ke svarUpa para prakAza DAlA hai| [ 68]

Page #70 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
While discussing the conduct of Shramans, solitary conduct has been prohibited
and the faults associated with it have been described.  The text lays down the
rules for serving ascetics of various types and those afflicted with diseases,
highlighting the psychological approach to serving those with agitated minds
(Kshiptachitt) and those with excited minds (Deeptachitt). The three causes of
an agitated mind are attachment, fear, and insult. The cause of an excited mind
is honor. When honored, pride arises in such a person. Due to this pride, they
become excited (Deeptachitt) after defeating their enemies. The main difference
between an agitated mind and an excited mind is that an agitated mind usually
remains silent, while an excited mind speaks even without purpose. The
commentator has considered the qualifications of those who hold the positions of
Ganavachchedak, Pracharaya, Upadhyaya, Pravartak, Sthavir, Pravatini, etc. Those
who are knowledgeable in the eleven Angas, knowledgeable in the Navam Purva, are
Kritayogi, Bahushruta, knowledgeable in many Agamas, experts in Sutra-artha, are
patient, are Shruta-nigharsha, and are Mahajan, are the only ones who can hold
the distinguished positions of Pracharaya, etc. While discussing the rules and
regulations regarding the conduct of Shramans, it has been stated that how many
saints should an Acharya, Upadhyaya, etc. stay with at least, etc. various rules
and regulations have been described. An Acharya and Upadhyaya have five duties,
which Shramans should pay special attention to: 1. Cleaning their feet when they
go out. 2. Offering them a clean place for their excretions. 3. Following their
wishes. 4. Staying with them inside the shelter. 5. Going out with them. A
Shraman can initiate a woman and after initiation, she should be handed over to
a Sadhvi. A Sadhvi cannot initiate any man. She should be sent to a qualified
Shraman for initiation. A Shramani who has been initiated in one group should
not be initiated into another group. She should be initiated where she wants to
stay, but there is no such rule for Shramans. An Upadhyaya with three years of
initiation can become an Acharya with five years of initiation. The best place
for Varshavas is described as one where there is not much mud, where there is
not a large number of two-sense and other beings, where the land is fertile,
where there are two or three habitable settlements, where there is an abundance
of juice, where there are many physicians, where medicines are easily available,
where there is an abundance of grain, where the king rules his subjects
properly, where there are few hypocritical saints, where begging is easy, and
where there is no obstacle to self-study. Shramans should not stay where there
are many dogs. While contemplating the qualities and defects of those who take
initiation, the commentary states that some individuals are inherently flawed
due to their country's nature. A person born in Andhra is cruel. A person born
in Maharashtra is talkative, and a person born in Kosala is inherently wicked.
It is very rare to find such qualities absent in individuals.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
zramaNoM ke vihAra kI carcA karate hue ekAkI vihAra kA niSedha kiyA hai aura
unako lagane vAle doSoM kA nirUpaNa kiyA hai| vividha prakAra ke tapasvI va
vyAdhiyoM se saMsakta zramaNa kI sevA kA vidhAna karate hae kSiptacitta aura
dIptacitta kI sevA karane ko manovaijJAnika paddhati para prakAza DAlA hai|
kSiptacitta ke rAga, bhaya aura apamAna tIna kAraNa hai| dIptacitta kA kAraNa
sammAna hai| sammAna hone para usameM mada paidA hotA hai| zatruoM ko parAjita
karane ke kAraNa baha mada se unmatta hokara dIptacitta ho jAtA hai| kSiptacitta
aura dIptacitta meM mukhya antara yaha hai ki kSiptacitta prAyaH mauna rahatA
hai aura dIptacitta binA prayojana ke bhI bolatA rahatA hai| bhASyakAra ne
gaNAvacchedaka, prAcArya, upAdhyAya, pravartaka, sthavira, pravatinI grAdi
padaviyoM ko dhAraNa karane vAle kI yogyatAnoM para vicAra kiyA hai| jo gyAraha
aMgoM ke jJAtA haiM, navama pUrva ke jJAtA haiM, kRtayogI haiM, bahuzruta hai,
bahuta AgamoM ke parijJAtA haiM, sUtrArtha vizArada haiM, dhIra haiM,
zrutanigharSa haiM, mahAjana haiM ve viziSTa vyakti hI prAcArya Adi viziSTa
padaviyoM ko dhAraNa kara sakate haiN| zramaNoM ke vihAra sambandhI
niyamopaniyamoM para vicAra karate hae kahA hai ki AcArya, upAdhyAya grAdi
padavIdAroM ko kama se kama kitane santoM ke sAtha rahanA cAhie, Adi vividha
vidhi-vidhAnoM kA nirUpaNa hai| prAcArya, upAdhyAya ke pAMca pratizaya hote
haiM, jinakA zramaNoM ko vizeSa lakSya rakhanA cAhie 1. unake bAhara jAne para
pairoM ko sApha krnaa| 2. unake uccAra-prasravaNa ko nirdoSa sthAna para
paraThanA / 3. unakI icchAnusAra vaiyAvRtya karanA / 4. unake sAtha upAzraya ke
bhItara rhnaa| 5. unake sAtha upAzraya ke bAhara jaanaa| zramaNa kisI mahilA ko
dIkSA de sakatA hai aura dIkSA ke bAda use sAdhvI ko sauMpa denA caahie| sAdhvI
kisI bhI puruSa ko dIkSA nahIM de sakatI / use yogya zramaNa ke pAsa dIkSA ke
lie preSita karanA caahie| zramaNI eka saMgha meM dIkSA grahaNa kara dUsare
saMgha meM ziSyA bananA cAhe to use dIkSA nahIM denI caahie| use jahA~ para
rahanA ho vahIM para dIkSA grahaNa karanI cAhie, kintu zramaNa ke lie aisA
niyama nahIM hai / tIna varSa kI dIkSAparyAya vAlA upAdhyAya aura 5 varSa kI
dIkSAparyAya vAlA prAcArya bana sakatA hai| varSAvAsa ke lie aisA sthAna zreSTha
batAyA hai, jahA~ para adhika kIcar3a na ho, dvIndriyAdi jIvoM kI bahulatA na
ho, prAsuka bhUmi ho, rahane yogya do tIna bastiyAM hoM, gorasa kI pracuratA ho,
bahuta koI vaidya ho, auSadhiyAM saralatA se prApta hotI hoM, dhAnya kI
pracuratA ho, rAjA samyak prakAra se prajA kA pAlana karatA ho, pAkhaNDI sAdhu
kama rahate hoM, bhikSA sugama ho aura svAdhyAya meM kisI bhI prakAra kA vighna
na ho| jahA~ para kutte adhika hoM vahA~ para zramaNa ko vihAra nahIM karanA
caahie| bhASya meM dIkSA grahaNa karane vAle ke guNa-doSa para cintana karate
hue likhA hai ki kucha vyakti apane dezasvabhAva se hI doSayukta hote haiN|
AMdhra meM utpanna vyakti krUra hotA hai| mahArASTra meM utpanna huA vyakti
vAcAla hotA hai aura kozala meM utpanna hayA vyakti svabhAva se hI duSTa hotA
hai| isa prakAra kA na honA bahata hI kama vyaktiyoM meM sambhava hai|

Page #71 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The commentary further explains the method of collecting and returning materials
for purposes like lying down, etc. It sheds light on the limitations of diet,
stating that a monk who eats eight morsels is called an *alpahƒÅri*, one who eats
twelve, sixteen, twenty-four, thirty-one, and thirty-two morsels is called an
*apƒÅr·∏çhƒÅri*, *ar·∏çhƒÅri*, *prƒÅptƒÅvamoudarya*, and *prama·πáƒÅhƒÅri* respectively. The
ninth *uddesaka* discusses the food intake of monks in relation to their
relatives, friends, and other visitors, highlighting various paradigms. The
tenth *uddesaka* focuses specifically on *yavamƒÅdhyapratimƒÅ* and
*vanamƒÅdhyapratimƒÅ*. It also explains five types of conduct, the method of
*bƒÅladikshƒÅ*, ten types of *vaiyƒÅv·πõtti*, etc. Stories of *PrƒÅya·πÅ rakshit*, *ƒÄrya
kƒÅlak*, King *SƒÅtavƒÅhana*, *Pradyot*, *Murunda*, *CƒÅ·πáakya*, *CilƒÅtaputra*,
*Avanti*, *SukumƒÅla*, *Rohiney*, *PrƒÅrya samudra*, *ƒÄrya mangu*, etc. are
included. This commentary is significant in many ways. A *c≈´·πáƒ´* was also written
on conduct. After the *c≈´·πáƒ´*, *ƒÄcƒÅrya Malayagiri* wrote a *v·πõtti* on conduct.
The *v·πõtti* clearly reflects the profound scholarship of *ƒÄcƒÅrya Malayagiri*.
The depth of the subject, the simplicity of the language, the elegance of the
style, and the clarity of the analysis are noteworthy. The beginning of the text
has a preface in the form of a *pƒ´·π≠hikƒÅ*, which discusses topics like *kalpa*,
conduct, faults, atonement, etc. The commentator, with devotion, has paid homage
to *Arhat Ari·π£·π≠anemi*, his revered guru, and the commentator of the
*vyavahƒÅras≈´tra*, etc. The commentator, while clarifying the difference between
the *B·πõhatkalpa* and *vyavahƒÅra*, writes that the study of *kalpa* deals with
atonement, but it does not include the method of giving atonement, whereas the
*vyavahƒÅra* includes both the method of giving atonement and the method of
criticism. This is the special feature of *vyavahƒÅra* compared to *B·πõhatkalpa*.
Analyzing *vyavahƒÅra*, *vyavahƒÅri*, and *vyavahartavya*, he writes that
*vyavahƒÅri* is the doer, *vyavahƒÅra* is the cause, and *vyavahartavya* is the
action. The cause-like *vyavahƒÅra* is of five types: *prƒÅgama*, *≈õruta*, *ƒÅj√±ƒÅ*,
*dhƒÅra·πáƒÅ*, and *jƒ´ta*. The *c≈´·πõ·πáikƒÅra* calls all five types of *vyavahƒÅra* as
*kara·πáa*. The commentator considers *s≈´tra*, *artha*, *jƒ´takalpa*, *mƒÅrga*,
*nyƒÅya*, *apsytavya*, *prƒÅcarita*, and *vyavahƒÅra* as synonymous. One who knows
the essence of *vyavahƒÅra* and has the ability to explain the nature of
*vyavahƒÅra* to others is called a *gƒ´tartha*. The use of *vyavahƒÅra* is for one
who is a *gƒ´tartha*. Both the giver of atonement and the receiver of atonement
should be *gƒ´tartha*. There are four meanings of atonement: *pratisevƒÅ*,
*manyajanƒÅ*, *grƒÅropa·πáƒÅ*, and *parik≈´canƒÅ*. There are ten types of atonement in
the form of *pratisevƒÅ*. (1) *ƒÄlocana*, (2) *pratikramƒÅ·πáƒÅ*, (3) *tadu-bhaya*,
(4) *viveka*, (5) *utsarga*, (6) *tapa*, (7) *chedha*, (8) *m≈´la*, (9)
*anavasthƒÅpya*, and (10) *pƒÅrƒÅ√±cƒ´ka*. These ten types of atonement have been
discussed in detail. If we compare these types of atonement with the atonement
method found in the *Vinayapitaka*, we will find a surprising similarity. It is
essential that the officer or *ƒÅcƒÅrya* who gives atonement be a *bahu≈õruta* and
serious. In front of each, 1. *Vinayapitaka* diagnosis [70]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
Age bhASya meM zayanAdi ke nimitta sAmagrI ekatrita karane aura punaH lauTAne kI
vidhi batalAI hai| AhAra kI maryAdA para prakAza DAlate hue kahA hai--ATha kaura
khAne vAlA zramaNa alpAhArI, bAraha, solaha, caubIsa, ikatIsa aura battIsa grAsa
grahaNa karane vAlA zramaNa kramaza: apArdhAhArI, ardhAhArI, prAptAvamaudarya
aura pramANAhArI hai / navama uddezaka meM zayyAtara ke jJAtika, svajana, mitra
prabhati pAgantuka vyaktiyoM se sambandhita AhAra ko lene aura na lene ke
sambandha meM vicAra kara zramaNoM kI vividha pratimAnoM para prakAza DAlA hai|
- dazama uddezaka meM yavamadhyapratimA aura vanamadhyapratimA para vizeSa rUpa
se cintana kiyA hai| sAtha hI pAMca prakAra ke vyavahAra, bAladIkSA kI vidhi,
dasa prakAra kI vaiyAvRtya Adi viSayoM kI vyAkhyA kI gaI hai| prAyaM rakSita,
Arya kAlaka, rAjA sAtavAhana, pradyota, muruNDa, cANakya, cilAtaputra, avanti,
sukumAla, rohiNeya, prArya samudra, Arya maMgu Adi kI kathAeM AI haiN| prastuta
bhASya aneka dRSTiyoM se mahattvapUrNa hai| vyavahAra para eka cUNi bhI likhI
gaI thii| cUNi ke pazcAt vyavahAra para prAcArya malayagiri ne vRtti likhii|
vatti meM AcArya malayagiri kA gambhIra pANDitya spaSTa rUpa se jhalakatA hai|
viSaya kI gahanatA, bhASA kI prAMjalatA, zailI kA lAlitya aura vizleSaNa kI
spaSTatA prekSaNIya hai| grantha ke prArambha meM prAkkathana ke rUpa meM
pIThikA hai| jisameM kalpa; vyavahAra, doSa, prAyazcitta prabhRti viSayoM para
cintana kiyA hai| vRttikAra ne prArambha meM arhat ariSTanemi ko, apane
sadguruvarya tathA vyavahArasUtra ke caNikAra Adi ko bhaktibhAvanA se vibhora
hokara namana kiyA hai| vRttikAra ne bRhatkalpa aura vyavahAra ina donoM
prAgamoM ke antara ko spaSTa karate hue likhA ki kalpAdhyayana meM prAyazcitta
kA nirUpaNa hai kintu usameM prAyazcitta dene kI vidhi nahIM hai, jabaki
vyavahAra meM prAyazcitta dene kI aura pAlocanA karane kI ye donoM prakAra kI
vidhiyAM haiN| yaha bahatkalpa se vyavahAra kI vizeSatA hai| vyavahAra,
vyavahArI aura vyavahartavya tInoM kA vizleSaNa karate hue likhA hai-vyavahArI
kartArUpa hai, vyavahAra kAraNarUpa hai aura vyavahartavya kAryarUpa hai|
kAraNarUpI vyavahAra prAgama, zruta, AjJA, dhAraNA aura jIta rUpa se pAMca
prakAra kA hai / cUrNikAra ne pAMcoM prakAra ke vyavahAra ko karaNa kahA hai|
bhASyakAra ne sUtra, artha, jItakalpa, mArga, nyAya, epsitavya, prAcarita aura
vyavahAra inako ekArthaka mAnA hai| jo svayaM vyavahAra ke marma ko jAnatA ho,
anya vyaktiyoM ko vyavahAra ke svarUpa ko samajhAne kI kSamatA rakhatA ho vaha
gItArtha hai| jo gItArtha hai usake lie vyavahAra kA upayoga hai / prAyazcitta
pradAtA aura prAyazcitta saMgrahaNa karane vAlA donoM gItArtha hone caahie|
prAyazcitta ke pratisevanA, maMyojanA, grAropaNA aura parikUcanA, ye cAra artha
haiN| pratisevanA rUpa prAyazcitta ke dasa bheda haiN| (1) AlocanA, (2)
pratikramaNA, (3) tadubhaya, (4) viveka (5) utsarga, (6) tapa, (7) cheda, (8)
mUla, (9) anavasthApya aura (10) pArAMcika / ina dasoM prAyazcittoM ke sambandha
meM vizeSa rUpa se vivecana kiyA gayA hai| yadi hama ina prAyazcitta ke prakAroM
kI tulanA vinayapiTaka' meM AyI huI prAyazcittavidhi ke sAtha kareM to
Azcaryajanaka samAnatA milegii| prAyazcitta pradAna karane vAlA adhikArI yA
prAcArya bahuzruta ba gambhIra ho, yaha Avazyaka hai| pratyeka ke sAmane 1.
vinayapiTaka nidAna [ 70 ]

Page #72 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Criticism is prohibited. Both criticism and atonement should be done in front of
a worthy person, so that it can remain confidential. / In the Buddhist
tradition, there is a provision for atonement in front of the community of
monks. The Vinaya Pitaka states that on the Krishna Chaturdashi and Purnima of
every month, all monks should gather in the Uposathagar. The Tathagata Buddha
told his successor Sangha. Therefore, a learned monk is appointed to the post of
head of the assembly and the Patimokkha is recited. At the end of each case, the
question is asked whether all the monks present are pure in the said matters? If
any monk wants to criticize his fault in this regard, the Sangha contemplates on
it and purifies him. The same question is repeated for the second and third
time. After everyone's approval, one by one cases are read further. Similarly,
the nuns recite the Bhikkhuni Patimokkha. It is true that the atonement methods
of both traditions are different. But both have psychological aspects. Both
traditions expect the purity of heart and simplicity of thoughts of the seeker
who is atoning. In the first objective, two types of atonement are mentioned:
original atonement and subsequent atonement. / Original atonement is of five
types: violence, falsehood, stealing, sexual misconduct, and attachment.
Subsequent atonement is of ten types. Subsequent atonement is in the form of
future, past, with a limit, controlled, concrete, abstract, quantified,
complete, symbolic, and non-acceptance. In the above words, the ten types of
subsequent atonement are: Pindavishuddhi, five samitis, external penance,
internal penance, Bhikshapratima, and Abhigha. Original atonement and subsequent
atonement are also of two types: Darya and Kalpya. Atonement without reason is
Dapka and atonement with reason is Kalpya. The commentator has presented
discussions at various places to clarify the subject. / The present commentary
has 34625 verses. After the commentary, short commentaries explaining the
meanings of the Pragama in simple and easy-to-understand language have been
written, whose language is a mixture of ancient Gujarati and Rajasthani. This is
known as Balavabodh and Tabba. / Dharmasimha Muni of the Stanakvasi tradition
has also written Tabba on the Vyavahar Sutra, but it is still unpublished. The
Hindi translation of the Vyavahar Sutra by Acharya Amolkarishiji Maharaj has
been published. Jivraj Ghelabhai Doshi has also published a Gujarati
translation. Shubing Leipzig wrote it in 1918 with German commentary. / Which
was published in 1923 by the Jain Sahitya Samiti, Pune. Pujya Ghasilalji M. has
published the Cheda Sutras only with Sanskrit commentary. The Agam Anuyog
Prakashan, Sanderao, published the Vyavahar Sutra in 1980. Which was edited by
Agammarmna Muni Shri Kanhaiyalalji M. "Kamal". The present editor, Muni Shri
Kanhaiyalalji M. "Kamal", had earlier edited and published the three Ved Sutras:
Prayar-Dasha, Kappasuttam, and Bahar Suttam. Based on the same, the present
three Agamas are being edited and published in more detail. Nishita has already
been published. This publication of the four Cheda Sutras with original,
meaning, and discussion is glorious in itself. With the publication of these
three Pragama, [71]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
pAlocanA kA niSedha kiyA gayA hai| pAlocanA aura prAyazcita donoM hI yogya
vyakti ke samakSa hone cAhie, jisase ki vaha gopanIya raha sake /
bauddhaparamparA meM sAdhusamudAya ke sAmane prAyazcitta grahaNa kA vidhAna hai|
vinayapiTaka meM likhA haipratyeka mahIne kI kRSNa caturdazI aura pUrNamAsI ko
sabhI bhikSu uposathAgAra meM ekatrita ho tathAgata buddha ne apanA
uttarAdhikArI saMgha ko batAyA hai| ata: kisI prAjJa bhikSu ko sabhA ke pramukha
pada para niyukta kara pAtimokkha kA vAcana kiyA jAtA hai aura pratyeka
prakaraNa ke upasaMhAra meM yaha jijJAsA vyakta kI jAtI hai ki upasthita sabhI
bhikSu ukta bAtoM meM zuddha haiM ? yadi koI bhikSu tatsambandhI apane doSa kI
mAlocanA karanA cAhatA hai to saMgha usa para cintana karatA hai aura usakI
zuddhi karavatA hai| dvitIya aura tRtIya bAra bhI usI prazna ko duharAyA jAtA
hai| sabhI kI svIkRti hone para eka-eka prakaraNa Age par3he jAte haiN| isI
taraha bhikSuNiyAM bhikkhunI pAtimokkha kA vAcana karatI haiN| yaha satya hai ki
donoM hI paramparAnoM kI prAyazcitta vidhiyAM pRthak-pRthak haiN| para donoM meM
manovaijJAnikatA hai| donoM hI paramparAoM meM prAyazcitta karane vAle sAdhaka
ke hRdaya kI pavitratA, vicAroM kI saralatA apekSita mAnI hai| prathama uddezaka
meM pratisevanA ke mUlapratisevanA aura uttarapratisevanA ye do prakAra batAye
haiM / mUlaguNaaticArapratisevanA prANAtipAta, mRSAvAda, adattAdAna, maithuna,
parigraha rUpa pAMca prakAra kI hai| uttaraguNAticAra pratisevanA dasa prakAra
kI hai| uttaragUNa anAgata, atikrAnta, koTisahita, niyantritaH sAkAra, anAkAra,
parimANakRta, niravazeSa, sAMketika aura adrA pratyAkhyAna ke rUpa meM hai|
Upara zabdoM meM uttaraguNoM ke piNDavizuddhi, pAMca samiti, bAhya tapa,
pAbhyAntara tapa, bhikSapratimA aura abhigraha isa taraha dasa prakAra haiN|
mUlaguNAticArapratisevanA aura uttaraguNAticArapratisevanA inake bhI darya aura
kalpya ye do prakAra haiN| binA kAraNa pratisevanA dapikA hai aura kAraNa yukta
pratisevanA kalpikA hai| vRttikAra ne viSaya ko spaSTa karane ke lie sthAna-
sthAna para vivecana prastuta kiyA hai / prastuta vRtti kA granthamAna 34625
zloka pramANa hai| vRtti ke pazcAt janabhASA meM sarala aura subodha zailI meM
prAgamoM ke zabdArtha karane vAlI saMkSipta TIkAeM likhI gaI haiM, jinakI bhASA
prAcIna gujarAtI-rAjasthAnI mizrita hai| yaha bAlAvabodha va TabbA ke nAma se
vizrata haiM / sthAnakavAsI paramparA ke dharmasiMha muni ne vyavahArasUtra para
bhI TabbA likhA hai, para abhI taka vaha aprakAzita hI hai| prAcArya
amolakaRSijI mahArAja dvArA kRta hindI anuvAda sAhita vyavahArasUtra prakAzita
huA hai| jIvarAja ghelAbhAI dozI ne gujarAtI meM anuvAda bhI prakAzita kiyA hai|
zubiMga lipajiga ne jarmana TippaNI ke sAtha san 1918 meM likhA / jisako jaina
sAhitya samiti pUnA se 1923 meM prakAzita kiyA hai| pUjya ghAsIlAlajI ma. ne
chedasUtroM kA prakAzana kevala saMskRta TIkA ke sAtha karavAyA hai| Agama
anuyoga prakAzana sANDerAva se san 1980 meM vyavahArasUtra prakAzita haa| jisakA
sampAdana AgamamarmajJa muni zrI kanhaiyAlAlajI ma. "kamala" ne kiyaa| prastuta
sampAdana-muni zrI kanhaiyAlAlajI ma. "kamala" ne pahale prAyAra-dasA,
kappasuttaM aura bahArasuttaM ina tInoM vedasUtroM kA sampAdana aura prakAzana
kiyA thaa| usI para aura adhika vistAra se prastuta tIna AgamoM kA sampAdana
kara prakAzana ho rahA hai| isake pUrva nizItha kA prakAzana ho cukA hai| cAroM
chedasUtroM para mUla, artha aura vivecana yukta yaha prakAzana apane Apa meM
gauravapUrNa hai| ina tIna prAgamoM ke prakAzana ke sAtha hI [71]

Page #73 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The publication of the thirty-two *PƒÅgamas* accepted by the *SthƒÅnakavƒÅsƒ´*
tradition is also being completed from this present *ƒÄgama* series. The
commendable vision of the late revered *Yuvacharya* Shri Madhukar Muni Ji
Maharaj has been given concrete form due to many editor *Munis*, *MahƒÅsatis* and
scholars. This is a matter of supreme joy. The *Chhedas≈´tras* elaborate on the
code of conduct of the *Shramanas*. The *Chhedas≈´tras* describe the path of
*utsarga* and *apvƒÅda*. I was thinking of writing about these in great detail,
but due to the responsibility of the *Shramanasangha* system, I have been
extremely busy with that work and due to the very crowded environment, I could
not write. I have this thought myself. I have written a very brief introductory
preface. I hope that the discerning reader will understand the essence that
remains in the *ƒÄgama*. As a result of the boundless grace of the great
*RƒÅsh·π≠rasanta* *ƒÄchƒÅryasamrƒÅt* Shri Anand Rishi Ji Maharaj and the most revered
*P≈´jya* *Gurudev* *UpƒÅdhyƒÅya* Shri Pushkar Muni Ji Maharaj, I have been able to
do some work in the field of literature and I am satisfied that I have been able
to give concrete form to the inspiration of the late *Yuvacharya* Shri Madhukar
Muni Ji Maharaj by writing prefaces on *ƒÄgama* literature. I hope, not only hope
but have full faith, that the discerning readers will enrich their lives by
studying the *ƒÄgamas*. *UpƒÅchƒÅrya* Devendra Muni Kot, PipƒÅ·∏çacity, Date 22-10-91
[72]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
prastuta AgamamAlA se sthAnakavAsI paramparA mAnya battIsa pAgamoM kA prakAzana
kArya bhI sampanna ho rahA hai| svargIya zraddheya yuvAcArya zrI madhukara
munijI ma. kI kamanIya kalpanA ko aneka sampAdaka muniyoM, mahAsatiyoM aura
vidvAnoM ke kAraNa mUrta rUpa mila gayA hai| yaha parama pAhlAda kA viSaya hai|
chedasUtroM meM zramaNoM kI prAcArasaMhitA kA vistAra se nirUpaNa hA hai|
chedasUtroM meM utsarga aura apavAda mArga kA nirUpaNa hai| maiM bahuta hI
vistAra se ina para likhane kA soca rahA thA, para zramaNasaMghIya vyavasthA kA
dAyitva A jAne se usa kArya meM atyadhika vyasta rahane ke kAraNa aura atyadhika
bhIr3a bharA vAtAbaraNa hone ke kAraNa nahIM likha sakA / isakA mujhe svayaM ko
vicAra hai| bahata hI saMkSipta meM paricayAtmaka prastAvanA likhI hai| AzA hai,
sujJa pAThaka Agama meM rahe hue marma ko smjheNge| mahAmahita rASTrasanta
AcAryasamrATa zrI AnandaRSijI ma. aura paramazraddheya pUjya gurudeva upAdhyAya
zrI puSkaramunijI ma. kI asIma kRpA ke phalasvarUpa hI maiM sAhitya ke kSetra
meM kucha kArya kara sakA hU~ aura svargIya yuvAcArya zrI madhukara munijI ma.
kI preraNA se Agama sAhitya para prastAvanAeM likhakara unakI preraNA ko
mUrtarUpa de sakA hai, isakA mana meM santoSa hai| AzA hI nahIM apitu pUrNa
vizvAsa hai ki sujJa pAThakagaNa AgamoM kI svAdhyAya kara apane jIvana ko dhanya
bnaayeNge| upAcArya devendramuni koTa, pIpAr3asiTI dinAMka 22-10-91 [72 ]

Page #74 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
127 129 132 133 Bism orror M al-na'a S Brihatkalpasutra [125-258] First
Uddeshak: The rules and prohibitions regarding the acceptance of offerings by
Sadhus and Sadhvis, the rules regarding the residence of Sadhus and Sadhvis in
Prama, etc., the rules regarding the residence of Sadhus and Sadhvis in
villages, etc., the rules and prohibitions regarding Sadhus and Sadhvis living
together in Apanagruh, etc., the rules and prohibitions regarding Sadhus and
Sadhvis living in places without doors, the rules and prohibitions regarding
Sadhus and Sadhvis accepting even a small amount of food, the rules regarding
accepting a mosquito net (Chilmilika), the prohibition against standing near
water, etc., the prohibition against staying in a Saccitta Upashraya, the rules
regarding taking shelter from a Sagarik, the rules and prohibitions regarding
staying in a Gahastha-Yukta Upashraya, the rules and prohibitions regarding
staying in a Pratibaddha Shayya, the rules and prohibitions regarding staying in
an Upashraya with a Pratibaddha Marg, the rules regarding calming oneself, the
rules and prohibitions regarding Vihar, the prohibition against repeatedly going
to and from a Vairajya-Viruddha Rajya, the rules regarding accepting controlled
clothes, etc., in Gochari, etc., the prohibition against searching for food,
etc., at night and the exceptions, the prohibition against traveling at night,
the prohibition against going alone to a Sthandila and Swadhyaya Bhumi at night,
the rules regarding wandering in Paryakshetra, the summary of the first
Uddeshak. S or 140 141 141 143 144 ~ ~ 151 xxx [ 75 ]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
127 129 132 133 bsm orror M ln` s bRhatkalpasUtra [125-258] prathama uddezaka
sAdhu-sAdhvI ke pralaMba-grahaNa karane kA vidhi-niSedha prAmAdi meM sAdhu-
sAdhvI ke rahane kI kalpamaryAdA grAmAdi meM sAdhu-sAdhvI ko eka sAtha rahane kA
vidhi-niSedha ApaNagRha Adi meM sAdhu-sAdhviyoM ke rahane kA vidhi-niSedha binA
dvAra vAle sthAna meM sAdhu-sAdhvI ke rahane kA vidhi-niSedha sAdhu-sAdhvI ko
ghaTImAtraka grahaNa karane kA vidhi-niSedha cilamilikA (maccharadAnI) grahaNa
karane kA vidhAna pAnI ke kinAre khar3e rahane Adi kA niSedha sacitta upAzraya
meM Thaharane kA niSedha sAgArika kI nizrA lene kA vidhAna gahastha-yukta
upAzraya meM rahane kA vidhi-niSedha pratibaddha zayyA meM Thaharane kA vidhi-
niSedha pratibaddha mArga vAle upAzraya meM Thaharane kA vidhi-niSedha svayaM ko
upazAnta karane kA vidhAna vihAra sambandhI vidhi-niSedha vairAjya-viruddharAjya
meM bArambAra gamanAgamana kA niSedha gocarI Adi meM niyaMtrita vastra prAdi ke
grahaNa karane kI vidhi rAtri meM AhArAdi kI gaveSaNA kA niSedha evaM apavAda
vidhAna rAtri meM gamanAgamana kA niSedha rAtri meM sthaMDila evaM svAdhyAya
bhUmi meM akele jAne kA niSedha pAryakSetra meM vicaraNa karane kA vidhAna
prathama uddezaka kA sArAMza s or 140 141 141 143 144 ~ ~ 151 xxx [ 75 ]

Page #75 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Chapter Two:    **158-162**   * **Rules and prohibitions for residing in an
abode containing grain:**   * **Rules and prohibitions for residing in an abode
containing alcohol, and its atonement:**   * **Rules and prohibitions for
residing in an abode containing water, and its atonement:**   * **Rules and
prohibitions for residing in an abode containing fire or a lamp, and its
atonement:**   * **Rules and prohibitions for residing in an abode containing
food, and its atonement:**   * **Rules and prohibitions for staying in a
Dharma≈õƒÅlƒÅ (rest house) for monks and nuns:**   * **Rules and prohibitions for
seeking permission to enter a house with multiple owners:**   * **Rules and
prohibitions for accepting food offered in a place other than a bed
(≈õayyƒÅtar):**   * **Rules and prohibitions for accepting food offered to a
≈õayyƒÅtar:**   * **Rules and prohibitions for accepting food offered to a
≈õayyƒÅtar's respected ones:**   * **Rules for the clothing of a Nirgrantha (Jain
monk) and a Nirgranthi (Jain nun):**   * **Rules for the removal of menstrual
blood for a Nirgranthi:**   * **Summary of the second chapter:**    ## Chapter
Three:    **165, 168, 170, 171, 174, 176, 178, 179**   * **Prohibition of
Nirgrantha and Nirgranthi standing together in an abode:**   * **Rules and
prohibitions for accepting clothing by monks and nuns:**   * **Rules and
prohibitions for monks and nuns wearing Avagrahanantaka and Avgrahapattaka
(types of clothing):**   * **Prohibition of a nun accepting clothing from her
own family:**   * **Rules for the type of clothing to be accepted at the time of
initiation:**   * **Rules and prohibitions for accepting clothing in the first
and second Samavasarana (Jain assembly):**   * **Rules for accepting clothing
with more than the prescribed number of jewels:**   * **Rules for accepting
bedding with more than the prescribed number of jewels:**   * **Rules for
performing actions with more than the prescribed number of jewels:**   *
**Prohibition of staying in a householder's house:**   * **Rules for limited
conversation in a householder's house:**   * **Rules for limited religious
discourse in a householder's house:**   * **Rules for returning bedding to a
householder:**   * **Rules for returning bedding to a ≈õayyƒÅtar:**   * **Rules
for searching for lost bedding:**   * **Rules for staying with visiting monks
with prior permission:**   * **Rules for seeking permission to enter a house
without an owner and seeking permission again:**   * **Rules for staying on the
road with prior permission:**   * **Rules for traveling near an army and
atonement for staying overnight:**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
158 .. 162 dvitIya uddezaka dhAnyayukta upAzraya meM rahane ke vidhi-niSedha
surAyukta makAna meM rahane kA vidhi-niSedha va prAyazcitta jalayukta upAzraya
meM rahane kA vidhi-niSedha aura prAyazcitta agni yA dIpaka yukta upAzraya meM
rahane ke vidhi-niSedha aura prAyazcitta khAdyapadArthayukta makAna meM rahane
ke vidhi-niSedha aura prAyazcitta sAdhu-sAdhvI ke dharmazAlA Adi meM Thaharane
kA vidhi-niSedha aneka svAmiyoM vAle makAna kI AjJA lene ke vidhi-niSedha
saMsRSTa-asaMsRSTa zayyAtara piMDagrahaNa ke vidhi-niSedha zayyAtara ke ghara
Aye yA bheje gaye AhAra ke grahaNa kA vidhi-niSedha zayyAtara ke aMzayukta
AhAra-grahaNa kA vidhi-niSedha zayyAtara ke pUjyajanoM ko diye gaye AhAra ke
grahaNa karane kA vidhi-niSedha nirgrantha-nirgranthI ke liye kalpanIyavastra
nirgrantha-nirgranthI ke liye kalpanIya rajoharaNa dUsare uddezaka kA sArAMza
165 168 170 171 174 176 178 179 tRtIya uddezaka nirgrantha-nirgranthI ko
paraspara upAzraya meM khaDe rahane prAdi kA niSedha sAdhu-sAdhvI dvArA vastra
grahaNa karane ke vidhi-niSedha sAdhu-sAdhvI ko avagrahAnantaka aura
avagrahapaTTaka dhAraNa karane ke vidhi-niSedha sAdhvI ko apanI nizrA se vastra
grahaNa karane kA niSedha dIkSA ke samaya grahaNa karane yogya upadhi kA vidhAna
prathama dvitIya samavasaraNa meM vastra grahaNa karane kA vidhi-niSedha
yathAratnAdhika vastra grahaNa kA vidhAna yathAratnAdhika zayyA-saMstAraka
grahaNa kA vidhAna yathAratnAdhika kRtikarma karane kA vidhAna gRhastha ke ghara
meM Thaharane Adi kA niSedha gahastha ke ghara meM maryAdita vArtA kA vidhAna
gRhastha ke ghara meM maryAdita dharmakathA kA vidhAna gRhastha kA zayyA-
saMstAraka lauTAne kA vidhAna zayyAtara kA zayyA-saMstAraka vyavasthita karake
lauTAne kA vidhAna khoye hue zayyA-saMstAraka ke anveSaNa kA vidhAna prAgantuka
zramaNoM ko pUrvAjJA meM rahane kA vidhAna svAmI-rahita ghara kI pUrvAjJA evaM
punaH AjJA kA vidhAna pUrvAjJA se mArga prAdi meM Thaharane kA vidhAna senA ke
samIpavartI kSetra meM gocarI jAne kA vidhAna evaM rAta rahane kA prAyazcitta
MMMMMMM Mus SI 0018 191 192 193 [76 ]

Page #76 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 194 194 197 000 205 206 211 216 221   **Proof of the Avagrahakshetra, Summary
of the Third Uddeshaka, Fourth Uddeshaka, Anudghatika PrƒÅya≈õcitta, ParƒÅ√±cƒ´ka
PrƒÅya≈õcitta, AnvasthƒÅpya PrƒÅya≈õcitta, Qualifications for Giving VaƒçanƒÅ,
Qualifications for Receiving Education, PrƒÅya≈õcitta for MithunabhƒÅva Caused by
GlƒÅna, Prohibition of Keeping Food from the First Prahara in the Fourth Prahara,
Prohibition of Carrying Food Beyond Two Kosas, Method of Accepting Non-Edible
Food from AnƒÅbh≈çga, Rules for Accepting and Rejecting Uddeshika Food, Rules for
Going to Another Ga·πáa for ≈örutagraha·πáa, Rules for Going to Another Ga·πáa for
SƒÅmbh≈çgika-VyavahƒÅra, Rules for Going to Another Ga·πáa for Giving VaƒçanƒÅ to
ƒÄcƒÅrya etc., Rules Regarding a Bhikshu Who Creates Conflict, Rules for VyƒÅvartya
of a Bhikshu in ParihƒÅra-Kalpasthiti, Rules for Crossing the MahƒÅnƒÅdƒ´, Rules for
Staying in an UpƒÅ≈õraya with a Grass-Covered Roof, Summary of the Fourth
Uddeshaka, Fifth Uddeshaka, PrƒÅya≈õcitta for MithunabhƒÅva Caused by Touching a
Vikurvita Divya Body, Duties Towards a Kalhak·πõta PƒÅgantuka Bhikshu, Discussion
and PrƒÅya≈õcitta Rules for Excess in Night Food, Discussion and PrƒÅya≈õcitta Rules
Regarding UdgƒÅla, Rules for Eating and Chewing Sansakta Food, Rules for Eating
and Chewing Food Mixed with Conscious Water Drops, PrƒÅya≈õcitta for MithunabhƒÅva
Caused by Touching Animals and Birds, Prohibition of a SƒÅdhvƒ´ Traveling Alone,
Prohibition of a SƒÅdhvƒ´ Being Without Clothes and Utensils, Prohibition of a
SƒÅdhvƒ´ Sitting etc. After Making a Vow, Rules for Wearing ƒÄkuca·πáapat·π≠aka, Rules
for Using a PrƒÅsana with a Support, Rules for Using a Seat with a Cushion, 222
223 225 227 rrr mmmmm 20. x 237 237 238 240 241 241 [77 ]**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
194 194 197 000 205 206 211 216 221 avagrahakSetra kA pramANa tIsare uddezaka kA
sArAMza cauthA uddezaka anudghAtika prAyazcitta ke sthAna pArAJcika prAyazcitta
ke sthAna anavasthApya prAyazcitta ke sthAna vAcanA dene ke yogyAyogya ke
lakSaNa zikSA-prApti ke yogyAyogya ke lakSaNa glAna ko maithunabhAva kA
prAyazcitta prathama prahara ke AhAra ko caturtha prahara meM rakhane kA niSedha
do kosa se Age AhAra le jAne kA niSedha anAbhoga se grahaNa kiye aneSaNIya AhAra
kI vidhi auddezika AhAra ke kalpyAkalpya kA vidhAna zrutagrahaNa ke liye anya
gaNa meM jAne kA vidhi-niSedha sAMbhogika-vyavahAra ke liye anya gaNa meM jAne
kI vidhi prAcArya Adi ko vAcanA dene ke liye anya gaNa meM jAne kA vidhi-niSedha
kalaha karane vAle bhikSu se sambandhita vidhi-niSedha parihAra-kalpasthita
bhikSu kI vaiyAvRtya karane kA vidhAna mahAnadI pAra karane ke vidhi-niSedha
ghAsa se DhakI huI chata vAle upAzraya meM rahane ke vidhi-niSedha cauthe
uddezaka kA sArAMza pAMcavA uddezaka vikurvita divya zarIra ke sparza se utpanna
maithunabhAva kA prAyazcitta kalahakRta pAgantuka bhikSa ke prati kartavya
rAtribhojana ke aticAra kA viveka evaM prAyazcitta vidhAna udgAla sambandhI
viveka evaM prAyazcitta vidhAna saMsakta AhAra ke khAne evaM paraThane kA
vidhAna sacitta jalabindu mile AhAra ko khAne evaM paraThane kA vidhAna pazu-
pakSI ke sparzAdi se utpanna maithunabhAva ke prAyazcitta sAdhvI ko ekAkI gamana
karane kA niSedha sAdhvI ko vastra-pAtra rahita hone kA niSedha sAdhvI ko
pratijJAbaddha hokara AsanAdi karane kA niSedha AkucanapaTTaka ke dhAraNa karane
kA vidhi-niSedha prabalaMbana yukta prAsana ke vidhi-niSedha savisANa pITha Adi
ke vidhi-niSedha 222 223 225 227 rrr mmmmm 20. x 237 237 238 240 241 241 [77 ]

Page #77 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
242 242 242 243 243 245 245 246  The rules and prohibitions regarding the use of
the **Tumb-patra** (water vessel), the **Patrakesarika** (a type of vessel), the
**Dandayukta Padaphochana** (foot-washing with a stick), the exchange of **Mok**
(a type of offering), the rules and prohibitions regarding the storage of food
and medicine, the **Pariharic Bhik·π£u**'s (a type of monk) consumption of
forbidden substances and their atonement, the rules and prohibitions regarding
going to **Gocharƒ´** (a pilgrimage site) after consuming **Pulaka-bhakta** (a
type of food), the summary of the fifth **Uddesaka** (chapter), the sixth
**Uddesaka**, the prohibition of **Prakalpya Vachanprayoga** (a type of speech),
the rule of atonement for the one who falsely accuses, the rule regarding the
removal of thorns and other objects from the body of a **Sadhu** (monk) or
**Sadhvƒ´** (nun), the rule regarding a **Sadhu** supporting a **Sadhvƒ´**, the
six places that lead to the loss of **Samyama** (self-control), the six types of
**Kalpasthiti** (situations), the summary of the sixth **Uddesaka** 249 249 251
252 254 256 257

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
242 242 242 243 243 245 245 246 savRta tumba-pAtra ke vidhi-niSedha sabUta
pAtrakesarikA ke vidhi-niSedha daNDayukta pAdapoMchana ke vidhi-niSedha
paraspara moka AdAna-pradAna ke vidhi-niSedha AhAra-auSadha parivAsita rakhane
ke vidhi-niSedha parihArika bhikSu kA doSasevana evaM prAyazcitta pulAka-bhakta
grahaNa ho jAne para gocarI jAne kA vidhi-niSedha pAMcaveM uddezaka kA sArAMza
chaTThA uddezaka prakalpya vacanaprayoga kA niSedha asatya AkSepakartA ko usI
prAyazcitta kA vidhAna sAdhu-sAdhvI ke paraspara kaNTaka Adi nikAlane kA vidhAna
sAdhu dvArA sAdhvI ko avalambana dene kA vidhAna saMyamanAzaka chaha sthAna
chaha prakAra kI kalpasthiti chaThe uddezaka kA sArAMza 249 249 251 252 254 256
257

Page #78 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Shri Agam Prakashan Samiti, Bayar (Executive Committee) President: Shri
Sagarmalji Betala Acting President: Shri Ratanchandji Modi Vice President: Shri
Dhanrajji Vinaykia Indore: Shri Parsamalji Chordia Bayar: Shri Hukmichandji
Parkh Bayar: Shri Dulichandji Chordia Madras: Shri Jasrajji Sa. Parkh Jodhpur:
Shri G. Sayarmalji Chordia Madras: Shri Amarchandji Modi Dug: Shri Gyanrajji
Mootha Maha Mantri: Shri Gyanchandji Vinaykia Mantri: Shri Javrilalji Shishodia
Madras: Shri R. Prasannachandji Chordia Bayar: Shri Manakchandji Sancheti Bayar:
Shri S. Sayarmalji Chordia Bayar: Shri Motichandji Chordia Madras: Shri
Mulchandji Surana Jodhpur: Shri Tejarajji Bhandari Jodhpur: Shri Bhanwarlalji
Gothi Jodhpur: Shri Prakashchandji Chopra Madras: Shri Jatanrajji Mehta Bayar:
Shri Bhanwarlalji Shrisrimal Madras: Shri Chandanmalji Chordia Madras: Shri
Sumermalji Medtiya Pali: Shri Pasulalji Bohra Sah Mantri: Shri Motichandji
Chordia Kosh Adhyaksh: Shri Mulchandji Surana Bayar: Shri Tejarajji Bhandari
Jodhpur: Shri Bhanwarlalji Gothi Parameshwardata: Shri Prakashchandji Chopra
Karyakarini Sadasy: Shri Jatanrajji Mehta Madras: Shri Bhanwarlalji Shrisrimal
Madras: Shri Chandanmalji Chordia Nagaur: Shri Sumermalji Medtiya Jodhpur: Shri
Pasulalji Bohra Madras: Shri Motichandji Chordia Bayar: Shri Mulchandji Surana
Medtacity: Shri Tejarajji Bhandari Durg: Shri Bhanwarlalji Gothi Madras: Shri
Prakashchandji Chopra Jodhpur: Shri Jatanrajji Mehta Jodhpur: Shri Bhanwarlalji
Shrisrimal

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
zrI Agama prakAzana samiti, byAvara (kAryakAriNI samiti) adhyakSa kAryavAhaka
adhyakSa upAdhyakSa indaura byAvara byAvara madrAsa jodhapura madrAsa duga
mahAmaMtrI maMtrI zrI sAgaramalajI betAlA zrI ratanacandajI modI zrI dhanarAjajI
vinAyakiyA zrI pArasamalajI coraDiyA zrI hukmIcandajI pArakha zrI dulIcandajI
corar3iyA zrI jasarAjajI sA. pArakha zrI jI. sAyaramalajI coraDiyA zrI
amaracandajI modI zrI jJAnarAjajI mUthA zrI jJAnacandajI vinAyakiyA zrI
javarIlAlajI zizodiyA zrI Ara. prasannacandrajI coraDiyA zrI mANakacandajI
saMcetI zrI esa. sAyaramalajI coraDiyA zrI motIcandajI coraDiyA zrI mUlacandajI
surANA zrI tejarAjajI bhaNDArI zrI bhaMvaralAlajI goThI zrI prakAzacandajI
copar3A zrI jatanarAjajI mehatA zrI bhaMvaralAlajI zrIzrImAla zrI candanamalajI
coraDiyA zrI sumeramalajI mer3atiyA zrI pAsUlAlajI boharA madrAsa byAvara pAlI
byAvara byAvara madrAsa sahamaMtrI koSAdhyakSa jodhapura parAmarzadAtA
kAryakAriNI sadasya madrAsa madrAsa nAgaura jodhapura madrAsa byAvara
mer3atAsiTI durga madrAsa jodhapura jodhapura

Page #79 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
B·πõhatkalpas≈´tra

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
bRhatkalpasUtra

Page #80 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Please provide the text you would like translated. I need the text to translate
it into English.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================


Page #81 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
1. It is not permissible for **Niggranthas** or **Niggranthis** to consume
unripe **Tal-Palamb** that is not cut. 2. It is permissible for **Niggranthas**
or **Niggranthis** to consume unripe **Tal-Palamb** that is cut. 3. It is
permissible for **Niggranthas** to consume ripe **Tal-Palamb** that is cut or
uncut. 4. It is not permissible for **Niggranthis** to consume ripe **Tal-
Palamb** that is uncut. 5. It is permissible for **Niggranthis** to consume ripe
**Tal-Palamb** that is cut; however, it is permissible only if it is cut
according to the prescribed method, not if it is cut in an unprescribed manner.
The term "**Tal-Palamb**" in the sutra refers to all fruits. According to the
principle of "**Ek-grahan-sarva-sajaati-grahan**" (the consumption of one
implies the consumption of all similar things), the term "**Tal-Palamb**"
includes fruits like banana, mango, pomegranate, etc., in addition to **Tal-
fruit**. Similarly, considering the term "**Palamb**" as **Anta-Deepak** (the
consumption of the end implies the consumption of the beginning and middle),
roots, tubers, and stems are also included. In the first and second sutras, the
term "**Am**" refers to unripe, "**Abhinna**" refers to uncut, and "**Bhinna**"
refers to cut.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
bRhatkalpasUtrA prathama uddezaka sAdhu-sAdhvI ke pralaMba-grahaNa karane kA
vidhi-niSedha 1. no kappai niggaMthANa vA niggaMthINa vA Ame tAla-palambe
abhinne pddiggaahitte| 2. kappai niggaMthANa vA niggaMthINa vA Ame tAla-palambe
bhinne pddiggaahitte| 3. kappai niggaMthANaM pakke tAla-palambe bhinne vA
abhinne vA pddiggaahitte| 4. no kappai niggaMthINaM pakke tAla-palambe abhinne
pddiggaahitte| 5. kappai niggaMthINaM pakke tAla-palambe bhinne paDiggAhittae;
se vi ya vihibhinne, no ceva NaM avihibhinne / 1. nirgranthoM aura nirgranthiyoM
ko abhinna zastra-apariNata kacce tAla-pralamba grahaNa karanA nahIM kalpatA
hai| 2. nirgranthoM aura nirgranthiyoM ko bhinna-zastrapariNata kaccA tAla-
pralamba grahaNa karanA kalpatA hai| 3. nirgranthoM ko khaNDa-khaNDa kiyA huA yA
akhaNDa-pakva (zastrapariNata) tAla-pralamba grahaNa karanA kalpatA hai| 4.
nirgranthiyoM ko akhaNDa pakva (zastrapariNata) tAla-pralamba grahaNa karanA
nahIM kalpatA hai| 5. nirgranthiyoM ko khaNDa-khaNDa kiyA huA pakva
(zastrapariNata) tAla-pralamba grahaNa karanA kalpatA hai / vaha bhI
vidhipUrvaka bhinna (atyanta choTe-choTe khaNDakRta) ho to grahaNa karanA
kalpatA hai, pravidhi-bhinna ho to grahaNa karanA nahIM kalpatA hai / vivecana
sUtrapaThita 'tAla-pralamba' pada sabhI phaloM kA sUcaka hai| "eka ke grahaNa
karane para sabhI sajAtIya grahaNa kara lie jAte haiM"isa nyAya ke anusAra
'tAla-pralamba' pada se 'tAla-phala' ke atirikta kelA, Ama, anAra Adi phala bhI
grahaNa karanA abhISTa hai| isI prakAra 'pralamba' pada ko anta:dIpaka (anta ke
grahaNa se Adi evaM madhya kA grahaNa) mAnakara mUla, kanda, skandha Adi bhI
grahaNa kiye gaye haiN| prathama, dvitIya sUtra meM 'Ama' pada kA apakva artha
aura 'abhinna' pada kA zastra-apariNata artha evaM 'bhinna' pada kA zastra-
pariNata artha abhISTa hai /

Page #82 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The term 'abhinna' in the third, fourth and fifth sutras of the Bahutkalpasutra
has the meaning of 'unbroken' and the term 'pakva' has the meaning of 'ripe' as
transformed by a weapon. In the commentary, the term 'talapralamb' refers to the
ten parts of a tree, namely: 1. root, 2. tuber, 3. trunk, 4. bark, 5. branch, 6.
twig, 7. leaf, 8. flower, 9. fruit and 10. seed. (Brihatkalpa Udd. 1, Commentary
verse 854)  The combined meaning of these sutras is that a sadhu or sadhvi
cannot consume the following, whether ripe or unripe, and whether transformed by
a weapon or not: 1. root, 2. tuber, 3. trunk, 4. bark, 5. branch, 6. twig, 7.
leaf, 8. flower, 9. fruit and 10. seed. However, if these parts are transformed
by a weapon, then a sadhu or sadhvi can consume them.  The commentary explains
the four terms used in these sutras, 'aam', 'pakva', 'bhinna' and 'abhinna', in
terms of both substance and essence. It states that if something is ripe in
essence or different in essence, and if it is a talapralamb transformed by a
weapon, then a monk can consume it.  The first sutra states that unripe
talapralambs that are not transformed by a weapon are not to be consumed, while
the second sutra states that the same talapralambs are to be consumed if they
are transformed by a weapon (bhinna). Just as the second sutra states that
unripe talapralambs are to be consumed if they are different in substance and
essence, the third sutra states that ripe talapralambs, whether different or
unbroken, are to be consumed by a monk.  The fourth sutra prohibits a sadhvi
from consuming ripe talapralambs that are unbroken in substance and essence. The
fifth sutra prohibits a sadhvi from consuming large, long pieces of ripe
talapralambs, but states that small pieces are acceptable.  The reason for
prohibiting a sadhvi from consuming unbroken or long pieces of fruit, even
though they are not sentient, is as follows: The sight of an unbroken piece of
fruit like a banana, or a long piece of tuber like a sweet potato or root, can
arouse desire in the mind of a non-ordained woman, and she may engage in sexual
activity, which would harm her discipline and health. Therefore, a non-ordained
woman is prohibited from consuming unbroken fruit or tubers.  Similarly, she is
also prohibited from consuming long pieces of fruit like bananas, or tubers like
roots, that have been broken in an improper way, and which could arouse lust.
However, a sadhvi can consume fruit or tubers that have been broken in a proper
way, into such small pieces that they cannot arouse the aforementioned desire.
Fruit that falls from a tree on its own when ripe, or that is plucked from the
tree when ripe, is called 'dravyapakva'. This 'dravyapakva' fruit is also
connected to a sentient, living seed, kernel, etc. Therefore, when it is broken
open with a weapon, the kernel, etc., is removed, or if it contains many seeds,
...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
bhinna arthAt 128] [bahatkalpasUtra tIsare, cauthe aura pAMcaveM sUtra meM
'abhinna' pada kA prakhaNDa artha evaM 'pakva' pada kA zastrapariNata artha
abhISTa hai| bhASya meM 'tAlapralamba' pada se vRkSa ke dasa vibhAgoM ko grahaNa
kiyA gayA hai, yathA mUle kaMde khaMdhe, tayA ya sAle pavAla patte ya / pupphe
phale ya bIe, palaMba suttammi dasa bheyA // bRhatkalpa udde. 1, bhASya gA. 854
ina sUtroM kA saMyukta artha yaha hai ki sAdhu aura sAdhvI pakva yA apakva aura
zastra-apariNata 1. mUla, 2. kanda, 3. skandha, 4. tvak, 5. zAla, 6. pravAla, 7.
patra, 8. puSpa, 9. phala aura 10. bIja ko grahaNa nahIM kara sakate haiM /
kintu ye hI yadi zastra-pariNata ho jAe~ to sAdhu aura sAdhvI grahaNa kara
sakate haiN| ina sUtroM meM prayukta 'aAma, pakva, bhinna evaM abhinna' ina
cAroM padoM kI bhASya meM dravya evaM bhAva se caubhaMgiyA~ karake bhI yahI
batAyA gayA hai ki bhAva se pakva yA bhAva se bhinna ; zastrapariNata
tAlapralamba ho to bhikSu ko grahaNa karanA kalpatA hai / prathama sUtra meM
kacce tAlapralamba zastrapariNata na hoM to agrAhya kahe haiM evaM dUsare sUtra
meM unhIM ko zastrapariNata (bhinna) hone para grAhya kahA hai| jisa prakAra
dUsare sUtra meM dravya aura bhAva se bhinna hone para kacce tAlapralamba grAhya
kahe haiM usI prakAra tIsare sUtra meM dravya aura bhAva se pakva tAlapralamba
bhinna yA abhinna hoM to bhikSu ke liye grAhya kahe haiM / cauthe sUtra meM
dravya aura bhAva se pakva tAlapralamba bhI abhinna ho to sAdhvI ko grahaNa
karane kA niSedha kiyA gayA hai| pAMcaveM sUtra meM dravya aura bhAva se pakva
tAlapralamba ke bar3e-bar3e lambe Tukar3e lene kA sAdhvI ke liye niSedha karake
choTe-choTe Tukar3e hoM to grAhya kahe haiN| acitta hote hue bhI akhaNDa yA
lambe khaNDa sAdhvI ko lene ke niSedha kA kAraNa isa prakAra hai abhinna--
prakhaNDa kelA Adi phala kA tathA zakarakaMda, mUlA Adi kanda-mUla kA lambA
AkAra dekhakara kisI nirgranthI ke mana meM vikAra bhAva jAgRta ho sakatA hai
aura vaha usase anaMgakrIr3A bhI kara sakatI hai, jisase usake saMyama aura
svAsthya kI hAni honA sunizcita hai| ataH nirgranthI ko abhinna phala yA kanda
Adi lene kA niSedha kiyA gayA hai| sAtha hI avidhipUrvaka bhinna kadalI Adi
phaloM ke, mUlA Adi kandoM ke, aise lambe khaNDa jinheM dekhakara kAmavAsanA kA
jAgRta honA sambhava ho, unheM lene kA bhI niSedha kiyA gayA hai / kintu
vidhipUrvaka bhinna arthAt itane choTe-choTe khaNDa kie hue hoM ki jinheM
dekhakara pUrvokta vikArabhAva jAgRta na ho to aisA phala yA kanda Adi sAdhvI
grahaNa kara sakatI haiN| jo phala pakakara vRkSa se svayaM nIce gira par3atA
hai athavA paka jAne para vRkSa se tor3a liyA jAtA hai, use dravyapakva kahate
haiN| vaha dravyapakva phala bhI sacitta-sajIva bIja, guThalI Adi se saMyukta
hotA hai| ataH use jaba zastra se vidArita kara, guThalI Adi ko dUrakara yA
jisameM aneka bIja haiM

Page #83 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
If a living being has been completely rendered lifeless by being cooked, boiled,
or roasted in fire, etc., then it is considered **‡§≠‡§æ‡§µ‡§™‡§ï‡•ç‡§µ-‡§∂‡§∏‡•ç‡§§‡•ç‡§∞-‡§™‡§∞‡§ø‡§£‡§§** (fully
ripened by the weapon) and acceptable. Conversely, if there is a possibility of
it still being sentient even after being cut, pierced, or cooked in fire, etc.,
then it is considered **‡§≠‡§æ‡§µ ‡§∏‡•á ‡§Ö‡§™‡§ï‡•ç‡§µ-‡§∂‡§∏‡•ç‡§§‡•ç‡§∞-‡§Ö‡§™‡§∞‡§ø‡§£‡§§** (not fully ripened by the
weapon) and unacceptable. For detailed discussion and the fourfold analysis, one
should refer to the **‡§≠‡§æ‡§∑‡•ç‡§Ø** (commentary) and **‡§µ‡•É‡§§‡•ç‡§§‡§ø** (explanation).  It is
prescribed that **‡§®‡§ø‡§∞‡•ç‡§ó‡•ç‡§∞‡§®‡•ç‡§•‡•ã‡§Ç** (Jain monks) should stay in the following
places for one month during the **‡§π‡•á‡§Æ‡§®‡•ç‡§§** (winter) and **‡§ó‡•ç‡§∞‡•Ä‡§∑‡•ç‡§Æ** (summer)
seasons: 1. **‡§ó‡•ç‡§∞‡§æ‡§Æ** (village), 2. **‡§®‡§ó‡§∞** (town), 3. **‡§ñ‡•á‡§ü** (field), 4.
**‡§ï‡§∞‡•ç‡§¨‡§ü** (a type of settlement), 5. **‡§Æ‡§°‡§Ç‡§¨** (a type of settlement), 6.
**‡§™‡§§‡•ç‡§§‡§®** (port), 7. **‡§™‡•ç‡§∞‡§æ‡§ï‡§∞** (walled city), 8. **‡§¶‡•ç‡§∞‡•ã‡§£‡§Æ‡•Å‡§ñ** (a type of
settlement), 9. **‡§®‡§ø‡§ó‡§Æ** (a type of settlement), 10. **‡§™‡§æ‡§∂‡•ç‡§∞‡§Æ** (a type of
settlement), 11. **‡§∏‡§®‡•ç‡§®‡§ø‡§µ‡•á‡§∂** (a type of settlement), 12. **‡§∏‡§Æ‡•ç‡§¨‡§æ‡§ß** (a type of
settlement), 13. **‡§ò‡•ã‡§∑** (a type of settlement), 14. **‡§Ö‡§Ç‡§∂‡§ø‡§ï‡§æ** (a type of
settlement), 15. **‡§™‡•Å‡§ü‡§≠‡•á‡§¶‡§®** (a type of settlement), and 16. **‡§∞‡§æ‡§ú‡§ß‡§æ‡§®‡•Ä**
(capital city), both with **‡§∏‡§™‡§∞‡§ø‡§ï‡•ç‡§∑‡•á‡§™** (with a surrounding wall) and
**‡§Ö‡§¨‡§æ‡§π‡§ø‡§∞‡§ø‡§ï** (without a surrounding wall).  It is prescribed that
**‡§®‡§ø‡§∞‡•ç‡§ó‡•ç‡§∞‡§®‡•ç‡§•‡•ã‡§Ç** should stay in the following places for two months during the
**‡§π‡•á‡§Æ‡§®‡•ç‡§§** and **‡§ó‡•ç‡§∞‡•Ä‡§∑‡•ç‡§Æ** seasons: 1. **‡§ó‡•ç‡§∞‡§æ‡§Æ** (village) to 16. **‡§∞‡§æ‡§ú‡§ß‡§æ‡§®‡•Ä**
(capital city), both with **‡§∏‡§™‡§∞‡§ø‡§ï‡•ç‡§∑‡•á‡§™** (with a surrounding wall) and
**‡§∏‡§¨‡§æ‡§π‡§ø‡§∞‡§ø‡§ï** (with a surrounding wall and an outer settlement). One month should
be spent inside the **‡§ó‡•ç‡§∞‡§æ‡§Æ** (village) etc., and one month outside. While
staying inside, **‡§≠‡§ø‡§ï‡•ç‡§∑‡§æ‡§ö‡§∞‡•ç‡§Ø‡§æ** (begging for food) should be done inside, and
while staying outside, **‡§≠‡§ø‡§ï‡•ç‡§∑‡§æ‡§ö‡§∞‡•ç‡§Ø‡§æ** should be done outside.  It is prescribed
that **‡§®‡§ø‡§∞‡•ç‡§ó‡§®‡•ç‡§•‡•Ä‡§£‡§Ç** (Jain nuns) should stay in the following places for two
months during the **‡§π‡•á‡§Æ‡§®‡•ç‡§§** and **‡§ó‡•ç‡§∞‡•Ä‡§∑‡•ç‡§Æ** seasons: 1. **‡§ó‡•ç‡§∞‡§æ‡§Æ** (village) to
16. **‡§∞‡§æ‡§ú‡§ß‡§æ‡§®‡•Ä** (capital city), both with **‡§∏‡§™‡§∞‡§ø‡§ï‡•ç‡§∑‡•á‡§™** (with a surrounding
wall) and **‡§Ö‡§¨‡§æ‡§π‡§ø‡§∞‡§ø‡§ï** (without a surrounding wall).  It is prescribed that
**‡§®‡§ø‡§∞‡•ç‡§ó‡§®‡•ç‡§•‡•Ä‡§£‡§Ç** should stay in the following places for four months during the
**‡§π‡•á‡§Æ‡§®‡•ç‡§§** and **‡§ó‡•ç‡§∞‡•Ä‡§∑‡•ç‡§Æ** seasons: 1. **‡§ó‡•ç‡§∞‡§æ‡§Æ** (village) to 16. **‡§∞‡§æ‡§ú‡§ß‡§æ‡§®‡•Ä**
(capital city), both with **‡§∏‡§™‡§∞‡§ø‡§ï‡•ç‡§∑‡•á‡§™** (with a surrounding wall) and
**‡§∏‡§¨‡§æ‡§π‡§ø‡§∞‡§ø‡§ï** (with a surrounding wall and an outer settlement). Two months
should be spent inside the **‡§ó‡•ç‡§∞‡§æ‡§Æ** (village) etc., and two months outside.
While staying inside, **‡§≠‡§ø‡§ï‡•ç‡§∑‡§æ‡§ö‡§∞‡•ç‡§Ø‡§æ** (begging for food) should be done inside,
and while staying outside, **‡§≠‡§ø‡§ï‡•ç‡§∑‡§æ‡§ö‡§∞‡•ç‡§Ø‡§æ** should be done outside.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
prayama uddezaka] [129 use agni prAdi meM pakAkara ubAlakara yA bhUnakara
sarvathA asaMdigdha rUpa se acitta-nirjIva kara liyA gayA ho, taba vaha
bhAvapakva-zastra-pariNata kahA jAtA hai evaM grAhya hotA hai| isase viparIta-
arthAt chedana-bhedana kiye jAne para yA agni Adi meM pakAne para bhI
arddhapakva hone kI dazA meM usake sacitta rahane kI sambhAvanA ho to vaha bhAva
se apakva-zastra-apariNata kahA jAtA hai evaM agrAhya hotA hai / vistRta
vivecana evaM caubhaMgiyoM ke liye bhASya evaM vRtti kA avalokana karanA caahie|
grAmAdi meM sAdhu-sAdhvI ke rahane kI kalpamaryAdA 6. se 1. gAmaMsi vA, 2.
nagaraMsi vA, 3. kheDaMsi vA, 4. kambaDaMsi vA, 5. maDaMbaMsi vA, 6. paTTaNaMsi
vA, 7. AgaraMsi vA, 8. doNamuhaMsi vA, 9. nigamaMsi vA, 10. AsamaMsi vA, 11.
sannivesaMsi vA, 12. saMvAhaMsi vA, 13. ghosaMsi vA, 14. aMsiyaMsi vA, 15.
puDabheyaNaMsi vA, 16. rAyahANisi vA, saparikkhevaMsi abAhiriyaMsi, kappai
niggaMthANaM hemanta-gimhAsu egaM mAsaM vatthae / 7. se gAmaMsi vA jAva
rAyahANisi vA, saparikkhevaMsi sabAhiriyaMsi, kappaha niggaMthANaM hemanta-
gimhAsu do mAse vtthe| anto egaM mAsaM, bAhiM egaM mAsaM / anto vasamANANaM anto
bhikkhAyariyA, bAhi vasamANANaM bAhi bhikkhaayriyaa| 8. se gAmaMsi vA jAva
rAyahANisi vA, saparikkhevaMsi abAhiriyaMsi, kappai niggaMthINaM hemantagimhAsu
do mAse vtthe| 9. se gAmaMsi vA jAva rAyahANisi vA saparikkhevaMsi
sabAhiriyaMsi, kappai niggaMthINaM hemanta-gimhAsu cattAri mAse vatthae / anto
do mAse, bAhiM do mAse / anto vasamANoNaM anto bhikkhAyariyA, bAhiM vasamANINaM
bAhiM bhikkhaayriyaa| 6. nirgranthoM ko saparikSepa aura abAhirika 1. grAma, 2.
nagara, 3. kheTa, 4. karbaTa, 5. maDaMba, 6. pattana, 7. prAkara, 8. droNamukha,
9. nigama, 10. pAzrama, 11. sanniveza, 12. sambAdha, 13. ghoSa, 14. aMzikA, 15.
puTabhedana aura 16. rAjadhAnI meM hemanta aura grISma Rtu meM eka mAsa taka
rahanA kalpatA hai / 7. nirgranthoM ko saparikSepa (prAkAra yA vADa-yukta) aura
sabAhirika (prAkAra ke bAhara kI bastI yukta) grAma yAvat rAjadhAnI meM hemanta
aura grISma Rtu meM do mAsa taka rahanA kalpatA hai| eka mAsa grAma Adi ke
andara aura eka mAsa grAmAdi ke baahr| grAma Adi ke andara rahate hue andara hI
bhikSAcaryA karanA kalpatA hai| grAma Adi ke bAhara rahate hue bAhara hI
bhikSAcaryA karanA kalpatA hai| 8. nirganthiyoM ko saparikSepa aura abAhirika
grAma yAvat rAjadhAnI meM hemanta aura grISma Rtu meM do mAsa taka rahanA
kalpatA hai /

Page #84 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[130] [Brihatkalpa Sutra 9. It is prescribed for Nirgranthis to stay in a
village with a surrounding wall (Sapariskhepa) and a village without a
surrounding wall (Sabaharik) for four months during the winter and summer
seasons. Two months should be spent inside the village and two months outside
the village. While staying inside the village, it is prescribed to beg for alms
only inside the village. While staying outside the village, it is prescribed to
beg for alms only outside the village. Explanation: In every region, there are
many settlements as mentioned in the sutras. These settlements are of two types:
1. A village that has a surrounding wall made of stone, brick, mud, wood,
bamboo, thorns, or a moat, pond, river, pit, or mountain, and the houses are
located only inside the wall, not outside, is called "Sapariskhepa" and
"Abaharik". 2. A village that has a surrounding wall of any of the
aforementioned types, but also has houses located outside the wall, is called
"Sapariskhepa" and "Sabaharik". The monks and nuns stay in both types of
settlements. During the rainy season, they are prescribed to stay anywhere for
four months. But where and for how long should they stay for the remaining eight
months? This is prescribed in the four sutras mentioned. The statement in the
sutra regarding begging for alms in a village with a surrounding wall
(Sapariskhepa) and a village without a surrounding wall (Sabaharik) for twice
the prescribed time means that if a monk begs for alms in a particular part of
the village, he should stay in that part for the prescribed time. But if he begs
for alms in other parts of the village while staying in one part, he does not
have to stay in those parts for the prescribed time. The word "village" used in
the sutra is explained as follows: "Natthettha karo nagaram, khedam punam hoi
dhulipagaran / Kambadagam tu kunagaram, madambagam savvato chhinnam //
Jalpattanam cha yalpattanam cha, iti pattanam bhave duviham. Ayamai pragara
khalu, donamuhum jal-thalpahenam / Nigama negamvaggo, vasai rayahani jahi raya.
Tavasaamai asam, niweso satthaijattha va // Sanvaho sanvodhu, vasati jahin
pavvayavisaamesu / Ghosou u goulam, ansiya u gamaddhamaiiya // Nanadisagayanam,
bhijhati puda u jaththa bhandanam / Pudabheyanam tagam sankaro ya, kesinch
kaayavyo." - Bah. Bhashya Gatha 1089-1093

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
130] [bRhatkalpasUtra 9. nirgranthiyoM ko saparikSepa aura sabAhirika grAma
yAvat rAjadhAnI meM hemanta aura grISma Rtu meM cAra mAsa taka rahanA kalpatA
hai| do mAsa grAma Adi ke andara aura do mAsa grAma Adi ke bAhara / grAma Adi ke
andara rahate hue andara hI bhikSAcaryA karanA kalpatA hai| grAma Adi ke bAhara
rahate hue bAhara hI bhikSAcaryA karanA kalpatA hai| vivecanapratyeka janapada
meM grAma Adi sUtrokta aneka bastiyAM hotI haiN| ye bastiyAM do prakAra kI hotI
haiM 1. jisa grAma Adi ke cAroM ora pASANa, IMTa, miTTI, kASTha, bAMsa yA kAMToM
Adi kA tathA khAI, tAlAba, nadI, garta, parvata kA prAkAra ho aura usa prAkAra
ke andara hI ghara base hue hoM, bAhara na hoM to usa grAma prAdi ko
'saparikSepa' aura 'abAhirika' kahA jAtA hai| 2. jisa grAma Adi ke cAroM ora
pUrvokta prakAra ke prAkAroM meM se kisI prakAra kA prAkAra ho aura usa prAkAra
ke bAhara bho ghara base hue hoM, usa grAma Adi ko 'saparikSepa' aura
'sabAhirika' kahA jAtA hai| sAdhu-sAdhviyA~ ukta donoM prakAra kI bastiyoM meM
Thaharate haiM / varSAkAla meM unake lie sarvatra cAra mAsa taka rahane kA
vidhAna hai kintu varSAkAla ke atirikta pATha mAsa taka ve kahA~ kitane
ThahareM? isakA vidhAna ullikhita cAra sUtroM meM hai| sUtra meM saparikSepa
sabAhirika grAmAdi meM dugune kalpa taka rahane ke liye bhikSAcaryA sambandhI jo
kathana hai, usakA tAtparya yaha hai ki bhikSu grAmAdi ke jisa vibhAga meM rahe
usI vibhAga meM gocarI kare to use pratyeka vibhAga meM alaga-alaga kalpa kAla
taka rahanA kalpatA hai| kintu eka vibhAga meM rahate hue anya vibhAgoM meM bhI
gocarI kare to una vibhAgoM meM alaga mAsakalpa kAla rahanA nahIM kalpatA hai|
sUtra meM prayukta grAmAdi zabdoM kI vyAkhyA natthettha karo nagaraM, kheDaM
puNaM hoI dhUlipAgAraM / kambaDagaM tu kunagaraM, maDaMbagaM savvato chinnaM //
jalapaTTaNaM ca yalapaTTaNaM ca, iti paTTaNaM bhave duvihN| ayamAi prAgarA
khalu, doNamuhaM jala-thalapaheNaM / nigama negamavaggo, vasai rAyahANi jahi
raayaa| tAvasamAI Asama, niveso satthAijattA vA // saMvAho saMvoDhu, vasati
jahiM pavvayAivisamesu / ghoso u goulaM, aMsiyA u gAmaddhamAIyA / /
NANAdisAgayANaM, bhijjati puDA u jattha bhaMDANaM / puDabheyaNaM tagaM saMkaro
ya, kesiMci kaayvyo| -baha. bhASya gAthA 1089-1093

Page #85 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Types of Settlements in Ancient India:  **1. Gram:** A village where
eighteen types of taxes are levied or where the inhabitants are of low
intelligence.  **2. Nagar:** A city where eighteen types of taxes are not
levied.  **3. Khed:** A settlement with an earthen rampart.  **4. Karbat:** A
small town where many types of taxes are levied.  **5. Madamb:** A village that
is surrounded by no other village within a radius of 2.5 kos (approximately 12.5
km).  **6. Pattana:** Two types:     * **Jalpatta:** A port where goods arrive
by water.     * **Sthalpatta:** A port where goods arrive by land.  **7. Akar:**
A settlement established near mines of iron and other metals for the workers.
**8. Dronamukha:** A city with two entrances, where goods arrive by both water
and land routes.  **9. Nigam:** A settlement where a group of merchants reside.
**10. Prashram:** A hermitage where ascetics perform austerities. The village
surrounding the hermitage is also called a Prashram.  **11. Nivesh:** A place
where a caravan of merchants (SƒÅrthavƒÅha) stops while traveling abroad for
trade. Alternatively, a village where the inhabitants temporarily relocate to
another place. Also, any place where travelers rest. This is also referred to as
"Sannivesh" in some texts.  **12. Sambadh:** A village where farmers cultivate
land and reside in mountainous or other difficult terrain. Alternatively, a
village where merchants conduct business and reside in mountainous or other
difficult terrain. Also, a village located near granaries for storing grains.
**13. Ghosh:** A village where a herd of cows resides.  **14. Anshika:** A
settlement that occupies a half, a third, or a fourth part of a village.  **15.
Putbhadan:** A place where chests containing goods from various directions are
opened.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
prathama uddezaka] 1. grAma-jahAM aThAraha prakAra kA kara liyA jAtA hai athavA
jahAM rahane vAloM kI buddhi maMda hotI hai use 'grAma' kahA jAtA hai| 2.
nagara-jahAM aThAraha prakAra ke kara nahIM lie jAte haiM vaha 'nagara' kahA
jAtA hai| 3. kheDajahAM miTTI kA prAkAra ho vaha kheDa yA 'kheDA' kahA jAtA hai
/ 4. karbaTa-jahAM aneka prakAra ke kara liye jAte haiM aisA choTA nagara
karbaTa (kasbA) kahA jAtA hai| 5. maDaMba-jisa grAma ke cAroM ora ar3hAI koza
taka anya koI grAma na ho-vaha maDamba kahA jAtA hai| 6. paTTaNa-do prakAra ke
haiM-jahAM jala mArga pAra karake mAla AtA ho vaha 'jalapattana' kahA jAtA hai /
jahAM sthala mArga se mAla AtA ho vaha 'sthalapattana' kahA jAtA hai / 7. Akara-
lohA Adi dhAturoM kI khAnoM meM kAma karane vAloM ke liye vahIM para basA huvA
grAma Akara kahA jAtA hai| 8. droNamukha-jahAM jalamArga aura sthalamArga se
mAla AtA ho aisA nagara do muha vAlA hone se droNamukha kahA jAtA hai| 9.
nigama-jahAM vyApAriyoM kA samUha rahatA ho vaha nigama kahA jAtA hai| 10.
prAzrama-jahAM saMnyAsI tapazcaryA karate hoM vaha Azrama kahA jAtA hai evaM
usake AsapAsa basA huA grAma bhI Azrama kahA jAtA hai| 11. niveza-vyApAra hetu
videza jAne ke lie yAtrA karatA huA sArthavAha (aneka vyApAriyoM kA samUha)
jahAM par3Ava DAle vaha sthAna niveza kahA jAtA hai / athavA eka grAma ke nivAsI
kucha samaya ke lie dUsarI jagaha grAma basAveM-vaha grAma bhI niveza kahA jAtA
hai / athavA sabhI prakAra ke yAtrI jahAM-jahAM vizrAma leM ve saba sthAna
niveza kahe jAte haiN| ise hI Agama meM aneka jagaha sanniveza kahA hai| 12.
sambAdha-khetI karane vAle kRSaka dUsarI jagaha khetI karake parvata Adi viSama
sthAnoM para rahate hoM vaha grAma sambAdha kahA jAtA hai| athavA vyApArI dUsarI
jagaha vyApAra karake parvata Adi viSama sthAnoM para rahate hoM, vaha grAma
sambAdha kahA jAtA hai| athavA jahAM dhAnya Adi ke koThAra hoM vahAM base hue
grAma ko bhI sambAdha kahA jAtA hai / 13. ghoSa-jahAM gAyoM kA yUtha rahatA ho
vahAM base hue grAma ko ghoSa (gokula) kahA jAtA hai| 14. aMzikA-grAma kA prAdhA
bhAga, tIsarA bhAga yA cauthA bhAga jahAM Akara base vaha vasati 'aMzikA' kahI
jAtI hai / 15. puTabhedana-aneka dizAoM se Ae hue mAla kI peTiyoM kA jahAM
bhedana (kholanA) hotA hai vaha 'puTabhedana' kahA jAtA hai /

Page #86 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 132] [Brihatkalpa Sutra 16. Capital - The place where the king resides and
governs is called the capital. 17. Sankara - A place that is a mixture of a
village, a Khed, and a Pashram is called a 'Sankara'. / This word is not in the
original text, it is in the commentary. The rules for the residence of Sadhus
and Sadhvis in villages etc. are as follows: 10. It is not permissible for
Nirgranthas and Nirgranthis to reside in the same village or capital with one
entrance, one exit, and one enclosure. / 11. It is permissible for Nirgranthas
and Nirgranthis to reside in the same village or capital with multiple
enclosures, multiple entrances, and multiple exits. Discussion - The structure
of villages etc. is of many types, such as: 1. One division, 2. Multiple
divisions, 3. One entrance, 4. Multiple entrances, 5. One path, 6. Multiple
paths. The difference between an entrance and a path should be understood as
follows: 'Entrance' can be closed and opened from time to time, / but 'path'
remains open always and does not have any entrance. If a village has only one
division and only one path to enter and exit, and if monks have already stayed
there, then Sadhvis should not stay there, or if Sadhvis are staying there, then
monks should not stay there. If a village has multiple divisions and multiple
paths, then both Sadhus and Sadhvis can stay together in separate shelters. If
both Sadhus and Sadhvis happen to arrive in a village with one division or one
path, then they should take food and leave, i.e., they should not stay there for
a long time. The commentator has described in detail the faults that can arise
from the stay of both in such villages or capitals. In short, it is as follows:

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
132] [bRhatkalpasUtra 16. rAjadhAnI-jahAM rahakara rAjA zAsana karatA ho vaha
rAjadhAnI kahI jAtI hai| 17. saMkara-jo grAma bhI ho, kheDa bhI ho, pAzrama bhI
ho aisA mizrita lakSaNa vAlA sthAna 'saMkara' kahA jAtA hai / vaha zabda mUla
meM nahIM hai bhASya meM hai| grAmAdi meM sAdhu-sAdhvI ko eka sAtha rahane kA
vidhi-niSedha 10. se gAmaMsi vA jAva rAyahANisi vA, egavagaDAe, egaduvArAe, ega-
nikkhamaNa-pavesAe, no kappai niggaMthANa ya niggaMthINa ya egayao vatthae / 11.
se gAmaMsi vA jAva rAyahANisi vA, abhinivvagaDAe, abhininduvArAe
abhinikkhamaNapavesAe, kappai niggaMthANa ya niggaMthINa ya egayano vatthae /
10. nirgranthoM aura nirgranthiyoM ko eka vagar3A, eka dvAra aura eka
niSkramaNa-praveza vAle grAma yAvat rAjadhAnI meM (bhinna-bhinna upAzrayoM meM
bhI) samakAla basanA nahIM kalpatA hai / 11. nirgrantha aura nirgranthiyoM ko
aneka vagar3A, aneka dvAra aura aneka niSkramaNa-praveza vAle grAma yAvat
rAjadhAnI meM samakAla basanA kalpatA hai| vivecana-grAmAdi kI racanA aneka
prakAra kI hotI hai, yathA1. eka vibhAga vAle 2. aneka vibhAga vAle 3. eka dvAra
vAle 4. aneka dvAra vAle 5. eka mArga vAle 6. aneka mArga vaale| dvAra evaM
mArga meM yaha antara samajhanA cAhiye ki 'dvAra' samaya-samaya para banda kiye
jA sakate haiM evaM khole jA sakate haiM / kintu 'mArga' sadA khule hI rahate
haiM aura una para koI dvAra bane hue nahIM hote haiN| jo grAma kevala eka hI
vibhAga vAlA ho aura usameM jAne Ane kA mArga bhI kevala eka hI ho aura aise
grAmAdi meM pahale bhikSu Thahara cuke hoM to vahAM sAdhviyoM ko nahIM ThaharanA
cAhiye athavA sAdhviyAM ThaharI huI hoM to vahAM sAdhuoM ko nahIM ThaharanA
caahiye| jisa grAmAdi meM aneka vibhAga hoM evaM aneka mArga hoM to vahAM sAdhu-
sAdhvI donoM eka sAtha alaga-alaga upAzrayoM meM raha sakate haiN| kadAcit eka
vibhAga yA eka mArga vAle grAmAdi meM sAdhusAdhvI donoM vihAra karate hue
pahu~ca jAeM to vahAM para AhArAdi karake vihAra kara denA cAhiye arthAt adhika
samaya vahAM donoM ko nivAsa nahIM karanA caahiye| aise grAma yAvat rAjadhAnI
meM donoM ke Thaharane para jina doSoM ke lagane kI sambhAvanA rahatI hai unakA
varNana bhASyakAra ne vistArapUrvaka kiyA hai| vaha saMkSepa meM isa prakAra hai

Page #87 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## First Objective] [133 1. When coming and going in the Uccara-Prasravanabhoomi
and Swadhyaya Bhoomi, and during alms-round, frequent encounters with
Nirgrantha-Nirgranthis in the alleys or at the gates of the village increase
contact and lead to an increase in raga-bhava. Alternatively, seeing them coming
and going in the same direction on the same path can cause many anxieties in the
common people. According to the saying "Sangsargaja dosha-guna bhavanti", the
loss of restraint is certain. In a single vagara, the entrances of the
Nirgrantha-Nirgranthis' upashrayas should not be opposite each other. The
entrance of one upashraya should be on the side of the other upashraya, or the
entrance of one upashraya should be at the back of the other upashraya. The
entrance of one upashraya should be higher and the entrance of the other
upashraya should be lower. Even if the upashrayas of Nirgrantha and Nirgranthis
are in a straight line, many anxieties arise in the common people and there is a
possibility of loss of their restraint. In Sutra 11, there is a provision for
Nirgranthas and Nirgranthis to reside simultaneously in various upashrayas in
villages etc. with many vagaras, many entrances, and many paths for coming and
going. Because in villages etc. with many paths for coming and going,
Nirgranthas and Nirgranthis do not meet frequently, there will be no increase in
contact, no increase in raga-bhava, and no anxiety will arise in the common
people. Therefore, in such villages etc., it should be considered faultless for
sadhus and sadhvis to reside simultaneously. / The method and prohibition of
sadhus and sadhvis residing in Apanagruh etc. 12. No kappi nigganthinam 1.
Aavanagihansi va, 2. Ratthamuhansi va, 3. Singhaadagansi va, 4. Tiyansi va, 5.
Chaukkasi va, 6. Chaccaransi va, 7. Antaravanansi va batthae. 13. Kappi
nimganthanam praavanagihansi va jav antaravarnasi va vatthae / 12. Nirgranthis
should not reside in 1. Apanagruh, 2. Rathamukh, 3. Shrigatak, 4. Trik, 5.
Chatushk, 6. Chatvar, or 7. Antarapan. 13. Nirgranthas can reside in Apanagruh
or Antarapan. / Explanation-1. The market is called 'Apan', the house or
upashraya in the middle of it is called 'Apanagruh'. 2. Ratha means alley or
neighborhood, the upashraya or house whose entrance faces the alley or
neighborhood is called 'Rathamukh', or the house in front of which the alley
begins is also called 'Rathamukh'. 3. A triangular place like a Singhade is
called 'Shrigatak' / 4. The place where three alleys or three roads meet is
called 'Trik' /

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
prathama uddezaka] [133 1. uccAra-prasravaNabhUmi meM aura svAdhyAyabhUmi meM
Ate-jAte samaya tathA bhikSA ke samaya galiyoM meM yA grAma ke dvAra para
nirgrantha-nirgranthiyoM kA bAra-bAra milana hone se eka-dUsare ke sAtha
saMsarga bar3hatA hai aura usase rAgabhAva kI vaddhi hotI hai| athavA unheM eka
hI dizA meM eka hI mArga se jAte-Ate dekhakara janasAdhAraNa ko aneka AzaMkAeM
utpanna hone kI sambhAvanA rahatI hai| "saMsargajA doSa-guNA bhavanti" isa sUkti
ke anusAra saMyama kI hAni sunizcita hai| eka vagar3A meM nirgrantha-
nirgranthiyoM ke upAzrayoM ke dvAra eka-dUsare ke Amane-sAmane hoN| eka upAzraya
ke dvAra ke pArzvabhAga meM dUsare upAzraya kA dvAra ho / eka upAzraya ke
pRSThabhAga meM dUsare upAzraya kA dvAra ho| eka upAzraya kA dvAra Upara ho aura
dUsare upAzraya kA dvAra nIce ho| tathA nirgrantha aura nirgranthiyoM ke
upAzraya samapaMkti meM hoM to bhI jana-sAdhAraNa meM aneka AzaMkAeM utpanna
hotI haiM tathA unake saMyama kI hAni hone kI sambhAvanA rahatI hai| sUtrAMka 11
meM aneka vagaDA aneka dvAra aura aneka Ane-jAne ke mArga vAle grAma Adi ke
vibhinna upAzrayoM meM nirgranthoM aura nirgranthiyoM ke samakAla meM rahane kA
vidhAna hai| kyoMki aneka Ane-jAne ke mArga vAle grAma prAdi meM nirgranthoM
tathA nirgranthiyoM kA bAra-bAra milana na hone se na samparka bar3hegA aura na
rAgabhAva bar3hegA, na jana-sAdhAraNa ko kisI prakAra kI AzaMkA utpanna hogii|
ataH aise grAmAdi meM yathAvasara sAdhu-sAdhvI kA samakAla meM rahanA doSarahita
samajhanA cAhiye / ApaNagRha Adi meM sAdhu-sAdhviyoM ke rahane kA vidhi-niSedha
12. no kappai niggaMthINaM 1. AvaNagihaMsi vA, 2. ratthAmuhaMsi vA, 3.
siMghADagaMsi vA, 4. tiyaMsi vA, 5. caukkaMsi vA, 6. caccaraMsi vA, 7.
antarAvaNaMsi vA btthe| 13. kappai nimgaMthANaM prAvaNagihaMsi vA jAva
antarAvarNasi vA vatthae / 12. nirgranthiyoM ko 1. ApaNagaha, 2. rathyAmukha, 3.
zRgATaka, 4. trika, 5. catuSka, 6. catvara athavA 7. antarApaNa meM rahanA nahIM
kalpatA hai| 13. nirgranthoM ko ApaNagRha yAvat antarApaNa meM rahanA kalpatA
hai / vivecana-1. hATa-bAjAra ko 'ApaNa' kahate haiM, usake bIca meM vidyamAna
gRha yA upAzraya 'ApaNagRha' kahA jAtA hai| 2. rathyA kA artha galI yA mohallA
hai, jisa upAzraya yA ghara kA mukha (dvAra) galI yA mohalle kI ora ho, vaha
'rathyAmukha' kahalAtA hai athavA jisa ghara ke Age se galI prArambha hotI ho,
use bhI 'rathyAmukha' kahate haiN| 3. siMghAr3e ke samAna trikoNa sthAna ko
'zRgATaka' kahate haiM / 4. tIna galI yA tIna rAstoM ke milane ke sthAna ko
'trika' kahate haiM /

Page #88 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[134] [Brihatkalpa Sutra 5. A place where four paths meet is called a
'Chatushk'. 6. A place where six or more paths meet or where six or more paths
lead from is called a 'Chatvar'. 7. The meaning of 'Antarapan' is the path of a
market. / An Upashraya which has a market path on one or both sides is called
'Antarapan' / Or a house which has a shop on one side and a residence on the
other is also called 'Antarapan'. Sadhvis should not stay in such Upashrayas or
houses. Because there is a lot of coming and going of people in these places.
Their eyes naturally fall on the Sadhvis, which can create many obstacles in the
protection of their character. Therefore, it is safer for Sadhvis to stay inside
a lane or in a safe place, leaving the highway or crossroads, etc., as mentioned
in the sutras. / The sutra has been ordained for the Sadhu to stay in such
places without objection. If there is an obstacle in the practices of self-
study, meditation, etc., then the Sadhu should also not stay in such places. The
law of prohibition for Sadhu-Sadhvi to stay in a place without a door 14. No
Kampi Nigganthi Nam Avanguyaduvariye Uvassa Vatthae / Eg Patthar Am Anto Kiccha,
Eg Patyar Am Bahim Kiccha, Pohadiy Chilimiliyagansi Evam Nam Kappi Vatthae. 15.
Kappi Nigganthanam Avanguyaduvariye Uvassa Vatthae. 14. It is not proper for the
Nigganthis to stay in an Upashraya with an uncovered (open) door / But it is
proper for the Nigganthis to stay in an Upashraya with an uncovered door by
putting a curtain (curtain) inside the door and another curtain outside, thus
tying it in a way that it is Chilimilika (with a passage in between). 15. It is
proper for the Nigganthas to stay in an Upashraya with an uncovered door. _
Discussion-The reason why Sadhvis are prohibited from staying in an Upashraya or
house, etc., which does not have a door with a flap, is that seeing the open
door, thieves, etc., can take the Sadhvis' clothes, utensils, etc., at night.
Lustful men can also get in, they can harass the Sadhvis in many ways and even
rape them. Dogs, etc., can also enter, etc., for these reasons, Sadhvis are
prohibited from staying in an Upashraya or house with a door without a flap. But
if, after searching, a house with doors is not found in a village, etc., and
there is an opportunity to stay in a house with an open door, then the present
sutra says that a curtain of cloth should be made inside and outside in such a
way that no one's sight falls easily and there is also a way to come and go.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
134] [bRhatkalpasUtra 5. cAra mArgoM ke samAgama ko (caurAhe ko) 'catuSka'
kahate haiN| 6. jahAM para chaha yA aneka rAste Akara mileM, athavA jahAM se
chaha yA aneka ora rAste jAte hoM, aise sthAna ko 'catvara' kahate haiN| 7.
antarApaNa kA artha hATa-bAjAra kA mArga hai / jisa upAzraya ke eka aora athavA
donoM ora bAjAra kA mArga ho, use 'antarApaNa' kahate haiM / athavA jisa ghara
ke eka tarapha dukAna ho aura dUsarI tarapha nivAsa ho use bhI 'antarApaNa'
kahate haiN| aise upAzrayoM yA gharoM meM sAdhviyoM ko nahIM rahanA caahiye|
kyoMki ina sthAnoM meM aneka manuSyoM kA pAvAgamana rahatA hai| sahaja hI unakI
dRSTi sAdhviyoM para par3atI rahatI hai jisase unakI zIlarakSA meM kaI bAdhAyeM
utpanna hone kI sambhAvanA rahatI hai| ataH rAjamArga yA caurAhe Adi sUtrokta
sthAnoM ko chor3akara galI ke andara yA surakSita sthAnoM meM sAdhviyoM kA
rahanA nirApada hotA hai / sAdhu ko aise sthAnoM meM rahane meM Apatti na hone
se sUtra meM vidhAna kiyA gayA hai| svAdhyAya dhyAna Adi saMyama yogoM meM
rukAvaTa AtI ho to sAdhu ko bhI aise sthAnoM meM nahIM ThaharanA caahiye| binA
dvAra vAle sthAna meM sAdhu-sAdhvI ke rahane kA vidhi-niSedha 14. no kampai
niggaMthINaM avaMguyaduvArie uvassae vatthae / ega patthAraM anto kiccA, ega
patyAraM bAhiM kiccA, pohADiya cilimiliyAgaMsi evaM NaM kappai vtthe| 15. kappai
niggaMthANaM avaMguyaduvArie uvassae vtthe| 14. nirgranthiyoM ko apAvRta (khule)
dvAra vAle upAzraya meM rahanA nahIM kalpatA hai / kintu nirgranthiyoM ko
apAvRtadvAra vAle upAzraya meM dvAra para eka prastAra (pardA) bhItara karake
aura eka prastAra bAhara karake isa prakAra cilimilikA (jisake bIca meM mArga
rahe) bAMdhakara usameM rahanA kalpatA hai| 15. nigranthoM ko apAvRtta dvAra
vAle upAzraya meM rahanA kalpatA hai| _ vivecana-jisa upAzraya yA gRha Adi kA
dvAra kapATa-yukta na ho, aise sthAna para sAdhviyoM ko Thaharane kA jo niSedha
kiyA hai, usakA kAraNa yaha hai ki khulA dvAra dekhakara rAtri ke samaya cora
Adi pAkara sAdhviyoM ke vastra-pAtrAdi ko le jA sakate haiN| kAmI puruSa bhI pA
sakate haiM, ve aneka prakAra se sAdhviyoM ko parezAna kara sakate haiM evaM
unake sAtha balAtkAra bhI kara sakate haiN| kutte Adi bhI ghusa sakate haiM,
ityAdi kAraNoM se kapATa-rahita dvAra vAle upAzraya yA ghara meM sAdhviyoM ko
Thaharane niSedha kiyA gayA hai| kinta yadi anveSaNa karane para bhI kisI
grAmAdi meM kivADoM vAlA ghara Thaharane ko nahIM mile aura khule dvAra vAle
ghara meM Thaharane kA avasara Ave to usake lie prastuta sUtra meM batAyA gayA
hai ki andara bAhara isa taraha vastra kA pardA kara deM ki sahaja kisI kI dRSTi
na par3e aura jAne-Ane kA mArga bhI rhe|

Page #89 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## First Objective] [In the 135th commentary, the method of covering the door is
described as follows: The door should be closed from the outside with a mat made
of bamboo or date palm, or a curtain of sun-tat, etc., and also from the inside.
At night, both curtains should be tied with a peg, etc., at the top, middle, and
bottom in such a way that no man can enter from outside. For further security,
it is stated that a strong Sadhvi should guard the door throughout the night in
turns, and the Ganini or Pravartini should arrange for the sleeping arrangement
of the beautiful young Sadhvis, placing them in a circular pattern, with the
melodious Sadhvis in the middle and the elderly Sadhvis in between. The Ganini
should sleep in the middle and keep an eye on everyone. The reason for the
provision of accommodation for the Sadhus in a place with an open door is clear,
as there is no possibility of such fear for them. If there is any fear of dogs,
thieves, etc., the Sadhu should also take appropriate precautions. The
prohibition and permission for the Sadhu-Sadhvi to possess a Ghatimaatraka is
described in 16. Kappi Nigganthinam Antolittam Ghadimmattayam Dharittae Va
Pariharittae Va / 17. No Kappi Nigganthanam Antolittam Ghadimmattayam Dharittae
Va Pariharittae Va. 16. It is permissible for the Nirgranthis to keep and use a
Ghatimaatraka with a coating on the inside. 17. It is not permissible for the
Nirgranthis to keep and use a Ghatimaatraka with a coating on the inside.
Discussion - The Agam permits the keeping of three types of Maatraka, namely 1.
Uccaramaatraka, 2. Prasravanamaatraka, 3. Khelmaatraka. Here also, one type of
Maatraka is described. In many previous sutras, prohibitions have been made for
the protection of the Sadhvi's chastity, and here there is a prohibition for the
protection of the Bhikshu's Brahmacharya. The Ghatimaatraka is a type of
Prasravanamaatraka. Although it is permissible for both Sadhu and Sadhvi to keep
the Prasravanamaatraka, this Maatraka has a specific shape, and the word "Ghati"
describes that shape, which the commentator has interpreted as follows:
"Ghatimaatra" - Ghatisansthanam Mrnmaybhajan Vishesh, Ghatika (Ghadiga) ke
Prakar wala ek prakar ka Mitti ka Patra, Ghatimaatraka ka arth hai. Just as the
long pieces of Talapralamb were prohibited for the Sadhvi because they resembled
the male symbol, similarly, the Ghatimaatraka, due to its shape, resembles the
female symbol.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
prathama uddezaka] [135 bhASya meM dvAra ko DhaMkane kI vidhi isa taraha batAI
gaI hai ki bAMsa yA khajUra kI chidrarahita caTAI yA sana-TATa Adi ke parade se
dvAra ko bAharI aora se mora bhItarI ora se bhI banda karake ThaharanA caahie|
rAtri ke samaya una donoM paradoM ko kisI khUTI Adi se Ara, bIca meM aura nIce
isa prakAra bAMdhe ki bAhara se koI puruSa praveza na kara ske| phira bhI
surakSA ke lie batAyA gayA hai ki usa dvAra para sazakta sAdhvI bArI-bArI se
rAta bhara paharA deve tathA rUpavatI yuvatI sAdhviyoM ko gItArtha aura vRddha
sAdhviyoM ke madhya-madhya meM cakravAla rUpa se sthAna dekara sone kI vyavasthA
gaNinI yA pravartinI ko karanI cAhie / gaNinI ko sabake madhya meM sonA cAhie
aura bIca-bIca meM sabakI saMbhAla karate rahanA cAhie / khule dvAra vAle sthAna
meM sAdhuoM ko Thaharane kA jo vidhAna kiyA gayA hai usakA kAraNa spaSTa hai ki
unake ukta prakAra kI AzaMkA kI sambhAvanA nahIM hai| yadi kahIM kutte yA cora
grAdi ko AzaMkA ho to sAdhu ko bhI yathAyogya surakSA kara lenI cAhiye / sAdhu-
sAdhvI ko ghaTImAtraka grahaNa karane kA vidhi-niSedha 16. kappai niggaMthINaM
antolittaM ghaDimattayaM dhArittae vA pariharittae vA / 17. no kappai
niggaMthANaM antolittaM ghaDimattayaM dhArittae vA pariharittae vaa| 16.
nirgranthiyoM ko andara kI ora lepayukta ghaTImAtraka rakhanA aura usakA upayoga
karanA kalpatA hai| 17. nirgranthoM ko andara kI ora lepayukta ghaTImAtraka
rakhanA aura usakA upayoga karanA nahIM kalpatA hai| vivecana-Agama meM tIna
prakAra ke mAtraka rakhane kI AjJA hai, yathA1. uccAramAtraka, 2.
prazravaNamAtraka, 3. khelamAtraka / yahAM bhI eka prakAra ke mAtraka kA varNana
hai| pUrva ke aneka sUtroM meM sAdhvI ke zIlarakSA hetu niSedha kiye gaye haiM
aura yahAM bhikSu ke brahmacaryarakSA hetu niSedha hai / ghaTImAtraka eka
prakAra kA prazravaNamAtraka hI hai| yadyapi prazravaNamAtraka to sAdhu-sAdhvI
donoM ko rakhanA kalpatA hai tathApi isa mAtraka kA kucha vizeSa AkAra hotA hai,
usa AkAra ko batAne vAlA "ghaTI" zabda hai jisakA TIkAkAra ne isa prakAra artha
kiyA hai "ghaTImAtra" -ghaTIsaMsthAnaM mRnmayabhAjana vizeSa, ghaTikA (ghaDigA)
ke prAkAra vAlA eka prakAra kA miTTI kA pAtra, ghaTImAtraka kA artha hai| jisa
prakAra tAlapralamba ke lambe Tukar3oM meM puruSa cihna kA AbhAsa hone ke kAraNa
sAdhvI ko unakA niSedha kiyA gayA hai, usI prakAra ghaTI AkAra vAle mAtraka ke
mukha se strI-cihna kA AbhAsa

Page #90 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
This is prohibited for the Sadhu due to being a Brihatkalpasutra, and is
ordained for the Sadhvi as it is not a hindrance. The word "Ghat" means "earthen
pot" and "Ghati" or "Ghatika" means a small pot or a small pitcher. As per
"Ghadiga" Ghatika-Mrinmaykullalika - Suy. Patra 118, Alpaparichit Saiddhantic
Shabdakosh, page 381, the statement in the commentary and commentary about the
mouth being tied with cloth and being made of clay also makes it possible to be
like a pitcher, because only a vessel with a small mouth like a pitcher is tied
with cloth. Otherwise, the vessel or unit is kept covered with cloth. Being made
of clay can make it rough, which is not useful for Prashravan due to not drying
quickly, therefore it is Kalpata for the Sadhvi to keep it smooth inside. The
same vessel becomes a source of Vikar for the Sadhu due to its shape and touch
because it is smooth inside. This method of prohibition should be understood in
the same way for this unit. The commentary and commentary have stated that this
is a general Prashravan unit and it is unnecessary for the Sadhu to keep it. But
there are many mentions in the Agam of taking the general Prashravan unit.
Therefore, it is relevant to understand here the Prashravan unit with a specific
shape that is a hindrance to Brahmacharya. The ordinance to take Chilmilika
(mosquito net) is 18. Kappi Nigganthan Va Nigganthin Va Chalchilimiliyam
Dharittae Va Pariharittae Va. 18. It is Kalpata for the Nirgranthas and
Nirgranthis to keep and use the Chel-Chilmilika. Discussion - Chilmilika is a
local word, it is a type of cloth hut with the shape of a Chhola. It is of five
types: 1. Sutram‡§Ø‡•Ä - made of threads of cotton etc., 2. Rajjum‡§Ø‡•Ä - made of thick
threads of wool etc., 3. Valkalam‡§Ø‡•Ä - made of bark of San-Patasan etc., 4.
Dandakam‡§Ø‡•Ä - made of bamboo-cane, 5. Katam‡§Ø‡•Ä - made of mat. The ordinance in the
present Sutra is to keep the Chilmili made of cloth, not the others. Because it
is not possible to carry them along during Vihar due to their heaviness or it is
very laborious. The evidence of Chilmilika is said to be five hands long, three
hands wide and three hands high. A Sadhu or Sadhvi can be well protected inside
it.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
[bRhatkalpasUtra hone ke kAraNa sAdhu ke liye isakA niSedha kiyA gayA hai aura
sAdhvI ke liye bAdhaka na hone se vidhAna kiyA gayA hai| "ghaTa" zabda kA artha
"miTTI kA ghar3A" hotA hai aura "ghaTI" yA "ghaTikA" zabda se choTA ghar3A yA
choTo surAhI artha hotA hai / yathA"ghaDigA" ghaTikA-mRnmayakullaDikA / -sUya.
patra 118 alpaparicita saiddhAMtika zabdakoSa, pR. 381 bhASya tathA TIkA meM
kapar3e se mukha baMdhA hone kA tathA miTTI ke hone kA jo kathana hai usase bhI
surAhI jaisA honA sambhava hai kyoMki surAhI jaise choTe mukha vAle pAtra ke hI
kapar3A bAMdhA jAtA hai / anyathA to pAtra yA mAtraka kapar3e se DhaMka kara hI
rakhe jAte haiN| miTTI kA hone se khuradarA ho sakatA hai jo jaldI na sUkhane ke
kAraNa prazravaNa ke upayogI nahIM hotA hai ataH andara cikanA banA karake hI
sAdhvI ko rakhanA kalpatA hai| vahI pAtra andara cikanA hone ke kAraNa sAdhu ke
liye AkAra aura sparza donoM se vikArajanya ho jAtA hai| aise hI mAtraka kA yaha
vidhi-niSedha samajhanA caahiye| _ bhASya-TIkA meM ise sAmAnya prazravaNamAtraka
batAkara sAdhu ko rakhanA anAvazyaka hI kahA hai| kintu sAmAnya
prazravaNamAtraka ke grahaNa karane kA Agama meM aneka jagaha ullekha hai| ataH
yahAM brahmacaryabAdhaka AkRtivizeSa vAlA prazravaNamAtraka hI samajhanA
prasaMgasaMgata hai| cilamilikA (maccharadAnI) grahaNa karane kA vidhAna 18.
kappai niggaMthANa vA niggaMthINa vA calacilimiliyaM dhArittae vA pariharittae
vaa| 18. nirgranthoM aura nirgranthiyoM ko cela-cilimilikA rakhanA aura usakA
upayoga karanA kalpatA hai| vivecana-cilamilikA yaha dezI zabda hai, yaha
choladArI ke AkAra vAlI eka prakAra kI vastra-kuTI hai / yaha pAMca prakAra kI
hotI hai 1. sUtramayIkapAsa Adi ke dhAgoM se banI huI, 2. rajjumayI-Una Adi ke
moTe dhAgoM se banI huI, 3. valkalamayI-sana-paTasana Adi kI chAla se banI huI,
4. daNDakamayI-bAMsa-veMta se banI huI, 5. kaTamayI-caTAI se banI huii| prakRta
sUtra meM vastra se banI cilamilI ko rakhane kA vidhAna kiyA gayA hai, anya kA
nhiiN| kyoMki unake bhArI hone se vihAra ke samaya sAtha meM le jAnA sambhava
nahIM hotA hai yA bahuzrama-sAdhya hotA hai| cilamilikA kA pramANa pA~ca hAtha
lambI, tIna hAtha caur3I aura tIna hAtha U~cI batAyA gayA hai| isake bhItara eka
sAdhu yA sAdhvI kA saMrakSaNa bhalIbhAMti ho sakatA hai|

Page #91 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## First Objective:  [137 Nishƒ´thas≈´tra U. 1 states that the atonement for
making a **chilimilikƒÅ** (mosquito net) from threads (s≈´tra) is to keep a cloth
**chilimilikƒÅ**. Therefore, a monk can make a **chilimilikƒÅ** from a ready-made
cloth or accept a ready-made cloth **chilimilikƒÅ**. This s≈´tra refers to a
**chilimilikƒÅ** for wearing, which is a mosquito net. S≈´tra 14 states that a
**chilimilikƒÅ** should be made by tying a **prastƒÅra** (sheet or curtain) inside
and outside the door, leaving a passage in the middle. This **chilimilikƒÅ** made
from two **prastƒÅra** is different from the **chilimilikƒÅ** (mosquito net)
mentioned in this s≈´tra. The commentator has instructed each monk and nun to
keep one **chilimilikƒÅ** each. This means that during the rainy season and other
seasons when small creatures like flies, mosquitoes, moths, etc., are born,
sleeping inside the **chilimilikƒÅ** at night protects them. Similarly, it also
protects them from various creatures during the rainy season and from wild
animals when staying in forests during the wandering period. It also makes it
easier to care for a sick monk. If there are many flies and mosquitoes, eating
and drinking inside the **chilimilikƒÅ** also protects those creatures.  ##
Prohibition of Standing Near Water:  19. No **niggantha** or **nigganthƒ´**
should stand, sit, sleep, sleep, yawn, eat, drink, eat **khaima** or **saim**
food, excrete, urinate, expel phlegm, nasal mucus, etc., study, perform
**dharmajagarika** (meditation), or remain in **kayotsarga** near water.  ##
Explanation:  The place near a river, lake, or other water body where villagers
or forest dwellers fetch water and where cows, buffaloes, and other animals or
wild animals drink water is called **dakatira**. Alternatively, the edge of any
water body is called **dakatira**. The prohibition of monks and nuns standing,
sitting, eating, drinking, excreting, performing **dharmajagaran**, and
remaining in **kayotsarga** near such a place has been explained by the
**niyuktikƒÅra**, commentator, and **tƒ´kƒÅkara** for various reasons. Some of them
are:  1. Women coming to fetch water may doubt the character of the monk.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
prathama uddezaka] [137 nizIthasUtra u. 1 meM sUtra (dhAgoM) se svayaM
cilamilikA banAne kA prAyazcitta kahA hai aura yahAM para vastra kI cilamilikA
rakhanA kalpanIya kahA hai ataH taiyAra milane vAle vastra se bhikSu cilamilikA
banAkara rakha sakatA hai athavA vastra kI taiyAra cilamilikA mile to bhI bhikSu
grahaNa karake rakha sakatA hai| isa sUtra meM dhAraNa karane ke liye kahI gaI
cilamilikA se maccharadAnI kA kathana kiyA gayA hai aura sUtra 14 meM eka
prastAra (caddara yA pardA) dvAra ke andara evaM eka bAhara bAMdhakara bIca meM
mArga rakhane rUpa cilamilikA banAnA kahA gayA hai| vaha do padoM (caddaroM) se
banAI gaI cilamilikA prastuta sUtra kI cilamilikA (maccharadAnI) se bhinna hai|
bhASyakAra ne pratyeka sAdhu aura sAdhvI ko eka-eka cilimilikA rakhane kA
nirdeza kiyA hai, jisakA abhiprAya yaha hai ki varSA Adi RtuoM meM jabaki DAMsa,
macchara, makkho, pataMge Adi kSudra jantu Adi utpanna hote haiM, taba rAtri ke
samaya cilimilikA ke andara sone se unakI rakSA hotI hai| isI prakAra pAnI ke
barasane para aneka prakAra ke jIvoM se yA vihAra kAla meM vanAdi pradezoM meM
Thaharane para jaMgalI jAnavaroM se AtmarakSA bhI hotI hai| rogI sAdhu kI
paricaryA bhI usake lagAne se sahaja meM hotI hai| makkhI, macchara Adi ke
adhika ho jAne para AhAra-pAnI bhI cilamilikA lagAkara karane se una jIvoM kI
rakSA hotI hai| pAnI ke kinAre khar3e rahane Adi kA niSedha 19. no kappai
niggaMthANa vA niggaMthINa vA dagatIraMsi, 1. ciTThittae vA, 2. nisIittae vA, 3.
tuyaTTittae vA, 4. nidAittae vA, 5. payalAittae vA, 6. asaNaM vA, 7. pANaM bA,
8. khAimaM vA, 9. sAimaM vA Aharittae, 10. uccAraM vA, 11. pAsavaNaM vA, 12.
khelaM vA, 13. siMghANaM vA parivettae, 14. sajjhAyaM vA karittae, 15.
dhammajAgariyaM vA jAgarittae, 16. kAusaggaM vA ThAittae / 19. nirgranthoM aura
nirgranthiyoM ko dakatora (jala ke kinAre) para 1. khar3A honA, 2. baiThanA, 3.
zayana karanA, 4. nidrA lenA, 5. UMghanA, 6. azana, 7. pAna, 8. khAdima aura 9.
svAdima AhAra kA khAnA-pInA, 10.-11. mala-mUtra, 12. zleSma, 13. nAsAmala Adi kA
parityAga karanA, 14. svAdhyAya karanA, 15. dharmajAgarikA (dharmadhyAna) karanA
tathA 16. kAyotsarga kara sthita honA nahIM kalpatA hai| vivecana-nadI yA
sarovara Adi jalAzaya ke jisa sthAna se grAmavAsI yA vanavAsI loga pAnI bhara ke
le jAte haiM aura jahAM para gAya bhaiseM aAdi pazu yA jaMgalI jAnavara pAnI
pIne ko pAte haiM, aise sthAna ko 'dakatIra' kahate haiN| athavA kisI bhI
jalayukta jalAzaya ke kinAre ko 'dakatIra' kahate haiN| aise sthAna para sAdhU
yA sAdhvI kA uThanA-baiThanA, khAnA-pInA, mala-mUtrAdi karanA, dharmajAgaraNa
karanA aura dhyAnAvasthita hokara kAyotsarga Adi karane kA jo niSedha kiyA gayA
hai, usake aneka kAraNa niyuktikAra, bhASyakAra aura TIkAkAra ne batAye haiM,
unameM se kucha isa prakAra haiM 1. jala bharane ko Ane vAlI striyoM ko sAdhu ke
caritra meM zaMkA ho sakatI hai|

Page #92 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[138] **Bahutkalpasutra 2.** Animals coming to drink water may be frightened and
return without drinking, they may be obstructed from drinking water. **3.**
Running around may also lead to **Jivadhat**. **4.** Wicked animals may kill the
ascetic. **5.** Aquatic creatures in the water may be distressed upon seeing the
ascetic. **6.** They run around in the water, which causes **viraadhana** to the
aquatic creatures. **7.** The earth near the water's edge is **saccitta**,
therefore, there is **viraadhana** to the creatures of the earth. **8.** People
may be apprehensive about the ascetic drinking raw water or consuming it. Due to
these reasons, the sutra prohibits staying near the water. **...** **20.** It is
not appropriate for **Niggranthas** or **Nigganthis** to stay in a **saccitta**
**upaashraya**. **21.** It is appropriate for **Niggranthas** or **Nigganthis**
to stay in a **acitta** **upaashraya**. **20.** It is not appropriate for
**Niggranthas** and **Nigganthis** to stay in a **saccitta** **upaashraya**.
**21.** It is appropriate for **Niggranthas** and **Nigganthis** to stay in a
**acitta** **upaashraya**. **Explanation:** In **upaashrayas** where there are
paintings of gods and goddesses, men and women, and animals and birds playing in
various ways, or other entertaining pictures, ascetics or nuns should not stay,
because seeing them may arouse feelings of desire in their minds, and repeatedly
looking at them may prevent them from concentrating on their **samyama**
practices such as **svadhyay**, **dhyana**, and **pratilekhan**. Therefore,
ascetics and nuns are prohibited from staying in **saccitta** **upaashrayas**.
**...** **22.** It is not appropriate for **Niggranthis** to stay without the
**nishra** of a **sagarik**. **23.** It is appropriate for **Niggranthis** to
stay with the **nishra** of a **sagarik**. **24.** It is appropriate for
**Niggranthas** to stay with or without the **nishra** of a **sagarik**. **22.**
It is not appropriate for **Niggranthis** to stay without the **nishra** of a
**sagarik**. **23.** It is appropriate for **Niggranthis** to stay with the
**nishra** of a **sagarik**. **24.** It is appropriate for **Niggranthas** to
stay with or without the **nishra** of a **sagarik**. **Explanation:** Just as a
creeper, without the support of a tree, becomes agitated and unstable due to the
wind, in the same way, a **shraman** also becomes agitated and unstable without
the **nishra** of a **shayyatar**, i.e., without the responsibility of
protection.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
138] bahatkalpasUtra 2. pAnI pIne ko Ane vAle jAnavara Darakara binA pAnI piye
hI vApasa lauTa sakate haiM, unake pAnI pIne meM antarAya hotI hai| 3. idhara-
udhara bhAgane se 'jIvadhAta' kI bhI sambhAvanA rahatI hai| 4. duSTa jAnavara
sAdhu ko mAra sakate haiN| 5. jala meM rahe jalacara jIva sAdhu ko dekhakara
trasta hote haiN| 6. ve jala meM idhara-udhara daur3ate haiM, jisase pAnI ke
jIvoM kI virAdhanA hotI hai| 7. jala ke kinAre pRthvo sacitta hotI hai ataH
pRthvIkAya ke jIvoM ko virAdhanA hotI hai| 8. sAdhu ke kaccA pAnI pIne kI yA
grahaNa karane kI logoM ko aAzaMkA hotI hai| ityAdi kAraNoM se sUtra meM
jalasthAna ke kinAre Thaharane kA niSedha kiyA gayA hai / sacitra upAzraya meM
Thaharane kA niSedha .. 20. no kappai niggaMdhANa vA niggaMthINa vA sacittakamme
uvassae vatthae / 21. kappai niggaMthANa vA niggaMthINa vA acittakamme uvassae
vatthae / 20. nirgranthoM aura nirgandhiyoM ko sacitra upAzraya meM rahanA nahIM
kalpatA hai / 21. nirgranthoM aura nirgranthiyoM ko citra-rahita upAzraya meM
rahanA kalpatA hai| vivecana-jina upAzrayoM kI bhittiyoM para deva-deviyoM,
strI-puruSoM aura pazu-pakSiyoM ke jor3oM ke aneka prakAra se krIr3A karate hue
citra hoM athavA anya bhI manoraMjaka citra citrita hoM, vahAM sAdhu yA sAdhvI
ko nahIM ThaharanA cAhiye, kyoMki unheM dekhakara unake mana meM vikArabhAva
jAgRta ho sakatA hai tathA bAraMbAra udhara dRSTi jAne se svAdhyAya, dhyAna,
pratilekhana Adi saMyama kriyAoM meM ekAgratA nahIM rahatI hai| ataH sacitra
upAzrayoM meM Thaharane kA sAdhu-sAdhviyoM ko niSedha kiyA gayA hai| sAgArika kI
nizrA lene kA vidhAna 22. no kappai niggaMthoNaM sAgAriya-anissAe vatthae / 23.
kappai niggaMthINaM sAgAriya-nissAe bathae / 24. kappai niggaMthANaM sAgAriya-
nissAe vA anissAe vA vatthae / 22. nirgranthiyoM ko sAgArika ko anizrA se rahanA
nahIM kalpatA hai / 23. nirgranthiyoM ko sAgArika kI nizrA se rahanA kalpatA hai
/ 24. nirgranthoM ko sAgArika kI nizrA yA anizrA se rahanA kalpatA hai /
vivecana-jaise vRkSAdi ke Azraya ke vinA latA pavana se prerita hokara kampita
aura asthira ho jAtI hai, usI prakAra zayyAtara kI nizrA arthAt surakSA kA
uttaradAyitva mile binA zramaNI bhI

Page #93 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[First Objective] [139 A woman may be distressed and fearful, and her chastity
can be well protected by the guardianship of a man. Because there is a constant
fear of being raped by wicked men. Therefore, even when protected by a female
teacher, it is considered necessary for a Shraman to stay under the guardianship
of a male. But the virtuous are usually strong, resolute, and fearless in their
attitude, and it is not possible for them to be raped in the matter of their
celibacy. Therefore, he can stay in the shelter without the guardianship of a
male. If there is a thief or a violent animal or any other disturbance, then the
virtuous can also stay in the shelter after receiving assurance of protection
from a male. The rules for staying in a shelter with householders are as
follows: 25. It is not proper for a Niggrantha or a Niggranthi to stay in a
Sagarik (householder's residence) shelter. 26. It is not proper for a Niggrantha
to stay in a Itthi-Sagarik (only women's residence) shelter. 27. It is proper
for a Niggrantha to stay in a Puris-Sagarik (only men's residence) shelter. 28.
It is not proper for a Niggranthi to stay in a Puris-Sagarik (only men's
residence) shelter. 29. It is proper for a Niggranthi to stay in a Itthi-Sagarik
(only women's residence) shelter. _ Discussion-Sagarik shelters are of two
types-Dravy-Sagarik and Bhav-Sagarik. A shelter where men and women live or
where pictures of men and women are painted on the walls, where wooden, stone,
etc. statues of men and women are kept, where there are means of adornment like
clothes, ornaments, perfumes, garlands, decorations, etc., where food and drink
are kept, where there are songs, dances, plays, etc., or where instruments like
veena, flute, mridanga, etc. are played, that shelter is Dravy-Sagarik in one's
own place and Bhav-Sagarik in another place.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
prathama uddezaka] [139 kSubhita evaM bhayabhIta ho sakatI hai, usake zIla kI
rakSA puruSa kI nizrA se bhalIbhAMti ho sakatI hai| kyoMki kSudra puruSoM ke
dvArA balAtkAra karane kI AzaMkA banI rahatI hai| ataH guruNI-pravartinI se
rakSita hone para bhI zramaNI ko zayyAtara kI nizrA meM rahanA prAvazyaka batAyA
gayA hai| kintu sAdhuvarga prAyaH sazakta, dRDhacitta evaM nirbhaya manovRtti
vAlA hotA hai tathA usake brahmacarya bhaMga ke viSaya meM balAtkAra honA bhI
sambhava nahIM rahatA hai| ataH vaha zayyAtara kI nizrA ke binA bhI upAzraya meM
raha sakatA hai / yadi cora yA hiMsaka jIvoM kA yA anya koI upadrava ho to sAdhu
bhI kabhI zayyAtara se surakSA kA AzvAsana prApta karake Thahara sakatA hai|
gRhastha-yukta upAzraya meM rahane kA vidhi-niSedha 25. no kappai niggaMdhANa vA
niggaMthINa vA sAgArie uvassae vatthae / 26. no kappai niggaMthANaM itthi-
sAgArie uvassae vatthae / 27. kappai niggaMthANaM purisa-sAgArie uvassae vtthe|
28. no kappai niggaMthoNaM purisa-sAgArie uvassae vatthae / 29. kappai
niggaMthINaM isthi-sAgArie uvassae vatthae / 25. nirgranthoM aura nirgranthiyoM
ko sAgArika (gRhastha ke nivAsa vAle) upAzraya meM rahanA nahIM kalpatA hai| 26.
nigraMnthoM ko strI-sAgArika (kevala striyoM ke nivAsa vAle) upAzraya meM rahanA
nahIM kalpatA hai| 27. nigranthoM ko puruSa-sAgArika (kevala puruSoM ke nivAsa
vAle) upAzraya meM rahanA kalpatA hai| 28. nirgranthiyoM ko puruSa-sAgArika
(kevala puruSoM ke nivAsa vAle) upAzraya meM rahanA nahIM kalpatA hai| 29.
nirgranthiyoM ko strI-sAgArika (kevala striyoM ke nivAsa vAle) upAzraya meM
rahanA kalpatA hai| _ vivecana-sAgArika upAzraya do prakAra ke hote haiM-dravya-
sAgArika aura bhAva-sAgArika / jisa upAzraya meM strI puruSa rahate hoM athavA
strI-puruSoM ke rUpa bhitti Adi para citrita hoM, kASTha, pASANAdikI mUrtiyAM
strI-puruSAdi kI hoM, unake zRgAra ke sAdhana vastra, AbhUSaNa, gandha, mAlA,
alaMkAra Adi rakhe hoM, jahAM para bhojana-pAna kI sAmagrI rakhI huI ho, gIta,
nRtya, nATaka Adi hote hoM, yA vINA, bAMsurI, mRdaMgAdi bAje bajate hoM, vaha
upAzraya svasthAna meM dravya-sAgArika hai aura parasthAna meM bhAva-sAgArika
hai|

Page #94 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[140] The meaning of *svasthan* and *parasthan* in the *V·πõhatkalpas≈´tra* is
this: If in that *upa≈õraya* there are pictures, statues of men, and songs,
dances, plays, etc. of men, then it is *dravya-sƒÅgƒÅrika* for the *sƒÅdhu*s and
*bhƒÅva-sƒÅgƒÅrika* for the *sƒÅdhvƒ´*s. Similarly, if in that *upa≈õraya* there are
pictures, statues, etc. of women, and their songs, dances, plays, etc., then
that *upa≈õraya* is *bhƒÅva-sƒÅgƒÅrika* for men and *dravya-sƒÅgƒÅrika* for women.
*SƒÅdhu*s and *sƒÅdhvƒ´*s are not fit to stay in both these types of (*dravya-
sƒÅgƒÅrika* and *bhƒÅva-sƒÅgƒÅrika*) *upa≈õraya*s. Although the first s≈´tra clearly
prohibits staying in *dravya* and *bhƒÅva-sƒÅgƒÅrika* *upa≈õraya*s, this is the
*utsargamƒÅrga*. But if while wandering, *sƒÅdhu*s and *sƒÅdhvƒ´*s do not find a
faultless *upa≈õraya* free from the above defects, then in such a situation, a
*sƒÅdhu* or *sƒÅdhvƒ´* can stay in a *dravya-sƒÅgƒÅrika* *upa≈õraya*. But they cannot
stay in a *bhƒÅva-sƒÅgƒÅrika* *upa≈õraya*, as stated in the *s≈´tra-catur·π£ka*. In
summary, according to the *utsargamƒÅrga*, *sƒÅdhu*s and *sƒÅdhvƒ´*s should not stay
in *dravya* and *bhƒÅva-sƒÅgƒÅrika* *upa≈õraya*s, but according to the
*apvƒÅdamƒÅrga*, they can stay in a *dravya-sƒÅgƒÅrika* *upa≈õraya*.  **The rule and
prohibition of staying in a *pratibaddha-≈õayyƒÅ***  30. *No kappƒÅi nigganthƒÅ·πáam
pa·∏çibaddha-sejjƒÅe vatthae* / 31. *KappƒÅi nigganthƒ´·πáam pa·∏çibaddha-sejjƒÅe vatthae*
/ 30. It is not proper for *nirgrantha*s to stay in a *pratibaddha-≈õayyƒÅ* / 31.
It is proper for *nirgranthi*s to stay in a *pratibaddha-≈õayyƒÅ*.
**Discussion:**  *Pratibaddha* *upa≈õraya* is of two types: 1. *dravya-
pratibaddha*, 2. *bhƒÅva-pratibaddha*.  1. The *upa≈õraya* where the roof support,
i.e., the roof beams, are connected to the house of a householder, is called a
*dravya-pratibaddha* *upa≈õraya*.  2. *BhƒÅva-pratibaddha* *upa≈õraya* is of four
types:  1. Where the place for urination, etc. of women and *sƒÅdhu*s is the
same. 2. Where the place for sitting of women and *sƒÅdhu*s is the same. 3. Where
the form of a woman is easily visible. 4. Where, upon sitting, words related to
women's language, ornaments, and sexual intercourse are heard.  In a *dravya-
pratibaddha* *upa≈õraya*, the sound of *svƒÅdhyƒÅya*, etc. can be a hindrance to
the householder, and the sound of the householder's activities can be a
hindrance to the *sƒÅdhu*. There can also be interference in each other's
activities. *BhƒÅva-pratibaddha* *upa≈õraya* can be a hindrance to the feelings of
restraint and celibacy. Therefore, it is not proper to stay in a *dravya-bhƒÅva-
pratibaddha-≈õayyƒÅ*.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
140] [vRhatkalpasUtra svasthAna aura parasthAna kA artha yaha hai ki yadi usa
upAzraya meM puruSoM ke citra, matiyAM hoM aura puruSoM ke hI gIta, nRtya,
nATakAdi hote hoM to vaha sAdhunoM ke lie dravya-sAgArika hai aura sAdhviyoM ke
lie bhAva-sAgArika hai| isI prakAra jisa upAzraya meM striyoM ke citra, mUrti
Adi hoM aura unake gIta, nRtya, nATakAdi hote hoM to vaha upAzraya puruSoM ke
lie bhAva-sAgArika hai aura striyoM ke lie dravya-sAgArika hai| sAdhu aura
sAdhviyoM ko ina donoM hI prakAra ke (dravya-sAgArika aura bhAva-sAgArika)
upAzrayoM meM rahanA yogya nahIM hai| yadyapi prathama sUtra meM dravya aura
bhAvasAgArika upAzrayoM meM rahane kA jo spaSTa niSedha kiyA hai vaha
utsargamArga hai, kintu vicarate hue sAdhu-sAdhviyoM ko ukta doSa-rahita nirdoSa
upAzraya Thaharane ko na mile to aisI dazA meM dravya-sAgArika upAzraya meM
sAdhu yA sAdhvI Thahara sakate haiN| kintu bhAvasAgArika upAzraya meM nahIM
Thahara sakate, yaha sUtracatuSka meM batAyA gayA hai| sArAMza yaha hai ki
utsargamArga se sAdhu-sAdhvI ko dravya evaM bhAvasAgArika upAzraya meM nahIM
ThaharanA cAhiye kintu apavAdamArga se dravya-sAgArika upAzraya meM Thahara
sakate haiN| pratibaddhazayyA meM Thaharane kA vidhi-niSedha 30. no kappai
niggaMthANaM paDibaddha-sejjAe vatthae / 31. kappai niggaMthINaM paDibaddha-
sejjAe vatthae / 30. nirgranthoM ko pratibaddhazayyA meM rahanA nahIM kalpatA
hai / 31. nirgranthiyoM ko pratibaddhazayyA meM rahanA kalpatA hai| vivecana-
pratibaddha upAzraya do prakAra kA hotA hai-1. dravya-pratibaddha, 2. bhAva-
pratibaddha 1. jisa upAzraya meM chata ke baladhAraNa arthAt chata ke pATa
gRhastha ke ghara se sambaddha hoM, use dravyapratibaddha upAzraya kahA gayA
hai| 2. bhAvapratibaddha upAzraya cAra prakAra kA hotA hai 1. jahAM para strI
aura sAdhuoM ke mUtrAdi karane kA sthAna eka hI ho / 2. jahAM strI evaM sAdhuoM
ke baiThane kA sthAna eka hI ho|| 3. jahAM para sahaja hI strI kA rUpa dikhAI
detA ho| 4. jahAM para baiThane se strI ke bhASA, prAbhUSaNa evaM maithuna
sambandhI zabda sunAI dete hoN| dravya-pratibaddha upAzraya meM svAdhyAya Adi kI
dhvani gRhastha ko evaM gRhastha ke kAryoM kI dhvani sAdhu ko bAdhaka ho sakatI
hai tathA eka dUsare ke kAryoM meM vyAghAta bhI ho sakatA hai| bhAva-pratibaddha
upAzraya saMyama evaM brahmacarya ke bhAvoM meM bAdhaka bana sakatA hai| ataH
dravya-bhAvapratibaddhazayyA meM ThaharanA yogya nahIM hai /

Page #95 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[First Objective] [141 Although the said faults are common to both Sadhus and
Sadhvis, the provision made in the Sutra for Sadhvis is an exception. Because
they have to stay in the shelter of the householder, which is not bound. If the
unbound shelter is not available, it becomes necessary for them to stay in a
bound place. At such a time, they should know from the commentary how to live
with wisdom. In special circumstances, a Sadhu may also have to stay in such a
place, the method of which is also described in the commentary. According to the
Utsarga method, both Sadhus and Sadhvis should stay only in an unbound bed. The
method and prohibition of staying in a shelter with a bound path is 32. No Kappi
Nigganthanam Gahavaikulass Majjhamshenam Gantu Vatthae / 33. Kappi Nigganthinam
Gahavaikulass Masammajhenam Gantu Vatthae / 32. It is not proper for the
Nirgranthas to stay in the shelter where the path is through the middle of the
house. 33. It is proper for the Nirgranthis to stay in the shelter where the
path is through the middle of the house. / Discussion - If there is a shelter in
a place where one has to go through the middle of the householder's house and
there is no other way, then the Sadhus should not stay in such a shelter,
because going through the middle of the householder's house, seeing his wife,
sister, etc., hearing words, and seeing many kinds of activities of the
householder, the mind of the Sadhus may be disturbed. Or the women living in the
house may be disturbed. Nevertheless, the provision in the Sutra for the Sadhvis
to stay means that if a faultless unbound shelter is not available, then the
Sadhvis can stay in such a shelter. The previous two Sutras have stated the
bound place. In the present two Sutras, it has been stated that even though the
place is unbound, its path can be bound. It is very important for the Sadhu to
avoid such bound places, and it is not so important for the Sadhvi. The main
purpose of all these rules and prohibitions in the Sutras is to protect
celibacy. The provision for calming oneself 34. Bhikshu Ya Ahigaranam Katu, Tam
Ahigaranam Vinosavitt, Viosaviyapahude 1. Icchae Paro Pradhaaejja, Icchae Paro
No Pradhaaejja. 2. Icchae Paro Abbhutthajja, Icchae Paro No Abbhuthejj. 3.
Icchae Paro Vandejj, Icchae Paro No Vandejj. 4. Icchae Paro Sambhujejj, Icchae
Paro No Sambhujejj.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
prathama uddezaka] [141 yadyapi ukta doSa sAdhu-sAdhvI donoM ke liye samAna
haiM, phira bhI sAdhvI ke liye sUtra meM jo vidhAna kiyA hai vaha apavAda
svarUpa hai| kyoMki unheM gRhastha kI nizrAyukta upAzraya meM hI ThaharanA hotA
hai| nizrAyukta upAzraya kabhI apratibaddha na mile to pratibaddha sthAna meM
ThaharanA unako Avazyaka ho jAtA hai| aise samaya meM unheM kisa viveka se
rahanA cAhie, isakI vistRta jAnakArI bhASya se karanI caahiye| vizeSa paristhiti
meM kadAcit sAdhu ko bhI aise sthAna meM ThaharanA par3a jAe to usakI vidhi bhI
bhASya meM batAI gaI hai| utsarga vidhi se to sAdha-sAdhvI ko apratibaddha zayyA
meM hI ThaharanA caahiye| pratibaddha mArga vAle upAzraya meM Thaharane kA
vidhi-niSedha 32. no kappai niggaMthANaM gAhAvai-kulassa majjhamazeNaM gaMtu
vatthae / 33. kappai niggaMthINaM gAhAvai-kulassa masaMmajjheNaM gaMtu vatthae /
32. gRha ke madhya meM hokara jisa upAzraya meM jAne-mAne kA mArga ho usa
upAzraya meM nirgranthoM ko rahanA nahIM kalpatA hai| 33. gRha ke madhya meM
hokara jisa upAzraya meM jAne-mAne kA mArga ho usa upAzraya meM nirgranthiyoM ko
rahanA kalpatA hai / vivecana- yadi koI upAzraya aise sthAna para ho jahAM ki
gahastha ke ghara ke bIcobIca hokara jAnA-pAnA par3e aura anya mArga nahIM ho,
aise upAzraya meM sAdhuoM ko nahIM ThaharanA cAhie, kyoMki gRhastha ke ghara ke
bIca meM hokara jAne-mAne para usakI strI, bahina Adi ke rUpa dekhane, zabda
sunane evaM gRhasthI ke aneka prakAra ke kAryakalApoM ke dekhane se sAdhuoM kA
citta vikSobha ko prApta ho sakatA hai| athavA ghara meM rahane vAlI striyAM
kSobha ko prApta ho sakatI haiN| phira bhI sAdhviyoM ko Thaharane kA jo vidhAna
sUtra meM hai, usakA abhiprAya yaha hai ki nirdoSa nizrA yukta upAzraya na mile
to aise upAzraya meM sAdhviyAM Thahara sakatI haiN| pUrva sUtradvaya meM
pratibaddha sthAna kA kathana kiyA hai| prastuta sUtradvaya meM sthAna
apratibaddha hote hue bhI usakA mArga pratibaddha ho sakatA hai yaha batAyA gayA
hai| sAdhu ko aise pratibaddha sthAnoM kA varjana karanA atyanta Avazyaka hai
aura sAdhvI ko itanA Avazyaka nahIM hai| ina sabhI sUtroM ke vidhiniSedhoM meM
brahmacarya kI rakSA kA hetu hI pramukha hai| svayaM ko upazAnta karane kA
vidhAna 34. bhikSu ya ahigaraNaM kaTu, taM ahigaraNaM vinosavittA,
viosaviyapAhuDe 1. icchAe paro prADhAejjA, icchAe paro No praaddhaaejjaa| 2.
icchAe paro abbhuTThajjA, icchAe paro No abbhuThejjA / 3. icchAe paro vandejjA,
icchAe paro no vndejjaa| 4. icchAe paro saMbhujejjA, icchAe paro no sNbhujejjaa|

Page #96 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[142] [Brihatkalpa Sutra 5. If one desires, one should associate with another,
if one does not desire, one should not associate with another. 6. If one
desires, one should rise in respect, if one does not desire, one should not rise
in respect. If one rises in respect, there is the practice of restraint, if one
does not rise in respect, there is no practice of restraint; therefore, one
should rise in respect oneself. P. - Why is this said, Venerable One? A. -
"Uvasama is the essence of the Shraman life." 34. When a monk has a conflict
with someone, he should pacify the conflict and become completely free from
conflict himself. 1. If he desires, he should show respect to the monk with whom
he had the conflict, if he does not desire, he should not show respect. 2. If he
desires, he should rise in respect of him, if he does not desire, he should not
rise in respect. 3. If he desires, he should offer salutations, if he does not
desire, he should not offer salutations. 4. If he desires, he should eat with
him, if he does not desire, he should not eat with him. 5. If he desires, he
should stay with him, if he does not desire, he should not stay with him. 6. If
he desires, he should be pacified, if he does not desire, he should not be
pacified. If one is pacified, there is the practice of restraint, if one is not
pacified, there is no practice of restraint. Therefore, one should pacify
oneself. P. - Venerable One! Why is this said? A. - (O disciple) Uvasama is the
essence of the Shraman life. Although a monk accepts restraint for self-
cultivation and constantly engages in practices of restraint such as study,
meditation, etc. with unwavering devotion, there are many causes of distraction
and passions that remain in the life of a restrained person, such as the body,
food, disciples, teachers, clothes, bowls, bedding, etc. The nature, decay, and
discernment of each person are also different. The pacification of passions such
as anger and pride also varies from person to person. Even though they are
renunciants, there is variation in their attachment to possessions and
territories (in the absence of attachment). Not everyone achieves equal success
in the development of qualities such as humility, simplicity, forgiveness, and
peace. Everyone's peace is not equal in disciplining and following discipline.
The discernment of language use also varies from person to person. Due to these
and other reasons, in the incomplete state of practice, due to distraction and
arising, monks may sometimes experience passions or afflictions among
themselves.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
142] [vRhatkalpasUtra 5. icchAe paro saMvasejjA, icchAe paro no sNbsejjaa| 6.
icchAe paro uvasamejjA, icchAe paro no ukhsmejjaa| jo uvasamai tassa asthi
ArAhaNA, jo na uvasamai tassa nasthi ArAhaNA; tamhA appaNA ceva uvsmiyvN| pa0-se
kimAhu bhaMte ! u."uvasamasAraM khu sAmaNNaM / " 34. bhikSu kisI ke sAtha kalaha
ho jAne para usa kalaha ko upazAnta karake svayaM sarvathA kalaharahita ho jAe /
jisake sAtha kalaha huA hai 1. vaha bhikSu icchA ho to Adara kare, icchA na ho
to aAdara na kare / 2. vaha icchA ho to usake sanmAna meM uThe, icchA na ho to
na utthe| 3. vaha icchA ho to vandanA kare, icchA na ho to vandanA na kare / 4.
vaha icchA ho to usake sAtha bhojana kare, icchA na ho to na kare / 5. vaha
icchA ho to usake sAtha rahe, icchA na ho to na rhe| 6. vaha icchA ho to
upazAnta ho, icchA na ho to upazAnta na ho| jo upazAnta hotA hai usake saMyama
kI ArAdhanA hotI hai| jo upazAnta nahIM hotA hai usake saMyama kI ArAdhanA nahIM
hotI hai / isalie apane Apako to upazAnta kara hI lenA caahie| pra0-bhante !
aisA kyoM kahA? u0--(he ziSya) upazama hI zramaNa-jIvana kA sAra hai|
vivecanayadyapi bhikSu aAtmasAdhanA ke liye saMyama svIkAra kara pratikSaNa
svAdhyAya, dhyAna Adi saMyama-kriyAyoM meM apramatta bhAva se vicaraNa karatA
hai tathApi zarIra, AhAra, ziSya, guru, vastra, pAtra, zayyA-saMstAraka Adi kaI
pramAda evaM kaSAya ke nimitta saMyamI jIvana meM rahate haiN| pratyeka vyakti
kA svabhAva, kSayopazama, viveka bhI bhinna-bhinna hotA hai| krodha mAna Adi
kaSAyoM kI upazAnti bhI sabhI kI bhinna-bhinna hotI hai| parigrahatyAgI hote hue
bhI dravyoM evaM kSetroM ke prati mamatva ke prabhAva meM (amamatva bhAva meM)
bhinnatA rahatI hai| vinaya, saralatA, kSamA, zAnti prAdi guNoM ke vikAsa meM
sabhI ko eka samAna saphalatA nahIM mila pAtI hai| anuzAsana karane meM evaM
anuzAsana pAlane meM bhI sabhI kI zAnti barAbara nahIM rahatI hai| bhASA-prayoga
kA viveka bhI pratyeka kA bhinna-bhinna hotA hai| ityAdi kAraNoM se sAdhanA kI
apUrNa avasthA meM pramAdavaza udayabhAva se bhikSutroM ke Apasa meM kabhI
kaSAya yA kleza utpanna ho sakatA hai|

Page #97 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## First Objective] [143 _ The commentator has explained some of the causes of
discord as follows: 1. For the sake of disciples, 2. For the sake of
instruments, 3. By uttering harsh words, 4. For the sake of inspiring correction
of mistakes, 5. For the sake of mutual restraint-free discussions and debates,
6. For the sake of going or not going to specific established families of faith
/ Even after discord arises, the restrained Muni's burning passions do not cause
a state of unrest for long. He recovers, performs the atonement of criticism,
and becomes pure / But the present sutra has presented a specific possibility
and provided a solution for it. If a monk, due to intense passions, does not
want to calm down voluntarily, then another monk who is calm should think that
forgiveness, peace, and calmness are self-dependent, not dependent on others.
If, even after taking appropriate measures, the other monk does not calm down
and does not bring peace in behavior, then one should not be pacified again by
any kind of behavior of that monk. Because by becoming completely calm and free
from passions oneself, one can achieve self-worship, and by remaining uncalm,
the other monk only faces condemnation, not both. Therefore, it is the Jain
injunction for the monk to become completely calm himself. A question has been
raised in this regard: If the other monk does not calm down and the said
behavior does not become pure, then why is it necessary for the one alone to
become calm? In response, it has been explained that calming the passions is the
main goal of restraint. Only through this can one attain the state of being free
from passions / Remaining calm in every situation is the essence of upholding
and following restraint / Therefore, one should consider it absolutely necessary
to calm oneself completely for the sake of one's own restraint.   ## Rules
regarding Conduct 35. No kappƒÅi niggandhƒÅ·πá vƒÅ nigganth≈ç·πá vƒÅ vƒÅsa-vƒÅsa-su cƒÅrae /
36. KappƒÅi niggandhƒÅ·πá vƒÅ nigganth≈ç·πá vƒÅ hemanta-gimmhƒÅsa cƒÅrae. 35. It is not
appropriate for the Nirgranthas and Nirgranthis to wander during the rainy
season / 36. It is appropriate for the Nirgranthas and Nirgranthis to wander
during the winter and summer seasons /   ## Discussion - During the rainy
season, the land is covered everywhere with green grass, shoots, etc., due to
the rain / The earth is filled with small animals living in the grass and
earthworms, earthworms, etc., and other small and large creatures, so even with
careful wandering, it is possible to harm them / In addition, due to the rain,
the rivers and streams on the way are flowing with water, so it may be difficult
for the monks and nuns to cross them. During the wandering period, there is also
a possibility of their clothes and other belongings getting wet due to the rain,
which can lead to harm to the body.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
prathama uddezaka] [143 _ bhASyakAra ne kalaha utpatti ke kucha nimittakAraNa
isa prakAra batAye haiM 1. ziSyoM ke liye, 2. upakaraNoM ke liye, 3. kaTu vacana
ke uccAraNa se, 4. bhUla sudhArane ko preraNA karane ke nimitta se, 5. paraspara
saMyamanirapekSa carcA-vArtA evaM vikathAoM ke nimitta se, 6. zraddhAsampanna
viziSTa sthApanA kuloM meM gocarI karane yA nahIM karane ke nimitta se / kalaha
utpanna hone ke bAda bhI saMyamazIla muni ke saMjvalana kaSAya ke kAraNa azAnta
avasthA adhika samaya nahIM rahatI hai| vaha sambhala kara AlocanA prAyazcitta
kara zuddha ho jAtA hai / kintu prastuta sUtra meM eka viziSTa sambhAvanA
batAkara usakA samAdhAna kiyA gayA hai kikabhI koI bhikSu tIvra kaSAyodaya meM
Akara svecchAvaza upazAnta na honA cAhe taba dUsare upazAnta hone vAle bhikSu ko
yaha socanA cAhiye ki kSamApaNA, zAnti, upazAnti Atmanirbhara hai, paravaza
nhiiN| yadi yogya upAya karane para bhI dUsarA upazAnta na ho aura vyavahAra meM
zAnti bhI na lAve to usake kisI bhI prakAra ke vyavahAra se punaH prazAnta nahIM
honA caahiye| kyoMki svayaM ke pUrNa upazAnta evaM kaSAyarahita ho jAne se
svayaM kI ArAdhanA ho sakatI hai aura dUsare ke anupazAnta rahane para usakI hI
virAdhanA hotI hai, donoM kI nhiiN| ataH bhikSu ke lie yahI jinAjJA hai ki vaha
svayaM pUrNa upazAnta ho jaae| isa viSaya meM prazna upasthita kiyA gayA hai ki
yadi anya bhikSu upazAnta na hove aura ukta vyavahAra bhI zuddha na kare to
akele ko upazAnta honA kyoM Avazyaka hai ? isake uttara meM samajhAyA gayA hai
ki kaSAyoM ko upazAnti karanA yahI saMyama kA mukhya lakSya hai| isase hI
vItarAgabhAva kI prApti ho sakatI hai / pratyeka sthiti meM zAnta rahanA yahI
saMyamadhAraNa karane kA evaM pAlana karane kA sAra hai / ataH apane saMyama kI
dhArAdhanA ke liye svayaM ko sarvathA upazAMta honA atyaMta Avazyaka samajhanA
caahie| vihAra sambandhI vidhi-niSedha 35. no kappai niggaMdhANa vA niggaMthoNa
vA vAsAvAsAsu cArae / 36. kappai niggaMthANa vA niggaMyoNa vA hemanta-gimhAsa
caare| 35. nirgranthoM aura nirganthiyoM ko varSAvAsa meM vihAra karanA nahIM
kalpatA hai / 36. nirgranthoM aura nirgranthiyoM ko hemanta aura grISma Rtu meM
vihAra karanA kalpatA hai / vivecana-varSAkAla meM pAnI barasane se bhUmi
sarvatra harita tRNAMkurAdi se vyApta ho jAtI hai / ghAsa meM rahane vAle choTe
jantu evaM bhUmi meM rahanevAle keMcuA, gijAI Adi jIvoM se evaM anya bhI choTe-
bar3e trasajIvoM se pRthvI vyApta ho jAtI hai, ataH sAvadhAnIpUrvaka vihAra
karane para bhI unakI virAdhanA sambhava hai / isake atirikta pAnI ke barasane
se mArga meM par3ane vAle nadI-nAle bhI jala-pUra se pravAhita rahate haiM, ata:
sAdhu-sAdhviyoM ko unake pAra karane meM bAdhA ho sakatI hai| vihArakAla meM
pAnI barasane se unake vastra evaM anya upadhi ke bhIgane kI bhI sambhAvanA
rahatI hai, jisase apkAya kI

Page #98 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Translation:  **[144]** The **Brihatkalpa Sutra** clearly states that during
the rainy season, for four months, ascetics should stay in one place. This is
the first rule. The second rule states that after the **Chaturmas**, they should
wander for a month. Wandering helps in the advancement of self-control,
spreading the Dharma, achieving **Brahmacharya Samadhi**, improving health, and
following the **Jina's** commands. It is forbidden to stay in the same place
where **Chaturmas** or **Masakalp** was spent, even if one is healthy, or to
stay there for twice the time without wandering elsewhere. There is also a
**Prayaschitta** (penance) for this. Therefore, it is necessary to wander
according to one's strength during the summer and winter seasons.  **[37]** It
is not appropriate for **Nirgranthas** and **Nirgranthis** to travel quickly to
and from a **Vairaajya** (hostile kingdom) or a **Viruddha Rajya** (enemy
kingdom). Any **Nirgrantha** or **Nirgranthi** who travels quickly to and from a
**Vairaajya** or **Viruddha Rajya**, or approves of those who do so, is guilty
of violating the commands of both the **Tirthankara** and the king, and is
liable for the **Anudghatik Chaturmasik Prayaschitta** (penance).  The
**Vivechananiyuktikara** and the **Tikaakara** have given various
interpretations of the term "**Rajya**":  1. A kingdom where there is a long-
standing feud between the people. 2. Two kingdoms where a feud has arisen. 3. A
kingdom whose king and people are involved in burning villages and towns of
another kingdom. 4. A kingdom where the ministers, generals, and other important
people are discontented with the king and are plotting to overthrow him. 5. A
kingdom without a king, where the king has died or been removed. This is called
a **Vairaajya**.  **Viruddha Rajya** refers to kingdoms where travel between
them is prohibited.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
144] [bRhatkalpasUtra virAdhanA sunizcita hai, ataH varSAkAla meM cAra mAsa taka
eka sthAna para hI sAdhu-sAdhviyoM ke rahane kA vidhAna prathama sUtra meM kiyA
gayA hai| dvitIya sUtra meM cAturmAsa pazcAt pATha mAsa taka vicaraNa karane kA
kathana hai| vicaraNa karane se saMyama ko unnati, dharmaprabhAvanA,
brahmacaryasamAdhi evaM svAsthyalAbha hotA hai tathA jinAjJA kA pAlana hotA hai|
jisa kSetra meM cAturmAsa yA mAsakalpa vyatIta kiyA ho, vahAM usake bAda svastha
avasthA meM bhI rahanA yA dugunA samaya anyatra vicaraNa kiye binA pAkara rahanA
niSiddha hai aura usakA prAyazcittavidhAna bhI hai| ataH grISma evaM hemanta Rtu
meM zakti ke anusAra vicaraNa karanA Avazyaka hai / vairAjya-viruddharAjya meM
bAraMbAra gamanAgamana kA niSedha 37. no kappai niggaMthANa vA niragaMthINa vA
verajja-viruddharajjasi sajja gamaNaM, sajja prAgamaNaM, sajjaM gamaNAgamaNaM
karittae / jo khalu niggaMtho vA niggaMthI vA verajja-viruddharajjaMsi sajjaM
gamaNaM, sajja prAgamaNaM sajja gamaNAgamaNaM karei, kareMtaM vA sAijjai, se
duhano vi aikkamamANe Avajjai cAummAsiyaM parihAraTThANaM aNugdhAiyaM / 37.
nirgranthoM aura nirgranthiyoM ko vairAjya aura virodhI rAjya meM zIghra jAnA,
zIghra AnA, aura zIghra jAnA-pAnA nahIM kalpatA hai| jo nirgrantha yA nigranthI
vairAjya aura virodhI rAjya meM zIghra jAnA, zIghra pAnA aura zIghra jAnA-mAnA
karate haiM tathA zIghra jAnA-pAnA karane vAloM kA anumodana karate haiM, ve
donoM (tIrthaMkara aura rAjA) kI AjJA kA atikramaNa karate hue anudghAtika
cAturmAsika prAyazcittasthAna ke pAtra hote haiN| vivecananiyuktikAra ne aura
tadanusAra TIkAkAra ne rAjya ke aneka vyutpattiparaka artha kiye haiM- 1. jisa
rAjya meM rahane vAle logoM meM pUrva-puruSa-paramparAgata vaira cala rahA ho|
2. jina do rAjyoM meM vaira utpanna ho gayA ho| 3. dUsare rAjya ke grAma-
nagarAdi ko jalAne vAle jahAM ke rAjA loga hoN| 4. jahAM ke maMtrI senApati Adi
pradhAna puruSa rAjA se virakta ho rahe hoM, use padacyuta karane ke SaDyantra
meM saMlagna hoN| 5. jahAM kA rAjA mara gayA ho yA haTA diyA gayA ho aise
arAjaka rAjya ko 'vairAjya' kahate haiN| jahAM para do rAjAoM ke rAjya meM
paraspara gamanAgamana pratiSiddha ho, aise rAjyoM ko 'viruddharAjya' kahate
haiN|

Page #99 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[First Objective] [145] This text prohibits monks and nuns from traveling to and
from hostile kingdoms, as frequent travel in such kingdoms may lead to officials
perceiving them as thieves, spies, or conspirators, resulting in various forms
of suffering like death or imprisonment. Therefore, a monk who travels to and
from such "hostile kingdoms" not only violates the king's authority but also
disregards the wisdom of the Jinas. Consequently, they become liable for the
"Chaturmasik Anudghatik" atonement.  The "Niyuktikara Sutra" explains the terms
"Gaman," "Pagaman," and "Gamana-gaman" by stating that if travel to such
"hostile kingdoms" is necessary for specific reasons, one should first seek
permission from the border guard ("Parakshak"). They should inform the guard
about their purpose and request permission to enter the kingdom. If the guard
denies permission, they should send a message to the city's chief merchant
("Nagar-Seth") seeking permission. If the merchant also denies permission, they
should send a message to the commander-in-chief ("Senapati"). If the commander-
in-chief denies permission, they should send a message to the minister. Finally,
if the minister denies permission, they should send a message to the king,
stating their reason for entering the kingdom and requesting permission. They
should also request the king to instruct the border guards to allow their entry.
The same procedure should be followed when leaving the kingdom.  The
"Niyuktikara" has outlined specific reasons for travel to and from hostile
kingdoms:  1. To initiate parents who are ready to take "Diksha" (renunciation).
2. To console those who are grieving. 3. For a monk who desires "Bhaktapan
Pratyakhyan" (death by meditation) to seek guidance from their guru or
"Geetarth." 4. For the treatment of a sick monk. 5. To pacify a monk who is
angry. 6. To engage in scriptural debate ("Shastrarth") when invited by
disputants. 7. To rescue an abducted "Pracharaya" (teacher).  In addition to
these reasons, monks can travel to and from hostile kingdoms after obtaining
permission if other similar circumstances arise.  The term "Sajj" in the sutra,
which prohibits frequent travel, implies that repeated requests for permission
may irritate or raise suspicion in the king or his officials. While occasional
travel for essential purposes may be acceptable, frequent travel can be
problematic. If multiple tasks need to be accomplished, one should carefully
plan and complete them in a single trip. Ideally, it is best to avoid traveling
to such kingdoms or their capitals altogether. This is the path of
"Utsargamarga" (renunciation). If travel is unavoidable, it should not be
frequent. This is the essence of the sutra.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
prathama uddezaka] [145 isa prakAra ke vairAjya aura viruddha rAjya meM sAdhu-
sAdhviyoM ko vicarane kA evaM kAryavazAt jAne-Ane kA niSedha kiyA hai, kyoMki
aise rAjyoM meM jaldI-jaldI Ane-jAne se adhikArI loga sAdhu ko cora, guptacara
yA SaDyantrakArI jAnakara vadha, bandhana Adi nAnA prakAra ke duHkha de sakate
haiM / ataH aise 'vairAjya' aura 'viruddharAjya' meM gamanAgamana karane vAlA
sAdhu rAjA kI maryAdA kA ullaMghana to karatA hI hai, sAtha hI vaha jinezvara kI
prAjJA kA bhI ullaMghana karatA hai aura isI kAraNa vaha cAturmAsika anudghAtika
prAyazcitta kA pAtra hotA hai| niyuktikAra sUtra ke 'gamana', 'pAgamana' aura
'gamanAgamana' ina aMzoM kI vyAkhyA karate hue kahate haiM ki vizeSa kAraNoM se
ukta prakAra ke 'vairAjya' 'viruddha rAjya' meM jAnA-mAnA bhI par3e to pahale
sImAvartI 'pArakSaka' se pUche ki hama amuka kArya se Apake rAjya ke bhItara
jAnA cAhate haiM, ataH jAne kI svIkRti diijie| yadi vaha svIkRti dene meM apanI
asamarthatA batalAve to usa rAjya ke nagara-seTha ke pAsa saMdeza bhejakara
svIkRti maMgAve / usake bhI asamarthatA prakaTa karane para senApati se, usake
bhI asAmarthya prakaTa karane para maMtrI se, usake bhI asAmarthya batAne para
rAjA ke pAsa saMdeza bheje ki-"hama amuka kAraNa-vizeSa se Apake rAjya meM
praveza karanA cAhate haiM, ata: jAne kI svIkRti dIjie aura 'prArakSaka janoM ko
AjJA dIjie ki ve hameM rAjya meM praveza karane deN|" isI prakAra pAte samaya
bhI ukta krama se hI svIkRti lekara vApasa pAnA cAhie / niyuktikAra ne
gamanAgamana ke vizeSa kAraNa isa prakAra batAye haiM 1. yadi kisI sAdhu ke
mAtA-pitA dIkSA ke lie udyata hoM to unako dIkSA dene ke lie| 2. yadi zoka se
vihvala hoM to unako sAntvanA dene ke lie| 3. bhaktapAna pratyAkhyAna
(samAdhimaraNa) kA icchuka sAdhu apane guru yA gItArtha ke pAsa AlocanA ke lie|
4. rogI sAdhu kI vaiyAvRtya ke lie, 5. apane para kruddha sAdhu ko upazAnta
karane ke lie, 6. vAdiyoM dvArA zAstrArtha ke lie AhvAna karane para zAsana-
prabhAvanA ke lie, 7. prAcArya kA apaharaNa kara lie jAne para unako mukta
karAne ke lie tathA isI prakAra ke anya kAraNa upasthita hone para ukta prakAra
se svIkRti lekara sAdhu 'vairAjya' evaM 'viruddharAjya' meM jA A sakate haiN|
sUtra meM "sajja" zabda ke dvArA jo zIghra-zIghra jAne kA niSedha kiyA gayA hai,
usakA tAtparya yaha hai ki punaH-punaH isa prakAra prAjJA lekara jAne para rAjA
yA rAjakarmacArI ruSTa yA zaMkita ho sakate haiM / kyoMki Avazyaka kArya se eka-
do bAra jAnA to kSamya ho sakatA hai kintu bArambAra jAnA Apattijanaka hotA hai|
aise samaya meM aneka kArya karane Avazyaka hoM to pUrNa vicAra kara eka hI bAra
meM una sabhI kAryoM ko sampanna kara lene kA viveka rakhanA cAhiye aura
sambhava ho to usa dizA, rAjya yA rAjadhAnI meM jAnA hI nahIM cAhiye, yahI
utsargamArga hai| apavAda se jAnA par3e to bArambAra nahIM jAnA cAhiye, yaha isa
sUtra kA tAtparya hai|

Page #100 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[146] [Brihatkalpasutra Gochari etc. in the method of accepting invited clothes
etc. 38. If a Niggantha is invited to a Pindavayapadiya by a householder, he
should be invited with a cloth, a vessel, a blanket, or a foot-cloth. The
householder should accept the invitation and place the cloth, vessel, blanket,
or foot-cloth at the feet of the Acharya. Then, he should ask the Acharya's
permission and use it. 39. If a Niggantha is invited to a Viyarabhummi or a
Biharabhummi by a householder, he should be invited with a cloth, a vessel, a
blanket, or a foot-cloth. The householder should accept the invitation and place
the cloth, vessel, blanket, or foot-cloth at the feet of the Acharya. Then, he
should ask the Acharya's permission and use it. 40. If a Niggantha is invited to
a Pindavayapadiya by a householder, he should be invited with a cloth, a vessel,
a blanket, or a foot-cloth. The householder should accept the invitation and
place the cloth, vessel, blanket, or foot-cloth at the feet of the Pravartini.
Then, he should ask the Pravartini's permission and use it. 41. If a Niggantha
is invited to a Viyarabhummi or a Biharabhummi by a householder, he should be
invited with a cloth, a vessel, a blanket, or a foot-cloth. The householder
should accept the invitation and place the cloth, vessel, blanket, or foot-cloth
at the feet of the Pravartini. Then, he should ask the Pravartini's permission
and use it. / 38. If a householder invites a Niggrantha to his house for food,
and the householder offers him food and drink and asks him to take the clothes,
vessels, etc. mentioned in the sutras, and the Niggrantha needs them, he should
take them saying, "If our Acharya gives permission, we will keep them, otherwise
28. Ga

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
146] [bRhatkalpasUtra gocarI Adi meM nimantrita vastra Adi ke grahaNa karane kI
vidhi 38. niggaMthaM ca NaM gAhAvaikulaM piMDavAyapaDiyAe aNupaviLaM kei
vattheNa vA, paDiggaheNa vA, kaMbaleNa vA, pAyapuMchaNeNa vA uvanimaMtejjA,
kappai se sAgArakaDaM gahAya AyariyapAyamUle ThavettA, doccapi uggahaM
aNuNNavittA parihAraM prihritte| 39. niggathaM ca Na bahiyA viyArabhUmi vA,
bihArabhUmi vA, nikvaMtaM samANaM kei vatyeNa vA, paDiggaheNa vA, kaMbaleNa vA,
pAyachaNeNa vA uvanimaMtejjA, kappai se sAgArakaDaM gahAya AyariyapAyamUle
ThavittA docca pi uggahaM aNuNNavittA parihAraM prihritte| 40. nimnathi ca NaM
gAhAvaikulaM piMDavAyapaDiyAe aNupaviTThe kei vatyeNa vA, paDiggaheNa vA,
kaMbaleNa vA, pAyapuchaNeNa vA uvanimaMtejjA, kappai se sAgArakaDaM gahAya
pavattiNIpAyamUle ThavittA, doccaM pi uggahaM aNuNNavittA parihAraM prihritte|
41. nirgathi ca NaM bahiyA viyArabhUmi vA vihArabhUmi vA NikkhaMti samANi kei
vattheNa vA, paDiggaheNa vA, kaMbaleNa vA, pAyachaNeNa vA uvanimaMtejjA, kappai
se sAgArakaDaM gahAya pavittiNi. pAyamUle ThavettA, doccaMpi uggahamaNuNNavittA
parihAraM pariharittae / 38. gahastha ke ghara meM AhAra ke lie praviSTa
nirgrantha ko yadi koI vastra, pAtra, kambala yA pAdaproMchana lene ke lie kahe
to unheM "sAkArakRta" grahaNa kara, prAcArya ke caraNoM meM rakhakara puna:
unakI prAjJA lekara use apane pAsa rakhanA aura unakA upayoga karanA kalpatA
hai| 39. vicArabhUmi (mala-mUtra visarjana-sthAna) yA vihArabhUmi
(svAdhyAyabhUmi) ke lie (upAzraya se) bAhara nikale hue nirgrantha ko yadi koI
vastra, pAtra, kambala yA pAdapoMchana lene ke lie kahe to vastrAdi ko
"sAkArakRta" grahaNa kara unheM prAcArya ke caraNoM meM rakhakara punaH unakI
AjJA lekara use apane pAsa rakhanA aura unakA upayoga karanA kalpatA hai| 40.
gRhastha ke ghara meM AhAra ke lie praviSTa nirgranthI ko yadi koI vastra,
pAtra, kambala yA pAdapoMchana lene ke lie kahe to unheM "sAkArakRta" grahaNa
kara, pravartinI ke caraNoM meM rakhakara unase punaH aAjJA lekara use apane
pAsa rakhanA aura unakA upayoga karanA kalpatA hai / 41. vicArabhUmi yA
svAdhyAya bhUmi ke lie (upAzraya se) bAhara jAtI haI nimranthI ko yadi koI
vastra, pAtra, kambala yA pAdapoMchana lene ke lie kahe to unheM "sAkArakRta"
grahaNa kara, pratinI ke caraNoM meM rakhakara pUna: AjJA lekara use apane pAsa
rakhanA aura unakA upayoga karanA kalpatA hai| vivecana-yadi AcArya se gocarI kI
anujJA lekara sAdhu bhikSArtha kisI gRhastha ke ghara meM jAve aura gRhasvAminI
bhakta-pAna dekara sUtrokta vastra, pAtrAdi lene ke lie kahe aura bhikSu ko
unakI AvazyakatA ho to yaha kahakara lenA cAhie ki "yadi hamAre AcArya prAjJA
deMge to ise rakheMge anyathA 28. gaha

Page #101 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  [First Objective]  **[147 "Your clothes, utensils, etc. will be returned to
you," by saying this, accepting something with the intention of returning it is
called "Saakaraakrut" acceptance.** If the monk accepts it without saying
"Saakaraakrut" and uses it, even if given by the householder, he is a
participant in theft and is liable for atonement. The reason for this is that
when going for Gochari, permission is only given for taking food, therefore, it
is necessary to take separate permission explicitly for clothes, etc. The monk
can only accept the items for which he has taken permission. He can take other
items only with the prior permission of the Acharya, etc., if the householder
asks him to take them or if the need is known. If he has taken permission for
clothes, etc., then it is not necessary to take them "Saakaraakrut".  **The
Sutra-pathit "Uvanimantejja" word is interpreted as "Up-samepe maagaty
nimantrayet"** - meaning, the giver should say to the monk who has come for
alms, "Please accept this cloth or utensil." Then the monk should ask him
(especially the mistress of the house) - "Whose is this cloth, etc., and what is
it like, i.e., where and why was it brought?" After getting a satisfactory
answer to these two questions, he should ask a third question - "Why is it being
given to me?" If the answer is, "You have very old clothes on your body, or your
utensils look broken, therefore, it is being given to you out of a sense of duty
or religious feeling," then he should take it "Saakaraakrut" (with the intention
of returning it). If a satisfactory answer is not received, then he should not
take it.  **The appointed person has explained the intention of asking these
three things:** the first two questions reveal the nature of the object, and the
third question reveals the giver's intentions. If the monk accepts the given
cloth, etc., without asking, and the head of the household, brother-in-law, or
other maidservant, etc., silently watches the giving and taking, then he may
have many suspicions about the giver and the receiver, such as - "There seems to
be some mutual attraction between this woman of our house and the monk, or she
has no children, therefore, she wants some mantra, tantra, or medicine from the
monk for the purpose of procreation."  Overwhelmed by such various suspicions,
he may slander, beat, etc., the woman, the monk, or both. If no one in the house
has seen or heard anything like this, and the woman who gave the item wants some
knowledge, mantra, etc., from the monk because she is childless, etc., then
after taking the given item, she may go to the Upashraya and ask - "Tell me the
remedy for the success of such and such work." Or, if the woman is a "proshita-
bhartrika" (a woman whose husband is away) or lustful, or wants to fulfill her
impure desires by going to the Upashraya, she may also say so. If she says so,
the monk should answer regarding the mantra, etc., - "It is not our practice to
use "nimitta" (mantra, etc.) for householders."

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
prathama uddezaka] [147 tumhAre ye vastra-pAtrAdi tumheM vApasa lauTA die
jAyeMge", isa prakAra se kahakara grahaNa karane ko "sAkArakRta" grahaNa karanA
kahA jAtA hai| yadi vaha sAdhu "sAkArakRta" na kahakara use grahaNa karatA hai
aura apane upayoga meM letA hai to gRhastha ke dvArA diye jAne para bhI vaha
corI kA bhAgI hotA hai aura prAyazcitta kA pAtra banatA hai| isakA kAraNa yaha
hai ki gocarI ke liye prAcAryAdi se AjJA lekara jAne para AhAra grahaNa kI hI
AjJA hotI hai, ataH vastrAdi ke liye spaSTa kaha kara alaga se AjJA lenA
Avazyaka hai| sAdhu jisa vastu kI AjJA lekara jAtA hai vahI vastu grahaNa kara
sakatA hai| anya vastu lene ke lie gRhastha dvArA kahane para yA AvazyakatA
jJAta ho jAne para AcAryAdi kI svIkRti ke prAgAra se hI le sakatA hai| yadi
vastra Adi kI AjJA lekara gayA ho to 'sAkArakRta' lenA Avazyaka nahIM hotA hai|
/ sUtra-paThita "uvanimaMtejjA" pada kI nirukti karate hue kahA gayA hai ki
"upa-samIpe mAgatya nimaMtrayet / " arthAt bhikSA ke liye Aye hue sAdhu ko dAtA
kahe ki "Apa isa vastra yA pAtrAdi ko svIkAra kreN|" taba sAdhu usase (khAsakara
gRhasvAminI se) pUche ki-'yaha vastrAdi kisakA hai aura kaisA hai arthAt kahAM
se aura kyoM lAyA gayA hai ?' _ ina do praznoM kA santoSakAraka uttara milane
para punaH tIsarA prazna kare ki"mujhe kyoM diyA jA rahA hai ?" yadi uttara mile
ki"Apake zarIra para ati jIrNa vastra hai, yA pAtrAdi TUTe-phUTe dikha rahe
haiM, ataH Apako dharmabhAvanA yA kartavya se prerita hokara diyA jA rahA hai|"
taba use "sAkArakRta" (AgAra ke sAtha) le leve / yadi santoSakAraka uttara na
mile to na leve| niyuktikAra ne ukta tInoM bAtoM ko pUchane kA abhiprAya yaha
batAyA hai ki pahale do praznoM se to usakI kalpanIyatA jJAta ho jAtI hai aura
tIsare prazna se dAtAra ke bhAva jJAta ho jAte haiN| yadi sAdhu binA pUche hI
usa diye jAne vAle vastrAdi ko grahaNa karatA hai aura ghara kA pati, devara yA
anya dAsI-dAsa Adi cupacApa diye aura liye jAne ko dekhatA hai to dene aura lene
vAle ke viSaya meM vaha aneka prakAra kI AzaMkAeM kara sakatA hai ki-"hamAre
ghara kI isa strI kA aura sAdhu kA koI pArasparika AkarSaNa pratIta hotA hai
athavA isake santAna nahIM hai, ataH yaha sAdhu se santAnotpatti ke viSaya meM
koI mantra, tantra yA bheSaja prayoga cAhatI hai / " isa prakAra kI nAnA zaMkAoM
se AkrAnta hokara vaha strI kI, sAdhu kI yA donoM kI ho nindA, mArapITa Adi kara
sakatA hai| yadi ghara ke kisI vyakti ne aisI koI bAta nahIM dekhI-sunI hai aura
dene vAlI strI santAnAdi se hIna hone ke kAraNa sAdhu se kisI vidyA, mantrAdi ko
cAhatI hai to usa dI gayI vastu ko lekara cale jAne para vaha upAzraya meM
jAkara pUcha sakatI hai ki-"mujhe amuka kArya kI siddhi kA upAya btaao|" athavA
vaha strI yadi proSitabhartRkA hai yA kAmAturA hai yA upAzraya meM jAkara apanI
dUSita bhAvanA ko pUrNa karane ke lie bhI kaha sakatI hai / usake aisA kahane
para sAdhu mantrAdi ke viSaya meM to yaha uttara de ki-"gRhasthoM ke lie nimitta
(mantrAdi) kA prayoga karanA hameM nahIM kalpatA hai|"

Page #102 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[140] If a woman expresses her desire for something, and the monk, to avoid the
faults of accepting gifts from her, says, "We are restrained, we do not want to
destroy our restraint by accepting such offerings," she may become angry and
speak ill of the monk, demand the return of the gift, or cause other
disturbances. For these reasons, it is proper for the monk to ask the three
questions, to ascertain the complete purity of the offered clothes, utensils,
etc., and to know the true intentions of the giver before accepting the gift.
Otherwise, it is not proper. The same procedure should be followed by the nun,
but here it is important to note that the attendant keeps the clothes, etc.,
brought by the nun for seven days and examines them carefully to see if they are
"enchanted" with any Vidya, Sammohana-Churna, Mantra, etc. If she finds them
innocent, she gives them to the nun who brought them, or if she does not need
them, to another nun. She also sees that the giver is not a young man, a
widower, an adulterer, or a wicked person, and that the recipient is not a young
woman or a newly initiated nun. If any of these reasons are found, the attendant
returns the gift. If there is no such reason, she gives it to another nun. The
reason for this examination is given by the author of the text as follows:
"Women are naturally impatient and easily tempted by others." Although the text
states that a nun may accept "Sakarakruta" clothes, etc., from a lay person, the
commentator explains that the proper way is for the nun not to accept clothes,
etc., from any householder herself. Whenever she needs clothes, etc., she should
ask her attendant or the Ganadhara or the Acharya. The Acharya should bring the
clothes from the householder's house and keep them for seven days. Then, after
washing them, he should give them to a monk to wear. If, after this examination,
they are found to be innocent, the attendant should take them and give them to
the nun who needs them. If, by chance, the Ganadhara or Acharya is not nearby,
the attendant should bring the clothes from the householder's house and examine
them according to the above method and give them to the nun. If, by chance,
while going to the Gochari, Vicharbhumi, or Viharbhumi, a householder invites
her to take clothes, and the nun needs them, she should take the "Sakarakruta"
clothes and bring them to the attendant, who should examine them and give them
to the nun. This procedure should be understood in relation to an unfamiliar or
slightly familiar donor. In the case of a well-known and trusted lay man or
woman, the procedure mentioned in the text is sufficient. It should be
understood that the procedure mentioned by the commentator is not necessary for
them. 42. It is not proper for a monk or a nun, a king or a minister, to accept
food, drink, or anything else that has been touched by a person who is not a
Jain. 43. It is not proper for a monk or a nun, a king or a minister, to accept
clothes, a blanket, or a towel that has been touched by a person who is not a
Jain.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
140] [buhatkalpasUtra kAmAbhilASA prakaTa karane para kuzIlasevana ke doSa
batAkara kahe ki-"hama saMyamI haiM, aisA pApAcaraNa karake apane saMyama kA
nAza nahIM karanA cAhate haiN|" aisA kahane para vaha kSubdha hokara sAdhu kI
apakIti bhI kara sakatI hai, apanI dI gaI vastu vApasa bhI mAMga sakatI hai aura
isI prakAra ke anya aneka upadrava bhI kara sakatI hai / ina saba kAraNoM se
sAdhu ko ukta tIna prazna pUchakara aura diye jAne vAle vastra-pAtrAdi ke pUrNa
zuddha jJAta hone para tathA dAtAra ke vizuddha bhAvoM ko yathArtha jAnakara hI
AgAra ke sAtha lenA ucita hai, anyathA nhiiN| sAdhvI ko bhI isI vidhi kA pAlana
karanA cAhie kintu yahAM itanA vizeSa jJAtavya hai ki pravartinI usa sAdhvI ke
dvArA lAye gaye vastrAdi ko sAta dina taka apane pAsa rakhatI hai aura usakI
yatanA se parIkSA karatI hai ki-"yaha vidyA, saMmohana-cUrNa, mantra Adi se to
mantrita nahIM hai ?" yadi use vaha nirdoSa pratIta ho to vaha lAne vAlI sAdhvI
ko yA use AvazyakatA na hone para anya sAdhvI ko de detI hai / vaha yaha bhI
dekhatI hai ki dene vAlA vyakti yuvA, vidhura, vyabhicArI yA durAcArI to nahIM
hai aura jise diyA gayA hai, vaha yuvatI aura navadIkSitA to nahIM hai| yadi
inameM se koI bhI kAraNa dRSTigocara ho to pravartinI use vApasa karA detI hai /
yadi aisA koI kAraNa nahIM ho to use anya sAdhvI ko de detI hai| itanI parIkSA
kA kAraNa niyuktikAra ne yaha batAyA hai ki-"striyAM prakRti se hI
alpadhairyavAlI hotI haiM aura dUsare ke pralobhana se zIghra lubdha ho jAtI
haiN|" yadyapi sUtra meM sAdhvI ko zrAvaka se "sAkArakRta" vastrAdi lene kA
vidhAna hai, para bhASyakAra ne isakA spaSTIkaraNa karate hue kahA hai
ki-"utsargamArga to yahI hai ki sAdhvI kisI bhI gRhastha se svayaM vastrAdi
nahIM le / jaba bhI use vastrAdi kI AvazyakatA ho, vaha apanI pravartinI se kahe
athavA gaNadhara yA prAcArya se kahe / AcArya gRhastha ke yahAM se vastra lAve
aura sAta dina taka apane pAsa rkhe| tatpazcAt use dhokara kisI sAdhu ko
pror3hAve / isa prakAra parIkSA karane para yadi vaha nirdoSa jJAta ho to
pravartinI ko de aura vaha use lekara usa sAdhvI ko de jise usakI AvazyakatA
hai| yadi kadAcit gaNadhara yA prAcArya samIpa na hoM to pravartinI gRhastha ke
yahAM se vastra lAve aura ukta vidhi se parIkSA kara sAdhvI ko deve / yadi
kadAcit gocarI, vicArabhUmi yA vihArabhUmi ko jAte pAte samaya koI gRhastha
vastra lene ke lie nimaMtrita kare aura sAdhvI ko vastra lenA Avazyaka hI ho to,
use 'sAkArakRta' lekara pravartinI ko lAkara denA cAhie aura vaha parIkSA karake
usa sAdhvI ko deve| yaha vidhi aparicita yA alpaparicita dAtA kI apekSA se
samajhanI caahie| suparicita evaM vizvasta zrAvaka-zrAvikA se vastrAdi grahaNa
karane meM sUtrokta vidhi hI paryApta hotI hai| bhASyokta vidhi usake liye
Avazyaka nahIM hai aisA samajhanA cAhie / rAtri meM AhArAdi kI gaveSaNA kA
niSedha evaM apavAda vidhAna 42. no kappai niggaMthANa vA niggaMthINa vA rAo vA
viyAle vA asaNaM vA pANaM vA khAimaM vA sAimaM vA pddigaahette| na'nnattha
egeNaM punvapaDilehieNaM sejjAsaMthAraeNaM / 43. no kappai niggaMthANa vA
niggaMthINa vA rAo vA ciyAle vA vatthaM vA, paDiggahaM vA, kambalaM vA,
pAyapuchaNaM vA pddigaahette|

Page #103 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[First Objective] [149 Mannatha Egaae Hariyahadiaae, Sa Vi Ya Paribhutta Va,
Dhoya Va, Rattha Va, Ghattha Va, Mattha Va, Sampadhumia Va. 42. It is not
permissible for Nirgranthas and Nirgranthis to take Prasna, Pan, Khadim and
Swadim at night or during Vikal. Only a pre-written Shayyasanstarak is exempted.
/ 43. It is not permissible for Nirgranthas and Nirgranthis to take Vastra,
Patra, Kambal or Padapronchan at night or during Vikal. / Only a 'Hritahritika'
is exempted. / Even if it is Paribhukt, Dhaut, Rakta, Ghrist, Mrishta or
Sampradhumit, it is permissible to take it at night. Discussion - Some Acharyas
interpret 'Ratri' as Sandhyakal and some Acharyas interpret 'Vikal' as
Sandhyakal. The commentator has said that both meanings are appropriate
according to Niruktikar. Therefore, except for the pre-written Shayyasanstarak,
it is not permissible to take Bhakt-Pan at night or during Sandhya. Although
'Ratribhojan' is not prohibited in the 42 Doshas, there is a clear provision for
the sixth Vrat called 'Raibhoyanaveraman' in the Chhajjivikanaya study of the
Dashavakalik Sutra. Therefore, it is not permissible for a Sadhu to take any
kind of Bhakt-Pan at night. / In addition, even during the day, it is not
permissible for a Sadhu to eat food in a place where there is darkness. How can
it be permissible for him to eat in the darkness of night? Never. Doubt - The
sixth Ratri-Bhakt Vrat prohibits eating and drinking at night, but is there any
fault in bringing Bhaktpan at night? _Solution - When travelling for Gochari at
night, there is a violation of the Shatkayik Jivas, violation of their Sanjam,
and violation of their Atma. In addition, there are many possible faults in
travelling for Gochari at night, such as being caught by a thief, going to a
householder's house and facing various fears, etc. Therefore, Bhakt-Pan should
not be brought at night. / Dashav. A. 6 mentions the faults of eating at night
and Nishit U. 10 mentions their Prayaschitta. Doubt - If it is completely
prohibited to take Prasnadi at night, why is there a provision in the Sutra to
exempt the pre-written Shayyasanstarak? Solution - The Utsargamarga is that no
substance should be taken at night. But this Sutra is an example of the
Apvadamarga. / Its meaning is that due to reasons like losing the way or the way
being too long, a Sthavirakalpi Bhikshu may reach a suitable place after sunset.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
prathama uddezaka] [149 mannattha egAe hariyAhaDiyAe, sA vi ya paribhuttA vA,
dhoyA vA, rattA vA, ghaTThA vA, maTThA vA, saMpadhUmiyA vaa| 42. nirgranthoM
aura nirgranthiyoM ko rAtri meM yA vikAla meM prazana, pAna, khAdima aura
svAdima lenA nahIM kalpatA hai| kevala eka pUrvapratilekhita zayyAsaMstAraka ko
chor3akara / 43. nirgranthoM aura nirgranthiyoM ko rAtri meM yA vikAla meM
vastra, pAtra, kambala yA pAdaproMchana lenA nahIM kalpatA hai / kevala eka
'hRtAhRtikA' ko chor3akara / vaha paribhukta, dhauta, rakta, ghRSTa, mRSTa yA
sampradhUmita bhI kara dI gayI ho to bhI rAtri meM lenA kalpatA hai| vivecana-
kucha prAcArya rAtri kA artha sandhyAkAla karate haiM aura kucha AcArya vikAla
kA artha sandhyAkAla karate haiN| TIkAkAra ne niruktikAra ke donoM hI artha
saMgata kahe haiN| ataH pUrva pratilekhita zayyAsaMstAraka ke atirikta rAtri meM
yA sandhyA ke samaya bhakta-pAna grahaNa karanA nahIM kalpatA hai| yadyapi 42
doSoM meM "rAtribhojana" kA niSedha nahIM hai, tathApi dazavakAlikasUtra ke
chajjIvanikAya nAmaka adhyayana meM "rAibhoyaNaveramaNa" nAmaka chaThe vrata kA
spaSTa vidhAna hai| ataeva sAdhu ko kisI bhI prakAra kA bhakta-pAna rAtri meM
lenA nahIM kalpatA hai / isake atirikta dina ke samaya bhI jisa sthAna para
andhakAra ho vahAM para bhI jaba sAdhu ko bhojana grahaNa karanA nahIM kalpatA
hai to andhakAra se paripUrNa rAtri meM to use grahaNa karanA kaise kalpa sakatA
hai ? kabhI nhiiN| zaMkA-ukta chaThe rAtri-bhakta vrata meM rAta meM khAne-pIne
kA niSedha kiyA hai, para rAta meM bhaktapAna ko lAne meM kyA doSa hai ?
_samAdhAna-rAtri meM gocarI ke lie gamanAgamana karane para SaTkAyika jIvoM kI
virAdhanA hotI hai, unakI virAdhanA se saMyama kI virAdhanA hotI hai aura
saMyama kI virAdhanA se prAtma-virAdhanA hotI hai| isake atirikta rAta meM Ate-
jAte hue ko koI cora samajhakara pakar3a le, gRhastha ke ghara jAne para vahAM
aneka prakAra kI AzaMkAeM ho jAe~, ityAdi kAraNoM se rAtri meM gocarI ke lie
gamanAgamana karane para aneka doSa sambhava haiN| ataH rAtri meM bhakta-pAna
lAnA bhI nahIM cAhie / dazavai. a.6 meM rAtri meM AhAra grahaNa karane ke doSa
batAye haiM evaM nizItha u. 10 meM unake prAyazcitta bhI kahe haiN| zaMkA-jaba
rAtri meM prazanAdi grahaNa karane kA sarvathA niSedha hai to pUrvapratilekhita
zayyAsaMstAraka ko chor3akara aisA vidhAna sUtra meM kyoM kiyA gayA? samAdhAna-
utsargamArga to yahI hai ki rAta meM kisI bhI padArtha ko grahaNa nahIM karanA
caahie| kintu yaha sUtra apavAdamArga kA prarUpaka hai / isakA abhiprAya yaha
hai ki mArga bhUlane yA mArga adhika lambA nikala jAne Adi kAraNoM se
sthavirakalpI bhikSu sUryAsta bAda bhI yogya sthAna para pahuMca

Page #104 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[150] When the [Brihatkalpa Sutra] states that they should stay, then due to
reasons like housing and livelihood, it becomes necessary for them to accept
food, bedding, etc. at night and during the day. Even if they find housing
before sunset, if it is possible to obtain necessary bedding, etc. from a
householder's shop even after one or two hours at night, then it can also be
accepted at night. This rule should be understood in light of such
circumstances. Another Sutra prohibits accepting clothes, etc. at night, but if
someone like a thief steals the clothes, etc. of a monk or nun while they are
traveling from village to village, or steals them from their shelter, and after
some time, the thief realizes that they should not have stolen or taken the
clothes, etc. of the monk or nun, and then returns them in the evening or at
night, or places them in a visible location for the monk to see, then accepting
such clothes, etc. is called "Hritahritika". The item that was taken and then
returned is called "Hritahritika". The Sutra explains the nature of such
"Hritahritika" clothes, etc. using terms like "Paribhukta", etc., which have the
following meanings: Paribhukta - if the person who took the clothes, etc. has
used them for wearing, etc. Dhouta - if they have been washed with water. Rakta
- if they have been dyed in any of the five colors. Ghrista - if the special
marks on the clothes, etc. have been rubbed off. Mrishta - if the coarse or
rough clothes, etc. have been made soft by using a special substance.
Samprdhumita - if they have been perfumed with fragrant incense, etc. If the
person who took the clothes, etc. brings them back at night, even if they are of
any of the above types, then the monk or nun can accept them. Apart from their
own stolen clothes, etc., if someone brings a new garment, a vessel, a foot-
cloth, etc. in the evening or at night, then it is not appropriate for the monk
or nun to accept it. The Sutra has the reading "Hariyahadiae", which the
commentator has interpreted in two ways as "Hariuun ya Prahadia, Chhudha
Hariyesu vaa'aahatu". According to the first meaning, the person should come and
give it themselves, and according to the second meaning, if they leave it on a
"Haritakaya" (tree, bush, etc.) and the person whose clothes, etc. it is, sees
it in the light of the moon, etc., then the monk or nun can go and get it in the
evening or at night. Or, if another man picks it up and gives it, thinking that
it belongs to a particular monk or nun, then the person whose clothes, etc. it
is, can accept it. The word "Hritahritika" is feminine, hence the reading in the
Sutra is "Sa vi ya Paribhutta", etc., which is feminine. This means "the stolen
item".

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
150] [bRhatkalpasUtra kara Thaharate haiM taba unheM Thaharane ke liye makAna
evaM jIvarakSA Adi kAraNoM se pATa saMstAraka Adi rAtri evaM vikAla meM grahaNa
karanA Avazyaka ho jAtA hai| sUryAsta-pUrva makAna mila jAne para bhI kabhI
Avazyaka pATa gRhastha kI dukAna Adi se rAtri ke eka do ghaMTe bAda bhI milanA
sambhava ho to vaha bhI rAtri meM grahaNa kiyA jA sakatA hai| aisI paristhitiyoM
kI apekSA se hI yaha vidhAna samajhanA caahie| dUsare sUtra se rAtri meM
vastrAdi grahaNa karane kA niSedha kiyA gayA hai kintu grAmAnugrAma vicarate
samaya koI cora Adi kisI sAdhu yA sAdhvI ke kisI vastra Adi ko chIna le jAve yA
upAzraya se curA le jAve / kucha samaya bAda le jAne vAle ko yaha sadbuddhi
paidA ho ki-"mujhe sAdhu yA sAdhvI kA yaha vastra prAdi curAnA yA chInanA nahIM
cAhie thaa|" tadanantara vaha sandhyA yA rAta ke samaya pAkara de yA sAdhu ko
dikhAI dene yogya sthAna para rakha de to aise vastra Adi ke grahaNa karane ko
"hRtAhRtikA" kahate haiM / pahale harI gayo, pIche pAhRta kI gayI vastu
"hRtAhRtikA" kahI jAtI hai| vaha hRtAhRtika vastra Adi kaisA ho, isakA
spaSTIkaraNa sUtra meM paribhukta Adi padoM se kiyA gayA hai, jinakA artha isa
prakAra hai paribhukta-usa vastra Adi ko le jAne vAle ne yadi use pror3hane Adi
ke upayoga meM le liyA ho| dhauta-jala se dho liyA ho| rakta-pAMca prakAra ke
raMgoM meM se kisI raMga meM raMga liyA ho / ghRSTa-vastra Adi para ke cihna-
vizeSoM ko ghisakara miTA diyA ho| mRSTa-moTe yA khuradare kapar3e Adi ko
dravya-vizeSa se yukta kara komala banA diyA ho| sampradhUmita-sugandhita dhUpa
Adi se suvAsita kara diyA ho / ina ukta prakAroM meM se kisI bhI prakAra kA
vastra Adi yadi le jAne vAlA vyakti rAta meM lAkara bhI vApasa de to sAdhu aura
sAdhvI use grahaNa kara sakate haiN| apane apahRta vastra Adi ke atirikta yadi
koI navIna vastra, pAtra, pAdapoMchana Adi sandhyAkAla yA rAtri meM lAkara de to
use lenA sAdhu yA sAdhvI ko nahIM kalpatA hai| sUtra meM "hariyAhaDiyAe" aisA
pATha hai, jisakA niyuktikAra ne "hariUNa ya prAhaDiyA, chUDhA hariesu vA''haTu"
isa prakAra se usake do artha kiye haiN| prathama artha ke anusAra vaha svayaM
Akara de aura dUsare artha ke anusAra vaha yadi "haritakAya" (vRkSa-jhAr3I Adi)
para DAla jAe aura jisakA vaha vastrAdi ho use candra ke prakAza Adi meM dikha
jAe to sAdhu yA sAdhvI sandhyA yA rAta ke samaya jAkara use lA sakatA hai|
athavA use koI anya puruSa uThAkara aura yaha amuka sAdhu yA sAdhvI kA hai, aisA
samajha karake de to jisakA vaha vastrAdi hai, vaha use grahaNa kara sakatA hai|
"hatAhatikA" zabda strIliMga hai isalie sUtra meM "sA vi ya paribhuttA" Adi
strIliMga vAcI pATha hai| isakA artha hai "corI meM gaI huI vastu / "

Page #105 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## First Objective] [Prohibition of Travel at Night 151]  44. It is not
permissible for a Niggantha or a Nigganthi, a male or a female, to travel at
night or during the twilight hours.   45. It is not permissible for a Niggantha
or a Nigganthi, a male or a female, to go to a Sanka·∏çƒ´ or a Sanka·∏çƒ´-place for a
Sanka·∏çƒ´ at night or during the twilight hours.  **Discussion:**  The first sutra
completely prohibits the Nigganthas and Nigganthis from traveling at night or
during twilight hours. This is because during these times, those who are
traveling are not visible, making it impossible to follow the rules of
*ƒ´ryƒÅsamiti*. Failure to follow *ƒ´ryƒÅsamiti* violates the principles of
restraint. Furthermore, the *UttarƒÅdhyayana* 26 states that the time for
*ƒ´ryƒÅsamiti* is only during the day, not at night. Therefore, traveling at night
also violates this rule.  Additionally, traveling at night increases the risk of
injury from thorns, stumbling, or falling into ditches. There is also a risk of
being bitten by snakes or attacked by lions, tigers, or other predators.
Therefore, traveling at night is completely prohibited.  The second sutra
prohibits going to a Sanka·∏çƒ´. A Sanka·∏çƒ´ is a feast or a special gathering that
can last for one day or many days. On the main day of the Sanka·∏çƒ´, invitations
are sent out to all the villagers in the surrounding area. A monk who is staying
in that area will not be able to receive alms on that day. In such a situation,
a monk can go to a *gocari* (a place where alms are received) before the crowd
arrives from the Sanka·∏çƒ´ within a radius of two *ko≈õas* (approximately 4 miles).
The *ƒÄcƒÅrƒÅ·πÖga ≈öruta* 2, *a·πÖga* 1, *udde≈õaka* 2 prohibits going to a Sanka·∏çƒ´
beyond two *ko≈õas* and also prohibits going to and staying at Sanka·∏çƒ´s even if
invited.  Therefore, the present sutra prohibits a monk from leaving his place
before sunrise with the intention of going to a Sanka·∏çƒ´ within two *ko≈õas* to
receive alms after sunrise. If it is necessary to go to a Sanka·∏çƒ´, the monk can
go there during the day with discretion.  The use of the word "twilight" along
with "night" in the sutra indicates that the monk should not travel or go to a
Sanka·∏çƒ´ during the twilight hours before sunrise or after sunset.  **Prohibition
of Traveling Alone at Night to a *Stha·πá·∏çila* or a Place of Study**  46. It is
not permissible for a Niggantha to go out or enter a *stha·πá·∏çila* or a place of
study alone at night or during the twilight hours.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
prathama uddezaka] [151 rAtri meM gamanAgamana kA niSedha 44. no kappai
niggaMthANa vA niggaMthINa vA rAmro vA viyAle vA praddhANagamaNaM ette| 45. no
kappai niggaMthANa vA niggaMthINa vA rAo vA biyAle vA saMAMDa vA saMkhaDipaDiyAe
ette| 44. nirgranthoM aura nirgranthiyoM ko rAtri meM yA vikAla meM mArga-gamana
karanA nahIM kalpatA hai / 45. nimranthoM aura nirgranthiyoM ko rAtri meM yA
vikAla meM saMkhaDi ke liye saMkhaDI-sthala para (anyatra) jAnA bhI nahIM
kalpatA hai| vivecanaprathama sUtra meM rAtri yA sandhyAkAla meM sAdhu aura
sAdhviyoM ko vihAra karane kA sarvathA niSedha kiyA gayA hai, kyoMki usa samaya
gamana karane para mArga para calane vAleja va daSTigocara nahIM hote haiN| ata:
IryAsamiti kA pAlana nahIM ho sakatA hai aura usake pAlana na hone se saMyama kI
virAdhanA hotI hai tathA uttarA. a. 26 meM IryAsamiti kA kAla dina kA hI kahA
hai, rAtri kA nahIM, isa maryAdA kA ullaMghana bhI hotA hai / isake atirikta
pairoM meM kAMTe Adi lagane se, Thokara khAkara girane se yA gaDDhe meM par3a
jAne se prAtma-virAdhanA bhI hotI hai, sAMpa Adi ke dvArA iMsane kI yA zera-cIte
Adi ke dvArA khAye jAne kI bhI sambhAvanA rahatI hai, isalie rAtri meM gamana
karane kA sarvathA niSedha kiyA gayA hai / dUsare sUtra meM saMkhaDI meM jAne kA
niSedha kiyA hai| bhoja yA jImanavAra-vizeSa ko saMkhaDI kahate haiM, jo eka
dina kA yA aneka dina kA bhI hotA hai| usameM mukhya dina AsapAsa ke sabhI
grAmavAsiyoM ko pAne ke lie nimantraNa diyA jAtA hai| aise kSetra meM rahe hue
bhikSu ko usa dina anyatra kahIM bhikSA prApta nahIM hotI hai| aisI paristhiti
meM do kosa ke bhItara kI saMkhaDI meM se janasamUha ke Ane ke pUrva bhikSu
gocarI lA sakatA hai| AcArAMga zru. 2, a. 1, u. 2 meM do kosa uparAnta saMkhaDI
meM jAne kA niSedha hai tathA nimantraNa dene para bhI saMkhaDiyoM meM jAne kA
evaM vahAM Thaharane kA bhI niSedha hai / ataH ukta paristhiti ke kAraNa do kosa
ke bhItara kI saMkhaDI meM se bhikSA lAne ke saMkalpa se koI bhikSu sUryodaya
pUrva apane sthAna se nikalakara vahAM sUryodaya bAda bhikSA grahaNa karane hetu
jAnA cAhe to usakA prastuta sUtra meM niSedha kiyA gayA hai| ataH ukta saMkhaDI
meM kabhI jAnA Avazyaka ho to bhikSu dina meM hI vivekapUrvaka jA sakatA hai|
sUtra meM rAtri zabda ke sAtha vikAla zabda ke prayoga se yaha batAyA gayA hai
ki sUryodaya pUrva uSAkAla meM evaM sUryAsta bAda sandhyAkAla meM bhI bhikSu ko
vihAra evaM saMkhaDI ke liye gamanAgamana nahIM karanA caahie| rAtri meM
sthaMDila evaM svAdhyAya-bhUmi meM akele jAne kA niSedha 46. no kappai
niggaMthassa egANiyassa rAo vA viyAle vA bahiyA biyArabhUmi vA vihArabhUmi vA
nikkhamittae vA pavisittae vaa|

Page #106 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[152] It is not permissible for a single *Niggranthi* to go out of the
*upa≈õraya* to the *viyƒÅra-bh≈´mi* or *vihƒÅra-bh≈´mi* at night or in the twilight.
47. It is not permissible for a single *Niggranthi* to go out of the *upa≈õraya*
to the *viyƒÅra-bh≈´mi* or *vihƒÅra-bh≈´mi* at night or in the twilight. It is
permissible for one, two, or three *Niggranthi*s to go out of the *upa≈õraya* to
the *viyƒÅra-bh≈´mi* or *vihƒÅra-bh≈´mi* at night or in the twilight. 46. It is
permissible for one or two *Niggranthi*s to go out of the *upa≈õraya* to the
*viyƒÅra-bh≈´mi* or *vihƒÅra-bh≈´mi* at night or in the twilight.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
152] [bahatkalpasUtra kappai se appabiiyassa vA appataiyassa vA rAo vA viyAle vA
bahiyA biyArabhUmi vA vihArabhUmi vA nikkhamittae vA pavisittae vaa| 47. no
kappaI niggaMthIe egANiyAe rAo vA viyAle vA bahiyA viyArabhUmi vA vihArabhUmi vA
nikkhamittae vA pavisittae vaa| kappai se appabiiyAe vA appataiyAe vA
appacautthIe vA rAo vA viyAle vA bahiyA viyArabhUmi vA vihArabhUmi vA
nikkhamittae vA pavisittae vaa| 46. akele nirgrantha ko rAtri meM yA vikAla meM
upAzraya se bAhara kI vicArabhUmi yA vihArabhUmi meM jAnA-mAnA nahIM kalpatA hai
/ use eka yA do nirgranthoM ko sAtha lekara rAtri meM yA vikAla meM upAzraya kI
sImA se bAhara kI vicArabhUmi yA vihArabhUmi meM jAnA-mAnA kalpatA hai| 47.
akelI nirgranthI ko rAtri meM yA vikAla meM upAzraya se bAhara kI vicArabhUmi yA
vihArabhUmi meM jAnA-mAnA nahIM kalpatA hai / eka, do yA tIna nirgranthiyoM ko
sAtha lekara rAtri meM yA vikAla meM upAzraya se bAhara kI vicArabhUmi yA
vihArabhUmi meM jAnA-mAnA kalpatA hai / vivecana-mala-mUtra tyAgane ke sthAna
ko-'vicArabhUmi' kahate haiM aura svAdhyAya ke sthAna ko 'vihArabhUmi' kahate
haiN| rAtri ke samaya yA sandhyAkAla meM yadi kisI sAdhu ko mala-mUtra-visarjana
ke lie jAnA Avazyaka ho to use apane sthAna se bAhara vicArabhUmi meM akelA
nahIM jAnA caahie| isI prakAra ukta kAla meM yadi svAdhyAyArtha vihArabhUmi meM
jAnA ho to upAzraya se bAhara akele nahIM jAnA caahie| kintu vaha eka yA do
sAdhuoM ke sAtha jA sakatA hai| upAzraya kA bhItarI bhAga evaM upAzraya ke
bAhara sau hAtha kA kSetra upAzraya kI sImA meM ginA gayA hai, usase dUra (Age)
jAne kI apekSA se sUtra meM 'bahiyA' zabda kA prayoga kiyA gayA hai| svAdhyAya
ke liye yA mala-visarjana ke liye dUra jAkara punaH pAne meM samaya adhika
lagatA hai| isa kAraNa se akele jAne meM aneka ApattiyoM evaM AzaMkAoM kI
sambhAvanA rahatI hai / yathA 1. prabala moha ke udaya se yA strIupasarga se
parAjita hokara akelA bhikSu brahmacarya khaMDita kara sakatA hai / 2. sarpa Adi
jAnavara ke kATane se, mUrchA Ane se yA koI Takkara lagane se kahIM girakara
par3a sakatA hai / 3. cora, grAmarakSaka Adi pakar3a sakate haiM evaM mArapITa
kara sakate haiN| 4. svayaM bhI kahIM bhAga sakatA hai / 5. athavA Ayu samApta
ho jAe to usake marane kI bahuta samaya taka kisI ko jAnakArI bhI nahIM ho pAto
hai ityAdi kAraNoM se rAtri meM akele bhikSu ko mala tyAgane evaM svAdhyAya
karane ke lie upAzraya kI sImA se bAhara nahIM jAnA cAhiye / upAzraya kI sImA
meM jAne para ukta

Page #107 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Direct Objective] [The possibility of 153 faults is usually not there / because
there is constant coming and going of other monks and any sound can be heard. If
the number of monks is large and the house is small or there is some reason for
non-study in the shelter, then for night study, going elsewhere is done,
otherwise, due to the absence of time for walking at night, going out is
prohibited. While requesting the shelter, one should definitely keep in mind
that it is complete with the land for excreting feces and urine, this is the
rule in Aacha. Shra. 2, A. 2, U. 2. and in Dashav. A. 8, Ga. 52. Feces, urine,
etc., natural urges of the body cannot be stopped, therefore, even at night, a
monk has to go out / The commentator has said that if the monk is not going to
be afraid and the possibility of the above faults is not there, then after
informing the fellow monks, he can go alone with caution. If there are two monks
and one is sick or there are three monks, one is sick and one needs to sit in
his service, then he can go alone with caution after informing. Due to many
reasons or due to holding Abhigraha, Padima, etc., even those who wander alone
sometimes have to go out at night, then they can go with caution. But according
to the sutra, one should go with one or two monks with the method of excretion /
The reason for taking more than one monk is that there are some very frightening
places. A nun is prohibited from going alone anywhere, even during the day, like
to Gochari, etc. Therefore, it is more important to keep this in mind at night.
The reason for two or more nuns going, i.e., three or four going, should only be
understood as a frightening situation or a nature of being afraid. The rest of
the discussion should be understood as similar to the discussion related to the
monk. But it is not appropriate for nuns to go alone even in any kind of
exception, therefore, if there is any special situation, it is better to take a
Shravaka or Shravaka along. In any other special situation, the monk-nun can
excrete in the utterance-measure and can also eat in the morning and can take
appropriate atonement. The rule of wandering in the Aryan field is 48. Kappi
Nigganthaan Wa Niggathiin Wa-Purasthimeenam Jaav Angamagahao Ettae, Dakkhineenam
Jaav Kosambino Ettae, Pacchaththimeenam Jaav Thunaavisaaao Ettae, Uttreenam Jaav
Kunalaavisaaao Ettae. Eyaavayaav Kappi, Eyaavayaav Pariye Khette / No Se Kappi
Eto Bahi, Ten Paran Jaty Naan-Dasan-Charittaai Ussappanti / Tti Bemi. 48. It is
permissible for the Nirgranthas and the Nirgranthis to go east to Anga-Magadha,
south to Kosambi, west to Sthuna country and north to Kunala country / This much
is the Aryan field. It is not permissible to go outside this. Thereafter, wander
where there is an increase in knowledge, vision and character /

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
prayama uddezaka] [153 doSoM kI sambhAvanA prAyaH nahIM rahatI hai / kyoMki
vahAM to anya sAdhuoM kA jAnA-pAnA banA rahatA hai evaM koI AvAja hone para bhI
sunI jA sakatI hai| sAdhuoM kI saMkhyA adhika ho aura makAna choTA ho athavA
upAzraya meM asvAdhyAya kA koI kAraNa ho jAe to rAtri meM svAdhyAya ke liye
anyatra gamanAgamana kiyA jAtA hai, anyathA rAtri meM IryA kA kAla na hone se
gamanAgamana karane kA niSedha hI hai| upAzraya kI yAcanA karate samaya hI usake
mala-mUtra tyAgane kI bhUmi se sampanna hone kA avazya dhyAna rakhanA cAhie,
aisA AcA. zra. 2, a. 2, u. 2. meM tathA dazava. a.8, gA. 52 meM vidhAna hai|
mala-mUtra Adi zarIra ke svAbhAvika vegoM ko rokA nahIM jA sakatA hai isalie
rAtri meM bhI kisI sAdhu ko bAhara jAnA par3atA hai / bhASyakAra ne batAyA hai
ki yadi sAdhu bhayabhIta hone vAlA na ho evaM uparyukta doSoM kI sambhAvanA na
ho to sAtha ke sAdhuoM ko sUcita karake sAvadhAnI rakhate hue akelA bhI jA
sakatA hai| do sAdhu haiM aura eka bImAra hai athavA tIna sAdhu haiM, eka bImAra
hai aura eka ko usakI sevA meM baiThanA Avazyaka hai to use sUcita karake
sAvadhAnI rakhate hue akelA bhI jA sakatA hai| aneka kAraNoM se athavA
abhigraha, paDimA Adi dhAraNa karane se ekAkI vicaraNa karane vAle bhI kabhI
rAtri meM bAhara jAnA Avazyaka ho to sAvadhAnI rakhakara jA sakate haiN| kintu
utsargavidhi se sUtra meM kahe anusAra eka yA do sAdhuoM ko sAtha meM lekara hI
jAnA cAhie / eka se adhika sAdhuoM ko sAtha le jAne kA kAraNa yaha hai ki kahIM
atyadhika bhayajanaka sthAna hote haiN| sAdhvI ko to dina meM bhI gocarI Adi
kahIM bhI akele jAne kA niSedha hI hai| ata: rAtri meM to isakA dhyAna rakhanA
adhika Avazyaka hai| do se adhika sAdhviyoM ke jAne kA arthAt tIna yA cAra ke
jAne kA kAraNa kevala bhayajanaka sthiti yA bhayabhIta hone kI prakRti hI
samajhanA caahiye| zeSa vivecana bhikSu sambandhI vivecana ke samAna hI
samajhanA caahie| kintu sAdhviyoM ko kisI prakAra ke apavAda meM bhI akele jAnA
ucita nahIM hai, ataH koI vizeSa paristhiti ho to zrAvikA yA zrAvaka ko sAtha
meM lekara jAnA hI zreyaskara hotA hai| anya kisI vizeSa paristhiti meM sAdhu-
sAdhvI uccAramAtraka meM malavisarjana kara prAtaHkAla bhI paraTha sakate haiM
evaM yathAyogya prAyazcitta grahaNa kara sakate haiN| AryakSetra meM vicaraNa
karane kA vidhAna 48. kappai niggaMthANa vA niggathINa vA-purasthimeNaM jAva
aMgamagahAo ettae, dakkhiNeNaM jAva kosambIno ettae, paccatthimeNaM jAva
thUNAvisayAo ettae, uttareNaM jAva kuNAlAvisayAo ette| eyAvayAva kappai,
eyAvayAva pArie khette / no se kappai eto bahi, teNa paraM jatya nANa-dasaNa-
carittAI ussappanti / tti bemi| 48. nirgranthoM ko aura nirgranthiyoM ko pUrva
dizA meM aMga-magadha taka, dakSiNa dizA meM kozAmbI taka, pazcima dizA meM
sthUNA deza taka aura uttara dizA meM kuNAla deza taka jAnA kalpatA hai / itanA
hI prAryakSetra hai| isase bAhara jAnA nahIM kalpatA hai| taduparAnta jahAM
jJAna, darzana evaM cAritra kI vRddhi hotI ho vahAM vicaraNa kare /

Page #108 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[154] The *Brihatkalpa Sutra* commentary, in the first verse of the *Prajnapana
Sutra* on the twenty-five *Aryadesha* of this *Bharat Kshetra*, mentions their
names as follows: 1. Magadha, 2. Anga, 3. Bang, 4. Kalinga, 5. Kashi, 6.
Kaushala, 7. Kuru, 8. Saurya, 9. Panchala, 10. Jangala, 11. Saurashtra, 12.
Videha, 13. Vatsa, 14. Sandibba, 15. Malaya, 16. Vachcha, 17. Acchha, 18.
Dasharna, 19. Chedi, 20. Sindhu-Sauvira, 21. Surasena, 22. Bhrigu, 23. Kunala,
24. Kotivarsha, 25. Ladha and Kekaya.  The *Prakrut Sutra* defines their
boundaries as follows: In the east, from Angadesha (whose capital was Champa) to
Magadhadesha (whose capital was Rajagriha). In the south, to Vatsadesha (whose
capital was Kosambi). In the west, to Sthuna desha. In the north, to Kunala
desha (whose capital was Sravasti). This is the prescribed area for *sadhu-
sadhvi* to travel.  The reason for this is that within these four boundaries,
the glories of the *Tirthankaras* are manifested, including their birth,
liberation, etc. It is here that the *Sarvaj√±a-Sarvadarshi* *Tirthankaras* and
other great beings, who generate knowledge and vision, preach the Dharma. It is
here that the *bhavya jiva* attain enlightenment and it is here that they dispel
their doubts by listening to the Dharma from the *Jinavaras*. Additionally,
*sadhu-sadhvi* receive *bhakti-paan* and *upadhi* easily here, and the
*shravaka* people or others here are knowledgeable about the conduct and
thoughts of the *sadhu-sadhvi*. Therefore, they should only travel within these
*Aryakshetra*.  The *Sutra* clearly states: "This is the *Arya Kshetra* and this
is the prescribed area for travel. It is not permissible to travel outside of
this." This means that this is the eternal *Aryakshetra*.  Perhaps, due to the
good influence of a king or someone else, the people of a non-*Aryakshetra* may
become *Arya* in nature, but this change would be temporary. Similarly, in an
*Aryakshetra*, there may be a temporary change where the people become
non-*Arya* in nature. This is why the final section states: "Even though there
are boundaries of the *Kshetra* and boundaries of the *Kalpa*, one should travel
wherever the development of *samyama* qualities occurs." Because sometimes, in a
non-*Aryakshetra*, one's *samyama* qualities may increase and the *Jinasasana*
may be influenced, and sometimes, in an *Aryakshetra*, one's *samyama* qualities
may decrease. Therefore, the *Sutra* mentions the boundaries of the *Kshetra*
and specifically prescribes travel with the goal of increasing *samyama*.  The
*Bhashya* and *Tika* explain that currently, due to the influence and efforts of
kings, *sadhu-sadhvi* have started traveling in non-*Aryakshetra* as well. In
*Aryakshetra* too, where there are long routes, dense forests, which take many
days to cross, traveling in those areas is prohibited in *Acha. Shru. 2, A. 3*
and the faults of traveling in those areas are also explained. Therefore,
*sadhu-sadhvi* should not go to such divisions of the *Aryakshetra*.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
154] [bRhatkalpasUtra vivecana-isa bharatakSetra ke sADhe paccIsa prAryadeza
prajJApanAsUtra ke prathama pada meM batAye haiN| unake nAma isa prakAra haiM 1.
magadha, 2. aMga, 3. baMga, 4. kaliMga, 5. kAzI, 6. kauzala, 7. kuru, 8. saurya,
9. pAMcAla, 10. jAMgala, 11. saurASTra, 12. videha, 13. vatsa, 14. saMDibbha,
15. malaya, 16. vaccha, 17. accha, 18. dazArNa, 19. cedi, 20. sindhu-sauvIra,
21. sUrasena, 22. bhRga 23. kuNAla, 24. koTivarSa, 25. lADha aura kekaya ardha /
prakRta sUtra meM inakI sImA rUpa se, pUrva dizA meM- aMgadeza (jisakI rAjadhAnI
campA nagarI rahI hai) se magadhadeza (jisakI rAjadhAnI rAjagRha rahI hai) tk|
dakSiNa dizA meM vatsadeza (jisakI rAjadhAnI kozAmbI rahI hai) taka / pazcima
dizA meMsthUNAdeza tk| uttara dizA meM kuNAla deza (jisakI rAjadhAnI zrAvastI
nagarI rahI hai) taka jAne kA vidhAna sAdhu-sAdhviyoM ke lie kiyA gayA hai /
isakA kAraNa yaha batalAyA gayA hai ki ina cAroM dizAoM kI sImA ke bhItara hI
tIrthaMkaroM ke janma niSkramaNa Adi kI mahimA hotI hai, yahIM para kevalajJAna
darzana ko utpanna karane vAle sarvajJa-sarvadarzI tIrthaMkarAdi mahApuruSa
dharma kA upadeza dete haiM, yahIM para bhavyajIva pratibodha ko prApta hote
haiM aura yahIM para jinavaroM se dharmazravaNa kara apanA saMzaya dUra karate
haiN| isake atirikta yahAM para sAdhu-sAdhviyoM ko bhakta-pAna evaM upadhi
sulabhatA se prApta hotI hai aura yahAM ke zrAvaka jana yA anya loga sAdhu-
sAdhviyoM ke prAcAra-vicAra ke jJAtA hote haiM / ata: unheM ina pAryakSetroM meM
hI vihAra karanA caahie| sUtra meM nizcita zabdoM meM kahA gayA hai ki 'itanA hI
Arya kSetra hai aura itanA hI vicaranA kalpatA hai, inake bAhara vicaranA nahIM
kalpatA hai|' isakA tAtparya yaha hai ki yaha zAzvata pAryakSetra hai / _
kadAcit koI rAjA Adi kI sat preraNA se anAryakSetra kA janasamudAya Arya
svabhAva meM pariNata ho bhI jAe to alpakAlIna parivartana A sakatA hai| usI
taraha AryakSetra meM bhI alpakAlIna parivartana hokara janasamadAya anArya
svabhAva meM pariNata ho sakatA hai, isI kAraNa se antima satrAMza meM yaha kahA
gayA hai ki-'kSetramaryAdA evaM kalpamaryAdA isa prakAra se hote hue bhI jaba
jahAM vicaraNa karane se saMyama guNoM kA vikAsa ho vahIM vicaraNa karanA
caahie|' kyoMki kabhI anAryakSetra meM kisI ke saMyamaguNoM kI vRddhi evaM
jinazAsana ko prabhAvanA ho sakatI hai aura kabhI kahIM prAryakSetra meM bhI
saMyamaguNoM kI hAni ho sakatI hai| isalie sUtra meM kSetrasImA kA kathana
karake saMyamavaddhi kA lakSya rakhakara vicarane kA vizeSa vidhAna kiyA hai|
bhASya aura TIkA meM batAyA gayA hai ki saMprati rAjA kI preraNA evaM prayatnoM
se anAryakSetra meM bhI sAdhu-sAdhvI vicarane lage the| AryakSetra meM bhI jahAM
lambe mArga hoM, lambI aTavI ho, jinako pAra karane meM aneka dina lagate hoM to
una kSetroM meM vicaraNa karane kA AcA. zru. 2, a. 3 meM niSedha kiyA gayA hai
aura unameM vicaraNa karane se hone vAle doSoM kA spaSTIkaraNa bhI kiyA hai,
ataH prAryakSetra ke bhI aise vibhAgoM meM sAdhusAdhvI ko nahIM jAnA caahie|

Page #109 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[First Uddeshak] 155 This Sutra and the Pracharang Sutra conclude that while
keeping the main goal of Samyomonnaati in mind and considering one's own
capacity, one can wander in any area, but generally, one should understand that
wandering outside the Aryakshetra is prohibited. The Sutra mentions the names of
countries on the borders of the Aryakshetra in all four directions, but instead
of mentioning the Kachchh country in the south, it mentions the famous city of
'Kosambi' there. The name of the Thuna country and its main city are not
included in the above twenty-five Aryakshetras, the reason for this is the
multiplicity or difference in names. The essence of the first Uddeshak is that
all the edible parts of a plant, from its root to its seed, can be consumed if
they are achitt, but a Sadhvi cannot consume large pieces of kanda, root, fruit,
etc., even if they are achitt. It is Kalpata to stay in a village, town, etc.,
for one month. If there are suburbs, etc., one can stay there for many months,
but one should wander for alms only where one stays, not in other suburbs. 10-11
A Sadhu-Sadhvi should not stay in a Pramaadi with one Parikshep and one path for
coming and going, but if it has many paths or doors, they can stay there even
for one Kal. 12-13 Sadhvis should not stay in shelters built in tri-junctions,
four-junctions, or markets, etc., where there is a lot of movement of men, but
Sadhus can stay in those shelters. 14-15 Sadhvis should not stay in a place
without a door, if they have to stay due to circumstances, they should close the
door by putting up a curtain. But Bhikshus can stay in such places. 16-17 A
Sadhvi can keep a Prasravana-matraka in the shape of a surahi, but a Sadhu
cannot. It is Kalpata for a Sadhu-Sadhvi to keep a cloth chilmilika (mosquito
net). Sadhu-Sadhvi should not sit by the water, etc. 20-21 One should not stay
in a house with paintings. Sadhvis should stay only under the protection of
Shayyatar, but Bhikshus can stay without protection. 22-24

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
prathama uddezaka] 155 isa sUtra se evaM prAcArAMgasUtra se yaha nirNaya ho jAtA
hai ki saMyamonnati kA mukhya lakSya rakhate hue evaM apanI kSamatA kA dhyAna
rakhate hue kisI bhI kSetra meM vicaraNa kiyA jA sakatA hai, kintu sAmAnyatayA
AryakSetra se bAhara vicaraNa karane kA niSedha hI samajhanA caahie| sUtra meM
prAryakSetra ke cAroM dizAoM ke kinAre para Ae dezoM ke nAma kahe gae haiM,
kintu dakSiNa dizA meM kaccha deza na kahakara vahAM kI prasiddha nagarI
'kosambI' kA kathana kiyA gayA hai / thUNA deza kA nAma evaM usakI mukhya nagarI
kA nAma uparyukta paccIsa prAryakSetroM meM nahIM hai, isakA kAraNa nAmoM kI
anekatA yA bhinnatA honA hI hai| prathama uddezaka kA sArAMza vanaspati ke mUla
se lekara bIja paryanta dasa vibhAgoM meM jitane khAne yogya vibhAga haiM ve
acitta hone para grahaNa kiye jA sakate haiM, kintu sAdhvI kanda, mUla, phala
Adi ke pravidhi se kie gae bar3e-bar3e Tukar3e acitta hone para bhI grahaNa
nahIM kara sakatI hai| grAma, nagara Adi meM eka mAsa rahanA kalpatA hai| yadi
usake upanagara Adi hoM to unameM alaga-alaga aneka mAsakalpa taka ThaharA jA
sakatA hai, kintu jahAM rahe vahIM bhikSA ke liye bhramaNa karanA cAhie, anya
upanagaroM meM nhiiN| 10-11 eka parikSepa evaM eka gamanAgamana ke mArga vAle
prAmAdi meM sAdhu-sAdhvI ko eka kAla meM nahIM rahanA cAhie, kintu usameM aneka
mArga yA dvAra hoM to ve eka kAla meM bhI raha sakate haiN| 12-13 puruSoM ke
atyadhika gamanAgamana vAle tirAhe, caurAhe yA bAjAra Adi meM bane hue upAzrayoM
meM sAdhviyoM ko nahIM rahanA cAhie, kintu sAghu una upAzrayoM meM Thahara
sakate haiN| 14-15 dvAra-rahita sthAna meM sAdhviyoM ko nahIM ThaharanA cAhie,
paristhitivaza yadi ThaharanA par3e to pardA lagAkara dvAra ko banda kara lenA
caahie| kintu aise sthAnoM para bhikSu Thahara sakate haiN| 16-17 surAhI ke
AkAra kA prazravaNa-mAtraka sAdhvI rakha sakatI hai, kintu sAdhu nahIM rakha
sakatA hai| sAdhu-sAdhvI ko vastra kI cilamilikA (maccharadAnI) rakhanA kalpatA
hai| pAnI ke kinAre sAdhu-sAdhvI ko baiThanA Adi kriyAeM nahIM karanI caahie|
20-21 citroM se yukta makAna meM nahIM ThaharanA caahie| sAdhviyoM ko zayyAtara
ke saMrakSaNa meM hI ThaharanA cAhie, kintu bhikSu binA saMrakSaNa ke bhI
Thahara sakatA hai| 22-24

Page #110 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  [156] [Brihatkalpasutra Sutra 25-29 30-31 32-33 38.41]    **Monks and nuns
should stay in houses devoid of both men and women.**  **Monks can stay in
houses inhabited only by men, and nuns can stay in houses inhabited only by
women.**  **It is not appropriate for monks to stay in an *upaashraya* that is
bound by material possessions or emotions, but nuns may stay there.**  **It is
not appropriate for monks to stay in an *upaashraya* that is bound by a fixed
path, but nuns may stay there.**  **If there is conflict with someone, it is
essential to completely calm oneself, even if the conflict is not resolved.**
**Otherwise, the practice of restraint is not achieved.**  **Monks and nuns
should stay in one place during the *chaturmas* and should wander according to
their strength during the *hemanta* and *greeshma* seasons.**  **They should not
travel frequently to kingdoms where there is conflict.**  **If monks or nuns go
to a *gochari* and someone asks for clothes or other items, they should only
accept them with the permission of the *pracharya* or other authority.**  **If
they give permission, then accept the items, otherwise return them.**  **Monks
and nuns should not accept food, clothes, bowls, beds, or bedding at night.**
**In special circumstances, bedding may be accepted, and stolen clothes, bowls,
etc., may be accepted at night if they are returned.**  **Monks and nuns should
not wander at night or during *vikala* (inappropriate times), and should not go
to a *sanka·∏çƒ´* (a place where food is scarce) at night to eat.**  **Monks and
nuns should not go alone to a place away from the *upaashraya* at night for
chanting, listening, or study, but they can go with two or three others.**
**Monks and nuns should wander only within the boundaries of the *praryakshetra*
(the area of perception) as described in the sutras.**  **However, for the
advancement of restraint, they can wander in any suitable area with
discernment.**  **[42-43 44-45 46-47 48]  ** **[Upasangara Sutra 1-5]**  **In
this context, there are many *kalpya* and *akalpya* (permissible and
impermissible) food items from the plant kingdom (such as *tal* and *pralamb*),
the limits of *kalpa* (time), the suitability and unsuitability of *prama*
(measure) for monks and nuns to stay in one place at a time, and the suitability
and unsuitability of *prama* (measure) for monks and nuns to stay in one place
at a time.**  **[10-11]**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
156] [bRhatkalpasUtra sUtra 25-29 30-31 32-33 38.41 strI-puruSoM ke nivAsa se
rahita makAna meM hI sAdhu-sAdhviyoM ko ThaharanA cAhie / kevala puruSoM ke
nivAsa vAle makAna meM bhikSu aura kevala striyoM ke nivAsa vAle makAna meM
sAdhviyAM Thahara sakatI haiN| dravya yA bhAvapratibaddha upAzraya meM bhikSu ko
rahanA nahIM kalpatA hai, kadAcit sAdhviyAM raha sakatI haiN| pratibaddhamArga
vAle upAzraya meM bhikSu ko rahanA nahIM kalpatA hai, sAdhviyAM kadAcit raha
sakatI haiN| kisI ke sAtha kleza ho jAe to usake upazAnta na hone para bhI
svayaM ko sarvathA upazAnta honA atyanta Avazyaka hai| anyathA saMyama kI
ArAdhanA nahIM hotI hai| sAdhu-sAdhviyoM ko cAturmAsa meM eka sthAna para hI
rahanA cAhiye tathA hemanta aura grISma Rtu meM zakti ke anusAra vicaraNa karate
rahanA caahie| jina rAjyoM meM paraspara virodha cala rahA ho vahAM bArambAra
gamanAgamana nahIM karanA caahie| sAdhu yA sAdhviyAM gocarI Adi ke liye gaye hoM
aura vahAM koI vastrAdi lene ke lie kahe to prAcAryAdi kI svIkRti kI zarta
rakhakara hI grahaNa kre| yadi ve svIkRti deM to rakheM, anyathA lauTA deveM /
sAdhu-sAdhviyAM rAtri meM AhAra, vastra, pAtra, zayyA-saMstAraka grahaNa na
kreN| kabhI vizeSa paristhiti meM zayyA-saMstAraka grahaNa kiyA jA sakatA hai
tathA curAye gaye vastra, pAtrAdi koI punaH lAkara de to unheM rAtri meM bhI
grahaNa kiyA jA sakatA hai| rAtri meM yA vikAla meM sAdhu-sAdhviyoM ko vihAra
nahIM karanA cAhie tathA dUra kSetra meM hone vAlA saMkhaDI meM AhAra grahaNa
karane ke liye bhI rAtri meM nahIM jAnA caahiye| sAdhu-sAdhviyoM ko rAtri meM
uccAra-prazravaNa yA svAdhyAya ke liye upAzraya se kucha dUra akele nahIM jAnA
cAhie, kintu do yA tIna-cAra ko sAtha lekara jA sakate haiM / cAroM dizAoM meM
jo prAryakSetroM kI sImA sUtra meM batAI gaI hai, usake bhItara hI sAdhu-
sAdhviyoM ko vicaranA caahie| kintu saMyama kI unnati ke lie vivekapUrvaka kisI
bhI yogya kSetra meM vicaraNa kiyA jA sakatA hai / 42-43 44-45 46-47 48
upasaMhAra sUtra 1-5 isa uddezaka meMvanaspati vibhAgoM ke (tAla-pralamba ke)
aneka khAdya padArthoM ke kalpyAkalpya kA, kalpakAla kI maryAdA kA, eka kAla meM
sAdhu-sAdhviyoM ke rahane ke yogyAyogya prAmAdi kA, 10-11

Page #111 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[First Uddeshak] [157 34 Sutra 12-15, 20, 21, 25-33 various types of
Kalpyakalpya Upashrayas, 16-17 Ghatimaatraka (a unit shaped like an earthen pot)
Kalpyakalpya, 18 Chilmilika (mosquito net) keeping, standing by the water, etc.,
22-24 taking and not taking protection of Shayatar, completely calming the
Klesha, 35-36, 48 time of wandering and the limits of the areas of wandering, 37
not going between opposing kingdoms, 38-41 the method of taking clothes, etc.,
for Sadhus and Sadhvis who have gone for Gochari, etc., 42-43 not taking food,
etc., at night, 44 not wandering at night, 45 not going to a distant Sankhadi
(Jimanwar) at night, not going alone outside the limits of the Upashraya at
night, etc., various topics have been described. || First Uddeshak ends /

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
prathama uddezaka] [157 34 sUtra 12-15, 20, 21, 25-33 aneka prakAra ke
kalpyAkalpya upAzrayoM kA, 16-17 ghaTImAtraka ke (miTTI kI ghaTikA kI AkRti vAle
mAtraka ke) kalpyAkalpya kA, 18 cilamilikA (maccharadAnI) rakhane kA, jala ke
kinAre khar3e rahanA Adi kA, 22-24 zayyAtara kA saMrakSaNa grahaNa karane-na
karane kA, kleza ko pUrNataH upazAnta karane kA, 35-36, 48 vicaraNa kAla kA evaM
vicaraNa ke kSetroM kI maryAdA kA, 37 virodhI rAjyoM ke bIca gamanAgamana na
karane kA, 38-41 gocarI Adi ke liye gaye hue sAdhu-sAdhviyoM ko vastrAdi lene kI
vidhi kA, 42-43 rAtri meM AhArAdi grahaNa na karane kA, 44 rAtri meM vihAra na
karane kA, 45 rAtri meM dUravartI saMkhaDi (jImanavAra) ke liye na jAne kA,
rAtri meM upAzraya kI sImA ke bAhara akele na jAne, ityAdi bhinna-bhinna viSayoM
kA varNana kiyA gayA hai| ||prthm uddezaka samApta /

Page #112 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Second Objective: Rules and Prohibitions for Staying in a Granary  **1.**  It
is not permissible for Nirgranthas or Nirgranthis to stay in a granary where the
following grains are scattered, spread out, scattered in heaps, or scattered
widely: 1. Rice, 2. Wheat, 3. Green gram, 4. Black gram, 5. Sesame, 6. Horse
gram, 7. Wheat, 8. Barley, 9. Jowar, even for a short period of time.  **2.**
However, if it is known that the grains (from rice to jowar) are not scattered,
spread out, scattered in heaps, or scattered widely, but are stored in heaps, in
bundles, against the wall, in baskets, marked, stamped, or hidden, then it is
permissible for Nirgranthas or Nirgranthis to stay there during the winter and
summer seasons.  **3.** However, if it is known that the grains (from rice to
jowar) are not stored in heaps, in bundles, against the wall, or in baskets, but
are stored in a granary, in a loft, on a platform, or in a garland, plastered
with mud or dung, covered, marked, or sealed, then it is permissible for
Nirgranthas or Nirgranthis to stay there during the rainy season.
**Discussion:** These sutras describe three situations regarding houses where
grains are stored. The first situation is a house where grains are scattered
everywhere, which is completely impermissible.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
dUsarA uddezaka dhAnyayukta upAzraya meM rahane ke vidhi-niSedha 1. uvassayassa
aMtovagaDAe 1. sAlINi vA, 2. vIhINi vA, 3. muggANi vA, 4. mAsANi vA, 5. tilANi
vA, 6. kulatthANi vA, 7. godhUmANi vA, 8. javANi vA, 9. javajavANi vA,
ukkhittANi vA, vikkhittANi vA, viigiNNANi vA, vippANNANi vA no kappai
niggaMthANa vA niggaMthINa vA ahAlaMdamavi vtthe| 2. aha puNa evaM jANejjA-no
ukkhittAI, no vikkhitAI, no viikiNNAI, no vippinnnnaaii| rAsikaDANi vA,
puMjakaDANi vA, bhittikANi vA, kuliyAkaDANi vA, laMchiyANi vA, muddiyANi vA,
pihiyANi vaa|| kappai niggaMthANa vA niggaMthINa vA hemanta-gimhAsu vatthae / 3.
aha puNa evaM jANejjAno rAsikaDAI, no puMjakaDAI, no bhittikaDAI, no
kuliyaakddaaii| koTTAuttANi vA, pallAuttANi vA, maMcAuttANi vA, mAlAuttANi vA,
olittANi vA, vilittANi vA, pihiyANi vA, laMchiyANi vA, muddiyANi vaa| kappA
niggaMdhANa vA, niggaMthoNa vA vAsAvAsaM vatthae / 1. upAzraya ke bhItarI bhAga
(sImA) meM 1. zAli, 2. vrIhi, 3. mUga, 4. ur3ada, 5. tila, 6. kulatha, 7. gehUM,
8. jo yA 9. jvAra avyavasthita rakhe hoM yA jagaha-jagaha rakhe hoM, yA bikhare
hue hoM yA atyadhika bikhare hue hoM to nirgranthoM aura nirgranthiyoM ko vahAM
'yathAlandakAla' taka bhI rahanA nahIM kalpatA hai| 2. yadi yaha jAne ki
(upAzraya meM zAli yAvat jvAra) utkSipta, vikSipta, vyatikIrNa aura viprakIrNa
nahIM haiM, _kintu rAzIkRta, pujakRta, bhittikRta, kulikAkRta, lAMchita, mudrita
yA pihita haiM to inheM hemanta aura grISma Rtu meM vahAM rahanA kalpatA hai| 3.
yadi yaha jAne ki (upAzraya ke bhItara zAli yAvat jvAra) rAzikRta, pujIkRta,
bhittikRta yA kulikAkRta nahIM haiM, kintu koThe meM yA palya meM bhare hue
haiM, maMca para yA mAle para surakSita haiM, miTTI yA gobara se lipe hue haiM,
DhaMke hue, cihna kiye hue yA muhara lage hue haiM to unheM vahAM varSAvAsa meM
rahanA kalpatA hai / vivecana-prastuta sUtroM meM dhAnya rakhe hue makAnoM kI
tIna sthitiyoM kA kathana kiyA gayA hai| prathama sthiti haijisa makAna meM
sarvatra dhAnya bikharA huA ho, vaha makAna pUrNatayA akalpanIya hotA

Page #113 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The second objective [159 is / the second condition is that in the house where
grain is kept organized, one can stay while wandering in the Hemant or summer
season. The third condition is - where the grain is completely organized, one
can perform Chaturmas / The explanation of 'Yathalankal' used in the first sutra
is as follows - Gaha-Tivihan Cha Prahalandan, Jahannam Majjhim Cha Ukkosan /
Udaullam Cha Jahannam, Panagam Pun Hoi Ukkosan // - Briha. Bhashya 3303
Yathalanda is a special time. It is of three types 1. Jghanya, 2. Madhyama, 3.
Utkrishta / The time it takes for the line of a wet hand to dry is called
Jghanya Yathalankal. Five days and nights are called Utkrishta Yathalankal. In
Brihatkalpa Sutra Udde. 3 and in Uvvaisutr, 29 days have been taken from it and
the time between these two is called Madhyama Yathalankal. In the shelter where
any grain is scattered in the aforementioned manner, even Jghanya Yathalankal is
not considered appropriate. Because going and coming from above them causes
violation of seeds with consciousness and walking on grains can also cause self-
violation by slipping and falling, therefore, sadhus and sadhvis should not stay
there even for a moment. If, perhaps, another shelter is not found even after
trying, then one can stay there with effort after cleaning it with rajoharan
etc. Then one should accept the appropriate atonement for it. The word
'Antovagadae' has been used here for the part of the house where the sadhu has
to stay or move around. In the second sutra, the grains like Sali, Vrihi etc.
are not scattered in the house, but their circular mass is formed, long mass is
formed, they are kept against the wall, they are kept in round or square vessels
made of Kulik-earth, they are collected and marked with ash (ash) etc., they are
imprinted with dung etc., they are covered with bamboo mats, baskets or plates,
clothes etc., then in winter and summer, according to their own kalpa, sadhus
and sadhvis should stay in such a house, but it is not appropriate to stay in
such a house during the rainy season / The grains like Sali, Vrihi etc.
mentioned in the third sutra are not kept in the form of a mass within the
boundary of the house or against the wall etc., but they are kept well protected
inside a room or a kothi / Such as - Palya-gupta-wood, Vansh-dal etc. made and
plastered with dung-earth etc. round

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
dUsarA uddezaka [159 hai / dUsarI sthiti haijisa makAna meM dhAnya vyavasthita
rakhA huA hai usameM hemanta yA grISma Rtu meM vicaraNa karate hue ThaharA jA
sakatA hai| tIsarI sthiti hai-jisa makAna meM dhAnya sarvathA vyavasthita rakhA
huA ho vahAM cAturmAsa kiyA jA sakatA hai / prathama sUtra meM prayukta
'yathAlaMdakAla' kI vyAkhyA isa prakAra hai gAhA-tivihaM ca prahAlaMdaM,
jahannayaM majjhimaM ca ukkosaM / udaullaM ca jahaNNaM, paNagaM puNa hoi ukkosaM
// --bRha. bhASya 3303 yathAlanda nAma kAla vizeSa kA hai| vaha tIna prakAra kA
hotA hai1. jaghanya, 2. madhyama, 3. utkRSTa / gIle hAtha kI rekhA ke sUkhane
meM jitanA samaya lagatA hai, utane samaya ko jaghanya yathAlandakAla kahate
haiN| pAMca dina-rAta ko utkRSTa yathAlandakAla kahate haiN| bRhatkalpa sUtra
udde. 3 meM tathA uvavAIsUtra meM isase 29 dina grahaNa kiye gaye haiM aura ina
donoM ke madhyavartI kAla ko madhyama yathAlandakAla kahate haiN| jisa upAzraya
meM pUrvokta prakAra se koI bhI dhAnya bikhare hue par3e hoM vahAM para jaghanya
yathAlandakAla bhI rahanA nahIM kalpatA hai| kyoMki unake Upara se jAne-Ane meM
sacitta bIjoM kI virAdhanA hotI hai aura dhAnyoM para calate hue kabhI
phisalakara girane se Atma-virAdhanA bhI sambhava hai, ataH sAdhusAdhviyoM ko
vahAM kSaNabhara bhI nahIM ThaharanA caahie| kadAcit prayatna karane para bhI
anya upAzraya na mile to rajoharaNAdi se pramArjana karake yatanApUrvaka vahAM
para ThaharA jA sakatA hai| phira usakA yathAyogya prAyazcitta svIkAra kara lenA
caahie| makAna ke jisa vibhAga meM sAdhu ko ThaharanA ho yA gamanAgamana karanA
ho usake liye yahAM 'aMtovagaDAe' zabda kA prayoga kiyA gayA hai| dUsare sUtra
meM nirdiSTa zAli, vrIhi Adi dhAnya makAna meM bikhare hue nahIM haiM, kintu
unakI golAkAra rAzi banI huI hai, lambI rAzi banI huI hai, bhitti ke sahAre
rakhe hue haiM, kulikA-miTTI se bane gola yA caukora pAtra meM rakhe hue haiM,
ekatra karake bhasma (rAkha) Adi se lAMchita (cihnita) kiye hue haiM, gobara Adi
se mudrita (limpita) haiM, bAMsa se banI caTAI, TokarI yA thAlI vastra Adi se
pihita-DhaMke hue haiM to zIta evaM grISmakAla meM apane kalpa ke anusAra vaise
makAna meM sAdhu aura sAdhviyoM ko ThaharanA kalpatA hai, kintu varSAkAla meM
vaise makAna meM ThaharanA nahIM kalpatA hai / tIsare sUtra meM nirdiSTa zAli,
vrIhi Adi dhAnya makAna kI sImA ke bhItara rAzi rUpa meM yA bhitti Adi ke sahAre
nahIM rakhe haiM, kintu kisI koThA yA koThI ke bhItara acchI taraha se surakSita
rakhe hue haiM / yathA- palyAgupta-kATha, vaMza-dala Adi se nirmita aura gobara-
miTTI Adi se lipe hue golAkAra

Page #114 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Translation:  **160] The special vessel used to store grains, made according
to the Brihatkalpa Sutra, is called a 'paly'. The grains stored safely inside
such a 'paly' are called 'palyagupt'. 'Manchagupt' refers to grains stored in a
circular platform made of bamboo slats, built on three or four pillars,
plastered with cow dung and mud on all sides. 'Malagupt' refers to grains stored
in a house, where the doors of the upper floor are securely closed. If grains
are stored in these places and covered with mud, plastered with cow dung,
covered, marked, and sealed, so that the grains cannot come out on their own and
cannot be taken out during the rainy season, then monks or nuns can stay in such
a house during the rainy season. However, the commentators say that this rule of
staying in such houses applies only to 'geetarth' monks and nuns, not to
'ageetarth' monks and nuns, and only if no other place is available. It should
be understood that 'ageetarth' monks can stay under the guidance of 'geetarth'
monks.  **4. Prohibition and atonement for staying in a house with liquor:**  If
there are pots filled with liquor or 'sauvir' liquor inside the shelter, then it
is not permissible for 'nirgranth' monks and nuns to stay there even for a short
time. If, upon investigation, no other shelter is found, then it is permissible
to stay in the said shelter for one or two nights, but it is not permissible to
stay for more than one or two nights. Whoever stays there for more than one or
two nights is liable to 'diksha-ched' or 'tap' atonement for violating the
rules.  **Explanation:**  The liquor made from rice, etc., is called 'sura', and
the liquor made from grapes, dates, etc., is called 'sauvir liquor'. Monks and
nuns should not stay in a place where these two types of liquor are kept in
pots, even for a short time. If they do, they are liable to 'laghuchaumasi'
atonement. This is because staying in such a place may lead to a monk consuming
liquor, which can lead to many faults, and it can also raise doubts in the minds
of ordinary people.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
160] [bRhatkalpasUtra banAye gaye dhAnya rakhane ke pAtra-vizeSa ko palya kahate
haiN| aise palya ke bhItara surakSita rakhe hue dhAnya ko 'palyAgupta' kahate
haiN| maMcAgupta-tIna yA cAra khambhoM ke Upara banAye gaye macAna para bAMsa kI
khapacciyoM se nirmita golAkAra aura cAroM ora se gobara-miTTI se lipta aise
maMca meM surakSita rakhe gaye dhAnya ko 'maMcAgupta' kahate haiN|
mAlAguptamakAna ke Upara ko maMjila ke dvAra Adi ko acchI taraha banda karake
rakhe gaye dhAnya ko 'mAlAgupta' kahate haiN| ina sthAnoM meM dhAnya ko rakha
kara use miTTI se chAba diyA gayA hai, gobara se lIpA gayA hai, DhaMkA huA hai,
cihnita kiyA gayA hai aura mUda diyA gayA hai, jisake bhItara rakhA gayA dhAnya
svayaM bAhara nahIM nikala sakatA hai aura varSAkAla meM jisake bAhara nikAle
jAne kI saMbhAvanA bhI nahIM hai, aise makAna meM sAdhu yA sAdhviyAM caumAse meM
Thahara sakate haiM; kintu bhASyakAra kahate haiM ki ukta prakAra ke makAnoM meM
Thaharane kA vidhAna kevala gItArtha sAdhu aura sAdhviyoM ke lie hI hai,
agItArtha sAdhusAdhviyoM ke liye nahIM hai tathA anya sthAna na milane para hI
aise sthAna meM Thaharane kA vidhAna hai| agItArtha sAdhu gItArtha sAdhu ke
netRtva meM raha sakate haiM, aisA samajhanA caahie| surAyukta makAna meM rahane
kA vidhi-niSedha va prAyazcitta 4. uvassayassa aMtovagaDAe surA-viyaDa-kumbhe vA
sovIra-viyaDa-kumbhe vA uvanikkhitte siyA, no kappai niggaMthANa vA niggaMthINa
vA ahAlaMdamavi vtthe| harasthA ya uvassayaM paDilehamANe no labhejjA, evaM se
kappai egarAyaM vA durAyaM vA vatthae / no se kappai paraM egarAyAno vA durAyAno
vA ytthe|| je tattha egarAyAo vA durAyAo vA paraM vasai, se santarA chae vA
parihAre vaa| 4. upAzraya ke bhItara surA aura sauvIra se bhare kumbha rakhe hue
hoM to nirgranthoM aura nimranthiyoM ko vahAM 'yathAlandakAla' bhI rahanA nahIM
kalpatA hai / kadAcit gaveSaNA karane para anya upAzraya na mile to ukta
upAzraya meM eka yA do rAta rahanA kalpatA hai, kintu eka yA do rAtri se adhika
rahanA nahIM kalpatA hai| jo vahAM eka yA do rAta se adhika rahatA hai, vaha
maryAdA-ullaMghana ke kAraNa dIkSA-cheda yA tapa rUpa prAyazcitta kA pAtra hotA
hai| vivecana-cAvala prAdi kI pIThI se jo madirA banAyI jAtI hai vaha 'surA'
kahI jAtI hai aura dAkha-khajUra Adi se jo madya banAyA jAtA hai vaha 'sauvIra
madya' kahA jAtA hai| ye donoM hI prakAra ke madya jisa sthAna para ghar3oM meM
rakhe hue hoM, aise sthAna para agItArtha sAdhu-sAdhvI ko yathAlandakAla bhI
nahIM rahanA caahie| yadi rahatA hai to vaha laghucaumAsI prAyazcitta kA pAtra
hotA hai / kyoMki aise sthAna meM Thaharane para kabhI koI sAdhu surApAna kara
sakatA hai, jisase aneka doSa honA sambhava haiM aura vahAM Thaharane para
janasAdhAraNa ko zaMkA bhI utpanna ho sakatI hai|

Page #115 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Second Objective] [161 Aayachitt   If another place is not available, one can
rest there for one night. If it is more necessary, one can rest for two nights
as well. This is a special provision for the Gƒ´tartha or for the Agƒ´tartha under
the leadership of the Gƒ´tartha. Staying for more than two nights violates the
prescribed limit and incurs a penance of Tapp or Chhed. The commentary on the
sutra "Se Santara Chheee Wa Parihare Wa" is as follows: "Se-Tasy Sanayatasy,
'Swantaraat' Swaswakritam Yadantaram-Triraatra-Chatuhraatraadi Kalam
Pravasthanaroopam, Tasmaat, 'Chhedo Wa'-Panch Raatri Vivaadih, 'Pariharo
Wa'-Masalghukaaditipovishesho Bhavati Iti Sutraarthah. The meaning of this
commentary is that the restrained person, due to his own fault of staying for
three, four, or more days, incurs a penance of Tapp or Chhed as appropriate.
However, it is not appropriate to interpret the word "Se Santara" as meaning
that the penance should be for the same number of days as the stay. Because the
commentator has not interpreted it that way anywhere. Therefore, the meaning
accepted by the commentator should be followed.  ## The Law, Prohibition, and
Penance of Staying in a Water-Filled Upaashraya 5.   If there are pots filled
with cold water or hot water inside the Upaashraya, then it is not permissible
for the Nirgranthas and Nirgranthis to stay there even for "Yathalanda-kaal".
If, upon investigation, no other Upaashraya is found, then it is permissible to
stay in the said Upaashraya for one or two nights. However, it is not
permissible to stay for more than one or two nights. Whoever stays there for
more than one or two nights becomes liable for the penance of Diksha-Chhed or
Tapp due to violation of the prescribed limit.   ## Discussion  A pot filled
with cold water whose color, etc., has changed due to boiling on fire or due to
substances like alkali, etc., is called "Sheetodakavikritakumbha". Similarly, a
pot filled with hot water whose color, etc., has changed due to boiling on fire
or due to substances like alkali, etc., is called "Ushnodakavikritakumbha". In
an Upaashraya where such pots (of either or both types) are kept, the Sadhus and
Sadhvis should not stay there even for "Yathalanda-kaal".   ## Special
Discussion  It should be understood according to the previous sutra.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
dUsarA uddezaka] [161 Ayazcitta anya sthAna ke na milane para vahAM eka rAta
vizrAma kiyA jA sakatA hai| adhika Avazyaka ho to do rAtri bhI vizrAma kiyA jA
sakatA hai / yaha prApavAdika vidhAna gItArthoM ke liye hai athavA gItArtha ke
netRtva meM agItArthoM ke liye bhI hai| do rAtri se adhika rahane para sUtrokta
maryAdA kA ullaMghana hotA hai aura usakA tapa yA cheda rUpa prAyazcitta AtA
hai| 'se saMtarA chee vA parihAre vA' isa sUtrAMza kI TIkA isa prakAra hai 'se-
tasya saMyatasya, 'svAMtarAt' svasvakRtaM yadantaraM-trirAtra-catuHrAtrAdi kAlaM
pravasthAnarUpaM, tasmAt, 'chedo vA'-paMca rAtri vivAdiH, 'parihAro
vA'-mAsalaghukAditapovizeSo bhavati iti suutraarthH| isa TIkA kA bhAvArtha yaha
hai ki usa saMyata ke dvArA tIna cAra Adi dinoM ke avasthAna rUpa kie hue apane
doSa ke kAraNa use tapa rUpa yA cheda rUpa yathocita prAyazcitta prAtA hai|
kintu se saMtarA' zabda kA jitane dina rahe utane hI dina kA prAyazcitta Ave
aisA artha karanA ucita nahIM hai| kyoMki TIkAkAra ne aisA artha kahIM bhI nahIM
kiyA hai| ataH TIkAkArasammata artha hI karanA caahie| jalayukta upAzraya meM
rahane kA vidhi-niSedha aura prAyazcitta 5. uvassayassa aMtovagaDAe sonovaga-
viyaDakumbhe vA usiNodaga-viyaDakumbhe vA uvanikkhitte siyA, no kappai
niggaMthANa vA niggaMthINa vA ahAlaMdamavi vtthe| huratthA ya uvassayaM
paDilehamANe no labhejjA, evaM se kappai egarAyaM vA durAyaM vA vatthae / no se
kappA paraM egarAyAno vA durAyAo vA vatthae / je tattha egarAyAo vA durAyAo vA
paraM basai, se santarA chee yA parihAre thaa| 5. upAzraya ke bhItara acitta
zItala jala yA uSNa jala ke bhare hue kumbha rakhe hoM to nirgranthoM aura
nirgranthiyoM ko vahAM 'yathAlandakAla' bhI rahanA nahIM kalpatA hai| kadAcit
gaveSaNA karane para bhI anya upAzraya na mile to ukta upAzraya meM eka yA do
rAta rahanA kalpatA hai, kintu eka yA do rAtri se adhika rahanA nahIM kalpatA
hai / jo vahAM eka yA do rAta se adhika rahatA hai vaha maryAdA-ullaMghana ke
kAraNa dIkSA-cheda yA tapa rUpa prAyazcitta kA pAtra hotA hai| _ vivecana-agni
para ubAlane se yA kSAra Adi padArthoM se jisake varNAdi kA parivartana ho gayA
hai aise prAsuka ThaNDe jala ke bhare hue ghar3e ko zItodakavikRtakumbha kahate
haiN| isI prakAra prAsuka uSNa jala ke bhare hue ghar3e ko uSNodakavikRtakumbha
kahate haiN| jisa upAzraya meM aise (eka yA donoM hI prakAra ke) jala se bhare
ghar3e rakhe hoM, vahAM para sAdhu aura sAdhviyoM ko 'yathAlandakAla' bhI nahIM
rahanA cAhie / vizeSa vivecana pUrva sUtra ke anusAra samajha lenA caahie|

Page #116 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Translation:  [162] The present Sutra in the Bahutkalpa Sutra does not
mention *saccitta* water, but *acitta* water. This means that a Sadhu can easily
use *acitta* water. It is not easily possible for a Sadhu to drink *saccitta*
water. / If a Bhikshu gets thirsty at night while staying in a place with
*acitta* water, and drinks that water, then his *ratribhojanaviraman* is broken.
Therefore, it is forbidden to stay in such places of doubt. The Sutra uses the
word 'Viyad' along with cold and hot water, which is used in other Agamas with
different meanings and as an adjective. For detailed information on this topic,
see Nishita U. 19 Sutra 1-7.  **Rules and prohibitions for staying in an
Upashraya with fire or lamp, and the atonement:**  6. If fire burns all night
inside the Upashraya, then neither the Nirgranthas nor the Nirgranthis are
allowed to stay there even for *yathalankadkal*. If, after searching, no other
Upashraya is found, then it is permissible to stay in the said Upashraya for one
or two nights, but not more than that. / Whoever stays there for more than one
or two nights is liable for *diksha-ched* or *tap* atonement due to
transgression of the rules.  7. If a lamp burns all night inside the Upashraya,
then neither the Nirgranthas nor the Nirgranthis are allowed to stay there even
for *yathalankadkal*. If, after searching, no other Upashraya is found, then it
is permissible to stay in the said Upashraya for one or two nights, but not more
than that. / Whoever stays there for more than one or two nights is liable for
*diksha-ched* or *tap* atonement due to transgression of the rules.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
162] [bahatkalpasUtra prastuta sUtra meM sacitta pAnI kA kathana na hokara
acitta pAno kA kathana hai| isakA tAtparya yahI hai ki sAdhu ke dvArA acitta
pAnI kA sahaja hI upayoga kiyA jA sakatA hai| sacitta pAnI kA sAdhu dvArA pInA
sahaja sambhava nahIM hai / acitta jala yukta sthAna meM Thaharane para kisI
bhikSa ko rAtri meM pyAsa laga jAe, usa samaya vaha yadi usa jala ko pI le to
usakA rAtribhojanaviramaNavata khaMDita ho jAtA hai, ataH aise zaMkA ke sthAnoM
meM Thaharane kA niSedha kiyA hai| sUtra meM zItala evaM uSNa jala ke sAtha
'viyaDa' zabda kA prayoga hai, anya AgamoM meM yaha bhinnabhinna artha meM evaM
vizeSaNa ke rUpa meM prayukta hai| isa viSaya kI vizeSa jAnakArI ke liye nizItha
u. 19 sUtra 1-7 kA vivecana dekheN| agni yA dIpaka yukta upAzraya meM rahane ke
vidhi-niSedha aura prAyazcitta 6. uvassayassa aMtovagaDAe, sambarAie joI
ziyAejjA, no kappai niggaMthANa vA niggaMthINa vA prahAlaMdamavi vtthe| huratthA
ya uvassayaM paDilehamANe no labhejjA, evaM se kappai egarAyaM vA durAyaM vA
vatthae / no se kappai paraM egarAyAo vA durAyAo vA vatthae / je tattha
egarAyAno vA durAyAno vA paraM vasai, se santarA chee vA parihAre vaa| 7.
ubassayassa aMtoyagaDAe, savvarAie paIve dipajjA, no kappai niggaMthANa vA
niggaMthINa vA ahAlaMdamavi vtthe| huratthA ya uvassayaM paDilehamANe no
labhejjA, evaM se kappai egarAyaM vA durAyaM vA vatthae / no se kappai paraM
egarAyAo vA durAyAo vA vathae / je tattha egarAyAo vA durAyAo vA paraM ksai, se
santarA chee vA parihAre vaa| 6. upAzraya ke bhItara sArI rAta agni jale to
nirgranthoM aura nirgranthiyoM ko vahAM 'yathAlandakAla' bhI rahanA nahIM
kalpatA hai| kadAcit gaveSaNA karane para bhI anya upAzraya na mile to ukta
upAzraya meM eka yA do rAta rahanA kalpatA hai, kintu eka yA do rAtri se adhika
rahanA nahIM kalpatA hai / jo vahAM eka yA do rAta se adhika rahatA hai, vaha
maryAdA-ullaMghana ke kAraNa dIkSA-cheda yA tapa rUpa prAyazcitta kA pAtra hotA
hai / 7. upAzraya ke bhItara sArI rAta dIpaka jale to nirgranthoM aura
nirgranthiyoM ko vahAM 'yathAlandakAla' bhI rahanA nahIM kalpatA hai / kadAcit
gaveSaNA karane para bhI anya upAzraya na mile to ukta upAzraya meM eka yA do
rAta rahanA kalpatA hai, kintu eka yA do rAtri se adhika rahanA nahIM kalpatA
hai|

Page #117 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Second Objective] [163 Whoever stays there for more than one or two nights is
eligible for Diksha-Chhed or Tap-Roop PrƒÅya≈õcitta due to Marmaada Ullanghan.
Discussion- It is not appropriate for a monk to stay in a house where fire burns
all night or day and night (like a potter's workshop or a blacksmith's workshop
etc.). If there is no fire in the place of stay and on the path of coming and
going, but it burns somewhere else, then it is appropriate to stay there /
Similarly, the place where a lamp burns all night or day and night is also
inappropriate. The faults of staying in a place with fire or lamp are: 1. The
killing of Agni-Kaya Jivas while coming and going near the fire or lamp. 2. Any
equipment can fall into the fire due to wind and burn. 3. The killing of Tris
Jivas coming due to the lamp. 4. The intention of cooling may arise. Aacha.
Shru. 2, A. 2, U. 3 also prohibits staying in a place with fire and Nishƒ´th U.
16 has its PrƒÅya≈õcitta Vidhan. These previous texts do not prohibit short-term
fire or lamp, but in the first objective of this Sutra, there is a provision for
the Sadhu to stay in a male Sagarik Upashraya and the Sadhvi to stay in a female
Sagarik Upashraya. Where there is also a possibility of fire or lamp burning /
Therefore, from these Sutras, one should understand the prohibition of places
where fire burns all night. Other discussions should be understood in the same
way as the previous Sutra / The rules, prohibitions and PrƒÅya≈õcitta of staying
in a house with food items 8. Pind-shaped food, Lochak-Mava etc., milk, curd,
Navneet, ghee, oil, Phaniyam, Purva, Sakkuli, Siharini, etc. are placed inside
the Upashraya, whether they are scattered, scattered, scattered, or scattered,
it is not appropriate for Nigganthas or Nigganthis to stay there for a day. 9.
But one should know this - not scattered, not scattered, not scattered, not
scattered. Rasikadaani, Punjakadaani, Bhiti-kadaani, Kuliya-kadaani,
Lanchhiyani, Muddiyani, Pihiyani are appropriate for Nigganthas or Nigganthis to
stay there during Hemant-Grima / 10. But one should know this - not Rasikadaani,
not Kuliya-kadaani, Kotta-uttaani, Palla-uttaani, Mancha-uttaani, Mala-uttaani,
Kubhi-uttaani, Karabi-uttaani, Olittaani, Vilitaani, Pihiyani, Lanchhiyani,
Muddiyani are appropriate for Nigganthas or Nigganthis to stay there during
Vasa-Vas. 8. Inside the Upashraya, Pind-shaped food, Lochak-Mava etc., milk,
curd, Navneet, ghee, oil,

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
dUsarA uddezaka] [163 jo vahAM eka yA do rAta se adhika rahatA hai vaha marmAdA
ullaMghana ke kAraNa dIkSA-cheda yA tapa rUpa prAyazcitta kA pAtra hotA hai|
vivecana-jisa makAna meM sArI rAta yA dina-rAta agni jalatI hai, usa
(kumbhakArazAlA yA lohArazAlA Adi) meM bhikSu ko ThaharanA nahIM kalpatA hai|
yadi Thaharane ke sthAna meM evaM gamanAgamana ke mArga meM agni nahIM jalatI
ho, kintu anyatra kahIM bhI jalatI ho to vahAM ThaharanA kalpatA hai / isI
prakAra sampUrNa rAtri yA dina-rAta jahAM dIpaka jalatA hai, vaha sthAna bhI
akalpanIya hai| agni yA dIpaka yukta sthAna meM Thaharane ke doSa 1. agni ke yA
dIpaka ke nikaTa se gamanAgamana karane meM agnikAya ke jIvoM kI virAdhanA hotI
hai| 2. havA se koI upakaraNa agni meM par3akara jala sakatA hai| 3. dIpaka ke
kAraNa Ane vAle trasa jIvoM kI virAdhanA hotI hai| 4. zItanivAraNa karane kA
saMkalpa utpanna ho sakatA hai| AcA. zru. 2, a. 2, u. 3 meM bhI agniyukta sthAna
meM Thaharane kA niSedha hai evaM nizItha u. 16 meM isakA prAyazcitta vidhAna
hai| ina prAgamasthaloM meM alpakAlIna agni yA dIpaka kA niSedha nahIM kiyA hai,
kintu isI sUtra ke prathama uddezaka meM puruSa sAgArika upAzraya meM sAdhu ko
evaM strI sAgArika upAzraya meM sAdhvI ko Thaharane kA vidhAna hai| jahAM agni
yA dIpaka jalane kI sambhAvanA bhI rahatI hai / ataH ina sUtroM se sampUrNa
rAtri agni jalane vAle sthAnoM kA niSedha samajhanA caahie| anya vivecana pUrva
sUtra ke samAna samajhanA cAhie / khAdyapadArthayukta makAna meM rahane ke
vidhi-niSedha aura prAyazcitta 8. uvassayassa aMtovagaDAe piNDae vA, loyae thA,
khIraM vA, dahi vA, navaNIyaM vA, sappi vA, telle vA, phANiyaM vA, pUrva vA,
sakkulI vA, sihariNI vA ukkhittANi vA, vikkhittANi vA, viigiNNANi vA,
vippaiNNANi vA, no kappai niggaMthANa vA nigaMthINa vA ahAlaMdamavi vtthe| 9.
aha puNa evaM jANejjA-no ukkhittAI, no vikkhitAI, no viikiNNAI, no
vippinnnnaaii| rAsikaDANi vA, puMjakaDANi bA, bhitikaDANi vA, kuliyAkaDANi vA,
laMchiyANi vA, muddiyANi vA, pihiyANi vA kappai niggaMthANa vA niggaMthoNaM vA
hemaMta-gimhAsu vatthae / 10. aha puNa evaM jANejjA-no rAsikaDAi jAva no
kuliyAkaDAyaM, koTTAuttANi vA, pallAuttANi vA, maMcAuttANi vA, mAlAuttANi vA,
kubhiuttANi vA, karabhi-uttANi vA, olittANi vA, vilittANi vA, pihiyANi vA,
laMchiyANi vA, muddiyANi vA kappai nimgaMthANa bA niggaMthoNa vA vAsAvAsaM
vtthe| 8. upAzraya ke bhItara meM piNDarUpa khAdya, locaka-mAvA Adi, dUdha,
dahI, navanIta, ghRta, tela,

Page #118 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[164] [Brihatkalpa Sutra] It is not permissible for Nirgranthas and Nirgranthis
to stay in a place where there are sweets, malpuas, puris, and sandalwood
scattered, scattered, scattered, and scattered. / 9. If it is known that (in the
shelter, food in the form of a lump or sandalwood) is not scattered, scattered,
scattered, or scattered / but is piled up, worshipped, made into a wall, made
into a small mound, and marked, printed, or hidden, then it is permissible for
Nirgranthas and Nirgranthis to stay there during the winter and summer seasons.
10. If it is known that (inside the shelter, food in the form of a lump or
sandalwood) is not piled up or made into a small mound, but is stored in a
granary or a container, is kept on a platform or a garland, is kept in a pot or
a bowl, is smeared with mud or dung, is covered, marked, or sealed, then it is
permissible for them to stay there during the rainy season. / The discussion-
sutra 1-3 describes a shelter house containing grain, and these three sutras
describe a house containing food. / Grain can be scattered on the ground, but
these food items are scattered in vessels, etc. / The faults that arise from
staying in a shelter containing food are: 1. Insects are more likely to breed in
a house containing food. 2. Rats, cats, etc. also roam around. 3. Animals and
birds can eat them carelessly. 4. There is a fault of obstruction in preventing
and removing them from eating, and if they are not removed, the owner of the
house may become angry or may suspect that the sadhu is eating them. 5.
Sometimes a hungry or thirsty monk may be tempted to eat, and if he eats, he
incurs the fault of adatta. 6. The fragrance or stench of food can lead to many
auspicious and inauspicious thoughts, which bind karma. Other discussion sutras
should be understood in the same way as 1-3. / The rules and prohibitions for
sadhus and sadhvis staying in a dharmshala, etc. 11. It is not permissible for
Nirgranthas to stay in a pragama·πáag·πõha, a house open on all sides, under a
thatched roof, or in a house with a bamboo lattice, under a tree, or under the
sky (in open spaces). 12. It is permissible for Nirgranthas to stay in a
pragama·πáag·πõha, a house open on all sides, under a thatched roof, or in a house
with a bamboo lattice, under a tree, or under the sky (in open spaces).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
164] [bRhatkalpasUtra gur3a, mAlapue, pUr3I aura zrIkhaNDa-utkSipta, vikSipta,
vyatikIrNa aura viprakIrNa ho to nirgranthoM aura nirgranthiyoM ko vahAM
'yathAlandakAla' rahanA bhI nahIM kalpatA hai / 9. yadi yaha jAne ki (upAzraya
meM piNDarUpa khAdya yAvat zrIkhaNDa) utkSipta, vikSipta, vyatikIrNa yA
viprakIrNa nahIM hai / kintu rAzIkRta, pujakRta, bhittikRta, kulikAkRta tathA
lAMchita mudrita yA pihita hai to nigranthoM aura nirgranthiyoM ko vahAM hemanta
aura grISma Rtu meM rahanA kalpatA hai| 10. yadi yaha jAne ki (upAzraya ke
bhItara piNDarUpa khAdya yAvat zrIkhaNDa) rAzIkRta yAvat kulikAkRta nahIM hai|
kintu koThe meM yA palya meM bhare hue haiM, maMca para yA mAle para surakSita
haiM, kumbhI yA bodhI meM dhare hue haiM, miTTI yA gobara se lipta haiM, DhaMke
hue, cihna kiye hue haiM yA muhara lage hue haiM to unheM vahAM varSAvAsa rahanA
kalpatA hai / vivecana-sUtra 1-3 meM dhAnyayukta upAzraya makAna kA varNana hai
aura ina tIna sUtroM meM khAdyapadArthayukta makAna kA varNana hai / dhAnya to
bhUmi para bikhare hue ho sakate haiM, kintu ye khAdyapadArtha bartana Adi meM
idhara-udhara avyavasthita par3e hote haiN| khAdyapadArthayukta upAzraya meM
Thaharane para lagane vAle doSa 1. khAdya padArthoM vAle makAna meM kIr3iyoM kI
utpatti jyAdA hotI hai| 2. cUhe billI Adi bhI bhramaNa karate haiN| 3.
asAvadhAnI se pazu-pakSI pAkara khA sakate haiN| 4. unheM khAte hue rokane evaM
haTAne meM antarAya doSa lagatA hai evaM na haTAne para makAna kA svAmI ruSTa ho
sakatA hai athavA sAdhu ke hI khAne kI AzaMkA kara sakatA hai| 5. kabhI koI
kSudhAtura yA rasAsakta bhikSu kA mana khAne ke liye calita ho sakatA hai evaM
khA lene para adatta doSa lagatA hai| 6. khAdya padArthoM kI sugandha yA
durgandha se aneka zubhAzubha saMkalpa ho sakate haiM, jisase karmabandha hotA
hai| anya vivecana sUtra 1-3 ke samAna samajhanA cAhiye / sAdhu-sAdhvI ke
dharmazAlA Adi meM Thaharane kA vidhi-niSedha 11. no kappai niggaMthoNaM ahe
prAgamaNagihaMsi vA, viyaDagihaMsi vA, vaMsImUlaMsi vA, rukkhamUlaMsi vA,
abhAvagAsiyaMsi vA vtthe| 12. kappai niggaMthANaM ahe prAgamaNagihaMsi bA,
viyaDagihaMsi vA, vasImUlaMsi vA, rukkhamUlaMsi vA, abbhAvagAsiyaMsi vA vasthae
/ 11. nirgranthiyoM ko prAgamanagRha meM, cAroM ora se khule ghara meM, chappara
ke nIce athavA bAMsa ko jAlo yukta gRha meM, vRkSa ke nIce yA AkAza ke nIce
(khule sthAnoM meM) rahanA nahIM kalpatA hai|

Page #119 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The second objective [165 12. It is appropriate for the Nirgranthas to stay in
an ƒÄgamana-g·πõha (dharma≈õƒÅlƒÅ), in a house open on all sides, under a canopy or in
a house with a bamboo lattice, under a tree or under the sky (in open spaces).
Discussion 1. ƒÄgamana-g·πõha - A temple, assembly hall, dharma≈õƒÅlƒÅ, inn or
traveler's inn, etc., where travelers come and go, is called 'ƒÄgamana-g·πõha'. 2.
Viv·πõta-g·πõha - A place that is covered only from above and open on two, three or
four sides is called 'Viv·πõta-g·πõha'. 3. Va·πÅ≈õƒ´-m≈´la - A corridor, verandah,
canopy, etc., covered from above with bamboo matting, etc., and open in front,
is called Va·πÅ≈õƒ´-m≈´la. Or a place enclosed on all sides with a bamboo lattice is
called 'Va·πÅ≈õƒ´-m≈´la'. 4. V·πõk·π£a-m≈´la - The base of a tree is called 'V·πõk·π£a-m≈´la'.
5. Abhra-ƒÅkƒÅ≈õa - Open sky or a place whose upper part is mostly open is called
'Abhra-ƒÅkƒÅ≈õa'. Sadhvis should not stay in such a place in any season because
these are completely unsafe places. Staying in such places increases the
possibility of breaking the vow of celibacy. If the time of sunset arrives while
traveling and a suitable place is not found, it is very important for the Sadhvi
to reach a suitable place after sunset. The reason for the provision made in the
s≈´tra for the Sadhus to stay in such a place is that men naturally have less
fear and they do not need a safe place as much for the protection of celibacy.
In normal circumstances, a sthavirakalpi bhik·π£u should stay only in such places
other than the places mentioned in the s≈´tra; where staying, all the bhik·π£us can
properly maintain their restraint, study, food, etc. The word 'viya·∏ç' is used in
the previous s≈´tra in the sense of 'unconscious' and in the present s≈´tra it is
used in the sense of being open in one or more directions of the house. This is
the unique style of word usage in the ƒÄgamas. The method of taking permission
for a house with many owners 13. Ega·πÅ sƒÅgƒÅrie pƒÅrihƒÅrie. Do, ti·πá·πái, cattƒÅri,
pa√±ca sƒÅgƒÅria pƒÅrihƒÅria. Ega tattha kappaga·πÅ ·π≠havaittƒÅ avasese nivvisejja / 13.
One owner of the house is the pƒÅrihƒÅrika. In a house with two, three, four or
five owners, one is considered the kalpaka = ≈õayyatar

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
dUsarA uddezaka [165 12. nirgranthoM ko AgamanagRha (dharmazAlA) meM, cAroM ora
se khule ghara meM, chappara ke nIce athavA bAMsa ko jAlI yukta gRha meM, vRkSa
ke nIce yA AkAza ke nIce (khule sthAnoM meM) rahanA kalpatA hai| vivecana1.
AgamanagRha-jahAM para pathikoM kA AnA-jAnA ho aise devAlaya, sabhA, dharmazAlA,
sarAya yA musAphirakhAnA Adi ko 'pAgamanagRha' kahate haiN| _2. vivRtagRha-
kevala Upara se DhaMke hue aura do, tIna yA cAroM ora se khule sthAna ko
'vivRtagRha' kahate haiN| 3. vaMzImUla-bAMsa kI caTAI prAdi se Upara kI ora se
DhaMke aura Age kI ora se khale aise dAlAna, prosArA, chaparI Adi ko vaMzImUla
kahate haiN| athavA cautarapha bAMsa kI jAlI se yukta sthAna ko 'vaMzImUla'
kahate haiN| 4. vRkSamUla-vRkSa ke tala bhAga ko 'vRkSamUla' kahate haiN| 5.
abhrAvakAza khule AkAza ko yA jisakA adhikAMza UparI bhAga khulA ho aise sthAna
ko 'prabhAvakAza' kahate haiN| aise sthAna para sAdhviyoM ko kisI bhI Rtu meM
nahIM ThaharanA cAhie kyoMki ye pUrNataH asurakSita sthAna haiN| aise sthAnoM
para Thaharane se brahmacarya vrata bhaMga hone kI sambhAvanA rahatI hai| vihAra
karate samaya kabhI sUryAsta kA samaya A jAe aura yogya sthAna na mile to sAdhvI
ko sUryAsta ke bAda bhI yogya sthAna meM pahu~canA atyanta Avazyaka hotA hai|
sAdhuoM ko aise sthAna meM Thaharane kA sUtra meM jo vidhAna kiyA gayA hai,
usakA kAraNa yaha hai ki puruSoM meM svAbhAvika hI bhayasaMjJA alpa hotI hai
tathA brahmacarya rakSA ke liye bhI unheM surakSita sthAna kI itanI AvazyakatA
nahIM hotI hai| sAmAnya sthiti meM to sthavirakalpI bhikSu ko sUtrokta sthAnoM
ke atirikta anya aise sthAnoM meM hI ThaharanA cAhie; jahAM Thaharane para bAla,
glAna Adi sabhI bhikSuoM ke saMyama, svAdhyAya, AhAra Adi kA bhalIbhAMti nirvAha
ho ske| pUrva sUtra meM 'viyaDa' zabda acitta artha meM prayukta hai aura
prastuta sUtra meM gRha ke eka yA aneka dizA meM khule hone ke artha meM
prayukta hai / AgamoM meM zabdaprayoga kI yaha vilakSaNa zailI hai| aneka
svAmiyoM vAle makAna ko AjJA lene kI vidhi 13. egaM sAgArie paarihaarie| do,
tiNNi, cattAri, paMca sAgAriyA paarihaariyaa| ega tattha kappAgaM ThavaittA
avasese nivvisejjA / 13. makAna kA eka svAmI pArihArika hotA hai| jisa makAna ke
do, tIna, cAra yA pAMca svAmI hoM, vahAM eka ko kalpAka= zayyAtara mAna

Page #120 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
One should not consider the remaining as *Shayatar* (one who provides lodging)
just because they have a *Brihatkalpasutra* (a Jain scripture). This means that
one can go to their houses to take food and other things. *Vivechanagar* is a
synonym for a house. The owner of a house or residence is called a *Sagarik*. A
*Sagarik* is also called *Shayatar*, *Shayyakar*, *Shayya-data*, and
*Shayyadhar*. A *Shayatar* is one who provides lodging, residence, or shelter to
monks and nuns, thereby saving their souls from the ocean of worldly existence.
A *Shayyakar* is one who builds lodging, residence, etc. A *Shayya-data* is one
who provides lodging to monks. A *Shayyadhar* is one who maintains the lodging,
residence, or shelter by providing its roof, walls, etc., or who protects his
soul from hell by providing lodging to monks.   The *Sagarik* who provides
lodging to a monk or nun is considered *Pariharic* (one who is to be avoided)
according to the scriptures, and therefore, one should not accept food or drink
from his house. If there are multiple owners of a place or house, then all of
them are *Pariharic*. Therefore, one should establish one of them as *Kalpak*
(Shayatar) and obtain knowledge from him, but should not accept food or drink
from his house. All the other owners of that place or house who are partners or
shareholders should not be considered *Shayatar*, and one can accept food and
drink from their houses.   The commentator of the *Sutras* has interpreted the
Prakrit word "Nivvisajja" in two ways: 1. *Nivishyet-Visarjayet-Shayataratvena
na ganayet* (one should not consider them as *Shayatar* by entering and
discarding them), or 2. *Nivishyet-Pravishet Ahararth Tesham (Seshanam) Griheshv
Anuvishyet* (one should enter their houses for the purpose of food).   In
addition, the commentator has explained in detail many things that are worth
knowing, such as the types of lodging, who should be considered *Sagarik*, and
whether it is permissible to accept food, drink, clothes, utensils, etc., from
the *Sagarik's* property. A summary of this is given in *Nishith Uddeshak* 2,
Sutra 46. Interested readers can refer to it.   This Sutra also implies that one
can establish one person as *Shayatar* among multiple owners and then, after a
few days, establish another person as *Shayatar-Kalpak*. This way, many people
can benefit from the donation of lodging and food.   **Sanskrit Verse:**  *14.
No Kappi Nigganthaan Va Niggathiin Va Sagariyapiindam Bahiya Anihadam, Asansarts
Va Sansaddham Va Padigahitte.*  **Translation:**  *14. A monk or nun should not
accept the property of a *Sagarik* outside the house, whether it is unmixed or
mixed, whether it is offered with respect or not.*

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
[bRhatkalpasUtra karake zeSa ko zayyAtara nahIM mAnanA cAhie arthAt unake gharoM
meM AhArAdi lene ke lie jA sakate haiN| vivecanaagAra ghara kA paryAyavAcI hai|
ghara yA vasati ke svAmI ko 'sAgArika' kahate haiM / sAgArika manuSya ko hI
zayyAtara, zayyAkara, zayyAdAtA aura zayyAdhara bhI kahate haiN| jo sAdhu-
sAdhviyoM ko zayyA arthAt Thaharane kA sthAna, vasati yA upAzraya dekara apanI
AtmA ko saMsAra-sAgara se tAratA hai, use zayyAtara kahate haiN| zayyA-vasati
Adi ko jo banavAtA hai, use zayyAkara kahate haiN| jo sAdhuoM ko Thaharane kA
sthAna rUpa zayyA detA hai, use zayyAdAtA kahate haiN| jo vasati yA upAzraya kI
chAna-chappara Adi ke dvArA usakA dhAraNa yA saMrakSaNa karatA hai athavA
sAdhuoM ko dI gaI zayyA ke dvArA naraka meM jAne se apanI AtmA ko dhAraNa karatA
hai, arthAt bacAtA hai, use zayyAdhara kahate haiM / yaha zayyAtara sAgArika
jisa sAdhu yA sAdhvI ko Thaharane ke lie vasati yA upAzraya rUpa zayyA de, sAdhu
ko usake ghara kA bhakta-pAna grahaNa karane kA Agama meM niSedha kiyA gayA hai,
ataH use pArihArika kahate haiN| yadi kisI sthAnaka yA makAna ke aneka (manuSya)
svAmI hoM to ve sabhI pArihArika hote haiM, ataH usa sthAna ke sabhI svAmiyoM
meM se kisI eka ko 'kalpAka' (zayyAtara) sthApita karake jisase prAjJA prApta
kare usake ghara kA bhakta-pAna Adi grahaNa nahIM kre| usake sivAya jitane bhI
svAmI usa sthAnaka yA makAna ke bhAgIdAra yA hissedAra haiM, unako zayyAtara
rUpa se na mAne arthAt unake gharoM se AhAra-pAnI grahaNa kiyA jA sakatA hai|
sUtrokta nivvisejjA' isa prAkRta pada ke TIkAkAra ne do prakAra se artha kiye
haiM 1. nivizeta-visarjayet-zayyAtaratvena na gaNayet / athavA2. nivizet-
pravizet AhArArtha teSAM (zeSANAM) gRheSu anuvizet / / isake atirikta bhASyakAra
ne zayyA kitane prakAra kI hotI hai, kauna-kauna sAgArika mAne jAe~, sAgArika ke
piNDa se bhakta-pAna, vastra, pAtrAdi kA bhI grahaNa abhISTa hai ityAdi aneka
jJAtavya bAtoM kI vistRta vyAkhyA kI hai, jisakA sArAMza nizItha uddezaka 2,
sUtra 46 meM diyA gayA hai| jijJAsu pAThaka vahIM dekheN| aneka svAmiyoM meM se
eka ko zayyAtara karake phira kucha dina bAda dUsare ko bhI zayyAtarakalpAka
banAyA jA sakatA hai| jisase aneka ko zayyAdAna kA evaM AhArAdi dAna kA lAbha
prApta ho sakatA hai / yaha bhI isa sUtra se phalita hotA hai| saMsRSTa
asaMsRSTa zayyAtarapiMDagrahaNa ke vidhi-niSedha 14. no kappai niggaMthANa vA
niggathINa vA sAgAriyapiNDaM bahiyA anIhaDaM, asaMsarTsa vA saMsaddhaM vA
pddigaahitte|

Page #121 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Second Objective:  **14.** It is not permissible for a Niggantha or Nigganthi
to accept Sagarikapi·πá·∏ça (bed-related food) from a house where it has not been
taken outside, whether it has been mixed with the food of others or not.
**15.** It is not permissible for a Niggantha or Nigganthi to accept
Sagarikapi·πá·∏ça from a house where it has been taken outside but not mixed with
the food of others.  **16.** It is permissible for a Niggantha or Nigganthi to
accept Sagarikapi·πá·∏ça from a house where it has been taken outside and mixed with
the food of others.  **17.** It is not permissible for a Niggantha or Nigganthi
to mix Sagarikapi·πá·∏ça that has been taken outside the house with the food of
others, even if it has not been mixed before.  **18.** A Niggantha or Nigganthi
who mixes Sagarikapi·πá·∏ça that has been taken outside the house and not mixed with
the food of others, or approves of such an action, transgresses both worldly and
transcendental norms and is liable for the four-month atonement of AnudghƒÅtika
ParihƒÅra·π≠·π≠hƒÅna.  **Discussion:**  The previous s≈´tra dealt with the rules
regarding accepting food from a house with multiple owners, including the owner
of the bed, and the prohibition of accepting food from the owner of the bed,
while allowing acceptance of food from other owners' houses. These s≈´tras
address the rules regarding accepting food from a place where food from multiple
individuals is collected, including food from the owner of the bed. They clarify
when such food is unacceptable and when it is acceptable.  The first s≈´tra
implies that if the collective food of multiple individuals is within the
boundaries of the owner of the bed's house, and the owner's food is either
separate or mixed with the others, it is not permissible for a monk to accept
it.  The second s≈´tra implies that if the collective food of multiple
individuals is outside the boundaries of the owner of the bed's house, and the
owner's food is kept separate, it is not permissible to accept it.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
dUsarA uddezaka] [167 15. no kappai niggaMthANa vA niggaMyoNa vA sAgAriyapiNDaM
bahiyA nohaDaM asaMsaTTha pddigaahitte| 16. kappai niggaMdhANa vA niggaMthINa vA
sAgAriyapiNDaM bahiyA nohaDaM saMsadraM paDigAhittae / 17. no kappai niggaMthANa
vA niggaMthINa vA sAgAriyapiNDaM bahiyA nohaDaM-asaMsaThTha saMsaTThe kaaritte|
18. je khalu niggaMtho vA niggaMthI vA sAgAriyapiNDaM bahiyA nIhaDaM asaMsaTTha
saMsaTTha kArei kAraMtaM vA sAijjai / se duhao viikkamamANe Avajjai cAummAsiyaM
parihAraTThANaM aNugdhAiyaM / 14. nirgranthoM aura nirgranthiyoM ko
sAgArikapiNDa (zayyAtarapiNDa) jo ki bAhara nahIM nikAlA gayA hai, vaha cAhe
anya kisI ke AhAra meM mizrita kiyA ho yA nahIM kiyA ho to bhI lenA nahIM
kalpatA hai| 15. nirgranthoM aura nirgranthiyoM ko sAgArikapiNDa jo bAhara to
nikAlA gayA hai, kintu anya ke AhAra meM mizrita nahIM kiyA gayA hai to lenA
nahIM kalpatA hai| 16. nirgranthoM aura nirgranthiyoM ko sAgArikapiNDa jo ghara
ke bAhara bhI le jAyA gayA hai aura anya ke AhAra meM mizrita bhI kara liyA gayA
hai to grahaNa karanA kalpatA hai| 17. nirgranthoM aura nirganthiyoM ko ghara se
bAhara le jAyA gayA sAgArikapiNDa jo anya ke AhAra meM mizrita nahIM kiyA gayA
hai, use mizrita karAnA nahIM kalpatA hai| 18. jo nirgrantha yA nirgranthI ghara
ke bAhara le jAye gaye evaM anya ke AhAra meM amizrita sAgArikapiNDa ko mizrita
karavAtA hai yA karavAne vAle kA anumodana karatA hai, vaha laukika aura
lokottara donoM maryAdA kA atikramaNa karatA huA cAturmAsika anudghAtika
prAyazcitta kA pAtra hotA hai| vivecana-pUrva sUtra meM aneka svAmiyoM vAle
makAna kI prAjJA lene ke sambandha meM evaM zayyA ke AjJAdAtA kA AhAra Adi na
lene kA tathA anya svAmiyoM ke gharoM se AhArAdi lene kA vidhAna kiyA gayA hai|
ina sUtroM meM aneka vyaktiyoM kA AhAra eka sthAna para ekatrita ho evaM unameM
zayyAtara kA bhI AhArAdi ho to vaha prAhAra kahAM kisa sthiti meM agrAhya hotA
hai aura kaisA grAhya hotA hai ityAdi vidhAna kiyA gayA hai| _ aneka vyaktiyoM
kA saMyukta AhArasthAna yadi zayyAtara ke ghara kI sImA meM ho aura vahAM
zayyAtara kA AhAra alaga par3A ho athavA saba ke AhAra meM milA diyA gayA ho to
bhI sAdhu ko grahaNa karanA nahIM kalpatA hai / yaha prathama sUtra kA prAzaya
hai| aneka vyaktiyoM kA sammilita AhAra zayyAtara ke ghara kI sImA se bAhara ho
evaM vahAM zayyAtara kA pAhAra alaga rakhA ho to usameM se lenA nahIM kalpatA
hai / yaha dUsare sUtra kA Azaya hai|

Page #122 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[168] The *Brihatkalpa Sutra* states that if the food offered to a *shayyatar*
has been mixed with the food offered to others, and the offerings to the deities
for which the food was intended have been removed, and the portion meant for
Brahmanas and others has been given, then a monk may accept the remaining food.
This is because the food of the *shayyatar* no longer has a separate existence
or ownership in the mixed food. Therefore, there is no fault in accepting this
mixed and remaining food, as it does not constitute accepting the *shayyatar*‚Äôs
food. This is the meaning of the third sutra.  It is not permissible for a monk
to accept unmixed food offered to a *shayyatar* for any reason, even if it is
offered to him by someone else. This is the meaning of the fourth sutra.
Accepting unmixed food offered to a *shayyatar* is against the principles of
restraint and decorum, and it is also offensive to people. Therefore, a monk who
does so violates both worldly conduct and the principles of restraint and
decorum. Hence, he incurs penance. This is the meaning of the fifth sutra.  If a
*shayyatar* offers unmixed food to a monk, or if the food is offered within the
boundaries of his house, and the *shayyatar* is of a good nature, he may try to
offer food again on that occasion. However, if he is of a mean nature, he may
become angry and refuse to offer food, or even forbid the monk from entering his
house or offering him a bed.  There is no such possibility of fault in accepting
mixed food offered outside the boundaries of the *shayyatar*‚Äôs house. Therefore,
it is considered acceptable.  The rules regarding accepting food offered to a
*shayyatar* at his house or sent from his house are as follows:  19. If a
*sagarik* has accepted food offered to him at his house, and the *sagarik*
offers it to a monk, then the monk should not accept it.  20. If a *sagarik* has
not accepted food offered to him at his house, and the person who brought the
food offers it to a monk, then the monk may accept it.  21. If food offered to a
*sagarik* at his house has been taken to another house and the householder of
that house has not accepted it, then the monk should not accept it.  22. If food
offered to a *sagarik* at his house has been taken to another house and the
householder of that house has accepted it, then the monk may accept it.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
168] [bRhatkalpasUtra kintu anya sabhI ke sammilita AhAra meM zayyAtara kA
aAhAra mizrita kara diyA gayA ho aura jisa hetu se AhAra sammilita kiyA gayA ho
una devatAoM kA naivedya nikAla diyA gayA ho, brAhmaNa Adi ko jitanA denA hai
utanA de diyA gayA ho, usake bAda bhikSu lenA cAhe to le sakatA hai| kyoMki aba
usa AhAra meM zayyAtara ke AhAra kA alaga astitva bhI nahIM hai evaM usakA
svAmitva bhI nahIM rahA hai ataH usa mizrita evaM parizeSa AhAra meM se bhikSu
ko grahaNa karane meM zayyAtarapiNDagrahaNa kA doSa nahIM lagatA hai / yaha
tIsare sUtra kA Azaya hai / vihAra prAdi kisI bhI kAraNa se ukta asaMsRSTa AhAra
ko grahaNa karane hetu saMsRSTa karavAnA bhikSu ko nahIM kalpatA hai / yaha
cauthe sUtra kA prAzaya hai / ukta asaMsRSTa AhAra Adi ko saMsRSTa karavAnA
saMyama-maryAdA se viparIta hai evaM logoM ko bhI aprotikAraka hotA hai| ataH
aisA karane para bhikSu laukika vyavahAra evaM saMyama-maryAdA kA ullaMghana
karane vAlA hotA hai / isalie use prAyazcitta aAtA hai / yaha pAMcaveM sUtra kA
prAzaya hai / zayyAtara ke asaMsRSTa AhAra ko yA usake ghara kI sImA meM rahe
AhAra ko grahaNa karane para yadi vaha bhadraprakRti vAlA ho to punaH punaH isa
nimitta se AhAra dene kA prayAsa kara sakatA hai| yadi vaha tuccha prakRti vAlA
ho to ruSTa ho sakatA hai, jisase vadha-baMdhana yA zayyA dene kA niSedha kara
sakatA hai / ghara kI sImA se bAhara rahe hue saMsRSTa AhAra meM ukta doSa kI
sambhAvanA nahIM hotI hai / ataH grAhya kahA gayA hai| zayyAtara ke ghara Aye yA
bheje gaye AhAra ke grahaNa kA vidhi-niSedha 19. sAgAriyassa AhaDiyA sAgArieNa
paDiggahiyA, tamhA dAvae, no se kappai pddiggaahette| 20. sAgAriyassa AhaDiyA
sAgArieNa apaDiggahiyA, tamhA dAvae, evaM se kappai pddiggaahette| 21.
sAgAriyassa nIhaDiyA pareNa apaDiggahiyA, tamhA dAvae, no se kappai
paDiggAhettae / 22. sAgAriyassa nohaDiyA pareNa paDiggahiyA, tamhA dAvae, evaM
se kappai pddiggaahette| 19. anya ghara se Aye hue AhAra ko sAgArika ne apane
ghara para grahaNa kara liyA hai aura vaha usameM se sAdhu ko de to lenA nahIM
kalpatA hai| 20. anya ghara se pAye hue AhAra ko sAgArika ne apane ghara para
grahaNa nahIM kiyA hai aura yadi prAhAra lAne vAlA usa AhAra meM se sAdhu ko de
to lenA kalpatA hai / 21. sAgArika ke ghara se anya ghara para le jAye gaye
pAhAra ko usa gRhasvAmI ne yadi svIkAra nahIM kiyA hai to usa AhAra meM sAdhu ko
de to lenA nahIM kalpatA hai /

Page #123 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## [169 Second Objective]  22. If food brought from another house to the house
of a *sagarika* is accepted by the householder, it is permissible for the
*sadhu* to accept it. The food brought to the *sagarika's* house from another
house is called *prahutika*, and the food brought from the *sagarika's* house to
another house is called *nihratika*. These four sutras explain the circumstances
under which a *sadhu* can accept *prahutika* and *nihratika* food related to a
*sagarika*. This *prahutika* and *nihratika* can be for a festival or
celebration. If someone asks the *sadhu* to accept *prahutika* or *nihratika*
food, the *sadhu* can accept the *prahutika* of the *sagarika* as long as it is
not in the possession of the *sagarika*. The *sadhu* can accept the *nihratika*
of the *sagarika* after it has been accepted by someone else. The *sadhu* cannot
accept food from the person distributing the *nihratika* of the *sagarika*, but
can accept food from the person distributing the *prahutika* of the *sagarika*.
The previous sutra states that the *sagarika's* food can be accepted, whether it
is separate or mixed with the food of many others, within the boundaries of the
*sagarika's* house or elsewhere. These sutras state that the food can be
accepted, whether it is in the *sagarika's* house or elsewhere, whether it is
the *sagarika's* or someone else's, whether it is given or taken, as long as it
is not in the possession of the *sagarika* or has not been accepted by someone
else. The *sadhu* cannot accept the food as long as it is in the possession of
the *sagarika* or if the *sagarika* has accepted food brought from someone else.
It is important to understand the difference between these two scenarios. These
sutras are meant to be understood in the context of a *bhiksu* arriving at the
place where the *prahutika* and *nihratika* are being distributed, while on a
*gochari* journey, and being invited by the distributor or receiver.  ## The Law
of Accepting Food with a *Sagarika's* Share  23. If the food of a *sagarika* and
others is: 1. not divided, 2. not divided, 3. the *sagarika's* share is not
separately determined, 4. the share is not separated and taken out, then it is
not permissible for the *sadhu* to accept it if someone offers it to them.  24.
If the food of a *sagarika* and others is: 1. divided, 2. separated, 3. the
*sagarika's* share is separately determined, 4. the share is separated and taken
out, then it is permissible for the *sadhu* to accept it.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
[169 dUsarA uddezaka] 22. sAgArika ke ghara se anya ghara le jAye gaye AhAra ko
usa gRhasvAmI ne svIkAra kara liyA hai / yadi vaha usa AhAra meM meM sAdhu ko de
to lenA kalpatA hai| vivecanadUsaroM ke ghara se zayyAtara ke ghara para lAI jA
rahI khAdyasAmagrI 'pAhatikA' kahI gaI hai aura zayyAtara kI jo khAdyasAmagrI
anya ke ghara le jAI jA rahI ho vaha 'nihatikA' kahI gaI hai| aisI zayyAtara
sambandhI prAhRtikA evaM nihRtikA sAmagrI sAdhu kisa sthiti meM grahaNa kara
sakatA hai, yaha ina cAra sUtroM meM batAyA gayA hai / ye AhRtikA nihatikA kisI
tyauhAra yA mahotsava ke nimitta se ho sakatI hai / yadi grAhRtikA yA nihRtikA
sAmagrI meM se koI vyakti sAdhu ko grahaNa karane ke lie kahe to zayyAtara kI
grAhRtikA kA prAhAra jaba taka zayyAtara ke svAmitva meM nahIM huA hai, taba
taka grahaNa kiyA jA sakatA hai| zayyAtara kI nihRtikA kA AhAra dUsare ke
grahaNa karane ke bAda usase liyA jA sakatA hai| zayyAtara kI nihatikA bAMTane
vAle se pAhAra nahIM liyA jA sakatA hai, kintu zayyAtara kI prAhRtikA bAMTane
vAle se usakA AhAra liyA jA sakatA hai|| pUrva sUtra meM zayyAtara kA pAhAra
anya aneka logoM ke AhAra ke sAtha alaga yA mizrita zayyAtara ke ghara kI sImA
meM yA anyatra kahIM ho, usI kA kathana hai aura ina sUtroM meM zayyAtara ke
ghara meM ho yA anyatra ho, zayyAtara kA ho yA anya kA ho, diyA jAne vAlA ho yA
liyA jAne vAlA ho, vaha AhAra jaba taka zayyAtara ke svAmitva meM nahIM huA hai
yA anya ne apane svAmitva meM le liyA hai to usa pAhAra ko grahaNa kiyA jA
sakatA hai aura vaha AhAra jaba taka zayyAtara ke svAmitva meM hai yA anya kA
lAyA gayA AhAra usane svIkAra kara liyA hai to vaha AhAra sAdha grahaNa nahIM
kara sakatA hai ityAdi kathana hai| donoM prakaraNoM meM yaha antara samajhanA
caahiye| AhRtikA evaM nihRtikA bAMTane vAlA jahAM ho usa samaya bhikSu bhI
sahajarUpa meM vahAM gocarI ke liye bhramaNa karate hue pahuMca jAye aura
bAMTane vAlA yA lene vAlA nimantraNa kare isa apekSA se yaha sUtrokta kathana
hai, aisA samajhanA caahiye| zayyAtara ke aMzayukta AhAra-grahaNa kA vidhi-
niSedha 23. sAgAriyassa aMsiyAno1. avibhattAno, 2. anvochinnAno, 3. anvogaDAo,
4. anijjUDhAo, tamhA dAvae, no se kappai pddigaahitte| 24. sAgAriyassa aMsiyAno
vibhattAmo, bocchinnAo, bogaDAo, nijjaDhAo tamhA dAvae. evaM se kappaha
paDigAhettae / 23. sAgArika tathA anya vyaktiyoM ke saMyukta AhArAdi kA yadi-1.
vibhAga nizcita nahIM kiyA gayA ho, 2. vibhAga na kiyA gayA ho, 3. sAgArika kA
vibhAga alaga nizcita na kiyA gayA ho, 4. vibhAga bAhara nikAlakara alaga na
kara diyA ho, aise AhAra meM se sAdhu ko koI de to lenA nahIM kalpatA hai|

Page #124 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 170] [Mahatkalpasutra 24. If the food, etc., containing a share of the
Sagarika, is 1. divided, 2. divided, 3. the Sagarika's share is divided, 4. that
share is removed, then it is permissible for the Sadhu to accept it from the
remaining food. / Discussion - The meaning of the terms used in the Sutra is as
follows: 1. A ‡§µ‡§ø‡§≠‡§ï‡•ç‡§§-‡§µ‡§ø‡§≠‡§ï‡•ç‡§§ means separation or division, until the Sagarika's
share is separately determined from the combined food, it is 'A ‡§µ‡§ø‡§≠‡§ï‡•ç‡§§'. 2.
‡§Ö‡§µ‡•ç‡§Ø‡§µ‡§ö‡•ç‡§õ‡§ø‡§®‡•ç‡§®-‡§µ‡•ç‡§Ø‡•Å‡§ö‡•ç‡§õ‡§ø‡§®‡•ç‡§® or ‡§µ‡•ç‡§Ø‡§µ‡§ö‡•ç‡§õ‡§ø‡§®‡•ç‡§® means severance of connection. Until the
Sagarika's share is severed, it is '‡§Ö‡§µ‡•ç‡§Ø‡§µ‡§ö‡•ç‡§õ‡§ø‡§®‡•ç‡§®'. 3. ‡§Ö‡§µ‡•ç‡§Ø‡§æ‡§ï‡•É‡§§-‡§µ‡•ç‡§Ø‡§æ‡§ï‡•É‡§§ means
clarification of the share, that this much share is yours and this much share is
mine, until such determination is made, it is called '‡§Ö‡§µ‡•ç‡§Ø‡§æ‡§ï‡•É‡§§'. 4. ‡§Ö‡§®‡§ø! ‡§¢
‡§®‡§ø‡§Ø‡•Ç‡§Ç‡§¢ means 'to separate from the separately determined share'. / Until the
Sagarika's share is removed from the combined food, it is called '‡§Ö‡§®‡§ø'‡§¢'. Thus,
the collective meaning of the entire Sutra is that when the share of the
Sagarika is undivided, unconnected, undetermined, and unremoved from the food of
many individuals, including the Shayatar, then if any individual among the
organizers of that food gives some share to the Sadhu, it is not acceptable to
them. But when the Sagarika's share is divided, severed, determined, and
removed, then the food offered from that combined food is acceptable to the
Sadhu and he can accept it. It is also mentioned here that in addition to the
food prepared jointly by many people, the jointly prepared jaggery, oil, ghee,
etc., are all included in this. Even from them, until the Sagarika's share is
removed and completely separated, those substances are also unacceptable to the
Sadhu. In the previous Sutras, the Sansrusht Asansrusht food does not belong to
anyone and is not divided. But the food mentioned in the present Sutra is owned,
it is divided and also given to the Shayatar. / This is the difference between
the two cases. / The rules for accepting or rejecting the food given to the
venerable ones of the Shayatar are as follows: 25. If the food offered to the
Sagarika is intended for the Pauddiya, and the Sagarika's share is removed and
given to the Pauddiya, and the Sagarika gives it, or the Sagarika's attendant
gives it, then it is not permissible to accept it. 26. If the food offered to
the Sagarika is intended for the Pauddiya, and the Sagarika's share is removed
and given to the Pauddiya, and the Sagarika does not give it, nor does the
Sagarika's attendant give it, but the Sagarika's Puja gives it, then it is not
permissible to accept it.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
170] [mahatkalpasUtra 24. sAgArika ke aMza yukta AhArAdi kA yadi-1. vibhAga
nizcita ho, 2. vibhAga kara diyA ho, 3. sAgArika kA vibhAga nizcita kara diyA
ho, 4. usa vibhAga ko bAhara nikAla diyA gayA ho to zeSa pAhAra meM se sAdhu ko
koI de to lenA kalpatA hai / vivecana-sUtra meM prayukta padoM kA artha isa
prakAra hai 1. avibhakta-vibhakta kA artha pRthakkaraNa yA vibhAjana hai, jaba
taka sAgArika kA bhAga usa sammilita bhojyasAmagrI meM se pRthaka rUpa se
nizcita nahIM kiyA jAya, taba taka vaha 'avibhakta' hai| 2. avyavacchinna-
vyucchinna yA vyavacchinna kA artha sambandhaviccheda hai| jaba taka sAgArika ke
aMza kA sambandha-viccheda na ho jAya, taba taka vaha 'avyavacchinna' hai| 3.
avyAkRta-vyAkRta kA artha bhAga ke spaSTIkaraNa kA hai ki itanA aMza tumhArA hai
aura itanA aMza merA hai, jaba taka aisA nirdhAraNa nahIM ho jAya taba taka vaha
'avyAkRta' kahalAtA haiN| 4. ani! DhaniyUMDha kA artha 'pRthak nirdhArita aMza
se alaga karanA' hai / jaba taka sAgArika kA aMza usa sammilita bhojana meM se
nikAla na diyA jAya, taba taka vaha 'ani'Dha' kahalAtA hai| isa prakAra pUre
sUtra kA samuccaya artha yaha hotA hai ki zayyAtara sahita aneka vyaktiyoM kI
khAdyasAmagrI meM se sAgArika kA aMza jaba taka avibhAjita hai, avyavacchinna
hai, anirNIta hai aura aniSkAsita hai, taba taka usa bhojana ke AyojakoM meM se
yadi koI vyakti sAdhu ko kucha aMza detA hai to vaha unake lie grAhya nahIM hai|
kintu jaba sAgArika kA aMza vibhAjita, vyavacchinna, nirdhArita aura niSkAsita
ho jAtA hai, taba usa sammilita bhojya-sAmagrI meM se diyA gayA bhakta-piNDa
sAdhu ke liye grAhya hai aura vaha use le sakatA hai| yahAM yaha bhI batAyA gayA
hai ki aneka janoM ke dvArA sammilita banAye gaye bhojana ke atirikta sammilita
taiyAra kiyA gayA gur3a, tela, ghI Adi sabhI isI ke antargata haiN| unameM se
bhI jaba taka sAgArika kA bhAga nikAla kara sarvathA pRthak na kara diyA jAve
taba taka be padArtha bhI sAdhu ke lie agrAhya hI haiN| pUrva sUtroM meM varNita
saMsRSTa asaMsRSTa AhAra meM kisI kA svAmitva nahIM rahatA hai aura na vaha
vibhakta hotA hai| kintu prastuta sUtrakathita AhAra meM svAmitva bhI hotA hai,
vaha vibhakta hokara zayyAtara ko milane vAlA bhI hotA hai / yaha ina donoM
prakaraNoM meM antara hai / zayyAtara ke pUjyajanoM ko diye gaye AhAra ke
grahaNa karane kA vidhi-niSedha 25. sAgAriyassa pUyAbhatte uddesie ceie
pAhuDiyAe sAgAriyassa uSagaraNajAe nidie nisaTTe pADihArie, taM sAgArio dei,
sAgAriyassa parijaNo dei tamhA dAvae, no se kappai pddiggaahitte| 26.
sAgAriyassa pUyAbhatte uddesie ceie pAhuDiyAe, sAgAriyassa uvagaraNajAe nir3hie
nisaTTe pADihArie, taM no sAgArio dei, no sAgAriyassa parijaNo dei, sAgAriyassa
pUyA dei, tamhA dAvae, no se kappai paDiggAhittae /

Page #125 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Second Objective] [171 27. If a Sagarika has offered food to her revered
guests, and the food was prepared in the Sagarika's utensils and is
*pratiharic*, then if the Sagarika or her family members offer it, it is not
*kalpata* for the Sadhu to accept. 28. If a Sagarika has offered food to her
revered guests, and the food was prepared in the Sagarika's utensils and is
*apratiharic*, then if the Sagarika or her family members offer it, it is not
*kalpata* for the Sadhu to accept. But if the revered guests offer it, then it
is *kalpata* for the Sadhu to accept. / 25. If a Sagarika has offered food to
her revered guests, and the food was prepared in the Sagarika's utensils and is
*pratiharic*, then if the Sagarika or her family members offer it, it is not
*kalpata* for the Sadhu to accept. 26. If a Sagarika has offered food to her
revered guests, and the food was prepared in the Sagarika's utensils and is
*pratiharic*, then if neither the Sagarika nor her family members offer it, but
the revered guests offer it, it is still not *kalpata* for the Sadhu to accept.
27. If a Sagarika has offered food to her revered guests, and the food was
prepared in the Sagarika's utensils and is *apratiharic*, then if the Sagarika
or her family members offer it, it is not *kalpata* for the Sadhu to accept. 28.
If a Sagarika has offered food to her revered guests, and the food was prepared
in the Sagarika's utensils and is *apratiharic*, then if neither the Sagarika
nor her family members offer it, but the revered guests offer it, then it is
*kalpata* for the Sadhu to accept. Discussion - Food prepared for various
relatives like father-in-law, maternal uncle, brother-in-law, son-in-law,
teacher, art teacher, master or guest, etc. is called *pujya-bhakta*. / If such
food is brought from the house of the *shayyatar* and offered to the revered
guests staying there, or if it is ordered from the market and sent as a gift to
the revered guests, or if it is cooked in the *shayyatar's* utensils (vessels),
taken out from their vessels and is *pratiharic*, i.e., if the servant or family
member sends it saying that the remaining food after feeding the revered guests
should be brought back, then all such food is called *pujya-bhakta*. Similarly,
clothes, vessels, blankets, etc. brought or prepared for the revered guests of
the Sagarika are called *pujya-utkaran*. Such *pujya-jan-nimitta* food and
utensils, whether offered by the *shayyatar* themselves, their family members,
or the revered guests, are not *kalpata* for the Sadhu-Sadhvi to accept. /
Because the remaining food is to be returned to the *shayyatar*, it remains
connected to their ownership.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
dUsarA uddezaka] [171 27. sAgAriyassa pUyAbhatte uddesie ceie pAhuDiyAe
sAgAriyassa uvagaraNajAe nir3hie nisaTTe apADihArie, taM sAgArio dei,
sAgAriyassa parijaNo dei, tamhA dAvae, no se kappai pddiggaahitte| 28.
sAgAriyassa pUyAbhatte uddesie ceie pAhuDiyAe, sAgAriyassa uvagaraNajAe niTThie,
nisaTTe apADihArie, taM no sAgArio dei, no sAgAriyassa parijaNo dei, sAgAriyassa
pUyA dei, tamhA dAvae, evaM se kappai paDiggAhittae / 25. sAgarika ne apane
pUjya puruSoM ko sammAnArtha bhojana diyA ho, pUjya puruSoM dvArA vaha AhAra
sAgArika ke upakaraNoM meM banAyA gayA ho aura prAtihArika ho, aise AhAra meM se
yadi sAgArika de yA usake parijana deM to sAdhu ko lenA nahIM kalpatA hai| 26.
sAgArika ne apane pUjya puruSoM ko sammAnArtha bhojana diyA ho, pUjya puruSoM
dvArA vaha AhAra sAgArika ke upakaraNoM meM banAyA gayA ho aura prAtihArika ho,
aise AhAra meM se na sAgArika de aura na sAgArika ke parijana deM, kintu
sAgArika ke pUjya puruSa deM to bhI sAdhu ko lenA nahIM kalpatA hai| 27.
sAgArika ne apane pUjya puruSoM ko sammAnArtha bhojana diyA ho, pUjya puruSoM
dvArA vaha AhAra sAgArika ke upakaraNoM meM banAyA gayA ho aura apratihArika ho,
aise AhAra meM se sAgArika de yA usake parijana deM to sAdhu ko lenA nahIM
kalpatA hai| 28. sAgArika ne apane pUjya puruSoM ko sammAnArtha bhojana diyA ho,
pUjya puruSoM dvArA vaha AhAra sAgArika ke upakaraNoM meM banavAyA gayA ho aura
apratihArika ho, aise AhAra meM se na sAgArika de aura na sAgArika ke parijana
deM kintu sAgArika ke pUjya puruSa deM to lenA kalpatA hai| vivecana-zayyAtara
ke nAnA, mAmA, bahanoI, jamAI, vidyAguru, kalAcArya, svAmI yA mehamAna Adi pUjya
jano ke nimitta se jo bhakta-pAna banAyA jAtA hai, use pUjya-bhakta kahate haiM
/ vaha zayyAtara ke ghara se lAkara jahAM pUjya jana Thahare hoM vahAM unheM
bhojanArtha samarpaNa kiyA gayA ho, bAjAra Adi se maMgAkara pUjya janoM ke pAsa
bheMTa rUpa bhejA gayA ho, zayyAtara ke bhAjanoM meM (bartanoM meM) pakAyA gayA
ho, usake pAtra se nikAlA gayA ho aura prAtihArika ho arthAt pUjya janoM ko
khilAne ke pazcAt jo bhojana bace, vaha vApasa lAkara soMpanA, aisA kahakara
sevaka yA kuTumbIjana dvArA bhejA gayA ho, aise sabhI AhAra pUjya-bhakta kahe
jAte haiN| isI prakAra sAgArika ke pUjya janoM ke lie banAye gaye yA lAye gaye
vastra-pAtra, kambalAdi bhI pUjya upakaraNa kahalAte haiN| aise pUjya jana-
nimitta vAle bhakta-piNDa aura upakaraNa ko cAhe zayyAtara svayaM sAdhu ke lie
de, usake svajana-parijana deM yA ukta pUjya jana deM to bhI sAdhu-sAdhvI ko
vaha AhAra Adi lenA nahIM kalpatA hai / kyoMki zeSa AhAra punaH zayyAtara ko
lauTAne kA hone se usameM zayyAtara ke svAmitva kA sambandha rahatA hai|

Page #126 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[172] [Brihatkalpa Sutra] If the food offered to the venerable ones is not to be
returned to the lay person after eating, i.e., if the remaining food is not to
be returned to the lay person, then such food can be taken. / If the lay person
or his family members give that food, then it cannot be taken, but if other
venerable ones, etc., give it, then it can be taken. From these sutras, it also
follows that food that is not owned by the lay person cannot be taken from the
hands of the lay person or his son, grandson, wife, daughter-in-law, etc., but
that food can be taken from the hands of married daughters. / For the
Nirgrantha-Nirgranthi, the following five types of clothes are considered
appropriate: 1. Jangmik, 2. Bhangik, 3. Sanak, 4. Potak, 5. Tiritpattak. /
Explanation: 1. Jangmik - Clothes made from the hair of sheep, etc., are called
'Jangmik'. 2. Bhangik - Clothes made from the bark of flax, etc., are called
'Bhangik'. 3. Sanak - Clothes made from jute are called 'Sanak'. 4. Potak -
Clothes made from cotton are called 'Potak'. 5. Tiritpattak - Clothes made from
the bark of the Tirit (Timir) tree are called 'Tiritpattak'. / These five types
of clothes are considered appropriate for the Sadhu. / Even though there is such
a sutra-instruction, the commentator has instructed that only three clothes, two
cotton and one woolen, should be kept for the Sadhu-Sadhvi. Jangam means
Trisajiv. / Asajiv are of two types - Vikalendriya and Panchendriya. / Kosa,
silk and velvet are Vikalendriya animal clothes. Their use is completely
prohibited for the Sadhu, because they are made from threads obtained by killing
those animals. Clothes made from the skin of Panchendriya animals are also
prohibited for the Sadhu-Sadhvi. But they can use woolen clothes made from their
hair. Because cutting the hair of sheep, etc., does not kill those animals. /
Rather, they feel lighter after cutting the wool. These clothes are also
considered appropriate in Pracha. Shru. 2, A. 5, U. 1 and Thanang A. 5, U. 3.
Acharaang Sutra also states that - 'A monk who is young, healthy and strong
should keep clothes of only one type, not of many types. / Other ordinary monks
can keep clothes of one or many types.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
172] [bRhatkalpasUtra yadi vaha AhAra pUjya janoM ko aprAtihArika de diyA gayA
ho arthAt khAne ke bAda zeSa rahA AhAra zayyAtara ko punaH nahIM lauTAnA ho to
vaise AhAra ko grahaNa kiyA jA sakatA hai / yadi usa AhAra ko zayyAtara yA usake
parijana deM to nahIM liyA jA sakatA hai, kintu anya pUjya jana Adi deM to liyA
jA sakatA hai| ina sUtroM se yaha bhI phalita hotA hai ki zayyAtara ke svAmitva
se rahita AhAra bhI zayyAtara ke hAtha se yA usake putra, pautra, strI,
putravadhU Adi ke hAtha se nahIM liyA jA sakatA hai, kintu vivAhita lar3akiyoM
ke hAtha se vaha pAhAra liyA jA sakatA hai / nirgrantha-nirganthI ke lie
kalpanIya vastra 29. kappai niggaMthANa vA niggaMthINa vA-imAiM paMca vatthAI
dhArittae vA pariharittae vA, taM jahA-1. jaMgie, 2. bhaMgie, 3. sANae, 4.
pottae, 5. tiroDapaTTe nAmaM pNcme| 29. nirgranthoM aura nimranthayoM ko pAMca
prakAra ke vastroM ko rakhanA aura unakA upayoga karanA kalpatA hai / yathA 1.
jAMgamika, 2. bhAMgika, 3. sAnaka, 4. potaka, 5. tirITapaTTaka / vivecana-1.
jAMgamika-bher3a Adi ke bAloM se bane vastra ko 'jAMgamika' kahate haiN| 2.
bhAMgika-alasI Adi kI chAla se bane vastra ko 'bhAMgika' kahate haiN| 3. zANaka-
sana (jUTa) se bane vastroM ko 'zANaka' kahate haiN| 4. potaka-kapAsa se bane
vastra ko 'potaka' kahate haiN| 5. tirITapaTTaka-tirITa (timira) vRkSa kI chAla
se bane vastra ko 'tirITapaTTaka' kahate haiM / ye pAMca prakAra ke vastra sAdhu
ke lie kalpanIya haiM / aisA sUtra-nirdeza hone para bhI bhASyakAra ne inameM se
sAdhu-sAdhvI ke lie do sUtI aura eka UnI aise tIna vastroM ko rakhane kA hI
nirdeza kiyA hai| jaMgama kA artha trasajIva hai / asajIva do prakAra ke hote
haiM-vikalendriya aura paMcendriya / kozA, rezama aura makhamala
vikalendriyaprANija vastra haiN| inakA upayoga sAdhu ke lie sarvathA vajita hai,
kyoMki ye una prANiyoM kA ghAta karake nikAle gaye dhAgoM se banate haiN|
paMcendriyajIvoM ke carma se nirmita vastra bhI sAdhu-sAdhvI ke liye niSiddha
haiN| kintu unake kezoM se nirmita UnI vastroM kA upayoga sAdhu-sAdhvI kara
sakate haiN| kyoMki bher3a Adi ke keza kATane meM una prANiyoM kA ghAta nahIM
hotA hai / apitu Una kATane ke bAda unako halkepana kA hI anubhava hotA hai|
prAcA. zru. 2, a. 5, u. 1 meM tathA ThANAMga a. 5, u. 3 meM bhI ye vastra
kalpanIya batAye haiN| AcArAMgasUtra meM yaha bhI kahA gayA hai ki-'jo bhikSu
taruNa svastha evaM samartha ho vaha inameM se eka hI jAti ke vastra rakhe,
aneka jAti ke nahIM rakhe / anya sAmAnya bhikSu eka yA aneka jAti ke vastra
rakha sakate haiN|

Page #127 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Second Objective] [173 From these five types of cloths, whichever is easily
available and suitable can be accepted.  /  Priority should be given to cotton
and wool, these two. For Nirgrantha-Nirgranthis, the suitable Rajoharan is 30.
Kappi Nigganthaan va Nigganthiin va imaim panch rayaharanai dharittae va
pariharaittae va, tan jaha-1. Onnie, 2. Uttrie, 3. Saanae, 4. Bacchachippae, 5.
Mujchippae naam panchmae. Tti bemi. 30. Nirgranthas and Nirgranthis are eligible
to keep and use these five types of Rajoharans / such as 1. Aunik, 2. Praustrik,
3. Sanak, 4. Vacchachippak, 5. Mujchippak / Discussion: That by which dust etc.
material-dust and karma-mal‡§∞‡•Ç‡§™ ‡§≠‡§æ‡§µ-‡§∞‡§ú are removed is called 'Rajoharan'.
Dravyarajoharan-While walking, the dust that sticks to the feet or the dust that
comes into the house is removed by sweeping, hence it is 'Dravyarajoharan'.
Bhavarajoharan-Insects etc. that have climbed on the ground, body or clothes-bed
etc. can be removed from Rajoharan without causing them any harm, hence it is
'Bhavarajoharan' as it is a means of protecting life. This Rajoharan is of five
types: 1. Aunik-That which is made from the wool of sheep etc. is 'Paunik' / 2.
Paustrik -That which is made from the hair of a camel is 'Paustrik'. 3. Shanak-
That which is made from the bark of flax is 'Shanak'. 4. Vacchachippak Vaccha
means grass or straw, the Rajoharan made by pounding it and removing the rough
parts is called 'Vacchachippak' / / 5. Mujchippak-The Rajoharan made by pounding
Munja and removing its hard parts is called 'Mujchippak'. In Sthananga A. 5, U.
3, these five types of Rajoharan are also mentioned. Of these five, the earlier
ones are softer and the later ones are rougher / Therefore, being the softest,
Aunik Rajoharan is considered the most suitable or best. In its absence, the
commentator has clearly instructed the use of Austrik and in its absence, Shanak
Rajoharan. If all three types of Rajoharans are not available in a particular
country, then in such a situation, it is the rule to accept Vacchachippak and in
its absence, Mujchippak Rajoharan.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
dUsarA uddezaka] [173 ina pAMca jAti ke vastroM meM se jaba jahAM jo sulabha
evaM kalpanIya prApta ho use grahaNa kiyA jA sakatA hai / prAthamikatA sUtI evaM
UnI ina do ko hI dI jAnI caahie| nirgrantha-nirgranthI ke lie kalpanIya
rajoharaNa 30. kappai niggaMthANa vA niggaMthINa vA imAiM paMca rayaharaNAI
dhArittae vA parihArittae vA, taM jahA-1. oNNie, 2. uTTie, 3. sANae, 4.
baccAcippae, 5. mujacippae nAmaM pNcme| tti bemi| 30. nirgranthoM aura
nigraMthiyoM ko ina pAMca prakAra ke rajoharaNoM ko rakhanA aura unakA upayoga
karanA kalpatA hai / yathA 1. auNika, 2. prauSTrika, 3. sAnaka, 4. vaccAcippaka,
5. mujacippaka / vivecanajisake dvArA dhUli Adi dravya-raja aura karma-malarUpa
bhAva-raja dUra kI jAe use 'rajoharaNa' kahate haiN| dravyarajoharaNa-
gamanAgamana karate hue pairoM para lagI raja yA makAna meM AI raja isase
pramArjana karake dUra ko jAtI hai, ataH yaha 'dravyarajoharaNa' hai|
bhAvarajoharaNa-bhUmigata, zarIra yA vastra-zayyAdi para car3he hue
kIr3e-makor3e Adi ko kaSTa pahuMcAe binA rajoharaNa se dUra kiyA jA sakatA hai,
ata: jIvarakSA kA sAdhana hone se yaha 'bhAvarajoharaNa' hai| yaha rajoharaNa
pAMca prakAra kA hotA hai1. auNika-jo bher3a Adi kI Una se banAyA jAe vaha
'pauNika" hai / 2. pauSTrika-jo U~Ta ke kezoM se banAyA jAya vaha 'pauSTrika'
hai| 3. zAnaka- jo sana ke valkala se banAyA jAya vaha 'zAnaka' hai| 4.
vaccAcippaka vaccA kA artha DAbha yA ghAsa hai, use kUTakara aura karkaza bhAga
dUrakara banAye gaye rajoharaNa ko 'baccAcippaka' kahate haiM / / 5.
mujacippaka-muMja ko kUTakara tathA usake kaThora bhAga ko dUra karake banAe gae
rajoharaNa _ko 'mujacippaka' kahate haiN| sthAnAMga a. 5, u. 3 meM bhI
rajorahaNa ke ye pAMca prakAra kahe haiN| ina pAMcoM meM pUrva-pUrva ke komala
hote haiM aura uttara-uttara ke karkaza / ataH sabase komala hone se auNika
rajoharaNa hI prazasta yA uttama mAnA gayA hai| usake abhAva meM auSTrika aura
usake prabhAva meM zAnaka rajoharaNa kA bhASyakAra ne spaSTa nirdeza kiyA hai|
yadi kisI deza-vizeSa meM ukta tInoM hI prakAra ke rajoharaNa upalabdha na hoM
to vaisI dazA meM hI vaccAcippaka aura usake bhI abhAva meM mujacippaka
rajoharaNa grahaNa karane kA vidhAna hai|

Page #128 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Brihatkalpasutra] The text prescribes a laghumasika (minor monthly)
prayashchitta (atonement) for the improper acquisition of rajoharana (menstrual
cloth). Maintaining the samyama (restraint) of the sadhus and sadhvis, and for
the removal of physical rajas (impurities), it is necessary to possess a
rajoharana.  The summary of the other topics is as follows: 1-3) One should not
stay in a house where grains are scattered, but if they are properly stacked,
one can stay there for a masakalpa (monthly period) or even the entire chaturmas
(four-month period) if the house is sealed. 4-7) One should not stay in a house
where vessels containing liquor, cold or hot water are present, or where a fire
or lamp is burning throughout the night. However, in the absence of any other
place, one can stay there for one or two nights. 8-10) One should not stay in a
house where food items are scattered here and there, but if they are properly
stacked in one corner, one can stay there for a masakalpa or the entire
chaturmas if the house is sealed. 11-12) Sadhvis should not stay in dharmashalas
(rest houses) or unsafe places, but in the absence of any other place, sadhus
can stay there. 14-16) If a bed has multiple owners, one should take the
permission of one owner and consider it as one's own. One should not take food
from the houses of other owners. 17-18) If the food of the bed-owner and others
is stored in the same place, one should not take from the portion set aside for
the bed-owner, but can take from the portion set aside for others. 19-22) The
sadhus and sadhvis should not mix the food set aside for the bed-owner with the
food of others. If they do so, they incur a chaturmasika (four-month)
prayashchitta. 23-24) One can take from the food items that belong to the bed-
owner only when the portion belonging to the bed-owner is completely separated.
If it is not completely separated, one should not take from it.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
174] [bRhatkalpasUtra viparIta krama se rajoharaNa ke grahaNa karane para
laghumAsika prAyazcitta kA nirdeza kiyA hai| sAdhu-sAdhvI ke saMyama kI rakSA ke
lie tathA zArIrika raja ko dUra karane ke lie eka rajoharaNa rakhanA Avazyaka
hotA hai| dUsare uddezaka kA sArAMza sUtra 1-3 4-7 8-10 11-12 jisa makAna meM
dhAnya bikharA huA ho usameM nahIM ThaharanA kintu vyavasthita rAzIkRta ho to
mAsakalpa evaM muharabanda ho to pUre cAturmAsa bhI rahA jA sakatA hai| jisa
makAna kI sImA meM madya ke ghar3e yA acitta zIta yA uSNa jala ke ghar3e bhare
hue par3e hoM athavA agni yA dIpaka sampUrNa rAtri jalate hoM to vahAM sAdhu-
sAdhvI ko nahIM ThaharanA cAhie, kintu anya makAna ke abhAva meM eka yA do rAtri
ThaharA jA sakatA hai| jisa makAna kI sImA meM khAdya padArtha ke bartana yatra-
tatra par3e hoM vahAM nahIM ThaharanA cAhie kintu eka kinAre para vyavasthita
rakhe hoM to mAsakalpa evaM muharabanda hoM to pUre cAturmAsa bhI rahA jA sakatA
hai / dharmazAlA evaM asurakSita sthAnoM meM sAdhviyoM ko nahIM ThaharanA cAhie,
kintu anya sthAna ke abhAva meM sAdhu vahA~ Thahara sakate haiN| zayyA ke aneka
svAmI hoM to eka kI prAjJA lekara use zayyAtara mAnanA evaM anya ke gharoM se
pAhArAdi grahaNa krnaa| zayyAdAtA evaM anya kA grAhAra kisI sthAna para
saMgrahIta kiyA gayA ho to zayyAtara ke ghara kI sImA meM aura sImA se bAhara
alaga rakhe hue zayyAtara ke AhAra meM se grahaNa karanA nahIM kalpatA hai /
kintu zayyAdAtA ke ghara kI sImA ke bAhara evaM anya saMgRhIta AhAra meM
zayyAtara kA hAra milA diyA gayA ho to grahaNa kiyA jA sakatA hai| sAdhu-sAdhvI
ko zayyAdAtA ke alaga rakhe hue AhAra ko anya AhAra meM milavAnA nahIM kalpatA
hai evaM aisA karane para use guru cAturmAsika prAyazcitta pAtA hai / zayyAdAtA
kI prAhRtikA evaM nihatikA kA AhAra usake AdhIna ho taba taka grahaNa nahIM kiyA
jA sakatA hai| anya ke AdhIna ho taba grahaNa kiyA jA sakatA hai| zayyAtara ke
svAmitva vAle aAhArAdi padArthoM meM se jaba zayyAtara ke svAmitva kA aMza pUrNa
vibhakta hokara alaga kara diyA jAve taba zeSa AhAra meM se grahaNa karanA
kalpatA hai, kintu zayyAtara kA aMza pUrNataH alaga na kiyA ho to usameM se
grahaNa karanA nahIM kalpatA hai| 14-16 17-18 19-22 23-24

Page #129 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Second Objective] [175 Sutra 25-28] It is permissible to accept food from the
**Shayyaa-daataa** (one who provides lodging) which is entirely dedicated to
**pujya purushas** (venerable men), but it is not permissible to accept food
that is given as **praatihaar** (a gift in return). It is also not permissible
to accept such food from the hands of the **Shayyaa-daataa** or their family
members. **Sadhus** (male ascetics) and **Sadhvis** (female ascetics) can accept
any type of **vastra** (clothing) or **rajo-haran** (toiletries) from the five
categories. 29-30 Conclusion 11-12 This objective discusses the **kalpya-
akalpya** (permissible and impermissible) of **dhaanya** (grains), **sura**
(liquor), **jal** (water), **agni** (fire), **deepak** (lamp), and
**khaadyapadaarth** (food) in a house, the **kalpya-akalpya** of places, the
need to seek permission from the **Shayyaa-swaami** (owner of the lodging), the
**kalpya-akalpya** of food owned by the **Shayyaa-tar** (one who provides
lodging), the categories of permissible **vastra** and **rajo-haran**, etc. //
Second Objective Ends // 14-28 29-30

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
dUsarA uddezaka] [175 sUtra 25-28 zayyAdAtA ke pUjya puruSoM ko sarvathA
samarpita kie gae AhAra meM se grahaNa karanA kalpatA hai, kintu 'prAtihArika'
diyA gayA ho to usameM se lenA nahIM kalpatA hai tathA vaha AhAra zayyAdAtA ke
yA usake pArivArika sadasyoM ke hAtha se lenA nahIM kalpatA hai| sAdhu-sadhviyAM
pAMca jAti ke vastra evaM pAMca jAti ke rajoharaNa meM se kisI bhI jAti kA
vastra yA rajoharaNa grahaNa kara sakate haiN| 29-30 upasaMhAra 11-12 isa
uddezaka meMdhAnya, surA, jala, agni, dIpaka evaM khAdya padArtha yukta makAna
ke kalpyAkalpya kA, / sthAnoM ke kalpyAkalpya kA, eka zayyA svAmI kI AjJA lene
kA, zayyAtara ke svAmitva vAle AhAra ke kalpyAkalpya kA, kalpanIya vastra evaM
rajoharaNa kI jAtiyoM kA, ityAdi viSayoM kA varNana kiyA gayA hai / // dvitIya
uddezaka samApta // 14-28 29-30

Page #130 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Third Objective: Prohibition of Nirgranthis and Nirgranthis residing in each
other's company  1. It is not permissible for Nirgranthis to reside in the
company of Nirgranthis, whether they are: 1. Standing, 2. Sitting, 3. Lying
down, 4. Sleeping, 5. Drowsing, 6. Eating, 7. Drinking, 8. Consuming Khadim, 9.
Consuming Sadim food, 10. Excreting, 11. Urinating, 12. Expelling phlegm, 13.
Cleaning nasal discharge, 14. Studying, 15. Meditating, or 16. Performing
Kayotsarga.   2. It is not permissible for Nirgranthis to reside in the company
of Nirgranthis, whether they are standing or performing Kayotsarga.
**Discussion:** Generally, Sadhus should not reside in the company of Sadhvis,
and Sadhvis should not reside in the company of Sadhus. If it is necessary to do
so due to some reason, they should perform their tasks while standing and return
quickly. They should not engage in the activities mentioned in the Sutras.
Because staying for a long time can lead to various apprehensions, and increased
familiarity can lead to a breach of Brahmacharya. It is also considered
inappropriate for Sadhus and Sadhvis to eat, drink, or dispose of excreta in
each other's company.  In the seventh chapter of the Vyavahar Upadesh, it is
stated that Sadhvis can visit Sadhus to listen to their studies and share their
own. Therefore, it is permissible for Sadhvis to visit Sadhus for this purpose.
The Thanang Sutra also mentions that visiting each other for service and other
tasks is permissible.  **Rules regarding the acceptance of leather by Sadhus and
Sadhvis:**  3. It is not permissible for Nirgranthis to accept leather from a
woman.  4. It is permissible for Nirgranthis to accept leather from a woman if:
1. It is offered by a respected person, 2. It is not offered by a non-respected
person, 3. It is offered by a single person, 4. It is not offered by multiple
people.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
tIsarA uddezaka nimrantha-nirgranthI ko paraspara upAzraya meM khar3e rahane Adi
kA niSedha 1. no kappai nimgaMthANaM, niggaMthoNaM uvassayaMsi-1. ciTTittae vA,
2. nisIittae vA, 3. tuyaTTittae vA, 4. nidAittae vA, 5. payalAittae vA, 6.
asaNaM vA, 7. pANaM vA, 8. khAimaM vA, 9. sAimaM vA pAhAraM pAhArittae, 10.
uccAraM vA, 11. pAsavaNaM vA, 12. khelaM vA, 13. siMghANaM vA paridRvittae, 14.
sajjhAyaM vA karittae, 15. sANaM vA jhAittae, 16. kAusaggaM vA (karittae)
tthaaitte| 2. no kampai niggaMthINaM niggaMthANaM uvassayaMsi ciTThittae vA jAva
kAussaggaM vA ThAittae / 1. nirgranthoM ko nirgranthiyoM ke upAzraya meM-1.
khar3e rahanA, 2. baiThanA, 3. leTanA, 4. nidrA lenA, 5. UMgha lenA, 6. azana,
7. pAna, 8. khAdima, 9. svAdima kA AhAra karanA, 10. mala, 11. mUtra, 12. kapha
aura, 13. nAka kA maila paraThanA, 14. svAdhyAya karanA, 15. dhyAna karanA tathA
16. kAyotsarga kara sthita honA nahIM kalpatA hai| 2. nirgranthiyoM ko
nirgranthoM ke upAzraya meM khar3e rahanA yAvat kAyotsarga kara sthita honA
nahIM kalpatA hai| vivecana-sAmAnyataH sAdhunoM ko sAdhviyoM ke upAzraya meM
tathA sAdhviyoM ko sAdhuoM ke upAzraya meM nahIM jAnA caahie| yadi kAraNavaza
jAnA par3e to unheM khar3e-khar3e hI kArya karake zIghra vApasa lauTa pAnA cAhie
aura vahAM para sUtrokta kArya nahIM karane caahie| kyoMki adhika samaya taka
Thaharane para logoM meM nAnA prakAra kI AzaMkAeM utpanna hotI haiM, adhika
paricaya bar3hane se brahmacarya meM bhI dUSaNa laganA sambhava hai aura sAdhu-
sAdhviyoM kA eka-dUsare ke upAzraya meM khAna-pAna yA mala-mUtrAdi kA visarjana
loka-nindita hai| sAdhviyoM ko sAdhu ke pAsa svAdhyAya sunAne evaM paraspara
vAcanA dene kA vyava. u. 7 meM kathana hai, ataH usa hetu sAdhviyoM kA sAdhuoM
ke upAzraya meM AnA-jAnA Agamasammata hai tathA sevA Adi kAryoM se bhI eka-
dUsare ke upAzraya meM Ane-jAne kA ThANAMga sUtra meM kathana kiyA gayA hai|
sAdhu-sAdhvI ko carma grahaNa ke vidhi-niSedha 3. no kappai niggaMthINaM salomAI
cammAI ahidvitte| 4. kappai niggaMthANaM salomAiM cammAiM ahidvittae, se vi ya
paribhutte, no ceva NaM aparibhutte, se vi ya pADihArie, no ceva NaM apADihArie,
se vi ya egarAie, no ceva NaM annegraaie|

Page #131 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Third Objective] [177 5. It is not permissible for a Niggantha or a Nigganthi
to possess or use a piece of leather with hair. 6. It is permissible for a
Niggantha or a Nigganthi to possess or use a piece of leather without hair. It
should be used, not new. It should be returned, not not returned. It should be
brought for use for only one night, not for many nights. 3. It is not
permissible for Nirgranthis to use leather with hair. 4. It is permissible for
Nirgranthis to use leather with hair. It should be used, not new. It should be
returned, not not returned. It should be brought for use for only one night, not
for many nights. 5. It is not permissible for Nirgranthis and Nirgranthis to
possess or use a whole piece of leather. 6. It is permissible for Nirgranthis
and Nirgranthis to possess or use a piece of leather. / Discussion - In the
general description of the Sadhu-Sadhvi, mention is made of clothes, utensils,
blankets, etc. It is generally not permissible for Sadhu-Sadhvi to keep leather
equipment, but if it is necessary to keep leather due to illness, etc., it is
permissible to keep a piece of leather without hair. The reason for this is that
in the situation of washing clothes with blood or stool, etc., the use of
leather makes it convenient. The patient also suffers less. / The prohibition of
whole leather is because a long and wide piece of leather with divisions for
hands and feet, etc., is unnecessary. / A limited cut piece of leather is
suitable. There is a possibility of life arising in leather with hair, so it is
unacceptable for Sadhu-Sadhvis. / The provision in the sutra for a Sadhu to take
leather with hair with many restrictions also indicates that leather with hair
is unacceptable. / If a Sadhu has skin disease or piles, etc., and experiences
extreme pain while sitting or sleeping, then leather with hair is more useful
than leather without hair, so the provision for its acceptance for special
reasons has been made. Also, some restrictions have been mentioned to avoid the
contradiction arising from the birth of life, the meaning of which is as
follows: Blacksmiths, goldsmiths, etc., who work near fire sitting on leather
all day long, do not have the possibility of life arising in that leather with
hair for some time. / Therefore, the permission has been given to accept leather
with hair as a gift for those who always work. If it is kept for a long time,
the heat of the fire will not be available, and there is a possibility of life
arising in that leather with hair. Therefore, keeping it for a long time is
prohibited.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
tIsarA uddezaka] [177 5. no kappai niggaMthANa vA, niggaMthINa vA kasiNAI
cammAiM dhArettae vA, pariharittae vaa| 6. kappai niggaMthANa vA niggaMthoNa vA
akasiNAI cammAiM dhArettae vA, pariharittae thaa| 3. nirgranthiyoM ko roma-
sahita carma kA upayoga karanA nahIM kalpatA hai / 4. nirgranthoM ko roma-sahita
carma kA upayoga karanA kalpatA hai| vaha bhI kAma meM liyA hA ho, nayA na ho|
lauTAyA jAne vAlA ho, na lauTAyA jAne vAlA nahIM ho| kevala eka rAtri meM
upayoga karane ke lie lAyA jAya para aneka rAtriyoM meM upayoga karane ke lie na
lAyA jAya / 5. nirgranthoM aura nirgranthiyoM ko akhaNDa carma rakhanA yA usakA
upayoga karanA nahIM kalpatA hai| 6. nirgranthoM aura nirgranthiyoM ko
carmakhaNDa rakhanA yA usakA upayoga karanA kalpatA hai / vivecana-sAdhu-sAdhvI
kI sAmAnya upadhi meM vastra, pAtra, kambala Adi kA kathana milatA hai| carma ke
upakaraNa sAmAnya rUpa se to sAdhu-sAdhvI ko rakhanA nahIM kalpatA hai, kintu
roga Adi ke kAraNa carma rakhanA Avazyaka ho to romarahita carmakhaNDa rakhanA
kalpatA hai| isakA kAraNa yaha hai ki khuna yA mala Adi ke kapaDe bArambAra
dhone kI paristhiti meM carmakhaNDa ke upayoga se suvidhA rahatI hai| rogI ko
bhI kaSTa kama hotA hai / akhaNDa carma kA niSedha isaliye hai ki hAtha pAMva
Adi ke vibhAga se yukta adhika lambA caur3A camar3A anAvazyaka hotA hai /
maryAdita kaTA huvA carma hI upayukta rahatA hai| saromacarma meM to jIvotpatti
kI AzaMkA rahatI hai, ataH vaha sAdhu-sAdhviyoM ke liye agrAhya hotA hai / sUtra
meM jo sAdhu ke liye aneka maryAdAoM se yukta saromacarma grahaNa karane kA
vidhAna hai, isase bhI saromacarma kA agrAhya honA dhvanita hotA hai / kisI
sAdhu ke carmaroga yA arza Adi ke kAraNa baiThane meM yA sone meM bhI atyanta
pIr3A hotI ho to romarahita carma kI apekSA romasahita carma adhika upayogI hotA
hai, isaliye vizeSa kAraNa se usake grahaNa karane kA vidhAna kiyA gayA hai|
sAtha hI jIvotpatti se hone vAlI virAdhanA se bacane ke lie kucha maryAdAeM kahI
gaI haiM, jinakA tAtparya isa prakAra hai luhAra, sunAra Adi jo dina bhara carma
para baiThakara agni ke pAsa kAma karate haiM, usa saromacarma meM kucha samaya
taka jIvotpatti kI sambhAvanA nahIM rahatI hai / ataH sadA kAma pAne vAle,
saromacarma ko prAtihArika rUpa meM grahaNa karane kI prAjJA dI gaI hai| jyAdA
dina rakhane para agni kI garmI na milane se usa saromacarma meM jovotpatti hone
kI sambhAvanA rahatI hai| ataH adhika rakhane kA niSedha kiyA gayA hai|

Page #132 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[178] The reason why the *Bahutkalpasutra* prohibits *Sadhvis* from wearing
*saromacharma* (leather with hair) is that it is difficult for them to find such
leather and follow the many restrictions associated with it. Additionally, the
possibility of experiencing a touch similar to that of a man in *saromacharma*
could hinder their *brahmacharya* (celibacy). The commentary mentions many
reasons for wearing *romarhit charmakhand* (hairless leather). These include
wearing it during *sanhdiwat* (rheumatism), extreme cold or heat, when unable to
walk, when vision becomes weak, or when blisters develop on the feet. The
commentary describes various types of *kritsna* (whole) and *akritsna* (partial)
leather and their uses in different situations. It is essential to study the
commentary to understand these details.  **Rules for *Sadhus* and *Sadhvis*
regarding clothing:**  7. It is not permissible for *nigganthas* (Jain monks) or
*nigganthis* (Jain nuns) to wear or use *kritsna* (whole) garments. 8. It is
permissible for *nigganthas* or *nigganthis* to wear or use *akritsna* (partial)
garments. 9. It is not permissible for *nigganthas* or *nigganthis* to wear or
use *abhinna* (unseparated) garments. 10. It is permissible for *nigganthas* or
*nigganthis* to wear or use *bhinna* (separated) garments.  **Discussion:**  In
these sutras, the terms *kritsna-akritsna* and *abhinna-bhinna* are synonymous.
The reason for having separate sutras for them is that the *kritsna* sutras
describe the *varna* (color), *mulya* (value), etc., of the garment, which are
*bhavakritsna* (whole in terms of qualities), while the *abhinna* sutras
describe the *prakhunda than* (large piece) or the very long and wide garment,
which is *dravya kritsna* (whole in terms of substance).  The commentator, while
explaining *kritsna* (whole) garments in detail, states that *kritsna* garments
are of four types based on *dravya* (substance), *kshetra* (area), *kala*
(time), and *bhava* (quality). Among these, *dravya kritsna* (whole in terms of
substance) is further divided into two types: *sakal-dravya kritsna* (whole in
terms of all substance) and *praman-dravya kritsna* (whole in terms of
quantity).  A garment that has its beginning and end parts, has a border, is
soft to touch, and is free from blemishes like soot, black or yellow spots,
etc., is called *sakal-dravya kritsna* (whole in terms of all substance). This
is further divided into three types based on quality: *jghanya* (inferior),
*madhyama* (medium), and *utkrista* (superior). *Mukhavastrika* (face cloth)
etc. are *jghanya* (inferior) *dravya kritsna*, *chola patta* (upper garment)
etc. are *madhyama* (medium), and *chadar* (sheet) is *utkrista* (superior)
*dravya kritsna*.  Garments that are longer and wider than the prescribed length
and width are called *praman-dravya kritsna* (whole in terms of quantity).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
178] [bahatkalpasUtra sAdhvI ko saromacarma grahaNa karane kA jo niSedha kiyA
gayA hai usakA kAraNa yaha hai ki unako aise carma kI gaveSaNA karanA evaM itanI
maryAdAoM kA pAlana karanA kaThina hai tathA saromacarma meM puruSa jaise sparza
kA anubhava hone kI sambhAvanA se vaha unake brahmacarya meM bhI bAdhaka ho
sakatA hai| romarahita carmakhaNDa rakhane ke aneka kAraNa bhASya meM kahe haiM
/ ve isa prakAra haiMsaMdhivAta meM, atizIta kAla evaM ati uSNa kAla meM na cala
sakane para, dRSTi manda ho jAya yA pairoM meM chAle par3a jAe~ ityAdi kAraNoM
se carmakhaNDa rakhe jA sakate haiM / bhASya meM kRtsna akRtsna carma ke aneka
prakAra se unake upayoga evaM paristhitiyoM kA varNana kiyA hai| isakI jAnakArI
ke liye bhASya kA adhyayana karanA Avazyaka hai| sAdhu-sAdhvI dvArA vastra
grahaNa karane ke vidhi-niSedha 7. no kappai niggaMthANa vA niggaMthINa vA-
kasiNAI vatthAI dhArettae vA, pariharittae vaa| 8. kappai niggaMthANa vA,
niggaMthINa vA akasiNAI vatthAI dhAretae vA, pariharittae vaa| 9. no kappai
niggaMdhANa vA, niggaMthINa vA-abhinnAI vatthAI dhArettae vA, pariharittae vaa|
10. kappai niggathANa vA, niggaMthINa vAbhinnAI vatthAI dhArettae vA,
pariharittae vaa| 7. nirgranthoM aura nirgranthiyoM ko kRtsna vastroM kA rakhanA
yA upayoga karanA nahIM kalpatA hai| 8. nirgranthoM aura nirgranthiyoM ko
akRtsna vastroM kA rakhanA yA upayoga karanA kalpatA hai / 9. nirgranthoM aura
nirgranthiyoM ko abhinna vastroM kA rakhanA yA upayoga karanA nahIM kalpatA hai|
10. nirgranthoM aura nirgranthiyoM ko bhinna vastroM kA rakhanA yA upayoga
karanA kalpatA hai| vivecanaina sUtroM meM kRtsna-akRtsna evaM abhinna-bhinna
donoM hI pada zabda kI apekSA ekArthaka haiN| inake pRthak-pRthak sUtra kahane
kA kAraNa yaha hai ki kRtsna sUtroM meM vastra ke varNa evaM mUlya Adi rUpa
bhAvakRtsna kA varNana hai evaM abhinna sUtroM meM prakhaNDa thAna yA ati lambe-
caur3e vastra rUpa dravyakRtsna kA kathana hai| bhASyakAra ne isa kRtsna arthAt
akhaNDa vastra kI vistRta vyAkhyA karate hue kahA hai ki kRtsna vastra dravya,
kSetra, kAla aura bhAva ke bheda se cAra prakAra kA hotA hai| unameM se dravya
kRtsna ke bhI do bheda haiM-sakala-dravyakRtsna aura pramANa-dravyakRtsna / jo
vastra apane Adi aura anta bhAga se yukta ho, kinArIvAlA ho, komala sparzayukta
ho aura kAjala, kAle-pIle dhabbe Adi se rahita ho, use dravya kI apekSA
sakalakRtsna kahate haiM / isake bhI jaghanya, madhyama aura utkRSTa kI apekSA
tIna bheda haiN| mukhavastrikAdi jaghanya dravyakRtsna hai, colapaTTAdi madhyama
aura cAdara utkRSTa dravyakRtsna hai| jo vastra maryAdita lambAI-caur3AI ke
pramANa se adhika lambe-caur3e hote haiM, unheM dravya kI apekSA pramANa-kRtsna
kahate haiM /

Page #133 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Third Requisite  [179] A garment that is rare in a particular region is
called **Kshetra-Kritsna**. A garment made in one country is often valuable and
rare in another country. A garment that is expensive in a particular time period
is called **Kala-Kritsna**. For example, during the summer, cotton, silk, and
other thin garments are valuable, while during the winter, thick woolen garments
are valuable, and during the rainy season, colorful garments become valuable.
There are two types of **Bhaava-Kritsna**: **Varna-Yuta** and **Mulyayuta**.
**Varna-Yuta** garments have five variations, such as black, blue, etc.
**Mulyayuta** garments are also of three types: **Jghanya**, **Madhyama**, and
**Utkrisht**. Where the price of a garment is low, it is **Jghanya**, and where
the price of the same garment is high, it is **Utkrisht**. A garment that is
available everywhere at the same price is called **Madhyama**. Alternatively, a
garment that evokes attachment is called **Bhaava-Kritsna**, meaning a beautiful
garment with excessive shine and splendor.  All four types of **Kritsna**
garments are unsuitable for monks or nuns to keep or wear. Commenting on the
disadvantages of keeping or wearing them, the commentator has said that carrying
extra garments during travel is burdensome. Thieves or robbers can steal fine,
valuable garments, or any unruly person can snatch them. When entering another
state, customs officials may demand taxes or confiscate the garments. A lay
person, seeing such garments near a monk, may feel disgust or contempt.  For
these reasons, all four types of **Kritsna** garments are not suitable for monks
and nuns. However, they should wear garments that are inexpensive or in
appropriate quantity, readily available in all regions and times, and not
valuable in terms of attachment.  **Avgrahanantak** and **Avgrahapattak** for
monks and nuns:  11. It is not appropriate for monks to keep or use
**Avgrahanantak** and **Avgrahapattak**. 12. It is appropriate for monks to keep
or use **Avgrahanantak** and **Avgrahapattak**.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
tIsarA uddezaka [179 jo vastra jisa kSetra meM durlabha ho, use kSetrakRtsna
kahate haiN| eka deza kA banA vastra dUsare deza meM prAyaH bahumUlya evaM
durlabha hotA hai| jo vastra jisa kAla meM mahaMgA mile use kAla kRtsna kahate
haiN| jaise grISmakAla meM sUtI, rezamI Adi patale vastra aura zItakAla meM moTe
UnI garama vastra tathA varSAkAla meM raMgIna vastra bahumUlya ho jAte haiN| _
bhAvakRtsna ke do bheda haiM-varNayuta aura muulyyut| inameM varNayuta vastra ke
kRSNa, nIla Adi varNoM kI apekSA pAMca bheda hote haiN| mUlyayuta vastra bhI
jaghanya, madhyama aura utkRSTa ke bheda se tIna prakAra kA hotA hai| jahAM para
jisakA mUlya kama ho vahAM vaha jaghanya aura jahAM usI kA mUlya adhika ho,
vahAM vahI utkRSTa mUlya kA jAnanA caahie| jo vastra sarvatra samAna mUlya se
upalabdha ho vaha madhyama mUlya vAlA kahalAtA hai| athavA jisa vastra ke
dhAraNa karane se rAgabhAva utpanna ho use bhAvakRtsna kahate haiM / arthAt ati
camaka-damaka vAle ramaNIya vastra / ukta cAroM hI prakAra ke kRtsnavastra sAdhu
yA sAdhviyoM ke lie rakhanA yA paharanA ayogya hai| inake rakhane yA paharane ke
doSoM kA nirdeza karate hue bhASyakAra ne kahA hai ki pramANAtirikta vastroM ke
rakhane para mArga-gamanakAla meM bhAra vahana karanA par3atA hai| akhaNDa,
bahUmUlya sUkSma vastroM ko cora-DAkU curA sakate haiM yA anya koI bhI asaMyamI
chIna sakatA hai| eka rAjya se dUsare rAjya meM praveza karane para cuMgI vAle
kara mAMga sakate haiM yA vastra chIna sakate haiN| zrAvaka aise vastroM ko
sAdhu ke samIpa dekhakara unase ghRNA yA nindA kara sakatA haiM / ityAdi kAraNoM
se cAroM hI prakAra ke kRtsnavastra sAdhu-sAdhvI ko nahIM kalpate haiM / kintu
jo dravya se alpa yA pramANopeta ho, kSetra aura kAla se sarvatra sulabha ho
aura bhAva se jo bahumUlya na ho, aisA vastra hI unako dhAraNa karanA caahie|
sAdhu-sAdhvI ko avagrahAnantaka aura avagrahapaTTapha dhAraNa karane ke vidhi-
niSedha 11. no kappai niggaMthANaM uggahaNantagaM vA, uggahapaTTagaM vA
dhArittae vA, pariharittae vaa| 12. kappai niggaMthoNaM uggahaNantarga vA,
uggahapaTTagaM vA dhArittae vA, pariharittae vaa| 11. nirgranthoM ko
avagrahAnantaka aura avagrahapaTTaka rakhanA yA usakA upayoga karanA nahIM
kalpatA hai| 12. nirgranthiyoM ko avagrahAnantaka aura avagrahapaTTaka rakhanA
yA usakA upayoga karanA kalpatA hai|

Page #134 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[180] The [G·πõhatkalpas≈´tra] commentary refers to the loincloth or kaupƒ´na that
covers the private parts as *avagrahanantak* and the garment that covers it as
*avagrahapattak*. The first s≈´tra prohibits both for monks, while the second
s≈´tra prescribes both for nuns. Although the s≈´tra clearly prohibits both these
items for monks, the commentator has written that if a monk suffers from a
disease like fistula or piles, he can wear the *avagrahapattak* to protect other
garments from blood and pus. The reason for nuns to keep and wear both these
items is that during menstruation, their clothes should not be stained with
blood. Therefore, it is prescribed that they should use both these garments
during that time and keep them nearby at other times. It is also necessary to
wear these items for the protection of virtue in the monastery, etc. Question:
How many garments and utensils are prescribed for nuns? Answer: The *niyukti*
and the commentator have instructed to keep 25 types of *upadhi*. Their names
are as follows: 1. *pƒÅtra*, 2. *pƒÅtrabandha*, 3. *pƒÅtrasthƒÅpana*, 4.
*pƒÅtrakesarikƒÅ*, 5. *pa·π≠alak*, 6. *rajastrƒÅ·πáa*, 7. *gocchaka*, 8-10. three
sheets (covering garments), 11. *rajohara·πáa*, 12. *mukhavastrikƒÅ*, 13.
*mƒÅtraka*, 14. *kam·∏çhaka* (garment worn in the place of *cholapa·π≠·π≠aka*,
*≈õƒÅ·π≠ikƒÅ*), 15. *avagrahanantak* (loincloth covering the private parts), 16.
*avagrahapattak* (garment wrapped around the waist over the loincloth), 17.
*osaka* (garment like a loincloth covering the thighs), 18. *calanikƒÅ* (larger
than *ardhƒÅsoka*, covering the knees), 19. *abhyantara nivasinƒ´* (covering half
the knees), 20. *bahirnivasi·πáƒ´* (covering the ankles), 21. *kancuka* (blouse),
22. *aupak·π£ikƒ´* (worn over the blouse), 23. *vaik·π£ikƒ´* (covering the *kancuka*
and *aupak·π£ikƒ´*), 24. *sa·πÖghƒÅ·π≠ƒ´* (worn in the residence), 25. *skandhakar·πáƒ´*
(garment to be worn on the shoulder). Thus, there are 25 *upadhi* or items for
ƒÄryikƒÅs. The commentator has also prescribed that beautiful nuns should keep or
wear *kubja-kar·πáƒ´* along with *skandhakar·πáƒ´*. This means that lustful men may be
attracted by the sight of a beautiful nun, so to make her look deformed, a
bundle of clothes is placed on her back and tied, making her look hunchbacked.
This is why this *upadhi* is called *kubja-kar·πáƒ´*. In addition, the commentator
has described the minimum and maximum number of garments and *upadhi* that monks
and nuns can keep, as well as other important topics and duties. All these
details should be known by those who are curious from the *sabhƒÅ·π£ya*
*b·πõhatkalpas≈´tra*. It is forbidden for a nun to accept clothes from her
relatives: 13. *nigganthƒ´e ya gƒÅhƒÅvaikulam pi·πá·∏çavƒÅyap·∏çiyƒÅe a·πáuppavitƒÅe celatthe
samuppannejja no se kappi appano nissƒÅe celam pa·∏çiggahƒìttae*.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
180] [gRhatkalpasUtra vivecanagupta aMga ke Dhakane vAle laMgoTa yA kaupIna ko
avagrahAnantaka kahate haiM aura usake bhI Upara use AcchAdana karane vAle
vastra ko avagrahapaTTaka kahate haiN| prathama sUtra meM sAdhuoM ke lie ina
donoM kA niSedha kiyA gayA hai aura dUsare sUtra meM sAdhviyoM ke lie ina donoM
ke rakhane aura pahinane kA vidhAna kiyA gayA hai| yadyapi sUtra meM ukta donoM
upakaraNa bhikSu ko rakhane kA spaSTa niSedha hai, tathApi bhASyakAra ne likhA
hai ki yadi kisI sAdhu ko bhagandara, arza prAdi roga ho jAe to usa avasthA meM
anya vastroM ko rakta-pIpa se bacAne ke lie vaha avagrahapaTTaka rakha sakatA
hai| sAdhviyoM ko donoM upakaraNa rakhane kA aura pahinane kA kAraNa yaha hai ki
RtukAla meM sAdhviyoM ko pror3hane-pahinane ke vastra rakta-raMjita na hoM, ataH
usa samaya ukta donoM vastroM ko upayoga meM lAne aura zeSa kAla meM samIpa
rakhane kA vidhAna kiyA gayA hai| vihAra Adi meM zIlarakSA ke liye bhI ina
upakaraNoM kA pahananA Avazyaka hotA hai| prazna-sAdhviyoM ke lie kitane vastra-
pAtrAdi rakhane kA vidhAna hai ? uttara-niyukti aura bhASyakAra ne 25 prakAra kI
upadhi rakhane kA nirdeza kiyA hai unake nAma isa prakAra haiM1. pAtra, 2.
pAtrabandha, 3. pAtrasthApana, 4. pAtrakesarikA, 5. paTalaka, 6. rajastrANa, 7.
gocchaka, 8-10. tIna cAdara (pracchAdaka vastra), 11. rajoharaNa, 12.
mukhavastrikA, 13. mAtraka, 14. kamaDhaka (colapaTTakasthAnIya vastra, zATikA),
15. avagrahAnantaka (guhyasthAnAcchadaka-laMgoTI), 16. avagrahapaTTaka (laMgoTI
ke Upara kamara para lapeTane kA vastra), 17. aosaka (grAdhI jAMghoM ko Dhakane
vAlA jAMghiyA jaisA vastra), 18.calanikA (ardhAsaka se bar3A, ghuTanoM ko bhI
DhaMkane vAlA vastra), 19. abhyantara nivasinI (prAdhe ghuTanoM ko Dhakane
vAlI), 20. bahirnivasanI (paira kI er3iyoM ko Dhakane vAlI), 21. kaMcuka (colI),
22. aupakakSikI . (colI ke Upara bAMdhI jAne vAlI), 23. vaikakSiko (kaMcuka aura
praupakakSikI ko Dhakane vAlI), 24. saMghATI (vasati meM pahane jAne vAlI), 25.
skandhakaraNI (kandhe para DAlane kA vstr)| isa prakAra AryikAyoM ke 25 upadhi
yA upakaraNa hote haiN| bhASyakAra ne skandhakaraNI ke sAtha rUpavatI sAdhviyoM
ko kubja-karaNI rakhane yA bAMdhane kA bhI vidhAna kiyA hai| isakA abhiprAya
yaha hai ki rUpavatI sAdhvI ko dekhakara kAmuka puruSa cala-citta ho sakate
haiM, ata: rUpavatI sAdhvI ko vikRtarUpA banAne ke lie pITha para vastroM kI
poTalI rakhakara bAMdha dete hai, jisase ki vaha kubar3I-sI dikhane lage / isI
kAraNa isa upadhi kA nAma kubja-karaNI rakhA gayA hai| _ isake atirikta sAdhu
aura sAdhvI kama se kama aura adhika se adhika kitane vastra-upadhi rakha sakate
haiM, bhASyakAra ne isakA tathA anya aneka jJAtavya viSayoM kA aura karaNIya
kAryoM kA bhI varNana kiyA hai / vaha saba vizeSa jijJAsu janoM ko sabhASya
bRhatkalpasUtra se jAnanA cAhie / sAdhvI ko apanI nizrA se vastra grahaNa karane
kA niSedha 13. niggaMthIe ya gAhAvaikulaM piMDavAyapaDiyAe aNuppaviTAe celaThe
samuppajjejjA no se kappai appaNo nissAe celaM paDiggAhettae /

Page #135 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Third Objective] [181 It is not proper for a nun to accept clothes from her
own *nisra* when she is staying at a householder's house for food. It is not
proper for her to accept clothes from her own *nisra* even if there are
*saamanas* (monks) present, whether they are *aacharyas*, *upaadhyaayas*,
*pravarttaks*, *sthaviras*, *ganis*, *ganadharas*, or *ganavachchedakas*, or if
she is staying with them. It is not proper for her to accept clothes from her
own *nisra* even if she is staying with someone else who is more important than
them.  /  It is proper for her to accept clothes from the *nisra* of the
*pravarttini* (leader of the group).  /  .13. If a nun needs clothes while
staying at a householder's house for food, it is not proper for her to accept
clothes from her own *nisra*, saying, "I am taking this cloth for myself."  /
But she can accept clothes from the *nisra* of the *pravarttini*.  /  She should
clearly tell the householder, "I am accepting this cloth from the *nisra* of the
*pravarttini*. If she accepts it and gives it to a nun, it will be kept,
otherwise it will be returned to you."  /  Only then can she accept the cloth
from the householder, otherwise not.  /  If her *pravarttini* is not in the
*upaashraya* (monastery) or in that village, she can accept the cloth from the
*nisra* of the *aacharya*, *upaadhyaaya*, or other *sadhujanas* (holy people)
mentioned in the scriptures who are nearby.  /  The characteristics of the
*aacharya* etc. mentioned in the scriptures are as follows: 1. An *aacharya* is
one who himself follows the five *praacharas* (principles) of knowledge, vision,
conduct, austerity, and vigor, and makes his disciples follow them. He is the
master of the *sadhusangh* (community of monks) and is skilled in the *anugraha-
nigraha* (grace and punishment), *saaran-vaaran* (praise and blame), and
*dhaaran* (holding) of the *sangh*. He is knowledgeable about the state of the
world and is endowed with *aacharasampada* (wealth of conduct) and other *paatha
sampadas* (wealth of scriptures).  /  Vyav. U. 3, Sutra. 5 He is the holder of
the qualities and scriptures mentioned.  /  2. An *upaadhyaaya* is one who is
himself an expert in the *dwadashaangashruta* (twelve-part scriptures) and
teaches the *praagamas* (ancient scriptures) to the disciples who come to him
for study.  /  Vyav. U. 3, Sutra. 3 He is the holder of the qualities and
scriptures mentioned.  /  3. A *pravarttak* is one who, seeing the ability or
interest of the *sadhus*, appoints them to the tasks assigned by the *aacharya*
and to *tapa* (austerity), *sanayama* (self-control), *yoga* (meditation),
*vaiyaavrutya* (conduct), *seva* (service), *shushrusha* (care), *adhyayana*
(study), and *adhyaapana* (teaching).  /  4. A *sthavir* is one who, seeing
laxity in the self-control of the *sadhus* or seeing them deviate from self-
control, gives them advice about the dangers (undesirable things or faults) of
this world and the next and makes them firm in their duties.  /  5. A *gani* is
one who is the master of a group of *sadhus* and takes care of the *sadhvis*
(nuns) and their arrangements.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
tIsarA uddezaka] [181 kappai se pavattiNI-nissAe celaM pddiggaahitte| no ya se
tattha pattiNo sAmANA siyA, je se tattha sAmANe Ayarie vA, uvajjhAe vA, pavattae
vA, there vA, gaNI vA, gaNahare vA, gaNAvaccheie vA, jaM ca anna purao kaTu
viharai / kappai se tannIsAe celaM paDiggAhettae / .13. gRhastha ke ghara meM
AhAra ke lie gaI huI nirgranthiyoM ko yadi vastra kI AvazyakatA ho to apanI
nizrA se vastra lenA nahIM kalpatA hai / kintu pravartinI kI nizrA se vastra
lenA kalpatA hai / yadi vahAM pravartinI vidyamAna na ho to jo prAcArya,
upAdhyAya, pravartaka, sthavira, gaNI, gaNadhara yA gaNAvacchedaka ho athavA
jinakI pramukhatA se vicaraNa kara rahI ho, unakI nizrA se vastra lenA kalpatA
hai| vivecana yadi koI sAdhviyAM bhakta-pAna lene ke lie gRhastha ke dhara gaI
hoM aura unameM se kisI eka ko vastra kI AvazyakatA ho to use apanI nizrA se
arthAt 'yaha vastra maiM mere lie grahaNa kara rahI hUM' isa prakAra kahakara
gRhastha se vastra lenA nahIM kalpatA hai| kintu vaha pratinI kI nizrA se
grahaNa kara sakatI hai, arthAt vaha gRhastha se vastra lete samaya spaSTa
zabdoM meM kahe ki'maiM pravartinI ko nizrA se ise grahaNa karatI hUM, ve ise
svIkAra kara kisI sAdhvI ko deMgI to rakhA jAegA anyathA Apako vApasa lauTA diyA
jaaegaa|' aisA kahakara hI vaha gahastha se vastra ko grahaNa kara sakatI hai,
anyathA nhiiN| yadi usakI pratinI upAzraya meM yA usa grAma meM na ho to jo
prAcArya yA upAdhyAya Adi sUtrokta sAdhujana samIpa meM hoM, unakI nizrA se vaha
vastra ko grahaNa kara sakatI hai| sUtrokta prAcArya Adi kA svarUpa isa prakAra
hai 1. AcArya jo jJAna, darzana, cAritra, tapa aura vIrya-ina pAMca prAcAroM kA
svayaM pAlana kare aura AjJAnuvartI ziSyoM se pAlana karAve, jo sAdhusaMgha kA
svAmI aura saMgha ke anugraha-nigraha, sAraNa-vAraNa aura dhAraNa meM kuzala ho,
loka-sthiti kA vettA ho, AcArasampadA Adi pATha sampadAoM se yukta ho / vyava.
u. 3, sUtra. 5 kathita guNoM kA evaM sUtroM kA dhAraka ho / 2. upAdhyAyajo
svayaM dvAdazAMgazruta kA vizeSajJa ho, adhyayanArtha pAne vAle ziSyoM ko
prAgamoM kA abhyAsa karAnevAlA ho aura vyava. u. 3, sU. 3 meM kahe gaye guNoM kA
evaM sUtroM kA dhAraka ho| 3. pravartaka-jo sAdhuoM kI yogyatA yA ruci dekhakara
unako prAcArya-nirdiSTa kAryoM meM tathA tapa, saMyama, yoga, vaiyAvRtya, sevA,
zuzrUSA, adhyayana-adhyApana Adi meM niyukta kre| 4. sthavira-jo sAdhunoM ke
saMyama meM zaithilya dekhakara yA unheM saMyama se vicalita dekhakara isa loka
aura paraloka sambandhI apAyoM (aniSTa yA doSoM) kA upadeza kare aura unheM
apane kartavyoM meM sthira kre| 5. gaNI-jo kucha sAdhunoM ke gaNa kA svAmI ho
aura sAdhviyoM kI dekha-rekha evaM vyavasthA

Page #136 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[182] The one who performs the Brihatkalpa Sutra is called a **Pracharaya**. Or,
under the guidance of the main **Pracharaya**, there are many **Pracharayas**,
they are called **Gan**s. 6. **Ganadhara** - who leads a group of monks. 7.
**Ganavcchedaka** - who manages the food, accommodation, medicine, and atonement
of the monks. It has been explained that the order of these seven ranks is as
follows: A **Sadhvi** should not take clothes from her own guidance, but from
her **Pravartiini**. If she is not available, then she should take it from the
**Pracharaya** of the **Sangha**. In their absence, she should take it from the
**Upadhyaya**. In this way, in the absence of the higher rank holders, she
should take the clothes from the lower rank holders. If none of these rank
holders are available, then she should take the clothes from any other **Sadhu**
or **Sadhvi** who understands the **Geetaarth**. But a **Sadhvi** should not
take clothes from her own guidance.  The rules for the robes to be taken at the
time of initiation are as follows: 14. A **Niggantha** who is being initiated
for the first time after renouncing worldly life, is eligible to receive
**Rajoharan**, **Gochchhak**, **Patra**, and three **Akhand** robes. If he has
been initiated before, then he is not eligible to receive **Rajoharan**,
**Gochchhak**, **Patra**, and three **Akhand** robes. But he is eligible to
receive the robes he had received before. 15. A **Nigganthi** who is being
initiated for the first time after renouncing worldly life, is eligible to
receive **Rajoharan**, **Gochchhak**, **Patra**, and four **Akhand** robes. If
she has been initiated before, then she is not eligible to receive
**Rajoharan**, **Gochchhak**, **Patra**, and four **Akhand** robes.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
182] [bRhatkalpasUtra karane vAlA ho| athavA jo mukhya prAcArya kI nizrA meM
aneka prAcArya hote haiM, unheM gaNo kahA jAtA hai| 6. gaNadhara jo kucha
sAdhuoM kA pramukha banakara vicaraNa karatA ho / 7. gaNAvacchedaka-jo
sAdhujanoM ke bhakta-pAna, sthAna, auSadhopacAra, prAyazcitta Adi kI vyavasthA
karane vAlA ho| ukta sAtoM padavIdhArakoM ke krama kA nirUpaNa karate hue batAyA
gayA hai ki sAdhvI ko svayaM kI nizrA se vastra nahIM lenA cAhie, kintu apanI
pravartinI kI nizrA se lenA caahie| yadi vaha na ho to saMgha ke prAcArya kI
nizrA se leve| unake abhAva meM upAdhyAya kI nizrA se leve| isa prakAra parva-
parva padadhArakoM ke abhAva meM uttara-uttara padadhArakoM kI nizrA se vastra
ko leve| yadi u padadhArakoM meM se koI bhI samIpa na ho to jo aura koI bhI
gItArtha sAdhu yA sAdhvI ho, usako nizrA se vastra leve| kintu sAdhvI ko svayaM
kI nizrA se vastra nahIM lenA caahie| dIkSA ke samaya grahaNa karane yogya
upadhi kA vidhAna 14. niggaMthassa NaM tappaDhamayAe saMpanvayamANassa kappai
rayaharaNa-gocchaga-paDiggahamAyAe tihi kasiNehi batthehi AyAe saMpanvaittae /
se ya puvovaTThie siyA, evaM se no kappai rayaharaNa-gocchaga-paDiggahamAyAe
tihiM kasihi vatthehiM AyAe saMpanyaittae / kappai se ahApariggahiehi vatyahiM
AyAe sNpnvitte| 15. niggaMthoe ya tappaDhamayAe saMpanvayamANoe kappai
rayaharaNa-gocchaga-paDiggahamAyAe cahi kasiNehiM vatthehi AyAe saMpavvaittae /
sA ya pucovaTiyA siyA evaM se no kappai rayaharaNa-gocchaga-paDiggahamAyAe cauhi
kasiNehi vatthehi AyAe saMpavvaittae / kappai se ahApariggahiehi vatthehiM
prAyAe sNpnvitte| 14. gahavAsa tyAgakara sarvaprathama pravajita hone vAle
nirgrantha ko rajoharaNa, gocchaka, pAtra tathA tIna akhaNDa vastra lekara
pravrajita honA kalpatA hai| yadi vaha pahale dIkSita ho cukA ho to use
rajoharaNa, gocchaka, pAtra tathA tIna prakhaNDa vastra lekara pravajita honA
nahIM kalpatA hai|| kintu pUrvagRhIta vastroM ko lekara pravajita honA kalpatA
hai / 15. gahavAsa tyAgakara sarvaprathama pravajita hone vAlI nirgranthI ko
rajoharaNa, gocchaka, pAtra tathA cAra akhaNDa vastra lekara pravajita honA
kalpatA hai| yadi vaha pahale dIkSita ho cukI ho to use rajoharaNa, gocchaka,
pAtra tathA cAra akhaNDa vastra lekara pravajita honA nahIM kalpatA hai /

Page #137 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Third Objective] [183 But it is permissible for a monk to be ordained with
previously accepted clothes / This sutra explains which articles a monk who
accepts the Samayika-charitra and Chhedopasthapaniya-charitra should take for
ordination. The one who is being ordained for the first time should take
ordination with Rajoharan, Gochchak (Pramarjanika), Patra and three
Kritsnavastra given by his parents or relatives. A piece of cloth one hand wide
and twenty-four hands long is considered a Kritsnavastra / This means that he
should be ordained with three pieces of cloth, each seventy-two hands long,
along with the Rajoharan etc. equipment / After this, when he has his major
ordination or when he incurs pollution in a particular vow or when he violates a
Mahavrata, and he appears before the Acharya for re-ordination, he can take
ordination with his previously accepted clothes and utensils, i.e. he does not
need to take new clothes and utensils instead of the old ones / For detailed
information regarding the articles, see Nishita U. 16, Su. 39. The description
of the articles of a Sadhvi who takes ordination is also similar, but instead of
three Kritsnavastra, they have four Kritsnavastra. Because their clothing
equipment is slightly more. The clear meaning of three or four Akhand Vastra is
not available in the commentary. Therefore, different traditions of different
meanings are prevalent. The concept of 72 hand cloth measurement is also not
very ancient, but it seems to be closer to the intention of the Agamas. In the
first and second Samvasarana, the method of accepting clothes is prohibited 16.
No Kapphah Nigganthan or Nigganthin va Padhamsamosaranuddesapattai Chelai
Padighahettae / 17. Kapphai Nigganthan va Nigganthin va-
Dochchasamosaranuddesapattai Chelai Padighahettae. 16. It is not permissible for
Nirgranthas and Nirgranthis to accept clothes in the first Samvasarana. 17. It
is permissible for Nirgranthas and Nirgranthis to accept clothes in the second
Samvasarana / Discussion - The word Samvasarana means to receive from all sides.
Sadhus and Sadhvis stay in one suitable place for Chaturmas, so it is called the
first Samvasarana, and the time after the rainy season or Chaturmas is called
the second Samvasarana. After arriving at the place where the Sadhus and Sadhvis
are to perform Chaturmas, it is not permissible to take clothes from
householders for the entire rainy season, i.e. from Prashtadh Shukla Purnima to
Kartik Shukla Purnima. But after the rainy season, in the second Samvasarana,
i.e. from Margashirsha Krishna Pratipada to Ashadh Shukla Purnima, during the
Paath Maas, if they need clothes in that country and time, they can take them
from householders / The Niyuktikara and the Bhashyakara have described all other
known things related to Chaturmas in detail.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
tIsarA uddezaka] [183 kintu pUrvagrahIta vastroM ko lekara pravajita honA
kalpatA hai / vivecana sAmAyikacAritra evaM chedopasthApanIyacAritra grahaNa
karane vAlA bhikSu kina-kina upadhiyoM ko lekara dIkSA le, yaha isa sUtra meM
batAyA gayA hai| jo sarvaprathama dIkSita ho rahA hai use apane abhibhAvakoM
dvArA yA sage-sambandhiyoM dvArA diye hue rajoharaNa, gocchaka (pramArjanikA),
pAtra aura tIna kRtsnavastra lekara dIkSA lenA caahie| eka hAtha caur3e aura
caubIsa hAtha lambe thAna ko kRtsnavastra mAnA jAtA hai / isakA artha yaha hai
ki vaha rajoharaNa Adi upakaraNoM ke sAtha kula bahattara hAtha lambe hoM, aise
tIna thAna lekara ke dIkSita hove / isake pazcAt jaba usakI bar3I dIkSA ho yA
kisI vrata-vizeSa meM dUSaNa laga jAne para yA kisI mahAvrata ko virAdhanA ho
jAne para punaH dIkSA ke lie prAcArya ke sammukha upasthita ho to vaha apane
pUrvagRhIta vastra-pAtrAdi ke sAtha hI dIkSA le sakatA hai, arthAt pahale ke
vastra-pAtrAdi ko chor3akara navIna vastra-pAtrAdi ke lene kI use AvazyakatA
nahIM hai / upadhi sambandhI vistRta jAnakArI ke lie nizItha u. 16, sU. 39 kA
vivecana dekheN| dIkSA lene vAlI sAdhvI ke upakaraNoM kA varNana bhI isI prakAra
hai kintu tIna kRtsnavastra ke sthAna para unake cAra kRtsnavastra hote haiN|
kyoMki unake vastra sambandhI upakaraNa kucha adhika hote haiN| tIna yA cAra
akhaNDa vastra kA spaSTArtha bhASya TIkA meM upalabdha nahIM hai| ata: bhinna-
bhinna arthoM kI paramparAe~ pracalita haiN| 72 hAtha vastra mApa kI kalpanA bhI
adhika prAcIna nahIM hai tathApi Agama-Azaya ke adhika nikaTa hai aisA pratIta
hotA hai| prathama dvitIya samavasaraNa meM vastra grahaNa karane kA vidhi
niSedha 16. no kappaha niggaMthANa yA niggaMthINa vApaDhamasamosaraNuddesapattAI
celAI paDigAhettae / 17. kappai niggaMthANa vA niggaMthINa vA-
doccasamosaraNuddesapattAI celAI pddigaahette| 16. nirgranthoM aura
nirgranthiyoM ko prathama samavasaraNa meM vastra grahaNa karanA nahIM kalpatA
hai| 17. nirgranthoM aura nirgranthiyoM ko dvitIya samavasaraNa meM vastra
grahaNa karanA kalpatA hai / vivecana-samavasaraNa zabda kA artha hai-sarva aora
se paanaa| cAturmAsa karane ke lie sAdhusAdhviyAM kisI eka yogya sthAna para
pAkara sthita hote haiM, ataH use prathama samavasaraNa kahA jAtA hai aura
varSAkAla yA cAturmAsa kI samApti ke pazcAt ke kAla ko dvitIya samavasaraNa kahA
jAtA hai| jisa sthAna para sAdhu aura sAdhviyoM ko cAturmAsa karanA hai usa
sthAna para Ane ke pazcAt pUre varSAkAla taka arthAt prASAr3ha zuklA pUrNimA se
lekara kArtika zuklA pUrNimA taka gRhasthoM se vastra lenA nahIM kalpatA hai|
kintu varSAkAla ke bAda dUsare samavasaraNa meM arthAt mArgazIrSa kRSNA
pratipadA se lekara ASAr3ha zuklA pUrNimA paryanta pATha mAsa taka jisa deza
aura jisa kAla meM unheM yadi vastroM kI AvazyakatA ho to gRhasthoM se le sakate
haiM / cAturmAsa sambandhI anya sabhI jJAtavya bAtoM kA vizada varNana
niyuktikAra aura bhASyakAra ne kiyA hai|

Page #138 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 184] [Brihatkalpa Sutra: The Law of Receiving Clothes and Other Possessions
According to One's Ratnas (Merits)  **18. It is the law that Nigganthas (male
ascetics) and Nigganthis (female ascetics) should receive clothes in the order
of their Charitraparaya (spiritual progress).**  **Explanation:** A Sadhu (male
ascetic) or Sadhvi (female ascetic) with a higher Charitraparaya is called a
Ratnas (one with merits). When a Sadhu or Sadhvi receives clothes from a
householder, they should be received in the order of their Charitraparaya. The
Sadhu or Sadhvi with the highest Charitraparaya should be given clothes first,
followed by those with lower Charitraparaya. The word "clothes" here is a
general term, so other possessions like bowls, etc., should also be received and
given according to the order of Charitraparaya. Giving or receiving in reverse
order would be disrespectful to the Ratnas, leading to envy and other negative
emotions, which are against the principles of Sadhu conduct. The Bhashyakar
(commentator) has prescribed atonement for Sadhus and Sadhvis who give or
receive in reverse order.  **19. It is the law that Nigganthas and Nigganthis
should receive beds and bedding in the order of their Charitraparaya.**
**Explanation:** The word "bed" refers to a dwelling or shelter. The things used
for sitting, like mats, cushions, etc., are called "bedding." These should also
be received in the order of Charitraparaya.  The Niyuktikar (author) and
Bhashyakar, while establishing the law of receiving beds and bedding according
to one's Ratnas, have further clarified that after the Acharya, Upadhyaya, and
Pravartaka (three types of spiritual teachers), the Sadhu who has come from
another gana (group) to receive knowledge and other merits should be given a
place for his bed and bedding. After him, the sick Sadhu should be given a
place, followed by the Sadhu with fewer possessions (clothes), then the Sadhu
striving for Karmakshaya (destruction of karmas), then the Sadhu who has taken a
vow to not wear clothes at night, then the Sthavira (elder), then the Gani,
Ganadhara, Ganavacchedaka (different types of spiritual leaders), and finally
other Sadhus should be given a place for their beds and bedding.  It is further
explained that a newly initiated or young Sadhu should be given a place to sleep
near a Ratnas Sadhu, who can take care of him at night. Similarly, a Sadhu who
is traveling should be given a place near a sick Sadhu, so that he can take care
of the sick Sadhu as needed. And a Shaiksha Sadhu (student) who is studying
scriptures should be given a place near the Upadhyaya, etc., with whom he is
studying, so that he can receive help from them during his study sessions.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
184] [bRhatkalpasUtra yathAratnAdhika vastra grahaNa kA vidhAna 18. kappai
niggaMthANa vA niggaMthoNa vAahArAiNiyAe celAI paDiggAhittae / 18. nirgranthoM
aura nirgranthiyoM ko cAritraparyAya ke krama se vastra-grahaNa karanA kalpatA
hai / vivecana-jisa sAdhu yA sAdhvI kI cAritraparyAya adhika ho use rAttika yA
ratnAdhika kahate haiN| jaba kabhI sAdhu yA sAdhvI vastroM ko gahastha se leveM
to unheM cAritraparyAya kI hInAdhikatA ke kramAnusAra hI grahaNa karanA caahie|
arthAt jo sAdhu yA sAdhvI sabase adhika cAritraparyAya vAle haiM, unheM
sarvaprathama vastra pradAna karanA caahie| tatpazcAt unase kama cAritraparyAya
vAle ko aura tadanantara unase kama cAritraparyAya vAle ko denA caahie| yahAM
para vastra pada dezAmarzaka hai, ata: pAtrAdi anya upadhiyoM ko bhI
cAritraparyAya kI hInAdhikatA se lenA aura denA caahie| kyoMki vyutkrama se dene
yA lene meM ratnAdhikoM kA avinaya, AzAtanA Adi hotI hai, jo sAdhu-maryAdA ke
pratikUla hai / vyutkrama se dene aura lene vAle sAdhu-sAdhviyoM ke lie
bhASyakAra ne prAyazcitta kA vidhAna kiyA hai| yathAratnAdhika zayyA-saMstAraka
grahaNa kA vidhAna 19. kappai niggaMdhANa vA niggaMthINa vA ahArAyaNiyAe sejjA-
saMthArae paDiggAhittae / 19. nirgranthoM aura nirgranthiyoM ko cAritraparyAya
ke krama se zayyA-saMstAraka grahaNa karanA kalpatA hai| vivecana zayyA kA artha
vasati yA upAzraya hai| usameM Thaharane para sAdhuoM yA sAdhviyoM ke vaiThane
yogya sthAna evaM pATa, dhAsa Adi ko saMstAraka kahate haiM / inheM bhI
cAritraparyAya kI hInAdhikatA ke krama se grahaNa karanA cAhie / niyuktikAra
aura bhASyakAra ne yathArAnika zayyA-saMstAraka kA vidhAna karate hue itanA aura
spaSTa kiyA hai ki prAcArya, upAdhyAya aura pravartaka ina tIna gurujanoM kI
kramazaH zayyA-saMstAraka ke pazcAt jJAnAdi sampadA ko prApta karane ke lie jo
anya gaNa se sAdhu AyA huA hai, usake zayyAsaMstAraka ko sthAna denA caahie|
usake bAda glAna (rugNa) sAdhu ko, tatpazcAt alpa upadhi (vastra) vAle sAdhu ko,
usake bAda karmakSayArtha udyata sAdhu ko, tadanantara jisane rAtabhara vastra
nahIM pror3hane kA abhigraha liyA hai aise sAdhu ko, tadanantara sthavira ko,
tadanantara gaNI, gaNadhara, gaNAvacchedaka aura anya sAdhuoM ko zayyA-
saMstAraka ke lie sthAna grahaNa karanA cAhie / yahAM itanA aura vizeSa batAyA
gayA hai ki navadIkSita yA alpa Ayu vAle sAdhu ko ratnAdhika sAdhu ke samIpa
sone kA sthAna denA cAhie, jo rAta meM usakI sAra-sambhAla kara ske| isI prakAra
vaiyAvRtya karane vAle sAdhu ko glAna sAdhu ke samIpa sthAna denA cAhie, jisase
vaha rogI sAdhu kI yathAsamaya paricaryA kara ske| tathA zAstrAbhyAsa karane
vAle zaikSa sAdhu ko upAdhyAya prAdi, jisake samIpa vaha adhyayana karatA ho, ke
pAsa sthAna denA cAhie jisase ki vaha jAgaraNakAla meM apane pATha-parivartanAdi
karate mamaya unase sahayoga prApta kara sake /

Page #139 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Third Objective: [185] The Law of Performing the Right Ritual Actions  **20.
It is proper for the Nigganthas and Nigganthis to perform the following actions
in the order of their ethical categories:**  **20. It is proper to pay respects
to the Nirgranthas and Nirgranthis in the order of their ethical categories.**
**Explanation:** The actions of respect, bowing, etc., performed towards the
Guru and the Ratnadhikas before starting the Pratikraman, etc., at times like
morning and evening, are called "Kritikarma." There are two types of Kritikarma:
Abhyutthan and Vandanak.  Standing up when the Acharya, Upadhyaya, and other
Gurus, as well as those who are senior in the initiation category, are coming or
going is called "Abhyutthan Kritikarma." Bowing to the Gurus in the morning,
evening, and during Pratikraman, as well as when asking a question, etc., by
joining the hands and placing the palms together on the forehead, etc., is
called "Vandanak Kritikarma." The commentator has said that one should perform
the five-limbed salutation with the head, with a simple heart like that of a
child, making three revolutions in each direction. The act of revolving with
both hands joined together, as in circumambulation, is called "Pavart." These
revolutions are performed to express devotion with a pure mind, speech, and
body. The intention of revolving in all four directions is that I am also paying
respects and bowing to all the five Supreme Beings, Gurus, and Ratnadhika Sadhus
who are present in those directions, with the purity and devotion of Triyoga.
Similarly, when Sadhus and Sadhvis come near the Gurus, they should pay respects
to them according to their initiation category. There are many different
interpretations of this Kritikarma according to different sects. It is said that
it is necessary to perform the Kritikarma according to the Ratnadhika of one's
sect, knowing these interpretations. The commentator has also described in
detail the 32 faults of Kritikarma and finally written that one should perform
Kritikarma free from all these faults, otherwise it becomes liable for
atonement.  **21. It is not proper for the Nigganthas or Nigganthis to stay in
the house of a householder:**  **1. To eat food offered by them, 2. To sit down,
3. To be comfortable, 4. To sleep, 5. To lie down, 6. To eat food, 7. To drink
water, 8. To eat food, 9. To drink water, 10. To speak, 11. To wear clothes, 12.
To play, 13. To wear ornaments, 14. To engage in conversation, 15. To meditate,
16. To keep a bed.**  **However, it is proper to stay in the house of a
householder if they are:**  **Old, weak, ascetic, sick, unconscious, or
injured.**  **It is proper to stay in the house of a householder if they are
old, weak, ascetic, sick, unconscious, or injured.**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
tIsarA uddezaka] [185 yathAralAdhika kRtikarma karane kA vidhAna 20. kappai
niggaMthANa yA niggaMthINa vA-ahArAiNiyAe kiikammaM karettae / 20. nirgranthoM
aura nirgranthiyoM ko cAritraparyAya ke krama se vandana karanA kalpatA hai /
vivecana-prAtaH sAyaMkAla Adi samayoM meM pratikramaNa Adi prArambha karane ke
pUrva guru evaM ratnAdhikoM kA jo vinaya, vandana Adi kiyA jAtA hai, use
'kRtikarma' kahate haiM / isake do bheda haiMabhyutthAna aura vandanaka /
prAcArya, upAdhyAya Adi gurujanoM ke evaM jo dIkSA-paryAya meM jyeSTha haiM,
unake gamana-Agamana kAla meM uThakara khar3e honA 'abhyutthAna kRtikarma' hai|
prAta:kAla, sAyaMkAla evaM pratikramaNa karate samaya tathA kisI prazna Adi ke
pUchate samaya gurujanoM ko vandanA karanA, hAtha jor3akara mastaka para aMjali
lagAkara namaskAra Adi karanA 'vandanaka kRtikarma' hai| bhASyakAra ne kahA hai
ki yathAjAta bAlaka ke samAna sarala bhAva se pratyeka dizA meM tIna-tIna
pAvarta karate hue mastaka se paMcAMga namaskAra karanA caahie| pradakSiNA dene
kI taraha donoM hAtha saMyukta karake ghumAne ko 'pAvarta' kahate haiM / zuddha
mana, vacana, kAyA se bhakti prakaTa karane ke liye ye Avarta kiye jAte haiN|
cAroM dizAoM meM Avarta karane kA abhiprAya yaha hai ki usa-usa dizA meM jahAM
para jo bhI paMca parameSThI, gurujana evaM ratnAdhika sAdhu vidyamAna haiM,
unheM bhI maiM triyoga kI zuddhi evaM bhakti se vandana evaM namaskAra karatA
huuN| isI prakAra gurujanoM ke samIpa Ane para bhI sAdhu aura sAdhviyoM ko
dIkSAparyAya ke anusAra unheM vandana karanA caahie| isa kRtikarma ke viSaya meM
sampradAya-bheda se aneka prakAra kI vyAkhyAeM upalabdha haiN| unheM jAnakara
sampradAya ke anusAra yathAratnAdhika kA kRtikarma karanA Avazyaka batAyA gayA
hai| bhASyakAra ne kRtikarma ke 32 doSoM kA bhI vizada varNana kiyA hai aura
anta meM likhA hai ki ina saba doSoM se rahita kRtikarma karanA cAhie, anyathA
vaha prAyazcitta kA pAtra hotA hai| gRhastha ke ghara meM Thaharane Adi kA
niSedha 21. no kappai niggaMthANa vA niggaMthINa vA-aMtaragihaMsi 1. cidvattae
vA, 2. nisIittae vA, 3. tuyaTTittae vA, 4. nidAittae vA, 5. payalAittae vA, 6.
asaNaM vA, 7. pANaM vA, 8. khAimaM vA, 9. sAimaM vA prAhAramAharittae, 10.
uccAraM vA, 11. pAsavaNaM vA, 12. khelaM vA, 13. siMghANaM vA parivettae, 14.
sajjhAyaM vA karittae, 15. jhANaM vA jhAittae, 16. kAusaggaM vA tthaaitte| aha
puNa evaM jANejjA vAhie, jarAjuNNe, tavassI, dumbale, kilaMte, mucchejja vA,
pavaDejja vA evaM se kappai aMtaragihaMsi ciTThittae vA jAva kAusaggaM vA
tthaaitte|

Page #140 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 186] [Brihatkalpa Sutra 21. It is not permissible for Nirgranthas and
Nirgranthis to: 1. Stay, 2. Sit, 3. Sleep, 4. Take a nap, 5. Drowse, 6. Eat, 7.
Drink, 8. Serve food, 9. Consume palatable food, 10. Excrete, 11. Urinate, 12.
Spit, 13. Cleanse phlegm, 14. Study scriptures, 15. Meditate, 16. Remain in a
state of Kayotsarga within a householder's home. / However, it is permissible
for a monk who is ill, elderly, an ascetic, weak, fatigued, or experiencing
anxiety, to stay in a householder's home if they fall unconscious and remain in
a state of Kayotsarga until they regain consciousness. / Discussion: A monk who
has gone out for alms should not stay, sit, or engage in other activities
mentioned in the sutra within a householder's home, as it may lead to various
doubts and suspicions among the householders. / This is the path of
renunciation. _An exception is mentioned: If a monk is ill, very old, weakened
by asceticism, or weak, or if they are about to faint and fall, they may stay in
a householder's home for a short time. The commentator has mentioned some other
reasons for staying. For example, if a monk goes to a house to get medicine for
a sick person and the medicine provider is not at home, the householders may
say, "Stay for a while, the medicine provider will be back soon." Or, if it
starts raining after entering the house, or if a royal procession or a wedding
procession passes by on the same route, the monk may stay there.   ## The rule
of limited conversation in a householder's home 22. It is not permissible for
Nirgranthas and Nirgranthis to speak four or five verses, explain their meaning,
describe the fruits of righteous conduct, or engage in detailed discussions
within a householder's home. / However, it is permissible to speak only one
example, one question and answer, one verse, or one verse in the form of a
shloka, if necessary. They should speak while standing, not sitting. /
Discussion: Monks and nuns who have gone out for alms should not recite verses,
shlokas, etc., while standing in a householder's home. This is the path of
renunciation. The commentator has explained the reason for this: If a monk
stands in a place where someone else is present, it may lead to...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
186] [bRhatkalpasUtra 21. nirgranthoM aura nirgranthiyoM ko gRhastha ke ghara ke
bhItara 1. ThaharanA , 2. baiThanA, 3. sonA, 4. nidrA lenA, 5. UMgha lenA, 6.
azana, 7. pAna, 8. khAdima, 9. svAdima-AhAra karanA, 10. mala, 11. mUtra, 12.
kheMkAra, 13. zleSma pariSThApana karanA, 14. svAdhyAya karanA, 15. dhyAna
karanA, 16. kAyotsarga kara sthita honA nahIM kalpatA hai / yahAM yaha vizeSa
jAneM ki jo bhikSu vyAdhigrasta ho, vRddha ho, tapasvI ho, durbala ho, thakAna
yA ghabarAhaTa se yukta ho, vaha yadi macchita hokara gira par3e to use gRhastha
ke ghara meM ThaharanA yAvat kAyotsarga karake sthita honA kalpatA hai /
vivecana-bhikSArtha nikale hue sAdhu ko gRhastha ke ghara meM ThaharanA,
baiThanA Adi sUtrokta kArya nahIM karanA cAhie, kyoMki vahAM para ukta kArya
karane se gahasthoM ko nAnA prakAra kI zaMkAeM utpanna ho sakatI haiM / yaha
utsargamArga hai| _apavAda rUpa meM batAyA gayA hai ki yadi koI sAdhu rogI ho,
ativRddha ho, tapasyA se jarjarita yA durbala ho, yA mUrchA A jAe, gira par3ane
kI sambhAvanA ho to vaha kucha kSaNoM ke lie gRhastha ke ghara meM Thahara
sakatA hai| bhASyakAra ne kucha aura bhI kAraNa Thaharane ke batAye haiN| jaise
kisI rogI ke lie auSadhi lene ke lie kisI ghara meM koI sAdhu jAve aura
auSadhadAtA ghara se bAhara ho, usa samaya ghara vAle kaheM'kucha samaya
Thaharie, auSadhadAtA Ane hI vAle haiM,' athavA ghara meM praveza karane ke
pazcAt pAnI barasane lage yA usI mArga se rAjA Adi kI savArI yA kisI kI bArAta
Adi nikalane lage to sAdhu vahAM Thahara sakatA hai| gRhastha ke ghara meM
maryAdita vArtA kA vidhAna 22. no kappai niggaMthANa vA niggaMthINa vA
aMtaragihaMsi jAva caugAhaM vA paMcagAhaM vA Aikkhittae vA, vibhAvittae vA,
kiTTattae vA, paveittae vaa| nannattha eganAeNaM vA, egavAgaraNeNa vA, egagAhAe
bA, egasiloeNa vA; se vi ya ThiccA, no cevaNaM atthiccaa| 22. nirgranthoM aura
nirgranthiyoM ko gRhastha ke ghara meM cAra yA pAMca gAthAoM dvArA kathana
karanA, unakA artha karanA, dharmAcaraNa kA phala kahanA evaM vistRta vivecana
karanA nahIM kalpatA hai / kintu Avazyaka hone para kevala eka udAharaNa, eka
praznottara, eka gAthA yA eka zloka dvArA kathana karanA kalpatA hai| vaha bhI
khar3e rahakara kathana kare, baiThakara nhiiN| vivecana-gocarI ke lie gaye hue
sAdhu yA sAdhviyAM gRhastha ke ghara meM khar3e hokara gAthA, zloka zrAdi kA
uccAraNa hI na kreN| yaha utsargamArga hai| bhASyakAra ne isakA kAraNa batAyA
hai ki jahAM para sAdhu khar3A hogA vahAM se yadi kisI kI

Page #141 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Third Objective] [187 If any object is stolen, its owner may accuse that a
certain monk or nun was standing there / Therefore, they have taken my object,
etc. / In addition, in response to a controversial question of a householder,
time will be spent in accusation and counter-accusation. His fellow monks, who
eat together in a congregation, will wait. Therefore, he will be a participant
in the obstacle due to not being able to eat on time. Secondly, if he has
promised a sick monk, "Today I will bring you suitable food and drink soon",
then by getting involved in an argument, he will not be able to return on time,
and he will suffer from hunger and thirst and will experience more suffering,
etc. For these reasons, monks and nuns who have gone to Gochari should not
engage in excessive conversation anywhere, otherwise they will be liable for
many penances from Chaturlaghu to the best of their ability. / It has been
stated as an exception that if a curious person asks a monk or nun who has gone
to Gochari, 'What is the characteristic of Dharma?', then he should only give
the brief answer, "Ahimsa Paramo Dharma·∏•". / If someone asks again to explain
Dharma, then he should only say, "Whatever you consider desirable or undesirable
for yourself, consider the same for others", this is the essence of Jainism. If
the curious person asks for proof in support of the said statement, then he
should say a verse that denotes the meaning / Such as "Savvabhuyapabhuyasss,
Sammam Bhuyaai Paaso / Pihiyasavass Dantass, Pavam Kammam Na Bandhai || -
Dasavai. A. 4, Ga. 9 He should say it while standing, not sitting. Otherwise,
due to the above mentioned faults, he will be liable for penance. The provision
of a limited Dharmakatha in the house of a householder 23. No Kappi Nigganthaan
Va Nigganthiin Va Antargihansi, Imai Panch Mahvavvaai Sabhavanai Aikkhithtae Va,
Vibhavittae Va, Kittithtae Va, Paveittae Va. Nannaty Eganaen Va Jav Egasiloen
Va; Se Vi Ya Thiccha, No Chev Nam Athiccha. 23. It is not appropriate for
Nirgranthas and Nirgranthis to speak about the five great vows, their meaning,
or the fruits of observing the great vows in the house of a householder, with
feeling, or with detailed explanation. / But it is appropriate to speak only
with one example or one verse, if necessary. He should do so while standing, but
not sitting. In the previous sutra, the method of conversation was prohibited
when asked by someone / In the present sutra, the method of speaking about the
great vows is prohibited /

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
tIsarA uddezaka] [187 koI vastu corI calI jAyegI to usakA svAmI yaha lAMchana
lagA sakatA hai ki yahAM para amuka sAdhu yA sAdhviyAM khar3e rahe the / ataH ve
hI merI amuka vastu le gaye haiM, ityAdi / isake atirikta kisI gRhastha ke
vivAdAspada prazna ke uttara meM vahAM AkSepa-vyAkSepa meM samaya vyatIta hogaa|
usase usake sAthI sAdhU, jo ki eka maNDalI meM baiThakara bhojana karate haiM,
pratIkSA karate raheMge, ataH unake yathAsamaya bhojana na kara sakane se vaha
antarAya kA bhAgI hogaa| dUsare, yadi vaha kisI rogI sAdhu se yaha kahakara pAyA
hai ki"aAja maiM tumhAre lie zIghra yogya bhakta-pAna lAUMgA", phira vAda-vivAda
meM par3akara samaya para vApasa nahIM pahu~ca sakane se vaha bhUkhapyAsa se
pIr3ita hokara aura adhika saMtApa ko prApta hogA, ityAdi kAraNoM se gocarI ko
gaye hue sAdhu aura sAdhviyoM ko kahIM bhI adhika vArtAlApa nahIM karanA cAhie
anyathA vaha caturlaghu se lekara yathAsambhava aneka prAyazcittoM kA pAtra hotA
hai| apavAda rUpa meM yaha batAyA gayA hai ki gocarI ko gaye sAdhu yA sAdhvI se
yadi koI jijJAsu pUche ki 'dharma kA lakSaNa kyA hai ?' taba vaha "ahiMsA paramo
dharmaH" itanA mAtra saMkSipta uttara deve / yadi koI punaH pUche ki dharma kI
kucha vyAkhyA kIjie, taba itanA mAtra kahe ki "apane lie jo tuma iSTa yA aniSTa
mAnate ho vaha dUsare ke lie bhI vaisA hI samajho", basa itanA hI jainazAsana kA
sAra hai| yadi jijJAsu ukta kathana kI puSTi meM koI pramANa pUche to ukta
artha-dyotaka eka gAthA kahe / yathA "savvabhUyappabhUyassa, sammaM bhUyAI pAso
/ pihiyAsavassa daMtassa, pAvaM kammaM na bNdhi|| -dazavai. a. 4, gA. 9 vaha bhI
khar3A-khar3A hI kahe, baiThakara nhiiN| anyathA uparyukta doSoM ke kAraNa vaha
prAyazcitta kA bhAgI hotA hai| gahastha ke ghara meM maryAdita dharmakathA kA
vidhAna 23. no kappai niggaMthANa vA niggaMthINa vA aMtaragihaMsi, imAI paMca
mahavvayAI sabhAvaNAI Aikkhittae vA, vibhAvittae vA, kiTTittae vA, paveittae
vaa| nannatya eganAeNa vA jAva egasiloeNa vA; se vi ya ThiccA, no ceva NaM
atthiccaa| 23. nirgranthoM aura nirgranthiyoM ko gRhastha ke ghara meM bhAvanA
sahita pAMcoM mahAvratoM kA kathana, artha-vistAra yA mahAvratAcaraNa ke phala
kA kathana karanA evaM vistRta vivecana karanA nahIM kalpatA hai / kintu
Avazyaka hone para kevala eka udAharaNa yAvat eka zloka se kathana karanA
kalpatA hai| vaha bhI khar3e rahakara kintu baiThakara nhiiN| vivecana-pUrva
sUtra meM kisI ke dvArA pUche jAne para vArtAlApa karane kA vidhi-niSedha kiyA
gayA hai / prastuta sUtra meM mahAvatoM ke kathana kA vidhi-niSedha kiyA gayA
hai /

Page #142 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 188] It is not appropriate for Sadhus and Sadhvis to narrate the five great
vows in a householder's home, along with their meaning, explanation, and
description of worldly benefits, and to reveal the otherworldly fruits of heaven
and liberation. The commentator has explained the reason for this, stating that
if a Sadhu begins to preach the great vows in detail, and a pregnant woman
listening to him experiences some harm due to the restriction of food and drink
for the fetus while she sits there, then the preacher becomes a participant in
her violence. Alternatively, if a woman in the house goes out at that time to
relieve herself, and a woman who harbors animosity towards her, either a co-wife
or another envious woman, kills her child and brings it to the Sadhu, throwing
it down and shouting that the Sadhu killed it, then people might suspect the
Sadhu of causing the death. Similarly, if a Sadhu, when asked, says that it is
not appropriate for him to preach in a householder's home, and then preaches
elsewhere, he incurs the sin of falsehood. If, during the Sadhu's preaching, a
maid in the house takes the opportunity to steal some jewelry or other
valuables, and after the Sadhu leaves, the householder accuses the Sadhu of
theft, then the Sadhu is implicated in the theft.  /  _ If a woman's husband is
away, and she uses the pretext of listening to the preaching to keep the Sadhu
for a while and then requests sexual intercourse, and the Sadhu is swayed, or if
she tempts the Sadhu with the promise of fine clothes, utensils, etc., then the
Sadhu incurs a transgression of the great vows. Therefore, the sutra prohibits
the narration of the five great vows, their meaning, and other detailed
discourses in a householder's home. If someone who is sick or curious asks about
the nature of the great vows, then the Sadhu should answer briefly, with a
single verse or a single shloka, and should do so while standing, not sitting.
Because a wandering mendicant stands while begging. Sitting there creates many
doubts.  /  Therefore, sitting is completely prohibited. The rule for returning
the householder's bedding is as follows: 24. No Nirgrantha or Nirgranthi should
leave for another village without returning the bedding to its owner. 24. It is
not appropriate for Nirgranthas and Nirgranthis to leave for another village
without returning the bedding to its owner.  /  Discussion: The Sadhu's entire
body, including the back-rest, straw, etc., is called "bedding," and the back-
rest, straw, etc., measuring two and a half hands is called "bedding."  /  Those
who are brought to return the bedding are called "attendants."  /  When a Sadhu
arrives in a village, he should find suitable bedding, a blanket, etc.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
188] [bRhatkalpasUtra sAdhu aura sAdhviyoM ko gRhastha ke ghara meM pAMcoM
mahAvratoM kA unakI bhAvanAoM ke sAtha AkhyAna-mUla pATha kA uccAraNa,
vibhAvana-artha kA pratipAdana, kIrtana laukika lAbhoM kA varNana aura pravedana
svarga-mokSAdi pAralaukika phala ko prakaTa karanA nahIM kalpatA hai| bhASyakAra
ne isakA kAraNa batAte hue kahA hai ki yadi sAdhu mahAvratoM kA vistAra se
upadeza karane laga jAe aura use sunane vAlI garbhiNI strI jaba taka vahAM
baiThI rahatI hai taba taka garbhastha jIva ke AhAra-pAna ke nirodha se yadi
kucha aniSTa ho jAe to vaha upadeSTA usakI hiMsA kA bhAgI hotA hai| athavA usI
samaya koI ghara kI strI dIrghazaMkA-nivAraNArtha calI jAe aura usase dveSa
rakhane vAlI usako sauta yA anya vidveSiNI strI usake bacce ko mAra kara sAdhu
yA sAdhvI ke sammukha lAkara paTaka de aura cillAne lage ki isa sAdhu ne isako
mAra DAlA hai| aise avasara para logoM ko sAdhu ke viSaya meM prANaghAta karane
kI AzaMkA ho sakatI hai| isI prakAra kabhI kisI ke pUchane para sAdhu ne kahA ho
ki use gRhastha ke ghara para upadeza denA nahIM kalpatA hai, pIche kisI ke
yahAM upadeza de to mRSAvAda kA bhI doSa lagatA hai| sAdhu ke upadeza-kAla meM
ghara kI dAsI avasara pAkara kisI AbhUSaNAdi ko curA le jAe, pIche sAdhu ke cale
jAne para gRhasvAmI usa sAdhu para corI kA doSa lagA de / _ kisI strI kA pati
videza gayA ho aura vaha upadeza sunane ke chala se kucha dera sAdhu ko ThaharA
karake maithuna-sevana kI prArthanA kare aura sAdhu vicalita ho jAe athavA vaha
strI acche vastra-pAtrAdi dene kA pralobhana dekara sAdhu ko pralobhita kare,
ityAdi kAraNoM se sAdhu ke mahAvratoM meM hI doSa lagatA hai| ataH sUtra meM
gRhastha ke ghara para pAMcoM mahAvratoM ke AkhyAna, vibhAvanAdi vistRta
pravacana kA niSedha kiyA hai| yadi kabhI koI rugNa-jijJAsu mahAvratoM ke
svarUpa Adi ke viSaya meM pUche to use vivekapUrvaka eka gAthA se yA eka zloka
se arthAt saMkSipta rUpa meM kathana kare, vaha bhI khar3e rahakara hI karanA
cAhie baiThakara nhiiN| kyoMki gocarI gayA huA bhikSu khar3A to rahatA hI hai|
vahAM baiThanA hI aneka zaMkAoM kA sthAna hotA hai / ataH baiThane kA sarvathA
niSedha kiyA gayA hai| gRhastha kA zayyA-saMstAraka lauTAne kA vidhAna 24. no
kappai niragaMthANa vA niggaMthoNa vA pADihAriyaM sejjAsaMthArayaM prAyAe
apaDihaTTa sNpvitte| 24. prAtihArika zayyA-saMstAraka jo grahaNa kiyA hai use
usake svAmI ko sauMpe vinA grAmAntara gamana karanA nirgranthoM aura
nirgranthiyoM ko nahIM kalpatA hai / vivecana-sAdhu ke pUrNa zarIra-pramANa
pITha-phalaka-tRNa Adi ko 'zayyA' kahate haiM aura aDhAI hAtha pramANa vAle
pITha-phalaka-tRNa Adi ko "saMstAraka" kahate haiM / jo zayyA-saMstAraka
gRhastha ke ghara se vApasa lauTAne ko kahakara lAye jAte haiM, unheM
"prAtihArika" kahate haiM / sAdhu jaba kisI grAma meM pahuMcatA hai to apane
yogya zayyA-saMstAraka sAgA

Page #143 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Third Objective] [189] It is not proper for a Sadhu or Sadhvi to leave for
another village without returning the bedding and other items taken from the
house of a householder. If they leave without returning them, they are liable to
atonement. If they leave without returning them, it leads to the Sadhu's lack of
respect and criticism, making it difficult to obtain bedding and other items in
the future. The term "bedding and other items" is used here as a metaphor.
Therefore, whatever items a Sadhu or Sadhvi takes from the householder's house,
they should return them before leaving for another place.  The rule for
returning the bedding and other items of the householder is as follows:  25. It
is not proper for the Nigganthas or Nigganthis to leave for another village
without returning the bedding and other items of the householder in the same
condition as they were received.  26. It is proper for the Nigganthas or
Nigganthis to leave for another village after returning the bedding and other
items of the householder in the same condition as they were received.
**Discussion:** Returning the bedding and other items of the householder in the
same condition as they were received is called "Vikaran". If they are not placed
in the same place and not arranged in the same way, it is called "Avikaran".
This sutra instructs that the bedding and other items of the householder should
be placed in the same place and arranged in the same way before leaving for
another village. Otherwise, the Sadhu or Sadhvi are liable to atonement.  The
method of returning the bedding and other items is described in Pracha. Shru. 2,
A. 2, U. 3. It means that they should be carefully examined and cleaned. If
necessary, they should be aired or exposed to sunlight. They should be returned
only after they are completely free of life. If they are soiled due to use, they
should be washed and wiped clean. If they are torn or damaged, they should be
returned with a polite explanation. The commentary states that if the bamboo
sticks used to tie the bedding are tied or untied, they should be returned in
their original condition.  The purpose of all these rules is to ensure that the
Sadhu or Sadhvi are respected, the bedding and other items are easily available,
and the third great vow is followed in its purest form.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
tIsarA uddezaka] [189 rika ke atirikta anya kisI gRhastha ke ghara se vApasa
sauMpane ko kahakara lAtA hai| vaha zayyA-saMstAraka usa gRhastha ko sauMpe vinA
grAmAntara jAnA sAdhu yA sAdhvI ke lie ucita nahIM hai / yadi vaha vinA lauTAe
jAtA hai to prAyazcitta kA pAtra hotA hai| vinA sauMpe hI vihAra kara jAne para
sAdhu kI apratIti evaM nindA hotI hai, jisase punaH vahAM zayyA-saMstAraka
milanA durlabha hotA hai| yahAM zayyA-saMstAraka pada upalakSaNa rUpa hai| ataH
vApasa sauMpane ko kahakara jo bhI vastu gRhastha ke ghara se sAdhu yA sAdhvI
lAveM, use vApasa sauMpa karake hI anyatra vihAra karanA caahie| zayyAtara kA
zayyA-saMstAraka vyavasthita karake lauTAne kA vidhAna 25. no kappai niggaMthANa
vA niggaMthINa vA-sAgAriyasaMtiyaM sejjAsaMthArayaM AyAe avikaraNaM kaTu
sNpnvitte| 26. kappai niggaMthANa vA niggaMthINa vA-sAgAriyasaMtiyaM
sejjAsaMthArayaM AyAe vikaraNaM kaTu sNpvvitte| 25. sAgArika kA zayyA-saMstAraka
jo grahaNa kiyA gayA hai, use yathAvasthita kiye vinA grAmAntara gamana karanA
nirgranthoM aura nirgranthiyoM ko nahIM kalpatA hai| 26. sAgArika kA zayyA-
saMstAraka jo grahaNa kiyA hai, use vyavasthita karake grAmAntara gamana karanA
nirgranthoM aura nirgranthiyoM ko kalpatA hai / vivecana-zayyAtara ke zayyA-
saMstAraka jahAM para jisa prakAra se the, unheM usI prakAra se karake sauMpane
ko "vikaraNa" kahate haiN| yadi usI sthAna para na rakhe aura usI prakAra se
vyavasthita karake na sauMpe to ise "avikaraNa" kahate haiN| isa sUtra dvArA
yaha nirdeza kiyA gayA hai ki zayyAtara ke zayyA-saMstAraka jahAM jaise rakhe
hue the, jAte samaya unheM usI sthAna para aura usI prakAra se vyavasthita
karake grAmAntara ke lie vihAra karanA cAhie / anyathA ve sAdhu-sAdhvI
prAyazcitta ke pAtra hote haiM / prAcA. zru. 2, a. 2, u. 3 meM zayyA-saMstAraka
lauTAne kI vidhi batAI hai| usakA tAtparya yaha hai ki unakI acchI taraha Upara
nIce pratilekhana kara lenA caahie| Avazyaka ho to khaMkheranA yA dhUpa meM
prAtApita karanA caahie| isa prakAra sarvathA jIvarahita hone para lauTAnA
caahie| pATa Adi upayoga lene se malIna ho jAe~ to unheM dhokara evaM poMchakara
sApha karake denA da ve kucha TUTa-phaTa jAe~ yA kharAba ho jAe~ to unheM
vivekapUrvaka sUcanA karate hae lauTAnA caahie| bhASya meM batAyA gayA haijisa
bAMsa kI kaMbiyA Adi ko bAMdhA ho athavA baMdhe hue ko kholA ho to unheM punaH
pUrva avasthA meM karake lauTAnA caahie| _ina sabhI vidhAnoM kA Azaya yaha hai
ki vyavasthita lauTAne se sAdhu-sAdhvI kI pratIti rahatI hai evaM zayyA-
saMstAraka kI sulabhatA rahatI hai tathA tIsare mahAvrata kA zuddha rUpa se
pAlana hotA hai| caahie|

Page #144 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
190 [Bahutkalpasutra] **Provision for the investigation of a lost bed-spread**
27. If a Niggantha or Nigganthi, a Padihari or a Sagari, loses their bed-spread,
they should investigate it. If they find it while investigating, it should be
given back to them. If they do not find it while investigating, then it is
appropriate to take another bed-spread after seeking permission from a wise
person.   The commentator has stated that a Sadhu should be careful to protect
any bed-spread or other items that they have requested from a householder's home
and should not leave the shelter unattended. If they need to go out for Gochari
or other reasons, they should appoint someone to guard the shelter. If someone
steals it while they are away to relieve bodily needs, or while they are
engrossed in reading or studying, or if someone runs away with it while it is
being brought from the householder's home or while it is being returned, or if
someone takes it while it is being kept outside in the sun, or if it is lost for
any other reason, then the Sadhu should immediately investigate it.   If they
find the person who took it while investigating, they should ask them to return
it, saying, "O noble one! I have requested this from a householder. If you have
taken it, please return it to us." If they are unwilling to return it, they
should encourage them to do so by reciting religious verses. If they still
refuse, they should offer them a reward. If they are a government official and
refuse even after being asked, then the Sadhu should try to get it back by using
appropriate means, as far as possible. If they still refuse, they should send a
message to higher authorities and try to get it back. If they still cannot find
it or cannot find the person who took it, they should tell the householder from
whose home they brought the bed-spread or other items about its disappearance.
If they can somehow get it back, they should use it again after seeking
permission from a wise person. If they cannot get it back, they should request
another bed-spread. If the Sadhu does not investigate in this appropriate
manner, they are liable for atonement.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
190 [bahatkalpasUtra khoe hue zayyA-saMstAraka ke anveSaNa karane kA vidhAna 27.
isa khalu niggaMthANa vA niggaMthINa vA pADihArie vA sAgAriyasaMtie vA
sejjAsaMthArae vippaNasejjA, se ya aNugavesiyavve siyaa| se ya aNugavesamANe
labhejjA tasseva paDidAyabve siyaa| se ya aNugavesamANe no labhejjA, evaM se
kappai doccaMpi uggahaM aNuNNavettA parihAra prihritte| 27. nirgranthoM aura
nirgranthiyoM kA prAtihArika yA sAgArika zayyA-saMstAraka yadi guma ho jAe to
usakA unheM anveSaNa karanA caahie| anveSaNa karane para yadi mila jAe to usI ko
de denA caahie| anveSaNa karane para kadAcit na mile to punaH prAjJA lekara anya
zayyA-saMstAraka grahaNa karake upayoga meM lenA kalpatA hai| vivecana-
niyuktikAra ne batAyA hai ki sAdhu gRhastha ke ghara se jo bhI zayyA-saMstAraka
Adi mAMga kara lAve usakI rakSA ke lie sAvadhAnI rakhanI cAhie aura upAzraya ko
sUnA nahIM chor3anA caahie| gocarI Adi ke lie bAhara jAnA ho to kisI na kisI ko
upAzraya kI rakSA ke lie niyukta karake jAnA caahie| yadi kAyikI bAdhA ke
nivAraNArtha idhara-udhara jAne para yA paThana-pAThanAdi meM citta lagA rahane
para koI curAkara le jAe, athavA gRhastha ke ghara se lAte samaya yA vApasa dete
samaya 1 lAta samaya yA vApasa dete samaya hAtha se chInakara koI bhAga jAe yA
bAhara hAtha se chInakara koI bhAga jAe yA bAhara dhUpa meM rakhane para koI
uThA le jAe ityAdi kisI bhI kAraNa se zayyA-saMstAraka kho jAe to sAdhu usakI
gaveSaNA tatkAla kare / anveSaNa karate hue yadi le jAne vAlA mila jAve to usase
use dene ke lie kahe-'he bhadra ! yaha maiM kisI gRhastha se mAMga kara lAyA
hU~, Apa yadi le Aye haiM to hameM vApasa deveN|" yadi usake bhAva nahIM dene ke
hoM to use dhArmika vAkya kahakara de dene ke lie utsAhita kre| yadi phira bhI
na denA cAhe to use pAritoSika Adi dilAne kA AzvAsana de / yadi vaha
rAjyAdhikArI ho aura mAMgane para bhI na de to usake lie sAdhu yathocita upAyoM
se jahAM taka sambhava ho use vApasa lAne kA prayatna kre| yadi phira bhI vaha
na de to Upara ke adhikAriyoM taka sUcanA bhijavAkara vApasa mAMgane kA prayatna
kre| phira bhI na mile yA le jAne vAle kA patA na lage to jisa gahastha ke ra /
ke yahAM se vaha zayyAsaMstArakAdi lAyA hai usako usake apaharaNa kI bAta khe|
yadi vaha kisI prakAra se use vApasa le Ave to usako dUsarI bAra prAjJA lekara
upayoga meM le / yadi use bhI vaha na mile to dUsare zayyA-saMstAraka kI yAcanA
kare / yadi vaha sAdhu aisA yathocita viveka-anveSaNa nahIM karatA hai to
prAyazcitta kA pAtra hotA hai|

Page #145 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Third Objective  [191 At the end, the commentator has also written that if
the owner of the bed-furniture has been expelled from the country by the king,
or if he has gone elsewhere with his family, or if he has attained death, or if
the sadhu himself is unable to search due to illness, old age, etc., or if there
is any other such reason, then in such a situation, even without searching for
the lost bed-furniture, the sadhu is not a participant in the atonement. The
provision for the stay of visiting ascetics 28. If the ascetics-nirgranthas
leave the bed-furniture, on that day or at that time, other ascetics-nirgranthas
come, then they can stay for as long as they want, taking the bed-furniture with
the previous permission. / 29. If there is any unused equipment in the shelter,
then it can also be used for as long as they want, with the previous permission.
/ Discussion - In the shelter where the sadhu has stayed with permission for a
month or a year, if other sadhus come to stay there on the day they leave, then
they can stay for 'as long as they want' without taking permission from the
owner of the shelter. For them, the previous acceptance taken by the sadhus who
stayed there earlier will be considered for that period. The permission taken by
the previously staying sadhus includes the permission for their fellow sadhus to
stay. / Therefore, any sadhu can come and stay with them at any time. They do
not need to take permission again. If the previously staying sadhus leave after
their arrival, then they can stay there according to their own time. 'As long as
they want' here means 'as long as the time is suitable'. If the previously
staying sadhus have left and handed over the house to the owner, and then some
sadhus come, then they need to take permission again. If the owner of the house
has given permission by specifying the number of sadhus or the limit of the
house, then if more sadhus come or if they want to use more space than the limit
of the house, then they need to take permission again. If they stay with the
permission of the previously staying sadhus, then the additional bed-furniture
etc. in the shelter can also be taken with the permission of the previously
staying sadhus and used for as long as they want.]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
tIsarA uddezaka [191 anta meM bhASyakAra ne yaha bhI likhA hai ki zayyA-
saMstAraka kA svAmI rAjA ke dvArA deza se nikAla diyA gayA ho yA vaha apane
kuTumba parivAra ko lekara anyatra calA gayA ho, athavA kAladharma ko prApta ho
gayA ho, athavA roga, vRddhAvasthA prAdi ke kAraNa sAdhu svayaM gaveSaNA karane
meM asamartha ho yA isI prakAra kA aura koI kAraNa ho jAe to vaisI avasthA meM
khoe gae zayyA-saMstAraka kI gaveSaNA nahIM karatA huA bhI sAdhu prAyazcitta kA
bhAgI nahIM hotA hai| Agantuka zramaNoM ko pUrvAjJA meM rahane kA vidhAna 28.
jaddivasaM ca NaM samaNA niggaMthA sejjAsaMthArayaM vippajahaMti, tadivasaM ca
NaM avare samaNA niggaMthA havvamAgacchejjA, sacceva oggahassa puvvANuNNavaNA
ciTThai ahAlaMdamavi uggahe / 29. atthi yA ittha kei uvassayapariyAvannaya
acitte pariharaNArihe, sacceva' uggahassa puvANuNNavaNA ciTThai, ahAlaMdamavi
uggahe / 28. jisa dina zramaNa-nirgrantha zayyA-saMstAraka chor3akara vihAra
kara rahe hoM usI dina yA usI samaya dUsare zramaNa-nirgrantha A jAveM to usI
pUrva grahIta AjJA se jitane bhI samaya rahanA ho, zayyA-saMstAraka ko grahaNa
karake raha sakate haiM / 29. yadi upayoga meM Ane yogya koI acitta upakaraNa
upAzraya meM ho to usakA bhI usI pUrva kI AjJA se jitane kAla rahanA ho, upayoga
kiyA jA sakatA hai / vivecana--jisa upAzraya meM sAdhu mAsakalpa yA varSAkalpa
taka kI AjJA lekara rahe haiM, vahAM se ve jisa dina vihAra kareM usI dina anya
sAdhu usa upAzraya meM Thaharane ke lie A jAveM to ve 'yathAlandakAla' taka
upAzraya ke svAmI kI AjJA lie binA Thahara sakate haiM, unake lie utane kAla
taka pUrva meM rahane vAle sAdhuoM ke dvArA gRhIta avagraha hI mAnA jaaegaa|
pahale Thahare hue sAdhuoM ke dvArA lI gaI AjJA meM unake sArmika sAdhuoM ke
Thaharane kI AjJA nihita rahatI hai / ataH unake sAtha koI bhI sAdhu kabhI bhI
Akara Thahara sakate haiN| unake liye punaH AjJA lene kI AvazyakatA nahIM hotI
hai| unake Ane ke bAda pahale Thahare hue sAdhu vihAra kara jAe~ to ve apane
kalpAnusAra vahAM ruka sakate haiN| yathAlandakAla kA yahAM 'yathAyogya
kalpAnusAra samaya aisA artha hotA hai| yadi pahale Thahare hue sAdhuoM ne
vihAra kara mAlika ko makAna supurda kara diyA ho, usake bAda koI sAdhu pAveM to
unheM punaH AjJA lenA Avazyaka hotA hai| yadi makAna mAlika ne sAdhU-saMkhyA yA
makAna kI sImA batAkara hI AjJA dI ho to usase jyAdA sAdhu AveM yA makAna kI
sImA se adhika jagaha kA upayoga karanA ho to punaH prAjJA lenA Avazyaka hotA
hai| yadi pUrvasthita sAdhuoM kI AjJA meM hI ThaharA jAe to upAzraya meM rahe
atirikta zayyA-saMstAraka Adi bhI usI pUrvasthitoM kI AjJA se grahaNa kiye jA
sakate haiM aura yathAyogya samaya taka unakA upayoga kara sakate haiN|

Page #146 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Translation:  [192] The term 'achitt' is used in the Brihatkalpa Sutra
because the upashraya may contain many 'saccitt' substances. A monk is not
permitted to take 'saccitt' or living beings as equipment. Therefore, only
'achitt' and usable equipment can be taken with the prior permission of the
monks. If it is known that these equipment were not previously authorized by the
monks from the owner, then the visiting monk must obtain their permission. The
intention of the Sutra is that there is no need to seek permission again for the
house and equipment that have already been authorized by the previous monks. The
rules for prior permission and re-permission for a house without an owner are as
follows:  _30. For houses, buildings, unused, not divided by the family, not
under the control of another, or possessed by a deity, the permission of the
previously residing monks is sufficient for staying there for as long as needed.
31. For houses, buildings, used, divided by the family, or taken over by
another, permission should be sought again for staying there for as long as
needed for the sake of the monk's conduct, even if the house is unused._
**Explanation:**  1. **Avyaprit:** A house that is not being used by anyone due
to its dilapidated condition or collapse is called 'avyaprit'. 2. **Avyakrit:**
A house that is not under the control of anyone due to multiple owners is called
'avyakrit'. 3. **Aparparigrihit:** A house that has been abandoned by the owner
and is not taken over by anyone else, but is without an owner, is called
'aparparigrihit'. 4. **Amarparigrihit:** A house that has been abandoned by the
builder for some reason and in which a deity like a Yaksha has taken residence
is called 'amarparigrihit'.  If the monks are leaving the place and other monks
arrive, they do not need to seek permission again to stay there, as the
permission granted by the previous monks is considered sufficient. If a deity
leaves the house after the visiting monks have stayed there and a real owner
arrives, then the real owner must seek permission again.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
192] [bRhatkalpasUtra sUtra meM 'acitta' zabda kA prayoga isaliye kiyA gayA hai
ki upAzraya meM to kaI sacitta padArtha bhI ho sakate haiN| bhikSu ko sacitta
athavA jIvayukta upakaraNa lenA nahIM kalpatA hai, ataH acitta aura upayoga meM
Ane yogya upakaraNa hoM to hI bhikSoM kI pUrvagRhIta AjJA se grahaNa kiye jA
sakate haiN| yadi yaha jJAta ho jAe ki ina upakaraNoM kI pUrva bhikSutroM ne
svAmI se prAjJA nahIM lI hai to Agantuka bhikSu ko unakI AjJA lenA Avazyaka hotA
hai| sUtra kA prAzaya yaha hai ki pUrva bhikSuoM ne jisa makAna kI evaM jina
upakaraNoM kI AjJA le rakhI hai unakI punaH AjJA lene kI AvazyakatA nahIM hotI
hai| svAmI-rahita ghara kI pUrvAjJA evaM punaH AjJA kA vidhAna _30. se vatthUsu-
avvAvaDesu, avyogaDesu, aparapariggahiesu, amarapariggahiesu sacceva uggahassa
puvANuNNavaNA ciTThai ahAlaMdamavi ugghe| 31. se vatthUsu-vAvaDesu, bogaDesu,
parapariggahiesu, bhikkhubhAvassa aTThAe doccapi uggahe aNunaveyavve siyA
ahAlandamavi ugghe| 30. jo ghara kAma meM na A rahA ho, kuTumba dvArA vibhAjita
na ho, jisa para kisI anya kA prabhutva na ho athavA kisI deva dvArA adhikRta ho
to usameM bhI usI pUrvasthita sAdhunoM kI AjJA se jitane kAla rahanA ho, ThaharA
jA sakatA hai| 31. vahI ghara Agantuka bhikSutroM ke Thaharane ke bAda meM kAma
meM Ane lagA ho, kuTumba dvArA vibhAjita ho gayA ho yA anya se parigahIta ho
gayA ho to bhikSu bhAva arthAt saMyamamaryAdA ke liye jitane samaya rahanA ho
usakI dUsarI bAra AjJA le lenI cAhiye / vivecana-1. avyApRta-jo ghara jIrNa-
zIrNa hone se yA gira jAne se kisI ke dvArA upayoga meM nahIM pA rahA hai, use
'avyApRta' kahate haiM / 2. avyAkRtajo ghara aneka svAmiyoM kA hone se kisI ke
dvArA apane adhIna nahIM kiyA gayA hai, use 'avyAkRta' kahate haiN| 3.
aparaparigRhIta-jo ghara gRhasvAmI ne chor3a diyA ho aura anya kisI vyakti ke
dvArA parigRhIta nahIM hai, kintu binA svAmI kA hai, use 'aparaparigRhIta'
kahate haiN| 4. amaraparigRhItajo ghara kisI kAraNa-vizeSa se nirmAtA ke dvArA
chor3a diyA gayA hai aura jisameM kisI yakSa Adi deva ne apanA nivAsa kara liyA
hai, use 'amaraparigRhIta' kahate haiN| ukta sthAna se sAdhu vihAra kara anyatra
jAne vAle haiN| usa samaya Ane vAle sAdhunoM ko usameM Thaharane ke lie punaH
AjJA lene kI AvazyakatA nahIM hai, kyoMki pUrva sthita sAdhuoM ke dvArA lI gaI
anujJA hI AjJA mAnI jAtI hai / Agantuka sAdhunoM ke Thaharane para devatA ne usa
makAna ko chor3a diyA ho aura usake bAda usa makAna kA koI vAstavika mAlika A
jAve to vAstavika mAlika ko punaH prAjJA lenA Avazyaka

Page #147 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Third Objective [193]  It is not proper to consume even a small amount of
*adatta* (unpaid for) in the *sanayamaaryada* (rules of conduct). The
consumption of *adatta* occurs when one stays at a place with the permission of
an unknown owner, while the actual owner is absent, and then continues to stay
there after the actual owner returns. Therefore, one should seek the permission
of the actual owner upon his arrival.  The rule regarding staying in a place
like a road, etc., with prior permission is as follows:  **32.** One can stay
for as long as one wishes, with the permission of the previous *sadhus*
(ascetics), near a wall made of mud, etc., near a wall made of bricks, etc.,
near a *charika* (path between a fort and a city), near a ditch, near a common
path, near a fence or a fort.    **Commentary:** If one wishes to stay near a
fort, etc., on a road, or near the wall of someone's house, one should seek the
permission of the owner, the passerby, or the *Shakrendra* (Indra). If other
*sadhus* arrive before the *sadhus* who are already sitting there leave, they
can stay with the same permission. It is not necessary for them to seek
permission again. Here, the commentary explains the ownership of different areas
near the wall of a house, with different measurements. The remaining land is
said to be owned by the king.  ## The rule regarding going to *gochari* (a place
for begging) near an army camp and the atonement for staying overnight:  **33.**
If there is an enemy army camp outside the village or the capital, then
*nirgranthas* (male ascetics) and *nirgranthis* (female ascetics) should go to
the village for begging and return on the same day. However, it is not
permissible for them to stay there overnight. Any *nirgrantha* or *nirgranthi*
who stays there overnight, or approves of someone staying overnight,
transgresses both *jinaagna* (Jain teachings) and *rajagna* (king's order) and
incurs the *chaturmasik anudghatik* (four-month atonement).  **Commentary:** The
*Pracha. Shru. 2, A. 3* prohibits *sadhus* from going near an army camp. Here,
the rule is that if it is absolutely necessary for *sadhus* to go to a village,
etc., for *vihar* (spiritual practice), etc., they can cross the army camp and
go to the village, etc., for begging. This means that during the time of an army
camp, *bhikshus* (begging ascetics) are only allowed to go for begging and
return immediately, and others are not allowed to enter.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
tIsarA uddezaka] [193 hai| saMyamamaryAdA meM sUkSma adatta kA bhI sevana karanA
ucita nahIM hotA hai, ajJAta mAlika ke samaya lI gaI AjJA se jJAta mAlika ke
samaya Thaharane para adatta kA sevana hotA hai| ataH vAstavika mAlika ke A jAne
para usakI AjJA le lenA caahie| pUrvAjJA se mArga Adi meM Thaharane kA vidhAna
32. se aNukuDDesu vA, aNubhittIsu vA, aNucariyAsu vA, aNupharihAsu vA,
aNupaMthesu vA, aNumerAsu vA, sacceva uggahassa punvANuNNavaNA ciTThai /
prahAlaMdamavi uggahe / 32. miTTI Adi se nirmita dIvAla ke pAsa, IMTa Adi se
nirmita dIvAla ke pAsa, carikA (koTa aura nagara ke bIca ke mArga) ke pAsa, khAI
ke pAsa, sAmAnya patha ke pAsa, bAr3a yA koTa ke pAsa bhI usI pUrvasthita
sAdhuoM kI AjJA se jitane kAla rahanA ho, ThaharA jA sakatA hai| vivecana--mArga
meM koTa Adi ke kinAre yA kisI ke makAna kI dIvAra ke pAsa ThaharanA ho to usake
mAlika kI, rAhagIra kI athavA zakrendra kI AjJA lenI cAhiye / vahAM baiThe
sAdhuoM ke uThane ke pUrva anya sAdhu A jAe~ to ve usI AjJA meM Thahara sakate
haiN| unako punaH kisI kI AjJA lenA Avazyaka sahIM hai / yahAM bhASya meM makAna
kI dIvAla ke pAsa kitanI jagaha kA svAmitva kisakA hotA hai, usakA aneka
vibhAgoM se alaga-alaga mApa batAyA hai| zeSa bhUmi rAjA ke svAmitva kI honA
batAyA hai| senA ke samIpavartI kSetra meM gocarI jAne kA vidhAna evaM rAta
rahane kA prAyazcitta 33. se gAmassa vA jAva rAyahANIe vA bahiyA seNNaM
sanniviTTha pehAe kappai niggaMthANa vA niggaMthINa vA taddivasaM bhikkhAyariyAe
gaMtUNa paDiniyattae no se kappai taM raNi tatyeva uvaainnaavette| jo khalu
niggaMthe vA niggaMthI vA taM raNi tattheva uvAiNAvei, uvAiNAvetaM vA sAijjai /
se duhao vi aikkamamANe Avajjai cAummAsiyaM parihAraTThANaM aNugghAiyaM / 33.
grAma yAvat rAjadhAnI ke bAhara zatrusenA kA paDAva ho to nirgranthoM aura
nirgranthiyoM ko bhikSAcaryA ke liye bastI meM jAkara usI dina lauTakara AnA
kalpatA hai kintu unheM vahAM rAta rahanA nahIM kalpatA hai| jo nirgrantha yA
nirgranthI vahAM rAta rahate haiM yA rAta rahane vAle kA anumodana karate haiM,
ve jinAjJA aura rAjAjJA donoM kA atikramaNa karate hue cAturmAsika anudghAtika
prAyazcitta ko prApta hote haiN| vivecana-senA ke par3Ava ke nikaTa se sAdhu ko
gamanAgamana karane kA prAcA. zru. 2, a. 3 meM niSedha kiyA hai aura yahAM
vihArAdi meM atyanta Avazyaka hone para senA ke paDAva ko pAra kara grAmAdi ke
bhItara gocarI jAne kA vidhAna hai| isakA tAtparya yaha hai ki senA ke paDAva ke
samaya meM jahAM bhikSAcaroM ko kevala bhikSA lekara Ane kI hI chUTa ho aura
anyoM ke liye praveza banda ho taba bhikSu ko bhikSA lekara ke zIghra hI lauTa

Page #148 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[194] The *Bahutkalpasutra* should be known, but not dwelt upon. Dwelling upon
it leads to violation of royal and *Jina* commands, making one liable for
atonement. The evidence for the *avagrahakshetra* is from verse 34: "It is
proper for the *nirgranthas* and *nirgranthis* to take an *avagraha* of one
*yojana* with a radius of one *ko≈õa* in villages or assemblies, i.e., it is
proper to travel two and a half *ko≈õas* in one direction." Explanation: It is
proper for a monk to travel up to two and a half *ko≈õas* in any one direction
from his *upa≈õraya*, but it is not proper to travel beyond that. Although it is
proper for a monk to travel only two *ko≈õas* for *gocharƒ´*, the intention of
saying two and a half *ko≈õas* is that if a monk who has gone two *ko≈õas* for
*gocharƒ´* encounters an obstacle due to excrement, he can go half a *ko≈õa*
further to remove the obstacle. Thus, the total travel in one direction is two
and a half *ko≈õas*. Adding the areas of the two directions, east-west or north-
south, results in five *ko≈õas*, i.e., one and a quarter *yojanas*, which is the
*avagrahakshetra*. This is what is referred to in the *sutra* as the *sako≈õa
yojana avagrahakshetra*. The essence of the third *uddeshaka* of *sutra* 1-2 is
that a monk should not sit, sleep, etc., in the *upa≈õraya* of a nun, and a nun
should not sit, sleep, etc., in the *upa≈õraya* of a monk. Monks and nuns can use
leather without hair if necessary, but hairy leather is not proper for them. In
an extreme situation, a monk can use hairy leather that is used by a householder
for one night, but it is completely forbidden for a nun. Monks and nuns should
not keep expensive clothes, uncut cloth, or clothes that are longer than
necessary. Monks should not keep loincloths, undergarments, etc., that are worn
close to the genitals, but nuns must keep these items. A nun should not accept
clothes from her own *ni≈õrƒÅ*, but she can request clothes from other
*prav·πõtinƒ´*s, etc. 7-10, 11-12.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
194] [bahatkalpasUtra jAnA cAhiye, andara nahIM ThaharanA cAhiye / andara
Thaharane para rAjAjJA evaM jinAjJA kA ullaMghana hone se vaha prAyazcitta kA
pAtra hotA hai| avagrahakSetra kA pramANa 34. se gAmaMsi vA jAva sannivesaMsi vA
kappai niggaMthANa vA niggaMthINa vA savvAno samaMtA sakkosaM jAyeNaM uggahaM
opihitANaM citttthitte| 34. nirgranthoM aura nirganthiyoM ko grAma yAvat
sanniveza meM cAroM ora se eka kosa sahita eka yojanA kA avagraha grahaNa karake
rahanA kalpatA hai arthAt eka dizA meM DhAI kosa jAnA-mAnA kalpatA hai|
vivecana-upAzraya se kisI bhI eka dizA meM bhikSu ko ar3hAI kosa taka jAnA-pAnA
kalpatA hai, isase adhika kSetra meM jAnA-mAnA nahIM kalpatA hai| yadyapi gocarI
ke liye bhikSu ko do kosa taka hI jAnA kalpatA hai tathApi DhAI kosa kahane kA
Azaya yaha hai ki do kosa gocarI ke liye gaye hue bhikSu ko vahAM kabhI mala-
mUtra kI bAdhA ho jAe to bAdhA nivAraNa ke liye vahAM se vaha AdhA kosa aura Age
jA sakatA hai / taba kula ar3hAI kosa eka dizA meM gamanAgamana hotA hai| pUrva-
pazcima yA uttara-dakSiNa yoM do-do dizAoM ke kSetra kA yoga karane para pAMca
koza arthAt savA yojana kA avagrahakSetra hotA hai| use hI sUtra meM sakosa
yojana avagrahakSetra kahA hai| sUtra 1-2 tIsare uddezaka kA sArAMza sAdhu ko
sAdhvI ke upAzraya meM aura sAdhvI ko sAdhu ke upAzraya meM baiThanA, sonA prAdi
pravRttiyAM nahIM karanI caahiye| romarahita carmakhaNDa Avazyaka hone para
sAdhu-sAdhvI grahaNa kara sakate haiM, kintu saromacarma unheM nahIM kalpatA hai
/ AgAr3ha paristhitivaza gRhastha ke sadA upayoga meM Ane vAlA saromacarma eka
rAtri ke liye sAdhu grahaNa kara sakatA hai kintu sAdhvI ke liye to usakA
sarvathA niSedha hai| bahumUlya vastra evaM akhaNDa thAna yA AvazyakatA se
adhika lambA vastra sAdhu-sAdhvI ko nahIM rakhanA caahiye| guptAMga ke nikaTa
pahane jAne vAle laMgoTa jAMghiyA Adi upakaraNa sAdhu ko nahIM rakhanA cAhiye
kintu sAdhvI ko ye upakaraNa rakhanA Avazyaka hai| sAdhvI ko apanI nizrA se
vastra grahaNa nahIM karanA cAhiye kintu anya pravartinI prAdi kI nizrA se vaha
vastra kI yAcanA kara sakatI hai| 7-10 11-12

Page #149 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Third Objective [195 Sutras 14-15]  When taking initiation, monks and nuns
should accept the **Rajoharan Gochchag** (cleaning cloth) and necessary
utensils. For clothing like **Muhpatti**, **Chadder**, **Cholpattak**, etc., a
monk can take a maximum of three **Thans** worth of cloth, while a nun can take
four **Thans** worth.  [16-17] Monks and nuns should not accept clothing during
**Chaturmas**, but they can take clothing during **Hemant** and **Greeshma**
seasons.  [18-19-20] Healthy monks and nuns should accept clothing and bedding
according to the order of the initiation ceremony, and they should also offer
their respects in the same order.  [21-23] Healthy monks and nuns should not
engage in activities like sitting in a householder's house, as mentioned in the
sutras. They should also avoid engaging in inappropriate conversations or giving
sermons there. If necessary, they can make a brief and appropriate statement
while standing.  [24-26] Before leaving, monks and nuns should return the
bedding and other items belonging to the householder. They should return them in
the same condition as they received them. If the bedding is lost, they should
search for it. If it is not found, they should inform the owner of the loss and
accept another bedding. If the bedding is found later, they should return it if
it is no longer needed.  [28-32] If monks and nuns are staying in an
**Upashray**, an empty house, or on the road, and another monk arrives before
they leave, they can stay there with the same permission they received earlier.
They do not need to seek new permission. However, if the owner of an empty house
appears, they must seek permission again. If there is a military camp outside
the village, monks and nuns can enter for alms, but they should not stay there
overnight. Staying overnight would result in the **Guru Chaturmasik** penance.
Monks and nuns can travel up to two and a half **Kos** in any direction from the
**Upashray** where they are staying, but not beyond that.  **Conclusion:** This
objective discusses the prohibition of monks and nuns sitting in each other's
**Upashrays**, the rules regarding the acceptance of leather, and other related
matters.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
tosarA uddezaka] [195 sUtra 14-15 dIkSA lete samaya sAdhu-sAdhvI ko rajoharaNa
gocchaga (pramArjanikA) evaM Avazyaka pAtra grahaNa karane cAhiye tathA
muhapatti caddara colapaTTaka Adi ke liye bhikSu adhikatama tIna thAna ke mApa
jitane vastra le sakatA hai evaM sAdhvI cAra thAna ke mApa jitane vastra le
sakatI hai / 16-17 sAdhu-sAdhvI ko cAturmAsa meM vastra grahaNa nahIM karanA
cAhiye kintu hemanta grISma Rtu meM ve vastra le sakate haiN| 18-19-20 svastha
sAdhu-sAdhvI ko vastra evaM zayyA-saMstAraka dIkSAparyAya ke anukrama se grahaNa
karane cAhiye evaM vandanA bhI dIkSAparyAya ke krama se karanI caahiye| 21-23
svastha sAdhu-sAdhvI ko gRhastha ke ghara meM baiThanA Adi sUtrokta kArya nahIM
karane cAhiye tathA vahAM amaryAdita vArtAlApa yA upadeza bhI nahIM denA cAhiye
/ Avazyaka ho to khar3e-khar3e hI maryAdita kathana kiyA jA sakatA hai| 24-26
zayyAtara evaM anya gRhastha ke zayyA-saMstAraka ko vihAra karane ke pUrva
avazya lauTA denA cAhiye tathA jisa avasthA meM grahaNa kiyA ho, vaisA hI
vyavasthita karake lauTAnA caahiye| zayyA-saMstAraka kho jAne para usakI khoja
karanA evaM na milane para usake svAmI ko kho jAne kI sUcanA dekara anya zayyA-
saMstAraka grahaNa krnaa| yadi khoja karane para mila jAe to AvazyakatA na
rahane para lauTA denA cAhiye / 28-32 sAdhu-sAdhvI upAzraya meM, zUnya gRha meM
yA mArga Adi meM kahIM para bhI AjJA lekara Thahare hoM aura unake vihAra karane
ke pUrva hI dUsare sAdhu vihAra karake A jAeM to ve usI pUrvagRhIta AjJA se
vahAM Thahara sakate haiM kintu navIna AjJA lene kI AvazyakatA nahIM hotii| yadi
zUnya gRha kA koI svAmI prakaTa ho jAe to puna: usakI AjJA lenA Avazyaka hotA
hai| grAmAdi ke bAhara senA kA par3Ava ho to bhikSA ke liye sAdhu-sAdhvI andara
jA sakate haiM, kintu unheM vahAM rAtrinivAsa karanA nahIM kalpatA hai|
rAtrinivAsa karane para gurucAturmAsika prAyazcitta AtA hai| sAdhu-sAdhvI jisa
upAzraya meM Thahare hoM, vahAM se kisI bhI eka dizA meM ar3hAI kosa taka
gamanAgamana kara sakate haiM, usase adhika nhiiN| upasaMhAra isa uddezaka
meMsAdhu-sAdhviyoM ko eka-dUsare ke upAzraya meM baiThane Adi ke niSedha kA,
carma grahaNa ke kalpyAkalpya kA,

Page #150 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[196] [Bhatkalpasutra Sutra 7-10,13, regarding the permissible and impermissible
regarding the acceptance of clothes, 11-12 regarding the permissible and
impermissible regarding clothes covering the genitals and private parts, 14-15
regarding the permissible instruments to be accepted at the time of initiation,
18-20 regarding the order of prostration etc. during the initiation period,
regarding the permissible and impermissible regarding sitting at home or
conversation etc. of a householder, 24-27 regarding the rules related to bed and
bedding, 28-32 regarding the stay of newly arrived monks in the previous
permission, regarding bringing alms from villages etc. where the army is
encamped, regarding the area of ‚Äã‚Äãmovement from the Upashraya, etc. various
topics are described. 21-23 34 // Third Uddeshaka ends //

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
196] [bahatkalpasUtra sUtra 7-10,13, vastra-grahaNa ke kalpyAkalpya kA, 11-12
guptAMga pAvaraka vastroM ke kalpyAkalpya kA, . 14-15 dIkSA-samaya grahaNa
karane ke kalpanIya upakaraNoM kA, 18-20 dIkSAparyAya ke krama se vandana Adi
kA, gRhastha ke ghara baiThane yA vArtAlApa Adi ke kalpyAkalpya kA, 24-27 zayyA-
saMstAraka sambandhI vidhiyoM kA, 28-32 naye Aye sAdhuoM ko pUrvAjJA meM
Thaharane kA, senA ke par3Ava vAle grAmAdi se bhikSA lAne kA, upAzraya se
gamanAgamana ke kSetrAvagraha kA, ityAdi vibhinna viSayoM kA varNana hai| 21-23
34 // tIsarA uddezaka samApta //

Page #151 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Fourth Objective: Anudghatik PrƒÅya≈õcitta  **1. Anudghatik PrƒÅya≈õcitta is
applicable in the following situations:**  * **1. Hatthaphammam karemane:** One
who commits a physical act (like stealing, killing, etc.) * **2. Mehu·πáam
pa·∏çisevamƒÅ·πáe:** One who engages in sexual misconduct. * **3. Raibhoya·πáam
bhujamƒÅ·πáe:** One who consumes food after sunset.  **Explanation:**  * **Udghatik
PrƒÅya≈õcitta** refers to the atonement for offenses that can be purified through
ordinary penance. * **Anudghatik PrƒÅya≈õcitta** refers to the atonement for
offenses that can only be purified through special penance.  A monk who commits
a physical act, engages in sexual misconduct, or consumes food after sunset is
considered to have committed a grave sin. The first two offenses violate the
Mahavrat of Brahmacharya (celibacy), and the last violates the sixth Vrat of
Ratribhaktvirman (abstinence from food after sunset). Therefore, these three
offenses are subject to Anudghatik PrƒÅya≈õcitta.  **10 Types of PrƒÅya≈õcitta:**
The Bhagavati Sutra (Chapter 25, Verse 6, Sutra 195) and the Uvvaiyasutra
(Chapter 30) mention ten types of PrƒÅya≈õcitta:  1. **ƒÄlocanƒÅ:** Confession of
minor transgressions to the Guru, even while adhering to the vows. 2.
**PratikramƒÅ·πáa:** Reciting "MicchƒÅ me dukkadam hojjƒÅ" (I have erred) to atone
for unintentional mistakes while fulfilling one's duties. 3. **Tadu-bhay:**
Combining ƒÄlocanƒÅ and PratikramƒÅ·πáa to rectify transgressions related to the
fundamental principles or secondary principles. 4. **Viveka:** Examining and
discarding any food or drink that is found to be contaminated. 5. **Vyutsarga:**
Performing a specific breathing exercise while standing in meditation after
activities like traveling, experiencing a bad dream, or crossing a river by
boat. 6. **Tap:** Performing penance prescribed by the Guru for deliberate
misconduct. 7. **Chheda:** A type of penance involving specific restrictions. 8.
**M≈´la:** A type of penance involving complete renunciation. 9. **AnvasthƒÅpya:**
A type of penance involving permanent renunciation. 10. **PƒÅra√±cƒ´ka:** A type of
penance involving severe consequences.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
cauthA uddezaka anudghAtika prAyazcitta ke sthAna 1. tao aNugghAiyA paNNattA,
taM jahA- 1. hatthaphamma karemANe, 2. mehuNaM paDisevamANe, 3. rAibhoyaNaM
bhujmaanne| 1. anudghAtika prAyazcitta ke yogya ye tIna kahe gaye haiM, yathA-
1. hastakarma karane vAlA, 2. maithuna sevana karane vAlA, 3. rAtribhojana
karane vaalaa| vivecana-jisa doSa kI sAmAnya tapa se zuddhi kI jA sake, use
udghAtika prAyazcitta kahate haiM aura jisa doSa kI vizeSa tapa se hI zuddhi kI
jA sake, use anudghAtika prAyazcitta kahate haiN| hastakarma karane vAlA, strI
ke sAtha saMbhoga karane vAlA aura rAtribhojana karane vAlA bhikSu mahApApa
karane vAlA hotA hai, kyoMki inameM se do brahmacarya mahAvrata ko bhaMga karane
vAle haiM aura antima rAtribhaktaviramaNa nAmaka chaThe vrata ko bhaMga karane
vAlA hai| ataH ye tInoM hI anudAtika prAyazcitta ke pAtra hote haiN|
bhagavatIsUtra za. 25, u. 6, sU. 195 meM tathA uvavAIsUtra 30 meM prAyazcitta ke
dasa bheda batAye gaye haiM 1. AlocanA, 2. pratikramaNa, 3. tadubhaya, 4.
viveka, 5. vyutsarga, 6. tapa, 7. cheda, 8. mUla, 9. anavasthApya, 10. pArAJcika
/ inakA svarUpa isa prakAra hai 1. AlocanA- svIkRta vratoM ko yathAvidhi pAlana
karate hue bhI chadmastha hone ke kAraNa vratoM meM jo atikrama Adi doSa lagA
ho, use guru ke sammukha nivedana krnaa| 2. pratikramaNa-apane kartavya kA
pAlana karate hue bhI jo bhUleM hotI haiM unakA "micchA me dukkaDaM hojjA"
uccAraNa kara apane doSa se nivRtta honaa| . 3. tadubhaya-mUlaguNa yA
uttaraguNoM meM lage aticAroM kI nivRtti ke lie AlocanA aura pratikramaNa donoM
krnaa| 4. viveka-gRhIta bhakta-pAna Adi ke sadoSa jJAta hone para use paraThanA
/ 5. vyutsarga-gamanAgamana karane para, nidrAvasthA meM burA svapna pAne para,
naukA Adi se nadI pAra karane para ityAdi pravRttiyoM ke bAda nirdhArita
zvAsocchvAsa kAla-pramANa kAyA kA utsarga karanA arthAt khar3e hokara dhyAna
krnaa| 6. tapa-pramAda-vizeSa se anAcAra ke sevana karane para guru dvArA diye
gaye tapa kA AcaraNa krnaa|

Page #152 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[198] There are two types of these - Udghatim, meaning minor atonement, and
Anudghatim, meaning major atonement. Both of these have two sub-types, monthly
and Chaturmasik. If a vow is broken due to being overpowered by royal authority,
ghost possession, etc., then: 1. In minor monthly atonement (Udghatim), it is
necessary to perform 4, 15, and 27 Ekasan for minor, medium, and severe
transgressions respectively. 2. In major monthly atonement (Anudghatim), it is
necessary to perform 4, 15, and 30 Nivi for minor, medium, and severe
transgressions respectively. 3. In minor Chaturmasik atonement, it is necessary
to perform 4 Ayambil, 60 Nivi, and 108 fasts for minor, medium, and severe
transgressions respectively. 4. In major Chaturmasik atonement, it is necessary
to perform 4 fasts, 4 Bele, and 120 fasts or 4 months of Diksha-ched for minor,
medium, and severe transgressions respectively. If the vow is broken
intentionally and with haste, then... 1. In minor monthly atonement, it is
necessary to perform 4, 15, and 27 Ayambil for minor, medium, and severe
transgressions respectively. 2. In major monthly atonement, it is necessary to
perform 4, 15, and 30 Ayambil for minor, medium, and severe transgressions
respectively. 3. In minor Chaturmasik atonement, it is necessary to perform 4
fasts, 4 Bele, and 108 fasts for minor, medium, and severe transgressions
respectively. 4. In major Chaturmasik atonement, it is necessary to perform 4
Bele, 4 days of Diksha-ched, 4 Tele and 6 days of Diksha-ched, and 120 fasts and
4 months of Diksha-ched for minor, medium, and severe transgressions
respectively. If the vow is broken due to the strong emergence of Mohaniya
Karma, then: 1. In minor monthly atonement, it is necessary to perform 4, 15,
and 27 fasts for minor, medium, and severe transgressions respectively. 2. In
major monthly atonement, it is necessary to perform 4, 15, and 30 fasts for
minor, medium, and severe transgressions respectively. 3. In minor Chaturmasik
atonement, it is necessary to perform 4 Bele, Ayambil during Parana, 4 Tele,
Ayambil during Parana, and 108 fasts and Ayambil during Parana for minor,
medium, and severe transgressions respectively. 4. In major Chaturmasik
atonement, it is necessary to perform 4 Tele, Ayambil during Parana or 40 days
of Diksha-ched, 15 Tele, Ayambil during Parana or 60 days of Diksha-ched, and
120 fasts and Ayambil during Parana or Mula (new initiation) or 120 days of
Diksha-ched for minor, medium, and severe transgressions respectively. During
the reign of Lord Mahavira, the maximum atonement was six months. If more
atonement is required, then Diksha-ched atonement is performed. In minor six
months, there are 165 fasts, and in major six months, there are 180 fasts. The
Acharya and other disciples, while giving atonement, consider the strength of
the disciple and the circumstances of the vow-breaking and give appropriate
lesser or greater atonement.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
198] isake do bheda haiM-udghAtima arthAt laghuprAyazcitta aura anuddhAtima
arthAt guruprAyazcitta / ina donoM ke bhI mAsika aura cAturmAsika ke bheda se
do-do bheda hote haiN| yadi rAjasattA yA pretabAdhA Adi se paravaza hone para
vata-virAdhanA ho to- 1. laghumAsatapa (udghAtima) prAyazcitta meM jaghanya 4,
madhyama 15 aura utkRSTa 27 ekAsana karanA prAvazyaka hai| 2. gurumAsatapa
(anudghAtima) prAyazcitta meM kramazaH 4 nIvI, 15 nIvI aura 30 nIvI karanA
Avazyaka hai| 3. laghucAturmAsika tapa meM kramazaH 4 AyaMbila, 60 nIvI aura 108
upavAsa karanA Avazyaka hai| . 4. gurucAturmAsika tapa meM kramazaH 4 upavAsa, 4
bele aura 120 upavAsa yA 4 mAsa kA dIkSAcheda Avazyaka hai| yadi AturatA se
jAnabUjha kara vrata-virAdhanA ho to... 1. laghumAsa meM jaghanya 4, madhyama 15
aura utkRSTa 27 AyaMbila karanA Avazyaka hai| 2. gurumAsa meM jaghanya 4,
madhyama 15 aura utkRSTa 30 AyaMbila karanA Avazyaka hai| 3. laghucAturmAsika
meM jaghanya 4 upavAsa, madhyama 4 bele aura utkRSTa 108 upavAsa karanA
prAvazyaka hai| 4. gurucAturmAsika meM jaghanya 4 bele, 4 dina kA dIkSA-cheda,
madhyama meM 4 tele tathA 6 dina kA dIkSA-cheda aura utkRSTa meM 120 upavAsa
tathA 4 mAsa kA dIkSA-cheda Avazyaka hai| yadi mohanIyakarma ke prabala udaya se
vrata kI virAdhanA huI hai to 1. laghumAsaprAyazcitta meM jaghanya 4 upavAsa,
madhyama 15 upavAsa aura utkRSTa 27 upavAsa karanA Avazyaka hai| 2.
gurumAsaprAyazcitta meM jaghanya 4 upavAsa, madhyama 15 upavAsa aura utkRSTa 30
upavAsa karanA Avazyaka hai| 3. laghucAturmAsika prAyazcitta meM jaghanya 4
bele, pAraNe meM AyaMbila, madhyama meM 4 tele, pAraNe meM AyaMbila aura utkRSTa
108 upavAsa aura pAraNe meM AyaMbila karanA Avazyaka hai| 4. gurucAturmAsika
prAyazcitta meM jaghanya 4 tele, pAraNe meM AyaMbila yA 40 dina kA dIkSAcheda,
madhyama 15 tele, pAraNe meM AyaMbila yA 60 dina kA dIkSA-cheda aura utkRSTa 120
upavAsa aura pAraNe meM AyaMbila yA mUla (naI dIkSA) yA 120 dina kA cheda
prAyazcitta Avazyaka hai| bhagavAna mahAvIra ke zAsana meM utkRSTa prAyazcitta
chaha mAsa kA hotA hai, isase adhika prAyazcitta denA Avazyaka ho to dIkSA-cheda
kA prAyazcitta diyA jAtA hai| laghu chaha mAsa meM 165 upavAsa aura guru chaha
mAsa meM 180 upavAsoM kA vidhAna hai| prAyazcitta dene vAle AcAryAdi ziSya kI
zakti aura vrata-bhaMga kI paristhiti ko dekhakara yathAyogya hInAdhika
prAyazcitta bhI dete haiN|

Page #153 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Fourth Uddeshaka] [199 7. The expiation for the renunciation of the diksha of a
monk who violates the vows and indulges in the exceptional path without reason
is called 'Cheda Prayashchitta'. This expiation is also for six months. If more
expiation is required, the original (new diksha) expiation is given.  8. Mula -
If a monk-nun knowingly and with hatred kills any five-sensed being, and
similarly indulges in the sin of false speech etc. many times and does not
perform self-confession, then the complete cutting off of his/her previous
diksha is called 'Mula Prayashchitta'. Such a person with Mula Prayashchitta has
to take diksha again.  9. Anavasthaapya - If one commits sins like non-
abstinence from violence, theft etc. whose purification is not possible even
through Mula Prayashchitta, then making him/her wear the householder's dress
without re-initiating is called 'Anavasthaapya Prayashchitta'. In this, wearing
the householder's dress is necessary even for a short time.  10. Paraanchika -
If one's purification is not possible even through Anavasthaapya Prayashchitta
due to the intensity of passions or negligence, then such a person is made to
wear the householder's dress for a minimum of one year and a maximum of twelve
years, and all the vows and rules of a monk are made him/her observe. After
that, new diksha is given, which is called 'Paraanchika Prayashchitta'. The
three types of Paraanchika Prayashchitta are: 1. Dushta Paraanchika, 2. Pramatta
Paraanchika, 3. Annamana Karemana Paraanchika.  Explanation - The word
'Paraanchika' means the expiation through which the purified monk can cross the
ocean of worldly existence. Or it is the last and most excellent of the ten
types of expiations, which is called Paraanchika Prayashchitta. In this sutra,
three types of Paraanchika Prayashchitta are mentioned. Among them, the first is
Dushta Paraanchika, which has two types - Kashaya-dushta and Vishaya-dushta. 1.
Kashaya-dushta - One who kills a monk etc. due to the intensity of passions like
anger is Kashaya-dushta. 2. Vishaya-dushta - One who becomes attached to women
like sadhvis due to the attachment to sense objects and indulges in sensual
pleasures with them is called Vishaya-dushta. The five types of Pramatta
Paraanchika are: 1. Madya-pramatta - Those who indulge in intoxicating
substances like liquor. 2. Vishaya-pramatta - Those who are greedy for sense
objects. 3. Kashaya-pramatta - Those who are intense in passions.]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
cauthA uddezaka] [199 7. cheda-aneka vratoM kI virAdhanA karane vAle aura binA
kAraNa apavAdamArga kA sevana karane vAle sAdhu kI dIkSA kA chedana karanA
'cheda prAyazcitta' hai| yaha prAyazcitta bhI chaha mAsa kA hotA hai| isase
adhika prAyazcitta denA Avazyaka hone para mUla (naI dIkSA kA) prAyazcitta diyA
jAtA hai| _8. mUla-jo sAdhu-sAdhvI jAnabUjha kara dveSabhAva se kisI paMcendriya
prANI kA ghAta kara. isI prakAra mRSAvAda Adi pApoM kA aneka bAra sevana kare
aura svataH pAlocanA na kare to usakI pUrvagRhIta dIkSA kA samUla chedana karanA
'mUla prAyazcitta' hai| aise prAyazcitta vAle ko punaH dIkSA grahaNa karanA
Avazyaka hotA hai| 9. anavasthApya-hiMsA, corI Adi pApa karane para jisakI
zuddhi mUla prAyazcitta se bhI sambhava na ho, use gahasthaveSa dhAraNa karAye
binA pUnaH dIkSita na karanA 'anavasthApya prAyazcitta' hai| isameM alpa samaya
ke liye bhI gahasthaveSa dhAraNa karAnA Avazyaka hotA hai| 10. pArAJcika-
anavasthApya prAyazcitta se bhI jisakI zuddhi sambhava na ho, aise viSaya kaSAya
yA pramAda kI tIvratA se doSa sevana karane vAle ko jaghanya eka varSa aura
utkRSTa bAraha varSa taka gRhasthaveza dhAraNa karAyA jAtA hai evaM sAdhu ke
saba vrata-niyamoM kA pAlana karAyA jAtA hai / usake pazcAt navIna dIkSA dI jAtI
hai, use pArAJcika prAyazcitta kahate haiN| pArAJcika prAyazcitta ke sthAna 2.
tao pAraMciyA paNNatA, taM jahA 1. duThe pAraMcie, 2. pamate pAraMcie, 3.
annamana karemANe paarNcie| pArAJcika prAyazcitta ke yogya ye tIna kahe gae
haiM, yathA 1. duSTa pArAJcika, 2. pramatta pArAJcika, 3. paraspara maithunasevI
pArAJcika / vivecana-pArAJcika zabda kA nirukta hai--jisa prAyazcitta ke dvArA
zuddha kiyA huA sAdhu saMsAra-samudra ko pAra kara sake / athavA prAyazcitta ke
dasa bhedoM meM jo antima prAyazcitta hai aura sabase utkRSTa hai-use pArAJcika
prAyazcitta kahate haiM / isa sUtra meM pArAJcika prAyazcitta ke tIna sthAna
kahe gaye haiN| unameM prathama duSTa pArAJcika hai / isake do bheda haiM-
kaSAyaduSTa aura viSayaduSTa / 1. kavAyatuSTa-jo krodhAdi kaSAyoM kI
prabalatAvaza kisI sAdhu Adi kA ghAta kara de vaha kaSAyaduSTa hai| 2.
viSayaduSTa-jo indriyoM kI viSayAsakti se sAdhvI Adi striyoM meM Asakta ho jAya
aura unake sAtha viSayasevana kare, use viSayaduSTa kahate haiN| pramatta
pArAJcika pAMca prakAra ke hote haiM1. madya-pramatta-madirA Adi nazIlI vastuoM
ke sevana karane vAle madya-pramatta kahe gae haiM / 2. viSaya-pramatta-indriyoM
ke viSaya-lolupI viSaya-pramatta kahe gae haiM / 3. kaSAya-pramatta-kaSAyoM kI
prabalatA vAle kaSAya-pramatta kahe gae haiN|

Page #154 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Bahatkalpas≈´tra 4. Those who engage in activities such as immoral speech,
negligence of vows, and royal affairs are called vikathƒÅ-pramatta.  5. Those who
are in deep sleep, stupor, or unconsciousness are called nidrƒÅ-pramatta. A
person who gets up from deep sleep, commits dreadful deeds that are not to be
done, and then goes back to sleep, and upon waking has no recollection of the
misdeeds committed, is called nidrƒÅ-pramatta. A monk who engages in sexual
activity with another monk is both liable for pƒÅrƒÅ√±cika prƒÅya≈õcitta (the most
severe penance).    In this way, the purification of the wicked, negligent, and
mutually copulating is done through pƒÅrƒÅ√±cika prƒÅya≈õcitta. 3. The three types of
anava·π£·π≠hƒÅpya prƒÅya≈õcitta (irrevocable penance) are: 1. One who steals from co-
religionists, 2. One who steals from those of other faiths, 3. One who attacks
with his own hands.   It is stated in this s≈´tra that 1. A monk who steals the
clothes, utensils, books, etc. of co-religionist monks. 2. One who steals the
clothes, utensils, books, etc. of monks of other faiths like Buddhists,
SƒÅ·πÉkhyas, etc. 3. One who physically assaults others with his hands, fists,
sticks, etc. or torments them through mantras and tantras - these three receive
anava·π£·π≠hƒÅpya prƒÅya≈õcitta.  4-9. The three types of eunuchs unfit for initiation
are: 1. Pa·πá·∏çaka - one with a feminine nature from birth, 2. VƒÅtika - one unable
to control sexual desires, 3. Klƒ´ba - the impotent. These three are not fit to
be initiated through tonsure, instruction, establishment, consecration, or
cohabitation.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
200] [bahatkalpasUtra 4. vikathA-pramatta-strIkathA, rAjakathA Adi kriyAe~
karane vAle vikathA-pramatta kahe gae haiM / 5. nidrA-pramatta-styAnaddhi-nidrA
vAle nidrA-pramatta kahe gae haiN| jo vyakti ghora nidrA meM se uThakara nahIM
karane yogya bhayaMkara kAryoM ko karake punaH so jAtA hai aura jAgane para use
apane dvArA kiye gaye duSkara kAryoM ko kucha bhI smRti nahIM rahatI hai, aise
vyakti ko nidrA-pramatta kahate haiN| jo sAdhu kisI dUsare sAdhu ke sAtha
anaMga-krIr3A rUpa maithuna karatA hai, ve donoM hI pArAJcika prAyazcitta ke
pAtra hote haiN| isa prakAra duSTa, pramatta aura paraspara maithunasevI kI
zuddhi pArAJcika prAyazcitta se hotI hai / anavasthApya prAyazcitta ke sthAna 3.
tao aNavaTuppA paNNattA, taM jahA 1. sAhammiyANaM teNNaM karemANe, 2.
annadhammiyANaM teNNaM karemANe, 3. hatthAvAlaM dlmaanne| anavasthApya
prAyazcitta yogya ye tIna kahe gaye haiM, yathA- 1. sArmikoM kI corI karane
vAlA, 2. anyadhAmikoM kI corI karane vAlA, 3. apase hAthoM se prahAra karane
vaalaa| vivecana-isa sUtra meM batAyA gayA hai 1. jo sAdhu apane samAna dharma
vAle sAdharmIjanoM ke vastra, pAtra, pustaka Adi kI corI karatA hai| 2. jo
anyadhArmika janoM ke arthAt bauddha, sAMkhya Adi matoM ke mAnane vAle sAdhu Adi
ke vastra, pAtra, pustaka Adi kI corI karatA hai| 3. jo apane hAtha se dUsare ko
tADanAdi karatA hai, muTThI, lakar3I Adi se mAratA hai yA mantra-tantra Adi se
kisI ko pIr3ita karatA hai / ina tInoM ko anavasthApya prAyazcitta pAtA hai|
dIkSA Adi ke ayogya tIna prakAra ke napuMsaka 4-9. tao no kappaMti pavAvettae,
taM jahA 1. paNDae, 2. vAie, 3. kove / evaM muNDAvettae, sikkhAvettae,
uvaTThAvettae, saMbhu jittae, sNvaasitte| ina tIna ko pravajita karanA nahIM
kalpatA hai, yathA1. paNDaka-mahilA sadRza svabhAva vAlA janma-napusaka, 2.
vAtika-kAmavAsanA kA damana na kara sakane vAlA 3. kliib-asmrth|

Page #155 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Fourth Objective] [201 Similarly, it is not permissible to shave the head,
educate, install, eat together in a congregation, and keep company with a
**Pundak**, **Vatik**, or **Kleb**.   **Explanation:**  1. **Pundak:** One who
is impotent from birth is called a **Pundak**. 2. **Vatik:** One who is
suffering from **Vataroga** (a disease that makes one incapable of controlling
sexual desire) is called a **Vatik**. 3. **Kleb:** A cowardly man who is
impotent or lacks masculinity is called a **Kleb**.  All three types of impotent
individuals are not eligible for initiation, as initiating such individuals
leads to many faults, such as mockery of the teachings and condemnation of the
**Nirgrantha** Dharma.  If initiation is given to such individuals without full
knowledge, and their impotence is later discovered, they should not be
**mundit** (shaved) i.e., their hair should not be cut. If their impotence is
discovered after their hair is cut, they should not be installed in the
**mahavrata** (great vows) i.e., they should not be given the higher initiation.
If their impotence is discovered after the higher initiation, they should not be
allowed to eat together in a congregation. If their impotence is discovered
after this, they should not be allowed to sleep or sit together.  The intention
is that these three types of impotent individuals are not eligible for
initiation in any way. Even if they are initiated, they are not fit to be kept
in the **Sangha** (community) upon discovery.  **Characteristics of those
eligible and ineligible for receiving **Vachana** (teachings):**  10.
**Ineligible for receiving Vachana:**  1. **Avinie:** One who does not show
**vinaya** (humility) towards the **Sutradhara** (teacher). 2. **Vigai-
padibandh:** One who is attached to **vikruti** (vices). 3.
**Aviossaviyapahade:** One who has not calmed their **praabhrut** (anger).  11.
**Eligible for receiving Vachana:**  1. **Vinie:** One who shows **vinaya**
(humility) towards the **Sutradhara** (teacher). 2. **No Vigai-padibandh:** One
who is not attached to **vikruti** (vices). 3. **Viossaviyapahude:** One who has
calmed their **praabhrut** (anger).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
cauthA uddezaka] [201 isI prakAra muNDita karanA, zikSita karanA, upasthApita
karanA, eka maNDalI meM sAtha biThAkara AhAra karanA tathA sAtha rakhanA nahIM
kalpatA hai| vivecana-1. paNDaka-jo janma se napuMsaka hotA hai, use 'paNDaka'
kahate haiN| 2. vAtika-jo vAtarogI hai arthAt kAmavAsanA kA nigraha karane meM
asamartha hotA hai, use 'vAtika' kahate haiN| 3. klIba-asamartha yA
puruSatvahIna kAyara puruSa ko 'klIba' kahate haiN| ye tInoM hI prakAra ke
napusaka dIkSA dene ke yogya nahIM haiM, kyoMki aise vyaktiyoM ko dIkSita karane
se pravacana kA upahAsa aura nirgrantha dharma kI nindA Adi aneka doSa hote
haiN| yadi pUrI jAnakArI kie binA ukta prakAra ke napusakoM ko dIkSA de dI gaI
ho aura bAda meM unakA napuMsakapana jJAta ho to use muNDita nahIM kare arthAt
unake kezoM kA lucana nahIM kare / yadi kezalucana ke pazcAt napuMsakapana jJAta
ho to unheM mahAvratoM meM upasthApita na kare arthAt bar3I dIkSA na de| yadi
bar3I dIkSA ke pazcAt unakA napusakapana jJAta ho to unake sAtha eka maNDalI meM
baiThakara khAna-pAna na kre| yadi isake pazcAt unakA napuMsakapana jJAta ho to
unheM sone-baiThane ke sthAna para eka sAtha na sulaave-bitthaave| abhiprAya
yaha hai ki ukta tInoM prakAra ke napuMsaka kisI bhI prakAra se dIkSA dene yogya
nahIM haiN| kadAcit dIkSita ho bhI jAya to jJAta hone para saMgha meM rakhane
yogya nahIM hote haiM / vAcanA dene ke yogyAyogya ke lakSaNa 10. tao no kappaMti
vAittae, taM jahA- 1. aviNIe, 2. vigai-paDibaddha, 3. aviosaviyapAhaDe / 11. tao
kappaMti vAittae, taM jahA 1. viNIe, 2. no vigai-paDibaddha, 3. viosaviyapAhuDe
/ 10. tIna ko vAcanA denA nahIM kalpatA hai, yathA 1. pravinIta-vinayabhAva na
karane vAle ko, 2. vikRti-pratibaddha-vikRtiyoM meM prAsakta rahane vAle ko, 3.
anupazAMtaprAbhRta-anupazAnta krodha vAle ko| 11. ina tInoM ko vAcanA denA
kalpatA hai, yathA 1. vinIta-sUtrArthadAtA ke prati vandanAdi vinaya karane vAle
ko, 2. vikRti-apratibaddha-vikRtiyoM meM prAsakta na rahane vAle ko, 3.
upazAntaprAbhRta-upazAnta krodha vAle ko /

Page #156 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Translation:  **202] [Brihatkalpa Sutra Discussion-1. Avinita -** One who is
devoid of humility, who does not show proper respect and reverence, such as
rising to greet, upon the arrival or departure of an Acharya, a senior monk who
has received Diksha, or other such dignitaries, is called 'Avinita'.   **2.
Vikriti-Prabaddha -** One who is addicted to milk, yogurt, and other such
flavors, and becomes sluggish in learning Sutra-artha, etc., when these flavors
are not available, is called 'Vikriti-Prabaddha'.   **3. Avyavashmitpraabhut -**
One who becomes extremely angry at a minor offense, and even after the offender
apologizes, continues to express anger repeatedly, is called
'Avyavashmitpraabhut'.   These three types of monks are unfit for Sutra-vachana
and Ubha-vachana, because humility is the key to acquiring knowledge. Teaching a
student who lacks humility is futile, if not harmful. One who is attached to
milk, yogurt, and other such flavors, cannot retain the teachings in their
heart, so giving them Vachana is also futile. One who is naturally aggressive,
and expresses intense anger at the slightest offense, even after the offender
apologizes, is also unfit for Vachana. Such individuals are disliked in this
life and create strong negative karmic bonds for the next life. Therefore, these
three types of students are considered unfit for Sutra, Artha, or both Vachana.
However, those who are humble, not attached to milk, yogurt, and other such
flavors, and are forgiving, are the ones who should be given Sutra, Artha, and
both Vachana. Because the Vachana given to them expands the teachings, improves
their present and future lives, and promotes the Jain teachings.   A monk with
the above-mentioned faults is also unfit for Samyama and Aradhana. He should not
be given Diksha. If these faults are discovered after Diksha, he should not be
kept with the Upadhyaya for Vachana, but should be guided by the Pravartaka and
the Stavira to learn other studies, teachings, and ethical conduct. If he
acquires the necessary qualifications, he can then be placed with the Upadhyaya
for Vachana. If he does not become qualified, he should remain a student and
follow the discipline of others while practicing Samyama.   Those Gachchha-
pramukhs who do not follow the prescribed methods of the Sutra, and give Vachana
to everyone without discerning who is fit and unfit, and do not appoint
Upadhyaya and others to give Vachana, or do not ensure that they are treated
with respect and humility, are guilty of violating the Sutra-vidhan regarding
Vachana. According to Nishita U. 19, they are liable for PrƒÅya≈õcitta.   These
PrƒÅya≈õcitta are as follows:   1. Not giving Vachana in the prescribed order, but
giving or causing to be given Vachana of any Sutra at will.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
202] [bRhatkalpasUtra vivecana-1. avinIta-jo vinaya-rahita hai, AcArya yA
dIkSAjyeSTha sAdhu Adi ke AnejAne para abhyutthAna, satkAra-sammAna Adi
yathocita vinaya ko nahIM karatA hai, vaha 'avinIta' kahA gayA hai| 2. vikRti-
pratibaddhajo dUdha, dahI Adi rasoM meM gaddha hai, una rasoM ke nahIM milane
para sUtrArtha Adi ke grahaNa karane meM manda udyamI rahatA hai, vaha 'vikRti-
pratibaddha' kahA gayA hai| 3. avyavaza mitaprAbhUta-alpa aparAdha karane para
jo aparAdhI para pracaNDa krodha karatA hai aura kSamA-yAcanA kara lene para bhI
bAra-bAra usa para krodha prakaTa karatA rahatA hai, use 'avyavazamitaprAbhRta'
kahate haiN| ye tIna prakAra ke sAdhu sUtra-vAcanA aura ubhaya-vAcanA ke ayogya
haiM, kyoMki vinaya se hI vidyA kI prApti hotI hai, avinayI ziSya ko vidyA
par3hAnA vyartha yA niSphala to jAtA hai, pratyuta kabhI-kabhI duSphala bhI detA
hai| jo dUdha-dahI Adi vikRtiyoM meM prAsakta hai, usake hRdaya meM dI gaI
vAcanA sthira nahIM raha sakatI hai ataH use bhI vAcanA denA vyartha hai| jisake
svabhAva meM ugratA hai, jarA-sA bhI aparAdha ho jAne para jo aparAdhI para
bhArI roSa prakaTa karatA hai, kSamA mAMga lene para bhI bAra-bAra doharAtA hai,
aise vyakti ko bhI vAcanA denA vyartha hotA hai| aise vyakti se loga isa janma
meM bhI sneha karanA chor3a dete haiM aura parabhava ke lie bhI vaha tIvra
vairAnubandha karatA hai, isalie ukta tInoM hI prakAra ke ziSya sUtra, artha yA
donoM kI vAcanA ke lie ayogya kahe gaye haiN| kintu jo vinaya-sampanna haiM,
dUdha, dahI Adi vigayoM ke sevana meM jinakI Asakti nahIM hai aura jo kSamAzIla
haiM, aise ziSyoM ko hI sUtra kI, usake artha kI tathA donoM kI vAcanA denA
cAhie, kyoMki unako dI gaI vAcanA zruta kA vistAra karatI hai, grahaNa karane
vAle kA ihaloka aura paraloka sudhAratI hai aura jinazAsana kI prabhAvanA karatI
hai| sUtrokta doSa vAlA bhikSu saMyama ArAdhanA ke bhI ayogya hotA hai / use
dIkSA bhI nahIM dI jA sakatI hai| dIkSA dene ke bAda ina avaguNoM ke jJAta hone
para use vAcanA ke lie upAdhyAya ke pAsa nahIM rakhanA cAhie kintu pravartaka
evaM sthavira ke netRtva meM anya adhyayana zikSAeM evaM AcAravidhi kA jJAna
karAnA caahie| aisA karane para yadi ukta yogyatA prApta ho jAe to vAcanA ke lie
upAdhyAya ke pAsa rakhA jA sakatA hai| yogya na banane para sadA agItArtha
rahatA hai aura dUsaroM ke anuzAsana meM rahate hue saMyama pAlana karatA hai|
jo gacchapramukha sUtrokta vidhi kA pAlana na karate hue yogya-ayogya ke nirNaya
kie binA sabhI ko icchita vAcanA dete haiM-upAdhyAya Adi vAcanA dene vAle kI
niyukti nahIM karate haiM athavA unake prati vinaya-pratipatti Adi ke pAlana kI
vyavasthA bhI nahIM karate haiN| isa prakAra vAcanA sambandhI sUtra-vidhAnoM kA
yathArtha pAlana nahIM karane se ve gacchapramukha nizItha u. 19 ke anusAra
prAyazcitta ke pAtra hote haiM / ye prAyazcitta isa prakAra haiM 1.
prAgamanirdiSTa krama se vAcanA na de kintu svecchAnusAra kisI bhI sUtra kI
vAcanA de yA dilvaae|

Page #157 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Dhoya Uddeshak  **[203 2. Giving or causing to be given the recitation of
the Cheda Sutras without giving the recitation of the Pracharanga Sutra / 3.
Giving the recitation of the Kalikashruta to an uninitiated or ineligible Sadhu.
4. Not paying attention to giving the recitation to worthy Sadhus at the
appropriate time. 5. Giving the recitation to those who do not abandon their
vices and do not pacify their quarrels. 6. Giving the recitation of the
Kalikashruta (Angasutra or Cheda Sutra) to someone under sixteen years of age.
7. Giving the recitation to one Sadhu of equal qualification and not to another.
8. Giving the recitation to a lax Sadhu of the Sveta-Gachchha or another
Gachchha. 9. Giving the recitation to a householder who is a Mithyatva-mati or
placing him among those who receive the recitation, then they incur the small-
four-month penance.  Nishith U. 19, Sutra 16-35  **  **Characteristics of those
who are fit and unfit for receiving education**  **12. Those who are Dus-
sannyapya (difficult to understand) are as follows: 1. Dusht, 2. M≈´·∏çha, 3.
Vyudgrahit. 13. Those who are Su-sannyapya (easy to understand) are as follows:
1. Pravuta, 2. Am≈´·∏çha, 3. Avya-udgrahit.**  **12. These three are called Dus-
sannyapya (difficult to understand), as follows: 1. Dusht - one who harbors
hatred towards the teacher who imparts the essence of the scriptures, 2. M≈´·∏çha -
one who is ignorant of virtues and vices, 3. Vyudgrahit - one who is prejudiced
and holds onto blind faith. / 13. These three are called Su-sannyapya (easy to
understand), as follows: 1. Adusht - one who does not harbor hatred towards the
teacher who imparts the essence of the scriptures, 2. Am≈´·∏çha - one who knows
virtues and vices, 3. Avya-udgrahit - one who has right faith.**  **Discussion -
1. 'Dusht' is one who harbors hatred towards the Guru, etc., who formulates the
scriptures, or who harbors hatred towards the essence that is being expounded.
2. 'M≈´·∏çha' is one who is devoid of the discernment of virtues and vices. / 3.
'Vyudgrahit' is one who is extremely opinionated and holds onto contrary
beliefs. All three types of Sadhus are Dus-sannyapya, meaning it is very
difficult to make them understand. Even if explained, they do not understand.
There is no benefit in teaching or explaining to them. Therefore, they are
completely unfit for receiving the recitation of the Sutras. But those who are
free from hatred, who are endowed with the discernment of benefit and harm, and
who are not opinionated or hold onto contrary beliefs, are fit to receive
education. / Such individuals are the ones who...**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
dhauyA uddezaka] [203 2. prAcArAMga sUtra kI vAcanA die binA chedasUtroM kI
vAcanA de yA dilavAve / 3. avinIta yA ayogya sAdhuoM ko kAlikazruta kI vAcanA
de| 4. vinayavAn yogya sAdhuoM ko yathAsamaya vAcanA dene kA dhyAna na rkhe| 5.
vigayoM kA tyAga nahIM karane vAle evaM kalaha ko upazAnta nahIM karane vAle ko
vAcanA de| 6. solaha varSa se kama umra vAle ko kAlikazruta (aMgasUtra yA
chedasUtra) kI bAcanA de| 7. samAna yogyatA vAle sAdhuoM meM se kisI ko vAcanA
de, kisI ko na de| 8. svagaccha ke yA anyagaccha ke zithilAcArI sAdhu ko vAcanA
de| 9. mithyAmata vAle gRhastha ko vAcanA de yA use vAcanA lene vAloM meM
biThAve to inako laghucaumAsI prAyazcitta AtA hai| nizItha u. 19, sUtra 16-35
zikSA-prApti ke yogyAyogya ke lakSaNa 12. tao dussannappA paNNattA, taM jahA 1.
duche, 2. mUDhe, 3. buggaahie| 13. tao susannappA paNNatA, taM jahA 1. pravuThe,
2. amUDhe, 3. aggaahie| 12. ye tIna duHsaMjJApya (durbodhya) kahe gaye haiM,
yathA1. duSTa-tatvopadeSTA ke prati dveSa rakhane vAlA, 2. mUDha-guNa aura doSoM
se anabhijJa, 3. vyudgrAhita-aMdhazraddhA vAlA durAgrahI / 13. ye tIna
susaMjJApya (subodhya) kahe gae haiM, yathA1. aduSTa-tattvopadeSTA ke prati
dveSa na rakhane vAlA, 2. amUDha-guNa aura doSoM kA jJAtA, 3. avyudgrAhita-
samyak zraddhA vAlA / vivecana-1. 'duSTa' jo zAstra kI prarUpaNA karane vAle
guru Adi se dveSa rakhe athavA yathArtha pratipAdana kiye jAne vAle tattva ke
prati dveSa rakhe, use 'duSTa' kahate haiN| 2. mUDha-guNa aura avaguNa ke viveka
se rahita vyakti ko 'mUDha' kahate haiM / 3. vyugrAhita-viparIta zraddhA vAle
atyanta kadAgrahI puruSa ko 'vyudgrAhita' kahate haiN| ye tInoM hI prakAra ke
sAdhu duHsaMjJApya haiM arthAt inako samajhAnA bahuta kaThina hai, samajhAne
para bhI ye nahIM samajhate haiM, inheM zikSA dene yA samajhAne se bhI koI
prayojana siddha nahIM hotA hai| ataH ye sUtravAcanA ke pUrNa ayogya hote haiN|
kintu jo dveSabhAva se rahita haiM, hita-ahita ke viveka se yukta haiM aura
viparIta zraddhA vAle yA kadAgrahI nahIM haiM, ve zikSA dene ke yogya hote haiM
/ aise vyaktiyoM ko hI

Page #158 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
1. The recitation of the B·πõhatkalpas≈´tra, the scripture and its meaning, should
be given. Because they easily or conveniently grasp the propounded principles.
2. If a sick Nirgrantha's (Jain ascetic) father, brother, or son supports a
falling Nirgrantha woman or wife or son, and that Nirgrantha woman gets up, then
she incurs the atonement of four-monthly AnudghƒÅtika (non-violent) penance, as
she has approved of the consequences of sexual intercourse.  3. If a sick
Nirgrantha's mother, sister, or daughter supports a falling Nirgrantha man, and
that Nirgrantha man gets up, then he incurs the atonement of four-monthly
AnudghƒÅtika penance, as he has approved of the consequences of sexual
intercourse.  4. The touch of a man's body for a SƒÅdhvƒ´ (female Jain ascetic)
and the touch of a woman's body for a SƒÅdhu (male Jain ascetic) are completely
prohibited for the protection of celibacy. Even in the case of illness, only a
SƒÅdhvƒ´ should attend to a SƒÅdhvƒ´, and a SƒÅdhu should attend to a SƒÅdhu, this is
the Jina's instruction.  5. However, if by chance, a SƒÅdhvƒ´ falls somewhere
while coming or going due to physical weakness, and seeing this, her father,
brother, or son, or any other man, lifts her up, seats her, or provides other
bodily care, and if due to this touch, sexual desire arises in the mind of the
SƒÅdhvƒ´, then she incurs the atonement of four-monthly AnudghƒÅtika penance.  6.
Similarly, if a physically weak SƒÅdhu falls somewhere, and his mother, sister,
or daughter, or any other woman, lifts him up, and if due to this touch, sexual
desire arises in the mind of the SƒÅdhu, then he incurs the atonement of four-
monthly Guru-cƒÅturmƒÅsika penance.  7. The prohibition of keeping the first
watch's (early morning) food until the fourth watch (afternoon).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
204] [bRhatkalpasUtra zruta evaM artha kI vAcanA denI caahie| kyoMki ye
pratipAdita tattva ko saralatA se yA sugamatA se grahaNa karate hai| glAna ko
maithunabhAva kA prAyazcitta 14. niggathi ca NaM gilAyamANi piyA vA bhAyA vA
putto vA palissaejjA, taM ca nigAyI sAijjejjA mehuNapaDisevaNapattA Avajjai
cAummAsiyaM parihAraTThANaM aNugdhAiyaM / 15. nigaMthaM ca gilAyamANaM mAyA vA
bhagiNI yA dhUyA vA palissaejjA, taM ca niggathe sAijjejjA mehuNapaDisevaNapatte
Avajjai cAummAsiyaM parihArahANaM aNugdhAiyaM / 14. glAna nirgranthI ke pitA,
bhrAtA yA putra giratI huI nirgranthI ko hAtha kA sahArA deM, girI huI ko
uThAveM, svataH uThane-baiThane meM asamartha ko uThAveM biThAveM, usa samaya
vaha nirgranthI maithunasevana ke pariNAmoM se puruSasparza kA anumodana kare to
vaha anudghAtika cAturmAsika prAyazcitta kI pAtra hotI hai| 15. glAna nirgrantha
kI mAtA, bahina yA beTI girate hue nirgrantha ko hAtha kA sahArA deM, gire hue
ko uThAe~, svataH baiThane-uThane meM asamartha ko uThAe~, biThAe~, usa samaya
vaha nirgrantha maithunasevana ke pariNAmoM se strIsparza kA anumodana kare to
vaha anudghAtika cAturmAsika prAyazcitta kA pAtra hotA hai| vivecana-sAdhvI ke
lie puruSa ke zarIra kA sparza aura sAdhu ke lie strI ke zarIra kA sparza
brahmacarya kI rakSA ke lie sarvathA vajita hai| bImArI Adi ke samaya bhI sAdhvI
kI sAdhvI aura sAdhu kI sAdhu hI paricaryA kareM, yahI jina-prAjJA hai| kintu
kadAcit aisA avasara prA jAya ki koI sAdhvI zarIra-bala ke kSINa hone se kahIM
para Ate yA jAte hue gira jAya aura use dekhakara usa sAdhvI kA pitA, bhAI yA
putrAdi koI bhI puruSa use uThAe, biThAe yA anya zarIra-paricaryA kare taba
usake zarIra ke sparza se yadi sAdhvI ke mana meM kAma-vAsanA jAgRta ho jAya to
usake lie cAturmAsika anudghAtika prAyazcitta kahA gayA hai| isI prakAra bImArI
Adi se kSINabala koI sAdhu kahIM gira jAya aura usakI mAtA, bahina yA putrI Adi
koI bhI strI use uThAe, taba usake sparza se yadi sAdhu ke mana meM kAma-vAsanA
jaga jAya to vaha sAdhu gurucAturmAsika prAyazcitta kA pAtra kahA gayA hai|
yahAM prAyazcitta kahane kA tAtparya yaha hai ki vaha rugNa sAdhu yA sAdhvI
sparzaparicAraNA kA anubhava kare to ve ukta prAyazcitta ke bhAgI hote haiN|
prathama prahara ke AhAra ko caturtha prahara meM rakhane kA niSedha 16. no
kappai niggaMthANa vA, niggaMthoNa vA asaNaM vA jAva sAimaM vA, paDhamAe porisIe
paDiggAhettA, pacchimaM porisi uvaainnaavette|

Page #159 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[205] It is not proper for a monk to keep food brought in the first *p‡•å‡§∞‡•Å‡§∑‡•Ä*
(hour) until the last *p‡•å‡§∞‡•Å‡§∑‡•Ä*. If the food happens to remain, he should not eat
it himself nor give it to another, but should take it to a secluded and deserted
place, and after writing on it and cleaning it, he should throw it away. If he
eats it himself or gives it to another, he incurs the penalty of *‡§â‡§¶‡•ç‡§ò‡§æ‡§§‡§ø‡§ï
‡§ö‡§æ‡§§‡•Å‡§∞‡•ç‡§Æ‡§æ‡§∏‡§ø‡§ï* (a type of severe penance).   **Explanation:** *P‡•å‡§∞‡•Å‡§∑‡•Ä* refers to
an hour. Food brought in the first hour of the day should not be kept until the
fourth hour. It should be consumed by the monks and nuns before that. If, due to
forgetfulness or any other reason, it remains, then after the time has passed,
the monks and nuns should neither eat it themselves nor feed it to others, but
should take it to a secluded, deserted place, write on it and clean it, and
dispose of it properly. If they do not do this and eat it themselves or give it
to other monks and nuns, they become liable for the *‡§≤‡§ò‡•Å-‡§ö‡§æ‡§§‡•Å‡§∞‡•ç‡§Æ‡§æ‡§∏‡§ø‡§ï* (a type of
minor penance).   The commentator has further clarified in the explanation of
this sutra that a *‡§ú‡§ø‡§®‡§ï‡§≤‡•ç‡§™‡•Ä* (a type of monk) should eat the food brought in the
same hour. Otherwise, he becomes liable for the sin of *‡§∏‡§Ç‡§ó‡•ç‡§∞‡§π‡§æ‡§¶‡§ø*
(accumulation). But the *‡§ó‡§ö‡•ç‡§õ‡§µ‡§æ‡§∏‡•Ä* (a type of monk) can consume the food brought
in the first hour until the third hour. After that, they become liable for the
penance mentioned in the sutra.   The sutra mentions all four types of food, so
monks cannot keep water, fruits, nuts, and mouth fresheners until the fourth
hour. If all four types of food are brought in the second hour, they can be kept
and consumed until the fourth hour. Medicines can also not be kept for more than
three hours. This should also be understood from the provisions of this sutra.
The fifth *‡§â‡§¶‡•ç‡§¶‡•á‡§∂‡§ï* (section) mentions the prohibition and exception for *‡§≤‡•á‡§™‡•ç‡§Ø*
(ointments).   **Prohibition of carrying food beyond two *‡§ï‡•ã‡§∏* (miles):**  [17]
It is not proper for a *‡§®‡§ø‡§ó‡•ç‡§ó‡§Ç‡§•* (Jain monk) or a *‡§®‡§ø‡§ó‡•ç‡§ó‡§Ç‡§•‡§æ* (Jain nun) to carry
food or drink beyond two *‡§ï‡•ã‡§∏*. However, if it is necessary for the sake of
*‡§Ö‡§ú‡•ã‡§Ø‡§£‡§Æ‡•á‡§∞‡§æ‡§è* (the welfare of the community), then it is permissible. If the food
happens to remain, he should not eat it himself nor give it to another, but
should take it to a secluded and deserted place, and after writing on it and
cleaning it, he should throw it away.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
[205 cauyA uddezaka se ya pAhacca uvAiNAvie siyA taM no appaNA bhujejjA, no
annesi aNuppadejjA, egante bahuphAsue theDile paDilehittA pamajjittA
paridvaveyave siyaa| taM appaNA bhujamANe, annesi vA dalamANe Avajjai
cAummAsiyaM parihAraTThANaM ugdhAiyaM / nirgranthoM aura nirgranthiyoM ko
prathama pauruSI meM grahaNa kie hue prazana yAvat svAdima ko antima pauruSI
taka apane pAsa rakhanA nahIM kalpatA hai| kadAcit vaha prAhAra raha jAya to use
svayaM na khAe aura na anya ko de kintu ekAnta aura sarvathA acitta
sthaMDilabhUmi kA pratilekhana evaM pramArjana kara usa AhAra ko paraTha denA
caahie| yadi usa AhAra ko svayaM khAe yA anya ko de to vaha udghAtika
cAturmAsika prAyazcitta kA pAtra hotA hai| vivecana -pauruSI kA artha hai prhr|
dina ke prathama prahara meM lAyA gayA AhAra caturtha prahara taka rakhanA yogya
nahIM hai / isake pUrva hI sAdhu aura sAdhviyoM ko use kAma meM le lenA caahie|
yadi bhUla Adi se kabhI raha jAya to kAlAtikrama ho jAne para sAdhu-sAdhvI na
svayaM use khAe~, na dUsaroM ko khilAe~, kintu kisI ekAnta, prAsuka bhUmi para
pratilekhana aura pramArjana karake yathAvidhi paraTha deN| yadi ve aisA nahIM
karate haiM aura use svayaM khAte haiM yA dUsare sAdhu-sAdhviyoM ko dete haiM to
ve laghu-cAturmAsika prAyazcitta ke bhAgI hote haiN| bhASyakAra ne isa sUtra kI
vyAkhyA meM itanA aura spaSTa kiyA hai ki jinakalpI sAdhu ko to jisa prahara meM
vaha gocarI lAve usI prahara meM use khA lenA caahie| anyathA vaha saMgrahAdi
doSa kA bhAgI hotA hai| kintu jo gacchavAsI (sthavirakalpI) sAdhu haiM, ve
prathama prahara meM lAyI gaI gocarI ko tIsare prahara taka sevana kara sakate
haiN| usake pazcAt sevana karane para ve sUtrokta prAyazcitta ke bhAgI hote
haiN| sUtra meM cAroM prakAra ke AhAra kA kathana hai, isalie bhikSu AhAra ke
sivAya pAnI, phala, meve evaM mukhavAsa bhI cauthe prahara meM nahIM rakha
sakate haiM / yadi cAroM prakAra ke AhAra dUsare prahara meM lAye gaye hoM to
unheM caturtha prahara taka rakha sakate haiM aura upayoga meM le sakate haiN|
prauSadha-bheSaja bhI tIna prahara se adhika nahIM rakha sakate haiN| aisA bhI
isa sUtra ke vidhAna se samajhanA cAhie / lepya padArthoM ke lie pAMcaveM
uddezaka meM niSedha evaM apavAda batAyA gayA hai| do kosa se Age AhAra le jAne
kA niSedha / 17. no kappai niggaMthANa vA niggaMthoNa vA asaNaM vA jAva sAimaM
vA, paraM ajoyaNamerAe uvaainnaavette| se ya Ahacca uvAiNAlie siyA, taM no
appaNA bhujejjA, no agnesi aNuppadejjA, egante bahuphAsue thaMDile paDilehittA
pamajjittA pariDhuveyadhve siyaa|

Page #160 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 206] [Brihatkalpa Sutra] It is not proper for a Nirgrantha or Nirgranthi to
keep food beyond the limit of half a yojana, even if it is tasty. / 17. If, by
chance, that food remains, then they should not eat it themselves nor give it to
others, but should write and clean a secluded and completely unmindful place and
dispose of that food properly. If they eat that food themselves or give it to
other Nirgranthas or Nirgranthis, then they incur the Udghatik Chaturmasik
Pratikramana. Discussion - A Bhikshu can bring food from a place two kos away
from their shelter and can travel and take food, water, etc. in any direction up
to two kos. If they mistakenly take it beyond that, then it is not proper to eat
or drink it after knowing, but it is proper to dispose of it. / Food, etc. do
not become mindful or contaminated by being taken further, but it is necessary
to follow this area limit as stated in the Agamas. Two kos is four thousand
dhanus, which is approximately four miles or seven kilometers. / No food, water,
medicine, or any other edible material should be taken beyond this area. The
method of disposing of inedible food taken unintentionally is as follows: 15. If
a Niggantha, while collecting alms, receives inedible food from a householder
due to lack of knowledge, then it is proper to give it to a disciple who is
present. If there is no disciple present, then they should not eat it themselves
nor give it to others, but should write and clean a secluded and unmindful place
and dispose of it properly. 18. If a Nirgrantha, while entering a householder's
house for food, receives contaminated, unmindful food or water, then _ if there
is a disciple present there, then it is proper to give it to them or to give it
to them after giving them edible food. If there is no disciple present, then
they should not eat that inedible food themselves nor give it to others, but
should write and clean a secluded and unmindful place and dispose of it
properly. Discussion - After giving quick initiation, until the initiation for
the whole life is given, that newly initiated Sadhu is called 'Anupasthapit
Shaikshtar'.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
206] [bRhatkalpasUtra taM appaNA bhujamANe, annesi vA dalamANe, Avajjai
cAummAsiyaM parihAraTThANaM ugghAiyaM / 17. nirgranthoM aura nirgranthiyoM ko
prazana yAvat svAdima AhAra ardhayojana kI maryAdA se Age rakhanA nahIM kalpatA
hai / kadAcit vaha prAhAra raha jAya to usa AhAra ko svayaM na khAe aura na anya
ko de, kintu ekAnta aura sarvathA acitta bhUmi kA pratilekhana evaM pramArjana
kara usa AhAra ko yathAvidhi paraTha denA caahie| yadi usa AhAra ko svayaM khAe
yA anya nirgrantha-nirgranthiyoM ko de to use udghAtikacAturmAsika prAyazcitta
AtA hai| vivecana-bhikSa apane upAzraya se do kosa dUra ke kSetra se prazanAdi
lA sakatA hai evaM vihAra karake kisI bhI dizA meM do kosa taka AhAra-pAnI Adi
le jA sakatA hai| usake Age bhUla se le bhI jAe to jAnakArI hone para use khAnA
yA pInA nahIM kalpatA hai, kintu paraThanA kalpatA hai / Age le jAne para
AhArAdi sacitta yA dUSita to nahIM ho jAte haiM, kintu yaha Agamokta kSetra-sImA
hone se isakA pAlana karanA Avazyaka hai| do kosa ke cAra hajAra dhanuSa hote
haiM, jisake cAra mAila yA sAta kilomITara lagabhaga kSetra hotA hai / itane
kSetra se Age AhAra-pAnI evaM auSadha-bheSaja koI bhI khAdyasAmagrI nahIM le
jAnI caahie| anAbhoga se grahaNa kiye aneSaNIya AhAra kI vidhi 15. niggaMtheNa
ya gAhAvaikulaM piNDavAyapaDiyAe aNuppavidreNaM annayare pracitte aNesaNijje
pANabhoyaNe paDigAhie siyaa| asthi ya ittha kei sehatarAe aNuvaTThAviyae, kappai
se tassa dAuM vA aNuppadAuM vaa| natthi ya itya kei sehatarAe aNuvaTThAviyae,
taM no appaNA bhujejjA, no annesi dAvae, egante bahuphAsae paese paDilehittA
pamajjittA pariTTaveyave siyaa| 18. AhAra ke lie gRhastha ke ghara meM praviSTa
nirgrantha ke dvArA koI doSayukta acitta AhArapAnI grahaNa ho jAya to _ vaha
aAhAra yadi koI vahA~ anupasthApita ziSya ho to use denA yA eSaNIya prAhAra dene
ke bAda meM denA kalpatA hai| yadi koI anupasthApita ziSya na ho to usa
aneSaNIya AhAra ko na svayaM khAe aura na anya ko de kintu ekAnta aura acitta
pradeza kA pratilekhana aura pramArjana kara yathAvidhi paraTha denA caahie|
vivecana-itvarika dIkSA dene ke pazcAt jaba taka yAvajjIvana kI dIkSA nahIM dI
jAtA hai, taba taka usa navadIkSita sAdhu ko 'anupasthApita zaikSatara' kahA
jAtA hai|

Page #161 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Period for the Great Initiation  The period for giving the Great
Initiation after the Small Initiation and establishing the Mahavrata is seven
days at the lowest and six months at the highest. A newly initiated Sadhu who
has not been established in the Mahavrata can be given food that is not
considered suitable for consumption, but this should be done with caution. Here,
"not suitable" refers to food that is contaminated with faults related to
"Aeshna" (desire). Although a newly initiated Sadhu who has not been established
is considered a practitioner of restraint, they do not receive any specific
atonement for eating such food because their establishment is certain.
Therefore, the scriptures prescribe giving them food that is suitable for
consumption. If there is no such newly initiated Sadhu who has not been
established in the Sadhu community, then one should neither consume such
contaminated food nor give it to others, but should dispose of it in a suitable
place according to the prescribed method in the scriptures. The word "Dau" in
the scriptures refers to giving once, and the word "Anuppadaun" refers to
inviting or giving little by little multiple times.  ## The Rules for Offering
Food  The rules for offering food to those who are and are not in the "Kalpa"
(state of being) are as follows:  1. Food prepared for those who are in the
"Kalpa" can be consumed by those who are not in the "Kalpa", but not by those
who are in the "Kalpa". 2. Food prepared for those who are not in the "Kalpa"
cannot be consumed by those who are in the "Kalpa", but can be consumed by
others who are not in the "Kalpa". 3. Those who are in the "Kalpa" are called
"Kalpasthit", and those who are not in the "Kalpa" are called "Akalpasthit".  ##
Explanation  Sadhus who are in the ten types of "Kalpa", including "Achelky",
and follow the "Panchayam" form of Dharma are called "Kalpasthit", especially
the Sadhus of the first and last Tirthankaras. Sadhus of the twenty-two
intermediate Tirthankaras who are not in the ten types of "Kalpa" but are in
some "Kalpas" and follow the "Chaturyaam" form of Dharma are called
"Akalpasthit".  Food prepared by householders for "Kalpasthit" Sadhus cannot be
consumed by them, but can be consumed by "Akalpasthit" Sadhus. Similarly, food
prepared for "Akalpasthit" Sadhus can be consumed by other "Akalpasthit" Sadhus,
but not by "Kalpasthit" Sadhus.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
cauyA uddezaka] [207 choTI dIkSA ke pazcAt bar3I dIkSA dekara mahAvratoM meM
upasthApita karane kA jaghanya kAla sAta dina hai aura utkRSTa kAla chaha mAsa
hai / aise anupasthApita navadIkSita sAdhu ko asAvadhAnI se AyA humA aneSaNIya
acitta prAhAra sevana karane ke lie diyA jA sakatA hai| yahA~ aneSaNIya se eSaNA
sambandhI doSa se yukta pAhAra samajhanA caahie| yadyapi navadIkSita
anupasthApita ziSya bhI saMyamI ginA jAtA hai| tathApi punaH upasthApana karanA
nizcita hone se use usa AhAra ke khAne para alaga se koI prAyazcitta nahIM pAtA
hai| ataH paraThane yogya AhAra ko use dene kA sUtra meM vidhAna kiyA gayA hai|
yadi sAdhu-maNDalI meM aisA koI navadIkSita anupasthApita ziSya na ho to usa
doSayukta AhAra ko na svayaM khAe aura na dUsaroM ko de, kintu prAsuka acitta
sthAna para sUtroktavidhi se paraTha denA caahie| sUtra meM 'dAuM' pada hai,
usakA abhiprAya hai eka bAra denA aura 'aNuppadAuM' pada kA abhiprAya hai-
nimantraNa karanA yA aneka bAra thor3A-thor3A karake denA / auddezika AhAra ke
kalpyAkalpya kA vidhAna 19. je kaDe kappaTThiyANaM, kappai se akappaTThiyANaM no
se kappai kappaTTiyANaM / je kaDe prakappaTiyANaM no se kappai kappaTThiyANaM,
kappai se akappaTThiyANaM / kappe ThiyA kappaTThiyA, akappe ThiyA prkppttttiyaa|
19. jo AhAra kalpasthitoM ke lie banAyA gayA hai, vaha akalpasthitoM ko lenA
kalpatA hai kintu kalpasthitoM ko lenA nahIM kalpatA hai / jo AhAra
akalpasthitoM ke lie banAyA gayA hai, vaha kalpasthitoM ko nahIM kalpatA hai
kintu anya akalpasthitoM ko kalpatA hai| jo kalpa meM sthita haiM ve kalpasthita
kahe jAte haiM aura jo kalpa meM sthita nahIM haiM ve akalpasthita kahe jAte
haiN| vivecana jo sAdhu Acelakya Adi dasa prakAra ke kalpa meM sthita hote haiM
aura paMcayAma rUpa dharma kA pAlana karate haiM, aise prathama aura antima
tIrthaMkara ke sAdhuoM ko kalpasthita kahate haiM / _ jo AcelakyAdi daza prakAra
ke kalpa meM sthita nahIM haiM kintu kucha hI kalpoM meM sthita haiM aura
cAturyAma rUpa dharma kA pAlana karate haiM, aise madhyavartI bAIsa tIrthaMkaroM
ke sAdhu akalpasthita kahe jAte haiN| jo AhAra gRhasthoM ne kalpasthita sAdhuoM
ke lie banAyA hai, use ve nahIM grahaNa kara sakate haiM, kintu akalpasthita
sAdhu grahaNa kara sakate haiN| isI prakAra jo AhAra akalpasthita jina sAdhuoM
ke lie banAyA gayA hai, use akalpasthita anya sAdhu to grahaNa kara sakate haiM
kintu kalpasthita sAdhu grahaNa nahIM kara sakate haiN|

Page #162 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Ten Kalpas (Practices of the Ascetics) as described in the Brihatkalpa
Sutra, Chapter 10:  1. **Achelkalpa:**  Not possessing extravagant clothing, but
only modest clothing. Not wearing colored clothing, but only naturally colored
(white) clothing. Not possessing valuable, bright clothing, but only
inexpensive, ordinary clothing. 2. **Auddeshikakalpa:** Not consuming food or
other items that have been prepared for the purpose of another ascetic or lay
person, as such food is considered to have a "proddeshik" (purposeful) fault. 3.
**Shayatarapindakalpa:** Not consuming food or other items offered by the one
who provides a bed. 4. **Rajapidakalpa:** Not consuming food or other items
offered by a crowned king. 5. **Kritikarmakalpa:** Performing acts of respect
and humility towards those who possess great wealth. 6. **Vratakalpa:**
Observing the five great vows or the four yamas. The fourth and fifth great vows
are collectively known as "Bahiddhadan" in the four yamas. 7. **Jyeshtakalpa:**
One who has received the greater initiation earlier is considered "Jyeshta"
(senior). All ascetics are considered "Jyeshta" for the female ascetics.
Therefore, one should behave accordingly, treating them as seniors. 8.
**Pratikramanakalpa:** Performing daily, regular "Pratikraman" (self-reflection)
both in the day and night. 9. **Masakalpa:** While wandering during the Hemant
(winter) and Grishma (summer) seasons, one should not stay in any village or
town for more than one month. After staying for one month, one should not return
to that place for two months. For female ascetics, the duration is two months
instead of one. 10. **Chaturmasakalpa:** During the rainy season (Varsha ritu),
one should stay in the same village or town for four months and not wander.
After Chaturmas, one should not stay in that village and should not return there
for eight months (making it a total of twelve months after Chaturmas).  These
ten Kalpas are mandatory for the ascetics of the first and last Tirthankaras.
For the ascetics of the middle Tirthankaras, only four Kalpas are mandatory,
while the remaining six are optional.  The four mandatory Kalpas are:  1.
Shayatarapindakalpa 2. Kritikarmakalpa 3. Vratakalpa 4. Jyeshtakalpa  The six
optional Kalpas are:  1. **Achel:** Possessing clothing of any type, whether
inexpensive or expensive, colored or naturally colored, in any quantity as
desired or as available. 2. **Proddeshik:** Not consuming food or other items
prepared for oneself, but consuming food or other items prepared for any other
ascetic as desired. 3. **Rajapind:** Consuming food offered by crowned kings as
desired. 4. **Pratikraman:** Performing regular Pratikraman as desired, but
performing Pakkhi, Chaturmasik, and Sanvatsarik Pratikraman is mandatory.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
208] [bRhatkalpasUtra 10 kalpa (sAdhu ke prAcAra) isa prakAra haiM- 1.
acelakalpa-amaryAdita vastra na rakhanA, kintu maryAdita vastra rakhanA, raMgIna
vastra na rakhanA, kintu svAbhAvika raMga kA arthAt sapheda raMga kA vastra
rakhanA aura mUlyavAn camakIle vastra na rakhanA kintu alpamUlya ke sAmAnya
vastra rkhnaa| 2. auddezikakalpa- anya kisI bhI sArmika yA sAMbhogika sAdhuoM ke
uddezya se banAyA gayA AhAra Adi prauddezika doSa vAlA hotA hai / aise AhAra Adi
ko grahaNa nahIM karanA / 3. zayyAtarapiMDakalpa-zayyAdAtA kA AhArAdi grahaNa
nahIM krnaa| 4. rAjapiDakalpamUrdhAbhiSikta rAjAoM kA AhArAdi nahIM lenaa| 5.
kRtikarmakalpa-ratnAdhika ko vaMdana Adi vinaya-vyavahAra karanA / 6.
vratakalpa-pAMca mahAvratoM kA pAlana karanA athavA cAra yAma kA pAlana karanA /
cAra yAma meM cauthe aura pAMcaveM mahAvrata kA sammilita nAma "bahiddhAdANa"
hai| 7. jyeSThakalpa-jisakI bar3I dIkSA pahale haI ho vaha jyeSTha kahA jAtA hai
aura sAdhviyoM ke liye sabhI sAdhu jyeSTha hote haiM / ataH unheM jyeSTha
mAnakara vyavahAra krnaa| 8. pratikramaNakalpa-nitya niyamita rUpa se devasika
evaM rAtrika pratikramaNa krnaa| 9. mAsakalpa-hemaMta-grISma Rtu meM vicaraNa
karate hue kisI bhI prAmAdi meM eka mAsa se adhika nahIM ThaharanA tathA eka
mAsa Thaharane ke bAda vahA~ do mAsa taka puna: prAkara nahIM ThaharanA / sAdhvI
ke lie eka mAsa ke sthAna para do mAsa kA kalpa samajhanA / 10. cAturmAsakalpa-
varSARtu meM cAra mAsa taka eka hI grAmAdi meM sthita rahanA kintu vihAra nahIM
karanA / cAturmAsa ke bAda usa grAma meM nahIM rahanA evaM ATha mAsa [bAda meM
cAturmAsa kAla mA jAne se bAraha mAsa] taka punaH vahA~ Akara nahIM rhnaa| ye
dasa kalpa prathama evaM aMtima tIrthaMkara ke sAdhu-sAdhviyoM ko pAlana karanA
Avazyaka hotA hai| madhyama tIrthaMkaroM ke sAdhu-sAdhviyoM ko cAra kalpa kA
pAlana karanA Avazyaka hotA hai, zeSa chaha kalpoM kA pAlana karanA Avazyaka
nahIM hotaa| cAra Avazyaka kalpa-1. zayyAtarapiMDakalpa, 2. kRtikarmakalpa, 3.
vratakalpa, 4. jyeSThakalpa / chaha aicchika kalpa 1.acela-alpa mUlya yA
bahumUlya, raMgIna yA svAbhAvika, kisI bhI prakAra ke vastra alpa yA adhika
parimANa meM icchAnusAra yA mileM jaise hI rkhnaa| 2. prauddezika-svayaM ke
nimitta banA huyA AhArAdi nahIM lenA kintu anya kisI bhI sArmika sAdhu ke liye
bane AhArAdi icchAnusAra lenaa| 3. rAjapiMDa -mUrdhAbhiSikta rAjAoM kA AhAra
grahaNa karane meM icchAnusAra karanA / 4. pratikramaNa niyamita pratikramaNa
icchA ho to karanA kintu pakkhI cAturmAsika aura sAMvatsarika pratikramaNa
avazya krnaa|

Page #163 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Fourth Topic] 5. Masakalpa - Staying in any village or town for one month or
more as per one's desire, or returning there and staying. 6. Chaturmasakalpa -
If desired, staying in one place for four months, but after Samvatsari,
remaining in one place until Kartika Shukla Purnima. After that, one may
undertake a vihara (journey) if desired, or not undertake it if not desired.
Procedure and prohibition for going to other groups for Shrutagrahan (scripture
learning):  20. A bhikkhu who desires to stay with another group should not do
so without seeking permission from 1. the Acharya, 2. the Upadhyaya, 3. the
Pravartaka, 4. the Thera, 5. the Gani, 6. the Ganadhara, or 7. the
Ganavatsheyaka. He may stay with another group after seeking permission from the
Acharya or up to the Ganavatsheyaka. If they allow him, he may stay with another
group. If they do not allow him, he may not stay with another group.  21. A
Ganavatsheyaka who desires to stay with another group should not do so without
relinquishing his Ganavatsheyaka status. He may stay with another group after
relinquishing his Ganavatsheyaka status. He may not stay with another group
without seeking permission from the Acharya or up to the Ganavatsheyaka. He may
stay with another group after seeking permission from the Acharya or up to the
Ganavatsheyaka. If they allow him, he may stay with another group. If they do
not allow him, he may not stay with another group.  22. An Acharya or Upadhyaya
who desires to stay with another group should not do so without relinquishing
his Acharya or Upadhyaya status. He may stay with another group after
relinquishing his Acharya or Upadhyaya status. He may not stay with another
group without seeking permission from the Acharya or up to the Ganavatsheyaka.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
cauthA uddezaka] 5. mAsakalpa-kisI bhI grAmAdi meM eka mAsa yA usase adhika
icchAnusAra rahanA yA kabhI bhI vApisa vahAM Akara tthhrnaa| 6. cAturmAsakalpa-
icchA ho to cAra mAsa eka jagaha ThaharanA kintu saMvatsarI ke bAda kArtika sudI
pUnama taka eka jagaha hI sthira rahanA / usake bAda icchA ho to vihAra karanA,
icchA na ho to na krnaa| zrutagrahaNa ke liye anyagaNa meM jAne kA vidhi-niSedha
20. bhikkhU ya gaNAo avakkamma icchejjA annaM gaNaM upasaMpajjittANaM
viharittae, no se kappai aNApucchittA 1. AyariyaM vA, 2. uvajjhAyaM vA 3,
pavattayaM vA, 4. theraM vA, 5. gaNi vA 6. gaNaharaM vA, 7, gaNAvaccheiyaM vA
annaM gaNaM uvasaMpajjittANaM vihritte| kappai se prApucchittA AyariyaM vA jAva
gaNAvaccheiyaM vA annaM gaNaM uvasaMpajjittANaM vihritte| te ya se viyarejjA,
evaM se kappaDa annaM gaNaM uvasaMpajjittANaM viharittae / te ya se no
viyarejjA, evaM se no kappai annaM gaNaM uvasaMpajjittANaM viharittae / 21.
gaNAvaccheyae ya gaNAo avakkamma icchejjA annaM gaNaM uvasaMpajjittANaM
viharittaeno se kappaDa gaNAvaccheyattaM anikkhivittA annaM gaNaM
uvasaMpajjittANaM vihritte| kappai se gaNAvaccheiyattaM nikkhivittA annaM gaNaM
uvasaMpajjittANaM vihritte| no se kappai aNApucchittA AyariyaM vA jAva
gaNAvaccheiyaM vA annaM gaNaM uvasaMpajjitANaM vihritte| kappai se ApucchittA
pAyariyaM vA jAva gaNAvaccheiyaM vA annaM gaNaM upasaMpajjittANaM vihritte| te
ya se viyarejjA, evaM se kappai annaM gaNaM uvasaMpajjittANaM viharittae / te ya
se no viyarejjA, evaM se no kappai annaM gaNaM uvasaMpajjittANaM vihritte| 22.
pAyariya-uvajjhAe ya gaNAo pravakkamma icchejjA annaM gaNaM uvasaMpajjittANaM
viharittae no se kappai Ayariya-uvajjhAyattaM anikkhivittA annaM gaNaM
uvasaMpajjittANaM vihritte| kappai se Ayariya-uvajjhAyattaM nikkhivittA annaM
gaNaM upasaMpajjitANaM viharittae / no se kappai aNApucchittA AyariyaM vA jAva
gaNAvaccheiyaM vA annaM gaNaM uvasaMpajjittANaM viharittae /

Page #164 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[210] It is not permissible for a monk to join another *gana* (group) for the
purpose of *≈õrutagraha·πáa* (study of scriptures) without the permission of the
*ƒÅcƒÅrya* (spiritual leader), *upƒÅdhyƒÅya* (teacher), *prav·πõtaka* (preceptor),
*sthavira* (elder), *ga·πáƒ´* (head of a *gana*), *ga·πáadhara* (leader of a *gana*),
or *ga·πáƒÅvacchedaka* (one who divides a *gana*). However, it is permissible to
join another *gana* after seeking permission from the *ƒÅcƒÅrya* or
*ga·πáƒÅvacchedaka*. If they grant permission, it is permissible to join another
*gana*. If they do not grant permission, it is not permissible to join another
*gana*. 20. If a *ga·πáƒÅvacchedaka* wishes to join another *gana* for the purpose
of *≈õrutagraha·πáa*, it is not permissible for him to do so without relinquishing
his position. It is permissible for him to join another *gana* after
relinquishing his position. It is not permissible for him to join another *gana*
without seeking permission from the *ƒÅcƒÅrya* or *ga·πáƒÅvacchedaka*. However, it is
permissible to join another *gana* after seeking permission from the *ƒÅcƒÅrya* or
*ga·πáƒÅvacchedaka*. If they grant permission, it is permissible for him to join
another *gana*. If they do not grant permission, it is not permissible for him
to join another *gana*. 21. If an *ƒÅcƒÅrya* or *upƒÅdhyƒÅya* wishes to join another
*gana* for the purpose of *≈õrutagraha·πáa*, it is not permissible for them to do
so without relinquishing their position. It is permissible for them to join
another *gana* after relinquishing their position. It is not permissible for
them to join another *gana* without seeking permission from the *ƒÅcƒÅrya* or
*ga·πáƒÅvacchedaka*. However, it is permissible to join another *gana* after
seeking permission from the *ƒÅcƒÅrya* or *ga·πáƒÅvacchedaka*.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
210] [bahatkalpasUtra kappai se prApucchittA prAyariyaM vA jAva gaNAvaccheiyaM
vA annaM gaNaM ubasaMpajjittANaM vihritte| te ya se viyarejjA, evaM se kappai
annaM gaNaM uvasaMpajjittANaM vihritte| te ya se no viyarejjA, evaM se no kappai
annaM gaNaM uvasaMpajjittANaM vihrite| 20. yadi koI bhikSu svagaNa ko chor3akara
anyagaNa ko (zrutagrahaNa karane ke liye) svIkAra karanA cAhe to use 1. AcArya,
2. upAdhyAya, 3. pravartaka, 4. sthavira, 5. gaNI, 6. gaNadhara yA 7.
gaNAvacchedaka ko pUche binA anya gaNa ko svIkAra karanA nahIM kalpatA hai|
kintu prAcArya yAvat gaNAvacchedaka ko pUchakara anyagaNa ko svIkAra karanA
kalpatA hai / yadi ve AjJA deM to anyagaNa ko svIkAra karanA kalpatA hai| yadi
ve AjJA na deM to anyagaNa ko zruta grahaNa ke liye svIkAra karanA nahIM kalpatA
hai / 21. yadi gaNAvacchedaka svagaNa ko chor3akara zrutagrahaNa ke liye anya
gaNa ko svIkAra karanA cAhe to _ use apane pada kA tyAga kie vinA anyagaNa ko
zrutagrahaNa ke liye svIkAra karanA nahIM kalpatA hai| use apane pada ko tyAga
karake anyagaNa ko zrutagrahaNa ke liye svIkAra karanA kalpatA hai| prAcArya
yAvat gaNAvacchedaka ko pUche vinA use anyagaNa ko zrutagraNa ke liye svIkAra
karanA nahIM kalpatA hai| kintu prAcArya yAvat gaNAvacchedaka ko pUchakara
anyagaNa ko zrutagrahaNa ke liye svIkAra karanA kalpatA hai| yadi ve AjJA deM to
use anyagaNa ko zrutagrahaNa ke liye svIkAra karanA kalpatA hai| yadi ve AjJA na
deM to use anyagaNa ko zrutagrahaNa ke liye svIkAra karanA nahIM kalpatA hai /
22. prAcArya yA upAdhyAya yadi svagaNa ko chor3akara anyagaNa ko zrutagrahaNa ke
liye svIkAra karanA cAheM to unheM apane pada ko tyAga kie vinA anyagaNa ko
zrutagrahaNa ke liye svIkAra karanA nahIM kalpatA hai| apane pada ko tyAga
karake anyagaNa ko zrutagrahaNa ke liye svIkAra karanA kalpatA hai / prAcArya
yAvat gaNAvacchedaka ko pUche vinA unheM anyagaNa ko zrutagrahaNa ke liye
svIkAra karanA nahIM kalpatA hai| kintu prAcArya yAvat gaNAvacchedaka ko
pUchakara anyagaNa ko zrutagrahaNa ke liye svIkAra karanA kalpatA hai|

Page #165 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Fourfold Purpose] [211] If they give permission, it is permissible for them to
accept other ganas for the purpose of receiving the scriptures. If they do not
give permission, it is not permissible for them to accept other ganas for the
purpose of receiving the scriptures. The meaning of this sutra is that if a
sadhu wishes to accept the ordination of an acharya or upadhyaya of another gana
for a short period of time for the purpose of attaining knowledge or practicing
special austerities, it is necessary for him to obtain the permission of his own
acharya. If the acharya is not nearby, then the permission of the upadhyaya
should be obtained, in their absence the permission of the pravartaka, in their
absence the permission of the sthavira, in their absence the permission of the
gani, in their absence the permission of the ganadhara, and in their absence the
permission of the ganavacchedaka should be obtained before going to another
gana. Otherwise, he is liable to atonement. After the completion of studies,
etc., the monk returns to his own gana's acharya. Because he has not gone
forever. The provision for going forever is made in the following sutras.
Acharyas, upadhyayas, or ganavacchedakas, etc., who hold these positions, may
also go to another acharya or upadhyaya for special studies, but they can only
do so after handing over their position to another qualified monk and obtaining
their permission, ensuring that the order of the gachcha continues. They cannot
go without permission. The reasons for handing over the position and obtaining
permission are as follows: 1. Studying may take a long time. 2. Studying can
only be done if one is free from the worries of the gachcha. 3. It is necessary
to obtain permission for the sake of the order of the gachcha, for the sake of
vinaya-pratipatti, and for the success of the work. After completing their
studies, they can return to their own gachcha and resume their position. It is
important to note here that a sadhu can go to another gana alone if he has the
permission of the acharya, etc., but a sadhvi cannot go alone. Even if she has
permission, she must go to another gana with at least one other sadhvi. The same
rules apply to obtaining the permission of the acharya, etc., or following other
necessary procedures. It is important to note that it is also necessary to
obtain the permission of the pravarti. The method of going to another gana for
sambhogika-vyavahara is as follows: 23. If a monk wishes to go to another gana
for the purpose of sambhogika-vyavahara, he should be ordained in that other
gana. It is not permissible for him to be ordained in another gana for the
purpose of sambhogika-vyavahara without the permission of the acharya or
upadhyaya or ganavacchedaka.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
cauyA uddezaka] [211 yadi ve AjJA deM to unheM anyagaNa ko zrutagrahaNa ke liye
svIkAra karanA kalpatA hai / yadi ve AjJA na deM to unheM anyagaNa ko
zrutagrahaNa ke liye svIkAra karanA nahIM kalpatA hai| vivecanaisa sUtra meM
yaha vidhAna hai ki yadi koI sAdhu jJAnAdi kI prApti yA vizeSa saMyama kI
sAdhanA hetu alpakAla ke liye kisI anyagaNa ke AcArya yA upAdhyAya kI upasaMpadA
svIkAra karanA cAhe to usake lie yaha Avazyaka hai ki vaha apane prAcArya kI
svIkRti le| prAcArya samIpa meM na hoM to upAdhyAya kI, unake abhAva meM
pravartaka kI, unake abhAva meM sthavira kI, unake abhAva meM gaNI kI, unake
abhAva meM gaNadhara kI aura unake abhAva meM gaNAvacchedaka kI svIkRti lekara
ke hI anyagaNa meM jAnA cAhie / anyathA vaha prAyazcitta kA pAtra hotA hai|
adhyayana Adi kI samApti ke bAda punaH vaha bhikSu svagaccha ke prAcArya ke pAsa
prA jAtA hai| kyoMki vaha sadA ke liye nahIM gayA hai| sadA ke liye jAne kA
vidhAna Age ke sUtroM meM kiyA gayA hai| AcArya, upAdhyAya yA gaNAvacchedaka Adi
padavIdhara bhI viziSTa adhyayana hetu anya prAcArya yA upAdhyAya ke pAsa jAnA
cAheM to ve bhI jA sakate haiM kintu gaccha kI vyavasthA barAbara cala sake,
aisI vyavasthA karake anya yogya bhikSu ko apanA pada sauMpa kara aura phira
unakI prAjJA lekara ke hI jA sakate haiM kintu AjJA liye binA ve bhI nahIM jA
sakate haiN| pada sauMpane evaM prAjJA lene ke kAraNa isa prakAra haiM1.
adhyayana karane meM samaya adhika bhI laga sakatA hai| 2. gaccha kI ciMtA se
mukta hone para hI adhyayana ho sakatA hai| 3. gaccha kI vyavasthA ke liye,
vinayapratipatti ke liye evaM kArya kI saphalatA ke liye AjJA lenA Avazyaka hotA
hai| adhyayana samApta hone para punaH svagaccha meM pAkara pada grahaNa kara
sakate haiN| yahAM itanA vizeSa jJAtavya hai ki prAcAryAdi kI svIkRti milane
para sAdhu to akelA bhI vihAra kara anyagaNa meM jA sakatA hai, kintu sAdhvI
akelI nahIM jA sakatI hai| use svIkRti milane para bhI kama se kama eka anya
sAdhvI ke sAtha hI anyagaNa meM jAnA caahie| prAcArya Adi kI prAjJA lenA yA anya
Avazyaka vidhi kA pAlana karanA sAdhu ke samAna hI jAnanA cAhie / vizeSa yaha
hai ki pravartinI kI AjJA bhI lenA Avazyaka hotA hai| sAMbhogika-vyavahAra ke
lie anyagaNa meM jAne kI vidhi 23. bhikkhU ya gaNAo avakkamma icchejjA annaM
gaNaM saMbhogapaDiyAe uvasaMpajjittANaM vihritte| no se kappa ttA AyariyaM vA
jAva gaNAvacchehayaM vA annaM gaNaM saMbhogapaDiyAe upasaMpajjittANaM vihritte|

Page #166 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[212] (From the Brihatkalpasutra, if one has received the *pairiya* or the
*ganavaccheiya* or any other *gana* endowed with the *sanbhogapadya*, then one
should live accordingly. If one is not worthy of it, then one should not live
accordingly. If one receives the *dhammavinaya* in the future, then one should
live accordingly. If one does not receive the *dhammavinaya* in the future, then
one should not live accordingly. 24. If one desires to be free from the *gana*
in the *ganavaccheiya*, then one should not live accordingly without having
renounced the *gana* endowed with the *sanbhogapadya*. One should live
accordingly after having renounced the *gana* in the *ganavaccheiya*. One should
not live accordingly without having received the *pairiya* or the
*ganavaccheiya* or any other *gana* endowed with the *sanbhogapadya*. One should
live accordingly after having received the *pairiya* or the *ganavaccheiya* or
any other *gana* endowed with the *sanbhogapadya*. If one is worthy of it, then
one should live accordingly. If one is not worthy of it, then one should not
live accordingly. If one receives the *dhammavinaya* in the future, then one
should live accordingly. If one does not receive the *dhammavinaya* in the
future, then one should not live accordingly. 25. If one desires to be free from
the *gana* in the *ayariya-uvajjhaya*, then one should not live accordingly
without having renounced the *gana* endowed with the *sanbhogapadya*.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
212] (bRharakalpasUtra kappaDa se prApucchittA pAyariyaM vA jAva gaNAvaccheiyaM
vA annaM gaNaM saMbhogapaDiyAe uvasaMpajjittA NaM vihritte| te ya se viyarejjA
evaM se kappai annaM gaNaM saMbhogapaDiyAe uvasaMpajjittANaM vihritte| te ya se
no viyarejjA evaM se no kappai annaM gaNaM saMbhogapaDiyAe uvasaMpajjittANaM
viharittae / jatthuttariyaM dhammaviNayaM labhejjA evaM se kappai annaM gaNaM
saMbhogapaDiyAe uvasaMpajjittANaM vihritte| jatthuttariyaM dhammaviNayaM no
labhejjA, evaM se no kappai annaM gaNaM saMbhogapaDiyAe uvasaMpajjittAgaM
vihritte| _ 24. gaNAvaccheie ya gaNAo avakkama icchejjA annaM gaNaM
saMbhogapaDiyAe uksaMpajjittANaM viharittae / no se kappai gaNAvaccheiyattaM
anikkhivittA annaM gaNaM saMbhogapaDiyAe uvasaMpajjittA gaM vihritte| kappai se
gaNAvaccheiyattaM nikkhivittA annaM gaNaM saMbhogapaDiyAe uvasaMpajjittA NaM
vihritte| no se kappai aNApucchittA pAyariyaM vA jAva gaNAvaccheiyaM vA annaM
gaNaM saMbhogapaDiyAe uvasaMpajjittANaM vihritte| kappai se ApucchittA AyariyaM
vA jAva gaNAvaccheiyaM vA annaM gaNaM saMbhogapaDiyAe uvasaMpajjittANaM
vihritte| te ya se viyarejjA evaM se kappai annaM gaNaM saMbhogapaDiyAe
upasaMpajjittANaM viharittae / te ya se no viyarejjA evaM se no kappai annaM
gaNaM saMbhogapaDiyAe uvasaMpajjittANaM vihritte| jatyuttariyaM dhammaviNayaM
labhejjA, evaM se kappai annaM gaNaM saMbhogapaDiyAe uvasaMpajjittANaM
viharittae / jatthuttariyaM dhammaviNayaM no labhejjA evaM se no kappai annaM
gaNaM saMbhogapaDiyAe uvasaMpajjittANaM vihritte| 25. Ayariya-uvajjhAe ya gaNAo
avakamma icchejjA annaM gaNaM saMbhogapaDiyAe uvasaMpajjitANaM vihritte| no se
kappai Ayariya-uvajjhAyattaM anikkhibittA annaM gaNaM saMbhogapaDiyAe
uvasaMpajjittANaM vihrite|

Page #167 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The fourth rule states that a monk cannot engage in *sam Bhoga* with another
*gana* without first asking the *pracharaya* or *gana avchhedaka*. However, if
the *pracharaya* or *gana avchhedaka* gives permission, then the monk can engage
in *sam Bhoga* with another *gana*. If they do not give permission, then the
monk cannot engage in *sam Bhoga* with another *gana*. If the monk believes that
engaging in *sam Bhoga* with another *gana* will lead to the advancement of
*dharma*, then they can engage in *sam Bhoga* with another *gana*. However, if
the monk believes that engaging in *sam Bhoga* with another *gana* will not lead
to the advancement of *dharma*, then they cannot engage in *sam Bhoga* with
another *gana*.  The twenty-third rule states that a *gana avchhedaka* cannot
engage in *sam Bhoga* with another *gana* without first relinquishing their
position as *gana avchhedaka*. However, if the *gana avchhedaka* relinquishes
their position, then they can engage in *sam Bhoga* with another *gana*.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
cauthA uddezaka 212 kappai se prAyariya-uvajJAyattaM nikkhivittANaM annaM gaNaM
saMbhogapaDiyAe uvasaMpajjittANaM vihritte| no se kappai aNApucchittA AyariyaM
vA jAva gaNAvaccheiyaM vA annaM gaNaM saMbhogapaDiyAe uvasaMpajjittANaM
vihritte| kappai se ApucchittA AyariyaM vA jAva gaNAvaccheiyaM vA annaM gaNaM
saMbhogapaDiyAe upasaMpajjittANaM vihritte| te ya se viyarejjA, evaM se kappai
annaM gaNaM saMbhogapaDiyAe udhasaMpajjittANaM vihritte| te ya se no viyarejjA,
evaM se no kappai annaM gaNaM saMbhogapaDiyAe uvasaMpajjittANaM vihritte|
jatthuttariya dhammaviNayaM labhejjA, evaM se kappai annaM gaNaM saMbhogapaDiyAe
uvasaMpajjittANaM vihrite| jatyuttariyaM dhammaviNayaM no labhejjA, evaM se no
kappai annaM gaNaM saMbhogapaDiyAe uvasaMpajjittANaM vihritte| 23. bhikSu yadi
svagaNa se nikalakara anyagaNa ke sAtha sAmbhogika vyavahAra svIkAra karanA cAhe
to prAcArya yAvat gaNAvacchedaka ko pUche vinA anyagaNa ke sAtha sAmbhogika
vyavahAra karanA nahIM kalpatA hai| kintu prAcArya yAvat gaNAvacchedaka ko pUcha
kara anya gaNa ke sAtha sAmbhogika vyavahAra karanA kalpatA hai| yadi ve AjJA
deM to anyagaNa ke sAtha sAmbhogika vyavahAra karanA kalpatA hai| yadi ve AjJA
na deM to anyagaNa ke sAtha sAmbhogika vyavahAra karanA nahIM kalpatA hai| yadi
vahAM saMyamadharma kI unnati hotI ho to anyagaNa ke sAtha sAmbhogika vyavahAra
karanA kalpatA hai| kintu jahAM saMyamadharma kI unnati na hotI ho, vahA~
anyagaNa ke sAtha sAmbhogika vyavahAra karanA nahIM kalpatA hai| 24.
gaNAvacchedaka yadi svagaNa se nikalakara anyagaNa ke sAtha sAmbhogika vyavahAra
svIkAra karanA cAhe to gaNAvacchedaka pada kA tyAga kiye binA anyagaNa ke sAtha
sAmbhogika vyavahAra karanA nahIM kalpatA hai| kintu gaNAvacchedaka kA pada
chor3akara anyagaNa ke sAtha sAmbhogika vyavahAra karanA kalpatA hai|

Page #168 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[214] It is not permissible for a monk to engage in *samyog* (communal living)
with another *gana* (sect) without asking the *acharya* or *gana-avchhedak*
(head of the sect). However, it is permissible to engage in *samyog* with
another *gana* after asking the *acharya* or *gana-avchhedak*. If they give
permission, then it is permissible to engage in *samyog* with another *gana*. If
they do not give permission, then it is not permissible to engage in *samyog*
with another *gana*. If there is progress in the *samyama-dharma* (practice of
self-restraint) in that *gana*, then it is permissible to engage in *samyog*
with them. However, if there is no progress in the *samyama-dharma* in that
*gana*, then it is not permissible to engage in *samyog* with them. 25. If an
*acharya* or *upaadhyaya* (teacher) wishes to engage in *samyog* with another
*gana* after leaving their own *gana*, then they cannot engage in *samyog* with
another *gana* without relinquishing their position as *acharya* or
*upaadhyaya*. However, it is permissible for them to engage in *samyog* with
another *gana* after relinquishing their positions. It is not permissible for a
monk to engage in *samyog* with another *gana* without asking the *acharya* or
*gana-avchhedak*. However, it is permissible to engage in *samyog* with another
*gana* after asking the *acharya* or *gana-avchhedak*. If they give permission,
then it is permissible to engage in *samyog* with another *gana*. If they do not
give permission, then it is not permissible to engage in *samyog* with another
*gana*. If there is progress in the *samyama-dharma* in that *gana*, then it is
permissible to engage in *samyog* with them. However, if there is no progress in
the *samyama-dharma* in that *gana*, then it is not permissible to engage in
*samyog* with them. Discussion: Sitting, rising, eating, drinking, and
performing other daily duties together in a community of monks is called
*samyog*. The *Samavayanga Sutra* (Samavay 12) lists twelve types of *samyog*,
which are as follows: 1. Giving and receiving utensils such as clothes, vessels,
etc. 2. Giving and receiving the recitation of scriptures. 3. Giving and
receiving food, water, or medicine.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
214] [bRhatkalpasUtra AcArya yAvat gaNAvacchedaka ko pUche binA anyagaNa ke
sAtha sAmbhogika vyavahAra karanA nahIM kalpatA hai| kintu prAcArya yAvat
gaNAvacchedaka ko pUchakara anyagaNa ke sAtha sAmbhogika vyavahAra karanA
kalpatA hai| yadi ve AjJA deM to anyagaNa ke sAtha sAmbhogika vyavahAra karanA
kalpatA hai / yadi ve prAjJA na deM to anyagaNa ke sAtha sAmbhogika vyavahAra
karanA nahIM kalpatA hai| yadi vahA~ saMyamadharma kI unnati hotI ho to anyagaNa
ke sAtha sAmbhogika vyavahAra karanA kalpatA hai| kintu jahAM saMyama-dharma kI
unnati na hotI ho to anyagaNa ke sAtha sAmbhogika vyavahAra karanA nahIM kalpatA
hai| 25. prAcArya yA upAdhyAya yadi svagaNa se nikalakara anyagaNa ke sAtha
sAmbhogika vyavahAra karanA cAhe to- prAcArya, upAdhyAya pada kA tyAga kiye vinA
anyagaNa ke sAtha sAmbhogika vyavahAra karanA nahIM kalpatA hai| kintu unheM
apane padoM kA tyAga karake anyagaNa ke sAtha sAmbhogika vyavahAra karanA
kalpatA hai| prAcArya yAvat gaNAvacchedaka ko pUche vinA anyagaNa ke sAtha
sAmbhogika vyavahAra karanA nahIM kalpatA hai| kintu AcArya yAvat gaNAvacchedaka
ko pUchakara anyagaNa ke sAtha sAmbhogika vyavahAra karanA kalpatA hai| yadi ve
prAjJA deM to anyagaNa ke sAtha sAmbhogika vyavahAra karanA kalpatA hai| yadi ve
prAjJA na deM to anyagaNa ke sAtha sAmbhogika vyavahAra karanA nahIM kalpatA
hai| yadi vahAM saMyamadharma kI unnati hotI ho to anyagaNa ke sAtha sAmbhogika
vyavahAra karanA kalpatA hai| kintu jahAM saMyamadharma kI unnati na hotI ho to
anyagaNa ke sAtha sAmbhogika vyavahAra karanA nahIM kalpatA hai| vivecana-sAdhu
maNDalI meM eka sAtha baiThanA-uThanA, khAnA-pInA tathA anya dainika kartavyoM
kA eka sAtha pAlana karanA "saMbhoga" kahalAtA hai| samavAyAMgasUtra ke samavAya
12 meM saMbhoga ke bAraha bheda batalAye gaye haiM, ve isa prakAra haiM1.
upadhi-vastra-pAtra Adi upakaraNoM ko paraspara denaa-lenaa| 2. zruta-zAstra kI
vAcanA denaa-lenaa| 3. bhakta-pAna-paraspara AhAra-pAnI yA auSadha kA lena-dena
krnaa|

Page #169 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Fourth Uddeshak:  **[215 4. Anjali-pragraha-samyama-paryaya]**  1. Standing
with folded hands in front of senior monks or bowing with folded hands when
meeting them. 2. Giving and receiving gifts as a disciple. 3. Inviting for a
bed, robe, food, discipleship, and study. 4. **[Abhyutthana-deeksha-paryaya]**
Standing up when a senior monk arrives. 5. **[Kritika-karma]** Offering respects
with folded hands, circumambulation, bowing with folded hands, and chanting
mantras. 6. **[Vaiyaavrutya]** Providing physical service like massage, bringing
food, sewing or washing clothes, cleaning excreta, and delegating these services
to other monks. 7. **[Samavasarana]** Sitting, sleeping, and engaging in
activities in the same shelter. 8. **[Sannishedya]** Sitting on the same seat or
offering a seat. 9. **[Katha-prabandha]** Delivering discourses together in an
assembly, either sitting or standing.  These twelve types of interactions are
prescribed among monks of the same gana (group). They are called "**Sam
Bhogic**" monks.  Monks who engage in eleven of these interactions, excluding
"**Bhakta-paan**", are called "**Any-Sam Bhogic**" monks.  They are also called
"**Samanojnya**" monks because their conduct and views are similar.  These
eleven or twelve types of interactions are practiced with "**Samanojnya**"
monks. However, these twelve types of interactions are not practiced with
"**Asamanojnya**" monks, such as those who are "**Parshvastha**" (those who have
deviated from the path) or "**Svachchandaachari**" (those who act
independently).  Some interactions may be practiced with them in exceptional
cases, based on the judgment of the "**Geetarth**" (scriptural interpretation).
There is no penance for such interactions. However, if these interactions are
practiced without reason or without the guidance of "**Geetarth**", then penance
is incurred.  These interactions are not practiced with householders.  With
nuns, only six interactions are practiced through the "**Utsarga**" ritual, and
six interactions can be practiced in exceptional circumstances.  **Utsarga
Interactions** | **Exceptional Interactions** ------- | -------- Shruta (Second)
| Upadhi (First) Anjali-pragraha (Fourth) | Bhakta-paan (Third) Shiksha-daan
(Fifth) | Nimantra (Sixth) Abhyutthana (Seventh) | Vaiyaavrutya (Ninth) Kritika-
karma (Eighth) | Samavasarana (Tenth) Katha-prabandha (Twelfth) | Sannishedya
(Eleventh)  If these twelve interactions are practiced with a householder, then
the penance of "**Guru Chaumaasi**" is incurred.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
cauthA uddezaka] [215 4. aJjalipragraha-saMyamaparyAya meM jyeSTha sAdhunoM ke
pAsa hAtha jor3akara khar3e rahanA yA unake sAmane milane para mastaka jhukA
kara hAtha jor3anA / 5. dAna-ziSya kA denaa-lenaa| 6. nimantraNazayyA, upadhi,
AhAra, ziSya evaM svAdhyAya Adi ke lie nimaMtraNa denA / 7. abhyutthAna-
dIkSAparyAya meM kisI jyeSTha sAdhu ke Ane para khar3e honA / 8. kRtikarma-
aMjaligrahaNa, Avartana, mastaka jhukA kara hAtha jor3anA evaM sUtroccAraNa kara
vidhipUrvaka vandana krnaa| 9. vaiyAvRtya-aMga-mardana Adi zArIrika sevA karanA,
AhAra Adi lAkara ke denA, vastrAdi sInA yA dhonA, mala-mUtra Adi paraThanA evaM
ye sevAkArya anya bhikSu se krvaanaa| 10. samavasaraNa-eka hI upAzraya meM
baiThanA sonA rahanA prAdi pravRtiyAM krnaa| 11. sanniSadyA-eka Asana para
baiThanA athavA baiThane ke lie prAsana denaa| 12. kathA-prabandha-sabhA meM eka
sAtha baiThakara yA khar3e rahakara pravacana denaa| eka gaNa ke yA aneka gaNoM
ke sAdhuaoM meM ye bAraha hI prakAra ke paraspara vyavahAra vihita hote haiM, ve
paraspara "sAmbhogika" sAdhu kahe jAte haiN| jina sAdhuoM meM "bhakta-pAna" ke
atirikta gyAraha vyavahAra hote haiM, ve paraspara anya-sAmbhogika sAdhu kahe
jAte haiN| prAcAra-vicAra lagabhaga samAna hone se ve samanojJa sAdhu bhI kahe
jAte haiM / _ samanojJa sAdhuoM ke sAtha hI ye gyAraha yA bAraha prakAra ke
vyavahAra kiye jAte haiM kintu asamanojJa arthAt pArzvasthAdi evaM
svacchaMdAcArI ke sAtha ye bAraha prakAra ke vyavahAra nahIM kiye jAte haiM /
lokavyavahAra yA apavAda rUpa meM gItArtha ke nirNaya se unake sAtha kucha
vyavahAra kiye jA sakate haiN| unakA koI prAyazcitta nahIM hai| akAraNa yA
gItArtha ke abhAva meM ye vyavahAra karane para prAyazcitta AtA hai| gRhastha ke
sAtha ye sabhI vyavahAra nahIM kiye jAte haiN| sAdhviyoM ke sAtha utsargavidhi
se chaha vyavahAra hI hote haiM evaM chaha vyavahAra ApavAdika sthiti meM kiye
jA sakate haiN| utsarga vyavahAra apavAda vyavahAra 1. zruta (dUsarA) 1. upadhi
(pahalA) 2. aMjalipragraha (cauthA) 2. bhakta-pAna (tIsarA) 3. ziSyadAna
(pAMcavAM) 3. nimantraNa (chaThA) 4. abhyutthAna (sAtavAM) 4. vaiyAvRtya
(navamA) 5. kRtikarma (AThavAM) 5. samavasaraNa (dasavAM) 6. kathA-prabandha
(bArahavAM) 6. sanniSadyA (gyArahavAM) ye bAraha vyavahAra gRhastha ke sAtha
karane para guru caumAsI prAyazcita AtA hai|

Page #170 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[216] [Brihatkalpa Sutra] If one behaves improperly with a Svechchandaachari, a
Guruchaumaasi Pratikraman is incurred, and if one behaves improperly with a
Parsvastadi, a Laghuchaumaasi or Laghumaasik Pratikraman is incurred. If one
behaves improperly with Sadhvis without reason, a Laghuchaumaasi Pratikraman is
incurred, and if one does not follow the instructions of the Geetaarth, a
Guruchaumaasi Pratikraman is incurred. / _ If one behaves with Bhakt-paan with
other Sambhaugik Samanojn Bhikshus, a Laghuchaumaasi Pratikraman is incurred.
The Bhashyakar has also said that in a Lok-vyavahar or an Apavadik situation,
even if one does not perform the necessary actions (Anjali-pragrah, etc.) with
the Parsvastadi, even then one is a participant in the Pratikraman, and by doing
so, there is a lack of devotion and disgrace to the Jinshasan. / In the previous
Sutraatrik, there is a statement about going to another Gachch for a short-term
Upasampada for the purpose of studying, and in these Sutras, there is a
description of going to another Gachch for the purpose of staying there
permanently, accepting a Mandalik Aahar, etc., and Sambhog. Obtaining permission
and giving the degree to another eligible Bhikshu is necessary in these Sutras
as well, just as it was in the previous Sutras. In these Sutras, there is one
more option even after obtaining Prajnaaprapti, as follows: "Jatthuttarayam
Dhamma-vinayam LabhejjƒÅ Evam Se Kampi / Sutra-pathit" This sentence indicates
that when a Sadhu sees that while staying in this Sangha, while eating and
drinking in a Mandali, and while performing other Kritikarmas, there is an
increase in Sanklesh instead of Bhava-vishuddhi, and due to this, his knowledge,
Darshan, Charitra, etc., are not being properly cultivated, then he can go to
another Gan, where there is more possibility of Dharma-labh, to protect himself
from Sanklesh and to increase his knowledge, Charitra, etc., after obtaining
permission from the one under whose Nishra he is staying. However, it is not
permissible to go to a Gachch where there is a loss of restraint from the
current state, and if one goes, the Pratikraman mentioned in Nishita U. 16 is
incurred. Therefore, one should only resolve to go to a Gachch where there is an
improvement in the Dharma of restraint. / The method and prohibition of going to
another Gan to give a lecture to the Acharya, etc., is as follows: 26. Bhikkhu
Ya Icchajja Annam Payariy-Uvajjaayam Uddisavettae, No Se Kappad Anaapuchchita
Aayariyam Va Jaav Ganavchcheiyam Va Annam Payariy-Uvajjaayam Uddisavettae. Kappi
Se Aapuchchita Prayariyam Va Jaav Ganavchcheiyam Va Annam Aayariy-Uvajjaayam
Uddisavettae. Te Ya Se ViyarejjƒÅ Evam Se Kappi Annam Aayariy-Uvajjaayam
Uddisavettae. Te Ya Se No ViyarejjƒÅ Evam Se No Kappi Annam Aayariy-UvajshƒÅyam
Uddisavettae / No Se Kappi Teshi Karanam Adivetta Annam Aayariy-Uvajjaayam
Uhissavettae. Kappi Se Teshi Karanam Diveta Annam Aayariy-Uvajjaayam
Udisavettae.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
216] [bRhatkalpasUtra svacchaMdAcArI ke sAtha ye vyavahAra karane para
gurucaumAsI aura pArzvasthAdi ke sAtha karane para laghucaumAsI yA laghumAsika
prAyazcitta AtA hai| sAdhviyoM ke sAtha akAraNa ApavAdika vyavahAra karane para
laghucaumAsI aura gItArtha kI AjJA ke vinA karane para gurucaumAsI prAyazcitta
aAtA hai / _ anya sAmbhaugika samanojJa bhikSuoM ke sAtha bhakta-pAna kA
vyavahAra karane se laghucaumAsI prAyazcitta AtA hai| bhASyakAra ne yaha bhI
kahA hai ki loka-vyavahAra yA ApavAdika sthiti meM gItArtha kI nizrA se bhI jo
Avazyaka vyavahAra (aMjalipragraha Adi) pAvasthAdi ke sAtha nahIM karatA hai,
vaha bhI prAyazcitta kA bhAgI hotA hai evaM aisA karane se jinazAsana kI abhakti
aura apayaza hotA hai / pUrva sUtrAtrika meM adhyayana karane ke liye alpakAlIna
upasaMpadA hetu anya gaccha meM jAne kA kathana hai aura ina sUtroM meM sadA ke
liye eka mAMDalika AhAra Adi sambhoga svIkAra karake anya gaccha meM rahane ke
liye jAne kA varNana hai| AjJA prApta karanA aura anya yogya bhikSa ko padavI
denA yaha pUrva sUtroM ke samAna hI inameM bhI Avazyaka hai| ina sUtroM meM
prAjJAprApti ke bAda bhI eka vikalpa adhika rakhA gayA haiyathA"jatthuttariyaM
dhamma-viNayaM labhejjA evaM se kampai / sUtra-paThita isa vAkya se yaha sUcita
kiyA gayA hai ki jaba koI sAdhu yaha dekhe ki isa saMgha meM rahate hue, eka
maNDalI meM khAna-pAna evaM anya kRtikarma karate hue bhAva-vizuddhi ke sthAna
para saMklezavRddhi ho rahI hai aura isa kAraNa se mere jJAna darzana cAritra
Adi kI samucita sAdhanA nahIM ho rahI hai, taba vaha apane ko saMkleza se bacAne
ke lie tathA jJAna-cAritrAdi kI vRddhi ke lie anyagaNa meM, jahAM para ki adhika
dharmalAbha kI sambhAvanA ho, jAne kI icchA kare to vaha jisakI nizrA meM raha
rahA hai, usako anujJA lekara jA sakatA hai| kintu jisa gaccha meM jAne se
vartamAna avasthA se saMyama kI hAni ho, vaise gaccha meM jAne kI jinAjJA nahIM
hai evaM jAne para-nizItha u. 16 meM kathita prAyazcitta AtA hai| ataH
saMyamadharma kI unnati ho vaise gaccha meM jAne kA hI saMkalpa karanA cAhie /
AcArya Adi ko vAcanA dene ke liye anyagaNa meM jAne kA vidhi-niSedha 26. bhikkhU
ya icchajjA annaM pAyariya-uvajjhAyaM uddisAvettae, no se kappaDa aNApucchittA
AyariyaM vA jAva gaNAvaccheiyaM vA annaM pAyariya-uvajjhAyaM uddisaavette|
kappai se ApucchittA prAyariyaM vAjAva gaNAvaccheiyaM vA annaMAyariya-uvajjhAyaM
uddisaavette| te ya se viyarejjA evaM se kappai annaM Ayariya-uvajjhAyaM
uddisaavette| te ya se no viyarejjA evaM se no kappai anna Ayariya-uvajzAyaM
uddisAvettae / no se kappai tesi kAraNaM adIvettA annaM Ayariya-uvajjhAyaM
uhisaavette| kappai se tesi kAraNaM dIvettA anna Ayariya-uvajjhAyaM udisaavette|

Page #171 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Fourth Precept:  **217.27.** If a **Gana-avchhedaka** wishes to give a
discourse to another **Aarya** or **Upadhyaya**, it is not permissible for him
to do so without informing his own **Aarya** or **Gana-avchhedaka**. However, it
is permissible for him to give a discourse to another **Aarya** or **Upadhyaya**
after informing his own **Aarya** or **Gana-avchhedaka**. It is not permissible
for him to give a discourse to another **Aarya** or **Gana-avchhedaka** without
asking permission. It is permissible for him to give a discourse to another
**Aarya** or **Gana-avchhedaka** after asking permission. If they give
permission, then it is permissible for him to give a discourse to another
**Aarya** or **Upadhyaya**. If they do not give permission, then it is not
permissible for him to give a discourse to another **Aarya** or **Upadhyaya**.
It is not permissible for him to give a discourse to another **Aarya** or
**Upadhyaya** without explaining the reason. It is permissible for him to give a
discourse to another **Aarya** or **Upadhyaya** after explaining the reason.
**28.** If an **Aarya-Upadhyaya** wishes to give a discourse to another
**Aarya** or **Upadhyaya**, it is not permissible for him to do so without
informing his own **Aarya-Upadhyaya**. However, it is permissible for him to
give a discourse to another **Aarya** or **Upadhyaya** after informing his own
**Aarya-Upadhyaya**. It is not permissible for him to give a discourse to
another **Aarya** or **Gana-avchhedaka** without asking permission. It is
permissible for him to give a discourse to another **Aarya** or **Gana-
avchhedaka** after asking permission. If they give permission, then it is
permissible for him to give a discourse to another **Aarya** or **Upadhyaya**.
If they do not give permission, then it is not permissible for him to give a
discourse to another **Aarya** or **Upadhyaya**. It is not permissible for him
to give a discourse to another **Aarya** or **Upadhyaya** without explaining the
reason. It is permissible for him to give a discourse to another **Aarya** or
**Upadhyaya** after explaining the reason.  **26.** If a **Bhikshu** wishes to
give a discourse to another **Aarya** or **Upadhyaya** of a different **Gana**,
it is not permissible for him to do so without informing his own **Aarya** or
**Gana-avchhedaka**. However, it is permissible for him to give a discourse to
another **Aarya** or **Upadhyaya** after informing his own **Aarya** or **Gana-
avchhedaka**. If they give permission, then it is permissible for him to give a
discourse to another **Aarya** or **Upadhyaya**. If they do not give permission,
then it is not permissible for him to give a discourse to another **Aarya** or
**Upadhyaya**. It is not permissible for him to give a discourse to another
**Aarya** or **Upadhyaya** without explaining the reason.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
cauthA uddezaka] [217 27. gaNAvaccheie ya icchejjA annaM Ayariya-uvamAyaM
uddisAvettae, no se kappai gaNAvaccheiyattaM anikkhivittA annaM Ayariya-
uvajjhAyaM uddisAvettae / kappai se gaNAvaccheiyattaM nikkhivittA annaM Ayariya-
uvajjhAyaM uddisaavette| no se kappai aNApucchittA AyariyaM vA jAva
gaNAvaccheiyaM vA anna Ayariya-uvajjhAyaM uddisaavette| kappai se prApucchittA
AyariyaM vA jAva gaNAvaccheiyaM vA annaM pAyariya-uvajjhAyaM uddisaavette| te ya
se viyarejjA, evaM se kappai annaM Ayariya-uvamAyaM uddisAvettae / te ya se no
viyarejjA, evaM se no kappai annaM Ayariya-uvajjhAyaM uddisaavette| no se kappai
tesi kAraNaM adIvettA anna Ayariya-uvajzAyaM uddisaavette| kappar3a se tesi
kAraNaM dIvettA annaM Ayariya-uvajjhAyaM uddisAvettae / 28. Ayariya-uvajmAe ya
icchejjA annaM Ayariya-uvajjhAyaM udisAvettae, no se kappar3a Ayariya-
uvajhAyattaM anikkhavittA annaM Ayariya-uvajjhAyaM uddisaavette| kappai se
Ayariya-uvajzAyattaM nikkhivittA annaM Ayariya-uvajhAyaM uddisAvettae / no se
kappai aNApucchittA AyariyaM vA jAva gaNAvaccheiyaM vA annaM Ayariya-uvajjhAyaM
uddisaavette| kappai se ApucchittA AyariyaM vA jAva gaNAvaccheiyaM vAannaM
Ayariya-uvajjhAyaM uddisaavette| te ya se viyarejjA, evaM se kappai Ayariya-
uvajjhAyaM uddisaavette| te ya se viyarejjA, evaM se no kappai annaM Ayariya-
uvajjhAyaM uddisAvettae / no se kappai tesi kAraNaM adIvettA annaM Ayariya-
uvajjhAyaM uddisaavette| kappai se tesi kAraNaM dIvettA annaM Ayariya-uvajjhAyaM
uddisAvettae / 26. bhikSu yadi anya gaNa ke AcArya yA upAdhyAya ko vAcanA dene
ke lie (yA unakA netRtva karane ke lie) jAnA cAhe to apane prAcArya yAvat
gaNAvacchedaka ko pUche binA anya prAcArya yA upAdhyAya ko vAcanA dene ke lie
jAnA nahIM kalpatA hai| kintu apane prAcArya yAvat gaNAvacchedaka ko pUchakara
anya prAcArya yA upAdhyAya ko vAcanA dene ke liye jAnA kalpatA hai / yadi ve
prAjJA deM to anya prAcArya yA upAdhyAya ko vAcanA dene ke liye jAnA kalpatA
hai| yadi ve AjJA na deM to anya prAcArya yA upAdhyAya ko vAcanA dene ke liye
jAnA nahIM kalpatA hai| - unheM kAraNa batAye binA anya AcArya yA upAdhyAya ko
vAcanA dene ke liye jAnA nahIM kalpatA hai|

Page #172 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[218] [Brihatkalpasutra] However, it is permissible to go to another Acharya or
Upadhyaya to give a reading only after giving them a reason. / 27. If a
Ganavacchedaka wishes to go to another Acharya or Upadhyaya to give a reading
(or to lead them), it is not permissible for them to go to another Acharya or
Upadhyaya to give a reading without relinquishing their position. However, it is
permissible to go to another Acharya or Upadhyaya to give a reading after
relinquishing their position. / It is not permissible to go to another Acharya
or Upadhyaya to give a reading without asking their Acharya or Ganavacchedaka. /
However, it is permissible to go to another Acharya or Upadhyaya to give a
reading after asking their Acharya or Ganavacchedaka. If they give permission,
it is permissible to go to another Acharya or Upadhyaya to give a reading. If
they do not give permission, it is not permissible to go to another Acharya or
Upadhyaya to give a reading. It is not permissible to go to another Acharya or
Upadhyaya to give a reading without giving them a reason. However, it is
permissible to go to another Acharya or Upadhyaya to give a reading only after
giving them a reason. 28. If an Acharya or Upadhyaya wishes to go to another
Acharya or Upadhyaya to give a reading (or to lead them), it is not permissible
for them to go to another Acharya or Upadhyaya to give a reading without
relinquishing their position. However, it is permissible to go to another
Acharya or Upadhyaya to give a reading after relinquishing their position. It is
not permissible to go to another Acharya or Upadhyaya to give a reading without
asking their Acharya or Ganavacchedaka. / However, it is permissible to go to
another Acharya or Upadhyaya to give a reading after asking their Acharya or
Ganavacchedaka. If they give permission, it is permissible to go to another
Acharya or Upadhyaya to give a reading. If they do not give permission, it is
not permissible to go to another Acharya or Upadhyaya to give a reading.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
218] [bRhatkalpasUtra kintu unheM kAraNa batAkara hI anya prAcArya yA upAdhyAya
ko vAcanA dene ke liye jAnA kalpatA hai / 27. gaNAvacchedaka yadi anyagaNa ke
prAcArya yA upAdhyAya ko vAcanA dene ke liye (yA unakA netRtva karane ke liye)
jAnA cAhe to use apanA pada chor3e binA anya prAcArya yA upAdhyAya ko vAcanA
dene ke liye jAnA nahIM kalpatA hai| kintu apanA pada chor3akara anya AcArya yA
upAdhyAya ko vAcanA dene ke liye jAnA kalpatA hai / apane AcArya yAvat
gaNAvacchedaka ko pUche binA anya prAcArya yA upAdhyAya ko vAcanA dene ke liye
jAnA nahIM kalpatA hai / kintu apane prAcArya yAvat gaNAvacchedaka ko pUcha kara
anya AcArya yA upAdhyAya ko vAcanA dene ke liye jAnA kalpatA hai| yadi ve AjJA
deM to anya AcArya yA upAdhyAya ko vAcanA dene ke liye jAnA kalpatA hai| yadi ve
AjJA na deM to anya prAcArya yA upAdhyAya ko vAcanA dene ke liye jAnA nahIM
kalpatA hai| unheM kAraNa batAe binA anya prAcArya yA upAdhyAya ko vAcanA dene
ke liye jAnA nahIM kalpatA hai| kintu unheM kAraNa batAkara hI anya prAcArya yA
upAdhyAya ko vAcanA dene ke liye jAnA kalpatA hai| 28. prAcArya yA upAdhyAya
anya prAcArya yA upAdhyAya ko vAcanA dene ke liye (yA unakA netRtva karane ke
liye) jAnA cAheM to unheM apanA pada chor3e binA anya prAcArya yA upAdhyAya ko
vAcanA dene ke liye jAnA nahIM kalpatA hai| kintu apanA pada chor3akara anya
AcArya yA upAdhyAya ko vAcanA dene ke liye jAnA kalpatA hai| unheM apane
prAcArya yAvat gaNAvacchedaka ko pUche binA anya prAcArya yA upAdhyAya ko vAcanA
dene ke liye jAnA nahIM kalpatA hai / kintu AcArya yAvat gaNAvacchedaka ko
pUchakara anya prAcArya yA upAdhyAya ko vAcanA dene ke liye jAnA kalpatA hai|
yadi ve AjJA deM to anya prAcArya yA upAdhyAya ko vAcanA dene ke liye jAnA
kalpatA hai| yadi ve AjJA na deM to anya prAcArya yA upAdhyAya ko vAcanA dene ke
liye jAnA nahIM kalpatA hai|

Page #173 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Fourth Objective] [219 It is not proper for a monk to go to another Acharya
or Upadhyaya to give them a reading without a reason. But it is proper for them
to go to another Acharya or Upadhyaya to give them a reading only after stating
the reason. Discussion - The first Sutra-trika mentions the method of going to
another gana for a certain period of time for study. The second Sutra-trika
mentions the method of going to another gana for the sake of Samyama-Samadhi and
Chitta-Samadhi. The third Sutra-trika mentions going to another Acharya or
Upadhyaya to have them accept one's Upasampada by using the 'Uddisavitt' action.
/  In this third Sutra-trika, the option 'Jatyuttarayam Dhammavinayam Labhejj'
is not present, so it does not mention going to another gana permanently. The
mention of going permanently is in the second trika, and the mention of
accepting Upasampada for study is in the first trika. Therefore, it is
appropriate to interpret this third trika as meaning going to another gana for
the purpose of teaching (etc.).  /  The last option in the Sutra is 'Kappati
Tesim Karanam Diveta'. This means that it is necessary to explain the specific
reason for going to teach.  /  Because if there is no specific reason, then it
is not practically appropriate for the teacher to go, but it is appropriate for
the student to come. Some reasons for going to teach are: 1. A newly appointed
Acharya of a Gachch needs to study the scriptures and it is not possible for
them to leave the burden of the Gachch to someone else. 2. A newly appointed
Acharya of a Gachch is someone's son, grandson, daughter, etc., and it is not
possible for them to come for study.  /  3. An Acharya of a Gachch is in a
difficult or confusing situation and they are a former benefactor of a monk. In
such situations, it may be necessary for someone to go. It is appropriate to
understand that this third Sutra-trika is stated with this intention. The method
of disposing of the body of a fallen monk 29. A monk or Rao or Viyale or Ahachch
should dispose of the body, and the monk who wishes to dispose of the body
should do so in a secluded place, alone or with many people.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
cauthA uddezaka] [219 unheM kAraNa batAe binA anya AcArya yA upAdhyAya ko vAcanA
dene ke liye jAnA nahIM kalpatA hai| kintu unheM kAraNa batAkara hI anya
prAcArya yA upAdhyAya ko vAcanA dene ke liye jAnA kalpatA hai| vivecana-prathama
sUtratrika meM adhyayana hetu kucha samaya ke liye anya gaNa meM jAne kI vidhi
kahI hai| dvitIya sUtratrika meM saMyama-samAdhi evaM citta-samAdhi hetu
saMbhoga ke liye anya gaNa meM jAne kI vidhi kahI hai| tRtIya sUtratrika meM
'uddisAvittae' kriyA kA prayoga karake anya prAcArya, upAdhyAya ko apanI
upasaMpadA dhAraNa karavAne ke liye jAne kA kathana kiyA gayA hai / isa tRtIya
sUtratrika meM 'jatyuttariyaM dhammaviNayaM labhejjA' yaha vikalpa na hone se
anyagaNa meM sadA ke lie sarvathA jAne kA kathana nahIM hai| sadA ke lie jAne kA
kathana dUsare trika meM kiyA gayA hai aura adhyayana karane ke lie upasaMpadA
dhAraNa karanA prathama trika meM kahA gayA hai| ata: isa tRtIya trika meM
adhyayana karavAne (Adi) ke liye anya gaNa meM jAne kA artha karanA ho
prasaMgasaMgata hai / sUtra meM aMtima vikalpa hai 'kappai tesi kAraNaM dIvettA'
isakA tAtparya yaha hai ki adhyayana karAne ke liye jAne meM aisA kyA viziSTa
kAraNa hai, isakA spaSTIkaraNa karanA Avazyaka hotA hai / kyoMki viziSTa
kAraNayukta paristhiti na ho to adhyayana karAne vAle kA jAnA vyAvahArika rUpa
se zobhAjanaka nahIM hai kintu adhyayana karane vAle kA pAnA hI ucita hotA hai|
adhyayana karAne hetu jAne ke kucha kAraNa 1. kisI gaccha ke naye banAye gaye
prAcArya ko zruta-adhyayana karanA Avazyaka ho evaM gaccha kA bhAra anya ko
sauMpa kara pAnA saMbhava na ho| 2. kisI gaccha kA nayA banAyA gayA prAcArya
kisI kA putra-pautra-duhitra Adi ho evaM usake adhyayanArtha Ane kI paristhiti
na ho / 3. kisI gaccha kA prAcArya kisI vikaTa yA ulajhanabharI paristhiti meM
ho aura vaha kisI sAdhu kA pUrva upakArI ho| ityAdi paristhitiyoM meM kisI kA
jAnA Avazyaka ho sakatA hai| isI prAzaya se isa tRtIya sUtratrika kA kathana
kiyA gayA hai, aisA samajhanA ucita hai| phAla-gata bhikSu ke zarIra ko
paraThane kI vidhi 29. bhikkhU yA rAo vA viyAle vA Ahacca vIsubhejjA, taM ca
sarIragaM kei veyAvaccakare bhikkhU icchejjA egate bahuphAsue paese pridvvette|

Page #174 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[220] [Brihatkalpa Sutra] If a monk dies at night or during the day, and a sadhu
who is a vaidya wants to perform the parithana (burial) of the deceased monk in
a secluded, completely a-chitta (non-material) place, then if there is a
suitable a-chitta instrument (i.e., a carrying pole) belonging to a householder,
he should take it (saying that he will return it) and use it to carry the
deceased monk's body to a secluded, completely a-chitta place, and then leave
the carrying pole there. Discussion: If a monk dies while residing in a place
where he has been observing a masakalp (monthly observance) or other such
observance, it is not appropriate to keep the body in the residence or the
upashraya (monastery) for a long time. As the bhashyakar (commentator) says, the
body should be taken out as soon as possible after death. Therefore, if the
vaidya sadhu wishes, they can take the body to a suitable place for parithana
even at night. The sutra prescribes requesting a carrying instrument for the
parithana. Therefore, whatever is available in the monastery or upashraya, such
as a carrying pole, bamboo, or a stretcher, can be used and returned later. The
body of a monk who has died a padupopagaman santhara (death due to natural
causes) is not cremated. However, cremation is an option in the case of a
bhaktapratyakhyan santhara (death due to rejection of food). If there is no one
to perform the cremation, the sadhu should perform it according to the method
described in this sutra. This is because monks cannot even conceive of the
intention to perform cremation. However, if there are shravaks (lay followers)
or other devout householders, they can perform some worldly actions, and the
monks remain detached from them. The cremation of Tirthankaras and other monks
who have attained kaladharma (liberation) is described in the Agamas. Therefore,
there are two options for the final rites of a monk who has died a
bhaktapratyakhyan death: 1. parithana by a sadhu, or 2. cremation by a
householder. The bhashyakar has also described the directions suitable for
parithana of the body. The direction south-west (nairitya kona) from the
residence of the sadhus is considered auspicious for parithana. Performing
parithana in this direction leads to samadhi (concentration) in the sangha
(community). If a suitable place is not available in this direction, the body
should be buried in the south direction. If a suitable place is not available in
the south direction, the body should be buried in the south-east direction. All
other directions are considered inauspicious for discarding the body. Performing
parithana in those directions is said to lead to conflict, division, and disease
in the sangha.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
220] [bRhatkalpasUtra asthi ya itya kei sAgAriyasaMtie uvagaraNajAe acitte
pariharaNArihe kampai se sAgArikaDaM gahAya taM sarIragaM egate bahuphAsue paese
pariTThavettA tattheva uvanikkhiviyavve siyaa| 29. yadi kisI bhikSu kA rAtri meM
yA vikAla meM nidhana ho jAya to usa mRta bhikSu ke zarIra ko koI vaiyAvRtya
karane vAlA sAdhu ekAnta meM sarvathA acitta pradeza para paraThanA cAhe taba
yadi vahAM upayoga meM pAne yogya gRhastha kA acitta upakaraNa arthAt vahana
yogya kASTha ho to use prAtihArika (punaH lauTAne kA kahakara) grahaNa kare aura
usase mRta bhikSu ke zarIra ko ekAnta meM sarvathA acitta pradeza para paraTha
kara usa vahana-kASTha ko yathAsthAna rakha denA caahie| vivecana-bhikSu jahAM
para mAsakalpa Adi rahA ho vahAM usa nivAsakAla meM yadi bhaktapratyAkhyAnI
sAdhu kA, rugNa sAdhu kA athavA sAMpa Adi ke kATane se kisI anya sAdhu kA maraNa
ho jAya to usa zava ko vasati yA upAzraya meM adhika samaya rakhanA ucita nahIM
hai, kyoMki bhASyakAra kahate haiM ki jisa samaya maraNa ho usI samaya usa zava
ko bAhara kara denA cAhie / ataH vahAM vayAvRtya karane vAle sAdhu yadi cAheM to
ve rAtri meM bhI paraThane yogya bhUmi para le jAkara paraTha sakate haiM /
paraThane ke liye prAtihArika upakaraNa kI yAcanA karane kA sUtra meM vidhAna
kiyA gayA hai / ata: usa nAmAdi meM yA upAzraya meM vahanakASTha yA bAMsa athavA
Dolo athavA Adi jo bhI mila jAe usakA upayoga kiyA jA sakatA hai evaM puna: usa
upakaraNa ko lauTAyA jA sakatA hai| pAdapopagamana saMthArA vAle ke zarIra kA
dAhasaMskAra to kiyA hI nahIM jAtA hai| kintu bhaktapratyAkhyAna saMthAre meM
dAhasaMskAra kA vikalpa bhI hai| jahAM koI bhI dAhasaMskAra karane vAle na hoM
vahAM sAdhu dvArA isa sUtrokta vidhi ke anusAra kiyA jAtA hai, aisA samajhanA
cAhie / kyoMki bhikSu to dAhasaMskAra kI prAraMbhajanya pravRti kA saMkalpa bhI
nahIM kara skte| kintu jahAM zrAvakasaMgha ho yA anya zraddhAlu gRhastha hoM
vahAM ve sAMsArika kRtya samajhakara kucha laukika kriyAe~ kareM to bhikSu usase
nirapekSa rahate haiN| tIrthakara evaM anya aneka kAladharmaprApta bhikSuoM ke
dAhasaMskAra kiye jAne kA varNana AgamoM meM bhI hai / ataH
bhaktapratyAkhyAnamaraNa vAle bhikSutroM kI antima kriyAoM ke donoM hI vikalpa
ho sakate haiM, yathA 1. sAdhu ke dvArA paraThanA yA 2. gRhastha dvArA
dAhasaMskAra krnaa| bhASyakAra ne zava ko paraThane yogya dizAMtroM kA bhI
varNana kiyA hai / sAdhuoM ke nivAsasthAna se dakSiNa-pazcimadizA (naiRtyakoNa)
zava ke paraThane ke yogya zubha batalAyI hai| isa dizA meM paraThane para
saMgha meM samAdhi rahatI hai / yadi ukta dizA meM paraThane yogya sthAna na
mile to dakSiNa dizA meM zava ko paraThe aura usameM yogya sthAna na milane para
dakSiNa-pUrva dizA meM prtthe| zeSa saba dizAeM zavaparityAga karane ke lie
azubha batalAyI gaI haiN| una dizAoM meM zava paraThane para saMgha meM kalaha,
bheda aura rogAdi kI utpatti sUcita kI gaI hai|

Page #175 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Fourth Uddeshak [221]  If a corpse needs to be kept overnight, the monks of
the Sangha should stay awake all night. To prevent any ghost or spirit from
entering the corpse, they should tie both thumbs of the hands and feet with a
rope, cover the mouth with a mukhavastra (muhpatti), and pierce the middle part
of the finger. This is because ghosts and spirits do not enter a wounded body.
While carrying the corpse, the feet should be placed forward. While performing
the parthan (funeral rites), the muhpatti, rajoharan, and cholapattak are three
essential tools. The commentary elaborates on these details.   The Vyavahar
Uddeshak 7 describes the method of performing the parthan for a monk who dies
while traveling. Here, the description is for a monk who dies in the upashraya.
**Regarding the monk who engages in conflict:**  30. If a monk engages in
conflict and does not pacify it, he is not allowed to go out for food and drink
from the houses of householders. He is not allowed to go out from the upashraya
to the study ground or the preaching ground. He is not allowed to travel from
village to village. He is not allowed to move from one gana to another or to
stay for the rainy season.   However, if he approaches his learned and
knowledgeable Acharya and Upadhyaya, he can be criticized, made to perform
pratikramna, be condemned, be reprimanded, be freed from sin, be purified from
the fruits of sin, be committed to not committing the sin again, and accept the
appropriate tapas form of atonement.   If the atonement is given according to
the scriptures, he should accept it. But if it is not given according to the
scriptures, he should not accept it. If he does not accept the atonement even
when it is given according to the scriptures, he should be expelled from the
gana.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
cothA uddezaka] [221 yadi zava ko rAtri meM rakhanA par3e to saMgha ke sAdhu
rAtri bhara jAgaraNa karate haiM, zava meM koI bhUta-preta praviSTa na ho jAya
isake lie hAtha aura paira ke donoM aMguSThoM ko DorI se bAMdha dete haiM,
mukhavastra (muhapatti) se mukha ko Dhaka dete haiM aura aMgulI ke madhya bhAga
kA chedana kara dete haiM, kyoMki kSatadeha meM bhUta-pretAdi praveza nahIM
karate haiN| zava ko le jAte samaya Age kI tarapha pAMva karanA, paraThate
samaya muhapatti, rajoharaNa, colapaTTaka ye tIna upakaraNa avazya rakhanA,
ityAdi bAtoM kA bhASya meM vistAra se varNana kiyA gayA hai / vyava. udde. 7 meM
vihAra karate hue mArga meM kAladharmaprApta bhikSu ke zarIra ko paraThane kI
vidhi kA varNana kiyA gayA hai aura yahAM upAzraya meM kAla karane vAle bhikSu
ke zarIra ko paraThane kA varNana hai / kalaha karanevAle bhikSu se sambandhita
vidhi-niSedha 30. bhikkhU ya ahigaraNaM kaTTa taM ahigaraNaM aviosavettA, no se
kappai gAhAvaikulaM bhattAe vA pANAe vA nikkhamittae vA pavisittae vA, no se
kappai bahiyA viyArabhUmi vA vihArabhUmi vA nikkhamittae vA pavisittae vA, no se
kappai gAmANugAmaM duijjittae, gaNApro vA gaNaM saMkamittae, vAsAvAsaM vA vtthe|
jattheva appaNo Ayariya-uvajjhAyaM pAsejjA bahussuya-babhAgamaM, kappai se
tassaMtie pAloittae, paDikkamittae, nindittae, garihittayae, viuTTittae,
visohittae, akaraNAe abbhuTTittae, ahArihaM tavokkammaM pAyacchittaM
paDivajjittae / se ya sueNa pavie Aiyatve siyA, se ya suraNa no pavie no
pAiyavve siyaa| se ya sueNa paTThavijjamANe no Aiyai, se nijjUhiyabve siyaa| 30.
yadi koI bhikSa kalaha karake use upazAnta na kare touse gRhasthoM ke gharoM meM
bhakta-pAna ke lie niSkramaNa-praveza karanA nahIM kalpatA hai| use upAzraya se
bAhara svAdhyAyabhUmi meM yA uccAra-prasravaNabhUmi meM jAnA-bAnA nahIM kalpatA
hai| use grAmAnugrAma vihAra karanA nahIM kalpatA hai / use eka gaNa se
gaNAntara meM saMkramaNa karanA aura varSAvAsa rahanA nahIM kalpatA hai| kintu
jahAM apane bahuzruta aura bAgamajJa prAcArya aura upAdhyAya hoM unake samIpa
AlocanA kare, pratikramaNa kare, nindA kare, gardA kare, pApa se nivRtta ho,
pApa-phala se zuddha ho, punaH pApakarma na karane ke lie pratijJAbaddha ho aura
yathAyogya tapa rUpa prAyazcitta svIkAra kre| vaha prAyazcitta yadi zrutAnusAra
diyA jAe to use grahaNa karanA cAhie kintu zrutAnusAra na diyA jAe to use
grahaNa nahIM karanA caahiye| yadi zrutAnusAra prAyazcitta diye jAne para bhI jo
svIkAra na kare to use gaNa se nikAla denA caahie|

Page #176 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[222] The Brihatkalpa Sutra discusses intense kshaya and very large conflict,
stating that in such a situation, the monk's mind becomes agitated, his face
becomes heated, and he loses the ability to speak with discernment. Therefore,
it is not appropriate for him to leave the shelter according to the instructions
of the sutra. However, it is appropriate to go for gochari, etc., only after the
kshaya emotions have subsided. First, it is necessary to calm the kshaya and
then, after examining the situation, to approach the acharya or other
knowledgeable people present there and perform alochana (atonement) to resolve
the conflict. If the conflict is not resolved, he will also deviate from the
path of restraint and will gradually become subject to more and more atonement.
Sometimes, in the case of stubbornness and lack of calmness, atonement can be
given without alochana for discipline. If, even after explanation, he does not
understand and does not accept atonement or discipline, the sutra also
prescribes that he should be separated from the gachchha, meaning that he should
not be treated with mandalik pahara, vandana, etc. Along with the provisions for
discipline, restraint, and calmness, the sutra also provides just information:
if the monk accepting atonement is knowledgeable and the person giving atonement
decides to give him atonement contrary to the Agamas without being impartial,
then he can reject that atonement. This instruction from the sutra makes it
clear that rejecting any knowledge contrary to the sutra does not constitute a
violation of jina-agya, but this provision is not for those who are ignorant or
not knowledgeable. The provision for vyavavritti of a monk in the parihara-kalpa
state is as follows: 31. Pariharakappatthiyaassa na·πÉ bhikkuassa kappa√Ø ayari-
uvamƒÅyƒÅ·πáa·πÉ tadivasa·πÉ ega-girhasi pi·πá·∏çavƒÅya davƒÅvettƒÅe. Te·πáa para·πÉ no se kappa√Ø
asana·πÉ vƒÅ jƒÅva sƒÅima·πÉ vƒÅ dƒÅu·πÉ vƒÅ a·πáuppadƒÅu·πÉ vƒÅ kappada se annayaram veyƒÅva·∏çiya·πÉ
karettƒÅe, ta·πÉ jaha a·π≠·π≠hƒÅva·πáa·πÉ vƒÅ, nisƒ´yƒÅva·πáa·πÉ vƒÅ, tuyattƒÅva·πáa·πÉ vƒÅ, uccƒÅra-
pƒÅsava·πáa-khela-jalla-si·πÖghƒÅ·πáƒÅ·πáa·πÉ vigiƒça·πáa·πÉ vƒÅ visohana·πÉ vƒÅ karettƒÅe. Aha pu·πáa
eva·πÉ jƒÅ·πáejjƒÅ-chinnƒÅvƒÅsesu panthesu ƒÅure, jhijhƒ´e, pivƒÅsie, tavastƒ´, dubale,
kilate, mucchezja vƒÅ, pavadƒìja vƒÅ, eva·πÉ se kappa√Ø asana·πÉ yƒÅ jƒÅva sƒÅima·πÉ vƒÅ dƒÅu·πÉ
vƒÅ a·πáuppadƒÅu·πÉ vƒÅ. 31. On the day he accepts parihara-tapa, it is appropriate for
the acharya or upadhyaya to provide food from one house to the monk in the
parihara-kalpa state.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
222] [bRhatkalpasUtra vivecana-prastuta sUtra meM tIvra kaSAya evaM bahuta bar3e
kalaha ko apekSA se kathana kiyA gayA hai / aisI sthiti meM bhikSu kA mana
udvigna ho jAtA hai, ceharA saMtapta ho jAtA hai tathA bolane kA viveka bhI
nahIM rahatA hai| ataH use sUtra-nirdiSTa kAryoM se upAzraya ke bAhara jAnA
ucita nahIM hai| kintu kaSAya bhAvoM kI upazAMti hone para hI gocarI Adi ke lie
jAnA ucita hai| sarvaprathama kaSAya ko upazAMta karanA aura usake bAda prAcArya
Adi jo bhI bahuzruta vahAM hoM, unake pAsa AlocanA (prAyazcita) karake kalaha se
nivRtta honA Avazyaka hai| _ kalaha se nivRtta nahIM hone para vaha saMyamabhAva
se bhI cyuta ho jAtA hai aura kramazaH adhika se adhika prAyazcitta kA bhAgI
hotA hai / kabhI durAgraha evaM anupazAMta hone para anuzAsana ke liye use
AlocanA kiye binA prAyazcitta diyA jA sakatA hai| yadi samajhAne para bhI vaha
na samajhe evaM prAyazcitta yA anuzAsana svIkAra na kare to use gaccha se alaga
kara dene kA bhI sUtra meM vidhAna kiyA gayA hai arthAt usake sAtha mAMDalika
pAhAra evaM vaMdanA Adi vyavahAra nahIM rakhA jAtA hai| sUtra meM vinaya,
anuzAsana evaM upazAMti ke vidhAna ke sAtha aura nyAyasaMgata sUcanA kI gaI hai-
prAyazcitta grahaNa karane vAlA bhikSu bahuzruta ho evaM prAyazcittadAtA
niSpakSa bhAva na rakhakara Agama viparIta prAyazcitta use dene kA nirNaya kare
to vaha usa prAyazcitta ko asvIkAra kara sakatA hai| sUtra ke isa nirdeza se
yaha spaSTa hotA hai ki sUtraviparIta prAjJA kisI kI bhI ho, use asvIkAra karane
se jinAjJA kI virAdhanA nahIM hotI hai, kintu agItArtha athavA abahuzruta ke lie
yaha vidhAna nahIM hai| parihAra-kalpasthita bhikSu ko vaiyAvRtya karane kA
vidhAna 31. parihArakappaTThiyassa NaM bhikkhussa kappai Ayariya-uvamAyANaM
tadivasaM egagirhasi piMDavAya dvaavette| teNa paraM no se kappai asaNaM vA jAva
sAimaM vA dAuM vA aNuppadAU vA kappaDa se annayaraM veyAvaDiyaM karettae, taM
jahA aTThAvaNaM vA, nisIyAvaNaM vA, tuyaTTAvaNaM vA, uccAra-pAsavaNa-khela-
jalla-siMghANANaM vigicaNaM vA visohaNaM vA krette| aha puNa evaM jANejjA-
chinnAvAesu paMthesu Aure, jhijhie, pivAsie, tavastI, dubale, kilate, mucchejja
vA, pavaDejja vA, evaM se kappai asaNaM yA jAva sAimaM vA dAUM vA aNuppadAU vaa|
31. jisa dina parihAratapa svIkAra kare usa dina parihArakalpasthita bhikSu ko
eka ghara se AhAra dilAnA prAcArya yA upAdhyAya ko kalpatA hai|

Page #177 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[223 ‡§ö‡•å‡§•‡§æ ‡§â‡§¶‡•ç‡§¶‡•á‡§∂‡§ï] ‡§â‡§∏‡§ï‡•á ‡§¨‡§æ‡§¶ ‡§â‡§∏‡•á ‡§Ö‡§∂‡§® ‡§Ø‡§æ‡§µ‡§§‡•ç ‡§∏‡•ç‡§µ‡§æ‡§¶‡§ø‡§Æ ‡§¶‡•á‡§®‡§æ ‡§Ø‡§æ ‡§¨‡§æ‡§∞-‡§¨‡§æ‡§∞ ‡§¶‡•á‡§®‡§æ ‡§®‡§π‡•Ä‡§Ç
‡§ï‡§≤‡•ç‡§™‡§§‡§æ ‡§π‡•à, ‡§ï‡§ø‡§®‡•ç‡§§‡•Å ‡§Ü‡§µ‡§∂‡•ç‡§Ø‡§ï ‡§π‡•ã‡§®‡•á ‡§™‡§∞ ‡§µ‡•à‡§Ø‡§æ‡§µ‡•É‡§§‡•ç‡§Ø ‡§ï‡§∞‡§®‡§æ ‡§ï‡§≤‡•ç‡§™‡§§‡§æ ‡§π‡•à, ‡§Ø‡§•‡§æ -
‡§™‡§∞‡§ø‡§π‡§æ‡§∞‡§ï‡§≤‡•ç‡§™-‡§∏‡•ç‡§•‡§ø‡§§ ‡§≠‡§ø‡§ï‡•ç‡§∑‡•Å ‡§ï‡•ã ‡§â‡§†‡§æ‡§µ‡•á, ‡§¨‡§ø‡§†‡§æ‡§µ‡•á, ‡§ï‡§∞‡§µ‡§ü ‡§¨‡§¶‡§≤‡§æ‡§µ‡•á, ‡§â‡§∏‡§ï‡•á ‡§Æ‡§≤-‡§Æ‡•Ç‡§§‡•ç‡§∞, ‡§∂‡•ç‡§≤‡•á‡§∑‡•ç‡§Æ,
‡§ï‡§´ ‡§Ü‡§¶‡§ø ‡§™‡§∞‡§†‡•á, ‡§Æ‡§≤-‡§Æ‡•Ç‡§§‡•ç‡§∞‡§æ‡§¶‡§ø ‡§∏‡•á ‡§≤‡§ø‡§™‡•ç‡§§ ‡§â‡§™‡§ï‡§∞‡§£‡•ã‡§Ç ‡§ï‡•ã ‡§∂‡•Å‡§¶‡•ç‡§ß ‡§ï‡§∞‡•á‡•§  ‡§Ø‡§¶‡§ø ‡§™‡•ç‡§∞‡§æ‡§ö‡§æ‡§∞‡•ç‡§Ø ‡§Ø‡§æ
‡§â‡§™‡§æ‡§ß‡•ç‡§Ø‡§æ‡§Ø ‡§Ø‡§π ‡§ú‡§æ‡§®‡•á ‡§ï‡§ø ‡§ó‡•ç‡§≤‡§æ‡§®, ‡§¨‡•Å‡§≠‡•Å‡§ï‡•ç‡§∑‡§ø‡§§, ‡§§‡•É‡§∑‡§ø‡§§, ‡§§‡§™‡§∏‡•ç‡§µ‡•Ä, ‡§¶‡•Å‡§∞‡•ç‡§¨‡§≤ ‡§è‡§µ‡§Ç ‡§ï‡•ç‡§≤‡§æ‡§®‡•ç‡§§ ‡§π‡•ã‡§ï‡§∞
‡§ó‡§Æ‡§®‡§æ‡§ó‡§Æ‡§®-‡§∞‡§π‡§ø‡§§ ‡§Æ‡§æ‡§∞‡•ç‡§ó ‡§Æ‡•á‡§Ç ‡§ï‡§π‡•Ä‡§Ç ‡§Æ‡•Ç‡§ö‡•ç‡§õ‡§ø‡§§ ‡§π‡•ã‡§ï‡§∞ ‡§ó‡§ø‡§∞ ‡§ú‡§æ‡§è‡§ó‡§æ ‡§§‡•ã ‡§â‡§∏‡•á ‡§™‡•ç‡§∞‡§∂‡§® ‡§Ø‡§æ‡§µ‡§§‡•ç ‡§∏‡•ç‡§µ‡§æ‡§¶‡§ø‡§Æ
‡§¶‡•á‡§®‡§æ ‡§Ø‡§æ ‡§¨‡§æ‡§∞-‡§¨‡§æ‡§∞ ‡§¶‡•á‡§®‡§æ ‡§ï‡§≤‡•ç‡§™‡§§‡§æ ‡§π‡•à‡•§  ‡§µ‡§ø‡§µ‡•á‡§ö‡§®‚Äì‡§™‡•ç‡§∞‡§∏‡•ç‡§§‡•Å‡§§ ‡§∏‡•Ç‡§§‡•ç‡§∞ ‡§Æ‡•á‡§Ç ‡§™‡§∞‡§ø‡§π‡§æ‡§∞‡§ï‡§≤‡•ç‡§™-‡§∏‡•ç‡§•‡§ø‡§§ ‡§∏‡§æ‡§ß‡•Å
‡§ï‡•á ‡§∏‡§æ‡§• ‡§ï‡•à‡§∏‡§æ ‡§µ‡•ç‡§Ø‡§µ‡§π‡§æ‡§∞ ‡§ï‡§∞‡§®‡§æ ‡§ö‡§æ‡§π‡§ø‡§è, ‡§Ø‡§π ‡§¨‡§§‡§≤‡§æ‡§Ø‡§æ ‡§ó‡§Ø‡§æ ‡§π‡•à‡•§ ‡§Ø‡§π‡§æ‡§Ç ‡§Ø‡§π ‡§µ‡§ø‡§∂‡•á‡§∑ ‡§ú‡•ç‡§û‡§æ‡§§‡§µ‡•ç‡§Ø ‡§π‡•à ‡§ï‡§ø
‡§ú‡•ã ‡§∏‡§æ‡§ß‡•Å ‡§∏‡§Ç‡§ò ‡§ï‡•á ‡§∏‡§æ‡§ß‡•Å‡§ì‡§Ç ‡§ï‡•á ‡§Ø‡§æ ‡§ó‡•É‡§π‡§∏‡•ç‡§•‡•ã‡§Ç ‡§ï‡•á ‡§∏‡§æ‡§• ‡§ï‡§≤‡§π ‡§ï‡§∞‡•á, ‡§∏‡§Ç‡§Ø‡§Æ ‡§ï‡•ã ‡§µ‡§ø‡§∞‡§æ‡§ß‡§®‡§æ ‡§ï‡§∞‡•á ‡§î‡§∞
‡§™‡•ç‡§∞‡§æ‡§ö‡§æ‡§∞‡•ç‡§Ø ‡§ï‡•á ‡§¶‡•ç‡§µ‡§æ‡§∞‡§æ ‡§™‡•ç‡§∞‡§æ‡§Ø‡§∂‡•ç‡§ö‡§ø‡§§‡•ç‡§§ ‡§¶‡§ø‡§Ø‡•á ‡§ú‡§æ‡§®‡•á ‡§™‡§∞ ‡§≠‡•Ä ‡§â‡§∏‡•á ‡§∏‡•ç‡§µ‡•Ä‡§ï‡§æ‡§∞ ‡§® ‡§ï‡§∞‡•á, ‡§ê‡§∏‡•á ‡§∏‡§æ‡§ß‡•Å ‡§ï‡•ã
‡§™‡§∞‡§ø‡§π‡§æ‡§∞‡§§‡§™‡§∞‡•Ç‡§™ ‡§™‡•ç‡§∞‡§æ‡§Ø‡§∂‡•ç‡§ö‡§ø‡§§‡•ç‡§§ ‡§¶‡§ø‡§Ø‡§æ ‡§ú‡§æ‡§§‡§æ ‡§π‡•à‡•§  ‡§â‡§∏‡§ï‡•ã ‡§µ‡§ø‡§ß‡§ø ‡§Ø‡§π ‡§π‡•à ‡§™‡•ç‡§∞‡§∂‡§∏‡•ç‡§§ ‡§¶‡•ç‡§∞‡§µ‡•ç‡§Ø ‡§ï‡•ç‡§∑‡•á‡§§‡•ç‡§∞
‡§ï‡§æ‡§≤ ‡§≠‡§æ‡§µ ‡§Æ‡•á‡§Ç ‡§â‡§∏‡•á ‡§™‡§∞‡§ø‡§π‡§æ‡§∞‡§§‡§™ ‡§Æ‡•á‡§Ç ‡§∏‡•ç‡§•‡§æ‡§™‡§ø‡§§ ‡§ï‡§∞‡§®‡§æ‡•§ ‡§§‡§™ ‡§ï‡•Ä ‡§®‡§ø‡§µ‡§ø‡§ò‡•ç‡§® ‡§∏‡§Æ‡§æ‡§™‡•ç‡§§‡§ø ‡§ï‡•á ‡§≤‡§ø‡§è ‡§™‡§ö‡•ç‡§ö‡•Ä‡§∏
‡§∂‡•ç‡§µ‡§æ‡§∏‡•ã‡§ö‡•ç‡§õ‡•ç‡§µ‡§æ‡§∏ ‡§™‡•ç‡§∞‡§Æ‡§æ‡§£ ‡§ï‡§æ‡§Ø‡•ã‡§§‡•ç‡§∏‡§∞‡•ç‡§ó ‡§ï‡§∞‡§®‡§æ ‡§Ö‡§•‡§µ‡§æ ‡§Æ‡§® ‡§Æ‡•á‡§Ç ‡§ö‡§§‡•Å‡§∞‡•ç‡§µ‡§ø‡§Ç‡§∂‡§§‡§ø-‡§∏‡•ç‡§§‡§µ‡§® ‡§ï‡§æ ‡§ö‡§ø‡§®‡•ç‡§§‡§®
‡§ï‡§∞‡§®‡§æ‡•§ ‡§§‡§§‡•ç‡§™‡§∂‡•ç‡§ö‡§æ‡§§‡•ç ‡§ö‡§§‡•Å‡§∞‡•ç‡§µ‡§ø‡§Ç‡§∂‡§§‡§ø‡§∏‡•ç‡§§‡§µ ‡§ï‡•ã ‡§™‡•ç‡§∞‡§ï‡§ü ‡§¨‡•ã‡§≤‡§ï‡§∞ ‡§ö‡§§‡•Å‡§∞‡•ç‡§µ‡§ø‡§ß ‡§∏‡§Ç‡§ò ‡§ï‡•ã ‡§™‡§∞‡§ø‡§π‡§æ‡§∞‡§§‡§™ ‡§µ‡§π‡§®
‡§ï‡§∞‡§æ‡§®‡•á ‡§ï‡•Ä ‡§ú‡§æ‡§®‡§ï‡§æ‡§∞‡•Ä ‡§¶‡•á‡§®‡§æ‡•§  ‡§ú‡§ø‡§∏ ‡§¶‡§ø‡§® ‡§â‡§∏ ‡§∏‡§æ‡§ß‡•Å ‡§ï‡•ã ‡§™‡§∞‡§ø‡§π‡§æ‡§∞ ‡§§‡§™ ‡§Æ‡•á‡§Ç ‡§∏‡•ç‡§•‡§æ‡§™‡§ø‡§§ ‡§ï‡§ø‡§Ø‡§æ ‡§ú‡§æ‡§§‡§æ ‡§π‡•à ‡§â‡§∏
‡§¶‡§ø‡§® ‡§ú‡§π‡§æ‡§Ç ‡§™‡§∞ ‡§ï‡§ø‡§∏‡•Ä ‡§â‡§§‡•ç‡§∏‡§µ ‡§Ü‡§¶‡§ø ‡§ï‡•á ‡§®‡§ø‡§Æ‡§ø‡§§‡•ç‡§§ ‡§∏‡•á ‡§∏‡§∞‡§∏ ‡§Ü‡§π‡§æ‡§∞ ‡§¨‡§®‡§æ ‡§π‡•ã, ‡§µ‡§π‡§æ‡§Ç ‡§™‡§∞ ‡§Ü‡§ö‡§æ‡§∞‡•ç‡§Ø ‡§â‡§∏‡•á ‡§∏‡§æ‡§•
‡§≤‡•á ‡§ú‡§æ‡§ï‡§∞ ‡§Æ‡§®‡•ã‡§ú‡•ç‡§û ‡§≠‡§ï‡•ç‡§§‡§™‡§æ‡§® ‡§¶‡§ø‡§≤‡§æ‡§§‡•á ‡§π‡•à‡§Ç, ‡§ú‡§ø‡§∏‡§∏‡•á ‡§ú‡§®‡§∏‡§æ‡§ß‡§æ‡§∞‡§£ ‡§ï‡•ã ‡§Ø‡§π ‡§ú‡•ç‡§û‡§æ‡§§ ‡§π‡•ã ‡§ú‡§æ‡§§‡§æ ‡§π‡•à ‡§ï‡§ø ‡§á‡§∏‡•á
‡§ï‡•ã‡§à ‡§µ‡§ø‡§∂‡§ø‡§∑‡•ç‡§ü ‡§§‡§™ ‡§µ‡§π‡§® ‡§ï‡§∞‡§æ‡§Ø‡§æ ‡§ú‡§æ ‡§∞‡§π‡§æ ‡§π‡•à ‡§ï‡§ø‡§®‡•ç‡§§‡•Å ‡§ó‡§ö‡•ç‡§õ ‡§∏‡•á ‡§Ö‡§≤‡§ó ‡§ï‡§∞‡§®‡§æ ‡§Ü‡§¶‡§ø ‡§ï‡•ã‡§à ‡§Ö‡§∏‡§¶‡•ç‡§µ‡•ç‡§Ø‡§µ‡§π‡§æ‡§∞
‡§®‡§π‡•Ä‡§Ç ‡§ï‡§ø‡§Ø‡§æ ‡§ú‡§æ ‡§∞‡§π‡§æ ‡§π‡•à‡•§  ‡§â‡§∏‡§ï‡•á ‡§™‡§∂‡•ç‡§ö‡§æ‡§§ ‡§® ‡§Ü‡§ö‡§æ‡§∞‡•ç‡§Ø ‡§π‡•Ä ‡§â‡§∏‡•á ‡§≠‡§ï‡•ç‡§§-‡§™‡§æ‡§® ‡§™‡•ç‡§∞‡§¶‡§æ‡§® ‡§ï‡§∞‡§§‡•á ‡§π‡•à‡§Ç ‡§î‡§∞ ‡§®
‡§∏‡§Ç‡§ò ‡§ï‡•á ‡§∏‡§æ‡§ß‡•Å ‡§π‡•Ä‡•§ ‡§ï‡§ø‡§®‡•ç‡§§‡•Å ‡§ú‡•ã ‡§∏‡§æ‡§ß‡•Å ‡§â‡§∏‡§ï‡•Ä ‡§µ‡•à‡§Ø‡§æ‡§µ‡•É‡§§‡•ç‡§Ø ‡§ï‡•á ‡§≤‡§ø‡§è ‡§™‡•ç‡§∞‡§æ‡§ö‡§æ‡§∞‡•ç‡§Ø ‡§¶‡•ç‡§µ‡§æ‡§∞‡§æ ‡§®‡§ø‡§Ø‡•Å‡§ï‡•ç‡§§
‡§ï‡§ø‡§Ø‡§æ ‡§ú‡§æ‡§§‡§æ ‡§π‡•à, ‡§µ‡§π ‡§â‡§∏‡§ï‡•á ‡§ñ‡§æ‡§®-‡§™‡§æ‡§® ‡§è‡§µ‡§Ç ‡§∏‡§Æ‡§æ‡§ß‡§ø ‡§ï‡§æ ‡§ß‡•ç‡§Ø‡§æ‡§® ‡§∞‡§ñ‡§§‡§æ ‡§π‡•à‡•§  ‡§™‡§∞‡§ø‡§π‡§æ‡§∞‡§§‡§™ ‡§ï‡§∞‡§®‡•á ‡§µ‡§æ‡§≤‡§æ
‡§∏‡§æ‡§ß‡•Å ‡§ú‡§¨ ‡§∏‡•ç‡§µ‡§Ø‡§Ç ‡§â‡§†‡§®‡•á-‡§¨‡•à‡§†‡§®‡•á ‡§è‡§µ‡§Ç ‡§ö‡§≤‡§®‡•á-‡§´‡§ø‡§∞‡§®‡•á ‡§Ü‡§¶‡§ø ‡§ï‡§æ‡§∞‡•ç‡§Ø ‡§ï‡§∞‡§®‡•á ‡§Æ‡•á‡§Ç ‡§Ö‡§∏‡§Æ‡§∞‡•ç‡§• ‡§π‡•ã ‡§ú‡§æ‡§§‡§æ ‡§π‡•à, ‡§§‡•ã
‡§â‡§∏‡§ï‡•Ä ‡§µ‡•à‡§Ø‡§æ‡§µ‡•É‡§§‡•ç‡§Ø ‡§ï‡§∞‡§®‡•á ‡§µ‡§æ‡§≤‡§æ ‡§∏‡§æ‡§ß‡•Å ‡§â‡§∏‡§ï‡•Ä ‡§∏‡§π‡§æ‡§Ø‡§§‡§æ ‡§ï‡§∞‡§§‡§æ ‡§π‡•à ‡§î‡§∞ ‡§ó‡•ã‡§ö‡§∞‡•Ä ‡§≤‡§æ‡§®‡•á ‡§Æ‡•á‡§Ç ‡§Ö‡§∏‡§Æ‡§∞‡•ç‡§• ‡§π‡•ã
‡§ú‡§æ‡§®‡•á ‡§™‡§∞ ‡§≠‡§ï‡•ç‡§§-‡§™‡§æ‡§® ‡§≤‡§æ‡§ï‡§∞ ‡§ï‡•á ‡§â‡§∏‡•á ‡§¶‡•á‡§§‡§æ ‡§π‡•à‡•§  ‡§™‡§∞‡§ø‡§π‡§æ‡§∞‡§§‡§™‡§∏‡•ç‡§•‡§ø‡§§ ‡§∏‡§æ‡§ß‡•Å ‡§§‡§™ ‡§ï‡•á ‡§™‡•Ç‡§∞‡•ç‡§£ ‡§π‡•ã‡§®‡•á ‡§§‡§ï
‡§Æ‡•å‡§® ‡§ß‡§æ‡§∞‡§£ ‡§ï‡§ø‡§Ø‡•á ‡§∞‡§π‡§§‡§æ ‡§π‡•à ‡§î‡§∞ ‡§Ö‡§™‡§®‡•á ‡§Æ‡§® ‡§Æ‡•á‡§Ç ‡§Ö‡§™‡§®‡•á ‡§¶‡•ã‡§∑‡•ã‡§Ç ‡§ï‡§æ ‡§ö‡§ø‡§®‡•ç‡§§‡§® ‡§ï‡§∞‡§§‡§æ ‡§π‡•Å‡§Ü ‡§§‡§™ ‡§ï‡•ã ‡§™‡•Ç‡§∞‡•ç‡§£
‡§ï‡§∞‡§§‡§æ ‡§π‡•à‡•§  ‡§™‡§∞‡§ø‡§π‡§æ‡§∞‡§§‡§™ ‡§è‡§ï ‡§™‡•ç‡§∞‡§ï‡§æ‡§∞ ‡§∏‡•á ‡§∏‡§Ç‡§ò ‡§∏‡•á ‡§¨‡§π‡§ø‡§∑‡•ç‡§ï‡•É‡§§ ‡§ï‡§∞‡§®‡•á ‡§ï‡§æ ‡§∏‡•Ç‡§ö‡§ï ‡§™‡•ç‡§∞‡§æ‡§Ø‡§∂‡•ç‡§ö‡§ø‡§§‡•ç‡§§ ‡§π‡•à,
‡§´‡§ø‡§∞ ‡§≠‡•Ä ‡§â‡§∏‡§ï‡•á ‡§∏‡§æ‡§• ‡§ï‡•à‡§∏‡•Ä ‡§∏‡§π‡§æ‡§®‡•Å‡§≠‡•Ç‡§§‡§ø ‡§∞‡§ñ‡•Ä ‡§ú‡§æ‡§®‡•Ä ‡§ö‡§æ‡§π‡§ø‡§è, ‡§Ø‡§π ‡§á‡§∏ ‡§∏‡•Ç‡§§‡•ç‡§∞ ‡§Æ‡•á‡§Ç ‡§§‡§•‡§æ ‡§µ‡§ø‡§µ‡•á‡§ö‡§® ‡§Æ‡•á‡§Ç
‡§™‡•ç‡§∞‡§§‡§ø‡§™‡§æ‡§¶‡§® ‡§ï‡§ø‡§Ø‡§æ ‡§ó‡§Ø‡§æ ‡§π‡•à‡•§  ‡§™‡§∞‡§ø‡§π‡§æ‡§∞‡§ø‡§ï ‡§§‡§™ ‡§∏‡§Æ‡•ç‡§¨‡§®‡•ç‡§ß‡•Ä ‡§Ö‡§®‡•ç‡§Ø ‡§µ‡§ø‡§µ‡•á‡§ö‡§® ‡§®‡§ø‡§∂‡•Ä‡§•. ‡§â. 4 ‡§§‡§•‡§æ ‡§â. 20
‡§Æ‡•á‡§Ç ‡§≠‡•Ä ‡§ï‡§ø‡§Ø‡§æ ‡§ó‡§Ø‡§æ ‡§π‡•à‡•§  ‡§Æ‡§π‡§æ‡§®‡§¶‡•Ä ‡§™‡§æ‡§∞ ‡§ï‡§∞‡§®‡•á ‡§ï‡•á ‡§µ‡§ø‡§ß‡§ø-‡§®‡§ø‡§∑‡•á‡§ß 32. ‡§£‡•ã ‡§ï‡§™‡•ç‡§™‡§á ‡§®‡§ø‡§ó‡•ç‡§ó‡§Ç‡§•‡§æ‡§£ ‡§µ‡§æ
‡§®‡§ø‡§ó‡•ç‡§ó‡§Ç‡§•‡•ã‡§£ ‡§µ‡§æ ‡§á‡§Æ‡§æ‡§ì ‡§â‡§¶‡•ç‡§¶‡§ø‡§ü‡•ç‡§†‡§æ‡§Æ‡•ç‡§∞‡•ã ‡§ó‡§£‡§ø‡§Ø‡§æ‡§ì ‡§µ‡§ø‡§Ø‡§Ç‡§ú‡§ø‡§Ø‡§æ‡§ì ‡§™‡§Ç‡§ö ‡§Æ‡§π‡§£‡•ç‡§£‡§µ‡§æ‡§ì ‡§Æ‡§π‡§æ‡§£‡§à‡§Ø‡•ã ‡§Ö‡§Ç‡§§‡•ã
‡§Æ‡§æ‡§∏‡§∏‡•ç‡§∏ ‡§¶‡•Å‡§ï‡•ç‡§ñ‡•Å‡§§‡•ç‡§§‡•ã ‡§µ‡§æ ‡§§‡§ø‡§ï‡•ç‡§ñ‡•Å‡§§‡•ç‡§§‡•ã ‡§µ‡§æ ‡§â‡§§‡•ç‡§§‡§∞‡§ø‡§§‡•ç‡§§‡§è ‡§µ‡§æ ‡§∏‡§Ç‡§§‡§∞‡§ø‡§§‡•ç‡§§‡§è ‡§µ‡§æ, ‡§§‡§Ç ‡§ú‡§π‡§æ‡•§

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
[223 cauthA uddezaka] usake bAda use azana yAvat svAdima denA yA bAra-bAra denA
nahIM kalpatA hai, kintu Avazyaka hone para vaiyAvRtya karanA kalpatA hai,
yathA- parihArakalpa-sthita bhikSu ko uThAve, biThAve, karavaTa badalAve, usake
mala-mUtra, zleSma, kapha Adi paraThe, mala-mUtrAdi se lipta upakaraNoM ko
zuddha kare / _ yadi prAcArya yA upAdhyAya yaha jAne ki glAna, bubhukSita,
tRSita, tapasvI, durbala evaM klAnta hokara gamanAgamana-rahita mArga meM kahIM
mUcchita hokara gira jAegA to use prazana yAvat svAdima denA yA bAra-bAra denA
kalpatA hai| vivecana-prastuta sUtra meM parihArakalpa-sthita sAdhu ke sAtha
kaisA vyavahAra karanA cAhie, yaha batalAyA gayA hai / yahAM yaha vizeSa
jJAtavya hai ki jo sAdhu saMgha ke sAdhuoM ke yA gRhasthoM ke sAtha kalaha kare,
saMyama ko virAdhanA kare aura prAcArya ke dvArA prAyazcitta diye jAne para bhI
use svIkAra na kare, aise sAdhu ko parihArataparUpa prAyazcitta diyA jAtA hai /
usako vidhi yaha hai prazasta dravya kSetra kAla bhAva meM use parihAratapa meM
sthApita krnaa| tapa kI nivighna samApti ke lie paccIsa zvAsocchvAsa pramANa
kAyotsarga karanA athavA mana meM caturviMzati-stavana kA cintana karanA /
tatpazcAt caturviMzatistava ko prakaTa bolakara caturvidha saMgha ko
parihAratapa vahana karAne kI jAnakArI denaa| jisa dina usa sAdhu ko parihAra
tapa meM sthApita kiyA jAtA hai usa dina jahAM para kisI utsava Adi ke nimitta
se sarasa AhAra banA ho, vahAM para AcArya use sAtha le jAkara manojJa
bhaktapAna dilAte haiM, jisase janasAdhAraNa ko yaha jJAta ho jAtA hai ki ise
koI viziSTa tapa vahana karAyA jA rahA hai kintu gaccha se alaga karanA Adi koI
asadvyavahAra nahIM kiyA jA rahA hai| usake pazcAta na AcArya hI use bhakta-pAna
pradAna karate haiM aura na saMgha ke sAdhu hii| kintu jo sAdhu usakI vaiyAvRtya
ke lie prAcArya dvArA niyukta kiyA jAtA hai, vaha usake khAna-pAna evaM samAdhi
kA dhyAna rakhatA hai| parihAratapa karane vAlA sAdhu jaba svayaM uThane-
baiThane evaM calane-phirane Adi kArya karane meM asamartha ho jAtA hai, to
usakI vaiyAvRtya karane vAlA sAdhu usakI sahAyatA karatA hai aura gocarI lAne
meM asamartha ho jAne para bhakta-pAna lAkara ke use detA hai|
parihAratapasthita sAdhu tapa ke pUrNa hone taka mauna dhAraNa kiye rahatA hai
aura apane mana meM apane doSoM kA cintana karatA huA tapa ko pUrNa karatA hai|
parihAratapa eka prakAra se saMgha se bahiSkRta karane kA sUcaka prAyazcitta
hai, phira bhI usake sAtha kaisI sahAnubhUti rakhI jAnI cAhie, yaha isa sUtra
meM tathA vivecana meM pratipAdana kiyA gayA hai| parihArika tapa sambandhI anya
vivecana nizItha. u. 4 tathA u. 20 meM bhI kiyA gayA hai / mahAnadI pAra karane
ke vidhi-niSedha 32. No kappai niggaMthANa vA niggaMthoNa vA imAo uddiTThAmro
gaNiyAo viyaMjiyAo paMca mahaNNavAo mahANaIyo aMto mAsassa dukkhutto vA
tikkhutto vA uttarittae vA saMtarittae vA, taM jahA

Page #178 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[224] [Bahutkalpasutra 1. Ganga, 2. Jamuna, 3. Sarayu, 4. Eravati (Kosiya), 5.
Mahi. It is not considered appropriate to cross these five great rivers, known
for their vastness and abundant water, by swimming or by boat two or three times
in a month. These rivers are: 1. Ganga, 2. Jamuna, 3. Sarayu, 4. Eravati
(Kosiya), and 5. Mahi. However, if it is known that the Eravati river near
Kunala city can be crossed by placing one foot in the water and one foot on land
(or in the air), then it is considered appropriate to cross it two or three
times in a month. If it cannot be crossed in this manner, then it is not
considered appropriate to cross that river two or three times in a month. /
Discussion - Rivers with continuous flow and deep water are called 'Madanadis'.
In India, besides the five mentioned in the sutra, there are many other rivers
like Sindhu, Brahmaputra, etc. All of them are included in the term 'Maharnava'
and 'Mahanadi'. The word 'Uttaritte' used in the sutra means crossing by
entering the water oneself, and the word 'Santaritie' means crossing by sitting
in a boat, etc. Crossing by entering the water oneself leads to the violation of
aquatic beings, and thorns, etc., present at the bottom of the river can prick
the feet. Sometimes, due to the speed of the water flow, there can be self-
violation as well. Crossing by boat, etc., leads to the violation of aquatic
beings as well as six-bodied beings, and one has to depend on the boatman. / If
the boatman demands a fee before or after crossing the river, then the problem
of paying it arises, and there are many other potential problems. If there is a
special reason to cross, then it should be done only once in a month, because
the sutra clearly prohibits crossing by boat, etc., two or three times. For
further discussion, see Nishita. Udde. 12 Sutra 44. The reference to Kunala city
and the Eravati river is symbolic, therefore, wherever the Sadhus are staying
for a month or a year, and there is a shallow river near that city, which can be
crossed by placing one foot in the water and one foot on land (or in the air),
then it is considered appropriate to cross it two or three times in a month.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
224] [bahatkalpasUtra 1. gaMgA, 2. jauNA, 3. sarayU, 4. erAvaI (kosiyA), 5.
mhii| aha puNa evaM jANejjA erAvaI kuNAlAe jattha cakkiyA egaM pAyaM jale kiccA,
egaM pAyaM thale kiccA, evaM gaM kappai aMtomAsassa dukkhutto vA, tivakhutto vA
uttarittae vA saMtarittae vaa| jattha evaM no cakkiyA evaM NaM no kappai aMto
mAsassa dukkhutto vA, tikkhutto vA uttarittae vA saMtarittae vaa| 32. nirgrantha
aura nirgranthiyoM ko mahAnadI ke rUpa meM kahI gaI, ginAI gaI prasiddha aura
bahata jala vAlI ye pAMca mahAnadiyAM eka mAsa meM do yA tIna bAra tairakara
pAra karanA yA naukA se pAra karanA nahIM kalpatA hai| ve ye haiM 1. gaMgA, 2.
jamunA, 3. sarayu, 4. airAvatI (kozika) aura 5. mhii| kintu yadi jAne ki kuNAlA
nagarI ke samIpa jo airAvatI nadI hai vaha eka paira jala meM aura eka paira
sthala (AkAza) meM rakhate hue pAra kI jA sakatI hai to use eka mAsa meM do yA
tIna bAra utaranA yA pAra karanA kalpatA hai| yadi ukta prakAra se pAra na kI jA
sake to usa nadI ko eka mAsa meM do yA tIna bAra utaranA yA pAra karanA nahIM
kalpatA hai / vivecana-jina nadiyoM meM nirantara jala bahatA rahatA hai aura
agAdha jala hotA hai ve 'madAnadiyAM' kahI jAtI haiN| bhAratavarSa meM sUtrokta
pAMca ke atirikta sindhU, brahmaputrA Adi aneka nadiyAM haiM, una sabakA
mahArNava aura mahAnadI pada se saMgraha kara liyA gayA hai| sUtra meM prayukta
'uttarittae' pada kA artha hai-svayaM jala meM praveza karake pAra karanA tathA
'saMtarittae' pada kA artha hai-nAva Adi meM baiThakara pAra krnaa| sAdhU ke
svayaM jala meM praveza karake pAra karane para jalakAyika jIvoM kI virAdhanA
hotI hI hai aura nadI ke tala meM sthita kaNTaka Adi paira meM lagate haiN|
kabhI jalapravAha ke vega se baha jAne para Atma-virAdhanA bhI ho sakatI hai|
nAva Adi se pAra karane para jala ke jIvoM kI virAdhanA ke sAtha-sAtha SaTkAyika
jIvoM kI virAdhanA bhI hotI hai aura nAvika ke sahayoga para nirbhara rahanA
par3atA hai / nAvika nadI pAra karAne ke pahile yA pIche zulka mAMge to dene kI
samasyA bhI utpanna hotI hai, ityAdi aneka doSoM kI saMbhAvanA rahatI hai| yadi
vizeSa kAraNa se pAra jAne-mAne kA avasara prA jAya to eka mAsa meM eka bAra hI
pAra karanA cAhie, kyoMki sUtra meM do yA tIna bAra nAvAdi se pAra utarane kA
spaSTa niSedha kiyA hai| anya vivecana ke lie nizItha. udde. 12 sUtra 44 kA
vivecana dekheN| kuNAlA nagarI aura airAvatI nadI kA nirdeza upalakSaNa rUpa
hai, ataH jahAM sAdhugaNa mAsakalpa yA varSAkalpa se raha rahe hoM aura usa
nagara ke samIpa bhI koI aisI uthalI nadI ho, jisakA ki jala

Page #179 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Fourth Objective] [225 If the depth of the water is such that a Sadhu can
walk through it with one foot in the water and one foot above the water, then
the Sadhu can cross it if there is no other safe path nearby. If the crossing
requires effort, then it is necessary to perform **Kayotsarga** atonement. Due
to the killing of living beings, the Sadhu also incurs **Chaturmasik** atonement
according to **Nishith U. 12**.  **Regarding the rules for staying in a shelter
with a thatched roof:**  **33.** A shelter made of **Tana**, **Tanapuja**,
**Palala**, or **Palalpuja**, free from eggs, **Trasa** creatures, green
sprouts, dew drops, insect nests, mud, flowers, and spider webs, with a roof
height lower than the ears, is not suitable for **Nirgranthas** and
**Nirgranthis** to stay in during the **Hemant** and **Grihsma** seasons.
**34.** A shelter made of **Tana** or **Tanapuja**, free from eggs, **Trasa**
creatures, green sprouts, dew drops, insect nests, mud, flowers, and spider
webs, with a roof height higher than the ears, is suitable for **Nirgranthas**
and **Nirgranthis** to stay in during the **Hemant** and **Grihsma** seasons.
**35.** A shelter made of **Tana** or **Tanapuja**, free from eggs, **Trasa**
creatures, green sprouts, dew drops, insect nests, mud, flowers, and spider
webs, with a roof height lower than the height of a standing person's
outstretched arms, is not suitable for **Nirgranthas** and **Nirgranthis** to
stay in during the **Varshavas** season.  **36.** A shelter made of **Tana** or
**Tanapuja**, free from eggs, **Trasa** creatures, green sprouts, dew drops,
insect nests, mud, flowers, and spider webs, with a roof height higher than the
height of a standing person's outstretched arms, is suitable for **Nirgranthas**
and **Nirgranthis** to stay in during the **Varshavas** season.  **Discussion:**
The first rule in the above four rules states that a shelter with a roof made of
dry grass, dry grain, **Palala**, straw, or other similar materials, free from
eggs, **Trasa** creatures, green sprouts, dew drops, insect nests, mud, flowers,
and spider webs, but with a roof height...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
cauthA uddezaka] [225 jaMghArdha pramANa bahatA ho to tathA usake jala meM eka
paira rakhate hue aura eka paira jala se Upara karate hue calanA sambhava ho to
sAdhu anya nirdoSa mArga ke nikaTa na hone para jA sakatA hai| yatanA se nadI
pAra karane para kAyotsarga kA prAyazcitta karanA Avazyaka hai evaM jIva-
virAdhanA ke kAraNa nizItha u. 12 ke anusAra cAturmAsika prAyazcitta bhI pAtA
hai| ghAsa se DhakI huI chata vAle upAzraya meM rahane ke vidhi-niSedha 33. se
taNesuvA, taNapujesu dhA, palAlesu vA, palAlapujesuvA, appaMDesu jAva
makkaDAsaMtANaesu, ahe savaNamAyAyAe no kappai niggaMthANa vA, niggaMthINa vA,
tahappagAre uvassae hemaMta-gimhAsu vatthae / 34. se taNesu vA taNapujesu bA,
jAva makkaDAsaMtANaesu uppi savaNamAyAe, kappai niggaMthANa vA niggaMthINa vA
tahappagAre uvassae hemaMta gimhAsu vatthae / _35. se taNesu vA, taNapujesu vA
jAva makkaDAsaMtANaesu ahe rayaNimukkamauDesu, no kappar3a niggaMthANa vA
niggaMthINa vA tahappagAre uvassae vAsAvAsaM vatthae / 36. se taNesu vA,
taNapujesu vA jAva makkaDAsaMtANaesu uppiM rayaNimukkamauDesu, kappai
niggaMthANa vA niggaMthINa vA tahappagAre uvassae vAsAvAsaM vtthe| 33. jo
upAzraya tRNa tRNapuja parAla yA parAlapuja se banA ho aura vaha aMDe yAvat
makar3I ke jAloM se rahita ho tathA usa upAzraya ke chata kI UMcAI kAnoM se nIcI
ho to aise upAzraya meM nirgranthoM aura nirgranthiyoM ko hemanta va grISma Rtu
meM rahanA nahIM kalpatA hai / 34. jo upAzraya tRNa yA tRNapuMja se banA ho
yAvat makar3I ke jAloM se rahita ho tathA usa upAzraya kI chata kI UMcAI kAnoM
se UMcI ho to aise upAzraya meM nirgranthoM aura nirgranthiyoM ko hemanta tathA
grISma Rtu meM rahanA kalpatA hai| 35. jo upAzraya tRNa yA tRNapuMja se banA ho
yAvat makar3I ke jAloM se rahita ho kintu upAzraya ke chata kI UMcAI khar3e
vyakti ke sira se Upara uThe sIdhe donoM hAthoM jitanI UMcAI se nIcI ho to aise
upAzraya meM nirgrantha evaM nirgranthiyoM ko varSAvAsa meM rahanA nahIM kalpatA
hai / 36. jo upAzraya tRNa yA tRNapuja se banA ho yAvat makar3I ke jAloM se
rahita ho aura usa upAzraya ke chata kI UMcAI khar3e vyakti ke sira se Upara
uThe sIdhe donoM hAthoM jitanI UMcAI se adhika ho, aise upAzraya meM nirgrantha
nirgranthiyoM ko varSAvAsa meM rahanA kalpatA hai / vivecanauparyukta cAra
sUtroM meM se prathama sUtra meM yaha batalAyA gayA hai ki jisa upAzraya kI
chata sUkhe ghAsa yA sUkhe dhAnya Adi ke palAla bhUsA-phUsa Adi se banI ho,
jisameM aNDe na hoM, trasa jIva bhI na hoM, harita aMkura bhI na hoM, aosabindu
bhI na hoM aura kIr3I-makor3I ke ghara bhI na hoM, lIlana-phUlana yA kIcar3a Adi
bhI na ho aura makar3I kA jAlA Adi bhI na ho| kintu usa chata kI

Page #180 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Translation:  [226]  A monk or nun should not stay in a dwelling whose height
is lower than the ear of a monk during the Hemant (winter) and Grishma (summer)
seasons.  Another Sutra states that if the height of such a dwelling is higher
than the ear of a monk, then monks and nuns can stay there during the Hemant and
Grishma seasons.    A third Sutra states that if the height of such a pure
dwelling is lower than the Ratnimukuta (a crown made of jewels), then it is not
appropriate for monks and nuns to spend the rainy season there.  A fourth Sutra
states that if the height of the roof is higher than the Ratnimukuta, then monks
and nuns can stay there during the rainy season.  The Ratnimukuta is the size of
a hand.  When both hands are raised and the two palms are joined together, it
forms a crown-like shape, hence it is called the Ratnimukuta.    If a monk
stands in a house with a thatched roof that is lower than the height of his ear,
then particles of grass, mud, etc. will fall down repeatedly due to the touch of
the grass.  Therefore, one should stay there for one or two nights during the
Hemant and Grishma seasons and then move on.  During the Chaturmas (four months
of the rainy season), it is necessary to stay for a long time.  During such a
long period, there may be many occasions to raise one's hands.  Therefore, one
can stay in a house with a thatched roof that is high enough so that the hands
do not touch the grass when raised.  The reason for prohibiting staying in a
dwelling with a low roof is also explained in the Bhashya (commentary).  It
states that monks and nuns will have to bend down while entering and leaving
such a low dwelling.  They will also not be able to stand upright inside, which
will hinder them in performing Vandana (worship) and other rituals.  If they
stand upright, there is a possibility of their head hitting the roof or being
stung by scorpions or other creatures living above.  The word 'Alp' (less) in
the Sutra-read "Appadesu Apppaanesu" etc. means 'absence'.  Staying in a
dwelling with grass, seeds, or soil, etc. leads to the Chaturlaghook and
Anantakaayapanak Praadi, etc.  Staying in a dwelling with Chaturghuru leads to
the Chaturghuru Praayashchitta (penance).  Similarly, staying in a dwelling
lower than the prescribed height also leads to the Chaturlaghoo Praayashchitta.
The Bhashyakar (commentator) has also stated that if a snake is seen residing in
the grass covering of such a dwelling during the rainy season, then it should be
subdued by chanting mantras.  If this is not possible, then a canopy should be
built under the grass covering.  If this is also not possible, then a bamboo mat
should be placed above.  This will prevent the snake from hanging down and
biting from above.  If it is not possible to place a mat, then the monks staying
there should use a Chilmilika (a kind of mosquito net).  All the above
statements apply to dwellings or residences that are made of or covered with
grass, straw, etc., or have grass, etc. placed on the top.  However, there is no
prohibition on staying in a house made of stone, etc.  However, it is advisable
to stay in a house with a suitable height, as it is conducive to restraint and
good health.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
226] [bRhatkalpasUtra UMcAI sAdhu ke kAnoM se nIcI ho to aise upAzraya meM sAdhu
yA sAdhviyoM ko hemanta aura grISma kAla meM bhI nahIM rahanA caahie| dUsare
sUtra meM batalAyA hai ukta prakAra ke upAzraya kI UMcAI yadi sAdhu ke kAnoM se
UMcI ho to usameM sAdhu aura sAdhviyAM hemanta aura grISma Rtu meM Thahara
sakate haiM / tIsare sUtra meM yaha batalAyA hai ki ukta prakAra ke zuddha
upAzraya kI UMcAI yadi ratnimuktamukuTa se nIcI ho to usa upAzraya meM varSAvAsa
bitAnA sAdhu-sAdhviyoM ko nahIM kalpatA hai| cauthe sUtra meM yaha batAyA gayA
hai ki yadi chata kI UMcAI ratni-muktamukuTa se UMcI ho to usameM sAdhu-sAdhvI
varSAvAsa raha sakate haiN| ratni nAma hAtha kA hai / donoM hAthoM ko UMcA
karake donoM aMjaliyoM ko milAne para mukuTa jaisA AkAra ho jAtA hai, ata: use
rali-muktamukuTa kahate haiN| kAna kI UMcAI se bhI kama UMcAI vAle ghAsa kI
chata bAle makAna meM khar3e hone para ghAsa ke sparza se ghAsa yA miTTI Adi ke
kaNa bAra-bAra nIce girate rahate haiN| ataH vahAM hemanta grISma Rtu meM eka-do
rAta raha kara vihAra kara denA caahie| cAturmAsa meM lambe samaya taka rahanA
nizcitta hotA hai / itane lambe samaya meM hAtha UMce karane kA aneka bAra
prasaMga A sakatA hai, ataH hAtha UMce karane para ghAsa kA sparza na ho itane
UMce ghAsa kI chata vAle makAna meM cAturmAsa kiyA jA sakatA hai| nIcI chata
vAle upAzraya meM rahane ke niSedha kA kAraNa bhASya meM yaha bhI batalAyA hai
ki sAdhu-sAdhviyoM ko itane nIce upAzraya meM Ate-jAte jhukanA par3egA, bhItara
bhI sIdhI rIti se nahIM khar3A ho sakane ke kAraNa vandanAdi karane meM bhI
bAdhA paaegii| sIdhe khar3e hone para sira ke TakarAne kA yA Upara rahane vAle
bicchU Adi ke DaMka lagane kI sambhAvanA rahatI hai| sUtra-paThita "appaDesu
appapANesu" Adi padoM meM 'alpa' zabda abhAva artha meM hai / bIja yA mRttikAdi
se yukta tRNAdi vAle upAzraya meM Thaharane para caturlaghuka aura
anantakAyapanaka prAdi yukta upAzraya meM Thaharane para caturguru prAyazcitta
AtA hai| isI prakAra pratipAdita UMcAI se nIce upAzraya meM rahane para bhI
caturlaghu prAyazcitta pAtA hai| bhASyakAra ne yaha bhI batAyA hai ki varSAvAsa
meM ukta prakAra ke upAzraya meM rahate hue yadi tRNAcchAdana meM sAMpa kA
nivAsa pratIta ho to use vidyA se maMtrita kara de / yadi aisA na kara sake to
ukta pAcchAdAna ke nIce caMdovA baMdhavA de| aisA bhI sambhava na ho to Upara
bAMsa kI caTAI lagA denA cAhie, jisase ki Upara se sAMpa dvArA laTakakara kATane
kA bhaya na rahe, yadi caTAI lagAnA bhI sambhava na ho to rahane vAle sAdhuoM ko
cilamilikA kA upayoga karanA caahie| upayukta sarva kathana usa upAzraya yA
vasati kA hai, jo ki ghAsa-phUsa Adi se nirmita aura AcchAdita hai yA jisake
UparI bhAga meM ghAsa Adi rakhA ho, kintu patthara Adi se nirmita makAna meM
rahane kA koI niSedha nahIM hai| phira bhI yogya UMcAI vAle makAna meM rahanA
saMyama evaM zarIra ke

Page #181 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The fourth [**uddeshaka**] is the [**samadhikaraka**] for 227. Therefore, one
should stay in a house with a suitable height ceiling, if possible. The summary
of the fourth [**uddeshaka**] is that the [**sutras**] 1 [**hastakarma**,
**maithunasevan** and **ratribhojan**] receive [**anudghatik prayaschitta**]. It
receives [**paranchik prayaschitta**] for consuming three types of [**dosha**].
It receives [**anavasthapy prayaschitta**] for consuming three types of
[**dosha**]. It is not permissible to initiate, ordain or appoint three types of
eunuchs. It is not appropriate to give [**vachana**] to those with 10-11
[**avaguna**], but it is appropriate to give [**vachana**] to those with three
[**guna**]. It is difficult to understand three types of people and easy to
understand three types of people. If a monk experiences pleasure with the
intention of serving, by touching etc., he receives [**prayaschitta**] for the
violation of the fourth [**vrat**]. Food and water taken in the first
[**prahar**] should not be kept in the fourth [**prahar**]. Food and water
should not be taken beyond two [**kos**]. Do not eat inedible food etc. taken
from [**anabhoga**], but a newly ordained monk can eat it. It is not permissible
for the monks of the first and last [**tirthankara**] to take any [**prauddeshik
aahar**], but it is permissible for the monks of other [**tirthankara**]. Any
monk or graduate can go to study in another [**gana**], to change [**gana**] and
to study, after taking permission from the [**pracharaya**] etc. and following
the [**sutras**]. The [**kaladharmaprapta bhikku**] can be taken outside the
village to a secluded place by his [**sarmic sadhu**] with the [**pratiharik
upakaran**]. The monk should not go to [**gochari**] etc. without calming the
[**klesha**]. Upon calming the [**klesha**], one should give and take
appropriate [**prayaschitta**]. The [**pracharaya**] should take the one who is
carrying out [**parihara tapa**] with him and give him [**gochari**] for one
day, and later, if necessary, he can perform [**vaiavritta**] etc. One should
not cross rivers with strong currents more than once a month, but rivers with
water flow up to the thighs can be crossed many times a month according to the
[**sutras**]. 20-28

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
cauyA uddezaka] [227 liye samAdhikAraka hotA hai| isalie yogya UMcAI vAlI chata
ho, aise makAna meM hI yathAsambhava ThaharanA caahie| cauthe uddezaka kA
sArAMza sUtra 1 hastakarma, maithunasevana evaM rAtribhojana kA anudghAtika
prAyazcitta pAtA hai| tIna prakAra ke doSa sevana karane para pArAMcika
prAyazcitta pAtA hai| tIna prakAra ke doSa sevana karane para anavasthApya
prAyazcitta AtA hai| tIna prakAra ke napuMsakoM ko dIkSita, muDita yA
upasthApita karanA Adi nahIM klptaa| 10-11 tIna avaguNa vAle ko vAcanA nahIM
denA cAhie, kintu tIna guNa vAle ko vAcanA denA yogya hai| 12-13 tIna prakAra ke
vyaktiyoM ko samajhAnA kaThina hotA hai aura tIna prakAra ke vyaktiyoM ko
samajhAnA sarala 14-15 sevA karane vAle ke abhiprAya se sparza Adi karane para
bhikSu maithuna sevana ke saMkalpa yukta sukhAnubhava kare to use caturtha vrata
ke bhaMga hone kA prAyazcitta pAtA hai| prathama prahara meM grahaNa kiyA AhAra-
pAnI caturtha prahara meM nahIM rkhnaa| do kosa se Age AhAra-pAnI nahIM le
jaanaa| anAbhoga se grahaNa kiye aneSaNIya AhArAdi ko nahIM khAnA, kintu
anupasthApita navadIkSita bhikSu khA sakatA hai| prathama aura antima
tIrthaMkara ke sAdhuoM ko koI bhI prauddezika AhAra grahaNa karanA nahIM kalpatA
hai, anya tIrthaMkara ke sAdhuoM ko kalpatA hai| anya gaNa meM adhyayana karane
hetu, gaNaparivartana karane hetu evaM adhyayana karAne hetu jAnA ho to prAcArya
Adi kI AjJA lekara sUtrokta vidhi se koI bhI sAdhu yA padavIdhara jA sakatA hai|
kAladharmaprApta bhikSu ko usake sArmika sAdhu pratihArika upakaraNa lekara
gAMva ke bAhara ekAnta meM paraTha sakate haiN| kleza ko upazAMta kiye binA
bhikSu ko gocarI Adi nahIM jAnA cAhiye / kleza ko upazAMta karane para yathocita
prAyazcitta hI denA evaM lenA caahie| prAcArya parihAratapa vahana karane vAle
ko sAtha le jAkara eka dina gocarI dilavAe, bAda meM Avazyaka hone para hI
vaiyAvRtya Adi kara sakate haiN| adhika pravAha vAlI nadiyoM ko eka mAsa meM eka
bAra se adhika bAra pAra nahIM karanA cAhie, kintu jaMghArdha pramANa
jalapravAha vAlI nadI ko sUtrokta vidhi se eka mAsa meM aneka bAra bhI pAra kiyA
jA sakatA hai| 20-28

Page #182 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[228] (Brihatkalpasutra Sutra 33-36) One should not stay in houses made of grass
if they are low, but one can stay if they are high. / (Upasamsar Sutra 1-3 14-15
16-17 18) In this Uddesaka, the following topics have been discussed:
Anuddhattika, Paranchika, and Anvasthapya Pratikramanas; the qualifications for
Diksha, Vachana, and Shiksha; the Pratikramana for sexual desires; the area and
time limits for food; the use of non-edible food; the possibility of what is and
what is not prescribed in the Kalpa; going to another gana for study, etc.; the
seclusion of a Kaladharmaprapta Bhikku; the wisdom required to keep a Bhikku who
is suffering; the duties towards a Bhikku who is performing Pariharatapas; the
permissible and impermissible ways to cross a river; the permissible and
impermissible ways to build houses of grass; etc. 20-25 29 30 WW. 33-36 //
Fourth Uddesaka ends //

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
228] (bRhatkalpasUtra sUtra 33-36 ghAsa ke bane makAnoM kI UMcAI kama ho to
vahAM nahIM ThaharanA cAhie, kintu adhika UMcAI ho to ThaharA jA sakatA hai /
upasaMhAra sUtra 1-3 14-15 16-17 18 isa uddezaka meManuddhAttika, pArAMcika,
anavasthApya prAyazcittoM kA, dIkSA, vAcanA evaM zikSA ke yogyAyogyoM kA,
maithuna bhAvoM ke prAyazcitta kA, AhAra ke kSetra, kAla kI maryAdA kA,
aneSaNIya pAhAra ke upayoga kA, kalpasthita akalpasthita ke kalpanIyatA kA,
adhyayana Adi ke lie anya gaNa meM jAne kA, kAladharmaprApta bhikSu ko ekAnta
meM paraThane kA, kleza yukta bhikSu ke rakhane yogya viveka kA, parihAratapa
vAle bhikSu ke prati karttavyoM kA, nadI pAra karane ke kalpyAkalpya kA, ghAsa
vAle makAnoM ke kalpyAkalpya kA, ityAdi viSayoM kA kathana kiyA gayA hai| 20-25
29 30 WW. 33-36 // cauthA uddezaka samApta //

Page #183 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
1. If a deva, by the power of transformation, creates the form of a woman and
embraces a nirgrantha, and the nirgrantha approves of his touch, then (even
without engaging in sexual intercourse) he incurs the karmic fault of sexual
indulgence. Therefore, he becomes eligible for the anutthƒÅyika (non-obstructive)
cƒÅturmƒÅsika (four-month) penance.  2. If a deva, by the power of transformation,
creates the form of a man and embraces a nirgranthƒ´, and the nirgranthƒ´ approves
of his touch, then (even without engaging in sexual intercourse) she incurs the
karmic fault of sexual indulgence. Therefore, she becomes eligible for the
anutthƒÅyika cƒÅturmƒÅsika penance.  3. If a devƒ´, by the power of transformation,
creates the form of a woman and embraces a nirgrantha, and the nirgrantha
approves of her touch, then (even without engaging in sexual intercourse) she
incurs the karmic fault of sexual indulgence. Therefore, she becomes eligible
for the anutthƒÅyika cƒÅturmƒÅsika penance.  4. If a devƒ´, by the power of
transformation, creates the form of a man and embraces a nirgranthƒ´, and the
nirgranthƒ´ approves of her touch, then (even without engaging in sexual
intercourse) she incurs the karmic fault of sexual indulgence. Therefore, she
becomes eligible for the anutthƒÅyika cƒÅturmƒÅsika penance.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
pAMcavAM uddezaka vikukti divya zarIra ke sparza se utpanna maithunabhAva kA
prAyazcitta 1. deve ya itthirUvaM viumvittA nigrothaM paDiggAhijjA, taM ca
niggathe sAijjejjA mehaNapaDisevaNapatte Avajjai cAummAsiyaM parihAraTThANaM
aNugdhAiyaM / 2. deve ya purisarUvaM viuvittA nirathi paDiggAhijjA, taM ca
niggaMthI sAijjejjA mehuNapaDisevaNapattA Avajjai cAummAsiyaM parihAraTThANaM
aNugghAiyaM / 3. devI ya itthirUvaM viuvvittA niggaMthaM paDiggAhejjA, taM ca
niggathe sAijjejjA mehuNapaDisevaNapatte Avajjai cAummAsiyaM parihAraTThANaM
aNugghAigaM / 4. devI ya purisarUvaM viubdittA niggathi paDiggAhejjA, taM ca
niggaMthI sAijjejjA mehuNapauisevaNapattA prAvajjai cAummAsiyaM parihAraTThANaM
aNugdhAiyaM / 1. yadi koI deva vikurvaNAzakti se strI kA rUpa banAkara
nirgrantha kA AliMgana kare aura nirgrantha usake sparza kA anumodana kare to
(maithunasevana nahIM karane para bhI) bhAvoM se maithunasevana ke doSa ko
prApta hotA hai / ata: vaha anudghAtika cAturmAsika prAyazcitta kA pAtra hotA
hai| 2. yadi koI deva vikurvaNA zakti se puruSa kA rUpa banAkara nirgranthI kA
AliMgana kare aura nirgranthI usake sparza kA anumodana kare to (maithunasevana
nahIM karane para bhI) bhAvoM se maithunasevana ke doSa ko prApta hotI hai /
ataH vaha anudghAtika cAturmAsika prAyazcitta kI pAtra hotI hai / 3. yadi koI
devI vikurvaNA zakti se strI kA rUpa banAkara nirgrantha kA AliMgana kare aura
nirgrantha usake sparza kA anumodana kare to (maithunasevana nahIM karane para
bhI) bhAvoM se maithunasevana ke doSa ko prApta hotA hai / ataH vaha anudghAtika
cAturmAsika prAyazcitta kA pAtra hotA hai| 4. yadi koI devI puruSa kA rUpa
banAkara nirgranthI kA AliMgana kare aura nirgranthI usake sparza kA anumodana
kare to (maithunasevana nahIM karane para bhI) bhAvoM se maithunasevana ke doSa
ko prApta hotI hai / ataH vaha anuddhAtika cAturmAsika prAyazcitta kI pAtra hotI
hai / vivecana-ina cAra sUtroM meM kevala maithunabhAvoM kA prAyazcitta kahA
gayA hai| kisI nirgrantha yA nirgranthI ko dekhakara koI deva yA devI manuSya yA
mAnuSI kA rUpa banAkara maithuna ke saMkalpoM se nirgrantha yA nirgranthI kA
AliMgana Adi kare aura isase vicalita hokara nirgrantha yA nirgranthI AliMganAdi
se sukhAnubhava kare yA maithunasevana kI abhilASA kare to ve gurucAturmAsika
prAyazcitta ke bhAgI hote haiN|

Page #184 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
230 [Brihatkalpa Sutra Tatparya is that a Sadhu incurs atonement for approving
the touch of a deformed female form of a god or goddess, and a Sadhvi incurs
atonement for approving the touch of a deformed male form of a god or goddess.
Duty towards a quarrelsome visiting monk 5. If a monk wishes to stay in another
gana after quarreling and without pacifying him, he should be given a five-day-
night initiation break and should be returned to the same gana after being
completely pacified. Or, it should be done in the way that is perceived by the
gana from which he came. 5. If a monk wants to join another gana after
quarreling and without pacifying him, he should be given a five-day-night
initiation break and should be returned to the same gana after being completely
pacified. Or, it should be done in the way that is perceived by the gana from
which he came. Discussion The meaning of this sutra is that if a monk goes to
another gana due to anger for some reason, then the elders of that gana should
pacify him by giving him advice and send him back to his former gana after
giving him a five-day initiation break. This will make the nirgrantha monks of
that gana believe that the anger of this nirgrantha monk has now subsided. If
the Upadhyaya goes to another gana due to anger for some reason, then the elders
of that gana should pacify him with gentle words and return him to his former
gana after giving him a ten-day initiation break. If the Acharya etc. also go to
another gana due to anger, then the elders of that gana should pacify them with
gentle words and return them to their former gana after giving them a fifteen-
day initiation break. While explaining the widespread effect of kshaya, the
commentator said that the character that has been earned by performing penance
for crores of years in the past is destroyed by the kshaya done for even a
moment. Therefore, a nirgrantha monk should not have kshaya. If kshaya arises by
chance, then one should try to pacify it immediately. If a monk etc. who has
come to another gana after leaving his own gana does not want to go back to his
own gana even after being explained, then the elders of that gana can keep him
in their gana after giving a ten-day initiation break to a common monk, a
fifteen-day initiation break to an Upadhyaya, and a twenty-day initiation break
to an Acharya, but before keeping him, if possible, information and permission
should be obtained from his gana. Discussion and atonement provision for excess
in night meal 6. If a monk, being greedy, wants to eat more than his quota, he
should not accept food until the next day, or he should accept food only as much
as he can eat. If he eats more than that, he should know that...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
230 [bRhatkalpasutra tAtparya yaha hai ki deva yA devI ke vikurvita strI rUpa ke
sparza kA anumodana karane se sAdhu ko prAyazcitta AtA hai aura deva yA devI ke
vikurvita puruSa rUpa ke sparza kA anumodana karane se sAdhvI ko prAyazcitta AtA
hai| kalahakRta AgaMtuka bhikSu ke prati kartavya 5. bhikkhu ya ahigaraNaM kaTu
taM ahigaraNaM avinosavettA icchejjA annaM gaNaM uvasaMpajjittANaM viharattie
kappai tassa paMca rAiMdiyaM cheyaM kaTu pariNivAviya-pariNivvAviya doccaM pi
tamevaM gaNaM paDinijjAeyanve siyA, jahA vA tassa gaNassa pattiyaM siyaa| 5.
bhikSa kalaha karake use upazAnta kiye binA anyagaNa meM sammilita hokara rahanA
cAhe to use pAMca dina-rAta kI dIkSA kA cheda dekara aura sarvathA zAnta-
prazAnta karake punaH usI gaNa meM lauTA denA cAhiye athavA jisa gaNa se vaha
AyA hai, usa gaNa ko jisa prakAra se pratIti ho usI taraha karanA caahie|
vivecanaisa sUtra kA abhiprAya yaha hai ki yadi koI bhikSu kisI kAraNa se
krodhita hokara anyagaNa meM calA jAve to usa gaNa ke sthaviroM ko cAhie ki use
upadeza dekara zAnta kare aura pAMca dina kI dIkSA kA chedana kara pUrva ke gaNa
meM vApisa bheja deN| jisase usa gaNa ke nirgrantha bhikSutroM ko yaha vizvAsa
ho jAe ki aba isa nirgrantha bhikSu kA krodha upazAnta ho gayA hai| yadi
upAdhyAya kisI kAraNa se krodhita hokara anyagaNa meM cale jAe~ to usa gaNa ke
sthavira unheM bhI komala vacanoM se prazAnta kareM aura unakI daza ahorAtra
pramANa dIkSA kA chedana kara unheM pUrva ke gaNa meM lauTA deN| yadi prAcAryAdi
bhI krodhita hokara anyagaNa meM cale jAe~ to unheM bhI usa gaNa ke sthavira
komala vacanoM se zAnta kareM aura unakI pandraha ahorAtra pramANa dIkSA kA
chedana kara unheM pUrva ke gaNa meM lauTA deN| kaSAya kA vyApaka prabhAva
batAte hue bhASyakAra ne kahA ki dezona koTi (karor3a) pUrvakAla taka
tapazcaraNa karake jisa cAritra kA upArjana kiyA hai vaha eka muhUrta pramANa
kAla taka kI gaI kaSAya se naSTa ho jAtA hai / ataH nirgrantha bhikSu ko kaSAya
nahIM karanA cAhie / yadi kadAcit kaSAya utpanna ho jAe to use tatkAla zAnta
karane kA prayatna karanA caahie| _ apane gaNa ko chor3akara anya gaNa meM Aye
hue bhikSu prAdi samajhAne para bhI punaH apane gaNa meM jAnA na cAheM to usa
gaNa ke sthavira sAmAnya bhikSu ko daza ahorAtra, upAdhyAya kI pandraha ahorAtra
aura prAcArya kI bIsa ahorAtra dIkSA kA chedana kara apane gaNa meM rakha sakate
haiM, kintu rakhane ke pUrva sambhava ho to usa gaNa se usakI jAnakArI evaM
svIkRti prApta kara lenI caahie| rAtribhojana ke aticAra kA viveka evaM
prAyazcittavidhAna 6. bhikkhU ya uggayavittIe aNatyamiya-saMkappe saMthaDie
ninvitigicche asaNaM vA jAva sAimaM vA paDiggAhettA AhAraM prAharemANe aha
pacchA jANejjA

Page #185 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Fifth Uddeshak [231 Anuggae Suriye, Athamie Va Se Jan Cha Prasayansi, Jan Cha
Panisi, Jan Cha Padiggahe Tan Vigichamane Va, Visohemane Va No Aikkami. Tan
Appana Bhujamane, Annasi Va Dalmane, Raibhoyanapadisevanapatte Avajjai
Chaumasian Pariharatthanam Anuggahiyam / 7. Bhikkhu Ya Uggajavittiye
Anatyamiyasankapye Santhadie Viigicchhasamavanne Asan Va Jav Saim Va
Padiggahitta Aharam Paharemane Graha Paccha Janejja Anuggae Suriye, Athamie Va
Se Jan Cha Prasayansi, Jan Cha Panisi, Jan. Cha Padiggahe Tan Vigichamane Va
Visohemane Va No Jaikkami. Tan Appana Bhujamane, Annasi Va Dalmane
Raibhoyanapadisevanapatte Avajjai Chaumasitham Pariharadvanam Anugdhahiyam / 8.
Bhikkhu Ya Uggajavittiye Anathamiyasankappe Asanthadie Nivitigicche Asan Va Jav
Saim Va Padiggahettta Aharam Aharememane Ah Paccha Janejja Anuggae Suriye,
Prathamie Va Se Jan Cha Asayansi, Jan Cha Panisi, Jan Cha Padiggahe Tan
Vigichamane Va, Visohemane Va No Aikkami / Tan Appana Bhujamane Annasi Va
Dalmane Raibhoyanapadisevanapatte Avajjai Chaumasian Pariharatthanam Anuggahiyam
/ 9. Bhikkhu Ya Uggajavittiye Anathamiyasankappe Asanthadie Viigicchhasamavanne
Asan Va Jav Saim Va Padiggahettta Aharam Paharemane Ah Paccha Janejja Anuggae
Suriye, Prathamie Va Se Jan Cha Asayansi, Jan Cha Panisi, Jan Cha Padiggahe Tan
Vigichamane Va, Visohemane Va No Aikkami / Tan Appana Bhujamane, Annasi Va
Dalmane Raibhoyanapadisevanapatte Avajjai Chaumasian Pariharatthanam
Anugdhahiyam / 6. Suryoday Ke Paschat Aur Suryast Se Purva Bhiksacharya Karne Ki
Pratigya Wala Tatha Suryoday Ya Suryast Ke Sambandh Me Asandigdh-Samarth-Bhikkhu
Asan Yavat Swadim Grahan Kar Ahar Karta Hua Yadi Yah Jane Ki Suryoday Nahin Hua
Hai Athava Suryast Ho Gaya Hai, To Us Samay Jo Ahar Muh Mein Hai, Hath Mein Hai,
Patra Mein Hai Use Parth De Tatha Mukh Adi Ki Shuddhi Kar Le To Vah Jinagya Ka
Atikraman Nahin Karta Hai. Yadi Us Ahar Ko Vah Swayam Khave Ya Anya Nirgranth Ko
De To Use Ratribhojansevan Ka Dosh Lagta Hai / Atah Vah Anudghatik Chaturmasik
Prayaschitt Ka Patra Hota Hai /

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
pAMcavA uddezaka] [231 aNuggae sUrie, athamie vA se jaM ca prAsayaMsi, jaM ca
pANisi, jaM ca paDiggahe taM vigicamANe vA, visohemANe vA No aikkmi| taM appaNA
bhujamANe, annesi vA dalamANe, rAibhoyaNapaDisevaNapatte Avajjai cAummAsiyaM
parihAraTThANaM aNugghAiyaM / 7. bhikkhU ya uggayavittIe aNatyamiyasaMkapye
saMthaDie viigicchAsamAvaNNe asaNaM vA jAva sAimaM vA paDiggAhittA AhAraM
pAhAremANe graha pacchA jANejjA aNuggae sUrie, athamie vA se jaM ca prAsayaMsi,
jaM ca pANisi, jaM. ca paDiggahe taM vigicamANe vA visohemANe vA no jikkmi| taM
appaNA bhujamANe, annesi vA dalamANe rAibhoyaNapaDisevaNapatte Avajjai
cAummAsithaM parihAradvANaM aNugdhAiyaM / 8. bhikkhU ya uggayavittIe
aNathamiyasaMkappe asaMthaDie nivitigicche asaNaM vA jAva sAimaM vA paDiggAhettA
AhAraM AhAremANe aha pacchA jANejjA aNuggae sUrie, pratthamie vA se jaM ca
AsayaMsi, jaM ca pANisi, jaM ca paDiggahe taM vigicamANe vA, visohemANe vA no
aikkamai / taM appaNA bhujamANe annesi vA dalamANe rAibhoyaNapaDisevaNapatte
Avajjai cAummAsiyaM parihAraTThANaM aNugghAiyaM / 9. bhikkhU ya uggayavittIe
aNathamiyasaMkappe asaMthaDie viigicchAsamAvaNNe asaNaM vA jAva sAimaM vA
paDiggAhettA AhAraM pAhAremANe aha pacchA jANejjA aNuggae sUrie, prathamie vA se
jaM ca AsayaMsi, jaM ca pANisi, jaM ca paDiggahe taM vigicamANe vA, visohemANe
vA no aikkamai / taM appaNA bhujamANe, annesi vA dalamANe
rAibhoyaNapaDisevaNapatte Avajjai cAummAsiyaM parihAraTThANaM aNugdhAiyaM / 6.
sUryodaya ke pazcAt aura sUryAsta se pUrva bhikSAcaryA karane kI pratijJA vAlA
tathA sUryodaya yA sUryAsta ke sambandha meM asaMdigdha-samartha-bhikSu azana
yAvat svAdima grahaNa kara AhAra karatA huA yadi yaha jAne ki sUryodaya nahIM
huA hai athavA sUryAsta ho gayA hai, to usa samaya jo AhAra muMha meM hai, hAtha
meM hai, pAtra meM hai use paraTha de tathA mukha Adi kI zuddhi kara le to vaha
jinAjJA kA atikramaNa nahIM karatA hai| yadi usa AhAra ko vaha svayaM khAve yA
anya nirgrantha ko de to use rAtribhojanasevana kA doSa lagatA hai / ataH vaha
anudghAtika cAturmAsika prAyazcitta kA pAtra hotA hai /

Page #186 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Translation:  **232] [Brihatkalpa Sutra 7.** A monk who has vowed to beg for
alms between sunrise and sunset, but is uncertain about the time of sunrise or
sunset, and is eating while still able to taste, if he learns that sunrise has
not occurred or sunset has already occurred, then he should spit out the food
that is in his mouth, hand, or bowl, and cleanse his mouth and other parts. He
will not have transgressed the Jina's command. If he eats that food himself or
gives it to another non-Jain, then he will be guilty of eating at night, and
therefore he will be liable for the Anudghatik Chaturmasik Pratikraman.   **8.**
A monk who has vowed to beg for alms between sunrise and sunset, and is certain
about the time of sunrise or sunset, and is eating while still able to taste, if
he learns that sunrise has not occurred or sunset has already occurred, then he
should spit out the food that is in his mouth, hand, or bowl, and cleanse his
mouth and other parts. He will not have transgressed the Jina's command. If he
eats that food himself or gives it to another non-Jain, then he will be guilty
of eating at night, and therefore he will be liable for the Anudghatik
Chaturmasik Pratikraman.   **9.** A monk who has vowed to beg for alms between
sunrise and sunset, but is uncertain about the time of sunrise or sunset, and is
eating while still able to taste, if he learns that sunrise has not occurred or
sunset has already occurred, then he should spit out the food that is in his
mouth, hand, or bowl, and cleanse his mouth and other parts. He will not have
transgressed the Jina's command. If he eats that food himself or gives it to
another non-Jain, then he will be guilty of eating at night, and therefore he
will be liable for the Anudghatik Chaturmasik Pratikraman.   **Discussion:**
These four sutras are spoken with respect to four types of monks:   * The first
sutra is for a **Samst·πõta** and **Nivicikitsa** monk. * The second sutra is for
a **Samst·πõta** and **Vicikitsa** monk. * The third sutra is for an **Asamst·πõta**
and **Nivicikitsa** monk. * The fourth sutra is for an **Asamst·πõta** and
**Vicikitsa** monk.  **Samst·πõta** means strong, healthy, and able to eat enough
every day.  **Asamst·πõta** means weak, unhealthy, and practicing austerities like
fasting.   There are three types of **Asamst·πõta** monks:  1. **Tap-Asamst·πõta:**
A monk who has become weak due to practicing austerities. 2. **Glan-
Prasamst·πõta:** A monk who has become weak due to illness. 3. **Adhvan-
Prasamst·πõta:** A monk who has become tired due to travel.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
232] [bRhatkalpasUtra 7. sUryodaya ke pazcAt aura sUryAsta se pUrva bhikSAcaryA
karane kI pratijJA vAlA kintu sUryodaya yA sUryAsta ke sambandha meM saMdigdha-
samartha-bhikSu azana yAvat svAdima grahaNa kara AhAra karatA huA yadi yaha jAne
ki sUryodaya nahIM huA hai yA sUryAsta ho gayA hai, to usa samaya jo AhAra muha
meM hai, hAtha meM hai, pAtra meM hai use paraTha de tathA mukha Adi kI zuddhi
kara le to vaha jinAjJA kA atikramaNa nahIM karatA hai| yadi usa AhAra ko vaha
svayaM khAve yA anya nirgrantha ko de to use rAtribhojanasevana kA doSa lagatA
hai ataH vaha anudghAtika cAturmAsika prAyazcitta kA pAtra hotA hai| 8.
sUryodaya ke pazcAt aura sUryAsta se pUrva bhikSAcaryA karane kI pratijJA vAlA
tathA sUryodaya yA sUryAsta ke sambandha meM asaMdigdhana-samartha-bhikSu
prazana yAvat svAdima grahaNa kara AhAra karatA huA yadi yaha jAne ki-sUryodaya
nahIM huA hai yA sUryAsta ho gayA hai to usa samaya jo AhAra muha meM hai, hAtha
meM hai, pAtra meM hai use paraTha de tathA mukha Adi kI zuddhi kara le to vaha
jinAjJA kA atikramaNa nahIM karatA hai| yadi usa pAhAra ko vaha svayaM khAve yA
anya nirgrantha ko de to use rAtribhojanasevana kA doSa lagatA hai / ata: vaha
anudghAtika cAturmAsika prAyazcitta kA pAtra hotA hai / 9. sUryodaya ke pazcAt
aura sUryAsta se pUrva bhikSAcaryA karane kI pratijJA vAlA kintu sUryodaya yA
sUryAsta ke sambandha meM saMdigdha-asamartha-bhikSu azana yAvat svAdima grahaNa
kara AhAra karatA huA yaha jAne ki 'sUryodaya nahIM huA hai yA sUryAsta ho gayA
hai to usa samaya jo AhAra muha meM hai, hAtha meM hai, pAtra meM hai use
paraTha de tathA mukha prAdi kI zuddhi kara le to vaha jinAjJA kA atikramaNa
nahIM karatA hai| yadi usa AhAra ko vaha svayaM khAve yA anya nirgrantha ko de
to use rAtribhojanasevana kA doSa lagatA hai / ataH vaha anudghAtika cAturmAsika
prAyazcitta kA pAtra hotA hai / vivecana-prastuta ina cAra sUtroM meMprathama
sUtra saMstRta evaM nivicikitsa nirgrantha kI apekSA se kahA gayA hai / dvitIya
sUtra saMstRta evaM vicikitsa nirgrantha kI apekSA se kahA gayA hai / tRtIya
sUtra asaMstRta evaM nivi cikitsa nirgrantha kI apekSA se kahA gayA hai|
caturtha sUtra asaMstRta evaM vicikitsa nirgrantha kI apekSA se kahA gayA hai /
saMstRta-zabda kA artha hai--samartha, svastha aura pratidina paryAptabhojI
bhikSu / asaMstRta-zabda kA artha hai-asamartha, asvastha tathA telA Adi
tapazcaryA karane vAlA tapasvI bhikSu ! asaMstRta tIna prakAra ke hote haiM1.
tapa-asaMstRta, 2. glAna-prasaMstRta, 3. adhvAna-prasaMstRta / 1. tapa-
prasaMstRta tapazcaryA karane se jo nirgrantha asamartha ho gayA hai| 2. glAna-
prasaMstRta-roga Adi se jo nirgrantha azakta ho gayA hai| . 3. adhvAna-
prasaMstRta-mArga kI thakAna se jo nirgrantha klAnta ho gayA hai|

Page #187 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The fifth objective [233 The term *vichchikits* means a monk who is doubtful
whether sunrise has occurred or not, or whether sunset has occurred or not /
*nivitchikits* means a monk who is certain, i.e., 'sunrise has occurred' or
'sunset has not occurred' - a *nirgranth* with such certainty / *nirgranth-
nirgranthis* may travel with merchants for self-protection while passing through
large forest areas between countries / the merchant may stop and stay wherever
sunset occurs / he may proceed as soon as sunrise occurs / sometimes merchants
coming from opposite directions may also stay together at such stops / at that
time, if the sun is not visible in the cloudy sky, there may be a misconception
of sunrise, and the merchant may depart for the next journey, then if a new
merchant wants to give food to the *nirgranth* or *nirgranthi*, it is possible
to accept food etc. with the belief that 'sunrise has occurred', and it is also
possible to consume it / at that time, if the clouds clear and the morning glow
appears or the sunrise is seen, then the *nirgranth* or *nirgranthi* should
return the food / otherwise, he becomes liable for the atonement mentioned in
the scriptures. See other discussions in *Nishith* U. 10, Sutra 28 / there also,
these four sutras are mentioned in the same way.  Discussion regarding *udgal*
and atonement rules 10. If a *nirgranth* or *nirgranthi* receives *udgal* at
night or during the twilight (sandhya) with water and food, then if he spits it
out and cleanses his mouth, there is no transgression of the *jina* command / if
he swallows the *udgal*, he is considered to have committed the sin of eating
food at night, and he becomes liable for the *anudghatik* four-month atonement.
Discussion: Whenever a monk eats or drinks more than the prescribed amount, he
experiences *udgal*, and the food and drink from his stomach comes back to his
mouth / therefore, the advice of the gurus is that a monk should always eat and
drink less than the prescribed amount. If a monk happens to eat or drink more
than the prescribed amount and experiences *udgal* at night or in the evening,
then he should cleanse his mouth with cloth etc. according to the prescribed
method / whoever swallows the *udgal* that comes out, becomes liable for the
atonement mentioned in the scriptures. To clarify this matter, the commentator
has given an allegory.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
pAMcavAM uddezaka [233 vicikitsa-pada kA kA artha hai sUryodaya huA yA nahIM
athavA sUryAsta huA yA nahIM, isa prakAra ke saMzaya vAlA bhikSu / nivicikitsa-
pada kA artha hai saMzayarahita arthAt 'sUryodaya ho gayA hai' yA 'sUryAsta
nahIM huA hai'-isa prakAra ke nizcaya vAlA nirgrantha / nirgrantha-nirgranthiyAM
eka deza se anya deza meM jAte samaya bIca meM par3ane vAle bar3e araNya-
pradezoM meM AtmasurakSA ke lie kadAcita sArthavAhoM ke sAtha vihAra kareM /
vaha sArthavAha jahAM sUryAsta ho vahIM par3Ava DAlakara Thahara jAve /
sUryodaya hote hI Age cala deve / aise par3AvoM para sAmane se Ane-jAne vAle
sArthavAha bhI kabhI-kabhI eka sAtha hI Thahara jAveM / usa samaya meghAcchanna
AkAza meM sUrya na dikhane para sUryodaya kA bhrama ho jAne se sArthavAha Age ke
lie prasthAna kara de taba nayA Ane vAlA sArthavAha nirgranthoM yA nimranthiyoM
ko AhAra denA cAhe to 'sUryodaya ho gayA hai' isa saMkalpa se AhArAdi lenA
sambhava hai aura usakA sevana karanA bhI sambhava hai| / usI samaya bAdala dUra
ho jAe aura uSAkAlIna prabhA dikha jAe yA sUryodaya hotA huA dikha jAe to
nirgrantha yA nirgranthI ko vaha AhAra paraTha denA cAhie / anyathA vaha
sUtrokta prAyazcitta kA bhAgI hotA hai| anya vivecana nizItha u. 10, sUtra 28
meM dekheM / vahAM bhI ye cAra sUtra isI prakAra ke kahe gaye haiN| udgAla
sambandhI viveka evaM prAyazcitta-vidhAna 10. iha khalu nigaMthassa vA nigaMthIe
vA rAo vA biyAle vA sapANe sabhoyaNe umgAle AgacchejjA, taM vigicamANe vA
visohemANe vA no aikkamai / taM uggalittA paccogilamANe
rAibhoyaNapaDisevaNapatte prAvajjai cAummAsiyaM parihAraTThANaM aNugdhAiyaM /
10. yadi kisI nirgrantha yA nimranthI ko rAtri meM yA vikAla ( sandhyA ) meM
pAnI aura bhojana sahita udgAla Aye to usa samaya vaha use thUka de aura muha
zuddha kara le to jinAjJA kA atikramaNa nahIM rahatA hai| _yadi vaha udgAla ko
nigala jAve to use rAtri-bhojanasevana kA doSa lagatA hai aura vaha anudghAtika
cAturmAsika prAyazcitta kA pAtra hotA hai| vivecanajaba kabhI koI sAdhu mAtrA se
adhika khA-pI letA hai, taba use udgAla AtA hai aura peTa kA anna aura pAna
mukha meM A jAtA hai / isalie gurujanoM kA upadeza hai ki sAdhu ko sadA mAtrA se
kama hI khAnA-pInA caahie| kadAcit sAdhu ke adhika mAtrA meM AhAra-pAna ho jAe
aura rAta meM yA sAMyakAla meM udgAla yA jAe to use sUtrokta vidhi ke anusAra
vastra Adi se mukha ko zuddha kara lenA cAhie / jo usa ugAla Aye bhakta-pAna ko
vApasa nigala jAtA hai vaha sUtrokta prAyazcitta kA bhAgI hotA hai| isa . viSaya
ko spaSTa karane ke lie bhASyakAra ne eka rUpaka diyA hai|

Page #188 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[234] Just as when less than the required amount of milk or other liquid is put
into a frying pan, it boils and cooks within the pan and does not overflow, but
when the pan is filled to the brim with milk or any other substance, it boils
over and overflows from the pan, sometimes even extinguishing the fire of the
stove. Similarly, when one consumes food beyond the limit, it causes
indigestion, and when one consumes less food, it does not cause indigestion. /
This is also mentioned in the PrƒÅya≈õcitta S≈´tra, Ni≈õƒ´tha U. 10. The rules for
eating and discarding contaminated food are as follows: 11. If any living being,
seed, or sentient dust falls into the bowl of a monk who has entered a
householder's house for food and water, and if it can be separated and purified,
then it should be separated and purified first, and then eaten or drunk with
care. / If it is not possible to separate or purify it, then it should not be
consumed by oneself or given to others, but should be discarded in a secluded
and clean place after being carefully cleaned and washed. When a monk or nun
goes out for alms, they should first inspect the food offered by the person who
gives it to them to see if it is pure or not. Are there any living beings in it?
If it appears pure and free from living beings, then it should be accepted,
otherwise not. / After accepting the food with care, either by seeing or by
examining it, one should again check the bowl to see if any flies or other
insects have fallen into it while the food was being given, or if any other
insects have crawled onto it. If a monk or nun does not take such precautions,
they are liable to the PrƒÅya≈õcitta of the Lahu-mƒÅsa. If, while the householder
is giving food, the monk's attention is diverted elsewhere, and as soon as he
leaves the householder's house, he remembers that he did not inspect the bowl
for living beings, then he should stop at some place within seven steps and
inspect it. If the monastery is nearby, he should go there and inspect it. If
any living beings are found moving about, they should be carefully removed one
by one. / Similarly, if any dead creatures, sentient seeds, or food mixed with
sentient leaves are found in the food, and if they can be removed, they should
be removed with discretion. If they cannot be removed, then the food should be
discarded in a secluded, lifeless place.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
234] [bRhatkalpasUtra jaise kar3AhI meM mAtrA se kama dUdha Adi oMTAyA yA rAMdhA
jAtA hai to vaha usake bhItara hI ubalatA pakatA rahatA hai, bAhara nahIM AtA
kintu jaba kar3AhI meM bhara-pUra dUdha yA anya koI padArtha bhara kara oMTAyA
yA pakAyA jAtA hai taba usameM ubAla Akara kar3AhI se bAhara nikala jAtA hai
aura kabhI to vaha cUlhe kI Aga taka ko bujhA detA hai| isI prakAra maryAdA se
adhika AhAra karane meM udgAla A jAtA hai aura kama AhAra karane se udgAla nahIM
pAtA hai / aisA hI prAyazcittasUtra nizItha u. 10 meM bhI hai| saMsakta AhAra ke
khAne evaM paraThane kA vidhAna 11. niragaMthassa ya gAhAvaikulaM
piMDavAyapaDiyAe aNuppaviddhassa aMto paDiggahaMsi pANANi vA, bIyANi vA, rae vA
pariyAvajjejjA, taM ca saMcAei vigicittae vA visohittae thA, taM puvyAmeva
vigiciya visohiya, to saMjayAmeva bhujejja vA, piejja vaa| taM ca no saMcAei
vigicittae vA, visohittae vA, taM no appaNo bhujejjA, no annesi dAvae, egate
bahuphAsue thaMDile paDilehittA pamajjittA pariTThaveyavve siyaa| 11. gRhastha
ke ghara meM zrAhAra-pAnI ke lie praviSTa hue sAdhu ke pAtra meM koI prANI, bIja
yA sacitta raja par3a jAe aura yadi use pRthaka kiyA jA sake, vizodhana kiyA jA
sake to use pahale pRthaka kare yA vizodhana kare, usake bAda yatanApUrvaka
khAve yA pIve / yadi use pRthak karanA yA vizodhana karanA sambhava na ho to
usakA na svayaM upabhoga kare aura na dUsaroM ko de, kintu ekAMta aura prAsuka
sthaMDila-bhUmi meM pratilekhana pramArjana karake paraTha de| vivecana-gocarI
ke lie gae hue sAdhu yA sAdhvI ko sarvaprathama AhAra dene vAle vyakti ke hAtha
meM lie hue annapiMDa kA nirIkSaNa karanA cAhie ki yaha zuddha hai yA nhiiN|
jIvAdi to usameM nahIM haiM ? yadi zuddha evaM jIvarahita dikhe to grahaNa kare,
anyathA nahIM / dekha kara yA zodha kara yatanA se grahaNa karate hue ukta anna-
piMDa ke pAtra meM diye jAne para punaH dekhanA cAhie ki pAtra meM annapiMDa
dete samaya koI makkhI Adi to nahIM daba gaI hai, yA Upara se pAkara to nahIM
baiTha gaI hai, yA anya kor3I Adi to nahIM car3ha gaI hai ? yadi sAdhu yA sAdhvI
isa prakAra sAvadhAnIpUrvaka nirIkSaNa na kare to ladhumAsa ke prAyazcitta kA
pAtra hotA hai| kadAcit gRhastha dvArA AhAra dete samaya sAdhu kA upayoga
anyatra ho aura gRhastha ke ghara se nikalate hI usakA dhyAna pAhAra kI ora jAve
ki maiM pAtra meM lete samaya jIvAdi kA nirIkSaNa nahIM kara pAyA hUM to sAta
kadama jAe jitane samaya ke bhItara hI kisI sthAna para khar3e hokara usakA
nirIkSaNa karanA caahie| yadi upAzraya samIpa ho to vahAM jAkara nirIkSaNa
karanA cAhie aura nirIkSaNa karane para yadi sa prANI calate-phirate dIkhe to
unheM yatanA se eka-eka karake bAhara nikAla denA cAhie / isI prakAra yadi AhAra
meM mRta jIva dIkhe yA sacitta bIjAdi dIkhe athavA sacitta-patrAdi se mizrita .
AhAra dIkhe aura unakA nikAlanA saMbhava ho to vivekapUrvaka nikAla denA caahie|
yadi unakA nikAlanA saMbhava na ho to use ekAnta nirjIva bhUmi para paraTha denA
caahie|

Page #189 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[235 Fifth Uddeshak] The commentator has also said that while partaking food,
the sadhu should also be mindful that the householder from whose place the food
has been brought is not watching? It should be partaken while hidden from his
eyes / Otherwise, he will criticize saying, "Look how these sadhus are insane,
who even after receiving such rare food, throw it away." The meaning of this
sutra is that if any sentient substance or sentient-mixed food is taken
carelessly and the sentient substance can be purified, then it can be eaten
after purification. If the sentient substance is so mixed that it is not
possible to remove it, then that mixed food should also be partaken. For
example: 1. Onion pieces in curd, 2. Salt in sugar, 3. Poppy seeds etc. fallen
in dry cold churma etc., 4. It is less possible to remove insects etc. from
ghevar or feeni etc., and food contaminated with phulan and rasaj jivas cannot
be purified, therefore these are fit for partaking / The rule for eating and
partaking food on which sentient water drops have fallen is 12. Nigganthassa ya
gahavaikulam pindavayapadiae anuppavitthassa anto padiggahansi dae va, dagarae
ba, dagaphuse va pariavajjezza se ya usinabhoyajaae paribhottabve sia. Se ya
siyabhoyajaae tan no appana bhujezza, no agnessi vaave, egate bahufasueae
thandile padilheita pamjjitta parittabveyadhve sia / 12. If sentient water,
water drops or water particles fall into the vessel of a sadhu who has entered
the householder's house for food and water, and that food is hot, then it should
be eaten. _ If that food is cold, then neither should it be eaten by oneself nor
given to others, but it should be partaken in a secluded and spacious place /
Discussion - The previous sutra states the law regarding contaminated food, and
the present sutra states that if sentient water or water drops or fine sprinkles
fall on food taken due to rain or someone else's carelessness, then the bhikshu
should know whether that food is hot or cold? If it is hot, then the water drops
become non-sentient, so that food can be eaten / Such as khichdi, milk, dal etc.
hot items / If the food taken is cold, then it should not be eaten, but should
be partaken, such as khakhra roti etc. / In the commentary-gatha. 5910-5912 of
this sutra, while explaining, the alternatives (bhang) of the quantity of cold
food and touch etc. have been given, and the conditions of the fallen water
drops etc. becoming weaponized or not from the food have been explained. Their
summary is - 'Vyakhyato Visheshpratipatti:' Therefore, the quantity of water and
the quantity of cold or hot food and the conditions of touch etc.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
[235 pAMcavAM uddezaka] bhASyakAra ne yaha bhI kahA hai ki paraThate samaya
sAdhu isa bAta kA bhI dhyAna rakhe ki jisa gahastha ke yahAM se AhAra lAye haiM
vaha dekha to nahIM rahA hai? usakI A~khoM se ojhala hI paraThanA cAhie /
anyathA vaha nindA karegA ki dekho ye sAdhu kaise unmatta haiM jo aise durlabha
prAhAra ko grahaNa karake bhI pheMka dete haiN| isa sUtra kA tAtparya yaha hai
ki koI bhI sacitta padArtha yA sacittamizrita khAdya padArtha asAvadhAnI se
grahaNa kara liyA jAe aura sacitta padArtha zodhana ho sake to unakA zodhana
karake acitta AhAra khAyA jA sakatA hai| yadi sacitta padArtha aise mizrita hoM
ki unakA nikAlanA sambhava na ho to vaha mizrita AhAra bhI paraTha denA caahie|
jaise-1. dahI meM pyAja ke Tukar3e, 2. zakkara meM namaka, 3. sUkhe ThaMDe
cUrame Adi meM gire hue khazakhaza Adi ke bIja, 4. ghevara yA phINI Adi meM
kIr3iyoM Adi kA nikAlanA sambhava kama hotA hai aura phUlana evaM rasaja jIvoM
se saMsakta AhAra bhI zuddha nahIM ho sakatA hai, ataH ye paraThane yogya haiM /
sacitta jala-bindu gire AhAra ko khAne evaM paraThane kA vidhAna 12.
niggaMthassa ya gAhAvaikulaM piMDavAyapaDiyAe aNuppaviTThassa aMto paDiggahaMsi
dae vA, dagarae bA, dagaphusie vA pariyAvajjejjA se ya usiNabhoyaNajAe
paribhottabve siyaa| se ya sIyabhoyaNajAe taM no appaNA bhujejjA, no agnesi
vAvae, egate bahuphAsue thaMDile paDilehitA pamajjittA pariTTaveyadhve siyA /
12. gRhastha ke ghara meM AhAra-pAnI ke lie praviSTa sAdhu ke pAtra meM yadi
sacitta jala, jalabindu yA jalakaNa gira jAe aura vaha pAhAra uSNa ho to use khA
lenA caahie| _ vaha AhAra yadi zItala ho to na khuda khAve na dUsaroM ko de
kintu ekAnta aura prAsuka sthaMDilabhUmi meM paraTha denA cAhie / vivecana-pUrva
sUtra meM saMsakta AhAra sambandhI vidhi kA kathana kiyA gayA hai aura prastuta
sUtra meM yaha batAyA gayA hai ki varSA se yA anya kisI kI asAvadhAnI se grahaNa
kie hue AhAra para sacitta pAnI yA pAnI kI bUdeM athavA bArIka chIMTe uchalakara
gira jAe~ to bhikSa yaha jAnakArI kare ki vaha AhAra uSNa hai yA zItala ? yadi
uSNa hai to pAnI kI bUMdeM acitta ho jAne se usa AhAra ko khAyA jA sakatA hai /
yathA khIcar3I, dUdha, dAla Adi garma padArtha / yadi grahaNa kiyA huA bhojana
zItala hai to use nahIM khAnA cAhiye kintu paraTha denA cAhie, yathA-khAkharA
roTI Adi / isa sUtra ke bhASya-gAthA. 5910-5912 meM spaSTIkaraNa karate hue
zItala pAhAra kI mAtrA evaM sparza Adi ke vikalpa (bhaMga) kie haiM evaM girI
huI pAnI kI bUdoM Adi ko khAdya padArtha se zastrapariNata hone yA nahIM hone kI
avasthAeM batAI gaI haiN| unakA sArAMza yaha hai-'vyAkhyAto vizeSapratipattiH'
ataH pAnI kI mAtrA evaM zIta yA uSNa AhAra kI mAtrA aura sparza Adi ke

Page #190 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Brihatkalpas≈´tra AnupƒÅta] According to the Brihatkalpas≈´tra, one should
determine on one's own that the water is acittaja (devoid of consciousness) and
if it is acittaja, one should consume the food, and if it is sacittaja (with
consciousness), one should offer it. The ƒÄgamas have stated that the water
containing parts of various food items is acittaja and acceptable. Therefore,
there is a high possibility that the drops of water falling on the cold food
become acittaja. Just as the hot food can be consumed, similarly, the cold food
can also be consumed over time without any fault. The immediate acittaja state
of the water drops in the hot food is certain, while the acittaja state of the
water drops falling on the cold food is uncertain or becomes acittaja over time.
This is the reason for the difference in the provisions for both in the s≈´tra.
[PrƒÅya≈õcitta] 13. If a Nirgrantha woman, while urinating or defecating at night
or in the afternoon, is touched by any part of the body of an animal or bird,
and she approves of that touch with a sexual feeling, she incurs the fault of
hƒÅthakamma (manual activity) and becomes eligible for the anugghƒÅiya (non-
obstructive) monthly prƒÅya≈õcitta.  14. If a Nirgrantha woman, while urinating or
defecating at night or in the afternoon, is penetrated by any part of the body
of an animal or bird, and she approves of that penetration with a sexual
feeling, she incurs the fault of mehu·πáapa·∏çisevva·πáa (sexual intercourse) and
becomes eligible for the anugghƒÅiya (non-obstructive) four-monthly prƒÅya≈õcitta.
These two s≈´tras are stated for the protection of the vow of brahmacarya
(celibacy). If a sƒÅdhvƒ´ (female ascetic) is urinating or defecating at night or
in the evening, and a monkey, deer, dog, or a peacock, swan, etc. suddenly
touches any part of her body, and she experiences that touch as pleasurable, she
becomes eligible for the guru-mƒÅsika (major monthly) prƒÅya≈õcitta. If any part of
the aforementioned animals or birds enters her genital region, and she
experiences sexual pleasure, she becomes eligible for the guru-cƒÅturmƒÅsika
(major four-monthly) prƒÅya≈õcitta for her purification.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
236] [bRhatkalpasUtra anupAta se pAnI ke acitta hone kA svataH nirNaya karanA
cAhie evaM acitta ho jAe to khAnA cAhie aura sacitta rahe to paraTha denA
caahie| AgamoM meM aneka khAdya padArthoM ke aMza yukta pAnI ko acitta evaM
grAhya batAyA gayA hai, ataH zItala AhAra para girI huI pAnI kI bUdoM ke
zastrapariNata hone kI pUrNa sambhAvanA rahatI hai| jisa prakAra garma pAha vaha
AhAra khAyA jA sakatA hai, vaise hI kAlAntara se vaha zItala AhAra bhI khAyA jAe
to usameM koI doSa nahIM hai| uSNa AhAra meM pAnI kI bUMdoM kA tatkAla acitta ho
jAnA nizcita hai aura zItala AhAra meM girI pAnI kI bUMdoM kA acitta honA
anizcita hai athavA kAlAntara meM acitta hotI haiM / isI kAraNa se sUtra meM
donoM ke vidhAnoM meM antara kiyA gayA hai| pazu-pakSI ke sparzAdi se utpanna
maithunabhAva ke prAyazcitta 13. niggaMthIe ya rAo vA viyAle vA uccAraM vA
pAsavaNaM vA vigicamANIe vA visohemANIe vA annayare pasujAie vA pakkhijAie vA
annayaraM iMdiyajAyaM parAmusejjA, taM ca niggaMthI sAijjejjA hatthakamma-
paDisevaNapattA pAvajjai mAsiyaM parihAraTThANaM aNugghAiyaM / 14. niggaMthIe ya
rAmo vA viyAle vA uccAraM vA pAsavaNaM vA vigicamANIe vA annayare pasujAie vA
pakkhijAie vA annayaraMsi soyaMsi progAhejjA taM ca niggaMtho sAijjejjA,
mehuNapaDisevaNapattA Avajjai cAummAsiyaM parihAraTThANaM aNugdhAiyaM / 13. yadi
koI nirgranthI rAtri meM yA vikAla meM mala-mUtra kA parityAga kare yA zuddhi
kare usa samaya kisI pazu-pakSI se nirgranthI kI kisI indriya kA sparza ho jAe
aura usa sparza kA vaha (yaha sukhada sparza hai isa prakAra) maithunabhAva se
anumodana kare to use hastakarma doSa lagatA hai, ataH vaha anudghAtika mAsika
prAyazcitta kI pAtra hotI hai|| 14. yadi koI nirgranthI rAtri meM yA vikAla meM
mala-mUtra kA parityAga kare yA zuddhi kare, usa samaya koI pazu-pakSI
nirgranthI ke kisI zrota kA avagAhana kare aura usakA vaha 'yaha avagAhana
sukhada hai' isa prakAra maithunabhAva se anumodana kare to (maithunasevana
nahIM karane para bhI) use maithunasevana kA doSa lagatA hai / ataH vaha
anudghAtika cAturmAsika prAyazcitta kI pAtra hotI hai| vivecana-ye donoM sUtra
brahmacaryavrata kI rakSA ke lie kahe gaye haiM, yadi koI sAdhvI rAtri yA
sandhyA ke samaya mala-mUtra parityAga kara rahI ho aura usa samaya koI vAnara,
hariNa, zvAna Adi pazu yA mayUra, haMsa Adi pakSI akasmAt pAkara sAdhvI ke kisI
aMga kA sparza kare aura sAdhvI usa sparza ke sukhada hone kA anubhava kare to
vaha hastamaithuna-pratisevanA kI pAtra hotI hai aura use isakA prAyazcitta
gurumAsika tapa batalAyA gayA hai| _ yadi ukta pazu yA pakSiyoM meM se kisI ke
aMga usa sAdhvI ke guhya pradeza meM praviSTa ho jAeM aura usase vaha rati-sukha
kA anubhava kare to vaha maithuna-pratisevanA kI pAtra hotI hai / usakI zuddhi
ke lie gurucAturmAsika tapa kA vidhAna kiyA gayA hai|

Page #191 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[237th Uddeshaka] The commentator writes that in places where there is a lot of
movement of monkeys and other animals, the sadhvis should not go alone to
excrete urine and feces. If they have to go, they should go with another sadhvi
holding a danda (staff) so that the animals can be warded off when they come
near. Even during the day, the sadhvis should go to excrete holding a danda.
15. It is not proper for a solitary nirgrantha (Jain nun) to go out or enter the
house of a householder for alms. 16. It is not proper for a solitary nirgrantha
to go out or enter the place of defecation or the place of study. 17. It is not
proper for a solitary nirgrantha to go from one village to another village, or
to stay in a monsoon retreat.  Explanation - It is not appropriate for a
nirgrantha (Jain nun) to stay or move around alone at any place, because there
is a possibility of attack and assault by immoral people if a woman is seen
alone. For the same reason, she should not go alone even to a householder's
house for alms. The place outside the village for excretion is called
'vicarabhumi' and the quiet place for study is called 'viharabhumi'. Going alone
to these lands, wandering from one village to another, and staying alone at any
place during the monsoon retreat are also prohibited for the sadhvi.  18. It is
not proper for a nirgrantha to be without clothes. 19. It is not proper for a
nirgrantha to be without footwear.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
[237 pAMcavAM uddezaka] bhASyakAra likhate haiM ki jahAM para vAnarAdi kA yA
mayUrAdi pakSiyoM kA saMcAra adhika ho aise sthAna para sAdhviyoM ko akele mala-
mUtra parityAga ke lie nahIM jAnA caahie| yadi jAnA bhI par3e to daNDa ko hAtha
meM lie hue kisI dUsarI sAdhvI ke sAtha jAnA cAhie jisase una pazu-pakSiyoM ke
samIpa Ane para unakA nivAraNa kiyA jA ske| dina meM bhI sAdhviyoM ko mala-mUtra
parityAga ke lie daNDa hAtha meM lekara jAnA caahie| sAdhvI ko ekAko gamana
karane kA niSedha 15. no kappai niggaMthIe egANiyAe gAhAvaikulaM
piNDavAyapaDiyAe nikkhamittae vA pavisittae vaa| 16. no kappai niggaMthIe
egANiyAe bahiyA viyArabhUmi vA vihArabhUmi vA nikkhamittae vA pavisittae vaa|
17. no kappai niggaMthIe egANiyAe gAmANugAmaM dUijjittae, vAsAvAsaM vA vasthae /
15. akelI nirgranthI ko prAhAra ke lie gRhastha ke ghara meM AnA-jAnA nahIM
kalpatA hai| 16. akelI nirgranthI ko zauca ke lie tathA svAdhyAya ke lie
upAzraya se bAhara AnAjAnA nahIM kalpatA hai| 17. akelI nimranthI ko eka gAMva
se dUsare gAMva vihAra karanA tathA varSAvAsa karanA nahIM kalpatA hai|
vivecana-nirgranthI ko kisI sthAna para akele rahanA yA akele kahIM AnA-jAnA
yogya nahIM hai, kyoMki strI ko akele dekhakara durAcArI manuSya ke dvArA
AkramaNa aura balAtkAra kI sambhAvanA rahatI hai| isI kAraNa gocarI ke lie use
kisI gRhastha ke ghara meM bhI akele nahIM jAnA caahie| mala-parityAga ke lie
grAmAdi ke bAhara jo bhI sthAna ho, use 'vicArabhUmi' kahate haiM aura svAdhyAya
ke liye jo bhI zAMta sthAna ho use 'vihArabhUmi' kahate haiN| ina bhUmiyoM para
akele jAnA, grAmAnugnAma vihAra karanA aura akele kisI sthAna para varSAvAsa
karanA bhI sAdhvI ke lie niSiddha hai| sAdhvI ko vastra-pAnarahita hone kA
niSedha . ... . 18. no kappai niggaMthIe aceliyAe hotte| 19. no kappai
niggaMdhIe apAiyAe hotte| . .. 18. nirgranthI ko vastrarahita honA nahIM kalpatA
hai| 19. nirgranthI ko pAvarahita honA nahIM kalpatA hai /

Page #192 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
238) For a Sadhvi, being Achel and Jinkalpi is also prohibited. Although it is
prescribed to be Achel in the religion of the omniscient, it is completely
prohibited for a Sadhvi to be without clothes due to many reasons like public
opinion, male attraction, etc. / It is not possible for a Sadhvi to do Ahar-
Nihar without having the qualifications of Bhakta-Panadi. It is also prohibited
for a Sadhvi to abandon clothes and do Kayotsarga, because in that state, there
is a possibility of Upasargadi by young men motivated by lust. A Sadhvi is
prohibited from doing Asanadi with a vow. 20. It is not proper for a Nirgranthi
to be in Vosattkaya. 21. It is not proper for a Nirgranthi to stand outside a
village or capital, with arms raised, facing the sun, with one leg, and to take
a nap.  It is proper to take a nap with the body relaxed, with the arms hanging
down, with the legs straight, and with the body relaxed. 22. It is not proper
for a Nirgranthi to be in Thanaiya. 23. It is not proper for a Nirgranthi to be
in Padimatthaya. 24. It is not proper for a Nirgranthi to be in Ukkudyasaniya.
25. It is not proper for a Nirgranthi to be in Nisajjiya. 26. It is not proper
for a Nirgranthi to be in Viraasaniya. 27. It is not proper for a Nirgranthi to
be in Dandasanaiya. / 28. It is not proper for a Nirgranthi to be in
Lagandasaiya. It is not proper for a Nirgranthi to be in Omanthiya. 30. It is
not proper for a Nirgranthi to be in Uttaniya. 31. It is not proper for a
Nirgranthi to be in Ambakhujjiya. 32. It is not proper for a Nirgranthi to be in
Egapasaiya. / 20. It is not proper for a Nirgranthi to completely cover the
body. / 21. It is not proper for a Nirgranthi to stand outside a village or
capital, with arms raised, facing the sun, with one leg, and to take a nap.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
238) vivecanasAdhvI ke lie acela honA aura jinakalpI honA bhI niSiddha hai|
sarvajJaprarUpita dharma meM acela rahanA vihita hai phira bhI sAdhvI ke lie
lokApavAda puruSAkarSaNa prAdi aneka kAraNoM se vastrarahita honA sarvathA
niSiddha hai / bhakta-pAnAdi ke pAtra nahIM rakhane para sAdhvI ke AhAra-nIhAra
kA karanA sambhava nahIM hai| vastra tyAgakara kAyotsarga karanA bhI sAdhvI ke
lie niSiddha hai, kyoMki usa dazA meM kAmaprerita taruNa janoM ke dvArA
upasargAdi kI sambhAvanA rahatI hai| sAdhvI ko pratijJAbaddha hokara AsanAdi
karane kA niSedha 20. no kappada niggaMthIe vosaTTakAiyAe hotte| 21. no kappai
niggaMthIe bahiyA gAmassa vA jAva rAyahANIe vA uDDhaM bAhAo pagijimayapaginmiya
sUrAbhimuhIe egapAiyAe ThiccA AyAvaNAe aayaavette| kappai se uvassayassa
aMtovagaDAe saMghADiyapaDibaDAe palaMbiyabAhuyAe samatalapAiyAe ThiccA mAyAvaNAe
aayaavette| 22. no kappai niggaMthoe ThANAiyAe hotte| 23. no kappai niggaMthIe
paDimaTThAiyAe hotte| 24. no kappai niggaMthIe ukkuDuyAsaNiyAe hote| 25. no
kappai niggaMthIe nisajjiyAe hotte| 26. no kappai niragaMthoe vIrAsaNiyAe hotte|
27. no kappai niggaMthIe daNDAsaNiyAe hottae / 28. no kappai niggaMthIe
lagaNDasAiyAe hotte| no kappai niggaMthIe omaMthiyAe hotte| 30. no kappai
niggaMthIe uttANiyAe hotte| 31. no kappai niggaMthIe ambakhujjiyAe hotte| 32. no
kappai niggaMthIe egapAsiyAe hottae / 20. nirgranthI ko sarvathA zarIra
vosirAkara rahanA nahIM kalpatA hai / 21. nirgranthI ko grAma yAvat rAjadhAnI ke
bAhara bhujAoM ko Upara kI ora karake, sUrya kI pora muha karake tathA eka paira
se khar3e hokara prAtApanA lenA nahIM kalpatA hai|

Page #193 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Fifth Objective [239 But it is proper to take sunbath inside the Upashraya by
hanging the arms down, keeping both legs flat and standing with a curtain inside
/ 22. It is not proper for a Nirgranthi to take up Kayotsarga while standing.
23. It is not proper for a Nirgranthi to take up Kayotsarga for one night or
more. 24. It is not proper for a Nirgranthi to take up the posture of Utkuta
Asana. 25. It is not proper for a Nirgranthi to take up the posture of Nishadya.
/ 26. It is not proper for a Nirgranthi to take up the posture of Vira Asana. /
27. It is not proper for a Nirgranthi to take up the posture of Danda Asana. /
28. It is not proper for a Nirgranthi to take up the posture of Lakuta Asana.
29. It is not proper for a Nirgranthi to take up the posture of sleeping face
down. / 30. It is not proper for a Nirgranthi to take up the posture of Uttana
Asana. / 31. It is not proper for a Nirgranthi to take up the posture of Amra-
Kubjika Asana. / 32. It is not proper for a Nirgranthi to take up the posture of
sleeping on one side. Discussion: It is forbidden for a Sadhvi to endure any
kind of affliction related to the body, whether it be human, animal or divine. /
/ If a Sadhvi wants to take a sunbath, she can do so inside her Upashraya
according to the method mentioned in the scriptures, without going outside the
village or other places. It is also forbidden for a Sadhvi to stand for a long
time with a fixed time for Kayotsarga. The 12 Pratimas, Moyapadimas, etc., which
are performed alone, are also forbidden for a Sadhvi. It is also forbidden for a
Sadhvi to sit in five types of Nishadya Asana for a fixed time. The five types
of Nishadya are as follows: 1. Samapada-puta - in which both feet touch the puta
part, 2. Go-Nishadya - sitting like a cow. 3. Hastishundika - sitting on both
putas, raising one leg like an elephant's trunk. 4. Paryanka - sitting in
Padmasana and 5. Ardha-Paryanka - half Padmasana, i.e. sitting with one leg on
top of the other. Sadhvis are forbidden from taking up these five types of
Nishadya.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
pAMcavAM uddezaka [239 kintu upAzraya ke andara pardA lagAkara ke bhujAeM nIce
laTakAkara donoM pairoM ko samatala karake khar3e hokara AtApanA lenA kalpatA
hai / 22. nirgranthI ko khar3e hokara kAyotsarga karane kA abhigraha karanA
nahIM kalpatA hai| 23. nirgranthI ko eka rAtri Adi kAyotsarga karane kA
abhigraha karanA nahIM kalpatA hai| 24. nirgranthI ko utkuTukAsana se sthita
rahane kA abhigraha karanA nahIM kalpatA hai| 25. nirgranthI ko niSadyAoM se
sthita rahane kA abhigraha karanA nahIM kalpatA hai / 26. nirgranthI ko vIrAsana
se sthita rahane kA abhigraha karanA nahIM kalpatA hai / 27. nirgranthI ko
daNDAsana se sthita rahane kA abhigraha karanA nahIM kalpatA hai / 28. nimranthI
ko lakuTAsana se sthita rahane kA abhigraha karanA nahIM kalpatA hai| 29.
nirgranthI ko pradhomukhI sokara sthita rahane kA abhigraha karanA nahIM kalpatA
hai / 30. nirgranthI ko uttAnAsana se sthita rahane kA abhigraha karanA nahIM
kalpatA hai / 31. nirgranthI ko Amra-kubjikAsana se sthita rahane kA abhigraha
karanA nahIM kalpatA hai / 32. nirgranthI ko eka pArzva se zayana karane kA
abhigraha karanA nahIM kalpatA hai|| vivecana zarIra ko sarvathA vosirAkara
manuSya tiryaMca yA deva sambandhI upasarga sahana karanA sAdhvI ke liye
niSiddha hai / / sAdhvI yadi AtApanA lenA cAhe to grAmAdi ke bAhara na jAkara
apane upAzraya ke andara hI sUtrokta vidhi se AtApanA le sakatI hai| _ samaya
nizcita kara lambe kAla ke liye khar3e rahakara kAyotsarga karanA bhI sAdhvI ke
liye niSiddha hai| bhikSu ko 12 pratimAeM, moyapaDimA prAdi pratimAeM, jo ekAkI
rahakara kI jAtI haiM, ve bhI sAdhvI ke liye niSiddha haiN| samaya nizcita
karake pAMca prakAra ke niSadyAsana se bhI baiThanA sAdhvI ko niSiddha hai|
pAMca prakAra kI niSadyA isa prakAra hai 1. samapAdaputA-jisameM donoM paira
puta-bhAga kA sparza kareM, 2. go-niSadyakAgAya ke samAna baitthnaa| 3.
hastizuNDikA- donoM putoM ke bala baiThakara eka paira hAthI kI sUDa ke samAna
uThAkara baitthnaa| 4. paryakA-padmAsana se baiThanA aura 5. ardhaparyaMkA-ardha
padmAsana arthAt eka paira ke Upara dUsarA paira rakhakara baitthnaa| sAdhviyoM
ko ina pAMcoM hI prakAra kI niSadyAoM se abhigraha karake baiThane kA niSedha
kiyA gayA hai|

Page #194 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[240] The text from Sutras 26 to 33 of the Brihatkalpa Sutra states that it is
forbidden for a Sadhvi to perform the mentioned asanas at a fixed time. The
nature of these asanas is described in Dasha. Dasha. 7, from where it can be
understood. The commentator has explained the reason for prohibiting all these
practices as there is a possibility of upsarga (adverse effects) etc. by young
men who are motivated by lust. She cannot be careful and alert before the fixed
time is over. If a Sadhvi stands, sits or sleeps in any posture without a fixed
time, then it is not prohibited in these Sutras. The commentary also states:
"Birasana Godohi Muttusamve Vi Tana Kampati / Te Pun Paducch Chettha, Suttha U
Abhiggaham Pappa // 5956 //" Except for Virasana and Goduhikasana, all asanas
are considered appropriate for a Sadhvi according to her inclination. The
prohibition mentioned in the Sutras is with respect to Abhiggaha. Virasana and
Goduhikasana are not suitable for a woman's physical state, which is why the
commentator has prohibited them. Although Abhiggaha etc. practices are special
places for Nirjara, they are prohibited for Sadhvis because they hinder the
protection of the Mahavrat of Brahmacharya. The commentary explains this topic
in detail and also prohibits the Agit-artha Bhikshutras from wearing these
Abhiggahas. The rules regarding wearing the Akucanapattak are as follows: 33. No
Kappi Nigganthinam Akucanapattagandharitte Va, Pariharitte Va. 34. Kappi
Nigganthanam Akucanapattagandharitte Va, Pariharitte Va. 33. It is not
appropriate for Nirgranthis to keep or use the Akucanapattak. 34. It is
appropriate for Nirgranthis to keep or use the Akucanapattak. Discussion: The
other name for 'Akucanapattak' is 'Paryastikapattak'. It is a cotton cloth four
fingers wide and as long as the body. It is used when there is no support like a
wall etc. Where there is a possibility of Udai etc. creatures on the wall etc.
and it is necessary for the elderly, weak etc. to sit leaning on something, then
by tying the waist with this Paryastikapattak and raising the knees and tying
the legs, a comfortable chair-like position is achieved and the body gets
comfort similar to leaning on a wall.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
240] [bRhatkalpasUtra sUtra 26 se 33 taka kahe gaye pATha Asana bhI sAdhvI ko
samaya nizcita karake karanA niSiddha hai| ina AsanoM kA svarUpa dazA. dazA. 7
meM kiyA gayA hai, vahAM se samajhA jA sakatA hai / ::. bhASyakAra ne ina sabhI
sAdhanAoM ke niSedha kA kAraNa yaha batAyA hai ki usa dazA meM kAmaprerita
taruNa janoM ke dvArA upasargAdi kI sambhAvanA rahatI hai / nizcita samaya pUrNa
hone ke pUrva vaha sambhala kara sAvadhAna nahIM ho sakatI hai| samaya
nirdhArita kiye binA sAdhvI kisI bhI Asana se khar3I rahe, baiThe yA soe to
usakA ina sUtroM meM niSedha nahIM hai / bhASya meM bhI kahA hai bIrAsaNa godohI
muttusamve vi tANa kampati / te puNa paDucca ceTTa, suttA u abhiggahaM pappA / /
5956 // vIrAsana aura godohikAsana ko chor3akara pravRtti kI apekSA sabhI Asana
sAdhvI ko karane kalpate haiM / sUtroM meM jo niSedha kiyA hai vaha abhigraha kI
apekSA se kiyA hai| vIrAsana aura goduhikAsana ye strI kI zArIrika samAdhi ke
anukUla nahIM hote haiM, isI kAraNa se bhASyakAra ne niSedha kiyA hai / yadyapi
abhigraha Adi sAdhanAeM vizeSa nirjarA ke sthAna haiM, phira bhI sAdhvI ke liye
brahmacarya mahAvrata kI surakSA meM bAdhaka hone se inakA niSedha kiyA gayA
hai| bhASya meM vistRta carcA sahita isa viSaya ko spaSTa kiyA gayA hai tathA
vahAM agItArtha bhikSutroM ko bhI ina abhigrahoM ke dhAraNa karane kA niSedha
kiyA hai| AkucanapaTTaka ke dhAraNa karane kA vidhi-niSedha 33. no kappai
niggaMthINaM AkucaNapaTTagaMdhArittae vA, pariharittae vaa| 34. kappai
niggaMthANaM AkucaNapaTTagaMdhArittae vA, pariharittae vaa| 33. nirgranthiyoM ko
prAkucanapaTTaka rakhanA yA upayoga meM lenA nahIM kalpatA hai / 34. nirgranthoM
ko prAkucanapaTTaka rakhanA yA upayoga meM lenA kalpatA hai /
vivecana'prAkucanapaTTaka' kA dUsarA nAma 'paryastikApaTTaka' hai| yaha cAra
aMgula caur3A evaM zarIrapramANa jitanA sUtI vastra kA hotA hai| bhIta Adi kA
sahArA na lenA ho taba isakA upayoga kiyA jAtA hai| jahAM dIvAra Adi para udaI
Adi jIvoM kI sambhAvanA ho aura vRddha glAna Adi kA avalambana lekara baiThanA
Avazyaka ho to isa paryastikApaTTa se kamara ko evaM ghuTane UMce karake pairoM
ko bA~dha dene para ArAma kursI ke samAna avasthA ho jAtI hai aura dIvAra kA
sahArA lene ke samAna zarIra ko ArAma milatA hai|

Page #195 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The fifth objective [Sitting with a Paryastika pattak (a cushion) is considered
a proud posture. For a Sadhvi, sitting in this way is considered inappropriate
due to her body structure, therefore, the Sutra prohibits the use of Paryastika
pattak for her. The Bhashyakar has explained that in case of extreme necessity,
a Sadhvi should use her discretion to sit with a Paryastika pattak and cover it
with a cloth. A Sadhu should also generally avoid using a Paryastika pattak, as
it is a supplementary tool to be used in special circumstances. The rules and
prohibitions of using a supported seat are as follows: 35. Nigganthi should not
sit or sleep on a supported seat. 36. Niggantha can sit or sleep on a supported
seat. Discussion: The above Sutras mention the use of Paryastika pattak for
support, and these Sutras describe supported chairs and other seats. A monk can
use these tools if necessary. If these are not available, a Paryastika pattak
can be used. Monks who always need a Paryastika pattak can keep one with them,
as chairs and other tools are not available in all areas. Due to the
aforementioned reasons, Sadhvis are prohibited from using these supported seats.
If a Sadhu or Sadhvi finds it necessary to use a chair or other tool in a
general setting, they can use it with discretion without relying on support. The
rules and prohibitions of using a Savisaan Peeth (a wooden platform for sitting)
are as follows: 37. Sadhvis should not sit or sleep on a Savisaan Peeth (a
wooden platform for sitting) or a Falak (a golden slab). 38. Sadhus can sit or
sleep on a Savisaan Peeth or a Falak. Discussion: A Peetha or Falak has small,
raised pillars like horns. They are round and smooth, making them appear like
male symbols. Therefore, it is prohibited for a Sadhvi to use them.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
pAMcavAM uddezaka [241 paryastikApaTTaka lagAkara isa taraha baiThanA garvayukta
prAsana hotA hai| sAdhvI ke liye isa prakAra baiThanA zarIra-saMracanA ke kAraNa
loka nindita hotA hai, isaliye sUtra meM unake liye paryastikApaTTaka kA niSedha
kiyA gayA hai| bhASyakAra ne batAyA hai ki atyanta Avazyaka hone para sAdhvI ko
paryastikApaTTaka lagAkara usake Upara vastra pror3hakara baiThane kA viveka
rakhanA caahie| sAdhu ko bhI sAmAnyatayA paryastikApaTTaka nahIM lagAnA cAhiye,
kyoMki vizeSa paristhiti meM upayoga karane ke liye yaha aupagrahika upakaraNa
hai| avalambanayukta Asana ke vidhi-niSedha 35. no kappai niggaMthINaM
sAvassayaMsi AsaNaMsi Asaittae vA tuyaTTittae vA / 36. kappai niggaMthANaM
sAvassayaMsi pAsaNaMsi Asaittae vA tupaTTittae vaa| 35. nirgranthI ko sAvazraya
(avalambanayukta) Asana para baiThanA yA zayana karanA nahIM kalpatA hai| 36.
nirgrantha ko sAvazraya Asana para baiThanA yA zayana karanA kalpatA hai /
vivecana-pUrvokta sUtroM meM avalambana lene ke liye paryastikApaTTaka kA
kathana kiyA gayA hai aura ina sUtroM meM avalambanayukta kursI Adi AsanoM kA
varNana hai / Avazyaka hone para bhikSu ina sAdhanoM kA upayoga kara sakatA hai
/ inake na milane para paryastikApaTTa kA upayoga kiyA jAtA hai| jina bhikSuoM
ko paryastikApaTTa kI sadA AvazyakatA pratIta hove use apane pAsa rakha sakate
haiN| kyoMki kursI Adi sAdhana sabhI kSetroM meM upalabdha nahIM hote| pUrvokta
doSoM ke kAraNa hI sAdhvI ko avalambanayukta ina AsanoM kA niSedha kiyA gayA
hai| sAdhu-sAdhvI kabhI sAmAnya rUpa se bhI kursI Adi upakaraNa upayoga meM lenA
Avazyaka samajhe to avalambana liye binA be unakA viveka pUrvaka upayoga kara
sakate haiN| savisANa pITha Adi ke vidhi-niSedha 37. no kappai niggaMthoNaM
savisANaMsi pIDhaMsi vA phalagaMsi vA Asaittae vA tuTTittae vA / 38. kappai
niggaMthANaM savisANaMsi pIDhaMsi vA phalagaMsi vA prAsaittae vA tuyaTTittae
vaa| 37. sAdhviyoM ko saviSANa pITha (baiThane kI kASTha caukI prAdi) yA phalaka
(sone kA pATA Adi) para baiThanA yA zayana karanA nahIM kalpatA hai / 38.
sAdhuoM ko saviSANa pITha para yA phalaka para baiThanA yA zayana karanA kalpatA
hai| vivecana-pIr3hA yA phalaka para sIMga jaise UMce uThe hue choTe-choTe
stambha hote haiN| ve gola evaM cikane hone se puruSa cihna jaise pratIta hote
haiM / isaliye inakA upayoga karanA sAdhvI ke lie niSedha

Page #196 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[242] [The Brihatkalpa Sutra states / If a sadhu has access to other types of
foot-rests, they should not use those with spikes. This is because if they are
not careful, they could trip and fall or get injured, and if they are sharp,
they could puncture the skin. / The rules regarding the use of a Tumbe-patra
with a stalk are as follows: 39. It is not permissible for a sadhvi to keep or
use a Tumbe-patra with a stalk. 40. It is permissible for a sadhu to keep or use
a Tumbe-patra with a stalk. Explanation: These sutras state that a sadhvi should
not keep a Tumbe-patra with a stalk. / The reason for this is that it should be
considered similar to a foot-rest with spikes (in terms of its potential to
hinder celibacy). / There is no objection to a sadhu keeping such a Tumbe-patra.
The rules regarding the use of a Patrakesarika with a stalk are as follows: 41.
It is not permissible for a sadhvi to keep or use a Patrakesarika with a stalk.
42. It is permissible for a sadhu to keep or use a Patrakesarika with a stalk. /
Explanation: A 'Patrakesarika' is a tool used to wipe or clean the inside of a
vessel or Tumbe-patra, made by tying a piece of cloth to one end of a wooden
stick. The prohibition against a sadhvi keeping this tool is based on the
potential for it to hinder celibacy. She can use other types of Patrakesarika,
such as those with a round stick, or those without a stick, just like she can
use a cleaning tool without a stick. The rules regarding the use of a foot-rest
with a wooden stick are as follows: 43. It is not permissible for a nirgranthi
to keep or use a foot-rest with a wooden stick. 44. It is permissible for a
sadhu to keep or use a foot-rest with a wooden stick. /

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
242] [bRhatkalpasUtra kiyA gayA hai / sAdhu ko bhI anya pITha-phalaka mila jAye
to viSANayukta pITha-phalaka Adi upayoga meM nahIM lene caahie| kyoMki sAvadhAnI
na rahane para inakI Takkara se girane kI yA coTa lagane kI sambhAvanA rahatI
hai aura nukIle hoM to cubhane kI sambhAvanA rahatI hai / savata tumba-pAtra ke
vidhi-niSedha 39. no kappai niggaMthoNaM saveNTayaM lAuyaM dhArettae vA
pariharittae vaa| 40. kappai niggaMthANaM saveNTayaM lAuyaM dhArettae vA
pariharittae vaa| 39. sAdhviyoM ko savRnta alAbu (tumbI) rakhanA yA usakA
upayoga karanA nahIM kalpatA hai : 40. sAdhuoM ko savRnta alAbu rakhanA yA usakA
upayoga karanA kalpatA hai| vivecana-ina sUtroM meM kahA gayA hai ki sAdhvI ko
apane pAsa DaMThalayukta tubI nahIM rakhanA cAhie / isakA kAraNa viSANayukta
pITha-phalaka ke samAna (brahmacarya sambandhI) samajha lenA cAhiye / sAdhu ko
aisA tumba-pAtra rakhane meM koI Apatti nahIM hai| savaMta pAtrakesarikA ke
vidhi-niSedha 41. no kappai niggaMthINaM saveNTayaM pAyakesariyaM dhArittae vA
pariharittae thaa| 42. kappai niggaMthANaM saveNTayaM pAyakesariyaM dhAritae vA
pariharittae thaa| 41. sAdhviyoM ko savRnta pAtrakesarikA rakhanA yA usakA
upayoga karanA nahIM kalpatA hai / 42. sAdhuoM ko savRnta pAtrakesarikA rakhanA
yA usakA upayoga karanA kalpatA hai / vivecana-kASTha-daNDa ke eka sire para
vastra-khaNDa ko bAMdhakara pAtra yA tubI Adi ke bhItarI bhAga ko poMchane ke yA
pramArjana karane ke upakaraNa ko 'savanta pAtrakesarikA' kahate haiN|
brahmacarya ke bAdhaka kAraNoM kI apekSA se hI sAdhvI ko isake rakhane kA
niSedha kiyA gayA hai| golAkAra daMDa ke atirikta anya prakAra kI pAtrakesarikA
kA upayoga vaha kara sakatI hai arthAt jisa taraha sAdhvI daMDarahita
pramArjanikA rakhatI hai, vaise hI vaha pAtrakesarikA bhI daNDarahita rakha
sakatI hai| daNDayukta pAdapoMchana ke vidhi-niSedha 43. no kappai niggaMthINaM
dArudaNDayaM pAyachaNaM dhArettae vA pariharittae vaa| 44. kappai niggaMthANaM
dArudaNDayaM pAyapuchaNaM dhArettae vA pariharittae vaa| 43. nirgranthI ko
dArudaNDa vAlA (kASTha kI DaMDI vAlA) pAdapoMchana rakhanA yA usakA upayoga
karanA nahIM kalpatA hai /

Page #197 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Fifth Objective] [243 44. It is not permissible for a Niggrantha to keep or
use a 'Padaponchhan' with a wooden stick. Discussion- The Padaponchhan
instrument of the Vastra Khand is used to wipe off dust from the feet, etc. /
Its different uses are described in the Pagam. Here, due to the aforementioned
reasons, the use of a Padaponchhan with a wooden stick is prohibited for a
Sadhvi, and a Sadhu can keep a Padaponchhan with a stick if necessary / Other
information related to this instrument is given in the discussion of Nishita U.
2 Sutra 1. Mutual exchange of urine method-prohibition 45. It is not permissible
for Niggranthas or Niggranthis to drink each other's urine or massage with it,
except in severe illness and terror / 45. It is not permissible for Niggranthas
and Niggranthis to drink each other's urine or massage with it, except in severe
illness and terror / Discussion- Although urine is not drinkable, yet on the
advice of a physician, in difficult-to-treat diseases like blood disorders,
leprosy, etc., or in case of snakebite or terror that can quickly cause death,
Sadhus and Sadhvis are allowed to drink urine, and in case of swelling, etc.,
they are allowed to massage with it, as per the present Sutra / In many
diseases, the use of cow, goat, etc., urine and in many diseases, the use of
one's own urine is prescribed in medical science. Due to these reasons, there
may be a situation where a Sadhu-Sadhvi may have to exchange urine with each
other. The Sutra has been laid down in this regard, and in normal circumstances,
mutual exchange is also prohibited. The meaning of Achaman is also to purify,
but here, due to the strong provision related to severe illness, the meaning of
massage is relevant. Method-prohibition of keeping food-medicine contaminated
46. It is not permissible for Niggranthas or Niggranthis to eat food that has
been kept overnight, even if it is the size of a skin, even if it is the size of
the earth, even if it is the size of a drop, except in severe illness and terror
/ 47. It is not permissible for Niggranthas or Niggranthis to apply or smear
their body with anything that has been contaminated, except in severe illness
and terror / 48. It is not permissible for Niggranthas or Niggranthis to apply
or smear their body with oil or ghee that has been contaminated, except in
severe illness and terror / 46. It is not permissible for Niggranthas and
Niggranthis to eat food that has been kept overnight (Parivasit), even if it is
the size of a skin, even if it is the size of the earth, even if it is the size
of a drop, except in severe illness and terror

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
pAMcavAM uddezaka] [243 44. nirgrantha ko dArudaNDa vAlA 'pAdapoMchana' rakhanA
yA usakA upayoga karanA kalpatA hai| vivecana-vastrakhaNDa kA pAdapoMchana
upakaraNa pAMva kI raja Adi poMchane ke kAma AtA hai / usake bhinna-bhinna
upayoga pAgama meM varNita haiN| yahAM pUrvokta kAraNoM se kASThadaNDayukta
pAdapoMchana kA sAdhvI ke liye niSedha kiyA gayA hai aura sAdhu ko yadi Avazyaka
ho to vaha daNDayukta pAdapoMchana rakha sakatA hai / isa upakaraNa sambandhI
anya jAnakArI nizItha u. 2 sUtra 1 ke vivecana meM dI gaI hai| paraspara moka
AdAna-pradAna vidhi-niSedha 45. no kappai niggaMthANa vA niggaMthINa vA
annamannassa moyaM prApibittae vA Ayamittae vA nannattha gADhA'gADhesu
rogAyakesu / 45. nirgranthoM aura nirgranthiyoM ko eka dUsare kA mUtra pInA yA
usase mAliza karanA nahIM kalpatA hai, kevala ugra roga evaM AtaMkoM meM kalpatA
hai / vivecana-yadyapi mUtra apeya hai phira bhI vaidya ke kahane para
raktavikAra, kor3ha Adi kaSTasAdhya rogoM meM athavA sarpa-daMza yA zIghra
prANaharaNa karane vAle AtaMka hone para sAdhu aura sAdhviyoM ko mUtra pIne kI
aura zotha Adi roga hone para usase mAliza karane kI chUTa prastuta sUtra meM dI
gaI hai / aneka rogoM meM gAya, bakarI Adi kA tathA aneka rogoM meM svayaM ke
mUtrapAna kA cikitsAzAstra meM vidhAna kiyA gayA hai| ina kAraNoM se kabhI
sAdhu-sAdhvI ko paraspara mUtra ke AdAna-pradAna karane kA prasaMga A sakatA
hai| isI apekSA se sUtra meM vidhAna kiyA gayA hai tathA sAmAnya sthiti meM
paraspara lena-dena karane kA niSedha bhI kiyA hai| Acamana kA artha zuddhi
karanA bhI hotA hai kintu yahAM para prabala roga sambandhI vidhAna hone se
mAliza karane kA artha hI prasaMgAnukUla hai| AhAra-auSadha parivAsita rakhane
ke vidhi-niSedha 46. no kappai niggaMdhANa vA niggaMthoNa vA pAriyAsiyassa
prAhArassa tayappamANamettamavi, bhUippamANamettamavi, toviMduppamANamettamavi
AhAramAhArettae, nannattha gADhA'gADhesu rogAyaMkesu / 47. no kappai niggaMthANa
vA niggaMthoNa vA pAriyAsieNaM AlevaNajAeNaM gAyAI prAlipittae vA vilipittae vA,
nannatya gADhA'gAhiM rogAryakehi / 48. no kappaha niggaMthANa vA niggaMthINa vA
pAriyAsieNaM telleNa vA jAva navanIeNa vA gAyAI abhaMgittae vA makkhittae vA,
nannatya gADhA'gAhiM rogAyaMkehi / 46. nirgranthoM aura nirgranthiyoM ko
parivAsita (rAtri meM rakhA huA) AhAra tvak pramANa

Page #198 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[244] It is not permissible for a Jain to consume food the size of a sesame seed
or husk, or to drink water the size of a pinch, except in cases of severe
illness or fear. 47. It is not permissible for Jains to apply any kind of
ointment to their bodies, whether once or repeatedly, except in cases of severe
illness or fear. 48. It is not permissible for Jains to apply oil or ghee to
their bodies, except in cases of severe illness or fear. Discussion: It is
strictly forbidden for Jains to accumulate food and drink, or to apply
ointments, at night, and there is a penance for doing so. This is because such
actions violate the principles of non-violence. The commentary provides a
detailed explanation of this topic. In cases of severe illness or fear, it is
permissible to accumulate the aforementioned essential items, to keep them
overnight, and to use them. If one knows that a severe illness or fear is
imminent, such as a pandemic or an invasion, and the village is being evacuated,
or if a monk is ill and unable to walk, and the necessary medicines are not
available in nearby villages and have to be brought from far away, then one can
accumulate these items, keep them overnight, and use them. Sandalwood, nutmeg,
and ginger are examples of substances that can be used as ointments. They are
prepared by grinding or crushing them on a stone.  *MƒÅlepan* refers to applying
an ointment once, *vilepan* refers to applying it repeatedly, and *ƒÅlepan*
refers to applying it all over the body in case of burning sensation. *Vilepan*
refers to applying an ointment to a specific part of the body, such as the head.
Jains should not use any kind of ointment for beautification. They can only use
ointments for the relief of illness. In cases of severe illness or fear, these
substances can be kept overnight. These sutras allow for the consumption and use
of substances kept overnight in exceptional circumstances. This should not be
understood as allowing for the consumption of food or the use of substances at
night, but rather as allowing for the use of substances kept overnight during
the day. The sutras should be understood as allowing for the keeping of rare
substances overnight and their use during the day in cases of severe illness or
fear. The commentary explains how to keep different substances overnight and how
to use them.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
244] [bRhatkalpasUtra (tila-tuSa jitanA) bhUti-pramANa (eka cuTakI jitanA) khAnA
tathA pAnI bindupramANa jitanA bhI pInA nahIM kalpatA hai, kevala ugra roga evaM
AtaMka meM kalpatA hai| 47. nirgranthoM aura nirgranthiyoM ko apane zarIra para
sabhI prakAra ke parivAsita lepana eka bAra yA bAra-bAra lagAnA nahIM kalpatA
hai, kevala ugra roga evaM prAtaMkoM meM lagAnA kalpatA hai| 48. nirgranthoM
aura nirgranthiyoM ko apane zarIra para parivAsita tela yAvat navanIta ko
cupar3anA yA malanA nahIM kalpatA hai, kevala ugra roga yA aAtaMkoM meM kalpatA
hai| vivecana-nirgrantha-nirgranthiyoM ko khAne-pIne yogya aura lepana-mardana
karane yogya padArthoM kA saMcaya karanA tathA rAtri meM una padArthoM kA lAnA,
rakhanA evaM unakA upayoga karanA utsargamArga meM sarvathA niSiddha hai aura
ina kAryoM ke liye prAyazcitta kA bhI vidhAna hai| kyoMki ina kAryoM ke karane
se saMyamavirAdhanA hotI hai| bhASya meM isa viSaya kA vistRta varNana hai| ugra
roga yA aAtaMka hone para pUrvokta atyanta Avazyaka padArthoM ke saMcaya karane
kA tathA rAtri meM parivAsita rakhane kA evaM unake upayoga karane kA
apavAdamArga meM hI vidhAna hai| gItArtha yadi yaha jAna le ki nikaTa bhaviSya
meM ugna roga yA AtaMka hone vAlA hai, mahAmArI yA senAoM ke AtaMka se gAMva
khAlI ho rahe haiM, sthavira rugNa haiM, calane meM asamartha haiM, Avazyaka
auSadhiyAM Asa-pAsa ke gAMvoM meM na milane ke kAraNa dUra gAMvoM se lAI gaI
haiM, ityAdi kAraNoM se ukta padArthoM kA saMcaya kara sakate haiM, rAtri meM
parivAsita rakha sakate haiM evaM unakA upayoga bhI kara sakate haiN| candana,
kAyaphala, soMTha Adi dravya lepana yogya hote haiN| zilA para ghisa kara yA
pIsakara inakA lepa taiyAra kiyA jAtA hai| mAlepana-eka bAra lepana karanA /
vilepana-bAra-bAra lepana karanA / athavA Alepana-zarIra meM jalana Adi hone
para sarvAMga meM lepa krnaa| vilepana-mastaka Adi viziSTa aMga para lepa karanA
/ nirgrantha nirgranthiyoM ko saundaryavRddhi ke lie kisI prakAra ke pAlepana-
vilepana kA prayoga nahIM karanA caahie| kevala rogAdi kI zAnti ke lie lepya
padArthoM kA prayoga kara sakate haiM / AgADha rogAtaMka meM ina padArthoM ko
rAtri meM bhI rakhA jA sakatA hai| ina sUtroM meM rAtri meM rakhe gaye padArthoM
kA paristhitivaza khAne evaM upayoga meM lene kA vidhAna kiyA gayA hai| isase
rAtri meM khAnA yA upayoga meM lenA na samajhakara parivAsita padArthoM ko dina
meM upayoga meM lene kA hI samajhanA cAhiye / durlabha dravyoM ko rAta meM
rakhane kI evaM prabala rogAtaMka meM dina meM upayoga lene kI chUTa sUtra se
samajha lenI cAhiye / bhinna-bhinna padArthoM ko rAtri meM kisa viveka se kisa
prakAra rakhanA, isakI vidhi bhASya se jAnanI caahiye|

Page #199 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Fifth Objective | 245. The Fault of a Pariharak Bhikshu and Its Atonement
49. If a Pariharak Bhikshu goes out for a Vyavavritti (a period of retreat) to
the Theras, and by chance commits a fault while in the Pariharakalp (period of
austerity), and the Thera learns of this through his own knowledge or from
others, then after the Vyavavritti, he should be given a very small Prasthapana
(atonement).  **Explanation:** The word "Vyavavritti" in this sutra is an
example of Upalakshana (a word used to denote something else), therefore other
necessary tasks are also included in it. If the Acharya (teacher) or the head of
the Gan (group) sends a Pariharatap (one who is undergoing austerity) for
Vyavavritti or to debate with the followers of other philosophies, or if he
himself goes elsewhere for some unavoidable reason, and there he transgresses
the limits of his Pariharatap, then the Acharya, etc., should know about this
transgression through his own knowledge or from someone else and give him a very
small atonement. This is because his Pariharatap was interrupted due to special
reasons like Vyavavritti or debate, etc. In such situations, if necessary, the
Acharya can also release him from his Pariharatap. Therefore, the transgression
committed during that period is considered forgivable and a very small
Prasthapana atonement is given.  ## The Law of Going to a Gochari (a place of
retreat) After Accepting Pulak-Bhakta (a very delicious meal)  50. If a
Nigganthi (Jain monk) enters a householder's house for food and accepts Pulak-
Bhakta (a very delicious meal) there, and if he is able to sustain himself with
that meal, then he should stay on that food for that day, but he should not go
to the householder's house for food again. If he is not able to sustain himself
with that meal, then it is permissible for him to go to the householder's house
for food again.  **Explanation:** The word "Pulak" generally means
"unsubstantial food," but here it has a special meaning...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
pAMcavAM uddezaka] |245 parihArika bhikSu kA doSasevana evaM prAyazcitta 49.
parihArakappaTThie bhikkhU bahiyA therANaM veyAvaDiyAe gacchejjA, se ya Ahacca
aikkamejjA, taM ca therA jANijjA appaNo AgameNaM annesi vA aMtie soccA, to
pacchA tassa ahAlahusae nAma vavahAre paTudhiyavve siyaa|| 49.
parihArakalpasthita bhikSu yadi sthaviroM kI vaiyAvRtya ke lie kahIM bAhara jAe
aura kadAcit parihArakalpa meM koI doSa sevana karale, yaha vRttAnta sthavira
apane jJAna se yA anya se sunakara jAna le to vaiyAvRtya se nivRtta hone ke bAda
use atyalpa prasthApanA prAyazcitta denA cAhiye / vivecana-isa sUtra meM
'vaiyAvRtya' pada upalakSaNa hai, ataH anya Avazyaka kArya bhI isameM samAviSTa
kara lie jAte haiN| _ prAcArya yA gaNa pramukha Adi parihAratapa vahana karane
vAle ko vaiyAvRtya ke lie yA anya darzana ke vAdiyoM ke sAtha zAstrArtha karane
ke lie kahIM anyatra bhejeM yA vaha svayaM anivArya kAraNoM se kahIM anyatra jAe
aura vahAM usake parihAratapa kI maryAdA kA atikramaNa ho jAe taba usake
atikramaNa ko prAcAryAdi svayaM apane jJAna-bala se yA anya kisI ke dvArA jAna
leM to use atyalpa prAyazcitta deM, kyoMki usakA parihAratapa vaiyAvRtya yA
zAstrArtha Adi vizeSa kAraNoM se khaNDita huyA hai| aise prasaMgoM meM Avazyaka
lage to prAcArya usakA parihAratapa chur3Akara bhI bheja sakate haiN| ataH usa
avadhi meM kiyA gayA atikramaNa kSamya mAnA gayA hai evaM usakA atyalpa
prasthApanA prAyazcitta diyA jAtA hai| pulAka-bhakta grahaNa ho jAne para gocarI
jAne kA vidhi-niSedha 50. niggaMthIe ya gAhAvaikulaM piNDavAyapaDiyAe
aNupaviTThAe annayare pulAgabhatte paDiggAhie siyA sA ya saMtharejjA, kappai se
tadivasaM teNeva bhattaTThaNaM pajjosavettae, no se kappai doccaM pi
gAhAvaikulaM piNDavAyapaDiyAe pavisittae / sA ya na saMtharejjA, evaM se kappai
doccaM pi gAhAvaikulaM piNDavAyapaDiyAe pvisitte| 50. nimranthI AhAra ke lie
gRhastha ke ghara meM praveza kare aura vahAM yadi pulAka-bhakta (atyaMta sarasa
AhAra) grahaNa ho jAe aura yadi usa gRhIta AhAra se nirvAha ho jAe to usa dina
usI pAhAra se rahe kintu dUsarI bAra aAhAra ke lie gRhastha ke ghara meM na
jaave|| yadi usa gRhIta AhAra se nirvAha na ho sake to dUsarI bAra pAhAra ke lie
jAnA kalpatA hai| vivecana--pulAka zabda kA sAmAnya artha hai-'asAra padArtha',
kintu yahAM kucha vizeSa artha

Page #200 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
This Kalpasutra states that any food that causes a loss of restraint or
disrespect or criticism of the Jain religion, the Sangha, or the Dharma is
called Pulak-Bhakta. The commentary explains that Pulak-Bhakta is of three
types: 1. Dhanya Pulak, 2. Gandha Pulak, 3. Rasa Pulak. 1. Grains like Sanwa,
Sali, and Ball, which do not increase physical strength, are called 'Dhanya
Pulak'. 2. Garlic, onion, cloves, cardamom, and perfumes with strong odors are
called 'Gandha Pulak'. 3. Milk, tamarind juice, grape juice, and other highly
nutritious, flavorful, and chemically-mixed foods are called 'Rasa Pulak'. This
Sutra prohibits a Sadhvi from going out for alms again if she can sustain
herself on 'Pulak-Bhakta'. Therefore, the Sutra should be understood in the
context of 'Rasa Pulak'. The Sutra's prohibition on going out for alms again in
the case of 'Gandha Pulak' and 'Dhanya Pulak' is not logical. 'Rasa Pulak' often
causes indigestion or madness. Therefore, if a Sadhvi can sustain herself on it,
she should not go out for alms to avoid these potential problems. If the 'Rasa
Pulak' is in small quantities and cannot sustain her, she can go out for alms
again. This Sutra applies to Nirgranthi. Why not to Nirgranth? The commentator
answers: "Eseva gamo niyama tivihpulagammi hoi samanaanam" - the rule that
applies to Nirgranthi also applies to Nirgranth. The summary of the fifth
Uddeshak is: If a man or woman, disguised as a Sadhu or Sadhvi, embraces a Sadhu
or Sadhvi and they experience sexual desire from the touch, they incur
Guruchaumasi Pratikraman. If a monk from another gana comes to you in distress,
you should pacify him and give him a Dikshached Pratikraman for five days and
send him back to his gana. If you realize that the sun has set or has not risen
after eating or while eating, you should spit out the food. If you eat it, you
incur Guruchaumasi Pratikraman. If you have a bad taste in your mouth at night,
you should spit it out and not swallow it.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
[yahatkalpasUtra jinake sevana se saMyama nissAra ho jAe athavA jinazAsana,
saMgha aura dharma kI avahelanA yA nindA ho ve saba khAdyapadArtha pulAka-bhakta
kahe jAte haiM / bhASya meM vistRta artha karate hue pulAka-bhakta tIna prakAra
ke kahe haiM 1 dhAnyapulAka, 2. gandhapulAka, 3. rasapulAka / 1. jina dhAnyoM ke
khAne se zArIrika sAmarthya Adi kI vRddhi na ho, aise sAMvA, zAli, balla Adi
'dhAnyapulAka' kahe jAte haiN| 2. lahasuna pyAja prAdi tathA loMga ilAyacI itra
prAdi jinakI utkaTa gandha ho, ve saba padArtha 'gandhapulAka' kahe jAte haiN|
3. dUdha imalI kA rasa drAkSArasa Adi athavA ati sarasa, pauSTika evaM aneka
rAsAyanika auSadha-mizrita khAdya padArtha 'rasapulAka' kahe jAte haiN| isa
sUtra meM 'pulAkabhakta' ke grahaNa kie jAne para nirvAha ho sake to sAdhvI ko
punaH gocarI jAne kA niSedha kiyA hai / ataH yahAM rasapulAka kI apekSA sUtra kA
vidhAna samajhanA caahie| kyoMki gandhapulAka aura dhAnyapulAka rUpa vaikalpika
artha meM puna: gocarI nahIM jAne kA sUtrokta vidhAna tarkasaMgata nahIM hai|
rasapUlAka ke prati sevana se ajIrNa yA unmAda hone kI prAyaH sambhAvanA rahatI
hai / ataH usa dina usase nirvAha ho sakatA ho to phira bhikSA ke lie nahIM jAnA
cAhie, jisase ukta doSoM kI sambhAvanA na rahe / yadi vaha rasa-pulAkabhakta
atyalpa mAtrA meM ho aura usase nirvAha na ho sake to punaH bhikSA grahaNa kI jA
sakatI hai| isa sUtra meM nimranthI ke lie hI vidhAna kiyA gayA hai, nirgrantha
ke lie kyoM nahIM? isakA uttara bhASyakAra ne isa prakAra diyA hai| "eseva gamo
niyamA tivihapulAgammi hoI samaNANaM" jo vidhi nirgranthI ke lie hai, vahI
nirgrantha ke lie bhI hai| pAMcaveM uddezaka kA sArAMza deva yA devI strI kA yA
puruSa kA rUpa vikurvita kara sAdhu sAdhvI kA AliMgana Adi kare, taba ve usake
sparza Adi se maithunabhAva kA anubhava kareM to unheM gurucaumAsI prAyazcitta
AtA hai| anya gaNa se koI bhikSu Adi kleza karake Ave to use samajhAkara zAnta
karanA evaM pAMca dina Adi kA dIkSAcheda prAyazcitta dekara punaH usake gaNa meM
bheja denaa| yadi AhAra grahaNa karane ke bAda yA khAte samaya yaha jJAta ho jAe
ki sUryAsta ho gayA hai yA sUryodaya nahIM huA hai to usa pAhAra ko paraTha denA
cAhiye / yadi khAve to use gurucaumAsI prAyazcitta pAtA hai / rAtri ke samaya
muha meM udgAla A jAe to use nahIM nigalanA kintu paraTha denA caahiye|

Page #201 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Fifth Uddeshak:  **Sutras 11, 12, 13-14, 15-17, 18-21, 22-32:**  * If a
**saccitta** seed, **raj** or **tras** creature enters the food while
**gochari**, it should be carefully removed. If it cannot be removed, then that
much contaminated food should be discarded. * If **saccitta** water drops fall
into the food while **gochari**, hot food can be eaten, but cold food should be
discarded. * If an animal or bird touches or enters the genitals of a
**nirgranthi** while she is excreting at night, and the **nirgranthi** approves
of it with **maithunabhav**, then she incurs **guruchaumasi** penance. * A
**nirgranthi** should not go alone for **gochari**, **sthandil** or
**svadhyaya**, and should not wander or observe **chaturmas** alone. * A
**nirgranthi** should not be without clothes, free from sin, keep her body
**vosira**, or take **atapan** outside the village. However, she can take
**atapan** in the **upashraya** according to the prescribed method. * A
**nirgranthi** should not be bound by any kind of **asana** by vow. *
**Aakuchana patta**, **palamban**-equipped **asana**, small **stambha**-equipped
**pidhe**, **nal**-equipped **tumba**, **kasthadanda**-equipped
**patrakesarika** or **padaphochana** are not allowed for a **sadhvi**, but a
**sadhu** can use them. * Without a strong reason, **sadhu** and **sadhvi**
cannot use each other's urine for drinking or rinsing. * **Sadhu** and
**sadhvi** cannot use food, water, medicine, and **lepya** substances kept
overnight without a strong reason. However, they can use these substances during
the day with a strong reason. * If a **bhikshu** carrying **parihara tap** goes
for service and violates any of his **maryada**, he should perform a very small
penance after returning from the service. * After getting very nutritious food,
a **sadhvi** should not search for other food. However, if she cannot survive on
that food, and it is in very small quantity, she can go for **gochari** again.
**Conclusion:**  This **uddeshak** contains 45 **sutras**. **Sutras 1-4** and
**13-14** deal with the penance for **maithunabhav**, and the duty towards a
**bhikshu** who has come after suffering.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
pAMcavAM uddezaka] sUtra 11 12 13-14 15-17 18-21 22-32 [247 gocarI karate hue
kabhI AhAra meM sacitta bIja, raja yA trasa jIva A jAe to use sAvadhAnIpUrvaka
nikAla denA caahie| yadi nahIM nikala sake to utanA saMsakta AhAra paraTha denA
caahiye| gocarI karate hue kabhI AhAra meM sacitta jala kI bUdeM Adi gira jAe~
to garma AhAra ko khAyA jA sakatA hai aura ThaNDe sAhAra ko paraTha denA
caahiye| rAtri meM mala-mUtra tyAga karatI huI nirgranthI ke guptAMgoM kA koI
pazu yA pakSI sparza yA avagAhana kareM aura nirgranthI maithunabhAva se usakA
anumodana kare to use gurucaumAsI prAyazcitta AtA hai| nirgranthI ko gocarI,
sthaMDila yA svAdhyAya Adi ke liye akele nahIM jAnA cAhiye tathA vicaraNa evaM
cAturmAsa bhI akele nahIM karanA caahie| nirgranthI ko vastrarahita honA,
pAparahita honA, zarIra ko vosirA kara rahanA, grAma ke bAhara AtApanA lenA
nahIM kalpatA hai, kintu sUtrokta vidhi se vaha upAzraya meM prAtApanA le sakatI
hai| nirgranthI ko kisI bhI prakAra ke Asana se pratijJAbaddha hokara rahanA
nahIM kalpatA hai| AkucanapaTTa, pAlambana yukta Asana, choTe stambhayukta
pIDhe, nAlayukta tumbA, kASThadaNDayukta pAtrakesarikA yA pAdapoMchana sAdhvI ko
rakhanA nahIM kalpatA hai, kintu sAdhu inheM rakha sakatA hai| prabala kAraNa ke
binA sAdhu-sAdhvI eka dUsare ke mUtra ko pIne evaM Acamana karane ke upayoga meM
nahIM le sakate haiN| sAdhu-sAdhvI rAta rakhe hue AhAra-pAnI auSadha aura lepya
padArthoM ko prabala kAraNa ke binA upayoga meM nahIM le sakate, kintu prabala
kAraNa se ve una padArthoM kA dina meM upayoga kara sakate haiN| parihAratapa
vahana karane vAlA bhikSu sevA ke liye jAve, usa samaya yadi vaha apanI kisI
maryAdA kA ullaMghana kara le to use sevAkArya se nivRtta hone para atyalpa
prAyazcitta denA caahie| atyanta pauSTika AhAra A jAne ke bAda sAdhvI ko anya
AhAra kI gaveSaNA nahIM karanA caahie| kintu usa AhAra se yadi nirvAha na ho
sake, itanI alpa mAtrA meM hI ho to puna: gocarI lAne ke liye jA sakatI hai|
upasaMhAraisa uddezaka meM 45 sUtra 1-4, 13-14 maithunabhAva ke prAyazcitta kA,
kleza karake Aye bhikSu ke prati kartavya kA,

Page #202 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[24] [Brihatkalpasutra 15-32 33-44 45] The discernment of night-time meals and
its atonement, the discernment of contaminated food, the non-solitude of a
Nirgranthi, and the non-washing of the body, the taking of heat, the distinction
between permissible and impermissible, the non-performance of pledged postures,
the distinction between permissible and impermissible for various tools, the
distinction between permissible and impermissible for mutual urine use, the
distinction between permissible and impermissible for contaminated food and
medicine, the transgression of a Pariharic monk, nutritious food, etc. have been
discussed. // Fifth Uddeshak ends // 46-48

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
24] [bRhatkalpasUtra 15-32 33-44 45 rAtribhojana kA viveka evaM usake
prAyazcitta kA, saMsakta AhAra ke viveka kA, nirgranthI ko ekAkI na hone kA evaM
zarIra ko na vosirAne kA, AtApanA lene ke / kalpyAkalpya kA aura pratijJAbaddha
Asana na karane kA, aneka upakaraNoM ke kalpyAkalpya kA, paraspara mUtra-upayoga
ke kalpyAkalpya kA, parivAsita AhAra evaM auSadha ke kalpyAkalpya kA, parihArika
bhikSu ke atikramaNa karane kA, pauSTika AhAra kA, ityAdi viSayoM kA kathana
kiyA gayA hai| // pAMcavAM uddezaka samApta // 46-48

Page #203 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Sixth Uddeshak: Prohibition of Unthinkable Speech  1. **It is not befitting
for Nigganthas or Nigganthis to utter these six types of speech:**      1.
**Alikavacana:** False or deceitful speech.     2. **Holitavacana:** Speech that
insults or belittles others.     3. **Khisitavacana:** Speech that is angry or
provokes anger.     4. **Parushavacana:** Harsh, rough, or cruel speech.     5.
**Garhasthyavacana:** Addressing family members by their familial names like
father, son, uncle, etc.     6. **Vinosaviyam:** Rekindling conflict by
repeating words that cause strife, even after reconciliation.  **Explanation:**
1. **Alikavacana:** False or deceitful speech is considered "Alikavacana." 2.
**Holitavacana:** Speech that belittles or insults others is considered
"Holitavacana." 3. **Khisitavacana:** Speech that is angry or provokes anger is
considered "Khisitavacana." 4. **Parushavacana:** Harsh, rough, or cruel speech
is considered "Parushavacana." 5. **Garhasthyavacana:** Addressing family
members by their familial names like father, son, uncle, etc. is considered
"Garhasthyavacana." 6. **Vinosaviyam:** Rekindling conflict by repeating words
that cause strife, even after reconciliation, is considered "Vinosaviyam."
**Sadhus and Sadhvis should avoid these six types of speech.**  **The same
atonement applies to those who falsely accuse others:**  2. **There are six
specific types of atonement for transgressions, as follows:**     1.
**Pa·πáƒÅivairasa:** Violence against a living being.     2. **MusƒÅvƒÅya:** Lying.
3. **Pradi·πá·πáƒÅdƒÅ·πáassa:** Accepting a gift that was not given freely.     4.
**Aviraiva:** Stealing.     5. **AparisavƒÅ:** Sexual misconduct.     6.
**VƒÅsavƒÅ:** Indulging in worldly pleasures.  **These six types of atonement
should be performed until the transgression is fully atoned for, and the
individual attains the state of TatthƒÅ·πáapatta.**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
chaTThA uddezaka akalpya vacanaprayoga kA niSedha 1. no kappai niggaMthANa vA
niggaMthINa vA imAI cha avayaNAI vaittae, taM jahA 1. aliyavayaNe, 2.
holiyavayaNe, 3. khisiyavayaNe, 4. pharusavayaNe, 5. gAratthiyavayaNe, 6.
vinosaviyaM vA puNo udorittae / 1. nirgranthoM nirgranthiyoM ko ye chaha
niSiddha vacana bolanA nahIM kalpatA hai, yathA 1. alIkavacana, 2. hIlitavacana,
3. khisitavacana, 4. paruSavacana, 5. gArhasthyavacana, 6. kalahakAraka vacana
kA punarkathana / / vivecana-1. alIkavacana-asatya yA mithyA bhASaNa
'alIkavacana' hai| 2. holitavacana-dUsare kI avahelanA karane vAlA vacana
'hIlitavacana' hai| 3. khisitavacana-roSapUrNa kahe jAne vAle yA roSa utpanna
karane vAle vacana khisitavacana' haiN| 4. paruSavacana-karkaza, rUkSa, kaThora
vacana 'paruSavacana' haiN| 5. gArhasthyavacana-gRhastha-avasthA ke sambandhiyoM
ko pitA, putra, mAmA Adi nAmoM se pukAranA 'gArhasthyavacana' haiN| 6.
kalahaudIraNAvacana-kSamAyAcanAdi ke dvArA kalaha ke upazAnta ho jAne ke bAda
bhI kalahakAraka vacana kahanA 'vyupazamita-kalaha-udIraNa vacana' hai| sAdhu
aura sAdhviyoM ko aise chahoM prakAra ke vacana nahIM bolane caahie| asatya
AkSepakartA ko usI prAyazcitta kA vidhAna 2. kappassa cha patyArA paNNattA, taM
jahA 1. pANAivAyarasa vAyaM vayamANe, 2. musAvAyassa vAyaM vayamANe, 3.
pradinnAdANassa vAyaM vayamANe, 4. aviraivAyaM bayamANe, 5. apurisavAyaM
vayamANe, 6. vAsavAyaM vymaanne| iccee kappassa cha patyAre pattharettA samma
appaDipUremANe taTThANapatte siyaa| 2. kalpa-sAdhvAcAra ke chaha vizeSa prakAra
ke prAyazcittasthAna kahe gaye haiM, yathA

Page #204 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[250] 1. When accused of *PrƒÅ·πáƒÅtipƒÅta*, 2. When accused of *M·πõ·π£ƒÅvƒÅda*, 3. When
accused of *AdattƒÅdƒÅna*, 4. When accused of violating *Brahmacarya*, 5. When
accused of being *Napumsaka*, 6. When accused of being a *DƒÅsa*. A *SƒÅdhu* who
does not prove someone innocent by accusing them of these specific *PrƒÅya≈õcitta*
places, becomes a partaker of that very *PrƒÅya≈õcitta* place. Discussion - 1. The
conduct of the *Kalpa-nirgrantha*, 2. *PrastƒÅra* - specific *PrƒÅya≈õcitta*
places, 3. Accusing someone of having taken *Prastara·πáa PrƒÅya≈õcitta* - *Sevana*.
/  The s≈´tra mentions six *PrastƒÅra* - First *PrastƒÅra* - If a *Nirgrantha* in
the presence of the *ƒÄcƒÅrya* etc. says about another *Nirgrantha*, "Such and
such *Nirgrantha* has killed such and such *Trasa* being." The *ƒÄcƒÅrya* etc.
hearing his statement, should call the *Nirgrantha* related to the accusation
and ask him, "Did you kill a *Trasa* being?" If he says, "I did not kill any
being." In such a situation, the *Nirgrantha* who made the accusation should be
asked to prove his statement. If the accuser proves the accusation, then the one
who is accused of killing a being, is eligible for *PrƒÅya≈õcitta* according to
the fault. If the accuser cannot prove the accusation, then he becomes a
partaker of the *PrƒÅya≈õcitta* given for committing *PrƒÅ·πáƒÅtipƒÅta*. Similarly, the
second *PrastƒÅra* should be understood in relation to the accusation of
*M·πõ·π£ƒÅvƒÅda*, the third *PrastƒÅra* in relation to the accusation of *AdattƒÅdƒÅna*,
and the fourth *PrastƒÅra* in relation to the accusation of *AvirativƒÅda* -
violation of *Brahmacarya*.  /  Accusing a *Nirgrantha* of being *Napumsaka* in
front of the *ƒÄcƒÅrya* etc. who gave the initiation, is the fifth *PrastƒÅra* '
*Apu·π£u·π£avƒÅda*'. Accusing a *Nirgrantha* of being "a slave or a son of a slave",
is the sixth *PrastƒÅra* " *DƒÅsavƒÅda*".  /  If the accuser and the accused accuse
each other or there is a debate between them, then the amount of *PrƒÅya≈õcitta*
also increases. That is, the *Caturlaghu* mentioned in the s≈´tra becomes
*Caturguru* *PrƒÅya≈õcitta*. If the accusation reaches its peak, then the
*PrƒÅya≈õcitta* is also given to the peak.  /  That is, the *Nirgrantha* with the
fault has to bear the final *PrƒÅya≈õcitta* *PƒÅra√±cƒ´ka*. For specific details, one
should refer to the *BhƒÅ·π£ya*.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
250] 1. prANAtipAta kA Aropa lagAye jAne para, 2. mRSAvAda kA Aropa lagAye jAne
para, 3. adattAdAna kA Aropa lagAye jAne para, 4. brahmacaya bhaga karane kA
Aropa lagAye jAne para, 5. napuMsaka hone kA Aropa lagAye jAne para, 6. dAsa
hone kA Aropa lagAye jAne pr| saMyama ke ina vizeSa prAyazcittasthAnoM kA Aropa
lagAkara use samyak pramANita nahIM karane vAlA sAdhu usI prAyazcittasthAna kA
bhAgI hotA hai| vivecana -1. kalpa-nirgrantha kA AcAra, 2. prastAra-vizeSa
prAyazcittasthAna, 3. prastaraNaprAyazcittasthAna-sevana kA AkSepa lagAnA /
sUtra meM chaha prastAra kahe gae haiM- prathama prastAra-yadi koI nirgrantha
kisI eka nigrantha ke sambandha meM prAcAryAdi ke sammukha / upasthita hokara
kahe ki "amuka nirgrantha ne amuka trasa jIva kA hanana kiyA hai|" prAcAryAdi
usakA kathana sunakara abhiyoga (prAropa) se sambandhita nirgrantha ko bulAve
aura usase pUche ki "kyA tumane trasa jIva kI ghAta kI hai ?" yadi vaha kahe ki
"maiMne kisI jIva kI ghAta nahIM kI hai|" aisI dazA meM abhiyoga lagAne vAle
nirgrantha ko apanA kathana pramANita karane ke lie kahanA caahie| yadi
abhiyoktA Aropa ko pramANita kara de to jisa para jIvaghAta kA Aropa lagAyA hai,
vaha doSAnurUpa prAyazcitta kA pAtra hotA hai| yadi abhiyoktA abhiyoga pramANita
na kara sake to vaha prANAtipAta kiye jAne para die jAne vAle prAyazcitta kA
bhAgI hotA hai| isI prakAra dvitIya prastAra mRSAvAda, tRtIya prastAra
adattAdAna aura caturtha prastAra avirativAda-brahmacaryabhaMga ke abhiyoga ke
sambandha meM samajha lenA cAhie / dIkSA dene vAle prAcAryAdi ke sAmane kisI
nigrantha ke napuMsaka hone kA abhiyoga lagAnA paMcama prastAra 'apuruSavAda'
hai| kisI nirgrantha ke sambandha meM "yaha dAsa thA yA dAsIputra thA", isa
prakAra kA abhiyoga lagAnA SaSTha prastAra "dAsavAda" hai / abhiyoktA aura doSa-
sevI yadi eka dUsare para Aropa-pratyAropa lagAveM yA unameM vAdaprativAda bana
jAe to prAyazcitta kI mAtrA bhI bar3ha jAtI hai| arthAt sUtrokta caturlaghu kA
caturguru prAyazcitta ho jAtA hai| yadi abhiyoga carama sImA taka ho jAtA hai to
prAyazcitta bhI carama sImA kA hI diyA jAtA hai / arthAt sadoSa nirgrantha ko
antima prAyazcitta pArAJcika vahana karanA par3atA hai| vizeSa vivaraNa ke lie
bhASya dekhanA cAhie /

Page #205 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Sixth Uddeshak] [251 Sadhu-Sadhvi's mutual removal of thorns etc. - rules] 3.
If a Niggrantha has a thorn, glass, or sharp stone stuck in his foot, and
another Niggrantha is able to remove it or cleanse the area, then the Niggrantha
who removes it or cleanses it does not violate the Jina-agya. 4. If a Niggrantha
has a mosquito, seed, or dust in his eye, and another Niggrantha is unable to
remove it or cleanse the area, then the Niggrantha who removes it or cleanses it
does not violate the Jina-agya. 5. If a Niggranthi has a thorn, glass, or sharp
stone stuck in her foot, and another Niggranthi is unable to remove it or
cleanse the area, then the Niggranthi who removes it or cleanses it does not
violate the Jina-agya. 6. If a Niggranthi has a mosquito, seed, or dust in her
eye, and another Niggranthi is unable to remove it or cleanse the area, then the
Niggranthi who removes it or cleanses it does not violate the Jina-agya.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
chaTThA uddezaka] [251 sAdhu-sAdhvI ke paraspara kaNTaka Adi nikAlane kA vidhAna
3. niggaMthassa ya ahe pAyaMsi khANU vA, kaMTae vA, hIrae vA, sakkare vA
pariyAvajjejjA, taM ca niggaMthe no saMcAei nIharittae vA, visohettae vA, taM
niggaMthI nIharamANI vA visohemANI vA naaikkm| 4. niggaMthassa ya acchisi pANe
vA, bIye vA, rae vA pariyAvajjejjA, taM ca niggathe no saMcAei nIharittae vA
visohettae vA, taM niggathI noharamANI vA visohemANI vA nAikkamai / 5.
niggaMthIe ya ahe pAyaMsi khANU vA, kaMTae vA, horae vA, sakkare vA
pariyAvajjejjA, taM ca niggaMthI no saMcAei nIharittae vA visohettae vA, taM
nigaMthe noharamANe vA visohemANe vA naaikkmi| 6. niggaMthIe ya acchisi pANe vA,
boye vA, rae vA pariyAvajjejjA, taM ca niggaMthI no saMcAiei noharittae vA
visohettae vA, taM niggathe noharamANe vA visohemANe vA naaikkmi| 3. nirgrantha
ke paira ke taluve meM tIkSNa zuSka ThuTha, kaMTaka, kAMca yA tIkSNa pASANa-
khaNDa laga jAve aura use vaha (yA anya koI nirgrantha) nikAlane meM yA usake
aMza kA zodhana karane meM samarthana ho, (usa samaya) yadi nirgranthI nikAle yA
zodhe to jinAjJA kA atikramaNa nahIM karatI hai| 4. nirgrantha kI A~kha meM
macchara Adi sUkSma prANI, bIja yA raja gira jAve aura use vaha (yA anya koI
nirgrantha) nikAlane meM yA usake sUkSma aMza kA zodhana karane meM samartha na
ho, (usa samaya) yadi nirgranthI nikAle yA zodhe to jinAjJA kA atikramaNa nahIM
karatI hai| 5. nirgranthI ke paira ke taluve meM tIkSNa zuSkaLUTha, kaMTaka,
kAMca yA pASANa khaNDa laga jAve aura use vaha (yA anya nirgranthI) nikAlane meM
yA unake sUkSma aMza kA zodhana karane meM samartha na ho, (usa samaya) yadi
nirgrantha nikAle yA zodhe to jinAjJA kA atikramaNa nahIM karatA hai| 6.
nirgranthI kI A~kha meM (macchara Adi sUkSma) prANI, bIja yA raja gira jAve aura
use vaha (yA anya koI nirgranthI) nikAlane meM yA usake sUkSma aMza kA zodhana
karane meM samartha na ho, (usa samaya) yadi nirgrantha nikAle yA zodhe to
jinAjJA kA atikramaNa nahIM karatA hai| vivecana-nirgrantha nirgranthI ke zarIra
kA aura nirgranthI nirgrantha ke zarIra kA sparza na kare, yaha utsargamArga
hai| kintu paira meM kaMTaka Adi laga jAne para evaM aA~kha meM raja Adi gira
jAne para anya kisI ke dvArA nahIM nikAle jA sakane para kaNTakAdi nikAlane meM
kuzala nirgrantha yA nirgranthI apavAdamArga meM eka dUsare ke kaNTakAdi nikAla
sakate haiN| aisI sthiti meM eka dUsare ke zarIra kA sparza hone para bhI ve
prAyazcitta ke pAtra nahIM hote haiM kintu aise samaya meM bhI kSetra aura kAla
kA tathA vastrAdi kA viveka rakhanA atyanta Avazyaka hotA hai evaM yogya sAkSI
kA honA bhI Avazyaka hai|

Page #206 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[252] [Hatkalpasutra] 7. A Niggrantha does not transgress the Jina's command by
taking hold of or supporting a Niggranthi who is falling or slipping from a
dangerous (inhabited by ferocious animals), uneven, or mountainous place. 8. A
Niggrantha does not transgress the Jina's command by taking hold of or
supporting a Niggranthi who is falling or sinking into mud, mire, or water. 9. A
Niggrantha does not transgress the Jina's command by taking hold of or
supporting a Niggranthi who is boarding or disembarking a boat. 10. A Niggrantha
does not transgress the Jina's command by taking hold of or supporting a
Niggranthi who is distracted. 11. A Niggrantha does not transgress the Jina's
command by taking hold of or supporting a Niggranthi who is distressed. 12. A
Niggrantha does not transgress the Jina's command by taking hold of or
supporting a Niggranthi who is afflicted by a disease. 13. A Niggrantha does not
transgress the Jina's command by taking hold of or supporting a Niggranthi who
is suffering from a fever. 14. A Niggrantha does not transgress the Jina's
command by taking hold of or supporting a Niggranthi who is suffering from a
cold. 15. A Niggrantha does not transgress the Jina's command by taking hold of
or supporting a Niggranthi who is suffering from a cough. 16. A Niggrantha does
not transgress the Jina's command by taking hold of or supporting a Niggranthi
who is suffering from a headache. 17. A Niggrantha does not transgress the
Jina's command by taking hold of or supporting a Niggranthi who is suffering
from a stomach ache. 18. A Niggrantha does not transgress the Jina's command by
taking hold of or supporting a Niggranthi who is suffering from a wound.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
252] [hatkalpasUtra sAdhu dvArA sAdhvI ko avalambana dene kA vidhAna 7. niggathe
niggItha duggaMsi vA, visamaMsi vA, padhvayaMsi vA pakkhalamANi vA pavaTamANi vA
geNhamANe vA avalambamANe vA nAikkamai / 8. niggaMthe nigya seyaMsi vA, paMkasi
vA, paNagaMsi vA udayaMsi vA, prokasamANi vA ovajmamANi vA geNhamANe vA
avalambamANe vA nAikkamai / 9. niggathe nigathi nAvaM prArohamANi vA, orohamANi
vA geNhamANe vA avalambamANe vA naaikkmi| 10. khittacittaM niggathi niggathe
giNhamANe vA avalambamANe vA nAikkamai / 11. dittacittaM niggathi niggathe
giNhamANe vA avalambamANe vA nAikkamai / 12. jakkhAiTTha niggathi niggaMthe
giNhamANe vA avalambamANe vA nAikkamai / 13. ummAyapattaM nigathi niggathe
giNhamANe vA avalambamANe vA nAikkamai / 14. uvasAMgapattaM niggathi niggaMthe
giNhamANe vA avalambamANe vA nAikkamai / 15. sAhigaraNaM nigathi niggaMthe
giNhamANe vA avalambamANe vA nAikkamai / 16. sapAyacchittaM niggathi niggaMthe
giNhamANe vA avalambamANe vA nAikkamai / 17. bhattapANapaDiyAikkhiyaM niggathi
niggaMthe giNhamANe vA avalambamANe vA nAikkamai / 18. aTThajAyaM niggathi
niggaMthe giNhamANe vA avalambamANe vA nAikkamai / 7. durgama(hiMsaka jAnavaroM
se vyApta) sthAna, viSama sthAna yA parvata se phisalatI huI yA giratI huI
nirgranthI ko nirgrantha grahaNa kare yA sahArA de to jinAjJA kA atikramaNa
nahIM karatA hai| _8. dala-dala, paMka, panaka yA jala meM giratI huI yA DUbatI
huI nirgranthI ko nirgrantha grahaNa kare yA sahArA de to jinAjJA kA atikramaNa
nahIM karatA hai| 9. naukA para car3hatI huI yA naukA se utaratI huI nirgranthI
ko nirgrantha grahaNa kare yA sahArA de to jinAjJA kA atikramaNa nahIM karatA
hai| 10. vikSiptacitta vAlI nirgranthI ko nirgrantha grahaNa kare yA avalambana
de to jinAjJA kA atikramaNa nahIM karatA hai|

Page #207 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Sixth Uddeshak] [253 11. A Nirgranthi with a disturbed mind (Kshipta Chitta)
may accept Nirgrantha food or support from another Nirgranthi without violating
the Jina-agya. 12. A Nirgranthi possessed by a Yaksha may accept Nirgrantha food
or support from another Nirgranthi without violating the Jina-agya. 13. A
Nirgranthi suffering from madness (Unmada) may accept Nirgrantha food or support
from another Nirgranthi without violating the Jina-agya. 14. A Nirgranthi
afflicted by an upsarga (Upsarga-prapta) may accept Nirgrantha food or support
from another Nirgranthi without violating the Jina-agya. 15. A Nirgranthi who
has calmed down from intense passions (Saadhikaran) may accept Nirgrantha food
or support from another Nirgranthi without violating the Jina-agya. 16. A
Nirgranthi who is undergoing severe penance (Saprayaschitta) may accept
Nirgrantha food or support from another Nirgranthi without violating the Jina-
agya. 17. A Nirgranthi who has renounced food and drink (Bhakta-paan-
pratyakhyata) may accept Nirgrantha food or support from another Nirgranthi
without violating the Jina-agya. 18. A Nirgranthi who is seeking disciples or a
position (Artha-jat) may accept Nirgrantha food or support from another
Nirgranthi without violating the Jina-agya.   The path of liberation for
Nirgranthi-Nirgranthis is to never touch each other. If they do, they violate
the Jina-agya. However, in the situations mentioned in the above sutras,
Nirgranthi-Nirgranthis can help each other and provide service without violating
the Jina-agya. 1. Kshipta Chitta - Disturbed mind due to sorrow or fear / 2.
Dipta Chitta - Disturbed mind due to excessive joy / 3. Yaksha-vist - Possessed
by a ghost, spirit, etc. / 4. Unmada-prapta - Mad due to delusion / 5. Upsarga-
prapta - Afflicted by a deva, human, or a celestial being / 6. Saadhikaran -
Calmed down from intense passions / 7. Saprayaschitta - Disturbed mind due to
severe penance / 8. Bhakta-paan-pratyakhyata - Exhausted due to lifelong fasting
/ 9. Artha-jat - Disturbed due to the desire for disciples or a position /
Nirgranthi-Nirgranthis who are mad, possessed by a ghost, afflicted by an
upsarga, or fearful should take care of each other. They should stop those who
are engaged in conflict or discord by holding their hands.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
chaTThA uddezaka] [253 11. diptacitta vAlI nirgranthI ko nirgrantha grahaNa kare
yA avalambana de to jinAjJA kA atikramaNa nahIM karatA hai| 12. yakSAviSTa
nimranthI ko nirgrantha grahaNa kare yA avalambana de to jinAjJA kA atikramaNa
nahIM karatA hai| 13. unmAda-prApta nirgranthI ko nirgrantha grahaNa kare yA
avalambana de to jinAjJA kA atikramaNa nahIM karatA hai| 14. upasarga-prApta
nirgranthI ko nirgrantha grahaNa kare yA avalambana de to jinAjJA kA atikramaNa
nahIM karatA hai| 15. sAdhikaraNa nirgranthI ko nirgrantha grahaNa kare yA
avalambana de to jinAjJA kA atikramaNa nahIM karatA hai| 16. saprAyazcitta
nirgranthI ko nirgrantha grahaNa kare yA avalambana de to jinAjJA kA atikramaNa
nahIM karatA hai| 17. bhakta-pAnapratyAkhyAta nirgranthI ko nirgrantha grahaNa
kare yA avalambana de to jinAjJA kA atikramaNa nahIM karatA hai| 18. artha-jAta
nirgranthI ko nirgrantha grahaNa kare yA avalambana de to jinAjJA kA atikramaNa
nahIM karatA hai| vivecana-nirgrantha-nirgranthiyoM kA utsargamArga to yahI hai
ki ve kabhI bhI eka dUsare kA sparza na kreN| yadi karate haiM to ve jinAjJA kA
ullaMghana karate haiN| kintu ukta sUtroM meM kahI gaI paristhitiyoM meM
nirgrantha nirgranthiyAM eka dUsare ke sahAyaka bana kara sevA-zuzrUSA kareM to
jinAjJA kA atikramaNa nahIM karate haiM 1. kSiptacitta-zoka yA bhaya se
bhramitacitta / 2. diptacitta harSAtireka se bhramitacitta / 3. yakSAviSTa-
bhUta-preta Adi se pIr3ita / 4. unmAdaprApta-mohodaya se pAgala / 5.
upasargaprApta-deva, manuSya yA tithaMca Adi se trasta / 6. sAdhikaraNa-tIvra
kaSAya-kalaha se prazAMta / 7. saprAyazcitta kaThora prAyazcitta se calacitta /
8. bhakta-pAnapratyAkhyAtaAjIvana anazana se klAMta / 9. arthajAta-ziSya yA pada
kI prApti kI icchA se vyAkula / unmatta, pizAcagrasta, upasarga-pIr3ita,
bhayagrasta nirgrantha-nirgranthiyAM eka dUsare ko sambhAleM, kalaha, visaMvAda
meM saMlagna ko hAtha pakar3a kara rokeN|

Page #208 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
In the absence of other attendant Sadhvi, make arrangements for all kinds of
care for the Nirgranthi who is about to die in Samadhi after rejecting the
devotee. / Although many Sadhvis live together, in some special circumstances,
it becomes necessary to take care of or assist the Sadhu because the Sadhvis
cannot handle it. / The Sutra only mentions the Nirgranthi being supported by
the Nirgranthi when falling, etc. But in some special circumstances, a Sadhvi
can also support a falling Sadhu, etc., this should also be understood by
implication. Six places that destroy restraint 19. Kappass ch palimanthu pannta,
tan jaha 1. Kokkuie sanjamass palim), 2. Moharie sacchavayanas palimanthu, 3.
Chakkhuloluae iriyavahiae palimanthu, 4. Titiinie esanagoyaras palim), 5.
Ichchaloluae muttimanggass palimanthu, 6. Bizzaniyanakarane mokkhamanggass
palimanthu, samvatth bhagavaya aniyanaya pasattha / 19. Six completely fatal
aspects of the Kalp Sadhvachar have been mentioned, such as 1. Doing bodily
activity without seeing or cleaning, is fatal to restraint. 2. Talkativeness, is
fatal to truthful speech. 3. Walking while looking here and there, is fatal to
Iryasamiti. 4. Being annoyed by the lack of food, etc., is fatal to Esanasamiti.
5. Greed for equipment, etc., is fatal to Aparigraha / 6. Seeking Nirvana
(desire for the fruits of penance) out of greed, i.e., desire for worldly
pleasures, is fatal to the path of liberation. Because the Lord has praised non-
desire and non-attachment everywhere. Discussion Although there are many
tendencies that destroy the virtues of restraint, the present Sutra mentions the
main six defects that destroy restraint. / The word "palimanthu" means to
completely destroy the virtues of restraint in many ways. 1. Kautkuchya -
whoever sits here and there without looking, keeps the body or hands, feet,
head, etc., limbs without looking or without discretion, he is the destroyer of
17 types of restraint.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
[bRhatkalpasUtra bhakta-pratyAkhyAna karake samAdhimaraNa karane vAlI nirgranthI
kI anya paricArikA sAdhvI ke abhAva meM sabhI prakAra kI paricaryA kI vyavasthA
kreN| / yadyapi aneka sAdhviyAM sAtha meM rahatI haiM phira bhI kucha vizeSa
paristhitiyoM meM sAdhviyoM se na sambhala sakane ke kAraNa sAdhu ko sambhAlanA
yA sahayoga denA Avazyaka ho jAtA hai / sUtra meM kevala giratI huI nirgranthI
ko nirgrantha dvArA sahArA dene Adi kA kathana hai| kintu kabhI vizeSa
paristhiti meM girate hue sAdhu ko sAdhvI bhI sahArA Adi de sakatI hai, yaha bhI
upalakSaNa se samajha lenA caahie| saMyamanAzaka chaha sthAna 19. kappassa cha
palimaMthU paNNatA, taM jahA 1. kokkuie saMjamassa palima), 2. moharie
saccavayaNassa palimaMthU , 3. cakkhulolue iriyAvahiyAe palimaMthU , 4. titiNie
esaNAgoyarassa palima), 5. icchAlolue muttimaggassa palimaMthU, 6.
bhijjAniyANakaraNe mokkhamaggassa palimaMthU, samvattha bhagavayA aniyANayA
pasatthA / 19. kalpasAdhvAcAra ke chaha sarvathA ghAtaka kahe gaye haiM, yathA
1. dekhe binA yA pramArjana kie binA kAyika pravRtti karanA, saMyama kA ghAtaka
hai| 2. vAcAlatA, satya vacana kA ghAtaka hai| 3. idhara-udhara dekhate hue
gamana karanA, IryAsamiti kA ghAtaka hai| 4. AhArAdi ke alAbha se khinna hokara
cir3hanA, eSaNAsamiti kA ghAtaka hai| 5. upakaraNa Adi kA prati lobha,
aparigraha kA ghAtaka hai / 6. lobhavaza arthAt laukika sukhoM kI kAmanA se
nidAna (tapa ke phala kI kAmanA) karanA, mokSamArga kA ghAtaka hai| kyoMki
bhagavAn ne sarvatra anidAnatA-nispRhatA prazasta kahI hai| vivecana yadyapi
saMyama-guNoM kA nAza karane vAlI aneka pravRttiyAM hotI haiM tathApi prastuta
sUtra meM mukhya chaha saMyamanAzaka doSoM kA kathana kiyA gayA hai /
"palimaMthu" zabda kA artha haisaMyamaguNoM kA aneka prakAra se sarvathA nAza
karane vaalaa| 1. kautkucya-jo yatra-tatra binA dekhe baiThatA hai, zarIra ko yA
hAtha pAMva mastaka Adi aMgopAMgoM ko binA dekhe yA binA viveka ke idhara-udhara
rakhatA hai, vaha 17 prakAra ke saMyama kA nAza karane vAlA hotA hai| .

Page #209 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Sixth Objective:  **2.  Maukarya (Excessive Speech):** Excessive speech is a
fault of the tongue. One who speaks excessively neglects virtues like humility,
becomes disliked, and speaks without thinking. Therefore, they speak
untruthfully and unnecessarily, thus polluting the true great vow. The
scriptures often refer to ascetics as those who speak little.  Being a person of
few words is also considered one of the eight virtues of a lay follower.  **3.
Chakshurlolya (Wandering Eyes):** One who looks around cannot follow the vow of
non-violence. Their vow of non-violence is broken. It is not appropriate for an
ascetic to look around while walking. This is because, due to the inability to
see clearly, it is possible to harm living beings, both mobile and immobile. The
restraint of the eye sense is for the protection of life in the first great vow.
In the fourth great vow, the restraint of the eye sense is for not looking at
women, etc. The second aspect of the fifth great vow is to maintain restraint
over the eye sense.  **4. Titinaka (Grumbling):** One who becomes distressed and
grumbles when they do not receive pleasing food, etc., and also neglects the
faults of craving in obtaining desired food, is said to break the vow of non-
attachment due to their nature of grumbling.  **5. Ichchhalolup (Greedy for
Desires):** A monk who has an intense desire for delicious food, clothes,
utensils, disciples, etc., does not follow the path of liberation, which is
primarily based on non-attachment. Because the main characteristic of the path
of liberation is the reduction of desires and attachment. One who destroys this
is called a greedy seeker, who destroys the path of liberation.  **6. Bhidhya
Nidankaran (Seeking Rewards):** A monk who, out of greed or attachment, seeks
rewards (the intention of obtaining worldly pleasures as a result of righteous
conduct) related to gods or any other kind of reward, will not attain liberation
in future lives due to these reward-seeking intentions, and will continue to
wander in hell, etc. Thus, this seeking of rewards is a barrier to attaining
liberation. It is appropriate and non-seeking to pray to the Supreme Being only
for the cultivation of virtues like knowledge, etc., or for the attainment of
liberation, without any kind of greed or attachment. For example:  1. May the
Tirthankaras be pleased with me. 2. May I receive the best of good fortune,
peace, and happiness. 3. May the Siddhas grant me liberation. -~Aav. A. 2, Ga.
5-6-7  There is no greed in this kind of prayer, therefore, this prayer is
conducive to liberation, not a hindrance. The commentator has explained the word
"Bhidhya" in this way: "Bhidhya" means greed, and the seeking of rewards due to
that greed. Seeking with the intention of getting rid of worldly suffering and
following the path of liberation is not a hindrance to the path of liberation.
-Brihatkalpa Bhashya, Part 6  In many copies, due to errors, the word "Bhidhya"
has been replaced with "Bhujjo", etc., which are later additions after the
commentator.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
chaTThA uddezaka] [255 2. maukharya-atyadhika bolanA vANI kA doSa hai, jyAdA
bolane vAlA vinaya Adi guNoM kI upekSA karatA hai, aprIti kA bhAjana banatA hai,
jyAdA bolane vAlA vicAra karake nahIM bolatA hai / ataH vaha asatya evaM
anAvazyaka bolatA hai / isa prakAra pratibhASI satyamahAvrata ko dUSita karatA
hai| AgamoM meM sAdhuoM ko aneka jagaha alpabhASI kahA hai / zrAvaka ke ATha
guNoM meM bhI alpabhASI honA eka guNa kahA gayA hai| 3. cakSurlolya-idhara-
udhara dekhane vAlA IryAsamiti kA pAlana nahIM kara sakatA hai, usakI IryAsamiti
bhaMga hotI hai| calate hue idhara-udhara dekhane kI pravRtti sAdhu ke liye
ucita nahIM hai| kyoMki yazodhana na kara sakane ke kAraNa trasa-sthAvara
prANiyoM kI hiMsA honA sambhava hai| cakSa-indriya kA saMyama prathama mahAvrata
meM jIvarakSA ke lie hai, caturtha mahAvata meM cakSa-indriya kA saMyama strI
Adi kA nirIkSaNa na karane ke lie hai| pAMcaveM mahAvrata kI dUsarI bhAvanA hI
cakSaindriya kA saMyama rakhanA hai| 4. titinaka-manojJa AhArAdi prApta na hone
para jo khinna hokara bar3abar3a karatA rahatA hai evaM icchita AhAra kI prApti
meM eSaNA ke doSoM kI upekSA bhI karatA hai / isa prakAra vaha tinatinATa karane
ke svabhAva se eSaNAsamiti ko bhaMga karane vAlA kahA gayA hai| 5. icchAlolupa-
sarasa AhAra kI, vastra-pAtrAdi upakaraNoM kI tathA ziSya Adi kI atyanta
abhilASA rakhane vAlA bhikSu aparigrahapradhAna muktimArga kA anusaraNa nahIM
karatA hai| kyoMki muktimArga rUpa saMyama meM icchAoM evaM mamatva kA kama honA
hI pramukha lakSaNa hai| isakA nAza karane vAlA icchAlolupa sAdhaka muktimArga
kA nAza karane vAlA kahA gayA hai / 6. bhidhyA nidAnakaraNa-lobhavaza yA
prAsaktivaza manuSya deva sambandhI yA anya kisI bhI prakAra kA nidAna
(dharmAcaraNa ke phalasvarUpa laukika sukhoM kI prApti kA saMkalpa) karane vAlA
bhikSa ina nidAna-saMkalpoM se dUsare bhavoM meM bhI mokSa prApta na karake
narakagati Adi meM paribhramaNa karatA rahatA hai / isa prakAra yaha
nidAnakaraNa mokSaprApti kA viccheda karane vAlA hai| kisI prakAra kA lobha yA
Asakti na rakhate hue kevala jJAnAdi guNoM kI ArAdhanA ke lie yA muktiprApti ke
lie paramAtmA se yAcanA-prArthanA karanA prazasta bhAva hai evaM anidAna hai|
yathA-1. titthayarA me psiiyNtu| 2. AruggabohilAbha, samAhivaramuttamaM ditu /
3. siddhA siddhi mama visNtu| -~Ava. a. 2, gA. 5-6-7 isa prakAra kI prArthanA
meM lobha nahIM hai, isalie yaha yAcanA mokSasAdhaka hai, bAdhaka nhiiN| aisA
TIkAkAra ne "bhijjA" zabda kI vyAkhyA karate hue spaSTa kiyA hai| vaha TIkA isa
prakAra hai "bhijja" ti lobhastena yad nidAnakaraNaM / bhijjA grahaNena
yadalobhasya bhavanirvedamArgAnusAritAdiprArthanaM tanna mokSamArgasya
parimantharityAveditaM prtipttvym| -bRhatkalpabhASya bhAga 6 kaI pratiyoM meM
bhrama se "bhijjA" ke sthAna "bhujjo" Adi pATha bhI bana gaye haiM, jo ki
TIkAkAra ke bAda meM bane haiN|

Page #210 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  [256] [Brihatkalpasutra Six Types of Kalpasthiti 20.  Chhamviha Kappattii
Pannaatta, Tam Jaha 1. Samaaiy-Sanjay-Kappattii, 2. Chhenovattaavaniiy-Sanjay-
Kappattii, 3. Nivisamaan-Kappattii, 4. Nisvitukaiiy-Kappattii, 5. Jinakappattii,
6. Therakappattii. The state of Kalpa is said to have six types of boundaries of
conduct / As follows: 1. Boundaries of Samayikacharitra, 2. Boundaries of
Chhedopasthapaniyacharitra, 3. Boundaries of the one who carries out penance in
Pariharavishuddhicharitra, 4. Boundaries of the Guru-kalpa and Anu-pariharic
Bhikshus in Pariharavishuddhicharitra, 5. Boundaries of the Jinakalp Bhikshus
who live a special ascetic life, having emerged from the Gachchha, 6. Boundaries
of the Sthavirakalp, that is, the Gachchha-dwelling Bhikshus. Discussion - Here,
the meaning of "Kalpa" is the conduct of a Sannyata. Remaining in that is called
Kalpasthiti. The Samachari (boundaries) of Nirgrantha-Nirgranthis is also called
Kalpasthiti. It is said to be of six types. As follows: 1. Samayikasannyata-
Kalpasthiti - To remain in Samabhava and to abandon all Saavdha tendencies, this
is Samayikasannyata-Kalpasthiti. This is of two types: 1. Itvarkalik - Until the
five Mahavratas are imposed, it is Itvarkalik Samayik-Kalpasthiti. 2. Yavajjivic
- Samayik that remains for life, Yavajjivic Samayikkalpasthiti. In which the
Mahavratas are not imposed again, this happens during the reign of the Madhyama
Tirthankaras / 2. Chhedopasthapaniy-Sannyata-Kalpasthiti - To give the great
initiation or to impose the Mahavratas again. This Kalpasthiti is of two types:
1. Niratichaar - To impose the five Mahavratas on the teachers who are Itvar
Samayik or on the disciples of Bhagwan Parshvanath, this is Niratichaar
Chhedopasthapaniy-Sannyata-Kalpasthiti.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
256] [bRhatkalpasUtra chaha prakAra kI kalpasthiti 20. chamvihA kappaTTiI
paNNattA, taM jahA 1. sAmAiya-saMjaya-kappaTTiI, 2. chenovaTThAvaNiya-saMjaya-
kappaTTiI, 3. nivisamANa-kappaTTiI, 4. nisviTukAiya-kappaTTiI, 5. jiNakappaTTiI,
6. therkppttttiii| kalpa kI sthitiAcAra kI maryAdAeM chaha prakAra kI kahI gaI
haiM / yathA 1. sAmAyikacAritra kI maryAdAeM, 2. chedopasthApanIyacAritra kI
maryAdAeM, 3. parihAravizuddhicAritra meM tapa vahana karane vAle kI maryAdAeM,
4. parihAravizuddhicAritra meM gurukalpa va anuparihArika bhikSuSoM kI
maryAdAeM, 5. gacchanirgata viziSTa tapasvI jIvana bitAne vAle jinakalpI
bhikSuoM kI maryAdAeM, 6. sthavirakalpI arthAt gacchavAsI bhikSuoM kI
mryaadaaeN| vivecana-yahAM "kalpa" kA artha saMyata kA prAcAra hai| usameM
avasthita rahanA kalpasthiti kahA jAtA hai| nirgrantha-nirgranthiyoM kI samAcArI
(maryAdA) ko bhI kalpasthiti kahA jAtA hai| vaha chaha prakAra kI kahI gaI hai|
yathA 1. sAmAyikasayata-kalpasthiti-samabhAva meM rahanA aura sabhI sAvadha
pravRttiyoM kA parityAga karanA, yaha sAmAyikasaMyata-kalpasthiti hai| yaha do
prakAra kI hotI hai 1. itvarakAlika-jaba taka paMca mahAvratoM kA AropaNa na
kiyA jAe taba taka itvarakAlika sAmAyika-kalpasthiti hai| 2. yAvajjIvika-
jIvanaparyanta rahane vAlI sAmAyika yAvajjIvika sAmAyikakalpasthiti hai| jisameM
punaH mahAvatAropaNa na kiyA jAya, yaha madhyama tIrthaMkaroM ke zAsanakAla meM
hotI hai / 2. chedopasthApanIya-saMyata-kalpasthiti bar3I dIkSA denA yA punaH
mahAvratAropaNa krnaa| yaha kalpasthiti do prakAra kI hotI hai 1. niraticAra-
itvarasAmAyika vAle zaikSakoM ko athavA bhagavAn pArzvanAtha ke ziSyoM ko paMca
mahAvratoM kI prAropaNA karAnA niraticAra chedopasthApanIya-saMyata-kalpasthiti
hai|

Page #211 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Translation:  **Chapter Six:  The Objective**  **257. 2.  **After accepting
the five great vows (mahavrata) of the Sa·πÉti-cara, if a nirgrantha or nirgranthi
knowingly breaks one or all five of these vows, then the cutting off of their
previous initiation (dƒ´k·π£ƒÅ-paryƒÅya) and the re-establishment of the great vows
is the state of the Sa·πÉti-cara-chhedopasthƒÅpanƒ´ya-sa·πÉyata-kalpasthiti.  **3.
**The state of the nirvi≈õamƒÅna-kalpasthiti is the state of those ascetics who
are engaged in the practice of austerity (tapa) in the purity of restraint
(pariharavi≈õuddhi).  **4.  **The state of the nirvi·π£·π≠akƒÅyika-kalpasthiti is the
state of those ascetics who have completed the practice of austerity in the
purity of restraint.  **5.  **The state of the jina-kalpasthiti is the state of
those ascetics who are solitary wanderers, who eat from their hands (pƒÅ·πáipƒÅtra-
bhojƒ´), and who are engaged in the study of the scriptures (gƒ´tartha), and who
have left their monastic order (gaccha).  **6.  **The state of the sthavira-
kalpasthiti is the state of those ascetics who remain within their monastic
order (gaccha) under the guidance of the ƒÅcƒÅrya and others.  Thus, the
Tƒ´rtha·πÉkaras have described six types of kalpasthiti for ascetics.  **Chapter
Six: Summary of the Objective**  **1.  **Ascetics (sƒÅdhu-sƒÅdhvƒ´) should not
speak six types of unjustifiable words. They should not make false accusations
against any ascetic. Because in the absence of evidence, they will have to
undergo penance themselves.    **2.  **Due to circumstances, ascetics can remove
thorns or other objects from each other's feet, and they can also remove dust or
other objects from each other's eyes.  **3-18.  **In special circumstances
mentioned in the s≈´tras, ascetics can provide support and care to each other.
Ascetics should be aware of the six faults that destroy restraint (sa·πÉyama) and
abandon them. There are six types of moral conduct (ƒÅcƒÅra-maryƒÅdƒÅ) based on the
different practices of those who uphold restraint.  **Conclusion**  This chapter
prohibits the speaking of unjustifiable words, describes the penance for making
false accusations without evidence, and outlines the mutual service duties of
ascetics in exceptional circumstances (3-18).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
TThA uddezaka [257 2. sAticAra-paMca mahAvrata svIkAra karane ke bAda jo
nirgrantha yA nirgranthI jAnabUjhakara kisI eka mahAvrata ko yAvat pAMcoM
mahAvratoM ko bhaMga kare to usakI pUrva dIkSAparyAya kA chedana kara punaH
mahAvratAropaNa karAnA sAticAra-chedopasthApanIya-saMyata-kalpasthiti hai| 3.
nivizamAna-kalpasthiti -parihAravizuddhi saMyama meM tapa kI sAdhanA karane vAle
sAdhuoM kI samAcArI ko nirvizamAna-kalpasthiti kahate haiN| _4. niviSTakAyika-
kalpasthiti-jo sAdhu saMyama kI vizuddhi rUpa tapa-sAdhanA kara cuke haiM, unakI
samAcArI ko nirviSTakAyika-kalpasthiti kahate haiN| 5. jinakalpasthiti- gaccha
se nikalakara ekAkI vicarane vAle pANipAtra-bhojI gItArtha sAdhuoM kI samAcArI
ko jinakalpasthiti kahate haiN| 6. sthavirakalpasthiti-gaccha ke bhItara
prAcAryAdi kI AjJA meM rahane vAle sAdhuoM kI samAcArI ko sthavirakalpasthiti
kahate haiN| isa prakAra tIrthaMkaroM ne sAdhuoM kI kalpasthiti chaha prakAra kI
kahI hai / cha? uddezaka kA sArAMza sUtra 1 sAdhu-sAdhvI ko chaha prakAra ke
akalpanIya vacana nahIM bolanA caahiye| kisI bhI sAdhu para asatya Aropa nahIM
lgaanaa| kyoMki pramANAbhAva meM svayaM ko prAyazcitta kA pAtra honA par3atA
hai| paristhitivaza sAdhu-sAdhvI eka dUsare ke paira meM se kaMTaka Adi nikAla
sakate haiM aura prAMkha meM par3I raja Adi bhI nikAla sakate haiM / 7-18
sUtrokta vizeSa paristhitiyoM meM sAdhu-sAdhvI ko sahArA de sakatA hai evaM
paricaryA kara sakatA hai| sAdhu-sAdhvI saMyamanAzaka chaha doSoM ko jAnakara
unakA parityAga kre| saMyamapAlana karane vAloM kI bhinna-bhinna sAdhanA kI
apekSA se chaha prakAra kI AcAramaryAdA hotI hai| upasaMhAra isa uddezaka meM
akalpya vacana bolane ke niSedha kA, AkSepa vacana pramANita nahIM karane ke
prAyazcitta kA, _3-18 apavAdamArga meM sAdhu-sAdhvI ke paraspara sevA kartavyoM
kA, sUtra 1

Page #212 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
255 [Brihatkalpa Sutra Sutra 19 has discussed the faults that destroy restraint,
the six types of Kalpa limits, etc. /  // Sixth Uddeshaka ends // Sutra number
according to the table Uddeshaka Sutra 30 ** NewM our.. 217  // Brihatkalpa
Sutra ends //

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
255 [bRhaskalpasUtra sUtra 19 saMyamanAzaka doSoM kA, . chaha prakAra kI kalpa
maryAdAoM kA, ityAdi viSayoM kA kathana kiyA gayA hai / ||chtttthaa uddezaka
samApta // sUtra saMkhyA ko tAlikA uddezaka sUtra 30 ** NewM our.. 217 //
bRhatkalpasUtra samApta //

Page #213 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Shri Bhagamprakashan Samiti, Byawar**  **Arthsahyogee Members' Auspicious Name
List**  **Mahastamh Sanrakshak**  1. Shri Seth Mohanmalji Chordia, Madras 2.
Shri Birdichandji Prakashchandji Telesara, Pali 3. Shri Gulabchandji Mangilalji
Surana, Sikandrabad 4. Shri Premrajji Jatanrajji Mehta, Medta City 5. Shri
Pukairajji Shishodia, Byawar 6. Shri Sha. Jadawmalji Manakchandji Betala,
Bagalkot 7. Shri Sayermalji Jethamalji Chordia, Bangalore 8. Shri Premrajji
Bhanwarlalji Shrishrimal, Durg 9. Shri Hiralalji Pannalalji Chopra, Byawar 10.
Shri S. Kishanchandji Chordia, Madras 11. Shri Mohanlalji Nemichandji Lalwani,
Changaitola 12. Shri Kanwarlalji Betala, Gohati 13. Shri Seth Khivrajji Chordia,
Madras 14. Shri Deepchandji Chandanmalji Chordia, Madras 15. Shri Gumanmalji
Chordia, Madras 16. Shri S. Badalchandji Chordia, Madras 17. Shri J. Dulichandji
Chordia, Madras 18. Shri S. Ratanchandji Chordia, Madras 19. Shri J. Annarajji
Chordia, Madras 20. Shri S. Sayerchandji Chordia, Madras 21. Shri R.
Shantillalji Uttamchandji Chordia, Madras 22. Shri Siremalji Hirachandji
Chordia, Madras 23. Shri J. Hukmichandji Chordia, Madras  **Stambh Sadasy**  1.
Shri Agarchandji Fatechandji Parekh, Jodhpur 2. Shri Jasrajji Ganeshmalji
Sancheti, Jodhpur 3. Shri Tilokchandji Sagarmalji Sancheti, Madras 4. Shri
Poosalalji Kisturchandji Surana, Katangi 5. Shri R. Prasannachandji Chordia,
Madras 6. Shri Deepchandji Chordia, Madras 7. Shri Mulchandji Chordia, Katangi
8. Shri Vardhaman Industries, Kanpur 9. Shri Mangilalji Mishrilalji Sancheti,
Durg 10. Shri Bastimalji Mohanlalji Bohra, Jadan 11. Shri Thanchandji Mehta,
Jodhpur 12. Shri Bhairudanji Labhchandji Surana, Nagaur 13. Shri Khubchandji
Gadiya, Byawar 14. Shri Mishrilalji Dhanrajji Vinaykia, Byawar 15. Shri
Indrachandji Baid, Rajnandgaon 16. Shri Ravatmalji Bhikmachandji Pagaria,
Balaghat 17. Shri Ganeshmalji Dharmicandji Kankaria, Tangla 18. Shri
Suganchandji Bokardia, Indore 19. Shri Harkachandji Sagarmalji Betala, Indore
20. Shri Raghunathmalji Lakshmi Chandji Lodha, Changaitola 21. Shri
Siddhakarnaji Shikharchandji Baid, Changaitola  **_Note:_** The term
"Arthsahyogee" refers to a member who contributes financially to the
organization. "Mahastamh Sanrakshak" and "Stambh Sadasy" are titles given to
members based on their level of contribution.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
zrI bhAgamaprakAzana-samiti, byAvara arthasahayogI sadasyoM kI zubha nAmAvalI
mahAstambha saMrakSaka 1. zrI seTha mohanamalajI corar3iyA , madrAsa 1. zrI
biradIcaMdajI prakAzacaMdajI talesarA, pAlI 2. zrI gulAbacandajI mAMgIlAlajI
surANA, 2. zrI jJAnarAjajI kevalacandajI mUthA, pAlI sikandarAbAda 3. zrI
premarAjajI jatanarAjajI mehatA, mer3atA siTI 3. zrI pukharAjajI zizodiyA,
byAvara 4. zrI za0 jaDAvamalajI mANakacandajI betAlA, 4. zrI sAyaramalajI
jeThamalajI coraDiyA, baiMgalora bAgalakoTa 5. zrI premarAjajI bhaMvaralAlajI
zrIzrImAla, durga 5. zrI hIrAlAlajI pannAlAlajI caupar3A, byAvara 6. zrI esa.
kizanacandajI coraDiyA, madrAsa 6. zrI mohanalAlajI nemIcandajI lalavANI, 7. zrI
kaMvaralAlajI baitAlA, gohATI cAMgATolA 8. zrI seTha khIMvarAjajI coraDiyA
madrAsa 7. zrI dIpacaMdajI candanamalajI coraDiyA, madrAsa 9. zrI gumAnamalajI
corar3iyA, madrAsa 8. zrI pannAlAlajI bhAgacandajI botharA, cAMgA10. zrI esa.
bAdalacandajI coraDiyA, madrAsa TIlA 11. zrI je. dulIcandajI coraDiyA, madrAsa
9. zrImatI sirekuvara bAI dharmapatnI sva. zrI sugana12. zrI esa. ratanacandajI
coraDiyA, madrAsa candajI jhAmar3a, madurAntakam 13. zrI je. annarAjajI
coraDiyA, madrAsa 10. zrI bastImalajI mohanalAlajI boharA 14. zrI esa.
sAyaracandajI coraDiyA, madrAsa (K. G. F.) jAr3ana / 15. zrI Ara. zAntilAlajI
uttamacandajI 11. zrI thAnacandajI mehatA, jodhapura coraDiyA, madrAsa 12. zrI
bhairudAnajI lAbhacandajI surANA, nAgaura 16. zrI siremalajI hIrAcandajI
corar3iyA, madrAsa 13. zrI khUbacandajI gAdiyA, byAvara 17. zrI je. hukmIcandajI
coraDiyA, madrAsa 14. zrI mizrIlAlajI dhanarAjajI vinAyakiyA stambha sadasya
byAvara 1. zrI agaracandajI phatecandajI pArakha, jodhapara 15. zrI indracandajI
baida, rAjanAMdagAMva 2. zrI jasarAjajI gaNezamalajI saMcetI, jodhapura 16. zrI
rAvatamalajI bhIkamacandajI pagAriyA, 3. zrI tilokacaMdajI, sAgaramalajI
saMcetI, madrAsa bAlAghATa 4. zrI pUsAlAlajI kistUracaMdajI surANA, kaTaMgI 17.
zrI gaNezamalajI dharmIcandajI kAMkariyA, TaMgalA 5. zrI Ara. prasannacandajI
coraDiyA, madrAsa 18. zrI suganacandajI bokar3iyA, indaura 6. zrI dIpacandajI
coraDiyA, madrAsa 19. zrI harakacandajI sAgaramalajI betAlA, indaura 7. zrI
mUlacandajI coraDiyA, kaTaMgI 20. zrI raghunAthamalajI likhamIcandajI lor3hA, 8.
zrI varddhamAna iNDasTrIja, kAnapura _ cAMgATolA 9. zrI mAMgIlAlajI mizrIlAlajI
saMcetI, durga 21. zrI siddhakaraNajI zikharacandajI baida, cAMgATolA

Page #214 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Member List  **Members**  1. Shri Sagarmalji Nortamlaji Pincha, Madras 2.
Shri Phoolchandji Gautamchandji Kanthad, Pali 3. Shri Mohanrajji Mukanchandji
Baliya, Ahmedabad 4. Shri K. Pukharajji Bafna, Madras 5. Shri Rooparajji
Jodhrajji Motha, Delhi 6. Shri Keshrimalji Janvarilaji Talesara, Pali 7. Shri
Mohanlalji Mangalchandji Pagaria, Raipur 8. Shri Ratanchandji Uttamchandji Modi,
Byawar 9. Shri Nathmalji Mohanlalji Luniya, Chandawal 10. Shri Dharmicandji
Bhagchandji Bohra, Jhata 11. Shri Bhanwarlalji Gautamchandji Pagaria, Dondi
Lohara Kushalpura 12. Shri Uttamchandji Mangilalji, Jodhpur 13. Shri Moolchandji
Parkh, Jodhpur 14. Shri Sumermalji Medtiya, Jodhpur 15. Shri Ganeshmalji
Nemichandji Tantia, Jodhpur 16. Shri Udayrajji Pukharajji Sancheti, Jodhpur 17.
Shri Badarmalji Pukharajji Bant, Kanpur 18. Smt. Sundarbai Gothi w/o Shri
Tarachandji Gothi, Jodhpur 19. Shri Raichandji Mohanlalji, Jodhpur 20. Shri
Dhevarchandji Rooparajji, Jodhpur 21. Shri Bhanwarlalji Manakchandji Surana,
Madras 22. Shri Jalmachandji Rikhbachandji Bafna, Agra 23. Shri Janvarilaji
Amarchandji Kothari, Byawar 24. Shri Manakchandji Kishnalalji, Medtacity 25.
Shri Mohanlalji Gulabchandji Chatar, Byawar 26. Shri Jasrajji Janvarilaji
Dhariawal, Jodhpur 27. Shri Mohanlalji Champalalji Gothi, Jodhpur 28. Shri
Nemichandji Dakalia Mehta, Jodhpur 29. Shri Tarachandji Kevalchandji Karnavat,
Jodhpur 30. Shri Prasumal & Co., Jodhpur 31. Shri Pukharajji Lodha, Jodhpur 32.
Shri C. Amarchandji Bothra, Madras 33. Shri Bhanwarlalji Moolchandji Surana,
Madras 34. Shri Badalchandji Jugrajji Mehta, Indore 35. Shri Lalchandji
Mohanlalji Kothari, Gothan 36. Shri Hiralalji Pannalalji Chopra, Ajmer 37. Shri
Mohanlalji Parsamalji Pagaria, Bangalore 38. Shri Bhanwarimalji Chordia, Madras
39. Shri Bhanwarlalji Gothi, Madras 40. Shri Ghevarchandji Pukharajji Bhurt,
Guwahati 41. Shri Jabarchandji Gelda, Madras 42. Shri Jadavamalji Suganchandji,
Madras 43. Shri Pukharajji Vijayrajji, Madras 44. Shri Chenmalji Surana Trust,
Madras 45. Shri Lanakaranji Rikhbachandji Lodha, Madras 46. Shri Surajmalji
Sajjanrajji Mehta, Koppal  **Associate Members**  1. Shri Devkaranji Shrichandji
Dosa, Medtacity 2. Smt. Chaganibai Vinaykia, Byawar 3. Shri Poonamchandji
Nahata, Jodhpur 4. Shri Bhanwarlalji Vijayrajji Kankaria, Villipuuram 5. Shri
Bhanwarlalji Chopra, Byawar 6. Shri Vijayrajji Ratnalalji Chatar, Byawar 7. Shri
B. Gajrajji Bokdia, Salem 8. Smt. Suganibai W/o Shri Mishrilalji Sand, Jodhpur
9. Shri Bachharaji Surana, Jodhpur 10. Shri Harkachandji Mehta, Jodhpur 11. Shri
Devrajji Labhchandji Medtiya, Jodhpur 12. Shri Kanakrajji Madanrajji Golia,
Jodhpur 13. Shri Ghevarchandji Parsamalji Tantia, Jodhpur 14. Shri Mangilalji
Chora, ...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
[sadasya-nAmAvalI 22. zrI sAgaramalajI noratamalajI pIMcA, madrAsa 8. zrI
phUlacandajI gautamacandajI kAMTheDa, pAlI 23. zrI mohanarAjajI mukanacandajI
bAliyA, 9. zrI ke. pukharAjajI bAphaNA, madrAsa ahamadAbAda 10. zrI rUparAjajI
jodharAjajI mUthA, dillI 24. zrI kezarImalajI jaMvarIlAlajI talesarA, pAlI 11.
zrI mohanalAlajI maMgalacaMdajI pagAriyA, rAyapura 25. zrI ratanacandajI
uttamacandajI modI, byAvara 12. zrI nathamalajI mohanalAlajI lUNiyA, caNDAvala
26. zrI dharmIcandajI bhAgacandajI boharA, jhaThA 13. zrI bhaMvaralAlajI
gautamacandajI pagAriyA, 27. zrI chogamalajI hemarAjajI lor3hA DoMDIlohArA
kuzAlapurA 28. zrI guNacaMdajI dalIcaMdajI kaTAriyA, bellArI 14. zrI
uttamacaMdajI mAMgIlAlajI, jodhapura 29. zrI mUlacandajI sujAnamalajI saMcetI,
jodhapUra 15. zrI mUlacandajI pArakha, jodhapura 30. zrI sI0 amaracandajI
botharA, madrAsa 16. zrI sumeramalajI mer3atiyA, jodhapUra 31. zrI
bhaMvaralAlajI mUlacaMdajI surANA, madrAsa 17. zrI gaNezamalajI nemIcandajI
TAMTiyA, jodhapura 32. zrI bAdalacaMdajI jugarAjajI mehatA, indaura 18. zrI
udayarAjajI pukharAjajI saMcetI, jodhapura 33. zrI lAlacaMdajI mohanalAlajI
koThArI, goThana 19. zrI bAdaramalajI pukharAjajI baMTa, kAnapura 34. zrI
hIrAlAlajI pannAlAlajI caupar3A, ajamera 20. zrImatI sundarabAI goThI w/o zrI
tArAcaMdajI 35. zrI mohanalAlajI pArasamalajI pagAriyA, goThI, jodhapura
baiMgalora 21. zrI rAyacandajI mohanalAlajI, jodhapura 36. zrI bhaMvarImalajI
corar3iyA, madrAsa 22. zrI dhevaracandajI rUparAjajI, jodhapura 37. zrI
bhaMvaralAlajI goThI, madrAsa 23. zrI bhaMvaralAlajI mANakacaMdajI surANA,
madrAsa / 38. zrI jAlamacaMdajI rikhabacaMdajI bAphanA. aAgarA 24. zrI
javarIlAlajI amaracandajI koThArI. byAvara 39. zrI ghevaracaMdajI pukharAjajI
bhuraTa, gohATI 25. zrA mANakaca 25. zrI mANakacandajI kizanalAlajI, mer3atAsiTI
40. zrI jabaracandajI gelar3A, madrAsa 26. zrI mohanalAlajI gulAbacandajI
catara, byAvara 41. zrI jar3AvamalajI suganacandajI, madrAsa 27. zrI jasarAjajI
jaMvarIlAlajI dhArIvAla, jodhapura 28. zrI mohanalAlajI campAlAlajI goThI,
jodhapura 42. zrI pukharAjajI vijayarAjajI, madrAsa 43. zrI cenamalajI surANA
TrasTa, madrAsa 29. zrI nemIcaMdajI DAkaliyA mehatA, jodhapura 44. zrI
laNakaraNajI rikhabacaMdajI lor3hA, madrAsa / 30. zrI tArAcaMdajI kevalacaMdajI
karNAvaTa, jodhapura 45. zrI sUrajamalajI sajjanarAjajI mahetA, koppala 21 - 31.
zrI prAsUmala eNDa ke0, jodhapura 32. zrI pukharAjajI loDhA, jodhapura sahayogI
sadasya 33. zrImatI suganIbAI W/o zrI mizrIlAlajI 1. zrI devakaraNajI zrIcandajI
DosA, mer3atAsiTI sAMDa, jodhapura 2. zrImatI chaganIbAI vinAyakiyA, byAvara 34.
zrI baccharAjI surANA, jodhapura 3. zrI pUnamacandajI nAhaTA, jodhapura 35. zrI
harakacandajI mehatA, jodhapura 4. zrI bhaMvaralAlajI vijayarAjajI kAMkariyA,
36. zrI devarAjajI lAbhacaMdajI mer3atiyA, jodhapura villIpuram 37. zrI
kanakarAjajI madanarAjajI goliyA, 5. zrI bhaMvaralAlajI caupar3A, byAvara
jodhapura 6. zrI vijayarAjajI ratanalAlajI catara, byAvara 38. zrI
ghevaracandajI pArasamalajI TAMTiyA, jodhapura 7. zrI bI. gajarAjajI bokaDiyA,
selama 39. zrI mAMgIlAlajI corA

Page #215 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Member List 40. Shri Sardarmalji Surana, Bhilai 69. Shri Hiralalji Hastimalji
Deshlhara, Bhilai 41. Shri Prokchandji Hemrajji Soni, Durg 70. Shri Vardhaman
Sthanakwasi Jain Shravak Sangh, Dalli-Rajhara 42. Shri Surajkaranji Surana,
Madras 71. Shri Champalalji Buddharajji Bafna, Beawar 43. Shri Ghisulalji
Lalchandji Parkh, Durg 72. Shri Gangaramji Indrachandji Bohra, Kuchera Jodhpur
73. Shri Fatehrajji Nemichandji Karnavat, Kolkata 44. Shri Pukharajji Bohra,
(Jain Transport Co.) 74. Shri Balchandji Thanchandji Bharat, Bangalore 45. Shri
Champalalji Saklecha, Jalna 75. Shri Sampatrajji Kataria, Jodhpur 46. Shri
Premrajji Mithalalji Kamdar, Kolkata 76. Shri Janvarilalji Shantilalji Surana,
Bolaram 47. Shri Bhanvarlalji Motha & Sons, Jaipur 77. Shri Kanmalji Kothari,
Dadia Mettpalayam 48. Shri Lalchandji Motilalji Gadia, Bangalore 78. Shri
Pannalalji Motilalji Surana, Pali 49. Shri Bhanvarlalji Navratnamalji Sankhla,
79. Shri Manakchandji Ratnalalji Munot, Tangla 50. Shri Pukharajji Chhallani,
Karanguli 80. Shri Chimman Singhji Mohansinghji Lodha, Beawar 51. Shri
Asakaranji Jasrajji Parkh, Durg 81. Shri Riddhakaranji Ravatmalji Bhurt,
Guwahati 52. Shri Ganeshmalji Hemrajji Soni, Bhilai 82. Shri Parsamalji
Mahavirchandji Bafna, Goth _ Medtacity 53. Shri Amritrajji Jaswantrajji Mehta,
83. Shri Fakirchandji Kamalchandji Shrishrimal, Kuchera 54. Shri Ghevarchandji
Kishoramalji Parkh, Jodhpur 84. Shri Mangilalji Madanlalji Chordia, Bhairund 55.
Shri Mangilalji Rekhchandji Parkh, Jodhpur 85. Shri Soh‡§®‡§≤‡§æ‡§≤ji Lunakaranji
Surana, Kuchera 56. Shri Munnilalji Mulchandji Gulechha, Jodhpur 86. Shri
Ghisulalji, Parsamalji, Janvarilalji Kothari, Gothan City 57. Shri Ratnalalji
Lakhpatrajji, Jodhpur 87. Shri Sardarmalji & Company, Jodhpur 58. Shri Jivrajji
Parsamalji Kothari, Medta 88. Shri Champalalji Hiralalji Bagrecha, Jodhpur 59.
Shri Bhanvarlalji Rikhabchandji Nahta, Nagaur 89. Shri Dhukharajji Kataria,
Jodhpur 60. Shri Mangilalji Prakashchandji Runwal, Mysore 90. Shri Indrachandji
Mukanchandji, Indore 61. Shri Pukharajji Bohra, Pipaliya Kalan 91. Shri
Bhanvarlalji Bafna, Indore 62. Shri Harkachandji Jugrajji Bafna, Bangalore 92.
Shri Jethmalji Modi, Indore 63. Shri Chandanmalji Premchandji Modi, Bhilai 93.
Shri Balchandji Amarchandji Modi, Beawar 64. Shri Bhiraji Baghmar, Kuchera 94.
Shri Kundanmalji Parsamalji Bhandari, Bangalore 65. Shri Tilakchandji
Premprakashji, Ajmer 95. Smt. Kamal Kanwar Lalwani, wife of Late Shri Parsamalji
Lalwani, Gothan 66. Shri Vijaylalji Premchandji Mulechha, Rajnandgaon 96. Shri
Akhechandji Lunakaranji Bhandari, Kolkata 67. Shri Ravatmalji Chajed, Bhilai 97.
Shri Suganchandji Sancheti, Rajnandgaon 68. Shri Bhanvarlalji Dungarmalji
Kankaria, Bhilai

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
sadasya-nAmAvalI 40. zrI saradAramalajI surANA, bhilAI 69. zrI hIrAlAlajI
hastImalajI dezalaharA, bhilAI 41. zrI prokacaMdajI hemarAjajI sonI, durga 70.
zrI varddhamAna sthAnakavAsI jaina zrAvakasaMgha, 42. zrI sUrajakaraNajI surANA,
madrAsa dallI-rAjaharA 43. zrI ghIsUlAlajI lAlacaMdajI pArakha, durga 71. zrI
campAlAlajI buddharAjajI bAphaNA, byAvara 44. zrI pukharAjajI boharA, (jaina
TrAnsaporTa kaM.) 72. zrI gaMgArAmajI indracaMdajI boharA, kucerA jodhapura 73.
zrI phateharAjajI nemIcaMdajI karNAvaTa, kalakattA 45. zrI campAlAlajI sakalecA,
jAlanA 74. zrI bAlacaMdajI thAnacandajI bharaTa, 46. zrI premarAjajI mIThAlAlajI
kAmadAra, kalakattA baiMgalora 75. zrI sampatarAjajI kaTAriyA, jodhapura 47. zrI
bhaMvaralAlajI mUthA eNDa sansa, jayapura 76. zrI jaMvarIlAlajI zAMtilAlajI
surANA, 48. zrI lAlacaMdajI motIlAlajI gAdiyA, baiMgalora bolArama 49. zrI
bhaMvaralAlajI navaratnamalajI sAMkhalA, 77. zrI kAnamalajI koThArI, dAdiyA
meTTapAliyama 78. zrI pannAlAlajI motIlAlajI surANA, pAlI 50. zrI pukharAjajI
challANI, karaNagullI 79. zrI mANakacaMdajI ratanalAlajI muNota, TaMgalA 51. zrI
AsakaraNajI jasarAjajI pArakha, durga 80. zrI cimmanasiMhajI mohanasiMhajI
loDhA, byAvara 52. zrI gaNezamalajI hemarAjajI sonI, bhilAI 81. zrI
riddhakaraNajI rAvatamalajI bhuraTa, gohATI 53. zrI amRtarAjajI jasavantarAjajI
mehatA, 82. zrI pArasamalajI mahAvIracaMdajI bAphanA, goTha _ mer3atAsiTI 83.
zrI phakIracaMdajI kamalacaMdajI zrIzrImAla, 54. zrI ghevaracaMdajI kizoramalajI
pArakha, jodhapura kucerA 55. zrI mAMgIlAlajI rekhacaMdajI pArakha, jodhapura
84. zrI mAMgIlAlajI madanalAlajI corar3iyA, bhairUMda 56. zrI munnIlAlajI
mUlacaMdajI gulecchA, jodhapura 85. zrI sohanalAlajI lUNakaraNajI surANA, kucerA
57. zrI ratanalAlajI lakhapatarAjajI, jodhapura 86. zrI ghIsUlAlajI,
pArasamalajI, jaMvarIlAlajI 58. zrI jIvarAjajI pArasamalajI koThArI, mer3atA
koThArI, goThana siTI 87. zrI saradAramalajI eNDa kampanI, jodhapura 59. zrI
bhaMvaralAlajI rikhabacaMdajI nAhaTA, nAgaura 88. zrI campAlAlajI hIrAlAlajI
bAgarecA, 60. zrI mAMgIlAlajI prakAzacandajI rUNavAla, maisUra jodhapura 61. zrI
pukharAjajI boharA, pIpaliyA kalAM 89. zrI dhukharAjajI kaTAriyA, jodhapura 62.
zrI harakacaMdajI jugarAjajI bAphanA, baiMgalora 90. zrI indracandajI
mukanacandajI, indaura 63. zrI candanamalajI premacaMdajo modI, bhilAI 91. zrI
bhaMvaralAlajI bAphaNA, indaura 64. zrI bhIvarAjajI bAghamAra, kucerA 92. zrI
jeThamalajI modI, indaura 65. zrI tilokacaMdajI premaprakAzajI, ajamera 93. zrI
bAlacandajI amaracandajI modI, byAvara 66. zrI vijayalAlajI premacaMdajI
mulecchA, 94. zrI kundanamalajI pArasamalajI bhaMDArI, baiMgalora rAjanAMdagA~va
65. zrImatI kamalAkaMvara lalavANI dharmapatnI zrI 67. zrI rAvatamalajI
chAjer3a, bhilAI sva. pArasamalajI lalavANI, goThana 68. zrI bhaMvaralAlajI
DUMgaramalajI kAMkariyA, 96. zrI akhecaMdajI laNakaraNajI bhaNDArI, kalakattA
bhilAI 97. zrI suganacandajI saMcetI, rAjanAMdagAMva

Page #216 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Member List 98. Shri Prakashchandji Jain, Nagaur 116. Shrimati Ramkunwarbai,
wife of Shri Chandamalji 99. Shri Kushalchandji Rikhabchandji Surana, Lodha,
Bombay Bolaram 117. Shri Mangilalji Uttamchandji Bafna, Bangalore 100. Shri
Lakshmichandji Ashok Kumarji Shrisrimal, 118. Shri Sanchalalji Bafna, Aurangabad
Kuchera 119. Shri Bhikhamchandji Manakchandji Khabia, 101. Shri Guddamalji
Champalalji, Gothan (Kuddalore) Madras 102. Shri Tejarajji Kothari,
Mangaliyaavas 120. Shrimati Anopkunwar, wife of Shri Champalalji 103.
Sampatrajji Chordia, Madras / Sanghvi, Kuchera 104. Shri Amarchandji Chajed,
Padu Bari 121. Shri Soh‡§®‡§≤‡§æ‡§≤ji Sojatiya, Thanvala 105. Shri Jugrajji Dhanrajji
Barmecha, Madras 122. Shri Champalalji Bhandari, Calcutta 106. Shri Pukharajji
Naharmalji Lalvani, Madras 123. Shri Bhikhamchandji Ganeshmalji Chaudhary, 107.
Shrimati Kanchandevi and Nirmaladevi, Madras 108. Shri Dulerajji Bhanwarlalji
Kothari, 124. Shri Pukharajji Kish‡§®‡§≤‡§æ‡§≤ji Tated, Kushalpura Secunderabad 109.
Shri Bhanwarlalji Mangilalji Betala, Deh 125. Shri Mishrilalji Sajjanlalji
Kataria 110. Shri Jeevarajji Bhanwarlalji Chordia, Secunderabad Bhairooda 126.
Shri Present Jain Shravak Sangh, 111. Shri Mangilalji Shantilalji Runwal, Bagar
Nagar Harsolav 127. Shri Pukharajji Parsamalji Lalvani, 112. Shri Chandamalji
Dhanrajji Modi, Ajmer Bilada 113. Shri Ramprasanna Gyanprasar Kendra, Chandrapur
128. Shri T. Parsamalji Chordia, Madras 114. Shri Bhurmalji Dulichandji
Bokardia, Medta 129. Shri Motilalji Asulalji Bohra City & Co., Bangalore 115.
Shri Mohanlalji Dh–∞riwal, Pali 130. Shri Sampatrajji Surana, Manmad 00 Dh–∞lia]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
[sadasya-nAmAvalI 98. zrI prakAzacaMdajI jaina, nAgaura 116. zrImatI
rAmakuMvarabAI dharmapatnI zrI cAMdamalajo 99. zrI kuzAlacaMdajI rikhabacandajI
surANA, loDhA, bambaI bolArama 117. zrI mAMgIlAlajI uttamacaMdajI bAphaNA,
baiMgalora 100. zrI lakSmIcaMdajI azokakumArajI zrIzrImAla, 118. zrI sAMcAlAlajI
bAphaNA, auraMgAbAda kucerA 119. zrI bhIkhamacandajI mANakacandajI khAbiyA, 101.
zrI gUdaDamalajI campAlAlajI, goThana (kuDAlora) madrAsa 102. zrI tejarAjajI
koThArI, mAMgaliyAvAsa 120. zrImatI anopakuMvara dharmapatnI zrI campAlAlajI
103. sampatarAjajI corar3iyA, madrAsa / saMghavI, kucerA 104. zrI amaracaMdajI
chAjer3a, pAdu bar3I 121. zrI sohanalAlajI sojatiyA, thAMvalA 105. zrI
jugarAjajI dhanarAjajI baramecA, madrAsa 122. zrI campAlAlajI bhaNDArI,
kalakattA 106. zrI pukharAjajI nAharamalajI lalavANI, madrAsa 123. zrI
bhIkhamacandajI gaNezamalajI caudharI, 107. zrImatI kaMcanadevI va nirmalAdevI.
madrAsa 108. zrI dulerAjajI bhaMvaralAlajI koThArI, 124. zrI pukharAjajI
kizanalAlajI tAter3a, kuzAlapurA sikandarAbAda 109. zrI bhaMvaralAla jI
mAMgIlAlajI betAlA, Deha 125. zrI mizrIlAlajI sajjanalAlajI kaTAriyA 110. zrI
jIvarAjajI bhaMvaralAlajI coraDiyA, sikandarAbAda bhairUdA 126. zrI vartamAna
sthAnakavAsI jaina zrAvaka saMgha, 111. zrI mAMgIlAlajI zAMtilAlajI rUNavAla,
bagar3Inagara harasolAva 127. zrI pukharAjajI pArasamalajI lalavANI, 112. zrI
cAMdamalajI dhanarAjajI modI, ajamera bilAr3A 113. zrI rAmaprasanna jJAnaprasAra
kendra, candrapura 128. zrI TI. pArasamalajI coraDiyA, madrAsa 114. zrI
bhUramalajI dulIcaMdajo bokar3iyA, mer3atA 129. zrI motIlAlajI AsUlAlajI boharA
siTI eNDa kaM., baiMgalora 115. zrI mohanalAlajI dhArIvAla, pAlI 130. zrI
sampatarAjajI surANA, manamAr3a 00 dhaliyA

Page #217 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Published by the **Nama Agama Prakashan Samiti, Byawar**, the following
**Agama** translations and editors are available:  * **Acharaangasutra** (Two
Parts) - **Shri Chand Surana 'Saras'** * **Upasakadasangasutra** - **Dr.
Chaganlal Shastri (M.A., Ph.D.)** * **Jnatadharmakathangasutra** - **Pandit
Shobhachand Bharill** * **Antakrddasangasutra** - **Sadhvi Divyaprabha (M.A.,
Ph.D.)** * **Anuttarovvaiysutra** - **Sadhvi Muktiprabha (M.A., Ph.D.)** *
**Sthanangasutra** - **Pandit Hiralal Shastri** * **Samavayangasutra** -
**Pandit Hiralal Shastri** * **Sutrakrtangasutra** - **Shri Chand Surana
'Saras'** * **Vipaksutra** - **Translation by Pandit Roshanlal Shastri, Edited
by Pandit Shobhachand Bharill** * **Nandisutra** - **Translation by Sadhvi
Umravkavar 'Archana', Edited by Kamala Jain 'Gigi' M.A.** * **Aupapatik Sutra**
- **Dr. Chaganlal Shastri** * **Vyakhyaprajnaptisutra** (Four Parts) - **Shri
Amarmuni** * **Rajprashniyasutra** - **Vani Bhushan Ratnamuni, Edited by
Devkumar Jain** * **Prajnapanasutra** (Three Parts) - **Jain Bhushan Gyanmuni**
* **Prashnavyakaranasutra** - **Translation by Muni Pravin Rishi, Edited by
Pandit Shobhachand Bharill** * **Uttaradhyayanasutra** - **Shri Rajendramuni
Shastri** * **Niryavalikasutra** - **Shri Devkumar Jain** * **Dashakalikasutra**
- **Mahasati Pushpavati** * **Aavashyakasutra** - **Mahasati Suprabha** *
**Jambudeep Prajnaptisutra** - **Dr. Chaganlal Shastri** * **Anuyogadwarasutra**
- **Upadhyay Shri Kevalmuni, Edited by Devkumar Jain** * **Surya Prajnapti,
Chandra Prajnapti Sutra** - **Edited by Muni Shri Kanhaiyalalji 'Kamal'** *
**Jivajivaabhigamasutra** (First Part) - **Shri Rajendramuni** *
**Jivajivaabhigamasutra** (Second Part) - **Shri Rajendramuni** *
**Nishitasutra** - **Muni Shri Kanhaiyalalji 'Kamal', Shri Tilakmuni** * **Trini
Chhedasutraani**  For more information, please contact:  **Shri Agama Prakashan
Samiti** **Shri Braj-Madhukar Smriti Bhavan** **Pipaliya Bazaar, Byawar-305901**
**Education International**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
nAma AgamaprakAzana samiti, byAvara dvArA adyAvadhi prakAzita Agama-sA
anuvAdaka-sampAdaka AcArAMgasUtra do bhAga zrIcanda surAnA 'sarasa'
upAsakadazAMgasUtra DaoN. chaganalAla zAstrI (ema.e., pI-eca. DI.)
jJAtAdharmakathAMgasUtra paM. zobhAcandra bhArilla antakRddazAMgasUtra sAdhvI
divyaprabhA (ema.e., pI-eca.DI.) anuttarovavAiyasUtra sAdhvI muktiprabhA
(ema.e., pI-eca.DI.) sthAnAMgasUtra paM. hIrAlAla zAstrI samavAyAMgasUtra paM.
hIrAlAla zAstrI sUtrakRtAMgasUtra zrIcanda surAnA 'sarasa' vipAkasUtra anu. paM.
rozanalAla zAstrI sampA. paM. zobhAcandra bhArilla nandIsUtra anu. sAdhvI
umarAvakaMvara 'arcanA' sampA. kamalA jaina 'jIjI' ema. e. aupapAtikasUtra DaoN.
chaganalAla zAstrI vyAkhyAprajJaptisUtra [cAra bhAga] zrI amaramuni
rAjapraznIyasUtra vANIbhUSaNa ratanamuni, saM. devakumAra jaina prajJApanAsUtra
[tIna bhAga] jainabhUSaNa jJAnamuni praznavyAkaraNasUtra anu. muni pravINaRSi
sampA. paM. zobhAcandra bhArilla uttarAdhyayanasUtra zrI rAjendramuni zAstrI
nirayAvalikAsUtra zrI devakumAra jaina dazavakAlikasUtra mahAsatI puSpavatI
AvazyakasUtra mahAsatI suprabhA jambUdvIpaprajJaptisUtra DaoN. chaganalAla
zAstrI anuyogadvArasUtra upAdhyAya zrI kevalamuni, saM. devakumAra jaina
sUryaprajJapti, candraprajJaptisUtra sampA. muni zrI kanhaiyAlAlajI 'kamala'
jIvAjIvAbhigamasUtra [pra. bhAga] zrI rAjendramuni jIvAjIvAbhigamasUtra dvi.
bhA.] nizIthasUtra munizrI kanhaiyAlAlajI 'kamala', zrI tilokamuni
trINichedasUtrANi vizeSa jAnakArI ke liye samparkasUtra zrI Agama prakAzana
samiti zrI braja-madhukara smRti bhavana, pIpaliyA bAjAra, byAvara-305901 in
Education International

