Catalog link: https://jainqq.org/explore/034698/1

Page #1 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Namo Namo Nimmaladansanas Bal Brahmachari Shri Neminaathay Namah Pujya Anand-
Kshama-Lalit-Sushil-Sudharmasagar-Guru-bhyo Namah Aagam-30/2 Chandravendhyak
Aagam Sutra Hindi Anuvaad 000000000 00000000. Anuvaadak Evam Sampadak Aagam
Deepaakar Muni Deepa Ratna Sagarji [M.Com. M.Ed. Ph.D. Shruta Maharshi] Aagam
Hindi-Anuvaad-Shreni Pushp-30/2

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 namo namo nimmaladaMsaNassa bAla brahmacArI zrI neminAthAya namaH pUjya Ananda-
kSamA-lalita-suzIla-sudharmasAgara-gurUbhyo namaH Agama-30/2 caMdravedhyaka
AgamasUtra hindI anuvAda 000000000 00000000. anuvAdaka evaM sampAdaka Agama
dIvAkara muni dIparatnasAgarajI [ M.Com. M.Ed. Ph.D. zruta maharSi] Agama hindI-
anuvAda-zreNI puSpa-30/2

Page #2 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Agam Sutra 30/2, Payanna Sutra-7/2, ‘Chandravedhyak’ Agam Sutra-30/2-
‘Chandravedhyak’ Payanna Sutra-7/2- Hindi Translation Where to see what? Order
Subject Order Subject Page 6 12 Mangal and Dvar Nirupan Vinayagun Dvar Acharya
Dvar Shilp Dvar Vinaynigrah Dvar Jnanagun Dvar Charitra Gun Dvar Maran Gun Dvar
Upsanhar 14 18 Muni Diparatna Sagar Krit “(Chandravedhyak)” Agam Sutra-Hindi
Translation" Page 2

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama sUtra 30/2, payannAsUtra-7/2, 'candravedhyaka' AgamasUtra-30/2-
'caMdravedhyaka' payannAsUtra-7/2- hindI anuvAda kahAM kyA dekhe? krama viSaya
krama viSaya pRSTha 6 12 maMgala tathA dvAra nirUpaNa vinayaguNa dvAra AcArya
dvAra zIlpa dvAra vinayanigraha dvAra jJAnaguNa dvAra cAritraguNa dvAra
maraNaguNa dvAra upasaMhAra 14 18 muni dIparatnasAgara kRt "(caMdravedhyaka)"
Agama sUtra-hindI anuvAda" Page 2

Page #3 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Agam Sutra 30/2, Payanna Sutra-7/2, Chandrabhedyak 45 Agam Classification Order
Agam Name Sutra | Order Agam Name Ang Sutra-1 Payanna Sutra-2 01 Achar 02 Sutra
Krit Ang Sutra-2 26 03 Sthan Ang Sutra-3 | 25 Atur Pratyakhyan | Maha
Pratyakhyan Bhakti Parijna 28 | Tandul Vaicharhik Samstarak 27 Payanna Sutra-3
Payanna Sutra-4 Payanna Sutra-5 04 Samavay Ang Sutra-4 05 Ang Sutra-5 29 Payanna
Sutra-6 Bhagavati Jnatadharmakatha 06 | Ang Sutra-6 Payanna Sutra-7 Upasak Dasha
Ang Sutra-7 Payanna Sutra-7 Antkrit Dasha 09 Anuttaroppapatik Dasha Ang Sutra-8
Ang Sutra-9 30.1 | Gachhachar 30.2 Chandrabhedyak 31 | Ganividya Devendra Stav
Vira Stav Payanna Sutra-8 Payanna Sutra-9 32 | 10 Prashnavyakaran Dasha Ang
Sutra-10 33 Ang Sutra-11 34 | Nishit 11 Vipak Shrut 12 Aupapatik Payanna
Sutra-10 Chhed Sutra-1 Chhed Sutra-2 Upang Sutra-1 Brihatkalp Vyavhar
Rajprashchiy Upang Sutra-2 Chhed Sutra-3 14 Jivajivabhigam Upang Sutra-3 37
Upang Sutra-4 Upang Sutra-5 Upang Sutra-6 Chhed Sutra-4 Chhed Sutra-5 Chhed
Sutra-6 40 Upang Sutra-7 Dasha Shrut Skandh 38 Jitkalp 39 Mahanishit Aavashyak
41.1 Oghan Niyukti 41.2 | Pind Niyukti 42 | Dasha Vaikalik 43 Uttaradhyay 44
Nandi Anuyogdwar Mul Sutra-1 Mul Sutra-2 Mul Sutra-2 15 Prajnapana 16
Suryaprajnapti 17 Chandraprajnapti | Jambudvip Prajnapti 19 Nirayavalika Kalpa
Vatanshika 21 | Pushpika | Pushpachoolika 23 Vrishni Dasha 24 Chatuh Sharan
Upang Sutra-8 Upang Sutra-9 Upang Sutra-10 Upang Sutra-11 Upang Sutra-12 Payanna
Sutra-1 Mul Sutra-3 Mul Sutra-4 Chulika Sutra-1 Chulika Sutra-2 Muni Diparatna
Sagar Krit “(Chandrabhedyak)” Agam Sutra-Hindi Anuvaad" Page 3

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama sUtra 30/2, payannAsUtra-7/2, candravedhyaka' 45 Agama vargIkaraNa krama
Agama kA nAma sUtra | krama Agama kA nAma aMgasUtra-1 payannAsUtra-2 01 AcAra 02
sUtrakRt aMgasUtra-2 26 03 sthAna aMgasUtra-3 | 25 AturapratyAkhyAna |
mahApratyAkhyAna bhaktaparijJA 28 | taMdulavaicArika saMstAraka 27
payannAsUtra-3 payannAsUtra-4 payannAsUtra-5 04 samavAya aMgasUtra-4 05
aMgasUtra-5 29 payannAsUtra-6 bhagavatI jJAtAdharmakathA 06  /  aMgasUtra-6
payannAsUtra-7 upAsakadazA aMgasUtra-7 payannAsUtra-7 aMtakRt dazA 09
anuttaropapAtikadazA aMgasUtra-8 aMgasUtra-9 30.1 | gacchAcAra 30.2
candravedhyaka 31 | gaNividyA devendrastava vIrastava payannAsUtra-8
payannAsUtra-9 32  /  10 praznavyAkaraNadazA aMgasUtra-10 33 aMgasUtra-11 34 |
nizItha 11 vipAkazruta 12 aupapAtika payannAsUtra-10 chedasUtra-1 chedasUtra-2
upAMgasUtra-1 bRhatkalpa vyavahAra rAjaprazciya upAMgasUtra-2 chedasUtra-3 14
jIvAjIvAbhigama upAgasUtra-3 37 upAMgasUtra-4 upAMgasUtra-5 upAMgasUtra-6
chedasUtra-4 chedasUtra-5 chedasUtra-6 40 upAMgasUtra-7 dazAzrutaskandha 38
jItakalpa 39 mahAnizItha Avazyaka 41.1 oghaniyukti 41.2 | piMDaniyukti 42 |
dazavaikAlika 43 uttarAdhyayana 44 nandI anuyogadvAra mUlasUtra-1 mUlasUtra-2
mUlasUtra-2 15 prajJApanA 16 sUryaprajJapti 17 candraprajJapti |
jaMbUdvIpaprajJapti 19 nirayAvalikA kalpavataMsikA 21 | puSpikA | puSpacUlikA 23
vRSNidazA 24 catu:zaraNa upAgasUtra-8 upAMgasUtra-9 upAMgasUtra-10
upAMgasUtra-11 upAMgasUtra-12 payannAsUtra-1 mUlasUtra-3 mUlasUtra-4
cUlikAsUtra-1 cUlikAsUtra-2 muni dIparatnasAgara kRt "(caMdravedhyaka)" Agama
sUtra-hindI anuvAda" Page 3

Page #4 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Box 10 06 02 01 13 05 04 Aagam Sutra 30/2, Payannasutra-7/2, ‘Chandravedhyak’
Muni Diparatnasagarji Published Literature Aagam Literature Aagam Literature
Literature Name Box Order Literature Name Original Aagam Literature: 147 6 |
Aagam Other Literature:1-1- Aagam Suttanni-Mulam print [49] -1- Maram Thanuyog
-2- Aagam Suttanni-Mulam Net [45] -2- Aagam Sambandhi Sahitya -3- Aagam Manjusha
(Mula Prat) [53] -3- Rishibhashit Suttranni | Aagam Anuvaad Sahitya: 165 -4-
Aagamiy Suktavali 01 -1- Aagam Sutra Gujarati Anuvaad [47] | Aagam Sahitya- Kul
Pustak 516 -2- Aagam Sutra Hindi Anuvaad Net [47] | -3- Aagamsootra English
Trans. | [11] | -4- Saamsutra Sati 42rati Manuvaah [48] -5- Aagam Sutra Hindi
Anuvaad print [12] Other Literature:3 Aagam Vivechan Sahitya: 171 Tattvabhyas
Sahitya-1- Aagam Sutra Satikam [46] 2 Sutraabhyas Sahitya 06 -2- Aagam Suttranni
Satikam Prataakar-11 [51]] 3 Vyakaran Sahitya| -3- Aagam Suttranni Satikam
Prataakar-2 Vyakhyan Sahitya. -4- Aagam Churni Sahitya [09] 5 Unalat Sahitya|-5-
Savrittik Aagam Suttranni-1 [40] 6 V Sahitya 04 -6- Savrittik Aagam Suttranni-2
[08] 7 Maradhana Sahitya 03 |-7- Sachurnik Aagam Suttanni. [08] 8 Pariyay
Sahitya 04 Aagam Kosh Sahitya:-1- Aagam Saddakoso [04] 10 | Tirthankar Sanksipt
Darshan -2- Aagam Kahakoso [01] | 11hi Sahitya-3- Aagam-Sagar-Kosh: [05] 12
Diparatnasagarna Laghushodhanibandh 05 -4- Aagam-Shabdadhi-Sangrah (Pra-San-Gu)
[04] Aagam Siwayanu Sahitya Kool Pustak 5 Aagam Anukram Sahitya: 09 -1-
Sagamvishayanoomub- (Bhoog) | 1-Aagam Sahitya (Kul Pustak) | 516 -2- Aagam
Vishayanoomukram (Satik) 04 2-Aagametar Sahitya (Kul 085 -3- Aagam Sutra-Gatha
Anukram Diparatnasagarji ke Kul Prakashan | 601 A AAEmunihiparatnasagarunu
Sahitya | Bhunitiparatnasagarunu Sagam Sahitya [Is Pust8 516] Tana Huda Pana
[98,300] 2 Bhunitiparatnasagarunu Many Sahitya [Hut Pust8 85] Tana Hus Pana
[09,270] Munihiparatnasagar Sanshatit Tattvarthsutra'ni Vishisht DVD Tenal Pana
[27,930] | Saba. Prashanola 501 + Vishisht DVD Hul Pana 1,35,500 09 | 149 | Poon
Sahitya 02 25 05 02 | 03 3 Muni Diparatna Sagar Krit "(Chandravedhyak)” Aagam
Sutra-Hindi Anuvaad" Page 4

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 baksa 10 06 02 01 13 05 04 Agama sUtra 30/2, payannAsUtra-7/2, 'candravedhyaka'
muni dIparatnasAgarajI prakAzita sAhitya Agama sAhitya Agama sAhitya sAhitya
nAma baksa krama sAhitya nAma mUla Agama sAhitya: 147 6 | Agama anya
sAhitya:1-1- AgamasuttANi-mUlaM print [49] -1- mArAma thAnuyoga -2-
AgamasuttANi-mUlaM Net [45] -2- Agama saMbaMdhI sAhitya -3- AgamamaJjUSA (mUla
prata) [53] -3- RSibhASita sUtrANi | Agama anuvAda sAhitya: 165 -4- Agamiya
sUktAvalI 01 -1- AgamasUtra gujarAtI anuvAda [47] | Agama sAhitya- kula pustaka
516 -2- AgamasUtra hindI anuvAda Net [47] | -3- Aagamsootra English Trans. |
[11] | -4- sAmasUtra saTI 42rAtI manuvAH [48] -5- AgamasUtra hindI anuvAda print
[12] anya sAhitya:3 Agama vivecana sAhitya: 171 tattvAbhyAsa sAhitya-1-
AgamasUtra saTIkaM [46] 2 sUtrAbhyAsa sAhitya 06 -2- AgamasUtrANi saTIkaM
pratAkAra-11 [51]] 3 vyAkaraNa sAhitya| -3- AgamasUtrANi saTIkaM pratAkAra-2
vyAkhyAna sAhitya. -4- Agama cUrNi sAhitya [09] 5 unalata sAhitya|-5- savRttika
AgamasUtrANi-1 [40] 6 va sAhitya 04 -6- savRttika AgamasUtrANi-2 [08] 7
mArAdhanA sAhitya 03 |-7- sacUrNika AgamasuttANi  /  [08] 8 pariyaya sAhitya 04
Agama koSa sAhitya:-1- Agama saddakoso [04] 10 | tIrthakara saMkSipta darzana
-2- Agama kahAkoso [01] | 11hI sAhitya-3- Agama-sAgara-koSa: [05] 12
dIparatnasAgaranA laghuzodhanibaMdha 05 -4- Agama-zabdAdi-saMgraha (prA-saM-gu)
[04] Agama sivAyanuM sAhitya kUla pustaka 5 Agama anukrama sAhitya: 09 -1-
sAgamaviSayAnubha- (bhUga) | 1-Agama sAhitya (kula pustaka) | 516 -2- Agama
viSayAnukrama (saTIka) 04 2-Agametara sAhitya (kula 085 -3- Agama sUtra-gAthA
anukrama dIparatnasAgarajI ke kula prakAzana | 601 A AAEmunihIparatnasAgaranuM
sAhitya | bhuniTIparatnasAgaranuM sAgama sAhitya [isa pusta8 516] tanA hudA pAnA
[98,300] 2 bhuniTIparatnasAgaranuM manya sAhitya [huta pusta8 85] tanA husa pAnA
[09,270] munihIparatnasAgara saMzatita tatvArthasUtra'nI viziSTa DVD tenAla pAnA
[27,930] | sbhaa| prAzanolA 501 + viziSTa DVD hula pAnA 1,35,500 09 | 149 | pUna
sAhitya 02 25 05 02 | 03 3 muni dIparatnasAgara kRt "(caMdravedhyaka)" Agama
sUtra-hindI anuvAda" Page 4

Page #5 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Agam Sutra 30/2, Payanna Sutra-7/2, ‘Chandravedhyak’ [30/2] Chandravedhyak
Payanna Sutra-7/2- Hindi Translation Sutra - 1 Salutations to the glorious
Siddha Bhagavants, who are always present on the head (Siddhashila) of the human
beings, and possess the developed, complete, and superior qualities of knowledge
and vision, and to the glorious Arihant Paramatma, who illuminates knowledge in
the world. Sutra - 2 This chapter is the essence of the Jin Agam, a scripture
that guides towards liberation, and is full of profound and significant meaning.
Listen to it with a focused mind, free from all four types of distortions, and
do not be negligent for even a moment in acting according to it. Sutra - 3 I
will speak about humility, the qualities of an Acharya, the qualities of a
disciple, the qualities of humility-control, the qualities of knowledge, the
qualities of conduct, and the qualities of death. Sutra - 4 The knowledge
acquired from an Acharya-Guru, even if obtained with great difficulty, becomes
useless for a person who disrespects him. Sutra - 5 A being who disrespects the
Guru due to the strength of his karma, is arrogant, proud, and devoid of
humility. Such a being cannot attain fame or glory anywhere in the world, but
only faces defeat everywhere. Sutra - 6 A person who humbly accepts the
knowledge taught by the Guru, attains shelter, trust, and fame everywhere. Sutra
- 7 The knowledge acquired with great effort by an undisciplined disciple is
bound to be destroyed due to the fault of disrespecting the Guru. Even if it is
not completely destroyed, it will not yield its true benefits. Sutra - 8
Knowledge is worthy of repeated remembrance and preservation. It is not fit to
be given to the undisciplined and unworthy. Because both the undisciplined and
the knowledge-giver, the Guru, face defeat. Sutra - 9 An undisciplined being who
disrespects knowledge and does not reveal the qualities of the knowledge-giver,
the Acharya, attains strong falsehood and becomes a Rishi-killer, experiencing
the suffering of hell and other miserable states. Sutra - 10 Knowledge acquired
by a virtuous person endowed with humility and other qualities becomes powerful.
Just like a girl born in a noble family becomes great by getting an ordinary man
as her husband. Sutra - 11 O child! Practice humility until you achieve it. What
use is knowledge to you without humility? Indeed, learning humility is
difficult, but knowledge is easily accessible to the humble. Muni Diparatnasagar
Krit “(Chandravedhyak)” Agam Sutra-Hindi Translation" Page 5

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama sUtra 30/2, payannAsUtra-7/2, 'candravedhyaka' [30/2] candravedhyaka
payannAsUtra-7/2- hindI anuvAda sUtra - 1 loka puruSa ke mastaka (siddhazIlA)
para sadA virAjamAna vikasita pUrNa, zreSTha jJAna aura darzana guNa ke dhAraka
aise zrI siddha bhagavanta aura loka meM jJAna ko udyota karanevAle zrI arihaMta
paramAtmA ko namaskAra ho| sUtra - 2 yaha prakaraNa mokSamArgadarzaka zAstra-
jina Agama ke sArabhUta aura mahAna gambhIra arthavAlA hai| use cAra taraha kI
vikathA se rahita ekAgra citta se suno aura sunakara tad anusAra AcaraNa karane
meM palabhara kA bhI pramAda mata kr| sUtra-3 vinaya, AcArya ke guNa, ziSya ke
guNa, vinayanigraha ke guNa, jJAnaguNa, cAritraguNa aura maraNaguNa meM
khuuNgaa| sUtra-4 jinake pAsa se vidyA-zikSA pAI hai, vo AcArya-guru kA jo
mAnava parAbhava tiraskAra karatA hai, usakI vidyA kaise bhI kaSTa se prApta kI
ho to bhI niSphala hotI hai| sUtra-5 karma kI prabalatA ko lekara jo jIva guru
kA parAbhava karatA hai, vo akkaDa-abhimAnI aura vinayahIna jIva jagata meM
kahIM bhI yaza yA kIrti nahIM pA sakatA  /  lekina sarvatra parAbhava pAtA hai|
sUtra-6 gurujanane upadezI huI vidyA ko jo mAnava vinayapUrvaka grahaNa karatA
hai, vo sarvatra Azraya, vizvAsa aura yaza-kIrti prApta karatA hai| sUtra -7
avinIta ziSya kI zramapUrvaka zIkhI haI vidyA gurujana ke parAbhava karane kI
buddhi ke doSa se avazya naSTa hotI hai, zAyada sarvathA naSTa na ho to bhI
apane vAstavika lAbha phala ko denevAlI nahIM hotii| sUtra-8 vidyA bAra-bAra
smaraNa karane ke yogya hai, saMbhAlane yogya hai  /  durvinIta-apAtra ko dene
ke lie yogya nahIM hai  /  kyoMki durvinIta vidyA aura vidyA dAtA guru dono
parAbhava karate haiN| sUtra -9 vidyA kA parAbhava karanevAlA aura vidyAdAtA
AcArya ke guNa ko prakaTa nahIM karanevAlA prabala mithyAtva pAnevAlA durvinIta
jIva RSighAtaka kI gati yAni narakAdi durgati kA bhoga banatA hai| sUtra - 10
vinaya Adi guNa se yukta punyazAlI puruSa dvArA grahaNa kI gaI vidyA bhI
balavatI banatI hai  /  jaise uttama kula meM paidA honevAlI lar3akI mAmUlI
puruSa ko pati ke rUpa meM pAkara mahAna banatI hai  /  sUtra-11 he vatsa ! taba
taka tU vinaya kA hI abhyAsa kara, kyoMki vinaya vinA-durvinIta aise tujhe vidyA
dvArA kyA prayojana hai ? sacamuca vinaya zIkhanA duSkara hai| vidyA to vinIta
ko ati sulabha hotI hai| muni dIparatnasAgara kRt "(caMdravedhyaka)" Agama
sUtra-hindI anuvAda" Page 5

Page #6 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Aagam Sutra 30/2, Payanna Sutra-7/2, ‘Chandravedhyak’ Sutra - 12**  O well-
behaved child! Learn knowledge and scriptural wisdom with humility, remember the
learned knowledge and virtues repeatedly, and do not be careless in them.
Because the knowledge that is acquired and counted becomes a source of happiness
in the afterlife. Sutra - 13  The fruit of knowledge learned with humility,
taught by the Guru with joy, and memorized completely through the sutras can
certainly be felt. Sutra - 14  In this difficult time, it is extremely rare to
find an Acharya Bhagvant, the giver of all scriptural knowledge, and then it is
also rare to find a disciple who learns scriptural knowledge without the four
kshayas (anger, pride, etc.). Sutra - 15  Whether it is a sadhu or a
householder, wise men certainly praise their humility. An unrefined person can
never achieve fame or glory in the world. Sutra - 16  Some people, despite
knowing the nature, fruit, etc. of humility, do not want to practice humility
due to the influence of strong inauspicious karma and are surrounded by
attachment and aversion. Sutra - 17  Even those who do not speak or read much,
but are always humble and submissive with control over their senses, some men or
women, their fame spreads everywhere in the world. Sutra - 18  Knowledge bears
fruit only for the fortunate man, but knowledge does not bear fruit for the
unfortunate. Sutra - 19  One who despises or misuses knowledge and destroys the
virtues of knowledgeable Acharyas Bhagvant, etc., through slander, insult, etc.,
becomes deeply deluded by falsehood and suffers terrible misfortune. Sutra - 20
Indeed! It is not easy to find an Acharya Bhagvant, the giver of all scriptural
knowledge. And then it is also not easy to find a disciple who is simple and
constantly striving in the practice of knowledge. Sutra - 21  This is a brief
description of the great benefits of becoming a special-humble person through
the virtue of humility. Now I will speak of the virtues of Acharya Bhagvant,
listen attentively. Sutra - 22  I will speak of the virtues of such an Acharya,
who is the embodiment of the pure path of conduct, the carrier of the jewel of
scriptural knowledge, and the possessor of countless virtues like forgiveness,
etc. Sutra - 23-27  One who bears everything like the earth, is steadfast in
unwavering dharma like Mount Meru, and has a gentle radiance like the moon, one
who does not reveal the faults pointed out by disciples, etc., to others. One
who knows the proper intention, reason, and method of criticism, one who has a
serious heart, one who is not defeated by rivals, etc. One who knows the proper
time, place, and feeling... Muni Diparatnasagar Krit “(Chandravedhyak)” Aagam
Sutra-Hindi Translation" Page 6

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama sUtra 30/2, payannAsUtra-7/2, 'candravedhyaka' sUtra - 12 he suvinIta
vatsa ! tU vinaya se vidyA-zrutajJAna zIkha, zIkhI huI vidyA aura guNa bAra-bAra
yAda kara, usameM sahaja bhI pramAda mata kara  /  kyoMki grahaNa kI huI aura
ginatI kI huI vidyA hI paraloka meM sukhAkArI banatI hai  /  sUtra - 13 vinaya
se zIkhI huI, prasannatApUrvaka gurujana ne upadezI huI aura sUtra dvArA
saMpUrNa kaMThastha kI gaI vidyA kA phala yakInana mahasUsa kara sakate haiN|
sUtra - 14 isa viSama kAla meM samasta zrutajJAna ke dAtA AcArya bhagavaMta
milane ati durlabha haiM aura phira krodha, mAna Adi cAra kaSAya rahita zruta
jJAna ko zIkhanevAle ziSya milane bhI durlabha haiM  /  sUtra -15 sAdhu yA
gRhastha koI bhI ho, usake vinaya guNa kI prazaMsA jJAnI puruSa yakInana karate
haiM  /  avinIta kabhI bhI loka meM kIrti yA yaza prApta nahIM kara sktaa| sUtra
- 16 kucha loga vinaya kA svarUpa, phala Adi jAnane ke bAvajUda bhI Isa taraha
ke prabala azubha karma ke prabhAva ko lekara rAgadveSa se ghire hae vinaya kI
pravRtti karanA nahIM caahte| sUtra-17 na bolanevAle yA adhika na par3hanevAle
phira bhI vinaya se sadA vinIta-namra aura indriya para kAbU pAnevAle kucha
puruSa yA strI kI yazakIrti loka meM sarvatra phailatI hai| sUtra - 18 bhAgazAlI
puruSa ko hI vidyAeM phala denevAlI hotI hai, lekina bhAgyahIna ko vidyA nahIM
phltii| sUtra - 19 vidyA kA tiraskAra yA durUpayoga karanevAlA aura niMdA
avahelanA Adi dvArA vidyAvAn AcArya bhagavaMta Adi ke guNa ko naSTa karanevAlA
gahare mithyAtva se mohita hokara bhayAnaka durgati pAtA hai| sUtra - 20
sacamuca ! samasta zrutajJAna ke dAtA AcArya bhagavaMta milane sulabha nahIM hai
/  aura phira sarala aura jJAnAbhyAsa meM satata udyamI ziSya milane bhI salabha
nahIM hai| sUtra-21 isa taraha ke vinaya ke guNa vizeSI-vinIta banane se
honevAle mahAna lAbha ko saMkSipta meM kahA hai, aba AcArya bhagavaMta ke guNa
kahatA hU~, vo ekAgra citta se suno| sUtra - 22 zuddha vyavahAra mArga ke
prarUpaka, zrutajJAna rUpa ratna ke sArthavAha aura kSamA Adi kaIM lAkhoM guNa
ke dhAraka aise AcArya ke guNa maiM khuuNgaa| sUtra - 23-27 pRthvI kI taraha
sabakucha sahanevAle, meru jaise niSprakaMpa-dharma meM nizcala aura candra
jaisI saumya kAntivAle, ziSya Adi ne Alocana kie hae doSa dUsaroM ke pAsa
prakaTa na karanevAle  /  AlocanA ke ucita Azaya, kAraNa aura vidhi ko
jAnanevAle, gaMbhIra hRdayavAle, paravAdI Adi se parAbhava nahIM pAnevAle  /
ucitakAla, deza aura bhAva muni dIparatnasAgara kRt "(caMdravedhyaka)" Agama
sUtra-hindI anuvAda" Page 6

Page #7 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Agam Sutra 30/2, Payanna Sutra-7/2, "Chandravadhyak"**  Those who know the
"Chandravadhyak", are free from haste, do not rush in any work, are free from
delusion, inspire their disciples and dependents in self-restraint, study, etc.,
are free from illusion, have knowledge of worldly, Vedic and social sciences,
and are knowledgeable in the Swasamaya Jinagam and Parasamaya-Anyadarshan
Shastra, whose beginning is Samayik and end is pre-arranged. Such a Dwadashangi,
whose meaning they have found and accepted, is always praised by learned
scholars and pandits. Sutra - 28  In the endless cycle of birth and death, this
being has acquired thousands of Acharyas, who are knowledgeable and teachers of
karma, work, art and other religious practices for many births. Sutra - 29-30
The Acharyas who are mentioned in the Nirgranth Pravachan, are the ones who
explain the true nature of both the world and liberation, just as hundreds of
lamps are lit from one illuminated lamp, yet that lamp remains illuminated and
radiant, so too are the Acharyas like lamps, illuminating and liberating
themselves and other souls. Sutra - 31-32  Those who constantly pay homage to
the feet of the glorious Acharyas, who are like the sun in their brilliance, the
moon in their gentleness and coolness, and who are revolutionary and capable of
leading across the ocean of the world, are blessed. Such devotion to the
glorious Acharyas brings fame in this world, the highest divine destiny in the
next world, and unyielding, unparalleled knowledge and faith in religion. Sutra
- 33, 34  Even the gods residing in the heavenly realms, through their divine
knowledge, see the glorious Acharyas and always remember their virtues, and
arrange their seats, beds, etc.  Even the gods residing in the heavenly realms,
amidst beautiful apsaras, remember the Nirgranth Pravachan and have those
apsaras pay homage to the glorious Acharyas. Sutra - 35  Those sadhus who,
despite performing difficult austerities like the sixth, eighth, and four fasts,
do not follow the Guru's words, become eternally bound to the cycle of birth and
death. Sutra - 36  There are many other virtues of the glorious Acharyas, which
cannot be counted. Now I will briefly describe the special qualities of a
disciple. Sutra - 37  Those who are always humble, polite, free from pride,
knowledgeable, virtuous, and understand the intentions and desires of the
glorious Acharyas, are praised by learned men. (Such a sadhu is called a good
disciple). Sutra - 38  Those disciples who are patient in enduring cold, heat,
wind, hunger, thirst, and discomfort, and who are like the earth in bearing all
kinds of adversity and prosperity, are praised by wise men. Sutra - 39  Those
disciples whose facial expressions do not change in the face of gain or loss,
i.e., they do not become joyful or sorrowful, and who have few desires and are
always content, are praised by learned men. Muni Diparatnasagar Krit
"(Chandravadhyak)" Agam Sutra - Hindi Translation" Page 7

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama sUtra 30/2, payannAsUtra-7/2, 'candravedhyaka' ko jAnanevAle, tvarA
rahita, kisI bhI kAma meM jaldabAjI na karanevAle, bhrAntirahita, Azrita ziSyAdi
ko saMyamasvAdhyAyAdi meM preraka aura mAyArahita, laukika, vaidika aura
sAmAjika-zAstra meM jina kA praveza hai aura svasamayajinAgama aura parasamaya-
anyadarzanazAstra ke jJAtA, jisa kI AdimeM sAmAyika aura anta meM pUrvo
vyavasthita hai|aisii dvAdazAMgI kA artha jinhoMne pAyA hai, grahaNa kiyA hai,
vaise AcArya kI vidvadjana paMr3ita-gItArtha sadA tArIpha karate haiM sUtra - 28
anAdi saMsAra meM kaIM janma ke lie yaha jIva ne karma kAma-kAja, zilpakalA aura
dUsare dharma AcAra ke jJAtA-upadeSTA hajAroM AcArya prApta kie haiN| sUtra -
29-30 sarvajJa kathita nirgrantha pravacana meM jo AcArya haiM, vo saMsAra aura
mokSa-donoM ke yathArtha rUpa ko batAnevAle hone se jisa taraha eka pradIpta
dIpa se seMkar3oM dIpaka prakAzita hote haiM, phira bhI vo dIpa pradIpta-
prakAzamAna hI rahatA hai, vaise dIpaka jaise AcArya bhagavaMta sva aura para,
apane aura dUsare AtmAoM ke prakAzaka-uddhAraka sUtra-31-32 sUraja jaise
pratApI, candra jaise saumya-zItala aura krAntimaya evaM saMsArasAgara se pAra
utAranevAle AcArya bhagavaMta ke caraNoM meM jo puNyazAlI nitya praNAma karate
haiM, vo dhanya haiM  /  aise AcArya bhagavaMta kI bhakti ke rAga dvArA isa loka
meM kIrti, paraloka meM uttama devagati aura dharma meM anuttara-ananya bodhi-
zraddhA prApta hotI hai| sUtra - 33, 34 devaloka meM rahe deva bhI divya
avadhijJAna dvArA AcArya bhagavaMta ko dekhakara hamezA unake guNa kA smaraNa
karate hue apane Asana-zayana Adi rakha dete haiN| devaloka meM rUpamatI apsarA
ke bIca meM rahe deva bhI nirgrantha pravacana kA smaraNa karate hue usa apsarA
dvArA AcArya bhagavaMta ko vandana karavAte haiN| sUtra - 35 jo sAdhu chaThTha,
aThuma, cAra upavAsa Adi duSkara tapa karane ke bAvajUda bhI guruvacana kA
pAlana nahIM karate, vo ananta saMsArI banate haiN| sUtra - 36 yahA~ ginavAe ve
aura dUsare bhI kaIM AcArya bhagavaMta ke guNa hone se usakI ginatI kA pramANa
nahIM ho sakatA  /  aba maiM ziSya ke viziSTa guNa ko saMkSepa meM khuuNgaa|
sUtra-37 _jo hamezA namra vRttivAlA, vinIta, madarahita, guNa ko jAnanevAlA,
sujana-sajjana aura AcArya bhagavaMta ke abhiprAya-Azaya ko samajhanevAlA hotA
hai, usa ziSya kI prazaMsA paMDita puruSa bhI karate haiM  /  (arthAt vaisA
sAdhu suziSya kahalAtA hai|) sUtra - 38 zIta, tApa, vAyu, bhUkha, pyAsa aura
arati parISaha sahana karanevAle, pRthvI kI taraha sarva taraha kI pratikUlatA
-anukUlatA Adi ko saha lenevAlI-dhIra ziSya kI kuzala puruSa tArIpha karate
haiN| sUtra- 39 lAbha yA geralAbha ke avasara meM bhI jisake mukha kA bhAva
nahIM badalatA arthAt harSa yA kheda yukta nahIM banatA aura phira jo alpa
IcchAvAlA aura sadA saMtuSTa hotA hai, aise ziSya kI paMr3ita puruSa tArIpha
karate haiN| muni dIparatnasAgara kRt "(caMdravedhyaka)" Agama sUtra-hindI
anuvAda" Page 7

Page #8 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Agam Sutra 30/2, Payanna Sutra-7/2, Chandravedhyak' Sutra-40**  A disciple who
knows the six types of Vinaya-vidhi and is interested in spiritual benefit, is
praised by the Gitas even if he is humble and devoid of pride like Riddhi etc.
Sutra - 41  A disciple who is always eager to perform the ten types of Vyavachch
like Acharya etc., constantly strives in recitation etc. and is engaged in all
the essentials like Samayik etc., is praised by the wise. Sutra - 42  The great
sages praise a disciple who praises the qualities of the Acharyas, enhances the
glory of the Gachchvasi Guru and the Shasana, and is highly alert towards his
goal with pure wisdom. Sutra - 43  O seeker of liberation! First of all, kill
all kinds of pride and then acquire education. Only a well-behaved disciple
becomes another soul disciple, a non-disciple does not become a disciple of
anyone. Sutra - 44  A well-behaved disciple should be able to bear the very
harsh or loving words of Acharya Shri well. Sutra - 45, 46  Now, some specific
characteristics and qualities of a disciple are mentioned for his test, who is
endowed with excellent caste, family, form, youth, strength, vigor-valor,
equality and sattva qualities, is soft-spoken, does not gossip, is not
deceitful, naked and not greedy, has unbroken hands and feet, has less hair, has
a smooth and strong body, has a deep and elevated nose, has a generous gaze, has
a long vision and has large eyes. Sutra - 47  He should be a devotee of the
Jinasasana, a partisan, looking towards the mouth of the Guru, full of patience,
faith, free from vices and living a life dominated by humility. Sutra - 48  He
who recognizes time, place and opportunity, knows the form of character and
humility, is free from greed, fear, attachment, sleep and fatigue, is called a
proper disciple by the skilled. Sutra - 49  A man may be proficient in Shruta-
jnana, know the reason, cause and method, yet if he is not humble and is proud,
the Shruta-dhar Maharshis do not praise him. Sutra - 50, 51  A pure, devoted,
always practicing the conduct of humility, simple-hearted, enhancing the beauty
of the discourse and patient disciple should be given the recitation of the
Agam.  Even a son who is deficient in the above-mentioned humility etc.
qualities and is endowed with hundreds of other qualities like Nay etc., is not
taught the scriptures by a well-wisher, then how can a completely quality-less
disciple be taught the knowledge of the scriptures? Sutra - 52  This disciple
test, which is explained in detail in the scriptures with a skillful and subtle
meaning, is said in brief. A Guru who desires the benefit of the hereafter must
definitely test the disciple. Muni Diparatnasagar Krit "(Chandravedhyak)" Agam
Sutra-Hindi Translation" Page 8

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama sUtra 30/2, payannAsUtra-7/2, candravedhyaka' sUtra-40 cha taraha kI
vinayavidhi ko jAnanevAlA aura Atmikahita kI rUcivAlA hai, aisA vinIta aura
Rddhi Adi gArava rahita ziSya ko gItArtha bhI prazaMsate haiN| sUtra - 41 AcArya
Adi daza prakAra kI vaiyAvacca karane meM sadA udyata, vAcanA Adi svAdhyAya meM
nitya prayatnazIla tathA sAmAyika Adi sarva Avazyaka meM udyata ziSya kI
jJAnIpuruSa prazaMsA karate haiM  /  sUtra - 42 AcAryoM ke guNAnuvAda kartA,
gacchavAsI guru evaM zAsana kI kIrti ko bar3hAnevAle aura nirmala prajJA dvArA
apane dhyeya prati ati jAgarUka ziSya kI maharSijana prazaMsA karate haiN| sUtra
- 43 he mumukSu muni ! sarva prathama sarva taraha ke mAna kA vadha karake zikSA
prApta kara  /  suvinIta ziSya ke hI dUsare AtmA ziSya banate haiM, aziSya ke
koI ziSya nahIM bntaa| sUtra -44 suvinIta ziSya koAcAryazrI ke ati kaTa-
roSabhare vacana yA premabhare vacana ko acchI taraha se sahanA cAhie
sUtra-45,46 _ aba ziSya kI kasauTI ke lie usake kucha viziSTa lakSaNa aura guNa
batAte haiM, jo puruSa uttama jAti, kula, rUpa, yauvana, bala, vIrya-parAkrama,
samatA aura sattva guNa se yukta ho mRdu-madhurabhASI, kisI kI cugalI na
karanevAlA, azaTha, nagna aura alobhI ho- aura akhaMDa hAtha aura caraNavAlA,
kama romavAlA, snigdha aura puSTa dehavAlA, gambhIra aura unnata nAsikA vAlA
udAra dRSTi, dIrghadRSTivAlA aura vizAla netravAlA ho| sUtra -47 jinazAsana kA
anurAgI pakSapAtI, gurujana ke mukha kI ora dekhanevAlA, dhIra, zraddhA guNa se
pUrNa, vikAra rahita aura vinaya pradhAna jIvana jInevAlA ho| sUtra - 48 kAla,
deza aura samaya-avasara ko pahacAnanevAlA, zIlarUpa aura vinaya ko jAnanevAlA,
lobha, bhaya, moharahita, nidrA aura parISaha ko jItanevAlA ho, use kuzala
puruSa ucita ziSya kahate haiN| sUtra - 49 kisI puruSa zAyada zrutajJAna meM
nipuNa ho, hetu, kAraNa aura vidhi ko jAnanevAlA ho phira bhI yadi vo avinIta
aura gauravayukta ho to zrutadhara maharSi usakI prazaMsA nahIM karate  /  sUtra
- 50,51 pavitra, anurAgI, sadA vinaya ke AcAra kA AcaraNa karanevAlA, sarala
dilavAle, pravacana kI zobhA ko bar3hAnevAle aura dhIra aise ziSya ko Agama kI
vAcanA denI cAhie  /  ukta vinaya Adi guNa se hIna aura dUsare naya Adi seMkar3o
guNa se yukta aise putra ko bhI hitaiSI paMDita zAstra nahIM paDhAtA, to
sarvathA guNahIna ziSya ko kaise zAstrajJAna karavAyA jAe? sUtra - 52 nipuNa-
sUkSma matalabavAle zAstra meM vistAra se batAI huI yaha ziSya parIkSA saMkSepa
meM kahI hai  /  paralaukika hita ke kAmI guru ko ziSya kA avazya ImtihAna lenA
caahie| muni dIparatnasAgara kRt "(caMdravedhyaka)" Agama sUtra-hindI anuvAda"
Page 8

Page #9 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Agama Sutra 30/2, Payanna Sutra-7/2, ‘Chandravedhyak’ Sutra - 53 I have
briefly described the qualities of a disciple, now I will tell you about the
restraining qualities of humility, listen carefully with an attentive mind.
Sutra - 54 Humility is the door to liberation. Humility should never be rejected
because even a person who practices little knowledge can conquer all karma
through humility. Sutra - 55 The person who conquers non-humility through
humility, lack of character through good conduct, and sin through non-sinful
conduct, conquers all three realms. Sutra - 56 A Muni who is proficient in
knowledge, understands the cause, effect, and method, but is still arrogant and
proud, is not praised by the Shruta-dhar-geetarthas. Sutra - 57, 58 Even a
person with vast knowledge, if he is devoid of good qualities, humility, and lax
in his conduct, is considered to have little knowledge by the geetarthas. A
person who is endowed with austerity, discipline, and good conduct, always
engaged in knowledge, insight, and conduct, even if he has little knowledge, is
considered to have vast knowledge by the wise. Sutra - 59 Knowledge is embedded
in right conduct, both knowledge and insight are included in character, through
the power of forgiveness, austerity and through humility, specific types of
discipline become successful and independent. Sutra - 60 Specific types of
austerity, specific types of discipline, and many other qualities become
fruitless and useless without humility, which grants liberation. Sutra - 61 The
infinite knowing Lord Jinendra, while outlining the path to liberation in all
realms of karma, first taught humility. Sutra - 62 Humility is knowledge, and
knowledge is humility. Because knowledge is obtained through humility, and
through knowledge, the nature of humility can be understood. Sutra - 63 The
essence of a human's entire character is established in humility, therefore, the
Nirgrantha Maharshis do not praise a Muni who lacks humility. Sutra - 64 Even
with vast knowledge, a person who is arrogant and lacks faith and devotion
cannot cultivate character, and a character-corrupted being continues to wander
in the world. Sutra - 65 A Muni who is content with even a little knowledge, is
eager to practice humility, and diligently follows the five great vows, is
praised by the Nirgrantha Maharshis.  Muni Deepa Ratna Sagar Krit
“(Chandravedhyak)” Agama Sutra-Hindi Translation" Page 9

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama sUtra 30/2, payannAsUtra-7/2, 'candravedhyaka' sUtra - 53 ziSya ke guNa
kI kIrti kA maiMne saMkSepa meM varNana kiyA hai, aba vinaya ke nigraha guNa
batAUMgA, vo tuma sAvadha cittavAle banakara suno| sUtra - 54 vinaya mokSa kA
daravAjA hai  /  vinaya ko kabhI ThukarAnA nahIM cAhie kyoMki alpa zruta kA
abhyAsI puruSa bhI vinaya dvArA sarva karma ko khapAte haiN| sUtra - 55 jo
puruSa vinaya dvArA avinaya ko, zIla sadAcAra dvArA niHzIlatva ko aura apApa-
dharma dvArA pApa ko jIta letA hai, vo tInoM loka ko jIta letA hai| sUtra-56
puruSa muni zrutajJAna meM nipuNa ho-hetu, kAraNa aura vidhi ko jAnanevAlA ho,
phira bhI avinIta aura gaurava yukta ho to zrutadhara-gItArtha puruSa unakI
prazaMsA nahIM karate  /  sUtra - 57, 58 bahuzruta puruSa bhI guNahIna,
vinayahIna aura cAritra yoga meM zithila banA ho to gItArtha puruSa use
alpazruta vAlA mAnatA hai  /  jo tapa, niyama aura zIla se yukta ho-jJAna,
darzana aura cAritrayoga meM sadA udyata ho vo alpa zrutavAlA ho to bhI jJAnI
puruSa use bahuzruta kA sthAna dete haiN| sUtra-59 samyaktva meM jJAna samAyA
huA hai, cAritra meM jJAna aura darzana donoM sAmila haiM, kSamA ke bala dvArA
tapa aura vinaya dvArA viziSTa taraha ke niyama saphala-svAdhIna banate haiN|
sUtra-60 mokSaphala denevAlA vinaya jisameM nahIM hai, usake viziSTa taraha ke
tapa, viziSTa koTi ke niyama aura dUsare bhI kaIM guNa niSphala-nirarthaka
banate haiN| sUtra - 61 anantajJAnI zrI jinezvara bhagavaMta ne sarva karmabhUmi
meM mokSamArga kI prarUpaNA karate hue sarva prathama vinaya kA hI upadeza diyA
hai| sUtra- 62 jo vinaya hai vahI jJAna hai  /  jo jJAna hai, vo hI vinaya hai
/  kyoMki vinaya se jJAna milatA hai aura jJAna dvArA vinaya kA svarUpa jAna
sakate haiN| sUtra-63 mAnava ke pUre cAritra kA sAra vinaya meM pratiSThita hai
isalie vinayahIna muni kI prazaMsA nirgrantha maharSi nahIM krte| sUtra-64
bahazruta hone ke bAvajUda bhI jo avinIta aura alpa zraddhA-saMvegavAlA hai vo
cAritra kA ArAdhana nahIM kara sakatA aura cAritra-bhraSTa jIva saMsAra meM
ghUmatA rahatA hai| sUtra-65 jo muni thor3e se bhI zrutajJAna se saMtuSTa
cittavAlA banakara vinaya karane meM tatpara rahatA hai aura pA~ca mahAvrata
muni dIparatnasAgara kRt "(caMdravedhyaka)" Agama sUtra-hindI anuvAda" Page 9

Page #10 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Agam Sutra 30/2, Payanna Sutra-7/2, ‘Chandravadhyak’ follows the path of non-
violence and keeps mind, speech, and body secret, he is surely a devotee of
character. Sutra - 66**  **What benefit can the study of great scriptures bring
to a virtuous person without humility? What benefit can millions and billions of
shining lamps bring to a blind human? Sutra-67,68**  **In this way, I have
briefly described the specific benefits of humility. Now I will describe the
special qualities and benefits of the knowledge of scriptures learned through
humility, listen. **  **Shri Jinendra, the Supreme Being, has given teachings,
it is not possible to fully know the great subject matter of the scriptures.
Therefore, that man is praiseworthy, who is knowledgeable and virtuous. Sutra -
69**  **The detailed form of the upper world, lower world, and the world of
animals, including gods, demons, humans, Garuda sons, Naga sons, and Gandharva
gods, can be known through the knowledge of scriptures. Sutra - 70**  **A wise
man can also know the nine principles through the knowledge of scriptures -
being, non-being, merit, demerit, inflow, restraint, bondage, liberation, and
liberation. Therefore, knowledge is the cause of character. Sutra-71**  **The
abandonment of known faults and the use of known virtues, that is, both things
that are instrumental to religion are achieved only through knowledge.
Sutra-72**  **Character (action) alone without knowledge and knowledge alone
without action do not become liberators. But a knowledgeable person with
(action) crosses the ocean of the world. Sutra - 73**  **Even though he is
knowledgeable, if he does not abide in virtues like forgiveness, etc., and does
not abandon vices like anger, etc., then he can never become free from vices and
virtuous. Sutra - 74**  **Bound by many feelings due to the vices of non-
restraint and ignorance, the good and bad karmic impurities are completely
destroyed by the knowledgeable person through the practice of character. Sutra -
75**  **Like a soldier alone without a weapon, or a weapon alone without a
soldier, knowledge without character and character without knowledge do not
become liberators. Sutra - 76**  **There is no knowledge for one who has a false
view, there are no virtues of character without knowledge, there is no complete
liberation without virtues, and there is no nirvana without complete karmic
liberation. Sutra - 77**  **One should believe that knowledge is the instrument
of character, character is the essence of preaching, and the essence of
preaching is the ultimate truth.**  **Muni Diparatnasagar Krit
“(Chandravadhyak)” Agam Sutra-Hindi Translation”** **Page 10** **Page 10**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama sUtra 30/2, payannAsUtra-7/2, 'candravedhyaka' kA niraticAra pAlana
karatA hai aura mana, vacana, kAyA ko gupta rakhatA hai, vo yakInana cAritra kA
ArAdhaka hotA hai sUtra - 66 bahata zAstra kA abhyAsa bhI vinaya rahita sAdhu ko
kyA lAbha karavA sake ? lAkho-karoDoM jhagamagAte dIe bhI aMdhe mAnava ko kyA
phAyadA karavA sake ? sUtra-67,68 isa taraha maiMne vinaya ke viziSTa lAbhoM kA
saMkSepa meM varNana kiyA  /  aba vinaya se zIkhe zrutajJAna ke vizeSa guNa-
lAbha kA varNana karatA hU~, vo suno| zrI jinezvara paramAtmA ne upadeza die
hue, mahAna viSayavAle zrutajJAna ko pUrI taraha jAna lenA mumakIna nahIM hai|
isalie vo puruSa prazaMsanIya hai, jo jJAnI aura cAritra sampanna hai  /  sUtra
- 69 sura, asura, mAnava, garur3akumAra, nAgakumAra evaM gaMdharvadeva Adi
sahita Urdhvaloka, adholoka aura tirchAloka kA vizada svarUpa zrutajJAna se jAna
sakate haiN| sUtra - 70 jIva, ajIva, puNya, pApa, Azrava, saMvara, ba~dha,
nirjarA aura mokSa-yaha nau tattva ko bhI buddhimAna puruSa zrutajJAna dvArA
jAna sakate haiM  /  isalie jJAna cAritra kA hetu hai  /  sUtra-71 jAne hue doSa
kA tyAga hotA hai, aura jAne hue guNa kA sevana hotA hai, yAni ki dharma ke
sAdhanabhUta vo donoM cIja jJAna se hI siddha hotI hai| sUtra-72 jJAna rahita
akelA cAritra (kriyA) aura kriyA rahita akelA jJAna bhavatAraka nahIM banate  /
lekina (kriyA) saMpanna jJAnI hI saMsAra sAgara ko pAra kara jAtA hai| sUtra -
73 jJAnI hone ke bAvajUda bhI jo kSamA Adi guNa meM na vartatA ho, krodha Adi
doSa ko na chor3e to vo kabhI bhI doSamukta aura guNavAna nahIM bana sktaa|
sUtra - 74 asaMyama aura ajJAnadoSa se kaIM bhAvanA meM ba~dhe hue zubhAzubha
karma mala ko jJAnI cAritra ke pAlana dvArA samUla kSaya kara dete haiN| sUtra -
75 binA zastra ke akelA sainika, yA binA sainika ke akele zastra kI taraha jJAna
binA cAritra aura cAritra binA jJAna, mokSa sAdhaka nahIM bntaa| sUtra - 76
mithyAdaSTi ko jJAna nahIM hotA, jJAna binA cAritra ke guNa nahIM hote, guNa
binA sampUrNa kSaya samAna mokSa nahIM aura sampUrNa karmakSaya-mokSa binA
nirvANa nahIM hotaa| sUtra - 77 jo jJAna hai, vo hI karaNa-cAritra hai, jo
cAritra hai, vo hI pravacana kA sAra hai, aura jo pravacana kA sAra hai, vahI
paramArtha hai aise mAnanA caahie| muni dIparatnasAgara kRt "(caMdravedhyaka)"
Agama sUtra-hindI anuvAda" Page 10 Page 10

Page #11 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Āgama Sūtra 30/2, Payannā Sūtra-7/2, Chandravedhyaka' Sūtra-78** The man who
properly understands the ultimate meaning of the discourse, knowing bondage and
liberation well, destroys his ancient karma. Sūtra - 79 Knowledge leads to right
action, and action leads to the assimilation of knowledge. In this way, the
combination of knowledge and right action purifies the mind and character. Sūtra
- 80 Knowledge illuminates, austerity purifies, and restraint protects. In this
way, the combination of knowledge, austerity, and restraint leads to liberation
in the Jina Dharma. Sūtra - 81 People of the world repeatedly look at the mouth
of a multi-learned, great soul like the moon. What is greater, more wondrous,
and more beautiful than that? Sūtra - 82 Just as the cool moonlight emanates
from the moon, bringing joy and delight to all, so too, cool Jina words like
sandalwood emanate from the mouth of a knowledgeable person, enabling humans to
cross the ocean of existence. Sūtra - 83 Just as a needle threaded with yarn
does not get lost even when it falls into garbage, so too, a soul who knows the
Āgama does not get lost even when it falls into the forest of existence. Sūtra -
84 Just as a needle without yarn becomes lost and invisible, so too, a soul
enveloped in falsehood without the knowledge of the Sūtra-śāstra gets lost in
the ocean of existence. Sūtra - 85 By seeing the true nature of the ultimate
reality through the knowledge of the scriptures, by maintaining the qualities of
austerity and restraint throughout life, and by losing the body and possessions
at the time of death, the soul attains a special, good, and liberated state.
Sūtra - 86 Just as a physician knows the diagnosis of a disease through the
knowledge of medical science, so too, a monk knows how to purify his character
through the knowledge of the scriptures. Sūtra - 87 Just as a physician cannot
diagnose a disease without studying medical texts, so too, a monk cannot know
the means of purifying his character without the knowledge of the Āgama. Sūtra -
88 Therefore, a soul aspiring for liberation should constantly strive to study
the meaning of the Āgama as formulated by the Tīrthankaras. Sūtra - 89 There is
no other austerity equal to self-study, nor will there ever be, among the twelve
types of external and internal austerities taught by the Supreme Lord Jina. Muni
Dīparatnasāgara Kṛt “(Chandravedhyaka)” Āgama Sūtra-Hindi Anuvāda" Page 11

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama sUtra 30/2, payannAsUtra-7/2, candravedhyaka' sUtra-78 pravacana ke
paramArtha ko acchI taraha se grahaNa karanevAlA puruSa hI ba~dha aura mokSa ko
acchI taraha jAnakara vo hI purAtana-karma kA kSaya karate haiN| sUtra - 79
jJAna se samyak kriyA hotI hai aura kriyA se jJAna-AtmasAt hotA hai  /  isa
taraha jJAna aura samyag kriyA ke yoga se bhAva cAritra kI vizuddhi hotI hai|
sUtra-80 jJAna prakAza karanevAlA hai, tapa zuddhi karanevAlA hai aura saMyama
rakSaNa karanevAlA hai, isa taraha jJAna, tapa aura saMyama tInoM ke yoga se
jinazAsana meM mokSa kahA hai| sUtra - 81 jagata ke loga candra kI taraha
bahuzruta-mahAtmA puruSa ke mukha ko bAra-bAra dekhatA hai  /  usase
zreSThatara, AzcaryakAraka aura ati sundara cIja kauna-sI hai? sUtra-82 candra
se jisa taraha zItala-jyotsanA nIkalatI hai, vo saba logoM ko khuza-AhlAdita
karatI hai  /  usa taraha gItArtha jJAnIpuruSa ke mukha se candana jaise zItala
jinavacana nIkalate haiM, jo sunakara mAnava bhavATavI pAra pA lete haiM
sUtra-83 dhAge se pirAI haI sUI jisa taraha kUr3e meM girane ke bAda nahIM gUma
hotI vaise Agama kA jJAnI jIva saMsAra aTavI meM girane ke bAda bhI gama nahIM
hotaa| sUtra-84 jisa taraha dhAge ke binA sUI najara meM na Ane se gUma ho jAtI
hai  /  vaise sUtra-zAstra bodha binA mithyAtva se ghirA jIva bhavATavI meM kho
jAtA hai| sUtra-85 zrutajJAna dvArA paramArtha kA yathArtha darzana hone se,
tapa aura saMyama guNa ko jIvanabhara akhaMDa rakhane se maraNa ke vakta zarIra
saMpatti naSTa ho jAne se jIva ko viziSTa gati-sadgati aura siddhagati prApta
hotI hai| sUtra -86 jisa taraha vaidya vaidaka zAstra ke jJAna dvArA bImArI kA
nidAna jAnate haiM, vaise zrutajJAna dvArA muni cAritra kI zuddhi kaise karanA,
vo acchI taraha jAnate haiN| sUtra - 87 vaidaka graMtha ke abhyAsa binA jaise
vaidya vyAdhi kA nidAna nahIM jAnatA, vaise Agamika jJAna se rahita muni cAritra
zuddhi kA upAya nahIM jAna sakatA  /  sUtra -88 usa kAraNa se mokSAbhilASI AtmA
ne zrI tIrthaMkara prarUpita Agama artha ke sAtha par3hane meM satata udyama
karanA caahie| sUtra-89 zrI jinezvara paramAtmA ke batAe hae bAhya aura
abhyaMtara tapa ke bAraha prakAroM meM svAdhyAya samAna anya koI tapa nahIM hai
aura hogA bhI nhiiN| muni dIparatnasAgara kRt "(caMdravedhyaka)" Agama sUtra-
hindI anuvAda" Page 11

Page #12 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Agam Sutra 30/2, Payanna Sutra-7/2, ‘Chandravedhyak’ Sutra - 90, 91 One who
is interested in the study of knowledge should make an effort, whether they have
intellect or not. Because intellect is obtained through the destruction and
pacification of karma like Jnanavaraniya. ## Sutra-92 The soul, which has
accumulated karma over countless births, uses it every moment, but through self-
study, the accumulated karma of many births is consumed in an instant. ##
Sutra-93 All beings, including Tiryanch, Sur, Asura, Manav, Kinnar, Mahorag, and
Gandharva, who are in a state of delusion, should ask the Kevali Bhagwan. In
other words, the only appropriate place to seek answers to one's curiosity in
the world is a Kevalgyani. ## Sutra-94 One who attains human detachment through
the hearing and contemplation of a single principle is also a Samyaggyani.
Because whatever brings detachment is the true knowledge of that. ## Sutra-95
One who has attained intense detachment through a single principle on the path
of the Vitarag Paramatama should not abandon that principle even until death. ##
Sutra-96-97 Even the most powerful-minded Muni cannot contemplate the entire
twelve-fold path at the time of death. Therefore, the one who contemplates even
a single principle during that time and place, is considered an Aradhak by
Jinendra. ## Sutra-98 A well-established Muni, by being focused in Aradhana,
attains Samadhi and through the passage of time, surely attains liberation in
three births. In other words, they attain Nirvana, the eternal state. ##
Sutra-99 In this way, I have briefly described the great benefits of the
specific qualities of Shrutagyan. Now, listen with a focused mind to the
specific qualities of Charitra. ## Sutra-100 Those who are completely free from
the bonds of household life, striving to follow the Dharma taught by Jinendra
Bhagwan, are blessed. ## Sutra-101 The virtuous Muni, who follows the Jinavachan
with a focused mind and pure intention, does not feel sadness or dejection even
when facing death, despite the attainment of the state of Muni. ## Sutra-102
Those who have not stabilized their soul in this path of liberation, which is
the only way to free oneself from suffering, are foolish to attain such a rare
state of Shramanatva. ## Muni Diparatnasagar Krit “(Chandravedhyak)” Agam Sutra-
Hindi Translation" Page 12

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama sUtra 30/2, payannAsUtra-7/2, 'candravedhyaka' sUtra - 90, 91 jJAnAbhyAsa
kI rucivAle ko buddhi ho yA na ho lekina udyama jarura karanA cAhie  /  kyoMki
buddhi jJAnAvaraNIyAdi karma ke kSayopazama se prApta hotI hai| asaMkhya janma
ke upArjana kie karma ko upayoga yukta AtmA prati samaya khapAtA hai lekina
svAdhyAya se kaIM bhava ke saMcita karma palabhara meM khapAte haiN| sUtra-92
tiryaMca, sura, asura, mAnava, kinnara, mahoraga aura gaMdharva sahita sarva
chadmastha jIva kevalI bhagavAna ko pUchatA hai, yAni lokameM chadmastha ko
apanI jijJAsA ke samAdhAna ke lie pUchane ko ucita sthAna kevala eka kevalajJAnI
hai sUtra-93 jo kisI eka pada ke zravaNa-cintana se mAnava vairAgya pAtA hai vo
eka pada bhI samyagjJAna hai  /  kyoMki jisase vairAgya prApta ho, vo hI usakA
saccA jJAna hai| sUtra - 94 vItarAga paramAtmA ke mArga meM jo eka pada dvArA
mAnava ne tIvra vairAgya pAyA ho, usa pada ko maraNa taka bhI na chor3anA
caahie| sUtra-95 jinazAsana ke jo kisI eka pada ke dhAraNa se jise saMvega
prApta hotA hai, vahI eka pada ke Alambana se kramika adhyAtma-yoga kI ArAdhanA
dvArA viziSTa dharmadhyAna aura zukladhyAna dvArA samagra mohajAla ko bhedate
haiN| sUtra-96-97 maraNa ke vakta samagra dvAdazAMgI kA cintana honA vo ati
samartha cittavAle muni se bhI mumakIna nahIM hai  /  isalie usa deza-kAla meM
eka bhI pada kA cintana ArAdhanA meM upayukta hokara jo karatA hai use jinezvara
ne ArAdhaka kahA hai| sUtra - 98 suvihita muni ArAdhanA meM ekAgra hokara
samAdhipUrvaka kAla karake utkRSTa se tIna bhava meM yakInana mokSa pAtA hai|
arthAt nirvANa-zAzvata pada pAtA hai| sUtra - 99 isa taraha zrutajJAna ke
viziSTa guNa ke mahAna lAbha saMkSepa meM maiMne varNana kiyA hai  /  aba
cAritra ke viziSTa guNa ekAgra cittavAle banakara suno| sUtra-100 jinezvara
bhagavAna ke batAe dharma kA kozIza se pAlana karane ke lie jo sarva taraha se
gRhapAza ke bandhana se sarvathA mukta hote haiM, vo dhanya haiN| sUtra - 101
vizuddha bhAva dvArA ekAgra cittavAle banakara jo puruSa jinavacana kA pAlana
karatA hai, vo guNa-samRddha muni maraNa samaya prApta hone ke bAvajUda sahaja
bhI viSAda-glAni mahasUsa nahIM krte| sUtra-102 kevala duHkha se mukta
karanevAle aise mokSamArga meM jinhoMne apane AtmA ko sthira nahIM kiyA, vo
durlabha aise zramaNatva ko pAkara sIdAte haiN| muni dIparatnasAgara kRt
"(caMdravedhyaka)" Agama sUtra-hindI anuvAda" Page 12

Page #13 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Āgama Sūtra 30/2, Payannā Sūtra-7/2, Chandravedhyaka' Sūtra - 103** Those who,
with firm wisdom, become one-pointed in mind and search for the welfare of the
other world, they cross over all human suffering. Sūtra-104 The man who, without
negligence, destroys anger, pride, deceit, greed, aversion, and hatred in
restraint, he certainly attains supreme happiness. Sūtra - 105 The human being
who, having obtained the very rare human birth, does not make it meaningful, is
like a ship captain who is very unhappy after the ship is wrecked. Sūtra - 106
The man who, having obtained the rare Śramaṇa Dharma, does not violate it by his
mind, speech, and body, does not experience sorrow like a sailor who finds a
ship in the ocean. Sūtra - 107, 108 _ First of all, it is rare to obtain human
birth, it is rare to attain enlightenment in human birth. Even if enlightenment
is attained, Śramaṇatva is very rare. Even after obtaining the status of a
Sadhu, it is very rare to obtain the secret knowledge of the scriptures. After
understanding the secret of knowledge, it is very rare to attain purity of
character. Therefore, wise men are always striving for purity of character
through criticism, etc. Sūtra-109 Some praise the virtues of Right Conduct, some
praise the purity of character, and some praise Right Knowledge. Sūtra - 110-111
If both Right Conduct and character are attained together, which virtue should
an intelligent man practice first? Right Conduct can be attained even without
character. Just as King Kṛṣṇa and King Śreṇika had Right Conduct even in their
non-restraint. But those who are virtuous have Right Conduct as a rule. Sūtra -
112 One who is corrupted by character should certainly adopt the superior Right
Conduct. Because a being can become a Siddha even without having the substance
of character, but a being without the qualities of perception cannot become a
Siddha. Sūtra - 113 Even those who practice excellent character fall from the
category of restraint due to some false conduct, then what is surprising if a
Right-seeing person who is in the path of attachment falls from it? Sūtra - 114
The character of the Muni who has the intellect of five Samitis and three
Guptis, and who does not have attachment and aversion, becomes pure. Sūtra - 115
Strive diligently in the work of observing Samitis and Guptis for the
purification of that character. And then do not be negligent in the slightest in
the practice of Right-seeing, character, and knowledge. Muni Dīparatnasāgara Kṛt
“(Chandravedhyaka)” Āgama Sūtra-Hindi Anuvāda" Page 13

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama sUtra 30/2, payannAsUtra-7/2, candravedhyaka' sUtra - 103 jo dRr3ha
prajJAvAle bhAva se ekAgra cittavAle banakara pAralaukika hita kI gaveSaNA
karate haiM  /  vo mAnava sarva duHkha kA pAra pAte haiN| sUtra-104 saMyama meM
apramatta hokara jo puruSa krodha, mAna, mAyA, lobha, arati aura dugaMchA kA
kSaya kara detA hai  /  vo yakInana parama sukha pAtA hai| sUtra - 105 ati
durlabha mAnava janma pAkara jo mAnava usakI virAdhanA karatA hai, janma ko
sArthaka nahIM karatA, vo jahAja tUTa jAne se duHkhI honevAle jahAjacAlaka kI
taraha pIche se bahuta duHkhI hotA hai| sUtra - 106 durlabhatara zramaNadharma
pAkara jo puruSa mana, vacana, kAyA ke yoga se usakI virAdhanA nahIM karate, vo
sAgara meM jahAja pAnevAle nAvika kI taraha pIche zoka nahIM pAte  /  sUtra -
107, 108 _ sabase pahale to mAnava janma pAnA durlabha, mAnava janma meM bodhi
prApti durlabha hai  /  bodhi mile to bhI zramaNatva ati durlabha hai  /
sAdhupana milane ke bAvajUda bhI zAstra kA rahasyajJAna pAnA ati durlabha hai  /
jJAna kA rahasya samajhane ke bAda cAritra kI zuddhi honA ati durlabha hai  /
isalie hI jJAnI puruSa AlocanAdi ke dvArA cAritra vizuddhi ke lie parama
udyamazIla rahate haiN| sUtra-109 kitaneka samyaktvaguNa kI niyamA prazaMsA
karate haiM, kitaneka cAritra kI zuddhi kI prazaMsA karate haiM to kucha samyag
jJAna kI prazaMsA karate haiN| sUtra - 110-111 samyaktva aura cAritra donoM guNa
eka sAtha prApta hote ho to buddhizAlI puruSa ko usameM se kauna-sA guNa pahale
karanA cAhie? cAritra binA bhI samyaktva hotA hai| jisa taraha kRSNa aura
zreNika mahArAjA ko aviratipana meM bhI samyaktva thA  /  lekina jo cAritravAna
haiM, unheM samyaktva niyamA hote haiN| sUtra - 112 cAritra se bhraSTa honevAle
ko zreSThatara samyaktva yakInana dhAraNa kara lenA caahie| kyoMki dravya
cAritra ko na pAe hae bhI siddha ho sakatA hai, lekina darzanaguNa rahita jIva
siddha nahIM ho sakate  /  sUtra - 113 utkRSTa cAritra pAlana karanevAle bhI
kisI mithyAtva ke yoga se saMyama zreNI se gira jAte haiM, to sarAga dharma meM
rahe-samyagdRSTi usameM se patita ho jAe usameM kyA tAjjuba ? sUtra - 114 jo
muni kI buddhi pA~ca samiti aura tIna gupti yukta hai| aura jo rAga-dveSa nahIM
karatA, usakA cAritra zuddha banatA hai| sUtra - 115 usa cAritra kI zuddhi ke
lie samiti aura gupti ke pAlanarUpa kArya meM prayatnapUrvaka udyama kro| aura
phira samyagdarzana, cAritra aura jJAna kI sAdhanA meM lezamAtra pramAda mata
kara  /  muni dIparatnasAgara kRt "(caMdravedhyaka)" Agama sUtra-hindI anuvAda"
Page 13

Page #14 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Āgama Sūtra 30/2, Payannā Sūtra-7/2, ‘Candraveḍhyaka’ Sūtra - 116  I have
briefly described the qualities and great benefits of the Dharma of conduct. Now
listen with a focused mind to the special qualities of Samadhi-Maraṇa.
Sūtra-117-118  Just as an untrained man riding an uncontrolled horse might wish
to defeat an enemy army, but that man and horse, not having been trained and
practiced beforehand, are destroyed upon seeing the enemy army in battle. Sūtra
- 119  Similarly, a Muni who has not previously practiced the Pariṣaha of
hunger, etc., the suffering of Loca, etc., and Tapas, cannot bear the Pariṣaha,
Upaśarga, and pain that come upon the body at the time of death with equanimity.
Sūtra - 120  A Muni who has practiced Tapas, etc., beforehand and desires
Samadhi, if he can restrain the desire for worldly pleasures, can bear the
Pariṣaha with equanimity. Sūtra - 121  A Muni who has previously renounced all
food, having practiced the prescribed methods of the scriptures, such as Vigaya,
Uṇodari, and excellent Tapas, pierces the army of Pariṣaha at the time of death
like a sharp axe. Sūtra - 122  A Muni who has not made great effort in upholding
conduct beforehand experiences sensory pain at the time of death. It creates an
obstacle to Samadhi. In this way, a Muni who has not practiced Tapas, etc.,
beforehand becomes cowardly and fearful at the time of final worship. Sūtra-123
Even a Muni who is a student of the Āgama, if he becomes attached to sensory
pleasures, may or may not attain Samadhi at the time of death. If he remembers
the words of the scriptures, he may attain Samadhi, but due to the inability to
remember the words of the scriptures because of being under the control of
sensory pleasures, he usually does not attain Samadhi. Sūtra - 124  Even a Muni
who has little knowledge, if he has practiced Tapas, etc., well, can fulfill the
vows of restraint and a good death without suffering and in a beautiful way.
Sūtra - 125  A cowardly man, overwhelmed by the desire for sensory pleasures,
bound by the power of severe Pariṣaha, and without the practice of Tapas, etc.,
becomes frightened at the time of final worship. Sūtra - 126  A Muni who has
become virtuous by practicing difficult Tapas and restraint beforehand cannot be
overcome by the army of Pariṣaha, which has been prevented by the power of
fortitude at the time of death. Sūtra-127  A wise Muni who has practiced
difficult Tapas and restraint beforehand, thinking carefully about his future
benefit, free from the hope of Nidāna-Pauḍgalika pleasure, and without any
restrictions regarding any substance, field, etc., practices the acceptable
Samadhi Yoga well.  Muni Dīparatnasāgara Kṛt “(Candraveḍhyaka)” Āgama Sūtra-
Hindi Anuvāda" Page 14

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama sUtra 30/2, payannAsUtra-7/2, 'candravedhyaka' sUtra - 116 isa taraha
cAritradharma ke guNa-mahAna phAyade maiMne saMkSipta meM varNana kie haiM  /
aba samAdhimaraNa ke guNa vizeSa ko ekAgra citta se suno| sUtra-117-118 jisa
taraha bekAbU ghor3e para baiThA huA anajAna puruSa zatru sainya ko parAsta
karanA zAyada IcchA rakhe, lekina vo puruSa aura ghor3e pahale se zikSA aura
abhyAsa nahIM karane se saMgrAma meM zatru sainya ko dekhate hI naSTa ho jAte
haiN| sUtra - 119 usI taraha pahale kSudhAdi parISaha, locAdi kaSTa aura tapa kA
abhyAsa nahIM kiyA, vaisA muni maraNa samaya prApta hote hI zarIra para AnevAle
parISaha upasarga aura vedanA ko samatA se saha nahIM sktaa| sUtra - 120 pUrva
tapa Adi kA abhyAsa karanevAle aura samAdhi kI kAmanAvAlA muni yadi vaiSayika-
sukha kI IcchA roka le to parISaha ko samatA se sahana kara sakatA hai| sUtra -
121 pahale zAstrokta vidhi ke mutAbika vigaI tyAga, uNodarI utkRSTa tapa Adi
karake kramazaH sarva AhAra kA tyAga karanevAle muni maraNa kAla se
nizcayanayarUpa parazu ke prahAra dvArA parISaha kI senA cheda DAlate haiN|
sUtra - 122 pUrve cAritra pAlana meM bhArI kozIza na karanevAle muni ko maraNa
ke vakta indriya pIr3A detI hai  /  samAdhi meM bAdhA paidA karatI hai  /  isa
taraha tapa Adi ke pahale abhyAsa na karanevAle muni antima ArAdhanA ke vakta
kAyarabhayabhIta hokara ghabarAte haiN| sUtra-123 Agama kA abhyAsI muni bhI
indriya kI lolupatA vAlA bana jAe to use maraNa ke vakta zAyada samAdhi rahe yA
na bhI rahe, zAstra ke vacana yAda Ae to samAdhi raha bhI jAe, lekina
indriyarasa kI paravazatA ko lekara zAstra vacana kI smRti nAmumakIna hone se
prAyaH karake samAdhi nahIM rhtii| sUtra - 124 alpazrutavAlA muni bhI tapa Adi
kA sundara abhyAsa kiyA ho to saMyama aura maraNa kI zubha pratijJA ko vyathA
binA-sundara tarIke se nibhA sakate haiN| sUtra - 125 indriya sukha-zAtA meM
vyAkula ghora parISaha kI parAdhInatA se ghirA, tapa Adi ke abhyAsa rahita
kAyara puruSa aMtima ArAdhanA ke vakta ghabarA jAtA hai| sUtra - 126 pahale se
hI acchI taraha se kaThina tapa-saMyama kI sAdhanA karake sattvazIla bane muni
ko maraNa ke vakta dhRtibala se nivAraNa kI gaI parISaha kI senA kucha bhI
karane ke lie samartha nahIM ho sktii| sUtra-127 pahale se hI kaThina tapa,
saMyama kI sAdhanA karanevAle buddhimAna muni apane bhAvi hita ko acchI taraha
se socakara nidAna-paudgalika sukha kI AzaMsA rahita hokara, kisI bhI dravya-
kSetrAdi viSayaka pratibaMdha na rakhanevAlA aisA vo svakArya samAdhi yoga kI
acchI taraha se sAdhanA karatA hai| muni dIparatnasAgara kRt "(caMdravedhyaka)"
Agama sUtra-hindI anuvAda" Page 14

Page #15 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Āgama Sūtra 30/2, Payannā Sūtra-7/2, ‘Chandravedhyaka’ Sūtra - 128** Taking
the bow, drawing it back, and fitting the arrow, the man with a steady mind
towards the target, thinking about his training, binds the Rādha-vedhya. Sūtra -
129 But if that archer makes the mistake of taking his mind away from the
target, even though he is committed, he cannot pierce the Rādha’s Chandraka-like
vedhya. Sūtra - 130 Like the Chandravedhya, one should make one’s soul an
unwavering, virtuous, and devoted Ārādhaka in order to attain samadhi at the
time of death. Sūtra - 131 The death of a Muni at the end is pure, with the
firmness of Samyagdarshana, a pure intellect, and the criticism and condemnation
of self-created sins. Sūtra - 132 I have come to criticize all the offenses that
have been committed against me in the matters of knowledge, vision, and conduct,
which Śrī Jineśvara Bhagavān knows directly. Sūtra - 133 The man who stops and
removes the two sins of attachment and aversion, which bind the world and are
related to the soul, will certainly become free from negligence and attain
samadhi at the time of death. Sūtra - 134 The man who controls the soul with the
knowledge-goad of the three dands, by keeping it secret, can remain steadfast
and attain samadhi at the time of death. Sūtra - 135 The man who always controls
the terrible passions like anger, etc., which arise in his own body, as taught
by Jineśvara Bhagavān, achieves the state of equanimity at death. Sūtra - 136
The wise man who controls the senses, which are excessively attached to objects,
with the goad of knowledge, becomes one who attains samadhi at the time of
death. Sūtra - 137 The Muni, who is benevolent towards the six living beings,
free from the seven fears of this world and beyond, and has a very gentle and
soft nature, constantly experiences the natural state of equanimity and becomes
one who achieves perfect samadhi at the time of death. Sūtra - 138 Those who
have conquered the eight intoxications, who are protected by the new secrecy of
celibacy, who are engaged in the practice of the ten vows of the Yati Dharma,
such as forgiveness, etc., will certainly attain the state of equanimity and
samadhi at the time of death. Sūtra - 139 He who desires the worship of this
very rare path of liberation, who avoids the desires of gods, gurus, etc., or
who has become face-to-face with the white meditation through the continuous
practice of Dharma meditation, will certainly attain samadhi at death. Muni
Dīparatnasāgara Kṛt “(Chandravedhyaka)” Āgama Sūtra-Hindi Anuvāda" Page 15

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama sUtra 30/2, payannAsUtra-7/2, 'candravedhyaka' sUtra - 128 dhanuSa
grahaNa karake, usake Upara khIMcakara tIra car3Akara lakSya ke prati-sthira
mativAlA puruSa apanI zikSA ke bAre meM socatA huA-rAdhA vedha ko bA~dha letA
hai  /  sUtra - 129 lekina vo dhanurdhara apane citta ko lakSya se anyatra le
jAne kI galatI kara baiThe to pratijJAbaddha hone ke bAvajUda rAdhA ke candraka
rUpa vedhya ko bIMdha nahIM sktaa| sUtra - 130 candravedhya kI taraha maraNa ke
vakta samAdhi prApta karane ke lie apane AtmA ko mokSa mArga meM avirAdhi
guNavAlA arthAt ArAdhaka banAnA caahie| sUtra-131 samyagdarzana kI dRr3hatA se
nirmala buddhivAlA aura svakRta pApa kI AlocanA niMdA-gardA karanevAle antima
vakta para muni kA maraNa zuddha hotA hai  /  sUtra - 132 jJAna, darzana aura
cAritra ke viSaya meM mujhase jo aparAdha hue haiM, zrI jinezvara bhagavaMta
sAkSAt jAnate haiM, una sarva aparAdha kI sarva bhAva se AlocanA karane ke lie
maiM upasthita huA huuN| sUtra - 133 saMsAra kA baMdha karanevAle, jIva
sambandhI rAga aura dveSa do pApa ko jo puruSa roka le-dUra kare vo maraNa ke
vakta yakInana apramatta-samAdhiyukta banatA hai| sUtra - 134 jo puruSa jIva ke
sAtha tIna daMr3a kA jJAnAMkuza dvArA gupti rakhane ke dvArA nigraha karate
haiM, vo maraNa ke vakta kRtayogI-yAni apramatta rahakara samAdhi rakha sakatA
hai| sUtra-135 jinezvara bhagavaMta se garhita, svazarIra meM paidA honevAle,
bhayAnaka krodha Adi kaSAya ko jo puruSa hamezA nigraha karatA hai, vo maraNa
meM samatAyoga ko siddha karatA hai| sUtra - 136 jo jJAnI puruSa viSaya meM ati
lipta indriya ke jJAna rUpa aMkuza dvArA nigraha karatA hai, vo maraNa ke vakta
samAdhi sAdhanevAlA banatA hai| sUtra - 137 cha jIva nikAya kA hitasvI,
ihalokAdi sAta bhaya rahita, ati mRdu-namra svabhAvavAlA muni nitya sahaja
samatA kA ahasAsa karate hue maraNa ke vakta parama samAdhi ko siddha karanevAlA
banatA hai| sUtra - 138 jinhoMne ATha mada jIta lie haiM, jo brahmacarya kI
nava-gupti se gupta-surakSita hai, kSamA Adi dasa yati dharma ke pAlana meM
udyata hai, vo maraNa ke vakta bhI yakInana samatA-samAdhibhAva pAtA hai| sUtra
- 139 jo atidurlabha aise mokSamArga kI ArAdhanA IcchatA ho, deva, guru, Adi
AzAtanA kA varjana karatA ho yA dharmadhyAna ke satata abhyAsa dvArA zukladhyAna
sanmukha haA ho, vo maraNa meM yakInana samAdhi prApta karatA hai| muni
dIparatnasAgara kRt "(caMdravedhyaka)" Agama sUtra-hindI anuvAda" Page 15

Page #16 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Āgama Sūtra 30/2, Payannā Sūtra-7/2, Chandravedhyaka' Sūtra-140** A Muni who
endures twenty-two Pariṣaha and unbearable afflictions in a deserted place,
village, town, etc., can also endure them in samadhi at the time of death. Sūtra
- 141 The kṣaya of a blessed person, despite being confronted by the kṣaya of
anger, etc., of others, does not desire to stand up like a crippled human being
who is well-seated. Sūtra - 142, 143 I believe that the śramaṇatva of a virtuous
person who practices śramaṇadharma is futile like the flower of a śeladī if
their kṣaya is of a high order. Even a pure character cultivated for a few years
in the past is lost in a moment by a man with a polluted mind due to kṣaya.
Sūtra - 144 The karma earned through the fault of heedlessness for an infinite
period is consumed by a Muni who conquers and destroys attachment and aversion
only in a koti of past years. Sūtra-145 If a yogi who has attained the category
of upasama with subdued kṣaya falls into degradation countless times, then why
should one trust the remaining little kṣaya? Sūtra - 146 If the kṣaya of anger,
etc., has been destroyed, then only consider oneself to be safe and well, just
as if the kṣaya is alive, then know the true victory, if the kṣaya is defeated,
then consider that fearlessness has been attained, and if the kṣaya is
completely destroyed, then know that indestructible happiness will surely be
attained. Sūtra - 147 Blessed are those virtuous ones who always remain immersed
in the Jina's words, conquer the kṣaya, have no attachment to external objects,
and wander freely in the path of restraint, becoming detached and devoid of
cruelty. Sūtra - 140 Blessed are those great Munis who are absorbed in the path
of liberation, who are endowed with inexhaustible virtues, and who wander
without restraint in this world or the next, in life or death. Sūtra-149 A wise
person should make a strong effort to attain right faith by vomiting out wrong
faith at the time of death. Sūtra-150-151 It is unfortunate that even great
patient men, at the time of powerful death, become overwhelmed by the intense
pain of death and attain the state of wrong faith. Therefore, a wise Muni should
remember all the sins committed from the day of initiation in the presence of
the Guru and cleanse them by criticizing, condemning, and discarding them. Sūtra
- 152 At that time, the Guru Bhagavan should give the appropriate atonement, and
accepting it willingly and considering it the Guru's grace, say, "O Bhagavan! I
want to perform the atonement-tapas given by you. You have freed me from sin."
Muni Diparatnasāgar Kr̥t “(Chandravedhyaka)” Āgama Sūtra-Hindi Translation" Page
16

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama sUtra 30/2, payannAsUtra-7/2, candravedhyaka' sUtra-140 jo muni bAIsa
parISaha aura duHsaha aise upasarga ko zUnya sthAna yA gA~va nagara Adi meM
sahana karatA hai, vo maraNakAla meM samAdhi meM bhI jhaila sakatA hai| sUtra -
141 dhanya puruSa ke kaSAya dUsaroM ke krodhAdika kaSAya se TakarAne ke bAvajUda
bhI acchI taraha se baiThe hue paMgu mAnava kI taraha khar3e hone kI IcchA nahIM
rkhte| sUtra - 142, 143 zramaNadharma kA AcaraNa karanevAle sAdhu ko yadi kaSAya
ucca koTi ke ho to unakA zramaNatva zelar3I ke phUla kI taraha niSphala hai,
aisA merA mAnanA hai  /  kucha nyUna pUrva koTi sAla taka pAlana kiyA gayA
nirmala cAritra bhI kaSAya se kalUSita cittavAlA puruSa eka muhUrta meM hAra
jAtA hai| sUtra - 144 anantakAla se pramAda ke doSa dvArA upArjana kie karma ko,
rAga-dveSa ko parAsta karanevAle-khatma kara denevAle muni kevala koTi pUrva
sAla meM hI khapA dete haiN| sUtra-145 yadi upazAnta kaSAyavAlA-upazama zreNI
meM ArUr3ha huA yogI bhI ananta bAra patana pAtA hai| to bAkI rahe thor3e kaSAya
kA bharosA kyoM kiyA jAe ? sUtra - 146 yadi krodhAdi kaSAya kA kSaya huA ho to
hI khuda ko kSema-kuzala hai, usa taraha jaise, agara kaSAya jIte ho to saccA
jaya jAne, yadi kaSAya hata-prahata hue ho to abhaya prApta huA aisA mAne evaM
kaSAya sarvathA naSTa hue ho to avinAzI sukha avazya milegA aisA jAne  /  sUtra
- 147 dhanya hai una sAdhubhagavaMtoM ko jo hamezA jinavacanameM rakta rahate
haiM, kaSAyoM kA jaya karate haiM, bAhya vastu prati jinako rAga nahIM hai tathA
niHsaMga, nirmamatva banakara yatheccha rUpa se saMyamamArga meM vicarate haiN|
sUtra - 140 mokSamArga meM lIna bane jo mahAmuni, avirahita guNoM se yukta
hokara isaloka yA paraloka meM tathA jIvana yA mRtyu meM pratibandha rahita
hokara vicarate haiM, ve dhanya haiN| sUtra-149 buddhimAna puruSa ko
maraNasamudghAta ke avasara para mithyAtva kA vamana karake samyaktva ko prApta
karane ke lie prabala puruSArtha karanA caahie| sUtra-150-151 kheda kI bAta hai
ki mahAn dhIra puruSa bhI balavAn mRtyu ke samaya maraNa samudghAta kI tIvra
vedanA se vyAkula hokara mithyAtva dazA pAte haiM  /  isIlie buddhimAna muni ko
guru ke samIpa dIkSA ke dina se hue sarva pApoM ko yAda karake usakI AlocanA,
niMdA, gardA karake pApa kI zuddhi avazya kara lenI cAhie  /  sUtra - 152 usa
vakta guru bhagavaMta jo ucita prAyazcitta deve, usakA IcchApUrvaka svIkAra
karake tathA guru kA anugraha mAnate hue kahe ki he bhagavan ! maiM Apake dvArA
diyA gayA prAyazcitta-tapa karanA cAhatA hU~, Apane mujhe pApa se muni
dIparatnasAgara kRt "(caMdravedhyaka)" Agama sUtra-hindI anuvAda" Page 16

Page #17 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Agam Sutra 30/2, Payanna Sutra-7/2, Chandravadhyak' has been removed and the
ocean of existence has been crossed. Sutra - 153 A Muni should never commit an
offense against the ultimate truth, if it happens by mistake, then atonement
must be done. Sutra - 154 A being with a lot of negligence can only be purified
by atonement, atonement should be practiced like a leash to protect the
character. Sutra - 155, 156 A being with a wound (Shalya) never gets purified,
this has been said by the all-knowing Jineswar. Those who criticize and condemn
sin are free from death and rebirth. A being who dies even once without a wound
(Shalya) wanders in this terrifying world again and again, taking many births
and deaths. Sutra - 157 A Muni who is careful of the five committees, secretive
of the three secrets, and wanders for a long time, but at the time of death,
violates Dharma, is called an Anaradhak - one who is not worthy of worship by
the wise. Sutra - 158 A person who lived a life of extreme attachment in the
past, but in the final life, becomes restrained and becomes suitable for worship
at the time of death, is called an Aradhak by Jineswar. Sutra - 159 Therefore, a
Muni who is pure in all respects, faces worship, is free from delusion, and
accepts Santhara, will think in his heart like this. Sutra - 160, 161 My soul is
one, eternal, full of knowledge and vision. The rest, all external things like
body, etc., are born from the relationship of association. ..... I am one, I
belong to no one, or I am not anyone's. I cannot see who I belong to, and there
is nothing that is mine. Sutra - 162-163 In the past, due to the fault of
ignorance, I have attained divinity, humanity, animal birth, and hellish
existence countless times. But due to suffering, I have not attained
satisfaction or perfect purity through my own karma. Sutra - 164 Those humans
who are negligent in the religion that liberates, wander in this terrifying
ocean of the world for a long time. Sutra - 165 Those humans with firm intellect
who do not abandon the path of Jina's words, which was practiced by the previous
men, cross all suffering. Sutra - 166 The man who strives to destroy anger,
pride, deceit, greed, attachment, and hatred, surely practices the path of
liberation, which is like eternal happiness. "Dukh Samukt Karana" Muni
Diparatnasagar Krit "(Chandravadhyak)" Agam Sutra - Hindi Translation" Page 17

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama sUtra 30/2, payannAsUtra-7/2, candravedhyaka' nikAlakara bhavasamudra
pAra karavAyA hai| sUtra - 153 paramArtha se muni ko aparAdha karanA hI nahIM
cAhie, pramAdavaza ho jAe to prAyazcitta avazya karanA cAhie sUtra - 154 pramAda
kI bahulatAvAle jIva ko vizuddhi prAyazcitta se hI ho sakatI hai, cAritra kI
rakSA ke lie usake aMkuza samAna prAyazcitta kA AcaraNa karanA caahie|
sUtra-155,156 zalyavAle jIva kI kabhI zuddhi nahIM hotI, aisA sarvabhAvadarzI
jinezvarane kahA hai  /  pApa kI AlocanA, niMdA karanevAle maraNa aura punaH
bhava rahita hote haiN| eka bAra bhI zalya rahita maraNa se marakara jIva
mahAbhayAnaka isa saMsAra meM bAra-bAra kaIM janma aura maraNa karate hue
bhramaNa karate haiN| sUtra - 157 jo muni pA~ca samiti se sAvadha hokara, tIna
gupti se gupta hokara, cirakAla taka vicarakara bhI yadi maraNa ke samaya dharma
kI virAdhanA kare to use jJAnI puruSa ne anArAdhaka-ArAdhanA rahita kahA hai|
sUtra-158 kAphI vakta pahale ati mohavaza jIvana jI kara antima jIvana meM yadi
saMvRtta hokara maraNa ke vakta ArAdhanA meM upayukta ho to use jinezvara ne
ArAdhaka kahA hai| sUtra-159 isalie sarvabhAva se zuddha, ArAdhanA ko abhimukha
hokara, bhrAnti rahita hokara saMthArA svIkAra karatA huA muni apane dila meM
isa taraha cintana kregaa| sUtra - 160, 161 merI AtmA eka hai, zAzvata hai,
jJAna aura darzana yukta hai  /  zeSa sarva-dehAdi bAhya padArtha saMyoga
sambandha se paidA huA hai  /  ..... maiM eka hU~, merA koI nahIM yA maiM kisI
kA nahIM  /  jisakA maiM hU~ use maiM dekha nahIM sakatA, aura phira aisI koI
cIja nahIM ki jo merI ho  /  sUtra - 162-163 pUrve-bhUtakAlameM ajJAna doSa
dvArA ananta bAra devatva, manuSyatva, tiryaMca yoni aura narakagati pA cUkA
huuN| lekina duHkha ke kAraNa aise apane hI karma dvArA aba taka mujhe na to
saMtoSa prApta huA na samyaktva vizuddhi paaii| sUtra - 164 mukta karavAnevAle
dharma meM jo mAnava pramAda karate haiM, vo mahA bhayAnaka aise saMsAra sAgara
meM dIrgha kAla taka bhramaNa karate haiN| sUtra - 165 dRr3ha-buddhiyukta jo
mAnava pUrva-puruSa ne AcaraNa kie jinavacana ke mArga ko nahIM chor3ate, vo
sarva duHkha kA pAra pA lete haiN| sUtra - 166 jo udyamI puruSa krodha, mAna,
mAyA, lobha, rAga aura dveSa kA kSaya karatA hai, vo parama-zAzvata sukha samAna
mokSa kI yakInana sAdhanA karatA hai| daHkha samukta karaNA" muni
dIparatnasAgara kRt "(caMdravedhyaka)" Agama sUtra-hindI anuvAda" Page 17

Page #18 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Agam Sutra 30/2, Payanna Sutra-7/2, Chandravedhyak Sutra - 167** At the time
of death, neither mother, father, relatives, nor dear friends can become a
support, meaning they cannot save one from death. Sutra - 168, 169 Silver, gold,
slaves, maidservants, chariots, bullock carts, or palanquins, etc., none of
these external things are of any use to a person at the time of death, they
cannot provide support. Horsepower, elephant power, military power, bow power,
chariot power, etc., none of these external protectors can save a human from
death. Sutra - 170 In this way, by removing the afflictions, the soul, by
worshipping the Samadhi-death as spoken by the Jinas, becomes pure. Sutra - 171
Even a Muni who knows the remedy for the transgression-faults that occur in
vows, should purify his own afflictions only through a Guru or other witness.
Sutra - 172 Just as a skilled physician, when treating himself, consults another
physician and takes the medicine prescribed by him, similarly, a Sadhu reveals
his faults to a proper Guru and purifies them. Sutra - 173 In this way, at the
time of death, a Muni develops a pure Pravrajya-character, who does not cling to
attachment at the time of death, he is called an Aradhak. Sutra - 174-175 O
seeker of liberation! By listening to the method of humility, the qualities of
an Acharya, the qualities of a disciple, the qualities of humility-control, the
qualities of knowledge, the qualities of feet, and the qualities of death, you
should behave in such a way that you can be completely free from the fall of
womb-dwelling, death, rebirth, birth, and evil destiny. **30/2 Chandravedhyak-
Prakirnak Sutra-7/2, Hindi translation by Muni Diparatnasagar** **Muni
Diparatnasagar's "(Chandravedhyak)" Agam Sutra-Hindi Translation** Page 18

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama sUtra 30/2, payannAsUtra-7/2, candravedhyaka' sUtra - 167 puruSa ke
maraNa vakta mAtA, pitA, bandhu yA priya mitra koI bhI sahaja mAtra bhI Alambana
samAna nahIM banatA matalaba maraNa se nahIM bacA sakate  /  sUtra - 168,169
cA~dI, sonA, dAsa, dAsI, ratha, bailagAr3I yA pAlakhI Adi kisI bhI bAhya cIjeM
puruSa ko maraNa ke vakta kAma nahIM lagate, Alambana nahIM de sakate  /
azvabala, hastIbala, sainikabala, dhanubala, rathabala Adi kisI bAhya saMrakSaka
cIjeM mAnava ko maraNa se nahIM bacA skte| sUtra - 170 isa taraha saMkleza dUra
karake, bhAvazalya kA uddhAra karanevAle AtmA jinokta samAdhimaraNa kI ArAdhanA
karate hue zuddha hotA hai| sUtra - 171 vrata meM laganevAle aticAra-doSa kI
zuddhi ke upAya ko jAnanevAle muni ko bhI apane bhAvazalya kI vizuddhi guru Adi
parasAkSI se hI karanI caahie| sUtra-172 jisa taraha cikitsA karane meM mAhira
vaidya bhI apanI bImArI kI bAta dUsare vaidya ko karate haiM, aura usane batAI
huI davAI karate haiM  /  vaise sAdhu bhI ucita guru ke sAmane apane doSa
prakaTa karake usakI zuddhi karate haiN| sUtra - 173 isa taraha maraNakAla ke
vakta muni ko vizuddha pravrajyA-cAritra paidA hotA hai, jo sAdhu maraNa ke
vakta moha nahIM rakhatA, use ArAdhaka kahA hai| sUtra - 174-175 he mumukSu AtmA
! vinaya, AcArya ke guNa, ziSya ke guNa, vinayanigraha ke guNa, jJAnaguNa,
caraNaguNa aura maraNaguNa kI vidhi ko sunakara-tuma isa taraha vyavahAra karo
ki jisase garbhavAsa, maraNa, punarbhava, janma aura durgati ke patana se
sarvathA mukta ho sko| 30/2 candravedhyaka-prakirNaka sUtra-7/2 kA muni
dIparatnasAgara kRt hindI anuvAda pUrNa muni dIparatnasAgara kRt
"(caMdravedhyaka)" Agama sUtra-hindI anuvAda" Page 18

Page #19 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Agam Sutra 30/2, Payannasutra-7/2, 'Chandravedhyak' Namo Namo Nimmaldansanasss
Pushyapashrimananh-Kshabha-Dalit-Sushil-Sudhasagar 43lyo Namah 30/2
Chandravedhyak / Agam Sutra Hindi Anuvaad ' [Anuvaadak Evam Sampadak Agam
Diwakar Muni Deeperatnasagarji [M.Com. M.Ed. Ph.D. Shruta Maharshi ] all 21182:-
(1)  (2) deepratnasagar.in Bhela Bhedress:- iainmunideepratnasagar@gmail.com
Bhova 09825967397 Muni Deeperatnasagar Krit “(Chandravedhyak)” Agam Sutra-Hindi
Anuvaad" Page 19

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
Agama sUtra 30/2, payannAsUtra-7/2, 'candravedhyaka' namo namo nimmaladaMsaNassa
pUzyapAzrImAnaMha-kSabhA-dalita-suzIla-sudhasAgara 43lyo namaH 30/2
caMdravedhyaka / AgamasUtra hindI anuvAda ' [anuvAdaka evaM saMpAdaka Agama
dIvAkara muni dIparatnasAgarajI [M.Com. M.Ed. Ph.D. zruta maharSi ] all 21182:-
(1) (2) deepratnasagar.in bhelA bheDresa:- iainmunideepratnasagar@gmail.com
bhovA 09825967397 muni dIparatnasAgara kRt "(caMdravedhyaka)" Agama sUtra-hindI
anuvAda" Page 19

