Catalog link: https://jainqq.org/explore/034691/1

Page #1 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Namo Namo Nimmaladansanas Bal Brahmachari Shri Neminathaya Namah Puja Anand-
Kshama-Lalit-Sushil-Sudharmasagar-Guru Bhyo Namah Aagam-24 Chatuhsharan Aagam
Sutra Hindi Anuvaad Anuvaadak Evam Sampadak Aagam Deepaakar Muni Deepa Ratna
Sagarji [ M.Com. M.Ed. Ph.D. Shruta Maharshi ] 'Aagam Hindi - Anuvaad-Shreni
Pushp-24

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 namo namo nimmaladaMsaNassa bAla brahmacArI zrI neminAthAya namaH pUjya Ananda-
kSamA-lalita - suzIla-sudharmasAgara-gurUbhyo namaH Agama-24 catuHzaraNa
AgamasUtra hindI anuvAda anuvAdaka evaM sampAdaka Agama dIvAkara muni
dIparatnasAgarajI [ M.Com. M.Ed. Ph.D. zruta maharSi ] 'Agama hindI - anuvAda-
zreNI puSpa-24

Page #2 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Agam Sutra 24, Payanna Sutra-1, 'Chatuh-Sharan' Sutra Agam Sutra-24- 'Chatuh-
Sharan' Payanna Sutra-1- Hindi Translation Where to see what? Order Subject Page
Order Subject Necessary-Arthaadhikār Mangal etc. four Sharan 05 | 4 | Dushkrut
did | Sukrit Anumodana 06 | 6 Upasamhar Muni Diparatnasagar Krit "(Chatuh-
Sharan)" Agam Sutra-Hindi Translation" Page 2

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama sUtra 24, payannAsUtra-1, 'catu:zaraNa' sUtra AgamasUtra-24-
'catuHzaraNa' payannAsUtra-1- hindI anuvAda kahAM kyA dekhe? krama viSaya pRSTha
krama viSaya Avazyaka-arthAdhikAra maMgala Adi cAra zaraNa 05  /  4  /  duSkRta
gare | sukRta anumodanA 06  /  6 upasaMhAra muni dIparatnasAgara kRt
"(catuHzaraNa)" AgamasUtra-hindI anuvAda" Page 2

Page #3 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Agam Sutra 24, Payanna Sutra-1, 'Chatuhsharan' **Sutra** 45 Agam
Classification Sutra Order **Order** Agam Name Agam Name Sutra 01 | Achar Ang
Sutra-1 25 | Aturpratyakhyan Payanna Sutra-2 02 Sutrakrit Ang Sutra-2 26 03
Sthan Ang Sutra-3 27 | Mahapratyakhyan Bhaktaparijna | Tandulavaicharhik
Sanstharak Payanna Sutra-3 Payanna Sutra-4 Payanna Sutra-5 04 Samavay Ang
Sutra-4 28 05 Ang Sutra-5 29 Payanna Sutra-6 Bhagavati Jnatadharmakatha 06 | Ang
Sutra-6 Payanna Sutra-7 Upasakadasha Ang Sutra-7 Payanna Sutra-7 Antakrit Dasha
09 Anuttaroppapatikadasha Ang Sutra-8 Ang Sutra-9 30.1 | Gachhachar 30.2
Chandravadhyak 31 | Ganividya Devendrastav Virastav 34 | Nishit Payanna Sutra-8
Payanna Sutra-9 32 | 10 Prashnavyakaranadasha Ang Sutra-10 33 Ang Sutra-11 11
Vipakshrut 12 Aupapatik Payanna Sutra-10 Chhed Sutra-1 Chhed Sutra-2 Upang
Sutra-1 Brihatkalp Vyavahar Rajaprashchiy Upang Sutra-2 Chhed Sutra-3 14
Jivajivabhigam Upang Sutra-3 37 Upang Sutra-4 Upang Sutra-5 Upang Sutra-6 Chhed
Sutra-4 Chhed Sutra-5 Chhed Sutra-6 40 Upang Sutra-7 Dashashrutaskandh 38
Jitakalp 39 Mahanishit Aavashyak 41.1 Oghaninyukti 41.2 | Pindaninyukti 42 |
Dashavaikalik 43 Uttaradhyayayan 44 Nandi Anuyogadwar Mulsutra-1 Mulsutra-2
Mulsutra-2 15 Prajnapan 16 Suryaprajnapti 17 Chandraprajnapti 18 |
Jambudvipprajnapti 19 Nirayavalika Kalpavatanshika 21 | Pushpika |
Pushpachoolika 23 Vrishnidasha 24 Chatuhsharan Upang Sutra-8 Upang Sutra-9 Upang
Sutra-10 Upang Sutra-11 Upang Sutra-12 Payanna Sutra-1 Mulsutra-3 Mulsutra-4
Chulika Sutra-1 Chulika Sutra-2 Muni Diparatnasagar Krit “(Chatuhsharan)” Agam
Sutra-Hindi Anuvaad" Page 3

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama sUtra 24, payannAsUtra-1, 'catuHzaraNa' sUtra 45 Agama vargIkaraNa sUtra
krama krama Agama kA nAma Agama kA nAma sUtra 01 | AcAra aMgasUtra-1 25 |
AturapratyAkhyAna payannAsUtra-2 02 sUtrakRt aMgasUtra-2 26 03 sthAna
aMgasUtra-3 27 | mahApratyAkhyAna bhaktaparijJA | taMdulavaicArika saMstAraka
payannAsUtra-3 payannAsUtra-4 payannAsUtra-5 04 samavAya aMgasUtra-4 28 05
aMgasUtra-5 29 payannAsUtra-6 bhagavatI jJAtAdharmakathA 06  /  aMgasUtra-6
payannAsUtra-7 upAsakadazA aMgasUtra-7 payannAsUtra-7 aMtakRt dazA 09
anuttaropapAtikadazA aMgasUtra-8 aMgasUtra-9 30.1 | gacchAcAra 30.2
candravedhyaka 31 | gaNividyA devendrastava vIrastava 34 | nizItha
payannAsUtra-8 payannAsUtra-9 32  /  10 praznavyAkaraNadazA aMgasUtra-10 33
aMgasUtra-11 11 vipAkazruta 12 aupapAtika payannAsUtra-10 chedasUtra-1
chedasUtra-2 upAMgasUtra-1 bRhatkalpa vyavahAra rAjaprazciya upAMgasUtra-2
chedasUtra-3 14 jIvAjIvAbhigama upAgasUtra-3 37 upAMgasUtra-4 upAMgasUtra-5
upAMgasUtra-6 chedasUtra-4 chedasUtra-5 chedasUtra-6 40 upAMgasUtra-7
dazAzrutaskandha 38 jItakalpa 39 mahAnizItha Avazyaka 41.1 oghaniyukti 41.2 |
piMDaniyukti 42 | dazavaikAlika 43 uttarAdhyayana 44 nandI anuyogadvAra
mUlasUtra-1 mUlasUtra-2 mUlasUtra-2 15 prajJApanA 16 sUryaprajJapti 17
candraprajJapti 18 | jaMbUdvIpaprajJapti 19 nirayAvalikA kalpavataMsikA 21 |
puSpikA | puSpacUlikA 23 vRSNidazA 24 catu:zaraNa upAgasUtra-8 upAMgasUtra-9
upAMgasUtra-10 upAMgasUtra-11 upAMgasUtra-12 payannAsUtra-1 mUlasUtra-3
mUlasUtra-4 cUlikAsUtra-1 cUlikAsUtra-2 muni dIparatnasAgara kRt "(catuHzaraNa)"
AgamasUtra-hindI anuvAda" Page 3

Page #4 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Aagam Sutra 24, Payanna Sutra - 1, 'Chatuh Sharan' No. 1 4 Muni Diparatnasagarji
Published Literature Aagam Literature Literature Name Original Aagam Literature:
5 - 1- Aagam Suttanni Moolam print -2- Aagam Suttanni-Moolam Net D 2 Aagam
Translation Literature: -3- Aagam Manjusha (Moola Prat) -4- Aagam Sutra Satiik
Gujarati Anuvaad -5- Aagam Sutra Hindi Anuvaad print 3 Aagam Discussion
Literature: -1- Aagam Sutra Gujarati Anuvaad |-2- Aagam Sutra Hindi Anuvaad Net
-3- Aagam Sootra English Trans. - 1- Aagam Sutra Satiikam -2- Aagam Sutraani
Satiikam Prataakar- 1 -3- Aagam Sutraani Satiikam Prataakar-2 4- Aagam Churni
Literature 5- Savrittik Aagam Sutraani - 1 | -6- Savrittik Aagam Sutraani - 2
-7- Sachurnik Aagam Suttanni Aagam Kosh Literature: 1- Aagam Saddakoso -2- Aagam
Kahakoso -3- Aagam-Sagar-Kosh: -4- Aagam-Shabdadhi-Sangrah (Pra-San-Gu) Aagam
Anukram Literature: - 1- Khaagam Vishayanubh- (Bhuj) -2- Aagam Vishayanukram
(Satiikam) -3- Aagam Sutra - Gatha Anukram Books Order 147 6 [49] [45] [53] 165
[47] [47] [11] [48] [12] 171 1 [46] 2 [51] 3 Aagam Literature Literature Name 11
[05] 12 [04] 09 02 04 03 Aagam Other Literature: - 1- Khaagam Thanuyog -2- Aagam
Sambandhi Saahitya - 3 - Rishibhashit Sutraani 4- Aagami Suktaavali Aagam
Saahitya- Kul Pustak Other Literature: Tattvabhyas Saahitya Sutraabhyas Saahitya
Vyakaran Saahitya [09] 4 Vyakhyan Saahitya [09] 5 Jinbhakti Saahitya [40] 6
Vidhi Saahitya [08] 7 Aaradhana Saahitya [08] 14 8 Parichaya Saahitya 9 Poojan
Saahitya [04] 10 Tirthanka 42 Sanksipt Harshan [01] Pradia Saahitya
Diparatnasagarna Laghushodhanibandh Aagam Siwayanu Saahitya Kool Pustak Sutra 1-
Aagam Saahitya (Kul Pustak) 2-Aagametar Saahitya (Kul Diparatnasagarji ke Kul
Prakashan Muni Diparatnasagarnu Saahitya | Muni Hiparatnasagarunu Khaagam
Saahitya [Dul Pustak 516] 2 | Muni Diparatnasagarnu Anya Saahitya [Hul Pustak
85] 3 Muni Hiparatnasagar Sankalit 'Tattvarth Sutra' Ni Vishisht DVD Amara
Prakashano Kul 601 + Vishisht DVD Muni Diparatnasagar Krit " (Chatuh Sharan)”
Aagam Sutra - Hindi Anuvaad " §al Pana 1,35,500 Boo 10 06 02 01 01 516 Page 4 13
06 05 04 09 04 03 04 02 25 05 05 85 Tena Dulaana [98,300] Tena Hul Pana [09,
270] Tenaahul Pana [27,930] 51 08 60

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama sUtra 24, payannAsUtra - 1, 'catu: zaraNa' kra 1 4 muni dIparatnasAgarajI
prakAzita sAhitya Agama sAhitya sAhitya nAma mUla Agama sAhitya: 5 - 1-
AgamasuttANi mUlaM print -2- AgamasuttANi-mUlaM Net D 2 Agama anuvAda sAhitya:
-3- AgamamaJjUSA (mUla prata) -4- AgamasUtra saTIka gujarAtI anuvAda -5-
AgamasUtra hindI anuvAda print 3 Agama vivecana sAhitya: -1- AgamasUtra gujarAtI
anuvAda |-2- AgamasUtra hindI anuvAda Net -3- AagamSootra English Trans. - 1-
AgamasUtra saTIkaM -2- AgamasUtrANi saTIkaM pratAkAra- 1 -3- AgamasUtrANi
saTIkaM pratAkAra-2 4- Agama cUrNi sAhitya 5- savRttika AgamasUtrANi - 1 | -6-
savRttika AgamasUtrANi - 2 -7- sacUrNika AgamasuttANi Agama koSa sAhitya: 1-
Agama saddakoso -2- Agama kahAkoso -3- Agama-sAgara-koSaH -4- Agama-zabdAdi-
saMgraha (prA-saM-gu) Agama anukrama sAhitya: - 1- khAgama viSayAnubha- (bhUja)
-2- Agama viSayAnukrama (saTIkaM) -3- Agama sUtra - gAthA anukrama bUksa krama
147 6 [49] [45] [53] 165 [47] [47] [11] [48] [12] 171 1 [46] 2 [51] 3 Agama
sAhitya sAhitya nAma 11 [05] 12 [04] 09 02 04 03 Agama anya sAhitya: - 1-
khAgama thAnuyoga -2- Agama saMbaMdhI sAhitya - 3 - RSibhASita sUtrANi 4-
Agamiya sUktAvalI Agama sAhitya- kula pustaka anya sAhitya: tattvAbhyAsa
sAhityasUtrAbhyAsa sAhitya vyAkaraNa sAhitya [09] 4 vyAkhyAna sAhitya [09] 5
jinabhakti sAhitya [40] 6 vidhi sAhitya [08] 7 ArAdhanA sAhitya [08] 14 8
paricaya sAhitya 9 pUjana sAhitya [04] 10 tIrthaM42 saMkSipta harzana [01]
praDIe sAhitya dIparatnasAgaranA laghuzodhanibaMdha Agama sivAyanuM sAhitya kUla
pustaka sUtra 1- Agama sAhitya (kula pustaka) 2-Agametara sAhitya (kula
dIparatnasAgarajI ke kula prakAzana muni dIparatnasAgaranuM sAhitya | muni
hIparatnasAgaranuM khAgama sAhitya [Dula pustaka 516] 2 | muni
dIparatnasAgaranuM anya sAhitya [hula pustas 85] 3 muni hIparatnasAgara
saMkalita 'tattvArthasUtra' nI viziSTa DVD amArA prakAzano kula 601 + viziSTa
DVD muni dIparatnasAgara kRt " (catuHzaraNa)" AgamasUtra - hindI anuvAda " SSla
pAnA 1,35,500 bU 10 06 02 01 01 516 Page 4 13 06 05 04 09 04 03 04 02 25 05 05
85 tenA DulAnA [98,300] tenA hula pAnA [09, 270] tenAhula pAnA [27,930] 51 08 60

Page #5 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Āgama Sūtra 24, Payannāsūtra-1, 'Chatuḥśaraṇa'  **Sūtra** [24] Chatuḥśaraṇa
Payannāsūtra-1-Hindi Translation **Sūtra-1** The first essential, called
Sāmāyika, is like refraining from sinful activities. The second essential,
called Chauvīsattthao, is like the inscription of the qualities of the twenty-
four Tirthankaras. The third essential, called Vandana, is like the veneration
of a virtuous Guru. The fourth essential, called Pratikramāṇa, is like the
condemnation of the faults committed. The fifth essential, called Kaussagga, is
like the removal of the heavy defilement of the soul, which is like a wound in
the heart. The sixth essential, called Pacchakkhāṇa, is like the acceptance of
virtues.  **Sūtra-2** In this Jinaśāsana, through Sāmāyika, the purity of
conduct is definitely achieved. This happens by abandoning the path of
negligence and adopting the path of non-defilement.  **Sūtra-3** The purity of
vision and conduct is achieved through Chauvīsattthao (Logass). This happens
through praise, which is like the narration of the extraordinary qualities of
the twenty-four Jinas.  **Sūtra-4** The purity of knowledge and other virtues is
achieved through the third essential, called Vandana, which is like the proper
veneration of the Guru Maharaj, who possesses knowledge and other virtues.
**Sūtra-5** The proper purification of the condemnation of the desire for
knowledge and other virtues (both primary and secondary virtues) is called
Pratikramāṇa.  **Sūtra-6** The purification of the transgressions of conduct and
other virtues, which have not been purified through Pratikramāṇa, is achieved
through the fifth essential, called Kaussagga, which is like a medicine for a
wound or a boil, and is done gradually.  **Sūtra-7** The purification of the
transgressions of austerity is achieved through the sixth essential, called
Pacchakkhāṇa, which is like the acceptance of virtues. The purification of the
transgressions of the conduct of heroism is achieved through all the essentials.
**Sūtra-8** (1) Elephant, (2) Bull, (3) Lion, (4) Coronation (Lakshmi), (5)
Garland, (6) Moon, (7) Sun, (8) Flag, (9) Kalasha, (10) Lotus Pond, (11) Ocean,
(12) The mother of a Tirthankara who came from the celestial realm sees a
chariot, and the mother of a Tirthankara who came from hell sees a house, (13) A
pile of jewels, and (14) Fire. These fourteen dreams are seen by the mother of
every Tirthankara when she is pregnant with him.  **Sūtra-9** I will speak of
the study of Chatuḥśaraṇa, which grants liberation, by venerating Mahāvīrasvāmī,
who is venerated by the Devas, Chakravartis, and Munīśvaras.  Muni
Dīparatnasāgara Kṛt “(Chatuḥśaraṇa)” Āgamasūtra-Hindi Translation Page 5 Page 5

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama sUtra 24, payannAsUtra-1, 'catu:zaraNa' sUtra [24] catuHzaraNa
payannAsUtra-1-hindI anuvAda sUtra-1 pApa vyApAra se nivartane ke samAna
sAmAyika nAma kA pahalA Avazyaka, caubIsa tIrthaMkara ke guNa kA utkIrtana
karane rUpa cauvisatthao nAmaka dUsarA Avazyaka, guNavaMta guru kI vaMdanA
samAna vaMdanaka nAma kA tIsarA Avazyaka, lage hue aticAra rUpa doSa kI nindA
samAna pratikramaNa nAma kA cauthA Avazyaka, bhAva vraNa yAni AtmA kA lage bhArI
dUSaNa ko miTAnevAlA kAussagga nAma kA pA~cavA Avazyaka aura guNa ko dhAraNa
karane samAna paccakkhANa nAma kA chaThA Avazyaka nizcaya se kahalAtA hai|
sUtra-2 isa jinazAsana meM sAmAyika ke dvArA nizcaya se cAritra kI vizuddhi kI
jAtI hai| vaha sAvadhayoga kA tyAga karane se aura niravadyayoga kA sevana
karane se hotA hai| sUtra -3 darzanAcAra kI vizuddhi cauvisatthao (logassa)
dvArA kI jAtI hai; vaha caubIsa jina ke ati adbhUta guNa ke kIrtana samAna stuti
ke dvArA hotI hai| sUtra -4 jJAnAdika guNa, usase yukta guru mahArAja ko
vidhivat vaMdana karane rUpa tIsare vaMdana nAma ke Avazyaka dvArA jJAnAdika
guNa kI vizuddhi kI jAtI hai| sUtra -5 jJAnAdika kI (mUlaguNa aura uttaraguNa
kI) AzAtanA kI niMdA Adi kI vidhipUrvaka zuddhi karanA pratikramaNa kahalAtA
hai| sUtra-6 cAritrAdika ke jina aticAra kI pratikramaNa ke dvArA zuddhi na huI
ho unakI zuddhi gaD-gumar3a ke osar3a samAna aura kramika Ae hae pA~cave
kAussagga nAma ke Avazyaka dvArA hotI hai| sUtra - 7 guNa dhAraNa karane samAna
paccakkhANa nAma ke chaThe Avazyaka dvArA tapa ke aticAra kI zuddhi hotI hai
aura vIryAcAra ke aticAra kI zuddhi sarva Avazyaka dvArA kI jAtI hai| sUtra-8
(1) gaja, (2) vRSabha, (3) siMha, (4) abhiSeka (lakSmI), (5) mAlA, (6) candramA,
(7) sUrya, (8) dhajA, (9) kalaza, (10) padmasarovara, (11) sAgara, (12) devagati
meM se Ae hue tIrthaMkara kI mAtA vimAna aura (narka meM se Ae hue tIrthaMkara
kI mAtA) bhavana ko dekhatI hai, (13) ratna kA Dhera aura (14) agni, ina caudaha
sapane sabhI tIrthaMkara kI mAtA vaha (tIrthaMkara) garbha meM Ae taba dekhatI
hai  /  sUtra-9 devendroM, cakravartIoM aura munIzvara dvArA vaMdana kie hue
mahAvIrasvAmI ko vandana kara ke mokSa dilAnevAle causaraNa nAma kA adhyayana
maiM khuuNgaa| muni dIparatnasAgara kRt "(catuHzaraNa)" AgamasUtra-hindI
anuvAda" Page 5 Page 5

Page #6 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Āgama Sūtra 24, Payannā Sūtra 1, Chatuḥ Sharaṇa **Sūtra 10** Acceptance of
the Four Refuges, condemnation of sinful actions, and approval of virtuous
deeds, these three are the causes of liberation. Therefore, they are always
worth doing.  **Sūtra 11** The Arihant, Siddha, Sadhu, and Kevali Bhagavan have
revealed the Dharma that brings happiness. These four refuges destroy the four
states of existence, and a fortunate person can attain them.  **Sūtra 12, 13**
Now, the soul, adorned with the armor of faith in the Tirthankara, shining like
the hairs standing on end, with great joy and affection, bows its head, joins
its hands, and says accordingly:  "O Arihant Bhagavan, who destroys the enemies
like attachment and aversion, who destroys the eight karmas and other enemies,
and who destroys the enemies like passions and defilements, be my refuge."
**Sūtra 14** O Arihant, who renounced worldly wealth, practiced difficult
austerities and virtuous conduct, and became worthy of the wealth of perfect
knowledge, be my refuge.  **Sūtra 15** O Arihant, worthy of praise and
veneration, worthy of worship by Indra and Chakravarti, and worthy of attaining
eternal happiness, be my refuge.  **Sūtra 16** O Arihant Bhagavan, who knows the
thoughts of others, who is worthy of meditation by the masters of yoga and the
great kings, and who is a preacher of Dharma, be my refuge.  **Sūtra 17** O
Arihant, who is capable of protecting all beings, who is worthy of truthful
speech, and who is worthy of practicing celibacy, be my refuge.  **Sūtra 18** O
Arihant, who sits in the Samavasarana, enjoys the thirty-four perfections, and
preaches Dharma, be my refuge.  **Sūtra 19** O Arihant, who with a single word
pierces through the many doubts of beings in a single moment, and who preaches
to the three worlds, be my refuge.  **Sūtra 20** O Arihant Bhagavan, who brings
peace to the world with the nectar of your words, who establishes beings in
their true nature, and who liberates the world of living beings, be my refuge.
**Sūtra 21** O Arihant, who possesses extraordinary qualities, whose glory
illuminates the ends of the directions like the moon, who is eternal,
beginningless, and infinite, I have taken refuge in you.  **Sūtra 22** O
Arihant, who has completely renounced old age and death, who is the refuge of
all beings suffering from sorrow, and who brings happiness to the world of the
three realms, I bow to you.  **Muni Dīparatnasāgar Kr̥t " (Chatuḥ Sharaṇa)"
Āgamasūtra - Hindi Anuvāda" Page 6

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama sUtra 24, payannAsUtra 1, catuH zaraNa' sUtra 10 cAra zaraNa svIkAranA,
pApa kArya kI niMdA karanI aura sukRta kI anumodanA karanA yaha tIna adhikAra
mokSa kA kAraNa hai  /  isalie haMmezA karane lAyaka hai  /  sUtra - 11
arihaMta, siddha, sAdhu aura kevalI bhagavaMtane batAyA huA sukha denevAlA
dharma, yaha cAra zaraNa, cAra gati ko naSTa karanevAle haiM aura use bhAgazAlI
puruSa pA sakatA hai| sUtra - sUtra - 12, 13 aba tIrthaMkara kI bhakti ke samUha
se uchalatI romarAjI samAna bakhtara se zobhAyamAna vo AtmA kAphI harSa aura
sneha sahita mastaka jhukAkara do hAtha jor3akara isa mutAbika kahatA hai rAga
aura dveSa samAna zatru kA ghAta karanevAle, ATha karma Adi zatru ko haNanevAle
aura viSaya kaSAya Adi vairI ko haNanevAle arihaMta bhagavAna mujhe zaraNa ho  /
sUtra - 14 rAjyalakSmI kA tyAga karake, duSkara tapa aura cAritra kA sevana
karake kevala jJAna rUpI lakSmI ke yogya arahaMta mujhe zaraNarUpa ho  /  sUtra
- 15 stuti aura vaMdana ke yogya, indra aura cakravartI kI pUjA ke yogya aura
zAzvata sukha pAne ke lie yogya arahaMta mujhe zaraNarUpa ho  /  sUtra - 16
dUsaroM ke mana ke bhAva ko jAnanevAle, yogezvara aura mahendra ko dhyAna karane
yogya aura phira dharmakathI arahaMta bhagavAna mujhe zaraNarUpa ho  /  sUtra -
17 sarva jIva kI dayA pAlane yogya, satya vacana ke yogya, brahmacarya pAlane ke
yogya arahaMta mujhe zaraNarUpa ho  /  sUtra 18 samavasaraNameM baiThakara
cauMtIsa atizaya kA sevana karate hue dharmakathA kahanevAle arihaMta mujhe
zaraNarUpa ho| sUtra - 19 eka vacana dvArA jIva ke kaI saMdeha ko eka hI kAla
meM chedanevAle aura tInoM jagata ko upadeza denevAle arihaMta mujhe zaraNarUpa
ho  /  sUtra - 20 vacanAmRta dvArA jagata ko zAnti denevAle, guNa meM sthApita
karanevAle, jIva loka kA uddhAra karanevAle arihaMta bhagavAna mujhe zaraNarUpa
ho  /  sUtra - 21 ati adbhUta guNavAle, apane yaza samAna candra dvArA dizAoM ke
anta ko zobhAyamAna karanevAle, zAzvata anAdi ananta arihaMta ko zaraNarUpa se
maiMne aMgIkAra kiyA hai| sUtra - 22 bur3hApA aura mRtyu kA sarvathA tyAga
karanevAle, duHkha se trasta samasta jIva ko zaraNabhUta aura tIna jagata ke
loka ko sukha denevAle arihaMta ko merA namaskAra ho  /  muni dIparatnasAgara
kRt " (catuH zaraNa)" AgamasUtra - hindI anuvAda" Page 6

Page #7 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Sutra Agam Sutra 24, Payannasutra-1, 'Chatuh-Sharan' Sutra-23  **Sutra 24:**
One who has reverence for the Siddha, the Supreme Soul, whose pure form has been
revealed through the purification of karma by taking refuge in the Arihant,
joins their hands in a gesture of respect, like the stem of a blooming lotus,
with a bowed head and says, "I take refuge in the Siddha."  **Sutra 25:** I take
refuge in the Siddha, who has become a Siddha through the destruction of the
eight karmas, who is rich in innate knowledge and vision, and who has attained
all that is worthy of attainment.  **Sutra 26:** I take refuge in the Siddha,
who resides in the crown of the three worlds, who has attained the supreme
abode, Moksha, who is of inconceivable power, who is auspicious, who is in the
Siddha state, and who bestows infinite happiness.  **Sutra 27:** I take refuge
in the Siddha, who has uprooted the enemies of attachment and aversion from
their roots, who is the direct witness of the Kevalis, who are always useful and
have a clear target, who experiences innate happiness, and who is the supreme
liberator.  **Sutra 28:** I take refuge in the Siddha, who despises the enemies
of attachment, etc., who burns the karmic seeds, which are like whirlpools, with
the fire of complete meditation, who is worthy of the shelter of the Yogeshwar,
and who is worthy of being remembered by all beings.  **Sutra 29:** I take
refuge in the Siddha, who has attained supreme bliss, who is like an ocean of
virtues, who has completely destroyed the root of existence, who has dimmed the
sun and moon with the light of his perfect knowledge, and who has destroyed the
duality of attachment, aversion, etc.  **Sutra 30:** I take refuge in the
Siddha, who has attained the supreme Brahman (supreme knowledge), who has
attained the rare benefit of liberation, who is free from all kinds of
beginnings, who is like a pillar in sustaining the house of the three worlds,
and who is without beginning.  **Sutra 31:** The Bhavy being, who is filled with
love due to the Nay (knowledge) and Brahman, which are the causes of the virtues
of the Sadhu, who has taken refuge in the Siddha, places their head on the
ground and says:  **Sutra 32:** I take refuge in the Sadhu, who is the relative
of the Jiva-loka (six life forms), who has crossed the ocean of misery, who is
very fortunate, and who has attained the happiness of liberation through
knowledge, etc.  **Sutra 33, 34:** I take refuge in the Sadhu, who are Kevalis,
who have perfect knowledge, who are of vast intellect, who are omniscient, who
are Shrutadhar, who are the Acharyas and Upadhyayas of the Jain teachings.  I
take refuge in the Sadhu, who are fourteen-purvi, ten-purvi, nine-purvi, who
possess twelve angas, who possess eleven angas, who are Jin-kalpi, who are
Yathalandi, who are Parihar-vishad, who are of good character, who have attained
the knowledge of the Kshira-ashrava, who have attained the knowledge of the
Madhyashrava, who have attained the knowledge of the Sambhinna-shrota, who have
attained the knowledge of the Kostha-buddhi, who are Charan-muni, who have
attained the knowledge of the Vaikriya, and who have attained the knowledge of
the Pada-anusari.  Muni Diparatna Sagar, "Chatuh-Sharan" Agam Sutra - Hindi
Translation Page 7 Page 7

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 sUtra Agama sUtra 24, payannAsUtra-1, 'catu:zaraNa' sUtra-23 arihaMta ke zaraNa
se honevAlI karma samAna mela kI zuddhi ke dvArA jise ati zuddha svarUpa prakaTa
huA hai vaise siddha paramAtmA ke lie jinheM Adara hai aisA AtmA jhuke hue
mastaka se vikasvara kamala kI dAMDI samAna aMjali jor3a kara harSa sahita
(siddha kA zaraNa) kahate haiN| sUtra - 24 ATha karma ke kSaya se siddha
honevAle, svAbhAvika jJAna darzana kI samRddhivAle aura phira jinheM sarva artha
kI labdhi siddha huI hai vaise siddha mujhe zaraNarUpa ho  /  sUtra-25 tIna
bhuvana ke mastaka meM rahe aura paramapada yAni mokSa pAnevAle, aciMtya
balavAle, maMgalakArI siddha pada meM rahe aura ananta sukha denevAle prazasta
siddha mujhe zaraNa ho  /  sUtra - 26 rAga-dveSa samAna zatru ko jar3a se ukhADa
denevAle, amUr3ha lakSyavAle (sadA upayogavaMta) sayogI kevalIoM ko pratyakSa
dikhanevAle, svAbhAvika sukha kA anubhava karanevAle utkRSTa mokSavAle siddha
(mujhe) zaraNarUpa ho  /  sUtra - 27 rAgAdika zatru kA tiraskAra karanevAle,
samagra dhyAna samAna agni dvArA bhavarUpI bIja (karma) ko jalA denevAle,
yogezvara ke Azraya ke yogya aura sabhI jIva ko smaraNa karane lAyaka siddha
mujhe zaraNarUpa ho  /  sUtra - 28 parama Ananda pAnevAle, guNa ke sAgara
samAna, bhava samAna kaMda kA sarvathA nAza karanevAle, kevala jJAna ke prakAza
dvArA sUrya aura candra ko phIkA kara denevAle aura phira rAga dveSa Adi dvandva
ko nAza karanevAle siddha mujhe zaraNarUpa ho| sUtra - 29 parama brahma (utkRSTa
jJAna) ko pAnevAle, mokSa samAna durlabha lAbha ko pAnevAle, aneka prakAra ke
samArambha se mukta, tIna bhuvana samAna ghara ko dhAraNa karane meM stambha
samAna, Arambha rahita siddha mujhe zaraNarUpa ho  /  sUtra - 30 siddha ke
zaraNa dvArA naya (jJAna) aura brahma ke kAraNabhUta sAdhu ke guNameM prakaTa
honevAle anurAgavAlA bhavya prANI apane ati prazasta mastaka ko pRthvI para
rakhakara isa taraha kahate haiMsUtra - 31 jIvaloka (cha jIvanikAya) ke bandhu,
kugati samAna samudra ke pAra ko pAnevAle, mahA bhAgyazAlI aura jJAnAdika dvArA
mokSa sukha ko sAdhanevAle sAdhu mujhe zaraNa ho  /  sUtra - 32 kevalIo,
paramAvadhijJAnavAle, vipulamati manaHparyavajJAnI zrutadhara aura jinamata ke
AcArya aura upAdhyAya ye saba sAdhu mujhe zaraNarUpa ho  /  sUtra - 33, 34
caudahapUrvI, dasapUrvI aura naupUrvI aura phira jo bAraha aMga dhAraNa
karanevAle, gyAraha aMga dhAraNa karanevAle, jinakalpI. yathAlaMdI aura
parihAravizadi cAritravAle sAdha  /  kSIrAzravalabdhivAle,
madhyAzravalabdhivAle, saMbhinnazrotalabdhivAle, koSThabuddhivAle, cAraNamuni,
vaikriyalabdhivAle aura padAnusArIlabdhivAle sAdhu mujhe zaraNarUpa ho  /  muni
dIparatnasAgara kRt "(catuHzaraNa)" AgamasUtra-hindI anuvAda" Page 7 Page 7

Page #8 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Āgama Sūtra 24, Payannā Sūtra-1, 'Chatuḥśaraṇa' Sūtra Sūtra - 35 The sage who
abandons enmity and opposition, always has a non-hostile attitude, has a very
peaceful face, honors the group of virtues, and destroys attachment, let him be
my refuge. Sūtra - 36 The muni who breaks the bonds of affection, resides in a
changeless state, desires the happiness free from defilements, delights the mind
of the virtuous, and delights in the Self, let him be my refuge. Sūtra - 37 The
sage who removes objects and passions, abandons the taste of the pleasure of
home and wife, is free from joy and sorrow, and is free from carelessness, let
him be my refuge. Sūtra - 38 The sage who is free from the faults of violence,
etc., has compassion, has vast intelligence like the ocean of self-existence,
goes on the path of liberation free from old age and death, and is very
virtuous, let him be my refuge. Sūtra - 39 The muni who is free from the mockery
of desire, free from the stain of sin, abandons theft, is free from sexual
intercourse which is the cause of sin, and has the brilliance of the gem of the
virtues of the sage, let him be my refuge. Sūtra - 40 For him who has well-
established conduct in sainthood, the Ācāryas, etc., are also called sages. By
calling them sages, they have also been accepted in the position of sainthood;
for him, let those sages be my refuge. Sūtra - 41 Having accepted the refuge of
the sage, the body adorned with the expansion of the thrill that arises from
great joy, speaks in this way to accept the refuge of this Jina-declared Dharma.
Sūtra - 42 I accept as refuge that Dharma which was declared by the Kevali
Bhagavan, which was obtained by great merit, which perhaps even some fortunate
men have not obtained. Sūtra - 43 That Dharma which, by obtaining or not
obtaining it, has obtained the happiness of humans and gods, but the happiness
of liberation is obtained only by those who obtain Dharma, let that Dharma be my
refuge. Sūtra - 44 Let the Jina Dharma, which destroys the defilement of karma,
purifies birth, removes unrighteousness, etc., and is beautiful in its results,
be my refuge. Sūtra - 45 I accept as refuge the Jina-doctrine, which is not
destroyed even in the three periods of time, which alleviates birth, old age,
death, and hundreds of diseases, which is like nectar, and which is dear to
many. Sūtra - 46 I accept as refuge the Dharma which perfectly pacifies the
frenzy of desire, which does not oppose seen and unseen objects, and which is
infallible in giving the fruit equal to the happiness of liberation. Muni
Dīparatnasāgara Kṛt “(Chatuḥśaraṇa)” Āgamasūtra-Hindi Anuvāda" Page 8

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama sUtra 24, payannAsUtra-1, 'catuHzaraNa' sUtrasUtra - 35 vaira-virodha ko
tyAga karanevAle, hamezA adroha vRttivAle ati zAnta mukha kI zobhAvAle, guNa ke
samUha kA bahumAna karanevAle aura moha kA ghAta karanevAle sAdhu mujhe
zaraNarUpa ho  /  sUtra-36 sneha samAna baMdhana ko toDa denevAle, nirvikArI
sthAna meM rahanevAle, vikArarahita sukha kI IcchA karanevAle, satpuruSa ke mana
ko Ananda denevAle aura AtmA meM ramaNa karanevAle muni mujhe zaraNarUpa ho  /
sUtra - 37 viSaya, kaSAya ko dUra karanevAle, ghara aura strI ke saMga ke sukha
kA svAda kA tyAga karanevAle, harSa aura zoka rahita aura pramAda rahita sAdhu
mujhe zaraNarUpa ho  /  sUtra - 38 hiMsAdika doSa rahita, karuNA bhAvavAle,
svayaMbhUramaNa samudra samAna vizAla buddhivAle, jarA aura mRtyu rahita mokSa
mArga meM jAnevAle aura ati puNyazAlI sAdhu mujhe zaraNarUpa ho  /  sUtra - 39
kAma kI viDambanA se mukta, pApamala rahita, corI kA tyAga karanevAle, pAparUpa
ke kAraNarUpa maithuna rahita aura sAdhu ke guNarUpa ratna kI kAntivAle muni
mujhe zaraNarUpa ho  /  sUtra - 40 jisa ke lie sAdhupana meM acchI taraha se
rahe hue AcAryAdika haiM usa ke lie ve bhI sAdhu kahalAe jAte haiM  /  sAdhu
kahate hue unheM bhI sAdhupada meM grahaNa kie haiM; usake lie ve sAdhu mujhe
zaraNarUpa ho  /  sUtra-41 sAdhu kA zaraNa svIkAra kara ke, ati harSa se
honevAle romAMca ke vistAra dvArA zobhAyamAna zarIravAlA (vaha jIva) isa
jinakathita dharma ke zaraNa ko aMgIkAra karane ke lie isa taraha bolate
haiMsUtra - 42 ati utkRSTa puNya dvArA pAyA huA, kucha bhAgyazAlI puruSo ne bhI
zAyada na pAyA ho, kevalI bhagavAna ne batAyA huA vo dharma maiM zaraNa ke rUpa
meM aMgIkAra karatA huuN| sUtra-43 jo dharma pA kara yA binA pAe bhI jisane
mAnava aura devatA ke sukha pAe, lekina mokSasukha to dharma pAnevAle ko hI
milatA hai, vaha dharma mujhe zaraNa ho  /  sUtra - 44 malIna karma kA nAza
karanevAle, janma ko pavitra banAnevAle, adharma ko dUra karanevAle ityAdika
pariNAma meM sundara jina dharma mujhe zaraNarUpa ho  /  sUtra-45 tIna kAla meM
bhI naSTa na honevAle; janma, jarA, maraNa aura seMkar3oM vyAdhi kA zamana
karanevAle amRta kI taraha bahuta logoM ko iSTa aise jinamata ko maiM zaraNa
aMgIkAra karatA huuN| sUtra - 46 kAma ke unmAda ko acchI taraha se zamAnevAle,
dekhe hue aura na dekhe hue padArtha kA jisameM virodha nahIM kiyA hai vaise
aura mokSa ke sukha samAna phala ko dene meM amogha yAni saphala dharma ko maiM
zaraNarUpa meM aMgIkAra karatA huuN| muni dIparatnasAgara kRt "(catuHzaraNa)"
AgamasUtra-hindI anuvAda" Page 8

Page #9 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Āgama Sūtra 24, Payannā Sūtra-1, 'Chatuḥśaraṇa' **Sūtra Sūtra - 47** I take
refuge in the Dharma that prevents descent into hell, is a collection of
virtues, and is unshakeable, defeating the enemies of the righteous and the
wicked.  **Sūtra - 48** I accept the Dharma taught by the Jinas, which is like a
beautiful creation of the finest quality, adorned with the best ornaments, and
is of great value due to its inherent worth. It destroys the ignorance that is
like poverty, a treasure that is hidden.  **Sūtra - 49** By accepting the four
refuges, the being with a body adorned with gooseflesh, which arises from the
good deeds accumulated, and desires the destruction of evil karma due to the
condemnation of the sins committed, says:  **Sūtra - 50** I condemn the evil
deeds, like the transgression of the truth, which are forbidden in the Jina's
teachings, both in this life and in other lives.  **Sūtra - 51** I condemn the
sin of ignorance, which is like blindness in the darkness of falsehood, and the
wrong views I have held about the Arhants and others.  **Sūtra - 52** I condemn
the sins I have committed by being an enemy of the Śruta Dharma, the Sangha, and
the Sadhus, and the other sins I have committed in the various categories of
sin.  **Sūtra - 53** I condemn the sin of causing suffering to other beings,
like the pain of separation, in relation to friendship, compassion, and other
such things.  **Sūtra - 54** I condemn all the sins that I have committed,
caused to be committed, or approved of, through mind, speech, and body, which
are against the Dharma and impure.  **Sūtra - 55-57** The being, with gooseflesh
that arises from the good deeds, which destroys the heavy karmic sins through
the condemnation of evil deeds, now clearly says: I approve of the Arhant-hood
of the Arhants, the Siddha-hood of the Siddhas, the Āchārya-hood of the
Āchāryas, the Upādhyāya-hood of the Upādhyāyas, the excellent conduct of the
Sadhus, the renunciation of the world by the Śrāvakas, and the Samyak-dṛṣṭi of
the Samyak-dṛṣṭis.  **Sūtra - 58** Or, according to the words of the Vītarāga,
we approve of all the good deeds done in the three times (past, present, and
future) in three ways (through mind, speech, and body).  **Sūtra - 59** The
being, who always has auspicious results, by practicing the acceptance of the
four refuges and other such things, binds the auspicious nature and makes the
bound (inauspicious) nature auspicious.  **Muni Dīparatnasāgar Kṛt
“(Chatuḥśaraṇa)” Āgamasūtra-Hindī Anuvāda** Page 9

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama sUtra 24, payannAsUtra-1, 'catu:zaraNa' sUtrasUtra - 47 narakagati ke
gamana ko rokanevAle, guNa ke samUhavAle anya vAdI dvArA akSobhya aura kAma
subhaTa ko haNanevAle dharma ko zaraNarUpa se maiM aMgIkAra karatA huuN|
sUtra-48 dedIpyamAna, uttama varNa kI sundara racanA samAna alaMkAra dvArA
mahattA ke kAraNabhUta se mahAmUlyavAle, nidhAna samAna ajJAnarUpa dAridra ko
haNanevAle, jinezvaroM dvArA upadiSTa aise dharma ko maiM svIkAra karatA huuN|
sUtra-49 cAra zaraNa aMgIkAra karane se, IkaTe honevAle sukRta se vikasvara
honevAlI romarAjI yukta zarIravAle, kie gae pApa kI niMdA se azubha karma ke
kSaya kI IcchA rakhanevAlA jIva (isa prakAra) kahatA haisUtra-50 jinazAsanameM
niSedha kie hae isa bhava meM aura anya bhava meM kie mithyAtva ke pravartana
samAna jo adhikaraNa (pApakriyA), ve duSTa pApa kI maiM gardA karatA hU~ yAni
guru kI sAkSI se usakI nindA karatA huuN| sUtra - 51 mithyAtva samAna aMdhere
meM aMdha hue, maiM ajJAna se arihaMtAdika ke bAre meM jo avarNavAda, vizeSa
kiyA ho usa pApa ko maiM garhatA hU~-nindA karatA huuN| sUtra - 52 zrutadharma,
saMgha aura sAdhu meM zatrupana meM jo pApa kA maiMne AcaraNa kiyA hai ve aura
dUsare pApa sthAnakameM jo pApa lagA ho ve pApoM kI aba maiM gahA~ sUtra - 53
dUsare bhI maitrI karuNAdika ke viSaya samAna jIvameM paritApanAdika duHkha
paidA kiyA ho usa pApa kI maiM aba nindA karatA huuN| sUtra -54 mana, vacana
aura kAyA dvArA karane karavAne aura anumodana karate hae jo AcaraNa kiyA gayA,
jo dharma ke viruddha aura azuddha aise sarva pApa use maiM nindatA huuN|
sUtra-55-57 aba duSkRta kI nindA se kar3e pApa karma kA nAza karanevAle aura
sukRta ke rAga se vikasvara honevAlI pavitra romarAjIvAle vaha jIva prakaTarUpa
se aisA kahatA hai arihaMtoM kA jo arihaMtapana, siddhoM kA jo siddhapana,
AcArya ke jo AcAra upAdhyAya kA jo meM upAdhyAya pn| tathA- sAdhu kA jo uttama
caritra, zrAvaka loga kA dezaviratipana aura samakitadRSTi kA samakita, una
sabakA maiM anumodana karatA huuN| sUtra-58 yA phira vItarAga ke vacana ke
anusAra jo sarva sukata tIna kAla meM kiyA ho vo tIna prakAra se (mana, vacana
aura kAyA se) hama anumodana karate haiM  /  sUtra-59 _hamezA zubha pariNAmavAle
jIva cAra zaraNa kI prApti Adi kA AcaraNa karatA huA punya prakRti ko bA~dhatA
hai aura (azubha) bA~dhI huI prakRti ko zubha anubaMdhavAlI karate haiN| muni
dIparatnasAgara kRt "(catuHzaraNa)" AgamasUtra-hindI anuvAda" Page 9

Page #10 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Agam Sutra 24, Payannasutra-1, 'Chatuhsharan' Sutrasutra-60 And then that
auspicious result-bearing being who is bound by (auspicious) nature, slow-
tasting, makes it intense-tasting, and makes the inauspicious (slow-tasting)
nature unbound, and makes the intense-tasting slow-tasting. Sutra-61 For him,
the wise men should always perform this worship in affliction (due to illness
etc.), and in non-affliction also, it should be done well in all three times,
this worship is the cause of the fruit equal to the acquisition of good deeds.
Sutra-62 He who did not do the four-limbed Jina Dharma (equal to donation,
Shiyal, penance and emotion), who did not take refuge in the four types (Arihant
etc.), and then who did not pierce the world equal to the four motions, then
indeed the human birth is lost. Sutra-63 O being! Thus, meditate on this study,
which is the cause of the boundless happiness of welfare and liberation, in
three Sandhyas, conquering the great enemy like carelessness. (24)-Chatuhsharan-
Prakirnak-1's Muni Diparatnasagar-made Hindi translation is complete. Muni
Diparatnasagar made "(Chatuhsharan)" Agamsutra-Hindi translation" Page 10

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama sUtra 24, payannAsUtra-1, 'catuHzaraNa' sUtrasUtra-60 aura phira vo zubha
pariNAmavAlA jIva jo (zubha) prakRti maMda rasavAlI bA~dhI ho use hI tIvra
rasavAlI karatA hai, aura azubha (maMda rasavAlI) prakRti ko anubaMdha rahita
karata haiM, aura tIvra rasavAlI ko maMda rasavAlI karate sUtra-61 usa ke lie
paMr3itapuruSoM ko saMklezameM (roga Adi vajahameM) yaha ArAdhana hamezA kare,
asaMklezapanameM bhI tInoM kAlameM acchI taraha se karanA cAhie, yaha ArAdhana
sukRta ke upArjana samAna phala kA nimitta hai| sUtra-62 jo (dAna, ziyala, tapa
aura bhAva samAna) cAra aMgavAlA jinadharma na kiyA, jisane (arihaMta Adi) cAra
prakAra se zaraNa bhI na kiyA, aura phira jisane cAra gati samAna saMsAra kA
cheda na kiyA ho, to vAkaI meM mAnava janma hAra gayA hai| sUtra-63 he jIva !
isa taraha pramAda samAna bar3e zatru ko jItanevAlA, kalyANarUpa aura mokSa ke
sukha kA avaMdhya kAraNarUpa isa adhyayana kA tIna saMdhyA meM dhyAna kro|
(24)-catuHzaraNa-prakIrNaka-1 kA muni dIparatnasAgarakRt hindI anuvAda pUrNa
muni dIparatnasAgara kRt "(catuHzaraNa)" AgamasUtra-hindI anuvAda" Page 10

Page #11 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Aagam Sutra 24, Payannasutra-1, 'Chatuh-Sharan' Sutra Namo Namo
Nimmaladansanasss Pujyapaad Shri Anand-Kshama-Lalit-Sushil-Sudharmasagar Guru
Bhyo Nam: 24 XXXXXXXX Chatuh-Sharan Aagam Sutra Hindi Anuvaad [Anuvaadak Evam
Sampadak] Aagam Deepaakar Muni Deepa Ratna Sagarji [M.Com. M.Ed. Ph.D. Shruta
Maharshi] QG 21188:- (1) (2) deepratnasagar.in Bhel Address:-
jainmunideepratnasagar@gmail.com Monal 09825967397 Muni Deepa Ratna Sagar Krit
"(Chatuh-Sharan)” Aagam Sutra-Hindi Anuvaad" Page 11

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
Agama sUtra 24, payannAsUtra-1, 'catu:zaraNa' sUtra namo namo nimmaladaMsaNassa
pUjyapAd zrI AnaMda-kSamA-lalita-suzIla-sudharmasAgara gurUbhyo nama: 24
XXXXXXXX catuHzaraNa AgamasUtra hindI anuvAda [anuvAdaka evaM saMpAdaka] Agama
dIvAkara muni dIparatnasAgarajI [ M.Com. M.Ed. Ph.D. zruta maharSi ] QG 21188:-
(1) (2) deepratnasagar.in bhela aDresa:- jainmunideepratnasagar@gmail.com monAla
09825967397 muni dIparatnasAgara kRt "(catu:zaraNa)" AgamasUtra-hindI anuvAda"
Page 11

