Catalog link: https://jainqq.org/explore/034699/1

Page #1 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Namo Namo Nimmaladansanas, Bal Brahmachari Shri Neminaathay Namah. Pujya Anand-
Kshama-Lalit-Sushil-Sudharmasagar-Guru-bhyo Namah. Aagam-31 Gani Vidya Aagam
Sutra Hindi Anuvaad Anuvaadak Evam Sampadak Aagam Diwaakar Muni Diparatnasagarji
[ M.Com. M.Ed. Ph.D. Shruta Maharshi ] Aagam Hindi-Anuvaad-Shreni Pushp-31

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 namo namo nimmaladaMsaNassa bAla brahmacArI zrI neminAthAya namaH pUjya Ananda-
kSamA-lalita-suzIla-sudharmasAgara-gurUbhyo namaH Agama-31 gaNividyA AgamasUtra
hindI anuvAda anuvAdaka evaM sampAdaka Agama dIvAkara muni dIparatnasAgarajI [
M.Com. M.Ed. Ph.D. zruta maharSi ] Agama hindI-anuvAda-zreNI puSpa-31

Page #2 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Agam Sutra 31, Payanna Sutra-8, 'Gani Vidya' Agam Sutra-31- 'Gani Vidya' Payanna
Sutra-8- Hindi Translation Where to see what? Serial No. Subject Serial No.
Subject Page 05 - 6 Divas Dvar Tithi Dvar 07 Muhurta Dvar Shakun Dvar Lagna Dvar
Nimitta Dvar 8 07 Nakshatra Dvar Karan Dvar Graha Divas Dvar 07 5 Muni
Diparatnasagar Krit “(Gani Vidya)” Agam Sutra-Hindi Translation" Page 2

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama sUtra 31, payannAsUtra-8, 'gaNividyA' AgamasUtra-31- 'gaNividyA'
payannAsUtra-8- hindI anuvAda kahAM kyA dekhe? krama viSaya krama viSaya pRSTha
05 - 6 divasa dvAra tithi dvAra 07 muhUrta dvAra zakuna dvAra lagna dvAra
nimitta dvAra 8 07 nakSatra dvAra karaNa dvAra graha divasa dvAra 07 5 muni
dIparatnasAgara kRt "(gaNividyA)" Agama sUtra-hindI anuvAda" Page 2

Page #3 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Payannā Sūtra-2 26 03 27 Payannā Sūtra-3 Payannā Sūtra-4 Payannā Sūtra-5 29
Payannā Sūtra-6 06. Payannā Sūtra-7 Payannā Sūtra-7 Payannā Sūtra-8 Payannā
Sūtra-9 32. 33 Āgama Sūtra 31, Payannā Sūtra-8, 'Gaṇividyā' 45 Āgama
Classification Order Āgama Name Sūtra | Order Āgama Name 01 Ācāra Aṅgasūtra-1 |
25 Āturapratyākhyāna 02 Sūtrakr̥t Aṅgasūtra-2 | Mahāpratyākhyāna Sthāna
Aṅgasūtra-3 Bhaktaparijñā 04 Samavāya Aṅgasūtra-4 28 | Tandulavaicārika 05
Bhagavatī Aṅgasūtra-5 Saṁstāraka Jñātādharmkathā Aṅgasūtra-6 30.1 | Gacchācāra
Upāsakadashā Aṅgasūtra-7 30.2 Candraveḍhyaka Antakṛt Dashā Aṅgasūtra-8 31 |
Gaṇividyā 09 Anuttaroppapātika Dashā Aṅgasūtra-9 Devendrastava 10
Praśnavyākaraṇadashā Aṅgasūtra-10 Vīrastava 11 Vipākashruta Aṅgasūtra-11 34 |
Niśītha 12 Aupapātika Upāṅgasūtra-1 Bṛhatkalpa Rājaprasciya Upāṅgasūtra-2
Vyavahāra 14 Jīvajīvābhigama Upāṅgasūtra-3 Daśāśrutaśkaṇḍha 15 Prajñāpanā
Upāṅgasūtra-4 38 Jītakalpa 16 Sūryaprajñapti Upāṅgasūtra-5 39 Mahāniśītha 17
Candraprajñapti Upāṅgasūtra-6 Āvashyaka | Jambūdvīpaprajñapti Upāṅgasūtra-7 41.1
Oghanīyukti 19 Nirayāvalikā Upāṅgasūtra-8 41.2 Piṇḍanīyukti Kalpavantaṁsikā
Upāṅgasūtra-9 42 | Daśavaikālika 21 | Puṣpikā Upāṅgasūtra-10 43 Uttarādhyayana |
Puṣpachūlikā Upāṅgasūtra-11 44 Nandī 23 Vṛṣṇidashā Upāṅgasūtra-12 Anuyogadvāra
24 Chatuḥśaraṇa Payannā Sūtra-1 Payannā Sūtra-10 Chhedasūtra-1 Chhedasūtra-2
Chhedasūtra-3 37 Chhedasūtra-4 Chhedasūtra-5 Chhedasūtra-6 40 Mūlasūtra-1
Mūlasūtra-2 Mūlasūtra-2 Mūlasūtra-3 Mūlasūtra-4 Cūlikāsūtra-1 Cūlikāsūtra-2 Muni
Dīparatnasāgara Kr̥t “(Gaṇividyā)” Āgama Sūtra-Hindī Anuvāda" Page 3

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 payannAsUtra-2 26 03 27 payannAsUtra-3 payannAsUtra-4 payannAsUtra-5 29
payannAsUtra-6 06  /  payannAsUtra-7 payannAsUtra-7 payannAsUtra-8
payannAsUtra-9 32  /  33 Agama sUtra 31, payannAsUtra-8, 'gaNividyA' 45 Agama
vargIkaraNa krama Agama kA nAma sUtra | krama Agama kA nAma 01 AcAra aMgasUtra-1
| 25 AturapratyAkhyAna 02 sUtrakRt aMgasUtra-2 | mahApratyAkhyAna sthAna
aMgasUtra-3 bhaktaparijJA 04 samavAya aMgasUtra-4 28 | taMdulavaicArika 05
bhagavatI aMgasUtra-5 saMstAraka jJAtAdharmakathA aMgasUtra-6 30.1 | gacchAcAra
upAsakadazA aMgasUtra-7 30.2 candravedhyaka aMtakRt dazA aMgasUtra-8 31 |
gaNividyA 09 anuttaropapAtikadazA aMgasUtra-9 devendrastava 10
praznavyAkaraNadazA aMgasUtra-10 vIrastava 11 vipAkazruta aMgasUtra-11 34 |
nizItha 12 aupapAtika upAMgasUtra-1 bRhatkalpa rAjaprazciya upAMgasUtra-2
vyavahAra 14 jIvAjIvAbhigama upAgasUtra-3 dazAzrutaskandha 15 prajJApanA
upAMgasUtra-4 38 jItakalpa 16 sUryaprajJapti upAMgasUtra-5 39 mahAnizItha 17
candraprajJapti upAMgasUtra-6 Avazyaka | jaMbUdvIpaprajJapti upAMgasUtra-7 41.1
oghaniyukti 19 nirayAvalikA upAgasUtra-8 41.2 piMDaniyukti kalpavataMsikA
upAMgasUtra-9 42 | dazavaikAlika 21 | puSpikA upAMgasUtra-10 43 uttarAdhyayana |
puSpacUlikA upAMgasUtra-11 44 nandI 23 vRSNidazA upAMgasUtra-12 anuyogadvAra 24
catu:zaraNa payannAsUtra-1 payannAsUtra-10 chedasUtra-1 chedasUtra-2
chedasUtra-3 37 chedasUtra-4 chedasUtra-5 chedasUtra-6 40 mUlasUtra-1
mUlasUtra-2 mUlasUtra-2 mUlasUtra-3 mUlasUtra-4 cUlikAsUtra-1 cUlikAsUtra-2 muni
dIparatnasAgara kRt "(gaNividyA)" Agama sUtra-hindI anuvAda" Page 3

Page #4 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Aagam Sutra 31, Payannasutra-8, 'Ganividya' **Box** 10 06 02 01 13 05 04 09
Muni Diparatnasagarji Published Literature Aagam Literature Aagam Literature
Literature Name Box Order Literature Name Original Aagam Literature: 147 6 |
Aagam Other Literature: 1-1- Aagamsuuttaani-Moolam print [49] -1- Maaraam
Thaanuyoag -2- Aagamsuuttaani-Moolam Net [45] -2- Aagam Sambandhi Saahitya -3-
Aagammanjooasha (Moola Prat) [53] -3- Rishibhaashit Sutraani | Aagam Anuvaad
Saahitya: 165 -4- Aagamiya Sooktaavali 01 -1- Aagamsootra Gujarati Anuvaad [47]
| Aagam Saahitya- Kul Pustak 516 -2- Aagamsootra Hindi Anuvaad Net [47] | -3-
Aagamsootra English Trans. | [11] | -4- Saamsutra Sati 42raati Manuvaah [48] -5-
Aagamsootra Hindi Anuvaad print [12] Other Literature: 3 Aagam Vivechan
Saahitya: 171 Tattvabhyaas Saahitya-1- Aagamsootra Satikam [46] 2 Sootraabhyaas
Saahitya 06 1-2- Aagamsootraani Satikam Prataakar-1 / Vyakaran Saahitya| -3-
Aagamsootraani Satikam Prataakar-2 Vyakhyaan Saahitya. -4- Aagam Churni Saahitya
[09] 5 Unalat Saahitya|-5- Savrittik Aagamsootraani-1 [40] 6 V Saahitya 04 -6-
Savrittik Aagamsootraani-2 [08] 7 Maaraadhana Saahitya 03 |-7- Sachurnik
Aagamsuuttaani. [08] 8 Pariyay Saahitya 04 Aagam Kosh Saahitya: Poojan
Saahitya-1- Aagam Saddakoso [04] 10 | Tirthakar Sanksipt Darshan -2- Aagam
Kahaakoso [01] | 11hi Saahitya-3- Aagam-Sagar-Kosh: [05] 12 Diparatnasagarna
Laghushodhanibandh 05 -4- Aagam-Shabdaadhi-Sangrah (Pra-San-Gu) [04] Aagam
Siwayanu Saahitya Kool Pustak 5 Aagam Anukram Saahitya: 09 -1-
Saagamvishayanoomub- (Bhoog) | 1-Aagam Saahitya (Kul Pustak) | 516 -2- Aagam
Vishayanoomukram (Satikam) 04 2-Aagametar Saahitya (Kul 085 -3- Aagam Sutra-
Gaatha Anukram Diparatnasagarji ke Kul Prakashan | 601 A
AAEmunihiparatnasagarunu Saahitya | Bhunitiparatnasagarunu Saagam Saahitya [Is
Pust8 516] Tana Huda Paana [98,300] 2 Bhunitiparatnasagarunu Many Saahitya [Hut
Pust8 85] Tana Hus Paana [09,270] Munihiparatnasagar Sanlit Tattvarthsootra'ni
Vishisht DVD Tenal Paana [27,930] | Saba. Praashano 501 + Vishisht DVD Is Paana
1,35,500 Muni Diparatnasagar Krit “(Ganividya)" Aagam Sutra-Hindi Anuvaad" Page
4 02 25 05 02 | 03 3 .

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama sUtra 31, payannAsUtra-8, 'gaNividyA' baksa 10 06 02 01 13 05 04 09 muni
dIparatnasAgarajI prakAzita sAhitya Agama sAhitya Agama sAhitya sAhitya nAma
baksa krama sAhitya nAma mUla Agama sAhitya: 147 6 | Agama anya sAhitya:1-1-
AgamasuttANi-mUlaM print [49] -1- mArAma thAnuyoga -2- AgamasuttANi-mUlaM Net
[45] -2- Agama saMbaMdhI sAhitya -3- AgamamaJjUSA (mUla prata) [53] -3-
RSibhASita sUtrANi | Agama anuvAda sAhitya: 165 -4- Agamiya sUktAvalI 01 -1-
AgamasUtra gujarAtI anuvAda [47] | Agama sAhitya- kula pustaka 516 -2-
AgamasUtra hindI anuvAda Net [47] | -3- Aagamsootra English Trans. | [11] | -4-
sAmasUtra saTI 42rAtI manuvAH [48] -5- AgamasUtra hindI anuvAda print [12] anya
sAhitya:3 Agama vivecana sAhitya: 171 tattvAbhyAsa sAhitya-1- AgamasUtra saTIkaM
[46] 2 sUtrAbhyAsa sAhitya 06 1-2- AgamasUtrANi saTIkaM pratAkAra-1 / vyAkaraNa
sAhitya| -3- AgamasUtrANi saTIkaM pratAkAra-2 vyAkhyAna sAhitya. -4- Agama cUrNi
sAhitya [09] 5 unalata sAhitya|-5- savRttika AgamasUtrANi-1 [40] 6 va sAhitya 04
-6- savRttika AgamasUtrANi-2 [08] 7 mArAdhanA sAhitya 03 |-7- sacUrNika
AgamasuttANi  /  [08] 8 pariyaya sAhitya 04 Agama koSa sAhitya: pUjana
sAhitya-1- Agama saddakoso [04] 10 | tIrthakara saMkSipta darzana -2- Agama
kahAkoso [01] | 11hI sAhitya-3- Agama-sAgara-koSa: [05] 12 dIparatnasAgaranA
laghuzodhanibaMdha 05 -4- Agama-zabdAdi-saMgraha (prA-saM-gu) [04] Agama
sivAyanuM sAhitya kUla pustaka 5 Agama anukrama sAhitya: 09 -1-
sAgamaviSayAnubha- (bhUga) | 1-Agama sAhitya (kula pustaka) | 516 -2- Agama
viSayAnukrama (saTIka) 04 2-Agametara sAhitya (kula 085 -3- Agama sUtra-gAthA
anukrama dIparatnasAgarajI ke kula prakAzana | 601 A AAEmunihIparatnasAgaranuM
sAhitya | bhuniTIparatnasAgaranuM sAgama sAhitya [isa pusta8 516] tanA hudA pAnA
[98,300] 2 bhuniTIparatnasAgaranuM manya sAhitya [huta pusta8 85] tanA husa pAnA
[09,270] munihIparatnasAgara saMlita tatvArthasUtra'nI viziSTa DVD tenAla pAnA
[27,930] | sbhaa| prAzano 501 + viziSTa DVD isa pAnA 1,35,500 muni
dIparatnasAgara kRt "(gaNividyA)" Agama sUtra-hindI anuvAda" Page 4 02 25 05 02
| 03 3 .

Page #5 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Agam Sutra 31, Payanna Sutra-8, 'Gani Vidya' [31] Gani Vidya Payanna
Sutra-8-Hindi Translation Sutra-1 I will speak of the excellent Nav Bal method,
as it is shown in the Pravachan Shastra, as it is spoken by the Jinas, and as it
is praised by the learned. Sutra-2 This excellent Nav Bal method is as follows:
day, tithi, nakshatra, karan, graha din, muhurta, shukan bal, lagna bal, nimitta
bal. Sutra-3 In both halves of the day, hora is strong, in the night it is weak,
in the night it is the opposite, recognize that bala bal method. Sutra-4-7 Ekam
has no benefit, bij has calamity, trij has wealth fulfillment, pancham has
victory and remains ahead. Satam has many virtues, dasham has a smooth path if
you depart. Know that ekadashi has no obstacles in health and well-being. Those
who have become enemies are in the family after terah. Avoid fourteenth, full
moon, eighth, ninth, sixth, fourth, and twelfth in both halves of the day.
Sutra-8 Shiksha should be given on ekam, pancham, dasham, full moon, and
ekadashi. Sutra-9-10 There are five tithis: Nanda, Bhadra, Vijaya, Tushka, and
Purna. These occur once each in a month, six times. Give shiksha on Nanda, Jaya,
and Purna tithi. Observe fast on Nanda Bhadra and abstain from food on Purna.
Sutra-11-14 Pursya, Ashwini, Magha, Revati, Hasta, Chitra, Anuradha, Jyestha,
and Mula, these nine nakshatras are auspicious for travel. Mrigashirsha, Magha,
Mula, Visakha, Anuradha Hasta, Uttara, Revati, Ashwini, and Shravana, depart and
stay in these nakshatras, but there should not be an eclipse or twilight during
this time. (Those who travel in this way) always receive food and drink, many
fruits and flowers on the way, and also find peace and well-being on their
journey. Sutra-15 Avoid all nakshatras that are Sandhyagat, Ravigat, Vidder,
Sangrah, Vilambi, Rahugat, and Grahabhinna. (Explaining further, it is said
that). Sutra-16 The nakshatra at the time of sunset is Sandhyagat, the nakshatra
in which the sun is present is Ravigat, the nakshatra that is reversed is
Vidder, the nakshatra in which a cruel planet is present is Sangrah. Sutra-17
The nakshatra that the sun has left is Vilambi, the nakshatra in which there is
an eclipse is Rahugat, the nakshatra in which a planet is spread in the middle
is called Grahabhinna. Muni Diparatnasagar Krit "(Gani Vidya)" Agam Sutra-Hindi
Translation" Page 5

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama sUtra 31, payannAsUtra-8, 'gaNividyA' [31] gaNividyA payannAsUtra-8-hindI
anuvAda sUtra-1 pravacana zAstra meM jisa taraha se dikhAyA gayA hai, vaisA yaha
jinabhASita vacana hai aura vidvAn ne prazaMsA kI hai vaisI uttama nava bala
vidhi maiM khuuNgaa| sUtra-2 yaha uttama navabala vidhi isa prakAra hai - dina,
tithi, nakSatra, karaNa, grahadina, muhUrta, zukanabala, lagnabala, nimittbl|
sUtra-3 ubhayapakSameM dinameM horA tAkatavara hai, rAtri ko kamajhora hai,
rAtri meM viparIta hai usa balAbala vidhi pahacAno sUtra-4-7 ekama ko lAbha
nahIM, bIja ko vipatti hai, trIja ko artha siddhi, pA~cama ko vijaya Age rahatA
hai  /  sAtama meM kaIM guNa haiM, dazama ko prasthAna kare to mArga niSkaMTaka
banatA hai  /  ekAdazI ko Arogya meM vighnarahitatA aura kalyANa ko jAno  /  jo
amitra hue haiM vo terasa ke bAda ba~sa meM hote haiM  /  caudaza, pUnama,
AThama, noma, chaTha, cautha, bArasa kA ubhaya pakSa meM varjana krnaa| sUtra-8
ekama, pA~cama, dazama, pUrNimA, agiyArasa ina dinoM meM ziSya dIkSA karanI
caahie| sUtra-9-10 pA~ca tithi hai-nandA, bhadrA, vijayA, tucchA aura pUrNA  /
cha bAra eka mAsa meM yaha eka-eka aniyata vartatI hai| nandA, jayA aura pUrNA
tithi meM ziSya dIkSA karanA  /  nandA bhadrA meM vrata aura pUrNA meM anazana
karanA cAhie  /  sUtra - 11-14 pRSya, azvinI, magazIrSa, revatI, hasta, citrA,
anurAdhA, jyeSThA aura mUla yaha nau nakSatra gamana ke lie siddha haiN|
mRgazIrSa, maghA, mUla, vizAkhA, anurAdhA hasta, uttarA, revatI, azvinI aura
zravaNa isa nakSatra meM mArga meM prasthAna aura sthAna karanA lekina isa kArya
avasara meM grahaNa yA saMdhyA nahIM honI cAhie  /  (isa taraha sthAna-prasthAna
karanevAle ko) sadA mArga meM bhojana-pAna, bahuta sAre phala-phUla prApta hote
haiM aura jAte hue bhI kSema-kuzala pAte haiN| sUtra - 15 sandhyAgata, ravigata,
viDDera, saMgraha, vilaMbi, rAhugata aura grahabhinna yaha sarva nakSatra
varjana karane  /  (jisako samajhAte hue Age batAte haiM ki)| sUtra - 16 asta
samaya ke nakSatra ko sandhyAgata, jisameM sUraja rahA ho vo ravigata nakSatra
ulTA honevAlA viDera nakSatra, krUra graha rahA ho vo saMgraha nakSatra  /
sUtra - 17 sUraja ne chor3A huA vilambI nakSatra, jisameM grahaNa ho vo rAhugata
nakSatra, jisakI madhya meM se graha pasAra ho vo graha bhinna nakSatra kahalAtA
hai| muni dIparatnasAgara kRt "(gaNividyA)" Agama sUtra-hindI anuvAda" Page 5

Page #6 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Agam Sutra 31, Payannasutra-8, 'Ganividya' Sutra - 18-20 There is disagreement
in the Sandhyagat Nakshatra and dispute in the Vilambi Nakshatra. In the Vidder,
the one in front wins and in the Adityagat, supreme sorrow is obtained. In the
Sangrah Nakshatra, there is suppression, in the Rahugat, death, and in the
Grahabhinn, there is vomiting of blood. Sandhyagat, Rahugat and Adityagat
Nakshatras are weak and rough. Know the remaining Nakshatras, free from the
Sandhyadi four and the Grahanakshatra, as strong. Sutra-21-28 To approach plants
in Pushya, Hasta, Abhijit, Ashwini and Bharani Nakshatras. Do not perform
Nishkraman (initiation) in Shravana, Ghanishtha and Punarvasu, and should start
learning in Shatabhisha, Pushya, Hasta Nakshatras. Mrigashirsha, Ardra, Pushya,
three Purva, Mula, Ashlesha, Hasta, Chitra, these ten are the Nakshatras that
increase knowledge. Hasta etc. five are auspicious for clothes. To perform
Lochkarma in Punarvasu, Pushya, Shravana and Ghanishtha, these four Nakshatras.
In the three Uttara and Rohini, the newly initiated should be given Nishkraman
(initiation), Upasthapana (major initiation) and permission from the Gani or
Vachan. To collect the Gan, establish the Gandhar. To make Avgrah Vasati, to
make stability in the place. Sutra - 29, 30 Pushya, Hasta, Abhijit, Ashwini,
these four Nakshatras are beautiful and capable for starting work. (What works
they tell). ..... To acquire knowledge, to practice Brahmayog, to study, to get
permission, to have a purpose and a goal. Sutra - 31-32 Anuradha, Revati, Chitra
and Mrigashirsha, these four are soft Nakshatras, in which soft work should be
done. One suffering from begging should take on the vow. For children and old
people, one should do Sangrah-Upgrah. Sutra - 33-34 Ardra, Ashlesha, Jyestha and
Mula, these four Nakshatras are for Guru pratima and Tapkarma. To bear the
affliction of Devas, humans and animals, to strengthen the Mulaguna-Uttaraguna.
Sutra - 35-36 Madha, Bharani, three Purva are fierce Nakshatras. In them, one
should do external and internal penance. There are 360 penance practices. In the
combination of fierce Nakshatras, one should do other penances. Sutra - 37-38
Krittika and Vishakha, these two are hot Nakshatras, in them, one should do
smearing and sewing and Santhara-equipment, vessels etc., disputes, Avgrah and
clothes (wearing) should be done by the Acharya. Sutra- 39-41 Ghanishtha,
Shatabhisha, Swati, Shravana and Punarvasu, in these Nakshatras, one should do
Guru seva, Chaitya puja, study, acquire knowledge and renunciation, perform
vows, and get permission from the Gani and Vachan. To collect the Gan, initiate
the disciple, to collect etc. by the Ganavcchedak. Sutra -42-43 Bav, Balav,
Kolav, Strilochan, Gar - etc., Vanij Visti, are the Nishadhi Karana of the
Shukla Paksha; Shakuni, Chatushpad, Nag, Kinstughna are Dhruva Karana. On the
night of Krishna Chaturdashi, Shakuni Karana occurs. Sutra-44 By doubling the
Tithi and not counting the dark night, dividing by seven, the remainder is the
Karana. (In general practice, two Karana are mentioned for one Tithi.) Muni
Diparatnasagar Krit “(Ganividya)” Agam Sutra-Hindi Translation" Page 6

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama sUtra 31, payannAsUtra-8, 'gaNividyA' sUtra - 18-20 sandhyAgata nakSatra
meM takarAra hotI hai aura vilambI nakSatra meM vivAda hotA hai  /  viDDera meM
sAmanevAle kI jaya ho aura Adityagata meM paramaduHkha prApta hotA hai  /
saMgraha nakSatra meM nigraha ho, rAhugata meM maraNa ho aura grahabhinna meM
lahU kI ulTI hotI hai  /  sandhyAgata, rAhugata aura Adityagata nakSatra,
kamajhora aura rUkhe haiM  /  sandhyAdi cAra se aura grahanakSatra se vimukta
bAkI ke nakSatra tAkatavara jAnane  /  sUtra-21-28 puSya, hasta, abhijita,
azvinI aura bharaNI nakSatra meM pAdapopagamana karanA  /  zravaNa, ghaniSThA
aura punarvasu meM niSkramaNa(dIkSA) nahIM karanA, zatabhiSA, puSya, hasta
nakSatra meM vidyAraMbha karanA cAhie  /  mRgazIrSa, ArdrA, puSya, tIna pUrvA,
mUla, AzleSA, hasta, citrA yaha dasa jJAna ke vRddhikAraka nakSatra haiM  /
hasta Adi pA~ca vastra ke lie prazasta haiN| punarvasu, puSya, zravaNa aura
ghaniSThA yaha cAra nakSatra meM locakarma karanA  /  tIna uttarA aura rohiNI
meM nava dIkSita ko niSkramaNa (dIkSA), upasthApanA (bar3I dIkSA) aura gaNi yA
vAcaka kI anujJA karanA  /  gaNasaMgraha karanA, gaNadhara sthApanA karanA  /
avagraha vasati, sthAna meM sthiratA krnaa| sUtra - 29, 30 puSya, hasta,
abhijita, azvinI, yaha cAra nakSatra kArya Arambha ke lie sundara aura samartha
haiM  /  (kauna se kArya vo batAte haiN)| ..... vidyA dhAraNa karanA, brahmayoga
sAdhanA, svAdhyAya, anujJA, uddeza aura samuddeza  /  sUtra - 31-32 anurAdhA,
revatI, citrA aura mRgazIrSa yaha cAra mRdu nakSatra haiM, usameM mRdu kArya
karane cAhie  /  bhikSAcaraNa se pIr3ita ko grahaNa dhAraNa karanA cAhie  /
bacce aura bur3hoM ke lie saMgraha-upagraha karanA caahie| sUtra - 33-34 ArdrA,
AzleSA, jyeSThA aura mUla yaha cAra nakSatra meM gurupratimA aura tapakarma
karanA  /  deva-mAnava-tiryaMca kA upasarga sahanA, mUlaguNa-uttaraguNa puSTI
karanA  /  sUtra - 35-36 madhA, bharaNI, pUrvA tInoM ugra nakSatra haiM  /
usameM bAhya abhyantara tapa karanA  /  360 tapa karma haiM  /  ugra nakSatra ke
yoga meM usase dUsare tapa karane caahie| sUtra - 37-38 kRtikA aura vizAkhA yaha
donoM uSNa nakSatra meM lepana aura sIvaNa evaM saMthArA-upakaraNa, bhA~r3a Adi,
vivAda, avagraha aura vastra (dhAraNa karanA) AcArya dvArA upakaraNa aura
vibhAga karanA  /  sUtra- 39-41 ghaniSThA, zatabhiSA, svAti, zravaNa aura
punarvasa isa nakSatra meM gurusevA, caityapUjana, svAdhyAyakaraNa karanA, vidyA
aura virati karavAnA, vrata-upasthApanA gaNi aura vAcaka kI anujJA karanA  /
gaNasaMgraha, ziSyadIkSA, gaNAvacchedaka dvArA saMgraha Adi karanA  /  sUtra
-42-43 bava, bAlava, kolava, strilocana, gara - Adi, vaNija viSTI, zukla pakSa
ke nizAdi karaNa haiM; zakuni, catuSpAda, nAga, kiMstughna dhruva karaNa haiM  /
kRSNa caudaza kI rAta ko zakunikaraNa hotA hai| sUtra-44 tithi ko dugunA karake
aMdherI rAta na ginate hue sAta se hisse karane se jo bace vo karaNa  /
(sAmAnya vyavahAra meM eka tithi ke do karaNa batAe haiN|) muni dIparatnasAgara
kRt "(gaNividyA)" Agama sUtra-hindI anuvAda" Page 6

Page #7 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Āgama Sūtra 31, Payannā Sūtra-8, 'Gaṇividyā' Sūtra - 45  **Sūtra - 46**
Initiation of disciples in the following Karana: Bava, Bālava, Kaulava, Vaṇija,
Nāga, and Chatushpāda.  **Sūtra - 47-48** In Bava Karana, perform Vrata-
Upasthāpana and seek permission from the Gaṇi-Vācak. In Śakuni and Viṣṭi Karana,
observe Anashana (fasting).  **Sūtra - 49-55** Perform Śaikshanikṣramaṇa, Vrata,
Upasthāpana, and seek permission from the Gaṇi-Vācak on Guru, Śukra, and Soma
days. On Ravi, Mangala, and Śani days, perform Mūla-Uttaraguna, Tapakarma, and
Pādapōpagamana.  **Sūtra - 56-58** Rudra, etc., Muhūrta are measured by 96
angula shadow. 60 angula shadow indicates Śreya, 12 angula indicates Mitra. 6
angula indicates Ārabhaḍ Muhūrta, 5 angula indicates Saumitra. 4 angula
indicates Vāvyavya, 2 angula indicates Supratīta Muhūrta. Midday position
indicates Parimandala Muhūrta. 2 angula indicates Rōhaṇa, 4 angula shadow
indicates Punabala Muhūrta. 5 angula shadow indicates Vijay Muhūrta, 6 angula
indicates Nairṛta. 12 angula shadow indicates Varuna, 60 angula indicates
Adharma and Dvīpa Muhūrta. 96 angula shadow indicates night and day Muhūrta.
Know the night Muhūrta opposite to the day Muhūrta. Know the shadow measurement
by the speed of the day Muhūrta.  **Sūtra - 59-60** In Mitra, Nanda, Susthita,
Abhijit, Chandra, Vāruṇa, Agni, Veśya, Iśāna, Ānanda, Vijay Muhūrta Yoga,
perform disciple initiation, Vrata-Upasthāpana, and seek permission from the
Gaṇi-Vācak. In Bamba, Valaya, Vāyu, Vṛṣabha, and Varuṇa Muhūrta Yoga, perform
Pādapōpagamana Anashana for Uttāmārtha (Moksha).  **Sūtra - 61-63** Perform
disciple initiation in Puṇṇāmādheya Śakuna. In Strīnāmi Śakuna, let the learned
attain Samadhi. In Napumsaka Śakuna, refrain from all actions. In Vyāmiśra
Nimitta, refrain from all beginnings.  **Sūtra - 64-67** When a Tiryanch speaks,
then travel. When you see a tree bearing flowers and fruits, then perform
Svādhyāyakriyā. When you hear the sound of a tree branch breaking, then perform
the installation of a craft. When there is thunder in the sky, then attain
Uttāmārtha (Moksha). When you hear the sound of a burrow, then take possession
of the place. When there is a Śakuna of a thunderbolt, then death will occur. In
the Śakuna of light, be joyful and content.  **Sūtra - 68** Perform disciple
initiation in a moving Rāśi Lagna. In a stationary Rāśi Lagna, perform Vrata-
Upasthāpana, Śrutaśkandha Anujñā, Udeśa, Samudeśa. In a Dvirāśi Lagna, perform
Svādhyāya. Perform disciple initiation in the Hōrā of Ravi.  **Sūtra - 69-71**
In the Hōrā of Chandra, gather disciples. In a Saumya Lagna, teach the Caraṇa-
Karaṇa. In Khūṇā-Diśā Lagna, attain Uttāmārtha. In this way, know the strength
of the Lagna and have no doubt about the direction, angle, etc.  Perform
disciple initiation when a Saumya Graha is in the Lagna. Perform Uttāmārtha when
a Krūra Graha is in the Lagna. Refrain from all actions when Rāhu or Ketu is in
the Lagna. Perform auspicious actions in an auspicious Lagna. Refrain from all
actions in an inauspicious Lagna. One should know the Lagna of such a Graha as
spoken by Jineśvara.  **Muni Dīparatnasāgara Kṛt "(Gaṇividyā)" Āgama Sūtra -
Hindi Anuvāda** - Page 7

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama sUtra 31, payannAsUtra-8, 'gaNividyA' sUtra - 45 bava, bAlava, kaulava,
vaNija, nAga, catuSpAda yaha karaNa meM ziSya-dIkSA krnaa| sUtra -46 bava meM
vrata-upasthApana, gaNi-vAcaka kI anujJA karanA  /  zakuni aura viSTI karaNa meM
anazana karanA  /  sUtra -47-48 guru-zukra aura soma dina meM zaikSaniSkramaNa,
vrata, upasthApana aura gaNi vAcaka anujJA karanA  /  ravi, maMgala aura zani ke
dina mUla-uttaraguNa, tapakarma aura pAdapopagamana kArya karanA caahie| sUtra
-49-55 rudra Adi muhUrta 96 aMgula chAyA pramANa haiM  /  60 aMgula chAyA se
zreya, bAraha se mitra  /  cha aMgula se ArabhaDa muhUrta, pA~ca aMgula se
saumitra | cAra se vAyavya, do aMgula se supratIta muhUrta hote hai  /
madhyAhna sthiti parimaMDala muhUrta hotA hai  /  do aMgula se rohaNa, cAra
aMgula chAyA se punabala muhUrta hotA hai  /  pA~ca aMgula chAyA se vijaya
muhUrta, cha se naiRta hotA hai  /  12 aMgula chAyA se varuNa, 60 aMgula se
adharma aura dvIpa muhUrta hotA hai  /  96 aMgula chAyA anusAra rAta-dina ke
muhUrta batAe  /  dina muhUrta se viparIta rAtri muhUrta jAnanA  /  dina muhUrta
gati dvArA chAyA pramANa jaannaa| sUtra-56-58 mitra, nanda, susthita, abhijita,
candra, vAruNa, agni, vezya, IzAna, Ananda, vijaya  /  isa muhUrta yoga meM
ziSya-dIkSA, vrata-upasthApanA aura gaNi vAcaka kI anujJA karanA  /  bambha,
valaya, vAyu, vRSabha aura varuNa muhUrta-yoga meM uttamArtha (mokSa) ke lie
pAdapopagamana anazana krnaa| sUtra-59-60 puMnAmadheya zakuna meM ziSya dIkSA
karanA  /  strInAmI zakuna meM vidvAna samAdhi ko sAdhe  /  napuMsaka zakuna meM
sarva karma kA varjana karanA, vyAmizra nimitta meM sarva Arambha varjana krnaa|
sUtra-61-63 tiryaMca bole taba mArgagamana karanA, puSpaphalita per3a dekhe to
svAdhyAyakriyA karanA  /  per3a kI DAlI phUTane kI AvAjha se zilpa kI
upasthApanA karanA  /  AkAza gar3agaDATa ho to uttamArtha (mokSa) sAdhanA karanA
/  bilamUla kI AvAjha se sthAna grahaNa karanA  /  vajra ke utpAta ke zakuna ho
to mauta ho  /  prakAza zakuna meM harSa aura saMtoSa vikurvanA  /  sUtra -
64-67 cala rAzi lagna meM ziSya-dIkSA karanA  /  sthira rAzi lagna meM vrata-
upasthApanA, zrutaskaMdha anujJA, udeza, samudeza karanA  /  dvirAzIlagna meM
svAdhyAya karanA, ravi kI horA meM ziSya dIkSA krnaa| sUtra-68 candra horA meM
zISyA saMgraha karanA aura saumya lagna meM caraNa-karaNa zikSApradAna karanA  /
khUNA-dizA lagna meM uttamArtha sAdhanA, isa prakAra lagna bala jAnanA aura
dizA-konA Adi ke lie saMzaya nahIM karanA  /  sUtra- 69-71 saumyagraha lagna meM
ho taba ziSyadIkSA karanA, krUragraha lagna meM ho taba uttamArtha sAdhanA
karanI  /  rAhu yA ketu lagna meM sarvakarma varjana karane, prazasta lagna meM
prazasta kArya kare  /  aprazasta lagna meM sarva kArya varjana karane  /
jinezvara bhASita aise graha ke lagna ko jAnane caahie| muni dIparatnasAgara kRt
"(gaNividyA)" Agama sUtra-hindI anuvAda" - Page 7

Page #8 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Agam Sutra 31, Payannasutra-8, 'Ganividya' Sutra - 72 Causes are not destroyed.
What is spoken by the Rishis is not false, conduct is destroyed by the cause of
bad sight. Conduct is not destroyed by the cause of good sight. Sutra - 73-79
There is no transgression in the speech of the one who is born, and the child
who speaks, and then the woman who speaks - by that birth and of that birth and
by it, similarly, there is instruction from the similar to the similar, from the
similar to the similar. To initiate disciples in the cause of men and women. To
abandon all actions in the cause of eunuchs, to abandon all beginnings in the
cause of mixed, the cause is not artificial. Causes indicate the future. By
which the Siddha Purusha knows the characteristics of the origin of the cause.
To initiate disciples, establish vows, gather the community, and establish the
Ganadhara in a good, strong, and powerful cause. One should seek the permission
of the Shruta Skandha and the Ganivachaka. Sutra - 80-81 To abandon all actions
and practice self-realization in an unsuitable, weak, and loose cause. To begin
a good action always in a good cause, to abandon all actions in an unsuitable
cause. Sutra - 82-84 The tithi is stronger than the day. The nakshatra is
stronger than the tithi. The karana is stronger than the nakshatra, the graha-
dina is stronger than the karana. The muhurta is stronger than that, the shakun
is stronger than the muhurta. The lagna is stronger than the shakun. The cause
is the most important. The strength of the cause is superior to the isolated
cause. The cause is the most important. There is nothing stronger than the cause
in the world. Sutra - 85 Thus, the method of strength and weakness has been
spoken by the well-wisher in brief. Which is the knowledge that is to be grasped
by the Anuyoga. And one should know it with diligence. 31 Ganividya-Prakirnak
Sutra-8, Muni Diparatnasagar's Hindi translation complete Muni Diparatnasagar's
“(Ganividya)” Agam Sutra-Hindi translation" Page 8

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama sUtra 31, payannAsUtra-8, 'gaNividyA' sUtra - 72 nimitta naSTa nahIM hote
/  RSibhASita mithyA nahIM hote, durdiSTi nimitta dvArA vyavahAra naSTa hotA hai
/  sudRSTa nimitta dvArA vyavahAra naSTa nahIM hotaa| sUtra - 73-79 jo utpAtikI
bolI aura jo bacce bolate haiN| aura phira strI jo bolatI hai usakA vyatikrama
nahIM hai - usa jAta dvArA aura usa jAta kA aura usake dvArA samAna tadrUpa se
tAdUpya aura sadRza se sadRza nirdeza hotA hai  /  strIpuruSa ke nimitta meM
ziSya-dIkSA karanA  /  napuMsaka nimitta meM sarvakArya varjana, vyAmizra
nimitta meM sarva Arambha varjana karanA, nimitta kRtrima nahIM hai  /  nimitta
bhAvi batAte haiM  /  jisase siddha puruSa nimitta-utpatta lakSaNa ko jAnate
haiN| prazasta-dRr3ha aura tAkatavara nimitta meM ziSya-dIkSA, vrata-sthApanA,
gaNasaMgraha karanA aura gaNadhara kI sthApanA krnii| zrutaskaMdha aura gaNi-
vAcaka kI anujJA karanI caahie| sUtra-80-81 aprazasta, kamajhora aura zithila
nimitta meM sarva kArya varjana karanA aura AtmasAdhanA karanA  /  prazasta
nimitta meM hamezA prazasta kArya kA Arambha karanA, aprazasta nimitta meM
sarvakArya varjana krnaa| sUtra-82-84 dina se adhika tithi tAkatavara hai  /
tithi se adhika nakSatra tAkatavara hai  /  nakSatra se karaNa, karaNa se
grahadina tAkatavara hai  /  usase adhika muhUrta, muhUrta se adhika zakuna
tAkatavara hai  /  zakuna se lagna tAkatavara hai  /  usase nimitta pradhAna hai
/  vilagna nimitta se nimitta bala uttama hai  /  nimitta saba se pradhAna hai
/  nimitta se adhika balavAna loka meM kucha nahIM hai| sUtra-85 isa taraha
saMkSepa se bala-nirbala vidhi suvihita dvArA kahI gaI hai  /  jo anuyoga jJAna
grAhya hai  /  aura vo apramattapana se jAnanI caahie| 31 gaNividyA-prakirNaka
sUtra-8 kA muni dIparatnasAgara kRt hindI anuvAda pUrNa muni dIparatnasAgara kRt
"(gaNividyA)" Agama sUtra-hindI anuvAda" Page 8

Page #9 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Agam Sutra 31, Payannasutra-8, 'Ganividya'  Namo Namo Nimmaladansanas  Puja Pal
Shri Anand-Kshama-Lalit-Sushil-Sudharmasagar Gurubhyo Nam: 31 Ganividya _ Agam
Sutra Hindi Anuvaad ' [Anuvaadak Evam Sampadak Agam Diwakar Muni Dipratan
Sagarji [ M.Com. M.Ed. Ph.D. Shruta Maharshi ] 1 21188:- (1)  (2)
deepratnasagar.in Bhel Dress:- jainmunideepratnasagar@gmail.com Bhoja
09825967397 Muni Dipratan Sagar Krit “(Ganividya)” Agam Sutra-Hindi Anuvaad”
Page 9

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
Agama sUtra 31, payannAsUtra-8, 'gaNividyA' namo namo nimmaladaMsaNassa
pUjyapAla zrI AnaMda-kSamA-lalita-suzIla-sudharmasAgara gurUbhyo nama: 31
gaNividyA _ AgamasUtra hindI anuvAda ' [anuvAdaka evaM saMpAdaka Agama dIvAkara
muni dIparatnasAgarajI [ M.Com. M.Ed. Ph.D. zruta maharSi ] 1 21188:- (1) (2)
deepratnasagar.in bhela Dresa:- jainmunideepratnasagar@gmail.com bhojA
09825967397 muni dIparatnasAgara kRt "(gaNividyA)" Agama sUtra-hindI anuvAda"
Page 9

