Catalog link: https://jainqq.org/explore/034706/1

Page #1 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Namo Namo Nimmaladansanas, Bal Brahmachari Shri Neminaathay Namah. Pujya Anand-
Kshama-Lalit-Sushil-Sudharmasagar-Guru-bhyo Namah. Aagam-38 Jitakalp Aagam Sutra
Hindi Anuvaad. Anuvaadak Evam Sampadak Aagam Diwaakar Muni Diparatnasagarji [
M.Com. M.Ed. Ph.D. Shruta Maharshi ] Aagam Hindi-Anuvaad-Shreni Pushp-38

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 namo namo nimmaladaMsaNassa bAla brahmacArI zrI neminAthAya namaH pUjya Ananda-
kSamA-lalita-suzIla-sudharmasAgara-gurUbhyo namaH Agama-38 jItakalpa AgamasUtra
hindI anuvAda anuvAdaka evaM sampAdaka Agama dIvAkara muni dIparatnasAgarajI ' [
M.Com. M.Ed. Ph.D. zruta maharSi ] Agama hindI-anuvAda-zreNI puSpa-38

Page #2 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Agam Sutra 38, Chhed Sutra-5, 'Jita Kalp' Agam Sutra-38- "Jita Kalp" Chhed
Sutra-5- Hindi Translation Where to see what? | Page | Order Order Subject
Subject Page 1 Introduction Ten types of criticism and method | Conclusion Muni
Diparatnasagar Krit "(Jita Kalp)" Agam Sutra-Hindi Translation" Page 2

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama sUtra 38, chedasUtra-5, 'jItakalpa' AgamasUtra-38- "jItakalpa'
chedasUtra-5- hindI anuvAda kahAM kyA dekhe? | pRSTha | krama krama viSaya
viSaya pRSTha 1 prastAvanA dazavidha AlocanA aura vidhi | upasaMhAra muni
dIparatnasAgara kRt "(jItakalpa)" Agama sUtra-hindI anuvAda" Page 2

Page #3 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Āgama Sūtra 38, Cheda Sūtra-5, 'Jītakalpa' 45 Āgama Classification Sūtra
Order Order Āgama Name Āgama Name 01 | Āchāra Anga Sūtra-1 02 Sūtra Kṛt 03 Anga
Sūtra-2 Anga Sūtra-3 Anga Sūtra-4 | Sthāna 04 | Samavāya 25 | |
Āturapratyākhyāna 26 Mahāpratyākhyāna | Bhaktaparijñā 28 | Tandulavaichārik 29 |
Sanstāraka 27 Payannā Sūtra-2 Payannā Sūtra-3 Payannā Sūtra-4 Payannā Sūtra-5
Payannā Sūtra-6 Bhagavati Anga Sūtra-5 06 Jñātādharmkathā Payannā Sūtra-7 Anga
Sūtra-6 Anga Sūtra-7 07 | Upāsakadashā 30.1 Gachchāchāra 30.2 Chandravēdyaka 31
| Gaṇividya 32 Devēndrastava Anga Sūtra-8 Payannā Sūtra-7 Payannā Sūtra-8
Payannā Sūtra-9 Antakṛt Dashā 09 Anuttaroppapātikadashā 10 Praśnavyākaraṇadashā
11 Vipākaśruta 12 | Aupapātika Anga Sūtra-9 Anga Sūtra-10 Anga Sūtra-11 Upānga
Sūtra-1 33 Vīrastava 34 | Niśītha 35 Bṛhatkalpa Upānga Sūtra-2 36 Vyavahāra
Rājapraschīya Jīvajīvābhigama Upānga Sūtra-3 37 | Dashāśruta Skandha Jītakalpa
Payannā Sūtra-10 Cheda Sūtra-1 Cheda Sūtra-2 Cheda Sūtra-3 Cheda Sūtra-4 Cheda
Sūtra-5 Cheda Sūtra-6 Mūla Sūtra-1 Mūla Sūtra-2 15 Upānga Sūtra-4 38 Prajñāpanā
Sūryaprajñapti 16 Upānga Sūtra-5 Chandraprajñapti Upānga Sūtra-6
Jambūdvīpaprajñapti Nirayāvalikā Upānga Sūtra-7 Upānga Sūtra-8 Upānga Sūtra-9 39
| Mahāniśītha 40 | Āvashyaka 41.1 Oghanīyukti 41.2 | Piṇḍanīyukti Dashāvaikālika
Mūla Sūtra-2 Mūla Sūtra-3 20 Kalpavataṁsikā 42 Puṣpikā Upānga Sūtra-10 |
Uttarādhyayana Mūla Sūtra-4 44 | Nandī Puṣpachūlikā 23 | Vṛṣṇidashā 24
Chatuḥśaraṇa Upānga Sūtra-11 Upānga Sūtra-12 Payannā Sūtra-1 Chūlikā Sūtra-1
Chūlikā Sūtra-2 | Anuyogadvāra Muni Dīparatnasāgara Kṛt “(Jītakalpa)” Āgama
Sūtra-Hindi Anuvāda" Page 3

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama sUtra 38, chedasUtra-5, 'jItakalpa' 45 Agama vargIkaraNa sUtra krama
krama Agama kA nAma Agama kA nAma 01 | AcAra aMgasUtra-1 02 sUtrakRt 03
aMgasUtra-2 aMgasUtra-3 aMgasUtra-4 | sthAna 04 | samavAya 25  /  |
AturapratyAkhyAna 26 mahApratyAkhyAna | bhaktaparijJA 28 | taMdulavaicArika 29
/  saMstAraka 27 payannAsUtra-2 payannAsUtra-3 payannAsUtra-4 payannAsUtra-5
payannAsUtra-6 bhagavatI aMgasUtra-5 06 jJAtAdharmakathA payannAsUtra-7
aMgasUtra-6 aMgasUtra-7 07 | upAsakadazA 30.1 gacchAcAra 30.2 candravedhyaka 31
/  gaNividyA 32 devendrastava aMgasUtra-8 payannAsUtra-7 payannAsUtra-8
payannAsUtra-9 aMtakRt dazA 09 anuttaropapAtikadazA 10 praznavyAkaraNadazA 11
vipAkazruta 12 | aupapAtika aMgasUtra-9 aMgasUtra-10 aMgasUtra-11 upAMgasUtra-1
33 vIrastava 34 | nizItha 35 bRhatkalpa upAMgasUtra-2 36 vyavahAra rAjaprazciya
jIvAjIvAbhigama upAMgasUtra-3 37 | dazAzrutaskandha jItakalpa payannAsUtra-10
chedasUtra-1 chedasUtra-2 chedasUtra-3 chedasUtra-4 chedasUtra-5 chedasUtra-6
mUlasUtra-1 mUlasUtra-2 15 upAMgasUtra-4 38 prajJApanA sUryaprajJapti 16
upAMgasUtra-5 candraprajJapti upAMgasUtra-6 jaMbUdvIpaprajJapti nirayAvalikA
upAMgasUtra-7 upAMgasUtra-8 upAMgasUtra-9 39  /  mahAnizItha 40 | Avazyaka 41.1
oghaniyukti 41.2 | piMDaniyukti dazavaikAlika mUlasUtra-2 mUlasUtra-3 20
kalpavataMsikA 42 puSpikA upAMgasUtra-10 | uttarAdhyayana mUlasUtra-4 44 | nandI
puSpacUlikA 23 | vRSNidazA 24 catu:zaraNa upAMgasUtra-11 upAMgasUtra-12
payannAsUtra-1 cUlikAsUtra-1 cUlikAsUtra-2 | anuyogadvAra muni dIparatnasAgara
kRt "(jItakalpa)" Agama sUtra-hindI anuvAda" Page 3

Page #4 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Aagam Sutra 38, Chhed Sutra-5, Jeetkalp'  **Muni Diparatnasagarji Published
Literature Aagam Literature**  **Aagam Literature Literature Name Books Order
Literature Name**  **Books Original Aagam Literature: 1476 Aagam Other
Literature:**  * 1-1- Aagam Suttanni-Mulam print [49] | -1- Maaram Thanuyog *
1-2- Aagam Suttanni-Mulam Net [45] -2- Aagam Sambandhi Saahitya * -3- Aagam
Manjusha (Mula Prat) [53] |-3- Rishibhashit Suttranni * 2 | Aagam Anuvaad
Saahitya: * -4- Aagamiy Suktaavali -1- Saagam Sutra Gujarati Anuvaad [47] Aagam
Saahitya- Kul Pustak * -2- Aagam Sutra Hindi Anuvaad Net [47] -3- Aagamsootra
English Trans. | [11] -4- Saamsutra Sati 14 Sati Anuvaad [48]| -5- Aagam Sutra
Hindi Anuvaad print | [12]  **Other Literature: Aagam Vivechan Saahitya:**  *
1-1- Aagam Sutra Satik [46]| 2 Sutraabhyaas Saahitya * 1-2- Aagam Suttranni
Satikam Prataakar-1 [51]| 3 Vya2. Saahitya- * -3- Aagam Suttranni Satikam
Prataakar-2 [09]| 4 Vyakhyaan Saahitya * 1-4- Aagam Churni Saahitya [09] 5 Halat
Saahitya * -5- Savrittik Aagam Suttranni-1 | [40] 6 V Saahitya|-6- Savrittik
Aagam Suttranni-2 [08]| 7 Saraadhana Saahitya -7- Sachurnik Aagam Suttanni [08]|
Pariyay Saahitya Aagam Kosh Saahitya: * 1-1- Aagam Saddakoso [04] 10 Tarth62
Sanksipt Darshan |-2- Aagam Kahakoso [01] | 11 Hee Saahitya * -3- Aagam-Sagar-
Kosh: [05] 12 | Diparatnasagarna Laghushodhanibandh * -4- Aagam-Shabdadhi-
Sangrah (Pra-San-Gu) [04]|  **Aagam Siwayanu Saahitya Kool Pustak Aagam Anukram
Saahitya:**  * -1- Saagam Vishayanubh- (Bhoot) * 1- Aagam Saahitya (Kul Pustak)
516 -2- Aagam Vishayanukram (Satik) | 2- Aagametar Saahitya (Kul 085 -3- Aagam
Sutra-Gatha Anukram Diparatnasagarji Ke Kul Prakashan | 601 Muni Diparatnasagar
Nu Saahitya // 1 Muni Diparatnasagar Nu Aagam Saahitya [Is Pustak 516] Tenas
Pana [98,300] 2 Muni Diparatnasagar Nu Many Saahitya [Hut Pustak: 85] Tenas Hua
Pana [09,270] 3 Muni Diparatnasagar Sandalit 'Tattvarth Sutra' Ni Vishisht DVD
Tenata Pana [27,930] Abhara Prashnala 101 + Vishisht DVD Hul Pana 1,35,500
**Muni Diparatnasagar Krit “(Jeetkalp)” Aagam Sutra-Hindi Anuvaad"**  **Page 4**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 01 Agama sUtra 38, chedasUtra-5, jItakalpa' muni dIparatnasAgarajI prakAzita
sAhitya Agama sAhitya Agama sAhitya sAhitya nAma buksa krama sAhitya nAma buksa
mUla Agama sAhitya:1476 Agama anya sAhitya: 10 1-1- AgamasuttANi-mUlaM print
[49] | -1-mArAma thAnuyoga 06 1-2- AgamasuttANi-mUlaM Net [45] -2- Agama
saMbaMdhI sAhitya 02 | -3- AgamamaJjUSA (mUla prata) [53] |-3-RSibhASita sUtrANi
01 2 | Agama anuvAda sAhitya: 165 -4- Agamiya sUktAvalI -1- sAgamasUtra gurAtI
anuvAda [47] Agama sAhitya- kula pustaka 516 -2- AgamasUtra hindI anuvAda Net
[47] -3- Aagamsootra English Trans. | [11] -4- sAmasUtra saTI 14satI anuvAda
[48]| -5- AgamasUtra hindI anuvAda print | [12] anya sAhitya:Agama vivecana
sAhitya: 171 tattvAbhyAsa sAhitya 13 -1-AgamasUtra saTIka [46]| 2 sUtrAbhyAsa
sAhitya 06 1-2- AgamasUtrANi saTIkaM pratAkAra-1 [51]| 3 vyaa2| sAhitya- al 05
-3-AgamasUtrANi saTIkaM pratAkAra-2 [09]| 4 vyAkhyAna sAhitya 04 1-4- Agama
cUrNi sAhitya [09] 5 halata sAhitya 09 -5- savRttika AgamasUtrANi-1 | [40] 6 va
sAhitya|-6- savRttika AgamasUtrANi-2 [08]| 7 sArAdhanA sAhitya -7- sacUrNika
AgamasuttANi [08]| pariyaya sAhityaAgama koSa sAhitya: 9 | pUjana sAhitya1-1-
Agama saddakoso [04] 10 tArtha62 saMkSipta rzana |-2- Agama kahAkoso [01] | 11hI
sAhitya 05 -3-Agama-sAgara-koSa: [05] 12 | dIparatnasAgaranA laghuzodhanibaMdha
05 -4- Agama-zabdAdi-saMgraha (prA-saM-gu) [04]| Agama sivAyanuM sAhitya kUla
pustaka Agama anukrama sAhitya:-1- sAgama viSayAnubha- (bhUta) 02 | 1-Agama
sAhitya (kula pustaka) 516 -2- Agama viSayAnukrama (saTIka) | 2-Agametara
sAhitya (kula 085 -3-Agama sUtra-gAthA anukrama dIparatnasAgarajI ke kula
prakAzana | 601 ja muni dIparatnasAgaranuM sAhitya // 1 bhuniTIparatnasAgaranuM
mAgama sAhitya [isa pustas 516] tenAsa pAnA [98,300] 2 bhuniTIparatnasAgaranuM
manya sAhitya [huta pusta: 85] tanA huA pAnA [09,270] 3 muni dIparatnasAgara
saMDalita 'tattvArthasUtra'nI viziSTa DVD tenAtA pAnA [27,930] abhArA prAzanAlA
101 + viziSTa DVD hula pAnA 1,35,500 04 03 04 14 02 25 85 09 04 03 muni
dIparatnasAgara kRt "(jItakalpa)" Agama sUtra-hindI anuvAda" Page 4

Page #5 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Agam Sutra 38, Chhed Sutra-5, 'Jita Kalp' [38] Jita Kalp Chhed Sutra-5 -
Hindi Translation Sutra -1 Paying homage to the (scripture) of the discourse, I
will briefly speak of atonement and charity. (In the five practices mentioned in
Agam, Sutra, Agyan, Dharana, and Jita) Jita refers to a practice that has been
passed down through tradition, a practice that has been determined by a great
person - a Githarth - after considering the substance, field, time, and emotion.
Entering this practice (with its characteristics of use) leads to the ultimate
purity of the living being. Just as a soiled garment is purified by alkali,
etc., so too is a living being stained with karma purified by atonement and
charity according to the Jita practice. Sutra -2 The cause of penance is
atonement, and penance is also the cause of restraint and purification. And this
restraint and purification are the cause of liberation. That is, twelve types of
penance are mentioned for purification through atonement. These penances stop
incoming karma and destroy accumulated karma. As a result, the path to
liberation is attained. Sutra -3,4 Purity of character is achieved through the
purity of knowledge from Samayik to Bindusar. Liberation is attained through
purity of character. But one who seeks liberation through purity of character
must certainly know atonement, because it is through atonement that purity of
character is achieved. There are ten types of atonement: Alochana, Pratikraman,
Ubhay, Vivek, Vyutsarg, Tap, Chhed, Mool, Anvasthapy, and Paranchit. Sutra -5
The practice of restraint that is obligatory, the same yoga (which is now
instructed in the remaining verses), the purity of the Chhadmastha who is free
from evil thoughts, or the cessation of karma bondage, the non-negligence, that
is, Alochana. (The next 6 to 8 verses describe Alochana atonement.) Sutra -6-7
Going out for the purpose of taking food, etc., or going out of the Ucchaar
Bhoomi (land of excretion) or Vihar Bhoomi (land of study, etc.), or going out
for the purpose of visiting a Chaitya or paying homage to a Guru, etc.,
following the proper procedure, all these actions, or any other action, if one
has to go out more than ten steps, then if one does not perform Alochana, then
one is considered impure or guilty of excess, and by performing Alochana, one
becomes pure or free from excess. Sutra -8 If one goes out due to a reason with
one's own group or another group, that is, with those who have similar conduct
or those who have dissimilar conduct, then purity is achieved through Alochana.
If one engages in conduct with those who have similar conduct or others, and if
one is guilty of excess, then also (if one meets a Githarth Acharya) purity is
achieved through Alochana. (The next 9 to 12 verses describe Pratikraman
atonement.) Sutra -9-12 Negligence in the three types of Gupti or the five types
of Samiti, desiring something from the Guru in any way, violating Vinaya,
following the ten Samachari, even a little falsehood, theft, or possessiveness,
sneezing without covering the mouth, upward movement of air, minor cutting,
piercing, or peeling, etc. Muni Diparatnasagar Krit "(Jita Kalp)" Agam Sutra -
Hindi Translation" Page 5

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama sUtra 38, chedasUtra-5, 'jItakalpa' [38] jItakalpa chedasUtra-5- hindI
anuvAda sUtra -1 pravacana-(zAstra) ko praNAma karake, maiM saMkSepa meM
prAyazcitta dAna kahU~gA  /  (Agama, sUtra, AjJA, dhAraNA, jIta vo pA~ca
vyavahAra batAe haiM usameM) jIta yAni paramparA se koI AcaraNA calatI ho mahA
puruSane - gItArthane dravya kSetra kAla-bhAva dekhakara nirNIta kiyA ho aisA jo
vyavahAra vo jIta vyavahAra  /  usameM praveza kie gae (upayoga lakSaNa vAle)
jIva kI parama vizuddhi hotI hai  /  jisa taraha malina vastra ko kSAra Adi se
vizuddhi ho vaise karmamalayukta jIva ko jIta vyavahAra anusAra prAyazcitta dAna
se vizuddhi hotI hai| sUtra-2 tapa kA kAraNa prAyazcitta hai aura phira tapa
saMvara aura nirjarA kA bhI hetu hai| aura yaha saMvara-nirjarA mokSa kA kAraNa
hai  /  yAni prAyazcitta dvArA vizuddhi ke lie bAraha prakAra kA tapa kahA hai
/  yaha tapa dvArA AnevAle karma rUkate haiM aura saMcita karma kA kSaya hotA
hai  /  jisake pariNAma se mokSa mArga prApta hotA hai| sUtra-3,4 sAmAyika se
bindusAra paryanta ke jJAna kI vizuddhi dvArA cAritra vizuddhi hotI hai  /
cAritra vizuddhi se nirvANa prApti hotI hai  /  lekina cAritra kI vizuddhi se
nirvANa ke arthI ko prAyazcitta avazya jAnanA cAhie, kyoMki prAyazcitta se hI
cAritra vizuddhi hotI hai| vo prAyazcitta daza prakAra se hai  /  AlocanA,
pratikramaNa, ubhaya, viveka, vyutsarga, tapa, cheda, mUla, anavasthApya aura
pAraMcita  /  sUtra - 5 avazyakaraNIya aisI saMyama kriyA samAna yoga (ki jisakA
aba bAkI gAthA meM nirdeza kiyA hai) usameM pravarte hue aduSTa bhAvavAle
chadmastha kI vizuddhi yA karmabaMdha nivRtti kA apramattabhAva yAni aalocnaa|
(Age kI 6 se 8 gAthA dvArA AlocanA prAyazcitta kahate haiN|) sUtra-6-7 AhAra-Adi
ke grahaNa ke lie jo bAhara jAnA yA uccAra bhUmi (mala-mUtra tyAga bhUmi) yA
vihAra bhUmi (svAdhyAya Adi bhUmi) se bAhara jAnA yA caitya yA guruvaMdana ke
lie jAnA Adi meM yathAvidhi pAlana karanA, yaha sabhI kArya yA anya kArya ke lie
so kadama se jyAdA bAhara jAnA par3e to yadi AlocanA na kare to vo azuddha yA
aticAra yukta mAnA jAe aura AlocanA karane se zuddha yA niraticAra bane  /
sUtra -8 svagaNa yA paragaNa yAni samAna sAmAcArIvAle yA asamAna sAmAcArIvAle ke
sAtha kAraNa se bAhara nirgamana ho to AlocanA se zuddhi hotI hai| yadi samAna
sAmAcArIvAle yA anya ke sAtha upasaMpadA se vihAra kare to niraticAra ho to bhI
(gItArtha AcArya mile taba) AlocanA se zuddhi hotI hai| (Age kI 9 se 12 gAthA
meM pratikramaNa prAyazcitta kahate haiM  / ) sUtra - 9-12 tIna taraha kI gupti
yA pA~ca taraha kI samiti ke lie pramAda karanA, guru kI kisI taraha AzAtanA
karanA, vinaya bhaMga karanA, IcchAkAra Adi daza sAmAcArI kA pAlana karanA, alpa
bhI mRSAvAda, corI yA mamatva honA, avidhi se yAni muhapatti rakhe binA
chIMkanA, vAyu kA urdhvagamana karanA, mAmUlI chedana-bhedana-pIlaNa Adi muni
dIparatnasAgara kRt "(jItakalpa)" Agama sUtra-hindI anuvAda" Page 5

Page #6 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Agam Sutra 38, Chhed Sutra-5, 'Jitatkalp'  **Consuming unattached karma,
engaging in humor and jest, speaking falsehoods, indulging in the four passions
of anger, etc., consuming the five senses of sound, etc., slipping in vision,
knowledge, conduct, or austerity, and even though not killing while being
victorious, if one consumes excessive transgressions due to haste or misuse,
then one becomes pure through the Mithya Dushkrut form of Pratikraman. If one
commits minor transgressions with affection, fear, sorrow, washing the body,
etc., or engages in humor, jest, and falsehoods, even with use or caution, then
one should know the Pratikraman atonement. This means that Pratikraman atonement
is applicable in all these cases.**  **(Now, the atonement for both is explained
in verses 13 to 15.) Sutra-13-15**  **If one commits transgressions related to
vows due to confusion, fear, sorrow, adversity, haste, carelessness, or
dependence, then both atonement, i.e., Alochana and Pratikraman, are applicable.
Repeatedly engaging in actions contrary to restraint through the mind, speech,
or body, i.e., evil thinking, evil speech, and evil conduct. Even a virtuous
person who has become adept in use may not know these transgressions as daily
transgressions, etc. If one commits transgressions of vision, knowledge, and
conduct due to the cause or haste, then both atonement is applicable.**
**(Verses 16-17 explain the 'Vivek' atonement.) Sutra-16-17**  **If one accepts
food, etc., in the form of a body, an epithet, a bed, etc., according to the
Sutra, and believes that it is not pure, or if one performs the purification
ritual without transgression, according to the rules, or if one brings it from
the first porsi to the fourth porsi due to time, or if one brings it from half a
yojana away, or if one accepts it before sunrise or after sunset, or if one
believes that the sun did not rise or set after accepting it, or if one accepts
food, etc., due to illness, old age, etc., and performs the purification ritual
according to the rules, then in all these cases, 'Vivek' atonement is
applicable.**  **(Now, the Kausagg atonement is explained.) Sutra-18**
**Kausagg atonement is applicable in walking, coming, going, the purpose of the
Sutra, etc., in being careful or faultless, in dreams, etc., in crossing a river
by boat, etc.**  **(Kausagg atonement is applicable in eating, drinking,
sleeping, sitting, visiting a shrine, being a monk, dwelling, excreting,
walking, and in 25 breaths (which people currently call 'Logass' or
'Iriyavah').) Sutra-19**  **(Kausagg atonement is applicable in walking outside
the dwelling for 100 steps, in a dream of killing, violence, and in a dream of
sexual intercourse for 108 breaths.) Sutra-21**  **(In daily Pratikraman,
Kausagg atonement is applicable for 50 breaths initially, then 25-25 breaths, in
nightly Pratikraman for 25-25 breaths, in Pavik Pratikraman for 300 breaths, in
Chaumasi Pratikraman for 500 breaths, and in Samvatsari for 1008 breaths.)**
**Muni Diparatnasagar Krit "(Jitatkalp)" Agam Sutra-Hindi Translation** **Page
6**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama sUtra 38, chedasUtra-5, 'jItakalpa' asaMkliSTa karma kA sevana karanA,
hAsya-kuceSTA karanA, vikathA karanA, krodha Adi cAra kaSAya kA sevana karanA,
zabda Adi pA~ca viSaya kA sevana karanA, darzana-jJAna-cAritra yA tapa Adi meM
skhalanA honA, jayaNAyukta hokara hatyA na karate hone ke bAvajUda bhI
sahasAkAra yA anupayogadazA se aticAra sevana kare to mithyA duSkRta rUpa
pratikramaNa se zuddha bane yadi upayoga yA sAvadhAnI se bhI alpa mAtra sneha
sambandha, bhaya, zoka, zarIra Adi kA dhonA Adi aura kuceSTA-hAsya-vikathAdi
kare to pratikramaNa prAyazcitta jAnanA  /  yAni isa sabameM pratikramaNa yogya
prAyazcitta AtA hai| (aba gAthA 13 se 15 meM tadubhaya prAyazcitta batAte haiM
/ ) sUtra-13-15 saMbhrama, bhaya, duHkha, Apatti kI kAraNa se sahasAt asAvadhAnI
kI kAraNa se yA parAdhInatA se vrata sambandhI yadi koI aticAra sevana kare to
tadubhaya yAni AlocanA aura pratikramaNa donoM prAyazcitta AtA hai, duSTa
cintavana, duSTa bhASaNa, duSTa ceSTita yAni mana, vacana yA kAyA se saMyama
virodhI kArya kA bAra-bAra pravartana  /  vo upayoga pariNata sAdhu bhI ina
sabako daivasika Adi aticAra ke rUpa se na jAne, to aura sarva bhI utsarga aura
apavAda se darzana, jJAna, cAritra kA jo aticAra usakA kAraNa se yA sahasAt
sevana huA ho to tadubhaya prAyazcitta AtA hai| (gAthA 16-17 meM 'viveka'' yogya
prAyazcitta batAte haiM  / ) sUtra-16-17 azana Adi rUpa piMDa, upadhi, zayyA Adi
ko gItArtha sUtrAnusAra upayoga se grahaNa kare vo yaha zuddha nahIM hai aisA
mAne yA niraticAra-zuddha vidhivat paraThave, kAla se asaThapana se pahalI
porasI se lAkara cauthI taka rakhe, kSetra se AdhA yojana dUra se lAkara rakhe,
sUrya nIkalane se pahale yA asta hone ke bAda grahaNa kare  /  yAni grahaNa
karane ke bAda sUrya nahIM nIkalA yA asta huA aisA mAne, glAna-bAla Adi kI
kAraNa se azana Adi grahaNa kiyA ho, vidhivat pariSThApana kiyA ho to ina
sabameM viveka-yogya' prAyazcitta AtA hai| (aba kAUssagga prAyazcitta batAte
haiM  / ) sUtra-18 gamana, Agamana, vihAra, sUtra ke uddeza Adi, sAvadha yA
niravadya svapna Adi, nA~va, nadI se jalamArga pAra karanA una sabameM
kAyotsarga prAyazcitta  /  sUtra-19 bhojana, pAna, zayana, Asana, caitya,
zramaNa, vasati, mala-mUtra, gamana meM 25 zvasocchvAsa (vartamAna meM jise
logassa yAni IriyAvahI kahate haiM vo) kAUssagga prAyazcitta AtA hai  /  sUtra -
20 sau hAtha pramANa yAni so kadama bhUmi vasati bAhara gamanAgamana meM paccIsa
zvAsocchavAsa, prANAtipAta, hiMsA kA sapanA Ae to so zvAsocchvAsa aura maithuna
ke sapane meM 108 zvAsocchvAsa kAUssagga kA prAyazcitta AtA hai sUtra-21 dina
sambandhI pratikramaNa meM pahale 50 ke bAda 25-25 zvAsocchavAsa pramANa, rAtri
pratikramaNa meM 25-25 zvAsocchvAsa pramANa, pavikha pratikramaNa meM 300
zvAsocchvAsa, caumAsI pratikramaNa meM 500 zvAsocchvAsa, saMvatsarI meM 1008
zvAsocchvAsa pramANa kAUssagga prAyazcitta AtA hai| arthAt vartamAna praNAlI
anusAra daivasika meM logassa do-eka-eka, rAtri meM logassa eka-eka, pavikha meM
12 logassa, caumAsI meM 20 logassa aura saMvatsarI muni dIparatnasAgara kRt
"(jItakalpa)" Agama sUtra-hindI anuvAda" Page 6

Page #7 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Agam Sutra 38, Chhed Sutra-5, 'Jitkalp'**  **Sutra-22** Knowing the Kausagg
Pratikraman for one Navkar Praman for 40 people.  **Sutra-23-25** Knowing the
Kausagg Pratikraman for 27 breaths for the purpose and objective of the Sutra,
and for reading the Sutra (while explaining) for eight breaths (one Navkar
Praman). (Now the verses related to Tapa Pratikraman are being told.)
**Sutra-26** There are two types of Atichar related to Jnanaachar - from Ogh and
from Vibhag. From Vibhag, the order of practice is Uddeshak, Adhyayan, Shruta
Skandh, Ang. In that relation, there are eight Atichar - Kal, Vinay, Bahuman,
Updhan, Aninhvan, Vyanjan, Arth, Tadubhay. The transgression in these eight
Achars is Atichar related to Jnanaachar. In that, for Uddeshak Atichar due to
Anagadh reason, there is one Nivi, for Adhyayan Atichar, there is Purimadd, for
Shruta Skandh Atichar, there is Ekasana, and for Ang related Atichar, there is
Ayambik Tapa Pratikraman. If the reason is Agadh, then for the same fault, there
is Tapa Pratikraman up to the eighth Paryant of Purimadd. That Vibhag
Pratikraman and from Ogh, for any Sutra, there is Upavas Tapa Pratikraman, and
from Arth, for unobtained or inappropriate, there is also Upavas Tapa for giving
something like reading.  **Sutra-27** Do not transgress Kal-Anuyog, do not clean
the Sutra, Arth, or food ground, do not give up Vigei, do not sit down on the
Sutra-Arth, then there is one Upavas Tapa Pratikraman.  **Sutra-28** There are
two types of Jog - Agadh and Anagadh. Both have two divisions - from Sarv and
from Desh. From Sarv means Ayambil, and from Desh means taking Vigei by doing
Kausagg. If Ayambil breaks in Agadh Jog, then there are two Upavas, and in Desh
Bhang, there is one Upavas. In Anagadh, there are two Upavas in Sarv Bhang and
Ayambil Tapa in Desh Bhang.  **Sutra-29-30** Doubt, desire, Vitigicchha,
Moohdristi, Anupabrinhna, Asthiri Karan, Avatasaly, Aprabhavna - these eight
Darshan Atichar, if consumed from Desh, meaning in some part, then there is one
Upavas Tapa, and for the increase of Mithyatva, there is one Upavas. Such Ogh
Pratikraman should be considered, and the Sadhu who consumes these eight
divisions from Desh, should know the Pratikraman Tapa as Purimadu for Sadhu,
Ratnadhik for Ekasana, Upadhyay for Ayambil, and Acharya for Upavas.
**Sutra-31** In the same way, for every Sadhu, there is Pratikraman Tapa up to
Purimadd, etc., Upavas, for not increasing, strengthening, etc., the Upbrinhna-
Samyam. And then, for having Mamtav for Passatha, Avasann-Kushila, etc., due to
the help of the family, for taking care of Shravak, etc., or for having
Vatsalya, there is Pratikraman Tapa like Nivi-Purimadd, etc. Here, one should
have Mamtav, etc., Alamban from all sides with complete freedom from fault, with
the intention of making the Sadharmik a Samyami, or for the concern or
satisfaction of the Kula Sangha-Gana, etc.  **Sutra-32** For organizing a
Ekendriya Jiva, there is Nivi Tapa. Giving pain to these Jivas or causing
trouble with a stronger operation, that is told in two divisions - Anagadh and
Agadh. For doing this due to Anagadh reason, there is Purimadd Tapa, and for
Agadh reason, there is Ekasana Tapa Pratikraman.  **Muni Diparatnasagar Krit
"(Jitkalp)" Agam Sutra-Hindi Anuvad** Page 7

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama sUtra 38, chedasUtra-5, 'jItakalpa' meM 40 logassa para eka navakAra
pramANa kAUssagga prAyazcitta jaannaa| sUtra - 22 sUtra ke uddeza-samuddeza-
anujJA meM 27 zvAsocchvAsa pramANa, sUtra paThThavaNa ke lie (sajjhAya
paraThavate hue) ATha zvAsocchvAsa pramANa (1 navakAra pramANa) kAUssagga
prAyazcitta jAnanA caahie| (aba tapa prAyazcitta ke sambandhita gAthA batAte
haiM  / ) sUtra- 23-25 jJAnAcAra sambandhI aticAra ogha se aura vibhAga se do
taraha se haiM  /  vibhAga se uddezaka, adhyayana, zrutaskaMdha, aMga yaha
paripATI krama haiM  /  usa sambandha se kAla kA atikramaNa Adi ATha aticAra
haiM - kAla, vinaya, bahumAna, upadhAna, aniNhavaNa, vyaMjana, artha, tadubhaya
ATha AcAra meM jo atikramaNa vaha jJAnAcAra sambandhI aticAra, usameM anAgAr3ha
kAraNa se uddezaka aticAra ke lie eka nIvi, adhyayana aticAra meM purimaDDa,
zrutaskandha aticAra ke lie ekAsaNA, aMga sambandhI aticAra ke lie AyaMbika tapa
prAyazcitta AtA hai  /  AgAr3ha kAraNa ho to yahI doSa ke lie purimaDDa ke
aThThama paryanta tapa prAyazcitta hai  /  vo vibhAga prAyazcitta aura ogha se
kisI bhI sUtra ke lie upavAsa tapa prAyazcitta aura artha se aprApta yA anucita
ko vAcanAdi dene meM bhI upavAsa tapa  /  sUtra - 26 kAla-anuyoga kA
pratikramaNa na kare, sUtra, artha yA bhojana bhUmi kA pramArjana na kare, vigaI
tyAga na kare, sUtra-artha niSadyA na kare to eka upavAsa tapa prAyazcitta  /
sUtra - 27 joga do prakAra se haiM-AgAr3ha aura aNAgAr3ha  /  donoM ke do bheda
haiM  /  sarva se aura deza se  /  sarva se yAni AyaMbila aura deza se yAni
kAUssagga karake vigaI grahaNa karanA vo  /  yadi AgAr3ha joga meM AyaMbila tUTa
jAe to do upavAsa aura deza bhaMga meM eka upavAsa, aNAgAr3ha meM sarvabhaMge do
upavAsa aura dezabhaMge AyaMbila tapa  /  sUtra - 28 zaMkA, kAMkSA, vitigicchA,
mUr3hadRSTi, anupabRMhaNA, asthirikaraNa, avAtsalya, aprabhAvanA yaha ATha
darzanAticAra kA sevana deza se yAni ki kucha aMza meM karanevAle ko eka upavAsa
tapa, mithyAtva kI vRddhi ke lie eka upavAsa aise ogha prAyazcitta mAnanA aura
zaMkA Adi ATha vibhAga deza se sevana karanevAle sAdhu ko purimaDU, ratnAdhika
ko ekAsaNA, upAdhyAya ko AyaMbila, AcArya ko upavAsa tapa prAyazcitta jAnanA  /
sUtra - 29-30 usa prakAra pratyeka sAdhu ko upabRMhaNA-saMyama kI vRddhi puSTi
Adi na karanevAle ko purimaDDa Adi upavAsa paryanta prAyazcitta tapa AtA hai
aura phira parivAra kI sahAya nimitta se pAsatthA, avasanna-kuzIla Adi kA
mamatva karanevAle ko, zrAvaka Adi kI paripAlanA karanevAle ko yA vAtsalya
rakhanevAle ko nivi-purimaDDa Adi prAyazcitta tapa AtA hai  /  yahA~ yaha
sAdharmika ko saMyamI karanA yA kula saMgha-gaNa Adi kI phikra yA tRpti kare
aisI buddhi se sarva taraha se nirdoSapana se mamatva Adi Alambana honA caahie|
sUtra - 31 ekendriya jIva ko saMghaTana karate nIvitapa, ina jIva ko paritApa
denA yA gAr3hatara saMcAlana se upadrava karanA vo aNAgAr3ha aura AgAr3ha do
bheda se batAyA aNAgAr3ha kI kAraNa se aisA karane se purimaDDa tapa aura
aNAgAr3ha kAraNa se ekAsaNA tapa prAyazcitta tapa AtA hai| muni dIparatnasAgara
kRt "(jItakalpa)" Agama sUtra-hindI anuvAda" Page 7

Page #8 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Agam Sutra 38, Chhed Sutra-5, 'Jitkalp' Sutra - 32** Collision, affliction or
harassment of infinite-bodied plants, two, three, four-sensed beings, from
Purimadd to fasting, and the formation of five-sensed beings, from Ekasana,
Anagadh affliction to Ayambil, from Agadh affliction to fasting, penance comes
from harassment, one Kalyanak penance comes. Sutra-33 False speech, non-payment,
possession, these three, for those who consume them from substance, field, time
or emotion, from the lowest to Ekasana, from the middle to Ayambil, from the
highest to one fasting penance. Sutra - 34 If clothes, vessels, vessel-bands
etc. are torn, if they are smeared with oil, ghee etc., then one fast, if they
are in the presence of sand, harad, medicine etc., then one fast, if they are in
the presence of gad, ghee, oil etc., then six, if they are in the presence of
others, then three fasting penances. Sutra-35-43 This translation of nine verses
has been done with the help of "Jitkalp Charni". Two types of objectives, from
the general flow and from the division. From the general, limited alms-giving,
similar faults, Purim, and from the division, three types, Uddesho-krit and
Karma Uddesho, for Purimak, for Kritdosh, Ekasana, and for Karmadosh, Ayambil
and fasting penance. Two types of Puti dosh, subtle and gross. Smoke, embers
etc. are subtle dosh, tools and food-drink are gross dosh, in which for tool-
puti dosh, Purimadd, and for food-drink Puti dosh, Ekasana-penance. Mixed-born
dosh in two ways - Javantiy and Pakhand-Javantiy, for mixed-born Javantiy,
Ayambil, and for Pakhand-mixed, fasting, establishment dosh in two ways, for
short-term, Nivi, and for long-term, Purimadu, Prabhutik dosh in two ways, for
subtle, Nivi, for gross, fasting, Prakrishtakaran dosh in two ways, if it is not
revealed, then Purimadu, and if it is revealed, then Ayambil, for Krit dosh,
Ayambil, for Pramit dosh and Parivartit dosh in two ways, if it is worldly, then
Ayambil, if it is transcendental, then Purimadu, for Ahrut dosh in two ways, if
it is from one's own village, then Purimadu, if it is from another village, then
Ayambil. Ubhinn dosh in two ways, if it is Dadar, then Purimadd, and if it is a
closed door-cupboard, then Ayambil. _ Malopharit dosh in two ways - from the
lowest, Purimadd, and from the highest, Ayambil, if there is Achedya dosh, then
Ayambil, for Anisrusht dosh, Ayambil, for Adhyayapurk dosh in three ways -
Javantiy, Pakhand-mixed, Sadhu-mixed. In Javantiy dosh, Purimadu, and for the
other two, Ekasana. Dhatri Duti-nimitt Aajiv, Vanimag, those five dosh, for
Ayambil, Tigichchha in two ways, if it is subtle, then Purimadu, if it is gross,
then Ayambil, in Krodh-Man dosh, Ayambil, for Maya-dosh, Ekasana. For Lobh dosh,
fasting, for Sansthav dosh in two ways, for Vachan Sansthav, Purimadu, for
Sambandhi Sansthav, Ayambil, for Vidya, Mantra, Churn, Jog, all have Ayambil
penance. In Sankit dosh, the penance for which there is doubt comes.
Sachittasansarg dosh in three ways - (1) In Prithvi Kay Sansarg dosh, Nivi, in
mixed Kardam, Purimadd, in unmixed Kardam, Ayambil, (2) In water-mixed, Nivi,
(3) In plant-mixed, if it is mixed, then Purimadu, if it is infinite-bodied
mixed, then Ekasana, in Pihit dosh, if it is later Pihit, then Ayambil, if it is
Parampra Pihit, then Ekasanu, if it is Saharit dosh, then from Nivi to fasting.
Dayarayachak dosh, Ayambil-fasting penance, in Sansakt dosh, Ayambil, in
Oyatanthiya etc., Ayambil, in Unmishra, from Nivi to fasting penance, Aparinat
dosh in two ways, in Prithvi etc. five immovable, Ayambil, but if it is
infinite-bodied plant, then fasting, if Chardit dosh is attached, then Ayambil
penance should be known. In Sanayana dosh, Ayambil, in Ingal dosh, fasting, in
Dhumra, unnecessary food-quantity excess dosh, Ayambil. Muni Diparatnasagar Krit
"(Jitkalp)" Agam Sutra-Hindi Translation" Page 8

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama sUtra 38, chedasUtra-5, 'jItakalpa' sUtra - 32 anantakAya vanaspati, do,
tIna, cAra indriyavAle jIva ko saMghaTTana, paritApa yA upadrava karane se
purimaDDa se upavAsa paryanta aura paMcendriya kA saMghaTana karate hue ekAsaNA,
aNAgAr3ha paritApa se AyaMbila, AgAr3ha paritApa se upavAsa tapa prAyazcitta AtA
hai upadrava karane se eka kalyANaka tapa prAyazcitta AtA hai| sUtra-33
mRSAvAda, adatta, parigraha yaha tInoM dravya-kSetra-kAla yA bhAva se sevana
karanevAle ko jaghanya se ekAsaNA, madhyama se AyaMbila, utkRSTa se eka upavAsa
prAyazcitta  /  sUtra - 34 vastra. pAtra, pAtraba~dha Adi kharaDa jAe, tela, ghI
Adi ke lepavAle rahe to eka upavAsa, sa~Tha, harar3e auSadha Adi kI saMnidhi se
eka upavAsa. gaDa, ghI, tela Adi saMnidhi se chaThU, bAkI saMnidhi se tIna
upavAsa tapa prAyazcitta satra-35-43 yaha nau gAthA kA "jItakalpa carNI' kI
sahAyatA se kiyA gayA anuvAda yahA~ batAyA hai| auddezika ke do bheda ogha-
sAmAnya se aura vibhAga se  /  sAmAnya se parimita bhikSAdAna samAna doSa meM
purima aura vibhAga se tIna bheda uddezo-kRta aura karma uddezo ke lie purimaka,
kRtadoSa ke lie ekAsaNA aura karmadoSa ke lie AyaMbila aura upavAsa tapa
prAyazcitta  /  pUti doSa ke do bheda sUkSma aura bAdara  /  dhUma aMgAra Adi
sUkSma doSa, upakaraNa aura bhojana-pAna do bAdara doSa jisameM upakaraNabhUti
doSa ke lie purimaDDha aura bhojana-pAna pUti doSa ke lie ekAsaNA-tapa
prAyazcitta  /  mizrajAta doSa do taraha se-jAvaMtiya aura pAkhaMDa-jAvaMtiya
mizra jAta ke lie AyaMbila aura pAkhaMDamizra ke lie upavAsa, sthApanA doSa do
taraha se alpakAlina ke lie nIvi aura dIrghakAlina ke lie purimaDU, prAbhRtika
doSa do taraha se sUkSma ke lie nIvi, bAdara ke lie upavAsa, prakRSTakaraNa doSa
do taraha se aprakaTa ho to purimaDDU aura prakaTa vyakta rUpa se AyaMbila,
krIta doSa ke lie AyaMbila, prAmitya doSa aura parivartIta doSa do tarIke
selaukIka ho to AyaMbila, lokottara ho to purimaDDU, AhRta doSa do taraha se
apane gA~va se ho to purimaDU, dUsare gA~va se ho to AyaMbila  /  ubhinna doSa
do taraha se dAdara ho to purimaDDa aura banda daravAjA-alamArI khole to
aayNbil| _ mAlopahRta doSa do taraha se-jaghanya se purimaDDa aura utkRSTa se
AyaMbila, Achedya doSa ho to AyaMbila, anisRSTa doSa ke lie AyaMbila,
adhyayapUraka doSa tIna taraha se-jAvaMtiya, pAkhaMDamizra, sAdhumizra  /
jAvaMtiya doSa meM purimaDU aura bAkI donoM ke lie ekAsaNA  /  dhAtri dUti-
nimitta AjIva, vaNImaga vo pA~ca doSa ke lie AyaMbila tigIcchA do tarIke se
sUkSma ho to purimaDDU, bAdara ho to AyaMbila, krodha-mAna doSa meM AyaMbila
mAyA-doSa ke lie ekAsaNA  /  lobha doSa ke lie upavAsa, saMstava doSa do taraha
se vacana saMstava ke lie purimaDU, sambandhI saMstava ke lie AyaMbila, vidyA,
maMtra, cUrNa, joga sarva meM AyaMbila tapa prAyazcitta  /  zaMkita doSa meM
jisa doSa kI zaMkA ho vo prAyazcitta AtA hai| sacittasaMsarga doSa tIna taraha
se-(1) pRthvI kAya saMsarga doSa meM nIvi, mizra kardama meM purimaDDa nirmizra
kardama meM AyaMbila, (2) jala mizrita meM nIvi, (3) vanaspati mizrita meM
pratyeka mizrita ho to purimaDU, anantakAya mizra ho to ekAsaNA, pihita doSa meM
anantara pihita ho to AyaMbila, paraMpara pihita ho to ekAsaNu, sAharita doSa ho
to nIvi se upavAsa paryanta  /  dAyArayAcaka doSa AyaMbila-upavAsa tapa,
saMsakta doSa meM AyaMbila, oyataMtiya Adi meM AyaMbila, unmizra nIvi se upavAsa
paryanta tapa, apariNata doSa do taraha se pRthvI Adi pA~ca sthAvara meM
AyaMbila lekina yadi anantakAya vanaspati ho to upavAsa, chardita doSa lage to
AyaMbila tapa prAyazcitta jAnanA  /  saMyojanA doSame AyaMbila, iMgAladoSa meM
upavAsa, dhUmra, akAraNa bhojana-pramANa atirikta doSa meM AyaMbila muni
dIparatnasAgara kRt "(jItakalpa)" Agama sUtra-hindI anuvAda" Page 8

Page #9 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Āgama Sūtra 38, Chhedasūtra-5, 'Jītakalpa' Sūtra - 44  For all the reasons
mentioned for Pratikramṇa-Prāyaścitta due to Sahasāt and Anābhōga, if one
consumes them knowingly, or repeatedly, or in excess, then in all these cases,
one should know the Nīvi Tapa Prāyaścitta. Sūtra - 45  Running, crossing, moving
quickly, playing, swimming by creating illusions, speaking in a loud voice,
singing, sneezing loudly, making sounds like a peacock or parrot, in all these
cases, Upavāsa Tapa Prāyaścitta. Sūtra - 46-47  Three types of Upādhi are
mentioned: Jghanya, Madhyama and Utkṛṣṭa. If they fall and are found again, and
the Paḍilehaṇa remains, then for the four - Muhpaṭṭi, Pātra Kesarikā, Guchchha,
Pātra Sthāpanaka - Nīvi Tapa, for the six - Paḍala, Pātrabandha, Chōlapatṭaka,
Mātraka, Rajōharaṇa Rajastrāṇa - Purimaḍḍa Tapa, and for the four - Utkṛṣṭa
Pātra and three Vastra - Ekāsana Tapa Prāyaścitta. If they are forgotten, then
Āyambila Tapa. If they are taken away, lost, or washed, then for the Jghanya
Upādhi - Ekāsana, for the Madhyama - Āyambila, and for the Utkṛṣṭa Upādhi -
Upavāsa. If one takes something without informing the Ācārya, or without giving
it through the Ācārya, or if one eats it and gives it to others, then for the
Jghanya Upādhi - Ekāsana, and for the Utkṛṣṭa - Upavāsa Tapa Prāyaścitta. Sūtra
- 48  If Muhpaṭṭi is torn, then Nīvi, if Rajōharaṇa is torn, then Upavāsa, if it
is destroyed or ruined, then for Muhpaṭṭi - Upavāsa, and for Rajōharaṇa - Chaṭha
Tapa Prāyaścitta. Sūtra - 49  If one transgresses the time and place for food,
then Nīvi, if one eats that transgressed food, then Upavāsa, if one eats it
unlawfully, then Purimaḍḍu Tapa Prāyaścitta. Sūtra - 50-51  If food and water
are not properly collected, if one does not perform Paḍilehaṇa of excreta,
urine, time, and earth, then Nīvi. If one does not perform Navakārsi-Pōrisi etc.
Paṭṭakkhaṇa, or if one breaks them after performing them, then Purimaḍḍu. This
is generally said. If one does not take Tapa-Pratima, or if one breaks them
after taking them, then Purimaḍḍu. If one is a Pakkhi, then Āyambila or Upavāsa
Tapa. If one does not perform Tapa according to one's strength, then for
Kṣullaka - Nīvi, for Sthavira - Purimaḍḍu, for Bhikṣu - Ekāsana, for Upādhyāya -
Āyambila, and for Ācārya - Upavāsa. If it is Chōmāsi, then from Kṣullaka to
Ācārya, one should observe Prāyaścitta from Purima to Chaṭhu, and if it is
Samvatsari, then from Ekāsana to Aṭṭhama Tapa Prāyaścitta. Sūtra - 52  If one
does not observe Kāyōtsarga due to sleep or negligence, if one transgresses the
first Pāra of the Guru, if one breaks Kāussagga, if one does it in a hurry, if
one performs Vandana in the same way, then Nīvi-Purimaḍḍu Ekāsana Tapa, and for
all the faults - Āyambila Tapa Prāyaścitta. Sūtra - 53  If one does not perform
one necessary Kāussagga, then Purimaḍḍu-Ekāsana-Āyambila, if one does not
perform all the necessary ones, then Upavāsa. If one sleeps in the night in an
unanticipated place, if one excretes or sleeps during the day, then Upavāsa Tapa
Prāyaścitta. Sūtra - 54  If one holds anger for many days, if one collects
fruits like Kankōla, Lavinga, Jāyaphala, Lahsuna etc., or if one collects
Tannaga-Mōra etc., then Purimaḍḍu. Sūtra - 55  If one eats without a hole or if
one eats something soft and without a reason, then Nīvi. If one eats other grass
while eating it, or if one eats unapproved grass, then... Muni Dīparatnasāgara
Kṛt "(Jītakalpa)" Āgama Sūtra - Hindi Anuvāda" Page 9

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama sUtra 38, chedasUtra-5, 'jItakalpa' sUtra - 44 sahasAt aura anAbhoga se
jo-jo kAraNa se pratikramaNa-prAyazcitta batAyA hai una kAraNa kA Abhoga yAni
jAnate hae sevana kare to bhI bAra-bAra yA ati mAtrA meM kare to sabameM nIvi
tapa prAyazcitta jAnanA  /  sUtra - 45 daur3anA, pAra karanA, zIghra gati meM
jAnA, krIr3A karanA, indrajAla banAkara tairanA, UMcI AvAjha meM bolanA, gIta
gAnA, joroM se chIMkanA, mora-tote kI taraha AvAjha karanA, sarva meM upavAsa-
tapa prAyazcitta  /  sUtra - 46-47 tIna taraha kI upadhi batAI hai jaghanya,
madhyama aura utkRSTa vo gira jAe aura phira se mile, paDilehaNa karanA bAkI
rahe to jaghanya muhapatti, pAtra kesarikA, gucchA, pAtra sthApanaka una cAra ke
lie nIvi tapa, madhyama par3ala, pAtraba~dha, colapaTTaka, mAtraka, rajoharaNa
rajastrANa una cha ke lie purimaDDa tapa aura utkRSTa-pAtra aura tIna vastra una
cAra ke lie ekAsaNA tapa prAyazcitta visara jAe to AyaMbila tapa, koI le jAe yA
kho jAe yA dhoe to jaghanya upadhi-ekAsaNu madhyama ke lie AyaMbila, utkRSTa
upadhi ke lie upavAsa  /  AcAryAdika ko nivedana kie binA le AcAryadi ke jhariye
binA die le bhUgate-dUsaroM ko de to bhI jaghanya upadhi ke lie ekAsaNA yAvat
utkRSTa ke lie upavAsa tapa prAyazcitta  /  sUtra -48 muhapatti phAr3a de to
nIvi, rajoharaNa phAr3a de to upavAsa, nAza yA vinAza kare to muhapatti ke lie
upavAsa aura rajoharaNa ke lie chaTha tapa prAyazcitta AtA hai| sUtra-49 bhojana
meM kAla aura kSetra kA atikramaNa kare to nIvi, vo atikramita bhojana bhugate
to upavAsa, avidhi se paraThave to purimaDU tapa prAyazcitta  /  sUtra - 50-51
bhojana-pAnI na ba~ke, mala-mUtra-kAla bhUmi kA paDilehaNa na kare to nIvi
navakArasI-porIsi Adi paccakakhANa na kare yA lekara tor3a de to purimaDDU yaha
Ama tora para kahA, tapa-pratimA abhigraha na le, lekara tor3a de to bhI
purimaDDa pakkhi ho to AyaMbila yA upavAsa tapa, zakti anusAra tapa na kare to
kSullaka ko nIvi, sthavira ko purimaDU, bhikSu ko ekAsaNA, upAdhyAya ko
AyaMbila, AcArya ko upavAsa  /  comAsI ho to kSullaka se AcArya ko kramazaH
purima se chaThU, saMvatsarI ko kramazaH ekAsaNA se aThThama tapa prAyazcitta
mAnanA caahie| satra-52 nidrA yA pramAda se kAyotsarga pAlana na kare, guru ke
pahale pAre, kAUssagga bhaMga kare, jaldabAjhI meM kare, usI taraha hI vaMdana
kare, to nIvi-purimaDU ekAsaNA tapa aura sAre doSa ke lie AyaMbila tapa
prAyazcitta  /  sUtra - 53 eka kAUssagga Avazyaka ko na kare to purimaDDa-
ekAsaNA-AyaMbila, sabhI Avazyaka na kare to upavAsa, pUrve aprekSita bhUmi meM
rAta ko sthaMDila vosirAve, mala-tyAga kare yA dina meM soe to upavAsa tapa
prAyazcitta  /  sUtra-54 kaI dina taka krodha rakhe, kaMkola nAma kA phala,
laviMga, jAyaphala, lahasUna Adi kA taNNaga-mora Adi kA saMgraha kare to
purimdddd| sUtra- 55 _ chidra rahita yA komala aura binA kAraNa bhugate to nIvi,
anya ghAsa ko bhugatate hue yA apratilekhita ghAsa muni dIparatnasAgara kRt
"(jItakalpa)" Agama sUtra-hindI anuvAda" Page 9

Page #10 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Āgama Sūtra 38, Cheda Sūtra-5, 'Jītakalpa'  **Sūtra-56** The Purimaḍ tapa
prāyaścitta is performed while lying down on the 'Jītakalpa'.  **Sūtra-57**
Entering a house for food without the permission of the Ācārya, or engaging in
parākrama gopa, requires an ekāsaṇā prāyaścitta. According to the Jīta
vyavahāra, if the act is done without māyā, then an ekāsaṇā is required, but if
it is done with māyā, then a upavāsa is required.  **Sūtra-58** Activities like
running and jumping have the potential to cause the death of the five senses.
Acts like angadāna, śukra niṣkramaṇa, and other complex karmas, consuming food
that is half-cooked, and prolonged sexual intercourse, all require a
pañcakalyāṇaka prāyaścitta tapa.  **Sūtra-59** One should not perform paḍilehaṇa
during the last part of the first porīsi, or during the pādono porīsi, or during
the first and last porīsi. If one performs śuddhi during the cāumāsī or on the
Sanvatsarī day, then a pañcakalyāṇaka tapa prāyaścitta is required.
**Sūtra-60** Those who do not have faith in the cheda (prāyaścitta), who do not
know whether their paryaya is chedita or achedita, and who are proud of their
paryaya, require a cheda prāyaścitta. This is the Jīta vyavahāra for the
gaṇādhipati. If the gaṇādhipati requires a cheda prāyaścitta, then they should
perform the appropriate tapa prāyaścitta.  **Sūtra-61** For those prāyaścitta
not mentioned in this Jīta vyavahāra, I will briefly mention them here. They are
the ones mentioned in the Nīsiha-vyavahāra-kappa. They should be observed for a
period of six months.  **Sūtra-62** (Here, the term 'sarva bheda' is used to
encompass all offenses, while the term 'bhinna' is used to refer to offenses
that are different from the general category.) For all offenses mentioned in the
Sūtra vyavahāra, the appropriate nīvi tapa should be performed according to the
Jīta vyavahāra. Generally, the following prāyaścitta tapas should be performed:
Purimaḍ for a laghu māsa, ekāsaṇā for a guru māsa, āyambila for a laghu cāumāsa,
upavāsa for a guru cāumāsa, ṣaṭṭha for a laghu ṣaḍ māsa, and aṭṭhama for a guru
ṣaḍ māsa.  **Sūtra-63** In all these cases, the tapas mentioned in the Siddhānta
should be followed, and the nīvi to aṭṭhama tapas should be performed according
to the Jīta vyavahāra.  **Sūtra-64-67** Regarding the prāyaścitta mentioned
above, it is important to note that all prāyaścitta are categorized as general
and specific. They should be observed according to the specific instructions
regarding dāna-vibhāga, dravya-kṣetra-kāla-bhāva-puruṣa paḍisevī. This means
that one should be aware of the dravya, etc., and give accordingly. One should
also consider the amount, whether it is less, more, or moderate, and give
according to one's capacity. The prāyaścitta should be given according to the
Jīta vyavahāra, considering the food, etc., of the recipient, and the
availability of resources in the region. Where food, etc., is scarce, the
prāyaścitta should be less. One should also consider the nature of the kṣetra,
whether it is rūkṣa, snigdha, or ordinary. In a rūkṣa kṣetra, the prāyaścitta
should be less, in an ordinary kṣetra, it should be as mentioned in the Jīta
vyavahāra, and in a snigdha kṣetra, it should be more. The prāyaścitta should be
performed in all three kālas (seasons) in three different ways. Summer is a
rūkṣa kāla, winter is an ordinary kāla, and the rainy season is a snigdha kāla.
**Muni Dīparatnasāgara Kṛt "(Jītakalpa)" Āgama Sūtra-Hindi Anuvāda"** **Page
10**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama sUtra 38, chedasUtra-5, 'jItakalpa' para zayana karavAte purimaDa tapa
prAyazcitta  /  sUtra-56 AcArya kI AjJA binA sthApanA kula meM bhojana ke lie
praveze to ekAsaNA, parAkrama gope to ekAsaNA, usa anusAra jIta vyavahAra hai  /
sUtra vyavahAra anusAra mAyA rahita ho to ekAsaNA mAyA sahita ho to upavAsa  /
sUtra-57 daur3anA-kUdanA Adi meM vartate paMcendriya ke vadha kI saMbhAvanA hai
/  aMgAdAna-zukra niSkramaNa Adi saMkliSTa karma meM kAphI aticAra lage,
AdhAkarmAdi sevana rasa se glAna Adi kA lambA sahavAsa kare una saba meM
paMcakalyANaka prAyazcitta tapa AtA hai| sUtra-58 sarva upadhi Adi ko dhAraNa
karate hue prathama porIsi ke antima hisse meM yAni pAdonaporIsi ke vakta yA
prathama aura antima porIsi ke avasara para paDilehaNa na kare  /  comAsI meM yA
saMvatsarI ke dina zuddhi kare to paMcakalyANaka tapa prAyazcitta  /  sUtra- 59
jo cheda (prAyazcitta) kI zraddhA nahIM karatA  /  merA paryAya chedita yA na
chedita aisA nahIM jAnatA  /  abhimAna se paryAya kA garva karatA hai use cheda
Adi prAyazcitta AtA hai| jIta vyavahAra gaNAdhipati ke lie isa prakAra kA hai|
gaNAdhipati ko cheda prAyazcitta AtA ho to bhI tapa ucita prAyazcitta denA
caahie| sUtra - 60 isa jIta vyavahAra meM jo prAyazcitta nahIM batAe usa
prAyazcitta sthAna ko vartamAna meM saMkSepa se maiM kahatA hU~ jo nisIha-
vyavahAra-kappo meM batAe gae haiM  /  use tapa se cha mAsa paryanta ke mAnanA
/  sUtra - 61 (bhinna zabda se paccIsa dina grahaNa karane ke lie yahA~ viziSTa
zabda se sarva bheda grahaNa karanA) bhinna aura aviziSTa aise jo-jo aparAdha
sUtra vyavahAra meM batAe una sabake lie jita vyavahAra anusAra nIvi tapa AtA
hai| usameM jyAdAtara itanA ki laghumAsa meM purimaDDha, gurumAsa meM ekAsaNA,
laghucaUmAse AyaMbila, guru caUmAse upavAsa, laghu cha mAse chaThTha, guru cha
mAse aThThama, aise prAyazcitta tapa do| sUtra - 62 ina sabhI prakAra se - sabhI
tapa ke sthAna para yathAkrama siddhAMta meM jo tapa batAe vahA~ jIta vyavahAra
anusAra nIvi se aThThama paryanta tapa khnaa| sUtra - 63 isa prakAra jo
prAyazcitta kahA gayA usake lie vizeSa se kahate haiM ki sabhI prAyazcitta kA
sAmAnya evaM vizeSa meM nirdeza kiyA gayA hai  /  vo dAna-vibhAga se dravya-
kSetra-kAla-bhAva-puruSa paDisevI vizeSa se mAnanA  /  yAni dravya Adi ko
jAnakara usa prakAra denA  /  kama adhika yA sahaja usa anusAra zakti vizeSa
dekhakara denA  /  sUtra - 64-67 dravya se jisakA AhAra Adi ho, jisa deza meM vo
jyAdA ho, sulabha ho vo jAnakara jIta vyavahAra anusAra prAyazcitta denA  /
jahA~ AhAra Adi kama ho, durlabha ho vahA~ kama prAyazcitta do  /  kSetra rUkSa-
snigdha yA sAdhAraNa hai yaha jAnakara rUkSa meM kama, sAdhAraNa meM jisa taraha
se jIta vyavahAra meM kahA ho aise aura snigdha meM adhika prAyazcitta do, usa
prakAra tInoM kAla meM tInoM tarIke se prAyazcitta do  /  garmI rUkSa kAla hai,
zardI sAdhAraNa kAla hai aura varSA snigdha muni dIparatnasAgara kRt
"(jItakalpa)" Agama sUtra-hindI anuvAda" Page 10

Page #11 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Agam Sutra 38, Chhed Sutra-5, 'Jita Kalpa' is the time.** In summer, the
penance should be given in order: least - one fast, medium - sixth, best -
eighth. In winter, the penance should be given in order: sixth-eighth, four
fasts. In rainy season, the penance should be given in order: eighth-four fasts,
five fasts. According to the Sutra's practical advice, there are nine ways of
conduct. Sutra-68  Knowing the feelings of the healthy and the sick, give the
healthy a little more penance and the sick a little less. Give him as much
penance as he is capable of. Just like the feeling of substance-field, consider
time also as a target. Sutra-69-72  **Whether a man is a 'Gitarth' or an
'Agitarth', whether he is tolerant or intolerant, whether he is straightforward
or deceitful, whether he is a devotee or not, and whether he is an 'Atiparinam'
who only follows exceptions, whether he is endowed with 'Dhriti-Sanghaya' and
both, whether he is deficient in it, whether he is powerful in penance, whether
he is 'Vaiyavacchi', whether he is powerful in both, whether he has no power at
all or is of another kind.**  **Achelka etc. are 'Kalpasthit', 'Parinat',
'Kritajogi', 'Taraman' (skillful) or 'Akalpasthit', 'Aparinat', 'Akritajogi' or
'Ataraman', there are two types of men, in the same way, 'Kalpasthit' can also
be 'Gachchvasi' or 'Jinkalpi'.**  **Among all these men, give more penance to
the one who has more power and qualities, and give less penance to the one who
has less power and qualities, and do not give any penance to the one who is
completely deficient, consider it as 'Jita Vyavahar'.** Sutra-73  There are many
types of sadhus in this 'Jita Vyavahar'. For example, those who commit
'Akritya', 'Agitarth', 'Agnat', for this reason, there are penances from 'Nevi'
to 'Aththam' in 'Jita Vyavahar'. (Now 'Padishevna' is explained.) Sutra-74
**Violence, running, jumping, etc. actions, negligence or the use of 'Kalpa', or
those who use 'Dravya', 'Kshetra', 'Kal' according to their feelings (such men
are called 'Padishevna' i.e. those who use forbidden things).** Sutra-75  Just
as I have said about penance according to 'Jita Vyavahar', should it be given to
those who use it with negligence, i.e. those who use forbidden things? In this
penance, by using 'Pramad-Sthan', increase it by one place. Instead of the
penance from 'Nevi' to 'Aththam' which is considered acceptable, those who use
it with negligence should be given from 'Purimadd' to four fasts (one more
penance in order). Sutra-76  Give the one who commits violence one 'Asana' to
five fasts or six places or the original penance. If 'Kalpa' is used with
effort, i.e. it is used with effort, then give 'Pratikraman' penance or
'Taduphal-Alochana' and 'Pratikraman-Pratikraman' penance. Sutra-77  Even during
the time of 'Alochana', if he hides or deceives, then give more penance to that
'Sanklishta Parinam'. If he scolds and insults due to 'Sanveg Parinam', then
give less penance knowing his pure feeling. Give the same penance to the
'Madhyam Parinam'. Sutra-78  In the same way, if he appears to have more
qualities of 'Dravya-Kshetra-Kal' feeling, then give more penance for the sake
of 'Guru Seva'. If he appears to be devoid of 'Dravya-Kshetra-Kal' feeling, then
give less penance, and if he appears to be very less, then do not give any
penance. **Muni Diparatnasagar Krit "(Jita Kalpa)" Agam Sutra-Hindi
Translation** Page 11

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama sUtra 38, chedasUtra-5, 'jItakalpa' kAla hai  /  garmI meM krama se
jaghanya eka upavAsa, madhyama chaThTha, utkRSTa aThuma, zardI meM krama se
chaThTha-aThuma, cAra upavAsa, varSA meM krama se aThuma-cAra upavAsa, pA~ca
upavAsa tapa prAyazcitta denA  /  sUtra vyavahAra upadeza anusAra isa taraha nau
tarIke se vyavahAra haiN| sUtra-68 nirogI aura glAna aise bhAva jAnakara nirogI
ko kucha jyAdA aura glAna ko thor3A kama prAyazcitta do  /  jisakI jitanI zakti
ho utanA prAyazcitta use do  /  dravya-kSetra bhAva kI taraha kAla ko bhI lakSya
meM lo| sUtra - 69-72 _puruSa meM koI gItArtha ho koI agItArtha ho, koI
sahanazIla ho, koI asahanazIla ho, koI Rju ho koI mAyAvI ho, kucha zraddhA
pariNAmI ho, kucha apariNAmI ho, aura kucha apavAda kA hI AcaraNa karanevAle
atipariNAmI bhI ho, kucha dhRti-saMghayaNa aura ubhaya se saMpanna ho, kucha
usase hina ho, kucha tapa zaktivAle ho, kucha vaiyAvaccI ho, kucha donoM
tAkatavAle ho, kucha meM eka bhI zakti na ho yA anya taraha ke ho  /  Acelaka
Adi kalpasthita, pariNata, kRtajogI, taramANa (kuzala) yA akalpasthita,
apariNata, akRtajogI yA ataramANa aise do taraha ke puruSa ho usI taraha
kalpasthita bhI gacchavAsI yA jinakalpI ho sake  /  ina sabhI puruSa meM jisakI
jitanI zakti guNa jyAdA use adhika prAyazcitta do aura hIna sattvavAle ko
hInatara prAyazcitta do aura sarvathA hIna ko prAyazcitta na do use jIta
vyavahAra maano| sUtra - 73 isa jIta vyavahAra meM kaI taraha ke sAdhu haiM  /
jaise ki akRtya karanevAle, agItArtha, ajJAta isa kAraNa se jIta vyavahAra meM
nIvi se aThThama paryanta tapa prAyazcitta haiN| (aba par3isevaNA' batAte haiM
/ ) sUtra-74 hiMsA, daur3anA, kUdanA Adi kriyA, pramAda yA kalpa kA sevana
karanevAle yA dravya, kSetra, kAla bhAva anusAra pratisevana karanevAle puruSa
(Isa prakAra par3isevaNa yAni niSiddha cIja ko sevana karanevAle kahA  / ) sUtra
- 75 jisa prakAra maiMne jIta vyavahAra anusAra prAyazcitta dAna kahA, vo kyA
pramAda sahita sevana karanevAle ko yAni niSiddha cIja sevana karanevAle ko bhI
de ? isa prAyazcitta meM pramAda-sthAna sevana karake eka sthAna vRddhi karanA
mAnya se jo prAyazcitta nIvi se aThThama paryanta kahA usake bajAya pramAda se
sevana karanevAle ko purimaDDa se cAra upavAsa paryanta (kramazaH eka jyAdA
tapa) denA caahie| sUtra-76 hiMsA karanevAle ko ekAsaNA se pA~ca upavAsa yA cha
sthAna yA mUla prAyazcitta do  /  kalpa par3isevana karake yAni yatanA pUrvaka
sevana kiyA ho to pratikramaNa prAyazcitta yA tadubhala-AlocanA aura
pratikramaNa-prAyazcitta denaa| sUtra - 77 AlocanakAla meM bhI yadi gopave yA
chala kare to usa saMkliSTa pariNAmI ko punaH adhika prAyazcitta do  /  yadi
yadi saMvega pariNAma se niMdA-gardA kare to vo vizuddha bhAva jAnakara kama
prAyazcitta do madhyama pariNAmI ko utanA hI prAyazcitta do| sUtra-78 usa
prakAra jyAdA guNavAna dravya-kSetra-kAla bhAvavAle dikhe to guru sevArthe jyAdA
prAyazcitta do  /  yadi dravyakSetra-kAla-bhAvahIna lage to kama prAyazcitta do
aura ati alpa lage to prAyazcitta na do| muni dIparatnasAgara kRt "(jItakalpa)"
Agama sUtra-hindI anuvAda" Page 11

Page #12 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Āgama Sūtra 38, Chhedasūtra-5, 'Jītakalpa' Sūtra - 79 One who performs other
austerities well, more than Jīta conduct, should not be given Jīta conduct
penance by giving other penances. If one is a Vaivavacchāri, then a little
penance should be given. (Now it is called Chhed penance.) Sūtra-80 Give Chhed
penance to those who are proud of austerity, or are unable to perform austerity,
or who have no faith in austerity, or who cannot restrain themselves from
austerity, or who are Atiparināmi-Apvāda-sevī, or who have few companions.
Sūtra-81-82 Those who are mostly destroyers of Uttaraguṇa, who repeatedly commit
Chheyāvatti, i.e., Chhed āvṛtti, who are Pāsaththa, Osanna Kushīla, etc., even
those who repeatedly commit Vaivavacch of a Sanvigna Sadhu, who perform six-
month austerity in the excellent austerity land, i.e., the rule of Vīra Prabhu,
who have remaining Charitra, give them Chhed penance for five, ten, fifteen
years, or up to six months, or as many Paryāyas as they have taken. (Now the
Mūla penance is explained.) Sūtra-83 Those who repeatedly commit Prāṇātipāta,
the killing of the five senses, sexual intercourse with aversion or pride,
Mṛṣāvāda-Adattādāna or Parigraha from the excellent, give them Mūla penance.
Sūtra - 84 Those who are proud of austerity, who are unable to perform
austerity, who have no faith in austerity, who find fault with or destroy Mūla-
Uttaraguṇa, who abandon Darshan and Charitra, or who abandon duties like
Darshan, etc., such a Shaiksha (Shaiksha, etc., all) also receives Mūla penance.
Sūtra-85-86 Those who are extremely depressed, who commit violence, etc.,
against a householder or other Tirthika, who take or destroy a woman's womb,
such a Sadhu - he has been told to perform austerity, such austerity - Chhed or
Mūla, Anvasthāpya or Pāraṃcita penance, if he transgresses it, then Paryāya
Chhed, Anvasthāpya, Pāraṃcita austerity should be completed, then he should be
established in Mūla penance. In the case of an objection to Mūla, Mūla penance
is repeatedly given. (Now Anvasthāpya penance is explained.) Sūtra - 87 Those
who repeatedly have hatred towards the excellent, who steal with their mind, who
strike with a terrible result and without impartiality, either for their own
side or for the other side, give them Anvasthāpya penance. Sūtra-88 Where
Pāraṃcita penance is given for all offenses by doing enough, there the Upādhyāya
should be given Anvasthāpya penance, where Anvasthāpya penance is given by doing
enough, there also give Anvasthāpya penance. Sūtra - 89 Anvasthāpya is said to
be of four kinds: Linga, Kshetra, Kāla, and Tapa, which cannot be established in
Vrata or Linga, i.e., Vesh, which seems inappropriate for Pravrajyā, give them
Anvasthāpya penance. There are two kinds of Linga: Dravya and Bhāva,
Dravyalinga, i.e., Rajoharaṇa, and Bhāvalinga, i.e., Mahāvrat. Muni
Dīparatnasāgar Kṛt “(Jītakalpa)” Āgama Sūtra-Hindi Anuvāda" - Page 12 Page 12

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama sUtra 38, chedasUtra-5, 'jItakalpa' sUtra - 79 jIta vyavahAra se jyAdA
anya tapa acchI taraha se karanevAle ko anya prAyazcitta dekara jIta vyavahAra
prAyazcitta nahIM denA cAhie  /  vaiyAvaccakArI vaiyAvacca karatA ho taba thor3A
prAyazcitta denA caahie| (aba cheda prAyazcitta kahate haiM  / ) sUtra-80 tapa
garvita yA tapa meM asamartha, tapa kI azraddhA karanevAle, tapa se bhI jo
nigraha nahIM kara sakate, atipariNAmI-apavAda sevI, alpasaMgI ina sabako cheda
prAyazcitta do  /  sUtra-81-82 jyAdAtara uttaraguNa bhaMjaka, bAra-bAra
cheyAvatti yAni cheda AvRtti kare, jo pAsatthA, osanna kuzIla Adi ho, to bhI jo
bAra-bAra saMvigna sAdhu kI vaiyAvacca kare, utkRSTa tapa bhUmi yAni vIra prabhu
ke zAsana meM cha mAsI tapa kare, jo avazeSa cAritravAlA ho use pA~ca, daza,
paMdraha sAla se cha mAsa paryanta yA jitane paryAya dhAraNa kare usa taraha se
cheda prAyazcitta do| (aba mUla prAyazcitta batAte haiM  / ) sUtra-83
prANAtipAta, paMcendriya kA ghAta, aruci yA garva se maithunasevana, utkRSTa se
mRSAvAda-adattAdAna yA parigraha kA sevana kare isa taraha bAra-bAra karanevAle
ko mUla prAyazcitta  /  sUtra -84 tapa garviSTha, tapa sevana meM asamartha,
tapa kI azraddhA karate, mUla-uttara guNa meM doSa lagAnevAle yA bhaMjaka,
darzana aura cAritra se patIta darzana Adi kartavya ko chor3anevAlA, aisA zaikSa
ko bhI (zaikSa Adi sarva ko) mUla prAyazcitta AtA hai| sUtra-85-86 ati avasanna,
gRhastha yA anyatIrthika ke bheda ko hiMsA Adi kAraNa se sevana karanevAlA, strI
garbha kA AdAna yA vinAza karanevAlA aisA sAdhu-use tapa batAyA gayA hai aisA
tapa-cheda yA mUla, anavasthApya yA pAraMcita prAyazcitta use atikrame to
paryAya cheda, anavasthApya, pAraMcita tapa pUrA hone para use mUla prAyazcitta
meM sthApanA krnaa| mUla kI Apatti meM bAra-bAra mUla prAyazcitta AtA hai| (aba
anavasthApya prAyazcitta batAte haiM  / ) sUtra - 87 utkRSTa se bAra-bAra
dveSavAle, citta se corI karanevAlA, svapakSa yA parapakSa ko ghora pariNAma se
aura nirapekSapana se niSkAraNa prahAra kare to anavasthApya prAyazcitta  /
sUtra-88 sarva aparAdha ke lie jahA~-jahA~ kAphI kucha karake pAraMcita
prAyazcitta AtA hai vahA~ upAdhyAya ko anAvasthApya prAyazcitta denA, jahA~
kAphI kucha karake anavasthApya prAyazcitta AtA ho vahA~ bhI anavasthApya
prAyazcitta do| sUtra - 89 liMga, kSetra, kAla aura tapa usa cAra bheda se
anavasthApya kahA hai jo vrata yA liMga-yAni veza meM sthApanA na kara sake,
pravrajyA ke lie anucita lage use anavasthApya prAyazcitta do  /  liMga ke do
bheda dravya aura bhAva, dravyaliMga yAni rajoharaNa aura bhAvaliMga yAni
mahAvrata  /  muni dIparatnasAgara kRt "(jItakalpa)" Agama sUtra-hindI anuvAda"
- Page 12 Page 12

Page #13 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Agam Sutra 38, Chhed Sutra-5, 'Jitkalp' Sutra- 90  For a dravya or bhava
lingi who is engaged in harming oneself or others, and for one who is devoid of
bhava lingi like osanna, etc., the prescribed penance is Anvasthapy. The penance
should be Anvasthapy in the same area where the fault occurred. Sutra- 91  The
duration of the Anvasthapy penance should be equal to the duration of the fault.
There are two types of Anvasthapy faults: Ashatana and Padishevna-Nishiddha
Karma. The Anvasthapy penance for Ashatana is six months for the least severe
and one year for the most severe. The Anvasthapy penance for Padishevna is one
year for the least severe and twelve years for the most severe. Sutra- 92  If
the Anvasthapy penance of twelve years arises due to Padishevna caused by
Utsarga, then due to an exception, a lesser or even lesser penance should be
given, or it should be completely waived. Sutra- 93  (After performing the
Anvasthapy penance) one should also pay respects to the Shaiksha. However, no
one should pay respects to him. After performing the penance, he should
diligently perform Parihar Tapa. He can live with them, but he should not engage
in any interaction or acts of respect, etc.  (Now, the Pariंचित penance is
mentioned.) Sutra- 94  If one has Ashatana towards Tirthankar, Pravachan,
Shruta, Acharya, Ganadhar, Mahardhik, etc., due to Abhinivesha-Kadagraha, then
Pariंचित penance is prescribed. Sutra- 95  If one, while in their own gender
form, repeatedly and openly engages in the service of the king's chief queen,
being influenced by Kshaya-Dushta or Vishaya-Dushta and being overpowered by
raga, then Pariंचित penance is prescribed. Sutra- 96  If one is afflicted by a
great fault due to the arising of Thinaddhi Nidra, is attached to mutual sexual
intercourse, and repeatedly engages in the appropriate penance for Pariंचित,
then Pariंचित penance is prescribed. Sutra- 97  There are four types of
Pariंचित: Ling, Kshetra, Kal, and Tap. Pariंचित penance is prescribed for those
who engage in mutual Padishevna and those who are afflicted by Thinaddhi
Mahadosha. Sutra- 98-99  For the place of entry into a city, country, or
kingdom, such as Vasati, Nivesha, Pado, Vriksh, Rajya, etc., one should perform
Pariंचित for the fault committed in that place. Sutra- 100  The duration of the
Pariंचित penance should be equal to the duration of the fault. There are two
types of Pariंचित: Ashatana and Padishevna. The Ashatana Pariंचित is six months
to one year, and the Padishevna Pariंचित is one year to twelve years. Sutra- 101
After performing the Pariंचित penance, one should keep the Maha-Sattvashaali
alone, like a Jinkalpi, outside the area, at a distance of half a yojana, and
establish him for Tapa. The Acharya should observe him daily.  Muni
Diparatnasagar Krit "(Jitkalp)" Agam Sutra-Hindi Translation" Page 13

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama sUtra 38, chedasUtra-5, 'jItakalpa' sUtra- 90 svapakSa-parapakSa ke ghAta
meM udyata aise dravya yA bhAva liMgI ko aura osanna Adi bhAvaliMga rahita ko
anavasthApya prAyazcitta  /  jina-jina kSetra se doSa lage use usI kSetra meM
anavasthApya prAyazcitta  /  sUtra - 91 jo jitane kAla ke lie doSa meM rahe use
utane kAla ke lie anavasthApya  /  anavasthApya doSa ke do bheda AzAtanA aura
paDisevaNA-niSiddha kArya karanA vo  /  usameM AzAtanA anavasthApya prAyazcitta
jaghanya se cha mAsa aura utkRSTa se eka sAla, paDisevaNa anavasthApya
prAyazcitta jaghanya se eka sAla utkRSTa se bAraha sAla | sUtra- 92 utsarga se
paDisevaNa kAraNa se bAraha sAla kA anavasthApya prAyazcitta Ae aura apavAda se
alpa yA alpatara prAyazcitta do yA sarvathA chor3a do| sUtra-93 vo (anavasthApya
prAyazcitta sevana karake) khuda zaikSa ko bhI vaMdana kare  /  lekina use koI
vaMdana na kare, vo prAyazcitta sevana karake parihAra tapa kA acchI taraha se
sevana kare, usake sAtha saMvAsa ho sake lekina usake sAtha saMvAda yA vaMdana
Adi kriyA na ho ske| (aba pAraMcita prAyazcitta kahate haiM  / ) sUtra- 94
tIrthaMkara, pravacana, zruta, AcArya, gaNadhara, maharddhika una sabakI AzAtanA
kaIM abhiniveSa-kadAgraha se kare use pAraMcita prAyazcitta AtA hai| sUtra-95 jo
svaliMga-veza meM rahA ho vaise kaSAyaduSTa yA viSayaduSTa aura rAga ko vaza
hokara bAra-bAra prakaTa rUpa se rAjA kI agramahiSI kA sevana kare use pAraMcita
prAyazcitta  /  sUtra-96 thiNaddhi nidrA ke udaya se mahAdoSavAlA, anyonya
maithuna Asakta, bAra-bAra pAraMcita ke ucita prAyazcitta meM pravRtta ko
pAraMcita prAyazcitta AtA hai| sUtra - 97 vo pAraMcita cAra taraha se haiM  /
liMga, kSetra, kAla aura tapa se, usameM anyonya par3isevana karake aura
thiNaddhi mahAdoSavAle ko pAraMcita prAyazcitta  /  sUtra - 98-99 kSetra se
vasati, nivesa, pAr3o, vRkSa, rAjya Adi ke pravezasthAna nagara, deza, rAjya meM
jisa doSa kA jisane sevana kiyA ho use usa doSa ke lie vahIM pAraMcika kro|
sUtra - 100 jo jitane kAla ke lie doSa kA sevana kare use utane kAla ke lie
pAraMcita prAyazcitta, pAraMcita do taraha se- AzAtanA aura par3isevaNA, AzAtanA
pAraMcita 6 mAsa se 1 sAla, par3isevaNA prAyazcitta 1 sAla se 12 sAla  /
sUtra-101 pAraMcita prAyazcitta sevana karake mahAsattvazAlI ko akele jinakalpI
kI taraha aura kSetra ke bAhara ardha yojana rakhanA aura tapa ke lie sthApana
karanA, AcArya pratidina usakA avalokana kare  /  muni dIparatnasAgara kRt
"(jItakalpa)" Agama sUtra-hindI anuvAda" Page 13

Page #14 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Āgama Sūtra 38, Chhedasūtra-5, 'Jītakalpa' Sūtra-102 The Anvasthāpya Tapa and
Pāraṃcita Tapa, both Prāyaścitta, have been severed from the last fourteen
Pūrva-Dhara Āchārya Bhadra-Bāhu Svāmī. The rest of the Prāyaścitta will remain
as long as the Śāsana exists. Sūtra - 103 Thus, this Jīta Kalpa-Jīta Vyavahāra
has been briefly explained with compassion and wisdom for the benefit of the
sādhus. Accordingly, one should give Prāyaścitta with full knowledge of its
qualities. (38) Jītakalpa-Chhedasūtra-5, complete Hindi translation by Muni
Dīparatnasāgar Kṛt Muni Dīparatnasāgar Kṛt “(Jītakalpa)” Āgama Sūtra-Hindi
translation" Page 14

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama sUtra 38, chedasUtra-5, 'jItakalpa' sUtra-102 anavasthApya tapa aura
pAraMcita tapa donoM prAyazcitta aMtima caudaha pUrvadhara AcArya bhadrabAhu
svAmI se viccheda hae haiN| bAkI ke prAyazcitta zAsana hai taba taka rheNge|
sUtra - 103 isa prakAra yaha jIta kalpa-jIta vyavahAra saMkSepa se, suvihita
sAdhu kI anukaMpA buddhi se kahA  /  usI anusAra acchI taraha se guNa jAnakara
prAyazcitta dAna karanA  /  (38) jItakalpa-chedasUtra-5 kA muni dIparatnasAgara
kRt hindI anuvAda pUrNa muni dIparatnasAgara kRt "(jItakalpa)" Agama sUtra-hindI
anuvAda" Page 14

Page #15 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Agam Sutra 38, Chhed Sutra-5, Jitkalp' Namo Namo Nimmaldansanas  Pujapaad Shri
Anand-Kshama-Lalit-Sushil-Sudharmasagar Guru Bhyo Nam: 38 Jitkalp   Agam Sutra
Hindi Anuvaad XXXXXXXXX X XXX [Anuvaadak Evam Sampadak] Agam Diwaakar Muni
Diparatnasagarji [ M.Com. M.Ed. Ph.D. Shruta Maharshi ] QG 211882:- (1)  (2)
deepratnasagar.in Bhel Dress:- jainmunideepratnasagar@gmail.com Bhola
09825967397 Muni Diparatnasagar Krit “(Jitkalp)” Agam Sutra-Hindi Anuvaad" Page
15

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
Agama sUtra 38, chedasUtra-5, jItakalpa' namo namo nimmaladaMsaNassa pUjyapAda
zrI AnaMda-kSamA-lalita-suzIla-sudharmasAgara gurUbhyo nama: 38 jItakalpa
AgamasUtra hindI anuvAda XXXXXXXXX X XXX [anuvAdaka evaM saMpAdaka] Agama
dIvAkara muni dIparatnasAgarajI [ M.Com. M.Ed. Ph.D. zruta maharSi ] QG 211882:-
(1) (2) deepratnasagar.in bhela Dresa:- jainmunideepratnasagar@gmail.com bholA
09825967397 muni dIparatnasAgara kRt "(jItakalpa)" Agama sUtra-hindI anuvAda"
Page 15

