Catalog link: https://jainqq.org/explore/090245/1

Page #1 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
।। Shri Adinathaay Namah। Karanaanuyoag Deepak Pratham Bhag - Lekhak - Pan.
(Dr.) Pannalal Jain Sahityacharya Shri Varni Digambar Jain Gurukul Atishay
Kshetra, Pisanari ki Madhiya, Jabalpur (M.P.) Saujanya se Shrimati Vimala Jain
Dharmpatni Shri Parsamal Ji Patni Dvara: Messers Raj Investments . : | . . B-6,
Dvitiya Tal, Strand Road, Kolkata Phone: 2433893, 2432934, 2433995 Nivas:
3377542, 2349032 - Prakashk - Shri Bharatvarshiya Digambar Jain (Dharma
Sanrakshani) Mahasama (Prakashan Vibhag) Kendriya Karyalaya: Shri Nandishwar
Floor Mills, Mill Road, Aishbaag ... Lucknow - 226 004 (U.P.) Phone/Fax: (0522)
267287, 654489 Email: mahasabha@yahoo.com

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
  /  /  zrI AdinAthAya nmH| karaNAnuyoga dIpaka prathama bhAga - lekhaka - paM.
(DA.) pannAlAla jaina sAhityAcArya zrI varNI digambara jaina gurukula atizaya
kSetra, pisanArI kI mar3hiyA, jabalapura (ma. pra.) saujanya se zrImatI vimalA
jaina dharmapatnI zrI pArasamala jI pATanI dvArA: mesarsa rAja invesTameMTsa . :
| . . bI-6, dvitIya tala, sTraiNDa roDa,kalakattA phona : 2433893, 2432934,
2433995 nivAsa : 3377542, 2349032 - prakAzaka - zrI bhAratavarSIya digambara
jaina (dharma saMrakSiNI) mahAsamA (prakAzana vibhAga) kendrIya kAryAlayaH zrI
nandIzvara phlora milsa, mila roDa, aizabAga ... lakhanaU - 226 004 (u0 pra0)
phona/phaiksaH (0522) 267287,654489 Email: mahasabha@yahoo.com

Page #2 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Bhavana Acharya Samantabhadra divided the Jain Agamas into four parts:
Pratimanuyoga, Charananuyoga, Karananuyoga, and Dravyanuyoga. Of these,
Karananuyoga is the most complex and not easily understood by everyone.
Motivated by compassion, the learned, elderly, and experienced scholar Pandit
Pannalalji Sahityacharya wrote the first part of Karananuyoga Deepak based on
the Jivakanda, the second part based on the Karmakanda, and the third part based
on Triloksar, Tiloypannatti, and Rajavartika. These were published by the Shri
Bharatvarshiya Di. Jain Mahasabha in 1685, 1687, and 1960 respectively. The
copies of the first part have been exhausted. Last year, there was a need in the
Sangha, which was fulfilled by making Xerox copies. Therefore, a plan was made
to publish its second edition. Aryika Prasantamatiji, a member of the Sangha,
prepared the press copy by making some corrections based on the Jivakanda and
adding some questions and answers. It is our hope that she will continue to work
in this way and increase her available क्षयोपशम. Panditji Sa. has explained very
difficult concepts in a concise

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 bhAvanA AcArya samantabhadra ne jainAgama ko cAra bhAgoM meM vibhakta kiyA hai|
yathA- prathamAnuyoga, caraNAnuyoga, karaNAnuyoga aura drvyaanuyog| inameM tIna
anuyogoM kI apekSA karamAnuyoga kA viSaya jaTila hai; jisase kisI ke sahaja
grAhya nahIM hai| karuNAbuddhi se prerita hokara jJAnavRddha, vayovRddha aura
anubhavavRddha vidvadvarya paM. pannAlAla jI sAhityAcArya ne jIvakANDa ke AdhAra
se karaNAnuyoga dIpaka kA prathama bhAga, karmakANDa ke AdhAra se dUsarA bhAga
aura trilokasAra, tiloyapaNNattI evaM rAjavArtika ke AdhAra se tIsarA bhAga
likhA thA; jinakA prakAzana kramazaH san 1685, 1687 aura 1960 meM zrI
bhAratavarSIya di. jaina mahAsabhA se huA hai| prathama bhAga kI pratiyA~
samApta ho cukI haiN| gata varSa saMgha meM AvazyakatA par3I thI jisakI pUrti
jIroksa kaoNpiyA~ nikalavA kara karanI par3I, ataH isakA dUsarA saMskaraNa
prakAzita karane kI yojanA banI1 saMghasthA AryikA prazAntamatI jI ne isa
saMskaraNa meM jIvakANDa ke AdhAra se hI kucha saMzodhana kara aura kucha
praznottara parivardhita kara presa kaoNpI taiyAra kii| ve isI prakAra kAryarata
rahakara apane upalabdha kSayopazama kI vRddhi kareM, yahI bhAvanA hai| zrI
paNDita jI sA. ne atyanta kaThina prameyoM ko saMkSipta

Page #3 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
And the simple and accessible literature that you have given to today's
pleasure-seeking human mind is highly praiseworthy. Even in your old age, you
remain constantly engaged in the service of Mother Saraswati, this is exemplary
for every self-interested person. My feeling was that Pandit Ji would progress
further in character, but due to physical circumstances, it could not happen.
Now, may your use be engaged in the service of Jinvani until the end, this is my
heartfelt wish. _ For the purpose of study, Br. Bhavana had the Xerox copies of
this book made. Therefore, the results of their efforts have led to its
publication. May their results in the service of Saraswati continue in this way,
this is my blessing. - Aryika Vishuddhamati Shrutapanchami Samvat 2050, AD 1663

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 aura sarala karake Aja ke bhogAsakta mAnava-mastiSka ko jo sugama sAhitya diyA
hai, vaha atistutya kArya hai| itanI vRddhAvasthA meM bhI Apa anavarata mA~
sarasvatI kI sevA meM saMlagna rahate haiM, yaha bAta pratyeka AtmahitaiSI ke
lie anukaraNIya hai| merI bhAvanA thI ki paNDita jI sA. cAritra meM Age
bar3hate, zArIrika paristhitivaza aisA nahIM ho skaa| aba ApakA upayoga anta-
paryanta jinavANI kI sevA meM rata rahe, yahI merI hArdika bhAvanA hai| _
adhyayana hetu bra. bhAvanA ne hI isa pustaka kI jIroksa kaoNpiyA~ karavAI
thiiN| ataH unake pariNAma ise prakAzana karAne ke hue haiN| sarasvatI sevA ke
unake pariNAma isI prakAra banate raheM, yahI merA AzIrvAda hai| - AryikA
vizuddhamatI zrutapaMcamI saM. 2050 san 1663

Page #4 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Introduction  The complexity of Karanaanuyoag in Jain literature is well-
known. Access for the average reader to authentic texts is practically
impossible. Without a proper understanding of Gunasthan, Margana and Jivasamaas,
it is impossible to move forward in this direction. Therefore, it is possible to
present these profound topics in a simple and understandable manner (Madc Easy).
While work has been done in this direction, its usefulness cannot be denied.
The books written by Pandit Kailashchandra Shastri in the question-and-answer
style on Karanaanuyoag, Dravyanuyoag and Charanaanuyoag were published by the
Chira Seva Mandir Trust, Varanasi, but are now unavailable. A version of
'Dravyanuyoag Pradeshka' written by Pandit Pannalalji was published from
Shantivirnagar, but it is also unavailable now. Before these, Guru of Gurus,
Shri Gopaladasji Bareya, had written 'Jain Siddhant Praveshika' in the question-
and-answer style, which was a very useful publication, but it is also not easily
available today.  Understanding the importance of publishing books in this
style, the Bharatvarshiya Digambar Jain Mahasabha took a step in this direction,
resulting in the publication of Karanaanuyoag Deepak parts 1, 2, and 3 in 1985,
1987, and 1990 respectively. The author of these three books is Pandit
Pannalalji Jain Sahityacharya, a renowned scholar of the Jain world. He is
continuously...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Amukha jaina vAGmaya meM karaNAnuyoga kI jaTilatA suvidita hai| prAmANika
granthoM meM ausatabuddhi pAThaka kA praveza asaMbhava hI rahatA hai|
guNasthAna, mArgaNA aura jIvasamAsa kI samyak avadhAraNAoM ko AtmasAta kiye binA
isa dizA meM kathamapi Age nahIM bar3hA jA sakatA hai| ataH ina gahana viSayoM
ko sarala aura subodharUpa meM (Madc Easy) prastuta karane kI jA sakatA hai  /
isa dizA meM kAma hue bhI maiM, mI upAdeyatA se nakArA bhI nahIM jA sktaa|
karaNAnuyoga, dravyAnuyoga aura caraNAnuyoga para praznottara zailI meM likhI
gaI paM. kailAzacandra jI zAstrI kI pustakeM cIra sevA maMdira TrasTa, vArANasI
se prakAzita huI thIM jo aba aprApya haiN| paM. pannAlAla jI dvArA likhita
'dravyAnuyoga pradezikA' kA eka saMskaraNa zAntivIranagara se nikalA thA, vaha
bhI aba upalabdha nahIM hai| inase pUrva gurUNAM guru zrI gopAladAsa jI baraiyA
ne 'jaina siddhAnta pravezikA' praznottara zailI meM likhI thI, yaha bar3A
upayogI prakAzana thA para Aja yaha bhI sulama nahIM hai| zrI bhAratavarSIya di.
jaina mahAsabhA ne isa zailI kI pustakoM ke prakAzana kA mahattva samajhakara
isa dizA meM kadama rakhA, phalasvarUpa karaNAnuyoga dIpaka bhAga 1, 2, 3 kA
prakAzana kramazaH 1985, 1687 aura 1660 meM huaa| ina tInoM pustakoM ke lekhaka
paM. pannAlAla jI jaina sAhityAcArya jaina jagat ke vizruta vidvAn haiN| ve
anavarata

Page #5 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
They are engaged in study and teaching. Every *swadhyayee* is well acquainted
with their numerous translated and original works. Recently, they have done a
new edition and translation of Acharya Viranandi's 'Acharsar' by taking textual
variations from ancient manuscripts, this edition will be available soon. This
publication is the new revised and edited second edition of *Karananuyog Deepak*
Part One. The first edition had 166 questions and answers, this edition has 262.
The effort of editing and preparing the press copy for this edition has been
done by the venerable *Aryika* 105 Shri Prashantamati Mataji. Br. Bhavana has
provided financial assistance for its publication. _ I express my heartfelt
gratitude to the venerable *Aryika* Prashantamatiji, the esteemed Pandit
Pannalalji and Br. Mavna sister and the publication department of the Mahasabha
for this useful publication and I offer my humble salutations at the feet of the
inspiring source of *Shruta-sadhana*, the venerable *Aryika* Vishuddhamati
Mataji, whose blessings enable me to serve the *Jinvani* Mata in whatever small
way. I humbly apologize for any errors in the publication. Aashadi Ashthanhika,
VS 2050 June, 1663 Humble Dr. Chetan Prakash Patni Jodhpur

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 adhyayana-adhyApana meM rata haiN| unakI anekAneka anUdita aura maulika kRtiyoM
se pratyeka svAdhyAyI suparicita hai| abhI hAla hI unhoMne AcArya vIranandI ke
'AcArasAra' kA prAcIna pratiyoM se pATha bheda lekara navIna sampAdana-anuvAda
kiyA hai, yaha saMskaraNa zIghra hI upalabdha hogaa| prastuta prakAzana
karaNAnuyoga dIpaka prathama bhAga kA navIna saMzodhi ta parivaryiMta dvitIya
saMskaraNa hai| prathama saMskaraNa meM 166 praznottara the, isa saMskaraNa meM
inakI saMkhyA 262 hai| isa saMskaraNa ko sa~vAra kara isakI presakaoNpI karane
kA zrama pUjya AryikA 105 zrI prazAntamatI mAtAjI ne kiyA hai| bra. bhAvanA ne
isake prakAzana hetu artha-sahayoga pradAna kiyA hai| _ maiM pUjya AryikA
prazAntamatI jI, AdaraNIya paNDita pannAlAla jI aura bra. mAvanA bahana va
mahAsabhA ke prakAzana vibhAga ke prati isa upayogI prakAzana hetu hArdika
AbhAra vyakta karatA hU~ tathA zruta-sAdhanA ke lie preraNAsrota pUjya AryikA
vizuddhamatI mAtAjI ke caraNoM meM apanA savinaya namostu nivedana karatA hU~
jinake AzIrvAda se mujhase bhI jinavANI mAtA kI yatkikiMcita sevA bana jAtI hai|
prakAzana meM rahI bhUloM ke lie savinaya kSamA cAhatA huuN| ASAr3hI aSTAnhikA,
vi. saM. 2050 jUna, 1663 vinIta DaoN. cetana prakAza pATanI jodhapura

Page #6 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
|| Shri Adinath Jinendraya Namo Namaha || || Shri Shanti-Veer-Shiv-Dharmanit-
Varthaman-Suribhyo Namo Namaha ||  Karananuyog Deepak Aksham Mana 1. Question:
What is Karananuyog? Answer: It is the description of Gunasthan, Margana, and
the emotions of the Jiva, as well as the Lok-Alok and the Kalchakra, etc. 2.
Question: What is Gunasthan? Answer: The gradation of the self-transformations
that occur due to Moha and Yoga is called Gunasthan. 3. Question: How many types
of Gunasthan are there? Answer: There are fourteen types of Gunasthan: 1.
Mithyatva, 2. Sasadan, 3. Misra, 4. Avirat Samyaktva, 5. Deshavirat, 6.
Pramattavist, 7. Apramattavirat, 8. Apurvakaran,

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
  /  /  zrI AdinAtha jinendrAya namo namaH  /  /   /  /  zrI zAnti-vIra-ziva-
dharmANita-varthamAna- sUribhyo namo nmH1| karaNAnuyoga dIpaka akSama mAnA 1.
prazna : karaNAnuyoga kise kahate haiM ? uttara : jisameM guNasthAna, mArgaNA
evaM jIva ke bhAvoM kA loka-aloka kA tathA kAlacakra Adi kA varNana hotA hai use
karaNAnuyoga kahate haiN| 2. prazna : guNasthAna kise kahate haiM ? uttara :
moha aura yoga ke nimitta se hone vAle Atma-pariNAmoM ke tAratamya ko guNasthAna
kahate haiN| 3. prazna : guNasthAna ke kitane bheda haiM ? uttara : guNasthAna
ke caudaha bheda haiM- 1. mithyAtva, 2. sAsAdana, 3. mizra, 4. avirata
samyaktva, 5. dezavirata, 6. pramattavista, 7. apramattavirata, 8. apUrvakaraNa,

Page #7 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
6. Anivrittikaran, 10. Sukshma Sampray, 11. Upashantamoha, 12. Kshina-moha, 13.
Sayogkevali and 14 Ayogkevali. _ 4. Question: What is Mithyatva Gunasthan?
Answer: The results of the lack of faith in the true nature of reality, which
arise from the Mithyatva nature, are called Mithyatva Gunasthan. Those beings
who are endowed with these results are called Mithyadrishti. 5. Question: How
many types of Mithyadrishti are there? Answer: There are two types of
Mithyadrishti - 1. Svasthan Mithyadrishti and 2. Satishya Mithyadrishti. The
being who is immersed in Mithyatva is called Svasthan Mithyadrishti. The being
who is endowed with the results of Adhokarana, Apurvakarana and Anivrittikaran,
which are in front of the attainment of Samyagdarshan, is called Satishya
Mithyadrishti. 6. Question: What is Sasadan Gunasthan? Answer: When only the
time of Antarmuhurt remains in the first or second Upashma Samyaktva, and when
the time of the lowest one Samaya and the highest six Avali remains, then in
that time, from the infinite Anubandhi Krodha-Mana-Maya-Lobha, any one of them
(2)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 6. anivRttikaraNa, 10. sUkSma sAmparAya, 11. upazAntamoha, 12. kSINa-moha, 13.
sayogakevalI aura 14 ayogkevlii| _ 4. prazna : mithyAtya guNasthAna kise kahate
haiM ? uttara : mithyAtva prakRti ke udaya se hone vAle tattvArtha ke
azraddhAnarUpa pariNAmoM ko mithyAtva guNasthAna kahate haiN| ina pariNAmoM se
yukta jIvoM ko mithyAdRSTi kahate haiN| 5. prazna : mithyAdRSTi ke kitane bheda
hai ? uttara : mithyAdRSTi ke do bheda haiM- 1. svasthAna mithyAdRSTi aura 2.
sAtizaya mithyAdRSTi  /  jo jIva mithyAtva meM hI raca-paca rahA hai, use
svasthAna mithyAdRSTi kahate haiN| samyagdarzana kI prApti ke sammukha jIva ke
jo adhaHkaraNa, apUrvakaraNa aura anivRttikaraNa rUpa pariNAma hote haiM, unase
yukta jIva ko sAtizaya mithyAdRSTi kahate haiN| 6. prazna : sAsAdana guNasthAna
kise kahate haiM ? uttara : prathamopazama samyaktva athavA dvitIyopazama
samyaktva ke antarmuhUrta mAtra kAla meM se jaba jaghanya ekasamaya tathA
utkRSTa chaha AvalI pramANa kAla zeSa rahe, utane kAla meM anantAnubandhI
krodha-mAna-mAyA-lobha meM se kisI ke bhI (2)

Page #8 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The state of **Sāsādan Guṇasthān** is the latent, non-essential belief
(**atattva-śraddhā**), which is the result of the **samyaktva** (right faith,
right knowledge, right conduct) being contradicted by the arising of
**anantānubandhī** (infinitely connected) **kaṣāya** (passions).   Or, in other
words, **Sāsādan Guṇasthān** is the state that arises in the middle period when
the **samyaktva** results are lost due to the arising of any one of the
**anantānubandhī** **kaṣāya**, and the **mithyātva** (false faith, false
knowledge, false conduct) results are not present due to the non-arising of
**mithyātva** nature.  **Question:** If the arising of **anantānubandhī**
destroys **samyaktva**, then it should be counted among the types of
**darśanamohaniya** (that which obscures right faith). If it is a type of
**cāritramohaniya** (that which obscures right conduct), then it cannot
contradict **samyaktva**. In such a situation, how can **Sāsādan Guṇasthān**
exist?  **Answer:** The **anantānubandhī** **kaṣāya** is a type of
**cāritramohaniya**, but it has the nature of destroying both **samyagdarsan**
(right faith) and **samyakcāritra** (right conduct). In other words,
**anantānubandhī** **kaṣāya** has a dual nature. This **kaṣāya** destroys
**samyaktva** and maintains the infinite flow of **apratyākyānāvaraṇa** (non-
rejectable covering) and other **kaṣāya**. Thus, **anantānubandhī**...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 udaya meM Ane se samyaktva kI virAdhanA hone para samyagdarzana guNa kI jo
avyakta atattva-zraddhAnarUpa pariNati hotI hai use sAsAdana guNasthAna kahate
haiN| athavA anantAnubandhI kaSAya meM se kisI eka kA udaya hone se samyaktva
pariNAmoM ke chUTane para aura mithyAtva prakRti ke udaya na hone se mithyAtva
pariNAmoM ke na hone para madhya ke kAla meM jo pariNAma hote haiM, use sAsAdana
guNasthAna kahate haiN| prazna : anantAnubandhI ke udaya se yadi samyaktva kA
nAza hotA hai to use darzanamohanIya ke bhedoM meM ginanA caahie| yadi vaha
cAritramohanIya kA bheda hai, to usase samyaktva kI virAdhanA nahIM ho sakatI,
aisI avasthA meM sAsAdana guNasthAna kaise ho sakatA hai ? uttara :
anantAnubandhI kaSAya cAritramohanIya kA bheda hai, phira bhI anantAnubandhI
kaSAya meM samyagdarzana aura samyak cAritra donoM ko hI ghAta karane kA
svabhAva hai arthAt anantAnubandhI kaSAya dvisvabhAvavAlI hai| yaha kaSAya
samyaktva kA ghAta karatI hai aura apratyAkhyAnAvaraNAdi kaSAyoM kA ananta
pravAha banAye rakhatI hai, isa prakAra anantAnubandhI

Page #9 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The duality of *kṣaya* being established, the *sāsādana* *guṇasthāna* is
separately established. 8. Question: What is a mixed *guṇasthāna*? Answer:
Where, due to the arising of the nature of *jātyantara* *sarvaghāti*
*samyagmithyātvaprakṛti*, the result is not only in the form of *samyaktva* or
*mithyātvaprakṛti*, but in a mixed form, it is called a mixed *guṇasthāna*. 6.
Just as the taste of mixed curd and jaggery is neither sour nor sweet, but sour-
sweet, in the same way, in the same time, the result of this
*guṇasthāna*-dwelling being is obtained in the form of *samyaktva* in relation
to the well-known *tattvashraddhā* and in the form of *mithyātvaprakṛti* in
relation to the *atattvashraddhā* known as *sarvajñābhās*! Question: What are
the characteristics of a being dwelling in a mixed *guṇasthāna*? Answer: A being
dwelling in a mixed *guṇasthāna* does not accept *sakalasamyama* or
*deśasamyama*. In this *guṇasthāna*, there is no new *āyu* bondage, no
*māraṇāntika* *samuddhāt*, and no death. (4)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 kaSAya kA dvisvabhAvapanA siddha hone se sAsAdana guNasthAna pRthak siddha hotA
hai| 8. prazna : mizra guNasthAna kise kahate haiM ? uttara : jAtyantara
sarvaghAtI samyagmidhyAtva prakRti ke udaya se kevala samyaktvarUpa yA
mithyAtvarUpa pariNAma na hokara jahA~ mizrarUpa pariNAma hote haiM, use mizra
guNasthAna kahate haiN| 6. jisa prakAra mile hue dahI aura gur3a kA svAda na
khaTTA aura na mIThA hai parantu khaTamIThA hai, usI prakAra eka hI kAla meM isa
guNasthAnavartI jIva ke sarvajJakathita tattvazraddhAna kI apekSA samyaktvarUpa
aura sarvajJAbhAsa kathita atattva - zraddhAna kI apekSA midhyAtvarUpa pariNAma
pAye jAte haiM ! prazna: mizra guNasthAnavartI jIva kI kyA-kyA vizeSatAe~ haiM ?
uttara : mizra guNasthAnavartI jIva sakalasaMyama yA dezasaMyama ko grahaNa
nahIM karatA hai| isa guNasthAna meM navIna Ayu kA baMdha nahIM hotA hai,
mAraNAntika samududhAta nahIM hotA hai aura maraNa bhI nahIM hotA hai  /  (4)

Page #10 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
10. Question: What is Avirat Samyaktv Gunasthan? Answer: Where Mithyatva,
Samyagmithyatva and Samyaktv nature and the seven natures of Anantanu bandhi
Krodh, Man, Maya and Lobh, are subsided, destroyed or subsided and destroyed,
resulting in Samyagdarshan, but the four natures of A-pratyakhyana Avarana,
etc., of Charitramoh remain, resulting in no outcome of the abandonment of the
five sins, it is called Avirat Samyaktv. The being in this Gunasthan is not
detached from the objects of the senses and the violence of Tras and Sthavar
beings, but due to the manifestation of the qualities of Prasham, Sanveg,
Anukampa and Astikya in the inner being, he does not engage in sinful acts like
injustice, violence, etc., and does not enjoy worldly pleasures with attachment.
11. Question: What is the special characteristic of Shraddhan in the fourth
Gunasthan? Answer: The Samyagdristi being has faith in the teachings given by
the Acharyas, but due to his own ignorance, he also has faith in the opposite
meaning of the Guru's teachings, even then he is a Samyagdristi.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 . 10. prazna : avirata samyaktva guNasthAna kise kahate haiM ? uttara : jahA~
mithyAtva, samyagmithyAtva aura samyaktva prakRti tathA anantAnubandhI krodha,
mAna, mAyA evaM lobha, ina sAta prakRtiyoM ke upazama, kSaya athavA kSayopazama
se samyagdarzana to ho jAtA hai parantu apratyAkhyAnAvaraNAdi cAritramoha kI
prakRtiyoM kA udaya rahane se paMca pApa ke tyAgarUpa pariNAma nahIM hote haiM,
use avirata samyaktva kahate haiN| isa guNasthAnavI jIva indriyoM ke viSayoM se
tathA trasa aura sthAvara jIvoM kI hiMsA se virata nahIM hotA hai tathApi
antaraMga meM prazama, saMvega, anukampA aura Astikya guNa ke prakaTa ho jAne se
anyAya, hiMsA Adi pApa-kAryoM meM pravRtta nahIM hotA hai evaM AsaktipUrvaka
bhoga nahIM bhogatA hai| 11. prazna : caturtha guNasthAna meM zraddhAna kI
apekSA kyA vizeSatA hai ? uttara : samyagdRSTi jIva AcAryoM ke dvArA upadiSTa
pravacana kA zraddhAna karatA hai kintu svayaM ke ajJAnavaza guru ke upadeza se
viparIta artha kA bhI zraddhAna kara letA hai, to bhI vaha samyagdRSTi hI hai|

Page #11 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Sutra  By the support of the Sutra, by showing the Agamas through the Acharya
etc., even if the explanation of the appropriate matter does not break the
**jiva** in any way, then from that time onwards, the **jiva** is called
**Mithyadristi** due to the **Ajnana** (ignorance) committed by it.  **12.**
**Question:** What is **Deshaviraat Gunasthan**?  **Answer:** Where, due to the
arising of **Apratyaakhyanavaran Kshaya**, there are results in this **jiva** in
the form of the abandonment of one part of the five sins like **Himsa**
(violence) etc., it is called **Deshaviraat Gunasthan**. In this **Gunasthan**,
there is a **viraat** (detached) feeling with respect to **ahimsa** (non-
violence) and an **aviraat** (attached) feeling with respect to the abandonment
of **sthavar himsa** (violence towards stationary beings), therefore this
**Gunasthan** is also called **viraataviraat** or **sanyamasanyam**.  **13.**
**Question:** What is **Pramattaviraat Gunasthan**?  **Answer:** Where, due to
the arising of **Pratyaakhyanavaran Kshaya**, complete **sanyam** (self-control)
has been achieved, but due to the remaining arising of **sanjwalan** (agitation)
and **nokshaaya** (attachment), there is a result in the form of **pramada**
(negligence) which produces impurities in **sanyam**, therefore this
**Gunasthan** is called **Pramattaviraat Gunasthan**.  **(6)** 2.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 sUtra ke Azraya se AcAryAdi ke dvArA Agama dikhAkara samIcIna padArtha ke
samajhAne para bhI yadi vaha jIva meM ko na tor3e to ha ajJAna se kiye hue ata
jIva usI kAla se midhyAdRSTi kahA jAtA hai| 12. prazna : dezavirata guNasthAna
kise kahate haiM ? uttara : apratyAkhyAnAvaraNa kaSAya ke anudaya se jahA~ isa
jIva ke hiMsA Adi pA~ca pApoM ke ekadeza- tyAgarUpa pariNAma hote meM haiM, use
dezavirata guNasthAna kahate haiM  /  isa guNasthAna sahiMsA kI apekSA
viratarUpa bhAva aura sthAvara hiMsA ke tyAga kI apekSA avirata rUpa bhAva pAye
jAte haiM, isaliye isa guNasthAna ko viratAvirata athavA saMyamAsaMyama bhI
kahate haiM  /  13. prazna : pramattavirata guNasthAna kise kahate haiM ? uttara
: pratyAkhyAnAvaraNa kaSAya ke anudaya se jahA~ sampUrNa saMyama to ho cukA hai,
kintu saMjvalana aura nokaSAya kA udaya rahane se saMyama meM mala utpanna
karane vAlA pramAda rUpa pariNAma hotA hai, ataeva isa guNasthAna ko
pramattavirata guNasthAna kahate haiN| (6) 2.

Page #12 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
। 14. Question: What is the Aprammattavirata Gunasthan? Answer: When the
Sanjwalana and Nokashaya have a mild rise, then the absence of the Pramāda-rupa
parināmas of the Muni who is endowed with Sakalasanyama, is called
Aprammattavirata Gunasthan. 15. Question: How many types of Aprammattavirata
Gunasthan are there? Answer: There are two types of Aprammattavirata Gunasthan:
1. Sammana Aprammattavirata and 2. Sātishaya Aprammattavirata. Those who keep
going up and down from the seventh Gunasthan to the sixth and from the sixth
Gunasthan to the seventh are called Svasthan Aprammattavirata. Those who, being
in front of the Upshama or Kshapaka श्रेणी, perform the Adhapravṛttakarana-rupa
parināmas are called Sātishaya Aprammattavirata. 16. Question: What is
Adhapravṛttakarana? Answer: Where the parināmas of the Sama-samayavarti jivas
are both equal and unequal to the parināmas of the Bhinna-samayavarti jivas, it
is called Adhapravṛttakarana. These Adhapravṛttakarana

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
  /  14. prazna : apramattavirata guNasthAna kise kahate haiM ? uttara : jaba
saMjvalana aura nokaSAya kA manda udaya hotA hai taba sakalasaMyama se yukta
muni ke pramAda-rUpa pariNAmoM kA abhAva ho jAtA hai, isalie ise apramattavirata
gaNasthAna kahate haiN| 15. prazna : apramattavirata guNasthAna ke kitane bheda
haiM ? uttara : apramatadina guNaradhAna ke do mena haiM.. 1 sammAna
apramattavirata aura 2. sAtizaya aprmttvirt| jo sAtaveM guNasthAna se chaThe meM
aura chaThe guNasthAna se sAtaveM meM utarate-car3hate rahate haiM unako
svasthAna agramattavirata kahate . haiN| jo upazama athavA kSapaka zreNI ke
sammukha hokara adhaHpravRttakaraNarUpa pariNAma karate haiM, unako sAtizaya
apramattavirata kahate haiN| 16. prazna : adhaHpravRttakaraNa kise kahate haiM ?
uttara : jahA~ sama-samayavartI jIvoM ke pariNAma bhinna-samayavartI jIvoM ke
pariNAmoM se samAna aura asamAna donoM prakAra ke hote haiM use
adhaHpravRttakaraNa kahate haiN| ina adhaHpravRttakaraNa

Page #13 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The second name for the *apramattavirata* *gunasthan* is also *adhahkaran*.
Here, the *anukrishti-rachana* is present, which shows attraction in the upper
and lower results. 7. Question: What is the *purvaha* *gunasthan*? Answer: Where
the results of the contemporary beings are both similar and dissimilar, and the
results of the non-contemporary beings are only dissimilar, it is called the
*apurvakaran* *gunasthan*. In this *gunasthan*, *anukrishti-rachana* is not
present. 18. Question: What is *anukrishti-rachana*? Answer: The creation that
shows attraction, i.e., similarity, in the upper and lower results is called
*anukrishti-rachana*. 16. Question: What are the necessary functions performed
by the *apurvakaran* results? Answer: There are four necessary functions
performed by the *apurvakaran* results: (1) *gunashreni nirjara* (2)
*gunasanakraman* (3) *sthikhandan*

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pariNAmoM kI apekSA apramattavirata guNasthAna kA dUsarA nAma adhaHkaraNa bhI
hai| Upara ke aura nIce ke pariNAmoM meM anukarSaNa ko dikhAne vAlI anukRSTi-
racanA yahA~ para hotI hai| 7. mAna : pUrvAha ga guNasthAna kise kahate haiM ?
uttara : jahA~ sama-samayavartI jIvoM ke pariNAma samAna aura asamAna donoM
prakAra ke aura bhinna-samayavartI jIvoM ke pariNAma asamAna hI hote haiM, use
apUrvakaraNa guNasthAna kahate haiN| isa guNasthAna meM anukRSTi racanA nahIM
hotI hai| 18. prazna : anukRSTi-racanA kise kahate haiM ? uttara : Upara ke aura
nIce ke pariNAmoM meM anukarSaNa arthAt sAdRzya dikhAne vAlI racanA ko anukRSTi
racanA kahate 16. prazna : apUrvakaraNa pariNAmoM ke dvArA kyA-kyA Avazyaka
kArya hote haiM ? uttara : apUrvakaraNa pariNAmoM ke dvArA cAra Avazyaka kArya
hote hai| (1) guNazreNI nirjarA (2) guNasaMkramaNa (3) sthitikhaNDana

Page #14 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
And (4) Section-Khandan. All these four actions take place in the pre-determined
Kones. These results are eager to destroy or alleviate the 21 natures of
Mohaniya Karma in the garden of results. 20. Question: What is Gunashreni
Nirjara? Answer: The falling (destruction) of Karma-Paramanus in successive
times in a multiplied form is Gunashreni Nirjara. For example, if 10 Karma-
Paramanus arise in the first time of a being, then in the second time, 10 times
innumerable Paramanus arise. In the third time, 10 times innumerable times
innumerable Paramanus arise. In the fourth time, innumerable times more
Paramanus arise than in the third time. In this way, the continuous arising of
innumerable times innumerable Karma Paramanus is Gunashreni Nirjara. Suppose
that innumerable is 2 and the Paramanus arising in the first time are 10, then
the number of Paramanus arising in the first, second, third, etc. times will be:
10, 20,

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 aura (4) anubhaag-khnnddn| ye cAroM hI kArya pUrvabaddha koM meM hote haiN| ina
pariNAma ke bAgIca mohanIya karma kI 21 prakRtiyoM kA kSapaNa athavA upazamana
karane ke lie udyata hote haiN| 20. prazna : guNazreNI nirjarA kise kahate haiM
? uttara : guNita rUpa se uttarottara samayoM meM karma-paramANuoM kA jharanA
(nirjIrNa honA) guNazreNI nirjarA hai jaise kisI jIva ke pahale samaya meM 10
karma-paramANu udaya meM Aye, phira dUsare samaya meM 10 guNe asaMkhyAta
paramANu udaya meM aaye| tIsare samaya meM 10 guNe asaMkhyAta guNe asaMkhyAta
paramANu udaya meM aaye| cauthe samaya meM tIsare samaya se bhI asaMkhyAta guNe
paramANu udaya meM aaye| isa taraha lagAtAra asaMkhyAta guNe-asaMkhyAta guNe
karma paramANuoM kA udaya meM AnA guNazreNI nirjarA hai| mAnA ki asaMkhyAta-2 ho
tathA prathama samaya meM udIyamAna paramANu 10 hoM to prathama, dvitIya, tRtIya
Adi samayoM meM udayAgata paramANuoM kI saMkhyA aisI hogI- 10, 20,

Page #15 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
40, 80, 160, 320, 640, 1280, this is the **guna-shreni nirjara**. In **guna-
shreni nirjara**, the juice of inauspicious karmas also becomes weak and arises.
**Guna-shreni nirjara** is of both auspicious and inauspicious karmas. In the
fourth **guna-sthana**, there is no continuous **guna-shreni nirjara** (My Pro.
Ma. - 341, 361 Sasti Granthamala). Only when there is **samyama** (vrat) is
there continuous **guna-shreni nirjara** (Dhavala - 8/83). Therefore, from the
fifth **guna-sthana**, there is continuous **guna-shreni nirjara** (J.D. 12).
21. Question: What is **guna-samkramana**? Answer: Where, due to countless
**guna-shreni-krama**, the **paramanu-pradesha** transforms into another
**prakriti** form, it is called **guna-samkramana**. 22. Question: What is
**sthiti-khandana** (**sthiti-kandaka-ghat**)? Answer: Scratching and destroying
the upper part, sections, or layers of the state of karmas is called **sthiti-
khandana** or **sthiti-kandaka-ghat**. By **sthiti-kandaka-ghat**, the **sthiti-
sattva** of karmas decreases. (10)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 40, 80, 160, 320 640, 1280, yahI guNazreNI nirjarA hai| guNazreNI nirjarA meM
azubha karmoM kA rasa bhI manda par3akara udaya meM AtA hai| guNa zreNI nirjarA
vaise zubhAzubha donoM karmoM kI hotI hai| cauthe guNasthAna meM nirantara
guNazreNI nirjarA nahIM merI pro.mA ya.-341. 361 sastI grnthmaalaa)| saMyama
(vrata) hone para hI nirantara guNazreNI nirjarA hotI hai (dhvl-8/83)| ataH
paMcama guNasthAna se nirantara guNazreNI nirjarA hotI hai| (ja.dha. 12) /  21.
prazna : guNasaMkramaNa kise kahate haiM ? uttara : jahA~ para pratisamaya
asaMkhyAta guNazreNIkrama se paramANupradeza anya prakRti rUpa pariName, use
guNasaMkramaNa kahate haiM ? 22. prazna : sthitikhaNDana (sthitikAMDakaghAta)
kise kahate haiM ? uttara : karmoM kI sthiti ke uparima aMza, khaNDa yA pauroM
ko kharoMcakara naSTa kara dene ko sthitikhaNDana yA sthitikANDakaghAta kahate
haiN| sthitikANDakaghAta ke dvArA karmoM kA sthitisattva kama ho jAtA hai| (10)

Page #16 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
23. Question: What is **Anubhag-Khandan** (**Anubhag-Kandak-Ghat**)? Answer:
Scratching and destroying the upper part, section, or layers of the **Anubhag**
of karmas is called **Anubhag-Khandan** or **Anubhag-Kandak-Ghat**. Through
**Anubhag-Kandak-Ghat**, the **Anubhag-Satva** of karmas decreases. 24.
Question: What is **Anivrittikaran Gunasthan**? Answer: Just as there is a
difference among various contemporary beings in terms of external factors like
the body's **Avgahana** etc. and internal factors like **Jnana-Avarana** etc.
karmas due to their destruction and pacification, similarly, there is no
difference in the **Parinamas** of various contemporary beings (in terms of
purity), but there is a complete difference in the **Parinamas** of beings from
different times. This is called **Anivrittikaran Gunasthan**. The time for these
three causes decreases progressively, and the number of **Parinamas** increases
progressively. (11)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 23. prazna : anubhAgakhaNDana (anubhAgakANDakaghAta) kise kahate uttara :
karmoM ke anubhAga ke uparima aMza, khaNDa yA pauroM ko kharoMcakara naSTa kara
dene ko anubhAga-khaNDana yA anubhAgakANDakaghAta kahate haiN|
anubhAgakANDakaghAta ke dvArA karmoM kA anubhAgasatva kama ho jAtA hai| 24.
prazna : anivRttikaraNa guNasthAna kise kahate haiM ? uttara : eka samayavartI
nAnA jIvoM meM jisa prakAra zarIra kI avagAhanA Adi bAhya tathA jJAnAvaraNAdi
karma ke kSayopazamAdi antaraMga kAraNoM se paraspara bheda pAyA jAtA hai, usa
prakAra ekasamayavartI nAnA jIvoM ke pariNAmoM meM (vizuddhi kI apekSA) nivRtti-
bheda nahIM pAyA jAtA hai, parantu bhinna samayavartI jIvoM ke pariNAmoM meM
sarvathA bheda  /  hI pAyA jAtA hai, use anivRttikaraNa guNasthAna kahate haiN|
ina tInoM kAraNoM kA kAla uttarottara kama hotA hai aura pariNAmoM kI saMkhyA
uttarottara adhika-adhika hotI hai| (11)

Page #17 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
25. Question: What is the subtle Saṃpārāya Guṇasthāna? Answer: Just as a subtle
redness remains in a washed kusuma cloth, in the same way, where the twenty
types of karmas that are conducive to attachment are subdued or destroyed, and
the subtle Kṛṣṭi is attained, the subtle Sanjvalana Lobha Kaṣāya arises. This is
called the subtle Saṃpārāya Guṇasthāna. In this Guṇasthāna, there is slightly
less Charitra than the known Charitra.  26. Question: How is subtle Kṛṣṭi
attained? Answer: Those that are found before the cessation of competition are
called Pūryasparadhaka. Those whose portion becomes infinitely diminished due to
the result of cessation of competition are called Apūrvāspardhaka. Those whose
portion becomes infinitely diminished than the Apūrvāspardhaka are called
Bādarkṛṣṭi. Those whose portion becomes infinitely diminished than the
Bādarkṛṣṭi are called Sūkṣmakṛṣṭi. All these actions take place in the ninth
Guṇasthāna.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 25. prazna : sUkSma sAmparAya guNasthAna kise kahate haiM ? uttara : jisa
prakAra dhule hue kasUmI vastra meM sUkSma lAlimA raha jAtI hai, usI prakAra
jahA~ cAritra mohanIya karma kI bIsa prakRtiyoM kA upazama athavA kSaya ho jAne
para sUkSma kRSTi ko prApta saMjvalana lobha kaSAya kA hI udaya pAyA jAya, .
usako sUkSma sAmparAya guNasthAna kahate haiN| isa guNasthAna meM yathAkhyAta
cAritra se kucha nyUna cAritra pAyA jAtA hai| 26. prazna : sUkSma kRSTi kI
prApti kaise hotI hai ? uttara : jo spardhaka anivRttikaraNa ke pUrva meM pAye
jAte haiM, unako pUryaspardhaka kahate hai| anivRttikaraNarUpa pariNAma ke
nimitta se jinakA anabhAga ananta-gaNa kSINa ho jAtA hai unako apUrvasparpaka
kahate haiN| jinakA anubhAga apUrvaspardhaka se bhI anantaguNA kSINa ho jAtA
hai, unako bAdarakRSTi kahate haiN| jinakA anubhAga bAdarakRSTi se bhI
anantaguNA kSINa ho jAtA hai, unako sUkSmakRSTi kahate haiN| ye saba kArya navam
guNasthAna meM hote haiN|

Page #18 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
27. Question: What are Avibhaga-pratichheda, Samayabaddha, Varga, Vargana and
Sparadhaka? Answer: The power of karmas to bear fruit is called Anubhaga and the
smallest part of that power is called Avibhaga-pratichheda. The group of all the
atoms of karma or nokarma that bind at every moment in the state of Samsara is
called Samayabaddha. The atom in which the smallest part of the power of
Anubhaga, i.e. Avibhaga-pratichheda, is found in the desired Samayabaddha is
called Harga. The group of all the Vargas in which the same number of Avibhaga-
pratichhedas are found is called Vargana. The group of Varganas in which the
same increase in Avibhaga-pratichhedas is found is called Sparadhaka. 28.
Question: What is the Upshanta-moha Gunasthan? Answer: Like the water of a pond
filled with pure fruit or like the water of a lake that becomes clear from the
top in the autumn season, the state of mind that arises from the complete
cessation of all mohaniya karma is called Upshanta-moha Gunasthan.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 27. prazna : avibhAgapraticcheda, samayabaddha, varga, vagaNA aura spardhaka
kise kahate haiM ? uttara : kamoM ke phala dene kI zakti ko anubhAga aura usa
zakti ke sabase choTe aMza ko avibhAga-praticcheda kahate saMsArAvasthA meM
prati samaya ba~dhane vAle karma yA nokarma ke samasta paramANuoM ke samUha ko
samayaprabaddha kahate haiN| vivakSita samayaprabaddha meM sabase kama anubhAga
zakti ke aMza arthAt avibhAgapraticcheda jisa paramANu meM pAye jAte haiM, usI
harga kahate haiN| samAna saMkhyAvAle avibhApraticcheda jinameM pAye jAyeM, una
saba vargoM ke samUha ko vargaNA kahate haiN| jinameM avibhAgapraticchedoM kI
samAna vRddhi pAyI jAya una vargaNAoM ke samUha ko spardhaka kahate haiN| 28.
prazna : upazAntamoha guNasthAna kise kahate haiM ? uttara : nirmalI-phala se
yukta jala kI taraha athavA zarad Rtu meM Upara se svaccha ho jAne vAle sarovara
ke jala kI taraha sampUrNa mohanIya karma ke upazama se utpanna hone vAle

Page #19 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The **Nirmala** (pure) results are called **Nasaloh Gunasthan**. The living
being who possesses this **Gunasthan** falls down to the lower **Gunasthan** due
to the destruction of **Ayukṣaya** (lifespan) or the time of the **Gunasthan**
within a moment. 26. Question: What is **Kṣīṇamoha Gunasthan**? Answer: Where
the **Mohaniya** (delusive) karma is completely destroyed and the results of the
soul are as pure as water kept in a clear crystal vessel, it is called
**Kṣīṇamoha Gunasthan**. 30. Question: What is **Sayogakevali Gunasthan**?
Answer: Where the **Ghātiya** (destructive) karma of 47, **Nāmakarma** (name
karma) of 13, and **Ayukarma** (lifespan karma) of 3, thus 63 types of karma are
destroyed, and **Kevalgyan** (omniscience) is attained along with **Yoga**
(spiritual practice), it is called **Sayogakevali Gunasthan**. In this
**Gunasthan**, the soul is endowed with **Ananta Chatuṣṭaya** (four infinite
qualities) and **Nava Kevalalabdhi** (nine omniscient attainments). Due to the
destruction of **Ghātikarma**, they are called **Jin**, **Jinendra**, or
**Arihant**. The **Tīrthankara** **Arihant** creates a **Samavasarana**
(assembly hall). (14)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 nirmala pariNAmoM ko nasAloha guNasthAna kahate haiN| isa guNasthAna kA dhAraka
jIva antarmuhUrta ke bhItara AyukSaya athavA (guNasthAna ke) kAla kSaya ke
kAraNa niyama se nIce ke guNasthAna meM patana karatA hai| 26. prazna :
kSINamoha guNasthAna kise kahate haiM ? uttara : mohanIya karma kA sarvathA
kSaya ho jAne se jahA~ AtmA ke pariNAma sphaTikamaNi ke svaccha pAtra meM rakhe
hue jala ke samAna nirmala hote haiM, use kSINamoha guNasthAna kahate haiN| 30.
prazna : sayogakevalI guNasthAna kise kahate haiM ? uttara : jahA~ ghAtiyA
karmoM kI 47, nAmakarma kI 13 evaM Ayukarma kI 3, isa prakAra 63 prakRtiyoM ke
kSaya se kevalajJAna prApta hotA hai tathA yogasahita pravRtti hotI hai, use
sayogakevalI guNasthAna kahate haiN| isa guNasthAna meM AtmA ananta catuSTaya
evaM nava kevalalabdhi se yukta hotA hai| ghAtikarma kA kSaya hone se ve jina,
jinendra athavA arihanta kahalAte haiN| tIrthakara arahanta ke samavasaraNa kI
racanA hotI hai| (14)

Page #20 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
31. Question: What is the Aयोगकेवली गुणस्थान? Answer: Where there is complete
absence of the three yogas - मन (mind), बचन (speech), and काय (body) - it is
called Aयोगकेवली गुणस्थान. The duration of this गुणस्थान is equal to the time
taken to pronounce the five short vowels - 'अ इ उ ऋ तृ'. In the penultimate
moment, 72 प्रकृतियों are destroyed, and in the final moment, 13 प्रकृतियों are
destroyed. Upon liberation from karma-bandha, the soul's प्रदेशes reach the
सिद्धालय in a single moment through ऋजुगति. 32. Question: Where is the सिद्धालय?
Answer: At the end of the लोक, in the last 525 धनुष-प्रमाण क्षेत्र of the
तनुवातवलय, lies the सिद्धालय, i.e., the abode of the सिद्ध परमेष्ठी. The
प्रदेशes of the सिद्धात्मा, due to their upward-moving nature, although ascend,
but due to the absence of further धर्मास्तिकाय, they remain in the लोकान्त. 33.
Question: Which भाय are found in each गुणस्थान in relation to मोहनीय कर्म?
Answer: In relation to दर्शनमोहनीय कर्म, in the first गुणस्थान, औदयिक...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 31. prazna : ayogakevalI guNasthAna kise kahate hai ? uttara : jahA~ mana,
bacana aura kAya ina tInoM yogoM kA sarvathA abhAva ho jAtA hai use ayogakevalI
guNasthAna kahate haiN| isa guNasthAna kA kAla ' a i u R tR' ina pA~ca laghu
akSaroM ke uccAraNa kAla ke barAbara hai| isake upAntya samaya meM 72 aura antya
samaya meM 13 prakRtiyoM kA kSaya hotA hai| karmabandha se mukta hote hI AtmA ke
pradeza eka samaya meM Rjugati se siddhAlaya meM pahu~ca jAte haiN| 32. prazna :
siddhAlaya kahA~ hai ? uttara : loka ke anta meM tanuvAtavalaya ke antima 525
dhanuSa pramANa kSetra meM siddhAlaya hai arthAt siddha parameSThI kA vahIM
nivAsa hotA hai| siddhAtmA ke pradeza Urdhvagamana-svabhAva ke kAraNa yadyapi
Upara kI ora jAte haiM parantu Age ke dharmAstikAya kA abhAva hone se lokAnta
meM hI Thahara jAte -.. - - - 1 haiN| 33. prazna : mohanIya karma kI apekSA
pratyeka guNasthAna meM kauna-kauna se bhAya pAye jAte haiM ? _ uttara :
darzanamohanIya karma kI apekSA prathama guNasthAna meM audayika .. .. . .. ...

Page #21 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
In the second *guna sthana*, there are *parinaamik* emotions. In the third *guna
sthana*, there are *kshayopshaamik* emotions. In the fourth *guna sthana*, all
three emotions, *aupshamik*, *kshayik*, and *kshayopshaamik*, are found.  With
respect to *darshanamohaniya karma*, *aupshamik*, *kshayik*, and
*kshayopshaamik* emotions are found in all three *guna sthana*s: *deshvirat*,
*pramatvirat*, and *apramatvirat*. With respect to *charitramohaniya karma*,
only *kshayopshaamik* emotions are found in these three *guna sthana*s.  With
respect to *darshanamohaniya karma*, *aupshamik* and *kshayik* emotions are
found in the eighth, ninth, tenth, and eleventh *guna sthana*s of the *upsham*
category. With respect to *charitramohaniya karma*, only *aupshamik* emotions
are found in these four *guna sthana*s.  With respect to both *darshanamohaniya
karma* and *charitramohaniya karma*, only one *kshayik* emotion is found in the
eighth, ninth, tenth, and twelfth *guna sthana*s of the *kshapik* category.  In
*sayogkevali*, *ayogkevali*, and *gunasthanatit* *siddhas*, one *kshayik*
emotion is also found as a rule. (16)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 bhAva, dvitIya guNasthAna meM pAriNAmika bhAva, tRtIya guNasthAna meM
kSAyopazamika bhAva aura caturtha guNasthAna meM aupazamika, kSAyika aura
kSAyopazamika tInoM hI bhAva pAye jAte haiN| darzanamohanIya karma kI apekSA
dezavirata, pramattavirata aura apramattavirata ina tInoM guNasthAnoM meM
aupazAmaka, kSAyika aura kSAyopazamika bhAva pAye jAte haiN| cAritramohanIya
karma kI apekSA ina tInoM guNasthAnoM meM mAtra kSAyopazamika bhAva pAyA jAtA
hai| darzanamohanIya karma kI apekSA upazama zreNI vAle AThaveM, nauveM, dasaveM
aura gyArahaveM guNasthAnoM meM aupazamika aura kSAyika bhAva pAyA jAtA hai|
cAritramohanIya karma kI apekSA ina cAroM guNasthAnoM meM mAtra aupazamika bhAva
hI pAyA jAtA hai| darzanamohanIya evaM cAritramohanIya karma kI apekSA kSapaka
zreNI vAle AThaveM, nauveM, dasaveM aura bArahaveM guNasthAnoM meM eka kSAyika
bhAva hI pAyA jAtA hai| sayogakevalI, ayogakevalI aura guNasthAnAtIta siddhoM
meM bhI niyama se eka kSAyika bhAva hI pAyA jAtA hai| (16)

Page #22 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
34. Question: In what order does the soul ascend and descend through the
Gunasthanas? Answer: Mithyadrishti is the nature of the Gunasthana. The Anadi
Mithyadrishti soul, due to the influence of Karnalabdhi, goes to the fourth
Gunasthana through the subsidence of the Samyaktvaghatak (destructive of right
faith) natures. The Sadi Mithyadrishti soul goes to the fourth Gunasthana
through the rise of the Samyaktvaprakriti (nature of right faith). The Sadi
Mithyadrishti soul goes to the third Gunasthana through the rise of the
Samyagmithyatva (mixed right and wrong faith) nature. The Sadi Mithyadrishti
soul goes to the Deshaviraat Gunasthana through the result of the partial
abandonment of Samyaktv and the five sins. The Sadi Mithyadrishti soul goes to
the Aprammattaviraat Gunasthana through the result of the four-fold nature of
the Charitra (conduct) arising from the rise of Samyaktv and the
Pratyakhyanavaran Chatushk (fourfold veil of negation). From this statement, it
is evident that the Mithyadrishti soul can attain the four Gunasthanas up to
Aprammattaviraat, excluding Sasadan and Prammattaviraat. (17)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 34. prazna : yaha jIva guNasthAnoM meM kisa krama se car3hatA-utaratA uttara :
mithyAdRSTi guNasthAna bhUmikA svarUpa hai| anAdi mithyAdRSTi jIva karaNalabdhi
ke prabhAva se samyaktvaghAtaka prakRtiyoM ke upazama se caturtha guNasthAna meM
jAte haiN| sAdi mithyAdRSTi jIva samyaktva prakRti ke udaya se caturtha
guNasthAna meM jAte sAdi mithyAdRSTi jIva samyagmithyAtva prakRti ke udaya se
tIsare guNasthAna meM jAte haiN| sAdi mithyAdRSTi jIva samyaktva evaM pA~ca
pApoM ke ekadezatyAgarUpa pariNAma se dezavirata guNasthAna meM jAte haiN| sAdi
mithyAdRSTi samyaktva evaM pratyAkhyAnAvaraNa catuSka ke anudaya se hone vAle
cAritrarUpa pariNAma se apramattavirata guNasthAna meM jAte haiN| isa kathana se
yaha pratiphalita hotA hai ki mithyAdRSTi jIva sAsAdana aura pramattavirata ko
chor3akara apramattavirata * paryanta cAra guNasthAnoM ko prApta ho sakate haiN|
(17)

Page #23 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Sāsādan guṇasthān vī jīva ūpar ke kisī guṇasthān ko prāpt nahīṁ hote hain. Ye
jīva niyam se mithyātvaguṇasthān ko hī prāpt hote hain. Miśra guṇasthān vī jīva
samyaktvam prakriti ke uday se caturtha guṇasthān ko prāpt hote hain, to
mithyātv prakriti ke uday se mithyātv guṇasthān ko prāpt hote hain.
Aviratsamyaktva guṇasthānvarti upasham samyagdṛṣṭi jīva samyaktv prakriti ke
uday se vedak samyaktv ko prāpt hote hain. Vedak samyagdṛṣṭi jīva anantānubandhī
kā visanyojana aur darśanamohaniya kī tīn prakritiyon kā arthāt sāt prakritiyon
kā kṣaya hone par kṣāyik samyaktv ko prāpt hote hain. Caturtha guṇasthān vī jīva
apratyākhyānāvarana caturṣka ke anuday se pancama guṇasthān ko prāpt hote hain.
Caturtha guṇasthān vī jīva pratyākhyānāvarana caturṣka ke anuday se saptam
guṇasthān ko prāpt hote hain. Caturtha guṇasthān vī jīva miśra prakriti ke uday
se tīsare guṇasthān ko, anantānubandhī ke uday se dūsare guṇasthān  (18)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 sAsAdana guNasthAnavI jIva Upara ke kisI guNasthAna ko prApta nahIM hote haiN|
ye jIva niyama se mithyAtvaguNasthAna ko hI prApta hote haiN| mizra guNasthAnavI
jIva samyaktvaM prakRti ke udaya se caturtha guNasthAna ko prApta hote haiM, to
mithyAtva prakRti ke udaya se mithyAtva guNasthAna ko prApta hote haiN|
aviratasamyaktva guNasthAnavartI upazama samyagdRSTi jIva samyaktva prakRti ke
udaya se vedaka samyaktva ko prApta karate haiN| vedaka samyagdRSTi jIva
anantAnubandhI kA visaMyojana aura darzanamohanIya kI tIna prakRtiyoM kA arthAt
sAta prakRtiyoM kA kSaya hone para kSAyika samyaktva ko prApta hote haiN|
caturtha guNasthAnavI jIva apratyAkhyAnAvaraNa catuSka ke anudaya se paMcama
guNasthAna ko prApta hote haiN| caturtha guNasthAnavI jIva pratyAkhyAnAvaraNa
catuSka ke anudaya se saptam guNasthAna ko prApta hote haiN| caturtha
guNasthAnavI jIva mizraprakRti ke udaya se tIsare guNasthAna ko, anantAnubandhI
ke udaya se dUsare guNasthAna (18)

Page #24 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Those who attain the first *gunasthana* (stage of spiritual progress) are freed
from *ko* (attachment) and *mithyatva* (false belief).  Those who attain the
fifth *gunasthana* are freed from the four *pratyakhyana-avaran* (veils of
knowledge) and attain the seventh *gunasthana*. They can also attain the four
lower *gunasthanas*. Those who attain the sixth *gunasthana* can attain the five
lower *gunasthanas* but can only progress up to the *aprammatta-virata*
*gunasthana* (the stage of perfect non-attachment), not beyond. Those who attain
the seventh *gunasthana* are freed from *apuurva-karana* (the cause of rebirth),
the sixth *gunasthana*, and attain the fourth *gunasthana* (the stage of
heavenly existence) in relation to death (thus, three *gunasthanas*). Those who
attain the eighth, ninth, and tenth *gunasthanas* in the *upshama* (subduing)
category, can attain higher *gunasthanas* in relation to ascending, lower
*gunasthanas* in relation to falling, and the fourth *gunasthana* in relation to
death. Those who attain the eleventh *gunasthana* can attain the tenth
*gunasthana* in relation to falling and the fourth *gunasthana* in relation to
death. Those who attain the eighth and ninth *gunasthanas* in the *kshapika*
(destroying) category...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 ko aura mithyAtva ke udaya se prathama guNasthAna ko prApta hote haiN| paMcama
guNasthAnavI jIva pratyAkhyAnAvaraNa catuSka ke anudaya se saptam guNasthAna ko
prApta hote haiN| ye nIce ke cAroM guNasthAnoM ko bhI prApta ho sakate haiN|
SaSTha guNasthAnavI jIva nIce ke pA~ca guNasthAnoM ko prApta hote haiM parantu
Upara ke apramattavirata guNasthAna paryanta jAte haiM, Age nhiiN| saptam
guNasthAnavI jIva apUrvakaraNa ko, chaThe guNasthAna ko aura maraNa kI apekSA
devagati sambandhI caturtha guNasthAna (isa prakAra tIna guNasthAnoM) ko prApta
hote haiN| upazama zreNI vAle AThaveM, nauveM evaM dasaveM guNasthAnavartI jIva
car3hane kI apekSA anantara Upara ke, girane kI apekSA anantara nIce ke aura
maraNa kI apekSA devagati sambandhI caturtha guNasthAna ko prApta hote haiN|
gyArahaveM guNasthAnavI jIva girane kI apekSA dasaveM aura maraNa kI apekSA
cauthe guNasthAna ko prApta hote haiN| kSapakazreNI vAle AThaveM aura nauveM
guNasthAnavI jIva (16)

Page #25 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Instead of ascending, they attain the higher Gunasthanas. The tenth Gunasthanas,
belonging to the Kshapaka category, attain the twelfth Gunasthanas by rule, and
from there, they attain the subsequent Gunasthanas in order, ultimately
achieving Moksha. 35. Question: What is the Upshama category, and which beings
attain it? Answer: The category that is traversed to subdue Charitramoha is
called the Upshama category. Both the Dvitiyopshama Samyagdarshi and the
Kshayika Samyagdarshi can traverse this category. The category begins with the
Adhokarana results. Beings in this category attain the Adhokarana, Apurvakarana,
Anivrittikarana, and Sukhma-Sampsaya Gunasthanas, at least, and at the end of
Sukhma-Samparaya, they completely subdue Charitramoha and then attain the
eleventh Upshanta Moha Gunasthanas. From there, they descend in order. The
Dvitiyopshama Samyagdarshi beings fall from the eleventh Gunasthanas (20)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 caDhane kI apekSA anantara Upara ke guNasthAna ko prApta hote haiN| kSapaka
zreNI vAle dasaveM guNasthAnavI jIva niyama se bArahaveM guNasthAna ko prApta
hote haiM aura vahA~ se krama se Age ke guNasthAnoM ko prApta hote hue mokSa ko
prApta karate haiN| 35. prazna : upazama zreNI kise kahate haiM aura use kauna
jIva prApta karate haiM ? uttara : cAritramohanIya kA upazama karane ke lie jo
zreNI mAMDI jAtI hai use upazama zreNI kahate haiN| ise dvitIyopazama
samyagdRSTi tathA kSAyika samyagdRSTi donoM mAMDa sakate haiN| adhaHkaraNa
pariNAmoM se zreNI kA prAraMbha hotA hai| isa zreNI vAle jIva adhaHkaraNa,
apUrvakaraNa, anivRttikaraNa aura sUkSma-sAmpasaya guNasthAnoM ko kama se prApta
karate hue sUkSmasAmparAya ke anta meM cAritramoha kA bilakula upazama kara
cukate haiM aura usake bAda gyArahaveM upazAnta moha guNasthAna ko prApta hote
haiN| vahA~ se kramapUrvaka girakara nIce Ate haiN| dvitIyopazama samyagdRSTi
jIva 11veM guNasthAna se girate hue (20)

Page #26 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
They can reach the first Gunasthana, but the Kshayik Samyagdarshi Jivas do not
fall below the fourth Gunasthana. 36. Question: How many times can the Upshama
Shreni be attained at the most? Answer: The Upshama Shreni can be attained at
the most four times, but it is attained only twice in one Bhav. The fifth time,
the Kshapaka Shreni is attained by rule. 37. Question: What is the Kshapaka
Shreni and which Jivas attain it? Answer: The one in which the destruction of
Charitramohaniya occurs is called the Kshapaka Shreni. This Shreni also begins
with Adhokarana Parinamas. The Jivas in this Shreni, in order, attain the
A-purvakarana, Anivrittikarana and Sukshma-Samparaya Gunasthanas, and at the end
of the Sukshma-Samparaya Gunasthana, they completely destroy the
Charitramohaniya and attain the twelfth Kshina-moha Gunasthana. Only the Kshayik
Samyagdarshi can attain it. The Jivas in this Shreni do not fall downwards and
do not die.  (S)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 - - - - - prathamaguNasthAna taka A sakate haiM, parantu kSAyika samyagdRSTi
jIva caturtha guNasthAna se nIce nahIM Ate haiN| 36. prazna : upazamazreNI
adhika se adhika kitanI bAra prApta kI jAtI hai ? uttara : upazama zreNI adhika
se adhika cAra bAra prApta kI jA sakatI hai parantu eka bhava meM do bAra hI
prApta kI jAtI hai| pA~cavIM bAra niyama se kSapaka zreNI prApta hotI hai| 37.
prazna : zapaka zreNI kise kahate haiM aura ise kauna jIva prApta karate haiM ?
uttara : jisameM cAritramohanIya kA kSaya hotA hai use kSapaka zreNI kahate
haiN| isa zreNI kA prAraMbha bhI adhaHkaraNa pariNAmoM se hotA hai| isa zreNI
vAle jIva krama se apUrvakaraNa, anivRttikaraNa aura sUkSmasAmparAya guNasthAnoM
ko prApta hote hue sUkSmasAmparAya guNasthAna ke anta meM cAritramohanIya kA
sarvathA kSaya kara bArahaveM kSINamoha guNasthAna ko prApta hote haiN| kSAyika
samyagdRSTi hI ise mAMDa sakate haiN| isa zreNI vAle jIva kA nIce kI ora patana
nahIM hotA hai aura maraNa bhI nahIM hotA hai| (sa)

Page #27 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
38. Question: Which beings do not experience death? Answer: Beings in the mixed-
quality state, those who have attained the state of complete liberation, those
who are in the mixed-body yoga, those in the eighth, ninth, tenth, and twelfth
quality states of the क्षपक category, those in the first part of the अपूर्वकरण
quality state of the ascending उपशम category (until the bondage and liberation
of sleep and प्रचला are not removed), those with the first उपशम right faith,
those in the thirteenth quality state, and those in the second, third, and
fourth quality states of the seventh hell do not experience death. Beings who
attain मिथ्यात्व by disintegrating the अनन्तानुबन्धी do not experience death
until the next moment. Beings who are on the verge of attaining क्षायिक right
faith do not experience death until they have destroyed मिथ्यात्व,
सम्यग्मिथ्यात्व, and the four अनन्तानुबन्धी, i.e., until they remain कृतकृत्य.
They experience death after the कृतकृत्य state ends. (1) According to one
opinion, the कृतकृत्यवेदक सम्यक्त्वी experiences death. (Labdhisar). According
to another opinion, the कृतकृत्यवेदक सम्यक्त्वी does not experience death.
(Jayapvala, pp. 28215-220) (2)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 38. prazna : maraNa kina-kina jIvoM kA nahIM hotA hai ? uttara :
mizraguNasthAna vAle, nirvRtyaparyApta avasthA ko dhAraNa karane vAle
mizrakAyayogI, kSapaka zreNI sambandhI AThaveM, nauveM, dasaveM evaM bArahaveM
guNasthAna vAle, upazamazreNI car3hate hue apUrvakaraNa guNasthAna ke pahale
bhAga vAle (jaba taka nidrA aura pracalA kI bandha - vyucchitti nahIM hotI hai),
prathamopazama samyaktva vAle, terahaveM guNasthAna vAle aura sAtaveM naraka ke
dvitIya, tRtIya aura caturtha guNasthAna vAle jIva maraNa ko prApta nahIM hote
haiN| anantAnubandhI kA visaMyojana karake mithyAtva ko prApta hone vAle jIva
antarmuhUrta taka maraNa ko prApta nahIM hote haiN| kSAyika samyagdarzana kI
prApti ke sammukha jIva jaba taka mithyAtva, samyagmithyAtva aura anantAnubandhI
catuSka kA kSaya nahIM kara dete haiM arthAt jaba taka kRtakRtyatA rahatI hai
taba taka maraNa nahIM karate haiN| kRtakRtyatA samApta ho jAne para maraNa
karate haiN|' 9. eka mata ke anusAra kRtakRtyavedaka sapyakacI kA maraNa hotA
hai| (lbdhisaar)| dUsare mata ke anusAra kRtakRtyavedaka samyaktvI kA maraNa
nahIM hotA hai| jayapavalA pu. 28215 se 220) (2)

Page #28 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
36. Question: Where are the *Samyagdristi* souls who have attained liberation
born after death? Answer: The time of *Samyaktva* for those who have attained
liberation is *Antarmuhurta*. In the first part of it, the deceased souls are
born among the gods, in the second part, they are born among both gods and
humans, in the third part, they are born among gods, humans, and animals, and in
the fourth part, they are born in any of the four realms. 40. Question: What is
*Jivasamaas*? Answer: Those specific doctrines by which the collection of many
souls and their many species can be made, are called *Jivasamaas*. 41. Question:
How many types of *Jivasamaas* are there? Answer: There are many types of
*Jivasamaas*, but the 14 types, 57 types, and 68 types are more famous. 42.
Question: What are the fourteen types of *Jivasamaas*? Answer: There are two
types of *Ekeindriya* - *Badar* and *Sukshma*, three types of *Vikalatriya* -
*Dwiindriya*, *Triindriya*, *Chaturindriya*, two types of *Panchendriya* -
*Saini* and *Asaini*; in this way, there are seven types of souls (23)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 36. prazna : kRtakRtyayedaka samyagdRSTi jIva marakara kahA~-kahA~ utpanna hote
hai ? uttara : kRtakRtyavedaka samyaktva kA kAla antarmuhUrta hai| usake cAra
bhAgoM meM se pahale bhAga meM mare hue jIva devoM meM, dUsare bhAga meM mare
hue jIva devoM aura manuSyoM meM, tIsare bhAga meM mare hue jIva deva, manuSya
aura tiryacoM meM tathA cauthe bhAga meM mare hue jIva cAroM gatiyoM meM se kisI
bhI gati meM utpanna hote haiN| 40. prazna : jIvasamAsa kise kahate haiM ?
uttara : jina dharmavizeSoM ke dvArA aneka jIvoM tathA unakI aneka jAtiyoM kA
saMgraha kiyA jA sake, aise dharma vizeSoM ko jIvasamAsa kahate haiN| 41. prazna
: jIvasamAsa ke kitane bheda haiM ? uttara :jIvasamAsa ke aneka bheda haiM
parantu unameM 14 bheda, 57 bheda aura 68 bheda adhika prasiddha hai| 42. prazna
: jIvasamAsa ke caudaha bheda kauna-kauna se hai ? uttara : ekendriya ke do
bheda -bAdara aura sUkSma, vikalatraya ke tIna  /  bheda - dvIndriya, trIndriya,
caturindraya, paMcendriya ke do bheda-sainI asainI; isa taraha ina sAtoM hI
prakAra ke jIvoM (23)

Page #29 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
There are fourteen divisions of *Jivasamaas* due to the two-two distinctions of
sufficient and insufficient. 43. Question: What are the fifty-seven divisions of
*Jivasamaas*? Answer: After the six types of beings - earth, water, fire, air,
body, and eternal *nigoda* and other *nigoda* - there are two-two divisions in
terms of gross and subtle, two divisions in terms of established and
unestablished for each plant, thus there are fourteen divisions of one-sense
beings. Adding five divisions of two-sense, three-sense, four-sense, *Saini*,
five-sense, and non-*Saini* five-sense to them, there are sixteen divisions. Due
to three-three divisions in terms of sufficient, *nirvrittyaparyapt* and
*labdhyaparyapt*, there are a total of fifty-seven divisions of *Jivasamaas*.
44. Question: What are the eighty-nine divisions of *Jivasamaas*? Answer: There
are three-three divisions in terms of sufficient, *nirvrittyaparyapt* and
*labdhyaparyapt* for the above-mentioned fourteen divisions of one-sense,
therefore there are (14 x 3) = 42 divisions related to one-sense. There are
three-three divisions in terms of sufficient, *nirvrittyaparyapt* and
*labdhyaparyapt* for the *Vikalatrai*, therefore there are (3 x 3) = 6 divisions
of *Vikalatrai*. (24)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 ke paryApta aura aparyApta kI apekSA do-do bheda karane se jIvasamAsa ke
caudaha bheda hote haiM 43. prazna : jIvasamAsa ke sattAvana bheda kauna kauna
se haiM ? uttara : pRthivI-jala-agni, vAyukAyika, nitya nigoda tathA itara
nigoda ina chaha prakAra ke jIvoM ke bAdara aura sUkSma kI apekSA do-do bheMda,
pratyeka vanaspati ke pratiSThita aura apratiSThita kI apekSA do bheda, isa
prakAra ekendriya jIva ke caudaha bheda hue| unameM basa ke dvIndriya trIndriya,
caturindriya, sainI, paMcendriya aura asainI paMcendriya ye pA~ca bheda milAne
se 16 bheda hote haiN| unake paryApta, nirvRtyaparyApta aura labdhyaparyApta kI
apekSA tIna-tIna bheda hone se saba milakara jIvasamAsa ke sattAvana bheda hote
haiN| 44. prazna : jIvasamAsa ke aThAnave bheda kauna-kauna se haiM ? uttara :
ekendriya ke uparyukta 14 bheda ke paryApta, nirvRtyaparyApta aura
labdhyaparyApta kI apekSA tIna-tIna bheda haiM, ataH ekendriya sambandhI (14 x 3
) = 42 bheda hote haiM  /  vikalatraya ke paryApta, nirvRtyaparyApta aura
labdhyaparyApta kI apekSA tIna-tIna bheda haiM, ataH vikalatraya ke (3 x 3 ) = 6
bheda hote haiN| (24)

Page #30 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
There are two categories of **karmabhūmija** **tiryach** with five senses:
**saṁjñī** and **asaṁjñī**.  Each of these has three subcategories based on
their habitat: **jalachara** (aquatic), **thalachara** (terrestrial), and
**nabhachara** (aerial), resulting in a total of six categories. These six types
of beings are further divided into two categories based on their birth:
**garbhajanma** (born from a womb) and **sammūrchana janma** (born from a
sprout).   The six types of beings born from a womb are further divided into two
categories based on their **paryāpta** (capacity): **paryāpta** and
**nityaparyāpta**, resulting in (6 x 2) = 12 categories. The six types of beings
born from a sprout are further divided into three categories based on their
**paryāpta**: **paryāpta**, **nirvṛtyaparyāpta**, and **labdhyaparyāpta**,
resulting in (6 x 3) = 18 categories. Thus, there are a total of (12 + 18) = 30
categories of **karmabhūmija** **tiryach**.  **Bhogabhūmija** **tiryach** with
five senses are divided into two categories based on their habitat:
**thalachara** and **nabhachara**. Each of these is further divided into two
categories based on their **paryāpta**: **paryāpta** and **nityaparyāpta**,
resulting in (2 x 2) = 4 categories.   Humans in the **āryakhaṇḍa** are divided
into three categories based on their **paryāpta**: **paryāpta**,
**nirvṛtyaparyāpta**, and **labdhyaparyāpta**. Humans in the **mlecchakhaṇḍa**
are divided into two categories based on their **paryāpta**: **paryāpta** and
**nirvṛtyaparyāpta**.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmabhUmija paMcendriya tiyacoM ke saMjJI aura asaMjhI kI apekSA do bheda
haiN| ina donoM ke jalacara, thalacara aura nabhacara kI apekSA tIna-tIna bheda
hone se 6 bheda hote haiN| ye chaha prakAra ke jIva garbha, janma aura
sammUrchana janma kI apekSA do prakAra ke hote haiN| garbha janma vAle chaha
prakAra ke jIvoM ke paryApta aura nityaparyApta kI apekSA do-do bheda haiM ataH
(6x2) = 12 bheda hote haiN| sampUrchana janma vAle chaha prakAra ke jIvoM ke
paryApta, nirvRtyaparyApta aura labdhyaparyApta kI apekSA tIna-tIna bheda haiM,
ataH (643) = 18 bheda hote haiN| isa prakAra karmabhUmija tiryaca ke (12 + 18)-
30 bheda hote haiN| bhogabhUmija paMcendriya tiryacoM ke thalacara aura
nabhacara, ye do bheda hote haiN| inake paryApta aura nityaparyApta kI apekSA
do-do bheda haiM, ataH (2x2) = 4 bheda hote haiN| AryakhaNDa ke manuSya ke
paryApta, nivRtyaparyApta aura labthyaparyApta kI apekSA tIna bheda hote haiN|
mlecchakhaNDa ke manuSya ke paryApta aura nirvRtyaparyApta kI (2)

Page #31 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
There are two types of expectations: Bhogbhoomij and Kubhogbhoomij. There are
two types of expectations for humans, both for Paryapt and Nirvrittyaparyapt.
There are two types of expectations for Devas and Narakis, both for Paryapt and
Nirvrittyaparyapt. In this way, there are 85 types for Tiryanch (42 + 6 + 12 +
18 + 4), 6 types for humans (3 + 2 + 4), 2 types for Devas, and 2 types for
Narakis. All these combined, there are 98 types for Jivasamaas (85 + 6 + 4).
Question 45: What is Yoni and how many types are there?  Answer: The place of
origin of a Jiva is called Yoni. There are two types of Yoni: 1. Aakaryoni and
2. Gunayoni. There are 3 types of Aakaryoni for humans: 1. Shankhaavart Yoni, 2.
Koormoannat Yoni, and 3. Vanshapatra Yoni. There are 6 types of Gunayoni: 1.
Sachitt, 2. Achitt, 3. Sachittachitt, 4. Sheet, 5. Ushna, 6. Sheetoshna, 7.
Samvrit, 8. Vivrit, and 9. Samvritvivrut.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 apekSA do bheda hote haiN| bhogabhUmija aura kubhogabhUmija manuSya ke paryApta
aura nirvRtyaparyApta kI apekSA do-do bheda hote haiN| deva aura nArakiyoM ke
paryApta aura nirvRtyaparyApta kI apekSA do-do bheda hote haiN| isa taraha
tiryaMca ke (42 + 6 + 12 + 18 + 4) = 85 bheda, manuSya ke (3 + 2 + 4) = 6 meda,
deva ke 2 bheda aura nArakI ke 2 bheda, ye saba milAkara jIvasamAsa ke (85 + 6 +
4) = 68 bheda hote haiN| 45. prazna : yoni kise kahate haiM tathA isake kitane
bheda hote uttara :jIva ke utpatti-sthAna ko yoni kahate haiN| yoni ke 2 bheda
haiM-1. AkArayoni aura 2. guNayoni  /  AkArayoni ke manuSya kI apekSA 3 bheda
haiM - 1. zaMkhAvarta yoni, 2. kUrmonnata yoni aura 3. vaMzapatra yoni  /  guNa
yoni ke 6 bheda haiM-1,sacitta, 2. acitta, 3. sacittAcitta, 4. zIta, 5. uSNa, 6
zItoSNa, 7. saMvRta 8 vivRta aura 6. sNvRtvivRt| (26)

Page #32 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
46. Question: What is the nature of the three types of shape wombs? Answer:
Shankhavart womb: The shape of this womb is similar to the coil of a conch
shell. Women of this womb do not remain warm! Kuurmonnat womb: The shape of this
womb is elevated like the back of a tortoise. Women of this womb give birth to
Tirthankaras (spiritual teachers in Jainism), Chakravartins (universal
monarchs), Narayan (a divine figure in Hinduism), Balabhadra (a figure in Jain
tradition), as well as ordinary humans. Vamshpatra womb: The shape of this womb
is long like a genealogical chart. Women of this womb give birth only to
ordinary humans. 47. Question: What is the nature of the six types of qualities
wombs? Answer: Sachitta: A substance particle (pudgala) endowed with the self-
properties (sachitta) is called sachitta womb. Achitta: A substance particle
without self-properties is called achitta womb. Sachitta-achitta: If some
substance particles in the basic location of birth are sachitta and some are
achitta, it is called sachitta-achitta womb.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 46. prazna : 3 prakAra kI AkAra yoniyoM kA svarUpa kyA hai ? uttara
:zaMkhAvarta yoni : isa yoni kA AkAra zaMkhA ke Avarta samAna hotA hai| isa yoni
tAlI strI ke garma nahIM rahatA hai! kUrmonnata yoni : isa yoni kA AkAra kuchae
kI pITha kI taraha unnata hotA hai| isa yoni vAlI strI ke tIrthakara, cakavartI,
nArAyaNa, balabhadra tathA sAdhAraNa manuSya bhI utpanna hote haiN| vaMzapatra
yoni : isa yoni kA AkAra vaMzapatra ke samAna lambA hotA hai| isa yoni vAlI strI
ke sAdhAraNa manuSya hI utpanna hote haiN| 47. prazna : 6 prakAra kI guNayoniyoM
kA svarUpa kyA hai ? uttara : sacitta : AtmapradezoM se yukta pudgala piNDa ko
sacitta yoni kahate haiN| acitta : AtmapradezoM se rahita pudgalapiNDa ko acitta
yoni kahate haiN| sacittAcitta : janma ke AdhArabhUta sthAna ke kucha pudgala
sacitta aura kucha pudgala acitta hoM, una ko sacittAcitta yoni kahate haiN|
(27)

Page #33 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Cold, hot, and temperate: The beings composed of the properties of cold, hot,
and temperate are respectively referred to as cold, hot, and temperate beings.
Covered, uncovered, and covered-uncovered: The beings that are partially
covered, partially uncovered, and those that are both covered and uncovered are
respectively called covered, uncovered, and covered-uncovered beings.  Question:
What is birth? What are its types? Answer: The origin of a living being is
called birth. There are three types of birth - 1. womb birth, 2. spontaneous
birth, and 3. aggregation birth.   Question: What is womb birth? Who does it
apply to? Answer: The birth that occurs after the union of male and female
fluids (sperm and ovum) is called womb birth. The three types of beings that
have womb birth are 1. jarayuja (born from the womb), 2. andaja (hatched from
eggs), and 3. pota (born from moisture).   Jarayuja: Beings that are born from a
type of pouch filled with flesh and blood, similar to a net, are called
jarayuja, such as cows, buffaloes, humans, etc.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zIta, uSNa aura zItoSNa : zIta, uSNa aura mizra guNoM se yukta pudgata
paramANuvAlI yoni ko krama se zIta, uSNa aura zItoSNa yoni kahate haiN| saMvRta,
vivRta aura saMvRta-vivRta : kucha DhakI huI, kucha khulI huI aura kucha DhakI
huI aura kucha khulI huI yoni ko krama se saMvRta, vivRta aura saMvRta-vivRta
yoni kahate 49. prazna : janma kise kahate haiM ? usake kisane bheva hai? uttara
: jIva kI utpatti ko janma kahate haiN| janma ke tIna bheda hai - 1. garbha
janma, 2. upapAda janma aura 3. sammUrchana jnm| 46. prazna : garbha janma kise
kahate haiM ? yaha kisake hotA hai? uttara :nara aura mAdA kI ratikriyA ke bAda
raja aura vIrya milane se jo janma hotA hai, use garbha janma kahate haiN| ina
tIna prakAra ke jIyoM ke garmajanma hI hotA hai| 1. jarAyuja, 2. aMDaja aura 3.
pota  /  jarAyuja : jAla ke samAna mAMsa aura khUna se vyApta eka prakAra kI
thailI se lipaTe hue jo jIva paidA hote haiM, unheM jarAyuja kahate haiM jaise-
gAya, bhaiMsa, manuSya Adi  /  (4)

Page #34 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Andaja:** Creatures that are born from eggs are called Andaja. For example,
eagles, pigeons, etc.  **Pot:** Creatures that are born without a covering and
start moving immediately after birth are called Pot. For example, lions, deer,
cats, etc.  **Question 50:** What is Upapad Janma and who experiences it?
**Answer:** The birth of a being within a very short period of time in a womb-
like bed or in burrows like those of camels, etc., is called Upapad Janma.
Upapad Janma occurs only in Devas and Narakas.  **Question 51:** What is
Sammurchana Janma and who experiences it? **Answer:** The birth that occurs from
the coming together of atoms from here and there is called Sammurchana Janma.
Sammurchana Janma occurs only in humans and Tiryanchas. From one-sense to four-
sense Tiryanchas, Sammurchana Janma is the rule. Humans born from Sammurchana
Janma are born from the excreta of men and women, and...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 aNDaja : jo jIva aNDe se utpanna hote haiM, unheM aNDaja kahate haiN| jaise-
cIla, kabUtara Adi  /  : pota jo jIva AvaraNa rahita utpanna hote haiM aura
utpanna hote hI jo calane-phirane laga jAte haiM unheM pota kahate haiM jaise -
siMha, hiraNa, billI Adi  /  50. prazna: upapAda janma kise kahate haiM aura
yaha kisake hotA hai ? uttara : sampuTa zayyA evaM uSTrAdi mukhAkAra biloM meM
laghu antarmuhUrta kAla meM hI jIva kA utpanna honA upapAda janma hai| upapAda
janma deva aura nArakiyoM ke hI hotA hai| 51. prazna : sammUrcchana janma kise
kahate haiM aura yaha kisake hotA hai ? uttara : idhara-udhara ke paramANuoM ke
milane se jo janma hotA hai use sammUrcchana janma kahate haiN| sammUrcchana
janma manuSya aura tiryaMcoM ke hI hotA hai  /  ekendriya se lekara cAra indriya
paryanta tiryaMcoM ke niyama se sammUrcchana janma hI hotA hai| sammUrcchana
janma vAle manuSya strI-puruSa ke mala-mUtra tathA (26)

Page #35 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Sweat, etc., are produced in them. The **sampurchhan** born humans are
insufficient. 52. Question: Which birth has which **gunayoni**? Answer: The
**uppaad** birth has **achitt**, **sheet**, **ushn** and **sanvrit** **yonis**.
The **ghabhan** birth has **sachittchitt**, **sheet**, **udhy**, **sheetoshn**
and **sanvrit-vivrit** **yonis**. The **sampurchhan** birth has **sachitt**,
**achitt**, **sachittachitt**, **sheet**, **ushn**, **sheetoshn**,
**ekendriya**'s **sanvrit**, **vikaleendriya**'s **vivrit** and **panchendriya**
beings' **vivrit** **yoni**. 53. Question: How many types of **gunayoni** are
there in detail? Answer: In detail, there are eighty-four lakh types of
**gunayoni**, which are as follows: **nitya nigod**, **itar nigod** and
**prithvi-jal-agni** and **vayukaayik** these six types of beings, each having
seven lakh, each **vanaspati** having ten lakh, each **vikalatraya** having two
lakh, each **dev-naarki** and **panchendriya** **tiryanch** having four lakh and
humans having fourteen lakh, thus all together there are eighty-four lakh types
of **gunayoni**.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pasInA Adi meM utpanna hote haiN| sampUrchana janma vAle manuSya aparyApta hI
hote haiN| 52. prazna : kisa janma kI kauna-sI guNayoni hotI hai ? uttara :
upapAda janma kI acitta, zIta, uSNa aura saMvRta yoniyA~ hotI haiN| gabhaM janma
kI sacittacitta, zIta, udhya, zItoSNa aura saMvRta-vivRta yoniyA~ hotI haiN|
sampUrchana janma kI sacitta, acitta, sacittAcitta, zIta, uSNa, zItoSNa,
ekendriya kI saMvRta, vikalendriya kI vivRta aura paMcendriya jIvoM kI vivRta
yoni hotI hai| 53. prazna : vistAra se guNo yoni ke kitane bheda haiM ? uttara :
vistAra se guNayoni ke caurAsI lAkha bheda haiM; jo isa prakAra hai-nitya
nigoda, itara nigoda evaM pRthivI-jala-agni aura vAyukAyika ina chaha prakAra ke
jIvoM meM se pratyeka kI sAta-sAta lAkha, pratyeka vanaspati kI dasa lAkha,
vikalatrayoM meM pratyeka kI do-do lAkha, deva-nArakI aura paMcendriya tiryaMcoM
meM pratyeka kI cAra-cAra lAkha aura manuSyoM kI caudaha lAkha isa taraha saba
milAkara guNayoni ke caurAsI lAkha bheda hote haiN|

Page #36 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
54. Question: What is the most heinous and the most excellent Avagahana? Answer:
The most heinous Avagahana occurs in the third time of the birth of a subtle
Nigoda-Labdhyaparyaptak Jiva born from the righteous path, whose measure is an
innumerable part of a Ghanaangula. The most excellent Avagahana occurs in the
Mahamatsya that is in the middle of the Svayambhuraman Sea, whose measure is one
thousand Yojanas long, five hundred Yojanas wide, and two hundred and fifty
Yojanas thick. 55. Question: How much is the excellent Avagahana of Jivas in
comparison to the senses, and who has it? Answer: In Ekaindriya Jivas, it is a
little more than one thousand Yojanas of a lotus, in Dviindriya Jivas, it is
twelve Yojanas of a conch, in Triindriya Jivas, it is three Koshas of an ant, in
Chaturindriya Jivas, it is one Yojana of a bumblebee, and in Panchendriya Jivas,
it is one thousand Yojanas of a Mahamatsya. The Jivas who possess the excellent
Avagahana are in the Svayambhuraman Island and the Svayambhuraman Sea. (31)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 54. prazna : sabase jaghanya aura sabase utkRSTa avagAhanA kisakI hotI hai ?
uttara : sabase jadhanya-avagAhanA Rjugati se utpanna hone vAle sUkSma-nigodiyA-
labdhyaparyAptaka jIva ke utpatti se tIsare samaya meM hotI hai, jisakA pramANa
ghanAMgula kA asaMkhyAtayA~ bhAga hai| utkRSTa ayagAhanA svayambhUramaNa samudra
ke madhya meM hone vAle mahAmatsya kI hotI hai, jisakA pramANa eka hajAra yojana
lambA, pA~ca sau yojana caur3A aura DhAI sau yojana moTA hai| 55. prazna :
indriyoM kI apekSA jIvoM kI utkRSTa avagAhanA kitanI hai aura yaha kinake hotI
hai ? uttara : ekendriya jIvoM meM kamala kI kucha adhika eka hajAra yojana,
dvIndriya jIvoM meM zaMkha kI bAraha yojana, trIndriya jIvoM meM cIMTI kI tIna
koza, caturindriya jIvoM meM bhramara kI eka yojana aura paMcendriya jIvoM meM
mahAmatsya kI eka hajAra yojana utkRSTa avagAhanA hai| utkRSTa avagAhanA ke
dhAraka jIva svayambhUramaNa dvIpa aura svayambhUramaNa samudra meM hote haiN|
(31)

Page #37 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
56. Question: How much is the gross transgression of the two-sensed, etc.,
beings in comparison to the senses, and of whom? Answer: The grossest
transgression among the two-sensed beings is that of the Anundhari, which is an
innumerable part of the Ghanaangul, among the three-sensed beings it is that of
the Kundhu, which is innumerable times greater than this, among the four-sensed
beings it is that of the Kagamakshika, which is innumerable times greater than
this, and among the five-sensed beings it is that of the Sikthak Matsya, which
lives in the ear of the Mahamatsya, and is innumerable times greater than this.
57. Question: What is called a Kula, and how many Kulas are there for each
being? Answer: The differences in the Nokarmavargana, which are the causes of
the origin of different bodies, are called Kulas. Prithvikaayik Jalakaayik
Agnikaayik Vayuakaayik Vanaspatikaayik Dwiindriya - 22 lakh koti 7 lakh koti 3
lakh koti 7 lakh koti 28 lakh koti 7 lakh koti (32)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 56. prazna: indriyoM kI apekSA paryAptaka dvIndriyAdi jIvoM kI jaghanya
avagAhanA kitanI hai aura kinake hotI hai ? uttara : paryApta dvIndriya jIvoM
meM sabase jadhanya avagAhanA anundharI nAmaka jIva kI ghanAMgula ke
asaMkhyAtaveM bhAga pramANa, trIndriya jIvoM meM kundhu nAmaka jIva kI isase
saMkhyAtaguNI, caturindriya jIvoM meM kAgamakSikA nAmaka jIva kI isase
saMkhyAtaguNI paMcendriya jIvoM meM mahAmatsya ke kAna meM rahane vAle sikthaka
matsya kI isase saMkhyAtaguNI hotI hai| 57. prazna: kula kise kahate haiM aura
kisa jIva ke kitane kula hote haiM ? uttara : bhinna-bhinna zarIroM kI utpatti
meM kAraNabhUta nokarmavargaNA ke bhedoM ko kula kahate haiM  /  pRthivIkAyika
jalakAyika agnikAyika vAyukAyika vanaspatikAyika dvIndriya - 22 lAkha koTi 7
lAkha koTi 3 lAkha koTi 7 lAkha koTi 28 lAkha koTi 7 lAkha koTi (32)

Page #38 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Dev Shrindriya 8 lakh koti Chaturindriya - 6 lakh koti Panchendriya Jalchar - 12
lakh koti Panchendriya Pakshi - 12 lakh koti Panchendriya Pashu - 10 lakh koti
Panchendriya Chhati ke sahaare chalne vale - lakh koti 26 lakh koti Naraki 25
lakh koti Manushya 14 lakh koti Athava 12 lakh koti 16E lakh koti Athava - 167%
lakh koti Is prakar samasth kul-kotion ki sankhya ek koda-kodi ninyanve lakh
pachas hazar koti hoti hai. Kahin-kahin manushyon ki 12 lakh kul kotian batayi
gayi hain, atah unke mat se samasth kulon ka pariman ek koda-kodi sattanve lakh
pachas hazar koti hota hai. (33)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 deva zrIndriya 8 lAkha koTi caturindriya - 6 lAkha koTi paMcendriya jalacara -
12 lAkha koTi paMcendriya pakSI - 12 lAkha koTi paMcendriya pazu - 10 lAkha koTi
paMcendriya chAtI ke sahAre calane vAle - lAkha koTi 26 lAkha koTi nArakI 25
lAkha koTi manuSya 14 lAkha koTi athavA 12 lAkha koTi 16E lAkha koTi athavA -
167% lAkha koTi isa prakAra samasta kula-koTiyoM kI saMkhyA eka kor3A-kor3I
ninyAnave lAkha pacAsa hajAra koTi hotI hai| kahIM-kahIM manuSyoM kI 12 lAkha
kula koTiyAM batAyI gaI haiM, ataH unake mata se samasta kuloM kA parimANa eka
kor3A-kor3I sattAnave lAkha pacAsa hajAra koTi hotA hai| (33)

Page #39 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
58. Question: What is the difference between Yoni and Kula? Answer: The place of
origin of a living being, such as the root, egg, womb, embryo, sap, and sweat,
is called Yoni. The differences in the NoKarmaVargana, which are the causes of
the origin of different bodies, are called Kula. 56. Question: What is Paryapti?
How many types are there? Answer: Paryapti is the completeness of the powers of
food, body, senses, breath, speech, and mind. There are six types of Paryapti:
1. Food, 2. Body, 3. Senses, 4. Breathing, 5. Speech, and 6. Mind. 60. Question:
What is Ahar Paryapti? Answer: Ahar Paryapti is the attainment of incoming
Pudgala Skandhas, which are the cause of the NoKarmaVargana that the living
being takes in for the new body, and which have the power to transform into Khal
and Rashabhag. Ahar Paryapti is completed from the time the body is taken until
one Antarmuhurta. (34)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 58. prazna: yoni aura kula meM kyA antara hai ? uttara : kanda, mUla, aNDA,
garbha, rasa, sveda Adi jIva ke utpatti - sthAna ko yoni kahate haiM  /  bhinna-
bhinna zarIra kI utpatti meM kAraNabhUta nokarmavargaNA ke bhedoM ko kula kahate
haiN| 56. prazna: paryApti kise kahate haiM ? usake kitane bheda haiM ? uttara :
AhAra, zarIra, indriya, AnApAna, bhASA aura manarUpa zaktiyoM kI pUrNatA ke
kAraNa ko paryApti kahate haiN| paryApti ke chaha bheda haiM- 1. AhAra, 2.
zarIra, 3. indriya, 4. zvAsocchvAsa, 5. bhASA aura 6. mana  /  60. prazna: AhAra
paryApti kise kahate haiM ? uttara : navIna zarIra ke lie kAraNabhUta jina
nokarmavargaNAoM ko jIva grahaNa karatA hai, unako khala aura rasabhAga rUpa
pariNamane kI zakti kI nimittabhUta Agata pudgala skandhoM kI prApti ko
AhAraparyApti kahate haiN| zarIra ko grahaNa karane ke prathama samaya se lekara
eka antarmuhUrta meM AhAra paryApti niSpanna hotI hai| (34)

Page #40 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
61. Question: What is **Sharira Paryapti**? Answer: The attainment of **pudgala
skandhas** endowed with the power to transform into three body forms -
**audarik** etc., with the **khalabhag** (hard part) like sesame husk and the
**rasabhag** (liquid part) like sesame oil, including **rasa**, **rudhira**,
**vasa**, **chiry** etc., is called **Sharira Paryapti**. This **Sharira
Paryapti** is completed in one **antarmuhurt** after **Ahar Paryapti**.  62.
Question: What is **Indriya Paryapti**? Answer: The attainment of **pudgala
prachay** that is the cause of the generation of the power of perception in the
form of grasping objects endowed with **rupa** etc., located in a suitable
**desh**, is called **Indriya Paryapti**. This **Indriya Paryapti** is also
completed in one **antarmuhurt** after **Sharira Paryapti**.  63. Question: What
is **Shwasochchwas Paryapti**? Answer: The attainment of **pudgala prachay**
that is the cause of the fullness of the power in the form of **uchchwas** and
**nishchwas** is called **Shwasochchwas Paryapti**. This **Paryapti** is
completed in one **antarmuhurt** after **Indriya Paryapti**. (35)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 61. prazna : zarIra paryApti kise kahate haiM ? uttara : tila kI khalI ke
samAna usa khalabhAga ko haDDI Adi kaThina avayavarUpa se aura tila ke tela ke
samAna rasabhAga ko rasa, rudhira, vasA, cIrya Adi drava avayava sahita audArika
Adi tIna zarIra rUpa se pariNamana karane vAlI zakti se yukta pudgala skandhoM
kI prApti ko zarIraparyApti kahate haiN| yaha zarIra paryApti AhAraparyApti ke
pazcAt eka antarmuhUrta meM pUrNa hotI hai  /  62. prazna indriya paryApti kise
kahate haiM ? uttara : yogya deza meM sthita rUpAdi se yukta padArthoM ke
grahaNa karane rUpa zakti kI utpatti ke nimittabhUta pudgalapracaya kI prApti ko
indriyaparyApti kahate haiN| yaha indriya paryApti bhI zarIra paryApti ke pazcAt
eka antarmuhUrta meM pUrNa hotI hai  /  63. prazna : zvAsocchvAsa paryApti kise
kahate haiM ? uttara : ucchvAsa aura niHzvAsarUpa zakti kI pUrNatA ke
nimittabhUta pudgala pracaya kI prApti ko zvAsocchvAsa paryApti kahate haiN|
yaha paryApti indriya paryApti ke anantara eka antarmuhUrta meM pUrNa hotI hai|
(35)

Page #41 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
64. Question: What is Bhāṣāparyāpti? Answer: The attainment of the Pudgala-
pracaya, which is the cause of the power to transform into four types of
language forms from the Skandhas of the Bhāṣā-vargaṇa, is called Bhāṣāparyāpti.
This Paryāpti is also completed in one Antarmūhūrta after the Śvāsochchvāsa
Paryāpti. 65. Question: What is Manaḥparyāpti? Answer: The attainment of the
Pudgala-pracaya, which is the cause of the power of the form of remembrance of
the experienced meaning, from the Skandhas of the Manova-vargaṇa, is called
Manaḥparyāpti. This Paryāpti is also completed in one Antarmūhūrta after the
Bhāṣāparyāpti. In all these Paryāptis, the time of each is Antarmūhūrta, and the
time of all together is also Antarmūhūrta. The beginning of all Paryāptis is
simultaneous, but the completion is sequential. 66. Question: What are
Paryāptak, Nirvṛtyaparyāptak, and Labdhaparyāptak? Answer: The Jīvas whose body
Paryāpti is complete due to the rise of the Paryāpta-nāmakarma are called
Paryāptak Jīvas.  (36)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 64. prazna: bhASAparyApti kise kahate haiM ? uttara : bhASA vargaNA ke skandhoM
ke nimitta se cAra prakAra kI bhASA rUpa se pariNamana karane kI zakti kI
nimittabhUta nokarma pudgalapracaya kI prApti ko bhASAparyApti kahate haiN| yaha
paryApti bhI zvAsocchvAsa paryApti ke pazcAt eka antarmuhUrta meM pUrNa hotI hai
/  65. prazna: manaH paryApti kise kahate haiM ? uttara : anubhUta artha ke
smaraNa rUpa zakti kI nimittabhUta manovargaNA ke skandhoM se niSpanna
pudgalapracaya kI prApti ko manaH paryApti kahate haiN| yaha paryApti bhI
bhASAparyApti ke pazcAt eka antarmuhUrta meM pUrNa hotI hai| ina saba
paryAptiyoM meM pratyeka kA kAla antarmuhUrta hai aura sabakA milAkara bhI
antarmuhUrta hI hai| saba paryAptiyoM kA prArambha eka sAtha hotA hai, parantu
pUrNatA krama se hotI hai  /  66. prazna: paryAptaka, nirvRtyaparyAptaka aura
labdhaparyAptaka kise kahate haiM ? uttara : paryApta nAmakarma ke udaya se
yukta jina jIvoM kI zarIra paryApti pUrNa ho jAtI hai, unheM paryAptaka jIva
kahate haiN| (36)

Page #42 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Those who are endowed with the **Paryāpta** karma and whose bodies are not yet
fully **Paryāpta** are called **Nitya-Paryāpta**. These beings are **Paryāpta**
due to the arising of **Paryāpta** karma, but they are called **Nirghātya-
Paryāpta** for some time due to the expectation of **Nirvṛti-racanā**.  Those
who are endowed with **Aparyāpta** karma and have not attained even a single
**Paryāpta** or a part of it are called **Labdhya-Paryāpta** beings. Such beings
die quickly, their lifespan being only one-eighteenth of a breath.  **Question
67:** How many **Maya** can a **Labdhya-Paryāpta** being acquire in one
**Antarmūhūrta**?  **Answer:** If a **Labdhya-Paryāpta** being continuously
takes birth and dies, it can take birth a maximum of 66,336 times and die the
same number of times in one **Antarmūhūrta**. In these births, the duration of
each birth is **Kṣudra-bhavamāna**, i.e., one-eighteenth of a breath. Therefore,
the total number of breaths in 66,336 births is 3,685. In this time, the being
can experience the **Pṛthivīkāyika**, **Jalakāyika**, **Agnikāyika**,
**Vāyukāyika**, and **Sādhāraṇa** (37)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paryApta nAmakarma ke udaya se yukta jinakI jaba taka zarIra paryApti pUrNa
nahIM hotI hai taba taka unheM nityaparyAptaka kahate haiN| ye jIva paryApta
nAmakarma ke udaya se paryAptaka hI hote haiM, parantu nirvRtiracanA kI apekSA
kucha kAla taka nirghatyaparyAptaka kahe jAte haiN| aparyApta nAma karma ke
udaya se yukta jinakI eka bhI paryApti na purNa huI hai aura na bhAge purNa
hogI, unheM labdhyaparyAptaka jIva kahate haiN| aise jIvoM kA zIghra hI maraNa
ho jAtA hai, inakI Ayu zvAsa ke aThArahaveM bhAga mAtra hotI hai| 67. prazna :
labdhyaparyAptaka jIva eka antarmuhUrta meM adhika se adhika kitane maya dhAraNa
kara sakatA hai ? uttara : eka labdhaparyAptaka jIva yadi nirantara janma-maraNa
kare to eka antarmuhUrta meM adhika se adhika 66336 bAra janma aura utane hI
bAra maraNa kara sakatA hai| ina bhavoM meM pratyeka bhava kA kAla kSudrabhava
pramANa arthAt eka zvAsa kA aThArahavA~ bhAga hai, phalataH 66336 bhavoM ke
zvAsoM kA pramANa 3685 meM hotA hai| itane kAla meM pRthivIkAyika, jalakAyika,
agnikAyika, vAyukAyika aura sAdhAraNa (37)

Page #43 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
After plants and microscopic beings, and each plant, there are 6012-6012
excellent births for each of these eleven types of *labdhyaparyaptak* beings.
The excellent births of the one-sensed beings are 6012 x 11 = 66132.  The
excellent births of the two-sensed *labdhyaparyaptak* are 80, the excellent
births of the three-sensed *labdhyaparyaptak* are 60, the excellent births of
the four-sensed *labdhyaparyaptak* are 40, the excellent births of the *asangni*
*labdhyaparyaptak* are 8, the excellent births of the *sangni*
*labdhyaparyaptak* are 8, and the excellent births of the human
*labdhyaparyaptak* are 8.  Thus, in total, there are 66336 excellent births in
time.  **Question 68:** In which *gunasthanas* do *labdhyaparyaptak*,
*nityaparyaptak*, and *paryaptak* states occur?  **Answer:** The
*labdhyaparyaptak* state occurs only in the *mithyatva* *gunasthan*.  It also
occurs in the beings of the human and animal realms who are born from
*sammurchana* birth, but not in other beings.  The *nityaparyaptak* state occurs
in *mithyatva*, *sasadan samyaktava*, *samyaktava*, and *aharakasarira*.  With
respect to *pramatavirat* (38) ...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 vanaspati ke bAdara aura sUkSma tathA pratyeka vanaspati ina gyAraha prakAra ke
labdhyaparyAptaka jIvoM meM se pratyeka ke 6012-6012 utkRSTa bhava kI apekSA
ekendriyoM ke utkRSTa bhava 6012 x 11 = 66132 hote haiN| dvIndriya
labdhyaparyAptaka ke utkRSTa 80 bhava, trIndriya labthyaparyAptaka ke utkRSTa 60
bhava, caturindriya labdhyaparyAptaka ke utkRSTa 40 bhava, asaMjJI
labdhyaparyAptaka ke utkRSTa 8 bhava, saMjJI labdhyaparyAptaka ke utkRSTa 8 mava
aura manuSya labdhyaparyAptaka ke utkRSTa 8 bhava isa prakAra kA milA . . kAla
meM utkRSTa 66336 mava hote haiN| : 68. prazna : labdhyaparyAptaka,
nityaparyAptaka aura paryApta avasthA kina-kina guNasthAnoM meM hotI hai ?
uttara : labdhyaparyApta avasthA mAtra mithyAtva guNasthAna meM hotI hai| vaha
bhI sammUrchana janma se utpanna hone vAle manuSyagati aura tiryaJcagati ke
jIvoM ke hotI hai, anya jIvoM ke nahIM hotI  /  niyaMtyaparyApta avasthA
mithyAtva, sAsAdana samyaktva, 54yaktva, AhArakazarIra kI apekSA pramatavirata
(38)

Page #44 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
And the **Samudghat** is expected to be **Sayogkevali** of the **Jins**. The
**Paryapt** state is in all **Gunasthanas**. 66. Why is the **Kevali Bhagwan**'s
body called **Aparyapt** even though it is complete and has the **Paryapt
Namarkam** and **Kay-Yog**? Answer: The **Kevali Bhagwan** has all the
**Kayyog** etc. present, but because their **Samudghat** is not complete in all
three states of **Kapat Pratar** and **Lokpuran**, they are called **Aparyapt**
in the **Agam** in a secondary sense. 70. What is **Pran**? How many types of
**Pran** are there? Answer: That which, when combined, makes a living being
alive and when separated, makes it dead, is called **Pran**. There are two types
of **Pran** based on the distinction of **Dravyapran** and **Bhavapran**. The
**Atma**'s **Jnana**, **Darshan**, etc. qualities are called **Bhavapran** and
the **Indriya**, **Bal**, **Ayu**, and **Shwasochchwas** are called
**Dravyapran**. 5 **Indriya**, 3 **Bal**, **Ayu**, and **Shwasochchwas**; thus
there are 10 types of **Dravyapran**. (36)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 I aura samudghAta kI apekSA sayogakevalI jina ke hotI hai| paryApta avasthA
sabhI guNasthAnoM meM hotI hai| 66. kevalI bhagavAna kA zarIra pUrNa hai aura
unake paryApta nAmarkama kA udaya bhI hai tathA kAya-yoga bhI hai taba unako
aparyApta kyoM kahA ? uttara : kevalI bhagavAna ke kAyayoga Adi sabhI vidyamAna
haiM tathApi unake samudghAta kI kapATa pratara aura lokapUraNa tInoM hI
avasthAoM meM yoga pUrNa nahIM hone se Agama meM gauNatA se unako aparyApta kahA
hai| 70. prANa kise kahate haiM ? prANa ke kitane bheda haiM ? uttara : jinake
saMyoga se jIva jIvita aura viyoga se mRta kahalAtA hai, unheM prANa kahate haiM
/  dravyaprANa aura bhAvaprANa ke bheda se prANa ke do bheda hote haiN| AtmA ke
jJAna darzana Adi guNoM ko bhAvaprANa aura indriya, bala, Ayu aura zvAsocchvAsa
ko dravyaprANa kahate haiM  /  5 indriya, 3 bala, Ayu aura zvAsocchvAsa; isa
prakAra dravyaprANa ke 10 bheda hote haiM  /  (36)

Page #45 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Question: How many vital breaths do the one-sensed etc. beings have? Answer:
Beings 71. Sense Non-conscious Five-sensed Strength One-sensed Touch Sense
Touch-Tongue Three-sensed Touch-Tongue Vital breaths Four-sensed Touch-Tongue
Body Speech Vital breaths-Eye Touch-Tongue Smell-Eye-Ear Touch-Tongue Conscious
Five-sensed Smell-Eye Ear Lifespan Breath Count Breath Body Body Speech Body
Speech .. Body Speech 辻 み ת Body Speech Mind Л Ja 44 8 6 90 In the insufficient
state, speech, mind, strength, and inhalation-exhalation, these three vital
breaths are not present. Therefore, in the insufficient one-sensed etc. beings,
there are 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, and 7 vital breaths respectively. 72. What is
consciousness? How many types are there? Answer: Those by which the being
becomes afflicted and is in this world, and those whose objects the being
consumes, both in this world and the next, are terrible. (40)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prazna : ekendriya Adi jIvoM ke kitane-kitane prANa hote haiM ? uttara : jIva
71. indriya asaMjJI paMcendriya bala ekendriya sparzana jIndriya sparzana-
rasanA trIndriya spardhAna- rasanA prANa caturindriya sparzana- rasanA kAya
vacana prANa-cakSu sparzana- rasanA ghANa-cakSu-karNa sparzana- rasanA saMjJI
paMcendriya ghANa-cakSu karNa Ayu zvAso kula svAsa kAya kAya vacana kAya vacana
.. kAya vacana Sip  mi t kAya vacana mana L Ja 44 8 6 90 aparyApta avasthA meM
vacana mana bala aura zvAsocchvAsa ye tIna prANa nahIM hote haiM, ataH
aparyAptaka ekendriya Adi jIvoM meM kramazaH 3, 4, 5, 6, 7 aura 7 prANa hote
haiN| 72. saMjJA kise kahate haiM ? usake kitane bheda haiM ? uttara : jinase
saMklezita hokara jIva isa bhava meM aura jinake viSaya kA sevana karane se jIva
donoM hI bhavoM meM dAruNa (40)

Page #46 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Dukkha** That which is obtained is called **sanjna**. It has four divisions:
1. **Aahar**, 2. **Bhay**, 3. **Maithun**, and 4. **Parigraha**.  73. Question:
What is **Aahar sanjna**? Answer: When the **asaataavedaniya karma** is aroused
in the inner being, and when the **baasya** sees food, or uses it, or when the
stomach is empty, the desire for food that arises in the being is called **Aahar
sanjna**.  74. Question: What is **Bhay sanjna**? Answer: When the **bhay
nokashaya** is aroused in the inner being, and when the **baahya** sees a fear-
inducing object, or remembers a previously seen fearful object, or when the
being's strength is diminished, the fear that arises in the being's heart is
called **Bhay sanjna**.  75. What is **Maithun sanjna**? Answer: When the **ved
nokashaya** is aroused in the inner being, and when the **baahya** eats
delicious and heavy, juicy substances that stimulate desire, or hears love
stories, plays, etc., or remembers past sensual objects,  (41)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 duHkha ko prApta hote haiM, use saMjJA kahate haiN| isake cAra bheda haiM- 1.
AhAra, 2. bhaya, maithuna aura 4 parigraha  /  73. prazna: AhAra saMjJA kise
kahate haiM ? uttara : antaraMga meM asAtAvedanIya karma kI udIraNA hone se
tathA bAsya meM AhAra dekhane se athavA usa aura upayoga jAne se athavA peTa
khAlI hone se jIva ko jo AhAra kI icchA hotI hai use AhAra saMjJA kahate haiN|
74. prazna : bhaya saMjJA kise kahate haiM ? uttara : aMtaraMga meM bhaya
nokaSAya kI udIraNA hone se tathA bAhya meM bhayotpAdaka vastu dekhane se athavA
pahale dekhe hue bhayaMkara padArtha ke smaraNAdi se athavA zakti ke hIna hone
para usa jIva ke hRdaya meM jo bhaya utpanna hotA hai, use bhaya saMjJA kahate
haiN| 75. maithuna saMjJA kise kahate haiM ? uttara : antaraMga meM veda
nokaSAya kI udIraNA hone se aura bAhya meM kAmottejaka svAdiSTa aura gariSTha
rasayukta padArthoM kA bhojana karane se athavA kAmakathA, nATaka Adi ke sunane
se athavA pahale ke mukta viSayoM kA smaraNa karane se (41)

Page #47 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Or, the desire that arises in the heart of a living being due to the company of
lustful men is called **Maithuna**. 76. Question: What is **Parigraha**? Answer:
The thought of acquiring, protecting, and collecting that arises in the heart of
a living being due to the stimulation of the **lobha** (greed) **kṣaya**
(passion) in the inner being, and due to seeing the objects that are the means
of enjoyment in the external world, or due to remembering the previously enjoyed
objects or hearing their stories, and due to the **mamatva** (attachment)
results, is called **Parigraha**. 77. Which **saṁjñā** (perception) occurs up to
which **guṇasthāna** (stage of spiritual development)? Answer: **Āhāra**
**saṁjñā** occurs up to the sixth **guṇasthāna**, **bhaya** **saṁjñā** occurs up
to the eighth **guṇasthāna**, **maithuna** **saṁjñā** occurs up to the
**sāvedha** (conscious) part of the ninth **guṇasthāna**, and **parigraha**
**saṁjñā** occurs up to the tenth **guṇasthāna**. The three **saṁjñā**s,
**bhaya** etc., which are mentioned in the seventh and subsequent
**guṇasthāna**s, are mentioned only with respect to the arising of those
particular actions in the inner being, not with respect to their tendency. 78.
Question: What is **Mārgaṇā**? Answer: Those in whom or by whom the living
beings are sought, are called **Mārgaṇā**.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 athavA kuzIla puruSoM kI saMgati se jIva ke hRdaya meM jo kAmavAsanA utpanna
hotI hai, use maithuna saMjJA kahate haiN| 76. prazna : parigraha saMjJA kise
kahate haiM ? uttara : antaraMga meM lobha kaSAya kI udIraNA hone se aura bAhya
meM bhogopabhoga ke sAdhanabhUta padArthoM ko dekhane se athavA pahale ke mukta
padArthoM kA smaraNa yA unakI kathA sunane se aura mamatva pariNAmoM se jIva ke
hRdaya meM jo parigraha-arjana-rakSaNa saMgraha kI buddhi hotI hai, use
parigraha saMjJA kahate haiN| 77. kauna-kauna sI saMjJA kisa-kisa guNasthAna
taka hotI hai ? uttara :AhAra saMjJA chaThe guNasthAna taka, bhaya saMjJA
AThaveM guNasthAna taka, maithuna saMjJA navam guNasthAna ke saveda bhAga taka
aura parigraha saMjJA dasaveM guNasthAna taka hotI hai| sAtaveM Adi guNasthAnoM
meM jo bhaya Adi tIna saMjJAe~ batalAyI haiM, ve mAtra antaraMga una-una kamoM
ke udaya kI apekSA batalAyI haiM, pravRtti kI apekSA nhiiN| 78. prazna : mArgaNA
kise kahate haiM ? uttara : jinameM athavA jinake dvArA jIvoM kI khoja kI jAve,
unheM mArgaNA kahate haiN|

Page #48 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
76. Question: How many types of Margana are there? Answer: There are fourteen
types of Margana: 1. Gati, 2. Indriya, 3. Kay, 4. Yog, 5. Ved, 6. Kashay, 7.
Gyan, 8. Samyam, 9. Darshan, 10. Lashya, 11. Bhavya, 12. Samyak, 13. Sanjee and
14. Ahar. 50. Question: What is Santar Margana and Nirantar Margana? How many
types are there? Answer: Those in which there is an interval of separation are
called Santar Margana. Those in which there is no interval of separation are
called Nirantar Margana. Of the above 14 Marganas of worldly beings, none of
them are separated. They are all found in beings at all times, therefore they
are called Nirantar Margana. There are 8 types of Santar Margana: 1. Upsham
Samyak, 2. Sukshma Samparaya Samyam, 3. Aharak Kayyog, 4. Aharak Mishrakayyog,
5. Vaikriyik Mishrakayyog, 6. Labdhyaparyaptk Manushya, 7. Sasadan Samyak and 8.
Mishr. These Marganas are generally in Nirantar only.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 76. prazna : mArgaNA ke kitane bheda haiM ? uttara : mArgaNA ke caudaha bheda
haiM- 1. gati, 2. indriya, 3. kAya, 4. yoga, 5. veda, 6 kaSAya, 7. jJAna, 6.
saMyama, 6. darzana, 10. lazyA, 11. bhavyatva, 12. samyaktva, 13. saMjJI aura
14. aahaar| 50. prazna : sAntara mArgaNA aura nirantara mArgaNA kise kahate haiM
? unake kitane bheda haiM ? uttara : jinameM viccheda-antara par3atA hai, unheM
sAntara mArgaNA kahate haiN| jinameM viccheda-antara nahIM par3atA hai, unheM
nirantara mArgaNA kahate haiN| saMsArI jIvoM ke uparyukta 14 mArgaNAoM meM se
kisI kA bhI viccheda nahIM par3atA hai| ve sabhI jIvoM ke sadA hI pAyI jAtI
haiM, ataeva unako nirantara mArgaNA kahate haiN| sAntara mArgaNA ke 8 bheda
haiM- 1. upazama samyaktva, 2. sUkSmasAmparAya saMyama, 3. AhAraka kAyayoga, 4.
AhAraka mizrakAyayoga, 5. vaikriyikamizrakAyayoga, 6. labdhyaparyAptaka manuSya,
7. sAsAdana samyaktva aura 8. mishr| ye mArgaNAyeM sAmAnya se nirantara meM hI
gabhiMta (43)

Page #49 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
81. Question: What is Antar-Vicched? Answer: The time taken by a soul to regain
a desired Gunasthan or Margana after leaving it is called Antar-Vicched or
Viraha. 52. Question: What is the superior and inferior Viraha-kal of the eight
Santar Marganas in comparison to various souls? Answer: In comparison to various
souls, the superior Viraha-kal of Upsham Samyaktva is seven days, of Sukshma
Samparaya is six months, of Aharak Kayayog and Aharak Mishrakayayog is one year
each, of Vaikriyik Mishrakayayog is twelve Muhurtas, of Labdhyaparyaptak
Manushya, Sasadan Samyaktva and Mishrakayayog is an uncountable fraction of a
Paly. The inferior Viraha-kal of Santar Marganas is one moment. 83. Question:
What is Gati Margana? How many types are there? Answer: The specific state of a
soul obtained from the rise of Gati Karma is called Gati. There are four types
of Gati: 1. Narakgati, 2. Tiryanch Gati, 3. Manushya Gati and 4. Dev Gati.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 81. prazna : antara-viccheda kise kahate hai ? uttara : kisI bhI vivakSita
guNasthAna yA mArgaNA sthAna ko chor3akara punaH usI ko prApta karane meM jIva
ko bIca meM jo samaya lagatA hai usako antara viccheda yA viraha kahate haiN|
52. prazna : nAnA jIvoM kI apekSA ATha sAntara mArgaNAoM kA utkRSTa aura
jaghanya viraha-kAla kitanA hai ? uttara : nAnA jIvoM kI apekSA upazama
samyaktva kA utkRSTa viraha-kAla sAta dina, sUkSmasAmparAya kA chaha mahInA,
AhAraka kAyayoga aura AhAraka mizrakAyayoga kA pRthaktva varSa, vaikriyika
mizra, kAyayoga kA bAraha muhUrta, labdhyaparyAptaka manuSya, sAsAdana samyaktva
aura mizra kA utkRSTa viraha kAla palya kA asaMkhyAtavA~ bhAga hai| sAntara
mArgaNAoM kA jaghanya viraha-kAla eka samaya hai| 83. prazna : gati mArgaNA kise
kahate haiM ? usake kitane bheda uttara : gati nAmakarma ke udaya se prApta huI
jIva kI avasthA vizeSa ko gati kahate haiN| gati ke cAra bheda haiM1.
narakagati, 2. tithaMcagati, 3. manuSyagati aura 4. devgti|

Page #50 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
84. Question: What is the nature of Naraka-Gati? Answer: Those who do not attain
love for themselves and others in terms of substance, space, time, and emotion
are called Naraka (Naraki) and their state of existence is called Naraka-Gati.
The Narakis reside in the seven earths below this earth. Narakis are constantly
afflicted by five types of suffering: natural, physical, mental, external, and
environmental. Due to excessive beginning, excessive attachment, and fierce
meditation, the soul is bound to Naraka-Ayu and is born in these earths.  15.
Question: What is the nature of Tiryancha-Gati? Answer: Those who are
characterized by crookedness of mind, speech, and body, whose perceptions
regarding food and other objects are very clear, who are extremely ignorant, and
who are abundant in sin are called Tiryancha and their state of existence is
called Tiryancha-Gati. They have five categories based on their senses. The one-
sensed beings reside in the entire universe, the three-sensed beings reside in
the intestines, and the rest of the universe is inhabited by the four-sensed,
five-sensed, and the Kevali-Samudghat.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 84. prazna : narakagati kA svarUpa kyA hai ? uttara :jo dravya, kSetra, kAla,
bhAva meM svayaM tathA paraspara prIti ko prApta nahIM hote, unako nAraka
(nArakI) kahate haiM aura unakI gati ko nAraka-gati kahate haiN| nArakiyoM kA
nivAsa isa pRthivI ke nIce sAtoM pRthiviyoM meM hai, nArakI nirantara hI
svAbhAvika, zArIrika, mAnasika, Agantuka tathA kSetra janya ina pA~ca prakAra ke
duHkhoM se duHkhI rahate haiN| bahuta Arambha, bahuta parigraha tathA raudra
dhyAna ke kAraNa jIva narakAyu kA bandha kara ina pRthiviyoM meM utpanna hote
15. prazna : tiyacagati kA svarUpa kyA hai ? uttara :jo mana-vacana-kAya kI
kuTilatA se yukta haiM, jinakI AhArAdi viSayaka saMjJAe~ atyanta spaSTa haiM, jo
nikRSTa ajJAnI haiM aura jinameM atyanta pApa kA bAhulya pAyA jAtA hai, unako
tiryaMca kahate haiM aura unakI gati ko niryacagati kahate haiN| inake
ekendriyAdi pA~ca bheda haiN| ekendriya jIvoM kA samasta loka meM nivAsa hai,
basanAlI meM trasa jIvoM kA nivAsa hai, tathA upapAda, mAraNAntika samudghAta
aura kevalI-samudghAta kI apekSA samasta loka

Page #51 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
There is also residence. Due to the tendency to engage in deceit and fraud, and
due to excessive attachment, the living being is born in the animal realm. 86.
Question: What is the nature of the human realm? Answer: Those who can
constantly contemplate the worthy and unworthy, the true and the false, the
attained and the unattained, dharma and adharma, etc., who can contemplate the
merits and demerits, remember, etc., through the mind, who are excellent in
matters of the mind, skilled in arts and crafts, etc., who can attain liberation
through austerity, and who are born from humans at the beginning of the age are
called humans, and their realm is called the human realm. Humans reside in the
two and a half islands. There are two divisions of humans: Aryakhandaja and
Mlechchhakhandaja. Due to a small beginning, few possessions, and a simple
nature, the living being is born in the human realm. 17. Question: What is the
nature of the divine realm? Answer: Those who play as they please in various
islands and oceans through the eight powers of anima, mahima, etc., and whose
form, beauty, youth, etc., are always radiant, are called gods, and their realm
is called the divine realm. Their

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 meM bhI nivAsa hai| chala-kapaTa rUpa pravRtti karane se evaM Atai dhyAna ke
kAraNa jIva tiryacagati meM utpanna hote haiN| 86. prazna : manuSyagati kA
svarUpa kyA hai ? uttara : jo nitya hI heya-upAdeya, tattva-atattva, Apta-
anApta, dharma-adharma Adi kA vicAra kara sake, jo mana ke dvArA guNadoSAdi kA
vicAra evaM smaraNa Adi kara sakeM, jo mana ke viSaya meM utkRSTa hoM, zilpakalA
Adi meM kuzala hoM, tapazcaraNa kara mokSa prApta kara sakeM tathA yuga kI Adi
meM jo manuSyoM se utpanna hoM unheM manuSya kahate haiM aura unakI gati ko
manuSyagati kahate haiN| manuSyoM kA nivAsa DhAI dvIpa meM hai| manuSya ke Arya-
khaNDaja aura mleccha-khaNDaja kI apekSA do bheda haiN| alpa Arambha, alpa
parigraha tathA svabhAva kI saralatA se jIva manuSya gati meM utpanna hote haiN|
17. prazna : devagati kA svarUpa kyA hai ? uttara :jo aNimA, mahimA Adi ATha
RddhiyoM ke dvArA nAnA dvIpa-samudroM meM icchAnusAra krIr3A karate haiM aura
jinakA rUpa, lAvaNya, yauvana Adi sadA prakAzamAna rahatA hai, unheM deva kahate
haiM aura unakI gati ko devagati kahate haiN| inake

Page #52 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Bhavanaasi, Vyantara, Jyotishi and Vaimanika are the four types of Devas.
Bhavanaasi and Vyantara Devas reside in the Ratnaprabha earth, which is located
below this earth, in the Kharbhaag and Pank-maag, and also in the Madhyaloka.
Jyotishi Devas reside from a height of 760 yojanas to a height of 600 yojanas
from this earth. Vaimanika Devas reside in sixteen Swargas, nine Graiveyak, nine
Anudish and five Anuttara Vimanas. Through the emotions of Saral Parinam, Dharma
Dhyan and Shubhopayog, the Jivas are born in Devagati. Siddh Parameshti are free
from the cycle of all four gatis. 18. Question: How many types of Tiryanchas and
Manusyas are there? Answer: Saamaanya Tiryanch, Panchendriya Tiryanch, Paryapt
Tiryanch, Yonini Tiryanch and Apariapt Tiryanch are the five types of
Tiryanchas. Saamaanya Manusya, Paryapt Manusya, Yonini Manusya and Apariapt
Manusya are the four types of Manusyas. 86. Question: What is the number of
Paryapt Manusyas and Manusyas? Answer: 76228162514264337563543850336, i.e., 26
Ak is the number of Paryapt Manusyas. The number of Manusyas is 3/4 of the
number of Paryapt Manusyas. (47)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 bhavanavAsI, vyantara, jyotiSI aura vaimAnika ye cAra bheda haiN| bhavanavAsI
aura vyantara devoM kA nivAsa isa pRthivI ke nIce sthita ratnaprabhA pRthvI ke
kharabhAga aura paMka-mAga meM hai evaM madhyaloka meM bhI hai| jyotiSI devoM kA
nivAsa isa pRthvI se 760 yojana kI UMcAI se lekara 600 yojana kI U~cAI taka hai|
vaimAnika devoM kA nivAsa solaha svarga, nau graiveyaka, nau anudiza tathA pA~ca
anuttara vimAnoM meM hai| sarala pariNAma, dharmadhyAna tathA zubhopayoga rUpa
bhAvoM se jIva devagati meM utpanna hote haiN| siddha parameSThI cAroM gatiyoM
ke cakra se rahita hote haiN| 18. prazna : tiryaMcoM aura manuSyoM ke kitane
bheda haiM ? uttara : sAmAnya tiryaMca, paMcendriya tiryaca, paryApta tiryaMca,
yoninI tiryaMca aura aparyApta tiryaca isa prakAra tiryacoM ke pA~ca bheda haiN|
sAmAnya manuSya, paryApta manuSya, yoninI manuSya aura aparyApta manuSya isa
prakAra manuSyoM ke cAra bheda haiN| 86. prazna : paryApta manuSya aura
mAnuSiyoM kA kitanA pramANa hai ? uttara : 76228162514264337563543850336 arthAt
26 aka pramANa paryApta manuSyoM kA pramANa hai| paryApta manuSyoM kA jitanA
pramANa hai, usameM 3/4 mAnuSiyoM kA pramANa hai| (47)

Page #53 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
60. Question: What is Indriya Margana? How many types are there and what is
their nature?  Answer: The state of a being, from the arising of the Karmic
influence called Ekaindriyadi Jati, which is characterized by having one sense
organ, etc., is called Indriya Margana. Indriyas are called so because they are
independent in their respective objects, like Indra. Or, the subtle beings
through whom we know objects are called Indriyas. There are two types of
Indriyas: (1) Bhavaindriya (2) Dravyendriya. Labdhi and Upayoga are called
Bhavaindriya. The purity in the form of the power of understanding the meaning,
which arises from the destruction and pacification of the Matijnana Avarana
Karma, is called Labdhi, and the activity of grasping the meaning from that
purity is called Upayoga. Nivritti and Upakaran are called Dravyendriya. The
creation of the respective Indriya's form, along with the arising of the Jiva
Vipaki Jati Karma, from the arising of the Sharira Karma, is called Nivritti.
The component that helps in the protection of Nivritti, etc., is called
Upakaran.  (48)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 60. prazna: indriya mArgaNA kise kahate haiM ? usake kitane bheda haiM aura
unakA svarUpa kyA hai ? | uttara : ekendriyAdi jAti nAmakarma ke udaya se jIva
kI jo ekendriya Adi avasthA hotI hai, use indriya mArgaNA . kahate haiM  /
indra ke sadRza apane-apane viSaya meM svatantra hone se indriya kahate haiN| yA
chadmastha jIva jinake mAdhyama se padArthoM ko jAnate haiM, unheM indriya
kahate haiM  /  indriya ke do bheda haiM- (1) bhAvendriya ( 2 ) dravyendriya  /
labdhi aura upayoga ko bhAvendriya kahate haiN| matijJAnAvaraNa karma ke
kSayopazama se utpanna hone vAlI arthagrahaNa kI zaktirUpa vizuddhi ko labdhi
aura usa vizuddhi se artha ko grahaNa karane rUpa jo vyApAra hotA hai, usako
upayoga kahate haiM  /  nivRtti aura upakaraNa ko dravyendriya kahate haiN|
jIvavipAkI jAti nAmakarma ke udaya ke sAtha-sAtha zarIra nAmakarma ke udaya se
tattat indriya ke AkAra meM jo AtmapradezoM tathA Atmasambaddha zarIra- pradezoM
kI racanA hotI hai usako nirvRtti kahate haiM  /  nirvRtti Adi kI rakSA meM
sahAyaka avayava ko upakaraNa kahate haiN| (48)

Page #54 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
61. Question: What are the other divisions of the senses? Answer: There are also
five divisions of the senses - (1) touch (2) taste (3) smell (4) sight and (5)
hearing.  Based on the divisions of the senses, there is a classification of
beings into one-sensed, two-sensed, etc. based on the arising of the karma
called jati.  Those beings who have external signs (dravyaindriya) and knowledge
of the objects of touch, taste, smell, form, and sound through them are called
one-sensed, two-sensed, three-sensed, four-sensed, and five-sensed beings
respectively.  Except for the path of the lower animals, all other paths have
only five-sensed beings, but in the path of the lower animals, all beings from
one-sensed to five-sensed exist. 61. Question: What is the extent of the
superior object-field of the senses of touch, etc. of one-sensed, etc. beings?
Answer: The extent of the superior object-field of the senses of touch, etc. of
one-sensed, two-sensed, three-sensed, four-sensed, non-cognizant five-sensed,
and cognizant five-sensed beings is as follows:

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 61. prazna : indriya ke aura kitane bheda hote haiM ? uttara : indriya ke pA~ca
bheda bhI hote haiM- (9) sparzana (2) rasanA (3) ghANa (4) cakSu aura (1) krnn|
indriya ke bhedoM kI apekSA jAti nAmakarma ke udaya se jIva kA ekendriya,
dIndriya Adi jAtiyoM meM vargIkaraNa duA hai| jina jIvoM ke bAhya cihna
(dravyendriya) aura usake dvArA hone vAlA sparza, rasa, gandha, rUpa, zabda ina
viSayoM kA jJAna ho, unako kramazaH ekendriya, dvIndriya trIndriya,
caturindriya, paMcendriya jIva kahate haiN| tiryaca gati ko chor3akara zeSa
gatiyoM meM paMcendriya jIva hI hote haiM, parantu tithaMca gati meM ekendriya
Adi sabhI jIva hote haiN| 61. prazna : ekendriyAdi jIvoM kI sparzanAdi indriyA~
kA utkRSTa viSaya-kSetra kitanA hai ? uttara : ekendriya, dvIndriya, trIndriya,
caturindriya, asaMjJI paMcendriya aura saMjJI paMcendriya jIvoM ke sparzana Adi
indriyoM kA utkRSTa viSayakSetra isa prakAra hai :

Page #55 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Chakshu Karna Jid Sparshan Rasana Ghrāṇa Ekendiriya 400 Dhanush - . Hindriya
800" 46 Dhanush Shrīndriya 1600 " 128 " 100 10 Chaturindriya 3200" 256 " .
Asanjhī) 6400" 512" 400 " Panchendriya) Sanjhī) 6 Yojana Pojan Yojana
Panchendriya) 2654 Yo० - 0" 000 Dhanush 472632 Yojana 12 Yojana 63. Question:
What is the size of the senses? Answer: The size of the Chakshu Indriya is like
a lentil, the size of the Shrotra Indriya is like a Yach-Nali, the size of the
Ghrāṇa Indriya is like a sesame flower, the size of the Rasana Indriya is like a
hoe, and the size of the Sparshan Indriya is of many kinds. 64. Question: What
is the proof of the number of Ekendiriya etc. beings? Answer: There are
countless numbers of Prithvikaayik, Jalakaayik, AgniKaayik and Vayukaayik
beings. Vanaspatikaayik beings . (50)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 cakSu karNa jIda sparzana rasanA ghrANa ekendriya 400 dhanuSa - . hIndriya 800"
46 dhanuSa zrIndriya 1600 " 128 " 100 10 caturindriya 3200" 256 "  /  asaMjhI)
6400" 512" 400 " paMcendriya) saMjhI) 6 yojana pojana yojana paMcendriya) 2654
yo0 - 0" 000 dhanuSa 472632 yojana 12 yojana 63. prazna : indriyoM kA AkAra
kaisA hai ? uttara : cakSu indriya kA AkAra masUra ke samAna, zrotra indriya kA
AkAra yaca-nAlI ke samAna, ghrANa indriya kA AkAra tila ke phUla samAna, rasanA
indriya kA AkAra khurapA ke samAna aura sparzana . indriya kA AkAra aneka
prakAra kA hai| 64. prazna : ekendriyAdi jIvoM kI saMkhyA kA pramANa kyA hai ?
uttara : pRthvIkAyika, jalakAyika, agnikAyika aura vAyukAyika jIva
asaMkhyAtAsaMkhyAta haiN| vanaspatikAyika jIva . (50)

Page #56 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Anantanant are. Shankha etc. dwindriya jivas, chiti etc. trindriya jivas,
bhramara etc. chaturindriya jivas, manushya etc. panchendriya jivas are
'asankhyatasankhyat'. In ekendriya jivas, one part are badar jivas and the
majority are sukshma jivas. In badar ekendriya jivas, one part are paryapt jivas
and the majority are aparyapt jivas. In sukshma ekendriya jivas, the majority
are paryapt jivas and one part are aparyapt jivas. 65. Question: What is
kayamargna? Answer: The particular paryaya of a jiva that arises from the
aavinaabhavi tras of jati namakarma and the uday of sthavar namakarma is called
kay. 66. Question: How many types of kay are there? Answer: There are five
sthavarkay: prithvikaay, jalkaay, agnikaay, vayukaay, and vanaspatikaay, and one
traskaay, thus there are six types of kay. (51)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 anantAnanta haiN| zaMkha Adi dvIndriya jIca, cITI Adi trIndriya jIva, bhramara
Adi caturindriya jIva, manuSya Adi paMcendriya jIva 'asaMkhyAtAsaMkhyAta haiN|
ekendriya jIvoM meM eka bhAga pramANa bAdara jIva evaM bahubhAga pramANa sUkSma
jIva hote haiN| bAdara ekendriya jIvoM meM eka bhAga paryApta jIva evaM
bahubhAga pramANa aparyApta jIva hote haiN| sUkSma ekendriya jIvoM meM bahubhAga
paryApta jIva aura eka bhAga aparyApta jIva pAye jAte haiN| 65. prazna :
kAyamArgaNA kise kahate haiM ? uttara : jAti nAmakarma ke avinAbhAvI trasa aura
sthAvara nAmakarma ke udaya se hone vAlI jIva kI paryAya vizeSa ko kAya kahate
haiN| 66. prazna : kAya ke kitane bheda haiM ? uttara : pRthivIkAya, jalakAya,
agnikAya, vAyukAya aura vanaspatikAya ye pA~ca sthAvarakAya tathA eka trasakAya
isa prakAra kAya ke chaha bheda haiN| (51) haiM

Page #57 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
67. Question: How many types of plant bodies are there? What is their nature?
Answer: There are two types of plant bodies - (1) **pratyek** and (2)
**sadharan**. **Pratyek** is a plant body where only one living being is the
owner of the body. **Sadharan** is a plant body where the bodies of living
beings are in a **nigod** form due to the rise of **sadharan karma**, where
countless living beings reside in one body and their food, breathing, life, and
death are the same. These have two types in terms of **badar** and **sukshma**.
It is special that in a **badar nigod** body or a **sukshma nigod** body, the
countless **sadharan** living beings born together are either **paryaptak** or
**aparyaptak**, but not mixed, because they have the same rule of **karma
uday**. 68. Question: How many types of **pratyek** plants are there? Answer:
There are two types of **pratyek** plants - (1) **sapratiṣṭhita pratyek** and
(2) **apratiṣṭhita pratyek**.  (52)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 67. prazna : vanaspatikAya ke kitane bheda haiM ? unakA svarUpa kyA hai ? 7
uttara : vanaspatikAya ke do bheda haiM- (1) pratyeka aura (2) sAdhAraNa  /
pratyeka vanaspatiH jisameM eka zarIra kA svAmI eka hI jIva hotA hai, use
pratyeka vanaspati kahate haiN| sAdhAraNa vanaspatiH jina jIvoM kA zarIra
sAdhAraNa nAmakarma ke udaya ke kAraNa nigoda rUpa hotA hai, jahA~ eka zarIra
meM anantAnanta jIva rahate haiM aura jinakA AhAra, zvAsocchvAsa, jIvana tathA
maraNa samAna hotA hai unheM sAdhAraNa vanaspati kahate haiN| inake bAdara aura
sUkSma kI apekSA do bheda hote haiN| itanA vizeSa hai ki eka bAdara nigoda
zarIra meM yA eka sUkSmanigoda zarIra meM sAtha hI utpanna hone vAle anantAnanta
sAdhAraNa jIva yA to paryAptaka hI hote haiM yA aparyAptaka hI hote haiM kintu
mizrarUpa nahIM hote, kyoMki unake samAna karmodaya kA niyama hai| 68. prazna
pratyeka vanaspati ke kitane bheda haiM ? uttara : pratyeka vanaspati ke do
bheda haiM- ( 1 ) sapratiSThita pratyeka aura ( 2 ) apratiSThita pratyeka  /
(52)

Page #58 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
66. Question: What is a sapratiṣṭhita pradeśa? Answer: A sapratiṣṭhita pradeśa
is a plant that has badara nigodīya jīvas living in it, and whose veins, joints,
and nodes are not visible. It breaks evenly when bent, its fibers do not stick
together when broken, and it regrows after being pierced. It also has a thick
bark on its trunk. These are called sapratiṣṭhita pradeśa plants, and they are
considered ordinary plants in terms of treatment.  100. Question: What is the
difference between a sapratiṣṭhita pradeśa and an ordinary plant? Answer: The
badara nigodīya jīvas that live in a sapratiṣṭhita pradeśa plant have their own
independent existence. The anantānanda jīvas that live in an ordinary plant do
not have their own independent existence, but are all part of the same body.
101. Question: What is an apratiṣṭhita pradeśa? Answer: An apratiṣṭhita pradeśa
is a plant that does not have badara nigodīya jīvas living in it, and whose
veins, joints, and nodes are visible. It does not break evenly when bent, and...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 66. prazna : sapratiSThita pratyeka kise kahate haiM ? uttara : jinake Azraya
bAdara nigodiyA jIva rahate haiM tathA jinakI zirA, sandhi tathA parva Adi
prakaTa na hue hoM, jinakA maMga karane para samAna bhaMga hotA ho, tor3ane para
jinameM paraspara tantu na lage raheM evaM cheda karane para bhI jinakI punaH
vRddhi ho jAve aura jisakI skandha kI chAla moTI ho unako supratiSThita pratyeka
vanaspati kahate haiM, inheM upacAra se sAdhAraNa vanaspati kI kahate haiM  /
100 prazna : sapratiSThita pratyeka aura sAdhAraNa vanaspati meM kyA bheda hai ?
uttara : sapratiSThita pratyeka vanaspati ke Azrita rahane vAle bAdara nigodiyA
jIva apane zarIra kA svatantra astitva rakhate haiN| sAdhAraNa vanaspati meM
rahane vAle anantAnanta jIva apane zarIra kA svatantra astitva na rakhakara eka
zarIra ke hI svAmI hote hai  /  101. prazna: apratiSThita pratyeka kise kahate
haiM ? uttara: jinake Azraya bAdara nigodiyA jIva nahIM rahate haiM tathA jinakI
zirA, saMdhi aura parva Adi kI rekhAe~ prakaTa ho cukI haiM, tor3ane para jinakA
samAna bhaMga nahIM hotA hai evaM (53)

Page #59 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Those plants which do not regenerate after being cut and whose bark is thin are
called **Aapratiṣṭhita** plants. **Aapratiṣṭhita** plants remain
**Sapratiṣṭhita** from the time of their origin until the end of their lifespan.
102. Question: What is the proportion of **Jīvas** to matter in a **Nigoda**
body? Answer: The number of **Jīvas** in a **Nigoda** body is infinite times
greater than the amount of matter, as much as the entire **Siddharaśi** and the
entire time of the past. 103. Question: What is a **Nitya Nigoda**? Answer:
Those who have not left the **Nigoda** state until now are called **Nitya
Nigoda**. The time of **Nitya Nigoda** **Jīvas** is **Anadi Ananta** and **Anadi
Santa**, but the time of other **Nigoda** **Jīvas** is **Sadi Santa** and **Sadi
Ananta**. 104. Question: What is an **Itra Nigoda**? Answer: Those who leave the
**Nigoda** state and wander in other states and are reborn in the **Nigoda**
state again are called **Itra Nigoda**.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 chinna ho jAne para jo phira se utpanna nahIM hotI haiM aura jinakI skandha kI
chAla patalI hotI hai, unako apratiSThita pratyeka vanaspati kahate haiN|
apratiSThita pratyeka vanaspati apanI utpatti ke prathama samaya se lekara
antarmuhUrta paryanta sapratiSThita pratyeka hI rahatI hai| 102. prazna : eka
nigoda zarIra meM dravya kI apekSA jIdoM kA pramANa kitanA hai ? uttara :
samasta siddharAzi kA aura sampUrNa atIta kAla ke samayoM kA jitanA pramANa hai,
dravya kI apekSA unase anantaguNe jIva eka nigoda zarIra meM rahate haiN| 103.
prazna : nitya nigoda kise kahate hai ? uttara : jo Aja taka nigoda paryAya se
nahIM nikale haiM, unheM nitya nigoda kahate haiN| nitya-nigodiyA jIvoM kA kAla
anAdi ananta aura anAdi sAnta hotA hai, parantu itara nigodiyA jIvoM kA kAla
sAdi sAnta aura sAdi ananta hotA hai| 104. prazna : itara nigoda kise kahate hai
? uttara : jo nigoda se nikalakara tathA anya paryAyoM meM bhramaNa kara punaH
nigoda meM hI utpanna hote haiM, unheM itara nigoda kahate haiN|

Page #60 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
105. Question: Where do the **Bādar Nigodīya** not reside? Answer: In these four
**sthāvara** (immovable) elements: earth, water, fire, and air; and in these
eight places: the body of the **āhārak** (eating), the body of the **deva-
nārak** (gods and hell beings), and the body of the **kevalī** (omniscient)
Lord, the **Bādar Nigodīya** beings do not reside. 106. Question: What is the
size of the **sthāvarakāyika** (immovable-bodied) and **sakāyika** (movable-
bodied) beings? Answer: From the **pṛthivīkālika** (earth-bodied) to the
**vāgufāṭika** (air-bodied) **pāta** (species), their size is like a lentil, a
drop of water, a group of needles, and a flag, respectively. The size of the
**vanaspatikāyika** (plant-bodied) and **usakāyika** (animal-bodied) beings is
of many kinds. 107. Question: What is the maximum lifespan of the
**sthāvarakāyika** beings? Answer: The maximum lifespan of the **mṛdu
pṛthivīkāyika** (soft earth-bodied) beings is 12,000 years, the **kaṭhora
pṛthivīkāyika** (hard earth-bodied) beings is 22,000 years, the **jalakāyika**
(water-bodied) beings is 7,000 years, the **tejakāyika** (fire-bodied) beings is
3 days, the **vātakāyika** (air-bodied) beings is 3,000 years, and the
**vanaspatikāyika** (plant-bodied) beings is 10,000 years.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 105. prazna : bAdara nigodiyA jIya kahA~-kahA~ nahIM rahate haiM ? uttara :
pRthivI, jala, agni aura vAyu ina cAra sthAvaroM meM, AhAraka zarIra, deva-
nArakiyoM kA zarIra aura kevalI bhagavAna kA zarIra ina ATha sthAnoM meM bAdara
nigodiyA jIva nahIM rahate haiN| 106. prazna : sthAvarakAyika aura sakAyika
jIvoM kA kaisA AkAra hai ? uttara : pRthivIkAlika se vAguphATika pAta: nIyoM kA
AsAra kramazaH masUra, jala kI bindu, suiyoM kA samUha aura dhvajA ke sadRza
hai| vanaspatikAyika aura usakAyika jIvoM kA AkAra aneka prakAra kA hai| 107.
prazna : sthAvarakAyika jIvoM kI utkRSTa Ayu kA kitanA pramANa hai ? uttara :
mRdu pRthivIkAyika jIvoM kI utkRSTa Ayu 12,000 varSa, kaThora pRthivIkAyika
jIvoM kI 22,000 varSa, jalakAyika jIvoM kI 7,000 varSa, tejakAyika jIvoM kI 3
dina, vAtakAyika jIvoM kI 3,000 varSa aura vanaspatikAyika jIvoM kI utkRSTa Ayu
10,000 varSa pramANa hai| (55)

Page #61 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Tre. **Man:** What is the maximum duration of staying in the **Nigoshise
Nikalna** **Haptarashi**? Answer: The maximum duration of staying in the
**Trasa** **Rashi** is 2,000 **Sagar** years. 106. Question: What is **Yoga**?
Answer: **Yoga** is the causal power that is responsible for the **Jiva**
(living being) with **Man** (mind), **Vachan** (speech), and **Kay** (body) to
receive **Karma** due to the arising of **Pudgalvipaki** **Sharira**
**Namakarma**. It is also called **Bhadayoga**. The pulsation that arises in the
**Atmapradesha** (regions of the soul) due to this power is called
**Dravyayoga**. 110. Question: How many types of **Yoga** are there? Answer:
Briefly, there are three types of **Yoga**: (1) **Kayayoga**, (2)
**Vachanyoga**, and (3) **Manoyoga**. In detail, there are seven types of
**Kayayoga**: (1) **Audarik-Mishra Kayayoga**, (2) **Audarik Kayayoga**, (3)
**Vaikriyik Mishra Kayayoga**, (4) **Vaikriyik Kayayoga**, (5) **Aharak Mishra
Kayayoga**, (6) **Aharak Kayayoga**, and (7) **Karman Kayayoga**.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Tre. mana : nigozise nikalanA haptarAzi meM rahane kA kAla adhika se adhika
kitanA hai ? uttara : trasa rAzi meM rahane kA adhika se adhika kAla sAdhika
2,000 sAgara varSa hai| 106. prazna : yoga kise kahate haiM ? uttara :
pudgalavipAkI zarIra nAmakarma ke udaya se mana-vacana-kAya se yukta jIva kI
karma grahaNa meM kAraNa-bhUta zakti ko yoga kahate haiM arthAt bhAdayoga kahate
haiN| isa zakti ke kAraNa AtmapradezoM meM jo parispandana utpanna hotA hai, use
dravyayoga kahate haiN| 110. prazna : yoga ke kitane bheda haiM ? uttara :
saMkSepa meM yoga ke tIna bheda hai (1) kAyayoga (2) vacanayoga aura (3) mnoyog|
vistAra se kAyayoga ke sAta bheda hai(1) audArika-mizra kAyayoga (2) audArika
kAyayoga (3) vaikriyika mizra kAyayoga (4) vaikriyika kAyayoga (5) AhAraka mizra
kAyayoga (6) AhAraka kAyayoga aura (7) kArmaNa kaayyog|

Page #62 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
..... There are four types of *Yachanayoga* - (1) *Satyavachanayoga* (2)
*Asatyavachanayoga* (3) *Ubhayavachanayoga* and (4) *Anumayavachanayoga*. There
are four types of *Manoyoga* - (1) *Satyamanoyoga* (2) *Asatyamanoyoga* (3)
*Ubhayamanoyoga* and (4) *Anubhayamanoyoga*. Thus, in total there are 15 types
of *Yoga*. 111. Question: What is *Audarikamishra Kayayoga*? Answer: After
*Vigrahagati*, until the *Shariraparayapti* is complete in the human or
*Tiryanch* state, i.e., in the *Aparayapta* state, the *Atmapradesha*
oscillation due to the *Karman* body and the *Audarik* body of this being is
called *Audarikamishra Kayayoga*. 112. Question: What is *Audarik Kayayoga*?
Answer: After the *Nirvrittyaparayapta* state, when the *Audarik* body becomes
*Parayapta*, the *Atmapradesha* oscillation due to the *Audarik* body is called
*Audarik Kayayoga*. Humans and *Tiryanch* experience *Audarik Kayayoga*
throughout their lives. .......

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 ..... yacanayoga ke cAra bheda haiM- (1) satya vacanayoga (2) asatya vacanayoga
(3) ubhaya vacanayoga aura (4) anumaya vcnyog| manoyoga ke cAra bheda haiM- (1)
satya manoyoga (2) asatya manoyoga (3) ubhaya manoyoga aura (4) anubhaya mnoyog|
isa prakAra saba milAkara yoga ke 15 bheda haiN| 111. prazna : audArikamizra
kAyayoga kise kahate haiM ? uttara : vigrahagati ke bAda manuSya athavA tithaMca
gati meM jaba taka zarIraparyApti pUrNa nahIM hotI hai taba taka arthAt
aparyApta avasthA meM isa jIva ke kArmaNa zarIra aura audArika zarIra ke nimitta
se AtmapradezoM kA jo parispandana hotA hai, use audArikamizra kAyayoga kahate
haiN| 112. prazna : audArika kAyayoga kise kahate haiM ? uttara :
nirvRtyaparyApta avasthA ke antarmuhUrta bAda paryApta ho jAne para audArika
zarIra ke nimitta se jo AtmapradezoM kA parispandana hotA hai use audArika
kAyayoga kahate haiN| manuSya aura tiryaMca ko pUre jIvana bhara audArika
kAyayoga ....... - - - - -

Page #63 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
It remains. It is special that that sufficient being sometimes has मनोयोग (mano-
yog) and sometimes बचनयोग (vachan-yog). 113. Question: What is वैक्रियिकमिश्र
काययोग (vaikriyika-mishra kaya-yog)? Answer: After the विग्रहगति (vigraha-gati),
in the देवगति (deva-gati) and नरक गति (naraka-gati), until the अन्तर्मुहूर्त
(antar-muhurta) of the insufficient state, the pulsation of the आत्मप्रदेश
(atma-pradesh) due to the कार्मण शरीर (karman-sharira) and वैक्रियिक शरीर
(vaikriyika-sharira) is called वैक्रियिकमिश्र काययोग (vaikriyika-mishra kaya-
yog). 114. Question: What is वैक्रियिक काययोग (vaikriyika kaya-yog)? Answer: The
pulsation of the आत्मप्रदेश (atma-pradesh) due to the वैक्रियिक शरीर
(vaikriyika-sharira) in the sufficient state is called वैक्रियिक काययोग
(vaikriyika kaya-yog). वैक्रियिक काययोग (vaikriyika kaya-yog) remains throughout
the entire life of the देव (deva) and नारक (naraka). Sometimes वचनयोग (vachan-
yog) and मनोयोग (mano-yog) also occur. 115. Question: What is आहारकमिश्र काययोग
(aaharaka-mishra kaya-yog)? Answer: The white-colored pupil that emerges from
the head of the जिन मुनि (jin muni) who are in the sixth गुणस्थान (guna-sthana)
to avoid असंयम (asan-yama) and for the removal of doubt, their first...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 rahatA hai| yaha vizeSa hai ki usa paryAptaka jIva ke kabhI manoyoga bhI hotA
hai, kabhI bacanayoga bhI hotA hai| 113. prazna : vaikriyikamizra kAyayoga kise
kahate haiM ? uttara : vigrahagati ke bAda devagati aura naraka gati meM
aparyApta avasthA ke antarmuhUrta paryanta kArmaNa zarIra aura vaikriyika zarIra
ke nimitta se AtmapradezoM kA jo parispandana hotA hai use vaikriyikamizra
kAyayoga kahate haiN| 114. prazna : vaikriyika kAyayoga kise kahate haiM ?
uttara : paryApta avasthA meM vaikriyika zarIra ke nimitta se AtmapradezoM meM
jo parispandana hotA hai use caikriyika kAyayoga kahate haiN| deva aura
nArakiyoM ke pUre jIvana bhara caikriyika kAyayoga rahatA hai| kabhI-kabhI
vacanayoga aura manoyoga bhI hotA hai| 115. prazna : AhArakamizra kAyayoga kise
kahate haiM ? uttara : chaThe guNasthAnavartI jina muniyoM ke asaMyama kA
parihAra karane ke lie aura sandeha-nivAraNa hetu mastaka se jo zveta raMga kA
putalA nikalane vAlA hai, unake prathama

Page #64 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
In the Antarmūhūrta, until the Āhārak body is not sufficient, the pulsation that
occurs in the Ātmapradeśas due to the Ādārik body and the Āhārak body is called
Āhārakamiśra Kāyayoga. 16. Question: What is Āhākaayoga called? Answer: The
white pupil that emerges from the head of the Muni residing in the sixth
Guṇasthāna, goes to the Kevali and absorbs subtle substances. Therefore, the
pulsation that occurs in the Ātmapradeśas due to this Āhārak body is called
Āhārak Kāyayoga. 117. Question: How many Āhārak Kāyayogi and Āhārakamiśra
Kāyayogi beings are there? Answer: At one time, there are a maximum of 54 beings
with Āhārak Kāyayoga and a maximum of 27 beings with Āhārakamiśra Kāyayoga. 118.
Question: What is Kārmaṇ Kāyayoga called? Answer: When this being dies and goes
to the Vigrahāti to obtain a new body, then due to the Kārmaṇ body...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 antarmuhUrta meM jaba taka AhAraka zarIra paryApta nahIM hotA hai taba taka
AdArika zarIra aura AhAraka zarIra ke nimitta se AtmapradezoM meM jo
parispandana hotA hai, use AhArakamizra kAyayoga kahate haiN| 16. prazna :
AhAkAyayoga kile kahate haiM ? uttara : chaThe guNasthAnavartI muni ke mastaka
se jo zveta raMga kA putalA nikalatA hai vaha kevalI ke pAsa jAkara sUkSma
padArthoM kA AharaNa-grahaNa karatA hai, isalie isa AhAraka zarIra ke dvArA
AtmapradezoM meM jo parispandana hotA hai, use AhAraka kAyayoga kahate haiN|
117. prazna : AhAraka kAyayogI aura AhArakamizra kAyayogI jIvoM kA kitanA
pramANa hai ? uttara : eka samaya meM AhAraka kAyayoga vAle jIva adhika se
adhika 54 hote haiM aura AhArakamizna kAyayoga vAle jIva adhika se adhika 27
hote haiN| 118. prazna : kArmANa kAyayoga kise kahate haiM ? uttara : jaba yaha
jIva maraNa kara nayA zarIra prApta karane ke lie vigrahAti meM jAtA hai taba
kArmANa zarIra ke nimitta se

Page #65 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The pulsation of the Atma-pradeshas is called Karma-kaya-yoga. This yoga lasts
for one, two or three times. 116. Question: How many types of bodies are there?
Answer: There are five types of bodies: (1) Vaikriya, (2) Audarika, (3) Aharaka,
(4) Taijasa and (5) Karmana. 120. Question: What is an Audarika body? Answer:
The body of humans and animals that originates from the womb and unconscious
birth is called an Audarika body. 121. Question: What is a Vaikriya body?
Answer: The body of gods and hell beings that originates from Uppaada birth is
called a Vaikriya body. 122. Question: What is an Aharaka body? Answer: The
Aharaka body that arises from the tapasya of the Muni in the sixth Gunasthan,
resulting in the Aharaka Riddhi, is used for the Diksha Kalyanak of the
Tirthankaras, the worship of Jin-Jin-griha, Chaitya and Chaityalaya, and for
avoiding Asanyama.  } (60)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 AtmapradezoM kA jo parispandana hotA hai, use kArmANa kAyayoga kahate haiN|
yaha yoga eka, do athavA tIna samaya taka hotA hai| 116. prazna: zarIra ke
kitane bheda hote haiM ? uttara : zarIra ke pA~ca me hote haiM- (1) aura (-)
vaikimika ( 3 ) AhAraka ( 4 ) taijasa aura (5) kArmANa  /  120. prazna :
audArika zarIra kise kahate haiM ? uttara : garbha aura sammUrcchana janma se
jisakI utpatti hotI haiM aise manuSya aura tiryaMcoM ke zarIra ko audArika
zarIra kahate haiM  /  121. prazna: vaikriyika zarIra kise kahate haiM ? uttara
: upapAda janma se jisakI utpatti hotI hai, aise deva aura nArakiyoM ke zarIra
ko vaikriyika zarIra kahate haiN| 122. prazna : AhAraka zarIra kise kahate haiM
? uttara : chaThe guNasthAnavartI muni ke tapazcaraNa ke nimitta se hone vAlI
AhAraka Rddhi ke phalasvarUpa tIrthaMkaroM ke dIkSA kalyANaka Adi evaM jina
jinagRha, caitya caityAlayoM kI vandanA ke lie arthAt asaMyama kA parihAra
karane ke lie } (60)

Page #66 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
And for the removal of doubt, the white puppet that emerges from the head,
devoid of metal and solidity, and possessing a square structure, is called the
**āhārak** body. 123. Question: What are the **taijas** and **karmāṇ** bodies
called? Answer: That by which the **audārik** etc. bodies have a specific type
of brilliance is called the **taijas** body. The group of karmas is called the
**karmāṇ** body. 124. Question: Besides the bodies of gods and hell beings, in
which other bodies can **vikriyā** occur? Answer: **Bādar**, **tejaskaayik**,
and **vāyukaayik**, and **sañjñī** **paryāpt** **pañcendriya** **tiryanch** and
**manushya**, and **bhogabhūmij** **tiryanch** and **manushya** can perform
**vikriyā** through their **audārik** body, but **bhogabhūmij** **tiryanch** and
**manushya**, and **chakravarti** can also perform **vikriyā** separately. 125.
Question: How many types of **taijas** body are there? Answer: There are two
types of **taijas** body: (1) **nissaraṇātmak** and (2) **anissaraṇātmak**. The
**nissaraṇ** **taijas** body is present in the sixth **guṇasthāna**. (61)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 evaM sandeha - nivAraNa ke lie mastaka se dhAtu evaM saMhanana se rahita,
samacaturastra saMsthAna yukta eka hAtha kA sapheda raMga kA jo putalA nikalatA
hai, use AhAraka zarIra kahate haiM  /  123. prazna: taijasa aura kArmANa zarIra
kise kahate haiM ? uttara: jisake nimitta se audArika Adi zarIroM meM viziSTa
prakAra kA teja hotA hai, use taijasa zarIra kahate haiN| karmoM ke samUha ko
kArmANa zarIra kahate haiN| 124. prazna: devoM aura nArakiyoM ke zarIroM ke
atirikta kina-kina zarIroM meM vikriyA ho sakatI hai ? uttara : bAdara
tejaskAyika aura vAyukAyika tathA saMjJI paryApta paMcendriya tiryaMca evaM
manuSya tathA bhogabhUmija tiryaMca aura manuSya apane audArika zarIra ke dvArA
apRthak vikriyA kara sakate haiM parantu bhogabhUmija tiryaMca aura manuSya
tathA cakravartI pRthak vikriyA bhI kara sakate haiN| 125. prazna: taijasa
zarIra ke kitane bheda haiM ? uttara : taijasa zarIra ke do bheda haiM- (1)
nissaraNAtmaka aura (2) anissaraNAtmaka; nissaraNa taijasa zarIra chaThe
guNasthAnavartI (61)

Page #67 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The **Riddhi Dharak Muni** has **Anissaran Tejass** for all beings. 126.
Question: What are **Karma** and **Naukarma**? Answer: The four bodies that
arise from the **Audarik**, **Vaikriyik**, **Aharak**, and **Tainas**
**Namakarma** are called **Naukarma**. The group of eight **Karmas** such as
**Jnanavarana** etc. that arise from the **Karma** **Namakarma** are called
**Karman Sharira** or **Karma**. 127. Question: What is **Vinasopachay**?
Answer: Along with all the **Atma Pradesh**, the **Karma** and **Naukarma** that
are bound, with each atom of those **Karma** and **Naukarma**, there are
**Vinasopachay** atoms in an infinite number of times from the **Jiva Ras**,
which are not **Karma** or **Naukarma** in form, but are candidates to become
**Karma** or **Naukarma** in form, those atoms are called **Vinasopachay**. 128.
Question: Where is the best accumulation of **Audarik** etc. bodies? Answer: The
best accumulation of the **Audarik** body occurs in the **Deva Kuru** and
**Uttara Kuru** born humans and animals with three **Paly** states, at the end
and penultimate time of their lifespan. The best accumulation of the
**Vaikriyik** body occurs in the lifespan of twenty-two **Sagars**.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 RddhidhAraka muni ke hotA hai| anissaraNa taijasa samasta saMsAriyoM ke hotA
hai| 126. prazna : karma aura naukarma kise kahate haiM ? uttara : audArika,
vaikriyika, AhAraka aura tainasa nAmakarma ke udaya se hone vAle cAra zarIroM ko
naukarma kahate haiN| kArmANa zarIra nAmakarma ke udaya se hone vAle
jJAnAvaraNAdika ATha karmoM ke samUha ko kArmANa zarIra arthAt karma kahate
haiN| 127. prazna : vinasopacaya kise kahate haiM ? uttara : sampUrNa
AtmapradezoM ke sAtha jo karma aura nokarma ba~dhe haiM, una karma aura nokarma
ke pratyeka paramANu ke sAtha jIvarAzi se anantAnantaguNe vinasopacayarUpa
paramANu bhI sambaddha haiM, jo karmarUpa yA nokarmarUpa to nahIM haiM, kintu
karmarUpa yA nokarmarUpa hone ke lie ummIdavAra haiM, una paramANuoM ko
visasopacaya kahate haiN| 128. prazna : audArikAdi zarIroM kA utkRSTa saMcapa
kahA~ hotA hai ? uttara : audArika zarIra kA utkRSTa saMcaya tIna palya kI
sthiti vAle devakuru aura uttarakuru meM utpanna manuSya tathA tiryaca ke Ayu ke
antima aura upAntya samaya meM hotA hai| vaikriyika zarIra kA utkRSTa saMcaya
bAisa sAgara kI Ayu

Page #68 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The **Āran** and **Achyuta** are the **Devas** who reside in the celestial
planes above the **Svarga**. The **Āhāraka** body's **utkṛṣṭa saṃcaya** belongs
to the **Āhāraka**, the **Pramavirata** who sustains the body. The **Taijasa**
body's **utkṛṣṭa saṃcaya** belongs to the being who is born for the second time
in the **Saptam Pṛthivī**. The **Kāṇi** body's **utkṛṣṭa saṃcaya** belongs to
the being who is born in the **Saptam Pṛthivī** after wandering through the
**Narakas** many times.   126. Question: What are the causes of **utkṛṣṭa
saṃcaya** of **karmas**? Answer: There are six essential causes for the
**utkṛṣṭa saṃcaya** of **karmas**: (1) **Bhavadhā** (2) **Āyuṣya** (3) **Yoga**
(4) **Saṃkleśa** (5) **Apakṣaṇa** and (6) **Utkṣaṇa**.  130. Question: What is
**Madādya**? Answer: The time (state) related to **Bhava-paryāya** is called
**Bhavadhā**.  131. Question: What is **Apakṣaṇa**? Answer: The state of
**karma-pradeśas** and the refraction of the **anubhāga**, i.e., the decrease,
is called **Apakṣaṇa**. (63)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 vAle AraNa aura acyuta svarga ke Upara ke vimAnoM meM rahane vAle devoM ke hotA
hai| AhAraka zarIra kA utkRSTa saMcaya AhAraka, zarIra kA sadhAna karane vAle
pramAvirata ke hotA hai| taijasa zarIra kA utkRSTa saMcaya saptam pRthivI meM
dUsarI bAra utpanna hone vAle jIva ke hotA hai| kANi zarIra kA utkRSTa saMcaya
aneka bAra narakoM meM bhramaNa karake saptam pRthivI meM utpanna hone vAle jIva
ke hotA hai| 126. prazna : karmoM kA utkRSTa saMcaya karane meM kyA-kyA kAraNa
uttara : karmoM kA utkRSTa saMcaya karane meM chaha Avazyaka kAraNa hote haiN|
(1) bhavAddhA (2) AyuSya (3) yoga (4) saMkleza (5) apakarSaNa aura (6) utkrssnn|
130. prazna : madAdyA kise kahate haiM ? uttara : bhava-paryAya sambandhI kAla
(sthiti) ko bhavAdA kahate haiN| 131. prazna : apakarSaNa kise kahate haiM ?
uttara : karmapradezoM kI sthiti aura anubhAga ke apavartana arthAt ghaTane ko
apakarSaNa kahate haiN| (63)

Page #69 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
132. Question: What is Utkarshana? Answer: The state of Karma-predesh and the
increase in the Anu-bhag is called Utkarshana. 133. Question: In which
Gunasthanas does Karman Kayayog occur? Answer: In comparison to Vigraha-Gati,
Karman Kayayog occurs in the first, second, and fourth Gunasthanas. And in
comparison to Kevali Samudghat, Karman Kayayog occurs in the Pratar and Lok-
puran states. 134. Question: What is the nature of the four types of Vachan-yog
and Mano-yog? Answer: The tendency of the Jiva to speak or think about a
substance in four ways: Satya, Asatya, Ubhaya, and Anubhaya, is called Satya
Vachan-yog, Satya Mano-yog, etc. respectively. The substance that is the subject
of Samyak-gyan is called Satya, for example, "This is water." The substance that
is the subject of Mithya-gyan is called Asatya, for example, calling a mirage
"water." The substance that is the subject of both is called Ubhaya, for
example, a "Kamandalu" (a water pot).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 132. prazna : utkarSaNa kise kahate haiM ? uttara : karmapradezoM kI sthiti
aura anubhAga kI vRddhi ko utkarSaNa kahate haiN| 133. prazna : kArmANa kAyayoga
kisa-kisa guNasthAna meM hotA hai ? uttara : vigrahagati kI apekSA kArmANa
kAyayoga pahale, dUsare aura cauthe guNasthAna meM hotA hai tathA kevalI
samudghAta kI apekSA kArmANa kAyayoga pratara aura lokapUraNa avasthA meM hotA
hai| 134. prazna : vacanayoga aura manoyoga ke cAra bhedoM kA svarUpa kyA hai ?
uttara : padArtha ko kahane yA vicArane ke lie jIva kI satya, . asatya, ubhaya
aura anubhaya rUpa cAra prakAra se bacana aura mana kI jo pravRtti hotI hai, use
krama se satya vacanayoga tathA satya manoyoga Adi kahate haiN| samyagjJAna ke
viSayabhUta padArtha ko satya kahate haiM, jaise 'yaha jala hai'| mithyAjJAna ke
viSayabhUta padArtha ko asatya kahate haiM, jaise 'mRgamarIcikA' ko jala khnaa|
donoM ke viSayabhUta padArtha ko ubhaya kahate haiM, jaise 'kamaNDalu ko

Page #70 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
"Ghat" is said because the Kamandalu serves the purpose of a "Ghat," therefore
it is partially true and not "Ghatakar," therefore it is partially false. The
substance which is not the subject of both knowledge is called "Anubhay," like
the general appearance that "this is something." Here, there can be no decision
of truth or falsehood, therefore it is "Anubhay." 135. Question: How many types
of "Anubhayavachan" are there? Answer: There are nine types of "Anubhayavachan"
- (1) "Aamantrani" - O Devadatta! Come here, (2) "Aagnapani" - Do this work, (3)
"Yachaniya" - Give me this, (4) "Aachhani" - What is this? (5) "Prajnapani" -
What should I do, such informational sentences, (6) "Pratyakhyani" - I leave
this, (7) "Sanshayavachani" - Is this a "Balaka" or a "Pataka," (8)
"Ichchhanuloomni" - I should also be like this, such sentences expressing
desire, (9) "Anksharatmak" - The language of the five-sense beings, including
the "Indriya" and the "Asanji," is "Anksharatmak." These nine types of
sentences, when heard, give knowledge of both the manifest and the unmanifest
parts, because they cannot be called false due to the manifestation of the
general part, and they cannot be called true due to the non-manifestation of the
specific part.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 ghaTa kahanA kyoMki kamaNDalu ghaTa kA kAma detA hai, isalie kathaMcit satya
hai aura ghaTAkAra nahIM hai, isalie kathaMcita asatya hai| jo donoM hI jJAna kA
viSaya nahIM hotA hai aise padArtha ko anubhaya kahate haiM, jaise sAmAnya rUpa
se yaha pratibhAsa honA ki 'yaha kucha hai'  /  yahA~ para satya-asatya kA kucha
bhI nirNaya nahIM ho sakatA, isalie anubhaya hai| 135. prazna : anubhayavacana
ke kitane bheda haiM ? uttara : anubhayavacana ke nau bheda haiM- (9) AmantraNI-
he devadatta! yahA~ Ao, (2) AjJApanI- yaha kAma karo, (3) yAcanIyaha mujhako do,
(4) AcchanI- yaha kyA hai ? (5) prajJApanI- maiM kyA karU~ isa taraha ke sUcanA
vAkya, (6) pratyAkhyAnI- ise chor3atA hU~, (7) saMzayavacanI- yaha balAkA hai
athavA patAkA, (8) icchAnulomnI- mujhe bhI aisA hI honA cAhie, aisI icchA
prakaTa karane vAle vacana, (6) anakSarAtmaka- hIndriyAdika asaMjJI paMcendriya
paryanta jIvoM kI bhASA anakSarAtmaka hotI hai| ye nau prakAra ke vacana sunane
se vyakta aura avyakta donoM hI aMzoM kA bodha hotA hai, kyoMki sAmAnya aMza ke
vyakta hone se inheM asatya bhI nahIM kaha sakate aura vizeSa aMza ke vyakta na

Page #71 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
They cannot be called truth because of their existence, therefore they are
called **Anubhay Vachan**. 136. Question: What are Vedas? How many types are
there and what is their nature? Answer: Vedas are the great delusion that arises
in the results of the soul due to the rise and stimulation of **Nokeshay**. Due
to delusion, the soul does not consider qualities and defects. There are two
types of Vedas - (1) **Bhavaved** and **Dravyaved**. **Bhavaved**: The desire
for enjoyment that arises from the rise of **Purushaved**, **Strived** and
**Napunsakaved** in the inner self is called **Bhavaved**. **Dravyaved**: The
creation of the body that arises from the rise of **Angopaang Namakarma** is
called **Dravyaved**. There are also three types of Vedas (1) **Purushaved** (2)
**Strived** and (3) **Napunsakaved**. **Napunsakaved** is present in hell
beings, **Strived** and **Purushaved** in gods and all three Vedas are present
in the remaining beings. There is similarity in **Dravyaved** and **Bhavaved**
in gods and hell beings, but there is also some disparity in humans and animals
of the **Karmabhoomi**. (66)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 hone se inheM satya bhI nahIM kaha sakate haiM, isalie inheM anubhaya vacana
kahate haiN| 136. prazna: veda kise kahate haiM ? usake kitane bheda haiM aura
usakA svarUpa kyA hai ? uttara : veda nokaSAya ke udaya tathA udIraNA hone se
jIva ke pariNAmoM meM bar3A bhArI moha utpanna hotA hai use veda kahate haiN|
moha ke kAraNa jIva guNa aura doSa kA vicAra nahIM karatA hai| veda ke do bheda
haiM- (1) bhAvaveda aura dravyaveda | bhAvaveda : antaraMga meM puruSaveda,
strIveda aura napuMsakaveda ke udaya se jo ramaNa kI icchA hotI hai, use
bhAvaveda kahate haiN| dravyaveda : aMgopAMga nAmakarma ke udaya se jo zarIra kI
racanA hotI hai, use dravyaveda kahate haiM  /  veda ke tIna bheda bhI haiM ( 1
) puruSaveda ( 2 ) strIveda aura ( 3 ) napuMsakaveda  /  nArakiyoM meM
napuMsakaveda, devoM meM strIveda evaM puruSaveda tathA zeSa jIvoM meM tInoM
veda hote haiN| deva nArakI meM dravyaveda aura bhAvaveda kI samAnatA rahatI hai
parantu karmabhUmi ke manuSya aura tiryacoM meM kahIM viSamatA bhI pAyI jAtI hai
(66)

Page #72 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
That is to say, there is something called *dravya-ved* and something called
*bhava-ved*. The obstacle of *purusha-ved* is like the fire of straw, the
obstacle of *stri-ved* is like the fire of kindling wood, and the obstacle of
*nasaka-ved* is like the fire of a kiln for baking bricks. 137. Question: Where
does the good conduct of *ved* remain? Answer: The good conduct of *stri-ved*
and *napumsaka-ved* remains until the fifth *guna-sthana*, and the good conduct
of *purusha-ved* remains until the fourteenth *guna-sthana*. In comparison to
*bhava-ved*, the good conduct of all three *veds* remains until the beginning of
the ninth *guna-sthana*. Beyond this, the living beings are without *ved*. 138.
Question: What is *kṣaya*? How many types are there? Answer: That which destroys
the qualities of *samyak-tva* etc. of the soul is called *kṣaya*. *Krodha-mana-
maya-lobha* with infinite attachments, *krodha-mana-maya-lobha* with non-
rejection covering, *krodha-mana-maya-lobha* with rejection covering, *krodha-
mana-maya-lobha* with burning, and *hasya-rati-arati-soka-bhaya-jugupsa-stri-
ved-purusha-ved* and *napumsaka-ved*, these are the 25 types of *kṣaya*. In
comparison to the places of arising, there are also countless types of *kṣaya*
according to the number of worlds. 1. Whatever *bhava-ved* is obtained in any
desired *paryaya* of a living being, that same *bhava-ved* remains throughout
life, it does not change. *Dhavla* 1/34 (67)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 arthAt dravyada kucha hotA hai aura bhAvaveda kucha hotA hai| phuruSaveda kI
bAdhA tRNa kI Aga ke samAna, strI kI bAdhA kArISa (kaMDe) kI Aga ke samAna aura
nasakaveda kI bAdhA ITa pakAne ke A~vA~ kI Aga ke samAna hotI hai| 137. prazna :
vaida kA sadbhAva kahA~ taka rahatA hai ? uttara : dravyaveda kI apekSA strIveda
aura napuMsakaveda kA sadbhAva pA~caveM guNasthAna taka tathA puruSaveda kA
sadbhAva caudahaveM guNasthAna taka hotA hai| bhAvaveda kI apekSA tInoM vedoM kA
sadbhAva navam guNasthAna ke pUrvArtha taka rahatA hai| isake Age ke jIva
vedarahita hote haiN| 138. prazna : kaSAya kise kahate haiM ? usake kitane bheda
haiM ? uttara : jo AtmA ke samyaktvAdi guNoM kA ghAta kare, use kaSAya kahate
haiN| anantAnubandhI krodha-mAna-mAyA-lobha, apratyAkhyAnAvaraNa krodha-mAna-
mAyA-loma, pratyAkhyAnAvaraNa, krodha-mAna-mAyA-lobha, saMjvalana krodha-mAna-
mAyA-lobha aura hAsya-rati-arati-zoka-bhaya-jugupsA-strIveda-puruSaveda evaM
napuMsakaveda, ye kaSAya ke 25 bheda haiN| udayasthAnoM kI apekSA kaSAya ke
asaMkhyAta lokapramANa bheda bhI haiN| 1. jisa jIva ke jisa-kisI vivakSita
paryAya meM jo bhAvaveda prApta huA hai, vahI bhAvaveda jIvana bhara taka rahatA
hai, badalatA nahIM hai| dhavalA 1/34 (67)

Page #73 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
136. Question: What are the *ananubandhi* kṣayās called? Answer: Since
*mithyātva* is the cause of the infinite world, it is called infinite. The
*kṣayās* that are connected with this infinite, i.e., which destroy the
*samyaktvaguna* of the soul, are called *ananta-anubandhi* kṣayās. 1  140.
Question: What are the *apratyakhyāna-āvaraṇa*, *pratyakhyāna-āvaraṇa*, and
*sanjvalana* kṣayās? Answer: The *kṣayās* that destroy *ekadeśa-cāritra* are
called *apratyakhyāna-āvaraṇa* kṣayās. The *kṣayās* that destroy *sakala-
cāritra* are called *pratyakhyāna-āvaraṇa* kṣayās. The *kṣayās* that destroy
*yathākhyāta-cāritra* are called *sanjvalana* kṣayās.  1. *Ananta-anubandhi* is
also said to be destructive of *cāritra* along with *samyaktvaguna* (Dhavala
1/164, Pañcādhyāyī Uttarārdha 1140). This is also correct. The point is that the
function of *ananta-anubandhi* kṣayās is to maintain the infinite flow of
*apratyakhyāna-āvaraṇa* etc. kṣayās. It (the *ananta-anubandhi*) itself does not
obtain any *cāritra*. (Dhavala 6, p. 42) | The activity of the *ananta-
anubandhi* quartet in *cāritra* is not futile either, because the *cāritra* is
destroyed by the infinite flow of *apratyakhyāna-āvaraṇa* etc. which is caused
by the *ananta-anubandhi* kṣayās, which is contrary to the futility of the
*ananta-anubandhi* kṣayās (Dhavala 6/43); thus the dual nature of the *ananta-
anubandhi* is established. (68)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 136. prazna: anAnubandhI kaSAya kille kahate haiM ? uttara : ananta saMsAra kA
kAraNa hone se mithyAtva ko ananta kahate haiM, isa ananta ke sAtha jisakA
anubandha ho arthAt jo AtmA ke samyaktva guNa kA ghAta kare use anantAnubandhI
kaSAya kahate haiM ? 1 140. prazna: apratyAkhyAnAvaraNa, pratyAkhyAnAvaraNa aura
saMjvalana kaSAya kise kahate haiM ? uttara : jo kaSAya ekadezacAritra ko ghAte
use apratyAkhyAnAvaraNa kaSAya kahate haiN| jo kaSAya sakala - cAritra ko ghAte
use pratyAkhyAnAvaraNa kaSAya kahate haiN| jo kaSAya yathAkhyAta cAritra ko
ghAte use saMjvalana kaSAya kahate haiM  /  1. anantAnubandhI ko samyaktva ke
sAtha-sAtha cAritra kA bhI ghAtaka kahA hai ( dhavala 1/164, paMcAdhyAyI
uttarArdha 1140) vaha bhI ThIka hI hai| bAta yaha hai ki anantAnubandhI kaSAya
kA kArya apratyAkhyAnAvaraNAdi kaSAyoM kA ananta pravAha banAye rakhanA hai|
vaha (anantAnubandhI) svayaM kisI cAritra ko nahIM paatii| (dhavala pu. 6 pR. 42
) | cAritra meM anantAnubandhI catuSka kA vyApAra niSphala bhI nahIM hai, kyoMki
cAritra kI ghAtaka apratyAkhyAnAvaraNAdi ke ananta udaya rUpa pravAha ke
kAraNabhUta anantAnubandhI kaSAya ke niSphalatva kA virodha hai ( dhavala 6 /
43); isa prakAra anantAnubandhI kI dvisvabhAvatA siddha hotI hai| (68)

Page #74 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
141. Question: How many types of kṣayās like anger are there in relation to
power? Answer: There are four types of kṣayās like anger in relation to power.
(See table on page 70) 142. Question: What are nokṣayās? Answer: Those whose
arising is less than that of kṣayās like anger are called nokṣayās (kincit
kṣayās). There are nine types of these: (1) hāsa, (2) rati, (3) arati, (4) śoka,
(5) bhaya, (6) jugupsā, (7) puruṣaved, (8) strīved, and (9) napuṃsakaved. 143.
Question: Up to which guṇasthāna does the arising of which kṣayā occur? Answer:
The arising of anantānubandhī kṣayā occurs up to the second guṇasthāna, the
arising of apratyākhyānāvaraṇa occurs up to the fourth guṇasthāna, the arising
of pratyākhyānāvaraṇa occurs up to the fifth guṇasthāna, and the arising of
sanjvalana occurs up to the tenth guṇasthāna. The arising of the six nokṣayās
like hāsa occurs up to the eighth guṇasthāna, and the three  (66)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 141. prazna : zakti kI apekSA krodhAdi kaSAyoM ke kitane bheda hote haiM ?
uttara : zakti kI apekSA krodhAdi kaSAyoM ke cAra-cAra bheda hote haiM  /  (
tAlikA pRSTha 70 para dekheM) 142. prazna : nokaSAya kise kahate haiM ? uttara:
jinakA udaya krodhAdi kaSAyoM kI apekSA nyUna hotA hai, unheM nokaSAya (kiMcit
kaSAya) kahate haiN| inake nau bheda haiM- ( 1 ) hAsya, ( 2 ) rati, (3) arati,
(4) zoka, (5) bhaya, (6) jugupsA, (7) puruSaveda ( 8 ) strIveda aura (6)
napuMsakaveda | 143. prazna: kisa kaSAya kA udaya kisa guNasthAna taka hotA hai
? uttara : anantAnubandhI kaSAya kA udaya dUsare guNasthAna taka,
apratyAkhyAnAvaraNa kA udaya cauthe guNasthAna taka, pratyAkhyAnAvaraNa kA udaya
pA~caveM guNasthAna taka aura saMjvalana kA udaya dasaveM guNasthAna taka hotA
hai| hAsyAdi chaha nokaSAyoM kA udaya AThaveM guNasthAna taka aura tInoM (66)

Page #75 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Distinction of Kṣayās (passions) in relation to strength  * **A-pratyākhyāna**
(non-rejection) * **Pratyākhyāna** (rejection) * **Sanjvalana** (agitation)  *
**Like a line drawn on an endless stone** * **Like a line drawn on the earth** *
**Like a line drawn on dust** * **Like a line drawn on water** * **Like a bone**
* **Like a stone** * **Like wood** * **Like a cane** * **Like the root of a
bamboo, like the horn of a deer, like cow urine** * **Like a rope** * **Greed**
* **Like a worm** * **Like a wheel** * **Like bodily excrement** * **Like
turmeric**  **Results**  * **Naraka-gati** (hell) * **Tiryach-gati** (animal
realm) * **Manushya-gati** (human realm) * **Deva-gati** (heaven)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zakti kI apekSA kaSAyoM ke bheda apratyAkhyAna pratyAkhyAna saMjvalana
anantAnubandhI patthara para khIMcI gayI rekhA ke samAna pRthivI para khIMcI
gayI rekhA ke samAna dhUli para khIMcI gayI jala para khIMcI gayI rekhA ke
mamAna rekhA ke samAna haDDI ke samAna patthara ke samAna kASTha ke samAna veta
ke samAna (06) _ bA~sa kI jar3a ke samAna per3he ke sIMga ke samAna gomUtra ke
samAna  /  yurapA ke samAna lobha krimirAga ke samAna cakramala ke samAna
zarIramala ke samAna haldIraMga ke samAna phala narakagati tiryacagati manuSyati
devagati

Page #76 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The rise of the Vedas remains until the *savad* part of the ninth *gunasthan*.
From the eleventh *gunasthan* onwards, there is a state free from *kashāya*.
144. Question: What is *prashna jnana*? Answer: The knowledge by which a living
being knows the *dravya*, *guna*, and their various *paryaya* pertaining to the
three times is called *prashna jnana*.  145. Question: How many types of *jnana*
are there? Answer: There are five types of *jnana*: (1) *matijnana*, (2)
*shrutajnana*, (3) *avadhijnana*, (4) *man:paryayajnana*, and (5) *kevaljnana*.
*Mati* and *shrutajnana* are indirect knowledge, *avadhi* and *man:paryayajnana*
are *deshapratyaksha*, and *kevaljnana* is *sakalpratyaksha*. *Mati*, *shruta*,
*avadhi*, and *man:paryaya* are the four types of *kshayopashamic jnana*, and
*kevaljnana* is *kshayik jnana*.  146. Question: What is *matijnana*? Answer:
The knowledge of an object that is *abhimukh* (situated in a suitable field) and
*niyat* (the fixed object of its respective sense organ, such as the form of the
eye) with the help of the senses and mind is called *abhinibodhik* or
*matijnana*.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 : vedoM kA udaya navam guNasthAna ke saveda bhAga taka rahatA hai  /
gyArahaveM guNasthAna se kaSAyarahita avasthA hai  /  144. prazna jJAna kise
kahate haiM ? uttara : jisake dvArA jIva trikAlaviSayaka dravya, guNa aura unakI
aneka prakAra kI paryAyoM ko jAne use jJAna kahate haiN| 145. prazna jJAna ke
kitane bheda haiM ? uttara : jJAna ke pA~ca bheda haiM- (1) matijJAna, (2)
zrutajJAna, (3) avadhijJAna, (4) mana:paryayajJAna aura (5) kevalajJAna  /  mati
aura zrutajJAna parokSajJAna haiM, avadhi aura mana:paryaya jJAna dezapratyakSa
haiM tathA kevalajJAna sakalapratyakSa hai| mati, zruta, avadhi aura
mana:paryaya ye cAra jJAna kSAyopazamika jJAna haiM aura kevalajJAna kSAyika
jJAna hai  /  146. prazna : matijJAna kise kahate haiM ? uttara : indriya aura
mana kI sahAyatA se abhimukha ( yogya kSetra meM avasthita ) aura niyata (
apanI-apanI indriya kA niyata viSaya, jaise cakSu kA rUpa ) padArtha kA jo jJAna
hotA hai, use Abhinibodhika arthAt matijJAna kahate haiM  /  (199)

Page #77 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
147. Question: How many types of Matigyan are there? What is their nature?
Answer: There are four types of Matigyan. 1. Avgraha: When there is a
relationship between the object and the senses in the form of a state in the
appropriate field, there is a general observation-like perception, and after
this, there is Avgraha knowledge that takes in the specific shape, etc. For
example, 'This is a human being.' There are two types of Avgraha: (a)
Vyanjanavgraha: The meaning associated with the senses and the unmanifest
meaning is called Vyanjan, i.e., even when associated with the senses, it is
called Vyanjan until it is manifested, and the knowledge of this is called
Vyanjanavgraha. This knowledge occurs through the remaining four senses,
excluding the eye and mind. For example, the initial unmanifest perception of
words, etc., through the ear, etc., is called Vyanjanavgraha. (b) Arthavgraha:
The knowledge that occurs regarding the unacquired, unassociated meaning is
called Arthavgraha, which occurs after Vyanjanavgraha - for example, perceiving
words, etc., through the ear, etc., in a manifest form. This knowledge occurs
through all five senses and the mind.  (72)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 147. prazna : matijJAna ke kitane bheda haiM ? unakA svarUpa kyA uttara :
matijJAna ke cAra bheda haiM. 1. avagraha : padArtha aura indriyoM kA yogya
kSetra meM avasthA narUpa sambandha hone para sAmAnya avalokana rUpa darzana
hotA hai aura isake anantara vizeSa AkAra Adika ko grahaNa karane vAlA avagraha
jJAna hotA hai| jaise 'yaha manuSya hai|' avagraha ke do bheda haiM- . (a)
vyaMjanAvagraha : indriyoM se prApta-saMbaddha aura avyakta artha ko vyaMjana
kahate haiM arthAt indriyoM se sambaddha hone para bhI jaba taka prakaTa na
hove, use vyaMjana kahate haiM aura inake jJAna ko vyaMjanAvagraha kahate haiN|
yaha jJAna cakSuindriya aura mana ko chor3akara zeSa cAra indriyoM se hotA hai|
jaise zrotrAdika ke dvArA prathama zabdAdika ke avyakta grahaNa ko
vyaMjanAvagraha kahate haiN| (A) arthAvagraha : jo aprAptaasambaddha artha ke
viSaya meM hotA hai use arthAvagraha kahate haiM, jo vyaMjanAvagraha ke bAda
hotA hai- jaise zrotrAdika ke dvArA zabdAdika ko prakaTa rUpa se grahaNa krnaa|
yaha jJAna pA~coM indriyoM aura mana se hotA hai| (72)

Page #78 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(2) **Iha:** The effort to know a specific object through **avagraha** is called
**Iha** knowledge. For example, "This man should be from the south." (3)
**Avaya:** The decisive knowledge of the object known through **Iha** knowledge
is called **Avaya**. For example, "The man is indeed from the south." (4)
**Dharana:** The knowledge of the object known through **Avaya** that is not
forgotten over time is called **Dharana**. For example, "I had seen a man from
the south."  **Avagraha** knowledge is only present for unclear, acquired, or
implied objects. Clear objects have all four types of knowledge. 148. Question:
How many types of objects are there with respect to **matijnan**? Answer: There
are twelve types of objects with respect to **matijnan**. (1) **Bahu:** Many
objects of the same kind are called **bahu**. For example, knowledge of a
quantity of wheat. (2) **Bahuvidha:** Many objects of different kinds are called
**bahuvidha**. For example, knowledge of quantities of wheat, chickpeas, rice,
etc. (3) **Alp:** One or two objects of the same kind are called **alp**. For
example,  (73)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (2) IhA : avagraha ke dvArA jAne hue padArtha ko viziSTa rUpa se jAnane kI
ceSTA honA IhA jJAna hai| jaise yaha manuSya dAkSiNAtya honA caahie| (3) avAya :
IhA jJAna ke dvArA jAne hue padArtha kA nirNayAtmaka jJAna honA avAya kahalAtA
hai| jaise "manuSya dAkSiNAtya hI hai|" (4) dhAraNA : avAya ke dvArA jAne hue
padArtha ko kAlAntara meM na bhUlane vAle jJAna ko dhAraNA kahate haiN| jaise-
maiMne dAkSiNAtya manuSya ko dekhA thaa| aspaSTa- prApta yA vyaMjana padArtha kA
sirpha avagraha jJAna hotA hai| spaSTa padArtha ke cAroM jJAna hote haiN| 148.
prazna : matijJAna ke viSayabhUta padArtha kI apekSA kitane bheda hote haiM ?
uttara : matijJAna ke viSayabhUta padArtha kI apekSA bAraha bheda haiN| (1) bahu
: eka jAti ke bahuta padArthoM ko bahu kahate haiN| jaise- gehU~ kI rAzi kA
jJAna  /  (2) bahuvidha : aneka jAti ke bahuta padArthoM ko bahuvidha kahate
haiN| jaise- gehU~, canA, cAvala Adi kI rAziyoM kA jJAna  /  (3) alpa : eka jAti
ke eka, do padArtha ko alpa kahate haiN| jaise (73)

Page #79 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
: Knowledge of wheat etc. (4) Alpavidha: One or two substances of many kinds are
called alpavidha. For example, knowledge of one wheat, gram, rice etc. (5)
Kshipra: A substance that moves quickly is called kshipra, for example, a fast
flowing stream of water. (6) Akshipra: A substance that moves slowly is called
akshipra, for example, the speed of a tortoise etc. (7) Anissruta: The knowledge
of the whole object by seeing a part of the object is called anissruta. For
example, knowing the whole elephant by seeing its trunk submerged in water. The
knowledge of another object by grasping a part or the whole object and its cause
is also called anissruta. For example, knowing the moon by seeing the face. (8)
Nissruta: A manifest object is called nissruta. For example, an elephant
standing in front. (6) Anukta: The object that is understood by intention is
called anukta, for example, knowing a thirsty man by the expression of his face
and gestures of his hands etc. (10) Ukta: That which is said by words is called
ukta. (11) Dhruva: A stable object is called dhruva, for example, a mountain
etc. (12) Adhruva: A temporary object is called adhruva, for example, lightning
etc. . (74)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 : gehU~ Adi kA jJAna  /  ( 4 ) alpavidha: aneka jAti ke eka, do padArtha ko
alpavidha kahate haiN| jaise- eka gehU~, canA, cAvala Adi kA jnyaan| (5) kSipra
zIghra padArtha ko kSipra kahate haiM, jaise- tejI se bahatA huA jlprvaah| (6)
akSipra : manda gati se calane vAle padArtha ko akSipa kahate haiN| jaise-
kachuA kI cAla aadi| (7) aniHsRta vastu ke ekadeza ko dekhakara samasta vastu ke
jJAna ko aniHsRta kahate haiN| jaise jala meM DUbe hue hAthI kI sUMDa dekhakara
pUre hAthI kA jJAna honA  /  vastu ke ekadeza yA pUrNa vastu kA grahaNa karake
usake nimitta se kisI dUsarI vastu ke jJAna ko bhI aniHsRta kahate haiN| jaise-
mukha ko dekhakara candramA kA jJAna honA  /  ( 8 ) niHsRta : prakaTa padArtha
ko niHsRta kahate haiN| jaise sAmane khar3A huA hastI  /  ( 6 ) anukta jo
padArtha abhiprAya se samajhA jAya use anukta kahate haiM jaise - mu~ha kI
sUrata tathA hAtha Adi ke izAre se pyAse manuSya kA jJAna  /  (10) ukta : jo
zabda ke dvArA kahA jAya use ukta kahate haiM  /  ( 11 ) dhruva : sthira
padArtha ko dhruva kahate haiN| jaise parvata Adi  /  ( 12 ) adhruva :
kSaNasthAyI padArtha ko adhruva kahate haiN| jaise-bijalI Adi  /   /  (74)

Page #80 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
There are 4 types of *vyanjanavgraha* (excluding the eyes and mind, in relation
to the 4 senses) and 24 types of *arthaavgraha* (6 x 4) = 24 types (five senses
and mind, these six and *avgraha*, *iha*, *avaya*, *dharana*). Thus, in the
aforementioned twelve types of substances, there is a tendency of 28 types, so
28 x 12 = 336 types of *matijnana*.  146. Question: What is *shrutajnana*? How
many types are there? Answer: *Shrutajnana* is the knowledge of a different
substance, taking the substance known through *matijnana* as a basis.
*Shrutajnana* occurs only after *matijnana*. There are two types of
*shrutajnana*: (1) *aksharatmika* and (2) *anakshatatmika*. *Aksharatmika*,
meaning word-based *shrutajnana*, is the main type, because in the path to
liberation and in all worldly transactions, such as giving and taking, words and
the understanding derived from them are of primary importance. *Anaksharatmika*
*shrutajnana* is found in all beings, from those with one sense to those with
five senses, but it is not useful in worldly transactions or in the path to
liberation.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 vyaMjanAvagraha ke 4 bheda ( cakSu aura mana ko chor3akara 4 indriyoM kI apekSA
) aura arthAvagraha ke ( 6x4 ) = 24 bheda (pA~ca indriyA~ aura mana ye chaha
aura avagraha, IhA, avAya, dhAraNA ) isa prakAra ukta bAraha prakAra ke
padArthoM meM 28 bhedoM kI pravRtti hotI hai to 28x12 = 336 matijJAna ke bheda
hote haiN| 146. prazna: zrutajJAna kise kahate haiM ? usake kitane bheda hote
haiM ? uttara : matijJAna ke dvArA jAne hue padArtha kA avalambana lekara usase
bhinna padArtha ke jJAna ko zrutajJAna kahate haiN| matijJAnapUrvaka hI
zrutajJAna hotA hai| zrutajJAna ke do bheda haiM- (1) akSarAtmaka aura (2)
anakSarAtmaka | akSarAtmaka arthAt zabdajanya zrutajJAna mukhya hai, kyoMki
upadeza zAstrAdhyayana, dhyAna Adi kI apekSA mokSamArga meM tathA lenadena Adi
samasta loka vyavahAra meM zabda aura tajjanya bodha kI mukhyatA hai|
anakSarAtmaka zrutajJAna ekendriya se lekara paMcendriya taka sabhI jIvoM ke
pAyA jAtA hai, parantu yaha loka vyavahAra meM aura mokSamArga meM upayogI nahIM
hai| (5) 4

Page #81 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
150. Question: What is the measure of *anakshatraatmika* and *akshatraatmika*
*shrutagyaan*? Answer: From the most inferior to the most superior place of
*anakshatraatmika* *shrutagyaan*, which is like *paryaaya* and *paryaayasamaas*,
there are countless *loka* measures of difference, in comparison to the six
*sthana* based increases of *anantabhaagavruddi*, *asankhyaatabhaagavruddi*,
*sankhyaatabhaagavruddi*, *sankhyaatgunavruddi*, *asankhyaatgunavruddi*, and
*anantagunavruddi*. The measure of *akshatraatmika* *shrutagyaan* is one less
than the measure of the sixth *varga* in the *dvirupayvargadhaara*, which is the
measure of one *ekatti*.  151. Question: In detail, how many types of
*shrutagyaan* are there? Answer: There are twenty types of *shrutagyaan*: (1)
*Paryaaya*, (2) *Paryaayasamaas*, (3) *Akshara*, (4) *Akshara-samaas*, (5)
*Pada*, (6) *Padasamaas*, (7) *Sanghaat*, (8) *Sanghaatsamaas*, (9)
*Pratipattika*, (10) *Pratipattika Samaas*, (11) *Anuyog*, (12) *Anuyogsamaas*,
(13) *Praabhrutpraabhrut*, (14) *Praabhrutpraabhrutsamaas*, (15) *Praamrut*,
(16) *Praabhrutsamaas*, (17) *Vastu*, (18) *Vastusamaas*, (19) *Purva*, and (20)
*Purvasamaas*.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 150. prazna: anakSarAtmaka aura akSarAtmaka zrutajJAna kA kitanA pramANa hai ?
uttara : anantabhAgavRddhi, asaMkhyAta bhAgavRddhi, saMkhyAtabhAgavRddhi,
saMkhyAtaguNavRddhi, asaMkhyAtaguNavRddhi, anantaguNavRddhi ina SaTsthAnapatita
vRddhi kI apekSA se paryAya, paryAyasamAsarUpa anakSarAtmaka zrutajJAna ke
sabase jaghanya sthAna se lekara utkRSTa sthAna paryanta asaMkhyAta loka pramANa
bheda hote haiN| dvirupavargadhArA meM chaThe varga kA jitanA pramANa hai arthAt
ekaTTI pramANa usameM se eka kama karane se jitanA pramANa bAkI rahe, utanA hI
akSarAtmaka zrutajJAna kA pramANa hai| 151. prazna vistAra se zrutajJAna ke
kitane bheda hote haiM ? uttara : zrutajJAna ke bIsa bheda hote haiM (1)
paryAya, ( 2 ) paryAyasamAsa, (3) akSara, (4) akSara-samAsa, (5) pada, (6)
padasamAsa, (7) saMghAta, (8) saMghAtasamAsa, (6) pratipattika, (10)
pratipattika samAsa, (11) anuyoga, ( 12 ) anuyogasamAsa, (13) prAbhRtaprAbhRta,
(14) prAbhRtaprAbhRtasamAsa, (15) prAmRta, (16) prAbhRtasamAsa, (17) vastu, (18)
vastusamAsa, (18) pUrva aura ( 20 ) pUrvasamAsa  /  (19%)

Page #82 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
152. Question: What is the nature of Paryaya-Jnana? Who are its masters? Answer:
In one Antarmukhurta of a Sukshma-Nigodaya Labdhya-Paryapta Jiva, a maximum of
6012 Bhavas are possible. The Jiva, while traversing through them, acquires the
last inadequate body through three turns. At the time of the first turn, the
most inferior knowledge, which is in the form of Akshara, obtained through the
knowledge of the mind generated by the sense of touch, is called Paryaya-Jnana.
Its only characteristic is that the fruit of the Karma that covers it does not
manifest in this Paryaya-Jnana. Because if the fruit of Paryaya-Avarana Karma
becomes Paryaya-Jnana, then due to the lack of knowledge-use, the Jiva would
also cease to exist. However, at least the Paryaya-rupa knowledge is definitely
found in the Jiva. This makes this knowledge Avarana-free because the effect of
the Shruta-Jnana-Avarana called Paryaya, which obstructs it, falls on the
Paryaya-Samasa-Jnana, not on the Paryaya-Jnana. 153. Question: How many types of
Akshara-Atmaka Shruta-Jnana are there? Answer: There are two types of Akshara-
Atmaka Shruta-Jnana: (1) Anga-Pravist and (2) Anga-Bahya. Anga-Pravist has
twelve types: (1) Acharaanga,  (77)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 152. prazna : paryAyajJAna kA kyA svarUpa hai ? unake svAmI kauna haiM ? uttara
: sUkSmanigodiyA labdhyaparyAptaka jIva ke eka antarmuhUrta meM adhika se adhika
6012 bhava sambhava haiN| unameM bhramaNa karake anta ke aparyApta zarIra ko
tIna mor3oM ke dvArA grahaNa karane vAle jIva ke prathama mor3A ke samaya meM
sparzana indriyajanya matijJAnapUrvaka labdhyakSararUpa sabase jaghanya jJAna
hotA hai, usako paryAyajJAna kahate haiN| isameM vizeSatA kevala yahI hai ki
isake AvaraNa karane vAle karma ke udaya kA phala isa paryAyajJAna meM nahIM
hotA kyoMki yadi paryAyAvaraNa karma kA phala paryAyajJAna ho jAya to
jJAnopayoga kA abhAva hone se jIva kA bhI abhAva ho jAtA hai parantu kama-se-
kama paryAyarUpa jJAna jIva ke avazya pAyA jAtA hai| isase yaha jJAna nirAvaraNa
hotA hai kyoMki ise ghAtane vAle paryAya nAmaka zrutajJAnAvaraNa kA prabhAva
paryAyasamAsa jJAna para par3atA hai, paryAya nAmaka jJAna para nahIM par3atA
hai| 153. prazna : akSarAtmaka zrutajJAna ke kitane bheda haiM ? uttara :
akSarAtmaka zrutajJAna ke do bheda haiM- (1) aMgapraviSTa aura (2) aMgabAhya  /
aMgapraviSTa ke bAraha bheda hai- (1) AcArAMga, (77)

Page #83 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
2. Sutra Kritanga, 3. Sthananga, 4. Samavayanga, 5. Vyākhyāprajñapti Anga, 6.
Dharmakathaanga, 7. Upāsakādhyayanaanga, 8. Antahkṛdaśaanga, 9. Anuttaropāpadīka
Daśaanga, 10. Praśna-Vyākaraṇāanga, 11. Vipākasūtrāanga and 12. Dṛṣṭivādāanga.
Dṛṣṭivādāanga has five divisions - (1) Parikarma, (2) Sutra, (3) Prathamanuyoga
(4) Purvagata and (5) Chūlikā. Parikarma has five divisions - (1)
Chandraprajñapti, (2) Surya-prajñapti, (3) Jambudvipaprajñapti (4) Dvipa-
Sāgaraprajñapti and (5) Vyākhyāprajñapti; Purvagata has fourteen divisions - (1)
Utpadapurva, (2) Agrayaniyapurva, (3) Viryapravad, (4) Astinaastipravad, (5)
Gyanapravad, (6) Satyapravad (7) Atmapravad, (8) Karmapravad, (9) Pratyakhyan
(10) Viryanuavad (11) Kalyanwavad, (12) Pranavvad, (13) Kriyavishal and (14)
Trilok-Bindusar. Chūlikā has five divisions - (1) Jalagata, (2) Sthalagata, (3)
Mayagata, (4) Akashgata and (5) Rupagata. Angabāhya Śrutjñāna has fourteen
divisions - (1) Samāyik, (78)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 2. sUtrakRtAMga, 3. sthAnAMga, 4. samavAyAMga, 5. vyAkhyAprajJapti aMga, 6.
dharmakathAMga, 7. upAsakAdhyayanAMga, 8. antaHkRdazAMga, 6.
anuttaropapAdikadazAMga, 10. prazna-vyAkaraNAMga, 11. vipAkasUtrAMga aura 12.
dRssttivaadaaNg| dRSTivAdAMga ke pA~ca bheda haiM- (1) parikarma, (2) sUtra, (3)
prathamAnuyoga (4) pUrvagata aura (5) cUlikA  /  parikarma ke pA~ca bheda haiM-
(1) candraprajJapti, (2) sUrya-prajJapti, (3) jambUdvIpaprajJapti (4) dvIpa-
sAgaraprajJapti aura (5) vyAkhyAprajJapti; pUrvagata ke caudaha bheda haiM- (9)
utpAdapUrva, (2) AgrAyaNIyapUrva, (3) vIryapravAda, (4) astinAstipravAda, (5)
jJAnapravAda, (6) satyapravAda (7) AtmapravAda, (8) karmapravAda, (6)
pratyAkhyAna (10) vIryAnuvAda (11) kalyANavAda, (12) prANAvAda, (13) kriyAvizAla
aura (14) trilok-bindusaar| cUlikA ke pA~ca bheda haiM- (1) jalagatA, (2)
sthalagatA, (3) mAyAgatA, (4) AkAzagatA aura (5) ruupgtaa| aMgabAhya zrutajJAna
ke caudaha bheda haiM- (1) sAmAyika, (78)

Page #84 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(2) Chaturvinshati Stava, (3) Vandana, (4) Pratikramana (5) Vainayik (6)
Kritikarma (7) Dashavai Kalik, (8) Uttaradhyayanasutra, (6) Kalpa Vyavahar, (10)
Kalpakalpya, (11) Mahakalpa, (12) Pundarika, (13) Maha Pundarika and (14)
Nishiddhika. 154. Question: How many letters are there in Shrutagyan that are
not repeated? Answer: In the original, there are 27 vowels, 33 consonants and 4
Yogavah (Anuswar, Visarga, Jamuliya and Upadhmniya), thus 64 original letters.
Their combined permutations are 64 multiplied by itself, minus one, which is
18446744073706551615. This is the total number of letters in Shruta that are not
repeated, both internal and external. 155. Question: How many letters are there
in one pada? How many padas are there in the Dvadasanga? Answer: One pada has
sixteen hundred thirty-four crore eighty-three lakh seven thousand eight hundred
eighty-eight letters (1634,83,7888). This is the number of letters in the
Madhyama pada. The total number of padas in the Dvadasanga is one hundred twelve
crore eighty-two lakh fifty-eight thousand five (112,82,58,005). (76)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (2) caturviMzati stava, (3) vandanA, (4) pratikramaNa (5) vainayika (6)
kRtikarma (7) dazavai kAlika, (8) uttarAdhyayana, (6) kalpa vyavahAra, (10)
kalpAkalpya, (11) mahAkalpa, (12) puNDarIka, (13) mahApuNDarIka aura (14)
nissiddhikaa| 154. prazna : zrutajJAna ke apunarukta akSara kitane haiM ? uttara
: mUla meM 27 svara, 33 vyajana aura 4 yogavAha (anusvAra, visarga jiAmUlIya
aura upadhmAnIya) isa prakAra 64 mUlavarNa haiN| inake saMyogI bhaMga 64 jagaha
duA mAMDakara paraspara guNA karane se eka kama ekaTThI pramANa arthAt
18446744073706551615 itane aMgapraviSTa aura aMga-bAhya zruta ke samasta
apunarukta akSara haiN| 155. prazna : eka pada meM kitane akSara hote haiM ?
dvAdazAMga ke samasta pada kitane haiM ? uttara : eka pada meM solaha sau
cauMtIsa karor3a tirAsI lAkha sAta hajAra ATha sau aThAsI akSara hote haiM-
(1634,83,7888) yaha madhyama pada ke akSaroM kA pramANa hai| dvAdazAMga ke
samasta pada eka sau bAraha karor3a bayAsI lAkha aTTAvana hajAra pA~ca
(112,82,58,005) hai| (76)

Page #85 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
156. Question: What is the proof of the letters of Angabahya? Answer: The proof
of the letters of Angabahya is eight crore one lakh, eight thousand one hundred
seventy-five (8,01,08,175). One cannot be formed from this, therefore it is
called Angabahya. 157. Question: What is Avadhijnana? Answer: Avadhijnana is the
knowledge that has a limit to its subject matter in relation to dravya, kshetra,
kala, and bhava, due to the destruction and pacification of the Avadhijnana-
avarana karma. The living being who possesses this knowledge knows the substance
that is located in its field of knowledge without the help of senses, light,
etc. 158. Question: How many types of Avadhijnana are there? Answer: There are
two types of Avadhijnana: 1. Bhavapratyay: The Avadhijnana that occurs due to
bhava is called Bhavapratyay Avadhijnana. This knowledge is possessed by Devas,
Narakis, and Tirthankaras, and it arises from all parts. 2. Guna-Pratyay: The
Avadhijnana that occurs due to qualities like Samyagdarshan and Tapascharana is
called Guna-Pratyay Avadhijnana. This knowledge is possessed by some worthy
humans and sentient five-sensed Tiryanchas, not all. (50)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 156. prazna : aMgabAhya ke akSaroM kA pramANa kyA hai ? uttara : aMgabAhya ke
akSaroM kA pramANa ATha karor3a eka lAkha, ATha hajAra eka sau pacahattara
(8,01,08, 175) hai| itane se eka para nahIM banatA hai, ataH ise aMgabAhya
kahate haiM  /  157 prazna: avadhijJAna kise kahate haiM ? uttara :
avadhijJAnAvaraNa karma ke kSayopazama se dravya-kSetra - kAla - bhAva kI apekSA
jisake viSaya kI sImA ho use avadhijJAna kahate haiM  /  isa jJAna kA dhAraka
jIva indriyoM tathA prakAza Adi kI sahAyatA ke binA hI apane viSayakSetra meM
sthitarUpI padArtha ko jAnatA hai| 158. prazna: avadhijJAna ke kitane bheda haiM
? uttara : avadhijJAna ke do bheda hai- 1. bhavapratyaya : jo bhava ke nimitta
se hotA hai, use bhavapratyaya avadhijJAna kahate haiN| yaha jJAna deva, nArakI
aura tIrthaMkara ke hotA hai tathA sarvAMga se utpanna hotA hai  /  2. guNa-
pratyaya : jo samyagdarzana aura tapazcaraNAdi guNoM ke nimitta se hotA hai, use
guNapratyaya avadhijJAna kahate haiN| yaha jJAna kinhIM paryApta manuSyoM tathA
saMjJI paMcendriya tiryacoM ke hotA hai sabake nahIM ( 50 )

Page #86 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
- - This is also called **kshayopasham nimittak avadhigyan**. This knowledge
arises from conch etc. signs. 156. Question: How many types of **gunapratyay
avadhigyan** are there? Answer: There are six types of **gunapratyay
avadhigyan**. 1. **Anugami**: The **avadhigyan** that goes with its owner (Jiva)
is called **anugami**. It has three types: (a) The one that goes with its owner
to another **kshetra** is called **kshetranugami**. (b) The one that goes with
its owner to another **bhav** is called **bhavanugami**. (c) The one that goes
with its owner to another **kshetra** and **bhav** both is called
**ubhayanugami**. 2. **Ananugami**: The **avadhigyan** that does not go with its
owner (Jiva) is called **ananugami**. It also has three types: (a)
**kshetrananugami** (b) **bhavananugami** and (c) **ubhayananugami**. (3)
**Vardhman**: The **avadhigyan** that increases till its final stage like the
moon in the **shukla paksha** is called **vardhman avadhigyan**. (4)
**Hiyaman**: The **avadhigyan** that decreases till its final stage like the
moon in the **krishna paksha** is called **hiyaman avadhigyan**. (5)
**Avasthit**: The **avadhigyan** that neither decreases nor increases like the
**surya mandala** is called **avasthit**. (6) **Anavasthit**: The **avadhigyan**
that sometimes decreases and sometimes increases like the **chandra mandala** is
called **anavasthit**. (81)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 - - hotA hai| isI ko kSayopazama nimittaka avadhijJAna bhI kahate haiN| yaha
jJAna zaMkhAdi cihanoM se utpanna hotA hai| 156. prazna : guNapratyaya
avadhijJAna ke kitane bheda haiM ? uttara : guNapratyaya avadhijJAna ke chaha
bheda hote haiM 1. anugAmI : jo avadhijJAna apane svAmI (jIva) ke sAtha jAya use
anugAmI kahate haiN| isake tIna bheda hai (ka) jo dUsare kSetra meM apanI svAmI
ke sAtha jAya use kSetrAnugAmI kahate haiN| (kha) jo dUsare bhava meM sAtha jAya
use bhavAnugAmI kahate haiN| (ga) jo dUsare kSetra tathA bhava donoM meM sAtha
jAya use ubhayAnugAmI kahate haiN| 2. ananugAmI : jo apane svAmI (jIva) ke sAtha
na jAya use ananugAmI kahate haiN| isake bhI tIna bheda haiM- (ka)
kSetrAnanugAmI (kha) bhavAnanugAmI aura (ga) ubhayAnanugAmI  /  (3) vardhamAna :
jo zuklapakSa ke candra kI taraha apane antima sthAna taka bar3hatA jAya use
vardhamAna avadhijJAna kahate haiN| (4) hIyamAna : jo kRSNa pakSa ke candra kI
taraha antima sthAna taka ghaTatA jAya use hIyamAna kahate haiN| (5) avasthita :
jo sUryamaNDala ke samAna na ghaTe, na bar3he use avasthita kahate haiN| (6)
anadasthita : jo candra-maNDala kI taraha kabhI kama ho, kabhI adhika ho use
anavasthita kahate haiN| (81)

Page #87 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
160. Question: How many types of *avadhijnana* are there, other than the ones
already mentioned? Answer: There are three types of *avadhijnana*: (1)
*deshavadhi*, (2) *paramavadhi*, and (3) *sarvavadhi*. *Deshavadhi* knowledge
can occur in all four *gatis*, but *paramavadhi* and *sarvavadhi* knowledge only
occur in the human *gati* and only in *charmashiri* monks, not in others.
*Deshavadhi* knowledge is *pratipati*, it comes and goes, but *paramavadhi* and
*sarvavadhi* are *apratipati*, they do not disappear before *kevaljnana* is
attained. *Deshavadhi* knowledge is both *avastha* and *gunapratyay*.
*Bhavapratyay* *avadhijnana* is only *deshavadhi*. The lowest *deshavadhi*
knowledge occurs in both restrained and unrestrained humans, as well as in
*desha-samyami* restrained and unrestrained beings. The highest *deshavadhi*
knowledge occurs only in restrained beings.  161. Question: What is the extent
of the object of the lowest *deshavadhi* in terms of substance, space, time, and
feeling? Answer: The lowest *deshavadhi* knows the amount of substance that is
obtained by giving the part of the *loka* to the accumulation of the *nokarma*
classification with *sopacaya*. It cannot grasp a smaller *skandha* than this.
The space

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 | 160. prazna: anya prakAra se avadhijJAna ke kitane bheda haiM ? uttara :
avadhijJAna ke tIna bheda haiM- (1) dezAvadhi, ( 2 ) paramAvadhi aura ( 3 )
sarvAvadhi | dezAvadhi jJAna cAroM gatiyoM meM ho sakatA hai, parantu
paramAvadhi aura sarvAvadhi jJAna manuSya gati meM caramazarIrI muniyoM ke hI
hotA hai, anya ke nahIM  /  dezAvadhijJAna pratipAtI hai, hokara chUTa jAtA hai
parantu paramAvadhi aura sarvAvidhi apratipAtI hai- kevalajJAna hone ke pahale
nahIM chUTatA hai| dezApAMdhajJAna avastha aura guNapratyaya donoM taraha kA
hotA hai  /  bhavapratyaya avadhijJAna dezAvadhi hI hotA hai  /  jaghanya
dezAvadhijJAna saMyata tathA asaMyata donoM hI prakAra ke manuSyoM tathA deza-
saMyamI saMyatAsaMyata tiyaMcoM ke hotA hai  /  utkRSTa dezAvadhijJAna saMyata
jIvoM ke hI hotA hai  /  161. prazna: jaghanya dezAvadhi kA dravya-kSetra - kAla
aura bhAva kI apekSA kitanA viSaya hai ? sopacaya sahita nokarma vargaNA ke
saMcaya meM loka kA bhAga dene se jo dravya labdha prApta ho, utane dravya ko
jaghanya dezAvadhijJAna jAnatA hai| isase choTe skandha ko vaha grahaNa nahIM
kara sakatA hai| kSetra uttara : madhyama yoga ke dvArA saMcita (2)

Page #88 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Compared to the subtle **nigoda** (subtle atom), the **labdhyaparyaptak**
(capable of attaining liberation) living being knows a **tridasa** (third)
number of **jambhya** (birth) **avasahat** (periods of existence). Compared to
time, it knows a **praman** (measure) number of **avali** (a measure of time)
parts of the **bhut-bhavishyat** (past and future) **sambandhi** (related)
**dravya** (substance) **vyanjan-paryaya** (combinations of categories).
Compared to **bhaya** (fear), it knows a **praman** number of **asankhyat**
(innumerable) parts of the **paryaya** (categories) that it knows compared to
time. It knows a **praman** number of **asankhyat** parts of the **paryaya**
(categories) of the present time. 162. Question: How much is the subject matter
of **utkrista deshavadhigyan** (supreme knowledge of the universe) in terms of
**dravya** (substance), **kshetra** (space), **kal** (time), and **bhava**
(emotion)? Answer: It knows a **dravya** (substance) as subtle as the result
obtained by dividing the **dhruvahar** (a measure of time) once in the
**karmanavargna** (a measure of time). It knows the entire **lok** (universe) in
terms of **kshetra** (space). It knows one **kal** (time) less than one **paly**
(a measure of time) in terms of **kal** (time). It knows **asankhyat**
(innumerable) **lokpraman** (measure of the universe) **dravya** (substance)
**paryaya** (categories) in terms of **bhava** (emotion). 163. Question: How
much is the subject matter of **jghanya parmavithi jhan** (lowest knowledge of
the universe) in terms of **dravya** (substance), **kshetra** (space), **kal**
(time), and **bhava** (emotion)? Answer: It knows a **dravya** (substance) as
subtle as the result obtained by dividing the **dhruvahar** (a measure of time)
once in the **utkrista deshavadhi** (supreme knowledge of the universe) **dravya
praman** (measure of substance).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 kI apekSA sUkSma nigodiyA labdhyaparyAptaka jIva ke utpanna hone ke tRtIya
samaya meM jamanya avasAhata hotI hai, utane pramANa kSetra ko jAnatA hai| kAla
kI apekSA, AvalI ke asaMkhyAtaveM bhAga pramANa bhUta-bhaviSyata sambandhI
dravya kI vyaMjana-paryAyoM ko jAnatA hai| bhAya kI apekSA jitanI paryAyoM ko
kAla kI apekSA jAnatA hai usake asaMkhyAtaveM bhAga pramANa vartamAna kAla kI
paryAyoM ko jAnatA hai| 162. prazna : utkRSTa dezAvadhijJAna kA dravya-kSetra-
kAla-bhAva kI apekSA kitanA viSaya hai ?  /  uttara : kArmaNavargaNA meM eka
bAra dhruvahAra kA bhAga dene se jo labdha prApta ho utane sUkSma dravya ko
utkRSTa dezAvadhijJAna jAnatA hai| kSetra kI apekSA sampUrNa loka ko jAnatA hai|
kAla kI apekSA eka samaya kama eka palya kI bAta ko jAnatA hai| bhAva kI apekSA
asaMkhyAta lokapramANa dravya kI paryAyoM ko jAnatA hai| 163. prazna : jaghanya
paramAvathi jhAna kA dravya-kSetra-kAla-bhAva kI apekSA kitanA viSaya hai ? |
uttara : dezAvadhi kA jo utkRSTa dravyapramANa hai, usameM eka bAra dhruvahAra
kA bhAga dene para jo labdha prApta ho utanA hI (83)

Page #89 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The smallest particle of the Paramāvadhi is the proof. Multiplying the finest
region of the Desāvadhi by an innumerable (an innumerable part of an Āvali)
gives the proof of the smallest region of the Paramāvadhi. Multiplying the
finest time of the Desāvadhi by an innumerable gives the proof of the smallest
time of the Paramāvadhi. Multiplying the proof of the finest state of the
Desāvadhi by an innumerable part of an Āvali gives the proof of the smallest
state of the Paramāvadhi, because the state of the smallest particle of the
Desāvadhi is in the form of a series multiplied by an innumerable part of an
Āvali from the smallest Desāvadhi to the entire duration. Therefore, in relation
to the state, multiplying the proof of the state related to the previous
difference by an innumerable part of an Āvali gives the proof of the state
related to the subsequent difference. 164. Question: How much is the subject of
the finest Paramāvadhi in terms of particle, region, time, and state? Answer:
The particle of the finest Paramāvadhi is Dhruvahara (which is an infinite part
of the Siddhrāśi and an infinite multiple of the Abhavyarāśi) in proof. The
region is innumerable Lokas in proof. The time is equal to the time of the
regions of innumerable Lokas. The finest Paramāvadhi (84)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paramAvadhi ke jaghanya dravya kA pramANa hai| dezAvadhi ke utkRSTa kSetra ko
asaMkhyAta (AvalI ke asaMkhyAtaveM bhAga) se guNA karane para paramAvadhi kA
jaghanya kSetra pramANa prApta hotA hai| utkaSTa dezAvadhi ke kAla ko asaMkhyAta
se guNA karane para jo labdha prApta ho, tatpramANa paramAvadhi kA jaghanya kAla
hotA hai| utkRSTa dezAvadhi ke bhAva kA jo pramANa hai use AvalI ke
asaMkhyAtaveM bhAga se guNita karane para jaghanya paramAvadhi kA bhAva-pramANa
prApta hotA hai, kyoMki dezAvadhi ke jaghanya dravya kI paryAyarUpa bhAva
jaghanya dezAvadhi se sarvAvadhi paryanta AvalI ke asaMkhyAtaveM bhAga se
guNitakrama hai| ataH bhAva kI apekSA pUrva bheda sambandhI bhAva ke pramANa ko
AvalI ke asaMkhyAtaveM bhAga se guNita karane para uttara bheda sambandhI bhAva
kA pramANa nikalatA hai| 164. prazna : utkRSTa paramAyadhizana kA dravya-kSetra-
kAla-bhAva kI apekSA kitanA viSaya hai ? uttara : utkRSTa paramAvadhi kA dravya
dhruvahAra (jo siddharAzi ke anantaveM bhAga pramANa aura abhavyarAzi se
anantaguNA hai) pramANa hai| kSetra asaMkhyAta loka pramANa hai| kAla asaMkhyAta
lokoM ke pradezoM ke barAbara samayarUpa hai| utkRSTa paramAvadhi (84)

Page #90 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The feeling is multiplied by an innumerable part of the Avali from the feeling
that is the subject of the two extreme distinctions of the Parmavadhi (for
details see - Dhadana, 41-50 Go.Ji. 5 Me 12 and Thavala 13/322 to 325). 165.
Question: How much is the subject of Sarvavadhi knowledge in terms of dravya-
kshetra-kal-bhav? Answer: The dravya of Sarvavadhi is one atom. Multiplying the
excellent kshetra, kal and bhav of Parmavadhi by innumerable, the kshetra, kal
and bhav of Sarvavadhi comes. That is, multiplying the excellent kshetra of
Parmavadhi by innumerable worlds worthy of it, the excellent kshetra of
Sarvavadhi is obtained. Multiplying the kal of Parmavadhi by innumerable forms
worthy of it, the excellent kal of Sarvavadhi is obtained. 1. Note: It should be
known that the subject of Sarvavadhi is not an atom, but a skandha of infinite
atoms, as many Acharyas say. (Rajyartik 1/24/2 p. 86 and its notes 3 and 6 and
Shloka-Varttik part 4 p. 66 and 671 Shri Shruta Sagar Suri's Tatvarthavritti and
Acharya Bhaskaranandi's 'Sukhabodh' commentary should also be seen). Thus, two
teachings are received regarding the dravya of Sarvavadhi knowledge, one atom
form, the other skandha form. (85)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 kA bhAva paramAvadhi ke dvicarama bheda ke viSayabhUta bhAva se AvalI ke
asaMkhyAtaveM bhAga guNA hai (vizeSa ke lie dekhA- dhadanA ,41-50 go.jI. 5 me 12
evaM thavalA 13/322 se 325  / ) 165. prazna : saryAvadhi jJAna kA dravya-kSetra-
kAla-bhAva kI apekSA kitanA viSaya hai ? uttara : sarvAvadhi kA dravya eka
paramANu hai|' paramAvadhi ke utkRSTa kSetra kAla va bhAva ko asaMkhyAta se guNA
karane para sarvAvadhi kA kSetra, kAla va bhAva AtA hai| arthAt paramAvadhi ke
utkRSTa kSetra ko usake yogya asaMkhyAta lokoM se guNita karane para sarvAvadhi
kA utkRSTa kSetra hotA hai| paramAvadhi ke kAla ko usake yogya asaMkhyAta rUpoM
se guNA karane para sarvAvadhi kA utkRSTa kAla hotA hai| 1. noTa : itanA vizeSa
jAnanA cAhie ki sarvAvadhi kA viSayabhUta dravya paramANu nahIM hai, kintu
ananta paramANuoM kA skandha hai, aisA bhI aneka AcArya kahate haiN|
(rAjayArtika 1/24/2 pR. 86 evaM isake TippaNa 3 va 6 tathA zloka-vArtika bhAga 4
pR. 66 va 671 zrI zrutasAgara sUri kRta tatvArthavRtti evaM AcArya bhAskaranandI
kI 'sukhabodha' TIkA bhI draSTavya hai|) isa prakAra sarvAvadhijJAna ke dravya
ke viSaya meM do upadeza prApta hote haiM, eka paramANu rUpa, dUsarA skandha
ruup| (85)

Page #91 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The supreme emotion of Parāvādī, multiplied by its countless worthy forms,
becomes the supreme emotion of Sarvāvādī. (See Dhavala 6/47-51; Go.Ji. 413-423)
166. Question: What is the extent of the field of knowledge of the beings in the
hellish, animal, and human realms? Answer: The extent of the field of knowledge
of the hellish beings in the seventh hell is one kos. Above this, the extent of
the field of knowledge of the hellish beings in the first hell increases by half
a kos in each successive hell, so that the extent of the field of knowledge of
the hellish beings in the first hell is a full yojana. The knowledge of the
animals ranges from the lowest country-knowledge to the knowledge of the country
that is the object of the luminous body, in accordance with their excellence. In
the human realm, the knowledge of humans ranges from the lowest country-
knowledge to the highest, Sarvāvādī. 167. Question: What is the extent of the
field of knowledge in the heavenly realm? Answer: The lowest extent of the field
of knowledge of the Bhavanavāsī and Vyantara is 25 yojanas. The knowledge of the
Jyotishī Devas... (6)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paramAvadhi ke utkRSTa bhAva ko usake yogya asaMkhyAta rUpoM se guNita karane
para sarvAvadhi kA utkRSTa bhAva hotA hai| (vizeSa ke lie dhavalA 6/47 se 51;
go.jI. 413-423 dekhiye) 166. prazna : narakagati, tiryacagati aura manuSyagati
ke jIvoM kA avadhijJAna ke viSayakSetra kA pramANa kitanA hai ? uttara : sAtavIM
bhUmi meM nArakiyoM ke avadhijJAna ke viSayabhUta kSetra kA pramANa eka kosa
hai| isake Upara pradhama bhUmi ke nArakiyoM ke avadhikSetra paryanta krama se
Adhe-Adhe kosa kI vRddhi hotI gaI hai, isa prakAra prathama naraka meM nArakiyoM
ke avadhijJAna ke viSayabhUta kSetra kA pramANa pUrNa eka yojana hotA hai|
tiryacoM kA avadhijJAna jaghanya dezAvadhi se lekara utkRSTatA kI apekSA taijasa
zarIra ko viSaya karane vAle dezAvadhi ke bheda paryanta hotA hai| manuSya gati
meM manuSyoM kA avadhijJAna jaghanya dezAvadhi se lekara utkRSTayA sarvAvadhi
paryanta hotA hai| 167. prazna : devagati meM avadhijJAna ke viSayakSetra kA
pramANa kitanA hai ? uttara : bhavanavAsI aura vyantaroM ke avadhi ke kSetra kA
jaghanya pramANa 25 yojana hotA hai| jyotiSI devoM ke avadhi kA (6)

Page #92 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The **kṣetra** is multiplied by the number. The **bhavanatrik** devas'
**avadhi** **kṣetra** decreases downwards and increases laterally. The
**bhavanavāsi** devas can see from their location to the peak of **Meru**. The
devas of the **Saudharm-Aiśān** heaven have a **kṣetra** of **avapijñāna**
downwards:  * First **bhūmi** to **Sanatkumāra-Mahendra** * Second " **Brahma-
Brahmottara** **Sāntava-Kāpiṣṭa** * Third " **Śuka-Mahāśukra** **Śatāra-
Sahasrāra** **Ānata-Prāṇata** **Āraṇa-Acyuta** * Fourth " **Nava** **Aveyaka-
Vāsi** * Fifth " **Nava** **Anudiś** and five **Sampoorna** **Lokanāḍī** to
**Anuttaravāsi**  They see through their **avadhi**.   168. Question: What is
**manaḥparyaya-jñāna**? Answer: It is the knowledge of another's mind, without
the help of external stimuli like the senses, of thoughts that have been thought
in the past (**cintita**) or will be thought in the future (**acintita**).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 kSetra isase saMkhyAta guNA hai| bhavanatrika devoM ke avadhi kA kSetra nIce-
nIce kama hotA hai, aura tiryaga-rUpa se adhika hotA hai| bhavanavAsI deva apane
avasthita sthAna se meru ke zikhara paryanta dekhate haiN| saudharma-aizAna
svarga ke devoM kA nIce kI ora avapijJAna kA kSetra prathama bhUmiparyanta
sAnatkumAra-mAhendra dvitIya " brahma-brAhmottara sAMtava-kApiSTa tRtIya " zuka-
mahAzukra zatAra-sahasrAra Anata-prANata AraNa-acyuta paMcama " nava aveyaka-
vAsI chaThI " nava anudiza aura pA~ca sampUrNa lokanAr3I ko anuttaravAsI avadhi
ke dvArA dekhate hai| 168. prazna : manaHparyayajJAna kise kahate haiM ? uttara
: jo indriyAdika bAhya nimittoM kI sahAyatA ke binA hI dUsare ke mana meM sthita
cintita (jisakA bhUtakAla meM cintana kiyA ho), acintita (jisakA bhaviSyat kAla
meM (87) caturtha "

Page #93 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(It will be contemplated) or the substance in the form of half-contemplated
(which is being contemplated at present) is known clearly, it is called
**Manahparyaya Jnana**. This knowledge is only available to the **Munis** in the
human realm, i.e., in the **Ardha-dvipa**. 166. Question: How many types of
**Manahparyaya Jnana** are there? Answer: There are two types of **Manahparyaya
Jnana**: (1) **Rijumati Manahparyaya Jnana** and (2) **Vipulmati Manahparyaya
Jnana**. The one who knows the substance located in the mind of another, which
is done through simple mind, speech, and body, is called **Rijumati Manahparyaya
Jnana**. The one who knows the substance located in the mind of another, which
is done through simple and crooked means, is called **Vipulmati Manahparyaya
Jnana**. He knows the **Kashaya** of the other's mind, even when asked and not
asked. 170. Question: Where does **Manahparyaya Jnana** originate from and who
is its master? Answer: **Manahparyaya Jnana** originates from the regions of the
soul where the **Dravyaman** is located. From the seven **Gunasthanas** from
**Pramatta** to **Kshina-Kashaya**, in any one of them...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 cintana kiyA jAyegA) athavA ardhacintita (vartamAna meM jisakA cintana kiyA jA
rahA hai) rUpI padArtha ko spaSTa jAnatA hai use manaHparyayajJAna kahate haiN|
yaha jJAna manuSyaloka meM arthAta ar3hAI dvIpa meM muniyoM ko hI hotA hai| 166.
prazna : manaHparyayajJAna ke kitane bheda haiM ? uttara : manaHparyayajJAna ke
do bheda haiM- (1) Rjumati manaHparyayajJAna aura (2) vipulamati
manaHparyayajJAna  /  jo sarala mana, vacana, kAya ke dvArA kiye hue dUsare ke
mana meM sthita rUpI padArtha ko jAnatA hai use Rjumati manaHparyayajJAna kahate
haiN| jo sarala tathA kuTila rUpa se kiye hue dUsare ke mana meM sthita rUpI
padArtha ko jAnatA hai use vipulamati manaHparyayajJAna kahate haiN| dUsare ke
pUchane para aura nahIM pUchane para bhI usake manaHsthita kaSAya ko jAnatA hai|
170. prazna : manaHparyayajJAna kahA~ se utpanna hotA hai aura usakA svAmI kauna
hai ? uttara : jahA~ para dravyamana hotA hai, usa sthAna para AtmA ke jo
pradeza haiM, vahA~ se manaHparyayajJAna utpanna hotA hai| pramattAdi
kSINakaSAya paryanta sAta guNasthAnoM meM se kisI eka

Page #94 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Only those who possess the seven **riddhis** (psychic powers) from the
**Gunasthanavati** (those who have attained the highest spiritual state), or at
least one of them, and among the **riddhi-prapta** (those who have attained
psychic powers), only the **Vardhaman** (the present Tirthankara) and the
**vishist charitra-dhari muniraj** (the monks with exceptional character) can
possess **manah-paryaya-gyan** (knowledge of the thoughts of others).  171.
Question: What is the difference between **rijumati** and **vipulamati**
**manah-paryaya-gyan**? Answer: The difference lies in their purity and the
ability to perceive or not perceive. **Vipulamati** **manah-paryaya-gyan** is
more pure than **rijumati** and **rijumati** is **pratipati** (perceiving) while
**vipulamati** **manah-paryaya-gyan** is **apratipati** (not perceiving). A
**rijumati** **manah-paryaya-gyani** first knows the object in another's mind
through **iha-mati-gyan** (knowledge of the present) and then directly through
**rijumati** **manah-paryaya-gyan** according to the rules. A **vipulamati**
**manah-paryaya-gyani** directly knows the object in another's mind, which can
be **chint** (thought), **achint** (unthought), or **ardha-chint** (half-
thought), and many other variations. (86)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 guNasthAnavatI ke, sAta RdiyoM meM se kama se kama kisI bhI eka Rddhi dhAraNa
karane vAle ke aura RddhiprApta meM bhI vardhamAna tathA viziSTa cAritradhArI
munirAja ke hI manaHparyayajJAna pAyA jA sakatA hai| 171. prazna : Rjumati aura
vipulamati manaHparyayajJAna meM kyA vizeSatA hai ? uttara : vizuddhatA aura
pratipAta-apratipAta kI apekSA donoM meM vizeSatA hai| Rjumati kI apekSA
vipulamati manaHparyayajJAna meM adhika vizuddhatA hotI hai tathA Rjumati
pratipAtI hai aura vipulamati manaHparyayajJAna apratipAtI hai| Rjumati
manaHparyayajJAnI dUsare ke mana meM saralatA ke sAtha sthita padArtha ko pahale
IhA matijJAna ke dvArA jAnatA hai, pazcAt pratyakSa rUpa se niyama se Rjamati
manaHparyayajJAna ke dvArA jAnatA hai| vipulamati manaHparyayajJAnI cintita,
acintita, ardhacintita isa taraha aneka bhedoM ko prApta dUsare ke manogata
padArtha ko pratyakSa rUpa se jAnatA hai| (86)

Page #95 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
172. Question: What is the characteristic of both types of knowledge in relation
to substance, space, time, and feeling? Answer: The inferior substance of the
*ṛjūmati* mind-perception knowledge is the *audārika* body, which is a measure
of time that is not destroyed, while the superior substance is the eye sense,
which is a measure of substance that is not destroyed. The inferior space of the
*ṛjūmati* is two to three *kośa* and the superior is seven to eight *yojana*.
The inferior time of the *ṛjūmati* is two to three *bhavas* and the superior
time is seven to eight *bhavas*. The inferior and superior feeling of the
*ṛjūmati*, although a measure of an innumerable part of an *āvalī*, the superior
is an innumerable times greater than the inferior. The inferior substance of the
*vipulamati* is equal to what is obtained by dividing the superior substance of
the *ṛjūmati* by a *dhūvahāra* (an infinite part of the *manodravya* class). The
superior substance of the *vipulamati* is equal to what is obtained by dividing
the second substance of the *vipulamati* mind-perception knowledge by a
*dhūvahāra* an innumerable number of times, equal to the number of times in
innumerable *kalpas*.  (60)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 172. prazna : dravya-kSetra kAla-bhAva kI apekSA donoM bhedoM meM kyA vizeSatA
hai ? uttara : Rjumati manaHparyayajJAna kA jaghanya dravya audArika zarIra ke
nirjIrNa samayaprabaddha pramANa hai tathA utkRSTa dravya cakSuindriya ke
nirjarA dravya pramANa hai| Rjumati kA jaghanya kSetra do-tIna kosa aura utkRSTa
sAta-ATha yojana hai| Rjumati kA jaghanya kAla do-tIna bhava aura utkRSTa kAla
sAta-ATha bhava hai| Rjumati kA jaghanya aura utkRSTa bhAva yadyapi AvalI ke
asaMkhyAtaveM bhAga pramANa hai, to bhI jaghanya se utkRSTa kA pramANa
asaMkhyAtaguNA hai| vipulamati kA jaghanya dravya, Rjumati ke utkRSTa dravya meM
dhuvahAra (manodravyavargaNA kA anantavA~ bhAga) kA bhAga dene se jo labdha
prApta ho, utanA hai| asaMkhyAta kalpoM ke jitane samaya haiM, utanI bAra
vipulamati manaHparyayajJAna ke dvitIya dravya meM dhruvahAra kA bhAga dene se
jo labdha Ave utanA vipulamati ke utkRSTa dravya kA (60)

Page #96 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
It is proven. The inferior realm of Vipulamati's Manahparyaya-jnana is eight to
nine yojanas, and the superior realm is the human realm, which is proven. The
inferior time of Vipulamati is seven to eight bhava, and the superior time is an
innumerable part of a palya, which is proven. In terms of bhava, the inferior
subject of Vipulamati is innumerable times greater than the superior subject of
Rijumati, and the superior subject is innumerable lokas, which is proven.  173.
Question: What is Kevalajnana? Answer: One who knows all the dravyas and their
all paryaya, like the present paryaya, is called Kevalajnana. Kevalajnana is the
most excellent paryaya of jnanaguna, its avibhagpraticchedha are excellent,
infinite, and innumerable.  1. Here, the diameter of the human realm should be
taken from the human realm, not the circle, because the Vipulamati Manahparyaya-
jnani knows the objects thought about by the tiryanch and devas located in the
four corners outside the Manushottara mountain, because the superior realm of
Manahparyaya-jnana is 45 lakh yojanas in the form of a square, even though it is
less in height. (Go.Ji.Ga. 456). The word Manushottara Shaila is an
upalakshanabhuta, therefore, it is proven that they know the objects of the
nikalagochar padarthas, which are the objects of knowledge of the beings located
within these 45 lakh yojanas. Yaval 13/343-344, Dhaval 6/68, Jayaghaval 1/17,
1/18, 1/16. (91)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pramANa hai| vipulamati mana:paryayajJAna kA jaghanya kSetra ATha-nau yojana
tathA utkRSTa kSetra manuSyaloka' pramANa hai  /  vipulamati kA jaghanya kAla
sAta-ATha bhava aura utkRSTa kAla palya ke asaMkhyAtaveM bhAga pramANa hai|
bhAva kI apekSA vipulamati kA jaghanya viSaya Rjumati ke utkRSTa viSaya se
asaMkhyAtaguNA hai tathA utkRSTa viSaya asaMkhyAta loka pramANa hai| 173.
prazna: kevalajJAna kise kahate haiM ? uttara : jo samasta dravya aura unakI
samasta paryAyoM ko vartamAna paryAya kI taraha spaSTa jAne use kevalajJAna
kahate haiN| kevalajJAna jJAnaguNa kI sarvotkRSTa paryAya hai, isake
avibhAgapraticcheda utkRSTa anantAnanta pramANa haiM | 1. yahA~ naraloka -
manuSyaloka se manuSyaloka kA viSkambha grahaNa karanA cAhie na ki vRtta, kyoMki
mAnuSottara parvata ke bAhara cAroM koNoM meM sthita tiryaMca aura devoM ke
dvArA cintita padArtha ko bhI vipulamati mana:paryayajJAnI jAnate haiM, kAraNa
yaha hai ki mana:paryayajJAna kA utkRSTa kSetra U~cAI meM kama hote hue bhI
samacaturasra dhanapratararUpa 45 lAkha yojana pramANa hai| (go.jI.gA. 456 )  /
mAnuSottara zaila zabda upalakSaNabhUta hai, isalie ye 45 lAkha yojana ke
bhItara sthita jIvoM kI cintA ke viSajJayabhUta nikAlagocara padArthoM ke viSaya
ko jAnate haiM, aisA siddha hotA hai| yavala 13/343-344, dhavala 6 / 68,
jayaghavala 1/17, 1/18, 1/16/ (91)

Page #97 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
174. Question: What is the number of beings in the path of knowledge? Answer:
The number of Matijnanis or Shrutijnanis in the path of knowledge is an
immeasurable fraction of a Palya. Manahparyayajnanis are countable. The number
of Kevaljnanis is slightly more than Siddharashi. The number of Tiryanch
Matijnanis without Avadhijnana is an immeasurable fraction of a Palya. Humans
without Avadhijnana are countable. And subtracting both these quantities from
the number of Matijnanis, the remainder is the number of Avadhijnanis. 175.
Question: What is Kumati, Kushruta and Kuavadhishana? Answer: The Mati, Shruta
and Avadhijnana of Mithyadrishti beings are called Kumati, Kushruta and
Kuavadhishana respectively. 176. Question: Which knowledge belongs to which
Gunasthan? Answer: Kumati, Kushruta and Kuavadhishana are present in the first
and second Gunasthan. In the third Gunasthan, there is mixed knowledge. Mati,
Shruta and Avadhijnana are present from the fourth to the twelfth Gunasthan;
Manahparyayajnana is present from the sixth to the twelfth Gunasthan. Kevaljnana
is present in the thirteenth and fourteenth Gunasthan.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 174. prazna : jJAnamArgaNA meM jIvoM kI saMkhyA kA pramANa kitanA hai ? uttara
: jJAnamArgaNA meM matijJAniyoM kA athavA zrutajJAniyoM kA pramANa palya ke
asaMkhyAtaveM bhAga pramANa hai| manaHparyayajJAnI saMkhyAta haiN|
kevalajJAniyoM kA pramANa siddharAzi se kucha adhika hai| avadhijJAna rahita
tiryaMca matijJAniyoM kI saMkhyA ke asaMkhyAtaveM bhAga pramANa haiN|
avadhijJAna rahita manuSya saMkhyAta haiM tathA ina donoM hI rAziyoM ko
matijJAniyoM ke pramANa meM se ghaTAne para jo zeSa rahe utanA avadhijJAniyoM kA
pramANa hai| 175. prazna : kumati, kuzruta aura kuavadhizAna kise kahate haiM !
uttara : mithyAdRSTi jIvoM ke mati, zruta aura avadhijJAna ko krama se kumati,
kuzruta aura kuavadhijJAna kahate haiN| 176. prazna : kauna-kauna sA zAna kisa
guNasthAna se kisa guNasthAna paryanta hotA hai ? uttara : kumati, kuzruta aura
kuavadhijJAna prathama aura dUsare muNasthAna meM hotA hai| tIsare guNasthAna
meM mizra rUpa jJAna hotA hai| mati, zruta aura avadhijJAna caturtha se
bArahaveM guNasthAna paryanta hotA hai; manaHparyayajJAna chaThe se bArahaveM
guNasthAna paryanta hotA hai| kevalajJAna terahaveM aura caudahaveM (12)

Page #98 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
It exists in the Gunasthana and also remains in the Siddha state. After
Matijnana and Shrutajnana, there can be direct Kevaljnana, and after Mati,
Shruta and Avadhijnana, there can be Kevaljnana, and after Bhat, Shruta, Avadhe
and Manahparyaya Jnana, there can be Kevaljnana. 177. Question: What is Samyama?
Answer: To adopt the Mahavratas like Ahimsa, to follow the Samitis like Irya, to
suppress the Kshayas like Krodha, to abandon the punishments in the form of
tendencies of mind, speech and body, and to conquer the objects of the senses
like touch, is called Samyama. 176. Question: What is the inner cause of the
origin of Samyama? Answer: From the destruction and pacification of the
Pratyakhyanavarana, Krodha-Mana-Maya-Lobha, from the rise of Badar Sanjwalan, or
from the rise of subtle Lobha, and from the pacification or destruction of
Mohaniya Karma, Samyama-like feelings arise. 17E. Question: How many types of
Samyama Marg are there, what are the causes of their origin, and in which
Gunasthana are they found?

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 guNasthAna meM hotA hai tathA siddha avasthA meM bhI rahatA hai| matijJAna aura
zrutajJAna ke bAda sIdhA kevalajJAna ho sakatA hai tathA mati, zruta aura
avadhijJAna ke bAda bhI kevalajJAna ho sakatA hai aura bhAta, zruta, avAMdhe
aura manaHparyayajJAna ke bAda bhI kevalajJAna ho sakatA hai| 177. prazna :
saMyama kise kahate haiM ? uttara : ahiMsA Adi mahAvratoM ko dhAraNa karanA IryA
Adi samitiyoM kA pAlana karanA, krodha Adi kaSAyoM kA nigraha karanA, mana,
vacana aura kAya kI pravRtti rUpa daNDoM kA tyAga karanA tathA sparzana Adi
indriyoM ke viSayoM ko jItanA, use saMyama kahate haiN| 176. prazna : saMyama kI
utpatti kA antaraMga kAraNa kyA hai ? uttara : pratyAkhyAnAvaraNa krodha-mAna-
mAyA-lobha ke kSayopazama se, bAdara saMjvalana ke udaya se athavA sUkSma lobha
ke udaya se aura mohanIya karma ke upazama se athavA kSaya se niyama se saMyama
rUpa bhAva utpanna hote haiN| 17E. prazna : saMyama mArgaNA ke kitane bheda hai,
unakI utpatti ke kyA kAraNa hai aura kauna-kauna se guNasthAna meM ve pAye jAte
haiM ?

Page #99 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Answer: There are seven types of **Samyama** - (1) **Samayik**, (2)
**Chhedopasthapana**, (3) **Parihar-Vishuddhi**, (4) **Sukshmasampray**, (5)
**Yathakyat**, (6) **Samyamasanyam**, and (7) **Asanyam**. **Samayik**,
**Chhedopasthapana**, and **Pariharvishuddhi** are the three **Samyamas** that
occur while the **Kshayas** of the **Badar Sanjwalan** are present. **Samayik**
and **Chhedopasthapana** **Samyamas** occur from the sixth to the ninth
**Gunasthanas**. **Pariharvishuddhi** occurs in the sixth and seventh
**Gunasthanas**. **Sukshmasampray** **Samyama** occurs in the tenth
**Gunasthanas** called **Sukshmasampray**, while the **Kshaya** of **Lobh** is
present in the **Sukshmakrishti**. **Yathakyat** **Samyama** occurs in the
eleventh **Gunasthanas** due to the **Upsham** of all **Mohaniya Karmas** and in
the twelfth and subsequent **Gunasthanas** due to the **Kshaya** of all
**Mohaniya Karmas**. **Samyamasanyam** occurs in the fifth **Gunasthanas** due
to the **Kshayo-Upsham** of the **Apratya-Khyana-Avaran Kshaya** and the
**Uday** of the **Pratya-Khyana-Avaran** and other **Kshayas**. **Asanyam**
occurs in the first four **Gunasthanas** due to the **Uday** of the
**Mithyatva**, **Ananta-Anubandhi**, and **Apratya-Khyana-Avaran Kshayas**.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 uttara : saMyama ke sAta bheda haiM- (1) sAmAyika, (2) chedopasthApanA, (3)
parihAra-vizuddhi, (4) sUkSmasAmparAya, (5) yathAkhyAta, (6) saMyamAsaMyama aura
(7) asNym| sAmAyika, chedopasthApanA aura parihAravizuddhi ye tIna saMyama
bAdara saMjvalana kaSAya ke dezaghAti-spardhakoM kA udaya rahate hue hote haiN|
sAmAyika aura chedopasthApanA saMyama chaThe guNasthAna se nauveM guNasthAna
taka hotA hai| parihAravizuddhi sathama chaThe aura sAtaveM guNasthAna me hotA
hai| sUkSmasAmparAya saMyama sUkSmakRSTi ko prApta saMjvalana lobha kA udaya
rahate hue sUkSmasAmparAya nAmaka dasaveM guNasthAna meM hotA hai| yathAkhyAta
saMyama sampUrNa mohanIya karma ke upazama se gyArahaveM guNasthAna meM tathA
sampUrNa mohanIya karma ke kSaya se bArahaveM Adi guNasthAnoM meM hotA hai|
saMyamAsaMyama apratyAkhyAnAvaraNa kaSAya ke kSayopazama aura
pratyAkhyAnAvaraNAdi kaSAya ke udaya se pA~caveM guNasthAna meM hotA hai|
asaMyama mithyAtva, anantAnubandhI evaM apratyAkhyAnAvaraNa kaSAya ke udaya se
Adi ke cAra guNasthAnoM meM hotA hai|

Page #100 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
180. Question: What is Samayik Samyam? Answer: Samayik Samyam is the complete
renunciation of all Savadya (faults) in a way that is free from distinction,
meaning without any difference, with the understanding "I am the renouncer of
all Savadya."  181. Question: What is Chhedopasthapana Samyam? Answer:
Chhedopasthapana Samyam is the act of placing oneself in Samyam as an
alternative to the Mahavrata (great vows) like Ahimsa (non-violence), or the act
of placing oneself back in the same Samyam after being deviated from the Samayik
Charitra (Samayik conduct).  182. Question: What is Pariharvishuddhi Samyam?
Answer: Pariharvishuddhi Samyam is the Samyam that involves a specific type of
purity along with the avoidance of harming living beings. This Samyam manifests
in a Muni who takes Diksha (initiation) after living happily for thirty years
from birth and studies Pratyakhyanapurva for eight years at the feet of the
Tirthankara. No living being is harmed by their body. Those with this Samyam
walk two Kos (a unit of distance) daily, except for the three Sandhyakal
(twilight periods), and do not travel at night. During the rainy season, their
(€4)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 180 prazna : sAmAyika saMyama kise kahate haiM ? uttara : saMyama meM saMgraha
naya kI apekSA se bheda rahita hokara arthAt abheda rUpa se "maiM sarvasAvadya
kA tyAgI hU~" isa taraha se sampUrNa sAvadya kA tyAga karanA sAmAyika saMyama
hai| 181. prazna: chedopasthApanA saMyama kise kahate haiM ? uttara : cheda
arthAt ahiMsAdi mahAvrata ke vikalpapUrvaka apane Apako saMyama meM upasthita
karanA athavA chaMda arthAt sAmAyika cAritra se cyuta hone para apane Apako
phira se usI meM upasthita karanA chedopasthApanA saMyama kahalAtA hai 1 182.
prazna: parihAravizuddhi saMyama kise kahate haiM ? uttara : jisa saMyama meM
jIvahiMsA ke parihAra ke sAtha viziSTa prakAra kI vizuddhatA hotI hai use
parihAravizuddhi saMyama kahate haiN| jo janma se lekara tIsa varSa taka sukhI
rahakara dIkSA lete haiM aura tIrthaMkara ke pAdamUla meM ATha varSa taka
pratyAkhyAnApUrva kA adhyayana karate haiM, aise muni ke yaha parihAravizuddhi
saMyama prakaTa hotA hai| unake zarIra se kisI jIva kA vighAta nahIM hotA hai|
isa saMyama vAle jIva tIna saMdhyAkAloM ko chor3akara pratidina do kosa bihAra
karate haiM, rAtri ko gamana nahIM karate haiN| inake varSARtu meM (EUR4)

Page #101 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
1. There is no rule about whether to go on a pilgrimage or not. 183. Question:
What is subtle samparaya restraint? Answer: The restraint of a being in the
upshama category or the kshapaka category where there is a very subtle rise of
burning greed is called subtle samparaya restraint. The results of these are
slightly less than the results of a being with a well-known character. This
restraint occurs in the tenth gunasthan. 184. Question: What is well-known
restraint? Answer: When the upshama or kshaya of all mohaniya karma occurs, and
the inherent nature of the self is attained, it is called well-known restraint.
This restraint occurs in the twelfth gunasthan from the upshama of mohaniya
karma and in the three higher gunasthanas from the kshaya of mohaniya karma.
185. Question: What is restraint-non-restraint? Answer: Where there is one-sided
character due to the rapid kshayopa-shama of the non-rejectable covering kshaya
and the rise of the rejectable covering, it is called restraint-non-restraint.
In this restraint, the twelve vows of five anuvrata, three gunavrata and four
shikshavrata  (96)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 1 vihAra karane kA yA nahIM karane kA koI niyama nahIM hai| 183. prazna:
sUkSmasAmparAya saMyama kise kahate haiM ? uttara : upazama zreNI vAle athavA
kSapaka zreNI vAle jIva ke jahA~ saMjvalana lobha kA atyanta sUkSma udaya rahatA
hai, usake saMyama ko sUkSmasAmparAya saMyama kahate haiN| inake pariNAma
yathAkhyAta cAritra vAle jIva ke pariNAmoM se kucha hI kama hote haiN| yaha
saMyama dasaveM guNasthAna meM hotA hai| 184. prazna : yathAkhyAta saMyama kise
kahate haiM ? uttara : samasta mohanIya karma kA upazama athavA kSaya ho jAne se
jahA~ yathAvasthita Atma svabhAva kI upalabdhi ho jAtI hai, use yathAkhyAta
saMyama kahate haiN| yaha saMyama gvArahaveM guNasthAna meM mohanIya karma ke
upazama se aura Upara ke tIna guNasthAnoM meM mohanIya karma ke kSaya se hotA
hai| 185 prazna : saMyamAsaMyama kise kahate haiM ? uttara : jahA~
apratyAkhyAnAvaraNa kaSAya ke kSayopazama aura pratyAkhyAnAvaraNa ke udaya kI
taratamatA se ekadezacAritra hotA hai use saMyamAsaMyama kahate haiN| isa
saMyama meM pA~ca aNuvrata, tIna guNavrata aura cAra zikSAvrata ina bAraha vrata
(96)

Page #102 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The observance of **desha-samvama** is practiced. Its **darshan** has eleven
distinctions, including **pratima** etc. Through this **desha-samvama**, the
countless **gunī** karmas of living beings are eradicated.  186. Question: What
is **asan-yama**? Answer: Where there is no **tras**, violence towards
**sthāvar** beings, and no desire to renounce the objects of the five senses, it
is called **asan-yama**. This occurs from the beginning to the fourth
**gunasthāna**. There is a great difference in the tendencies of **samyag-
drishti** and **mithyā-drishti** **asan-yama**.  187. Question: What is the
individual count of **samyami** beings like **samāyika** etc.? Answer: There are
as many **samāyika** **samyami** as there are beings in the four **gunasthāna**
of **pramatta** etc. [eight crore ninety lakh ninety-nine thousand one hundred
and three (8,00,66,103)]. There are also as many **chodo-upasthāpana**
**samyami**. **Parihāra-vishuddhi** **samyami** are three less than seven
thousand (6,667). **Sookshma-samparāya** **samyami** are three less than nine
hundred (867). **Yathā-kyāta-samyami** are three less than nine lakh (8,66,667).
**Desha-samyami** are in the countless fraction of a **palya**. (67)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 kA pAlana hotA hai| isake darzana pratimA Adi gyAraha bheda haiN| isa
dezasaMvama ke dvArA jIvoM ke asaMkhyAta guNI karmoM kI nirjarA hotI hai| 186.
prazna : asaMyama kise kahate haiM ? uttara : jahA~ trasa, sthAvara jIvoM kI
hiMsA tathA pA~ca indriyoM ke viSayoM ke tyAga kA bhAva nahIM hotA hai, use
asaMyama kahate haiN| yaha prArambha se caturtha guNasthAna taka hotA hai|
mithyAdRSTi asaMyata kI apekSA samyagdRSTi asaMyata kI pravRtti meM bahuta
antara hotA hai| 187. prazna : sAmAyika Adi saMyamI jIvoM kA pRthak-pRthak
kitanA pramANa hai ? uttara : pramattAdi cAra guNasthAnavI jIvoM kA jitanA
pramANa hai [ATha karor3a nabbe lAkha ninyAnave hajAra eka sau tIna
(8,0,66,103)] utane sAmAyika saMyamI hote haiM aura utane hI chodopasthApanA
saMyamI hote haiN| parihAravizuddhi saMyamI tIna kama sAta hajAra (6,667) hote
haiN| sUkSmasAmparAya saMyamI tIna kama nau sau (867) hote haiN|
yathAkhyAtasaMyamI tIna kama nau lAkha (8,66,667) hote haiN| deza-saMyamI palya
ke asaMkhyAtaveM bhAga pramANa hote haiN| (67)

Page #103 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
By subtracting these six categories from the worldly living beings, the
remaining amount is the measure of the unrestrained. 188. Question: What is
Darshan? Answer: The unaltering perception of the general aspect of a substance,
without perceiving its specific aspects, is called Darshan. Some Acharyas
consider the general aspect to be the soul, therefore, according to them, soul-
perception is called Darshan. 186. Question: How many types of Darshan Margana
are there? Answer: There are four types of Darshan Margana: (1) Chakshudarshan,
(2) Achakshudarshan, (3) Avadhi Darshan, and (4) Keval Darshan. 160. Question:
What is Chakshudarshan? Answer: The general perception of the first object of
knowledge that occurs through the eye sense is called Chakshudarshan. 161.
Question: What is Achakshudarshan? Answer: The general perception of the first
object of knowledge that occurs through senses other than the eye and the mind
is called Achakshudarshan. (68)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 ina chahoM rAziyoM ko saMsArI jIvarAzi meM se ghaTAne para jo zeSa rahe utanA
asaMyamiyoM kA pramANa hai| 188. prazna : darzana kise kahate haiM ? uttara :
sAmAnya-vizeSAtmaka padArtha ke vizeSa aMza ko grahaNa na karake sAmAnya aMza kA
jo nirvikalpa grahaNa hotA hai, use darzana kahate haiN| koI AcArya sAmAnya kA
artha AtmA karate haiM, ataH unake abhiprAya se AtmAvalokana ko darzana kahate
haiN| 186. prazna : darzana mArgaNA ke kitane bheda haiM ? uttara : darzana
mArgaNA ke cAra bheda haiM- (1) cakSudarzana, (2) acakSudarzana, (3)
avadhidarzana aura (4) kevldrshn| 160. prazna : cakSudarzana kise kahate haiM ?
uttara : cakSu indriya se hone vAle jJAna ke pahale padArtha kA jo sAmAnya
pratibhAsa hotA hai, use cakSudarzana kahate haiN| 161. prazna : acakSudarzana
kise kahate haiM ? uttara : cakSu indriya ke sivAya anya indriyoM aura mana se
hone vAle jJAna ke pUrva padArtha kA jo sAmAnya pratibhAsa hotA hai, use
acakSudarzana kahate haiN| (68)

Page #104 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
192. Question: What is Avadhi Darshan? Answer: The general perception of the
first substance of Avadhi Jnana is called Avadhi Darshan. 163. Question: What is
Keval Darshan? Answer: The general perception of all substances along with Keval
Jnana is called Keval Darshan. 164. Question: Which Darshan occurs from which
Gunasthan to which Gunasthan? Answer: Chakshu Darshan and Achakshu Darshan occur
from the first Gunasthan to the twelfth Gunasthan. Avadhi Darshan occurs from
the fourth Gunasthan to the twelfth Gunasthan. Keval Darshan occurs in the
thirteenth and fourteenth Gunasthan and also in the Siddha state thereafter.
165. Question: What is Leshya? Answer: The tendency of Yogas, influenced by the
rise of Kashaya, is called Leshya. Or, that by which the Jiva attaches itself to
virtue and vice, is called Leshya. (16)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 192. prazna: avadhidarzana kise kahate haiM ? uttara : avadhijJAna ke pahale
padArtha kA jo sAmAnya pratibhAsa hotA hai, use avadhidarzana kahate haiM  /
163. prA keyattadarzana kise kahate haiM ? uttara : kevalajJAna ke sAtha samasta
padArthoM kA jo sAmAnya pratibhAsa hotA hai, use kevaladarzana kahate haiM  /
164. prazna: kauna - kauna sA darzana kisa guNasthAna se kisa guNasthAna taka
hotA hai ? uttara: cakSudarzana aura acakSudarzana prathama guNasthAna se
bArahaveM guNasthAna taka hotA hai| avadhidarzana caturtha guNasthAna se
bArahaveM guNasthAna taka hotA hai| kevaladarzana terahaveM aura caudahaveM
guNasthAna meM aura usake bAda siddha avasthA meM bhI hotA hai| 165. prazna :
lezyA kise kahate haiM ? uttara : kaSAya ke udaya se anuraMjiMta yogoM kI
pravRtti ko lezyA kahate haiM  /  athavA jisake dvArA jIva apane ko puNya aura
pApa se lipta kare, use lezyA kahate haiN| (16)

Page #105 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
166. Question: How many types of *leshya* are there? What is the color of
*dravya-leshya*? Answer: There are six types of *leshya*: (1) *Krishna* (2)
*Neela* (3) *Kapota* (4) *Peet* (5) *Padma* and (6) *Shukla*. There are a number
of differences in relation to the manifestation of each sense organ. There are
countless differences in relation to the *skandha* and infinite and infinitely
infinite differences in relation to the atomic difference. In relation to color,
*Krishna-leshya* is like a bumblebee, *Neela-leshya* is like a sapphire,
*Kapota-leshya* is like a pigeon, *Peet-leshya* is like gold, *Padma-leshya* is
like a lotus, and *Shukla-leshya* is like a conch shell. 167. Question: Which
beings have which *dravya-leshya*? Answer: All hell beings have a *Krishna*
color. The *dravya-leshya* of the *Kalpavaasi* gods is similar to their *bhaava-
leshya*. The *Bhavanatrik* gods have all six *leshyas*. Humans and *tiyac* have
all six *leshyas*. The *dravya-leshya* of the gods is the color of one of the
six *leshyas* according to their reaction. (100)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 166. prazna : lezyA ke kitane bheda haiM ? dravyalezyA kA varNa kaisA hai ?
uttara : lezyA ke chaha bheda haiM- (1) kRSNA (2) nIla (3) kApota (4) pIta (5)
padma aura (6) zukla  /  pratyeka indriyoM se prakaTa hone kI apekSA saMkhyAta
bheda haiN| skandhoM ke bhayo kI apekSA asaMkhyAta aura paramANu bheda kI apekSA
ananta tathA anantAnanta bheda hote haiN| varNa kI apekSA bhramara ke samAna
kRSNalezyA, nIlamaNi ke samAna nIlalezyA, kabUtara ke samAna kApotalezyA,
suvarNa ke samAna pItalezyA, kamala ke samAna padmalezyA aura zaMkha ke samAna
zuklalezyA hotI hai| 167. prazna : kauna se jIvoM kI kauna-sI dravyalezyA hotI
hai ? uttara : sampUrNa nArakiyoM kA kRssnnvrnn| kalpavAsI devoM kI dravyalezyA
bhAvalezyA ke sadRza  /  bhavanatrika devoM ke chahoM lezyA  /  manuSya, tiyacoM
ke chahoM lezyA  /  devoM kI vikriyA kA chahoM lezyAoM meM se kisI eka lezyA kA
vrnn| (100)

Page #106 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The beings of the Uttama Bhogbhumi have a colour like the sun. The beings of the
Madhyama Bhogbhumi have a colour like the moon. The beings of the Jghanya
Bhogbhumi have a green colour. The Bada Jalakayik Bidos have a Shukra colour,
the Bada Tejasakayik beings have a yellow colour. The Ghanodadhivatavalyaya,
i.e. the Vayukayik beings, have a Gomutra colour. The Ghanavatavalyaya
(Vayukayik beings) have a coral colour. The Tanuvatavalyaya (Vayukayik beings)
have an Avyakt colour. The bodies of all the Sukshma beings have a Kapota
colour. In Vigraha, the bodies of all beings have a Shukla colour, and the
beings in Nirvrittyaparyapta Avastha have a Kapota colour.  168. Question: What
are the characteristics of a being with Krishna Leshya? Answer: One who is
extremely angry, does not give up enmity, speaks harsh words, is devoid of
compassion, has a fierce gaze, and is not under anyone's control, is a being
with Krishna Leshya. (101)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 uttama bhogabhUmi ke manuSya-tiyacoM kA sUrya samAna vrnn| madhyama bhogabhUmi
ke jIvoM kA candra samAna vrnn| jaghanya bhogabhUmi ke jIvoM kA harita vrnn|
bAdA jalakAyika bIdoM kA zukra varga bAdara tejaskAyika jIvoM kA pIta vrnn|
ghanodadhivAtavalaya arthAt vAyukAyika jIvoM kA gomUtra vrnn| ghanavAtavalaya
(vAyukAyika jIvoM) kA mUMgA samAna vrnn| tanuvAtavalaya (vAyukAyika jIvoM) kA
avyakta vrnn| sampUrNa sUkSma jIvoM ke zarIra kA kApota vrnn| vigraha meM
sampUrNa jIvoM ke zarIra kA zukla varNa aura nirvRtyaparyApta avasthA vAle jIvoM
kA kApota varNa hotA 168. prazna : kRSNa lezyA yAle jIva ke kyA lakSaNa haiM ?
uttara : jo atyanta krodhI ho, baira ko nahIM chor3atA ho, bhaMDa vacana bolane
vAlA ho, dayAdharma se rahita ho, dRSTi ho tathA kisI ke bhI vaza meM na ho,
vaha kRSNa lezyA vAlA jIva hai| (101)

Page #107 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
166. Question: What are the characteristics of a being with a blue *leshya*?
Answer: One who is slow in action, foolish, lacking in discernment, a cheat, and
intensely attached to wealth and possessions is a being with a blue *leshya*.
2000. Question: What are the characteristics of a being with a *kapol* *leshya*?
Answer: One who is angry towards others, criticizes others, experiences great
sorrow and fear, is envious of others, praises himself excessively, considers
others equal to himself, does not trust anyone, is satisfied by hearing his own
praise, does not understand loss and gain, desires to die in battle, gives a lot
of wealth when praised, and does not recognize right and wrong actions, is a
being with a *kapol* *leshya*.  201. Question: What are the characteristics of a
being with a yellow *leshya*? Answer: One who knows what should be done and what
should not be done, has discernment regarding what should be served and what
should not be served, has equal vision towards all beings, and is eager in
compassion and charity, is a being with a yellow *leshya*.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 166. prazna : nIla lezyA vAle jIva ke kyA lakSaNa hai ? uttara : jo kAma karane
meM manda ho, buddhihIna ho, vivekarahita ho, Thagane vAlA ho aura dhana-dhAnya
meM tIvra Asakti rakhatA ho, vaha nIla lezyAvAlA jIva hai| 2000 nana: kApola
lezyA vAle jIya ke kyA lakSaNa hai ? uttara : jo dUsaroM para krodha karatA ho,
dUsaroM kI nindA karatA ho, bahuta zoka tathA bhaya karane vAlA ho, dUsaroM se
IrSyA karatA ho, apanI bahuta prazaMsA karatA ho, apane hI samAna dUsaroM ko
mAnatA huA jo kisI kA vizvAsa nahIM karatA ho, apanI prazaMsA sunakara santuSTa
hotA ho, hAni-lAbha ko nahIM samajhatA ho, yuddha meM marane kI icchA rakhatA
ho, stuti kiye jAne para bahuta dhana dene vAlA ho aura kArya - akArya kI jise
pahacAna nahIM ho, vaha kApota lezyA vAlA jIva hai  /  201. prazna : pIta lezyA
vAle jIva ke kyA lakSaNa haiM ? uttara : jo karane yogya aura na karane yogya
kArya ko jAnatA ho, sevya - asevya kA viveka rakhatA ho, saba jIvoM para samAna
dRSTi rakhatA ho tathA dayA, dAna meM tatpara rahatA ho, vaha pIta lezyA vAlA
jIva hai  /  (102)

Page #108 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
202. Question: What are the characteristics of a being with Padma Leshya?
Answer: One who is renunciant, of good conduct, excellent, enterprising,
forgiving, and devoted to the worship of the virtuous and the gurus, is a being
with Padma Leshya. 203. Question: What are the characteristics of a being with
Shukla Leshya? Answer: One who is free from fat, free from disease, treats
everyone equally, is free from attachment and aversion, and has no affection for
wife, children, etc., is a being with Shukla Leshya. 204. Question: What are the
different Leshyas in the Narakas? Answer: The Narakas of the Ratnapraba earth
have the lowest aspect of Kapota Leshya, the Narakas of the Sharkarapraba earth
have the middle aspect of Kapota Leshya, the Narakas of the Balukapraba earth
have the highest aspect of Kapota Leshya, and the lowest aspect of Neel Leshya,
the Narakas of the Pankapraba earth have the middle aspect of Neel Leshya, the
Narakas of the Dhumpapraba earth have the highest aspect of Neel Leshya, and the
lowest aspect of Krishna Leshya, the Narakas of the Tamahpraba earth have the
middle aspect of Krishna Leshya, and the Narakas of the Maha Tamahpraba earth
have the highest aspect of Krishna Leshya.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 202. prazna: padma lezyA vAle jIva ke kyA lakSaNa haiM ? uttara : jo tyAgI ho,
bhadrapariNAmI ho, uttama ho, udyamazIla ho, kSamAvAna ho tathA sAdhu aura
gurujanoM kI pUjA meM lIna rahatA ho, vaha padma lezyA vAlA jIva hai| 203.
prazna : zukla lezyA vAle jIva ke kyA lakSaNa haiM ? uttara : jo phAta se rahita
ho, nidAnarahita ho, sabake sAtha samAna vyavahAra rakhatA ho, jise rAga-dveSa
na ho tathA strI- putrAdika meM sneha rahita ho, vaha zukla lezyA vAlA jIva hai|
204 prazna : nArakiyoM meM kauna-kauna sI bhAva lezyA hotI haiM ? uttara :
ratnaprabhA pRthvI ke nArakiyoM meM kApota lezyA kA jaghanya aMza, zarkarAprabhA
pRthvI ke nArakiyoM meM kApota lezyA kA madhyama aMza, bAlukAprabhA pRthvI ke
nArakiyoM meM kApota lezyA kA utkRSTa aMza, aura nIla lezyA kA jaghanya aMza,
paMkaprabhA pRthvI ke nArakiyoM meM nIla lezyA kA madhyama aMza, dhUmaprabhA
pRthvI ke nArakiyoM meM nIla lezyA kA utkRSTa aMza, aura kRSNa lezyA kA jaghanya
aMza, tamaH prabhA pRthvI ke nArakiyoM meM kRSNa lezyA kA madhyama aMza,
mahAtamaH pRthvI ke nArakiyoM meM kRSNa lezyA kA utkRSTa aMza hotA hai| (103)

Page #109 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
205. Question: What are the Bhava Leshyas in the Devas? Answer: In the
Bhavanatrik Devas, there is a minor portion of Peet Leshya, in the Saudharma-
Ishana Svarga Devas, there is a medium portion of Peet Leshya, in the
Sanatkumar-Mahendra Svarga Devas, there is a superior portion of Peet Leshya and
a minor portion of Padma Leshya, in the Brahma Brahmoत्तर, Lantva-Kapishta and
Shukra MahaShukra Svarga Devas, there is a medium portion of Padma Leshya, in
the Shatar-Sahasrar Svarga Devas, there is a superior portion of Padma Leshya
and a minor portion of Shukla Leshya, in the Anant-Pranat, Aran-Achyut and Nau
Graiveyak Devas, there is a medium portion of Shukla Leshya, in the Nau Anudish
and Panch Anuttar Devas, there is a superior portion of Shukla Leshya, and in
the Bhavanavasi and other three Devas, there are three inauspicious Leshyas in
their inadequate state.  206. Question: What are the Bhava Leshyas in humans?
Answer: In humans up to the fourth Gunasthan, there are all six Leshyas, in
humans who are Deshavira, Pramattavira and Apramattavira Gunasthanavarti, there
are three auspicious Leshyas, and in humans from Aapuurvakaran to Sayogkevali,
there is only one Shukla Leshya. In the Bhogbhumi, there are adequate states of
Samyagdristi or Mithyadristi humans.  (104)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 205. prazna: devoM meM kauna-kauna sI bhAva lezyA hotI hai ? uttara :
bhavanatrika devoM meM pIta lezyA kA jaghanya aMza, saudharma - IzAna svarga ke
devoM meM pIta lezyA kA madhyama aMza, sAnatkumAra- mAhendra svarga ke devoM meM
pIta lezyA kA utkRSTa aMza aura padma lezyA kA jaghanya aMza, brahma
brahmottara, lAMtava- kApiSTa aura zukra mahAzukra svarga ke devoM meM padma
lezyA kA madhyama aMza, zatAra - sahasrAra svarga ke devoM meM padma lezyA kA
utkRSTa aMza, aura zukla lezyA kA jaghanya aMza, Anata-prANata, AraNa- acyuta
tathA nau graiveyaka ke devoM meM zukla lezyA kA madhyama aMza, nau anudiza aura
pA~ca anuttara devoM meM zukla lezyA kA utkRSTa aMza aura bhavanavAsI Adi tIna
devoM ke aparyApta avasthA meM tIna azubha lezyAeM hotI haiN| 206. prazna:
manuSyoM meM kauna-kauna sI bhAva lezyA hotI hai ? uttara : caturtha guNasthAna
paryanta manuSyoM meM chahoM lezyAe~, dezavirata, pramattavirata aura
apramattavirata guNasthAnavartI manuSyoM meM tIna zubha lezyAe~ tathA
apUrvakaraNa se sayogakevalI paryanta manuSyoM meM eka zukla lezyA hI hotI hai|
bhogabhUmi meM samyagdRSTi athavA mithyAdRSTi manuSyoM ke paryApta avasthA (104)

Page #110 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
There are three auspicious hues, namely yellow, etc., and a negligible portion
of the pigeon hue in the state of liberation-sufficiency. 207. Question: What
are the hues of the animals? Answer: In the one-sensory and the three-disabled
beings, there are three inauspicious hues, namely black, etc. In the non-
conscious five-sensory beings with attainment-sufficiency, and in the conscious
five-sensory beings with attainment-sufficiency, there are three inauspicious
hues, namely black, etc. In the non-conscious five-sensory beings with
sufficiency, there are four hues, namely black, etc. In the conscious five-
sensory beings with sufficiency, there are six hues, namely all six from the
first to the fourth stages of virtue, and in the fifth stage of virtue, there
are three auspicious hues. In the animals with sufficiency in the realm of
enjoyment, there are three auspicious hues, namely yellow, etc., and a
negligible portion of the pigeon hue in the state of liberation-sufficiency.
208. Question: What is called *samudghāt*? How many types are there and what is
their nature? Answer: The exit of some regions of the soul without leaving the
original body is called *samudghāt*. There are 7 types of *samudghāt*: (1)
*Vedana*: Due to the cause of pain-sensation (105)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 meM pIta Adi tIna zubha lezyAe~ aura nirvRtyaparyApta avasthA meM kApota lezyA
kA jaghanya aMza hotA hai| 207. prazna : tiryaMcoM meM kauna-kauna sI bhAva
lezyA hotI hai ? uttara : ekendriya aura vikalatraya jIvoM meM kRSNa Adi tIna
azubha lezyAe~ hotI haiN| asaMjJI paMcendriya labdhyaparyApta tiyacoM meM evaM
saMjJI paMcendriya labdhyaparyAta tiryacoM meM kRSNa Adi tIna azubha lezyAe~
hotI haiN| asaMjJI paMcendriya paryApta tiryacoM meM kRSNa Adi cAra lezyAe~ hotI
haiN| saMjJI paMcendriya paryApta tiryaMcoM meM prathama se caturtha guNasthAna
paryanta chahoM lezyAe~ hotI haiM aura paMcama guNasthAna meM tIna zubha lezyAe~
hotI haiN| bhogabhUmistha paryApta tiryaMcoM meM pIta Adi tIna zubha lezyAe~
evaM nirvRtyaparyApta avasthA meM kApota lezyA kA jaghanya aMza hotA hai| 208,
prazna : samudghAta kise kahate haiM ? usake kitane bheda haiM aura unakA kyA
svarUpa hai ? uttara : mUla zarIra ko na chor3ate hue AtmA ke kucha pradezoM ke
bAhara nikalane ko samudghAta kahate haiN| samudghAta ke 7 bheda haiM- (1)
vedanA : pIr3A- vedanA ke nimitta se (105)

Page #111 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The exit of the Atma-pradeshas from the body is called Vedana Samudghat. (2) The
exit of the Atma-pradeshas under the influence of Kshayas like anger, etc., is
called Kshaya Samudghat. (3) The exit of the Atma-pradeshas due to Vikriya is
called Vaikriyik Samudghat. (4) The exit of the Atma-pradeshas to touch the
field suitable for a new birth before death is called Marananatik Samudghat. (5)
The exit of the Atma-pradeshas along with the Taijas body due to auspicious or
inauspicious Taijas Riddhi is called Taijas Samudghat. (6) The exit of the Atma-
pradeshas through the Aharak body emanating from the head of the Riddhi-dhari,
Prammat Gunasthanavarti Muni-rajas is called Aharak Samudghat. (7) The exit of
the Atma-pradeshas in the Dand, Kapat, Pratar and Lok-puran Kriya of the Kevali
Bhagwan to perform the remaining three non-fatal Karmas equal to the Ayusthiti
is called Kevali Samudghat. In the Aharak and Marananatik Samudghat states, the
Atma-pradeshas travel in one direction only, but in the other five types, they
travel in all ten directions. (106)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 AtmapradezoM kA zarIra se bAhara nikalanA vedanA smudghaat| (2) kaSAyaH
krodhAdi ke vaza AtmapradezoM kA bAhara nikalanA kaSAya samudghAta hai| (3)
vaikriyika : vikriyA ke dvArA AtmapradezoM kA bAhara nikalanA vaikriyika
samudghAta hai| (4) mAraNAntika : maraNa se pUrva navIna janma ke yogya kSetra
kA sparza karane hetu AtmapradezoM kA bAhara nikalanA mAraNAntika samudghAta
hai| (5) taijasa : zubha yA azubha taijasa Rddhi ke dvArA taijasa zarIra ke
sAtha AtmapradezoM kA bAhara nikalanA taijasa samuddhAta hai| (6) AhAraka :
RddhidhArI pramatta guNasthAnavartI munirAjoM ke mastaka se nikalane vAle
AhAraka zarIra ke dvArA AtmapradezoM kA bAhara nikalanA AhAraka samudghAta hai|
(7) keyalI : Ayusthiti ke barAbara zeSa tIna aghAtI kamoM kI sthiti karane ke
lie kevalI bhagavAna ke daNDa, kapATa, pratara evaM lokapUraNa kriyA meM
AtmapradezoM kA bAhara nikalanA kevalI samuddhAta hai| AhAraka aura mAraNAntika
samuddhAta avasthA meM AtmapradezoM kA eka hI dizA meM gamana hotA hai kintu
bAkI pA~ca bhedoM meM dasoM dizAoM meM gamana hotA hai| (106)

Page #112 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
206. Question: What is the minimum and maximum duration of the *leshyas*?
Answer: The minimum duration of all *leshyas* in relation to a single being is
an *antarmuhurt*. The maximum duration of the *Krishna leshya* in relation to a
single being is slightly more than thirty-three *sagars*, the *Neel leshya* is
slightly more than *matrah* *sagars*, the *Kapot leshya* is slightly more than
seven *sagars*, the *Peet leshya* is slightly more than two *sagars*, the *Padma
leshya* is slightly more than eighteen *sagars*, and the *Shukla leshya* is
slightly more than thirty-three *sagars*. 210. Question: Which *leshya* extends
to which *gunasthan*? Answer: All six *leshyas* exist from the first *gunasthan*
to the fourth *gunasthan*. The three *sham leshyas* exist from the first to the
seventh *gunasthan*, and the *Shukla leshya* exists from the first to the
thirteenth *gunasthan*. 211. Question: How does the characteristic of the
*leshya* manifest from the eleventh to the thirteenth *gunasthan* without the
*anuranjana* of *kashayoday*? Answer: In relation to the *bhootpurva prajnapan
nay*, the *yogpravritti* there behaves in such a way that it is the same
*yogpravritti* that was previously *anuranjit* by *kashayoday*. This behavior is
what causes the *leshya* to manifest there. (107)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 206. prazna : lezyAoM kA jaghanya aura utkRSTa kAla kitanA hai ? uttara : eka
jIva kI apekSA sampUrNa lezyAoM kA jaghanya kAla antarmuhUrta hai| eka jIva kI
apekSA kRSNalezyA kA utkRSTa kAla kucha adhika taiMtIsa sAgara, nIlalezyA kA
kucha adhika matraha sAgara, kApotalezyA kA kucha adhika sAta sAgara, pItalezyA
kA kucha adhika do sAgara, padmalezyA kA kucha adhika aThAraha sAgara aura
zuklalezyA kA kucha adhika taiMtIsa sAgara hai| 210. prazna : kauna-sI lezyA
kisa guNasthAna taka hotI hai ? uttara : prathama guNasthAna se lekara caturtha
guNasthAna paryanta chahoM lezyAe~ hotI haiN| prathama se saptam guNasthAna
paryanta tIna zama lezyAe~ evaM prathama se terahaveM guNasthAna paryanta zukla
lezyA hotI hai| 211. prazna : kaSAyodaya kI anuraMjanA ke binA gyArahaveM se
terahaveM guNasthAna paryanta lezyA kA lakSaNa kaise ghaTita hotA hai ? uttara :
bhUtapUrva prajJApana naya kI apekSA vahA~ kI yogapravRtti meM aisA vyavahAra
hotA hai ki yaha vahI yoga-pravRtti hai jo pahale kaSAyodaya se anuraMjita thii|
isa vyavahAra se vahA~ (107)

Page #113 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Leshya is considered to be in a state of well-being. In the fourteenth
Gunasthan, the absence of Leshya is considered due to the absence of
Yogapravritti. 212. Question: Who is called a Bhavya? Answer: A being who has
the potential to attain the Ratnatraya is called a Bhavya. 213. Question: How
many types of Bhavya are there? Answer: There are three types of Bhavya: (1)
Nikat-Bhavya, (2) Dur-Bhavya, and (3) Duradur-Bhavya. A being who is destined to
attain liberation in the eight existences is called a Nikat-Bhavya. A being who
is destined to attain liberation within the time period of Ardha-Pudgala
Paravartan Praman is called a Dur-Bhavya. Just as a woman who is free from the
defect of infertility will give birth to a child according to the law when
external factors are available, so will these beings attain liberation according
to the law. A being who, despite being a Bhavya, never attains liberation is
called a Duradur-Bhavya. These beings are found only in the Nitya-Nigoda. Just
as a widowed woman who is free from the defect of infertility has the potential
to give birth to a child, but will never give birth to a child because external
factors are not available, so too, in the Nitya-Nigoda, the absence of external
materials prevents the attainment of liberation. (108)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 lezyA kA sadbhava mAnA jAtA hai| caudahaveM guNasthAna meM yogapravRtti nahIM
hone se lezyA kA abhAva mAnA jAtA hai| 212. prazna : bhavya kise kahate haiM ?
uttara : jisa jIva meM ratnatraya - prApti kI yogyatA ho use bhavya kahate haiM
/  213. prazna: bhavya ke kitane bheda haiM ? uttara : bhavya ke tIna bheda
haiM- (1) nikaTa-bhavya, (2) dUrabhavya aura (2) dUrAdurabhandA kI sAja- aSTa
bhava meM mokSa prApta karane vAlA ho, use nikaTabhavya kahate haiN| jo
ardhapudgala parAvartana pramANa kAla ke bhItara mokSa prApta karane vAlA ho use
dUrabhavya kahate haiN| jaise bandhyApane ke doSa se rahita strI ke bAhya
nimitta milane para niyama se putrotpatti hogI, vaise ina jIvoM ko niyama se
mokSaphala kI prApti hogii| jo bhavya hone para bhI kabhI mokSa prApta na kara
sake use dUrAnudUrabhavya kahate haiN| ye jIva nityanigoda meM hI pAye jAte
haiN| jaise bandhyApane ke doSa se rahita vidhavA satI strI meM putrotpatti kI
yogyatA hai, parantu bAhya nimitta nahIM milane para usake kabhI putrotpatti
nahIM hogI, vaise hI nitya nigoda meM bAhya sAmagrI kA abhAva hone se mokSaphala
(108)

Page #114 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The attainment will not happen. Just as Ahmindra Devas have the power to go to
hell etc. but that power is not expressed, similarly the power of distant
Bhavyas is not expressed. 214. Question: Who is called Abhavy? Answer: The being
in whom the ability to attain the Ratna Tray is not present, is called Abhavy.
Just as a barren woman will not give birth to a son, whether she gets the
opportunity or not, similarly Abhavy beings will never attain the fruit of
liberation. 215. Question: What is the division of the Bhavyatva Margna in the
Gunasthanas? Answer: Abhavy beings always remain in the first Gunasthan. Bhavy
beings are from the first to the fourteenth Gunasthan. Siddha Paramesthi is
devoid of the practice of Bhavyatva and Abhavyatva. 216. Question: What is the
measure of Bhavy and Abhavy beings? Answer: The measure of Abhavy beings is
Jghanya Yuktanantgrama, and subtracting the measure of Abhavy beings from the
entire population of worldly beings, the remaining is the measure of Bhavy
beings. (106)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 kI prApti nahIM hogii| jaise ahamindra devoM meM narakAdi meM gamana karane kI
zakti hai parantu usa zakti kI abhivyakti nahIM hai, vaise dUrAnudUra bhavyoM kI
zakti kI abhivyakti nahIM hotI hai| 214. prazna : abhavya kise kahate haiM ?
uttara : jisa jIva meM ratnatraya-prApti kI yogyatA na ho, use abhavya kahate
haiN| jaise-bandhyA strI ko nimitta mile cAhe na mile parantu putrotpatti nahIM
hogI vaise abhavya jIvoM ko kabhI mokSaphala kI prApti nahIM hogii| 215. prazna
: bhavyatva mArgaNA kA guNasthAnoM meM kisa prakAra kA vibhAga hai ? uttara :
abhavya jIva sadA prathama guNasthAna meM rahate haiN| bhavya jIva prathama se
caudahaveM guNasthAna paryanta hote haiN| siddha parameSThI bhavyatva aura
abhavyatva ke vyavahAra se rahita hote haiN| 216. prazna : bhavya-abhavya jIvoM
kA kitanA pramANa hai ? uttara : jaghanya yuktAnantagramANa abhavya jIvoM kA
pramANa hai aura sampUrNa saMsArI jIvarAzi meM se abhavya jIvoM kA pramANa
ghaTAne para, jo zeSa rahe utanA bhavya jIvoM kA pramANa hai| (106)

Page #115 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
217. Question: How many types of worldly transformations are there? Answer:
There are five types of worldly transformations: (1) Dravya, (2) Kshetra, (3)
Kala, (4) Bhav, and (5) Bhav.  218. Question: How many types of Dravya
transformations are there and what is their nature? Answer: There are two types
of Dravya transformations: (1) Nokarmadravya transformation and (2) Karmadravya
transformation.  Nokarmadravya transformation: A living being, at one time, has
taken in pudgalas suitable for the six Paryapti forms of transformation, related
to any of the three bodies (Audarika, etc.), which are endowed with the intense,
mild, and moderate qualities of Snigdha, Rooksha, Varna, Gandha, etc., to the
best of its ability. Later, in the second and subsequent times, it has exhausted
that Dravya. Later, it has taken in and released ungrasped pudgalas an infinite
number of times, taken in and released mixed Dravya an infinite number of times,
and taken in and released grasped Dravya an infinite number of times. When the
same living being takes in the same pudgalas endowed with the same Snigdha,
Rooksha, etc., qualities, from the beginning to that period of time, it is
called Nokarmadravya transformation.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 217 prazna: saMsAra parivartana ke kitane bheda hai ? uttara : saMsAra-
parivartana ke pA~ca bheda haiM- (1) dravya, (2) kSetra, (3) kAla, (4) bhava
aura (5) bhAva  /  218. prazna: dravya parivartana ke kitane bheda haiM aura
unakA svarUpa kyA hai ? uttara : dravya parivartana ke do bheda haiM- (1)
nokarmadravya parivartana aura (2) karmadravya parivartana  /  nokarmadravya
parivartana : kisI jIva ne snigdha, rUkSa, varNa, gandhAdi ke tIvra - manda -
madhyama bhAvoM meM se yathAsambhava bhAvoM se yukta audArikAdi tIna zarIroM meM
se kisI zarIra sambandhI tathA chaha paryApti rUpa pariNamana ke yogya pudgaloM
ko eka samaya meM grahaNa kiyaa| pIche dvitIyAdi samaya meM usa dravya kI
nirjarA kara dii| pIche ananta bAra agRhIta pudgaloM ko grahaNa kara chor3a
diyA, ananta bAra mizra dravya ko grahaNa kara chor3a diyA, ananta bAra gRhIta
ko bhI grahaNa kara chor3a diyA, jaba vahI jIva una hI snigdha- rUkSAdi bhAvoM
se yukta unhIM pudgaloM ko jisane samaya bAda grahaNa kare, prAraMbha se lekara
utane kAla samudAya ko naukarmadravya parivartana kahate haiN| (990)

Page #116 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Karmadravya Parivartan:  A living being, at a particular time, takes in
Karma-pudgaldravya, suitable for the eight karmas, with varying intensities of
qualities like smoothness, roughness, color, and fragrance. After an Avli
period, the process of depletion of the acquired Karmadravya begins.
Subsequently, the being acquires and releases countless unacquired pudgals,
acquires and releases countless mixed dravyas, and acquires and releases
countless acquired pudgals! The period from the initial acquisition of these
pudgals with the same qualities of smoothness, roughness, etc., to the
subsequent acquisition of the same pudgals, is called Karmadravya Parivartan.
The combination of Nokarmadravya Parivartan and Karmadravya Parivartan is called
Dravya Parivartan.  ## Kshetra Parivartan:  **Question:** How many types of
Kshetra Parivartan are there, and what is their nature?  **Answer:** There are
two types of Kshetra Parivartan:  1. **Sva-Kshetra Parivartan:** A living being,
after acquiring the lowest level of Avgahana for a period equal to the extent of
the lowest Avgahana, gradually acquires higher and higher levels of Avgahana,
ultimately reaching the level of Mahamatsya (111).   2. **Para-Kshetra
Parivartan:**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmadravya parivartana : kisI jIva ne snigdha, rUkSa, varNa evaM gandhAdi ke
tIvra-manda-madhyama bhAvoM meM se yathAsambhava bhAvoM se yukta ATha karmoM ke
yogya karma-pudgaladravya kA samayaprabaddha rUpa meM eka samaya meM grahaNa
kiyaa| pazcAt eka AvalI kAla ke anantara gRhIta karmadravya kI nirjarA kA
prAraMbha huaa| pIche ananta bAra agRhIta pudgaloM ko grahaNa kara chor3a diyA,
ananta bAra mizradravya ko grahaNa kara chor3a diyA, ananta z2Ara gRhIta ko bhI
grahaNa kara chor3a diyA ! jaba vahI jIva unhIM snigdha rUkSAdi bhAvoM se yukta
unhIM pudgaloM ko jitane samaya bAda grahaNa kare, prAraMbha se lekara utane
kAla samudAya ko karmadravya parivartana kahate haiN| nokarmadravya parivartana
aura karmadravya parivartana ke samUha ko dravya parivartana kahate haiN| 216.
prazna : kSetra parivartana ke kitane bheda haiM aura unakA kyA svarUpa hai ?
uttara : kSetra parivartana ke do bheda haiM- (1) sva-kSetra parivartana aura
(2) parakSetra parivartana  /  svakSetra parivartana : eka jIva sarva jaghanya
avagAhanA ke pradeza pramANa bAra jaghanya avagAhanA ko dhAraNa kara pazcAt
kramazaH eka-eka pradeza adhikaadhika kI avagAhanAoM ko dhAraNa karate-karate
mahAmatsya (111)

Page #117 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
A **Svakshetra Parivartan** is a period of time during which a being can hold as
many **Avgahnas** as possible until reaching the **Utkrishta Avgahana**.
**Parakshetra Parivartan**: A being holding a **Jghanya Avgahana**, a **Sukshm
Nigodhya Labya Paryaptak Jiva**, is born in the **Asta Madhya Pradesh** of the
**Sudarshan Meru**, below the **Achal Roop** of the **Lok**, making it their
body. Later, the same being is born again in the same place, in the same form,
for a second or third time. In this way, the being is born in the same place, in
sequence, as many times as there are **Pradesh** of the **Jghanya Avgahana**,
which is a fraction of the **Ghanangal**. The being then experiences **Kshudra
Aayu**, which is one-eighteenth of a **Shwas**, and dies. Later, the being takes
birth in the entire **Lok**, in sequence, over a period of time, which is equal
to the number of times the being is born in each **Pradesh**. This period of
time is called a **Parakshetra Parivartan**.  **Question**: What is **Kal
Parivartan**?  **Answer**: A being is born for the first time in the first
**Samay** of the **Utsarpini**. Similarly, the being is born for the second time
in the second **Samay** of the second **Utsarpini**. In this way, the being is
born in sequence, in all the **Samay** of the twenty **Koda Kodi Sagar** of the
**Utsarpini** and **Avasarpini**. The being then dies in the same sequence.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 kI utkRSTa avagAhanA paryanta avagAhanAoM ko jitane samaya meM dhAraNa kara
sake utane kAlasamudAya ko eka svakSetra parivartana kahate haiN| parakSetra
parivartana : koI jaghanya avagAhanA kA dhAraka sUkSma nigodiyA labyaparyAptaka
jIva sudarzana meru ke nIce acala rUpa se sthita loka ke aSTa madhya pradezoM ko
apane zarIra ke banAkara utpanna huA, pIche vahI jIva usI rUpa se usI sthAna meM
dUsarI-tIsarI bAra utpanna huaa| isI taraha ghanAMgala ke asaMkhyAtaveM bhAga
pramANa jaghanya avagAhanA ke jitane pradeza haiM utanI bAra usI sthAna para
krama se utpanna huA aura zvAsa ke aThArahaveM bhAga pramANa kSudra Ayu ko
bhoga-bhogakara maraNa ko prApta huaa| pIche eka-eka pradeza ke adhika krama se
jitane kAla meM sampUrNa loka ko apanA janmakSetra banA le utane kAlasamudAya ko
eka parakSetra-parivartana kahate haiN| 220. prazna : kAla parivartana kise
kahate haiM ? uttara : koI jIva utsarpiNI ke prathama samaya meM pahalI bAra
utpanna huA, isI taraha dUsarI bAra dUsarI utsarpiNI ke dUsare samaya meM
utpanna huA, isI krama se utsarpiNI tatha avasarpiNI ke bIsa kor3Akor3I sAgara
ke jitane samaya haiM unameM kramazaH utpanna huA tathA isI krama se maraNa ko
(112)

Page #118 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
It is received, the time period taken for this is called a Kalasamudaya. 221.
Question: What is called a Bhaya Parivartan? Answer: A being is born in the
first hell from the lowest age of ten thousand years, as many times as there are
ten thousand years. Afterwards, it has completed the highest age of thirty-three
Sagars related to hell-existence in a gradual order of one time each. After
that, it is born in the Tiryanch-Gati from the lowest age of Antarmuhurt, as
many times as there are Antarmuhurts, and here also, similar to the hell-goers,
it has completed the highest age of three Palyas related to Tiryanch-Gati in a
gradual order of one time each. After that, it has completed the Manushya-Gati
similar to the Tiryanch-Gati, because in Manushya-Gati also, the lowest age is
Antarmuhurt and the highest age is three Palyas. After Manushya-Gati, it is born
in Dev-Gati from the lowest age of ten thousand years, as many times as there
are ten thousand years, and afterwards, it has completed the age of thirty-one
Sagars in a gradual order of one time each, because the highest age of
Mithyadrishti Dev is only up to thirty-one Sagars. The time taken to travel
through all four Gatis in this order is called Bhaya Parivartan. (113)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prApta huA, isameM jitanA kAla lage utane kAlasamudAya ko eka kAla parivartana
kahate haiN| 221. prazna : bhaya parivartana kise kahate haiM ? uttara : koI
jIva dasa hajAra varSa ke jitane samaya haiM utanI bAra jaghanya dasa hajAra
varSa kI Ayu se prathama naraka meM utpanna huA, pIche eka-eka samaya ke adhika
krama se narakagati sambandhI taiMtIsa sAgara kI utkRSTa Ayu ko usane krama se
pUrNa kiyA, pazcAt antarmuhUrta ke jisane samaya haiM utanI bAra jaghanya
antarmuhUrta kI Ayu se tiryaMcagati meM utpanna hokara yahA~ para bhI
narakagAMta ke sadRza eka-eka samaya ke adhika krama se tiryaMcagati sambandhI
tIna palya kI utkRSTa Ayu ko pUrNa kiyA, pazcAt tiryaMcagati ke sadRzya
manuSyagati ko pUrNa kiyA, kyoMki manuSyagati meM bhI jaghanya Ayu antarmuhUrta
tathA utkRSTa Ayu tIna palya hai| manuSyagati ke bAda dasa hajAra varSa ke
jitane samaya haiM, utanI bAra jaghanya dasa hajAra varSa kI Ayu se devagati meM
utpanna hokara pIche eka-eka samaya ke adhika krama se ikatIsa sAgara kI Ayu ko
pUrNa kiyA kyoMki mithyAdRSTi deva kI utkRSTa Ayu ikatIsa sAgara taka hI hotI
hai| isa krama se cAroM gatiyoM meM bhramaNa karane meM jitanA kAla lage, (113)

Page #119 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
That much time is called a **bhaava-parivartan** (cycle of rebirth) and the
journey undertaken in that time is called **bhaava-parivartan**. These changes
are described from the perspective of **mithyaadrishti** (false vision) because
**samyagdristi** (right vision) souls do not remain in the world for more than
the time of the **ardhapadagal parivartan pramaan** (half-cycle of rebirth).
222. Question: What causes **bhaava-parivartan**? Answer: **Yogasthan**,
**anubhaagbandh adhyavasaayasthan**, **kashay adhyaksayasthan** or
**sthiitibandh adhyavasaayasthan** and **sthiitiasthan** cause **bhaava-
parivartan**. 223. Question: What is **yogasthan**? Answer: The **tartam**
(highest) form of the **yog** (state of being bound) which is the **pradesh-
parispandan** (vibration of the soul) caused by the **prakriti** (nature) and
**pradesh** (region) bond is called **yogasthan**. 224. Question: What is
**anubhaagbandh adhyavasaayasthan**? Answer: The **tartam** form of the
**kashayas** (passions) from which **anubhaagbandh** (bond of karma) occurs is
called **anubhaagbandh adhyavasaayasthan**. 225. Question: What is
**sthiitibandh adhyavasaayasthan**? Answer: The **kashay-parinarm**
(transformation of passions) that cause **sthiitibandh** (bond of existence) is
called **sthiitibandh adhyavasaayasthan**. (114)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 utane kAla ko eka bhava-parivartana kA kAla kahate haiM tathA itane kAla meM
jitanA bhramaNa kiyA jAya use bhava parivartana kahate haiN| ina parivartanoM kA
nirUpaNa mithyAdRSTi kI apekSA se hai kyoMki samyagdRSTi jIva saMsAra meM
ardhapadagala parivartana pramANa kAla se adhika kAla taka nahIM rahate haiN|
222. prazna : bhAva parivartana kisake nimitta se hotA hai ? uttara :
yogasthAna, anubhAgabandha adhyavasAya-sthAna, kaSAya adhyaksAyasthAna athavA
sthitibandha adhyavasAyasthAna aura sthitisthAna ke nimitta se bhAva parivartana
hotA hai| 223. prazna : yogasthAna kise kahate haiM ? uttara : prakRti aura
pradeza bandha ke kAraNabhUta AtmA ke pradeza-parispandana rUpa yoga ke
taratamarUpa sthAnoM ko yogasthAna kahate haiN| 224. prazna : anubhAgabandha
adhyavasAya sthAna kise kahate haiM ? uttara : jina kaSAyoM ke taratama rUpa
sthAnoM se anubhAgabandha hotA hai, unako anubhAgabandha adhyavasAyasthAna
kahate haiN| 225. prazna : sthiti-bandha adhyavasAyasthAna kise kahate haiM ?
uttara : sthitibandha ke kAraNabhUta kaSAya-pariNArmoM ko sthitibandha
adhyavasAyasthAna kahate haiN| (114)

Page #120 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
226. Question: What is **sthiti-sthān**? Answer: The **jghanya** (lowest) state
of **bandha** (bondage) is called **sthiti-sthān**. 227. Question: What is
**māyā-parivartan**? Answer: When countless **yoga-sthān** (stages of yoga) of a
**śreṇī** (category) are completed, there is one **anubhāga-bandha-adhyavasāya-
sthān** (stage of determination of the section of bondage). When countless
**loka-pramaṇ** (world-measure) **anubhāga-bandha-adhyavasāya-sthān** are
completed, there is one **sthiti-bandha-adhyavasāya-sthān** (stage of
determination of the state of bondage). When countless **loka-pramaṇ** **sthiti-
bandha-adhyavasāya-sthān** are completed, there is one **sthiti-sthān**. In this
way, when all the **sthān** (stages) of all the **mūla-prakrti** (original
nature) and **uttara-prakrti** (derived nature) are completed, there is a
**bhāva-parivartan** (change in state). For a **saṁjñī** (cognizant) **mithyā-
dṛṣṭi** (false-seeing) **jīva** (soul) with sufficient **karma** (action), the
**bandha** of the **jghanya** state of **jñāna-āvaraṇa** (knowledge-obscuring
karma) is **anta-koḍī-sāgara-pramaṇ** (countless as the ocean of the end of the
universe). This is the **jghanya** state here, therefore, for the **vivakṣita**
(intended) **jīva** who is eligible for this, there are only **jghanya**
**anubhāga-bandha-adhyavasāya-sthān**, only **jghanya** **kaṣāya-adhyavasāya-
sthān** (stage of determination of the passions), and only **jghanya** **yoga-
sthān**. From here, **bhāva-parivartan**... (115)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 226. prazna : sthitisthAna kise kahate haiM ? uttara : bandha rUpa kama kI
jaghanyAdi sthiti ko sthitisthAna kahate haiN| 227. prazna : mAya parivartana
kise kahate haiM ? uttara : zreNI ke asaMkhyAtaveM bhAga pramANa yogasthAnoM ke
ho jAne para eka anubhAgabandha adhyavasAyasthAna hotA hai| asaMkhyAta loka
pramANa anubhAgabandha adhyavasAyasthAnoM ke ho jAne para eka sthitibandha
adhyavasAyasthAna hotA hai| asaMkhyAta lokapramANa sthitibandha
adhyavasAyasthAnoM ke ho jAne para eka sthitisthAna hotA hai| isa krama se
jJAnAvaraNa Adi samasta mUla prakRtiyoM va uttara prakRtiyoM ke samasta sthAnoM
ke pUrNa hone para eka bhAva parivartana hotA hai| kisI paryApta saMjJI
mithyAdRSTi jIva ke jJAnAvaraNa karma kI antakor3Akor3I sAgara pramANa jaghanya
sthiti kA bandha hotA hai| yahI yahA~ para jaghanya sthiti hai, ataH isake yogya
vivakSita jIva ke jaghanya hI anubhAgabandha adhyavasAyasthAna, jaghanya hI
kaSAya adhyavasAyasthAna aura jaghanya hI yoga sthAna hote haiN| yahA~ se bhAva-
parivartana kA (115)

Page #121 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The beginning takes place. That is, after an innumerable number of parts of the
series in the order of the Pramana Yoga Sthanas, the second section is the
Bandha Adhyavasaya Sthana. After that, again, after an innumerable number of
parts of the series in the order of the Pramana Yoga Sthanas, the third section
is the Bandha Adhyavasaya Sthana. In this way, after an innumerable number of
Lokapramana Anubhaga Bandha Adhyavasaya Sthanas, the second Kashaya Adhyavasaya
Sthana takes place. In the same way, after an innumerable number of Lokapramana
Kashaya Adhyavasaya Sthanas, the same Jghanya Sthiti Sthana takes place. The
order that was described in the Jghanya Sthiti Sthana, the same should be known
in the Dvitiyaadi Sthiti Sthanas, one at a time, and in this way, after all the
Sthiti Sthanas from the Jghanya Sthiti of Jnanaavaran to the Utkrushta Sthiti,
and after all the Sthiti Sthanas of the Mula and Uttar Prakritis in the same
order as the Sthiti Sthanas of Jnanaavaran are complete, there is a change in
the state. In all the changes, where there is a break in the order, the complete
change is not counted, it is counted again from the beginning. (116)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prAraMbha hotA hai| arthAt isake Age zreNI ke asaMkhyAtaveM bhAga pramANa
yogasthAnoM ke krama se ho jAne para dUsarA anubhAga bandha adhyavasAyasthAna
hotA hai| isake bAda phira zreNI ke asaMkhyAtaveM bhAga pramANa yogasthAnoM ke
krama se ho jAne para tIsarA anubhAgabandha adhyavasAya sthAna hotA hai| isI
krama se asaMkhyAta lokapramANa anubhAgabandha adhyavasAyasthAnoM ke ho jAne
para dUsarA kaSAya adhyavasAyasthAna hotA hai  /  usI krama se asaMkhyAta loka
pramANa kaSAya adhyavasAyasthAnoM ke ho jAne para bhI vahI jaghanya sthiti -
sthAna hotA hai| jo krama jaghanya sthiti sthAna meM batAyA, vahI kama eka-eka
samaya adhika dvitIyAdi sthiti-sthAna meM jAnanA cAhie tathA isI krama se
jJAnAvaraNa kI jaghanya sthiti se utkRSTa sthiti taka samasta sthiti sthAnoM ke
ho jAne para aura jJAnAvaraNa ke sthiti sthAnoM kI taraha krama se sampUrNa mUla
va uttara prakRtiyoM ke samasta sthiti sthAnoM ke pUrNa hone para eka bhAva
parivartana hotA hai| sabhI parivartanoM meM jahA~ kramabhaMga hogA vahA~ pUrA
parivartana ginatI meM nahIM AtA hai, punaH prArambha se ginA jAtA hai  /  (116)

Page #122 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
228. Question: What are the characteristics of the six substances? Answer: That
which is used in the form of knowledge and perception is called the Jiva
substance. That which has the qualities of color, smell, taste, and touch is
called the Pudgala substance. That which, while moving itself, is an indifferent
cooperative cause for the movement of the Jiva and Pudgala substances is called
the Dharma substance, like a path for a traveler. That which, while remaining
stationary itself, is an indifferent cooperative cause for the Jiva and Pudgala
substances to remain stationary is called the Adharma substance, like a seat for
one who is sitting. That which is helpful in giving space to all the substances
is called the Akasha substance, like a house for those who reside. That which is
a cooperative cause for all the substances to function in their own nature is
called the Kala substance, i.e., the cooperative cause that tells the substances
how to function, the quality of functioning is found in it, that is called the
Kala substance. 226. Question: How does the Kala substance, the cause of
functioning, occur in all the substances? Answer: It is not the case that the
Kala substance, being a result, becomes transformed into another substance. It
neither transforms itself into another substance nor does it transform other
substances into its own form.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 228. prazna : chaha dravyoM meM kyA-kyA lakSaNa haiM ? uttara : jisameM jJAna-
darzana rUpa upayoga pAyA jAya use jIva dravya kahate haiN| jisameM varNa-
gandha-rasa-sparza guNa pAyA jAya use pudgala dravya kahate haiN| jo svayaM
gamana karate hue jIva aura pudgala dravya ko gamana karane meM udAsIna rUpa se
sahakArI kAraNa ho use parma dravya kahate haiM, jaise pathika ko maarg| jo
svayaM Thahare hue jIva aura pudgala dravya ko Thaharane meM udAsIna rUpa se
sahakArI kAraNa ho use adharma dravya kahate haiM, jaise Thaharane vAle ko Asana
/  jo sampUrNa dravyoM ko sthAna dene meM sahAyaka ho use AkAza dravya kahate
haiM, jaise nivAsa karane vAloM ko makAna  /  jo samasta dravyoM ko apane-apane
svabhAva meM vartane kA sahakArI kAraNa ho use kAla dravya kahate haiM arthAta
dravyoM ko batAne vAlA sahakArI kAraNa rUpa vartanA guNa jisameM pAyA jAya use
kAla dravya kahate hai| 226. prazna : sabhI dravyoM meM vartanA kA kAraNa kAla
dravya kaise ghaTita hotA hai ? uttara : pariNAmI hone se kAladravya dUsare
dravyarUpa pariNata ho jAya, aisI bAta nahIM hai, vaha na to svayaM dUsare
dravya rUpa pariNata hotA hai aura na dUsare dravyoM ko apane svarUpa (117)

Page #123 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Or, a different substance-form arises, but in the transformation of substances
that transform into their own appropriate permutations by their own nature,
time-substance becomes an external cooperative cause with indifference. By means
of subtle, infinite, indivisible, intersecting, non-gross, and minute qualities,
the dharma-etc. substances undergo transformation in the form of gain and loss
of the six qualities. 230. Question: What is called a *samaya*? Answer: The time
taken by an atom located in one region of space to reach another contiguous
region by slow motion is called one *samaya*. The lowest state of permutation of
all substances is just one *kshana*, which is also called *samaya*. 231.
Question: What is called a *pradesa*? Answer: The region of space occupied by
one indivisible atom of *pudgala* in the *loka-akasha* is called a *pradesa*.
232. Question: What is called the lowest and highest *antar-muhurta*? Answer:
The time period of one *samaya* along with the *avali* measure is called the
lowest *antar-muhurta*, and the time period of one *samaya* less the *muhurta*
is called the highest *antar-muhurta*. (118)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 athavA bhinna dravya svarUpa pariNamAtA hai, kintu apane-apane svabhAva se hI
apane-apane yogya paryAyoM se pariNata hone vAle dravyoM ke pariNamana meM
kAladravya udAsInatA se svayaM bAhya sahakArI kAraNa ho jAtA hai| sUkSma
anantAnanta avibhAga praticcheda yukta agurulaghu guNa ke dvArA dharmAdika
dravya SaDguNa hAni-vRddhi rUpa pariNamana karate haiN| 230. prazna : samara
kise kahate haiM ? uttara : AkAza ke eka pradeza para sthita eka paramANu
mandagati ke dvArA gamana karake dUsare anantara pradeza para jitane kAla meM
pahu~ca jAya, utane kAla ko eka samaya kahate haiN| sampUrNa dravyoM kI paryAya
kI jaghanya sthiti eka kSaNamAtra hotI hai, isI ko bhI samaya kahate haiN| 231.
prazna : pradeza kise kahate haiM ? uttara : pudgala kA eka avibhAgI paramANu
lokAkAza ke jitane kSetra meM A jAya, utane kSetra ko pradeza kahate haiN| 232.
prazna : jaghanya aura utkRSTa antarmuhUrta kise kahate haiM ? uttara : eka
samaya sahita AvalI pramANa kAla ko jaghanya antarmuhUrta kahate haiM aura eka
samaya kama muhUrta ko utkRSTa antarmuhUrta kahate haiN| (118)

Page #124 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
233. Question: What are Vyajan Paryaya and Arth Paryaya? How many types are
there? Answer: The gross Paryayas which are the subject of speech are called
Vyajan Paryaya, or the Paryaya of the qualities of Pradeshvatva Guna related to
the three times (Trikal) is Vyajan Paryaya. The subtle Paryayas which are not
the subject of speech are called Arth Paryaya, or all the Paryayas related to
the three times (Trikal) of the remaining ganas except Pradeshvatva Guna are
Arth Paryaya. Both of these have two types each. (1) The Vyajan Paryaya which is
without any other cause is called Svabhav Vyajan Paryaya, for example, the
Siddha Paryaya of a Jiva. And (2) The Vyajan Paryaya which is due to another
cause is called Vibhav Vyajan Paryaya, for example, the Narakadi Paryaya of a
Jiva. (1) The Arth Paryaya which is without any other cause is called Svabhav
Arth Paryaya, for example, the Kevalgyan of a Jiva. And (2) The Arth Paryaya
which is due to another cause is called Vibhav Arth Paryaya, for example, the
Ragadveshadi of a Jiva. 234. Question: How many are the six Dravyas? Answer: The
Jiva Dravya are infinite, the Pudgal Dravya are infinite times more than them,
Dharma, Adharma and Akash are all three indivisible and one each. The number of
Kal Dravya is equal to the number of Pradesh of Lokakash (Asankhyat). (116)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 233. prazna : vyaMjana paryAya aura artha paryAya kise kahate haiM ? inake
kitane bheda haiM? uttara : vacana kI viSayabhUta sthUla paryAyoM ko vyaMjana
paryAya kahate haiM athavA trikAla sambandhI saMsthAna rUpa pradezavattva guNa
kI paryAya vyaMjana paryAya hai| vacana agocara sUkSma paryAyoM ko ardhaparyAya
kahate haiM athavA pradezavattva guNa ko chor3akara zeSa gaNoM kI trikAla
sambandhI samasta paryAya arthaparyAya hai| ina donoM ke do-do bheda haiN| (1)
svabhAvavyaMjanaparyAya binA dUsare nimitta ke jo vyaMjana paryAya ho-jaise jIva
kI siddha pryaay| aura (2) dUsare nimitta se jo vyaMjana paryAya ho, use
vibhAvavyaMjanaparyAya kahate haiN| jaise jIva kI naranArakAdi pryaay| (1) binA
dUsare nimitta ke jo arthaparyAya ho, use svabhAva aryaparyAya kahate haiM jaise
jIva kA kevalajJAna aura (2) para-nimitta se jo arthaparyAya ho, use vibhAva
ardhaparyAya kahate haiM- jaise jIva ke rAgadveSAdika  /  234. prazna : chaha
dravyoM kI kitanI-kitanI saMkhyA hai ? uttara : jIva dravya ananta haiM, unase
anantaguNe pudgala dravya haiM, dharma, adharma aura AkAza ye tInoM dravya
akhaNDa tathA eka-eka haiN| lokAkAza ke jitane pradeza haiM, utanI saMkhyA
pramANa (asaMkhyAta) kAladravya haiN| (116)

Page #125 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
235. Question: Are the provinces of substances moving, stationary, or both?
Answer: The eight fleshy provinces located in the middle part of the body of all
worldly beings are stationary. The remaining provinces are moving and both
moving and stationary because worldly beings are in an unstable state. The
provinces of beings in the state of *vigraha-gati* are only moving. The
provinces of liberated beings are stationary and unmoving because they are in a
stable state. The provinces of the substances of Dharma, Adharma, Akasha, and
Kala are stationary and unmoving because they are stable substances. In the
substance of Pudgala, all the *skandhas* of atoms and countable, uncountable,
etc. molecules are moving, but the final *maha-skandha* is both moving and
stationary.   236. Question: How many types of *pudgala* classifications are
there? How many of them are *grama* classifications? Answer: There are twenty-
three types of *pudgala* classifications: (1) *Anu* classification, (2)
*Sankhyata* classification, (3) *Asankhyata* classification, (4) *Ananta*
classification, (5) *Aahara* classification, (6) *Agrahya* classification, (7)
*Taijasa* classification, (8) *Agrahya* classification, (9) *Bhasha*
classification, (10) *Agrahya* classification, (11) *Mano* classification, (12)
*Agrahya* classification, (13) *Karmana* classification... (120)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 235. prazna : dravyoM ke pradeza cala haiM yA acala haiM yA calAcala uttara :
sarva saMsArI jIvoM ke zarIra ke madhya bhAga meM sthita gostanAkAra ATha
pradeza acala hI hAla hai, zeSa pradeza cala aura calAcala hote haiM kyoMki
saMsArI jIca anavasthita sthiti vAle haiN| vigrahagati meM sthita jIvoM ke
pradeza cala rUpa hI hote haiN| mukta jIvoM ke pradeza acala evaM akampa hI hote
haiM kyoMki ye avasthita hote haiN| dharma, adharma, AkAza aura kAla dravya ke
pradeza acala evaM akampa hI hote haiM, kyoMki ye avasthita dravya haiN| pudgala
dravya meM paramANu tathA saMkhyAta, asaMkhyAta Adi aNu ke jitane skandha haiM,
ve sabhI cala haiM, kintu eka antima mahAskandha calAcala hai| 236. prazna :
pudgala vargaNA ke kitane bheda haiM ? unameM se grAma vargaNAyeM kitanI haiM ?
uttara : pudgala vargaNA ke teIsa bheda haiM- (1) aNu vargaNA (2) saMkhyAtANa
vargaNA (3) asaMkhyAtANa vargaNA (4) anantANa vargaNA (5) AhAra vargaNA (6)
agrAhya vargaNA (7) taijasa vargaNA (8) agrAhya vargaNA (6) bhASA vargaNA (10)
agrAhya vargaNA (11) mano vargaNA (12) agrAhya vargaNA (13) kArmaNa (120)

Page #126 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Translation:  **Vargana (14) Dhruva Vargana (15) Santara-Nirantara Vargana
(16) Shunya Vargana (17) Pratyek Sharee Vargana (18) Dhruva Shunya Vargana (16)
Badar Nigod Vargana (20) Shunya Vargana (21) Sukshma Nigod Vargana (22) Nabho
Vargana and (23) Maha Skandha Vargana.**  **Out of these twenty-three Varganas,
Ahar Vargana, Taijas Vargana, Bhasha Vargana, Mano Vargana and Karman Vargana
are the five Grahya Varganas.**  **Question 237: What are the five types of
Pradha Varganas and their creations?**  **Answer:** Ahar Vargana creates the
three bodies - Audarik, Vaikriyik and Aharak, and also the breath. Taijas
Vargana creates the Taijas body. Bhasha Vargana creates the four types of
speech. Mano Vargana creates the mind, which is a substance in the heart region,
shaped like an eight-petaled lotus. Karman Vargana creates the eight types of
Karma.  **Question 238: What are the different types of Pudgal Dravya and their
nature?**  **Answer:** There are six types of Pudgal Dravya: (9) The Skandha
which can be pierced, broken and acquired elsewhere is called Badar-Badar. (125)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 vargaNA (14) dhruva vargaNA (15) sAntara-nirantara vargaNA (16) zUnya vargaNA
(17) pratyeka zarIra vargaNA (18) dhruva zUnya vargaNA (16) bAdara nigoda
vargaNA (20) zUnya vargaNA (21) sUkSmanigoda vargaNA (22) nabho vargaNA aura 23)
mahAskandha vargaNA  /  ina teIsa vargaNAoM meM se AhAravargaNA, taijasavargaNA,
bhASAvargaNA, manovargaNA aura kArmaNavargaNA ye pA~ca grAhya vargaNAyeM haiN|
237. prazna : pA~ca prakAra kI prAdha vargagAo kyA-kyA racanA hotI hai? uttara :
AhAravargaNA ke dvArA audArika-vaikriyika aura AhAraka ina tIna zarIroM kI aura
zvAsocchvAsa kI racanA hotI hai| taijasavargaNA ke dvArA taijasa zarIra kI,
mASAyargaNA ke dvArA cAra prakAra ke vacanoM kI aura manovargaNA ke dvArA hRdaya
sthAna meM aSTa dala kamala ke AkAra dravya mana kI racanA hotI hai| kArmaNa
vargaNA ke dvArA ATha prakAra ke karma banate haiN| 238. prazna : prakArAntara
se pudgala dravya ke kitane bheda haiM ? unakA svarUpa kyA hai ? uttara :
pudgala dravya ke chaha bheda haiM- (9) jisakA chedana-bhedana evaM anyatra
prApaNa ho sake, usa skandha ko bAdara-bAdara kahate (125)

Page #127 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(1) Those which can be pierced and broken, and can be obtained elsewhere, are
called **Skandha**, like earth, wood, stone, etc. (2) Those which cannot be
pierced or broken, but can be obtained elsewhere, are called **Badar**, like
water, oil, etc. (3) Those which cannot be pierced or broken, and cannot be
obtained elsewhere, and are visible to the eye, are called **Badar-sukshma**,
like shadow, sunlight, moonlight, etc. (4) The **Pudgala Skandha** which is the
object of the four senses other than the eye, is called **Sukshma-sthula**, like
sound, smell, taste, etc. (5) The **Pudgala Skandha** which is not perceived by
any sense organ, and is beyond the reach of the senses, is called **Sukshma**,
like **Karma**. (6) The **Pudgala** atoms which are indivisible and have no
form, are called **Sukshma-sukshma**.  236. Question: What are **Skandha**,
**Skandha-desh**, **Skandha-pradesh**, and **Paramanu**? Answer: That which is
complete in all aspects is called **Skandha**. Half of **Skandha** is called
**Skandha-desh**. Half of **Skandha-desh** is called **Skandha-pradesh**. That
which is indivisible is called **Paramanu**. (122)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 haiM jaise pRthvI, kASTha, pASANa Adi  /  (2) jisakA chedana-bhedana na ho
sake, kintu anyatra prApaNa ho sake usa skandha ko bAdara kahate haiM, jaise
jala, taila aadi| (3) jisakA chedana-bhedana evaM anyatra prApaNa kucha bhI na
ho sake, aise netra se dekhane yogya skandha ko bAdarasUkSma kahate haiM, jaise
chAyA, Atapa, cA~danI aadi| (4) netra ko chor3akara zeSa cAra indriyoM ke
viSayabhUta pudgala skandha ko sUkSma sthUla kahate haiM, jaise zabda, gandha,
rasa aadi| (5) jisakA kisI indirA ke dvArA rAhata na ho ke pAra pugata raNadha
ko sUkSma kahate haiM, jaise karma  /  (6) jo skandha rUpa nahIM hai, aise
avibhAgI pudgala paramANuoM ko sUkSma-sUkSma kahate 236. prazna : skandha,
skandha deza, skanya-pradeza aura paramANu kise kahate haiM? uttara : jo sarvAza
meM pUrNa hai, use skandha kahate haiN| skandha ke Adhe ko skandha-deza kahate
haiN| skandha-deza ke Adhe ko skandha-pradeza kahate haiN| jo avibhAgI hai, use
paramANu kahate haiN| (122)

Page #128 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
240. Question: How do indivisible pudgala atoms transform into skandha form?
Answer: There are two alternatives for any particular quality: smoothness and
roughness. These are the causes of binding. There are countless, infinite
variations of these alternatives, from one to countless, compared to the
indivisible intersections (the non-existent parts of power). Binding occurs in
at least two atoms. So, these two atoms can be smooth or rough, or one smooth
and one rough, and binding can occur. In both smoothness and roughness, binding
occurs where there is an increase of two in the two qualities (a two-quality
smooth or rough with a four-quality smooth or rough, and a three-quality smooth
or rough with a five-quality smooth or rough), but the binding of atoms with the
lowest quality (one non-existent part) does not occur. The atom with more
qualities transforms the atom with fewer qualities into its own form. 241.
Question: What is astikaya? How many types are there? Answer: That which is real
is called asti, and that which has many regions is called kaya. There are two
types of kaya: (1) (123)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 240. prazna : avibhAgI pudgala paramANu skandha rUpa meM kisa taraha pariNata
hote haiM ? uttara : kisI eka guNa vizeSa kI snigdhatva aura rUkSatva ye do
paryAyeM haiN| ye hI bandha kI kAraNa haiN| avibhAgI praticchedoM kI (zakti ke
niraMza aMza) apekSA ina paryAyoM ke eka se lekara saMkhyAta, asaMkhyAta, ananta
bheda haiN| bandha kama-se-kama do paramANuoM meM hotA hai| so ye donoM paramANu
snigdha ho athavA rUkSa hoM athavA eka snigdha aura eka rUkSa hoM taba bandha ho
sakatA hai| snigdha va rUkSa donoM meM hI do guNa ke Upara jahA~ do-do kI vRddhi
hotI hai vau~ (do guNavAle snigdha yA rUkSa kA cAra guNavAle snigdha yA rUkSa ke
sAtha tathA tIna guNavAle snigdha yA rUkSa kA pA~ca guNavAle snigdha yA rUkSa ke
sAtha) bandha hotA hai, kintu jaghanya guNavAle (eka niraMza aMza) paramANuoM kA
bandha nahIM hotA hai| adhika guNavAlA paramANuhIna guNavAle ko apane rUpa
pariNamA letA hai| 241. prazna : astikAya kise kahate haiM ? usake kitane bheda
haiM ? uttara : jo sadpa ho use asti kahate haiM aura jisake pradeza aneka hoM
use kAya kahate haiN| kAya ke do bheda haiM- (1) (123)

Page #129 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Those which are **akhandapradeshi** - having many undivided **pradeshas** - are
called **mukhya kaya**, such as jiva, dharma, adharma, and akasha. (2) Those
whose **pradeshas** are divided (**prithak-prithak**), but which have attained
unity due to the binding effect of **snigdha-ruksha** qualities, or which have
the potential to attain unity due to binding, are called **upcharit kaya**, such
as pudgala.  **Kaladravya** does not possess either of these qualities. It is
not **mukhya kaya** because it is not itself **anekapradeshi**, and it does not
have the potential to attain unity due to binding because it does not possess
**snigdha-ruksha** qualities. Therefore, **kaladravya** is not **upcharit kaya**
either. Thus, excluding **kaladravya**, the remaining five substances -
**jiva**, **pudgala**, **dharma**, **adharma**, and **akasha** - are called
**panchaastikaya**. **Kaladravya** is not a **kaya** (body), but it is a form of
**asti** (existence). 242. Question: How many types of **padartha** (substance)
are there? What is their nature? Answer: Fundamentally, there are two
**padarthas**: **jiva** and **ajiva**. Both have two types each: **punya**
(merit) and **papa** (demerit), making a total of four **padarthas**. **Jiva**
and **ajiva** also have five types each: **anava**, **samvara**, **nirjara**,
**bandha**, and **moksha** (124).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 jo akhaNDapradezI haiM-akhaNDita aneka pradeza rUpa haiM, una dravyoM ko mukhya
kAya kahate haiM, jaise jIva, dharma, adharma, AkAza  /  (2) jinake pradeza
khaNDita (pRthak-pRthak) hoM, kintu snigdha-rUkSa guNa ke nimitta se paraspara
bandha ko prApta hokara jinameM ekatva ho gayA ho athavA bandha hokara ekatva ko
prApta hone kI jinameM sambhAvanA ho unako upacArita kAya kahate haiM, jase
pudgala  /  kAladravya meM ye donoM hI bAteM nahIM hai, vaha svayaM anekapradezI
na hone se mukhya kAya bhI nahIM hai aura snigdha-rUkSa guNa na hone se baMdha
ko prApta hokara ekatva kI bhI usameM sambhAvanA nahIM hai, isalie kAladravya
upacarita kAya bhI nahIM hai| ataH kAla dravya ko chor3akara zeSa jIva, pudgala,
dharma, adharma, AkAza ina pA~ca dravyoM ko paMcAstikAya kahate haiN| kAla
dravya kAyarUpa nahIM hai, parantu asti rUpa hai| 242. prazna : padArtha ke
kitane bheda hai ? unakA kyA svarUpa hai? uttara : mUla meM jIva-ajIva do
padArtha haiN| donoM ke puNya-pApa ye do-do bheda hote haiM isalie cAra padArtha
hue| jIva aura ajIva ke hI Anava-saMvara-nirjarA-bandha-mokSa ye pA~ca bheda
(124)

Page #130 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
There are nine substances that combine to form a being (jiva) which possesses
knowledge, perception, and consciousness. That which does not possess
consciousness is called an ajiva. Those who are endowed with the qualities of
samyaktva (right faith) or who observe the vows are called punya-jiva, and those
who are opposite to this are called papa-jiva. Inanimate objects like the
jinabimba (image of the Tirthankara) and other ayatanas (sense organs) are
called punya-ajiva, and inanimate objects like the anayatanas (non-sense organs)
are called papa-ajiva. Similarly, auspicious karmas (actions) are called punya-
ajiva and inauspicious karmas are called papa-ajiva. The state of being without
karma, or the karmarupa (karma-body), or the results of the jiva that lead to
karma, such as mithyatva (false belief) and other parinamas (transformations),
or the atmapradesha parispandana (vibrations of the soul) that occur through the
mind, speech, and body, and the causes of bondage are called asrava. The special
relationship that produces the knowledge of oneness in many substances, or the
special relationship of the soul and karma in the form of kshetravagah (mutual
penetration), or the results of the jiva that are the cause of this, are called
bandha. The cessation of asrava is called sambara. The partial destruction of
bound karmas is called nirjara. The complete liberation of the soul from all
karmas is called moksha. (125)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 milAne se nau padArtha hote haiM jisameM jJAna-darzana rUpa cetanA pAI jAye use
jIva kahate haiN| jisameM cetanA na ho use ajIva kahate haiN| jo samyaktva guNa
se yA vrata se yukta haiM unako puNyajIva aura isase jo viparIta haiM unheM
pApajIva kahate haiM  /  acetana jinabimba Adi AyatanoM ko puNya ajIva tathA
acetana anAyatanoM ko pApa ajIva athavA zubha karmoM ko puNya ajaya aura azubha
karmoM ko pApaajIva kahate haiN| akarma ke karmarUpa hone ko athavA jIva ke jina
pariNAmoM se karma Ate haiM, una midhyAtvAdi rUpa pariNAmoM ko yA mana-vacana-
kAya ke dvArA hone vAle Atmapradeza parispandana ko tathA bandha ke kAraNoM ko
Asrava kahate haiN| aneka padArthoM meM ekatva buddhi ke utpAdaka sambandha
vizeSa ko athavA AtmA aura karma ke eka kSetrAvagAha rUpa sambandha vizeSa ko yA
isake kAraNabhUta jIva ke pariNAmoM ko bandha kahate haiN| Asrava ke nirodha ko
saMbara kahate haiM  /  baddha karmoM ke ekadeza kSaya ko nirjarA kahate haiN|
AtmA se samasta karmoM ke chUTa jAne ko mokSa kahate haiN| (125)

Page #131 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
243. Question: How many individual beings are there in each of the five *guna
sthānas* from *mithyātva* to the fifth *guna sthāna*? Answer: There are
countless *mithyādṛṣṭi* beings. In *deśa-saṃyata*, there are thirteen crore
humans and countless times more *tiryac* beings. In *sāsādana* *guna sthāna*,
there are fifty-two crore humans and countless times more beings of the
remaining three *gatis* than *śrāvakas*. In *mitra* *guna sthāna*, there are one
hundred and four crore humans and countless times more beings of the remaining
three *gatis* than those in *sāsādana* *guna sthāna*. In *avirata-samyakta*
*guna sthāna*, there are seven hundred crore humans and countless times more
beings of the remaining three *gatis* than those in *miśra* *guna sthāna*. 244.
Question: How many individual beings are there in each of the *guna sthānas*
from *pramatta-virata* to *ayogakevali* *guna sthāna*? Answer: The number of
*saṃyata* beings in *pramatta* *guna sthāna* is five crore sixty-three lakh
sixty-eight thousand two hundred and six (5,63,68,206). The number of *saṃyata*
beings in *aprammatta* *guna sthāna* is two crore sixty-six lakh sixty-six
thousand one hundred and three (2,66,66,103). The number of *saṃyata* beings in
the eighth, ninth, tenth, and eleventh *guna sthānas* of the *upasama* *śreṇī*
is 266 (126).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 243. prazna : mithyAtya guNasthAna se pA~caveM guNasthAna taka pRthak-pRthak
jIyoM kI saMkhyA kitanI hai ? uttara : mithyAdRSTi jIva anantAnanta haiN|
dezasaMyata meM teraha karor3a manuSya aura palya ke asaMkhyAtaveM bhAga pramANa
tiryaca haiN| sAsAdana guNasthAna meM bAvana karor3a manuSya aura zrAvakoM se
asaMkhyAta guNe zeSa tIna gatiyoM ke jIva haiN| mitra guNasthAna meM eka sau
cAra karor3a manuSya aura sAsAdana guNasthAna vAle jIvoM ke pramANa se saMkhyAta
guNe zeSa tIna gatiyoM ke jIva haiN| avirata samyaktya guNasthAna meM sAta sau
karor3a manuSya aura mizra guNasthAna vAle jIvoM ke pramANa se asaMkhyAtaguNe
zeSa tIna gatiyoM ke jIva haiN| 244. prazna : pramattavirata guNasthAna se
ayogakevalI guNasthAna paryanta saMyata jIvoM kI pRthak-pRthak saMkhyA kitanI
hai ? uttara : pramatta guNasthAnayartI saMyata jIvoM kA pramANa pA~ca karor3a
tirAnave lAkha aTThAnave hajAra do sau chaha (5,63,68,206) hai| apramatta
guNasthAnAvartI saMyata jIvoM kA pramANa do karor3a chiyAnave lAkha ninyAnave
hajAra eka sau tIna (2,66,66,103) hai| upazama zreNI vAle AThaveM, nauveM,
dasaveM, gyArahave guNasthAnavatI saMyata jIvoM kA pramANa 266 (126)

Page #132 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Or 300 or 304. The number of restrained beings in the eighth, ninth, tenth, and
twelfth Gunasthana, belonging to the Kshapaka category, is double that of those
in the Upshama category, i.e., 568 or 600 or 608. The number of Sayoga-Kevali
Jinas is eight lakh eighty-nine thousand five hundred two (8,68,502). The number
of Ayoga-Kevali Jinas is 598 or 600 or 608. Thus, the total number of restrained
beings is three less than nine crore (8,66,66,563). That is, the number of all
restrained beings from the Pramala-Avarta Gunasthana to the fourteenth
Gunasthana is three less than nine crore (assuming the number of beings in each
category is 2E6).  245. Question: What is the number of beings who manifest in
the Upshama and Kshapaka categories for eight consecutive times? Answer: The
number of beings who manifest in the Upshama category for eight consecutive
times is: in the first time, a maximum of 16 beings, in the second time, 24
beings, in the third time, 30 beings, in the fourth time, 36 beings, in the
fifth time, 42 beings, in the sixth time, 48 beings, in the seventh time, 54
beings, and in the eighth time,  (127)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 athavA 300 athavA 304 hai| kSapaka zreNI vAle AThaveM, nauveM, dasaveM,
bArahaveM guNasthAnavartI saMyata jIvoM kA pramANa upazama-zreNI vAloM se dugunA
arthAt 568 athavA 600 athavA 608 hai| sayogakevalI jinoM kI saMkhyA ATha lAkha
aTTAnave hajAra pA~ca sau do (8,68,502) hai| ayogakevalI jinoM kI saMkhyA 598
athavA 600 athavA 608 hai| isa prakAra samasta saMyata jIvoM kI saMkhyA tIna
kama nau karor3a (8,66,66,563) hai| arthAt pramalAvarata guNasthAna se
caudahaveM guNasthAna paryanta sarva saMyamiyoM kA pramANa tIna kama nau karor3a
hai (zreNIsthita jIvoM kI saMkhyA 2E6 mAnane se)| 245. prazna : nirantara ATha
samaya paryanta upazama zreNI aura kSapaka zreNI mAMDane vAle jIvoM kA pramANa
kitanA hai ? uttara : nirantara ATha samaya paryanta upazama zreNI mAMDane vAle
jIvoM meM prathama samaya meM adhika se adhika 16 jIva, dvitIya samaya meM 24
jIva, tRtIya samaya meM 30 jIva, caturtha samaya meM 36 jIva, pA~caveM samaya
meM 42 jIva, chaThe samaya meM 48 jIva, sAtaveM samaya meM 54 jIva aura AThaveM
(127)

Page #133 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
There are 54 Jivas in the time cycle. In the Kshapaka category, there are twice
as many, meaning 32 Jivas in the first time, 48 Jivas in the second time, E0
Jivas in the Khaniya time, 72 Jivas in the fourth time, 64 Jivas in the fifth
time, 66 Jivas in the sixth time, 108 Jivas in the seventh time, and 108 Jivas
in the eighth time.  246. Question: How many types of Samyaktvamargna are there?
Answer: There are six types of Samyaktvamargna: (1) Aupashmik Samyagdarshan, (2)
Kshayopashmik Samyagdarshan, (3) Kshayik Samyagdarshan, (4) Mishr, (5) Sasadan,
and (6) Mithyatva.  247. Question: What is Aupashmik Samyagdarshan? Answer:
Aupashmik Samyagdarshan is the Samyagdarshan that arises from the subsiding of
the five natures of Aanadi Mithyadrishti Jiva, namely Mithyatva, and
Anantaanubandhi Krodha-Mana-Maya-Lobha, and the subsiding of the seven natures
of Saadi Mithyadrishti Jiva, namely Mithyatva, Samyagmithyatva, Samyaktvam, and
Anantaanubandhi Krodha-Mana-Maya-Lobha.  (128)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 samaya meM 54 jIva hote haiN| kSapaka zreNI meM inase dugune hote haiM arthAt
prathama samaya meM 32 jIva, dvitIya samaya meM 48 jIva, khanIya samaya meM E0
jIta, caturtha samaya meM 72 jIva, pA~caveM samaya meM 64 jIva, chaThe samaya
meM 66jIva, sAtaveM samaya meM 108 jIva aura AThaveM samaya meM 108 jIva hote
haiN| 246. prazna : samyaktva mArgaNA ke kitane bheda haiM ? uttara : samyaktva
mArgaNA ke chaha bheda haiM- (1) aupazamika samyagdarzana, (2) kSAyopazamika
samyagdarzana (3) kSAyika samyagdarzana, (4) mizra, (5) sAsAdana aura (6)
mithyAtva  /  247. prazna : aupazamika samyagdarzana kise kahate haiM ? uttara :
anAdi mithyAdRSTi jIva ke mithyAtva aura anantAnubandhI krodha-mAna-mAyA-lobha
ina pA~ca prakRtiyoM ke upazama se aura sAdi mithyAdRSTi jIva ke mithyAtva,
samyagmithyAtva aura samyaktva prakRti tathA anantAnubandhI krodha-mAnamAyA-
lobha ina sAta prakRtiyoM ke upazama se hone vAle samyagdarzana ko aupazamika
samyagdarzana kahate haiN| (128)

Page #134 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
248. Question: How many types of *aupashamik samyagdarshan* are there? What is
their nature? Answer: There are two types of *aupashamik samyagdarshan*: (1)
*Prathamopahsam samyagdarshan* and (2) *Dvitiyopahsam samyagdarshan*.
*Prathamopahsam samyagdarshan* occurs in a *mithyadrishti* being due to the
*upahsam* of 5 or 7 *prakritis*. *Prathamopahsam samyagdarshan* occurs from the
fourth *gunasthan* to the seventh *gunasthan*. No one dies during the time of
*Prathamopahsam samyaktva*. *Dvitiyopahsam samyagdarshan* occurs with the
*upahsam* of the three *prakritis* of *darshanamohaniya* along with the
*vinsaayog* (transformation of the *anantaanubandhi* into the form of
*apratyakhyana* etc.) of the four *anantaanubandhi kshayas*. *Dvitiyopahsam
samyagdarshan* arises in the seventh *gunasthan* of the being facing the ascent
of the *shreni* and arises after *kshayopashamik samyagdarshan*. When the being
falls from the eleventh *gunasthan* after ascending the *shreni*, it is also
found in the sixth, fifth, and fourth *gunasthan*. In this regard,
*Dvitiyopahsam samyagdarshan* is found from the fourth *gunasthan* to the
eleventh *gunasthan*. *Dvitiyopahsam samyaktva* along with *upahsam* ascends the
*shreni*  (129)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 248. prazna : aupazamika samyagdarzana ke kitane bheda haiM ? unakA svarUpa kyA
hai ? uttara : aupazamika samyagdarzana ke do bheda haiM- (1) prathamopazama
samyagdarzana aura (2) dvitIyopazama samyagdarzana  /  prathamopazama
samyagdarzana 5 athavA 7 prakRtiyoM ke upazama se mithyAdRSTi jIva ko hotA hai|
prathamopazama samyagdarzana caturtha guNasthAna se lekara sAtaveM guNasthAna
taka hotA hai| prathamopazama samyaktva ke kAla meM kisI kA maraNa nahIM hotA
hai| darzanamohanIya kI tIna prakRtiyoM ke upazama ke sAtha-sAtha cAra
anantAnubandhI kaSAyoM ke visaMyojana (anantAnubandhI kA apratyAkhyAnAdi rUpa
pariNamana honA) se dvitIyopazama samyagdarzana hotA hai| dvitIyopazama
samyagdarzana zreNI car3hane ke sammukha jIva ke sAtaveM guNasthAna meM utpanna
hotA hai evaM kSAyopazamika samyagdarzana ke pazcAt utpanna hotA hai| zreNI kA
ArohaNa karake jaba jIva gyArahaveM guNasthAna se nIce giratA hai taba chaThe,
pA~caveM evaM cauthe guNasthAna meM bhI pAyA jAtA hai| isa apekSA dvitIyopazama
samyagdarzana caturtha guNasthAna se gyArahaveM guNasthAna paryanta pAyA jAtA
hai| dvitIyopazama samyaktva sahita upazama zreNI para car3hane (129)

Page #135 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The beings who have the **apuurvakaran** quality do not die in the first
**gunasthan**. In all **gunasthanas**, when they die during the
**dvitiyopaśama** period, the being goes to the **devagati** according to the
rules.  **246. Question:** What is **mayopashmik samyagdarshan**?   **Answer:**
The destruction of the **niṣeka** that arises in the present time of the six
**sarvaghati-prakriti** - **mithyatva**, **samyagmithyatva**, and
**anantaanubandhi krodha-mana-maya-lobha**; the **upaśama** in the form of
**sadavastha** of the **niṣeka** that arises in the future time; and the
**samyaktva prakriti** - the **deshaghati-prakriti** - remaining present, the
**samyagdarshan** that occurs is called **kṣayopashmik samyagdarshan**. In this
**samyaktva**, **malin** and **avagaḍha** defects arise due to the arising of
**samyaktva prakriti**. This being experiences the arising of **samyaktva
prakriti**, therefore their **samyaktva** is also called **vedak samyaktva**.
This **samyagdarshan** occurs from the fourth **gunasthan** to the seventh
**gunasthan**. The **bhayopashmik samyagdṛṣṭi** being, who is about to attain
**kṣayik samyagdarshan**, experiences **mithyatva**, **samyagmithyatva**, and...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 vAle jIvoM kA apUrvakaraNa guNasthAna ke prathama pAye meM maraNa nahIM hotA
hai, sabhI guNasthAnoM meM dvitIyopazama ke kAla meM maraNa hone para jIva
niyama se devagatti meM jAtA 246. prazna : mAyopazamika samyagdarzana kise
kahate haiM ? uttara : mithyAtva, samyagmithyAtva aura anantAnubandhI krodha-
mAna mAyA-lobha ina chaha sarvaghAti-prakRtiyoM ke vartamAna kAla meM udaya Ane
vAle niSekoM kA udayAbhAvI kSaya, AgAmI kAla meM udaya Ane vAle niSekoM kA
sadavasthArUpa upazama tathA samyaktva prakRti nAmaka dezaghAtiprakRti kA udaya
rahate hue jo samyagdarzana hotA hai use kSAyopazamika samyagdarzana kahate
haiN| isa samyaktva meM samyaktva prakRti ke udaya se cala, malina, avagAr3ha
rUpa doSa utpanna hote haiN| yaha jIva samyaktva prakRti ke udaya kA vedana
karatA hai isalie unake samyaktva ko vedaka samyaktva bhI kahate haiN| yaha
samyagdarzana caturtha guNasthAna se saptam guNasthAna paryanta hotA hai| jo
bhAyopazamika samyagdRSTi jIva kSAyika samyagdarzana kI prApti ke sammukha hotA
huA mithyAtva, samyagmithyAtva aura (130)

Page #136 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The **Anantānubandhī Chatuṣka** destroys these six **Prakṛtis**, leaving only
the **Samyaktva Prakṛti** to arise. When this happens, the being is called a
**Kṛtakṛtyavedaka Samyagdṛṣṭi**, and this state lasts only for a **single
Antarmūhūrta**. 250. Question: What is **Kṣāyika Samyagdṛṣṭi**? Answer: The
**Samyagdṛṣṭi** that arises from the destruction of the seven **Prakṛtis** is
called **Kṣāyika Samyagdṛṣṭi**. This **Samyagdṛṣṭi** is **infinite** in its
duration. The **Dṛṣṭi** begins with the destruction of the **Mohaniya Karma**
and can occur in the **Karmabhūmi** for humans, **Kevali**, and **Śrutakevali**,
but its **perfection** can occur in all four **Gatis**. A being with **Kṣāyika
Samyagdṛṣṭi** does not remain in the world for more than **four Bhavas**. This
**Samyaktva** is found from the **fourth Guṇasthāna** to the **fourteenth
Guṇasthāna**, and also in the **Siddh Parameṣṭhī**. 251. Question: What is
**Miśra Samyaktva**? Answer: When the **Samyagmithyātvā Prakṛti** arises, it
produces results that are neither **Samyaktva** nor **Mithyātvā**, meaning the
being has **belief** and **disbelief** regarding the **Tattva**. This is called
**Miśra Samyaktva**. This occurs only in the **third Guṇasthāna**. (131)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 anantAnubandhI catuSka ina chaha prakRtiyoM kA kSaya kara cukatA hai, mAtra
samyaktva prakRti kA udaya jaba zeSa raha jAtA hai taba vaha kRtakRtyavedaka
samyagdRSTi kahalAtA hai aura isakA kAla mAtra antarmuhUrta kA hI hai| 250.
prazna : kSAyika samyagdarzana kise kahate haiM ? uttara : sAta prakRtiyoM ke
kSaya se jo samyagdarzana hotA hai, use sAyika samyagdarzana kahate haiN| yaha
samyagdarzana sAdi ananta hai| darzana mohanIya karma ke kSaya kA prArambha
karmabhUmija manuSya kevalI aura zrutakevalI ke pAdamUla meM hI karatA hai kintu
niSThApana cAroM gatiyoM meM ho sakatA hai| kSAyika samyagdRSTi jIva cAra bhava
se adhika saMsAra meM nahIM rahatA hai| caturtha guNasthAna se caudahaveM
guNasthAna paryanta evaM siddha parameSThI ke bhI yaha samyaktva pAyA jAtA hai|
251. prazna : mizra samyaktva kise kahate haiM ? uttara : samyagmithyAtva
prakRti ke udaya se jahA~ aise pariNAma ho jinheM na samyaktva rUpa kaha sakeM
aura na mithyAtvarUpa arthAt jisa jIva ke tattva ke viSaya meM zraddhAna aura
azraddhAna rUpa pariNAma hoM, use mizra samyaktva kahate haiN| yaha mAtra tRtIya
guNasthAna meM hotA hai| (131)

Page #137 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
252. Question: What is Saasadan Samyaktv? Answer: When at least one and at most
six Avali Praman Kal remain during the time of Prathamopa Sham Samyaktv, and the
arising of any one of the Anantanu bandhi nature of Krodh-Man-Maya-Lom, which
has contradicted Samyaktv, but has not attained Mithyatv, those Saasadan form
results are called Saasadan Samyaktv. This state remains only in the second
Gunasthan. This Jiva, by rule, attains the Mithyatv state. 253. Question: What
is Mithyatv? Answer: The Jiva who does not have faith in the words of
Jinendradev, Aapt, Aagam, Padarth, but due to the arising of Mithyatv nature,
has faith in the opposite of Padarth, whether said by a wrong Guru or not, is
called Mithyatv. This is the state of the first Gunasthan. 254. Question: How
many types of Sanjni Margana are there and what is their nature? Answer: There
are two types of Sanjni Margana: (1) Sanjni and (2) Asanji. From the Kshayopa
Sham of No Indriya Avaran Karma, the Jiva who has Shiksha (taking benefit,
abandoning harm), Kriya (willingly

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 252. prazna : sAsAdana samyaktva kise kahate haiM ? uttara : prathamopazama
samyaktva ke kAla meM kama-se-kama eka samaya aura adhika-se-adhika chaha AvalI
pramANa kAla zeSa rahane para anantAnubandhI krodha-mAna-mAyA-loma meM se kisI
eka prakRti kA udaya A jAne para jisane samyaktva kI virAdhanA kara dI hai,
kintu mithyAtva ko prApta nahIM huA hai una AsAdana rUpa pariNAmoM ko sAsAdana
samyaktya kahate haiN| yaha avasthA mAtra dvitIya guNasthAna meM rahatI hai|
yaha jIva niyama se mithyAtva avasthA ko prApta hotA hai| 253. prazna :
mithyAtva kise kahate haiM ? uttara : jo jIva jinendradeva ke kahe hue Apta,
Agama, padArtha kA zraddhAna nahIM karatA hai parantu mithyAtva prakRti ke udaya
se kuguruoM ke kahe hue yA binA kahe hue bhI padArtha kA viparIta zraddhAna
karatA hai use mithyAtya kahate haiN| yaha prathama guNasthAna kI avasthA hai|
254. prazna : saMjJI mArgaNA ke kitane bheda haiM aura unakA kyA svarUpa hai ?
uttara : saMjJI mArgaNA ke do bheda haiM- (1) saMjJI aura (2) asNjii| no
indriyAvaraNa karma ke kSayopazama se jo jIva zikSA (hitagrahaNa, ahitatyAga
rUpa zibhA), kriyA (icchApUrvaka

Page #138 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
One who receives (like the ability to move hands and feet), teachings and
discourse (like the recitation of verses) through the dependence of the mind is
called **sanjñi**. Those beings in whom the mind is not found in the form of
**labdhi** or **upayoga** are called **asanjñi**. From **ekendriya** to
**charendriya**, beings are generally **asanjñi**. **Panchendriya** beings are
of both **sanjñi** and **asanjñi** types. In **naraka**, **manushya**, and
**devagati**, all beings are **sanjñi**, but in **tithyancha** **gati**, both
**sanjñi** and **asanjñi** exist. The **asanjñi** being has only the
**mithyatva** **gunasthan**, while the **sanjñi** being has **mithyatva** to
twelve **gunasthanas**. The beings of the thirteenth and subsequent
**gunasthanas** are neither **sanjñi** nor **asanjñi**, but are devoid of both
designations. 255. Question: How many types of **aaharaka** **margana** are
there? Answer: There are two types of **aaharaka** **margana**: (1) **aaharaka**
and (2) **anaaharaka**. 256. Question: What is **aaharaka**? Answer: The
**pudgala** **vargana** suitable for the three bodies (**oudarika**, etc.) and
six **paryaptis** is called **aahar**. The one who receives it is called
**aaharaka**. (133)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 hAtha-paira calAne kI), upadeza aura AlApa (zloka Adi ke pATha) ko mana ke
avalambana se grahaNa karatA hai use saMjJI kahate haiN| jina jIvoM meM labdhi
yA upayoga rUpa mana nahIM pAyA jAtA hai, unheM asaMtrI kahate haiN| ekendriya
se lekara cAra indriya taka ke jIva niyama se asaMjJI hI hote haiN| paMcendriya
saMjJI-asaMjJI donoM prakAra ke hote haiN| naraka, manuSya aura devagati meM
saba jIva saMjJI hI hote haiM, parantu tithaMca gati meM saMjJI-asaMjJI donoM
hote haiN| asaMjJI jIva ke mAtra mithyAtva guNasthAna hotA hai aura saMDI jIva
ke mithyAtva se lekara bAraha guNasthAna taka hote hai| terahaveM Adi
guNasthAnavI jIva na saMjJI haiM, na asaMjJI haiM, kintu ubhaya vyapadeza se
rahita haiN| 255. prazna : AhAraka mArgaNA ke kitane bheda hote haiM ? uttara :
AhAraka mArgaNA ke do bheda haiM- (1) AhAraka aura (2) anaahaark| 256. prazna :
AhAraka kise kahate haiM ? uttara : audArikAdi tIna zarIra aura chaha
paryAptiyoM ke yogya pudagala vargaNA ko AhAra kahate haiN| use jo grahaNa
karatA hai, vaha AhAraka kahalAtA hai| (133)

Page #139 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
257. Question: What is an *Anaharak*? Answer: One who does not consume the
aforementioned food is called an *Anaharak*.  258. Question: In which
*Gunasthanas* are the states of *Aharak* and *Anaharak* found? Answer: The four
*Gati* related beings who attain *Vigraha Gati*, the *Pratar* and the
*Lokapurana* *Samudghāt* making *Sayogkevali*, *Ayogkevali* and all *Siddh*
beings are *Anaharak*. That is, in the first, second and fourth, in the
thirteenth and fourteenth *Gunasthanas* in comparison to *Samudghāt*, and from
the beginning to the thirteenth *Gunasthanas* there is the state of *Aharak*.
The *utkrista* time of *Aharak* is the *asankhyātava* part of the *suchyangula*
(for so long a time the being is born from *rijugati*). And the *jghanya* time
is the eighteenth part of three *samaya* less than a breath. The *utkrista* time
of *Anaharak* is three *samaya* and the *jghanya* time is one *samaya*.  256.
Question: What is *Upayog*? Answer: The feeling of the being that is inclined to
take in an object is called *Upayog*.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 257 prazna: anAhAraka kise kahate haiM ? uttara : jo uparyukta AhAra ko grahaNa
nahIM karatA hai use anAhAraka kahate haiN| 258. prazna: AhAraka- anAhAraka
avasthA kina-kina guNasthAnoM meM hotI hai ? uttara : vigrahagati ko prApta hone
vAle cAroM gati sambandhI jIva, pratara aura lokapUraNa samudghAta karane vAle
sayogakevalI, ayogakevalI aura samasta siddha jIva anAhAraka hote haiN| arthAt
pahale, dUsare va cauthe meM, samuddhAta kI apekSA terahaveM meM aura caudahaveM
guNasthAna meM anAhAraka avasthA hotI hai tathA prArambha se lekara terahaveM
guNasthAna taka AhAraka avasthA hotI hai| AhAraka kA utkRSTa kAla sUcyaMgula ke
asaMkhyAtaveM bhAga pramANa ( itane kAla paryanta jIva Rjugati se utpanna hotA
rahatA hai  /  aura jaghanya kAla tIna samaya kama zvAsa ke aThArahaveM bhAga
pramANa hai| anAhAraka kA utkRSTa kAla tIna samaya aura jaghanya kAla eka samaya
hai| 256. prazna: upayoga kise kahate haiM ? uttara : jIva kA jo bhAva vastu ko
grahaNa karane ke lie pravRtta hotA hai use upayoga kahate haiN| (134)

Page #140 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
260. Question: How many types of usage are there and what is their nature?
Answer: There are two types of usage - (1) Sakar usage and (2) Aakar usage.
There are eight types of Sakar usage - five types of Samyakgyan and three types
of Agyan. There are four types of Aakar usage - (1) Chakshudarshan (2)
Achakshudarshan, (3) Avadhidarshan and (4) Kevaldarshan. Mati, Shruta, Avadhi
and Manahparyaya, by which there is special knowledge of their respective
subjects until the end of the Antarmuhurt Kala, is called Sakar usage. This
transformation of consciousness in the form of perception of an object can only
remain for the maximum Antarmuhurt Kala of the Chham-sth Jiva. The general
perception of substances by the senses, mind and Avadhi until the Antarmuhurt
Kala is called Aakar usage. Aakar usage occurs for the maximum Antarmuhurt Kala
of the Chhadm-sth Jiva. 261. Question: Which Margna has which Samyakdarshan?
Answer: In the Gati Margna, in the first Earth-bound Narakio of the Af-o Narak
Gati, in the insufficient state of the Kshayik and Kritakritavedek,  (130

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 260. prazna : upayoga ke kitane bheda haiM aura unakA kyA svarUpa uttara :
upayoga ke do bheda haiM- (1) sAkAra upayoga aura (2) anAkAra upyog| sAkAra
upayoga ke ATha bheda haiM- pA~ca prakAra kA samyagjJAna aura tIna prakAra kA
ajJAna anAkAra upayoga ke cAra bheda haiM- (1) cakSudarzana (2) acakSudarzana,
(3) avadhidarzana aura (4) kevaladarzana  /  mati, zruta, avadhi aura
manaHparyaya inake dvArA apane-apane viSaya kA antarmuhUrta kAla paryanta jo
vizeSa jJAna hotA hai use sAkAra upayoga kahate haiN| eka vastu ke grahaNa rUpa
cetanA kA yaha pariNamana chamastha jIva ke adhika se adhika antarmuhUrta kAla
taka hI raha sakatA hai| indriya, mana aura avadhi ke dvArA antarmuhUrta kAla
taka padArthoM kA jo sAmAnya rUpa se grahaNa hotA hai usako nirAkAra upayoga
kahate haiN| nirAkAra upayoga chadmastha jIva ke adhika se adhika antarmuhUrta
taka hotA hai| 261. prazna : kisa mArgaNA meM kauna-sA samyagdarzana hotA hai ?
uttara : gatimArgaNA kI apheA narakagati meM prathama pRthvIstha nArakiyo kI
aparyApta avasthA meM kSAyika aura kRtakRtyavedaka kI apekSA (130

Page #141 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
In the state of *kshayopashmik* and *paryapt* (sufficient), there are three
*samyagdarshan* (right faith): *aupashamik*, *kshayik*, and *kshayopashmik*. In
the *dvitiya* (second) and subsequent *prithvisth* (earth-bound) *naraki* (hell
beings), there is not a single *samyagdarshan* in the *aparyapt* (insufficient)
state, and in the *paryapt* state, there are two *samyagdarshan*: *aupashamik*
and *kshayopashmik*. In the *tiyanch* (heavenly) realm, in the *aparyapt* state
of *bhogabhumij* (enjoyment-bound) *tiyanch*, there are two *samyagdarshan*:
*kshayik* and *kshayopashmik*, compared to *kritkritya-vedak* (those who have
performed their actions). In the *paryapt* state, all three *samyagdarshan* are
present. In the *manushya* (human) realm, in the *aparyapt* state of *manushya*,
there are two *samyagdarshan*: *kshayik* and *kshayopashmik*, compared to
*kritkritya-vedak*. In the *paryapt* state, all three are equal. In the *dev*
(divine) and *kalvari* (female divine) realms, there is not a single
*samyagdarshan* in the *aparyapt* state, but in the *paryapt* state, there are
two *samyaktva* (right conduct): *aupashamik* and *kshayopashmik*. In the
*vaimanik* (aerial) *dev* realm, in both the *aparyapt* and *paryapt* states,
all three types of *samyagdarshan* are present.  With respect to *indriya*
(sense organ) *margana* (destruction), from *ekendriya* (one-sense) to
*chaturindriya* (four-sense) beings, there is not a single *samyagdarshan*, but
in *panchendriya* (five-sense) beings, all three *samyagdarshan* are present.
With respect to *kaya* (body) *margana*, in the five *sthavar* (stationary)
beings, there is not a single *sampad* (wealth), and in *tras* (mobile) beings,
all three *samyaktva* are present. (136)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 kSAyopazamika tathA paryApta avasthA meM aupazamika, kSAyika aura kSAyopazamika
tInoM samyagdarzana hote hai| dvitIyAdi pRthvIstha nArakiyoM kI aparyApta
avasthA meM eka bhI samyagdarzana nahIM hotA hai aura paryApta avasthA meM
aupazamika tathA kSAyopazamika do samyagdarzana hote hai  /  tiyaMcagati meM
bhogabhUmija tiyaMca ke aparyApta avasthA meM kSAyika aura kRtakRtyavedaka kI
apekSA kSAyopazamika do samyagdarzana hote haiM tathA paryApta avasthA meM tInoM
samyagdarzana hote haiN| manuSyagati meM manuSya ke aparyApta avasthA meM
zvAyika aura kRtakRtyavedaka kI apekSA kSAyopazamika do samyagdarzana tathA
paryApta avasthA meM tInoM samAna hote hai| deva aura kalavArI deviyoM ke
aparyApta avasthA meM eka bhI samyagdarzana nahIM hotA hai, kintu paryApta
avasthA meM aupazamika aura kSayopazamika do samyaktva hote haiN| vaimAnika
devoM meM aparyApta aura paryApta donoM hI avasthAoM meM tInoM prakAra ke
sabhyagdarzana hote haiN| indriya mArgaNA kI apekSA ekendriya se lekara
caturindriya taka ke jIvoM ke eka bhI samyagdarzana nahIM hotA parantu
paMcendriya jIvoM ke tInoM samyagdarzana hote haiN| kAya mArgaNA kI apekSA pA~ca
sthAvara jIvoM ke eka bhI sampada nahIM hotA hai aura trasa jIvoM ke tInoM
samyaktva hote haiN| (136)

Page #142 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
In comparison to the path of Yoga, the three Samyaktvas are present in the
Sayoga beings, and only one Kshayik Samyaktva is present in the Yogarhit beings.
In comparison to the path of Veda, the three Samyaktvas are present in the
Saveda beings, and two Samyaktvas, namely Aupashmik (Dvitiyopashma) and Kshayik,
are present in the Aveda beings. In comparison to the path of Kashaya, the three
Samyaktvas are present in the Sakashay beings, and two Samyaktvas, namely
Aupashmik (Dvitiyopashma) and Kshayik, are present in the Akashay beings. In
comparison to the path of Jnana, the three Samyaktvas are present in the Mati,
Shruta-Avadhi, and Manah-Paryaya Jnanis, and only one Kshayik Samyaktva is
present in the Kevalajnanis. In comparison to the path of Samyama, the three
Samyaktvas (except for the Upaashma Samyaktva - Prathamopashma of the Parihar
Vishuddhi holder) are present in the beings who hold the three Samyamas, namely
Samayik, Chhedopasthapana, and Parihar Vishuddhi, and the Aupashmik
(Dvitiyopashma) and Kshayik Samyaktvas are present in the Sukshmasampray and
Aupashmik - Yathakyat holders, and only one Kshayik Samyaktva is present in the
Kshayik Yathakyat holders. In comparison to the path of Darshan, the three
Samyaktvas are present in the Chakshudarshan, Achakshudarshan, and Avadhidarshan
holders, and only one Kshayik Samyaktva is present in the Kevaldarshan holders.
In comparison to the path of Leshya, the three Samyaktvas are present in the
Saleshya beings, and the Aleshya (137)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 yoga mArgaNA kI apekSA sayoga jIvoM ke tInoM samyaktva hote haiM aura
yogarahita jIvoM ke eka kSAyika samyagdarzana ho hotA hai| veda mAgaMgA ko
apekSA saveda jIvoM ke tInoM samyaktva aura aveda jIvoM ke aupazamika
(dvitIyopazama) tathA kSAyika do samyaktva hote haiN| kaSAya mArgaNA kI apekSA
sakaSAya jIvoM ke tInoM samyaktva aura akaSAya jIvoM ke aupazamika (
dvitIyopazama) tathA kSAyika do samyaktva hote haiN| jJAnamArgaNA kI apekSA mati
zruta-avadhi aura mana:paryaya jJAniyoM ke tInoM samyaktva tathA kevalajJAniyoM
ke eka kSAyika samyaktva hI hotA hai| saMyamamArgaNA kI apekSA sAmAyika,
chedopasthApanA aura parihAravizuddhi ina tIna saMyamoM ke dhAraka jIvoM ke
tInoM (parihAra vizuddhi vAle ke upazama samyaktva - prathamopazama ko
chor3akara) samyaktva, sUkSmasAmparAya aura aupazamika - yathAkhyAta vAlo ke
aupazamika ( dvitIyopazama ) aura kSAyika samyaktva hotA hai tathA kSAyika
yathAkhyAta vAloM ke eka kSAyika samyaktva hI hotA hai  /  darzanamArgaNA kI
apekSA cakSudarzana, acakSudarzana aura avadhidarzana vAloM ke tInoM samyaktva
tathA kevala darzana vAloM ke eka kSAyika samyaktva hI hotA hai| lezyAmArgaNA kI
apekSA salezya jIvoM ke tInoM samyaktva aura alezya (137)

Page #143 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
All beings have only *kshayik* samyaktv. There is no *bhavya* samyaktv in the
*bhavya* being, nor even one *samyaktv* in the *abhavya* being. *Samyaktv* is
not a matter of *margana*, but rather, wherever there is *samyagdarshan*, there
it is. From the *samanya* to the fourth *gunasthan*, there are all three
*samyagdarshans*. From the eighth to the eleventh *gunasthan*, there are
*aupashamik* (second *upasham*) and *bhayyik* *samyaktv*, and beyond that, only
*kshayik* *samyaktv*. In terms of *santrimangana*, the *sanjni* being has all
three *samyaktv*, while the *asanjni* being has none. In terms of
*aaharakamangana*, the *aaharaka* and the fourth *gunasthan* *aaharaka-
anaaharaka* beings have all three *samyaktv*, while the thirteenth and
fourteenth *gunasthan* *anaaharaka* beings have only *kshayik* *samyaktv*.
Question: How many and which *gunasthanas* are there in each *margana*? Answer:
In terms of *gatimangana*, there are four *gunasthanas* at the beginning of both
*narakagati* and *devagati*. There are five *gunasthanas* at the beginning of
*tiyanchagati*, and fourteen *gunasthanas* in *manushyaagati*.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 jIvoM ke mAtra kSAyika samyaktva hotA hai| bhavyatva mAgaNA kI apekSA bhavya
jIva ke tInoM samyaktva aura abhavya jIva ke eka bhI samyaktva nahIM hotA hai|
samyaktva mArgaNA kI apekSA jahA~ jo samyagdarzana hotA hai vahA~ vahIM hotA
hai| sAmAnya se caturtha guNasthAna se sAtaveM guNasthAna taka tInoM
samyagdarzana hote haiN| AThaveM se gyArahaveM guNasthAna taka aupazamika
(dvitIyopazama) aura bhAyika samyaktva tathA usake Age kevala kSAyika samyaktva
hI hotA hai| saMtrImArgaNA kI apekSA saMjJI jIva ke tInoM samyaktva hote haiM
aura asaMjJI jIva ke eka bhI samyakca nahIM hotA hai| AhArakamArgaNA kI apekSA
AhAraka aura caturtha guNasthAnavI AhAraka-anAhAraka jIvoM ke tInoM samyaktva
tathA terahaveM aura caudahaveM guNasthAnavartI anAhAraka jIvoM ke kevala
kSAyika samyaktva hotA hai| 262. prazna : kisa mArgaNA meM kitane aura kauna-
kauna se guNasthAna hote haiM ? uttara : gatimArgaNA kI apekSA narakagati aura
devagati meM prArambha ke cAra guNasthAna hote haiN| tiyaMcagati meM prArambha
ke pA~ca guNasthAna aura manuSyagati meM caudaha guNasthAna hote haiN| (138)

Page #144 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The four initial *gunasthana* are common to both *bhogabhumij* humans and
*tiryachas*. In the *nivritya-paryapta* state of *narakagati*, the *sasadan*
*gunasthana* is absent. In the *nivritya-paryapta* state of any *gati*, the
*misra* *gunasthana* is absent. In the *labhya-paryapta* state of humans and
*tiryachas*, only the *mithyatva* *gunasthana* exists. With respect to
*indriyamargna*, from *ekendriya* to *asangni panchendriya* beings, there is
only one *mithyatva* *gunasthana*. *Sangni panchendriya* beings have fourteen
*gunasthana*. With respect to *kayamargna*, the five *sthadarkaayik* beings have
one *mithyatva* *gunasthana*, while *usakaayik* beings have all fourteen
*gunasthana*. With respect to *yogamargna*, beings with *yoga* have thirteen
*gunasthana*, while beings without *yoga* have a fourteenth *gunasthana*. With
respect to *vedamargna*, beings with *veda* have the initial nine *gunasthana*,
while beings without *veda* have five *gunasthana* from the latter half of the
ninth *gunasthana* to the fourteenth. With respect to *kshayamargna*, the
initial nine *gunasthana* exist for the *kshayas* of *krodha*, *mana*, and
*maya*, while the initial ten *gunasthana* exist for the *kshaya* of *lobha*.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 bhogabhUmija manuSya aura tiryacoM meM prArambha ke cAra guNasthAna hote haiN|
narakagati kI aparyApta (nivRtyaparyApta) avasthA meM sAsAdana guNasthAna nahIM
hotA hai| kisI bhI gati kI nirvRtyaparyApta avasthA meM mizra guNasthAna nahIM
hotA hai| manuSya aura tiryacoM kI labdhyaparyApta avasthA meM mithyAtva
guNasthAna hI hotA hai| indriyamArgaNA kI apekSA ekendriya se lekara asaMjJI
paMcendriya paryanta jIvoM ke eka mithyAtva guNasthAna hI hotA hai| saMjJI
paMcendriya jIvoM ke caudaha guNasthAna hote haiN| kAyamArgaNA kI apekSA pA~ca
sthAdarakAyika jIvoM meM eka mithyAtva guNasthAna hotA hai tathA usakAyika jIvoM
meM sabhI caudaha guNasthAna hote haiN| yogamArgaNA kI apekSA yoga sahita jIvoM
meM teraha guNasthAna aura yoga rahita jIvoM meM eka caudahavA~ guNasthAna hotA
hai| vedamArgaNA kI apekSA veda sahita jIvoM meM prArambha ke nau guNasthAna
aura vedarahita jIvoM meM navama guNasthAna ke uttarArdha se caudahaveM taka
pA~ca guNasthAna hote haiN| kaSAyamArgaNA kI apekSA krodha, mAna aura mAyA
kaSAya meM prArambha ke nau guNasthAna, lobha kaSAya meM prArambha ke dasa (136)

Page #145 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
There are four **guna sthana** from the eleventh to the fourteenth in the
absence of **kṣaya** and **guṇa**. With respect to **jñāna mārgaṇā**, there are
nine **guna sthāna** from the fourth to the twelfth in **mati jñāna**, **śruta
jñāna** and **avadhi jñāna**, seven **guna sthāna** from the sixth to the
twelfth in **manaḥparyaya jñāna** and two **guna sthāna** at the end in **kevala
jñāna**. There are three **guna sthāna** at the beginning in **kumati jñāna**,
**kuśruta jñāna** and **kuavadhi jñāna**. With respect to **samyama mārgaṇā**,
there are four **guna sthāna** from the sixth to the ninth in **samāyika** and
**chodopa sthāpanā samyama**, **kuta** and **satna** **guna sthāna** in
**pariharaviśuddhi samyama**, the tenth **guna sthāna** in **madhyasāgarāya
samyama**, four **guna sthāna** from the eleventh to the fourteenth in
**yathākhyāta samyama**, the fifth **guna sthāna** in **samyāmāsamyama** and
four **guna sthāna** at the beginning in **asamyama**. With respect to **darśana
mārgaṇā**, there are twelve **guna sthāna** from the beginning to the twelfth in
**chakṣudarśana** and **achakṣudarśana**, nine **guna sthāna** from the fourth
to the twelfth in **avadhidarśana** and two **guna sthāna** at the end in
**kevaladarśana**. With respect to **leśyā mārgaṇā**, there are four **guna
sthāna** at the beginning in **kṛṣṇa**, **nīla** and **kāpota leśyā**, seven
**guna sthāna** at the beginning in **pīta** and **padmaleśyā** and

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 guNasthAna tathA kaSAya ke abhAva meM gyArahaveM se caudahaveM taka cAra
guNasthAna hote haiN| jJAnamArgaNA kI apekSA matijJAna, zrutajJAna aura
avadhijJAna meM caturtha se bArahaveM taka nau guNasthAna, manaHparyayajJAna meM
chaThe se bArahaveM taka sAta gaNasthAna aura kevalajJAna meM anta ke do
guNasthAna hote haiN| kumatijJAna, kuzrutajJAna aura kuavadhijJAna meM prArambha
ke tIna guNasthAna hote haiN| saMyamamArgaNA kI apekSA sAmAyika aura
chodopasthApanA saMyama meM chaThe se nauveM taka cAra guNasthAna,
parihAravizuddhi saMyama meM kutA aura satanA ho guNasthAna, madhyasAgarAyA
saMyama meM dasavAM guNasthAna, yathAkhyAta saMyama meM gyArahaveM se caudahaveM
taka cAra gaNasthAna, saMyamAsaMyama meM pA~cavAM gaNAsthAna aura asaMyama meM
prArambha ke cAra guNasthAna hote haiN| darzanamArgaNA kI apekSA cakSudarzana
aura acakSudarzana meM prArambha se bArahaveM taka bAraha guNasthAna,
avadhidarzana meM cauthe se bArahaveM taka nau guNasthAna aura kevaladarzana meM
anta ke do guNasthAna hote haiN| lezyAmArgaNA kI apekSA kRSNa, nIla aura kApota
lezyA meM prAraMbha ke cAra guNasthAna, pIta aura padmalezyA meM prAraMbha ke
sAta guNasthAna aura zuklalezyA meM prAraMbha ke (140)

Page #146 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
There are thirteen Gunasthanas. A fourteenth Gunasthan is present only in the
case of a Leshyarahit Jiva. All Gunasthanas are present in a Bhavya Jiva, as
opposed to only one Mithyatva Gunasthan in an Abhavya Jiva. In the case of
Samyaktvamargna, there are four Gunasthanas from the fourth to the seventh in
Prathamopahsam Samyaktv and Kshayopahsam Samyaktv, eight Gunasthanas from the
fourth to the eleventh in Dvitiyopahsam Samyaktv, and eleven Gunasthanas from
the fourth to the fourteenth in Kshayik Samyaktv. Kshayik Samyaktv Gunasthan is
also present in the Siddha Parameshti, who is beyond Gunasthanas. In the case of
Sanjimargna, the first twelve Gunasthanas are present in Sanji Jivas, one
Mithyatva Gunasthan is present in Asanji Jivas, and the last two Gunasthanas are
present in Kevali, who is devoid of the behavior of Sanji and Asanji.  1. It is
noteworthy that many Acharyas have considered the Sasadan Gunasthan to be
present in Asanji Jivas in the Nityaparyapt state. Thus, they have considered
two Gunasthanas in Asanji Jivas. Go.k. 113, Panchasangrah p. 75 (Amitagati
Acharya) etc. Thus, there are two opinions regarding the presence of Sasadan
Gunasthan in Asanji Jivas. (141)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 teraha guNasthAna hote haiN| lezyArahita jIva ke eka caudahavA~ guNasthAna hI
hotA hai| bhavyatvamArgaNA kI apekSA bhavya jIva ke sabhI gaNasthAna hote haiM
aura abhavya jIva ke eka mithyAtva guNasthAna hI hotA hai| samyaktvamArgaNA kI
apekSA prathamopazama samyaktva tathA kSayopazama samyaktva meM caturtha se
saptam taka cAra guNasthAna, dvitIyopazama samyaktva meM caturtha se gyArahaveM
taka ATha guNasthAna aura kSAyika samyaktva meM caturtha se caudahaveM taka
gyAraha guNasthAna hote haiN| kSAyika samyaktva guNasthAnAtIta siddha parameSThI
ke bhI hotA hai| saMjImArgaNA kI apekSA saMjJI jIvoM meM prArambha ke bAraha
guNasthAna, asaMjJI jIvoM meM eka mithyAtva guNasthAna aura saMjJI-asaMjJI ke
vyavahAra se rahita kevalI ke anta ke do guNasthAna hote haiN| 1, itanI vizeSatA
hai ki aneka AcAryoM ne asaMjI jIvoM meM bhI nityaparyApta avasthA meM sAsAdana
guNasthAna mAnA hai| isa prakAra unhoMne asaMjhI jIvoM meM do guNasthAna mAne
haiN| go.ka. 113, paMcasaMgraha pR. 75 (amitagati AcArya) aadi| isa prakAra
asaMjJI jIdoM meM sAsAdana guNasthAna ke sadabhAva ke viSaya meM do mata pAye
jAte haiN| (141)

Page #147 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
In comparison to the *āhāramārgaṇā*, the *āhārak* living being has thirteen
*guṇasthāna* from the beginning, and the *anāhārak* living being has the first,
second, and fourth *guṇasthāna*, and in comparison to *samudghāta*, the
thirteenth and fourteenth, thus there are five *guṇasthāna*. In the *siddh*
*parameṣṭhī*, except for *siddhgati*, *kevalajñāna*, *kevaldarśana*, *kṣāyik*
*samyaktv* and *anāhārak* *mārgaṇā*, the remaining *mārgaṇā* are absent. (142)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 AhAramArgaNA kI apekSA AhAraka jIva meM prArambha ke teraha guNasthAna aura
anAhAraka jIva meM prathama, dvitIya aura caturtha guNasthAna tathA samudghAta
kI apekSA terahavA~ aura caudaha isa prakAra pA~ca guNasthAna hote haiN| siddha
parameSThI meM siddhagati, kevalajJAna, kevaladarzana, kSAyika samyaktva aura
anAhAraka mArgaNAoM ko chor3akara zeSa mArgaNAoM kA abhAva hotA hai (142)

Page #148 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Karṇānuyoga  **Chaturgati - Yugāvart - Lokālok - Vibhāgavid.**  Hṛdi praṇeyaḥ
karṇānuyogaḥ karaṇātigaiḥ.  ||  Adho madhyordhvalokānām, saṅkhyānām ādivarṇanam.
Kriyate yatra sa jñeyaḥ, yogaḥ hi karaṇātmakaḥ. ||  He who knows the four gatis,
the transformation of yugas, and the division of lokālok, should know the
Karṇānuyoga for the indriyatil puruṣas.  Know the Karṇānuyoga, where the number
and names of the adho, madhya, and ūrddha lokas are described.  Yaḥ kālabhedam
guṇadhāmabhedam, lokasya bhedam vasudhādhārānām.  Saṁsthānabhedam
bahukarmabhedam, bhāvasya bhedam ca nṛṇām bravīti. ||  He who speaks of the
differences in time, the differences in guṇasthāna, the differences in lokas,
the differences in the shapes of mountains, the differences in karmas,  (143)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karaNAnuyoga caturgati - yugAvarta - lokAloka - vibhAgavid  /  hRdi praNeyaH
karaNAnuyogaH karaNAtigaiH  /   /  adho madhyordhvalokAnAM,
saMkhyAnAmAdivarNanam  /  kriyate yatra sa jJeyo, yogo hi karaNAtmakaH  /  /  jo
cAra gatiyoM, yugoM kA parivartana tathA lokAloka ke vibhAga ko jAnane vAlA hai,
use indriyAtIla puruSoM ko karaNAnuyoga jAnanA cAhie  /  adho, madhya aura
Urdhva loka kI saMkhyA tathA nAmAdi kA varNana jisameM kiyA jAtA hai, use
karaNAnuyoga jAno  /  yaH kAlabhedaM guNadhAmabhedaM, lokasya bhedaM
vasudhAdharANAm  /  saMsthAnabhedaM bahukarmabhedaM, bhAvasya bhedaM ca nRNAM
bravIti  /   /  prANAyamAno jinavAGmayasya, dhyAnaikapAtraM vibudhezvarANAm  /
priyo munInAM tapasA yutAnAM, sa kathyate vai karaNAnuyogaH  /  /  jo utsarpiNI
avasarpiNI Adi kAla ke bhedoM ko, guNasthAna ke bhedoM ko, loka ke bhedoM ko,
parvatoM ke AkAra-bheda ko, karmoM (143)

Page #149 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
It is called **Karananuyoga** which speaks of the distinction of **Jinaagam**'s
souls, the distinction of human emotions, which is worthy of the attention of
scholars and dear to the ascetic monks. **Karananuyoga** is also that which
speaks of **Karanasutra**-**Ganitasutra** to derive the extent of **Loka**,
**Jagatpratar**, **Jagachheni**, **Dweep**, **Samudra**, **Parvat** etc.
Similarly, it is also called **Karananuyoga** where the description of the
causes of **Gunasthan**, **Margna**, **Jivasamaas** etc. - the special results
of the soul - is given. The discussion related to the rise, subsidence,
destruction and destruction-subsidence of **Karmas** also takes place in this
**Anuyoga**.   **Texts:** **Tiloyapannatti**, **Triloksar**, **Jivakand**,
**Karmakand**, **Shatkhandagam**, **Dhavalatika**, **Jayadhavala Tika**,
**Mahadhavala**, **KasayapahuduSutta**, **Siddhant-Sarasangrah**,
**Rajavartika**, **Jambudeep Prajnapti**, **Ganitasarasangrah**, **Lokavibhag**,
**Labdhisar-Kshapanasar** etc.  /  /  /  **End**  /  /  (144)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
ke bheda ko tathA manuSyoM ke bhAvoM ke bheda ko kahatA hai, jo jinAgama ke
prANoM ke samAna hai, vidvAnoM ke dhyAna kA pAtra hai tathA jo tapasvI muniyoM
ke liye priya hai, vaha karaNAnuyoga kahalAtA hai| jisameM loka, jagatpratara,
jagaccheNI, dvIpa, samudra, parvata Adi ke vistAra ko nikAlane ke lie
karaNasUtroM-gaNitasUtroM kA kathana hotA hai, use kAraNAnuyoga kahate haiN| isI
prakAra jisameM guNasthAna, mArgaNA, jIvasamAsa Adi ke AzrayabhUta kAraNoM-jIva
ke pariNAma vizeSoM kA varNana hotA hai, use bhI karaNAnuyoga kahate haiN|
karmoM ke udaya, upazama, kSaya aura kSayopazama se sambandha rakhane vAlI carcA
bhI isI anuyoga meM hotI hai| grantha : tiloyapaNNattI, trilokasAra, jIvakANDa,
karmakANDa, SaTkhaNDAgama, dhavalATIkA, jayadhavalA TIkA, mahAdhavalA,
kasAyapAhuDasutta, siddhAnta-sArasaMgraha, rAjavArtika, jambuddhIpa prajJapti,
gaNitasArasaMgraha, lokavibhAga, labdhisAra-kSapaNAsAra Adi / / / samApta / /
(144)

