Catalog link: https://jainqq.org/explore/090246/1

Page #1 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
|  Salutations to Shri Adinatha. || Karanaanuyoag Deepak Second Part - Author -
Pt. (Dr.) Pannalal Jain Sahityacharya Shri Varni Digambar Jain Gurukul Atishay
Kshetra, Pisanhari ki Madhiya, Jabalpur (M.P.) Courtesy of  Smt. Vimala Jain,
wife of Shri Parsamal Ji Patni Through: Messers Raj Investments V-6, Second
Floor, Strand Road, Calcutta Phone: 2433893, 2432934, 2433995 Residence:
33775442, 2349032 - Publisher - Shri Bharatvarshiya Digambar Jain (Dharma
Sanrakshani) Mahasabha (Publication Department) Central Kaganjaya: Shri
Nandishwar Floor Mills, Minn Ged, Shivan Jalanau. 226074. (U.P.) Phone/Fax:
(022) 167287.  Email: mahasuhhuyal.com

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 | zrI AdinAthAya namaH  /  /  karaNAnuyoga dIpaka dvitIya bhAga - lekhaka -
paM. (DaoN.) pannAlAla jaina sAhityAcArya zrI varNI digambara jaina gurukula
atizaya kSetra, pisanahArI kI mar3hiyA, jabalapura (ma. pra.) saujanya se
zrImatI vimalA jaina dharmapatnI zrI pArasamala jI pATanI dvArA : mesarsa rAja
invesTameMTsa vI-6, dvitIya tala, sTreNDa roDa,kalakattA phona : 2433893,
2432934, 2433995 nivAsa : 33775442, 2349032 - prakAzaka - zrI bhAratavarSIya
digambara jaina (dharma saMrakSiNI) mahAsabhA (prakAzana vibhAga) kendrIya
kAgaMjayaH zrI nandIzvara phlora milsa, minna geDa, zivANa jAlanaU. 226074  /
u0 pra0) phona/phaiknaH (022) 167287. prA . Email: mahasuhhuyal.com

Page #2 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Introductory Note  I am delighted to present the second part of the
**Karananuyog Deepak** to the readers. To understand the great texts of
**Karananuyog**, namely **Dhavala**, **Jayathvala**, and **Mahadhayat**, it is
essential to have knowledge of **Jiva-kanda** and **Karma-kanda**. Acharya
Nemichandraji had compiled **Jiva-kanda** and **Karma-kanda** by selecting from
the **Dhavala** and other texts. There was a time when these texts were studied
and taught in schools with true understanding, but now it seems that students
study only to obtain a certificate.  The first part of **Karananuyog Deepak**
was written based on **Jiva-kanda**. Today, I am publishing the second part
based on **Karma-kanda**. In this part, I have attempted to elucidate the key
topics of **Karma-kanda** through 300 questions. The method initiated by Guru-
na-Guru Shri Gopaladasji Baraiya, who wrote **Jain Siddhant Praveshika** in a
question-answer format, making a difficult subject easy, proved to be very
engaging. Other scholars have also attempted to write in the same style.
Organizing educational camps based on these publications can be highly
beneficial. I had sent this book to Shri 105 Aryika Vishuddhamatiji, who
reviewed it. Our fellow scholar, Pandit Jawaharlalji Shastri Bhindar, also added
some annotations to clarify the subject. I have great respect for all of them.
I am addicted to serving the **Jinvani**. As a result, I do some work...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Adya nivedana karaNAnuyoga dIpaka dvitIya bhAga ko pAThakoM ke hAthoM meM
arpita karate hue prasannatA kA anubhava kara rahA huuN| karaNAnuyoga ke mahAn
grantha dhavala, jayathavala aura mahAdhayata meM pAne ke lie roDa aura
karmakANDa kA jJAna honA Avazyaka hai| AcArya nemicandra jI ne dhavalAdi
granthoM meM se cayana kara jIvakANDa aura karmakANDa kI racanA kI thii| eka
samaya thA jaba vidyAlayoM meM inakA yathArtha adhyayana-adhyApana hotA thA,
para aba parIkSA kA pramANa patra prApta karane ke lie hI chAtra adhyayana
karate haiM aisA jAna par3atA hai| jIvakANDa kA AdhAra lekara karaNAnuyoga
dIpaka kA prathama bhAga likhA thaa| Aja karmakANDa kA AdhAra lekara dvitIya
bhAga prakAzita kara rahA huuN| isameM 300 praznoM ke dvArA karmakANDa ke
pramukha viSayoM ko prakaTa karane kA prayAsa kiyA hai| guruNAM guru zrI
gopAladAsajI baraiyA ne jaina siddhAnta pravezikA ko praznottara kI zailI meM
likhakara kaThina viSaya ko sarala banAne kI jisa rIti kA prArabhbha kiyA thA
vaha rucikara siddha huI  /  usI zailI para anya vidvAnoM ne bhI likhane kA
prayAsa kiyA hai| ina prakAzanoM ke AdhAra para zikSaNa ziviroM kA Ayojana kiyA
jAve to adhika lAbha ho sakatA hai| yaha pustaka likhakara maiMne zrI 105 AryikA
vizuddhamatIjI ke pAsa bheja dI thI, ise unhoMne dekhA tathA hamAre sahayogI
vidvAna paM0 javAharalAla jI zAstrI bhINDara ne viSaya ko spaSTa karane ke lie
kucha TippaNa lgaaye| ina sabake prati merA Adara bhAva hai| jinavANI kI sevA kA
mujhe vyasana hai| isake phalasvarUpa kucha karatA

Page #3 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
I remain, in the publication of this, Shriman Dr. Chetanprakashji Patni has
taken great effort. The Shruta Seva is obtained from Samatasagarji.  Its
publication is being done by the Shri Bharatvarshiya Digambar Jain (Dharma
Sanrakshani) Mahasabha. For this, the Mahasabha's publication department is
worthy of thanks. If there is any mistake in the answers to the questions, then
the learned reader is requested to kindly inform the correction. Humble Pannalal
Sahityacharya  -

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 rahatA hU~, isake prakAzana meM zrImAn DaoN0 cetanaprakAza jI pATanI ne bar3A
zrama kiyA hai| zrutasevA kI samatAsAgarajI se prApta hai| unheM isakA prakAzana
zrI bhAratavarSIya digambara jaina (dharma saMrakSiNI) mahAsabhA se ho rahA hai
/  etadartha mahAsabhA kA prakAzana vibhAga dhanyavAda kA pAtra hai| praznoM ke
uttara meM kahIM bhUla huI ho to vijJa pAThaka saMzodhana kara sUcita karane kI
kRpA kreN| vinIta pannAlAla sAhityAcArya -

Page #4 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Bhavana**  From time immemorial, every being in the world is bound by the
strong chains of karma. Why, how, by whom, how much, and what kind of
relationship does this karma have with the conscious soul? The living being has
not yet contemplated or strived to understand all this and find ways to liberate
itself from it. The compassionate Acharya Nemichandra, to impart understanding
of all these questions with ease, revealed the Karmakanda text from the
Shatkhandagama. To remove the complexities of Prakrit and Sanskrit languages,
the great scholar Pandit Todarmalji translated this text into the Dhoondhari
language. To further clarify the subject, the learned Aryika 105 Shri Adimataji
took up her pen, which was edited by the expert in Karananuyoga, the late Pandit
Ratanchandji Mukhtar of Saharanpur.  The wise scholar Pandit Pannalalji
Sahityacharya, for the sake of easy understanding of the above questions, has
presented the essence of the text before society through 300 questions and
answers, performing a commendable task. It is hoped that the self-benefiting
Bhavyas will make good use of this unparalleled work and make sincere efforts to
liberate themselves from karma. This is my auspicious wish.  I Aryika
Vishuddhamati -

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 bhAvanA anAdikAla se saMsAra kA pratyeka prANI ati dRr3ha karma zrRMkhalAoM ke
bandhana se baddha hai| caitanyamayI AtmA ke sAtha karmoM kA yaha sambandha
kyoM, kaise, kisake dvArA, kitanA aura kisa prakAra kA hai ? yaha saba jAnane ke
tathA inase chUTane ke upAyoM kA cintana evaM puruSArtha jIva ne Aja taka nahIM
kiyaa| karuNAvanta AcArya nemicandra ne ina saba praznoM kA saralatA se bodha
karAne hetu SaTkhaNDAgama se karmakANDa grantha kA avataraNa kiyaa| prAkRta evaM
saMskRta bhASA kI paTilatA dUra karane hetu mahAmanA paM. ToDaramala jI ne isa
grantha kI TIkA Adi kA DhUMDhArI bhASA meM rUpAntara kiyA  /  viSaya ko aura
spaSTa karane hetu viduSI AryikA 105 zrI AdimatI mAtAjI ne isa para apanI
lekhanI uThAI, jisakA sampAdana karaNAnuyoga ke marmajJa vidvAna sva. paM.
ratanacandajI mukhtAra sahAranapura vAloM ne kiyaa| jaina jagat ke manISI
vidvAna paM. pannAlAla jI sAhityAcArya ne uparyukta praznoM ko saralatApUrvaka
samajhane hetu 300 praznottaroM dvArA grantha ke hArda ko samAja ke samakSa
rakhakara sarAhanIya kArya kiyA hai| AzA hai Atma hitaiSI bhavya jIva isa
anupama kRti kA sadupayoga kara karmoM se chUTane kA satu prayAsa kareMge, yahI
merI maMgala bhAvanA hai I AryikA vizuddhamatI -

Page #5 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Contents  **Question No.** | **Page No.** ------- | -------- **Chapter 1.** |
**Topic: Karma** | **1-13** **Bandha** | **140-182** **Udaya** | **183-252**
**Satva** | **213-225** **Vyuchchitti** | **226-234** **Samkran** | **235-241**
**Dasha Karan Karma Bandha ke Samanya Pratyay** | **242-245** **900** |
**246-266** **102** | **267-300** **Other** | **106**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 anukrama prazna saM. pRSTha saM. adhikAra 1. viSaya karma 1-13 bandha udaya
sattva vyunchitti saMkramaNa dasa karaNa karma baMdha ke sAmAnya pratyaya
140-182 183-252 213-225 226-234 235-241 242-245 246-266 900 102 anya 267-300 106

Page #6 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Karmanuyoga Deepak, Part Two, First Chapter, Mangalacharan  **1.  **Saluting
the present Jina, the leader of the western Tirthankaras, whose blazing fire of
pure knowledge burns away all karmas. **2.**  Inspired by the welfare of the
young, I describe, as per the scriptures, something about the karmas of those
whose minds are afflicted.  **1. Question:** What is karma?  **Answer:** Karma
refers to those pudgala atoms, which, having been transformed by the passions of
the soul (raga, etc.), become karma.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karaNAnuyoga dIpaka dvitIya bhAga prathamAdhikAra maGgalAcaraNa
zuklathyAnapracaNDAgni-saMdagdhAkhila-karmakam  /  varthamAnaM jinaM natvA
pazcima tIrthanAyakam  /  / 1 /  /  bAlAnAM hitabuddhyAhaM prerito'dya
yathAgamam karomi varNanaM kiMcit karmaNAM hatazarmaNAm  /  / 2 /  /  1. prazna
: karma kise kahate haiM ? utaraH karma, kArmaNa vargaNArUpa una pudgala
paramANuoM ko kahate haiM jo jIva ke rAgAdika vikArI bhAvoM kA nirmagata pAkara
karmarUpa pariNata ho jAte haiN|

Page #7 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
2. Question: What is Karma Vargana? Answer: Karma Vargana is the category of
Pudgala Dravya which has the ability to produce Karma-rupa parinaama. These
Karma Vargana paramanu are present in all lokas and are attached to every
pradesha of the jiva. When the jiva has raaga, dvesha, etc. vikari bhaava, then
the Karma Vargana paramanu become Karma-rupa and they develop the power of
sthiti and phala. This is called bandha. 3. Question: Since when has Karma-
bandha been going on? Answer: Just as the relationship between the kit-kalima
and the suvarna-kanas residing in the mine is from anaadikaala, similarly the
relationship between the jiva and karma is from anaadikaala. In Raja-vartika it
is also said that on every pradesha of every aatma there are ananta-ananta
pradesha of jnaana-aavaran, etc. karma. Then on each karma-pradesha there are
ananta-ananta pradesha (paramanu) of audarika, etc. sharir. Then on each sharir-
sambandhi pradesha there are ananta-ananta vinasopachya, which are situated like
the accumulation of sand, etc. on wet jaggery. (Ra.Va. 5/8/16/451)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 2. prazna : kArmaNa vargaNA kise kahate haiM ? uttaraH kArmaNa vargaNA, pudgala
dravya kI vaha jAti hai jisameM , karmarUpa pariNAmana karane kI yogyatA hai !
ye kArmaNa vargama ke paramANu samasta loka meM vyApta haiM aura jIva ke
pratyeka pradeza ke sAtha saMlagna haiN| jaba jIva meM rAga dveSAdi ! vikArI
bhAva hote haiM taba kArmaNa vargaNA ke paramANu karmarUpa ho jAte haiM aura
unameM sthiti tathA phala dene kI zakti utpanna ho jAtI hai| yahI bandha
kahalAtA hai| 3. prazna : karmabaMdha kaba se calA A rahA hai ? uttara : jisa
prakAra khAna meM rahane vAle suvarNa- kaNoM ke sAtha kiTa-kAlimA kA sambandha
anAdikAla se hai usI prakAra jIva ke sAtha karmoM kA sambandha anAdikAla se calA
A' rahA hai| 1, rAjavArtika meM kahA bhI hai ki pratyeka AtmA ke pratyeka
pradeza para jJAnAvaraNAdi kamoM ke anaMtAnaMta pradeza haiN| phira eka-eka
karma-pradeza para audArika Adi zarIroM ke anantAnanta pradeza (paramANa) haiN|
phira eka-eka zarIra sambandhI pradeza para anantAnaMta vinasopacaya haiM, jo
gIle gur3a para reta Adi ke saMcaya ke samAna sthita haiN| (rA.vA.5/8/16/451)

Page #8 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
4. Question: If karma is not visible, how can its existence be known? Answer:
Karma is a form of pudgala dravya and has form, taste, smell and touch, but
because of its subtle transformation, it is not visible. However, the existence
of karma can be inferred by observing the different conditions of beings, such
as their knowledge and ignorance, poverty and wealth, strength and weakness.
Question: Why do beings have emotions like attachment, etc., and since when?
Answer: There is a natural power in both the jiva and pudgala dravya; due to
that power, the jiva has the ability to transform into emotions like attachment,
etc., and the pudgala dravya has the ability to transform into karma. Due to
this ability, when the opportunity for karma arises, emotions like attachment,
etc., arise in the jiva, and the pudgala dravya transforms into karma. This
transformation of the jiva into emotions like attachment, etc., has been going
on since time immemorial, and the transformation of the pudgala dravya into
karma has also been going on since time immemorial. The material cause of the
jiva's emotions like attachment, etc., is...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 4. prazna : karma dikhAI nahIM dete phira inakA astitva kaise jAnA jAve ?
uttara : karma haiM to pudgala dravya tathA rUpa, rasa, gandha aura sparza
sahita haiM parantu unakA sUkSma pariNamana hone se ve dikhAI nahIM dete| phira
bhI jIvoM kI jJAnI-ajJAnI, daridratA-sadhanatA, sabalatA aura nirbalatA Adi
viSama dazAoM ko dekhakara karmoM kA anumAna kiyA jAtA hai ? prazna : jIva meM
rAgAdika bhAva kyoM hote haiM aura kaba se hote haiM ? uttara : jIva aura
pudgala dravya meM eka vaibhAvika zakti hotI hai; usa zakti ke kAraNa jIva meM
rAgAdirUpa pariNamana karane kI yogyatA hai aura pudgala dravya meM karmarUpa
pariNamana karane kI yogyatA hai  /  isa yogyatA ke kAraNa karmodaya kA nimitta
pAkara jIva meM rAgAdika bhAva utpanna hote haiM aura pudgala dravya meM
karmarUpa pariNamana hotA hai| jIva kA yaha rAgAdirUpa pariNamana anAdikAla se
calA A rahA hai aura pudgala dravya kA karmarUpa pariNamana bhI anAdikAla se
calA A rahA hai| jIva ke rAgAdika mAvoM kA upAdAna

Page #9 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Because the soul is itself and the material substance is itself the material
cause of the karmic transformation of the material substance. The immediate
cause of the soul's passions, etc. is the arising state of the karma of conduct
and delusion, and the immediate cause of karma is the soul's passions, etc. Even
though there is a mutual cause-and-effect relationship between the soul and
karma, one substance does not transform into the other, i.e., the soul always
remains a soul and the material substance always remains material substance, but
because of their synthetic union, they are not separate in the worldly state.
Question: Even though the relationship between the soul and karma is from
beginningless time, does it ever cease or not? Answer: The relationship between
the soul and karma is of three types: beginningless-infinite, beginningless-
finite, and finite-finite. The karma-relationship of the non-liberated and the
distant-liberated is beginningless-infinite in comparison to the ordinary, i.e.,
it is from beginningless time and lasts for an infinite time. The karma-
relationship of the liberated soul, even though it is beginningless in
comparison to the ordinary, ceases due to austerity, by which it attains
liberation. Therefore, it is beginningless...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 kAraNa jIva svayaM hai aura pudgala ke karmarUpa pariNamana kA upAdAna kAraNa
pudgala dravya svayaM hai| jIva ke rAgAdika mAvoM kA nimitta kAraNa cAritramoha
karma kI udayAvasthA hai aura karma kA nimitta kAraNa jIva kA rAgAdika bhAva
hai| jIva aura karma meM paraspara nimitta naimittika bhAva hone para bhI eka
dravya dUsare dravya rUpa pariNamana nahIM karatA arthAt jIva sadA jIca rahatA
hai aura pudgala sadA pudgala rahatA hai, parantu ina donoM kA saMzleSAtmaka
saMyoga mahantha hone ke kAraNa saMsArI dazA meM ye alaga-alaga nahIM hote haiN|
prazna : jIva aura karma kA sambandha anAdi se hone para bhI kyA kabhI chUTatA
hai yA nahIM? uttara : jIva aura karma kA sambandha anAdi-ananta, anAdi sAnta
aura sAdi sAnta ke bheda se tIna prakAra kA hotA hai| abhavya tathA dUrAnudUra-
bhavya kA karma-sambandha sAmAnya kI apekSA anAdi anaMta hai arthAt anAdi se hai
aura anaMta kAla taka rahatA hai| bhavya jIva kA karma-sambandha sAmAnya kI
apekSA anAdi hone para bhI tapazcaraNa se chUTa jAtA hai jisase vaha mokSa
prApta kara letA hai isaliye anAdi (4) 6.

Page #10 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Saant is and both Bhavy Abhavy in comparison to special, there is always a karma
bandh and according to its state, the karma keeps getting destroyed, therefore
it is Sadi-Saant. 7. Question: What is Upaadan Karan? Answer: The one which
transforms into a work is called Upaadan Karan. For example, flour is the
Upaadan Karan of roti because it transforms into roti. Question: What is Nimitt
Karan? Answer: The one which helps the Upaadan to transform into a work is
called Nimitt Karan. For example, fire, water, chakla, belan and the person who
makes it, are the Nimitt Karan in the transformation of flour into roti. 6.
Question: How many types of Nimitt Karan are there? Answer: There are two types
of Nimitt Karan - 1. Antaranga Nimitt and 2. Bahiranga Nimitt. 10. Question:
What is Antaranga Nimitt? Answer: The one due to which the transformation of
Upaadan into work happens according to the rule is called Antaranga Nimitt, for
example, Bhavy Jeev's...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 sAnta hai aura vizeSa kI apekSA bhavya abhavya donoM ke pratisamaya karmabandha
hotA hai aura apanI sthiti ke anusAra karmoM kI nirjarA hotI rahatI hai isaliye
sAdi-sAnta hai| 7. prazna : upAdAna kAraNa kise kahate haiM ? uttara : jo
kAryaslapa pariNata ho use upAdAna kAraNa kahate haiM | jaise roTI rUpa
pariNamana karane se ATA roTI kA upAdAna kAraNa hai| prazna : nimitta kAraNa
kise kahate haiM ? uttara : jo upAdAna ko kArya rUpa pariNamana karane meM
sahAyaka ho use nimitta kAraNa kahate haiN| jaise ATA ke roTI rUpa pariNamana
karane meM agni, pAnI, cakalA, belana tathA banAne vAlA vykti| 6. prazna :
nimitta kAraNa ke kitane bheda haiM ? uttara : nimitta kAraNa ke do bheda haiM -
1. antaraGga nimitta aura 2. bahiraMga nimitta  /  10. prazna : aMtaraMga
nimitta kise kahate haiM ? uttara : jisake hone para upAdAna meM kAryarUpa
pariNamana niyama se hotA hai use antaraGga nimitta kahate haiM jaise bhavya
jIva ke

Page #11 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Mithyatva, Samyak Mithyatva, Samyaktva Prakriti and the subsidence, destruction
or subsidence of the infinite Anantaanubandhi Krodha-Mana-Maya-Lobha, are
revealed by the Samyagdarshan rule. 11. Question: What is called Bahirang
Nimitta? Answer: That which is cooperative with Antarang Nimitta is called
Bahirang Nimitta, such as the teachings of Sadgurus, the vision of the Jinenndra
Bimba, etc., in the origin of Samyagdarshan. It is not a rule that the work will
be accomplished by the meeting of Bahirang Nimitta, but the work is accomplished
by the rule of the meeting of Antarang Nimitta. When Antarang Nimitta is met,
Bahirang Nimitta can be anything. 12. Question: Is it necessary to have Bahirang
Nimitta to get Antarang Nimitta? Answer: It is necessary to make an effort to
get Bahirang Nimitta to get Antarang Nimitta. For example, it is necessary to
get married to get a son, but it is not a rule that a son will be born after
getting married. It is certain that the meeting of Bahirang Nimitta like
marriage is necessary for the birth of a son when the suitability of Antarang
Nimitta is met. (6)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 mithyAtva, samyaG mithyAtva, samyaktva prakRti aura anantAnubaMdhI krodha-mAna-
mAyA - lobha kA upazama, kSaya yA kSayopazama hone se samyagdarzana niyama se
prakaTa hotA hai  /  11. prazna : bahiraMga nimitta kise kahate haiM ? uttara :
jo antaraMga nimitta kA sahakArI ho use bahiraMga nimitta kahate haiM jaise
samyagdarzana kI utpatti meM sadguruoM kA upadeza, jinendra bimba kA darzana Adi
/  bahiraMga nimitta ke milane para kArya kI siddhi anivArya rUpa se ho, yaha
niyama nahIM hai parantu antaraGga nimitta ke milane para kArya kI siddhi niyama
se hotI hai| antaraMga nimitta ke milane para bahiraMga nimitta kucha bhI ho
sakatA hai| 12. prazna : antaraMga nimitta milAne ke liye bahiraMga nimitta kA
milAnA Avazyaka hai yA nahIM? uttara : antaraMga nimitta milAne ke liye
bahiraMga nimitta ke milAne kA puruSArtha karanA Avazyaka hai| jaise putra -
prApti ke liye vivAhAdi karanA Avazyaka hai para vivAhAdi karane para putra ho
hI jAve, yaha niyama nahIM hai| itanA avazya haiM ki antaraMga nimitta kI
anukUlatA milane para putra kI utpatti hone meM vivAhAdi bAhya nimitta kA milanA
Avazyaka hai | (6)

Page #12 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
13. Question: What is a **Samarth Karan**? - Answer: The compatibility of
**Upaadan** and **Nimitt** is called **Samarth Karan**. The accomplishment of a
task is not only due to the **Upaadan Karan** or only due to the **Nimitt
Karan**. It happens due to the **Samarth Karan** which is the compatibility of
both. One substance cannot be the **Upaadan Karan** of another substance, but it
can be the **Nimitt Karan**. 14. Question: What is a **Bhavya**? - Answer: A
being who has the ability to attain **Samyag Darshan**, **Samyag Gyan**, and
**Samyacharitra** is called a **Bhavya**. Only a **Bhavya** being is eligible
for **Moksha**, but after attaining **Moksha**, the **Bhavya** state does not
remain. 15. Question: Can all **Bhavya** beings attain **Moksha**? - Answer: No,
not all **Bhavya** beings attain **Moksha**. They are called **Bhavya** due to
their potential, but they never get the opportunity to develop their potential.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 13. prazna : samartha kAraNa kise kahate haiM ? - uttara : uppAdAna aura
nimitta kI anukUlatA ko samartha kAraNa . kahate haiN| kArya kI siddhi na kevala
upAdAna kAraNa se hotI hai aura na kevala nimitta kAraNa se| donoM kI anukUlatA
rUpa samartha kAraNa se hotI hai| eka dravya dUsare dravya kA upAdAna kAraNa
nahIM ho sakatA, para nimitta kAraNa avazya hotA hai| 14. prazna : bhavya kise
kahate haiM ? uttara : jisa jIva meM samyagdarzana, samyagjJAna aura
samyaJcAritra prApta karane kI yogyatA ho use bhavya kahate haiN| bhavya jIva hI
mokSa kA pAtra hotA hai parantu mokSa prApta ho cukane ke bAda usameM bhavyatva
bhAva nahIM rhtaa| 15. prazna : kyA saba bhavya jIva mokSa prApta kara sakate
haiM ? uttara : nahIM, dUrAnudUra bhavya ko mokSa prApta nahIM hotaa| yogyatA ke
kAraNa hI usako bhavya kahate haiM parantu use apanI yogyatA ko vikasita karane
ke liye kabhI nimitta nahIM milte|

Page #13 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
16. Question: What is an Abhvy? Answer: One who does not have the capacity to
attain Samyagdarshan, etc. is called an Abhvy. Just as unripe mung beans, even
when exposed to fire and water, do not ripen, similarly, Abhvy beings, even when
the necessary conditions are present, cannot attain the Ratna Tray.  17.
Question: How many types of Karma are there? Answer: In essence, Karma is of two
types: Dravyakarma and Bhavakarma. The mass of Pudgala Dravya that is
transformed into Karma is called Dravyakarma, and its power is called
Bhavakarma. The transformation that occurs in the Jiva due to the arising of
Dravyakarma, which is in the form of Raga and Dvesha, is also called Bhavakarma.
Dravyakarma is further divided into two types: Ghati and Aghati.  18. Question:
What is Ghati Karma? And how many types are there? Answer: Karma that destroys
the Jiva's knowledge, perception, happiness, and energy (Anujeevi Gunas) is
called Ghati Karma. There are four types of Ghati Karma: 1. Jnanavarana, 2.
Darshanavarana, 3. Mohaniya (8)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 16. prazna : abhavya kise kahate haiM ? uttara : jisameM samyagdarzanAdi prApta
karane kI yogyatA na ho use abhavya kahate haiN| jisa prakAra binA sIjhane vAlI
mUMga, Aga aura pAnI kA nimitta milane para bhI nahIM sIjhatI hai usI prakAra
abhavya jIva, nirmita milane para bhI ratnatraya ko prApta nahIM kara skte| 17.
prazna: karma ke kitane bheda haiM ? uttara : mUla meM dravyakarma aura
bhAvakarma ke bheda se karma do prakAra ke hote haiN| karmarUpa pariNata pudgala
dravya kA jo piNDa hai use dravyakarma kahate haiM tathA usakI zakti ko
bhAvakarma kahate haiN| dravyakarma kI udayAvasthA kA nimitta pAkara jIva meM jo
rAgadveSa rUpa pariNati hotI hai use bhI bhAvakarma kahate haiM  /  dravyakarma
ke ghAti aura aghAti ke bheda se do bheda hote haiN| 18. prazna : ghAtikarma
kise kahate haiM ? aura usake kitane bheda haiM ? uttara : jo jIva ke jJAna,
darzana, sukha aura vIrya ina anujIvI guNoM kA ghAta karate haiM unheM ghAti
karma kahate haiM  /  inake cAra bheda haiM 1. jJAnAvaraNa, 2. darzanAvaraNa 3
mohanIya (8)

Page #14 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
And 4. Antaray. These karmas, in order, destroy the qualities of knowledge,
perception, happiness and vigor in the jiva. 16. 'Question: What are the
Anujeevi qualities? Answer: Those qualities that keep the jiva's jivatva (state
of being a jiva) secure are called Anujeevi qualities, such as knowledge,
perception, happiness and vigor. Just as the presence of heat keeps the fire's
agnitva (state of being fire) secure, similarly, the presence of knowledge,
perception, etc. qualities keeps the jiva's jivatva secure. 20. Question: What
are Aghati karmas and how many types are there? Answer: Those karmas that do not
destroy the Anujeevi qualities of the jiva are called Aghati karmas. There are
four types of these: 1. Vedaniya 2. Aayu 3. Naam and 4. Gotra. These karmas, in
order, destroy the qualities of Avyaabadhatva, Avgahanatva, Sukshmatva and
Agurulaghutva in the jiva. These qualities are called the Pratijeevi qualities
of the jiva. 21. Question: What is the Jnanavarana karma? Answer: That which
prevents the jiva's knowledge quality from manifesting is called Jnanavarana.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 aura 4. antraay| ye karma, jIva ke krama se jJAna, darzana, sukha aura vIrya
guNa ko ghAtate haiN| 16. ' prazna : anujIvI guNa kise kahate haiM ? uttara :
jinake rahate hue jIva kA jIvatva surakSita rahe unheM anujIvI guNa kahate haiM
jaise jJAna, darzana, sukha aura vIrya  /  jisa prakAra uSNatA ke rahane para
agni kA agnitva surakSita rahatA hai usI prakAra jJAna darzanAdi guNoM ke rahate
hue jIva kA jIvatva surakSita rahatA hai ? 20. prazna : aghAti karma kise kahate
haiM aura usake kitane bheda haiM ? uttara : jo jIva ke anujIvI guNoM kA ghAta
na kareM unheM aghAti karma kahate haiN| inake cAra bheda haiM- 1. vedanIya 2.
Ayu 3. nAma aura 4. gotr| ye karma krama se jIva ke avyAbAdhatva, avagAhanatva,
sUkSmatva aura agurulaghutva guNoM kA ghAta karate haiN| ye guNa jIva ke
pratijIvI guNa kahalAte haiN| . 21. prazna : jJAnAvaraNa karma kise kahate haiM
?. uttara : lo jIva ke jJAna guNa ko prakaTa na hone de use jJAnAvaraNa

Page #15 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
22. Question: How many types of **Jñānāvaraṇa Karma** are there? Answer: There
are five types: 1. **Matijñānāvaraṇa**, 2. **Śruta-jñānāvaraṇa**, 3. **Avadhi-
jñānāvaraṇa**, 4. **Manaḥparyaya-jñānāvaraṇa**, and 5. **Kevala-jñānāvaraṇa**.
The meaning of all these is clear.  23. Question: What is **Darśanāvaraṇa
Karma**? Answer: **Darśanāvaraṇa Karma** is that which, upon its arising, does
not allow the **darśana** (general perception) of the soul to manifest.  24.
Question: How many types of **Darśanāvaraṇa Karma** are there? Answer: There are
nine: 1. **Cakṣudarśanāvaraṇa**, 2. **Acaksu-darśanāvaraṇa**, 3. **Avadhi-
darśanāvaraṇa**, 4. **Kevala-darśanāvaraṇa**, 5. **Nidrā**, 6. **Nidrā-nidrā**,
7. **Pracalā**, 8. **Pracalā-pracalā**, and 9. **Styāna-gṛddhi**.  25. Question:
What is **Cakṣudarśanāvaraṇa**? Answer: **Cakṣudarśanāvaraṇa** is that which
does not allow the general perception that precedes knowledge arising from the
eye sense to manifest.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karma kahate haiN| 22. prazna : jJAnAvaraNa karma ke kitane bheda haiM ? uttara
: pA~ca bheda haiM- 1. matijJAnAvaraNa 3. zrutajJAnAvaraNa 3. avadhijJAnAvaraNa
4. manaHparyaya jJAnAvaraNa aura 5. kevala jnyaanaavrnn| ina sabakA artha spaSTa
hai| 23. prazna : darzanAvaraNa karma kise kahate haiM ? uttara : jisake udaya
se jIva kA darzana (sAmAnya pratibhAsa) guNa prakaTa na ho sake use
darzanAvaraNa karma kahate haiN| 24. prazna : darzanAvaraNa karma ke kitane
bheda haiM ? . uttara : nau haiM- 1. cakSadarzanAvaraNa 2. acakSurdarzanAvaraNa
3. avadhidarzanAvaraNa 4. kevaladarzanAvaraNa 5. nidrA 6. nidrA-nidrA 7. pracalA
8. pracalA-pracalA aura 6. styaangRddhi| 25. prazna : cakSurdarzanAvaraNa kise
kahate haiM ? uttara : jo cakSu indriya se hone vAle jJAna ke pUrvavartI sAmAnya
pratibhAsa ko prakaTa na hone de use cakSurdarzanAvaraNa kahate (10)

Page #16 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
26. Question: What is Achakṣurdarśanāvaraṇa? Answer: The general appearance that
precedes the knowledge arising from the senses other than the eye and the mind,
which is not revealed, is called Achakṣurdarśanāvaraṇa. 27. Question: What is
Avadhidarśanāvaraṇa? Answer: The general appearance that precedes Avadhijñāna,
which is not revealed, is called Avadhidarśanāvaraṇa. 28. Question: What is
Kevaladarśanāvaraṇa? Answer: The general appearance that accompanies
Kevalajñāna, which is not revealed, is called Kevaladarśanāvaraṇa. 26. Question:
What are knowledge and perception, and how many types are there? Answer: The one
who knows the specific characteristic, like "This is a pot, this is a cloth", is
called knowledge. There are five types of knowledge: 1. Matijñāna 2. Śrutajñāna
3. Avadhijñāna 4. Manaḥparyaya jñāna and 5. Kevalajñāna. The one who

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 .. 26. prazna : acakSurdarzanAvaraNa kise kahate haiM ? uttara : jo cakSu
iMdriya ke sivAya zeSa iMdriyoM tathA mana se hone vAle jJAna ke pUrvavartI
sAmAnya pratibhAsa ko prakaTa na hone de use acakSurdarzanAvaraNa kahate haiN|
27. prazna : avadhidarzanAvaraNa kise kahate haiM ? uttara : jo avadhijJAna ke
pahale hone vAle sAmAnya pratibhAsa ko prakaTa na hone de use avadhi
darzanAvaraNa kahate haiN| 28. prazna : kevala darzanAvaraNa kise kahate haiM ?
uttara : jo kevalajJAna ke sAtha hone vAle sAmAnya pratibhAsa ko prakaTa na hone
de use kevaladarzanAvaraNa kahate haiN| 26. prazna : jJAna aura darzana kise
kahate haiM tathA unake kitane bheda haiM ? uttara : 'yaha ghaTa hai, yaha paTa
hai' isa prakAra kI vizeSatA ko liye hue jo jAnatA hai use jJAna kahate haiN|
isake pA~ca bheda haiM1. matijJAna 2. zrutajJAna 3. avadhijJAna 4.
manaHparyayajJAna aura 5. kevljnyaan| jo padArtha ko (11)

Page #17 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Darshan** is the term used for knowledge that is obtained without any choice.
There are four types of Darshan: 1. **Chakshudarshan**, 2. **Achakshudarshan**,
3. **Avadhi Darshan**, and 4. **Keval Darshan**.  The knowledge of beings up to
the 12th **Gunasthan** is obtained through **Darshan**, meaning that **Darshan**
occurs first, followed by knowledge. However, **Kevalgyan** and **Keval
Darshan** occur simultaneously.   **Shrutagnyan** and **Matigyan** are obtained
through **Darshan**. Similarly, **Manahparyaya Gyan** and **Iha Matigyan** are
obtained through **Darshan**. Therefore, **Shrutadarshan** and **Manahparyaya
Darshan** do not occur before these types of knowledge.  **Veerasen Swami** has
defined the term **Samanya** as **Atma** (soul). Therefore, according to him,
**Samanyavlokan** means **Atmavalokan** (observing the soul).  **30. Question:**
What is **Nidradarshnavaran**? **Answer:** **Nidradarshnavaran** is the
**Avaran** (covering) that causes ordinary sleep.  **31. Question:** What is
**Nidra-Nidradarshnavaran**? **Answer:** **Nidra-Nidradarshnavaran** is the
**Avaran** that causes deep sleep.  **32. Question:** What is
**Prachaladarshnavaran**? **(12)**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 vikalpa rahita-sAmAnya rUpa se jAnatA hai use darzana kahate haiN| isake cAra
bheda haiM- 1. cakSurdarzanaM 2, acakSurdazana 3. avadhidarzana aura 4. kevala
darzana  /  chadmastha bArahaveM guNasthAna taka ke jIvoM kA jJAna darzana
pUrvaka hotA hai arthAt pahale darzana hotA hai aura usake bAda jnyaan| parantu
kevalajJAna aura kevaladarzana sAtha sAtha hote haiN| zrutajJAna, matijJAna
pUrvaka hotA hai| aura manaHparyaya jJAna, IhA matijJAna pUrvaka hotA hai
isaliye inake pahale zrutadarzana aura manaHparyaya darzana nahIM hotaa|
vIrasena svAmI ne sAmAnya kA artha AtmA kahA hai ataH unake kahe anusAra
sAmAnyAvalokana kA artha AtmAvalokana hotA hai| 30. prazna : nidrAdarzanAvaraNa
kise kahate haiM ? uttara : jisake udaya se sAdhAraNa nIMda AtI hai use nidrA
darzanAvaraNa kahate haiN| 31. prazna : nidrA-nidrAdarzanAvaraNa kise kahate
haiM ? uttara : jisake udaya se gaharI nIMda AtI hai use nidrA-
nidrAdarzanAvaraNa kahate haiN| _32. prazna : pracalAdarzanAvaraNa kise kahate
haiM ? (12)

Page #18 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Answer: The karma that causes a living being to fall asleep while sitting, and
some remain awake, is called **Prachaladarshanavaran karma**. 33. Question: What
is **Prachaladarshanavaran**? Answer: The deep **Prachal** that causes saliva to
flow from the mouth and the hands and feet to move during sleep is called
**Prachaladarshanavaran**. 34. Question: What is **Styanagriti**? Answer: The
**darshanavaran karma** that causes a living being to perform terrible actions
in their sleep and not remember them upon waking is called **Styanagriti
darshanavaran karma**. These five types of sleep destroy the **darshan**
qualities of the soul, therefore they are included in the categories of
**darshanavaran karma**. 35. Question: What is **Vedaniya karma** and how many
types are there? Answer: The karma that destroys the **avyabadha** qualities of
the soul, or that causes a living being to experience pleasure and pain, is
called **Vedaniya karma**. There are two types. (13)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 uttara : jisake udaya se jIva baiThe baiTe so jAtA hai tathA kucha jAgatA
rahatA hai use pracalAdarzanAvaraNa karma kahate haiN|. 33. prazna : pracalA-
pracalAdarzanAvaraNa kise kahate haiM ? uttara : jisake udaya se sote samaya
mu~ha se lAra bahane lage tathA hAtha paira calane lageM, aisI gaharI pracalA ke
kAraNa ko pracalA-pracalAdarzanAvaraNa kahate haiN| 34. prazna : styAnagRti kise
kahate haiM ? uttara : jisake udaya se jIva sote samaya bhayaMkara kArya kara le
aura jAgane para smaraNa nahIM rahe use styAnagRddhi darzanAvaraNa karma kahate
haiN| ina pA~ca nidrAoM se AtmA ke darzana guNa kA ghAta hotA hai isaliye inheM
darzanAvaraNa karma ke bhedoM meM sammilita kiyA hai| 35. prazna : vedanIya
karma kise kahate haiM ? aura usake kitane bheda haiM ? uttara : jisake udaya se
AtmA ke avyAbAdha guNa kA ghAta hotA hai athavA jisake udaya se jIva sukha
duHkha kA vedana karatA hai use vedanIya karma kahate haiN| isake do bheda haiM
(13)

Page #19 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Seven Vedaniya and Two Asata Vedaniya  **36. Question:** What are the Seven
Vedaniya? **Answer:** The Seven Vedaniya are those which, upon arising, cause
the living being to experience the feeling of happiness in the acquired
material.  **37. Question:** What are the Asata Vedaniya? **Answer:** The Asata
Vedaniya are those which, upon arising, cause the living being to experience the
feeling of suffering in the acquired material.  **38. Question:** What is Moh-
Mohaniya Karma? **Answer:** Moh-Mohaniya Karma is that which obscures the soul's
Samyaktva or the qualities of happiness, or upon arising, causes the living
being to forget its true nature and develop ego and attachment to external
objects.  **36. Question:** How many types of Moh Karma are there? **Answer:**
There are two main types: 1. Darshan Moh and 2. Charitra Moh.  Darshan Moh has
three types: 1. Mithyatva, 2. Samya-Mithyatva, and 3. Samyaktva Prakriti.
Charitra Moh has two types: 1. Kashaya Vedaniya and 2. Naukashaya Vedaniya.
Kashaya Vedaniya has sixteen types.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 sAtA vedanIya aura 2. amAtA vedanIya 36. prazna : sAtA vedanIya kise kahate
haiM ? uttara : jisake udaya se yaha jIva prApta sAmagrI meM sukha kA vedana _
karatA hai use sAtA vedanIya kahate haiN| 37. prazna : asAtA vedanIya kise
kahate haiM ? uttara : jisake udaya se jIva prApta sAmagrI meM duHkha kA vedana
anubhava karatA hai use asAtA vedanIya kahate haiN| 38. prazna : moha-mohanIya
karma kise kahate haiM ? uttara : jo AtmA ke samyaktva yA sukha guNa kA dhAta
kare athavA jisake udaya se jIva svarUpa ko bhUla kara para padArthoM meM
ahaMkAra aura mamakAra karane lagatA hai use moha yA mohanIya karma kahate haiM
? 36. prazna : moha karma ke kitane bheda haiM ? uttara : mUla meM do meda haiM-
1. darzana moha aura 2. cAritra moh| darzana moha ke tIna bheda haiM- 1.
mithyAtva 2. samya.mithyAtva aura 3. samyaktva prkRti| cAritra. moha ke do bheda
hai- 1. kaSAya vedanIya aura 2. naukaSAya vedniiy| kaSAya veMdanIya ke solaha
bheda haiM (14)

Page #20 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
1. Anantanubandhi Krodha Mana Maya Lobha 2. Apratyakhyanavaran Krodha- Mana-
Maya Lobha 3. Pratyakhyanavaran Krodha - Mana-Maya Lobha and 4. Sanchalana
Krodha-Mana-Maya-Lobha (444 = 16) | There are nine types of Nauskashaya - 1.
Hasya 2. Rati 3. Arati 4 Shoka 5. Bhaya 6. Jugupsa 7. Stri Ved 8 Purusha Ved and
6. Napunsaka Ved.  40. Question: What is Mithyatva? Answer: Mithyatva is the
state of mind that leads to the perception of the self as non-existent.  41.
Question: What is Samyang Mithyatva? Answer: Samyang Mithyatva is the state of
mind that leads to a mixture of Mithyatva and Samyaktva.  42. Question: What is
Samyaktva Prakriti? Answer: Samyaktva Prakriti is the state of mind that leads
to the development of the Vedak (Kshayopaashamik) Samyagdarshan, which is
characterized by the presence of the Chal, Malina, and Angadh doshas.  43.
Question: What is Chal Dosha? " (15)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 1. anantAnubandhI krodha mAna mAyA lobha 2. apratyAkhyAnAvaraNa krodha- mAna-
mAyA lobha 3. pratyAkhyAnAvaraNa krodha - mAna-mAyA lobha aura 4. saMjcalana
krodha-mAna-mAyA-lobha (444 = 16 ) | naukaSAya ke nau bheda haiM- 1. hAsya 2.
rati 3. arati 4 zoka 5. bhaya 6. jugupsA 7. strI veda 8 puruSa veda aura 6.
napuMsaka veda  /  I 40. prazna : mithyAtya kise kahate haiM ? uttara: jisake
udaya se jIva kI atattva zraddhAna rUpa pariNati hotI hai use mizyAtva kahate
haiM ! 41. prazna : samyaG mithyAtva kise kahate haiM ? uttara: jisake udaya se
mithyAtva aura samyaktva ke mizrita pariNAma hote haiM use samyaG midhyAtva
kahate haiM  /  42. prazna : samyaktva prakRti kise kahate haiM ? uttara: jisake
udaya se vedaka ( kSAyopazamika ) samyagdarzana meM cala, malina aura aMgAr3ha
doSa lagate haiM use samyaktva prakRti kahate haiN| 43. prazna : cala doSa kise
kahate haiM ? " (15)

Page #21 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Answer: Even though all Tirthankaras have equal power, considering Shantinath as
the one who brings peace and Parshvanath as the one who protects is called a
"chal dosh" (defect of wavering). 44. Question: What is "malin dosh"? Answer: In
Samyagdarshan, the presence of the twenty-five defects, including "kans," "adi,"
and "ma" (three types of foolishness), is called "malin dosh." 45. Question:
What is "agadh dosh"? Answer: Having the feeling of "this temple is mine, this
statue is mine" towards a temple or statue built or established by oneself is
called "agadh dosh." 46. Question: What is "anantaanubandhi"? Answer: One who
destroys the Kshaya Samyaktva or has an attachment to Anant Mithyatva is called
"anantaanubandhi." There are four types of this based on the four Kshayas:
anger, pride, deceit, and greed.   1. Remember that this is just an example.
(16)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 uttara : saba tIrthaMkaroM kI samAna zakti hone para bhI zAntinAtha zAnti ke
karane vAle haiM tathA pArzvanAtha rakSA karane vAle haiM aisA bhAva honA cala
doSa kahalAtA hai| 44. prazna : malina doSa kise kahate haiM ? unra :
sAmyagdarzana meM kAMsa, adi mA tIna mUr3hatA Adi paccIsa doSa lagane ko malina
doSa kahate haiN| 45. prazna : agar3ha doSa kise kahate haiM ? uttara : apane
dvArA nirmApita yA pratiSThApita pratimA Adi meM 'yaha mandira merA hai, yaha
pratimA merI hai' isa prakAra kA mAva honA agAr3ha doSa kahalAtA hai|' 46.
prazna : anantAnubandhI kise kahate haiM ? uttara : jo kaSAya samyaktva ko
ghAtatI hai athavA anantamithyAtva ke sAtha jisakA anubandha-sambandha ho use
anantAnubandhI kahate haiN| isake krodha-mAna-mAyA aura lobha ke bheda se cAra
bheda haiN| . 1. smaraNa rahe ki yaha eka udAharaNa mAtra hai| (16)

Page #22 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
47. Question: What is A-pratyakhyana-avaran? .. Answer: That which does not
allow the A-pratyakhyana-eka-desh-charitra to manifest is called A-pratyakhyana-
avaran. It has four divisions, namely, Krodha (anger) etc. 48. Question: What is
Pratyakhyana-avaran? Answer: That which destroys the Pratyakhyana-sakala-
charitra is called Pratyakhyana-avaran. It has four divisions, namely, Krodha
(anger) etc. 46. Question: What is Sanjwalan? Answer: That which does not allow
the Yatha-khyata-charitra to manifest and remains radiant with restraint is
called Sanjwalan. It also has four divisions, namely, Krodha (anger) etc. The
above sixteen Kshayas constantly afflict the soul - make it unhappy, therefore
they are called Kshaya-vedaniya. 50. Question: What is Hasya? Answer: That which
causes laughter upon its arising is called Hasya. 51. Question: What is Rati?
Answer: That which causes a result in the form of affection for women, children,
etc. upon its arising is called Rati.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 47. prazna : apratyAkhyAnAyaraNa kise kahate haiM ? .. uttara : jo
apratyAkhyAna-eka deza cAritra ko prakaTa na hone de use apratyAkhyAnAvaraNa
kahate haiN| isake krotha Adi cAra bheda haiN| 48. prazna : pratyAkhyAnAvaraNa
kise kahate haiM ? uttara : jo pratyAkhyAna-sakala cAritra kA ghAta kare use
pratyAkhyAnAvaraNa kahate haiN| isake krodha Adi cAra bheda haiN| 46. prazna :
saMjvalana kise kahate haiM ? uttara : jo yathAkhyAta cAritra ko prakaTa na hone
de tathA saMyama ke sAtha prakAzamAna rahe use tajvalana kahate haiN| isake bhI
krodha Adi cAra bheda haiN| uparyukta solaha kaSAya AtmA ko nirantara kaSatI
rahatI haiM- dukhI karatI rahatI haiM isaliye inheM kaSAya vedanIya kahate haiN|
50. prazna : hAsya kise kahate haiM ? uttara : jisake udaya se ha~sI Ave use
hAsya kahate haiN| 51. prazna : rati kise kahate haiM ? uttara : jisake udaya se
strI putra, Adi meM prIti rUpa pariNAma (17)

Page #23 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
It is called **rati**. 52. Question: What is **arati**? Answer: That which, upon
arising, results in aversion towards enemies and other undesirable things, is
called **arati**. 53. Question: What is **shoka**? Answer: That which, upon
arising, results in sorrow due to separation from the beloved and association
with the undesirable, is called **shoka**. 54. Question: What is **bhaya**?
Answer: That which, upon arising, results in fear, is called **bhaya**. 55.
Question: What is **jugupsa**? Answer: That which, upon arising, results in
disgust, is called **jugupsa**. 56. Question: What is **stri ved**? Answer: That
which, upon arising, results in a desire to be with a man, is called **stri
ved**. (18)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 hotA hai use rati kahate haiN| 52. prazna : arati kise kahate haiM ? uttara :
jisake udaya se zatru Adi aniSTa padArthoM meM aprItirUpa pariNAma hote haiM use
arati kahate haiN| 53. prazna : zoka kise kahate haiM ? uttara : jisake udaya se
iSTa viyoga aura aniSTa saMyoga meM kheda rUpa pariNAma hote haiM use zoka
kahate haiN| 54. prazna : bhaya kise kahate haiM ? uttara : jisake udaya se
bhayarUpa pariNAma hote haiM use bhaya kahate haiN| 55. prazna : jugupsA kise
kahate haiM ? uttara : jisake udaya se glAnirUpa pariNAma hotA hai use jugupsA
kahate haiN| 56. prazna : strI veda kise kahate haiM ? uttara : jisake udaya meM
puruSa se ramane ke bhAva hote haiM use strI veda kahate haiN| (18)

Page #24 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
57. Question: What is called the Purusha Veda? Answer: The one who has the
desire to copulate with a woman at the time of his arising is called the Purusha
Veda.  58. Question: What is called the Napumsaka Veda? Answer: The one who has
the desire to copulate with both a woman and a man at the time of his arising is
called the Napumsaka Veda.  1. It is said in Sarvartha-siddhi (2/12) that
"Napumsaka" means the one who is devoid of both the powers (feminine and
masculine) due to the arising of the Napumsaka Veda. In the Jivakanda, it is
said that the Dravya Napumsaka (substance Napumsaka) is the one who has a body
different from both the genders due to the arising of the Napumsaka Veda and the
arising of the Nirmana Namaka-karma. Regarding the Bhava Napumsaka (psychic
Napumsaka), it is written that the one who is devoid of the physical marks of a
woman and a man like beard, moustache, and breasts, and is tormented by the
intense pain of lust like the fire for baking bricks, and has a polluted mind,
is called Napumsaka in the Paramagama. The intense desire for a woman and a man,
which is the characteristic of the Napumsaka Veda, is the psychic state of that
being.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 57. prazna : puruSa veda kise kahate haiM ? uttara : jisake udaya meM strI se
ramane ke bhAva hote haiM use puruSa veda kahate haiN| 58. prazna : napuMsaka
veda kise kahate haiM ? uttara : jisake udaya se strI tathA puruSa donoM se
ramane ke bhAva hoM use napuMsaka veda kahate haiN|' 1. sarvArthasiddhi (2/12)
meM kahA hai ki 'nasakavedodayAttadubhayazaktivikata napuMsakam arthAt
napuMsakaveda ke udaya se jo donoM zaktiyoM (strIrUpa va puruSarUpa) se rahita
hai vaha napuMsaka hai| jIvakAMDa meM dravya napuMsaka ke lie kahA hai-
napuMsakaveda ke udaya se tathA nirmANa nAmakarma ke udaya se yukta aMgopAMga
nAmakarma ke udaya se donoM liMgoM se bhinna zarIra vAlA dravya napuMsaka hotA
hai| (gojIgA0 271 TIkA, pR0 463 bhAratIya jJAnapITa) vahIM bhAva napuMsaka ke
liye likhA hai ki dAr3I, mUMcha aura stana Adi strI aura puruSa ke dravya liMgoM
(cihanoM) se raheita; ITa pakAne ke pajAve kI Aga ke samAna tIvra kAma-vedanA se
pIr3ita tathA kaluSita cita usa jIva ko paramAgama meM napuMsaka kahA hai| usa
jIva ke strI aura puruSa kI abhilASA rUpa tIvra kAma vedanA lakSaNa vAlA bhAva
napuMsaka veda hotA hai| (go0 jI0 gA0 275 evaM dhavala 1/344 evaM prA. paM. saM.
1/107) (16)

Page #25 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The above mentioned nine emotions like humor etc. are not ingrained for a long
time like the passions like anger etc., therefore they are called Akashaya
Vedaniya or Nau Kshayakinchitkshaya. 56. Question: What is Ayukarma? Answer:
That which does not allow the manifestation of the Avgahan guna of the soul is
called Ayukarma or the karma whose arising causes this being to remain in the
bodies of hell, animal, human and god for a definite time is called Ayukarma.
60. Question: How many types of Ayukarma are there? Answer: There are four - 1.
Narakayu 2. Tiryanagayu 3. Manushyayu and 4. Devayu. Their meaning is clear from
their names. 61. Question: What is Namakarma? Answer: That which does not allow
the manifestation of the subtle guna of the soul or whose arising causes the
formation of motion, caste and body etc. is called Namakarma. 62. Question: How
many types of Namakarma are there? Answer: There are forty-two types with
respect to Pind Prakritis and ninety-nine types with respect to general. (20)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 uparyukta hAsya Adi nau bhAvoM kA saMskAra krodha Adi kaSAyoM ke samAna
dIrghakAla taka nahIM rahatA, isaliye inheM akaSAya vedanIya athavA nau
kaSAyakiMcitkaSAya kahate haiN| 56, prazna : Ayukarma kise kahate haiM ? uttara
: jo AtmA ke avagAhana guNa ko prakaTa na hone de use Ayu karma kahate haiM
athavA jisa karma ke udaya se yaha jIva nizcita samaya taka naraka, tithaMca,
manuSya aura deva ke zarIra meM sakAra use kAyu karma kahate haiN| 60. prazna :
Ayukarma ke kitane bheda haiM ? uttara : cAra haiM- 1. narakAyu 2. tiryagAyu 3.
manuSyAyu aura 4. devAyu  /  inakA artha nAma se hI spaSTa hai| 61. prazna :
nAmakarma kise kahate haiM ? uttara : jo AtmA ke sUkSmatva guNa ko prakaTa na
hone de athavA jisake udaya se gati-jAti tathA zarIra Adi kI racanA hotI hai use
nAma karma kahate haiN| 62. prazna : nAma karma ke kitane bheda haiM ? uttara :
piNDa prakRtiyoM kI apekSA bayAlIsa aura sAmAnya apekSA se tirAnabe bheda hote
haiN| (20)

Page #26 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
63. Question: What is **piṇḍa-prakriti**? Answer: That which has more than one
variety is called **piṇḍa-prakriti**. For example, **gati**, **jāti**, etc. 64.
Question: What is **gati-nāmakarma**? Answer: The karma whose fruition causes
the living being to be born in hell, animal, human, or god form is called
**gati-nāmakarma**. It has four varieties: hell-gati, etc. 65. Question: What is
**jāti-nāmakarma**? Answer: The karma whose fruition causes the living being to
be born with one sense, two senses, three senses, four senses, or five senses is
called **jāti-nāmakarma**. It has five varieties: one-sense, etc. 66. Question:
What is **śarīra-nāmakarma**? Answer: The karma whose fruition causes the
formation of the five bodies: **audārika**, **vaikriyika**, **āhāraka**,
**taijas**, and **kārmaṇa** is called **śarīra-nāmakarma**. It has five
varieties: **audārika-śarīra-nāmakarma**, etc. 67. Question: What is
**aṅgopāṅga-nāmakarma**? Answer: The karma whose fruition causes the formation
of two arms, two legs, buttocks, back, chest,

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 63. prazna : piNDa prakRti kise kahate haiM ? uttara : jinake eka se adhika
bheda hote haiM unheM piNDa prakRti kahate haiN| jaise gati, jAti aadi| 64.
prazna : gati nAmakarma kise kahate haiM ? uttara : jisa karma ke udaya se jIva
kI naraka, tiryaca, manuSya aura devarUpa avasthA ho use gati nAma karma kahate
haiN| isake naraka gati Adi cAra bheda haiN| 65. prazna : jAti nAmakarma kise
kahate haiM ? uttara : jisake udaya se isa jIva kA ekendriya, dvIndriya,
trIndriya, caturindriya aura paMcendriyoM meM janma ho use jAti nAma karma
kahate haiN| isake ekendriyAdi pA~ca bheda haiN| 66. prazna : zarIra nAmakarma
kise kahate haiM ? uttara : jisake udaya se audArika, vaikriyika, AhAraka,
taijasa aura kArmaNa, ina pA~ca zarIroM kI racanA hotI hai use zarIra nAmakarma
kahate haiN| isake audArika zarIra nAmakarma .. Adi pA~ca bheda haiN| 67. prazna
: aMgopAMga nAmakarma kise kahate haiM ?  /  uttara : jisake udaya se do hAtha,
do paira, nitamba, pITa, chAtI (21)

Page #27 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
And the creation of the head, these eight limbs, and the appendages like
fingers, ears, nose, etc. is called the Angopang Karma. There are three types of
it..... Audarika Shariraangopang 2. Vaikriyik Shariraangopang and 3. Aharak
Shariraangopang. It does not arise in one-sense beings. 68. Question: What is
called the Nirman Karma? Answer: The karma whose arising creates the limbs and
appendages in their proper place and form is called Nirman Karma. 66. Question:
What is called the Bandhan Karma? Answer: The karma whose arising causes the
atoms of the Audarika and other bodies to attain a state of mutual bondage is
called Bandhan Karma. It has five types: Audarika Sharira Bandhan, etc. 70.
Question: What is called the Sanghat Karma? Answer: The karma whose arising
causes the atoms of the Audarika and other bodies to come together without any
gaps is called Sanghat Karma. It has five types: Audarika Sharira Sanghat, etc.
(22)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 aura sira ina ATha aMgoM kI tathA aMgulI, kAna, nAka Adi upAMgoM kI racanA ho
use aMgopAMga nAma karma kahate haiN| dararake tIna bheda haiM..... audArikA
zarIrAMgopAMga 2. vaikriyika zarIrAMgopAMga aura 3. AhAraka zarIrAMgopAMga  /
isakA udaya ekeMdriya jIvoM ko nahIM hotaa| 68. prazna : nirmANa nAmakarma kise
kahate haiM ? uttara : jisake udaya se aMgopAMgoM kI racanA yathAsthAna tathA
yathApramANa ho use nirmANa nAmakarma kahate haiN| 66. prazna : bandhana
nAmakarma kise kahate haiM ? uttara : jisa karma ke udaya se audArikAdi zarIroM
ke paramANu paraspara bandhanarUpa avasthA ko prApta hoM use bandhana nAmakarma
kahate haiN| isake audArika zarIra bandhana Adi pA~ca bheda haiN| 70. prazna :
saMghAta nAmakarma kise kahate haiM ? uttara : jisake udaya se audArika Adi
zarIroM ke paramANu paraspara chidra rahita hokara mileM use saMghAta nAmakarma
kahate hai| isake audArika zarIra saMghAta Adi pA~ca bheda hote : (22)

Page #28 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
71. Question: What is Sansthan Naamakarma? Answer: The Sansthan Naamakarma is
the karma that determines the shape of the body. It has six types: 1.
Samachatursra Sansthan 2. Nyagrodhaparimandala Sansthan 3. Swaati Sansthan 4.
Vaman Sansthan 5. Kubjak Sansthan and 6. Hundak Sansthan. 72. Question: What is
Samachatursra Sansthan? Answer: The Samachatursra Sansthan is the karma that
results in a beautiful and well-proportioned body. 73. Question: What is
Nyagrodhaparimandala Sansthan? Answer: The Nyagrodhaparimandala Sansthan is the
karma that results in a body shaped like a banyan tree, meaning the lower part
is thin and the upper part is thick. 74. Question: What is Swaati Sansthan?
Answer: The Swaati Sansthan is the karma that results in a body shaped like a
Swaati snake, meaning the lower part is thick and the upper part is thin.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 71. prazna : saMsthAna nAmakarma kise kahate hai ? uttara : jisake udaya se
zarIra kI AkRti banatI hai use saMsthAna nAmakarma kahate haiN| isake chaha
bheda haiM- 1. samacaturasrasaMsthAna 2. nyagrodhaparimaNDala saMsthAna 3.
svAtisaMsthAna 4. vAmanasaMsthAna 5. kubjaka saMsthAna aura 6. huNDaka sNsthaan|
72. prazna : samacaturanasaMsthAna kise kahate haiM ? uttara : jisake udaya se
zarIra sundara aura suDaula hotA hai use rAnaturanasaMsthAna kahate haiM : 73.
prazna : nyagroyaparimaNDalasaMsthAna kise kahate haiM ? uttara : jisake udaya
se zarIra vaTavRkSa ke samAna hotA hai arthAt nAbhi se nIce kA bhAga patalA aura
Upara kA bhAga moTA hotA hai use nyagrodhaparimaNDala saMsthAna kahate haiN| 74.
prazna : syAti saMsthAna kise kahate haiM ? uttara : jisake udaya se isa jIva kA
zarIra svAti-sA~pa kI vAmI ke samAna hotA hai arthAt. nAbhi se nIce kA bhAga
moTA aura Upara kA bhAga patalA hotA hai use svAti saMsthAna kahate haiN| (23)

Page #29 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
75. Question: What is Vaman Sansthan? Answer: The Sansthan from which the body
arises is called Vaman Sansthan. 76. Question: What is Kubjak Sansthan? Answer:
The Sansthan from which the body of the being becomes hunchbacked is called
Kubjak Sansthan. 77. Question: What is Hundak Sansthan? Answer: The Sansthan
from which the body of the being is not of a particular shape but deformed is
called Hundak Sansthan. 76. Question: What is Sanhanan Namakarma? Answer: The
Namakarma from which the formation of bones inside the body takes place is
called Sanhanan Namakarma. It has 6 types: 1. Varshabhanaracha Sanhanan 2. Vajra
Naracha Sanhanan 3. Naracha Sanhanan 4. Ardhanaracha Sanhanan 5. Kilka Sanhanan
and 6. Asamprapta Sripatika Sanhanan. 76. Question: What is Vajrarashabha
Naracha Sanhanan Namakarma? Answer: The Namakarma from which there are Vajra
bones, Vajra coverings and Vajra nails is called Varshamanaracha Sanhanan
Namakarma. (24)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 75. prazna : vAmana saMsthAna kise kahate haiM ? uttara : jisake udaya se
zarIra honA hotA hai jo vA saMsthAna kahate haiN| 76. prazna : kubjaka saMsthAna
kise kahate haiM ? uttara : jisake udaya se jIva kA zarIra kubar3A hotA hai use
kubjaka saMsthAna kahate haiN| 77. prazna : huNDaka saMsthAna kise kahate haiM ?
uttara : jisake udaya se jIva kA zarIra kisI khAsa AkRti kA na hokara virUpa
hotA hai use huNDaka saMsthAna kahate haiN| 76. prazna : saMhanana nAmakarma
kise kahate haiM ? uttara : jisake udaya se zarIra ke andara saMhanana haDDI kI
racanA hotI hai use saMhanana nAmakarma kahate haiN| isake 6 bheda haiM1.
varSabhanArAca saMhanana 2. vajra nArAca saMhanana 3. nArAca saMhanana 4.
ardhanArAca saMhanana 5. kIlaka saMhanana aura 6. asaMprApta sRpATikA sNhnn| 76.
prazna : vajrarSabha nArAca saMhanana nAmakarma kise kahate haiM ? uttara :
jisake udaya se vajra ke hAr3a, vajra ke veSTana aura vaz2a kI kIleM hoM use
varSamanArAca saMhanana nAmakarma kahate haiN| (24)

Page #30 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
80. Question: What is Vajranaraach Samhanan Karma? Answer: When the body has
bones like a thunderbolt and nails like a forest, but the covering is not like a
thunderbolt, it is called Vajranaraach Samhanan Karma.  81. Question: What is
Naraach Samhanan Karma? Answer: When the body has bones with ordinary covering
and nails, it is called Naraach Samhanan Karma.  82. Question: What is
Ardhanaraach Samhanan Karma? Answer: When the body has joints that are half-
nailed, it is called Ardhanaraach Samhanan Karma.  83. Question: What is Keelak
Samhanan Karma? Answer: When the body has joints that are connected with
ordinary nails, it is called Keelak Samhanan Karma.  84. Question: What is
Asampraapt Srupaatika Samhanan Karma? Answer: When the bones are connected by
nerves, but not nailed, it is called Asampraapt Srupaatika Samhanan Karma. (25)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 . 80. prazna : vajranArAca saMhanana nAmakarma kise kahate haiM ? uttara :
jisake udaya se vajra ke hAr3a tathA vana kI kIleM hoM parantu veSTana vajra ke
na hoM use baja nArAca saMhanana nAmakarma kahate haiM  /  81. prazna : nArAca
saMhanana nAmakarma kise kahate haiM ? uttara: jisake udaya se zarIra ke hAr3a
sAdhAraNa veSTana aura kIloM se sahita hote haiM use nArAcasaMhanana nAmakarma
kahate haiM  /  82. prazna: ardhanArAca saMhanana nAmakarma kise kahate haiM ?
uttara : jisake udaya se hAr3oM kI sandhiyA~ ardhakIlita hoM use ardhanArAca
saMhanana nAmakarma kahate haiN| 83. prazna: kIlaka saMhanana nAmakarma kise
kahate haiM ? uttara: jisake udaya se hAr3oM kI sandhiyA~ sAdhAraNa kIloM se
yukta hoM use kIlaka saMhanana nAmakarma kahate haiM | 84. prazna : asaMprApta
sRpATikA saMhanana nAmakarma kise kahate haiM ? uttara: jisake udaya se hAr3a
paraspara nasoM se baMdhe hoM, kIlita na hoM, use asaMprApta sRpATikA saMhanana
nAmakarma kahate haiN| (25)

Page #31 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
85. Question: What is Sparśa Nāmakarma? Answer: Sparśa Nāmakarma is that which,
upon arising, causes the body to experience touch sensations such as smooth,
rough, etc. It has eight divisions: 1. Smooth, 2. Rough, 3. Soft, 4. Hard, 5.
Light, 6. Heavy, 7. Cold, and 8. Hot.  86. Question: What is Rasa Nāmakarma?
Answer: Rasa Nāmakarma is that which, upon arising, causes the body to
experience tastes such as sour, sweet, etc. It has five divisions: 1. Sour, 2.
Sweet, 3. Bitter, 4. Astringent, and 5. Salty.  87. Question: What is Gandha
Nāmakarma? Answer: Gandha Nāmakarma is that which, upon arising, causes the body
to experience pleasant or unpleasant smells. It has two divisions: 1. Pleasant
smell and 2. Unpleasant smell.  88. Question: What is Varṇa Nāmakarma? Answer:
Varṇa Nāmakarma is that which, upon arising, causes the body to experience
colors such as black, yellow, etc. It has five divisions: 1. Black, 2. Yellow,
3. Blue, 4. Red, and 5. White.  86. Question: What is Anupūrvya Nāmakarma?

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 85. prazna : sparza nAmakarma kise kahate haiM ? uttara : jisake udaya se
zarIra meM snigdha- rUkSa Adi sparza ho use sparza nAmakarma kahate haiN| isake
ATha bheda haiM- 1. snigdha 2. rUkSa 3. komala 4 kaThora 5 halkA 6. bhArI 7.
zIta aura 8. uSNa  /  kahate hai ? uttara : jisake udaya se zarIra meM khaTTA
mIThA Adi rasa ho use rasa nAmakarma kahate haiN| isake pA~ca bheda haiM- 1.
khaTTA 2. mIThA 3. kaDuA 4. kaSAyalA aura 5. caraparA  /  87. prazna: gandha
nAmakarma kise kahate haiM ? 66. prazna prazna usa varga - uttara : jisake udaya
se zarIra meM sugandha yA durgandha utpanna ho use . gandha nAmakarma kahate hai
| isake do bheda haiM- 1. sugandha aura 2. durgandha  /  prazna : varNa
nAmakarma kise kahate haiM ? 88. uttara : jisake udaya se zarIra meM kAlA - pIlA
Adi varNa utpanna hoM use varNa nAmakarma kahate haiN| isake pA~ca bheda haiM1.
kAlA 2. pIlA 3. nIlA 4. lAla aura 5. sapheda  /  86. prazna AnupUrvya nAmakarma
kise kahate haiM ? (26)

Page #32 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Answer: The emergence of which, in the state of *vigraha-gati*, results in the
form of the *ātmya-pradeśa* being the same as the form of the previous
(abandoned) body. There are four types of this: 1. *naraka-gatyānupūrvya*, 2.
*tiryag-gatyānupūrvya*, 3. *manuṣya-gatyānupūrvya*, and 4. *deva-gatyānupūrvya*.
For example, if a human dies and goes to the *deva-gati*, then *deva-
gatyānupūrvya* will emerge, and the form of the abandoned human body will remain
in the *vigraha-gati*. The emergence of the *ānupūrvya* karma occurs only in the
*vigraha-gati*. 90. Question: What is *vigraha-gati*? Answer: The movement of
the *jīva* to acquire a new body after abandoning the previous body is called
*vigraha-gati*. There are four types of this: 1. *ṛju-gati* (also called *iṣu-
gati*), 2. *pāṇimuktā-gati*, 3. *lāṅgalikā-gati*, and 4. *gomūtrikā-gati*. In
*ṛju-gati*, *ānupūrvya* does not emerge because the form of the new body is
acquired within the same time period. 61. Question: What is *aguru-laghu* karma?
Answer: The karma whose emergence results in a body that is like iron (27)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 uttara : jisake udaya se vigrahagati meM Atmya pradezoM kA AkAra pichale
(chor3e hue) zarIra ke AkAra kA ho| isake cAra bheda haiM 1. naraka
gatyAnupUrvya 2, tiryaggatyAnapavyaM 3. manuSyagatyAnupUrva aura 4.
devagatyAnupUvyaM  /  jaise koI manuSya marakara deva gati meM jA rahA hai usake
devagatyAnupUrvI kA udaya hogA aura chor3e hue manuSya ke zarIra kA AkAra
vigraha gati meM banA rhegaa| AnupRvyaM nAmakarma kA udaya vigrahagati meM hI
hotA hai| 90. prazna : vigrahagati kise kahate haiM ? uttara : pUrva zarIra
chUTane para navIna zarIra grahaNa karane ke liye jIva kA jo gamana hotA hai use
vigraha gati kahate haiN| isake cAra bhoda haiM- 1. Rju gati (izu gati 2.
pANimuktAgati 3. lAMgalikAgati aura 4. gomuutrikaate| inameM se Rjugati meM
AnupUrvya kA udaya nahIM hotA kyoMki eka samaya ke bhItara hI navIna zarIra kA
AkAra prApta ho jAtA hai| 61. prazna : agurulaghu nAmakarma kise kahate haiM ?
uttara : jisa karma ke udaya se aisA zarIra prApta ho jo lohe ke (27)

Page #33 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
As heavy as a sphere and as light as the fluff of cotton, It is not called the
*sānta* karma. 62. Question: What is called *upghāta* karma? Answer: That which,
upon its arising, has limbs that harm oneself. It is called *upghāta* karma. 63.
Question: What is called *parghāta* karma? Answer: That which, upon its arising,
has limbs that harm others. It is called *parghāta* karma. 64. Question: What is
called *ātapa* karma? Answer: That which, upon its arising, results in a
luminous body whose core is cold and whose radiance is hot. Its arising is in
the plane of the sun, for the *bādar* earth-bodied beings. 65. Question: What is
called *udyota* karma? Answer: That which, upon its arising, results in a
luminous body whose core and radiance are both cool. Its arising is in the plane
of the moon, for the *bādar* earth-bodied beings and the fireflies, etc. (28)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 golA ke samAna bhArI aura arka ke tUla ke samAna halkA na ho use sAntA
nAmakarma kahate haiN| 62. prazna : upaghAta nAmakarma kise kahate haiM ? uttara
: jisake udaya se apanA hI ghAta karane vAle aMgopAMga hoN| use upaghAta nAma
karma kahate haiN| 63. prazna : paraghAta nAmakarma kise kahate haiM ? uttara :
jisake udaya se dUsaroM kA ghAta karane vAle aMgopAMga hoN| use paraghAta
nAmakarma kahate haiN| 64. prazna : Atapa nAmakarma kise kahate haiM ? uttara :
jisake udaya se aisA bhAsvara zarIra prApta ho jisakA mUla ThaNDA aura prabhA
uSNa ho| isakA udaya sUrya ke vimAna meM rahane vAle bAdara pRthivIkAyika jIvoM
ke hotA hai| 65. prazna : udyota nAmakarma kise kahate haiM ? uttara : jisake
udaya se aisA bhAsvara zarIra prApta ho jisakA mUla aura prabhA-donoM zItala
hoN| isakA udaya candramA ke vimAna meM rahane vAle bAdara pRthivIkAyika tathA
jugunR Adi ke hotA hai| (28)

Page #34 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
66. Question: What is Ucchvasa Karma? - Answer: The Karma that causes the
process of inhalation and exhalation is called Ucchvasa Karma. 67. Question:
What is Vihayogati Karma? - Answer: The Karma that causes movement in the sky is
called Vihayogati Karma. It has two types: 1. Prashasta Vihayogati and 2.
Aprashasta Vihayogati. It arises in everyone, not just birds. 68. Question: What
is Pratyek Sharira Karma? - Answer: The Karma that causes the attainment of a
body that has only one Jiva as its owner. 69. Question: What is Sadharan Sharira
Karma? - Answer: The Karma that causes the attainment of a body that has many
Jivas as its owner. It arises only in Vanaspatikayik Jivas. 100. Question: What
is Tras Karma? - Answer: The Karma that causes birth in the Dwindriyadi jati is
called Tras Karma.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 66. prazna : ucchvAsa nAmakarma kise kahate haiM ? - uttara : jisake udaya se
zvAsocchvAsa calatA hai use ucchvAsa nAmakarma kahate haiN| . 67. prazna :
vihAyogati nAmakarma kise kahate haiM ? uttara : jisake udaya se AkAza meM
gamana ho use vihAyogati nAmakarma kahate haiN| isake do bheda haiM- 1. prazasta
vihAyogati aura 2. aprazarata vihyayogati  /  isakA udaya sabake hotA hai, na
kevala pakSiyoM ke| 68. prazna : pratyeka zarIra nAmakarma kise kahate haiM ?
uttara : jisake udaya se aisA zarIra prApta ho jisakA eka jIva hI svAmI ho| 66.
prazna : sAdhAraNa zarIra nAmakarma kise kahate haiM ? uttara : jisake udaya se
aisA zarIra prApta ho jisake aneka jIva svAmI ho| isakA udaya vanaspatikAyika
jIva ke hI hotA 100. prazna : trasa nAmakarma kise kahate haiM ? uttara : jisake
udaya se dvIndriyAdi jAti meM janma ho use usa nAmakarma kahate haiN|

Page #35 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
101. Question: What is **sthāvar** **nāmakarma**? Answer: The **nāmakarma** that
gives rise to birth in one-sensed beings is called **sthāvar** **nāmakarma**. It
has five divisions: 1. **pṛthivīkāyika**, 2. **jalakāyika**, 3. **agnikāyika**,
4. **vāyukāyika**, and 5. **vanaspātakādhika**. 102. Question: What is
**subhaga** **nāmakarma**? Answer: The **nāmakarma** that gives rise to a body
that is pleasing to others is called **subhaga** **nāmakarma**. 103. Question:
What is **durbhaga** **nāmakarma**? Answer: The **nāmakarma** that gives rise to
a body that, even with its own form and qualities, is not pleasing to others is
called **durbhaga** **nāmakarma**. 104. Question: What is **susvara**
**nāmakarma**? Answer: The **nāmakarma** that gives rise to a good voice in a
being is called **susvara**. 105. Question: What is **duḥsvara** **nāmakarma**?
Answer: The **nāmakarma** that gives rise to a bad voice is called **duḥsvara**
**nāmakarma**. (30)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 101. prazna : sthAvara nAmakarma kise kahate haiM ? uttara : jisake udaya se
ekendriya jIvoM meM janma ho use sthAvara nAmakarma kahate haiN| isake pA~ca
bheda haiM- 1, pRthivIkAyika 2. jalakAyika 3. agnikAyika 4. vAyukAyika aura 5.
vnspaatkaadhik| 102. prazna : subhaga nAmakarma kise kahate haiM ? uttara :
jisake udaya se dUsaroM ko priya lagane vAlA zarIra prApta ho use subhaga
nAmakarma kahate haiN| 103. prazna : durbhaga nAmakarma kise kahate haiM ?
uttara : jisa karma ke udaya se apanA rUpAdi guNoM se yukta bhI zarIra dUsaroM
ko acchA na lage use durbhaga nAmakarma kahate 104. prazna : susvara nAmakarma
kise kahate haiM ? uttara : jisake udaya se jIva ko acchA svara prApta hotA hai
use susvara kahate haiN| 105. prazna : duHsvara nAmakarma kise kahate haiM ?
uttara : jisake udaya se acchA svara na ho use duHsvara nAmakarma kahate haiN|
(30)

Page #36 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
106. Question: What is a Shubha Namakarma? Answer: A Shubha Namakarma is one
whose arising results in beautiful body parts. A Namakarma whose arising results
in signs indicative of Chakravartitva, Baldevatva, Vasudevatva, etc. such as
conch, lotus, etc. appearing on the limbs and body parts is a Shubha Namakarma.
107. Question: What is an Ashubha Namakarma? Answer: An Ashubha Namakarma is one
whose arising results in body parts that are not beautiful. Or, a Namakarma
whose arising results in inauspicious signs appearing on the body is an Ashubha
Namakarma. 108. Question: What is a Sukshma Namakarma? Answer: A Sukshma
Namakarma is one whose arising results in a body that neither obstructs nor is
obstructed by anyone. This body is only found in Ekendriya beings. Even among
them, it is not found in every plant.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 106. prazna : zubha nAmakarma kise kahate haiM ? uttara : jisake udaya se
zarIra ke avayava sundara hoM use zubha nAmakarma kahate haiM ! zazayA jisa
karma ke udaya se cakravartitva, baladevatva, vAsudevatva Adi RddhiyoM ke sUcaka
zaMkha, kamala Adi cihna aMga pratyaMgoM meM utpanna hoveM vaha zubha nAmakarma
hai| 107. prazna : azubha nAmakarma kise kahate haiM ? . uttara : jisake udaya
se zarIra ke avayava sundara na hoM use azubha 'nAmakarma kahate haiN| athavA
jisa nAmakarma ke udaya se zarIra meM azubha lakSaNa utpanna hote haiM vaha
azuma nAmakarma hai| 108. prazna : sUkSma nAmakarma kise kahate haiM ? uttara :
jisake udaya se aisA zarIra prApta ho jo na kisI se ruke aura na kisI ko roka
ske| use sUkSma nAmakarma kahate haiN| yaha zarIra ekendriya jIvoM ke hI hotA
hai| unameM bhI pratyeka vanaspati ke nahIM hotaa| (31)

Page #37 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
106. Question: What is the *Bādar* karma? Answer: The karma that causes a body
to obstruct and be obstructed by others is called *Bādar* karma. It arises in
all worldly beings.  110. Question: What is the *Paryāpti* karma? Answer: The
karma that causes the six *paryāptis* - food, body, senses, breath, speech, and
mind - to be fulfilled in their respective ways is called *Paryāpti* karma.
111. Question: What is the *Aparyāpti* karma? Answer: The karma that causes even
one *paryāpti* to be unfulfilled, i.e., the state of insufficiency, is called
*Aparyāpti* karma. It arises only in humans born in a state of unconsciousness
and in animals.  112. Question: What is the *Sthira* karma? Answer: The karma
that causes the elements and sub-elements of the body to...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 106. prazna : bAdara nAmakarma kio dAhate haiM ? uttara : jisake udaya se aisA
zarIra ho jo kisI se ruke tathA  /  kisI ko roke use bAdara nAmakarma kahate
haiN| isakA udaya saba saMsArI jIvoM ke hotA hai| 110, prazna : paryApti
nAmakarma kise kahate haiM ? uttara : nisake. udaya se AhAra, zarIra, iMdriya,
zvAsocchvAsa, bhASA aura mana ina chaha paryAptiyoM kI yathAyogya (paryAyayogya)
pUrNatA ho use paryApti nAmakarma kahate haiN| 111. prazna : aparyApti nAmakarma
kise kahate haiM ? uttara : jisake upaya se eka bhI paryApti pUrNa na ho arthAt
vyaparyAptaka avasthA ho use aparyApti nAmakarma kahate haiN| isakA udaya
sammUrchana janma vAle manuSya aura tiryaMcoM ke hI hotA hai| 112. prazna :
sthira nAmakarma kise kahate haiM ? uttara : jisake udaya se zarIra ke dhAtu-
upadhAtu apane apane (32)

Page #38 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The karma that causes the body to remain stable in its form, in its places, is
called **sthira karma**.  113. Question: What is **asthira karma**? Answer: The
karma that causes the body's dhatus and upadhatus to not remain stable, i.e.,
they keep moving, is called **asthira karma**.  114. Question: What is **adeya
karma**? Answer: The karma that causes the body to be endowed with a specific
radiance is called **adeya karma**.  115. Question: What is **anadeya karma**?
1.  **Asthira karma** causes the transformation of rasa (nutrient fluid) into
other dhatus (tissues). (Yal 13/361) This means rasa transforms into rakta
(blood), rakta into mamsa (flesh), mamsa into meda (fat), meda into asthi
(bone), asthi into majja (marrow), and majja into virya (semen). The karma that
causes this transformation is called **asthira karma**. If **asthira karma** is
not present, rasa will remain as rasa, and it will not transform into other
dhatus. (Dhaval 6/63.64)  Rajavarteka (8/11, Pa. 34) states that the karma that
causes the body and its limbs to remain stable even after performing difficult
fasts, etc., and not become thin, is **sthira karma**. The karma that causes the
body to become thin due to a single fast or exposure to ordinary cold or heat is
**asthira karma**. 70 Va. 8/29/34-35, p. 176 and 755!! (33)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 sthAnoM para yAnI apane svarUpa se sthira raheM use sthira nAmakarma kahate
haiN| 113. prazna : asthira nAmakarma kise kahate haiM ? uttara : jisake udaya
se zarIra ke dhAtu upadhAtu sthira na raheM arthAt calAyamAna hote raheM use
asthira nAmakarma kahate 114. prazna : Adeya nAmakarma kise kahate haiM ? uttara
: jisake udaya se zarIra, viziSTa kAMti se sahita hotA hai use Adeya nAmakarma
kahate haiN| 115. prazna : anAdeya nAmakarma kise kahate haiM ? 1. arthAta isa
asthira nAmakarma ke udaya se rasAdikoM kA Age kI dhAtuoM rUpa se pariNamana
hotA hai| (yala 13/361) yAnI rasa se rakA rUpa pariNamana, rakA se mAMsa rUpa,
mAMsa se mede rUpa, mede se haDDI rUpa, haDDI se majje rUpa tathA majje se
vIryarUpa pariNamana (badalana) hotA hai| isa ukta prakAra se badalana jisa
karma ke udaya se hotA hai, vaha asthira nAmakarma kahA gayA hai| edi asthira
nAmakarma na ho to rasa, rasa rUpa hI raha jAya, Age kI mAtuoM rUpa pariNata na
hogA, ityaadi| (dhavala 6/63.64) rAjavArateka (8/11, pA0 34) meM likhA hai ki
jisake udaya se duSkara upavAsAdi karane para bhI aMga-upAMga (zarIra) sthira
bane rahate haiM- kRza nahIM hote vAha sthira nAmakama hai tathA jisake kAraNa
eka upAvarA se yA sAdhAraNa zIta uSNa asaddhi lagane se hI zarIra kama ho nApa
vaha asthira nAmakarma hai| 70 vA0 8/29/34-35 pR0176 va 755!! (33)

Page #39 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Answer: The **Anadeya Karma** is that which, upon its rise, causes the body to
be devoid of specific radiance. 116. Question: What is **Yashaskirti Karma**?
Answer: The **Yashaskirti Karma** is that which, upon its rise, causes the
being's fame to spread throughout the world. 117. Question: What is
**Ayashaskirti Karma**? Answer: The **Ayashaskirti Karma** is that which, upon
its rise, causes the being's infamy to spread throughout the world. 118.
Question: What is **Tirthankara Karma**? Answer: The **Tirthankara Karma** is
that which, upon its rise, causes the being to attain the position of a
**Tirthankara**. This is a **Sati-shaya** (exceedingly auspicious)
**Punyakarma** (karmic action of merit). Upon its rise, the eight
**Pratiharayas** (miracles) are obtained in the **Samavasarana** (assembly hall
of a Tirthankara). 116. Question: What is **Gotra Karma**? Answer: The **Gotra
Karma** is that which, upon its rise, causes the destruction of the
**Aguruladhu** (subtle) qualities of the being, or causes the being to be born
in a high or low family. It has two divisions: 1. **Uchcha Gotra** (high family)
and 2. **Nīcha Gotra** (low family). Upon the rise of **Uchcha Gotra**, the
being is born in a high family, renowned in the world.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 uttara : jisake udaya se zarIra viziSTa kAnti se rahita ho use anAdeya
nAmakarma kahate haiN| 116. prazna : yazaskIrti nAmakarma kise kahate haiM ?
uttara : jisake udaya se jIva kI saMsAra meM kIrti vistRta ho use yazaskIrti
nAmakarma kahate haiN| 117. prazna : ayazaskIrti nAmakarma kise kahate haiM ?
uttara : jisake udaya se jIva kA saMsAra meM apayaza vistRta ho use ayazaskIti
nAmakarma kahate haiN| 118. prazna : tIrthakara nAmakarma kise kahate haiM ?
uttara : jisake udaya se jIva tIrthaMkara pada ko prApta hotA hai use tIrthakara
nAmakarma kahate haiN| yaha prakRti sAtizaya puNya-prakRti hai| isake udaya se
samavazaraNa meM aSTa prAtihAryoM kI prApti hotI hai| 116. prazna : gotrakarma
kise kahate haiM ? uttara : jisake udaya se jIva ke aguruladhu guNa kA ghAta ho
athavA yaha jIva ucca-nIca kula meM utpanna ho use gotrakarma kahate haiN| isake
do bheda haiM- 1. ucca gotra aura 2. nIca gotra  /  ucca gotra ke udaya se loka
prasiddha ucca

Page #40 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Birth occurs in a family and from the rise of a low gotra, the world is
considered low. Birth occurs in a low gotra of naraki and tiryanch. The rise of
a high gotra remains for dev and bhogabhumij humans, but karmabhumij humans are
born in both types of gotras. 120. Question: What is antarayakarma? Answer: The
karma that destroys the viryatva guna of a jiva or whose rise causes obstacles
in dan, lam, bhog, upbhog and virya is called antarayakarma. It has five types:
1. Danantaraya, 2. Labhantaraya, 3. Bhogantaray, 4. Upbhogantaray and 5.
Viryantaray. The meaning of all is clear from the name. 121. Question: How many
karma pradeshas are bound at one time? Answer: At one time, the binding of time-
bound karma occurs from the infinite part of the siddhas and the infinite
multiplied pradeshas from the abhavya rashi.  1. However, the revered Bhagavad
Virasen Swami has said that - tirikhkesu sanjamasanjam padivalayantesu
uchagoudattubalam badho (Dhaval 15/142, 173-74 etc.) meaning that a high gotra
is found in tiryanch who follow sanjamasanjam. Thus, there are two opinions on
this subject. (35)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 kula meM janma hotA hai aura nIca gotra ke udaya se loka nincha nIca kula meM
janma hotA hai| nArakI aura tiryaMcoM ke nIca gotra kA udaya rahatA hai| deva
aura bhogabhUmija manuSyoM ke ucca gotra kA udaya rahatA hai parantu
karmabhUmija . manuSyoM kA janma donoM prakAra ke gotroM meM hotA hai| 120.
prazna : ansarAyakarma kise kahate haiM ? uttara : jo jIva ke vIryatva guNa kA
ghAta kare athavA jisake udaya se dAna, lAma, bhoga, upabhoga aura vIrya meM
vighna utpanna ho use antarAya karma kahate haiN| isake pA~ca bheda haiM 1.
dAnAntarAya, 2. lAbhAMtarAya 3. bhogAntarAya 4. upabhogAntarAya aura 5.
viiryaantraay| sabakA artha nAma se spaSTa hai| 121. prazna : eka samaya meM
kitane karma pradezoM kA bandha hotA hai? uttara : eka samaya meM siddhoM se
anantaveM bhAga aura abhavyarAzi se ananta guNita pradeza vAle samaya prabaddha
kA bandha hotA hai| 1. parantu paramapUjya bhagavad vIrasena svAmI ne kahA hai
ki- tirikkhesu saMjamAsajama paDivAlayaMtesu uccAgodattuvalaMbhAdo (dhavala
15/142, 173-74 Adi) yAnI saMyamAsaMyama ko pAlane vAle tiryacoM meM ucca gotra
pAyA jAtA hai| isa prakAra isa viSaya meM do mata haiN| (35)

Page #41 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
122. Question: How many types of destructive karmas are there? Answer: There are
two types: 1. Desha-ghati and 2. Sarva-ghati. 123. Question: What are Desha-
ghati karmas? And what are they? Answer: Those karmas which destroy the
qualities of a being, i.e., those which remain present even when the qualities
are partially manifested, are called Desha-ghati karmas. 1. Mati-jnana-avaran,
2. Shruta-jnana-avaran, 3. Avadhi-jnana-avaran, 4. Manah-paryaya-jnana-avaran,
5. Chakshu-darshan-avaran, 6. Achakshu-darshan-avaran, 7. Avadhi-darshan-avaran,
8. Samyak-tvaprakriti, 9. Sanjwalan-krodha, 10. Sanchalan-mana, 11. Sanjwalan-
maya, 12. Sanjwalan-lobha, 13. Hasya, 14. Rati, 15. Arati, 16. Shoka, 17. Bhaya,
18. Jugupta, 19. Stri-veda, 20. Purusha-veda, 21. Napunsaka-veda, 22. Dana-
antaraya, 23. Labha-antaraya, 24. Bhoga-antaraya, 25. Upbhoga-antaraya, and 26.
Virya-antaraya. These twenty-six prakritis are Desha-ghati. 124. Question: What
are Sarva-ghati karmas? And what are they? Answer: Those which completely
prevent the manifestation of the qualities of the soul are called Sarva-ghati.
They are twenty-one: 1. Kevala-jnana-avaran. (36)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 122. prazna : ghAtiyA karmoM ke kitane bheda haiM ? uttara : do bheda haiM 1.
dezadhAti aura 2, srvghaati| 123. prazna : dezaghAti kise kahate haiM ? aura ve
kauna kauna haiM . uttara : jo jIva ke guNoM kA eka dezaghAta kareM arthAt
jinakA udaya rahate hue bhI guNa kucha aMzoM meM prakaTa raheM unheM dezaghAti
karma kahate haiN| 1. mati jJAnAvaraNa 2. zruta jJAnAvaraNa 3. avadhi
jJAnAvaraNa, 4. manaHparyaya jJAnAvaraNa, 5. cakSurdarzanAvaraNa, 6.
acakSurdazanAvaraNa, 7. avadhi darzanAvaraNaM, 8. samyaktva prakRti, 6.
saMjvalana krodha 10, saMcalana mAna 11. saMjvalana mAyA 12. saMjvalana lobha,
13. hAsya, 14. rati 15. arati 16. zoka 17. bhaya 18. juguptA 16. strI veda, 20.
puruSa veda, 21. napuMsaka veda, 22. dAnAntarAya 23. lAbhAntarAya 24.
bhogAntarAya, 25. upabhogAnta rAya aura 26. vIryAntarAya ye chabbIsa prakRtiyA~
dezaghAti haiN| 124. prazna : sarvaghAti kise kahate haiM ? aura ve kauna kauna
haiM? uttara : jo Atma guNoM ko bilkula hI prakaTa na hone de use sarvaghAti
kahate haiN| ve ikkIsa haiM- 1. kevalajJAnAvaraNa (36)

Page #42 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
2. **Kevaldarshanavaran**, five **nidras**, **mithyatva samthan**,
**mithyatva**, and **anantaanubandhi**, etc., twelve **kashayas**. These do not
bind **samyamithyatva**; only **udaya** and **sattva** occur. Their function is
different from all other **ghatis**. 125. Question: How many types of **karma**
**prakritis** are there in relation to **vipaka**? Answer: Four. 1. **Jiva
vipaki**, 2. **Pudgala vipaki**, 3. **Kshetra vipaki**, and 4. **Bhava vipaki**.
126. Question: What is **jiva vipaki**? And which are they? Answer: Primarily,
those whose fruit is on the **atma** are called **jiva vipaki**. They are the
following 78: such as 47 of **ghatiya karmas**, 2 of **vedaniya**, 2 of
**gotra**, and 27 of **namakarma**. 127. Question: Which are the 27 **jiva
vipaki** **prakritis** of **namakarma**? Answer: 1. **Tirthankara**, 2.
**Uchchvas**, 3. **Badar**, 4. **Sukshma**, 5. **Paryapta** (37)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 2. kevaladarzanAvaraNa, pA~ca nidrAe~, mithyAtva samthaG mithyAtva tathA
anantAnubandhI Adi bAraha kaSAya  /  inameM samyamithyAtva kA vandha nahIM hotA;
mAtra udaya aura sattva hotA hai| isakA kArya anya sarva ghAtiyoM kI apekSA
vibhinna prakAra kA hotA hai| 125. prazna : vipAka kI apekSA karma prakRtiyoM ke
kitane bheda uttara : cAra haiM. 1. jIva vipAkI, 2. pudgala vipAkI, 3. kSetra
vipAkI aura 4. bhava vipaakii| 126. prazna : jIva vipAkI kise kahate haiM ? aura
ve kauna kauna uttara : pramukha rUpa se jinakA phala AtmA para hotA hai unheM
jIva vipAkI kahate haiN| ve nimnalikhita 78 haiM jaise ghAtiyA karmoM kI 47,
vedanIya kI 2, gotra kI 2 aura nAmakarma kI 271 127. prazna : nAmakarma kI 27
jIva vipAkI prakRtiyA~ kauna kauna haiM? uttara : 1. tIrthakara 2. ucchvAsa 3.
bAdara 4. sUkSma 5. paryApta (37)

Page #43 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
6. Aparāpta 7. Susvara 8. Duhsvara 6. Ādeya 10. Anādeya 11. Yashaskīrti 12.
Ayashaskīrti 13. Trasa 14. sthāvara 15. Prashastha Vihāyogati 16. Aprashastha
Vihāyogati 17. Subhaga 18. Durbhaga 16. Naraka Gati 20. Tiryaṅgati 21.
Manushayagati 22. Devagati 23. Ekeindriya Jāti 24. Dvīndriya Jāti 25. Trīndriya
Jāti 26. Chaturindriya Jāti and 27. Panchendriya Jāti. 128. Question: Who are
called Pudgala Vipāki? And who are they? Answer: Those whose vipāka is
especially on Pudgala are called Pudgala Vipāki. They are 62 - 5 bodies, 5
bandhanas, 5 sanghātas, 3 angopāngas, 6 sansthānas, 6 sanhananas, 8 sparshas, 5
rasas, 2 gandhas, 5 varṇas, thus fifty, and nirmanā, ātapā, udyota, sthira,
asthira, shubha, ashubha, pratyek, sādhāraṇa, aguru laghu upghāta and parghāta
these twelve, both together are 62. 126. Question: Who are called Bhava Vipāki?
And who are they? Answer: Those whose udaya is in narakadi paryaya are called
Bhava (38)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 6. aparyApta 7. susvara 8. duHsvara 6. Adeya 10. anAdeya 11. yazaskIrti 12.
ayazaskIrti 13. trasa 14. sthAvara 15. prazasta vihAyogati 16. aprazasta
vihAyogati 17. subhaga 18. durbhaga 16. naraka gati 20. tiryaggati 21.
manuSyagati 22. devagati 23. ekendriya jAti 24, dvIndriya jAti 25. zrIndriya
jAti 26. caturindriya jAti aura 27. paMcendriya jaati| 128. prazna : pudgala
vipAkI kise kahate haiM ? aura ye kauna kauna haiM ? uttara : jinakA vipAka
khAsakara pudgala para hotA hai unheM pudgala vipAkI kahate haiN| ve 62 hotI
haiM- 5 zarIra. 5 bandhana. 5 saMghAta, 3 aMgopAMga. 6 saMsthAna. 6 saMhanana. 8
sparza .5 rasa. 2 gaMdha. 5 varNa, isa taraha pacAsa tathA nirmANa, AtApa,
udyota, sthira, asthira, zubha, azubha, pratyeka, sAdhAraNa, aguru laghu
upaghAta aura paraghAta ye bAraha, donoM milakara 62 hotI haiN| 126. prazna :
bhava vipAkI kise kahate haiM ? aura ve kauna kauna uttara : jinakA udaya
narakAdi paryAyoM meM hotA hai unheM bhava (38)

Page #44 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
They are called **vipaki**. There are four: 1. **Narakayu**, 2. **Tiryagayu**,
3. **Manushyayu**, and 4. **Devayu**. 130. Question: What are **kṣetra vipaki**?
And how many are they? Answer: Those whose **udaya** is in the **kṣetra** of
**vigraha-gati** are called **kṣetra vipaki**. There are four: 1. **Naraka-
gatyānupūrvya**, 2. **Tiryag-gatyānupūrvya**, 3. **Manushya-gatyānupūrvya**, and
4. **Deva-gatyānupūrvya**. 131. Question: What is **puṇya-prakriti**? And what
are they? Answer: Those from whose **udaya** a worldly being experiences
happiness are called **puṇya-prakriti**. They are 68 from the perspective of
**bheda-vivakṣā** and 42 from the perspective of **abheda-vivakṣā**. For
example: 1. **Sāta-vedanīya**, 2. **Tiryagayu**, 3. **Manushyayu**, 4.
**Devayu**, 5. **Ucca-gotra**, 6. **Manushya-gati**, 7. **Manushya-
gatyānupūrvī**, 8. **Deva-gati**, 9. **Deva-gatyānupūrvī**, 10. **Pañcendriya-
jāti**, 11. **Audārikadi** five bodies, 12. **Audārikadi** five **bandhana**,
13. **Audārikadi** five **saṁghāta**, 14. **Audārikadi** three **aṅgopaṅga**,
15. **Śukla** color, smell, taste, touch, 16. **Sama-caturana-saṁsthāna**, 17.
**Vajrarṣabha** and **Nārāca** **saṁhanana**.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 vipAkI kahate haiN| ve cAra haiM. 1. narakAyu 2. tiryagAyu 3. manuSyAyu aura 4.
devaayu| 130. prazna : kSetra vipAkI kise kahate haiM ? aura ve kitanI uttara :
jinakA udaba vigrahagati rUpa kSetra meM ho unheM kSetra vipAkI kahate haiN| ve
cAra haiM- 1. naraka- gatyAnupUrvya, 2. tiryaggatyAnupUrya, 3.
manuSyagatyAnupUrvya aura 4. devgtyaanupuurvy| 131. prazna : puNya prakRti kise
kahate haiM ? aura ve kauna kauna uttara : jinake udaya se saMsArI jIva sukha kA
anubhava karatA hai unheM puNya prakRti kahate haiN| ve bheda vivakSA se 68 aura
abheda vivakSA se 42 haiN| yathA- 1 sAtA vedanIya 2 tiryagAyu 3 manuSyAyu 4
devAyu 5 ucca gotra 6 manuSyagati 7 manuSyagatyAnupUrvI 8 devati 6
devagatyAnupUrvI 10 paMcendriya jAti 15 audArikAdi pA~ca zarIra 20 audArikAdi
pAMca baMdhana 25 audArikAdi pA~ca saMghAta 28 audArikAdi tIna aMgopAMga 48 zuma
varNa-gandha-rasa-sparza ke bIsa 16 samacaturanasaMsthAna 50 bajrarSabha nArAca
saMhanana '

Page #45 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
51 Agurulaghu 52 Parghaat 53 Uchchhvaas 54 Aalap 55 Udyot 56 Prashast
Vihaayogati 57 Tras 58 Baadar 56 Paryapti 60 Pratiyek Sharira 61 Sthir 62 Shubh
63 Subhag 64 Suswar 65 Aay 66 Yasharkirti 67 Nirman aur 68 Tirthankar
Abhedvivaksha mein 5 Bandhan aur 5 Sanghaat ki das prakritiyaan paanch sharira
mein garbhrit ho jaati hain aur varnaadi ke bees bhed na lekar ek ek 'med liya
jaata hai is prakar 26 prakritiyaan kam ho jaane se 42 punya prakritiyaan hain.
|  132. Question: What are Pap Prakriti? And how many and which are they?
Answer: Those whose arising brings about the experience of suffering are called
Pap Prakriti. These are 68 in number in the form of Bandha according to Bhed
Vivaksha and 100 in the form of Uday, and in Abhed Vivaksha, 82 in the form of
Bandha and 84 in the form of Uday. For example, 47 of the Ghatiya Karmas, Neecha
Gotra, Asataavedaniya, Narakayu, Narak Gati, Narak GatyAnupurvi, Tiryaag Gati,
Tiryaag GatyAnupurvi, four types of Ekeindriyaadi, five Sansthan except
Samachaturasra, five Sanhanan except Vajrarashabha Naraach, twenty of Ashubh
Varnaadi, Upghaat, Aprashast Vihaayogati, Sthavar, Sukshma, Aparayapti,
Sadharan, (40) :

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 51 agurulaghu 52 paraghAta 53 ucchvAsa 54 Alapa 55 udyota 56 prazasta
vihAyogati 57 trasa 58 bAdara 56 paryApti 60 pratyeka zarIra 61 sthira 62 zubha
63 subhaga 64 susvara 65 Aya 66 yazarakIrti 67 nirmANa aura 68 tIrthaMkara
abhedavivakSA meM 5 baMdhana aura 5 saMghAta kI dasa prakRtiyA~ pA~ca zarIra meM
garbhita ho jAtI haiM aura varNAdika ke bIsa bheda na lekara eka eka 'meda liyA
jAtA hai isa prakAra 26 prakRtiyA~ kama ho jAne se 42 puNya prakRtiyA~ haiM  /
| 132. prazna: pApa prakRti kise kahate haiM ? aura ve kitanI tathA kauna kauna
haiM ? uttara: jinake udaya meM duHkha kA anubhava hotA hai unheM pApa prakRti
kahate haiM ye bheda vivakSA se bandha rUpa 68 aura udaya rUpa 100 hai tathA
abheda vivakSA meM bandha 82 aura udaya rUpa 84 haiM  /  yathA ghAtiyA karmoM kI
47, nIca gotra, asAtAvedanIya, narakAyu, naraka gati, naraka gatyAnuppUrvI,
tiryaggati, tiryaggatyAnu pUrvI, ekendriyAdi cAra jAti, samacaturasra ko
chor3akara pA~ca saMsthAna, vajrarSabha nArAca ko chor3akara pA~ca saMhanana,
azubha varNAdi ke bIsa, upaghAta, aprazasta vihAyogati, sthAvara, sUkSma,
aparyApti, sAdhAraNa, (40) :

Page #46 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Asthir, Ashubh, Durbhrag, Duhswar, Anadeya, Ayashaskirti. These 100 are the
natures of sins. In these, there is no bondage of Samyag Mithyatva and Samyaktva
nature, only the bondage of Mithyatva nature occurs! Due to the influence of
Samyaktva, when the three parts of Mithyatva are broken, their existence occurs
and their rise also occurs in due time, therefore, there are 68 in terms of
bondage and 100 in terms of existence and rise. The twenty natures of Varna etc.
are in both the forms of punya and papa, therefore, they are included in both.
133. Question: Is the bondage of Ayukarma less? Answer: The bondage of Ayukarma
occurs in the first time of the third part after two parts of the present age of
the Karmabhoomij man and Tiryanch are gone. If the bondage does not occur at
that time due to the absence of the share of Leshya suitable for the bondage of
age, then it occurs at the beginning of the third part after two parts of the
remaining third part are gone. In this way, eight Apakarshkalas come. If there
is no bondage in these, then when in the present age  (41)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 asthira, azubha, durbhaga, duHsvara, anAdeya, ayazaskIrti  /  ye 100 pApaM
prakRtiyA~ haiN| inameM samyag mithyAtva aura samyaktva prakRti kA bandha nahIM
hotA sirpha mithyAtva prakRti kA bandha hotA hai ! samyaktva ke prabhAva se
mithyAtva ke tIna khaNDa ho jAne para inakI sattA hotI hai tathA yathA samaya
udaya bhI hotA hai ataH bandha kI apekSA 68 aura sattva tathA udaya kI apekSA
100 haiM  /  varNAdi kI bIsa prakRtiyA~ puNya aura pApa donoM rUpa meM hotI haiM
isaliye donoM meM zAmila kiyA jAtA hai  /  133. prazna: Ayukarma kA bandha kama
hotA hai ? uttara : Ayu karma kA bandha, karmabhUmija manuSya aura tiryaca ke
vartamAna Ayu ke do bhAga nikala jAne ke bAda tRtIya bhAga ke prathama samaya
meM hotA hai| yadi Ayu bandha ke yogya lezyA ke aMza na hone se usa samaya
bandha na ho to avaziSTa tRtIya bhAga ke do bhAga nikala jAne para tRtIya bhAga
ke prAraMbha meM hotA hai  /  isa prakAra ATa apakarSakAla Ate haiN| yadi inameM
bandha na ho to vartamAna Ayu meM jaba (41)

Page #47 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
When the remaining time is "Asankṣepāddhā" (half of the lifespan), according to
the rules, the bondage of the lifespan related to the next birth occurs. When
six months remain in the current lifespan of Devas and Narakas. The time of "Āya
Apakṣarṣa" (decline of lifespan) arrives, and when nine months remain in the
current lifespan of Bhoga Bhūmij humans and Tiryanchas, eight "Apakṣarṣa" times
arrive. 134. Question: Until which "Guṇasthāna" (stage of spiritual progress)
does the bondage of which lifespan occur? Answer: The bondage of Naraka lifespan
occurs until the first "Guṇasthāna", the bondage of Tiryancha lifespan occurs
until the second "Guṇasthāna", the bondage of human lifespan occurs until the
second "Guṇasthāna" in comparison to Karma Bhūmij humans and Tiryanchas, and
until the fourth "Guṇasthāna" in comparison to Devas and Narakas. The bondage of
any lifespan does not occur in the third "Guṇasthāna". The fourth and fifth
"Guṇasthāna" of Tiryanchas, and... 1. It is important to note that the
"Asankṣepāddhā" time is a fraction of the "Āvali" (cycle of time), not a
fraction of the "Asankhyāta" (innumerable). (Gok. Page 126, Āryikā Ādimati Ji's
commentary, edited by A. Ratanchand Mukhtar and Dhaval 11/266, 273, 275 and P.
11 162, last line, etc. should be seen) (42)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 asaMkSepAddhA' pramANakAla zeSa raha jAtA hai taba niyama se parabhava
sambandhI Ayu kA bandhaM hotA hai| deva aura nArakiyoM ke vartamAna Ayu meM
chaha mAsa zeSa rahane pr| Aya apakarSa kAla hAta haiM tathA bhoga bhUmija
manuSya aura tiryacoM ke vartamAna Ayu ke nau mAha zeSa rahane para ATha
apakarSa kAla Ate haiN| 134. prazna : kisa Ayu kA kisa guNasthAna taka bandha
hotA uttara : narakAyu kA bandha prathama guNasthAna taka, tiryaca Ayu kA bandha
dvitIya guNasthAna taka, karmabhUmija manuSya aura tiyaMcoM kI apekSA manuSyAyu
kA bandha dvitIya guNasthAna taka aura deva tathA nArakiyoM kI apekSA caturtha
guNasthAna taka hotA hai tRtIya guNasthAna meM kisI bhI Ayu kA bandha nahIM
hotaa| tiryaca ke caturtha aura paMcama guNasthAna meM tathA . 1. yaha bAta
khAsa dhyAna rakhane yogya hai ki asaMkSepAddhA kAla AvalI ke saMkhyAtaveM bhAga
pramANa hotA hai, na ki asaMkhyAtaveM bhAga prmaann| (goka0 pRSTa 126 AryikA
AdimatI jI kI TIkA sampA0 a0 ratanacanda mukhtAra evaM dhavala 11/266, 273, 275
evaM pa0 11 162 kI carama paMkti Adi draSTavya haiM) (42)

Page #48 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
From the fourth to the seventh *guna sthana* of a human being, only *deva-ayu*
is bound. In the *asta-maadi* *guna sthana*, *ayukarma* is not bound. The
*saakshi* does not have any *ayu* bound. According to the rules of *bhog-
bhoomija* and *ku-bhog-bhoomija* humans and *tiryanch*, *deva-ayu* is bound. In
the seventh hell, the *naarki* has only *tiryanch-ayu* bound. The *naarki* of
the remaining hells and the *deva* up to the twelfth heaven are eligible to have
*manushya-ayu* and *tiryanch-ayu* bound. From the thirteenth heaven to
*sarvarth-siddhi*, the *deva* are bound by *manushya-ayu* according to the
rules. *Tejas-kayika* and *vayu-kayika* beings are bound by *tiryanch-ayu*
according to the rules. A being who has come out of hell is neither *eka-
indriya* nor *vikal-tray*; but a *deva* up to the second heaven can be born in
the remaining *eka-indriya* except *tejas-kayika* and *vayu-kayika*. However,
1. In the seventh *guna sthana*, there is only *bandha-nishtpan*. And in those
*sthana* which are not on the verge of becoming a *shreni*, *yudhiti* occurs
only at the end of the time of the *aprammat*. On the other hand, *saatishay-
aprammat* does not become a *shreni*, therefore, *vyuniti* does not occur.  When
a significant portion (or a specific portion) of the time of the *aprammat-
sanyat* has passed, the binding of *deva-ayu* is severed. (Dhaval 8/302, 30,
353. 371 etc.) In other words, if the *aprammat* is *ghar-samaya-yati*, then it
remains *abandha* (unbound). (43)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 manuSya ke caturtha se saptama guNasthAna taka' devAyu kA hI bandha hotA hai|
aSTamAdi guNasthAnoM meM Ayukarma kA bnH| nahIM hotaa| sAkSI ke Aka kA bandha
nahIM hotaa| bhogabhUmija tathA kubhogabhUmija manuSya aura tiryacoM ke niyama
se devAyu kA bandha hotA hai| saptam naraka ke nArakI ke eka tiryaMca Ayu kA hI
bandha hotA hai| zeSa naraka ke nArakiyoM tathA bArahaveM svarga taka ke devoM
ke manuSyAyu aura tiryaMcAyu bandha yogya hai| terahaveM svarga se lekara
sarvArtha siddhi taka ke deva niyama se manuSyAyu kA hI bandha karate haiN|
tejaskAyika aura vAyukAyika jIva niyama se tiryaca Ayu kA bandha karate haiN|
naraka se nikalA huA jIva na ekendriya hotA hai aura na vikalatraya; parantu
dUsare svarga taka kA deva tejaskAyika aura vAyukAyika ko chor3a zeSa ekendriyoM
meM utpanna ho sakatA hai, para 1. saptama guNasthAna meM bandha niSTApana hI
hai| tathA jo zreNI banane ke sanmukha nahIM hai aise svasthAna apramatta ke hI
anta samaya meM yudhiti hotI hai| dUsare sAtizaya apramatta ke banya nahIM hotA
ataeva vyuniti bhI nahIM hotii| apramatta saMyata ke kAla ke saMkhyAta bahubhAga
(athavA saMkhyAtaveM bhAga) bItane para devAyu kA bandha vyuccheda ho jAtA hai|
(dhavala 8/302, 30, 353. 371 Adi) arthAt gharama samayayatI apramatta to
abandhaka hI rahatA hai| (43)

Page #49 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Not in the three Vikal. 135. Question: How many karmas of a being are bound
together? Answer: The binding of Ayus karma does not happen at every moment, but
in divisions. Therefore, the binding of the remaining seven karmas happens at
every moment. And at the time of Tribhaga, the binding of Ayus happens, so the
binding of eight karmas happens. The binding of Moh karma happens only up to the
ninth Gunasthan, therefore in the tenth Gunasthan, the binding of the remaining
six karmas happens, excluding Moh and Ayus. And in the 11th, 12th, and 13th
Gunasthan, only the binding of one Saatavedaniya happens. In this way, the
binding of 8, 7, 6, and 1 karma happens. 136. Question: What is the arrangement
of the binding of Sapratipaksha Prakritis in Uttar Prakritis? Answer: In Uttar
Prakritis, the binding of mutually opposing Prakritis does not happen together.
For example, when Saatavedaniya is being bound, Asaatavedaniya will not be
bound. And when the binding of Neecha Gotra is happening, the binding of Uccha
Gotra will not happen. When the binding of the opposing Prakriti is
extinguished, then further... (44)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 vikalatrayoM meM nhiiN| 135. prazna : eka sAtha eka jIva ke kitane karmoM kA
bandha . hotA hai ? uttara : Ayu karma kA bandha pratyeka samaya na hokara
vibhAga meM hotA hai ataH pratyeka samaya zeSa sAta karmoM kA bandha hotA hai
aura tribhAga ke samaya Ayu kA bandha hone se AToM ko kA bandha hotA hai|
mohakarma kA bandha navam guNasthAna taka hI hotA hai, ataH dazam guNasthAna meM
moha aura Ayu ko chor3akara zeSa chaha karmoM kA bandha hotA hai aura 11-12-13
ina tIna guNasthAnoM meM eka sAtAvedanIya kA hI bandha hotA hai| isa prakAra 8,
7, 6 aura 1 karma kA bandha hotA 136. prazna : uttara prakRtiyoM meM
sapratipakSa prakRtiyoM ke baMdha kI kyA vyavasthA hai ? uttara : uttara
prakRtiyoM meM paraspara virodhI prakRtiyoM kA bandha eka sAtha nahIM hotaa|
jaise jaba sAtAvedanIya kA bandha ho rahya ho taba asAtAvedanIya kA bandha nahIM
hogA aura jaba nIca gotra kA bandha ho rahA ho taba ucca gotra kA bandha nahIM
hogaa| virodhI prakRti kI bandha vyucchitti ho jAne para Age (44)

Page #50 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
It is only the residual nature that is continuously bound. For example, the
Saata Vedaniya and Asaata Vedaniya are two opposing natures. The binding of
Asaata Vedaniya is extinguished in the sixth Gunasthan, therefore, until the
sixth Gunasthan, the binding of one of the two will occur, and from the seventh
Gunasthan to the thirteenth Gunasthan, the binding of Saata Vedaniya will occur
at all times. 137. Question: When and to whom does the binding of the
Tirthankara nature occur? Answer: The binding of the Tirthankara nature occurs
in the fourth to eighth Gunasthan, in the sixth part of the constitution of a
Kavalika or Shruta Kevali human in the Karmabhoomi. The binding of the
Tirthankara nature can occur in all four Samyagdarshanas: Prathamopa Sham,
Dvitiyopa Sham, Kshayopa Shamik, and Kshayik. A human who has bound himself to
the Tiryanch or Manushyaayu before attaining Samyagdarshan will not have the
binding of the Tirthankara nature even after attaining Samyagdrishti. However, a
person who has bound himself to Naraka or Devaayu before attaining Samyagdarshan
may have the binding of the Tirthankara nature, or a person who has bound
himself to any (સપૂર્વ

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 avaziSTa prakRti kA hI nirantara bandha hotA hai  /  yathA, sAtA vedanIyaM aura
asAtAvedanIya ye donoM prakRtiyA~ paraspara virodhI haiN| inameM asAtAvedanIya
kI bandha vyucchitti chaTe guNasthAna meM ho jAtI hai ataH chaThe guNasthAna
taka to do meM se kisI eka kA bandha hogA aura saptam guNasthAna se terahaveM
guNasthAna taka sAtAvedanIya kA hI pratyeka samaya bandha hogA  /  137. prazna
tIrthaMkara prakRti kA bandha kaba aura kisake hotA hai ? uttara : tIrthaMkara
prakRti kA bandha karmabhUmija manuSya ke kaMvalI yA zrutakevalI ke saMvidhAna
meM caturtha se lekara aSTam guNasthAna ke chaThe bhAga taka hotA hai|
tIrthaMkara prakRti kA bandha, prathamopazama, dvitIyopazama, kSAyopazamika aura
kSAyika, ina cAroM samyagdarzanoM meM ho sakatA hai| jisa manuSya ne
samyagdarzana prApta karane ke pahale tiryaMca yA manuSyAyu kA bandha kara liyA
hai use samyagdRSTi hone para bhI tIrthaMkara prakRti kA bandha nahIM hogaa|
hA~, jisane samyagdarzana prApta karane ke pahale naraka yA devAyu kA bandha
kiyA hai use tIrthaMkara prakRti kA bandha ho sakatA hai yA jisane kisI (sapUrva

Page #51 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Even if one has not bound the lifespan, they can bind the Tirthankara nature. If
a human being binds the Tirthankara nature, they will attain liberation or the
third existence. Their second existence will be spent in hell or in the
celestial realm. If a human being with right faith who binds the Tirthankara
nature goes to hell, they will only go to the first hell. Although one can
become a Tirthankara even after escaping the second and third hells, the humans
born there become wrong faith at the time of death, and as long as they remain
wrong faith, the inflow of the Tirthankara nature's realms remains closed. It
resumes upon attaining right faith. The Tirthankara nature is such that once it
begins, its inflow continues uninterrupted.  138. Question: Where does the
binding of the food-consuming body and the limbs and organs of the food-
consuming body occur? Answer: The binding of the food-consuming body and the
limbs and organs of the food-consuming body occurs from the seventh guna-sthana
to the sixth part of the eighth guna-sthana, and their emergence occurs in the
sixth guna-sthana. (46)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 bhI Ayu kA bandha nahIM kiyA hai vaha tIrthaMkara prakRti kA bandha kara sakatA
hai| tIrthaMkara prakRti kA bandha karane vAlA manuSya thA to usI bhAva se mokSa
jAtA hai yA tRtIya bhava meN| usakA dvitIya bhava naraka yA devagati meM vyatIta
hotA hai| tIrthaMkara prakRti kA bandha karane vAlA samyagdRSTi manuSya yadi
naraka jAyegA to prathama naraka taka hI jaavegaa| yadyapi dvitIya aura tRtIya
naraka se nikalakara bhI tIrthaMkara ho sakate haiM parantu vahA~ utpanna hone
vAle manuSya mRtyu ke samaya mithyAdRSTi ho jAte haiM aura jaba taka midhyAdRSTi
rahate haiM taba taka tIrthaMkara prakRti ke pradezoM kA Asrava banda rahatA
hai| samyagdarzana prApta karane para punaH cAlU ho jAtA hai| tIrthaMkara
prakRti kA aisA svabhAva hai ki prAraMbha hone para usakA Asrava nirantara hotA
rahatA hai| 138. prazna: AhAraka zarIra aura AhAraka zarIrAMgopAMga kA bandha
kahA~ hotA hai ? uttara : AhAraka zarIra aura AhAraka zarIrAMgopAMga kA bandha
saptam guNasthAna se lekara aSTam guNasthAna ke chaThe bhAga taka hotA hai tathA
inakA udaya chaTe guNasthAna meM hI hotA (46)

Page #52 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
There is no other. 136. Question: Where in heaven and hell is a living being
born with which cohesion? Answer: A living being with Asamprapta Pattika
cohesion is born up to the eighth heaven, with Keelak cohesion up to the twelfth
heaven, with Ardha Narach cohesion up to the sixteenth heaven, with Narach,
Vajra Narach, and Vajra-Rshabha Narach cohesion up to the Navgraiveyak, with
Vajra Narach and Vajra-Rshabha Narach cohesion up to the Nav Anudish Vimanas,
and with Vajra-Rshabha cohesion up to the Anuttar Vimanas. A sentient being with
six cohesions, if it goes to hell, goes up to the third hell, a being with five
cohesions, excluding Sripatika, goes up to the fifth hell, a being with Ardha
Narach cohesion goes up to the sixth hell, and a being with Vajra-Rshabha
cohesion goes up to the seventh hell. ।। Iti Prathama Adhikarah ॥ (ne)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 hai anyatra nahIM  /  136. prazna: kisa saMhanana kA dhArI jIva svarga aura
naraka meM kahA~ taka utpanna hotA hai ? uttara : asaMprApA pATikA sahana vAhI
AThaveM svarga taka kIlaka saMhanana vAle bArahaveM svarga taka, ardha nArAca
saMhanana vAle solahaveM svarga taka, nArAca, vajra nArAca vajrarSabhanArAcaina
tIna saMhananoM vAle navagraiveyaka taka, vajranArAca, vajrarSabhanArAca ina do
saMhananoM vAle nava anudiza vimAnoM taka aura vajrarSabha saMhanana vAle
anuttara vimAnoM taka utpanna hote haiN| chaha saMhanana vAle saMjJI jIva yadi
naraka jAyeM to tIsare naraka taka, sRpATikA ko chor3a zeSa pA~ca saMhanana vAle
pA~caveM naraka taka ardhanArAca paryaMta vAle chaThe taka aura vajrarSabha
saMhanana vAle sAtaveM naraka taka jAte haiN|  /  /  iti prathamAdhikAraH  //
(ne)

Page #53 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Bandha (Bondage)  **140. Question:** What is Bandha?  **Answer:** When a Jiva
(soul) with Kashayas (passions) acquires Karma-rupa (karmic matter) particles,
it is called Bandha. This bond between the Jiva and Karma is like the
inseparable union of water and milk, a synthetic combination.  **141.
Question:** How many types of Bandha are there? **Answer:** There are four
types: 1. Prakriti Bandha, 2. Sthiti Bandha, 3. Anubhag Bandha, and 4. Pradesh
Bandha.  **142. Question:** What is Prakriti Bandha? **Answer:** The inherent
nature of Karma particles, such as obscuring knowledge, is called Prakriti
Bandha.  **143. Question:** What is Sthiti Bandha? **Answer:** The duration of
time for which Karma particles bear fruit in the Karma Pradesh (karmic field) is
called Sthiti Bandha.  **144. Question:** What is Anubhag Bandha? **Answer:**
The intensity of the fruit-bearing capacity of Karma particles in the Karma
Pradesh is called Anubhag Bandha.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dvitIyAdhikAra 140, prazna : bandha kise kahate haiM ? uttara : kaSAya sahita
jIva, karmarUpa hone ke yogya pudgala paramANuoM ko jo grahaNa karatA hai use
bandha kahate haiN| jIva aura karma kA yaha bandha nIra-kSIra ke samAna eka
kSetrAvagAha hokara saMzleSAtmaka saMyogarUpa hotA hai| 141. prazna : banya ke
kitane bheda haiM ? uttara : cAra haiM- 1 prakRti bandha 2 sthiti bandha 3
anubhAga bandha aura 4 pradeza bndh| 142. prazna : prakRti bandha kise kahate
haiM ? uttara : karma paramANuoM meM jJAna ko AvRta karanA Adi kA svabhAva
par3anA prakRti bandha hai| 143. prazna : sthiti bandha kise kahate haiM ?
uttara : karma pradezoM meM phala dene kI zakti kA jo hInAdhika kAla hai use
sthiti bandha kahate haiN| 144. prazna : anubhAga bandha kise kahate haiM ?
uttara : karma pradezoM meM phala dene kI zakti kI jo hInAdhikatA hai (48)

Page #54 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
It is called **Anubhag Bandha**. 145. Question: What is **Pradesh Bandha**?
Answer: The **parinaman** (transformation) that occurs due to the **hina-
adhikta** (lesser-greater) in the number of **pradeshas** (regions) of **karma**
(actions) like **Jnana-avaran** (knowledge-obscuring karma) is called **Pradesh
Bandha**. 146. Question: What are the causes of **Chaturvidha Bandha** (fourfold
bondage)? Answer: **Prakriti Bandha** (nature bondage) and **Pradesh Bandha**
occur due to **yoga** (union), and **Sthiti Bandha** (state bondage) and
**Anubhag Bandha** occur due to **kashaya** (passions). 147. Question: How many
**ayantar** (sub-divisions) are there of **Prakriti Bandha** etc.? Answer: There
are four: **utkrusht** (excellent), **anutkrusht** (inferior), **ajghannya**
(not the worst), and **jghannya** (worst); the most is called **utkrusht**, the
less than that is called **anutkrusht**, the least is called **jghannya**, and
slightly more than **jghannya** is called **ajghannya**. The divisions from
**anutkrusht** to **ajghannya** are called **madhyama** (medium). 1.
Alternatively, the nature of **anutkrusht** and **ajghannya** can also be seen
like this. In the **ajghannya** category, all options beyond **jghannya** are
seen. (That is, all divisions different from **jghannya** are **ajghannya** in
nature). Similarly, in all options with the designation **anutkrusht** below
**utkrusht**, the **jghannya** category is also seen. (Dhaval Pu. 12 p. 5, 6)
(That is, all divisions different from **utkrusht** are **anutkrusht** in
nature). (46)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 use anubhAga bandha kahate haiN| 145. prazna : pradeza bandha kise kahate haiM
? uttara : jJAnAvaraNAdi karmoM ke pradezoM kI saMkhyA meM jo hInAdhikatA liye
huye pariNamana hai use pradeza bandha kahate haiN| 146. prazna : caturvidha
bandha kina kAraNoM se hotA hai ? uttara : prakRti aura pradeza bandha yoga ke
nimitti se aura sthiti tathA anubhAga bandha kaSAya ke nimitta se hote haiN|
147. prazna : prakRti bandha Adi ke ayAntara bheda kitane hai ? uttara : cAra
haiM- utkRSTa, anutkRSTa, ajaghanya aura jaghanya; sabase adhika ko utkRSTa,
usase kama ko anutkRSTa, sabase kama ko jaghanya aura jaghanya se kucha adhika
ko ajaghanya kahate haiN| anutkRSTa se ajaghanya taka ke bheda madhyama kahe
jAte haiN| 1. athavA, anuskRSTa va ajaghanya kA svarUpa aise bhI dekhane ko
milatA hai| anaghanya pada meM jaghanya se Age ke sabhI vikalpa dekhe jAte haiN|
(yAnI jaghanya se bhinna saba bheda ajaghanya svarUpa haiN| isI taraha utkRSTa
se nIce ke anutkRSTa saMjJA vAle saba vikalpoM meM jaghanya pada kA bhI prayeza
dekho jAtA hai| (dhavala pu. 12 pR 5, 6) (yAnI utkRSTa se bhinna saba bheda
anutkRSTa rUpa hai| (46)

Page #55 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
148. Question: How many sub-categories are there of **utkrusht bandh** (superior
bondage) etc.? Answer: There are four: **saadi**, **anaadi**, **dhruv**, and
**adhruv**. The bondage that stops and then resumes is called **saadi bandh**.
The bondage that continues from **anaadi** (beginningless) until **vyuchchitti**
(liberation) is called **anaadi bandh**. The bondage that is continuous is
called **dhruv bandh**, and the bondage that has intervals is called **adhruv
bandh**. The **abhavya** (non-liberated) being has **dhruv bandh**, and the
**bhavya** (liberated) being has **adhruv bandh**. 146. Question: How do the
**saadi-anaadi-dhruv-adhruv** categories occur in the **mool prakritis**
(fundamental substances)? Answer: Except for **vedaniya** (sensory) and **ayu**
(life-span) karma, the remaining six karmas have all four types of bondage:
**saadi**, **anaadi**, **dhruv**, and **adhruv**. **Vedaniya karma** has three
types of bondage except for **saadi**, and **ayu karma** has only **saadi** and
**adhruv** bondage.  1. **Vedaniya** does not have **saadi bandh** because even
when ascending the **upsham** (subduing) category, there is no absence of
bondage of **vedaniya** in general. (Go. Ka. p. 100, 612, Tika Pu. A. Adimatiji;
Samp. Ratanchand Ji Mukhtar).  (50)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 148. prazna : utkRSTa bandha Adi ke avAntara bheda kitane haiM ? uttara : cAra
haiM.. sAdi, anAdi, dhruva aura adhruva  /  jo bandha rukakara punaH jArI hotA
hai vaha sAdi bandha hai, jo bandha vyucchitti taka anAdi se calA AtA hai use
anAdi bandha kahate haiN| jo bandha nirantara hotA rahatA hai use dhruva bandha
kahate haiM tathA jo bandha antara sahita hotA hai use adhruva bandha kahate
haiN| abhavya jIva kA dhruva aura bhavya jIva kA adhruva bandha hotA hai| 146.
prazna : mUla prakRtiyoM meM sAdi-anAdi-dhruva-anuva bheda kisa prakAra ghaTita
hote haiM ? uttara : vedanIya aura Ayu karma ko chor3akara zeSa chaha karmoM kA
sAdi, anAdi, dhruva aura adhruva-cAroM prakAra kA bandha hotA hai| vedanIya
karma kA sAdi ko chor3akara zeSa tIna prakAra kA bandha hotA hai' tathA Ayu
karma kA sAdi aura adhruva hI bandha hotA hai| 1. vedanIya kA sAdi bandha nahIM
hotA hai, kyoMki upazama zreNI car3hane para bhI vedanIya sAmAnya ke bandha kA
abhAva nahIM hotaa| (go0 ka0 pR0 100, 612, TIkA pU0 A. AdimatijI; sampA0
ratanacaMda jI mukhtaar)| (50)

Page #56 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
150. Question: What are the Dhruva-bandhi (fixed-binding) natures and how many
and which are they? Answer: Those whose binding continues until the destruction
of the bond are called Dhruva-bandhi natures. They are 47, such as the 16
natures of the three Ghatiya Karmas (5+6+5=16) without Mohaniya, the 16 Kashayas
like Mithyatva, Anantanabandhi Chatushk, etc., the 4 of Varna, etc. from Bhaya,
Jugupsa, Taijasa, Karman, Agurulaghu, Upghāt, Nirman, and Abhed Vivaksha. Their
binding continues until their respective Gunasthan of binding and destruction.
Except for these, the remaining 73 natures are Adhruva-bandhi (non-fixed-
binding). They have only two types of binding: Sadi (with) and Adhruva
(without). 151. Question: Which are the Sapratipaksha (with opposing) and
Apratipaksha (without opposing) natures among the Adhruva-bandhi natures?
Answer: The Tirthankara Aharaka pair, Parghāt, Ucchvās, Ātap, Udyot, and the
four Āyas, these 11 natures are Apratipaksha - without opposing, meaning that
when their binding occurs, it occurs, and if it does not occur, it does not
occur. The remaining 62 natures are Sapratipaksha - with opposing, such as the
51 Sata-vedaniya.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 150. prazna : dhruvabandhI prakRtiyA~ kinheM kahate haiM aura ve kitanI tathA
kauna-kauna hai ? uttara : bandha cyucchitti paryaMta jinakA nirantara bandha
hotA rahatA hai unheM dhruva bandhI prakRtiyA~ kahate haiN| ve 47 haiM
jaisemohanIya ke binA tIna ghAtiyA karmoM kI 16 prakRtiyA~ (5+6+5=16) midhyAtla,
anantAnabandhI catuSka Adi 16 kaSAya, bhaya, jugupsA, taijasa, kArmaNa,
agurulaghu, upaghAta, nirmANa aura abheda vivakSA se varNAdi kI 4 /  inakA apanI
apanI bandha vyucchitti ke guNasthAna taka nirantara bandha hotA rahatA hai|
inake sivAya zeSa rahI 73 prakatiyA~ adhrava bandhI hai| inameM sAdi aura
adhruva- do hI bandha hote haiN| 151. prazna : adhruvabandhI prakRtiyoM meM
sapratipA aura apratipakSa prakRtiyA~ kauna-kauna hai ? uttara : tIrthakara
AhAraka yugala, paraghAta, ucchvAsa, Atapa, udyota aura cAroM Aya ye 11
prakRtiyA~ apratipakSa-virodhI rahita haiM arthAt jisa samaya inakA bandha hotA
hai usa samaya hotA hI hai, aura na hove to nahIM hotaa| bAkI 62 prakRtiyA~
sapratipakSI haiM-virodhI sahita haiM jaise sAtAvedanIya (51)

Page #57 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
And Asatavedaniya, etc. When one is bound, the other is not. The Tirthankara,
Aharaka couple and the four Asas, these seven natures are bound and unbound in
an instant, and the rest in one time. || 152. Question: How many natures are
eligible for bondage, arising and being? Answer: The Acharyas have described
bondage and arising with the intention of non-differentiation, and being with
the intention of differentiation. In the intention of non-differentiation, there
are five bondages, five aggregates, and sixteen of Varna, etc., and the
Samyagmithyatva and Samyaktava-nature, thus twenty-eight natures are less,
making 120 natures eligible for bondage. The arising of Samyagmithyatva and
Samyaktava-nature occurs. Therefore, there are 122 natures eligible for arising.
The arising of Samyagmithyatva occurs in the third Gunasthan, and the arising of
Samyaktava-nature occurs from the fourth to the seventh Gunasthan. Being is of
5+6+2+28+4+63+2+5=148 natures. 153. Question: What is called Bandha Tribhangi?
Answer: Bandha Vyuchchichchhati, Bandha and Abandha are called Bandha Tribhangi.
The description of these three in the Gunasthanas and Marganas

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 aura asAtAvedanIya aadi| inameM jaba eka kA bandha hotA hai taba dUsarI kA
nahIM hotaa| tIrthakara, AhAraka yugala tathA cAra Asa, ina sAta prakRtiyoM ke
mArakara ba-dhone kA kAla antarmuhUrta hai aura zeSa kA eka smy|| 152. prazna :
bandha, udaya aura sattva yogya prakRtiyAM kitanI haiM? uttara : AcAryoM ne
bandha aura udaya kA varNana abheda vivakSA se kiyA hai aura sattva kA bheda
vivakSA se| abhedra vivakSA meM pA~ca bandhana, pA~ca saMghAta tathA varNAdika
kI solaha aura samyagmithyAtva evaM samyaktva-prakRti isa prakAra aTThAIsa
prakRtiyoM ke kama hone se 120 prakRtiyA~ bandha yogya haiN| samyagmithyAtva
aura samyaktvaprakRti kA udaya AtA hai . isaliye udaya yogya 122 prakRtiyA~ haiM
/  samyagmithyAtva kA udaya tRtIya guNasthAna meM aura samyaktva prakRti kA
udaya caturtha se lekara saptam guNasthAna taka hotA hai| sattva
5+6+2+28+4+63+2+5=148 prakRtiyoM kA hotA 153. prazna : bandha tribhaMgI kise
kahate haiM ? uttara : bandha vyuchichatti, bandha aura abandha ko bandha
tribhaMgI kahate haiN| ina tInoM kA guNasthAnoM aura mArgaNAoM meM varNana

Page #58 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
It is done. 154. Question: In which Gunasthana are how many types of Bandha
Vyuchchitti? Answer: In the first Gunasthana, 16, in the second Gunasthana, 25,
in the third Gunasthana, zero, in the fourth Gunasthana, 10, in the fifth
Gunasthana, 4, in the sixth Gunasthana, 6, in the seventh Gunasthana, 1, in the
eighth Gunasthana, 36, in the ninth Gunasthana, 5, in the tenth Gunasthana, 16,
in the eleventh and twelfth Gunasthana, zero, and in the thirteenth Gunasthana,
one type of Bandha Vyuchchitti occurs. In the fourteenth Gunasthana, there is no
Bandha or Bandha Vyuchchitti. 155. Question: What are the 16 types of Vyuchchinn
in the first Mithyatva Gunasthana? Answer: 1. Mithyatva, 2. Hundak Sansthan, 3.
Napunsakaved, 4. Asamprapta Sripatika Sanhanan, 5. Ekendriya Jati, 6. Sthavar,
7. Atap, 8. Sukshma, 9. Apariyapta, 10. Sadharan, 11. Dwiindriya, 12.
Triindriya, 13. Chaturindriya Jati,

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 kiyA jAtA hai| 154. prazna : kisa guNasthAna meM kitanI prakRtiyoM kI baMdha
vyucchitti hotI hai ? uttara : prathama guNasthAna meM 16, dvitIya guNasthAna
meM 25, tRtIya guNasthAna meM zUnya, caturtha guNasthAna meM 10, paMcam
guNasthAna meM 4, SaSTham guNasthAna meM 6, saptam guNasthAna meM 1, aSTam
guNasthAna meM 36, navam guNasthAna meM 5, dazam guNasthAna meM 16, ekAdaza aura
dvAdaza guNasthAna meM zUnya tathA trayodaza guNasthAna meM eka prakRti kI
bandha vyucchitti hotI hai| caturdaza guNasthAna meM bandha aura bandha
vyucchitti kucha bhI nahIM hai| 155. prazna : prathama-mithyAtva guNasthAna meM
vyucchinna hone vAlI 16 prakRtiyA~ kauna kauna hai ? uttara : 1. mithyAtva, 2.
huNDaka saMsthAna, 3 napuMsakaveda, 4 asaMprApta sRpATikA saMhanana, 5 ekendriya
jAti, 6 sthAvara, 7 Atapa, 8 sUkSma, 6 aparyApta, 10 sAdhAraNa, 11 dvIndriya, 12
trIndriya, 13 caturindriya jAti,

Page #59 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
14 Narakagati, 15 Narakagatyānupūrvi and 16 Narakāyu. These sixteen Prakṛtis are
bound only up to the first Guṇasthāna, not beyond. 156. Question: Which are the
25 Prakṛtis that are severed in the second - Sāsādan Guṇasthāna? Answer: The
four Styāna-gaddhi of Anantānubandhi, Nidrā Nidrā, Prachalā Prachalā, Durbhaga,
Duḥsvara, Anādeya, Nyagrodhādi four Sansthāna, Yajra-nārāchādi four Sanhanana,
Aprashasta Vihāyoga-gati, Strīveda, Nīcha-gotra Tiryag-gati Tiryag-gatyānupūrvi,
Udyota and Tiryag-āyu, these twenty-five Prakṛtis are severed in the second
Guṇasthāna. 157. Question: Which are the ten Prakṛtis that are severed in the
fourth - Asanyata Samyagdṛṣṭi Guṇasthāna? Answer: Apratyākhyānāvaraṇa Krodha-
māna-māyā-lobha, Vajrarṣabhanārācha Sanhanana, Audārika Śarīra, Audārika
Śarīrāngopaṅga, Manuṣya-gati, Manuṣya-gatyānupūrvi and Manuṣyāyu, these ten
Prakṛtis are severed in the fourth Guṇasthāna. 158. Question: Which are the ten
Prakṛtis that are severed in the fifth - Deśavirat Guṇasthāna?  (54)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 14 narakagati, 15 narakagatyAnupUrvI aura 16 narakAyu  /  ina solaha prakRtiyoM
kA bandha prathama guNasthAna taka hI hotA hai, Age nahIM  /  156. prazna:
dvitIya - sAsAdana guNasthAna meM vyucchinna hone vAlI 25 prakRtiyA~ kauna haiM
? uttara : anantAnubandhI kI cAra styAnagaddhi, nidrA nidrA, pracalA pracalA,
durbhaga, duHsvara, anAdeya, nyagrodhAdi cAra saMsthAna, yajranArAcAdi cAra
saMhanana, aprazasta vihAyogati, strIveda, nIcagotra tiryaggati
tiryaggatyAnupUrvI, udyota aura tiryagAyu ina paccIsa prakRtiyoM kI bandha
vyucchitti dvitIya guNasthAna meM hotI hai  /  157 prazna: caturtha - asaMyata
samyagdRSTi guNasthAna meM vyucchinna hone vAlI dasa prakRtiyA~ kauna haiM ?
uttara : apratyAkhyAnAvaraNa krodha-mAna- mAyA - lobha, vajrarSabhanArAca
saMhanana, audArika zarIra, audArika zarIrAMgopAMga, manuSyagati,
manuSyagatyAnupUrvI aura manuSyAyu, ina dasa prakRtiyoM kI bandha vyucchitti
caturtha guNasthAna meM hotI hai| 158. prazna : paMcama - dezavirata guNasthAna
meM vyucchinna hone (54)

Page #60 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
What are the four natures that are detached? Answer: The four natures of
**pratyakhyanavaran**, **krodha**, **mana**, **maya**, and **loma** are detached
in the fifth **gunasthan**. 156. Question: What are the six natures that are
detached in the sixth **gunasthan** - **pramatta-samyata**? Answer: The six
natures of **asthir**, **ashubha**, **asataavedaniya**, **ayashaskirti**,
**arati**, and **shoka** are detached in the sixth **gunasthan**. 160. Question:
What is the one nature that is detached in the seventh **gunasthan** -
**apramatta-samyata**? Answer: The one nature of **devayu** is detached in the
seventh **gunasthan**. 161. Question: What are the 36 natures that are detached
in the eighth **gunasthan** - **apuurvakarana**? Answer: The eighth
**gunasthan** has seven stages. In the first stage, which is **maran-rahit**,
the two natures of **nidra** and **prachala** are detached at the end of the
sixth stage. The other natures detached in the eighth **gunasthan** are
**tirthankara**, **nirmana**, **prashasta-vihayogati**, **panchendriya-jati**,
**taijas**, **karman**, **aaharaka-sharira**, **aaharaka**.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 vAlI 4 prakRtiyA~ kauna haiM ? uttara : pratyAkhyAnAvaraNa krodha-mAna-mAyA
aura loma ina cAra prakRtiyoM kI bandha vyucchitti paMcam guNasthAna meM hotI
hai| 156. prazna : SaSTham-pramatta saMyata guNasthAna meM vyucchinna hone vAlI
6 prakRtiyA~ kauna hai ? uttara : asthira, azubha, asAtAvedanIya, ayazaskIrti,
arati aura zoka, ina chaha prakRtiyoM kI bandha vyucchitti SaSTam guNasthAna meM
hotI hai| 160. prazna : saptam-apramatta saMyata guNasthAna meM vyucchinna hone
vAlI eka prakRti kauna hai ? uttara : devAyu, isa eka prakRti kI baMtha
vyucchitti saptam guNasthAna meM hotI hai| 161. prazna : aSTam-apUrvakaraNa
guNasthAna meM byucchinna hone vAlI 36 prakRtiyoM kauna hai? uttara :
apUrvakaraNa guNasthAna ke sAta mAga haiM unameM maraNa rahita prathama bhAga
meM nidrA aura pracalA ina do ko chaThe bhAga ke anta samaya meM tIrthakara,
nirmANa, prazasta vihAyogati, paMcendriya jAti, taijasa, kArmaNa, AhAraka
zarIra, AhAraka

Page #61 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Shararangopag, Samchaturanasansthan, Devagati, Devagatyānupūrvi, Vaikriyik
Sharira, Vaikriyik Shariraangopag, Varnaadi Char, Agurulaghu, Upghāt, Parghāt,
Ucchvās, Tras, Bādar, Paryāpti, Pratiyek Sharira, Sthira, Shubha, Subhaga,
Susvara and Ādeya, these thirty and in the seventh part of the end, Hāsya, Rati,
Bhaya and Jugupsā these four; all together in the Ashtam Gunasthan, there is the
binding and liberation of thirty-six natures. 162. Question: In the Navam-
Anivrittikaran Gunasthan, which five natures are liberated? Answer: In the five
parts of Anivrittikaran, in order, Purusha Veda, Sanchalan Kroth, Man, Maya and
Lobha, these five natures are bound and liberated. 163. Question: In the Dasham-
Sookshma Samparaya Gunasthan, which sixteen natures are liberated? Answer: Five
of Jnanavaran, five of Antaraya, four of Darshanavaran - Chakshudarshanavaran,
Achakshudarshanavaran, Avhidarshanavaran, केवल Darshanavaran, Uchchh Gotr and
Yashaskirti, these sixteen natures are bound and liberated at the end of the
Dasham Gunasthan.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zarArAMgopAga, samacaturanasaMsthAna, devagati, devagatyAnupUrvI, vaikriyika
zarIra, vaikriyika zarIrAMgopAMga, varNAdi cAra, agurulaghu, upaghAta,
paraghAta, ucchvAsa, trasa, bAdara, paryApti, pratyeka zarIra, sthira, zubha,
subhaga, susvara aura Adeya, ina tIsa kI tathA anta ke saptama bhAga meM hAsya,
rati, bhaya aura jugupsA ina cAra kI; saba milAkara aSTam guNasthAna meM
chattIsa prakRtiyoM kI bandha vyucchitti hotI hai| 162. prazna : navam-
anivRttikaraNa guNasthAna meM vyucchinna hone vAlI 5 prakRtiyA~ kauna haiM?
uttara : anivRttikaraNa ke pA~ca bhAgoM meM krama se puruSa veda, saMcalana
krotha, mAna, mAyA aura lobha ina pA~ca prakRtitoM kI bandha vyucchitti hotI
hai| 163. prazna : dazam-sUkSma sAMparAya guNasthAna meM vyucchinna hone yAlI 16
prakRtiyoM kauna hai? uttara : jJAnAvaraNa kI 5, antarAya kI 5, darzanAvaraNa kI
cAra-cakSurdarzanAvaraNa, acakSurdarzanAvaraNa, avadhidarzanAvaraNa, kevala
darzanAvaraNa, ucca gotra aura yazaskIrti ina solaha prakRtiyoM kI bandha
vyucchitti dazam guNasthAna ke anta meM hotI hai|

Page #62 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
164. Question: Which one nature is severed in the thirteenth **guna-sthana** of
the thirteen **sayoga**? Answer: **Sata-vedaniya**, the bondage of this one
nature is severed in the thirteenth **guna-sthana**? - 165. Question: How many
natures are bound in which **guna-sthana**? Answer: In the thirteen **guna-
sthana** from **mithya-drishti** onwards, there are 117, 101, 74, 77, 67, 63,
56, 58, 22, 17, 1, 1, 1 natures bound respectively. In the fourteenth **guna-
sthana**, no nature is bound. - 166. Question: How many natures are unbound in
which **guna-sthana**? Answer: In the fourteen **guna-sthana** from **mithya-
drishti** onwards, there are 3, 16, 46, 43, 53, 57, 61, 62, 68, 103, 116, 116,
116, 120 natures unbound respectively. - 167. Question: How is the plan of the
three-fold bondage in the **guna-sthana** from **mithya-drishti** onwards?
Answer: There are 120 natures in total that are capable of being bound, out of
which the **tirthankara** (57)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 164. prazna : trayodaza-sayoga kevalI guNasthAna meM vyucchinna hone vAlI 1
prakRti kauna hai ? uttara : sAtAvedanIya, isa eka prakRti kI baMdha vyucchitti
trayodazaguNasthAna meM hotI hai ? - 165. prazna : kisa guNasthAna meM kitanI
prakRtiyoM kA bandha hotA uttara : mithyAdRSTi Adi teraha guNasthAnoM meM krama
se 117, 101, 74, 77, 67, 63, 56, 58, 22, 17, 1, 1, 1, prakRtiyoM kA bandha hotA
hai| caudahaveM muNasthAna meM kisI bhI prakRti kA bandha nahIM hotaa| . 166.
prazna : kisa guNasthAna meM kitanI prakRtiyoM kA abanya uttara : mithyAdRSTi
Adi caudaha guNasthAnoM meM krama se 3, 16, 46, 43, 53, 57, 61, 62, 68, 103,
116, 116, 116, 120 prakRtiyoM kA abandha hai| 167. prazna : mithyAdRSTi Adi
guNasthAnoM meM bandha tribhaMgI kI yojanA kisa prakAra kI jAve ? uttara : kula
bandha yogya prakRtiyA~ 120 haiM unameM se tIrthakara kA (57)

Page #63 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Bonding occurs from the fourth to the eighth *gunasthanas*, and the bonding of
the *aaharaka* pair occurs in the seventh and eighth *gunasthanas*. Therefore,
since the three *prakritis* are unbondable in the first *gunasthanas*, they have
been reduced. As a result, in the first *gunasthanas*, the bond *vyuchchitti* is
16, the bond is 117, and the non-bond is 3. Due to the reduction of 16
*vyuchchhinna* *prakritis* in the first *gunasthanas*, 101 *prakritis* remain
bondable in the second *gunasthanas*. Therefore, the bond *vyuchchitti* is 25,
the bond is 101, and the non-bond is 16+3-16. Due to the reduction of 25
*vyuchchhinna* *prakritis* in the second *gunasthanas*, 76 remain. However, in
the third *gunasthanas*, there is no bond of *ayu*. Therefore, 2 more
*prakritis* are reduced. In this way, in the third *gunasthanas*, the bond
*vyuchchitti* is zero, the bond is 74, and the non-bond is 16+25+2=46. In the
fourth *gunasthanas*, the bond of *manushyayu*, *devayu*, and *tirthankara*
*prakritis* begins. Therefore, the bond is 74+3=77. The bond *vyuchchitti* is
10, the bond is 77, and the non-bond is 46-3=43. Due to the reduction of 10
*vyuchchhinna* *prakritis* in the fourth *gunasthanas*, in the fifth
*gunasthanas*, the bond is 67, the bond *vyuchchitti* is 4, and the non-bond is
43+10=53. Due to the reduction of 4 *vyuchchhinna* *prakritis* from the fifth
*gunasthanas*, in the sixth...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 bandha caturtha se lekara aSTam guNasthAna taka hotA hai tathA AhAraka yugala
kA bandha saptam aSTam meM hotA hai, ataH , tIna prakRtiyA~ prathama guNasthAna
meM abandhanIya hone se kama ho gaI  /  phalasvarUpa prathama guNasthAna meM
bandha vyacchitti 16 kI, bandha 117 kA aura abandha 3 kA hai| prathama
guNasthAna kI vyucchinna 16 prakRtiyA~ ghaTa jAne se dvitIya guNasthAna meM
bandha yogya 101 prakRtiyA~ raha gaI ataH bandha vyucchitti 25 kI, bandha 101 kA
aura abandha 16+3-16 kA hai| dvitIya guNasthAna kI vyucchinna 25 prakRtiyA~ kama
ho jAne se 76 rahIM para tRtIya guNasthAna meM Ayu kA bandha nahIM hotA ataH 2
prakRtiyA~ aura kama ho gii| isa taraha tRtIya guNasthAna meM bandha vyucchitti
zUnya  /  kI, bandha 74 kA aura abandha 16+25+2=46 kA hai| caturtha guNasthAna
meM manuSyAyu, devAyu aura tIrthaMkara prakRti kA bandha hone lagatA hai ataH
bandha 74+3=77 kA hai| ' bandha vyucchitti 10 kI, bandha 77 kA aura abandha
46-3-43 kA hai| caturtha guNasthAna kI vyucchinna 10 prakRtiyA~ ghaTa jAne se
paMcam guNasthAna meM bandha 67 kA, bandhu vyucchitti 4 kI aura abandha 43+10=53
kA hai| paMcam guNasthAna se vyucchinna 4 prakRtiyA~ ghaTa jAne se chaThe

Page #64 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
In the Gunasthana, there are 63 Bandha, 6 Bandha Vyuchchitti, and 53+4=57
Abandha. By reducing the 6 Vyuchchinn Prakritis of the 6th Gunasthana and
combining the Aharak Yugal, in the 7th Gunasthana, there are 56 Bandha, 1 Bandha
Vyuchchitti, and 57+6=63, 63 Abandha. By reducing the 1 Vyuchchinn Prakriti of
the 7th Gunasthana, in the 8th Gunasthana, there are 58 Bandha, 36 Bandha
Vyuchchitti, and 61+1=62 Abandha. By reducing the 36 Vyuchchinn Prakritis of the
8th Gunasthana, in the 9th Gunasthana, there are 22 Bandha, 5 Bandha
Vyuchchitti, and 62+36=68 Abandha. By reducing the 5 Vyuchchinn Prakritis of the
9th Gunasthana, in the 10th Gunasthana, there are 17 Bandha, 16 Bandha
Vyuchchitti, and 68+5=103 Abandha. By reducing the 16 Vyuchchinn Prakritis of
the 10th Gunasthana, in the 11th, 12th, and 13th Gunasthana, there is 1 Bandha
and 116 Abandha. In the 11th and 12th Gunasthana, Bandha Vyuchchitti is zero. By
reducing the 1 Bandha Vyuchchitti of the 13th Gunasthana, in the 14th
Gunasthana, Bandha and Bandha Vyuchchitti are zero, and there are 120 Abandha
Prakritis. By subtracting the Vyuchchitti from the Bandha Prakritis of the
previous Gunasthana, the Bandha of the next Gunasthana is obtained. (59)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 guNasthAna meM bandha 63 kA, bandha vyucchitti 6 kI aura abandha 53+4= 57 kA
hai| SaSTham guNasthAna kI vyucchinna 6 prakRtiyA~ kama karane aura AhAraka
yugala milAne se saptam guNasthAna meM bandha 56 kA bandha vyucchitti 1 kI aura
abandha 57+ 6 = 63, 63 2061 kA hai| saptam kI meM vyucchinna 1 prakRti kama ho
jAne se aSTam guNasthAna bandha 58 kA, bandha vyucchitti 36 kI aura abandha
61+1=62 kA hai| aSTam meM vyucchinna 36 prakRtiyA~ kama ho jAne se navama meM
bandha 22 kA, bandha vyucchitti 5 kI aura abandha 62 + 36 = 68 kA hai  /  navam
kI vyucchinna 5 prakRtiyA~ kama ho jAne se dazam guNasthAna meM bandha 17 kA
bandha vyucchitti 16 kI aura abandha 68+5=103 kA hai| dazam kI vyucchinna 16
prakRtiyA~ kama ho jAne se gyArahaveM, bArahaveM tathA terahaveM guNasthAnoM meM
bandha 1 kA aura abandha 116 kA hai| 11veM aura 12veM meM guNasthAna meM bandha
vyucchitti zUnya hai  /  terahaveM guNasthAna 1 kI bandha vyucchitti ho jAne se
caudahaveM guNasthAna meM bandha aura bandha vyucchitti zUnya tathA abandha 120
prakRtiyoM kA hai| pichale guNasthAna kI bandha prakRtiyoM meM se usakI
vyucchitti kama karane para AgAmI guNasthAna kA bandha (59)

Page #65 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
It emerges and by combining the detachment of the present quality-state and the
bondage of the present quality-state, the bondage of the upcoming quality-state
emerges. The plan of combining and subtracting other natures should be done
according to the instructions. 168. Question: How much is the state-bondage of
the original natures like knowledge-obscuration etc.? Answer: The excellent
state-bondage of knowledge-obscuration, vision-obscuration, obstruction and
vedaniya karma is thirty koḍa koḍī sagar, name and gotra is twenty koḍa koḍī
sagar, delusion is seventy koḍa koḍī sagar, lifespan karma is thirty-three
sagar. Special-vision-delusion-falsehood is seventy koḍa koḍī sagar and
character-delusion is forty koḍa koḍī sagar. Unsufferable is thirty koḍa koḍī
sagar and sufferable is fifteen koḍa koḍī sagar. 166. Question: What is the
least state-bondage of the original natures? Answer: The least state-bondage of
vedaniya is twelve muhūrta, name and gotra is eight muhūrta and the rest karma
is antarmuhūrta. The least state-bondage of natures happens at the time of
detachment. That is, where the bondage of which nature detaches... (60)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 nikalatA hai tathA vartamAna guNasthAna kI vyucchitti aura vartamAna guNasthAna
kA abandha milAne se AgAmI guNasthAna kA abandha nikalatA hai| anya prakRtiyoM
ke milAne aura ghaTAne kI yojanA nirdezAnusAra kara lenA caahiye| 168. prazna :
jJAnAvaraNAdi mUla prakRtiyoM kA sthiti bandha kitanA hai ? uttara :
jJAnAvaraNa, darzanAvaraNa, antarAya aura vedanIya karma kA utkRSTa sthitibandha
tIsa kor3A kor3I sAgara, nAma aura gotra kA bIsa kor3A kor3I sAgara, moha kA
sattara kor3A, kor3I sAgara, Ayu karma kA teMtIsa sAgara hai| vizeSa-
darzanamoha-mithyAtva kA sattara kor3A kor3I sAgara aura cAritra mohanIya kA
cAlIsa kor3A kor3I sAgara hai| asAtAvedanIya kA tIsa kor3A kor3I sAgara aura
sAtAvedanIya kA pandraha kor3A kor3I sAgara hai| 166. prazna : mUla prakRtiyoM
kA jaghanya sthitibandha kyA hai ? uttara : vedanIya kA jaghanya sthitibandha
bAraha muhUrta, nAma aura gotra kA ATha muhUrta tathA zeSa kamA~ kA antarmuhUrta
hai| prakRtiyoM kA jaghanya sthitibandha vyucchitti ke samaya hotA hai| arthAt
jisa prakRti kI jahA~ bandha vyucchitti hotI . (60)

Page #66 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
There it is. The **jighnya** **sthitibandha** of the **vishesh-tirthankara**
nature and the **aaharaka** couple is **kora kori** **sagar**. The **jighnya**
**sthitibandha** of **manushyayu** and **tiryagayu** is **antarmuhurt** and that
of **devayu** and **narakayu** is ten thousand years. . 170. Question: What is
the cause of **utkrusht** **sthitibandha**? Answer: The **utkrusht**
**sthitibandha** of the other 117 natures without the three **shubh** **ayu** is
due to the **utkrusht** **samklesh** **parinam** as much as possible and the
**jighnya** **sthitibandha** is the opposite of this, i.e., due to
**mandakshaya** **rupa** **parinam**. The **utkrusht** **sthitibandha** of the
three **shubhayuk** is due to **vishuddha** **parinam** and the **jighnya**
**sthitibandha** is due to **samklesh** **parinam**. In particular, the
**utkrusht** **sthitibandha** of **devayu** is done by the one who is in the
**pramatt** **gunasthan** facing the ascent to the seventh **gunasthan**. The
**utkrusht** **sthitibandha** of the **aaharaka** couple is done by the one who
is in the seventh **gunasthan** facing the descent to the sixth **gunasthan**
and the **utkrusht** **sthitibandha** of the **tirthankara** nature is done by
the **avirat** **samyagdristi** who is in the fourth **gunasthan** facing hell.
Except for these four natures of **tirthankara**, **aaharaka**, and **devayu**,
the **utkrusht** **sthitibandha** of the other 116 natures is done by the
**mithyadristi** **jiva**.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 vahIM hotA hai| vizeSa-tIrthaMkara prakRti tathA AhAraka yugala kA jaghanya
sthitibandha antaH kor3A kor3I sAgara hotA hai| manuSyAyu tathA tiryagAya kA
jaghanya sthitibandha antarmuhUrta tathA devAyu aura narakAyu kA dasa hajAra
varSa hotA hai| . 170. prazna : utkRSTa sthitibaMdha kA kAraNa kyA hai ? uttara
: tIna zubha Ayu ke binA anya 117 prakRtiyoM kA utkRSTa sthitibandha
yathAsaMbhava utkRSTa saMkleza pariNAmoM se hotA hai aura jaghanya sthitibandha
isase viparIta arthAt mandakaSAya rUpa pariNAmoM se hotA hai| tIna zubhAyukoM kA
vizuddha pariNAmoM se utkRSTa aura saMkleza pariNAmoM se jaghanya sthitibandha
hotA hai| vizeSa- devAyu kA utkRSTa sthitibaMtha, saptam guNasthAna meM car3hane
ke sanmukha pramatta guNasthAna vAlA karatA hai| AhAraka yugala kA utkRSTa
sthitibandha, chaTe guNasthAna meM utarane ke sanmukha saptam guNasthAna vAlA
aura tIrthakara prakRti kA utkRSTa sthitibandha naraka jAne ke liye sanmukha
caturtha guNasthAnavartI avirata samyagdRSTi karatA hai| tIrthakara,
AhArakaddhika aura devAyu ina cAra prakRtiyoM ke sivAya anya 116 prakRtiyoM kA
utkRSTa sthitibandha mithyAdRSTi jIva hI karatA hai|

Page #67 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
171. Question: What is Ābādhā? Answer: The time period from when a substance
comes into existence in the form of karma until it becomes manifest or activated
is called Ābādhā.  172. Question: What is the Ābādhā of each karma? Answer: The
consideration of Āraksha is of two types, based on the distinction between Aga
and Umarga. With respect to Udaya, except for Āyukarma, the Ābādhā of the
remaining seven karmas is one Koḍa Koḍī Sāgara for a hundred years. The Ābādhā
of all other situations should be understood in the same proportion. For
example, the Ābādhā of a karma whose highest state is bound to seventy Koḍa Koḍī
Sāgara will be seven thousand years, meaning that those karma atoms will not
manifest for that duration. Specifically, the Ābādhā of karmas whose state is
bound to Anta Koḍa Koḍī Pramaṇ is Antarmūhūrta. The Ābādhā of Āyukarma ranges
from one-third of a crore Pūrva to Asankṣepād Dhā Kāla. With respect to
Udeeraṇā, the Ābādhā of all karmas is one Āvali Pramaṇ, meaning that the bound
karma nature can be activated after one Achalāvali. (62)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 171. prazna : AbAthA kise kahate hai ? uttara : karmarUpa hokara AyA huA dravya
jaba taka udaya yA udIraNA rUpa na ho taba taka ke kAla ko AbAdhA kahate 172.
prazna : kisa karma kI kitanI AbAdhA hotI hai ? uttara : ArakSa kA vicAra aga
aura umaragA ke bheda se do prakAra kA hotA hai| udaya kI apekSA, Ayukarma ko
chor3akara zeSa sAta kau kI AbAthA, eka kor3A kor3I sAgara kI sthiti para sau
varSa kI hotI hai isI anupAta se saba sthitiyoM kI AbAthA samajhanA caahiye|
jaise jisa karma kI utkRSTa sthiti sattara kor3A kor3I sAgara kI ba~dhI hai
usakI AbAdha sAta hajAra varSa kI hogI arthAt itane samaya taka ve karma
paramANu udaya meM nahIM aayeNge| vizeSa- jina karmoM kI sthiti antaH kor3A
kor3I pramANa ba~dhI hai , unakI AbAdhA antarmuhUrta kI hotI hai| Ayukarma kI
AbAthA eka karor3a pUrva ke tRtIya bhAga se lekara asaMkSepAddhA kAla taka hotI
hai| udIraNA kI apekSA saba karmoM kI AbAdhA eka AvalI pramANa hotI hai arthAt
ba~dhI huI karma prakRti kI eka acalAvalI ke bAda udIraNA ho sakatI (62)

Page #68 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
It should be kept in mind that the **āyुकर्म** (life-span karma) does not
stimulate the **परभव** (previous life), only the **वर्तमान यु** (present life).
173. Question: How do **बद्ध कर्म** (bound karmas) arise? Answer: From the total
duration of a karma, subtract the **आबाधाकाल** (period of obstruction). The
remaining time is the period in which the karma atoms, according to the **निषेक
रचना** (process of maturation), bear fruit and are gradually **निजीणे**
(destroyed) - **खिरते** (disappear). After the **आबाधा** (obstruction) is over,
in the first **निषेक** (maturation), many karma atoms **खिरते** (disappear), and
in subsequent **निषेक** (maturations), they disappear in decreasing numbers.
This process continues until the end of the duration of the bound karma. This is
the process of **सविपाक निर्जरा** (destruction of karmas with fruition). If, due
to **तपश्चरणादि** (austerities, etc.), the opportunity for **अविपाक निर्जरा**
(destruction of karmas without fruition) arises, then many karma atoms disappear
at once. 574. Question: How does the power of **अनुभाग** (fractional fruition)
arise in karmas? Answer: The **अनुभाग बन्ध** (binding of fractional fruition) is
in accordance with the **हीनधिकता कषाय** (degree of passion). In **शुभ कर्म**
(auspicious karmas), there is more **अनुभाग** (fractional fruition) due to
**विशुद्ध परिणाम** (pure result) and **मन्दकषाय रूप परिणाम** (result with mild
passion), and less in **अशुभ कर्म** (inauspicious karmas). (63)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 hai| Ayukarma kI udIraNA meM yaha dhyAna rakhanA cAhiye ki parabhava sambandhI
Ayu kI udIraNA nahIM hotI, mAtra vartamAna yu kI ho sakatI hai| 173. prazna :
baddha karma udaya meM kisa prakAra Ate haiM ? uttara : jisa karma kI jitanI
sthiti ba~dhI hai usameM se AbAdhAkAla ko ghaTA dene para jo kAla zeSa rahatA
hai usameM karma paramANu niSeka racanA ke anusAra phala dete hue nijINe hote
jAte haiM-khirate jAte haiN| AbAdhA vyatIta hone para prathama niSeka meM bahuta
karma paramANu khirate haiM pazcAt Age-Age ke niSekoM meM kama hote jAte haiN|
yaha krama bA~dhe hue karma kI sthiti ke anta taka calatA rahatA hai  /  yaha
savipAka nirjarA kA krama hai yadi tapazcaraNAdi ke yoga se avipAka nirjarA kA
avasara AtA hai to eka sAtha bahuta karma paramANu khira jAte haiN| 574. prazna
: karmoM meM anubhAga phala dene kI zakti kisa prakAra par3atI hai ? uttara :
anubhAga bandha meM hInadhikatA kaSAya ke anusAra hotI hai| vizuddha pariNAma-
mandakaSAya rUpa pariNAmoM se zubha karmoM meM adhika anubhAga par3atA hai aura
azubha karmoM meM kama (63)

Page #69 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
And due to the results in the form of afflictions, there is less experience of
auspicious karmas and more experience of inauspicious karmas. 175. Question: How
is the experience of Dhātia karmas? Answer: The Ācāryas have explained the
experience of Dhātia karmas through the example of a creeper (latā), wood
(dāru), bone (asthi) and stone (śaila), i.e., just as the hardness increases in
a creeper, wood, bone and stone, in the same way the power of experiencing the
results of karma-natures increases in hardness. In the above examples, the
experiences up to the infinite part of the creeper and wood are Deshaghati-rupa,
and the remaining majority part of the wood, and the experiences related to bone
and stone are Sarvaghati-rupa. 176. Question: How is the experience of Adhātia
karmas? Answer: In Adhātia karmas, the auspicious natures like Sātavedaniya etc.
have an experience like jaggery, sugar candy, sugar and nectar, and the
inauspicious natures like Asātavedaniya etc.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 tathA saMklezarUpa pariNAmoM se zubha karmoM meM kama aura azubha karmoM meM
adhika anubhAga par3atA hai| 175. prazna : dhAtiyA karmoM kA anumAga kisa
prakAra hotA  /  uttara : dhAtiyA karmoM ke anubhAga ko AcAryoM ne latA (bela),
' dAru (kASTha), asthi (haDDI) aura zaila (pASANa ) ke dRSTAMta dvArA spaSTa
kiyA hai arthAt jisa prakAra latA, dAru, haDDI aura pASANa meM Age Age kaThoratA
bar3hatI jAtI hai usI prakAra karma prakRtiyoM ke anubhAga-phala dene kI zakti
meM kaThoratA bar3hatI jAtI hai| uparyukta dRSTAntoM meM latA aura dAru ke
anantaveM bhAga taka ke spardhaka dezaghAti rUpa hote haiM aura dAru ke zeSa
bahubhAga tathA  /  haDDI aura pASANa sambandhI anubhAga sarvaghAti rUpa hote
176. prazna : aghAtiyA karmoM kA anubhAga kisa prakAra hotA uttara : adhAtiyA
kamoM meM jo sAtAvedanIya Adi puNya prakRtiyA~ haiM unakA anubhAga gur3a,
khAMDa, zakkara aura amRta ke samAna hotA hai aura jo asAtAvedanIya Adi pApa
prakRtiyA~

Page #70 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
They are like Neem, Kanjira, poison and Halahala. This means that there are
countless Lok Praman Avantaar Bhed of punya and paap. According to the Anubhag,
the Jeeva experiences happiness and sorrow in proportion to its merit. For
example, even though a Devagati and a Devayu are of the same punya prakriti, a
Dev of an ineligible jati has to become a vehicle, which makes him experience
sanklesh, while the one who sits on him experiences happiness.  **Question
177:** What is the nature and quantity of Samay Prabaddh in Pradesh Bandh?
**Answer:** The Pind of Karman Vargana, which is bound at one time, consisting
of five rasas, five varn, two gandhas and four sparshas (Sheeta-Ushna, Snigdha
Rooksha), is equal to the Anantavaan Bhaag of Siddhas multiplied by Anantaguna
of Abhavya Rashi. This is called Samay Prabaddh.  **Question 178:** Who divides
Samay Prabaddh into Jnana Avaranaadi Karmas and in what proportion?  **1-** This
number is so large that even after being multiplied by Ananta by Abhavya, it is
still equal to the Ananta Bhaag of Siddhas.  (65)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 haiM unakA anubhAga nIma, kAMjIra, viSa aura halAhala ke samAna hotA hai|
tAtparya yaha hai ki puNya pApa ke asaMkhyAta loka pramANa avAntara bheda haiN|
anubhAga ke anusAra hI jIva ke sukha duHkha meM hInAdhikatA hotI hai| jaise
devagati aura devAyu rUpa puNya prakRti ke samAna hone para bhI abhiyogya jAti
ke deva ko vAhana bananA par3atA hai jisase vaha saMkleza kA anubhava karatA hai
aura usa para baiThane vAlA sukha kA anubhava karatA hai  /  177 prazna: pradeza
bandha meM samaya prabaddha kA svarUpa aura parimANa kitanA hai ? uttara : pA~ca
rasa, pA~ca varNa, do gandha tathA zIta-uSNa, snigdha rUkSa ina cAra sparzo se
sahita kArmaNa vargaNA kA jo piNDa eka samaya meM ba~dhatA hai usakA pramANa
siddhoM ke anantaveM bhAga evaM abhavyarAzi se anantAguNA hotA hai|' yahI
samayaprabaddha kahalAtA hai  /  178 prazna samaya prabaddha kA jJAnAvaraNAdi
karmoM meM vibhAga kauna karatA hai aura kisa anupAta se hotA hai ? 1- arthAt
yaha saMkhyA itanI hai ki abhavyoM se anantaguNI hotI huI bhI siddhoM ke ananta
bhAga pramANa hI hai| (65)

Page #71 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Answer: At the time of attaining the state of bondage, the transformation of
knowledge-obscuration, etc. happens on its own. Among the Aatmas, the Vedaniya
receives the most province, the Mohaniya receives less, the Jnanaavaran-
Darshanavaran and Antaraya receive less but are equal to each other, the Naam
and Gotra receive less but are equal to each other, and the Aayu Karma receives
the least province. . 576. Question: What is the main cause of Pradesh? And how
many types are there? Answer: Pradesh is the main cause of bondage, which are
the alternatives of Yogasthan-Atma Pradesh. There are three types of it - 1
Uppaad Yogasthan, 2 Ekantaanuvrudhi Yogasthan and 3 Parinaam Yogasthan. At the
first time of the new Paryaya, the living being has Uppaad Yogasthan. From the
second time of holding the Paryaya till the completion of the body's
sufficiency, it receives a regular increase and becomes Ekantaanuvrudhi
Yogasthan, and from the time of completion of the body's sufficiency till the
end of life, it becomes Parinaam Yogasthan. In this, the Atma Pradesh's
Parispand keeps decreasing and increasing. Its other name is Ghotmaan Yogasthan.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 uttara : bandhAvasthA ko prApta hue samaya prabaddha meM jJAnAvaraNAdi
pariNamana svayaM ho jAtA hai| ATa koM meM sabase adhika pradeza vedanIya ko,
usase kama mohanIya ko, usase kama parantu paraspara meM samAna jJAnAvaraNa-
darzanAvaraNa aura antarAya ko, usase kama parantu paraspara meM samAna nAma
aura gotra ko tathA Ayu karma ko sabase kama pradeza prApta hote haiN| . 576.
prazna : pradeza ra pramukha kAraNa kyA hai ? aura usake kitane meva hai? uttara
: pradeza bandha kA pramukha kAraNa yoga sthAna-Atmapradeza parispanda ke
vikalpa haiN| usake tIna bheda haiM- 1 upapAda yoga sthAna, 2 ekAntAnuvRddhi
yoga sthAna aura 3 pariNAma yoga sthaan| navIna paryAya ke prathama samaya meM
sthita jIva ke upapAda yoga sthAna hotA hai| paryAya dhAraNa karane ke dUsare
samaya se lekara zarIra paryApti ke pUrNa hone taka niyama se vRddhi ko prApta
hotA huA ekAntAnuvRddhi yoga sthAna hotA hai aura zarIra paryApti ke pUrNa hone
ke samaya se lekara jIvana paryanta pariNAma yoga sthAna hotA hai| isameM
AtmapradezoM kA parispanda kabhI kama aura kamI bar3hatA rahatA hai| isakA
dUsarA nAma ghoTamAna yogasthAna

Page #72 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
80. Question: What is the material of the utkriṣṭa (excellent) and jaghanya
(inferior) pradeśa bandha? Answer: The living being who engages in vanya
(destruction) of saṃjñā, paryāptaka, and alpaprākṛtis along with utkarṣa yogas
(excellent yogas) performs the utkriṣṭa pradeśa bandha, and the living being
opposite to this performs the jaghanya pradeśa bandha.  181. Question: In which
gunasthāna (spiritual stage) does the utkriṣṭa pradeśa bandha of the mūla
prakṛtis (fundamental karmas) occur? Answer: The utkriṣṭa pradeśa bandha of
āyuḥkarma (lifespan karma) is performed by the one residing in the seventh
gunasthāna after the anantara (immediately preceding) six gunasthānas. The
utkriṣṭa pradeśa bandha of mohanīya (deluding) karma is performed by the one in
the ninth gunasthāna, and the utkriṣṭa pradeśa bandha of the remaining six
karmas is performed by the one possessing utkriṣṭa yogas (excellent yogas) in
the sūkṣma sāmparāya (subtle equanimity) gunasthāna.  182. Question: Whose is
the jaghanya pradeśa bandha? Answer: The sūkṣma nigodīya labdhyaparyāptaka
(minutely subtle nigodīya with partial capacity) living being performs the
jaghanya (inferior) yoga-induced pradeśa bandha of all karmas except āyuḥkarma
(lifespan karma) in the first moment of its paryāya (state of existence).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 bhI hai| 80. prazna: utkRSTa tathA jaghanya pradeza bandha kI sAmagrI kyA hai ?
uttara : utkaTa yogoM se sahita, saMjJA, paryAptaka aura alpaprakRtiyoM kA vanya
karane vAlA jIva utkRSTa pradeza bandha ko karatA hai aura isase viparIta jIva
jaghanya pradeza bandha ko karatA hai 1 181 prazna mUla prakRtiyoM kA utkRSTa
pradeza bandha kisa guNasthAna meM hotA hai ? uttara : Ayukarma kA utkRSTa
pradeza bandha chaha guNasthAnoM ke anantara saptam guNasthAna meM rahane vAlA
karatA hai| mohanIya kA utkRSTa pradeza bandha navam guNa sthAnavartI karatA hai
aura zeSa chaha karmoM kA utkRSTa pradeza bandha utkRSTa yogoM ko dhAraNa karane
vAlA sUkSma sAmparAya guNasthAna vAlA karatA hai  /  182. prazna: jaghanya
pradeza bandha kisake hotA hai ? uttara : sUkSma nigodiyA labdhyaparyAptaka jIva
apanI paryAya ke prathama samaya meM jaghanya yoga ke dvArA Ayu ke sivAya zeSa
(67)

Page #73 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The seven actions bind the gross region of the karma. Further, when the bondage
of life occurs, the gross region of the karma of that very being is also bound.
|| End of the Second Chapter || (68)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 sAta kAmoM kA jaghanya pradeza pandha karatA hai| Age malA Ayu kA bandha hone
para isI jIva ke Ayukarma kA bhI jaghanya pradeza bandha hotA hai|  /  /
dvitIyAdhikAraH smaapt|| (68)

Page #74 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Vṛttiyādhhikāraḥ  **183. Question:** What is meant by **udaya**? **Answer:**
The ripening of karmas according to dravya, kṣetra, kāla, and bhāva is called
**udaya**.  **184. Question:** In which **guṇasthāna** does the **udaya** of
which **prakrti** occur? **Answer:** The **udaya** of the **āhārak** body and
its limbs occurs in the sixth **guṇasthāna**. The **udaya** of the
**tīrthaṅkara** **prakrti** occurs in the thirteenth and fourteenth
**guṇasthāna** as a **kevalī**. The **udaya** of the **samyag** and **mithyātv**
**prakrti** occurs in the third **guṇasthāna**. The **udaya** of the
**samyaktva** **prakrti** occurs from the fourth to the seventh **guṇasthāna**
as a **vedaka** and **samyagdṛṣṭi**. The **udaya** of **ānupūrvī** occurs in the
first, second, and fourth **guṇasthāna**. The **udaya** of **ananta-anubandhī**
occurs in the first and second **guṇasthāna**. The **udaya** of the
**apratyākhȳāna-āvaraṇa** **caturṣka** occurs from the first to the fourth
**guṇasthāna**. The **udaya** of the **pratyākhȳāna-āvaraṇa** **caturṣka**
occurs from the first to the fifth **guṇasthāna**. The **udaya** of the
**sanjvalana** **krodha**, **māna**, and **māyā** occurs from the first to the
ninth **guṇasthāna**. The **udaya** of the **sanjvalana** **lobha** occurs from
the first to the tenth **guṇasthāna**. The **udaya** of **narakāyu** and
**devāyu** occurs from the first to the fourth **guṇasthāna**. The **udaya** of
**tiryagāyu** occurs from the first to the fifth **guṇasthāna**.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 vRtIyAdhikAraH 183. prazna udaya kise kahate haiM ? uttara : dravya, kSetra,
kAla aura bhAva ke anusAra karmoM kA phala dene laganA udaya kahalAtA hai  /
184 prazna kisa prakRti kA kisa guNasthAna meM udaya hotA hai ? uttara : AhAraka
zarIra aura AhAraka zarIrAMgopAMga kA udaya chaThe guNasthAna meM tIrthaMkara
prakRti kA kevalI terahaveM, caudahaveM guNasthAna meM, samyaG mithyAtva kA
tRtIya guNasthAna meM, samyaktva prakRti kA vedaka samyagdRSTi ke caturtha se
lekara saptam guNasthAna taka, AnupUrvI kA udaya prathama, dvitIya aura caturtha
guNasthAna meM, anantAnubandhI kA udaya prathama, dvitIya guNasthAna meM,
apratyAkhyAnAvaraNa catuSka kA udaya prathama se caturtha guNasthAna taka
pratyAkhyAnAvaraNa catuSka kA udaya prathama se paMcama guNasthAna taka,
saMjvalana krodha, mAna, mAyA kA udaya prathama se lekara navam guNasthAna taka
aura saMjvalana lobha kA prathama se lekara dazam guNasthAna taka, narakAyu aura
devAyu kA udaya prathama se lekara caturtha guNasthAna taka, tiryagAyu kA udaya
prathama se lekara paMcam (66) .

Page #75 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Tak and Manushayau arise in all Gunasthanas from the beginning. The Jiva who
arises in the Saladar Gunasthana does not arise in the Naraka Gati, therefore
his Naraka Gati Anupurvi does not arise. The remaining Karma Prakruti arise in
the Mithyatvadi Gunasthanas until the end of their respective Uday Vyuchchitti.
185. Question: What is Uday Tribhangi? Answer: Uday Vyuchchitti, Uday and
Anudaya are called Uday Tribhangi. 186. Question: How many Karma Prakruti
Vyuchchitti occur in each Gunasthana? Answer: From the perspective of Abhed
Vivaksha, in the Mithyadristi etc. fourteen Gunasthanas, 10, 4, 1, 17, 8, 5, 4,
6, 6, 1, 2, (2, 14), 26 and 13 Prakruti Vyuchchitti occur respectively. 187.
Question: According to the teachings of Bhootbali Acharya, how many Karma
Prakruti Vyuchchitti occur in each Gunasthana? Answer: According to the
teachings of Bhootbali Acharya, in the Mithyadristi etc. Gunasthanas, 5, 6, 1,
7, 8, 5, 4, 6, 6, 1, 2, 16, 30 and 12 Karma Prakruti Vyuchchitti occur
respectively. • (90)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 taka aura manuSyAyu kA udaya prAraMbha se lekara sabhI guNasthAnoM meM hotA
hai| yatasya sAlAdara guNasthAna meM huA jIva naraka gati meM utpanna nahIM
hotA, ataH usake naraka gatyAnupUrvI kA udaya nahIM hotaa| zeSa karma prakRtiyoM
kA udaya mithyAtvAdi guNasthAnoM meM apanI-apanI udaya vyucchitti ke antima
samaya taka hotA hai| 185 prazna udaya tribhaMgI kise kahate haiM ? uttara :
udaya vyucchitti udaya aura anudaya ko udaya tribhaMgI kahate haiM T 186.
prazna: kisa guNasthAna meM kitanI karma prakRtiyoM kI udaya vyucchitti hotI hai
? uttara : abheda vivakSA se midhyAdRSTi Adi caudaha guNasthAnoM meM krama se
10, 4, 1, 17, 8, 5, 4, 6, 6, 1, 2, (2, 14 ), 26 aura 13 prakRtiyoM kI udaya
vyucchitti hotI hai| 187 prazna: bhUtabalI AcArya ke upadezAnusAra kisa
guNasthAna meM kitanI karma prakRtiyoM kI udaya vyucchitti hotI hai ? uttara :
bhUtabalI AcArya ke upadezAnusAra midhyAdRSTi Adi guNasthAnoM meM krama se 5, 6,
1, 7, 8, 5, 4, 6, 6, 1, 2, 16, 30 aura 12 karma prakRtiyoM kI udaya vyucchitti
hotI hai| * (90)

Page #76 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
188. Question: What are the **vyakshadeva** (characteristics) on both sides?
Answer: According to some **acharyas**, there are no **sasadan gunasthana**
(stages of purification) in **ekendriya** (one-sensed) and **vikalatraya**
(three-fold affliction). Therefore, the **ekendriya**, **sthavar** (stationary),
and **dwi-indriyadi** (two-sensed and above) three **jati** (species) have their
**udaya** (arising) and **vyuchchitti** (cessation) in the first **gunasthana**
(stage of purification). As a result, there are 10 **prakriti** (elements) in
the first and 4 in the second. In the penultimate stage of the twelfth
**gunasthana**, there are 2, and in the final stage, there are 14, making a
total of 16 **vyuchchitti**. In the fourteenth **gunasthana**, due to being
mutually contradictory, **sata** (true) and **asata** (false) **avedaniya**
(non-cognizable) do not arise simultaneously. Therefore, 1 **vyuchchitti** is
considered in the thirteenth and 1 in the fourteenth. However, considering
different **jiva** (souls), both can arise simultaneously, making the options
26, 13 and 30, 12. Here, the **udaya** (arising) is described as **tribhangi**
(three-fold) according to the **mata** (opinion) of **Bhutbali Acharya**.  186.
Question: Which 5 **prakriti** (elements) are **vyuchchhinna** (ceased) in the
**mithyadristi** (false belief) **gunasthana** (stage of purification)? Answer:
**Mithyatva** (falsehood), **atapas** (heat), **sukshma** (subtle),
**aparayapta** (insufficient), and **sadharana** (ordinary), these five
**prakriti** (elements) have their **udaya** (arising) and **vyuchchitti**
(cessation) in the first **gunasthana** (stage of purification).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 188. prazna donoM pakSoM meM vayakSAdeva kyA hai ? uttara : kinhI AcAryoM ke
mata se ekendriya aura vikalatraya meM sAsAdana guNasthAna nahIM hotA isaliye
ekendriya, sthAvara aura dvIndriyAdi tIna jAtiyA~, ina prakRtiyoM kI udaya
vyucchitti pahale guNa sthAna meM hI ho jAtI hai phalasvarUpa pahale meM 10 aura
dUsare meM 4 prakRtiyoM kI udaya vyucchitti hotI hai| bArahaveM guNasthAna ke
upAntya meM 2 kI aura antya samaya meM 14 kI donoM milAkara 16 kI vyucchitti
kahI gaI hai| caudahaveM guNasthAna meM paraspara virodhI hone se sAtA -
asAtAvedanIya donoM kA eka sAtha udaya nahIM hotA ataH 1 kI vyucchitti terahaveM
meM aura 1 kI caudahaveM meM mAnI gaI hai parantu nAnA jIvoM kI apekSA donoM kA
udaya saMbhava hai ataH 26, 13 aura 30, 12 kA vikalpa bana jAtA hai| yahA~
bhUtabalI AcArya ke matAnusAra udaya tribhaMgI kA varNana kiyA gayA hai| 186.
prazna: mithyAdRSTi guNasthAna meM vyucchinna hone vAlI 5 prakRtiyA~ kauna haiM
? uttara: mithyAtva, Atapa, sUkSma, aparyApta aura sAdhAraNa, ina pA~ca
prakRtiyoM kI udaya vyucchitti prathama guNasthAna meM ((71)

Page #77 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
It means that they do not arise in the second and subsequent Gunasthanas. 160.
Question: Which natures are cut off in the second Gunasthana? Answer: The nine
natures of Anantanubandhi Krodha-Mana-Maya-Lobha, Ekeindriya, Sthavar,
Dviindriya jati, Triindriya jati and Chaturindriya jati, their arising and
cutting off occurs in the second Gunasthana. 161. Question: Which one nature is
cut off in the third Gunasthana? Answer: The Samyamithyatva nature, its arising
and cutting off occurs in the third Gunasthana. 162. Question: Which 17 natures
are cut off in the fourth Gunasthana? - Answer: Apratyakhyanavaran Krodha-Mana-
Maya-Lobha, Vaikriyika Sharira, Vaikriyika Shariraangopanga, Narakagati,
NarakagatyAnupurvi, Devagati, DevagatyAnupurvi; Narakayu, Devayu,
ManushyaGatyAnupurvi, TiryaGatyAnupurvi, Durbhaga, Anadeya and Ayashaskirti.
(72)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 hotI hai arthAt dvitIyAdi guNasthAnoM meM inakA udaya nahIM rhtaa| 160. prazna
: dvitIya guNasthAna meM vyucchinna hone vAlI hai prakRtiyoM kauna hai? uttara :
anantAnubandhI krodha-mAna-mAyA-lobha, ekendriya, sthAvara, dvIndriya jAti,
trIndriya jAti aura caturindriya jAti, ina nau prakRtiyoM kI udaya vyucchitti
dvitIya guNasthAna meM hotI hai| 161. prazna : tRtIya guNasthAna meM vyuchinna
hone vAlI eka prakRti kauna hai ? uttara : samyamithyAtva prakRti, isakI udaya
vyucchitti tRtIya guNasthAna meM hotI hai| 162. prazna : caturtha guNasthAna meM
yudhinna hone vAlI 17 prakRtiyoM kauna hai? - uttara : apratyAkhyAnAvaraNa
krodha-mAna-mAyA-lobha, vaikriyika zarIra vaikriyika zarIrAMgopAMga, narakagati,
narakagatyAnupUrvI, devagati, devagatyAnupUrvI; narakAyu, devAyu
manuSyagatyAnupUrvI, tiryaggatyAnupUrvI, durbhaga, anAdeya aura ayshskiirti|
(72)

Page #78 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
163. Question: What are the 8 natures that are extinguished in the fifth *guna-
sthāna*? Answer: *Pratyākhānavaraṇa*, *krotha*, *māna*, *māyā*, *lobha*,
*tiryagāyu*, *udyota*, *nīca-gotra*, and *tiryagūgati*. The arising and
extinction of these eight natures occur in the fifth *guna-sthāna*. 164.
Question: What are the 5 natures that are extinguished in the sixth *guna-
sthāna*? Answer: *Āhārak-śarīra*, *āhārak-śarīrāṅgopāṅga*, *styāna-gṛddhi*,
*nidrā*, and *prachalā*. The arising and extinction of these five natures occur
in the sixth *guna-sthāna*. 165. Question: What are the 4 natures that are
extinguished in the seventh *guna-sthāna*? Answer: *Samyaktva-prakṛti*,
*arthanārāca*, *kīlaka*, and *asamprāpta-sṛpāṭikā-saṁhanana*. The arising and
extinction of these four natures occur in the seventh *guna-sthāna*. 166.
Question: What are the 6 natures that are extinguished in the eighth *guna-
sthāna*? Answer: *Hāsya*, *rati*, *arati*, *śoka*, *bhaya*, and *jugupsā*. The
arising and extinction of these six natures occur in the eighth *guna-sthāna*.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 163. prazna : paMcam guNasthAna meM vyucchinna hone vAlI 8 prakRtiyoM kauna
hai? uttara : pratyAkhyAnAvaraNa krotha-mAna-mAyA-lobha tiryagAyu, udyota, nIca
gotra aura tiryagUgati, ina ATha prakRtiyoM kI udaya vyucchitti paMcam
guNasthAna meM hotI hai| 164. prazna : SaSTham guNasthAna meM vyucchinna hone
vAlI 5 prakRtiyA~ kauna hai? uttara : AhAraka zarIra, AhAraka zarIrAMgopAMga,
styAnagRddhi, nidrA nidrA aura pracalA pracalA, ina 5 prakRtiyoM kI udaya
vyucchitti chaThe guNasthAna meM hotI hai| . 165. prazna : saptam guNasthAna meM
vyucchinna hone vAlI 4 prakRtiyA~ kauna hai? uttara : samyaktva prakRti,
arthanArAca, kIlaka aura asaMprApta sRpATikA saMhanana, ina cAra prakRtiyoM kI
udaya vyucchitti saptam guNasthAna meM hotI hai| 166. prazna : aSTam guNasthAna
meM vyucchinna hone vAlI 6 prakRtiyA~ kauna hai ? uttara : hAsya, rati, arati,
zoka, bhaya aura jugupsA ina chaha prakRtiyoM kI udaya vyucchitta aSTam
guNasthAna meM hotI hai? (73)

Page #79 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
197. Question: What are the 6 natures that are extinguished in the ninth *guna-
sthana*? Answer: *Nपुंसकवेद*, *स्त्रीवेद*, *पुरुषवेद*, *संज्वलन क्रोध-मान* and
*माया*. These six natures arise and are extinguished in the ninth *guna-sthana*.
16... *समन्द*: What is the one nature that is extinguished in the tenth *guna-
sthana*? Answer: *संज्वलन लोभ*. This one nature arises and is extinguished in
the tenth *guna-sthana*. 166. Question: What are the two natures that are
extinguished in the eleventh *guna-sthana*? Answer: *वज्रनाराच* and *नाराच
संहनन*. These two natures arise and are extinguished in the eleventh *guna-
sthana*. 200. Question: What are the 16 natures that are extinguished in the
twelfth *guna-sthana*? Answer: *निद्रा* and *प्रचला* are extinguished in the
penultimate time, and the five *ज्ञानावरण*, five *अन्तराय* and four *दर्शनावरण*,
a total of 14, are extinguished in both. These 16 natures arise and are
extinguished in the twelfth *guna-sthana*. (74)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 197. prazna : navam guNasthAna meM vyucchinna hone vAlI 6 prakRtiyA~ kauna hai
? uttara : napuMsakaveda, strIveda, puruSaveda, saMjvalana krodha-mAna aura mAyA
ina chaha prakRtiyoM kI udaya-vyucchitti navam guNasthAna meM hotI hai| 16...
samanda : vazam guNastAna meM yukminna hone vAlI 1 prakRti kauna hai ? uttara :
saMjvalana lobha, isa eka prakRti kI udaya vyucchitti dazam guNasthAna meM hotI
hai| 166. prazna : ekAdaza guNasthAna meM vyucchinna hone vAlI 2 prakRtiyA~
kauna hai ? uttara : vajranArAca aura nArAca saMhanana, ina do prakRtiyoM kI
udaya _ vyucchitti gyArahaveM guNasthAna meM hotI hai| 200. prazna : dvAdaza
guNasthAna meM vyucchinna hone vAlI 16 prakRtiyA~ kauna haiM ? uttara : nidrA
aura pracalA ina do kI upAntya samaya meM tathA 5 jJAnAvaraNa 5 antarAya aura
cAra darzanAvaraNa ina 14 kI donoM milAkara 16 prakRtiyoM kI udaya vyucchitti
bArahaveM guNasthAna meM hotI hai| (74)

Page #80 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
201. Question: What are the 30 natures that are extinguished in the thirteenth
Gunasthan? Answer: One of the seven-non-seven Vedaniya of Vedaniya Karma,
Vajrarṣabha, Nāraça, Samhanana, Nirmana, Sthira, Asthira, Śubha, Aśubha,
Susvara, Duḥsvara, Praśasta Vihāyogati, Apraśasta Vihāyogati, Audārika Śarīra,
Audārika Śarīrāṅgopaṅga, Taijasa, Kārmaṇa, Samacaturṇādi 6 Sansthāna, Varṇādi 4
Aguru Laghu etc. four and each body, these thirty natures are extinguished in
the thirteenth Gunasthan. 202. Question: What are the 12 natures that are
extinguished in the fourteenth Gunasthan? Answer: One of the seven-non-seven
Vedaniya natures, Manuşyagati, Pañcendriya Jāti, Subhaga, Trasa, Bādar,
Śvāsochchvāsa, Ādeya, Yaśaskīrti, Tīrthakara and Manuṣyāyu, these twelve natures
are extinguished in the fourteenth Gunasthan. 203. Question: How many natures
are extinguished in each Gunasthan? Answer: In the Mithyādṛṣṭi etc. Gunasthanas,
117, 111, 100, 104, 87, 81, 76, 72, 66, 60, 56, 57, 42 and 12 natures are
extinguished respectively. (75)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 201. prazna : trayodaza guNasthAna meM vyucchinna hone vAlI 30 prakRtiyA~ kauna
hai ? uttara : vedanIya karma kI sAtA-asAtA vedanIya meM se eka, vajrarSabha
nArAca saMhanana, nirmANa, sthira, asthira, zubha, azubha, susvara, duHsvara,
prazasta vihAyogati, aprazasta vihAyogati, audArika zarIra, audArika
zarIrAMgopAMga, taijasa, kArmaNa, samacaturanAdi 6 saMsthAna, varNAdi 4 aguru
laghu Adi cAra aura pratyeka zarIra ina tIsa prakRtiyoM kI udaya vyucchitti
terahaveM guNasthAna meM hotI hai| 202. prazna : caturdaza guNasthAna meM
vyucchinna hone vAlI 12 prakRtiyoM kauna haiM ? . uttara : sAtA-asAtA vedanIya
meM se koI eka prakRti, manuSyagati, paMcendriya jAti, subhaga, trasa, bAdara,
zvAsocchvAsa, Adeya, yazaskIrti, tIrthakara aura manuSyAyu ina bAraha prakRtiyoM
kI bandha vyucchitti cauhadaveM guNasthAna meM hotI hai| 203. prazna : kisa
guNasthAna meM kitanI prakRtiyoM kA udaya hotA hai ? uttara : mithyAdRSTi Adi
guNasthAnoM meM krama se 117, 111, 100, 104, 87, 81, 76, 72, 66, 60, 56, 57, 42
aura 12 prakRtiyoM kA udaya hotA hai| (75)

Page #81 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
204. Question: In which Gunasthana (state of being) do how many Prakṛtis
(principles) arise? Answer: In Mithyadṛṣṭi (false belief) etc. Gunasthānas, 5,
11, 22, 18, 35, 41, 46, 50, 56, 62, 63, 65, 80 and 110 Prakṛtis arise
respectively. 205. Question: How is the plan of Tribhanga (three-fold) in the
Gunasthānas? Answer: In total, there are 122 Prakṛtis that are capable of
arising. Out of these, in the first Gunasthāna, Samyamithyatva (complete false
belief), Samyaktva (right belief) Prakṛti, Āhārak Śarīra (physical body), Āhārak
Śarīrāṅgopāṅga (parts and sub-parts of the physical body) and Tīrthankara
(liberated soul) these five Prakṛtis do not arise, so there are 117 that arise.
The above 5 arise and there is a Vyucchitti (disappearance) of 5. Out of the 117
that arise in the first Gunasthāna, after subtracting the 5 of Vyucchitti and
the Narakagatyānupūrvī (consecutive births in hell), the arising in the second
Gunasthāna is 111. There is a Vyucchitti of 5 and an Anudaya (non-arising) of 5,
so in these 10 Prakṛtis, there is a Narakagatyānupūrvī, so the Anudaya is 11 and
the Vyucchitti is 6. Out of the 111 Prakṛtis that are capable of arising in
Sāsadan (the state of being a human), after subtracting the 6 Prakṛtis of
Vyucchitti, 102 remain, but in the third Gunasthāna... (76)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 204. prazna : kisa guNasthAna meM kitanI prakRtiyoM kA anudaya hotA hai ?
uttara : mithyAdRSTi Adi guNasthAnoM meM krama se 5, 11, 22, 18, 35, 41, 46, 50,
56, 62, 63, 65, 80 aura 110 prakRtiyoM kA udaya hotA hai| 205. prazna :
guNasthAnoM meM udaya tribhaMgI kI yojanA kisa prakAra hotI hai ? uttara : kula,
udaya yogya prakRtiyA~ 122 haiM unameM se prathama guNasthAna meM
samyamithyAtva, samyaktva prakRti, AhAraka zarIra, AhAraka zarIrAMgopAMga aura
tIrthakara ina pA~ca prakRtiyoM kA udaya na hone se 117 kA udaya hai| uparyukta
5 kA anudaya hai aura 5 kI udaya vyucchitti hai| prathama guNasthAna ke udaya
117 meM se udaya vyucchitti kI 5 tathA narakagatyAnupUrvI ke ghaTAne se dvitIya
guNasthAna meM udaya 111 kA hai| udaya vyucchitti kI 5 aura anudaya kI pA~ca
aise 10 prakRtiyoM meM narakagatyAnapUrvI ke mila jAne se anudaya 11 kA aura
udaya vyucchitti 6 kI hai| sAsAdana kI udaya yogya 111 prakRtiyoM meM se udaya
vyucchitti kI 6 prakRtiyA~ ghaTAne se 102 rahIM parantu tRtIya guNasthAna meM
(76)

Page #82 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Since there is no death, no *anupurvi* arises. The *narak gatyanupurvi* has
already decreased, so after subtracting 3 *anupurvis*, 66 remain. When
*samyagmithyatva* nature is added to these, the *udaya* in the third *gunasthan*
is 100. Adding the 11 *anudaya* from the previous *anudaya* and the 6 *udaya
vyuchchitti* natures, we get 20. Adding 3 *anupurvis* to this and subtracting 1
*samyagmithyatva* nature, the *anudaya* in the third *gunasthan* is 22 and the
*udaya vyuchchitti* is 1. Subtracting the 1 *udaya vyuchchitti* nature from the
100 *udaya yogya* natures of the third *gunasthan*, 66 remain. Adding 4
*anupurvis* and 1 *samyaktava* nature to these, the *udaya yogya* natures in the
fourth *gunasthan* are 104. Adding the 1 *udaya vyuchchitti* nature to the 22
*anudaya* natures from the previous *anudaya*, we get 23. Subtracting 4
*anupurvis* and 1 *samyaktava* nature from these, the *anudaya* in the fourth
*gunasthan* is 18 and the *udaya vyuchchitti* is 17. Subtracting the 17 *udaya
vyuchchitti* natures from the 104 *udaya yogya* natures of the fourth
*gunasthan*, the *udaya yogya* natures in the fifth *gunasthan* are 87. Adding
the 17 *udaya vyuchchitti* natures to the 18 *anudaya* natures from the previous
*anudaya*, the fifth *gunasthan*  (77)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 mRtyu na hone se kisI bhI AnupUrvI kA udaya nahIM rahatA  /  naraka
gatyAnupUrvI pahale se ghaTI huI hai ataH 3 AnupUrviyoM ke ghaTAne se 66 rahIM
unameM samyaramithyAtva prakRti ke mila jAne se tRtIya guNasthAna meM udaya 100
kA hai| pichale anudaya kI 11 aura udaya vyucchitti kI 6 prakRtiyA~ milAne se 20
huI usameM 3 AnupUrvI milAne aura 1 samyagamithyAtva prakRti ke ghaTAne se
tRtIya guNasthAna meM anudaya 22 kA hai tathA udaya vyucchitti 1 kI hai| tRtIya
guNasthAna kI udaya yogya 100 prakRtiyoM meM udaya vyucchitti kI 1 prakRti
ghaTAne se 66 rhiiN| inameM AnupUrvI kI 4 tatha samyaktva prakRti ke milAne se
caturtha guNasthAna meM udaya yogyaM 104 prakRtiyA~ haiN| pichale anudaya kI 22
prakRtiyoM meM udaya vyucchitti kI 1 prakRti milAne se 23 huIM, unameM se 4
AnupUrvI aura 1 samyaktva prakRti ke ghaTAne se caturtha guNasthAna meM anudaya
18 kA hai aura udaya vyucchitti 17 kI hai| caturtha guNasthAna kI udaya yogya
104 prakRtiyoM meM se udaya vyucchitti kI 17 prakRtiyA~ ghaTA dene se paMcam
guNasthAna meM udaya yogya 87 prakRtiyA~ haiN| pichale anudaya kI 18 prakRtiyoM
meM udaya vyucchitti kI 17 prakRtiyA~ mila jAne se paMcam guNasthAna (77)

Page #83 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
My *anudaya* is 35 and *udaya vyuchchitti* is 8. Out of the 87 *prakritis*
eligible for *udaya* in the fifth *gunasthan*, subtracting the 8 *prakritis* of
*udaya vyuchchitti* and removing the *aaharaka* pair, there are -1 *prakritis*
eligible for *udaya* in the *matam muga*. Adding the *prakritis* of *udaya
vyuchchitti* to the previous *anudaya* of 35 *prakritis* and subtracting the
*aaharaka* pair, there are 41 *prakritis* eligible for *anudaya* and the *udaya
vyuchchitti* is 5. Subtracting the 5 *prakritis* of *udaya vyuchchitti* from the
81 *prakritis* eligible for *udaya* in the sixth *gunasthan*, there are 76
*prakritis* eligible for *udaya* in the seventh *gunasthan*. Adding the 5
*prakritis* of *udaya vyuchchitti* to the previous *anudaya* of 41 *prakritis*,
there are 46 *prakritis* eligible for *anudaya* in the seventh *gunasthan* and
the *udaya vyuchchitti* is 4. Subtracting the 4 *prakritis* of *udaya
vyuchchitti* from the 76 *prakritis* eligible for *udaya* in the seventh
*gunasthan*, there are 72 *prakritis* eligible for *udaya* in the eighth
*gunasthan*. Adding the 4 *prakritis* of *udaya vyuchchitti* to the previous
*anudaya* of 46 *prakritis*, there are 50 *prakritis* eligible for *anudaya* in
the eighth *gunasthan* and the *udaya vyuchchitti* is 6. Subtracting the 6
*prakritis* of *udaya vyuchchitti* from the 72 *prakritis* eligible for *udaya*
in the eighth *gunasthan*,  (78)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 meM anudaya 35 kA aura udaya vyucchitti 8 kI hai| paMcam guNasthAna kI udaya
yogya 87 prakRtiyoM meM se udaya vyucchitti kI 8 prakRtiyA~ ghaTAne tathA
AhAraka yugala ke sijAne se mAtama mugA meM udaya yorapa -1 prakRtiyA~ haiN|
pichale anudaya kI 35 prakRtiyoM meM udaya vyucchitti kI prakRtiyA~ milAne aura
AhAraka yugala ke ghaTAne se anudaya yogya 41 prakRtiyA~ haiM tathA udaya
vyucchitti 5 kI hai| SaSTham guNasthAna ke udaya yogya 81 prakRtiyoM meM se
udaya vyucchitti kI 5 prakRtiyA~ kama hone se saptam guNasthAna meM udaya yogya
76 prakRtiyA~ haiN| pichale anudaya kI 41 prakRtiyoM meM udaya vyucchitti kI 5
prakRtiyA~ milAne se saptam guNasthAna meM anudaya yogya 46 prakRtiyA~ haiM
tathA udaya vyucchitti 4 kI hai| saptam guNasthAna kI udaya yogya 76 prakRtiyoM
meM se udaya vyucchitti kI 4 prakRtiyA~ kama kara dene se aSTam guNasthAna meM
72  /  /  prakRtiyA~ udaya yogya haiN| pichale anudaya kI 46 prakRtiyoM meM
udaya vyucchitti kI 4 prakRtiyA~ mila jAne se aSTam guNasthAna meM anudaya yogya
50 prakRtiyA~ haiM aura 6 kI udaya vyucchitti hai| aSTam guNasthAna kI udaya
yogya 72 prakRtiyoM meM se udaya vyucchitti kI 6 prakRtiyA~ kama kara (78)

Page #84 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
In the ninth *guṇasthāna*, there are 66 *prakṛtis* eligible for *udaya*
(arising). Adding the 6 *prakṛtis* of *udaya-vyuccheddi* (arising-ceasing) to
the 50 *prakṛtis* of the previous *anudaya* (non-arising), there are 56
*prakṛtis* eligible for *anudaya* in the ninth *guṇasthāna*, and 6 *prakṛtis* of
*udaya-vyuccheddi*. Subtracting the 6 *prakṛtis* of *udaya-vyuccheddi* from the
66 *prakṛtis* eligible for *udaya* in the ninth *guṇasthāna*, there are 60
*prakṛtis* eligible for *udaya* in the tenth *guṇasthāna*. Adding the 6
*prakṛtis* of *udaya-vyuccheddi* to the 56 *prakṛtis* of the previous *anudaya*,
there are 62 *prakṛtis* eligible for *anudaya*, and 1 *prakṛti* of *udaya-
vyuccheddi*. Subtracting the 1 *prakṛti* of *udaya-vyuccheddi* from the 60
*prakṛtis* eligible for *udaya* in the tenth *guṇasthāna*, there are 56
*prakṛtis* eligible for *udaya* in the eleventh *guṇasthāna*. Adding the 1
*prakṛti* of *udaya-vyuccheddi* to the 62 *prakṛtis* of the previous *anudaya*,
there are 63 *prakṛtis* eligible for *anudaya*. There are 2 *prakṛtis* of
*udaya-vyuccheddi*. Subtracting the 2 *prakṛtis* of *udaya-vyuccheddi* from the
56 *prakṛtis* eligible for *udaya* in the eleventh *guṇasthāna*, there are 57
*prakṛtis* eligible for *udaya* in the twelfth *guṇasthāna*. Adding the 2
*prakṛtis* of *udaya-vyuccheddi* to the 63 *prakṛtis* of the previous *anudaya*,
there are 65 *prakṛtis* eligible for *anudaya*, and 16 *prakṛtis* of *udaya-
vyuccheddi*. In the twelfth *guṇasthāna*,  (UE)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dene se navam guNasthAna meM udaya yogya 66 prakRtiyA~ haiM  /  pichale anudaya
kI 50 prakRtiyoM meM udaya vyucchitti kI 6 milA dene se navam guNasthAna meM
anudaya yogya 56 prakRtiyA~ hotI haiM aura 6 kI udaya vyucchitti hai| navam
guNasthAna kI udaya yogya 66 prakRtiyoM meM se udaya vyucchitti kI 6 prakRtiyA~
kama ho jAne se dazam guNasthAna meM udaya yogya 60 prakRtiyA~ haiN| pichale
anudaya kI 56 prakRtiyoM meM udaya vyucchitti kI 6 prakRtiyA~ milAne se 62
prakRtiyA~ anudaya yogya haiM aura 1 kI udaya vyucchitti hai| dazam guNasthAna
kI udaya yogya 60 prakRtiyoM meM se udaya vyucchitti kI 1 prakRti kama ho jAne
se ekAdaza guNasthAna meM udaya yogya 56 prakRtiyA~ haiN| pichale anudaya kI 62
prakRtiyoM meM udaya vyucchitti kI 1 prakRti mila jAne se 63 prakRtiyA~ anudaya
yogya haiN| 2 kI udaya vyucchitti hai| ekAdaza guNasthAna kI udaya yogya 56
prakRtiyoM meM se udaya vyucchitti kI 2 prakRtiyA~ kama kara dene se dvAdaza
guNasthAna meM udaya yogya 57 prakRtiyA~ haiM  /  pichale anudaya kI 63
prakRtiyoM meM udaya vyucchitti kI 2 prakRtiyA~ mila jAne se 65 prakRtiyA~
anudaya yogya haiM aura 16 kI udaya vyucchitti hai| dvAdaza guNasthAna kI (UE)

Page #85 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Of the 57 **prakritis** eligible for **udaya**, 16 **prakritis** of **udaya
vyuchchitti** are reduced and 1 **tirthankara** **prakriti** is added, resulting
in 42 **prakritis** eligible for **udaya** in the **Trayodasha Gunasthan**.
Similarly, in the **anudaya** of 65 **prakritis**, 16 **prakritis** of **udaya
vyuchchitti** are added and 1 **tirthankara** **prakriti** is subtracted,
resulting in 80 **prakritis** of **anudaya** and 30 **prakritis** of **udaya
vyuchchitti**. In the **Trayodasha Gunasthan**, 30 **prakritis** of **udaya
vyuchchitti** are reduced from the 42 **prakritis** eligible for **udaya**,
leaving 12 **prakritis** eligible for **udaya** in the **Chaturdasha
Gunasthan**. In the previous **anudaya** of 80 **prakritis**, 30 **prakritis**
of **udaya vyuchchitti** are added, resulting in 110 **prakritis** of
**anudaya** and 12 **prakritis** of **udaya vyuchchitti**. Thus, in the fourteen
**gunasthanas** from **mithyadrishti** onwards, there is a plan of **udaya
tribhangi**.  **Question:** What is the difference between **udaya** and
**udirana**?  **Answer:** The attainment of the fruits of **karmas** according
to the creation of **nisheka** after the completion of **avabadha** is called
**udaya**, and the emergence of **karmas** into **udaya** before the
**avabadhakal** due to specific reasons is called **udirana**.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 udaya yogya 57 prakRtiyoM meM se udaya vyucchitti kI 16 prakRtiyA~ kama ho jAne
aura 1 tIrthakara prakRti ke mila jAne se trayodaza guNasthAna meM 42 prakRtiyA~
udaya yogya haiN| einne anudaga kI 65 prakRniyoM meM udaya vyucchitti kI 16
prakRtiyoM ke milAne aura 1 tIrthakara prakRti ke ghaTAne se 80 prakRtiyoM kA
anudaya hai tathA 30 kI udaya vyucchitti hai| trayodaza guNasthAna kI udaya
yogya 42 prakRtiyoM meM se udaya vyucchitti kI 30 prakRtiyA~ kama karane se
caturdaza guNasthAna meM udaya yogya 12 prakRtiyA~ haiN| pichale anudaya kI 80
prakRtiyoM meM udaya vyucchitti kI 30 prakRtiyA~ milAne se anudaya yogya 110
prakRtiyA~ haiM aura 12 prakRtiyoM kI udaya vyucchitti hai| isa prakAra
mithyAdRSTi Adi caudaha guNasthAnoM meM udaya tribhaMgI kI yojanA hai| 206.
prazna : udaya aura udIraNA meM kyA antara hai ? uttara : AbAdhA pUrNa hone para
niSeka racanA ke anusAra kamoM kA phala prApta honA udaya kahalAtA hai aura
viziSTa kAraNoM se AvAdhAkAla ke pUrva hI karmoM kA udaya meM A jAnA udIraNA.
hai| (60)

Page #86 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
207. Question: What is the special characteristic of karma-prakritis in
comparison to uday and udirana? Answer: Except for the three gunasthanas of
pramatta-samyata, sayog-kevali and ayog-kevali, there is no special
characteristic in uday and udirana in comparison to swamitva in other
gunasthanas. From the 42 prakritis, which are the combined 30 prakritis of uday-
vyuchchitti of sayog-kevali and the 12 prakritis of uday-vyuchchitti of ayog-
kevali, one should subtract the three tan-prakritis of satavedaniya,
asatavedaniya and manushyayu. The udirana of these three subtracted prakritis
occurs in the sixth gunasthan called pramatta-virata, and the udirana of the
remaining 36 prakritis occurs in sayog-kevali, and there their udirana-
vyuchchitti also occurs. Ayog-kevali does not have udirana. 205. Question: In
which gunasthanas does the udirana-vyuchchitti of how many prakritis occur?
Answer: From the mithyadristi gunasthan to the sayog-kevali gunasthan, the
udirana-vyuchchitti of 5, 6, 1, 17, 8, 8, 4, 6, 6, 1, 2, 16 and 36 prakritis
occurs respectively. (1)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 207. prazna : udaya aura udIraNA kI apekSA karma prakRtiyoM meM kyA vizeSatA
hai ? uttara : pramatta saMyata, sayoga kevalI aura ayoga kevalI ina tIna
guNasthAnoM ko chor3akara anya guNasthAnoM meM svAmitva kI apekSA udaya aura
udIraNA meM koI vizeSatA nahIM hai| sayoga kevalI kI udaya vyucchitti kI 30 aura
ayoga kevalI kI udaya vyucchitti kI 12 prakRtiyoM ko milAkara una 42 prakRtiyoM
meM se sAtAvedanIya, asAtAvedanIya aura manuSyAyu ina tAna prakRtiyoM ko ghaTAnA
caahiye| ina ghaTAyI huI tIna prakRtiyoM kI udIraNA pramatta virata nAmaka
chaThe guNasthAna meM hotI hai aura zeSa 36 prakRtiyoM kI udIraNA sayoga kevalI
ke hotI hai tathA vahIM inakI udIraNA vyucchitti bhI hotI hai| ayoga kevalI ke
udIraNA nahIM hotii| 205. prazna : kisa guNasthAna meM kitanI prakRtiyoM kI
udIraNA vyucchitti hotI hai ? uttara : mithyAdRSTi guNasthAna se lekara sayoga
kevalI guNasthAna taka krama se 5, 6, 1, 17, 8, 8, 4, 6, 6, 1, 2, 16 aura 36
prakRtiyoM kI udIraNA vyucchitti hotI hai| (1)

Page #87 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
206. Question: How many types of Udeerna are there in each Gunasthan? Answer:
From Mithyadrishti Gunasthan to Sayog Kevali Gunasthan, there are 117, 111, 100,
104, 7, 81, 73, 66, 63, 57, 56, 54 and 36 types of Udeerna respectively. 210.
Question: How many types of Anudeerna are there in each Gunasthan? Answer: From
Mithyadrishti to Sayog Kevali Gunasthan, there are 5, 11, 22, 18, 35, 41, 46,
53, 56, 65, 66, 68 and 83 types of Anudeerna respectively. Udeerna should be
planned according to the Trimanghi scheme of Udar Tribhangi. 211. Question: Who
does not experience death? Answer: Those with mixed Gunasthan, those who possess
the Nirvritti Paryaptak state, mixed-body Yogis, those in the Kshapak category,
Upsham  (2)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 206. prazna: kisa guNasthAna meM kitanI prakRtiyoM kI udIraNA hotI hai ?
uttara: mithyAdRSTi guNasthAna se lekara sayoga kevalI guNasthAna taka krama se
117, 111, 100, 104, 7, 81, 73, 66, 63, 57, 56, 54 aura 36 prakRtiyoM kI udIraNA
hotI hai  /  210. prazna: kisa guNasthAna meM kitanI prakRtiyoM kI anudIrayA hai
? uttara: mithyAdRSTi se lekara saMyoga kevalI guNasthAna taka krama se 5, 11,
22, 18, 35, 41, 46, 53, 56, 65, 66, 68 aura 83 prakRtiyoM kI anudIraNA hai|
udIraNA trimaMgI kI yojanA udara tribhaMgI ke anusAra kara lenA cAhiye  /  211.
prazna maraNa kina kina kA nahIM hotA hai ? uttara : mizra guNasthAna vAle,
nirvRtya paryAptaka avasthA ke dhAraNa * karane vAle mizrakAya yogI, kSapaka
zreNI vAle, upazama (2)

Page #88 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
While ascending the श्रेणी, humans situated in the first part of the अपूर्वकरण
गुणस्थान, as well as those with प्रथमोगा सम्यग्मृति and those in the 2-3-4
गुणस्थानवर्ती नारकी, do not attain death. Similarly, one who attains मिथ्यात्व
after the विसंयोजना of अनन्तानुबन्धी does not die until the अन्तर्मुहूर्त, and
one who destroys दर्शन मोहनीय does not die until कृतकृत्यता remains. 212.
Question: Where is a कृतकृत्य वेदक सम्यग्दृष्टि born after death? Answer: The
time of a वृद्धायुष्क कृतकृत्यवेदक सम्यग्दृष्टi is अन्तर्मुहूर्त. It should be
divided into four parts. One who dies in the first part is born among the देवों,
one who dies in the second part is born among the देव and मनुष्यों, one who dies
in the third part is born among the देव-मनुष्य-तिर्यंचों, and one who dies in
the fourth part is born in any of the four गति. 1. There are two उपदेश
(opinions) on this subject. According to one उपदेश, a कृतकृत्यदेदक सम्यग्दृष्टि
जीव does not die, and according to the other उपदेश, it does die. (Param Pujya
Jayadvala Pu. 2, p. 315, 216 etc.) (3)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zreNI car3hate samaya apUrvakaraNa guNasthAna ke pahale bhAga meM sthita
manuSya, prathamogA samyagmRti aura sArA kAra ke 2-3-4 guNasthAnavartI nArakI,
maraNa ko prApta nahIM hote| isI taraha anantAnubandhI kI visaMyojanA kara
mithyAtva ko prApta hone vAle kA antarmuhUrta taka maraNa nahIM hotA tathA
darzana mohanIya kA kSaya karane vAlA, jaba taka kRta kRtyatA rahatI hai taba
taka maraNa nahIM krtaa|' 212. prazna : kRtakRtya vedaka samyagdRSTi marakara
kahA~ utpanna hotA hai? uttara : vRddhAyuSka kRtakRtyavedaka samyagdRSTi kA kAla
antarmuhUrta hai| isake cAra bhAga karane cAhiye ina cAra bhAgoM meM se prathama
bhAga meM marane vAlA devoM meM dvitIya bhAga meM marane vAlA deva aura manuSyoM
meM, tRtIya bhAga meM marane vAlA deya-manuSya-tiryaMcoM meM aura caturtha bhAga
meM marane vAlA cAroM gatiyoM meM se kisI meM bhI utpanna hotA hai| 1. isa
viSaya meM do upadeza (mata) haiN| eka upadeza ke anusAra kRtakRtyadedaka
samyagdRSTi jIva maratA nahIM hai aura dUsare upadeza ke anusAra maratA bhI hai|
(parama pUjya jayadhavalA pu0 2 pR0 315, 216 Adi) (3)

Page #89 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Keep in mind that the first hell-born being will be born in hell, the
**tithanch** born among humans will be born among humans, and the **vaimanik**
born among gods will be born among gods.  || Thus ends the third chapter. ||  1.
It is also noteworthy that the **prakirnak**, **abhiyogy**, and **kilvishak**
are not born even among gods. (Dhavala 1/336)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dhyAna rahe ki naraka meM utpanna hone vAlA prathama naraka meM, tithaMca tathA
manuSyoM meM utpanna hone vAlA bhogabhUmija tithaMca tathA manuSyoM meM aura
devoM meM utpanna hone vAlA vaimAnika devoM meM hI utpanna hogaa|'  /  /  iti
tRtIyAdhikAra : smaaptH|| 1. itanA aura smaraNIya hai ki prakIrNaka, Abhiyogya
aura kilviSaka devoM meM bhI nahIM utpanna hotaa| (dhavala 1/336)

Page #90 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Question 213:** What is sattva? **Answer:** When bound, the attachment of the
karma-pradesh to the atma-pradeshas according to their respective states is
called sattva.  **Question 214:** What is the arrangement of karma-sattva in the
gunasthans? **Answer:** In the first gunasthan, the tirthankara and the aharaka
couple do not exist together. In the second sasadan gunasthan, the tirthankara
nature and the aharaka couple do not exist sequentially or simultaneously. In
the third misranam gunasthan, the tirthankara nature does not exist. This means
that beings with the above-mentioned natures will not have the above-mentioned
gunasthans.  **Question 215:** What is the arrangement for obtaining samyaktvam,
deshavrat, and mahavat after the ayubandha is complete? **Answer:** When the ayu
of all four gatis is bound, samyakdarshan can be obtained, but except for
devayu, other ayus  (85)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 aguffawn: 213 prazna kise kahate hai ? uttara : bandha hone para apanI apanI
sthiti ke anusAra karma pradeza kA Atma pradezoM ke sAtha saMlagna rahane ko
sattva kahate haiN| 214. prazna: guNasthAnoM meM karma sattva kI kyA vyavasthA
hai ? uttara : prathama guNasthAna meM tIrthaMkara aura AhAraka yugala kI sattA
eka sAtha nahIM hotii| dvitIya sAsAdana guNasthAna meM tIrthakara prakRti aura
AhAraka yugala kI sattA krama se bhI nahIM hotI aura yugapat bhI nahIM hotI
tathA tRtIya mizraNaM guNasthAna meM tIrthaMkara prakRti kI sattA nahIM hotI  /
tAtparya yaha hai ki uparyukta prakRti kI sattA vAle jIvoM ke uparyukta
guNasthAna nahIM hoNge| 215. prazna: Ayubandha ho cukane para samyaktva,
dezavrata aura mahAvata prApta hone kI kyA vyavasthA hai ? uttara : cAroM
gatiyoM sambandhI Ayu kA bandha hone para samyagdarzana to ho sakatA hai,
parantu devAyu ko chor3akara anya Ayu kA (85)

Page #91 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
When bound, there are no *anuvrata* and *mahavrata* in that *paryaya*. This
means that in the fourth *gunasthan*, called *avirata samyagdristi*, there can
be the existence of all four *ayus* in relation to the *bhujyaman* *ayu* of
various beings. The peculiarity is that in the *dev* and *narak* realms, there
will be bondage of only human and *tiryach* *ayus*, and bondage related to all
four *ayus* of humans and *tiryachs* is possible. When a new *ayu* is bound, the
existence of two *ayus* arises due to the distinction between *badyaman* and
*bhujyaman* of a being. Before the binding of a new *ayu*, there is only the
existence of one *bhujyaman* *ayu*. A being of the *kshapika* category is a
*tadhva* seeker of liberation, therefore, it does not have the binding of a new
*ayu*. There is only the existence of one *bhujyaman* human *ayu*. If a being of
the *upshama* category is *baddhayushk*, then there will be the existence of two
*ayus*: *bhujyaman* human *ayu* and *badyaman* *devayu*. And if it is
*abaddhayushk*, then there will be only the existence of one *bhujyaman* human
*ayu*. The attainment of *kshayika samyagdarshan* happens for a human in the
*karmabhumij* from the fourth *gunasthan* to the seventh *gunasthan*. Its
*anantaanubandhi* *chatushk* and the *mithyatva*, *samyakmithyatva*, and
*samyaktva* natures, these seven natures are destroyed. (86)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 bandha hone para usa paryAya meM aNuvrata aura mahAvrata nahIM hote  /
tAtparya yaha hai ki avirata samyagdRSTi nAmaka caturtha guNasthAna meM nAnA
jIvoM kI apekSA bhujyamAna Ayu ke sAtha cAroM Ayu kI sattA ho sakatI hai|
vizeSatA yaha hai ki deva aura narakagati meM manuSya aura tiryaca Ayu kA hI
bandha hogA tathA manuSya aura tiryacoM ke cAroM Ayu saMbaMdhI bandha ho sakatA
hai| navIna Ayu kA bandha ho jAne para eka jIva ke badhyamAna aura bhujyamAna ke
bheda se do Ayu kI sattA ho jAtI hai| navIna Ayu ke bandha ke pahale eka
bhujyamAna Ayu kI hI sattA rahatI hai| kSapaka zreNI vAlA jIva tadbhava
mokSamAgI hotA hai, ataH usake navIna Ayu kA bandha nahIM hotaa| mAtra eka
bhujyamAna manuSyAyu kI sattA rahatI hai| upazama zreNI vAlA yadi baddhAyuSka
hai to usake bhujyamAna manuSyAyu aura badhyamAna devAyu ina do Ayu kI sattA
hogI aura abaddhAyuSka hai to mAtra eka bhujyamAna manuSyAyu kI hI sattA hogii|
kSAyika samyagdarzana kI prApti karmabhUmija manuSya ko caturtha guNasthAna se
lekara saptam guNasthAna taka hotI hai usake anantAnubaMdhI catuSka aura
mithyAtva, samyakmidhyAtva tathA samyaktva prakRti ina sAta prakRtiyoM kA kSaya
ho jAtA hai| (86)

Page #92 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Therefore, they do not exist. 116. Question: How many **prakritis** exist in
each **guna-sthana**? Answer: In the **mithyadrishti** **guna-sthana**, there
are 148 **prakritis** in existence, as per the existence of various beings. In
**sasadan**, there are 145 **prakritis** in existence, as **tirthankara** and
**aaharaka** are not present. In the **misra** **guna-sthana**, there are 147
**prakritis** in existence, as the **tirthankara** **prakriti** is not present.
In the fourth **guna-sthana**, there are 148 **prakritis** in existence, as the
seven **ananta-anubandhi** **prakritis** exist in the form of **upshama**. In
the fifth **desh-vrata** **guna-sthana**, there are 1457 **prakritis** in
existence, as the **naraka-ayu** is not present. In the sixth **guna-sthana**,
called **pramatta-virata**, there are 146 **prakritis** in existence, as the
**naraka** and **tiryanch-ayu** are not present. Similarly, in the seventh
**guna-sthana**, called **aprammatta-virata**, there are also 146 **prakritis**
in existence. From the fourth **guna-sthana** to the seventh **guna-sthana**,
there is an absence of the seven **ananta-anubandhi** **prakritis**, including
**kshayika** **samyagdristi**, resulting in 141 **prakritis** in existence. In
the eighth **guna-sthana**, there is an absence of the aforementioned seven
**prakritis**, along with **naraka**, **tiryanch**, and **deva-ayu**, for those
belonging to the **kshapka** category. Therefore, there are 138 **prakritis** in
existence. At the beginning of the ninth **guna-sthana**, called
**anivrittikaran**, there are also 138 **prakritis** in existence. Afterwards,
(87)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 ataH inakI sattA nahIM hotI  /  116. prazna: kisa guNasthAna meM kitanI
prakRtiyoM kI sattA hotI hai ? uttara : nAnA jIvoM kI apekSA midhyAdRSTi
guNasthAna meM 148 kI sattA hai| sAsAdana meM tIrthaMkara aura AhArakadvaya kI
sattA na hone se 145 ko sattA hai| mizra guNasthAna maM tIrthaMkara prakRti kI
sattA na hone se 147 kI sattA hai| caturtha guNasthAna meM anantAnubaMdhI sAta
prakRtiyoM kI upazama rUpa sattA hone se 148 kI sattA hai| paMcam dezavrata
guNasthAna meM narakAyu kI sattA na hone se 1457 kI sattA hai| pramattavirata
nAmaka SaSTham guNasthAna meM naraka aura tiryaca Ayu kI sattA na hone se 146 kI
sattA hai| isI prakAra apramattavirata nAmaka saptam guNasthAna meM bhI 146 kI
sattA hai| caturtha guNasthAna se lekara saptam guNasthAna taka kSAyika
samyagdRSTi ke anaMtAnubaMdhI Adi sAta prakRtiyoM kA abhAva hone se 141 kI sattA
hotI hai| aSTam guNasthAna meM kSapaka zreNI vAle ke uparyukta sAta prakRtiyoM
ke sAtha naraka, tiryaMca aura devAyu kA bhI abhAva hotA hai  /  ataH 138 kI
sattA hai| anivRttikaraNa nAmaka navam guNasthAna ke prAraMbha meM bhI 138 kI
sattA rahatI hai pazcAt (87)

Page #93 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
A human being in the Kshapaka category has nine parts, and the destruction of
16, 8, 1, 1, 6, 1, 1, 1, and 1 natures in order results in the destruction of 36
natures. Therefore, the tenth Gunasthan has a state of 102. At the end of the
tenth, the destruction of subtle greed also occurs, leaving a state of 101 in
the twelfth Gunasthan. In the twelfth Gunasthan, the destruction of 16 sattva
occurs, resulting in a state of 85 in the thirteenth Gunasthan. No nature is
destroyed in the thirteenth Gunasthan, so the fourteenth Gunasthan also has a
state of 85. Subsequently, in the penultimate time, 73 natures are destroyed,
and in the final time, 12 natures are destroyed, causing the soul to become
completely free from karma. If a person in the Upshama category is a Kshayika
Samyagdarshi and has already bound a new lifespan, then their state will remain
at 138 + 1 = 139 until the Upshant Moh Gunasthan. If they are Abaddhayushk, then
their state will be 138. If they are a Dvitiyopshama Samyagdarshi, then the
disassociation of the infinite Anubandhi Chatushk results in a state of 14.  1.
See - Go.K. page 357, edited by V.P. Ratanchand Mukhtar. (88)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 kSapaka zreNI vAle manuSya ke nau bhAgoM meM krama se 16,8, 1, 1, 6, 1, 1, 1
aura 1 prakRti kA kSaya hone se 36 prakRtiyoM kA kSaya ho jAtA hai ataH dazam
guNasthAna meM 102 kI sattA hotI hai| dazam ke anta meM sUkSma lobha kA bhI
kSaya ho jAne se bArahaveM guNasthAna meM 101 kI sattA rahatI hai| bArahaveM
guNasthAna meM 16 kI sattva vyucchitti hone se terahaveM guNasthAna meM 85 kI
sattA hotI hai| terahaveM guNasthAna meM kisI prakRti kA kSaya nahIM hotA
isaliye caudahaveM guNasthAna meM bhI 85 kI hI sattA rahatI hai  /  pazcAt
upAntya samaya meM 73 aura antya samaya meM 12 prakRtiyoM kA kSaya ho jAne se
AtmA sarva karma vipramukta ho jAtI hai  /  upazama zreNI vAlA yadi kSAyika
samyagdRSTi hai aura navIna Ayu kA bandha kara cukA hai to usake 138+1=136 kI
sattA upazAnta moha guNasthAna taka rahegI  / ' yadi abaddhAyuSka hai to 138 kI
sattA hogI  /  yadi dvitIyopazama samyagdRSTi hai to anantAnubandhI catuSka kI
visaMyojanA hone se 14 kI sattA rahatI hai  /  I 1. dekho - go.ka. pRSTha 357
sampA. va. paM. ratanacaMda mukhtAra  /  (88)

Page #94 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
217. Question: In the Sarak श्रेणी (category) of the Kāla (time) Nāmar (name)
Guṇapan (quality), how do the Prakṛtis (principles) decay? Answer: The Navam
(ninth) Guṇasthān (stage of spiritual progress) has nine parts. In the first
part, the following sixteen Prakṛtis decay: Narakagati (hellish existence),
Narakagatyānupūrvi (existence preceding hell), Tiryaṅgati (animal existence),
Tiryaṅgatyānupūrvi (existence preceding animal existence), Dwīndriya (two-
sense), Trīndriya (three-sense), Chaturindriya (four-sense) Jāti (species),
Styāna (stupor), Gṛddhi (greed), Nidrā (sleep), Prachalā (restlessness), Udyota
(brightness), Ātap (heat), Ekendriya (one-sense) Jāti, Sādhāraṇa (ordinary),
Sūkṣma (subtle), and Sādhāraṇa. In the second part, the following eight Prakṛtis
decay: Apratyākhyānāvaraṇa Chatuṣka (fourfold non-rejection veil) and
Pratyākhyānā Chatuṣka (fourfold rejection veil). In the third part, one
Napuṃsakaved (non-masculine knowledge) decays. In the fourth part, one Strīved
(feminine knowledge) decays. In the fifth part, six No Kṣayās (non-passions)
decay. In the sixth part, one Puruṣaved (masculine knowledge) decays. In the
seventh part, one Sanjvalana Krodha (burning anger) decays. In the eighth part,
Sanjvalanāmāna (burning pride) decays. And in the ninth part, Sanjvalanāmāyā
(burning delusion) decays. 21. Question: Which one Prakṛti decays in the Dasam
(tenth) Guṇasthān? Answer: Sanjvalana Lobha (burning greed), this one Prakṛti
decays at the end of the Dasam Guṇasthān. It does not decay for those in the
Upaśānta (calm) Moh (delusion) Guṇasthān, who are in the Kṣapaka (destructive)
श्रेणी (category), but only for those in the Upaśama (subduing) श्रेणी
(category).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 217. prazna : saraka zreNI kAle namAra guNapana meM prakRtiyoM kA kSaya kisa
prakAra hotA hai ? uttara : navam guNasthAna ke nau bhAga haiN| unameM se pahale
bhAga meM narakagati, narakagatyAnupUrvI, tiryaggati, tiryaggatyAnupUrvI,
dvIndriya-trIndriya-caturindriya jAti, styAnagRddhi, nidrA nidrA, pracalA
pracalA, udyota, Atapa, ekendriya jAti, sAdhAraNa, sUkSma aura sAdhAraNa, ina
solaha prakRtiyoM kA kSaya hotA hai| dvitIya bhAga meM apratyAkhyAnAvaraNa
catuSka aura pratyAkhyAnA catuSka, ina ATha prakRtiyoM kA, tRtIya bhAga meM 1
napuMsakaveda kA, caturtha. bhAga meM 1 strIveda kA, paMcam bhAga meM 6 no
kaSAyoM kA, SaSTham bhAga meM 1 puruSaveda kA, saptama bhAga meM 1 saMjvalana
krodha kA, aSTam bhAga meM saMjvalanamAna kA aura navam bhAga meM saMjvalana
mAyA kA . kSaya hotA hai| 21. prazna : dazam guNasthAna meM kSaya hone vAlI 1
prakRti kauna uttara : saMjvalana lobha, isa 1 prakRti kA kSaya dazam guNasthAna
ke anta meM hotA hai| upazAnta moha-guNasthAna, kSapaka zreNI vAle ke nahIM
hotA, mAtra upazama zreNI vAle ke hotA hai

Page #95 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
And in it, there is no decay of any nature. 216. Question: Which are the sixteen
natures that are destroyed in the twelfth *guna-sthana*? Answer: In the
penultimate time of the twelfth *guna-sthana*, *nidra* and *prachala* are
destroyed, and in the final time, five of *jnana-avaran*, four of *darshan-
avaran*, and five of *antaraya*, thus a total of fourteen, making sixteen
natures destroyed. 220. Question: Which are the sixty-five natures that are
destroyed in the *ayog kevali guna-sthana*? Answer: From the five bodies to
*sparsha-namakarma*, fifty *sthira*, *asthira*, *shubha*, *ashubha*, *susvara*,
*duhsvara*, *devagati*, *devagaty-anupurvi*, *prashasta vihayogati*, *aprashasta
vihayogati*, *durbhaga*, *nirmana*, *ayashaskirti*, *anadeya*, *pratyek*,
*aparyapta*, *agurulaghu*, *upghata*, *parghata*, *uchchvasa*, *vedaniya* from
the seven *asa-ta-vedaniya*, one *anudaya* form, and *nicha gotra*, these
seventy-three natures are destroyed in the penultimate time, and one *vedaniya*,
*manushya-gati*, *panchendriya jati*, *subhaga*, *basa*, *badara*, *paryapti*,
*adeya*, *yashaskirti*, *tirthankara prakriti*, *manushyayu*, and *uchcha
gotra*, these twelve natures are destroyed in the final time, attaining fear.
(60)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 tathA usameM kisI. prakRti kA kSaya bhI nahIM hotaa| 216. prazna : bArahatheM
guNasthAna meM naSTa hone vAlI solaha prakRtiyA~ kauna haiM ? uttara : bArahaveM
guNasthAna ke upAntya samaya meM nidrA aura pracalA kA tathA anta samaya meM
jJAnAvaraNa kI 5, darzanAvaraNa kI . cAra aura antarAya kI pA~ca isa taraha 14
kA saba milAkara 16 prakRtiyoM kA kSaya hotA hai| 220. prazna : ayoga kevalI
guNasthAna meM kSaya hone vAlI 65 prakRtiyA~ kauna haiM ? uttara : pA~ca zarIra
se lekara sparza nAmakarma taka 50 sthira, asthira, zubha, azubha, susvara,
duHsvara, devagati, deva gatyAnupUrvI, prazasta vihAyogati, aprazasta
vihAyogati, durbhaga, nirmANa, ayazaskIrti, anAdeya, pratyeka, aparyApta,
agurulaghu, upaghAta, paraghAta, ucchvAsa, vedanIya kI sAtA-asAtAvedanIya meM se
anudaya rUpa eka aura nIca gotra ye 73 prakRtiyA~ upAntya samaya meM tathA
vedanIya kI eka, manuSyagati, paMcendriya jAti, subhaga, basa, bAdara, paryApti,
Adeya, yazaskIrti, tIrthakara prakRti, manuSyAyu aura uccagotra, ye bAraha
prakRtiyA~ anta samaya meM bhaya ko prApta hotI haiN| (60)

Page #96 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
221. Question: How is the subsidence of the remaining 21 natures of the
*charitra mohaniya* of the *upshama* category? Answer: The order of subsidence
in the *upshama* category is similar to the *kshapana* method, but there is a
special feature, which is that in the second part of the six parts of
*anivrittikaran*, the *apratyakhyanavaran* and *pratyakhyanavaran* quartet,
these eight *kashyas* do not subside, but they subside before *purushaved* and
*sanjwalan*, and their order is such that after the subsidence of *purushaved*,
the subsidence of both *apratyakhyan* and *pratyakhyan* anger occurs, and then
the subsidence of *sanjwalan* anger occurs. This order should also be known in
*manadi*.  222. Question: What is *ubelan*? Answer: Just as the force of a tied
rope is removed by turning it backwards, similarly, the bound nature is
destroyed by transforming it into another nature form with the special
characteristics of the backward results, i.e., not allowing its fruit to arise
in *udaya*, is called *udvelana*. The *udvelit* nature does not remain true to
its form.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 221. prazna: upazama zreNI vAle ke cAritra mohanIya kI zeSa 21 prakRtiyoM kA
upazama kisa prakAra hotA hai ? uttara : upazama zreNI meM hone vAle upazama kA
krama kSapaNA vidhi ke samAna hai, parantu kucha vizeSatA hai, vaha yaha ki
yahA~ anivRttikaraNa ke 6 bhAgoM meM se dUsare bhAga meM apratyAkhyAnAvaraNa
aura pratyAkhyAnAvaraNa catuSka, ina ATha kaSAyoM kA upazama nahIM hotA kintu
puruSaveda aura saMjvalana ke pahale hotA hai tathA usakA krama aisA hai ki
puruSaveda kA upazama hone ke bAda apratyAkhyAna aura pratyAkhyAna donoM ke
krodha kA upazama hotA hai pazcAt saMjvalana krodha kA upazama hotA hai  /  yahI
krama mAnAdi meM bhI jAnanA caahie| 222. prazna : ubelana kise kahate haiM ?
uttara : jisa prakAra baTI huI jevar3I kA bala ulaTA ghumAne se nikAla diyA jAtA
hai isI prakAra ba~dhI huI prakRti ko pIche pariNAmoM kI vizeSatA se anya
prakRti rUpa pariNamA kara naSTa kara denA, arthAt usakA phala udaya meM nahIM
Ane dene ko udvelanA kahate haiN| udvelita prakRti kA apane rUpa se saca nahIM
rhtaa| (61)

Page #97 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
223. Question: Of which natures is there an *udvelana*? Answer: *Aharak* body,
*Aharak* body parts, *Samyaktva* nature, *Samyamithyatva* nature, *Devagati*,
*Devagatyānupūrvi*, *Narakagati*, *Narakagatyānupūrvi*, *Vaikriyik* body parts,
*Manushyagati*, *Manushyagatyānupūrvi*, and *Uchcha Gotra*, these thirteen
natures have *udvelana*. When there is *udvelana*, their essence does not
remain. 224. Question: Does the *udvelit* nature come back into existence?
Answer: It does, just like the *Anadi Mithya Drishti* in the middle of *Liv* has
the essence of 26 natures, which after attaining *Upsham Samyagdarshan* becomes
28 natures by dividing the *Mithyatva* nature into three parts: *Mithyatva*,
*Samyamithyatva*, and *Samyaktva*. Later, becoming *Mithyadrishti*, it becomes
27 or 26 natures by *udvelana* of one or both of *Samyamithyatva* and
*Samyaktva* nature in the countless parts of *Palyopam*. Later, after attaining
*Samyagdarshan* again, it obtains the essence of *Samyamithyatva* and
*Samyaktva* nature by dividing the *Mithyatva* nature into three parts.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 223. prazna : udvelanA, kina prAkRtiyoM kI hotI hai ? . uttara : AhAraka
zarIra, AhAraka zarIrAMgopAMga, samyaktva prakRti, samyaG midhyAtva prakRti,
devagati, devagatyAnupUrvI, narakagati, narakagatyAnupUrvI, vaikriyika
zarIrAMgopAMga manuSyagati, manuSyagatyAnupUrvI aura ucca gotra, ina teraha
prakRtiyoM kI : uddhelanA hotI hai| udvelanA hone para inakA sattva nahIM rhtaa|
224. prazna : udvelita prakRti punaH sattA meM AtI hai yA nahIM ? uttara : AtI
hai, jaise anAdi mithyA dRSTi madhya lIva ke mehamIda . kI 26 prakRtiyoM kI
sattA hai vaha upazama samyagdarzana prApta kara mithyAtva prakRti ke mithyAtva,
samyamithyAtva . aura samyaktvarUpa tIna khaNDa kara 28 prakRtiyoM kI sattA vAlA
huA pazcAt mithyAdRSTi hokara palyopama ke asaMkhyAtaveM bhAga meM
samyamithyAtva aura samyaktva prakRti meM se eka  /  kI athavA donoM kI udvelanA
kara 27 aura 26 prakRti kI sattA vAlA huaa| pazcAt punaH samyagdarzana prApta
kara mithyAtva prakRti ke 3 khaNDa karane se samyamidhyAtva aura samyaktva
prakRti kI sattA ko prApta kara letA hai|

Page #98 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
225. Question: What is the characteristic of the existence of an Abhyavya being?
Answer: An Abhyavya being never possesses the seven natures of Tirthankara
nature, Sabhyamithyatva, Samyaktva nature, Aharaka body, Aharaka body parts,
Aharaka bondage, and Aharaka aggregation. || Thus ends the fourth chapter. ||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 225. prazna : abhavya jIva kI sattA meM kyA vizeSatA hai ? uttara : abhavya
jIva ke tIrthaMkara prakRti, sabhyamithyAtva, samyaktvaprakRti, AhAraka zarIra,
AhAraka zarIrAMgopAMga, AhAraka bandhana aura AhAraka saMghAta, ina sAta
prakRtiyoM kA kabhI sattva nahIM rhtaa| || iti caturtha adhikAra samApta  /  /

Page #99 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Panchamaadhikār: 226. Question:** After the cessation of *udaya*, what are the
natures of the cessation of *bandha*? **Answer:** *Devagati*,
*Devagatyānupūrvi*, *Vaikriyika-śarīra*, *Vaikriyika śarīrāṅgopāṅga*, *Āhārak
yugal ayasaskīrti* and *Devāyu*, these 8 natures have cessation of *bandha*
after the cessation of *udaya*. 227. **Question:** What are the natures that
have simultaneous cessation of *bandha* and *udaya*? **Answer:** *Mithyātva*,
*Ātāpa*, *Manuṣyagatyānupūrvi*, *Sthāvara*, *Sūkṣma*, *Aparyāpta*, *Sādhāraṇa*,
*Sanjvalana lobha* without 15 *kaṣāya*, *Bhaya*, *Jugupsā*, *Hāsya*, *Rati*,
*Ekaindriyādi* four *jāti* and *Puruṣa veda*, these 31 natures have simultaneous
cessation of *bandha* and *udaya*, meaning that in the same *guṇasthāna* where
cessation of *bandha* occurs, cessation of *udaya* also occurs. 228.
**Question:** Before the cessation of *udaya*, what are the natures that have
cessation of *bandha*? **Answer:** Except for the above mentioned natures, 81
natures have cessation of *bandha*. (64)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paMcamAdhikAra: 226. prazna : udaya vyucchitti ke pazcAt bandhavyucchitti kina
prakRtiyoM kI hotI hai ? uttara : devagati, devagatyAnupUrvI, vaikriyika-zarIra,
vaikriyika zarI rAMgopAMga, AhAraka yugala ayazaskIrti aura devAyu, ina 8
prakRtiyoM kI bandha vyucchitti udaya ke pazcAt vyucchitti hotI hai| 227. prazna
: kina prakRtiyoM kI bandha thucchiti aura udaya vyucchitti sAtha sAtha hotI hai
? uttara : mithyAtva, AtApa, manuSyagatyAnupUrvI, sthAvara, sUkSma, aparyApta,
sAdhAraNa, saMjvalana lobha ke binA 15 kaSAya, bhaya, . jugupsA, hAsya, rati,
ekendriyAdi cAra jAti aura puruSa veda, ina 31 prakRtiyoM kI bandhavyucchitti
aura udayavyucchitti sAtha hI hotI hai, arthAt jisa guNasthAna meM bandha
vyacchitti hotI hai usI guNAsthAna meM udaya vyucchitti ho jAtI hai| 228. prazna
: udaya vyucchitti ke pahale bandha vyucchitti kina prakRtiyoM kI hotI hai ?
uttara : uparyukta prakRtiyoM ke sivAya 81 prakRtiyoM kI bandha (64)

Page #100 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Vyuchchitti uday precedes Vyuchchitti. 226. Question: Which are the Parodaya-
bandhi (bound at the time of others' arising)  natures? Answer: Devayau,
Narakayau, Tirthankara nature, Vaikriyika-shatkar, Vaikriyika body, Vaikriyika
body parts, Narakagati, Narakagati-anupurvi, Devati, Devagati-anupurvi, Aharak
body and Aharak body parts, these 11 natures are Parodaya-bandhi, meaning their
bondage occurs at the time of others' arising. Their bondage does not occur in
their own karma. 230. Question: Which are the Svodya-bandhi (bound at the time
of their own arising) natures? Answer: Mithyatva, five Jnana-avaran (knowledge
obscurations), four Darshan-avaran (perception obscurations), five Antaraya
(hindrances), Tejas, Kaman, four of Varnadik (color, etc.), Sthira, Asthira,
Shubha, Ashubha, Agurulaghu and Nirman, these 27 natures are Svodya-bandhi,
meaning their bondage occurs at the time of their own arising. 231. Question:
Which are the Ubhayo-daya-bandhi (bound at the time of both their own and
others' arising) natures? Answer: Except for the above mentioned natures, 82
natures are Ubhayo-daya-bandhi, meaning they bind whether their own arising
occurs or not. (65)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 vyucchitti udaya vyucchitti ke pahale hotI hai| 226. prazna : parodayabandhI
prakRtiyA~ kauna haiM? uttara : devAyu, narakAyu, tIrthakara prakRti,
vaikriyikaSaTkara, vaikriyika zarIra, vaikriyika zarIrAMgopAMga, narakagati,
naraka gatyAnupUrvI, devati, deva gatyAnupUrvI, AhAraka zarIra aura AhAraka
zarIrAMgopAMga, ye 11 prakRtiyA~ parodaya bandhI haiM arthAt inakA para u8 meM
hotA hai| nAnI inake gAma kAra meM inhIM kA bandha nahIM hotaa| 230. prazna :
svodayabandhI prakRtiyA~ kauna haiM ? uttara : mithyAtva, pA~ca jJAnAvaraNa,
cAra darzanAvaraNa, pA~ca antarAya, taijasa, kAmaNa, varNAdika kI cAra, sthira,
asthira, zubha, azubha, agurulaghu aura nirmANa ye 27 prakRtiyA~ svodayabandhI
haiM arthAt inakA bandha apane udaya ke samaya meM hI hotA hai| 231. prazna :
umayodayabandhI prakRtiyA~ kauna haiM ? uttara : uparyukta prakRtiyoM ke sivAya
82 prakRtiyA~ ubhayodaya bandhI haiM, arthAt apanA udaya hone athavA na hone
para bhI baiMdhatI haiN| (65)

Page #101 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
232. Question: Which are the continuously binding natures? Answer: The 47
natures bound to Dhruva (5 Jnanaavaran, 6 Darshanavaran, 5 Antaray, Mithyatva,
16 Kashay, Bhay, Jugupsa, Taijas, Karman, Agurulaghu, Upghāt, Nirman and 4
Varnaadi), Tirthankara, Aharak Yugal and 4 Ayu, these 54 natures bind
continuously. Those natures which bind continuously from the most insignificant
to the Antarmukhurta period are called continuously bound. 233. Question: Which
are the intermittently binding natures? Answer: Naraka Gati, Naraka
Gatyānupūrvi, the four castes starting with Ekeindriya, 5 Sansthān except
Samachaturana Sansthān, 5 Sanhanan except Varshabha Naracha Sanhanan, Aprashast
Vihayogati, Atap, Udyot, Sthavar etc. 10 Asata Vedaniya, Napunsak Ved, Stri Ved,
Arati and Shok, these 34 natures are intermittently bound, i.e. sometimes one
nature and sometimes another nature binds. Those which bind at one time and
whose binding ceases at the second time or bind irregularly for two or more
times are intermittently bound natures.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 232. prazna : nirantara ba~dhane vAlI prakRtiyA~ kauna haiM ? uttara : dhruva
bandhI 47 prakRtiyA~ (5 jJAnAvaraNa, 6 darzanAvaraNa, 5 antarAya, mithyAtva, 16
kaSAya, bhaya, jugupsA, taijasa, kArmaNa, agurulaghu, upaghAta, nirmANa aura 4
varNAdi) tIrthakara, AhAraka yugala aura 4 Ayu ye 54 prakRtiyA~ nirantara
ba~dhatI haiN| jo prakRtiyA~ jaghanya se bhI antarmuhUrta kAla taka nirantara
rUpa se ba~dhatI haiM ve nirantara bandhI kahalAtI haiN| 233. prazna : sAntara
bandhI prakRtiyA~ kauna haiM ? uttara : naraka gati, naraka gatyAnupUrvI,
ekendriyAdi cAra jAti, samacaturana saMsthAna ko chor3akara 5 saMsthAna,
varSabha nArAca saMhanana ko chor3akara 5 saMhanana, aprazasta vihAyogati, .
Atapa, udyota, sthAvara Adi 10 asAtA vedanIya, napuMsaka veda, strI veda, arati
aura zoka ye 34 prakRtiyA~ sAntarabandhI haiM, arthAt kabhI kisI prakRti aura
kabhI kisI anya prakRti kA bandha hotA hai| eka samaya ba~dhakara dvitIya samaya
meM jinakA bandha vizrAnta ho jAtA hai athavA aniyama se do Adi samaya taka
bandha hotA hai ve sAntara bandhI prakRtiyA~ haiN|

Page #102 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
234. Question: Which are the natures that bind alternately and continuously?
Answer: Devagati, Devagatyānupūrvi, ManushyaGati, ManushyaGatyānupūrvi,
TimanchGati, Tiryaḥ Kāpūdhaḥ Audārik Śarīra, Audārik Śarīrāngopaṅga, Vaikriyik
Śarīra, Vaikriyik Śarīrāngopaṅga, SamachaturasraSaṁsthāna, Vajrarṣamanārāca
Saṁhanana, Praśasta VihāyogaTi, ParaghātaYugal, Pañcendriya Jāti, Sādi 10,
Sātāvedaniya, Hāsya, Rati, Puruṣaved and Gotra Yugal, these 32 natures bind
alternately in the presence of the opponent and bind continuously in the absence
of the opponent. That is, they are both-binding. 235. Question: What is called
Bhāgahāra and how many types are there? Answer: The results of the worldly
beings, due to which the auspicious and inauspicious karmas are transferred -
change into another form, is called Bhāgahāra. It has 5 types - Udvelana
Saṁkramaṇa, Vidhyāta Saṁkramaṇa, Adhaḥ Pravṛtta Saṁkramaṇa, Guṇa Saṁkramaṇa and
SarvaSaṁkramaṇa. 1. Prasādi Das, that is, Tras, Bādar, Paryāpta, Pratiyaka,
Sthira Shubha, Subhaga, Susvara, Ādeya and Yaśa-Kīrti. (67)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 234. prazna : sAntara-nirantara ba~dhane vAlI prakRtiyoM kauna haiM ? uttara :
devagati, devagatyAnupUrvI, 'manuSyagati, manuSyagatyAnupUrvI, timaMcagati,
tiryaH kApUdhaH audArika zarIra, audArika zarIrAMgopAMga, vaikriyika zarIra,
vaikriyika zarIrAMgopAMga, samacaturasrasaMsthAna, vajrarSamanArAca saMhanana,
prazasta vihAyogati, paraghAtayugala, paJcendriya jAti, sAdi 10', sAtAvedanIya,
hAsya, rati, puruSaveda aura gotra yugala ye 32 prakRtiyA~ virodhI ke rahate hue
sAMtara ba~dhatI haiM aura virodhI kI vyucchitti ho jAne para nirantara ba~dhatI
haiN| arthAt ye ubhayabandhI haiN| 235. prazna : bhAgahAra kise kahate hai tathA
usake kitane bheda uttara : saMsArI jIvoM ke jina pariNAmoM ke nimitta se jo
zubha azubha karma saMkramaNa kareM-anya rUpa pariNamana kare use bhAgahAra
kahate haiN| isake 5 bheda haiM- udvelana saMkramaNa, vidhyAta saMkramaNa, adhaH
pravRtta saMkramaNa, guNa saMkramaNa aura srvsNkrmnn| 1. prasAdi dasa arthAt
trasa, bAdara, paryApta, pratyeka, sthira zubha, subhaga, susvara, Adeya tathA
ysh-kiirti| (67)

Page #103 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
236. Question: How does transition occur? Answer: Transition of the fundamental
natures does not occur, i.e., the *pradeshas* of *jnanavarana* etc. do not
become *darshanavarana* etc. *Darshan* does not become *mohaniya*, *charitra*
does not become *mohaniya*. The four divisions of *ayukarma* never become *alpa
ayu*. The transition of the remaining natures occurs. The transition of the
*samyaktva* nature from *asanyata samyagdristi* to *aprammatta* *sanyata*
*gunasthan* does not occur. Similarly, the transition of the *mithyatva* nature
does not occur in the *mithyatva* *gunasthan*, and the transition of *samyag
mithyatva* does not occur in the *misra* *gunasthan*. The transition of the
three divisions of *darshan mohaniya* does not occur in the *sasadan* and
*misra* *gunasthan*. The transition of *darshan mohaniya* from the general state
occurs in the four *gunasthanas* of *asanyata* etc. 237. Question: What is the
nature of *udvelan* transition? Answer: The transformation of *karma* atoms into
other nature forms without the three causal forms of *adhah pravritti* etc. is
called *udvelan* transition. This occurs only in the 13 natures of *aharaka*
*dwika* etc.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 236. prazna : saMkramaNa kisa prakAra hotA hai ? uttara : mUla prakRtiyoM kA
saMkramaNa nahIM hotA arthAt jJAnAvaraNAdi ke pradeza darzanAvaraNAdi rUpa nahIM
hote| darzana mohanIya, cAritra mohanIya rUpa nahIM hotaa| Ayukarma ke cAra
bheda kabhI alpa AyurUpa nahIM hote| zeSa uttara prakRtiyoM kA saMkramaNa hotA
hai| samyaktva prakRti kA asaMyata samyagdRSTi se lekara apramatta saMyata
guNasthAna taka saMkramaNa nahIM hotA  /  isI prakAra mithyAtva prakRti kA
mithyAtva guNAsthAna meM tathA samyaG mithyAtva kA mizra guNasthAna meM
saMkramaNa nahIM hotaa| darzana mohanIya ke tIna bhedoM kA sAsAdana aura mizra
guNasthAna meM saMkramaNa nahIM hotaa| sAmAnya se darzana mohanIyaM kA
saMkramaNa asaMyatAdi cAra guNa-sthAnoM meM hotA hai| 237. prazna : udvelana
saMkramaNa kA kyA svarUpa hai ? uttara : adhaH pravRtta Adi tIna kAraNa rUpa
pariNAmoM ke binA hI karma paramANuoM kA anya prakRti rUpa pariNamana honA
udvelana saMkramaNa kahalAtA hai| yaha AhAraka dvika Adi 13 prakRtiyoM meM hI
hotA hai|

Page #104 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
238. Question: What is **Vidhyat Sankraman**? Answer: The state of a being with
**mand vishuddhata** (moderate purity) - the **kaandak** of the past state of
**anubhag** reduction, and the **anubhag kaandak** and **guna shreni** etc.
results, is called **Vidhyat Sankraman**.  236. Question: What is
**Adhahpravritt Sankraman**? Answer: The transition of the atoms of the bound
**prakritis** (natures) to the possible **prakritis** within their bond is
called **Adhahpravritt Sankraman**.  240. Question: What is **Guna Sankraman**?
Answer: Where countless **guna shreni** (quality series) continuously transform
the **karma pradesh** into other **prakriti** forms, it is called **Guna
Sankraman**.  241. Question: What is **Sarvasankraman**? Answer: The
transformation of the atoms of all the **pradeshas** of the last **phal**
(fruit) of the last **kaandak** into other **prakriti** forms, which have not
yet become other **prakriti** forms, is called **Sarvasankraman**.  (66)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 238. prazna : vidhyAta saMkramaNa kise kahate haiM ? uttara : manda vizuddhatA
vAle jIva kI sthiti - anubhAga ke ghaTAne rUpa bhUtakAlIna sthiti kANDaka aura
anubhAga kANDaka tathA guNa zreNI Adi pariNAmoM meM pravRtti honA vidhyAta
saMkraNa hai| 236. prazna: adhaHpravRtta saMkramaNa kise kahate haiM ? uttara :
bandha rUpa huI prakRtiyoM ke paramANuoM kA, apane bandha meM saMbhavatI
prakRtiyoM meM jo pradeza saMkramaNa hotA hai use adhaHpravRtta saMkramaNa
kahate haiN| 240. prazna: guNa saMkramaNa kise kahate haiM ? uttara : jahA~ para
prati samaya asaMkhyAta guNa - zreNI ke krama se karmapradeza anya prakRti rUpa
pariNamate haiM use guNa saMkramaNa kahate haiN| 241. prazna: sarvasaMkramaNa
kise kahate haiM ? uttara : antima kANDaka kI antima phAli ke sarva pradezoM kA
jo anya prakRti rUpa nahIM hue haiM aise una paramANuoM kA anya prakRti rUpa
hone ko sarvasaMkramaNa kahate haiM  /  (66)

Page #105 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
242. Question: What are the ten karmas (states)? · Answer: 1. Bandha, 2.
Utkarṣaṇa, 3. Saṃkramaṇa, 4. Apakṣaṇa, 5. Udīraṇā, 6. Sattv, 7. Uday, 8.
Upasama, 9. Nidhatti and 10. Nikācana are the ten karmas of each karma-prakriti.
Its nature is as follows: 1. The connection of karmas with the soul is bandha.
2. The increase in the state and section of karmas is utkarṣaṇa. 3. The
transformation of the bandha-rupa prakriti into another form is saṃkramaṇa. 4.
The decrease in the state and section of karmas is apakṣaṇa. 5. Bringing the
karma-dravya located outside the udayavali into the udayavali time by the force
of apakṣaṇa is udīraṇā. 6. The karma-rupa remaining of the bound karma-pudgala
is sattv. 7. The karma-pradeshas start giving fruits is uday. 8. The karma not
being obtained in the udayavali for a definite time is upasama. 9. The karmas
not obtaining these states of udīraṇā and saṃkramaṇa is nidhatti. (900)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 242. prazna: karmoM ke dasa karaNa ( avasthA ) kauna-kauna haiM ? * uttara : 1.
bandha, 2 utkarSaNa, 2. saMkramaNa, 4. apakarSaNa, 5. udIraNA, 6 sattva, 7.
udaya, 8. upazama, 6. nidhatti aura 10 nikAcanA ye dasa karaNa pratyeka karma
prakRti ke hote haiN| isakA svarUpa isa prakAra hai1. karmoM kA AtmA ke sAtha
sambandha honA bandha hai  /  2. karmoM kI sthiti tathA anubhAga kA bar3hanA
utkarSaNa hai| 3. bandharUpa prakRti kA anya rUpa pariNamana honA saMkramaNa
hai| 4. karmoM kI sthiti tathA anubhAga kA ghaTa jAnA apakarSaNa hai| 5.
udayAvalI ke bAhara sthita karmadravya ko apakarSaNa ke bala se udayAvalI kAla
meM lAnA udIraNA hai| 6. ba~dhe hue karma pudgala kA karmarUpa rahanA sattva
hai| 7. karma pradezoM kA phala dene laganA udaya hai| C. nizcita samaya taka
karma kA udayAvalI meM prApta nahIM honA upazama hai| 6. karmoM kA udaya udIraNA
aura saMkramaNa - ina avasthaoM ko prApta nahIM honA nidhati hai  /  (900)

Page #106 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
3. The karma which cannot have all four stages of udirana, utkarṣaṇa, apkarṣaṇa
and saṃkramaṇa is called nikācita karana. 243. Question: How many times can the
violation of samyaktvādi occur? Answer: This being can abandon and again acquire
the four, namely, prathamopasama samyaktv, kṣayopasamik samyaktv, deśavrata and
anantānubandhi, as many times as there are moments in the countless parts of a
palya, at most. Afterwards, it attains the Siddha-pad by rule. 244. Question:
How many times can this being ascend the upasama category at most? Answer: The
being can ascend the upasama category at most twice in one paryaya and four
times in all paryayas. Afterwards, it attains liberation by the destruction of
karma. The kṣapaka category is attained only once. From that one category,
liberation is attained by the destruction of karma. (101)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 3. jisa karma kI udIraNA, utkarSaNa, apakarSaNa aura saMkramaNa cAroM hI
avasthAe~ na ho sakeM use nikAcita karaNa kahate haiN| 243. prazna :
samyaktyAdika kI virAdhanA kitanI bAra ho sakatI haiM ? uttara : prathamopazama
samyaktva, kSAyopazamika samyaktva dezavrata aura anantAnubaMdhI kI visaMyojanA
vidhi, ina cAroM ko yaha jIva adhika se adhika palya ke asaMkhyAtaveM bhAga ke
jitane samaya haiM utanI bAra chor3a chor3akara punaH punaH grahaNa kara sakatA
hai| pazcAt siddhapada ko niyama se prApta karatA hai  /  244 prazna : yaha jIva
adhika se adhika upazama zreNI kitanI bAra car3ha sakatA hai ? uttara : upazama
zreNI para jIva eka paryAya meM adhika se adhika do bAra aura saba paryAyoM kI
apekSA cAra bAra car3ha sakatA hai  /  pazcAt karmoM kA kSaya kara mokSa prApta
karatA hai  /  kSapaka zreNI eka bAra hI prApta hotI hai| usI eka zreNI 'se
karma kSaya kara mokSa kI prApti ho jAtI hai| (101)

Page #107 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
245. Question: How many times does one have to attain the *Bhavalingi Muni*
state? Answer: One has to attain the *Bhavalingi Muni* state a maximum of 32
times. Liberation is attained definitely from the third *Muni* state. The
*Dravyalingi Muni* state can be attained an infinite number of times. Some
attain liberation by attaining the *Bhavalingi Muni* state only once.   246.
Question: What are the general causes (reasons) for the bondage of karma?
Answer: Generally, *Mithyatva*, *Avirati* *Kashaya*, and *Yoga* are the four
causes of bondage. Sometimes *Pramada* is also considered a cause of bondage,
but here it is included in *Kashaya*. In the first *Gunasthan*, all four causes
of bondage are present. In the three *Gunasthanas* from *Sāsādana* to
*Samyagdṛṣṭi*, bondage occurs due to these three causes: *Avirati*, *Kashaya*,
and *Yoga*. In the *Deśa-saṃyata* *Gunasthan*, *Avirati* is abandoned, and the
second cause called *Avirati* is present along with *Virati*. The remaining
*Kashaya* and *Yoga* are fully present. From *Pramatta-saṃyata* to *Sūkṣma-
sāṃpārāya*, there are five  (102)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 245. prazna bhAvaliMgI munipada kitanI bAra dhAraNa karanA par3atA hai ? uttara
: bhAvaliMgI muni pada adhika se adhika 32 bAra hI dhAraNa karanA par3atA hai  /
3vIM bAra ke munipada se avazya hI mokSa prApta ho jAtA hai  /  dravyaliMgI
munipada ananta bAra nAma ho kA hai, koI koI nikaTa eka bAra hI bhAvaliMgI
munipada dhAraNa kara mokSa prApta kara lete haiN| 246. prazna: karma ke bandha
ke sAmAnya pratyaya (kAraNa) kauna haiM ? uttara : sAmAnya rUpa se midhyAtva,
avirati kaSAya aura yoga ye cAra bandha ke pratyaya haiN| kahIM kahIM pramAda ko
bhI bandha kA pratyaya kahA gayA hai parantu yahA~ use kaSAya meM garbhita kara
liyA hai, prathama guNasthAna meM bandha ke cAroM pratyaya rahate haiN| sAsAdana
se avirata samyagdRSTi taka tIna guNasthAnoM meM avirati, kaSAya aura yoga ina
tIna pratyayoM se bandha hotA hai  /  eka deza avirati kA tyAga hone se deza
saMyata guNasthAna meM avirati nAma kA dUsarA pratyaya virati se milA huA hai
zeSa kaSAya aura yoga pUrNarUpa se vidyamAna haiN| pramatta saMyata se lekara
sUkSma sAMparAya taka pA~ca (102)

Page #108 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
In the Gunasthans, there are two types of Pratyaya: Kshaya and Yoga. From
Upshant Moh to Sayogkevali, there is only Yoga Pratyaya in the three Gunasthans.
In the fourteenth Gunasthan, called Ayog Kevali, there is not even a single
Pratyaya of Bandha, hence there is complete Abandha, meaning no Bandha of any
Prakruti. 247. Question: How many answers are there for the above four Pratyaya?
Answer: There are 5 for Mithyatva, 12 for Avirati, 25 for Kshaya and 15 for
Yoga, thus there are 57 different answers for Pratyaya in total. There are 5
types of Mithyatva due to the differences in Ekant, Vipreet, Sanshay, Agnan and
Vainayik. There are 6 types of Pran-Avirati due to the lack of restraint from
violence towards the Shatkayik Jivas and 6 types of Indriya Avirati due to the
lack of restraint from the objects of the six senses, thus there are 12 types of
Avirati. There are 25 types of Kshaya due to the 16 Anantanu bandhi Kshaya like
Krodh, Man, Maya, Lom etc. and 6 No Kshaya like Hasya etc. There are 7 types of
Kay Yoga, 4 types of Bachan Yoga and 4 types of Mano Yoga, thus there are 15
types of Yoga. One should plan these 57 Pratyaya in the Gunasthans. (103)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 guNasthAnoM meM kaSAya aura yoga-do pratyaya hai| upazAnta moha se lekara
sayogakevalI taka tIna guNasthAnoM meM eka yoga hI pratyaya rahatA hai| ayoga
kevalI nAmaka caudahaveM guNasthAna meM bandha kA eka bhI pratyaya nahIM hai
ataH vahA~ pUrNa rUpa se abandha rahatA hai, arthAt eka bhI prakRti kA bandha
nahIM hotaa| 247. prazna : uparyukta cAra pratyayoM ke uttara me kitane hai ?
uttara : mithyAtva ke 5, avirati ke 12, kaSaya ke 25 aura yoga ke 15, isa taraha
saba milAkara pratyaya ke 57 uttara bheda haiN| ekAnta, viparIta, saMzaya,
ajJAna aura vainayika ke bheda se mithyAtva ke 5 bheda haiN| SaTkAyika jIvoM kI
hiMsA se virati na hone ke kAraNa prANi- avirati ke aura chaha indriyoM ke
viSayoM se virati na hone ke kAraNa indriya avirati ke 6, isa taraha avirati ke
12 bheda hai| anantAnubandhI krodha mAna mAyA, loma Adi 16 kaSAya aura hAsyAdi 6
no kaSAya milakara kaSAya ke 25 bheda haiN| kAya yoga ke 7, bacanayoga ke 4 aura
manoyoga ke 4, isa taraha yoga ke 15 bheda haiN| ina 57 pratyayoM kI guNasthAnoM
meM yojanA kara lenI caahiye| (103)

Page #109 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
245. Question: What are the effects of Jnanayaran and Darshanavaran karma?
Answer: The effects of Jnanayaran and Darshanavaran karma are the following:  *
**Jnanayaran:**  * **Pradosh:**  * **Nihanav:**  * **Matsarya:**  *
**Antaraya:**  * **Asadana:**  * **Upghat:**  * **Darshanavaran:**  *
**Pradosh:**  * **Nihanav:**  * **Matsarya:**  * **Antaraya:**  * **Asadana:**
* **Upghat:** 246. Question: What are the effects of Satavedaniya karma? Answer:
The effects of Satavedaniya karma are:  * **Bhootanukampa:**  *
**Vratyanukampa:**  * **Dan:**  * **Sarag Samyam:**  * **Kshama:**  *
**Shouch:** 250. Question: What are the effects of Asatavedaniya karma? Answer:
The effects of Asatavedaniya karma are:  * **Dukha:**  * **Shok:**  * **Tap:**
* **Akrandan:**  * **Vadh:**  * **Paridevan:** 256. Question: What are the
effects of Darshan Mohaniya karma? Answer: The effects of Darshan Mohaniya karma
are:  * **Avarnavad:**  * **Kevali:**  * **Shruta:**  * **Sangh:**  *
**Dharma:**  * **Dev:** 258. Question: What are the effects of Charitra Mohaniya
karma? Answer: The effects of Charitra Mohaniya karma are:  * **Kashaya:**  *
**Tivra Parinam:**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 245. prazna : jhAnAyaraNa aura darzanAvaraNa karma ke vanya ke pratyaya kyA
haiM ? uttara : jJAna aura darzana ke viSaya meM kiye gaye pradoSa, nihanava,
mAtsarya, antarAya, AsAdanA aura upaghAta, jJAnAvaraNa aura darzanAvaraNa ke
pratyaya haiN| 246. prazna : sAtAvedanIya ke pratyaya kyA haiM ? uttara :
bhUtAnukampA (prANimAtra para dayA karanA) vratyanukampA (vratIjanoM para dayA
bhAva rakhanA), dAna, sarAga saMyama, kSamA aura zauca (saMtoSa) sAtAvedanIya ke
pratyaya haiN| 250. prazna : asAtAvedanIya ke pratyaya kyA hai ? uttara :
duHkha, zoka, tApa, Akrandana, vadha aura paridevana (vilApa) . Adi
asAtAvedanIya ke pratyaya haiN| 256. prazna : darzana mohanIya ke pratyaya kyA
haiM ? uttara : kevalI, zruta, saMgha, dharma aura deva kA avarNavAda karanA
(mithyA doSa lagAnA) darzanamoha ke pratyaya haiN| 258. prazna : cAritra
mohanIya ke pratyaya kyA haiM ? uttara : kaSAya ke udaya se tIvra pariNAma
rakhanA cAritra mohanIya ke pratyaya haiN| (104)

Page #110 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
256. Question: What are the causes of being born in hell? Answer: Attachment to
many beginnings and possessions are the causes of being born in hell. 260.
Question: What is the cause of being born in the state of "tithanch"? Answer:
The culmination of Maya-char is the cause of being born in the state of
"tithanch". 261. Question: What is the cause of being born as a human? Answer:
Having few beginnings and few possessions is the cause of being born as a human.
Gentleness of nature is also a cause of being born as a human. 262. Question:
What are the causes of being born as a deva? Answer:  "Saraag-samyama",
"Samyama-samyama", "Akaam-nirjara", "Baal-tap", and the noble attachment that
arises during the time of attaining "Samyaktva" are the causes of being born as
a deva. 263. Question: What are the causes of "naama-karma"? Answer: Crookedness
of mind, speech, and body, and discord with fellow practitioners are the causes
of unfavorable "naama-karma". The opposite of these are the causes of favorable
"naama-karma". ... 264. Question: What are the causes of the nature of a
Tirthankara?

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 256. prazna : narakAyu banya ke pratyaya kyA haiM ? uttara : bahuta Aramma aura
parigraha meM Asakti rakhanA narakAyu ke pratyaya haiN| 260. prazna : tithaMca
Ayu kA pratyaya kyA hai ? uttara : mAyAcAra rUpa pariNati tithaMca Ayu kA
pratyaya hai| 261. prazna : manuSyAyu kA pratyaya kyA hai ? uttara : alpa
Arambha aura alpa parigraha kA honA manuSyAyu kA pratyaya hai| svabhAva kI
mRdutA bhI manuSyAyu kA pratyaya hai| 262. prazna : dedAyu ke pratyaya kyA haiM
? uttara : sarAga saMyama, saMyamA saMyama, akAma nirjarA aura bAla tapa tathA
samyaktva ke kAla meM hone vAlA prazasta rAga devAyu ke pratyaya haiN| ' 263.
prazna : nAmakarma ke pratyaya kyA haiM ? uttara : mana, vacana, kAya kI
kuTilatA tathA sahadharmIjanoM ke sAtha visaMvAda karanA azubha nAmakarma ke
pratyaya haiM aura inase viparIta bhAva zubha nAmakarma ke pratyaya haiN| . ...
264. prazna : tIrthaMkara prakRti ke pratyaya kyA haiM ? (105)

Page #111 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Answer:  **Darshan Vishuddhi**, **Vinaya Sampannata**, **Sheel** and **Vratas**
not being transgressed, **Abhikṣaṇa Jñānopayoga**, **Samvega**, **Shakti
Tasyaga**, **Shakti Tastapa**, **Sadhu Samadhi**, **Vaiyāvṛtya**, **Arhad
Bhakti**, **Ācārya Bhakti**, **Bahū Śruta Bhakti**, **Pravachana Bhakti**,
**Āvaśvanāparepa Sadashmala Kimane** not being lacking, **Marg Pramavana** and
**Pravachana Vatsalatva**, these sixteen are the **pratyayas** of the
**Tirthankara** nature. 265. Question: What are the **pratyayas** of **Gotra
Karma**? Answer:  **Ninda** of others, **Prashansa** of oneself, **Loka** of the
existing **gunas** of others and **Prakata** of one's non-existent **gunas** are
the **pratyayas** of **Neecha Gotra Karma** and the opposite of these are the
**pratyayas** of **Uchcha Gotra**. 266. Question: What are the **pratyayas** of
**Antaraya Karma**? Answer:  **Vighna** in someone's **daan**, **laabh**,
**bhog**, **upbhog** and **veerya** are the **pratyayas** of **Antaraya Karma**.
267. Question: What is **Gunahani**? Answer:  Where **gunaakar** form **heen**
**heen** **dravya** are found, they are called **Gunahani**. When the **Abadha
Kala** is complete, the time (106)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 uttara : darzana vizuddhi, vinaya saMpannatA, zIla aura vratoM meM aticAra
nahIM lagAnA, abhIkSaNa jJAnopayoga, . saMvega, zaktitastyAga, zaktitastapa,
sAdhu samAdhi, vaiyAvRtya, arhadbhakti, AcArya bhakti, bahu zrutabhakti,
pravacana bhakti, AvazvanAparepa sadazmala kimAne meM kamI nahIM karanA) mArga
pramAvanA aura pravacana vatsalatva, ye solaha bhAvanAe~ tIrthakara prakRti ke
pratyaya haiN| 265. prazna : gotra karma ke pratyaya kyA haiM ? uttara : dUsaroM
kI nindA, apanI prazaMsA, dUsaroM ke vidyamAna guNoM kA lopa karanA aura apane
avidyamAna guNoM kA prakaTa karanA nIca gotra karma ke pratyaya haiM tathA inase
viparIta pariNati ucca gotra ke pratyaya haiN| 266. prazna : antarAya karma ke
pratyaya kyA haiM ? uttara : kisI ke dAna, lAbha, bhoga, upabhoga aura vIrya meM
vighna karanA antarAya karma ke pratyaya haiN| 267. prazna : guNahAni kise
kahate haiM ? uttara : jisameM guNAkAra rUpa hIna hIna dravya pAye jAte haiM
unheM guNahAni kahate haiN| AbAdhA kAla pUrNa hone para samaya (106)

Page #112 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The substance of the *Prabuddha* becomes progressively inferior in a multiplied
manner. This process of deterioration is called *guna-hani* (loss of merit). For
example, a being at one time bound *Prabuddha* in the form of a group of 6300
atoms, and it had a state of 48 *kalas*. In this, there were 6 *guna-hanis* in
the form of a group of various *guna-hanis*. Of these, the first *guna-hani*
lost 3280, the second *guna-hani* lost 1600, the third *guna-hani* lost 800, the
fourth *guna-hani* lost 400, the fifth *guna-hani* lost 200, and the sixth
*guna-hani* lost 100 *karma* atoms.  **Question 1268:** What is meant by *guna-
hani-ayāma*?  **Answer:** The extent of time for one *guna-hani* is called
*guna-hani-ayāma*. For example, in the above illustration, the state of the
*Prabuddha* was 48 *kalas*, and there were 6 *guna-hanis*. Therefore, dividing
48 by 6, the extent (duration) of one *guna-hani* is 8 *kalas*. This is called
*guna-hani-ayāma*.  The actual measure of the *Prabuddha* is multiplied by an
infinite number of *sindhus* and an infinite number of *abhyavyarashis*. Here,
for the sake of illustration, 6300 has been assumed. (107)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prabaddha kA dravya AgAmI samayoM meM guNita rUpa se hIna hIna hotA huA khiratA
hai| yaha hAnirUpa krama hI guNa hAni hai| jaise kisI jIva ne eka samaya meM
6300 paramANuoM ke samUha rUpa samaya prabaddha' kA bandha kiyA aura usameM 48
samaya kI sthiti pdd'ii| usameM guNa hAniyoM kI samUha rUpa nAnA guga hAni 6
huii| unameM se prathama guNa hAni meM 3280, dvitIya guNa hAni meM 1600, tRtIya
guNa hAni meM 800, caturtha guNahAni meM 400, paMcama guNahAni meM 200 aura
SaSTham guNahAni meM 100 karma paramANu khirate haiN| 1268. prazna : guNa hAni
AyAma kise kahate haiM ? udhara : eka guNa hAni ke samayoM ke vistAra ko guNa
hAni AyAma kahate haiM jaise Upara ke dRSTAnta meM samaya prabaddha kI sthiti 48
samaya thI aura usameM 6 guNa hAniyA~ thIM, ataH 48 meM 6 kA bhAga dene se eka
guNa hAni kA AyAma (vistAra) 8 samaya huaa| yahI guNa hAni AyAma kahalAtA samaya
prabaddha kA vAstavika pramANa sindroM ke anantaveM bhAga aura abhavyarAzi se
ananna guNita hotA hai| yahAM dRSTAnta ke liye 6300 kA kalpita kiyA gayA hai|
(107)

Page #113 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
266. Question: What is Nana Gunhani? Answer: Nana Gunhani is the group of Gun
Hanis. For example, in the above illustration, there are 6 Gun Hanis of 8-8
times. This number 6 is the quantity of Nana Gunhani. 270. Question: What is
Anyonyabhyast Rashi? Answer: The quantity obtained by writing two-two in the
quantity of Nana Gunhani and multiplying them mutually is called Anyonyabhyast
Rashi. For example, in the above illustration, the quantity of Nana Gunhani is
6, so by writing two-two in 6 places and multiplying them mutually, we get 64. 2
x 2 x 2 x 2 x 2 x 2 = 64. This is Anyonyabhyast Rashi. 271. Question: What is
the method of extracting the substance of the last Gunhani? Answer: Dividing the
substance of the time-bound by one less than the Anyonyabhyast Rashi gives the
substance of the last Gunhani. For example, in the above illustration, the
quantity of Anyonyabhyast is 64, subtracting 1 from it gives 63. Dividing this
by the quantity of the time-bound 6300 gives the substance of the last Gunhani.
. . (108)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 266. prazna : nAnA guNahAni kise kahate haiM ? uttara : guNa hAniyoM ke samUha
ko nAnA guNahAni kahate haiN| jaise Upara ke dRSTAnta meM ATha-ATha samaya kI 6
guNa hAniyA~ haiN| yahI 6 saMkhyA nAnA guNa hAni kA parimANa hai| 270. prazna :
anyonyAbhyasta rAzi kise kahate hai ? uttara : nAnA guNa hAniyoM kA jitanA
pramANa hai utanI jagaha do-do likhakara anyonya-paraspara guNA karane se jo
rAzi labdha ho use anyonyAbhyasta rAzi kahate haiN| jaise Upara ke dRSTAnta meM
nAnA muga zAnine kA prayAsa hai staH 6 jagaha do do likha paraspara guNA karane
se 64 hote hai| 2 x 2 42 x 2 x 2 x 2=64 yahI anyonyAbhyasta rAzi 271. prazna :
antima guNa hAni kA dravya nikAlane kI vidhi kyA hai ? uttara : eka kama
anyonyAbhyasta rAzi kA samaya prabaddha ke pramANa meM bhAga dene se antima guNa
hAni kA dravya nikalatA hai| jaise Upara ke dRSTAnta meM anyonyAbhyasta kA
pramANa 64 hai usameM 1 kama karane para 63 rhe| inakA samaya prabaddha ke
pramANa 6300 meM bhAga dene se antima guNa hAni kA. . (108)

Page #114 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Dravy 100 came. 272. Question: How is the dravy of other guna-hanis derived?
Answer: By doubling the dravy of the last guna-hani till the first guna-hani,
the dravy of other guna-hanis is derived. For example, 200, 400, 800, 1600,
3200. 273. Question: How is the dravy of the first and subsequent times of each
guna-hani derived? Answer: By multiplying the chaya with the quantity of the
guna-hani aayam in the nishekahar form, the quantity of the dravy of the first
time of each guna-hani is derived, and by subtracting one chaya from it, the
quantity of the dravy of the subsequent times is derived. For example, in the
above illustration, the quantity of the aayam of the various guna-hanis was 8,
from which the quantity of the nishekahar was 16. Therefore, by multiplying the
chaya 32 with the nishekahar 16, the dravy of the first time of the first guna-
hani is 512. By subtracting one chaya 32 from it, the quantity of the dravy of
the second and subsequent times is derived as 480, 448, 416, 384, 352, 320, 288
respectively. (106)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dravya 100 aayaa| 272. prazna : anya guNa hAniyoM kA dravya kisa prakAra
nikalatA uttara : antima guNa hAni ke dravya ko prathama guNa hAni taka dUnA
dUnA karane se anya guNa hAniyoM kA dravya nikalatA hai| jaise 200, 400, 800,
1600, 3200  /  273. prazna : pratyeka guNa hAni ke prathamAdi samayoM kA dravya
kisa prakAra nikalatA hai ? uttara : guNa hAni AyAma se dUre parimANa rUpa
niSekahAra meM caya kA guNA karane se pratyeka guNa hAni ke prathama samaya ke
dravya kA parimANa nikalatA hai aura usameM se eka-eka caya ghaTAne se Age Age
ke samayoM ke dravya kA parimANa nikalatA hai| jaise Upara ke dRSTAnta meM nAnA
guNa hAni AyAma kA parimANa 8 thA usase dUne 16 niSekahAra kA parimANa huaa|
ataH niSekahAra 16 meM caya 32 kA guNA karane para prathama guNa hAni ke
prathama samaya kA dravya 512 hotA hai| isameM se eka eka caya battIsa battIsa
ghaTAne se dvitIyAdi samayoM ke dravya kA parimANa krama se 480, 448, 416, 384,
352, 320, 288, nikalatA (106)

Page #115 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Similarly, the substance of each time of the second and other qualities should
be removed. 274. Question: What is called *chay*? Answer: In the mathematics of
*shreni vyavahar*, the magnitude of equal loss or equal increase is called
*chay*. 275. Question: What is the method of calculating the magnitude of *chay*
in this case? Answer: By adding one more *guna hani* dimension to the
*nishekahar* and dividing by two, the resulting value is multiplied by the *guna
hani* dimension. Dividing the product by the substance of the desired *guna
hani* gives the magnitude of *chay* for the desired *guna hani*. For example, in
*nishekahar* 16, adding one more *guna hani* dimension gives 25. Half of that,
12.5, is multiplied by the *guna hani* dimension, *p*, to get 100. Dividing this
by the substance of each desired *guna hani* gives the *chay* of the first and
other *guna hani*s in order: 32, 16, 8, 4, 2, 1.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 hai| isI prakAra dvitIyAdi guNa hAniyoM ke pratyeka samaya kA dravya nikAla
lenA caahiye| 274. prazna: caya kise kahate haiM ? uttara : zreNI vyavahAra
gaNita meM samAna hAni yA samAna vRddhi ke parimANa ko yaya kahate haiM  /  275
prazna isa prakaraNa meM caya kA parimANa nikAlane kI kyA rIti haiM ? . uttara :
niSekahAra meM eka adhika guNa hAni AyAma kA parimANa jor3akara AdhA karane se
jo labdha Ave usameM guNa hAni AyAma se guNA kareM, isa prakAra guNA karane se
jo guNanaphala ho usakA bhAga vivakSita guNa hAni ke dravya meM dene se
vivakSita guNa hAni ke caya kA parimANa nikalatA hai| jaise niSekahAra 16 meM
eka adhika guNahAni AyAma ko jor3ane se 25 hue| usake Adhe sAr3he 12 ko guNa
hAni AyAma pa se guNA karane para 100 hote haiM isakA apanI apanI vivazcita guNa
hAni ke dravya meM bhAga dene se prathamAdi guNahAniyoM kA krama se 32, 16, 8,
4, 2, 1 caya nikalatA hai|

Page #116 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The division of 6300 time-bound (samaya prabaddha) in 6 types of losses (guna
hanis) is as follows:  | **Caya 32** | **Caya 16** | **Caya 8** | **Caya 1** |
|---|---|---|---| | 900 | 16 | 15 | 14 | | 300 | 512 | 480 | 448 | | 416 | 384 |
352 | 320 | | 288 | 400 | 64 | 60 | | 56 | 52 | 48 | 44 | | 40 | 36 | 275.
**Question:** What is niseka? | | 1670 | 256 | 240 | 224 | | 208 | 192 | 176 |
160 | | 144 | 500 | 128 | 120 | | 112 | 104 | 66 |  | **Caya 4** | **Caya 2** |
**Question:** What is spardhaka? | | 80 | 72 | **Answer:** A group of varganas
is called spardhaka. | | 277. **Question:** What is vargana? | | 32 | 30 | 28 |
26 | | 24 | 22 | 20 | 18 | | **Answer:** A group of vargas is called vargana. |
| 13 | 12 | 11 | 90 |

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 6 guNa hAniyoM meM 6300 samaya prabaddha kA vibhAga isa prakAra hai: caya 32
caya 16 | caya 8 caya 1 900 16 15 14 | 300 512 480 448 416 - 384 - 352 320 288
400 64 60 56 52 48 '44 40 36 275. prazna: niSeka kise kahate haiM ? uttara : eka
samaya meM udaya meM Ane vAle karma paramANuoM ke samUha ko niSeka kahate haiM
/  1670 256 240 224 - 208 162 176 160 144 500 128 120 112 104 66 cha da vaya 4
caya 2 80 72 277 prazna: sparddhaka kise kahate haiM ? rn uttara : vargoM ke
samUha ko vargaNA kahate haiM  /  (999) 32 30 28 26. 24 22 20 18 | uttara :
vargaNAoM ke samUha ko sparddhaka kahate haiM. 278. prazna : vargaNA kise kahate
haiM ? 13. 12 11 90 hU~

Page #117 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
276. Question: What is a **varga**? Answer: Each **karma** atom with the same
**avibhaga pratishecha** is called a **varga**. 280. Question: What is
**avibhaga pratishecha**? Answer: The indivisible part of **shakti** is called
**avibhaga pratishecha**. 281. Question: What is meant by **shakti** in this
context? Answer: The **shakti** in the form of the ability to produce **phala**
(results) is meant. 282. Question: What is a **muhurta**? Answer: Two **ghadi**
or 48 minutes is called a **muhurta**. 283. Question: What is an
**antarmuhurta**? Answer: The time between **avali** and **muhurta** is called
**antarmuhurta**. It has countless divisions. 284. Question: What is an
**avali**? Answer: A countable part of a **shvasa** is called an **avali**,
meaning there are countable **avali** in a **shvasa**. 265. Question: What is a
**shvasa**? Answer: One beat of a healthy human's pulse is called a **shvasa**.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 276. prazna : varga kise kahate haiM ? uttara : samAna avibhAga praticchedoM
vAle pratyeka karma paramANu ko varga kahate haiN| 280. prazna : avibhAga
praticcheda kise kahate haiM ? uttara : zakti ke avibhAgI aMga ko avibhAga
praticcheda kahate haiN| 281. prazna : isa prakaraNa meM zakti se kyA viyakSita
hai? uttara : phala dene kI anubhAga rUpa zakti vivakSita hai| 282. prazna :
muhUrta kise kahate haiM ? uttara : do ghar3I athavA 48 minaTa ko eka muhUrta
kahate haiN| 283. prazna : antarmuhUrta kise kahate haiM ? uttara : AvalI se
Upara aura muhUrta se bhItara ke kAla ko antarmuhUrta kahate haiN| isake
asaMkhyAta bheda hote haiN| 284. prazna : AvalI kise kahate haiM ? uttara : eka
zvAsa ke saMkhyAtaveM bhAga ko AvalI kahate haiM arthAt eka zvAsa meM saMkhyAta
AvaliyAM hotI haiN| 265. prazna : eka zyAsa kise kahate haiM ? uttara : svastha
manuSya kI nAr3I ke eka bAra calane ko zvAsa kahate haiN| (paparI

Page #118 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
286. Question: How many breaths are there in one Muhurta? Answer: There are
three thousand seven hundred seventy-three breaths in one Muhurta. 287.
Question: How many times does a living being take birth and death in one breath?
Answer: A living being can take birth and death eighteen times in one breath.
258. Question: How many times can a living being take birth and death in one
Muhurta? Answer: A living being can take birth and death sixty-six thousand
three hundred thirty-six times in one Muhurta. 286. Question: What is the lowest
lifespan of a worldly being? Answer: The lowest lifespan of a worldly being is
one-eighteenth of a breath. 260. Question: What is the highest lifespan of a
worldly being? Answer: The highest lifespan of a worldly being is thirty-three
Sagars. 261. Question: What is a Sagar? Answer: One Sagar is equal to ten
Kodakodi Adha Palya. 262. Question: What is Kodakodi? Answer: Kodakodi is the
product obtained by multiplying one crore by one crore. 263. Question: What is
Adha Palya?

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 .. 286. prazna : eka muhUrta meM kitane zvAsa hote hai ? uttara : eka muhUrta
meM tIna hajAra sAta sau tihattara zvAsa hote haiN| 287. prazna : yaha jIva eka
zyAsa meM kitanI bAra janma maraNa karatA hai ? uttara : eka zvAsa meM aThAraha
bAra janma maraNa kara sakatA hai| 258. prazna : eka muhUrta meM kitanI bAra
janma maraNa kara sakatA uttara : eka muhUrta meM chiyAsaTha hajAra tIna sau
chattIsa bAra janma maraNa kara sakatA hai| 286. prazna : saMsArI lIya kI janya
Ara likhatI hai ? uttara : saMsArI jIva kI jaghanya Ayu zvAsa ke aThArahaveM
bhAga hai| 260. prazna : saMsArI jIva kI utkRSTa Ayu kitanI hai ? uttara :
saMsArI jIva kI utkRSTa Ayu tetIsa sAgara hai| 261. prazna : sAgara kise kahate
hai ? uttara : dasa kor3A kor3I addhA palyoM kA eka sAgara hotA hai| 262. prazna
: koDAkor3I kise kahate hai ? uttara : eka karor3a meM eka karor3a kA guNA
karane para jo guNanaphala prApta ho use koDAkor3I kahate haiN| 263. prazna :
achApalya kise kahate hai ? (113)

Page #119 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Answer: In a round pit two thousand *kos* wide and two thousand *kos* deep, fill
it with the hair of a ram, such that no part of it can be cut with scissors, and
then after one hundred years, remove one hair at a time. The number of years it
takes to remove all the hair is called *vyavahar palya*. *Uddhar palya* is
countless times greater than *vyavahar palya*, and *anddha palya* is countless
times greater than *uddhar palya*. One *utsarpini* and one *avsarpiini* period
each last for ten *koda kodi sagar* years. Together, they make up one *kalpa*
period of twenty *koda kodi sagar* years.  264. Question: What is an *utsarpini*
period? Answer: An *utsarpini* period is one in which the lifespan, strength,
intelligence, and physical abilities of living beings gradually increase.  265.
Question: How many types of *utsarpini* periods are there? Answer: There are
six: 1. *Ati dushama* (twenty-one thousand years), 2. *Dushama* (twenty-one
thousand years), 3. *Dusham sushama* (forty-two thousand years minus one *koda
kodi sagar*), 4. *Susham dushama* (two *koda kodi sagar*), 5. *Sushama* (three
*koda kodi sagar*). (114)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 uttara : do hajAra koza caur3e aura do hajAra koza gahare gola gaDDhe meM
mer3he ke aise bAla ko jinakA kaiMcI se dUsarA bhAga na ho sake dhAMsa-dhAMsa
kara bhare aura phira sau sau varSa bAda * eka eka bAla nikaale| aisA karane
para jitane varSoM meM saba bAla nikala jAveM utane varSoM ke jitane samaya hoM
utane samayoM ko vyavahAra palya kahate haiN| vyavahAra palya se asaMkhyAta guNA
uddhAra palya hotA hai aura uddhAra palya se asaMkhyAta guNA anddhA palya hotA
hai| dasa kor3A kor3I sAgara kA eka utsarpiNI aura itane hI varSoM kA eka
avasarpiNI kAla hotA hai| donoM hI milakara bIsa kor3Akor3I sAgara kA eka kalpa
kAla hotA hai| 264. prazna: utsarpiNI kAla kise kahate haiM ? uttara: jisameM
jIvoM kI Ayu bala, buddhi tathA zarIra kI avagAhanA Adi meM krama se vRddhi hotI
rahe use utsarpiNI kAla kahate haiN| + 265. prazna utsarpiNI kAla ke kitane
bheda haiM ? uttara : chaha haiM- 1. ati duHSamA ( ikkIsa hajAra varSa), 2.
duHSamA ( ikkIsa hajAra varSa), 3. duHSama suSamA ( bayAlIsa hajAra varSa kama
eka kor3A kor3I sAgara), 4. suSama duHSamA ( 2 kor3Akor3I sAgara ) 5. suSamA (3
kor3Akor3I sAgara ) ( 114)

Page #120 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
6. Sushma Sushma (4 Kodakodi Sagar). 266. Question: What is the Avasarpini Kal?
Answer: The time period in which the fire, strength, intellect, and #... of the
living beings gradually decline is called Avasarpini Kal. 267. Question: How
many Bhav are there in Avasarpini Kal? Answer: There are six - 1. Sushma Sushma,
2. Sushma, 3. Sushma Dushma, 4. Dushma Sushma, 5. Dushma Sushma, 6. Ati Dushma.
The duration of these Bhav is equal to the six Bhav of Utsarpini Kal. 268.
Question: What is Purva? Answer: Eighty-four lakh Purvagas make one Purva. 266.
Question: What is Purvaga? Answer: Eighty-four lakh years make one Purvaga. 300.
Question: What is Purvakoti? Answer: Multiplying one Purva by one crore gives
one Purvakoti. ।। Iti Panchamadhikarah Samapt:।।

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 6. suSama suSamA (4 kor3Akor3I saagr)| 266. prazna : avasarpiNI kAla kise
kahate hai? uttara : jisameM jIvoM kI Aga, bala buddhi tathA # . avagAhanA Adi
meM krama se hAni hotI rahe use avasarpiNI kAla kahate haiN| 267. prazna :
avasarpiNI kAla ke kitane bheva hai? uttara : chaha haiM-1. suSama suSamA, 2.
suSamA, 3. suSamA duHSamA, 4. duHSama suSamA, 5.duHSama suSamA, 6. ati duHssmaa|
inake kAla kA pramANa utsarpiNI ke chaha kAloM ke samAna 268. prazna : pUrva
kise kahate haiM ? uttara : caurAsI lAkha pUrvAgoM kA eka pUrva hotA hai| 266.
prazna : pUrvAga kise kahate hai ? uttara : caurAsI lAkha varSoM kA eka pUoga
hotA hai| 300. prazna : pUrvakoTi kise kahate hai ? uttara : eka pUrva meM eka
karor3a kA guNA karane se labdha Aye use eka pUrva koTi kahate haiN|  /  /  iti
paMcamAdhikAraH smaaptH||

Page #121 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Chim Gandh Triangi, Payom Kritiyaan 25 Gunasthan Bandh Abandh | Bandh Mithyatva
Saasadan Mishra Avirat S. Deshavirat Pramatt Virat Apramatt Virat Apoovarakaran
Anivrittikaran Sukshma Samparaya Upashant Moh Ksheenmoh Sayog Kevali Ayog.
Kevali (Papaai)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 cima gAndha triaMgI, pAyoma kRtiyA~ 25 guNasthAna bandha abandha | bandha
mithyAtva sAsAdana mizra avirata sa. dezavirata pramatta virata apramatta virata
apUrvakaraNa anivRttikaraNa sUkSma sAMparAya upazAnta moha kSINamoha sayoga
kevalI ayoga. kevalI (papAI)

Page #122 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Chitra Uday Tribhangi, Uday Yogya Prakṛtis 122 Anudaya Uday Vyuchchitti
Mithyatva Guṇasthāna Sāsādana Miśra Avirata S. Deśavirat Pramatta Virata
Aprammatta Virata Apūrvakaraṇa Anivṛttikaraṇa Sūkṣma Sāmpārāya Upaśānta Moha
Kṣīṇamoha Sayoga Kevali Ayoga Kevali (448)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 citra udaya tribhaMgI, udaya yogya prakRtiyoM 122 anudaya udaya vyuchitti
mithyAtva guNasthAna sAsAdana mizra avirata sa. dezavirata pramatta virata
apramatta virata apUrvakaraNa anivRttikaraNa sUkSma sAMparAya upazAnta moha
kSINamoha sayoga kevalI ayoga kevalI (448)

Page #123 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Vitar' sattva tribhangi sattva yogya 158. Sattwa | Asattva | Satva vyuchchitti
Gunasthan 148 145 147 148 ] 0 147 146 146 138 6] Bhag 138 6|| Bhag 122 6JI Bhag
114 EIV Bhag 113 112 EV Bhag Tippani 1 Prishth.120 par dekhiye. (11)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 vitra' sattva tribhaMgI sattva yogya 158  /  sattva | asattva | satva
vyucchitti guNasthAna 148 145 147 148 ] 0 147 146 146 138 6] bhAga 138 6 //
bhAga 122 6JI bhAga 114 EIV bhAga 113 112 EV bhAga TippaNI 1 pRSTha.120 para
dekhiye  /  (11)

Page #124 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Gunasthan | Sattwa Asattwa Sattwa Vyuchchitti EVI Bhaga 6 V] Bhaga 6 VII] Bhaga
* IX Bhaga 4; Dwicharama Samaya Matantara 14 Charma Samaya 63 | 73 (Dhavala
6/417) 135 | 13 (Dhavala 6/417) 136 | 12 (Dhavala 6/457) Matantara . (116)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 guNasthAna  /  sattva asattva sattva vyucchitti EVI bhAga 6 V] bhAga 6 VII]
bhAga * IX bhAga 4; dvicarama samaya matAntara 14 carama samaya 63 |73 (dhavala
6/417) 135 | 13 (dhavala 6/417) 136 | 12 (dhavala 6/457) matAntara . (116)

Page #125 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
. Footnote 1 on page 116. Note- This statement regarding the Tribhanga of all
beings is expected in the Kshapaka category. In the Upshama category, the same
thing is true up to the sixth Gunasthan, and from the seventh to the Shevashanta
Kashaya Gunasthan, for each Gunasthan, the Asattva Prakriti should be said to be
"2", the Sattva Prakriti "146", and the Sattva Vyuchchitti Prakriti "". This
statement is also expected from the view that does not accept the rule of
disassociation of the Anantanubandhi in the Dvitiyopshama Samyaktv. (120)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
. pRSTha 116 kI TippaNI1. noTa- yaha sarva sattva tribhaMgI viSayaka kathana
kSapaka zreNI kI apekSA kiyA hai| upazama zreNI kI apekSA chaTeM guNasthAna taka
vahI bAta hai tathA sAtaye se zevaH zanta kaSAya guNasthAna taka ke pratyeka
guNasthAna meM asattva prakRti '2' sattva prakRti "146" tathA sattva vyucchitti
prakRti '' kahanA caahie| yaha kathana bhI usa mata kI apekSA hai jo
dvitIyopazama samyaktva meM anantAnubandhI kI visaMyojanA kA niyama svIkAra
nahIM karatA hai| (120)

