Catalog link: https://jainqq.org/explore/090239/1

Page #1 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Jñānavarṇīya Karma Karma Granth 00000 Muniśrī Miśrīmal Jī Darśanāvarṇīya Karma
Vedaniya Karma Mohaniya Karma Āyuṣya Karma Nāma Karma Gotra Karma 'Antarāya
Karma Gold 2941 Karma Granth Jain Karma Śāstra ka Sarvāṅga Vivecan Vyākhyākara
Marudhara Kesarī Pravartaka Muniśrī Miśrīmaljī

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 jJAnAvaraNIya karma karma grantha 00000 munizrI mizrImala jI darzanAvaraNIya
karma vedanIya karma mohanIya karma AyuSya karma nAma karma gotra karma
'aMtarAya karma geum 2941 karma grantha jaina karma zAstra ka sarvAMga vivecana
vyAkhyAkAra marudhara kesarI pravartaka munizrI mizrImalajI

Page #2 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
1 294! On the occasion of the 25th Nirman Shatabdi of Bhagwan Shri Mahavir
Karmagranth named Karmavipak written by Shreemad Devendrasur [Sun Nan]
[Original. Gatharth, Vishesharth Vivechan and Tippani and Parishishta Yukt]
Vyakhyakar Madharakesari Pravartak Muni Shri Mishrimal Ji Maharaj Sank Shrichand
Surana 'Saras' Devkumar Jain Prakashk Shri Marudhar Kesari Sahitya Prakashan
Samiti Jodhpur-Byawar 5

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 1 294! bhagavAna zrI mahAdaura kI 25vIM nirmANa zatAbdI ke upalakSya meM zrImad
devendrasUri viracita karmavipAka nAmaka karmagrantha [sna naan] [mUla.
gAthArtha, vizeSArtha vivecana evaM TippaNa tathA pariziSTa yukta ] vyAkhyAkAra
madharakesarI pravartaka muni zrI mizrImala jI mahArAja saMka zrIcanda surAnA
'sarasa' devakumAra jaina prakAzaka zrI marudhara kesarI sAhitya prakAzana
samiti jodhapura-byAvara 5

Page #3 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Rakspa** **Prakashkiya**  One of the primary and creative objectives of the
Shri Marudhar Kesari Sahitya Prakashan Samiti is to publish literature related
to Jain religion and philosophy. The institution's guide, the highly revered
Shri Marudhar Kesariji Maharaj, is himself a great scholar, a poet, and an
expert in Jain Agamas and philosophy. Under his guidance, the institution's
various philanthropic activities are flourishing. Gurudevshri is also an expert
in literature and a devotee. Inspired by him, we have so far published
discourses, biographies, poetry, Agamas, and profound analytical works. Now, we
are presenting their long-awaited work, "Karmagranth Vivechan," to scholars and
inquisitive readers.  "Karmagranth" is a great text of Jain philosophy. Its six
parts contain a comprehensive discussion of Jain philosophy. Under the guidance
of the revered Gurudevshri, renowned author-editor Shriyut Shrichandji Surana
and his associate Shri Dev Kumarji Jain have jointly edited this beautifully.
With the inspiration of Tapasvivar Shri Rajtamuni Ji and Vidya Vinod Shri
Suknamuni Ji, this grand work is being completed on time in a beautiful manner.
We express our heartfelt gratitude to all the scholars, Munivar, and supportive
generous householders and hope that we will present the complete "Karmagranth
Vivechan" to the readers in six parts, one after the other.  **Vinit**
**Mantri** Shri Marudhar Kesari Sahitya Prakashan Samiti

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 rakSapA prakAzakIya zrI mayadharakesarI sAhitya prakAzana samiti ke vibhinna
uddezyoM meM eka pramukha evaM racanAtmaka uddezya hai - jaina dharma evaM
darzana se sambandhita sAhitya kA prakAzana karanA  /  saMsthA ke mArgadarzaka
paramazraddheya zrI marudhara kesarIjI ma svayaM eka mahAna vidvAna, Azukavi
tathA jaina Agama tathA darzana ke mamaMjJa haiM aura unhIM ke mArgadarzana meM
saMsthA kI vibhinna lokopakArI pravRttiyA~ ghala rahI haiM  /  gurudevazrI
sAhitya ke mamajJa bhI haiM, anurAgI bhI haiN| unakI preraNA se aba taka hamane
pravacana, jIvana caritra, kAvya, Agama tathA gambhIra vivecanAtmaka granthoM kA
prakAzana kiyA hai| aba vidvAnoM evaM tattvajijJAsu pAThakoM ke sAmane hama
unakA cira pratIkSita grantha karmagrantha vivecanayukta prastuta kara rahe haiM
/  karmagrantha jainadarzana kA eka mahAna grantha hai| isake chaha bhAgoM meM
jaina tattvajJAna kA sarvAMga vivecana samAyA huA hai| pUjya gurudevazrI ke
nirdezana meM prasiddha lekhaka-saMpAdaka zrIyuta zrIcandajI surAnA evaM unake
sahayogI zrI deva kumAra jI jaina ne milakara isakA sundara sampAdana kiyA hai
/  tapasvIvara zrI rajatamuni jI evaM vidyAvinodI zrI sukanamunijI kI preraNA se
yaha virATa kArya samaya para sundara DhaMga se sampanna ho rahA hai| hama sabhI
vidvAnoM, munivaroM, evaM sahayogI udAra gRhasthoM ke prati hArdika AbhAra
prakaTa karate hue AzA karate haiM ki atizodha kramazaH chahoM bhAgoM meM hama
sampUrNa karmagrantha vivecana yukta pAThakoM kI sevA meM prastuta kareMge |
vinIta mantrI- zrI marudhara kesarI sAhitya prakAzana samiti

Page #4 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Second Edition Two Words While publishing a profound and deep text like
'Karmagranth', it seemed that there would be very few readers of such texts,
hence instead of printing more copies, 1000 copies were printed. We printed 1200
copies and then published the complete set of Karmagranth from Part 2 to 6 in
the same year and delivered it to the hands of the readers! In a short span of
four years, the first and second parts were completely finished and for the past
year, there has been a constant demand for a new edition. This should be
understood as the popularity of the simple and easy explanation of a complex
text like Karmagranth. Many institutions have also included these parts in their
curriculum. Students and inquisitive people are reading them with great
enthusiasm. All this is an encouraging event for us. Now, according to the
demand of the readers, this second revised edition of Karmagranth is presented.
Despite the high cost of paper, printing, etc., keeping in mind the convenience
of the readers, there has been no increase in the price. Hopefully, the readers
will find it appropriate. The new edition of the second part is also being
presented soon. - Minister Shri Marudharakesari Sahitya Prakashan Samiti Jyaver

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dvitIya saMskaraNa do zabda 'karmagrantha' jaise gahana-gambhIra grantha kA
prakAzana karate samaya laga rahA thA ki aise granthoM ke pAThaka bahuta kama hI
hote haiM ataH adhika pratiyA~ na chApakara 1 hajAra pratiyA~ chApI jAyeM  /
hamane 1200 pratiyo chApI aura phira kramazaH bhAga 2 se 6 taka kA sampUrNa seTa
karmagrantha eka hI varSa meM prakAzita kara pAThakoM ke hAthoM meM pahu~cA diyA
! cAra varSa kI alpa avadhi meM hI prathama va dvitIya bhAga pUrNatayA samApta
ho gayA aura pichale eka varSa se hI barAbara naye saMskaraNa kI mAMga A rahI
hai| yaha karmagrantha jaise jaTila grantha kI sarala va subodha vyAkhyA kI
lokapriyatA hI samajhanA cAhie  /  aneka saMsthAoM ne apane pAThyakrama meM bhI
hamAre ina bhAgoM ko sthAna diyA hai  /  vidyArthI va jijJAsu bar3e cAva se
inheM par3ha rahe haiM  /  yaha saba hamAre utsAha ko bar3hAne vAle prasaMga
haiN| aba pAThakoM kI mAMga ke anusAra karmagrantha kA yaha dvitIya saMzodhita
makaraNa prastuta hai| kAgaja-chagAI Adi sabhI vastuoM kI atyadhika maMhagAI
hote hue bhI bhane pAThakoM kI suvidhA kA dhyAna rakhakara mUlma meM kucha bhI
vRddhi nahIM kI hai| AzA hai, pAThakoM ko yaha ucati hI lagegA _dvitIya bhAga kA
nayA saMskaraNa bhI zIghra hI sevA meM prastuta ho rahA hai| -maMtrI zrI
marudharakesarI sAhitya prakAzana samiti jyAvara

Page #5 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Editorial  The key to understanding Jain philosophy is the 'Karma Siddhanta'.
It is certain that the soul is the foundation of the entire philosophy and
metaphysics. And the 'Karma Siddhanta' reveals the mystery of the various
states, forms, and transformations of the soul. Therefore, understanding the
'Karma Siddhanta' is essential for understanding Jain philosophy.  Among the
major texts that discuss the 'Karma Siddhanta', the 'Karma Granth' (Parts 1 to
6) written by Shrimad Devendra Murti holds a special significance. It occupies a
very important place in Jain literature. Even those who are curious about the
truth consider the 'Karma Granth' as an object of daily study and self-study,
like the Agamas. The Sanskrit commentaries on the 'Karma Granth' are very
important. There have also been many Gujarati translations of it. The first
commentary on the 'Karma Granth' in Hindi was presented by the learned sage, the
great scholar, Pandit Sukhlalji. His commentary is comparative and scholarly.
Pandit Sukhlalji's commentary is now almost unavailable. For some time, I was
receiving inspiration from the Ashukavi Ratna Gurudev Shri Madhar Kesariji
Maharaj to present a simple explanation of the 'Karma Granth' in a modern style.
This editing began with his inspiration and guidance. With the inspiration of
Vidya Vinod Shri Sukhanmuniji, this work progressed rapidly. The cooperation of
Shri Devkumarji Jain was received, and the work became ready to take shape in a
short time.  In this editing work, I received the support of the ancient text
writers, commentators, commentators, and especially the works of Pandit
Sukhlalji, due to which the commentary of such a profound text became easily
understandable. I express my gratitude to all the scholars with immense
gratitude.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 sampAdakIya jainadarzana ko samajhane kI kuMjI hai--'karmasiddhAnta  / ' yaha
nizcita hai ki samagra darzana evaM tattvajJAna kA AdhAra hai AtmA  /  aura AtmA
kI vividha dazAoM, svarUpoM kA vivecana evaM umake parivartanoM kA rahasya
udghATita karatA hai 'karmasiddhAnta  / ' isaliye jainadarzana ko samajhane ke
lie karmasiddhAnta' ko samasamA anivArya hai| karmasiddhAnta kA vivecana karane
vAle pramukha granthoM meM zrImad devendramUri racita' karmagrantha (bhAga 1 se
6) apanA viziSTa mahatva rakhatA hai  /  jaina sAhitya meM isakA atyanta
mahatvapUrNa sthAna hai| tattvajijJAsu bhI karmagrantha ko Agama kI taraha
pratidina adhyayana evaM svAdhyAya kI vastu mAnate haiN| _ karma grantha kI
saMskRta TIkAe~ bar3I mahatvapUrNa haiN| isake kaI gujarAtI anuvAda bhI ho cuke
haiN| hindI meM karmagrantha kA sarvaprathama vivecana prastuta kiyA thA
vidvadvareNya manISI pravara mahAprAjJa paM0 sukhalAlajI ne| unakI pAlI
tulanAtmaka evaM vidvattApradhAna hai  /  paM0 sukhalAla jI kA vivecana Aja
prAyaH duppApya-sA hai| kucha samaya se Azukaviratna gurudeva zrI
mahadharakesarIjI ma0 kI preraNA mila rahI thI ki karmagrantha kA Adhunika zailI
meM sarala viyamana prastuta karanA cAhie  /  unakI preraNA evaM nidezana se
yaha sampAdana prArambha huA  /  vidyAvinodI zrI sukanamunijI kI preraNA se yaha
kArya bar3I gati ke sAtha Age bar3hatA gyaa| zrI devakUmAra jI jaina kA sahayoga
milA aura kArya kucha hI samaya meM AkAra dhAraNa karane yogya bana gyaa| isa
saMpAdana kArya meM jina prAcIna grantha lekhakoM, TIkAkAroM, vivecanakartAoM
tathA vizeSataH paM0 sukhalAla jI ke granthoM kA mujhe sahayoga prApta huA aura
inake kAraNa itane gahana grantha kA vivecana sahajagamya bana sakA  /  maiM
ukta sabhI vidvAnoM kA asIma kRtajJatA ke sAtha AbhAra mAnatA huuN|

Page #6 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
I am deeply grateful for the guidance of Shri Marudhar Kaisariji M. from time to
time, the inspiration of Shri Rajtamuni ji and Shri Sumanmuniji, and the
cooperation of the officials of the Sahitya Samiti, especially the heartfelt
inspiration and cooperation of the committee's administrator Shri Sujanmalji
Sethia, which has brought dynamism to the editing and publication of this book.
It would be entirely fitting for me to express my heartfelt gratitude to all of
you.  If there are any errors, theoretical mistakes, ambiguities, or printing
errors in the discussion, I apologize and request the kind readers to kindly
point them out. Those who contribute to the removal of these errors are
commendable. With this request, ...  With humility, Shrichand Surana

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zraya zrI marudharakaisarI jI ma. kA samaya-samaya para mArgadarzana, zrI
rajatamunijI evaM zrI sumanamunijI kI preraNA evaM sAhityasamiti ke adhikAriyoM
kA sahayoga, vizeSakara samiti ke vyavasthApaka zrI sujAnamala jI seThiyA kI
sahRdayatA pUrNa preraNA va sahakAra se grantha ke saMpAdana-prakAzana meM
gatizIlatA AI hai, maiM hRdaya se Apa saba kA AbhAra svIkAra karUM yaha sarvathA
yogya hI hogaa| vivecana meM kahIM truTi, saiddhAntika bhUla, aspaSTatA tathA
mudraNa Adi meM azuddhi rahI ho to usake lie maiM kSamAprArthI haiM aura haMsa-
buddhi pAThakoM se apekSA hai ki ne snehapUrvaka sucita ha' arahITa kara jamA
prasAda parihAra meM sahayogI banane vAle abhinandanIya hote haiN| basa isI
anurodha ke sAtha-... vinIta zrIcanda surAnA

Page #7 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The soul is the foundation of all contemplation, reflection, and analysis in
Janadarshan. The soul is an all-powerful, independent force. It is both the
creator of its own happiness and sorrow, and the one who experiences the fruits
of its actions. The soul itself is formless, pure, but it is embodied in the
body and wanders in the world in an impure state. Despite being inherently
blissful, it is caught in the cycle of happiness and sorrow. Though immortal, it
is swept away in the flow of birth and death. It is astonishing that the soul,
which is supremely powerful, is also experiencing torment and suffering in the
world as a poor, miserable, and destitute being. What is the reason for this?
Janadarshan, while examining this reason, says that karma is what causes the
soul to wander in the world. Karma is the root of birth and death. "Kammam cha
jai maranassa mulan" - this statement of Bhagwan Shri Mahavira is absolutely
true, a fact. Due to karma, this world is constantly changing in various strange
cycles of events. While theistic philosophies attribute the cause of this
world's diversity and happiness and sorrow to God, Janadarshan considers the
soul and its primary assistant, karma, as the root cause of all happiness and
sorrow and the world's diversity. Karma itself is not an independent force; it
is a pudgala, inert. But when karma is performed by the soul under the influence
of attachment and aversion, it becomes so powerful and potent that it binds the
doer in its own chains. It makes the master dance like a servant. This is the
extraordinary power of karma. What is karma, the main seed of all changes in our
life and the world, and what is its nature? How do its various results occur?
This is a very serious subject.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 A mukha janadarzana ke sampUrNa cintana, manana aura vivecana kA AdhAra AtmA
hai| AtmA sarvatantra svataMtra zakti hai  /  apane sukha-duHkhya kA nirmAtA bhI
vahI hai aura usakA phala bhoga karane vAlA bhI yahI hai| AtmA svayaM meM amUrta
hai, parama mizuza hai kintu vaha zarIra ke sAtha mUrtimAna banakara azuddha
dazA meM saMsAra meM paribhramaNa kara rahA hai 1 svayaM parama Ananda svarUpa
hone para bhI sukha-duHkha ke cakra meM pisa rahA hai  /  ajara-amara hokara bhI
janma-mRtyu ke prabAha meM baha rahA hai| Azcarya hai ki jo AtmA parama
zaktisampanna haiM, bahI dIna-hIna, dukhI daridra ke rUpa meM saMsAra meM yAtanA
aura kaSTa bhI bhoga rahA hai| isakA kAraNa kyA hai ? _ janadarzana isa kAraNa
kI vivecanA karate hue kahatA hai-AtmA ko saMsAra meM bhaTakAne vAlA karma hai
/  karma hI janma-maraNa kA mUla hai| kammaM ca jAI maraNassa mulaM-bhagavAna
zrI mahAvIra kA yaha kathana akSaramAH satya hai, tathya hai  /  karma ke kAraNa
hI yaha vizva vividha vicitra ghaTanA cakroM meM pratipala parivartita ho rahA
hai  /  IzvaravAdI darzanoM ne isa vizva-vaicizya evaM sukha-duHkha kA kAraNa
jahAM Izvara ko mAnA hai, vahA~ jainadarzana' ne samasta mukha-dUkha evaM
vizvadinya kA kAraNa mUlataH jIva evaM usakA mukhya sahAyaka karma mAnA hai  /
kama svatantra rUpa se koI zakti nahIM hai, vaha svayaM meM pudgala hai, jar3a
hai| kintu rAga-dveSa vazavartI AtmA ke dvArA karma kiye jAne para ve itane
balavAna aura pAktisaMpanna bana jAte haiM ki kartA ko bhI apane baMdhana meM
bAMdha lete haiN| mAlika ko bhI naukara kI taraha nacAte haiN| yaha karma kI
bar3I vicitra zakti hai| hamAre jIvana aura jagata ke samasta parivartanoM kA
yaha mukhya bIja karma kyA hai, isakA svarUpa kyA hai ? isake vividha pariNAma
kaise hote haiM ? yaha bar3A hI gambhIra viSaya hai|

Page #8 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Jainism extensively describes the concept of karma. A very detailed and subtle
analysis of karma is found in the Jain Agamas and subsequent texts. These texts,
written in Prakrit and Sanskrit, are accessible to scholars but difficult for
the average seeker to understand. Ancient Acharyas have summarized the various
aspects of karma theory in concise verses, which are beneficial for the average
seeker to learn by heart.  The Karmagrantha holds a significant place among the
ancient texts on karma theory. The six parts of this work, authored by Shrimad
Devendrasuri, are extremely important. They cover all aspects of Jain
philosophy, including karma theory, gunasthana, margam, jiva, ajiva, and their
various classifications. The Karmagrantha is widely known for its commentary in
Sanskrit and has also been explained in Gujarati. A renowned scholar, Pandit
Sukhlalji, prepared a Hindi commentary on it about 40 years ago.  Currently, the
Hindi commentary on the Karmagrantha was becoming difficult to obtain. Moreover,
the style of commentary has also changed significantly over time. Many
inquisitive monks and devotees had been requesting the revered Gumdev Marudhar
Kesariji Maharaj Saheb for several years to provide a new commentary and
publication of such a vast and profound text as the Karmagrantha. Only a capable
scholar, learned, and venerable saint like you could accomplish this extremely
laborious and expensive task. Gurudev was also drawn to this endeavor. His body
has aged considerably. Despite this, he continues to engage in long pilgrimages,
organize various institutions and programs, and dedicate over 10-12 hours daily
to scriptural study, literary creation, etc. Last year, Gurudev resolved to take
this work forward. He began writing the commentary. The responsibility of making
the commentary beautiful and engaging in terms of language, style, etc., and
compiling footnotes, citations from the Agamas, and writing the introduction was
entrusted to the renowned scholar Shriyut Shrichandji Surana. Shri Surana is
very close to Gurudev's literature and thoughts.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 jainadarzana meM karma kA mahata hI vistAra ke sAtha varNana kiyA gayA hai|
karma kA sUkSmAtisUkSma aura atyanta mahana' vivecana jaina AgamoM meM aura
uttaravartI granthoM meM prApta hotA hai  /  vaha prAkata evaM saMskRta bhASA
meM hone ke kAraNa vidvadmogya to hai para sAdhAraNa jijJAsu ke lie durbodha
hai| thokar3oM meM karmasiddhAnta ke vividha svarUpa kA varNana prAcIna AcAryoM
ne guthA hai, jo kaMThastha karane para sAdhAraNa satvajizAsu ke lie acchA
jJAnadAyaka siddha hotA hai  /  karma siddhAnta ke prAcIna granthoM meM
kamagrantha kA mahatvapUrNa sthAna hai| zrImad devendrasUri racita isake chaha
bhAga atyanta hI mahattvapUrNa haiN| inameM janadarzana sammata samasta
karmavAda, guNasthAna, mArgamA, jIva, ajIva ke bheda-prabheda Adi samasta
janadarzana kA vivecana pras" kara liyA gayA hai| mana kA gAnA meM hai aura
isakI saMskRta meM aneka TIkAeM bhI prasiddha haiN| gujarAtI meM bhI isakA
vivecana kAphI prasiddha hai| hindI bhASA meM isa para vivecana pragiddha vidvAn
manISI paM0 sukhalAla jI ne lagabhaga 40 varSa pUrva taiyAra kiyA thaa|
vartamAna meM karmagrantha kA hindI vivecana duSprApya ho rahA thA, phira isa
samaya taka bivecana kI zailI meM bhI kAphI parivartana A gyaa| aneka
tattvajijJAsu munivara evaM zraddhAlu thAvaka paramazraddheya gumdeva marudhara
kesarI jI ma0 sA0 se kaI varSoM se prArthanA kara rahe the ki karmagrantha jaise
vizAla aura gambhIra grantha kA naye DhaMga se vivecana evaM prakAzana honA
caahie| Apa jaise samartha zAstrajJa vidvAna evaM mahAsthavira santa hI isa
atyanta zramasAdhya evaM vyayasAdhya kArya ko sampanna karA sakate haiN|
gurudeva kA bhI isa ora AkarSaNa thA  /  zarIra kAphI vRddha ho cukA hai| isameM
bhI lambe-lambe bihAra aura aneka saMsthAoM va kAryakramoM kA Ayojana ! vyasta
jIvana meM bhI Apa 10-12 ghaNTA se adhika samaya taka Aja bhI zAstra svAdhyAya,
sAhitya sarjana Adi meM lIna rahate haiM  /  gata varSa gurudevaznI ne isa kArya
ko Age bar3hAne kA saMkalpa kiyA  /  vivecana likhanA prArambha kiyaa| vivecana
ko bhASA-kAlI Adi dRSTiyoM ro sundara evaM rucikara banAne tathA phUTanoTa,
AgamoM ke uddharaNa saMkalana, bhUmikA lekhana Adi kAyauM kA dAyitva prasiddha
vidvAna zrIyuta zrIcanda jI surAnA ko sauMpA gyaa| zrI surAnA jI gurudevazrI ke
sAhitya evaM vicAroM se ati nikaTa saparka meM haiN|

Page #9 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Under the guidance of Gurudev, they have prepared this scholarly and useful
discourse for the general public through immense effort. This discourse fulfills
a long-standing need. At the same time, society is receiving a cultural and
philosophical treasure in a new form, which is a matter of great joy. I have a
special interest in this subject. I have been encouraging Gurudev and the
editorial team to complete it from time to time. This first part is coming
before the public today, and I am very happy about it. -Sukan Muni

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 gurudeva ke nirdezana meM unhoMne atyadhika zrama karake yaha vidvattApUrNa
tathA sarvasAdhAraNa jana ke lie upayogI vivecana taiyAra kiyA hai| isa vivecana
meM eka dIrghakAlIna abhAva kI pUrti ho rahI hai| sAtha hI samAja ko eka
sAMskRtika evaM dArzanika nidhi naye rUpa meM mila rahI hai, yaha atyadhika
prasannatA kI bAta hai  /  mujhe isa viSaya meM vizeSa ruci hai  /  maiM
gurudeva ko tathA saMpAdaka bandhuoM ko isakI saMpUrti ke lie samaya-samaya para
prerita karatA rahA  /  yaha prathama bhAga Aja janatA ke samakSa A rahA hai,
isakI mujhe hArdika prasannatA hai  /  -sukana muni

Page #10 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Table of Contents Preface Review of Karma Theory The Fundamental Elements of the
World | The Cause of Change - Different Words Denoting Karma. The Views of
Different Schools of Thought on Karma and Its Results. Objections to Karma
Theory and Their Refutation. The Existence of the Soul - Seven Proofs. Some
Points to Know About the Soul. The Eternal Nature of Karma | Even Though
Eternal, Karma Can End. Who is Stronger - the Soul or Karma? The Relationship of
Karma Theory to Other Scriptures. The Purpose of Karma Theory. Historical Review
of Karma Theory. Discussion of Karma Theory in Jainism. Discussion of Jainism.
Jainism's Worldview. The Characteristics of Karma. A Detailed Discussion of
Bhavakarma and Drashtakarma. Description of the Four Bonds. The Various Stages
of Karma - 1. Bandha, Udaya, Udirana, Satya - Explained. The Process of Karma
Destruction, Means of Destroying Karma. Summary of the Discussion on the Karma
Element in Jainism. The Place of Karma in Indian Philosophical Literature. The
Place of Karma in Jain Philosophy - 1. Original Jain Karma Literature. The
Authors of Jain Karma Literature. Introduction to Karma Shastra. Karmavipak
Granth: Introduction to the Text and its Author. I Verse 1 Invocation and
Statement of Purpose Explanation of the Phrase 'Siri Veer Jin' Definition of
Karma The Relationship Between the Soul and Karma 98-50 Page 1-8 1

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 viSayAnukramANikA prastAvanA karmasiddhAnta kA paryAlocana jagata ke
mUlapadArtha | vikAra kA kAraNa karma-zabda ke vAcaka vibhinna zabda  /  karma
vipAka ke viSaya meM vibhinna darzanoM kA mantavya  /  karmasiddhAnta para
AkSepa aura parihAra  /  AtmA kA astitva sAta pramANa  /  AtmA ke sambandha meM
kucha jJAtavya  /  karma kA anAditva | anAdi hone para bhI karmoM kA anta
sambhava hai | AtmA aura karma meM balavAna kauna ? karma siddhAnta kA anya
zAstroM se sambandha  /  karma siddhAnta kA sAdhya prayojana  /  karma siddhAnta
vicAra aitihAsika samIkSA | jainadarzana meM karmasiddhAnta kA vivecana
jainadana kA vivecana | jainadarzana kA vizva sambandhI dRSTikoNa  /  karma kA
lakSaNa | bhAvakarma aura draSpakarma kA vizeSa vivecana cAra bandha kA varNana
/  karma kI vividha avasthAe~ 1 baMdha, udaya, udIraNA, sattA kA spaSTIkaraNa  /
karmakSaya kI prakriyA, karmakSaya karane ke sAdhana  /  jainadarzana meM karma
tatva viSayaka vivecanA kA sArAMza | bhAratIya darzana sAhitya meM karmavAda kA
sthAna  /  jaina darzana meM karmavAda kA sthAna 1 maulika jaina karma sAhitya
jaina karma sAhitya ke praNetA  /  krarmazAstra kA paricaya  /  karmavipAka
grantha : grantha evaM granthakAra kA paricaya | I gAthA 1 maMgalAcaraNa evaM
abhidheya 'siri vIra jiNa' pada kI vyAkhyA karma kI paribhASA jIva aura karma kA
sambandha 98-50 pRSTha 1-8 1

Page #11 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Dravyakarma and Bhavakarma  **Karmabandha and its Causes**  *
**Characteristics of the Causes of Karmabandha** * **Explanation of the
Tradition Regarding the Number of Causes of Karmabandha**  **Gatha 2** (11) *
**Four Types of Karmabandha** * **Characteristics and Examples of the Four Types
of Karmabandha** * **Characteristics of the Original and Subsequent Natures of
Karma and their Number**  **Gatha 3** **Gatha 4** * **Names of the Original
Natures of Karma** * **Characteristics of the Original Natures of Karma -
Jnanavarana, etc.** * **Distinction between Ghati and Aghati of the Eight Karmas
- Jnanavarana, etc. and their Causes** * **Number of Subsequent Natures of the
Eight Karmas - Jnanavarana, etc.**  **Five Types of Knowledge** * **Names of the
Five Types of Knowledge** * **Characteristics of Matijnana and Shrutajnana** *
**Difference between Matijnana and Lajnana** * **Characteristics of
Avadhijnana** * **Characteristics of Manahparyavjnana** * **Speciality of
Manahparyavjnana** * **Characteristics of Kevaljnana** * **Reason for Accepting
Indirect and Direct Evidence in the Five Types of Knowledge - Matijnana, etc.**
**Types of Matijnana** * **Characteristics of Vyanjanavagraha and its Types**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 1 dravyakarma aura bhAvakarma karmabandha ke kAraNa *maMndha ke kAraNoM ke
lakSaNa karmabandha ke kAraNoM kI saMkhyAoM kI paramparA sambandhI spaSTIkaraNa
gAdhA 2 ( 11 ) karmavandha ke cAra prakAra karmabandha ke cAra prakAroM ke
lakSaNa va dRSTAnta karma kI mUla evaM uttaraprakRti kA lakSaNa aura unakI
saMkhyA gAthA 3 gAyA 4 karma kI mUla prakRtiyoM ke nAma karma kI mUla prakRtiyoM
- jJAnAvaraNa Adi ke lakSaNa jJAnAvaraNa Adi ATha karmoM ke ghAti aura aghAtI
bheda aura kAraNa jJAnAvaraNa Adi ATha karmoM ko uttara prakRtiyoM kI saMkhyA
jJAna ke pA~ca bhedoM ke nAma matijJAna aura zrutajJAna ke lakSaNa matijJAna
aura lajJAna meM antara avadhijJAna kA lakSaNa manaH paryavajJAna kA lakSaNa
manaH paryavajJAna kI vizeSatA kevalajJAna kA lakSaNa matijJAna Adi pA~ca jJAnoM
meM parokSa aura pratyakSa pramANa mAnane kA kAraNa matijJAna ke bheda
vyaMjanAvagraha kA lakSaNa aura usake bheda pRSTha 5 5 W 8 6-12 EUR 10 12 12-15
12 14 15 1. 5 16-24 //// z 17 17 18 & wa 20 21 22

Page #12 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Page 24-32 Therefore, *Iha Avay*, characteristics and types of *Dharana* + 24 26
336 and 340 types of *Matijnana* and their causes, four types and
characteristics of *Aśrutaniśrita Matijnana* like *Autpattikī Buddhi* etc. 32
Verse 5. Verse 6, 7 (12) Names of fourteen and twenty types of *Śrutjnana*
Characteristics of fourteen types of *Śrutjnana* Names of twenty types of
*Saparyavasita* and *Adhibhūtjnana* Characteristics of twenty types of
*Śrutjnana* Verse 10 Types and characteristics of *Avadhijnana* Difference
between *Bhavapratyay* and *Gunapratyay* *Avadhijnana* Types and characteristics
of *Gunapratyay* *Avadhijnana* Description of *Avadhijnana* in relation to
*Dravyādi Catuṣṭaya* Types and characteristics of *Manahparyavjnana* Difference
between *Rijumati* and *Vipulmati* *Manahparyavjnana* Difference between
*Avadhijnana* and *Manahparyavjnana* Characteristics of *Kevaljnana* How many
types of knowledge can be known simultaneously in relation to *Shakti*? It is
said 33-43 33 34 38 42 42 Nature of *Jnanavaran* Karma Types and characteristics
of *Jnanavaran* Karma Which of the five types, *Matijnanaavaran* etc., are
*Deshghati* and *Sarvaghati*? Number of types of *Darshanavaran* Karma 44-54 K
45 46 42 50 51 52 5.3 53 55-58 55 56 57 58

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pRSTha 24-32 refore, IhA avAya, dhAraNA ke lakSaNa aura bheda + 24 26 matijJAna
ke 336 aura 340 bheda aura unake hone ke kAraNa autpattikI buddhi Adi
azrutanizrita matijJAna ke cAra bheda va lakSaNa 32 gAthA 5. gAthA 6, 7 ( 12 )
zrutajJAna ke caudaha aura bIsa bhedoM ke nAma zrutajJAna ke caudaha bhedoM ke
lakSaNa saparyavasita aura adhi bhutajJAna ke bIsa bhedoM ke nAma zrutajJAna ke
bIsa bhedoM ke lakSaNa gAthA da avadhijJAna ke bheda aura lakSaNa bhavapratyaya
aura guNapratyaya avadhijJAna meM antara guNapratyaya avadhijJAna ke bheda aura
unake lakSaNa avadhijJAna kA dravyAdicatuSTaya kI apekSA varNana manaH
paryavajJAna ke bheda aura unake lakSaNa Rjumati aura vipulamati manaH
paryavajJAna meM antara avadhijJAna aura manaHparvavajJAna meM antara
kevalajJAna kI vizeSatA zakti kI apekSA eka sAtha kitane jJAna ? gAyA hai 33-43
33 4 38 42 42 jJAnAvaraNa karma kA svarUpa jJAnAvaraNa karma ke bheda aura unake
lakSaNa matijJAnAvaraNa Adi pA~ca bhedoM meM kauna dezaghAtI aura sarvaghAtI ?
darzanAvaraNa karma ke bhedoM kI saMkhyA 44-54 K 45 46 42 50 51 52 5.3 53 55-58
55 56 57 58

Page #13 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Chapter 10**  **The Nature of Darshanavarana Karma**  **The Divisions of
Darshan and Their Covering Names and Characteristics**  **Verses 11, 12**  **The
Names and Characteristics of the Five Nidras, the Nature of Bedaniya Karma**
**(13)**  **Verse 13**  **The Order of Arising of Bedaniya Karma in the Four
Gatis (Devas, etc.), the Nature of Mohaniya Karma and Its Function, the
Divisions of Mohaniya Karma and Their Characteristics**  **Verse 14**  **The
Divisions of Darshanamohaniya and Their Characteristics, the Covering Power of
the Divisions of Darshaniya and an Illustration**  **Verse 15**  **The
Characteristics of the Nine Tattvas (Jiva, etc.), the Divisions of Samyaktva and
Their Characteristics**  **Verse 16**  **Explanation and Illustration of
Mishramohaniya, the Characteristics and Divisions of Mithyatva Mohaniya**
**Page**  **58-56**  **58**  **58**  **60-63**  **61**  **62**  **63-66**
**63**  **65.**  **65**  **66-66**  **67**  **68**  **66-74**  **66**  **72**
**75-77**  **75**  **76 7781**  **Verse 17**  **77**  **The Names of the
Divisions of Charitramohaniya Karma, the Divisions of errett, Their
Characteristics and the Reason for Their Four Types**  **78**  **The
Characteristics of Anantanubandhi, etc., Kashayas**  **178**  **The
Characteristics of Nopayamohaniya**  **81**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 gAyA 10 darzanAvaraNa karma kA svarUpa darzana ke bheda aura unake AvaraNoM ke
nAma va lakSaNa gAthA 11, 12 pA~ca nidrAoM ke nAma va unake lakSaNa
bedanIyakarma kA sva ( 13 ) gAthA 13 deva Adi cAra gatiyoM meM vedanIyakarma ke
udaya kI taratamatA mohanIya karma kA svarUpa aura usakA kArya mohanIyakarma ke
bheda aura unake lakSaNa gAthA 14 darzanamohanIya ke bheda aura unake lakSaNa
darzanIya ke bhedoM kI mAvaraNa zakti va dRSTAnta gAthA 15 jIva Adi navatattvoM
ke lakSaNa samyaktva ke bheda aura unake lakSaNa gAthA 16 mizramohanIya kI
vyAkhyA aura dRSTAnta mithyAtvamohanIya kA lakSaNa va bheda pRSTha 58-56 58 58
60-63 61 62 63-66 63 65. 65 66-66 67 68 66-74 66 72 75-77 75 76 7781 gAthA 17 77
cAritramohanIya karma ke bhedoM ke nAma errett ke bheda, lakSaNa aura unake cAra
prakAra hone ke kAraNa 78 anantAnubandhI Adi kaSAyoM ke lakSaNa 178
nopAyamohanIya kA lakSaNa 81

Page #14 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Gatha 18 **Arrenge** (arrangement) of the **adi kshayas** (primary passions)
according to time limits **Ansanubandhi** (non-eternal) **adi kshayas** - names
of the **gatis** (paths) that bind due to **ansanubandhi adi kshayas**
**Anantanubandhi** (eternal) **adi kshayas** - the work done by **anantanubandhi
adi kshayas**  ## Gatha 16, 20 **Anantanubandhi adi kshayas** - examples of
**atmaparinam** (soul transformations) with **anantanubandhi adi kshayas**  ##
Gatha 21 **Nokashaya mohniya** (not susceptible to passions) - names and
characteristics of its divisions  ## Gatha 23 (14) **Ayukarma** (life-span
karma) - characteristics and work of **ayukarma** **Apvartaaniya**
(irreversible) - **anapvartaaniya** (reversible) - characteristics of
**ayukarma** **Mayukarma** (life-span karma) - names and characteristics of its
divisions **Namakarma** (name karma) - characteristics and work of **namakarma**
**Namakarma** - number of **uttaraprakritis** (secondary characteristics)
according to **apeksha bhed** (differences in dependence)  ## Gatha 24, 25
**Namakarma** - names of the fourteen **prakritis** (characteristics)
**Namakarma** - names of the eight **pratyekaprakritis** (individual
characteristics) **Namakarma** - characteristics of the fourteen
**pindaprakritis** (physical characteristics)  ## Gatha 26, 27 **Sadaska** (six-
sense beings) - names of the **prakritis** **Sthavardashaka** (stationary ten-
sense beings) - names of the **prakritis**  ## Gatha 28, 26 **Regan** (name of a
type of being) - names of **sanjnas** (names) and the names of the **prakritis**
contained within them

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 gAthA 18 arrengedhI Adi kaSAyoM ko kAla maryAdA ansAnubandhI Adi kaSAyoM se
bandhane vAlI gatiyoM ke nAma anantAnubandhI Adi kaSAyoM dvArA hone vAlA kArya
gAthA 16, 20 anantAnubandhI Adi kaSAyoM se yukta AtmapariNAmoM ke dRSTAnta 22
gAyA 21, nokaSAyamohanIya ke bhedoM ke nAma aura unake lakSaNa gAyA 23 ( 14 )
Ayukarma kA lakSaNa aura usakA kArya apavartanIya - anapavartanIya Ayu ke
lakSaNa mAyukarma ke bhedoM ke nAma aura unake lakSaNa nAmakarma kA lakSaNa aura
unakA kArya nAmakarma kI uttara prakRtiyoM kI apekSAbheda se saMkhyA gANA 24, 25
nAmakarma kI caudaha prakRtiyoM ke nAma nAmakarma kI ATha pratyekaprakRtiyoM ke
nAma nAmakarma kI caudaha piMDaprakRtiyoM ke lakSaNa gAMSa 26, 27 sadasaka kI
prakRtiyoM ke nAma sthAvaradazaka kI prakRtiyoM ke nAma gAyA 28, 26 regon Adi
saMjJAoM ke nAma aura unameM garbhita prakRtiyoM ke nAma pRSTha 81-82 51 81 82
82-85 3 85-86 86 86-63 86 60 w it my m 63 63-66 4 4 65 7-6 es dekha 68-100 PSEUR

Page #15 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Verse 35 Verse 30 The number of sub-divisions of the Pindaprakritis of Namekarma
Verses 31, 32 The reason for the difference in the number of Namekarma Prakritis
is the binding, arising, and excitation of the eight Karmas, the number of
Sattvayoga Prakritis, and the differences in them. The divisions of Gati
Namekarma and their characteristics, the divisions of Jati Namekarma and their
characteristics, the divisions of Sarira Namekarma and their characteristics,
how many bodies are there in worldly beings? Verse 34 The divisions of
Mangopaanga Namekarma Verse 35 (15) The characteristics of Bandhana Namekarma
The divisions of Bandhana Namekarma and their characteristics Verse 36 The
characteristics of Samvaatana Namekarma The divisions of Sanghatana Namekarma
and their characteristics Verse 37 The reason for the fifteen divisions of
Bandhana Namekarma, the names of the fifteen divisions of Bandhana Namekarma and
their characteristics Verses 35, 36 Page 100-101 101 101-102 102 The
characteristics of Samhanana Namekarma The divisions of Samhanana Namekarma and
their characteristics 103 104 106 105 105 106 108 10- 110 101 110-112 111 111
112-114 113 113 114-116 114 115 117-118 s 117

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 gAya 35 gAyA 30 nAmakarma kI vaha piMDaprakRtiyoM ke uttarabhedoM kI saMkhyA
gAthA 31, 32 nAmakarma kI prakRtiyoM kI saMkhyAbhinnatA kA kAraNa ATha karmoM kI
bandha, udaya udIraNA, sattAyogya prakRtiyoM kI saMkhyA aura unameM bhinnatA ke
kAraNa gati nAmakarma ke bheda aura unake lakSaNa jAti nAmakarma ke bheda aura
unake lakSaNa zarIra nAmakarma ke bheda aura unake lakSaNa saMsArI jIvoM meM
kitane zarIra ? gAyA 34 maMgopAMga nAmakarma ke bheda gAyA 35 ( 15 ) baMdhana
nAmakarma kA lakSaNa baMdhana nAmakarma ke bheda aura unake lakSaNa gAyA 36
saMvAtana nAmakarma kA lakSaNa saMghAtana nAmakarma ke bheda aura unake lakSaNa
gAyA 37 baMdhana nAmakarma ke pandraha bheda banane kA kAraNa baMdhana nAmakarma
ke pandraha bhedoM ke nAma aura unake lakSaNa gAyA 35, 36 pRSTha 100-101 101
101-102 102 saMhanana nAmakarma kA lakSaNa saMhanana nAmakarma ke bheda aura
unake lakSaNa 103 104 106 105 105 106 108 10- 110 101 110-112 111 111 112-114
113 113 114-116 114 115 117-118 s 117

Page #16 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Verse 40 The characteristics and types of the **Sansthana** Karma The
characteristics and types of the **Varna** Karma  ## Verse 41 The types and
characteristics of the **Gandha** Karma The types and characteristics of the
**Rasa** Karma The types and characteristics of the **Sparsha** Karma  ## Verse
42 Which types of **Varna**, **Gandha**, **Rasa**, and **Sparsha** are
auspicious and which are inauspicious  ## Verse 43 Explanation and types of the
**Manupurvi** Karma The terms **Gati-dvik** etc. Types of the **Vihayoga-gati**
Karma  ## Verse 44 (16) The characteristics of the **Parapaata** and
**Uchchvaasa** Karma  ## Verse 45-46 The characteristics of the **Aatpa** Karma
The difference between **Aatpa** and **Ushna** Karma The characteristics of the
**Yo** Karma  ## Verse 47 The characteristics of the **Agurulaghu** Karma The
characteristics of the **Tirthankara** Karma  ## Verse 48 The characteristics of
the **Nirmaana** Karma The characteristics of the **Upvaata** Karma

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 gAthA 40 saMsthAna nAmakarma kA lakSaNa aura usake bheda varNa nAmakarma kA
lakSaNa aura bheda gAthA 41 gaMdha nAmakarma ke bheda va unake lakSaNa rasa
nAmakarma ke bheda va unake lakSaNa sparza nAmakarma ke bheda va unake lakSaNa
gAthA 42 varNa, gaMdha, rasa aura spardhA ke bhedoM meM kauna zubha, kauna
azubha gAthA 43 mAnupUrvI nAmakarma kI vyAkhyA aura bheda gatidvika Adi
saMjJAyeM vihAyogati nAmakarma ke bheda gAthA 44 ( 16 ) parApAta aura ucchvAsa
nAmakarma ke lakSaNa gAthA 45-46 Atapa nAmakarma kA lakSaNa Atapa aura uSNa
nAmakarma meM antara yo nAmakarma kA lakSaNa gAyA 47 agurulaghu nAmakarma kA
lakSaNa tIrthaMkara nAmakarma kA lakSaNa gAthA 48 nirmANa nAmakarma kA lakSaNa
upavAta nAmakarma kA lakSaNa pRSTha 118-121 116 120. 122-123 121 122 122 123-124
123 124-126 125 126 126 127 127 127-126 128 126 *** 126-131 130 131 131-132 131
131

Page #17 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Verse 46 Characteristics and divisions of *As* Karma Explanation of *Badar*
Karma Explanation of *Paryapt* Karma, its divisions and characteristics
Divisions of *Paryapt* beings  ## Verse 50 Characteristics of each Karma
Characteristics of *Sthir* Karma Characteristics of *Shubh* Karma,
characteristics of *Subhag* Karma  ## Verse 51 Characteristics of *Swar* Karma
Characteristics of *Are* Karma Characteristics of *Yasha-kili* Karma Names and
characteristics of the *Sthavar-dashak* natures  ## Verse 52 (17)
Characteristics and field of *Gokarma* Characteristics and divisions of
*Antaratra-karma*  ## Verse 53 An example of *Antaraya-karma*  ## Verse 54
Specific causes of *Jnana-avaran*, *Darshana-avaran*, and *Karma-bandh* and
their explanations Pages 132-137 132 132 134 135 137 137-138 138 138 138 138
138-142 136 136 140 142-145 46 144 145-146 145 146-148 146

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 gAthA 46 asa' nAmakarma kA lakSaNa va bheda bAdara nAmakarma kI vyAkhyA
paryApta nAmakarma kI vyAkhyA paryApta nAmakarma ke bheda aura unake lakSaNa
paryApta jIvoM ke bheda gAyA 50 pratyeka nAmakarma kA lakSaNa sthira nAmakarma
kA lakSaNa zubha nAmakarma kA lakSaNa subhaga nAmakarma kA lakSaNa gAthA 51
svara nAmakarma kA lakSaNa are nAmaka kA lakSaNa yazaHkIli nAmakarma kA lakSaNa
sthAvaradazaka kI prakRtiyoM ke nAma aura unake lakSaNa gAthA 52 ( 17 ) gokarma
kA lakSaNa va kSetra antarAtrakarma kA lakSaNa va bheda gAthA 5.3 antarAyakarma
kA dRSTAnta gAthA 54 jJAnAvaraNa, darzanAya raNa karmabandha ke vizeSa kAraNa
aura unakI vyAkhyA pRSTha 132-137 132 132 134 135 12.7 137-138 138 138 138 138
138-142 136 PRA 136 140 142-145 46 144 145 - 146 145 146-148 146

Page #18 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(18) 148-150 146 150-152 152-155 153 Gatha 55  The special causes of
*Saataadaniya Karmabandha* and their explanation Gatha 56 The causes of
*Darshanamohaniya* bondage Gatha 57 The causes of *Charitramohaniya* bondage The
causes of *Narakaayushpa* bondage Gatha 58 The causes of *Tiryachaayu* and
*Manushyaayu* bondage Gatha 59 The causes of *Devaayu* bondage The causes of
*Shubha* and *Ashubha* *Naamakarma* bondage Gatha 60 The causes of *Gotrakarma*
bondage Gatha 61 The causes of *Antaraayakarma* bondage 156-158. 156 157 15-156
156-16 Appendix 164 • The number and names of the original and subsequent
natures of *Karma* • A special explanation of the calculation of the natures of
*Naamakarma* • The number of *Bandha*, *Udaya*, *Udeerna* and *Sattayoga*
natures • *Aagam* text related to the special causes of *Karmabandha* • Similar
and dissimilar opinions on the subject of *Karma* literature • Pictures of
*Ashtamahapraitaharya*, *Sanhanan* and *Sansthan* 178 186-11

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 ( 18 ) 148-150 146 150-152 152-155 153 gAsa 55 sAtAdanIya karmabandha ke vizeSa
kAraNa aura unakI vyAkhyA gAnA 56 darzanamohanIva ke bandha ke kAraNa gAthA 57
cAritramohanIya ke bandha ke kAraNa narakAyuSpa ke baMdha ke kAraNa pApA 58
tiryacAyu va manuSyAyu ke baMdha ke kAraNa gAthA 56 devAyu ke baMdha ke kAraNa
zubha aura azubha nAmakarma ke baMdha ke kAraNa gAyA 60 gotrakarma ke bandha ke
kAraNa gAyA 61 antarAyakarma ke bandha ke kAraNa 156-158  /  156 157 15-156
156-16 pariziSTa 164 * karma kI mUla evaM uttara prakRtiyoM kI saMkhyA tathA
nAma 0 nAmakarma kI prakRtiyoM kI gaNanA kA vizeSa spaSTIkaraNa 0 baMdha, udaya,
udIraNA evaM sattAyogya prakRtiyoM kI saMkhyA * karmabaMdha ke vizeSa kAraNa
sambandhI Agama pATha 0 karma sAhitya viSayaka samAna-asamAna mantavya *
aSTamahAprAtihArya, saMhanana evaM saMsthAna ke citra 178 186-11

Page #19 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Introduction: A Review of the Doctrine of Karma  The fundamental substances
of the universe: There are two types of substances in the visible universe. Both
have their own existence, qualities, and processes. One type of substance is
sentient, possessing desires, emotions, knowledge, and the experience of
pleasure and pain. The other type is non-sentient, lacking the processes
mentioned in the first type.  Every philosopher has acknowledged the separate
existence of these two types of substances based on their qualities. In the
language of science, the first type of substance is called conscious (Jiva) and
the second type is called unconscious (Ajīva, inert, physical). The Jiva acts
with its own emotional and active efforts, while the Ajīva substances act
according to nature. They do not have their own personal effort or endeavor in
their actions. This difference distinguishes them from each other.  The cause of
variation: If every substance has its own qualities, then what is the reason for
the diversity and strangeness we see? We only see the Jiva mixed with Ajīva. We
do not see the pure form of either. This is a question that every philosopher
has tried to answer from their own perspective.  Every substance's inherent
nature and the action that corresponds to it, as well as the substance with
similar qualities, is called homogeneous. The nature of that substance...
...involves variation, Ajīva or...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 | prastAvanA karmasiddhAnta kA paryAlocana jagat ke mUla padArtha dRzyamAna
jagata meM do prakAra ke padArtha haiN| donoM kA apanA-apanA astitva, guNa-
dharma aura tijI prakriyA hai| unameM se eka prakAra ke padArtha de haiM,
jinameM icchAe~ haiM, bhAvanAe~ haiM, jJAna hai evaM sukha-dukha kA saMvedana
hotA hai aura dUsare prakAra ke ve haiM, jinameM prathama prakAra ke batAye gaye
padArthoM kI koI prakriyA nahIM hotI hai  /  pratyeka tattvacintaka ne guNa-
dharmo kI mitratA se ina donoM prakAra ke padArthoM kA pRthak-pRthak astitva
svIkAra kiyA hai| vijJAna kI bhASA meM prathama prakAra ke padArthoM ko sacetana
(jIva ) aura dUsare prakAra ke padArthoM ko acetana ( ajIva jar3a, bhautika)
kahA jAtA hai| jIva kI kriyA meM jIna svayaM bhAvAtmaka aura kriyAtmaka
puruSArthaM karatA hai, jabaki ajIva padArthoM kI kriyA prakRti se hotI rahatI
hai| unakI kriyA meM unakA apanA nijI puruSArtha yA prayatna nahIM hotA hai  /
yahI antara una donoM ko pRthak-pRthak middha karatA hai  /  vikAra kA kAraNa
pratyeka padArtha ke jaba apane-apane guNa-dharma hai taba phira vibhinnatA aura
vicitratA dikhane kA kAraNa kyA hai ? hama ajIva mizrita jIva ko hI dekhate
haiN| donoM kA zuddha rUpa to hameM dRSTigocara nahIM hotA hai  /  yaha eka
prazna hai, jisakA pratyeka tasvatvika ne apane-apane dRSTikoNa se uttara dene
kA prayatna kiyA hai  /  pratyeka padArtha kA nijI svabhAva aura usase mela
khAne vAlI kriyA tathA samAna guNa-dharma vAlA padArtha sajAtIya kahalAtA hai
tathA usa padArtha ke svabhAva inameM vikAra, ajIva athavA

Page #20 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
{20} A substance with a nature or action different from or opposite to that of
another is called *vijātiya*. When substances with similar qualities come
together, no change occurs. However, when substances with opposite qualities
come together, they undergo change and are called *bikṛta*. This can be clearly
seen through science and medicine. The reaction to the action of *vijātiya*
substances is seen in the *rāja* itself.  In inanimate substances, contact with
*vijātiya* substances also produces change, but because their action occurs
naturally according to natural laws, they do not try to react on their own.
However, living substances have the special characteristic that, even while
coming into contact with *vijātiya* substances, they do not tolerate the contact
of these *vijātiya* substances and strive to remove them. They begin to try to
remove the *vijātiya* substances that have come into contact with their senses,
which are formed by their own contact, and they do not rest until these
*vijātiya* substances are removed. The implication is that living beings are
affected by contact with *vijātiya* substances, and the contact of *vijātiya*
substances is the cause of change.  The theoretical implication of this
statement is that for a living being, non-living matter is *vijātiya*. When non-
living matter comes into contact with a living being, it produces change in the
living being. The contact of non-living matter with a living being and the
resulting action can be described in philosophical terms as *karma* or other
synonymous terms.  Various words that denote *karma*  The word *karma* is used
both in common parlance and in scriptures. Ordinary people use the word *karma*
in the sense of work, business, action, etc. in their worldly dealings. In
scriptures, the word *karma* is used in various senses. For example, the word
*karma* is used for any movement, whether it be of a living being or a non-
living being, such as eating, drinking, walking, etc. *Karmakāṇḍī* *Mīmāṃsaka*
use the word *karma* in the sense of rituals, sacrifices, etc.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 ( 20 } se bhinna yA viparIta svabhAva kriyA vAlA padArtha vijAtIya kahA jAtA
hai  /  atra samAna guNa-dharma vAle padArthoM kA saMyoga hotA hai, taba koI
vikAra paidA nahIM hotA, parantu viruddha guNadharma vAle padArthoM ke milate hI
unameM vikAra paidA ho jAtA hai aura ve bikRta kahalAte hai| vijJAna aura
cikitsAzAstra dvArA yaha spaSTa dekhA jA sakatA hai| vijAtIya padArtha ke
saMyoga se hone vAlI kriyA kI pratikriyA rAja meM hI dikhalAI detI hai  /
nirjIva padArthoM meM bhI vijAtIya dravya ke milane se vikAra to utpanna hotA
hai, parantu unakI kriyA prAkRtika niyamAnusAra svataH hotI rahane se ke apanI
ora se pratikriyA karane kA yatna nahIM karate haiN| lekina sajIva dravya kI
yaha vizeSatA hai ki vaha vijAtIya padArtha kA saMyoga karate hue bhI usa
vijAtIya dravya ke saMyoga ko sahana nahIM karatA hai aura use dUra karane ke
lie prayatnazIla rahatA hai| apane saMyoga se suna-sI banI huI indriyoM Adi ke
saMyoga meM AI huI vijAtIya vastuoM ko dUra karane kA prayatna Arambha bAra detA
aura jaba taka vaha vijAtIya padArtha dUra nahIM ho jAtA, taba taka use nahIM
par3atA  /  tAtparya yaha hai ki rAjIva vijAtIya dvanca ke saMyoga se
vikAragrasta hotA hai aura vijAtIya dravya kA saMyoga hI vikAra kA janaka hai  /
isa kathana kA saiddhAntika phalitArtha yaha hai ki jIva ke lie ajIva vijAtIya
padArtha hai aura jaba jIva ke sAtha ajIva kA saMyoga hotA hai to jIva meM
vikAra utpanna hotA hai  /  jIva ke sAtha ajIva kA saMyoga aura tajjanya kArya
ko dArzanika zabdoM meM karma yA isake samAnArthaka anya zabdo se kaha sakate
haiN| karma zake vAcaka vibhinna zabda karma zabda lokavyavahAra aura zAstra
donoM meM vyavahRta huA hai  /  janasAdhAraNa apane laukika vyavahAra meM kAma (
kArya ), vyApAra, kriyA Adi ke artha meM karma zabda kA prayoga karate haiN|
zAstroM meM vibhinna arthoM meM karma zabda kA prayoga kiyA gayA hai| jaise ki
khAnA pInA, calanA Adi kisI bhI halacala ke lie, cAhe vaha jIva kI ho yA ajIva
ko ho karma zabda kA prayoga kiyA jAtA hai  /  karmakAMDI momAMsaka yajJa
yAgAdika kriyAoM ke artha meM, P smArla

Page #21 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(21) The term "karma" is used in the sense of the fixed duties (actions) of the
four varnas (Brahmana, Kshatriya, Vaishya, Shudra) and the four ashramas
(Brahmacharya, Grihastha, Vanaprastha, Sanyasa), in the sense of the fruit of
the grammarian's work, which falls on the meaning of the Vedic rituals, vows,
rules, etc., in the sense of the five symbolic actions of Vaisheshika
(utkshepan, etc.), and in the sense of action in the context of counting. The
term "karma" is also used in the sense of the cause of rebirth. The term "vand"
is used for that. Similar meanings are found in the Jain scriptures for "bhaga,"
"vasana," "aashya," "dharma-adharma," "ashta-sanskar," "dev," "bhagya." In Jain
scriptures, the terms "avidya," "prakriti," "apatram," etc., are found to have
similar meanings.  I 1 There are many words like "daiva," "bharatra," "punya,"
"papa," etc., which are common to all philosophies, but the three words "maya,"
"avidya," and "prakriti" are found in Vedanta philosophy. The root meaning of
"vanka" is almost the same as what is called "bhatrakam" in Jain scriptures.
The word "apuurva" is found in Mimamsa philosophy. This philosophy believes that
the creation of non-existent things happens in the material world according to
the past karma of souls. Karma is an independent power that drives the world.
When a person performs a yajna or other karma, a power is generated, which is
called "apuurva." It is due to this "apuurva" that the fruit of any karma is
received in the future at the appropriate time.  The word "vasana" is famous in
Buddhist philosophy. In the four noble truths of Buddhist philosophy, while
explaining the causes of suffering, the four noble truths, it is said that the
effect of all the past actions of a human being in the last birth remains in the
last stage of life, and according to karma, "sanskaras" are formed. These
"sanskaras" are called "vasana," which continue to flow.  The word "vasana" is
also used in Yoga philosophy as a synonym for karma. There, while explaining the
nature of God, it is said that all the beings of the world suffer due to
ignorance, ego, desire, attachment-aversion, and clinging.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 ( 21 ) vidvAn brAhmaNa Adi cAra varNoM aura brahmacarya Adi cAra AzramoM ke
niyata kartavya (karma) ke rUpa meM, paurANika vrata niyama Adi dhArmika kriyAoM
ke artha meM vaiyAkaraNakarttA ke vyApAra kA phala jisa para giratA hai, usake
artha meM aura vaizeSika utkSepaNa Adi pAMca sAMketika karmoM ke artha meM tathA
gInA meM kriyA. kartavya punarbhatra ke kAraNarUpa artha meM karma zabda kA
vyavahAra karate haiN| ke lie vanda kA prayoga kiyA jAtA hai. una milate-julate
artha ke lie janavara darzanoM meM bhAgA, vAsanA, Azaya, dharmAdharma aSTa
saMskAra deva, bhAgya janadarzana meM jina artha athavA usa artha se avidyA
prakRti apatraM, Adi zabda milate hai  /  I 1 daiva, bhAratra puNya pApa Adi kaI
aise zabda hai, jo saba darzanoM ke lie sAdhAraNa se haiM, lekina mAyA avidyA
aura prakRti ke tIna zabda vedAntadarzana meM pAye jAte hai  /  vanakA mUla
artha karIba pArIba vahI hai, jise jainagaMga meM bhAtrakamaM kahate hai |
'apUrva' zabda mImAMsAdarzana meM milatA hai| yaha darzana mAnatA hai ki nAM
rika vastuoM kA nirmANa AtmAoM ke pUrvAjita karmoM ke anusAra bhautika tat me
hotA hai| kama eka svatantra zakti hai, jisase saMsAra paricAlita hotA hai| jaba
koI vyakti yajJAdi karma karatA hai to eka zakti kI utpati hotI hai, use
'apUrva' kahate haiN| isI apUrva ke kAraNa kisI bhI karma kA phala bhaviSya meM
upayukta avasara para milatA hai  /  'vAsanA' zabda bauddhadarzana meM prasiddha
hai| bauddhadarzana meM cAra AryasatyoM meM ro, dUsare duHkha ke kAraNoM ke rUpa
meM dvAraNa nidAnoM ko batalAte hue kahA hai ki pUrvajanma kI antima avasthA meM
manuSya ke pUrvavartI sabhI kamoM kA prabhAva rahatA hai aura karmo ke anusAra
saMskAra banate haiN| ina saMskAroM ko vA kahate haiM jo kramazaH calatI rahatI
hai  /  yogadarzana meM bhI vAsanA zabda kA karma-paryAya ke rUpa meM prayoga
kiyA gayA hai  /  vahA~ Izvara kA svarUpa batalAte hue kahA hai ki saMmAra ke
sabhI jIva avidyA, ahaMkAra, vAsanA, rAga-dveSa aura abhiniveza Adi ke kAraNa
duHkha pAte haiM  /

Page #22 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(22) They perform various actions and experience happiness and sorrow as a
result of their consequences or fruits. They are also influenced by the inherent
impressions of past lives. The tradition of these past life impressions is also
called Basana or Karma. In addition, the term 'Ashaya' is also used in Yoga
Darshan to explain the meaning of Karma. The term Ashaya is also found in the
Saanspadarshan. Generally, the terms Dharma-Adharma, Ashta, and Sanskar are also
used in other Darshanas. But mainly these two words have been used in Nyaya and
Vaisheshik Darshanas. Darshanas that believe in rebirth, called Atmajati
Darshanas, have to accept Karma for the realization of rebirth. Due to the
different processes of these Darshanas, or due to the difference in opinion, the
nature of Karma has been understood differently. It is certain that the
Atmavadis have used the aforementioned terms like Basana, Karma, etc. to explain
Karma. We will further elaborate on the meaning of the term Karma as accepted by
Jain Darshan. The views of different Darshanas on Karma and its consequences.
The contemplation of Karma and its fruits is an inherent tendency of human life.
Every individual wants to see what the result of whatever he does is? Based on
this experience, he also decides what actions he should perform to achieve what
results. Thus, the entire historical, social, and religious thinking of human
civilization has been making Karma and its fruits its subject of thought in some
form or the other. From the point of view of thinking about Karma and its
fruits, all the Darshanas of the world can be divided into two parts. One
Darshan is those who believe that the cause-and-effect tradition related to
Karma is limited to this life only. They do not believe that after the
destruction of this body, its actions continue in the tradition.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 ( 22 ) ve bhA~ti-bhAMti ke karma karate haiM aura unake vipAka yA phalasvarUpa
sukha-duHkha bhoga karate haiM  /  ve pUrvajanma ke nihita saMskAroM se bhI
prabhAvita hote haiM  /  ina pUrva janma ke saMskAroM kI paramparA kA dUsarA
nAma bAsanA yA kama hai| isake atirikta yogadarzana meM karma kA artha
pratipAdana karane ke lie 'Azaya' zabda kA bhI upayoga dekhane meM AtA hai|
sAMsapadarzana meM bhI Azaya zabda kA prayoga milatA hai| sAmAnyatayA anya
darzanoM meM bhI dharmAdharma, aSTa aura saMskAra Avi zabdoM kA prayoga dekhane
meM AtA hai  /  lekina mukhya rUpa se do zabda nyAya aura vaizeSika darzanoM meM
prayukta hue haiN| punarjanma ko mAnane vAle AtmajAdI darzanoM ko punarjanma kI
siddhi ke lie karma ko mAnanA hI par3atA hai| lAha una darzanoM kI bhinna-bhinna
prakriyAoM ke kAraNa yA canana ko ravarUpa meM mana-bhinnatA hone kA kAraNa
karma kA svarUpa bhinnabhinna gAnUma par3e. nnui itanA nizcita hai riha gabhI
AtmavAdiyoM ne pUrvokta mA:: gAdi zabdoM meM f: mI. se garma pAhIkAra kiyA hai
jainadarzana dvArA mAnya karma zabda ke artha ko yathAsthAna Age vizepa rUpa
mASTa kreNge| karmavipAka ke viSaya meM vibhinna darzanoM kA mantavya kama aura
karmaphala kA cintana mAnava-jIvana kI sAhajika pravRtti hai  /  pratyeka vyakti
yaha dekhanA cAhatA hai ki vaha jo kucha bhI karatA hai, usakA kyA pAla hotA hai
? isI anubhava ke AdhAra para vaha yaha bhI nizcita karatA hai ki kina phala kI
prApti ke lie use kauna-gA bAyaM karanA caahie| isa prakAra mAnavIya sabhyatA kA
samasta aitihAsika, sAmAjika va dhArmika cintana kisI na kisI rUpa meM karma va
karmaphala ko apanA vicAra-viSaya banAtA calA A rahA hai  /  karma aura
karmaphala-sambandhI cintana kI dRSTi se saMsAra ke sabhI darzanoM ko do bhAgoM
meM vibhakta kiyA jA sakatA hai  /  eka darzana ve haiM jo karmaphala-sambandhI
kAraNa-kArya-paramparA ko isa jIvana taka hI calane vAlI mAnate haiN| meM yaha
vizvAsa nahIM karate ki isa deha ke vinaSTa ho jAne para usake kAryoM ko
paramparA

Page #23 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(23) It continues. According to them, all activities related to life begin with
the combination of the five elements (Panchabhuta) from the time of the being's
conception or birth and end with the destruction of the body at the end of life,
when these activities merge back into the five elements. Philosophies that hold
such beliefs are called materialistic.  In contrast, there is another type of
philosophy that believes that within the body composed of the five elements,
there exists another element - the Jiva or Atma. This Atma is eternal and
infinite. Its taking on and discarding of a particular physical body during its
endless journey through the world is merely an incidental event. The Atma,
through its physical body, constantly creates new karmas through various mental,
verbal, and physical actions. It experiences the fruits of these karmas and
accordingly enters one womb after another until, through these specific actions,
it purifies itself and attains liberation from this cycle of birth and death,
becoming a Siddha. Achieving such liberation or Siddhi is the ultimate goal of
human life. Philosophies that accept such beliefs are called spiritual.  Among
these two types of ideologies, some spiritual philosophers have considered the
Jiva to be not an independent enjoyer of the fruits of karma and have not
considered creation to be eternal, but rather to have originated at some point
in time. They have also established a definite time for destruction along with
creation and have connected God in some form or another to its creation and
destruction. The viewpoint of some of them is as follows:  The Nyaya philosophy
states that the fruits of good and bad karma are received through the
inspiration of God. God is the creator, sustainer, and destroyer of the
universe. He does not create the world from nothing, but rather from eternal
atoms, space, time, air, mind, and souls. He is also the sustainer of the world,
as the world continues to exist according to his will. He is also the destroyer
of the world, because whenever the world needs to be destroyed for religious
purposes...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 ( 23 ) Age calatI hai  /  unake anusAra jIvana sambandhI samasta pravRttiyoM
paMcabhUtoM ke saMyoga se prANI ke garbha yA janmakAla se prArambha hotI haiM
aura Ayu ke anta meM zarIra ke binaSTa ho jAne para punaH paMcabhUtoM meM milane
se una' pravRttiyoM kA avasAna ho jAtA hai  /  aisI mAnyatA vAle darzanoM ko
bhautikavAdI kahA jAtA hai  /  isake viparIta dusare prakAra ke darzana ne hai,
jo mAnate haiM ki paMcabhUtAtmaka zarIra ke bhItara eka anya tattva-jIna yA
gAtmA vidyamAna hai. aura vaha anAdiananta hai| usakA anAdikAlIna sAMsArika
yAtrA ke bIca kisI vizeSa bhautika zarIra ko dhAraNa karanA aura use tyAganA eka
avAntara ghaTanA mAtra hai  /  AtmA hI apane bhautika zarIra ke mAdhyama se nAnA
prakAra kI mAnasika, bAcika aura kAvika kriyAoM dvArA nitya naye saMskAra
utpanna karatI hai. unake phaloM ko bhAMgatI hai aura tadanusAra eka yoni ko
chor3akara dUsarI yoni meM praveza karatI rahatI hai, jaba taka ki yaha vizeSa
kriyAoM dvArA apane ko zuddha kara isa janma-maraNarUpa saMsAra se mukta hokara
siddha nahIM ho jAtI hai  /  aisI hI mukti mA siddhi prApta karanA mAnava jIvana
kA parama uddezya hai  /  isa prakAra kI mAnyatAoM ko svIkAra karane vAle
darzana adhyAtmavAdI kahalAte haiM  /  ina donoM prakAra kI vicAradhArAoM meM se
kucha eka adhyAtmavAdI dArzanikoM ne karmaphala-prApti ke bAre meM jIya ko
svataMtra bhoktA na honA tathA suSTi ko anAdi na mAnakara kisI samaya sRSTi kA
utpanna honA mAnA hai aura utpatti ke sAtha vinAza kA bhI samaya nizcita karake
usakI utpatti aura vinAza ke lie kisI na kisI rUpa meM Izvara kA sambandha jor3a
diyA hai| unameM se kucha eka kA dRSTikoNa isa prakAra hai nyAyadarzana meM kahA
gayA hai ki acche-bure karma ke phala Izvara kI preraNA se milate haiN| Izvara
jagan kA Adi sarjaka, pAlaka aura saMhAraka hai| vaha zUnya se saMsAra kI suSTi
nahIM karatA varan nitya paramANuoM, dika. kAla, AphApA, mana tathA AtmAoM se
usakI saSTi karatA hai| vaha saMsAra kA poSaka bhI hai, kyoMki usakI icchAnusAra
saMsAra kAyama rahatA hai| vaha saMsAra kA saMhAraka bhI hai  /  kyoMki jaba-
jaba dhArmika prayojanoM ke lie saMsAra ke saMhAra

Page #24 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(24) When the need arises, he also destroys. Although God has to become
according to the sins and virtues of man in order to provide fruits, yet he is
omnipotent. Man is the doer of his own actions, but he acts under the influence
or instigation of God according to his adrishta (past karma). Thus, God is the
administrator of the karma of the beings of the world, both human and non-human,
the giver of the fruits of their karma and the judge of their happiness and
sorrow.  According to the Vaisheshika Darshan, the creator of the universe and
the world is Maheshwar. By his will, the universe is created and by the same
will, it is destroyed. When he wills, the universe comes into being, so that all
beings can enjoy happiness and sorrow according to their karma, and when he
wills, he folds up that net. This flow of creation and dissolution has been
going on since time immemorial. Sridhi means the destruction of the old order
and the creation of the new. Keeping in mind the past karma of the beings (past
sins and virtues), God creates a new creation. Brahma or Vishwatma, who is the
repository of infinite knowledge, detachment and wealth, rotates the cycle of
the universe in such a way that beings experience happiness and sorrow according
to their past dharma and adharma.  1 In Yoga Darshan, the manifestation of
nature from the foundation of God is considered to be the spread of the inert
world. In Yoga Darshan, God is the Supreme Person, who is above all beings and
free from all defects, he is eternal, omnipresent, omniscient, omnipotent and
the perfect Supreme Being. All the beings of the world suffer due to ignorance,
ego, desire, attachment-aversion and attachment to life (fear of death), etc.
The universe is created by the union of Purusha and Prakriti and is destroyed by
their separation. Prakriti and Purusha are two different elements. Their union
or separation cannot happen naturally. For this, one has to assume an efficient
cause, which is infinitely intelligent and can bring about the union or
separation of Purusha from Prakriti according to the adrishta of the beings. The
Jivatma or Purusha does not know his own self, therefore it is necessary to
believe in an omniscient Supreme Being who...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 ( 24 ) kI AvazyakatA par3atI hai, taba-taba vaha saMhAra bhI karatA hai|
yadyapi phala pradAna hetu Izvara ko manuSya ke pApa aura puNya ke anusAra
bananA par3atA hai| phira bhI yaha sarvazaktimAna hai| manuSya apane karmoM kA
kartA to hai, lekina vaha Izvara ke dvArA apane adRSTa ( atIta karma ) ke
anusAra prerita yA prayojita hokara karma karatA hai  /  isa prakAra Izvara
saMsAra ke manuSyoM evaM manuSyetara jIvoM kA karmavyavasthApaka hai, unake
karma kA phaladAtA aura sukha-dukha kA nirNAyaka hai  /  vaizeSikadarzana ke
anusAra sRSTi aura saMsAra kA kartA mahezvara hai| usakI icchA se saMsAra kI
sRSTi hotI hai aura usI ko icchA se pralaya hotA hai  /  usakI icchA ho, taba
saMsAra bana jAnA hai, jisase sabhI jIva apane-apane karmAnusAra sukha-duHkha kA
bhoga kara sakeM aura jana usakI icchA hotI hai, taba vaha usa jAla ko sameTa
letA hai  /  yaha sRSTi aura laya kA pravAha anAdi kAla se calA A rahA hai|
sRddhi kA artha hai, purAtana krama kA dhvaMsa kara navIna kA nirmANa  /  jIvoM
ke prAktana karma (purvakRta pApa aura puNya ) ko dhyAna meM rakhate hue Izvara
eka nava sRSTi kI racanA karatA hai  /  brahma yA vizvAtmA jo ananta jJAna,
vairAgya aura aizvarya kA bhaNDAra hai| brahmANDa ke cakra ko isa prakAra
ghumAtA hai ki purAkRta dharma aura adharma ke anusAra jIvoM ko sukha-duHkha kA
bhoga hotA rahatA hai  /  1 yogadarzana meM Izvara ke adhiSThAna se prakRti kA
pariNAma jar3a jagat kA phailAva mAnA hai| yogadarzana meM Izvara parama puruSa
haiM, jo sabhI jIvoM se Upara aura sabhI doSoM se rahita hai, vaha nitya,
sarvavyApI, sarvajJa, sarvazaktimAn aura pUrNa paramAtmA hai| saMsAra ke sabhI
jIva avidyA, ahaMkAra, vAsanA, rAga-dveSa aura abhiniveza ( mRtyubhaya) Adi ke
kAraNa duHkha pAte haiM  /  puruSa aura prakRti ke saMyoga se saMsAra kI sRSTi
hotI haiM aura donoM ke viccheda se pralaya hotA hai  /  prakRti aura puruSa do
bhinna tattva haiN| donoM kA saMyoga yA viyoga svabhAvataH nahIM ho sakatA hai|
isake lie eka ainA nimitta kAraNa mAnanA par3atA hai jo ananta buddhimAna ho
aura jIvoM ke adRSTa ke anusAra prakRti se puruSa kA saMyoga yA viyoga karA sake
/  jIvAtmA yA puruSa svayaM apanA aSTa nahIM jAnatA, isalie eka aise sarvajJa
paramAtmA ko mAnanA Ava

Page #25 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
It is necessary that there be a being who, according to the unseen karmas of
living beings, creates or destroys the world, causing the union and separation
of purusha and prakriti. The one who accomplishes this task is God, without
whose inspiration nature cannot develop the world in a way that is conducive to
the self-elevation and liberation of living beings.  In Vedanta philosophy, Sri
Shankaracharya, in his Brahma Sutra Bhashya, based on the Upanishads, has
established Brahma as the cause of creation. The description of the creator in
different Upanishads, though not identical, generally agrees that the soul
(Brahma or Atman) is both the efficient and material cause of the world.
Regarding the beginning of creation, the opinion of most Upanishads is that in
the beginning (Adi) there was only the soul. It occurred to him, "I will become
many, I will create the universe," and creation took place. Brahma creates this
universe through the power of Maya, which resides within him.  Contrary to all
these hypotheses, Jain philosophy does not consider God to be the instigator of
karma for the purpose of making living beings experience the fruits of their
actions, because just as a living being is free to perform actions, so too is it
free to experience their fruits. If God were considered the giver of karmic
fruits, then the good and bad actions performed by the living being itself would
be rendered futile. Because if we perform bad actions, can anyone, no matter how
powerful, make us happy? Similarly, if we perform good actions, can he make us
unhappy? If so, then performing good actions and fearing bad actions is
pointless for us, because the fruits of our actions are not under our control.
And if it is true that we must experience the fruits of our good and bad actions
ourselves, then the idea of divine intervention is pointless, because the living
being itself experiences the fruits of its own actions.  "Always, eternally,
one's own actions are the cause of one's birth, death, life, sorrow, and
happiness. It is a falsehood that another is the cause of one's birth, death,
life, sorrow, and happiness."

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zyaka hai, jo jIvoM ke adRSTAnusAra saMsAra kI racanA yA saMhAra kara puruSa-
prakRti kA saMyoga-viyoga karAnA rahe  /  jo yaha kArya sampanna karatA hai,
vaha Izvara hai, jisakI preraNA ke binA prakRti jagat kA usa rUpa meM vikAsa
nahIM kara sakatI, jo jIvoM kI Atmonnati tathA mukti ke lie anukUla ho  /
vedAMtadarzana meM zrI zaMkarAcArya ne brahmasUtra bhApya meM upaniSad ke AdhAra
para brahma ko sRSTi kA kAraNa siddha kiyA hai  /  bhinna-bhinna upaniSadoM meM
jo rASTri kA varNana kiyA gayA hai. vaha yadyapi eka jaisA nahIM hai, parantu
isa viSaya ma prAya: sabhI ekamata haiM ki AtmA (brahma yA san) hI jagata ko
nimitta aura pAdAnadonoM hI kAraNa haiM  /  suSTi kI Adi ke viSaya meM adhikAMza
upaniSadoM kA mata kucha isa prakAra hai ki sabase pahale (Adi meM) AtmA mAtra
thA  /  usameM gaMgAma huA ki maiM egemane honAU zani kI racanA karU; aura ma
sRSTi kI racanA ho gaI  /  brahma isa sRSTi kA sRjana apane meM vidyamAna mAyA
zakti se karatA hai| ina saba parikalpanAoM ke viparIta jainadarzana jIyoM se
karmaphala bhogavAne ke lie Izvara ko karma kA preraka nahIM mAnatA hai, kyoMki
jaise jIva karma karane meM svataMtra hai, bama hI usakA phala bhogane meM bhI
svataMtra hai| yadi Izvara ko karmahala kA pradAtA mAnA jAye to svayaM jIva
dvArA kRtaM zubhAzubha karma niSphala sAbita hoMge  /  kyoMki hama bure karma
kareM aura kAI dvArA vyakti cAhe vaha kitanA hI zaktizAlI kyoM na ho kyA hameM
sukhI kara sakatA hai ? isI prakAra hama acche kama kareM to kyA vaha hamArA
burA kara sakatA hai ? yadi hAM, to phira acche karma karanA aura bure karmoM se
DaranA hamArA vyartha hai, kyoMki unake phala kA bhoga svayaM jIva ke adhIna
nahIM hai aura yadi yaha sahI hai ki hameM apane acche-bure karmoM kA phala
svayaM bhoganA par3egA to para ke hastakSepa kI kalpanA vyathaM haiM, kyoMki
jIva svayaM apane kutakarmoM kA phala bhogatA hai sarva sadaiva niyataM bhavati
svakIya,kodayAnmaraNa-jIvita-duHkha-saukhyam  /  azaramametadiha yattu paraM
parastha, kuripumAn maraNajIvita duHkha-saulyam  /  /

Page #26 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(26) Therefore, to believe that anyone, even God, is the creator of the
happiness and sorrow, life and death of others is merely an imagination, pure
ignorance. Acharya Amitagati has clearly stated this:  " *Self-created karma,
whatever is done by the soul in the past, its good and bad fruits are received
by itself.* " *If it is clearly received from another, then self-created karma
is meaningless.* " *Leaving aside the karma done by oneself, no one gives
anything to anyone.* " *Thinking and contemplating, one should abandon the idea
that another gives, and be free from the rest.*  Even when tested by the
yardstick of logic, the creator of the world, God, etc., is not proven. So many
questions arise about him that neither the existence of the world is proven nor
is it possible for an infinite variety of the world to be created by one. In
fact, every being is the creator of its own individual world. That is why
Jainism does not consider God as the creator of the universe, because the
universe is eternal and infinite, it has never been created in a new form, and
since it is itself subject to change, it does not require the support of God.
**Objections and Refutations to the Karma Theory**  There are some objections to
the Karma theory from those who believe in God as the creator or motivator.
These can be divided into the following categories:  I (1) Just as small and big
things in the world, like palaces and houses, are created by someone, so there
must be a creator of the entire universe, which appears in the form of work. (2)
All beings perform good and bad karma, but no one desires the fruit of bad
karma, and karma itself is inert and unable to bear fruit without the motivation
of any conscious being. Therefore, God should be considered as the cause of the
experience of the fruits of karma.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 ( 26 ) ataeva kisI ko cAhe vaha Izvara hI kyoM na ho, dUsaroM ke sukha-duHkha
kA jIvana-maraNa kA karttA mAnanA mAtra eka kalpanA hai| ajJAna mAtra hai |
AcArya amitagati ne isako spaSTa karate hue kahA hai svayaM kRtaM karma
yadAtmanA purA phalaM sadIyaM labhate zubhAzubham  /  " pareNa dattaM yadi
labhyate sphuTaM svayaM kRtaM karma nirarthakaM tadA || 1 nijAjitaM karma vihAya
dehino, na kopi kasyApi dadAti kiMcana  /  vicArayanneva mananyamAnasaH: paro
dadAtIti vimucya zeSIm  /  tarka kI kasauTI para kase jAne para bhI saMsAra kA
sraSTA Izvara Adi koI siddha nahIM hotA hai  /  usake viSaya meM utane prazna
uTha khar3e hote hai ki na koI jagat kA majaka siddha hotA hai aura na asaMkhya
prakAra kA jagat vaicitrya kimI ekaH ke dvArA rathA jAnA saMbhava hai| vastutaH
pratyeka prANI apane vyaktigata jagat kA svayaM sruSTA hai  /  isIlie
jainadarzana Izvarako sRSTi kA adhiSThAtA bhI nahIM gAnanA hai, kyoMki sRSTi
anAdi ananta ho kabhI apUrva rUpa meM utpanna nahIM huI hai tathA vaha bhI
svayaM pariNaganazIla hone se Izvara ke adhiSThAna kI bhI apekSA nahIM rakhatI
hU~  /  se karmasiddhAnta para AkSepa aura parihAra karmasiddhAnta para Izvara
ko sRSTikartA yA preraka mAnane vAloM ke kucha AkSepa haiM  /  jinako nimnalikhi
phona dhakAroM meM vibhAjita kiyA jA sakatA haiM I ( 1 ) mahala makAna Adi vizva
kI choTI bar3I cIjeM, jaise kisI vyakti ke dvArA nirmita hotI haiM to pUrNa
jagat jo kArya rUpa dikhatA hai usakA bhI utpAdaka koI avazya honA cAhie  /  (2)
sabhI prANI acche-bure karma karate haiM, parantu bure karma kA phala koI nahIM
cAhatA aura karma svayaM jar3a hone se binA kisI caina kI preraNA ke phala dene
meM asamartha hai| isalie Izvara ko karmaphala bhogavAne meM kAraNa rUpa se
karmacAdiyoM ko mAnanA cAhie  /

Page #27 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(3) God should be a being who is eternally liberated and possesses some special
qualities beyond liberated beings. Therefore, the belief of karma theory that
everyone becomes liberated, i.e., God, upon liberation from karma is not
correct. Jain objections: We do not agree. (1) This world has always existed, it
was not created at any point in time. Changes certainly keep happening. Many
changes are such that they require the effort of a human or other living being,
and other changes are seen that do not require anyone's effort. They are formed
automatically due to various combinations and separations of inert elements,
therefore there is no need or utility in considering God as the creator. (8) It
is true that karma is inert and beings do not want the fruits of every bad karma
they do, but it should be noted that due to the association of the living being
(jīva), a kind of power is generated in karma, which causes it to manifest its
good and bad consequences at the appointed time. Karma theory does not believe
that inert karma is capable of producing results without the connection of the
conscious being, but it believes that there is no need to assume the inspiration
of a God-like conscious being for the results to occur, because all living
beings are conscious. And they develop a mind according to the karma they
perform, which causes them to perform such actions that lead them to experience
the fruits of their karma, even if they do not desire the fruits of bad karma.
Performing karma and not desiring its fruits are two different situations,
simply not wanting it cannot stop the fruits of the performed karma from being
experienced. When the materials are gathered, the work starts happening on its
own, like a person standing in the sun, feeling thirsty, and wishing not to feel
thirsty, can thirst be stopped in any way? If the theistic God-believers say
that karma manifests its fruits on beings due to the will of God, then the
answer is that at the time of performing karma, such impressions are left in the
jīva according to the results, which inspire the jīva to experience the fruits
of karma on its own.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (3) Izvara eka aisA vyakti honA cAhie jo sadA mukta ho aura mukta jIvoM kI
apekSA bhI usameM kucha vizeSatA ho| ata: karmavAda kA yaha mAnanA ThIka nahIM
ki karma se chUTa jAne para sabhI mukta, arthAt Izvara ho jAte haiN| jA AkSepoM
ke : nAni karAra kara hai. . (1) yaha jagat sadA se hai, kisI samaya nayA nahIM
banA hai | parivartana avazya hote rahate haiN| aneka parivartana aise hote haiM
ki jinameM kisI manuSya Adi prANivarga ke prayatna kI apekSA hotI hai aura
dUsare aise bhI parivartana dekhe jAte haiM, jinameM kisI ke prayatna kI apekSA
nahIM bhI rahatI hai| ve jar3a tattvoM ke taraha-taraha ke saMyogoM-viyogoM se
svata: svayameva banate rahate haiM, isalie Izvara ko sRSTikartA mAnane kI koI
jarUrata nahIM hai aura na upayogitA hai| (8) yaha ThIka hai ki karma jar3a haiM
aura prANI apane kiye hara bure karma kA phala nahIM cAhate haiM, parantu yaha
dhyAna rakhanA cAhie ki jIva (vetana) ke saMyoga se karma meM eka prakAra kI
aisI zakti paidA ho jAtI hai ki jirAse vaha apane acche cure vipAkoM ko niyata
samaya para prakaTa karatA hai  /  karma siddhAna graha nahIM mAnatA ki cetana
ke sambandha ke sivAya hI jaDakarma phala bane meM samartha haiM, parantu yaha
mAnanA hai ki phala dene ke lie IzvararUpa cenana kI preraNA mAnane kI koI
jarUrata nahIM hai, kyoMki sabhI jIva cetana hai aura ve jaisA karma karate
haiM, usake anusAra unakI vaisI buddhi bana jAtI hai, jisase bure kama ke phala
kI icchA na rahane para bhI va aisA kRtya kara baiThate haiM ki jisase unako
apane karmAnusAra pAna mila jAtA hai  /  karma karanA aura phala na cAhanA. ye
do alaga-alaga sthitiyAM haiM, kevala cAha na hone se hI kiye gaye karma kA
phala milane se ruka nahIM sakatA hai  /  sAmagrI ikaTThI ho gaI ho to kArya,
Apa-hI-Apa hone lagatA hai, jaise-eka manuSya dhUpa meM khar3A ho. garaga cIja
svAnA ho aura cAhe ki pyAsa na lage to kyA kisI taraha pyAsa ruka sakatI hai?
yadi Izvarakata tvavAdI yaha kaheM ki Izvara kI icchA se prerita hokara karma
apanA phala prANiyoM para prakaTa karate hai to isakA uttara yaha hai ki karma
karane ke samaya pariNAmAnusAra joba meM aise saMskAra par3a jAte haiM ki jinase
prerita hokara kA jIva kama ke phala ko Apa hI bhogate haiM  /

Page #28 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(3)  Jiva and Ishvara - both are conscious, then what is the difference between
them? The only difference can be that all the powers of the jiva are covered by
the karmic coverings, but not those of Ishvara. However, when the jiva removes
the coverings through its own efforts, all its powers become fully illuminated.
There is no difference between jiva and Ishvara. If the difference remains even
after the removal of the karmic coverings, then what is liberation? The
difference is limited to the cycle of samsara, not beyond. Therefore, there is
no objection in believing that all liberated jivas are Ishvara. It is not
appropriate to say that Ishvara should be only one, just on the basis of
imagination. There are many souls and they are all Ishvara from the tattvic
point of view. They are seen as small and big jivas only due to the karmic
coverings. This principle gives full strength to everyone to manifest their
Ishvaratva and inspires them to make efforts.  The existence of the soul - seven
proofs  Who binds karma and who experiences its fruits? The answer is the soul.
While considering the soul-substance, it is necessary to accept the existence of
the soul, otherwise the discussion of karma will not be considered logical. The
independent existence of the soul is proved by the following seven proofs:  (1)
The proof of self-awareness, (2) The absence of contradictory evidence, (3) The
proof of the negator from the negation, (4) The proof of the effect from the
cause, (5) The scriptural evidence, (6) The consensus of modern scholars, (7)
Rebirth. The discussion of these proofs is as follows:

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (3) Ipavara aura jIna--donoM cetana haiM, phira unameM antara hI kyA hai ?
antara sirpha itanA hI ho sakatA hai ki jIva kI sabhI zaktiyA~ AvaraNoM se virI
huI haiM aura Izvara kI nahIM, parantu jisa samaya jIva apane puruSArthaM dvArA
AvaraNoM ko haTA detA hai, usa samaya usakI sabhI zaktiyoM pUrNa rUpa se
prakAgina ho jAtI haiM  /  annaH jIpa aura Izvara meM viSamatA kA kAraNa nahIM
rahatA hai| viSamatA ke kAraNa aupAdhika karmoM ke haTa jAne para bhI yadi
viSamatA banI rahI to phira mukti hI kyA hai ? viSamatA saMsAra caka hI sImita
hai, Age nahIM  /  isalie yaha mAnane meM koI Apatti nahIM ki sabhI mukta jIva
Izvara hI haiM  /  kevala kalpanA ke bala para yaha kaha denA ki Ipavara eka hI
honA cAhie, ucita nahIM hai| AtmA meM aneka haiM aura ve sabhI tAttika dRSTi se
IzabarahI haiM kevala jandhana ke kAraNa hI choTe-bar3e jIva rUpa meM dekhI jAtI
hai  /  yaha siddhAnta sabhI ko apanA Izvaratva prakaTa karane ke lie pUrNa bala
detA hai aura puruSArtha karane kI preraNA detA hai| AzmA kA astitva-sAta
pramANa karma kA bandha kauna karatA hai aura usakA phala kauna bhogatA hai, isa
prazna kA uttara hai AmA  /  atApatra nama-tattva ke bAre meM vicAra karane ke
sAthasAtha AtmA ke astitva ko mAnanA jarUrI hai, nabhI karma kA vivecana yukti.
saMgata mAnA jAegA | AtmA kA svataMtra astitva nimnalikhina mAtra pramANoM se
siddha hotA hai (1) svasaMvedana-rUpa sAdhaka pramANa, (2) bAdhaka pramANa kA
abhAva, (3) niSedha se niSedhakartA kI siddhi (4) taka, (5) zAstra-pramANa, (6)
Adhunika vidvAnoM kI sammati, (7) punarjanma  /  ukA pramANoM kA vivecana
kramazaH isa prakAra hai

Page #29 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(1) **Self-awareness as evidence -** Although all embodied beings are more or
less enveloped by the veil of ignorance and doubt their own existence, when
their intellect becomes even slightly stable, they experience the realization,
"I am not." This is contradicted by the certainty, "I am." This is what Shri
Shankaracharya also said, "All souls experience their existence, not 'I am
not'." This certainty is called self-awareness or self-realization.  (2)
**Refutation of obstructive evidence -** There is no evidence that negates the
existence of the soul. If it is doubted that the inability of the mind and
senses to perceive the soul is obstructive evidence, then the solution is
simple. Because obstructive evidence is considered to be that which has the
power to know the object and, even when all other materials are present, cannot
perceive it. For example, the eye can see an earthen pot. But if, even when
light, proximity, etc. are present, it does not see the pot, then it should be
considered an obstruction to that object.  The senses are all physical. Their
power of perception is finite. They can only superficially know the terrestrial,
nearby, and fixed objects from among physical objects. Microscopes, etc. are
also in a similar state. They have so far only been proven to work on physical
objects, and even then not completely. Therefore, their inability to know the
non-physical, non-material soul cannot be called obstructive. Even though the
mind is subtle and physical, it becomes a slave to the senses - one after
another, it runs around like monkeys in many objects, then Rajas and Tamas
qualities are generated in it. The Sattvic quality does not manifest. This is
also mentioned in the Gita.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (1) svasaMvevama-kapa sAdhaka pramANa-yadyapi sabhI deha-dhArI ajAna ke AvaraNa
se nyUnAdhika rUpa se ghire hue haiM aura isase ye apane hI astitva kA sandeha
karate haiM, tathApi jisa samaya unakI buddhi thor3I-sI bhI sthira ho jAtI hai,
usa samaya unako yaha sphuraNA hotI hai ki 'maiM yaha sphU manAI hotI ki 'maiM
nahIM huuN'| isa se ulTA yaha nizcaya hotA hai 'maiM hU~' | isI bAta ko zrI
zaMkarAcArya ne bhI kahA hai sarva AtmA'stitvaM pratyeti na nAhamasmIti''-isI
nizzya ko svasaMvedana yA Atmanizcaya kahate haiM  /  (2) bAdhaka pramANa kA
abhASa-aisA koI pramANa nahIM jo AtmA ke astitva kA niSedha karatA ho  /  ima
para yadi yaha zaMkA kI jAye ki mana aura indriyoM ke dvArA AtmA kA grahaNa na
honA usakA bAdhaka pramANa hai, to isakA samAdhAna sahaja hai| kyoMki bAdhaka
pramANa vahI mAnA jAtA hai, jo uga viSaya ko jAnane kI zakti rakhatA ho aura
anya saba sAmagrI maujUda hone para bhI use grahaNa na kara ske| udAharaNArtha-
A~kha miTTI ke ghar3e ko dekha sakatI hai| parantu prakAza, samIgatA Adi sAmagrI
rahane para bhI baha ghar3e ko na dele, usa samaya use usa viSaya kI bAdhaka
samajhanA caahie| indriyA~ sabhI bhautika hai  /  unako grahaNazakti parimita
hai| ve bhautika padArthoM meM se bhI sthala, nikaTavartI aura niyata viSayoM ko
hI Upara-Upara se jAna sakatI haiM  /  sUkSmadarzaka yantroM Adi sAdhanoM kI bhI
sahI dazA hai| ve abhI taka bhItiyA padAthoM meM hI kAryakArI siddha hue haiM
aura unameM bhI pUrNa rUpa se nahIM  /  isalie unakA abhauliva-amUrta AtmA ko na
jAna sakanA bAdhaka nahIM kahA jA sakatA hai| mana mukSma bhautika hone para bhI
indriyoM kA dAsa bana jAtA hai-eka ke pIche eka, isa taraha aneka viSayoM meM
bandaroM ke samAna daur3a lagAtA phiratA hai taba usameM rAjasa aura tAmasa
vRtiyAM paidA hotI haiN| sAttvika bhAva prakaTa nahIM ho pAtA hai  /  yahI bAta
gItA meM bhI kahI gayI hai 1 brahmabhASya 1-1-1

Page #30 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
"The senses wander, and the mind follows them, just as the wind carries a boat.
When the mind is free to roam, it takes the intellect along with it."
"Therefore, the soul does not shine brightly in a restless mind. It is observed
that just as a mirror possesses the power to reflect, but when it becomes
tarnished, it cannot reflect any object, similarly, the unstable mind, which
runs after external objects, does not perceive the soul, not because of any
obstacle, but simply due to its own weakness."  "Thus, it is proven that the
mind, senses, microscopes, and all other instruments, being material, do not
have the power to negate the soul."  "(3) Proof of Existence from Negation -
Some people argue that we cannot be certain about the soul, but only experience
its absence at times, because sometimes thoughts arise in the mind like 'I am
not' etc. However, they should understand that this very thought proves the
existence of the soul, because how can such a thought arise if there is no soul?
The one who is negating is the soul itself. Shankaracharya has stated this in
his commentary on the Brahma Sutras: 'The one who negates is indeed the self,
its own nature.' (2.3.137)"  "(4) Logic - This also supports the independent
existence of the soul. It states that in the world, every object has an
opposite. For example, darkness has light as its opposite, heat has cold, and
pleasure has pain. Similarly, there must be a conscious entity that is the
opposite of inert matter."

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 indriyANAM hi caratA mammano'nuvidhIyate  /  tavasya harasi prA vAyu
vaniyAmbhasi  / ' mana jaba svatantra vicaratI huI indrimoM meM jisa kisI eka
bhI indriya ke pIche laga jAtA hai, to usakI buddhi ko bhI apane sAtha bahAkara
le jAtA hai, jaise nAva ko pavana  /  . isalie caMcala mana meM AtmA kI sphuraNA
bhI nahIM hotI  /  yaha dekhI huI bAta hai ki pratibimba grahaNa karane kI zakti
jima darpaNa meM vidyamAna hai, vahIM jaba malina ho jAtA hai, taba usameM kisI
vastu kA pratibimba vyakta nahIM hotaa| isase yaha bAta siddha hai ki bAharI
viSayoM meM daur3a lagAne vAle asthira mana me AgA kA grahaNa na honA, usakA
bAdhava nahIM, kintu mana kI azakti mAtra hai| isa prakAra vicAra karane se yaha
pramANita hotA hai ki mana', indriyAM, sUkSmadarzakA-yantra Adi sabhI sAdhAna
bhautika hone se AtmA kA niSedha karane kI zakti nahIM rakhate 1 (3) niSedha se
niSedhaphattA kI siddhi-kucha loga yaha kahate haiM ki hameM AtmA kA nizcaya
nahIM hogA, balki kabhI-kabhI usake abhAva kI sphuraNA ho jAlI hai, kyoMki kisI
samaya mana meM aisI kalAnA hone lagatI hai ki 'maiM nahIM hU~ ityAdi  /
parantu unako jAnanA cAhie ki unakI yaha kalpanA hI AtmA ke astisya ko siddha
karatI hai, kyoMki AtmA na ho to aisI kalpanA kA prAdurbhAka kaise ho? jo
niSedha kara rahA hai, vaha svayaM hI AtmA hai| isa bAta ko zaMkarAcArya ne
apane brahmasUtra ke bhASya meM kahA hai-. pa evaM hi nirAkartA tavevahi tamya
svarUpam  /  2 / 3 / 137 (4) tarka-yaha bhI AtmA ke svatantra astitva kI puSTi
karatA hai| yaha kahatA hai ki jagata meM sabhI padArthoM kA virodhI koI na koI
dekhA jAtA hai| jaise aMdhakAra kA virodhI prakAza, uSNatva kA virodhI zItatva
aura sukha kA virodhI duHkha, isI taraha jar3a padArtha kA virodhI koI tastra
honA cAhie  /  yaha 1 gItA, adhyAya 2, phloka 67  /

Page #31 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
( 31 ) Logic is not invalid in the absence of proof, but rather such logic is a
sign of pure intellect. That which is the opposite of inert is conscious or the
soul. — It can be argued that it is not appropriate to consider inert and
conscious as two opposing independent principles, but it is appropriate to
consider both inert and conscious powers in one type of fundamental substance.
When the power of consciousness begins to develop, it is expressed, at which
time the power of inertness disappears. All beings with conscious power are
simply names for the development of inert matter! There is no existence of
sages, but due to the feeling of self-power, they appear in the form of living
beings. This is the same view of Hegel and other Western scholars. But it is not
impossible to refute this adverse argument. It is seen that when one power
emerges in an object, the other opposing power disappears in it. But the power
that disappears is not forever, it will emerge again when favorable conditions
are created. Similarly, the power that has reappeared is not forever. It
disappears when unfavorable conditions are encountered. For example, take the
molecules of water, when they get heat, they turn into steam, then when cold and
other conditions are encountered, they rain down in the form of water and when
they become more cold, they leave the liquid form and acquire density in the
form of ice. All inert matter today Similarly, if we consider both inertness and
consciousness as two powers in one fundamental principle, then evolution will
not be able to stand because the beings that are considered conscious today due
to the development of the power of consciousness, will become inert again when
that power develops, and the stones, etc., which appear in the form of
inertness, will also become conscious someday, and the humans, animals, birds,
etc., who appear in the conscious form, will also become inert someday.
Therefore, it is right to consider inert and conscious as two independent
principles, rather than considering both opposing powers of inertness and
consciousness in one substance.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 ( 31 ) tarka nila mA apramANa nahIM hai, balki isa prakAra kA tarka zuddha
buddhi kA cihna hai  /  jo tattva jar3a kA virodhI hai, vahIM cetana yA AtmA hai
/  -- isa para yaha tarka kiyA jA sakatA hai ki jar3a-cetana ye do virodhI
svatantra tattva mAnanA ucita nahIM, parantu kisI eka hI prakAra ke mUla
padArtha meM jar3a va cetana taptva donoM zaktiyA~ mAnanA ucita hai| jisa samaya
cetanatva zakti kA vikAsa hone lagatA hai- usako abhivyakti hotI hai usa samaya
jar3atva zakti kA tirobhAva rahatA hai| sabhI cetana zakti vAle prANI jar3a
padArtha ke vikAsa ke hI nAma haiM! seja nivAsa astitva nahIM rakhate kintu sva
zakti kA bhAva hone se jIvadhArI rUpa meM dikhAI dete haiN| aisA hI mantavya
hegala Adi pazcimI vidvAnoM kA hai  /  parantu isa pratikUla tarka kA nirAkaraNa
azakya nahIM hai  /  yaha dekhA jAtA hai ki kisI vastu meM jaba eka zakti kA
prAdurbhAva hotA haiM, taba usameM dUsarI virodhI zakti kA tirobhAtra ho jAtA
hai  /  parantu jo zakti tirohita ho jAtI hai, vaha sadA ke lie nahIM, kisI
samaya anukUla nirmita milane para usakA prAdurbhAva ho jAtA hai| isI prakAra jo
zakti punaH prAdurbhUta huI hotI hai, vaha bhI sadA ke lie nahIM  /  pratikUla
nimitta milate hI usakA tirobhAva ho jAtA hai, udAharaNArthaM pAnI ke aNuoM ko
lIjie, ke garamI pAte hI bhApa ke rUpa meM pariNata ho jAte haiM, phira zaitya
Adi nimitta milate hI pAnI ke rUpa meM barasate haiM aura adhika zItala hone
para drava-rUpa ko chor3a barpha ke rUpa meM ghanatva ko prApta kara lete haiM
/  saba jar3atva padArtha Aja isI taraha yadi jar3atva cetanatva donoM zaktiyoM
ko kisI eka mUlatattvagata mAna leM to vikAsavAda hI na Thahara sakegA kyoMki
cetanatva zakti ke vikAsa ke kAraNa jo Aja vetana (prANI) samajhe jAte haiM, ve
hI zakti kA vikAsa hone para phira jar3a ho jAyeMge, jo pASANa Adi jar3a-rUpa
meM dikhAI dete haiM, ve bhI kabhI cetana ho jAe~ge aura cetanarUpa se dikhAI
dene vAle manuSya, pazu-pakSI Adi prANI kabhI jar3a-rUpa bhI ho jAeMge 1 ataeva
eka hI padArtha meM jar3atva va cetanatva -- donoM virodhinI zaktiyoM ko na
mAnakara jar3a va celana- do svatantra tattvoM ko hI mAnanA ThIka hai  /

Page #32 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(32) (5) **Scriptural Authority** - Many ancient scriptures advocate the
independent existence of the soul. Those scriptural scholars who have
investigated the subject of the soul with great peace and seriousness, if we
dismiss their scriptural experiences without experiencing them ourselves, whose
fault is it? Nowadays, we see many great souls who have spent their lives in
contemplation of the soul. If we do not accept their pure experiences based on
our own deluded experiences, then the deficiency lies with us. Ancient
scriptures and contemporary experienced great souls are selflessly revealing the
existence of the soul. (6) **Agreement of Modern Scientists** - Nowadays, people
often want to know the opinion of scientific scholars to clarify every subject.
It is true that many Western physicists do not believe in the soul, but they are
doubtful about it. However, there are many great scientists who have spent their
entire lives in the pursuit of physical thought, but their vision has also
reached beyond the physical to the essence of the soul. Among them, Sir Oliver
Lodge and Lord Kelvin are famous in the scientific world. Both these scholars
are in favor of considering the conscious principle as connected to the
material. They have refuted the arguments of materialists with great care. Their
view is that without the independent existence of consciousness, the unique
structure of living beings cannot be formed. I do not consider the brain to be
the root of knowledge, like other materialists, but I consider it to be merely a
means of the emergence of knowledge. The world-renowned scientist Dr. Jagadish
Chandra Bose's research has established that plants also possess memory. Through
his discoveries, he has compelled the scientific world to accept the independent
soul principle. (7) **Rebirth** - There are many questions here that cannot be
fully answered without accepting rebirth.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 ( 32 ) (5) zAstra - prAmANya - aneka purAtana zAstra bhI AtmA ke svatantra
astit kA pratipAdana karate hai  /  jina zAstrakAroM ne bar3I zAnti va
gambhIratA ke sAtha AtmA ke viSaya meM khoja kI hai, unake zAstragata anubhava
ko yadi hama vinA anubhava kiye capalatA se yoM hI hama deM to isameM kSudratA
kisakI ? Ajakala mI aneka mahAtmA aise dekhe jAte haiM ki jinhoMne apanA jIvana
patritratA pUrvaka AtmA ke vicAra meM hI bitaayaa| unake zuddha anubhava ko yadi
hama apane bhrAnta anubhava ke bala para na mAneM to isameM nyUnatA hamArI hI
hai  /  purAtana zAstra aura vartamAna anubhavI mahAtmA nissvArtha bhAva se AtmA
ke astitva ko batalA rahe haiM  /  ( 6 ) Adhunika vaijJAnikoM kI sammati -
Ajakala loga pratyeka viSaya kA khulAsA karane ke lie bahudhA vaijJAnika
vidvAnoM kA vicAra jAnanA cAhate haiM  /  yaha ThIka hai ki aneka pAzcAtya
bhautika vijJAnavizArada AtmA ko nahIM mAnate para usake viSaya meM sandigdha
hai, parantu aise bhI aneka dhurandhara vaijJAnika haiM, jinhoMne apanI sArI Ayu
bhautika cintana kI khoja meM bitAI hai, parantu unakI dRSTi bhUtoM se pare
Atmatattva kI ora bhI phuNcii| unameM se sara AlIvara laoNja aura lAI kelavina
ke nAma vaijJAnika saMsAra meM prasiddha haiM  /  ve donoM vidvAna cetana tattva
ko jar3a se jur3A mAnane ke pakSa meM haiN| unhoMne jahAdiyoM kI yuktiyoM kA
khaNDana bar3I sAvadhAnI se kiyA hai| unakA mantavya hai ki cetana ke svatantra
astitva ke sivAya jIvadhAriyoM ke deha kI vilakSaNa racanA bana nahIM sakatI  /
meM anya bhautikavAdiyoM kI taraha mastiSka ko jJAna kI jar3a nahIM samajhate,
kintu use jJAna ke AvirbhAva kA sAdhana mAtra samajhate haiM  /  saMsAra -
prakhyAta vaijJAnika DA0 jagadIzacandra basu kI khoja se yahA~ taka nizcaya ho
gayA hai ki vanaspatiyoM meM bhI smaraNazakti vidyamAna hai| unhoMne apane
AviSkAroM se svatantra Atmatatva mAnane ke lie vaijJAnika saMsAra ko vivaza kiyA
hai| (7) punarjanma - yahA~ aneka aise prazna haiM, jinakA pUrA samAdhAna
punarjanma mAne binA nahIM hotA  /

Page #33 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(33) Consider The suffering a child endures from the beginning of conception to
birth. Are these the result of the child's actions or those of their parents?
The child has not done anything good or bad during their gestation. If we say it
is the result of the parents' actions, it seems inconsistent, because why should
the child suffer the consequences of their parents' good or bad actions without
reason? To believe that the child experiences all their joys and sorrows without
reason is the height of ignorance, because it is impossible for anything to
happen without a cause. If it is said that the parents' diet, conduct, and
physical and mental states begin to affect the child from the time of
conception, then the question arises again: why did the child get such parents?
And what is the solution to the fact that sometimes the child's abilities are
completely different from those of their parents? Many examples are seen where
the parents are completely illiterate and the child becomes fully educated. In
fact, it is even seen that the child becomes proficient in something that the
parents have absolutely no interest in. This cannot be attributed solely to the
surrounding environment, because even with similar circumstances and equal care,
differences in thought and behavior are seen among many students. If it is said
that this is the result of the child's extraordinary knowledge-fibers, then
there is doubt about this: the child's body is formed from the parents' Shukra
and Shonit, then where did these non-existent knowledge-fibers come from in the
child's brain? Sometimes the parents' intellectual abilities are seen in the
child, it is true, but even in this there is a question: why did such a
fortunate opportunity arise? In some places, it is also seen that the parents'
abilities are very high, and even with their best efforts, the child remains a
simpleton. It is well known that even two children born together are not the
same. Even with equal care from the parents, one is ordinary

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 ( 33 ) pAhIM kare garbha ke prArambha se lekara janma taka bAlaka ko jo-jo
kaSTa bhogane par3ate haiN| ve kyA usa bAlaka kI kRti ke pariNAma haiM yA usake
mAtA-pitA kI kRti ke ? unheM bAlaka kI janma kI kRSi usane garbhAvasthA meM to
acchA-burA kucha bhI kAma nahIM kiyA hai| yadi mAtApitA kI kRti kA pariNAma
kaheM to bhI asaMgata jAna par3atA hai, kyoMki mAlApitA acchA yA burA kucha bhI
kareM, usakA pariNAma bAlaka ko binA kAraNa kyoM bhoganA par3e ? bAlaka jo kucha
sukha-duHkha bhogatA hai, vaha yoM hI binA kAraNa bhogatA hai, yaha mAnanA to
ajJAna kI parAkASThA hai, kyoMki binA kAraNa kisI kArya kA hotA asaMbhava hai|
yadi yaha kahA jAye ki mAtA-pitA ke AhAra-vihAra kA, AcAra-vicAra kA aura
zArIrika-mAnasika avasthAoM kA asara bAlaka para garbhAvasthA se hI par3anA zurU
hotA hai to punaH yaha prazna hotA hai ki bAlaka ko aise mAtA-pitA kA saMyoga
kyoM huA ? aura isakA kyA samAdhAna hai ki kabhI-kabhI bAlaka kI yogyatA mAtA-
pitA se bilakula hI judA prakAra kI hotI hai| aise aneka udAharaNa dekhe jAte
haiM ki mAtA-pitA bilakula apar3ha hote haiM aura bAlaka pUrA zikSita vana jAtA
hai| vizeSa kyA, yahA~ taka dekhA jAtA hai ki kinhIM - kinhIM mAtA-pitAoM kI
ruci jisa bAta para bilakula hI nahIM hotI, usameM bAlaka feahasta ho jAtA hai|
isakA kAraNa kevala Asa-pAsa kI paristhiti hI nahIM mAnI jA sakatI hai, kyoMki
samAna paristhiti aura barAbara dekhabhAla hote hue bhI aneka vidyArthiyoM meM
vicAra aura vyavahAra kI mitratA dekhI jAtI hai  /  yadi kahA jAye ki yaha
pariNAma bAlaka ke adbhuta jJAna- tantuoM kA hai to isa para yaha zaMkA hotI hai
ki bAlaka kI deha mAtA-pitA ke zukazoNita se banI hotI haiM, phira unameM
avidyamAna aise jJAna cantu bAlaka ke mastiSka meM Aye kahA~ se ? kahIM kahIM
mAtA-pitA kI-sI jJAnazakti bAlaka meM dekhI jAto haiM sahI, para isameM bhI
prazna hai ki aisA suyoga kyoM milA ? kisI-kisI jagaha yaha bhI dekhA jAtA hai
ki mAtA-pitA kI yogyatA bahuta bar3hI car3hI hotI hai aura unake sI prayatna
karane para bhI lar3akA ga~vAra hI raha jAtA hai  /  yaha saba to vidita hI hai
ki eka sAtha yugalarUpa se janme hue do bAlaka bhI samAna nahIM hote| mAtA-pitA
kI dekhabhAla barAbara hone para bhI eka sAdhAraNa

Page #34 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
This one lives and that one goes far ahead. One is freed from yellow disease and
the other shakes hands with great wrestlers. One lives long and the other
becomes a guest of Yama even after a hundred efforts. One's desire is fulfilled
and the other's is not. The power that was in Mahavira, Buddha and
Shankaracharya was not in their parents. Hemchandracharya's parents cannot be
considered because of his image. His guru was also not the main reason for his
brilliance, because Devchandra Suri had other disciples besides him. Then what
is the reason that people don't even know the names of other disciples and
Hemchandracharya's name is famous? The unique power that is seen in Mrs. Annie
Besant was not in her parents and not in her daughter either.  Considering the
above examples, it becomes clear that all the extraordinary things seen in this
birth are neither the result of the work of the present birth, nor the strength
of the parents, nor only the circumstances. Therefore, the limit of the
existence of the soul should be considered even before the beginning of the
womb. That is the previous birth. The impressions accumulated by desire or
tendency in the previous birth, on the basis of them, the above doubts and
anomalies are solved consistently. By the same method by which one previous
birth is proved, the tradition of many previous births is also proved, because
unlimited knowledge cannot be the result of the practice of one birth. Thus, the
soul is proved to be eternal, different from the body. The eternal element is
never destroyed, this principle is accepted by all philosophers. It is also said
in the Gita:  Naasato vidyate bhavo na bhavo vidyate sataha. - Geeta, Chapter 2,
Verse 16  Not only this, but many questions cannot be solved without accepting
the existence of the soul after the present body. There are many people who live
a righteous life in this birth, but they remain poor, and others are also seen
who get irritated even after hearing the name of justice, morality and religion,
but they are happy in every way. Many such individuals can be found who are
themselves...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 hI rahatA hai aura dura Age tA hai| pIlA roga se hI chuTatA aura dUsarA
bar3e-bar3e kuztIbAjoM se hAtha milAtA hai| eka dIrghajIvI bamatA hai aura
dUsarA sau yatna hote rahane para bhI yama kA atithi bana jAtA hai  /  eka kI
icchA saMmata hotI hai aura dUsare kI asaMgrata  /  jo zakti mahAvIra, buddha
aura zaMkarAcArya meM thI, vaha unake mAtA-pitA meM nahIM thii| hemacandrAcArya
kI pratimA ke kAraNa unake mAtA-pitA nahIM mAne jA sakate  /  unake guru bhI
unakI pratibhA ke mukhya kAraNa nahIM the, kyoMki devacandra sUri ke unake
sivAya aura bhI ziSya the  /  phira kyA kAraNa hai ki dUsare ziSyoM ke nAma loga
jAnate taka nahIM aura hemacandrAcArya kA nAma prasiddha hai  /  zrImatI enI
viseMTa meM jo viziSTa zakti dekhI jAtI hai. vaha unake mAtA-pitA meM na thI
aura nahIM unakI putrI meM hI thii| ukta udAharaNoM para dhyAna dene se yaha
spaSTa jAna par3atA hai ki isa janma meM dekhI jAne vAlI saba vilakSaNanA na to
vartamAna janma kI kRti kA pariNAma haiM, na mAtA-pitA ke bala-saMsthAra kI aura
na kevala paristhiti kI ho  /  isalie AtmA ke astitva kI maryAdA ko garbha ke
prArambha samaya se aura bhI pUrva mAnanA caahie| vahI pUrvajanma hai|
pUrvajanma meM icchA yA pravRtti dvArA jo saMskAra saMcita hue hoM unhIM ke
AdhAra para uparyukta zaMkAoM tathA visakSaNatAoM kA susaMgata samAdhAna ho jAtA
hai  /  jisa yukti se eka pUrvajanma siddha huA, usI ke bala para aneka
pUrvajanmoM kI paramparA siddha ho jAtI hai, kyoMki aparimita jAnazakti eka
janma ke abhyAsa kA phala nahIM ho sakatI  /  isa prakAra AtmA deha se bhinna
anAdi siddha hotI hai 1 anAdi tattva kA kabhI nAza nahIM hotA, isa siddhAnta ko
sabhI dArzanika mAnate haiM  /  gItA meM bhI kahA gayA hai nAsato vidyate bhAvo
nAbhAvo vidyate sataH  /  -gI0, a0 2, zloka 16 itanA hI nahIM, balika vartamAna
zarIra ke bAda AtmA kA astitva mAne binA aneka prazna hala nahIM ho sakate  /
bahuta-se aise loga hote haiM ki jo isa janma meM to prAmANika jIvana bitAte
haiM, parantu rahate haiM daridrI aura dUsare aise bhI dekhe jAte haiM jo nyAya,
nIti aura dharma kA nAma bhI sunakara cir3hate haiM, parantu hote haiM saba
taraha se sukhii| aise aneka vyakti mila sakate haiM jo haiM to svayaM

Page #35 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The guilty and their sins are being borne by others. One commits murder and
another is caught and hanged. One steals and another is caught.  We should also
consider that those who did not receive the fruits of their good or bad deeds in
this life, will their deeds simply fail? To say that deeds do not fail, even if
the doer does not receive the fruit, it still affects the upper society or other
people of the country—this is also not right, because whatever a human being
does, he does not do it all for others. Even the great souls who are engaged in
charity day and night, their desire is only to manifest their divine self for
the benefit of others. Desire has a very high place in the order of the
universe. In such a situation, it is not reasonable to assume that the root of
desire is also destroyed along with the present body. A human being continues to
strive until the last moment of his life, so that he may benefit himself. It is
not that all those who do this are deluded. Even the accomplished, steady-
minded, peaceful, wise yogis are engaged in trying to achieve their goal with
the same thought, that if not in this life, then in the next life, at some point
we will manifest the divine nature.  If the existence of karma is not accepted
after the destruction of the body, how narrow does the purpose of the individual
become and how small does the scope of work become? You can think about it
yourself. Whatever is done for others cannot be equal to the work done for
oneself! Accepting the afterlife of the conscious being until the last moment of
the present body, in a way, forces the individual to give up ambition. If not in
this life, then in the next life, but I will surely achieve my purpose—this
feeling can manifest more power in the human heart than any other feeling. It
cannot be said that the said feeling is false, because its emergence is natural
and well-known.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 doSI aura unake doSoM kA aparAdhoM kA phala bhoga rahe haiM dUsare  /  eka
hatyA karatA hai aura dUsarA pakar3A jAkara phAMsI para laTakAyA jAtA hai| eka
karatA hai corI aura dUsarA pakar3A jAtA hai  /  hameM isa para bhI vicAra
karanA cAhie ki jinako apanI acchI yA burI kRti kA phala isa janma meM nahIM
milA, kyA unakI kRti yoM hI viphala ho jAyagI? yaha kahanA ki kRti viphala nahIM
hotI, yadi kartA ko phala nahIM milA to bhI sasakA apara samAja ke yA deza ke
anya logoM para hotA hI hai--mo bhI ThIka nahIM, kyoMki manuSya jo kucha karatA
hai, vaha saba dUsaroM ke lie hI nahIM krtaa| rAta-dina paropakAra karane meM
nirata mahAtmAoM kI bhI icchA dUsaroM kI bhalAI karane ke nimitta se apanA
paramAtmatta prakaTa karane kI hI rahatI hai| vizva ko vyavasthA meM icchA kA
bahuta UMcA sthAna hai  /  aisI dazA meM vartamAna deha ke sAtha icchA ke mUla
kA bhI nAza mAna lenA yuktisaMgata nahIM | manuSya apane jIvana kI AkhirI ghar3I
taka aisI hI koziza karatA rahatA hai, jisase ki apanA bhalA ho  /  paha nahIM
ki aisA karane vAle saba bhrAnta hI hote haiN| bahasa pahu~ce hue sthiracitta va
zAnta prajJAvAna yogI bhI isI vicAra se apane sAdhya ko siddha karane kI ceSTA
meM lage rahate hai ki isa janma meM nahIM to dUsare janma meM hI sahI, kisI
samaya hama paramAtmabhAva ko prakaTa kara hI leNge| zarIra ke nAza hone ke bAda
vetana kA astitva yadi na mAnA jAe to vyakti kA uddezya kitanA saMkucita bana
jAtA hai aura kAryakSetra bhI kitanA alpa raha jAtA hai ? isakA cintana Apa
svayaM kara leM  /  auroM ke lie jo kucha bhI kiyA jAe, vaha apane lie kiye jAne
vAle kAryoM ke barAbara nahIM ho sakatA ! cetana kI uttara mayAMdA ko vartamAna
deha ke antima kSaNa taka mAna lene se vyakti ko mahattvAkAMkSA eka taraha se
chor3a denI par3atI hai  /  isa janma meM nahIM to agale janma meM sahI, parantu
maiM apanA udde paya avazya siddha karUMgA-yaha bhAvanA manuSya ke hRdaya meM
jitanA bala prakaTa kara sakatI hai, utanA bala anya koI bhAvanA prakaTa nahIM
kara sakatI hai  /  yaha bhI nahIM kahA jA sakatA ki ukta bhAvanA mithyA hai,
kyoMki usakA AvirbhAva naisargika aura sarvavidita hai  /

Page #36 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(36) It is not possible to be content without acknowledging that the soul is an
independent entity, considering all these points. Whatever good or bad karma it
performs, knowingly or unknowingly, it has to bear its fruits, and therefore it
has to go through the cycle of rebirth. The Tathagata Buddha also believed in
rebirth. The karma-chakra-created rebirth is accepted. This acceptance of
rebirth is strong evidence for accepting the independent existence of the soul.
**Some Special Things to Know About the Soul**  From the above references, it
becomes clear that the soul's existence is eternal and infinite. It was never
created and will never be destroyed. It is eternal. One might question how we
can accept its existence when it is not visible in any way. In this regard, it
can be said that seeing, touching, etc., are properties of physical matter. But
the soul is not physical matter, it is non-physical, so it should not be
imagined to be seen or touched. It can only be known through experience.  It is
generally said that we see with our eyes, hear with our ears, etc. But this is
not true. These senses are merely instruments; the actual power to perceive
objects lies in the soul. It is the soul that performs the actions of seeing,
touching, etc., through these senses.  Another fact worth considering in this
regard is that eyes can only see, ears can only hear, nose can only smell,
tongue can only taste sour-sweet, etc., and skin can only feel cold-hot, etc. If
we close our eyes, we cannot see with any other part of the body; if we close
our ears, we cannot hear with any other part of the body, and so on. But there
is something inside our body that can see, hear, smell, etc., simultaneously.
This power is called the soul or consciousness.  The unique power that exists
can...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 ( 36 ) ina saba bAtoM para dhyAna dene se yaha mAne binA santoSa nahIM hotA ki
cetana eka svatantra tatva hai| jAnate yA anajAnale vaha jo kucha bhI acchAburA
karma karatA hai, usakA phala use bhoganA hI par3atA hai aura isIlie use
punarjanma ke cakkara meM ghUmanA par3atA hai  /  tathAgata buddha ne bhI
punarjanma mAnA hai| karma jakra-kRta punarjanma ko mAnatA hai | yaha punarjanma
kA svIkAra AtmA ke svatantra astisva ko mAnane ke lie prabala pramANa hai  /
AtmA ke sambandha meM kucha vizeSa jJAtavya pUrvokta saMdarbhoM se yaha spaSTa
jJAta ho jAtA hai ki AtmA kA astitva anAdi ananta hai| vaha na to kabhI banI thI
aura na kabhI isakA nAza hogA | vaha zAzvata hai  /  isa para prazna ho sakatA
hai ki jaba AsmA kisI bhI prakAra se dikhAI nahIM detI hai to hama usakA astitva
kaise svIkAra kara leM ? isa sambandha meM yahI kahA jA sakatA hai ki dekhanA,
sparza honA Adi bhautika padArthoM kA hotA hai| lekina AtmA bhautika padArtha
nahIM hai, abhautika hai, isalie isake dekhane, sparza hone kI kalpanA nahIM kI
jAnI caahie| yaha to anubhUti dvArA hI jAnI jA sakatI hai| sAdhAraNatayA yaha
kahA jAtA hai ki hama apanI A~kha se dekhate haiM, kAnoM se sunate haiM Adi  /
kintu yaha satya nahIM hai  /  ye indriyA~ to upakaraNa mAtra hai, vAstava meM
viSayoM ko grahaNa karane kI zakti to AtmA meM hai| yahI AtmA ina indriyoM ke
mAdhyama se dekhane, sparza karane Adi kAryoM ko karatI hai  /  isa sambandha
meM eka aura tathya vicAraNIya hai  /  A~kheM kevala dekha sakatI haiM, kAna
kevala suna sakate haiM, nAka sUMgha sakatI hai, jIma khaTTe-mIThe Adi rasoM kA
svAda le sakatI hai aura tvacA ThaMDe-garama Adi kA anubhava kara sakatI hai|
yadi hama A~kheM banda kara leM to zarIra ke anya aMga se dekha nahIM sakate,
madi hama kAna banda kara leM to zarIra ke kisI anya aMga se suna nahIM sakate
haiM AdiyAdi  /  parantu hamAre zarIra ke andara koI eka aisI hai jo eka sAtha
dekhanA, sunanA sUcanA Adi kriyA zakti kA nAma hI AtmA yA cetanA hai  /
vilakSaNa zakti vidyamAna kara sakatI hai aura usa

Page #37 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
37) The characteristic of the soul is knowledge. We can say that wherever the
soul is, there is knowledge, that is, knowing. Knowledge and the soul are
inseparable. Every living being, whether it be a human being or an animal or a
microscopic insect, has knowledge. It is another matter that due to the
different types of karmic coverings on different souls, there may be more or
less knowledge in different beings, but it never happens that where there is a
soul, there is no knowledge. If we consider knowledge to be the characteristic
of the body, then there should be more knowledge in a large body and less
knowledge in a small body. But this is contrary to experience. In addition, we
would have to accept the existence of knowledge in a corpse, which is not the
case. We can compare the knowledge-quality of the soul to the light of the sun
and the karmic covering to the clouds. Although the sun is emitting light, we
cannot see the sun when clouds come. If the clouds are dense, we get very little
light, and as the density of the clouds decreases, we get more and more light.
The same thing should happen in the case of the development of knowledge and the
karmic covering. Light is in its entirety Light is in its entirety Every living
being exhibits emotions such as joy, sorrow, love, hatred, etc. These emotions
are not of the physical body of the living being. If these emotions were the
qualities of physical matter, they should have been found in all physical matter
at all times; but this is not the case. Like consciousness, these emotions are
only found in living beings. Therefore, these emotions also make us aware of
some immaterial substance present in the body, and that immaterial substance is
called the soul. There is no obstacle to the existence of countless souls in one
region, because the soul is an immaterial substance. It does not have form,
taste, smell, touch - which are the qualities of physical matter. Therefore, at
the same time, in the same place, one - .

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 37 ) AtmA kA lakSaNa jJAna hai| hama yaha kaha sakate haiM ki jahAM-jA~ AtmA
vahIM-vahIM jJAna arthAta jAnanA hai| jJAna aura AtmA eka-dUsare se abhinna  /
pratyeka jIvita prANI, cAhe vaha manuSya ho yA pazu-pakSI yA sUkSma kITa-
pataMga, usameM jJAna avazya hotA hai| yaha bAta dUsarI hai ki vibhinna AtmAoM
para karmoM kA AvaraNa bhinna-bhinna prakAra kA hone ke kAraNa bhinna-bhinna
jIvoM ke jJAna meM nyUnAdhikatA ho sakatI hai parantu aisA kabhI nahIM hotA ki
jahA~ AtmA ho. vahA~ jJAna na ho  /  jJAna ko yadi zarIra kA lakSaNa mAneM to
bar3e zarIra meM adhika jJAna aura choTe zarIra meM apekSAkRta kama jJAna honA
cAhie | parantu yaha bAta anubhava ke viparIta hai| isake atirikta zava meM bhI
jJAna kA astitva mAnanA par3egA jo ki hotA hI nahIM  /  kI hama AtmA ke jJAna-
guNa kI tulanA sUrya ke prakAza se aura karmoM ke AvaraNa tulanA bAdaloM se kara
sakate haiN| yadyapi sUrya meM se se nikala rahA hai parantu bAdala AjAne se
hama sUrya ke grahaNa nahIM kara pAte haiN| yadi bAdala ghane hoM to hameM
prakAza bahuta kama mila pAtA hai aura jaise-jaise bAdaloM kA ghanatva kama hotA
jAtA hai, hama adhikAdhika prakAza pAne jAte haiM  /  yahI bAta jJAna ke vikAsa
aura karmAvaraNa ke sambandha meM ghaTita kara lenI cAhie  /  prakAza to
sampUrNa rUpa prakAza ko pUrNa rUpa se pratyeka jIva meM harSa viSAda, prema,
ghRNA Adi bhAvanAeM dikhatI haiN| ye bhAvanAe~ jIva ke bhautika zarIra piNDa kI
nahIM haiN| yadi ye bhAvanAe~ bhautika padArtho kI guNa hotIM to unheM sadaiva
hI saba bhautika padArthoM meM prApta honA cAhiye thA; parantu aisA hotA nahIM
hai  /  zAna kI taraha ye bhAvanAe~ kevala jIvita prANiyoM meM ho hotI haiM  /
isalie ye bhAvanAeM bhI zarIra meM vidyamAna kisI abhautika padArtha kI anubhUti
karAtI haiM aura vaha jo abhautika padArtha hai, usI kA nAma AtmA hai  /  eka
pradeza meM asaMkhya AtmAoM ke vidyamAna hone meM bhI koI bAdhA nahIM hai,
kyoMki AtmA abhautika padArtha hai| usameM rUpa, rasa, gaMdha, sparza - jo
bhautika padArtha ke guNa hai nahIM haiM  /  isalie eka hI samaya meM, eka hI
sthAna para, eka - .

Page #38 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
There is no obstacle in the existence of countless souls together. Just as the
light of a lamp in a room can exist, and the light of thousands of other lamps
can also exist in the same room without any hindrance, similarly, there is no
obstacle in countless souls existing together in the same place at the same
time, completely independent of each other.  Each soul has its own body-size -
neither less nor more. The soul has the quality of shrinking and expanding,
therefore it becomes the size of the body it receives as a result of its
actions, just as the light of a lamp is limited to a small room when placed in
it, and when the same lamp is placed in a large room, its light spreads
throughout the large room. Similarly, one should understand the existence of the
soul in the body of an ant and a giant.  **The Atemporal Nature of Karma**  From
the above discussion, it becomes clear that the soul's existence is eternal and
bound by karma. So, naturally, a question arises in the human mind: which came
first, the soul or karma? Which is older and which is younger, or is karma also
eternal like the soul? If the soul is older, then the bond of karma with it
would also have to be considered eternal. In response to this question, the Jain
scriptures say that karma is eternal in relation to the individual, but
atemporal in relation to its flow. It is everyone's experience that beings
sleep, wake up, rise, sit, walk, fall, and perform various actions. This action
itself is the cause of karma-bondage. This proves that karma is eternal in
relation to the individual. But no one knows or can tell when the flow of karma
began. Just as the future is infinite, so is the past. There is no other way to
describe infinity except by the words "eternal" or "infinite".

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 sAtha asaMmpa AtmAoM ke vidyamAna hone meM koI bAdhA nahIM hai  /  jaiseeka
kamare meM eka dIpaka kA prakAza bhI raha sakatA hai aura dUsare sahasroM
dIpakoM kA prakAza bhI usI kamare meM nagAna ho sakatA hai| isameM kisI kAra se
vyAghAta (rukAvaTa) nahIM AtA hai 1 una saba dIpakoM kA prakAza eka dUsare se
bilakula svatantra hai  /  isI prakAra eka hI samaya meM, eka hI sthAna para
asaMkhya AtmAoM ke nilakula svatantra rUpa se eka sAtha rahane meM koI bAdhA
nahIM AtI hai| pratyeka AtmA Ane-apane zarIra-pramANa hai--na usase kama aura na
usase adhika  /  AtmA meM sikur3ane aura phailane kA guNa hotA hai, isalie vaha
apane kamoM ke phalasvarUpa prApta zarIra ke pramANa vAlI ho jAtI hai, jaise ki
eka dIpaka kI choTI sI koTharI meM rakhane para usakA prakAza usa koTharI taka
sImita rahatA hai aura jaba usI dIpaka ko eka baDe kamare meM rakhate haiM to
usakA prakAza usa bar3e kamare meM phaila jAnA hai| isI taraha AsA ke kIr3I aura
kujara ke pArIra meM vyApta hone ke bAre meM samajhanA cAhie  /  karma kA
anAditva pUrva karana ne yaha spaSTa ho jAtA hai ki AtmA kA astitva anAdikAlIna
hai aura karmavandha honA rahatA hai  /  to sahaja hI manuSya ke mana meM vicAra
hotA hai ki AnmA pahale hai yA karma pahale hai  /  donoM meM se pahale kIna hai
aura pIche kauna hai athavA AkSA kI taraha karma bhI anAdi hai| yadi AtmA pahale
hai to jana meM uke sAtha kAma kA baMdha huA, taba ne usako nAdi mAnanA par3egA
/  janadarzana meM isake uttara meM kahA hai ki karma vyakti kI apekSA se gAdi
hai aura pravAha kI apekSA se anAdi hai  /  yaha sabakA anubhava hai ki prANI
sote jAgate, uThate-baiThate, calate-girate kinI na kisI taraha kI jhalacala
kiyA karatA hai 1 hula nala kA honA hI karmabandha kA kArama hai  /  isase
siddha hotA hai ki karma vyakti kI apekSA se sAdi hai. kintu karma kA pravAha
kaba se calA, isako koI nahIM jAnatA aura na koI batA sakatA hai  /  bhaviSya
kAla kI taraha bhUtakAla bhI ananta hai  /  ananta kA varNana anAdi yA ananta
zabda ke sivAya aura dUsare

Page #39 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
It is impossible for something to come into existence by a word. Therefore,
there is no other way but to say that the flow of karma is anadi (without
beginning). _Some people, frightened by the confusion of the unclear explanation
of anadi, start changing the flow of karma to sadi (with beginning), but in an
attempt to remove the fear of a fault imagined by their own intellect, they
accept another bigger fault. If they accept the beginning of the flow of karma,
then the jiva (soul) should have been extremely pure and enlightened before,
then what is the reason for its involvement? And if even the completely pure and
enlightened jiva gets involved, then even the liberated jivas will be involved
in karma, and in that situation, liberation should be called the sleeping world.
The anadi nature of the flow of karma and the non-return of liberated jivas to
the world has been accepted by all the established darshanas (philosophies)._
For the solution of the anadi relationship of karma with the soul and bhakti
(devotion) in comparison to the flow-lineage, the Acharyas (teachers) have said:
> _Jo khatu sansaratyo jivo tatto du hodi parinamo parinamaado kamma kammaado
hovi gavi sugavi. Gadim adhigavassa deho dehaavo indiyani jayante. Tehi duvi
sayaggahanam tato rago doso va. Jadi jivas sevam bhavo sansara dhakka valammi._
> _Di jinavarehi manido anadinidhanu sanidhanu va._  The anadi relationship of
karma with the jiva can be understood by this example: just as within a mine,
gold and stone, milk and ghee, egg and hen, seed and tree have an anadi
relationship, in the same way, the relationship of jiva and karma should be
known as self-evident in comparison to the flow-lineage. That is, the mind,
speech, and

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 kisI zabda dvArA honA asaMbhava hai  /  isalie karma ke pravAha ko anAdi kahe
binA anya koI upAya hI nahIM hai  /  _kucha loga anAdi kI aspaSTa vyAkhyA kI
ulajhana se ghabarAkara karma-pravAha ko sAdi badalAne laga jAte haiM, kintu
apanI buddhi se kalpita doSa kI AzaMkA karake use dUra karane ke prayatna meM
dUsare bar3e doSa ko svIkAra kara lete haiM ki yadi karma-prabAha kI Adi mAnate
haiM to jIva ko pahale hI atyanta zuddha-buddha honA cAhie, phira use lipta hone
kA kyA kAraNa ? aura yadi sarvayA zuddha-buddha jIva bhI lipta ho jAtA hai to
mukta hae jIva bhI karmalipta hoMge aura usa sthiti meM mukti ko soyA huA
saMsAra hI kahanA cAhie  /  kArma-pravAha ke anAditya aura mukta jIvoM ko puna:
saMsAra meM na lauTane ko sabhI pratiSThita darzanoM ne mAnA hai| pravAha-
saMtati kI apekSA AtmA ke sAtha karma ke anAdi sambandha aura bhakti ko apekSA
di sAdha ko 1-yA samAdhAna ke lie AcAryoM ne kahA hai jo khatu saMsAratyo jIvo
tatto du hodi pariNAmo pariNAmAdo kamma kammAdo hovi gavi sugavI  //
gadimadhigavassa deho dehAvo indiyANi jAyante  /  tehi duvi sayaggahaNaM tato
rAgo doso vA  //  jAdi jIvassevaM bhAvo saMsAra dhakkavAlammi  /  di jiNavarehi
maNido aNAdiNidhaNo saNidhaNo vA  //  jIva ke sAtha karma ke anAdikAlIna
sambandha ko isa udAharaNa dvArA samajhA jA sakatA hai ki jisa prakAra khAna ke
bhItara svarNa aura pASANa, dudha aura ghRta, aNDA aura murgI, bIja aura vRkSa
kA anAdikAlIna sambandha calA A rahA hai, usI prakAra jIva aura karma kA bhI
pravAha-saMtati kI apekSA anAdikAlIna sambandha svayaMsiddha jAnanA cAhie  /
arthAt saMsArI jIvoM ke mana, vacana, 1. paMcAstikAya

Page #40 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
There is pulsation in the body and there is motion. When there is motion, the
body and the senses take in objects and then from these feelings of attachment
and aversion, the cycle of the world continues.  From that, due to the influx of
karma, motion, etc., senses are formed in the body, from them, the taking in of
objects, attachment and aversion are continuously produced. Even though it is
beginningless, is there an end to karma? It is a general rule that what is
beginningless can never be destroyed. But this rule is not applicable in the
case of the beginningless relationship between karma and the soul. There is a
beginningless relationship between gold and earth, milk and ghee, yet they are
seen to be separated by special effort. Similarly, the beginningless
relationship between the soul and karma also ends. It is to be remembered that
no karma is beginningless in itself, no particular karma has a beginningless
relationship with the soul. When the previous karmic situation is complete, it
is separated from the soul and a new karma is bound. In this way, even though
karma is beginningless in the form of a stream, it is not beginningless
individually, and by the destruction of the stream of karma through austerity
and restraint, the soul is liberated. Thus, the beginningless tradition of karma
is destroyed by special efforts and the binding of new karma does not happen
again. Who is stronger, the soul or karma? Even though karma is beginningless,
the soul destroys karma by its own efforts. Therefore, the power of the soul is
infinite compared to karma. From the outside, karma appears to be powerful and
the soul, being under the control of karma, keeps revolving in the cycle of
birth and death in various species, but when seen from within, the power of the
soul is limitless. Just as it binds itself to karma by its own actions and gets
entangled in them, it also has the capacity to destroy karma. No matter how
powerful karma may seem, the soul is more powerful than them. Just as a stone
appears hard and water appears soft from a worldly perspective, but that water
also breaks large rocks into pieces

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 f 40 } kAyA meM parispandana hotA hai aura hotI hai  /  gati hone para deha
aura grahaNa hotA hai aura viSayoM ke aura phira ina rAga-dveSarUpa bhAvoM se
saMsAra kA cakra calatA rahatA hai  /  usase karmo kA Asava hone se gati Adi
deha meM indriyA~ banatI hai, unase viSayoM kA grahaNa se rAga-dveSa utpanna
hotA rahatA hai anAdi hone para bhI karmoM kA anta sambhava hai ? jo anAdi hotA
hai usakA kabhI nAza nahIM ho sakatA, aisA sAmAnya niyama hai  /  lekina karma
aura AtmA ke anAdi sambandha ke bAre meM yaha niyama sA kAlika nahIM hai  /
svarNa aura miTTI kA dUdha aura ghI kA anAdi sambandha hai, tathApi ve prayatna
vizeSa se pRthaka-pRthaka hote dekhe jAte haiM  /  vaise hI AramA aura karma ke
anAdi sambandha kA bhI anta hotA hai  /  yaha smaraNIya hai ki vyakti rUpa se
koI bhI karma anAdi nahIM hai, kisI eka karma- vizeSa kA AtmA ke sAtha anAdi
sambandha nahIM hai  /  pUrvabaddha karmasthiti pUrNa hone para vaha AtmA se
pRthaka ho jAtA hai aura navIna karma kA baMdha hotA rahatA hai| isa prakAra se
pravAharUpa se karma ke anAdi hone para bhI vyaktizaH anAdi nahIM hai aura
tapasaMyama ke dvArA kamoM kA pravAha naSTa hone se AtmA mukta ho jAtI hai  /
isa prakAra karmo kI anAdi paramparA prayatna- vizeSoM se naSTa ho jAtI hai aura
punaH navIna karmoM kA baMdha nahIM hotA hai  /  AtmA aura karma meM balavAna
kauna ? karmoM ke anAdi hone para bhI AtmA apane prayatnoM se karmoM ko naSTa
kara detI hai| ataH karma kI apekSA AtmA kI zakti ananta hai  /  bahiSTi se
karma zaktizAlI pratIta hote haiM aura karma ke vazavartI hokara AtmA nAnA
yoniyoM meM janma-maraNa ke cakkara ke bhI kATatI rahatI hai, parantu antardRSTi
se dekhA jAya to AtmA kI zakti asIma hai  /  vaha jaise apanI pariNati se karmoM
kA Asana karatI hai aura unameM ulajhI rahatI hai, vaise hI karmoM ko kSaya
karane kI kSamatA bhI rakhatI | karma cAhe kitane bhI zaktizAlI pratIta hoM,
lekina AtmA unase bhI adhika zakti-sampanna hai  /  jaise laukika dRSTi se
patthara kaThora aura pAnI mulAyama pratIta hotA hai, kintu vaha pAnI bhI
pattharoM kI bar3I-bar3I caTTAnoM ke Tukar3e

Page #41 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(41) It breaks it into pieces. In the same way, the power of the soul is
infinite. Until it becomes aware of its own vast consciousness-power, it
considers karma to be more powerful than itself and remains subject to it. As
soon as it gains knowledge, it strives to be free from it and attains the pure,
enlightened and perfected state. This is the spiritual principle.
**Relationship of Karma Theory with Other Scriptures**  **Spiritual Science**  -
The purpose of spiritual science is to consider matters related to the soul.
Therefore, before describing the transcendental nature of the soul, it is
necessary to state its practical nature. If this is not done, the question
naturally arises in the mind: how can one acquire the ability and vision to know
the true nature of the soul without knowing the nature of the visible states of
the soul, such as man, animal, bird, happiness, sorrow, etc.? Besides this,
there is also the question: why are the visible present states not the nature of
the soul? Therefore, it is necessary for spiritual science to first show the
origin of the visible form of the soul and then proceed. This work has been done
by karma science. It shows the visible states of being as karmic and informs us
of the soul's distinct nature from it. From this perspective, karma science is a
part of spiritual science.  If the purpose of spiritual science is considered to
be only to describe the pure nature of the soul, even then karma science has to
be considered its first step. The reason for this is that until the relationship
of the soul with the present states experienced is explained, how can the vision
move forward? When it becomes known that all the forms above (present) are
illusory or phenomenal, then the curiosity arises as to what is the true nature
of the soul. At that time, the presentation of the pure nature of the soul alone
becomes meaningful.  To show the relationship of the soul with the Supreme Soul
is also the subject of spiritual science. Just as thoughts are found in the
Upanishads, Gita, etc. regarding this relationship, so also in karma science.
Karma science says that the soul is the Supreme Soul - the living being.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 ! ( 41 ) Tukar3e kara detA hai | vaise hI AtmA kI zakti ananta hai| jaba taka
use apanI virATa cetanA-zakti kA bhAna nahIM hotA, taba taka vaha karmo ko apane
se balavAna samajhakara unake adhIna sI rahatI hai aura jJAna hote hI unase
mukta hone kA prayatna kara zuddha, buddha aura siddha avasthA prApta kara letI
hai  /  yahI AdhyAtmika siddhAnta hai  /  karmasiddhAnta kA anya zAstroM se
sambandha adhyAtmazAstra -- - adhyAtmazAstra kA uddezya AtmA sambandhI viSayoM
kA vicAra karanA hai  /  ataeva usako AtmA ke pAramArthika svarUpa kA nirUpaNa
karane ke pahale usake vyAvahArika svarUpa kA bhI kathana karanA par3atA hai  /
yadi aisA na kiyA jAya to yaha prazna sahaja hI mana meM uThatA hai ki manuSya,
pazu-pakSI, sukha-dukhI Adi AtmA kI dRzyamAna avasthAoM kA svarUpa ThIka-ThIka
jAna binA usake bAda kA svarUpa jAnane kI yogyatA, dRSTi kaise prApta ho sakatI
hai ? isake sivAya yaha bhI prazna hotA hai ki dRzyamAna vartamAna avasthAe~ hI
AtmA kA svabhAva kyoM nahIM haiM ? isalie adhyAtmazAstra ke lie Avazyaka hai ki
vaha pahale AtmA ke dRzyamAna svarUpa kI utpatti dikhAkara Age bddh'e| yaha kAma
karmazAstra ne kiyA hai| vaha dRzyamAna satra avasthAoM ko karmajanya batalAkara
usase AtmA ke svabhAva kI pRthakatA kI sUcanA karatA hai  /  isa dRSTi ke
karmazAstra adhyAtmazAstra kA hI eka aMga hai | adhyAtmazAstra kA uddezya yadi
AtmA ke zuddha svarUpa kA varNana karanA hI mAnA jAya, taba bhI karmazAstra ko
usakA prathama sopAna mAnanA hI par3atA hai  /  isakA kAraNa yaha hai ki jaba
taka anubhava meM Ane vAlI vartamAna avasthAoM ke sAtha AtmA ke sambandha kA
spaSTIkaraNa na ho, taba taka dRSTi Age kaise bar3ha sakatI hai ? jaba yaha
jJAta ho jAtA hai ki Upara ke ( vartamAna ke ) saba rUpa mAyika yA vaibhAvika
haiM, taba svayameva jijJAsA hotI hai ki AtmA kA saccA svarUpa kyA hai ? usI
samaya AtmA ke kevala zuddha svarUpa kA pratipAdana sArthaka hotA hai  /
paramAtmA ke sAtha AtmA kA sambandha dikhAnA, yaha bhI adhyAtmazAstra kA viSaya
hai  /  isa sambandha meM upaniSada, gItA Adi meM jaise vicAra pAve jAte hai,
vaise hI karmazAstra meM bhI  /  karmazAstra kahatA hai ki AtmA ho paramAtmA -
jIva

Page #42 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(42) This is God. The merging of the soul with the Supreme Soul means that the
soul, becoming free from karma, realizes its Supreme Soul nature and becomes
permeated with the Supreme Soul. The soul is a part of the Supreme Soul, which
means, from the perspective of karma-shastra, that the soul possesses all
knowledge and skills, but it is only a fraction of the complete, yet veiled
(covered) consciousness-moonlight. When the veil of karma is removed,
consciousness manifests in its fullness. This should be understood as the
attainment of God-consciousness or Godhood.  To consider oneself as the body,
wealth, possessions, etc., i.e., to identify with the non-self, is an external
perspective. Karma-shastra teaches to abandon this false belief by realizing the
true nature of the soul. Even though those whose karmic impressions are solely
focused on the external self may not find the teachings of karma-shastra
appealing, it does not diminish its truth.  Karma-shastra reveals the
distinction between the body and the soul, dispelling the illusion of their
oneness, and brings forth the knowledge of this distinction, the wisdom of
discrimination. At this point, the inner vision opens up. Through this inner
vision, one sees the Supreme Soul nature within oneself. To fully experience
this Supreme Soul nature is to become Shiva (Brahman). Karma-shastra has taken
upon itself the task of revealing this Brahman alone. Because it aims to guide
the soul from the illusion of oneness to the realization of distinction, towards
the higher state of natural non-dual knowledge. At the same time, the main
subject matter of yoga-shastra is also found within it. Therefore, it is clear
that karma-shastra is a mine of various spiritual and philosophical ideas. This
is its significance.  Karma has the closest connection with the body and the
soul. Karma-shastra describes the impure state of the soul, its causes, etc.,
before it becomes pure and free from karma. In its impure state, the soul has a
body, senses, etc. Therefore, these are also described in karma-shastra in their
respective places. While the elements of body formation, its gross and subtle
forms, its growth and decay, etc., are discussed in physiology, and in fact,
this is the domain of physiology,

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 ( 42 ) hI Izvara hai  /  AtmA kA paramAtmA meM mila jAnA, isakA matalaba yaha
hai ki AtmA kA karmamukta hokara apane paramAtmamAva ko bakta karake
paramAvasvarupamaya ho jAnA  /  jIva paramAtmA kA aMpA hai, isakA matalaba
karmazAstra kI dRSTi se yaha hai ki jIva meM jitanI jJAnakalA vyakta hai, vaha
paripUrNa. parantu avyakta (AvRta) cetanA caMdrikA kA eka aMza mAtra hai  /
karma kA AvaraNa haTa jAne se cetanA paripUrNa rUpa meM prakaTa hotI hai  /  usI
ko IzvarabhAna yA Izvaratva kI prApti samajhanA cAhie  /  dhana, pArIra Adi
bAhya vibhUtiyoM meM Atmabuddhi rakhanA arthAt jar3a meM ahatva karanA bAhA
dRSTi hai| isa ameda bhrama ko boharAtmabhAva siddha karake use chor3ane kI
zikSA karmazAstra detA hai| jinake saMskAra kevala bahirAtmabhAvamaya ho gaye
haiM unheM karmazAstra kA upadeza bhale hI rucikara na ho, parantu isase usakI
sacAI meM kucha bhI antara nahIM par3a sakatA hai  /  zarIra aura AtmA ke
abheda-bhrama ko dUra karAkara usake bhedajJAna ko, vivekalyAti ko kArmaNAstra
pragaTa karatA hai  /  isI samaya meM antaSTi khulatI hai| antaSTi ke dvArA
apane meM vidyamAna paramAtma-bhAva dekhA jAtA hai  /  paramAtmabhAva ko
dekhakara ro pUrNatayA anubhava meM lAnA--yaha jIva kA ziva (brahma) honA hai  /
isI brahma mAtra ko vyakta karAne kA kAma kucha aura kuMga se karmazAstra ne
apane Upara le rakhA hai| kyoMki vaha abheda-bhrA se bhedabhAna kI tarapha
jhukAkara phiTa svAbhAvika abhedajJAna kI ucca bhUmikA kI ora AtmA ko sIMcanA
hai| sAtha hI, yogazAstra ke mukhya pratipAdya aMga kA varNana bhI urA meM mila
jAtA hai| isalie yaha spaSTa hai ki karmazAsya aneka prakAra ke AdhyAmika
zAstrIya vicAroM kI khAna hai  /  yahI usakA mahatva hai| zarIrazAstra-AtmA ke
sAtha karma kA nikaTatama sambandha hai| zuddha, niSkama AtmA hone ke pUrva
usakI azuddha sthiti, kAraNoM Adi kA kathana karmazAstra meM hai| azuddha sthiti
meM AtmA kA koI-na-koI zarIra, indriya Adi hotI haiM  /  ataH inakA bhI varNana
karmazAstra meM yathAsthAna kiyA jAtA hai| vaise to zarIra nirmANa ke tattva,
jasake sthUla-suthama prakAra, usake vRddhi-hAsa-krama Adi kA vicAra
zarIrazAstra meM kiyA jAtA hai aura vAstava meM yaha zarIrazAstra kA

Page #43 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The subject is, but in Karmaśāstra also, incidentally, many things are described
which are related to the body. Even though the things related to the body in
Karma-siddhānta are said from an ancient method, their importance does not
diminish just because of that. The main thing to see is that in Karmaśāstra, the
structure of the body, its types, its strength, and the elements that are its
cause, have been systematically stated, and by researching them, newness can
also be brought and the importance of the scripture can also be proved.
Language-Śāstra-Similarly, in Karmaśāstra, there is also a discussion worth
considering regarding language and the senses. From what element is language
formed, how much time does it take to form? For its creation, it uses various
japalo pani in different ways and by what means does it do so? What is the basis
of the truth and falsehood of language? Which creatures can speak? Which species
of creature has the power to speak in what kind of language? etc. Important and
serious consideration of questions related to language is found in Karmaśāstra
in a detailed manner. Similarly, how many senses are there, what are they like,
what are their various differences and what are their powers? Which creature has
how many senses? What is the relationship between external and internal senses,
what is their shape, etc.? Many kinds of thoughts related to the senses are
found in Karmaśāstra. It may be that all these thoughts may not be found in it
in a systematic manner, but it should be kept in mind that the main subject of
Karmaśāstra is something else, and in the context of its description, the body,
language, senses, etc. have been considered as needed. Therefore, it is possible
that a systematic compilation may not have been possible, but this does not
prove the fault of Karmaśāstra, rather it will be called the glory of discussing
the subject of many scriptures.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 viSaya hai, lekina karmazAstra meM bhI prasaMgavaza aisI aneka bAtoM kA varNana
kiyA gayA hai, joki zarIra se sambandha rakhatI haiN| karmasiddhAnta meM zarIra
sambandhI bAteM cAhe purAtana paddhati se kahI gaI haiN| lekina itane mAtra se
unakA mahattva kama nahIM ho jAtA hai  /  mukhya rUpa se yaha dekhanA hai ki
karmazAstra meM bhI zarIra kI banAvaTa, usake prakAra, usakI majabUtI aura usake
kAraNabhUta tatvoM kA vyavasthita rIti se kathana kiyA gayA hai aura unakI zodha
karake navInatA bhI lAyI jA sakatI hai aura zAstra kI mahattA bhI siddha kI jA
sakatI hai| bhASA-zAstra-isI prakAra karmazAstra meM bhASA va indriyoM ke
sambandha meM bhI vicAraNIya carcA milatI hai  /  bhASA kisa tattva se banatI
hai, usake banane meM kitanA samaya lagatA hai| usakI racanA ke lie nAnA japalo
pani kA krima taraha prayoga karatI hai aura kisa sAdhana dvArA karatI hai  /
bhASA kI satyatA, asatyatA kA AdhAra kyA hai ? kauna-kauna prANI bhASA bola
sakate haiM ? kisa jAti ke prANI meM kisa prakAra kI bhASA bolane kI zakti hai
ityAdi bhASA sambandhI praznoM kA mahatvapUrNa va gambhIra vicAra karmazAstra
meM vizad rIti se kiyA huA milatA hai| isI prakAra indriyAM kitanI haiM, kaisI
haiM, unake kaise-nause bheda aura kaisIkaisI zaktipAM haiM? kirA-kisa prANI ko
kitanI-kitanI indriyA~ prApta haiM ? vAdya aura Abhyantarika indriyoM kA Apasa
meM kyA sambandha hai, inakA kaisAkaisA AkAra hai, ityAdi indriyoM se sambandha
rakhane vAle aneka prakAra ke vicAra karmazAstra meM pAye jAte haiM  /  yaha ho
sakatA hai ki ye saba vicAra usameM amana nahIM bhI milane hoM kintu yaha dhyAna
meM rahe ki karmazAstra kA mukhya pratipAdya viSama aura hI hai aura usI ke
varNana ke prasaMga meM zarIra, bhASA, indriya Adi kA vicAra AvazyakatAnusAra
kiyA gayA hai  /  isalie saMbhavataH vyavasthita saMkalanA na ho pAI ho, to bhI
isase karmazAstra kI truTi siddha nahIM hotI hai, balki isako to aneka zAstroM
ke viSaya kI carcA karane kA gaurava hI kahA jaaegaa|

Page #44 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
( 44 ) The Purpose of the Doctrine of Karma: Its Objective In response to the
question of why the doctrine of karma came into being, from a practical
perspective, the following three main purposes can be stated: (1) To remove the
erroneous aspects of the Vedic religion's belief in God. (2) To clarify the
inadequacy of Buddhism's momentary nihilism. (3) To establish the principle that
karma is the cause of our experiences. A detailed explanation of these is as
follows: (1) In the India of Mahavira's time, besides Jainism, Vedic and
Buddhist religions were prominent, but their doctrines differed significantly on
key issues. In the original Vedas, Upanishads, Smritis, and certain Vedantic
schools of thought, there was a conception of God that led the common people to
believe that God is the creator of the universe, and that He is the one who
makes beings experience the fruits of good or bad actions. Since karma is inert,
it cannot produce its fruits without the intervention of God. No matter how high
a being may be, it cannot become God through its own development; a being is
just a being, not God, and salvation from the world is not possible without
God's grace, etc. _There were three errors in this kind of belief: (1) The
intervention of a self-sufficient God in creation without any purpose. (2) The
suppression of self-autonomy. (3) Ignorance of the power of karma. To rectify
these errors and to reveal the true state of affairs, Lord Mahavira propounded
the doctrine of karma. Although Buddhism denied the role of God, Buddha's main
objective was to stop violence and spread compassion, and his style of
presenting the truth was also in line with his immediate objective. The
Tathagata Buddha believed in karma and its consequences, but his doctrine
propounded momentary nihilism. Therefore, another objective of Lord Mahavira's
propounding the doctrine of karma was that if the soul is considered to be
momentary, then there can be no explanation for the consequences of karma.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 ( 44 ) karmasiddhAnta kA sAdhya : prayojana karmasiddhAnta kA AvirbhAva kisa
prayojana se huA isake uttara meM vyAvahArika dRSTi se nimnalikhita tIna
prayojana mukhyatayA kahe jA sakate haiM (1) vaidika dharma kI Izvara sambandhI
mAnyatA ke bhrAnta aMza ko dUra karanA  /  (2) bauddhadharma ke ekAnta
kSaNikavAda kI ayuktatA ko spaSTa karanA  /  (3) mAmA ko jar3a taba se milavA
detana tattva sthApita karanA  /  inakA vizeSa spaSTIkaraNa isa prakAra hai (1)
mahAvIrakAlIna bhAratavarSa meM jainadharma ke atirikta vaidika aura bauddha
dharma mukhya the, parantu donoM ke siddhAnta mukhya-mukhya viSayoM meM nitAnta
bhinna the  /  mUla vedoM, upaniSadoM, smRtiyoM meM aura vedAnuyAyI katipaya
darzanoM meM IzvaraviSayaka aisI kalpanA thI ki jisase sarvasAdhAraNa kA yaha
vizvAsa ho gayA thA ki jagata kA utpAdaka Izvara hI hai, vahI acche yA bure kamo
kA phala jIva se bhogavAtA hai, karma jar3a hone se Izvara kI preraNA ke binA
apanA phala bhogavA nahIM sakate  /  cAhe kitanI hI uccakoTi kA jIva ho, parantu
vaha apanA vikAsa karake Izvara nahIM ho sakatA; jIra, jIva hI hai, Izvara nahIM
aura Izvara ke anugraha ke sivAya saMsAra se nistAra bhI nahIM ho sakatA ityAdi
/  _isa prakAra ke vizvAsa meM ye tIna bhUleM thIM-(1) kRtakRtya Izvara kA
niSprayojana sRSTi meM hastakSepa karanA  /  (2) AtmasvAtaMtrya kA daba jAnA  /
(3) karma kI zakti kA ajJAna  /  ina bhUloM kA parimArjana karane aura yathArtha
vastusthiti ko batalAne ke lie bhagavAna mahAvIra ne karmasiddhAnta kA
pratipAdana kiyA hai| yadyapi baudadharma meM Izvara-kartRtva kA niSedha kiyA
gayA thA kintu buddha kA uddezya mukhyatayA hiMsA ko rokane aura karuNAbhAva ko
phailAne kA thA aura unakI tattvapratipAdana kI zailI bhI tatkAlIna uddezya ke
anurUpa hI thI  /  tathAgata buddha karma aura usakA viSAka mAnate the, lekina
unake siddhAnta meM kSaNikavAda kA pratipAdana kiyA gayA thaa| isalie bhagavAna
mahAvIra kA karmasiddhAnta ke pratipAdana kA eka vaha bhI uddezya thA ki yadi
AramA ko kSaNikamAtra mAna liyA jAya to karmavipAka kI kisI taraha upapatti hI
nahIM ho sakatI  /  svakRta

Page #45 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The experience of karma and the absence of the experience of parakrita karma can
only occur when the soul is neither considered eternally solitary nor
momentarily solitary.  Materialists were the same then as they are today. They
did not believe in the permanent work of the rebirth garden of the karma-
experiencer after the destruction of the physical body: this view was very
narrow, which was refuted by the theory of karma.  Karma theory-thought: In the
public discourse, the consideration of the element of karma has been considered
timeless. Jains have supported it in the same way that Mimamsakas support the
belief in the timelessness of the Vedas. Both types of devotees, those who use
intellect and those who do not, have believed in it, and those who use intellect
do not just accept it out of faith, but also support it as much as possible
through intellect. From this perspective, the examination of karma theory is
important, but it is equally important to consider it from a historical
perspective.  From a historical perspective, the first proposition in the chain
of tradition related to the thought of karma is whether or not to believe in the
theory of karma, and if so, on what basis. There was one side that did not
believe in any other goal of life than kama and its means, artha. In their view,
the material world is the only goal of life. Therefore, they were not obliged to
believe in any theory of karma that would lead to good or bad births or the
afterlife. This side was known as the Charvakas. But in that ancient age, there
were also thinkers who said that there is rebirth after death. Not only that,
there are also other superior and inferior worlds besides this visible world.
They were called rebirthists and afterlife believers, and they accepted the
theory of karma as the cause of rebirth and the afterlife. Their view was that
if there is no karma, then the relationship between birth after birth and this
world and the afterlife cannot occur. Therefore, it is necessary to accept the
theory of karma on the basis of the belief in rebirth. These karma believers
called themselves afterlife believers and theists.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karma kA bhoga aura parakRta karma ke bhoga kA abhAva tabhI ghaTa sakatA hai,
jabaki AtmA na to ekAnta nitya mAnA jAe aura na ekAnta kSaNika  /  bhautikavAdI
Aja kI taraha usa samaya bhI the| ve bhautika deha naSTa hone ke bAda kRtakarma-
bhogI punarjanmabAga ki sthAyI kAma ko nahIM mAnate : yaha dRSTi bahuta hI
saMkucita thI, jisakA karmasiddhAnta ke dvArA nirAkaraNa kiyA gyaa|
karmasiddhAnta-vicAra : aitihAsika samIkSA janadarzana meM karmatatva ke
vivecana ko anAdi mAnA hai  /  jaina isakA samarthana vaise hI karate Aye haiM,
jaise mImAMsaka vedoM ke anAditva kI mAnyatA kA karate haiN| buddhi-aprayogI
aura buddhi-prayogI donoM prakAra ke zraddhAlu mAnate Aye haiM aura
buddhiprayogI to zraddhA se mAna hI nahIM lete kintu usakA buddhi ke dvArA
yathAsambhava samarthana bhI karate haiN| ukta dRSTi se karmatasya kI vicAraNA
kA mahattva to hai hI, lekina aitihAsika dRSTi se bhI vicAra kiyA jAnA utanA hI
mahattvapUrNa hai| aitihAsika dRSTi se kamatatta sambandhI vicAra paramparA kI
zrRMkhalA meM pahalA prapana hai karmatattva mAnanA yA nahIM aura mAnanA to kisa
AdhAra para  /  eka pakSa aisA thA jo kAma aura usake sAdhana rUpa artha ke
sivAya anya koI puruSArtha hI nahIM mAnatA thaa| usakI dRSTi meM iloka hI
purupArtha hai  /  ataeva vaha aisA koI karmasattva mAnane ke lie bAdhya nahIM
thA jo acche-bure janmAntara yA paraloka kI prApti karAnevAlA ho| yaha pakSA
cArvAka ke nAma se vikhyAta hA  /  parantu usa purAne yuga meM aise bhI cintaka
the, jo batalAte the ki mRtyu ke bAda janmAntara bhI hai  /  itanA hI nahIM, isa
dRzyamAna loka ke alAvA anya zreSTha aura kaniSTha loka bhI haiM  /  ve
punarjanma aura paralokavAdI kahalAte ye aura ve punarjanma aura paraloka ke
kAraNarUpa meM karmatattva ko svIkAra karate the  /  inakI dRSTi rahI ki agara
kAma na ho to janma-janmAntara evaM ihalokaparaloka kA sambandha ghaTa hI nahIM
sktaa| ataeva punarjanma kI mAnyatA ke AdhAra para karmatattva ko svIkAra karanA
Avazyaka hai| ye hI karmavAdI apane ko paralokavAdI tathA Astika kahate the  /

Page #46 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
There have been two main factions among these Karmavadi. One faction propounded
that the fruits of Karma are inevitable in this life, in future lives and in the
afterlife, but for a superior birth and a desirable afterlife, Karma must also
be superior. This faction, being a believer in the afterlife and considering
heaven as the superior realm and advocating Dharma as the means to attain it,
accepted only three Purusharthas: Dharma, Artha, and Kama. It did not have a
separate place for Moksha.  Wherever the term "Pravartak Dharma" is mentioned,
it is indicative of the mindset of this Tripurushartha faction. This faction was
a supporter of the social order, therefore, it indicated a kind of social order
by explaining the origin of Dharma in socially acceptable, refined, and inherent
conduct and the origin of Adharma from inappropriate conduct. This faction
became known as Brahmanmarg, Mimamsak, and Karmakandi. Its meaning in brief is:
Dharma - the fruit of good deeds is heaven and Adharma - the fruit of bad deeds
is hell, etc. Dharma and Adharma are called punya-papa and adrishta, and through
them, the cycle of birth and death continues, which cannot be eradicated. If it
is possible, then it is only possible if one wants to attain a good realm and
more happiness, then Dharma is the duty. According to this view, Adharma or sin
is to be avoided, but Dharma or virtue is not to be avoided.  The second faction
of Karmavadi held a completely opposite view to the above faction. It believed
that Karma is indeed the cause of rebirth. The practice of refined, acceptable,
and prescribed actions gives rise to Dharma and also leads to heaven, but that
Dharma is also completely avoidable, just like Adharma. According to this view,
there is a fourth Purushartha, which is called Moksha. It states that Moksha
alone is the goal of life and for Moksha, all Karma, whether it be in the form
of virtue or sin, is avoidable. It is not that Karma cannot be eradicated. It is
also possible with effort.  Wherever the term "Nivartaka Dharma" is mentioned,
it is indicative of this view.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 ina karmavAdiyoM ke bhI mukhya do dala rahe haiN| eka to yaha pratipAdita
karatA thA ki karma kA phala janma-janmAntara aura paraloka avazya hai, parantu
zreSTha janma aura aMgcha paraloka ke vAste karma bhI zreSTha honA caahie| yaha
dala paralokavAdI hone se tathA svarga ko zreSThaloka mAnane vAlA hone aura
usake sAdhana rUpa meM dharma kA pratipAdana karanevAlA hone se dharma, artha,
kAma aise tIna hI puruSArthoM ko mAnatA thaa| usakI pTi maoNne kA alaga
pUrabArya rUpa sthAna na thaa| jahA~ kahIM pravartakadharma kA ullekha AtA hai,
vaha isI tripuruSArthavAdI dala ke manama kA sUcaka hai| yaha dala sAmAjika
vyavasthA kA samarthaka thA, ataeva vaha samAjamAnya. ziSTa evaM nihita AcaraNoM
meM dharma kI utpatti tathA nidha AcaraNoM se adharma kI utpatti batalAkara eka
taraha kI sAmAjika suvyavasthA kA hI saMkena karatA thaa| yahI dala
bAhmaNamArga. mImAMsaka aura karmakANDI nAma se prasiddha huA  /  isakA mantavya
saMkSepa meM isa prakAra hai: dharma-zubhakarma kA phala svarga aura adharma-
azubhakarma kA phala naraka Adi haiM  /  dharmAdharma hI puNya-pApa tathA adRSTa
kahalAte haiM aura unhIM ke dvArA janma-janmAntara kI cakraprayatti calatI
rahatI hai, jisakA uccheda zakya nahIM hai| yadi zakya hai, lo itanA ki agara
acchA loka aura adhika sukha pAnA hai to dharma hI kartavya hai  /  isa mata ke
anusAra adharma vA pApa to heya hai parantu dharma yA puNya heya nhiiN| _
karmavAdiyoM kA dUsarA dala upayukta dala se sarvathA viruddha dRSTi rakhane
vAlA thaa| vaha mAnatA thA ki punarjanma kA kAraNa karma avazya hai| ziSTa,
sammata evaM vihita karmoM ke AcaraNa se dharma utpanna hokara svarga bhI detA
hai, parantu vaha dharma bhI adharma kI taraha hI sarvathA heya hai  /  isake
matAnusAra eka cauthA puruSArtha bhI hai, jo mokSa kahA jAtA hai  /  isakA
kathana hai ki eka mAtra mokSa hI jIvana kA lakSya hai aura mokSa ke vAste
karmamAtra, cAhe vaha puNyarUpa ho yA pAparUpa-heya hai  /  yaha nahIM ki karma
kA uccheda zakya na ho| prayatna se vaha bhI zakya hai  /  jahA~ kahIM bhI
nivartaka dharma kA ullekha AtA hai, vahA~ sarvaSa isI mata kA

Page #47 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
This is a hint. According to this view, when ultimate karma-nivṛtti is desired,
it had to be explained as the real cause of the origin of karma against the view
of the first group. It said that the root cause of dharma and adharma is not the
prevailing social laws and prohibitions, but ignorance and raga-dvesha. Even if
the conduct is refined, accepted and prescribed by society, if it is based on
ignorance and raga-dvesha, then it gives rise to adharma. The distinction
between punya and papa is for those who have a gross vision. In reality, since
punya and papa are all based on ignorance and raga-dvesha, they are both adharma
and despicable. This nivṛttakadharma group was not social but individualistic.
When it accepted the annihilation of karma and moksha as the purpose of life, it
had to consider the causes that annihilate karma and generate moksha. As a
result of this consideration, the causes that it established as karma-nivṛttak
are the nivṛttakadharma of this group.  The direction of pravṛttakadharma and
nivṛttakadharma are completely opposite to each other. The aim of one is to
protect the social order and create good order, while the aim of the other is to
achieve personal inner happiness, therefore it is only self-oriented.
Nivṛttakadharma is known by names like śramaṇa, parivājaka, tapasvī and
yogamārga etc. Since karma-pravṛtti is born of ignorance and raga-dvesha, the
means of its ultimate cessation was established as samyak-jñāna, which is
opposed to ignorance, and samyama, which is in the form of raga-dvesha-nāśa,
which is opposed to raga-dvesha. The rest of the means, such as tapas, dhyāna,
bhakti etc., were considered as means of the said knowledge and samyama.  There
were many factions among the followers of nivṛttakadharma. This factionalism was
partly due to the aggressive nature of the arguments and partly due to the
different processes of epistemology. Three factions seem to be known: (1)
Paramāṇunādī, (2) Pradhānavādī, (3) Paramāṇu but with the shadow of Pradhāna. Of
these, the first, the Paramāṇuvādī, although supporting moksha, was not as
opposed to pravṛttakadharma as the latter two. This faction became known as
Nyāya, Vaiśeṣika darśana. The second faction, the Pradhānavādī, being a
supporter of ultimate karma-nivṛtti, also considered pravṛttakarma, i.e. śrauta-
smārta karma, to be despicable.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 saMketa hai| isa mata ke anusAra jaba Atyantika karmanivRtti iSTa hai, taba ise
prathama dala kI dRSTi ke viruddha karma kI utpatti kA asalI kAraNa batalAnA
par3A  /  isane kahA ki dharma aura adharma kA mUla kAraNa pracalita sAmAjika
vidhi-niSedha nahIM kintu ajJAna aura rAgadveSa haiN| phaisA bhI ziSTa, sammata
aura vihita sAmAjika mAcaraNa kyoM na ho, para yaha agAna evaM rAga-dveSamUlaka
hai to usase adhama ko hI utpatti hotI hai| puNya aura pApa kA bheda sthUla
dRSTi vAloM ke lie hai  /  tattvataH puNya aura pApa saba ajJAna evaM rAga-
dveSamUlaka hone se adharma evaM heya hI hai  /  yaha nivartakadharmavAdI dala
sAmAjika na hokara vyakti vikAsavAdI rahA  /  jaba isane karma kA uccheda aura
mokSa puruSArtha mAna liyA, taba ise karma ke ucchedaka evaM mokSa ke janaka
kAraNoM para bhI vicAra karanA par3A  /  isI vicAra ke phalasvarUpa isane jo
karma-nivartaka kAraNa sthira kiye, vahI isa dala kA nivartakadharma hai 1
pravartaka aura nivartaka dharma kI dizA paraspara bilakula viruddha haiN| eka
kA dhyeya sAmAjika vyavasthA kI rakSA aura suvyavasthA kA nirmANa hai, jabaki
dUsare kA dhyeya nijI Atpantika sukha kI prApti hai, ataeva yaha mAtra AtmagAmI
hai  /  nivataMkadharma hI zramaNa, parivAjaka, tapasvI aura yogamAgaM Adi nAmoM
se prasiddha hai  /  karmapravRtti ajJAna evaM rAga-dveSajanita hone se usakI
Atyantika nivRtti kA upAya ajJAnavirodhI samyakjJAna aura rAga-dveSavirodhI
rAga-dveSanAphArUpa saMyama hI sthira huA  /  bAkI ke tapa, dhyAna, bhakti Adi
sabhI upAya ukta jJAna aura saMyama ke hI sAdhana rUpa se mAne gaye  /  /
nivartaka-dharmAvalaMbiyoM meM aneka pakSa pracalita the  /  yaha pakSabheda
kucha to vAdoM kI ravabhAvamulaka ugratA-matA kA AbhArI thA aura kucha aMzoM meM
tattvajJAna kI bhinna-bhinna prakriyA para bhI avalamvita thaa| unake tIna pakSa
jAna par3ate haiM(1) paramANunAdI, (2) pradhAnavAdI (3) paramANu hokara bhI
pradhAna kI chAyA vAlA 1 inameM se pahalA paramANuvAdI mokSa samarthaka hone
para bhI pravartakadharma kA utanA virodhI na thA, jitane ki pichale do  /  yahI
pakSa-nyAya, vaizeSika darNana ke rUpa meM prasiddha huA | dUsarA pakSa
pradhAnavAdI Atyantika karmanivRtti kA samarthaka hone se pravartakakarma,
arthAt zrauta-smArta karma ko bhI heya batalAtA

Page #48 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(48) This side is known as Sankhya-Yoga and it is on the basis of its philosophy
and under the shadow of its renunciation that the Vedanta philosophy and the
path of renunciation were established. The third side was the main shadow, i.e.,
the opposite of the promoter dharma, the ultimate, like the peacock's tail. This
side is known as Jain and Nirgnyadarshan. Buddhism is the ultimate opponent of
promoter dharma, but it is a later independent development of a mixture of the
second and third sides. But the common goal of all renunciants is to destroy the
root of karma in some way and to attain a state where they do not have to return
to the cycle of birth again.  It does not seem that promoter dharma was ever
prevalent alone, and renunciation emerged later. Yet, there was certainly a time
in the beginning when the establishment of promoter dharma was the main thing in
society and renunciation was limited to individuals, so it was not only
neglected by the promoters of dharma, but also faced the brunt of their
opposition. But the distinct traditions of renunciants gradually developed inner
elements like meditation, contemplation, austerity, yoga, devotion, etc. to such
an extent that even in the presence of promoter dharma, the stamp of
renunciation was imposed on society in a way, and everywhere there was talk of
renunciation, and literature also began to be created and propagated with the
ideas of renunciation.  Renunciants had to speculate about the nature of
liberation and its means; but along with this, they also had to think a lot
about the elements of karma. They established definitions and explanations of
karma and its divisions, classified the elements of karma from the point of view
of cause and effect, discussed the inherent powers of karma, considered the time
limits of the consequences of each, and also considered the mutual relationships
of karmas. In this way, renunciants developed a well-established science of
karma.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (48 ) thaa| yahI pakSa sAMkhya-yoga nAma se prasiddha hai aura isI ke
tatvajJAna kI bhUmikA ke Upara tathA isI ke nivRttivAda kI chAyA meM Age jAkara
vedAnta darzana aura saMnyAsa mArga kI pratiSThA huI  /  tIsarA pakSa pradhAna
chAyApana, arthAt pariNI garamA gunAdI kA kA, mora kI sA hI pravartakadharma kA
Atyantika, virodhI thA  /  yahI pakSa jaina evaM nirga nyadarzana ke nAma se
prasiddha hai| bauddhadarzana pravartakadharma kA Atyantika roidhI hai, para
vaha dUsare aura tIsare pakSa ke mizraNa kA eka uttaravartI svatantra vikAsa
hai| parantu sabhI nivartakavAdiyoM kA sarvamAnya sAmAnya lakSya yaha hai ki
kisI-na-kisI prakAra koM kI jar3a naSTa karanA aura aisI sthiti pAnA ki jahA~ me
phira janmacakra meM AnA na pdd'e| aisA mAlUma nahIM hotA hai ki kabhI mAtra
pravartakadharma pracalita rahA ho, aura nivartakadharma kA pIche se prAdurbhAna
huA ho  /  phira bhI prArambhika samaya aisA jarUra bItA hai, jabaki samAja meM
pravartakamarma kI pratiSThA mukhya thI aura nivartakadharma vyaktiyoM taka hI
sImita hone ke kAraNa pravartakadharmavAdiyoM kI tarapha se na kevala upekSita
hI thA, balki usake virodha ke AghAta bhI mahatA rahA  /  parantu
nivartakadharmavAdiyoM kI pradhaka-pRthaka paramparAoM ne zAna, dhyAna, tapa,
yoga, bhakti Adi Abhyantara tattyoM kA kramazaH itanA adhika vikAsa kiyA ki
phira to pravartakadharma ke hote hae bhI nAre samAja para eka taraha se
nivartakadharma kI pratiSThA kI muhara laga gaI aura jahA~ dekho vahA~ nivRtti
kI carcA hone lagI aura sAhitya bhI nivRtti ke vicAroM se hI nirmita evaM
pracArita hone lgaa| nivartakanarmavAdiyoM ko mokSa ke svarUpa tathA usake
sAdhanoM ke viSaya meM to UhApoha karanA hI par3atA thA; para isake sAtha unako
karmatattvoM ke viSaya meM bhI bahuta vicAra karanA pdd'aa| unhoMne karma tathA
usake bhedoM kI paribhASAe~ evaM vyAkhyAe~ sthira kI, kArya aura kAraNa kI dRSTi
se karmatattva kA vividha vargIkaraNa kiyA, karma kI phasagata zaktiyoM kA
vivecana kiyA, pratyeka ke vipAkoM kI kAla-maryAdAe~ socI, kamoM ke pArasparika
sambandhoM para bhI vicAra kiyA  /  isa taraha nivartakadharmavAdiyoM kA acchA-
khAsA pharmatattvaviSayaka zAstra vyavasthita

Page #49 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
It has been happening and in this, day by day, new questions and their answers
have been leading to further development.  These renunciate groups have been
considering different aspects separately according to their own convenience, but
as long as the combined objective of all of them was to refute the doctrine of
the creator, there was exchange of ideas among them and there was also
unanimity. This is the reason why in the literature on karma in Nyaya-
Vaisheshika, Sankhya Yoga, Jain and Buddhist philosophies, there is a lot of
similarity in terms of definition, meaning, classification, etc. While the
existing literature of the said philosophies is mostly from the time when the
harmony between the said philosophies had diminished considerably.  There was
already a problem before the liberationists that on the one hand, the old bound
karmas are also infinite, on the other hand, new karmas are bound every moment
at the time of experiencing their fruits in sequence, then how is the complete
annihilation of all these karmas possible? The liberationists had also solved
this problem very cleverly. Today we find the description of that solution in
the literature of the said renunciate philosophies in brief or in detail.  This
situation is sufficient to indicate that there was a lot of exchange of ideas
among the different groups of renunciates. Despite all this, the time had come
when these renunciate groups were not as close as before. Nevertheless, each
group continued to speculate about the element of karma. In the meantime, it
also happened that a separate group of karma thinkers became stable in a
renunciate group, who thought deeply about karma rather than questions related
to liberation and mainly studied it, just as other groups of thinkers did in
their own subjects and still do today. All liberationists agree on the causes of
bondage of karma and the means of its annihilation, but there is a difference in
the views of the above-mentioned group of thinkers regarding the nature of the
element of karma. Atomic liberationists

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 ho gayA aura isameM dina-prati-dina naye-naye praznoM aura unake uttaroM ke
dvArA adhikAdhika vikAsa bhI hotA rahA  /  ye nivartakavAdI vibhinna pakSa
apane-apane subhIte ke anusAra pRthak-pRthak vicAra karate rahe, parantu jaba
taka ina sabakA sammilita dhyeya pravartakadharmavAda kA khaNDana rahA, taba
taka unameM vicAra-vinimaya bhI hotA rahA aura ekamAkyatA bhI rhii| yahI kAraNa
hai ki nyAya-vaizeSika, sAMsya yoga, jaina aura bauddhadarzana meM karma-
viSayaka sAhitya meM paribhASA, bhAva, vargIkaraNa Adi kA zabdAH aura arthazaH
sAmya bahuta kucha dekhane meM AtA hai| jabaki ukta darzanoM kA vidyamAna
sAhitya usa samaya kI adhikAMza paidAiza hai, jisa samaya ki ukta darzanoM kA
paraspara sadbhAva bahuta kucha ghaTa gayA thA  /  mokSavAdiyoM ke sAmane eka
samasyA pahale se yaha thI ki eka to yurAne baddha karma bhI ananta haiM, dUsare
unakA kramazaH phala bhogane ke samaya pratyeka kSaNa meM nayenaye karma
baMdhate haiM, phira ina saba karmoM kA sarvathA uccheda kaise sambhava hai ?
isa samasyA kA samAdhAna bhI mokSakAdiyoM ne bar3I khUbI se kiyA thA  /  Aja
hama ukta nivRttivAdI darzanoM ke sAhitya meM usa samAdhAna kA varNana saMkSepa
yA vistAra meM eka-sA pAte haiN| _ yaha vastusthiti itanA sUcita karane ke lie
paryApta hai ki kabhI nivatakavAdiyoM ke bhinna-bhinna pakSoM meM khUba vicAra-
viniyama hotA thaa| yaha saba kucha hote hue bhI dhIre-dhIre aisA samaya A gayA
thA, jabaki ye nivasaMkavAdI pakSa sApasa' meM pahale jaise nikaTa na rahe  /
phira bhI hara eka pakSa karmatatva ke viSaya meM UhApoha to karatA hI rahA  /
isa bIca aisA bhI huA ki kisI nivataMkavAdI pakSa meM eka sAsA karmacintaka
varga hI sthira ho gayA, jo mokSa sambandhI praznoM kI apekSA karma ke viSaya
meM hI gahrA vicAra karatA thA aura pradhAnatayA usI kA adhyayana-adhyAyana
karatA zrA, jaisA ki zranya-anya viSaya ke cintaka varga apane-apane viSaya meM
kiyA karate the aura Aja bhI karate haiN| karma ke bandhaka kAraNoM aura isake
ucchedaka upAyoM ke bAre meM sabhI mokSabAdI gauNa-mukhyabhAva se ekamata haiM
hI para vAmatatva meM svarUpa ke bAre meM Upara nirdiSTa cintaka varga ke
mantavya meM antara hai  /  paramANuvAdI mokSamArgI

Page #50 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(50) 1 Vaisheshika and other schools considered karma to be an attribute of the
soul (chetana), while the Pradhana-vada school of Samkhya Yoga considered it to
be an attribute of the mind (antarahkarana), which is inert (jada). However,
Jain thinkers, who consider both the soul and atoms to be products of karma,
hold a unique view of karma as a result of both the soul and the inert.
According to them, the soul, while being conscious, is also capable of
contraction and expansion like the Prakriti (nature) of Samkhya, which allows
for karmic modifications and can also become one with inert atoms.   According
to Vaisheshika and other schools, karma, being an attribute of the soul, is not
truly separate from it. Similarly, according to Samkhya, karma, being an
attribute of Prakriti, is not truly separate from the inert. However, Jain
thinkers believe that karma is a result of both the soul and the inert, which
they call "bhaava karma" (karma of consciousness) and "dravya karma" (karma of
matter).  This entire process related to karma is undoubtedly very old, as there
was a lot of exchange of ideas among thinkers of karma. While it cannot be said
for sure how old this time was, the deep thought, systematic structure, and
extraordinary presentation of subtle and extremely subtle concepts in the Jaina
Karma Shastra, which has been a long-standing institution in Jain philosophy,
makes it clear that Jain philosophy's unique karma-vidya (science of karma) must
have been established before the time of Lord Parshvanatha. This very vidya is
what made Jain thinkers known as Karma Shastrajnas, and this vidya was spread
under the names "Agrayaniya-purva" and "Karma-pravada-purva".  Jain thinkers
paid a lot of attention to the concept of karma, while Samkhya Yoga focused
particularly on the path of meditation. Later, when the Tathagata Buddha
appeared, he also emphasized meditation. However, all of them retained the form
of karma-chintan that they inherited. This is why Jain Karma Shastra holds a
unique place in terms of its subtlety and detail. Nevertheless, it shares a lot
of similarities with the karma-chintan of Samkhya Yoga, Buddhism, and other
schools, and there is also a fundamental unity, which is important for students
of Karma Shastra to know.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 ( 50 ) 1 vaizeSika Adi karma ko cetananiSTha mAnakara use cetanadharma batalAte
the, jabaki pradhAnavAdI sAMkhyayoga use antaHkaraNa sthita mAnakara jar3adharma
batalAte the  /  parantu AtmA aura paramANu ko pariNAmI mAnane vAle jaina
cintaka apanI svatantra prakriyA ke anusAra karma ko cetana aura jar3a ubhaya ke
pariNAmarUpa se ubhayarUpa mAnate haiM  /  inake matAnusAra bAtmA vetana hokara
bhI sAMkhya ke prAkRta antaHkaraNa kI taraha saMkoca vikAsazIla hai, jisameM
karmarUpa vikAra bhI sambhava hai aura jo jar3a paramANuoM ke sAtha ekarasa bhI
ho sakatA hai| vaizeSika Adi ke matAnusAra karma cetanadharma hone se vastutaH
cetana se alaga nahIM aura sAMkhya ke anusAra karma prakRtidharma hone se
vastutaH jar3a se pRthaka nahIM, jabaki jaina cintakoM ke matAnusAra karmatattva
cetana aura jar3a ubhayarUpa ho phalita hotA hai, jise ve bhAva aura dravya
karma kahate haiM  /  yaha saba karmatattva sambandhI prakriyA itanI purAnI to
avazya hai, jabaki pharma ke cintakoM meM paraspara vicAra-vinimaya adhikAdhika
hotA thA  /  vaha samaya : purAnA hai yaha nica to nahIM kahA jA sakatA, parantu
jainadarzana meM karmazAstra kA jo cirakAlIna saMsthAna hai usa zAstra meM jo
vicAroM kI gaharAI, zrRMkhalAbaddhatA tathA sUkSmAtisUkSma bhASoM kA asAdhAraNa
nirUpaNa hai, use dhyAna meM rakhane se yaha binA mAne kAma nahIM calatA ki
jainadarzana kI viziSTa karmavidyA bhagavAna pArzvanAtha ke pahale avazya sthira
ho cukI thii| isI vidyA ke kAraNa jaina karmazAstrajJa kahalAye aura yahI vidyA
agrAyaNIyapUrva tathA karmapravAdapUrva ke nAma se vita huI  /  jaina cintakoM
ne karma-tatva ke cintana kI ora bahuta dhyAna diyA, jabaki sAMkhyayoga ne
dhyAnamArga kI ora savizeSa dhyAna diyA  /  age jAkara jaba tathAgata buddha
hue, taba unhoMne bhI dhyAna para hI adhika bhAra diyA  /  para saboM ne
virAsata meM mile karmacintana kA rUpa apanA rakhA hai| yahI kAraNa haiM ki
sUkSmatA aura vistAra meM jaina karmazAstra apanA asAdhAraNa sthAna rakhatA hai
/  phira bhI sAMkhyayoga, bauddha Adi darzanoM ke karma-cintakoM ke sAtha usakA
bahuta kucha sAmya hai aura mUla meM ekatA bhI hai jo karmazAstra ke abhyAsiyoM
ke lie jJAtavya hai  /

Page #51 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Jain Philosophy and the Doctrine of Karma  India is the sacred land of
philosophical thought. Here, sages have pondered deeply on the profound
questions of life.  They have contemplated and analyzed the nature of the soul,
the Supreme Soul, the nature of karma, and the fruits of karma.  Indeed, this is
the very backbone of philosophical thought.  The doctrine of karma holds a
significant place in the spiritual Indian philosophical tradition.  In their
quest to understand the causes of happiness, suffering, and the various
complexities of worldly existence, Indian thinkers explored the doctrine of
karma.  However, the well-organized and well-developed form of this doctrine
found in Jain philosophy is not found in any other system in such a systematic
manner.  Therefore, we present here the Jain perspective on the doctrine of
karma.  **The Nature of Karma**  The actions that occur within this worldly
being, who is bound by attachment and aversion, can be categorized into five
forms:  Mithyatva (false belief), Aviriti (non-restraint), Pramada
(carelessness), Kshaya (passions), and Yoga (attachment).  These actions lead to
the association of a type of unconscious substance with the soul.  This
substance, fueled by attachment and aversion, binds itself to the soul.  In
time, this substance bears fruit in the form of happiness and suffering.  This
is called karma.  In other words, the actions performed by a being due to
Mithyatva, Aviriti, Pramada, Kshaya, etc., are called karma.  **(a)  **"Kīrai
jīma he uhi jeṇam tto bhaṇṇāe kamnam."**  (He who speaks of karma is a true
knower.)  **(b)  **"Vimaya kamāyai rangiyahan je anuyālagganti. Jīva paesa
mohiyahana te jiṇ kamm bhaṇati."**  (He who is attached to the world, who is
stained by the colors of the world, is bound by karma.  The soul who is freed
from attachment is free from karma.)  - Karma Grantha, Part 1.1 - Paramātma
Prakash, 162

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 } jainadarzana meM karma siddhAnta bhAratavarSaM dArzanika cintana kI
puNyabhUmi hai| yahA~ ke ma ne jIvana ke gambhIra praznoM para cintana-manana
karanA adhika etadathaM vahA~ AtmA-paramAtmA, lagkasvarUpa, karma, karmaphala A
cintana-manana va vivecana kiyA gayA hai| vastutaH yaha cintana kA merudaNDa hai
/  ( 51 y adhyAtmavAdI bhAratIya dArzanika cintana meM karma siddhAnta kA
mahatva sthAna hai| sukha-duHkha evaM vibhinna prakAra kI sAMsArika vicitratAoM
ke kAraNoM kI khoja karate hue bhAratIya cintakoM ne karmasiddhAnta kA anveSaNa
kiyA tathApi isakA jo suvyavasthita aura suvikasita rUpa jainadarzana meM
upalabdha hotA hai, vaha anyatra kramabaddha rUpa se prApta nahIM hotA hai  /
isalie yahA~ jainadarzana kA karmasiddhAnta-viSayaka dRSTikoNa prastuta karate
haiM  /  karma kA lakSaNa rAga-dveSa se saMyukta isa saMsArI jIva ke andara
prati samaya parispaMdana rUpa jo kriyA hotI rahatI hai, usako sAmAnya se
mithyAtva avirati, pramAda, kaSAya aura yoga ina pA~ca rUpoM meM vargIkRta kara
sakate haiN| inake nimitta se AtmA ke sAtha eka prakAra kA acetana dravya AtA
hai aura vaha rAga-dveSa kA nimitta pAkara AtmA ke sAtha ba~dha jAtA hai| samaya
pAkara vaha dramya sukha-duHkha phala dene lagatA hai, use karma kahate haiM  /
arthAta mithyAtva avrata, pramAda, kaSAya Adi se jIva ke dvArA jo kiyA jAtA hai,
use karma kahate haiM  / " 1 (ka) kIrai jIema he uhi jeNaM tto bhaNNAe kamnaM  /
dasa use (kha) vimaya kamAyahi raMgiyahaM je anuyAlaggaMti  /  jIva paesa
mohiyahaM te jiNa kamma bhaNati  //  - karmagrantha bhAga 1 / 1 - paramAtma
prakAza 162

Page #52 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(52) There are two types of karma - **bhavan karma** and **dravya karma**.
**Bhavan karma** refers to the emotions of attachment and aversion in the soul,
which attract the unconscious karmic matter towards the soul. **Dravya karma**
refers to the unconscious karmic matter that binds to the soul.  The detailed
explanation of **bhavan karma** and **dravya karma** is found in the Jain
scriptures. The five causes of karmic bondage are: **mithyatva** (false belief),
**avirati** (non-renunciation), **pramada** (carelessness), **kṣaya**
(passions), and **yoga** (attachment). These five causes can be summarized into
two: **kṣaya** and **yoga**. Further, **kṣaya** is the ultimate cause of karmic
bondage.  While there are many other causes of karmic bondage, the Jain
scriptures categorize them into two: **raga** (attachment) and **dvesha**
(aversion). Every mental thought is either rooted in attachment or aversion.
Experience shows that even if the outward behavior of ordinary beings appears
different, their actions are either driven by attachment or aversion. These
tendencies lead to various desires. Whether a being is aware of it or not, their
subtle desires are fueled by attachment and aversion.  Just as a spider gets
trapped in its own web, a soul, due to ignorance and delusion, creates a web of
karma and gets entangled in it. Ignorance, false knowledge, and other factors
considered causes of karma are also connected to attachment and aversion. When
attachment or aversion increases, knowledge gets distorted.  Despite the
difference in terminology, the Jain view on the cause of karmic bondage does not
contradict other orthodox philosophies. The Nyaya and Vaisheshika schools
consider **mithyatva** (false knowledge) as the cause of karma. Yoga philosophy
considers the non-differentiation of **prakriti** (nature) and **purusha**
(soul) as the cause. Vedanta and other philosophies consider **avidya**
(ignorance) as the cause. Jain philosophy considers **mithyatva** (false belief)
as the cause of karmic bondage. However, it is important to remember that
regardless of the terminology used, if the cause does not lead to karmic
bondage, it cannot be considered the true cause of karma.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 ( 52 ) karma ke do bheda hai--bhAvanarma aura dravyakarma  /  jIva ke jina
rAga-dveSarUpa bhAvoM kA nimitta pAkara acetana karnadravya AtmA kI ora AkRSTa
hotA hai una bhAvoM kA nAma bhAvakarma hai aura jo acetana kamaMdravya AtmA ke
sAtha saMbaddha hotA hai, use dravyakarma kahate haiN| bhASakarma aura
dravyakarma kA vizeSa vivecana _ 'bhAvakarma - jainadarzana meM karmabandha ke
vistAra se mithyAtva, avirati, pramAda, kaSAya aura yoga ye pA~ca kAraNa
batalAye haiM aura inako kramazaH saMkSepa karate hue, inakA saMkSipta rUpa
antima do kAraNoM -kaSAya aura yoga meM kiyA huA milatA hai| ina do kAraNoM ko
bhI adhika saMkSepa meM kahA jAya to kaSAya hI karmabandha kA kAraNa hai  /  yoM
to kaSAya ke atirikta vikAra ke anya aneka kAraNa haiM, para una sabakA saMkSepa
meM vargIkaraNa karake adhyAtmavAdiyoM ne rAga aura hai ye do hI prakAra kahe
hai; kyoMki koI bhI mAnasika vicAra ho vaha yA to rAga (Asakti) rUpa hai yA
dveSa (ghRNA) rUpa hai| anubhava se bhI yahI siddha hai ki sAdhAraNa prANiyoM kI
pravRtti cAhe Upara se kaisI hI kyoM na dIkha par3e parantu vaha yA to
rAgamUlaka hotI hai yA dveSamulaka  /  aisI pravRtti hI vividha vAsanAoM kA
kAraNa hotI hai  /  prANI jAna sake yA na jAna sake para usakI vAsanAtmaka
sUkSma dRSTi kA kAraNa usake rAga aura dveSa hI hote haiN| _ makar3I jaise apanI
pravRtti se apane anAye hue jAla meM phaMsatI rahatI hai, vaise hI jIva bhI
apanI pravRtti se karma ke jAla ko ajJAna-mohavaza raca letA hai aura usameM
phaMsatA rahatA hai  /  ajJAna, mithyAjAna Adi jo karma ke kAraNa kahe jAte
haiM, ve bhI rAga dveSa ke sambandha se hI ! rAga kI yA dvaipa kI mAtrA bar3hI
phi jJAna viparIta rUpa meM badalane lagatA hai  /  isameM zabdabheda hone para
bhI vArmabandha ke kAraNa ke sambandha meM anya kisI bhI Astika darzana ke sAtha
jainadarzana kA koI matabheda nahIM hai| naiyAyika aura vaizeSika darzanoM meM
mithyAjJAna ko, yogadarzana meM prakRti aura puruSa ke abhedazAna ko, vedAnta
Adi darzanoM meM avizA ko aura jainadarzana meM mizyAtva ko karmabandha kA
kAraNa batalAyA hai| lekina yaha bAna dhyAna meM rakhanI cAhie ki kisI ko bhI
karma kA kAraNa kyoM na kahA jAya para yadi usameM karma kI

Page #53 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(53) Bondage (the power to create karma) is only due to attachment and aversion.
When attachment and aversion are absent, ignorance (mithyatva) diminishes or is
destroyed. In the Mahabharata Shantiparva, the statement "karma binds the
creature" also refers to attachment and aversion. Thus, whether it is called
mithyatva or attachment and aversion, all these are called bhavakarma. Avyakarma
- From the above statement, it is clear that karma bondage occurs due to
physical and mental tendencies arising from attachment and aversion. Although
every thought is a cause of karma acquisition, the karma bondage that occurs due
to actions arising from kshaya is particularly strong, and the karma bondage
that occurs due to actions with thought is weak and of short duration, and it
takes less effort and less time to destroy it. Jain philosophy provides a well-
organized description of the process of karma bondage. According to its belief,
there are two types of substances in the world - (1) conscious and (2)
unconscious. Unconscious substances are also of five types: dharma, adharma,
space, time, and matter. Of these, the first four types of substances are
intangible and formless. Therefore, they are beyond the reach of the senses and
are therefore imperceptible. Only matter is a substance that is tangible and has
form, and therefore it is visible to the senses and can be grasped and released.
According to the etymology "puranadgalana pungala", to meet and to separate is
its very nature. This matter has categories of perceptible and imperceptible
forms. Among these are also karma particles. There is no place in the world
where karma-producing matter particles are not present. When a being acts with
its mind, speech, or body in any way, karma-producing matter particles are
attracted from all sides, and as many regions as the soul exists in, so many
matter particles are absorbed by it at that time. The number of particles varies
according to the intensity of the action. The amount of action...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 ( 53 ) baMdhakatA ( karmale paidA karane kI zakti ) hai to vaha rAga-dveSa ke
sambandha se hI hai| rAgadveSa kA abhAva hote hI ajJAnapanA ( mithyAtva ) kama
yA naSTa ho jAtA hai  /  mahAbhArata zAntiparva ke karmaNA baMdhyate jantu isa
kathana meM bhI karma zabda kA matalaba rAga-dveSa se hI haiM  /  isa prakAra
mithyAtvAdi kisI nAma se kaheM vA rAga-dveSa kaheM ye saba bhAvakarma kahalAte
haiM  /  avyakarma -- pUrvokta kathana se yaha bhalIbhAMti spaSTa ho jAtA hai ki
rAgadveSajanita zArIrika-mAnasika pravRtti se karmabandha hotA hai| vaise to
pratyeka thiyA karmopAjana kA kAraNa hotI hai lekina jo kriyA kaSAyajanita hotI
hai, usase hone vAlA karmatrandha vizeSa balavAna hotA hai aura kathAsahita
kriyA se hone vAlA karmabandhana nirbala aura alpa sthiti vAlA hotA hai, use
naSTa karane meM alpa zakti aura alpa samaya lagatA hai  /  jainadarzana meM
karmabandha kI prakriyA kA suvyavasthita varNana kiyA gayA hai  /  usakI
mAnyatAnusAra saMsAra meM do prakAra ke dravya pAye jAte haiM - (1) cetana aura
(2) acetana  /  acetana dravya bhI pAMca prakAra ke hai dharma, adharma, AkAza,
kAla, pudgala  /  itaro se prathama cAra prakAra ke dravya amUrtika evaM arUpI
haiM  /  ataH ve indriyoM ke agocara haiM aura isI meM agrAhya haiN| kevala eka
pudgala dravya hI aisA hai jo mUrtika aura rupI hai aura isIlie vaha indriyoM
dvArA dikhAI detA hai aura pakar3A tathA chor3A bhI jAtA hai  /  'pUraNAdgalAnA
puGgalaH ' isa nirukti ke anusAra milanA aura bichar3anA isakA svabhAva hI hai
/  isa pudgala ibha kI grAhya agrAhyarUpa vargamAeM hotI hai| inameM se eka
karmabagaMNAe~ bhI haiM  /  loka meM aisA koI bhI sthAna nahIM hai, jahA~ se
karmayogya pudgala vargaNAe~- pudgala paramANu vidyamAna na hoN| jaba prANI
apane mana, vacana athavA kAya se kisI bhI prakAra kI pravRtti karatA hai, tatra
cAroM ora se karmayogya mudgala paramANuoM kA AkarSaNa hotA hai aura jitane
kSetra arthAt pradeza meM usakI AtmA vidyamAna hotI hai, utane hI pradeza meM
vidyamAna pudgala paramANu usake dvArA usa mamaya grahaNa kiye jAte haiM  /
pravRtti kI taratamatA ke anusAra paramANuoM kI saMkhyA meM bhI tAratamya hotA
hai| pravRtti kI mAtrA meM

Page #54 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
When there is an abundance of atoms, there is an increase in the number of
atoms, and when there is a deficiency in the amount of tendency, there is a
decrease in the number of atoms, and the binding of this group of assumed
pudgala atoms with the soul through karma is called dvyakarma. There are four
types of bonds: These symbols are classified into four categories:
prakritibandha, pradeshabandha, anubhagabandha, and sthitivedha. From the four
categories of yoga, shrir, kshaya, and parigati, prakritibandha and
pradeshabandha are from yoga, and anubhagabandha and sthitibandha are from
kshaya. In the absence of kshaya, karma cannot remain associated with the soul.
Just as dust does not stick well to dry clothes and falls off upon touching,
similarly, when there is no kshaya in the soul, even subtle atoms do not become
associated and fall off upon touching. The pulsating activity of the yogas of
mind, speech, and body occurs every moment, but if they do not receive the
support of kshayas, they cannot become active yogas for karmabandha. Therefore,
the weak karmabandha that occurs from the necessary actions of walking, etc.,
that occur diligently is called 'asaparayika bandha', and the tendency of yoga
that occurs due to kshayas is called 'saaparayika bandha'. Asaparayika bandha is
not the cause of bhavanashaga, and it is through saaparayika bandha that the
being wanders in the world. **Discussion of Prakritibandha** In the karma atoms
associated with the soul, powers (sthabhatra) arise that cover the qualities of
the soul, such as knowledge, etc.; this is called prakritibandha. The soul has
infinite qualities. Therefore, the nature of the karmas that cover them will
also be considered infinite, but all of them are summarized in the following
eight karmas: (1) Jnanavarana, (2) Darshanavarana, (3) Vedaniya, (4) Mohaniya,

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 adhikatA hone para paramANuoM kI saMkhyA meM adhikatA hotI hai aura pravRtti kI
mAtrA meM nyUnatA hone para paramANuoM kI saMkhyA meM nyUnatA hotI hai aura ina
gRhIta pudgala paramANuoM ke samUha kA karma-rUpa se AtmA ke sAtha baddha honA
davyakarma kahalAtA hai| cAra prakAra ke baMdha ina pratyakoM kA kramazaH
prakRtibaMdha, pradeSAbaMdha, anubhAgabaMdha aura sthitivedha ina cAra bhedoM
meM vargIkaraNa kara liyA jAtA hai| AmA ko yoga zrIraH kaSAyampa parigati meM se
yoga se prakRtibaMdha aura pradezabaMdha tathA kaSAya se anubhAga va
sthitibaMdha hote haiM  /  kaSAya ke abhAva meM karma AsmA ke sAtha saMzliSTa
nahIM raha sakate haiN| jaise sUkhe vastra para dhUla acchI naraha na cipakate
hue urAkA sparza kara alaga ho jAtI hai, vaise hI AtmA meM kapAya kI AtA na hone
para narma paramANu bhI saMzliSTa na hote hue usaphA mparza kara alaga ho jAte
haiN| mana, vacana, kAyArUpa yogoM kI parispandanAtmaka kriyA pratikSaNa hotI
rahatI hai, kintu unheM kaSAyoM kA sahayoga na mile to ve karmabaMdha ke lie
sakriya yoga nahIM de pAte haiM  /  isalie yatnapUrvaka hone vAlI calane-phirane
Adi kI Avazyaka kriyAoM se hone vAlA nirbala karmacandha asAparAyivA baMdha'
kahalAtA hai aura kaSAyoM gahita hone vAlI yoga kI pravRtti ko sAMparAyika
baMdha kahate haiM  /  asAparAdhika baMdha bhavanaSaga kA kAraNa nahIM hotA aura
sAMparAyika baMdha se hI prANI saMsAra meM paribhramaNa karatA hai  /
prakRtibaMdha kA vivecana AtmA ke sAtha sambaddha karmaparamANuoM meM AtmA ke
jJAna Adi guNoM ko AvRta karane kI zaktiyAM (stabhAtra) utpanna hotI hai ; use
prakRtibaMdha ke nAma se sambodhina kiyA jAtA hai  /  AtmA meM ananta guNa haiM
/  ataH unako AvRta karane vAle karmoM ke svabhAva bhI ananta mAne jAyeMge
lekina una sabakA nimnalikhita ATha karmoM meM samAhAra kara liyA jAtA hai (1)
jJAnAvaraNa, (2) darzanAvaraNa, (3) vedanIya, (4) mohanIya,

Page #55 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(55) The five (5) Darshanas, (6) Ayu, (7) Name, (6) Gotra, and (8) Antaray.
Among these, Jnanavarana, Varana, Mohaniya, and Antaray - these four are called
Ghatti (destructive) Prakṛtis, and the remaining Vedaniya, Ayu, Name, and Gotra
- these four are called Aghati (non-destructive) Prakṛtis.  The Ghatti Prakṛtis
destroy the four fundamental qualities (Jnan, Darshan, Veer, and Sukha Shakti)
of the soul. Jnanavarana destroys the Jnanaguna of the soul, Darshanavarana
destroys the Darshanaguna of the soul, Mohaniya is destructive for Sukha
(Atmasukha), and Antaray destroys the Veer-Shakti of the soul. These four are
called Ghatti Karma Prakṛtis because they cover and destroy the fundamental
qualities of the soul.  Some of the Uttar-bhedas (sub-categories) of these four
Ghatti Prakṛtis are partially destructive (Ekadesh Ghatti), hence they are
called Desh-Ghatti, and some are completely destructive (Sarvansh Ghatti), hence
they are called Sarva-Ghatti. But the Aghati Karma Prakṛtis do not destroy any
quality of the soul. They provide the soul with a form that is not its own, but
rather a collective, physical form. Vedaniya is the cause of favorable and
unfavorable sensations, i.e., Sukha (pleasure) and Duhkha (pain). Ayu causes the
soul to obtain various births in Naraka (hell) and other realms. Name gives the
being various births, species, bodies, etc. and Gotra is the cause of the high
and low status of beings.  The total number of Uttar-Prakṛtis of the above-
mentioned Ghatti and Aghati Prakṛtis, including Jnanavarana, etc., is 158, which
are as follows:  (1) Jnanavaraniya Karma (2) Darshanavaraniya Karma (3) Vedaniya
Karma (4) Mohaniya Karma (5) Ayu Karma (6) Name Karma (7) Gotra Karma (8)
Antaray Karma  15 4 103 56 Total 158

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 ( 55 ) darzanA(5) Ayu, (6) nAma, (7) gotra, (6) aMtarAya  /  inameM se
jJAnAvaraNa, varaNa, mohanIya aura aMtarAya - ye cAra ghAtI prakRtiyA~ aura zeSa
vedanIya, Ayu. nAma aura gotra - ye cAra aghAtI prakRtiyAM kahalAtI haiM  /  1
ghAtI prakRtiyoM se AtmA ke cAra mUla guNoM (jJAna, darzana, aura vIrya sukha
zakti) kA ghAta hotA hai, arthAt jJAnAvaraNa AtmA ke jJAnaguNa kA ghAta karatA
hai, darzanAvaraNa se AtmA ke darzanaguNa kA ghAta hotA hai, mohanIya sukha (
Atmasukha ) ke lie ghAtaka hai aura aMtarAya dvArA AtmA ke vIrya-zakti kA ghAta
hotA hai  /  AtmA ke mUla guNoM ko AvRta karane ghAta karane se ina cAra ko
ghAtI karmaprakRti kahate haiM  /  ina cAra ghAtI prakRtiyoM ke uttarabhedoM meM
se kucha prakRtiyA~ aisI haiM jo AMzika - ekadeza ghAta karatI haiM, ata: unako
dezaghAtI aura kucha pUrNataH - sarvAMza ghAta karane vAlI hone se sarvaghAtI
kahI jAtI haiM  /  lekina reat karmaprakRtiyA~ AtmA ke kisI guNa kA ghAta nahIM
karatI haiM, ve AtmA ko aisA rUpa pradAna karatI haiM jo usakA nijI nahIM hai,
apitu paugalika bhautika hai| vedanIya anukUla-pratikUla saMvedana arthAt sukha-
duHkha kA kAraNa hai  /  Ayu se AtmA ko nArakAdi vividha matroM ko prApti hotI
hai  /  nAma ke dvArA jIva ko vividha gati, jAti, zarIra Adi prApta hote haiM
aura gotra prANiyoM ke uccatvava-nIcatya kA kAraNa hotA hai  /  ukta bAtI aura
aghAtI bhaya meM kahI gayI jJAnAvaraNa Adi mUla karmoM kI kula milAkara 158
uttaraprakRtiyA~ hotI haiM, jo isa prakAra haiM (1) jJAnAvaraNIya karma (2)
darzanAvaraNIya karma (3) vedanIyakarma (4) mohanIyakarma (5) Ayukarma (6)
nAmakarma (7) gotrakarma ( - ) aMtarAma karma 15 4 103 Rs yoga 158

Page #56 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The names and characteristics of the aforementioned 158 Prakṛtis are mentioned
in this very text (Karmavipaka, the first Karmagrantha), therefore, they should
be seen by the inquisitive people.   **Description of Praveshabandha**  The
collection of Karma-pradeshas, i.e., Karma-paramanus, that a Jiva accumulates
through its actions like Kayika etc., is called Pradeshabandha. These Pradeshas
are associated with the soul, being divided into various types of Karmas. Among
them, Ayakarma gets the least share, and Namakarma gets a slightly larger share
than Ayukarma. Gotrakarma's share is equal to Namakarma!  Slightly more share is
received by Jnanavaraniya, Darshanavaraniya, and Antaraya Karmas. The share of
these three remains equal.  Mohaniya Karma receives an even larger share, and
the largest share is received by Vedaniya Karma. These Pradeshas are further
divided into Uttaraprakṛtis. This is the basis for the more or less share of
each type of bound Karma.  **Description of Sthitibandha**  The different
durations (time spent in Udya) of the maximum and minimum time of the eight
Karmas, Jnanavaraniya etc., are described in the Karma literature as follows...
| Karma-Name | Maximum Time | Minimum Time | |---|---|---| | (1) Jnanavaraniya |
30 Koṭakoṭi Sagaropama | Antamuhurta | | (2) Darshanavaraniya | 12 Muhurta |
Antamuhurta | | (3) Vedaniya | 70 Koṭakoṭi Sagaropama | 33 Sagaropama | | (4)
Mohaniya | 20 Koṭakoṭi Sagaropama | + Muhurta | | (5) Ayu | 8 Muhurta |
Antamuhurta | | (6) Nama |  |  | | (7) Gotra |  |  | | (8) Antaraya |  |  |

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 ukta 158 prakRtiyoM ke nAma aura lakSaNa isI grantha (karmavipAka, prathama
karmagrantha) meM kahe gaye haiM, ataH jijJAsu janoM dvArA vahA~ dRSTavya haiM
/  pravezabandha kA varNana jIva apanI kAyipha Adi kriyAoM dvArA jitane
kamaMpradezoM, arthAt karmaparamANuoM kA saMgraha karatA hai, usako
pradezabaMdha kahate haiN| ve pradezA vividha prakAra ke karmoM meM vibhakta
hokara AtmA ke sAtha saMbaddha rahate haiM  /  unameM se Ayakarma ko sabase kama
hissA aura Ayukarma kI apekSA nAmakarma ko kucha adhika hissA milatA hai  /
gotrakarma kA hissA nAmakarma ke barAbara hai ! isase kucha adhika bhAga
jJAnAbaraNIya, darzanAvaraNIya aura antarAya kamoM ko prApta hotA hai  /  ina
tInoM kA bhAga samAna rahatA hai  /  isase bhI adhika bhAga mohanIyakarma ko
prApta hotA hai aura sabase adhika bhAga bedanIya karma ko milatA hai| ina
pradezoM kA punaH uttaraprakRtiyoM meM vibhAjana hotA hai| pratyeka prakAra ke
baddha karma ke pradezoM kI nyUnAdhikatA kA yahI AdhAra hai| sthitibandha kA
varNana jJAnAvaraNIya Adi ATha karmoM kI adhikatama aura nyUnatama samaya kI
vibhinna sthitiyA~ (udaya meM rahane kA kAla) nimna prakAra se karma sAhitya meM
batalAI gaI haiM... karma-nAma adhikatama samaya nyUnatama samaya 30 koTAkoTi
sAgaropama antamuhUrta (1) jJAnAvaraNIya (2) darzanAvaraNIya (3) vedanIya (4)
mohanIya (5) Ayu (6) nAma (7) gotra () antarAya 12 muhUrta antamuhUrta 70
koTAkoTi sAgaropama 33 sAgaropama 20 koTAkoTi sAgaropama + muhUrta 8 muhUrta
antamahataM

Page #57 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
{57) To understand the nature of the various divisions of time, such as
Sagaropama Adi, one should study the scriptures like Anuyogadwar and other
Sutras. This will provide knowledge about Jain beliefs regarding the calculation
of time. **Explanation** The intensity and slowness of the karmic results are
based on the intensity and slowness of the causative passions (Kashaya). The
more intense the passions of a being, the stronger will be his sinful actions
(Ashubha Karma) and the weaker will be his virtuous actions (Shubha Karma).
Conversely, the more free a being is from the intensity of passions and the
purer his results, the stronger will be his virtuous actions and the weaker will
be his sinful actions. This is the perspective of Jain Karma Shastra regarding
the intensity and slowness of karmic results. **Various Stages of Karma** The
various stages of karma are described in Janakarma Shastra. These are related to
the binding, arising, transformation, existence, decay, etc., of karma. These
are broadly classified into the following categories: (1) Bandhana (Binding),
(2) Satya (Existence), (3) Udaya (Arising), (4) Udirana (Stimulation), (5)
Uvartana (Rotation), (6) Apavartana (Reversal), (7) Sankraman (Transition), (8)
Upshaman (Sublimation), (9) Nivatti (Cessation), (10) Nikanchan (Annihilation),
and (11) Abada (Unhindered). (1) Bandhana (Binding) - The binding of karma
particles with the soul, i.e., becoming one like milk and water, is called
Bandhana. Binding is of four types: Prakriti Bandha, Sthiti Bandha, Anubhag
Bandha, and Pradesh Bandha. These have been described earlier. (2) Satya
(Existence) - The karma particles remain connected to the soul until their
exhaustion (Kshaya). This state is called Satya. In this state, karma remains
present even though it does not yield its results. (3) Udaya (Arising) - The
state of karma yielding its results is called Udaya.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 { 57 ) sAgaropama Adi samaya ke vividha bhedoM ke svarUpa ko samajhane ke lie
anuyogadvAra Adi sUtroM kA avalokana karanA caahie| isase kAlagaNanA viSayaka
jaina mAnyatA kA jJAna prApta ho sakegA  /  anuvarNana karmaphala kI sIvratA
aura maMdatA kA AdhAra tanimittaka kaSAyoM kI tIvratA aura maMdatA hai| jo prANI
jitanI adhika kaSAya kI tIvratA se yukta hogA, usake pApakarma arthAt
azubhakarma utane hI prabala evaM puNyakarma arthAta zubhakarma utane hI nirbala
hoMge aura isake viparIta jo prANI jitanA kamAtra kI tIvratA se mukta evaM
vizuddha pariNAma vAlA hogA, usake puNyakarma utane hI adhika prabala evaM
pApakarma utane hI adhika nirbala hoMge jaina karmazAstra ke anusAra karmaphala
kI tIvratA aura mandatA ke sambandha meM yahI dRSTikoNa hai  /  karma kI vividha
avasthAeM janakarmazAstra meM karma kI vividha avasthAoM kA varNana milatA hai
/  inakA sambandha karma ke baMdha, udaya parivartana, sattA, kSaya Adi se hai|
jinakA moTe taura para nimnalikhita bhedoM meM vargIkaraNa kiyA gayA hai (1)
baMdhana, ( 2 ) sattA, (3) udaya, (4) udIraNA, (5) uvartanA, (6) apavartanA, (7)
saMkramaNa, (5) upazamana (6) nivatti, (10) nikAMcana aura (11) abAdhA (1)
baMdhana - AtmA ke sAtha karmaparamANuoM kA ba~dhanA, arthAt nIrakSIravat
ekarUpa ho jAnA baMdhana kahalAtA hai| baMdhana cAra prakAra kA hotA hai-
prakRtibaMdha, sthitibaMdha anubhAgabaMdha aura pradezabaMdha | inakA varNana
pahale kiyA jA cukA hai  /  (2) sattA- - ba karmaparamANu apanI nirjarA arthAta
kSayaparyanta AtmA meM sambaddha rahate haiM  /  isa avasthA kA nAma sattA hai
/  isa avasthA meM karma apanA phala pradAna na karate hue bhI vidyamAna rahate
haiM  /  - (3) udaya - karma kI phala pradAna karane kI avasthA ko udaya kahate
haiM  /

Page #58 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(18) Karmic particles that arise give their fruits according to their own nature
and then are destroyed. (4) Jayorana - The arising of karma before its appointed
time is called udirana. Just as fruits can be ripened before their appointed
time by effort, so too can bound karmas be experienced before their appointed
time by effort. Generally, the udirana of a karma of the same type as the one
whose arising is ongoing is possible. (5) Uvartana - An increase in the state
and section of bound karmas due to a particular feeling, a particular
determination, is called udvartana. This is also called anga. (6) Apavartana -
This state is the exact opposite of udvartana. The reduction of the state and
section of bound karmas due to a particular determination is called apavartana.
Its other name is apakarshana. The acceptance of both udvartana and apavartana
proves that the intensity of the state and fruit of a karma can also change due
to a particular determination. (7) Sankraman - The transformation or change of
the state, etc., of one type of karma-particles into the state, etc., of another
type of particle is called sankraman. This sankraman occurs only within the sub-
natures of a single root nature, not between different root natures. Sankraman
is considered to occur only in homogeneous natures, not in heterogeneous
natures. There are some exceptions even in the sankraman of homogeneous natures,
such as the four ayus of ayukarma, which do not inter-sankraman, nor do darshan
mohaniya and charitra mohaniya. (8) Upashaman - The state of karma in which
arising, udirana, nirdhati, and nikachana are not possible is called upashaman.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 ( 18 ) udaya meM AnevAle karma-pudgala apanI-apanI prakRti ke anusAra phala
dekara naSTa ho jAte haiM  /  (4) jayoraNA - niyata samaya se pUrva karma kA
udaya meM AnA udIraNA kahalAtA hai  /  jisa prakAra prayatna dvArA niyata samaya
se pahale phala pakAye jA sakate haiM, usI prakAra prayatnapUrvaka niyata samaya
se pahale baddha karmoM ko bhogA jA sakatA hai  /  sAmAnyatayA jisa karma kA
udaya cAlu rahatA hai, usake sajAtIya karma kI hI udIraNA sambhava hotI hai  /
(5) uvartanA - baddha karmoM kI sthiti aura anubhAga meM bhAva vizeSa,
adhyavasAya vizeSa ke kAraNa vRddhi ho jAnA udvartanA kahalAtA hai  /  isako
eMga bhI kahate haiM ! (6) apavartanA - yaha avasthA uvartanA se bilakula
viparIta hai| baddha karmoM kI sthiti tathA anubhAga meM adhyavasAya - vizeSa se
kamI kara dene kA nAma apavartanA hai  /  isakA dUsarA nAma apakarSaNA bhI hai
/  uvartanA aura apavartanA ina donoM avasthAoM kI mAnyatA se yahI siddha hotA
hai ki adhyavasAya vizeSa se kisI karma kI sthiti evaM phala kI tIvratAmandatA
meM parivartana bhI ho sakatA hai  /  (7) saMkramaNa - eka prakAra ke
kamaMparamANuoM kI sthiti Adi kA dUsare prakAra ke paramAoM kI sthiti Adi meM
parivartana athavA pariNamana honA saMkramaNa kahalAnA hai  /  yaha saMkramaNa
kisI eka mUla prakRti kI uttaraprakRtiyoM meM hI hotA hai, vibhinna mUla
prakRtiyoM meM nahIM  /  saMkramaNa sajAtIya prakRtiyoM meM hI mAnA gayA hai,
vijAtIya prakRtiyoM meM nahIM hotA hai  /  sajAtIya prakRtiyoM ke saMkramaNa meM
bhI kucha apavAda haiM, jaise ki Ayukarma kI narakAyu Adi cAroM AyuoM meM
paraspara saMkramaNa nahIM hotA aura na darzana mohanIya tathA cAritramohanIya
meM  /  (8) upazamana - karma kI jisa avasthA meM udaya, udIraNA, nirdhAti aura
nikAcanA sambhava nahIM hotI, use upazamana kahate haiM  /

Page #59 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Translation:  **Karma in the state of suppression (Upaśamana) begins to
function as soon as that state ends, meaning it arises (Udaya) and starts to
bear fruit.**  **(9) The state of complete absence of Niśi-karma, Udarana, and
Sankraman is called Nirdhāta. In this state, there is a possibility of Udvartana
and Apavartana.**  **(10) Nikācana - This state means that karma, in the form in
which it is bound, must be experienced in the same form. This state can also be
called Niyati. Some karmas have this state.**  **(13) Abādha - The state of
karma not yielding any fruit for a certain time after being bound is called
Abādha. It is a part of Sattā. However, there is a difference between Abādha and
Sattā. The state from binding to complete exhaustion is called Sattā, but Abādha
is a state of Sattā in which the bound karma remains in its original form. This
is the state before Udaya. The time period of this state is called Abādha
Kāla.**  **Other philosophical traditions use different terms for Udaya, Sattā,
Bandhana, Nikācana, Sankraman, and Upaśamana, such as Prārabdha, Sancita,
Kriyamāṇa, Nigala Vipāki, Āvagamana, and Tanu respectively.**  **Bandha, Upay-
Udirana, and Sattā are explained in terms of the eight karmas and their 158
Uttaraprakṛitis. Jain karma-shastra texts provide detailed descriptions of how
many prakṛitis are involved in each of these states. According to these texts,
Bandha has 120, Udaya and Udirana have 122, and Sattā has 158 prakṛitis.**
**The explanation of the above statement is that Sattā has all 158 prakṛitis,
while Udaya and Udirana do not count the 20 prakṛitis of the 15 Bandhana and 5
Sanghatana Nāmakarma separately. However, their Audārika, etc...**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 upazamana avasthA meM rahA huA karma usa avasthA ke samApta hote hI apanA kArya
prArambha kara detA hai arthAt udaya meM Akara phala pradAna karanA zurU kara
detA hai| (9) nisi-karma kI udAraNA, saMkramaNa Adi ke sarvathA abhAva kI sthiti
ko nirdhAta kahate haiN| isa sthiti meM udvartanA aura apavartanA kI saMbhAvanA
rahatI hai| (10) nikAcana-isa avasthA kA artha hai ki karma kA jisa rUpa meM
baMdha huA hai, usI rUpa meM use anivAryataH bhoganA  /  isa avasthA kA nAma
niyati bhI kaha sakate haiN| kisI-kisI karma kI yaha avasthA bhI hotI hai  /
(13) abAdha-karma kA baMdhane ke bAda amuka samaya taka kisI prakAra kA phala na
denA, abAdha avasthA hai| yaha sattA kA eka aMza hai| phira bhI abAdha aura
sattA meM antara hai  /  baMdha se lekara nirjIrNa hone taka kI avasthA ko sattA
kahate haiM lekina abAdha avasthA aisI sattA hai jisameM baddha karma yathArUpa
meM banA rahatA hai  /  yaha udaya se pUrva kI avasthA hai| isa avasthA ke kAla
ko abAdhA kAla kahata haiN| anya-anya dArzanika paramparAoM meM udaya ke lie
prArabdha, sattA ke lie saMcita, baMdhana ke lie kriyamANa, nikAcana ke lie
nigala vipAkI, saMkramaNa ke lie AvAgamana, upazamana ke lie tanu Adi zabdoM kA
prayoga upalabdha honA hai| baMdha, upaya-udIraNA, sattA kA spaSTIkaraNa ATha
karmoM ko 158 uttaraprakRtiyAM hotI haiN| unameM se baMdha Adi meM kitanI-kitanI
prakRtiyA~ hotI haiM, isakA vizada varNana jaina-karmazAstroM meM kiyA gayA hai|
tadanusAra baMdha meM 120, udaya aura udIraNA meM 122 aura sattA meM 158
prakRtiyAM mAnI gayI haiN| ukta kayana kA spaSTIkaraNa yaha hai ki sattA meM to
samasta 158 prakutiyA~ hotI haiM, jabaki udaya aura udIraNA meM 15 baMdhana aura
5 saMghAtana nAmakarma kI 20 prakRtiyAM alaga se nahIM ginI jAtI, kintu inakA
audArika Adi

Page #60 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(60) These five bodies are included in the five karmas called **nama karma**.
The four **pinda prakritis** - color, smell, taste, and touch - are counted as
only four **prakritis** instead of twenty **uttar prakritis**.  Therefore, out
of the total 158 **prakritis**, 36 **prakritis** of **nama karma** (20 and 16)
are reduced, leaving 122 **prakritis** that are involved in **udaya** and
**udirana**.  The reason for considering 120 **prakritis** in the
**bandhavasta** is that out of the 122 **prakritis** that are capable of
**udaya** and **udirana**, only **mithyatva mohaniya** is bound, not **samyaktva
mohaniya** and **misra mohaniya** separately, because **samyaktva mohaniya** and
**misra** (**samyaktva - mithyatva**) **mohaniya** are just specialized states
of **mithyatva mohaniya**.  Therefore, when these two **prakritis** are reduced
from the above 122 **prakritis** of **udaya** and **udirana**, there are 120
**prakritis** that remain in the **bandhavasta**.  The following table clearly
shows the number of **prakritis** that exist in the states of **satta** etc.
Karma Name | Bandha | Udaya Udirana | Satta | Karmakshaya Process ------- |
-------- | -------- | -------- | -------- Jnanavaraneya Karma | 5 | 26 | 2 |  |
Darshanavaraneya Karma | 2 | 4 | 4 |  |  Vedaniya Karma | 28 | 67 | 103 |  |
Mohaniya Karma | 4 | 67 |  |  |  Ayukarma |  |  |  |  |  Nama Karma |  |  |  |
|  Gotra Karma |  |  |  |  |  Antaraya Karma |  |  |  |  |   Through **yoga**
and **kṣaya**, a worldly being continuously binds karma, just as the process of
karma destruction also continues.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 ( 60 )  /  isa pA~ca zarIra nAmakarmoM meM hI samAveza kara diyA jAtA hai tathA
varNa, gandha, rasa aura sparza-nAma ina cAra piMDaprakRtiyoM ko 20
uttaraprakRtiyoM ke sthAna para kevala varNa, gaMdha, rasa aura sparza ye cAra
hI prakRtiyAM ginI gaI prakAra kula 158 prakRtiyoM meM se nAma-karma kI 36 (20
aura 16) prakRtiyA~ kama kara dene se 122 prakRtiyA~ zeSa raha jAtI haiM, jo
udaya aura udIraNA meM AtI haiN| baMdhAvasthA meM 120 prakRtiyoM kA astitva
mAnane kA kAraNa yaha hai ki udaya udIraNAyogya 122 prakRtiyoM meM se
darzanamohanIya kI samyaktva - mohanIya aura mizramohanIya kA alaga se baMdha na
hokara sirpha midhyAtvamohanIya ke rUpa meM hI baMdha hotA hai, kyoMki
samyaktvamohanIya aura mizra (samyatratva - midhyAttra) mohanIya
midhyAtvamohanIya kI hI vizoSita avasthAe~ haiM  /  ataeva ina do prakRtiyoM ko
udaya udIraNA kI uparyukta 122 prakRtiyoM meM se kama kara dene para prakRti
hai, jo vAvasthA meM vimAna rahatI haiN| nimnalikhita tAlikA se sattA Adi
avasthAoM meM vidyamAna rahane bAlI prakRtiyoM kI saMkhyA kA spaSTatayA
parijJAna ho jAtA hai karma kA nAma baMdha udaya udIraNA (1) jJAnAvaraNIya karma
(2) darzanAvaraNIyaka (3) vedanIyakarma (4) mohanIya karma (5) Ayukarma (6)
nAmakarma (7) gotrakarma ( 5 ) antarAyakarma 5. E 2 26 4 67 Qi  & // 28 4 67
sattA 5. EUR // 2 4 103 // karmakSaya kI prakriyA yoga aura kaSAya ke dvArA
pratikSaNa saMsArI prANI jisa prakAra karmabandha karatA rahatA hai, usI prakAra
karmakSaya kA bhI krama nirantara cAlU rahatA hai  /

Page #61 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(61) Some karmas do not bear fruit immediately, they remain dormant for some
time. This fruitless state is called **Abadha Kala**. After the **Abadha Kala**
passes, the bound karma starts to bear fruit, which is called **Uday**. Each
karma comes into **Uday** for a period of time according to its bound state and
then detaches from the soul after bearing fruit, which is called **Nirjara**.
This means that the time of **Karma-Nirjara** is equal to the time of the
karma's state. When all karmas are detached from the soul, the being becomes
completely free from karma and resides in its true nature of **Sat-Chit-Ananda-
Ghan**. This is called **Moksha**.  The cycle of binding and experiencing the
fruits of karma continues for the worldly beings. All worldly beings are holders
of some **Gati** (state of existence) among the **Naraka** (hell) and other
**Paragati** (transmigration). The classification of how many senses they have,
what kind of body they have, and what kind of **Yoga** (spiritual practices)
they have is done in **Jan-Karma Shastra** through **Margna** (categories).
There are fourteen types of **Margna**:  **Gati**, **Indriya**, **Sharira**,
**Yoga**, **Ved**, **Kashaya**, **Jnana**, **Samyama**, **Darshan**, **Leshya**,
**Bhavya**, **Samyaktva**, **Sanji**, **Aharak**.  By adding the word **Margna**
to each of these, we get the full name, such as **Gati Margna**, **Indriya
Margna**, etc.  Through these **Margna**, a complete classification of all
worldly beings' external conditions like body, etc., and internal qualities like
knowledge and power, etc., is achieved. For example, if a being is in the
**Naraka Gati**, we can know what kind of body it will have, how many senses it
will have, and what its capacity for **Shan**, **Darshan**, **Samyaktva**, etc.,
will be in this bound state.  Based on these external and internal conditions,
each being binds what kind of karmas, and how they gradually detach from the
soul, leading to what level of purity in the soul, and what kind of qualities
and states are achieved as a result of this purity, is described in **Karma
Shastra** through **Gunasthanas** (stages of purification). These
**Gunasthanas** are also fourteen in number, like the **Margna**, and their
names are as follows:

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 ( 61 ) koI mata denA prapA nahIM kara dete haiM kucha samaya aise hI par3e
rahate haiM  /  isa phalahIna sthiti ko abAdhA kAla kahate haiN| abAdhA kAla ke
vyatIta hone para baddha karma kA phala denA prArambha hotA hai, jise udaya
kahate haiN| pratyeka karma apanI baMdha sthiti ke anusAra utane samaya taka
udaya meM AtA hai aura phala pradAna kara AtmA se alaga ho jAtA hai, jise
nirjarA kahate haiM, arthAt karmasthiti ke barAbara hI karma-nirjarA kA bhI
samaya hai| jaba AtmA se sabhI karma alaga ho jAte haiM, taba prANI sarvAMzataH
karmamukta hokara apane satcin-Anandaghana-rUpa svarUpa meM avasthita ho jAtA
hai  /  isI ko mokSa kahate haiM  /  saMsArI jIva ke dvArA karmoM ke baMdha aura
bhaya kA krama sadaiva calatA rahatA hai  /  samasta saMsArI jIva narakAdi pAra
gatiyoM meM se kisI-na-kisI gati ke dhAraka hote haiM, yahAM unakI kitanI
indriyA~ hotI haiM, kauna-sA zarIra hotA hai, phitane yoga Adi hote haiM, isa
prakAra kA vargIkaraNa jana-karmazAstra meM mArgaNA sthAna dvArA kiyA hai  /
mArgaNA-sthAna ke nimnalikhita caudaha bheda haiM... gati, indriya, zarIra,
yoga, beda, kaSAya, jJAna, saMyama, darzana, lezyA, bhavya', samyaktva, saMjI,
AhAraka  /  pratyeka ke sAtha mArgaNA zabda jor3a dene se purA nAma ho jAtA hai
jaise - gati mArgaNA, indriya mArgaNA Adi  /  ina mArgaNAoM ke mAdhyama se
samasta saMsArI jIvoM ke zarIra Adi bAhya sthiti aura Antarika jJAna-zakti Adi
kA pUrNatayA vargIkaraNa ho jAtA hai  /  jaise naraka gati bAlA jIva hai to
usake kauna-sA zarIra hogA, kitanI indriyA~ hoMgI tathA isa bAdha sthiti ke
sAtha zAna, darzana, samyaktva Adi kI kitanI kSamatA hai, yaha spaSTa jAna ho
jAtA hai| isa prakAra kI bAhya aura Antara sthiti ke hone para pratyeka jIva
kisa sthiti vAle karmoM kA baMdha karatA hai aura kramazaH nirjarA karate hue
AtmA meM kahA~ saka vizuddhatA lA sakatA hai aura isa vizutA ke phalasvarUpa
kramazaH karmoM ke kSaya kA krama layA vizuddhi se prApta guNoM ke sthAna Adi kA
varNana karmazAstra meM guNasthAnoM ke mAdhyama se kiyA gayA hai| ye guNasthAna
bhI mArgaNAoM kI taraha paudaha hote haiM, jinake nAma kramazaH isa prakAra haiM

Page #62 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Mithyatva, Sasvadan, Mitra (Samyam-Mithyasthi), Aviraat Samyagdristi,
Deshaviraat, Amattasanyata, Aprammatasanvat, Nivritti (Apuurva Karan),
Anivrittabadar Samparaya, Sukshma Samparaya, Upashant Kashaya-Chhamastha,
Ksheenakashayaveetaraag-Chhadamastha, Sayogi-Keshi, Ayogi-Kevali. Adding the
word Gunasthan to each of these creates their full name. For example, Mithyatva
Gunasthan, Sasvadan Gunasthan, etc. These Gunasthanas are the stages of purity
and impurity of the soul's knowledge, perception, and conduct. Mithyatva
Gunasthan is the most impure state and Ayogi-Kevali Gunasthan is the purest
state. As a worldly soul progresses from impurity to purity, it sheds its karmas
and becomes purer. As purity increases, karma-shedding increases and karma-
binding decreases. With less binding and more shedding, a time comes when the
worldly soul sheds all its karmas and attains liberation, becoming free from the
cycle of birth and death forever.  Thus, in Jain Karma Shastra, the
classification of all worldly souls is done through Marganas and the stages of
gradual purification are explained through Gunasthanas, culminating in the
depiction of the state of complete purity.  Now, let's consider the means by
which a karma-bound soul can manifest its true nature.  Jain philosophy states
that there are three means to attain the ultimate goal of liberation (Moksha):
(1) Samyagdarshan, (2) Samyagjnana, and (3) Samyakcharitra. In some places, only
knowledge and action are mentioned as the means to liberation. In such cases, it
should be understood that Darshan is considered to be the essence of knowledge
and is not separate from it.  In this context, a question arises: Vedic
philosophies consider karma, knowledge, yoga, and devotion as the four means to
liberation. Why does Jain philosophy mention only three or two means? The answer
is that the Samyakcharitra mentioned in Jain philosophy encompasses both karma
and yoga.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 mithyAtva, sAsvAdana, mitra (samyam-mithyASTi), avirata samyagdRSTi,
dezavirata, amattasaMyata, apramattasaMvata, nivRtti (apUrva karaNa),
anivRttabAdara saMparAya, sUkSma saMparAya, upazAnta kaSAya-chamastha,
kSINakaSAyavItarAga-chadamastha, sayogi- kesI, ayogi-kevalI  /  pratyeka ke
sAtha guNasthAna zabda jor3ane se usakA pUrA nAma ho jAtA hai| jaise--mithyAtva
guNasthAna, sAsvAdana guNasthAna Adi  /  _ ye guNaspAna jIva ke jJAna, darzana,
cAritra Adi guNoM kI zuddhi aura azuddhi no taratamabhAva se hote haiM  /
inameM mithyAtva guNasthAna azuddhatama aura ayogikevalI guNasyAna zuddhatama
dazA hai| saMsArI jIva azuddhi se zuddhi kI ora bahane hue jaise-jaise karmoM kA
kSaya karatA jAtA hai..vaise-vaise zuddhi bhI bar3hatI jAtI hai aura zuddhi ke
bar3hane se karmoM kA kSaya adhika aura karmoM kA bandha kama hotA jAtA hai|
bandha kama aura kSaya adhika hone se eka aisA samaya A jAtA hai, java saMsArI
jIna' samasta karmoM kA kSaya karake mukta avasthA ko prApta kara janma-maraNa-
rUpa saMsAra se sadA ke lie chUTa jAtA hai| isa prakAra jana-karmazAstra meM
mArgaNAoM ke dvArA samasta saMsArI jIvoM kA vargIkaraNa kiyA gayA hai aura
guNasthAnoM ke dvArA kramika zuddhi kA krama batalAte hue pUrNa zuddha avasthA
kA citraNa hai  /  karmakSaya karane ke sAdhana aba yaha vicAra karate haiM ki
karma-AvRta jIva ko apane paratmAtmabhAva ko pragaTa karane ke lie kina sAdhanoM
kI apekSA hai| jana-darzana meM parama puruSArtha-..mokSa pAne ke tIna sAdhana
analAye gaye haiM(1) samyagdarzana, (2) mampajJAna aura (3) samyakcAritra  /
kahIM-kahIM jJAna aura kriyA do ko hI gAkSa kA sAdhana kahA gayA hai, to aine
sthaloM para samajhanA cAhie ki darzana ko jJAnasvarUpa samajhakara usase bhinna
nahIM bhinA hai  /  ukta sandarbha meM yaha prazna hotA hai ki vaidika darzanoM
meM karma, jJAna, yoga aura bhakti ina cAroM ko mokSa kA sAdhanA mAnA hai, phira
jainadarzana meM tIna yA do hI sAghrana kyoM kahe gaye haiM ? isakA samAdhAna
yaha hai ki jainadarzana meM jisa rAmyacAritra ko samyak kriyA kahA hai, usameM
karma aura yoga donoM bhAgoM kA

Page #63 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Right Conduct (Samyakcharitra) encompasses the control of the mind
(Manonigraha), the conquest of the senses (Indriyay), the purification of the
mind (Chittashuddhi), equanimity (Samabhava), and the means to achieve these.
The control of the mind, the conquest of the senses, etc., are the activities of
the Karma Path (Karmamarg), while the purification of the mind and the virtuous
tendencies leading to it are the activities of the Yoga Path (Yogmarg). Thus,
the combination of the Karma Path and the Yoga Path constitutes Right Conduct.
Right Faith (Samyakdarshan) is the path of devotion (Bhaktimarg) because
devotion primarily involves faith (Shraddha), and Right Faith is also in the
form of faith. Right Knowledge (Samyakgyan) is the path of wisdom (Shanmarg).
Thus, the three means of liberation (Moksha) described in Jainism - Right Faith,
Right Knowledge, and Right Conduct - are the collective sum of all the means of
other philosophies.  The essence of the discussion on karma in Jainism is that
every karma is considered to have three states: binding (Badyaman), existing
(Sat), and ripening (Udayaman). These are called bondage (Bandha), existence
(Satta), and ripening (Uday) respectively. Other philosophers have also
described these three states with different names. In Jain scriptures, karma is
classified into eight and one hundred and eighty-one categories, such as the
knowledge-obscuring (Gyanabaraneya), and the way these categories reveal the
different states of the embodied soul is not found in any other philosophy. In
Patanjali's philosophy, karma is described as having three types of results:
birth (Jati), lifespan (Ayu), and enjoyment (Bhog). However, this description is
merely nominal compared to the elaborate discussion of karma in Jainism.  How
does karma bind with the soul? What are the reasons for this binding? What
causes karma to develop its power? How long can karma remain attached to the
soul, both at its maximum and minimum duration? How long can karma remain
attached to the soul without producing its results? Can the fixed time of
ripening be changed? If so, what kind of self-transformations (Atma-parinam) are
necessary? When can one karma become another karma? How can the three subtle
powers of karma during its binding phase be changed? When and how can karma that
is about to ripen be experienced earlier? How can even the most powerful karma
be prevented from ripening by pure spiritual transformations? Sometimes, the
soul...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 samAveza ho jAtA hai; kyoMki samyakcAritra meM manonigraha, indriyajaya,
cittazuddhi, samabhAva aura unake lie kiye jAne vAle upAyoM kA samAveza hotA
hai| manonigraha, indrimajaya Adi mAttvika kArya karmamArga hai aura citta
zuddhi tathA usake lie kI jAne vAlI satpravRtti yogamArga hai| isa taraha
karmamArga aura yogamArga kA mizraNa hI samyakcAritra hai  /  samyagdarzana
bhaktimArga hai; kyoMki bhakti meM zraddhA kA aMza pradhAna hai aura
samyagdarzana bhI zraddhArUpa hI hai  /  samyagjJAna zAnamArga hai| isa prakAra
jainadarzana meM batAye gaye mokSa ke tIna sAdhana samyagdarzana, jJAna tathA
cAritra-anya darzanoM ke saba sAdhanoM kA samuccaya hai| jainadarzana meM
kamaMtattva-viSayaka vivecanA kA sArAMza jainadarzana meM pratyeka karma ko
badhyamAna, sat aura udayamAna ye tIna avasthAeM mAnI hai| inheM kramazaH
baMdha, sattA aura udaya kahate haiM  /  anya dArzanikoM ne bhI ina tIna
avasthAoM kA bhinna-bhinna nAmoM se kathana kiyA hai| janazAstra meM
jJAnAbaraNIya Adi rUpa se karma kA ATha tathA ekasau aTrAvana bhedoM meM
vargIkaraNa kiyA hai aura inake dvArA saMsArI AtmA kI anubhavasiddha bhinna-
bhinna avasthAoM kA jaisA khulAsA kiyA hai, vaisA kisI anya darzana meM nahIM
kiyA gayA hai| pAtaMjaladarzana meM karma ke jAti, AyU aura bhoga tIna taraha ke
vipAka batAye gaye haiM, kintu jainadarzana meM karma ke sambandha meM kiye gaye
vicAra ke sAmane yaha varNana nAmamAtra kA hai| _AtmA ke sAtha karma kA bandha
kaise hotA hai ? kina-kina kAraNoM se hotA hai ? kisa kAraNa se karma meM kaisI
zakti paidA hotI hai ? karma adhika-se-adhika aura kama-se-kama kitane samaya
taka AtmA ke sAtha lagA raha sakatA hai ? AtmA ke sAtha lagA haA bhI karma
kitane samaya taka vipAka dene meM asamartha hai ? vipAka kA niyata samaya bhI
badalA jA sakatA hai yA nahIM ? yadi badalA jA sakatA hai to usake lie kaise
yAtma-pariNAma avazyaka haiM ? eka karma anyakarmarUpa kaba bana sakatA hai ?
usakI baMdhakAlIna tIna-manda zaktiyA~ kisa prakAra badalI jA sakatI haiM ?
pIche se vipAka denevAlA karma pahale hI kaba aura kisa prakAra bhogA jA sakatA
hai ? kitanA bhI balavAna pharma kyoM na ho para usakA vipAka zuddha Atmika
pariNAmoM se kaise roka diyA jAtA hai ? kabhI-kabhI AtmA ke zatazaH

Page #64 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(64) Why does the result of karma not cease without being experienced even after
trying? How is the soul the doer of karma and how is it the experiencer? Even
though this is the case, how is there actually no doership and experience of
karma in the soul? How do the results in the form of afflictions create a subtle
layer of dust on the soul through their power of attraction? How does the soul,
through the manifestation of its inherent power, lift and throw away this subtle
layer of dust? How does the naturally pure soul appear to be stained by the
influence of karma? How does the soul not deviate from its pure form even though
there are thousands of external influences? How does it remove even the intense
karmas of the past at the time of its liberation? What kind of barrier exists
between the soul and the karmas that are obstacles when it is eager to see its
present state of being the Supreme Soul? Finally, how does the powerful soul
weaken the powerful karmas through its results and make its path of progress
free from obstacles? What is the nature of the results called 'Apuurvakaran' and
'Anivrittikaran' that help in experiencing the Supreme Soul in the temple of the
soul? How does the soul, with its pure wave-like results, crush the mountains of
karma with its electrical machine? How do karmas, which are suppressed for a
while after being swallowed, sometimes throw the progressive soul down? Which
karmas are opposed to each other in terms of their binding and arising? In which
state is the binding of which karma inevitable and in which state is it
uncertain? In which state is the result of which karma fixed and in which state
is it uncertain? How does the subtle karma associated with the soul attract
subtle particles through its power of attraction and create the body, mind,
subtle body, etc. through them? And so on, countless questions related to karma.
Their logical and detailed description cannot be found in the literature of any
other philosophy except Jain karma literature. This is the special feature of
Jainism regarding the principle of karma. The place of karma in Indian
philosophical literature. Jainism, propounded by the Shraman Bhagwan Mahavira
Tirthankara, is a philosophy of Syadvada,

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 ( 64 ) prayatna karane para bhI karma kA vipAka binA bhoge kyoM nahIM chUTatA ?
AtmA kisa taraha karma kA kartA aura kisa taraha bhoktA hai ? itanA hone para
bhI vastutaH AtmA meM karma kA kartRtva aura bhoktRtva kisa prakAra nahIM hai ?
saMkleza rUpa pariNAma apanI AkarSaNa zakti se AtmA para eka prakAra kI sUkSma
raja kA paTala kisa prakAra DAla dete haiM ? AtmA vIrya zakti ke AvirbhAga dvArA
irA sUkSma raja ke paTala ko kisa prakAra uThAkara pheMka detI hai ? svabhAvataH
zuddha AtmA bhI karma ke prabhAva se kisa-kisa prakAra malina sI dIkhatI hai ?
bAhya hajAroM bAraNoM ke hone para bhI AtmA apane zuddha svarUpa se cyuta kisa
prakAra nahIM hotI hai ? vaha apanI utkrAnti ke samaya pUrva tIvra karmoM ko bhI
kisa taraha haTA detI hai ? yaha apane vartamAna paramAtmabhAva ko dekhane ke
lie jisa samaya utsuka hotI hai, usa samaya usake aura aMtarAyabhUta karma ke
bIca kaisA indra (kha) hotA hai ? anta meM vIryavAn AtmA kisa prakAra ke
pariNAmoM se balavAna kamoM ko kamajora karake apane pragati mArga ko niSkaMTaka
karatI hai ? Atmamandira meM vartamAna paramAtmadeva kA sAkSAtkAra karAne meM
sahAyaka pariNAma, jinheM 'apUrvakaraNa' tathA 'anivRttikaraNa kahate haiM,
unakA kyA svarUpa hai ? jIva apanI zuddha pariNAma taraMga - mAlA ke vaidyutika
yaMtra se karma ke pahAr3oM ko kisa prakAra ghUra-cUra kara DAlatI hai ? kabhI-
kabhI gulAMTa khAkara karma, jo kucha dera ke lie dabe hote haiM, pragatizIla
AtmA ko kisa taraha nIce paTaka dete haiM ? kaunakauna karma banna kI va udaya
kI apekSA Apasa meM virodhI hai ? kisa karma kA baMdha kisa avasthA meM
avazyambhAvI aura kitta avasthA meM aniyata hai ? kisa karma kA vipAka kisa
hAlata taka niyata aura kisa hAlata meM aniyata hai ? AtmasaMbaddha atIndriya
karma kisa prakAra kI AkarSaNa zakti se skula pugaloM ko khIMcatA hai aura unake
dvArA zarIra, mana, sUkSma zarIra Adi kA nirmANa kiyA karatA hai ? ityAdi
saMkhyAtIta prazna jo karma se sambandha rakhate haiM. unakA sayuktika vistRta
varNana jaina - karma sAhitya ke sivAya anya kisI bhI darzana ke sAhitya se
nahIM kiyA jA sakatA hai ? yahI karmatattva ke viSaya meM jainadarzana kI
vizeSatA hai  /  bhAratIya darzana - sAhitya meM karmavAda kA sthAna zramaNa
bhagavAna mahAvIra tIrthaMkara dvArA pratipAdita jainadana gaM syAdavAda,

Page #65 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Ahiṃsābāda, Ādi, etc., are its important limbs. In the same way, and to the same
extent, Karmavāda is also its principal limb. Just as Janadarśana has marked a
perspective in world literature in the explanation and description of Syādvāda
and Ahiṃsābāda, in the same way, it has also displayed the same skill and glory
in the exposition of Karmavāda. This is the reason why the research and
explanation of Karmavāda done by Janadarśana has gained a very important place
in Indian philosophical literature, like its Anekantavāda, Ahiṃsābāda, etc.  The
place of Karmavāda in Janadarśana is generally believed that Jain philosophy is
Karmavādi. Although this belief is not false, yet under the cover of this
belief, an illusion has arisen that Janadarśana is only Karmavādi. In this
regard, it should be said that Jain philosophy is not only Karmavādi, but
according to the statement of Ācārya Siddhasena Divākara, it is a philosophy
that believes in five causal theories, namely Kālatraya, Svabhāvādi, etc.
Karmavāda is one of the aforementioned causal theories. Nevertheless, the main
reason for the emergence of the aforementioned illusory belief is that out of
the five aforementioned theories accepted by Jain philosophy, Karmavāda has
occupied so much space in the literary field that no other theory has occupied
even a hundredth of the space that it has occupied.  There is no such Āgama in
the original Jain Karma literature, which is only subject-oriented to Karmavāda,
and the nature of Jain Karmavāda and its explanation are separately indicated in
the Jain Āgamas available today, so it cannot become a limb in the publication
of the importance of Jain Karmavāda. Therefore, in this situation, this
curiosity is natural and should be:

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 ahisAbAda Adi jaise isake mahatvapUrNa aMgarUpa hai. vaise hI aura utane hI  /
pramANa meM karmavAda bhI usakA pradhAna aMga hai  /  syAdavAda aura ahiMsAvAda
kI vyAkhyA aura varNana meM jaise janadarzana ne vizvasAhitya meM eka dRSTikoNa
aMkita kiyA hai, usI prakAra karmavAda ke vyAkhyAna meM bhI usane utanA hI
kauzala aura gaurava pradarzita kiyA hai| yahI kAraNa hai ki janadarzana dvArA
kI gaI karmavAda ko zodha aura usakI vyAkhyA- ina donoM ko bhAratIya darzana-
sAhitya meM usake anekAntavAda, ahiMsAvAda Adi vAdoM ke samAna cimarIya
mahatvapUrNa mAga prApta hai| janadarzana meM karmavAda kA sthAna sAmAnyatayA
aisI mAnyatA hai ki jainadarzana karmabAdI hai| yadyapi yaha mAnyatA asatya to
nahIM hai, tathApi isa mAnyatA kI oTa meM eka aisI bhrAnti utpanna huI hai ki
janadarzana mAtra karmavAdI hai| isa sambandha meM kahnA cAhie ki jainadarzana
mAtra karmatrAdI hai, aisA nahIM hai, parantu vaha AcArya siddhasana divAkara ke
isa kathana ke anusAra kAlo sahAva niyaI puncakayaM purisakAraNe gatA  /  misa
te cevA samAsao hoI sammatta  /  /  kAlatrAi, svabhAvAda Adi pAMca kAraNavAda ko
mAnane vAlA darzana hai| karmavAda ukta pAtra kAraNavAdoM meM se eka vAda haiM
/  phira bhI ukta bhrAnta mAnyatA utpanna hone kA mukhya kAraNa yahI hai ki
jainadarzana ke dvArA mAnya kiye gaye pukta pA~ca vAdoM meM se karmavAda ne
sAhitya-kSetra meM itanA sthAna roka rastrA hai ki usakA zatAMza jitanA sthAna
Dumare kisI vAda ne nahIM rokA hai| maulika jaina-karmasAhitya jaina-AgamoM meM
se aisA koI Agama nahIM hai, jo kevala karmavAda viSayalakSI ho tathA jaina-
karmavAda kA svarUpa aura usakI vyAkhyA vartamAna meM vidyamAna jainAgamoM meM
pRthaka-pRthaka rUpa se amuka pramANa meM saMketarUpa hone se vaha jaina
karmavAda kI mahatA ke prakAzana meM aMgampa nahIM bana sakatI hai  /  ataH isa
sthiti meM yaha jijJAsA sahaja hI hotI hai aura honI bhI cAhie ki

Page #66 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
What is the source of the exposition of Karmavada, an integral part of Jain
philosophy? The answer of the interpreters and proponents of Jain Karmavada
literature is that the fundamental, detailed, and comprehensive exposition of
the subject matter of Jain Karmavada is found in the Maha Shastra called Karma
Pravada Purva. Our exposition of Karmavada, other compositions, etc., are based
on this Maha Shastra. Although this original Maha Shastra has been lost to
oblivion and vanished due to the passage of time, the Karmavada literature
available to us today is a shadow of the original Maha Shastra. Due to the
oblivion and absence of the aforementioned Maha Shastra, the creators of Karma
literature had to leave out the exposition of many things in Karmavada, and many
descriptions that appear contradictory have been left to the mercy of fate.
**Proponents of Jain Karma Literature**  The proponents of Jain Karma Siddhanta
literature are divided into two traditions: Shwetambar and Digambar. However,
the exposition and description of Karmavada have remained the same. This is why
both traditions are considered to have the same theoretical framework in every
subject. Both traditions are also on the same level in terms of the
characteristics of this literature. In addition, there may be ease or
difficulty, brevity or detail in the composition and description of the subject
matter depending on the abilities of the authors. However, from a realistic
perspective, the Karmavada literature of neither tradition can be considered
less glorious. As is the case with every subject, both traditions have borrowed,
described, and compared each other's material in Karmavada literature. This
proves that neither tradition is less glorious in Karmavada literature. There
have been many learned Acharyas in both traditions who are experts in Karmavada,
and their statements are never flawed. Powerful texts like Karma Prakriti,
Pancha Sangraha, etc.,

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 jainadarzana ke aMgabhUta karmavAda ke vyAkhyAna kA mUlasthAna kauna-sA hai ?
isa viSaya meM jaina-karmadAda-viSayaka sAhitya ke vyAkhyAtA aura praNetAoM kA
yaha uttara hai ki jaina-kamavAda-viSayaka padArthoM kA mUlabhUta vistRta aura
sampUrNa vyAkhyAna karmapravAdapUrva nAmaka mahAzAstra meM kiyA gayA hai| isa
mahAzAstra ke AdhAra para hamArA yaha karmavAda kA vyAkhyAna, anya-racanA Adi
hai  /  yadyapi yaha mUla mahAzAstra to kAla ke prabhAva se vismRti aura vilupti
ke garbha meM calA gayA hai lekina Aja hamAre samakSa vidyamAna kamavAda-
viSayavA sAhitya pUrvokta mahAzAstra ke Azaya ke AdhAra para nirmANa kiyA gayA
aMdhArUpa sAhitya hai  /  ukta mahAzAstra kI vismRti aura abhAva meM karma-
sAhitya ke nirmAtAoM ko karmavAda-viSayaka kitanI hI vastuoM ke vyAkhyAna
prasaMga-prasaMga para chor3a dene par3e aura kitanI hI vastuoM ke visaMvAdI
pratIta hone vAle varNana zratugharoM para chor3a diye gaye haiN| jaina-
karmasAhitya ke praNetA jaina-kamasiddhAnta-viSayaka mAhitya ke puraskartA
AcArya zvetAmbara aura digambara-ina do paramparAoM meM vibhAjita ho gaye haiM,
phira bhI karmavAda kA bAjyAna aura varNana eka hI rUpa meM rahA  /  yahI kAraNa
hai ki pratyeka tAttvika viSaya meM donoM hI paramparAeM samAna taMtrIya mAnI
jAtI haiN| isa sAhitya kI vizeSatA ke viSaya meM bhI donoM paramparAeM samAna
stara para haiN| isake atirikta granthakartAoM ke kSayopazamAnusAra grantha-
racanA aura vastubarNana meM sugamatA-durgamatA nyUnAdhikatA, vizadatA-
abhizadatA hai aura ho sakatI hai  /  lekina yathArtha dRSTi se dekhane para
donoM meM se kisI ke bhI karmavAda-viSayaka sAhitya kA gaurava kama nahIM mAnA
jA sakatA hai  /  avasarAnusAra jasA pratyeka viSaya meM hotA hai vaisA hI
karmavAda-viSayaka sAhitya meM bhI donoM sampradAyoM ne eka dUsare kI vastu lI
hai, varNana kI hai aura tulajA bhI kI hai| aisA karanA yahI siddha karatA hai
ki karmavAda-viSayaka sAhitya meM donoM meM se eka kA gauraya kaMga nahIM hai  /
donoM sampradAyoM meM karmavAda-viSayaka niSNAta aneka AcArya hue haiM, jinake
vaktavya meM kahIM bhI skhalAnA nahIM AtI hai| kramaprakRti, paMcasaMgraha jaise
samartha grantha,

Page #67 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
{67} Both sects are at the same level in terms of their subject matter and
nomenclature. In the Svetambara sect, Acharya Shivsharm Suri, Churnikar Acharya
Shri Chandri Mahत्तर, Shri Gargarshi, Navangivrittikar Acharya Shri Abhaydev
Suri, Shri Muni Suri Malladhari Shri Hemchandracharya Shri Chakreswaramuri, Shri
Dhaneshwaracharya, Kharatar, Gachchiya Acharya Shri Jinvallabh Suri Acharya
Malayagiri, Shri Yashodev Suri Shri Paramanand Suri, Brihadgachchiya Shri
Haribhadra Suri, Shri Ramdev, Tapa Gachchiya Acharya Shri Devendra Suri Shri
Udayaprabha, Shri Gunaratna Suri Shri Munishekhara Agamic Shri Jayatilak Suri
Nyayavisharad Nyayacharya Mahamahaopadhyay Shri Yashvijayji, etc. have become
many original and explanatory Karmavad-related literature. Proponents and
interpreters, expert Acharyas and Sthaviras. 1 . The great Acharya Shri
Siddharsi's Upbhitibhavprapancha Katha, Malladhari Hemchandra Suri's Bhavana
Mantri Yashpal's Mohiraj Parajay Natak, Mahamahaopadhyay Yashovijayji's
Vairagiya Kalpalata, etc. are presenting the Karma Siddhanta of Janadarshan with
utmost precision. The works are adorning a unique place in Indian literature,
which is glorious for the Karma Siddhanta of Jain Darshan. Similarly, in the
Digambara sect, Shri Pushpadanta Acharya, Shri Bhootbali Acharya, Shri Gunadhara
Acharya, Shri Yativrishabha Acharya, Shri Virasena Acharya, Shri Nemichandra
Siddhantachkravarti, etc. have been prominent interpreters of Karmavatra-related
literature, proficient Acharyas and Sthaviras. 1 Scholars from both sects have
made similar efforts to record Karmavad-related literature in Prakrit, Magadhi,
Sanskrit and vernacular languages. Svetambara Acharyas have created
Karmaprakriti, Panchasangrah, ancient and modern Karmagranthas and their Churni,
Bhashya, Tika, Avchurni, Tippani, Tabba, etc. in various forms of Karma
literature, while Digambara Acharyas have created Mahakramam Prakriti Prabhrit,
Kashaya Prabhrit, Gommatasar, Labdhisar, Kshapanasar, Panchasangrah, etc. and
their commentaries in Magadhi, Sanskrit, etc. languages. ·

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 ( 67 } unake varNya viSaya aura nAmakaraNa Adi meM bhI donoM sampradAya samAna
stara para haiN| zvetAmbara saMpradAya meM AcArya zivazarmasUri, cUrNikAra
AcArya zrI candri mahattara, zrI gargarSi, navAMgIvRttikAra AcArya zrI
abhayadevasUri, zrI muni sUri malladhArI zrI hemacandrAcArya zrI cakrezvaramUri,
zrI dhanezvarAcArya, kharatara, gacchIya AcArya zrI jinavallabhasUri AcArya
malayagiri, zrI yazodevasUri zrI paramAnanda sUri, bRhadgacchIya zrI
haribhadrasUri, zrI rAmadeva, tapAgacchIya AcArya zrI devendra sUri zrI
udayaprabha, zrI guNaratna sUri zrI munizekhara Agamika zrI jayatilaka sUri
nyAyavizArada nyAyAcArya mahAmahopAdhyAya zrI yazavijayajI Adi aneka maulika
evaM vyAkhyAtmaka karmavAda-viSayaka sAhitya ke praNetA aura vyAkhyAtA niSNAta
AcArya va sthavira ho gaye haiM  /  1 . mahAn AcArya zrI siddharSi kI
upabhitibhavaprapaMca kathA malladhArI hemacandra sUri kI bhAvanA mantrI
yazapAla kA moharAja parAjaya nATaka mahAmahopAdhyAya yazovijayajI kI vairAgya
kalpalatA Adi janadarzana ke karmasiddhAnta ko ati sukSmatA se prastuta
karanevAlI kRtiyAM bhAratIya sAhitya meM advitIya sthAna zobhita kara rahI hai,
jo jainadarzana ke karmasiddhAnta ke lie gauravaNIya hai| isI prakAra digambara
sampradAya meM bhI zrI puSpadantAcArya zrI bhUtabali AcArya zrI guNadharAcArya
zrI yativRSabhAcArya zrI vIrasenAcArya zrI nemicandra siddhAntacakravartI Adi
karmavAtra viSayaka sAhitya ke pramukha vyAkhyAnA pAraMgata AcArya aura sthavira
hue haiM  /  1 donoM sampradAyoM ke vidvAn granthakAroM ne karmavAda - viSayaka
sAhitya ko prAkRta, mAgadhI, saMskRta evaM loka bhASA meM aMkita karane kA eka
jaisA prayatna kiyA hai| zvetAmbara AcAryoM ne karmaprakRti, paMcasaMgraha
prAcIna arvAcIna pharmagrantha aura unake Upara cUNi, bhASya, TIkA, avacUrNi
TippaNa, TabbA Adi rUpa viziSTa kama sAhitya kA sRjana kiyA hai, jabaki
digambara AcAryoM ne mahAkramaM prakRti prAbhRta, kaSAya prAbhRta, gommaTasAra,
labdhisAra, kSapaNAsAra, paMcasaMgraha Adi vazAstra aura usa para mAgathI,
saMskRta Adi bhASAoM meM vyAkhyAtmaka vizAla *

Page #68 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
This is a composition of **kamasahitya**. While the literature related to
**karmavada** from both traditions has many characteristics, it is like saying
that the owner of another sect is **taran durjay sharda ma kosa** - deprived of
the unique brilliance of **karmavada**. In short, both sects have made a
significant contribution to strengthening the **karmavada** accepted by Jain
philosophy.  The concept of **karma** is found in Vedic and Buddhist literature,
but it is so limited that no specific text on it is found in that literature.
However, in Jain philosophy, the concept of **karma** is subtle, systematic, and
very detailed. Therefore, the scripture that expounds these ideas, which is
called **karma shastra** or **karma-related literature**, has occupied a large
part of the **janasahitya**. **Karma sahitya** should be called the heart of
Jain literature. Although some discussion of **karma** is found in other Jain
texts, there are also many independent texts on it.  Lord Mahavira preached
**karmavada**, and its tradition continues to this day. However, there have been
some changes in it due to sectarian differences, compilation, and language.  (1)
**Sectarian Differences:** Lord Mahavira's teachings were divided into two
branches: **Svetambara** and **Digambara**. At that time, **karma shastra** also
became divided. The foundation of sectarian differences was laid in such a way
that scholars from both sects never got the opportunity to discuss the **karma
tattva** preached by Lord Mahavira together. As a result, in the original
subject:  1. To get a special introduction to **Svetambara-Digambara karmavada**
literature, see the preface of '**Sastikrashnatwar Prachin Karmaprantha:**'
published by Shri Atmanand Jain Sabha Bhavnagar and edited by Shri Narvijayji
Maharaj.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 kamasAhitya kI racanA kI hai  /  karmavAda-viSayaka uparyukta ubhaya paramparA
se sambandhita sAhitya meM aneka prakAra kI vizeSatAeM hone para bhI eka-dUsare
sampradAya ke mAlika kI taraNa durjaya zAradA mA kozA karanA gada karma-viSayaka
apUrva zAna se vaMcita rahane jaisI hI bAta hai  /  anta meM saMkSepa meM itanA
hI saMketa karate haiM ki jainadarzanamAnya karmanAda ko puSTa banAne meM donoM
sampradAyoM ne eka mahattvapUrNa yoga diyA hai  /  karmazAstra kA paricaya
vaidika aura bauddha sAhitya meM karma sambandhI vicAra hai, para vaha itanA
alpa hai ki usakA koI khAsa grantha usa sAhitya meM dRSTigocara nahIM hotA hai
/  lekina jainadarzana meM karma-sambandhI vicAra sUkSma, vyavasthita aura ati
vistRta haiM  /  ataeva una vicAroM ke pratipAdaka zAstra ne jise karmazAstra yA
karma viSayaka sAhitya kahate haiM, janasAhitya ke bahula bar3e bhAga kI roka
rakhA hai  /  karmasAhitya ko jaina sAhitya kA hRdaya kahanA cAhie  /  yoM to
anya viSayaka jaina granyoM meM bhI karma kI thor3I-bahuta carcA pAI jAtI hai
parantu usake svatantra grantha bhI aneka haiN| bhagavAna mahAvIra ne karmavAda
kA upadeza diyA hai aura usakI paramparA abhI taka calI A rahI hai| lekina
sampradAya-bheda, saMkalanA aura bhASA kI dRSTi se usameM kucha parivartana
avazya ho gayA hai| (1) sampradAya-bheva- bhagavAna mahAvIra kA zAsana
zvetAmbara aura digambara ina do zAkhAjoM meM vibhakta huaa| usa samaya
karmazAstra bhI vibhAjita-sA ho gayA  /  sampradAya-bheda kI nIMva isa sUhalatA
meM par3I ki jisase bhagavAna mahAvIra ke upadiSTa karmatattva para milakara
vicAra karane kA avasara donoM sampradAyoM ke vidvAnoM ko kabhI prApta nahIM
huaa| isakA phala yaha huA ki mUla viSaya meM 1. zvetAmbara-digambara karmavAda
viSayaka sAhitya kA vizepa paricaya prApta karane ke lie zrI AtmAnanda jaina
sabhA bhAvanagara dvArA prakAzita aura zrI naravijayajI mahArAja dvArA saMpAdita
'saSTIkrAznatvAra prAcIna karmapranthA:' bo prastAvanA dekheM  /

Page #69 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Although there are no major differences, there are some minor variations in
terminology, their explanations, and sometimes in their implications, which are
still prevalent today. We will present these points of difference in their
respective places.  (2) Compilation - From the time of Lord Mahavira till now,
the compilation of Karma Shastra has been ongoing, which can be broadly divided
into three parts: (a) Purvatmak Karma Shastra, (b) Karma Shastra derived from
the Purvas (Aakar Roop Karmashalya), and (c) Prakaranik Karma Shastra.  (a)
Purvatmak Karma Shastra - This part is the largest and the first, it is the
foundation of all knowledge, until the Purva Vidya was not discontinued. After
Lord Mahavira, for about nine hundred or a thousand years, the Purva Vidya
remained in a declining state. The eighth of the fourteen Purvas, called Karma
Pravad, was mainly about Karma, but in addition to this, the other Purva,
'Agravaniya', also had a part called Karma-Prabhut, which explained the subtle
principles. At this time, the original part of Purvatmak Karma Shastra is not
present in the Svetambar or Digambar literature.  (b) Karma Shastra derived from
the Purvas (Aakar Roop) - This part is much smaller than the first part, but it
is so large for the present practitioners that it has to be called Aakar Karma
Shastra. This part is directly derived from the Purvas, this mention is found in
the texts of both Svetambar and Digambar. The part of Karma Shastra derived from
the Purvas is still present in both sects. Due to the establishment of sectarian
differences at the time of borrowing, the derived part is known by different
names in both sects. In the Svetambar sect - (1) Karma Prakriti, (2) Shatak, (3)
Panchasangrah and (4) Saptatika - these four texts and in the Digambar sect -
(1) Maha Karma-Prakriti Prabhut and (2) Kashaya Prabhut - these two texts are
considered to be derived from the Purvas.  (c) Prakaranik Karma Shastra - This
part is the result of the third compilation. It includes many small and large
chapters on Karma. These chapters...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 kucha matabheda na hone para bhI kucha pAribhASika zabdoM meM, unakI vyAkhyAoM
meM aura kahIM-kahIM tAtparya meM thor3A-bahuta bheda ho gayA jisakI paramparA
Aja bhI pUrvavat cala rahI hai  /  bhedabinduoM ko yathAsthAna Age prastuta
kareMge  /  (2) saMkalanA- bhagavAna mahAvIra ke samaya se aba taka karmazAstra
kI jo uttarotara saMkalanA hotI AI hai, usake sthUla dRSTi se tIna vibhAga
batalAye jA sakate haiM - (ka) pUrvAtmaka karmazAstra, (sa) pUrva se uddhRna
(Akara rUpa kArmazAlya), aura (ga) prAkaraNika karmazAstra  /  (ka) pUrvAtmaka
karmazAstra - yaha bhAga sabase bar3A aura sabase pahalA hai, papIka isavaH
adhisva saba nA jAtA hai, jaba taka ki pUrva vidyA vicchinna nahIM huI thii|
bhagavAn mahAvIra ke bAda karIba nau sau yA eka hajAra varSa taka Rmika hrAsa
rUpa se pUrva vidyA vartamAna rahI  /  'caudaha meM se AThavA pUrva jisakA nAma
karmapravAda hai, mukhyatayA karmaviSayaka hI thA, parantu isake atirikta dUsare
pUrva 'agrAvaNIya' meM bhI kamatattva ke vivAra kA eka karma-prAbhUta nAmaka
bhAga thaa| isa samaya zvetAmbara yA digambara sAhitya meM pUrvAtmaka karma.
zAstra kA mUla aMza vartamAna nahIM hai  /  (kha) pUrva se uddhata (Akara rUpa)
karmazAstra -yaha vibhAga pahale vibhAga se bahuta choTA hai, tathApi vartamAna
abhyAsiyoM ke lie itanA bar3A hai ki use Akara karmazAstra kahanA par3atA hai|
yaha bhAga sAkSAt pUrva se uddhata hai, aimA ullekha zvetAmbara-digambaradonoM
ke granthoM meM pAyA jAtA hai  /  pUrva se uddhRta kiye gaye karmazAstra kA aMza
donoM sampradAyoM meM abhI vartamAna hai| udhAra ke samaya sampradAya-bheda
rUr3ha ho jAne se uddhRta aMza donoM mampradAyoM meM kucha bhinna-bhinna nAma se
prasiddha hai| zvetAmbara sampradAya meM-(1) karmaprakRti, (2) zataka, (3)
paMcasaMgraha aura (4) saptatikA-ye cAra grantha aura digambara sampradAya
meM-(1) mahAkama-prakRtiprAbhUta tathA (2) kaSAya prAbhUta-ye do grantha pUrvoda
ta mAne jAte haiN| (ga) prAkaraNika karmazAstra-yaha vibhAga tIsarI saMkalanA kA
phala hai  /  isameM karmaviSayaka choTe-bar3e aneka prakaraNa grantha sammilita
haiN| inhIM prakaraNa

Page #70 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The study of scriptures is particularly prevalent at this time. After reading
these case-specific scriptures, the intelligent practitioner reads the Ākara
scriptures. To enter the Ākara scriptures, it is necessary to first study the
Prākaranika division. This Prākaranika Karmaśāstra division flourished from the
12th-13th century to the 16th-17th century.  From a language perspective,
Karmaśāstra can be divided into three parts: (a) Prākrit language, (b) Sanskrit
language, and (c) prevalent regional language.  (a) Prākrit language - The early
and previously established Karmaśāstra is written in the Prākrit language. A
large part of the Prākaranika Karmaśāstra is also found written in the Prākrit
language. In addition to the original texts, commentaries on them are also in
the Prākrit language.  (b) Sanskrit language - The Karmaśāstra that was created
in ancient times is all in the Prākrit language, but later Karmaśāstra was also
composed in the Sanskrit language. Most of the Karmaśāstra in the Sanskrit
language is in the form of commentaries and annotations. However, there are also
some original Prākaranika Karmaśāstra texts in both traditions that are written
in the Sanskrit language.  (c) Prevalent regional language - The prevalent
regional languages mainly include Kannada, Gujarati, and Rajasthani Hindi. There
are only a few original texts in these languages. These languages have been
primarily used for translating original texts and commentaries. In particular,
these regional languages are used for commentaries, annotations, and
translations written on the Prākaranika Karmaśāstra division. The Digambara
literature adopted Kannada and Hindi languages, while the Gujarati and
Rajasthani languages were used in the Śvetāmbara literature.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 granthoM kA adhyayana-adhyAnana isa samaya vizeSanayA pracalita hai| ina
prakaraNagranthoM ko par3hane ke bAda medhAvI abhyAsI Akara-granthoM ko par3hate
haiM  /  AkaragranthoM meM praveza karane ke lie pahale prAkaraNika vibhAga kA
adhyayana karanA jarUrI hai  /  yaha pAkaraNika karmazAstra kA vibhAga vikrama
kI mAThavIM-nauvIM zatAbdI se lekara solahavIM-satrahavIM zatAbdI taka meM
nirmita ba pallavita huA hai| bhASA-bhASA kI dRSTi se pharmazAstra ko tIna
bhAgoM meM vibhAjita kara sakate haiM -(ka) prAkRta bhASA, (kha) saMskRta bhASA
aura (ga) pracalita prAdezika bhASA  /  (ka) prAkRta bhASA-pUrvAtmakA aura
pUrvodhRta karmazAstra prAkRta bhASA meM bane hai  /  prAkaraNika karmazAstra kA
bhI bahuta bar3A bhAga prAkRta bhASA meM hI racA huA milatA hai| mUla anyoM ke
atirikta unake Upara TIkA-TippaNI bhI prAkRta bhASA meM haiN| (kha) saMskRta
bhASA purAne samaya meM jo karmazAstra banA hai, vaha saba prAkA bhASA meM hI
hai, kintu pIche meM saMskRta bhASA meM bhI karmazAstra kI racanA hone nagI  /
adhikatara saMskRta bhASA meM karmazAstra para TIkA-TippaNI Adi hI likhI gaI
haiM  /  parantu kucha mula prAkaraNika karmazAstra donoM sampradAyoM meM aise
bhI haiM, jo saMskRta bhASA meM race gaye haiN| ga) pracalita prAdezika bhASA-
pracalita prAdezika bhASAoM meM mukhyanayA-kITakI, gujarAtI aura rAjasthAnI
hindI - ina tIna bhASAoM kA samAveza hai  /  ina bhASAoM meM maulika grantha
nAma mAtra ke haiM  /  ina bhASAoM kA upayoga pugthyatayA mUla tathA TIkA ke
anuvAda karane meM hI kiyA gayA hai  /  vizeSakara ina prAdezika bhASAoM meM
yahI TIkA, TippaNa, anuvAda Adi haiM jo prAkaraNika karmazAstra vibhAga para
likhe gaye haiN| karNATakI aura hindI bhASA kA Azcaya digambara sAhitya ne liyA
aura gujarAtI va rAjasthAnI bhASA zvetAmbara sAhitya meM prayukta huI  /

Page #71 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
{71} Introduction to the Karmafare Granth  The literature of the established
religions in the world is divided into two parts - (1) Tattvajnan (2) Achar and
Kriya. These two divisions are not completely separate from each other. Their
relationship is like that of the eyes and hands and feet, etc., in the body.
Jain literature is also divided into these two divisions of Tattvajnan and
Achar. This Granth Karmavipak is related to the first division. Although Jain
philosophy has considered many principles from various perspectives, this Granth
does not describe all of them. It mainly describes the principle of Karma.  To
gain a better understanding of this Granth, it is important to pay attention to
its name, subject, description order, basis of composition, definition, and
author, etc.  Name --- This Granth has two names - 'Karmavipak' and 'Pratham
Karmagranth'. The first name is appropriate to the subject and the author
himself has clearly stated it in the beginning with 'Kappanika gamaso bucchham'
and at the end with 'Ia kammatrivaago'ayam'. However, the second name is not
mentioned anywhere. The second name has become popular only because it is the
first among other Karma-related Granths like Karmastav, etc. Without reading
this, one cannot enter the next chapters like Karmastav, etc. This name is so
famous that readers, teachers, and other people generally use this name. Due to
this popular name, the original name 'Karmavipak' has become almost unknown that
many people do not understand the intention of the speaker when they say
'Karmavipak'. This is not only true for this chapter but also for the subsequent
chapters like Karmastav, etc. For example, very few people will understand the
meaning of the second, third, fourth, fifth, and sixth chapters when they are
called Karmastav, Karmaswamitva, Shadshitka, Shatak, and Satna respectively. But
everyone will understand the intention of the speaker when they are called the
second, third, fourth, fifth, and sixth Karmagranth respectively.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 ( 71 } karmafare grantha kA paricaya vizva meM pratiSThita dharmoM kA sAhitya
do bhAgoM meM vibhAjita hai - (1) tatrajJAna (2) AcAra va kriyA  /  ye donoM
vibhAga eka dUsare se bilakula alaga nahIM haiN| inakA sambandha vaisA hI hai.
jaisA zarIra meM netra aura hAtha-paira Adi anya atrayavoM kA hai| jaina sAhitya
bhI tattvajJAna aura AcAra ina donoM vibhAgoM meM ba~TA huA hai  /  yaha grantha
karmavipAka pahale vibhAga ro sambandha rakhatA hai  /  yoM to jainadarzana meM
aneka tattvoM para vividha dRSTiyoM se vicAra kiyA gayA hai parantu isa grantha
meM una sabakA varNana nahIM hai  /  pradhAnatayA karmatattva kA varNana hai  /
isa grantha kA adhika paricaya prApta karane ke lie isake nAma, viSaya, varNana
krama, racanA kA mUlAdhAra paribhASA aura kartA Adi bAtoM kI ora dhyAna denA
jarUrI hai  /  nAma ---- mik -isa grantha ke 'karmavipAka' aura 'prathama
karmagrantha'-ina do nAmoM meM se pahalA nAma to viSayAnurUpa hai tathA usakA
ullekha svayaM granyakAra ne Adi meM 'kampanikA gamAsao bucchaM' tathA anta meM
'ia kammatrivAgo'yaM isa kathana se spaSTa kara diyA hai  /  parantu dUsare nAma
kA ullekha kahIM bhI nahIM kiyA | dUsarA nAma kevala isalie pracalita ho gayA
hai ki karmastava Adi anya karmaviSayaka granthoM meM yaha pahalA hai. isake
par3he binA karmastava Adi agale prakaraNoM meM praveza nahIM ho sakatA hai|
yaha nAma itanA prasiddha haiM ki par3hane par3hAne vAle taza anya loga prAyaH
isI nAma kA vyavahAra karate haiN| pahalA karmagranya isa pracalita nAma se mUla
nAma vahA~ taka atrasiddha ho gayA hai ki karmavipAka kahane se bahuta se loga
kahane vAle kA Azaya hI nahIM samajhate haiN| yaha bAta isa prakaraNa ke viSaya
meM hI nahIM, balki kastava Adi Age ke prakaraNoM ke bAre meM caritArtha hotI
hai, arthAt karmastava karmasvAmitva SaDazItikA, zataka aura satanA kahane se
kramaza: dUsare, tIsare cauthe, pAMcaveM aura chaThe prakaraNa kA matalaba
bahuta kama loga samajheMge, parantu dUsarA, tIsarA, cauthA, pA~cavA~ aura
chaThA karmagrantha kahane se saba loga kahane vAle kA bhAva samajha leMge  /  1
1

Page #72 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Subject:** The subject matter of this text is the Karma-Tattva, but it focuses
only on the nature aspect, without considering many related matters. In other
words, it primarily describes the results of all the natures of Karma. This is
why it is named Karmavipak.  **Description:** The text begins by explaining that
Karma-bandha is not natural but caused. To fully explain the nature of Karma, it
is divided into four parts: (1) Nature, (2) State, (3) Rasa, and (4) Region. It
then lists the eight fundamental natures and their sub-categories.   To
illustrate the nature of Jnanabaranīyakarma, the author first describes
knowledge. The five types of knowledge and their sub-categories are briefly but
accurately explained. After describing knowledge, the text clarifies the Karma
that covers it. Then, Darshanabaranīyakarma is explained with examples. The text
then describes its categories and defines the word "Darshan." Among the
categories of Darshanabaranīyakarma, the five types of sleep are described in a
concise and engaging manner, based on universal experience.   Following this,
the text describes the Vedaniya Karma that causes pleasure and pain, the
Mohaniya Karma that hinders faith and good conduct, the Ayukarma that opposes
eternal life, the Namakarma that generates various states like motion, the
Gotrakarma that determines high and low birth, and the Antarayakarma that
obstructs benefits. The text briefly but experientially describes the categories
of each Karma. Finally, the text concludes by explaining the cause of each
Karma.  Thus, the main subject of this text is the result of Karma. The content
can be summarized into five parts:  (1) Description of the four parts of each
Karma, including Nature, etc. (2) The fundamental and sub-natures of Karma. (3)
Description of the five types of knowledge and four types of Darshan. (4)
Explanation of the function of all natures with examples. (5) Explanation of the
cause of all natures.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 viSaya- isa grantha kA darya-viSama karmatatva hai, parantu isameM kama se
sambandha rakhnane bAlI aneka bAtoM para vicAra na karake prakRti aMza para hI
vicAra kiyA gayA hai, arthAt karma kI saba prakRtiyoM ke vipAka kA hI isameM
mukhyatayA varNana kiyA gayA hai  /  isI abhiprAya se isakA nAma bhI karmavipAka
rakhA gayA hai  /  varNanakA maH sanma meM gabaro par3ane kA rinAgA gayA hai ki
pharmabandha svAbhAvika nahIM, kintu sahetuka hai| isake bAda karma kA svarUpa'
paripurNa batAne ke lie use cAra aMzoM meM vibhAjita kiyA gayA hai-(1) prakRti,
(2) sthiti, (3) rasa aura (4) pradeza  /  isake bAda ATha mUla prakRtiyoM ke
nAma aura unake uttara-bhedoM kI saMkhyA batAI gaI hai  /  anantara
jJAnAbaraNIyakarma ke svarUpa ko dRSTAnta, kArya aura kAraNa dvArA dikhalAne ke
lie prArambha meM granthakAra ne jJAna kA nirUpaNa kiyA hai | jJAna ke pA~ca
bhedoM aura unake avAntara bhedoM ko saMkSapa meM parantu tattvarUpa se dikhAyA
hai| jJAna kA nirUpaNa karake usake AvaraNabhUta kama kA sahaSTAnta spaSTIkaraNa
kiyA hai| anaMtara darzanAvaraNakama ko dRSTAnta dvArA samajhAyA hai| bAda meM
usake bhedoM ko dikhAte hae darzana zabda kA artha batalAyA hai|
darzanAvaraNIyakarma ke bhedoM meM pA~ca prakAra kI nidrAoM kA
sarvAnubhavasiddha svarUpa saMkSepa meM bar3I manoraMjakatA se varNana kiyA hai|
isake bAda krama se sukha-dukha-janaka vedanIya karma, savizvAsa aura saccAritra
ke pratibandhaka mohanIyakarma, akSaya jIvana ke virodhI Ayukarma, gati, Adi
aneka avasthAoM ke janaka nAmakarma, ucca-nIca gotrajanaka gotrakarma aura lAbha
Adi meM kATa DAlane vAle antarAyakarma tathA unake pratyeka karma ke bhedoM kA
thoDe meM kintu anubhavasiddha varNana kiyA hai  /  anta meM pratyeka karma ke
kAraNa ko dikhAkara anya samApta kiyA hai| isa prakAra isa grantha kA pradhAna
viSaya karma kA vipAka hai tathA prasaMgavaza isameM jo kucha kahA gayA hai, usa
sabako saMkSepa meM pAMca bhAgoM meM bA~Ta sakate haiM: (1) pratyeka karma
prakRti Adi cAra aMzoM kA kAthana, (2) karma kI mula tathA uttaraprakRtiyAM, (3)
pA~ca prakAra ke jJAna aura cAra prakAra ke darzana kA varNana, (4) saba
prakRttiyoM kA dRSTAntapUrvaka kAryakathana aura (5) saba prakRtiyoM ke kAraNa
kA kathana  /

Page #73 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Basis:** This work is a concise version of the *Karmavipak* by Bhaus. The
*Karmavipak* is based on the *Agamas* such as the *Viganis*, *Anuyogadwar*, etc.
The *Agamas* are the scriptures of Jainism. The *Karmavipak* is a commentary on
the *Agamas* and presents the principles of karma in a concise and accessible
way. The *Karmavipak* is also based on the ancient *Kamantripaph* by Garg Rishi,
and other ancient texts such as *Pharm-prakriti* and *Panchasangrah*.  The
ancient *Karmagranth* has 166 verses. It is very detailed and can be
overwhelming for beginners. Therefore, this work is a concise version of the
*Karmagranth* with only 61 verses. Despite its brevity, this work covers all the
essential principles of karma.  The author has also included some new topics
that are not found in the ancient *Karmavipak*. For example, the 20 synonyms of
*Shush-gyan* and the 8 types of karma that bind the soul are not mentioned in
the ancient *Karmavipak*, but are included in this work.  The author has also
taken care to ensure that the work is easy to understand. For example, the
author has not explained the consequences of each type of karma, as is done in
the ancient *Karmavipak*. However, all the essential information has been
included.  This work has been widely accepted and has made the study of karma
accessible to everyone. Those who read this work can easily understand the
ancient *Karmavipak* without needing any commentary. This work is also easy to
memorize due to its concise nature.  **Language:** The original language of this
*Karmagranth* and all other *Karmagranths* is Prakrit. The original verses are
written in a simple language that can be understood by those who have a basic
knowledge of Sanskrit and Prakrit. The commentary is written in Sanskrit and is
very detailed, making it easy to understand.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 AdhAra- bausa meM i: prama kA AbhAra . viganI, anuyogadvAra Adi Agama haiM  /
Agamagata kamasiddhAnta ko hI AcArya ne apanI kuzala pratipAdana zailI dvArA
pallavita kiyA hai ! AgamoM ke bAda isakA sAkSAta AdhAra garga RSi kA banAyA huA
prAcIna kamaMtripApha hai aura pharmaprakRti, paMcasaMgraha Adi prAcIna granthoM
kA bhI AdhAra liyA gayA hai| prAcIna karmagrantha 166 gAyA pramANa hone se
pahale-pahala karmazAstra meM praveza karane vAloM ke lie bahuta vistRta ho jAtA
hai, isalie isakA saMkSepa kevala 61 gAthAoM meM kara diyA gayA hai| itanA
saMkSepa hone para bhI isameM prAcIna karmavipAka kI koI bhI mukhya aura
tAttvika bAta nahIM chuTI hai| saMkSepa karane meM grandhakAra ne yahAM taka
dhyAna rakhA hai ki kucha ati upayogI navIna viSaya, jinakA varNana prAcIna
karmavipAka meM nahIM, isa grantha meM samAviSTa kara diyA hai ; udAharaNArtha-
zusajJAna ke paryAya Adi bIsa bheda tathA ATha karma prakRtiyoM ke baMdha hetu
prAcIna karma-vipAka meM nahIM haiM. kintu unakA varNana isameM hai  /  saMkSepa
karane meM granthakAra ne isa ora bhI dhyAna rakhA hai ki jisa eka bAta kA
varNana karane se anya bAteM bhI samAnatA ke kAraNa sugamatA se samajhI jA
sakeM, vahA~ usI bAta ko batalAnA, anya ko nhiiN| isa' abhiprAya se prAdhIna
karmavipAka meM jaise pratyeka mUla yA uttara prakRti kA vipApha dikhAyA hai,
vaise isa grantha meM nahIM dikhAyA hai| parantu Avazyapha vaktavya meM kucha
bhI kamI nahIM kI gayI hai  /  isI se isa pantha kA pracAra sarvasAdhAraNa meM
ho gayA hai| isake par3hane vAle prAcIna karmavipAka ko binA TIkA-TippaNa ke
anAyAsa hI samajha lete haiM  /  yaha grantha saMkSepa rUpa hone se sabako
mukhapATha karane va yAda karane meM bar3I AsAnI hotI hai  /  bhASA isa
karmagrantha aura isase Age ke anya sabhI karmagranthoM kI mUla bhASA prAkRta
hai  /  mUla gAthAeM aisI sugama bhASA meM racI gaI haiM ki par3hane vAloM ko
thor3A bahuta saMskRta kA bodha ho, aura unheM prAkRta ke kucha niyama samajhA
diye jAeM to ve bhUla gAthAoM ke Upara se hI viSaya kA parijJAna kara sakate
haiM  /  inakI TIkA saMskRta meM hai aura bar3I vizadatA se likhI gayI hai,
jisase par3hane vAloM ko bar3I sugamatA hotI hai|

Page #74 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
{74} The Life of Anyakara  The time period of the present author, Shri
Devendrasuri, is the end of the 13th century and the beginning of the 14th
century Vikram Samvat. His passing is mentioned in the Gurvavali (verse 174) as
Vikram Samvat 1337, but the time of his birth, initiation, and Murtipad is not
mentioned anywhere. However, it seems that in 1225, Shri Jagachandrasur
established the Tapa Gachchha, and he may have been initiated there. After the
establishment of the Gachchha, Shri Jagachandrasur gave the Suri Gad to Shri
Devendrasuri and Shri Vijayachandrasur, as mentioned in the Gurvavali (verse
107). It must be accepted that Shri Devendrasuri would have been a senior in
age, knowledge, and restraint at the time of receiving the Suri Pad. Otherwise,
how could he have handled the burden of such a heavy position, especially the
leadership of the newly established Tapa Gachchha? His Suri Pad was received
after Vikram Samvat 1285. If we assume the time of his Suri Pad to be Vikram
Samvat 1300, then it can be said that he would have been newly initiated at the
time of the establishment of the Tapa Gachchha. If we assume his total lifespan
to be 50 or 52 years, then it is clear that he was born around Vikram Samvat
1275. In Vikram Samvat 1602, he initiated Biradval, the son of Shreshthivar
Jinachandra, in Ujjaini, who later became known as Vidyānandasūri. At that time,
Devendrasuri would have been around 25-27 years old. This further confirms the
assumption of his birth around Vikram Samvat 1275. Even though the time of his
birth, initiation, and Murtipad is not certain, there is no doubt that he was
enhancing the glory of Bharatavarsha, especially Gujarat and Malwa, with his
presence at the end of the 13th century and the beginning of the 14th century
Vikram Samvat.  Birthplace, Caste, etc. - There is no evidence of where Shri
Devendrasuri was born, what caste he belonged to, or what family he came from.
The Gurvavali mentions his life story, but it is very brief. It mentions events
after he received the Suri Pad, but not other details. Therefore, based on it,

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 ( 74 } anyakAra ko jIvanI samaya-prastuta granthakartA zrI devendrasUri kA
samama vikrama kI terahavIM zatAbdI kA anta aura caudahavIM zatAbdI kA prArambha
kAla hai| unakA svargavAsa vikrama saMvata 1337 meM huA, aisA ullekha gurvAvalI
(zloka 174) meM spaSTa hai, parantu unake janma, dIkSA, mUripada Adi ke samaya
kA ullekha kahIM nahIM milatA, tathApi yaha jAna par3atA hai ki 1225 meM zrI
jagaccandrasUri ne tapAgaccha kI sthApanA kI, tatra ve dIkSita hue hoMge; gaccha
sthApanA ke bAda zrI jagaccandrasUri ke dvArA hI thI devendrasUri aura zrI
vijayacandrasUri ko sUrigada diye jAne kA varNana gurvAvalI ke praloka 107 meM
hai| yaha to mAnanA hI par3atA hai ki sUripada grahaNa karane ke samaya zrI
devendrasUri baya, vidyA aura saMyama se sthavira hoMge; anyathA itane guratara
pada kA aura khAsakara navIna pratiSThita kiye gaye tapAgaccha ke nAyakatva kA
bhAra ve kaise samhAla sakate the  /  vanakA suripada vikrama saMvat 1285 ke
bAda huA  /  sUriSada ke samaya kA anumAna vikrama saMvat 1300 mAna liyA jAe,
tava bhI yaha kahA jA sakatA hai ki tapAgaccha kI sthApanA ke samaya ve
navadIkSita hoMge 1 unakI kula umna pacAsa yA vAvana traSaM kI mAna lI jAya to
yaha siddha hai ki vikrama sambat 1275 ke lagabhaga usakA janma huA hogA  /
vikrama samban 1602 meM unhoMne ujjayinI meM zreSThivara jinacandra ke putra
bIradhavala ko dIkSA dI, jo Age vidyAnandasUri ke nAma se vikhyAta hue| usa
samaya devendrasuri kI jana paccIsa-sattAIsa varSa kI mAna lI jAe. jaba bhI ukta
anumAna- - 1275 vi0 saM0 ke lagabhana janma hone kI puSTi hotI hai  /  janma,
dIkSA tathA mUriNava kA samaya nizcita na hone para bhI isa bAta meM mandeha
nahIM ki ve vikrama kI terahavIM zatAbdI ke anta meM tathA caudahavIM zatAbdI ke
prArambha meM apane astitva se 'bhAratavarSa kI aura khAsakara gujarAta tayA
mAlavA kI zobhA bar3hA rahe the| janmabhUmi, jAti Adi-zrI devendramUri kA janma
misa deza, kisa jAti aura kisa parivAra meM huA, isakA pramANa nahIM milaa|
gurvAvalI meM unakA jIvana vRttAnta hai, parantu vaha bahuta saMkSipta hai|
usameM sUripada grahaNa karane ke bAda kI bAtoM kA ullekha hai, anya bAtoM kA
nahIM  /  isalie usake AdhAra para

Page #75 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
While there is mention of his life, it is incomplete. However, his travels in
Gujarat and Maswa suggest that he may have been born in Gujarat or Malwa. Due to
lack of resources, there is no room for speculation regarding his caste or
parents.  Scholarship and Character: There is no doubt that Shri Devendrasuri
was a profound scholar of Jain scriptures. His writings are proof of this. The
Guruvali mentions that he was a master of the six philosophies, and this is why
ministers like Mantreshwar Vastupal and other scholars used to attend his
lectures. Scholarship and writing are two different things, and it is not
necessary for a scholar to write. However, it is undeniable that Devendrasuri
had a deep understanding of Jain Agamas. He accurately composed the Karmagranth,
which is known as the Nadin Karmagranth. The commentary is so detailed and well-
supported that after reading it, one's curiosity to see the ancient Karmagranth
or its commentaries is somewhat satisfied. His numerous works written in
Sanskrit and Prakrit clearly indicate that he was a brilliant scholar of both
languages.  Shri Devendrasuri was not only a scholar but also a great devotee of
Dharma. As proof of this, it is sufficient to say that he supported the revival
of the activities that had become inactive during the time of Shri
Jagachchandrasuri, which was achieved through great effort and selfless
sacrifice. Guru Shri Devendrasuri had Guru Jagachchandrasuri, who had started
the work of revival with the help of Devbhadra Upadhyay. In this work, he
presented an ideal for others by showing his extraordinary spirit of sacrifice.
Family: There is no specific information about Shri Devendrasuri's disciple
family. However, it is written that many monks were his followers. The Guruvali
mentions two of his disciples, Shri Vidyānanda and Shri Dharmakiriti. These two
were brothers. Vidyānanda is the name behind Suripadi,

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 unake jIvana ke sambandha meM jahA~-kahIM ullekha huA hai, vaha adhUrA hI hai,
tathApi gujarAta aura mAsavA meM unakA vihAra isa anumAna kI sUcanA kara sakatA
hai ki ke gujarAta yA mAlakA meM janme hoMge  /  unakI jAti va mAtA-pitA ke
sambandha meM sAdhana ke abhAva meM kisI prakAra ke anumAna ko avakAza nahIM
hai| vidvattA aura cAritratatparatA-isameM koI saMdeha nahIM ki zrI devendramUri
jainazAstra ke gambhIra vidvAna the| isakI sAkSI unake granthya hI de rahe haiM
/  gurvAvalI ke varNana se patA calatA hai ki ve SaDdarzana ke mAmika vidvAna
the aura isI se mantrIzvara vastupAla tavA anya-vidvAn unake vyAkhyAna meM AyA
karate the  /  vidvattA aura grantha-lekhana-ye do alaga alaga kArya haiM aura
yaha Avazyaka nahIM ki vidvAna ko grantha likhanA hI cAhie  /  parantu
devendrasUri kA jainAgama-viSayaka jJAna talasparzI thA, yaha bAta asaMdigdha
hai  /  unhoMne karmagrantha, jo nadIna karmagrantha ke nAma se prasiddha haiM,
saTIka race haiN| TIkA itanI vizada aura sapramANa hai ki use dekhane ke bAda
prAcIna karmagranya yA usako TokAe~ dekhane kI jijJAsA eka taraha se zAnta ho
jAtI hai| saMskRta aura prAkRta bhASA meM race hue unake aneka grantha isa bhAna
kI spaSTa sUcanA karate haiM ki ve saMskRta tathA prAkRta bhASA ke prakhara
paNDita dhe| zrI devendrasUri vidvAna hone ke sAtha-sAtha cAritradharma meM
bar3e dada the  /  isake pramANa meM inanA hI kahanA paryApta hai ki usa samaya
kriyAzithilatA ko dembakara zrI jagaccandramuri ne bar3e puruSArtha aura nissIma
tyAga me jo kiyoddhAra kiyA thA, usakA nirvAha zrI devendrasUri ne kiyA  /  _
guru -zrI devendramUri meM guru thI jagaccandrasUri the, jinhAna thI devabhadra
upAdhyAya kI madada se kriyoddhAra kA kArya prArambha kiyA thaa| isa kArya meM
unhoMne apanI asAdhAraNa tyAga-vRtti dikhAkara auroM ke lie Adarza upasthita
kiyA thaa| parivAra-zrI devendrasUri ke ziSya parivAra ke bAre meM vizeSa
jAnakArI nahIM milatI hai  /  parantu itanA likhA milatA hai ki aneka saMvigna
muni unake Athita the  /  gurvAvalI meM unake do ziSya zrI vidyAnanda aura zrI
dharmakIrti kA ullekha milatA hai  /  ye donoM bhAI the| vidyAnanda nAma
sUripada ke pIche kA hai,

Page #76 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
They have created a grammar called Vidyānanda. Dharmakiriti Upādhyāya, who
became famous as Dharmaghosa after taking the Mooripad, has also composed some
Sandhis. Both these disciples were good scholars of other scriptures besides
Janasastras. Evidence of this is found in the last verse of their Guru Shri
Devendrasūri's Karmagrantha commentary. They have written that this commentary
created by me has been scrutinized by both the scholars Shri Vidyānanda and Shri
Dharmakiriti. Some of the works of Shri Devendrasūri are as follows: (1)
Shraddhadinakritya Sutravrutti, (2) Accurate Five New Karmagranthas, (3) Siddha
Panchasika Sutravrutti, (4) Dharmaratna Vrutti, (5) Sudarshan Charitra, (6)
Chaityavandanādi Bhashyatraya, (7) Vandaruvrutti, (8) Siriusbaddaman prominent
Stotra, (9) Siddhadandika and (10) Saramr Nidesha.  Many of these have been
published by other Jain Dharma-propagating organizations like the Atmananda
Sabha Bhavnagar, Devchand Lal 'Mai' Pustkodar Fund Murat. -Shrichand Surana
-Devkumar Jain

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 unhoMne vidyAnanda nAma kA vyAkaraNa banAyA hai| dharmakIti upAdhyAya ne bhI jo
mUripada lene ke bAda dharmaghoSa nAma se prasiddha hue, kucha sandha race haiN|
ye donoM ziSya janazAstroM ke atirikta anya zAstroM ke bhI acche vidvAna the  /
isakA pramANa inake, guru zrI devendrasUri kI karmagrantha kI vRtti ke aMtima
padya se milatA hai| unhoMne likhA hai ki merI banAI huI isa TIkA kA zrI
vidyAnanda aura zrI dharmakIrti-donoM vidvAnoM ne zodhana kiyA hai| zrI devendra
sUri ke kucha granthoM ke nAma isa prakAra haiM- (1) zrAddhadinakRtya
sUtravRtti, (2) saTIka pA~ca navIna karmagrantha, (3) siddha paMcAzikA
sutravRtti, (4) dharmaratna vRtti, (5) sudarzana caritra, (6) caityavaMdanAdi
bhASyatraya, (7) vaMdAruvRtti, (8) siriusabaDDamANa pramukha stavana, (6)
siddhadaNDikA aura (10) sAramR nidazA  /  /  inameM se prAyaH bahuta se anya
jainadharma-prasAraka sabhA bhAvanagara, AtmAnanda sabhA bhAvanagara aura
devacanda lAla'mAI pustakodAra phaNDa murata dvArA prakAzita ho cuke haiN|
-zrIcanda surAnA -devakumAra jaina

Page #77 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Our Important Publications 1-6 Karmagranth [Complete in 6 parts in Part 1]
Pravachan Prabha 8 Jeevan Jyoni Dhaval-Gyan-Dhara Pravachan-Sudha On the Path of
Sadhana 12 Mishri ki Chaliyan [Part 1] 13 Jan Ramprashorsayan [Jain Ramayana]
Pandav Yagorsayan [Jain Mahabharata]   Dashavkalik Mootra [Padyamay Anuvaad and
Hindi Bhavanuvaad] Uttaraadhyayana Mootra [Charitanuvaad] 17 Jain Dharma mein
Sapna: Swaroop aur Vishleshan 18 Tirthankar Mahavira 16 Sankalp aur Madhana ke
Dhni Marudharakesari Shri Mishrimal Ji Maharaj 20-26 Sudharma Pravachan Mala
[Part 1 to 10] Kismat ka Khiladi Beej aur Vriksh Bhagya-Kreeda Sanjh-Sabeera
Vishvabandhu Mahavira Hriday Parivartan [Natak

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 hamAre mahatvapUrNa prakAzana 1-6 karmagrandha [bhAga 1 meM 6 taka sampUrNa
saMda] pravacana prabhA 8 jIvana jyoni dhavala-jJAna-dhArA pravacana-sudhA
sAdhanA ke patha para 12 mizrI kI chaliyA~ [bhAga 1] 13 jana rAmaprazorasAyana
[jaina rAmAyaNa pAMDava yagorasAyana [jaina mahAbhArata] dazavakAlika mUtra
[padyamaya anuvAda va hindI bhAvAnuvAda] uttarAdhyayana mUtra [caritAnuvAda] 17
jainadharma meM sapa' : svarUpa aura vizleSaNa 18 tIrthaMkara mahAvIra 16
saMkalpa aura mAdhanA ke dhanI marudharakesarI zrI mizrImala jI mahArAja 20-26
sudharma pravacana mAlA [bhAga 1 se 10] kismata kA khilAr3I bIja aura vRkSa
bhAgya-krIr3A sAMjha-saberA vizvabandhu mahAvIra hRdaya parivartana [nATaka

Page #78 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
36 37 a 36 40 40 42 43 44 (78) Savik and Vyasanamukt Jeevan Vipattiyon ki Jad -
Jua Mansahar Anek Anarthon ka Karan Manav ka Shatru Madyapaan Veshvagaman: Manav
Jeevan ka Kod Vikar Papon ka Srot Chori: Anaitikata ki Janani Parastri-Men
Sarvanash ka Marg Jeevan-Sudhar [ Ukt Aathon Pustakon ka Sant ] Prapti Sthan
Shri Marudhar Kesari Sahitya Prakashan Samiti Paplia Bazaar, Byawar [ Rajasthan
] Pin 305601 1) 1) 1) 1.) 1) =)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 36 37 a 36 40 4o 42 43 44 ( 78 ) sAvika aura vyasanamukta jIvana vipattiyoM kI
jar3a - jUA mAMsAhAra aneka anarthoM kA kAraNa mAnava kA zatru madyapAna
vezyAgamana : mAnava jIvana kA kor3a vikAra pApoM kA srota corI : anaitikatA kI
jananI parastrI-mena sarvanAza kA mArga jIvana-sudhAra [ ukta AThoM pustakoM kA
saMTa ] prApti sthAna zrI marudhara kesarI sAhitya prakAzana samiti papaliyA
bAjAra, byAvara [ rAjasthAna ] pina 305601 1) 1) 1) 1.) 1) =)

Page #79 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Part One Karma Granth [Karma-Vipaka]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prathama bhAga karma grantha [karma-vipAka]

Page #80 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The five great vows (Mahavratas) are: 1. **Ahimsa** (non-violence) 2. **Satya**
(truthfulness) 3. **Asteya** (non-stealing) 4. **Brahmacharya** (chastity) 5.
**Aparigraha** (non-attachment)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================


Page #81 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
I bow to the glorious, victorious, auspicious Shiva. **Karmavipak** [First Karma
Granth]  Bhangalacharan and Abhidhey: I, Siri Veer, offer my salutations, and
will briefly explain the Karmavivag.  I will speak of the actions that lead to
the creation of karma. ||1|| **Gatharth** - Salutations to Shri Veer Jinendra.
I will briefly explain the text called 'Karmavipak'.  The actions performed by a
living being due to reasons such as Mithyatva, and the karma-worthy pudgala
dravya that is combined with its own regions due to these actions, is called
karma. **Vishesharth** -  It is customary for noble people to remember great and
auspicious beings at the beginning of any task, to ensure a smooth and
successful completion.  Therefore, the author has begun the text by offering
salutations to Shri Veer Jinendradev with the words 'Siri Veer Jinam'.  The
reason for offering salutations to Shri Veer Jinendradev is that he has
completely destroyed all karma, and attained the pure, enlightened state of the
self. 'Siri Yore Jinam' - This phrase indicates the name of Shri Veer
Jinendradev, and also his qualities, such as...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 vande vIram zrImaya vAra zivA karmavipAka [prathama karmagrantha]
bhaMgalAcaraNa evaM abhidheya : siri vIra jirNa baMdiya, kammavivAgaM samAsao
dunch| kIrai jieNa hebahi, jeNaM to bhaNNae kAmaM  // 1 //  gAthArtha-zrI vIra
jinendra kI bandanA-namaskAra karake saMkSepa meM 'karmavipAka' nAmaka grantha
ko kahUMgA  /  mithyAtva Adi kAraNoM se jIva dvArA jo kiyA jAtA hai, use tathA
unake nimitta se jo karmayogya padgala dravya apane pradezoM ke sAtha milA liyA
jAtA hai, usa Atmasambaddha pudgaladravya ko kama kahate haiN| vizeSArtha-
ziSTajanocita pravRtti kA pradarzana karane aura kArya ke nirvighna pUrNa hone
ke lie kArya ke prArambha meM maMgala kArI mahApuruSoM kA smaraNa kiyA jAtA hai
/  isIliye granthakAra ne grantha prArambha karane me pUrva siri vIra jiNaM'
pada dvArA zrI vIra jinendradeva ko namaskAra kiyA hai| zrI vIra jinendradeva ko
namaskAra karane kA kAraNa yaha hai ki unhoMne grantha meM varNita karmoM ko
pUrNa rUpa se naSTa kara zuddha, buddha Atma-svarUpa ko prApta kara liyA hai|
'siri yora jiNaM'-yaha pada zrI vIra jinendradeva ke nAma evaM sAtha-sAtha unakI
vizeSatAoM ko bhI bodha karAne vAlA hai; jaise ki

Page #82 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Karmavipaka  **Shri** means Lakshmi. It has two aspects - inner and outer.
The inherent qualities of a Jiva, such as infinite knowledge, infinite vision,
Magasuna, Amagadarya, etc., are called inner Lakshmi. And the eight great
miracles - (1) Ashoka tree, (2) rain of celestial flowers, (3) divine sound, (4)
fly whisk, (5) seat, (6) halo, (7) drum, (8) sunshade - are called outer
Lakshmi.  When a Tirthankara attains Kevala Jnana and delivers sermons to awaken
the aspiring souls, the gods and Indra create a Samavasarana adorned with these
eight outer Lakshmi to express their devotion and joy.  **Veer** is derived from
the root "**vi**" meaning "special" and "**ra**" meaning "to protect". It can be
interpreted as "one who possesses special qualities like infinite knowledge and
protects others by helping them attain these qualities". Or, "one who destroys
karma through tapasya and shines with its power".  **Jin** is derived from the
root "**ji**" meaning "to conquer". It refers to one who has conquered the
passions like attachment, hatred, delusion, lust, anger, etc., and the material
obstacles like knowledge-obscuring karma, etc., and attained self-realization.
The eight great miracles are the hallmarks of the Jineshwara.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmavipAka zrI zabda kA artha hai, lkssmii| usake do bheda haiM--Antara aura
baahy| anantajJAna, anantadarzana, mAgAsuna. AmagAdIrya Adi jArasA ke svAbhAvika
guNoM ko antaraMga lakSmI kahate haiM aura (1) azokavRkSa, (2) surapuSpavRSTi,
(3) didhyadhvani, (4) cAmara, (5) Asana, (6) bhAmaMDala, (7) dundubhi, (8)
Atapatra' ina ATha mahAprAtihAryoM ko bAhya lakSmI kahate haiN| jaba tIrthaGkara
bhagavAna kevalajJAna prApta kara bhavya mumukSu jIvoM ke pratibodhanArtha
dharmadezanA dete haiM taba deva, devendra apanA bhakti-pramoda prakaTa karane
ke lie ukta aSTa prAvihAryoMrUpa bAhya lakSmI se yukta samavasaraNa kI racanA
karate haiN| vIra "cIviziSTA, I- lakSmI, ra- zati-svAti; AramIyatvena gRhAtIti
vA viirH|" athavA "vIvizeSe anantajJAnAvi AsmaguNAn, hara-harayati prApayati vA
viirH|" yaha vIra zabda kI vyutpatti-mUlaka vyAkhyA hai| jisakA artha hai ki
anantajJAna, darzana Adi AtmA ke asAdhAraNa-vizeSa guNoM ko jo prApta karane
vAle haiM aura dUsaroM ko bhI ina Atmika guNoM ko prApta karAne meM samartha
sahayogI bana sakate haiM, ve bIra kahalAte haiM  /  athavA-vidArayati
yarapharma tapasA ca virAjate  /  tapo vIryeNayuktazca tasmAdvIra prati smRtaH
/  /  arthAt-jinhoMne karmoM kA vidAraNa- nAza kiyA hai tathA tapa se
zobhAyamAna haiM tathA tapovIrya se saMpanna haiM unheM vIra kahate haiN| jina-
ayatIti jinaH  /  jinhoMne svarUpopalabdhi meM bAdhaka rAga, daSa, moha, kAma,
krodha Adi bhAvakoM ko evaM jJAnAvaraNAdi rUpa dravyakoM ko jIta liyA hai, unheM
jina kahate haiN| 1 azokavRkSaH surapuSpavRSTidipadhvanizcAmaramAsanaM ca  /
bhAmaNDalaM dundubhirAtapatraM satprAtihAryANi jinezvarANAm  /  /

Page #83 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## First Karma Granth ### 3 Lord Shri Veer Jinendra Dev is endowed with all
these qualities and attributes. Therefore, the author has paid homage to him at
the beginning of the granth. Thus, indicating the meaning of the words of the
auspicious invocation, now the subject of the granth is indicated. ###
Definition of Karma J Whatever is done by the jiva through mithyatva, aviriti,
pramada, kshaya and yoga is called karma, i.e., the subtle particles of karma,
which are present in the infinite space, are attracted by the raag-dvesh-atmak
action of the soul, like a magnet, and become attached to the soul's space, they
are called karma. Karma is pudgalik. That which has touch, taste, smell, and
color is called pudgal. Earth, water, air, etc. are made of pudgal. The pudgal
that becomes karma, i.e., transforms into the form of karma, is a kind of
extremely subtle dust, i.e., dust, which the senses (even with the help of
instruments) cannot know, but only the omniscient, the only knower, or the
perfect clairvoyant knows it through his knowledge. When the pudgal capable of
becoming karma is taken up by the jiva, it is called karma. 1. **Vishay kshayah
rangiyahan je anuy lagati. Jiva-ame mohiyahante te jig kamma bhayanti.** 2. (a)
**Roop-ras-gandh-varg-vantaha pudgalah.**     - **Paramatma Prakash 162**     -
**Tattvarth Sutra A. 5 Sutra 23** (b) **Poggale panchavane pancharase dugandhe
atthaphse pannatte.**     - **Vyakhya Prajnaptti S. 12, 05, S. 450**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prathama karmagrantha 3 bhagavAna zrI vIra jinendra deva ukta sabhI guNoM aura
vizeSaNoM se yukta haiM  /  isIlie grantha ke prArambha meM granthakAra ne unheM
namaskAra kiyA hai  /  isa prakAra maMgalAcaraNAtmaka pada ke zabdoM kA artha -
gAmbhIrya pradazita karake aba grantha ke abhidheya kA saMketa karate haiM  /
karma kI paribhASA J mithyAtva avirati, pramAda, kaSAya aura yoga se jIva dvArA
jo kucha kiyA jAtA hai, use karma kahate haiM, arthAt AtmA kI rAgadveSAtmaka
kriyA se AkAza-pradezoM meM vidyamAna anantAnanta karma ke sUkSma pudgala
cumbaka kI taraha AkarSita hokara AtmapradezoM se saMzliSTa ho jAte haiM, unheM
karma kahate haiM  /  ' karma paudgalika haiN| jisameM sparza, rasa, gandha,
aura varNa hoM, use pudgala kahate haiM  / " pRthvI, pAnI, havA, Adi pudgala se
bane haiN| jo pudgala karma banate haiM, arthAt karma rUpa meM pariNata hote
haiM, ve eka prakAra kI atyanta sUkSma raja, arthAt dhUli haiM, jisako indriyA~
(yaMtra Adi kI madada se bhI nahIM jAna sakatI haiM, kintu sarvajJa kevalajJAnI
athavA paramaavadhijJAnI usako apane jJAna se jAnate haiN| karma banane yogya
pudgala jaba jIva dvArA grahaNa kara liye jAte haiM, taba unheM karma kahate
haiM  /  1. viSaya kasAyaha raMgiyahaM je aNuyA lagati  /  jIva-emaI mohiyahaM
te jiga kamma bhayaMti || 2. (ka) rUparasagaMdhavargavantaH pudgalAH  /  -
paramAtmaprakAza 162 - - tasvArthasUtra a0 5 sUtra 23 (kha) poggale paMcavaNe
paMcara se dugaMdhe aTThaphAse paNNatte  /  - vyAkhyAprajJapti za0 12,05, sU0
450 *

Page #84 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  **Low Karma**  Just as a person who applies oil to their body and then rolls
in dust, the dust sticks to their entire body, in the same way, when there is a
pulsation - movement - in the soul-regions of a being bound to the cycle of
existence, due to false belief, lack of dispassion, carelessness, passions, and
yoga, etc., then an infinite number of karmic particles become connected to the
soul-regions. Just as a ball of iron heated by fire constantly draws water to
itself, in the same way, a being bound to the cycle of existence, through the
fickleness of their mind, speech, and body, due to the causes of karmic bondage
like false belief, etc., constantly attracts and accumulates low karmic
particles. And just as there is a relationship between milk, water, fire, and a
ball of iron, so too is there a relationship between the being and these karmic
particles.  The being possesses infinite qualities like knowledge, perception,
subtle body, and energy. Karma, while covering these infinite qualities of the
being, also becomes the cause of birth and death, and of being called high or
low, and sustains the being in those states.  ## **The Relationship Between the
Being and Karma**  The relationship between the being and karma has existed
since time immemorial. Just as the relationship between gold and the stone-like
impurities in gold ore (kan-kopal) is timeless, so too is the relationship
between the being and karma. The natural tendency of a being bound to the cycle
of existence is to be transformed by attachment, etc., and the nature of bound
karma is to cause the being to be transformed by attachment, etc.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 kamavipAka jaise koI vyakti zarIra meM tela lagAkara dhuli meM loTe to vaha
dhUli umake sa ga zarIra meM cipaka jAtI hai, usI prakAra mithyAtva, avirati,
pramAda, kaSAya, yoga Adi meM jaba saMsArAvasthApanna jIba' ke AtmapradezoM meM
parispandana - halana-calana hotA hai, usa samaya anantAnanta karmayogya pudgala
paramANuoM kA AtmapradezoM ke sAtha sambandha hone lagatA hai aura jisa prakAra
agni se saMtapta lohe kA golA pratisamaya apane sarvAMga ro jala ko khIMcatA
hai, usI prakAra saMsArIchadmastha-jIva apane mana, vacana, kAyA kI caMcalatA se
mithyAtvAdi karmabandha ke kAraNoM dvArA pratikSaNa kamapudgaloM ko grahaNa
vAratA rahatA hai aura dUdha-pAnI va agni tathA lohe ke gole kA jaisA sambandha
hotA hai, usI prakAra kA jIva aura una karmapudgaloM kA sambandha ho jAtA hai|
jIva meM jJAna, darzana, sustra, vIrya Adi ananta guNa vidyamAna haiN| karma
jIva ke ina ananta guNoM ko AvRta karane ke sAtha-sAtha janma-maraNa karAne
tathA ucca-nIca Adi kahalAne meM kAraNa banate haiM aura una-una avasthAoM meM
jIva kA astitva TikAye rakhate haiM  /  jIva aura karma kA sambandha jIva aura
karma kA sambandha anAdikAla se calA A rahA hai  /  jaise kanakopala (svarNa-
pASANa) meM sone aura pASANa-rUpa mala kA milApa anAdikAlika hai, vaise hI jIva
aura karma kA sambandha anAdikAlika hai| saMsArI jIva kA baMbhAvika svabhAva
rAgAdirUpa se pariNata hone kA hai aura baddhakarma kA svabhAva jIva ko
rAgAdirUpa se pariNamAne kA hai| isa 1. snehAdhyaktazarIrasya reNDA zliSyate yA
gAtram  /  rAgadvemA klinnasya kAmaMbaMdho bhavatpenam  /  /  -Avazyaka TIkA

Page #85 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## First Karma Granth  This nature of the soul and karma has been going on since
the beginning of time. Therefore, the relationship between the soul and karma
should be understood as being from the beginning of time. If the relationship
between karma and the soul is considered to be from the beginning of time, then
it leads to the fault that "even liberated souls should be bound by karma."
The relationship between the soul and karma is from the beginning of time, but
it is not the same as the beginning of time of the karma-lineage (flow).
However, being from the beginning of time, it is both finite (with an end) and
infinite (without an end). Those souls who have attained or will attain
liberation have a finite relationship with karma from the beginning of time, and
those who will never attain liberation have an infinite relationship with karma
from the beginning of time.  Among the souls bound by karma, those who have the
potential to attain liberation are called *bhavya*, and those who do not have
this potential are called *abhavya*.  Although there is one type of karma in
general, there are two types of karma in particular, based on the difference
between substance and quality. Among them, the form of knowledge-obscuration,
etc., is called *dravya karma*, which is the aggregate of *pudgala* atoms, and
the qualities of ignorance, etc., and the emotions of anger, etc., which arise
from their power, are called *bhava karma*.  Due to the influence of *kṣaya*,
the soul attracts *pudgala* particles that are fit for karma, but to explain
this specifically: (1) *mithyatva*, (2) *avirati*, (3) *pramada*, (4) *krodha*,
and (5) *yoga*, these five are...  1. (a) The relationship between the two, like
gold, copper, and fire. (b) This soul is bound by karma from the beginning of
time, because it is the object of desire. - Lokaprakash, 424  2. The aggregate
of *pudgala* atoms is *dravya karma*, and the qualities are *bhava karma*. -
Gommatasar-Karmakanda

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prathama karmagrantha prakAra jIva aura karma kA yaha svabhAva anAdikAla se
calA A rahA hai| ataeva jIva aura karma kA sambandha anAdikAlIna samajhanA
caahie|' yadi karma aura jIva kA sAdi-sambandha mAnA jAe to aisA mAnane para
'yaha doSa AtA hai ki 'muka jIvoM ko bhI karmavandha honA caahie|' _kama-saMtati
(pravAha) kI apekSA jIva aura karma kA sambandha anAdikAlIna hai| kintu
anAdikAlIna hone para sAnta (antasahita) bhI hai aura ananta (antarahita) bhI
hai| jo jIva mokSa pA cuke haiM yA pAyeMge, unakA karma ke sAtha anAdi-sAnta
sambandha hai aura jinakA kabhI mokSa na hogA, unakA karma ke sAtha anAdi-ananta
sambandha hai| _karmasambaddha jIvoM meM se jina jIvoM meM mokSa-prApti kI
yogyatA hai, unheM bhavya aura jinameM yaha yogyatA nahIM hai, unheM abhavya
kahate haiM  /  yadyapi sAmAnya kI apekSA karma kA eka prakAra hai, kintu vizeSa
kI apekSA dravya aura bhAva ke bheda se do prakAra haiN| unameM se jJAnAvaraNa
Adi rUpa paudgalika paramANaoM ke piMDa ko davyakarma aura unakI zakti se
utpanna hue ajJAnAdi tathA rAmAdi bhAtroM ko bhAvakama kahate haiM  /  kaSAya ke
sambandha se jIva karma ke yogya pudgaloM ko grahaNa karatA hai, kintu isako
vizeSa rUpa se samajhAne ke lie-(1) mithyAtva, (2) avirati, (3) pramAda, (4)
kapAya aura 15) yoga, ye pAMcoM 1. (ka) dvayoramyanAdisambandhaH kanakopala-
sagnibhaH  /  (sya) asyAtmA'nAdito baddhAH karmabhiH kAmaMNAtmakaH  /  -
lokaprakAza, 424 2. poggala-piDo dakSaM tassanti bhAvakama tu  /  - gommaTasAra-
karmakANDa

Page #86 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Karmavipaka: The Causes of Bondage  Karmavipaka are known as the causes of
bondage. Their brief explanation should be understood as follows:
**Mithyatva:** Also known as Mithyadarshana, it is the opposite of
Samyagdarshana. Samyagdarshana is the interest in believing and understanding
the true nature of things, while Mithyadarshana is the belief in the untrue
nature of things.  This untrue belief occurs in two ways: (1) Absence of true
belief in the object and (2) Untrue belief in the object. The difference between
the first and second type is that the first can occur even in the state of
ignorance (Mootadash), while the second occurs only in the state of thought
(Vichardash). Even when the power of thought develops, if due to prejudice, one
clings to a single perspective, then that perspective is called Mithyadarshana,
even though the state of thought exists. But when the state of thought is not
awakened, then there is only ignorance due to the ancient covering (Aanadikalin
Avaran). At that time, there is no belief in the truth, and similarly, there is
no belief in the untruth.   **References:**  1. (a) - (b)
Mithyadarshanaviratipramadakshayayoga bandhahetavaha. -  Sthananga 5/2/418 -
Tattvarth Sutra, A.M. Sutra 1  2. (a) Tahriyaanam tu bhaavaanam sambhave
uvaesagam. Bhaavenaam saddahantas tra sammatta tam viyaayi. (b) Tattvartha
shraddhanam samyagdarshanam. - Uttara 28, Ga 15 - Tattvarth Sutra A. 10.2

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmavipAka bandhahetuoM ke rUpa meM prasiddha haiN| unakI saMkSipta vyAkhyA
nIce likhe anusAra samajhanI cAhie  /  mimyAtva - isakA dUsarA nAma
mithyAdarzana hai| yaha samyagdarzana ke ulTe arthavAlA hotA hai, arthAt
yathArtharUpa se padArthoM ke zraddhAna, nizcaya karane kI ruci samyagdarzana
hai evaM padArthoM ke a yathArtha zraddhAna ko mithyAdarzana kahate haiM  /
yaha a yathArtha zraddhAna do prakAra se hotA hai - ( 1 ) vastuviSayaka
yathArtha zraddhAna kA abhAva aura (2) vastu kA a yathArtha zraddhAna | pahale
aura dUsare prakAra meM pharka itanA hai ki pahalA bilakula mUtadazA meM bhI ho
sakatA hai, jabaki dUsarA vicAradazA meM hI hotA hai| vicAra-zakti kA vikAsa
hone para bhI jaba durAgraha ke kAraNa kisI eka hI dRSTi ko pakar3a liyA jAtA
hai, tatra vicArazA ke rahane para a-tattva meM pakSapAta hone se vaha dRSTi
mithyAdarzana kahalAtI hai  /  lekina jaba vicAradazA jAgrata nahIM huI ho, taba
anAdikAlIna AvaraNa se sirpha mUr3hatA hotI hai  /  usa samaya tatva kA
zraddhAna nahIM hotA aura vaise hI atattva paMca basavadArA paNNalA, taM jahA
micchattaM aviraI pamAe kasAyA jogA 1 1. ( ka ) - (kha)
mithyAdarzanAviratipramAdakaSAyoga baMdhahetavaH  /  - sthAnAMga 5/2/418 -
tatvArthasUtra, a0ma0 sUtra 1 2. (ka) tahriyANaM tu bhAvANaM sambhAve uvaesagaM
/  bhAveNaM saddahantastra sammatta taM viyAyi  //  (kha) tattvArthe zraddhAnaM
samyagdarzanam  /  - uttarA0 a0 28, gA0 15 - tattvArtha sUtra a0 1 0 2

Page #87 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## First Karma Granth  There is no faith in the **Karma Granth**. In that state,
the lack of faith in the truth is called **Ashwadhan**. This is called
**Anbhigrihit** because it happens naturally, without any external influence.
And the **Mithyadarshan** that happens due to some reason is called **Abhigrihit
Mithyadarshan**.  **Abhigrihit Mithyadarshan** is possible in developed beings
like humans, while **Anbhigrihit Mithyadarshan** is possible in undeveloped
beings like insects.  **Avirati** - Not abstaining from sinful deeds.
**Pramad** - Forgetfulness of the self, meaning not having respect for good
deeds, not being careful about remembering what should be done and what should
not be done.  **Kashaya** - That which destroys the qualities of the soul or
that which increases the cycle of birth and death.  **Yoga** - The activities of
the mind, speech, and body, meaning movement and action, are called **Yoga**.
Although specific causes of bondage for **Jnanavarana** and other karmas have
been mentioned, which are also mentioned elsewhere in this text, these five are
called the general causes of all karmas. There is a rule that where the earlier
causes of bondage exist, all the subsequent causes will also exist. For example,
if **Mithyatva** exists, then **Avirati** to **Yoga** will also exist.  1.
**Kayavangmanahkarma Yoga:** – **Tattvapansutra**, Chapter 6, Sutra 1

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prathama karmagrantha kA bhI zraddhAna nahIM hotA hai| usa dazA meM sirpha
mUr3hatA hone se tattva kA azvaddhAna honA kahate haiN| yaha naisargika-
paropadezanirapekSasvabhAva se hone ke kAraNa anabhigrahIta kahalAtA hai aura jo
kisI kAraNa ke vaza hokara ekAttika kadAgraha hotA hai, use abhigRhIta
mithyAdarzana kahate haiN| abhigRhIta mithyAdarzana manuSya jaise vikasita prANI
meM honA saMbhava hai aura dUsarA anabhigRhIta mithyAdarzana to kITa-pataMga Adi
jaise avikasita cetanA vAle prANiyoM meM hI saMbhava hai| avirati - doSI-pApo se
virata na honaa| pramAda-AtmavismaraNa honA, arthAt kuzala kAryoM meM AdarabhAva
na rakhanA, vArtavya-akartavya kI smRti ke lie sAvadhAna na rahanA  /  kaSAya-jo
AtmaguNoM ko karenaSTa kare athavA jo janma-maraNarUpI saMsAra ko bar3hAve  /
yoga-mana-vacana-kAyA ke vyApAra-pravRtti arthAt calana-halana ko yoga kahate
haiN|' yadyapi jJAnAvaraNAdika karmoM ke vizeSa bandhahetu bhI batalAye gaye
haiM, jinakA isI grantha meM anyatra ullekha bhI kiyA gayA hai lekina
mithyAtvAdi yogaparyanta ye pAMcoM samasta karmoM ke sAmAnya kAraNa kahalAte
haiN| mithyAtva se lekara yoga taka ke ina pAMcoM bandhahetuoM meM se jahA~
pUrva-pUrva ke bandhahetu hoMge, vahA~ usake bAda ke sabhI hetu hoMge, aisA
niyama hai| jaise mithyAtva ke hone para avirati se lekara yoga 1.
kAyavAGmanaHkarma yoga:  /  -tatvApaMsUtra, a0 6, sUtra 1

Page #88 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Karmavipaka  Until the end of the karmavipaka, all four causes will be
present, and in the case of aviriti, the three causes of pramada, etc., will
also be present. Similarly, one should understand the causes of pramada, vayu,
and yoga in a sequential manner. However, when the future bandhahetu is present,
the previous bandhahetu may or may not be present. For example, in the first
gunasthan, mithyatva is present along with aviriti, but in the second, third,
and fourth gunasthan, mithyatva is not present even when aviriti is present.
Similarly, one should understand this for other bandhahetus.  There are three
traditions regarding the number of bandhahetus for karmabandha: (1) Kshaya and
Yoga, (2) Mithyatva, Aviriti, Kshaya, and Yoga, (3) Mithyatva, Aviriti, Pramada,
Kshaya, and Yoga. However, despite the difference in number and names, there is
no difference in these traditions from a tattvic perspective. Pramada is a type
of asanayam, so it is included in aviriti or kshaya. From this perspective, in
texts like Karma-prakriti, only mithyatva, aviriti, kshaya, and yoga are
mentioned as the four bandhahetus. If we consider these in more detail,
mithyatva and aviriti are not separate from the nature of kshaya. Therefore,
kshaya and yoga are considered the main causes of bandha. However, to explain it
in detail to inquisitive people, all five, including mithyatva, are mentioned as
causes of bandha. Those who are ordinary and intelligent can understand through
four or five causes, while those who are particularly knowledgeable can
understand through the tradition of two causes.  Thus, after explaining karma
and the causes of karmabandha, the next verse explains the types of karmabandha,
the root and the number of different types of karma.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmavipAka paryanta cAroM hetu hoMge hI aura avirati ke hone para pramAda Adi
tInoM hoNge| isI prakAra kramazaH pramAda, vAya, yoga ke bAre meM gAda lenA
cAhie  /  parantu jaba Age kA bandhahetu hogA, taba pUrva kA bandhahetu ho bhI
aura na bhI ho, kyoMki pahale guNasthAna meM avirati ke sAtha mithyAtva hotA
hai, kintu dUsare, tIsare, cauthe guNasthAna meM avirati ke hone para bhI
mithyAtva nahIM rahatA hai| isI prakAra anya bandhahetuoM ke lie bhI samajha
lenA caahie| _ karmabandha ke ukta hetuoM kI saMkhyA ke bAre meM tIna
paramparAe~ dekhane ko milatI haiM:-(1) kaSAya aura yoga. (2) mithyAtva,
avirati, kaSAya aura yoga, (3) mithyAtva, avirati, pramAda, kaSAya aura yoga  /
kintu isa prakAra se saMkhyA aura usake nAmoM meM bheda rahane para bhI tAttvika
dRSTi se ina paramparAoM meM koI bheda nahIM hai  /  pramAda eka prakAra kA
asaMyama hI hai| ata: usakA samAveza abirati yA kaSAya meM ho jAtA hai  /  isa
dRSTi se karma-prakRti Adi gnanthoM meM sirpha mithyAtva, avirati, kaSAya aura
yoga ye cAra bandhahetu kahe gaye haiN| yadi inake bAre meM aura bhI sUkSmatA se
vicAra kareM to mithyAtva aura aviratiye donoM kaSAya ke svarUpa se alaga nahIM
par3ate haiM, ata: kaSAya aura yoga ina donoM ko mukhya rUpa se bandha kA kAraNa
mAnA jAtA hai| phira bhI jijJAsu janoM ko vistAra se samajhAne ke lie
mithyAtvAdi pAMcoM ko bandha kA kAraNa kahA hai| jo sAdhAraNa vivekavAna haiM,
ve cAra kAraNoM athavA pA~ca kAraNoM dvArA aura jo vizeSa marmajJa haiM, ve do
kAraNoM kI paramparA dvArA jJAna prApta kara sakate haiN| isa prakAra karma aura
karmabandha ke hetuoM kA kathana karake Age kI gAthA meM karmadhandha ke prakAra
aura karma ke mUla evaM uttara bhedoM kI saMkhyA batalAte haiN|

Page #89 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## First Karma Granth  **Verse 2:**  The four types of karma bondage are
described as: **nature, state, taste, and region**. There are eight **root
natures** and one hundred and eight **consequent natures**.  **Explanation:**
After describing the characteristics of karma and the causes of karma bondage in
the previous verse, this verse explains the different types of karma bondage and
the number of root natures and consequent natures of karma.  When a living being
(jiva) acquires karma particles, they take on the form of karma. At that time,
four aspects are created within them. These aspects are called types of bondage.
For example, when grass, etc., is eaten by cows, buffaloes, etc., it is
transformed into milk. In this milk, a sweet taste is created. This taste
remains in this form for a certain period of time, which is also a part of it.
This sweetness also has characteristics like intensity and mildness, and the
milk also has a certain quantity. Similarly, when karma particles are acquired
by a living being and become connected with the regions of the soul, four
aspects are created in them, which are called **nature bondage, state bondage,
taste bondage, and region bondage**. Their characteristics should be understood
as follows:  1. (a) There are four types of bondage: **attachment bondage, time
bondage, subtle bondage, and space bondage**. - Samvayanga, Samvay 4 (b)
**Nature, state, subtle aspect, and region are of two types**. - Tattvarth
Sutra, Chapter 8, Sutra:

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prathama karmagrantha pagaThiirasapaesA taM cauhA moyagassa dilNtaa|
bhUlapagaiTTha uttarapagaI aDavanasaya meyaM  // 2 //  gAthArtha-laDDU ke
dRSTAnta sa vana karmabandha prakRti, sthiti, rasa aura pradezoM kI apekSA se
cAra prakAra kA hai| mUlaprakRtiyA~ ATha aura uttara-prakRtiyA~ ekasau aTThAvana
haiN| vizeSArtha-pUrva gAthA meM krama kA lakSaNa aura karmabandha ke kAraNoM kA
kathana karane ke anantara isa gAthA meM karmabandha ke bheda aura karma kI
mUla-prakRtiyoM tathA unakI uttara-prakRtiyoM kI saMkhyA ginAte haiN| jIva dvArA
karmapudgaloM ke grahaNa kiye jAne para ve karmarUpa ko prApta hote haiM, usa
samaya unameM cAra aMzoM kA nirmANa hotA hai| ve aMza bandha ke prakAra kahalAte
haiM; udAharaNArtha-jaise gAya-bhaiMsa Adi dvArA svAI huI ghAsa Adi dudha-rUpa
meM pariNata hotI hai, taba usameM madhuratA kA svabhAva nirmita hotA hai  /
vaha svabhAva amuka samaya taka isI rUpa meM banA rahe, aisI kAlamaryAdA bhI
usameM AtI hai| isa madhuratA meM tIvratA-maMdattA Adi vizeSatAe~ bhI hotI haiM
tathA usa dUdha kA kucha parimANa bhI hotA hai  /  isI prakAra jIva dvArA
grahaNa kiye gaye aura AtmapradezoM ke sAtha saMsleSa ko prApta hue karma
pudgaloM meM bhI cAra aMzoM kA nirmANa hotA hai, jinako kramazaH prakRtibandha,
sthitibandha, rasabandha aura pradezabandha kahate haiM  /  unake lakSaNa nimna
prakAra samajhanA cAhie 1. (ka) cauci he bandha paNNate, taM jahApagabance,
Tibandha, aNubhAvabandhe, pAsabandhe  /  -samavAyAMga, samavAya 4 (kha)
prakRtisthityanubhAgapradezAstadvidhayaH  /  -tattvArthamUtra, a08, sUtra :

Page #90 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Karmavipaka  **(1)  Praकृति-Bandha:** The emergence of different powers and
natures within the karma-pudgalas (particles of karma) taken by the jiva (soul)
is called Praकृति-Bandha.  **(2)  स्थिति-Bandha:** The time limit within which
the karma-pudgalas taken by the jiva do not abandon their own nature and remain
with the jiva is called स्थिति-Bandha.  **(3)  रस-Bandha:** The potential of the
karma-pudgalas taken by the jiva to bear fruit is called रस-Bandha. रस-Bandha is
also called अनुभाग-Bandha or अनुभाव-Bandha.  **(4)  प्रदेश-Bandha:** The
connection of karma-skandhas (bundles of karma) with the jiva, having more or
fewer atoms, is called प्रदेश-Bandha.  Now, the nature of Praकृति-Bandha etc. is
explained through the example of laddoos (sweet balls) given in the verse.  Just
as laddoos made from substances that destroy wind have the nature of destroying
wind, laddoos made from substances that destroy bile have the nature of calming
bile, and laddoos made from substances that destroy phlegm have the nature of
destroying phlegm, similarly, some of the karma-pudgalas taken by the soul have
the power to destroy the soul's knowledge-quality, some have the power to cover
the soul's perception-quality, some have the power to suppress the soul's
infinite power, etc. In this way,  **1. स्वभावः प्रकृतिः प्रोक्तः, स्थितिः
कालावधारणम् ।** **अनुभागो रसो शेयः प्रदेशी दलसञ्चयः ॥**  - That is, nature is
called Praकृति, the time limit of the action is called स्थिति, the section is
called रस, and the number of parts is called प्रदेश.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmavipAka (1) prakRti-bandha - jona ke dvArA grahaNa kiye hue karmapudgaloM
meM bhinna-bhinna zaktiyoM svabhAvoM kA paidA honA prakRti-bandha kahalAtA hai
/  1. (2) sthitibandha jIva ke dvArA grahaNa kiye hue karma-pudgaloM meM amuka
samaya taka apane-apane svabhAva kA tyAga na kara jIva ke sAtha rahane kI
kAlamaryAdA kA honA sthiti bandha hai  /  - (3) rasa-bandha - jIva ke dvArA
grahaNa kiye hue karmapudgaloM meM phala dene ke taratamabhAva kA honA rasa-
bandha kahalAtA hai  /  rasa-bandha ko anubhAgabandha athavA anubhAvabandha bhI
kahate haiM  /  (4) pradeza bandha - jIva ke sAtha nyUnAdhika paramANu vAle
karmaskandhoM kA sambandha honA pradeza- -bandha kahalAtA hai  / " aba
prakRtivandha Adi ke svarUpa ko gAthA meM diye hue laDDuoM ke dRSTAnta dvArA
spaSTa karate haiM  /  jaise vAtanAzaka padArthoM se bane hue laDDuoM kA
svabhAva vAyu ko nAza karane kA, pittanAzaka padArthoM se bane hue laDDuoM kA
svabhAva pitta ko zAMta karane kA aura kaphanAzaka padArthoM se bane hue laDDuoM
kA svabhAva kapha naSTa karane kA hotA hai, vaise hI AtmA ke dvArA gRhIta
karmapudgaloM meM se kucha meM AtmA ke jJAnaguNa ko ghAta karane kI, kucha meM
AtmA ke darzanaguNa ko Dhakane kI, kucha meM AtmA ke ananta sAmarthya ko dabA
dene Adi kI zaktiyA~ paidA hotI haiN| isa prakAra 1. svabhAvaH prakRtiH proktaH,
sthitiH kAlAvadhAraNam  /  anubhAgo raso zeyaH pradezI dalasaJcayaH  //  -
arthAt svabhAva ko prakRti kahate haiM, kAma kI maryAdA ko sthiti, anubhAga ko
rasa aura daloM kI saMkhyA ko pradeza kahate haiM  /

Page #91 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The binding of different types of natures, i.e., powers, in different karma
pudgals is called **prakriti-bandha**. This refers to the arising of different
inherent qualities.  Some of the aforementioned laddus have a time limit of one
week, some fifteen days, and some one month for their power and nature to
remain. This time limit is called **sthiti**. Upon completion of the sthiti, the
laddus lose their nature, i.e., they become spoiled and tasteless. Similarly,
some karmadals remain with the soul for seventy koḍa-koḍī sāgaropam, some for
twenty koḍa-koḍī sāgaropam, and some for antarmūhurta. Thus, the binding of
different karmadals with different sthitis, i.e., the time limits for remaining
with the soul without abandoning their nature, is called **sthiti-bandha**. Upon
completion of the sthiti, these karmas abandon their nature, i.e., they become
separate from the soul.  Just as some laddus have more sweet taste, some have
less, some have more bitter taste, and some have less, similarly, there is a
difference in the intensity of sweet, bitter, etc., tastes. In the same way,
some karmadals have more auspicious or inauspicious taste, and some have less.
Thus, the binding or arising of various types of intense, moderate, very
intense, mild, less mild, and very mild auspicious and inauspicious tastes in
karma pudgals is called **rasa-bandha**.  The taste of auspicious karmas is
sweet like the juice of sugarcane, etc., which makes the jiva happy. The taste
of inauspicious karmas is bitter like the juice of neem, etc., which makes the
jiva anxious and distressed.  Some laddus have a weight of two tolas, some have
a weight of a chatank, and some have a weight of a pav, etc. Similarly, some
karma-skandhas have a number of atoms...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prapama karmagranya bhinna-bhinna karmapudgaloM meM bhinna-bhinna prakAra kI
prakRtiyoM ke arthAt zaktiyoM ke bandha ko, svabhAvoM ke utpanna hone ko
prakRtibandha kahate haiM  /  ukta laDDuoM meM se kucha kI eka saptAha, kucha kI
pandraha dina, kucha kI eka mAha taka apanI zakti, svabhAva rUpa meM rahane kI
kAlamaryAdA hotI hai| isa kAlamaryAdA ko sthiti kahate haiN| sthiti ke pUrNa
hone para laDDU apane svabhAva ko chor3a dete haiM arthAt bigar3a jAte haiM,
virasa ho jAte haiM  /  isI taraha koI karmadala AtmA ke sAtha sattara
kor3A-kor3I sAgaropama taka, koI bIsa kor3A-kor3I sAgaropama taka, koI
antarmuhurta taka rahate haiN| isa prakAra bhinna-bhinna karmadaloM meM pRthaka-
pRthak sthitiyoM kA yAnI apane svabhAva kA tyAga na kara AtmA ke sAtha bane
rahane kI kAla-maryAdAoM kA bandha honA sthiti-bandha kahalAtA hai  /  sthiti ke
pUrNa hone para ve karma apane svabhAva kA parityAga kara dete hai, arthAt AtmA
se pRthak ho jAte haiM  /  jaise kucha laDDuoM meM madhura rasa adhika, kucha
meM kama, kucha meM kaTuka rasa adhika, kucha meM kama Adi, isa prakAra madhura,
kaTuka rasa Adi rasoM meM nyUnAdhikatA dekhI jAtI hai  /  isI prakAra kucha
karmadaloM meM zubha yA azubha rasa adhika, kucha karmadaloM meM kama, isa
taraha vividha prakAra ke tIvra, tInatara, tIvratama, maMda, maMdatara,
maMdatama zubha-azubha rasoM kA karma-pudgaloM meM baMdhanA yAnI utpanna honA
rasabandha hai| zubha karmoM kA rasa Ikha Adi ke rasa ke sadRza madhura hotA
hai, jisake anubhava se jIva harSita hotA hai| azubha karmoM kA rasa nIma Adi ke
rasa ke sadRza kaDuvA hotA hai, jisake anubhava se jIva ghabarAtA hai, duHstrI
hotA hai| kucha laDDuoM kA parimANa do tolA, kucha kA chaTAMka aura kucha kA
pAva Adi hotA hai| isI prakAra kinhIM karmaskandhoM meM paramANuoM

Page #92 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The number of **kamvipaka** is more in some and less in others. Thus, the
connection of karma-dals with different atomic numbers with the soul is called
**pradeshabandha**. The being does not accept karma-skandhas made of countless
or infinite atoms, but accepts karma-skandhas made of **anantaanant** (infinite
times infinite and infinite parts of the Siddhas). Of the above four types of
karma-bandhas, **prakritibandha** and **pradeshabandha** are bound by **yoga**,
and **sthitibandha** and **anubhagabandha** are bound by **kashaya**. After
stating the types of karma, the definition and number of the original and
subsequent natures of karma are explained. **Mulaprakriti** - The main types of
karma are called **mulaprakriti**. **Uttarprakriti** - The sub-types of the main
types of karma are called **uttaraprakriti**. There are eight **mulaprakritis**
and one hundred and fifty-six **uttaraprakritis** of karma. Their names and
numbers will be described in the next verse. Names of **mulaprakritis** and
number of **uttaraprakritis**: **Iha nanasanavaranaveyamohau namgoyani. Vigdha
cha pananavaduaththavisghautissayapanavihm. ||3|| 1. Joga patinaes thi7 agubhag
kasayo kunabd. —Pancham karmagranya, Ga. 66**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 kamavipAka kI saMkhyA adhika aura kinhIM meM kama hotI hai  /  isa prakAra
bhinna-bhinna paramANu saMkhyAoMyukta karmadaloM kA AtmA ke sAtha sambandha honA
pradezabandha kahalAtA hai| jIva saMkhyAta, asaMkhyAta yA ananta paramANuoM se
bane karmaskandhoM ko grahaNa nahIM karatA, kintu anantAnanta (abhanyoM me
anantaguNe aura siddhoM ke anantaveM bhAga pramANa paramANuoM) se bane hue
karmaskandhoM ko grahaNa karatA hai| ukta cAra prakAra ke karmabandhoM meM se
prakRtibandha ora pradezabandha kA bandha yoga meM evaM sthitibandha aura
anubhAgabandha kA bandha kaSAya se hotA hai| karma ke bhedoM kA kathana karane
ke anantara karmoM kI mUla evaM uttara-, prakRtiyoM kI paribhASA aura saMkhyA
batAte haiN| mUlaprakRti - karmoM ke mukhya bhedoM ko mUlaprakRti kahate haiM  /
uttaraprakRti-karmoM ke mukhya bhedoM ke avAntara bhedoM ko uttaraprakRti kahate
haiN| karma kI mulaprakRtiyoM ke ATha aura uttaraprakRtiyoM ke ekasau achAvana
bheda hote haiM  /  unake nAma aura saMkhyA Adi ke nirUpaNa Age kI gAthA meM
kiyA jAyagA  /  mUlaprakRtiyoM ke nAma aura uttaraprakRtiyoM kI saMkhyA : iha
nANasaNAvaraNaveyamohAu nAmagoyANi  /  vigdhaM ca
paNanavaduaThThavIsaghAutisayapaNavihaM  // 3 //  1. jogA paTinaesa Thi7
agubhAga kasAyao kuNabda  /  --paMcama karmagranya, gA066

Page #93 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
First Verse - In Karma Shastra, there are eight names for the fundamental
natures of Karma: Jnanavarana, Darshanavarana, Vedaniya, Mohaniya, Ayu, Nama,
Gotra, and Antaraya. These have five, nine, two, twenty-eight, four, one hundred
and three, two, and five divisions respectively. Special Note - The diversity of
the power of Adhyavasaya Shakti in the Karma Pudgala mass taken by the Jiva
creates many different natures. Although these natures are invisible, we
experience and know their transformation by observing the effects of their
actions. The countless effects of Karma on one or many Jivas are experienced,
and the productive natures of these effects are also countless. Even though this
is the case, for the sake of brevity, all of them have been classified and
divided into eight parts, whose names are given below in order: 13 (1)
Jnanavarana, (2) Darshanavarana, (3) Vedaniya, (4) Mohaniya, (5) Ayu, (6) Nama,
(7) Gotra, and (8) Antaraya. These names 1. (a) Naanasavara Nijjam Dansanavaran
Nhaa | Panijjam Vaha Moh Aavakammam Tadev Ya || Namakammam Cha Govam Cha
Antarayam Tadev Ya. Evabhayaai Kammaai Ab U Samaas t - - Uttaradhyayanasutra
33.2-3 (c) Kamma Pagadio Pannaattao, Tam Jaha Gaanavaranijjam, Dasanavaniijjam
Venijjam Mohanijjam Avayam, Nama, Goyam, Antaradayam. - Prajnapanapada 21.301,
30228 J (c) Adyo Jnanadarshan Charan Vedaniya Mohani Manamigotraantarayaah. }
Tattvarthasutra, A. 805

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prathama gAthA - karmazAstra meM jJAnAvaraNa, darzanAvaraNa, vedanIya,
mohanIya, Ayu, nAma, gotra aura antarAya ye karma kI mUlaprakRtiyoM ke ATha nAma
haiM aura inake kramaza: pA~ca, nau, do, aTThAIsa, cAra, ekasau tIna, do aura
pAMca bheda haiM  /  vizeSArtha- jIva dvArA grahaNa kI gaI karmapudgalarAzi meM
adhyava sAyazakti kI vividhatA ke anusAra aneka svabhAvoM kA nirmANa hotA hai  /
yadyapi ye svabhAva adRzya haiN| phira bhI unake pariNamana kI anubhUti evaM
jJAna unake kAryoM ke prabhAva ko dekhakara karate haiM  /  eka yA aneka jIvoM
para hone vAle karma ke asaMkhya prabhAva anubhava meM Ate haiM aura ina
prabhAvoM ke utpAdaka svabhAva bhI asaMkhyAta haiM  /  aisA hone para bhI
saMkSepa meM vargIkaraNa karake una sabhI ko ATha bhAgoM meM vibhAjita kara diyA
hai, jinake nAma kramazaH nIce diye jA rahe haiM 13 (1) jJAnAvaraNa, (2)
darzanAvaraNa, (3) vedanIya, (4) mohanIya, (5) Ayu, (6) nAma ( 7 ) gotra aura
(8) antarAya  /  ina nAmoM 1. ( ka ) nANasAvara NijjaM daMsaNAvaraNa nhA |
paNijjaM vahA moha AvakammaM tadeva ya  //  nAmakammaM ca govaM ca antarAyaM
tadeva ya  /  evabhayAI kammAI aba u samAsa t - - uttarAdhyayana 33 / 2-3 (ca)
kamma pagaDIo paNNattAo, taM jahA gANAvaraNijjaM, dasaNAvaNijjaM veNijjaM
mohaNijjaM avayaM, nAma, goyaM, antarAdayaM  /  - prajJApanA pada 21.301, 30 228
J (ga) adyo jJAnadarzana caraNa vedanIya mohanI mAnamigotrAntarAyAH  /  }
tattvArthasUtra, a0805

Page #94 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
By adding the word "karma" at the end of each karma with its vipaka, the full
name of that karma is formed. For example, jnanaavaranakarma,
darshanavaranakarma, etc.  The reason for classifying countless karma-effects
into these eight parts is so that the inquisitive person can easily understand
the karma-theory. The characteristics of the eight karmas, jnanaavaranakarma,
etc., are as follows:  (1) The karma that covers the jnana-guna of the soul is
called jnanaavaranakarma. (2) The karma that covers the darshanaguna of the soul
is called darshanavaranakarma. (3) The karma by which the jiva experiences
worldly sensory pleasure and pain is called vedaniya karma. (4) The karma that
hinders the jiva in self-awareness and self-absorption, or the karma that
destroys the samyaktva and charitra-guna of the soul, is called mohaniyakarma.
(5) The karma due to whose existence the jiva lives and due to whose destruction
the jiva dies is called aayuhkarma. (6) The karma due to whose rise the jiva is
addressed by names like narak, tiryanch, manushya, dev, etc., is called
namakarma. (7) The karma that causes the jiva to be born in a high or low
family, or the karma due to whose rise the jiva develops a sense of respect or
disrespect, and the jiva is called high or low, is called gotrakarma.   (From
Pramaapana 23.1.288)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmavipAka ke sAtha pratyeka ke anta meM karma zabda jor3a dane se usa karma
kA pUrA nAma ho jAtA hai| jaise- jJAnAvaraNakarma, darzanAvaraNakarma ityAdi  /
asaMkhya karmaprabhAvoM ko ukta ATha bhAgoM meM vargIkRta karane kA kAraNa yaha
hai ki jisase jijJAsujana saralatA se karmasiddhAnta ko samajha skeN|
jJAnAvaraNakarma Adi ATha karmoM ke lakSaNa kramazaH isa prakAra haiM (1) jo
karma AtmA ke jJAnaguNa ko AcchAdita kare, use jJAmA. varaNakarma kahate haiN|
(2) jo karma AtmA ke darzanaguNa ko AcchAdita kare, use varzanAvaraNapharma
kahate haiN| (3) jisa karma ke dvArA jIva ko sAMsArika indriyajanya sukha-duHkha
kA anubhava ho, vaha bedanI pakarma kahalAtA hai  /  (4) jo karma jIva ko
svapara-viveka meM tathA svarUparamaNa meM bAdhA pahuMcAtA hai athavA jo karma
AtmA ke samyaktva aura cAritraguNa kA ghAta karatA hai, use mohanIyakarma kahate
haiN| (4) jisa karma ke astitva se jIva jItA hai tathA kSaya hone se maratA hai,
use Adhukarma kahate haiN| (6) jisa karma ke udaya se jIva nAraka, tiryaMca,
manuSya, deva Adi nAma se sambodhita ho. use nAmakarma kahate haiN| (7) jo karma
jIva ko ucca, nIca kula meM janmAve athavA jisa karma ke udaya se jIva meM
pUjyatA, apUjyatA kA bhAva utpanna ho, jIva ucca, nIca kahalAye use gotrakarma
kahate haiN| 1 yadA karmaNomAdAma vivakSA gUyate zabdyane uccAvarSa: gavarAtmA
yasmAt karmaNaH udayAta gotra  /  -pramApanA 23 / 1 / 288 rokA

Page #95 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## First Karma Granth  (8) Karma that destroys the powers of the soul, such as
giving, receiving, enjoyment, consumption, and strength, or acts as an obstacle
in giving, etc., is called **Mantarayakarma**.  These eight karmas are further
divided into two categories: **Ghati** and **Aghati**. **Gnanavarana**,
**Darsanavarana**, **Mohaniya**, and **Antaraya** are the four **Ghati** karmas.
"Ghati" is a meaningful term. These karmas are called "Ghati" because they
destroy the soul's inherent qualities and its true nature. The remaining four
karmas - **Vedaniya**, **Ayu**, **Nama**, and **Gotra** - are called **Aghati**.
Although they do not have the power to destroy the soul's inherent qualities and
its true nature, they possess the power to bind the soul to the body through its
acquired qualities.  -  **Ghati** karmas:  1. **Gnanavarana** and the other
eight karmas have five sub-categories for **Gnanavarana**, nine for
**Darsanavarana**, two for **Vedaniya**, twenty-eight for **Mohaniya**, four for
**Ayu**, one hundred and three for **Nama**, two for **Gotra**, and five for
**Antaraya**. These sub-categories are called the **Uttara-Prakritis** of those
respective karmas. Some texts mention a total of sixty-nine or one hundred and
forty-eight sub-categories of these karmas. The reasons for these variations
will be explained as needed. Here, for the sake of easy understanding for the
inquisitive, the number of **Uttara-Prakritis** of **Gnanavarana** and other
karmas is mentioned as one hundred and forty-eight.  Further, in the next verse,
to explain the names of the **Uttara-Prakritis** of **Gnanavarana** karma, we
will first describe the five categories of knowledge.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prathama karmagrantha ne (8) jo karma AtmA kI dAna, lAbha, bhoga, upabhoga,
vIryarUpa zaktiyoM kA ghAta karatA hai yA dAnAdi meM antarAyarUpa ho, use
mantarAyakarma kahate hai  /  ina AThoM karmoM ke bhI ghAti ora aghAti rUpa meM
do bheda haiM  /  jJAnAvaraNa, darzanAvaraNa, mohanIya tathA antarAya - yaha
cAra ghAtikarma haiM  /  'ghAti' yaha sArthaka saMjJA hai  /  AtmA ke anujIvI
guNoM kA, AtmA ke vAstavika svarUpa kA ghAta karane ke kAraNa hI ye karma
'ghAti' kahalAte haiN| zeSa arthAt vedanIya, Ayu, nAma aura gotra - ye cAra
karma 'aghAti' kahalAte haiM  /  yadyapi inameM AtmA ke anujIvI guNoM vAstavika
Atma-svarUpa kA bAta karane kI zakti nahIM hai, tathApi inameM aisI zakti pAI
jAtI hai, jo AtmA ke pratijIvI guNoM kA jisase AtmA ko zarIra kI kaida meM
rahanA par3atA hai  /  ghAta karatI hai, - 1 jJAnAvaraNAdi ATha karmoM meM meM
kramazaH jJAnAvaraNa ke pA~ca, darzanAvaraNa ke nau vedanIya ke do mohanIya ke
aTThAIsa Ayu ke cAra, nAma ke ekasau tIna, gotra ke do aura antarAya ke pAMca
bheda hote haiM  /  ye avAntara bheda una-una karmoM kI uttara- prakRtiyA~
kahalAte haiM  /  kinhIM kinhIM granthoM meM ukta karmoM ke kula milAkara
sattAnave yA eksI ar3atAlIsa bheda bhI batalAye haiM  /  isa taraha kI bhinnatA
ke kAraNoM ko yathAprasaMga batalAyA jaaegaa| yahA~ to jijJAsujanoM ko saralatA
se samajhAne ke lie hI jJAnAvaraNAdi karmoM kI uttaraprakRtiyoM kI saMkhyA ekasI
aTThAvana batAI gaI hai| atra Age kI gAthA meM jJAnAvaraNakarma ko
uttaraprakRtiyoM ke nAma batalAne ke lie pahale jJAna ke pA~ca bhedoM kA varNana
karate haiM  /

Page #96 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Karma and its Results  **Karmavipak**  There are five types of knowledge:
Mati, Shruta, Avadhi, Manahparyaya, and Kevala. Among these, Mati-knowledge has
four sub-types, as it arises from the four senses excluding the mind and the
eye.  **Explanation:**  The first of the eight karmas is Jnanavarana
(obstruction of knowledge). To explain its different types, we first need to
understand the different types of knowledge. Knowing the types of knowledge will
make it easier to understand the types of their obstructions.  There are five
main types of knowledge:  1. **Mati-knowledge:** Knowledge of an object gained
through the mind and senses. It is also called Abhinibodhik knowledge. 2.
**Shruta-knowledge:** Knowledge gained by hearing words. It is also defined as
knowledge that follows Mati-knowledge and involves the analysis of words and
their meanings. For example, hearing the word "pot" or seeing it with the eyes,
and then understanding its maker, etc. 3. **Avadhi-knowledge:**  4.
**Manahparyaya-knowledge:** 5. **Kevala-knowledge:**  **References:**  1. (a)
"There are five types of knowledge, such as Abhinibodhik, Shruta, Avadhi,
Manahparyaya, and Kevala." - **Sthananga Sutra**, Chapter 5, Verse 3, Sutra 463
2. (b) "Knowledge is based on the strength of Mati, Shruta, Avadhi, and
Manahparyaya." - **Tattvartha Sutra**, Chapter 1, Sutra 1

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmavipAka mai-suya-ohI-maNa phevalANi nANANi tattha mainANaM  /
baMjaNavagaha cauhA maNanayaNayiNiviya ghaukkA  // 4 //  gApArtha-mati, zrata,
avadhi, manaHparyaya aura kevala ye pA~ca zAna haiN| unameM se matijJAna kA
avAntarabheda vyaMjanAvagraha mana aura cakSurindriya ke sivAya zeSa cAra
indriyoM se hone ke kAraNa cAra prakAra kA hai ! vizeSArtha- pUrvokta
jJAnAvaraNAdi ATha karmoM meM pahalA karma jJAnAvaraNa hai  /  usakI uttara-
prakRtiyoM ke nAma samajhAne ke lie pahale jJAna ke bheda batalAte haiN| kyoMki
jJAnoM ke nAma jAna lene se unake AvaraNoM ke nAma bhI saralatA me samajha meM A
jaayeNge| jJAna ke mukhya pA~ca bheda haiM-(1) matijJAna, (2) zrutajJAna, (3)
avadhijJAna, (4) manaHparyayajJAna, (5) kevalajJAna  / ' _malijJAna mana aura
indriyoM kI sahAyatA dvArA hone vAle padArtha ke jJAna ko matijJAna kahate haiM
/  matijJAna ko Abhinibodhika jJAna bhI kahate haiN| zru tajJAna- zabda ko
sunakara jo artha kA jJAna hotA hai, use, zrutajJAna kahate haiN| athavA
matijJAna ke anantara hone vAlA aura zabda tathA artha kI paryAlocanA jisameM
ho, use zrutajJAna kahate haiM; jaiseghaTa zabda ko sunane athavA A~kha se
dekhane para usake banAne vAle, 1. (ka) paMcavihe NANe paNNa', taM jahA-
abhiNibohiyaNAge, suyagANe, ohiNANe, maNapanavaNANe, ke banaNA  /  -
sthAnAMgasUtra, sthAna 5. u0 3, sU0 463 (kha) matizrutAvadhimanaHparyayake
valAni jJAnam  /  -tasvArthasUtra, a0 1, sa01

Page #97 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
First, the knowledge of different subjects like the color, form, etc. and their
related aspects is done through Shruta Jnana. The knowledge of meaning that is
gained by reading and listening to scriptures is also called Shruta Jnana.
Although the origin of Shruta Jnana, like Mati Jnana, also requires the help of
mind and senses, there is a difference between the two. Mati Jnana is directed
towards existing objects, while Shruta Jnana is directed towards the three
periods of time: past, present, and future.  Besides the difference based on the
subject, there is also a difference in that Mati Jnana does not involve verbal
expression, while Shruta Jnana does. This means that Mati Jnana is what is not
born from the womb, i.e., not born from a mother. Like Mati Jnana, Shruta Jnana
is also produced by the senses and mind, but in Shruta Jnana, the mind is more
important than the senses. The senses only perceive the tangible, but the mind
perceives both the tangible and the intangible. In reality, it is the mind that
contemplates and thinks; as it is said, "Yathamanagmanah." The mind also
contemplates the subject matter perceived by the senses, and sometimes it
contemplates independently. It is also said, "Shrutamanindriyasya" (Tattvarth
Sutra A. 2. Su. 20), meaning that Shruta Jnana is primarily the subject of the
mind.  Avadhi Jnana is the knowledge of the form, meaning, and tangible
substance that is obtained solely through the soul, without the need for the
mind or senses.  Alternatively, the word "Ava" means "adhah" (below). What is
below...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prathama pharmagranya raMga-rUpa Adi tatsambandhI bhinna-bhinna viSayoM kA
vicAra zrutajJAna dvArA kiyA jAtA hai  /  zAstroM ke par3hane tathA sunane me jo
artha kA jJAna hotA hai, vaha bhI zrutajJAna kahalAtA hai| matijJAna aura
zutajJAna meM antara yadyapi matijJAna kI taraha zrutajJAna kI utpatti meM bhI
mana aura indriyoM kI sahAyatA apekSita hai. phira bhI ina donoM meM itanA
antara hai ki mavijJAna vidyamAna vastu meM pravRtta hotA hai aura zratajJAna
atIta, vartamAna aura bhAvI ina traikAlika viSayoM meM pravana hotA hai|
viSayakRta bheda ke sivAya donoM meM yaha bhI antara hai ki matijJAna meM zabda-
ullekha nahIM hotA hai aura zrutajJAna meM hotA hai  /  isakA Azaya yaha hai ki
jo na diyajanya - mojanma hone para kokha se rahita hai, vaha matiz2Ana hai|
matijJAma kI taraha zrutajJAna bhI indriya aura mana ke nimita se utpanna hotA
hai, phira bhI zruvajJAna meM indriyoM kI apekSA mana kI mukhyatA hai| indriyA~
to mAtra murta ko hA grahaNa karatI haiM, kintu mana mUrta aura amUrta donoM ko
grahaNa karatA hai  /  vAstava meM dekhA jAya to manana-cintana mana hI karatA
hai; yathAmamanAgmanaH  /  indriyoM ke dvArA grahaNa kiye hue viSaya kA manana
bhI mana hI karatA hai aura kabhI vaha svatantra rUpa meM bhI manana karatA hai
/  kahA bhI hai--zrutamanindriyasya (tattvArthasutra a0 2. su020), arthAt
dhutajJAna mukhyatayA mana kA viSaya hai| avadhijJAna - mana aura indriyoM kI
apekSA na rakhate hue kevala AtmA ke dvArA rUpI, arthAna mUrtadravya kA jo jJAna
hotA hai, use avadhijJAna kahate haiN| athavA 'ava' zabda adha: (nIce) artha kA
vAcaka hai| jo adhodho

Page #98 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  **Knowledge of Karma and its Results**  **1. Avadhijnana**  Avadhijnana is
the power to know the nature of an extended object, or it can also mean a limit.
It is the power to perceive material objects directly, but not immaterial ones.
This is its limit. Alternatively, Avadhijnana is the activity of the soul that
directly perceives external objects.  **Manahparyaya Jnana**  Manahparyaya Jnana
is the knowledge of the mental states of sentient beings, within their limits,
without the need for senses or mind. Sentient beings think and contemplate any
object in their minds. The knowledge that directly perceives the mental results
of these thoughts is called Manahparyaya Jnana. When the mind contemplates any
object, it takes on different forms depending on the nature of the object being
contemplated. These forms are the permutations of the mind. Manahparyaya Jnana
has the power to directly perceive these permutations.  A Manahparyaya Jnani
does not know any external object, field, time, or material permutations, but
when they come into someone's thoughts, they know the mental states. Just as a
person sitting in a closed room can see a special ceremony taking place outside
and the people and objects participating in it through television, but not
otherwise, similarly, a Manahparyaya Jnani, through the eyes, indirectly
perceives all living and non-living beings.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmavipAka 1 ka vistRta vastu ke svarUpa ko jAnane kI zakti rakhatA hai athavA
avadhi zabda kA artha maryAdA bhI hotA hai| avadhijJAna rUpI padArthoM ko
pratyakSa karane kI zakti rakhatA hai, arUpI ko nahIM  /  yahI usakI maryAdA hai
/  athavA bAhya artha ko sAkSAt karane kA jo AtmA kA vyApAra hotA hai use
avadhijJAna kahate haiM  /  ' mana:paryayajJAna - indriyoM aura mana kI apekSA
na rakhate hue maryAdA lie hue saMjJI jIvoM ke manogata bhAvoM ko jAnanA
mana:paryayajJAna kahalAtA hai| saMjJI jIva kisI bhI vastu kA cintana-manana
mana me hI karate haiN| mana ke cintanIya pariNAmoM ko jisa jJAna se pratyakSa
kiyA jAtA hai, use mana:paryayajJAna kahate haiM  /  jaba mana kisI bhI vastu kA
cintana karatA hai; taba cintanIya vastu ke bhedAnusAra cintana kArya meM
pravRtta mana bhI taraha-taraha kI AkRtiyA~ dhAraNa karatA hai| ve hI AkRtiyA~
mana kI paryAya haiN| unheM manaH payajJAna pratyakSa karane kI bhakti rakhatA
hai  /  " mana:paryayajJAnI kisI bAhya vastu ko kSetra ko kAla ko tathA
dravyagata paryAyoM ko nahIM jAnatA, kintu jaba ve kisI ke cintana meM A jAte
haiM, taba manogata bhAvoM ko jAnatA hai  /  jaise banda kamare meM baiThA huA
vyakti bAhara hone vAle vizeSa samAroha tathA usameM bhAga lene vAle manuSyoM va
vastuoM ko TelIvijana ke dvArA pratyakSa karatA hai, anyathA nahIM; vaise hI
mana:paryayajJAnI cakSu se parokSa jo bhI jIva, ajIva haiM unakA 1. aba
btro'dhaH zabdArthaH aba -adho'dho vistRtaM vastu dhIya paricchidyate'ne
netyavadhi, athavA avadhi maryAdA rUpISveva dvazveSu paricchedakatayA
pravRttirUpA tadupalakSitaM jJAnamapyavadhi yahA avadhAnam
AtmanojyaMsakSAtkaraNavyApAro'vadhi:, avadhizvAsI jJAnaM cAtradhijJAnam  /
nadIsUtra TokA J

Page #99 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
First Karma Granth Direct knowledge can be obtained only when they are reflected
in someone's mind, otherwise not. A mind-reader cannot see a village, city, etc.
hundreds of yojanas away. But if these villages, etc. are present in someone's
mind as a memory, then they can be seen directly. Similarly, other examples
should be understood. The characteristic of mind-reading is that the subject of
avadhi knowledge is also material, and the subject of mind-reading is also
material. Because the mind is also material, being made of pudgala, then why
can't an avadhi-knower know the mind and its permutations? So the solution is
that an avadhi-knower can directly perceive the mind and its permutations, but
he cannot directly perceive the substance, space, time and emotion that are
reflected in it, just as a soldier understands the emotions of his comrades from
afar by day through a special process of flags and by night through a process of
light, and understands their emotions. But an untrained person can see the
flags, light, etc. and can also see their processes, but cannot understand the
emotions expressed by them. Similarly, an avadhi-knower can directly perceive
the mind and its permutations, but cannot directly perceive the mental
substance, space, time and emotion, while a mind-reader can. This is his special
subject. If this were not his special subject, then it would be pointless to
consider mind-reading separately. Kevalgyan - knowing all the substances
existing in the universe, including all their permutations in the past, present
and future, simultaneously, is called Kevalgyan. That is, the knowledge that
someone

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prathama karmagrantha pratyakSa taba kara sakate haiM, jabaki ve kisI saMjI ke
mana meM jhalaka rahe hoM, anyathA nhiiN| saikar3oM yojana dUra rahe kisI grAma,
nagara Adi ko manaHparyayajJAnI nahIM dekha skte| lekina yadi ye grAma Adi kisI
ke mana meM smRti ke rUpa meM vidyamAna haiM, taba unakA sAkSAtkAra kara sakate
haiM  /  isI prakAra anya-anya udAharaNa samajhane caahiye| manaHparyayajJAna kI
vizeSatA avadhijJAna kA viSaya bhI rUpI hai, aura manaHparyayajJAna kA viSaya
bhI rUpI hai| kyoMki mana bhI paudgalika hone se rUpI hai, phira avadhi. jJAnI
mana tathA mana kI paryAyoM ko kyoM nahIM jAna sakatA? to isakA samAdhAna yaha
hai ki avadhijJAnI mana ko tathA usakA pIyoM ko bhI pratyakSa kara sakatA hai,
kintu usameM jhalakate hue dravya, kSetra, kAla aura bhAva ko pratyakSa nahIM
kara sakatA hai jaise ki sainika dUra rahe apane sAthiyoM ko dina meM jhaNDiyoM
kI vizeSa prakriyA dvArA aura rAtri meM prakAza kI prakriyA dvArA apane bhAvoM
ko samajhAte haiM aura unake bhAva samajhate haiN| kintu aprazikSita vyakti
maNDiyA~, prakAza Adi ko dekha sakatA hai aura unakI prakriyAoM ko bhI dekha
sakatA hai kintu unake dvArA vyakta manobhAvoM ko nahIM samajha sakatA hai| isI
prakAra avadhijhAnI mana tathA mana kI paryAyoM ko pratyakSa to kara sakatA hai,
kintu manogata dravya, kSetra, kAla aura bhAva ko pratyakSa nahIM kara sakatA
hai, jabaki manaHparyayajJAnI kara sakatA hai| yaha usakA vizeSa viSaya hai|
yadi yaha usakA vizeSa viSaya na hotA to manaHparyayajJAna ko alaga se mAnanA hI
vyartha hai| kevalajJAna-vizva meM vidyamAna sampUrNa dravyoM ko, unakI
trikAlabhUta, vartamAna aura bhaviSya meM hone vAlI samasta paryAyoM sahita
yugapat (eka sAtha) jAnanA kevalajJAna kahalAtA hai| arthAt jo jJAna kisI kI

Page #100 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Karma Vipaka  Karma Vipaka encompasses all knowable objects without any
assistance, meaning it doesn't require the mind, senses, body, or scientific
instruments. It possesses the power to directly perceive all knowable objects,
both formless and formed, tangible and intangible, like a universal perceiver.
Therefore, it is called Keval Jnana (Omniscience).  These five types of
knowledge - Mati Jnana, Shruta Jnana, Avadhi Jnana, Mana:paryaya Jnana, and
Keval Jnana - are the powers of the soul. Among these, the first two - Mati
Jnana and Shruta Jnana - are considered indirect knowledge (Paroksha Pramana)
because they require assistance. However, Avadhi Jnana, Mana:paryaya Jnana, and
Keval Jnana are direct knowledge (Pratyaksha Pramana). These three types of
knowledge arise solely from the soul's inherent ability, without the aid of the
mind or senses.  Although Avadhi Jnana and Mana:paryaya Jnana perceive tangible
objects, they are unable to comprehend their complete essence due to the
incomplete development of their consciousness. Therefore, these two types of
knowledge are called Vikal-Pratyaksha (Partial Direct Knowledge). In contrast,
Keval Jnana simultaneously perceives all objects, including their past, present,
and future states. Hence, Keval Jnana is called Sakal-Pratyaksha (Complete
Direct Knowledge).  Keval Jnana is devoid of any incompleteness or distinction
because there is no object or its associated state that remains unknown to it.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karma vipAka sahAyatA ke binA sampUrNa jJeya padArthoM ko viSaya karatA hai,
yAnI isake lie mana aura indriya tathA deha evaM vaijJAnika yaMtroM kI
AvazyakatA nahIM rahatI  /  vaha binA kisI kI sahAyatA ke rUpI arUpI mUrta-
amUrta sabhI jJeyoM ko hastAmalaka kI taraha pratyakSa karane kI zakti rakhatA
hai  /  ataH use kevalajJAna kahate haiM  /  20 ke AtmA kI zakti ke dvArA ye
matijJAna Adi pA~coM jJAna pramANa haiM  /  inameM se Adi ke do jJAna- matijJAna
aura zrutajJAna - parokSapramANa kahalAte haiN| kyoMki ina donoM jJAnoM ke hone
ke sahayoga kI apekSA hotI hai aura avadhijJAna, panaH paryayajJAna tathA
kevalajJAna- ye tInoM jJAna pratyakSapramANa haiM  /  ye tInoM jJAna mana aura
indriyoM kI sahAyatA binA hI sirpha AtmA kI yogyatA ke bala se utpanna hote haiM
/ " yadyapi avadhijJAna aura mana:paryayajJAna mUrta padArthoM kA jJAna karate
haiM, kintu ye cetanA zakti ke apUrNa vikAsa ke kAraNa unakI samagra paryAyoM
bhAvoM ko jAnane meM asamartha haiM  /  isalie ina donoM jJAnoM ko vikala-
pratyakSa kahate haiM, jabaki kevalajJAna sampUrNa padArthoM ko unakI
trikAlavartI paryAyoM sahita yugapat jAnatA hai  /  ataH kevalajJAna ko
sakalapratyakSa kahate haiM  /  kevalajJAna meM apUrNatAjanya koI bheda-prabheda
nahIM hotA hai, kyoMki koI bhI padArtha aura tajjanya paryAya aisI nahIM hai jo
kevalajJAna ke dvArA na jAnI jAya  /  1 - * 1. ( ka ) duvihe nANe paNNatte taM
jahA - paccakakhe caiva parokkhe caiva  /  pacanANe dubihe patte taM jahA
kebalanANe NokedalaNANe ceva  /  NokevalaNANe dubihe paNNatte taM jahA ohiNANe
ceva maNapajjavaNA caiva  /  parokakhaNANe dRvihe paNNatte taM jahA -
AbhiNinohidaNANe va sukANe ceva 1 sthAnAMgasUtra, sthAna 2 0 1 sU0 71 (kha) Adhe
parokSam  /  pratyakSamanyat - tattvArthasUtra a0 1 sU0 11 12 1 L 1 3 --

Page #101 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## First Karma Granth  Although Matijnana and Shrutijñana are indirect in terms
of Nishchayanaya, they are considered direct knowledge in terms of
Vyavaharanaya. Therefore, these two are called Saavyaavaharik Pratyaksha, and
the remaining three types of knowledge, including Avadhijnana, are called
Paramार्थिक Pratyaksha.  Among the five types of knowledge, Matijnana,
Shrutijñana, Avadhijnana, and Manahparyaya Jnana are called Kshayopaamik Jnana
because they arise from the destruction of their respective Avarana Karma.  Only
Kevaljnana is called Kshayik Jnana because it completely destroys its Avarana
Karma.  There are no further sub-categories of Kevaljnana within Matijnana, but
the other four types of knowledge, being Kshayopaamik, have sub-categories.
Here, we will discuss the number and names of the sub-categories of Matijnana.
In summary, there are four categories of Matijnana, and they can further be
divided into 28, 336, or 340 sub-categories.  The four categories of Matijnana
are: Avagraha, Iha, Avaya, and Dharana.  Among these, Iha, Avaya, and Dharana do
not have further sub-categories, but Avagraha has the following two sub-
categories:  1. (a) Se ki lan sunissam? Chamihan panatan, san jaha- jaggah, Iha,
Bhavao, Dharana. - Manvisutra 26 (b) Avmahapayadharana. - Tattvarth Sutra, A. 1,
S. 15 (c) Chauvvivaha mai pananta, tan jaha- umgahammai, Ihamai, Bhavayamai,
Dharanamaai. -  Sthananga 4.4.364

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prathama karmagranya yadyapi matijJAna aura zrutajJAna nizcayanaya kI apekSA
parokSa haiM, kintu vyavahAranaya kI apekSA pratyakSajJAna bhI kahe jAte haiN|
isalie ina donoM ko sAMvyAvahArika pratyakSa aura zeSa rahe avadhikAna Adi tIna
jJAnoM ko pAramArthika pratyakSa bhI kahate haiN| _ matijJAnAdi pAMca jJAnoM meM
se Adi ke cAra jJAna-matijJAna, zrutajJAna, avadhijJAna aura manaHparthayajJAna
apane-apane AvaraNa karma ke kSayopazama se utpanna hone ke kAraNa kSAyopamika
jJAna haiM aura kevalajJAna apane AvaraNa karma kA pUrNa rUpa se kSaya kara dene
se kSAyikajJAna kahalAtA hai| _masijhAna ke bheda kevalajJAna kA anya koI
avAntara bheda nahIM hotA hai, kintu matijJAnAdi cAroM jJAnoM ke kSAyopamika
hone se avAntara bheda hote haiN| unameM se yahA~ matijJAna ke avAntara bhedoM
kI saMkhyA aura nAmoM ko batalAte haiN| saMkSepa meM matijJAna ke cAra bheda
haiM aura kramazaH aTThAIsa, tInasauM chattIsa athavA tInasau cAlIsa bheda bhI
hote haiN|| avagraha, IhA, avAya aura dhAraNA ye matijJAna ke cAra bheda haiN|'
inameM se IhA, avAya aura dhAraNA ke prabheda-aura dUsare bheda nahIM hote haiM,
kintu avagraha ke nimnalikhita do bheda haiM1. (ka) se ki laM sunissima ?
camihaM paNataM, saM jahA- jaggaha, IhA, bhavAo, dhAraNA  /  -manvIsUtra 26
(kha) avamahApAyaghAraNA  /  tattvArthasatra, a0 1, sU0 15 (ga) cauvivahA maI
paNNatA, taM jahA- umgahamaI IhAmaI bhavAyamaI dhaarnnaamii| -sthAnAMga 4 / 4 /
364

Page #102 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Karmavipaka  **(1) Vyajanavagraha and (2) Arthavagraha.**  Vyajanavagraha is
the knowledge of general quantity without any specific conception of name,
caste, etc. When the connection between the object and the senses is
established, the general awareness of the object as "this is something" is
called Arthavagraha. However, this knowledge is also in an unmanifest form. The
extremely unmanifest knowledge that precedes this unmanifest knowledge in the
form of Arthavagraha is called Vyajanavagraha.  In essence, when the senses come
into contact with an object, there is an indistinct knowledge of "this is
something," which is called Arthavagraha. The extremely indistinct knowledge
that precedes this is called Vyajanavagraha. Vyajanavagraha occurs upon grasping
the existence of the object, meaning that the perception of existence comes
first, followed by Vyajanavagraha.  This Vyajanavagraha occurs through the four
senses of touch, smell, taste, and sound, excluding the mind and the eye. This
is because Vyajanavagraha requires the connection of the senses with the object,
but the mind and the eye perceive objects from a distance, without direct
contact. Therefore, the mind and the eye are called "Aapraapyakari" (incapable
of grasping).  1. (a) "Ugmhe duvihe panṇatte, tam jaha-asthurgahe pa
banjanumgahe ya." - Nandosootra 27 (b) "Sunissie dusi panṇatte, tam jaha-asyoghe
va vanjanoggahe ceva." - Staanaanga, Staana 2, Uo 1, Soo 71 2. "Na
chakshurinindyaabhyaam." - Tattvarthasootra, Ao 1, Poo 16

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmavipAka (1) vyaMjanAvagraha aura (2) arthAvagraha  / '  /  vyaMjanAvagraha-
nAma, jAti Adi kI vizeSa kalpanA se rahita sAmAnya mAtra kA jJAna avagaha hai
aura viSaya tathA indriyoM kA saMyoga puSTa ho jAne para 'yaha kucha hai' aisA
jI viSaya kA sAmAnya bodha hotA hai, vaha arthAvagraha kahalAtA hai, kintu vaha
jJAna bhI avyakta rUpa hI hotA hai aura isa avyakta jJAnarUpa arthAvagraha se
pahale hone vAle atyanta avyakta jJAna ko vyaMjanAvagraha kahate haiN| tAtparya
yaha hai ki jaba indriyoM kA padArtha ke sAtha sambandha hotA hai, taba 'yaha
kucha hai' aisA aspaSTa jJAna hotA hai, use arthAvagraha kahate hai aura usase
bhI pahale hone vAlA atyanta aspaSTa jJAna vyaMjanAvagraha kahalAtA hai|
vyaMjanAvagraha padArtha kI sattA ko grahaNa karane para hotA hai, arthAt pahale
sattA kI pratIti hotI hai aura usake bAda vyaM janAvagraha hotA hai| yaha
vyaMjanAvagraha mana aura cakSagindriya ke sivAya zeSa sparza nendriya Adi cAra
indriyoM se hotA hai| kyoMki vyaMjanAvagraha meM indriyoM kA padArtha ke sAtha
saMyoga-sambandha honA jarUrI hai, lekina mana aura cakSurindriya ye donoM
padArthoM se alaga-dUra rahakara hI unako grahaNa karate haiN| isalie mana aura
cakSurindriya aprApyakArI kahalAte haiM  /  1. (ka) ugmahe duvihe paNNatte, taM
jahA-asthuragahe pa baMjaNumgahe ya  /  -nandosUtra 27 (kha) sunissie duSi
paNNate, taM jahA- asyogahe va vaMjaNoggahe ceva  /  -sthAnAMga, sthAna 2, u0 1,
sU0 71 2. na cakSuranindiyAbhyAm  /  -tatvArthasUtra a0 1, pU0 16

Page #103 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## First Karma Granth, Chapter 23  **The four senses of touch, taste, smell, and
hearing are called "praapyakaari" because they acquire knowledge through contact
with objects.**  **"Apraapyakaari" means to know objects without contact with
them, while "praapyakaari" means to know objects through contact, connection,
and touch.**  **This means that only the "praapyakaari" senses can perceive
objects, not the "apraapyakaari" senses.**  **For example, the collyrium applied
to the eye is not visible by the eye itself, and the mind perceives external
objects while residing within the body.**  **Therefore, the mind and the sense
of sight are not "praapyakaari".**  **For this reason, there are four types of
"vyanjnavagraha":**  **(1) Sparshanendriya-vyanjnavagraha (perception through
the sense of touch)** **(2) Rasnendriya-vyanjnavagraha (perception through the
sense of taste)** **(3) Ghranendriya-vyanjnavagraha (perception through the
sense of smell)** **(4) Shrotrendriya-vyanjnavagraha (perception through the
sense of hearing)**  **The very subtle knowledge acquired through the sense of
touch is called "sparshateendriya-vyanjnavagraha".**  **Similarly, one should
understand the "vyanjnavagraha" that occurs through the senses of taste, smell,
and hearing.**  **The shortest duration of "vyanjnavagraha" is equal to an
immeasurable fraction of the "avaliika" (a unit of time), and the longest
duration is from two to nine breaths.**  **Footnotes:**  *1. This is a reference
to the "Nanvisutra" (a Jain text), chapter 28. *2. This is a reference to the
"Nanvisutra" (a Jain text), concluding verse.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prathama karmagrantha 23 jabaki sparzanAdi cAra indriyA~ padArtha se sambandha
karake jJAna karAne vAlI hone se prApyakArI kahI jAtI haiM  /  aprApyakArI kA
artha hai ki padArthoM ke sAtha binA saMyoga kiye hI padArthoM kA jJAna karanA
aura prApyakArI arthAt padArtha ke sAtha sambandha, saMyoga aura sparza hone
para jJAna honA  /  tAtparya yaha hai ki jo indriyA~ prApyakArI haiM, unhIM se
vyaMjanAvagraha hotA hai aura aprApyakArI indriyoM se nahIM hotA hai| jaise
AMkha meM DAlA huA aMjana svayaM A~kha se nahIM dikhatA aura mana zarIra ke
andara rahakara hI bAhya padArthoM ko grahaNa karatA hai  /  isIlie mana aura
cakSurindriya- ye donoM prApyakArI nahIM haiM  /  isI kAraNa vyaMjanAvagraha ke
( 1 ) sparzanendriya-vyaMjanAvagraha, (2) rasanendriya-vyaMjanAvagraha, (3)
ghrANendriya-vyaMjanAvagraha aura (4) zrotrendriya-vyaMjanAvagraha - ye cAra
bheda hote haiM  / " sparzanendriya ke dvArA jo atyanta avyakta jJAna hotA hai,
use sparzatendriya-vyaMjanAvagraha kahate haiN| isI prakAra rasanA, ghrANa aura
zrotra - ina indriyoM se hone vAle vyaMjanAvagrahoM ko bhI samajha lenA caahie|
vyaMjanAvagraha kA jaghanya kAla AvalikA ke asaMkhyAtaveM bhAga pramANa hotA hai
aura utkRSTa zvAsocchvAsa - pRthaktva arthAt do zvAsocchvAsa se lekara nau
zvAsocchvAsa jitanA hai  /  * 1. jaNumhe bar3e paNNattaM taM jahA-
soindiyajaNugmahe, ghANidiyabaMjaNuggahe, jibbhidiyavaMjaNumAhe, phAsi
diyavaMjaNugrahe se taM jaNu  /  nanvIsUtra 28 nanvIsUtra TokA 2. vaMjaNodamma
kAlo AliyAsaMkhabhAga tullo u  /  povA ukkosA puNe ANapANU puhuti 11

Page #104 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Karmavipaka  After explaining the four types of *matijnana* (knowledge of the
mind) and their twenty-eight sub-types, including the four types of
*vyanjanavgraha* (perception of meaning), we now describe the remaining twenty-
four types and the number of types of *shrutajnana* (knowledge of scriptures).
*Atyuggaha* (extreme perception), *iha* (desire), *avaya* (doubt), and *dharana*
(retention) are each present in the five senses and the mind, making six types
for each, totaling twenty-four. Adding the four types of *vyanjanavgraha*
mentioned earlier, we have twenty-eight types of *matijnana*. *Shrutajnana* has
fourteen or twenty types.  **Special Note:** The four types of *vyanjanavgraha*
within the twenty-eight types of *matijnana* were mentioned in the previous
verse. Before explaining the remaining twenty-four types, we describe the
characteristics of *arthaavgraha* (perception of meaning), *iha* (desire),
*avaya* (doubt), and *dharana* (retention) mentioned in the verse.
**Arthaavgraha:** The unmanifest knowledge of an object is called
*arthaavgraha*. For example, "This is something." *Arthaavgraha* does not
include knowledge of the object's color, smell, etc. However, it is more
specific than *vyanjanavgraha*. The duration of *arthaavgraha* is one moment.
**Iha:** The contemplation of the object known through *avgraha* (perception) in
relation to dharma (righteousness) is called *iha*. In other words, the
contemplation that occurs to determine the specific nature of the general object
perceived through *avgraha* is called *iha*. For example, "Is this the touch of
a rope or a snake?"

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmavipAka matijJAna ke avagraha Adi cAra bhedoM ke nAma aura unake aTThAIsa
uttarabhedoM meM se vyaMjanAvagraha ke cAra bhaMda batalAne ke bAda aba zeSa
rahe caubIsa bhedoM ke nAma tathA zrutajJAna ke bhedoM kI saMkhyA batalAte haiM
atyuggaha IhAvAyadhAraNA karaNamANasehi chahA  /  ayaM asvIsaneyaM vasA sahA va
suyaM  // 5 //  gAthArtha-arthAvagraha, IhA, avAya aura dhAraNA ye pratyeka
karaNa arthAt pA~ca indriyoM aura mana me hote haiM, isalie pratyeka ke chaha-
chaha bheda hone se caubIsa bheda ho jAte haiM aura pahale batAye gaye
vyaMjanAvagraha ke cAroM bhedoM ko milAne meM matijJAna ke aTThAIsa bheda hote
haiM  /  zrujJAna ke caudaha athavA bIsa bheda hote haiN| vizeSArtha - matijJAna
ke aTThAIsa bhedoM meM vyaMjanAvagraha ke cAra bhada pUrva kI gAthA meM kahe
gaye haiN| bAkI rahe caubIsa bhedoM ko batalAne se pahale gAthA meM batAye gaye
arthAvagraha, IhA, avAya aura dhAraNA ke lakSaNa kahate haiN| arthAvagraha-
padArtha ke avyakta jJAna ko arthAvagraha kahate haiN| jaise'yaha kucha hai|
arthAvagraha meM bhI padArtha ke varNa, gandha Adi kA jJAna nahIM hotA hai|
kintu vyaMjanAvagraha kI apekSA arthAvagrahajJAna meM kucha vizeSatA hotI hai  /
arthAvagraha kA kAla eka samaya pramANa hai| IhA-avagraha ke dvArA jAne hue
padArtha ke viSaya meM dharma-viSayaka vicAraNA ko IhA kahate haiM, arthAt
avagraha ke dvArA grahaNa kiye gaye sAmAnya viSaya ko vizeSa rUpa se nizcaya
karane ke lie jo vicAraNA hotI hai, use IhA kahA jAtA hai| jaise yaha rassI kA
sparza hai yA sarpa

Page #105 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## First Karma Granth, Chapter 25  **Eeha:** When doubt arises about the nature
of something, like whether a touch was from a rope or a snake, we engage in
**Eeha**, which is a process of reasoning and considering possibilities. For
example, "If it were a snake, it would have hissed when touched." Eeha lasts for
an **Antarmuhurta** (a very short period of time).  **Avaya:** The definite
knowledge gained through Eeha is called **Avaya**. For example, "The touch was
definitely from a rope, not a snake." Avaya also lasts for an **Antarmuhurta**.
**Dharana:** The firm knowledge that prevents forgetting the object known
through Avaya is called **Dharana**. It is the knowledge that retains the memory
of the object known through Avaya, even after a long time. Dharana can last for
a **countable or uncountable number of years**.  **Explanation:** The certainty
of Avaya may fade with time as the mind shifts to other objects. However, it
leaves a **Samskara** (impression) that allows for the recollection of the
object when a suitable opportunity arises. This continuous flow of certainty,
the resulting Samskara, and the memory arising from the Samskara, all constitute
the **Dharana** process.  **Note:** All four types of knowledge (Arthaavagraha,
etc.) are forms of **Matijnana** (knowledge through the mind). They are acquired
through the five senses and the mind, and therefore have five **r**
(characteristics).  **Reference:** Navisutra 34: "Eeha lasts for an
Antarmuhurta, Avaya for an Antarmuhurta, and Dharana for a countable or
uncountable number of years."

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prathama karmagrantha 25 kA, isa prakAra kA saMzaya utpanna hone para donoM ke
guNa-dharmo ke sambandha meM vicAraNA hotI hai ki yaha rassI kA sparza honA
cAhiye  /  kyoMki yadi yaha sarpa hotA to AghAta hone para phuphakAra kiye binA
na rahatA ityAdi saMbhAvanA, vicAraNA IhA kahalAtI hai| IhA kA kAla antarmuhUrta
hai  /  avAya - IhA ke dvArA kiye gaye pArtha ke lie meM kucha adhika jo
nizcayAtmaka jJAna hotA hai, use atrAya kahate haiM, jaisepahale jo sparza huA
thA, vaha rassI kA hI sparza thA, sarpa kA nahIM  /  isa prakAra jo nizcaya hotA
hai, vaha avAya hai  /  avAya kA samaya antarmuhUrta hai  /  - dhAraNA - avAya
ke dvArA jAne hue padArtha kA kAlAntara meM vismaraNa na ho, aisA jo dRr3ha
jJAna hotA hai, use dhAraNA kahate haiM, arthAt avAya dvArA jAne gaye padArtha
kA kAlAntara meM bhI smaraNa ho, isa prakAra ke saMskAra vAle jJAna ko dhAraNA
kahA jAtA hai  /  avAyarUpa nizcaya kucha kAla taka vidyamAna rahatA hai, phira
viSayAntara meM mana ke cale jAne se vaha nizcaya lupta to ho jAtA hai, kintu
aisA saMskAra DAla jAtA hai ki Age kabhI koI yogya nimitta milane para usa
nizcita viSaya kA smaraNa ho jAtA hai  /  yaha nizcaya kI satata dhArA, tajjanya
saMskAra aura saMskArajanya smaraNa, yaha saba mati vyApAra dhAraNA hai| dhAraNA
kA kAla saMkhyAta tathA asaMkhyAta varSoM kA hai| matijJAna ke rUpa hone se
arthAvagraha Adi cAroM jJAna pA~ca indriyoM aura mana ke dvArA padArtha kA jJAna
karate haiM  /  isalie unakA pA~ca r 1. ummahe ikkasamaie, antomuhuttiyA IhA
amtomuhuttie avAe, dhAraNA saMkhejjaM vA kAlaM asaMkhejjaM vA kAlaM  /
-navIsUtra 34

Page #106 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Karmavipaka, when combined with the senses and mind, results in six distinct
categories for each. For example, the sense of touch, the sense of taste, the
sense of smell, the sense of sight, the sense of hearing, and the mind, when
combined with Arthaavgraha, result in the following six categories of
Arthaavgraha:  (1) Sparshendriya-Arthaavgraha, (2) Rasnendriya-Arthaavgraha, (3)
Ghranendriya-Arthaavgraha, (4) Chakshusendriya-Arthaavgraha, (5) Shrotrendriya-
Arthaavgraha, and (6) Man-Arthaavgraha.  Similarly, by combining the five senses
and the mind with Iha, Avaya, and Dharana respectively, six categories each
should be derived.  Combining the six categories of each of these four -
Arthaavgraha, Iha, Avaya, and Dharana - results in a total of twenty-four
categories. Adding the four categories of Vyanjanavgraha to these categories
results in a total of twenty-eight categories of Matijnana. These categories are
clearly explained in the table on page 27.  After explaining the twenty-eight
categories of Matijnana, we now explain the 336 and 340 categories.  The
function of knowledge is to know objects. Depending on the intensity of
Kshayopa-shama, knowledge sometimes knows one type of object and sometimes many
types of objects. Sometimes the knowledge of an object is quick, and sometimes
it is slow, etc. Therefore, the twenty-four categories that arise from the six
instruments - the five senses and the mind - in the form of Arthaavgraha, Iha,
Avaya, and Dharana, are related to Kshayopa-shama and the object.  1. Nandī
Sūtra 26, 31, 32, 33.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmavipAka indriyoM aura mana ke sAtha guNA karane se chaha-chaha bheda ho
jAte haiM, jaise-sparzanendriya, rasanendriya, ghrANendriya, cakSurindriya,
zrotrendriya aura mana kA arthAvagraha ke sAtha saMyoga karane se arthAvagraha
ke nimnalikhita chaha bheda ho jAte haiM (1) sparza nandriya athAvagraha. (2)
rasanendriya-arthAtagraha (3) ghrANendriya-arthAvagraha, (4) cakSurindriya
arthAvagraha, (5) dhotrendriya-arthAvagraha aura (6) mana-arthAvagraha  /  isI
prakAra pA~ca indriyoM aura mana ke sAtha kramazaH IhA, avAya aura dhAraNA ko
jor3akara una-unake bhI chaha-chaha bheda kara lenA caahie| arthAvagraha se
lekara dhAraNA taka ina cAroM ke chaha-chaha bhedoM ko milAne se kula caubIsa
bheda hote haiM tathA ina bhedoM meM vyaMjanAvagraha ke cAra bhedoM ko aura
milAne se matijJAna ke kula aTThAIsa bheda ho jAte haiN| ye bheda pRSTha 27 para
dI gaI tAlikA se spaSTa jJAta ho jAte haiN| isa prakAra matijJAna ke aTThAIsa
bheda batalAne ke anantara aba 336 aura 340 bhedoM ko samajhAte hai jJAna kA
kArya padArthoM ko jAnanA hai| kSayopazama kI taratamatA meM jJAna kabhI eka
prakAra ke padArthoM ko to kabhI aneka prakAra ke padArthoM ko jAnatA hai| kabhI
padArtha kA zIghra zAna ho jAtA hai to kabhI vilamba se hotA hai, ityAdi  /
ataH pA~ca indriyoM aura mana ina chaha sAdhanoM se hone vAle matijJAna ke
arthAvagraha, IhA, avAya', dhAraNA ke rUpa se jo kula caubIsa bheda hote haiM ve
kSayopazama aura viSaya 1. nandIsUtra 26, 31. 32, 33  /

Page #107 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Sparśana I. 1 Vyanjanavigraha Arthavagraha 4 Abaya 5 Dhāraṇā Rasana I. 1
Vyanjanavigraha R Arthavagraha 4 Avaya 5 Dhāraṇā Ghāna I. 1 Vyanjanavigraha
Vyanjanavagraha Arthavagraha Athavagraha Iha Śrotra I. 4 Avaya 5 Cāraṇā Iha 4
Avadhi 5 Dhāraṇā Cakṣu I X Arthavagraha 3 Atraaya 4 Dhāraṇā Mana x Arthavagraha
Iha 3 Avaya 4 Dhāraṇā Sarvabheda 28 * Y 6 6 ali + Prathama Karmagrantha 27

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 sparzana i0 1 vyaMjanAvagraha arthAvagraha 4 abAya 5 dhAraNA rasana i0 1
vyaMjanAvagraha ra arthAvagraha 4 avAya 5 dhAraNA ghANa i0 1 vyaMjanavigraha
vyaMjanAvagraha arthAvagraha athAvagraha IhA zrotra i0 4 avAya 5 cAraNA IMhA 4
avadhi 5 dhAraNA cakSa i X arthAvagraha 3 atrAya 4 dhAraNA mana x arthAvagraha
IhA 3 avAya 4 dhAraNA sarvabheda 28 * Y 6 6 ly + prathama karmagrantha 27

Page #108 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  28. Karmavipaka  Karmavipaka are of twelve types due to their diversity. The
names of those twelve types are as follows:  (1) Bahu, (2) Alp, (3) Bahuvidha,
(4) Ekavidha, (5) Kshipra, (6) Akshita, (7) Anishrita, (8) Nishrita, (9)
Asandigdha, (10) Sandigdha, (11) Dhruva, (12) Adhruva.  Bahu means many and Alp
means one. For example, Avgraha, Iha, etc., which are the four types of
knowledge that know two or more books, are called Bahuprahi Avgraha, Bahugrahi
Iha, Bahugrahi Avaya, and Bahugrahi Dharana. And one should understand that
Avgraha, etc., which know one book, are called Alpgrahi Avgraha, etc., up to
Dharana.  Bahuvidha means in many ways and Ekavidha means in one way. For
example, Chiha, Uggahanati, etc., which have diversity in shape, form, color,
etc., are called Bahuvidha Mogimhati, Dhuba Mogimhati, Anissiya Bhogirihada,
Asandigdha Mogimhati.   For example, Iha, etc., which have diversity in speed,
etc., are called Khippa Mihati, Patta Mihati, etc., up to Asandigdha Mohani.
For example, Avaya, etc., which have diversity in speed, etc., are called Khippa
Maveti, etc., up to Asandigdha Maveti.   For example, Dharana, etc., which have
diversity in speed, etc., are called Bahudhare, Bahuvidhandhare, Poranam Ghare,
Duddhara Dharana, Agnissiya Dharana, Asandigdha Dharana.   -Sthananga Sutra,
Sthan 6, Su 510  TAPA - Jam Bahu Bahuvidha Kshiya Anissiya Nichchya
Ghubeyarabhibhisha Punaroghaado To Tam Tisasatya Bhedam.  -Dhati Bhasayarega
(iti Bhasyakarenen)  (K) Bahubahuvidhakshipranihsritanukta Dhru Banaam
Setaranaam.  -Tattvartha Sutra, A 1, Sut 16

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 28 karmavipAka ko vividhatA se bAraha-bAraha prakAra ke hote haiN| una bAraha
prakAroM ke nAma isa prakAra haiM (1) bahu, (2) alpa, (3) bahuvidha, (4)
ekavidha, (5) kSipra, (6) akSita, (7) anizrita, (8) nizrita, (6) asaMdigdha,
(10) saMdigdha, (11) dhruva (12) adhruva bahu kA Azaya aneka aura alpa kA Azaya
eka hai| jaise do yA do se adhika pustakoM ko jAnane vAle avagraha, IhA. Adi
cAroM kramabhAvI bhatijJAna bahuprAhI avagraha, bahugrAhiNI IhA, bahugrAhI avAya
aura bahugrAhiNI dhAraNA kahalAte haiM aura eka pustaka ko jAnane vAle alpagrAhI
avagraha Adi dhAraNAparyanta samajha lenA cAhie  /  bahuvidha kA Azaya aneka
prakAra se aura ekavidha kA artha eka prakAra se hai  /  jaise-AkAra-prakAra,
raMga-rUpa Adi vividhatA rakhane 1. (ka) cihA uggahanatI paNa tA, taM jahA-
viSNamogihati bahumogiNhati bahuvidha mogimhati dhubamogiti aNissiyabhogirahada
asaMdiddhamogiNhai  /  chavihA IhAmatI paNNatA, taM jahA-khippamIhati
paTTamIhati jAva asaMdidamohani  /  chanvihA avAyamatI paNattA, taM jahA-
khippamaveti jAva asaMdidamaveti  /  chavihA dhAraNA paNNatA, taM
jahAbahuMdhArei, bahuvihaMdhArei, porANaM ghArei, duddharaM dhAre, agNissiyaM
dhAreca, asaMdiddhaM dhaaredd| -sthAnAMgasUtra, sthAna 6, sU0 510 tapA-jaM bahu
bahuviha khiyA aNissiya nicchiya ghubeyarabibhiSA puNarogahAdo to taM
tIsattisaya bhedaM  /  -dati bhAsayArega (iti bhASyakAreNa) (kha)
bahubahuvidhakSiprAniHsRtAnukta dhra bANAM setarANAm  /  -tatvArthasUtra, a0 1,
sUta 16

Page #109 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## First Knowledge **26**  Those who know books of various kinds, such as those
with different sizes, shapes, colors, and thicknesses, are called
**bahuvidhagrahi** (multi-faceted knowledge) etc. Those who know books of the
same kind, with the same size, shape, color, and thickness, are called
**alpavidhagrahi** (limited knowledge) etc.  The difference between **bahu**
(many) and **alp** (few) lies in the number or quantity of the object. The
difference between **bahuvidha** (multifaceted) and **ekavidha** (single-
faceted) lies in the type, variety, or category of the object.  **Kshipra**
(swift) means quick, and **akshipra** (slow) means delayed. Those who know
quickly are called **kshipragrahi** (swift knowledge) etc., and those who know
slowly are called **abhipragrahi** (slow knowledge) etc.  **Anishrita**
(uncertain) means not proven by evidence, and **nishrita** (certain) means
proven by evidence. For example, those who know the flowers of a jasmine plant
based on the previously experienced evidence of cool, soft, and smooth touch,
are called **nishrita grahi** (certain knowledge) etc. Those who know the same
flowers without the aforementioned evidence are called **anishrita grahi**
(uncertain knowledge) etc.  The meaning of **nishrita** and **anishrita**
mentioned above is also found in the commentary of the **Nandisutra**. In
addition to this, the commentator of the **Nandisutra**, Acharya Malayagiri, has
given another meaning: **nishrita grahi** etc. are those who acquire knowledge
mixed with other religions, and **anishrita grahi** etc. are those who acquire
knowledge without mixing with other religions (published by Agamoday Samiti,
page 183).  **Asandigdha** (certain) means definite, and **sandigdha**
(doubtful) means uncertain. For example, those who know with certainty that this
is the touch of sandalwood and not a flower, are called **nishchita** (certain)
etc.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prathama kamagnanya 26 vAlI pustakoM ke jAnane vAle avagraha Adi krama se
bahuvidhagrAhI avagraha Adi kahalAte haiM aura AkAra-prakAra, raMga-5 Adi tathA
moTAI Adi meM eka hI prakAra kI pustakoM ke jAnane vAle ye zAna alpavidhagrAhI
avagraha Adi kahalAte haiM  /  bahu aura alpa kA tAtparya vastu kI saMkhyA
(ginatI) se aura bahuvidha tathA ekavidha kA tAtparya prakAra, kisma yA jAti me
hai| yahI donoM meM antara hai| kSipra kA artha zIghra aura akSipra kA artha
vilamba-derI hai  /  zIghra jAnane vAle avagraha Adi kSipragrAhI avagraha Adi
tathA vilamba se jAnane vAle abhipragrAhI Adi kahalAte haiN| anizrita kA artha
hetu-cihna dvArA asiddha aura nizrita kA Azaya hetu dvArA siddha vastu me hai|
jaise -pUrva meM anubhUta zItala, komala aura snigdha sparzarUpa hetu se jahI ke
phUloM ko jAnane vAle avagraha Adi cAroM jJAna kramazaH nizritagrAhI avagraha
Adi tathA ukta hetu ke binA hI una phaloM ko jAnane vAle anizritagrAhI avagraha
Adi kahalAte haiN| Upara jo nidhita aura anizrita zabda kA artha batalAyA hai,
vaha nandIsUtra kI TIkA meM bhI hai| isake sivAya ukta sUtra ke TIkAkAra AcArya
malayagiri ne eka dUsarA bhI artha batalAyA hai-para-dharmoM se mizrita-grahaNa
nizritAvagraha Adi aura para-dharmoM se amizritagrahaNa anizritAvagraha Adi
(Agamodaya samiti dvArA prakAzita, pRSTha 183) /  asaMdigdha kA artha nizcita
aura saMdigdha kA artha anizcita hai  /  jaise-yaha candana kA hI sparza hai,
phula kA nahIM; isa prakAra se sparza ko nizcita rUpa se jAnane vAle avagraha
Adi cAroM jJAna nizcita

Page #110 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Karmavipaka  (Undoubtedly! Grahi Avgraha etc. are called and this will be the
touch of Nandan or the flower, because both have coolness, thus doubtful
knowledge occurring with the non-availability of the specific is called
uncertain (doubtful) Nahi-Avgraha etc. As the knowledge was before, so it is
also behind, there is no difference in it, it is called Dhruvgrahan and the
knowledge that occurs before and behind, the less or more in it is called
Adhruvgrahan. For example - a person, when the means-materials etc. are the
same, he definitely knows that subject and the other sometimes knows it and
sometimes does not. The four knowledges of Avgraha etc. that definitely know the
subject when the materials are present are called Dhruvgrahi Avgraha etc. and
the said four knowledges that sometimes take and sometimes do not take due to
the slowness of Kshayopa-sham even when the materials are present are called
Adhruvgrahi Avgraha etc. Out of the said twelve divisions of Bahu etc., the four
divisions of Bahu, Alp, Bahuvidh and Alpvidh are based on the diversity of the
subject and the remaining eight divisions of Kshipra etc. are based on the
diversity of Kshayopa-sham. Bahu, Bahuvidh, Kshipra, Anishrit, Asandigdh and
Dhruv in these, specific Kshayopa-sham, concentration of use, habit are the
intimate extraordinary causes and Alp, Alpvidh, Akshipra, Nishchit, Sandigdh and
Adhruv in these, slowness of Kshayopa-sham, scattered use, unfamiliarity are the
intimate extraordinary causes. The four divisions of Vyanjanavgraha and the
twenty-four divisions of Arthavgraha etc. are multiplied by the twelve divisions
of Bahu etc., there are 336 divisions, such as - Arthavgraha, Iha, Avaya and
Dharana, each of these four has five senses and mind, so there are twenty-four
divisions and these twenty-four

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmavipAka (asaMdigdha! grAhI avagraha Adi kahalAte haiM aura yaha nandana kA
sparza hogA yA phUla kA, kyoMki donoM meM zItalatA hotI hai, isa prakAra vizeSa
kI anupalabdhi ke sAtha hone vAle saMdehayukta jJAna anizcita (saMdigdha) nAhI-
avagraha Adi kahalAte haiN| jaisA ki pahale jJAna huA thA, vaisA hI pIche bhI
hotA hai, usameM koI antara nahIM AtA, use dhra vagrahaNa aura pahale tathA
pIche hone vAle jJAna meM nyUnAdhika rUpa se annara 'A jAnA adhra vagrahaNa
kahalAtA hai| jaise--koI manuSya mAdhana-sAmagrI Adi samAna hone para usa viSaya
ko avazya jAna letA hai aura dUsaga use kabhI jAnatA hai aura kabhI nhiiN|
sAmagrI hone para viSaya ko avazya jAnane vAle avagraha Adi cAroM jJAna dhra
vagrAhI avagraha Adi kahalAte haiM aura sAmagrI hone para bhI kSayopazama kI
maMdatA ke kAraNa kabhI grahaNa karane vAle aura kabhI na karane vAle ukta cAroM
jJAna adhra vagrAhI avagraha Adi kahalAte haiM  /  ukta brahU Adi bAraha bhedoM
meM se bahu, alpa, bahuvidha aura alpavidha ye cAra bheda viSaya kI vividhatA
para evaM kSipra Adi zeSa ATha bheda kSayopazama kI vividhatA para AdhArita
haiN| bahu, bahuvidha, kSipra, anizrita, asaMdigdha aura dhra ba inameM viziSTa
kSayopazama, upayoga kI ekAgratA, abhyastatA ye aMtaraMga asAdhAraNa kAraNa haiM
aura alpa, alpavidha, akSipra, nizcita, saMdigdha aura adhruvainase hone vAle
jJAna meM kSayopazama kI maMdatA, upayoga kI vikSiptatA, anabhyastatA ye
antaraMga asAdhAraNa kAraNa haiM  /  vyaMjanAvagraha ke cAra aura arthAvagraha
Adi ke caubIsa bhedoM ko bahuAdi bAraha bhedoM se guNA karane para 336 bheda
hote haiM, yathA- arthAvagraha, IhA, avAya aura dhAraNA ina cAroM meM se
pratyeka ke pA~ca indriyoM aura mana se hone ke kAraNa caubIsa bheda banate haiM
aura ina caubIsa kA

Page #111 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
First Karmapranya Multiplying the twelve categories of Bahu etc. with the
twenty-four categories of Vyavaharanavagraha, we get 288 categories.  Except for
the Vyavaharanavagraha of the eye and mind, the remaining four senses, namely
touch, taste, smell, and hearing, generate Vyavaharanavagraha. Multiplying these
four types of Vyavaharanavagraha with the twelve categories of Bahu etc., we get
48 categories. Thus, combining the 288 categories of Arthaavagraha etc. and the
48 categories of Vyavaharanavagraha, we get a total of 336 categories of
Matigyan.  The reason for having forty-eight categories of Vyavaharanavagraha is
that, except for the eye and mind, the remaining four senses - touch, taste,
smell, and hearing - generate Vyavaharanavagraha.  However, the sequential
knowledge of Iha, Aavaaya, and Dharana does not occur. Therefore, multiplying
the Vyavaharanavagraha generated by the four senses of touch etc. with the
twelve categories of Bahu etc., we get only forty-eight categories.  The
aforementioned 336 categories of Matigyan are Shruta-nishrit Matigyan. Adding
the four categories of Ashruta-nishrit Matigyan - (1) Autpattiki Buddhi, (2)
Vainayiki Buddhi, (3) Karmaja Buddhi, and (4) Parinaamiki Buddhi - to these, we
get a total of 340 categories of Matigyan.  The nature of these four Buddhis
should be understood as follows:  1. (a) "Asooyanispattiyam Unih Pannaattam Tam
Jaha Utpattiya Vean Ah Kammiya Parinaamiya. Buddhi Ghadabdiha Butta Panchma
Noaklabhai." - Nandosutra 26 (b) "Baumaviha Buddhi Pannaata, Tam Jaha -
Ppatttiya, Veanaiya, Kammiya, Parinaamiya." - Staanaanga 4.4.364

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prathama karmapranya bahu Adi bAraha ke sAtha guNA karane se 288 bheda hue
tathA vyaMjanAvagraha cakSurindriya aura mana ina donoM ke sivAya zeSa
sparzanendriya Adi cAra indriyoM se hone aura ina cAra prakAra ke
vyaMjanAvagraha kA bahu Adi bAraha ke sAtha guNA karane se 48 bhada hue| isa
prakAra arthAvagraha Adi ke 2EE aura gaMgAnagaDa le 4: bhedoM ko milAne se kula
336 bheda matijJAna ke ho jAte haiN| vyaMjanAvagraha ke ar3atAlIsa bheda hone kA
kAraNa yaha hai vyaMjanAvagraha cakSurindriya aura mana ke sivAya zeSa cAra
indriyoMsparzana, rasana, ghrANa aura zrotra se hotA hai tathA IhA, avAya evaM
dhAraNArUpa kramavartI jJAna nahIM hote haiN| isalie sparzanAdi cAra indriyoM se
janya vyaMjanAvagrahoM kA bahu Adi bAraha ke sAtha guNA karane para sirpha
ar3atAlIsa bheda hote haiN| matijJAna ke pUrvokta 336 bheda zrutanizrita
matijJAna ke haiM, inameM azrutanizrita matijJAna ke-(1) autpAtikI buddhi, (2)
vainayikI buddhi, (3) karmajA buddhi aura (4) pAriNAmikI buddhi-ina cAra bhedoM
ko milAne me matijJAna ke kula 340 bheda ho jAte haiN| ukta cAra buddhiyoM kA
svarUpa nimna prakAra se samajhanA cAhie 1. (ka) asUyanisptiyaM uniha paNNattaM
taM jahA utpattiyA veNa aH kammiyA pariNAmiyA  /  buddhI ghaDabdihA buttA
paMcamA noklabhAI  /  /  -nandosatra 26 (kha) baumvihA buddhI paNNatA, taM jahA-
ppattiyA, veNaiyA, kammiyA, pariNAmiyA  /  - sthAnAMga 4 / 4 / 364

Page #112 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter 32: Karma and its Results  **Outpattiki Buddhi:** This is the type of
intellect that instantly grasps the pure meaning and intention of things, even
without prior hearing or knowledge. This kind of intellect manifests suddenly in
a situation to achieve a task.  **Banyiki Buddhi:** This intellect is acquired
through service to gurus and others. It is useful in many intellectual
activities and bears fruit in this world and the next.  **Karmaja Buddhi:** This
intellect is gained through purposeful thinking, contemplation, and practice.
**Parinamiki Buddhi:** This intellect is acquired through long life and
experiences in the world. It is used to prove things through inference,
reasoning, and examples, and it benefits the world.  Thus, the discussion of
Matigyan (intellectual knowledge) is complete. Although Matigyan and Shrutigyan
(scriptural knowledge) are both present, Matigyan comes first, followed by
Shrutigyan.  1. **"Pubvamditham asmay mavei ya tarakhanavisuddagahiyastha.
Ambahayphalajoga buddhi utpattiya bham."** - Nandi Sutra, Gatha 66 2.
**"Bharaniththaranasamstha tishyasagassatthagahiyapeayala. Ubho loga phalavai,
thineyasamuttha hevah buddhi."** - Nandi Sutra, Gatha 73 3.
**"Udyogaditththassara kamasangparighollan visala. Matukara phalavai kampsamudda
hava buddhi."** - Nandi Sutra, Gatha 76 4. **"Anuman-hetu-bittat-sahiyaa vay
vavagparinama. Hir nisseya saphalabai buddhi parinamiya naam."** - Nandi Sutra,
Gatha 78

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 32 karmavipAka autpAtiko buddhi' - jisa buddhi ke dvArA pahale binA sune, binA
jAne hue padArthoM ke vizuddha artha, abhiprAya ko tatkAla grahaNa kara liyA
jAtA hai, use autpAtikI buddhi kahate haiN| isa prakAra kI buddhi kisI prasaMga
para kAryasiddhi karane meM ekAeka prakaTa hotI hai  /  _ banayikI buddhi - yaha
gurujanoM Adi kI sevA me prApta hone vAlI buddhi hotI hai ! kaI buddhi
kAryaravahana karoM meM kAmartha hotI hai aura ihaloka va paraloka meM phala
dene vAlI hotI hai  /  pharmajA buddhi - upayogapUrvaka cintana, manana aura
abhyAsa karatekarate prApta hone vAlI buddhi ko karmajA buddhi kahate haiN| _
pAriNAmikI buddhi-dIrghAyu ke kAraNa bahuta kAla taka saMsAra ke anubhavoM se
prApta hone vAlI buddhi ko pAriNAmikI buddhi kahate haiM  /  yaha buddhi
anumAna, hetu, dRSTAnta Adi se kArya ko siddha karane vAlI aura lokahita karane
vAlI hotI hai| _isa prakAra matijJAna kA vivecana pUrNa huA  /  yadyapi
matijJAna aura zrutajJAna - donoM sahavartI haiM, tathApi pahale matijJAna aura
usake anantara 1. pubvamadiThamasmaya mavei ya tarakhaNavisuddhagahiyasthA  /
ambAhayaphalajogA buddhI utpattiyA bhAma  //  -nanvIsUtra, gAyA 66 2.
bharanittharaNasamasthA tizyagAsattasthagahiyapeyAlA  /  ubho loga phalavaI,
thiNayasamutthA hevaha buddhI  /  /  -nandIsUtra, gAthA 73 3. udyogadiThThasArA
kAmAsaMgaparigholaNa visAlA  /  mATukAra phalavaI kampasamuddhA havA buddhI  /
/  nandIsUtra, gAyA 76 4. aNumANa-he u-biTTata-sAhiyA vaya vvaagprinnaamaa| hira
nisseya saphalabaI buddhI pariNAmiyA nAma | mandIsUtra, gAthA 78

Page #113 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## First Karma Text  **Knowledge of Scriptures**  Now, after the description of
**Knowledge of Mind**, we will describe **Knowledge of Scriptures**. There are
fourteen divisions of **Knowledge of Scriptures** and twenty divisions of
**Knowledge of Scriptures** with **Bos** (a term used to denote a specific type
of knowledge).  **Verse 6:**  * **Apaakhar**, **Santi**, **Samm**, **Sai**,
**Sapjayavasian**, **Gamiyan**, **Angpavilu**, **Ttavi**, **Eae**,
**Sapdiwakkha**  These seven terms, along with their corresponding opposite
meanings, make up the fourteen divisions of **Knowledge of Scriptures**.
**Verse 7:**  * **Pajjay**, **Akhar**, **Pay**, **Sandhaya**, **Padivatti**,
**Tatah**, **Anuogo**, **Pahuḍapahuḍ**, **Pahuḍ**, **Vathu**, **Puva**, **Ya**,
**Sa-Samasa**  These ten terms, along with the addition of the word **Samasa**
to each of them, make up the twenty divisions of **Knowledge of Scriptures**.
**Explanation:**  After **Knowledge of Mind**, **Knowledge of Scriptures** is
acquired in a sequential manner. Verse 6 lists fourteen divisions of **Knowledge
of Scriptures**, while Verse 7 lists twenty divisions. We will first describe
the fourteen divisions.  **Fourteen Divisions of Knowledge of Scriptures:**
Although only seven terms are mentioned in the verse, the remaining seven are to
be understood as their opposites. Therefore, by adding the seven opposite terms
to the seven terms like **Akhar**, we get the following fourteen divisions of
**Knowledge of Scriptures**:  1. **Mayipurva Jan Sujan Na Mayi Syapushviya** -
**Nanda Sutra 24**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prathama karma grantha zrutajJAna hotA hai| ataH aba matijJAna ke pazcAt
zrutajJAna kA varNana kiyA jAtA hai| zrutajJAna ke caudaha aura bosa bheda :
apAkhara santI samma sAi khalu sapajjavasiyaM ca  /  gamiyaM aMgapavilU sa ttavi
ee sapaDivakkhA  // 6 //  pajjaya akkhara paya saMdhAyA paDivatti taha ya
annuogo| pAhuDapAhuDa pAhuDa vatthU puvA ya sa-samAsA  // 7 //  gAthArtha-
akSara, saMjI, samyak, sAdi, saparyavasita, gamika aura aMgapraviSTa tathA ina
sAta ke sAtha inake pratipakSI arthavAle sAta nAmoM ko jor3ane se zrutajJAna ke
caudaha bheda ho jAte haiN| payAMya, akSara, pada, saMghAta, pratipatti,
anuyoga, prAbhUtaprAbhRta, prAbhUta, vastu evaM pUrva ye dasa tathA ina dasoM
meM se pratyeka ke sAtha samAsa zabda jor3a dene se zrutajJAna se bIsa bheda
hote haiM  /  / 6-7 /  vizeSArtha-matijJAna ke anantara kramaprApta zrutajJAna
ke gAthA 6 meM caudaha bhedoM evaM gAthA meM bIsa bhedoM ke nAma ginAye haiN|
unameM se pahale caudaha bhedoM kA varNana karate haiN| zrutajJAna ke caudaha
bheda * zrutajJAna ke caudaha bhedoM kA kathana karane ke lie yadyapi gAthA meM
sirpha sAta nAmoM kA ullekha hai aura zeSa sAta nAmoM ko samajhane ke lie kahA
hai ki ukta nAmoM me pratipakSI artha rakhane vAle sAta nAmoM ko aura jor3a lenA
caahie| ataeva akSara Adi sAta nAmoM ke sAtha unake pratipakSI sAta nAma jor3ane
se zrutajJAna ke nimnalikhita paudaha bheda ho jAte haiM1. maIpurva jaNa sujhaM
na maI syapuzviyA  /  -nandausUtra 24

Page #114 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  34 ## Karmavipaka (1) Aksharashruta, (2) Anaksharashruta, (3) Sanjishruta,
(4) Asanjisruta, (5) Samyakshruta, (6) Mithyashruta, (7) Sadishruta, (8)
Anadishruta, (9) Saparyavasitashruta, (10) Aparyavasitat, (11) Gamikashruta,
(12) Agamikashruta, (13) Angpravishtaashruta, (14) Angvahyashruta.  Although the
remaining twelve categories are included within the first two categories of
Aksharashruta and Anaksharashruta, there are two types of seekers: (1)
Vyutpannamathi (those with sharp intellect) and (2) Avyutpannamathi (those with
dull intellect). Those with sharp intellect understand the knowledge of Shruta
through these two categories alone, while those with dull intellect are unable
to describe or understand the remaining categories through these two categories.
Therefore, the remaining twelve categories have been mentioned for their easy
understanding.  The explanation of the fourteen categories of Shruta knowledge
is as follows:  (1) Aksharashruta - The word 'Akshar' is derived from the root
'Kshar sanchalane'. For example, 'Na ksharati, na chalati ityaksharam' meaning
knowledge is called Akshar. Knowledge is the nature of the Jiva and no substance
deviates from its nature. Jiva is also a substance. Since knowledge is its
nature and quality, it is not found in any other substance besides Jiva. - - -
1. Supramanaparoctram codadasadhiham pannam, tam jaha-akkharasuyam,
anamakharasyam, sapnisuyam, asanisum, sammammayam. micchasugam, saiyam, agaiyam,
sapjjabasiyam, apjjavasiyam, gamiyam, agabhiyam, angvilen, anagap vitth. - Nandi
Sutra 37

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 34 karmavipAka (1) akSarazrata, (2) anakSarazruta, (3) saMjIdhuta', (4)
asaMjIzruta, (5) samyakazruta, (6) mithyAzruta, (7) sAdizruta, (8) anAdizruta,
(6) saparyavasitazruta, (10) aparyavasitata, (11) gamikazruta, (12)
agamikazruta, (13) aMgapraviSTazruta, (14) aMgavA hyazruta  / ' zrutajJAna ke
ukta caudaha bhedoM meM se yadyapi akSarazruta aura anakSarazruta ina do bhedoM
meM zeSa bAraha bhedoM kA antarbhAva ho jAtA hai lekina jijJAsuoM ke do prakAra
haiM-(1) vyutpannamati (prakharabuddhi vAle) aura (2) avyutpannamati
(mandabuddhi vaale)| inameM se prakharabuddhi vAle to akSarazruta aura
anakSarazruta ina do bhedoM ke dvArA hI zrutajJAna ke bAre meM samajha lete haiM
aura mandabuddhi vAle akSarazruta aura anakSarazruta ina do bhedoM ke dvArA zeSa
bhedoM kA varNana karane va samajhane meM samartha nahIM hote haiM  /  ataH
unheM bhI saralatA se bodha karAne kI dRSTi se zeSa bAraha bhedoM kA bhI ullekha
kiyA gayA hai  /  dhrutajJAna ke ukta caudaha bhedoM kI vyAkhyA isa prakAra hai
(1) akSarazruta-'kSara saMcalane' dhAtu se akSara zabda banatA hai| jaise--'na
kSarati, na calati ityakSaram' arthAt jJAna kA nAma akSara hai  /  jJAna jIva kA
svabhAva hai aura koI dravya apane svabhAva se vicalita nahIM hotA hai| jIva bhI
eka dravya hai| jJAna usakA svabhAva tathA guNa hone se vaha jIva ke atirikta
anya kisI dravya meM nahIM pAyA jAtA -.. -.. 1. supramANaparoktraM
codadasadhihaM paNNanaM, taM jahA-akkharasuyaM, aNamakharasyaM, sapNisuyaM,
asaNisumaM, sammamayaM. micchAsugaM, sAiyaM, agAiya, sapajjabasiyaM,
apajjavasiyaM, gamiyaM, agabhiyaM, aMgavileM, aNagapa viTTha | -nandIsUtra 37

Page #115 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The First Karma Granth Knowledge never departs from the Jiva-Atma, even in the
state of deep sleep, because it is the nature of the Jiva. Therefore, Shruta-
Jnana is itself cognitive and because knowledge is the nature of the Jiva,
Shruta-Jnana is itself Akshara. There are three types of Akshara: (1) Sanjna-
Akshara, (2) Vyanjana-Akshara, and (3) Labdha-Akshara.  Sanjna-Akshara - The
form, structure, and arrangement by which it is known that this is a particular
Akshara is called Sanjna-Akshara. The letters of the various scripts of the
world are examples of this. They convey the knowledge of those letters through
their form. For example, A, Aa, I, Ee, U, etc.  Vyanjana-Akshara - The type of
pronunciation that clearly conveys the meaning of the Akshara, such as A, is
called Vyanjana-Akshara. In other words, Vyanjana-Akshara is simply the name of
the pronunciation of the Akshara. Vyanjana-Akshara is only used in speaking.
Labdha-Akshara - To contemplate the meaning of a word by hearing it or seeing
its form is called Labdha-Akshara.  Sanjna-Akshara and Vyanjana-Akshara produce
Bhava-Bhuta. Therefore, both of them are called Dravya-Shruta, because the
pronunciation of the Akshara conveys its meaning and it produces Bhava-Shruta.
1. Balarasaya Tivid Panate, Nan Jaha-Mannavasara, Banjanavaksharam, Ladhi
Akkharam. - Nandi Sutra 38 2. Rannakharam Aksarassa Santhanagii. - Nandi Sutra
38 3. Banjanakavara Aksasa Vyanjanabhilayo. - Nandi Sutra 38 4. Laddhaakharam -
Akkharalashivassa Nadimaakharam Samuppajji. . . Nandousutra 38

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prathama karmagrantha hai| jJAna jIva-AtmA se kabhI nahIM haTatA hai, suSupita
avasthA meM bhI jIva kA svabhAva hone se jJAna rahatA hI hai  /  ataH zrutajJAna
svayaM jJAnAtmaka hai aura jJAna jIva kA svabhAva hone ke kAraNa zrutazAna
svayaM akSara hI hai| akSara ke tIna bheda haiM- (1) saMjJAkSara, (2)
vyaMjanAkSara aura (3) labdhyakSara  / ' saMjJAkSara-jisa AkRti, banAvaTa,
saMsthAna dvArA yaha jAnA jAe ki yaha amuka akSara hai, use saMjJAkSara kahate
haiN| vizva kI vibhinna lipiyoM ke akSara isake udAharaNa haiN| ve apanI AkRti
dvArA una akSaroM kA bodha karAte haiN| jaise-a, A, i, I, u Adi  /  yajanAkSara
--jisase akAra Adi akSaroM ke artha kA spaSTa bodha ho, usa prakAra ke uccAraNa
ko vyaMjanAkSara kahate haiM, arthAt vyaMjanAkSara kevala akSaroM ke uccAraNa kA
nAma hai  /  vyaMjanAkSara kA upayoga kevala bolane meM hI hotA hai| labdhyakSa
- zabda ko sunakara yA rUpa ko dekhakara artha kA anubhavapUrvaka paryAlocana
karanA labdhyakSara kahalAtA hai  /  saMjJAkSara aura vyaMjanAkSara se
bhAvabhuta paidA hotA hai| isalie una donoM ko dravyazruta kahate haiM, kyoMki
akSara ke uccAraNa se usake artha kA bodha hotA hai aura usane bhAvazrata
utpanna hotA hai aura 1. balarasaya tivida paNate, naM jahA-mannavasara,
baMjaNavakSaraM, laddhi akkharaM  /  - nandIsUtra 38 2. rAnnakkharaM aksarassa
saMThANagiI  /  - nandIsUtra 38 3. baMjaNakAvara aksasa vaMjJaNAbhilAyo  /  -
nandIsUtra 38 4. lAddhaaksaraM- akkha ralazivassa nadimAkharaM samupajjai  /  .
. nandausUtra 38

Page #116 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  36. Karmavipaka  **Labdhyakshar** is the knowledge that arises from the
perception of words, following the reception of sound, through the agency of the
senses and mind. As it is said, "The knowledge that arises after the reception
of sound, through the agency of the senses and mind, following the perception of
the meaning of the word, like 'this is a conch', etc., is called Labdhyakshar."
**(2) Anakshar:** The knowledge that is not based on letters but on sounds, is
called Anakshar. This includes understanding the intentions of others through
gestures like sneezing, snapping fingers, nodding, etc.  **(3) Sanjot:** Those
five-sensed beings who have a mind are called Sanjnee, and their knowledge is
called Sanshashrut.  There are three types of Sanjna: (1) Dirghkaliki, (2)
Hetuvaadopaadeshiki, and (3) Drishtivaadopaadeshiki.  **Dirghkaliki Sanjna** is
the knowledge of the past, present, and future, like "I have done this", "I am
doing this", and "I will do this". This Sanjna is present in Devas, Narakas,
Garbhaja Tiryachas, and humans.  **Hetuvaadopaadeshiki Sanjna** is the knowledge
that is useful for the sustenance of the body, leading to the pursuit of
desirable things and the avoidance of undesirable things. This Sanjna is present
in beings with two senses or more, who are not Sanjnee.
**Drishtivaadopaadeshiki Sanjna** is present in the fourteen Purvadharas.
**Nandisutra, Gatha:**  1. **Uus siyam nees siyam nichham khasiyam cha diyam
cha. Nissindhiamanusar am ankwara chheliyaaiye.**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 36 karmavipAka labdhyakSara bhAvazruta hai  /  kahA bhI haiM - 'zabdAdigrahaNa
samanantaramindriyamanonimittaM zabdArtha paryAlocanAnusAri
zaMkho'yamityAdyakSarAnuviddha jJAnamupajAyate ityarthaH ' - zabda grahaNa
karane ke pazcAt indriya aura mana ke nimitta se jo zabdArtha paryAlocanAnusAra
jJAna utpanna hotA hai, usI ko labdhyakSara kahate haiM  /  (2) anakSara' - jo
zabda abhiprAyapUrvaka varNAtmaka nahIM, balki dhvanyAtmaka kiyA jAtA hai, use
anakSarazruta kahate haiN| chIMkanA, cuTakI bajAnA, sira hilAnA, ityAdi saMketoM
se dUsaroM kA abhiprAya jAnanA isake rUpa haiM  /  + (3) saMjota- jina
paMcendriya jIvoM ke mana hai, ve saMjJI aura unakA zruta saMzazruta kahalAtA
hai  /  saMjJA ke tIna bheda - (1) dIrghakAliko, (2) hetuvAdopadezikI aura (3)
dRSTivAdopadezikI haiM  /  amuka kAma kara cukA hU~, amuka kAma kara rahA hU~
Ara amuka kAma karUMgA isa prakAra kA bhUta, vartamAna aura bhaviSyat kA jJAna
jisase hotA hai, vaha borghakAlikI saMjJA hai  /  yaha saMjJA deva nAraka tathA
garbhaja tiyaMca evaM manuSyoM ko hotI hai  /  J 1. Usa siyaM nIsa siyaM nichaM
khAsiyaM ca dIyaM ca  /  nissiMdhiyamaNusAraM aNakvaraM cheliyAIye  //  apane
zarIra ke pAlana ke lie iSTa vastu meM pravRtti aura aniSTa vastu se nivRtti ke
lie upayogI sirpha vartamAnakAlika jJAna jisase hotA hai, vaha hetuvAdopadezikI
saMjJA hai| yaha saMjJA dvIndriya Adi asaMjJI jIvoM ke hotI hai  /
dRSTivAdopadezako saMjJA caturdaza pUrvadhara ko hotI hai  /  nandIsUtra, gAthA

Page #117 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## First Karma Granth, Chapter 37  (4) Those living beings who do not have a
mind are called *asangi* and their *shruta* is called *asangi shruta*.  The
explanation of *sangi* and *asangi* beings should be understood in relation to
the *dirghkaliki*, *hetuvadopadeshiki* and *drishtivadopadeshiki*
classifications.  **In relation to *dirghkaliki***: Those who have the intellect
to contemplate *iha sadarth* (the purpose of this life), the path of *apoh*
(definitive reasoning), *margana* (investigation of the inherent qualities),
*gaveshana* (examination of the nature of the differentiating qualities), and
*chinta* (reflection on how an event happened, is happening, and will happen)
and have the power to understand the true nature of things are called *sangi*.
All other beings are called *asangi*. Those who are born in the womb,
*aupapatik* (born spontaneously), *dev* (celestial beings), or *narak* (hell
beings) and have attained a mind are called *sangi*. Because contemplation,
deliberation, etc., regarding the three periods of time are possible only for
them. Those who have not attained a mind are called *asangi*.  **In relation to
*hetuvadopadeshiki***: Those who, with intelligence, engage in actions that are
beneficial for their own body, such as consuming desirable food, and refrain
from actions that are harmful, such as consuming undesirable food, are called
*sangi* in the context of *hetu* (reason) *upadesh* (instruction). Conversely,
those who do not are called *asangi*.  **In relation to
*drishtivadopadeshiki***: In this context, *drishti* refers to the knowledge of
*darshan* (vision). *Samyaggyan* (right knowledge) is called *sanjna*. One who
possesses such *sanjna* is called *sangi*.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prathama karmagrantha 37 (4) asaMto ta-jina jIvoM ke mana nahIM hai, ve asaMjJI
kahalAte haiM aura unake zruta ko asaMjJIzruta kahate haiM  /  dIrghakAlikI,
hatuvAdopadezikI aura dRSTivAdopadezikI saMjJAoM kI apekSA saMjJI aura asaMjJI
jIvoM kI vyAkhyA nimna prakAra samajhanI caahie| dorghakAlikI kI apekSA- jisake
IhA sadartha ke vicArane kI buddhi, apoha - nizcayAtmaka vicAraNA mArgaNA -
anvayadharma-anveSaNa karanA, gaveSaNA - vyatirekadharma svarUpa paryAlocana,
cintA yaha kArya kaise huA ? vartamAna meM kaise ho rahA hai aura bhaviSyata meM
kaise hogA ? isa prakAra va vastusvarUpa ko gata karane kI zakti hai, unheM
sajJI kheNge| inake atirikta zeSa jIva asaMjJI khlaayeNge| jo garbhaja,
aupapAtika -- deva, nAraka manapApti se sampala hai, ve saMjJI khlaayeNge|
kyoMki traikAlika viSaya sambandhI cintA, vimarza Adi unhIM ke sambhava ho
sakatA hai tathA jinheM manolabdhi prApta nahIM hai, unheM asaMjJI kahate haiM
/  hetuvAdopaveziko kI apekSA- jo buddhipUrvaka svadehapAlana ke liye iSTa AhAra
Adi meM pravRtti aura aniSTa AhAra Adi se nivRtti letA hai use hetu upadeza me
saMjJI kahA jAtA hai, isake viparIta arAMjI  /  isa dRSTi kI apekSA cAra lasa
(dvandriya se paMcendriya taka) saMjJI aura pA~ca sthAvara (pRthvI, jala, tejas,
vAyu aura vanaspatikAyika) asaMjI haiN| sArAMza yaha hai ki jina jIvoM ke
buddhipUrvaka iSTa-aniSTa meM pravRtti nivRtti hotI hai ve saMjJI aura jina
jIvoM ke buddhipUrvaka iSTaaniSTa meM pravRtti nivRtti nahIM hotI hai, ve
asaMjJI haiM dRSTivAdopadezikI kI apekSA-dRSTi nAma darzana jJAna kA hai  /
samyagjJAna kA nAma saMjJA hai  /  aisI saMjJA jisake ho vaha saMjJI kahalAtA

Page #118 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Karmavipaka  **Karmavipaka** is the result of karma. "Sanjnanam sanjna-
samyagjnanam tadasyastiti sanji-samyadrstis tasya yatshruttam tatsanjishruttam
samyakshrutmiti." A being with samyagdrsti and kshayopa-shaman-jnan is called a
sanji, in relation to the teachings of drstivada, and strives to conquer the
enemies of raga, etc. Their shrut is called sanjishrut.  (5) The shrut of beings
with samyagdrsti and samyakshrut is called samyakshrut.  (6) The shrut of beings
with mithyadrsti and mithyashrut is called mithyashrut.  (7) Sadishrut is that
which has a beginning (a starting point).  (8) Anadishrut is that which has no
beginning.  (9) Saparyavasitashrut is that which has an end.  (10)
Aparyavasitashrut is that which has no end.  In relation to the paryayathik nay,
shrut-jnan is sadishrut and saparyavasit. In relation to the dravyathik nay, it
is anadishrut and aparyavasit.  (11) Gamikashrut is the repeated recitation of
the same sutra with some special emphasis in the beginning, middle, and end,
like drstivada.  (12) Agamikashrut is that which does not have the same text,
like kalikashrut.  (13) Angapravishtashrut is the scripture composed by the
Tirthankaras...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmavipAka hai  /  'saMjJAnaM saMjJA-samyagjJAna tadasyAstIti saMjI-
samyAdRSTistasya yatzrutaM tatsaMjJizrutaM samyakzrutamiti  / ' jo samyagdRSTi
kSayopazamajJAna se yukta hai, vaha dRSTivAdopadeza kI apekSA se saMjhI kahalAtA
hai aura baha rAgAdi bhAvaMzatruoM ko jItane meM prayatnazIla hotA hai  /  usake
zruta ko saMjJIzruta kahate haiN| (5) samyakzruta-samyagdRSTi jIvoM kA zruta
samyakzruta kahalAtA hai| (6) mithyAta- mithyAdRSTi jIvoM ke zruta ko
mithyAzruta kahate haiN| (7) sAvizruta-jisakI Adi (prArambha, zurUAta) ho, vaha
sAdizruta hai| (E) anAdizruta-jisakI Adi na ho, vaha anAdizruta hai| (E)
saparyavasitazrula-jisakA anta ho, vaha saparyasitazruta kAhalAtA hai| (10)
aparyavasitazruta-jisakA anta na ho, vaha aparyavasiMtazruta hai| paryAyAthika
naya kI apekSA zrutajJAna sAdi, saparyavasita aura dravyAthikanaya kI apekSA
anAdi, aparyavasita hai| 111) gamikazruta - Adi, madhya aura avasAna meM kucha
vizeSatA se usI sUtra ko bAra-bAra kahanA gamikazruta hai, jaise-dRSTivAda  /
(12) agamikrazruta-jisameM eka sarIkhe pATha na Ate hoM, use agamikazruta kahate
haiM, jaise kAlikazruta  /  (13) aMgapraviSTazrata-jina zAstroM kI racanA
tIrthakaroM ke

Page #119 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
According to the first Karmagrantha Upadesha, the Ganadharas themselves perform
the Angapravishtashruta, meaning they describe and expound the nature and
essence of the Tirthankara's teachings. The Angapravishtashruta is the sutra
form in which these teachings are woven by the Ganadharas. The twelve Angas,
including Acharanga, are Angapravishtashruta.  (14) Angabahyashruta -  The
scriptures composed by the Sthaviras, based on the Angas, are Angabahyashruta;
for example, the Dashavaikalik, Uttaradhyayanasutra, etc. There are two types of
Angabahyashruta: (1) Aavashyak and (2) Aavashyakvyatirikt. The scriptures that
describe the subjugation of the soul through virtues are called 'Aavashyak
Shruta'. There are six studies in this category: Samayik, Jinastava, Vandana,
Pratikramana, Kayotsarga, and Pratyakhyana. There are many types of
Aavashyakvyatirikt Shruta, for detailed explanation and information about their
names, refer to the Nandisootra.  Sapyavasi and Sant (with end) both have the
same meaning. Similarly, Apyavasi and Anant are synonymous. Sadi Shruta, Anadi
Shruta, Sapyavasi Shruta, and Apyavasi Shruta, these four have four types each
with respect to dravya, kshetra, kala, and bhava. They are as follows:  With
respect to a single being, the Shruta knowledge is Sadi - with beginning and
Sapyavasi - without end. This means that when a being attains Samyaktva, Shruta
knowledge also arises simultaneously. Thus, Shruta knowledge is Sadi, and when
the being abandons Samyaktva or becomes a Kevalgyani, Shruta knowledge ends.
Thus, with respect to a single being, 1.   (For a detailed explanation of the
term 'Aavashyak', refer to the Anuyogadwarsutra, Chapter - )

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prathama karmagrantha upadezAnusAra gaNadhara svaya karate haiM, unheM
aMgapraviSTazruta kahataha, arthAt tIrthakara vastu kA svarUpa-bhAva kahate
haiM, pratipAdana karate haiM aura gaNadharoM ke dvArA una bhAvoM ko sUtra rUpa
meM gUMthA jAnA aMgapraviSTa zruta hai  /  AcArAMga Adi bAraha mUtra
aMgapraviSTazruta haiM  /  (14) aMgabAhAzruta-gaNadharoM ke atirikta, aMgoM kA
AdhAra lekara jo sthaviroM ke dvArA praNIta zAstra haiM, ve agavAhyazruta haiM;
jaise-dazavaikAlika, uttarAdhyayana Adi sUtra  /  _ aMgabAhya zruta ke do
prakAra haiM(1) Avazyaka aura (2) Avazyakavyatirikta  /  guNoM ke dvArA AtmA ko
vaza meM karanA AvazyakIya hai, aisA varNana jisameM ho use Avazyaka zruta'
kahate haiM  /  isake chaha adhyayana haiM--sAmAyika, jinastava, vaMdanA,
pratikramaNa, kAyotsarga Ara pratyAkhyAna  /  Avazyaka vyatirikta zruta ke aneka
prakAra haiM, jinakI vizeSa vyAkhyA va nAma Adi kI jAnakArI ke lie nandIsUna
dekheN| _ saparyavasita aura sAnta (antasahita) donoM kA artha eka hI hai  /
isI prakAra aparyavasita aura ananta ekArthaka haiN| sAdizruta, anAdizruta,
saparyavasitazruta aura aparyavasitadhuta ina cAra ke dravya, kSetra kAla, bhAva
ko apekSA cAra-cAra prakAra hote haiN| ve isa prakAra haiM lyApekSA-eka jIba kI
apekSA zrutajJAna sAdi-prArambhasahita aura saparyavasita-antarAhita hai| arthAt
jaba jIvoM ko samyaktva huA to usake sAtha zrutajJAna bhI huaa| isa prakAra
zrutajJAna sAdi huA aura jaba samyaktva kA tyAga karatA hai athavA kevalajJAnI
hotA hai, taba zrutazAna kA aMta ho jAtA hai| isa prakAra eka jIva kI apekSA 1.
'Avazyaka' zabda kI vizeSa vyAkhyA ke lie anuyogadvArasUtra, adhyAya -

Page #120 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Karmavipaka and Shrutagyan  **Shrutagyan** is **sadi-sant** (limited in
duration) in relation to **karmavipaka**. However, compared to all living
beings, Shrutagyan is **anadi** (beginningless) and **aparyavasit** (unlimited)
because it cannot be said that a particular being first received Shrutagyan and
then it ended when that being attained liberation. Therefore, in relation to all
living beings, Shrutagyan is **anadi** and **aparyavasit** in a continuous flow.
**In relation to the field (kshetra)**, Shrutagyan is both **sadi-sant** and
**anadi-ananta** (beginningless and endless). For example, in the Bharat and
Airavat fields, when Tirthankaras establish a Tirtha, the **Dwadashangi
Shrutagyan** begins, and when the Tirtha ends, Shrutagyan also ends. Thus,
Shrutagyan is **sadi-sant** in this context. However, in the Mahavideha field,
the Tirtha never ends, so Shrutagyan is **anadi-ananta** in relation to that
field.  **In relation to time (kala)**, Shrutagyan is both **sadi-sant** and
**anadi-ananta**. Compared to the **Utsarpini** and **Avasarpini** periods,
Shrutagyan is **sadi-sant** because it exists at the end of the third Ara, and
in the fourth and fifth Aras, but it is destroyed in the sixth Ara. However, in
relation to the **Nounsarpini** and **Noavarsarpini** periods, Shrutagyan is
**anadi-ananta**.  **In relation to the state of being (bhava)**, Shrutagyan
encompasses both **Samyakshruta** (correct knowledge) and **Mithyashruta**
(incorrect knowledge) from the **Shruta** period. Shrutagyan is both **sadi-
sant** and **anadi-ananta**. In relation to the **Samyakbhavas** (correct states
of being) of **Bhavya** beings, Shrutagyan is **sadi-sant**, and in relation to
the **bhavas** of **Abhavya** beings, **Mithyarupa** Shrutagyan is **anadi-
ananta**.  **Bhavya** and **Abhavya** are both **parinamik bhavas**
(consequential states of being) of living beings. **Parinamik bhavas** are the
results of **dravya** (substance) that occur naturally due to the existence of
the **dravya**. In other words, the natural transformation of the **dravya** is
called **parinamik bhava**.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmavipAka zratajJAna sAdisAnta (saparyavasita) hai  /  lekina samasta jIvoM
kI apekSA zrutajJAna anAdi, aparyavasita-ananta hai; kyoMki saMsAra meM sabase
pahale amuka jIva ko zrutajJAna ityA aura amaka jIta ke mukta hone para anta ho
gayA, aisA nahIM kahA jA sakatA hai| ataeva saba jIvoM kI apekSA dhArApravAha
rUpa se zrutajJAna anAdi, aparyavasita-ananta hai  /  kSetrApekSA-zrutamAna
sAdi-sAnta tathA anAdi-ananta hai; jaisebharata aura airAvata kSetroM meM
tIrthaGkaroM dvArA jaba tIrtha kI sthApanA hotI hai, taba dvAdazAMgI zrutajJAna
kI Adi aura jaba tIrtha kA viccheda hotA hai taba zrutajJAna kA bhI anta ho jAtA
hai  /  isa prakAra zrutajJAna sAdi-sAnta huA  /  lekina mahAvidehakSetra meM
tIrtha kA kabhI biccheda nahIM hotA hai, isalie usa kSetra kI apekSA zrutajJAna
anAdi-ananta hai| kAlApekSA- zrutajJAna sAdi-sAnta aura anAdi-ananta hai|
utsapiNI aura avasapiNI kAla kI apekSA se zrutajJAna sAdi-sAnta hai| kyoMki
tIsare Are ke anta meM aura cauthe, pA~caveM Are meM rahatA hai tathA chaThe Are
meM naSTa ho jAtA hai| kintu nounsapiNI, noavasarpiNI kAla kI apekSA se
zrutajJAna anAdi-ananta hai| _ bhAvApekSA-zrutajJAna meM zruta prAbda se
samyakzruta (suzruta) aura mithyAzruta (kuzruta) rUpa donoM kA grahaNa kiyA gayA
hai| zrutajJAna sAdi-sAnta aura anAdi-ananta hai| bhavya jIvoM ke samyakbhAvoM
kI apekSA se zrutajJAma sAdi-sAnta hai aura abhavya jIvoM ke bhAvoM kI apekSA se
mithyArUpa zrutajJAna anAdi-ananta hai| bhavyatva aura abhavyatva, ye donoM
jIvoM ke pAriNAmika bhAva haiM  /  pAriNAmika bhAva dravya kA vaha pariNAma hai,
jo dravya ke astitva se svayameva huA karatA hai; arthAta dravya ke svAbhAvika
svarUpa pariNamana ko pAriNAmika bhAva kahate haiN|

Page #121 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## First Mantra  **Twenty Divisions of Shrutagyan**  The text mentions ten names
in the gatha, including Paryaya, Akshara, etc. By adding the word "Samas" to
each of these names, we get the twenty divisions of Shrutagyan as follows:  (1)
Paryaya Shruta, (3) Akshara Shruta, (5) Pada Shruta, (7) Sanghata Shruta, (2)
Pratipatti Shruta, (11) Anuyogabhoot, (13) Prabhrit-Prabhrit Shruta, (2) Paryaya
Samas Shruta, (4) Akshara Samas Shruta, (6) Pada Samas Shruta. (8) Sanghata
Samas Shruta, (10) Pratipatti Samas Shruta, (12) Anuyog Samas Shruta, (14)
Prabhoot-Prabhrit Samas Shruta, (16) Prabhoot Samas Shruta, (18) Vastu Samas
Shruta, (20) Purva Samas Shruta | (15) Prabhrit Shruta, (17) Vastu Shruta, (16)
Purva Shruta and  Before understanding these twenty divisions in detail, let's
clarify the meaning of the word "Samas".  **Samas** refers to an abundance,
community, or collection.  (1) **Paryaya Shruta:** The amount of knowledge that
increases in the second time period from the portion of Kushruta that exists in
the subtle Nigodaya Jiva obtained in the first time period of its origin.  (2)
**Paryaya Samas Shruta:** The collection of the aforementioned Paryaya Shruta,
meaning two, three, four, or more quantities.  (3) **Akshara Shruta:** The
knowledge of a single Akshara (letter) from the obtainable Aksharas starting
with "A".

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prathama kamaMtra ph zrutajJAna ke bIsa meda gAthA meM paryAya, akSara Adi dasa
nAma ginAye haiN| una nAmoM tathA una nAmoM meM se pratyeka ke sAtha samAsa
zabda jor3a dene se zrutajJAna ke bIsa bhedoM ke nAma isa prakAra haiM (1)
paryAyazruta, (3) akSarazruta, (5) padazruta, (7) saMghAtazruta, (2)
pratipattizruta, (11) anuyogabhUta, (13) prAbhRta-prAbhRtazruta, (2)
paryAyasamAsazruta, (4) akSarasamAsazruta, (6) padasamAsazruta. (8)
saMghAtasamAsazruta, (10) pratipattisamAsazruta, (12) anuyogasamAsazruta, (14)
prAbhUta-prAbhRtasamAsazrata, (16) prAbhUtasamAsazruta, (18) vastusamAsazruta,
(20) pUrvasamAsazruta | (15) prAbhRtazruta, (17) vastuzruta, (16) pUrvazruta
aura ina bIsa bhedoM ko saMkSepa meM samajhane se pahale samAsa zabda kA Azaya
batalAte haiM  /  adhika, samudAya yA saMgraha ko samAsa kahate haiM  /  (1)
utpatti ke prathama samaya meM labdhyaparyApta sUkSma nigodiyA jIva ke hone vAle
kuzruta ke aMza se dUsare samaya meM jJAna kA jitanA aMza bar3hatA hai, vaha
paryAta hai  /  (2) ukta paryAyazruta ke samudAya arthAt do tIna, cAra Adi
saMkhyAoM ko paryAsamAsazrata kahate haiM  /  (3) akArAdi labdhyakSaroM meM se
kisI eka akSara ke jJAna ko akSarabhuta kahate haiM  /

Page #122 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Karmavipaka  (4) The knowledge of a group of **labyaksharas**, meaning the
knowledge of two, three, four, or more numbers, is called
**aksharasamaschupta**.  (5) The knowledge of a group of **arthaavabodhak**
letters, which form a word, is called **pad** and its knowledge is called
**pavdu**.  (6) The knowledge of a group of **pads** is called
**pavasamasashruta**.  (7) The knowledge of one part of one of the fourteen
**marganas**, such as **gati**, is called **sanghatashruta**. For example, the
**gati margana** has four divisions: **dev**, **manushya**, **tiryach**, and
**narak**. Knowing one of these is **sanghatashruta**.  (8) The knowledge of
many parts of one **margana** is called **sanghatasamasashruta**.  (9) Knowing
all the beings in the universe through one **dwar** like **gati**, **indriya**,
etc., is called **pratipattischuta**.  (10) Knowing beings through two, four, or
more **dwaras** like **gati**, **indriya**, etc., is called
**pratipattisamasashruta**.  (11) Knowing the **jiva** and other substances
through one of the **anuyog dvara** mentioned in the verse "**satpay paruvanyaya
davva pamanam cha**" is called **amuyogashruta**.  (12) The knowledge of two,
three, or more **anuyog dvara** is called **anuyogsamasashruta**.  (13) The
**drishtivad anga** has an authority called **praabhut-praabhrut**. Knowing one
of these is called **praabhut-praabhrutshruta**.  (14) The knowledge of two,
four, or more **praabhut-praabhrut** is called **praabhrut-
praabhrutsamasashruta**.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmavipAka (4) labdhyakSaroM ke samudAya ko, arthAt eka se adhika do, tIna,
cAra Adi saMkhyAoM ke jJAna ko akSarasamasacupta kahate haiM  /  (5)
arthAvabodhaka akSaroM ke samudAya ko pada aura usake jJAna ko pavadhu ta kahate
haiN| (6) padoM ke samudAya kA jJAna pavasamAsazruta kahalAtA hai  /  .. (7)
gati Adi caudaha mArgaNAoM meM se kisI eka mArgaNA ke ekadeza ke jJAna ko
saMghAtazruta kahate haiN| jaise - gatimArgaNA ke deva, manuSya, tiryaca,
nAraka-ye cAra bheda haiN| unameM se eka kA jJAna honA saMghAta ta hai| (E) kisI
eka mArgaNA ke aneka avayavoM kA jJAna saMghAtasamAsazruta kahalAtAtA hai| {6)
gati, indriya Adi dvAroM meM se kisI eka dvAra ke jariye samasta saMsAra ke
jIvoM ko jAnanA pratipattizcata hai| (10) gati Adi do-cAra dvAroM ke jariye
jIvoM kA jJAna honA pratipattisamAsata hai| (11) 'satapaya parUvaNayA davva
pamANaM ca' isa gAthA meM kahe hue anuyoga dvAroM meM se kisI eka ke dvArA
jIvAdi padArthoM ko jAnanA amuyogadhuta hai| (12) eka se adhika do-tIna
anuyogadvAroM kA jJAna anuyogasamAsa ta hai| (13) dRSTivAda aMga meM prAbhUta-
prAbhRta nAmaka adhikAra hai| usameM se kisI eka kA jJAna prAbhRta-prAmRtazruta
hai  /  (14) do-cAra prAbhUta-prAbhUtoM ke jJAna ko prAmRta-prAbhRtasamAsAta
kahate haiN|

Page #123 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
- First Karmagrantha . (15) Just as there is one study of many objectives, so
there is one Prabhut of many Prabhrit-Prabhrit. Knowledge of that one is
Prabhutbhoot. (16) Knowledge of more than one Prabhrit is called Prabhrit
Samasshrut. (17) Many Prabhuts have one authority called Vastu. Knowledge of one
in that is Vastubhoot. (18) Ho. The knowledge of many Vastus is called Vastu
Samasshrut. (19) There is one Purva of many Vastus. Knowledge of one in that is
called Purvashrut. (20) Knowledge of up to fourteen Purvas, like two, four,
etc., is called Purva Samasshrut. The names of the fourteen Purvas are as
follows: (1) Utpad, (2) Agrayaniy Pravad, (3) Viy Pravad, (4) Asti Nasti Pravad,
(5) Gyan Pravad, (6) Saty Pravad, (7) Atma Pravad, (8) Karma Pravad, (9)
Pratyakhyan Pravad (10) Vidya Pravad, (11) Kalyan, (12) Pranavad, (13)
Kriyavishal and (14) Lokvindusar. Or, in terms of Dravya, Kshetra, Kal and Bhav,
Shrutajnan is of four types. By the power of the scriptures, Shrutajnani
generally know all Dravyas, all Kshetras, all Kals and all Bhavas. Thus, the
description of Shrutajnan is complete.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 - prathama karmagrantha . (15) jisa prakAra kaI uddezakoM kA eka adhyayana hotA
hai, vaise hI kaI prAbhRta-prAbhRtoM kA eka prAbhUta hotA hai| usa eka kA jJAna
honA prAbhRtabhuta hai| (16) eka se adhika prAbhRtoM ke jJAna ko
prAbhRtasamAsazruta kahate haiN| (17) kaI prAbhUtoM kA eka vastu nAmaka adhikAra
hotA hai, usameM sa eka kA jJAna vastubhuta hai| (18) ho. vAra nAzikoM ke vAna
ko vastusamAsasa kahate haiN| (19) aneka bastuoM kA eka pUrva hotA hai| usameM
se eka kA jJAna pUrvazruta kahalAtA hai| (20) do-cAra Adi caudaha pUrva taka ke
jJAna ko pUrvasamAsadhu ta kahate haiN| caudaha pUrvo ke nAma isa prakAra hai(1)
utpAda, (2) agrAyaNIyapravAda (3) vIyapravAda (4) astinAstipravAda, (5)
jJAnapravAda (6) satyapravAda (9) AtmapravAda (8) karmapravAda (9)
pratyAkhyAnapravAda (10) vidyApravAda (11) kalyANa, (12) prANavAda, (13)
kriyAvizAla aura (14) lokavindusAra  /  athavA dravya, kSetra, kAla aura bhAva
kI apekSA se zrutajJAna cAra prakAra kA hai| zAstra ke bala se zrutajJAnI
sAdhAraNatayA saba dravya, saba kSetra, saba kAla aura saba bhAvoM ko jAnate
haiM  /  isa prakAra zrutajJAna kA varNana pUrNa huA  /

Page #124 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  44. Karmavipaka  After explaining Mattijnan and Shrutijnan, we now describe
Avadhijnan, Manahparyayajnan and Kevaljnan.  **Gathaarth:** Anugami, Vardhaman
Pratipati and their respective opponents, each have six types of Bhesha.
Rijuमति and Vipulmati are the two types of Manahparyayajnan, while Kevaljnan has
only one type, meaning there are no other types of Kevaljnan.  **Vishesharth:**
Avadhijnan, Manahparyayajnan and Kevaljnan - these three types of knowledge are
called Pratyajnan because they arise directly from the soul without the help of
the mind or senses.  We will first describe Avadhijnan.  **Types of
Avadhijnan:** There are two types of Avadhijnan: (1) Bhavapratyay and (2)
Gunapratyay. Gunapratyay is also called Kshayopa-shamajanya.  Their detailed
explanation is as follows:  **Bhavapratyay Avadhijnan:** Bhav means birth and
Pratyay means cause.  Therefore, Avadhijnan that manifests during the birth
process in that particular birth is called Bhavapratyay.  1. **Ohinaan-Paccharan
Duviham 'Pannanam, Jaha- Bhavaach Iyam Cha Swao-vasabhiyam Cha.** - Nandi Sutra,
6.2 2. **(a) Donh Bhavapacchaie Pannane, Tam Jaha- Devanam Chava Ne Yaanam
Chaiva.** - Syanang, Sthan 2, U. 1, Sutra 71 **(b) Bhavapratyayo'vadhi Devanar
Kanaam.** - Tattvarth Sutra, A. 1, Sutra 21

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 44 karmavipAka mattijJAna aura zrutajJAna kA kathana karane ke bAda aba
avadhijJAna, manaHparyayajJAna aura kevalajJAna kA varNana karate haiM  /
aNugAmi pahADamANaya paDivAIyaravihA chahA oho  /  riumada viulamaI maNanANaM
kevala migavihANaM  // 8 //  gAthArtha-anugAmI, vardhamAna pratipAtI aura inameM
pratyeka ke pratipakSI ko jojo vibhinA ne chaha bheSa hote haiN| Rjumati aura
vipulamati--ye manaHparyayajJAna ke do bheda haiM tathA kevalajJAna kA eka bheda
hai, arthAt kevalajJAna kA anya koI bheda nahIM hotA hai| vizeSArtha-
avadhijJAna, manaHparyayajJAna aura kevalajJAna - ye tInoM jJAna mana aura
indriyoM kI sahAyatA vinA sIdhe AtmA se hone vAle jJAna hone se pratyAjJAna
kahalAte haiN| unameM se sarvaprathama avadhijJAna kA varNana karate haiN|
avadhijJAna ke bheda _ avadhijJAna ke do bheda haiM-(1) bhavapratyaya tathA (2)
guNapratyaya  / ' guNapratyaya ko kSayopazamajanya bhI kahate haiN| inakI vizada
vyAkhyA ima prakAra hai . bhavapratyaya avadhijJAnabhava mAne janma aura
pratyaya mAne kAraNa, arthAt jo avadhijJAna usa-jasa gati meM janma lene me hI
pragaTa hotA hai, 1. ohinANa-paccarana duvihaM 'paNAnaM, jahA- bhavAcca iyaM ca
svAovasabhiyaM c| - nandIsUtra, 6 2. (ka) doNha bhavapaccaie paNNane, taM
jahA.-devANa cava ne yANaM caiva  /  -syAnAMga, sthAna 2, u. 1, sUtra 71 (kha)
bhavapratyayo'vadhi devanAra kANAm  / - tattvArthasUtra. a. 1, sUtra 21

Page #125 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## First Karma Granth, Chapter 45  **Pratyay Avadhigyan** is the knowledge that
does not require any austerities like **samyama**, **tapa**, etc. This type of
**avadhigyan** is present in **devas** and **narakas** and remains with them
throughout their lives.  **Gunapratyay Avadhigyan** is the knowledge that is not
present at birth but arises after birth due to the power of **yama-niyama**,
**vratas**, and other austerities. This type of **avadhigyan** is only present
in humans and **panchendriyatyantr** beings.  **Difference in Avadhigyan**
**Bhavapratyay** and **Gunapratyay**  Although **bhavapratyay avadhigyan** also
generally requires **kshayopasham** (the complete cessation of karmas) like
**gunapratyay**, the emphasis here is on the **bhavas** (states of existence)
due to the difference in the cause. There are certain species of beings who,
upon birth, acquire the necessary **kshayopasham** and the **avadhigyan** that
arises from it. These beings do not need to perform **vratas**, **tapas**, etc.
in that life to attain the **kshayopasham** necessary for **avadhigyan**. Such
beings, according to their state, develop **avadhigyan** immediately upon birth,
and it remains with them throughout their life in that state. For example, birds
acquire the ability to fly in the sky upon birth, while humans, on the other
hand, cannot fly in the sky simply by being born, unless they use an airplane or
other such device.  **1. Donham Khaovasa Mie Pashnatam Tam Jaha - Madhurasanam
Chaiva Pachidiya-Tirishakhajogiyanam Vesha | - Swamaang, Sthan 2. Uddeo 1 Sutra
71**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prathama karmagrantha 45 jisake lie saMyama, tapa Adi anuSThAna kI apekSA nahIM
rahatI use pratyaya avadhijJAna kahate haiN| yaha avadhijJAna deva aura nArakoM
meM hotA hai aura unake jIvanaparyanta rahatA hai  /  guNapratyaya avadhijJAna -
jo avadhijJAna janma lene se nahIM, kintu janma lene ke bAda yama-niyama aura
vrata Adi anuSThAna ke bala se utpanna hotA hai, use guNapratyaya yA
kSayopazamajanya avadhijJAna kahate haiM  /  yaha avadhijJAna manuSya aura
paMcendriyatiyaMtra jIvoM ko hI hotA hai  /  " avadhijJAna meM antara
bhavapratyaya aura guNapratyaya yadyapi guNapratyaya kI taraha bhavapratyaya
avadhijJAna meM bhI sAmAnyatayA kSayopazama ( tayAvara NijjA kammANaM udiSNANaM
svaeNaM aNudiNANaM usame ) to apekSita hai hI kintu yahA~ bhava kI mukhyatA kA
kathana nimitta bheda kI apekSA se kiyA haiM  /  dehadhAriyoM kI kucha jAtiyAM
aisI haiM ki jinameM janma lete hI yogya kSayopazama aura usake dvArA
avadhijJAna kI utpatti ho jAtI hai, unako avadhijJAna ke yogya kSayopazama ke
lie usa janma meM vrata tapa Adi anuSThAna nahIM karane par3ate haiN| aise jIvoM
ko apanI sthiti ke anurUpa nyUnAdhika rUpa meM janma lete hI avadhijJAna utpanna
ho jAtA hai aura vaha usa gati meM jIvanaparyanta rahatA hai| jaise ki pakSI
jAti meM janma lene se hI AkAza meM ur3ane kI zakti prApta ho jAtI hai aura
isake viparIta manuSya jAti meM janma lene mAtra se koI AkAza meM nahIM ur3a
sakatA, jaba taka ki vAyuyAna Adi kA mahArA na le  /  1 1. donhaM khaovasa mie
paSNataM taM jahA - madhurasANaM caiva pacidiya-tiriSakhajogiyANaM veSa | -
svAmAMga, sthAna 2. udde0 1 sUtra 71

Page #126 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Karmavipaka  The example mentioned indicates that the bird has the power to
fly in the sky from birth. Similarly, one should understand that
**Bhavapratyayavadhijnana** is the knowledge that arises in Devas and Narakas at
the time of their birth in their respective realms. Here, the birth is
considered primary and the **kshayopasham** (cessation of karmas) is secondary.
Therefore, it is called **Bhavapratyayavadhijnana** because it is primarily
related to birth.  On the other hand, there are some beings who do not acquire
**avadhijnana** at birth. However, through **vratas** (vows), **anusthanas**
(observances), and other practices, they become eligible for **avadhijnana**.
They develop specific powers and their **avadhijnana** can increase or decrease.
This type of **avadhijnana** is called **Gunapratyayavadhijnana**.
**Bhavapratyayavadhijnana** remains constant throughout life, without any change
or variation. However, **Gunapratyayavadhijnana** can increase or decrease,
leading to variations in its intensity. Therefore, the **Gaya** (a Jain
scripture) mentions six types of **Gunapratyayavadhijnana**:  1. **Anugami**:
This **avadhijnana** remains even when the being moves from one place to
another. It means that the **avadhijnana** that manifests in a being at a
particular place continues to exist even when the being moves to a different
location. 2. **Ananugami**: This **avadhijnana** does not follow the being when
it moves from one place to another. 3. **Vardhaman**: This **avadhijnana**
increases over time. 4. **Hiyaman**: This **avadhijnana** decreases over time.
5. **Pratipati**: This **avadhijnana** is acquired through effort and practice.
6. **Apratipati**: This **avadhijnana** is not acquired through effort and
practice.  - **Sthamaang, Sthan 6, Sutra 526**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmavipAka ukta udAharaNa meM pakSI ko AkAza meM ur3ane kI zakti janmataH
prApta hone kA saMketa kiyA hai, usI prakAra bhavapratyaya avadhijJAna ke lie
samajha lenA cAhie ki deva-nArakoM ko usa-usa jAti meM janma lene me avadhijJAna
ho jAtA hai| vahA~ ApekSika dRSTi se janma kI mukhyatA aura kSayopazama kI
gauNatA hai| isIlie bhava kI mukhyatA kI apekSA bhavapratyaya avadhijJAna kahA
jAtA hai| isake viparIta kucha jAtiyAM aisI hotI hai, jinameM janma lene mAtra
se hI avadhijJAna nahIM ho jAtA hai| kintu brata-anuSThAna Adi ke dvArA
avadhijJAna ke yogya bhayoNAra hote pahA zakti vizeSoM ko' avadhijJAna honA aura
usameM vRddhihAni honA bhI saMbhava hai  /  isIlie aise avadhijJAna ko
guNapratyaya avadhijJAna kahate haiN| bhavapratyaya avadhijJAna maiM yAvajjIvana
kucha bhI antara nahIM par3atA hai, vaha samAna rahatA hai: alpAdhikatA Adi
nahIM hotI hai| kintu guNapratyaya avadhijJAna meM vRddhi-hAsa-janya taratamatA
hone se alpAdhikatA hotI hai| isIlie gAyA meM guNapratyaya avadhijJAna ke
nimnalikhita chaha bheda batAye haiM (1) anugAmI, (2) ananugAmI, (3) vardhamAna,
(4) hIyamAna, (5) pratipAtI (6) apratipAtI  / ' inakI vyAkhyA isa prakAra hai
anugAmI -jo abadhijJAna apane utpattikSetra ko chor3akara dUsare sthAna para
cale jAne para bhI vidyamAna rahatA hai, use anugAmI kahate haiM; arthAta jisa
sthAna para jima jIva meM yaha avadhijJAna prakaTa hotA 1. lihe AhinANe pANane,
laM jA-aNugAmie, aNaNugAmie. vaDmANAra, hIyamANA. parivAI, apaDivAI  /
-sthAmAMga, sthAna 6, sUtra 526

Page #127 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## First Karma Text  **Anugami:** A being who, upon attaining knowledge of a
place, can see for countless yojanas around that place, and upon moving to
another place, can also see that same extent of area. (Anu-pashchat gamanam iti
anugamanam - anugachchatiti tasya bhavah anugamikam, arthat jo jeev ke sath-sath
jata rahta hai, use anugamik kahte hain.)  **Ananugami:** One who does not
follow, but remains in the same place where the knowledge arose, knowing the
objects in that place, but not knowing them upon leaving the place of origin.
For example, someone who has astrological knowledge can answer questions
correctly in their own place, but not in another. This type of knowledge, which
is superior only in its own place, is called ananugami.  **Vardhaman:** A
knowledge that, while having a small subject matter at the time of its origin,
increases day by day, encompassing the limits of substance, space, time, and
emotion with increasing purity, becoming more and more extensive. Just as a
spark generated from a match grows gradually with the contact of dry fuel, so
should this knowledge be understood.  **Hiyaman:** A knowledge that, while
having a large subject matter at the time of its origin, gradually becomes
shapeless, smaller, and smallest in subject matter due to the impurity of its
results.  **Pratipati:** This means falling, declining, and ending. A knowledge
that disappears suddenly, like a bright lamp extinguished by a gust of wind.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prathama karma grantha hai, vaha jIva usa sthAna ke cAroM ora saMkhyAta
asaMkhyAta yojana taka dekhatA hai tathA dUsare sthAna meM jAne para bhI vaha
utane kSetra ko jAnatA dekhatA hai, use anugAmI kahate haiM  /  (anu-pazcAt
gamanaM iti anugamanaM - anugacchatIti tasya bhAvaH anugAmikaM, arthAt jo jIva
ke sAtha-sAtha jAtA rahatA hai, use AnugAmika kahate haiM  / ) J 1 ananugAmI -
jo sAtha na cale, kintu jisa sthAna para avadhijJAna utpanna huA, usI sthAna meM
sthita hokara padArtho ko jAne aura utpattisthAna ko chor3a dene para na jAne
use amanugAmI kahate haiN| jaise kisI kA jyotiSajJAna aisA hotA hai ki apane
nizcita sthAna para to praznoM kA ThIka se uttara de sakatA hai kintu dUsare
sthAna para nahIM  /  isa prakAra apane hI sthAna para variyatAM je abhijJAna ko
anugAmI kahate haiM  /  bardhamAna - jo avadhijJAna utpatti ke samaya alpa
viSaya vAlA hone para bhI pariNAma vizuddhi ke sAtha dravya, kSetra, kAla, bhAva
kI maryAdA ko lie dinoMdina bar3he, arthAt adhikAdhika viSaya vAlA ho jAtA hai,
vaha vardhamAna kahalAtA hai| jaise diyAsalAI me paidA kI haI cinagArI sUkhe
Idhana ke saMyoga se kramazaH bar3hatI jAtI hai, vaise hI isa avadhijJAna ke lie
samajhanA cAhie | - hIyamAna - jo avadhijJAna utpatti ke samaya adhika viSaya
vAlA hone para bhI pariNAmoM kI azuddhi ke kAraNa dinoM-dina kramazaH arUpa,
alpatara aura alpatama viSaya vAlA ho jAe, use hIyamAna kahate haiM  /
pratipAtI - isakA artha patana honA, giranA aura samApta ho jAnA hai  /  jo
avadhijJAna jagamagAte dIpaka ke vAyu ke eka bujha jAne ke samAna ekadama lupta
ho jAtA hai, jhoMke se ekAuse pratipAtI

Page #128 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Karmavipaka  It is said that this Avadhijnana can arise and disappear at any
moment in life.  **A-pratipaati:** Avadhijnana whose nature is not perishable is
called A-pratipaati. Even when Kevaljnana is present, A-pratipaati Avadhijnana
does not disappear because there is no rise of Avadhijnana-avaran, which would
cause it to disappear. Instead, it merges into Kevaljnana, and its existence
becomes insignificant in the presence of Kevaljnana, like the light of a lamp in
the presence of the sun.  This A-pratipaati Avadhijnana occurs at the end of the
twelfth Gunasthan of the Jinas, and after that, Kevaljnana arises with the first
moment of attaining the thirteenth Gunasthan. This A-pratipaati Avadhijnana is
also called Paramavadhijnana.  The difference between Hoeyaman and Pratipaati
Avadhijnana is that Hoeyaman gradually diminishes over time, while Pratipaati,
like a lamp, is extinguished in a single moment.  The above six types of
Avadhijnana are mentioned according to the Nandisutr. However, sometimes,
instead of Pratipaati and A-pratipaati, two types are considered: Anvasthit and
Avashthit, making a total of six types. The characteristics of Anvasthit and
Avashthit are:  **Anvasthit:** Like a wave in water, this Avadhijnana sometimes
decreases and sometimes increases.  **Avashthit:** Like a mountain, this
Avadhijnana remains constant.  **Note:** Although the two categories of Anupaami
and Ananugaami may include differences in faults, they are discussed separately
to explain the specific types like Vardhaman, Hoeyaman, etc.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmavipAka kahate haiM | yaha avadhijJAna jIvana ke kisI bhI kSaNa meM utpanna
aura lupta bhI ho sakatA hai  /  4 apratipAtI - jisa avadhijJAna kA svabhAva
patanazIla nahIM hai, use apratipAtI kahate haiM  /  kevalajJAna hone para bhI
apratipAtI avadhijJAna nahIM jAtA hai kyoMki vahA~ avadhijJAnAvaraNa kA udaya
nahIM hotA hai, jisane jaae| apitu vaha kevalajJAna meM samA jAtA hai eva
kevalajJAna ke samakSa usakI sattA akiMcitkara hotI hai, jaise ki sUrya ke
samakSa dIpaka kA prakAza  /  - yaha apratipAtI avadhijJAna bArahaveM
guNasthAnavartI jItroM ke anta samaya meM hotA hai aura usake bAda terahavA~
guNasthAna prApta hone ke prathama samaya ke sAtha kevalajJAna utpanna ho jAtA
hai  /  isa apratipAtI avadhijJAna ko paramAvadhijJAna bhI kahate haiN|"
hoyamAna aura pratipAtI avadhijJAna meM yaha antara hai ki hIyamAna kA to
pUrvApekSA dhIre-dhIre hrAsa ho jAtA hai aura pratipAtI dIpaka kI taraha eka hI
kSaNa meM naSTa ho jAtA hai  /  - avadhijJAna ke ukta chaha bheda nandIsUtra ke
anusAra batalAye gaye haiN| lekina kahIM kahIM pratipAtI aura apratipAtI ke
sthAna para anavasthita aura avasthita yaha do bheda mAnakara chaha bheda ginAye
haiM  /  anavasthita aura avasthita ke lakSaNa ye haiM anavasthita jala kI
taraMga ke samAna jo avadhijJAna kabhI ghaTatA 1. zradyapi anupAmI aura
ananugAmI ina do metroM meM doSa bhedoM kA antarbhAva ho sakatA hai| lekina
bardhamAna hoyamAna Adi vizeSa bheTa batalAne ke lie 1 unakA pRthak pRthak vyAsa
kiyA gayA hai  /

Page #129 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## First Karma Granth, Chapter 46  **Unstable:** That which sometimes increases,
sometimes manifests, and sometimes disappears is called unstable.  **Stable:**
That which remains in the soul even after countless births, or which remains
only until the origin of knowledge, or which remains throughout life, is called
stable knowledge. - These two types are similar in characteristics to the
*pratipati* and *apratipati*, but they can be considered different only in terms
of name. There is no other difference.  **Description of Avadhijnana in terms of
the four categories of substance, etc.:** Avadhijnana knows the substances that
are the objects of knowledge. But it clarifies the extent of this knowledge,
which is generated by the destruction and pacification of karma, in terms of the
limits of substance, space, time, and state.  **In terms of substance:** The
Avadhijnani knows and sees from the least, i.e., from the minimum, to the
infinite number of substances, and from the best, i.e., from the maximum, to the
totality of substances.  **In terms of space:** The Avadhijnani knows and sees
from the least, i.e., from a space as small as an infinitesimal part of an inch,
to the substances in the space of the entire universe. And even in the non-
universe, if one were to imagine the universe divided into countless parts, the
Avadhijnani would have the power to know and see them.  Although there is no
substance in the non-universe, this imagination is made to show the power of
Avadhijnana, that it can encompass a space as large as countless parts of the
universe in the non-universe.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prathama karmagrantha 46 hai, kabhI bar3hatA hai, kabhI AvirbhUta ho jAtA hai
aura kabhI tirohita ho jAtA hai, use anavasthita kahate haiM  /  avasthita-jo
avadhijJAna janmAntara hone para bhI AtmA meM avasthita rahatA hai yA
kevalajJAna kI utpatti-paryanta athavA Ajanma ThaharatA hai, vaha avasthita
avadhijJAna kahalAtA hai| - ukta donoM bheda prAyaH pratipAtI aura apratipAtI ke
samAna lakSaNa vAle haiN| kintu mAtra nAmabheda kI apekSA se bhinna-bhinna kahe
jA sakate haiM  /  anya koI pArthA nahIM hai| avadhijJAna kA dravyAdi catuSTaya
kI apekSA varNana avadhijJAna rUpI padArthoM ko jAnatA hai| lekina kitane, kaise
Adi isa kSayopazamajanya taratamatA ko dravya, kSetra, kAla, bhAva kI maryAdA kI
apekSA se spaSTa karate haiN| dravya se ... avadhijJAnI jaghanya se. arthAt kama
se kama ananta' rUpI dravyoM ko jAnatA-dekhatA hai aura utkRSTa se arthAt adhika
se adhika sampUrNa rUpI dravyoM ko jAnatA-dekhatA hai| kSetra se avadhijJAnI
jaghanya se aMgula ke asaMkhyAtaveM bhAga jitane kSetra ke dravyoM ko jAnatA-
dekhatA hai aura utkRSTa se loka ke kSetragata rUpI dravya ko aura aloka meM bhI
kalpanA se yadi lokapramANa ke asaMkhyAta khaNDa kiye jAyeM to avadhijJAnI unheM
bhI jAnane-dekhane kI zakti rakhatA hai| yadyapi aloka meM koI padArtha nahIM
hai, tathApi yaha kalpanA avadhijJAna kI sAmarthya dikhAne ke lie kI gaI hai ki
aloka meM lokapramANa asaMkhyAta khaNDa jitane kSetra ko ghera sakate haiM,
utane kSetra ke

Page #130 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The power to know and see the karmic fruits, in the form of substances, is
present in the Avadhijnani.  _ From the perspective of time - the Avadhijnani
knows and sees the substances in the form of an infinitesimal part of the
Aalika, from the lowest, and knows and sees the substances in the form of the
past and future time, from the highest, up to countless Utsavini-Avarapio
proofs. From the perspective of feeling - he knows and sees the infinite
permutations of the substance in the form of the lowest, and also knows and sees
the infinite permutations of the substance in the form of the highest. There are
infinite distinctions of the infinite. Whether these distinctions are of any
kind, such as addition, subtraction, multiplication, and division, they will
still be infinite distinctions. Therefore, one should understand the difference
between the lowest and the highest infinite. The meaning of infinite feeling
should be understood as much as the infiniteth feeling of all feelings. Just as
the intellect and hearing of a Mithyadristi Jiva are called Kumati and Kushrut
(intellect-ignorance and hearing-ignorance), similarly the Avadhijnana of a
Mithyadristi Jiva is called Vibhangajnana.  After describing Avadhijnana, we now
describe Manahparyayajnana. Manahparyayajnana - There are two types of
Manahparyayajnana - Rijumati and Vipulmati. 1. (a) How many types of Parinamas
are there in Aṇay? Go Yama! It is said to be three types, namely - Maiyagaṇ
Parinām, Mayamāṇ Pariyām, Vimangṇāṇ Parigām. Prajñāpanā, Pada 13 (4) Mati
Tāyadhyo Viparyayaśca. -Tasyāyasūtra, A. 1. Sutra 31 2. Maṇapajjavṇāṇe Dṛvihe
Pāṇato, Na Jaha -Ujjumati Ceva Viulmati Ceva. • Sthānāṅga, Sthān 2. U. 1, Sutra
71

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmavipAka rUpI dravyoM ko jAnane aura dekhane kI bhI zakti avadhizAnI meM
hotI hai| _ kAla se- avadhijJAnI jaghanya me AlikA ke asaMkhyAtaveM bhAga mAtra
ke rUpI dravyoM ko jAnatA-dekhatA hai aura utkRSTa se asaMkhya utsaviNI-
avarapiyo pramANa atIta aura anAgata kAla ke rUpI dravyoM ko jAnatA-dekhatA hai|
bhAva se-jaghanya meM rUpI dravya' kI ananta paryAyoM ko jAnatAdekhatA hai aura
utkRSTa se bhI ananta paryAyoM ko jAnatA-dekhatA hai| ananta ke ananta bheda
hote haiN| cAhe ye bheda jor3a, bAkI, guNA aura bhAga rUpoM meM se kisI bhI
prakAra ke hoN| phira bhI ananta bheda hI hoNge| isalie jaghanya aura utkRSTa
ananta meM antara samajha lenA cAhie  /  ananta bhAva kA Azaya sampUrNa bhAvoM
ke anantaveM bhAva jitanA samajha lenA caahie| jisa prakAra mithyAdRSTi jIva ke
mati aura zruta ko kumati aura kuzruta (mati-ajJAna aura zruta-ajJAna) kahate
haiM, usI prakAra mithyAdRSTi jIva ke avadhijJAna ko vibhaMgajJAna kahate haiN|'
avadhijJAna kA varNana karane ke anantara aba manaHparyayajJAna kA kathana
karate haiN| manaHparyayajJAna-manaHparyAyajJAna ke do bheda haiM- Rjumati aura
vipulamati  / ' 1. (ka)aNAya pariNAme na bhanne katividhe paNAta ? goyamA !
tivihe paNNatte, naM jahA -maiagANa pariNAma, mayaamANa pariyAme, vimaMgaNANa
parigAme  /  prajJApanA, pada 13 (4) matitAyadhayo viparyayazca  /
-tasyAyasUtra, a0 1. sUtra 31 2. maNapajjavaNANe dRvihe pANato, na jahA
-ujjumati ceva viulamati ceva  /  * sthAnAMga, sthAna 2. u0 1, sUtra 71

Page #131 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## First Karma Granth 51  **Rjुमति** - Knowing the general nature of the
substance residing in another's mind, knowing the general service of poison, is
called **Rjुमति Man:paryayajnan**.  **Vipulmati** - Knowing the many synonyms of
the substance residing in another's mind, i.e., knowing the synonyms of the
object of contemplation with various characteristics and clarity, is called
**Vipulmati Man:paryayajnan**.  **Difference between Rjुमति and Vipulmati
Man:paryayajnan**  Although both Rjुमति and Vipulmati Man:paryayajnan are
knowledge and therefore know the specific, Rjुमति, which is called the general
perceiver, means that it knows the specifics, but not as many specifics as
Vipulmati. Therefore, their difference is explained in terms of substance,
field, time, and feeling.  **Substance** - Rjुमति sees and knows the infinite
infinite regions of the **Manovargana** skandhas, while Vipulmati sees and knows
the skandhas with more regions than Rjुमति, with greater purity and clarity.
**Field** - Rjुमति sees and knows the mental feelings of sentient beings in a
field from the lowest, a fraction of an angula, to the highest, below the
**Ratnaprabha** earth, up to the **Kshullak Pratar** (Kubdi Udovijay), and
above, up to the surface of the **Jyotish Chakra**, and diagonally up to two and
a half islands. Vipulmati sees and knows the mental feelings of sentient beings
in a field that is two and a half angulas wider than Rjुमति's, in the diagonal
direction.  **Time** - Rjुमति sees and knows the mental feelings of sentient
beings from the lowest, a fraction of a **Patyopas**, to the highest, a fraction
of a **Patyopas**.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prathama karmagrantha 51 Rjumati - dUsare ke mana meM sthita padArtha ke
sAmAnya svarUpa ko jAnanA, viSako sAmAnya sevAnnA Rtupati manaHparyayajJAna
kahalAtA hai  /  vipulamati-dUsare ke mana meM sthita padArtha kI aneka paryAyoM
ko jAnanA, arthAt cintanIya vastu kI paryAyoM ko vividha vizeSatAoM sahita
sphuTatA ne jAnanA vipulamati mana:paryayajJAna kahalAtA hai  /  Rjumati aura
vipulamati mana:paryayajJAna meM antara yadyapi Rjumati aura vipulamati
mana:paryayajJAna, jJAna hone se vizeSa ko jAnate haiM, to bhI Rjamati ko jo
sAmAnyagrAhI kahA jAtA hai, usakA matalaba itanA hai ki vaha vizeSoM ko jAnatA
hai, parantu vipulamati jitane vizeSoM ko nahIM jAnatA hai| isIlie ina donoM kI
dravya, kSetra, kAla aura bhAva kI apekSA vizeSatA batalAte haiM dravya se
Rjumati manovargaNA ke ananta ananta pradeza vAle skandhoM ko jAnatA dekhatA hai
aura vipulamati Rjumati kI apekSA adhika pradezoM vAle skandhoM ko vizuddhatA
aura adhika spaSTatA me jAnatAdekhatA hai  /  kSetra se - Rjumati jaghanya se
aMgula ke asaMkhyAtaveM bhAga mAtra kSetra ko tathA utkRSTa se nIce ratnaprabhA
pRthvI ke nIce kSullaka pratara (kubar3I ur3ovijaya) taka ko aura Upara jyotiSa
cakra ke uparitalaparyanta aura tirache aDhAI dvIpaparyanta ke saMjJI jIvoM ke
manogata bhAvoM ko jAnatA dekhatA hai aura vipulamati Rjumati kI apekSA aDhAI
aMgula adhika tirachI dizA meM kSetra ke saMjJI jIvoM ke manogata bhAvoM ko
dekhatA - jAnatA hai  /  kAla se - Rjamati jaghanya se patyopasa ke
asaMkhyAtaveM bhAga

Page #132 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
52 Karmavipaka And even more excellent than the Palyopama, he knows and sees the
innumerable parts of the past, present, and future mental states, and he knows
and sees the objects that are pure and free from delusion, which are thought
about or will be thought about by the mind for a slightly longer period of time
than the Vipulamati and the Riju. — From the perspective of the Riju, he knows
and sees the innumerable synonyms of mental states, but he knows and sees only
an infinite part of all the states, and the Vipulamati knows and sees a slightly
larger number of synonyms than the Riju, pure and free from delusion. In
addition to the above characteristics, there are some other characteristics in
both types of Man:paryayajnan: The Vipulamati Man:paryayajnan is more subtle and
knows more specifics clearly than the Riju. The Riju may disappear after it
arises, but the Vipulamati Man:paryayajnan does not disappear. It simply
transforms into knowledge, and then its existence is Akinchitkar. Difference
between Avadhijnan and Man:paryayajnan Avadhijnan and Man:paryayajnan are
similar in the form of imperfect, incomplete, and transcendental direct
perception, but they differ in purity, field, owner, and subject matter. For
example, "MA bound to know, near and far, Vipulamai is more subtle, more
extensive, more pure, the third way of knowing Near ... "etc. 1. (a) Ujjumai
Ananta - Mandi Sutra 18 (b) Sadvishesha by Vishuddhayapratipata. Sastha Sutra.
401 Sutra 24 -

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 52 karmavipAka aura utkRSTa se bhI palyopama ke asaMkhyAtavaM bhAga- bhUta aura
bhaviSyat ke manogata bhAvoM ko jAnatA dekhatA hai aura vipulamati Rjumati kI
apekSA kucha adhika kAla ke mana se cintita yA jinakA cintana hogA, aise
padArthoM ko vizuddha, bhramarahita jAnatA dekhatA hai  /  -- bhAva se Rjumati
manogata bhAvoM kI asaMkhyAta paryAyoM ko jAnatA dekhatA hai, lekina saba bhAvoM
ke anantaveM bhAga ko jAnatAdekhatA hai aura vipulamati Rjumati kI apekSA kucha
adhika paryAyoM ko vizuddha, bhramarahita jAnatA dekhatA hai  /  ukta vizeSatAoM
ke atirikta donoM prakAra ke mana:paryayajJAnoM meM nimnalikhita kucha aura
vizeSatAe~ hai- Rjumati kI apekSA vipulamati mana:paryayajJAna sUkSmatara aura
adhika vizeSoM ko sphuTatayA jAnatA hai  /  Rjumati utpanna hone ke bAda kadAcit
calA bhI jAtA hai parantu vipulamati mana:paryayajJAna nahIM jAtA hai| vaha
kevalajJAna meM pariNata ho jAtA hai aura taba usakI sattA akiMcitkara hotI hai
/ " avadhijJAna aura mana:paryayajJAna meM antara avadhijJAna aura
mana:paryayajJAna vikala - apUrNa - pAramArthika pratyakSa ke rUpa se samAna
hone para bhI inameM vizuddhi, kSetra, svAmI aura viSayakRta antara hai  /
jaise emae baMdhe jANa, pAsai le caiva biulamaI amahiyatarAe, viulatarAe,
visuddhatarAe tritimi tara jANa pAsava ...... "isyAdi  /  1. ( ka ) ujjumaI
anaMte - mandI sUtra 18 (kha) vizuddhayapratipAtAbhyAM sadvizeSaH  /
sasthAsUtra. 40 1 sUtra 24 -

Page #133 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## First Karma Granth  (1) **Manahparyaya Jnana**, in comparison to **Avadhi
Jnana**, knows its object in a more detailed manner. Therefore, it is purer.
(2) The scope of **Avadhi Jnana** extends from an infinitesimal part of a finger
to the entire **Lok**, whereas the scope of **Manahparyaya Jnana** is limited to
the **Madhyalok**, up to the **Manushottara Parvat**.  (3) The possessor of
**Avadhi Jnana** can be from any of the four **Gatis**, but the possessor of
**Manahparyaya Jnana** is only a **Riddhi-prapta**, **Aparamatta-samyata** human
being.  (4) The object of **Avadhi Jnana** is **Dravya** with some **Paryayas**,
but the object of **Manahparyaya Jnana** is only **Manodravya**.  (5) **Avadhi
Jnana** can accompany the soul in the **Parbhav**, whereas **Manahparyaya
Jnana** is only **Ihabhavik**.  Now, we discuss **Keval Jnana**. **Keval Jnana**
is the knowledge that, without any assistance, i.e., without the help of the
senses or anything else, has the power to directly perceive all knowable
objects, both concrete and abstract, like a **Hastamalaka**. It is the purest
form of knowledge. The other four **Kshayopaamik** knowledges, **Mati Jnana**
etc., can be pure, but not the purest, whereas **Keval Jnana** is the purest.
**Keval Jnana** is eternal, without any covering, everlasting, and infinite,
whereas the other four **Kshayopaamik** knowledges are not like that. **Keval
Jnana** has no sub-divisions.  How many knowledges can exist simultaneously, in
terms of their power? Out of the five types of knowledge mentioned above, one
soul can have one to...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prathama karmagrantha (1) manaHparya yajJAna avadhijJAna kI apekSA apane viSaya
ko vizada rUpa se jAnatA hai  /  isalie usame vizuddhatara hai| (2) avadhijJAna
kA kSetra aMgula ke asaMkhyAtaveM bhAga se lekara sampUrNa loka hai jabaki
manaHpayaMyajJAna kA kSetra mAnUSottaraparvataparyanta madhyaloka hai| (3)
avadhijJAna ke svAmI cAroM gati vAle ho sakate haiM, kintu manaHparyayajJAna ke
svAmI RddhiprApta apramatta-saMyata manuSya hI (4) abadhijJAna kA viSaya
katipaya paryAya sahita rUpI dravya hai, parantu manaHparyayajJAna kA viSaya
manodravya mAtra hai| (5) avadhijJAna parabhava meM bhI sAtha jA sakatA hai,
jabaki mana:paryayajJAna ihabhavika hI hotA hai| aba kevalajJAna kA kathana
karate haiMkevalajhAna-jo jJAna kisI kI sahAyatA ke binA arthAta indri. yAdi kI
sahAyatA ke binA muta-amUrta sabhI jJeya padArthoM ko hastAmalaka kI taraha
pratyakSa karane kI zakti rakhane vAlA hai, use kevalajJAna kahate haiN|
_matijJAnAdi cAroM kSAyopamika jJAna vizuddha ho sakate haiM kintu vizuddhatama
nahIM, jabaki kevalajJAna vizuddhatama hI hotA hai  /  kevalajJAna nitya,
nirAvaraNa, zAzvata aura ananta hotA hai, jabaki zeSa kSAyopazAmika cAroM jJAna
vaise nahIM haiN| kevalajJAna ke avAntara bheda nahIM hote haiN| zakti ko apekSA
eka sAtha kitane jJAna ? jJAna ke ukta pA~ca bhedoM meM se eka AtmA meM eka
sAtha eka se lekara

Page #134 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Karma Vipaka and the Five Knowledges  Karma Vipaka can be experienced through
the attainment of four knowledges. Some beings may attain one, two, three, or
even four knowledges, but never all five simultaneously. This is because if only
one knowledge is present, it would be Keval Jnana (Omniscience), and since Keval
Jnana is perfect, the other four knowledges, being imperfect, cannot coexist.
When two knowledges are present, they are Mati Jnana (Knowledge of Perception)
and Shruta Jnana (Knowledge of Scripture). These two knowledges are always
present together in all worldly beings.  When three knowledges are present, they
are either Mati, Shruta, and Avadhi Jnana (Clairvoyance) or Mati, Shruta, and
Mana:paryaya Jnana (Knowledge of Mind). This is because three knowledges can
only exist in an incomplete state, and in that state, either Avadhi Jnana or
Mana:paryaya Jnana will be present, but Mati and Shruta Jnana will always be
present.  When all four knowledges are present, they are Mati, Shruta, Avadhi,
and Mana:paryaya Jnana. This is because these four knowledges can coexist as
they are all incomplete in nature.  The simultaneous presence of two, three, or
four knowledges is possible due to the potential for their manifestation, not
their actual expression.  Mana:paryaya Jnana and Keval Jnana are only attained
by those who practice the five great vows (Panch Mahavrata), not by others.
Thus, there are 28 types of Mati Jnana, 14 or 20 types of Shruta Jnana, 6 types
of Avadhi Jnana, 2 types of Mana:paryaya Jnana, and 1 type of Keval Jnana.
Combining all these types, there are 51 or 57 types of the five knowledges.
After describing the five types of knowledge, the following verses continue:  1.
(a) Jivaabhi. Pratipatti 3, Sutra 41 (b) Ekadini Bhajyani
Gugpadekasminnachaturbhyah. - Tattvarth Sutra A 1, Sutra 30

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 * karma vipAka cAra jJAna taka bhajanA se ho sakate haiN| kisI jamA eka kisI
meM do, kisI meM tIna aura kisI meM cAra jJAna taka saMbhava haiM  /  parantu
pA~coM jJAna eka sAtha kisI meM nahIM hote haiN| kyoMki yadi eka jJAna hogA to
kevalajJAna hogA aura kevalajJAna paripUrNa hone se usake sAtha anya cAra jJAna
apUrNa hone se nahIM ho skte| jaba do hote haiM taba matijJAna aura zrutajJAna
hoNge| kyoMki pA~ca jJAnoM meM se ye donoM jJAna sahacArI haiM  /  samasta
saMsArI jIvoM ke ye donoM jJAna sahacArI rUpa se rahate haiM  /  jaba tIna jJAna
hote haiM, taba mati, zruta, avadhijJAna athavA mati, zrula, mana:paryayajJAna |
kyoMki tIna jJAna apUrNa avasthA meM hI saMbhava haiM aura usa avasthA meM cAhe
avadhijJAna ho, yA mana:paryayajJAna, parantu mati aura zrutajJAna avazya hote
haiN| jaba cAroM jJAna hote haiM taba mati zruta, avadhi aura mana:paryayajJAna
| kyoMki ye cAroM jJAna apUrNa avasthAbhAvI hone se eka sAtha ho sakate haiM  /
1 meM yaha do, tIna, cAra jJAnoM kA eka sAtha honA zakti kI apekSA saMbhava hai,
abhivyakti kI apekSA nahIM  / " mana:paryayajJAna aura kevalajJAna paMca
mahAvratadhArI manuSya ko hI hote haiM, anya ko nahIM  /  isa taraha matijJAna
ke 28, zrutajJAna 14 athavA 20, avadhijJAna ke 6, mana:paryayajJAna ke 2 aura
kevalajJAna kA eka bheda - ina saba bhedoM ko milAne se pA~coM jJAnoM ke 51 yA
57 bheda hote haiM  /  jJAna ke pAMcoM bhedoM kA varNana karane ke bAda Age kI
gAthA 1. (ka) jIvAbhi0 pratipatti 3, sUtra 41 (kha) ekAdIni bhAjyAni
gugapadekasminnAcaturbhyaH  /  - tattvArthasUtra a 1, sutra 30

Page #135 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The first Karma Granth states the number of distinctions of their coverings and
Darshanavaran Karma. The covering which falls on the eye, like a blindfold, is
called the covering of that knowledge. Darshanavaran Karma is like a gatekeeper
and has four Darshanavaran and five Nidra, totaling nine distinctions.
**Gathaarth:** The covering of these Matigyan, etc., knowledges, like a
blindfold on the eye, is called the covering of those knowledges. Darshanavaran
Karma is like a gatekeeper and has four Darshanavaran and five Nidra, totaling
nine distinctions.  **Special Meaning of Jnanavaran Karma:** Karma that covers
knowledge is called Jnanavaran. Just as a blindfold on the eye obstructs vision,
similarly, due to the influence of Jnanavaran Karma, the soul is obstructed in
knowing substances. But this obstruction is not such that the soul does not have
any knowledge at all. Just as even when the sun is obscured by dense clouds,
some light of the sun remains, enabling the distinction between day and night,
similarly, no matter how thick the covering of Karma may be, the soul always
retains some knowledge. Because knowledge is the quality of the soul, and the
covering can only obscure the quality of knowledge, it cannot completely destroy
it. Even when covered, only an infinite part of knowledge remains eternally
uncovered. If knowledge were to be completely destroyed, then:  **1. All living
beings would become non-living.**  —Chandrasutra 75

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 | prathama karmagrantha meM unake AvaraNoM aura darzanAvaraNa karma ke bhedoM
kI saMkhyA kA kathana karate haiM  /  esi jaM AvaraNaM par3antra cakkhusta taM
tayAvaraNaM  /  haMsaNaca panA vitisamaM daMsaNAvaraNaM 55  //  gAthArtha -
A~kha kI paTTI ke samAna ina matijJAna Adi gA~voM jJAnoM kA jo AvaraNa hai, vaha
una jJAnoM kA AvaraNa kahalAtA hai  /  darzanAvaraNa karma dvArapAla ke samAna
hai aura usake cAra darzanAvaraNa aura pAMca nidrA kula milakara nau bheda hote
haiM  /  jJAnAvaraNa karma kA svarUpa vizeSArtha - jJAna kA AvaraNa karane vAle
karma ko jJAnAvaraNa kahate haiM jaise A~kha para paTTI bA~dhane para dekhane
meM rukAvaTa AtI hai, usI prakAra jJAnAvaraNa karma ke prabhAva se AtmA ko
padArthoM ke jAnane meM kAvaTa AtI hai| lekina yaha rukAvaTa aisI nahIM hotI hai
ki jisase AtmA ko kisI prakAra kA jJAna hI na ho| jaise ghane bAdaloM se sUrya
ke taka jAne para bhI dina-rAta kA bheda samajhAne vAlA sUrya kA kuchana kucha
prakAza avazya banA rahatA hai| isI prakAra karmoM kA cAhe jaisA gAr3ha AvaraNa
ho jAya, lekina AtmA ko kucha-na-kucha jJAna avazya rahatA hai  /  kyoMki jJAna
AtmA kA guNa hai aura AvaraNa jJAnaguNa ko AcchAdita to kara sakatA hai,
samUloccheda nahIM kara sakatA hai| AvRta hone para bhI kevalajJAna kA anantavA~
bhAga to nitya udghATita - anAvarita hI rahatA hai  / ' yadi jJAna kA
samUloccheda ho jAya to phira 1 savajIvANAM pi dha NaM akvarassa
anaMtabhAgoNicacughADio baI | jaya purNa sovi AvarijjA teNaM jIvo ajIvattaM
pavejjA  //  --candasatra 75

Page #136 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Karma and Its Consequences  There is no distinction between the soul (Jiva)
and non-soul (Ajiva). Knowledge (Jnana) is not considered a quality of the soul.
Knowledge is the means by which the distinction between the soul and non-soul is
made, as knowledge is a quality of the soul and not of the non-soul. The nature
of the soul is eternal and cannot be destroyed. Therefore, the Karma of
knowledge-obscuring (Jnana-Avarana) can only cover the qualities of the soul,
not destroy them completely.  The analogy of a blindfold used here signifies
that the thickness of the blindfold, whether it is thick or thin, will determine
the extent of vision. Similarly, the power of the knowledge-obscuring Karma
varies in its ability to cover.  Based on the five types of knowledge mentioned
earlier, there are five corresponding types of Karma that obscure them:  1.
**Mati-Jnana-Avarana:** This Karma obscures the knowledge of perception (Mati-
Jnana). Different types of perception are obscured by different types of Karma,
but all are collectively referred to as Mati-Jnana-Avarana because they are all
forms of perception.  2. **Shruta-Jnana-Avarana:** This Karma obscures the
knowledge gained through scriptures (Shruta-Jnana).  3. **Avadhi-Jnana-
Avarana:** This Karma obscures the knowledge of clairvoyance (Avadhi-Jnana).  4.
**Manah-Paryaya-Jnana-Avarana:** This Karma obscures the knowledge of mental
perception (Manah-Paryaya-Jnana).  5. **Kevala-Jnana-Avarana:** This Karma
obscures the perfect knowledge of omniscience (Kevala-Jnana).  **References:**
(a) Utsaradhya-Pan, A. 33, G. 4  (b) Sthananga, Sthan 5, U. 3, Sutra 464  (c)
Tattvarth-Sutras, A. 6, Sutra 6

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmavipAka jIva-ajIba kA koI bheda nahIM rahegA  /  jJAna AtmA kA guNa
svabhAva) nahIM mAnA jaayegaa| jJAna ke dvArA hI to jIna-ajIva kA bheda kiyA
jAtA hai ki jJAna jIva kA guNa hai, ajIva kA nahIM aura svabhAva kA kabhI nAza
nahIM hotA hai| isalie jJAnAvaraNa karma AtmA ke guNa ko AcchAdita hI kara
sakatA hai, samUla nAza nahIM  /  yahA~ A~khoM para paTTI kA jo dRSTAnta diyA
gayA hai. usakA abhiprAya yaha hai ki jaise moTe, patale kapar3e kI paTTI hogI.
tadanusAra kamajyAdA dikhegA  /  isI prakAra jJAnAvaraNa karma kI AcchAdana
zakti meM bhI nyUnAdhika rUpa se pRthaka-pRthak zakti hotI hai  /  pUrva meM
varNita jJAna ke pAMcoM bhedoM ke kathanAnusAra unake AvaraNa karane vAle karma
ke nimnalikhita pA~ca bheda hote haiM (1) matijJAnAvaraNa, (2) zrutajJAnAvaraNa,
(3) avadhijJAnAvaraNa (4) manaHparyayajJAnAcaraNa aura (5) kevljnyaanaavrnn|
matijJAnAvaraNa -matijJAna kA AvaraNa karane vAlA karma matijJAnAvaraNa kahalAtA
hai| pUrvokta bhinna-bhinna prakAra ke matijJAnoM ke AvaraNa karane vAle bhinna-
bhinna kamoM ko bhI matijJAnAvaraNa kheNge| kyoMki ve saba matijJAna ke bheda
haiM, isalie una santrakA sAmAnya se matijJAna zabda se aura una-unakA AvaraNa
karane vAle karmoM kA matijJAnAvaraNa isa eka zabda se grahaNa kara liyA gayA
hai| isI prakAra 1. (ka) nANAvaraNaM paMcavihaM guyaM AbhiNibohiyaM  /  ohinANaM
ca taiyaM maNanANa ca kevala  /  /  utsarAdhyApana, a0 33, gA0 4 (kha) sthAnAga,
sthAna 5, u0 3, sUtra 464 (ga) matizrutAvadhimana paryaya kevalAnAm  /
tattvAryasUtra. a. 6, sUtra 6

Page #137 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The first Karma Granth, Shruta Jnana, Avadhi Jnana and Manah Paryaya Jnana,
should be understood as Shruta Jnana Avarana, Avadhi Jnana Avarana, Manah
Paryaya Jnana Avarana respectively.   Shruta Jnana Avarana is the Karma that
covers Shruta Jnana. Avadhi Jnana Avarana is the Karma that covers Avadhi Jnana.
Manah Paryaya Jnana Avarana is the Karma that covers Manah Paryaya Jnana. Kevala
Jnana Avarana is the Karma that covers Kevala Jnana.  The above five types of
Jnana Avarana Karma are of two types: Sarvaghati and Deshaghati. The nature that
completely destroys its Patia Jnana Guna is Sarvaghati, and the one that
partially destroys its Ghatiya Jnana Guna is Deshaghati. Mati Jnana Avarana,
Shruta Jnana Avarana, Avadhi Jnana Avarana, Manah Paryaya Jnana Avarana are all
Deshaghati, and Kevala Jnana Avarana is Sarvaghati. Even though Kevala Jnana
Avarana Karma is Sarvaghati, it cannot completely cover the Jnana Guna of the
soul, but it completely inhibits Kevala Jnana.  The example of a doorkeeper is
given for the nature of Darshan Avarana Karma. Just as a doorkeeper sitting at
the royal gate does not allow anyone to see the king, similarly Darshan Avarana
Karma does not allow the Jiva to see the objects.  - Stananga Sutra 241105

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prathama karmagrantha zratajJAna, avadhijJAna aura manaHparyayajJAna ke bhedoM
ke AvaraNa karane vAle karmoM ko bhI sAmAnya se zrutajJAnAvaraNa,
avadhijJAnAvaraNa, manaHparyayajJAnAvaraNa samajhanA cAhie  /  *
zrutajJAnAvaraNa zrutajJAna kA AvaraNa karane vAle karma ko zrutajJAnAvaraNa
kahate haiN| abadhijJAnAvaraNa - jo karma avadhijJAna kA AvaraNa karatA hai use
avadhijJAnAvaraNa kahate haiN| manaHparyayajJAnAvaraNa -jo karma manaHparya
yajJAna kA AvaraNa kare usa manaHparyayajJAnAvaraNa kahate haiM  /
kevalajJAnAvaraNa-kevalajJAna kA AvaraNa karane vAle karma ko kevalajJAnAvaraNa
kahate haiN| jJAnAvaraNa karma kI ukta pAMca prakRttiyA~ sarvaghAtI aura
dezaghAtI rUpa se do prakAra kI haiN|' jo prakRti apane pAtya jJAnaguNa kA
pUrNatayA ghAta kare, baha sarvaghAtI aura jo apane ghAtya jJAnaguNa kA AMzika
rUpa se ghAta kare, vaha dezaghAtI hai| matijJAnAvaraNa, zrutajJAnAbaraNa,
avadhijJAnAvaraNa, manaHparyayajJAnAvaraNa yaha cAra prakRtiyA~ dezaghAtI haiM
aura kavalajJAnAvaraNa sarvadhAtI hai| kevalajJAnAvaraNa karma sarvaghAtI hone
para bhI AtmA ke jJAnaguNa ko sarvathA AvRtta nahIM kara sakatA hai, parantu
kevalajJAna kA sarvathA nirodha karatA hai  /  /  darzanAvaraNa karma ke
svabhAva ke lie dvArapAla kA dRSTAnta diyA hai  /  jisa prakAra rAjadvAra para
baiThA huA dvArapAla kisI ko rAjA ke darzana nahIM karane detA, usI prakAra
darzanAvaraNa karma jIva ko padArthoM 1. NANAvara Nijne kamme duvihe paNNata.
taM jahA-desaNANAvaraNijje cera saccaNANAgharaNijje neva  /  -sthAnAMgasUtra
241105

Page #138 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Karmavipaka obstructs the power to see. Darshanavaran karma has nine divisions,
which are the four Darshanavaranchatushk and the five Nidras. The names and
characteristics of the Darshanavaranchatushk are mentioned in the following
verse.  **Verse 10:** "Chamvitthi, Achal, Sesidiya, Ohi Kevalehi Cha.
Dansanamiha Samannam Tassavaranam Tayam Chauha."  **Translation:** "There are
four types of Darshan: through the eyes, through the other four senses, through
the mind, through Avadhi, and through Kevala. Here, the perception of the common
characteristics present in an object is called Darshan. Four types of Darshan
have been mentioned, therefore, there should be four types of karma that cover
them."  **Nature of Darshanavaran Karma:**  **Explanation:** Every object has
two characteristics: common and specific. The characteristic that reflects the
existence of objects, as opposed to the specific characteristic, is called
Darshan. The karma that covers Darshan is called Darshanavaran.  **Four Types of
Darshan:** There are four types of Darshan: Chakshudarshan, Achakshudarshan,
Avadhidarshan, and Kevaladarshan.  **Four Types of Darshanavaran:** The karma
that covers these four types of Darshan are: Chakshudarshanavaran,
Achakshudarshanavaran, Avadhidarshanavaran, and Kevaladarshanavaran.
**Characteristics of Chakshudarshanavaran:** The perception of the common
characteristics of an object through the eyes is called Chakshudarshan. The
karma that obstructs this perception through the eyes is called
Chakshudarshanavaran.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 boda karmavipAka ko dekhane kI zakti meM rukAvaTa DAlatA hai  /
darzanAvaraNacatuSka aura pA~ca nidrAoM ko milAkara darzanAvaraNa karma ke nau
bheda hote haiN| darzanAvaraNacatuSka ke nAma aura lakSaNa Age kI gAthA meM
kahate haiM  /  camaviTThi acala sesidiya ohi kevalehi ca  /  daMsaNamiha
sAmannaM tassAvaraNaM tayaM cauhA  // 10 //  gAthA - netra tathA netra ke sivAya
anya cAra indriyoM va mana tathA avadhi va kevala inase darzana ke cAra bheda
hote haiM  /  yahA~ vastu meM vidyamAna sAmAnyadharma ke grahaNa ko darzana kahA
gayA hai  /  darzana ke cAra prakAra kahe gaye haiM, ataH usake AvaraNa karane
vAle karmoM ke bhI cAra bheda samajhane cAhie  /  darzanAvaraNa karma kA svarUpa
vizeSArtha - pratyeka padArtha meM sAmAnya va vizeSa rUpa do dharma rahate hai,
unameM se sAmAnyadharma kI apekSA jo padArthoM kI sattA kA pratibhAsa hotA hai,
use darzana kahate haiM aura darzana ko AvaraNa karane vAle karma ko
darzanAvaraNa kahate haiM  /  P darzana ke cAra bheda haiM-cakSudarzana,
acakSadarzana avadhidarzana aura kevaladarzana | darzana ke ina cAra bhedoM kA
AvaraNa karane se darzanAvaraNa ke bhI usa nAma vAle nimnalikhita cAra bheda ho
jAte haiM cakSudarzanAvaraNa, acakSudarzanAvaraNa, avadhidarzanAvaraNa,
kevaladarzanAvaraNa | inake lakSaNa kramazaH isa prakAra haiM
cakSudarzanAvaraNa- cakSu ke dvArA jo vastu ke sAmAnyadharma kA grahaNa hotA
hai, use cakSu darzana kahate haiM aura cakSu ke dvArA hone vAle usa sAmAnya-
dharma ke grahaNa ko rokane vAle karma ko cakSudarzanAvaraNa kahate haiM  /

Page #139 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
56 First Karma Granth Attaskhudarshan is the perception of the general
characteristics of its own subject matter by the four senses, excluding the eye,
and the mind. The karma that covers it is called Anamanaran. Avidhidarshanavaran
- The knowledge of the general characteristics of the substance called the soul
without the help of the senses and mind is called Avidhidarshan. The karma that
covers it is called Avidhidarshanavaran. Kevaldarshanavaran - The knowledge of
the general characteristics of all substances is called Kevaldarshan and the
karma that covers it is called Kevaldarshanavaran. The reason why
Manahparyayadarshan is not considered like Avidhidarshan is that
Manahparyayajnan, due to the effect of Kshayopa-sham, perceives the special
characteristics of substances, not the general characteristics. Due to the rise
of Chakshudarshanavaran karma, one-sense, two-sense and three-sense beings are
born without eyes and the eyes of four-sense and five-sense beings are destroyed
due to the rise of the said karma or become less visible due to blindness etc.
eye diseases. Similarly, the absence of the remaining four senses and mind from
birth or being weak or unclear even after birth is due to the rise of Achak-
shudarshanavaran karma. After stating the four divisions of Darshanavaran karma,
the remaining five divisions, namely Nidra, Nidra-Nidra etc. and Vedaniya karma
are stated in the next two verses. P

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 56 prathama karmagrantha acakSuvarzanAbaraNacakSurindriya ko chor3akara zeSa
sparzana Adi cAroM indriyoM aura mana ke dvArA hone vAle apane-apane viSayabhUta
sAmAnyadharma ke pratibhAsa ko attakSudarzana kahate haiN| usake AvaraNa mArane
vAle karma ko anAmanAraNa karate haiN| avadhidarzanAvaraNa- indriyoM aura mana
kI sahAyatA ke binA hI AtmA ko rUpI dravya ke sAmAnyadharma kA bodha hone ko
avadhidarzana kahate haiN| usako AvRta karane vAle karma ko avadhidarzanAvaraNa
kahate haiN| kebaladarzanAvaraNa-sampUrNa dravyoM ke sAmAnyadhamoM ke avabodha
ko kevaladarzana evaM usake AvaraNa karane vAle ko kevaladarzanAvaraNa kahate
haiN| avadhidarzana kI taraha manaHparyayadarzana nahIM mAnane kA kAraNa yaha
hai ki mana.paryayajJAna kSayopazama ke prabhAva se padArthoM ke vizeSadharmoM
ko grahaNa karatA hai, sAmAnyadharma ko grahaNa nahIM karatA hai|
cakSudarzanAvaraNa karma ke udaya se ekendriya, dvIndriya aura zrIndriya jIvoM
ke janma se hI netra nahIM hote haiM evaM caturindriya va pacendriya jIvoM ke
netra ukta karma ke udaya se naSTa ho jAte haiM athavA ratauMdhI Adi netraroga
ho jAne se kama dIkhane lagatA hai| isI prakAra cakSurindriya ke sivAya zeSa
cAra indriyoM aura mana kA janma se hI na honA athavA janma se hone para bhI
kamajora yA aspaSTa honA acakSudarzanAvaraNa karma ke udaya ke kAraNa hotA hai|
darzanAvaraNa karma ke cakSudarzanAvaraNa Adi cAra bhedoM kA kathana karane ke
anantara nidrA, nidrA-nidrA Adi zeSa pA~ca bhedoM evaM vedanIya karma kA kathana
Age kI do gAthAoM meM karate haiN| pa

Page #140 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 60 ## Karmavipaka  **Suhapatibhoha nidda niddanidda ya dukkhapatibhoha.
Payala thiovitthas payalpayala ya dhakamyo.** ||11|| **Vidhitiyasthakarani
thianddhi abruchhakki abala. Mahulittakhaggadharal ihanam va duha u veniyam.**
||12||  **Gathaarth:**  Sleep that is easy to overcome is called **nidda**,
sleep that is difficult to overcome is called **niddanidda**. Sleep that comes
while sitting or standing is called **prachala**, and sleep that comes while
walking is called **prachala-prachala**. Sleep that occurs during the night,
where the mind continues to work on the day's thoughts, is called **sthyanaddhi
nidda**. In this sleep, the tongue becomes half-curved, meaning it has half the
strength it normally has due to the power of Vasudeva. Vedaniya karma is like
licking the edge of a sword smeared with honey (madhu). This karma is of two
types.   **Vishesharth:** The previous gatha described four types of
**chakshudarshanavaran** from the nine types of **darshanavaran karma**. The
remaining five types of **darshanavaran karma** and **vedaniyakarma** are
described here. The five types of **darshanavaran karma** are: **nidda,
niddanidda, prachala, prachala-prachala, and sthyanaddhi**. Their
characteristics are as follows:  1. (a) **Gavavihe dabhanavaranijnam karma
panate, tam jaha-nidda, niddanidda, payana, palapalayala, yiangiddhi
chanakhudasanavaran, achakhudasanavaran, ohi dasanavaran, kevaladasanavaran.** -
**Sthananga, Sta. 6, Sutra 668** (b) **Uttagamyam na stra, a. 33, matha 5, 6**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 60 karmavipAka suhapaDibohA niddA niddAniddA ya dukkhapaDibohA  /  payalA
ThioviTThasa payalapayalA ya dhakamayo  // 11 //  vidhitiyasthakaraNI thINaddhI
abrucakki abalA  /  mahulittakhaggadhArAlihaNaM va duhA u veNiyaM  // 12 //
gAthArtha-jisameM saralatA se patijodha ho, hame nidrA aura jisameM kaSTa se
pratibodha ho use nidrA-nidrA tathA baiThe-baiThe yA khar3e-khar3e jo nIMda Aye
use pracalA evaM calate-calate nIMda Ane ko pracalA-pracalA nidrA kahate haiN|
dina meM vicAra kiye hue kArya ko rAtri meM nidrAvasthA meM karake vAlI nidrA ko
styAnaddhi nidrA kahate haiN| isa nidrA meM jIba ko ardhacakrI arthAt bAsudeva
ke bala se Adhe bala jitanI zakti ho jAtI hai  /  vedanIya karma madhu (zahada)
se lipta talavAra kI dhAra ko cAdane ke samAna hai aura yaha karma do prakAra kA
hai| vizeSArtha darzanAvaraNa karma ke nau bhaMdoM meM se cakSudarzanAvaraNa Adi
cAra bhedoM kA varNana pUrva gAthA meM ho cukA hai aura zeSa pA~ca bhedoM va
vedanIyakarma kA kathana yahA~ kiyA jAtA hai| _ darzanAvaraNa ke zaSa pA~ca
bhedoM ke nAma kramazaH isa prakAra haiMnidrA, nidrA-nidrA, pracalA, pracalA-
pracalA, mtyAnaddhi  / ' inake lakSaNa isa prakAra haiM : 1. (ka) gavavihe
dAbhaNAvaraNijnaM kamma paNate, taM jahA-niddA, niddAnidA, payanA, pAlApayalA,
yINagiddhI canakhudasaNAvaraNe, acakkhudasaNAbaraNe, ohidasaNAvaraNe,
kevaladasaNAva raNe  /  -sthAnAMga, sthA0 6, sUtra 668 (kha) uttagamyamna stra,
a. 33, mAthA 5, 6

Page #141 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## First Karma Granth  **Nidra:** The karma whose arising causes a living being
to experience sleep in such a way that they can wake up comfortably, i.e., it
doesn't take effort to wake them up. Such sleep is called Nidra.  **Nidra-
Nidra:** The karma whose arising makes it extremely difficult to wake a living
being from sleep, i.e., the sleeping being wakes up with great difficulty even
when shouted at loudly or shaken. Such sleep is called Nidra-Nidra.
**Prachala:** The karma whose arising causes sleep to come on while sitting or
standing is called Prachala.  **Prachala-Prachala:** The karma whose arising
causes sleep to come on while walking is called Prachala-Prachala.
**Styanadhi:** The karma whose arising manifests the ability to perform a
previously planned action in a state of sleep. In this sleep, the living being
performs impossible actions that are not possible in a waking state, and upon
waking, they have no memory of the actions performed in their sleep.
**Styanadhi** is also called **Styanagrudhi**. The sleep whose arising manifests
special strength in the sleeping state (Styane Swapne Yaya Veerya
Visheshpradurbhava: Sa Sthanati) or the sleep in which the concentration of
thoughts and resources related to the desired object occurs during the day.
**(g) Gharchakshurvadhikevalanyamnidranidranidraprachalaprachalaprachalaastyanag
rudhiyascha.**  - Tattvarth Sutra, Chapter 8, Sutra

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prathama karmagrantha nidrA-jisa karma ke udaya se jIva ko so nidrA Aye ki
sukhapUrvaka jAga sake, arthAt jagAne meM mehanata nahIM par3atI hai. aisI nidrA
ko nidrA kahate haiN| nidrA-nidrA-jisa karma ke udaya se jIva ko nIMda se jagAnA
atyaMta duSkara ho arthAt jo soyA huA jIva bar3e jora se cillAne yA hAtha se
hilAne para bhI muzkila meM jAgatA hai, aisI nIMda ko nidrA-nidrA kahate haiN|
prathalA-jisa karma ke udaya ye baiThe-baiThe yA khar3e-khar3e hI nIMda Ane
lage, usako pracalA kahate haiM  /  pracalA-pracalAjisa karma ke udaya se
calate-phirate hI nIMda A jAya, use pracalA-pracalA kahate haiN| styAnAra- karmo
kadara meM sAta varamA soce hue kArya ko nidrAvasthA meM karane kI sAmarthya
prakaTa ho jAya, use styAnaddhi kahate haiN| isa nidrA ke udaya meM jIva nIMda
meM aise asambhava kAryoM ko bhI kara letA hai, jinakA jAgrata sthiti meM honA
saMbhava nahIM hai aura isa nidrA ke dUra hone para apane dvArA nidrita avasthA
meM kiye gaye kArya kA smaraNa bhI nahIM rahatA hai| styAnaddhi kA dUsarA nAma
styAnagRddhi bhI hai| jisa nidrA ke udaya se nidrita avasthA meM vizeSa bala
prakaTa ho jAye (styAne svapne yayA vIrya vizeSaprAdurbhAvaH sA sthAnati) athavA
jisa nidrA meM dina meM cintita artha aura sAdhana viSayaka AkAMkSA kA
ekatrIkaraNa ho jAya, (ga)
gharacakSuravAdhikevalAnyAMnidrAnidrAnidrApracalApracalApracalAstyAnagRddhayazca
/  -tatvArtha sUtra, a0 8, sUtra ,

Page #142 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 62 ## Karma Vipaka  **Styanagridhi Nidra** (Styanasandhaatibhuta
Gridhivinchintitarth Sadhan Vishayaabhikanksha Yasyaam Sa Styanagridhi) is
called **Styanagridhi Nidra**.  In Prakrit language, 'dd' is used instead of 'p'
in 'swapana'.  If a being with Vajra Rishabhanaraach Samhanan experiences Styan
Nidra, then it has half the strength of Vasudeva. This being, upon death, goes
to hell.  **Darshan** Karma is of two types: **Deshghati** and **Sarvaghati**.
Chakshudarshanaavaran, Achakshudarshanaavaran, Avadhi Darshanaavaran are
**Deshghati**, and the remaining six **Prakritis** are **Sarvaghati**. Among the
**Sarvaghati** **Prakritis**, **Kavaladarshanaavaran** is the main one.  After
describing the nine types of **Darshanaavaran** Karma, we now describe
**Vedaniya** Karma. **Vedaniya** Karma is like licking a honey-coated sword. It
is the karma that is done by the senses. It causes the experience of **Indriya**
pleasure and pain. There are two types of **Vedaniya** Karma: **Saata Vedaniya**
and **Asaata Vedaniya**.  1. (a) **Saata Vedaniya**: The nature of this karma is
the experience of objects, i.e., **Vedana**. This karma causes the being to
experience objects. (b) **Veshaniya**: This is the karma that is done by the
senses. (c) **Sadasa**: This is the karma that is done by the mind.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 62 karma vipAka ume styAnagRddhi nidrA (styAnAsaMdhAtIbhUtA
gRddhivinacintitArtha sAdhana viSayA'bhikAMkSA yasyAM sA styAnagRddhiH ) kahate
haiM  /  prAkRta bhASA meM svapAna ke sthAna para 'ddha' yaha nipAta ho jAtA hai
/  yadi bajraRSabhanArAca saMhanana vAle jIva ko styAna nidrA kA udaya ho to
usameM bAsudeva ke Adhe bala ke barAbara bala ho jAtA hai  /  isa nidrA vAlA
jIva marane para naraka meM jAtA hai  /  darzanarary karma bhI dezaghAtI aura
sarvaghAtI rUpa meM do prakAra kA hai| cakSudarzanAvaraNa, acakSudarzanAvaraNa,
avadhidarzanAvaraNa dezaghAtI haiM aura zeSa chaha prakRtiyA~ sarvapAtI haiN|
sarvAtI prakRtiyoM meM kevaladarzanAvaraNa mukhya hai | isa prakAra
darzanAvaraNa karma ke nau bhedoM kA kathana karane ke anantara aba vedanIya
karma kA varNana karate haiM  /  aanIya karma kA strarUpa  /  khedanIya - jo
karma indriyoM ke karAye, use vedanIya karma kahate haiM lagI dhAra ko cATane ke
samAna hai| janya aindriyaka sukha - duHkha kA anubhava karatA rahatA hai  /
vedanIya karma ke do bheda haiM- sAtAvedanIya, asAtAvedanIya  / ' 1. (ka) sAyA
viSayoM kA anubhava arthAt vedana isakA svabhAva talavAra kI zahada isa karma ke
udaya se jIva viSaya yamAyANi  /  -- - prajJApanA, pada 23, 702, sU0 263 hiyaM
/  - utarAdhyayana, 2033 0 7 - tasvArthasUtra, a0 sUtra (kha) veSaNIyaM
yaduvihaM sAgamasAyaM ca (ga) sadasa 3

Page #143 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The First Karma Granth and it is Vedaniya. The seven Vedaniya times are like a
set, like licking honey on the edge of a sword. Saataavedaniya - The karma that
causes the soul to experience sensual pleasure is called Saataavedaniya karma.
Asaataavedaniya - The karma that causes the soul to experience pain in the non-
attainment of favorable objects and the attainment of unfavorable sensual
objects is called Asaataavedaniya karma. 63 The pleasure and pain that the soul
experiences through Vedaniya karma should be understood as sensual pleasure and
pain. The experience of the soul's own nature of happiness does not arise from
the rise of any karma. The experience of pleasure and pain caused by Vedaniya
karma is temporary. The verse uses the analogy of the edge of a sword smeared
with honey to indicate that worldly pleasure is mixed with pain. There is no
peace in it. The results are Kalup, which are the cause of increasing the world.
Now, in the next verse, we begin the explanation of Mohaniya karma, explaining
the nature of Vedaniya karma in the four paths. Oson' Suramanuaye Sayam Sayam Tu
Tiriyanareasu. Majjam Va Mohaniyam Duviham Dansancharanmoha || 13 || 0 Verse -
In the Deva and Manusya paths, Saataavedaniya karma usually arises, and in the
Tiryanch and Naraka paths, Asaataavedaniya karma arises. The nature of Mohaniya
karma is like alcohol and

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prathama karmagrantha hai aura yaha vedanIya hai  /  talavAra kI dhAra meM lage
hue zahada ko cATane ke samAna sAtAvedanIya samaya usa bAra seTa ke samAna asAnA
sAtAvedanIya - jisa karma ke udaya se AtmA ko indriya viSayasambandhI sukha kA
anubhava ho, use sAtAvedanIya karma kahate haiM  /  asAtAvedanIya- jisa karma ke
udaya se AtmA ko anukUla viSayoM kI aprApti aura pratikUla indriyaviSayoM kI
prApti meM duHkha kA anubhava hotA hai, use asAtAvedanIya karma kahate haiM  /
63 vedanIya karma dvArA AtmA ko jo sukha-duHkha kA anubhava hotA hai, vaha
indriyaviSayajanya sukha-duHkha samajhanA caahie| AtmA ko jo apane svarUpa ke
sukha kI anubhUti hotI hai, vaha kisI bhI karma ke udaya se nahIM hotI hai|
bedanIya karmajanya sukha-duHkha kI anubhUti kSaNika hotI hai  /  gAthA meM
bedanIya karma ke lie madhulipta talavAra kI dhAra kA dRSTAnta dekara yaha
sUcita kiyA gayA hai ki vaiSayikasukha duHkha se milA huA hI hai  /  usameM
nirAkulatA nahIM hotI hai| pariNAma kalupa hote haiM, jo saMsAra bar3hAne ke
kAraNa haiM  /  aba Age kI gAthA meM cAra gatiyoM meM vedanIya karma kA svarUpa
batalAte hue mohanIya karma kI vyAkhyA prArambha karate haiN| osana' suramaNue
sAyamasAyaM tu tiriyanaraesu  /  majjaM va mohaNIyaM duvihaM daMsaNacaraNamohA
//  13 //  0 gAthA - deva aura manuSya gati meM prAyaH sAtAvedanIya karma kA
aura tiryaMca evaM naraka gati meM asAtAvedanIya karma kA udaya hotA hai  /
mohanIya karma kA svabhAva madya ke samAna hai aura

Page #144 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Faravipak  Faravipak is of two types, in relation to Darshanmohaniya and
Charitramohaniya.  **Special Note:**  Living beings, who wander in the cycle of
four gatis (states of existence), experience pleasure and pain arising from
Vedaniya karma. They do not experience pure pleasure or pure pain. Their
pleasure is mixed with pain, and the cycle of pleasure followed by pain, and
pain followed by pleasure continues. However, the first part of the verse states
which gatis experience predominantly Saatavedaniya and which experience
predominantly Asaatavedaniya.   It is stated that Devas (gods) and Manusyas
(humans) predominantly experience Saatavedaniya karma. The word "predominantly"
indicates that they also experience Asaatavedaniya karma, albeit in smaller
amounts.   For example, when many Devas are about to be expelled from their
Devagati, they experience envy, jealousy, etc., upon seeing the greater power of
other Devas compared to their own. This, and other similar occasions, lead to
the arising of Asaatavedaniya karma. The same understanding should be applied to
humans. They also experience pain due to pregnancy, separation from loved ones
like wives and children, loss of wealth, etc.  Tiyanchas (animals) and Naraka
(hell) beings predominantly experience Asaatavedaniya karma. The word
"predominantly" indicates that they also experience Saatavedaniya karma, but
such occasions are rare. For example, some animals like elephants, horses, dogs,
etc., experience...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 phAravipAka darzana mohanIya evaM cAritramohanIya kI apekSA se do prakAra kA
hotA hai  /  - vizeSArtha-caturgatirUpa saMsAra meM paribhramaNa karane vAle
jIva vedanIya karma ke udaya se indriyaviSayajanya sukha-duHkha kA anubhava
karate rahate haiN| ve na to ekAnta sukha hI sukha kA aura na duHkha hI duHkha
kA vedana karate haiN| unakA sukha, duHkha se mizrita hotA hai aura sukha ke
bAda duHkha evaM duHkha ke anantara sukha kA krama calatA rahatA hai| phira bhI
kina gatiyoM meM sAtAvedanIya kA aura kina gatiyoM meM asAtAvedanIya kA
vizeSarUpa se udaya hone kA kathana gAthA ke pUrvArddha meM kiyA gayA hai. ki
devoM aura manuSyoM ko prAyaH sAtAvedanIya karma kA udaya rahatA hai  /  yahA~
prAyaH zabda se yaha sUcita kiyA gayA hai ki unake sAtAvedanIya ke alAvA
asAtAvedanIya kA bhI udaya huA karatA hai  /  cAhe vaha udaya alpAMza meM ho ho,
parantu usakI saMbhAvanA hai  /  jaise bahuta se devoM ke devagati se cyuta hone
ke samaya, apanI Rddhi kI apekSA anya devoM kI vizAla Rddhi ko dekhane se IrSyA,
mAtsarya Adi kA prAdurbhAva hotA hai, taba tathA anyAnya avasaroM para bhI
asAtAvedanIya karma kA udaya huA karatA hai  /  isI prakAra manuSyoM ke bAre meM
samajha lenA cAhie athavA garbhAvasthA meM evaM strI-putra Adi priyajanoM ke
biyoga, dhana-sampatti ke nAza Adi kAraNoM se bhI unako duHkha huA karatA hai|
tiyaMcoM aura nAraka jIvoM ko prAyaH asAtAvedanIya karma kA udaya rahatA hai  /
yahA~ prAyaH zabda se yaha sUcita kiyA gayA hai ki unheM sAtAvedanIya kA bhI
udaya huA karatA hai, kintu aise avasara kama hI hote haiN| jaise tiryoM meM
kinhIM - kinhIM hAthI, ghor3e, kutte, Adi jIvoM

Page #145 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**First Karma Granth**  Just as a child is nurtured with great love and
affection, similarly, even Naraka beings experience some happiness during the
birth and other auspicious events of Tirthankaras.  Devas experience worldly
pleasures in abundance, while humans experience them less. Similarly, Nigodaya
beings and Narakas experience suffering in abundance, while other Tiryanch
beings experience it less.  After discussing the Dhredaniya Karma, we now
describe the Mohaniya Karma, which is next in order.  **The Nature of Mohaniya
Karma**  The nature of Mohaniya Karma is like that of alcohol (madya). Just as
an intoxicated person forgets his own identity, similarly, with the rise of
Mohaniya Karma, the being loses the ability to recognize and discern his own
nature and welfare. Even if he somehow gains the ability to discern his welfare,
he is unable to act accordingly.  There are two types of Mohaniya Karma: (1)
Darshanmohaniya and (2) Charitramohaniya.  **Darshanmohaniya** - Here, Darshan
should be understood as Shraddha (faith).  1. (a) "Mohanijje nam mante! Kamme
kativih panate? Goyama! Dubihe panale. Tam jaha - Dasanmohanijje va
Charittamhohanijje pa." - Prajapana. Karmabandh par 23, Ja 2 (s) (b) "Mohanijj
pi dubih dasane charane taha." - Uttaradhyayayana A. 33, Ga.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prathama karmagrantha kA bar3e lAr3a-pyAra se lAlana-pAlana kiyA jAtA hai| isI
prakAra nAraka jIvoM meM bhI tIrthakaroM ke janma Adi kalyANakoM ke samaya kucha
sukha kA anubhava huA karatA hai| devoM ko sAMsArika sukhoM kA vizeSa anubhava
hotA hai aura manuSyoM ko uname kama  /  isI prakAra nigodiyA jIvoM aura nArakoM
ko duHkha kA vizeSa anubhava hotA hai aura unakI apekSA anya tiyaMca jIvoM ko
kama anubhava hotA hai| dhedanIya karma kA vivecana karane ke anantara aba
kramaprApta mohanIya karma kA varNana karate haiN| mohanIya karma kA svarUpa
mohanIya karma kA svabhAva madya (zarAba) ke samAna hai| jaise madya ve naze meM
manuSya apane hisAhila kA bhAta bhUla jAtA hai, usI prakAra mohanIya karma ke
udaya se jIva meM apane svarUpa evaM hitAhita ko pahacAnane aura parakhane kI
buddhi nahIM hotI hai| kadAcit apane hitAhita ko parakhane kI bhI buddhi bhI A
jAye to bhI tadanusAra AcaraNa karane kI sAmarthya prApta nahIM kara pAtA hai  /
mohanIya karma ke do bheda haiM(1) darzanamohanIya aura (2) cAritramohanIya  / '
darzanamohanIya-yahA~ darzana kA artha zraddhA samajhanA cAhie  /  1. (ka)
mohaNijje NaM maMte ! kamme katividha paNate ? goyamA ! dubihe paNale. taM jahA-
dasaNamohaNijje va carittamohaNijje pa  /  -prajApanA.karmabaMdha para 23, jA 2
(sa) mohaNijja pi dubiha dasaNe caraNe thaa|| uttarAdhyayana a0 33, gA.

Page #146 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Karmavipaka  One should not accept the common usage of the term "darshan"
(perception). It is different from this perception. Therefore, to understand
something as it is, is "darshan", i.e., "tattvarth-shraddha" (faith in the
truth) is called "darshan". This is a quality of the soul. The karma that
destroys or causes this "darshan" is called "darshanamohaniya" (that which
obscures perception).  "Charitra" (conduct) is the attainment or immersion in
the nature of the soul. This is a quality of the soul. The karma that destroys
this "charitra" quality of the soul is called "charitramohaniya" (that which
obscures conduct).  Thus, after explaining the main divisions of "mohaniya"
karma, the next verse describes "darshanamohaniya" in detail.  **Verse 14:**
"Vansanmoham tiviham samm mosam tahev micchattam. Suddh addhavassudd avisudd tam
habai kamaso."  **Meaning:** "Darshanamohaniya" karma is of three types:
"samyaktvamohaniya" (that which obscures right faith), "mishramohaniya" (that
which obscures mixed faith), and "mithyatvamohaniya" (that which obscures wrong
faith). Of these three types, "samyaktvamohaniya" is pure, "mishramohaniya" is
semi-pure, and "mithyatvamohaniya" is impure.  **Explanation:**
"Darshanamohaniya" karma is of the nature of "mithyatva" (wrong faith) in terms
of bondage, but in terms of its arising and existence, it is divided into three
types due to the soul's transformations: "samyaktvamohaniya", "mishramohaniya"
(samyamithyatva-mohaniya), and "mithyatvamohaniya". Their characteristics are as
follows:  1. (a) "Dansanmohanijj bhanta! Kramm katidhi ghe nnaroo? Goyama!
Tishihe panatte, tam jaha-sammann veyanijje, micchattabaganijje.
Sammamicchattaveyanijje." - Prajnapana, Karmabadh, Chapter 23, Verse 2. (b)
Uttaradhyayanasutra, Chapter 33, Verse 6.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmavipAka sAmAnya upayoga rUpa darzana ko grahaNa nahIM karanA cAhie  /  vaha
isa darzana se bhinna hai  /  ataH jo padArtha jaisA hai, use vaisA hI samajhanA
darzana hai, arthAt tattvArtha-zraddhA ko darzana kahate haiM  /  yaha AtmA kA
guNa hai  /  isako ghAta karane vAle-Avata karane vAle karma ko darzanamohanIya
kahate haiN| cAritramohanIya - AtmA ke svabhAva kI prApti yA usameM ramaNa
karanA cAritra hai  /  yaha AtmA kA guNa hai  /  AtmA ke isa cAritraguNa ko
ghAta karane vAle karma ko cAritramohanIya kahate haiN| isa prakAra mohanIya
karma ke mukhya bheda batalAne ke pazcAta Age kI gAthA meM darzanamohanIya kA
vizeSa kathana karate haiN| vaMsaNamohaM tivihaM samma mosaM taheva micchattaM
/  suddha addhAvasuddha avisuddha taM habaI kamaso  // 14 //  gAthArtha-
darzanamohanIya karma samyaktvamohanIya, mizramohanIya, mithyAtvamohanIya ke
bheda se tIna prakAra kA hotA hai| ina tInoM prakAroM meM kramazaH
samyaktvamohanIya zuddha, mizramohanIya arddha zuddha aura mithyAtvamohanIya
azuddha hotA hai| vizeSArtha-darzanamohanIyakarma bandha kI apekSA mithyAtvarUpa
hI haiM, kintu udaya aura sattA kI apekSA se AtmapariNAmoM ke dvArA usake
samyaktvamohanIya, mizramohanIya (samyamithyAtva-mohanIya) aura
mithyAtvamohanIya ye tIna bheda ho jAte haiN| inake lakSaNa kramazaH isa prakAra
haiM 1. (ka) daMsaNamohaNijja bhante ! kramma katidhi ghe NNaro ? goyamA !
tiSihe paNNatte, taM jahA-sammanna veyaNijje, micchattabegaNijja.
smmaamicchtveynnijje| -prajJApanA, karmabadha pada 23. sa. 2 (kha)
uttarAdhyayana sUtra, a0 33, gAthA 6

Page #147 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## First Karma Text **67**  **Samyaktvamohaniya:** A karma whose arising, though
caused by a desire for the true nature of things, restricts the true desire that
is either *aupashamik* (temporary) or *kshayik* (destructive) is called
*Samyaktvamohaniya*. Although this karma, due to its purity, does not obstruct
the true nature of things, it prevents the attainment of *Samyaktv* (right
knowledge) which is *aupashamik* and *kshayik* in nature. It also creates doubt
in the contemplation of subtle substances, leading to impurities in *Samyaktv*.
**Mishramohaniya:** This is also called *Samyaktv-Mithyatvamohaniya*. A karma
whose arising causes the living being to remain in a fluctuating state, neither
truly desiring nor disliking the reality, is called *Mishramohaniya*. Due to its
arising, the living being neither develops a desire for the true nature of
things nor a dislike for the untrue. This desire should be understood as similar
to the taste of a mixture of earth and clay.  **Mithyatvamohaniya:** A karma
whose arising prevents the living being from desiring the true nature of things
is called *Mithyatvamohaniya*. Due to the arising of this karma, the living
being does not follow the path of omniscience but instead walks on its opposite
path. It remains alienated from the right path, does not have faith in the true
nature of things like the living being and non-living being, and is unable to
contemplate its own benefit and harm. It considers benefit as harm and harm as
benefit.  The *pudgal* (matter) of *Mithyatvamohaniya* has a *sarvaghati* (all-
destroying) taste. This taste has four types: *ekasthānak*, *dvisthānak*,
*tristhānak*, and *chatusthānak*. Their explanation is as follows: If one takes
one kilogram of juice from neem or sugarcane, then its original natural taste is
called *ekasthānak*. But when this one kilogram of juice is mixed with other
tastes, it is called *dvisthānak*.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prathama karma grantha 67 samyaktvamohanIya - jisakA udaya tAttvika rucikA
nimitta hokara bhI aupazamika yA kSAyika bhAva vAlI tattvaruci kA pratibandha
karatA hai, use samyaktvamohanIya kahate haiN| yadyapi yaha karma zuddha hone ke
kAraNa tattvaruvirUpa sa meM vyAdhAna nahIM pahu~cAtA parantu isake kAraNa
AtmasvabhAvarUpa opazamika aura kSAyika samyaktva nahIM ho pAtA hai aura sUkSma
padArthoM ke vicArane meM zaMkA huA karatI hai, jisase samyaktva meM malInatA A
jAtI hai  /  mizramohanIya- isakA dUsarA nAma samyaktva - midhyAtvamohanIya hai
/  jisa karma ke udaya se jIva ko yathArtha kI ruci yA aruci na hokara
dolAyamAna sthiti rahe, use mizramohanIya kahate haiN| isake udaya se jIva ko na
to tattvoM ke prati ruci hotI hai aura na atattvoM ke prati aruci ho pAtI hai|
isa ruci ko khaTamiTTI bastu ke svAda ke samAna samajhanA cAhie  /
mithyAtvamohanIya - jisake udaya se jIva ko tatvoM ke yathArtha svarUpa kI ruci
hI na ho, use mithyAtvamohanIya kahate haiM  /  isa karma ke udaya se jIva
sarvajJatraNIta mArga para na calakara usake pratikala mArga para calatA hai |
sanmArga se vimukha rahatA hai, jIva, ajIva Adi tattvoM ke Upara zraddhA nahIM
karatA hai aura apane hita-ahita kA vicAra karane meM asamartha rahatA hai| hita
ko ahita aura ahita ko hita sama jhatA hai 1 mithyAtvamohanIya ke pudgala
sarvaghAtI rasa vAle hote haiN| usa rasa ke ekasthAnaka, dvisthAnaka,
tristhAnaka aura catuHsthAnaka - ye cAra prakAra hote haiN| jinakA spaSTIkaraNa
yaha haiM ki jaise nIma yA Ikha kA eka kilo rasa liyA jAya to una una ke mUla
svAbhAvika rasa ko ekasthAnaka kheNge| lekina jaba isa eka kilo rasa ko svAda
meM

Page #148 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
If the intensity of the karmic result is reduced by half, it is called
**Dwistahanak**. If it is reduced by two parts and one part remains, it is
called **Tristahanak**. And if only one-fourth part remains, it is called
**Chatuhstahanak**.  In common language, **Chatuhstahanak** can be called one-
fourth, **Tristahanak** one-third, **Dwistahanak** one-half, and the natural
state can be called **Ekstahanak**.  Similarly, the strongest power of karma
that gives auspicious and inauspicious results should be understood as
**Chatuhstahanak**, the very strong power as **Tristahanak**, the strong power
as **Dwistahanak**, and the weak power as **Ekstahanak**. Among these,
**Dwistahanak**, **Tristahanak**, and **Chatuhstahanak** are **Sarvaghati**
(all-destroying) **rasa** (taste). In **Mithyatvamohaniya** (false belief-
inducing), there are all three types of **Sarvaghati** **rasa** power:
**Chatuhstahanak**, **Tristahanak**, and **Dwistahanak**. In **Mishramohaniya**
(mixed false belief-inducing), there is **Ekstahanak** **rasa** power, and in
**Mabyaktvamohaniya** (obscuring the true nature), there is **Ekstahanak**
**rasa** power.  Just as there is intoxication in eating **Kodrab** (a type of
grain), but when the husk of the **Kodrab** is removed and it is washed and
purified with buttermilk, etc., the intoxicating power becomes very low.
Similarly, **Mithyatvamohaniya** karmic particles, which make the being fail in
the examination of what is beneficial and harmful, are like **Kodrab**. They
have **Sarvaghati** **rasa**, but when the being, by the power of its pure
**parinama** (results), reduces the **Sarvaghati** **rasa** power of these
karmic particles and only **Ekstahanak** remains, then these
**Mithyatvamohaniya** karmic particles with **Ekstahanak** power are called
**Samyaktvamohaniya** (right belief-inducing). And **Mishramohaniya** karmic
particles should be understood like **Kodrab** that is partly pure and partly
impure. In these karmic particles...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karma vipAka tIvratA lAne ke lie agni ga tapAkara AdhA kara liyA jAya to
dvisthAnaka aura do bhAga kama karake eka bhAga zeSa rakheM to tristhAnaka aura
jaba eka-caturthAMza bhAga hI zeSa rakhA jAe to catuHsthAnaka kaheMge  /
janasAdhAraNa kI bhASA meM catu:sthAnaka ko cauthAI, tristhAnaka ko tihAI aura
dvisthAnaka ko AdhA bhAga aura jo svAbhAvika hai, use ekasthAnaka kaha sakate
haiN| isI prakAra zubha-azubha phala dene kI karma kI tInatama zakti ko
catuHsthAnaka, tIvratara zakti ko tristhAnaka, tIvra zakti ko dvisthAnaka aura
maMda zakti ko ekasthAnaka samajhanA cAhie  /  inameM se dvisthAnaka,
tristhAnaka aura catuHsthAnaka rasa sarvaghAtI haiM aura mithyAtvamohanIya meM
catuHsthAnaka, tristhAnaka aura dvisthAnaka ye tInoM prakAra kI sarvaghAtI rasa-
zakti hotI hai| mizramohanIya (sambagmidhyAtva-mohanIya) meM visthAnaka rasa-
zakti aura mabhyaktvamohanIya meM ekasthAnaka rasazakti hotI hai| jaise kodraba
(kodoM-.-eka prakAra kA anna) ke khAne meM nazA hotA hai, parantu jaba una kodoM
kA chilakA nikAla diyA jAya aura chAcha Adi se dhokara zodha liyA jAe to uma
mAdaka zakti bahuta nyUna raha jAtI hai| isI prakAra kodoM ke samAna hitAhita kI
parIkSA karane meM jIva ko viphala banAne vAle mithyAtvamohanIya ke pudgala hote
haiN| unameM sarvadhAtI rasa hotA hai lekina jaba jIva apane vizuddha pariNAmoM
ke bala se una karmapudgaloM kI sarvaghAtI rasa-pAkti ko ghaTA detA hai aura
sirpha ekasthAnaka zeSa raha jAtA hai, taba isa ekasthAnaka zakti vAle
mithyAtvamohanIya ke pudgaloM ko samyaktvamohanIya kahA jAtA hai aura kucha
bhAga zuddha evaM kucha bhAga azuddha aige kodoM ke samAna mizramohanIya ke
karmapudgaloM ko samajhanA caahie| ina karmapudgaloM meM

Page #149 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The first type of karma is called *granya*, the second is *dvi-sthana*, and the
third is *ras*. Of these three, *mithyatva-mohaniya* is the most destructive,
while the other two, *samyak-tva-mohaniya* and *mitra-mohaniya*, are less
destructive.   This is how the three types of *darshan-mohaniya* are explained.
Now, in the following verse, the nature of *samyak-tva-mohaniya* is described:
**Verse 5:**  *Jiya-jaya punna-pavasa sanvara-bandha-mukkha-nijjarana. Jena sad-
dhaaiyam taya samm khaiga-gaha-bahu-meyam.*  **Meaning:**  The karma that causes
a being to have wrong beliefs about the self, non-self, merit, demerit, inflow,
restraint, bondage, liberation, and the cycle of birth and death is called
*samyak-tva-mohaniya*. It has many sub-types, such as *kshayika* and others.
**Explanation:**  The karma that causes the soul to have faith in the nine
principles (jiva, ajiv, punya, papa, asrava, sanvara, nirjara, bandha, and
moksha) is called *samyak-tva-mohaniya*. This means that even though this karma
acts as a veil, it does not prevent the soul from having true faith in the
principles.  **The Nine Principles:**  * **Jiva:** The living being. * **Ajiv:**
The non-living being. * **Punya:** Merit. * **Papa:** Demerit. * **Asrava:**
Inflow of karma. * **Sanvara:** Restraint of karma. * **Nirjara:** Exhaustion of
karma. * **Bandha:** Bondage. * **Moksha:** Liberation.  **Characteristics of
Jiva:**  A being that possesses life is called a *jiva*. There are two types of
life: *dravya-pran* (physical life) and *bhava-pran* (mental life). *Dravya-
pran* includes the five senses (touch, taste, smell, sight, and hearing), the
three powers (body, speech, and mind), and the nine *sam-bhava-payatya*
(potential for existence).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prathama karmagranya dvisthAnaka rasa hotA hai| ina tInoM prakAroM meM
mithyAtvamohanIya sarvaghAtI hai aura zeSa do samyaktvamohanIya, mitramohanIya
dezaghAtI haiN| isa prakAra darzanamohanIya ke tIna prakAroM ko batalAkara aba
Age kI gAthA meM samyaktvamolIya kA svarUpa kahate haiM  /  jiyajaya
puNNapAvAsava saMvarabandhamukkhanijjaraNA  /  jeNaM saddahAiyaM tayaM samma
khaigAhabahumeyaM  // 5 //  gAthArtha-jisa kama se jIva, ajIva, puNya, pApa,
Asraba, saMvara, baMdha, mokSa aura girA ina nakAratroM para bhAva vakSA karatA
hai, vaha samyaktvamohanIya hai| usake kSAyika Adi bahuta se bheda hote haiN|
vizeSArtha-jisa karma ke udaya se AtmA ko jIvAdi navatattvoM para zraddhA hotI
hai, usameM samyaktvamohanIya kahate haiN| aisA kahaDhe meM abhiprAya yaha hai
ki jisa prakAra cazmA A~khoM kA AcchAdaka hone para bhI dekhane meM rukAvaTa
nahIM DAlatA, usI prakAra samyaktvamohanIya karma AvaraNa rUpa hone para bhI
AtmA ko tattvArtha-zraddhAna karane meM vyAghAta nahIM pahuMcAtA hai| navatattva
naMba tattvoM ke nAma ye haiM-jIva, ajIva, puNya, pApa, Asrava, saMvara,
nirjarA, baMdha, aura mokSa  / ' jinake saMkSepa meM lakSaNa isa prakAra haiM
jIva-jo prANoM ko dhAraNa kare use jIva kahate haiM  /  prANa ke do bheda haiM-
dravyaprANa aura bhaavpraann| inameM se dravyaprANa ke pAMca indriya (sparzana,
rasana, prANa, cakSu aura dhotra), tIna bala (kAya, vacana, mana), 1. nava
sambhAvapayatyA paNate, taM jahA -jIvA ajIvA puNA pAvo AsabI saMvaro nijjarA
baMdho maarkho| - sthAnAMga, sthAna 6, saba 665

Page #150 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Karma and its Results  **Karmavipak**  There are ten divisions of karma:
lifespan and respiration. Knowledge, perception, and other natural qualities are
called **bhavpranas**.  **Jiva**  There are two types of **jiva**: (1)
**Muktajiv** and (2) **Sansarijiv**.   * **Muktajiv**: Those who have completely
destroyed all their karma and are endowed with knowledge, perception, and other
**bhavpranas** are called **Muktajiv**.  * **Sansarijiv**: Those who are endowed
with their respective **dravya-pranas** and **bhavpranas** like knowledge, etc.,
and wander in the cycle of existence, including hell, etc., are called
**Sansarijiv**.  There are fourteen divisions of the **jiva** principle.
**Ajiv**  That which does not have life, i.e., is inert, is called **Ajiv**.
**Dharma-astikaya**, **Adharma-astikaya**, **Akasa-astikaya**, **Pudgala-
astikaya**, and **Kala** are **Ajiv**. Among these, **Pudgala-astikaya**, i.e.,
those with form, taste, smell, and touch, are material, while the remaining four
are immaterial, i.e., devoid of form, etc. There are fourteen divisions of the
**Ajiv** principle.  **Punnya**  That which, upon its fruition, brings happiness
to the **jiva**, is called **Punnya**. There are two types of **Punnya**: (1)
**Dravya-Punnya** and (2) **Bhavpunya**.   * **Dravya-Punnya**: The karma that
brings happiness to the **jiva** upon its fruition.  * **Bhavpunya**: The
auspicious results of the **jiva**, such as compassion, kindness, charity, and
good thoughts.  **Punnya** is of the nature of auspiciousness and is bound by
auspicious **yoga**. There are forty-two divisions of **Punnya-prakriti**.
**Pap**  That which, upon its fruition, brings suffering, separates the soul
from good deeds, is called **Pap**. There are two types of **Pap**: **Dravya-
Pap** and **Bhavppap**.  * **Dravya-Pap**: The karma that brings suffering to
the **jiva** upon its fruition.  * **Bhavppap**: The inauspicious results of the
**jiva**.  **Pap** is of the nature of inauspiciousness and is bound by
inauspicious **yoga**. There are forty-two divisions of **Pap-prakriti**.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmavipAka Ayu aura zvAsocchvAsa ye dasa bheda haiM  /  jJAna, darzana Adi
svAbhAvika guNoM ko bhAvaprANa kahate hai  /  70 jIva ke do bheda haiM- (1)
muktajIva aura ( 2 ) saMsArIjItra | muktajIva- sampUrNa karmoM kA kSaya karake
jo apane jJAna darzana Adi bhAvaprANoM se yukta haiM, unheM muktajIva kahate
haiM  /  saMsArI jIva jo apane yathAyogya dravya-prANoM aura jJAnAdi bhAvaprANoM
se yukta hokara narakAdi caturgatirUpa saMsAra meM paribhramaNa karate rahate
haiM, unheM saMsArI jIva kahate haiM  /  jIva tattva ke caudaha bheda haiM  /  1
7 ajIva - jisameM prANa na ho, arthAt jar3a ho, use ajIva kahate haiM  /
dharmAstikAya, adharmAstikAya, AkAzAstikAya, pudgalAstikAya aura kAla- ye ajIba
haiN| inameM se pudmalAstikAya rUpI arthAt rUpa, rasa, gaMdha aura sparza vAle
haiM aura zeSa cAroM arUpI haiM, arthAt rUpAdi guNoM se rahita haiN| ajIva
tattva ke caudaha bheda haiN| puNya - jisake udaya se jIva ko sukha kA anubhava
hotA hai, use puNya kahate haiM  /  puNya ke do bheda hU~ (1) dravya-puNya aura
(2) bhAvapuNya  /  jisa karma ke udaya se jIva ko sukha kA anubhava hotA hai,
use dravyapuNya aura jIva ke dayA, karuNA, dAna, bhAvanA Adi zubha pariNAmoM ko
bhAvapuNya kahate haiM  /  puNya zubha prakRti rUpa hai aura zubha yoga se
ba~dhatA hai  /  puNyaprakRti ke bayAlIsa bheda haiM  /  pApa-jisake udaya se
duHkha kI prApti ho, AtmA ko zubha kAryo se pRthak rakhe, use pApa kahate haiM
/  isake do bheda haiM- dravyapApa, bhAvapApa  /  jisa karma ke udaya se jIva
duHkha kA anubhava karatA hai vaha dravyapApa hai aura jIva ke azubha pariNAma
ko bhAvapApa kahate haiM  /  pApa azubha prakRti rUpa hai aura azubha yogoM meM
ba~dhatA hai  /  pApaprakRti ke bayAsI bheda hai  /

Page #151 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## First Fundamental Text  **Asrava** refers to the gateway through which
auspicious and inauspicious karmas enter. There are two types of Asrava:
**Dravyasrava** and **Bhavasrava**. **Dravyasrava** refers to the tendencies
that produce auspicious and inauspicious results or are themselves produced by
auspicious and inauspicious results. **Bhavasrava** refers to the gateway
through which karmas enter the soul, leading to auspicious and inauspicious
results. There are forty-two types of Asrava.  **Samvara** refers to the
restraint of Asrava. There are forty-two types of Asrava, and the restraint of
each type of Asrava, to the extent it is restrained, is called Samvara. This
Samvara (restraint of Asrava) is achieved through **Gurit**, **Samiti**,
**Dharma**, **Anupreksha**, **Parishhajay**, and **Charitna**, etc. There are
two types of Samvara: **Bhavasamvara** and **Dravyasamvara**. **Bhavasamvara**
refers to the restraint of the soul's tendencies that prevent new karmas from
entering, while **Dravyasamvara** refers to the cessation of the influx of karma
particles. There are fifty-seven types of Samvara.  **Nirjara** refers to the
gradual destruction of karma particles that are intertwined with the soul like
water and milk. There are two types of Nirjara: (1) **Dravyanirjara** and (2)
**Bhavanirjara**. **Dravyanirjara** refers to the separation of karma particles
from the soul's regions, while **Bhavanirjara** refers to the pure results of
the soul, which are the cause or effect of **Dravyanirjara**. There are twelve
types of Nirjara.  **Bandha** refers to the binding of karma particles to the
soul, like water and milk, through Asrava. Through **Kashaya** (passions) like
attachment and aversion, and **Yoga** (tendencies), the worldly soul binds
itself to karma particles.   **1. Panchasamizho Tigutto Asao Jiindio. Agarako Ya
Nissalalo Jivo Hawai Anaasavo. - Usradhyayan, 330**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prathama pharmagrantha Asraya-zubhAzubha karmoM ke Agamana dvAra ko Asrava
kahate haiM  /  Asrava ke do bheda haiM - dravyAtrava, bhAvAsrava  /  zubha-
azubha pariNAmoM ko utpanna karane vAlo athavA zubha-azubha pariNAmoM se svayaM
utpanna hone bAlI pravRttiyoM ko dravyAstrava aura karmoM ke Ane ke dvAra rUpa
jIva ke zubha-azubha pariNAmoM ko bhAvAsrava kahate haiM  /  Asrava tattva ke
bayAlIsa bheda haiN| saMbara- Asrava ke nirodha ko saMvara kahate haiN| Asrava
ke bayAlIsa bheda haiM  /  unakA jitane-jitane aMzoM meM nirodha hogA, utane-
utane aMzoM meM saMbara kahalAyegA  /  yaha saMvara (Asrava kA cirodha) gurita,
samiti, dharma, anuprekSA, pariSahajaya aura cAritna Adi se hotA hai  / '
saMvara ke do bheda haiM-bhAvasaMvara aura dravyasaMbara  /  Ate hue naye karmoM
ko rokane vAle AtmA ke pariNAma ko bhAvasaMbara aura karmapudgaloM ke Agamana ke
ruka jAne ko dravyasaMvara kahate haiM  /  saMbara ke sattAvana bheda haiN| _
nirjarA-AtmA ke sAtha nIra-kSIra kI taraha Apasa meM mile hue karmapudgaloM ke
ekadaza kSaya hone ko nirjarA kahate haiM  /  nirjarA ke do prakAra haiM-(1)
dravyanirjarA, (2) bhAvanirjarA  /  AtmapradezoM se karmoM kA ekadeza pRthak
honA vyanirjarA aura dravyanirjarA ke janaka athavA dravyanirjarA-janya AtmA ke
zuddha pariNAma ko bhAvanirjarA kahate haiN| nirjarA ke bAraha bheda haiN|
baMdha-Asrava dvArA Aye hae karma pudgaloM kA AtmA ke sAtha nIra-kSIra kI taraha
Apasa meM milanA baMdha kahalAtA hai  /  rAga-dveSa Adi kaSAyoM aura yoga
pravRtti ke dvArA saMsArI jIva karmayogya pudgaloM ko 1. paMcasamijho tigutto
asAo jiiNdio| agArako ya nissalalo jIvo havAi aNaHsavo  /  /  - usarAdhyayana,
330

Page #152 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 72 ## Karma and its Results  The cycle continues endlessly: due to attachment
(raga), aversion (dvesha), and passions (kṣayā), the soul (jīva) attracts karmic
particles (karma-pudgala). These karmic particles, in turn, lead to the
development of passions. Yoga and passions are the causes of karmic bondage
(karma-bandha). There are two types of bondage: भावबंध (bhāva-bandha) and
द्रव्यबंध (dravya-bandha). The states of the soul that lead to karmic bondage,
or the states of the soul that arise from karmic bondage, are called भावबंध
(bhāva-bandha). The merging of karmic particles with the soul's regions (jīva-
pradeśa) like milk and water is called द्रव्यबंध (dravya-bandha). There are four
types of bondage.  ## Liberation (Moksha)  The complete destruction of all
karmas is called liberation (mokṣa). There are two types of liberation:
द्रव्यमोक्ष (dravya-mokṣa) and भावमोक्ष (bhāva-mokṣa). The complete separation
of all karmic particles from the soul's regions is called द्रव्यमोक्ष (dravya-
mokṣa). The pure states of the soul that lead to or arise from द्रव्यमोक्ष
(dravya-mokṣa) are called भावमोक्ष (bhāva-mokṣa). There are nine and fifteen
types of liberation.  ## The Nine Tattvas  Out of the nine tattvas, the soul
(jīva), non-soul (ajīva), and bondage (bandha) are objects of knowledge (jñeya).
Virtue (puṇya), vice (pāpa), and inflow (āsrava) are objects to be abandoned
(heya). Restraint (samvara), outflow (nirjarā), and liberation (mokṣa) are
objects to be cultivated (upādeya).  ## Right Conduct (Samyaktvā)  Having faith
in the nine tattvas, including the soul, is called completeness (sampanattvā).
There are many types of right conduct (samyaktvā). From one perspective, there
are two types of right conduct: (1) व्यवहारसम्यक्त्व (vyavahāra-samyaktvā) and
(2) निश्चयसम्यक्त्व (niścaya-samyaktvā). From another perspective, there are
क्षायिकसम्यक्त्व (kṣayika-samyaktvā), औपशमिकसम्यक्त्व (aupaśamika-samyaktvā),
and क्षायोपशमिक (kṣayaupaśamika).  1.  When the soul (ātmā) is affected by
attachment, aversion, and passions, it attracts karmic particles. This leads to
the development of ignorance (nānāvarana) and other karmic obstacles.  **Note:**
The text refers to a specific verse from a Jain scripture, "Pravachana Sūtra 2,
Nav Tattva Ka Vishesh Varnan Devendra Rirchit Svopjaṭīkā Gāthā 15, Paṣṭh 30 se
32." This information is provided for context and understanding.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 72 karmavipAka grahaNa karatA rahatA hai  / ' yaha krama anAdi me cAlU hai ki
rAga, dveSa, kaSAya Adi ke sambandha se jIva karma ke yogya pudgaloM ko grahaNa
karatA hai aura una karmapudgaloM ke sambandha se kaSAyavAna hotA hai| yoga aura
kaSAya karmabandha ke kAraNa haiN| baMdha ke do prakAra haiM-bhAvabaMdha aura
dravyabaMdha  /  AtmA ke jina pariNAmoM se karmabaMdha hotA hai athavA
karmabandha se utpanna hone vAle AtmA ke pariNAmoM ko bhAvabaMdha kahate haiM
aura karmapudgaloM kA jIva pradezoM ke sAtha nIra-kSIra kI taraha Apasa meM
milanA dravyabandha kahalAtA hai  /  bandha ke cAra bheda haiN| _ mokSa-sampUrNa
karmoM ke kSaya hone ko mokSa kahate haiN| mokSa ke do prakAra haiM-dravyamokSa
aura bhAvamokSa  /  sampUrNa karmapudgaloM kA AtmapradezoM se pRthak ho jAnA
dravyamokSa aura dravyamokSajanaka athavA dravyamokSajanya AtmA ke vizuddha
pariNAmoM ko bhAvamokSa kahA jAtA hai  /  mokSa ke nau evaM pandraha bheda haiM
/ ' ukta navatattvoM meM se jIva, ajIva aura bandha jJeya haiN| puNya, pApa aura
Asrava heya haiM aura saMvara, nirjarA evaM mokSa upAdeya haiN| samyaktva ke
meva pUrvokta jIyAdi navatattvoM ke zraddhAna karane ko sampanatva kahate haiN|
samyaktva ke kaI bheda haiN| kisI apekSA se samyaktva do prakAra kA hai-(1)
vyavahArasamyaktva aura (2) nizcayasamyaktva  /  kisI apekSA se
kSAyikasamyaktva, aupazamikasamyaktva, kSAyopazamika 1. pariNadi jadA appA,
suhammi asuhammi raagdosjudo| taM paviladi kammarayaM, NANAvaraNAdimAvehiM  //
prava0 sa0 2, naba tattva kA vizeSa varNana devendra riracita svopajaTIkA gAthA
15, paSTha 30 se 32 meM dekhie|

Page #153 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## First Karma Text  There are various types of **Samyaktvam** such as
**Samyaktvam**, **Vedak Samyaktvam**, **Sasvadan Samyaktvam**, **Deepak
Samyaktvam**, etc. In brief, their characteristics are as follows:  **Vyavahar
Samyaktvam:**  Abandoning **Kuguru**, **Kudeva**, and **Kumarg** and accepting
**Suguru**, **Sudeva**, and **Sumarg** and having faith in them is called
**Vyavahar Samyaktvam**.  **Nischya Samyaktvam:**  Having faith in the true
nature of **Jiva** and other **Tattvas** is **Nischya Samyaktvam**. This is the
state of the soul where knowledge becomes pure.  **Kshayik Samyaktvam:**  The
specific result in the soul due to the destruction of the three natures of
**Mithyatvam**, **Mithya**, and **Lanyaktyamohaniya Darshan Mohaniya** is called
**Kshayik Samyaktvam**.  **Aupashamic Samyaktvam:**  The specific result in the
soul due to the suppression of the aforementioned three natures of **Darshan
Mohaniya** is called **Aupashamic Samyaktvam**.  **Kshayopaashamic Samyaktvam:**
The result in the soul due to the destruction of **Mithyatvam Mohaniya Karma**
and its suppression, and the rise of **Samyaktvam Mohaniya** is called
**Kshayopaashamic Samyaktvam**.  The destruction of **Mithyatvam** **Pudgalas**
that have arisen and the suppression of those that have not yet arisen is how
**Mithyatvam Mohaniya Kshayopaashama** occurs. Here, the rise of **Mithyatvam**
is the rise of **Pradeshodaya**.  1. (a) **Tattvavaddhanam Samyagdarshanam.** -
**Tatyargha Sutra** Chapter 1, Sutra 2 (b) **Mayatthenaabiyada Jivajijiya Ya
Punpavam Ma.** **Masatrasanvaanijjarbandho Moklo Ya Sammatam.** - **Samayasar**
13

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prathama karmagrantha samyaktva, vedakasamyaktva, sAsvAdanasamyaktva,
dIpakasamyaktva ityAdi bheda hote haiM  /  saMkSepa meM inake lakSaNa isa
prakAra haiM vyavahArasamyaktva-kuguru, kudeva aura kumArga ko tyAgakara suguru,
sudeva aura sumArga ko svIkAra karanA, unakI zraddhA karanA vyavahAra samyaktva
kahalAtA hai| nizcayasamyaktva - jIvAdi tattvoM kA yathArUpa se zraddhAna karanA
nizcayasamyaktva hai|' yaha AtmA kA vaha pariNAma hai, jisake hone para jJAna
vizuddha hotA hai| kSAyikasamya'- mithyAtva, mi aura lanyaktyamohanIdadarzana
mohanIya kI ina tIna prakRtiyoM ke kSaya hone para AtmA meM jo pariNAma-vizeSa
hotA hai use kSAyikasamyaktva kahate haiM  /  aupazAmikasamyaktva-
darzanamohanIya kI pUrvokta tIna prakRtiyoM ke upazama se AtmA meM hone vAle
pariNAma-vizeSa ko aupazamika samyaktva kahate haiN| kSayopazamikasamyaktva-
mithyAtvamohanIya karma ke kSaya tathA upazama se aura samyaktva mohanIya ke
udaya se AtmA meM hone vAle pariNAma ko kSAyopazamikasamyaktva kahate haiN|
udaya meM Aye hue mithyAtva ke pudgaloM kA kSaya tathA jo udaya ko prApta nahIM
hue una pudgaloM kA upazama isa prakAra mithyAtvamohanIya kAzayopazama hotA hai
/  yahA~ mithyAtva kA udaya pradezodaya kI 1. (ka) tattvAvaddhAnaM
samyagdarzanam  /  -tatyArghasUtra a0 1. sU02 (kha) mayattheNAbhiyadA jIvAjIyA
ya puNapAvaM ma  /  mAsatrasaMvANijjarabaMdho moklo ya sammataM  /  /
-samayasAra 13

Page #154 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Karmavipaka  One should understand the expectation of **Raso-day**
(fructification of karma), not the expectation of **Pradesho-day** (destruction
of karma). In **Aupashamak Samyaktv** (state of partial liberation), neither
**Mithyatva** (false belief) **Raso-day** nor **Pradesho-day** arises.
**Pradesho-day** is called **Udayabhavi Kshaya** (destruction of karma without
fructification). **Pradesho-day** does not affect the soul, while **Raso-day**
does.  When a being in **Vedak Samyaktv** (state of liberation) or **Shayopaamik
Samyaktv** (state of liberation with some residual karma) experiences the
**Rasa** (taste) of the last **Pudgala** (matter) of **Samyaktvamohaniya**
(karma that obscures right faith), the result is called **Vedakramyaktv**. After
**Vedakramyaktv**, the being attains **Kshayik Samyaktv** (state of complete
liberation).  When a being in **Swasvadan Samyaktv** (state of liberation with
the ability to enjoy the fruits of karma) or **Upsham Samyaktv** (state of
liberation with the ability to enjoy the fruits of karma) falls from these
states and faces **Mithyatva**, the specific result of this period is called
**Swasvadan Samyaktv**. **Swasvadan** is also called **Sasadan**.  **Karak
Samyaktv** (state of liberation with the ability to perform right actions) is
the performance of **Jinoct** (Jain teachings) actions like **Samayik**
(meditation), **Pratikraman** (confession), **Guruvandana** (salutation to the
teacher), etc.  **Rochak Samyaktv** (state of liberation with the ability to
enjoy right actions) is the interest in **Jinoct** actions.  **Deepak Samyaktv**
(state of liberation with the ability to spread right actions) is the support
and propagation of the benefits of **Jinoct** actions. Similarly, one should
understand the characteristics of other types of **Samyaktv**.  By mentioning
**Samyaktvamohaniya**, the following verse describes the remaining types of
**Darshanamohaniya** (karma that obscures right knowledge) - **Mishramohaniya**
(karma that obscures right knowledge and right faith) and **Mithyatvamohaniya**
(karma that obscures right faith).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmavipAka apekSA samajhanA cAhie, rasodaya kI apekSA nhiiN| aupazAmaka
samyaktva meM mithyAtva kA rasodaya aura pradezodana-donoM pakAra kA udaya nahIM
hotA hai aura pradezodaya ko hI udayAbhAvI kSaya kahate haiM  /  jisake udaya se
AtmA para kucha asara nahIM hotA, vaha pradezodaya tathA jisakA udaya AtmA para
prabhAva DAlatA hai, vaha rasodaya hai| . vedakasamyaktva - zAyopamikasamyaktva
meM vidyamAna jIva jaba samyaktvamohanIya ke aMtima pudgala ke rasa kA anubhava
karatA hai, usa samaya ke usake pariNAma ko bedakarAmyaktva kahate haiN|
vedakasamyaktva ke bAda jIva ko kSAyika samyaktva hI prApta hotA hai  /
sAsvAdanasamyaktva-upazamasamyaktva meM cyuta hokara mithyAtva ke abhimukha huA
jIva jaba taka mithyAtva ko prApta nahIM karatA, taba taka ke usake
pariNAmavizeSa ko sAsvAdana samyaktva kahate haiN| sAsvAdana ko sAsAdana bhI
kahate haiN| kArakasamyaktva-jinota kriyAoM-sAmAyika, pratikramaNa, guruvaMdana
Adi ko karanA kArakasamyaktva hai| rocakasamyaktva-jinokta kriyAoM meM ruci
rakhane ko rocakasamyaktva kahate haiN| dIpakasamyaktva-jinokta kriyAoM se hone
vAle lAbhoM kA samarthana, prasAra karanA dIpakasamyaktva hai| isI prakAra
samyaktva ke anya bhedoM ke lakSaNa samajha lene cAhie  /  samyaktvamohanIya kA
kathana karake Age kI gAthA meM darzanamohanIya ke zeSa bhedoM-mizramohanIya
aura mithyAtvamohanoya ke svarUpa ko kahate haiN|

Page #155 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## First Karma Granth  **1** **Verse:** Just as a person born on the Nalikera
island does not have attachment or aversion to food, similarly, due to the
Misra-Mohaniya karma, there is no attachment or aversion to the Jina Dharma.
This lasts only for the duration of Antarmuhurt. When Mithyatva-Mohaniya arises,
the being becomes inclined towards faith contrary to the Jina Dharma.  **75**
**Special Meaning:** The verse explains the consequences and nature of the
soul's transformation due to the arising of Misra-Mohaniya (Samyaktva Mithyatva
Mohaniya) and Mithyatva-Mohaniya karma.  Just as a person born on the Nalikera
island (where no food other than coconuts grows) has not heard or seen anything
about food, and therefore has neither interest nor aversion towards it, but
remains neutral, similarly, when Misra-Mohaniya karma arises, the being does not
have interest or aversion (attachment or aversion) towards the Dharma as taught
by the Vitaraga. This means they do not have firm faith that what the Vitaraga
has said is true, and they also do not have aversion in the form of disbelief,
considering it false and unreliable. They consider both the Vitaraga and the
Saraga, and their teachings, equally acceptable. The duration of Misra-Mohaniya
is Antarmuhurt.  When Mithyatva-Mohaniya karma arises, the soul does not have
faith in the nature, characteristics, and Dharma as taught by the Jina, of the
Jiva and other elements. Just as a sick person does not like wholesome things
and likes unwholesome things, similarly, when Mithyatva-Mohaniya karma arises,
the being does not like the Dharma as taught by the Vitaraga...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 1 prathama karmagrantha mIsA na rAgadoso jiNadhamme aMtamuhajahA ante  /
nAliyara dovamaguNo bhicchaM jiNadhammavivarIyaM  //  16  //  gAthArtha - jaise
nAlikera dvIpa meM utpanna manuSya ko anna para rAga-dveSa nahIM hotA hai, vaise
hI mizramohanIya karma ke kAraNa jinadharma para bhI rAga dveSa nahIM hotA hai
/  isakA samaya antamuhUrta mAtra hai| mithyAtvamohanIya ke udaya me jIva jinota
dharma se viparIta zraddhAna karane vAlA hotA hai | 75 vizeSArtha - gAthA meM
mizramohanIya (samyaktva mithyAtva mohanIya) aura mithyAtva - mohanIya karma ke
udaya se hone vAle AtmA ke pariNAmoM va unake svarUpa ko batalAyA gayA hai  /
jaise nAlikera dvIpa ( jahA~ nAriyala ke sivAya dUsare khAdyAnna paidA nahIM
hote haiM) meM utpanna manuSya ne anna ke viSaya meM kucha na sunA ho aura na
dekhA ho to use aza ke bAre meM na to ruci - rAga hotA hai aura na aruci - dveSa
hotA hai, kintu taTastha rahatA hai| isI prakAra jaba mizramohanIya karma kA
udaya hotA hai, taba jIva ko bItarAgaprarUpita dharma para ruci aruci ( rAga-
dveSa ) nahIM hotI hai| arthAt vItarAma ne jo kucha kahA hai, vaha satya hai,
aisI dRDha zraddhA nahIM hotI hai aura vaha asatya hai, avizvasanIya hai, isa
prakAra arucirUpa dveSa bhI nahIM hotA hai  /  vaha vItarAgI aura sarAgI evaM
unake kathana ko samAna rUpa se grAhya mAnatA hai  /  mitramohanIya kA udayakAla
antarmuhUrta hai  /  mithyAtvamohanIya karma ke udaya se AtmA ko jIvAdi tatvoM
ke svarUpa, lakSaNa aura jinaprarUpita dharma ke prati zraddhA nahIM hotI hai|
jaise rogI ko pRthya cIjeM acchI nahIM lagatI haiM aura kupathya cIjeM acchI
lagatI haiM, vaise hI mithyAtvamohanIya karma ke udaya se vItarAgaprarUpita

Page #156 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Karmavipaka  There is hatred towards Dharma-principles and attachment towards
opposing principles.  **Misconception** is the only difference between:  (1)
**Sadhu** (righteous) and (2) **Asadhu** (unrighteous) being considered as
Sadhu.  (3) Not considering **Ahimsa-mūlaka Dharma** (non-violence based Dharma)
as Dharma.  (4) Considering **Himsa, Jhuth** etc. (violence, lies etc.) -
**Adharma-pāpamūlaka** (unrighteous-sinful) actions as Dharma. Actions or
thoughts that lead to the downfall of the soul are Adharma.  (5) Considering
**Ajīva** (non-living) as **Jīva** (living).  (6) Considering **Jīva** (living)
as **Ajīva** (non-living). There is no soul in plants, animals, etc.  (7)
Considering **Kumārga** (wrong path) as **Sanmārga** (right path). Meaning,
considering the causes of the soul's wandering in the world as good. Considering
the path opposite to the **Kevalarūpita** (perfect) path as correct.  (8)
Considering **Sumārga** (right path) as **Unmārga** (wrong path). Meaning,
considering the causes of liberation as the causes of worldly bondage.  (9)
Considering **Karma-rahita** (without karma) as **Karma-sahita** (with karma).
For example, the Supreme Being is **niṣkarma** (without karma), but considering
Him as the protector of devotees and the destroyer of demons.  **1. Dasavihe
micchate pan tam jada - adhammam ammanna dhamme abamm sanna, amarage margamana,
magge ummabhasana, ajivasri jivasana, jivesri ajivasuna, asa sahas, sahas asa
sanna, amutte muuttana, mus amussana.** - **Svāmānga 10 Sūtra 734**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmavipAka dharma-siddhAntoM para dveSa aura usase viparIta siddhAntoM para
rAga hotA hai  /  mithyAtva ke basa bheda ko sAdhu na samajhanA  /  (1) sAdhu
(2) asAdhu ko sAdhu samajhanA  /  (3) ahiMsAmUlaka dharma ko dharma nahIM mAnanA
/  (4) hiMsA, jhUTha Adi adharma - pApamUlaka kAryoM ko dharma mAnanA  /  jina
kRtyoM yA vicAroM meM AtmA kI adhogati hotI hai, vaha adharma hai  /  76 (5)
ajIva ko jIva samajhAnA | (6) jIva ko ajIta rAmajhanA nA nA pakSa ja vanaspati
Adi muka Adi prANiyoM meM AtmA nahIM hai| (7) kumArga ko sanmArga samajhanA  /
arthAt AtmA ko saMsAra meM paribhramaNa karAne vAle kAraNoM ko acchA mAnanA  /
kevalarUpita mArga se viparIta prarUpaNA sahI mAnanA  /  (8) sumArga ko unmArga
samajhanA, arthAt mokSa ke kAraNoM ko saMsArabaMdha ke kAraNa kahanA | (2)
karmarahita ko kamasahita mAnanA  /  jaise paramAtmA niSkarma haiM, kintu unheM
bhaktoM kI rakSA aura daityoM kA nAza karane vAlA kahanA  /  1. dasavihe
micchate paNa taM jar3A - adhammaM ammaNNA dhamme abamma saNNA, amarage
maragamaNNA, magge ummabhAsaNNA, ajIvasR jIvasaNNA, jIvesR ajIvasuNNA, asA
sAhasa, sAhasa asA saNNA, amuttesa muttaNNA, mus amusasaNNA  /  - svAmAMga 10
sUtra 734

Page #157 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Chapter** **First Karma Granth** **(10)** Considering the one with karma as
without karma | Protecting the devotees and destroying the demons cannot be done
without attachment and aversion, yet considering them as devoid of karma is like
trembling, "God does everything but is detached." Thus, after stating the
distinctions of Darshanamohaniya, now in the next verse, the distinctions of
Charitramohaniya karma are described. **Verse** Sixteen Kasayas, nine Nokasayas,
two are Charitramohaniya.  Anantaanubandhi, Apratyakhyanavaran,
Pratyakhyanavaran, and Sanjwalana, these four-four distinctions make sixteen
distinctions of Kasayas. || 17 || **Meaning of the Verse** - There are two
distinctions of Charitramohaniya - Kasaya-mohaniya and Nokasaya-mohaniya. Of
these, Kasaya-mohaniya has sixteen and Nokasaya-mohaniya has nine distinctions.
Anantaanubandhi, Apratyakhyanavaran, Pratyakhyanavaran, and Sanjwalana, these
four-four distinctions make sixteen distinctions of Kasayas. **77** **Special
Meaning** - The main distinctions of Charitramohaniya are Kasaya and Nokasaya.
Their characteristics, distinctions, etc. should be understood as follows:
**Kasaya** - That which destroys the qualities of the soul. Or, the meaning of
Kas is birth-death-like samsara, its income, i.e., attainment from which 1. (a)
Charitamo Karma is of two types, it is said. Kasaya-mohaniya and Nokasaya. || -
Uttara 33, Verse 10 (b) Prajnapana, Karmabandha, Verse 23, 30, 2

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 gdr prathama karmagrantha (10) karmasahita ko karmarahita mAnanA | bhaktoM kI
rakSA aura daityoM kA nAza karanA rAga-dveSa ke binA nahIM ho sakatA, tathApi
unheM karmoM meM rahita mAnanA 'bhagavAna saba kucha karate hue bhI alipta haiM
aisA kapana karanA  /  isa prakAra darzanamohanIya ke bhedoM kA kathana karane
ke anantara aba Age kI gAthA meM cAritramohanIya karma ke bhedoM kA varNana
karate haiM  /  aNa solasa kasAya nava nokasAya dubihaM caritamohaNiyaM  /
appaccakkhANA pacavANA gra saMjalaNA  //  17  //  gAthArtha - cAritramohanIya ke
do bheda hai - kaSAya- mohanIya aura nokssaaymohniiy| unameM se kaSAyamohanIya
ke solaha aura nokasAyamohanIya ke nau bheda hote haiN| anantAnubandhI,
apratyAkhyAnAvaraNa, pratyAkhyAnAvaraNa aura saMjvalana inake cAra-cAra bheda
hone se kaSAyoM ke solaha bheda hote haiM  /  77 vizeSArtha cAritramohanIya ke
mukhya rUpa se kaSAya aura nokaSAya ye do bheda hote haiN| inake lakSaNa, bheda
Adi ko kramazaH nimna prakAra samajhanA cAhie | kaSAya - jo AtmA ke guNoM ko
kadhe (naSTa kare )  /  athavA kaSa kA artha hai janma-maraNa-rUpa saMsAra,
usakI Aya arthAt prApti jisase 1. (ka) caritamo kammaM duvihaM tu viyAhiyaM  /
kasAya mohaNijjaM tu nokasAyaM tava  /  /  - uttarA0 a0 33, gA 10 (kha)
prajJApanA, karmabaMdha pada 23 30, 2

Page #158 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Karmavipaka  The **kṣaya** is called **kṣaya**. There are sixteen types of
**kṣaya**, which are briefly described here.  **78**  The four types of
**kṣaya** in their original form are **krodha**, **māna**, **māyā**, and
**lobha**. The characteristics of these four are as follows:  **Krodha** - To be
filled with anger, forgetting equanimity. To be angry at another is **krodha**.
**Māna** - Pride, arrogance, false self-perception is called **māna**.  **Māyā**
- Deceitfulness, i.e., the lack of unity in thought and action is called
**māyā**.  **Lobha** - Attachment to the results is called **lobha**.  Due to
the **tīvratam**, **nīlaratīta**, and **manda** states of these **kṣaya**, there
are four types of each, which are called **anantaanubandhī** (most intense
state), **apratyākyānāvaraṇa** (intense state), **pratyākhyatnāvaraṇa** (intense
state), and **sanjvalana** (mild state), respectively. Their characteristics are
as follows:  **Anantaanubandhī** - The **kṣaya** that destroys the **samyaktva**
qualities of the **jīva** and causes it to wander in the world for an infinite
time is called **anantaanubandhī**. *  **Apratyākhyānāvaraṇa** - The **kṣaya**
that obstructs the **deśaviratiguṇa** and **cāritra** qualities of the soul...
* **1. Kammam kasso bhavo vā kasamāto sim kamāyā to. Kasamāyayan ti va jato
gamayati kasan kāyatti ||** - Viśeṣāvaśyaka Śrāvya Gāna 1227 * **2.
Anantaanubandhī - Samyagdarsanopghātī. Tasyodrayādhi samyagdarsanam noddyate.
Pūrvotpamapi ca pratipatati.  ** - Tattvārtha Sūtra 810

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmavipAka ho use kaSAya kahate haiN| kaSAyamohanIya ke solaha bheda haiM,
jinakA saMkSepa meM nirUpaNa karate haiM  /  78 mUla rUpa meM kaSAya ke krodha,
mAna, mAyA aura lobha ye cAra bheda haiM  /  ina cAroM ke lakSaNa isa prakAra
haiM krodha- samabhAva ko bhUlakara Akroza meM bhara jaanaa| dUsare para roSa
karanA krodha hai  /  mAna - garva, abhimAna, jhUThe Atmadarzana ko mAna kahate
haiM mAyA kapaTabhAva, arthAt vicAra aura pravRtti meM ekarUpatA ke abhAva ko
mAyA kahate haiM  /  lobha- mamatA pariNAmoM ko lobha kahate haiM  /  ina
kaSAyoM ke tInatama, nIlaratIta aura manda sthiti ke kAraNa cAra-cAra prakAra ho
jAte haiM, jo kramazaH anantAnubandhI (tIvratama sthiti), apratyAkhyAnAvaraNa
(tIvratara sthiti), pratyAkhyatnAvaraNa ( tIvra sthiti) tathA saMjvalana (maMda
sthiti) ke nAma se kahe jAte haiM  /  inake lakSaNa ye haiM anantAnubaMdhI - jo
jIva ke samyaktva guNa kA ghAta karake ananta kAla taka saMsAra meM paribhramaNa
karAve, usa kaSAya ko anantAnubandhI kahate haiM  /  * apratyAkhyAnAvaraNa - jo
kaSAya AtmA ke dezaviratiguNa cAritra 1 kammaM kaso bhavo vA kasamAto siM kamAyA
to  /  kasamAyayaMti va jato gamayati kasaM kAyatti || - vizeSAvazyaka zrAvya
gAna 1227 2. anantAnubaMdhI- samyagdarzanopaghAtI  /  tasyodrayAddhi
samyagdarzanaM nodyate  /  pUrvotpamapi ca pratipatati  /  tattvArtha sUtra 810
zayya

Page #159 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## First Chapter  **(The destruction of the Shravaka state, i.e., the state
where there is no partial renunciation of worldly attachments, is called
A-pratyakhyana-avaran. Due to the influence of this kshaya, the attainment of
Shravaka dharma does not occur.)**  **A-pratyakhyana-avaran:** The kshaya whose
influence obstructs the soul from attaining the state of complete renunciation
(Sarva-virati) and the attainment of Shraman (Sadhu) dharma is called
A-pratyakhyana-avaran. The emergence of this kshaya does not hinder the
observance of Shravaka conduct, which involves partial renunciation, but it
prevents the observance of Sadharma, which involves complete renunciation.
**Sanjwalan:** The kshaya whose emergence prevents the soul from attaining the
state of Yatha-khyata-charitra (conduct in accordance with knowledge), i.e., the
kshaya that influences and affects the observance of Shraman dharma through
Pari-shaha (endurance) and Upasarga (obstacles), is called Sanjwalan. This
kshaya obstructs the observance of Sarva-virati charitra in a pure form.  The
four fundamental categories of Krodha (anger), Mana (pride), Maya (delusion),
and Lobha (greed) are combined with the four types of Ananta-anubandhi, etc.,
resulting in sixteen categories of Kshaya-mohaniya as follows:  Ananta-anubandhi
- Krodha, Mana, Maya, Lobha. A-pratyakhyana-avaran - Krodha, Mana, Maya, Lobha.
Pratyakhyana-avaran - Krodha, Mana, Maya, Lobha.  1. **A-pratyakhyana-kshaya-
udayadi tinam bhavathi.** - **Tattvartha Sutra 10, Madhyama 2** 2.
**Pratyakhyana-avaran-kshaya-udaya-dvirata-virati-bhavathi uttama charitra
labhastu na bhavathi.** - **Tattvartha Sutra 10, Bhavyam 3** 3. **Sanjwalan-
kshaya-udaya-datha-agnyascha charitra-labho na bhavathi.** - **Tattvartha Sutra
8.10, Madhyama**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prathama kramaMgrantha (zrAvakapana kA ghAta kare, arthAta jisake udaya se
dezavirati AMzika tyAgarUpa alpapratyAkhyAna na ho sake, ume apratyAkhyAnAvaraNa
kahate haiM  /  isa kaSAya ke prabhAva meM zrAvakadharma kI prApti nahIM hotI
hai|' pratyAkhyAnAvaraNa-jisa kaSAya ke prabhAva se AtmA ko sarvavirati cAritra
prApta karane meM bAdhA ho, arthAt zramaNa (sAdhu) dharma kI prApti na ho, use
pratyAkhyAnAvaraNa kahate haiN| isa kaSAya ke udaya hone para ekadezatyAgarUpa
zrAvakAcAra ke pAlana karane meM to bAdhA nahIM AtI hai, kintu sarvatyAgarUpa-
sAdharma kA pAlana nahIM ho pAtA hai| _ saMjvalana- jisa kaSAya ke udaya se AtmA
ko yathAkhyAta-cAritra kI prApti na ho, arthAt jo kaSAya, pariSaha tathA
upasargoM ke dvArA zramaNadharma ke pAlana karane ko prabhAvita kare, asara
DAle, use saMjvalana kahate haiM  /  yaha kaSAya sarvavirati cAritra ko nirdoSa
rUpa me pAlana karane meM bAdhA DAlatI hai| ukta anantAnubandhI Adi cAra
prakAroM ke sAtha krodha, mAna, mAyA aura lobha-ina cAra mUla bhedoM ko jor3ane
se kaSAyamohanIya ke solaha bheda nimna prakAra me ho jAte haiM anantAbhubandhI-
krodha, mAna, mAyA, lobha  /  /  apratyAkhyAnAvaraNa-krodha, mAna, mAyA, lobha
/  pratyAkhyAnAvaraNa-krodha, mAna, mAyA, lobha  /  1. apratyAkhyAnakaSAyodayadi
tinaM bhavati  /  -taravArthasatra 10mAdhya 2.
pratyAkhyAnAvaraNakaSAmodayAdviratAviratibhaMvatyuttama caritra lAbhastu na
bhavati  /  -tattvArtha sUtra 10 bhAvya 3.
saMjvalanakaSAyodayAdAthAgnyAzcaritralAbho na bhavati  /  -tatvArthasUtra 8 / 10
mASya

Page #160 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## DO **Karmavipāka**  **Sanjvalana-Krodha, Māna, Māyā, Lobha.**  These four
types are collectively referred to as "Chatushk" or "Chaukdi" (quadruplet) for
brevity. For example, when we say "Anantānubandhi Chatushk" or "Anantānubandhi
Chaukdi," it encompasses all four: Anantānubandhi Krodha, Māna, Māyā, and Lobha.
Similarly, we should understand the terms "Apratyaкhyānāvarana,"
"Pratyaкhyānāvarana," and "Sanjvalana Chatushk."  After discussing the different
types of Kshayas, we now delve into the nature of "Nokashaya-Mohaniya."
**Nokashaya** -  Something that is not a Kshaya itself but arises simultaneously
with the emergence of a Kshaya or assists in generating or stimulating Kshayas.
Examples include Hāsya (laughter), Rati (desire), etc., which are types of
Nokashaya, and their details will be discussed as needed. A verse on this topic
is as follows:  > Kshayasahāvatitvātkṣayapreranāvapī | > Hāsyāvinavakasmokka
nokṣayākṣayātā ||  This means that Hāsya, etc., are considered Nokashaya because
they are associated with Kshayas, arise with them, and contribute to their
generation.  Therefore, we should understand the relationship of Nokashaya with
other Kshayas as follows:  1. **Kshayaveya gījje ṇam mane! Ṛtiviḍhe paṇṇate?** >
Goȳmā 1 molas viḍhe paṇṇate, tam bahā - aṇatapanuvanḍhi kohe, aṇantānubandhi
māṇe, aṇantānubandhi māyā, lohe, apaccakhaṇāve kohe evam māṇe, māyā, lohe,
paccaktraṇāvarane kohe evam māṇe, māyā, lohe, sanjalana kohe evam māṇe māyā
lohe.  - Prajñāpanā, Karmabandhapara 23, U. 2

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 DO varmavipAka saMjvalana-krodha. mAna, mAyA, lobha  / ' ukta cAroM prakAra ko
cAra-cAra kaSAyoM ko saMkSepa meM kahane ke lie 'catuSka' yA 'caukar3I' zabda kA
prayoga kiyA jAtA hai  /  jaise anantAnubandhI catuSka yA anantAnubandhI
caukar3I kahane se anantAnubandhI krodha, mAna, mAyA, lobha ina cAroM kA grahaNa
kiyA jAtA hai| isI prakAra apratyAkhyAnAvaraNa, pratyAkhyAnAvaraNa aura
saMjvalana catuSka ke lie bhI samajha lenA cAhie  /  kaSAyoM ke bhedoM kA
kathana karane ke anantara aba nokaSAya-mohanIya ke svarUpa kA kathana karate
haiN| nokaSAya - jo kAya to na ho, kintu kaSAya ke udaya ke sAtha jisakA udaya
hotA hai athavA kapAyoM ko paidA karane meM, uttejita karane meM sahAyaka ho,
use nokaSAya kahate haiN| hAsya, rati Adi nokaSAya ke prakAra haiM, jinakA
kathana yathAprasaMga kiyA jA rahA hai| isa viSaya kA eka zloka isa prakAra hai
kavAyasahavatitvAta kaSAyapreraNAvapi  /  hAsyAvinavakasmokkA nokaSAyakavAyatA
//  kaSAyoM ke sahavartI hone lage aura kaSAyoM ke sahayoga se paidA hone se
evaM kaSAyoM ko utpanna karAne meM preraka hone me hAsyAdi nokaSAyoM kA anya
kaSAyoM ke sAtha sambandha samajha lenA cAhie arthAt 1. kasAyaveya gijje NaM
mane ! Rtividhe paNNate? goyamA 1 molasa vidhe paNNate, taM bahA-
aNatapaNuvandhI kohe, aNaMtANabaMdhI mANe, a0 mAyA, lobhe, apaccarakhANe kohe
evaM mANa, mAyA, lobhe, paccaktraNAvaraNe kohe evaM mANe, mAyA, lobhe, saMjalaNA
kohe evaM mANe mAyA lobhe  /  -prajJApanA, karmabaMdhapara 23, u. 2

Page #161 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Manath**  The cooperation of kṣayās is essential for nokṣayās to attain the
form of kṣayās, and it is only through their contact that nokṣayās are
expressed. However, they are inactive in themselves. Only nokṣayās are not the
main ones.  Thus, after briefly indicating the sub-divisions of the two
divisions of kṣayā-mohaniya and nokṣayā-mohaniya, the following verse describes
in detail the four types of kṣayā-mohaniya, namely anantānubandhi, etc.  Jājīva-
varisa-cau-mās-pakkha-gā nar-yatiri-nar-amara. Sammāna-savirai-ahakha-ya-
charitta-ghāyakarā. ||18||  **Gāthā-artha:** The time limit of the four types of
kṣayās, namely anantānubandhi, etc., mentioned above, is respectively for life,
one year, four months, and fifteen days (one pakṣa), and they are respectively
the causes of bondage to hell, animal, human, and heavenly realms, and they
respectively destroy samyaktva, deśavirati, sarvavirati, and yathāsyāt-charitra.
**Viśeṣārtha:** The verse mentions the time limit of the four types of kṣayā-
mohaniya, namely anantānubandhi, etc., the realms to which they bind, and the
qualities of the soul that are destroyed by them. Their specific explanation is
as follows:  Anantānubandhi kṣayā remains for life, i.e., this kṣayā remains
even for birth after birth. In its presence, the bondage of karmas worthy of
hell takes place, and it is the destroyer of the quality of samyaktva in the
soul.  The time limit of apratyākhyānāvaraṇa kṣayā is one year, and...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 manAtha nokaSAyoM ko kaSAyarUpa prApta karane meM kaSAyoM kA sahakAra Avazyaka
hai aura unake saMsarga se hI nokaSAyoM kI abhivyakti hotI hai| vaise ve
niSkriya-sI haiN| kevala nokaSAya pradhAna nahIM haiN| isa prakAra
cAritramohanIya ke kaSAya aura nokaSAya mohanIya ina do bhedoM ke uttarabhedoM
kA saMkSepa meM saMketa karane ke bAda Age kI gAthA meM kaSAyamohanIya ke
anantAnubandhI Adi cAroM prakAroM ke sambandha meM vizeSa varNana karate haiN|
jAjIvavarisacaumAsapakkhagA narayatiriya nara amarA  /
sammANasaviraIahakhAyacarittaghAyakarA  // 18 //  gAthArya-pUrvokta
anantAnubandhI Adi cAroM prakAra kI kaSAyoM kI kAlamaryAdA kramaza:
jIvanaparyanta, eka varSa, cAra mAsa evaM pandraha dina (eka pakSa) kI hai aura
ve kramazaH naraka, tiryaMca, manuSya tathA devagati ke bandha kAraNa haiM tathA
samyaktva, dezavirati, sarvavirati aura yathAsyAtacAritra kA kramaza: ghAta
karatI haiN| vizeSArtha-gAthA meM anantAnubandhI Adi kaSAyamohanIya ke cAroM
prakAroM kI kAla maryAdA, unase baMdhane vAlI gatiyoM evaM AtmA ke ghAta hone
vAle guNoM kA nAma-nirdeza kiyA hai| jinakA vizeSa spaSTIkaraNa isa prakAra hai
anantAnubandhI kaSAya jIvanaparyanta rahatI hai, arthAt yaha kaSAya
janmajanmAntara taka bhI vidyamAna rahatI hai| isake sadbhAva meM naraka gati ke
yogya karmoM kA bandha hotA hai aura yaha AtmA ke samyaktva guNa kA ghAta karane
vAlI hai|| apratyAkhyAnAvaraNa kaSAya kI kAlamaryAdA eka varSa hai aura isake

Page #162 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Karma Vipaka  Due to the rise of karma, the soul becomes bound to the state of
sub-human existence (tiryancagati). As a result, the soul is unable to adopt the
vow of partial renunciation (deshavirata - the vow of a Shravaka).  Pratyakhyana
(Renunciation) Kashayas  The soul is unable to attain the vow of complete
renunciation (sarvavirata - the vow of a Shramana) due to the rise of karmas
suitable for the state of human existence. The duration of these Kashayas
(passions) is four months.  Samjvalana Kashaya  The rise of this Kashaya binds
the soul to karmas suitable for the state of divine existence, and the soul is
unable to attain the state of right conduct (yathakhyata-charitra).  The
duration and extent of the four types of Anantanubandhi Kashayas should be
understood in the same way, based on the perspective of the conventional point
of view (vyavahara-naya). This is because Bahubali and others had Samjvalana
Kashaya for up to one year, while the Anantanubandhi Kashaya of King
Prasannachandra lasted for only an instant.  Verse 16: Krodha (Anger) is like
water, renu (dust), prithvi (earth), and parvata-raji (mountain ranges). Mana
(Pride) is like the three-leafed plant, the hard rock, and the vast ocean.
Verse 20: Maya (Deceit) is like the formless, the single-horned, the dense, and
the root-like. Lobha (Greed) is like the yellow, the mud, and the impure.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmavipAka udaya se tiryaMcagati kA bandha hotA hai| isake kAraNa jIva
dezavirati ( zrAvaka cAritra) ko grahaNa karane meM asamartha rahatA hai| 82
pratyArUpaNa kaSAyI se jIva ke manuSyagati ke yogya karmoM kA ke sarvavirati (
zramaNadharma cAritra kA virati cAritra nahIM ho pAtA hai  /  cAra mAha hai|
isake udaya bandha hotA hai aura yaha jIva ghAta karatI hai, arthAt sarva
saMjvalana kaSAya kI kAlamaryAdA eka pakSa kI hai| isa prakAra kI kaSAyoM kI
sthiti meM jova ko devagati ke yogya karmoM kA bandha hotA hai tathA
yathAkhyAtacAritra nahIM ho pAtA hai  /  anantAnubandhI Adi kaSAyoM kA
samagramaryAdA viSayaka pUrvokta vyavahAranaya kI apekSA se samajhanA caahie|
kyoMki bAhubali Adi ko saMjvalana kaSAya eka varSa taka rahI aura prasannacandra
rAjarSi ko anantAnubandhI kaSAya kA udaya eka antarmuhUrta taka ke lie hI huA  /
isI prakAra anantAnubandhI kaSAya kA udaya rahate hue bhI kucha mithyAdRSTiyoM
ke navayaM vaiyakoM meM utpanna hone kA varNana dekhane ko milatA hai|
anantAnubandhI Adi kaSAyoM ke cAra prakAroM kI kAlamaryAdA Adi batalAne ke
anantara aba dRSTAnta dvArA unake vizeSa svarUpa kA kathana karate haiM  /  jala
reNu puDhavipaTarAIsariso cauvjiho koho  /  tiNisalayA kaTTThaTThiya sela tthaM
bhovamo mANo ||16|| mAyAbale higomUrttimidasiMgaghaNavaM simUlasamA loho
haliddavaMjaNakaddamaki mirAgasa mANo gAthArtha - krodha- jala, reNu, pRthvI
aura parvatarAji ke samAna,  // 20 //  1

Page #163 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## First Karma Granth  The four types of karma should be understood as follows:
* **Mana:** Like a field of clay, wood, bone, and rock pillar. * **Maya:** Like
a deceitful scribe, cow urine, a sheep's horn, and the root of a water plant. *
**Lobha:** Like the color of Haridwar, the soot of a lamp, mud, and a chili
pepper.  **Special Note:** These two verses explain the results of the soul,
which are filled with the four types of karma: anger, pride, deceit, and greed,
through examples. These examples respectively represent the symbols of the four
types of karma:   * **Sanjwalan:** Like a line drawn in water. *
**Pratyakhyanavaran:** Like a line drawn in dust. * **Apratyakhyanavaran:** Like
a line drawn in earth. * **Anantanubandhi:** Like a crack in a mountain.
Similarly, one should connect the examples of the symbols of pride, deceit, and
greed with Sanjwalan, etc.   **Explanation:**  * **Sanjwalan Anger:** This anger
is like a line drawn in water, which quickly disappears. * **Pratyakhyanavaran
Anger:** Like a line drawn in dust, which is filled by the wind after some time,
this type of anger is calmed by some remedy. * **Apratyakhyanavaran Anger:**
Like a crack in dry earth, which is filled by water, this type of anger is
calmed by some effort and exertion.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prathama karmagrantha mAna-kSetralatA, kASTha, asthi aura zaila-patthara-
stambha ke samAna, mAyAabalekhikA, gomUtrikA, bher3a ke sIMga, panavaMzI ke mUla
ke samAna aura lobha-haridvAraMga, dIpaka ke kAjala ke raMga, kIcar3a ke raMga
evaM kiramicI raMga ke samAna cAracAra prakAra ke samajhane caahie| . . . . . .
. . vizeSArSa-ina do gAthAoM meM anAtAnubaMdhI Adi cAroM prakAra : ke krodha,
mAna, mAyA aura lobha se yukta AtmA ke pariNAmoM ko dRSTAntoM ke dvArA samajhAyA
gayA hai| inameM kramazaH pahale se saMjvalana,' dUsare se pratyAkhyAnAvaraNa,
tIsare se apratyAkhyAnAvaraNa aura cauthe se anantAnubandhI krodha, mAna, mAyA
aura lobha kaSAya ke pratIkoM ko ginAyA hai, jaise saMjvalana krodha jala meM
khIMcI gaI rekhA sadRza, pratyAkhyAnAdaraNa kroSa dhUli meM khIMcI gaI rekhA
sadRza, apratyAkhyAnAvaraNa krodha pRthvI meM khIMcI gaI rekhA ke samAna aura
anantAnubandhI krodha parvata meM AI darAra ke samAna hotA hai  /  isI prakAra
saMjvalana Adi ke mAna, mAyA, lobha ke lie dRSTAnta ke pratIkoM kA kramazaH
sambandha jor3a lenA cAhie  /  jinakA vivecana isa prakAra hai| saMjvalana
krodha-jala meM khIMcI jAne vAlI rekhA ke samAna yaha krodha tatkAla zAnta ho
jAtA hai  /  pratyAkhyAnAvaraNa krodha-jaise ali meM khIMcI gaI rekhA havA ke
dvArA kucha samaya meM bhara jAtI hai vaise hI isa prakAra kA krodha kucha upAya
se zAnta ho jAtA hai| apratyAkhyAnAvaraNa krodha-sUkhI miTTI meM AI darAra jaise
pAnI ke saMyoga se phira bhara jAtI hai, vaise hI isa prakAra ke krodha kI zAnti
kucha parizrama aura prayala dvArA ho jAtI hai  /

Page #164 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Karmavipaka  **Anantanubandhi Krodha** - Just as a crack in a mountain caused
by its splitting never heals, similarly this anger does not subside even with
effort and income.  **64**  **Sanjwalan Man** - Like a cane that bends without
effort, this type of man quickly abandons his insistence.  **Pratyakhyanavaran
Man** - Just as dry wood can become soft with oil massage, similarly this type
of man can be overcome with great effort and remedies.  **Apratyakhyanavaran
Man** - Like bending a bone, which requires hard work, this type of man is
difficult to overcome even with effort and remedies.  **Anantanubandhi Man** -
Just as it is impossible to bend a stone pillar even with hard work, similarly
this type of man cannot be overcome.  **Sanjwalan Maya** - The crookedness in a
boss's bamboo stick straightens without effort, similarly this type of Maya
easily disappears.  **Pratyakhyanavaran Maya** - Like the curved path of a bull
that is being led, this type of Maya has crooked results. This crooked nature is
difficult to overcome.  **Apratyakhyanavaran Maya** - The curvature in a sheep's
horns can be overcome with hard work and many remedies. Similarly, this type of
Maya, which has similar results, is called Apratyakhyanavaran Maya. This type of
Maya can be overcome with great effort and remedies.  **Anantanubandhi Maya** -
The curvature in the root of a bamboo - crookedness -

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmavipAka anantAnubandhI krodha - parvata phaTane se AI darAra kabhI nahIM
jur3atI, isI prakAra yaha krodha parizrama aura Aya karane para bhI zAnta nahIM
hotA hai  /  64 saMjvalana mAna binA parizrama ke namAye jAne vAle beMta ke
samAna kSaNamAtra meM apane Agraha ko chor3akara namane vAlA hotA hai  /
pratyAkhyAnAvaraNa mAna - sUkhe kASTha meM tela Adi kI mAliza karane para
naramAI Ane kI saMbhAvanA ho sakatI hai| isI prakAra yaha mahAna kucha parizrama
aura upAyoM se dUra hone vAlA hotA hai  /  apratyAkhyAnAvaraNa mAna-jaise haDDI
ko namAne ke liye kaThina parizrama ke sivAya bhI hai ai parizrama aura upAya se
dUra hotA hai  /  anantAnubandhI mAna jaise kaThina parizrama se bhI patthara ke
khambha ko namAnA asambhava hai, vaise hI yaha mAna bhI dUra nahIM hotA hai  /
saMjvalana mAyA - baoNsa ke khilake meM rahane vAlA Ter3hApana binA zrama ke
sIdhA ho jAtA hai, usI prakAra yaha mAyAbhAva saralatA se dUra ho jAtA hai  /
pratyAkhyAnAvaraNa mAyA - calate hue mutane vAle baila ko sutrarekhA kI vakratA
ke samAna kuTila pariNAma vAlI hotI hai| yaha kuTila svabhAva kaThinAI se dUra
hotA hai  /  apratyAkhyAnAvaraNa mAyA bher3a ke sIMgoM meM rahane vAlI vakratA
kaThina parizrama va aneka upAya dvArA dUra hotI hai| isI prakAra ke pariNAma
vAlI mAyA ko apratyAkhyAnAvaraNI mAyA kahate haiM  /  yaha mAyApariNAma ati
parizrama va upAya se sarala hote haiN| anantAnubandhI mAyA - bAMsa kI jar3a meM
rahane vAlI vakratA - Ter3hepana -

Page #165 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
First Karma Granth 85 Just as it is not possible for a straight line to be
curved, similarly, there are results of Maya that are eternally bound.
Sanjwalana Lobha - The results of this greed are like the color of turmeric,
which easily fades. Pratyakhyanavaran Lobha - The results of this greed are like
the color of kohl, which fades with some effort. Apratyakhyanavaran Lobha - The
results of this greed are like the mud on a cart wheel, which are very difficult
to remove. Anantanubandhi Lobha - Just as the color of iron oxide cannot be
removed by any means, similarly, the results of this type of greed do not fade
even with effort. Thus, after describing the types of Kshaya-mohaniya, the next
two verses describe the types of No-Kshaya-mohaniya. Jassuvaya Hoh Jie Has Rai
Arai Sog Bhay Kuchcha | Sanimittamnna' Vart Ih Hasai-mohaniyaṃ || 21 ||
Purisiththitadubhayam Paksha Ahilaso Jabvsa Habadd Sou | Dhinaranpuveudoayo
Phuphumatnagaradaha-samo || 22 || Gatha-arth - Due to the rise of karma, with or
without a cause, 'Anna' without 1. 'Sanimittamnna Wa' - 'Sanimittam' - Both the
cause and the effect, the immediate external object is the cause - If there is a
cause, . And if only mental thoughts are the cause, then without a cause, this
is the meaning intended by the word 'Sanimittam'.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prathama karmagrantha 85 kA sIdhA honA sambhava nahIM haiN| isI prakAra
anantAnubandhI mAyA ke pariNAma hote haiM  /  saMjvalana lobha - sahaja hI
chUTane vAlI haldI ke raMga ke samAna isa lobha ke pariNAma hote haiM  /
pratyAkhyAnAvaraNa lobha- kAjala ke raMga ke samAna isa lobha ke pariNAma kucha
prayatna se chUTate haiN| apratyAkhyAnAvaraNa lobha-gAr3I ke pahiye kI kIcar3a
ke samAna ati kaThinatA se chUTane vAle pariNAma vAlA hotA hai  /
anantAnubandhI lobha-jaise kiramitrI raMga kisI bhI upAya se nahIM chUTatA hai,
vaise hI isa prakAra ke lobha ke pariNAma upAya karane para bhI nahIM chUTate
haiM  /  isa prakAra kaSAyamohanIya ke bhedoM kA nirUpaNa karane ke anantara Age
do gAthAoM meM nokaSAmohanIya ke bhedoM kA varNana karate haiM  /  jassuvayA
hoha jie hAsa raI arai soga bhaya kucchA | sanimitamannA' vArta iha
hAsAimohaNiyaM  //  21  //  purisitthitadubhayaM pakSa ahilAso jabvasA habadda
sou  /  dhInaranapuveudayo phuphumatanagaradAhasamo  // 22 //  gAthArtha - jisa
karma ke udaya se kAraNavaza vA binA kAraNa ke 'annA' binA 1. 'sanimittamannA
vA' - 'sanimitta ' - kAra aura kAraNa ke ina donoM meM tAtkAlika bAhya padArtha
kAraNa - hoM to sakAraNa . aura mAtra mAnasika vicAra hI nimita hoM to akAraNa
binA kAraNa ke, aisA Azaya 'sanimittA' pada se vivakSita kiyA gayA hai|

Page #166 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 86 ## Karmavipaka  The feelings of laughter, attraction, aversion, sorrow,
fear, and disgust are to be understood as the nine divisions of
Nokshayamohaniya, namely, laughter, attraction, aversion, sorrow, fear, disgust,
Striveda, Purushaveda, and Napumsakaved. The name Striveda, Purushaveda, and
Napumsakaved are given to the desires that arise from the respective genders,
male, female, and neuter. The desires of these three vedas are like the fires of
excrement, grass, and city respectively.  **Special Note:** These two verses
describe the nine divisions of Nokshayamohaniya. Their names are:  (1) Hasya
(Laughter) (2) Rati (Attraction) (3) Arati (Aversion) (4) Shoka (Sorrow) (5)
Bhaya (Fear) (6) Jugupsa (Disgust) (7) Striveda (Desire for a woman) (8)
Purushaveda (Desire for a man) (9) Napumsakaved (Desire for a neuter)  The word
"Mohaniya Karma" should be added before these names. The characteristics of
these nine divisions are as follows:  **Hasya (Laughter):** The karma that
causes laughter due to reasons like seeing the antics of a clown or without any
reason is called Hasya-Mohaniya Karma. In other words, the karma that produces
laughter is called Hasya-Mohaniya Karma.  **Rati (Attraction):** The karma that
causes attraction towards objects with or without reason is called Rati-Mohaniya
Karma.  **Arati (Aversion):** The karma that causes aversion or dislike towards
objects with or without reason is called Arati-Mohaniya Karma.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 86 karmavipAka hAsya, rati, arati, zoka, bhaya, jugupsA ke bhAva paidA hote
haiM, unheM kramazaH nokaSAyamohanIya ke hAsyAdi jugupsA paryanta bheda
samajhanA caahie| jisa nAma ke uda se puruSa zrI aura puruSa-strI donoM se
ramaNa karane kI maithunecchA utpanna hotI hai, jaise kramazaH strIveda,
puruSaveda aura napuMsakaveda kahate haiM  /  ina tInoM vedoM ke abhilASA bhAva
kramazaH karISAgni, tRNAgni aura nagaradAha ke samAna hote haiM  /  vizeSa- ina
do gAthAoM meM nokaSAyamohanIya ke nau bhedoM kA kathana kiyA gayA hai| jinake
nAma isa prakAra haiM (1) hAsya, (2) rati, (3) arati, (4) zoka, (5) bhaya, (6)
jugupsA, (7) strIveda, (8) puruSaveda aura (2) napuMsakaveda  / ' ina nAmoM ke
Age 'mohanIya karma' zabda jor3a lenA caahie| ukta nau bhedoM ke lakSaNa isa
prakAra haiM- P hAsya - jisa karma ke udaya se kAraNavaza arthAt bhA~r3a Adi kI
ceSTA dekhakara athavA binA kAraNa ke haMsI AtI hai, use hAsyamohanIya karma
kahate haiM. arthAta hAsya kI utpAdaka prakRtivAlA karma hAsya-mohanIya karma
kahalAtA hai  /  rati jisa karma ke udaya se sakAraNa yA akAraNa padArthoM meM
rAgaho, use rati- mohanIya karma kahate haiM  /  arati jisa karma ke udaya se
kAraNavaza yA binA kAraNa ke padArthoM se aprIti-dveSa hotA hai, use
aratimohanIya karma kahate haiM  /  nomasa veyagijjeNaM maMte ! kamme katividhe
paNate ? gomamA ! navaviSe 1. praNete taM jahA ityobeya veyaNijje purisake0
napuMsamave0 hAse ratI aratI : prajJApanA0 karmabandha pada 23, u02 r ma soge
duchaa|

Page #167 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
First Karma Grantha  Shoka (Grief) - The karma whose arising causes grief,
whether with or without a reason, is called Shoka-mohaniya karma.  Bhaya (Fear)
- The karma whose arising causes fear or apprehension, whether with or without a
reason, is called Bhaya-mohaniya karma. There are seven types of fear: (1) Fear
of this world, (2) Fear of the next world, (3) Fear of thieves and robbers, (4)
Sudden fear (due to accidental occurrences), (5) Fear of calamities, (6) Fear of
death, and (7) General fear.  Jugupsa (Disgust) - The karma whose arising causes
disgust or aversion towards repulsive or loathsome objects, whether with or
without a reason, is called Jugupsa-mohaniya karma.  Veda - The desire for
sexual indulgence is called Veda. The specific external manifestation of the
arising of the karma that fulfills this desire is called Dravya-veda, and the
corresponding inner desire is called Bhava-veda. There are three types of Veda:
Stri-veda, Purusa-veda, and Napumsaka-veda. Their characteristics and effects
are as follows: Stri-veda - The karma whose arising makes a woman desire to
engage in sexual activity with a man.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prathama karmagrantha zoka - kAraNavaza yA binA kAraNa hI jisa karma ke udaya
se zoka ho, use zoka - mohanIya karma kahate haiM  /  67 bhAya - jisa karma ke
udaya se kAraNavazAt yA binA kAraNa bhaya ho- Dara paidA ho, bhayazIlatA utpanna
ho, use bhayamohanIya karma kahate haiM  /  bhaya ke sAta prakAra haiM (1)
ihaloka bhaya, (2) paraloka bhaya, (3) AdAna bhaya (cora, DAkU Adi se bhaya
honA), (4) akasmAta bhaya ( Akasmika durghaTanAjanya bhaya), (4) vikAsa (6)
mRtyu aura () bhaya  /  jugupsA - jisa karma ke udaya se kAraNa yA binA kAraNa
ke hI bIbhatsa - dhUNAjanaka padArthoM meM dekhakara ghRNA paidA hotI hai, use
jugupsAmohanIya karma kahate haiM | maithuna sevana karane kI abhilASA ko veda
kahate haiM  /  maithunecchA kI pUrti ke yogya nAma karma ke udaya se pragaTa
bAhya cinha vizeSa ko dravyaveda aura tadanurUpa abhilASA ko bhAvaveda kahate
haiM  /  veda ke tIna bheda haiM--strIveda, puruSaveda aura napuMsaka veda  /
inake lakSaNa aura bhAva nimna prakAra haiM strIveda - jisa karma ke udaya meM
strI ko puruSa ke sAtha ramaNa karane 1. satta bhayANA paNNA taM jahA - ihaloga
mae, paralogabhae, AdANa bhae, amhA paNae maraNabhae, akhilogabhae  /  -
sthAnAMga 7 / 546 ghRNA aura nindA artha lekina jaba nindA-rUpa 2. kucchA kA
saMskRta meM kuttA rUpa banatA hai| isake hote haiN| vRNA kA Azaya yahA~ spaSTa
kiyA hai| artha liyA jAe tatha apane doSa chipAne aura dUsare ke doSa prakaTa
karane rUpa Azaya samajha lenA cAhie  /

Page #168 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Karma Vipaka  The desire for karmic fruition is called striveda. The emotions of
its longing are like the smoldering fire of dung cakes. Karisha means dry cow
dung, bricks, thorns, sifted, and small pots. Just as the fire in the bricks
keeps increasing the more it is fanned, similarly, the desire of the woman
increases with the touch and activities of the man.  Purushavedha - The arising
of which causes the man to have the desire to engage in intimacy with the woman,
is called purushavedha. The example given for the longing of this vedha is the
fire in the grass. Just as the grass fire ignites quickly and is extinguished
quickly, similarly, the man's desire for sexual union is quickly aroused and
quickly subsides.  Napumsaka Vedha - The arising of which causes the desire in
both the woman and the man to engage in intimacy, is called napumsaka vedha. The
example given for the passion of this vedha is the fire in the city. Just as the
fire in the city burns for many days and takes a long time to extinguish,
similarly, the desire arising from the napumsaka vedha is not easily subsided,
and satisfaction is not obtained even through sense indulgence. In this way, the
nine types of nokaṣāya-mohanīya have been described.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karma vipAka kI icchA ho, use strIveda kahate haiN| isakI abhilASA ke bhAva
karISAgni ke samAna hote haiM  /  karISa mAne sUkhA govara, upalA, kaMDA, chAnA,
ttheplii| jaise--upale meM sulagI huI Aga jaise-jaise jalAI jAe vaise-vaise
bar3hatI hai, vaise hI puruSa ke karasparza Adi vyApAra se strI kI abhilASA
bar3hatI hai  /  ky puruSada-jisake udaya se puruSa ko strI ke sAtha ramaNa
karane kI icchA ho, use puruSaveda kahate haiM  /  isa veda vAle kI abhilASA meM
dRSTAnta tRNAgni kA diyA hai| jaise tRNa kI agni zIghra jalatI hai aura zIghra
bujhatI hai, usI prakAra puruSa kI maithuna kI abhilASA zIghra uttejita hokara
zAnta ho jAtI hai| napuMsaka veda-jisake udaya se strI aura puruSa donoM ke
sAtha ramaNa karane kI icchA ho, use napuMsakaveda kahate haiN| isakI vAsanA ke
lie nagaradAha kA dRSTAnta diyA gayA hai| jaise nagara meM Aga lage to vaha kaI
dina taka nagara ko jalAtI hai aura usako bujhAne meM bahuta dina lagate haiN|
isI prakAra napuMsakaveda ke udaya se utpanna abhilASA cirakAla taka nivRtta
nahIM hotI aura viSaya sevana se tRpti bhI nahIM hotI  /  isa prakAra
nokaSAyamohanIya ke nau bhedoM kA kathana pUrNa huA  / " 1. uttarAdhyayana sUtra
dhyayana 33 gAthA 11 meM 'sattavihaM navavihaM vA kammaM gokasAyajaM - nokaSAya
mohanIya ke mAyano bhedoM kA jo kana hai, usakA kAraNa yaha hai ki jaba veda ke
strI, puruSa aura napuMsaka veda meM tIna bheda nahIM karake sAmAnya se veda ko
ginate haiM to hAsyAdi chaha aura veda ye sAta bheda ho jAte haiM aura beda ke
strIveda, puruSaveda aura napuMsakaveda ye tIna bheda kiye jAte haiM to no bheda
hote haiN| sAdhAraNatayA nokaSAya mohanIya ke nau bheda prasiddha haiM  /  ataH
yahA~ bhI bhedoM ke nAma ginAye gaye haiM aura vivecana kiyA hai  /

Page #169 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## First Karma Text  The twelve natures of anger, etc., which are infinite in
their consequences, are all-destructive, except for the fourfold of burning
passions and the nine non-passions, in addition to the fourfold of character-
obscuring. Thus, after describing the nature of character-obscuring karma, the
nature, etc., of lifespan and name karma are described.  **Verse 23:**
**Meaning:** Lifespan karma is of four types, differentiated by the realms of
gods, humans, animals, and hell beings, and its nature is like a shackle
(fetter). Name karma is similar in nature to a painter, and it has forty-two,
ninety-nine, one hundred and three, and sixty-six types.  **Explanation:** The
verse describes the nature of lifespan and name karma, and the number of their
sub-types. First, lifespan karma is described.  **Lifespan Karma:** The karma
whose fruition causes a being to live in the realms of gods, humans, animals,
and hell beings, and whose destruction causes the being to leave those realms,
i.e., to die, is called lifespan karma.  The nature of lifespan karma is like a
prison. Just as a criminal is imprisoned for a certain period of time according
to his crime, and the criminal also desires to be released from it, but cannot
leave without completing the term, he has to stay there for a fixed time.
Similarly, due to lifespan karma, a being has to live for a fixed period of
time.  1. **"The life and death of a being due to the presence or absence of
karma is called lifespan karma."** - Tattvarthadhigama Sutra 1012

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prathama karmagrantha saMjvalanakaSAya catuSka aura no nokaSAya ke atirikta
cAritramohanIya kI zeSa anantAnubandhI krodhAdi bAraha prakRtiyA~ sarvaghAtI
haiM  /  isa prakAra mohanIya karma kA nirUpaNa karane ke anantara Ayu aura nAma
karma ke svarUpa Adi kA varNana karate haiM  /  suranaratiribharAU haDisarisaM
nAmakamma cittisamaM  /  bAyAlatinavavihaM tiuttarasabhaM ca sataTThI  // 23 //
gAthArtha - deva, manuSya, tiryaca aura nAraka ke bheda se Ayukarma cAra prakAra
kA hai aura isakA svabhAva har3i (khor3A, ber3I) ke samAna hai  /  nAmakarma kA
svabhAva citrakAra ke sadRza hai aura usake bayAlIsa tirAnave, ekasau tIna aura
sar3asaTha bheda hote haiM  /  3 st vizeSArtha - gAthA meM Ayukarma aura
nAmakarma kA svabhAva tathA una una karmoM ke avAntara bhedoM kI saMkhyA batalAI
hai| unameM se pahale Ayukarma kA varNana karate haiN| Ayukarma - jisa karma ke
udaya me jIva deva, manuSya tiryaca aura nAraka rUpa se jItA hai aura usake
kSaya hone para una-una rUpoM kA tyAga karatA hai yAnI mara jAtA hai, use
Ayukarma kahate haiM  / " Ayukarma kA svabhAva kArAgRha ke samAna hai  /  jaise
aparAdhI aparAdha ke anusAra amuka kAla taka kArAgRha meM DAlA jAtA hai aura
aparAdhI usase chuTakArA pAne kI icchA bhI karatA hai, kintu avadhi pUrI hue
binA nikala nahIM pAtA hai, use nizcita samaya taka vahA~ rahanA par3atA hai  /
vaise hI Ayukarma ke kAraNa jIva ko nizcita avadhi 1. yadbhAvAbhAvayorjIvita
maraNaM tadAtruH  /  - tattvArtharAjanAttika 1012

Page #170 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
One has to stay in the realms of hell and the like until the karmic consequences
are exhausted. Only when the bound lifespan is exhausted, does one get
liberation from that particular body.  **Ayukarma** (Lifespan Karma): It does
not bring happiness or sorrow to the being, but it determines the duration for
which the being remains in a particular body. _Narkajivas_ (beings in hell) are
extremely miserable in the hellish realm. They would prefer to die rather than
live there, but due to the existence of _Ayukarma_, their desire is not
fulfilled as long as the _Ayukarma_ to be experienced remains. Similarly, humans
and gods who have access to worldly pleasures and have a strong desire to live,
are forced to depart to the next world when their _Ayukarma_ is exhausted. In
other words, due to the existence of _Ayukarma_, a being cannot abandon its
realm and gross body before its predetermined time and dies when it is
exhausted, meaning it cannot remain in that gross body after the time is up.
There are two types of _Ayukarma_: _Apvartaaniya_ (modifiable) and
_Anpavartaniiya_ (unmodifiable).  _Apvartaaniya_ lifespan: The lifespan that is
reduced due to external causes is called _Apvartaaniya_ lifespan or _Apvartya_
lifespan. This means that experiencing a lifespan bound for fifty years or more
in a moment due to external causes like drowning, weapon injury, poison
consumption, etc., is the modification of lifespan. This lifespan is also called
untimely death by the common people.  _Anpavartaniiya_ lifespan: The lifespan
that cannot be reduced by any cause. It is experienced for the duration for
which it is bound, and is called _Anpavartaniiya_ or _Anpavartya_ lifespan.
Those who are born in the realms of hell and gods, _Charma Shariri_ (those who
are destined for liberation from that body), and the best of men, ...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmavipAka taka nArakAdi gatiyoM meM rahanA par3atA hai| jaba bA~dhI huI Ayu
bhoga letA hai, tabhI usa-usa zarIra se chuTakArA milatA hai| Ayukarma  /  1
jIbako sukha duHna mA nahIM hai, parantu yata avadhi taka kisI eka mArIra meM
banAye rahane kA hai| _ nArakajIva narakagati meM atyanta dukhI rahate haiN| ve
vahAM jIne kI apekSA maranA pasanda karate haiM, kintu Ayukarma ke astitva se,
bhogane yogya Ayukarma bane rahane se unakI vaha icchA pUrI nahIM hotii| vaise
hI una manuSya aura devoM ko jinheM ki viSaya-bhogoM ke sAdhana prApta haiM aura
unheM bhogane ke lie jIne kI prabala icchA rahate hue bhI Ayukarma ke pUrNa hote
hI paraloka sidhAranA par3atA hai| arthAt Ayukarma ke astitva se jIva apane
nizcita samaya pramANa apanI gati evaM sthUla zArIra kA tyAga nahIM kara sakatA
hai aura kSaya hone para maratA hai, yAnI samaya pUrA hone para usa sthUla
zarIra meM nahIM raha sakatA hai  /  Ayukarma ke do prakAra haiM apavartanIya.
anapavartanIya  /  apavartanIya Ayu-bAhya nimitta se jo Ayu kama ho jAtI hai,
usako apavartanIya Ayu yA apavartya Ayu kahate haiN| tAtparya yaha hai ki jala
meM DUbane, zastraghAta, viSapAna Adi bAhya kAraNoM se saupacAsa Adi varSoM ke
lie bA~dhI gaI Ayu ko antarmuhurta meM bhoga lenA Ayu kA apavartana hai| isa Ayu
ko janasAdhAraNa akAla mRtyu bhI kahate haiN| anapavartanIya Ayu-jo Ayu kisI bhI
kAraNa se kama na ho| jitane kAla taka ke lie jA~dhI gaI hai, utane kAla taka
bhogI hI jAya, vaha Ayu anapavartanIya yA anapavartya Ayu kahalAtI hai| upapAta
janma lene vAle, arthAt nAraka aura deva, carama zarIrI (tadbhava mokSagAmI, usa
zarIra se mokSa jAne vAle), uttama puruSa,

Page #171 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Prapama Farmgranth  This text discusses the concept of lifespan in
Jainism, specifically focusing on the difference between **anavartaaniya**
(unbreakable) and **apvartaaniya** (breakable) lifespans.  **Anavartaaniya
lifespan** is possessed by beings like **Tirthankaras**, **Chakravartis**,
**Vasudevas**, **Baladevas**, and countless others who are born in the **Jivi-
Devakuru**, **Uttarakuru**, and other realms. These beings have a fixed lifespan
that cannot be shortened.  **Apvartaaniya lifespan** is possessed by the
remaining humans and animals. Their lifespan is subject to change and can be
shortened.  **The difference between these two types of lifespans depends on the
intensity of karma.** The lifespan of a future birth is determined by the karma
accumulated in the present life. If the karma is mild, the lifespan is loosely
bound, and the lifespan can be shortened if the appropriate conditions arise.
However, if the karma is intense, the lifespan is tightly bound, and it cannot
be shortened even if the appropriate conditions arise.  **Intense karma leads to
a tightly bound lifespan that cannot be shortened even by weapons, poison, or
other means.** This lifespan will be completed in its entirety, regardless of
external factors.  **Mild karma leads to a loosely bound lifespan that can be
shortened by external factors like weapons, poison, or fire.** This is known as
**apvartaana** or **akalamrityu** (premature death). The lifespan that is
completed in its entirety is known as **anavartaana** or **kalamrityu** (natural
death).  **Apvartaaniya lifespan is always accompanied by **sopkrama-upkrama**
(the conditions that lead to premature death, such as weapons, poison, or
fire).** These conditions are inevitable for beings with an apvartaaniya
lifespan.  **Anavartaaniya lifespan is possessed by humans who live for
countless years and are born in the 30 akarmabhumis, 56 antarvipas, and other
realms.** However, **anavartaaniya lifespan is also possessed by animals who
live for countless years and are found in the 2.5 dvipas outside the dvipa
oceans.**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prapama pharmagrantha arthAt tIrthakara, cakravartI, vAsudeva, baladeva Adi
aura asaMkhyAta varSa jIvI-devakruru, uttarakuru, Adi meM utpanna- manuSya,
tiyaMca' anapavartanIya Ayu vAle hote haiN| inake atirikta zeSa manuSya, tiryaca
apavartanIya Ayu vAle hote haiN| _ apavartanIya aura anapavartanIya Ayu kA
baMdha pariNAma ke tAratamya para avalambita hai| bhAvI janma kI Ayu vartamAna
janma meM bAMdhI jAtI hai| usa samaya agara pariNAma maMda hoM to Ayu kA bandha
zithila ho jAtA hai, jisase nimitta milane para bandhakAlIna kAlamaryAdA ghaTa
jAtI hai| agara pariNAma tIna hoM to Ayu kA baMdha gAr3ha hotA hai, jisase
nimitta milane para bhI baMdhakAlIna kAlamaryAdA nahIM ghaTatI hai aura na Ayu
eka sAtha hI bhAgI jA sakatI hai  /  tIvra pariNAma se gAr3ha rUpa se baddha Ayu
zastra, viSa Adi kA prayoga hone para bhI apanI niyata kAlamaryAdA se pahale
pUrNa nahIM hotI aura maMda pariNAma se zithila rUpa se baddha Ayu ukta prayoga
hote hI apanI niyata kAlamaryAdA samApta hone se pahale bhI antarmuhurta mAtra
meM bhoga lI jAtI hai  /  Ayu ke isa zIghra bhoga ko apavartanA yA akAlamRtyu
aura niyata sthiti vAle bhoga ko anapavartanA yA kAlamRtyu kahate haiM  /  _
apavartanIya Ayu sopakrama-upakrama (tIvra zastra, viSa, agni Adi jina nimittoM
se akAlamRtyu hotI hai, una nimittoM kA prApta honA upakrama hai) sahita hotI
hai| aisA upakrama apavartanIya Ayu ke avazya hotA hai  /  kyoMki vaha Ayu
kAlamaryAdA samApta hone ke pahale 1. asaMkhyAtavarSajIbI manuSya tIsa
akarmabhUmiyoM, chappana antarvIpoM aura kama bhUmiyoM meM utpanna yugatika hai,
parantu asaMkhyAtavarSajIvI tiryaca ukta kSetroM ke alAbA DhAI dvIpa ke bAhara
DhIpa samudroM meM bhI pAye jAte haiM  /

Page #172 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Karmavipaka (Karmic Consequences)  It is destined to be experienced. However,
there are two types of unchangeable lifespans: **Sopkrama** (with natural death)
and **Nirupkrama** (with premature death). This means that in some lifespans,
the causes for premature death are present, while in others they are not.
However, even if the causes for premature death are present, the unchangeable
lifespan does not end before its fixed time limit. In essence, beings with a
**Sopkrama** lifespan will inevitably encounter some cause for premature death,
such as a weapon, while those with a **Nirupkrama** lifespan will not die
prematurely, no matter how strong the cause.  There are four types of
**Ayukarma** (lifespan karma): **Devaayu** (divine lifespan), **Manushyaayu**
(human lifespan), **Tiyanchaayu** (animal lifespan), and **Narakaayu** (hellish
lifespan).  **Devaayu** is the lifespan that leads to rebirth in the realm of
gods. **Manushyaayu** is the lifespan that leads to rebirth as a human.
**Tiyanchaayu** is the lifespan that leads to rebirth as an animal.
**Narakaayu** is the lifespan that leads to rebirth in hell.  After explaining
**Ayukarma**, we will now discuss the nature and types of **Kramaprapta
Namakarma** (name karma).  1. a) **Neraiya tirikkaau manussaauं tahev ya. Deva
uy nauttham tu aaukaam chavii.** - Uttaraadhyayana, Chapter 33, Verse 12 b)
**Prajnaapana pan 23, u 2.** c) **Naarakarshagyonamanush bannani.** - Taravarth,
Chapter 8, Sutra 11

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmavipAka bhogane yogya hai| parantu anapavartanIya Ayu sopakrama aura
nirupakrama do prakAra kI hotI hai, arthAt usa Ayu meM akAlamRtyu lAne vAle
nimittoM kA saMnnidhAna hotA bhI hai aura nahIM bhI hotA hai| kintu ukta
nimittoM kA saMvidhAna hone para bhI anapavartanIya Ayu niyata kAla-maryAdA ke
pahale pUrNa nahIM hotI hai  /  sArAMza yaha ki apavartanIya Ayu vAle prANiyoM
ko akAla maraNa ke lie zastra Adi koI na koI nimitta mila hI jAtA hai, aura
anapavartanIya Ayu vAloM ko kaisA bhI prabala nimitta kyoM na mile, lekina ve
akAla meM nahIM marate hai| Ayukarma ke cAra bheda hai-devAyu, manuSyAyu,
tiyaMcAyu, aura narakAyu  / ' devAyu-jimake nimitta se devAti kA jIkara gitAnA
malA hai, use devAyu kahate haiN| manuSyAyu-jisake udaya se manuSya gati meM
janma ho vaha manuSyAyu hai  /  niyaMcAyu- jisake udaya se tiryaMcagati kA
jIvana vyatIta karanA par3atA hai, use tiryaMcAyu kahate haiN| _ narakAyu-jisake
udaya se narakagati kA jIvana bitAnA par3atA hai use narakAyu kahate haiN|
Ayakarma kA nirUpaNa hone ke anantara aba kramaprApta nAmakarma ke svarUpa va
bheda-prabhedoM kA kathana karate haiM 1. ka) neraiya tirikkhAu maNussAuM taheva
ya  /  devA uya nautthaM tu AukAma caviI  /  /  -uttarAdhyayana, a0 33, mA0 12
(kha) prajJApanA pana 23, u0 2 /  (ga) nArakarSagyonamAnuSa bannAni  /
-taravArtha a0 8. sU. 11

Page #173 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## First Karma Granthya  Just as a painter creates various forms of good and
bad, such as elephants, horses, lions, deer, humans, etc., similarly,
**Namakarma** creates various forms of good and bad for the soul. Therefore, the
painter is used as a metaphor for **Namakarma**. The characteristic of
**Namakarma** is this:  **Namakarma** is the karma that, upon its fruition,
causes the soul to attain hell, animal, human, and celestial realms, and
experience various good and bad states. Or, the karma that causes the soul to
experience motion, etc., various states, or the formation of body, etc., is
called **Namakarma**.  There are forty-two, ninety-nine, one hundred and three,
and sixty-four types of **Namakarma** due to **Apekṣābheda**.  Now, in the next
two verses, the fourteen **Piḍaprakṛtis** and eight **Pracīnaprakṛtis** of
**Namakarma** are mentioned.  **Gati, Jāti, Śarīra, Angopānga, Bandhana,
Saṃghātanā, Saṃhanana, Saṃsthāna, Varṇa, Gandha, Rasa, Sparśa, Anupūrvī, and
Vihāya** - these are the various states that cause the soul to experience
different states. Just as a merchant, in his business, earns various profits and
losses, similarly, **Namakarma** causes the soul to experience various states,
both good and bad, in the world.  **Stāṇāṅga 2.4.105 Tīkā**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prathama karmagranya jaise citrakAra hAthI, ghor3e, siMha, hirana, manuSya Adi
nAnA prakAra ke acche-bure rUpa banAtA hai  /  usI prakAra nAmakarma jIva ke
aneka prakAra ke acche-bure rUpa banAtA hai| isIlie nAnakama ke lie citrakAra kI
upamA dI jAtI hai  /  nAmakarma kA lakSaNa yaha hai nAmakarma-jisa karma ke
udaya se jIva naraka, tiryaMca, manuSya aura devamati prApta karake acchI-burI
vividha paryAya prApta karatA hai athavA jisa karma se AtmA gati Adi nAnA
paryAyoM kA anubhava kare athavA zarIra Adi bane, use nAmakarma kahate haiM  / '
_ apekSAbheda se nAmavArma ke bayAlIsa, tirAnave, ekasau tIna aura sar3asaTha
bheda haiN| aba Age kI do mAthAoM meM nAmakarma kI caudaha piDaprakRtiyoM aura
ATha pratyekaprakRtiyoM ke nAmoM ko kahate haiN| gaijAitaNuUvaMgA
bandhaNasaMghAyaNANi saMghayaNA  /  saMThANavaNNagandharasaphAsa aNupuTiva
vihagagaI  // 24 //  piDapaDisi caDavasa, paraghA ussAsa AyavujjoyaM  /
agurulahutisthAnimaNoyaghAyamiya aThThapatte yA  // 25 /  /  gAthArtha-gati,
jAti, zarIra, aMgopAMga, baMdhana, saMghAtana, saMhanana, saMsthAna, varNa,
gaMdha, rasa, sparza, AnupUrvI aura bihAyo vicitra paryApanamayati-pariNayati
yajjIvaM tamAma  /  jaha vittayage nitaNI aNaga havAI pAi ruvAI  /
sohaNamasoraNAI cokkhamokreti varNahi  /  /  taha nAmanihu kamma aNegarUvAI kUda
jIvasya  /  sohaNamasohAi zAmiNavAI loyassa || sthAnAMga 2 / 4 / 105 TIkA

Page #174 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Karmavipaka  There are 14 **Pindaprakritis** and 8 **Pratyekaprakritis** of
**Namakarma**. The eight **Pratyekaprakritis** are: **Paraghat**, **Uchchvas**,
**Atap**, **Udyot**, **Agurulghu**, **Tirthankar**, **Nirmaan**, and **Updhat**.
**Note:** The previous section hinted at the existence of 41 different types of
**Namakarma** due to differences in their characteristics. This number arises
from the way we choose to describe them, either briefly or in detail. Some of
these types have further subdivisions, while others do not. Those with
subdivisions are called **Pindaprakritis**, and those without are called
**Pratyekaprakritis**.  These two verses list the names of the 14
**Pindaprakritis** and 8 **Pratyekaprakritis** to explain the 41 different
types. Their names are as follows:  **Pindaprakritis:**  1. **Gati** 2. **Jati**
3. **Sharira** 4. **Angopang** 5. **Bandhan** 6. **Sanghatan** 7. **Sanhanan**
8. **Sansthan** 9. **Varn** 10. **Gandh** 11. **Ras** 12. **Sparsh** 13.
**Anupurvi** 14. **Vihayogati**  **Pratyekaprakritis:**  1. **Paraghat** 2.
**Uchchvas** 3. **Atap** 4. **Udyot** 5. **Agurulghu** 6. **Tirthankar** 7.
**Nirmaan** 8. **Updhat**  All these are **Namakarma** **Prakritis**, so when
pronouncing them, we should add the word "Namakarma" after each. For example,
**Gatinamkarma**, **Jatinamkarma**, **Shariranamkarma**, etc.  **Definitions of
Pindaprakritis:**  1. **(a)** **Prajnapanajaya 2, Pad 23, Sutra 263** 2. **(b)**
**Samavayangasthan 42**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmavipAka gati ye nAmakarma kI 14 piMDaprakRtiyAM haiM aura pagalAta,
ucchvAsa, Atapa, udyota, aguruladhu, tIrthakara, nirmANa aura upadhAta ye ATha
pratyeka prakRtiyA~ haiN| vizeSArtha-pUrvamAthA meM nAmakarma ke apekSAbheda ke
kAraNa vyAlIsa tirAnave Adi bheda hone kA saMketa kiyA gayA hai| saMkSepa yA
vistAra se kahane ko apekSA hI isa saMkhyAbheda kA kAraNa hai| ina bhedoM meM
kucha prakRtiyoM avAntara bheda vAlI haiM aura kucha avAntara bheda vAlI nahIM
haiN| jina prakRtiyoM ke avAntara bheda hote haiM unheM piMDaprakRti aura jina
ke avAntara bheda nahIM hote haiM unheM pratyeka prakRti kahate haiN|
sarvaprathama bayAlIsa bhedoM kA kathana karane ke lie caudaha piMDaprakRtiyoM
aura ATha pratyekaprakRtiyoM ke nAma ina do gAthAoM meM batalAye haiN| inake
nAma kramazaH isa prakAra haiM piDaprakRtiyA~-(1) gati, (2) jAti, (3) zarIra,
(4) aMgopAMga, (5) baMdhana. (5) saMghAtana, (7) saMhanana, (8) saMsthAna, (9)
varNa, (10) gaMdha, (11) rasa, (12) sparza, (13) AnupUrvI aura (14) vihAyogati
/  pratyekaprakRtiyA~- (1) parAghAta, (2) ucchvAsa, (3) Atapa, (4) udyota, (5)
agarulaghu, (6) tIrthakara, (7) nirmANa aura (8) upaghAta  / '  /  ye saba
nAmakarma kI prakRtiyA~ haiM, isalie inakA uccAraNa karate samaya pratyeka ke
sAtha nAmakarma zabda jor3a lenA caahie| jaise gatinAmakarma, jAtinAmakarma,
zarIranAmakarma Adi  /  piDaprakRtiyoM kI paribhASAyeM isa prakAra haiM1. (ka)
prajJApanA jA 2, pada 23, sUtra 263 (kha) samavAyAMga sthAna 42

Page #175 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## First Karma Granth  **Gati:** The karma that causes the soul to be reborn in
different realms like human, hell, animal, or god, is called **Mati Karma**.
**Jati:** The karma that causes the soul to acquire one, two, three, four, or
five senses (touch, taste, etc.) and be called one-sensed, two-sensed, three-
sensed, four-sensed, or five-sensed, is called **Jati Karma**.  **Sharira:** The
karma that causes the soul to acquire different types of bodies like Audarik,
Vaikriya, etc., is called **Sharira Karma**.  **Angopang:** The karma that
causes the soul to acquire different body parts like hands, feet, head, etc.,
and sub-parts like fingers, etc., is called **Angopang Karma**.  **Bandhan:**
The karma that causes the soul to connect newly acquired particles with the
previously acquired Audarik, etc., body particles, is called **Bandhan Karma**.
**Sanghat:** The karma that causes the newly acquired body particles to be
arranged in a systematic way on the previously acquired body particles, is
called **Sanghat Karma**.  **Sanhanan:** The karma that causes the joints in the
body to become strong, is called **Sanhanan Karma**.  **Sansthan:** The karma
that causes the body to acquire different auspicious or inauspicious shapes, is
called **Sansthan Karma**.  **Varn:** The karma that causes the body to acquire
different colors like black, brown, etc., is called **Varn Karma**.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prathama karmagrantha gati-jisake udaya me AtmA manuSyAdi gatiyoM meM jAe
athavA nArakI, tiryaca, manuSya, deva kI paryAya prApta karatA hai, use
matinAmakarma kahate haiN| jAti-jisa karma ke udaya se jIva sparzana, rasana Adi
patra indriyoM meM kramazaH eka, do, tIna, cAra, pAMca indriyA~ prApta kara
ekendriya, dvIndriya, zrIndriya, caturindriya aura paMcendriya kahalAtA hai, use
jAtinAmakarma kahate hai| zarIra - jisa karma ke udaya se jIva ke audArika,
vaikriya Adi zarIra bana athavA audArika Adi zarIroM kI prApti ho ume
zarIranAmakarma kahate haiN| aMgopAMga-jisa karma ke udaya se jIva ke aMga-
hAtha, paira, sira Adi aura upAMga-aMguli Adi rUpa meM pudgaloM kA pariNamana
hotA hai, use aMgopAMga nAmakarma kahate haiN| _ bandhana-jisa karma ke udaya se
pUrvagRhIta audArika Adi zarIra pudgaloM ke sAtha navIna grahaNa kie jAne vAle
pudgaloM kA sambandha ho, use bandhananAmakarma kahate haiN| saMghAta-jisa karma
ke udaya se prathama grahaNa kie hue zarIra pudgaloM para navIna grahaNa kie jA
rahe zarIra yogya pudgala vyavasthita rUpa se sthApita kiye jAte haiM, use
saMghAta nAmakarma kahate haiN| _ saMhananajisa karma ke udaya me zarIra meM
haDDiyoM kI saMdhiyA~ dRr3ha hotI haiM, use saMhanana nAmakarma kahate haiN|
saMsthAna-jisa karma ke udaya se zarIra ke jude-jude zubha yA azubha AkAra
baneM, use saMsthAna nAmakarma kahate haiN| _varNa-jisa karma ke udaya se zarIra
meM kRSNa, maura Adi raMga hote haiM, use varNa nAmakarma kahate haiM  /

Page #176 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Karmavipaka  **Gandha** - The karma that results in the body having a
pleasant or unpleasant odor is called Gandha karma.  **Rasa** - The karma that
results in the body experiencing bitter, sweet, or other pleasant or unpleasant
tastes is called Rasa karma.  **Sparsha** - The karma that results in the body
having a rough, soft, smooth, or dry touch is called Sparsha karma.
**Anupurvi** - The karma that results in the soul returning to its place of
origin in its next birth is called Anupurvi karma.  **Vihayogati** - The karma
that results in the soul having a gait like that of an elephant, bull, etc.
(pleasant) or like that of a camel, donkey, etc. (unpleasant) is called
Vihayogati karma.  The details of the various sub-categories of these Pind-
Prakritis will be mentioned in the following verses.  Out of the 28 categories
of Namakarma, eight have been mentioned in this verse. Their characteristics
will be explained in the following chapters.  Out of the 42 categories of
Namakarma, 22 have been mentioned here. The remaining 20 categories will be
mentioned in the next two verses.  **1. Vihayogati** - The word "Vihay" is used
as a qualifier in Vihayogati.  This is to avoid repetition. If only the word
"Gati" was used, it would have created repetition with the first category of
Namakarma, which is also called "Gati". The word "Vihay" is used to clarify the
meaning, which is "in the sense of".  The word "Gati" refers to the gait of the
soul, not to the state of being a god or a human.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmavipAka gandha - jisa karma ke udaya se zarIra meM zubha-acchI yA azubha
buro gandha ho, use gaMdha nAmakarma kahate haiM  /  66 rasa-jisa karma ke udaya
se zarIra meM tikta, madhura Adi zubhaazubha rasoM kI utpatti ho use
rasanAmakarma kahate haiM  /  sparza - jisa karma ke udaya se zarIra kA sparza
karkaza, mRdu, snigdha, rUkSa Adi rUpa ho, use sparzanAmakarma kahate haiM  /
AnupUrvI jisa karma ke udaya se jIva vigrahagati meM apane utpattisthAna para
pahu~catA hai, use AnupUrvInAmakarma kahate haiM  /  -- vihAyogati' - jisa karma
ke udaya se jIva kI cAla hAthI, baila Adi kI cAla ke samAna zubha athavA U~Ta,
gadhe kI cAla ke samAna azubha hotI hai, use vihAyogati kahate haiM  /  ina
piMDa- prakRtiyoM ke avAntara bheda-prabhedoM kI saMkhyA aura nAmoM kA saMketa
Age kI gAthAoM meM yathAsthAna kiyA jA rahA hai  /  nAmakarma kI 28 pratyeka
prakRtiyoM meM se ATha ke nAma gAthA meM batAye haiN| jinake lakSaNa grantha meM
Age kahe jA rahe haiM  /  nAmakarma ke apekSA bheda se hone vAle bayAlIsa bhedoM
meM yahAM bAIsa bheda kahe jA cuke haiN| zeSa rahe bIsa bhedoM nAma Age kI do
gAthAoM meM kahate haiN| 1. vihAyogati meM vihAya vizeSaNa punarukti doSa
nivAraNa hetu diyA gayA hai| sirpha gati zabda rakhane para nAmakarma kI pahalI
prakRti kA nAma bhI gati hone se punarukti doSa ho sakatA thA  /  zabda ko
samajhane ke lie vihAyas zabda hai, 1.-di ke artha meM  /  jIva ko cAla artha
meM gati na ki devagati, manuSyagati

Page #177 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## First Karma Granth  **Verse 26:** *Tasa* *shayar* *panjatt* *pattey* *thiran*
*subhan* *cha* *subhagan* *cha* | *Susaraizj* *jasan* *tasadasagan*
*thavaradasan* *tu* *iman* ||26||  **Verse 27:** *Thavar* *sum* *apj* *saharana*
*athira* *asubha* *dubhagani* | *Dussarana* *ijj* *aj* *jas* *miy* *name*
*seyara* *bosan* ||27||  **Gayaarth:** *Tras*, *badar*, *paryapt* *pratyek*,
*sthira*, *shubha*, *subhaga*, *susvara*, *aadey* and *yashakoti* - these are
the ten natures of the *Trasadashak*. And *sthavar*, *sukshma*, *aparyapt*,
*sadharana*, *asthira*, *akshubha*, *dubhang*, *duhsvara*, *anaadey* and
*ayashakoti* - these are the ten natures of the *Sthavaradashak*. By combining
the ten natures of the *Sadashak* and *Sthavaradashak*, the beads of *namakarma*
are formed.  **Vishesharth:** Out of the twenty-eight names of each nature, the
names of twenty natures, excluding eight, are mentioned in these two verses as
*Sadashak* and *Sthavaradashak*. Since the names from *tras* to *yashakoti* are
ten in number, they are called *Sadashak*. And since the names from *sthavar* to
*ayashakoti* are also ten in number, they are called *Sthavaradashak*.  The ten
names of the *Sadashak* natures are as follows: (1) *Vasanam*, (2) *Badarnam*,
(3) *Paryaptnam*, (4) *Pratyeknam*, (5) *Sthirnam*, (6) *Shubhnam*, (7)
*Subhaganam*, (8) *Susvarnam*, (9) *Ayanam*, and (10) *Yashakotirnam*.  The ten
names of the *Sthavaradashak* natures are: (1) *Sthavarnam*, (2) *Sukshmanam*,
(3) *Aparyaptnam*, (4) ...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prathama karmagrantha tasa zAyara paMjjattaM patteya thiraM subhaM ca subhagaM
ca  /  susarAijja jasaM tasadasagaM thAvaradasaM tu imaM  // 26 //  thAvara suma
apajja sAhAraNa athira asubha dubhagANi  /  dussaraNA ijjAjasa miya nAme seyarA
bosaM  // 27 //  gAyArtha - trasa, bAdara, paryApta pratyeka, sthira, zubha,
subhaga, susvara, Adeya aura yazaHkoti ye trasadazaka kI dasa prakRtiyA~ haiM
aura sthAvara, sUkSma, aparyApta, sAdhAraNa, asthira, akSubha, dubhaMga,
duHsvara, anAdeya aura ayazaHkIti ye sthAvaradazaka kI dasa prakRtiyA~ hai  /
sadazaka aura sthAvaradazaka kI ukta dasa-dasa prakRtiyoM ko jor3ane se
nAmakarma kI motiyoM hotI hai  /  67 vizeSArtha - pratyeka prakRtiyoM ke
aTThAisa nAmoM meM se ATha prakRtiyoM ke sivAya zeSa rahI bIsa prakRtiyoM ke
nAma sadazaka aura sthAvaradazaka ke rUpa meM ina do gAthAoM meM kahe haiM  /
trasa se lekara yaza:kIrti taka ke nAmoM kI saMkhyA dasa hone se unako sadazaka
aura sthAvara se lekara ayazaHkItiparyanta nAmoM ke bhI dasa bheda hone se unako
sthAvaradazaka kahate haiM  /  sadazaka kI dasa prakRtiyoM ke nAma kramaza: isa
prakAra haiM- (1) vasanAma, (2) bAdaranAma, (3) paryAptanAma, (4) pratyekanAma,
(5) sthiranAma, (6) zubhanAma, (7) subhaganAma (8) susvaranAma, (E) AyanAma aura
(10) yazaH kIrtinAma | sthAvaradazaka kI prakRtiyoM ke dasa nAma ye haiM(1)
sthAvaranAma, (2) sUkSmanAma, (3) aparyAptanAma, (4)

Page #178 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Karmavipaka  **Common Names:** (5) Asthiranam, (6) Ashubhanam, (7)
Durbhaganam, (8) Duhsvaranam, (6) Anadeyanam, and (10) Ayashah Kirtinam.  **68**
Out of these twenty types, the Sadashaka types are counted as punya
(meritorious) types, and the Stavardashaka types are counted as papa
(demeritorious) types. The characteristics of these types are explained further
in the text. After mentioning the names of these forty-two types of name-karma,
for the sake of brevity, the text uses two verses to describe these twenty types
with some symbolic names (sanketas) like Trasa, etc.  **1.**
**Trasachathirashak Athirakk Sahamatig Dhavarach Upakan. Subhagati Gaivibhassa
Tadaikhahi Payadih. || 28 ||**  **Vannachaou Agurulahucha Tasaitichaurachak
Micchai. Iya Annadi Vibhasa Tayaai Sankhahi Payadohi. || 26 ||**  **Meaning of
the verses:**  Starting with the name of the initial type, counting up to the
completion of the number, we have Trasachatuष्क, Sthiraषट्क, Asthiraषट्क,
Sukshmatrik, Stavarachatuष्क, Subharatrik, Varna...  **For the names of the
Sadashaka and Stavardashaka types, see Prajnapana Sutra, Chapter 2, Page 23,
Sutra 263, "Taksana me a varaname... Ajasokitthiname"**  **(a) Taksana me a
varaname... Ajasokitthiname**  **(b) Samvayaanga, Sam. 42**  **(c) Gatijati
Sharira Angaranga Nirman**  **Sangha Sansthan Sanhanan Varna Rasarudhoop
Ghatapradhata Tatpobalo Ucchvasaviha. Yogatayaha Pratyek Sharira Subhagasya
(Shubhamukhsma Ryapti Sthira Ayashansi Seraani Tiyam Kritvam Cha.**
**Swarthasutra 8.12**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmavipAka sAdhAraNanAma, (5) asthiranAma, (6) azubhanAma, (7) durbhaganAma,
(8) duHsvaranAma, (6) anAdeyanAma tathA (10) ayazaH kIrtinAma | 68 ina bIsa
prakRtiyoM meM se sadazaka kI prakRtiyoM kI gaNanA puNyaprakRtiyoM meM aura
sthAvaradazaka kI prakRtiyoM kI gaNanA pApaprakRtiyoM meM kI jAtI hai| ina
prakRtiyoM ke lakSaNa grantha meM Age kahe jA rahe haiM  /  isa prakAra
nAmakarma ke bayAlIsa bhedoM ke nAmoM kA kathana karane ke anantara
granthalAghava kI dRSTi se trasa Adi ina bIsa prakRtiyoM kI katipaya saMjJAoM
(saMketa) ko do gAthAoM dvArA kahate haiM  /  1. tasaca thirachaSaka athirakka
sahamatiga dhAvaraca upakaM  /  subhagatigAivibhAsA tadAikhAhi payaDIha  //  28
//  vaNNacau agurulahuca tasAiticaurachakka miccAI | iya annAdi vibhAsA tayAi
saMkhAhi payaDohi  //  26  //  gAthArtha - prArambha hone vAlI prakRti ke nAma
sahita Age kI saMkhyA kI pUrNatA taka ginane se trasacatuSka, sthiraSaTka,
asthiraSaTka, sUkSmatrika, sthAvaracatuSka, subharAtrika, varNa sadazaka aura
sthAvaradazaka kI prakRtiyoM ke nAma ke lie dekheMprajJApanA sUtra u02 pa 23.
sUtra 263 kA 'takSaNA me a varaNAme ....ajasokittiNAme kA aMza (kha)
samavAyAMga, sama0 42 (ga) gatijAtizarIrAGgarAGga nirmANa saMghasaMsthAna
saMhanana varNarasarudhUpaghAtaparAdhAtAtapobalocch vaasvih| yogatayaH
pratyekazarIrasubhagasya (zubhamUkSma ryAptisthirAyazAMsiserANi tIyaM kRtvaM ca
/  svArthasUtra 8 / 12

Page #179 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## First Karma Granth, Chapter 66  Terms like "Chatushk", "Agurulachuchatushk",
"Basadvik", "Satrik", "Sachatushk", "Asashatk" etc. are used (as synonyms).
Similarly, other terms should be understood by counting the number of
"Prakritis" (categories) and their names.   **Special Note:** This concise
method is used to avoid lengthy explanations and to help seekers understand the
essence of the scriptures. Therefore, some terms are defined here in a simple
way. "Sanket" (symbol), "Vibhasha" (synonym), and "Sanjna" (term) are
synonymous.  These terms are formed by combining the names of "Prakritis" with
numbers like two, three, four, etc. These terms represent the names of further
"Prakritis" along with the name of the initial "Prakriti" to complete the
number. Some of these terms are indicated in these two sections:  **Prasachatusk
(4):** (1) Sanam, (2) Badarnam, (3) Paryaptanam, (4) Pratyeknam.  **Spirishadk
(6):** (1) Sthirnam, (2) Shubhnam, (3) Subhaganam, (4) Susvarnam, (5) Adayanam,
(6) Yash-Kirtinam.  **Asthirishadk (6):** (1) Asthirnam, (2) Ashubhnam, (3)
Durbhaganam, (4) Duhsvarnam, (5) Anadayanam, (6) Ayash-Kirtinam.
**Sthavarachatushk (4):** (1) Sthavarnam, (2) Sukshmanam, (3) Aparyaptnam, (4)
Sadharannam.  **Subhagatrik (3):** (1) Subhaganam, (2) Sumvarnam, (3) Adayanam.
**Varnachatushk (4):** (1) Varnnam, (2) Gandhnam, (3) Rasnam, (4) Sparshnam.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prathama karmagrandha 66 catuSka, agurulacucatuSka, basadvika, satrika,
sacatuSka, asaSaTka ityAdi saMjJAeM (vibhASAeM) ho jAtI haiM  /  isI prakAra
anya bhI una-una saMkhyaka prakRtiyoM ke nAma ginane se aura aura saMjJAe~
samajha lenI cAhie  /  vizeSArtha- zAstra kA artha samajhane ke lie vistAra na
karanA par3e aura jijJAsuoM ko saMkSepa meM kathana kA Azaya samajhAne ke lie
saMketapaddhati apanAI jAtI hai| isIlie yahA~ bhI isI sugama zailI ko apanAkara
kucha saMjJAoM kA nirdhAraNa kiyA gayA hai| saMketa, vibhASA, saMjJA ye zabda
samAnArthaka haiM  /  prakRti ke nAmanirdazapUrvaka kiye gaye do, tIna, cAra Adi
saMkhyAoM ke saMketa ye usa prakRti ke nAma-sahita Age kI prakRtiyoM ke nAmoM ko
minakara saMkhyA kI pUrti karane se ye saMjJAeM banatI haiN| isa prakAra se
banane vAlI kucha saMjJAoM kA saMketa ina do mAthAoM meM kiyA gayA hai. jo isa
prakAra hai prasacatuSka(1) sanAma, (2) bAdaranAma, (3) paryAptanAma, (4)
prtyeknaam| spiraSadka-(1) sthiranAma, (2) zubhanAma, (3) subhaganAma. (4)
susvaranAma, (5) AdeyanAma, (6) yaza-kIrtinAma  /  asthiraSadka-(1) asthiranAma,
(2) azubhanAma, (3) durbhaganAma, (4) duHsvaranAma, (5) anAdeyanAma, (6)
ayazaHkIrtinAma  /  sthAvaracatuSka-(1) sthAvaranAma, (2) sUkSmanAma, (3)
aparyApta. nAma, (4) sAdhAraNanAma  /  subhagatrika -(1) subhaganAma, (2)
sumvaranAma, (3) AdeyanAma  /  varNacatuSka-(1) varNanAma, (2) gaMdhanAma, (3)
rasanAma, (4) sprshnaam|

Page #180 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Karmavipaka  **Agurulughuchatuska (4)** (1) Agurulughunama, (2)
Apaghanatnama, (3) Paraghanatnama, (4) Ucchvasanama  **Sadvik (2)** (1) Sanam
(2) Badarnama  **Nama (2)** (a) Badam, (b)   **Trasatrik (1)**  **Trasashatka
(6)** (1) Sanam (2) Badarnama, (3) Paryaptanama (4) Pratiyakanam (5) Sthiranama,
(6) Shubanama  **I**  The word "Adi" in the gatha should be understood as
meaning that other names should be created in this way to easily understand the
karma-prakritis. For example:  **Durbhagatrik (3)** (1) Durbhaganama, (2)
Duhsvaranama, (3) Anadeyanam  **Styanadvitrik (3)** (1) Styanadhit, (2) Nidra
Nidra, (3) Prachala  **100** Prachala  In the 23rd gatha, it was said that there
are 42, 63, 103, and 67 types of name-karma due to the difference in
expectation. Of these, the names and symbols of the 42 types have been explained
in brief. To explain the 93 types that arise from the difference in expectation,
the number of Uttaraprakritis of the 14 Pindaprakritis are mentioned.  **I**
**Gathiyan U Kamso Chapanapanatipanapanch Chchchrakam. Pan Bugapan Thasajadug
Uttarameyapanashatthi ||30||**  **Gathath** - The 14 Pindaprakritis of name-
karma mentioned earlier have 4, 5, 5, 3, 5, 5, 6, 6, 5, 2, 5, 8, 4, and 2 types
respectively. Adding all these types together, we get a total of 65 types. There
are also 93 types of name-karma due to the difference in expectation, which are
mentioned in the 24th gatha.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmavipAka agurulaghucatuSka (1) agurulaghunAma, (2) apaghAtanAma, (3)
parAghAtanAma, (4) ucchvAsanAma | sadvika- (1) sanAma (2) bAdaranAma | nAma (e)
bAdAma, (i) trasatrika (1) trasaSaTka - ( 1 ) sanAma (2) bAdaranAma, (3)
paryAptanAma (4) pratyekanAma) (5) sthiranAma, (6) zubhanAma I gAthA meM Aye Adi
zabda kA yaha artha samajhanA cAhie ki karmaprakRtiyoM ko saralatA se samajhane
ke lie isI prakAra kI ora dUsarI saMjJAe~ banA lenI caahie| jaise durbhagatrika
(1) durbhaganAma, (2) duHsvaranAma, (3) anAdeyanAma | styAnadvitrika (1)
styAnaddhi, (2) nidrA nidrA, (3) pracalA 100 pracalA  /  teIsavIM gAthA meM jo
apekSA bheda se nAmakarma ke 42, 63, 103 aura 67 bheda honA kahA thaa| unameM se
bayAlIsa bhedoM ke nAma aura saMketoM dvArA saMkSepa meM samajhane ke liye
saMjJAoM kA kathana kiyA jA cukA hai| apekSAbheda se banane vAle 93 bhedoM ko
kahane ke lie 14 fusprakRtiyoM kI uttaraprakRtiyoM kI saMkhyA batalAte haiM  /
iya gaiyAINa u kamaso capaNapaNatipaNapaMca chacchrakaM  /  paNa bugapaNa
ThaSajaduga uttarameyapaNasaTThI ||30| gAthArtha - pUrva meM kahI gaI nAmakarma
kI gati Adi caudaha piNDaprakRtiyoM ke kramazaH cAra, pAMca, pA~ca, tIna, pA~ca,
pA~ca, chaha, chaha, pAMca, do, pAMca, ATha, cAra aura do bheda hote haiM  /
ina saba bhedoM ko jor3ane se kula paiMsaTha bheda ho jAte haiM  /  vizeSArtha
apekSAbheda se nAmakarma ke terAnave Adi bheda bhI hote haiM  /  ataH unako
kahane ke lie caubIsavIM gAthA meM kahI gaI piMDa

Page #181 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## First Karma Granth 101  The number of sub-divisions of the *prakritis* is
mentioned in this verse. The verse does not mention the names of the
*prakritis*, but only the number of their sub-divisions. Therefore, the numbers
mentioned in this verse should be added to the names of the *prakritis*
mentioned in the twenty-fourth verse, respectively.  There are 4 sub-divisions
of *gatinam*, 5 sub-divisions of *jatinam*, 5 sub-divisions of *shariranam*,
sub-divisions of *angopangnam*, 5 sub-divisions of *bandhanam*, 5 sub-divisions
of *sanghatanam*, 6 sub-divisions of *sanhananam*, 6 sub-divisions of
*sansthanam*, 5 sub-divisions of *varnanam*, 2 sub-divisions of *gandhanam*, 5
sub-divisions of *rasanam*, 8 sub-divisions of *sparshanam*, 4 sub-divisions of
*anupurvinam*, and sub-divisions of *vihayogatinam*.  ## 2  Thus, by combining
the aforementioned sub-divisions of the fourteen *pindaprakritis* of
*namakarma*, the total number of sub-divisions is 65.  Due to the existence of
13, 103, and 67 *prakritis* of *namakarma*, and the different numbers of
*karmaprakritis* in relation to *bandha* etc., the following two verses clarify
this:  ## 31  Twenty-eight, three, and nine, or fifteen in *bandhana*.    ## 32
The *bandhana* aggregate, the subtle, and the seven, sixty-six in *bandha*
origin, or not, according to the understanding.    **Verse Meaning:**  By
combining the aforementioned sub-divisions of the *pindaprakritis* of
*namakarma*, there are twenty-eight *prakritis*. Adding fifteen sub-divisions of
*bandhana* to these, there are one hundred and three sub-divisions. By taking
into account the sub-divisions of *bandhana* and *sanghatanam* in the five
bodies, and by taking into account the four *varna* from the general, one should
understand sixty-six sub-divisions of *bandha*, *udaya*, and *udirana*. At the
time of *bandha*...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prathama karmagrantha 101 prakRtiyoM ke uttarabhedoM kI saMkhyA isa gAthA meM
batalAI hai | gAthA meM prakRtiyoM ke nAma na dekara uttarabhedoM kI saMkhyA hI
kahI hai  /  ataH caubIsavIM gAthA meM kahI gaI prakRtiyoM ke nAmoM ke Age isa
gAthA meM batAI gaI saMkhyA ko kramazaH isa prakAra jor3anA cAhie  /  gatinAma
ke 4 bheda, jAtinAma ke 5 bheda, zarIranAma ke 5 bheda, aMgopAMganAma ke bheda,
bandhanAma ke 5 bheda, saMghAtananAma ke 5 bheda, saMhanananAma ke 6 bheda,
saMsthAnanAma ke 6 bheda, varNanAma ke 5 bheda, gandhanAma ke 2 bheda, rasanAma
ke 5 bheda, sparzanAma ke 8 bheda, AnupUrvI nAma ke 4 bheda, vihAyogatinAma ke
bheda | 2 isa prakAra nAmakarma kI caudaha piMDaprakRtiyoM ke ukta prabhedoM ko
milAne se uttarabhedoM kI samasta saMkhyA 65 hotI hai  /  nAmakarma kI 13, 103
aura 67 prakRtiyA~ hone ke kAraNa tathA bandha Adi kI apekSA karmaprakRtiyoM ko
bhinna saMkhyA ko nimnalikhita do gAthAoM meM spaSTa karate haiM sAmannavaNNacau
// 31 //  aDavIsa - juyA tinavas saMte vA panarabaMdhaNe tisayaM  /
baMdhaNasaMghAya gaho taNU su iya sattaTThI baMdhodae ya na ya sammamIsayA
bandhe  /  bandhubae sattAe bosayosa aTThAvannasayaM  //  32  //  gAthArtha -
nAmakarma ko piMDaprakRtiyoM ke ukta bhedoM meM aTThAIsa prakRtiyoM ko milAne se
terAnace bheda tathA inameM bandhana ke pandraha bheda jor3ane se ekasau tIna
bheda tathA pA~ca zarIroM meM bandhana tathA saMghAtana ke bhedoM ko grahaNa
karane aura sAmAnya se varNacatuSka kA grahaNa kie jAne se baMdha, udaya aura
udIraNA ke sar3asaTha bheda samajha lenA cAhie  /  bandha ke samaya

Page #182 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 102 **Karmavishak**  One should understand that there are 120, 122, and 148
natures respectively, in relation to bondage, arising, and existence, due to the
absence of bondage from Samyaktva and mixed delusion.   **Special Note:** How
the 19th and subsequent divisions of Name Karma arise due to the difference in
expectation and how many natures are eligible for bondage, etc., is explained in
these two chapters.  In the previous verse, the 65 divisions of the 14
Pindaprakritis of Name Karma were mentioned. By adding the 10 natures each of
Paramarth, etc., Karma, and the 10 natures of the immovable decad, there are 93
natures in existence.   In these 63 natures, five divisions of bondage Name
Karma are taken, but in detail, there are 15 divisions of bondage Name Karma.
Therefore, by adding 15 divisions instead of five, one should understand that
there are 103 natures in the existence of Name Karma.  However, in the bodies of
Audarika, etc., there are Audarika, etc., forms of bondage and Audarika, etc.,
forms of aggregation. Therefore, by including the 15 divisions of bondage Name
Karma and the five divisions of aggregation Name Karma, a total of 20 divisions,
in the five divisions of body Name Karma, and by including the five, two, five,
and eight divisions of color, smell, taste, and touch Name Karma respectively,
in the four colors, the 16 natures of color, etc., and the 20 natures of bondage
and aggregation (a total of 36 natures) are subtracted from the aforementioned
103 natures of Name Karma, resulting in 67 natures of Name Karma being
considered from a relative perspective.   These 67 natures of Name Karma are
taken into account when calculating the natures eligible for bondage, arising,
and existence.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 102 karmaviSAka samyaktva va mizramohanIya kA baMdha nahIM hone se baMdha,
udaya aura satA kI apekSA kramazaH eka sau bIsa, ekasau bAIsa aura ekasau
aTThAvana prakRtiyAM samajhanA caahie| vizeSArtha-apekSA-bheda se nAmakarma ke
terAnave Adi bheda kaise banate haiM tathA bandha Adi ke yogya kitanI prakRtiyAM
haiM, yaha ina do mAthAoM meM batalAyA hai 1 pUrva gAthA meM jo nAmakarma kI
caudaha piMDaprakRtiyoM ke 65 bheda batalAye, meM parama Adi kAra lAmA ra
sthAvaradazaka kI dasa-dasa prakRtiyoM ko jor3a dene se sattA meM 93 prakRtiyA~
hotI haiM  /  ina 63 prakRtiyoM meM bandhana nAmakarma ke pA~ca bheda grahaNa
kie gae haiM kintu vistAra se bandhana nAmakarma ke pandaha bheda hote haiN|
ataH pA~ca ke sthAna para pandraha bhedoM ko jor3ane para nAmakarma kI sattA meM
ekasau tIna prakRtiyA~ samajhanA caahie| lekina audArikAdi zarIroM meM
audArikAdi rUpa bandhana aura audArikAdi rUpa saMghAtana hote haiN| ataH
bandhananAmakarma ke pandraha bheda evaM saMghAtana nAmakarma ke pAMca bheda,
saba milAkara bIsa bhedoM ko zarIra nAmakarma ke pA~ca bhedoM meM zAmila karane
aura varNa, gaMdha, rasa, sparza nAmakarmoM ke kramazaH pA~ca, do, pA~ca aura
ATha bhedoM ko varNa catuSka meM garbhita karane para varNAdi kI solaha tathA
bandhana, saMghAtana kI bIsa prakutiyoM (kula milAkara chattIsa prakRtiyoM) ko
nAmakarma kI pUrvokta 103 prakRtiyoM meM se ghaTA dene se ApekSika dRSTi se
nAmakarma kI 67 prakRtiyA~ mAnI jAtI hai| _ bandha, udaya aura udIraNA yogya
prakRtiyoM kI gaNanA karate samaya nAmakarma kI ina sar3asaTha prakRtiyoM ko
grahaNa karate haiN|

Page #183 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## First Karma Granth 103  **Number of Bandha-Adi Yogya Prakṛtis**  There are
120 Bandha-Adhikāriṇī Prakṛtis, 122 Udaya and Udiranā-Adhikāriṇī Prakṛtis, and
158 or 148 Sattā-Adhikāriṇī Prakṛtis.  **Bandha-Adhikāriṇī Prakṛtis (120)**
These are: 5 for Jñānāvaraṇa, 6 for Darśanāvaraṇa, 2 for Vedaniya, 26 for
Mohaniya, 4 for Āyu, 67 for Nāma, 2 for Gotra, and 5 for Antarāya. In total,
these are 120 Prakṛtis.  **Mohaniya Kali (22)**  The reason for 22 Mohaniya Kali
is that the original Bandha-Yogya Prakṛti is Mithyātva-Mohaniya. Samyaktva-
Mohaniya and Miśra-Mohaniya do not bind. Because the Jīva, due to its Samyaktva
Guna, purifies some of the Pudgalas bound by Mithyātva-Mohaniya and makes some
semi-pure. These purified Pudgalas are called Samyaktva-Mohaniya, and the semi-
pure Pudgalas are called Mith (Samyaktva-Mithyātva) Mohaniya. Therefore, out of
the 28 Prakṛtis of Mohaniya Karma, subtracting the two Prakṛtis of Samyaktva-
Mohaniya and Miśra-Mohaniya, 26 Prakṛtis are Bandha-Yogya, and 120 Prakṛtis are
considered Bandha-Adhikāriṇī.  **Udaya and Udiranā Yogya Prakṛtis (122)**  There
are 122 Udaya and Udiranā Yogya Prakṛtis. Because the two Prakṛtis of Samyaktva-
Mohaniya and Miśra-Mohaniya, which were subtracted from the Bandha-Yogya Karma
Prakṛtis, are added back, 122 Prakṛtis become Udaya and Udiranā Adhikāriṇī.
**Sattā Adhikāriṇī Prakṛtis (158 or 148)**  Sattā means existence. The eight
Karmas, Jñānāvaraṇa etc., are generally...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prathama karmagrantha 103 bandhAdi yogya prakRtiyoM kI saMkhyA karmoM kI
bancha-adhikAriNI prakRtiyA~ 120, udaya va udIraNAadhikAriNI prakRtiyA~ 122,
aura sattA adhikAriNI prakRtiyA~ bandha-adhikAriNI 120 prakRtiyA~ isa prakAra
haiM-jJAnAvaraNa kI 5, darzanAvaraNa kI 6, vedanIya kI 2, mohanIya kI 26, Ayu kI
4, nAma kI 67, gotra kI 2 aura antarAya kI 5  /  saba milAkara ye 120 prakRtiyA~
hotI haiN| mohanIya kalI 22 pratiToM ke vaya hone kA kAraNa yaha hai ki mUla
rUpa se bandhayogya prakRti mithyAtvamohanIya hai| samyaktvamohanIya aura
mizramohanIya kA bandha nahIM hotA hai  /  kyoMki jIva dvArA jo
mithyAtvamohanIya kA bandha kiyA jAtA hai, usake kucha pugaloM ko jIva apane
samyaktva guNa ke kAraNa zuddha banA letA hai aura kucha pudgaloM ko
arddhshuddh| inameM se zuddha pudgaloM ko samyaktvamohanIya aura arddha zuddha
pudgaloM ko mitha (samyaktvamithyAtva) mohanIya kahate haiN| ataeva
mohanIyakarma kI 28 prakRtiyoM meM se samyaktvamohanIya evaM mizramohanIya ina
do prakRtiyoM ko kama karane para 26 prakRtiyA~ bandhayogya hotI haiM aura 120
prakRtiyA~ bandha-adhikAriNI mAnI jAtI haiN| udaya aura udIraNA yogya 122
prakRtiyA~ haiM  /  kyoMki bandhayogya karmaprakRtiyoM meM mohanIyakarma ko jo
samyaktvamohanIya aura mizra mohanIya ye do prakRtiyA~ ghaTA dI gaI thIM, unako
milA dene se 122 prakRtiyA~ udaya aura udIraNA kI adhikAriNI hotI haiM  /  sattA
kI adhikAriNI 158 athavA 148 karmaprakRtiyA~ haiM  /  sattA kA artha hai
vidyamAna rahanA  /  jJAnAvaraNAdi ATha karmoM ke sAmAnya

Page #184 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 104 ## Karmavipaka  There are 158 types of karmavipaka, therefore 158
prakritis are considered to be the authority of existence to explain the
existence of all of them. The number of 158 karma prakritis that are the
authority of existence is as follows: 5 for jnanaavaran, 7 for darshanavaran, 2
for vedaniya, 28 for mohaniya, 4 for ayu, 103 for namakarma, 2 for gotra and 5
for antaraya. The sum of all these is 158.  The reason for saying that there are
148 prakritis that are the authority of existence due to the difference in
expectation is that if only 5 types of bandhana namakarma are taken instead of
15 types, then 10 types of bandhana will be reduced from 158, leaving 148
prakritis considered to be the authority of existence.  After stating the number
of pindaprakritis of namakarma and the number of prakritis in bandhana etc., now
in verses 33 to 51, the names, characteristics and characteristics of each
prakriti of the types of pindaprakritis of namakarma are explained.
Niryatirinarasuragai igabiyatiy chaupanidijaiyo. Orala viupaharagateyakamman pan
sarish ||33||  **Meaning of the verse:**  There are four types of gati
namakarma: narakagati, tiyanchagati, manushya gati and devagati. There are five
types of jati namakarma: ekendiriya, dwiindriya, triindriya, chaturindriya and
panchendriya. There are five types of sharir namakarma: audarik, vaikriya,
aharak, tejas and kaman.  **Special Meaning:**  The names and numbers of the
fourteen pindaprakritis of namakarma have been mentioned earlier. According to
that, in this verse, the names of the types of gati, jati and sharir namakarma
are mentioned in order.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 104 karmavipAka tayA 158 bheda hote haiM, ataH una sabakI vidyamAnatA batalAne
ke lie 158 prakRtiyA~ sattA kI adhikAriNI mAnI jAtI haiM  /  sattA-adhikAriNI
158 karmaprakRtiyoM kI saMkhyA yaha hai- jJAnAvaraNa kI 5, darzanAvaraNa kI hai,
vedanIya kI 2, mohanIya kI 28, Ayu kI 4, nAmakarma kI 103, gotra kI 2 aura
antarAya ko 5  /  ina sabakA jor3a 158 hotA hai  /  apekSAbheda se
sattAdhikAriNI 148 prakRtiyoM ke kahane kA kAraNa yaha hai ki yadi bandhana
nAmakarma ke 15 bhedoM ke bajAya 5 bheda hI grahaNa kiye jAya~ to 158 meM se
bandhana ke 10 bheda kama kara dene para 148 prakRtiyA~ sattAyogya mAnI jAyeMgI
/  isa prakAra nAmakarma kI piMDaprakRtiyoM kI saMkhyA aura bandhAdi meM
prakRtiyoM kI saMkhyA kA kathana karane ke bAda aba 33 se 51 taka kI gAthAoM meM
nAmakarma kI piMprakRtiyoM ke bhedoM ke nAma, lakSaNa tathA pratyeka prakRtiyoM
ke lakSaNa kahate haiM  /  nirayatirinarasuragaI igabiyatiya caupaNidijAio  /
orAlaviupAhAragateyakammaNa paNa sarIza ||33|| gAthArtha - narakagati,
tiyaMcagati, manuSyagati aura devagati ye cAra gatinAmakarma ke, ekendriya
dvIndriya, zrIndriya, caturindriya aura paMcendriya ye pAMca jAtinAmakarma ke
aura audArika, vaikriya, AhAraka, tejasa aura kAmaMNa ye pAMca zarIranAmakarma
ke bheda haiM  /  P vizeSArtha nAmakarma kI caudaha piMDaprakRtiyoM ke nAma va
saMkhyA jo pahale batalA cuke haiM  /  usake anusAra isa gAthA meM gati, jAti
aura zarIranAmakarma ke bhedoM ke kramazaH nAma batalAye haiM  /

Page #185 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## First Karma Granth  **Karma of Destination (Gati-namakarma) and its Types:**
(1) **Naraka-gati-namakarma:** The karma that, upon its fruition, causes a being
to experience the state of a hell-being (Naraka).  (2) **Tiryanch-gati-
namakarma:** The karma that, upon its fruition, causes a being to experience the
state of a lower animal (Tiryanch).  (3) **Manushya-gati-namakarma:** The karma
that, upon its fruition, causes a being to experience the state of a human
(Manushya).  (4) **Dev-gati-namakarma:** The karma that, upon its fruition,
causes a being to experience the state of a celestial being (Dev).  **Karma of
Species (Jati-namakarma) and its Types:**  (1) **Ekaindriya Jati-namakarma:**
The karma that, upon its fruition, causes a being to have only one sense organ -
the sense of touch (body).  (2) **Dwindriya Jati-namakarma:** The karma that,
upon its fruition, causes a being to have two sense organs - the sense of touch
(body) and the sense of taste (tongue).  (3) **Triindriya Jati-namakarma:** The
karma that, upon its fruition, causes a being to have three sense organs - the
sense of touch (body), the sense of taste (tongue), and the sense of smell
(nose).  (4) **Chaturindriya Jati-namakarma:** The karma that, upon its
fruition, causes a being to have four sense organs - the sense of touch (body),
the sense of taste (tongue), the sense of smell (nose), and the sense of sight
(eyes).  (5) **Panchendriya Jati-namakarma:** The karma that, upon its fruition,
causes a being to have five sense organs - the sense of touch (body), the sense
of taste (tongue), the sense of smell (nose), the sense of sight (eyes), and the
sense of hearing (ears).  **Explanation of Jati-namakarma:**  There are five
senses: (1) Touch (body), (2) Taste (tongue), (3) Smell (nose), (4) Sight
(eyes), and (5) Hearing (ears). Touch is the first sense, and hearing is the
fifth. All beings in the cycle of birth and death have the sense of touch. The
other senses develop gradually, leading to the five types of Jati-namakarma,
from Ekaindriya to Panchendriya.  **Ekaindriya Jati-namakarma:** The karma that,
upon its fruition, causes a being to have only one sense organ - the sense of
touch (body).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prathama karmagrantha gatinAmakarma ke bheva va lakSaNa 1) narakagati (2)
tiryaMcagati (3) manuSyagati (4) devagati  /  (1) jisa karma ke udaya se jIva ko
aisI paryAya prApta ho ki jisase yaha nAraka hai, aisA kahA jAe, vaha
narakamatinAmakarma hai  /  (2) jisa karma ke udaya se jIva ko aisI avasthA
prApta ho ki jisase yaha tiryaca hai, aisA kahA jAe, vaha tiryaMcagatinAmakarma
hai| (3) jisa karma ke udaya se jIva ko aisI avasthA prApta ho ki jisase yaha
manuSya hai, aisA kahA jAya, vaha manuSyagatinAmakarma hai| (4) jisa karma ke
udaya se jIva ko aisI avasthA prApta ho ki jisase yaha deva hai, aisA kahA jAye,
vaha devagatinAmakarma hai  /  jAtinAmakarma ke bheva ka lakSaNa (1) ekendriya
jAtinAma, (2) dvIndriya jAtinAma, (2) zrIndriya jAtinAma, (3) caturindriya
jAtinAma aura (5) paMcendriya jAtinAma  /  ye jAti nAmakarma ke pA~ca bheda
haiN| indriyoM pAMca haiM  /  jinake nAma kramaza:-(1) sparzanendriya (zarIra)
(2) rasanendriya (jIbha), (3) ghrANendriya (nAka), (4) cakSurindriya (A~kha)
aura (5) thotrendriya (kAna) haiM  /  ina pA~ca indriyoM meM se sparzanendriya
pahalI aura novendriya pA~cavIM indriya hai| samasta saMsArI jIvoM ke
sparzanendriya to hotI hai aura usake anantara kramazaH rasanendriya Adi eka-eka
indriya zrotrendriya taka kI vRddhi se ekendriya se lekara paMcendriya paryanta
jAtinAmakarma ke pA~ca bheda hote haiN| inake lakSaNa kramazaH isa prakAra hai
(1) jisa karma ke udaya se jIva ko sirpha eka indriya-sparzana (zarIra) indriya
prApta ho, use ekendriya jAtinAmakarma kahate haiN|

Page #186 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 58 ## 57 ## K ## .:: ## 106 ## Karma Vipaka (2) The karma that gives rise to
two senses - body and tongue - in a being is called **Dwiindriya Jati Karma**.
(3) The karma that gives rise to three senses - body, tongue, and nose - in a
being is called **Triindriya Jati Karma**. (4) The karma that gives rise to four
senses - body, tongue, nose, and eyes - in a being is called **Chaturindriya
Jati Karma**. (5) The karma that gives rise to all five senses - body, tongue,
nose, eyes, and ears - in a being is called **Panchendriya Jati Karma**.  ##
Characteristics of **Sharira Karma** There are five types of **Sharira Karma**:
(1) **Audarik Sharira Karma**, (2) **Vaikriya Sharira Karma**, (3) **Aharak
Sharira Karma**, (4) **Taijas Sharira Karma**, and (5) **Karman Sharira Karma**.
Their characteristics are as follows:  (1) The karma that gives rise to an
**Audarik Sharira** is called **Audarik Sharira Karma**. **Udara** means primary
or gross particles. A body made of these particles, containing bones, flesh,
blood, etc., is called an **Audarik Sharira**. The bodies of Tirthankaras and
Ganadharas are made of primary particles, while the bodies of ordinary beings
are made of gross, impure particles. This **Audarik Sharira** is present in all
humans and animals, whether they are born from the womb or from **Samucchema**
birth.  (2) The karma that gives rise to a **Vaikriya Sharira** in a being is
called **Vaikriya Sharira Karma**. A body that has the power to create various
forms, big and small, single and multiple, diverse and strange, is called a
**Vaikriya Sharira**.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 58 57 ka .:: 106 karma vipAka (2) jisa karma ke udaya se jIva ko do indriyA~ -
zarIra aura jIbha prApta hoM, use dvIndriya jAtinAmakarma kahate haiM  /  (3)
jisa karma ke udaya se jIva ko tIna indriyA~ - zarIra, jobha aura nAka prApta
hoM, use zrIndriya jAtinAmakarma kahate haiM  /  (4) jisa karma ke udaya se jIva
ko cAra indriyA~ - zarIra, jIbha, nAka aura A~kha prApta hoM, use caturindriya
jAtinAmakarma kahate haiM  /  (5) jisa karma ke udaya se jIva ke pA~coM indriyA~
- zarIra, jIbha, nAka, A~kha aura kAna prApta hoM, use paMcendriya jAtinAmakarma
kahate haiM  /  zarIranAmakarma ke meda va lakSaNa zarIra nAmakarma ke pA~ca
bheda haiM- ( 1 ) audA rikazarIra nAmakarma. (2) kriyazarIra nAmakarma, (3)
AhArakazarIra nAmakarma, (4) taijasazarIra nAmakarma aura (5) kArmaNazarIra
nAmakarma  /  inake lakSaNa kramazaH isa prakAra haiM (1) jisa karma ke udaya se
audArikazarIra prApta ho, use audArika zarIra nAmakarma kahate haiN| udAra
arthAt pradhAna athavA sthUla pudgaloM se banA tathA hAr3a mAMsa, rakta Adi
jisameM hoM, vaha audArikazarIra kahalAtA hai  /  tIrthaMkaroM va gaNadharoM kA
zarIra pradhAna pudgaloM se aura sarvasAdhAraNa kA zarIra sthUla, asAra pudgaloM
se banatA hai  /  yaha audArika zarIra sabhI manuSyoM, tiryatroM kA hotA hai,
cAhe ve garbha janma vAle hoM yA samUcchema janma vAle hoM  /  (2) jisa karma ke
udaya me jIva ko vaikriyazarIra prApta ho, vaha vaikriyazarIra nAmakarma
kahalAtA hai| jisa zarIra se choTe-bar3e, ekaaneka, vividha, vicitra rUpa banAne
kI zakti prApta ho, ume vaikriyazarIra kahate haiM  /

Page #187 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## First Karma Granth, Chapter 107  **4.** There are two types of Vaikriya
bodies:  * **Aupapatik:** This type of Vaikriya body is obtained by Devas and
Narakas, meaning they receive this body upon birth in those realms. *
**Labdhipratyaya:** This type of Vaikriya body is obtained by humans and animals
(Tiryach). They acquire this body through specific powers gained through
practices like penance (Tap).  **(3)** The Karma that gives rise to the
**Aharaksharira** is a type of **Namakarma**. This body is obtained by the
fourteen **Purvadhari** Muniraj in the **Mahavideha** (other realms) due to
their special abilities, such as **Riddhi** (miraculous powers), **Sanshaya-
nivarana** (removing doubts), etc. This body is extremely pure, like a crystal,
and is free from any obstacles. It is not hindered by anything and does not
hinder anything else. This body is only obtained by humans, and even then, only
by the fourteen **Purvadhari** Muniraj.   When a **Chaturdasha Purvadhari** Muni
has a doubt about something and the **Sarvagya** (omniscient being) is not
present, they create a **Aharaksharira** using their special abilities. This
body is made of **Shubh** (auspicious) **Pudgalas** and is extremely subtle,
making it free from obstacles. With this body, they travel to the other realm
where the **Sarvagya** resides, clear their doubts, and then return to their own
realm. This entire process happens within a moment.  **(4)** The Karma that
gives rise to the **Tejas Sharira** is called **Tejas Namakarma**.  The **Tejas
Sharira** is obtained by the Jiva and is made of **Tejas Pudgalas**.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prathama karmagrantha 107 4 vaikriyazarIra do prakAra ke haiM aupapAtika
labdhipratyaya deva aura nArakoM kA vaikriyazarIra aupapAtika kahalAtA hai|
arthAt unako una gatiyoM meM janma lene se vaMRiyazarIra milatA hai  /
labdhipratyaya vaikriyazarIra manuSya aura tiyaMcoM ko hotA hai  /  arthAt
manuSya aura tiryaMca tapa Adi ke dvArA prApta zaktivizeSa se vaikriyazarIra
dhAraNa kara lete haiM  /  (3) jisa karma ke udaya se phona ko AhArI na ho, vaha
AhArakazarIra nAmakarma hai| anya kSetra ( mahAvideha) meM vartamAna tIthaMkaroM
kI RddhidarbhAna, saMzaya-nivAraNa karane Adi kAraNoM se caudaha pUrvadhArI
munirAja labdhivizeSa se jo zarIra dhAraNa karate haiM, use AhArakazarIra kahate
haiN| yaha zarIra ati vizuddha sphaTika sA nirmala, zubha, vyAghAtarahita,
arthAt na to svayaM dUsare se rukatA hai aura na dUsaroM ko rokane vAlA hotA hai
/  yaha zarIra manuSyoM ko hI prApta hotA hai| unameM bhI sabako nahIM, kevala
caudaha pUrvadhArI munirAjoM ko prApta hotA hai| arthAt jaba kabhI kisI
caturdaza pUrvadhArI muni ko kisI viSaya meM sandeha ho aura vahA~ sarvajJa kA
sannidhAna na ho, taba AdArikazarIra se kSetrAntara meM jAnA asambhava
samajhakara apanI viziSTa labdhi ke prayoga dvArA eka hasta pramANa zarIra
banAte haiM  /  jo zubha pudgalajanya hone se zubha prazasta uddezya se banAye
jAne ke kAraNa niravadya aura atyanta sUkSma hone ke kAraNa avyAghAtI hotA hai
/  aise zarIra se anya kSetra meM sthita sarvajJa ke pAsa pahu~cakara unase
saMdeha kA nivAraNa kara phira apane sthAna para mA jAte haiN| yaha kArya sirpha
antarmuhUrta meM ho jAtA hai  /  (4) jisa karma ke udaya se tejasazarIra
nAmakarma kahate haiN| jIva ko tejasazarIra prApta ho, use tejasa pudgaloM se
banA huA, AhAra

Page #188 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Translation:  100. The body that digests the results of karma and is the
cause of Tejo-leshya is called the Tejas-sharira. Just like Tejo-leshya, the
cause of Sheeta-leshya is also this Tejas-sharira. One should understand that
any ascetic who harms others through Tejo-leshya due to anger and benefits
others through Sheeta-leshya due to happiness, does so due to the influence of
this Tejas-sharira.  5) The karma that results in the attainment of the Karman-
sharira is called Karman-sharira-karma. The body formed by the karma of Jnana-
avaran, etc., is called the Karman-sharira. Due to this body, the Jiva keeps
revolving in the cycle of birth and death in the world in the form of Naraka,
etc.  The Tejas and Karman-sharira are present in all worldly beings and have an
eternal connection with the soul. These two bodies do not face any resistance in
the world, meaning even a hard object like a thunderbolt cannot stop them from
entering. This is because they are extremely subtle, and subtle things can enter
everywhere without obstruction, like fire in a piece of iron. _ A worldly being
can have a minimum of two and a maximum of four bodies at a time. There are
never five. When there are two, it is Tejas and Karman, because these two are
present in all worldly beings. This situation is found in the interval of
movement during the transition from one body to another in the state of Vigraha-
gati. Because at that time, no other body exists. When there are three, it is
Tejas, Karman, and Audarik or Tejas, Karman, and Vaikriya. The first type is
found in humans and animals from birth to death, and the second type is found in
Devas and Narakas. When there are four, it is Tejas, Karman, Audarik, and
Vaikriya or Tejas,

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 100 karmavipAka ko pacAnevAlA aura tejolezyA kA sAdhaka zarIra taijasazarIra
kahalAtA hai| tejolezyA kI taraha zItalezyA kA hetu bhI yahI taijasazarIra hotA
hai| koI-koI tapasvI jo krodha se tajolezyA ke dvArA dUsaroM ko nukasAna tathA
prasanna hokara zItala lezyA ke dvArA lAbha pahu~cAtA hai yaha taijasazarIra ke
prabhAva se hI samajhanA caahie| 5) jisa karma me jIva ko kArmaNazarIra kI
prApti ho, vaha kArmaNazarIra nAmakarma hai| jJAnAvaraNa Adi karmoM se banA huA
zarIra kArmaNazarIra kahalAtA hai| isI zarIra ke kAraNa jIva narakAdi gati rUpa
saMsAra meM janma-maraNa ke cakkara lagAtA rahatA hai| tejasa aura kArmaNa
zarIra saba saMsArI jIvoM ke hote haiM aura AtmA ke sAtha unakA anAdi sambandha
hai| ye donoM zarIra loka meM kahIM bhI pratighAta nahIM pAte haiM, arthAt vaja-
jaisI kaThora vastu bhI inheM praveza karane se roka nahIM sakatI hai| kyoMki ye
atyanta sUkSma haiM aura sUkSma vastu binA rukAvaTa ke sarvatra praveza pA
sakatI hai| jaise-lohapiNDa meM agni  /  _ eka sAtha eka saMsArI jIva meM kama-
se-kama do aura adhika-seadhika cAra zarIra taka ho sakate haiN| pA~ca kabhI
nahIM hote haiN| jaba do hote haiM, taba taMjasa aura kArmaNa, kyoMki ye donoM
sabhI saMsArI jIvoM ke hote haiN| yaha sthiti vigrahagati meM pUrva zarIra ko
chor3akara dUsarI gati ke zarIra ko prApta karane ke lie hone vAlI gati ke
antarAla meM pAI jAtI hai| kyoMki usa samaya anya koI bhI zarIra nahIM hotA hai
/  jaba tIna hote haiM, taba tejasa, kArmaNa aura audArika yA tejasa, kArmaNa
aura vaikiya  /  pahalA prakAra manuSya-tiyaMcoM meM aura dUsarA prakAra
devanArakoM meM janma se lekara maraNa paryanta pAyA jAtA hai  /  jaba cAra hote
haiM, taba taijasa, karmaNa, audArika aura vaikriya athavA tejasa,

Page #189 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## First Karma Granth, Chapter 106: Ahar Karma  **Ahar Karma** is found in both
humans and animals during the time of **Bankiya Labdhi** (acquisition of
wealth). The second option, **Ahar Kalabdhi** (acquisition of food), is possible
for **Chaturdasha Purva Dhari Munis** (monks who have completed 14 stages of
spiritual development). However, **Vaniya Labdhi** and **Ahar Kalabdhi** cannot
be used simultaneously, so no one can have all five bodies at the same time.
Now, we will explain the different types of **Angopang Napakarma** (karma
related to body parts) in order: **Bahru, Pitti, Sir, Ur, Uyarang, Uvang,
Anguli, and Maha**.   **Gatha 34:** "Two hands, two feet, one back, one head,
one chest, and one stomach - these are the eight **Angas** (major body parts).
**Upangas** (minor body parts) are small parts attached to the **Angas**, such
as fingers, etc. The remaining parts are called **Angopangas**."  These
**Angas**, **Upangas**, and **Angopangas** are present only in the first three
bodies (**Audarik**, **Ahar**, and **Vaniya**). The **Angopang Napakarma** is a
type of **Vishesharth Napakarma** (karma related to specific characteristics)
and is explained in the **Gatha**.  The term **Angopang** encompasses **Angas**,
**Upangas**, and **Angopangas**. There are eight types of **Angas**: (1-2) two
hands, (3-4) two feet, (5) one back, (6) one head, (7) one chest, and (8) one
stomach. Small parts attached to the **Angas**, such as fingers, nose, ears,
etc., are called **Upangas**. The lines and joints of the fingers are called
**Angopangas**.  **(a) Taddadini Bhajyani Yugpadekaswa'a'chaturbhyah.** **(b)
Patra 21** - **Tattvarth Sutra**, Chapter 2, Sutra 43

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 budd prathama karmagrambha 106 AhAra kArmaNa, audArita pahalA vikalpa baiMkiya
labdhi ke samaya kucha manuSya aura tiryaMcoM meM pAyA jAtA hai| dUsarA vikalpa
AhArakalabdhi ke prayoga ke samaya caturdazapUrvadhArI muniyoM meM honA saMbhava
hai| kintu vainiyalabdhi aura AhArakalabdhi kA prayoga eka sAtha sambhava na
hone se pA~coM zarIra eka sAtha kisI ke bhI nahIM hote haiM  /  aba krama prApta
aMgopAMga nApakarma ke bhedoM ko batalAte haiMbAharu piTTi sira ura uyaraMga
uvaMga aMgulIpamahA  /  sesA aMgovaMgA paDhamata zutigassuvaMgANi  //  34  //
gAthArtha - do hAtha, do paira, eka pITha, eka sira, eka chAtI aura eka peTa ye
ATha aMga haiM  /  aMgulI Adi aMga ke sAtha jur3e hue choTe avayava upAMga haiM
aura zeSa aMgopAMga kahalAte haiM  /  ye aMgAdi audArikAdi prathama tIna zarIroM
meM hI hote haiM  /  vizeSArtha nAmakarma kI piNDaprakRtiyoM meM se aMgopAMga
nAmakarma ke bhedoM ko gAthA meM kahA hai  /  aMgopAMga zabda se aMga, upAMga
aura aMgopAMga ina tIna kA grahaNa hotA hai  /  inameM se aMga ke kramazaH ATha
bheda haiM- (1 - 2) do hAtha, ( 3 - 4 ) do paira, (5) eka pITha, (6) eka sira,
(7) eka chAtI aura (8) eka peTa aMgoM ke sAtha saMlagna aMgulI, nAka, kAna Adi
choTechoTe avayavoM ko uparaMga aura aMguliyoM kI rekhAoM tathA parvoM ko
aMgopAMga kahate haiM  /  1 (ka) tadAdIni bhAjyAni yugapadekasvA''caturbhyaH  /
(kha) patra 21 - tattvArthasUtra, a0 2. sUtra 43

Page #190 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Karmavipaka  Angadi (limbs) require a form, and this form is found in the
first three bodies - Audarik, Vaikriya, and Aharak. Therefore, Angadi are
present only in these three bodies. However, the Taijas and Karmag bodies do not
have any form or structure, so they do not have Angadi.  There are three types
of Angopaang Karma: Audarik-Angopaang, Vaikriya-Angopaang, and Aharak-Angopaang.
Their characteristics are as follows:  1. **Audarik-Angopaang Karma:** The karma
that, upon its fruition, transforms Audarik body-form Pudgalas into Angopaang-
form limbs. 2. **Vaikriya-Angopaang Karma:** The karma that, upon its fruition,
transforms Vaikriya body-form Pudgalas into Angopaang-form limbs. 3. **Aharak-
Angopaang Karma:** The karma that, upon its fruition, transforms Aharak body-
form Pudgalas into Angopaang-form limbs.  In their respective body-forms,
Pudgalas form their corresponding Angopaang. Now, in the next verse, we will
discuss the types of Bandhan Karma.  **Verse 35:**  **Uralai-Puggalanam
Nibaddha-Baajantayan Sambandha.** **Jan Kunai Jausaman Tan' Uralai-Bandhanan
Neyam.**  **Meaning:** The karma that binds together the Pudgalas of the
Audarik, Vaikriya, and Aharak bodies, like a red thread, is called Uralai-
Bandhan Karma.  **Alternative Reading:**  **Inghanam Uralai Tanuna Ma:**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmavipAka aMgAdi ke lie kisI-na-kisI AkRti ko AvazyakatA hotI hai aura AkRti
audArika Adi prathama tIna zarIroM meM pAI jAne se audArika, vaikriya aura
AhAraka ina tIna mArIroM meM hI aMgAdi hote hai| lekina taijasa, kArmaga zarIroM
kA koI saMsthAna arthAt AkAra na hone me aMgAdi nahIM hote haiM  /
aMgopAMganAmakarma ke tIna bheda haiM-audArikaaMgopAMga, vaikriya-aMgopAMga,
AhAraka-aMgopAMga  /  inake lakSaNa isa prakAra haiM. . (1) jisa karma ke udaya
se audArikazarIra rUpa meM pariNata puna galoM se aMgopAMga rUpa avayava banate
haiM, vaha audArika-aMgopAMga nAma (2) jisa karma ke udaya se vaikriyazarIra
rUpa pariNata pudgaloM se aMgopAMga rUpa azyantra banate haiM, yaha
vaikriyaaMgopAMga nAmakarma hai| (3) jisa karma ke udaya se AhArakazarIra rUpa
pariNata pudgaloM se aMgopAMga rUpa avayava banate haiM, use AhAraka-aMgopAMga
nAmakarma kahate haiN| apane-apane zarIra-rUpa meM pariNata pudgaloM me una-
unake yogya aMgopAMga banate haiN| aba Age kI gAthA meM bandhana nAmakarma ke
bhedoM ko kahate haiN| uralAipuggalANaM nibaddhabAjhaMtayANa sambandha  /  jaM
kuNAI jausamaM taM' uralAIbaMdhaNaM neyaM  // 35 //  gAthArtha-jo karma lAla ke
samAna baMdhe hue aura ba~dhane vAle audArikAdi zarIroM ke pudgaloM kA Apasa meM
sambandha karAtA 1. iMghaNamuralAI taNunA mA:- iti pAThAntaram  /

Page #191 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## First Karma Text  - Know that karma which binds together, as **Ādārika**
etc., by the name of **Bandhana Karma**. 111  **Special Meaning:** Just as
things are joined together by means of sticky substances like lac-gum, etc., in
the same way, **Bandhana Karma**, by the force of **Śarīra Karma**, binds
together the **Pudgalas** of the **Audārika** bodies previously taken and being
taken in the present. If **Bandhana Karma** were not present, there would be the
same instability in the **Pudgalas** transformed into the form of the body as
there is in the particles of roasted barley flour flying in the wind.
**Bandhana** is of two types: **Sarva-Bandha** at the beginning of the bodies
arising from all **Peshī**, and **Deśa-Bandha** later, as long as those bodies
are held. That is, **Deśa-Bandha** occurs as long as the bodies remain, not when
they are newly generated.  **Audārika**, **Vaikriya**, and **Āhārika** bodies
experience **Sarva-Bandha** at the time of their origin and **Deśa-Bandha**
later. However, the **Tejas** and **Kārma** bodies are always present in worldly
beings, they are not newly generated, therefore they experience **Deśa-Bandha**.
There are five types of **Bandhana Karma** (1) **Audārika Śarīra Bandhana** (2)
**Vaikriya Śarīra Bandhana** (3) **Āhārika Śarīra Bandhana** (4) **Tejas Śarīra
Bandhana** (5) **Kārma Śarīra Bandhana**. Their characteristics are as follows:
(1) The karma whose arising causes the **Pudgalas** of the previously taken
**Audārika** body to merge with the **Pudgalas** of the **Audārika** body being
taken in the present, is called **Audārika Śarīra Bandhana Karma**.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prathama karmagrantha - paraspara milAtA hai, usa karma ko AdArika Adi
bandhananAmakarma jAno  /  111 vizeSArtha - jisa prakAra lAkha goMda Adi
cipakane padArthoM se cIjeM Apasa meM jor3a dI jAtI haiM, usI prakAra bandhana
nAmakarma bhI zarIra nAmakarma ke bala se pahale grahaNa kiye hue aura vartamAna
meM grahaNa ho rahe audArika zarIroM ke pudgaloM ko bA~dha detA hai-jor3a detA
hai| yadi bandhana nAmakarma na ho to zarIrAkAra pariNata pudgaloM meM vaisI hI
asthiratA ho jAtI hai, jaisI havA meM ur3ate sattU ke kaNoM meM hotI hai  /
bandhana do prakAra kA hotA hai- sarva pezI paidA hone vAle zarIroM ke prArambha
kAla meM sarvabandha hotA hai aura bAda meM ve zarIra jaba taka dhAraNa kiye hue
rahate haiM, dezabandha hotA hai| arthAt jo zarIra navIna utpanna nahIM hote
haiM, kintu unameM jaba taka ve rahate haiM, dezabandha hI huA karatA hai  /  "
odArika, vaikriya aura AhAraka ina tIna zarIroM meM utpatti ke samaya
sarvabandha aura bAda meM dezabandha hotA hai| kintu tejasa aura kArmaNa zarIra
saMsArI jIvoM ke sadaiva rahate haiM, unakI utpatti navIna nahIM hotI hai ataH
unameM dezabandha hotA hai| bandhananAmakarma ke pA~va bheda hote haiM(1)
audArikazarIra bandhananAma (2) vaikriyazarIra bandhananAma (3) AhArakazarIra
bandhananAma, (4) taijasazarIra bandhananAma  /  (5) kArma zarIra bandhananAma
/  inake lakSaNa kramaza: isa prakAra haiM (1) jisa karma ke udaya se pUrva
gRhIta- pahale grahaNa kiye hue odArika zarIra pudgaloM ke sAtha gRhyamANa -
vartamAna meM grahaNa kiye jAne vAle zradArika pudgaloM kA Apasa meM mela ho,
vaha odArikazarIrabandhana nAmakarma hai  /

Page #192 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 112 **Karmavipaka 12)** The karma whose arising causes the merging of the
acquired **vaikriya-sharira** pudgalas with the previously acquired **vaikriya-
sharira** pudgalas is called **vaikriya-sharira-bandhana** karma. (3) The karma
whose arising causes the merging of the acquired **aaharaka-sharira** pudgalas
with the previously acquired **aaharaka-sharira** pudgalas is called **aaharaka-
sharira-bandhana** karma. (4) The karma whose arising causes the merging of the
acquired **taijas-sharira** pudgalas with the previously acquired **taijas-
sharira** pudgalas is called **taijas-sharira-bandhana** karma. (5) The karma
whose arising causes the merging of the acquired **karman-sharira** pudgalas
with the previously acquired **karman-sharira** pudgalas is called **karman-
sharira-bandhana** karma.  There are fifteen types of **bandhana** karma,
differentiated by their objects. Their names and causes are explained in verse
37. Now, the types of **sanghatan** karma are being explained.  **Verse 36:**
**Jān sanghayai uralai puggale tanaganam va dantaalo. Tan sanghay bandhanam iva
tanunamen panchaviham.**  **Meaning:** Just as a bundle of grass is gathered
together by a tooth-like object, similarly, the karma that gathers together the
**audarika** etc. body pudgalas is called **sanghatan** karma. Like **bandhana**
karma, it also has five types, differentiated by the five bodies, **audarika**
etc.  **Explanation:** **Sanghatan** means proximity, closeness. The merging of
the previously acquired and acquired body pudgalas is possible only...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 112 karmavipAka 12) jisa karma ke udaya se pUrvagRhIta vaikriyazarIra pudgaloM
ke sAtha gRhyamANa vaikriyazarIra pudgaloM kA Apasa meM mela ho, vaha
vaikriyazarIra bandhana nAmakama hai| (3) jisa karma ke udaya se pUrvagRhIta
AhArakazarIra pudgaloM ke sAtha gRhyamANa AhArakazarIra pudgaloM kA Apasa meM
mela ho, baha AhArakazarIraandhana nAmakarma hai| 4) jisa karma ke udaya se
pUrvagRhIta taijasazarIra pudgaloM ke sAtha gRhyamANa tejasazarIra pudgaloM kA
Apasa meM mela ho, vaha taijasazarIrabandhana nAmakarma hai| (5) jisa karma ke
udaya se pUrvagRhIta kArmaNazarIra pudgaloM ke sAtha gRhyamANa kArmaNazarIra
pudgaloM kA Apasa meM mela ho, vaha kArmaNazarIra-bandhana nAmakarma hai|
apekSAbheda se bandhana nAmakarma ke pandraha bheda bhI kahe haiM, unake nAma
aura banane ke kAraNa kA kathana gAthA 37 meM kiyA jA rahA hai| ava saMghAtana
nAmakarma ke bhedoM ko batalAte haiN| jaM saMghAyai uralAi puggale taNagaNaM va
dNtaalo| taM saMghAya baMdhaNamiva taNunAmeNa paMcavihaM  // 36 //  gAthArtha-
dantAlI dvArA jame tRNasamUha ekatrita hotA hai, vaise hI jo karma audArikAdi
zarIra pudgaloM ko ekatrita karatA hai, use saMghAtana nAmakarma kahate haiM  /
isake bhI bandhana nAmakarma kI taraha audArika Adi pAMca zarIroM ke nAma kI
apekSA se pA~ca bheda hote haiN| vizeSArtha-saMghAtana kA artha hai sAmIpya
honA, sAnnidhya honA  /  pUrvagRhIta aura gRhyamANa zarIra padgaloM kA paraspara
bandhana tabhI sambhava

Page #193 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## First Karma Granth 113  It is only when the **grahit** and **gahaman**
**pudgalas** are in close proximity to each other, that **bananan** is possible.
Therefore, bringing together the **pudgalas** suitable for the body,
establishing them close to each other in an organized manner, where they achieve
uniformity through the non-entry of their respective regions, is the work of the
**sanghatan** **namakarma**.  Just as scattered grass is gathered together by a
rake, forming a bundle, similarly, the **sanghatan** **namakarma** brings
together the **pudgalas** suitable for the body, and the **bandhan**
**namakarma** connects them to their respective bodies.  Just as there are five
types of **bandhan** **namakarma** based on the names of the five bodies,
**audarik** etc., similarly, there are also five types of **sanghatan**
**namakarma**:  1. **Audarik-sanghatan** **namakarma** 2. **Vaishya-sanghatan**
**namakarma** 3. **Aharak-sanghatan** **namakarma** 4. **Tejas-sanghatan**
**namakarma** 5. **Karman-sanghatan** **namakarma**  Their characteristics are
as follows:  1. The **namakarma** whose emergence brings about the close
proximity of **pudgalas** transformed into the **audarik** body is called
**audarik-sanghatan** **namakarma**. 2. The **namakarma** whose emergence brings
about the close proximity of **pudgalas** transformed into the **vaishya** body
is called **vaishya-sanghatan** **namakarma**. 3. The **namakarma** whose
emergence brings about the close proximity of **pudgalas** transformed into the
**aharak** body is called **aharak-sanghatan** **namakarma**. 4. The
**namakarma** whose emergence brings about the close proximity of **pudgalas**
transformed into the **tejas** body is called **tejas-sanghatan** **namakarma**.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prathama karmagrantha 113 hai, jaba gRhIta evaM gahamANa pudgaloM kA
pArasparika sAmIpya ho arthAt donoM eka dUsare ke nikaTa hoMge, tabhI bananana
honA sambhava hai  /  ataH zarIra ke yogya pudgaloM ko sannihita karanA, eka
dUsare ke pAsa vyavasthita rUpa se sthApita karanA, jisame una padgaloM kI
paraspara meM pradezoM ke anapraveza se ekarUpatA prApta ho sake. yaha
saMghAtana nAmakarma kA kArya hai| jaise dantAlI se idhara-udhara bikharI ghAsa
ikaTThI kI jAtI hai. jisase usa ghAsa kA gaTThA baMdha jAtA hai, isI prakAra
saMghAtana nAmakarma zarIrayogya pudgaloM ko samIpa lAtA hai aura bandhana
nAmakarma unheM una-una zarIroM se sambaddha karatA hai| audArika Adi pAMca
zarIroM ke nAma ke AdhAra se jaise bandhana nAmakarma ke pA~ca bheda haiM, vaise
hI saMghAtana' nAmakarma ke bhI nimnalikhita pA~ca meda hote haiM (1) audArika-
saMghAtana nAmakarma, 2) vaizyi-saMghAtana nAmakarma, (3) AhAraka-saMghAtana
nAmakarma, 13) tejasa-saMghAtana nAmakarma aura (5) kArmaNa-saMghAtana nAmakarma
/  inake lakSaNa kramazaH isa prakAra haiM (1) jisa karma ke udaya se
audArikazarIra ke rUpa meM pariNata pudgaloM kA paraspara sAnnidhya ho, vaha
audArika-saMghAtananAma hai| (2) jisa karma ke udaya se vaikriyazarIra rUpa meM
pariNata pudgaloM kA paraspara sAnidhya ho, vaha vaizriya-saMghAtananAma hai  /
(3) jisa karma ke udaya meM AhArakazarIra rUpa meM pariNata pudgaloM kA
paraspara sAnnidhya ho, vaha AhAraka saMghAtananAma hai  /  (4) jisa karma ke
udaya se tejasazarIra rUpa meM pariNata pudgaloM kA paraspara sAnnidhya ho, vaha
taijasa-saMghAtananAma hai  /  1.-.1

Page #194 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 114 ## Karma-Vipaka (5) The name "Karman-Sanghatanam" is given to the mutual
proximity of the pudgalas transformed into the karman-body due to the arising of
karma.  While explaining the five types of Bandhan-karma, it was mentioned that
it also has fifteen types. Therefore, we will now explain how these fifteen
types are formed and what their names are.  **Gatha-arth:** The combination of
the Audarik, Vaikriya, and Aharak bodies with their own named bodies and the
Tejas and Karman bodies results in nine types of Bandhan-karma. The combination
of Tejas and Karman with these bodies, taken together, results in three more
types. And the combination of Tejas and Karman with their own named bodies and
others results in three more types. Combining these types results in fifteen
types of Bandhan-karma.  **Visheshary:** The names of the original five types of
Bandhan-karma have been mentioned earlier. However, this Gatha explains the
names of the fifteen types of Bandhan-karma that are formed from a perspective
of expectation, and how they are formed. The combination of the Audarik,
Vaikriya, and Aharak bodies with the pudgalas of their own named bodies results
in three types. For example, Audarik-Audarik, etc. The combination of these
Audarik, Vaikriya, and Aharak bodies with the Tejas body results in three more
types. For example, Audarik-Tejas, etc. Similarly, the combination of each of
these three bodies (Audarik, etc.) with the pudgalas of the Karman body results
in three types: Audarik-Karman, etc.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 114 karmavipAka (5) jisa karma ke udaya se kArmaNazarIra rUpa meM pariNata
pugaloM kA paraspara sAnnidhya ho, vaha kArmaNa-saMghAtananAma hai| bandhana
nAmakarma ke pAMca bheda batalAte samaya yaha kahA thA ki isake pandraha bheda
bhI hote haiN| ataH aba ukta pandraha bheda kaige banate haiM aura unake kyA
nAma haiM, yaha batalAte haiN| orAlayiusvAhArayANa sgteykmmjuttnnaa| nava
bandhaNAmiiyarasahiyANaM tini tesiM ca  // 37 //  gAthArtha-audArika, vaikriya
aura AhAraka zarIroM kA apane nAmavAle aura taijasa va kArmaNa zarIra ke sAtha
sambandha jor3ane se bandhaganAmakarma ke nau bheda tathA tejasa-kArmaNa ko
saMyukta rUpa meM unake sAtha jor3ane se aura tIna bheda tathA taMjasa va
kArmaNa ko apane nAma bAle va anya se mayoga karane para tIna bheda hote haiN|
ina bhedoM ko milAne se baMdhana mAmakarma ke pandraha bheda ho jAte haiN|
vizeSArya-bandhananAmakarma ke mUla pA~ca 'bhedoM ke nAma pUrva meM batalAye jA
cuke haiM lekina apekSA dRSTi se banane vAle bandhananAmakarma ke pandraha
bhedoM ke nAma aura unake banane kI vidhi isa gAthA meM batalAI gaI ki audArika,
vaikriya aura AhAraka ina tInoM zarIroM kA apaneapane nAma vAle zarIra ke
pudgaloM ke sAtha saMyoga karane se tIna bhaMga banate haiM  /  jaise audArikA-
audArika Adi tathA ukta audArika, vaikriya, AhAraka kA taMjasa zarIra ke sAtha
saMyoga karane se aura tIna bhaMga ho jAte haiN| jaise-audArika-taMjasa aadi|
isI prakAra ukta audArika Adi tInoM zarIroM meM se pratyeka kA kArmaNa zarIra
pudgaloM ke sAtha saMyoga karane se audArika kArmaNa Adi tIna bhaMga banate haiM
/

Page #195 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## First Karma Granth, Chapter 115  Thus, by combining the *pudgalas* of the
original body with each of the three bodies, *audarik*, *vaikriya*, and
*aaharaka*, and by combining each of these with the *taijasa* body *pudgalas*,
and by combining each of these with the *karman* body *pudgalas*, nine
distinctions arise from combining the three parts of each.  From the *audarik*,
*vaikriya*, and *aaharaka* bodies, three distinctions arise from the
simultaneous combination of each with the *taijasa-karman* body *pudgalas*, such
as *audarik-taijasa-karman*, etc. And from the *taijasa* and *karman* bodies,
three more distinctions arise from the combination of each with its own and the
other body's *pudgalas*, such as *taijasa-taijasa-bandhana*, *taijasa-karman-
bandhana*, and *karman-karman-bandhana*.  Thus, by combining the aforementioned
nine, three, and three, a total of fifteen distinctions of *bandhana-nama-karma*
arise. Their names are as follows:  1. *Audarik-audarik-bandhana-nama* 2.
*Audarik-taijasa-bandhana-nama* 3. *Audarik-karman-bandhana-nama* 4. *Vaikriya-
vaikriya-bandhana-nama* 5. *Vaikriya-taijasa-bandhana-nama* 6. *Vaikriya-karman-
bandhana-nama* 7. *Aaharaka-aaharaka-bandhana-nama* 8. *Aaharaka-taijasa-
bandhana-nama* 9. *Aaharaka-karman-bandhana-nama* 10. *Audarik-taijasa-karman-
bandhana-nama* 11. *Vaikriya-taijasa-karman-bandhana-nama* 12. *Aaharaka-
taijasa-karman-bandhana-nama* 13. *Taijasa-taijasa-bandhana-nama* 14. *Taijasa-
karman-bandhana-nama* 15. *Karman-karman-bandhana-nama*  Their meaning is
that...  ---  1. **Another way to count the fifteen distinctions of *bandhana-
nama-karma***:  Distinctions arising from combination with the original body:  *
*Audarik* and *Vaikriya* - *Vaikriya* * *Aaharaka* and *Aaharaka* * *Taijasa* -
*Taijasa* * *Karman* - *Karman*

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 E prathama karmagrantha 115 isa prakAra odArika bAdi tIna zarIroM meM se
pratyeka ke mUla zarIra ke pudgaloM ke sAtha saMyoga karane se, pratyeka kA
taMjasazarIrapudgaloM ke sAtha saMyoga hone se tathA pratyeka kA kArmaNazarIra
pudgaloM ke sAtha saMyoga hone se banane vAle tIna-tIna bhAgoM ko jor3ane meM
nau bheda banate haiM  /  audArika, vaikriya aura AhAraka zarIroM meM se
pratyeka kA tejasakArmaNa zarIra pudgaloM ke sAtha yugapat saMyoga karane meM
tIna bheda banate haiM, jaise audArika- tejasa - kArmaNa Adi tathA taijasa,
kArmaNa meM se pratyeka kA svakIya aura anya zarIra ke pudgaloM ke sAtha saMyoga
karane se aura tIna bhaMga banate haiN| jaise tejasa tejasabandhana taijasa-
kArmaNabandhana, kArmaNa-kArmaNabandhana | isa prakAra pUrvokta nau, tIna aura
tIna ina kula bhaMgoM ko jor3ane me bandhananAmakarma ke pandraha bheda ho jAte
haiN| jinake nAma kramaza: isa prakAra haiM- (1) audArika-audArikabandhananAma,
(2) audArika- taijasabandhananAma, (3) audArika kArmaNabandhananAma, (4)
vaikriya-vaikriyabandhananAma, (5) vaikriya taijasabandhananAma, (6) vaikriya -
kArmaNabandhananAma, (7) AhAraka AhArakabandhananAma (8) AhAraka-
taijasabandhananAma, ( 8 ) AhAraka- kArmaNabandhananAma (10) audArika-tejasa -
kArmaNabandhananAma, (11) kriya- taijasa-kArmaNabandhananAma, (12) AhAraka-
tejasa - kArmaNabandhananAma, (13) taijasa- tejasabandhananAma, (14) tejasa -
kArmaNabandhananAma aura (15) kArmaNa kArmaNabandhananAma  /  inakA artha yaha
hai ki ---- 1. prakArAntara se bandhananAmakarma ke pandraha bhedoM ko ginane kI
sarala geti  /  mUla zarIra ke sAtha saMyoga karane se banane vAle bhaMga
audArika aura vaikriya-vaikisa AhAra va AhAraka, taMjasa - taMkhasa, kArmeNa
kArmaNa | 1 r

Page #196 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Karmavipaka  The karma whose arising causes a connection between the
previously acquired Audārika body particles and the acquired Audārika particles
is called Audārika-Audārika Bandhana Karma.  The karma whose arising causes a
connection between the Audārika body particles and the Taijasa particles is
called Audārika-Taijasa Bandhana Karma.  The karma whose arising causes a
connection between the Audārika body particles and the Kārmaṇa particles is
called Audārika-Kārmaṇa Bandhana Karma.  Similarly, the meaning of Vaikriya-
Vaikriya Bandhana Karma and all other karmas should be understood.  The
particles of the Audārika, Vaikriya, and Āhāraka bodies do not connect with each
other. That is, only the particles of the Audārika body can connect with the
Audārika body; not with the Vaikriya or Āhāraka body particles. Similarly, this
should be understood for the Vaikriya and Āhāraka bodies. Since these are
mutually contradictory in nature, there are no karmas that cause their
connection.  Now, we will explain the types of Samhanana Karma.  The types of
Samhanana Karma that arise from connection with the Taijasa body are: Bhaṅga-
Audārika-Taijasa, Bhaṅga-Vaikriya-Taijasa, and Bhaṅga-Āhāraka-Taijasa.  The
types of Samhanana Karma that arise from connection with the Kārmaṇa body are:
Bhaṅga-Audārika-Kārmaṇa, Bhaṅga-Vaikriya-Kārmaṇa, Bhaṅga-Āhāraka-Kārmaṇa, and
Bhaṅga-Taijasa-Kārmaṇa.  The types of Samhanana Karma that arise from
simultaneous connection with the Taijasa and Kārmaṇa bodies are: Bhaṅga-
Audārika-Taijasa-Kārmaṇa, Bhaṅga-Vaikriya-Taijasa-Kārmaṇa, and Bhaṅga-Āhāraka-
Taijasa-Kārmaṇa. [To say the full name, add Bandhana Karma to each.]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmavipAka jisa karma ke udaya se pUrvagRhIta audArikazarIra pudgaloM ke sAtha
gRhyamANa audArika pudgaloM kA paraspara sambandha hotA hai, vaha audArika-
audArikabandhananAmakarma hai| jisa karma ke udaya se audArikazarIra pudgaloM kA
taMjasa pudgaloM ke sAtha sambandha ho, vaha audArika-taijasabandhananAmakarma
hai| jisa karma ke udaya se audArikazarIra pudgaloM kA kArmaNa pudgaloM ke sAtha
sambandha ho, vaha audArika-kArmaNabandhananAmakarma hai| isI prakAra vaikriya
vaikriyabandhananAmakarma Adi anya sabhI kA artha samajha lenA caahie| audArika,
vaikriya, AhAraka zarIroM ke pudgaloM kA paraspara sambandha nahIM hotA hai,
arthAt audArika ke sAtha audArikazarIra ke pudgaloM kA hI sambandha ho sakatA
hai; vaikriya, AhAraka zarIra ke pudgaloM kA nahIM  /  isI prakAra vaikriya,
AhAraka zarIroM ke lie bhI samajha lenA caahie| caki ye paraspara viruddha
guNadharmI haiM, isalie unake sambandha karAne vAle nAmakarma bhI nahIM hai| aba
saMhanana nAmakarma ke bhedoM ko batalAte haiM taMjasa zarIra ke sAtha saMyoga
karane se banane vAle bhaMgaaudArika-tejasa, vaiphiya-naMjasa, AhAraka-taijasa
/  kArmaNa zarIra ke sAtha saMyoga karane se mAnane vAle bhaMgaaudArika-
phArmaNa, baiMkriya kArmaNa, AhAraka-kArmaNa, taMjasa-kArmaNa  /  taimasa-
kArmaNa zarIra kA yugapata saMyoga karane se jamane vAle bhaMga audArika-se
jala-kArmaNa, jhima-taijama-kAmaMNa, AharakA-tejasa-kArmaNa  /  [pUrA nAma
kahane ke lie pratyeka ke sAtha bandhananAmakarma jor3a deN||

Page #197 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## First Karma Text ### Chapter 117  **"The six types of Sanhanan are Vajra-
Rishabha-Narach, Rishabha-Narach, Narach, Ardha-Narach, Keelika, and Chevatta.
In these, Rishabha means patta-veshtan (bandage), Vajra means keel (nail), and
Narach means Markatbandh on both sides."**  **Explanation:**  The term Sanhanan
refers to the specific process of bone formation and joining. It is a type of
Namakarma (karma related to name and form) that occurs in the Audarik (physical)
body.   The six types of Sanhanan are:  1. **Vajra-Rishabha-Narach:** This type
involves two bones bound together by a Markatbandh on both sides, with a third
bone wrapped around them like a bandage. 2. **Rishabha-Narach:** This type
involves two bones bound together by a Markatbandh on both sides, but without
the third bone wrapping around them. 3. **Narach:** This type involves two bones
bound together by a Markatbandh on both sides, but without any wrapping. 4.
**Ardha-Narach:** This type involves two bones bound together by a Markatbandh
on only one side. 5. **Keelika:** This type involves a single bone being fixed
in place by a nail. 6. **Chevatta:** This type involves a single bone being
fixed in place by a bandage.  These six types of Sanhanan are responsible for
the various ways in which bones are joined together in the Audarik body.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 E prathama karma grantha 117 saMghayaNamaTThinicao taM chaddhA
bajJjarisanArAyaM  /  taha ya risanArAyaM nArAya addhanArAmaM  //  38  //  kolia
chevaTa iha risaho paTTo ya kIliyA vajjaM  /  ubhao makkaDabandho nArAyaM
imamurAlaMge  //  36  //  gAthAyeM - haDDiyoM kI racanA - vizeSa ko saMhanana
kahate haiM  /  isake vajraRSabha nArAca, RSabhanArAca, nArAca, arddhanArAca,
kIlikA aura sevArta ye chaha bheda haiM  /  inameM RSabha kA artha paTTa-
veSTana, vajra kA artha kIla aura nArAca kA artha donoM ora markaTabandha
samajhanA cAhiye  /  vizeSArtha - nAmakarma kI piGaprakRtiyoM ke varNana meM
kramaprApta saMhanananAmakarma ke doM kA ina do bAbAoM se kiyA gayA hai| jisa
nAmakarma ke udaya se haDDiyoM kA Apasa meM jur3a jAnA, arthAt racanA-vizeSa
hotI hai, use saMhanananAmakarma kahate haiM  /  audArika zarIra ke atirikta
anya maMtriya Adi zarIroM meM haDDiyA~ nahIM hone se odArika zarIra meM hI isakA
udaya hotA hai| saMhanana nAmakarma ke chaha bheda aura unake lakSaNa kramaza:
isa prakAra haiM (1) vajraRSabhanArAca, (2) RSabhanArAca, (3) nArAca, (4) arddha
nArAca, (5) kIlikA, (6) chebaTTa pratyeka ke sAtha saMhanananAmakarma jor3a lenA
cAhie  /  (1) vajra, RSabha aura nArAca, ina tIna zabdoM ke yoga se niSpanna
vajraRSabhanArAca pada hai| inameM vajra kA artha kIlI, RSabha ' kA artha
veSTana - paTTI aura nArAca kA artha donoM ora markaTabandha hai  /  jisa
saMhanana meM donoM tarapha se markaTa bandha meM baMdhI huI do haDDiyoM para
tIsarI haDDI kA vetana ( paTTa) ho aura ina tIna haDDiyoM ko bhedane

Page #198 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Translation:  **118**  The bone with a nail attached to it is called **Vana-
Rishabhanarach**. The karma that causes such a specific formation of bones is
called **Vajra-Rishabhanarach-Sahanan-Karma**.  **(2)** The karma that causes
the specific formation of bones with a **Morkatbandh** on both sides and a
**Vethan** of the third bone, but without a nail piercing all three, is called
**Rishabhanarach-Sahanan-Karma**.  **(3)** The karma that causes the formation
of bones with a **Morkatbandh** on both sides, but without a **Vethan** or a
nail, is called **Narach-Sahanan-Karma**.  **(4)** The karma that causes the
formation of bones with a **Morkatbandh** on one side and a nail on the other is
called **Ardha-Narach-Sahanan-Karma**.  **(5)** The karma that causes the
formation of bones without a **Morkatbandh** or a **Vethan**, but with the bones
joined by a nail, is called **Kilika-Sahanan-Karma**.  **(6)** The karma that
causes the formation of bones without a **Morkatbandh**, **Vethan**, or a nail,
but with the bones joined together, is called **Chevatta-Sahanan-Karma**.
**Chevatta** is also called **Sevat** or **Chhedavritta**.  Now we will describe
the differences in **Sansthan** and **Varna** karma.  **Samachaurans, Nygrodha,
Sadi, Kubja, Vaman, and...**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 118 karmavipAka vAlI haDDI kI kIlI lagI huI ho, usa vana RSabhanArAca kahate
haiM  /  jisa karma ke udaya se haDDiyoM kI aisI racanA-vizeSa ho, use
vajraRSabhanArAca-sahanananAmakarma kahate haiN| (2) jisa karma ke udaya se
haDDiyoM kI racanA-vizeSa meM donoM tarapha haDDI kA markaTabandha ho, tIsarI
haDDI kA veThana bhI ho, lekina tInoM ko bhedane vAlI haDDI kI kIlI na ho, use
RSabhanArAcasaMhanananAmakarma kahate haiN| (3) jisa kama ke udaya se haDDiyoM
kI racanA meM donoM tarapha maTabandha ho, lekina veThana aura kIla na ho, ume
nArAca-saMhanananAmakarma kahate haiN| jisa kapa ke usa se haTiyoM kI racanA meM
eka aura markaTa bandha aura dUsarI ora kIla ho use
ardhanArAcasaMhanananAmakarma kahate haiM  /  (5) jisa kama ke udaya se haDDiyoM
kI racanA meM markaTavandha aura veThana na ho, kintu kIla se haDDiyAM jur3I
hoM, use kIlikA-saMhanananAmakarma' kahate haiN| (6) jisa karma ke udaya se
haDDiyoM kI racanA meM markaTabandha, veThana aura kIla na hokara yoM hI
haDDiyA~ Apasa meM jur3I hoM, use chevaTTa-saMhanananAmakarma kahate haiM  /
chevaTTa ko sevAta athavA chedavRtta bhI kahate haiM  /  aba saMsthAna aura
varNa nAmakarma ke bhedoM kA varNana karate haiM samacauraMsa niggohasAikhujjAi
vAmaNa hu~  /  saMThANA vannA kiNhanIlalohiyalisiyA  // 40 //  gAthArtha-
samacaturasra, nyagrodha, sAdi, kubja, vAmana aura

Page #199 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## First Karma Granth  **Huṇḍa-ye** is the name of the **saṁsthāna-karma**, and
**kṛṣṇa, nīla, lohita, hāridra, pauta, and praveta** are the divisions of
**varṇa-karma**.  **Special Note:** The verses mention the divisions of
**saṁsthāna-karma** and **varṇa-karma**. This section first explains the
divisions of **saṁsthāna-karma** and then the divisions of **varṇa-karma**.  The
shape of the body is called **saṁsthāna**. The karma that gives rise to
**saṁsthāna** is called **saṁsthāna-karma**. The different physical
characteristics and variations in shapes seen in humans and other beings are due
to **saṁsthāna-karma**. The six divisions of **saṁsthāna-karma** are:  (1)
**Samacaturasra-saṁsthāna-karma**, (2) **Nyagrodha-parimaṇḍala-saṁsthāna-
karma**, (3) **Sāḍi-saṁsthāna-karma**, (4) **Kubja-saṁsthāna-karma**, (5)
**Vāmana-saṁsthāna-karma**, and (6) **Huṇḍa-saṁsthāna-karma**.  Their
characteristics are as follows:  (1) **Samacaturasra** is derived from the three
words **sama**, **catuḥ**, and **asra**. **Sama** means equal, **catuḥ** means
four, and **asra** means angle. Therefore, **samacaturasra** refers to a body
where all four angles are equal when sitting in a cross-legged position. This
means the distance between the seat and the head, the distance between both
knees, the distance between the right shoulder and left knee, and the distance
between the left shoulder and right knee are all equal. The karma that gives
rise to such a **saṁsthāna**, or according to the **Sāmudrika Śāstra**, a body
with all auspicious features, is called **samacaturasra-saṁsthāna-karma**.   (1)
See the appendix for illustrations of **saṁhanana** and **saṁsthāna**.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prathama karmagrantha huNDa-ye saMsthAnanAmakarma ke aura kRSNa, nIla, lohita,
hAridra pauta evaM praveta ye varNa nAmakarma ke bheda haiN| vizeSArtha-gAthA
meM saMsthAna aura varNanAmakarma ke bhedoM ke nAma kahe gaye haiN| unameM se
pahale maMsthAna nAmakarma aura bAda meM varNanAmakarma ke bhedoM kA nirUpaNa
karate haiN| zarIra ke AkAra ko saMsthAna' kahate haiN| jisa karma ke udaya se
saMsthAna kI prApti ho, use saMsthAnanAmakarma kahate haiN| manuSyAdi meM jo
zArIrika vibhinnatAe~ aura AkRtiyoM meM vividhatAeM dikhatI haiM, unakA kAraNa
saMsthAnanAmakarma hai| saMsthAnanAmakarma ke chaha bhedoM ke nAma kramazaH ye
haiM (1) samacaturasra-saMsthAnanAmakama, (2) nyagrodha-parimaMDala-saMsthAna
nAmakama, (3) sAdi-saMsthAnanAmakarma, (4) kubja-saMsthAnanAmakarma [5: vAmana-
saMsthAnanAmakarma, aura  / 6. huMDa-saMsthAnanAmakarma  /  inake lakSaNa
kramazaH isa prakAra haiM... (1) sama, catuH, asra, ina tIna zabdoM se niSpanna
samacaturastra pada meM sama kA artha samAna, catuH kA artha cAra aura astra kA
artha koNa hotA hai| arthAt pAlathI mArakara baiThane meM jisa zarIra ke cAroM
koNa samAna hoM; yAnI Asana aura kapAla kA antara, donoM ghuTanoM kA antara,
dAhine kaMdhe aura bAya jAnu kA antara, bAya kaMdhe aura dAhine jAnu kA antara
samAna ho, use samacaturastra kahate haiN| jisa karma ke udaya se aise saMsthAna
kI prApti hotI hai athavA sAmudrika zAstra ke anusAra jisa zarIra ke sampUrNa
avayava zubha hoM, vaha samacaturastra-saMsthAna nAmakarma kahalAtA hai| 1.
saMhanana evaM saMsthAna ke citra pariziSTa meM dekhie  /

Page #200 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 120 ## Karmavipaka (2) The karma whose arising results in a body shape
resembling a Nyagrodha (Banyan tree), i.e., the body parts above the navel are
full and thick, and the parts below the navel are thin and weak, is called
Nyagrodha-Parimandala-Sansthananama Karma. (3) The karma whose arising results
in the body parts above the navel being thin and weak, and the parts below the
navel being full and thick, is called Sadi-Sansthananama Karma. The shape of the
body parts in this Sansthan is like hair, opposite to Nyagrodha-Parimandala-
Sansthan. (4) The karma whose arising results in a hunchback body is called
Karan-Sansthananama Karma. (5) The karma whose arising results in a dwarf body
is called Vamanasansthananama Karma. (6) The karma whose arising results in all
body parts being disproportionate and not of the appropriate size is called
Hund-Sansthananama Karma.  After describing the types of Sansthananama Karma, we
will explain the types and characteristics of Varna Karma.  The arising of Varna
Karma results in the body having Krishna, Gaur, etc., colors. There are five
types of Varna Karma: (1) Krishna, (2) Neel, (3) Lohit, (4) Haridra, and (5)
Sit. Their characteristics are: (1) The karma whose arising results in the body
of the being being coal-black is called Krishnavarna Karma. (2) The karma whose
arising results in the body of the being being green like a parrot's feather is
called Neelvarna Karma.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 120 karmavipAka (2) jisa karma ke udaya se zarIra kI AkRti nyagrodha
(vaTavRkSa) ke samAna ho, arthAt zarIra meM nAbhi se Upara ke avayava pUrNa-moTe
hoM aura nAbhi se nIce ke avayava hIna-patale hoM, use nyagrodha-parimaMDala-
saMsthAnanAmakarma kahate haiN| (3) jisa karma ke udaya se nAbhi ke Upara ke
avayava hIna-patale aura nAbhi se nIce ke avayava pUrNa-moTe hoM, vaha sAdi-
saMsthAnanAmakarma hai| nyagrodha-parimaNDala-saMsthAna se viparIta zarIra-
avayavoM kI AkRti isa saMsthAna bAloM kI hotI hai  /  (4) jisa karma ke udaya me
zarIra kubaDA ho, vaha karana-saMsthAna nAma karma hai| (5) jisa karma ke udaya
se zarIra vAmana (baunA) ho, use vAmanasaMsthAnanAmakarma kahate haiN| (6) jisa
karma ke udaya se zarIra ke sabhI avayava beDaula hoMyathAyogya pramANa yukta na
hoM, uge huMDa-saMsthAna nAmakarma kahate haiN| saMsthAna nAmakarma ke bhedoM kA
nirUpaNa karane ke bAda varNa nAmakarma ke bheda aura lakSaNa batalAte haiN|
varNa nAmakarma ke udaya se zarIra meM kRSNa, gaura Adi varNa hote haiM  /
varNa nAmakarma ke pAMca bheda isa prakAra haiM 11) kRSNa, (2) nIla, (3) lohita,
(4) hAridra, aura (5) sita  /  inake lakSaNa yaha hai (1) jisa karma ke udaya se
jIva kA zarIra koyale-jaisA kAlA ho, vaha kRSNavarNanAmakarma hai|| (2) jisa
karma ke udaya se jIva kA zarIra tote ke paMkha-jaisA harA ho, vaha
nIlavarNanAmakarma hai  /

Page #201 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## First Karma Text  (3) The karma whose arising causes the living being's body
to be red like vermillion is called **Lohithavarna Karma**.  (4) The karma whose
arising causes the living being's body to be yellow like turmeric is called
**Haridravana Karma**.  (5) The karma whose arising causes the living being's
body to be white like a conch shell is called **Sitavarna Karma**.  Now, in the
following verse, we will explain the different types of **Gandha**, **Rasa**,
and **Sparsha** Karmas.  **Verse 41:**  **Translation:**  There are two types of
**Gandha Karma**: **Surabhi-Sugandha** (pleasant fragrance) and **Durabhi-
Durgandha** (unpleasant fragrance). There are five types of **Rasa Karma**:
**Tikta** (bitter), **Katu** (pungent), **Kashaya** (astringent), **Amla**
(sour), and **Madhura** (sweet). There are eight types of **Sparsha Karma**:
**Guru** (heavy), **Layu** (light), **Mrdu** (soft), **Khara** (rough),
**Sheet** (cold), **Ushna** (hot), **Snigdha** (unctuous), and **Rukha** (dry).
**Explanation:** After explaining the five types of **Varna Karma**, we now
explain the remaining **Gandha**, **Rasa**, and **Sparsha** Karmas, along with
their characteristics.  **Gandha Karma** has two types: (1) **Surabhi Gandha
Karma**, (2) **Durabhi Gandha Karma**.  (1) The karma whose arising causes the
living being's body to have a fragrance like camphor, musk, etc., is called
**Surabhi Gandha Karma**.  The bodies of Tirthankaras, etc., are fragrant.  (2)
The karma whose arising causes the living being's body to have a smell like
garlic, rotten things, etc., is called **Durabhi Gandha Karma**.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prathama karmagrantha (3) jisa karma ke udaya se jIva kA zarIra sindUra jaisA
lAla ho, vaha lohitavarNanAmakarma hai  /  (4) jisa karma ke udaya se jIva kA
zarIra haldI-jaMsA pIlA ho, vaha haridravarNa nAmakarma hai  /  (5) jisa karma
ke udaya se jIva kA zarIra zaMkha-jaisA sapheda ho, use sitavarNanAmakarma
kahate haiM  /  aba Age kI gAthA meM gandha, rasa aura sparza nAmakarma ke
bhedoM ko batalAte haiN| surahidurahI rasA paNa titakaDukasAya aMbilA mahurA  /
phAsA gurulahumiukharasouNha siNiddharuvakha'hA  // 41 //  gAthArya-surabhi-
sugandha aura durabhi-durgandha ye do gandhanAmakarma ke bheda haiM  /  tikta,
kaTu, kaSAya, amla aura madhura ye rasanAmakarma ke pA~ca bheda haiM tathA
sparzanAmakarma ke guru, layu, mRdu, khara, zIta, uSNa, snigdha aura rUkSa-ye
ATha bheda haiM  /  vizeSArtha-varNanAmakarma ke pAMca bhedoM kA kathana karane
ke pazcAta aba zeSa rahe gandha, rasa, sparza nAmakarma ke maMda aura unake
lakSaNa kramazaH yahA~ kahate haiN| gandhanAmakarma ke do bheda haiM-(1)
surabhigandha, (2) durabhigandha nAmakarma  /  (1) jisa karma ke udaya bha jIva
ke zarIra meM kapUra, kastUrI Adi padArthoM-jaisI sugandhi ho, use
surabhigandhanAmakarma kahate haiN| tIrthaMkara Adi ke zarIra sugandhita hote
haiN| (2) jisa karma ke udaya se jIva ke zarIra meM lahasuna, sar3e-gale
padArthoM jaisI gandha ho, vaha durabhigandhanAmakarma hai|

Page #202 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 122  There are five types of Karmavipak Rasa Karma and their characteristics
are as follows: (1) Tiktarasa, (2) Katurasa, (3) Kshayarasa, (4) Amla Rasa, (5)
Madhura Rasa.  (1) The Karma whose fruition makes the body-fluid of the Jiva
taste like ginger or black pepper is called Tiktarasa Karma.  (2) The Karma
whose fruition makes the body-fluid of the Jiva taste like Chirayata or Neem is
called Katurasa Karma.  (3) The Karma whose fruition makes the body-fluid of the
Jiva taste like Amla or Baheda is called Kshayarasa Karma.  (4) The Karma whose
fruition makes the body-fluid of the Jiva taste like lemon or tamarind is called
Amla Rasa Karma.  (5) The Karma whose fruition makes the body-fluid of the Jiva
taste like Mishri or other sweet substances is called Madhura Rasa Karma.  There
are eight types of Sparsha Karma and their characteristics are as follows: (1)
Guru, (2) Laghu, (3) Mridu, (4) Khara, (5) Sheet, (6) Ushna, (7) Snigdha, and
(8) Rooksha. Each should be combined with the word Sparsha Karma.  (1) The Karma
whose fruition makes the body of the Jiva feel heavy like iron is called Guru
Sparsha Karma.  (2) The Karma whose fruition makes the body of the Jiva feel
light like cotton is called Laghu Sparsha Karma.  (3) The Karma whose fruition
makes the body of the Jiva feel soft like butter is called Mridu Sparsha Karma.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 122 karmavipAka rasanAmakarma ke pAMca bheda aura unake lakSaNa isa prakAra
haiM(1) tiktarasa, (2) kaTu rasa, (3) kaSAyarasa, (4) amlarasa, (5) madhurarasa
/  (1) jisa karma ke udaya se jIva kA zarIra-rasa soMTha yA kAlI mirca jaisA
caraparA ho, use tiktarasanAmakarma kahate haiN| (2) jisa karma ke udaya se jIva
kA zarIra-rasa cirAyatA, nIma jaMsA kaTu ho, use kaTurasanAmakarma kahate haiN|
(6} jisa karma ke udaya me jIva kA zarIra-rasa AMvalA, baher3A jaisA kasalA ho,
vaha kaSAyarasanAmakarma hai  /  (4) jisa karma ke udaya se jIva kA zarIra-rasa
nIbU, imalI jaise khaTTe padArthoM jaisA ho, vaha amlarasanAmakarma kahA jAtA
hai  /  (2) jisa karma ke udaya se jIva kA zarIra-rasa mizrI Adi mIThe padArthoM
jaisA ho, use madhura-rasanAmakarma kahate haiM  /  sparzanAmakarma ke ATha
bheda aura unake lakSaNa kramazaH isa prakAra haiM (1) guru, (2) laghu, (3)
madu, (4) khara, (5) zIta, (6) uSNa, (7) snigdha aura (8) rUkSa  /  pratyeka ke
sAtha sparza nAmakarma jor3a lenA cAhie  /  (1) jisa kama ke udaya se jIva kA
zarIra lohe jaisA bhArI ho, vaha gurusparzanAmakarma hai| (2) jisa karma ke
udaya se jIva kA zarIra Aka kI ruI jaisA halkA ho, vaha laghusparzanAmakarma hai
/  (3) jisa karma ke udaya sa jIva kA zarIra makkhana jaisA komala ho, vaha
mRdusparzanAmakarma hai|

Page #203 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
1. Karma Granth 123 (4) The karma whose fruition makes the body of the living
being rough and harsh like the tongue of a cow is called *Kharsparsha karma*. It
is also called *Karkasha Sparsha karma*. (5) The karma whose fruition makes the
body of the living being cold like ice is called *Sheetsparsha karma*. (6) The
karma whose fruition makes the body of the living being hot like fire is called
*Ushnasparsha karma*. (7) The karma whose fruition makes the body of the living
being smooth like ghee is called *Snigdhasparsha karma*. (8) The karma whose
fruition makes the body of the living being rough like sand is called
*Rukhasparsha karma*. Now, in the next verse, we will classify these twenty
divisions of the *Varga Chatushk* into two categories, auspicious and
inauspicious, and mention their names. *Neelam Kasinam Dugandham Tis Kaduyam
Guru Kharam Ruktum. Seerya Cha Asunavam Im Ikarsagam Shubham Se.* ||42|| Meaning
of the verse - Out of the aforementioned twenty types of *Varna Chatushk*,
*Neel*, *Krishna*, *Durgandha*, *Tikta*, *Katu*, *Guru*, *Karkasha*, *Rukha*,
and *Shota* are nine inauspicious types, and the remaining eleven types are
auspicious. Special meaning - The names of the auspicious and inauspicious types
of *Varna*, *Gandha*, *Rasa*, and *Sparsha* karma are as follows: Inauspicious
*Varna karma* - *Krishnavarna*, *Neelvarna*. Inauspicious *Gandha karma* -
*Durabhigandha* ( *Durgandha* ). Inauspicious *Rasa karma* - *Tiktarasa*,
*Katurasa*. — Se

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 1 . prathama karmagran 123 (4) jisa karma ke udaya se jIva kA zarIra gAya kI
jIbha jaisA khuradarA, karkaza ho, vaha kharasparzanAmakarma hai| ise karkaza
sparzanAmakarma bhI kahate haiM  /  (5) jisa karma ke udaya se jIva kA zarIra
barpha jaisA ThaNDA ho, vaha zItasparzanAmakarma hai  /  (6) jisa karma ke udaya
se jIva kA zarIra Aga jaisA uSNa ho, vaha uSNasparzanAmakarma hai  /  ( 19 )
jisa karma ke udaya se jIva kA zarIra ghI ke samAna cikanA ho, vaha
snigdhasparzanAmakarma hai  /  (8) jisa karma ke udaya se jIva kA zarIra bAlU
jaisA rUkhA ho, vaha rUkSasparzanAmakarma hai 1 aba Age kI gAthA meM
vargacatuSka ke ina bIsa bhedoM kA zubha aura azubha ina do bhedoM meM
vargIkaraNa karake unake nAma batalAte haiM  /  nIlaM kasiNaM dugaMdha tisa
kaDuyaM guru kharaM ruktaM  /  sIrya ca asUnavamaM ikArasagaM zubhaM se  /  / 42
//  gAthArtha - varNacatuSka kI pUrvokta bIsa prakRtiyoM meM se nIla, kRSNa,
durgandha, tikta, kaTu, guru, karkaza, rUkSa aura zota ye no prakRtiyA~ azubha
haiM aura zeSa rahI gyAraha prakRtiyAM zubha haiN| vizeSArtha - varNa, gandha,
rasa aura sparza nAmakarma ke bIsa bhedoM meM azubha aura zubha prakRtiyoM ke
nAma isa prakAra haiMazubha varNanAmakarma-kRSNavarNa, nIlavarNa  /  azubha
gandhanAmakarma - durabhigandha ( durgandha ) | azubha rasanAmakarma -
tiktarasa, kaTurasa  /   /  -- se

Page #204 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Karma Vipaka  **Ashubha Swarśanāmakarma** - Guruśparśa, Khara-Karkaśa Sparśa,
Rūkṣaśparśa, Śīta Sparśa | **124** By combining the above two colors, one smell,
two tastes, and four touches, one should understand the nine inauspicious
natures of the four colors. The remaining eleven auspicious natures, their
number and names are as follows: **Shubha Varṇanāmakarma** - Sitavarṇa,
Pītavarṇa, Lohitavarṇa. **Shubha Gandhanāmakarma** - Surabhigandha (Sugandha).
**Shubha Rasānāmakarma** - Kaṣāyarasa, Āmlarasa, Madhura rasa. **Shubha
Sparśanāmakarma** - Laghuśparśa, Mudusparśa, Snigdhaśparśa, Uṣṇaśparśa. Now, in
the next verse, the divisions of Ānūpūrvī Nāmakarma, the terms like Narakadvik,
etc., and the divisions of Vihāyogati Nāmakarma are explained.  **Uh
Gahavvṇuputri Gaivyigam Tigam Niyāujuyam. Puthvīudo Bakke Suhaasuha Vasudd
Vihagagai ||43||** **Verse Meaning:** - Just as there are four divisions of Gati
Nāmakarma, there are also four divisions of Ānūpūrvī Nāmakarma. The rise of
Ānūpūrvī Nāmakarma occurs in the Vi-graha-gati. By combining Gati and Ānūpūrvī,
the terms Gati-drik are formed. By adding Āyu to this Drik, the term Gati-trik
is formed. Just like the pace of a bull and a camel, there are two divisions of
Vihāyogati Nāmakarma based on the difference between auspicious and
inauspicious.  **Special Meaning:** - In this verse, the divisions of Ānūpūrvī
and Vihāyogati, which are among the eight natures of Nāmakarma, and the terms
like Narakadvik, etc., formed from the divisions of Nāmakarma, are explained.
The divisions and nature of Ānūpūrvī Nāmakarma are as follows:

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karma vipAka azubha svarzanAmakarma - gurusparza, khara- karkaza sparza,
rUkSasparza, zIta sparza | 124 ukta do varNa, eka gandha, do rasa aura cAra
sparza ke nAma milAne se varNacatuSka kI nau azubha prakRtiyA~ samajhanI cAhie
tathA zeSa rahI gyAraha zubha prakRtiyoM kI saMkhyA aura nAma kramaza: isa
prakAra haiM zubha varNanAmakarma - sitavarNa, pItavarNa, lohitavarNa  /  zubha
gandhanAmakarma surabhigandha (sugandha ) | zubha rasanAmakarma - kaSAyarasa,
Amlarasa, madhurarasa zubha sparza nAmakarma - laghusparza, mudusparza,
snigdhasparza, uSNasparza  /  aba Age kI gAthA meM AnupUrvI nAmakarma ke bheda,
narakadvika Adi saMjJAeM aura vihAyogati nAmakarma ke bhedoM ko kahate haiM  /
uha gahavvaNuputrI gaivyigaM tigaM niyAujuyaM  /  puthvIudo bakke suhaasuha
vasuddha vihagagaI ||43|| gAthArtha -gatinAmakarma ke cAra bhedoM ke samAna
AnupUrvI nAmakarma ke bhI cAra bheda hote haiM aura AnupUrvI nAmakarma kA udaya
vigrahagati meM hotA hai| gati aura AnupUrvI ko milAne se gatidrika aura isa
DriMka meM Ayu ko jor3ane se gatitrika saMjJAe~ banatI hai| baila aura U~Ta kI
cAla kI taraha zubha aura azubha ke bheda se, vihAyogati nAmakarma ke do bheda
haiM  /  vizeSArtha nAmakarma kI pistrakRtiyoM meM se ghoSa rahI AnupUrvI aura
vihAyogati prakRtiyoM ke bhedoM aura nAmakarma ke bhedoM se banane vAlI
narakadvika Adi saMjJAoM kA kathana gAthA meM kiyA gayA hai  /  AnupUrvI
nAmakarma ke bheda aura svarUpa kramazaH isa prakAra hai

Page #205 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## First Karma Granth  (1) Devanupurvi, (3) Tiryanchanupurvi (2)
Manushyanupurvi, and (4) Narakanupurvi.  The Karma which, by its arising, causes
a living being in the state of Vigraha-Gati to travel through the series of
celestial regions and reach its destination, is called Anupurvi Karma.  125.
The power to move is present in both the Jiva and the Pudgala. Therefore, both
participate in the movement, being the cause. But here, the focus is mainly on
the movement of the Jiva.  The natural movement of the Jiva is according to the
series. The line of celestial regions is called a series. This movement of the
Jiva is of two types - Riju and Vakra. In Riju-Gati, the Jiva does not need to
make any new effort while transferring, because when it leaves its previous
body, it receives the velocity generated by the previous body, and with that
velocity, without any new effort, like an arrow released from a bow, it reaches
its new location directly. The other movement is Vakra, which is curved.
Therefore, while moving with this movement, the Jiva needs a new effort. Because
the effort generated by the previous body works only up to the point where the
Jiva needs to turn. In both these types of movements, the movement of a
liberated Jiva is only Riju-Gati, and the movement of a worldly Jiva is both
Riju and Vakra.  When the worldly Jiva moves to take on a body in another
existence after leaving the body of this existence, that is, when the Jiva in
the state of Vigraha-Gati moves, then according to the series of celestial
regions...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 ! prathama karmagrantha (1) devAnupUrvI, (3) tiryacAnupUrvI (2) manuSyAnupUrvI,
aura (4) narakAnupUrvI  /  jima karma ke udaya se vigrahagati meM rahA huA jIva
AkAzapradezoM kI zreNI ke anusAra gamana kara utpatti sthAna para pahu~catA hai,
ume AnupUrvI nAmakarma kahate haiM  /  125. gati karane kI zakti jIva aura
pudgala meM hai| ataH nimitta donoM gatiyA meM hokara gati karane lagate haiM  /
bAre meM vicAra kiyA jA kintu yahA~ mukhyatayA jIva kI gati ke rahA hai  /  jIva
kI svAbhAvika gati zreNI ke anusAra hotI hai| AkAzapradezoM kI paMkti ko zreNI
kahate haiN| jIva kI yaha gati do prakAra kI hotI hai -RRju aura vakra  /
Rjugati se sthAnAntara jAte samaya jIva ko kisI prakAra kA navIna prayatna nahIM
karanA par3atA hai, kyoMki jaba vaha pUrva zarIra chor3atA hai, taba use pUrva
zarIrajanya vega milatA hai aura usI ke vega se dUsare prayatna ke binA dhanuSa
se chUTe bANa ke samAna sIdhA apane navIna sthAna para pahu~ca jAtA hai| dUsarI
gati vakraghumAva vAlI hotI hai| isalie isa gati se jAte hue jIva ko naye
prayatna kI apekSA hotI hai| kyoMki pUrva zarIrajanya prayatna vahA~ taka hI
kArya karatA hai, jahA~ se jIva ko ghUmanA pdd'e| ina donoM prakAra kI gatiyoM
meM mukta jIva kI gati Rjugati hI hotI hai aura saMsArI jIva kI Rja aura vakra
donoM prakAra kI gati hotI hai  /  isa bhava sambandhI zarIra ko chor3akara
bhavAntara sambandhI zarIra ko dhAraNa karane ke lie jaba saMsArI jIva kI gati
hotI hai, yAnI vigrahagati meM rahA huA jIva gati karatA hai to AkAza-pradezoM
kI zreNI ke -

Page #206 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Karmavipaka and its Influence on Rebirth  A being reaches its destination of
rebirth based on its **karmavipaka**. This process is influenced by **anupurvi**
**namakarma**, which acts as a cause. **Anupurvi** **namakarma** pushes a being
from its **samashreni** (higher) birth place to a **vishreni** (lower) birth
place. If a being's birth place is already in **samashreni**, **anupurvi**
**namakarma** does not arise. **Anupurvi** **namakarma** arises in **vakragati**
(curved path) but not in **rijugati** (straight path).  The terms **gati-dvik**,
**gati-trik**, etc., are used in this context. **Gati-dvik** indicates the
presence of two elements: **gati** (path) and **anupurvi** **namakarma**.
**Gati-trik** indicates the presence of three elements: **gati**, **anupurvi**
**namakarma**, and **ayu** (lifespan).  For example, **narak-dvik** refers to
**narak-gati** (path to hell) and **narak-anupurvi** (karma leading to hell).
**Narak-trik** refers to **narak-gati**, **narak-anupurvi**, and **narak-ayu**
(lifespan in hell). Similarly, **tiryanch-dvik**, **tiryanch-trik**, **manushya-
dvik**, **manushya-trik**, **dev-dvik**, and **dev-trik** can be understood in
the same way.  **Dvik** refers to the combination of **gati** and **anupurvi**
**namakarma**, while **trik** refers to the combination of **gati**,
**anupurvi** **namakarma**, and **ayu**.  ## Vihayoga-gati Namakarma
**Vihayoga-gati** **namakarma** has two types:  1. **Shubha-vihayoga-gati**:
This karma leads to a good gait, like that of an elephant or a bull. 2.
**Ashubha-vihayoga-gati**: This karma leads to a bad gait, like that of a camel
or a donkey.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmavipAka anusAra gati karatA huA utpattisthAna para pahu~catA hai| isameM
AnupUrvI nAmakarma kAraNa hai  /  jo samazreNI se apane utpattisthAna ke prati
jAne vAle saMsArI jIva ko usake vizreNI patita utpattisthAna para pahu~cA detA
hai| yadi jIba kA utpattisthAna samazreNI meM ho to AnupUrvI nAmakarma kA udaya
nahIM hotA hai| vakragati meM AnupUrvI nAmakarma kA udaya hotA hai, Rjamati meM
nahIM hotA hai| _ isI sandarbha meM prayoga meM Ane vAlI gatidvika, gatitrika
Adi saMjJAoM ke saMketa kA artha yaha hai ki jahA~ gatiddhika aisA saMketa ho,
vahA~ gati aura AnupUryo nAmakarma yaha do prakRtiyAM lenA cAhie aura jahA~
gatitrika saMketa ho, vahA~ gati, AnupUrvo aura Ayu ina tIna prakRtiyoM kA
grahaNa karanA caahie| sAmAnya meM ye saMjJA, kAhI gaI haiN| vizana se saMjJAoM
ko isa prakAra samajhanA cAhiejaise-'narakadvika' meM narakagati aura
narakAnupUrvI kA grahaNa hogA  /  yadi narakatrika saMjJA kA saMketa ho to
usameM narakagati, narakAnupUrvI aura narakAyu kA grahaNa hogaa| isI prakAra
tiyecahika, tiryaMcatrika, manuSyadvika, manuSyatrika, devaddhika. devatrika
saMjJAoM ke lie samajha lenA caahie| apane-apane nAmavAlI gati, AnapUrvI ko
grahaNa karane se dvika, aura Ayu ko grahaNa karane para trika saMjJAeM banatI
haiM  /  vihAyogati nAmakarma ke bheda aura lakSaNa isa prakAra haiM (1)
zubhavihAyogati, (2) azubhavihAyogani  /  jisa karma ke udaya se jIva kI cAla
hAthI, baila kI cAla kI taraha zubha ho, vaha zubhavihAyogati nAmakarma hai|
jisa karma ke udaya se jIva kI cAla UMTa, gadhe Adi kI cAla kI taraha azubha ho,
vaha azubhavihAyogati nAmakarma hai  /

Page #207 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## First Karma Text  Having described the nature of the *piṇḍa-prakr̥ti*s, now
we describe each *prakr̥ti*.  **Gāthā:** Due to the arising of the *parāghāta*
karma, the being becomes invincible to the strong. And due to the arising of the
*uccvāsa* karma, the being obtains *uccvāsa*.  **Upāsanā-mavasī || 44 ||**
**127**  The eight *prakr̥ti*s which are the *apratipakṣa* of the *viśeṣārtha*
karma are as follows:  The characteristics of the *parāghāta* and *uccvāsa*
*prakr̥ti*s are as follows:  The karma whose arising makes the being appear
invincible even in the eyes of the very strong, is called *parāghāta* karma. In
other words, when *parāghāta* karma arises, the being appears invincible not
only to the weak, but also to the very strong, intelligent, learned, and
opponents. They are defeated by its influence.  The karma whose arising makes
the being capable of breathing is called *uccvāsa* karma. Drawing air from
outside the body through the nose is called *śvāsa*, and releasing air from
inside the body through the nose is called *uccvāsa*. The being obtains the
power to perform these two actions from the *uccvāsa* karma.  **ra** The next
two *gāthā*s describe the characteristics of the *ātapa* and *udyota* karma.
**ravi-bimbe ujiyangam tāva-juyam āvāja na u jalaṇe | jamusiṇa-phāsassā taha
lehi-yaṣannassa ughau tti || 45 ||**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prathama karma grantha isa prakAra piNDaprakRtiyoM kA kathana karane ke bAda
aba pratyeka prakRtiyoM kA varNana karate haiM  /  paradhAudA pANI paresi
baliNaM pi hoi duiriso  /  Usa saladvitto havera gAthA - parASA nAmaka karma ke
udaya se jIva dUsare balavAnoM ke lie ajeya hotA hai aura ucchvAsa nAmakarma ke
udaya se ucchvAsa labdhiyukta hotA hai  /  upAsanAmavasI  //  44  //  127
vizeSArtha nAmakarma kI jo apratipakSA ATha pratyekaprakRtiyA~ haiN| unameM se
parAghAta aura ucchvAsa prakRtiyoM ke lakSaNa isa prakAra haiM jisa karma ke
udaya se jIva bar3e-bar3e balavAnoM kI dRSTi meM bhI ajeya mAlUma ho, vaha
parAghAtanAmakarma hai  /  arthAt parAghAtanAmakarma kA udaya hone para jIva
kamajoroM kA to kahanA hI kyA, bar3e-bar3e balavAnoM, buddhimAnoM vidvAnoM aura
virodhiyoM kI dRSTi meM bhI ajeya dikhatA hai, usake prabhAva se ve parAbhUta ho
jAte haiM  /  jisa karma ke udaya se jIva zvAsocchvAsa labdhiyukta hotA hai, use
ucchvAsanAmakarma kahate haiN| zarIra ke bAhara kI havA ko nAka dvArA andara
khIMcanA zvAsa hai aura zarIra ke andara kI havA ko nAka dvArA bAhara chor3anA
ucchvAsa kahalAtA hai| ina donoM kAryoM ko karane ko zakti jIva ko ucchvAsa
nAmakarma se prApta hotI hai  /  ra Age kI do gAthAoM meM Atapa aura udyota
nAmakarma ke lakSaNa kahate haiM  /  ravibiMbe ujiyaMgaM tAvajuyaM AvAja na u
jalaNe 1 jamusiNaphAsassa taha lehiyaSannassa ughau tti  //  45  //

Page #208 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 128 ## Karma Vipaka  **Anunipāya sarūvam jiyangamujjoyae ihujjoyā.
Jaiveyuttavivik yajois khajjoyamāiva. ||46||**  **Gāthārtha:** Due to the rise
of the Ātap karma, the body of the jīva becomes warm. Its rise occurs in the
earthly body of the solar system, but not in the jīvas of the fire element. They
experience the rise of Uṣṇasparśa and Lohitavarṇa karma.  Similar to the light
of the moon, stars, and fireflies, the rise of Udyota karma causes the body of
the jīva to emit a cool, luminous light, like the bodies of the righteous and
the gods.  **Viśeṣārtha:** These two gāthās explain the characteristics of Ātap
and Udyota karma, their owners, and the difference between Ātap and Uṣṇasparśa
karma.  **(The karma whose rise causes the jīva's body to emit warm light, but
not be warm itself, is called Ātap karma.)**  **Ātap karma's rise does not make
the jīva itself warm, but it does cause it to emit light, radiance, and warmth.
Ātap karma arises in the jīvas of the earth element, outside the sun. Except for
these jīvas, Ātap karma does not arise in other jīvas of the solar system.**
**Ātap karma does not arise in the jīvas of the fire element, because Ātap karma
only arises in jīvas whose bodies are cool but emit warm light. However, the
bodies and light of the jīvas of the fire element are warm due to the rise of
Uṣṇasparśa and Lohitavarṇa karma.**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 128 karma vipAka aNuNipayA sarUvaM jiyaMgamujjoyae ihujjoyA  /
jaiveyuttavivika yajoisa khajjoyamAiva  // 46 //  gAthArtha - Atapa nAmakarma ke
udaya se jIvoM kA aMga tApayukta hotA hai| isakA udaya sUryamaNDala ke pArthiva
zarIra meM hotA hai, kintu agnikAya ke jIvoM ko nahIM hotaa| unake to uSNasparza
aura lohitavarNa nAmakarma kA udaya hotA hai  /  sAdhu aura devoM ke uttara
vaizriya zarIra evaM candra, tArA Adi jyotiSkoM aura juganU ke prakAza ko taraha
udyota nAmakarma ke udaya se jIvoM kA zarIra anuSNazIta prakAzarUpa udyota
karatA hai  /  vizeSArtha ina do gAthAoM meM Atapa aura udyota nAmakarma ke
lakSaNa tathA unake svAmI aura Atapa va uSNa sparza nAmakarma ke antara ko
spaSTa kiyA hai| (jisa karma ke udaya se jIva kA zarIra svayaM uSNa na hokara
uSNa prakAza karatA hai, use Atapa nAmakarma kahate haiM AtA nAmakarma kA udaya
vAlA svayaM to uSNatArahita hotA hai, parantu prakAza, prabhA, uSNatAsahita hotI
hai| Atapa nAmakarma kA udaya sUryabimba ke bAhara sthita pRthvIkAya ke jIvoM ke
hotA hai  /  ina jIvoM ke sivAya sUryamaNDala ke anya jIvoM ke Atapa nAmakarma
kA udaya nahIM hotA hai  /  Atapa nAmakarma kA udaya agnikAya ke jIvoM ko nahIM
hotA hai; kyoMki Atapa nAmakarma kA udaya unhIM jIvoM ke hotA hai, jinakA zarIra
svayaM to ThaNDA ho aura uSNa prakAza karate haiN| lekina agnikAya ke jIvoM kA
zarIra aura unakA prakAza bhI uSNasparza aura lohitavarNanAkarma kA udaya hone
se uSNa hotA hai  /

Page #209 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## First Karma Granth  **126 Summary:** The essence is that the bodies of those
beings who experience the *Atapanama* karma are themselves cold, but their aura
is hot. And the bodies of beings in the *Agnikai* are both hot to the touch and
emit hot light. This is the difference between beings with *Atapanama* karma and
those with *Ushnasparsha* karma.  Now we explain *Udyotanama* karma.  The karma
whose emergence causes a being's body to emit cold light is called *Udyotanama*
karma. When *Labdhi-dhari* monks take on a *Vaikriya* body, and when gods take
on a *Uttara Vaishya* body compared to their original body, the cold light that
emanates from their bodies should be understood as arising from this
*Udyotanama* karma. The bodies of beings in the *Prithvi Kaya* like the moon,
stars, and constellations emit cold light due to the presence of *Udyotanama*
karma. Similarly, the emergence of this *Udyotanama* karma should be understood
in fireflies, gems, and other substances that emit light.  Now, in the next
verse, we describe the characteristics of *Agurul* and *Tirthankara* karma.
**Verse 47:** The body of a being does not become heavy or light due to the
emergence of *Agurul* karma. A being becomes worthy of worship by the three
worlds due to the emergence of *Tirthankara* karma. This emergence occurs after
the attainment of *Kevalgyan*.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prathama karma granya 126 sArAMza yaha hai ki AtapanAmakarma kA udaya jina
jIvoM ke hotA hai, unakA zarIra svayaM to ThaNDA hai, lekina prabhA hI uSNa hotI
hai aura agnikAya ke jIvoM kA zarIra bhI uSNasparza evaM prakAza bhI uSNasparza
vAlA hotA hai| AtapanAmakarma aura uSNasparzanAmakarma vAle jIvoM meM yahI
antara hai| aba udyotanAmakarma kI vyAkhyA karate haiN| jisa karma ke udaya meM
jIva kA zarIra zIta prakAza phailAtA hai, use udyotanAmakarma kahate haiN|
labdhi-dhArI muni jaba vaikriya zArIra dhAraNa karate haiM tathA deva jaba mUla
zarIra kI apekSA uttaravaizyi zarIra dhAraNa karate haiM taba unake zarIra se
zItala prakAza nikalatA hai, vaha isI udyotanAmakarma ke udaya se samajhanA
caahie| candra, nakSatra aura tArA maNDaloM ke pRthvI kAya ke jIvoM ke zarIra
udyotanAmakarma se yukta hone ke kAraNa zItala prakAza phailAte haiN| isI
prakAra jugana, ratna evaM anya prakAza phailAne vAlI auSadhiyoM meM bhI isI
udyotanAmakarma kA udaya samajhanA caahie| aba Age kI gAthA meM agurula aura
tIrthakara nAmakarma ke lakSaNa kahate haiN| aMgaM na guru na lahuyaM jAyai
jIvassa agurulahuuvayA  /  tittheNa tihuyaNassa vi pujjo se udao kevaliNo  // 47
//  gAthArtha-agurulaghu karma ke udaya se jIva kA zarIra na to bhArI aura na
halkA hotA hai| tIrthaMkara nAmakarma ke udaya se jIva tribhuvana kA bhI pUjya
hotA hai| isakA udaya kevalajJAna utpanna hone ke pazcAta hotA hai|

Page #210 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Karmavipak  **Special Meaning:** The nature of Agurul and Tirthankara karmas
has been explained in the head.  The karma whose arising results in the body of
the being being neither light nor heavy, but having an Agurulghu result, is
called Agurulghunamakarma. Due to Agurulghunamakarma, the being does not
perceive its own body as so heavy that it becomes difficult to manage, nor so
light that it cannot be saved from flying in the air like cotton wool. In other
words, the being does not perceive its own body as heavy or light in weight, but
due to the arising of Agurulghunamakarma, it appears to have an Agurulghu
result.  The karma whose arising results in the attainment of the Tirthankara
position is called Tirthankaranamakarma.  The arising of Tirthankaranamakarma
occurs only upon the generation of Kevalgyan. Due to this karma, he becomes
Trilokyapujya and attains external splendor in the form of Samvasaran. This
splendor is not attained by all Kevalgyanis, but is attained by those who have
bound Tirthankaranamakarma. The Kevalgyani, seated in the Tirthankara position,
shows the path in authoritative speech, by following which he himself has
attained this state of accomplishment. He establishes a Dharma Tirtha, which is
also called the fourfold assembly of Shravak, Shraddhika, Sadhu, and Sadhvi.
Even the most powerful and mighty Devendras, Narendras, etc. of the world serve
him with great devotion and consider it their good fortune to get the
opportunity to listen to his words.  Now, in the next verse, the nature of
Nirman and Upadhat karmas is explained.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmavipAka vizeSArtha-agurula aura tIthaMkara nAmakarmoM kA svarUpa mAthA meM
samajhAyA gayA hai| jisa karma ke udaya se jIva kA zarIra halkA aura bhArI na
hokara agurulaghu pariNAma vAlA hotA hai. use agurulathunAmakarma kahate haiN|
agurulaghunAmakarma ke kAraNa hI jIva ko svayaM apanA zarIra itanA bhArI mAlUma
nahIM par3atA hai ki use saMbhAlanA kaThina ho jAe aura na itanA halkA hI
pratIta hotA hai ki Aka kI ruI ke samAna havA meM ur3ane se bhI nahIM bacAyA jA
ske| arthAta jIva ko svayaM kA zarIra vajana meM bhArI yA halkA pratIta na
hokara agurulaghanAmakarma ke udaya se agurulaghu pariNAma vAlA pratIta hotA
hai| jisa karma ke udaya se tIrthakara pada kI prApti hotI hai, use
tIrthakaranAmakarma kahate haiN| tIrthaMkaranAmakarma kA udaya kevalajJAna
utpanna hone para hotA hai  /  isa karma ke kAraNa hI vaha trailokyapUjya aura
use samavasaraNarUpa bAhya vaibhava prApta hotA hai| yaha vaibhava sabhI
kevalajJAniyoM ko prApta nahIM hotA, kintu unheM milatA hai jinhoMne
tIrthakaranAmakarma kA bandha kiyA ho| tIrthakara pada meM virAjamAna
kevalajJAnI adhikArayukta vANI meM usa mArga ko dikhAte haiM, jisakA AcaraNa
kara svayaM ne isa kRtakRtya dazA ko prApta kiyA hai  /  dharmatIrtha kI
sthApanA karate haiM, jisako zrAvaka, zrAdikA, sAdhu, sAdhvI rUpa caturvidha
saMgha bhI kahate haiM  /  saMsAra ke bar3e-se-bar3e zaktizAlI devendra,
narendra Adi taka unakI atyanta zraddhA se sevA karate haiM aura unakI vANI ko
sunane kA avasara prApta karanA apanA ahobhAgya mAnate haiM  /  aba Age kI gAthA
meM nirmANa aura upadhAta nAmakarma kA svarUpa kahate haiN|

Page #211 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## First Karma Granth  **Verse 48:** The Karma called **Nirmaan** (Creation)
arranges the limbs and appendages of the body in their proper places, like a
master architect. The Karma called **Upghaat** (Injury) causes the being to
suffer through its body's parts, like the **Lambika** (sixth finger) or other
such deformities.  **Explanation:**  The Karma called **Nirmaan** is responsible
for the orderly arrangement of the body's limbs and appendages. **Nirmaan**
means "organized creation." Just as a painter or sculptor arranges the limbs of
a painting or sculpture in their proper places, so too does **Nirmaan** regulate
the body's parts. Without this Karma, the limbs and appendages created by the
**Ango-Upanga** Karma (Karma of limbs and appendages) would not be properly
arranged. In other words, **Nirmaan** ensures that the body's parts are in their
correct positions, allowing them to function properly.  The Karma called
**Upghaat** causes the being to suffer through its body's parts, such as the
**Pratijihva** (a tongue-like growth), **Chauradant** (teeth protruding from the
lips), **Lambika** (sixth finger), and so on.  Even when the body's limbs and
appendages are properly arranged, some beings may have body parts that are not
useful and instead cause suffering. This suffering is caused by the **Upghaat**
Karma.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prathama karmagrantha aGgovaMganiyamaNaM nimmANaM kuNai sutahArasamaM  /
uvaghApA uvahammada sataNuvayabalaM vigAha  // 48 //
gAthArtha:-nirmANanAmakarma sUtradhAra ke samAna zarIroM ke aMgoM aura upAMgoM
kA yathAyogya pradezoM meM vyavasthApana karatA hai  /  upaghAtanAmakarma ke
kAraNa jIva apane zarIra ke avayavabhUta laMbikA yAnI chaThI aMgulI Adi se kleza
pAtA hai| vizeSArtha-jisa kama ke udaya se zarIra meM aMga-upAMga apanIapanI
jagaha vyavasthita hote haiM, use nirmANa-nAmakarma kahate haiM  /  nirmANa kA
artha hai vyavasthita rUpa meM racanA honA  /  jaise citrakAra yA zilpI citra yA
mUti meM hAtha-paira Adi avayavoM ko yathAsthAna citrita karatA yA banAtA hai,
vaise hI nirmANanAmakarma zarIra ke avayavoM kA niyamana karatA hai| yadi yaha
karma na ho to aMgopAMganAmakarma ke udaya se bane hue aMga-upAMgoM-hAtha,
paira, A~kha, kAna, Adi kA yathAsthAna niyamana nahIM ho sakatA hai| arthAt
nirmANanAmakarma zArIrika avayavoM kA una-unake sthAna para hone kA niyamana
karatA hai aura isake kAraNa ve aMga-upAMga Adi apane-apane sthAna para
vyavasthita rIti se sthApita hote haiN| jisa karma ke udaya se jIva apane zarIra
ke avayavoM-pratijihvA (par3ajIva , cauradanta (oTha ke bAhara nikale hue
dA~ta), labikA (chaThI uMgalI) Adi se kleza pAtA hai, use upaghAtanAmakarma
kahate haiN| zarIra meM aMga aura upAMgoM ke yathAyogya sthAna para vyavasthita
hone para bhI kisI-kisI jIva ke zarIra meM avayavabhUta aMga-upAMga aise dikhate
haiM, jo upayogI kArya meM sahakArI na hokara jIva ko klezotpAdaka bana jAte
haiN| inakA klezotpAdaka banane kA kAraNa upadhAtanAmakarma hai|

Page #212 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Karmavipaka  Thus, after stating the nature of the eight non-contradictory
(apratipaksa) categories, the following verse describes the nature of the
contradictory (sapratipaksa) categories of the Bos (Bosa) nature, namely, Tras,
Badar, and Paryapta karmas.  **Verse 132:**  "From the rise of Sanam karma, the
jiva becomes two, three, four, and five-sensed; from the rise of Badar karma,
the jiva becomes Badar, i.e., gross; and from the rise of Paryapta karma, the
jiva becomes endowed with its own appropriate Paryaptis. Paryapta jivas are of
two types, based on the difference in Labdhi and Karan."  **Explanation:**  This
verse explains the nature of Badar and Paryapta categories among the Sadshak
(six) categories.  The karma whose rise results in the attainment of a
Shravasakaya is called Tras karma.  There are four types of Tras jivas: (1) Dwi-
indriya (two-sensed), (2) Tri-indriya (three-sensed), (3) Chatur-indriya (four-
sensed), and (4) Pancha-indriya (five-sensed). Tras jivas are capable of moving
from one place to another to protect themselves from heat and cold.  Although
Tejasakayik and Vayukayik jivas have the rise of Stavar karma, they are also
called Tras due to their slow, crawling-like movement.  Thus, there are two
types of Tras: Labdhi and Tis. Dwi-indriya to Pancha-indriya jivas with the rise
of Tras karma are Labdhi-Tras, and they are primarily called Tras.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmavipAka isa prakAra apratipakSA ATha pratyeka prakRtiyoM ke svarUpa kA
kathana karane ke pazcAta Age kI gAthA meM, sapratipakSA bosa prakRtiyoM meM se
trasa bAdara aura paryApta nAmakarmoM kA svarUpa 1 132 kahate haiM  /
bitiupaNidiya tasA bAyarao bAyarA jiyA dhUlA  /  niyaniyapajjattijuyA pajjattA
kiraNeha  // 46 //  gAthArtha - sanAmakarma ke udaya se jIva do, tIna, cAra aura
pA~ca indriya vAle, bAdaranAmakarma ke udaya se jIva bAdara arthAt sthUla aura
paryApta nAmakarma ke udaya se jIba apanIapanI yogya paryAptiyoM sahita hote
haiN| paryApta jIva labdhi aura karaNa ke bheda se do prakAra ke haiM  /  J
vizeSArtha - gAthA meM sadazaka kI prakRtiyoM meM se basa bAdara aura paryApta
prakRtiyoM kA svarUpa samajhAyA hai  /  jisa karma ke udaya se jIva ko zrasakAya
kI prApti ho, ume trasa nAmakarma kahate haiM  /  asa jIvoM ke cAra bheda hai-
(1) dvIndriya ( 2 ) zrIndriya, (3) caturindriya aura (4) paMcendriya  /  trasa
jIva garmI-sardI se apanA bacAva karane ke lie eka sthAna ko chor3akara dUsare
sthAna meM jAne meM samartha hote haiM  /  . yadyapi tejaskAyika aura vAyukAyika
jIvoM ke sthAvara nAmaka meM kA udaya hai, lekina unameM basa kI-sI gati hone ke
kAraNa gati sAdRzya dekhakara unheM bhI trasa kahA jAtA hai  /  arthAt asa do
prakAra ke haiM-labdhi aura tisa  /  trasa nAmakarma ke udaya vAle dvIndriya se
lekara paMcendriya taka ke jIva labdhitrasa haiM aura mukhya rUpa se ye hI asa
kaha

Page #213 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
First Karma Granth 133 are called. The emergence of the stationary karma called
"nama karma" occurs in the tejaskaayik and vaayukaayik beings, and they are
stationary. But because they are mobile like the beings, they are called
"matitras". These are called "bas" by treatment. Among the living beings, the
dwii-indriya, tri-indriya and chatur-indriya are without mind, and among the
panch-indriya, many beings are with mind and many are without mind. But the
tejaskaayik and vaayukaayik tras are without mind. The karma whose emergence
causes the being to obtain a "baadar" (gross body) is called "baadar-nama
karma". "What the eye can see", this is not the meaning of "baadar", because
one-one "baadar" body of the earth-body etc. cannot be seen by the eyes. But the
"baadar-nama karma" manifests a type of expression in the body community of the
earth-body etc. beings, due to which those bodies become visible. "Baadar-nama
karma" is the jeeva-vipaakini nature. This nature produces the "baadar" result
in the being through the pudgals of the body, due to which they become visible.
But those who do not have the emergence of this karma, even if they gather
together in the form of a subtle community, they do not become visible. Even
though "baadar-nama karma" is the jeeva-vipaakini nature, the reason for its
manifestation through the pudgals of the body is that it is not against the
jeeva-vipaakini nature to show its effect in the body. Just as, even though
anger is the jeeva-vipaakini nature, its manifestation is - the crookedness of
the eyebrows, the redness of the eyes, the fluttering of the lips etc.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prathama karma grantha 133 lAte haiN| tejaskAyika aura vAyukAyika jIvoM ke
sthAvara nAmakarma kA udaya hotA hai aura ve sthAvara hI haiM  /  lekina basa
jIvoM ke samAna gatizIla hone se ve matitrasa kahalAte haiM  /  ye upacAra se
basa kahe jAte haiM  /  sajIvoM meM se dvIndriya, zrIndriya aura caturindriya sa
manarahita hote haiM aura paMcendriyoM meM se kaI prANI manasahita aura kaI
manarahita hote haiM  /  kintu tejaskAyika aura vAyukAyika trasa to manarahita
hI hote haiM  /  jisa karma ke udaya se jIva ko bAdara (sthUla kAya kI prApti
ho, use bAdaranAmakarma kahate haiM  /  'jise A~kha dekha sake', yaha bAdara kA
artha nahIM hai, kyoMki eka-eka bAdara pRthvIkAya Adi kA zarIra AMkhoM se nahIM
dekhA jA sakatA hai  /  kintu bAdaranAmakarma pRthvIkAya Adi jIvoM ke zarIra
samudAya meM eka prakAra kI abhivyakti pragaTa karatA hai, jisase ve zarIra
dRSTigocara hote haiM  /  bAdara nAmakarma jIvavipAkinI prakRti hai| yaha
prakRti zarIra ke pudgaloM ke mAdhyama se jItra meM bAdara pariNAma ko utpanna
karatI hai, jisase ve dRSTigocara hote haiN| kintu jinheM isa karma kA udaya
nahIM hotA, aise sUkSma jIva samudAya rUpa meM bhI ekatrita ho jAyeM to bhI
dRSTigocara nahIM hote haiM  /  bAdaranAmakarma ke jIvavipAkinI prakRti hone
para bhI zarIra ka pudgaloM ke mAdhyama se usakI abhivyakti kA kAraNa yaha hai
ki jIvavipAkinI prakRti kA zarIra meM prabhAva dikhalAnA viruddha nahIM hai  /
jaise krodha ke jIvavipAkinI prakRti hone para bhI usakA udaka - bhauMha kA
Ter3hA honA, A~khoM kA lAla honA, oThoM kI phar3aphar3AhaTa ityAdi

Page #214 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Karma-vipaka manifests as results. In essence, karma-shakti is peculiar, so
badar-namakarma produces a type of badar result in earth-bodied beings, etc.,
causing a type of expression to appear in their body community, and they become
visible in the body. The karma whose arising makes beings endowed with their
respective paryaptis is called paryapti-namakarma. The power of a being by which
it takes in pudgalas and transforms them into food, body, etc., is called
paryapti. There are six types of paryapti: (1) maha-bharyapsi, (2) shariyat, (3)
indriya-paryapti, (4) shwaso-chchwas-paryapti, (5) bhasha-paryapti, (6) man-
paryapti. In the above six paryaptis, in sequence, a one-sense being has four
(food, body, sense, breath), a two-sense being, a three-sense being, a four-
sense being, and an unconscious five-sense being has the above four paryaptis
along with bhasha-paryapti, making five, and conscious five-sense beings have
all six paryaptis, from food to mind. After abandoning the body related to the
present existence, in order to take on the body related to the future existence,
the being reaches the place of origin and, by means of the karmic body, takes in
pudgalas for the first time, which have six divisions in the form of food-
paryapti, etc., and by them, all six paryaptis begin to form simultaneously,
i.e., from the six parts of the pudgalas taken in for the first time, one part
is taken to begin the formation of each paryapti, but their...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmavipAka pariNAmoM dvArA prakaTa rUpa meM dikhalAI detA hai  /  sArAMza yaha
hai ki karmazakti vicitra hai, isalie bAdaranAmakarma pRthvIkAya Adi jIvoM meM
eka prakAra ke bAdara pariNAma ko utpanna kara detA hai, jisase unake zarIra
samudAya meM eka prakAra kI abhivyakti prakaTa ho jAtI hai aura ve zarIra
dRSTigocara hote haiN| jisa karma ke udaya se jIva apanI-apanI paryAptiyoM meM
yukta hote haiM. vaha paryAptanAmakarma hai| jIva kI usa zakti ko paryApti
kahate haiM, jisake dvArA pudgaloM ko grahaNa karane tathA unakA AhAra, zarIra
Adi ke rUpa meM badala dene kA kArya hotA hai| paryApti ke chaha bheda haiM-(1)
mahAbharyApsi, 2) zarIyAta (3) indriyaparyApti, (4) zvAsocchavAsaparyApti, 15)
bhASAparyApti, (6) manaparyApti  /  ukta chaha paryAptiyoM meM anukrama se
ekendriya jIva ke cAra (AhAra, zarIra, indriya, zvAsocchvAsa), dvIndriya,
zrIndriya, caturindriya aura asaMjJI paMcendriya ke ukta AhAra Adi cAra
paryAptiyoM ke sAtha bhASAparyApti ke milAne se pA~ca tathA saMjJI paMcendriya
jIvoM ke AhArAdi mana paryanta chahoM paryAptiyA~ hotI hai| ibhava sambandhI
zarIra kA parityAga karane ke bAda parabhava sambandhI zarIra grahaNa karane ke
lie jIva utpattisthAna meM pahuMcakara kArmaNa zarIra ke dvArA jina pudgaloM ko
prathama samaya meM grahaNa karatA hai, unake AhAraparyApti Adi rUpa chaha
vibhAga hote haiM aura unake dvArA eka sAtha chahoM payoptiyoM kA bananA
prArambha ho jAtA hai, arthAt prathama samaya meM grahaNa kiye hue pudgaloM ke
chaha bhAgoM meM se eka-eka bhAga lekara pratyeka paryApti kA bananA prArambha
ho jAtA hai, kintu unakI

Page #215 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## First Karma Granth, 135  "Perfection occurs gradually. That is, after food,
the body, after the body, the senses, and so on. In this way, the sequence of
perfections should be completed until the attainment of mind-perfection. This
can be explained with an example: Just as women spinning yarn begin spinning
cotton together, but those spinning thick yarn finish quickly and those spinning
fine yarn finish later, similarly, the beginning of perfections happens
simultaneously, but their completion occurs sequentially.  In the Audaric,
Vaikriya, and Aharak bodies, there are perfections. The sequence of their
completion in these bodies should be understood as follows:  The Audaric body of
a Bala Jiva completes the first perfection in one moment, and then the second in
the next moment, and then the third. Similarly, the fourth, fifth, and sixth are
completed sequentially, each in a moment.  The Vaikriya and Aharak bodied Jivas
complete the first perfection in one moment, and then the second in the next
moment, and then the third, fourth, fifth, and sixth perfections sequentially,
one at a time. However, Devas complete both the fifth and sixth perfections
sequentially, but together in one moment.  The characteristics of perfections
like Ahar, etc., are as follows:  (1) The perfection of the specific power by
which a Jiva, by taking in external food pudgalas, transforms them into
Khalabhag and Rasabhag, is called Ahar-paryapti."

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prathama karmagrantha 135 " pUrNatA kramazaH hotI hai| arthAt AhAra ke bAda
zarIra, zarIra ke bAda indriya Adi  /  isa prakAra manaparyApti paryanta
paryAptiyoM kA krama sama jhanA cAhie  /  isako eka udAharaNa dvArA spaSTa
karate haiMjaise graha kAtane vAlI striyoM ne eka sAtha ruI kAtanA prArambha
kiyA, kintu unameM se moTA sUta kAtane vAlI jaldI pUrA kara letI hai aura bArIka
kAtane vAlI dera se pUrA karatI hai  /  isI prakAra paryAptiyoM kA prArambha to
eka sAtha ho jAtA hai, kintu pUrNatA anukrama se hotI hai  /  r audArika,
vaikriya aura AhAraka- ina tIna zarIroM meM paryAptiyA hotI haiM  /  unameM
inakI pUrNatA kA krama nimna prakAra samajhanA cAhieaudArika zarIra bAlA jIva
pahalI paryApti eka samaya meM pUrNa karatA hai aura isake bAda antarmuhUrta meM
dUsarI, isake bAda tIsarI  /  isI prakAra cauthI, pAMcavIM aura chaThI pratyeka
kramaza: antarmuhUrta, antamuhUrta ke bAda pUrNa karatA hai  /  vaikriya aura
AhAraka zarIra vAle jIva pahalI paryApti eka samaya meM pUrI kara lete haiM aura
usake bAda antama hUrta meM dUsarI paryApti pUrNa karate haiM aura usake bAda
tIsarI cauthI, pAMcavIM aura chaThI paryApti anukrama se eka-eka samaya meM pUrI
karate haiN| kintu deva pA~cavIM aura chaThI ina donoM paryAptiyoM ko anukrama
se pUrNa na kara eka sAtha eka samaya meM hI pUrI kara lete haiM  /  AhAra Adi
hoM paryAptiyoM ke lakSaNa isa prakAra haiM(1) jisa zakti se jIva bAhya AhAra
pudgaloM ko grahaNa karake khalabhAga, rasabhAga meM pariNamAtre aisI zakti-
vizeSa kI pUrNatA ko AhAraparyApta kahate haiM  /

Page #216 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 136 ## Karma Vipaka (2) The completeness of the power by which a living being
transforms ingested food, which has been converted into rasa, into the seven
dhatus is called **Sharira Paryapti**. The seven dhatus present in the body are:
(1) Rasa, (2) Rakta, (3) Maans, (4) Med (fat), (5) Haddi (bone), (6) Majja, and
(7) Veerya. One dhatu is formed from the previous one, starting from Rasa and
ending with Veerya.  In addition to these seven dhatus, the body also contains
the following seven Upadhatus: (1) Vaat, (2) Pitt, (3) Shleeshma (Kapha), (4)
Shira, (5) Snayu, (6) Charma, and (7) Jathragni. (3) The completeness of the
power by which the soul transforms ingested food, which has been converted into
dhatus, into the form of senses like touch, etc., is called **Indriya
Paryapti**. (4) The completeness of the power by which a living being takes in
pudgals suitable for breathing, transforms them into the form of breathing,
absorbs their essence, and then releases them back is called **Shwaso-chchwas
Paryapti**. (5) The completeness of the power by which a living being takes in
pudgals suitable for speech, transforms them into the form of speech, and then
releases them back in the form of various sounds, using them as a base, is
called **Bhasha Paryapti**. (6) The completeness of the power by which a living
being takes in pudgals suitable for the mind, transforms them into the form of
the mind, and then releases them back using the special power of the mind, is
called **Manah Paryapti**. The **Aahar Paryapti** and **Sharira Paryapti** are
such that, through **Aahar Paryapti**,

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 136 karma vipAka (2) jisa zakti se jIva rasa ke rUpa meM badala diye gaye AhAra
ko sAta dhAtuoM ke rUpa meM pariNamAtA hai, usakI pUrNatA ko zarIraparyApti
kahate haiM  /  zarIra meM vidyamAna sAta dhAtuoM ke nAma kramaza: isa prakAra
hU~(1) rasa, (2), rakta, (3) mAMsa, (4) meda ( carbI), (5) haDDI (6) majjA aura
(7) vIrya  /  ina sAta dhAtuoM meM se eka ke bAda dUsarI, dUsarI se tIsarI dhAtu
vIrya - paryanta banatI haiN| ina sAta dhAtuoM ke alAvA zarIra meM nimnalikhita
sAta upadhAtueM hotI haiM (1) vAta, (2) pitta, (3) zleSma (kapha), (4) zirA, (5)
snAyu, (6) carma aura (7) jaTharAgni  /  (3) jisa zakti ro AtmA dhAtuoM ke rUpa
meM pariNata AhAra ko sparzana Adi indriya rUpa pariNamAve  /  usakI pUrNatA ko
indriyaparyApta kahate haiM  /  (4) jisa zakti se jIva zvAsocchvAsa yogya
pudgaloM ko grahaNa kara zvAsocchvAsa rUpa pariNata karake aura usakA sAra
grahaNa karake unheM vApasa chor3atA hai, usa zakti kI pUrNatA ko
zvAsocchvAsaparyApta kahate haiM  /  (5) jisa zakti se jIva bhASA vargaNA ke
pudgaloM ko grahaNa karake bhASArUpa pariNamAye aura usakA AdhAra lekara aneka
prakAra kI dhvani rUpa meM chor3e, usakI pUrNatA ko bhASAparyApti kahate haiM  /
(6) jisa zakti se jIva mana ke yogya manovargaNA ke pudgaloM ko grahaNa karake
manarUpa pariNamana kare aura usakI zakti-vizeSa se una pudgaloM ko vApasa
chor3e, usakI pUrNatA ko manaH paryApta kahate haiM  /  AhAraparyApti aura
zarIraparyApti meM jo AhAraparyApti ke dvArA

Page #217 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## First Karmagranth 137  This section discusses the formation of **rasa**
(essence) through **sharira-paryapti** (body-fulfillment), which is distinct
from the **rasa** formed through **aahar-paryapti** (food-fulfillment). This
specific **rasa** is crucial for the formation of the body.  The **pudgalas**
(particles) used in the formation of food, body, and senses are different from
those involved in **shwaso-chchwas** (breathing), **bhasha** (speech), and
**manah-paryapti** (mind-fulfillment).  There are two types of **paryapti**
(fulfillment) for living beings:  1. **Labdhi-paryapti**: These beings die after
fulfilling their respective **paryaptis**, not before. 2. **Karan-paryapti**:
This term has two meanings. **Karan** refers to the senses. Beings who have
fulfilled their **indriya-paryapti** (sense-fulfillment) are **karan-paryapti**.
Since **indriya-paryapti** cannot be achieved without fulfilling **aahar** and
**sharira-paryapti**, all three **paryaptis** are considered together.
Alternatively, beings who have fulfilled their respective **paryaptis** are
called **karan-paryapti**.  Beings with characteristics opposite to **labdhi-
paryapti** and **karan-paryapti** are called **labdhi-aparyapti** and **karan-
aparyapti**, respectively. Their nature will be discussed later in the context
of **sthavar-dashak** (ten types of stationary beings).  The following verse
describes the nature of **sthira** (stable), **shubha** (auspicious), and
**subhaga** (prosperous) **namakarma** (karmic actions).  **Verse 50:**
**Pasyan tan patte udaye-nam danta-adi-thama-i thiram | Namu-vari sirai suham
subhaga-o savva-jana-ittho ||**  This verse describes the nature of **sthira**
(stable), **shubha** (auspicious), and **subhaga** (prosperous) **namakarma**
(karmic actions).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prathama karbhagrantha 137 banane ke bAda bhI zarIraparyApti dvArA rama banane
vAle rasa kI zurUAta kA kathana hai, usakA Azaya yaha hai ki AhAraparyApti dvArA
rasa banane kI apekSA zarIraparyApti dvArA banA huA rasa bhinna prakAra kA hotA
hai aura yahI rasa zarIra ko banAne meM upayogI hotA hai  /  AhAra, zarIra aura
indriyoM ko banAne meM jo pudgala upayogI haiM unakI apekSA zvAsocchvAsa, bhASA
aura manaHparyApti ke pudgala bhinna prakAra ke hote haiN| paryApta jIvoM ke do
bheda hote haiM(1) landhiparyApta aura (2) karaNaparyApta  /  (1) jo jIva apanI-
apanI yogya paryAptiyoM ko pUrNa karake marate haiM, pahale nahIM, ve labdhi-
paryApta haiN| (2) karaNaparyApta ke do artha haiM  /  karaNa kA artha hai
indriya  /  jina jIvoM ne indriyaparyArita pUrNa karalI hai, ve karaNaparyApta
haiN| cUMki AhAra aura zarIra paryApti pUrNa kiye binA indriyaparyApti pUrNa
nahIM ho sakatI hai, isalie tInoM paryAptiyAM lI gaI haiM, athavA jina jIvoM ne
apanI yogya paryApniyo pUrNa kara lo haiM, ve karaNa-paryAsta kahalAte haiN|
labdhi-paryApta aura karaNa-paryApta se viparIta lakSaNa vAle jIva kramazaH
labdhi-aparyApta aura karaNa-aparyAsta kahalAne haiN| inake svarUpa kA kathana
Age sthAvaradazaka kI prakRtiyoM meM kreNge| aba Age kI gAthA meM pratyeka,
sthira, zubha aura subhaga nAmakarma ke svarUpa ko batalAte haiN| paseya taNa
patte udayeNaM daMtaadiThamAi thiraM  /  nAmuvari sirAi suhaM subhagAo
savvajaNaiTTho  // 50 //

Page #218 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Karmavipaka  **Verse Meaning:** Due to the arising of the *pratyek* karma,
beings have separate bodies. Due to the *sthira* karma, the bodies of beings
have teeth, bones, etc., which are stable. The body parts above the navel being
auspicious is *shubha* karma, and the karma that arises and makes a being loved
by all is *subhaga* karma.  **Detailed Meaning:** The verse describes the
characteristics of four types of karma: *pratyek*, *sthira*, *shubha*, and
*subhaga*. These are as follows:  (1) The karma that arises and results in a
single being owning a single body is called *pratyek* karma.  (2) The karma that
arises and results in the teeth, bones, neck, etc., of a being's body being
stable (remaining in their respective places) is called *sthira* karma.  (3) The
karma that arises and results in the body parts of a being above the navel being
auspicious is called *shubha* karma.  (4) The karma that arises and results in a
being being loved by all, even without doing any favors or having any
connection, is called *subhaga* karma.  Now, the next verse will describe the
remaining types of karma: *susvara*, *aadeya*, *yasha-kirti*, and *dhavara*.
**Verse 5:**  **Verse Meaning:** Due to the arising of *susvara* karma, one has
a sweet and melodious voice. Due to the arising of *aadeya* karma, everyone
accepts one's words...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmavipAka gAthArtha-pratyekanAmakarma ke udaya se jIvoM ke pRthak-pRthak
zarIra hote haiN| sthira nAmakarma ke kAraNa jIvoM ke zarIra meM dA~ta, haDDiyAM
Adi sthira hotI haiN| nAbhi se Upara ke zarIra avayava zubha hoM, vaha zubha
nAmakarma hai aura jisake udaya se jIva sabhI logoM ko priya lagatA hai, vaha
subhaga nAmakarma hai| vizeSArtha-gAthA meM pratyeka, sthira, zubha aura subhaga
ina cAra prakRtiyoM ke lakSaNa batAye haiM, jo isa prakAra haiM (1) jisa karma
ke udaya se eka sarIra kA eka hI jIva svAmI ho, use pratyekanAmakarma kahate
haiN| (2) jisa karma ke udaya se jIva ke dA~ta, haDDI, grIvA Adi zarIra ke
avayava sthira (apane-apane sthAna para raheM hoM use sthiranAmakarma kahate
haiN| (3) jisa karma ke udaya se jIva ke zarIra meM nAbhi se Upara ke avayava
zubha ho, ume zubhanAmakarma kahate haiN| (4) jisa karma ke udaya se jIva kisI
prakAra kA upakAra na karane para bhI aura kisI prakAra kA sambandha na hone
para bhI sabhI ko priya lagatA ho use subhaganAmakarma kahate haiN| aba Age kI
gAthA meM zeSa rahI susvara Adaya aura yazaHkIrti va dhAvara dazaka kI
prakRtiyoM kA kathana karate haiM  /  susarA mahurasuhajhuNI AijjA svloygijjhyo|
jasao jasakittIo thAvarakSasagaM vivajjasyaM  // 5 //  gAyArtha - susvara
nAmakarma ke udaya se madhura aura susvara ivani hotI hai| Adeya nAmakarma ke
udaya se saba loga vacana kA

Page #219 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
First Karma Granth We pay our respects. From the rise of the Yash Kirti name
karma, there is fame and glory, and from the natures of the Sadshak mentioned
earlier, one should understand the meaning of the natures of the opposite, the
Stavardashaka. 136 The nature of the seven natures of the Sadshak has been
mentioned in the first two gathas, and the remaining three natures - Suswar,
Aadey and Yash Kirti - and the characteristics of the ten natures of the
Stavardashaka, are indicated in this gatha to understand the opposite of the ten
natures of the Sadshak. The special discussion is as follows: (1) The karma from
whose rise the voice of the living being sounds pleasing to the listener, is
called Suswar name karma; for example, the voice of a cuckoo etc. (2) The karma
from whose rise the speech of the living being becomes universally accepted, is
called Aadey name karma. (3) The karma from whose rise the fame and glory of the
living being spreads in the world, is called Yash Kirti name karma. Yash Kirti,
this word, is derived from the two words Yash and Kirti. If praise spreads in
one direction, it is called Kirti, and if praise spreads in all directions, it
is called Yash, or the fame that comes from charity, penance etc. is called
Kirti, and the fame that comes from victory over the enemy is called Yash. In
this regard, a poet has said: Dan-punyakrita Kirti: parakramakrut yam Yash: Ek
diggamini kiti: sarvavigragamaka yam Yash: || Now the nature of the ten natures
of the Stavardashaka is being told. Their names are as follows:

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prathama karmagrantha Adara karate haiM  /  yazaH kIrti nAmakarma ke udaya se
yaza aura kIrti hotI hai aura pUrva meM kahI gaI sadazaka kI prakRtiyoM se
viparIta sthAvaradazaka kI prakRtiyoM kA artha samajhanA cAhie  /  136
vizeSArtha sadazaka kI sAta prakRtiyoM ke svarUpa pahale do gathAoM meM kahe jA
cuke haiM aura zeSa rahI tIna prakRtiyoM - susvara, Adeya aura yazaH kIrti ke
lakSaNa tathA sthAvaradazaka kI dasa prakRtiyoM ke lakSaNa jAnane ke lie
sadazaka kI dasa prakRtiyoM se viparIta samajhane kA saMketa isa gAthA meM kiyA
hai| vizeSa vivecana kramazaH nIce likhe anusAra hai - (1) jisa karma ke udaya
se jIva kA svara zrotA ko priya lagatA hai, use susvaranAmakarma kahate haiM;
jaise- koyala Adi kA svara  /  (2) jisa karma ke udaya se jIva kA vacana
sarvamAnya ho, use AdeyanAmakarma kahate haiM  /  (3) jisa karma ke udaya se
jIva kI saMsAra meM yaza aura kIrti phaile, use yazaH kIrtinAmakarma kahate haiM
/  yazaH kIrti yaha pada, yaza aura kIrti do zabdoM se niSpanna hai  /  usameM
kisI eka dizA meM prazaMsA phaile use kIrti aura saba dizAoM meM prazaMsA ho,
use yaza kahate haiM athavA dAna, tapa Adi se jo prasiddhi hotI hai, use kIrti
aura zatru para vijaya prApta karane se jo khyAti hotI hai use yaza kahate haiM
/  isa sambandha meM kisI kavi ne kahA hai dAna-puNyakRtA kIrtiH parAkramakRtaM
yazaH  /  eka diggAminI kItiH sarvavigragAmakaM yazaH  //  aba sthAvaradazaka kI
dasa prakRtiyoM kA svarUpa kahate haiM  /  unake nAma kramaza: isa prakAra haiM

Page #220 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 140 **Karmavipaka (1) Sthavar, (2) Sukshma, (3) Apariapt, (4) Sadharan, (5)
Asthir, (6) Ashubh, (7) Durbhg, (8) Duhswar, (9) Anadeya and (10) Ayash:kirti.**
**(1) Sthavar Karma:** The karma whose fruition causes a being to remain
stationary, lacking the ability to protect itself from cold and heat, is called
Sthavar Karma.  Earth-bodied, water-bodied, fire-bodied, air-bodied and plant-
bodied beings are Sthavar. They only have the first sense organ, touch.  Fire-
bodied and air-bodied beings have natural movement, but they lack the specific
movement to protect themselves from cold and heat like the two-sense and three-
sense beings. Therefore, they are considered Sthavar. They experience the
fruition of Samapanamdhaan.  **(2) Sukshma Karma:** The karma whose fruition
causes a being to obtain a subtle body (which neither obstructs nor is
obstructed by anything) is called Sukshma Karma.  Beings with this karma are
also the aforementioned five Sthavar. They are spread throughout the entire
Lokakasha and cannot be seen with the eye.  **(3) Apariapt Karma:** The karma
whose fruition causes a being to not fully achieve its own potential is called
Apariapt Karma. There are two types of Apariapt beings: Labdhyapariapt and
Karanapariapt.  Beings who die without fulfilling their potential are
Labdhyapariapt. Beings who are currently Apariapt but will fulfill their
potential in the future are Karanapariapt.  Labdhyapariapt beings also only
attain fulfillment in the three aspects of food, body and senses after death,
not before. This is because all beings die after the bondage of the lifespan of
the next birth, and this bondage only occurs for those who have fulfilled the
three aspects of food, body and senses.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 140 karmavipAka (1) sthAvara, (2) sUkSma, (3) aparyApta, (4) sAdhAraNa, (5)
asthira, (6) azubha, (7) durbhaga, (6) duHsvara, (E) anAdeya aura (10)
ayaza:kIrti  /  (1) jisa karma ke udaya se jIva sthira rahe -sardI-garmI se
bacane kA prayatna karane kI zakti na ho, use sthAvaranAmakarma kahate haiN|
pRthvIkAya, jalakAya, tejaskAya, vAyukAya aura vanaspatikAya ye sthAvara jIva
haiN| inake sirpha prathama arthAt sparzanendriya hotI hai| tejaskAya aura
vAyukAya ke jIvoM ke svAbhAvika gati hai, lekina dvIndriya Adi trasa jIvoM kI
taraha sardI-garmI se bacane kI viziSTa gati unameM na hone se unheM sthAira
ihate haiM : inheM samApanAmadhAnakA udaya hai| (2) jisa karma ke udaya se jIba
ko sUkSma zarIra, (jo svayaM na kisI ko roke aura na kisI se ke) prApta ho, use
sUkSmanAmakarma kahate haiN| isa nAmakarma vAle jIva bhI pUrvokta pAMca sthAvara
hI hote haiN| ve samasta lokAkAza meM vyApta haiM aura AMkha se dekhe nahIM jA
sakate haiN| (3) jisa karma ke udaya se jIva svayogya paryApti pUrNa na kare use
aparyApta nAmakarma kahate haiM  /  aparyApta jIvoM ke do bheda haiM -
landhyaparyApta aura karaNAparyApta  /  jo jIva apanI paryApti pUrNa kiye binA
hI marate haiM, ve labdhyaparyApta haiM aura jo jIva abhI aparyApta haiM, kintu
Age kI paryAptiyAM pUrNa karane vAle haiM, unheM karaNA'paryApta kahate haiM  /
_ labdhyaparyApta jIva bhI AhAra, zarIra aura indriyaina tIna paryAptiyoM ko
pUrNa karake hI bharate haiM, pahale nhiiN| kyoMki AgAmI bhava kI Ayu kA bandha
karane ke bAda hI saba jIva marA karate haiM aura Ayu kA bandha unhIM jIvoM ko
hotA hai, jinhIMne AhAra, zarIra aura indriya ye tIna paryAptiyoM pUrNa kara lI
haiN|

Page #221 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## First Karma Granth ## 14.1  **(4)** The karma whose arising causes an
infinite number of souls to have a single body, meaning that an infinite number
of souls are the owners of one body, is called **Saadharan Karma**.  These
infinite souls with a common body are interdependent in their life, death, food,
breathing, etc. This is why they are called **Saadharan**. In other words, the
activities of **Saadharan** beings like eating, etc., are similar and occur at
the same time.  Among the five stationary beings, starting with the Earth-
bodied, the plant-bodied beings have both **Saadharan** and **Pratiyaka** types
of **namakarma**. Here are some ways to identify them:  **3** Those whose veins,
joints, and knots are not visible, whose roots, tubers, skin, new buds,
branches, leaf-clusters, and seeds break evenly when broken, and whose bark of
the tuber, root, branch, or trunk is thick, should be considered **Saadharan**.
The opposite of this should be considered **Pratiyaka** plants.  **(5)** The
karma whose arising causes the ears, eyebrows, tongue, etc., to be unstable,
meaning fickle, is called **Asthir Karma**.  **(6)** The karma whose arising
causes the organs below the navel to be inauspicious is called **Ashubh Karma**.
Displeasure upon being touched by the feet is a sign of this inauspiciousness.
**(7)** The karma whose arising causes a soul to be disliked by all, even when
they do good deeds, and causes other beings to harbor enmity and hatred towards
them, is called **Durbhagna Karma**.  **(8)** The karma whose arising causes a
soul's voice and speech to be unpleasant and harsh to the listener is called
**Dushwar Karma**.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prathama karmagrantha 14 1 (4) jisa karma ke udaya se ananta jIvoM kA eka hI
zarIra ho, arthAt ananta jIva eka zarIra ke svAmI vanaM, use sAdhAraNanAmakarma
kahate haiM  /  ina sAdhAraNa zarIradhArI ananta jIvoM ke jIvana, maraNa, AhAra,
zvAsocchvAsa Adi parasparAzrita hote haiN| isIlie ve sAdhAraNa kahalAte haiM  /
arthAt sAdhAraNa jIvoM ke AhArAdika kArya sadRza aura samAna kAla meM hote haiM
/  pRthvIkAya Adi pA~ca sthAvara jIvoM meM se vanaspatikAyika jIva pratyeka aura
sAdhAraNa- donoM prakAra ke nAmakarma vAle hote haiM  /  unakI pahacAna ke kucha
upAya ye haiM 3 jinakI zirA, sandhi parva aprakaTa hoM, mUla, kanda, tvacA,
navIna kopala, TahanI, patra- kUla tathA bIjoM ko tor3ane se samAna bhaMga hoM
aura kanda, mUla, TahanI yA skandha kI chAla moTI ho usako mAdhAraNa aura usake
viparIta ko pratyeka vanaspati samajhanA caahie| (5) jisa karma ke udaya se
kAna, bhauMha, jIbha Adi avayava asthira arthAt capala hote haiM use
asthiranAmakarma kahate haiM  /  (6) jisa karma ke udaya se nAbhi se nIce ke
avayava azubha hoM, use azubha nAmakarma kahate haiN| paira se sparza hone para
aprasannatA hotI hai, yahI azubhatva kA lakSaNa hai  /  (7) jisa karma ke udaya
se jIva upakAra karane para bhI sabhI ko apriya lagatA hai. dUsare jIba zatrutA
evaM vairabhAva rakheM, vaha durbhaganAmakarma hai  /  (8) jisa karma ke udaya
se jIva kA svara va vacana zrotA ko apriya va karkaza pratIta ho, use
duHsvaranAmakarma kahate haiM  /

Page #222 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 142 ## Karma Vipaka  (1) The karma whose arising causes a being's righteous
and good speech to be considered disrespectful and offensive is called
Anadeyatmakarma.  (10) The karma whose arising causes a being to spread ill-
repute and bad conduct in the world is called Ayasha Kirtinamkarma.  With the
explanation of these ten types of Stavardashak, the description of the types of
Namkarma is complete. Now we will explain the nature and divisions of Gotra and
Antaraya karma.  **Gatha:** Like the potter who makes good pots and pots for
liquor, the nature of Gotrakarma is similar. It has two divisions: (1)
Uchchagotra and (2) Nichagotra. There are five divisions of Antaraya karma,
which obstruct giving, receiving, enjoyment, consumption, and virility.
**Special Meaning:** The gatha describes the nature and divisions of Gotrakarma
and the divisions of Antaraya karma. First, Gotrakarma is described. Gotrakarma
is the karma whose arising causes a being to be born in a high or low family.
There are two divisions of this: (1) Uchchagotra and (2) Nichagotra.
**Explanation:**  1. (a) "Goe nam mante! Kamme kaibihe pan? Goeyama! Drivihe pan
te ja - Uchchagoye va Niyagoe ya." - Prajnapan, Pada 23, U. 20263, Tatvarth
Sutra 08012.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 142 karma vipAka (1) jisa karma ke udaya se jIva kA yuktiyukta acchA vacana bhI
anAdaraNIya, agAr3A samajhA jAtA hai, vaha anAdeyatAmakarma hai  /  (10) jisa
karma ke udaya se jIva kA loka meM apayaza aura apakIti phaile, use ayazaH
kIrtinAmakarma kahate haiN| sthAvaradazaka kI ina dasa prakRtiyoM ke vivecana ke
sAtha nAmakarma kI prakRtiyoM kA kathana samApta huA  /  aba gotra aura antarAya
karma ke svarUpa aura bhedoM ko batalAte haiM  /  goyaM duhuccatIyaM kulAla iva
sudhabhu malAIyaM  /  vigdhaM dANe lAge bhoguvabhogesu bIrie ma  //  52  //
gAthArtha - su-ghaTa aura madyaghaTa banAne vAle kumbhakAra ke kArya ke samAna
gotrakarma kA svabhAva hai| usake do bheda haiM- ( 1 ) uccagotra aura ( 2 )
nIcagotra | dAna, lAbha, bhoga, upabhoga aura vIrya - inameM vighna karane se
antarAya karma ke pA~ca bheda haiM  /  vizeSArtha - gAthA meM gotrakarma kA
svabhAva aura bheda tathA antarAya karma ke bheda batalAye haiN| pahale
gotrakarma kA varNana karate haiM  /  gotrakarma - jisa karma ke udaya se jIva
ucca athavA nIca kula golakarma ke do bheda haiMinake lakSaNa kramaza: isa meM
/  janma letA hai, use gotrakarma kahate haiM (1) uccagotra aura (2) naucagotra
/ " prakAra haiM taM 1. (ka) goe NaM maMtte ! kamme kaibihe paNa ? goyamA !
dRvihe paNa te jA - uctrAgoe va nIyAgoe ya || uccaizca  /  - - prajJApanA, pada
23, u0 2 0 263 tatvArtha sUtra 08012

Page #223 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## First Karma Granth 143  (1) The karma that causes a being to be born in a
high lineage is called **high-lineage karma**. (2) The karma that causes a being
to be born in a low lineage is called **low-lineage karma**.  A lineage that has
gained fame for a long time due to the protection of dharma and morality is a
**high lineage**, such as the Ikshvaku dynasty, the Hari dynasty, the Chandra
dynasty, etc. A lineage that has gained infamy and disgrace for a long time due
to the practice of adharma and immorality is a **low lineage**, such as the
lineage of liquor sellers, butchers, and thieves, etc.  There are eight
distinctions of **high lineage** based on the superiority of caste, lineage,
strength, form, austerity, knowledge, wealth, and beauty. Similarly, there are
eight distinctions of **low lineage** based on the inferiority of these eight
qualities, such as inferiority of caste, inferiority of lineage, etc.  Pride
(ego) in the above eight qualities leads to bondage for a **high lineage**,
while pride in these qualities leads to bondage for a **low lineage**.
**Lineage karma** is like a potter. Just as a potter makes various kinds of
pots, big and small, some of which are considered auspicious and used for
worship with rice grains, sandalwood, etc., while others are considered
inauspicious and used to store things like liquor, etc., similarly, **lineage
karma** is of two types: **high** and **low**.  - Uttaraadhyayanasutra 23.141:
**High lineage** is the cause of respect for the country, lineage, place, and
the prevention of decline in the family. **Low lineage** is the opposite,
causing the prevention of respect for the Chandala, Mataka, Dhyagha, bondage,
and slavery. - Satvarayasutra 8.13 Commentary

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prathama karmagrantha 143 (1) jisa karma ke udaya se jIva uttamakula meM janma
letA hai, vaha uccagotrakarma hai. (2) jisa karma ke udaya se jIva nIcakula meM
janma letA hai, use nIcagotrakarma kahate haiN| dharma aura nIti kI rakSA ke
kAraNa jisa kula ne cirakAla se prasiddhi prApta kI hai, vaha uccakula hai;
jaise-ikSvAkuvaMza, harivaMza, candravaMza ityAdi  /  adharma aura anIti karane
se jisa kula ne cirakAla se aprasiddhi va akoti prApta kI ho, vaha nISakula hai;
jaise-madyavikretA kula, vadhaka (kasAI) kula aura caura kula ityAdi  / '
uccagotra ke jAti, kula, bala, rUpa, tapa, zruta, lAbha, aura rUpa kI viziSTatA
se ATha bheda hote haiM aura AThoM kI hInatA me nIcagotra ke bhI ATha bheda
samajhane cAhie; jaise-jAti-hInatA, kula-hInatA Adi  /  ukta jAti Adi ATha
vizaSatAoM kA mada (ahaMkAra) na karane se uccagotra kA aura mada karane se
nInagotra kA bandha hotA hai  /  gotrakarma kumbhakAra ke sadRza hai| jaise,
kumhAra (kumbhakAra) choTebar3e vividha prakAra ke ghar3e anatA hai| unameM se
kucha ghar3e kalaza rUpa hote haiM, jo akSata, candana Adi se pUjA yogya hote
haiN| kucha ghaDe madya Adi jaise nindanIya padArtha rakhe jAne se nindanIya
hote haiN| isI (ga) goyaM kammaM tu duvihaM ucca nIya ca AhiyaM  /  ucca
adAthihaM hoDa evaM dIyaM pi aAhiya  /  /  -uttarAdhyayana 23 / 14 1. uccagotra
dezajAli kulasthAnamAnasatkAra gavaryAdhutkarSanivartakam  /  viparItaM
nInagotra caNDAlamaTaka dhyAghamatmya vaMdhadAsyAdinivartakam  /  /  -
satvAryasUtra 8 / 13 bhASya

Page #224 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Karmavipaka 144  Due to the influence of Gotra Karma, many beings are
considered high and many are considered low. Now, we will understand the nature
of Antaraya Karma.  Antaraya Karma is the karma that, upon its fruition, causes
obstacles, hindrances, and impediments to a being in giving (daan), gaining
(laabh), enjoying (bhog), consuming (upbhog), and in their vigor (veerya). This
is also called Vighna Karma.  There are five types of Antaraya Karma: (1) Daana
Antaraya, (2) Laabh Antaraya, (3) Bhog Antaraya, (4) Upbhog Antaraya, and (5)
Veerya Antaraya. Their characteristics are as follows:  1. **Daana Antaraya:**
When the materials for giving are present, a worthy recipient is available to
receive the gift, the fruit of the donation is known, and the desire to give is
present, yet the being is not motivated to give due to the fruition of this
karma, it is called Daana Antaraya.  2. **Laabh Antaraya:** When the giver is
generous, the object of donation is available, and the receiver is worthy, yet
the being does not receive the desired object due to the fruition of this karma,
it is called Laabh Antaraya.  3. **Bhog Antaraya:** When the means for enjoyment
are present, yet the being cannot enjoy the objects of enjoyment due to the
fruition of this karma, it is called Bhog Antaraya.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmavipAka 144 prakAra gotrakarma ke prabhAva se kaI jIva ucca aura kaI nIca
mAne jAte haiM  /  aba antarAyakarma kA svarUpa samajhAte haiM  /  antarAyakarma
jisa karma ke udaya se jIva ko dAna, lAbha, bhoga, upabhoga, vIrya ( parAkrama)
meM antarAya, vighna-bAdhA utpanna ho, use antarAya karma kahate haiN| isako
vighnakarma bhI kahate haiM  /  antarAya karma ke nimnalikhita pAMca bheda hai -
(1) dAnAntarAya, (2) lAbhAntarAya (3) bhogAntarAya, (4) upabhogAntarAya aura (5)
viiryaantraay| inake lakSaNa kramaza: isa prakAra haiM 1 (1) dAna kI sAmagrI
pAsa meM ho, guNavAna pAtra dAna lene ke lie sAmane ho  /  dAna kA phala bhI
jJAta ho, dAna kI icchA bhI ho, phira bhI jisa karma ke udaya me jIva ko dAna
dene kA utsAha nahIM hotA hai. use dAnAntarAya kahate haiN| (2) dAtA udAra ho,
dAna kI vastu vidyamAna ho, lene vAlA bhI pAtra ho; phira bhI jisa karma ke
udaya se use iSTa vastu kI prApti na ho, use lAbhAntarAya kahate haiM  /  (3)
bhoga ke sAdhana hote hue bhI jisa karma ke udaya se jIva bhogya vastuoM kA
bhoga nahIM kara sakatA, use bhogAntarAya kahate haiM  /  I 1. jIvaM
cArthasAdhanaM cAntarA eti-pattItyantarAyam  /  idaM caivaM - jahA rAyA dANA Na
kuNai maMDArie vikUlaM mi evaM jeNaM jIvo kammaM taM antarAyaM ti || * DAga
2245105 TIkA 2. (ka) antarANaM bhanne ! kamme katividhe paNNatte ? goyamA !
paMcavihe paNNatte - taM jahA - dANaMtarAie, lAbhaMtarAie bhogaM tarahaie,
ubabhogaMtarAie. r vIriyaMtagaie  /  (kha) dAnAbhabhogopabhogadIryANIm  /  02,
0263 - tasyArthasUtra 08 sUtra 13 - prajJApanA, pakSa 22, r

Page #225 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## First Karma Granth  **(4)**  Even though a being has the means to enjoy
something, if they are unable to enjoy it due to the arising of a particular
karma, it is called **Upbhogaantaraya**. Things that are enjoyed once are called
**bhoga**, like food, etc. Things that are enjoyed repeatedly are called
**upbhoga**, like houses, clothes, ornaments, etc.  **(5)** **Veerya** means
strength or vigor. If a being is strong and healthy, but unable to perform a
particular task due to the arising of a karma, they are unable to utilize their
strength and vigor. This is called **Veeryantaraya**.  There are three types of
**Veeryantaraya**: **Bal Veeryantaraya**, **Pandit Veeryantaraya**, and **Bal-
Pandit Veeryantaraya**. If a being is capable of performing worldly tasks but is
unable to do so due to the arising of a karma, it is called **Bal
Veeryantaraya**. If a **Samyagdristi** (rightly-seeing) being desires liberation
but is unable to perform actions necessary for it due to the arising of a karma,
it is called **Pandit Veeryantaraya**. If a being desires to protect their
country and religion but is unable to do so due to the arising of a karma, it is
called **Bal-Pandit Veeryantaraya**.  The following verse gives an example of
**antaraya karma**:  **"Sirihariyasamam jah padkuleṇ teṇ raayai. Na kunadd
daṇaiyam evam triggheṇ jivo vi." (53)**  **Meaning:** **Antaraya karma** is like
a treasurer in a king's palace. Just as a king cannot give donations if the
treasurer is against it, similarly, a being cannot give donations even if they
desire to do so, due to the presence of **antaraya karma**.  **Special
Meaning:** This verse explains the nature of **antaraya karma** through an
example. The nature of **antaraya karma** is like that of a treasurer.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prathama karmagrantha *** (4) upabhoga kI sAmagrI hote hue bhI jIva jisa kama
ke udaya se usa sAmagrI kA upabhoga na kara sake, use upabhogAntarAya kahate
haiM  /  jo padArtha eka bAra bhoge jAe~, unheM bhoga kahate hai  /  jaisa-
bhojanAdi  /  jo padArtha bAra-bAra bhoge jAe~, unheM upabhoga kahate hai, jaise
- makAna, vastra, AbhUSaNa Adi  /  (5) vIrya yAne parAkrama  /  jisa karma ke
udaya se jIva zaktizAlI aura nIroga hote hue bhI kAryavizeSa meM parAkrama na
kara sake, zaktisAmarthya kA upayoga na kara sake, use vIryAntarAya kahate haiM
/  vIryAntarAya ke tIna bheda haiM- bAla vIryAntarAya, paNDita vIryAntarAya,
bAla-paNDita vIryAntarAya  /  sAMsArika kAryoM ko karane kI sAmarthya hone para
bhI jIva jisake udaya se unako na kara sake, vaha bAla vIryAtarAya hai  /
samyagdRSTi sAdhu mokSa kI cAha rakhate haiM, kintu jisake udaya me tadartha
kriyAoM ko na kara sake, vaha paNDita vIryAntarAya hai aura dezatrirati ko
cAhatA huA bhI jIva jisake udaya se usakA pAlana na kara sake, vaha bAla paNDita
vIryAntarAya hai  /  aba Age kI gAthA meM antarAya karma kA dRSTAnta kahate haiM
/  sirihariyasamaM jaha paDikUleNa teNa rAyAI  /  na kuNadda dANAIyaM evaM
triggheNa jIvo vi  //  53  //  gAthArtha - - antarAya karma zrIgRhI bhaNDArI ke
samAna hai  /  jaise bhaNDArI ke pratikUla hone para rAjA dAnAdi nahIM kara pAte
haiM, usI prakAra antarAyakarma ke kAraNa jIva bhI dAnAdi karane kI icchA
rakhate hue bhI dAnAdi nahIM kara pAtA hai  /  -- vizeSArtha - yahA~ dRSTAnta
dvArA antarAyakarma ke svabhAva ko samajhAyA hai ki antarAyakarma kA svabhAva
bhaNDArI ke samAna hai  /  bhaNDArI

Page #226 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Karmavipaka  When a king desires to give charity to a petitioner and even
orders it, but the treasurer creates an obstacle and prevents the king's desire
from being fulfilled, it is similar to the **Antaray Karma**. One should
understand that **Antaray Karma** creates an obstacle in the fulfillment of the
desires of the soul, the king, for charity, profit, enjoyment, etc.  Just as
**Antaray Karma** obstructs the giver's intentions, it also creates obstacles
for the receiver, preventing them from obtaining the desired object.  After
explaining the various types of the eight karmas, including **Jnanavarana**, we
will now discuss the specific causes of their bondage in the following verses.
**Verse 54:**  **Gathaarth:** The soul acquires **Jnanavarana** and
**Darshanavarana** karma through **Pratyaneeka** (unfavorable conduct),
**Nihnava** (slander), **Upadhat** (harm), **Praddvesha** (hatred), **Antaray**
(obstruction), and **Asatan** (attachment).  **Vishesharth:** The specific
causes of bondage are those that primarily bind a particular karma and
secondarily bind the others, along with the general causes of bondage like
**Mithyatva** (false belief). This verse describes the specific causes of
bondage for **Jnanavarana** and **Darshanavarana** karma, which are:
**Pratyaneeka** (unfavorable conduct), **Nihnava** (slander), **Chhipana**
(concealing), **Utsutra** (instigation).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmavipAka ke pratikUla hone para jaimeM rAjA kisI yAcaka ko dAna denA cAhatA
hai aura dAna dene kI AjJA bhI detA hai parantu bhaNDArI isameM bAdhA utpanna
kara rAjA kI dAna dene kI icchA ko saphala nahIM hone detA hai  /  isI prakAra
antarAya karma ke lie samajhanA cAhie ki vaha jIva rUpI rAjA ko dAna, lAbha,
bhoga Adi kI icchApUti meM sakAvaTa utpanna karatA hai| _ antarAya karma kA
udaya dAtA kI icAlAoM meM rukAvaTa DAlana ke samAna hI lene vAle ke lie bhI
prApta hone yogya vastu kI prApti meM vighnabAdhA upasthita kara detA hai,
jisame vaha use prApta nahIM kara pAtA hai| isa prakAra jJAnAvaraNa Adi ATha
karmoM ke bheda-prabhedoM kA kathana karane ke anantara aba Age kI gAthAoM meM
unake bandha ke vizeSa kAraNoM ko kahane haiM  /  AvaraNadvika ke bandhahetu
pariNIyattaNa ninhava uvadhAya paosa antarAeNaM  /  accAsAyaNayAe AvaraNa durga
jio jayai  // 54 //  gAthArtha-jJAna aura darzana ke bAre meM pratyanIkatva-
aniSTa AcaraNa, nihnava -apalApa, upaghAta, pradveSa, antarAya aura AsAtana
karane se jIva jJAnAvaraNa aura darzanAvaraNa karma kA upArjana karatA hai|
vizeSArtha - mithyAtva Adi sAmAnya bandhahetuoM ke sAtha jina kAraNoM se usa-usa
karma kA mukhya rUpa se aura zeSa kA gauNa rUpa se bandha hotA hai, unheM vizeSa
bandhahetu kahate haiN| yahA~ gAthA meM jJAnAvaraNa aura darzanAvaraNa karmoM ke
bandha ke vizeSa hetu batAye haiM, jo isa prakAra haiM pratyanIkatva-aniSTa
AcaraNa, ninhabaapalApa, chipAnA, utsUtra

Page #227 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 147  **Predvesha** - Dvesha, Aruchhi, Irsya, Antaravarnavad - these are the
knowledge-obscuring and special causes. Their characteristics are as follows:
**First Karma Granth** 1 **Prarupana** - to misrepresent, **Upghat** -
destruction, **Ray** - to oppose, **Asatana** - slander, are the ways in which
the Darshanavaran karmas bind.  (1) Acting contrary to knowledge, the knower,
and the means of knowledge is called **Pratyaniktvam**. (2) Hiding the name of
the human knowledge-giver, the Guru, saying "I did not learn from them even
though I was with them" or "I do not know this subject even though I know it" -
this kind of false speech is called **Nindrav**. (3) Destroying books, weapons,
fire, etc. is **Upghat**. (4) Having hatred and aversion towards the knowers and
the means of knowledge, instead of love, is **Predvesha**. (5) Creating
obstacles in the means of knowledge practice, preventing students from receiving
the benefits of knowledge, food, clothing, space, etc., making them do other
work instead of studying - this is called **Antaraya**. (6) Slandering the
knowers, spreading false or hurtful things about them in the world, creating a
web of deceit that causes them deep pain - this is **Asatana**.  Besides the
above actions, practicing in forbidden times, places, etc., not obeying the
Guru, moving books with one's feet, not allowing books to be used properly, and
other similar causes and actions...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 147 pradveSa - dveSa, aruci, IrSyA, antaavarNavAda - ye jJAnAvaraNa aura vizeSa
kAraNa haiN| inake lakSaNa kramazaH prathama karmagrantha 1 prarUpaNA karanA,
upaghAta - vinAza, rAya - virUna, AsAtanA - nindA, darzanAvaraNa karmoM ke
bandha ke isa prakAra haiM (1) jJAna, jJAnI aura jJAna ke sAdhanoM ke pratikUla
AcaraNa karanA pratyanIkatva kahalAtA hai  /  (2) mAnavA jJAnadAtA guru kA nAma
chipAnA, amuka ke pAsa paha kara bhI maiMne inase nahIM par3hA athavA amuka
viSaya ko jAnate hue bhI maiM nahIM jAnatA - utsUtra prarUpaNA karanA, isa
prakAra ke apalApa ko nindrava kahate haiM  /  pustaka paThaNalA Adi kA zastra,
agni Adi se nAza kara denA upaghAta hai  /  (3) jJAniyoM aura jJAna ke (4)
jJAniyoM aura jJAna ke sAdhanoM para prema na rakhakara dveSa rakhanA aruci
rakhanA pradeSa haiN| (5) jJAnAbhyAsa ke sAdhanoM meM rukAvaTa DAlanA,
vidyArthiyoM ko vidyA, bhojana, vastra, sthAna Adi kA lAbha hotA ho to use na
hone denA, vidyAbhyAsa chur3Akara unase anya kAma karavAnA antarAya kahalAtA hai
/  (6) jJAniyoM kI nindA karanA unake bAre meM jhUThI jhUThI bAteM kahanA yA
marmacchedI bAteM loka meM phailAnA, unheM mArmika pIr3A ho, aisA kapaTa - jAla
phailAnA AsAnanA hai  /  pUrvokta kAryoM ke sivAya niSiddha kAla sthAna Adi meM
abhyAsa karanA, guru kA vinaya na karanA, pustakoM Adi ko pairoM se haTAnA,
pustakoM kA sadupayoga na hone denA Adi tathA isI prakAra ke anya kAraNa va
kAryoM

Page #228 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Karmavipaka  By performing actions that show disregard for knowledge, etc.,
the **Jnanavarana karma** is bound.  The causes mentioned above, such as
performing undesirable actions regarding knowledge, the knower, and the means of
knowledge, lead to the binding of **Darshanavarana karma** when performed in
relation to perception, the perceptive-saint, and the means of perception.
Knowledge and perception are qualities of the soul. Therefore, even the
slightest carelessness or disregard for knowledge and its means, perception and
its means, is tantamount to harming oneself. Here, the actions that should not
be performed for the sake of these qualities are mentioned. Other similar
destructive actions should be included in this category.  ## Causes of Binding
of Vaniy Karma  **148**  **Guruhbhattitikaruna-vayajogak sayavijay danajuo.
Vadhammaai ajjai sayamsayam vivajjay. ||55||**  **Meaning of the verse:**
Devotion to the Guru, forgiveness, compassion, vows, yoga, conquering passions,
giving charity, and remaining steadfast in Dharma lead to the binding of
**Satavedaniya karma**. Conversely, acting contrary to these leads to the
binding of **Asatavedaniya karma**.  **Special Meaning:** The verse explains the
causes of binding for both types of **Vedaniya karma**, **Satavedaniya** and
**Asatavedaniya**.  **Sat** means happiness and **Asat** means suffering. The
karma that produces happiness upon its fruition is **Satavedaniya**, and the
karma that produces suffering upon its fruition is **Asatavedaniya**.
**Satavedaniya** is meritorious and **Asatavedaniya**...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmavipAka ke dvArA jJAnAdi ke prati upekSAbhAva darzAnevAle kAryoM ko karane
se jJAnAvaraNa karma kA bandha hotA hai  /  Upara jo jJAna, jJAnI aura jJAna ke
sAdhanoM ke bAre meM aniSTa AcaraNa karanA Adi kAraNa batalAye gaye haiM, unhIM
ko darzana, darzanI - sAdhu, aura darzana ke sAdhanoM ke bAre meM karane se
darzanAvaraNa karma kA bandha hotA hai  /  jJAna aura darzana AtmA ke guNa haiM
/  isalie jJAna aura jJAna ke sAdhanoM, darzana aura darzana ke sAdhanoM ke
prati kiMcinmAtra bhI asAvadhAnI va upekSA dikhAnA apanA hI ghAta karanA hai|
yahA~ una kAryoM ko batAyA hai jo una guNoM ke hone ke lie karane nahIM haiN|
isI prakAra ke anya vighAtaka kAryoM kA kI inhIM meM samAveza kara lenA cAhie  /
vanIya karma ke bandhahetu 148 gurubhattitikaruNA-vayajogaka sAyavijaya dANajuo
/  vadhammAI ajjai sAyamasAyaM vivajjaya  /  / 55|| gAthArtha -guru-bhakti,
kSamA, karuNA, vrata, yoga, kaSAyavijaya, dAna karane aura dharma meM sthira
rahane se sAtAvedanIya kA aura isake viparIta pravRtti karane se asAtAvedanIya
karma kA bandha hotA hai  /  vizeSArtha - gAthA meM vedanIya karma ke donoM
bheda sAtAvedanIya aura asAtAvedanIya karma ke bandha-kAraNoM ko batalAyA hai|
sAtA kA artha hai sukha aura amAtA kA artha hai duHkha  /  jisa karma ke udaya
se sukha ho, vaha sAtAvedanIya aura jisa karma ke udaya se duHkha ho, vaha
asAtAvedanIya hai  /  sAtAvedanIya puNya aura asAtAvedanIya

Page #229 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## First Karma Granth  **KUT** is sin. Therefore, **saataavedaniya** karma is
bound by actions that bring happiness to oneself and others, while
**asaataavedaniya** karma is bound by actions that cause suffering. This is the
perspective from which the binding of **saataavedaniya** and **asaataavedaniya**
karma is explained in the gatha.  **Guru-bhakti**, **kshamasheelata**,
**dayaluata**, **vrata-yukta**, **sanyam**, **sadhana**, **kashay-vijay**,
**dan-bhavana**, and **dharmic shraddha** are the causes of the binding of
**saataavedaniya** karma. Similarly, the word **aady** in the gatha refers to
serving the elderly, children, and the sick, helping the righteous in their
religious duties, having feelings of friendship and joy, and engaging in
activities that benefit the world.  The meanings of the words in the gatha are
as follows:  (1) **Guru-bhakti** is serving, respecting, and honoring one's
gurus (parents, religious teachers, educators, elder siblings, etc.).  (2)
**Kshamasheelata** is forgiving, meaning to tolerate the offenses of those who
have wronged us, even when we have the power to retaliate. It is not allowing
anger to arise even when provoked.  (3) **Dayaluata** is having compassion for
all living beings and striving to alleviate their suffering.  **1. Samahikaae
naṁ tamev samaahi pahillabmad.** - The one who attains samadhi, attains samadhi.
- Bhagavati 71

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prathama karmagrantha KUT pApa hai  /  ataH sukha ko karane vAle aura dUsaroM
ko sukha pahu~cAne vAle ' kAryoM dvArA sAtAvedanIya aura duHkha ke nimitta
juTAne se asAtAvedanIya karma kA bandha hotA hai  /  isI dRSTi se sAtAvedanIya
aura asAtAvedanIya ke bandha hone ke kucha kAraNoM ko gAthA meM batAyA hai, jo
isa prakAra hai guru-bhakti, kSamAzIlatA, dayAlutA vratayuktatA, saMyama
sAdhanA, kaSAyavijaya dAnabhAvanA aura dhArmika zraddhA kI dRr3hatA me
sAtAvedanIya karma kA bandha hotA hai  /  isI prakAra gAthA meM jo Adi zabda
hai, usase vRddha, bAla, glAna Adi kI sevA- vaiyAvRtya karanA, dharmAtmAoM ko
unake dharmacaka kRtya meM sahAyatA pahuMcAnA maitrI, pramoda Adi bhAvanA
rakhanA, lokopakArI kAryoM ko karanA ityAdi kA aura grahaNa kara lenA cAhie |
gAthA meM Agata zabdoM ke artha kramazaH isa prakAra haiM (1) gurujanoM (mAtA-
pitA, dharmAcArya, vidyA par3hAne vAle, zikSAguru, jyeSTha bhAI, bahana Adi) kI
sevA, Adara, satkAra karanA gurubhakti hai  /  (2) kSamA karanA arthAt badalA
lene kI zakti hote hue bhI apane sAtha burA bartAva karane vAle ke aparAdhoM ko
sahana karanA  /  krodha ke kAraNa upasthita hone para bhI kodhabhAva paidA na
hone denA - kSamAzIlatA hai  /  (3) prANimAtra para karuNAbhAva rakhanA, unake
duHkhoM ko dUra karane kA prayatna karanA dayAlutA hai  /  1. samAhikAe NaM
tameva samAhi pahilabmada  /  - samAdhi pahu~cAnevAlA samAdhi prApta karatA hai
/  - bhagavatI 71

Page #230 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Karmavipaka  (4) Abstaining from sins like Himsa (violence) etc. is Vrata
(vow). Observing Anuvratas (minor vows) or Mahavrata (major vows) is
Vratayuktatva (observance of vows).  (5) Following Yoga, i.e., following
Sadvachar (good conduct). The ten types of Sadhu Samachari (good conduct of
monks) like Chakraval etc. are called Samyam Yoga.  (6) Even when Kshayas
(passions) like anger etc. arise, not allowing them to manifest and conquering
them is Kshaya-Vijay (conquering passions).  (7) Giving Dana (charity) to the
deserving as per their need, arranging resources, is Danayuktatva (charity). For
example, giving medicine to the sick, making the fearful fearless and removing
the causes of fear, providing students with the means of education etc., giving
food to the hungry, and performing other related tasks.  (8) Stabilizing oneself
in Atmic Gunas (spiritual qualities) - Samyakgyan (right knowledge), Darshan
(right faith), and Nari (right conduct) - and maintaining stability in them
through a righteous life, honesty, and firmness in the words of the Vitarag
(liberated ones) is Dharm-Dridhata (firmness in Dharma).  Here, the causes of
the bondage of the Saatavedaniya Karma have been explained. Performing actions
and having thoughts opposite to these leads to the bondage of Asatavedaniya
Karma. For example, not respecting elders, punishing the innocent, having cruel
intentions, being prone to intense passions etc. The soul binds Asatavedaniya
Karma through actions that cause sorrow, grief, and anguish.  **Causes of the
bondage of Darshanmohaniya Karma:**  Umgadesanam, aggnasana, vedavvaharanehi.
Dasanmoham Jinmunicheiy sanghai padipio. ||56||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmavipAka (4) himAdi pApoM se virata honA vrata hai  /  aNuvratoM yA
mahAvatoM kA pAlana karanA vratayuktatA hai| (5) yoga kA pAlana karanA arthAt
sAdhvAcAra kA pAlana karanA  /  cakravAla Adi dasa prakAra kI sAdhu samAcArI ko
saMyamayoga kahate haiN| (6) krodhAdi kaSAyoM ke kAraNa upasthita hone para bhI
unheM nahIM hone denA aura kaSAyoM para vijaya pAnA kaSAya-vijaya hai| (7)
supAtra ko AvazyakatAnusAra dAna denA, sAdhana juTAnA, dAnayuktatA hai  /  jaise
rogI ko auSadha denA, bhayabhIta ko nirbhaya banAnA aura bhaya ke kAraNoM ko
haTAnA, vidyArthiyoM ko vidyA ke sAdhanoM Adi ko juTAnA aura bhUse ko bhojana
denA tathA inage sambandhita anya kAryoM ko krnaa| (8) Atmika guNoM -
samyakjJAnadarzana nAritra meM apane Apako sthira karanA tathA inameM sthiratA
lAne ke lie nItimaya jIvana, ImAnadArI, vItarAga ke vacanoM meM dRr3hatA rakhanA
dharma meM dRr3hatA rakhanA hai  /  yahA~ sAtAvedanIya karma ke bandha ke jo
kAraNa batalAye haiM, inase viparIta kArya karane, bhAvanA rakhane se
asAtAvedanIya karma kA bandha hotA hai, jaise-gurujanoM kA Adara na karanA,
niraparAdhI ko daNDa denA, krUra pariNAma rakhanA, tIvrakapAya yukta honA Adi  /
duHkha, zoka, saMtApa Adi paidA karane vAle kAryoM meM AtmA asAtAvedanIya karma
kA bandha karatI hai| darzanamohanIya ke bandhahetu ummagadesaNAmagganAsaNA
vedavvaharaNehiM  /  dasaNamohaM jiNamuNiceiya saMghAi paDipIo  // 56 //

Page #231 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## First Karma Granth  **Verse Meaning:**  Giving advice on the wrong path and
speaking ill of the right path, stealing from the Devas (divine beings), and
acting against the Jinas, Kevalis, Munis, Chaityas, Sangha, etc., leads to the
binding of Darshan-Mohaniya Karma.  **Specific Meaning:** The verse hints at
some of the causes of the binding of Darshan-Mohaniya Karma. These are:  1.
**Unmarg-Deshana:**  Teaching the causes and actions of the world as the causes
of liberation. For example, telling people that sacrificing animals in front of
deities is virtuous.  Presenting false views (Mithyadarshan) and other things as
means of liberation.  One should understand other similar causes. 2. **Sanmarg-
Nash:**  Speaking ill of the path of liberation from the world and attaining
liberation. For example, saying there is no liberation, no merit or demerit, and
that all happiness is in this life.  "Eat, drink, and be merry."  There is no
rebirth!  The body is meant for enjoyment.  Wasting time reading spiritual
literature, etc.  These teachings mislead innocent beings away from the right
path. 3. **Dev-Dravya-Haran:**  The soul itself, endowed with knowledge, vision,
and other qualities, is called Deva.  Similarly, other beings are also Devas.
The resources useful to them are called Dev-Dravya.  Stealing, wasting, or
mismanaging resources that are used for the protection of living beings is
called Dev-Dravya-Haran.  From a worldly perspective, stealing or using for
one's own benefit the offerings made to the Devas is also Dev-Dravya-Haran.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prathama karmagrantha gAthArtha- unmArga kA upadeza dene aura sanmArga kA
apalApa karane, devadravya kA haraNa karane aura jina, kevalI, muni, caMtya,
saMgha Adi ke viruddha AcaraNa karane se darzana mohanIya karma kA baMdha hotA
hai vizeSArtha -gAthA meM darzanamohanIya karma ke bandhahetuoM meM se kucha eka
kA saMketa kiyA gayA hai, jo isa prakAra haiM-unmArga dezanA, sanmArga-nAza,
devadravyaharaNa, jina, muni, caitya, saMgha-sAdhu-sAdhvI, thAvaka-zrAvikA Adi
ke viruddha pravRtti, vyavahAra karanA  /  ina kAraNoM kI vyAsthA nimna prakAra
hai (1) saMsAra ke kAraNoM aura kAryoM kA mokSa ke kAraNoM ke rUpa meM upadeza
dene ko unmArga-dezanA kahate haiM, jaise devI-devatAoM ke sAmane pazuoM kI bali
(hiMsA) karane meM puNya btaanaa| mithyAdarzana Adi ko mokSa kA sAdhana bAhanA
Adi  /  isI prakAra ke anya kAraNoM ko samajhanA caahie| () saMsAranivRtti aura
muktiprApti ke mArga kA apalApa karanA-mArganAza hai, jaise - na mokSa hai, na
puNya-pApa hai, jo kucha sukha hai. vaha isI jIvana meM hai  /  khAo-pIo-moja
udd'aao| punarjanma nahIM hai ! lA karake zarIra sukhAnA hai| AdhyAtmika sAhitya
par3hane meM vyartha samaya gaMvAnA hai Adi upadeza dekara bhole jIvoM ko
sanmArga se httaanaa| 3) deva yAne jJAna-darzanAdi guNa saMyukta svayaM AtmA
aura isI sarIkhe anya jIva, inake upayogI dravya ko devadravya kahate haiM  /
prANirakSA ke upayoga meM Ane vAle dravya kA haraNa karanA, apavyaya karanA,
vyavasthA na karanA, devadravya-haraNa kahalAtA hai  /  laukika dRSTi se deva ke
lie arpita dravya kI corI karanA, use apane upayoga meM lAnA,

Page #232 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 152 ## Karmavipaka  Neglecting to arrange, remaining silent even when capable
while another misuses, is called Devadravya Haran. Similarly, one should
understand the taking of dravya for the sake of Jnanadravya Gah and their
contacts, etc., as Jarmasthanas.  (4) To slander Jin Bhagwan, the Nirvaran
Kevalgyani, to point out faults in them even though they are free from all
faults, such as "There can be no omniscient in the world." Not calling them
Vitrag even though they use a canopy, chamara, etc., in the Samavasaran, is
called Jin Ninda.  (5) To slander Sadhu Muni Rajas, who are adorned with the
Ratnatraya, who are the holders of the five great vows, to accuse them of false
faults, is called Sadhu Ninda.  (6) To slander virtuous Mahatmas, ascetics,
etc., who are accomplished in knowledge, vision, and conduct, is called Chaitya
Ninda. And from a worldly perspective, one should understand the slander of
memorials, stupas, images, etc., and causing them harm, as Chaitya Ninda.  (7)
To slander the Sangha, which is in the form of Sadhu, Sadhvi, Shravak, Shravika,
to insult them, is called Sangha Ninda.  Besides these, in the word "Adi"
mentioned in the gatha, one should understand the inclusion of Agam, Gurus,
Dharma, etc. Acting contrary to them, slandering them, spreading false
doctrines, also leads to the bondage of Darshanmohaniya Karma.  ## Causes of
Bandha of Charitramohaniya and Narakayu  **Duviham Picharanmoham Kasayahasaai
Visaya Vivasamano. Bandhai Narayau Maha Rambha Pariggraharo Rudda. ||57||**  Two
types of Picharanmoha, due to Kasaya, are the cause of bondage of Narakayu and
Maha Rambha Pariggraha.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 152 karmavipAka vyavasthA karane meM pramAda karanA, dUsarA durupayoga karatA
ho to sAmarthya hote hue bhI mauna rahanA devadravyaharaNa kahalAtA hai| isI
prakAra jJAnadravyagAha va unake samparoM Adi jarmasthAnoM ke nimitta dravya kA
haraNa bhI samajha lenA caahie| (4) jina bhagavAna, nirAvaraNa kevalajJAnI kI
nindA karanA, sarva doSoM se unmukta hone para bhI unameM doSa batAnA jaise ki
'duniyA meM koI sarvajJa ho hI nahIM sakatA hai  / ' samavazaraNa meM chatra,
cAmara Adi kA upayoga karane se unako vItarAga na kahanA, jinanindA kahalAtI hai
/  (5) paMca mahAvratadhArI ratnatraya se vibhUSita sAdhu munirAjoM ko nindA
karanA, asaddbhUta doSoM kA Aropa lagAnA sAdhu kI nindA hai  /  (6) jJAna-
darzana- cAritasampanna guNI mahAtmA tapasvI Adi kI nindA karanA caityanindA
karanA kahalAtA hai aura laukika dRSTi se smAraka, stUpa, pratimA Adi kI nindA
karanA, unheM hAni pahu~cAnA bhI caityanindA samajhanA cAhie  /  r (7) sAdhu
sAdhvI zrAvaka zrAvikA rUpa saMgha kI nindA karane, gardA karane ko, saMghanindA
kahate haiM  /  inake sivAya gAthA meM Aye Adi zabda meM Agama, gurujanoM,
dharma Adi kA grahaNa kara lenA caahie| unake pratikUla AcaraNa karane, nindA
karate. avarNavAda phailAne se bhI darzanamohanIya karma kA baMdha hotA hai  /
cAritramohanIya aura narakAyu ke bandhahetu duvihaM picaraNamohaM kasAyahAsAi
visaya vivasamaNo  /  baMdhai narayAu mahAraMbhapariggaharao rudda  // 57 //

Page #233 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The First Karma Text  **Verse Meaning:**  Due to the attachment to passions
(kṣayās) like anger, etc., and non-passions (nokṣayās) like laughter, etc., and
to objects, a living being binds both types of character-obscuring karma. And a
living being who is multi-beginning, multi-grasping, and has a fierce result,
binds the karma of hellish life.  **Detailed Meaning:** The verse explains the
causes of binding the character-obscuring karma and the four types of life-
karma, specifically the causes of binding hellish life. First, it explains the
two types of causes for binding character-obscuring karma.  Character-obscuring
karma is of two types, based on passions (kṣayās) and non-passions (nokṣayās).
The sixteen types of passion-obscuring karma and the nine types of non-passion-
obscuring karma, which were mentioned earlier, are bound by the living being due
to their intense results. The binding of individual passions should be
understood as follows:  (1) A living being with a mind agitated by the arising
of infinite-binding anger, pride, deceit, and greed, binds the sixteen types of
infinite-binding, non-rejection-covering, rejection-covering, and burning
passions.  (2) A living being who is subjugated by the arising of the four non-
rejection-covering passions, binds the twelve passions of non-rejection-
covering, rejection-covering, and burning anger, etc.  (3) A living being
afflicted by the arising of the four rejection-covering passions, binds the
eight passions of rejection-covering and burning anger, etc.  (4) A living being
with the four burning passions, binds only the four passions of burning anger,
etc.  Here, it should be understood that anger, pride, deceit, and greed...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 7 prathama karmagrantha gAthArtha - krodhAdi kaSAyoM aura hAsyAdi nokaSAyoM
tathA viSayoM meM anurakta jIva donoM prakAra ke cAritramohanIya karma kA baMdha
karate haiM tathA bahu-ArambhI, bahuparigrahI aura raudra pariNAmavAlA jIva
naraka Ayu kA baMdha karatA hai  /  153 vizeSArtha - gAthA meM cAritramohanIya
karma ke kaSAya aura nokapAyamohanIya tathA Ayukarma ke cAra bhedoM meM se
narakAya ke baMdha kAraNoM ko batalAyA hai| pahale cAritramohanIya ke donoM
prakAra ke baMdha kAraNoM ko batalAte haiM  /  cAritramohanIyakarma kaSAya Ara
nokaSAya ke bheda se do prakAra kA hai  /  kaSAyamohanIya ke solaha tathA
nokaSAyamohanIya ke kaSAyodayaanita no bheda jo pahale kahe haiM, unakA jIva ke
tIvra pariNAmoM se bandha hotA hai aura pRthaka pRthak kaSAyoM ke bandha ke bAre
meM isa prakAra samajhanA cAhie (1) anantAnubandhI krodha, mAna, mAyA aura lobha
ke udaya se vyAkula mana vAle jIva anantAnubandhI, apratyAkhyAnAvaraNa,
pratyAkhyAnAvaraNa aura saMjvalana kaSAyoM ke solaha bhedoM kA bandha karate
haiM  /  (2) apratyAkhyAnAvaraNa catuSka ke udaya se parAdhIna huA jIva
apratyAkhyAnAvaraNa, pratyAkhyAnAvaraNa aura saMjvalana kocAdi bAraha kaSAyoM ko
bA~dhatA hai  /  (3) pratyAkhyAnAvaraNa catuSka ke udaya se grasta jIva
pratyAkhyAnAvaraNa va saMjvalana krodhAdi ATha kaSAyoM ko bAMdhatA hai  /  ( 4 )
saMjvalana catuSka yukta jIva sirpha saMjvalana krodhAdi cAra kaSAyoM kA bandha
karatA hai  /  yahA~ yaha samajha lenA cAhie ki krodha, mAna, mAyA aura lobha --

Page #234 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 154 ## Karmavipaka  These four kṣayās do not arise simultaneously, but one of
the four arises. Among the four types of kṣayās, namely, anāsādhi, etc., the
type of kṣayā that arises will be accompanied by the subsequent types, but not
the previous one. For example, if the kṣayā type of apratyākhyānāvaraṇa arises,
then along with it, pratyākhyānāvaraṇa, sañcalana types can arise, but not the
anantānubandhi kṣayā. Similarly, one should understand about the
pratyākhyānāvaraṇa, sañjvalana kṣayā types.  After stating the binding causes of
kṣayās, now we will explain the binding of nokṣayās. A being with a disturbed
mind, due to laughter, etc., binds six nokṣayās, such as:  (a) A being who acts
like a clown, mocks others, and talks nonsense binds hāsya-mohaniya karma.  (b)
A being who is interested in seeing colorful and diverse scenes, and is curious
about them, with the activities of the eyes, etc., binds rati-mohaniya karma.
(c) A being who is envious, sinful, makes others unhappy, and encourages others
for bad deeds binds arati-mohaniya karma.  (d) A being who is afraid himself,
creates fear in others, harms, and is cruel binds bhaya-mohaniya karma.  (e) A
being who is himself sorrowful and also makes others sorrowful binds śoka-
mohaniya karma.  (f) A being who criticizes the fourfold sangha, good conduct,
etc., and hates them binds jugupsā-mohaniya karma.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 154 karmavipAka ina cAroM kaSAyoM kA eka sAtha udaya nahIM hotA hai, kintu
cAroM meM se nisI eka kA udaya hotA hai| anasAdhI Adi cAroM prakAra ke
kapAyabhedoM meM se jisa kaSAya prakAra kA udaya hogA, usa sahita Age ke prakAra
bhI sAtha meM raheMge, kintu pUrva kA nahIM rhegaa| jaise apratyAkhyAnAvaraNa
kaSAya prakAra kA udaya hone para usa sahita pratyAkhyAnAvaraNa, saJcalana
prakAroM kA udaya ho sakatA hai, kintu anantAnubandhI kapAya kA nahIM hogaa| isI
prakAra pratyAkhyAnAvaraNa, saMjvalana kaSAya prakAra ke bAre meM bhI samajha
lenA caahie| kaSAyoM ke bandhahetuoM kA kathana karane ke bAda aba nokaSAyoM ke
bandha ke bAre meM batalAte haiM ki hAsyAdi nokaSAyoM meM vyAkula cittavAlA jIva
hAsyAdi chaha nokaSAyoM ko bAMdhatA hai, jaise ki (ka) bhAMDo-jaisI ceSTA karane
vAlA, dUsaro kI haMsI ur3Ane vAlA, bakavAda karane vAlA jIva hAsyamohanIya karma
kA bandha karatA hai  /  (sa) citra-vicitra dRzyoM ko dekhane meM ruci rakhane,
unake prati utsukatA dazani Adi kI vRttiyukta jIva ratimohanIyakarma ko bA~dhatA
hai| (ga) IrSyAlu, pApI, dusarA ko dukhI karane vAlA, bure karmoM ke lie dUsaroM
ko utsAhita karane vAlA jIva aratimohanIyakarma ko bandha karatA hai| (gha)
svayaM Darane vAlA, dUsaroM ko bhaya paidA karane vAlA, nAsa dene vAlA, nirdaya
jIva bhayamohanIyakarma ko bAMdhatA hai| () svayaM zokagrasta rahane vAlA aura
dUsaroM ko bhI zoka utpanna karane vAlA jIva zokamohanIya karma kA bandha karatA
hai| (ca) caturvidha saMgha kI, sadAcAra Adi kI nindA karane vAlA, ghaNA karane
vAlA jugupsAmohanIyakarma kA bandha karatA hai  /

Page #235 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
First Karma Grantha The causes of the bondage of the Vedatrika (three Vedas) are
as follows: (a) The jealous, attached to sensual objects, extremely crooked,
womanish being binds the Striveda (knowledge of women). (b) The self-contented,
with mild passions, simple, and virtuous being binds the Purusaveda (knowledge
of men). (c) The extremely desirous of sensual objects, violating the limits of
morality, etc. being binds the Napumsaka-veda (knowledge of eunuchs).  After
stating the causes of the bondage of the Charitra-mohaniya (deluding) karma, now
the causes of the bondage of the Narakayus (life-span in hell) are being told.
Due to excessive activity, excessive attachment, being immersed in the anxiety
of its accumulation, cruel dispositions, and killing of the five-sensed beings,
meat-eating, frequent indulgence in sexual intercourse, stealing the wealth of
others, etc., the being attains the bondage of Narakayus.  Tiryanchayu (life-
span in the animal world) and Manushyayu (life-span in the human world) are
bound as follows: Gūḍhahṛdaya, śaṭha, sasalla tiryañcāyu, and the one with mild
passions by nature, delighting in charity, and of medium qualities binds the
Manushyayu.  The gatha (verse) has sequentially explained the causes of the
bondage of Tiryanchayu and Manushyayu. Regarding the causes of the bondage of
Tiryanchayu, it is said that the Gūḍhahṛdaya, i.e., whose heart's matter cannot
be known, Śaṭha-sweet-tongued...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prathama karmagrantha vedatrika ke bandha-kAraNa isa prakAra haiM (ka) IrSyAlu,
viSayoM meM Asakta, atikuTila, strIlaMpaTa jIva strIveda ko bAMdhatA hai| (kha)
svadAra-santoSI, mandakaSAyI, sarala, zIlavatayukta jIva puruSaveda kA bandha
karatA hai| (ga) tI viSayAbhilASI, naitikatA kI maryAdA bhaMga karane vAlA Adi
jIva napuMsakaveda kA banca karatA hai  /  isa prakAra cAritramohanIya karma ke
bandhahatuoM kA kathana karane ke bAda aba Ayukarma ke cAra bhedoM meM se
narakAyu ke bandha ke kAraNoM ko batalAte haiM bahuta Arambha karane, bahuta
parigraha rakhane, usake saMgraha kI cintA meM DUbe rahane, raudra pariNAmoM
aura paMcendriya prANiyoM kI hatyA karane, mAMsa-bhakSaNa, vAra-bAra maithuna
sevana karane, dUsare ke dhana kA apaharaNa karane Adi-Adi kAraNoM se jIva ko
narakAyu kA bandha hotA hai  /  tiryacAyu aura manuSyAyu ke bandha hetu tiriyAja
gUDhahiyao saDho sasallo tahA mnnussaau| payaIi taNukasAo dANaruI majisamaguNo
a||58|| gAthArya-gUr3ha hRdaya, zaTha, sazalya tiryacAyu kA tathA prakRti se
manda kaSAya vAlA, dAna meM ruci rakhane vAlA aura madhyama guNa vAlA manuSyAyu
kA bandha karatA hai  /  vizeSArtha-gAthA meM kramazaH tiryaMcAyu aura manuSyAyu
ke bandha ke kAraNoM ko batalAyA hai| tiryaMcAyu ke bandhakAraNoM nA kathana
karate hue kahA hai ki gUr3hahRdaya arthAt jisake mana kI bAta kA patA na laga
sake, zaTha-mIThA

Page #236 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 156 ## Karmavipaka  A being who, while outwardly displaying speech, harbors
deceit in the mind, is vigilant about his faults and considers it cleverness,
binds the **Tirayu** (animal realm).  But a being who is simple-hearted, with
little beginning and little attachment, enthusiastic in giving, and due to
having subdued passions, possesses compassion, forgiveness, gentleness, etc.,
towards all beings, binds the **Manushyayu** (human realm).  The phrase
"**Maksima Gunon**" in the verse means that binding to **Narakayu** (hell realm)
occurs due to inferior qualities, and binding to **Devayu** (heavenly realm)
occurs due to superior qualities. A being with moderate qualities binds the
**Manushyayu**.  ## Binding Causes for Devayu and Namakarma  **Avirma Suraum
Basavo'kaamanijjaro Jayai. Saralo Agaravillo Suhanam Annah Asuham.** ||56||
**Meaning:** A being who continuously practices **Samyagdristi** (right faith)
and other virtues, and who practices **Balatapas** (austerities in youth) and
**Akamanijjara** (freedom from desires), binds the **Devayu**. A being with
simple consequences and without pride binds the **Shubha Namakarma** (auspicious
name karma) and a being with opposite tendencies binds the **Ashubha Namakarma**
(inauspicious name karma).  **Explanation:** The verse explains the causes of
binding to **Devayu** and the auspicious and inauspicious natures of
**Namakarma**. The causes of binding to **Devayu** are as follows:  Only humans
and animals are capable of binding the **Devayu**.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 156 karmavipAka bolane kA pradarzana karate hue bhI mana meM kapaTabhAva
rakhane vAlA, - apane doSo ke lie caukannA rahane vAlA aura isameM caturAI
samajhane vAlA jIva tivAyu kA bandha karatA hai  /  lekina jo jIva sarala hRdaya
vAlA hai, alpa- ArambhI aura alpaparigrahI hai, dAna dene meM utsAha rakhane
vAlA hai, mandakaSAya vAlA hone se jIva mAtra ke prati dayA, kSamA, mArdava Adi
bhAva rakhane vAlA hai, vaha manuSyAyu kA bandha karatA hai  /  gAthA meM jo
'makSima guNo' pada AyA hai, usakA artha yaha haiM ki ki akSama guNoM se
narakAyu kA aura uttama guNoM se devAyu kA bandha hotA hai aura jo jIva madhyama
guNa vAlA hai, vaha manuSyAyu kA bandha karatA hai  /  devAyu aura nAmakarma ke
bandhahetu aviramA surAuM bAsavo'kAmanijjaro jayai  /  saralo agAravillo
suhanAmaM annA asuhaM  // 56 //  gAyArtha - avirata samyagdRSTi Adi tathA
bAlatapa, akAmanirjarA karane vAlA jIva devAyu kA bandha karatA hai| sarala
pariNAma vAlA evaM nirabhimAnI jIva zubha nAmakarma kI prakRtiyoM kA tathA isake
viparIta vRttivAlA jIva azubha nAmakarma kI prakRtiyoM kA bandha karatA hai  /
vizeSArtha - gAthA meM kramaza: devAyu aura nAmakarma kI zubha aura azubha
prakRtiyoM ke bandhakAraNoM ko batalAyA hai| unameM se devAyu ke bandhakAraNa
isa prakAra haiM manuSya aura tiryaMca hI devAyu ke bandha kI yogyatA rakhate
haiM aura

Page #237 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The first Karma Granth is also for those who are at least Samyagdarshi. That is,
even though they are unable to follow the Prat etc., those who are Samyagdarshi,
either human or Tiryanch, bind Devaayu. To clarify this meaning, the word
Aviraat has been given in the verse. The meaning of the word Aadi given along
with Aviraat is that even Deshaviraat, Saragsamyami are capable of binding
Devaayu. In summary, Aviraat Samyagdarshi, Deshaviraat humans and Niyanch and
Saragsamyami humans can bind Devaayu. _ Balatapasvi, that is, those who are
Mithyadarshi who do penance like Kayaklesh etc. without understanding their true
nature, can also bind Devaayu. _ Due to ignorance, enduring hunger-thirst, cold-
heat etc., maintaining chastity in the absence of a woman etc., the depletion of
Karma that occurs due to such reasons is called Akamanirjara. Akamanirjara means
that the being whose Karma has been depleted without any desire, can bind
Devaayu. After explaining the causes of binding Devaayu, now we will explain the
causes of binding the auspicious and inauspicious natures of Naamakarma. Those
beings who are simple, that is, free from deceit and deception, whose mind,
speech and body have a uniform tendency, are free from pride, that is, those who
are not proud of their wealth, prosperity, body, beauty etc., bind the
auspicious natures of Naamakarma. There are three types of pride - Riddhigaurva,
Rasagaurva, Saatgaurva.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prathama karmagrantha unameM bhI vahIM, jo kama-se-kama samyagdRSTi haiN|
arthAta prata Adi kA pAlana karane meM asamartha hote hue bhI jo manuSya yA
tithaMca samyagdarzana sahita haiM, ve devAyu kA bandhra karate haiN| isI Azaya
ko spaSTa karane ke lie gAthA meM avirata pada diyA hai| avirata ke sAtha ho jo
Adi zabda diyA hai, usakA Azaya yaha hai ki dezAvirata, sarAgasaMyamI bhI devAyu
kA bandha karane kI sAmarthya bAle haiN| sArAMza yaha hai ki avirata
samyagdRSTi, dezavirata manuSya aura niyaMcoM tathA sarAgasaMyamI manuSyoM ke
devAyu kA bandha ho sakatA hai  /  _ bAlatapasvI, arthAt AtmasvarUpa ko na
samajhakara ajJAnapUrvaka kAyakleza Adi tapa karane vAle mithyAdRSTi bhI devAya
kA bandha kara sakate haiN| ajJAna se bhUkha-pyAsa, mardI-garamI Adi ko sahana
karanA, strI kI aprApti me zIla ko dhAraNa karanA ityAdi kAraNoM se jo karma kI
nirjarA hotI hai, use akAmanirjarA kahate haiN| akAmanirjarA arthAt icchA ke na
hote hue anAyAsa hI jisake karma kI nirjarA huI hai, aisA jIva devAyu kA bandha
kara sakatA hai| devAyu ke bandhakAraNoM ko batalAne ke bAda aba nAmakarma kI
zubha aura azubha prakRtiyoM ke bandha ke kAraNoM ko batalAte haiM  /  nAmakarma
kI zubha prakRtiyoM kA bandha ve jIva karate haiM, jo sarala arthAt chala-kapaTa
rahita haiM, jinake mana, vacana, kAyA kI pravRtti meM ekarUpatA hai.
gaurabarahita haiM, arthAt jinako apanI Rddhi, vaibhava, zarIra. saundarya Adi
kA abhimAna nahIM hai, ve jIva nAmakarma kI zubha prakRtiyoM kA bandha karate
haiN| gaurava ke tIna prakAra haiM-Rddhigaurava, rasagaurava, sAtagaurava  /

Page #238 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
15. (a) The fruition of karma (karmavipaka) in the form of wealth, prosperity,
and power is called *riddhi*. Considering oneself important due to this is
called *riddhi-gaurav*. (b) The enjoyment of sweet, sour, and other tastes is
called *rasagaurav*. (c) Pride in one's health, beauty, etc. is called
*sargaurav*.  Similarly, a being who is afraid of sin and possesses qualities
like forgiveness, compassion, and gentleness binds *shubha* (auspicious)
*namakarma*.  _A being who acts against the auspicious qualities of *namakarma*
binds its inauspicious qualities. For example, deceit, trickery, self-praise and
criticism of others, false testimony, taking oaths, misuse of temple funds,
public property, etc., abduction, etc. are all actions that bind the
inauspicious qualities of *namakarma*. In essence, unethical conduct leads to
the binding of inauspicious qualities like hellish existence, bad reputation,
and single-sense existence._  **Regarding the binding of *gotrakarma*** _The one
who sees virtues, is humble, and is interested in study and teaching, and is a
devotee of the Jina, binds the *uchchagotra* (high lineage). Conversely, a being
with opposite qualities binds the *nichagotra* (low lineage)._  **Explanation:**
There are two types of *gotrakarma*: (1) *uchchagotra* and (2) ...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 15. karmavipAka (ka) dhana-sampatti, zvarya ko Rddhi kahate haiN| usase apane
ko mahattvazAlI samajhanA Rddhi-gauratra hai| (sa) madhura. am, Adi proM meM
apanA mauraka rUpamA rasagaurava kahalAtA hai| (ga) zarIra ke svAsthya,
saundarya Adi kA abhimAna karanA sAtagArava kahalAtA hai| isI prakAra pApa se
Darane vAlA; kSamA, dayA, mArdava Adi guNoM se yukta jIva zubha nAmakarma ko
bAMdhatA hai| _ jina kAryoM meM nAmakarma kI zubhaprakRtiyoM kA bandha hotA hai,
unake viruddha kArya karane vAlA jIva azubha prakRtiyoM kA bandha karatA hai  /
jaise mAyA, chala-kapaTa, apanI prazaMsA aura dUsare kI nindA karanA, jhaThI
sAkSI denA, zapatha lenA, devadravya, sArvajanika sampatti Adi kA durupayoga
karanA, apaharaNa karanA Adi duSTa pravRttiyoM se nAmakarma kI azubha prakRtiyoM
kA bandha hotA hai  /  sarAMza yaha hai ki anaitika AcAravicAra me narakagati,
ayaza kIti, ekendriya jAti Adi azubha prakRtiyoM kA bandha hotA hai| gotrakarma
ke bandhahetu guNapehI mayarahio azmayaNa jhAvaNAraI niccaM  /  pakuNai jiNAi
bhatto uccaM nIyaM iyarahA u||6|| gAthArtha-guNoM ko dekhane vAlA, nirabhimAnI,
adhyayana-adhyApana meM ruci rakhane vAlA aura jina bhagavAn kA bhakta jIva
uccagotra kA tathA isase viparIta vRtti vAlA jIva nIcagotra kA bandha karatA
hai| vizeSArtha-gotrakarma ke do bheda haiM--(1) uccagotra aura (2)

Page #239 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## First Karma Granth 156  **Lower Sphere |** The verse explains the binding
causes of both spheres. While explaining the binding causes of the higher
sphere, it says that those beings who are **guna-prekshi**, meaning they are
indifferent to the faults of a person and only see their virtues, are admirers
of virtues; they are free from the eight types of **bheda** - **jatimad**,
**kulamada**, **balamada**, **rupamada**, **shrutamada**, **aishwaryamada**,
**labhamadad**, and **tapamada** - meaning they do not have pride in these
things. They are always interested in reading and teaching **satsahitya** and
are devoted to **Jinendra Bhagwan**, **Siddhas**, **Acharyas**, **Upadhyayas**,
**Sadhus**, parents, and virtuous people. They bind the karma of the higher
sphere.  On the other hand, those who perform actions opposite to those that
bind the karma of the higher sphere, bind the karma of the lower sphere. Seeing
faults, having pride in caste, lineage, etc., being disinterested in reading and
studying, and not having devotion to **Jinendra Bhagwan**, **Tirthankara**,
**Guru**, parents, and other great souls, are the causes of binding the karma of
the lower sphere.  1  **Conclusion of the Binding Causes of Antaray Karma**
**Jiryavirakaro hisaiparayana jayai vigdham.**  1  **Iya kammavivagotham lihio
debindasurihi.** || 61 ||  **Verse Meaning:** Those beings who are devoted to
sins like violence, etc., and who obstruct the worship of **Jin Bhagwan**, bind
**Antaray Karma**. Thus, **Shri Devendra Suri** composed this treatise called
**Karmavipak**.  **Special Meaning:** The first half of the verse indicates the
binding causes of **Antaray Karma**, and the second half indicates the end of
the treatise.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prathama karmagrantha 156 nIca gola | gAthA meM donoM bhedoM ke bandhahetuoM ko
batalAyA hai| unameM se uccagota ke bandhahetuoM ko batalAte hue kahA hai ki jo
jIva guNaprekSI haiM, arthAt kisI vyakti meM doSoM ke rahate hue bhI unake bAre
meM udAsIna hokara sirpha guNoM ko dekhane vAle haiM, guNoM ke prazaMsaka haiM;
jAtimada, kulamada, balamada, rUpamada, zrutamada, aizvaryamada lAbhamada aura
tapamada - ina AThoM prakAra ke bhedoM se rahita haiM, arthAt ukta bAtoM kA
abhimAna nahIM karate haiN| sadeva satsAhitya ke par3hane-par3hAne meM ruci
rakhane vAle haiM aura jinendra bhagavAna, siddha, AcArya, upAdhyAya sAdhu,
mAtA-pitA aura guNI janoM kI bhakti karane vAle haiM ve uccagotrakarma kA bandha
karate haiM  /  arthAt dUsaroM ke jina kRtyoM se uga kA bandha hotA hai, unase
ulTe kAryoM ko karane se jIva nocagotrakarma kA bandha karate haiN| doSoM ko
dekhane se, jAti, kula Adi kA abhimAna karane se paThanapAThana meM arucibhAva
rakhane meM aura jinendra bhagavAna, tIrthaGkara guru, mAtA-pitA Adi mahApuruSoM
meM bhakti na rakhane Adi kAraNoM se nIcagotra kA bandha hotA hai  /  1 antarAya
karma ke bandhahetu, upasaMhAra jiryyAvirakaro hisAiparAyaNo jayai vigdhaM  /  1
iya kammavivAgothaM lihio debiMdasurihi  //  61 //  gAthArtha - jina bhagavAna
kI pUjA meM vighna karane vAle hiMsA Adi pApoM meM tatpara jIva antarAya karma
kA bandha karate haiM  /  isa prakAra zrI devendra sUri ne isa 'karmavipAka'
nAmaka grantha kI racanA kI hai| vizeSArtha - gAthA ke pUrvArddha meM
antarAyakarma ke bandhahetuoM kA aura uttarArddha meM grantha samApti kA saMketa
kiyA gayA hai|

Page #240 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Karmavigak  The binding of Antarayakarma occurs to those beings who obstruct
the worship of the Jina Bhagwan, i.e., by criticizing the Jitendev, by
denigrating the Dharma they have established, by hindering the propagation of
the virtues, by discouraging those who are progressing towards the virtuous
vows, austerities, and self-control, and by engaging in other similar actions.
Furthermore, the binding of Antarayakarma occurs by committing, causing others
to commit, and taking pleasure in witnessing the sins of violence, falsehood,
theft, lust, and attachment, by obstructing acts of charity, and so on.  Thus
ends the treatise 'Karmavipak' composed by Shri Devendra Murti, which generally
describes the nature, types, and causes of binding of karma.  ||  Iti
Karmavipak'  namaka prathama karmagrantha ||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmavigaka antarAyakarma kA bandha una jIvoM ko hotA hai jo jina bhagavAna kI
pUjA meM vighna DAlate haiM, arthAt jitendra deva kA avarNavAda karane se, unake
dvArA prarUpita dharma kI nindA karane se, guNoM kA saMkIrtana karane meM
rukAvaTa DAlane me, AtmakalyANa ke sAdhaka brata, tapa, saMyama kI ora agrasara
hone vAloM ko nirutsAhita karane se tathA isI prakAra ke anyAnya kArya karane me
antarAyakarma kA banna hotA hai| sAtha hI hiMsA, jhUTha, corI. mathana,
parigraharUpa pApoM ko svayaM karane, dusaroM se karAne aura karate dekha
prasanna, anumodanA karane se, dAnAdi kAryoM meM vighna DAlane Adi se anta
rAyakarma kA bandha hotA hai| isa prakAra karmoM ke svarUpa, bhedoM,
bandhahetuoM kA sAmAnya rUpa se kathana karane vAlA zrI devendra mUri viracita
'karmavipAka' nAmaka grantha samApta huaa|  //  iti karmavipAka' nAmaka prathama
karmagrantha  //

Page #241 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Appendix **Number and Names of Karmas and their Counterparts**  **Original
Nature of Karmas:** (1) Jnanavarana, (2) Darshanavarana, (3) Vedaniya, (4)
Mohaniya, (5) Ayu, (6) Nama, (7) Gotra, and (8) Antaraya.  **Counterparts of the
Eight Karmas:** 158 (1) Counterparts of Jnanavarana Karma: 5 (1)
Matijnanavarana, (2) Shruta Jnanavarana, (3) Avadhi Jnanavarana, (4) Man:paryaya
Jnanavarana, (5) Kevala Jnanavarana. (2) Counterparts of Darshanavarana Karma: 6
(1) Chakshudarshanavarana, (2) Achakshudarshanavarana, (3) Avadhi
Darshanavarana, (4) Kevala Darshanavarana, (5) Nidra, (6) Nidra Nidra, (7)
Prachala, (8) Prachana - Prachala, (6) Styanadidhi. (3) Counterparts of Vedaniya
Karma: 2 (1) Satavedaniya, (2) Asatavedaniya. (4) Counterparts of Mohaniya
Karma: 28 Main Divisions: (1) Darshanamohiya, (2) Charitramohiya. Subdivisions
of Darshanamohiya: 3 (1) Samyaktva Mohaniya, (2) Mishramohiya, and (3) Mithyatva
Mohaniya. Subdivisions of Charitramohiya: 25 (Kaya - 16, Nokashay - 1) Kashay
(4) Anantanu bandhi Krodha (5) Anantanu bandhi Mana,

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pariziSTa karma ko bhUla evaM uttaraprakRtiyoM kI saMkhyA tathA nAma karma kI
mUla prakRtiyAM - (1) jJAnAvaraNa, (2) darzanAvaraNa, (3) vedanIya, (4)
mohanIya, (5) Ayu, (6) nAma, (7) gotra aura (8) aMtarAya  /  aSTa karmoM kI
uttara prakRtiyA~ - 158 (1) jJAnAvaraNakarma kI uttaraprakRtiyAM - 5 (1)
matijJAnAvaraNa, (2) zrutajJAnAvaraNa, (3) avadhijJAnAvaraNa, (4)
mana:paryayajJAnAvaraNa. (5) kevalajJAnAvaraNa | (2) darzanAvaraNa karma ko
uttaraprakRtiyA~ - 6 (1) cakSudarzanAvaraNa, (2) acakSudarzanAvaraNa, (3)
avadhidarzanAvaraNa. (4) kevaladarzanAvaraNa, (5) nidrA, (6) nidrA nidrA, (7)
pracalA, (8) pracanA - pracalA, (6) styAnaddhi | (3) vedanIyakarma kI
uttaraprakRtiyA~ - 2 (1) sAtAvedanIya ( 2 ) asAtAvedanIya | (4) mohanIya karma
kI uttaraprakRtiyA~ 28 mukhya bheda - (1) darzanamohanIya, (2) cAritramohanIya |
darzanamohanIya ke prabheda - 3 (1) samyaktvamohanIya, (2) mizramohanIya tathA
(3) mithyAtvamohanIya | cAritramohanIya ke prabheda - 25 ( kAya - 16, nokaSAya -
1) kaSAya (4) anantAnubaMdhI krodha ( 5 ) anantAnubaMdhI mAna, P

Page #242 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 162 **Karmavipaka**  **(6) Anantanubandhi Maya, (7) Anantanubandhi Lobha, (8)
Apratyakhyanavaran Krodha, (9) Apratyakhyanavaran Mana, (10) Apratyakhyanavaran
Maya, (11) Apratyakhyanavaran Lobha, (12) Pratyakhyanavaran Krodha, (13)
Pratyakhyanavaran Mana, (14) Pratyakhyanavaran Maya, (15) Pratyakhyanavaran
Lobha**  **(16) Sanjwalan Krodha, (17) Sanjwalan Mana, (18) Sanjwalan Maya, (19)
Sanjwalan Lobha**  **Nokshaya - (20) Hasya, (21) Rati, (22) Arati, (23) Shoka,
(24) Bhaya, (25) Jugupsa, (26) Purushaveda, (27) Striveda, (28) Napumsaka Veda**
**(5) Ayukarma's Uttar Prakritiya - 4** **(1) Devayu, (2) Manushayau, (3)
Tiryanchayau, (4) Narakayu**  **(6) Namakarma's Uttar Prakritiya - 103** **Gati
- (1) Narakagati, (2) Tiryanchagati, (3) Manushayagati, (4) Devagati**  **Jati -
(5) Ekendriya, (6) Dvoendriya, (7) Triendriya, (8) Chaturindriya, (9)
Panchendriya**  **Sharira - (10) Modarik Sharira, (11) Vaikriya Sharira, (12)
Aharak Sharira, (13) Tejas Sharira, (14) Karman Sharira**  **Angopanga - (15)
Modarik Angopanga, (16) Vaikriya Angopanga, (17) Aharak Angopanga**  **Bandhan -
(18) Audarik-Audarik Bandhan, (19) Audarik-Tejas Bandhan, (20) Audarik-Karman
Bandhan, (21) Audarik-Tejas-Karman Bandhan, (22) Vaikriya-Vaikriya Bandhan, (23)
Vaikriya-Tejas Bandhan, (24) Vaikriya-Karman Bandhan, (25) Vaikriya-Tejas-Karman
Bandhan, (26) Aharak-Aharak Bandhan, (27) Aharak-Tejas Bandhan, (28) Aharak-
Karman Bandhan, (29) Aharak-Tejas-Karman Bandhan, (30) Tejas-Tejas Bandhan, (31)
Tejas-Karman Bandhan, (32) Tejas-Karman Bandhan, (33) Karman-Karman Bandhan**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 162 karmavipAka J (6) anantAnubaMdhI mAyA, (7) anantAnubaMdhI lobha, (8)
apratyA khyAnAvaraNa krodha (2) apratyAkhyAnAtra raNa mAna, (10)
apratyAkhyAnAvaraNa mAyA, (12) apratyAkhyAtAvaraNa lobha, (12)
pratyAkhyAnAvaraNa krodha, (13) pratyAkhyAnAvaraNa mAna, (14) pratyAkhyAnAvaraNa
mAyA, (15) pratyAkhyAnAvaraNa ko 1 16, (17) saMjvalana mAna, (18) saMjvalana
mAyA, (16) saMjvalana lobha | nokaSAya - (20) hAsya, (21) rati, (22) arati, (23)
zoka, (24) bhaya, (25) jugupsA, (26) puruSaveda, (27) strIveda, ( 28 ) napuMsaka
veda  /  (5) Ayukarma kI uttara prakRtiyA~ -4 (1) devAyu, (2) manuSyAyu, (3)
tiryaMcAyu, (4) narakAya  /  (6) nAmakarma kI uttara prakRtiyA~ - 103 gati - (1)
narakagati, (2) tiyaMcagati, (3) manuSyagati, (4) devagati  /  jAti - ( 5 )
ekendriya (6) drondriya, (7) trIndriya, (8) caturi ndriya (1) paMcendriya 1 :
zarIra - ( 20 ) madArika zarIra (11) vaikriya zarIra, (12) AhAraka zarIra (13)
tejasa zarIra, (14) kArmaNa zarIra  /  aMgopAMga - (15) modArika aMgopAMga, (16)
vaikriya aMgopAMga, (17) AhAraka aMgopAMga  /  baMdhana - (18) audArika-audArika
baMdhana, (16) audArika- taMjasa baMdhana, ( 20 ) audArika kArmaNa baMdhana,
(21) audArika- tejasa - kArmaNa baMdhana, (22) vaikriya vaikiya baMdhana, (23)
vaikriya tejasa baMdhana, (24) vaikriya kArmaNa baMdhana, (25) vaikriya tejasa -
kArmaNa baMdhana, (26) AhA

Page #243 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## First Karma Granth  **Bandhan (Bondage):**  (27) Rak-Aharak Bandhan, (28)
Aharak-Tejas Bandhan, (26) Aharak-Karman Bandhan, (30) Aharak-Tanjas Karman
Bandhan, (31) Tanjas-Tejas Bandhan, (32) Tejas-Karman Bandhan, (33) Karman-
Karman Bandhan.  **Sanghatan (Aggregation):**  (33) Audarik Sanghatan, (34)
Vaikriya Sanghatan, (35) Ha Sanghatag, (26) Na Satankarin Sanghatan.  **Sanhanan
(Concatenation):**  (38) Vanrishabhanarach Sanhanan, (36) Rishabhanarach
Sanhanan, (40) Narach Sanhanan, (41) Ardhanarach Sanhanan, (42) Kolika Sanhanan,
(43) Sevat Sanhanan.  **Sansthan (Formation):**  (44) Samachaturasra Sansthan,
(45) Nyagrodha Sansthan, (46) Sadi Sansthan, (47) Vaman Sansthan, (48) Kubja
Sansthan, (46) Hund Sansthan.  **Varna (Color):**  (50) Krishnavarna, (51)
Neelavarna, (52) Lohitavarna, (53) Haridravarna, (54) Shwetavrana.  **Gandha
(Smell):**  (55) Surabhigandha, (56) Durabhigandha.  **Rasa (Taste):**  (57)
Tiktarasa, (58) Katurasa, (56) Vashayarasa, (60) Amla Rasa, (61) Madhura Rasa.
**Sparsha (Touch):**  (62) Karkasha-Sparsha, (63) Mrudusparsha, (64)
Gurusprasha, (65) Laghusparsha, (66) Shitasparsha, (67) Ushnasparsha, (68)
Snigdhasparsha, (69) Rookshasparsha.  **Anupurvi (Previous Birth):**  (70)
Narakanupurvi, (71) Tiryanchanupurvi, (72) Manudhyanupurvi, (73) Devanupurvi.
**Vihayogati (Liberation):**  (74) Shubha Vihayogati, (75) Ashubha Vihayogati.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prathama karmagrantha raka-AhAraka bandhana, (27) AhAraka-taijasa bandhana,
(28) AhArakakAmaNa vandhana, (26) AhAraka-taMjasa kArmaNa bandhana, (30)
taMjasatejasa bandhana, (31) taijasa kArmaNa bandhana, (32) kArmaNa-kArmaNa
bandhana  /  saMghAtana-(33) audArika saMghAtana, (34) vaikriya saMghAtana, (35)
hA saMghAtaga, (26 na satAnakArINa saMghAtana  /  saMhanana- (38)
vanaRSabhanArAca saMhanana, (36) RSabhanArAca saMhanana, (40) nArAca saMhanana,
(41) ardhanArAca saMhanana, (42) kolikA saMhanana, (43) sevAta saMhanana  /
saMsthAna(44) samacaturasra saMsthAna, (45) nyagrodha saMsthAna, (46) sAdi
saMsthAna, (47) vAmana saMsthAna, (48) kubja saMsthAna, (46) huNDa sNsthaan|
varNa-(50) kRSNavarNa, (51) nIlavarNa, (52) lohitavarNa, (53) hAridravarNa :
(54) zvetavarNa  /  gandha-(55) surabhigandha, (56) durabhigandha  /  rasa-(57)
tiktarasa, (58) kaTurasa, (56) vASAyarasa, (60) Amlarasa, (61) mdhurrs|
sparza-162) karkaza-sparza, (63) mRdusparza (64) gurusparza, (65) laghusparza,
(66) zItasparza, (67) uSNasparza, (68) snigdhasparza, (69) rUkSasparza  /
AnupUrvo-(70) narakAnupUrvI, (71) tiryaMcAnupUrvI, (72) manudhyAnupUrvI, [73)
devAnupUrvI  /  vihAyogati-74) zubha vihAyogati, (75) azubha vihaayogti|

Page #244 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Karmavipaka  **Each Nature (36)**: Paradhat (4), Ucchvas (78), Atap (76),
Udyot (50), Agurulghu (81), Tirthankar (82), Nirman (3), Upghāt (184), As (85),
Chadar (56), Paryāpan (87), Pratiyaka (8), Sthir (86), Shubh, Bhag, Rabar!
Adesh. (13) Yash:koti (64), Sthavar (65), Mukshma (66), Aparyāpt (65), Sadharan
(68), Asthir (66), Ashubh (100), Dubhang (101), Duhsvar (102), Anadeya (10),
Ayash:kirti.  **(7) Gotrakarma's Uttar Prakritis - 2** (1) Uchchgotra, (2)
Nichgotra.  **(8) Antarāyakarma's Uttar Prakritis - 5** (1) Danantarāy, (2)
Labhantarāy, (3) Bhogantaray, (4) Upbhogantaray, (5) Viryantgay.  **Special
Explanation of the Calculation of the Prakritis of Nāmakarma**  In the
calculation of the Uttar Prakritis of the eight Karmas, starting with
Jñānāvarana, the number of Uttar Gatas for each Karma is specified as per the
number of Karmas mentioned in the scriptures, except for Nāmakarma. However, the
number of Uttar Bhedas of Nāmakarma is stated as 42, 67, 63, and 103. This
difference arises due to the differences in expectations. Now, the order of
their calculation should be understood as follows:  **42 Bhedas**: 14 Pind
Prakritis, 10 Ashadak, 10 Sthavar Dashak, and 8 Pratiyaka Prakritis. Their names
are:  **14 Pind Prakritis**: Gati, Jati, Sharira, Angopang, Bandhan, Sangha,
Van, Sanhanan, Sansthan, Varna, Gandh, Ras, Sparsh, Anupurvi, Vihayogati.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmavipAka pratyekaprakRtiyA~ (36) parAdhAta, (4) ucchavAsa, (78) Atapa (76)
udyota, (50) agurulaghu, (81) tIrthakara, (82) nirmANa, (3) upaghAta 184) asa,
85.) cAdara, 56) paryApana, (87) pratyeka, 8) sthira, (86) zubha, bhaga, . '
rAbara ! Adeza. (13) yazaHkoti, (64) sthAvara, (65) mUkSma, (66) aparyApta, (65)
sAdhAraNa (68) asthira, (66) azubha, (100) dubhaMga, (101) duHsvara, (102)
anAdeya, (10) ayazaHkIrti  /  (7) gotrakarma kI uttara prakRtiyAM - 2 (1)
uccagotra, (2) nIcagotra  /  (8) antarAyakarma ko uttaraprakRtiyA~. 5 (1)
dAnAntarAya, (2) lAbhAntarAya, (3) bhogAnta rAya, (4) upabhogAntarAya, (5)
viiryaantgy| nAmakarma kI prakRtiyoM kI gaNanA kA vizeSa spaSTIkaraNa
jJAnAvaraNAdi ATha karmoM kI uttaraprakRtiyoM kI gaNanA meM nAmakarma ko
chor3akara zeSa karmoM kI jitanI saMkhyA bratalAI hai utane hI una-una ke
uttaragadoM ke nAma nirdiSTa haiM  /  lekina nAmakarma ke uttarabhedoM kI
saMkhyA 42. 67,63 aura 103 batAI gaI hai| isa bhinnatA kA kAraNa apekSA duTiyoM
se hai| aba unakI gaNanA kA krama isa prakAra samajhanA cAhie. . 42 bheda ... 14
piMDaprakRtiyA~, 10 asazadaka, 10 sthAvaradazaka aura 8 pratyekaprakRtiyA~  /
inake nAma ye haiM14 piDaprakRtiyA~... gati, jAti, zarIra, aMgopAMga, bandhana,
saMghA vana, saMhanana, saMsthAna, varNa, gandha, rasa, sparza, AnupUrvI,
vihaayogti|

Page #245 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## First Karma Granth **16**  **10 Sadshak Dashak** - Brus, Badar, Paryapt,
Pratiyaka, Sthir, Shubh, Subhag, Suswar, Aadey, Yash:Kiti.  **10 Sthavar
Dashak** - Sthavar, Sukshma, Aparyapt, Sadharan, Asthir, Ashubh, Dur Bhag, Duh
Swar, Anadey, Athash: Kirti.  **Pratiyaka Ashtak** - Paraghāt, Ucchvās, Ātap,
Udyot, Agurulavu, Tirthankar, Nirman, Upghāt.  **67 Bhed** - (These include 10
Sadshak, 10 Sthavar Dashak and Pratiyaka Ashtak, as mentioned earlier.) Out of
14 Pind Prakritis, the Bhed of Bandhan and Sanghatan Karma are included under
the category of Sharir Karma. The remaining 12 Pind Prakritis do not have Bhed
of Varna, Gandh, Ras, Sparsh. The remaining 35 Bhed of Prakritis are considered.
By including them, the total Bhed becomes 67.  **35 Bhed of 8 Pind Prakritis
are:**  **Gati 4** - Narak, Tiryanch, Manushya, Dev.  **Jati 5** - Ekendriya,
Dwiendriya, Triendriya, Chaturindriya, Panchendriya.  **Sharir 5** - Audarik,
Vaikya, Aharak, Taijas, Karman.  **Angopang 3** - Audarik Angopang, Vaikriya
Angopang, Aharak Angopang.  **Sanhanan 6** - Vajrrishabhanaracha,
Rishabhanaracha, Naracha, Arddhanaracha, Kilika, Sewart.  **Sansthan 6** -
Samachaturasra, Nyagrodh, Sadi, Vaman, Kubjak, Hundak.  **Anupurvi 4** -
Narakanupurvi, Tichyanupurvi, Manushyanupurvi, Devanupurvi.  **Vihayogati 2** -
Shubh Vihayogati, Ashubh Vihayogati.  **63 Bhed** - These include 10 Sadshak, 10
Sthavar Dashak, Pratiyaka.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prathama karmagrantha 16 10 trasadakazaka - brasa, bAdara, paryApta, pratyeka,
sthira, zubha, subhaga. susvara, Adeya, yazaHkIti  /  sthAvaradazaka - sthAvara,
sUkSma, aparyApta, sAdhAraNa, asthira, azubha, durbhaga, duHsvara, anAdeya,
athazaH kIrti  /  pratyekASTaka - parAghAta, ucchvAsa, Atapa udyota agurulavU,
tIrthakara, nirmANa, upaghAta  /  67 bheda - ( inameM 10 sadazaka 10
sthAvaradazaka aura pratyekASTaka prakRtiyoM ke nAma pUrvoktavat haiM  / ) 14
piMDaprakRtiyoM meM se bandhana aura saMghAtana nAmakarma ke bhedoM ko zarIra
nAmakarma ke antargata grahaNa kiyA hai  /  zeSa rahI 12 piMDaprakRtiyoM meM me
varNa, gandha, rasa sparza ke bheda na karake zeSa = prakRtiyoM ke 35 bheda hote
haiM  /  unako grahaNa karane se 67 bheda ho jAte haiN| 8 piMDaprakRtiyoM ke 35
bheda ye haiM gati 4 - naraka, tiryaMca, manuSya, deva | uu jAti 5 - ekendriya,
dvIndriya, trIndriya, caturindriya, paMcendriya  /  zarIra 5 - audArika,
vaikiya, AhAraka, taijasa, kArmaNa  /  aMgopAMga 3 - audArika aMgopAMga,
vaikriya aMgopAMga, AhAraka aMgopAMga | saMhanana 6 - vajraRSabhanArAca,
RSabhanArAca, nArAca, arddhanArAca kIlikA, sevArta  /  saMsthAna 6 -
samacaturasra, nyagrodha, sAdi, vAmana, kubjaka, huNDaka  /  AnupUrvI 4 -
narakAnupUrvI ticAnupUrvI, manuSyAnupUrvI, devAnupUrvI  /  vihAyogati 2 - zubha
vihAyogati, azubha vihAyogati  /  63 bheda - inameM 10 sadazaka 10
sthAvaradazaka, pratyeka 1

Page #246 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Translation:  **166**  In addition to the 35 varieties of the 8 *piṇḍa*
*prakr̥tis* mentioned earlier and the *kamvīpāka* *prakr̥tis*, when the
*bandhana* and *saṃghāṭana* *nāmakarma* are taken into account as *śarīra*
*nāmakarma*, there are 5 varieties each of *bandhana* and *saṃghāṭana*, and 5,
2, 5, and 8 varieties of *varṇa*, *gandha*, *rasa*, and *sparśa* respectively.
Adding these together, we get 63 varieties.  * **Bandhana (5):** *Audārika*
*bandhana*, *vaikriya* *bandhana*, *āhāraka* *bandhana*, *taijas* *bandhana*,
*kārmaṇa* *bandhana*. * **Saṃghāṭana (5):** *Audārika* *saṃghāṭana*, *vaikriya*
*saṃghāṭana*, *āhāraka* *saṃghāṭana*, *taijas* *saṃghāṭana*, *kārmaṇa*
*saṃghāṭana*. * **Varṇa (5):** *Kṛṣṇa*, *nīla*, *lohiṭa*, *hāridra*, and
*śukla*. * **Gandha (2):** *Surabhīḥ*, *durabhī*. * **Rasa (5):** *Tikt*,
*kaṭu*, *kaṣāya*, *amla*, and *madhura*. * **Sparśa (8):** *Karkaśa*, *mṛdu*,
*guru*, *laghu*, *śīta*, *uṣṇa*, *snigdha*, *rūkṣa*.  **103 Varieties:**  If we
replace the 5 varieties of *bandhana* mentioned earlier with the following 15
varieties, we get 103 varieties of *nāmakarma*.  * **Bandhana (15):** *Audārika*
*audārika* *bandhana*, *audārika* *taijas* *bandhana*, *audārika* *kārmaṇa*
*bandhana*, *audārika* *taijas* *kārmaṇa* *bandhana*, *vaivinya* *vaikriya*
*bandhana*, *vaikriya* *taijas* *bandhana*, *vaikriya* *kārmaṇa* *bandhana*,
*vaikriya* *taijas* *kārmaṇa* *bandhana*, *āhāraka* *āhāraka* *bandhana*,
*āhāraka* *taijas* *bandhana*, *āhāraka* *kārmaṇa* *bandhana*, *āhāraka*
*taijas* *kārmaṇa* *bandhana*, *taijas* *taijas* *bandhana*, *taijas* *kārmaṇa*
*bandhana*, *kārmaṇa* *kārmaṇa* *bandhana*.  In other words, by adding 15
varieties of *bandhana* in place of the original 5 varieties in the 63
*prakr̥tis*, we get 103 varieties.  (63 - 5 - 8 + 15 = 103)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 166 kamavipAka prakRtiyoM tathA pUrvokta 8 piMDaprakRtiyoM ke 35 bhedoM ke
atirikta jo bandhana aura saMghAtana nAmakarma ko zarIra nAmakarma meM grahaNa
kara liyA pA, una donoM ke 5, 5 uttarabhedoM tathA varNa, gandha, rasa aura
sparza ke kramazaH 5, 2, 5, 8 uttarabhedoM ko milAne se 63 bheda hote haiM
bandhana 5 audArika bandhana, vaikriya bandhana, AhAraka bandhana, taijasa
bandhana, kArmaNa bandhana  /  saMghAtana 5-audArika saMghAtana, vaikriya
saMghAtana, AhAraka saMghAtana, tejasa saMghAtana, kArmaNa saMghAtana  /  varga
5 kRSNa, nIla, lohita, hAridra aura zukla  /  gandha 2-surabhiH durabhi  /  rasa
5tikta, kaTu, kaSAya, amla aura madhura  /  sparza-karkaza, mRdu, guru, laghu,
zIta, uSNa, snigdha, rUkSa  /  103 bheda-pUrvokta 63 bhedoM meM bandhana ke jo 5
bheda grahaNa kiye haiM, unake sthAna para nimnokta 15 bheda grahaNa karane se
nAmakarma ke 103 bheda hote haiM bandhana 15-audArika audArika bandhana,
audArika-taijasa bandhana, audArika-kArmaNa bandhana, audArika-taijasa-kArmaNa
bandhana, vaivinya-vaikriya bandhana, vaikriya-tejasa bandhana, vaikriya-kArmaNa
bandhana, vaikriya-tejasa-kArmaNa mandhana, AhAraka-AhAraka bandhana, AhAraka-
taijasa bandhana, AhArakakArmaNa bandhana, AhArapha-taijasa kArmaNa bandhana,
taijasa-tejasa bandhana. taMjasa-kArmaNa vandhana, kArmaNa-kArmaNa bandhana 1
arthAt 63 prakRtiyoM meM bandhana ke pAMca bheda ke sthAna para 15 bheda jor3ane
se 103 bheda hote haiN| (63-5-8+15=103)

Page #247 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Ban, Udag-Udirama and Samayona Hashiyon ki Number (1) Bandhyogya Prakritiyaan -
120 Jnanaavaran 5, Darshanavaran, Vedaniya 2, Mohaniya 26, Aayu 4, Naam 67,
Gotra 2, Antaraya 5. 5+6+2+26-|-4 ! 67 -2+5=120 (2) Uday and Udirana Yogya
Prakritiyaan - 122 Shanavaran 5, Darshanavaran, Vedaniya 2. Mohaniya 28, Aayu 4,
Naam 67. Gotra 2, Antaraya '5. 5 +2+2+4+67-25=122 (3) Sattayogya Prakritiyaan
158 or 148 Jnanaavaran 5, Darshanavaran 6, Vedaniya 2, Mohaniya 28, Aayu 4, Naam
103 or 63, Gotra 2, Antaraya 5. 5...+2+28.4.103/63+21.5=158:148

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 bana, udaga-udIramA evaM samAyonA hAziyoM kI saMkhyA (1) bandhayogya
prakRtiyA~-120 jJAnAvaraNa 5, darzanAvaraNa , vedanIya 2, mohanIya 26, Ayu 4,
nAma 67, gotra 2, antarAya 5  /  5+6+2+26-|-4 ! 67 -2+5=120 (2) udaya aura
udIraNA yogya prakRtiyA~-122 zAnAvaraNa 5, darzanAvaraNa , vedanIya 2. mohanIya
28, Ayu 4, nAma 67. gotra 2, antarAya '5  /  5 +2+2+4+67-25=122 (3) sattAyogya
prakRtiyA~ 158 athavA 148 jJAnAvaraNa 5, darzanAvaraNa 6, vedanIya 2, mohanIya
28, Ayu 4, nAma 103 athavA 63, gotra 2, antarAya 5  /
5...+2+28.4.103/63+21.5=158:148

Page #248 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Special Causes of Karma-Bandha: An Agamic Text  This text discusses the
specific causes of karma-bandha, as described in the Agamas. While **mithyatva,
aviriti, pramada, kshaya, and yoga** are considered the general causes of karma-
bandha, there are specific causes for each type of karma-bandha.  The text
highlights these specific causes, drawing from the Agamas. Here is an excerpt
from the Agamas:  **Jnanavaran-Varshavaran**  **"O Bhagavan! What is the karma-
rasa that causes the bondage of the Jnanavaran karma-sharira?"**  **"Gautama! It
is caused by:**  * **Hatred towards the wise** * **Hiding knowledge** *
**Obstructing knowledge** * **Finding fault with knowledge** * **Disrespecting
knowledge** * **And engaging in arguments that contradict knowledge..."**  **-
Passya Prajnapti, 108.06, Sutra 75-76**  **Meaning:** This excerpt explains that
the bondage of the Jnanavaran karma-sharira is caused by specific actions
related to knowledge. These actions include hostility towards the wise,
concealing knowledge, hindering the pursuit of knowledge, criticizing knowledge,
disrespecting knowledge, and engaging in arguments that contradict knowledge.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmabandha ke vizeSa kAraNa-sambandhI Agama pATha mithyAtva, avirati, pramAda,
kaSAya aura yoga ke sadbhAva se saMsArI jIva sadaiva karmabandha karatA rahatA
hai| isIlie inheM karmabandha kA sAmAnya kAraNa kahA jAtA hai| lekina inakI
vidyamAnatA ke sAtha hI jina vizeSa kAraNoM se usa-usa karma kA jo viSeSa rUpa
se bandha hotA hai unheM usa-usa karma ke bandha kA vizeSa kAraNa kahate haiM  /
grantha meM granthakAra ne vibhinna karmoM ke bandha-viSayaka vizeSa kAraNoM kA
saMketa kiyA hai| ina kAraNoM ke kathana kA AdhAra Agama haiN| ataH pAThakoM kI
jAnakArI ke lie vizeSa bandhakAraNa sambandhI Agamagata pAThoM ko yahA~ prastuta
kiyA jA rahA hai  /  Agama pATha nimnaprakAra haiM(1-2) jJAnAvaraNa-
varzanAvaraNa NANAvaraNijjakammAsarIrampaogabandhaNa bhante ! kassa kammarasa
udaeNaM ? goyamA ! nANapaDiNIyayAe NANa nigahabaNAe NANaMtarAeNaM NANappadosaNaM
NANaccAsAyaNAe gANavisaMvAdaNAjogeNa ... "evaM jahA NANAvaraNijja navaraM
dasaNanAma ghettavvaM  /  - pAsyAprajJapti. 108,06, sU0 75-76 artha-bhagavan !
kisa karma ke udaya se jJAnAvaraNIya kArmaNa zarIra kA prayogabandha hotA hai ?
gautama ! jJAnI se zatrutA karane me, jJAna ko chipAne , jJAna meM vighna DAlane
sa, jJAna meM doSa nikAlane se, jJAna kA avinaya karane

Page #249 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## First Karma Granth ### 166  Therefore, engaging in pointless debate about
knowledge leads to the influx of *Jnanavaraniya Karma*. By adding the word
"darshan" or "darshani" (saint) in place of "knowledge" in the aforementioned
actions, one incurs the influx of *Darshanavaraniya Karma*.  In this regard,
Acharya Shri Umaswati has provided the following text in the Tattvarth Sutra:  >
*Tattpradoshanivamat sarayantaraayasadanopayata jnanadarshanavaranyoh.* > -
306.0.10  ### 1 **(3) Vedaniya**  There are two types of *Vedaniya Karma*:
*Satavedaniya* and *Asatavedaniya*. The text related to the bondage of the
first, *Asatavedaniya*, is as follows:  > *Paradukkhanayae parsoyanayae
parjuranyayae paritipanayae parivittayayae parpariavanayae bahunam pananam jav
sattanam dukkhanayae soyayae jav pariavanayae evam khalu goyama! Jiwanam assaya
yaveyagijja kamma kijjante.* - Vyakhyatprajnapti, Sh. 7, 306, Su. 207
**Meaning:** O Gautam! By causing suffering to others, by causing sorrow to
others, by humiliating others, by making others cry, by beating others, by
causing others to suffer, by causing suffering, sorrow, and suffering to many
beings and living beings, living beings incur the influx of *Asatavedaniya
Karma*.  ### 2 The text of the Tattvarth Sutra related to this is as follows:  >
*Dukhashokatapacrandanavadhaparidevananyatma parobhayasthan yasadvedasya.* > -
A. 6, Su. 11

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prathama karmagrantha 166 se, jJAna meM vyartha kA vAda-vivAda karane se
jJAnAvaraNIya karma kA Asrava hotA hai  /  ina uparyukta kAryoM meM jJAna ke
sthAna para darzana va darzanI (sAdhu) kA nAma jor3akara kArya karane se
darzanAvaraNIya karma kA Asrava hotA hai  /  isa sambandha meM AcArya zrI
umAsvAti ne tattvArthasUtra meM nimnalikhita pATha diyA hai
tatpradoSanivamAtsaryAntarAyAsAdanopayAtA jJAnadarzanAvaraNayoH  /  - 30 6 0 10
1 (3) vedanIya vedanIya karma ke do bheda haiM- sAtAvedanIya aura asAtAvedanIya
| unameM se prathama asAtAvedanIya kA bandhasambandhI pATha yaha hai
paradukkhaNayAe parasoyaNayAe parajUraNayAe paratipANayAe paraviTTayAe
parapariyAvaNayAe bahUNaM pANANaM jAva sattANaM dukkhaNayAe soyayAe jAba
pariyAvaNayAe evaM khalu goyamA ! jIvANaM assA yAveyagijjA kammA kijjante  /  -
vyAkhyatprajJapti, za0 7, 30 6, sU0 207 artha - he gautama! dUsaroM ko duHkha
dene se dUsare ko zoka utpanna karane se, dUsare ko jhurAne se, dUsare ko rulAne
se, dUsaroM ko pITane se, duHkha dUsaroM ko paritApa dene se bahuta se prANiyoM
aura jIvoM ko se, zoka utpanna karAne Adi paritApa dene se jIva asAtAvedanIya
karma kA Asrava karate haiM  /  S dena 2 isa sambandhI tattvArthasUtra kA pATha
isa prakAra hai duHkhazokatApAkrandanavadhaparidevanAnyAtma
parobhayasthAnyasadvedasya | -a0 6, sU0 11

Page #250 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 170 ## Karmavipaka ## Text related to the Seven Deities > "O Gautama! By
having compassion for beings, by having mercy for beings, by having kindness for
beings, by having compassion for beings, by not causing pain to many beings, by
not causing sorrow, by not causing distress, by not causing torment, by not
beating, by not causing suffering, a being accumulates the karma that leads to
the seven deities." - Bhagavati, Chapter 7, Verse 6, Sutra 286  **Meaning:** O
Gautama! By having compassion for beings, by having mercy for beings, by having
kindness for beings, by having compassion for beings, by not causing pain to
many beings, by not causing sorrow, by not causing distress, by not causing
torment, by not beating, by not causing suffering, a being accumulates the karma
that leads to the seven deities.  ## Text from the Satyartha Sutra > "Compassion
for living beings, non-attachment, restraint, yoga, patience, and purity are the
characteristics of the one who has attained the knowledge of the seven deities."
- Satyartha Sutra, Chapter 6, Sutra 12 (4)  ## Mohaniya Karma > "There are two
types of Mohaniya Karma: Darshanamohaniya and Charitramohaniya. The causes of
Darshanamohaniya are as follows:  > "In five ways, beings accumulate the
Durlabhavobdhi (Darshanamohaniya) karma: by speaking ill of the Arhats, by
speaking ill of the Dharma taught by the Arhats, by speaking ill of the
Ayariyauvazhā, by speaking ill of the Sangha of the four qualities, by speaking
ill of the gods who are in seclusion." - Syananga, Chapter 5, Verse 2, Sutra 426
**Meaning:** In five ways, beings accumulate the Durlabhavobdhi
(Darshanamohaniya) karma: by speaking ill of the Arhats, by speaking ill of the
Dharma taught by the Arhats, by speaking ill of the Ayariyauvazhā, by speaking
ill of the Sangha of the four qualities, by speaking ill of the gods who are in
seclusion.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 170 karmavipAka sAtAdevanIya sambandhI pATha pANANukaMpAe bhuyANukaMpAe
jIvANukaMpAe sattANukaMpAe bahUNaM pANANaM jApa sattANa adukkhaNayAe asoyaNayAe
ajUraNayAe atippaNayAe apiTTaNayAe apariyAvaNayAe evaM khalu goyamA ! jIvANaM
sAyAveyaNijjA kammA kirjati  /  -bhagavatI, za0 7, u0 6. sU0 286 artha-he
gautama ! prANoM para anukampA karane se, prANiyoM para lagA karane se, jIvoM
para dayA karane se, sattvoM para dayA karane se, bahuta-se prANiyoM ko duHkha
na dene meM, zoka na karAne se, na jhurAne se, na satAne se, na pITane se,
paritApa na dene se jIva sAtAvedanIya karma kA Asrava satvArthasUtragata pATha
bhUtavratyanukampAdAnasarAgasaMyamAdiyogaH kSAntiH zaucamitisavedyasya  /  -06,
sU0 12 (4) mohanIya karma mohanIya karma ke darzanamohanIya aura cAritramohanIya
ye do bheda haiN| unameM se pahale darzanamohanIya ke kAraNoM ko kahate haiM
paMcahi ThANehiM jIvA dullabhaboyittAe kammaM pagareMti, taM jahA - arahatANaM
avanna vadamANe, arahaMtapannattassa dhammassa avanna vadamANe,
AyariyauvajhAyANa avana vadamANe, cAuvaNNassa saMghassa avaNNaM badabhANe,
vivakkatavabaMbhacerANaM devANaM avanna vadamANe  /  - syAnAMga, sthAna 5, u0 2,
sU0 426 artha-pAMca sthAnoM ke dvArA jIva durlabhavodhi (darzanamohanIya) karma
kA upArjana karate haiMarhanta kA avarNavAda karane se, arhanta ke

Page #251 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
This is a description of the **avarnavada** (criticism) of the Dharma (religion)
that has been preached by the **Jinas**, the **Acharyas** and **Upadhyayas**,
the four types of **Sangha** (community), and the **Devas** (divine beings) who
are the holders of mature **tapas** (austerity) and **brahmacarya** (celibacy).
**Tattvarthasutra** text: **Kevalishrutasanghdharmadevavarnavado
darshanamohahya.** - Chapter 6, Sutra 13  **Charitramohaniya karmabandha**
related text: **Mohaniyajjakkammasarirapppaogapucchha, goyama! Tivvakohyaaye
tivvamanayaaye tinchmaayaaye tivvlobhaaye tibbvadansanamohaniyajjaaye
tibbvacharitamohaniyajjaaye.** - Ma. Pra. Sha. 2, U. 10351 **Meaning:**
(**Charitra**) How does the **mohaniya karma** (karma that binds to the body)
occur? **Gautama:** Through three types of anger, three types of pride, three
types of deceit, three types of greed, three types of **darshanamohaniya**
(karma that binds to the senses), and three types of **charitramohaniya** (karma
that binds to conduct).  **Tattvarthasutra** related text:
**Kashayodiyattimraparinamascharitramohasya.** - Chapter 6, Sutra 14  **(5)
Ayukarma** There are four types of **ayukarma** (karma that determines
lifespan): **naraka** (hell), **tiryanch** (animal), **manushya** (human), and
**deva** (divine). Each of these has its own separate cause of binding. While
the texts for the causes of binding for **naraka**, **tiryanch**, **manushya**,
and **deva** are separate, the text for the cause of binding for all lifespans
is generally cited.  1. To point out faults where there are none, to criticize,
is **avarnavada**.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 e jkh upadeza diye hue dharma kA avarNavAda karane se, AcArya aura upAdhyAya kA
avarNavAda karane se, cAroM prakAra ke saMgha kA avarNavAda karane se tathA
paripakva tapa aura brahmacarya ke dhAraka devoM kA avarNavAda karane se  /
tattvArthasUtragata pATha kevalizrutasaMghadharmadevAvarNavAdo drshnmohsy| -a0
6, sU0 13 cAritramohanIya karmabandha sambandhI pATha mohaNijjakammAsarIrappaoga
pucchA, goyamA ! tivvakohyAe tivvamANayAe tincamAyAe tivvalobhAe
tibvadaMsaNamohaNijjayAe tibvcaaritmohnnijjaae| -mA0 pra0 za0 2, u0 1 0 351 _
artha-(cAritra) mohanIya karma ke zarIra kA prayogabandha kisa prakAra hotA hai
? gautama : tIna krodha karane se, tIna mAna karane se, tIna mAyA karane se,
tIna lobha karane se, sIna darzanamohanIya se aura tIvra cAritramohanIya se  /
tasthAsUtra kA sambandhita pATha kssaayodyaattiimrprinnaamshcaaritrmohsy| -a0 6.
sa0 14 (5) Ayukarma _ Ayakarma ke nAraka, tiryaMca, manuSya aura deva ye cAra
bheda haiN| inake pratyeka ke pRthak-pRthak apane-apane bandha ke kAraNa haiN|
inameM se nAraka, tiryaMca, manuSya aura deva Ayu bandha ke kAraNoM ke pAThoM kA
saMketa bAra sAmAnyataH sabhI AyuoM ke bandha ke kAraNa kA pATha uddhRta karate
haiN| 1. jo doSa na hoM, unakA bhI honA batalAnA, nindA karanA avarNavAda hai|

Page #252 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 172 **Causes of Binding to the Hellish Realm**  A being binds to the hellish
realm in four ways: by excessive initiation, by excessive attachment, by killing
five-sensed beings, and by consuming the flesh of the dead.  **From the
*Sthānāṅga Sūtra*, Chapter 4, Verse 3013:**  > "Excessive initiation and
excessive attachment are the causes of a being's hellish existence."  **From the
*Tattvārtha Sūtra*, Chapter 19:**  > "Excessive initiation and excessive
attachment are the causes of a being's hellish existence."  ## 19 **Causes of
Binding to the Animal Realm**  A being binds to the animal realm in four ways:
by deceit, by concealing deceit, by false speech, and by cheating in weights and
measures.  **From the *Sthānāṅga Sūtra*, Chapter 4, Verse 373:**  > "A being
binds to the animal realm through deceit, concealing deceit, false speech, and
cheating in weights and measures."  **From the *Tattvārtha Sūtra*, Chapter 19:**
> "Deceit is the cause of a being's animal existence."  ## 7 **Causes of Binding
to the Human Realm**  A being binds to the human realm in four ways: by pride,
by arrogance, by greed, and by bad conduct.  **From the *Sthānāṅga Sūtra*,
Chapter 4, Verse 373:**  > "A being binds to the human realm through pride,
arrogance, greed, and bad conduct."  **From the *Tattvārtha Sūtra*, Chapter 6,
Verse 16:**  > "Pride, arrogance, greed, and bad conduct are the causes of a
being's human existence."

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 172 narakAyu bandha ke kAraNa cauhi ThANehiM jIvA ratiyattAe kammaM pareti, taM
jahA - mahArambhatAte. mahApariggahyAte paMcidiyavaNaM kuNimAhAreNaM  /  -
sthAnAMga sthAna hai, u0 4 0 0 3013 karmafore artha - jIva cAra prakAra se
narakAyu kA bandha karate haiM - bahuta Arambha karane meM bahuta parigraha
karane se, paMcendriya jIva ke vadha se aura (mRtaka ) mAMsa kA AhAra karane se
/  tattvArthasUtra kA pATha bAraMbhaparigrahatvaM nArakasyAyuSaH  /  19
tiryavaAyu ke bandha ke kAraNa vauhi aNaMhi jovA tirikkhajoNiyattAe kammaM
pagareMti, taM jahAmAillatAte, NiyaDillatA te aliyavayaNeNaM, kUDalakUDamANeNaM
/   /  1 sthAnAe sthAna 4,04, sU 0 373 -- artha - cAra prakAra se jIva tiyaMca
Ayu kA bandha karate haiM - chalakapaTa se chala ko chala ke dvArA chipAne se
asatya bhASaNa meM aura kama taulane va nApane se  /  7 tattvAryasUtra kA pATha
mAyA tairyagyonasya | manuSyAyu ke bandha ke kAraNa . caha ThANehi jIvA
manussattAte kammaM pagareti taM jahA - pagatibhatA, pagativiNIyAe sAkkosayAte
amaccharitAte  /  sthAnAMga sthAna 4, 704, sU0 373 - a0 6, sU0 16

Page #253 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## First Karma Granth 173 Those who are attached to Maya and are worldly, they
obtain the human birth due to their past karma. -Uttaradhyayanasutra, A... | 20
Aryas - Four ways in which a being binds itself to the human birth - by having a
good nature, by having humility in nature, by having compassion in nature, and
by not having jealousy in nature. Those beings who, through various teachings,
accept the highest vows, they obtain the human birth as a result of their good
karma. The text of Tattvarth Sutra says, "Alparambhaparigrahatvam manushyasya.
Svabhavamardavancha." -A. 6. Mr. 17, 18 Reasons for the bondage of Devatas In
those places, beings bind themselves to the Devatas due to their karma, such as
- by attachment to restraint, by restraint of restraint, by childish austerity,
and by desireless old age. -Sthananga, Sthan 4, U. 4, Su. 373 Meaning - In four
ways, beings bind themselves to the Devatas. By attachment to restraint, by
restraint of restraint, by childish austerity, and by desireless old age. If in
the Vaimānika Devas, a being is born with the characteristics of a human being,
who has attained the state of Samyagdrsti, has lived for a sufficient number of
years, has a karmic body, and is born from the womb, then is it possible that he
is born with the characteristics of a restrained Samyagdrsti, an unrestrained
Samyagdrsti, a restrained-unrestrained Samyagdrsti, or a being who has attained
the state of Samyagdrsti due to the number of years he has lived? Yes, it is
possible. This is true until the last karma. -Prajnapana, Pada 6 _Meaning - If
in the Vaimānika Devas, a being is born with the characteristics of a human
being, who has attained the state of Samyagdrsti, has lived for a sufficient
number of years, has a karmic body, and is born from the womb, then is it
possible that he is born with the characteristics of a restrained Samyagdrsti,
an unrestrained Samyagdrsti, a restrained-unrestrained Samyagdrsti, or a being
who has attained the state of Samyagdrsti due to the number of years he has
lived? Yes, it is possible. This is true until the last karma.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prathama karmagrantha 173 mAyAhi mikvAhi je narA gihisubbA  /  uti mANusa joNi
kammasacAhu pANiNo  /  -usarAdhyayana, a... | 20 arya-cAra prakAra se jIva
manuSyAyu kA bandha karate haiM- uttama svabhAva hone se. svabhAva meM vinaya
hone se, svabhAva meM dayA hone me, svabhAva meM IrSyAbhAva na hone se  /  jo
prANI vividha zikSAoM dvArA uttama vrata grahaNa karate haiM, ve prANI
zubhakarmoM ke phala meM manuSyayoni ko prApta karate haiN| tattvAryasUtra kA
pATha alpArambhaparigrahatvaM mAnuSasya  /  svabhAva mArdavaJca  /  -a. 6. mR.
17, 18 devati ke bandha ke kAraNa ca uhi ThANehiM jIvA devAuyattAe kammaM
pagareMti, taM jahA-sarAgasaMjameNaM, saMjamAsajameNaM, bAlanavokammeNaM,
akAmaNijjarAe  /  - sthAnAMga, sthAna 4, u. 4, sU0 373 artha - cAra prakAra meM
jIva devAyu kA bandha karate haiM. sarAgasaMyama se, saMyamAsaMyama mo, bAlatapa
se aura akAmanirjarA se  /  /  vemANiyAvi" jai
sammadiTThIpajjanasaMkhejjAvAsAuyakammabhUmija gabbhantrakka tiyamaNussehito
ubadajjati ki saMjatasamma hiTThIhito asaMjayasammapiTThIpajjattaehito
saMjayAsaMjayasammadivIpajjatta saMkhajjAhito uvavajjati ? goyamA ! tIhitovi
uvavajjati evaM jAva accugo kmpo| - prajJApanA, pada 6 _artha-yadi vaimAnika
devoM meM samyagdRSTi paryAptaka saMkhyAta varSa kI Aya vAle, karmabhUmija,
garbhaja manuSya utpanna hoM to kyA saMyata samya

Page #254 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
From the Karmavipaka Gdasti, how many of the Asanyata Samyagdristi Paryaptakas,
and the Samyata-Asamyata Samyagdristi Paryaptakas, are born in the number of
years of their lifespan? O Gautama! All three are born in the Achyuta heaven.
The text of the Tattvartha Sutra Saragsamyama Samyama-Asangrama-
Akamanirjarabalatapaansi Devasya. Samyaktvaṁ ca. -A. 6, S. 20-21 Generally, the
cause of bondage in all four lifespans Egantwale Nanu Manusse Neraiyauyanti
Pakarei, Tiriyayauyanti Pakarei, Manussauyamphi Pakarei Devaauyapi Pakarei.
-Tyaakhya Praapti, S. 1, 30 8, S. 63 Meaning: A person who is Ekantbal (without
virtue and restraint) binds the hellish lifespan, binds the animal lifespan,
binds the human lifespan, and also binds the divine lifespan. The text of the
Tattvartha Sutra: Ni:sheelavatatvam ca sarvesham. -06, S. 16 (6) Namekarma There
are two types of Namekarma - auspicious and inauspicious. The text regarding the
causes of bondage of both is as follows: Subhanamakamma Sarira Puchcha? Go-yama!
Kayaujjuyayaye Bhavujuyayaye Bhasujuyayaye Avisanvadanajogenaṁ Subhanamakamma
Sarirajavapayogabandhe, Asubhanamakamma Sarira Puchcha? Go-yama! Kayanujuyayaye
Jab Visanvayanaajogenaṁ Asubhanamakamma Jav Payogabandhe. -Vyakhya Prasasti S.
06

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmavipAka gdaSTiyoM se, asaMyata samyagdRSTi paryAptakoM se, saMyatAsaMyata
samyagdRSTi paryAptaka saMkhyAta varSa kI Ayu vAloM meM se utpanna hote haiM ?
he gautama ! tInoM meM se hI acyuta svarga taka utpanna hote haiM  /
tattvArthasUtra kA pATha sarAgasaMyama saMyamA'saMgramA'kAmanirjarAbAlatapAMsi
devasya  /  samyaktvaM ca  /  -a0 6, sU0 20-21 sAdhAraNataH cAroM Ayu ke bandha
kA kAraNa egaMtavAle NaM maNusse neraiyAuyaMti pakarei, tiriyAuyaMti pakarei,
maNussAuyaMpi pakarei devAuyapi pakarei  /  /  -thyAkhyA prApti, za0 1, 30 8,
sU0 63 arthaekAntabAla (binA zIla aura prata vAlA) manuSya narakAyu bhI bAMdhatA
hai, tithaMca Ayu bhI bAMdhatA hai, manuSya Ayu bhI bAMdhatA hai aura devAyu kA
bhI bandha karatA hai| tattvArthasUtra kA pATha niHzIlavatatvaM ca sarveSAm  /
-06, sU0 16 (6) nAmakarma nAmakarma ke do prakAra haiM-zubha aura azubha  /
donoM ke bandhakAraNoM sambandhI pATha yaha hai subhanAmakammA sarIra pucchA ?
goyamA ! kAyaujjuyayAe bhAvujjuyayAe bhAsujjuyayAe avisaMvAdaNajogeNaM
subhanAmakammA sarIrajAvApayogabandhe, asubhanAmakammA sarIra pucchA ? goyamA !
kAyaaNujjayayAe jAba visaMvAyaNAjogeNaM asubhanAmakammA jAva payogavandhe  /
-vyAkhyA prazasti zaE 06

Page #255 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Karma Granth of Effort **175**  **Meaning:** How is the body of
auspicious name-karma obtained?  O Gautama! By the simplicity of the body, the
simplicity of the mind, the simplicity of speech, and by not engaging in other
activities, the body of auspicious name-karma is bound.  How is the body of
inauspicious name-karma bound?  On the contrary, by the crookedness of the body,
mind, and speech, and by engaging in other activities, the body of inauspicious
name-karma is bound. The text of the Tattvartha Sutra states: "Yoga-vriti-
visamvadanam ca ashubhasya namnah. Tadviparitam shubham."  **Chapter 6, Sutra
22, 23:**  Name-karma holds a special place in the Tirthankara's name.
Therefore, there are specific reasons for its binding. These specific reasons
are described as follows:  **1.** Arhant-bhakti, Siddha-bhakti, Pravachana-
bhakti, Stavira (Acharya)-bhakti, Bahushruta-bhakti, Tapasvi-vatsalata,
continuous use of knowledge, keeping the vision pure, being humble, and
fulfilling necessities...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prazrama karmagrantha 175 artha-zubha nAmakarma kA zarIra kisa prakAra prApta
hotA hai ? he gautama ! kAya kI saralatA se, mana kI saralatA me, vacana kI
saralatA se tathA anyathA pravRtti na karane se zubha nAmakarma ke zarIra kA
prayogabandha hotA hai| azubha nAmakrama ke zarIra kA prayogabandha kisa prakAra
hotA hai ? isake viparIta kAya, mana tathA vacana kI kuTilatA se tathA anyathA
pravRtti karane se azubha nAmakarma ke zarIra kA prayogabandha hotA hai  /
tasvArthasUtra kA pATha yogavaRtA visaMvAdanaM cAzubhasya nAmnaH  /
tadviparItaM zubhamya  /  a0 6. sU. 22, 23 nAmakarma meM tIrthaMkara nAma kA
viziSTa sthAna hai  /  ataH usake bandha ke bhI viziSTa kAraNa haiN| ve vizeSa
kAraNa kramazaH isa prakAra varNita kiye gaye haiN| arahaMta-siddha-pavayama-
guru-thera-bahussue savassosu  /  vacchalayA ya teMsi abhikkhaNANovaoge ya  // 1
//  dasaNa viNae Avassae ya solabhya e niriyaarN| khaNa lava tavacciyAe
veyAvacce samAhI ya  // 2 //  apuThavaNANagahaNe suyabhatto pavayaNe pabhASaNayA
/  eehiM kAraNehi hityayarataM lahai jIvo  // 3 //  hAtAdharma0 a0 8, sU0 64
artha-ahaMdbhakti, siddhabhakti, pravacanabhakti, sthavira (AcArya)bhakti,
bahuzrutabhakti, tapasvI-vatsalatA, nirantara jJAna meM upayoga rakhanA, darzana
kA vizuddha rakhanA, vinayasahita honA, AvazyakoM kA

Page #256 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
176 The reasons due to which a living being binds the Tirthankar nature are:
Performing karmic retribution, observing faultless conduct and vows, considering
the world as transitory, performing austerities according to one's capacity,
renunciation, practicing equanimity, attaining the supreme knowledge, devotion
to the scriptures, devotion to the preaching, and propagating the teachings.
The text of Tattvartha Sutra: Purity of perception, disciplined conduct,
faultless behavior towards the virtuous, constant contemplation, spiritual
urgency according to one's capacity, renunciation and austerities, equanimity,
serving the preceptor, erudition, devotion to the preaching, and propagating the
path - these are the causes of attaining the Tirthankar nature.  (7) Gotra Karma
There are two types of Gotra Karma - low and high. First, the causes of binding
the low Gotra are described, followed by the causes of binding the high Gotra.
Low Gotra: Due to the pride of caste, clan, strength, beauty, and lordship, the
bondage of the body and its activities occurs.  High Gotra: Due to the absence
of pride of caste, clan, strength, beauty, and austerity, the bondage of the
high Gotra occurs.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 176 karmavipara pAlana karanA, aticArarahita zIla aura vratoM kA pAlana karanA,
saMsAra ko kSaNabhaMgura samajhanA, zakti anusAra tapa karanA, tyAga karanA,
vyAvRtya karanA samAdhi karanA apUrva jAna ko grahaNa karanA, zAstra meM bhakti
honA, pravacana meM bhakti honA aura prabhAvanA karanA - ina kAraNoM se jIva
tIrthaGkara prakRti kA bandha karatA hai  /  tattvasUtra kA pATha darzana
vizuddhi vinayasaMpannatA zIlavateSvanaticAro'bhIkSNajJAnopayogasaMvego
zaktitastyAgatapa sosA ghusamAdhivaiyAtyakaraNamadAcArya bahuzruta
pravacanabhakti rAvaNya kA parihANi mArgaprabhAvanA tIrthaMkaratvasya | (7)
gotrakarma gotrakarma ke nIca aura ucca ye do bheda hai| unameM se pahale
nIcagotra ke bandhakAraNoM kA anantara uccagotra ke bandhakAraNoM kA nirdeza
karate haiM - I nocagotra C artha - jAti ke mada se kula ke r
pravacanavatsalatvamiti - a0 6, sU0 24 jAtimadeNaM kulama deNaM balamadeNaM jAva
issariyama deNaM NIyAgoya kammA sarIra jAva payoga bandhe  /  - vyAkhyA008, u0 6
sU0 351 r mada se bala ke mada se tathA anya nIca gotrakarma ke zarIra kA
prayogabandha madoM sahita aizvarya ke mada se hotA hai| uccagotra jAti madeNaM
kulaama deNaM balaabhadeNaM rUvaamadeNaM tavaamadeNaM

Page #257 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## First Karma Granthya  **174**  Suyamdena, Labhamdena, Isariyamdena, Ucchagoya
Karma, Sarira, Javam, Payogabandhe.  **Commentary:**  Pride in birth, family,
strength, beauty, austerity, knowledge, wealth, and power leads to the bondage
of the body through the karma of high lineage.  **Tattvartha Sutra on Low and
High Lineage Bondage:**  * **6, Sutra 25, 26 (8) Antaray Karma:**  Condemnation
of the soul, praise of the self, covering and revealing good and bad qualities,
are the causes of bondage through low lineage. The opposite of these actions
leads to the bondage of high lineage.  **Antaray Karma:**  **Daanantarayena,
Labhantarayena, Bhogatrayena, Uvabhogantrayena, Virayantarayena, Antaraiyakamma,
Sarirapayogabandhe.**  **Commentary:**  Obstacles in giving, receiving,
enjoying, experiencing, and in virility lead to the bondage of the body through
Antaray Karma.  **Tattvartha Sutra on Antaray Karma:**  * **6, Sutra 27:**
Obstruction is the cause of Antaray Karma.  **Special Note:**  Here, the Agam
Sutras and the Tattvartha Sutra mention the specific causes of bondage for the
eight karmas. The similarities and differences in the causes mentioned in these
texts and the Karma Granths are due to the fact that the authors, while
primarily relying on the Agam Sutras, have expressed the causes of bondage in
their own language, style, sentence structure, and effort to simplify. This
should be understood as a difference in style of expression. However, the
fundamental objective and intention is to mention the causes of karma bondage
based on the Agams. Therefore, despite the apparent difference in language and
style, there should be no misunderstanding of the underlying meaning.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prathama karmagranya 174 suyaamadeNaM lAbhaamareNa isariyaamadeNaM uccAgoya
kammA sarIra jAva pyogbndhe| vyaH0 pra0 0 8, u0 9, sU. 351 jAti, kula, bala,
rUpa, tapa, vidyA, lAbha aura ezvarya kA ghamaNDa na karane se ucca gotrakarma
ke zarIra kA prayogabandha hotA hai| tattvArthasUtra kA nIcagotra aura uccagotra
bandha sambandhI pATha parAtmanindAprazaMsaH sadasadguNocchAdanodbhAvane ca
nIcairgotrasya  /  tadviparyayo novRtyinRtse ko conarasya  /  * 6, sU0 25, 26
(8) antarAya karma dANaMtarAeNaM lAbhaMtarAeNaM bhogatarAeNaM uvabhogaMtarAeNaM
vIrayaMtarAeNaM aMtarAiyakammA sarIrappayogabandhe  /  - pA0 pra0. za. 8, 3. 1,
sa0 351 dAna, lAbha, bhoga, upabhoga aura bIrya meM vighna karane se antarAya
karma ke zarIra kA prayogabandha hotA hai| tattvArthasUtra kA sambandhita pATha
vighnakaraNamantarAyasya  /  - a0 6, sU0 27 vizeSa- yahA~ Agama sUtroM aura
tattvArthasUtra ke sUtroM dvArA ATha karmoM ke bandha ke vizeSa kAraNoM kA
ullekha kiyA gayA hai| ina pAThoM meM tathA karmagranthoM meM pradarzita kAraNoM
meM samAnatA aura asamAnatA pratIta hone kA kAraNa yaha hai ki kAraNollekha meM
mukhyarUpa se Agama mUtroM kA. kahIM unake Azaya kA avalambana lekara
granthakAroM ne apanIapanI bhASA-zailI, vAkyavinyAsa, prayatnalAghava Adi dvArA
bandha ke kAraNoM ko abhivyakta karane kA prayAsa kiyA hai  /  ise kathana-zailI
kI bhinnatA samajhA jAya  /  lekina mUla uddezya aura Azaya to AgamoM ke AdhAra
se karmoM ke bandhakAraNoM kA ullekha karanA hI hai  /  ataH bhASA-zailI kA
bheda pratIta hone para bhI unameM mAlika bheda nahIM samajhanA caahie|

Page #258 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**On the Subject of Karma Literature: Similarities and Differences**  Generally,
there is a significant degree of similarity in the subject matter presented in
karma texts authored by theoreticians, karma text writers, and Svetambara and
Digambara Acharyas regarding the bondage of karma, its emergence, the state of
existence, the Gunasthanas, the Marganas, and the relationship of karma to
these. If there are any differences, they are to be considered worthy of
examination based on the principle of "Wade Wade Jayate Tattvabodhah" (Truth is
revealed through debate), for the purpose of deeper study and contemplation of
the subject of karma.  There are similarities in the Svetambara and Digambara
karma texts regarding the interpretation and usage of the term "Jiva," the
nature of the Kevalajnani (Omniscient Being) in terms of "Sanjnitva"
(consciousness) and "Asanjnitva" (unconsciousness), the flag-like nature of the
Vayukadik (air-based) body, the time frame for the use of the "Chhadmasthik"
(false body), the nature and examples of "Bhavaleshya" (emotional states), the
meaning of the fourteen Marganas, the interpretation of "Samyaktva" (right
faith), "Kshayik Samyaktva" (diminishing right faith), the presence of
"Dravyamana" (substance) in a Kevali, the twenty-nine numbers indicating the
number of "Garbhaja" (born in the womb) humans, the special characteristics of
the "Indriyamana" (sense organs) such as "Dvi-Indriya" (two senses), the special
characteristics of the "Kayamargna" (body-path) such as "Tejaskaya" (body of
light), the number of "Vigraha" (divisions) in "Vakragati" (curved path), the
number of uses in "Gunasthan" (stages of spiritual progress), the number of
causes of karma bondage being two, four, or five, and the consideration of
general and specific causes of bondage. The style of presentation in both is
similar.  In addition to these, there are some topics where, despite some
differences, there is a greater degree of similarity.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karma sAhitya viSayaka samAna asamAna mantavya E sAmAnyataH karma kI bandha,
udaya - udoragA aura sattA kI sthiti evaM guNasthAnoM, mArgaNAoM meM karmoM ke
bandha Adi ke sambandha meM saiddhAntikoM, karmagranthakAroM aura zvetAmbara
digambara AcAryoM dvArA racita karmagranthoM ke viSaya pratipAdana meM adhikAMza
samAnatA dRSTiga. cara hotI hai  /  yadi kathaMcit bhinnatA bhI hai to vaha
jijJAsA kI dRSTi se karmaviSayaka gahana adhyayana aura manana ke lie grAhya
mAnakara 'vAde vAde jAyate tattvabodhaH' ke nikaSa para parIkSAyogya hai  /
zvetAmbara evaM digambara karmagranthoM meM jIva zabda kI vyAkhyA, upayoga kA
svarUpa, kevalajJAnI ke viSaya meM saMjJitva tathA asaMjJitva kA vyavahAra,
vAyukAdhika zarIra kI dhvajAkAratA, chAdamasthika ke upayogoM kA kAlamAna,
bhAvalezyA sambandhI svarUpa dRSTAnta Adi, caudaha mArgaNAoM kA artha, samyaktva
kI vyAkhyA, kSAyika samyaktva, kevalI meM dravyamana kA honA, garbhaja manuSyoM
kI saMkhyA ke sUcaka untIsa aMka, indriyamANA meM dvIndriya Adi kA aura
kAyamArgaNA meM tejaskAya Adi kA vizeSAdhikatva, vakragati meM vigraha kI
saMkhyA, guNasthAna meM upayoga kI saMkhyA, karmabandha ke hetuoM kI saMkhyA do,
cAra, pA~ca honA, sAmAnya tathA vizeSa bandhahetuoM kA vicAra - ye viSaya samAna
rUpa se prApta hote haiN| donoM kI varNana zailI samAna hai  /  inake atirikta
kucha aise viSaya haiM, jinameM kucha aMzoM meM bhinnatA hote hue bhI adhika
aMzoM meM samAnatA hai  /  1

Page #259 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## First Firm Granth 176 Along with this, there are also some differences in
certain statements, which are being briefly presented.  **Nature Difference** -
In this, the word "prakriti" has been given two meanings - (1) nature and (2)
community. Both these meanings are found in the Svetambara karma literature, but
in the Digambara literature, only the meaning of "nature" for the word
"prakriti" is mentioned. For example - "Prakriti svabhavah", "Prakriti:
svabhavah ityanaanataram", "Payadi sile sahavo" etc.  **Evidence of the Side** -
A word that has a case ending or where the meaning ends in a particular part is
called a "pad". But in "padashruta", "pad" does not refer to such a word, but to
a symbolic word. The evidence of the Acharanga and other Agamas is counted in
such words. It is not known how many "pralokas" this symbolic word is considered
to be, as the corresponding sect has been destroyed. This is written somewhere
in a commentary, and somewhere it is also written that there are approximately
51,08,86,840 shlokas in one "pad". 1. (a) "Prakritistu svabhavah syad
jnanavrttyadi kamagam. Yatha jnanam avanaadih sthitih kalavinischayaih." -
Lokaprakash, Sarg 10, Imok 137 (b) "Shivam shravanasm thii paaes badho
paamagahanam cha. Tanaraso anubhaago tassasamudayo pagai bandho." - Here it
should be noted that in the meaning of "nature", "anubhagabandh" refers only to
the karmic power of fruition, its auspiciousness and inauspiciousness, and its
intensity and mildness. But in the meaning of "community", "anubhagabandh"
refers to the karmic power of fruition, its auspiciousness and inauspiciousness,
and its intensity and mildness. 2. Tattvarthsutra, A. 8, Sutra 3,
Sarvarthasiddhi and Rajavattika commentary. 3. Gommatasar, Karmakanda, Ga. 3.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prathama pharmagrantha 176 isake sAtha hI katipaya kathanoM meM bhinnatAeM bhI
haiM, jinakA saMkSepa meM digdarzana karAyA jA rahA hai  /  prakRtibheda -
isameM prakRti zabda ke do artha kiye gaye haiM- (1) svabhAva aura (2) samudAya
/  zvetAmbara karma sAhitya meM ukta donoM hI artha pAye jAte haiM parantu
digambara sAhitya meM prakRti zabda kA svabhAva artha hI ullikhita milatA hai|
jaise-'prakRti svabhAvaH', 'prakRtiH svabhAva ityanAntaram'". 'payaDI sIle
sahAvo'' ityAdi  /  pakSa kA pramANa-jisa zabda ke anta meM vibhakti AI ho yA
jitane bhAga meM artha kI samApti ho, use pada kahate haiN| lekina padazruta meM
pada kA matalaba aise pada se nahIM hai, sAMketika pada se hai| AcArAMga Adi
AgamoM kA pramANa aise hI padoM meM ginA jAtA hai  /  kitane pralokoM kA yaha
sAMketika pada mAnA jAtA hai, tAdRza saMpradAya ke naSTa ho jAne se isakA patA
nahIM calatA hai, yaha kahIM TIkA meM likhA hai aura kahIM yaha bhI likhA milatA
hai ki prAyaH 51,08,86,840 zlokoM kA eka pada hotA hai| 1. (ka) prakRtistu
svabhAvaH syAda jJAnavRtyAdi kamagAm  /  yathA jJAnAmAvanAdiH sthitiH
kAlavinizcayaH  /  /  -lokaprakAza, sarga 10 imoka 137 (sa) zivaM zravanasma
Thii pAesa badho pAemagahaNaM ca  /  taNarasoM aNubhAgo tassasamudAyo pagai
bandho  /  /  yahAM yaha jJAtavya hai ki svabhAva artha meM anubhAgabandha kA
matalaba karma kI phalajana kazakti ko zu mAzubhatA tathA tInanA-madatA se hI
hai, parantu samudAya artha meM anubhAgabandha meM karma kI phalajanaka zakti
aura usakI zubhAzubhatA tayA tIvratA-maMdatA itanA artha vivikSita hai| 2.
tatvArthasUba a0 8, sUtra 3, sarvArthasiddhi tathA rAjavAttika TIkA  /  3.
gommaTasAra, karmakANDa, gA. 3

Page #260 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Karmavik**  In Digambara literature, the word "pad" in "padashruta" also has a
symbolic meaning, signifying "chigya" (knowledge). The authority of texts like
Acharanga is also considered to be based on such "pads." However, a significant
difference is observed: while in Swetambara literature, all Acharyas show a
distinction in the interpretation of "pad" as evidence, in Digambara literature,
the evidence of "pad" is explicitly stated. There, a single "pad" is considered
to consist of 1,634 crore, 83 lakh, and 7 thousand aksharas (letters). This,
when considering a shloka (verse) to be 32 aksharas, equates to 21.08,84,62
shlokas.  This evidence, along with the "pad" evidence mentioned in some parts
of Swetambara literature, seems to indicate a degree of agreement.
**Man:paryayajnan**  Regarding the object (vishaya) of Man:paryayajnan, two
different accounts are found. The first states that a Man:paryayajnani, through
Man:paryayajnan, knows the objects (chinyaman padarthas) residing in the minds
of others. The second account states that Man:paryayajnan does not provide
knowledge of the object being contemplated (chintyaman vastu), but rather
knowledge of the mental formations (aakritiyaan) that arise during
contemplation. Knowledge of the contemplated object is obtained later through
inference. The first account is from Digambara literature, while the second is
from Swetambara literature.  > 1. Gommatamar Jivakanda, Gatha 335 | 2. Sarvarth
Siddhi Tika, Poo 124, Rajnattik 0 4 = Gommatasar, Jivakanda, 1 0 437-447 | " 3.
Tattvarth 0 A 1 Say 24 Tika. Aavashyak G 76 ki Tika. Vishesh Aavashyak Bhashya
Pu 310, G 13614. Lokaprakash San 3 Ilok 841 Me. :

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmavika digambara sAhitya meM bhI padazruta meM pada zabda kA sAMketika artha
cigayA hai| AcArAMga Adi kA pramANa aise hI padoM se usameM bhI mAnA gayA hai|
parantu sameM ya vizeSatA dekhI jAtI hai ki jahA~ zvetAmbara sAhitya meM pada ke
pramANa ke sambandha meM saba AcArya AmnAya kA viccheda dikhAte haiM, vahA~
digambara sAhitya meM pada kA pramANa spaSTa likhA pAyA jAtA hai  /  vahA~ 1634
karor3a, 83 lAkha, 7 hajAra akSaroM kA eka pada mAnA hai|' jo battIsa akSaroM kA
eka zloka mAnane para utane akSaroM ke 21.08,84,62 //  pramANa hote haiM  /  isa
pramANa meM tathA zvetAmbara sAhitya meM kahIM-kahIM batAye gaye pada pramANa
meM sambandha meM ekavAkyatA hI pratIta hotI hai  /  180 mana:paryayajJAna kA
jJeya (viSaya) - isa sambandha meM do prakAra kA ullekha pAyA jAtA hai| pahale
meM likhA hai ki mana:paryayajJAnI manaHparyayajJAna se dUsaroM ke mana meM
avasthita padArtha cinyamAna padArthako jAnatA hai aura dUsare ullekha meM kahA
hai ki mana:paryayajJAna se cintyamAna vastu kA jJAna nahIM hotA, kintu vicAra
karane ke samaya mana kI jo AkRtiyA~ hotI haiM, unhIM kA jJAna hotA hai aura
cintyamAna vastu kA jJAna pIche se anumAna dvArA hotA hai| pahalA ullekha
digambara sAhitya' kA hai aura dUsarA ullekha zvetAmbara sAhitya kA hai| > 1.
gommaTamAra jIvakAMDa, gAthA 335 | 2. sarvArthasiddhi TIkA pU0 124, rAjanAttika
0 4= gommaTasAra, jIvakAMDa, 1 0 437-447 | " 3. tattvArtha0 a0 1 saya 24 TIkA  /
Avazyaka gA0 76 kI TIkA  /  vizeSAvazyakabhASya pu0 310, gA0 13614  /
lokaprakAza saM0 3 iloka 841 me  /  :

Page #261 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## First Difference  **Regarding the origin of Avadhijnana and
Manahparyayajnana, the Digambar literature mentions aspects that are not found
in the Svetambar literature.**  **Concerning the origin of Avadhijnana, the
Digambar literature states that it originates from those regions of the soul
that are present in the auspicious limbs marked by conch shells, etc.**  **The
origin of Manahparyayajnana is from those regions of the soul that are connected
to Dravyaman, and the location of Dravyaman is the heart. In other words, the
cessation of Manahparyayajnana occurs in the regions of the soul located in the
heart.**  **The concept of Dravyaman, as described in the Digambar literature,
is not found in the Svetambar literature. The Digambar literature states that
Dravyaman resides in the heart. Its shape is like an eight-petaled lotus. It is
formed from the skandhas of Manovagana. Its formation involves the emergence of
Antaranga Karma and Angopanganam Karma.**  **Regarding the three types of
Mithyatvamohaniya (false belief and delusion), the Svetambar literature uses the
analogy of rice grains to explain the three types: Samyaktva (right belief),
Mithyatva (false belief), and Misra (mixed belief).**  **They consider pure rice
grains, washed and free from husk, as Samyaktva, rice grains with husk and
unwashed as Mithyatva, and partially washed and partially unwashed rice grains
as Misra.**  **However, the Digambar literature uses the analogy of ground rice
grains. They consider rice grains with husk as Mithyatva, those completely free
from husk as Samyaktva, and the particles (grains) as Misra (mixed belief).**
**The primary cessation (of Mithyatvamohaniya) is...**  **1. Gommatasar,
Jivakand, verse 442** **2. Gommatasar, Jivakand, verse 441**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prathama kamI _ avadhijJAna aura manaHparyayajJAna ko utpatti- isake sambandha
meM digambara sAhitya meM jo ullekha hai, vaha zvetAmbara sAhitya meM dekhane
meM nahIM AyA hai| avadhijJAna kI utpatti ke sambandha meM digambara. sAhitya kA
maMtavya yaha hai ki avadhijJAna kI utpatti AtmA ke unhIM pradezoM se hotI hai,
jo ki zaMkha Adi zubha cihna vAle aMgoM meM vartamAna hote haiM  /
manaHparyayajJAna kI utpatti AtmA ke una pradezoM se hotI hai, jinakA sambandha
dravyamana ke sAtha hai, aura dravyamana kA sthAna hRdaya hI hai, arthAta
hRdayabhAga meM sthita AtmA ke pradezoM meM hI manaHparyayajJAna kA kSayopazama
hai| dravyamana-isake lie jo kalpanA digambara sAhitya meM hai, vaha zvetAmbara
sAhitya meM nahIM hai  /  digambara sAhitya meM isa prakAra kahA gayA hai -
dravyamana hRdaya meM hI hai  /  usakA AkAra AThapatra bAle kamala kA-sA hai|
vaha manovagaNA ke skandhoM se banatA hai| usake banane meM antaraMgakAra.
aMgopAMganAmakarma kA udaya hai| mithyAtvamohanIya ke tIna bheda-mithyAtva
mohanIya ke tIna bhedoMsamyaktva, mithyAttra aura mizra kI kalpanA ke lie
yetAmbara sAhitya meM 'kodoM ke chAcha se dhoye aura bhUse se rahita zuddha
(samyaktva), bhUme sahita aura na dhoye hue azuddha (mithyAtva) aura kucha dhoye
hue aura kucha na dhoye hue mile ko ardhavizuddha (mizra) mAnA hai| lekina
digambara sAhitya meM cakkI se dale hAe, kodoM meM se jo bhUme ke sAtha haiM ve
azuddha (mithyAtva), jo bhUme se bilakula rahita haiM, ve zuddha (samyaktva)
aura kaNa (arddha vizuddha-mizra) mAne gaye haiM aura prAthamika upazama 1.
gommaTa'sAra, jIvakAMu, gAthA 442 2. gommaTasAra, jIpa kAMDa, gAthA 441

Page #262 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
152 **Karmavipaka Samyaktvaparinaam (Granthibhedajanaya Samyaktv)**, which
purifies the Dalik of the Mohaniya, is considered to be **Chakki Sthaaniya**.
The **Kashaya** are compared to various substances in **Upmaa-Karmagranth** and
**Gommatasar Jeevakand Gatha 286**. All these comparisons are essentially the
same, the only difference being that in **Parsaar**, **Prasmaasyanavaran** is
compared to the dirt on the body for **Lobha**, while in **Karmagranth**, it is
compared to **Kajal**.  The nature of **Apvartya Aayu** is explained in the
commentary of **Apvartya Aayu-Karmagranth Gatha 23**, where this death is called
**Akalamaran**, and in **Gommatasar Karmakaand Gatha 57**, it is called **Kadali
Dhaatmaran**. This word **Kadali Dhaat** is not found anywhere else in the sense
of untimely death.  The order of the **eight Karmas** - **Jnaanabaran** etc. -
is explained in the **Shwetaambar Granth Panchasangrah Tika**, **Karmavipaka
Tika**, **Jayasomasurikrit Tabba**, and **Jeevijayajikrit Balavabodh** as
follows:  **Upayog** is the characteristic of the **Jeev**. It has two aspects:
**Jnaan** and **Darshan**. **Jnaan** is considered to be the primary aspect.
Only through **Jnaan** can one contemplate a scripture. When one attains
something, the **Jeev** becomes **Jnaanopuyogee**. Moksha is also attained
during **Jnaanopuyogee**. Therefore, the **Karma** that covers **Jnaan** -
**Jnaanavaran** - is mentioned first. The tendency towards **Darshan** arises
after the **Jeev's Jnaan**.  1. **Gommatasar, Karmakaand, Gatha 26**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 152 karmavipAka samyaktvapariNAma (granthibhedajanya samyaktva) jisase mohanIya
ke dalika zuddha hote haiM, use cakkI sthAnIya mAnA gayA hai  / ' kaSAyoM ko
upamA-karmagrantha meM aura gommaTasAra jIvakAMDa gAthA 286 meM kaSAyoM ko jina-
jina padArthoM kI upamA dI gaI hai. ve saba eka-se hI haiM : bheTa kevala itanA
hI hai ki pArasAra meM prasmAsyAnAvaraNa lobha ke lie zarIra ke maila kI upamA
dI hai aura karmagrantha meM kAjala kI upamA dI hai| apavartya Ayu-karmagrantha
gAthA 23 kI vyAkhyA meM apavartya Ayu kA svarUpa batAyA gayA hai| jisameM isa'
maraNa ko akAlamaraNa kahA gayA hai aura gommaTasAra karmakAMDa gAthA 57 meM
'kadalIdhAtamaraNa' kahA hai| yaha kadalIghAta' zabda akAlamRtyu ke artha meM
anyatra kahIM dRSTigocara nahIM hotA hai| _ATha karmoM kA krama - jJAnAbaraNAdi
ATha karmoM ke kathanakrama kI utpatti zvetAmbara grantha paMcasaMgraha kI TIkA,
karmavipAka kI TIkA, jayasomasUrikRta TabbA aura jIvavijayajIkRta bAlavabodha
meM isa prakAra batAI hai upayoga, yaha jIva kA lakSaNa hai  /  isake jJAna aura
darzana, ye do bheda haiN| unameM jJAna pradhAna mAnA jAtA hai| jJAna se hI kisI
zAstra kA vicAra kiyA jA sakatA hai  /  jaba koI labdhi prApta hotI hai, taba
jIva jhAnopayoga yukta hotA hai| mokSa kI prApti bhI jJAnopayoga ke samaya hotI
hai| ataH jJAna ke AvaraNabhUta karma-jJAnAvaraNa kA kathana sabase pahale kiyA
gayA hai| darzana kI pravRtti jIvoM ke jJAna ke anantara 1. gommaTasAra,
karmakAMDa, gAthA 26

Page #263 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Translation:  163. The first is the Karma Granth, from which the
Darshanavaranakarma is described after the Gnanavaran. Both Gnanavaran and
Darshanavaran cause intense experiences of suffering upon their arising and
happiness upon their destruction, hence the Vedaniyakarma is described after
them. The intention behind mentioning the Mohaniyakarma after the Vedaniyakarma
is that during the experience of pleasure and pain, attachment and aversion
inevitably arise. The reason for mentioning the Ayukarma after the Mohaniyakarma
is that a confused being, due to attachment, binds itself to a lifespan,
beginning with birth. The being that experiences the arising of lifespan also
has to experience the Karma called "Gati" and others. This is explained by the
saying "Ashu ke yatma gan": a being experiencing the arising of "Gati" and other
Karmas has to experience the results of a high or low birth. This is why the
Gotrakarma is mentioned after the Namakarma. Those with a high birth experience
the destruction of Danaantaryay and other Karmas, while those with a low birth
experience their arising. This is why the Antaryaykarma is mentioned after the
Gotrakarma.  The Digambar text Gommatasar Karmakanda also has a similar
explanation for the order of the eight Karmas. However, it is important to note
that even though the Antaryaykarma is destructive, it is mentioned last, after
the Aghatikarma. This is because even though it is destructive, it does not
completely destroy the qualities of the being like the Aghatikarma. Its arising
is caused by the Aghatikarma like Nama and others. The Vedaniyakarma, even
though it is Aghati, is mentioned among the Ghatikarma because it destroys the
qualities of the being due to the power of the Mohaniyakarma, like the
Ghatikarma.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 163 prathama karmagrantha hotI hai, isI se jJAnAvaraNa ke bAda
darzanAvaraNakarma kA kathana kiyA gayA hai| jJAnAvaraNa aura darzanAvaraNa ina
donoM kAmoM ke tIvra udaya se duHkha kA tathA inake viziSTa kSayopazama se sukha
kA anubhava hotA hai, isalie una donoM ke bAda vedanIyakarma kA kathana kiyA
gayA hai| vedanIyakarma ke anantara mohanIyakarma ke kahane kA Azaya yaha hai ki
sukha-dukha vedane ke samaya avazya hI rAga-dveSa kA udaya ho AtA hai  /
mohanIya ke anantara Ayukarma kA pATha isalie hai ki moha vyAkula jIva Arambha
Adi karake Ayu kA bandha karatA hI hai  /  jisako Ayu kA udaya huA, use gati Adi
nAmakarma bhI bhogane hI par3ate haiN| isI ko batAne ke lie azu ke yAtmA gAna
hai : gati Adi nAmakarma ke udaya vAle jIva ko ucca yA nIca gotra kA vipAka
bhoganA par3atA hai. isI se nAma ke bAda gotrakarma kA kathana hai| ucca gotra
vAloM ko dAnAntarAya Adi kA kSayopazama hotA hai aura nIca govipAkI jIvoM ko
dAnAntarAya Adi kA udaya rahatA hai-isI Azaya ko batAne ke lie goya ke pazcAt
antarAya karma kA nirdeza kiyA gayA hai| digambara grantha gommaTasAra
karmakAMDa meM aSTa karmoM ke kathana-krama viSayaka upapatti lagabhaga pUrvokta
jaisI hai| parantu jAnane yogya bAta yaha hai ki antarAyakarma ghAtI hone para
bhI sabase pIche arthAt aghAtikarma ke pIche kahane kA Azaya itanA hI hai ki
vaha karma ghAtI hone para bhI adhAti karmoM kI taraha jIva ke guNa kA sarvathA
ghAta nahIM karatA tathA usakA udaya nAma Adi aghAtikamoM ke nimitta se hotA hai
tathA vedanIya karma adhAti hone para bhI usakA pATha ghAtikarmoM ke bIca isalie
kiyA gayA hai ki vaha ghAtikarma kI taraha mohanIyakarma ke bala se jIva ke guNa
kA ghAta karatA hai|

Page #264 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 184 ## Karmavipaka  **Difference in the Names of Karma-Prakritis:** The names
of the eight karma-prakṛitis are almost the same in both traditions. There are
some names where a slight change is seen.  **Shvetambar** | **Digambar** |
**Sadi Sansthan** | **Swati Sansthan** ------- | -------- | -------- | --------
Kīlikā Sanhanan | Kolita Sanhanan | Sevat Sanhanan | Asampraptapathika Sanhanan
Rishabhanaracha Sanhanan | Vajranaracha Sanhanan |  |    **Difference in the
Definition of Karma-Prakritis:** There is a great deal of similarity in the
definitions of karma-pravṛitis in both Shvetambar and Digambar karma-literature.
The differences in the definition of some prakṛitis, their names and definitions
are as follows:  [See next page 185]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 184 karmavipAka _kamaprakRtiyoM ke nAma viSayaka bheda donoM paramparAoM meM
aSTa karma kI prakRtiyoM ke nAma lagabhaga samAna hI haiN| kucha nAma aise haiM,
jinameM kiMcit parivartana dekhA jAtA hai zvetAmbara digambara sAdi saMsthAna
svAti saMsthAna kIlikA saMhanana kolita sahanana sevAta saMhanana
asaMprAptApATika saMhanana RSabhanArAca saMhanana bajranArAca saMhanana
karmaprakRtiyoM ko paribhASA viSayaka bheda-zvetAmbara aura digambara
karmasAhitya meM karmapravRtiyoM kI paribhAsAoM meM adhika aMzoM meM samAnatA
hai| donoM meM kucha prakRtiyoM kI paribhASA meM jo bhinnatA dikhatI hai, unake
nAma aura paribhASAeM kramazaH isa prakAra haiM [agale pRSTha 185 para dekhie]

Page #265 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Order ' ## Nature of Karma ## Anādeya Karma 2. Asthira Karma 3. Ashubha Karma
4. Ādeya Karma ## Svetambara Which, upon its rise, causes the words, etc., of
the soul to not be universally accepted, i.e., people do not accept beneficial
words as proof and disrespect them. Which, upon its rise, causes instability in
the head, teeth, tongue, ears, etc. parts of the body. It makes them restless.
Which, upon its rise, causes the parts of the body below the navel, like the
legs, etc., to be inauspicious. Which, upon its rise, causes the soul's
survival, etc., to be universally accepted, people accept them as proof and
respect them. ## Digambara Which, upon its rise, causes the body to not have any
. Which, upon its rise, causes the body's metals and non-metals to not remain
stable and even a little pain cannot be endured. Which, upon its rise, causes
the body's limbs to not be beautiful. Which, upon its rise, causes the body to
be  -filled. ## First Karma Text

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 krama ' prakRtinAma anAdeya nAmakarma 2. asthira nAmakarma 3. azubha nAmakarma
4. Adeya nAmakarma zvetAmbara jisake udaya se jIva ke vaca nAdi sarvamAnya na
hoM, arthAt hitakArI vacanoM ko bhI loga pramANa rUpa na mAneM aura anAdara
kareM | jisa karma ke udaya se sira haDDI, dA~ta, jIbha, kAna Adi avayavoM meM
asthiratA AtI hai. caMcala raha jisa karma ke udaya se nAbhi se nIce ke avayava
paira Adi azubha hoN| jisake udaya se jIva ke bacanAdi sarvamAnya hoM, loga
pramANa - bhUta samajhakara mAnate hoM aura satkAra karate hoM  /  digambara
jisake udaya se zarIra meM bhA na ho| jisake udaya se zarIra ke dhAtuupadhAtu
sthira na raheM aura thor3AsA bhI kaSTa na sahA jA sake : jisa karma ke udaya se
zarIra avayatra sundara na hoM  /  jisake udaya se zarIra prabhA yukta ho  /
prathama karmagrantha pheefeene

Page #266 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
English Translation (preserving Jain terms):  1. Anupurvi Namakarma: The karma
that determines the form and shape of the body in the next life.  2. Gati
Namakarma: The karma that determines the attainment of various states of
existence, such as human, animal, etc.  3. Jugupsa: The karma that causes the
soul to feel disgust or aversion towards its own possessions and to expose the
faults of others.  4. Nidra (Darsanavarana): The karma that causes light sleep,
where the sleeping soul can be awakened by a slight sound.  5. Nirmanaka
Namakarma: The karma that organizes and arranges the limbs and organs of the
body in their proper places.  6. Karmavipaaka: The result or fruition of karma.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 krama prakRti nAma svetAmbara digambara 186 5. AnupUrvI nAmakarma jisa karma ke
udaya se sama- jisake udaya se vigrahagati meM zreNI se gamana karatA huA jIva
jIva kA AkAra pUrva zarIra ke vidheNI gamana karake utpatti-sthAna samAna banA
rhe| meM phuNce| 6. gati nAmakarma jisake udaya se jIva ko jisake udaya jIva
bhavAntara manuSya, tithaMca Adi paryAyoM kI ko jAtA hai| prApti ho| 7. jugupsA
jisake udaya se jIva ko gaMdI jisake udaya se jIva apane vastuoM para vRNA yA
glAni ho| doSa chipAve aura para ke doSa prakaTa kre| 8. nidrA darzanAvaraNa)
jisake udaya meM halkI nIMda jisake udaya se jIva calatA Aye, sotA huA jIba
jarA-sI calatA khar3A raha jAya aura gira AvAja meM uThAyA jA ske| jaae| 1.
nirmANa nAmakarma aMgopAMgoM ko apane-apane isake sthAna nirmANa aura sthAna
para vyavasthita krnaa| pramANa-nirmANa se do bheda karake inakA kArya
aMgopAMgoM ko yathA karmavipAka

Page #267 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
10. Parāghāta Nāmakarma 11. Prachalā 12. Prachalāprachalā 13. Yaśaḥkīti
Nāmakarma 14. Śubha Nāmakarma Which, upon its arising, makes one invincible even
by other strong ones. Which, upon its arising, causes one to fall asleep while
standing or sitting. Which, upon its arising, causes one to fall asleep even
while walking. Which, upon its arising, spreads fame born from charity,
austerity, etc. Or, fame that spreads in one direction is called Yaśa, and fame
that spreads in all directions is called Kīrti. Which karma, upon its arising,
causes the organs above the navel to be auspicious. After arranging the place,
it is also considered to make them certified. Which, upon its arising, causes
the body's organs to be born that kill others, poison in the teeth, etc. Which,
upon its arising, causes the being to be partly awake and partly asleep. Which,
upon its arising, causes the being's hands and feet to move in sleep, and saliva
to drip from the mouth. Which, upon its arising, causes fame to spread in the
world and the praise of virtues. Which karma, upon its arising, causes the
body's organs to be pleasing. First Karmagram 187

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 10. parAghAta nAmakarma 11. pracalA 12. pracalApracalA 13. yazaHkIti nAmakarma
14. zubha nAmakarma jisake udaya se dUsare bala-vAnoM ke dvArA bhI ajeya ho  /
jisake udaya me khar3e-khar3e yA baiThe-baiThe nIMda Aye  /  jisake udaya se
manuSya ko calate-calate bhI nIMda Aye  /  jisake udaya meM dAna, tapa Adi
janita yaza phaile  /  athavA eka dizA meM phailanevAlI khyAti ko yaza aura
sarvadizAoM meM milane vAlI khyAti ko kIrti kahate haiN| jisa karma ke udaya ke
nAbhi ke Upara ke avayava zubha hoM  /  sthAna vyavasthita karane ke uparAnta
unako pramANopeta banAnA bhI mAnA hai  /  jisake udaya se dUsaroM kA ghAta
karane vAle zarIra ke avayava utpanna hoM, dAr3hoM meM viSa Adi ho  /  jisake
udaya se jIva kucha jAgatA aura kucha sotA sA rahe  /  jisake udaya se sote meM
jIva ke hAtha-paira bhI caleM aura maha se lAra bhI gire  /  jisake udaya se
saMsAra meM yaza phaina aura guNoM kA kIrtanA  /  jisa karma ke udaya se zarIra
ke avayava ramaNoya hoM  /  prathama karmagrama 187

Page #268 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Nature of Karma  **15. Samyaktvaprakriti** **Order** **16. Samyagmithyatva**
**17. Sthira Naamakarma** **18. Sarira ke Sanyogi Bhed**  **Svetambara** The
karma whose arising causes the being to not have faith in the principles
established by the omniscient. The karma whose arising causes hatred in the
being. The karma whose arising does not cause attachment to Jainism. The karma
whose arising causes teeth, bones, neck, and other body parts to remain stable.
There are fifteen types of Sanyogi Bhed related to the five bodies.
**Digambara** The karma whose arising causes blemishes like walking, dirt, etc.
to appear in Samyagdarshan. The karma whose arising causes the being to have
both faith and doubt in the principles and non-principles. The karma whose
arising causes the tissues and sub-tissues of the body to remain stable in their
respective places. This allows the being to endure hardships like illness,
penance, etc. There are fifteen types of Sanyogi Bhed related to the five
bodies.  **158** **Karmavipak**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prakRtinAma 15. samyaktva prakRti krama 16. samyagmithyAtva 17. sthira
nAmakarma 18. zarIra ke saMyogIbheva zvetAmbara jisa karma ke udaya se joba
sarvajJapraNIta tattva ko zraddhA na kare | jisa karma ke udaya se jIva ko dveSa
ho  /  jinadharma meM na rAga ho aura na jisake udaya se dA~ta, haDDI, sthira
raheM  /  grIvA Adi zarIra ke avayatra pAMcoM zarIra sambandhI bandhana hote
haiN| nAmakarma ke saMyogI bheda pandraha - digambara jisa karma ke udaya se
samyagdarzana meM cala, malina Adi doSa lagaM  /  jisake udaya se jIva ke tattva
aura atattva zraddhAturUpa donoM prakAra ke bhAva ho  /  jisake udaya se zarIra
ke tAtu- upadhAtu apane-apane sthAna para sthira rheN| jisase upasarga, tapasyA
Adi anya kaSTa sahana kiye jA sakate haiN| pAMcoM zarIra ke saMyogI bheda
pandraha hote haiM  /  158 karmavipAka

Page #269 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(186) The picture related to the Ashta Mahapratiharayadi on page 2. Or Ashta
Mahapratiharaya FE

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 ( 186 ) pRSTha 2 para Agata aSTa mahAprAtihAryAdi se sambandhita citra | ki
aSTa mahApratihArya FE

Page #270 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(190. Verses 35 to 40 [pages 117 to 116] describe six types of *Sanghyana* and
six types of *Sansthana*. See the illustrations that clarify them - Illustration
of *Sanghyana* *Vahu-prashabha-naracha* *Sasham-ana-ae* *Naracha* *Ardha-naraya*
*Kilika* *Sevartaka*

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 ( 190  /  gAthA 35 se 40 [pRSTha 117 se 116 ] meM saMghayaNa evaM saMsthAna ke
6-6 bheda batAye haiM  /  unako spaSTa karane vAle citra dekhie - saMghayaNa kA
citra vahuprazSabhanArAca saSamanAe nArAca ardhanArAya kIlikA sevArtaka

Page #271 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(191) just 1. Parimaṇḍala 2. Vṛtta O.ALI 3. Yansa 4. Caturansa 5. Āyata
HAPPmiriTISTRATI

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
( 191 ) just 1.parimaMDala 2.vRtta O.ALI 3.yaMsa 4.caturaMsa 5.Ayata
HAPPmiriTISTRATI

